Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



, Google 



, Google 



, Google 



, Google 



A DICTIONARY 



SLANG, JARGON & CANT 



, Google 



, Google 



A DICTIONARY 
SLANG, JARGON & CANT 



KM BRACING 

■NCUSH, AMERICAN, AND ANGLO-INDIAN SLANC 

PIDGIN BNGUSH, TINKERS' JARGON 

AND OTHER IRREGULAR 

PHRASEOLOGY 



ALBERT BARRilRE 



CHARLES G. LELAND, M.A., Hon. F.R.S.U 



With a New Introduction by Eric Partridge 

VOU I. A-K. 
PRtNTSD FOR SUBSCRIBERS ONLY 

THE BALLANTYNE PRESS 

UDCCCUCSXIX 



RBPUBLJSHED BY GALE RSaKARCH COMPANY, BOOK TOWER. DETROIT, IMT 



:v Google 



^Iftirary Sctoncl 



Library of Congms Catalog Card Number 66-27823 



PAPER USED IN THIS EDITION IS 
A FINE ACID FREE PERMANENT/DURABLE PAPER 
COUUONLV RKFERRED TO AS ■VM-YBAR" PAPER 



:v Google 



Vos V^ y - /B cf 



A MODERN WELCOME 
TO BARRERE AND LELAND 



There have been many dictionaries of English Slang 
since the tentative Cant glossaries of Awdeley and Har- 
man in the sixteenth centuiy, but the present work is 
one of the most important. 

Before this dictionaiy appeared, Barrere had already 
distinguished himself with the publication of his Argot 
and Slang: A New French and English' DictioTiary (pri- 
vately printed, Chiswick Press, London, 1887). lltat 
valuable work set the style for the present dictionary 
and also for the Dictionary of Slang and Its Analogues 
of John S. Farmer and William Ernest Henley (7 vol- 
umes, 1890-1904). The first volume of Parmer & Henley 
appeared soon after Barrere and Leland had completed 
their work, although the former dictionary was not com- 
pleted for another fourteen years. Barrere anA Leland 
wete first in the field, but these two notable dictionaries 
were so very differrat in scope and size tiiat they can 
hardly be regarded as competitors. 

One of the great virtues of this useful Barrere & Le- 
land is that it's an easy book to handle. It is alert, 
instructive and readable, very much to the point, and 
contains no padding. 



:v Google 



A Modem Welcome 



It is sometimes difficult for a dictionary of Slang to 
avoid the charge of vulgarity. It was the fate of most of 
the great Slang dictionaries of the late nineteenth cen- 
tury to be hampered by the prudisbness of their period, 
and in most instances the complete first edition is su- 
perior to later condensed and revised editions. Barry's 
Argot and Slang of 1887 was reissued in the 1890's m 
an expurgated version, while the Fanner & Henley 
seven volumes were drastically abridged into one tame 
volume as A Dictionary of Slang and CoUoquial Eng- 
lish in 1905. The present work of Bairere & Leliind was 
also reduced to a single volume in 1897, with some 
material omitted, but the present reprint is the com- 
plete edition of 1889-90. 

Another feature which this work has in common with 
Parmer & Henley is that both books had picturesque 
editors. The mysterious and versatile John Stephen 
Farmer and his collaborator, W. E. Hrailey, have been 
frequently discussed. Charles Godfrey Ldand (1824- 
1903), co-author of the present book, was an American 
who was in Paris during the revolution of 1848 and ac- 
tually took part in it. Later he went to England and 
studied tiie life and language of the gypsies. He even 
discovered and elucidated "Shelta," the secret language 
of the Irish tinkers, and wrote the once-famous Breit- 
mann Bedlada and many other highly original works. 

Albert Marie Victor Bairere (18467-1921), Offider 
de ki Legion d'Honneur and Offider de I'lnstitution 
Publique, was a Professor of French at the Royal Naval 
College, Greenwich, and the Royal Military Academy, 
Woolwich, England. He was also responsible for a score 
of useful works. He edited French texts of Dumas, 
Hugo and other authors, compiled Examination papers, 
a FrouJt language course, and a Dictionary of English 
and French Military Terms (1895-6; 1918); be was also 
in charge of Hachette'a French Directory (1909-10). 



:v Google 



A Modem Welcome 

He was an authority on French slang, and knew far 
more about English slang than Leland. The latter, how- 
ever, contributed some useful American material and a 
number of gypsy words. Barrere and Leland got along 
wdl together. Tliey had the good sense to a^ in help 
from numerous good scholars and many rather more 
woridly persons, and achieved a valuable work which 
earned a high place in the literature of Slang. Although 
tbey Doade several claims that might be difficult to sub- 
stantiate, their book is neither arrogant nor wrong- 
headed. 

At cme time— so long ago that I can remember the 
expmence with a wry jdeasure — I thoroughly examined 
both Barrere & Leland, and Farmer & Henley. That 
memory is so vivid that I can recall sa}^g to myself 
**You wear well, both of you, and I shouldn't care to 
have been deprived of your cheerful, infonnative and 
most hdpful company." Indeed, nobody studying Slang 
can afford to ignore either work. Both the first edition 
of Barrere & Leland and the original seven volumes of 
Farmer & Henley are very scarce books, and unless 
you were bom lucky you had to pay a stiff price for 
them. Now that the Fanner & Henley volumes have 
been reprinted it is good to see the Barrere & Leland 
easily available once more. The present reprint is a 
wdcome one of the best and fullest edition of a key 
dictionary of English Slang. 

ERIC PARTRIDGE 



:v Google 



, Google 



PREFACE. 



» very great number of respectable snd bj no meaiu 
uneducated peraonf, slang is siinplf a collective name 
for vulgar ezpresaiona, the moat refined individual 
being the one who uwa it least. To them it is all 
Utat which in speech is " tabn," or forbidden. Others 
r«gBid it as the ja^on of thievea, which has spread to costermcmgers 
and stieet-ar&ba, thougb in justice to the worthy people first men- 
tioned it most be admitted that many of tbem are so fortified in 
their ignoiance of what is beneath them, that they are unaware 
that thieves have a lingo of theu own. 

Others, again, believe that it is identical with the gypsy tongue 
or Bomany, an opinion which, in spite of its easily demonstrated 
etymological absurdity, has held its ground for more than a century ; 
whilst several writers, such as the author of the " Life of Bampfield 
(or Baropfylde) Hoore Carew," have published so-called gypsy 
vocabularies, in which barely half-a-dozen words of corrupt Somany 
are to be fonnd. 

Many, not without good excuse, find it very difficult to distinguish 
between technical terms not as yet recognised by lexicographers, 
and llioae which are, to all intents and purpose, firmly established. 

It is worthy of notice, let it be said nt jMiMOnl, that the two nations 
at the head of the intellectual movement, England and Fiance, have 
the most extenaive slang vocabolary, the two being about on a par 
in that respect. 

Now, the dialect alluded to above was, centuriee ago, almost the 
only slang — and there are men so much behind the times that it is 



:v Google 



vi Pre/ace. 

the onlj slang to them atilL We pat in the qoalifj'ing "Blmoat" 
becaase tliere always have been certain omditioDa, anch as emigra- 
tion to savage countries, which have bred new circnmstancee, with a 
corresponding development of language. The Boman legionaries in 
the wilds of OanI and Germany found claasical Latin as inadequate 
for bush vocabulary as the Anglo-Saxon finds classical English in 
the backwoods of America and the bachblocks of Anstralia, and they 
evolved a Low Latin slang corresponding with snch terms as "war- 
paint," " backwoodsman," " ring-barker," " bnshman,''and " throwing- 
stiek." Modem French baa its elements of hose Latin origin, just 
as the English lexicons of the future will include a number of 
words forged by necessit; in tiie bush and the backwoods— in New 
World mines and cities — and others which at the present time are 
only to be found in such dictionaries as the present one. 

But here, in the heart as well as at the extremitiea of "Anglo- 
Saxony," new needs and new circumstances are being developed 
unceasingly, and society both high and low, in every walk of life^ 
and on bypaths of art and trade, has of late years taken to inventing 
new words and phrases, some for practical wants, others for amnae* 
ment, some coarse and rude, others daintUy cut and polished, deftiy 
veiled — all in such profusion, that every one of Uie old definitions 
of slang is now inadequate to express the " new departure " phase 
of the language. 

Perhaps the best general definition at which one can arrive is 
that " slang " is a conventional tongue with many dialects, which are 
ns a rule unintelligible to outsiders. In one case at least it has 
been framed with the intention of its being intelligihle only to the 
initiated — the vagabond and thievish fraternity. 

The vocabulary is based chiefly on words of the language proper, 
ancient and modem (with an admiztore of foreign words), which 
have become "slang" through a metaphoric process or misappro- 
priation of meaning. Thus '* brass," " timbers " and " pins," " red 
lane," " mug," " canister," " claret," " ivory," " tile," taken figura- 
tively, enrich the slang vocabulary by respectively acquiring the 
conventional meaning of " impudence," " legs," " throat," " &ce,'> 
" head," " blood," " teeth," " hat" 



:v Google 



Preface. vii 

It bu been well aud therefore that alang, in ita general featurea, 
ia hardlr more tban an arbitrary interpretation of the ordinary 
language. It doea not anffice, however, that it should be merely 
conrentional or Ggnrative, elae it might be mnltiplicd ad i^fi/Mtum. 
Bnt being b> a great dc^free the outcome of the humour and wit, 
more or le«a refined, of its promoters, it bean the sUmp of 
aucaam, of callooaneaa, and occasionallj of a grim philoeophy, as, 
for example, when a drunkard is called a "lean away," or a man 
" waiting for a dead man's shoes " is aaid to be " shepherding " his 
rich relative — when a clergyman is jeetingly called a " aky-pilot " or 
a " flre-eecape " — when a man who feeb beaten says that he has been 
" had on toast," and will " give it best." 

Each profeasion or trade haa ita "lingo," not to be mistaken for 
technical phraseology. Thus in cricket "wickets" is technical, but 
" sticks" is slang ; to pnt a "break" on a ball the former, to pnt 
** stuff " on it the latter. " Bone shaker," tiie old type of bicycle, is 
dang ; bnt "kangaroo," the latest improvement on the spider bicycle, 
and which in shape somewhat resembles the primitive " bone shaker," 
bdmiga to the technical phraseology of 'cycle machinists. 

Itaometime* occun that a t«chnical word comes to be used figura- 
tivdy in an humorous and sarcastic sense. Sailors talk alang when 
they say of a drunken man that hie "mainbnce is well spliced," or 
that he is " two sheets in the wind." 

Occasionally a class slang word is adopted by the public, and 
swells the vocabulary of general or " society " slang. This specially 
applies to nautical and sporting phraseology. Thus it is quite pos- 
sible for people who do not belong to the seafaring fraternity to 
hear of a hnsband having to " look out for squalls " when he comes 
home "heeling over" from having dined too well, even if he haa 
not "capsiied" or been "thrown npon his beam-enda" in the 
gntter. And many a penon when asked to contribote to a charity 
haa declared himself " stomped," though he may never have been 
new a cricket-field since he left schooL 

What one might call the classical slang of thieves is technically 
t<TTnM "cant." It haa the appearance of possessing more quaint 
and original features than the more modem lingo, the sole reason 



:v Google 



viii Pn/ace. 

for which a perh&pa that it proceeds from dialecti but little known, 
M for iaataoM Romany, <ar from Celtic and Anglo-Saxon words no 
longer naed aa langnage-worda and known only to a few tcbolan. 

CmU poaaenea but few original temu coined in a direct manner 
by thoae who employ the Toeabolary, for it needa greater imaginatjre 
powers than these light-fingered profenora an generally credited 
with to invent terma that ahall remain and form port of a loiigni^ 
An illtutntion of this may be found in the French argot— taken in 
the narrower sense of malefaett^ language and leaving out alt<^ther 
the Parisian slang — which in spite of all the efforts of Uioee inte- 
rested in the matter has remained very nearly what it was in the 
seventeenth century. 

The components have been elongated, then curtailed, tlien their 
syllables have been interverted, and finally they have reappeared 
under their original form. 

Taking as a starting-point that slang and cant are of an eaeentially 
conventional and consequently metaphoris and Bgurative nature, it 
may safely be asserted that the origin of slang and cant terms must 
certainly be sought for in those old dialect words which bear a 
resemblance in form ; not however in words which bear an apptozi- 
mately identical meaning, but rather in such aa allow of the supposed 
offqirings having a figurative connection of sense. 

The reader will probably best understand what is meant if he 
will, for the sake of aigument, suppose tlie modem T'i"gl'«t' language 
to have become a dead language known only to scholars. Then let 
him take the slang word "top-li^^te," meaning eyes. He is seeking 
the origin of top-Uj^Ui. If he were to find in the old language a 
word having some resemblance in form and bearing the identical 
meaning of eyes he would have to reject it But when he finds the 
SIMM word signifying tfts upper lanttnu 0/ a Mp, he may adopt it 
without hesitation, because the metaphor forms a connection link 
and furnishes a safe clue. 

So far we have spoken rather as if slang were a kind of outlaw 
or Bedouin with every man's hand against it^ but of late yean 
many judicious and intelligent writers have recognised that there is 
a vast nnmber of words which, while current, are still on probation. 



:v Google 



Prt/act. ix 

like emigmtta in qnuantiiw, Awailuig Qie time iriien they an to 
be itoiitttid to the regnlv hanax of the Standard Dictionai;. Bat 
thia incxfaae has been wa enormoiu and ao rapid that no atandaid 
lexioognpher wold do it Jnstiee. It ia generally admitted that to 
keep psee with modem F)«nch jonrnaUnn or noreia, ft " Diddonnaire 
d' Argot' is absolntel7 indiapenuble, and this ii now qnite m much 
ttte case wilJi B"gl"*' And when we consider that it ia not poatible 
to take np a copj of any of Uie leading London sodetj joomala 
withont finding tttj often in one aingle article a doien alang 
[diTaMfl which have nerer jet been given in anj dictionary what- 
ever, it wQl be admitted that a time haa certainly come to pnldiah 
ft diistioiury apon new Unee in which every effort ahaU be made 
to define inch expnoaiona without r^ard to what the department ia 
called to which t^y belong. 

To ahow what a need there in of anch a work, one only haa to 
reflect that a vast number of more i«eent American skng phrasea 
(not old Engliah pnmndaliams catabliahed oi initio in New England, 
bvt tlioae chiefly of modem Weetem manafactnre) have never been 
selected and pnbliehed. And the same may be said of those which 
have crt^iped np and developed themaetvea in the English-speaking 
eoloniea, in the bnsh of Anatralia, or Sontli Africa. Hie real 
ftmonnt of Bomsny, Dntch, Celtic, and Yiddish, in die variona 
slangs, haa never yet been decided by writers who had « thorongb 
knowledge of these langnsgea, and Mr. Hotten, while declaring that 
to the gypsies we are in great measnre indebted for tlie cant lan- 
gnage, and tiiat it was the eomer-stime and a gnat port of the edifice 
of BinglinTi slang, was still ao utterly ignorant of it as to have 
leconive to a vocabnlary of Ronmanian gypsy to explain die very 
few w<»ds of 'Bng^'"*' Bomftny in his work, the gnat mqtwil; of 
which were in aome wfty enoneona. The preaent ia the first Shtng 
Dictionary ever writtm irtiich haa had the benefit of oontribntora 
iriio Utwon^ily nnderatood Celtic dialecta, Dntch, Oerman, and 
nmch ilanft and who were thus enabled to eetabliah their lela- 
tiona with It^l"*' cant, and one of these genUemen is equally 
at bome in Kdgin-En^iah, Oypsy, and Shelta or tinker's slang, 
which by-the-bye is one of the three principal slangs of the kingdom, 



:v Google 



X Prefeee. 

and is here made known tat Vat fint time in a work of Utia kind ; 
thii being also Uie fint Slang Dictionaiy to which the ridi and itfsj 
eUng of the fifth continent — the mighty Anatralian eommonwealtli 
of the fntnra — hu been eontribnted by one long teudent in the 
eonntry and familial- both with its life uid its literature. Informv 
tion haa been gathered at ila veiy source from all classu of society, 
and in every department contribnton have been employed who 
were perfectly at home in their lespectiTe epecialitieo. 

We b^an our preface with Izyii^ to define, or disoovet, Uia 
nature of Uiat ali|^)ery Protens, slang ; after doing which to Uie 
best of oar power, we proceeded to show the neoeari^ for a dic- 
tjonaiy snch as the present and b> instance the precautions 
taken to make it ezhanstiTe. We might have added thsi the 
m^ority of the contiibuton selected were men not only intimate 
with their subject, bnt also of proved ability in lit«ratiu«. We 
conld hardly conclude without making some allusion to the volnme 
iflHch was the forerunner of this, "Ajgot and Slang." One passage 
in ita preface has attiactad much attention for its terse enunciation 
of what is generally recognised. 

" Slang has invaded all classes of society, and is often used for 
want of terau suffieienUy strong to convey the speaker's real feel- 
ings. It seems to be resorted to in order to make up for the ahort- 
comingi of a well-balanced and polished tongue which will not lead 
itaelf to exaggeration and violence of utterance. Jonmslista, artists, 
politicians, men of fashion, soldiers, even women, talk aigo^ aoma- 
times onawaiee." A carious illoitration of Ukis has just been 
brought under tlie editor's notice, A gentleman had been pub- 
liahing for some years with the same firm of publishers, but with 
very varying snccesa. " I can nev^ for the life of me," he used to 
eomplain, " tell whether Mr. Pompons means that my new book ia 
a poor one or a had ona. His letters are tissues of wniftr csrioHi 
etnuMdaMf, (w Aovld not ftd juttifitd ta adtrUing (or not adviaingX 
m tiu pntmt dait <^ iKt puHie toitf U it impcttOU to pr^diet, con- 
ceivably, &&" But a year or two ago a college friend of ttiia author 
became a member of this firm of publishers. In due time another 
book was submitted, and the answer came from the new partner — 



:v Google 



PrtfiKt. zi 

" ILj dear , it would be rat pnblialiiiig a thing like tliu. Tho 

pnblie would nwrt kt it. Tonra vei7 trnl^, ' The antbor'a 

eomfide n ee in hia pnbliaher went up % hnndred per cent Then 
WM now « member of the firm enffieiently intimate witii him to 
employ " ala-np " in tJieir ^ ji m mnwif^ t.iftiiM uid the author knew that 
from that time he would be able to teU to a fraction the exact grade 
of value tliej put upon ever; work he ofFered them. "Slang" ia an 
eaential of tlu age. Even a bishop haa used it in the pnlpit, in a 
modified form, when he aaid that "Society wonld be impoadble 
withont white liea." It aeems as if the day was not far off when 
it might be tme to aay that " Sode^ would be impotsible without 
•lang." 

One thing ia certun, that the taste of the age ia to leam speci- 
alitica from tliow who have a epeeial knowledge of them. The 
public that goe« to aee ttw life of the Wild West and the prize-rin^ 
rqoice alao- in realistic nurels by those whose special knowledge beat 
qualifies them for the work, whetlier it be an uncanny familiaritj 
with the mysteries of the Far Vest, or the mysteries of Paris ; and 
these kind of works, as a rule, abound above all others in technical 
czjireadons and a^ot Oianted that people of the same country as 
the author are generally able to nnderstand these by the context 
without the labour of a dictionary, a very email percentage of the 
intelligent foreigners who make a practice of reading T!"gt''Ti works 
of note could, without the ud of a vocabulary, be able to decipher 
the multifarionB "lingos" which enter into these books, and this 
is just tlie class who will be moat aaaisted by the arrangement 
adopted in tbie work of givuig all the various departmenta of alang 

A. B. 



:v Google 



:v Google 



A BRIEF 

HISTORY OF ENGLISH SLANG. 

By CHARLES G. LELAND. 



■T doM not seem to hxve occnned to any writer that the 
chief reason ^ij the earl; histoij of porely English 
sUng is oliacDie, is because that previoiu to a certain 
determinate date, thexo was really so little of it, that 
it hardly eiisted at alL There can be no biography of 
a child worth writing ao long oa it can babble only a few words. It 
is probable that of these few early slang words, none bare been lost. 
Daring the S&ion Early English and Middle English periods, there 
were provincial dialects, familiar forms of speech, and vnlgarisms, 
but whether a distinct wLnting tongue was current in "F'^gla-nH ^ re- 
nuuns as yet to be esteblished. That the tinker* or metal-workers, 
who roamed all over Great Britain, were a peculiar people^* with a 
peculiar Celtic language called Shelta, may be true, but canting as 
yet did not exist. 

No discorenea bare as yet been made which cast much lif^t on 
the procees by which English canting or the language of the looee 
and dangerous classes, «m first formed. This much we know, that 
in "P!Tigl«nHj to a beginning of antiquated and provincial or perverted 
words, a few additions were mode of Welsh, Irish, or Gaelic, with 
here and there a contribution bata the Continent It seems to be 
evident that this rill of impure English, most defiled, was a very 

* Jobs BDD7a% it may be rwusmbarad, mim siIemI bii fstber wbetber tba 
tmkm were not "a paouliar people." Reguded (rom tnj point of view, 
tUi bidkktM tbst b« SDSpeoted tbay wen not BnglMi, BimTan, aooordins 
lo raosat nsaanbM, oould not have bam a gTpay, bat u a tinker he nvat 
turn known Skdla, or the old Unker'a language, and ttiarefore uatqnll; 
aoqMOtad that be belonged to aiinM kind at leparate nao. 



, Google 



xiv A Bruf History of EngltsA Slatig. 

■lender one. But u C. J. Bibton Turner mggeela, it wu the vriv«t 
of the gTpsiee in Engl&nd sbont 150J, ipeeking )^ Qttamlvm • 
perfect lengoege, iriiich etimnUted d>e EngUih nomade to g i ft ly 
improve their own rode and eeenty jargon. According to Samuel 
Bowlande, whoae work, " The Rnnnagate'e Bace," qipeued is 1610^ 
one Cock Lorrell, a gKat rsacal, but evidently a man of talenta, 
became, in 1501, the acknowledged head of all the atrollera in Eng- 
land. Thia person tormed his followen into a regular guild or 
order, according to the spirit of the tune in which he lived, and 
obeerving that the gjpnee, under their leader, Qilee Hatiior, were a 
powerful and npidly inoeaaing bodf , he propoeed to them a general 
oonndl and anion of interala and language. 

" After a time that theee vp-etart Loaeels had got nito a head, the 
two chief Commaunden of both theee regimenta met at the Dinela- 
arM.*-peak, there to parle and inbeete of matten that mi^t tend to 
the eelablialung of thia their new fonnd gouemment ; and flnt of all 
the^ think it fit to deuise a oertaine kinde of Language, to Hie end 
that their conaenings, knaneriee, and villainiee mi^t not be so eaailj 
perceined and knowne in placea where they come." 

Here Samuel Bawlonde, apeaking ignorantly, eajs that thia 
tongue was made up out of Latin, Englieh, and Dutch, with a few 
wordi borrowed from Spanish and Franch. To thia day it is com- 
mon enough for " bweUere," or gypeiee, to tell the ignorant that the 
language which thej speak is I^tin, French, or I>atch, Ac From 
the language iteel^ as given b^ Bobert Copland (1535), and Hannan 
(" Caveat for Cursitora ") in 1 567, it appean that the gypeiee actually 
ccmtribnted a certain amount of Bomany, bnt that with their 
natural dialike to teach it^ they made this contribution aa small aa 
poasible — thou^ it is larger than Mr. Turner suppoees. He haa, 
however, with very approximate accuracy, shown tiie various Celtic 
origins of the terms not reducible to English or Saxon. Of lAtin 
he finds only eight words, of which two are very doubtful, while 
two others, gtny (Le. jtrry), excrement, and peck, meat, are plainly 
&om the Bomany/trr (rectum vel KurttMnftm), and p«Uer, roast, «.«., 
roast meat It is too hr afield to seek these common gypsy w^nds 
in the Latin gtrrts, trifiee, and ptciu, cattle. 

This was the beginning made of the canting or thievee* tongue, 
and it must be admitl«d that the first meeting of this Philological 
Oriental Congress for the purpoee of forming a language waa 
probaUy not deficient in a certain pictnreeque element, and an able 
artiat might find a worse aubject than thia grand council of the 



:v Google 



A Bruf History of English Slang. 



__ 1 their ctvem among the hiUa. It ii to 

be obaerred that Human, ■ magubate who wu not aalj vaij 
familiar with «nrj t^pe of crimiuala, bnt who vaa the flrat who 
ever pnbliahed a canting yocabolarj, dedaiei that it vat oaZy 
witkm UUriy ftan prwiotu to 1567 Oud Oia iafttgerov* efauw hoi 
hyiMt to UN a familiar jargon ai aU. Hr. Tnmet aayi that thia 
■tatement ia litUe better than a gueas at the trath ; but Horman, 
who aeenu to have been an earnest and honeat writer, ezplidtlf 
deelarea that his statement waa the result of inquiry among many, 
or to nae his own words : "As far as I can leame or nnderrtand ij 
the examination of a mmier of them, their langnage — which the;r 
terme peddelan Frenche or canting— bepn bat within theae xxi: 
jMTca or Ijttle abore." 

What confirms this statement if it does not actnally prore it, 
ia the &ct that Hannan, tbon^ he evidently Ubonred hard to 
make a full vocabnlaij and had many facilities for collecting woid% 
gives nj in all only abont 1601 while those who came after him in the 
field are accused of only repeating him. Bat the trath probably 
ia, that Hamuui was quite right ; canting wai really young in his 
time, and small in proportion to its age. Its growth may be very 
dekrly tnced in drainatic, ccmic, or criminal literature from 153$, 
aa shown by Bobert Copland in his "Hye Way to the Spyttel 
House,' down to the present day. 

In old r».TiHiig Qie most striking element is the large proportion 
<rf Celtic words, drawn from all parts of Great Britain. Tomer has 
observed that the Act 5 Edward III. c 14, affords evidence that the 
Welsh gmtlw, " unbidden gnest," or vagabond, was a public nuisance 
in England prior to 1331. In foct the Welsh and Irish stroller, or 
professional rogue and b(^;gar, waa a oonunon type represented and 
ridicnied in brottdaidn or plays till within a century.* Edicts and 
Acts df t^liament, and the most vigorous punishment and reahip- 
ment of "ye vacabonea" to Uieir homes, were utterly ineffectual to 
keep them out of England. In the TJng iia b " kennick " or ra».n^ ing 
of the lowest clasats of the present day, the greater proportion of 

■ A majori^ of tb«w tiaiaUn* tad tnunpa in gnglwid, wbo ars nmplj 
tnggai* asd thl*TM, and who do not sMk lor work, srs itill Iriili. Full 
fabmMtioa on tUs tat^tcst tatj bs fotuid in tbe " Hiitory of Tkgnota and 
Vagttnej," bj C. J. Blbtoa ^inMr ; aod it ms; b* Mid with tnitb th^t all 
the orimiosli «( tbe towns and dtiM pat tog«th«r do not injara Uw aaontiy 
at large aa mneh w tbe** onatniM, wbo vxrj Ties into tmj bamlo^ and 
iato Um mnoteit oonwn cf Uw klDgdom. 



, Google 



A Britf History of English Slang. 



Celtic temu are appaientlj not t&ken dnttMn fiom Gaelic, Ene, 
Welah, or Uanx, bat from a wngnl^F and ni;iterio<u laogoage called 
ShelU (Celtic I), or UMitu Thari (tinlwn' bOl:), which it apohen 
\ij a Tuy large proporticin of all prorincial ti&kan (who elaun for 
it great antiquity), aa well aa by many other Tagabtatda, eapeeially 
by all the Irish who are on the roada. The very exittenra of Ukia 
dialect waa eompletely nnknown nntil 1867, ita Toeabolarr and 
qiecimena of the langnage being flnt pnblialied in "The Qypsea" 
(Boaton, 1880). It haa been ingeniooaly coqjectnted by a reviewer 
that as all the Celtic tinkera of Great Britain formed, until the 
nilmad era, or about 184;, an extremely done avpontlon, alwaya 
intermarrying and aa they are all fiimly peranaded that their 
tinkerdotn and tongue] are extremely andent, they may poeaibly 
be d««cendanta of the early bronae-workem, who alao perambu- 
lated the conntiy in bands, baying up broken implementa and 
aelling new onea. Thie ia at lea«t certain, that the tinkera aa a body 
were vary clanniah, had a atrongly-marked chancter, a wetl-de- 
veloped langnage of their own, and that while they were extiemelj 
intimate with the gypaiea, often taking wivea from among them, 
and being sometimea half-blood*, they itill always remained 
(wiJbI«n and spoke Shelta among themaelTea. The natme of thia 
alliance is very singular. In Scotland the tinkUr is popularly 
identified with the gypsy, but even half-blood tinklers, aucb 
aa the Hacdonalds,* who speak Romany, do not call themselves 
gypsies, but tinklers. The caste deserves this brief mention since 
it haa apparently been the chief source through which Celtic worda 
have come into English canting — an assertion which ia not the mare 
eoqjecture of a philoli^pat, but the opinion of more than one vefj 
intell^[ent and well-infonned vagabond. It is vety remarkable tliot 
though Sbelta ia more or leaa extensively spoken even in London, 
and thoQgfa it haa evidently had a leading inflnenoe in contributing 
the Cdtic element to canting, thus far only one writer has ever 
pnbliahed a line relative to it. Hotten or hia collaboratenrs seem, 
in common with Tumar and aU other writ«ra on vagabond*, never 
to have beard of its existence. It will probably be recognised by 
future analyata of canting that in all casee where a corruiAed Celtic 
word is found in it, it will be necMsary to aacertain if it did not 
owe ita change to having passed tbtough the medium of Shelt&. 



:v Google 



A Brit/ History of En^ish Shng. 



Tbongh the gypajr contribution to canting was not ezteiurre, it 
wai much lu^r than manf eztenaive writ«n on vagabonda have 
supposed, and it is worth noting tliat a noniber of our most char- 
acteriatic slang words, such a« row, shindj, tool (in driving), mash 
(i.e^ to fascinate), pal, chivvy, and especially the arch-term alang 
itself, are all Bomany. It is not lematkable that Cock Lorrell 
recognised in the gypeies "a race with a. back-bone," and one 
from whom something could be learned. Their blood "had rolled 
tltron^ scoundrels ever since the flood," and from the begin- 
ning they had spoken not a mere slang, but a really beautiful and 
perfect language resembling Hindustani or CidO, but which waa 
madi older. The constituentH of tliis tongue are Hindi and Fer- 
■iao — the f«Hiner greatly predominating — with an admixture of 
fither Indo- Aryan dialecn. It waa first suggested in "English 
Gypdes and their language" that the true origin of the Rom ot 
gfgKj was to be found among the Dom, a very low caste in India, 
whitji sprung from the Domai, a mountain tanbe of shepheid- 
lobben ; and recent researches by U r. Grierson among the Bibari 
Dom have gone far to confirm the conjecture. Ita author also 
discovered that there exists to-day in India a wandering bibe 
known as ZVoijb, who call themselves Bom, and who are in all 
respects identical with the Syrian and European gypaiea. About 
the tentli century, owing to political convulsions, there were ui 
India a great number of outcasts of different kinds. Among 
Ibeae the JSU, a fierce and warlike tribe, crushed by Mahometan 
power, seemed to have coalesced with t}ie Doms or Bom, the 
aemi-Persian Lnri or Nuri (originally Indian), and othetH, and 
to luve migrated westward. Uikloeich, in a very learned work, 
has, hj uudyaing the language aa it now exists, pointed out 
tlte Oraek, Slavonian, and other words which they picked up «» 
nMU. It was about the beginning of the fifteenth century that a 
bttnd of abont 300 of these wanderers flist appeared in Oermony, 
whence they in & few years spread themselves over Europe, so that 
within a decade many thousands of them penetrated to every comer 
of the GoniinenL They were evidently led by men of great ability. 
Iliey represented themselves as pilffrims, who, because they had 
become i«n<gadefl from Christianity, had been oidered by the King 
of Hni^ary as a penance to wander for fifty years aa pilgrims. 
They had previously by telling the same story, but adapted to the 
faith of Uahomet, got a foothold in %ypt They thus obtained 
official license to make themselves at home in every country, except 



:v Google 



A Brief History o/£ngUsh Skmg. 



in England, ^et w«nt there ftU the ume. Andrew Borde, the 
eccentric [dijaiciui, who lived during the reign of Henrj VIII., was 
the fint penon who m&de (in i $42) a vocabnlaiT of their langiuge, 
which he did under the impreeBion that it was " Egyptian ' or the 
conent tongae of Egypt. Booaventura Tulcanius, in 1597, in hia 
caricraa book " De Litcria et Lingua Oetarum," aUo gave (pecimena of 
Bomany aa "Nubian." T^e first European writer who diacovered 
that Romany waa really of Hindu origin, was J. C. Rodiger, and 
thia he announced in a book entitled " Keueater Zuwacha der Sprach- 
konde," Halle 1783. He waa followed by Orellmann, whose work 
woa much more copiooa. It waa tnuulated into English at the begin- 
ning of thie century, and pMsed thro<^ three editions. George 
Borrow, in his novels of " lAvengro " and " The Romany Rye," pub- 
lished about 184s, and in "The Qypaies in Spain," first told the pub- 
lic much about this subject^ and bis influence was very great both 
in England and on the Continent in awakening an int«rest in iL 
Among more recent writers. Dr. Bath C. Smart, Francis Groome, 
and the writer, have been the principal collectors of Anglo-Bwnany 
lore. Borrow, who knew the gypsies so well, was far from being 
perfect in their language, as he declared positively that there an 
only I30O words in the English dialect ; more recent researchea 
have more than doubled the number. 

The next element of importance which enters into English aUng 
of the middle type, subsequent to old cant, is Ihitch. Of thid there 
are two separate Murcea. In England, fnnn the time of William 
of Orange nntil that of George II., there waa a constant inllnx 
of NtdtrduyUA, whUe in America, the State of New fork, while 
anbject to Holland, contributed an equally large proportion of qnaint 
ex^esdona, and of these in time there was great interchange between 
the old country and the new. To detect many of these, one mnat 
go much deeper into Dutch than the standard dictionaries, and 
descend to TeirlinckV and other collections of thieves' slang, or dig 
into such old works as those of Sewel, in which the vulgar and anti- 
quated words " to be avoided " are indicated by signs. As 'Rn gtif h 
and Dutch belong to the same stock, it natumlly results that numb«n 
of onr provincial or obsolete terms are the same or nearly the same 
in both ; in such cases we hare generally placed them together. An 
ezaminatim of the work cannot fail to convince any one that our 
indebtcdnew to this source is much greater than has ever been sup- 
posed. But as these derivations are often as doubtful as they are 
numerous and plausible, the editor, with the example of Bellenden 



:v Google 



A Brit/ History of EngUsk Slang. 



SetT'* before him, would beg Uw nwlertoobaerTe that in thi>work 
no andoit or foreign woids are adTtwced u paaitiodjf eatabliahing 
tbe e^mologf.of anj eUng expression, bnt are rimpljr adduced aa 
mdiwtting pottBih relations. The daj has gone by when it mfficed 
to show something like a reaemblance in sound and meaning between 
a dosen Choctaw and as many Hebrew word^ to prore podlivelf 
tbat the Bed Indiann are Jews. Bat "wild goess-wcrk" is still 
qirrent even in very learned works, and though "in a pioneer way" 
it ia nsefnl in affording hints to tnie philologists, it should never 
claim to be mote than mere conjecture, 

Dtmug the reign of Queen EUnbeth many Italian words fonnd 
their way not only into English liUTatnre but also into slang, and 
additions have oecasicnially been made nnce then from the same 
■onrce. Thus fogU, a handkerchief, ia beyond question the Italian 
f»jl*a, a leaf, also slang for a silk handkerchief (Florentine fetio), 
wad not the Qoman >o^ a bird, as Hotten dedarea. The nnmber 
of tb<M derivations is much larger than has ever been snppoeed, 
and much of the mine is still unworked. 

Old canting retained its chancter until the teign of Charles IL, 
wben ft great deal of general slang began to he current, which waa 
BOt eonnected in any way with the jargon of the dangerous c lass c ai 
Bit*, maeorom, and quta were slang, bnt not cant ; they originated 
in or were first made popular by fashionable people. PoUowing the 
Bpaniab Qneredo, and other writers of the vida hmanlttca, or "tag- 
lag^and-bobtail school,'' as models, not only the diamatist^ hat 
antlKwa like Sir Roger L'Estoange and Defoe need directly, or put 
into the moaUis of tlteir heroes, a hmiliar, het and cfsy, offhand 
Mfit, which was anything bnt conventional, or as many may think, 
etxrect Pedantic writen also continued b» more tiian a century 
to deliberately mannfaetuie in great quantity, from ^^*^". wcada 
of the kind used by the nnfortnnate Limousin student who was 
beaten by Gaigantoa. An " abont-town ' dialect was developed 
by "Uoods" and wits, in which Dutch, Italian, and French bepn 
to appear more frequently than of yan. Oypsy and old i-awtiiig 
lemw roe now and then from the depths, or dr^i, and remained 
on the surfiue. It waa during this which may be called tlie middle 
■lang epoch, that those conventional or colloquial terms b^an to be 



u Ingwiiooi sod •eeaotrio week in two Tfilnmw, id <rUeh 
prora that mast EkiglUi p ni r erij i^ wjiMii, and oBnmj 
a Hotsrio Menipg. b^ng nally 



:v Google 



A Brief History of English SbtMg, 



current^ wliich, without being mdgar or directly MMciated with 
crime, were, owing to their aoveltv, flippuu^, or "tattaem," itiJl 
kept in limbo, or under probation. It has been tmly enough B&id 
that the old sUng was altogether couM or Tolgar, aiid that there 
was mibaequently a great increase in the aamber of low and obacene 
terms classed with it, a growth which went on Tigorooal; until Uie 
end of the reign of George IV. But while Bntler, Swift, Tom 
Brown, Grose, and scores of minor artiste dealt out more or less 
' dirt or deviltry," it should be remembered that the accretion of new 
phrases, which were in no way " immoral," was really much greater. 

Abont this time, daring the latter part of the seventeenth century 
and the fint half of the eighteenth, was the banning of the vast 
array of words now in familiar ose, which are unjustly called dan^ 
because that term forces upon them aasociationB with vulgaris uid 
crime which they no more merit than that leaves or flowers ^ald 
be identified with the dirt from which they grow. This quarantine 
language is simply the natural and inevitable result of a rapid in- 
crease in inventions, needs, new sources of humour, and, in fact, of 
all social causes. New names are in a* great demand as they were 
of yore, when heathen were converted and baptiied in batches. 
Then they were often sll called John or James by the tboosand 
"for short," but now we are more diecriminatdng and analytical. 
But it is to be observed that hitherto no writer whatever haa ever 
dealt with these quarantined words or piobationen in the spirit 
which they merit, or pointed out the fact that they fulfil a Intimate 
function in language, or attempted to collect them in a book. 

It would appear to have been about a century ago that a few 
Tiddish, or Uebrew-Oerman, words began to creep into English 
slang. When we consider that fully one-half of the itothwalach or 
real slang of Germany is of this kind of Hebrew, and also the great 
nnmben of persons who speak it, it ia remarkable that we really 
have ao little of it As an instance of the guess-work philology 
which we have alluded to, it may be pmnted out that the common 
Jewiah word gonnof (Hebrew gan^), a thie^ ia according to Hotten 
very old, in English, because it is found in a song of the time ri 
Edward TI. as gnoffe I 

" The oaimlT7 mnogtt. Hob, Dlek, and WOl, 
With alabs and clciat«d shoaD, 
Bball All up "Ovrnja Date 
With aUnghtwed bodio hmd." 

But gnofft, according to Wright, does not mean a thief at all, but 



:v Google 



A Brief Hi^ory of EtigUsh Slang. 



a ehaii (also on old miser). Its true root is probablj in the An^o- 
Saxon aieov, enirf, or aiAvan (also cntav, knave), to bend, yield to, 
atao^oH igem^lmiert}. If conntry boon or peasants be therefore the 
meaning of gnofftt, it would be in Yiddish ksferim. This remarkable 
dialect is now spoken by some thoosanda of persons in London, and 
there are one if not two newspapers published in it The editor 
has not only the Oerman-Jewish OAratomolw of Mar QrUnhanm, 
and many books written in Yiddish, hnt also eleven voeabnlaries 
of it, one of which, a MS. of about 3000 words, is by far the most 
extensive ever compilefl. It aeems not unlikely tJiat the word 
polur, as a game of cards, is derived bom Yiddish, since in it poehgtr 
(from poAgen) means a man who in play conceals the state of his 
winnings or losses, or bides his band. This is so eminently char- 
acteriatie of pofer that tiie resemblance seems to be something more 
than merely accidentaL There have always been Jewish card- 
players enough in tbe United States to have given the word. The 
most remarkable and desperate game of poker within the writer^ 
knowledge (in which not only a fortune but a life were risked) 
occurred on board a Mississippi steamer, its bero being a Jew. 

Of late years many Anglo-Indian and pidgin-En^ish, or Atiglo- 
Chineae words, have become familiar to the public. For the former 
onr chief authority has been the "Qloasary of Anglo-Indian Colloquial 
Words and Phrases, and of Kindred Terms," by CoL Henry Yule and 
file late Arthur Coke Bumell (870 pp. 8vo, London, John Murray, 
ifi86), a copious work, as remarkable for extensive eradition aa for 
sagacity, common-sense, and genial humour. For pidgin-Enj^h 
we have used tbe only work extant on the subject, vix., " Pidgin- 
English Ballads, with a Vocabnlary," by C. Q. Leland (London, 
Trtibner & Co, 1887). This remarkable dialect, owing to the ease 
with which it is acquired, ia now spreading so rapidly all over tbe 
East that Sir Bichard Burton thinks that it may at no distant date 
become the Imgtut-fiwiea of the whole world. 

Anything like a distinct hittory of the development of BngliA 
slang has hitherto been impoasible, owing to the ignorance of most 
ot those who have put themselves forward as its analysts and lexieo- 
grapherB. Samuel Rowlande told the world that gypsy and canting 
had resolved themselves into one and tbe same thing, and following 
his lead, .one authority after the other, such as the author of tbe 
"Life of Bampfytde Moore Carew," gave us as "Gypsy" vocabu- 
laries, works in which hardly a traca of Romany was to be found. 
In vain did GrcUmann, Hoyland, and Oeorge Barrow explain that 



:v Google 



A Brief History of EngUsk Slang. 



tlwae wanderera ipoke ui Oriental language — eren Hr. Edwaid 
OoBH, in his " Memoii of Samnel Bowlaude," saji that " ' Hartin 
Uarkall' ia entirely in in^we, except aome queer jypiy eongi ' — the 
"871*7 aongi' in question haying le« reaembUnce h> gjrpsj than 
Engliah haa to Spuiiah or French. The editor haa before him a 
work written and published within a few years, called "The New 
Tork Slang Dictiunary," in wbich the writer tells ns that "bitt ia 
a word in the gypsf jangnage, from which most Rngiiah alang ia 
derived " (Mtt not being Romany at all), 'and assnrea the reader that 
his book (which is simply a re-hash of Grose, wit^ the addition of 
■oma purely modem Americauiams) will enable him to make him- 
self nnderstood in the slnma of St. Petersburg, Paria, or in any 
countty in the world I In common with tax greater critica aAd 
acholara, he believea Uiat gypsy ia a mixture of .all £arope«> 
tougnea and corrupt English, when, in fact, it does not contain a 
aingle French wotd.* Hotten had a far better knowledge of the 
constituent elements of slan^ unfortunately be bad not even an 
average "amatteriug' of the langnagea which mvM be uaderstood, 
and that into their very provincialiama, B^>ta, and cormptiont, in 
order to solve the origin of all the really difficult problems in tL 
Be knew that the poet, Thomas Moore, made a great mistake in 
believing that i-^iTiting waa gypsy, but he knew nothing, whatever 
of Bomany, and asBerte that it is minted ap and confused with 
canting and ia ignorant enough to declaie that "had the gypsy 
tongue been analysed and committed to writing three centuries ago, 
there is every probability that many scores of words now in common 
use could be at once traced to its source." This was the result of an 
erroneous belief that Mr. Borrow knew everything of English Romany 
that could be known, while the fact is that by comparison with 
Continental dialeete, and with the aid of what Mr. Borrow did lut 
know, it ia tolerably certain that the Enf^h BJVY "^ three Gen< 
tnriea ago ia by no means the lost language which he assumed it 
to be. 

The last and not least important element in En^iah slang oonaiata 
of Americanisms. The original basia or beginning of these is to be 
found in Yankeeisms or words and phrases peculiar at fint to New 
Kngland. They consisted chiefly of (dd Engliah provincialism^ 



:v Google 



A Brief History of English Slang. xxill 

witit an impcfftuit addition of Dutch which came over the border 
from Hew York and New Jersey, and a few Canadian-Ftench 
cxpnauona. For Iheae the dictionary of Hr. Bartlett is ko. invalu- 
able Kniioe of reference; We cannot piaiae too highly ibe indiuti; 
and aagaeity manif etted in that work. His weak point lies in the 
fact Uut having been gnided by dictdonariea such as that of Wright, 
be too frequently awtunee that a word which ii marked as provincial 
la not genenlly known in England. Hence he gives as peculiarly 
and Bcdely American words which have no special claim to be re- 
prded aa sQch. In addition to these moetly Saz<Hi-bom terms, 
there is a mnch greater number of quaint eccentric espiessions of 
Weatem and Sondiem giowtli, which incEease at such a rate that one 
mi^t easily compile firom a very few newspaper* an annual volume 
of new ooMi Tet again, En^iah slang phrases are continually 
being received and shifted into new meanings and forma, as caprice 
or need may- dictate. It may surprise the reader to learn that the 
works of Aztemus Ward, Bret Haite, Uark Twain, and other standard 
bmnonrist^ are by no means the great mines of ilang which they 
■fe popularly supposed to be. It is in the newspapers, especially 
in tbeir teporta, theatrical or local, and not infrequently in the 
"editorials," that the new racy and startling words occur, as they 
are improvised and picked up. This dictionary contains a lai^ge 
collection of true and recent Americau colloquial or slang phrases, 
and though the works of the great American humourists have been 
coiefnlly searched for tins purpose, it will be found that the mtgo- 
titf of terms given are from other aonrces. The reader who is 
fam'H" with fisrtlett and other writen on AmericanismB, can judge 
for himself to what extent— or to what a slight extent — we are 
"indebted" to them. It is true that they are frequently cited, but 
in the great m(y<»i^ of instances it has been for the purpose of 
eomction, emendattim, or illustration of their definitions. 

Hm history of Slang is that of the transition of languages into 
new forms, and from this point of view it may be assumed that 
aneb a work as the present will be of as great interest to the 
tborongh student of bistoiy as the folk-lore to which it properly 
belra^ ot anything else which indicates the phaiea of culture. 



:v Google 




:v Google 



A DICTIONARY 



SLANG, JARGON, AND CANT. 



(papoiMz), • fonn 



tdgh degree of exoel- 



TbvT ■mctimo dnip thing! in ibdr flight, 
TboH thinci of cotint 1 uk€ ; 

To lean itwn tbcn to Mmpl Ibe poor 
WoBld be ■ gitu raiitakc. 

—tImA HmaStne- 

The ezpnnlcin ia alM nied ad- 
rerbiaUj. 

HT ftitodi RBuk, " Ob, whu ■ Uii: 
11h7 ht m'n Iwo ynmff dlli«, aad 

But yOB jut k*n my Fnd iloBc, 

H«'b nch B luwwlng ion, 
H* t>Ti (he maDcy out ^ i, 

And Ihit h Khnl h*'i boosht. 

—itiit& JfrnU Sn^. 



Kmt. 

lamAi.lamuH right, oom- 
fntabki. 



Itortgiiiatedtn)mJi,£&i|id'«, 
BO KbbrerlAtloii commonly used 
in mennntik clrolea to iodl- 
cftte tbe ohanctet of a ship 
sod Its nppoiQtmenta. To be 
cOasaed At at IXoySt meuu 
tlwt the nssd, its aoobois, 
saUa, taoUe, and Htorei baTe 
been examined bj official m- 
vejon, and found to be io 
good tiim, enUUing it to ba 
lanked as first class. When a 
vessel fails to reach the highest 
standard, other marks are be- 

A. I or No. t (fenian). The latter 
is oftea inoorreotly nsed. It 
■honld be A\, a title for the 



Aaron (thleree). Tbe Jotm Is 
the chief ot c^tain of a gang 
or school of thieresL This 
cognomen is iDvariably ao- 
oompaoled with the prefix Tkt 
—par exoellenoe (As flnt— slml- 



:v Google 



2 Aaron — Abatuhned. 

lar t<) the aldMt MpnMntK- KtmUoa (old), s tu^ilMiimn 

tlTe of occtMln Iriah and Sootoh thief, one who tnm* infoimar 

olana or f»mlUM, noh aa n« agaliut hi* teUow-ngaM, Tiota 

O'CouoT Don, Tka Cbiaholm, Ao. the Hebraw o&wMmi, * do- 

Aj ^armt mi the Ant high- aktajw \ often oonfonnded with 

pdMt, aitd the ^otmm an the tlMCoelciiejiain«-iad-'wi,»l»d 
chief* of the Hebrew tribea, it 
ii piobaUj til Jewiah origin in 
ita slang ^^oation. ^armw 



Tbc primtr, HoMT Uotu, bMMr 



doantl«nn for a oadget th. .ma,., hu bMd. u. .; k»*i.dc*. 

who OOmUned begging with far dw Im tmotr mn > rccdiw tod 

actlDg aa a guide to the mim. *••'" >" •»»" pnip«tT.-«<*»r* ifikt 
mite of mountain*, ohleflj to T^^nf^GflGMD^RM^. 
etade the lawi a^tlnrt vaga- 
bondage, no doabt a fa.-; In Abandaaoud (thlerea), otw who 
ita alang aeue on It* Hebrew ''■^ ^^ libert; bj oo miwl tti n g 
•qninleut, lofty. an act of oontamptible petty 
laiooDy. nie phiaae oiiglnatad 

A-baa (varioM). Aa ofcM oon, thiongh a footpad robbing a 
a bad man; an aboA mnC, a woman of a palby bandanna 
■Ulj poaon. Among trade (benoe otaa jjaaaa i) abawl 
nnloniita aa oiaa elgblfiea a mnedatninepanoe,forwhloha 
non-onionlrt, who la geuenDy notoiioM Ugh-olaaa, or "high- 
aas^led with the deriatTSahont, ^*^'' *l>l*if> <»>• "Kiddj Hai^ 
"Baa, baatblaofcaheep." rla," waa hanged, aKhoDghlnno- 

oent of any oooneotioii with the 

Abactcr <old), a diahoneat diorer robbeiy, the nal onlpclt hating 
or shepherd, one who oonuiTea *^^^ '"v oonfeaaed to the 
at the Bt««liiig of hif m*«ter'a CErlma. The poor pnaeontiix 
cattle. Probably from the lAtln waa ao horrified at dlaoorarlag 

odutorw, itealera of cattle. Iw miataken IdantUcatlon that 

Oite of the tricks ot the a6- alio became a Imiatlo. This 
aettr* of old SmitfaSeld was Inddant waa the chief oanaa 
the drlTing a bollock into a of the passing of Sir Samnd 
jeweller's or other ahop, ami Romllly'a Act for the abolition 
dniing the oonfoslon and uoite- of cai^tal poniibment for rob- 
ment of ezpaUon the a6aM«r'i beriea 0° tlw highway of pro- 

confedeiateB, under the cloak peri,y under for^ ahllllnga 
of asaiBtBitce, woald help them- ralne. 
■elTCB to any nlnalde* bandy. 

The AtmuA Stgiiltr for 1818 Abaodoned haUti (society), the 
records that one shop was to riding oostnme of the "Pretty 
served three tlmea in that HoisebMaken" of "the Lady'a 
jm. Mile," In Hyde Park. 



:v Google 



Abandonus — Abbrevtaiions. 



AliinrlnnfiH (prarliMlal), hooae- 
litm tammpt, wwkUicn. (Har- 
\ctaj), t. iwUtnt e who bu 
^tthtff dMVtod her husband or 
bMD alvndnMd bj hitw 



; tdtf term tor the 
bankrapfa^ of * railin7 oom> 
pwj. 



Abbcai, lutr (oteileU). tha ml«- 
k toothal, mlM A pro- 




Tb« fnnutM wen call«d the 
" Don*," and WHnetlinM "Blaten 
of ChBiitj." The Raioh iluig 
hkd lOfmerlj the tomsptmSiztg 
(u,pi union " allitmt" the catab- 
Uihment being termed " oUoik 
itt t'l^fr* d l«««," the fninatee 



Abber-JnUw (nimUokl). TUa U 
an old term ti. leproaoh for Idle* 
neai. and la appUed oiilj to the 
naatloa] hiUfr. In the " Bnm- 
>iige of FMile's Chvnb, 1563," 
ttlatbaa^[pbdned: "AnoUqr* 
toUn-, that waa Idle, weU-fad, 
ft 1«« lewed Utber Ldtem, 



Abbot, tba fuwr man or buband 
otaaabboM. A ooder'd oUot, 
or aU«< on the cniai, a man 
who keepa a brothel more for 
the pnipoee of robberj and ei> 
tortlcoi than that of pnwUtv- 



AbbnvUtloiw. Oite of the moat 
notable ligna of the degiadft- 
tlon and dotecloration of a lan- 
piage ia the popular habit. In 
many other oonntrlea beaidaa 
Bngiaad, of abbrerlftttng worde 
and redstdng them to their flnt 
•yllahlea, aa If in ft taat age 
tlM oommoa mnltitnde had only 
time to expnaa theniMlye* in 
iaaoo«7llal>lea. It pwraila alike 
in the learned haUa of Oxford 
and Cambridge and the loweat 
(Inms of St. OilM'i and White- 
obapel. Among the moat pro- 
minent may be oited the follow- 
ing which, though itriotly apeak- 
ing are not alang, tonoh on 
It aa not being the origimd 
forms. Wlienwiltten or printed 
thej are simply teohnkal and 
GonTentional, bnt naed Terbftlly 
they are slang. 

AJkC, Ald»4e-Camp ; Ad.a, 
adJDtant; Ad Ub., ad {{Ulna; 
A.Q.II.O., Aatlstant Qoaitw- 
Haater-Oeneral i Ui, bnitPBaa; 
C. In 0., GommaDder.in-Ghief ; 
0.-0., Commanding- Offloer ; 
<M', " Criterion "(restaotant); 
D.A.Q.ll.a., Depn^-Asiiitant 
QDBrter - Master -OcMral; Sz- 



:v Google 



Abbrematbrns — Ab^aiL 



am., rndTOfitj or oompeti- 
tl*« eoaminattw ; S«l, gn- 
tlamaai tha ffigk. High Street, 
Oxtotd; I.O., Iii«peoU»i-G«Da- 
nl : JoAa., JookBTS ; J.P., 
Jsrtioe of Um Peace ; Kmu., 
memomidQin or member ; 
Modi, modentloTifl (nniTenl^}; 
■.CO., Nod - Cknmnlnlotiod 
Offloer ; MeiK. Coo., hcmmw mi»- 
mdieailt; O.C.. Old CheltonUn 
(ChelMnbAm College) ; Ox., Ox- 
ford music-hall; Pvr., ParHlon 
miido-hall) Photo, photograph; 
pppa., popnlai oonoertii P.B., 
the price ring ; Pab., or pnblle, 
pnbllo-honae; Png., pngHiet; 
Q.O., Qneen'i Coniuel; Q.1I.0., 
Qnartfir-HHter-Oeneral ; Bad., 
ndlcal ; B«p., lepreeentatiTe ; 
8«v., lOTereigii ; Spec, speonla- 
Uod; Spec*.,Bpectaolee', B.1I.0., 
Senior Under -Officer {R.H. 
Academy) ; Ten., deteotlre ; 
Tolortallot,tolsiable; Tiul, 
trun-car; ^fO., typogtaphar 
orpilDter; VanitT, nnlTcvalt; ; 
Tat, nterinary smgeoti ; Tloa, 
Tloe-CbanoeUor. 

Cab and bui, which were ori- 
glnellj slang, have hj dint of 
uaage cmcoeeded In eatabllsbing 
themaelves in the Ungniga 
In the Doveli of Charlea Dicksiu 
thej had alreadf aoqnired a 
certain aiobalo flaTOor. 



Aberdeaa cntieti (popolar), onied 
or dried haddooka, or "had- 
dleii" aa the Soctoh teno them. 

JUMliis{vagiaiitB), "my Ming." 
geotatHy refen to a temponuy 
neUng or hiding place, aeciira 
fromcaptnra. Abidatff-hj,UA- 
ing within oalL 

Abd hul DO IHoidi, ud ■ 1» «u not 
a hMTc mn ^^Jinf^iaa, In 
I ban OH ^Dt ool J kd to th* 

uU he tail (DH te uetbir. — 
.- Lilfy Damtt M . 



Mn-Crw, 



Abdeli (Anglo-Indian), a hypo- 
orite, » oanting preaoher, a 
(aatldlona or fabe icftlot. 



Ablcait (KMjietj), a ladf'* maid. 
More properly one of an ill 
temper, <n tyiannioal to her mia- 
tieeK 

Tynill, 00 au«rla( hli ipaitnMH, haad 
ihu h wu not lictUed, m mn tba mU- 
/■fZirfMn. Dodi qwu B ikn B m miMr 

Will 

Old English writan Bnt em- 
ployed it as a oaut word for a 
termagant woman, and after- 
wards for a female bigamiat. 
It seems probable that having 
originally reoelTed its {M-eaent 
aignifioation from Abigail, who 
called heraell the *""'^'n»i<1ftii 
of David, the word beoame 
synonjmona for a lady's maid, 
in the Hune way that Job 
and Samson oame to be ap- 
plied respectively to a model 
of patience and to a man of 
heroolean strength. It waa 
oaed by Beaomont and Fletcher 
as tho name of a handmaiden in 
their comedy of the " Scomln] 
lAdy," and most have been fur- 
ther popularised by the maiden 



:v Google 



Wbcna IbcT pMidod U bcfrndbsB 



a of the nkmea of chat- 
I of comedie* or norda 



Abigait — Abnonmfy. 5 

DMIM AUgkU Hill of Kn. Ma- ^Hgil; qui tuim JscbdM tat )• dlfa 
■hMH. traltiug-womui to Qli«ai ''" v-i^.-BHamt-SmMim .- PkniM^ 

Aim«. It ^ipaan to hM« b«aa 

adcfitad b; maoT astbor& Dr. Olbokay, alluding totbe 

gonenlly aooeiAed deriTiutiaB of 
the wotd, ujt, " This aappoal- 
tlon maj, orma; notbe ooiTMt ; 
but it la ooilona to lemark that 
In thft anolBiit Breton and Gulio 
langnage, Mutgaa dgnifiea flip- 
pant, waaplah, and inappiah, 

By amk tt^ kin,-, p by tio«, .nd ,hioh word ia derlred from 

>et*d;DaD CauaoniantAHriit aau oMop, « towier, » anarllag dog." 

naUtatlT.— /Vfta' D^ry. 

^ .^ , AUahac (thlerea). the illegltinwte 

Thar* are many other i*. ^Sld^ a mother whotaa be«D 
■ednoed bj • married man. bi 

, , , , , , , , Hebrew It meani the motlMr'a 

having been adopted to denote a aiTar 
whole oUm of Indlvidnala. Thm, 

an inn-keeper ia called Boul- Wmlpoleimt*— "ilott Dnid toevdl 

bM,from Farqnhar'a -Beam' iioiiob.j«ilmiiof«ii^«a^«^,im 

BMUe^i." ABobAor«,fr«m »W-"-^^ "■«'•"-'-«'. 
Sharldan'i "The BiTala," ii ar- 

nooTmoaa with a coward. The Able - »ri»cketo (naotioa]), » 

neneb i^tlr to % awindler Vop"^ aaa-game with wda, 

the navia of Bobert Hacaire, wherein the loeer la bertanowt 

immoitaUBed by IWdirlo Le- *** P'"'" "^ "* '""^ ***'■ 

mattie in hU Imperaonatlon of » h a ndknw i hlwf tightly twlated 

tba oharaeter in the melo- Uke a rope. It li yery popular 

drMn»"l'AnbergedeaAdreta" Macmg aailora. French aoldiera 

-Bobert Macaire, by the bye. **" » •'"'l" B««»- »» !*»* 

waa the name of A notoriooa *" regards the penalty, tenoed 

baudiL One of tlM creation* " fovtro."—ViAis Barrirt'i Argal 

of Baluo, in faia "ComMie andSlaitg. 
Hntnaine," I'Cloatre Gaudia- 

md, haa provided an epithet Abaotmi^ (vnlguiim], "aUead- 

lot K commercial traveller ; and ing abnarmlif," an <^jfvobrioaa 

the Fienohnae^fr^aiJ with the epithet applied to the treaolie- 

Mme algnlftoation aa on tUi KU and deceitful; apanonof 

•ide «f the Ohannd. crooked waya, an Informer, ft 



:v Google 



Abob (WiuoIiMta], a Uige wblta 
jag coaUining kboot agkllon in 



' (Ameiicwi), Kpfdicd 
K peiBon nniniBtakablj pro- 
minent at a pMt; or a public 



told of ■ profetd wit 




Abont Eaat (American). A term 
DMd b7 men ooming from the 
New KngUnd, it., the eksteni 
Mid pnreir Yankee Slatei, to 
■ignlfj' anything that meets 
with ^pconL Bnob things or 
peo^ are wid to be miimt 
JU. J. Ra«*dl Lowell in hla 
"Letten" wdl iUn«tr»le« ttalt 
eoUoqniaUcm of men who re- 
gnid ererTthii^ done in their 
nattre atatea aa rigbt, and wboee 
«Tea an oft«m tuned to the old 
home »mij^ %i^^ roughing and 
■traggle of the wilder Weal. 

Tb« ma Bt ■ Ywl« whoa Hone* 
hUm ncnnod n hd ib< the Fnvk 
•obI ftrittUr in our ■md^ " yABm 
vrMtm bat not alwmTi b« to Cad sal 
>Im h mttmt Smt. The "ffciiirinh- 



■ba EMt br in oon> h. portapo, imm 
■ROoBtly maOnlod ia U^jor Jack Dmr- 



m tlia irfaDlc tbat'i 



About right (Tn^ariam). To do 
a thing tbout right la to do it 
thoronghly. 

Abont the aise of it (Anxerioan). 
An eipresalon indioating an 



KTeiBge, „ , _ _ 

preadon of ralne, or an eqniT>- 
lenl, la a Jtxj wide aenaa. 

" Da yoB thiok Ihot ib the uritolc oor 
Pbebc noldmUTT Sdlit" 

"Win-iciiwiiw 

sfcKl Oh Hf rf U. Sbi daal kaov 
btr own niad 7*1. Uit A« wiQ vita ib* 

Wbca E^k Dan died, 
1 was kitdii^ br hit iid«» 

laid UaM," Old bs7[ 

Dead or liTia', (aka na lack if 'joa caa 
— ^ Bmllmd: /■ Mf Wmv *»• 

" 1>» TOO take tbii wonaa, vrbooe baad 
jrqv'ra a^q p a grip ', to be ynir lawfal wife, 
in flodi lian an- ■kaapl" 

"I ladue thal^ mint Of Hi t/ il, 
■qaiic.'— CUcv* Lnfttr. 

Above one'a bend (Amerioaa), 
be;r<>nd ooa'i opacity. 



taimf >«■ au n H« aasnc tbt Kad- 
ikiai.-/. T. Clf*r: T%t Oak Oftwimgt. 

In the Sonth the phnae to sig- 
nify the same ide* ia " nbora 
my bnekle-berrj," or " a hooUe- 
beny above my perdmmon-'* 
Btud in this senae is probaUj 
derited fnan the Anglo^fiaxMi 
hmd, mgnfi^iag a bond or any- 
thing that binds— a contract. 

For idi aai cob» hider ut^ay. 



"Above my hmd" la "more 
than I am bound or held to do " 
— a Saxon idiom. 



:v Google 



Abovt — Abntkam. 7 

Ab»n far, bdvw par (popnlaz). hBngbig. So naniad from the 

TobaaloM or Maw par ilgiiUlM hainp trae, • Und of willow, 

(iMt tba penoo a^ the cs- tlMt li oitllad JbrwUM'i Ulm 

t»wrii» U In better ei wone I7 botanlaU. Bj the gTpsie* 

h— Hhtlntiiwiwl HladariTed it U oiUlad Tatber't balm, and 

firantheoomiaenlaltennwhieh it ia uaad tqr tb«m M % pfe- 

ntea to the fiioe of itook, in eanitiTa of ohutity. There li 

ttat eaae (ha meaning bdi^ » pecDBw ■hma In the nanby 

"Menve" or "lanL" JkM diatdcta of the North <tf Si«- 

yarilpiUaaaliotcdentilrdranh ; land oalled ^traAoM'i rtone ; a 

poeaeeeedof nMve7b«rrviidone'a pieoe erf thia atone b wont I7 
the lower <" 




Iran dlaeaw; when Abrahain 
died, Oodplaoed tbie ttoaa in 

The naicb nae the epitliet ^^ ,gg_ 
etfCTrfairil, wUoh ii beat 

nndared bj '■■taimiiig" or Abnhnm cmc (tbSerea}, n mean, 

" flabbaga^ng.' AhnoadAra bcggailr, dcaplaed tUef, tr 

waa a cabalistio wort fai the ^^or neak. Decker writea 

Middle Agea. It wm writton in 1608 that "The Jfe«iU»i«». 

ftt meoeMiTe liitaa in the f one ,, , i,„u, ^wmg ragna who 

of an taiTertad tariang^ cash walketh with a itade abort Ma 

line being ahcotar by a ietter ^oMnoat" {a iheet akrnt hia 

tbaa the one abere, till the laat body). The Hon. JnatloeMataia. 

WtM A lonetA the H>ez of a ^ jf„ yofk. In the Bogne'a 

triH«leatthebott». Itwaa L«tooo. regiieB -iirwuir*-. 

wid to bare oagioal power, and ■<» naked or poor man; abw- 

wban boog atomid the neok gatinfaga-(Or«a). 

H waa anppMad to aet a* a "^ ^ 

**■*" ^j^nat ague. It la Abrahaa gmtaa (tMerea), a pab- 

thooghttobederiTadfroM^ Ikan wto tawi hi. owi bJiT 
BabMw aft, &tbar. raaaA. qOtt. 
and Jillai . woid. AooocdiDg to 
tble dadration it myi ei aaU the 
Tdni^. 

Abcaban (popnlai), a ebe^^ and 
tiaahy alop abop. 

Afankam'a bakam or ttiapai to go begging on behalf of 

efixir (proriiMial}, exeeidleB by the boepUaJ. ■ ' 



ham want in Bedlam bad e«r- 
sallowed 



:v Google 



^plfed nibMqncntlr to luna cr 
dok begg^n, or tboM ■huunlng 
dirtreM. The begging impo*- 
Um deaigtiated u Abnum-men 
were well known in the els- 
teentb oaatoiy, and an men- 
Uooed in the " Fntenltle of 
Tagkbondea," 157$. "AnAbn- 
bsm-man ia one that walketb 
bu»4rmed and baie-legged, and 
bynetb to be mad, calling him- 
■bU Pom Tom." Abtabam-men, 
in Stepheu'a "Enaje and Char- 
aoteia," 1615, are designated aa 
fngitiTe ragamofflna, pcetend* 
ing to be oripplee or impotent 
aoldleta. Harman thoa deaoribee 



hn* iidoul; tod o 



The old Bn^bh dramatMa 



n a k ednaaa. In whlob aanae it la 
■till oommoD amoog trampa, who 
Mf of a naked patson, ■' He waa 
diened in Abraham's anit, aantt 
of ereriaating fleah oolonr." 

A tKWn^ beard waa termed 
an " AbrabamHwlonmd beard," 
probably In aooordanoe with the 
direotiona tta represent^ all 
the petsona in Sorlptnre ai given 
In the "BTmutlne Faintwa' 
Onida," the "Book of Bally- 
moti," fto. In all of tbaee the 
baarda are apedally deaoribed. 



wonl of alndlsr import, waa ao 
oaUed baoanae Jndaa laoariet 
waa tnulltionaUT nppoaed to 
have had a red beard, and waa 
•o rerfwaeuled bj tnlj Italian 
palnteia. Bnt the ^thet of an 
Abraham - oolonred baatd re- 
mains aa yet witboot any ex> 
planation or jnatiacaUoQ. To 
"■ham Abraham" waa to feign 
■lokneaa or dlatrea^ and the term 
I« need to the present day. 
To "Sham Auuum' Acn'S-noii. 
— Hutcn moK lun eamc la ■ imUT pua 
when em tba Daify ttm vkkdmn IM 
B^twi Ihm tha TraUfar Sqnn mpo*- 
Kn.—T»eGMi. 

A popular aoag of the last 
oeutnry, when forgery of bank 
notes for one pound waa a oom- 
mon crime, and when the hang- 
ing of the detected criminal waa 
qoite aa frequent, has preserred 
for posterity the name of Abra* 
baJU Newland, the then cashier 
of the Bank of England, who 
signed all the notes in drcol*- 



Sailors Dae the term to de- 
note an Idle fellow who wants 
to be pot on the slok list so as 
to shirk duty, 
nee it, with the n 
pretend to be tO," in order to 
get oS work. 

Abraham stdt, 00 Ow, aity kind 
of dodge (^ deceit deei^ied to 
excite sympathy, naed tv beg* 
glng-letter impoatot*. 



:v Google 



Abraham — -Abskizt. 

AbaHuaa work (popokr), Hi-paid 
tnunpoj work; tndlng ■hama; 
■howj Bwindlea 

Abraban's willlag^ (rhjinliig 

alaOS), a aMlHrw 

JUnsorna (Amerioao). Bartlett **»' (WIncheBter), »bbniTi«tlon 

■pelLithi.OOTnipttoiiof"»bori- ^'absent To get o(* li to get 

giiMs"aiAb«rgoiiuorAbn>gaiu, awsj. 

. '. ^ °?"- ^~^ At^y^ymauMti Ab»eirtdial«ter{thieTe«), one who 

^ta^S^'SS^^r^r^;;,^^ i.Udi=gaw.rfc,mthepoUo-. 

C. C. ItJant From the American ahtqaai/i^alt, 

Abaence (Eton). ThUwordintha 
slang of the boja la meant to 
convej jnst the oppoeita mean* 
Ing. It BignifleB also roll-caU. 

AbMnt wtthoiit leiTe (thievot), 
broken oat of gaol ; esoaped 
from the police. (Con 



Lftttm; Mmtx- 

Abnwd (Winobertw). aboyla , ^. - . .., 

•aid to be >fat»d when hl> (orthoonjUiB »hen wanted for 

naoie is taken off " ConUneat •*""* '"^*' ^*'^' "' ^^^1 \ 

RoU" or Sick LUt, and here- "i^eondBd. 

tuna to aohool dntiea. Mr. RoopeU, ibi aaaba tar LuabMh, 
mi reported aim/ miiMMrJ Amv. —Jf«ns- 

AbRwded (•odety), a noble de- ivSiMr:P.rii^m„aM^s,mm«y. 

faulter on the Continent to Al do bmer period on Ihm apindao 

armd creditors. It Is the poUoe "^ •>»* ""^ •™™ "" "™» ■• ""T 

olEciaLi- slang for oonvioto sent S?^ '*^ ""*^ /««.-J>*rt. 
to a calontal or penal setUe- 

ment, bnt applied by thieves In Abstt (nniTerdty), a permit to be 

thifl oonntry, and formraly In absent from oollege, ball, or 

the ooloniee, to Imprisotunent chapel tor the day. 

Abakdxe, abartiirr (Amerloan). 

A.B.S. IliBt'Olaas nllon are In a sketch of Westem life 

rated as A.B.8., "able-bodied published in 1833, In a Phila. 

Mamen." Sometimes taoetl- delphia newspaper, this word 

onsly tranaUted a« " a bottla- ooonrs as meaiiing to depart or 

■Dcker." go away. It woold seem to be 



:v Google 



Absquatuiate — Abusive. 



dnlTed from ib% Dntob t^tAtf- 
Ot deput. 

Abaqoatuble (Amcriou), to dli- 
■fp«u, to ran •Mt.y, to abaoond. 
ThareTOMof to "■qut,'*fraai 
at and (ffttot, origluUr lettlen' 
■Ung to ■twndoBlng s looktlon 
when fearing an nnweiloame 
TUtatloa, and Mttling on a 
mon remote qmA. 

Yeo'd think »a lo atfuthilmtr, m 
Um Yuk«a HT- . ■ ■ W<U, I win h a 
aiuue.— J?iM;i SmwiUM : Camnlil i^ 

Baitlett oalla thla "a taotltlon* 
TnlgaiiBm." ItwaalniuenBailjr 
fifty Tean ago. At that time 
naming away with money by 
bank preoidBatB, fto., became 
very oommoo In conaeqnenoe of 
flnaudal panics or odla p ae * . 
and It waa the fiubion to ooiu 
word* from the namea of the 
dellnqnents, ■■ " to Swartwoot " 
or " to Schyletiae," &o. When 
we reflect that there are many 
Yankee and Weatem men ao- 
cnatomed to spelling bees, and 
perhaps more *Tnl'<" with the 
dlfflonlt woida of the dlottonary 
than are many Bcfaolan, It doea 
not i^pear remarkable that we 
And In Axoerican lalang a rniin* 
ber of wordi which have a 
learned length and Latin eonnd. 
To any half -educated mas with 
a faooy for aztiaTagant ei> 
preasioD, and famtlUi- vlth 
"abeoond," "towjnattleaway," 
and " peranbnlate," abtqttatt^' 
laU would readily enggeat itaelf 
in an effort to recall one or the 



other. Onoe ottered and heard, 
it would became popular. To 
deliberately invent a new wtwd, 
without aome foregoing aog- 
geattoD or basis, and get tt 
adopted, is one of the ranat 
events in the world, even in 
America, where men are oon- 
tinnally attempting It. 

The Tariona alang aynonyma 
are " to akedaddk^ to out one'* 
lucky, (o aling one'a hook, to 
minle, to bott, to out and nm, 
to alip one's cablo, to step It, to 
leg it, to tip the double, to am- 
putate one's mahogany, to make 
or to take tracks, to hook it, to 
■lope, to slip it, to paddle, to 
evaporate, to vamoose, to tip 
your rags a gallop, to walk 
one'a chalks, to pike, to hop the 
twig, t« tttm it np, t« out the 
cable and nm before tbe wind," 
and In the lingo of the light- 
lingered and sure-footed gentry, 
"to make beef, to guy, to ipeeL" 
—Barrtrt: Argot and SlMg. 

AlnalTe driU, adjutant's diilL 
The adjutant, being respon- 
sible for the diiU of a ragi- 
ment, has constant parades for 
instractioB and practloe, at 
whioh hs may oooastoually 
use strong language. He is 
especially ooncemed with the 
development of reonlta, the 
perfecting of awkward sqnads, 
and of careless or inattentive 
soldiers sent back to driD as 
a pnnlahmeDt. A nlntary 
change has no doubt come over 
the army, which was once pro- 
TSibial for ouraing and swear- 



:v Google 



Abusive — A caden^. 



II 



tug. Kren the Ugbaat nuka 
wen addicted to It, >■ witneM 
the old Hqring, " Haw we nrora 
in Flanden," uid th« atoi7 In 
Onrrflle'a Hemolra of the Duke 
of WeUington and Lord AngleMs 
at Waterloa. Wlian the latter 
waa wounded, be rated, " Fve 
bMt mj 1^, bf O— d I " "Have 
ron, bj G^-^I" replied tbe 
ISoka. Bnt laagmge of oor- 
notion and reproof i« (till likely 
to be etroDg, and may at timea 
beoMne " abnsiTe " wben iaming 
tram a msob aggravated ad- 
Jntant'a montb. Aetoiytatold 
of tbe laat Lord Cudlgan 
wliioh Ulnstntea the otyle of a 
military officer of a compara- 
Ut^ modem Mibaol. Hie lord' 
ahip waa being driven to the 
eovett-aide in a poatcbaiee, 
and tlw poetillitm lo«t hia way. 
Lord Cardigan, fnrionB at being 
made late for tbe meet, threw 
down tbe {^aaa of the ehaiaa 
and cried, " I may be right or 
I may be wrong, or I may not 
be the proper person to aey eo, 

bnt you're a eon of , 

and if I could get near yon, I'd 
twiat your neck ofL" 



iiq;, thelowlodg- 
lnge or pnblio-boaaea for cad- 
gera and trampa, lorkera, or tbe 
honaea of call or country lodg< 
ing-honaea for beggars and im- 
poetori who eolidt alma by a 
written petitloD or forged eol- 
div'a or aailor'a diaobaiga. 



tor praoUshig the Oaah art 
"dodge;" a goal; a brothd. 
Termed alao " flaah-drnm,* 
" nanny - ahop," " bnttooklng 
ebop," and in polioe-oonrt re- 
ports, "diaorderly hoiia&" Eata- 
blialuneiita where " good beda " 
are [ooHded for coaplea [are 
termed "bouaea of aooommOda* 
tion," which correspond tO'tlie 
French "maitoni dt jawf."' A 
chronicler of old London relatea 
that Sir William Walworth, the 
ot^ fishmonger, who aBsaaai- 
nated Wat Tyler, poaseaaed a 
unmber of acadamia at low 
brothels In Scnthwark, which 
Wat Tyler had lerelled with the 
groDod. " Hence," aaya the old 
writer, " private feeling and re- 
venge may have prompted Wal- 
wortb'a activity to slay Tyler." 
Feter Pindar writes that " aoa- 



rion for a honae that baiboura 
oonrteaana." A " flnlahing eea* 
dtmg" la a private brothel, 
where a staS of yonng (not 
common) proetltnte* are kept on 
hire. So called from its being 
the laat gradation of private 
prostitution before going on tbe 
pnbllo streeta. The girls who 
chleSy reeort to theee brotbela 
are work girls who visit on the 
sly : they are not driven by want 
or desertion, bnt go from wll- 
folnesa; to nse their own wovda, 
they " work honestly for a liv- 
ing, bnt do the itaitgktu for tbeir 
clothee." A "chaiaoter Hew 
demg," a rendervons for cba- 
raoterieaa ahopmen, footmen, 
barmen, and othera, whereat 



:v Google 



12 



Academy — Accordtng lo. 



■ ooaoooted, 
•nd other [daiu aie tnotnied for 
robbing emplojen. TheaeplAOM 
ue ohieflj alehoiuea kept by 
diaoaided serrants ; as the mb- 
Bcrlptions are enforoad monthlr 
on thoK in place, the fnnda an 
Teiy large, and e«ch a«adem.y 
keepa a M&S of well- educated 
teaobDTB who ani well expe- 
lienoed In all the czaft of trade, 
and well-appointed igeuoiee ue 
kept up In all the numnfactnriiig 
town«, acting as references, and 
to give good written characters. 
A "gammoning oeocfmy" is a 
reformatoiy for jnreaile cri- 

AcceleratiOQ (vagrants). " Ha 
died of aerdtraiion," he died of 
BtairatioD. 

Acceleraton, the anion relieving 
officers, from their fieqneiit re- 
fuBdl to giTC food to the dying 
outcast, whose miseiable oaieei 
of wont often ends in de>th. 
In inoh cases the jar; invsri- 
abl7 Rccompanj their Terdlot of 
catuial death with the rider, 
*' Accelerated through the want 
of the common neoewaiies of 
life." 



tenced to a term of imprison- 



hcndcd mod wm aatrumiia 
■nontli'i baud ud kidginc u i 
of the niiioo.— -W*/**!" -■ i™ 



opa (dtj). 
The officers of certain '■ fin- 
ance Joint Stock CompaniBB " 
who practise the awiHHModatwN 
tviniSc , on " UoTd's Bcmda," 
Debentnrae, Fraferenoe, and tSi 
other sharee. 

Accommodktora {thleres), 
ehiefl J u-poUee ccostables who 
negotjate a oompoouding at 
felonies and other crimes bj 
briUng wibiessee and proee- 

Accofdinc to Cocker (oonunon), 
proper, acoording to mle, ao- 
oording to the best mthorl^. 
This phrase refwa to a tamona 
writing-master of the name of 
Oother, wbo In the time of 
Charles IL composed and pab> 
lished an elaborate TraatiBe on 
Arithmetic 

This work commenoen with a 
"Provena," or Preface, which 
ends thus: "All the Problem* 
and Propoeitions are well 
weighed, pertinent, and olear, 
and not one of them taken ui 
trust thronghont the tract ; 
therefore now 



Z(«u>>Dd Hob 



mon), brothels. Their female 



I Ik TUB dcwD and 
CBtkKU ynn vbok fiaci 



Prof eaaoi De Morgan wtUm 
that the phrase as a popo^ 



:v Google 



AceortSttg to — AecumuiaUves. 



■lying originated Id 1756, and 
ma taken ap hj the people 
from Mocphj'a jjaj ol "The 
Appcentioe," In whtoh the strong 
point of the old meichaat Win- 
gate it hli extreme reverenoe 
for Cotktr and his Arlthinetic. 
In America, a similar oonflr- 
""**"*■ phiaae la in common 
nse, ttzeept that the nam« of 
OwHter is nibstitDted for that of 
Ooelctr, Qnnter waa a tamon* 
aiithmeticiaD, and no doubt 
the Amerioaa ptuaae ia the 
oldest. The old laws of Rhode 
Island mj, "Alt oaaks shall be 
gained 1^ the rale commonly 
known as 'gauging bj/ OwMr.' " 
" Mi. K., a respected dtiten of 
Detroit, has pabliahed a letter 
entiTelj exonerating General 
Case from the cha^e of liaTing 
defracded hfa aasooiation in the 
land specnlationi. He ia posi- 
tlTO that all was done aeaonlmg 
to Ovnter." Aeeording to Jokn 
Iforit la the standard of appeal 
among a^lors. John Norie 
compiled a very popular work 
entitled, " The Navigator'a 
Standard MannaL" Among 
■ehoolboyi tteardiag to Watking- 
kamu la the oonflrmation of a 



[Sporting), to aecouM tor, re- 
fers to one's personal share in 
killing. 

Tba pcnecM«d uuauli (nu) boked 
■bora EnKuid ; lb* tsiicr wennUW lot 
oae, tbt kctper fbr KooOiB.—naciirwri 
Vmd^Fmir. 

Acconnta (common). To oast np 
oeoowUt U to Tomlt, and in 
tbteres' lingo it signlfles to be- 
come eridence against an accom- 
pUo& 

Accnmnlatlvta (Amerioan). At 
times an editor in tlie United 
Statea will make a remark W a 
joke, then another will olte it 
and add a remark or a parody 
of it, whioh will ag^n be com- 
mented on by a third. Tbns 
one says: - 

" Williiun, bmiliutr kncnni » ' KU ' 
Sticker, mu Indicieil lui week in Lekd- 
vOle for lawic CDonlcifcii money. Thit 
it wasxiivMt to l**i for Iw wt>o ""U vaj 
md ia uny itreet, ■ Bill Stickm will tx 



To which a rival adds : 



According to the reriaed ata- 
tntea (American]. Anything 
that is l^al, or properly 
BDthoriaed or cetabUshed. 
expression first nsed In this 
general or bnmoroua sense by 
a lawyer of New Toik named 
Halstead, in Fonilir Fair, in 
i860. 



And a third exclaims : 



IL ^' 



ih! LctDinOeclI' 



We have seen as many as 
twenty and more of these ac> 
cnmnktive paragraphs of this 
kind " going the rounds " of tho 
country press. 



:v Google 



Accumulator — Acres. 



AccoBBtator (ncdiig), a penon 
who back* one bona, uid then 
il tt wina Twolti (nmetimM in- 
olnding original itakN) goes on 



An ef tpwles (old ikug), • 
widow, aUndiDK to the boo ot 
ttM card. This slang word is 
given in tbe " Lezioon BaU- 
troaionm," liondon iSii. 

Ack (Christ'* Hocpital). In tbe 
■iBUg of Bloe Coat boTS thi« 
word i* BzpieMiTe of denial or 

Ade men or uk pintM (lUHitiaa)), 
tresfa water thleree. Frobablr 
from a oormption ot "ark," 
meaning boat, aa the tetm 
"aik nffi" haa alike tigntfioa- 
tlon. Act, bowever, leema to 
have some oonneotlon with the 
old term aier (apparentlj from 
tbe Anglo-Saxon igor, tbe flow- 
ing of tbe sea], whiob ia still 
applied oa tbe Trent to a kind 
of eddjtng twirl which ooctin 
on the river when It is flooded. 
In the dialect of Craven, ao- 
oordiDg to Mr. Tbomaa Wright 
(Dlotlonar; of Obsolete and 
Provincial Engllab], a ripple on 
tbe snrfaee ot the water ia 
tarmed taaettr. 

A^nowledge the com, to (Ame- 
rican). To admit that one baa 
been got tbe better ot, or la 
ODtdone. 



DnriBf tba Bi(lu Acn euH ■ itar 
tba tnl foU of com wu mDk. : 
Bunl^ tha gKmblcn cuiu lo dun 
■taka. Hh hoDila widi (nu & 



(Ghn mm jVlr n S^-tUtfi Die- 

A-COCk (popular), knocked orer, 
defeated i eoddenl; aorpriaed, 
•atonndad. 



Stf*t1,Mtjti,it6f. 

Alao, oooked np. 
TIm buhII frej q>if on tb* cm* of 

Strtk. 

Aconi (old cant), tbe gallowa tree. 



The oSc« •wpriied ibtra paddna 
op tbe K^titm.—TU Mmm tm Pf- 



given to picking and stealing. 

Acreocn^ (Amerioan), a ooined 
word to rignlf? tbe landlord 
interesL 
1\h inlmdiKlion of ■ phitocncT UHnfil 

Ibe uisocncj and Ihe MCTVcrmcj, thoo^ 



tiaiOirgtr', lUtatrmttd 



Acres (theatrical), a coward, from 
the poaillanimons Bob Aerti in 
Sheridan's plaj. 



:v Google 



Acres — Adam. 



Id Iidaiid "b regnki oerw 
man" mMntkprDfMMddnelUrt. 
nom "the flftMn aem," tat- 
11M1I7 a Add funou for dveb 
itiDiiUiu. Id India, Jmv Farm, 
near Oalentta, U naad foi dneli, 
benoe " a ragnlar oen'f man." 

Acran Ma (Amarloan). "In the 

ragsrdi time), or (ai regards dis- 
taaoe) "by the ■hortMt ant." 
" He ma7 be nld to bare at- 
tained plaoe and power aamt 
laU," i^, with g7«at raplditr. 
TUa phraM oomea down to na 
'from theold aettlera' Axjt, when 
tbe iborteet road then, as Indeed 
now, waa osroM toti, and not b; 
the main road. 

Y« wold cu anw ii< M like m nnaik 
f/g K^ufciHj if yea had ft ^"*'^i — Chm*^ 
ttmlSiiicJUl, i. J}. 



ActioniM, to (Ugal), to dt« bafwa 
a legal tribimal 

Act cf Pariiameot (old), imall 
ba». A militaryterm referring 
to the taot that publloana were 
bj Aet of Parliament compelled 
to inpply billeted coldlna with 
Ave pint! dailjr giaiu. There 
U a ftor^ onrtent among the 
Cheliea Teterans that the Dnke 
of Wellington saw a loldier 
wanning hie weak regnlatioD 
beei. Hi* Oraoe nid, "Damn 
the belljr that won't warm Aet 
of Pariiatient." The Midler re- 
plied, "Daaai ibe Aet af Paiiia- 
•i«nJ, It won't wann the bell;." 

Actual (Amerioan), "the actital," 



Ai for hupplim in ihi) mrid wiihaoi 
(In ihino, du chink, « tb« mctiiat, jtn 

tSKdoot in ft nO*.— /^fw't SfrmHu, 



ActiiV dickef (naval), an officer 
acting aa Ueatenant although 
not ooDflrmed b7 the Admiialtj. 
(Legal), a olerk or agent acting 
in the name of a lawyer on the 
Boll*. The praotioe of atlmg 
itdteg !■ generallj reeorted to 
In qaeeUonable prooeedlngi. 

AcliMi (Amevloan), quick work, 
an Immediate leanlt. Weatani 
oard playing, tc, elaog. 



dbDW," aid ft UwT«r, u he cnltnd tht 
oAca of ft iHviiiopo'. " !['• (ot to bo 
coapiT wilh Iba iiw, bat it 

t pablidly Itku w« con Ih]|x. 
yoai pftper ii ~ 



puUiilHid D 



v Rpliod that It 



Isn't itf 

Tlucdiui 

" Then run thii md. in under the church 
notko. It will Bern be itcn then by 
TOOT mbocribert," iftid the Iftwyer. — Am^ 



Adam (popular), matter-man, fore- 
man, or aDperiDteDdent; termed 



:v Google 



16 



AJam — Adntiral. 



Adam'B ale (old), mtai h a Addle-cere (popokr), a fooUah 

berenge. It Ii snppowd that man, mat am addle-pate. 

thla wu the oolj drink of our " Litaially, a rank moker." 

flist parent, and that before N. Y. Slang DieL 

Noah planted the vine all were 

porforoe teetotalers. Addled-^:8r (oo 



Ymr dam'i loo hot, dmh dmnr, go 



—T.Brtmm: War*t. 

Another old term for tbe 
beverage which "doea not in- 
toxicate bnt doea not cheer," 
la "flab broth." The French 
argot haa the oontemptnoiu 
epitheta " ratafia de grenonlUea," 
and "vaae," aometimei varied 
to " nainette." 

Adam Tiler (old cant), a piok- 
pooket'a ooofederate, who re- 
oeiTea the stolen erticle, and 
nina off with it. Origin un- 
known, bnt supposed to have 
been the name of one nototloos 
for hla skiU at this kind of thing. 
It is poaaiblT from the Qenoan 
7%«ler, one who shares, a con- 
federata 

Added to Uie Uat (racing), is said 
of a borae which haa been cas- 
trated. A like operation per- 
formed on a man is termed In 
French slang " Abdardiaer," 
from the barbarous treatment 
of Abjlard hy Chanoine Fnlbert. 
When a faorae has been impcr- 
f eotlj oaatrated he is colled a 
"rig." 

Addition. dlTiaioo, and— tilence I 
(American). Tbia phrase origi- 
nated in Philadelphia. 



an egg from the fabnlona Hem's 

Addle-headed (oommon), with 
little brains, or empty-headed; 
from Anglo-Saxon adda, mnd. 

Addl»{Mte (common), one whose 
brain cannot diatingnlsh be- 
tween the object* whloh are 
oataide It and the imaginationa 



Adept (thieves), a ptokpocket, a 



TocftboluT <]f obaliitic phnua lo Astonish 
tlu bdioldH. — T^lf Mrrfy Cti^miuom, 

tftoi {Jivtltri, 1711. 
(Old cant), an alohemlsb 



it'a gig; (military), tbe bar- 
rack roller, which is drawn, pre- 
snmablj under the adjataot's 
ordera, by the detaolteia — the 
men under ponishment — who 
ara the staves, the hewer* of 
wood and drawers of water for 
offlcers, comrades, and the bar- 
racka generally. 

Admiral (naval], tbe ship which 
carries tbe odrntmA Formerly 
all shipa were called admiraU. 



:v Google 



Admiral — Adopitd. 



17 



Admiim] cf the Blue (old lUi^), 
• pablio-hoiue keepei, to oalled, 
aftji Grose, beowue pabUoana 
wore modutoinacl to wwz blue 
^mm. Ftopeily ta Admiral 
0/ at BUm to one of tbe tUid 
cIuB In the nwr;, «nd hidd« the 
rear in Ml engagement. 

Admlnl of the nnnow seu (nan- 
tioal), one who from dninken- 
nesa romita Into the lap of Us 
oppodte oompenion. 

Admin] of the Red (conunon), a 
penon vhoM nbj conntensnoe 
gifaa DneqnifooAl eigne of hie 
penobnnt for tlie bottle. Ko- 
pet^, Admind o/ Oe Jbrf is ui 
mdndral of the lecond oleaa, Mid 
holds the centre in an engage- 
As reguda the wotd admiral 
taken in iu Ut«nd sense, it mnj 
be interasting to remaik that 
this word seems to h»>e been 
introdnced into Bnnpe bj the 
Genoese or TenetiMis in the 
twelfth or thirteenth oentnrj, 
tnm tbe AmUo Amir-al-behr, 
ooDunander of the aea, the termi- 
nating wmd having beenomitted 
(Webster). 

Admirals of the red, «rfiite, aad 
bfaw (popniar), street and square 
beadles, offloe and dob door- 
keepcn. 

Adminl of tbe iridte (popular), a 
wbite-tsoed pereou, a ooward; 



In manj strange wajs, t^,, " I 
oilaiirv to look at pictmrea." 
Athiire Is often oaed tor liking, 
pndilectlon, or taate. "I do 
aJatirt peaches and cream." 
" Don't jon admirt pnmpUn* 
pie with ginger in It t " corre- 
sponds to the proaalo nae of 
adorer, to worship ; " J'adore 
lea pommes de teire frites." 

Adobe (American), a honse made 
of dried day In adoba ta large 
01b7 blocka. "To the old 
adaii," ia the death-orj of the 
Tigilante of San Franclaoo wtken 
a criminal is tried by lynch law 
and condemned to death ; the 
(dd ad«it being the slang title 
of the oostom-honse where the 
Bzeontion of malefactors takes 
place. Ad^ signlSes a snn- 
boked briok, from the Spanish. 

At Um Aiifdoa, coaaly OUIfonli, Iha 
ddUcd lilk wcdnn m cgofonaU; boiMd 
'm mtlfit ccmt^—Vmlnl Slata C*rTti- 
frndml, SbmAird, H>r 1K9. 

Adoj, adoj (gTpay), ther& " Adei 
SB miri djel"— "There ia tay 
mothecl" 

Adonee (old cant), the DeitT. Brl* 
denUj Tlddisb, from Adimai, 
Loid. Martin Lather nsea the 
word aa a oant term «""w ig 
beggars for Ood. 
A trampa* toast aays :— 

" Utrf Ihc |DOd '/mil 
ScfMB IbcMimc; 



, Google 



i8 



/tdopted—AduUatHOes. 



Unooln pn>poMd to Coagnm 
thkt tbfl wud «ti9ri«j tboDld btt 
■truck fiom aH pabUo doon- 
nenti, ao u to jdkoe forsigii 
ditUas and natlre-bom dtiieoa 
OB an aqnalltf. 

Adopter, « Monndna who pn- 
tendi to be deriiont of mdefCimf 
a ohild, oat of philaathropia 
uotiTCS, on Um pa^rmBpt of a 
oertaln mtn, and eithw gate rid 
of It at the eatUeat (qipoctuiUj. 
orleaTM tttodfeot ■' 
andnaglect. 




priL AJomt, ttOtaagk nowoon- 
■Ideied mlgai, waa fonnarly 
saed bf ow b«at wiitara la 
[laoa of down ; tIoI raf era to the 
nofaa of the old-taahioned 1d- 
rtrnnuat whan pUfed bj atnat 
miuioiaiu, which wu Ttrj dlf> 
forent from Ita ^^ffiHT<Tig U^ 



U portaa {Wlaohaatar). a Utln 
a^aoh daUTwad bj the 6aiiiar 
CoOage Prefaot to the Wai. 
den of New Ccdlaga, and the 
"Paaen"<aea tU* woa^. Jtc, 



thayo. 



New OollBge aoboUrddpa and 



Hie Initials refer to the toli- 
Jc^ned adrBrtiaement, which U 
glTon ben aa a ^edmcoi of the 
node of prooaeding of aiiiqArs. 



B>difr«»,anaderw^; Onak 



(Low) "doption," an 
adopted ohild. In babj farm- 
ing, " to be motmtad tm InpjJng 
the • d(q>tion,< " ia to be plaoed 
In tlM criminal dock for oanalng 
tbe death of as adopted child. 

Adown In tbe viol (thierea), a hae 
and 017 againat a deteoted onl- 



douatat^hecel" 
Adam (ChartartiOMeX ToILall oi 

Addbunitn (FarilawntaiT}, the 
Moedeie tnm Oe liboal paitj 
lad bj Hr. (Hadatone dnrii« 
tbe Rafona Agitation at 1S67, 
To " take refine tn the oare of 
AdoBana" ia a jdiraee bomtwad 
from the (Nd Teatament, and 
waa naad dnrliig the grvt 
American dvU war in 1863 by 
Fieaident Linooln in nfcnooe 
to the ptztixua of QaDeral 
H'Lellan after hia *^«-n 1 
from tbe command of the army 
of the Potomaa It ma after- 



:v Google 



Adtdiamites — Affinity. 



--Hur 



B <CUif onilan) ; pooket 
mdtmmtagt, CkRTillg k piMol 
ehmig«d Htd At bklf coek In the 
0(Mt pocket, M that If Um hand 
ia^Medintbe pocket it lesta 
on the hukdle. Sometime* • 
■hot ie Bnd at an adienary 
tluot«htbepockBtitHlt Thi« 
to onl7 done with a derringer. 

JCfcn (nnlvenitj elang), lettoi 
m; fram the latin tv""- 



"t«7 ankaie ohesM." It is 
oooadonally abiued in mnoh tlM 
nme wa; in England. 

Aetna CWinohaeter), an ambitiona 
^ipeUadon givoi to a tmaU 
boUer tor " brewing," that ia, 
making cooo* or ooSee, the 
otxnbiutible lued being c[diits 




JBgtxMt (nnlrenit;), a remlMloa 
of a oollegiate dn^, genenDy 
obtained bj eome qoeetiMMbte 
exonae to the prinolF>l. From 
ovratoiT. tobeOL 

.£alhatk (American), Thtowotd, 
tmn b«dng enppcind to mean 
"aittotfo," hat been extended 
to exceUMoe of all Unda. In 
1884 B grocer In PUladelpbla 
advertised tctj ■erional; and 
innooentl7 that be had aome 






A. F., abbreviation for ' 
the Flat," one of tbe ni 
mbdlviidona of the racing tmck 
at Newmarket. The A. F. ooorM 
commeuoea at the running g^ 
In the Ditofa, and enda at the 
winiking poet ot the Bowky 
HOe, wbenoe atoo to the Onuid 
Stud. The diftanca A. F. la 



■eront^r-tluM Tarda. 

AffldMit nm (old), men who lot- 
tend abcmt tiw eonrta of ^oatloe 
ready to awear anTthing for 
F>7. Tbej were alao known aa 
Knights of the Fast, and were 
distlngnlahed by the straw 
which the; stuck In the beeto 
of their sboee. The word has 
become obsolete, but not so the 
psactice, as there are even now 
plmtj of Bconndrels loitering 
ontstde courts of jnstioe who 
arereadj to awear to anTthing 
fuhall-a' 



ASaStj (American), a person of 
the cf^ioslte sex who Is per- 
fectly in hannony win anr 



:v Google 



zo 



AffiM^—Affliaions. 



aU otlMT •ttribntM. Thia U 
Iha faToniite and ohanat«r> 
Iftlo expTMsion of the IYm- 
LOTS Beot, whioh sprang np 
aboat 1850, and for a time 
attracted a great deal of att«D- 
tion, holding public iiieetlnB« in 
New York, "givli^ tiae" to 
mnob newapaper writing, and 
not a little eztremelj IITBI7 
UteratnTe, snoh aa "Fanny 
Oreel;, or the OonleaBlona of a 
FreiB-LoTe Slater," ha. Sevond 
OCHmnnnitiBi ware founded to 
oany out Free-LoTo pnctioally ; 
that at Berlin Helghta waa made 
(he aabject of an amnsing aketob 
\>j Art«miia Ward. The Oneida 
oooDtj Free-Love oommnnity 
ia described by Hepwotth Dlzon 
In " Bpiritoal WItos." The ori- 
ginal Free-LoTera held that lore 
ii, or ahonld be made, the mo- 
tlT« power and Inipliatlon of 
life, that to perfect ooraelTea 
in ererj way we ahonld have an 
^fiitit]!, that two paraona are 
reqniied to make one complete 
life or deatfnT-, and that It la 
the great doty of life to aeek 
for thia t^ttUg, BrerTthing 
abonld yield to thla, and ahonld 
the <4^m/Uji nnfortnnataly be al- 
ready married to another, there 
ahonld be a dlvoroe and re* 
marriage at onoe. Of ooniae, it 
was soon diacorered that a great 
deal of experimenting with dif- 
ferent Isdiea or gentlemen waa 
neoeeaary before the trae ^mitu 
ooold be diaoovered. Thia 
Bberly to "ohop and change 
riba i la modt AnaoNarHM" 
waa not, hawerer, favonnibly 



la the JWH iljs, ■ 
lUTiii( bHn bnkcB ni^ 

' IvoD^ bdbn ■ ■mil 
■■■- Ifowic ladTof 




■T ■<>. for tu 

T«1] be Hnr to ban uMd Bidi a ciiuca 

ol addin' to iba soMea jajt cl nuk."— 

AfEraMdrc ride, the winitlDg aide, 
the aide moat likely to forward 
one's aelf-intereet and promo- 



Cmu Mud dciBi Ikk 



Afildiona (diapers), mourning 
haUllmenta. ^ictiiMwareqalet, 
iA, monming gooda are not In 
deioand. Mitigated <t^K(toM, 



half mourning. 



, Google 



Ajfygrapky — Age. 



AEfgnfibf (popnlar) la iMid of 
■DTtbiDg that fib Dioelj. 



"Qua. 4f^n^^r-"Qwn «fr 



who Utm and mlzea with tha 
bribe. FMm tha Spanish ^ftie- 




Afterdap (Amaricau). In Fenn- 
■ylTBiiia and tba Western Statoa 
<rf America tbii dgnifiea an ad- 
dTtifflia1i and toit often anjiut 



cr bargain origimJlj made. 
" None of yonr t^Urctoft," In 
BooUaad the same wend means 



1 (old), a deep 

iiFnoch Bard*u} 
■r.bal ■cdetnted 

BDod bsot hdMd in aWd ha nt woniKL 



After fonr (Eton), the Inteml 
between 3 and 6 r.M. 

Aftemoeo bvTer (popular), one 
who wait* antD atlw the market 
dinner with the hope of pu- 
chaaing cheaper than before 
that time. 

Afternoon farmer {popnlar), one 
who nc^Ieot* bl« fanning opeia< 
tiona nntU late in the seaion, or 
holda orei bli itook 'until late 
in the daj, In the hope of getting 
a better price. 

After twetv« (Eton), the leceea 
after motnlng echool and before 
aftemoon olaa*. 

1 ucd u volt him ntdlariy hi tha dvar 
oU calks* r>DB tha 4A0- ImilH.—lirfylf 
iftlBilV, Gt^/tr IfMitv. 

Ovfi^*, who ■bonintad all lawa and 
ddi^iad b 11 an 11.1 11 nil iiii. molvcd to fo 
Id ibt fair, mud wilhout diScuhy h« par- 
nad<d Ibc Pof wid va to join him. Oaa 
iajm/itrtttirht the tbm of u pattad orar 
Wiodaor Bridcv in the awpa condilioa ai 
■ha "hold ■dvcnmnn'' allndfd to In 
Gist'i Oi»--Briml^ SitAardl' AwB 

Ag;e (American, oarda, teefanloal), 
the oldeet band or plt^er to the 
left of the dealer, who, at Poker, 
la allowed to paaa the flnt round 
after the haada are "helped," 
and to oome in again after all 
baxe raised 01 gone oat. He 
dgnlflea hla Intention by aajing 
" my ag*w" or ■' I paaa the oje." 
The effect 1« that the fint player 
beoomea the laat pb^er. Thla 



:v Google 



Agi — A^mst. 



A " blnS," or « poor oiw. A« 
OMM ot alwolate eqailitj tunong 
haad* M« bU but ImpoMlhle at 
Fokn, UttJe li iliked bj it. 

Ag;ed (noiiig, taotmlMl), anjr 




Agxwi (Angla-Indiau), Ut. flie. 
oanii^ appUed by tlw aatlTM 
to A mamj tnln.— A6wit Jolf 
MM, feta; a* ■ingfo-Zwrfi— Ofs*- 
(orv, Loadon 1886. 

Afftcnivf tttofs (popular), % oottvi^ 
UoD ol "aggnvftton," tha look 
of hair fdnnerirln Tognaallko 



V on i>Ktinf, 

coM^ToBchitaDM, B«awiiiB>, ABc* Haw- 
thoni, Ac, br ItM don.— f>(n:£v 
TViiMi. 



AcMori^(Aiii«tioaa). Bartlett 
deBoea tbla aa " aakew ; " as to 
hava ona'a hat mym. TiOBk the 
tenn gm, oiMd In drlriug oattle. 
It »Mtaa ntbac to be darirad 
fnnn^M, "toagna with," "to 
Bt," with Uw pnflx negatlTe s. 
In Amerioa it la a~ 
a door ajar or partly opoi, 1 
^ppOHi bj the following thjDBea 
from a oomlo p^iar pnbliahed 
in niUaddpbia ia 1833 or 1834 
on an Indde&t irtiloh ooo nn ed 
there :— 



ltd the Bill SykcatTpc^w 
twirtad haok from the tampla 
towarda the eat. It la bow In 
favooT among gypalei and a 
tew " biulaer*." The Freneh 
paaaanta of Bairj aie fond of 
tbla omament, which reoaHa, 
thongb mnob aborter, the old 
odenettea of tha Tiaatih hna- 



Acitnte the *'^**"*""t tli*ititf (oom- 
nKm), ring the bell. 



1 iittil joahui 
Vanrbiiutqiui 



(kDofiln. 



AoQOiding to Wright (ftorindal 
XHotionary}, agn la North Sog- 
11^ and meaiia both bwtj and 
■jar. The word U, bowem, at 



Ag;og;nT« (Ameiioan thieiTaa* 
■lang), be qniokt 
aignal. Vttaaagag. 



I (American), 
agonj. A btTonrite wtnd wltb 



:v Google 



Agonise — Air. 



men. The writer on 
MM of Uuae declMC (in Kcn- 
tocl^), that "We mait agcmit 
If we wotild M« Ood," ud 
hehaednce net with tbe Mine 
iiHiiriMlnn in print. 



beud xiU. Tn pitf to baM nuiRd Eljnlu 



■ uad UiUsl cvu lo JOB 
Tu U ooN.— BIoi B ud knp «•, whu 



Acaay (ooaunon), to pnt or to 
pae the agomjf on, mMtie to 
tltriU, to bont^, to keep np or 
intcoid^ tbe ezdtement attcnd- 
•at on >wM»tlon»l ptodnctiont, 

•'Wife'' kibB ipcdBW* sfa bosk ef 
■kii kM- It B all -VKV but teabininl 
IS «•& TWn n K piaHS for kactli- 



p eiiUj i lm il' » l f iu qM fcpM, n 



Thet particDlar etdnmit In the 
daOy Fnpen, whkb ia heeded 
by print* o 




It is Mid thM tbe iMt Gullet 
revolctioQ w»* emnged entlTely 
yij meaoa of the Timal »eony 
colomn. 

Football players ny of tbe 
■ide that makes a unmbw of 
gonle th»t it "pilea on the 
mgmtf." In theatrioal perhnoe 
an "eponjr pOer" la an actor 
who performs in a Miuattonal 
pls7 in which the blood of the 
audience ia made to cnrdle 
and their fleeb creep. To " pile 
on the oyoaf " waa origiBtdlT 
American; it waa conunoo in 
184a 

Aidh (tinkcc), butter, 

Ainoch (tinker), a tbing. 

Air and cxeidM (tbleTeaV pB»t 
serritikle at a owTtct settle- 
ment. Two rtietchea of ofr 
L, two 7ein' penal 



Alrinff (TBobig), a hone is 
Tbe «r«af ODlnmn doca not ealdtobe "ont tor an otritv" 
alwa;i cont^n w^ eaaa nt or when there ia no intention on 
diamal tidinga. R la naed ex- tbe part irf those concerned with 
teusWelj tjj lorera and as a Um that he shonld win. 
mnann of oommnnicatico be- 
tween tbleres, Ac Air line road, aa (American), an 
8-ocu. b. ddchui » t.k. n«t ««I*<»to» »PPli«^ to a rail. 
EQwHi Of H 0«ci* B kmlT, rnc ud road tisok when it passes over 



:v Google 



Ao" — Alderman. 



the level nnbrokeii pnirie in ■ 
Btnight line wlthoat bend or 
gradient. "A Knight eboot" 
is alto another teim for this. 

Aj», «j«w (gjixy), H>. Often 
pleonsstio kmktt aji, good 
enoDgh. 



Akabk (Ane^Indiau), a 
n 1:7 Indian oSoeis 01 



Akerman'a Hotel (obiolete), 
Newgate priaon, the gorernor 
being, in 1787, a man named 
Akerman, 

Akeofo (gTpe;), alone. 



Um buti nufaior, 
Tc (vl chiridoi ncU, 
Pbo buidy filoir." 

{" I am all alone^" she eang, 
" among many flowen, and all 
the birdi are singing tongs to 
me."^faMt Tiuhtf.) 

Alftf, alA (g7ps7),doini.— ("Besh- 
tn atajr adol te me te vel pen 
tnt« a knahto gadlo"— " Sit 
thou down then, and I will tell 
thee a nice story I "} 

Albanr beef (Amerioan), the 
■targeon, so called becaose 
Waahington Irving spoke of the 
"hospitable boards" of that 
oi^ aa "smoking with stur* 
geon." It is a~ 



called "nigger beef," sturgeon 
being In some parta of tba 
Dnited States a obeap Bsh 
whioh was onoe hdd in very 
little aoooDDt. It ia to be re- 
marked that serentl Mitda of 
Bah are often apoken of aa meat. 
Thus a Yaimonth bloater ia 
called a two-eyed ateak, or a 
Yarmonth oa^xin; a kind of 
fiah in India ia known aa Bom- 
bay ducka, and a fresh herring 
ia a BiUingagate pheasant. 

Albert (common), a watoh chain. 

AlbettopoUi, aoooiding to Hotten, 
a faoetiODa appellation given b;- 
the Londoner! to the Kenelngton 
Oore diabrlot. How obsolete. 

AUm (Anglo-Indian and frontier 
American), a TiUi^ or aTUla,a 
ooontry-aeai. From the Spanish 
aldta, whiob is in tnm derived 
from the Aiabio. 



a (popnk^,a half -crown, 
aloi^[dpe,BtDrkej, An older- 
sioii in chains, la a tnikej hong 
with sausages. " Blood and 
gota oUerman," a fat and pom- 
pouaman. 

(Tliievee), an sUenum, a large 
"jemmy" or crowbar, need for 
opening aaf ea. An extra Urge 
one ia called a " lord maTor." 

Aldennnn Lnabingtoa, Intoxloat- 

ing drink. (Attcr imported 

into Australia bj convicts. ) 

Ban or lugooc of my kind i> /•uM ; le 

Aut it to drink. Spokii^ of ■ pcnoa 

lAe k drunk, iha "luh" fnMrnicjr ujr, 

I LmUi^ltm it oooommi' or 



, Google 



AtdgaU — AU along. 



■MB." Klmth-€ra.<itliaMm»,atya\iiti- 
bCBm.—Frtm Fmiyitftimin. 

AU^ate pamp (old), a drai^ht 
on Aldffatt J>i»p meuit a bill of 
ezohuigB drawu on peraons no 
bett«r kble to paj thui Aldgalt 
pump. 

Ale dn^er (old), ale-hoou "ktitfta. 



Ales (Stock Bxcbange), k niok 
name used by men on 'Cluuige 
for Allsopp k Soni' vtock, 

Alexaadn limp, the' (oommon), 
a twhionable crate, resnltlng 
from a toadying Imitation of a 
oertain ladj well known In 
society who walks with a alight 



Alfred David tpopnlar), affldaTtt ; 
alao AJUa^ and Dang. 
1 ilmoil dropped when up ihe jumped 
And Bid, " I'm readr new, 
Hut whT lbs kxA or Ihnineo 
Thkt it Itcaling o'er thj bnnrV* 



All abroad (common) an exprea- 
Bton n«ed when an; nndertaUng 
hat failed, and a perwn hi nn- 
oertain ai to the oootm to por- 
■oe. ATBTlantlB"aUat*ea." 


" Aim! poor (hortl- If 

To be pitW-ow dooo 
boil. »d renw,- 

Oi oae boodied about ll 

Tabe*iU*Lw<~(obe' 


imdoubl which 


■d to (tt, breO, 

bui flXHD piliu 

■itumped,-not 



Allacompaln or alicnmpdne 
(rhyming slang), isin, termed 
"pamey" in thieve*' lingo; 
also a oommon Bweetmeat de- 
riTed from the name of the 

Of upt eibd doviu I've Telt tht shock, 
Since 4mjt of ba» end ihutlkcoclu. 
And a/ieum/aiMt and Albot nxk* 
When 1 the world beien. 

He bed b«ii Doled Ibr in iounodenH 
pajtialilj for the leocheriiie ibouah iodi- 



And 111 take mj A(/nd Dmvid hM, 
She dos't cetch me there mcvJo. 

—BU^iltd Lmt, h tfmrrj Aimmt. 
He b engaced ia teceinn£ the tjitr. 
dM^ t£ a man who fat hie head broke by 
a i^iM.'-KiwpUf : Cnfrty Hamfy<L 

AlgVfinea (theatrical), performers 
who bully the manager of a 
theatre when the salaijee are 



AH alive (tailors), garmente nn> 
fairly or elorenly mad& 

All alone of, an Illiterate synonym 



:v Google 



z6 AU-a-mort — AU fours. 

onnlnpilBtaoaailyMitbntiiM ^v i Am^ iwnh iM*fa( ■ 
<d Cbaiaeet, and la thnaCora In 
tH probablli^ maoh older. 



. i (old), rtmolc dumb, 

CfgOamOtd. "^^ irotd ■t«'(<* Ha^ hu 
oeuedto bcdoog toilang phimM- 

AU Bromd i^orti (Aueriou), ology. It sujr be bit«ra«tliig 

BW who teko on liit«n«t in all to renuuk tbat tha gam* ma 

Unda <rf apart — lacdDg, ahoot- originaUj nine plna ; bnt tlia 

log, flshing, ball, pedeatiianiam, BlnelA'<n<dConDaottDnt baring 

aparriiig, oock-flghting, mttii^, forUdden that game, the aatnte 

Jto. Bona of the Puritan* added a 

AH at acA (oammoo), bewlldarad, pina, or, aa it la now oaOed, 
(Mofnaed ; " aB al aaa on the "Ameiloan bowla." 

AD fanodj (popnlar), good, pro- 
flbible, plflaiant 




AnbeeraiiddtIttki,rMeatalaiig AU-firad (Bn^iah and Ameii- 

aignlfflDg that the life and the oan), Immodeimte, Tlolenb Thla 

olnnunatanoea of the penon to oomnrao cocpnaeiao ia thought 

whom It la made applioable are in New En^and to be an en> 

not ao {teaaaat or to baftpy aa phemlamfor "hell-flred." Thna 

thajmlgbt beiOraatheyareie- people talk of an "^l-Jbwt 

jnaentedtobe. TheallDakai la abiiae,"meanlngaoi7lngabiue) 

to the aappoeed amnaamenta an "aa-Jh^id hnny," i^, in great 

ta working mot In the aUttle baate. 

thej drink to rebeatathemaelTea lnrlaIws'lMrtaIkui(,klalaHwiida( 

dniii% the emroiae. vt.—r.HMt*»:TtmSmmmiOjf/irA 

Bn ih* U* sf an tMlr 10 lb. RnuB 

a,nB,hMmtil^mmd4JUiila. Tl» All foan, to be on (oommcai), to 

THBC Onnd Dnka ha* nvrawlr xaped be OO good terma, to be exacUj 

S^ "?i 1 ''f ^?°^ if^ ."J " ■'«fl« S probably of Hasonlo 

,;„j. orlglu,andrefeiTlDgt«theoom- 
jdet«neaa and harmonj of the 
four sfdea of a " aqnare." 



:v Google 



AU gqy — AB ttty o*- 



AB (IV (tUaiTM), • tann to dmoto 

tlMt tiM ooMt fa oImi, a nilut 

tbtona DM the «ipnMlaa " tont 
art frmcM " in tbe ^na MDWL 

Hnli« HlwMd M bmt, at wUil 



AOfat-fltit {Amwiowi}, an <dd 
Tankee BTpreMJnti. " Oh, gat 
oqtl" ^^paantolHTanggMtad 
it, lUa fa atUoed ray oftan 



wbaa a maikat goaa lat, and 
tbeia U a fannal dfapoaUoa to 



AU Is a pBckar (oa 
ocnfuloa ; w hnrladl; a* to 
agitata and ptf^az. Woman 
of tbe lovai olaiiM, aapoataUr 
when nKUoidr flulamd and 
agiUtad, wiU daolantbamadrea 
•B to • jmdMr, and moat fra- 
qneBtlT*Boh a ctatamfnt willba 



a tho woal 



nying, *' That beat* 



— niXaU^ ^ Tim Zim Btat- 

An hoUd^at PetUuuB (iM^mlar) 
fa Mid wb«t Umn b nothing 
to cat. ^H iolidmt meana no 
work, and Pt Ma m U a pfa^ on 
"ftdk," food. 

An hollmv, hollmv (old daiw), 
oompletelj, attailj. " I baat 
him M ica«m at a laoe." Fro- 
baUj dailTed faom idoZIy. AU 
whole, or wbcda-and-all. Aarf en 
■I, fa a Ihitoh idiom ; iM-aS, 



An BOath (Amarloan), a man who 
fa a great talker, and onjj a 
talker, b laid to be all moutk. 



An in {racing} means that be 
made im bonaa In tha Ust a 
to aland whether the hone mi 



An inl (Stock ■xohange), an ax- 
pgawioa need by man on 'Change 



An aj aye (pmlar), noneaD 
nntme. Some philtdogiats hare 
anggeatad—thongh thaj hava 
not adc^tod— a darivatdon from 
the Welib ol IM iwjr, it fa reiy 
tadlona, i.*.. It fa all nonaensa. 
It eeema tax more probable that 
it fa a oonttaotioa of the phraea 
" there fa as mnoh of It as theie 
fa la aB my <iw," the words 
being made mora fondhla by 
oloalng one of tbe ogana of 
Tfaioo. ToezpMaadiaaanttrom 
any atatonen^ or a retnsal to 
comply with a reqneat, AoMh 
•fang has tbe oorreqwDdlivlantt 
aMd oil / whiob fa nsoaUy accom- 
panied bj a knowing wtnk and 



:v Google 



Aa my eft — AO natums. 



a dgnlflntit gMtnre h an In- 
TllaUo& to Iiuqwot the ocgan. 
iR w^ tf it MmatimM oloo- 
gBted Into " JU nil «|« Mid Bettr 
Hutin," wbloh bmhu to htiTa 
been the arigiuil phnie, and of 
whioh iiuDT irfylanatitmt baf o 
been giTtn. B7 huut It la tald 
to b« a oompttoo of a Po^ah 
pnjer to Bt. ^»'*t^i oommeno- 
Ing with the word*, "O mihi 
beate Martina I " whloh taU into 
dlacradit at the Befonnatlon. 
Hr. T. Lewia a Dariea thinks 
that it anwe from a (ETpar 
woman in Shiewabni?, named 
Bettjr Hartln, giving a black eje 
to a oonetaUe, who waa obaSed 
hj the boT* aooordlng^. The 
ezpreafton mnit hare been oom- 
mon in 1837, aa Dlokoiu giToa 
one of the Briok^Lane teeti- 
mcolala aa from " Bettj Martin, 
widow, one child, one eye" 
(■■Fiokwtak,"ah.zxzi{L). Tak- 
ii% for granted that the ex- 
preadon originated from tiie 
beginning of a pnjer (a theorj 
which la now rejected bjr 
moat e^mologiata), thia would 
be bot one of the man? in- 
•taoaea of a raUgloaa fonnnla 
being diatorted and lidi- 
enled. Thna, the oant term 
"to pattw flash," i.t., to talk 
In oant, la from "to patter" 
(•igniting to mnmUe), which 
itaeU is probablj derlVed from 
patsmoater. The French use 
jMlcnAru with the dgniSoa- 
tion of mumbling, and pait- 



movth of Frenoh wm^'people, 
la a dlqMiagIng <qplthet for 
irieet The familiar «««(, ml 
religloiia hTpocilte, wm for- 
metlj a friar of a mendicant 
order. Then ear* pcdlte, on 
both aide* of ths Ohannel. ai« 
freqnetit); offended \fj ▼olgar 
ffll^tlfti)* to the Bnlgarlan hare* 
tioa, thongb the e^ ceaalon baa 

meaning. Again, some etymo- 
logltt* derive the word "bigot" 
from the fli*t worda of a pnjer 
" by God." " Dn goddam " 
naed to be aTnonjmooa with an 
KngUahman, at the time when 
It waa thcDght In France that 
an Briton* had red hair, aold 
their wivea at Smlthfleld, got 
drank regnlarlj after dinner 
(this maj have been a fact at 
the time of three-bottle men), 
and alwaja had a boIl'Jog with 
his noae at thoii heel*. Bailey 
aaoribe* the origin of ian* 
poaa, naed by qnaoka, to koe 
tit earjma euinn, when thl* for- 
mula fell into ridicule with 
man? othen after the Befarma. 
tion. It la cariona to note that 
old-faahioned French charlatana 
atill noe the worda jMMi-prfcta 
as an opening to their Umimti 
or poffing speech. 

AH tiationa (obsolete), a coat or 
garment of dtfTerent patdtea; 
a woman with manj oolonr* 
In her dress. A glua of oil 
nalwni was mpplied at the 
dram sbopc^ and consisted of 
the mixed drli^ng* of the spirit 
txgt and drop* of spirltB left In 



:v Google 



AU HoiioHs — All over. 



Asmic* thia la omllsd 
MBto." It ii gBiienll7 mised 
with o*7eDiM pappar. In Lon- 
don "all aoTtc" iiKimpidlr fn- 
tozicatiiig oomponnd. 

Alio (pidgin English), all, averj. 
!■ added to maoj woida in 
pidgin in an arbitraiy manner. 
"^Oa man talkM my M fothion " 
— "Ereiy roan talks to mo 

Slu^'WhaDa ^UB ului doIh, 
WIl "ha pictul AoOa *i^ lWT*> 



AH of a honffh (tailon), very 
rough, twistod, or aloranly. 

AD ef mr tone (American), all 



AU on the go (vnlgariim), gone, 
done avaj with. 

Tba lu) laiipa—B nice I— that hud 
Sodi ■ hard diy'i »s(k— oow aiU « 

(iff*/ 

Tn* bernod • }ak*, ud eKngfa Is 

TIh mildttt iBd bdt'Miiipa'd Bold 

bckmt 

All ont (popular), much, h^ far ; 
"all ma the best," b; far the 
bwt. To be ail out, to be quite 
wamg. (Turf), one who has 
been nnsaoceestiil during a daj'e 
lacing i* said to be oU ml. 
(Stock Ezcbasge), all null m 
«zpiesBion to denote that the 
matket tmprovet, and that there 
is a general diepoeition to boj. 



AU ont (athletio), where a rannet 



AU-oretltli (Tolgarism), a lenH- 
tioD as of iUnesf , ohtUa, ihnd* 
dering pteasnre, or " the oreepa" 
from head to foot. 



—Am Hamal 8*r. 

AU otfX pAttcrn (decoratlre de- 
dgn.) " A technical term that 
is used to denote a design In 
which the whole of a field is 
covered with ornament in con* 
tradistinctlon to such a* have 
unit* only at Intervale, leaving 
spaces of the gronnd between 
them. The ornament of the 
Moors, as seen in the decora- 
tions of the Alhambra, and that 
of Eaitetn nations generally, la 
most oommonly of this nature ; 
the whole sorface of the object 
is covered with decorative forms 
so aa to present to the eye a 
mass of elaborate detail, the 
leading lines of which oan often 
on^ be detected by careful 
sonitiny. When, as in some 
Persian surfaces, these lines are 
often quite lost, the resnlt la 
uusatlsfaatory."_P. E. BmIwm: 
Bvggettiont in Flond Duign, 

AU over the ihop (common), aU 
over the place ; refers also to an 
obtmsive and exaggerated per< 
f ormanoe which asserts itself in 
an offensive manner. In retail 



:v Google 



30 



Ali over — AU-rounder. 



tiadBn'duig it s^nlflM a widel; 
aprMd movement of an; kind, 
a geDenJ •cninble, diMorbuics, 
or •gitatlon. (Tailon), naod of 
a penon or tbliig taking ap loo 
maoh rooDL 

AUow (Americui), to admit, to 
declare, to intimate that m tbii^ 
niut be done. TUs word U 
qoaintl; D*ed bj raatio* in dif- 
leitot Btateato ex^^eia thoDght, 
or oj^on on ita nttertmce ; to 
giTB. " All the people in the 
room oIlDiKd that his condnot 
waa perfectly shamefnl. " " He 
aUoKvi he'd give me a new tmnk 
if I'd allote falm my arm-chair." 
(Harrow), aUaie, a boy'a weekly 
allowance of pooket-mone;. 

Allomncw (t^on), aUowancei 
for making ap a garment, i.e., 
for seams, padding, wadding, 
bottoning, and respiratioo. 

All jAof». (pidgin), quite right. 

Olo Hi>*qiu> b* UUh*. kir wife ifae 
vtUjr 'culb 'bunt pauiaalumrcurioniw 
pBculUr u to pcariiX >b< likec oae kind 
pcultc, IB ether chop (quilitr) an do ; 
■be like* peiilw nomp* ant lound, he 
whiier oakwr. Look, Re iiU flfa, alio 
wmec (hat he EmpcLcr kub fol top tide 
he hit. Suppoiej peiHer blongy » 

All round (common), a phrase 
applied to a thing or person 
thoTonghiy adapted to ita ot 
his purpose, and signifies in Its 
restricted sense complete and 
perfect, aa "an oU round man 
of baslnesi," " an all mind 
lawyer," "an oU rOKmf sports- 



or lady," or even an "oB muMf 

Boonndrel or thief " (in America 

an " oU ronmA orook.") An all 

round man Is one who i»d tnm 

his hand to anything, or a clerk 

who can ondertake all the de- 

partmente in his bosiness. 

A much pxTcr qneBioa ii niied bj the 

ItronciT cxpnaaed opiiwn of lo many vit. 

Denei, th»t iha fimifncT is ■! pveKbt a 

bettnag n i w /min.— rfa Tima. 

Ur. Ccu in the imiU pi 



An aS, round player at billiards 
is one who goes in for any kind 
of stroke^ in contradistinotion to 
a player who plays eiclnsiTely 
the spot stroke. 

It mi nrr cvidmC that the lyiBrathiei 
o( the udience were with the ■// rrmU 
pUfer TKibcr Ehui with the tpot pe j farmer. 




An all round cannon is said 
of a cannon stroke effected by 
tonohing the cushions in sno- 
cession with one's ball before 
striking another. 

All-ronnder (common). A ehiit 
collar meeting in front, thus 
covering the throat, was Tery 
fashionable a short time ago, 
and no " masher" would be seen 
without ono reaching np to bis 



, Google 



AO round — Allspice. 



ill ntwd 1117 hat <popaUr), "I 
fwa an nfmi mf Aot," I feal 
qoMT, do not feal tmj wdL 
"Tbat'a all rtnnA Mjr iU(" ia 
•jnonrmoB* with "that'* iH 

ft MDg «lilcb wu m7 popsbr 
1111834. 

ABl (popolM), Up dropplagi, 
or InfBrioT ipitltt. sold ohasipi 
[workmen's), goods and ohat- 
tela, 01, perbapa, more properly, 
tooU "Come, pftck np yonr 
■Us and be off," U a common 
form of dlimlwal to a labourer 



All VBoke, gwfflnion, and pkUaa 
<popDlar), an deceit, lummiM. 



AH aofta. <8ea All Natk»s.) 



The title of a novel by Walter 
Beaaut, and tba b— jWig dt ft 
wdl-known oolleot In tbeTnyei* 
Book. It baa paaMd Into euob 
oommoB and geoMal nae m to 
hftTe become a truly " llxad 
popular phme." [See All 
Nanom.) 




AH wtnuk (popnlar), all aafe, all 
i%bl. 

Wbo'n TOO, iir1-4li, UlMs Sfrud- 



fnV-«ll rifhi, tba — jro, I think n'n 

lOt mvm I— Bird / Fraitm. 

Some yean ago tbe pbtaae wi* 
bawled In tbe etreete, before 
•acb erpuMtons sa "Bow's 
your poor {«et 1 " " Wbo's your 
hatt«Tl''cameintovogtie. Tbe 
Ftrisians at tbi« time Indulged 
in eqnally Idiotio inquiries or 
oftUs, SQch as " Et tea ^deda 
KTOt-D* b U mnoe t " " Obd 
Lftrobertl as-tn n I^nbertt" 



All sortft of (Ameiiou). BaiUett 
defines this as " expert, aoote, 
oxcallent, o^ltal." It ia more 
aoourately, as its name dsclarea, 
" perfect, complete In ereiy de- 
tail, bavbig erery qnality." iXi 
tortt a/ a iorw la ft horaa poa- 
Mssed of nwry merit, not one 
that la merdy esoellent or 
ca[dtaL JU «>rtt o/aj'ai {B. A. 
Foe, olted by BaiUett) doee not 
mean an export, aont«, or excel- 
lent undertaking, but one re- 
quiring all oonoelTable abllllieB. 
In this it ooneeponds to tbe 
Oerman a&crfn and Datoh at- 
ItrUg. "Hy la TftnaOcriqrsoort 
▼oonien." AlUrUf is, in bot, 
translated all sorti by BeweL 

AUsplce (popular), a grocer. 



:v Google 



32 



Airs quitt—Ai/ the way. 



Att» qaiet on the PateaiKl 
(AmwtoMi). TUa phnaa ori- 
ginated dming the Civil Wu, 
and luu dnoe b«eii th« rafnln 
of m TUj popnlu aong. It d»i 
notMqoietnde; a period of calm 
enjoTineiit. "Don't IrM «bont 
tbtngH ; the; an going on 
igly, foi «tr« jinrt M 



tf H/Hm Ltmdtn. «<A 


W DO ri» In 


oUinf on raoDC Bob Logic, who ou ■ 


■■y^ttrklikohiifilhcr,. 


adqmU..>.V 


«ilb nU die .p«« of 


h. melKvoliL 


" Fuhioni hum duDinl 


mT dcu Coi," 


■WttoCorinthimi, "imd 


ih«ro<>»Ei»ci<. 


ud [Jiquutn Kcm to u to 




bulnppoK Iheiiutin ii<//y^/> »», 




um«l<t>Tll» 


Dicker Primefii of the d> 


--/•«*. 


It is kUo naod in Ameriok. 


A EOitlaun tntend ■ 


Chkafo ru- 


slonuduk«lLobe>honi 





■• H« la ■ Ida baKir "<V0^' «U A* 
dtrk. "Fuilr iwpHt- "Ym, a 

tic tnndiV' li lao rix chubn^ <ir, 
no bollHi fiv roar WMm >»<, two far . 
Uw mlUa* Attnrtjm of ymr hoiif, aad 
two fci TOonclC "Dua an ma a» f 
jg,w."-TtM»tWiiip. 

Fluawdt B|f4liiicM bsai? Al(/*ia 
Unt lis* hn bow, and ibcn ■• mm ai 



AU T. H. (Uilonk »n right, or 
■nsrj good indeed (atook out- 
ten). 

AU the cnbooec (common), vnrj- 
where. The oiioowia thegalle; 
or cooking plus of k ahip, or 
timpl; a Ulclwn. 

Do« lore, Ion, kmr 
W* doB'i tod It mu dU lb* 



Ul tbera (general), axtMwtntr 
oaed with the ■Igalficaticm of 
Brat-rate, op to the mark. A 
good player at any game 1* aald 
to be oB Mm ; the nme to aaid 
of a prettj, well-dreaaed woman, 
A amart officer alao ia mO. lAov. 
It likewise meua to be in one's 



A Eindcr'i a aander, ■ fooH it a ffooov, 
Aod Cnt^'i the kug orcr all ihe aimm. 
Ohl knra, km, lenJ" 

AU the p> (common), in demand, 
fashionable, meeting with a very 



Tl» basd aod tl 
■boosb, and ' 

party ^Ih 



—Paatk. 

AU the shoot (popular), the whole 
assembly, aU the party. " ETeiy 
txisn-jaok of them." 

The Priao* of Wila to a bricUar"'* 



AU the my down, M simply aU tbe 
wky (common dang, [cobably 
Ameiioan), entirely \tf. " down 



:v Google 



All to — Alm^hfy. 



pnteUj bvm top to bottom. 
A oomiiuni phnn U "that viD 
•nit me aS tiU My dmm," or oU 



An WBC blue (Amuloaa), a joDjr 
time, ft frollo, • ^uubocM. — 
MS. Awttritanitm. bf C. Lt- 
larndBarrittm. 



Tob 



AH to hii Mm chMk (taOon) 
■IgnillM mil to Mm ti'l f 



An topieca(i 



gether. The tern ii *1jo used 
b7 bokting men. A orew are 
Mid to bBT* fallen oB to pkeit 
when they are ezhaiutad and 
the rowing U wild. 

An i!^ (genetal), a ayiumyia for 
" all am," ilgiilfie* that the end 
baa oome to anj one, that all la 
OTerwlthhlm. *'Alltoimaah" 
b another phnae of a cimilar 
meaaliig, ^tplled to a person 
whoee affair* are InettieTablj 
iDTolTed, who If ntterlj bank- 
rupt In fcatnne. ^na one been 
that " So-and-M haa gone all to 
■maili," i.t,, Ua credit is gone. 
Flani, and indeed anjthlng, maj 
M itfjx to imath " A similar 
ezpfeeriMi is popular among the 
knrer oliwoe in Bolginm and 
Holland, and amcng 



thing la gone — all la o?ei. An 
odd *arie^ of this slang Is 
■ranetlme* beaxd in tbe United 
State*. Mr. Bartlett leoord* 
that it la a oonunon expnaalon 
among sarrauta in Fennajlvanla 
to my, " all an; mote," instead 
of "all gone" oratTtay. 



Ally-begr, a bed. Thia tqi; 
anoient and nearlj obsolete 
cant word was ezpsesalTe of 
the pleasme found I^ the raga- 
bcmd olaasea in the nnDanal 
luziiij of a warm and comfort- 
able reatlng-idaoe for tbe nlgbt. 
People who slept in a nook 
in a waQ, under a bosh or a 
hedge, or tbe chanoe sbeltcc of 
a bam or onthoose, spoke of a 
bed as aSU, pleaaant, agreeable, 
and Ug, lltUe, t.a., a little place 
or harbour of pleasantnee*. 
L»ah ia Oaallo for a bed, and 
laii-6v, a UtUe bed ; and Jaoi- 
ber or ^ifar, a bonaa with bed* 
in it, a lodglng-bouae tor tiavel- 
leia. 

Afanifffa^ mauh (American). Tbe 
adjeotiTB is naed In an infinite 
TBiietj <rf waja, and Lord Lytton 
in a certain meaanre aoolima* 
tiaed it on this aide of tbe 
water. For example, be apeak* 
In tbe following qaolatlon* of 
olaiipktir tMort (that la, a state 
of oomplete demolition}; of 
" driTlng Into almighty ahivers " 
(a state of entire colb^iae) ; and 
of "aln^btj cinck" (that ia, 
witboat oeasing — a referenoe 
to the popular eraok of doom), 
nieaopbiaaea are tbnsilliutiated 
fiom one of hi* beat work* — 



:v Google 



Almighty— AU^de. 




wbcD U sum ts UUofi uid ""jflH-n*. 
■Ifht luiu> ■ sJiaipitr cnK^' " 

—t^NttO. 



Altemsl (AmerioMi tiilavM' ilKig)! 
Aliiiyn. M In^Indlu word »ltogrtherj the iok total of a 
lor « ohMt of dmwera, darired ■bnyoiUll; eutltihott, Fram 

from the HindMUnlalMdri, and tbe Dnbsh aUcaal, aUogathcr. 




oat deUIb— a pnotloe wblob 
mDowod of grOM oreHthaigas 
without aajr pOMible nwni of 



In oldAD dAjv tile fhht»ft WM 
with low qotfter. The Ugher ■pBoiallj«mIiedtotho«o«»mt« 

JtMti>wM»Miiotau7fnWhlt« „„d«i^ to tho frwpienter. of 
^?' J'^ P~^' waie f or- taothd^ mch beli« giTen with- 
uertj free from krrart t<a debt. - - 

The lowOT JiMrtta was alao ft 
nnotouT of the Mune deMnip> 
tiim. uid WM dtRoted In the 
Hint in Bonthwrnrk. 
And fcrihit nua [lu swiiiii«-iuiH b JUIerinc lb« jeffs cBck (taDora), 
nqnoribl*. Hamk r ■ ba t qh of ilia maUng np a ganaent withont 

Nataaljiifihariiuwy.bBtiidhtlrhHlih linM or ttylo. 

uA at [k^ kappinaL— r. C n ^; 

AGiimilimgHtU. AHtaill (old oant), a "enrmlTB'' 

WUutHun, ■4j«at ta ih* Tvapk, ''^ '^ CDTtaU wai a aeoond 

ifaes mti knnrn b; lb* cut bum ai in command In the fmtemitjot 



Lord Oaii- Jutkc. . 



, Google 



Amah — Anuer. 3S 

«^ita(A^o-bklteti).*w«t-iniTM. "I** "^ '"''■> •* v^i^ •"^ u 

■Ik intaaalr iDHis lucodn*, or ddck Imwo 




In pidgin f i^'"'' It bu the paitlM. Also a blaokleg who 

■».a» BignlAoaticai : — ahuM with both paiti«a at th« 

■,i<>ok«.<».»a,f.t«a)» gaming^aWe, or on tha ™». 

OM piten littH Jmmkm*t ddlo, nt OQIUM. 



I'—TklSiim^ 



Anlmili (Anmiean), a nlaknanM 

^^^^m^*^"' '"■""' for tha Malaa luod brgrooMia, 
ooa]-d«alaa, &o. 60 oaUed be- 

Amaadi, mande, owBigTpcr). wo ; oaiue th^ an alwara " lyiiiK to 

MMMli, m mm diO, fn two. wdgbt" 
"Ant tn nr amandi, nan ae 

baabno"— "Coma with n; nniainlllii(rTit TnitrTil. " ■-'-■- 

dont be ataid." void «■!<«, meaning a trait- 
woithj pcnoi, bot ^^tSad bf 

flaitMnailnf fnanflnaT] apirtJnal the »^'«'' in India to aereial 

joke pofonned «n boaid aUp kinda of nattra officials, ncazl^ 

bj 3mA Tan in warm latitndas, aO tadnolble to the definition 

the TicUm being daoked to tha ot^Mt SMmtaarMK Itlsalao 

wasb-daok tnb, and nbjected i^Ued to natire aMlstanta 

to other indigniUaa {AdmitxA to land anirojlng. — TitU aad 

SmtPn). SaOon of other natioaa AmMQ: Jnpb-Aidte Oi*- 

iadalge to aimHar joke* when «ary. 

cToedngthaaqnator. - b-^^ d™-. «. p««, « ™. 

Aabia or aaibeer (Amntean). a 1m, bKoa* ds«.— /■^onm, Sftteh in 

enphamlamforsalintedtobaooo IktlHtDmfKtmH.au. 
JnJoe, tha reaott of cltewtog. 

Bartlett mja, "The word U a Ameer (Anglo-Indian), orlginaUj 

otnraptiDn of wtAer, to which an Arab word omw, root a- 



tt bwra a dight reaemblance in signifTing o omm a ndln g or a 

oolonr, ■»«■«<*— t ing oertainly a oommandcT, is osed in tl>e Baat 

ddicaoT <A mpnaalnn which In a -naj general waj (or dlgni* 

• - - tarleaandiB ■" 



:v Google 



AtrUH — Ampersand. 




wrrioe on " Codi. and Ob." 
(whiob Me), whan the raapouMi 
■M ohmnted to tli« orgmo, and 
liwtMd of the ordiaMj pMlnu 
and Ant leasoii, ftalma 145, 146, 
and 147, sod Eoolea. an naed. 

Amen cntler (old), a pariah clerk, 
from the reaponae so frequentl7 
uadenM of bybiin. 

Anen wallah (military), the 
chaplain's clerk, who make* 
the raepoDMi In the garrlKm or 
other Ghonb. The rafflx ool- 
laA U the well-known Hludn- 
atanl word ilgiilfjring man or 
pnaoD, and U one of innumer- 
able Inatanoei of the adoption 
in onr annj of Hlndnatani tcnna, 
doe to the lengthened oaonp»- 
tlMof India I7' Britiah tzocqw. 



Americftnlalng (Ametioan). 
" Awuritattitiiif a peoide," ae> 
oordlng to the Bar. J. S. Qnbel- 
man, " oonaiata in teaehing 
them the Wngliwh laogxiage. 
After this oome snndiy tnlnnr 
vlitnea. Be la not a tne 
American who -deaeoatea the 
Sabbath, who Tielda to Intern- 
peraaoe, or tieada down the 

A merica n ahonlders (t^Ion), 
■honldsra oat broad and " bidlt 
np," to give the n 
peanooe of i 
the ahonlder. 



I anap- 



r (old), a ngnlar aatoMr, 
one who eaja Tea to evsTTthing. 

Amerftce (American thje*M' 
■lang), *«i7 near, within call. 



American tweexera {thioTw' 
slang), an Inatnunent l^ meana 
of which an hotel thief ia en- 
abled to open » door bstened 
with the key in the look inelde. 

Amee all (old ilaog), within amtt 
all, neariy, ytaj near. 



M (American). This 




Am m n mHon lef (annT}, a wooden 

Ampenand (American, hot of 
Bngliflh origin), the aeat or 
hinder part. In one of the 



:v Google 



Ampersand — Anall. 



37 



DaiTadfnun "andpetMuicI," 
thai explBiiied bj Birtlett : — 

"Two geai:taatiaa» ago, when 
Iticb achoolinastetm wen oom- 
inoaat tbe Booth, thia cspna- 
ffon, eqalrklent totbeft annoiad 
t« tha •IphabM (in«*fi3ng k ftr 
M oad^ to dlitiiiffiiiflli It from 
ko.), wu in fraqooiit oaa." 

Aatbe mmptrtoKi Oftme at the 
bottom tt tbe a^lisbet, it cune 
to be at length Mw>dated with 
thetmeohltMll 




and «*ar7 one, to make a fnri- 
ona onaet. A wotd jmbablj 
deiirad from tbe HiUaj, thongh 
Chen is some reaaon to asoiibe 
em Indian origin to tbe teim. 
HalaTaa aobolan say it nrelj 
oootm in a&j other than the 
verbal lonn mti^/aMuJc, to make 
a fnriona aaMuilt. It baa paaaed 
into gBneial naa. and la often 
applied to anj one who leta 
bimaelf np to del^ popular 
oplnlona, or the mnltitnde. The 
word was **'wni*> ^ Engliflh* 
mm two oentniea ago. 

onntlw 



—DryJtn: Tit Ub^ mad lit 
PaaOtr, a-d. tttr> 
Suin'* or OMpoo, b« rs'lao 4i>- 



ot ddstnltT, r iIh ihiip* at H 

■■ tm ^ni -mid, or in ihort ujtUaf.— 

OarUtMrntUim: ThtMim^UHWrrU. 

AatfU fomk Lodge opened b; 
tbe Orand Haater in penon, 

"Form" b;- other maaon or 
penon. Also need ooUoqulall; 
for tbe " ooneot thing." 



awBj, mn off. A Tariant of 
" out jroor ftiok," aa a penon 
who enta a waUdng^^tlck from 
a tiee or hedge preriona to 
■taitiiv on a JowiMT. 

A^OBck ( An^o-Andian), from the 
Ifalaj awMit or aw a t , to run 
fnrloacIjaDd deipeiaMl74an7 



Cttifi Vtf*t*- 

Amtwen [BngHah and Amertoan), 
thleTee, who fonoerlj used to 
throw annlf or pepper In a tIo- 
tlm'a efM, while an aooMnplioe 
robbed him, tmdor pretext of 
rendering aralatanoe. 

Anabaptiat (obaolete), a thief, 
oaoght in tbe act, and douaed 
In tbe boTM trough or pond. 

Analken (llnka), to waah. 

Aii>tt.(tinluar), to awe«p. to brown. 



:v Google 



Anava — AngeUferous. 



Aimk, Anner (gTpay). In the 
oouunon dialect itwur oi Amukt, 
to bring, fetch, can?. 



Aitdu>r (nantioal). "Bring jtinr 

a — e to ao oHeior," Lt., stt 

down ; also " bring jonrBoU to 

an andmr," a oommon phnwa. 

"IInno,F(tt . . . Mntynrtiffii 

anditr, aj BUD." Tlw Fa *eGO(diD(lT 

kndund himself b7 dnipfwia oa to tha 

edc*arsduit.-C ^lA; VirdaatGmm. 

" To l«t go an muAot to the 
windward of tho law," to keep 
JDSI within the lett« of the law. 
Sailon lue the ezprearion "to 
heave aaoAor," meaning to go 
away. 

And T«, art *>at*i vcmki yat belicn iDt t 



—C. DUdiM : TIU GndSJaf Ot KMj. 

Ancbontge (popnlar), a pboe of 
abode. The U 
ItwU. 



I {Oxford Uni- 
Tenjty slang), rawing "dons" 
at Oxford. A a«w of dona (vidf 
Doiis) are alwaje called oMtorf 



And dant jon foi^etitl (Ameri- 
can). This common-place ex- 
lioTtatiou, as it la popnlarly need 
and forcibly intoned, lUnstrates 
the fact that any word or ez- 
presaion, by dint of repetition 
and emphaaia, may become aa- 
eodatod with hnmoai imtU it 



nmmit to have aometUng in tt 
beyond It* real meaning. 

And be didn't (tailon), often need 
to expteu the belief that a per- 
son haa really done aometbing 
diaoieditable in spite of tbo 
attempt to prore hla iunooence. 

And no mocne (talloTB), and no 
mistake, joking ^lart. Some- 
times it is used as an Interroga- 
tion, and at oilier time* to ex- 
presa diabellef ; for Instanoe, a 
man may be relating some in- 
credible story, and an andltm 
will oonTey a wwld of meaning 
by qnletly romadlng, bat with 
pecnliar emphaaia, o«d ao ae^M; 

And DO wUMle (tailon). ThU 
remaiA means, no oneaeema to 
think that what yon hare said 
^)pliea to yooiaelf, bnt I do. 

Andrew Hillcr (nantioal), a man- 
o'-war; Jmircw MQia't Ugger, 
a Teeael of the royal navy, is 
BmogBlers' slang taken out to 
Australia by the ooaviots, and 
is used by acoomfdlces in warn- 
ing the emnggler* of the b[h 
proaoh of reveeoe ontters, ko. 

Aneijli (gypey). <mt againrt, mi- 
A-vit. Mungui is also an obao- 
lete term for the same. 



Aneeliferons (American), a word 
■IgniJ^ring "aogeUo," and flnt 



:v Google 



A ngeli/erous — Anglo-French. 



naed \fj Blid in hla norel al 
" Nick of the Woodi." In which 
rowing Balpfa Btaokpole fre- 
qnentl; emlla the heniiiM "an- 
f^ifrrintt U»d«m I " 

flunoui, bcaUifiil. mttgi lf /tTi m i place. 
E)« hkih wM wo, ai hull net hoid, 
it buh BDt auend into lb* boitol uy 



Aocds alti«etbcr (Weat IndlMn), 
A Mbriqnet applied to thooe who 
babitiuUj give waj to ezoeMl*e 

AnCcT* footitool (nsatical], ftu 
imaginaij skil joUngl; aEnuned 
to be cairied br Taokee Tcewls. 
It Is eaid to be * eqnaie sail, 
and to top the "^ lailB," 
"mocmialla," "olondoleanara," 
ke.— W. a^iiRntca: SaOon' 



AngUawTfc Anghtotwi* (gyp^r). 



Aiv«l's gew- (nantloal), ft gnc«- 
fal teim Died b; gallant tan to 
d«iot« female attire. 

Aocd nut (bulon ), veatand jacket 
OMEoblnediHid the trODsen made 
to bntton to the bottom of the 
jackeL It is now a thing of the 

Ai^d's wUsper (militajy), the 
bnl^ or tmmpet call for de- 
tanlten' diilL It lonnds from 
tfaiM to toax times ■ day, and 
tbe Bxpresiion !■ ondonbtedly 
eopbemietio ; like tbe lavonrite 
expMiTe of the na captain, 
who, wbtti reprarlng hi* orsw. 



Aai^ (biniards), an angltd baU 
!■ one that is so neai the edge 
of the pooket, that a plajer is 
prereoted from plajing at anj 
other ball direct. 



hookera (thieves) 
pettj thieves, who ste«l goods 
bf means of a stick with a hook 



Hooker of iuiother pack, 

Roffuc, V m^, fm^f nuiuidcn 

Trith toflc, or o(bcr wBodercT ; 



Uodem Froioh thieves call 
this mode of pnrloiniiig "grla- 
ohisiage an boulon," from the 
circnmstance that the hook is 
Inserted through a bolt-hole in 
the shatters. Angler is a very 
old slang term (nearly obso- 
lete) tor an adventorer or catoh- 
penny. It may be found osed in 
BretoD'H "Wit's Trenclimeii" 
(159) In this sense. It la now 
also applied to roguas, who at 
races and connti? fairs entioe 
the nnwary to try their Inck at 
the thimblerig, prick In the 
garter, three- trick-card, Ik. 

Aflglo-Frcndi. Unch notioe has 
been takm of late of Tt^ifh as 



:v Google 



Attglo'Frtnck — Animab. 



"■IwU(pok«ii;''ii(AKiinnchi>f whoindmnkenorMiid-dnnkMi 

nenoh M "he la BngUalied," froUoiiiMde nootonial dMotb* 

powiblj beoaoM it I* no loiiKer auoM in Uw (treeU, and oom- 

bahioiMbU in Engluid to nie mltted ovtnigM oa naollcmdlng 

Ftwich words needlessly in «on- 

vetwrflon, although the number 

of gentlemen who ask for Ut- 

tmrtt after dinner la itlll " very 

respeotable." In the United 

States it Is, however, stUl Tccy 

cnirent, if we ma; believe the 

aaaertion of an Am^eaa "news- 

pt^xirial writer," who aMerti 

that "there ate on an avenge /»iLa^. 

six miaqvotationa, tnalprounn- 

datlona, or miaappUoationa of Aagiihr pKty (oommon), * pa«^ 

French daily among onr entire oompoaad of three, ftve, ot 

population per head." ■"t"' person*. 

i^J'.Tl^Z.X^;!:'^^^ Anjnatrln (gypsy), a Snger. a 

His thri> M'Kcnni, ■ local muiciu. I^. O0nupt«d tO WM^OS^. 

It b alltd "Ldcila,' ud b alon ttory It alao mean* only a flngar'a- 

w-.. i,.Kau-«). bK«lth, or a very Uttle. In any 

Hence nta^OH, a littl^ 






a abort time. " ' Hatch a won- 
irinM»rtnH«J<» ■»[*<, «**''■ '>«*'' • wonglah akal (or 

me," pende liki "— " ' Stop a 
Uttle, wait a little hare for me.' 
sbeaald.'* 

Animal, to ffo the iriiole (Ameri* 
JLttTrtSmSTbtTii'^Sn^ "°'' *" conuaon ™ in the 

■ cfaord in ctht lanlnliM bwt.— cuatf* We«t. It is a mete, though 
TrOaat. more popular variant of the 

Kngliah " to go the whole hog," 
AaclomanlaCB (Amerioaa), and meaaa the «nie. 

another name for Bostonians 



as being oltra-Engliih. ntere 



Thu Uht bad modi batta pay fint- 



la a dnb at Boston called the T^ia Rtmmd lit O 



AagTT boya. Slang of the early 
part of the seventeenth oentnry, 
to dewlgnate the noisy and *"*"■'■ (Amerloan oadeta), the 
rlotone yonng men or "bloods," cognomen by which new anivala 



:v Google 



Animels — Anointing. 



•n known at tlie W««t Point " Ha hu ■ white itrlps tewn 

101itH7 Aoademr (Me &Uo the back," it being believed 

" Bbabm "), The Engllah have that mnlattoee ot qoadiooiw 

"ntooker" and the Frenob have a line ot light ocdonr <» 

"ndcii''aaaqnlfalenta. Anew the ipine. 
oadat who pnti m extravagant 

ain and pretendonB— a ooi- Annex (American), to eteal. It 

oomb ot "fvfpj" — ie oalled became popnlar In 1835, at the 

" a bet animaL" th°e of the aiinejatloD of Texaa, 

which wai legaidad bjr loanj Be 

Aak«ir(gn«7).*o begin. a theft 

" I A*! klUd kA niicioe, Robvl, "Priu~ at iba YMbolB 

BM if inn. ibid Urn. 11. MUTrf ,»eadJ ThT" PriD«7^ 

Hakk loHlrkuraJI." ihu Uacra w» b ■ wrqnw omdl- 

— & /f. Falmtr. yi^^ ^^ ^^^ ^ l^ „ bMadoB of «•• 

C t ban uku (|at) no nll^oa, asd iHziv ''>■ tpaaMk*. wfakh ba pidnd op 

rn aat bt^lB BW ; biu if ttlHr paofila 



, > ihon-riahwd polkr for 

Ankle (Amerioan thiaree' dang). 
" She has ifnined bar onUv," 
■be baa had an lUegiUniate 

obUd. Alto, " She ha* tvaken Bone aooonnt of thia r^lj- 

bar leg." A aomewhat almilar witted Prinoe Bobert m^ be 

a:qgaMloBlipaedin theFrmoh fonodin "The Bngllah OTpdea 

tb—trical worid ; a ladj who la msA their lAoguage," Thibtier, 

wBriart ia laid to bava a bad is^^, 
knee: " SDa a mal an genon." 

_ Anodne necklace (dd), a baltar. 

Annn(An^o-bdIai>). Hindi. Sad ^^h^nian'a nooae wa. atoo 

or tmAk. the aixtaatith part of a called the '■ Tjbwn tiH>et," a 

nq>ee. The term la aleo applied ■■hot»e'.nighto»p."a"hempan 

oolloqslaU; to pereona of mixed onrat." 
parentage. " Such an one baa 

at leaat two xmoi of dark Aapj (Amerioan), an andiraa. 

blood," or "of ooSee ooloor." Bartlalt derlvca thia fr«n A«m1- 

Tbla ma; be compared with the dg^, Dntoh anw Any, that wMoh 

Sootoh Bxpraaalon that a panon helgbteni or talaea. 
of deflolant Intalleot "wanU 

twopence in tbe sUUing."— Anointed (Irish), ia exp i eae l Te tS 

Am^ImUan (Oimarf. great raaoaUty. 

In the UuHad Statea tbli dai^ 

la paraDded b; the following AndnHng (popnlar), a eoend beat- 

eqceedoaa:— "He" or "abe Ing, tbe efleot taken for the 

hna a Uok of the tar-facnah." cMue. 



:v Google 



Anonyma— Another. 



■ (obwdrte), 
ftUdjof the 

the Tranob «Mi0B6 



AmttlitrfiamXt. 
Rgud bU tba Oi cvny «nnic I dip. 
And deep b llw pale T**'"t bitter I 



Hu cartfnllT wiihd aDnlopet centtk- 
inc l(tl« fnni fair Mit*mfmM).—Bmlmtr 

The iBte Mr. H. J. B7T011, 
ths plajirright and Aotor, in 
•ome U8S. annotAtiooB to & 
copfofthe " Slang DiotioDBiy," 
DOW in tho British Uoieniu, 
■a;a, writing In Novembw 1868, 

that " Wm , said to hsTS 

bMn the real JwmjnMa, died at 
Fkrls about that time." Other 
arnonrms aie " pretty horae- 
bteoker," "demi-rep," and the 
mora modem " tart," which, 
however, ia osed Also in the 
•enae of woman, wife. The 
loWBi in the scale are — mot, 
common }aek, bnnter, bed-bgot, 
■hake, bnlker, gay woman, nu- 
fortoaate, bamok-baok, dieaa 
lodger, Ac 

AaoOer sctoImU (miuio hall), for 
another tnmbler, ix., aaothei 
{^ati of drink; 

Another fellow's (popnlar), a 
slang phimse which, like moM ot 
its kind, owe* its popularity to 
Ita almoat indefinite power of 
iqildicatioD. Thus If a man re- 
marks that he has a new'coU, 
he if asked it it wa« anaOmr 
yUtow't, or If the girl with whom 
he is in company la not the 
property of some one else. 



}<*•, 



Another pien aort of mui (old). 
The ezpressioD is innriably 
applied to one who is knowliig 
and " fiy," or not the man yoa 
take him to be. It has a dose 
resemblanoe both in sonnd and 
meaning to the Yiddish "ohesi." 
Tills may be a mere oolnddenoe, 
but it ia certainly of Boyish 

Ha bu be« > mdmi in i>n uoqil* 
thetd three y«mn ; mtutivr tU4u nrl ^ 
•uw, I usun vrt.—TtmOV'fir'Mm- 
dmiM TickU, l6t>. 

Anettier lie naikd to Oe conalar 

(American), 
ezproation in 
papers in ref erenoe to detected 
slanders, Ac It was ntnal in 
olden times to niOl " Bnngtown 
<>.(., Birmingham) coppers," and 
all kinds of counterfeit or worth- 
leee coins, to the oonntere of 
the country "atores" or shops. 
Thia is mentioned in the " Jack 
Downing Letters." 

eidtvl editor of m North Ciiroliiw piipeiv 
" in the ttorr that oh of the Chtafo Aa- 
archuli 11 eihplaying hii time ia jell io 
tlM pafectiaf of en tnventioa by vtudi % 
cUrinxt, eqiuU Lo tooe to the beet in the 
meiket, on be oude of tin end eold tot 
Meen cbice, the men oufht to be henged 
It ooce.* Keii ee>r. bntbo-. Noat of 



:v Google 



Antagonise — Any other. 



43 



«f mfk to ^icDd ha dm* ini 

B^p The itory b&i dotibtleii bees or- 

CBliitcd (a poljlia] effecL Aialitr lit 



(qmitlng), to act •• 



g*me Mid forfeit fail anti, or 
nmcC make It good b; putting 
up > mm equal to It, so m to 
mako hli (take the «ajiie aa that 
of the other plajen. Saitiitf 



tA«ai 



;anyo] 



Atheti 



eof 



Dniflar IMI «! Jona ud Brown ta 
■ha widua, vim dwj wtn jnfryiJurf 
with tha iHthn br AIT and iha Yooni 



th« faToniite oi amallett {rig 
in tho Utter. To foUow like 
St. Aathonj'a pig meant to 
foUow oloM at one's heels. St. 
Anthoi^ the hermit waa aawine- 
becd, and la always represented 
wUb Us beU and pig. 



" chipping In " to fiU his hand 
may niae the onM, and the other 
players must then in torn make 
tbdi stakes eqnsl to the niajd- 
mom 10 raised, or else mnst 
"nm" and abandon what they 
haTe already staked. 



(^Inte^s), typcL 



An^-tip (Australian and Ame- 
iloan)^ a game of oards. 




., bat of American ori- 
gin), an after-meeting held dur- 
ing a " rerlval " for the benefit 
of those who protsM "to be 
onnoui for their soul's salva- 
tion." Those who during " re- 
Tivals " pn>(ess anzle^ for 
"ealraUoa " are said to ooou^ 



An^ow jon can fix it (Ame- 
rican), however yon may try, try 
as yoD may. " I don't see how 
yon oan oonvinoe me of that, 
onirAoK rm out fie it." 
OoBt OB a drift loR I [ink 1 Ha ui 



lUthi 



on' and dmck bim wntt 
wad an' try (nc to wb U, 



Tttaa ante, the stake with 
which the dealer at poker oom- 
menoee each hand befwe deal- 
ing the cards ; he psts np a 
" oUp " in front of him, benoe 
the name. Mate good tki anU; 
the dealer, aft^r looking at M* 
hand, mnst dthm go oat of tho 



Cooldn't fool hi 
•Irtf. 

Dm I iqi wid a hrick. 

An' 'twBtmiiKn baCapinalof uponabii 

—Camtt Cmf, a Nffw BaUad, itji. 

Aof Other man (American}, nils 
phrase had a great " ran " In 
i86a Ifauanbeoamepcosaio, 



:v Google 



At^ oUur — Apes. 



" dlMUM," and to 



or J<ai«a, or BoMuaoo," be mi 
pMnptlj oftlled to order by tlia 
orr "ortrnfoAerma*." Itwaa 
flrst ni«4e known in typo by 
CbulM O. Lalmnd In • ooBiio 
iketoh In tbfl New York FaaAy 
Fair. It bM linoe been die- 
OOTCTod thmt In "Wnvarl^" 
then ia the exprSMlon "GU 
anj man or any oAtr etoK." 

A17 imcket <Th7ining dug), • 
penny laggot. 

AnjOiliit etoe, not dofaic (Ame- 
rioan), e strong aJBnnatian gme- 
rallT in reply to * qneation na 
to whet Ii or bu been done by 
n tblrd par^. "Waa So-and- 
•o dnmk," 01 " bad tendered," 
m "in good ipiiltet" "He 
didat do or mat MtONvtb*," 
minld be the lei^y. 

Anjiriwn do>i^ than (tallon). 
an nuiiiMaliiii wbloh oomea al- 
moat ainialtaiieonitr from orcry 
man la the "ibop" when any- 
thing ia dropped on the floor. 
Theworda are peonliaily aggia- 
Tating it It la a breakable artiole. 

Apartment* to lot (popslar), a 
term naed In ref eienoe to one 
who li not orei bright, whoae 
head reqidiea metapborioally 
•ome fnmitnie to fill Ita emp^ 
nNnaa. The Frenoh bara a 
kindred .expreailon for a man 
who ahowi ilgna of becoming 
otaay, and mj that be It remoT- 
Ing bia hmitore, "U t Um tnae*." 



It ia r«Aatod of the ocMmtad 
mobaid Btinaley 8h«ddea that 
bit eoa Thomaa, who waa a oaa- 
didete for a acat in hrUanwot, 
jeaUn^y dedaied to bim that 
he had no dedded poUtioal prin- 
dl^ee, that he waa inollned to 
•erre the pai^ whiota would pay 
him beat, and that he ehonld 
put a placard on bla forehead 
inaoiibed with the worda, " To 
let." His father MpUed, "AB 
right, Tom ; bnt don't forget to 
add, 'Dnfamiabedt*" 

Apt, an "ap^leadeT" ia an old 
maid. The ei^madon ooenrs in 
•• The Taming of the Shrew," and 
la still common. The punish- 
ment of old spinsters, it w«a 
said, wu to lead epa in Hades; 
whereby two equally Innocent 
beings — the maid and the 
Oft — were equally bnt on jnstly 
punished. It ia probably •>> 
old aQpeistitton derired from 
tbeEaat. In India and China, 
oertain eril-doers are rappotoi 
to cany about or lead in h«Il 
oertain »niTn»lii, {Vidt Doo- 
little, "China.") "To say an 
op/t paternceter," is to obatter 
indistinctly, cither from oold or 
exoltemeait. Theexpresskmoor- 
re^onds to the Frmoh "dire 
des pateuMres de ainge," 

ApM (Btook Bxohange), a nick- 
name for Atlantic firet motgage 



:v Google 



Apollo — AppU-pie. 



npaOo tMBder (Ai^lo-IndUn], « 
w^-known whait at BomtMijr. 
Th« woid ApaBa appoM* to b« 
m Ttaj oortoiu ofaaago ot the 
uatlTe word poSa or poUiia, a 
kind of Sah, to that of a Oreak 
god. Othn natlra antboiitlM 
derira it from pdl, « fighting 
Toaael, ka.--Aitglo-Iiidiam fflot- 
mtrg. 

ApopU (g7p^), onoe more, again, 
yet again. Sair lU apcfU, do it 
■gain; onpdli, baok again, tU., 
-orefter." 



I (UnlTenitj, Cantab.). 
The "Oiadue ad Cantabilgiain " 
nji : "The ajxtdti are the 
olodlioppen of literature, who 
IwTa at lut scrambled through 
Uie Senate Hoose TJthont being 
plnoked, and have obtained the 
title of B^ bj a miraole. The 
laat twelTB namee on the Itit of 
Bachelor of Art<— those a degree 
lower than the ol rnXAaf— ate 
thoa deatgnated." The apot&it 
aie ao called baoanae thej are 
twain In nmnber. (Common) 



borrow money from one pomm 
to pay another, an allaslon to 
tha aipreaslon, "BobUng Peter 
to i»j PaoL" 

Apoatfe** Gtvn, Bt. John's Wood, 
alao called " Orore of the Bnn- 
geliat." Irtllj di^NMod persMu 
might remaA that the plaoa ia 
Mlntly only in name, as in some 
parte it oorreaponde to the Bue 
Breda <A Failt, whera ladiw of 



45 

Apple-cart (popnlar), the human 
body. The term la in keeping 
with the " potato tiap," wUoh 
doaa daty In the slang Tocabn- 
lary for mouth ; the " bread 



pet," (or head, ka. To the 
imaginatlTO power* of coeter- 
mongers we probably owe the 
metaphor. One will say that his 



df-suarfs dw«a. 



he has be«i diaappdnted lij the 
failoie of bis i^ans. (Am«doan) 
" To ' upset one's apjiUtart and 
sjrill the peaobas,' means to ruin 
any undertaking. The phnse 
was originally American, and 
had peculiarly this signiflcatlon 
Battel's limitation of It to the 
human body was all ooujeotnra 
and fancy." 

Apple-dnmtding shop (common), 
a fat woman's exposed bieasta. 
The French ai^t, with mora 
galanterit, terms the same 
" oranges sur I'Aagtoe." 

Apple-pie bed (general), ia made 
l;^ untnokii^; the sheet at tha 
bottom of the bed and donliling 
it up, so as to form a sort A 
bag half way down the bad and 
thus preTenting the owner from 
stretching himself at full Imigth. 
A common trick of misohlerous 
boys and girls at boarding- 
schools sod elsewhercL 

i^iple-pl« day (Winohester ool- 
lege), the last Thursday in Long 
Half, when the " men " get their 
money and the soholan get 



:v Google 



Apple-pie— Ard. 



Apple-pie order (common), in 
re^nlnr order. "Order" U kn 
old void for • low, and • pco- 
perij nude i^tple-pie had, of 
old, alwsjs an order, or row 
of regularlj ont " turrets," or 
an ezaotlj dividod border. Piea 
are seldom made now in this 
manner in En^knd, but in mial 
Amerioa, espeol«ll7 in Haw Bng- 
land, the; are still oonunon. 

Imjoxin the «r^(r- which nH blki 
— Ihonih whr I un nn I cu't tdl ya a 
vouU (mil mitlftU.—ltit*Utkj Jjgmdi. 



ApidlcatlMI (Irish], nune; a eor- 
rnptlon and perreriion of appeU 
Istlon. 



Uml't hsn coodoluiK 



I (old), pomp* 
Teimed also "Adam's 
ale," and "flsh broth," for- 
merlj, wbou people with weak 
stomaoha did not make a Tiitne 
of neoeeBit7,and when the others 
onlf "pledged" themsdres in 
bnmperm <d old Borgondj. 

A-ratti, ailti (grpsf), t^ nlg^ 



Arch (piqnilar), a boat 



Arch-con (thieves), leader of mob 
or party. 



(Oxford), the Mettoa 



i^tpn (tmde), a oootraction of 
approlMtlon. " On oppra," on 
sale for retom. The term is 
nsed bj tradesmen generally. 

A p propriation (tailMs), ganneots 
taken from old rejeoMoos and 
worked in for another " foiee," 
or the next "snpply" for the 



A piusiati lu g-hold (old), an estate 
held by a man daring his wife's 



(raduM, und csp^ld, hul ■ 



Areh dell (old), the wife of a 
headman of TOgrants. ' Teamed 
also "arch dozy." 

Aldi-dnke (Amerioau thiBres), a 

funny fellow. 

Ardi-ffonnaf (American thisTes), 
chief of a gang of tbierea ; 
termed "dtmberdamber,""Dp> 
right man," in old Bngllrfi oant ; 
and ardU-iNjipA In the old 
French aigot. Ovuwtf la Tld* 
dish for thief ; Hebrew, pan^. 

Ard (American thieves), hot; eri- 
dently from erdrat, la old oant 
it had the dgnification of foot. 



:v Google 



Area — Arkansas. 



Ana tiwfc Iptqmlkr), one wbo 
■n««k* faito Utobeoa to atnl. 
OthM TarietiM of male&oton go 
bj tha ajqwllktioiu of "prig, 



nuu, moncbOT, booker, fla«b' 
Dore, bag-bnnter, CTaa» 
biii-t*ket, fogle-honter, stook- 
bftoler, tcrr-^Btter, tooler, prop- 
naUar, ptdmer, dnganuui, box- 
^oak, amiiMr, bob-neak, boon- 
oer, bii%-prigg|er, tbimUe-twla- 
ter, gim, oonTeTanoer, dancer, 
pudding -Htammer, iLS, dram- 
nwr, kniiok, bnttook-and-flle, 
ptdl-tbief , UUls niakentMo, mil 
ben, a oove on the oroai, flaati 
man, finder, gleaner, pickai 
taz-oollector," and (ormerlj " a 
good fellow, a brldle-onll, a 
nmpaman, an angler."— £af^ 
rin^t Argot and SoKf. 

Argifr (popular), a jaigcoi cormp- 
tioo of to argDQ. 

"Th* EnnpMB imgam at Pcwa ud 
LibcRr tuR Jul bcid k cengnu u 



Mm •l.K' 



9' pnttr libBtT to pean, 
tttoargify, 7SD little iMCfU'. 



Aiftiaimxz'A- AoooTding to Hot- 
ten thla la a Sootcb phraae 
signifying "to bandj worda." 
It la ponible that It baa a 
Hebrew derivation. Bar4tt^ \a 
Tiddiib ia, " to talk oi apeak 
In anj mij," and bargein la 
one wbo goea abont in miaery 
and poverty, perhaps a flnent 
beggar. Jfyol ia tbe popnlar 
proDDndatlon of cttb— aa giten 
by Dune Qniokly— a word whicb 



I (old), a diet drink 
mnob In Togae in the latter part 
of the last oentniy. It waa 
made of ■an^^rilla and other 
dniga, and a(dd at the ooflee- 

AA (thlerea), a boat or rsMel. 
(Military), a box Id the barraok- 
Tootn QBOd for holding extra 
artiolee of a man's kit. In 
America a large boat nied on 
riveiB to tranaport prodnoe to 

It may be noted, that In tbe 
northern oonntiee the large 
cheats in fann-honsoa need for 
keeping meat or flonr are called 
arlct. Villon, the old French 
poet, in his Jargon Jobelln, 
tenna arjwc a ooffer as money- 
box, and In tbe modem French 
argot "aller k I'arohe" meane 
to go frequently to the money- 
box, to spend one's money freely. 

Aik and dove (masonic), an 
American degree prqauatoiy 
totbeRA. 



I tootbpiA (American), 
a large bowle knife which shnta 
up into the handle. It la a 
piece of sange irony which 
thns dnbe H, aa the Uade, whicb 
has a point of bait ita length, la 
OTer a foot long and two inohea 



:v Google 



48 



AHi — Arsy^vaniy. 



Afk lloatsr (thekferioal), u matot 
so loaded with jam, that ho la 
mppowd, through Mme effort 
of tlie imagiuktioii, to bMr« 
nud« hli dAmt before the 
"floBti," i^ the tootUght* In 
Noah'B uk. People wiU my, 
"Ton mnrt b»n oome out of 
the »f*," or "Too were bom Id 
the iu*i" becwiM jon we ao 
old-tuhloned, and ignoTant of 



Aik-niff (old), freah-wftter thlel 
AnniiitB(old),pettjhtn)en7. The 
term bu been Imported Into 
Australisl^theoonTieta. Tanz, 
In hla Hemoln, aai;s : " Ta work 
•win- tA* armpitf, la to ^naoUse 
onl7 aacb Unda of depredation 
aa will amount, upon conviction, 
to what the law temu aingle 
or pettj larceny, the extent of 
pni^hment for which ia tiana- 
portaUon for lerai 7«an. Bj 
f ollowix^ thia ayitem a thief 
MTolds the baltMT, which oer> 
talnlj ia applied abore the 
orapite." Watchea are atolen 
1^ nrfng the right hand under 
the ora^il of the left arm, which 
la put aotces the toeaat. 

Annctrons, Captain (tmf), a dia- 
honett jookej. " He came Cap- 
tain Anutrong" la eqnlTalent 
to aaying that the rider pwUcd 
with a atrong arm, thai prevent- 
ing hla hOTM from winning. 

'Any, for Barr;, a familiar general 
tem for a young ooatermonger 



dTMMed In hla best elothea when 
taking a Sondaj walk with hia 
Tonngwoman. Theooireapond- 
ii^ word fin- the yonng woman 
la"SanhjBue" ar"Jemlma." 
The 'A rrim arealmoetindlgeBoqa 
to London, are generally to be 
aaen with aboii pipe* in their 
movtha, and mm at fair* and 
race* and other plaMB of poblio 
leaort, talUng alang and pnjl- 
tng tobaooo atnc^, and If not 
Bltcgetbei of the aama genu 
aa the longba and rowdiei that 
Infaat gnat dtiea, are little re- 



tppMiaaoo, and oonrertatioD. 



'Anyfi rif'' tnoaii to Aakt, 

Bad Ibej, 'Arrjl 
'A rrj thinki It Tcty food lu 
. TapoffluichEitidtu 




Ane cooler* (vulgar), 
bj < 
apeaUng of dreaa-lmptoven. 



:v Google 



ArUsian — Assay. 



flrf ■Im (Anatraliui, popnlkr), 
CobnUlbeer. PaoplelnOlpp*- 
laod, Tiotoris, hm arta>« jmt 



tba oiw i* i n*i*TifmjT tn t#A from 
the oelebnted ariaiam well ftt 
Sale, OipptlAnd, Mid the gthar 
fiom the ctemdc mMr. 

Artfbl tpapolar), » word of wide 
^ppUoatioii to IntliiiUa triokerj, 
noreoj, and " dodgee." 

Ha'd u mrifiU Uol* bouU oa u arfM 



Artful dod^cn (tUerM), lodgm ; 
tdlowB wtw dsre not sleep twloa 
in the nma pUoe for (ear ol 



AiticlM of fbtMlta 



Artistic. It ii a a 
to eni^oie that ortMi ie a 
•jiioiiTin for beantUnl, tymD»- 
trioal, or attiaotlre. That ontjr 
la artuHa whlob, beliig nudfl 
b7 the hand ot man, indloatea 
direct indiTidnal chacaothr and 
tODoh. The mare maohinc^ in- 
tarrene* between the original 
pattern and the mere ocepj, tba 
leu art la then. The Sittlne 
Madonna ia trnlj a work of art, 
the meet perfect ohromo-Utho> 
giaphio oopT of it ia not Aa 
naed by many tiadennan, to 
indicate theli caat worka, 
maoblne-wtwed fnmltnie, Jtc, 



ArtidMke (American thlerea), a 
low and old pnwtitnte, It ia 
eoriona to note that the French 
■igot baa the term taw ioHi- 
cJtanttodenoteaman or woman 
ot a hlgUj amatorj diapoalttcoi. 

nkmuMB;qiail mar ^mlldimml, 
Cqc BQn fiA^; (IB* ftuULe poor loot 

An )oar d-Mieiinllnil J'(oba la Uood* 1 
Apcii i' BVn, c'at Ift bnu' qal B'&ot. 
-CiU: La Muu i BM. 



Aah path (mnnlng), a mnnlnff 
path formed of pnlTetiaed oln> 
deia or blaok aab. 

Aak bofjr (old ilang), an indeoent 
evaalTe ftTfilaiTuitloj> need br 
■aHora when not wiihlng to 
answer any qneaUon. 

Aaknr (<dd oant), thla mar be a 
coimption of cMulfa; 

Aakinf (tnif), a jockey la said to 



Artidea (American thieve), a inlt 
of oloUtaa ; tamed In the Bng- 
Uali dang, "toga, toggwy, olob- 



hamj (American thieved slang), 
oommanoa, try It. From tba 



:v Google 



50 Assqy — Atnusfikere. 

•mntrion to Uk0 the cmof or «j. It Mn b« ; uaMii4»ti, It 1* not 

enajr, toUatewlnetoinoTethat poMlble, i.*., it otwiot be. 
it is not pdMtMd. He&oe to 

ti7, to tMt«, tiial or nmple. Aitr«l body (theoMi^tiit), k 

ShmkBpcani luea the tmn. phrMe borrowed from the Bod- 

m Imalu. hiA» M>>mrU Oni(lI«IU, ■lid Ulod bj PMBOCI*!!* 

W""'^" '"™ Mid V»n Helmont. It rigniaet 

To siva tha an^ of umi ifUBM roar • (eml-apilitoal IClf , wMoh goei 

io^Mt- forth from the bod;. 

• __„ , r_. I B— n ■ "l" tl™! •* bay% mi h am be mad* 

Teem tifted bj prt—miTi for com- body, mod can be ^^aed biio **—W jbr 

poaitoia, t^ nj of retaliation ur oocwaoo vfaaa the iHur mold b* of 

In cKlling them "p!g»." The ■* •ecoimt, •mn to Iba muvialuin( Ot 

mnimal oreatloii hu fnrnlihed J^ifaZt^ tb.il^!^^J.S^^ " 

• TKietj of alMig termi for [JiTtot. (6ivx«*-. IT- only diB^ 

FVenob prioten In nfflolent wiib On aitmi t*^ b in tnmiwIaUiT. 

DombeiB to form a «in«ii mena- '> i* "Kb ■ tubde, al^tiBT ihbg thai ih* 

gerie. Thna a eomporitor la "«. "l— 1» t»nf. « to It wtth tb. 

» 9 .. . .. « .. otmoM Mudty. n uM to kae u jnM vbm 

oalled "molrt;- a marter or b. ».« n«d. i.. liie u» B«d^ i. 

fonman, "dnge;"aiiewapnpar, New York vbo wu juled tbeocber^y. 

" eauard " (whloh alio meaaa He had been in tha hiUt of depandiai 

Um newa); to baTe "om's T^^i'"^*^t^I^ '" 

monkej np," that la, tobeangrr, """ '"""' 
"gober n ohivre" 



tbe metapborio operatloii; a 

letter which baa fallen from 

the form is termed "obien;" a tboae wba hM no miirml htdia to ui 

creditor, " loop ;" an idle work- b^kopoqiniiBwof SiiKicklaiiiHjuicy. 

man who distnibe others, "onm" — ^*«^r» TrOmmt. 

" Poser one sa^ne" i» to oor- ^^^_ ,„t^ ^^,_ ^^ ,j,„j^_ 

reot ones fellow-workman b ,^, 

work in hie absence. Tbe Oer- ..„",..,, 

... " 5> nundy Aa^aUtf to kOr, ny iy« — 

hie "herring" when he gets 

dismiwed from his employ. Atmoephere (Ameriou, Boston), 

a new slang phrase of sodetj 
and liteiUnre thna explained 
b; an Amerioen journal : — 
. ., , ^_, ,, . . " Tbe cani of the day ii tha word */■(«- 

Aati (gypey), wonld have, haye ji*„.,hidib.idi.pta»d -looe.' whee 

to; a$Ht, can, possible ; lUii mpk tried tobaeniBiiite tbey^okaof 



:v Google 



Atottty — Attorney. 



51 




ii (gype;), ktnJd. 

" An wht mwr tlie buvl podind ho *M 

tallM »'tk* fOra'— "And wbaamT iIm 
wtod Ur> be I'M aftiU be wonU UI 
dom on tba tunit of dM tnlL"— Til( 

At tiut (AmerioMi), mawilng 

■n—m thtng In ttddmoU tO, >A 

intouiTe. SiJd to h»Te csigi- 
nated in FemiajlTBiilk, aod to 
b« ft ttMuUtloa of the 0«niian 
dam. "Bhe it be«iiUfnl uid 
rich t* that." "She ii old and 
ngl7 at Uiat." It ia also owd 
upon A mUcj of ooouioiu, 
wltboat teuon or naoenit;f. 

" Now Otm, Mate, drinlci ill nnod, 
■ad coblihH W Omtr-Nrtti tm C^mmiU. 

Ht'i ist ■ aaUait ^^ nod u Dglj 
OB* at ttrnt^—BmrtUU, 

Tlw HisMptf ■ ■ nSfbtr bif drink- 
and ■ BDddT oiH«( AUr.-/<bH 

Th* (noia wilh one-biU sf lb* Niv 
TsriHn, of Bonnc on lb« Em of UaT, ii 
■D awlul cmtoB, and fooliih si tAst^^ 

In Anatralia ons talka of dear 
at Oiai, weak at (Aul, fto., aome 
moh wordu "»to" or "price " 
being onderotood. 
Sd wtU diwB Ihc lawinc bowl. 
Twin not JeopudlK Ihc loal, 
Fv it'a eolf ten mid wait at Ma<. 

—rtftify CwtiicMU! Tit OU 
FtU Mml. 



Attic (poptilat), the human head, 
to be " queer in the attic," to 
be intozleated or eiaoked. A 
aontewbat sln^lar tenn in the 
Fnnoh ilaug la ■■ greniei k aeL" 
The vjvnnjmt are, " knowledge- 
box, Ubb^, oootud, nob, nnt, 
chomp, nppei atorey, omin- 
peU" 

Attteborongh (American), sham. 
Bham Jewellery, from the town 
of Attleboroogh, in Haasaohn* 
aetta, where mnoh imlWlon or 
tiuby jewellery la made. 

Attotney (thierea). The term ia 
^>plied to a onnnlng feQow, or 
at leaot one who paaaea Mm— if 
oil aa auohi olerer in getting 
Tonnd people, or twrnimg diifl> 
anltiea (attonMy, Franoh A lear- 
ner) ; m loftfer who pretenda to 
ft full knowledge of the legal 
meahea in which the light- 
fingered gentry fti« txtoaaioti* 
ftUy lnv<dred. The aitonug la 
alwftya leftdj to give adrioe in 
tbeae and othar mattera for • 
amftll oandd«ration in money, 
and tiling that, for a glaaa of 
any kind of "tipple" ftl the 
nearest "pnb." Thla distant 
relation to the gnat family of 
" limba of the law " hangs abont 
the favourite reaorta of other 
klnda of " piaotitloDCTi," i^t., 
thievea. He is conildered aa n 
■hilling light by aoine, aa an 
Impostor by othera, bat what- 
ever the caae may be, he dla- 
tingnisheebiiOMlf from the real 
attariMjr by the low iftte of hla 



:v Google 



Attonuy- C m n v/ — Aunt. 



n>U ia a barrlitar, who, not 
bring % Qneoii'i OooomI, li ^>- 
potutedl^ tlw Attonajr-Oananl 
for Uw time beli« to ba hia 
" jimlor" in Qavaminaiit «mm. 
He li mlmTa cue of the best 
men at the ]imior fakr, end ea 
■uob U ohoeen bj the AttanM7- 



TlH ufeb n v^J >iib oCM. mAI. 
■nlda «r tba huUrr.—OiMt! HMU 



Andky or wdolr (tlMfttiical), » 
t«nn wed b^ thMtricel ■bow- 
wben tlwr with to abcldgs 



AttoiT, 

a polaonona llttla aeipent, tvlgl- 
nallj ipelt and pmoonnoed md- 
dtrji. Obaaoer In the "Fet- 
•ou's Tale" ipeaki of aHry ai^er; 
Anglo-Saxon atlor, poiMn. 

Auctioneer (popalar), to tip him 



man off hU leg*. Derived tnaa 
tbe ttietvoiD phiaee to knock 



pooket-moner, called alao " ^- 
ple-pie daj." 

Andlt aU (Cambridge), tt^ 
•trong ale nppowd to bednmk 
OB audit daj. It ii peonllar to 
Trini^ College. About two oen- 
tnriea ago, aome ale me brewed 
for that oolite whioh wae so 
■trong and good that the recipe 
wac preaerred with care, and 
the ale haa erer ilnce beoi 
made efetj jcat in a limited 
qnantltj. Frofeawn and m- 
dsigndnatea are allowed to 
purahaaa a oertaJn number <d 
botttea. Thia ale wlU bom like 
■piritB whan thrown Into the 
fire. 



ber <d penou waltlog to tU 
"another hoiue." Tbe manager 
orpande maMar will then oaU 
out, JohnOrdetljl 

Aocar (Ameriean), a inaj fal- 



AnL pim. (WInobeatar), an abbre- 
TlatioD which itanda for Pro- 
ftm* A^ia, that U, Piafaot of 



Anly-anfy (Wlnohester), a gaoM 
tdajedoQ " giaaeoonrt" on Sa- 
turday aftamoMu after chapeL 
It ia idayed by throwing a 
small cricket bajl at jonr op- 
ponent. 

AnnL ThU-torm, as need Is tbe 
pbiaae at " mj mmtt," in a 
brotbel, la obaolele. The (dd 
•lang of tbe BUiabetban era, 
oant, had the dgnlfloatlon of 
a coDoabine, a proatitnt*^ or a 
woman of looae monla, ci, 
woTM, aporocDTeeL "HlneoiMl 
will feed me," waa a common 
phiBM at one time, meaning an 
agent who wonld procuv vlrglna 
for tbe porpoaee of debanoherr. 
Bhafcspeare and Ben Jonatm oae 
the word. 



:v Google 



Atmt — Autem. 



of the ContiUlk M " ilunring a« 



ThfF nuffft niodem flipujwlop 
Ice a oooenUiw — who live* In 
a aln^ nuui't honM withont 
•ftlMr ^ thMn Mtliigthe woild 
Into tho imI MOMt of tbe o<u- 
iMQtloii — i« " nieoo." Thai 
niBiij nrersnd gentlemen In 
CkthoUo oonntiiea, whow tows 
of chastity debar them bom 
enjt^lng Uie cweets of pater- 
nltT, an fain to oonMnt tbem- 
•elTe* with belog the nndee 
of pret^ "nieOM." A oar/j 
nleoe i» a etaadlng joke in 
rtanoe. The loua of Uie Pope 
—if thoM high eooledartloid 
dlgnitariea have any, m thej- 
had in anoient timee fu more 
frequently tlian in the present 
— are oalled " nephews." 

To go to "myaioU't," to go 
to the i^vy. The expression is 
nowadays nied chiefly by gids, 
who say among themselTea, " I 
am goliog to my aoaJ," or " I 
am going to my a«a(H." 

Aaittalianflaff, the ( Anglo-Anstia- 
tian slang), the bottom of a shirt. 
The Autnlian who llres np the 
oonntry gVMiallf wears a belt 
Instead of braoea, the reenlt 
being that wb«ai he ezerta him- 
self, titere is nsnally a great 
fold of aUn protniding between 
biasmaU clothes snd his waist- 
coat, which Bngliahmen have 
oalled in soom tht AiutraUafi 
tag. The Cornstalk talks of 



Anstralian grip (ap oonntiy Ans- 
tiallaa), a hearty shake of the 
hand (compare HaMMno Qkf.) 
The bnsbman shakes hands very 
beartUj— a Icmg grip with the 
whole hand, following three 
deep «>»»w— He does not omsh 
yooi hand ; but he Is sareastio 
abODt the "limp shakes" and 
"one-&nger ibakee" of people 
"newly ont from home." 

Wu h« ■ fnnfal, wtU-Ind bcM, 
But b> *M htwir b Kcgn, 
And irrins llK jlmtrmlimmfT^ 



AnteB or antaun, a ohuroh. This 
word, which is of the oldest 
cant, and is f^ven by Barman, is 
protMbly the Yiddish a'A a am mt, 
a ofanroh (tfjb being the common 
tatm), which in ordinaiy oon- 
Tersatlon wonld be prononnoed 
oatoa. It seems to haTe been 
at first always associated with 
oledoal marriage, and as in out 
Adam and Sve are terms for 
hnsband and wife, it is possible 
that AuUm also owes some- 
thing to Oatem or Ondem, as 
Adam is prononnoed in Yiddish. 
npiimm t or tusu really means 
the forbidden orimpma (ohoroh). 
("Unrdu rerboten." — Tliila) 
"A," or "ah," isthBTnlgai Yid- 
dish proDnnoiation for "Bin.'* 
It Is onriona to note that in (dd 



:v Google 



54 j4iitem — Author. 

I'laBab cant « ohnrah wm Aabim jat (cdd), om at Uw Ib- 

toniwd m t m m €K tmtf/U, tift umnaratde Mpii*alMiU tn * 

bdng nddlali &» ohtmli. panoa. ^trtoM, » ohnnb; jt*, 
black, bom the wwtSUag hm 

Antem twwlw or utaatjat (old), i^ . pmon'i dnai. 
a puacnL The mora mod«nt 

■Uiig haa the epithote, " duU Antem mett (<dd oaat). A legal 

dodger," and " Aj pilot." wifi^ »ho«i awrriege h«i been 

At IM Job opUMii tiH cwBi «( BIT oelebnted in a ofanroh. It 

'^'^r* doee not ^i^ to maniagea 

" -celebrated t^" hedge pa»0M- 
u the Ughwaj, aaiendBred ne- 

„ _ -JUnaUe t^ the line* anp p oeed 

?L2! ^ISil "* "■*■**-**«■ to bare bees giTOi to * pair of 

LytiKu ftUMm. gypeylorewl^ Dean Swift:— 

&atMB cncUe tab (old), oc»Ten- "B«wiktbMtMla«bmubv, 

tide, or Diuenteia' meeting- rn>aiD*dthawiwn«ndiUtfKisiihir: 



_«(cdd), ] 

m married women. '" Iswbbs rlu h ti^at, 

™. . . ™. . n , 1 .,_ ThiitoliimbomB, thbfcltMBOi™*. 

^taliS^lS.^^'l -Il.»wm..AJmlMlCn<: 

Tb* bn* aom, wba nnttiT ilnit . . _, . , ,,, 

Aliiiiidr«iiti«ei»ti«mi Antem prichaun (dd), a gens- 

Tbamxtim^mekbn; maun com, "^ name for DIaeeDten. (Bee 

Th* J0II7 bhila >bo wUdlr rant : AUTKM CAOXUBa.} 
And wbvt Iba cnSv, bnuB,' blomn, 

tss^rsjSitir,'"*'' A««»»«™«iid),Q»i™. 

Antem qnftTCf tab (old), a Qnakna' 

Antem can (thlerea), a manied meeting-boiue. 

A»t«n dipper, or di«r. (old), *Shtl^^i^^bi: 

AnabaptUtt, from the ourtom S^^ , ^^^ ^^^. 

ofdip^orbaptWngtheoon- ^"^^ ^ "" i^? "f* "^^ 
prooeea ia aa follows : — 

Antem dlven (old), ohoroh |dok •• FiTTt.-Sia roar tnp, and cudi JDH 

purwi, and derlatTClj, the iwAlrr. Ib ords ta do ao— all far Ub 

chnrchwardena and overBeeri -iA^MtmitT, "J ■?!««« ouiiiiMi™!- 

Of the poor. lli«tu,«noooMl»puu hn bHd bi^ 

Antem sclera (dd), pretAlded bellow, bin emit ■Hood of 'aUcannoiM 

Iteioh pcopbeta. ina Eltbr Kv^' 



:v Google 



Uick^ of (be loweic MuKUrd oRiuBiuilty, 
u>d when Tm tuvi inmlied the onforlu- 
BAtt dniDAtist by every mEuu vhicfa jonr 
paucity of bniu ud pIcniRid* of laaft 



At IgTpej), come; amkdi, oomB 
liflra. Fnll tona «w atom, I 
ooine. "If tatell av sk&i 
nundjil del tats a boira"— 
" If joall come here, I'll give 
jon B penny." 



Availa. profits or adraiitaf^, ab- 
brevutted into raili, is the gratni- 
ties given bj vUitore or guests 
in great houses to MrvautB for 
ciTilltiee, attentiona, or serrlcei 
rendered. 

ATut (naatica]], a sailor's phrase 
for stop, cease, ttAj. Accord* 
log to Webster a corruption of 
the Dutch houd wu(, hold fast. 
Borne etjmologists connect it 
with the old cant term " bynge 
a mate." Others ascribe its 
■wigin to the Italian toKo, 
enough. This derivation seems 
plaosible, from the citcom- 
stance that French workmen 
ose baila with the same signifl- 
cation as English tars. 
Anui hcanng s mumle, Tom, >sd 
veil lighl oor pips and gather nnBd 
and tfttn cnS; what do 700 lajr. ladT— 



Ivast. 55 

in the oldest English cant- 
ing," says C. G. Lelaod, "baa 
ever been offered." Id gypsy, 
mqK or vat (Hindu, hatia or 
hatl) means a band, and, as in 
Snglish, it is intimately con- 
nected with using the hands or 
being ready. Chiv a nut adm I 
means exactly in Bomany, "pnt 
a hand there 1" "be tdeitl" 
It is equivHlent to " lend a 
hand I " It will be readily an- 
deistood that the Injunction to 
lend a band might easily be- 
come a synonym for "attend 
there!" "observel" or "look 
out I " It is to be remarked 
tbat in modem Bnglish, gyp^ 
ioJeA a v(y»giA I means "stop 
a bit I" or, litenJIy, "stop a 
thumb I " WongiA is a cor- 
rupted form of an^iulrtit, a 
finger or thumb, and it seems 
to be a synonym for a bit or 
smaU piece, because a digit 
forms a smaller portion of tho 
hand. " I'll not bate a finger's 
breadth of it." TaA, meaning 
a band, appears to denote a 
greater extent or quantity, t.g., 
"a hand's breadth better," and 
is sometimes ooufused with mtl, 
meaning a great deal. An old 
Yorkshire song says — 
" Bat Tom lot ilw bat oT ihk bwiaia 



Wright gives tait as meaning 
a waste or deserted space. In 
the song the actual meaning is 
that the victor beat his anta- 
gonist not tiwtty but fay a little, 
or " by a hand," U., " barely," 



:v Google 



Avast — Awful. 



» the ■iiiNMNlliiit Unw okwlr 



n lb* bMt* br lb* hid* 
ibiM*.' 

Aw*M In old ottnt hu the 
dgnUeatioii of kwkj. 

Aft la tha p^ Ik B bfaw.— r. 

Juviag, tbm triok of ■ b«ggar 
boj wbo ftiip* hlmMlt aod goM 
naked into t, town with a talae 
ftoijof hi* being acdd and rob- 
bed at hUolothet, to moTB oom- 
paadcm and get otbet olotbee. 
Thla U osJled attrU and to go 



WrigUi 

nte word li eTldenOy gypey, 
from Mw, to oome or go, as 
tnrtliw appeM< by avrrit, U or 
at being (bb ta oomnum In Indian 
dlaleott] a anlBz to form a soon 

(MrftAT). 

Xve. fwo, un*o. awnill. avail 
(BTP*?)' T"*- •'*>'J te lue in 
^gland, but It may be oom- 
monly beard In Hungary. 



Avelidnpdi Uj (old), stealing 
biaM weight! oS ibop oonnten. 



Ibe 'fiunily people;' 
tUefwU MjU - 
on petoelting that the poaon 
they are about to rob ie aware 
of their lotentlon and upon hla 
goard, 'fitow it, the oore's 
amtia.' To be avah to any 
•ohema, deoeiAion, or deaign, 
maana, genenlly, to Methrangh 
or oompcebendlt.'' — iVoMpaWi 
Mmoir*. 

Awer (gypay), bnt. Thla reoalla 
the German mttr, tmt it ia pro- 
bably onlyaformottbeaiBnna- 
tiTeatDo. 

AivfnL Thii word doea duty in 
taiMonable ilaog for "very." 
QIiIb and women are no longer 
"Teiy pretty" or "Tory hand- 
some," bnt "m^faltg pretty" 
or "a^fkOf handsome." llw 
ozpreBsion is sometimea TBrled 
into " dreadfully." An ai^il 
■hame or pity, or a drta^U 
shame or pity, are oommon 
sxpres^ons boUi among the 
high and low mlgar. "An 
mt^uHy &ne day " is a faTonrite 
expletiTe ammg young and 
old, but eepenially among tbe 
yonng. AH tbeee, and oonnt- 
lees other pervanloDS of the 
word, might fitly be desorlbed 
as aiefiillf dsstrnQtiTe of tbe 
grace, elegance, and pnrity of 
the English langosge. In like 
manner very laoghaUe ItioM 
are declared to be tertamimgfy 
huiny or vcneiatiiigtjf toimj ; 
as if TBry were no .longer an 
English word. 



:v Google 



AtoJul-~Ayrshirts. 57 



hw wnne pet aoliame or bobby 
of hU own in tIsw, nippoita 

_ _— another who nj»r in the future 

lb* TDDDi \t^i wm qsiM dwBMd wiih be nsefol to him. Bach men 
luB. em Baid to hare ooxt to grind. 

•" 1 dunk him a^fW^nica,' ilMHid; 
'laBqoiuukmwiihhio.' SprtUl kcuUiko in bduJf rf priru* 

"ABilBiRntbt7all.ulilaHbHqiHDI inl*n«iU«»oftb*cun«.rflhiiootiolrT, 
UBBBMloa tf Iha Bdibsud dncloHd lb* «h«nniticibleiHdbytlia>nii1aiirDii4M 
bcllliUaeanuilaablapoitioBoftlMiilU* I'»ridcnc*. The nomber of u« wUdi 
liHl lik»iM hMO Ukm «ih him." " tJ™ n. the ™ri™ 5ui> CmauU. u 

be [rouod ju th* pabuc cxpanRi ii par 
The Philadelphia Preu qaotea (mHj aurmou— JVm yn* TrOtmt. 
t ehanning cM lad^'B advloe 



__ _ The phrmie U derived bom s 

thinreet-f^iddwn- f^^?*?;?''^?^ J^'f*^ 

In his life. Once when be w-- 



to gill* — itttj excellent edrloe 



seU who are "ftWng 

bowe to aooletjr tbie winter. 



a bt^, a man who wanted to 



Firat^. whirttoBToid; «^^ " *^ persuaded little 

Senjamin h-j flattery to turn the 
"11 he was utterly weary 
and hii hands were lore, and 
then when it was done, told 
him rudely to be oS. Aflw 
thii, whenever anybody was ex- 
tremely amiable, the great Ame- 
rican philosopher epeonlated 






aifbowtoUTr" whether the polite person had 

Awkward aqnad (military and prwu. 

nantloai;, a aqnad formed of ..,,,,.,, „, . 

the men who^ hwAward in ^^^ ^^^T^^h *."^ 

drill inrtniotlon. The French iiim»«l"dy'.att*nd«.t. From 

ban the oorreqwnding term, "* Portnguoee <ua, a nuiae. 
"Le peloton des naladroiti." 

Ayrshlres (Stock Sxohange), ia 

Ax* to giind. Ml (American, need to deaoribe (Haagow and 

poUtioal), Mid when a man who Sonth-Weatem Bailway itook. 



:v Google 



Ba — Baboo-EngUsh, 



(fenlao). IntbeFooian 
roobnlai; thlj l«tt«l 
ttaudi for a captain. 



friend. Ihitratemblesthanortb- 
conntrj tor, bat ia of Hlndn 
origin. 

BabUers (sport), ill-bred hoaods ; 
when the pock is questing the 
bMUrt frBqnsntlj open withont 



Bal>M (tntde), the " snull fi7 " or 
lower orders of "kuook-oat" 
men who Me bought over t^ the 
larger dealers just preriou* to 
a sale coming oS, and who for 
a few ahillinga retire alh)g«tlMT, 
or promise to make no biddings 
while the lot is held bj anj of 
the other party. 

Baboo (Anglo-Indian), from the 
Bengali and Hindu BaH, wUoh 
i* properly a term of respect, 
like Uaater or Mr. Its ap^oa- 
tion In this sense ia now oonSned 
to Lower Bengal, though C. P. 
Brown statea that it is also used 
in SoQtben) India for Hy Lord 
VT Tout Honour. In Bengal 
and elsewhere it ia often oaed 
among Anglo-Indiana with a 
■light saTOur of disparagement, 
aa ohaiacteristng a snperfiolally 
onltivated but too often eSemi- 
oata Bengali From the exten- 
aive employment of the olasa to 
which the term waa ^tpUed aa 



a title. In the capadt; of clorka 
In KigUah offloes, tlie w<xd has 
come often to algnify a nativ« 
olerk who writes ^"tft*^ — 

" But I'd •ooDH ta robbed b]i ■ tall mu 

who ihavcd Be m fard df tfed, 

Thu bt Beeocd by ■ nakiiit &(tH with 

k p«o« and bndcE u bii bid.' 

—SirA.C.l,fmll: TUtOU 



Baboo -En^iah {Anglo -Indian). 
This term la applied to the 
pocnliar Kngllsh which is rather 
written than apoken by the 
natives in India. It is diffleult 
to describe, not being apeoially 
nngnunnuitical or faulty aa re- 
gards orthography, and yet it ia 
the drollest dialsot of Buglish 
known. It is most hnmorona 
when the writer has made bim- 
•eU fiuDlliar with, let us any 
Shakspeaie and the R^fim, the 
Bible and the "Slang Diction- 
ary," Artemna Ward, Hilton, 
AiacA, and the "PoUt« Letter 
Writer,'' and then conblTee to 
happily unite all their chanoter- 
tatlos with most nnezoeptionable 
gravity and skUl. Itisaaidthat 
a converted Baboo, wiahing to 
oombine deroUon with kindly 
feeling, ended a letter to an 
Bn g U a h lady-patam, to whom 
be anpplied meat, with thla 
expreoaion ; "Tour affeotionate 
bntcher, in Christ." Of late 
yeaia many """'«<ng apeclmenB 
of Baboo-English have been 
oolleoted and published. There 
ia a work called " The Baboo 
and Otbei Tales." by Aognatiia 



:v Google 



Babus — Back block. 



BUm, bawboi iSTPf)> gnuid- 
Iktbat. "Hsndj dlkked ysr 
bStnu ft cblnnlu koshters ksiiko 
kdrd leetis taa" — "I raw joor 
gnadfatber a cutting woodi 
(maUng akewoi) yeitaidaj, in 
hiatent." 

Baby-lierder (Amerlaan cowboy 
•luig), fe noTBO for ui Inbnt. — 
C. U<M«i Barritan : US. Amtri- 



aluig f ot cttpa. 

Bftcca-idpe (popvlsT), old -tosh- 
ioned mj of wearing whiBker*. 
Tho (ocBo-pipf WBB the whiokac 
cniled Id tiny ilnglet& 

Bull, to, batch, *"'■*'■"£ (Ame- 
rican), from the word baoheloc. 
To tomapaityand live withoat 
women'* cooielT or aid in the 
woods at hj the aea-iide. The 
ezpenaea entailed on yoong 
men who mix with ladies In 
■ociety at the watering-places 
In Amerioa are great, and often 
out of all proportian to their 
means, the natnnd resnlt being 
that baohelon take to the 
forests or sea-nuf, and live 
in tents, enjoying tbemselTCa 
thoronghly without the aid of 
"the mnslln," for half, or quar- 
ter the money which they most 
otherwise have expended on 
treatlDg ladies to coiriages, 
jQlepe and cobblers after bath- 
ing, biUluds and tea pins, ball 
tii^etaand suppers. 



hns Jul whu ^BU sppetita bxto, ud 

tlic lnj-oot. Of CDUTH it mguiis Jiulc- 
meat to prtFrtte the iDgrtdienEieuebtittlM 
a fijit-dUB npKit, and freqneatlj apB vrrm 

impait ft pAluaUe relifh to com, tonuJocv, 
■trini bwa, and uavtaflh, bat -pra tooa 
catch OD, and h«qdenEly bdbn the ibU 
and pepper gin oat . . ■ Vo, tmtlmg ia 
perfectly deliitilfiil, ud ^iil< emti Bajr 
inUTTOie dorinf lb* period in which the 

phTHCiani.— Cj/^I I i i ji i a Nrm^^tr. 

BaA (general) to get one's baek 
up, to get angry, the idea being 
taken from a cat, that always 
arches its laik when irritated. 
" Don't get your Aoob np," 
"Keep yonr ludr on," "Don't 
lose your shirt," are synony- 
mous ezproBsioiis for an exhor* 
tatlon to keep one's temper. 

Back block (AnstraUan), the 
oonntry outside the margin of 

the settled district*. 

like the hrieT aiffat </i 

•rCnlir nifht. 
Out of the froB 




Ii thg adrent of 

DlWeM, 

Hon to-night, and | 

—b. a. W. Slmiln : Oat Wat £■ 
AvtnBm, Lrria). 

These hack Uoth are, as a role, 
grailDg country, often very 
poor, let to the squatters (or 
giadeis) in immense tracts at a 
.. One often bean 
of a man holding a tbowaad 



:v Google 




6o Back block — Back-*anded. 

or two tbonMnd Bqnua milo. Back • door work {popnkr), 

Mr. B1cli«r, ■ Booth Aiubm- ao&omj. 

liau, leoently put upon the _ . , 

m»kat, in t£e aorth^terri- B«k«I (old du^i), de«i, with 

toij of aoDth AuBtnllB, lloeki *">« ■ *o^ t"™" "P- 

to the •(Ktneato of thWj or Back end (r«ji^). the Urt two 

forty thomMd sqiure mU«. month, of the imamg ««oi.. 

In »ei7 remote pftrU, crown- 

iMids are sometimes leased U 

•Urpenoe & Bqnue mile. The 

two neatest dlfflooltles to oon- . , . , 

tend with (besides droogfats and ^^^ '^'T' ~«»<!°«>''T. »■ 

floods) are " getting up stores," » ''•™' ''"<=*' *PP«" <^ *?• 

and getting to market Cattle J^"™ »» "« "°d of the 

are sometimea ditrea all the way x^ann 

from the OoU of Carpentaria 

to Uelbonrne, the whole length 

of Anatnlia, for sale, and some 

oatUe which had some this 

journey had been six months _ _ 

and three weeks m rvuU. Sfmriav Tiwu 

Ba^en (a racing technical tenn), 

Back-bmkei*. According to the the general body of the betting 

eridenoe taken before the Chll- pnUio who wagv oa hones 

dren's Employment Oommls- winning, in oontradistlnctlon to 

■ion, the ganger who contracts the more limited society of the 

todothewcrkblresthesmalleBt "ring" or " bocAmakers," who 

and obeivest children, seloot- bet againgt horses. 

Ingthe strongest and most will- This term is also frequently 

btgof thegangasaAoat-bMbsr, a^^ed to ooal oarrien, whip- 

wboss daty it U to set an pars, or heaTers. 

example of aotLvity to the reat U[r. Dudley Baiter, KA., 

and " put them alraig." ^itos In NaticMol Iikowm that a 
coal backtr ia oonaidered past 

Back-dieat (old cant), a dcak. work at forty. 

Back-dotii (theatrloBl), sosiea in Back-gammoii plajer (old), a 

a theatre or mnslo halL praotdser of an nnmentioiiable 

vioe. Alsocalled"Bnnshw,"or 

TtK^wJ<iMtuibcwei]-lmowii"vood- "gentlemu of the back door." 

laod sbilc ' that Mr it Pinu, ihamuu- 

r change), having made an un- 
profitable bargain. 



:v Google 



Backhanders — Badt seats. 



6i 



lewbo 

keq« haek the deoanter in order 
to AoaJ hinuelf • aeoond glut 
before be pusea it. Also, a 
drink out of tnin. 




Back hanilicap Cmu>iiig)> the 
proceH of nrlaiiig a time handi- 
cap, the tine being reckoned 
frmn the second th 

Back-bonae, tn backward (com- 
mon), a prlvj. Bo called from 
being oniall; dtnated at the 
lear of bonee. Soldlen also 
caU it "the rear," frcnn aaking 
learD to Ul to the rear of tbe 
oompaoy. 



r fa tnfnitu^-oii (Amerl- 
ji tUeres* alaiig). a very nsoal 
Und of obeating, by which a 
man la vicl~ 

liable to piuklihitiefit. 

Back juof (thievea), a baok win- 
dow. The window Beenui to be 
comidered by tbievei only Id 
the light of a ooDTenlent meoua 
of eaupe, bcnce the ezpreadon 

Back iDaA (mnningl, the mark 
BMMet tbe eraalob — lometlme*, 
of oonrae, tbe leiatoh Itaelf. A 



man Ii Slid to be " baokmaiked " 
In buidlcapt^ng when tbo 
handioapper «ete him back, or 
glvee him lew start tban he hat 
hitherto had. 

Back of berond, the {American), 
a mythical aonnby wbcm large 
fortiowa ai« to be made — a Tom 
Tiddler'e gioimd. 



H Hmid lUyof April tit', 
> aotuD ihu I dioald fad 

the ttorj at vUdi I 
than I hiLV*, 14 ~ 

if tb> UT>- 
utry ksDWD u th* Bmek ff 
W. A. Fmtmi Dtm Ot /*■ 



3ackaciittle.ta(thfeT 
\tj the back way. 



Back aeata (Amerioan), a rery 
oommon alang expreuion rigni- 
fyliig reeerre m an obiouie and 
modeet petition. It originated 
In a taylng of Fretldent John- 
eon in 1868, that " in the wrak 
of TMonttmotion traiton ahonld 
take badt taU." 

Geomi Shtlbrcf nlKl^M(lri«7ByI;— 
" L« il ba dudnctlir undcntaed u St. 
LoDB ubd everrwba* cIh tlul, whll* Eha 
Hma of the war u* pas %bA totgoKUb, 
w* take hhck nolhinf, and then ii no uaa 
ef their eipecting ni IS do •!>.- 

Thai'i trm. Yan don't erto take taeh 
itmii. In the Oentaiid variety ahaw 
■my iBui'jiiek oTyou 11 m 
iow.-CUi4f Tt^imi. 



:v Google 



i staircase. 




Backsheesli (Anglo-bicUan). 
From the FeniBU baUiMik, k 
gnttdtj, » " tip." 

WkU an hgnaqr ig dusk tlut I ub ta 
b« tinmtfld to tlu tlmiM, and lo bring Ibe 
MU io PuliuMDI u ImUhiI M >bc 
Salon.— TiMctrrmf : PtuUimU. 

Back •Ung; (AnBtialiHiiooiiTlcti), 
the golDg atealthil; to or into k 
plkOe, Bnekkiiig into it. Plo- 
babl; taken oat to Aoatnlis 
bj the oouTiots tmupoited 
thither, though it maj bftve 
oiigiiutad there. 

(Thlerea), to enter or oome 
out of ■ boote b; the baok 
door, or to go a oiionitona or 
private mj through the Btraeta 
In order to avoid txxj puti- 
enlai [daoe In the direct road, 
la termed UKk-tLangtitg it. — 
YarndtUtawKn. Joeijian^alBo 
meana slang prodnoed by spel- 
ling words baokwardi, «.f., "oael 
ekom " for lean moke, " ocoa- 
bot " for tobacco, 

Back-tUmgiiiig Li quite ariato- 
oiatic ap the ooontiy In Aob- 
tralia, where, nnleu it i« a formal 
visit, It Is almovt the imiTersal 
custom for any one of any tank 
to dilve straight into the stablet 
of the house he is going to, call 
for a groom (or qoito as often 
a b(7) to take the horses, and 
then walk ronnd to the honse. 



Back shun (AnstiaUan Mnriott* 
alang), a baok room, a baok 
entrance. Probably taken ont 
to Australia by the oonTicts 
transported thither. 

In ordinary ooBoqnfal Bng- 
llsh, loci stmt simply means a 
"baok street" or a "bad neigh- 
bourhood," bat Vaux In Ua 
UemoUs says that among the 
Anstralian lays bank ifan Is a 
baok room, also the back en- 
tianoe toany house or premiMC ; 
thns, " Well give it 'em on the 
iost dyim," means " Will get In 
at the hack door." 

Back atalrcaM <popitlar), a de- 
risiTe term for a bnstle, called 
by mald-semnU "Urd cage," 
or " canary cage." ftuisian 
ladies bad framerly the nu- 
awomlog jMltssm, saperseded 
under the Third Empire tj the 
more "all ronnd" crinoline, 
bronght into fuUon by the 
Empress, and which became so 
mnoh the lage all the world 
over sa to be worn even by Afri- 
can belleB, whose sole adorn- 
ment ft frequently was. Eng- 
lish girls of the lower classes, 
who could not afford to procure 
the "real article," would affix 
wooden hoops to their petti- 
coats. Scoffing Parisians now 
term the modem " dress impro- 
ver "—so eltmgated, painfully 
pointed, and almost horliontal 
— " un lieutenant " (a pun <m 
" tenant lien de ce qni manque " ) 
" nnage " (" parcequ'il caohe la 
lone," lii»t being slang for the 
postffiiot), and " volapnk." 



:v Google 



Baekstairs — Bat^eer. 



63 



Tb« u BD ml* of ths (bV 



■aanom.— ^psM, April 16, itSt. 

Back talk (popular), no hack 
tali, it., tpMkliig ftankl;. 



aaUa, my popnlar in hi* tiine, 
nji thii phnaa haa lefsreBDe 
to a gilmaoe which ha usad 
to make^ and which wu called 
palling ■ lattn face, or, in 
ihort, pulling iaccti, bqt the «c- 
prcMiou la not in geneial uie. 



Bad bteak (Amarlcan), an ont- 
break, oatrag«, tnrbiilent oon- 
Back-tommj (tallon), a [dece of dnot. 
cloth owd to oorer the itaTB at ., c ' l h • 1 

, ' "Sun, b« HT>t TOUTfl nude odb or 



: (American) ; going 
back, retreating, eating one'^ 
woidi; to take the hadc-lraA, 
to reoede from one's position. 
TIh Efn law of nlf-|ii mn mlap hu 
■dBooiilHd Ur. Dooflai that be hai fooe 

Souh u bt cu fomUAj go, and that if he 
vooU nva hlmaelf at boaa ba mtial lalw 
iIm Uet-tnck-fffw Ytrk HtrmU, D«- 
«mb«>t,iBST. 

1 lancd to Uac aad taid, " Com«, 
Mac; vhat'i ihc ma of fimling ; coma 



Back np (public aoboola), to call 
oat, as, for instance, when a 
piasfeet reqnirea a Etg. 

B>Ay (tailors), the man working 
immediately behind the speaker. 
The term la mnch affected bj 
" slop cattera." 



Bad eg^ (popular), a rascal. 
Tike* U loait phDoMpbT in iha maik 

ba a Buiaaaca nnlcii ha |eu biokc— 
Sptrtiai Timi: 

The term is nrcd in America 
to express a man of onsoond or 
donbtfnl ohaiaoter. It became 
popular aboat iS49-5a U the 
ooirespondlng slangterm existed 
in China, a bad tgg would, on the 
contrary, mean a very honest 
feUow. 
But ooa (raTJiaiRd old «Uer (hmUed 

crimly uad bet 
Dat Bralunaas vmld pnn ay^ i^r lor 
dtnril- 



strike one ; (theat- 
rical), to " pnll hacon." 
The late Mr. H. J. Byron, the 



a A*rf Iff 1 1"! tl"7 mn went ao lar aa id 
UEieit that tba uoaer ha had a buUal ia 
him the bencc.— .1. SUerltfHUl: Pm» 

Badge corea (eld cant), persons 
existing on the bonntr of tbe 

Badgeer (Anglo- Indian), from tbe 
Persian bSd-glr, wind-catoh. 



:v Google 



64 



Batiger — Bad man. 



A QontrtTanoe tat bringiiig »li 
down Into, and for oooUng mud 
T«DtilfttIiig % houML A wind 

Bulger (Amerioan thlaToi], a 
" panel " thief {paoel being pro- 
bably » oormption of ponny, a 
oant word for a honae). who robe 
ft man alter a woman baa enticed 
biminto bed. 

In aohooU it ia the fate of 
rsd-bairad boya to be niok- 
named after tbla aaimaL (Na- 
*al) tod^er-bag, tba flctltions 
Neptune who rUitt tbe ship on 
ber omealng the line, and ia ao 
called from hla badgering the 
snlnitiatod. Foimerlj the tenn 
waa apidled to a hnobter or 
TOtailer, from hadpdatt, to cany, 
lAUn bajvlan. To overdraw 
one's iadgtr 1* slang for over- 
drawing one's banMng aoooont, 
a play on the azpreail<» drawing 
the badgtr. 
Hii dtocki v/o loofBT drew tha caih, 



~Htd : Mia Xdmaiu^r. 

A1k> afipUed In (dd cant to a 
foo^ad who In <dd days robbed 
perMHii near a river, snbaa- 
qoently throwing the body of 
the viotin into the water ; ■ 
n proatitnte. 



Bad giw^-nnj (Amerioan), In< 
caationj betrayal, lapana. 



Bad hallpensr (Anattalian mn- 
viots' s^mg), a frnitlaas etTaad, 
no go. Frobably taken out fay the 
oonviota transported thitbv. 
Taox in hla Uemoira nys; — 



A ne'ernlo-well Is called « 
tmf hatfyieimf, baosinatt the ne'er- 
do-weU of tbe family is so diffl- 
onlt to get rid of ; be is said " to 
turn up like a bad Kal/pni*]/,'' 
beoanae imperfect ooins ara 
oonitautly being traced back to 
and foiced back on the peraon 
who dronlates them. 

Bad lot (common), a parson of 
Indifferent obanu)t«r. The term 
aeems to be derived from an 
anctioneering phrase. It Is 
often ^ii^ed to girls who have, 
as tbe French t«nn it, "la 
cnlsso gale." 



The^ili 

'* I alwaji tboufht yoa vc 

Tba chdni girl wu tTyiog to 



ttmdUt.' 



1, well— I wn om u pcNiy u 
i m deal pnnkr, and wu aada 



Bad nian (American). This has 
a special meaning in tha Weat, 
where it indicatea a heartUaa, 
oroal mnTderet. Bowdiea and 



:v Google 



Bad man — Bagga^. 



balUM in their boMUng often 
dMoiibe themwlTM m "bud 
had mm bona Blttei CredL' 
In tttia ba begged for mercy. Uilloc 



" Oom« wid lutve ft bag " wonld 
be » form of Inritation given. 

Bkk. to (tuniUv), to eteal or 



DiST ihuiblcd pas ibcni od hii wny to 
iha jii] wen Iba dalh-luMll of lui tad- 
OHL He Bdda no ** John Bruch plftyi " 
after iba, bol uuadcd IklihTully to hk 
bard, HDil iht ban meniiQa of ihe nuu 
«f Had IlUloa wai niSdcal to knp him 
qniat w hm av ar h« forgot hii defeat and 
■— Tiri Ihg r«b of i>^ mMM.—DHrtH 

"Bad man" fomenMl mnr- 
deret U Indeed b very mild w>7 
of pntUngit. If theeuphemlnn 
were euried on, a mniderer 
pan and sim^ wonld probeiblj 
be itjled a mvigltty man. 



«.*,4^». (priH ring), blood; 
properly a kind of claret cnp. 
To " tKp tbe badminton, or 
elant," ti to draw blood. 

Bac (OMunou), anj Und of pone 
when emptj* ; to give tbe bog, 
>.«., to dlmdae, mn awi^. 



Aid goDi off inlh (MM ona (h* tq>0B 



Tha ihamehilmy in which ear ihipt 
an beiii( haaid irilbODl tba ilighteit 
•cniplo lo mil ptiTiM cDdi bacomo oor 

coiDpajably. Th« public^ who have to pay 
tbe inper F^etty nrcatly for the ^itbcad 
paceaot, can hardly ba cipactcd to look 
without wonder or diignit nt the banfacod 
partiality displayed by tbe Admiralty ia 

Aleo a ptanue in common nae 
aigni^'lDg tbe expanilon of gar- 
ments bj frequent wear. 

" You BWB are ■> lucky," n Mr maideo 
•aid, 
DiAciisidg the qnenion of droB, 



*'y«a, I know," nid a youth iriio'dbaiB 
waitiDC lor thii, 

" What yonWiaid iiall triM, bol Iban't 

Your pant! never lot at the knee*.' 

Basg«g« MMuJiw (American), a 
word with two meaninga. The 
Hist appllM to men wbo hang 
about tbe railway etatione to 
iteal leggage, tbe Koond to the 
iKilway poiten and others who 
in America handle tmnke and 
boxes, fto., with extraordinarf 

^' t feel depraiad ttHught," remarkad a 



-~Sfrrllai Tima. 

(nrinten and Milon), a ralgai 
t«nn for a pint or pot of beer ; 



:v Google 



A London thief who BteaU 
linage off oarriAgM or caba bj 
climbiDg ap behind, li termed 



Bagged (American thieves), im- 
pilioned, " scooped in," it, 
taken In, Tictimised. 

Bagging (noTtbenicoiiiitiea),nBed 
of food between meali ; in I^an- 
cashiro eEpeoiallj, an Kftemoon 
meal, i.&, what ii taken about 
In a bag. See Cakfbt Baq- 
aiNfl. 

Lknwhire idoplb the wholc-boaj^ or 
pwtUl.boutlirUeiiiircryeit(nu«l;r- The 
local Mnn of ^iffiv imp^in hnmd uid 
dwcK, or pief ; Mod Ihere $tk mil the 
vuietio of board ud lodgiDE. dinner of 
pautod and bacon will) butts-aiilk, 
itgZ^t ^^ ^h< ToRnooo and aflemoon, 
dtaaa and ]uach» and rations allovad for 
mnen.— CtamJln'i Jnnud. 

Bagging or jockeTing the orer 

(oncketenjitbepraotioe of bats- 
men who manaffe tbeir running 
in such a manner as to get ail 
the bowling to thenuelves. 



1 (general), a commercial 
ttaveHer. A name formerly 
given to commercial traTeUera 
from their travelling on horse- 
back and carrying their samples 
or wares in saddle-bags ; now 
used only in a somewhat oou- 
temptDous manner. 

The lau lord cane lo London wilh fonr 
poN^liauet and uleen bonn. Hie pre- 
■enl lord mveb with fire hfmt* In a 
raOnT curiage. — W. if. T/mektrmy : 



Bag of mill (American), the same 
aa hnrrab's nest or whore's nest. 
Everything in confusion, and 
topeytatry. The sign of the 
Sag of NaiU in England has 
been said by inventive and 
imaginative etymologists to be 
derived from " the Baccha- 



make yya iquint like a ia^ ^ mMilt," 
replied the muiideT, " tbough jou rub 
u lo whit for il.~-^7ii Mr TnU. 

Bag! (general), tronsers. The 
synonyms are " kicks," " lit 
□pons," "hams." Sometimes 
rudely called *' bimibags." 
"Hieo ihe ihmng begini lo t^I, 
But 1 Katun tn pell-mell. 
Be their ckxhins manlj Av* '" (amaia 

With my itaff I goet for all, 



tiffat IwHd hmp~ 



Bagoio (old), a bawdy bouse. 



When the pattern of the lagt 
is very staring they are called 
" howling bdjii." The synonyms 
" onmentlonahles " and "Inex- 
pressibles," thongh generally 
Dsed jocosely, mnst have been 
coined by people vrith Indecent 
imaginations who think more of 
the ctmtents than the container, 
and who would cover with petti- 
coats the nakedness of statnee 
or incase the l^a of pianos in 
" ineipreasiblea." It may, how. 
ever, have been invented by 



, Google 



Ba^ — Baked. 



ladiM who wiU blush tk the word 
obemioe, but who do Dot Boniide 
to ihow thenuelTM in public in 
•Qch a dtaOtii state u to inig- 
gMt thkt only the lower half of 
thkt gannent baa been retained. 
To "haye the bagt off," iato 
be of Bge and one's own master, 
to have plenty of money. To 
have the bagi on wonld sorel; be 
a more appropriate metaphor la 
this instance. 

Bags, to btke the {athletio}, to 
go hare in a paper chase. 

Ba-ha <tailora), bronchitis. 

B«l, by (gypsy), » sleeve, a bongb. 

Bail (Anstialian Blackfdlowa' 
Ungo}, no, not. The following 
ii a ipedmen of the pi^^in- 
KngUah Btnffed with Blaokf d- 
lows' woide tiMd by the wbitw 
CA itatlms in th^ iDteraonne 
with the aborigines :— 

"Toi 



"Yohi" (js). Bid JohB, ntba doal>t- 
ibllj, br he la But mm how Ui Womach 
wUl >«n wiih iIm >uug( amX—A. C. 

(Society), to give leg toil and 
hiid Mcnrtty, a phiase foe run- 
ning away, decampdng. 

Baiat • nari (tailors}, work np a 



angry. To boil a lad is to tc 



Bait-land (nantical), an old wtml, 
formerly used to ligntfj a pott 
where refreshments could be 
procored. — Admiral BatgOL 



'■Rt« dd muidr ■ pmier." "Wli« 
fort- "tixUk.- •' For bock, kek— tot 
muidrll do it ID nu to kia ■ dadTB*." 

"Hutviimii*Hi«r(5CBi[i).' "Wlul 
ftirl" "FotM*," "For bock (bar), M 
— Int 111 grn it to tou to bur m daar." — 
Gyfif Nila In Amtrita CMS.). 

Bake, to (Winchecter), to rest, to 
enjoy "doloefaiDiente;" (oom- 
mon), to fomlgate a room. 

Baked (Australian), tired out. 
Slang delight! In pnn*. BecaoM 
meat put in the oren is Miid to 
be haitd when it is "done," a 
man who Is "done np," or 
"done," is tidd to be baleid. 
This disUnctly "slang" use of 
baied is quite diHerent from 
baJctd in the sense of " heat«d " 
01 " hot," In which even ladles 
often oae it. In the English 
slang only "half-ioJ^" means 
imbedle. 

Baked Spanlah (oomm<m). A 
SpmuA means a large Spanish 



n wny.— An.' JWiOt VUHiie. 



:v Google 



BSkelo — Bakes. 



Baker (Amerioui), a word dii* 
covered or nnconioioiulr In- 
TeaUd b; the Baron ■. de 
Ifandkt 0noo(7. 

Wa fot lh« wilboiit nndBlr andilns 
th( idl* curioilly at the iaWn iiniwid w. 
Id AmeiicK iIht o" '^ hnUtul miui- 
mbool-lom, Ibe lonagn— tit fr -. 1 loo 
<a a Don Lcuoed ■tTDK^ofvt thui nyHlf 
Uhch 



raDDtry. — AarM S. Xamdmt CtuKty: 

The writer of the above bad 
heard the vord loafer, and having 
Inqnlred iti meaning, innocent]? 
tranilated it as haker. Id a ehort 
Uma hakgr will, perhaps, be 
onmnt aa a joke, and a few 
jean hence aome one teanied 
in Amerioaniwna ma? poaaiblj 
doolan it to be the original word. 



knock togetfaec — the podtlon in 
which bakers etand to knead 
their bread tending to mak' 
their knOM Incline inwarda. 



American term, and one recently 
heard bj him in America. 
(WinolieateT College), a hoixt 
la a oojhion, generallj a large 
green one, need by prefecta and 
by boja who have atndieeof their 
own, ThenameiaalaogiTentoa 
■mall red coahion naed at chapeL 
Formerly it meant a portfcdio. 
A "to fa r layer" iaa joniorwho 
baa to take a prefect'i Aofar in 
and out of hall at meala. The 
term waa probably obtained by 
panning Mi the connotation of 
the word lool 



I (workmen), an in- 
kneed man, cma wboae kneea 



Baker-l^^ged (aee Bazkb-xxud]. 

. . . Hii body crookBl ill am, Uf 

Baker's dwen (oommou), thir- 
teen. Originally tlie London 
baken aapplied the retailen 
with thirteen ioavea to the 
doien, BO aa to make sore of not 
giving ahott weight 
Abool ■ tmi t r'i jHtm of con isd calm 



To "give a man a baker's 
doaen " ia to give him a good 
beating, to give him full meaanre 
in that reepeot. 

Baker, to spell, an expreealoD for 
attempting anythlr^ diffionlt. 
In old apeUing-bookB, iabcr waa 
the flrat word of two ayllablea, 
and when a ohild came to it, 
ha thought be had a hard taak 
before him. 
If an old maa wtU marrr a Toong 

wifb, why dsefk — vhy Ibsi — why theo — Ika 

EKglmmdTfmitdi-- 

Bakes (Amerioan), onslt ordinal 
■take in a game, a juvenile twm ; 
B8 " ' I will atop when I get my 
'-•— ' nld by a boy playing 
-" (BortbH), in retar- 



marblea" 



:v Google 



Bakts — Balance. 



69 



•noe poMiblj to » bftker't not 
almja gatting his bate Mfely 
oot of the OTen. Hon probably 
from tbs prorincUl Engllah 
fate, marblM of baked claj ot 



r (Winqheater), one wbo 
b*k«a— that U, a aloggard, an 
Idle fellow who U food of lying 
down doing nothing. [Provln- 
oial), a oagnoiD«i for a bakeK 



Bakioff-lMTC (Winobest«r>, pei- 
miMltm to " bake " — that is, to 



BaUnc-ptace (mnoboater), a Kut 
of oonoh 01 sob, an important 
aitbjle of frnnitoie for those 
wlio daliglit in falsa;, that is, 
doing notiiing. 

Kkro, iokio (gypsy), a sheep o 
lamb ; iaimfiiv, a shepherd. 

BU fgrw), " boir (Hindn, fat). 
BMa, iiOor, hairs; Ulnoi, 
haiiy. 

BaluiB-lMx<piiiitiiig shopa), used 
by oomposlton to designate the 
reoeptaole tor tOij paragraphs 
aboot ffloastmitlM in art or 
natue; or old jfkesand anec- 
dotes kept in reiem to lengthen 
oat t'gt* or oolnmns which 
might otherwise nmain Taoant. 
^M [duase cniginated in the 
eomparatiToly leoiote days when 
aewq«per adllM* wore some- 
tiniM at<ilositoflUiipthe al- 
lotted tptat at thsir oommand. 
Ho snoh dilDonl^, howercs, 



of Terboaity, when Um "gift of 
the gab" is oonsidered to be 
one of the proofs of states- 
manship, and when short-hand 
wrttan supply the materials for 
filling and OTerfllling the news- 
pi^ers, by full leporta of the 
speeches of Tastrymcoi, platform 
oiaton, mambat* <a Parliament, 
and worse perhi^ than aB, of 
windy I>anist«rs, doing- their 
utmost in ooorts ot law to 
make goilt look InDooenoe, 
or nM wm, and otherwise 
"darkening counsel with tain 
words." The disease that afDlots 
the prlnting-ofBoea ia no longer 
that ui "atrophy," bat of fiato- 
lence in its worst and nuMt per- 
■Istent forms. 



wonld han bMa eonrifntd bjrtlw •dkor 



Baladan day {militaiy}, pay 
day, a surriral of the Crimean 
war. The day on whioh men 
having got theii pay took it 
down to Balaclava, the great 
baae of copply, where pnrohaaes 
ooDld best be made from sat- 
krs who had their hat shops 



I (Amerloan), the rest ta 
n^msJnd'"' ^ fcnyt^ing Bartlett 
says that it ia "a mercantile 
woid originally introdnoed into 
the ordinary taagnage of life by 
the Sontbem pecqile, bnt now 
improperly need throngheat the 
United States to signify tlw r«- 



:v Google 



70 



Balanix — Ball 



■Hinder otkthinjT. TbeioIanM 
of an ■ocowit U a tenn well 
KQthoilMd and proper, but we 
also freqaentl; hear each «c- 
preaaioiiB aa the halmta of a 
speech, the hdlamet at the da;, 
Ac." It ■eetnadonbtfnl whether 
boloawoanerer be quite oonect 
DiileM It (ignlllee an exacts 
aqnalhaU. 



Balbna (oniTenttj), Latin proae 
oompoailloil. A term deriTed 
from Amold'i " IaUo Proae 
Compodtion," a w^ • known 
text-book in which Balbut (who 
doea not oonnect In hi* memoij 
this odlona IndlTldnal with the 
magiiter*! canel) occniaatthe 
beginning of the exBroiHa and 
OD everj page, sometimea over 
and over a^ain, right through to 
the end of the book. 

Bnldcrdneh (old), a t«rm appUed 
to adnlterated wine, and to 
senaeleea talk or writing. 

Bald-face (Amcdcan), new whie- 



Bsld-fnced ahiit (Amerioaa oow- 
boTs), a white, i^., mnilin or 
linen ahirt. 80 oalled beoanae 
lald-fiietd, or Hereford cattle 
have white faoea. — 0. leland 
Sarriton : US. Ak 



w (American), the 
front Hats in the pit of a theatie. 
It ia an old joke in the United 
Statei, that whenever there i* 
agrtat " Icg-pleoe," or a "frog- 
salad " (i.r.,a ballet witii nnnsual 
opportnmtie* for stadjing ana- 
tomy), the front «e>ta are always 
filled with veteran tohU, or 
" Vnole Nedii." 

Baldober (see BaLDOwn), a direc- 
tor, or leader. In Oerman 
thierei' slang the director or 
planner of a robbeiy, who gets 
a donble share. 

Bald«wer(TlddishX head.speaker. 
One who conveys infonnaUon ; a 
spy. Oonneoted with this are 
iaUMMn*, to direct, plan, wpj, 
Inrk, obaerre (In Dutch slang 
ialdtnatK,), also MJartr, a wpj 
or traitor. 

Bale*, a little drive with (popu- 
lar) ; BdUt is the polioeman who 
snperinttftda the Blaok Haria, 
or prison van. 

I WM Imi tcKtj itaSiBtt, bat Mt Ibny 



to du p'iin TUk : 

I U Bmltt 1 lUBC ui uu in 

MtrOtrt^ stmt. 



bimdMml, 



Bald-Eaced atn^T (popnlar), a term 
of derision applied to a bald- 
headed man. 



B«)e-np (coDunoD), an equivalent 
of "fork oat," that is, pay, give 
the monej instantly, a phrase 
Imported from the AaBtralian 
bnghrangei*. 

Ball (prison), prison allowance ; 
siz onnoea of meal ; a drink. A 
ball of fire in popoJac slang Is a 



:v Google 



Ballad-basket— Bally. 



71 



gUai of bnmdy, tn aUnsIoii to 
tbs AeriiiGss ukd pnnffeooj of 
the wretchedlj bad g^rit aokl 
aa brandj to the lower olaasM. 

Balkd-fauket (<dd s 
•Inger. 

Ball«rt {common), money. Some 
of the ilaag tjntmYna lot money 
were or are — " Oof, ooftlah, 
■tamp;, mnok, biBse, lokver, 
bltm^ needfol, rhino, boitle, cole, 
gUt, dn«t, dinimock, feMbera, 
biBd<, chinki, pieces, cUnkert, 
Btnff, clomps, chips, c<aii, ihek- 
els, oorka, dibba, dinjurly, horse- 
nails, gent, hookstCT, mopnssss, 
nsUin cili posh, resdy, fipsnish, 
lowdj."— Bsrrips t Argit amd 
Saaff. 

A rich man is said to be well- 
baBoMUd. A nkso is slid to 
"lose his tallatt" when bis 
jQdgmeat falls him, or when he 
becomes top-he*v7 from conceit. 

BaTlonniDc (Stook Exchange). 
When stook ts tnoieosed to a 
flgnra far beyond Its real valoe 
it U said to be baUo<maI, and 
the operation by which this 
is effected Is called iaUooNM^. 
The means by which this result 
is attained are oo<Aed or other- 
wise faTooiahle reports, 
tions sales, and so on. 



J it (American), exag. 
geraUng, indulging in bonnce, 
polling the Itnig bow. It is 
Mid to have originated in a story 
of a nan who boasted that be 
had foDgbt a dnel in a balloon 



and brought down bisadTersaiy, 
baUoon and alL Bat this was 
a veritable occarrence, as ap- 
pears by the Si. Jamt^t OautU 
of Angnrt 5, I ~ ~ 



tty ■ dual en ihe n 
liooi icTHd «■ br U. da Gniul|ii< ud H. 
k Piqna IB Pam in iSoS. Thoe (tntkaiai 
hATiDf quArrtllAd mbcAt » Iftdj, afnad to 
hinitMitia ballooo, nch partfto liic U 
lbs MbcT** Ukxn uiil trr ud Mug him 
down. A monlb wu talmi u boild Ivt 
limilw ballaani ; >ad onafiaedsythtpai 
uemdid wiih thur lecDadi ftoo ihe Tni 



When tb*T WB* nboni Iwlf > nik dp, ud 

KHD* dflhtT TSJdf iqMrt, the Hgnal was 

1, and M. )e PiqiM niiiiad. H. da 




a (popular), " to make Mb of 
it," t« make a mistake, to get 
into tronble. 

Batta* aU Cpop<ilar), all mbblab. 



n (old), a ball where 
all the dancers are thlCTea, proa- 
titatea, or other leiy degraded 
perMns,na in the "baff-balt," in 
which both sexes join witbont 
olotbing. 

Bal^ (society), a word In n«e 
arntng the yoang men of the 
present day to emphasise a 
speech. Coined bf the Sporlinf 
Timn, from the Irish word 
"ball.r-liooly." It is mostly 



:v Google 



Bally—Balmy. 



OMd a* K enpheiniam for 
"bloo^r-" <M the ame.olua 
>ra "dull it I" "by goUyl" 
" gTMt Soott 1 " 



Ballrnv (Oxford UniTBrdty), 
a fTM flgbt in jest. Thia I* 
■a old woid that hM b«en in 
on at iMMt « hondnd jMtn — 
■pslt alao bnUuse;. The oou- 
olndon of ■ big "wine" {ridi 
Wm), ia often » wbolenle 
toBirnv or <mtU«, mlwayi omirled 
on in good tsmper (personal 
Tiolence in a qoanel i« [nwtl- 
oally nnknown at Oxford). To 
baUjmy a man la to mob him 
and plaj pmotlml joke* npon 
him, to hmtUe him. TotoUynifr 
a man'i rooma i> to torn them 
npatde down, to make "I»t" 



Dai Hniid,— I ■Iwiti mi nibs m 
toff I bat •hm I till jcn that thb bloom- 
iii| houH hiu b«coia« Jtrfiicify itmitfy, I 
kuiw jioii will pilj th* poor old boanUr. 
' If all diy In lb* libnijr, 



(OMnmon), to bnlly, to make 
a Uok ap oi riot 

Nme of yanr Ihiinc up, and imlfyrmi- 
gimf tin mpk ■boqt.— j M— arf Kate : 

The void ia a oomptiaa of 
hiAjmiy, to threaten, bnUy, 
hoitle. " Bnlly " la a prarin- 
oialiam tor a riot. It maj be 
noted that ta Tiddlah iaU« and 
Tog mean a riot, a llglit, and 
rage. AaMt-r^ would, in fact, 
be a icMiiag row. 



Balm (idd}, i 

Bain? (oommMi), sleepy, bom 
tabi|i (lit., eootlilng) ileep [ 
weak-minded, doll, eaaily Im- 
poaedupon, mad. 

Tbi people ia oar aUcTCatl BM Sahaliiiii 



Thcr Hy I BBM ba A>te> to fa a^ 

Jgia tbc Arntr, 
That laadi fou la Hlntioa ia tha Wbila- 
fh.[Mj Road. 



oat lijua bus i^tHj.—Hflij : /«Mhvi 

Amrag oontriot* to " ^ on 
thetalatyaUok" ia to feign In- 

Tbcn «ai alwa^ a aBabar pattiu on 



imeK O.E.C. 

P.S._nM'> wbva tha ]«U gchh Id. 
—TM Cmltmt </' Of Miua: Tkt SI. 



:v Google 



Babi^ — BambooMk. 



To be ft lUtl« bit "telMy in 
ooa'a ommpat " meuu to be 
illghtl; otaMf. The iTiioiiTiiie 
•re "tobetoDohed," "off one's 
chomp," " moDg in the upper 
•toiej," "to have nta tn the 
npper ttattj," " ft tUe loow," 
" helf-beked." " dot^." lo 
"go Aobqr" etgnlflea to go mad. 

"Ah," lud Ton CuAOaa nliHqiHB 
' ~' tdwt, "DODCD'uvkidir 
er Bav«n or Ebe Aadcm 



An' I Died lo mug tlu Mtr, 
Tinl lo Buc >bc mDllD Mbr 
When i jawd U Itw kn -- 



Babun (tbieree' ilang), monej. 

" It WH BO (HU qoid*, JiB— coir lb 



ih it-— JKb, K*»* . 



Ai <!'■ nlliB late, in trf uid cm ■ wiok 
ar MS of tbe taim^.-Omia Dtctitu! 
OUCmrtatifySluf. 

Bilo, biior, bawlor (grpe?), » 



ifmidtaibow U." 

Also impeTtiiienoe, impndenoe. 

Balwar (Anglo-Indiu), ■ barber. 
Thla is an «Tnn«t»g ingtanoe of 
native Mending of iiiwaia (b^- 
pertOD, eqiillaruu) with the 
Bngtiah word. 

Il ofUo uka th« fcnhB b(B Ml^v 
■Dotlnc fictilioiu hybrid ih^itd by Ih* 
Perdu Jarv^W. u oiti /aoi, bair- 
eaam.—Aniit-IiiJimm GItamrj. 

Bam (old), tacetioa* hambng ; 
"to iom" was to impose on a 
person b^ means of falsehood ; 
also to cbadl and poke fan at 



cheat, to delode, to 

F*lrlM]i«uUDdl udiTiroii' 



DoBi dubbUin 



" BellmAU] yona, 
Bkllovu u' Tonu, 
A' Ibc rTE u' iJh itoi 



In the language of Bailors, to 
tam&xolc has the meaning of 
to deco; the enemy b7 hoisting 
false colonrs. 

This word has been a stnmb- 
ling-block to all the et^mologlste 
who have attempted to grapple 



:v Google 



Bamboozle — B, ami S. 



with it. " It ia," Kijt the Dlc- 
tioDU7 of Fhraae «nd Fable, 
" a Chinwe and gjpsy word, 
meuiiiig to dreu a mui Id bun- 
booi to teach him swimtDing." 
Aa the gTpaies never had iiiter- 
ooQise with Cbin&, and as the 
ezpluuttion ia utterly DninteUJ- 
gible and Irrelerftnt, the etymo- 
logy muat be reckoned imagi- 
native, to aay the leaat of it. 
"Hotten, with others, credita 
ban^oo^ to the gypsies ; aa 
banbhonta ia Hindu for to hom- 
bog, M)d M the tenninatire iltd 
ia n«ed in Bomany, it is possible 
that haatboode is Uie Hindu word 
gypaifled."— C. 0. Ldand: MS. 
Oi/pif Ifola. 

BuMglier, to buig. 

Banco or bnnko •teerer or roper 
(AmeTican), a ahaiper, a con- 
fidenoe-triok man. 



hivt dinid ugclhcr in Cucinuti, or it 
may b* Orlaiu, « perhipi FuDcitco, 
be^uiK he §iidt out vhcR ywi canw from 
lut. And he will ihiJu band! with you ; 
and be will pnixK ■ dnnk ; und h« will 
pay for thai drink. And pRKDIly he will 
uk« you lomcwitm ebe, uioog hii paJi, 
and he will •trip you to doui ih»i ihtre 



{ChartCThouse School), I 
evening school 



(Anglo-Indian}. Hot* 
ten aays of this word that it 
WBB originally a peculiar kind 
of silk handkerchief, bnt ta now 
a alaog word, denoting all kinds 
of "atooka," "wipes," and "fo- 
gies," and In bet the genoio 
term for a kerchief. In the 
United Statei it Is specially 
applied to a kind of cotton or 
muslin handkerchief from Had- 

colonr, especially old-fashioned 
or elderly ones, wrapped aboat 
the head. The American ban- 
datuia Is Invariably made of 
yellow and red In cross stripes. 

Thii tern ie properly applied to the 
Ttcli yelkiv or red lilk handkcnJucf wiib 
diamood ^ocs left white by pnuon ap. 

The etymolocy may be (ilfaered £raa 
Shaluoctn'l Dictiooary, which fivct 
ant in which the 
placet, to prevent 
g the dye. " Sir 



cl«h ii tied in diffai 



«D or St. Lcmli. He will 
•nrf friendly, wonditfully 



HoTvcc Foglc ii about tt 

Ibe peenge a> Baron Bandanna (t'ajwfy 

/Wi>, it c ^t.y-Ang{»-Jmdijm Civuar^. 

Banded (popnlai), hnngiy; lite- 
rally, bonnd np. From the 
notion that to appease the pangs 
of hanger, one moat tighten his 
belt 

Bandero (American), vridow's 
weeda.— ilTcw York Slang Die- 



B. and 5- (common), toandy and 
" Add now, wife of mb 



, Google 



Bands (AtutMlkn oonTicta), bun- 
gar. lutiodiuMdIiitoAiutiallkbT 
tha cmiTtota tTMiqiortod tUtber. 
<y. the lini^iali thterM* u|ina- 
aiou iaadtd, meudug hungry. 



In the eadj d>7s of Hew 
Soatb Wmles, betoie Aiutn)l» 
b«g>n to produM tuMl and 
graiii for Itself, the colonj wu 
dependent for ita mpfdiea npoD 
Bi^tland JLUd the Cape of Good 
Hope, and the oolonista were 
■ereral titnei on rery short com- 
mona, and even on one occasion 
wore abaolutelj in danger of 
pwiahlng. ThephnseiideriTed 
from the cDstom among the poor, 
and soldien on an expedition, of 
wearing a tight belt round the 
sUmiaoh to prevent the ptina of 



In thlerct' sliag it means a 
sixpence, so oaQed tma this 
coin being sometimea bent. 

Banc (pngHlstio and low), a blow ; 
loalandlo bang, a hammering. 
"Ill give 7on a bang in the 
'gills.'" To iov, to beat. 



XMtaaei ■ dnf divuw. 
Ai huhiih ill 111 il, la lu^ ponn 
Cu Iv u 1b BIrwu bomn, 
Bui mMir br ov KcUl boon 

Onr m lliik of urine. 

&«0«{ up to the eyes, la drank 
Hair worn down low on the 
forehead almost to the eyea, is 
in America oaQed a bang, and 
the praotioe of tbna wearing it 
is lo bang. Called "t<^«" In 



lo*, U derind from ibt proriDcul Binliiti 
Id Norfslk [he gdcs c4' ■ hat u aid to 
itmtt, (Wriiht) when it dnpa or tmmg, 
down sm the eya. Asd com or yttaig 
ihuoti when balen hj the nin aad heog- 
lot dom, an ImmgUJ or tmtimL So 
kioeeaadliaiisJDieuien "banned tan. " 
^KtUi irC.G. Ltlmid. 



Bandy (Ane^o-Indian), a word of 
general application to several 
Unda of Tehlolea, snob as 
oanlages, bollock waggons, bog- 
glee, and carta. Used in Sonth- 
eni and Western Intlia. It is 
the Telega haiKd\, Tamil mn^t.— 
Jnglo-Indittn Qlcuarg. 



Mtwttir t/Crinul Mrtmtaa, iliS. 



tack. Tlie ptecoi ■ repealed oalil ih* 
whole [rant hidr hai been ncceiilBllT 
hamctd.—Ilbatrmttd LtnAtm Nmt. 

(Stock Exchange), to bm^, to 
londly offer stock with the in- 
tention of lowering the prioe. 

Oh 1 In the dayi of oU, 
We ontf heard of "paff,''aBd "rig," and 



, Google 



Bang — Bang-up. 



—AIMt! HrmSenift. 
To lanfig mlso «lgiJfle» to «xoel 

thumioEi^. 



Banc off (oonmkon), to write K 
letter iati|7 ^, In a bniTT'. 



a prorlndaUam for the 




(Fopolu), an obriona nntnith. 



B«a^ (Anglo - Indian]. This 
word, now ganerallj used In 
England, ia from the Hindn 
bm^ri. The original is applied 
to a bracelet of oolonrod glass, 
but it la now extended to all 
kinds of looh ornaments for the 
wrist when in ring-forni or of 
one piece of metal. 
HcKT tbtir wriKi %a& anklit jangki 
With muT > bnn ud nlTa *«v<^ .- 



tl(d»u 



arooch . . . ; and IwrEn*^ 

■ra called Ati^iet, 107 
dar, b]F tbt luiiJHi *)d<canicd ihc ikam 
leand ha bu old hud*. — Tiactert/i! 

It la cnriODB that the Hindu 
word bangri exists In Bug- 
land ae the gTpaj term for u 
waistcoat, j.c, originally a mere 
ring, belt, or circlet of oloth, 



/fKt>>'i : Ttm Brrmu mt O-^fird. 

Baag^-np (common), flne^ flnt>inte. 
STrMtnymooa with " sb^hnp." 
To bang-^, to make Orat-rvte, 
stylish. 

Pu to hk Hc^^loth |an u air 
In Mjlt. ud t U miUlain ; 
Hh packet, Iw, a kcnzhicf ban, 
Wilh woaoni w]i» ipriiiUKl a'er; 
Thu tamfd^, i n LuMu' d, ud dtu 




r« thoroughly imig'^ ukI 
la roUkbuig than tba run whkb 
1m Enrgtten had las Tbaniij.—Ptmtk, 

A bang-up COte la a daahing 
fellow who spends his money 



:v Google 



Bang-up — Banter. 



freelj. Baitlett girm ionff-tiji 
U Amarlcan, but it bM long 
baan oommon in Sngjand, where 
It origlomted. "Buga Bwag- 
ber." bokts the world. 

Baag iq> to tiw mark (popoUr), 
in Sne or ■i»«Miig itjle. 



Tolgai; brawn logkr. Fn>- 
batdjr from Ungi/, dnU, kIoobt. 
HI kdjeetlve tued in Bhsz. 



i (Anglo-Indlu), ■ 
■Ricr of paroida. 

■I, and the *^ i ^g mm ll mJ u , u Ihtr an 
•l,Kte any tb* boHi,hH] as air 
itta.—MariiLimt<t: FaOmtr I41U. 



■o traqnHitiT naed on Snndi^ 
jaunt* \rj eztran^aot tndaa- 



Bank nank (Amerioan), "laai 
«>uai thlerea," men «f ednoa- 
tion, good addreu, and faoU- 
l«aa attire, who in ganga of 
three or four engage the atten* 
tion of the officer* of a bank 
while one of their nnmber com- 
mit* a robbery. No thlana 
are ao daogerotu, or so mooh 
dnadad. 



(American), newiboy*' 
alaog. The word la e]q>lalned 
in the following extract from 
the Chitago Tnlmiu:^ 
" Oh, I HT, FlfiT," arM oot, " ib/i T* 



BaqfOt tba name given b; the 
parianta in one at leaat of the 
London hoapltala to a bed-pan, 
bom Ita aomewhat fandfnl re- 
isnblanoe to the well-known 
■ad now faahlonable mnalcal 



" Eadn'i,' OEplabMd Ibt Baling "an 
tha mcala wluch tb*r (U domhtowii. 
BaHMtn an iba ftn which Hnf pay In 
Ihcir meali and lodcinfi u Ihc boa*. 
Thai mrd u to nie all OKt ihg Uutad 
Slaua. and I han dckt Ibiind a iwvibDT 



Bank, to (tWovo*'), to pnt in a Banter, to (American). ThepreU. 
plaoe of aafetr. " To iaai the ""i"^ diaonwion or jww^par- 
•wag," to awmra the booty. ^ *">'<"' P~o«dea a barg^ 
AIM, (0 hamk ia to go aliarea.— '■ ^"^^^^ » *■»'» *" fcuitertay. 

hm^ It ia derlted from hatittr, to 

make a jeat of or to ohaUenge. 

Cbathah, N.C. Not. 15, itS£.— A 
ihoea. white man nuwd Uoerc wai Knl to lb* 

chaln-fantf OD Satuniar for haWns traded 

B«knn* «rt (old). » on^horj. S^"^"^,^ J^ i"^, 
ofaaiae; >o called. It la aaid, ,rt,, ««t.B« d«id «« b. p.-«l, h. » 
by Lord Manafldd, from being pUad ihai ht did om know bii act m a 



(old), olnnuy boota and 



:v Google 



Banting — Bar. 




_, the process of gtittlng 
rid of inperfluotu fftt b7 tuMoa 
of > ■triotl7 regulated diet. 
The method m* Introdnoed bj 
Hr. Banting — henoe the name 
— aboat twentj-flTs jcan ago. 



Ban^ (popolar), nraoy, Impndenl. 
Probabl7 from hantam or ioaly- 
ohlokeu, which are proverbial 
in Ameiiaa for pBrttiess. — Ntw 
Yirrk aiang DictHmarf. 

Baoyui (Anglo-IndiaD), an under- 
shirt, originally of muslin, and 
•ooaUed as tMemblingthe body 
gannent of the Hindus, bat now 
commonly applied to onder body 
clothing ot elaaUc ootton, wool- 
Icn, or Bilk web. — Ji^lo-/iidta» 

Tluaa win lb* dajt «>iu rra the 
b«n of tbfl Conndl nd 



in C*ailU, Fttmstji n 



I have kjtt Dotluiig by it bat it bmtjmt 
•hiK, m comer of mj quill, tiA aj Bibia 
•iii(«L— if lUfrriivi t/'m Dwtdt Sailrr. 

Btnjao daja (naatical], those in 
vhjob no flesh meat w*s ismed 
to tbs messes. 8tock<fish nssd 



u tlw7 laB itwB.— Oi^vM^ A.I1. itgo. 



^, lad ■ nckly imnn (or TOO, hna iht 
buiiia t— Jtfan^ : Jttfliit it Smrdi 
ffaFatiir. 

According to Admlnl Smyth, 
" Tho teim ts darired from a 
religions sect In the East, who, 
beliering in metempsyobosis, tmt 
of no orcaton endowed with 
life." Hotten says the term Is 
probably derived from the Ba- 
nians orBsayana, a Hindoo caster 
who abstain from animal food. 
Quite as probably from the sani- 
tary arrangements whloh hate 
in hot climates counselled the 
eating on oeitaln days ot ban- 
yans and other fruits In pre- 
ference to meat. 

Tb* lUiiDcr. I own, b (hy, onkn I cDa 
■nd diDcwitb my friends, uvltbco I mtik* 



Bar (racing), except. Bar is used 
instead of the common oom- 
ponnd form debar. Wben the 
bookmaker says " ten to one 
bar one," he means that fae will 
lay ten to one against any boiae 
bar (Ce., except) one. 
"How do ibly bclT" inquiicd tba 

Jiibil.1 Ptniigcr. 
" Btcu," npliad Ciu Jicobi. 
"AUriclu. lllbMynaaBaeluy." 



t I'D lay yoB TOO to 4EP *■ 



:v Google 



Baf — Bar^. 



ing phnw in the montlw ot tbs 
oommon p«opIe About the JMI 
1760, ilgiilfTliiK thdi ^tfnotw* 
tion ot anj ■etioD, meaaara, or 

Buber'a cat (oonunou). Hotten 
givM tbs definition — • balf- 
■tarvad, liokly-lookiiig penoo. 
A tsnn uMd In oonneoUon with 



(Ameiioan thloTM), "Aarthat 
tow," itop that game. 

" Bar thu u^ Pin," Miid B(U, " for 
jBa'n u 17 u the jiecatm w tlM dnil 
■t Iriat, ud I waald nilHr b* k kaisbt 
oT Akuik ihu B ptncbd pit«iii.''-^>K 

(Oztoid UniTenltT), lo ior, to 
objMit to. Fnfaably from ts bar, 
In the Mnaa ot to azoept ; 00m- 

rlnth.«»,[«niidl«m Butar'. dok |oo«mo.|, . cm- 

celtad, orer-dnsiad fellow, who 
apei the mannen of a gentle- 

Barbtj (pidgin), babble, noiM. 
Fiobablj the aame aa bobbei7 
or bobbelj. " Too niiiobee tar- 
tly makse that chilo." 

Bared (popular), ihaTed. 

Thm u* beyi who think ibeBtidw 

__ ^ men, unci who fo to Ixrbcci' ibofM lo be, 

Bancan tailor (tatlon), a rough „ tt^ wij, tmrwi-Dtfrm, : iMm m 



would probably n,j that ho bar- 
nd "the Union." An "Exeter" 
man wonld be pretty certidn to 
ny that ha banvd " Jesoi." 

Bar (grVT)- ■ badge, a garden or 
inolaaim; a pound for oattle. 
Fatdau, M^ Aleo a atone 1 ta«ik> 
bar, a tne or teal atone, %.«., a 



Barber, to (oniTeial^), to do 
one'* impodtlona by deputy, 
the o«dlege barber having often 
been employed to perform this 
dn^ — hoioe the phraaa. Those 
who by thia meau get rid of 
their Impodtloiw are eald to 
K them. 



iartiriit {01 joa, Gic-JunpiT'— C. BiJt: 
ftr^mmlGnm. 

Batter, Uial'a the (old ibuig). 
Oroee In bla ran first edition of 
the "daaaloal Dictionary of 
the Tttlgar Tcagne," nys thi« 



Bare-footed on top of the head 
(American), an expteedon ap- 
plied to a bald man. 

Barge (printera), an aitlcia nMd 
by oompoeitora in coiTeotiug 
the forma. Either a flat piece 
of oard, or a amaU wooden box, 
with divisions to hold apecea for 
altering the joatiflcotion of the 
line. A case, with some boiea 
foU and othen nearly empty, la 
also called a bargt, probably re- 
ferring to those boxes toll np to 
the edge. The teohnkal term 
would be apace p^en ac apaoe 
boi. 



:v Google 



Barge — Barking. 



(Couuqod), bargt or hargtji, b 
term of ridionle applied to a 
\eTj. corpnlent man oi woman 
of U^e posterior derelopmeDt ; 
a simile derived from the shape 
at a. coal barge, or anj clnmsj 
boat or ship, compared with a 
whenj, or other vessel of mor« 
elegant and slender build. 

Biria, bawrii, faami (gn«J)> « 
sDsil; iniprM tumun, BDail aonp. 

Buk (popular), an Irish man or 
woman. Eotten safs that no 
etymoliig; can be found for this. 
In low Wbitecbapel Yiddish 
the term would at once be 
understood to mean a wanderer 
or vagabond, based on barkUit, 
or bargdU, one who goes about 
in misery and poverty, and 
barditt, " fartheT," as lartha 
AdfcAcn, " to go further." It is, 
however, probably derived from 
the Celtic banitg, acom, or dirty 
scum. Scum, as an Bbnsive 
term, " aoum of the earth,'* 
is originally Irish, vidt Barx- 
SKIBE. (Common), the sUn, to 
" fcori one's shins " Is to get the 
skin oS one's shins. 

Thull uke tht Ur* lioin yonr noizle, 
«nd diilil the Dutch pink for 
\0—Tla Furtlur A Jvtnium « 



to entioe people indde. The 
French slang has the exactly 
corresponding term oAeymr. 
Among touting photographen be 
iscalleda "doorsman." Atuni- 
versitles a barlctr signifies a great 
swell, and In Americ* a noisy 
ooward ; barktr bas another sig- 
niScation explained by the fol- 
lowing quotation : — 

Bnlwhilwu "biuUiig*'T I thMghr m 
hit > Aintn- wu n boy thu attendeii ■ 



Also used by thieves for pis- 
toL The terra is in contradic- 
tion to the saying, that a " dog 
that barks seldom bites." 

Hen K loud htdlsa wuhurddou by the 
hoTMi' heads. " Good heAvcm. if thai b 
a footpedl" uid Mr. Spencer, ihaltint 
violent]/. " Lord, &r, [ have tay imriirrj 



-IToby 



In nantical parlance, hwktn is 
an old term for lower.deck guns 
and pistole. 

Barkey (nanttoal), a sailor thns 
calls a pet ship to which he 
belongs. 

For the imrttj the did know. 



Barker (common), a man em- 
ployed at the doors of shows 
and shops of an inferior class 



-OUAmtrka Slaatr't Stng. 



Barking irona (thieves), ^stols; 
and in nautical slang latga 



:v Google 



Barkshire — Barney. 



dudling [dstota, which Freuoh 
aohliflTS <akll " piedi de ooehon." 

TWltillilili. A word appllftd by the 
low SngUah to Ireland ; from 
tanb, K oontemptaoot and ded- 
■tve BMiM for an Irlabman ot 
Iiiabwoman. A member foi 
BttrtAirt It a noisy, howling, 
tzoobleeome fellow, who ti- 
iMnpte to cough down hii op- 
ponent*, Cc, iart at them. 

Baik op the inong tree, to 
(American), is Mid of a roan 
who Tainly andeaToon to no- 
oom^ish a thing for which ha 
la not fitted, or who addressea 
hinueU to the wrong penon for 



an initmment oonriiting of two 
bianohea joined at one end witb 
a hinge, to pnt npoo a hone'l 
noea, to confine him for shoe* 
Ing, bleeding, or dieaalng. 



—EilwanU: Dmrnt 



^FUUt. 



Bamdoof practice (aoolet;), tba 
bflhicnable but indefeoaible 
gyitem of battue, by which the 
birds are brought all within a 
limited laage, where the^ tall 
an eaaj prej to the "iporta- 



"Yoa didat rollr go M eU BoDiaa,' 
lid ■ pnliiidui to u office H t k n ; " wh;, 
B hu w iiduHm [ben, I cu tall ran ; 

HDdi ud TOO dacm to bil.— Xiici- 



.paraaby 

Bantabf la to move qaicklT 
and Inegnlaily, See Ootton Id 
hie "Virgil TiaTMUe," where, 
■peaUng of Eolna, he has thaae 



'Ard liao, iiin'i it, Cturlu, old lu]M*rI 
A ttnuy^t ■ ifsrairf , dotf bo7, 

Aod rcpu know Uut k tqaeegt imd ■ iky- 
tork it «M 1 did liwar* kdJot. 

A itrcet-msh li lomcthUik qjLcDdaciova 
to Mien of ipeorit liko bh, 

Bm diDU tai dukk^un liaiaa: wSl 



((dd cant), pickpocket 

thalitoad bwUilwaUold 
, tba BKiKl Botoriou KUar, 
sd IsiM in tho d».—Mmrt 



Buaactes (oommon), spectacle* ; 
tanned alio "gig-Uunpa" or 
"boaaca." fiomi(iniad(,aUnd 
of shdiaah, or from bonudM, 



Thia word haa tereral mean- 
ing*, and j^iparently two dia> 
tinot root* — one Aryan, and the 
other Semitic. Sarntf, a mob 
or crowd, may be derived bom 
the gTpay biro, great or many, 
which eometimea take* the form 
of bomo or ionw, and whioh 
■n^eate the Hlodn ioAnia, to 
increaie, proceed, to gain, Ao., 



:v Google 



Barney — Bamu m. 



•nd Monw, to fill or utUfj. 
Sanuf, ». iwindla, k Mil, or 
* oiDU, is probabi; from 
the Yiddish iomiH or barmu, 
which beoomea a Jawith propet 
■ULme in Bunet, popnlulf Bar- 
<Kjr. (Dtckcns gives this name 
toayomigJeir.) Barninmt»ta 
a leader of a moltitnde, or head- 
man of any description. Remote 
as the connection between a 
" swindle " and a " captain " 
may seem to be, it is direct 
enough according to the lowest 
form of Yiddish or German 
thieves' slang, in which a lead- 
ing, a clever, a swindling man 
ore all ouited in eaehtmcr, " a 
wiBeman,"andalso "aleaderot 
tliieve& " In aekpre$ck we have 
again the conceptions of intelli- 
genoe united to lobberj. and to 
leadership. Further, baUaier, a 
director, a leader, is applied to 
an aroh-thief who gats donble 
share. BalmoMttaalen has also 
the doable meaning of a shrewd 
man of bosluesi and a swin- 
dler, and the transitioQ from a 
swindler to a swindle is natDral 
enoagfa, and has many parallels. 
It is to be observed that Hebrew 
terms of this stamp are far 
more trequentlj used by Chris- 
tian than bj Jewish malefactors, 
as is proi«d by their cormp- 
tion. From the bamiu, banttt, 
or ianteg of a gang of thieves, 
we bare barnq/iitg, robbing, or 
swindling, whence innuy, a 
swindle, is all in order. 

(Rating), tbe person wbo pre- 
vents a horse winning a race, is 
deaeiibed as " doing a bamty." 



{Riumlng), hnmbog, rnbUah ; 
In neii%, when a man does 
not try to win. 

(Sooietj), brip, ezoursion, out- 
ing. 

(Fopolar), fun, Isj-kii^; teas- 
ing for amosement. It is 
common to hear people of the 
lower class say, whenever tbore 
is any object In view to make fim 
of, or have a game with. " Let's 
have a barney." 



Bam monw (popnlar), to be Ulton 
by a bora novte, to be tipey. 
Possibly an allnsion to barley. 

Bam stonner (familiar), a term 
formerly applied to itinerant 
actors who acted in bams, Uke 
the troupe of Scamm's Roman 
Comiqne, and that of Oantto's 
C^taine SVacassct 

Bamnm {American.) "To talk 
Barnum" is not to Indolge 
in extravagant " hlgh-falntin," 
— this tbe great Amaican never 
does, — but to ntter vast asser- 
tions In a quiet manner. Tlie 
following is a good specimen 
of it. 



Riiini Phoini, 



Id eqtul putnenhip 
■ergtlic and cMpcrieiiCBd friend uid 
r UBOciUc, Jama A. BaHtj. Wi 
enlarged ud vutly jmpnmd the 



, Google 



Bamumise — Barrack. 



83 



, Al *o oHr due m iotaid u> 
v«n] al tbc Urjcn Ameri- 




!, to (Amoitcui), to act 
•a Hr. Bunnin, a ihowituiii, im- 
pre«aiio. Mid a pablio ohancter, 
In BO nuuj pbMM lunona, or 
notorions, thftt bis name has 
paraed into tha established list 
of Amotioauiama. The word 
hnmbog does not ezpreii ao 
tnooh as that of Baiiinm. 

Barnnin had made himflf 
u extremely coaapicuons in so 
man; ways even thirtj jeara 
ago, ttwt a Paris editor sag- 
gested that when hie engage- 
ment as manager for Jenny Lind 
shonld come to ao eod, she 
wonld make qntte as mnoh 
money if ahe would go abont 
exhibiting him. Long ago not 
a Bool In the United 8t«tes pnt 
the leaat &ith in Bamnm'a 
cnrioeitiee, bat this made no 
difterence in the receipts, people 
thronged in "jnst to tt how 
he hnmbngged the greenhoma." 
In one advertisement the great 
exhibitor admitted with tieaoti- 
fnl candour that what he exhi- 
bited might not be genuine, that 
he himself with all his experience 
might have been taken in by on- 



eerapnlons deoelTeiB — " all that 
we ask," he aaid, " Is that tha 
public wiU oome and jitdge foe 
themselves, and we promise 
faithfuUy to abide by their ver- 
dict." The pablio did come, 
paying twenty-five cents (or one 
ahUling) per he«d and passed 
their verdict, and Hr. Bamnm 
did abide by it (and the dollars), 
and at cmce got ont something 
new. At last nobody put any 
foltb in bia CQiioaltlea. Then It 
became a aooroe of intense do- 
light to him to exhibit objeota 
wtilcb were really lemailcable, 
and to make the pablio believe 
they were trands. Having one* 
a real bearded woman, Bamom 
ingenioiuly contrived to have it 
reported that ahe was a man, 
and to get himself proseonted 
for impoaition, the result being 
a medical exanunation, an ac- 
quittal, and of conrae an In- 
creased msh of sight-Beers. It 
shonld be added that Hr. Bar- 
nom baa ^waya been noted for 
very great though always jndi- 
ciooa generosity, that he Is 
exceptionally honourable and 
honest in hla private dealings, 
and that he has ballt op Bridge- 
port, Connecticut, from a small 
town to a city. Bammn's oolos- 
■kl show was destroyed by fire 
a short time since. 

Banvck back (army), a girl who 
prowls about barracks for pur- 
poses of proatitation, generally 
the lowest of the low. French 
soldiers call these " paillasse do 
corpB-de-garde." Bamti-lMiek 



:v Google 



Barrack — Barvelo. 



Is alto q)[dl«d to Tonng ladia* 
of perfeotlj Tiituoiu chmcter, 
bat who hkTe bean to ganrlfoo 
or iniUtM7 balli tta leTenl 
7eua. The teim wu freely 



BuncUnf {AtutraUan), butei- 
ing. Vwibiblj bom Uie «i«»ig 
tttnn iorrfttfi, jargim, Bpeeoh, 
or diKxnrM, on moooimt of the 
"psUver" which tnden miut 
hold before the; can staike *, 



BamUii or buriUn (popnlar), 
jaigOQ, glbbertih; low, unin- 
telligible langiuge. 
Tin hi(1i wDTdi in s Ingcdr m callt 
Jlw-biuktn, ud m ay *■ can't cunibla 
to thu iMrrOU—Mtylitw : Ltmd^ Lar 



From the French h 
which has the i 
It ooonrs in Rabelais a 
poHi. " Chaeee your iatTitM," 
stop talktng, shnt ap. 

Barrel boarder (Amerloau), "a 
bnoket-shop bmomeT, a low 
■ot" (StM York Slang IHetun- 
atj), aiidently derived from 
dtting about on the barrels in 
a small shop 

Barrel ferer (oonunon), the slok- 
Dess caosed by IntozicatioD, 
sometimes called the bottle- 
aobe, the quart-mania, and the 
galloD- distemper, aH ponible 
pMOnnois of dtlirium trtmem. 



Bmtm (dd), gamblers' term. ^>. 
piled to money lost by them, 
bat whioh th^ do not pay. 
WlMnbr ther wrl dnm x bum* 
which tbcT call 






Banick (Ameiioaii), i 
word in Peonsylnida for a bill. 
From the German berg. 



BarTow-bnitter (costermongeis), 

female oostermonger. 

ItwaJutyJamin ItimltrlaibM^na, 
dcuinc hm doKj trmi with her on 
HbOt—SmtUill .- Hamflirtf Ctinktr. 

BatTow-tram (popular), a tenn 
applied joaolarly to a nw-boned, 
awkward-looking person. 

Barter (Winobsrter}, a h<Mtr Is 
a ball more generally called a 
"half volley" by crlcketere, 
from the name of R a Barter, 
a famous orioketer. It has also 
the signif cation of a hard hit. 
To iarfcr is to hit the ball hard 
at cricket. 

Barta, an abbreviation of 8t Bar- 
tholomew's Hospital, used by 
medical students and others. 

Barrelo (gypsy), rich, wealthy. 



:v Google 



Bash — Basktt. 



85 



&uh, to (popnlv), to strike, to 
ttmah, to cnuh ; to ioik hats ia 
M tkTODTit« uniueDaeut of Lon- 
dcnt tonglu in i, laige crowd. 
From ft pTOTinciBlism to bcftt 
frnit down from the tieM with 

Hs Mpa w ><»•■ thi haad with & CUM, 
■Dd my aotlber foH id and baiJut hui 
over thfl head vilh m poka, ukd (en hin 
bad for ■miiltliit >».— AnKi. 

(Pngillrtlo), k 6uA ia one of a 
*uie(7 of blows. 




(Old prorinoUI Engliah], to 
best, la Bodfordihire to best 
trait treM with A pole. Allied 
to badt, to beat; loelaodio 
Ufda, Swedish MXo, and halt, 
to beat. An Bngliah word of 
Danish DiigiiL 

In prisons to Uuk signifies to 
■farike, and eepeoiallT to flog. 
B mtkimt in, a flogglug at the 

tann of imprisonment ; AmUh; 
Mrf, one at the elooo. 



(Fopnlar},at(i 
or fsU. A word expresstre of 
sndden oononssioD, brealdng np, 
or tumbling. 
Tbi dull* won oih and I w«ol Au) 



Buher (pngilistio), prise fighter, 
BjrnonTmoiis with " bmiser." 

Rj^tiinj (prison), a flogging. 

Bating (gaming). "That'stamlg" 
whan elnba are tamed ap tmmps 
— the allnsloii as generally ez* 
platned being " that olnba were 
tmiapswben Awin; was taken." 
This was one of the most ma- 
morable of the sieges of the 
Civil War. 

Basket (old oant), nsed in the 
phrase "a kid In the 6a*ta," 
said of a woman in the family 
waj. (Tailots), stale news. 

Basket meeting (Amerioan). A 
ha}9 plonlo and lialf religions 

BaAet, to brins ta the (old), to 

fall into poTertj. 

Godbafiaiaedl I am not jrHKiU lit 
Iki tmttft, ihDotJi I had raibe II*e oa 
chariiT ihau impiua.— /kU<r Drnma: 
Gtmtltmn ImtnKtti 

Baiket, to go to die (old), to be 
imprisoned. 



:v Google 



Hs b aM vortli jranr pltjr, nc 



This is from the tact that a 
bMket «M lowered from the 
priaon window for alnis by a 
man, wh« callod ost, " Pity the 
poor prlsonera I " 

Bastard brig (nanl), a coaster, 
tenned alao a "tohooaj-orgj" 
or " bennapbrodlte brig.' 

Bastlle (thleree, psnpera, and 
trampa), the workhouse or " hlg 
house i " formerl; a prtaon. The 
word is now abbreviated Into 



aeanstbamn& 
n amr fnm tbt (hop wtd t-nj ban 
to CM np like ■ ic(<il« 
]i dw Laser and np with 
Wa an cC (or lb* dar 01 



Turk; 



Also a prottitate who only 

walks the etneta at night. 

Termed "hirondelle de nidt" 

In Fienoh slang. 

Van lie, y<» iat~t tmptt *i(h oe 
eon but or o^^- ^^"TT. ^^ Too In 
jnonaU be mule a two-Iiaad uul of bj 
■ ■■g-abwu f—0» Uu Trm'l, 

In the Sogliah slang, " on his 
own bat" has the slgniflcation 
of m his own aooount, by his 
own exertions, a oriokeUng 
phrase. Sat also means pace — 
to go off at a good iot. 



lates- Iknn (prtooD),the priaon; 


probably ^^ed mily to Cold 


BathFielda 


Now erCTT iMniiiw »tH Toa riaa 


Yo.t«a<«rTi«(».l, 


Aad if yoB doa'l aat all IlKT aaad 


Yon ban u -oA tha -had. 




Tach^ltohanpraTRi, 


AKiforalinleiwdine-ol 


Tlw snriauinc Nain. 


F»r i. w ibi. Uoomuw wonin. 


lldtOUBAta-iJkrim. 


ir«lB(tadiluibkaHlda7 


I-Tik^ OUSMtf-ifitml 



So C. B. y„ the initials of Cold 
Bath Fields stamped on aitlDles 
need in the prison, is interpreted 
Ouuiey Bates's Farm, and to be 
on the treadmill there i* feed- 
ing the chlokens on Charley 
Bates's Farm. A warder of that 
name is said to have been in 
cha^e there. 

Bath (general), " go to BaA " U 
so Qniversally used that it baa 
almost oeaaed to be slang. In- 
Tallds or insane persons need to 
be sent to Bath for the benefit 
of its mineral waters. So " go 
to Bclk" Utetally meant yon are 
mad, go to Bath to get ooied. 

Voatanad 



"Gota&tUr" aidtlnBaKn. Ada- 
Samx w ceDtHDptnOBt roucd tha itc at 
Um adTtna ecnnwiidtn.— /iv*Ut^ L*. 
grmi,. 

This town does not seem to 
have been In favour with the 
Earl of Rochester, who thus 
describes It : — 



:v Google 



T*)| tlwm— r-l pil^rf— . It 



SBtfa, which hu given ito 
name to tsiioiu things for which 
it w«a (iippoMd to b« tunoiu, 
u Salk hriok, Aitfc Iraiui, Bath 
chain, &o., baa, heaidea, pro- 
vided the Fnooh ugot with 
the adjeotlTe talk or bate, an 
•qnlvalentof J I, used In phissea 
anofa aa "o'eat bien boA," that 
la, exoellant, fliat-iilaaa, tip-top. 
" fitn de la iotc " afgnifiea to be 
tnokj, fistnnate. The origin 
of the axpresidon is as fcJlowa : 
— Towuda 1848 Bome Bathnote- 
|l^isr of mperior qnallty was 
hawked about in the Btreets of 
VvU aod sold at a low price. 
Thoa "papier bath" became 17- 
Donjinoafl with excellent paper. 
Id a short time the quBli^dng 
term alone remained, and re- 
oeired a gcnetsl application. — 
A. Barrin: Argot mud Slang. 

Badui (Anglo-Indian). "Two 
dUerent woida are thna ex- 
presaed la Anglo-Indian col- 
loqnlal, and in a manner 
<i.) HindD MOtd, 



offlcera, aoldien, or other 
pnbtio aervaota when in the 
field or on other ipedal occa- 
alona, alao anbalatence-monej 
to witawaea or priaoDenb (a.) 
Kndo iottB, agio or diflemnoa 
tn enhange, at disoonnt on 

imOIUTeBt OtiBM."—Aiigla-t»dian 



Pathing tn*#'ti<ti^ (nautical)) 
old lo-gnn briga are ao named. 

Bat mng^vr (Wluobeater), an in< 
atmment for oiling bata. 

Bnta (thierea* slang), old shoes or 
boots. In Somersetahlre, low- 
laoed boots. From pat, M 
gTpej for foot or shoe. 

Battel! (nnlTerattj). a student's 
aoconnt at the college Utaben. 
Bometimee also it la nsed for 
tlie goods supplied. 

Buttery and kitchcQ cooki wen adduB 
up the SUB total ; bonan wen pnpaiinc 
(or itltU.—C. Bt4t ! VtrJml Grttn. 
It is an old word, originally 
meaning an aooonnt. In the 
(?«*tlnu>n'« Magannt, Aognst 
187a, it U said to be derived 
fromteuAZM, "top^." Wright 
giTBB the derivation old Ei^liah 
bat, iucieaae, and Anglo-Saxon 
Ari, deal, portion. Another origin 
la that given by Dr. Stewer, 
baOau, from the verb to £at(«K,to 
feed. AMea ia naed by Shak- 
speate in Coriolanos, and also 
in Hamlet, where the ^Inoa 
addienee his mother, and aaka 
her to compare his father's por- 
trait with that of her aecond 
hosband, whom she married so 
aoon after the fnneral of the 
first aa to scandalise all Den- 




:v Google 



Battels — Baulk. 



(Oxford DnlTuritj), lo batul, to 
be Indebted to the bnttcny for 
prorlsloDa &nd diiuk, to ran ui 
woonnt for food, ka., with the 
college ai oppoaed to boarding 
in » ptirato honse. In De Qain- 
ce7*8 " Life and Ilemoin," p. 
374, there ia an allniion to tlila 
practice—" Haa? men battd at 
the rate of a goinea a week and 



BattHn'-iochcs (bird fanden), 
explained bf the foUowlng qno- 




and more carelen 
batteUtd mDoh higher;" also to 
reside or keep tenna at the 
nnlTBTsltj. It has been ang- 
geeted that the word ia deriTed 
from an old monkiib word, 
paUlU or AottUo, a plate. 

Batter (popnlai), wear and tear. 
"Can't atand the batUr," %.t., 
not eqoal to the ta«k ; " on the 
haUtr" on the streeta ap^dlea 
to proetltntee, termed in French 
argot "battrt le qnart" with 
thlaapeoial meaning ; alao, given 
np to debanoheiy. See Batit. 

Batten (printer*), a teoogniaed 
term ^filled to bad or broken 
letterv which are flnng into the 
" ttell box,** a receptacle to hold 
these diMarded t;pea, which an 
melted down eTentoalij. 

ir 7011 pJosv, nr, . . ' (be dvnl hju 
ban paniiii Un muiir iatn ball ia 
at SmiUn.—Amuriemm Vrmt^9f€r, 

BattifV l>i> Tca (American), a 
gambler's term for men who 
look on but do not pla7. 

Btftle of the Hue (rhTmlag ilang), 



Battiings (pnblio sohoola), weekl; 
allowance given oat to bo7i on 
Saturdays. 

m of a Butnini; u dktnbau maongit ia 
oar tatltaip <M poc k «™oney. — Z Wr t wr i 
HtrntiiU WtrJ,, nO. L p. iBS. 

Baitner (old), an ox. " The cove 
has hashed the iattaer,*' the 
bntoher hai killed the 01 ; from 
boftot, to fatten. According to 
Bkeat, of Scandinarian origin, 
from the same root aa " better." 

Battf (workmoi), wages, par* 
qoisitea. Derived from toMa, 
an extra paj given to Boldien 
while serving in India.— AoMca't 

Bat^*faiiff (pcovinoialism), to 
thnah 1 baUjf'ftaig at batUr-foKf, 
blow; ialt)r./as;>qp, a thralling. 
The Puitor lay* on loRr/^V 
Wbitcbud ibc FuMrtetter^v^ 

Banlk (Winchester), a hoax, a 
false report. (Popnlar), wh«o 
street boys are playing at pttob 
and toss, the cry may be heard 



:v Google 



Baom, to (UniT., Anwricui), t« 
Cnra, to flatter, to 011117 faroiiT. 

Uto, WtdI (gTpay), *lr, breftth, 
brerae, wind. "O ahlUo idvel 
pad«rl> 'drd 70 beT70r" — "The 
cold wind la blowing through 
the holM." B^Mi ia ■ometimea 
uMd tor diut. 

Bftwbella (old lOAiig), thet«atlDlea, 
A corraplioii of babbit, • pro- 
ficdAUini dgiii^'iiig gtonee and 



tor s duudng-glrl, li otil7 m 
Frenoh form of the FottogneM 
tailaiartt, from baiinr, to dance. 



B (old alang), wo- 
men who sold pins, kc, to ser- 
Tant girU, or exchanged these 
articles for eatablea, and occa- 
■iouallj stole linen off hedges. 
Also applied to the itinennt 
Tendon of obscene and ribald 
liteiatore, and to a prostitute. 



BMrimrder (Anglo-Indian), from 
the Hindn ialorfAr, a hero, a 
champion. A word applied in 
Anglo- Indian to an; great swell 
or soldier. It is a title of honour 
for braver;, whloh is found in 
one form or another all over the 



Then il iMbiBC of the grot Mtamitr 
About hiBL^^Mni^Miiv, Nok 94(70, p. tjt: 
Augii-lmiUmii GImmtj. 

Ba;«den. This word, though 
genenllj eopposed to be Hiodn 



Baymrd of ten toe*, to ride 
(oid Blangh The old equivalent 
of "Shanks' mare" (German 
jSotiufer* Aipfwn, oobbleE'a black 
horses), u., to go on foot, In 
the old romances Sagard was a 
Delsbrated horse. 

B«T- window (American), preg- 
nancy, with a big bell;. New 
Tork Slang Dictionary: "She 
has a baic-Kindoie to her toy- 
shop." The French aigot ex- 
presses the same by the phrase, 
" Bile a nn polichinelle dans le 
tiroir," the tiroir being in tiiU 
phrase a " toy-shopk" 

B.C. has become the atereotyped 
exponent of a ridicoloos charge 
of libel. A genteel yonog 
woman complained to Ur, Ing- 
ham ot having been abused by 
» person who oalled her a B.O. 
The magistrate asked what 
B.C. meant, when he was told 
that C. meant "cat," bat £. 
was too shocking to be uttered 
aloud. She consented, however, 
to whisper the nai^ht; word in 
his worship's ear. Ur. Ingham 
heard the mysterious " libel," 
and though be could not grant 
the sommons, S.C. has acquired 
the signiflcation given above.— 
J>r. Brtmtr: Didionary qfPhrati 
ondFaiU. 



:v Google 



B.C. — Beam enth. 



(BMsing), the Beacon Coqim, 
the fnU length (tour tnfle*, one 
fnrlong, one hundred and fortj- 
three ykrdi) of the ladng tnck 
at Newm&rket. 

Beach cadcera (old), Idle nga- 
bmda dieMBd at Milors, who 
prowl ahont the beaeh at water- 
Ing-plaoee and obtain money 
on false [astenoee frompenona 
fregnenting that part- 
Beachcomber (Ukntloal), a f dlow 
who loaf* about a port to Oloh 
■mall thinge. One who {^owla 
about the eea-ahmv 4o plunder 
wieoka OC pick op waifa and 
AV* *^ *'T Und. Id the 
Faotflo any hind of Mdlor ad- 
(Naotical), a rivBr 



b,nySulisi 



i-iaii-tflBl ... Mytjn 
. WllT. * fc-*'' ■ "^^ 

tna vna yx, mlk by a btm 
\ not itjufhtrorerd, bot ■!«■ 

R Dltktm: OUvtr Tmitf. 



Tim «u u old oteinaM Jmi 
(Who <in«ituBaa pliTBd ■ <iii«r frak), 
SiM, " T*k( ba inr— 

Aod mnld M> IM bv dlief w iau i 



(nantical), eoaat- 

Beadle (freemasona), an officer 
anawering to Junior wardcm in 
a oonuoll of Knlghta of the 
Holj Bepnlcbre. 

Beak, orlginall; tbieTes' cant 
(beck), for policeman, magiatnte, 
bnt now it baa on^ the latter 
■Ignlflcatlon. 



Borne etTmologiats derive teat 
from the Saioo beag, a gdd 
oollai worn b; ciTic magi«tist«a 
as an emblem of authority. It 
aeema, howerer, that "beck," a 
constable, was from a metafdm' 
baaed on the Ilteial meaning of 
the word htak or MI, and the 
dronmitanoe that a detective 
la nowadajra termed a " noae" 
cornea in support of thia anp- 
podtion. It may also be de- 
rived from " to beckon," to Inti- 
mate a command, the "move 
on " of the modem constable. 
To acconnt for the meaning 
of magistrate, it maj be ndd 
that the transition was easy 
from the humble gnatdlau of 
the law to the more exalted 
one. Thoa French malefaotcca 
gave both poUceroan and magis- 
trate the conunon appdlation of 



Beaker bmiter or beak hnster 
(thieves' alang), a tbief who de- 
votee hia attentlixi to the poultry 



Beam enda (gmeral), a naotioal 
metaphor. A person entirely at 
a loss, who is "all abroad," la 



:v Google 



Beam ends — Beans. 



9» 



Ht knilMd iIh Ida dowD ODDplmel]r ; 
■Dd Tota BtiHidoiuri it, vu thmvn «pan 

tioa.— CAarAf AWmi.' MmtHa Ckaatll- 



The BYeaoli wonld ezprew » 
•tate ot embumBtmeDt b7 "II 
est en boat de son latin," or " 11 
IM nit snr qnel pted daiwer," 

The phrase also means to be 
Id great need, when the " bsl- 
laet" (mone;)— to oontlnee the 
naati(»I metaphv — ii gone. 

WhH ■ feUoir B < 



altti^ poetnre. 

VoD (M CB MDHDiofly, fif-lunp^ and 
bawk'l bvoL an tout ttMHt-intdi man Uuut 



Bf n This wcrdoconte In several 
ooUoqnial pbiases, such as "three 
Une iwni in a blue bladder," 
and refers to a nrttle-head, a 
tooUdi Mlow. 

Tliat pottniK nil hit wordi lotctkEr, 
111 llin bhu jtmm in t bloc bladder, 
—PHrr: Alma CmU. 

The phraae is evident!; bom a 
jefter's bladder with bam* or 
peaa in It. It must be Doted, 
as a coincidenc«, that the Idea 
of a UmdiUr waa ni^)enn0Bt in 
the mhida of tboee who coined 
the Frertoh word JU, fool, jea> 



ter, from the low Latin yUli*, 
bellows or bladder. 

"Hot worth a btan," or "the 
black of a ieon," oorreaponds 
to the lAtin M UltHa (Uterallr 
" not the black of a ica»"), 
oontiacted Into Ht'JUI. There is a 
Dutch proverb, " Bver; Itati has 
Its black," (.0., " Bvfoy man has 
bis faolts," wbloh gives toroe to 
the English expression. 

(American slang), a istm is 
specially a five-dollar gold piece, 
and "iMm-trape" Is sTnonj- 
mons with stylish sharpns. 

Formeffly inm meaat a gainea. 
This is possibly from the French 
Msn, used in old canting amongr 
other meanings fot propMtj or 

" Couldn't yon let him pllu IT I ma* 
dawn with > thimbte ud Ecn^uvrf 
Tbc dMKlin ilHok hi 



Bean feast (t^ors), a good feast, 
also an annual ezcarsion ot 

workpeople. 

Beano (printen). See 'Qocsi. 
Abbreviation ol word "bean- 
feast," mostly used by maohlne- 
printeiB. Compositars generally 
employ the term " 'goose" or 
"wayigoose" for this festive 



Beam, be don't know (Ameri- 
can). The natives of New Eng- 
land, bnt espeofally of Boston, 
are celebrated for culture or In- 
telligence of the highest order, 
and also for an extraordlnaiT 
fcndneas tor beans baked In a 



:v Google 



92 Beatts- 

pot with pwk— of whioh Foller, 
the SbakBpe&TD of dlTines, nid 
that " it wu • good diih whicli 
Ibtt F^thagonMis and Jewi had 
OontriTed between them to 
■poll" The remit of til thia 
haa lieen a aajliig for kqj igno- 
rant person that he don't Jtnow 
(earn, «.£., " he ii an ignonunos, 
or Q«ntil»— he la not a Boa- 
tonian, he is not fond of bewu, 
rrpo, an ontaide baibatian." 
Otheia derixe It from the old 
joke, " How maitj blaok beana 
make Are white onea T " to 
whioh the anawer ia, " FUe, if 
yon peel them." He who knew 
how to answer this qneation 
waa anppoaed lo tiUM bmu. In 
the following extract from the 
Bvtion Olobt, in which an eSort 
U made to select from the local 
direotory names which indicate 
aitlolea of food, it Is worth ob- 
aerrlng that the Srst name 
thought of ia, of oonrse, Btan, 
although the list ia not in alpha- 
betical order : — 

"Tki Hull Hatpt Fahilt.— AccbkI- 
faif to the dtydinctoty, then in plenty of 
SMmm b Boenn, one Ee(«, d^ht Ptaa. ■ 
-"■">■** of OdIocu^ and ooe Cnunb. Be- 
tiiitt tbeie then an three Bate*, *!» S^t 
uid Jelljr. Seven Been ue fcKuxl, and 
Coffee, Milk, and Teu. There ii ona 
Cfaldun lo Ihni CnUnci ukI ■ Hawk. 



Sock, ana OnTatt. ■ pair of HUtani, and 
fooiCollan. Three HatI* and o« mgf 

coeiplete (he eatfit.' 

The writer for the OUAc forgot 
to look ont for BaooD to go 
with hla Beaut. It was, we be- 
Uere, a Beaton Baoon, " fore- 
nained" Delia, who flnt denied 



to Sbakipear* the antborahip of 
hisplajs. 

(8ooiet7),toba"fiiIlofienH," 
means to be in good form. The 
met^ihor ta borrowed from a 
hone bring aald to be fnll of 
btana when be Is fresh and 
frisJiT. To be iiMy, is to be in 
a good humoor, like a hana 
who haa bad a good feed. 
(Common), to "gi™ (mm," 
means to gin a good beating. 



The term heant is alao naed for 
none; ; a " haddock of hami," 
a purse of monej. 

Bear (Stock Biohauge), a [all, « 
a apacnlator for a fall ; a man 
whosells stock whioh hedoesnot 
possess in the Iiope of being paid 
not to have It delivered. His 
confrere the "bull" specnlatea 

while tbe "stag" operates on 
shares of new companies whioh 
he applies for with the Inten- 
tion of selling at once at a pra> 
miom. The oommonlyaooepted 
and very old ezpUnatlon of tbeae 
words is that the isors olaw 
or pnll the stock down, while 
the bolls toes tt np. The 
" stag " ia the repnsentative 
of the timid speculator, trust- 
ing more to his Beetness of 
foot than to the balanoe at his 
banker's when the ezpeoted 
premium is "nil," and he ia 



:v Google 



Bear — Bear-leader. 



eaOed npon to paj the allot- 

Now u tbt Ban had mil awBT, 
Uoabla b- tba ihus to pajr. 
TwH dar, M hs'd BO cadi to 
Tbs Sue dial ccnkla't ^)r lb 
So wbcs tbc Avmot ror hii 
Tba Sue had tsn to Boulo|i 



"to lend a hand; " (popnlu), 
to Jdn In ohom with pcnona 



WltEn IhBj woofbt ovi lb* biota'* aboda, 
Feond thai tba Aiv, or him Ibsr call M, 
Had col and nin to BooLofnc alio- 

Cnrrent exprea^ona In the 
" HoQH " m : to Dpeiate for 
* 5wr; to nalite » pcoSUtble 
itmr. To i«ar the market ii 
luli^ ereiy eBort to depreu the 
price of atook iDordsr to bnyit. 




—A aim .- /f«w# Sera^. 



ammil i>dc*dapii« itMK-7>>M, April 
i«,il81. 

When (peoalaton beoome de- 
fanlten— to whateTei categoi? 
of the nnipi»i trlnlt; mentioned 
abore the; nu^ belong — the; 
are metamorphoaed into *' lame 
daoks," and " mddle out of the 
tU»j." 

" To bear a bob " (aaatioal), 
used Joonlaily by Jaok-tan for 



Beard splitter (old aUng),* nke; 
one of the " looae llah " aort 
who ia f ond of proatltotes. The 
allndon la obrlona. 

Bear«r-ap (thierea' olang), a 
MmKUng oheat, more getunallT 
called a " bonnet," a oommia- 
alon agent, bddder or aweetener 
at an aootlon ; a deooy-dnok 
at carda who ludneea atrangera 
to play with alutrpera by per- 
niaaloii or by seeing him win. 
From the legal teim "bearttt" 
in old law, one who bean down 
and oppreiana otheia by vexa* 
tiouily aasirting a thlid paity 
in *t>**lT>teiniT>g a ault again tt 



Be«r ficht (MKdety), a roogh 
and tomble In good part. The 
amoking or billlatd roonu at 
night in oonntry faooaee are 
the plaoee where bmt fyhl* fre- 
qneutly oooor, 

Be-arg;ered (oommom), drank. 
Probably tnaa the Oecman b«- 
dfycrt, irritated, reied, refarrlng 
to the "fifth itageof intozioa- 
tion, which ta one of wrath and 
fighting " IKBrte, SpriekMrler 
dtr Htuttelun). 

Bear-leader (oommon), the travel- 
ling oompaalon « 

yOOng gBltlBD 



, Google 



Bear Uader — Beaslly, 



and ka^ him from aril oonnei 
which he might Edl faito if 
iBft to himoell "Uolicked 
cab" waa and atjll U a ilang 
tuin tor an tindlBoipliued jooth, 
and wu no donbt the origia 
of btar a* applied to the same 
kind of person. When Dr. 
Jofanaon vldted Scotland and 
the Hebrides In hli old age, 
aooompanled b; James Boe- 
weli, who has left the world 
eo »twnid.ig an aooonnt of the 
prejudice* of hi* unoonth and 
ungainly hero against ererj- 
thing he saw in Scotland, it 
pleased the wits of Bdinborgh 
to call Boewell his Uar^tadtr. 
Henry Brtklne, to whom Boe- 
well had introduced the great 
man, sli^^md a fiiimtig into 
Boewell's hand, sayhig, "Take 
that, my good man ; it's for the 
eight of you tear / " 

Bean? mn yon ttiere with yoof 
(old), are yon there, or, at it 
againi Joe Miller say* the ez- 
preaiion originated In this way. 
A man disgusted with a. sermon 
on Elisha and the bears, went 
on the following Snnday to an- 
otiier chorch, where lu heard 
the sermon delivered onoe more 
by the same preaobor. Irate 
at being thus foiled, be cried 
Ont, "Art yeu tlitr* wUK yaur 
htant" The explanation is more 
quaint than convintdng. The 
pliraae seems to havo been very 
common in the seventeenth cen- 

Aiiotlwr, wtwD U ibc ndici awn he had 



Oh, qiulh tbeTi ben u ui tcaixat. may 
Hniliamu; w ftu tktn wilkyrmr 
tmnt Wt will qoil the enrdie of th« 
HaaH'i lifhi niha thu ihsuhotild te.— 
Siftr Strik ! Ejnmtm. 

Bear watchinf , to (American), a 
piuaae indjcMIng aospicion. 

Bur be k Bid BUS, but bell 



'• Na* Bm RjLbbil kDoiRcl he bet' look 
■baal rictai qjrr. tajt de cmUn ill bud 
der CTCt tkinl an' dey y^on open fs- hisi, 
caviB be bed Ktcta cn'y'oiu IceUi wsti 
vid him du Itt'i hmr wmttMM.'—Brtr 
RiMU. 

Beastly (common). Tliis word, 
which waa onoe need only in 
a very abusive sense, has, by 
dint of repetition, come Ulce 
awfully, or dieadfnl, or luwrid 
In Amerioa, to signify " very." 
Ere Udia lue vich htmtth buu our 



TheyihoaLd bear in mii] 

find we're hatlfy ion 

—ZultrkmtCtmpMMu 






" itMiIfy jofly," 



An) lajr Ihu I ninu't talk Utot, 
And hdun me well on Ibe fall} 
Of >butdni Uh dooc wiib a buj. 

— //. Adami : O^ a LiUli 
Bit GUify. 

It is also used In society as 
an emphatic adjective. Every- 
thing that doea not meet with 
approval now is btatdf: as, 
'■ We had a bauUy dull eemum 
this morning." Sniely a libel 
on animals, as the original 
meaning is, "pertaining to, or 



:v Google 



Beastly—Beat. 



95 



hwing the form and uton 
of ft btatt." Thiu, the Tonng 
FMnoh Iftdr OMd tbs word 
borraotlr when shs Mid of her 
p«ta, " I lika honM, I Uk« dogi, 
I like panotB ; in ahoit, I like 
«Tei7thing that i» bratOg/" 

TImiIi (Ameiioui cadeto]. At 
the United 8titt«B HUttmry Aca- 
demj, at Weat Point , new oadaU 
are so called. Mora hppro' 
priate and niggeetiTe temu — 
though not ao forcible— ara naed 
at the BoTal HiUtauy A(«- 
deiny, Sandhnnt— "Soooker," 
"Johnn;;" "bajants" {bifmuta) 
li ^plied to freshmen at Aber- 
deen UDiverslt7. 



Tmof iheH tUiiil 
lux* Bod bovT place 
dabc* an Ik hud Tot 
ll ii Hiid that tba nilin m all uhlMn 



■ pa cu d hj tb* pablic tbui uj wakvn 
•<Rr wen bdon. It li like iriains whli 
drwBiH to tfy ^ itat oh of ibae plans 
out of a diiuKT, and lb* bwniDv who dou 
B la dncribtd ■» lookim aad (tollag am » 



To "teat ludlow," .to " btat 
into Bta," to " teal badlj," to 
nupau or excel. A man who 
ll whoU7 exbanited Ii nid to 
be "deed-teof." 

" That heat* the bnga I " (Am*- 
rlcan). The phraae i* used to 
denot* anTthing atupendons, 
Inoommonanrablo. 



Protatblr from an old atoij In 
which Knne bngt Bbowed as- 
tannding lagaaltj and aohlsred 
Bome wonderful feat in order to 
baffle their tormentor and extri- 
cate themselvet from a petiloni 
position. Another version la 
that a man to prevent the bugs 
from getting to his bed, made 
a oircle of tar ronnd It. Then 
they climbed up to the ceiling, 
and fdl or jumped down on the 
bed. Finally, he made another 
tiirde of tar on the ceiling, and 
that "teal the bogs." 

•• Wan, If Ihia doB-l iM Ihabiwi r iH'd 
■ay. " What a ipot o' work ihb U, nr- 
laiBlj.'—SMm Slici. 

Mr. AtUn, in hia " Honie 
Sor^w," has a storj of a dog 
that oertainly " teoii the bugs." 
" One B^d his dog WM so clever 
that it wonld not go ont with 
him onleas his cartridges fit hia 
gun. 'Well, old man, I must 
admit that yoor dog ia above 
the average, bat I'll iMtck mine 
agMnit him for a &va. I wm 
in OUT lane the other evening, 
when my dog pointed at a man 
I had never seen before, and aa 
nothing would make him move, 
I went np to the man and said, 
' Sir, would yoa oblige me with 
you rkame t ' ' Tea, tir, my 
name is Partridge.' " 

Beat, a (jonmalistic). "To have 
a teat on one," is tn 




:v Google 



915 



BttU—B^Umg. 

(Amarieui), to"gat«tMt€a ezccciM hit "iditeB of mew 
ODB," to hftre tha iMtgh of caw. The muoh dMplsed sfoing ri 

oUkea"riw"<nito& boots offioen tei "' 



•ditv. " TiM kfttr. Beaten (thtena), teet, an abbre- 




Beat Oe Diitcb, to (popolar). 
7%tf( (colt M* AKdl, ii mid of 
■Dj atutUng Btateme&t or in- 
^adible fact. To beggar de- 
•oription or stagger bdief. Ori- 
ginally Died to expreas extreme 
•topldltjand obstiikBo;, a Dntoh- 
man beiogpopolarly rei^eMiitod 
as a phlegmatic peraon whom 
nothing ooold more. 



Sou bad died, otlm ma* djini ; nBiit 
w*n wen, ind aO wen, •> tbcr mihIt 

Beater - cuea (obeolete), ihoca 
or boot* ; also called tormeilr 
"boirlee;" more modem are the 
" trotter-oasea " (teimed " trot- 
tineta/'or " trottina " in French 
■lang), "gmbben, carta, beetle- 
cnuhen, orab-ahells, and hock- 
dooUee." Thievei and rooghi 
in a poetical mood have given 
tbem the name of "dalaj-ioots," 
while maebere ruefully talk of 
their pointed patents aa " ez- 
CTDOiatoT*." A policeman on 
hli beat ia aafd bj the ronghs to 



term fat feet, sod, in H<»fi^ 
ooarae oOed stMes that resist the 
dew. "To pad one's iBaters," 
to walk, to walk away. 
Pluck BK *cn* iiuBM ud oftH, Bm, 

be I wm u pad BT iMIn-A'n* ftnl 

Slamf Dictitmart. 

Tlw eaiiler word li " batters " or 
" bata," which represents tlie (wi- 
ginal "pats." fn gypsy, les^sto 
is in common with oantli^ a 
word for feet. Hindu, l/J-^al, 
the sole. 



» — boobr (naatioal), the 

beating of the handa and anna 
across the ohest, to warm 
oneeelf in cold weather. An 
older aynoDymoss expi es si on is 
" beating Jonaa." 

Bf ting Uw qBartermaater (Ame- 
rioan), a phiaae onrrat in the 
amy, which probably originated 
in the following story ; — 

JoDH Smith, of WutuactsB, Indkno, 
■onrdi Uk ckiK of Ok law war. wu bed; 
■emnt u > Quulfnuaxr, uid after Ibc 
dsH. (od whoi Ihc Quwtcnnutn' had 
bmi moMend oat, u (he Morr U told, ba 
nqneHed Sndih, ■■ • lut mia bcfiin 
puninj, u take ■ Urga boi on a dn^ to 
Ihc fnichl depot and ihip it, ukini; Smith 
al Iht BOM line " if he couM nnd and 



Jo« 



:h the boK. and on the war la ilw 
I rtiBoted (he thippinf <Ug, wbkh 
h( uaan of th* Qiiait«Baiier and 



, Google 



Beatmg — BeautysUep, 



ta iaoa, to Uma aboiit. In 
Qaeen Aim«'s time tha hmi 
meant imthar ui elegant mui 
tluukalorec. 




**— **"g the roftd (American], 
tntTening in a r^w^ fatala 
vitbont paTing. Tbera ars 
many wayi <rf doing this known 
to the American "dead beat," 
adventmer, and tramp. One U 
to pntmd to be an official em- 
picked on lome other lallroad, 
anotber to make a private 
anangemoit with the condno- 
tor or an emplojd to be allowed 
to traTel in a freight cai, a third 
la to dmplj hide In the freight. 



pKjinc vk'* iMj« OTd til* mill, Thb 
wqold h4T« bHfl KQ «uy tAik to mui7, 
Bad naa ■''^■*" lM«r it would loirccLj 
D mBdi uodNj, Int 1 

votlMWi, vUchin 



icwg'f**' nxtgfai and thierea 
tenn thla kind of cheat- 
ing "didng a duck," geneiallj 
managed \tj hiding nndar the 
aeat of a oantaga. 

Rran Thla U a word in -mj 
genenl DM In America to rignl^ 
A lover tx an eapedall; deroted 
Tram thli tbe TOrb 



Bean-naat? (old), a fop who, 
though in exterior findj dreMed, 
ia dirtj and alovenly In peraon 
andhablta. 

Beaittifien (popdar). Women 
who, like Uadame Bachal, pn>- 
fou to make people "Tonng 
and beaDtUnl for ever." Of late 
yean theae penou harebeoome 
common, and haTs man;r cue- 
tomen not t>nl7 in the donl- 
monde, bat even among poor 
girla. 



«*n la !■ nbt^id by ■ pluiiUi a 
of flood id du M, iDd mud io lbs melbodi 
of Jf H mt A< r»ad, at, nxn lilcnllT, 
of dtoulnc lb* conetBj.—Siifrti : TkM 



Otij mi* t*lD*d by lulx iIiDlh, 
Hacd not the iuBttifitr't dirtoioa, 
Um tot bet dtu CHBatic nlli. 
—SmUsd.Smaii^Otmmtit f tmn 



3mui tr^ (old), ( 
Bharper who naed to Ue in wait 
for oonntij Tlaitota. 




:v Google 



Btavm—Btd-posL 



Jfim^jj;!^ wu MlMr iiiproiint 

<( Ml Ufh ■ CH 



Beam* (WluebMt«i), origlnmllj, 
laaTB to go oat in the aftcraooa, 
when none bet preteota were 
allowed to weer b»ti. Aftei- 
warde the appellatioo denoted 
an lutemibalon of half -an-honc 
in the oomse of the afternoon 
on whole eohool days, what 
•ohool begu) at two o'olot^ 
The tenn !■ now obeoletet A 
betutr {nautical), U a hdmet In 
geueial, bnt paiUooliily that 
I»rt which let! down to allow 
of the wearer's diinUng. 

Beck, bear (old oant], a oon- 
atable. In Dateh sluig, ictaa* 
means aneeted, inprlBoned. 

TIm raSo dy tha nb of the Kviua Jul 
If n mawnd Puidwb, Up « raff-peck. 



Bed BUug l»noj), Jjiaf down 
after dinner to iwt and digeet. 
It it the geneni rale that tbe 
oota or baa hediteadc In aol- 
dlen' bamok-roonu ehall be 
oonatantly k^ naat and tidy, 
palliane rolled up and bedding 
erenly folded. Bat at oertala 
boors, •• after dinnn, a little 
relaxation of the mle ti allowed. 



PUjKd cot Uht 1>T, it >iU be Bid, 



Bedder (nntvenltlea) , a bedmaker, 
a ipeoicti of cbuwoman now 
neatly eztlnot In Oifotd, bat 
flonifAhing 



Bed-fagot (common), a contemp- 
tuoos term for a woman, but 
more apedally applied to a 
prostltDte. A prorinciallgm for 
a bedfellow. 



, a booM of aealgna- 
ticm. One where beda and 
rooma are hired by the hour 
orhaU^day.Ao. An institution 
which has spread with incre- 
dible rapidity of lato years in 
England and America, dnoe the 
sappresdon or gndoal dlM^ 
peuance of brothels, so that, 
according to tmstworthy Infor- 
mation, where there formerly 
existed one of the latter, there 
are now from ten even to twotty 
of the former. Tha repeal <^ 
the Contagions Diaeasei Act 
baa given a great impetna to 
the eatablishment of lerf-AoMW. 

Bedoosle (Anmioan), to oonfnae, 
bewilder, the result bring that 
a man Is " an abroad," or " flab- 
beigaated." 

Bed-poat (oommon), hi tbe 
" twinkling of a itd-patl,' in a 
moment, as qniok as lightning. 
In a jil^, or as lapidly ai a 
staff can be twinkled or tamed. 



tenslvelyaaedis, inthe "twink- 
ling of a pike-staff," which 
explains Itself. Btdfttt, in 
this oaae, seems to have re- 
idaoed bed-staff, a woodesk pin 



:v Google 



Bed-post— Bee-bee. 



•tock -formeri J cm the ddes of 
tlw b«daicKd to kaep tho OMfaM 
from iHpidng <m dther side, 
and vhloh mlgtit be wielded aa 
ft stick 01 itkfl when a bmte 
thought it neoewaiT to nhastlae 
hia better bait. Notu ovdm 
eUangi toitt ala, and now the 
Improrind staff has been snper- 
ieded bj the poker, mied bj 
an api^loation of hob-nailed 
boots. 

Bed-rode (Ameriean), to get on 
the iof radl, not to be able to go 
lowei n to abate. Used in thia 
luitance: "What U the price 
ofthatt" "fflxdoUars." "Is 
It UArodt piioet" «.&, la It 
jonr lowest pitoe. Btd-rojt 
pieces, the last oolna in one's 
aloMMt emp^ pnise ; probably 
a miner'a pbtase. 

Bee (American), a meeUng, gene- 
nllj a meirTmaking, but with 
a practical or beneficial object. 
Thos thete are apple-bees 
foi filing applca, hnsUng-beea 
tat hnaking, lalring-bees to 
"nlie" hoDMB, and spelling- 
bees. Ptobably an abbrevia- 
tion of the old word "bidding," 
or the Dotoh Hat, iuflaenced 
bj i«« aa a type of indnstiy. 
" Bidding," prononneed (hi- 
ding, meant an invitation a cen- 
taiyago. 



I'D CCBH to jaw mdding vitlnl anr 

UMiiw, 

And ttiy with lb« btidc in ihe n[ght. 

—Hrlktr Gtmt't Nttntry Rl^ma ftr 

BvmJGiriilS ■ 



99 

A " ohopping-bM " is thus de- 
scribed In » weatem 
" Onoe a clearing wa 
on a laige aoale. It was for the 
slteof apnblicinititatlon. The 
inhabitants within a ladina of 
ten miles were inrited to a 
" chap[dng-iM:'' Each one 
brought bis axe and day's ^ro- 
visions. No sptritnoos liquors 
were aUowed. The work was 
ordered by an elected marshal 
of the day. The front nmk of 
trees, ten tods In width, were 
chopped partially throogh on 
either side, then the soooeedlng 
ones in like manner tor a space 
of perhaps twenty rods. Then 
the last rank was felled simnl* 
taneoDsly by the united foroe, 
when, with a crash iDcrearing to 
a thnnderir^ volnme, it bme 
down on the next, till all lay 
prostrate. And thns for three 
days did thia volonteei war 
against the forest progreas." 

Bee-bee (Ang^o-Indlan), Elndn, 
from the Persian M U, once ap- 
plied to English ladles, who ate 
now called Hem Sahib. It ta 
still often used by native lei- 
vaots in addressing Emopean 
maid •servants. — Aitgh- Indian 
Obmmrf. 
A Hindn cononUne. 

Bot ibc fodcty of till lUtuD dod btcr. 
(en in nch cuci, and Ibanfh it Aoet not 
nlod ttt-^tf f* tbair frrRiclA, il ri^ljf 

rinli.-»'i^J!w-i Htwtra Rumi:.- My 
Dimrj ia frnJim ta 1*4 Yar tl}l-». 



:v Google 



Bee-bte—Bitf. 

r middle' IfiB>i pacichwt ia m 



Tli tb« ball to and iitm UmmW 

WbHtetBtbl«B«l 

—Ifhim Uk Tmri it Ytm^- 

BMf (AwtraUu Mwrloti' ■Ung), 

•■■top ihlefl" liitrodDOed t^ Beef-beaded (popnlar), Btiiidd. 

UwDonTlatabaiiapoitedthitlwr. dull aa an ox. B*^-w3Ui. la » 

A teetnie ^ tUarea' cut, and prorinolsliam with a like rignl- 

Indeed of alang KenaaHy, ia Ita oatioo. " A^-wltted," that la, 

fondneea forpnuniiig and rlijm- doll, thiok-hettded ; " haTtng no 

lug, *Ji„ " oobbler," applied fa> more wit than an ox" la ■ 

the last ahaep that la aboni, term lued by Sbakqieaie. 
" slang-whaDg,'* awH ■< Bol^ln- 

tmna." Thief wh canted Into Beef it, to (pmrlndaUam). IV 

kt^bewnae the; Thjined. kf^itlatolndalge In a meal of 

butohen* meat ; it onl; oooDn 

^SK^^crTSJ^'in'S^^ ««««« the lower and poor« 

■« bin (teppad.-l'Air'i Mtmtin. claaaea. 

(■ngUfb thierea' ilang), to ^mf Beefiaeot (I 

ft, or to glTS hot \itf, la to give 

ohaae, pome, lalae a halloo 

and 017. Beef atkk (anny), the bona of 

v„ *•» ">*•* *" '•'* ^T"" Mttona. 

I VTA^ tbi n^ b. ■■« B» bot ^ ^^jj^j^ ^ aUowod, at home, 

ABdaKnffaBaatxntBmdboacKd'; thTee-qoartera ot > ponnd od 

I puUad ogt • chin, bat I ma ami to meat, Inolodlag bone, and iriMD 

***• the day's meat dinner li <mt np, 

*°*otoi'*" "^ ' *"" * "" "*"° *"* "•* *•** remalna for 

-TiuRiftrm. thooe laat ierTed. 

<NantiGal), a figniatlve term Betfatraight (American). When 

for ttrengtb — "more U^!" a man has nothing bst beef for 

mace men on ; (oommOn), " b^ a meal, and moat eat it withont 

tipt"or"pst TOUT ia^^ to It I " bread, Tegetablee, fto., it ia 1«^ 

An e]aanIatioa meant aa a re- ttraigU. The nune term la ^t- 

qneat to naa one'B atrongth, to pUed to anj other kind of food 

oae one'a mnaclea to good ac3- ftr m. 
oonnt. (Popular), the penla; 

to be dreeaed like "Chrirt- Beef ts tile beete, tike a HnlUn- 

maa U^," to be In ooe'a beat gar bdfer. lb. H. J. Byron 

olotbea, mijt; "The exiKMrioutej^leliU 



:v Google 



Beef— Been. 



JUibliflist fonnd, I b«llen,lii 
Um Iriali njliig, 'A Waterfoid 



BrwiV/^fa: CtmttkufimFlrmitr. 

Beefr (oonunon), tmdnlj thiok, 
oommon]; said of women's 
anklsa; also licb, joiaj, [doi- 
taona. To take the whole pool 
ktloo, M'toliftTeaDjputicalaz 
niD'Of lack at cards generallr, 
!■ Mid b7 pUyen to be •naj 
te«V (Hottea). B*^ U also 
applied to a bloated, rad-taoed 



I (Amarioao), a hollow 
gom-ttee In whloh beea hare 
hived. Thia la mote t«chiiical 
than alaiig* 

Bob tuck hia by dc ddo, 

Ai it bar wn Mola' in. 

An' h« pgU, u' b* poll till don de bol- 



WhOcdcboi link b. cut didcbbUio 
—tfttnSti^. 

Bee In the boonet (oonunon). To 
hkve A het i» om'i Unatet, U to 
be odd, eccentric, fantastical, 
whimalcai, or half 'Ciasy. It la 
aopposed tobe apecnliarl/ Boot- 
tUh phnae, bewnae Bootamen 
wear " bonneta," and Engliah- 
men do not. Ita nee, however, 
i« not confined to Scotland, bnt 
vaa known in England in the 
aeTtfitaenth ceotnrr, and ia atill 
oonunon. It ooonre in a aoDg 



Whidi boR BT br* »*r 1 

111 Hck bin in yvtt hmaitl bn**, 

111 Hck bin in jtpa eyo.' 

A Mend speaking to an Sdln- 
bnrgh lad7 of a late eminent 
profcMor in the Unlrenltj, aaid 



had a 6« «* Ai« ionnet. " Don't 
aa7 that," replied the lady, u- 
earning a look and tone of !«• 
prooL " Ton nndet-iate Um. 
J bM *■ Ail hmiut/ Why, ho 
haa a whole hive of ka fat it I " 
The Pnnch have the ooma- 
ponding expreaaion "avoir nn 
banneton " — a may-bng. 

Been in Oe ran (popular), intoxi- 
cated, Blinding to the flnahed 
oonntenanoe of one who haa 
been drinking hekvUy. 

Been meunred for * new nm- 
brella (American), aaid origt- 
nally <^ a man that nothing 
fitted him bnt hla vatfrnOa. An 
old joke, Teprodaoedby Aitemna 
Ward, who took bis own gene< 
lallf wherever he foond it. 



9 jidjiiccnt t 



D *lu bod ■ 



"Did It fit bin well! Wn il<snl»- 
" Hcuand fin *hu T ~ aid Abe. 

"Tb* oDibeUerl "-^rtenu Wvd. 

Beeno (gypsy), born. " Ei aoa o 
tikno iMMo r "—"Where was the 
babebOTnl" 

Been to Baagtown. Been to 
Boitoa (Amarioan). It la re- 



:v Google 



I02 



Bten — BeeHe-crushtrs. 



ported that linHnow have been 
blown In which ladiM Uving 
In th« oonntrjr h>Te gons "to 
town " for the pnrpoM of meet- 
ing with loren, or making them, 
"inloooeeoreto." SoltUnld 
of one not qnlte above raaploion, 
that «tc Aai ftfcn Ocrw, and ahoold 
a foreigner not nnderrtandlng 
the phnasMik where, the annrer 
m^ be, (o BungUmti. In Phila- 
delphia It Ii eald of a Tery fait 
woman, that ahe has been to, or 
oomea from Boianton, a town in 
PennajlTaniik 

Be«r harrel (pngtUilio), the bod;. 

Tlut dimwi lb* boiif &«b Iha iltr 
Urrwl, I'aalUDkiB'.-C. AA: Vtr*imt 

Beenlincer (American), a t«nn 
for a barman In a lager-beer 
"vloon" or taveiiL It origi- 
nated in Fhlladelpbia in 1S48- 
49, abont whlob tiine lager-beer 
was Snt btewsd In America. 
The word "ilingere" had pre- 
-vionsly been oonunonlj lulled 
for at least forty year* to other 
barmen, who were often spoken 
of as " whlakej - slingers " (a 
pnoningtetm). "Bmn-aUngera" 
or " gin-alingen," derived In tliia 
inatauoa probably from gln- 
eling. In America "aling" Is 
a <rer7 common expression, Indi- 
cating to be engaged with, or 
to tackle, attack, &o. Hence 
" hash-ilbiger," one who eata at 
an ordinary table, or one who 
Ii eating In any way. " Ink- 
slinger," a writer. "DoitBlIng 
your saai at me," means give 



me no more of yonr ti _ 

" Jerk " and "jaiteer'* are In every 

w^ ezaot synonynu for "aUng" 

and "illnger," t.g., a beer- 

JeAer. 



Beeawax (oommon), poor, 
■oft oheeee, tomeUmee called 
"(weaty-toecheew," the Fienoh 
equivalent of which la " [ded de 
factenr." Applied to peiaona 
whom It ia difflonlt to get rid 
of. Friends oonveislng together 
seeing one of this kind ooming 
toward* tbem, freqamtly say, 
" Hece'a old SonaoK, let's be off." 



a (WincheaterCoUege). 
Thiok-ioled, laoed-np boots an 
BO called, no donbt from being 
nsed in damp or snowy weather, 
after bavii^ been besmeared 
with beeswax, grease, or dub- 
bin, in order to make tbtm 
water-tight. 

Bee- a wcetentog {Amerlcwi), 
honey, more Jaigon than slai^. 




I (oommon), a per- 
son's foot. Hore freqnently 
nsed with the sense of foot of 
large pioportionB, large flat loot. 
Also shoe or book 



:v Google 



BeeUe-cntsktrs — Belial. 



y», tat whu hocribk b 



The ezpnwloD ma first osed 
in AuuA, In one of Leech's 
cuicUDTet. A mkn with "ex- 
trAniUa cuudUea," u the 
French bare it, U said to be 
bleased with " iw(I(-«nwAeri 
and mntton llita." (Army), an 
In&ntij soldier Is deriiiTelj 
t«nned Itott-ervAer bj Die 
cavaliy, varied sometimes to 
" ioDd-i»iiih«T," a near equi- 
valent of the French "pooBae- 
calUoQ." 

TiKHigb doloi-oiu the lax] Ihcjr bui— 
Who WDoldnl be ■ Dilliouin T 

H7 katltvnalur ilchcs I 



befitting term Is " slats'-wool," 
as teflecting on the laij hatdta 
of the maid. 

Begnm, a rich widow. 

Beilbj's baU (old), an old Bailey 
ezecationor. " Ton wUI dance 
at BtiOis'i fxdl, where the sheriff 
pays for the mado." from the 
name of the execntionet in the 
time of Jonathan Wild. 

Be ifl it, to (oommoa), like the 
American phrase "to be on it" 
Bnt the Boglish exprestdon 
seems todenoto being in trooble, 
" I'm always in It." 
Soil tat mU, tnAj in h t 
1 f«U in thfi "box of cggi ud then 1 
quieUf Hack. 
1 luu In it, hirly in il I 



Before -tin (pidgin), formerly, 

ont^, previously, ere now, of 

old. 

01dHow-qBa.bcoiK piecn nlly luge; 
Hope PBChio (ncrchui), Hrtin itfirt. 
tim yoa plvnly hodcc (hiiv« hutrti of) 

/>«n[r. 

BtggUboitM (nautical), a term 
formerly apidied to any miaailes 
thrown from a gaUey-slavea' 
boat at an attacking forc& 

Becgara' Telvet (common), par- 
ticles of down shaken from a 
bed, and left to aceumnlate 
under furniture by the negli- 
gence of housemaids. A more Belial (Oxford), Balliol Collie. 



B^jant, new student at Aberdeen 
UniveTsity. A corruption of 
the French b^unt {free jatau), 
unsophisticated young man, 
oompared to an unfledged black- 
bird. The term is applied to 
the first or lowest class, the 
second being the " eemi-b^laiit*," 
the third the "tertians," and 
the foortb the " magistrands." 

Belaj (n&ntical), stop. " Bdvg 
that yam," cease talking, we 
have bad enough of it. 



Belcher (roughs), a bine bird's- 
eye handkerchief. 



:v Google 



Bdl—B^-U>pptr. 



Ben (tno^), % nn^ 

Bellerin (Amerioan), talking 
I0DCU7, OTTiiig aloud. 



1 bad ft pllsiwr lood ol' nmikM thU I'd 
liniiv with ma froo my huu in JaneTi 
u' I'd poUihad u' Dsd II tiU It wu ilii^ 
■■ a whude, an' [ kinder thm^l I'd opes 
JtCl am ■ leetle if I pX an; kbd oT a 

Jeff 'd ben a btUtrin ta modi Ixiut.— JVnr 



MOM dgnUoatlon. 

BeUomcr (pngiUitiO. % bfew 
(bat knooki thswlndoot of tba 
" bBlloWB " or lung*. (Old oant), 
% Mtttenoe of tiao^KiTtatioti toe 
Ufa I Uwt li, to the oonriat's 
laot Ittaath wken Ills long* M' 
"ballom" osMo to pbv- 



BcUowi to n 
athletea), abort in the wind, 
pumped out. 

g tu iraakl pi 



■ <pagiliBtio), the IniigB; 
"bellom to mend " was f onnart; 
Mtld of a pogiUat when winded, 
and geneiaU; of a penon out of 

Bellawa, beUowaea (American), 



And vbsn old Tuai JeSeraon eeet for 
pu u fci to WaihiDcton, 1 vas idll hen 
with fifkeen childrto and as good a boaa aa 
any man are ud, only iba wai blind and 
liMt iha i€J/mm.-Um:li SUM't Stwm^ 



(Nandoal), an old hand at the 
Minn, a man np to hla work, 
tohladntf. A"fieih handat 
the MlMN''isealdwhena gale 



d (thlerea) was said of 
one who had " lumped the 
Ugbtei " or had been "lagged." 
Li., tiansported. Aa lagged is a 
gypsy word, meaning bound or 
Ued together (Hluda Ugdntd), 
It ia pobabU that btlhtmd ia 
I pioTindal word 



41"— 

BcU a w a gg et (old), a noiaj, 
bullying fellow. 

BcU-tapped or knoUwd (nlgar), 
a man with a large top to Ma 
generatlTe organ. 

Bell-topper, that Und of hat 
known in England as a "cbim- 
ne7-pot,"a "mlk hat," a "high 
bat," a " top bat," a "Mttdp- 
pn',"abell-ibapndtapliat. The 
term Is, we believe, not nn< 
known to hatters In Bnglamd, 
but in Australia It Is nnlveiHllj 
used, often erco by reSned peo- 
ple. White ones are very mnoh 
oommoner than black In Ana- 
tialia and America, on aooonnt 
of the higher tempentme. 

When the writer was aboat 
to land at Poit Helbonine he 
was warned " a man Is of no 
aooonnt In If elbonina withont 
a white MttofiiMr." flom after 
this he w«nt to the Qeelimg 



:v Google 



BelUlopper — Behndere. 



imott and ordered a down 
ojsUaa at • ttall. The man 
gSTS him thirt«eti by mictake. 
"Stop," he Mid, "you're giving 
me too nuuij" Tbe man who 
ma next to him — quite a com- 
m<ni nun and « little dnnk — 
tuned round and addreaaed him 
Mdtentloiulj, " A core with a 
white bdl-toppa' ahoiJd nerei 



log to a woman being In the 
famiijwa;. 

"So h^p mj greeni, if our 
Sal ain't Un and got hei AoBy 



Bcllr-cbere (cdd out), food. 

BeDj-cliete (<dd oant), an apron. 

BtOjtal (old), a soond dinbbing 
or thiaahlng. 

Bcllr-ffO-fintcr (old elang), the 
flift blow, nnuUly givAn in the 
bellj. 

BeUj hedses(Shrawibur7 School), 
Ml ob«tniction of a modeiate 
Chuacter in ateepleohaBea ran 
by thebojB. 

Bel)r pkk, tiie (old), t^ old alaag 
tonn to describe Oie practice 
of women condemned to death 
pleading pregnancy In mitiga- 
tion or deferment of «ent«ice. 
Thii cutom !■ Blinded to In the 
" Beggai's Opea." Inmost jaila 
there were men termed " child 
gecten," who made a pnotioe 
of qoalifTing women to put for- 
ward nich a pie*. 

B«ll7-tlmb*r {common), food; 
termed also " prog," " gmb." 

Btl^wf,*^oeUaaawmj of aUnd- 



BeUj-TengCMOce (common), aont 
beer that will gixe the stomach- 
aoha. 

Below the belt (tallon), nntaii 
or mean, from an exprearion 
need In boxing <^ fcodng. 

Belt, belt tinker, beOowa (tallon), 
a very roughly ns 



Beltiasr (nantical), a beating, be- 
fore the rattan or cat-o'-nine- 
taUa came into oae. 

BeltlnK aodctr {^egal), a debat- 
ing societ J, formerly held in the 
Innaot Court. 



Some of the ayuoDyme an " to 
give one Jesaie, a tanning, a hid- 
ing, a walloping, a jackettlng, 
A dusting, to walk into, to 
quilt, to aet aboat," the opeia- 
tioD being sometimes pnebed 
to " thrashing one wtthln an 
Inch of his life," or 
Into a cocked hat." 

Behrideie (popular), a handsome 
man, an Ap^o, Froionnoed 



:v Google 



io8 

form Dt the Hindu UAtcti (ofUn 
prouooDoed like hemgi), the okn 
of Ameiiom, alao c^ed bmdy 
ftud Mmw. One wletj of It ia 
■Lbont the at£e of na onion. 

Beagj, a waistooftt, ia from the 

Beaia^ited, tlw (Anglo- Indiui), 
» term ^iplied in nllleij to the 
iababitanta of Hkdiu bj their 
eoTioiu neighbonn. 



Bei^ainlii or benjie (oi 
wslatco&t or coat, (onner^ » 
"Joseph." Possiljj an allusion 
to JoHph's gannent left In Ha- 
djuna Potlphai'a grasp. Dr. C. 
HsAkay h^ it was so named 
from a once oalebiated advertlB- 
Ing tailor in London. (Nauti- 
oal), a low crowned straw hat, 
with a very faroad btlm. 

Ben joltcKin (old), poor and 
coeise food, snoh as j^onltmal 
men, navigators, and men work- 
ing on roads, have to pst np 
with. 



Batgi — Beskava. 



BenTennfl (printers), obsolete. 
This was a Und of antranoe-fee 
paid by the workman to the 
"obapel" on entering a new 
oIBoe. BqulTalent to " stand- 
ing his focrting." Derived from 
the French ^>paientl;, Um- 
oBiuM, weloome, footing, used 
In the ezpresslDn "pMjrer la 
blaiTanDe." 



Beoog' (oostermongers), a shilling ; 
in old cant ■"horde'' and now 
a "bob;" from tha Italian 
Mmm, white, also a silvet coin. 
An eqniralent for this is to be 
found in most slangs. For In- 
stanoe, In Datob thieves' alang, 
itUttn; InGetman, Uoniter; Ita- 
lian, Maneon. Formeriy French 
sUver coins were termed Hornet. 

Bomj (old oaot), dnng, dirt;. 



Bera (JirpEj). a -ship or boat ; 
btromtttgro, a ntlor ; iettMuwra, 
pertaining to a ship, naval 
" Ghiom adrd a b&o"— " I went 
in a ship," in oonunon jargon 
" mandj-jawed (or jaased), wdxi 

Beithu (Stock Eiohai^), Lon- 
don, Brighton, and Sooth Coast 
BaJlwa; Company, ordlnair 
stock. 

Dtu BtrOM, I ban dm fasattea, 

Slic'i naDf t, Icatiin in *■ nil*; " 

Aod Iho' •OM of Bj ripa bin ban ratta, 

-AMm: HrmmSat^. 

Besh(gype7},a7ear. Continental 
g7pe7i i«nA. Du* UOl, two 



Beahin (grpsj), I sit, c 
form UA; BeA tu aiag, ml 
down ; beOOa, he dts. " Who 
btA in ye pus, around the yag " 
— " Who sit in the stiaw around 
the fl»,"— tf. Am 



:v Google 



Beskermaigro — B^. 



DtibtrnwngTo (gjfj), c 



Bespeak-niglit (oonuDon), b nlgbt 
in theBtriokl performuico Mt 
qpait for the ip«oi^ benefit of 
■ome aotQT or sotne* — r benefit 
in modsm phiaoeolagj. 

Beit (oommon), to bat a man, 
to luTe the better of one in 
enywiV 

And thk (leM party, At wbU tnaj at 

to rah) tb* prk* of tha wwwHiy fcr 
dh* baidk cf the piodaan, whom, by ■ 
cnrim pBmwn of ndod, iIht CMHidn' 
tbdr unnl cnadM, to ba taUdtl etttr 



Beitinff the pistol (nmnliifl;), 
where b numer geta the beat 
of the iterter, and ii amy on 
Ilia ioanuy when the piitol 



Bet n aeed, to (American), to bet 
the Bmallsri chip or ooonter, 
i.e., itake. In the game of poker. 
— MS. CaUmtum of Amerieamum4, 



Be there, to (oommon), to ba in 
one's element, to be knowing at 

1 Tcry BOD boiiD topnach u 




M IbU b* viibe* 
hin, wd i> thiHd raoo^ U know that 
ID " (ho bi Itrt,' ■> h* vosld iipuw U, 
b tb* way M t(t let oC cuj.— /. &«n- 



Beater, (popular), one who gets 
the better. Alw a low bettli^t 
oheal, a blackleg. 

Beat girt (American), tbeprafemd 
one; aiweetheart. 

" DU yoB *<« hc»r,"aalnl Bjlof/M^ 
aa in inm alooi Dtlawan Amma, fm 
tb* lln«lll snundi of JooaUuD ScariUa, 
" wby Mr. SconUo amr buili ihat oottly 



Uitiiml—St^t. 

Better than a die In the eje with 
a blunt allck (common). The 
expreaaion \a Twed to denote a 
thing of little Talne. 

Betting; ronnd (radng), laying 
fair^ and equally agalnit nearly 
aU tha hOTHB in a nce, m that 
no great riak can be nm. Com- 
monly called " getting rouid." 



BetiT (thievee), a skeleton key 
or [dolclock, teimed alio UttII, 
twist, Borew ; all BOtf, it is all 
Qpl past r eooT«ay. 



:v Google 



Btt—Bibb-ckrk. 



Bet, yon (Amarioui), ro° via.j ba 
•DM of It, 70a tu7 Mf elj bet 
thkt It Ij t 

ulUiiu Tm 




■ oat, "Yoa iMl" 
With aqod pnnpOMH the dauctad tUrf 
•idMoed, " Koa M / " tad >Ud don ilw 

iWtf mmrmm. — AUx. SImtfy HiU: 



Berer (obaolete), a aUght reput 
between mekla, an attenoon 
Innoh, a meal sBten In a horr;. 
It watlnuMMtheBngliBhaad 
AmericaD TmiTerdties. At the 
former tbe htttn coiiiiM«d of 
a porUon of bread and an allow- 
anoe of beei laid oat In tbe haU 
In the aftamoon, a break of a 
quartet of an hoot In BChool 
time being allowed in rammer 
for this rBfreabmeut. Thepaon- 
liar natnre of tbe repaat waa a 
rello of the old fonndert' daya. 
Old Bngliab htttr, a drinking; 
from tbe old French k*re, to 
drink. 

Be*7 or btnU (common), beer; 
abbreviation of bsYenge. GTpey 
ym, drink ; Slavonian pivd, beer. 
Other appellatloDi for beer are 
" gatter, oilotbarlej, bug jnioe, 
ponjello " ; and wen it the beet 
of Base's it la termed bj boud- 
ing-aoho<d boya " awipea," 



Bewer (tinker** alang), ft womML 
"Midi to my jBwr"—" Write 
(la, go or eetkd) to mj woman." 
Tonag hvtfr, a giri. 

B flata (popular), bnga. 

Hn. B. bebdd on Bi|hl & Kant ai^a 
of the Au-^iackcd tribe, loun ui(in(oiaJc 
wriuti am iha B Jimiit iMaliDi iq> roward 
lb* haul eftba ffoflit.—HmiktU WtrA. 

Bheea^ (Anglo-Indian), a water* 
ourjer. "TbeanlTeRalwoidln 
tbe Anglo-Indian bonaeholda of 
Northam India for tbe domeatio 
who mppUea the bmilj with 
water, caTTylng it in a miuanok 
or goat'i akin on hli back. No 
olaaa of men is ao diligent, >o 
f^tbfnl, nnobtniii**, and ao 
onomnplaining as tlie bSUM*." 
—Anglo-I^iait OlaMafy. 
Htn coanct a fcal caTrrinf a potpoiao 
00 in back. No I it ii ooljr ow bkad Iha 
ikttHf.—Itt wtf ImdiMH Gmnltm. 

Bible (nantloal), a hand axe j also 
a aqoare piece of freeatone to 
grind the deok with aand in 
cleaning it ; a small holTStone^ 
so called from seamen using 
them kneeling.— Jdsiinij AajFtiL 



Bible carrier (c 
who sella songs wlthont alnging 
them (Hotten). 

Bn4e<l«riE (Winobeeter), a col- 
lege prefect wbo has to read 
the l o aaons in ohi^el, to keep 
order in aohool, to <qMn tbe 
doors for masters, to keep np 
tbe flrei and assist at flogging. 
He holds his ofliDe for a week 
at a time. Biii»-Aai» come into 



, Google 



BiMe-derk — Big as. 



Ill 



OouM now (dnoe " Clolrted 
time" 1873) on WednMdayin- 
ttMd of 8fttaTd>7. A BiiU- 
clcrffioob ia tlie Sitt "loob" 
(box Bpdt bAokmrds, phoiMti- 
callj) (u the light band u 70a 
enter Mho«>L It bSBrs a bnw 
ld«(e with the liuoriptlom en- 
graved od it: "Tw <L« dwy 
w » n " — "To eeofa snooMrive 
reader," becaoM .8tftl<-cbrli 
DMd to lead tlu iMson* at 



■r (jK^nilar), a paiMHi ; 
tetmea aiao a "white-ohoker," 
a " derll-dodger," a " onahlon- 

EUbBiv (mnchefter), a flogging 
ctn^tOag of tix onta on the 
mall of the back admiiiivtered 
by the head or aeoond nwEter. 
The term la obeolete. The 
NUjn^rod wai an initmment 
with which the pnnishDunt of 
MUhV wsb adminiateied. It 
eonriited of ahandle terminated 
\rj fonr apple-tree twigs. 



ia tha vdinuy biUon. u cuM fc 

m the BiUHJok introdao 




Biddy (WInohester College), a 
bath In coUcse whlob waa filled 
ereiy momliig for Fref eeta, ic, 
bj the Jsnior man in e«cb 



"gallery" or bed-Toom. The 
origin of the word ia poaaibly dne 
to the nienoh bidtl, an aitiole 
of bed-room frnnitnre for the 

the Continent than in Eng- 
land. (American), an Iriah aer- 
rant glri. 

BidfM or bidtj (Aof^Iiidian). 
Of late jean all amatenn of 
brlo-k-brac In England have be> 
come famiUni- with a M"^ of 
niello-work of silver pattern! on 
a blaok metal gronnd whioh 
oomea from the Deooan, and 
wUch take* tta name front the 
city of Bidar. TUa U bidrti 
^roA. The gronnd la made of 
three patti pewter to one of 
copper, which ia Inlaid with the 
aQver, and the gronnd is then 
blackened. — Madna Ltttrary 
Sodtty Jeunud, New Series, L 
81-84. 

Bt£r(Ameriaaniam), toglTOa "big 
in the jaw," to atrike one in the 
facet In England to "fetch 
70D a wipe in the mug," or 
"give yon a bang intheohopa," 
are choice. Big is bom the 
provincial English b^tt or i«tfU, 
a blow ; old French bafit. Pos- 
sibly Anglo-Saxon bifjam, to 

BitSn (popular), "my b^fta" la a 

friendly appellation. 

"Ain't iku Bp to IMdt. nr ^»> 
UmJtT at BIm BUnitl. 



ffi[ aa all out a' doors, a ho- 
morons Americanlam for any- 



:v Google 



B^-imi—B^ /elbw. 




~SsmSlia.- Tkt Ctthtmkir. 



Blf-blrd (tbMtrio*!), to "get the 
%-iM,''tobelilBBed. ThaNnI 
to wappoutA to be, and U veiy 
often, k gooM. Frenob aotors 
o&Q biwnng " Appeler Axa," 
tblj being the iwbbI oMoe for 
»dog, 

Blc bug! (Amerloai)), an e^me- 
aloti for great people, people of 
oonseqaenoe, anstoorMs. Bart- 
lett thinks that thli word sag- 
geita lome aneodote which 
would be " worth finding ouL" 
Theie to no laok in Ameiioan 
newip^MH of anaodotea es- 
plalnlng the origin of popular 
ptmaea, bat nnf ortnnatelT aboat 
ninetr-nlne in a hundred of 
them are what Oermaai oall 
Naekntrk, mannfactnTed after- 
waidi bj «ome ingenlooi ho- 
moariit to (nit the caae. The 
following, whloh to of leoent 
origin, iii%ht eaeilT pan for 
one o( tbeee Talnable oiiginato. 
Those whioh haye already ap- 
peared on Ohabma, ewom to by 
as many anthoritiea as those 
dted b7 Anloljoos, would fill a 



1r pnci DM in mind of & 



PmnpkiD Bof^ast toraad pale ■ 
pawled don nndenMUh. " CUMisi," 
ujt h^ " I iKBldn'I hcT tboo^ il, ba 
■hai'i Utfrimt' In tba vorid Ihu vliM 
Ib*I"— OwR-Aib. 
Whil* atf wif* idb oat wmAin', u 

dtuun' ^ hy Imbhi, 
III hm kdup dam-town for nnomin 



onigolag for tl 
rleuv "Ym," 1 
* iDl(hlr bia mi 



" Whal'i •fans taotba- dniiif t ' 

"OhI iH'iunwhl&Cr^nw- Tba 

Mbkler gf Raihnri busMhimaUlM 

iallHCSnlSirric*.' 

"Wiufithtbaictr" 

"RulnrpaRB u LkI UL"— C*- 
ttri^ Ctmie Prnftr. 

Bis cotmtfT (sport), the open 



Biff dog with a btus collar, the, 
the prinoipsd or head of ■ oon- 
oem, or the biggest "wig" o{« 



Biff fellow (Anstialian BlaaAfel* 
low's lingo), to^e, a qnanlit; ; 
a ipeoinien of the pidgin Eng- 
lish stnffed with BlsokfelloWi 
words used bj the whites €n 
stations in their Intetooorie with 
the aborigines; 



:v Google 



Biggin — Big mouth. 



'• Too iwidi Uf/iUim wuv. Uit (plj) 

lb* ■borisu], addui^ hovtvcr, Ihc qno- 
Ika, " You putcr pawhBB I " (mi peinnX 

Biniin (WiaotMater, Ac), » ooflso- 

pot ooDoirtbig of t 

•tnlner, mod ■ ooffee-pot. 

"It » TVTT oddt" laid w*"^*^ to hu 

taofmam Horler, " yoa cui'l fM coA* 

■fnnrhm." HotlcT, who hul •oppsaad 

ofcsawmpdoa in HowbnT* looked ■ tklk 
■ni p t b ed ; but ml thu mofnoit Hattoo'i 

■Au tiiiraptiuii (ir, (od abcrinE in ■ 



HCgUr (AmcricAii), lkig«, «xtn- 
Tagaat, grand, premmiAaODily. 

Van, dcB, wlls dejr wu ill a-iMlb' 



Tb* " lOTi" tot du jjr Amrf, and di>- 
plAfod flAmKenn Kkrcftly Ita ruarit* 
abig tlm tbuo< tba dumiioco* Itwll'— 
F. Frwmeii .■ SmUU mmd MKoaht. 

It dgniflee, farther, tbo fseUsg 
of « (welled head, acoompMiied 
bj headaolie experienced in the 
mondiif kft«r a debaooh, when 
one hu " m»l anx oberenz," sa 
theFreuoh expnsaft. 
A ijr liH^Udm vlih codtuDi and gin. 
To ta^od ma of tba wbUtT t^M hw *ll 

Tokboldthuit 
Aolriionaknn 



trthcbaan, 
MpinS d»v«, 
u tlH bai-keapor nur ban no 



For in whidcf II] nets b> drowned. 
— Ckiagi Trttmu .- .dv &7>, Ctmt 



A* loD( ai ibaj ktpt ool of tba ^ iImh 



Biff Knu (commtm), men of im- 
pottanoe, gnat peoi^ 

H. Ceqnclia hu bea Utad, bulEd, 
and gHwnHy otauiOEd durini faii Bar 
in thv lactTOpaliL The other wmtDc ba 
wai bTiiid to Biect iba Prinet of Walo, 



Bis bead (Amerioui), a tenn of 
abiiMk imp^rlog that a man 
U conceited, "bnmptlou;" to 
get the Ug tenf, to be in a 
•lata vexing on Intoxication, 
irhat the Ftenoh call " ttra al- 



Blff Injttn (Amerioan), a term ap- 
plied at first b; the red Indiana 
to indicate some great chief. 
" He Ht In j' wm b» h«p Uf I<vtm— 
ba dim biap Uf /avao— be miglKy dun 
bla heap daa Hg Ivw'-bt /m$l'- 
T%ni ThtmiidMtlii im m Xaihuv Cmr. 



Big 



1 (American), a Terj 
expi o— ion applied to 
any man who talks too much, 
who la windf, "gaaiy," and 
given to boeb. Dniii:^ bla 
trial for mcrder the wratofaed 
ODltean often Intermpted th« 
judge bj OTTlng o«t " Sbnt np, 
higmamlk. 



:v Google 



114 

Hmy Gnts* h (oioi u lorn N*w 
York ibr k whik. H« it pnUUr iakmi 
g( LJbcRT, wboH moDlh h ■ tuiI wida.— 
PUImJt^Um Stra Amtnam. 



—B4iamd ^UU Gntn OUMam. 

Bif anta to cntck (Ameriovi), a 
difflonlt or iMge DOdertkking. 

Ug pond (Aineriau),tlM Atlantio. 



BI2 pot (oommon), » aomabodr. 



B»j nuts — Bildar. 



tUvswiihiuuSloaali: 
xgM ■ ciiT clBliiUp, 
So I'b quilt a Kfftl Imr. 

—Mutlc HmH Shit- 



Big ndei (sohooLs), » sohool term 
for the pnotlos games at foot- 
ball, where all or nearly all tha 
bojs join Id. It was originallj 
(ued at Rugby. 

Big take (American), anything 
very maob affected or popular. 
A grand acqnislUon, a Eaehion, 



Blc, to look (oommon), to aMama 
an InOated air or manner. To 
" talk big," to talk in a bouUiv 
manner, from the jnopetud^ 

"bnmptiou" or dellant w^a. 
Tbeee ezpreodona hare almort 
oeaaed to be alang. 

Big wig; (common), a pcanpona, 
oonoeited individnaL Alao t:p- 
plied by the lower nlaMiii to 
thoae in a high station of life 
or offloe. Thus a jadge or 
nobleman will be teimed a big 
trig. Iht word ia naed in a 
good-hnmonred, f^™^'^^'■ Benie. 

Tbcponniti of Holjp BoBUiciu, Kibop 
of Bodgooo, ubd bU Ibfl dcAocI t^-migt 
of iho aMtw^—T»iK*tn^: Lma Om 

Talbot TWTidai'i diniwr^iU* b lufc, 



il llwITi ft Ht^mlt o 

Thii moniijif ho wmi up of hii ova 
■CGOnl iilbn the Lsd Hmjut tn woat at 

Ckmttltwit. 

(Naatical), a high offioer. 



BiUar or beUars (Anglo-Indian), 
a term applied to diggers with 
the spade or mattock in the pnb- 
lio worka. 



Bbf If DOBlrind booqoeu for Isdia in ■ 
Ugt^uiB Nn. York. In Iht cntn of 
■hi pntty tWDcha of Bomn lulf-^nnt 
bonis on Duilr cmaoled. TIm boulcs 
«r* BUcd wiifa cool cdreihiag uiltuk ; 
Itrtv* rtin through the coi^ vkI ei tho 
■•atl* duighteti el En tike a miff, tber 
am nioj a "uiha."—Fim. 



■t tyae U alU oni-j« u 
'a iiUmn have alt* mi 



Yekynaar 
And^ tbr 

—AatbJmdiait Ghutrji YiDrmm* 



:v Google 



Bile — Bilking. 



"5 



BBC (old bIu^), am old («Tm oMd 
for tba femmle otgan of gmera- 

mk (oonunou), to defnnd, to 
cheat, to obtain goods withont 
paTing tor them, to obeat tba 
dii*cT of a backD«j carriage 
or a girl from whom one haa 
leceiTed the ■exnal bTOnr; a 
hole, a deception. The tenn 
haa long been In use. 
And All tbe vil« CDOpaaiocH of k Mntt 
Kwp * pcipcRu) bwlinc dt lb* doer : 
Who bm tb( bcwd Inn m^it who 
NO/dicwhonl 

—BmH^KKlUtUi't Wtrb. 
I dca^ bund to Wk wj lodcinci.— 
FiiUime: Ttmjma. 
Bnl AS upoD Lb« moo I ovl 
Hy vdnd'rioc guBi & frknd wmt pait. 
Hb BOH *» nd, Ih Rcled aloDg, 
And wlica t aiked him what wu wno^ 
SoMidHnk. bt wd, >u(Uc /)■»», 
And to ba had been dtiDldof — milk 1 

To "do a niX," to defraad, 
■pedaU; osed in tbe c 
prostitiites who are obeated. In 
the Frmoh slaiig " poser an la- 
[rin." Most etjimoloKista deriTe 
the word UU from the Qothlo 
Mloifan*, to mook, to deride. 

BQic, aa provinolal or old Eng- 
lish, meaning to cheat 01 defmnd 
(Wright], iaa form of bnU, which 
haa the same meaning. In the 
tense of hindering a man in his 
rigbto. Baik, to hinder, is, ao- 
ooiding to Skeot (BtTmoL Diet.) 
from EoO, a beam or bar; to 
put a balk or bar in a man's 
•wKj. Anglo-Saxon ftoJco. Bnt 
as English it Is probably from a 
Danish aonroe, ^roUo, OldNone 



MA* (Bttmttller, La. Jng. 
SaiBeniauH], whititi brings tu 
dlreotl; to MEL 

" ^tUinj) tbe bines," In pris(m 
slang, Is oTsdlng the poUoe. 
In society a man who, though 
never aotoally fonnd ont, Is 
strongly snspeoted of obeating 
at cards, would be called a 
iOk. 



SB HU In the sense of cheat, 
bnt speolallj applied to rasoats 
who defraud prostitotea or oab- 



A lUrd and frcqacDl maani of vrmSSaf 
pftjnAat of cab fiuu ii for ridcfi lata at 
night, or in tbo amall boiin of tht raofii- 
ing, tA ttcallhiif gat out of tho vcikidaa 
in motion, and then ran off naobatoTTd. 
SoiBB of Lhcao malpnctitiODOn hava bfr 
cocDE (o iVilfiil in thi> agtion Ibat Ibaj 
ban liA tha eaba and gentij doaad Iha 
door aftenmdi wilbont brin|aaen, whan 
they vera bong driTcn along al lix or 

1 oTiheac UOfrt ban cm 
ida^roada 
or laaca pn paicai Tad by their driircta when 
tba " twO'whEdtt* " bars baa mnniag M 
dgbl or nine uila an hoar.—TU Biti. 

(Popelar), one who gets a bed 
at a lodging-honse and doe* not 

Brridra, the lyoiFathia of tha otbar 
lodgoi an ahnyi with tha Uktr, and if 
thcylooitaBypart inaacuflla,ibonld ndi 
a thing arije, it would be io hii &nar 
and againU the porter. — TAtr FrvAir; 
StrltJkrt/rtm Simfy PImCH. 



:v Google 



fiwmShm^Plactt. 



Sone rt the anill bori whan tlu dc 
Hthtfnl youh Unqitti] lo ^h hia hubki. 
liBd «Aa -~~=— ta nw it cIkii ilwy 
nin«d lia^ to GoDcgi (Udy lod ndi, 
canyias viA lh(m ■ pafOna *hkh UU 
It* tak to Ibiir tuon, tad caned thsBto 
be pu in tin UIL-Brimdrr Klchmrdt : 



BUI, * looff Of •bort (oommon), i 
term of Im^lionmeDt. 



BU brighten (wtater), nuU 
figoti amplored In the UtobeD 
t« light tlte Bzw. 

Billed op (K1117), ooDfined to bu- 
noln, k tenn paoaltar to Hw 
lUJMtj's Onuda, to wlioin a 
pnotohmait wtdoh onrtaUa tra»- 
dom of moveiiieDt U do doabt 
MpaoUItr IAmmu*. 

&llet(AnstnUkii,popDlu), k dtok- 
tlon. A hilUt ia h nnlToml • 
t«nu for a iltiiKtioii M " Mnw " 
!■ for a MU17 in Aiutnlift, or 
"bobbj"' 
land. The meUpboi 



- SJm a iJ ntgprmU; Primtm- 



Primla', Kuftmki. 

A gentleman at a boaidii^ 
honaein Fammatta, New Sooth 
Walea, Id 1883, related with 
great gruto a onnte's bOltt tn 
If ortliDmlMriaiid whloh had Jnrt 
oome under hia notiaa. The 
vloar was away tnTelUng Tomut 
the world for Mb health, and the 
mmte, a Cambridge gTadoate, 
reoelTed ttie magnlOoeDt etipend 
of £iaa a jeat for looking after 
the ohnroh terrioee, the pariah, 
the Tioai'e wife and five ohildten, 
and two pnptla oramcQlng for 
matrioolaticnL 

BilUt U used in England with 
a like aignlfloatlon. In pclaona 
"getting a bUiet" iE being ap- 
pointed to Kme oflice wbioh 
piooiues oertain adTantagea for 
the oonviot who ia fortunate 
enough to reoelTe the favonr. 




bedng fosnd for loldltTa, who 
an then aatd to be " MBitsd ont " 
In mBltaiy.padanoe. Thne one 
of the oommoiMat iaag word* 



MOalMaMM H*n 

|ha " cl MBa n ,' aad pnmoMd lo ba tin 
" chaplain'i otdtrtj," ^^di waa the onlj 
UlUI I wubed Is obtain far mjmIL H* 
■ecuRd it, and on a Sunday nlaaiilT 
narcbed up t>w pnliiit sain to upso Iba 
Bible or Pnyn Bo^ and Si tbtnla at 
the (mpa- pUca the bymnl aad witheM 
to ba Buli by tba ooncnsatioD. TUavai 
hil Snoday't dUy.— Aw«v fimt. 

(Old militai7 ilang)^ Mbi; vp. 
plated plaoe or aim. " Br^ 
bullet haa ita hOtt." 



:v Google 



BiBiard — Bitty- hHtUing. 



TJcts' skng), falsB preteaoM. 
ftotwbl? lotrodaced iato Ans- 
traU» by the ooDTlota tTMispoitod 
thitbST. To"glTeoD(JUMIiiinl 
ihim," to "Duce" or "give 
upon the mace," *.«., to obtain 
goods on credit wbioh 7011 neyer 
mean to pay for, to mn up a 
Bcore with the aame intention, 
or to spoiige npon yoor ftcqoaio- 
tanc« by coDtlnoally begf^ng 
or borroirliig from them (Tkoz'B 
Memoin). To pvallel the pun 
Itetween " maoe " and biUiard 
•Ida, ^. "bolt-in-tmi,'* "oob> 
Uer,"&o. Slang, and cepetdaUy 
thisTes' alang, ia veiy addioted 



BHUiifwate plwBBUit (oommon), 
a red barring or blOBt«r, other* 
wise known nnder ttte Oippella- 
tioB of "Tumoutb capon" or 
" two-oyed steak. " 

BUI of sale (old Blmng), widows' 



KUt (Bcotoh), a iUk handeTohief, 
also oaed by UiieTSB ; (common), 
a policeman's staff ; (thierea), 
stolen metal ; (Hew Zealand and 
Australia), a sancapan. In the 
Bnsb, ererytMng— tea, soap, or 
anything else — la boiled Id the 
MUjr, a tin sancepan with a 
wire poop-handle to cairy it by. 
The sundowner or swagman, 
tramping the country in ■enich 
of work, infariably oanies thia 
bill|r and a blanket In the 
latter all his worldly goods are 
nanally strapped ap ; somatlmM 



hegoea. 


mfarashaTlngabttot 


maoklntoah sheeting ontdde the 


blanket 


to keep it dry. He will 


be seen 


•■ bumping" (oanrying) 


these on 


the hottest day. 


Soniucbfbri 


nrkcnl AuuoaqiiefeM 


WoaMnOcr 


brwarint thu h<.yT»iM 


bo«- 






isiihudlrAdima: 


HD*mr, b< 


11 h^pjp. Hg cut > cnM 



—Dr.KtMbM: Tbmikt SpUtl^. 



Billr-bnttoii (thierea' alang), 
rhyming slang for mutton \ also 
a oontamptnona term for a yonng 
jonrrkeyman tailor. 



BiUy ba«man (thierea], a piok- 
pooket who oonfinea his atten- 
tion exoluslTely to sUk haDdkei> 
ohieb; 

BlUycock (Australian), a Und of 
hat. The aOtyant La a low, 
round, hard-felt hat with a 
tumed-np brim. Hotten de- 
soribes it as a soft felt bat of 
the ^m Crow or " wide-awake " 
description, 

BillT-fencer (popular), a maria^ 



BUfy-hontinf (popular), buying 
old metal ; one of the oooi^*- 
tlona of a " blUy-fencei " or 
■ ST. (Thtorea), 



:v Google 



Bilty-siinh — Binge, 



pdng out for the purpose of 
Atoftliiur pwrkfrt-han^kfriThift^i 

1KllT-«UDk (Anglo-Indian).* tu 
glTOB hj BnTopeami in IndiA t< 
the tUo liquids of nfttlTO mann- 
footnie sold in the bauan. 



-»jj— i-j natin cofflpoondi. It mnld 
Indeed be toy luod lo By *>>" ^^ "la- 
pOBHii pnpink* of tU) mjr hisUy- 
■ ■ ■ . . . WJwa 



nFmtUntm: Li/ilm at XiJk. 

Binu, Vm^Mft (Weet Indian). 
BMhadooe enif itii InhaWtantn are 
M nioknamed throngbout tbo 
Weet Indie*. A recent tiafeller 
buaida the fallowing ingenious 
explanation — which if not true 
ought to be 10 — of these terms, 
irtiloh are confessedly obeonie 
intlieirderiTation- "Baibadoee 
is known all the world over as 
the little island that pays hei 
way ; It has never been oon- 
quered ; its peofde are enter- 
priiinK fc"^ energetic, go-ahead 
and driving ; In short, the 
badness men of theae islands 
{theCaribbees). Barbadian may 
tbeiefore be said to mean a 
man with 'go' and grit, energy 



Bins (grpey), the devil ; (old oaot) 
a liquor shop, as a ram Hmg; 
to Mng, to go, to attack, shoot, 

" Could TDB BOi luiM tuned hiin m hU 



Btng avaat (old cant derived 
horn gypsy), an aogiy oommand 
to be off, meaning literally, " go 
to the deviL" Btng SngUsh 
gypey ; Scottish gypsy M^, 
meaningtbe devil, and amiM from 
avita second preeont Indicative 
sod imperative, ovdja or avOaa 
"then goest," or "go thon." 
Foil form, bui^aiiiu Iv / or a«ai(£ 
It is probable that in Hsnnan'e 
vocabulary a is by aooidsnt sepa- 
rated from wiu(. £Hi7,thBdenl, 
is not to be conf onnded with the 
same word in " to Uiv ont," in 
old cant, nor anut with woMt, 
in its other meaning. It is 
probable that those who made 
the old cant, having leaned 
from gypoiea that itay avatt 
meant "go to the devil," con- 
aidered that hi^ meant " go " 
or "ooms" a distance, andnaed 
it assoch. 

Binr out. btn morti aod toun, 
ForeUyt 



Blngie (Oxford), a big drinking 
boot. To bHve is a provincialism 
for to Boak a vesaal in water to 
prevent its leaking. It Is also a 
naatical term meaning to rinse 
a cask. This word seems to be 
oonneotad with bnng, the orifice 
in the bilge of a oask, through 
which tt is ailed. 



:v Google 



Bmgo — Birdcage. 



119 



Bioco (old OAot), probaUr of 
gTpajorlgiD. Sptriti ot bnndj. 

PaBiDmid ihaMv*! too of ■(■■■, 
Yon IBBMT, diaky, hukr m I 
—iH^ Lytfrn ; Paml Clf^rd. 
Son* lodiinur, wUli ■ duh of My, 
doHi on'i liMi) Id tlM mcninc-— r. 
tf ^<|0 ; Ttm Smm ml OnJirdL 

" BiKQo boj," A diunkaid ; 
" tiajTO mort," female dnun- 

^*V te7P*T)t the deril, an er:! 
ifdrit, probably Bnggeeted the 
word. Funi on eplrit Id it* 
twofold meaning have almTB 
b«en ooDunon both in Bngltth 



Biiig7 (trade), ■ term largely need 
in tbe batter trade to denote 
bad, Top7 batter (Hotton). 



ord (nantlcat), any 
learned or aflected word nssd 
in the naty, whloh the sallon 
jeeringlj oSer to cbalk apon 
the binnacle. 

Blnnl (tlnksf), nnall ; bmnifoMi, 
aboji UL, small man. 



lang term in vogna 
among tbe lower order* for a 
bnatle, or in more modem alaag a 
"dieaa-innproTer." Thiipartof 
a ladT** toilet ii a kind of pad or 
eaihitoi worn at the back of the 
dreaa for the ptupoee of ex- 
panding tbe eUrta, and. In some 
ca«w^ maUng np tor oartain 



defldcndea in tbe wearei'i form. 
Those DOW in fashion are Im- 
mensely elongated stractarea, 
littlo Bo^eattve of the hnmaa 
form ; some are built on the prin* 
oiple of the <dd crinoline, with 
wire or steel ribs, henoe the ap- 
pellatl<ni of Mrdtt^e. 
Sbc wu walking In bar bat clolbe* 00 
Bank HolidaT, whan a cradns awocpv 

feet Udy nbo wBi all over hit cbcrj bcftva 
ba'd time to tom roond, and Ibey look 
bcr br th« cbifDon and ika ttr^cmif and 
walUBd ber iaio Vim Stmt qsidBT Ihna 
■ wisk.~j>f r«nv Tima. 

Mc and JuH ni u Gnawldi but 
mfc. Itit bill'* T«r7 dIm, bat Jan* qoli* 
■irikd ber ^rdeM£t roUui* down, A D*v 
dicH, too.— ,1;^ Slff't Haif-HtUdf. 

Not long ago there was an 
action relating to patents in the 
High Court of Jostice. The 
court was strewn with fariona 
■pecimens of these articles, and 
oonsiderabie amaBsmenl was 
canaed by the speotaole of a 
jadge and sev«sal leading ooan< 
ael arguing gravely on the in- 
tricacies of the YuiDos designs 
(or dresa-improTers. Tbe jndge, 
after looking at se*Bral designs, 
said, " I hope yon are going to 
produce another of these ar- 
ticles, H r. , which I do not 

see here. It is called the JaU- 
lee . . . it is one which, when 
a lady site down, plays the 
' National Anthem.' " An old 
lawyer woald have his feeble 
joke, too, and remarked that ha 
had attended the sittings o( th« 
court for many yean, but that 
never had he witnessed so much 



:v Google 



Birdcage — Bishop's foot. 



(BadDg), tlM HMUUng pMl> 
dookadjoluiiigthe GrKnd Stand 
M Newmarkati (Fopnlar), a 
(our • wheeled cab, oth«rwi>e 
known bj tbe appn^itiate ap- 
pellation of " growler." 

Bifd-Unw (thiarea), rimnintt ififl "g 



Bird'a eye fog^ a<priM-flgltt«n), 
the name of a Mart tied tonad 
their watBte bj priie-flghten in 
the ring ; a neokerohief or band- 
kenbief with white apot* oo a 
blaok, blue, or otbar ground. 
Fogtt, from the Occman vigd, a 
bird. 



ker- 



Bird'a eye wipe (oommon), 
chief, either for the pocket 
neok, with bine apote on it 

Bilk (back alang), a " crib," i 



UiUmUt suit (oommon), the colt 
of oar fint parents before thej 
bad a bite in the apple, 

BUi (Anglo-Indian), pcdson ; Ban- 

akrit, vfiAa, poison. 

An old EagUiti k. . 
" 1 kiwv what tt€t* m 

uikladofpc 
Vnixdia it 
(dt paaao, w y cm yac 



Olhop (hone-dealera), to hiAap a 
hoiM la a swindling oontrlTanoa 
teaoited to in order to deoeive 
bayers aa to ita age. An old 
boree haa no black etreaka on 
hii teeth, and b7 aome prooees 
theaeara made to t^peat ; from 
a north of Bngland tenn. See 
Bubof's foot. 

(Common), the chamber nten- 
til or " Jordan ; " alao, lat- 
tsdy, an " IL" The last U de- 
rived from the hnmorona de- 
scription of Max (TBeU in 
"John Bnll'a WomanklDd," p. 
"Si- 



Bishop's cooit In moat A 
llan see* the bishop's palace is 
called bishop's oonrt. Pcrh^a 
palaoer t e considerad nnsoit- 
able lor democratic ctynmn- 
nltiea ; Joat aa it U not oorreot 
to address a colonial tdahop aa 
"mjlord." In practice, how- 
ever, the; are alwajs addieesed 
"milord." Not to do sowoold 
be an inolTility. 

Biahop*! foot, to Uahop (Low- 
land Scotch and North of Eng- 
land), the devil's foot. Milk 
burned in the pan la, in the 
North of Bn^and, aaid to be 
UiAapaeL In Fifeahin the 
expreaalcn Is ^pUed to food 
that haa been Boorahed In cock- 
ing or otherwise spoiled— "Iks 
tiriiip's/NiCitnlt" TheUabop 
meana the deva, and the aajli« 



:v Google 



Bisser — Bitch party. 



la probablT * itiia of the Umei 
of tbe Baf omwtioii, when In 
BooUud OTerjthlng oonnwited 
with frelkOT ma oonsidend to 
babkd. 

K O CT fgrtKj}. to foigflt 

Bit (Arurioftn), oonMtlj the old 
SpanUh " tM^">«qiial to twd*a 
and a half oentB, or about aix- 



In 



the I 



ponoo. 

teldom woi tonipenny-ideoe 
mM oallod a fompennj-MI, atao 
a " josy," ftom the lat« Jo«eph 
Hume, H.F., who extolled ita 
ooflTenienoe In a apeeoh whloh 
he made in Failiamont. In 
Peniuj'lTania the "real" wm 
called an eleTenpenny-iit,— M 
beli% a tnuialation of the 
Spanish " peao," a piooe or bit 
(as it waa popnlariy nndentood), 
and dgnlfled an; ooin. Sinoe 
thia Spanlih and Ifexicau 
monej waa withdrawn from 
drcnlatlon the term bit i» 
applied to the "dime." The 
" medio " or " half-real " WBB in 
Philadedphla oaUed a Jlppmmf- 
bit (flTepenn;), whioh was ab- 
bieriated to " fip," as " eleven- 
pennj-Ut" became oonttacted 
to "levj." This old Spanish 
cnzrenoy became so worn that 
the " lery," which was legally 
worth twelve and a hall cents, 
ofttti weighed leas than the ten- 
oeot ^ver piece or "dime," 
and it was s^d that bo;a wen 
In the habit of flUi^ down 
and imootUDg the latter to 



half ccBti,f« thca he cu nlwajpi bolda 

[West Indian), a iil Is a foni- 
penarpleoe. InDemerara tbe 
negroes make this one of their 
nnlts of oaloolatlon. Itbiia a 
■bilUtig is three Mtt, and ao 

(Popular), footpenoe. 

Bitch, to (old elang), to ^ve wi^ 
throngh feai. The primarr 
meaning Is to sport. (Common), 



To assume a woman's functions 
In maUng tea, presiding at the 
table, Ac. 

Bttchadey-pawdd (gypsj), trana- 

Bltch boobj (old miUtBi7 slang), 
a ooonti; gM. 

Bitcher (gypsy), to send. Henoe 
to order oi oommand. AUeter- 
ing Un, police or asaise-oonrta. 
Bee To Bitcb. 

Bttcherin muah (gypsy), a ma^ 



Bitclier-pawdd (gypq'), t 



a pass foi tbe Bitch pv^(iuilTenity), tea party; 
only snitahle for women In the 



, Google 



mind* of tho ocdnen of thU 
Ineraratit expraMicai. "Will 
Ton b« old W«A r " meus " Wm 
yon nuke t«B T " 



Bite Oe car, to (priMo dang), 
to borrow. "I bit btaeai for 
UuMMidsifnt"— I bonowed 
3S. 6d. of him. 

Bite the ngtr, to (thlerM), to 
Meal a portmuiteMi. 

Bite tite w^er, to (tUerei), to 
•taal a pooket-hBndkBrohlef . 



A take In, im- 
poM on, oheat, OTer-raaoh in aaj 
w^. HottoD uja thiM is a 
fjptj term, but dow not proTs 
Ik " Cros*-bite, tot a choat, 
oonatantiy ocean Id tho initen 
of thesliteeiithcentarj. Bailey 
ha«OT<M»'bite,adiaBppoiiitineDt, 
probably tho primary aense, and 
tUt ia Toiy probably a oootrao- 
tion of this." It la mnoh more 
probably derived from the Dutob 
huitm, which In elaog meani, 
aooording to Teirlinck, to boy, 
or tiade, and which le more 
aocniatel; doBned by Gbeiaid 
Tan der Bobenren (TVwdoiutte 
oft IhtjftAmdtr, i47S-?7) ■■ 
" BuigUn, weMelen mangeln, 
onyden ; (uywAm-oamblre, per- 
mntaie," Jcc. Tbeaa wordi all 
mean to tiade, exchange, or 
barter ; but ta^teKm indicate* 
cheating, or awlndllng ; com- 
bining the foroa of the analo- 



gona Oennan worda ta 
e«nh a i >ge ot tiad«^ and H hwat w , 
to deoeiTe. Hotten alio aaya 
that Hit !• a north oonntiy 
word for a hard bargain (need 
by Pope), and that Swift tdla 
na that it originated with a 
notdttsudi in his day. Aooord- 
iug to Sewel'e Diotlonary, M( 
la booty, ^oH, Ullage ; hwtm, 
■wi#iM. Other meaninn, haa '^ to 
go out to pUlage," and " dob t« 
bnyten gaan " <ia., to go ont, or 
amy, or too tar) la " to be ex- 
mbltaot." When we remember 
that hgitn meana In Dntoh to 
hitt, and hitytat (whloh haa al- 
most the aame pronnnoiatlon} 
to baigain with all tbe auooia- 
tiona of deoeit and ptnndsr, it 

Mt(, a bard bargain, or Mc, to 
cheat, came from the Low 
Oonntriee dlreot, than from an 
Sngliih w<a^ elgnifying '*dia> 
appointment." — C Q. L. 

SUt ma former^ oaed aa an 
Interjection eqalvalent to tbe 
modem ezpreaalon " aold I " 
Hiere la a atory of a man een- 
tenced to tbe gallowB who aold 
bla body to a aiugeon, . , . 



TbcfiUow 
(fttfl, v«f7 rorvudly, and lik« a nun who 
w» wilLinj to defti, told him, " Look Toti, 
Mr. Sbtckiii, that little dry Mlow, wha 
hai bcea balf-uarved all hit life, vnd k 
BOir halfnltul with fear, cannM innm- 
TPor purpoae. . . - Cook, for Iwcolj 
■hillin«» I am TOUT buil" Sajl llw 
nuieoo, "DoK, thin't ■ cuim.' Tia 
witly TO^OB took the matnj, and aa boo 



, Google 



Bit-fkker (thlsreB' tlang), * oolner 
or target of ttiae mOMj. To 
"iaka" U probAblj tba I^tin 
fytio, wbloh bMM wTjm y nuftnliiffa 
bMldM its piimar7 mcaolnga of 
"mike" Mid "da" It maj 
■lao be » fonn of the grpo; br, 
whiob h** the mhib ngnifioa- 
tioiu. A Ht-fiixr would, there- 
for^ be k BuJtet of money (btt). 

Blt-f«lthie (tbieres' iluig), coin- 
lug or loigliig mooej. 

BMnf his hipa (tailon), regret- 
ting what he haj done or said. 

Biting np (teflon), giieriog for 
•omethlDg loat or gone. 

Bitinc yoor name In (pc^ndar), 
taking ft Urge dmoght of Mme 
liqnor, diiDUng deep or gieedilj. 



ffit on, « (oommon), alightlT In- 
toxicated. 

Tba iiUut captnk vM ■ W ml Ha 
wuicd u miika naa puichuH then and 

Bit of otlckt {sporting), a oo|ae, 
Tha bfiD of Iha maaw, Ui wbita haul, 
whobaodi 
With ha Gaa old iduol air, dileafktM 
mod comtty, 
A> hii hud m «u Balla'i Udt bout- 
tip balcodv 
" Boot! ud Hddlg* " iha wonl ii ;— ud 
T« who naU bUow 
For ■ tan aimp-of kitet aoi nor 
d^l 
Foe fon ion M «< Hkii kUI « loos 



Bit of antiiy, a saddlo hone. 

Bit of lenf (prison), a amaU qnan- 
tit7 of tobaooo. 

Tba BBW ri(id niU u b Ibm 1 Poit- 
lud. I siiipciK it ■• bauc Ibc CDBTicU 

^hU ff b^t rcfmnluag it ai Eba gttalctt 
luBiT (rf tttar lino, tbu Iha anibanltEi 



Bit of BtDtF (familiar), orer- 
draased man ; a man with full 
conlldenM In hla appaaranoe 
and ability. A young woman 
of dlasolnte life, who ia also 
called a "bit of moalin." 

(Common], a draft or bill of 



I lai mij llial lit n/itajTfiawiJnc rhi 
bill) wan't fcr fin Ihonauid liwia.— 

Bits of stiff (popnlar), bank notea. 

Bitter (general), to " do a bitter," 
to hare a glass of bitter ale. 
Originally an Oxford term. 

Iniot)ia"CTL"a(uannIiicIaUp, 
And into Uw cool »paAli^ tilUr 1 

—Matk HaUSne. 



:v Google 



BiOo — Blacit-afid^aH. 



Bttto, UttKgTpar), ■ tdl, ft UtUa, 
main, UHla. A hiUQ m^A, t, 
BnuU man; biOi dtr, btntei, 
lower (rdoe), lew, omaUer; 
KM maiio* <a MtUqn, gobllna. 



In tbaatrioal lugoage the U 
ia th« acting, peifonalnga part. 



Birry, ptwwj (prorlndal), a drink, ^^ rf" J™ on* u Covm C, it aka 
boar; aahautof btny, apot of ^ "^""TJ** _,.._,.. . ^ 

how • lit I H nthmrmiTB ^^ Ho«« L«liud'l book b lOOd, tad 



a dImlnntiTO of bererage, wsthyiebaMd; 

orfromtheK7ptTi>ia*aoTMi«a, Ttau Squn wJ thait u 

todriiik;j>Aw,beuinBoh«nilan . .*^'"^^^''''P^' . 
oiO*6ah. InFrenohcaiitpHou 



And Joa^ita Cmn, la all the io, k a 



Blrlffliln (tjnktf), rteallngi 
MyJ^', to steal; b^tgV li.'«mii, 
to steal the tbliig. 

Blx (Sngllah and American), 



'^Tbiy maugfl thno thinicl b<Ct«r in 
FruDcs," bU Gnb. co Ih* Ci&nl i&Ir. 
"[('•■UTByinU toBKSU 'daconud 
lAilow,' bat I think if tdu can do il, to 
[■y row Uilor with a decnralioa ii dailwd 
good Ut. I Iliink I ihill tiy il on." 

"Wbatll Toa deCDcata him wkhl' 
ukad RooCTtootT. who talia a li*a]j In- 
tcrqi in thw matten, and baliarca muchiy 
in an cdiur*! abiliir to bcnafit hi> fallow. 

"Oh," 



'o bonnet a Lot af old bLoks and rnaka 
puiicoatt Kltical la (cud Um, 

ut a Cnuhar*! 'ard knncklat a emndinf 
ratatl No, rmblowadifthatial 



B. K. S. (olBoen), banaoka, naed 
specdalljamong ofBoen In mufti, 
who with to prHerre the lu- 
oognitoi 

BUb (ooQunou), to talk iuooa- 
■icleratelj, to let seoieta Slip 
out, bebay ; Dan. tlaHibrt, to 
babble. 

" H( bai not pgadwd B bi,' mid Ih* 



pnctlaed by tha ordinary woman tifucidj, 
oix of (Ih wont ii her hahil of iUUair, 
or ivpcatins to «H dew Friend the diiaci 
that ban been latdjF iwd and done by 



BUck-«od-tam («tne(), baU-and- 
balf, poitei and ale mixed. 

(American), applied to black and 
brown teirien. A mulatto^ a 
tnixtiue of mnlattoesand hla^ki 
Daring the Civil War the Soath 
was called the iloofc-aaii-tan 
connti7, froni the planteia" tan- 
ning " 01 beating their alaTee. 



:v Google 



BlMk WW (ocamum), ft kettle oi 
pot. 



BtocMiaD (wMdetr), meani to 
*ota agalnit a tnui for election 
for • olnb, ka., by ballot. Tbe 
expiMilcm was deriTsd from tbe 
onoe pierelent CDBtom at olnb 
eleottons of giving eaob Toter 
awUteudftbteckball; if he 
wisbed to TOt* for tbe eleotlon 
of tbe o«adid»te be pat In the' 
white ban, ir otberwise, tbe 
black >t" Tbii term Is so fre- 
qneotly need that it bas oeased 
tfi be elasg, and tbe word 
" pm " hai been labatitnted. 
The ITienob equiralent, a oor- 
mptioD of the Bnglieb, la Uaek- 



■p for ■ */«**«. bM k moUnt fai%*. 
OmOtTniiL 

ic, "Hj girl entioed a man 
iuto,a bawdj hoiue (when men 
■le robbed by otmfedentea), and 
stole Us watoh to pcoooie money 
for a oonnael, bnt It was of no 
ue. I got two years at a o<m' 
Tiot Mttlement." 

BtackboTB (np ooontry Anstn- 
lian}, ab<uiglnal aemnta in 
Aiutialia. .BtodUoy meau a 
black who hw become a aerrant. 
It is not snipriaing that "boy" 
should be synonyiiMiia with 
" Berrant" In oonntrias in wbosa 
Infoncy free adolt whites conld 
hardfy by any wages belndooed 
to work. The term is not ap> 
plied to wild blacks. 



idcKtdiiii2(ooloiiiBl), the 
slave trade ; Tecmiting oolonied 
Ubonren In the Sonth Sea 



Bhdc-box (thieves), a lawyer. 

Ur btom Udded ■ Uolw into B pu 
oib aad iboali Ub of hk tluBUe u p 



Btocfcbcnr wwrnggv (popnlar), a 
pecaon who hawks t^pea and 
bootlaow (Hott«n). 

BlmdMii, to (oolonial), to kidnap, 
from the ooloor of tbe skin of 
tboae kidnapped, snch as negroes, 
natives of New Zealand, 3m. In 
tbe quotation reference Is made 
- ■ "which see. 

podi ukd pnctioUy lold inco iUvery.— . 



diircD hj MkUph, ihit It to bt, mboii- 
giml nalivti; the LEim bcinc invarimblj 

■kUB vhu kge thtj may btt. llH>t 
vb« kttiRd liiniLbty ta their vhiLd com- 



Blad braceteU (old), bondonOs: 

When tba taniktj next inonusg itqip'd 
Tlie ii(hi of tbe hols la the mO nradc 
Th* ihiriffi Uui trmetbli liy Kitm oo 



:v Google 



Black eMk—Blaeh/ord. 



Stack oOtla (oldX fumUm InfMt- 

Blade cfttOn dww (elerioal), k 
gMbaring of olerg^; a;., Xpla- 
oopal TUtatioD, 01 gHden-pu^, 

Stack coat (oonunoii), ■ cUcgy- 
hhhi, from the hmUtnal sombre- 
ncM of Ua Bttira, Tbe Franch 
STgot liaa aorbta m for a [vieat. 

Stack ■"""*""<" (popntar), a 
oommoti dmllB for ooL AIm, 
talontod penou of ding; or im- 
poliihed eztetlor ; rough jewel* 

(BOttBD). 



(medloal), tlte 



Stadc eye (oonunoo), " we gare 
the bottle a Uadc eye," *'.<., diank 



ital 






■ tdaok ia the whito ol 107 ere,' " 
i^, lie oannot point oat a blot 
in 1117 ohaiacter. (Nautical), 
" hiatal the white of 1117 vjo I " 
iiaed when Jack aToa that no 
ODe can ta.j thli or that of hhn. 
It le an Indlgnaot asaettion of 
hmooenoe of a charge. "Le 
cdel a'eit pae plus pni qne te 
fond de men omxal" 

Btackfellow (AtutnJian), an ab- 
original, one of the native in- 
bahitanta of Anrtralla. The 
fliat f eatnie in tbe nativea which 
■tniok the ear^ aettlera of Ana- 
tiaUa waa their oolonr. It waa 



natual lor then to write of the 
UMJ^fUbw. At pnaent the 
tenn la moat need b7 whltea 
"up the ooDnti7," and brthe 
aboriglnee themaeltea, Towna- 
people gmm&j talk of "ab- 
uiginala." 



g« of Dm u pUj bn a*. Both cu 
into til* {HnUgD, wb« lb* od> who hi 
been ukad to pUj Hid to tbe othc 
" Blmdi/klltm. TUB jnu dew .st at ih» 



Stack flj (oonntry), a oletgTmaa. 

Btack-Aot (prorinolal), one who 
attenda on a oonitlng ezpedi- 
tloD, to bribe the serrant, make 
friends with the siatet, or ptit 
an7 friend oS hie goacd. Tbe 
n»nohaa7 of a man whotaTDtns 
lore intrignea, that " il tient ta 
ohandelle." 

Stackford, Stackfofd swell (Lcm- 
don alai^, a aweU Bnppoaed to 
be inboRowed orUred plninag& 
It la common for roi^lM to vrf 
Biaekford! to a eweU diaraed 
up for the occasion. 80 called 
from an adrardaing tndeaman 
well knon aa letting on hire 
mlta of elotbea b7 the daj. 

S^ tha ICHdier : " ' And it cuw to pBM 
thu Dand resl U> dutho.' Kam whM 
dots that iiiaiD, bori, 'reot hbclodKi'l* 
Up weM BtnnT't hind. "I innble,' 



:v Google 



Blackfriars — Blackguard. 



127 



Ha BT* ha iwdc* 

TboQcti hii l«tlcn 



r«r Bladl/trtI lodi nui 
hu to the boou. 



Blackfrian (thierea' Blang), used 
•a % warntng 1 "look out I" 
FTBnch thiBTGS would 07, " »o- 



BUckgnsnl (common), & low, dls- 
Tepotable fallow. Dr. John- 
son, Olfford, and otben derive 
tbi* from an atteudAut on 
the dsTll, and slso from tlie 
mean dependantt of a great 
hoiue, who were generally 
called the black gvard as eaily 
at least as the beginning o( the 
sixteenth century. 
Wb hm aeithcr Kbool 

iha dbtrcaed children c 

gmarii.—Ntbtm : Addrta t, 

A 1oD*T knavv, diAi vilhin Ihti twenty 
yean rod« with tha ^/ocj^nurdlr in iho 



d tha Mw4. 




O. O. Ld»nd says :— " It ie 
probably the old Dutch thierea' 
■laag word Uoffoort, from blag, 
meaning a man (but alw^g In 
an iDterior sense), and orl, the 



commonest termination for a 
noon. 'The greater part of 
the nouns in slang which are of 
Dutch origin, are (onned with 
the ending oarA (oort, rrd, eri), 
tr, ■nk, kai, and ing' — Jam** 
lUrUiwl, WtntriKritoik nm Bite- 
goentck. To those who would 
object that man does not neces- 
sarily mDu a mlgar or low per- 
son, I would snggest that in 
thleTes' patois it means nothing 
else, sad that In onr British 
inkers' dialect, wMI ttaHUacX 
(Gaelic lor a vagabond) is used 
rimply to denote any man." 

Likewise in the French argot, 
goMt, originally a fool {oocssion- 
aJly used with that meaning 
now), has the slgniflcatiou of 
man, indiTldnal. Wright has. 
however, shown that the entirdy 
English term liatkgvard, as ap- 
plied to sonllions, was in general 
use at an early date. 

Her MkJeUT, by »ric muni I know 
not, wu lodged at hi< horn* Ewuon, ruTC 
oamect for her highnrn, but fitter lor tha 
htmck gardt—I-tditt lOialrmliuu, U. 



and Iheie at the elecloi'i dnchme cham- 
ber, Ibnooth. which yoa would have laid 
to have been of Ibe timdu itimrd.—Mtri- 



Thonsb toiM of lb 
■hoae of their own ni 
gamrd in * priace'i coui 



To be an ensfD. 
Whne tatter'd coloon well do repreKnt 
Kb fin> eaute i' Ih' ragged nsiiKni. 



:v Google 



Biadigtiard—Btaekkg. 



nMM maka ont ft stKng cmm 
te Um mAj DM of tb* wocd 
In Ingtowil. It would mtm to 
hftTe died ont for ft Uma ftnd 
iMcn rarlTod, poMtbly nndei 
Datoh faiBaenoB, In th« time of 



Btaddt {AmtriMn), » tmj old 
word tor ft nagto, •US oee»- 
donaHj iiMd. Uiatobefomtd 
in ft neiro Mng whkli date* 



Mae>g—nll> from ir^yrt, with 
ft ohftnga of llqnld. Aanoh of 
th« ilztAanth ocotnij bwpMr, 
(»«Var4 or traflrlor (giftdnftUj 
ftUomd to hragumtr, tfaca iU- 
fMiv), dandy, nin fellow, 
■wnggw, trBocftble to the old 
IrefiML, biMoltMi *<""*'— of the 
■liliiiiiilli oeului; being known 
b7 tbe KppumA etyle id thetr 
bneobaa. Hon reoenttr there 
anbtftftnoea of dandiei or other* 
raoelTliv the a{^eUfttloB of the 
more oonepletKnu arUolea of 
thrir dfCM or Uie oolonr of theae 
— tbe lolon-myt, a dandy of the 
tlnM of Loaii XIV. ; eelttmi, the 
modem Farl5iaii"maafaer;" m«- 
giMM-d-tnu-fxntf, a boDy ; cub- 
TWtgti and durry-twiu, honftra ; 
wUto-eiobr, ft clei^yioaii, ka. 

It has also been Kild that the 
teim waa derlred from the olr- 
onitutanoe of a nnmber of dirty 
ragged boya attending on tbe 
pande to blacken the boota and 
aboea of tbe aoldleia and do any 
other dtr^ offloea. From tbe^ 
oonatant attendanoe at tbe time 
of the Boyal Body Quard mount- 
ing, the; were by aome faoetjona 
peraon oloknamed tbe Uoal- 




Bbck Jack (Amadean), ram 
and molawaa, wtth or vltbont 
water. A New Bngland drink. 
(Winoheatw), a large leathern 
jog which formerly waa noed 

Black Job (nndertakera*), a fone- 
raL. Lord Portnnonth'i hobby 
waa to attend all tbmtiaekJcU 
he ooold heai of. 

"Whu, ■ fiiBB*l uatcl" "Via, lb, 
Umct /it hoAmit.-'-SJmmmd YmUt: 
LimimtLmi. 

Blade langmce (Anglo-Indian), 



an, for Hindnatanl and other 
dian tongnea. It la remark- 
B that the Sngliib gypaiea 



•a thefdfo jik, or black tongoe. 
The term waa doubtleaa origl- 
ually Hindu. 



a for- 



vitj appropriated to iwind- 
lera in ndng tranaaotiona, and 
to thoae who betted without 
Intending to pey their loaaaa. 
Alao generally applied in Ama- 
rloft to gambling of any Und. 
bi ita eadiar wip^tioMoa ft 



:v Google 



Blackleg — Black Maria. 



129 



tDMUt k swindler or criminal, 
and 1j emij«ctimd]f doclTed 
from nob fellowi' lege being 
Uaok uid bmlBcd from fitting 
bi tile Btooks and weailng fet- 
ten ; or from the leg* of a 
game-cock, wbioh are alwajs 
black, gamblers and swindlers 
being freqneoters of the oock- 
pit. Else from an allnsioEi to 
the leg* of a " rook," another 
name for a swindler. Btaddtg is 
now a rocognlMd word. Id (dd 
prorlncial SnglUh a tlaeh-foot 
was a man who attended a Iotbt 
OD a conrting expedition to do 
the dirtj and mean work, aach 
as bribbig servants, and acting 
the Leporella 

(Tailors) U UacOeji, a set that 
reject a man a* not fit to move 
in tbetr (oolety, or who organise 
a method to compel a man to 
leave his situation or tbe town, 
are said to UooiU^ him. 



State*, sa;* Bartlett, it nsnallj 
means mon^ extorted from a 
person, by thrsatening to accnse 
him of a crime or to expoee him 
in the newspapers (it is used 
with a like meaning tn England). 

" ThricB 11 he uswd who hmh hii quvnl 



tin mbiirb^ but It ■ very jici 
■Iw catR of tht nrjr bat pi 
town, and th« » ' 



antiqnarian expert In law.whero- 
aa one well veised in " case 
law," or the deoisions of jadgea, 
is termed a " case lawyer." 

Blkck lion (medical), the name 
given to certain ra^ddly-elongb- 
ing nloera which affected our 
soMieTS when in Fortagal 

Btocltmafl (leoognlsed). To levy 
ilaefaaoiZ waa a tribute extorted 
hj powertnt robber chieftains to 
protect traveUers from the de- 
ptvdattons of other robben in- 
tertoT to themsdres in strength 
and organisation. IntbeUntted 



(he palicv hai been I 
DotiiHoiu ha in ■uh ihoRMghfiun » 
Fieadillr, Pall Mill, W>leH<» Flaca, 
Reteol Slrccl, Sec, tec •ohm jma puL 
—Smt-n/v Stviem. 

Bkeat HL7s:^"jr<M(lB aSeot> 
tish term for rent fitocjtsunt or 
Umk rtnt is the rent paid in 
catUf^ as distinct from wAite 
MOney or Bilver." It is onrioos 
to note, however, that naitl# in 
old French signified capper oidn 
(a trace of which still remains 
in the modem phrases «iuw ««m 
ai mmiUt, amir moQli i partir, 
fto.}. This wrad m^ have 
been adopted by the Scotch, who 
•till reti^ French words tn 
their phiaeeology. BhdMMiug 
is a provlnoiaUsm still nsed 
(Wright). 

Black Harla (Engllah and Ame< 
rican), the oell van in wbioh 
prisoners aro removed from 
ccnirt to prison. Termed in tbe 
Erenoh aigot " panier aaalade." 
I 



:v Google 



Black Maria-^Blaek town. 



Em; fitldnult'i paili poplei ; 
Who on culh would be ■ WDmu— 

Which it ii ■ wTMdied m. 
No OH fncr, no one pstcr, 

Rhonld be hobjcct of dtifuil T 
Wli«-i the navn, tell me why, nh I 

Why tlut t>i with chiUm nic* 
Sboald be Msnwd like BUci Maria, 
FDllafTillwnTudYiccT 

"AUy Sttfirit HMfHtlUmy. 
When Lord Curincloo tiA Ui UMod- 
ODl nablaiiicn urivgd in MelboorDt on a 
viul lately, Blmtk Mmria, the ijciua nn, 
w«i dr»wn Dp hr iht ituiaii, iqfiiiRntljf 
in naiting.— J/Hftm Sichf^. 

Thla term i« s»Id to have 
originated in Fbiladelphia In 
|8]8. 

BUck Miwdaj (popular), erecn- 
tioDB used to tobe place on 
Hondaj*. 



Jookered ■ man tn "middle 
put" he vu Mid to tfaat 
Attp blm, whilat the other «m 
Mid to be ilatl-tkteped. Thi* 
ooold onlj happen in " oloiated 
time," that is, dnring the lact 
eleven weeke of " long tudf," 
when "middle" Mid "Junior 
puts" went Qp together. It 
refer* now to eenfor Mid Junior 
divliton* of " middle part," 



Black olnbaent (tbleres), pleoei 



(old), 

the large keT* with which the 
doors of ■ponging-hooM* were 
fnmiahed, 

BUdt spy (popnlar), the de:*lL 

BUck itrmi (popnlu), port wine. 
(American), New ^glaod nun 
and malaMes. (Naatiiial), the 
dark ooiintij wines of the 
Uedltemmean. Also, had port, 
■nch as was serred for the slok 
in former times. 



Black paalm (old], to sing a blaek 
fttdm wag to 017. 

BUck Sal (popidar), the tea-kettle. 

BUck Saturdaj (workmen's). 
When a labourer or meohanio 
has anticipated or drawn all 
hi* wages and has no money to 
take at the end of the week, 
his mates say "he has a Uuol 
Saivrdaji In his week." 

BUck-«heep (Winohester). 
When a man in "junior part" 



DnnlmiM <*< MiUuit. 

(Old), the name by wbioh a 
oertsJn punishment, a labonr 
task Imposed on soldiers at 
Gibraltar for small oSenoM, 
was called, 

BUck teapot [popular), a bUck 



BUck town (Anglo-Indian), the 
popnlar local English name for 
Uadraa. It is also used at Bom- 



:v Google 



Black wash — Blank. 




Uatt, Oarman KSit*. B07it«T- 
en and debanohsai were alio 
tenned " roaring bcTi." 



Blade wuh (medioal), a lotion 
«»»»««i«n»»j - of <ialonwl and lime- *' <"id'^< 




Black woifc Cpc^nlar), nndeitak* 



v of lard (popular), a bald- 
boadad pertoD. The French 
eqtdnlent la "bonk de Tlenx 
oing." 

Blade (ooouaon). It la ganerallj 
and plaodblj aaanmed that this 
word for a man U detired from 
Kadt aa a ejiutajm for iword, 
and a aoldier. And this seona 
to be borne out by the anal^^ 
of a limUar French espreaioii, 
MMioBM loBU, which foRDerfy 
meant a man of the world, a 
HmMrig mail. Blmdt la atUl 
naed in the prorlnoea foe a 
briak, mettleeome, eharp yao.11% 
man. But aa it haa the lame 
prtmiuioiatlon aa the Dntch 
Itoed, meaning " blood," and aa 
a blood was the common term 
for "a taat, and high-mettled 
man " during the refgna of the 
Georges, It la not Impoeaible it 
owes maoh to the latter. The 
word waa alto a personal noon 
in Dotch, aa em armt Hotd, a 
poor fellow. £Io<d, a dmple- 
toB, ia from a different root; 
Heedt, timid, f eartnl ; Irlah 



(tinker), prison. 

Blaaie (popular), a mild aqiletlTe 

used when one ia dissatisfled or 

disappointed. Ottener heard In 

the proTinoea than in Londcm, 

uid tnuoh mttte ao In Amarloa. 

llM iHiptT hMI tnd fcor tiBHt lit u 

tndiitn, but be aud, vith ui mjund air, 

diu tbt Indtu bud ikipiMd imiDd b'i is 

■pill nwTtluiia— SDd iBiaiiioilloo Ummti 

•knne, too.— Mat* Tmahn Xt^gU^ /I. 



I Thbih 



I lb* b< 



" Ynr— doo'— iiiTH) I " dovlTfJiiciiUtad 
(be nsbniwd old MIow. "As' hen I'm 
been ■ nids' time bean lor the iUwud 
tUac b> lUit Kv BnoUya I '—DraUt 

" Daronation 1 " is aometjmea 
softened into " blamenatton 1 " 

Blank (hunting), to draw a hUmk 
In oonndng or hnntlng is to 
hare a run without meeting 
with anything. Qntte recently 
the term Uoai has been adopted 
as a snbstltnte for " damn," 
" bloodj," end other fordble 



:v Google 



on Ml sRUid br me, and i^ia m if you 
■In't nmnin' off vitboni x mrd aboiii lu- 
ff irt JimrU 1 Cmiriil Cmrv- 

Bmwu* m-n nUciou, ilmmk too, 
doTDacqMctBKIOBMiTcT Gawdocds 
npntrfinil StopI^KnisUHtvcyin 
■naff l~Brtt HmrU .- GairUl Ctmrwr. 

" For Wnfi 1.^ rir, (in m Ih. 
orfioe, ]FOT ItBMn nu lordT. uid ihu I'm 
Vdl,tl 
tUaii 
■ doa^-4]kiT(D, bnlkt-boida] 



i" 



,. "iflMUnt 
m Hw picur Willi ihc mini in hii ha 
ilown 'crt tod 'ere, ■ nhowin' out jmt jf ■ 
Umi luatut 'id pusud him. Till tct 
(■•"i lnmutJfBl, fine u ( Mui (reThmmd, 
wttli « iltt^t luavy sir with bim tlwt kuki 

OM, piT-Kirl" kddi the ipeaker. nddenlr 



Bteniej (oommoD), Sattei?; np. 
poaad to be derived from a BtoiM 
In the tow^ of Blarney CuQe, 
Dsar Cork, the kiniiig of wUch 
U « feat of tome dlffionlt;, from 
its perilooi poBitton Id the waU. 
It li inppoeed to oonfer the gift 
of eloqneuoe, of a kind pecnllariy 
adapted to win the heaita of 
women. It ia a oonunon tarltu 
in Cork, when a man ii tijing 
Ua powen of perraasioii or 
whoMlling, "he haa been to 
Blarae; OMtle," or "naao of 
yonr blarney," 

Blwt (popular), a familiar nama 
amongst the lower orden for 
erysipelaB of the hce. 

Blater (popalar), a oalf ; to " oiy 
beef on a hlaier," to make a fun 
about nothing: 

Dent be (Um-auhr: iAj, m'd or 
b«f oa ■ Uttr.-Ljian , p,aumi. 

, a lawful (old cant), a BbUber (geDoral), Idle 
wife. The alloiion la obrioos. ^^ ^^^ °"id or puddle. 

A priiE-Sibter wbo dos sot %ht b 

dock which doct at* go oK. He hu no 
rmJumiTMrT. We do not af cmne wiifa to 
i n ri n m re ih»i my at the "Gsic men ill* 
oflo-daruieuiJi)ii](iBdi(iiTidact. And 
T« Ihete mmy be tb<Me' who w«ch "Ifc." 
John L. Snllinn Rvolriog ronod the pn- 
naat in ■ dood af i/nOrr; who think the 
tip ihouid £l— /«>■ Trudt. 

Blatherskite (American), a man 
wboM tongue ran* away with 
him ; an iirepressible notay 
obattorer ; " blathering." Of 
Scotch origin {vide BiMiBtaa). 



—CMarUi Dicitm: Para/trUu 
"' •ifiHAIllUYtar 



Bluka (Anglo-Indian), a rare 
word uaed for whites or Kuro- 
peang by themselves. 

Blare (popular), to roar, to bawl. 



Hitccw (ot loni offud hehndn'i > ihin 

to Uh cook, 
Yen ■udnEKHu ttoitef, rou'd beu ilini 
rosrhook. 
— 7»f MmditrimdatPiimt: 



"To \t 



:v Google 



Blase — Blaxers. 



133 



to leave k white saifMa expoaed, 
whlob serrea rither for s boon- 
du7, a landmark, or as a Bign 
to dlraot ttaveller*. The Algan- 
kln Iniliiuiii of the north-aast 
Uou trees BO aa to dii«ot Indiana 
leaving a vlllaga; whlt« m«o 
make mob marks on the other 



di btoutht D* oppotHs 
id, iUMimt thi nw u ■ 
Vait.-Stmmltjr.TirratitiulMr»Ctm- 

It is used in this sense by the 
op oountiy Angtraliaus. 
T)w lut (ii miki of ■ neir rud inU 
CusOKr hud jiut b«D mukcd out ud 
P*rU1t ohI* hj rbs inhiUiuiii, a- 
pnatr for the lOTemor. It mi ■ wall 
cboacn bal nngh tnck duigiuUd br 
Wmid lr« oa tilha hand, the Dobaifcad 
pAiti bdDjE pUDled whiCfl, in ordtr to bi 
non nunireB in the duk.— ££nX.-Ca£ 
Mtmdmj: Our AmtifiJa. 

It also appUee to an; kind of 



a great incoeH and crowded 
hooMB. To the initiated this 
luoallf dgnlllea a dead fiUl- 
nre, and a hoosa crowded with 
" dead-heads." 

31aser (DnlTerdty), a ooloared 
loose flannel jaoket, worn as 
the nnifonn of a boating or 
other olab ; originaUy red, but 
now of the olnb oolonn, sbriped 
or ooloared aocordingl;. The 
■orplice worn by students in 
chapel on oertaln feast or fast 
days, is deaoribed as the Uattr 
of the Chnroh of England. Baoh 
olqb ohom a different colour 
or combination of oolonrs, and 
these oombinaUons aie some- 
thing snfflclently startling to 
have originated the appellation. 



rt deddcdLy the fknuntca. 



I pidUd op m BOH. ud N-a my 


Duogh «» diiiv duH b>d KDlond on 


(«» br U»Uds off . p«u«dD( onH 




of aUstaa.-MATi 7W£..- A Strmf 
Drtam, 


■n- effKi mdnd br tb* tbooHid. of 

flcuini: ud meriaa cnfi, with Ibdt occo- 


puti in briUIuI Mum ud light Do» 


BloMt is an English prorln- 


■DBH, !• qniU ulqu of iti kiad.-7-*» 


ciallsm for a white spot on a 




borM's forehead; and U««d is 


(Prisons), a jaoket worn hj 


a term appUed to a tree when 




marked lor sale. 


Iflh* jaag autloKB do not lik. the 


(General}, to Uue away, to 


onyicl Wo«r., the, wiU no. be iiUowkI 


Bra. 




Hi Munf anr ud aiHd T«i u ihu 


■ policeB«i.-A«w FoO^ 






SkkStKkriiUr. 


BUzera (nautical), a term applied 




to mortar or bomb vessdls, from 
tbe great emission of Same to 
throw a 13-iDch sh^— Jdairal 




by the poet Bonn, to indicate 


AvU. 



, Google 



BImm (oommon). "QotAlUia," 
i4., "go to httll," is % oomnuHi 
•zprMsion both in Qrat BriUic 
■ad the Dnited State*, among 
thow who ax* too &Bttdioits to 
■ay the word that the^ mean, 
uid are willing to go ninety-nine 
per oent. fn the ezpreadon of 
protani^, nukiiig dm of " b; 
Oad," Inatead of "hj Qod," 
"great Soott," instead of " great 
Ood," and "darned" inateadof 



1 caold b»e told Johnsr SkM IhU I 

■udi a lUfl hoar, mad m (o to U^m vltk 
lt.-itmrk Twmim. 

Bleach, to (Harvard UniTenity, 
Maaaaoboaetti), to absent ono- 
■elf from morning prayer& To 
prefer being present In the ipliit 
lather than In the body. 



Beak (thlerea' slai 
(New Tork Slang DiotioDarT). 

Bleating cheat (old CBOt), a sbeep. 
"Cheat," meaning a thing 
igJVJ)' *** added to a word 
deeotlbing the 017 of the ani- 
mal, tfana oaoHIng cheat, grant- 
ing oheat, &0. 
When I ipok* ra Mm, b* nid Moe- 

tUns ■boat ■ MHtny ihwg lous ■ bite ; 

but 1 ibonld think tku fofioff ■■»■ ■> hx 
a in flcacnL — Mac mil lMM't 



Bteating cull (dd eaot), a aheep- 



Bleating prig, iheep-ateallng. 



*"— **"g rig (old oant), sheep- 
Bleed, to (BngUsh and American), 
to be oUiged to pay mon^ 
•gainst CMie'B will, or to oUigB 
ime topay. 

A bay lira is Pamjtnu wbo niMifi 
from bleediot u intoimk. Ha uaaUr 
bfawb hbh iKjt at a iIm. 
irin N-d dm* Bouha a 



1 mot (popnlar), a bdr- 
oomplazloDed weni^ 



This is in ref sence to the 
oxtnTagani demands made 
upon poUtioal oandldatea by 
" heeltts " and " atrikem" 

each atbcr deed, 
Hal [atdr iboini that far our laka ba did 

■ul fear to Mi(£ 
A fcnaooi fifk, that tabta va^ ia nolh 

youll be agreed. 
That a a^ vfaich bean aiae hinrlinsn 

St.Httm'tLmmlirm. 

(Piinten), a book or pamphlet 
that i* oat down eo moch aa 
to toabh the printed poitionis 



Bleeder (sporting), a sorereign; 
(oulversi^). a " regular iUadtr" 
signiAee a lopeilatiTe dnffer. 

Bleedeta (old), spurs, from theic 
causing blood to flow by fr»- 

Bleeding the monkey (nantloal). 
The mimkry la a tall pyramidal 
rod or bucket which conveys the 
grog from the giog-tab to the 
men. Btoaling from this in InM- 
*<l« is so oalled.— Jcfaiiral On^ 



:v Google 



Btetlurs—Blmd. 



(Soottidi), wind or 
windj ; ncHuenM. Robert Bum* 
JooomIj Umenti that Ua biul- 
iiaw wu to ctriDg np Udktn 
in ihyme for fool* to ring. 
BUOmimd fa a loqnaoloiu fool. 
f8«rt«rwwrfif« la % arnonTmoaa 
woid, but axprMdtre of atlU 
grafttcr oontempt ^ the oae of 
tlM word "ikite" at "ik^te," 
wbioh (tgniflea exeremeiit. To 
ifaOtror UalWlato talk t«di- 
onalj and f ooUahly. Tbe word la 
akin to " bladder," tkat is, filled 
with wind. 

I hH beoi dMB Ipcill JBM vi' luUD- 
i« u tn AMAfriv eU warn—Sir 
WmOtrSaU: OUMtrimHlr. 



MiMfnVUack ne^bodi Ihut, aaj not 
U u pomfiil td innn And), ftc— .&VM : 

Blew or bhie (conunon), to warte, 
to spend, to diaalpate. " I Uns 
abob (I waated asblUlng)," nUd 
a ooetennooger, " wbeo I went 
to an exhibition of {dctDreB." 



Toq 



» il Ub w-i iikHd kiiria n 



W*11 polU nC lb* Mk and vaCiUd M 
A jtUr iW. ud Um tbt lirb ud « 



nl M nil, wd lliiBk 
»c'tv doinff right ; 
od if n hive u jmm thi dodi, MU 
day I ihaa'L npinc, 



Slewed (oommon), spent, dlspoeed 
of. Loot or been Tobbad oL Prl- 
maiil7, to p^ ont, to spend, 
Oennan Uanco, whloh anggerts 
bine, and not to blow, aa the 
originaL In* Uaua Aiiu in (awaj 
Into the blae), vanished, gone; 
the Frenoh fani au bleu ha* 
the same stgniflcatfon. Atn 
patmr au bltu, to sapprets, dl»- 
ripate, spend, aqnaoder, appro- 
priate. An alludon to a dla- 
tant, undefined place in tbe bine 

BUgee. bUcer (pidgin), obliged. 



■hu Tiihk, cu w _ 

sfftr. Hufl cuebc* chaml nov.— CWl ; 

Pm-cM. 

BUmcf (common), an appateatir 
meani^eM, abnalve term. 
C roK TKB Iloa-'A* lUi ii ■ coon, I 
(Mknitibta ud pnpa to n tboton 
of liiisu(* afanji Doed op *w«oan. 1 
■bnalon iimili. " Urn, Buudaicff, n»- 
adit fluAly hlaodndwn, dwik; cam 



EmmMimt EgtOttim. 



BUnd (popular), '■ in the UmhI," in 
^ii^i zilght, in dartaiesa. 



:v Google 



Blind—Blatsard. 



Tbta it'i dswB with tlw *— <— ' u^ Im 

Puk DP aU n cu bi tlu mm; 
ADd looff ov the bttnui, 
Wiibou uj wuniiia. 
Win lun Uck-TEqi ud ludtod bc- 



(Frinton), » term ^iplled to a, 
pangnph muk T. owiiig to tha 
fact of tbe «70 of the P being 
black or fllled Dp. 

Blliiddiaeka(pO[nlai},po*teilon, 
tanned ocaaetiiiie* Mod Cnpld. 
The French argut caII* it more 
epproprUtelf U lergm. An- 
other slang ezpreeston for the 
nme put of the bodj i* " two 
bit oheeks Mid ne'er » dom ; " 
In French slang " on Tl«age Mna 



Blinker (Amadou), » phiMa 
fnll7 explained bj the follow- 
ing aneodote tttaa a New Todc 
newsp^er: — 

'■Tlwta 



-■ . ■TTtt TMHW 

(mr ih«-fei llMT Itti iIhb CUM Okd 
BigfatyoAioI' Tbtnct vulM o«a 
lutr, vhoi om of dM wm 
ink with the ba>WT •rail* of 



-ridiBLDTX. 



I (pogilirtdo). the ere*, 
termed aleo oglea, optloa, peep- 
en, winkers. (Common), speo- 
taolBi. minktrt, Dntoh alaag. 



Soau rabUr lo wU had napiiHl ■ winder. 



BUiido, to ((umj), to die. 

Blind one'a trail, to (Amerloan), to 
mot In moh a va^ that tt wonld 
be dlffloolt to trace one's doii^ ; 
putting oS the loent. Thni m 
fox in croBslng a lirer Uimit Ui 
Irail, water being fatal to the 
■cent of dogs, 

BUnk, to (American), to drink. In 
Dntoh thierei' tlang, Umkett is 
a glaaa. ".HMheri cm nit t« 
boim"— "To booie from » 
glaea." 



BUnko (tbierea), the term U ex. 
plained bj the qnotatlon. 

"WUt la I UMk, br Intucal* 
" Well, il-io kind oTcawtHDimil, Aif 
ing, ud thu," replied ttia oU rdkm, 
" lowhidi Hiucn an tat ■-- ■— '--n 
of all tht polks.-- - - 



Bliu«d (American), a word of 
maoj meanings, in one of the 
eadj Crockett almanacs about 
1836 it appears as dictlnotlr 
meaning a shot from a rUe. 

""Dk ddv ba^i irhan tbay mot to 
■dual ouriad their ri>Et b> (M ■ H£DMtf 



:v Google 



Bliaard— Block. 



137 



blue, or from tha (Oanadlaii) 
Fraaoh tlaur, to wooncl or hit. 
It wsa «Ibo applied to lightning 
at BD Mrl^ data. At preaent the 
tremandooa wind-stoims lika 
(he (yphooD which iweep over 
tho Wert an caUed Uinonli. 
It posaiblj owes thia later mMD- 
ing to the Oeimaa bUtt. 
Wllb R&rcno* 10 lh< wsnl iOaarJ, m 
~ '»]• th< rgltov 

u Gnt tiled in Muihall, 
ft uujteen yvmn mgo. SoaH 
9 (ojoyuig tbonHlva u ■ 
, wbcn M nonn of wind aod 

iac up quickly, uttered ■ Gimuii eipm- 
■i(A (oar corrapondcpl bu forgotten ths 
vuidi) which KiondedTeTTmochlika Wi- 
AtfWl Hia fncHlm took it Dp And hmvfl 



BkMt (Amerioau), a dmnkard, a 
drowned ooipM. 

BliMter (popular), " my KoaUr," a 
terra of foiendehlp much in 
U,f<xa with 'Jmj, who like* 
hia trienda as mnob as his 
UoaUr for breakfast, and that 
Is not taying a little. 

•Omttr, il (n't all 
h vw on the Ruly, 



Block, the (AnstnUan}. 
Uu Hock," ' 



one of the favoorite amnee- 
ments of Helboiuiu ladles be- 
tween twelve and one and five 
andiiz. T%«6(oatUtheIaihioD- 
abte promensde la Helbonine. 
The Uoet is the block of boild- 
iugs in Collins Street Iring be- 
tween Swanston Street and 
EUiabeth Street. 

Block hooM (dd slang), a prison, 
honaeof ooiieotion, pMiltentiary, 
and similar aitabllshmenta. The 
eipi«BEion leminda one of the 
French military slang term U 
bhe, an abbrerlati<m otUoe/dtaut, 

Block of stock (American), ao 

adaptation of the Franoh term 
eti bloc, meaning a latge number 
of shares in anything, a great 
nndlvided maas, held as a single 
interest. 

I[ would ba compuaiinlj ouy, then- 
Ton, Tor k lyndicue to alit the anmal 
rnm }tj Gould, aptcudl; if Rusdl Smgt 
or KHH otbcr holds efa iHg Ue:t ^('(tai 
wen 10 join iho aOTemaL -CAiatr Tri- 
JMH, Ociobei I, 1W7. 



Block oniamenia (popnlar), the 
better kind of meat scraps sold 
at bntchets' atalls. 

On the ihdiei Kt oM in front af Ibc 
M ifl tb* 



lb.1 



tbtr 



Wtw 



■Bincd) nt ti.~Slmitdard. 
For dinner, whicli so n weali dajr it 
lurdJy ever enten nt the coaicrvaiver'i 
nhodn, Ibej boy Mk* murwrwir, u ihrf 
cnll [he «uU, dnik-eolourod pi«» of mul 
eipoaed 00 the dienp bulcbvi' blocki 
or coaiitm.~Hinr, Mayin, : iMdmt 
Laiturmiaau L^<i4t<t Ptrr. 

Also old-fashioned, qneer-look- 
ing men and women. 



:v Google 



IJS 



So the votd WM origliutUj naed 
in tbe police amnpKpea twenty- 
flre yean ago. A Uah wu a 
viotim of Bharpo, a atnpld pttT- 
•on, a greenhorn. It is not 
from tbe gypey latt, » nuui, a* 
Hotten aaserti, lalct not being 
an Anglo-Romany woid. It la 
probably from the Dutch iUk, 
a block, a log, a fool, which 
glToa riM to blok-ter, a plodder, 
a dull fellow, and to the Engllih 






"Givt ui > boricr, then, old iMi," 
■hrnksl aDolhtr (WBiD.— /'. W. SMx- 
tm: LMUKmitKirtj. 

It ha« another •igniflcatioo, 
whkh is explained by the qnota- 



vijwM noh as '■ darat " (e^eoi- 
ally ptotniMqae In oonneotiao 
with tapping), ** RadiTiinfaMi " 
(a pwoliai kind d olaiet cap 
Inrented at the Dnke of Beav- 
fort'eeeat). "inby," "aimaon," 
" Chateau I^tt«,"fcc 

Blood and entnik (nastioal). 
Tbla la a ilang name given to 
the Britiih eoitgn by Tankee 



Blood and thi 
(Amerioan), d 
England. Llteratnre of tha 
loodest and coaneat aensational 
kind, "dotecttre" dotbIb, ro- 
manoei like "Jack Bheppard" 
and the " Outlaw of the Plains," 
" Life of BuSftlo Bill," fto. 




f/Lrmdtm. 



Blood (fencing). In the old back- 
■wording oonteats a Uood, •.(., 
a streak of blood on the head or 
face at leaet one Inch In length, 
waa the equivalent of a deol- 
aive " broken- haad." The word 
Huiiger ia used in the same senaa 
by the Qerman students on the 
Henanr. 

In priie-ring parlance the 
word Is not considered anfflol- 
ently graphic, and hlood ia never 
mentioned except under B;rno- 



toiMd lituktnn, hu fHYDnrirc aiiihort 
iMuig PoDBD du Temil, Gaboruu, Mod 
LAceoun, the Icllcred murderer who 
onuUlcd tlH d«di of Hoffmu'i "Ch- 
dillu " br pnwlini uoond i)h Omtt of 
Purii for ^umt—PmriM Ctmtfndtmt ! 

Blood boat (uand), a "tally 
boat " or bninboat, a boat em* 
ployed to cany proTiaiona from 

the ahore. 

Blood-cnrdler (aociety). a story 
of murder likely to nwke tbe 
reader's blood ourdle. 



:v Google 



Biood— Bloody. 



tltt J e mrM tn cf Knglah tmractiBo ap bii 



Blood for blood [trade], barter 
among tradeajneu, who sz- 
ohaoge with each other the 
oommoditieB In which they 
deal 

Blood-aackera (lodety), eztor- 
tionen, people who are ood- 
■taoUy getting mon^. Derixed 
from mufhta, who are blood- 

ir tSam (Ur ba Inta-, tlw pontr uid iha 
boou crpcct ■o iBct bl n g. A bjr *"■**■** 
u abool two ftmoci per diem divided bfl' 

tbe Stock Ezchugs ICKnllT (in trcbl* 



(Nantioal), luj fellows, who 
bj Bknlkiiig throw their pro- 
portion of labour on the aboul- 
den of their •blpmatea. — id- 
mini Bmjitk. Id the arm; tnch 
fellows are ityled "•crlm- 



Bloody. Dr.C.Hackaynukestho 
following remark*; "A word 
that la con*t«iitl7 used in the 
■enae of augninarybythe radeat 
and fonlMt-moQthed of the vnl* 
gar. Did tbeee people know 
the harmlecmeia of the odlone 
eidtbet,aa they now nndentand 
it— U th^r understand it at all 
— tb^ would perlkape oeaee to 
empli^ it, aa not wlBoleatly 



139 

ooazM and dlagnmng to milt 
(heir ideas of the emplutic. 
Dean Swift, who was partiany 
aoqo&lnted with the vemaon- 
lai Gaelioof Ireluid, wrote from 
Dublin to hit friend Oaj that it 
was ' bloodg hot ' — an expres- 
sion which he woald not hare 
permitted himself to use in its 
blaokgnardly Kogllsh sense of 
Hsngnlnary. ' Xotdfi hot,* in 
the nse made of it by Dean 
Swift, meant ' rather hot' " 

Mr. Oharle* Q. Leland writes : 
"Mr. Hotten thinks that this is 
an arpledTB without referenoe 
to any moBning. Any on* who 
will take the pains to look orer 
the sanguinary words in any 
Eoropean langoage can at onoo 
peroeire agreat deal of meaning 
in the assooiatton of bloody with 
erU or revolting. We find, for 
inBtana«,ill or evil blood, blood- 
thfrrty, blood-stained, bloody. 
In the sense of omel or alfo- 
oioos, bloody aonnoU, blood- 
guilty, and In German or Datoh. 
blood-shame or Inoest, a tdood- 
rersnger, bloody revenge, and 
in aU three 'a bloody villain' 
for morderer, as nothing is more 
natoial than for an adjeotiva or 
adverb nsed in so many oppro- 
brious meanings to take on 
otbers. The transfer of tlecdg 
from mnrderons to evetything 
wioked or bad seems as natm«l 
as Haz O'ReU's derivation of it 
from By'r Lady I is absurd. As 
R. H. Prootor remarks, in Us 
AMtri e aititmt ('Knowledge'), 
it is ' simfde nonsense.' Tho 
Qormans have b hit ti mig , which 



:v Google 



Bloody — Blot. 



ha* nothing to do wiUi Mirf, 
'blood;' Um Snt oomponntt 
la » dialaotal hnn of Kom, 

Tha Xart ol Snffdk ^T«a 
Um follo«liig defloMon of 
the wend; "JKbody, Ml oni»- 
raeaUl adjeotlTe of InDnito 
■dapUUlltj and aignUcaiioA. 
This woid ia oaed Urgaty 
though not exolusiTelT In tort 

Bloodj Jmnny (popnlar), shMp'i 



pt^tment or raffled fodingB^ 
mild awMilnft In fact. It la 
^^«d to e*«i7tlilng from s 
•well to an ojatn. 




Hchud bHB otad and faond rulvor 
wiKkr. lUdiTliHlcaBtfccliacaaF 
tioo, ud ih* Tilifkchtr wd Toa Barf 



BldOdj Idnc^ a red-briok ohnrah 
In Bamwell (St. Har^'a the 
Laea), teaembUng King'a Col- 
lege Chapel in arohlteotnre. 

Bloody Haiy'a, the i«d-briok 
ohoTOh, 8L Paul's, raaemblii^ 
St. Mair'a in Oambtldge, the 
Unirenltj church. 

Bloody ahirt, the [American), 
agitation of the war qaestlon 
after the CItU War. 



ifaOHT to bar hk hamlet. AitbalKd 

■mil itH li "• • I III 1 111 lliilain 



Bloomer (Anatrallan), prison alaag 
for a miatak& Abbreriated 
from the exfovadon "a bloom- 
ing error." 

Bloominc (oommon), naed oom- 
monlf for emphaalalug a wocd, 
bat gntenUy in an inokal 



" Whu day g' ItH wcA b thb I " 
" Mendmy.*' i^ibed Bcny. 
"Hoodky, li ill W*ll. .'wh^ ar 
ood gmrdcD ■tuff, thk ia a J/ mh uV aioa 



BlOM (American thieves), woman, 
girl, mistress ; from iUmnm, oU 
Borilsh slang. 



vbo onldn't jad tb( boortor 
loun'i wiUwiU bit tha to 
am icuins pacy. — Ob Ot 



Blot tiu scrip (popular), to engago 
[ijtUng by a wittton 



Blot tfae aoip, and Jsric it (cdd 
cant), to stand snret; or baU 



:v Google 



Biovidte — B/ow. 



Blorlste (Amnicaii), « mmde up 
or "fBCtiUooB" word, wbloh baa 
b«en QMd sinoe 1850, and la 
perhaps oldor. It !■ liregnlarlj 
lued to tigDitj verbositj, wam- 
deiii^ fiom the nbjeot, and 
idla or Inflftted oratoij 01 blow* 
log, bj which word K was pro- 
bttblr BuggMtod, being partl- 
allj Inflnmeed by " deflate." 

Bloir (imiTerdl?), a drookeii 
froUo 1 an old alaug phnsa for- 
merly mnoh in TOgue at both 
Oifmd and Cambridge, bnt not 
mnoh used now, snob worda aa 
"•pree," "tight," &0., baTii^ 
Bapersaded it. Alao, " to hhm," 
utd " to go on the How." (Old 
cant), " He baa bit the blow," 
i^ ha baa atolen the gooda, or 
done the deed. (Oommon], a 

■ hilling 

Forihu 1 wtBt Id tb* SmbI (Budlc— 
Cold Buh TtMM PluooX IwTiiw ■ Dew 
•dl of dobber oa ma, (nd ■boot Eftf Ji!m> 
to aj hifb pocket). Whrn I cum oat 
I won u tb* aoM old (ua*— /■ t/mifr - 
PrUm/HUmti. 

Blow, blow It (American thleree' 
■lang), to be aUent, be quiet I 
bold TOUT chatter I Thla la 
qntt« the oppoelte of tbe BngUah 
slang "to blow," whlob meaiia 
to inlonn on, or the oommon 
Amcolaan " to blow," it., to talk 
londlr and emptilj. 



Oow, blow OB, npon (oommoo), 
toezpoae. Inform. 

And riH tSo't (M DoUidx Inl ma u k«p 
■ Hcnl far bv, and I-n bHB mud Utmid 
m bB.—J. Gm m a md: Diet Tn^U. 

Yoa mnldo'l Mw u old dmm maoBg 
WMhiBid3,woBiijvi1—SiimS»i.Tit 



Dcpoid Dpon il Ihu Ibrj'n oo the Kant 
down bcra, mod Ihat If he Dond, ha'd 
Utm ^M tha tUag at ooc*.— JKclMt .- 
OUvtrTuItt 

BbI I aiU Utm bar, ba «id, I wffl ibm 

Sirll'miUrSall:St.RKHtmiWia. 

Derixed from the prlmai; mean- 
ing (0 films, to spread hf report 
aa It with atntmpet, topabUsb; 
or from to Mow vjwa, to taint, 
to blast, to Mng into diafiftTom 



Happily Sit him. ha wai not put to 
tha hai lili tba Bnt bnnt of populu nic* 
had •peil itiel( aad lill lb* cr ' ' ' 



>M, "Nbar 
TooIhTi C** <^ l l l b tbw U, man, Utm 
Ur whidi Biani thu Mr. Uac Clanj 
th«0(bt thai Hi. Toohay oo^ DM to talk 
M maA.-~PMImJitfUm Fna, Dk. t, 



In Datoh an ear-blower, oo^ 
Utmtr, means an inatlgator. 
Informer, or STOOpbaut; the 
Fnnob nffitr d«u tertOU piniiia 
to ba cloael; allied to It. (Wln- 
obestor), to Uow algnlflea to 
blush, ^e a roee in foil bloom. 
(American), to Uow, to brag, 
0[<>gaa" midnlj. (Old slang), 
" to blow the groondaela," vilng 
theBoorforthepnTposeofaexnal 
interooorae, (Conunon),''toU«v 
the gaff," to rersal the lecret, 
to " peaoh," to Inform. The old 
form still In use la "to blow 
tha gab," i.*., to otter tbe dla- 
oonrae, whlob has m 
in it. 



:v Google 



Bhm — BlotBer. 



Wby, be ninly knn ■ j^ny fi«« ■ 
ronod nUB, uid Jack d mr wd ihn tippn 
ter nuUog ■ kw with bin, u nil com 
othk lodHT "Ntm tlH sdt--l?a 1*4 

Sometimes " to blow tbe gag," 
which lllenllj aignlfiea to Uow 
off tbe mebLphoric impedimeat 
which keeps one's month closed. 
T« ibm off, to tMKt to drinki, 
(Common), New Dtit, B good mML 
Thu wu ■ nn (and Utm rnt, kA^Io- 
qaiHt Dm, maplKaidr nalliof tlw 



BlomditobaBlMMl. ThiaexptM- 
■ioD is m. ir«Bk attempt to aToJd 
tb« nse of the oaths " damn " or 
" blast," asd ooours In onl; snch 
sxpressloiis as " I'U be UmcwI If 
I do," aod manj othen that 
are contlnnally heard from 
the months of tbe popolaoe. 
Tom Hood was asked to ooa- 
trlbnte to a new cheap periodi- 
cal for nothing, or for a small 
advance aa he termed It npon 
nothing:, and replied to the 
raqnert that he would will> 
Inglj do so In the interest of 
ohe^ literature. If his batoher 
and baker would act upon the 
same prinolple towards hlm^if 
He cited a letter on the sntajeot 
which he had receiTed from his 
butcher : — 

Sls,~'KapActifi'r«iriuta;<Jic«plitet«. 
ton b* Urmmll BntdiBi mat lin u 
Mil u iNhcr peofilc, ud ir B U u ran 
imd (be nadin' public mnU lo bin WfcmX 

— M , mad kill jmnFlKL— Johh Stokki. 



Bbnrcn (thieves), oilgiiMlly « 



of woman, mistreaa. 



A £<ewgiiie lumpipc a>vc fiat day 

All the BWM bilinoiblti ptigi, sr totv 
■am, mihi to get hun bto ibor m ; aad 
ilHHKcnAUnMa in Loadoe innld 
h.™ fi™ b« tuiM m, tja* fcr. tort* 
w«d fna BKfadoc VSi.—L9tUm: Paul 
CUffrrd. 



H. O. Davii givesthe definition 
of " Uoieen, a showy woman, 
used disparagingly," which 
would Implj that It is derived 
from ibnm, i.t., inflated. It 
•eems on tbe oontrary to be 
nsed in a complimentary sense, 
a simile from a foil-blown Sower, 
and this poetical derivation is 
borne ont by the cloeelj allied 
term, hbneett, a pet, and Ucm, 
a woman, from hlofom in Ame- 
rican thieves' Ungo. 

Blomr (American), a noisy, talk- 
ative man, a " gas-bag." 

' hit Uring bytrmTclIiiig 




, Google 



Blower — Blown. 






It would appear from this 
•Ttlesf anecdote that Ur. Toor- 
beea hu « Datmal repatatioD 
as a Umwt. It Is said that the 
late Horace Greeley, during a 
trip from New Yoik to Phlla> 
delphia, being engaged in a 
polltioal dlBcaadon, went on 
"nanating" or "ontlng" for 
a long time, while all the other 
pasBengers kept silence In ed- 
miiatton of the great man. 
But the oondnotor, not knowing 
who the Bpc&ker waa, and think- 
ing that he waa monopolisii^ 
an undoo abaie of oonTenatton 
—a gteat oSenoe in the United 
States— stepped up to him with 
the remark, " Old man, yon 
(oU too mnch. Shut np I We 
don't allow no soeh Uoieing on 
tbli tntin." And then there 
waa a roar of laughter "fit to 
blow the roof oft" 

(Popnlar), a tobaooo-pipe. 

Blow In (Amerloan), another 
form of "Uew," to spend one'i 

"SubI InthBiDtbeTmllcrt' "Mot 
Buchl SuD ROC two nanthi' wags Hhead, 



it.-SaMliamiM 



' Jakfl bughcd 



Tbht tbac'i ilEpi twill the cup and ihc 
Up. 

—Turf, PitU, and Farm. 

Blowing: (AQEtratian, popular), 
boasting, bragging. 
The pabllc-hoiuei pmcntcd avb^buty 
■Iflit, ud judging by the tm ii lecmcd 
thiit when men wva not vating, ilctfnng, 
or wotking, Ibty Mre dHnking grot t^^ 
boaiting (ot btemtt^, in colonul pajlumf) 
of KUBC itM wbich Ehcj hod pcHvuood, 
or of Ihc puiiailu neriu of (onH hoti*, 
bulladi.docoriDM.— Cnu(.' BtakLift. 

The metaphor probably Is "ilow- 
in^one'a own trumpet," if indeed 
it be not simply an abbreTiatiou, 
Anstrallan slang being given to 
abbreviSitionB of all kinds. An- 
thony Trollope gave a good deal 
of offence in Australia by speak- 
ing of lilovring as a national fiil- 
fng oat there. 

(American), " Uomng his ba- 
■00," blowing his own trumpet, 
boasting. From the Dutch taiu, 
abbreriation of iiuuin, a trum- 
pet or trombone, " Janandt lof 
batufnen," to sound one's (own) 
praise. (Thieves), " blowing oat 
a red light," stealing a gold 
watch, a white light being a 
silverwatoh. (Nantlcal), "Uov- 
ing great guns and small arms," 
heavy gales, a hurricane; "bleie- 
ing the grampus," throwing 
water over a man on watch who 
has fallen asleep. 

Blown together (tailors), gar- 
ments badly made are nid to 
have been blovn legetktr. 



:v Google 



BUm out— Blue. 



It Bi a ard In ■ Uw #• 



op." 



tob«alang; toTebMiieotljKold, 
nprimand. 

Th( Ether d>]' HUM poor ttliom ■unicd 
a KumriiU £uJact bauxtr* kad oib* of hii 
tanaa AcquAloEanca loquirtct how tlu 
Devly-wbldcd pur vcn ftcdsf oa. 
"V«ry iDd[ffenDl,''in<Eh«r«pt7. "Sbt'i 
■Inyi UnBoig Urn n^" " I'm dm hu^ 
priHdstlbM." nid the fini- "Ldakmt 
lb* iBoiuit of pomla ihc caurki iboiU 
iHr. '—A Ify SIftr't HmV HtOduf. 

To giT« a Ummy itp it ijiiodj- 

(Workmen), to Um tp (i*., 
to Mnmd the whistle), la to oall 
the men to work ; uMd by fon- 



Blowtj (oomnon), wUd, dU- 
orderod, dlaherelled, geiiBnllj 
Ap[d]ed to the hkli of ■ woman 
when Dokempt, diaanKiiged, and 
(tieuolug over her f oreheed and 
taoe. "Blowvbella" li the 
name given to a penonage In an 
andent mook heroio poem. 

Bhb (popnlar), an abbreriation 
of to *' blnbbai," to orj like a 
ohnd wltb noise and ilareiing. 

Don't l» > root ud Mds Jim, Il'tn 

thnxd flood lUsfl br 70a, 
Yaa-n tai.^ 



Bhdrtwf (popnlai), the month ; 
to "epoitUHUCT-" is nid of a 
large ooane woman whoazpiMaa 
hei boaam; UsUfr and gnta, 
obeeit;; UoUcr-bellj, a fat 
penoD ; tIaUtr.head, a atopld 
perwn. (NantJoalXNiiUtrboUv, 
a whaling reeeel (Common). 
UiMtr oheeki, large flaedd 
obeeka h»wg<ng like the tat or 
UabUr of a whale. The tmn 
ha* ceased to be alang. 

Bhichen (Wlnahe«t«r), college 
prefeota with onlj ' ' half " 
power, whloh meaaa tbej can 
onlj "fag" men in "hall" ot 
" ohambeiB." 
Thi nmiitDiu dalit ecdkc* pnActt 

(aOlcdii) 



Bliidg«n (tUerea), fellows who do 
not haaitate to nee the Uodgeon, 

Bhidget. a low female thief who 
deoojB her Ttotima into alle;- 
waTB, fto., to rob them (Hew 
York Slang UoUonary), B^idgtr 
(English ilai^]. a man whoniea 
violence to robbery; it has pos* 
fiblj some connection with the 
old Dutch slang word Mlt(ft, a 
man or master. " Tolmaakt, 
hoUetje, T 



Blue (oommon). This word en- 
ter* into seveial slai^; phntaea, 
not only SngUsh bnt of other 



riWimktoo. 



To he In " the tlua," to have 
a "At of the itua" (in Prencb 
irayer<tHiM(r),tobe afflicted with 



:v Google 



"«NtdeTfla,''todilnktm "aU 
UUm," "to beputial to Nm 
min," "toIookUic," "tooirUiM 
mardor," &rfi ftll ^frtm**- phiBAOi 
of anolent origin and modem 
fnralaaoe. -■DnTtaMrB,''Mid 
"petit iltu," are mML bf the 
I'nnoh to ilgiiUj tbln, aoor, 
onwholBBOnie wine, temu whloh 
owe tbeif origin to & limllar 
■wectatlon ol idaw. 

In aome of tiioae with melan- 
oholj meaninga, there la an 
evident oesnection between Uu* 
aa a colour, and the Idea of 
grief , dlMqiixdotnMDt. Thnathe 
rtcnoh bare the expreedon, 
"En Toir de iUuet," to meet 
with great diiappolntment, an- 
noTanoe, anfieriuga, a Taiiant 
of "En Toir de griMa." "Bn 
baiUer toat bttit," to be g^ilng 
with aatoniahment at aome newa 
at act whioh aroiuee one'* in- 
dlgnatioo, from the lirid hne ot 
the bee. 

Ohailee O. Leland makea the 
foUowing nmaika :— 

*' JBtM, Bngliah popular alang, 
but a<H&ewbi4 extended In the 
United Statei. When thii word 
la tiaed to denote extremee, aa 
' to drink tm aU u Mw,' < a ^red 
in the wool blut PnabTtarian,' 
' tnie-Utu ' in political opioiona 
or bmeatjr, it would appear that 
Ita origin ta poaalblf maritime^ 
Sua water waa till a reoent 
period alwaji deaorlhed aa off 
or oat of Bonndinga, ao that, 
Uke the iky, it inggeat* no end. 
It la remarkable that in both 
German and Dutch the 
ide» ot extremitj li ooDiieot«d 



ft 145 

withaiM. An uttflrir bad, pW- 
tal reeolt In the latter la ' Xen 
Ub«n nTtrlogt.' Inthelaatax- 
trendtj of dead dnmkeaneaa, 
or in the awoona of a man in 
the dMriitm (rnaow, a Mm aky 
or atmoapbore aeema to gather 
round the rlotim, in wbloh a 
lominoui point appean, whloh 
'aeenuto comedireotljathim,* 
aa the writer has heaxd it de- 
aoribed. To look bttit la pro* 
bably derived, like Mna-noBa*, 
from cold, ea from »n;»m°"*'liig 
death, which latter would >ulB> 
olentlj aoooont for the relation 
of Una to deapali, deapoudenoy, 
andmiaerj." 

I limulH]* from da Shv- 



Hk ftnie* wen >Aw br da U^ afd* 
Und rj ihonldn't afarr man an}a7 hU 
C#nH.— Room, poyi, nMB, br da li^ 

Und ry ihaolda't tAty Baa aojoy tib 

owoncat 

—ymbctapsme. 

" £!«« derila and i«d mmkeja 
are aald bj the experienced to 
be the oharaoteriatla appari- 
tlona whioh haunt dmnkaida." 

(Common), to talk Um, to 
talk inunodBBtl7, or UUdinondr. 
"A Ut of Nm," an obaoene or 
libidinous anecdote. "Abn>wn 
conTCTsatlon " and "a brown 
atudj" ta uMd in the oontiair 



gianij, and deoMitlj. 



:v Google 



■46 



Bhte—Bbu-blmer, 



(Oxtoid and Ounbridge), » 
nwB to Bid to get Ilia UtM (tlutt 
It, the tight to WMT the Uni- 
Tcnl^ oolonr) when he repro- 
■ent* hii DniTenitj egaiiiBt 
the linj onlreni^, in the an- 
nnal boat-ntoe, orioket-matah, 
mthMio •porU, or 



BhM, binv. ts (oammou), to pawn 
or plMlga, to ipend or Iom wie'i 
mtmej at gauUlng, to mate 
mMte; geoenllr. Taiiod to 
il«f, from the ph»w "blown 
in," wUob TOfcn to mooej 
th«t hu been ipeut, as in the 
pbiBoe, " I ' blewed ' all mj 
tin." For another deriTation 
•eeBLXWiD. 

B*'d ■ notti mctI w la amrtUDf 




the alUn of the naticoL Tbm 
nf enooB ia to the blue Kftva 
ottoe worn hj alnioat all tndee- 
nwn, but now Tertrioted to bnt- 



Bfaw Un (WInobertw). «T«rj 



ia, Mhool, in oontiadiaUnction 
to ooQege, baa hla ttadeaman'a 
UUa eodoaed in a Mm envelope 
givrnto him bytbe head-maater 
on the laat evening of the half. 



Bliie BiOr (popnlar), the hand- 
kerchief (bloe giovnd with 
white ipota) aomeUmea worn 
aod oaed aa a ooloar at ptrlie- 
flghta. Alao the refnae ammo- 
niaoal Hnie from gaa &otariea 
(Hottw). 

BfaM blanket (ngiaata), «qdained 
by qnoUUon :— 



blow In the aenae of make worth' 
leaa ; (thierea), to Utit, to atc^ ; 
" Uciatd of hto red 'on," i^, his 
watoh atolen from him. " I've 
been Uaeed at my aklQ," I've 
been robbed of inj pniae^ 

Dhie Bprow (oammon),ailiw-c9im 
atatecman. "A lay politician, a 
tradeainan who interferea with 



The Freneb have the eqnl- 
nlent "Oonober h lliStel do 
I'lfttoila." (PopDlar), a large 
rongb ooat, a pilot ooat. 

Btne-Uaaer (Amerloan), a faner 
drink of eogar, hot water, and 
apirjta, bnt made in a peonHar 



:v Google 



Blu4-blaMes—Blu* mmtUrs. 



U7 



■ (oocamon), hdL A* 
tb«ra U pntMblj no man wbo 
bu em htMd of hell who hu 
not iMtti' tugbt to UMoiato it 
with boming ralphor or brim- 
•toM. Uw exprewloti doea not 
•Mm t^ be so nwuUnglMi m 
•onwwiltcnnippoM. (Fopalu), 



•oldlanlMUni. 
BDd tho gng"'*! wen im|i«o- 
tirelf a^led la Uoaci utd 
knhli rvH^tbj French aoldiny. 
Agftin, "bine balliM" ma ft 
tann affiled hj the Confodeiato 
■oUUeij aoring the CiTil War 



Bfaie-botUe (gnunl), apolloeman, 
a ocButable, tamed alio a » Una 
dorlL" 



" graj-baok^" Manj other az- 
amplea might be glT«D In mp- 
port of the abore darintlon of 



« bo7 {popular}, a bnba 




It oooon In Bhakapoue In 
the Seooud Fait of King Heniy 
IT., where Doll TMnheet 
oalla the bevUe " a Utuhem* 
rogna." MoetetTmoIaglftaagiea 
in aaeilbing the appellatioii to 
the oolonr of a polloeman'a nui- 
f onn. Tbe term was fonnerir 
applied to aerranta dieaaad In 
blue HmlM. The poHoa foroa 
la Bometlniea ^oken of aa the 
" bloea." Tbe old French dty 
poUoe wcm tanned b? thleraa 
Zm *>rt«, from thelt green nnl- 
forma, and nowaday* a Franoh 
rogue win talk of U* uritu 
(canarlea), i.t., gatdarma, with 
yellow taoinga. The rebel 
cioHoat caQsd the BepnbUoan 



Bine cheek <p(^nlar), ex[Jalned 
bj quotation. 

Ttwn wen Una fiuhioH far vfaldicn 
whcD I wu A ^diitd, and Ibay *ia^ v>i^ 
ooiIt Imown H Mar cJiai, tbt vluilar 
ihind sff wd kuTuig ibi di*^ bloa; 
pe,~ the whi^a cnried h tmr 



Blue flaf (poptlarX a Mae i^nw 
wom bybntoben, greeugrooeia, 
fto. "Hehaa h<drted thaUM 




Btat fflntden (popnlar), a gnat 
and nsuanal noiae. To call him 



:v Google 



I4S 



■Bkurum. 



MWtfan, toodl ont kmdlr. 



To >faid> tlM unn n^'- EbTnTt 
<4R..>UIt>i>dI 



Blae ooasa (AaMriowitan), !!|!"J*i!:^^ " 
natlTCiodfonBootla. to« »d i«, bo«. , 

" Pr>r. air. 'nid 00*0 



"It it llH . 

"vbkh dwrpmhta b rtw^ 

" ' ~ a b* tka bM ia'th. 



r (omntloal}, tha sfgnftl 
tor Bafliug when hoi(t«d at tha 
fontop maat-hHuL Thli well- 
known fla(r hM » bine gnmnd 
with » white aqnaTe in the 
oatre (Adminl Smjth], 
T^iMw /nS(f hM taw b™ f^DB M 



Bbe pinittlw (thterM), bnlMt. 

NonttenoBaqalilHtotTma'tJan 
Tb biH dnb Mw /bi.rf( (if* tba 



Bbe ribboo (ndng), the tann !■ 
onlj ^ipUed to the Derby. 



Bbe niia (popnlu), gin of infcsliv 
qnalltT. Tenned alao "bine 
ribbend." 



^niij azpranlon te alw ap. 
Idled to tha oall for tramps 
imtUrt. 

Bbw pigeon (thjerea}, the lend 
on roota; to fiy or ■boot the 
MiM pigton, to rteal lead ofT 
the toolB of boildlngi. (N»ati- 
cal). a nfo^nafflo for the sound- 
ing lead. 

Bne pai (Amerioan), a ballet. 
I«ad has long been termed U«<y 
In England, and death by a 
ballet Mhs murder, bat the 
entmnoas oonsimtptton of i(H« 
p3i* or oalomel In the United 
States renden it possible that 
the simile (algiiiatad ther& 



b7 Dm idd miu ml 
oca lowwiBS iriiu tbfooaU w 



Dr. Brewer glres the ezplana- 
tlon: "Biut, from Its tint, and 
ruM, from its eSeots." Compare 
as regards similea of ooloor "red 
tape," red wine; "petit bleo," 
ooarse red wine; "one Torte" 
or "petroqnet," a glass of ab- 
sinthe (which i« green); "ana 
bnme," a ^aas of porter ; "ane 



:v Google 



■Bluf. 



jMn^" ft dnm ol bntidr; ™ ""r* "i" °? '"'? **^^ "^ 

"ttBo duna bludu^" ■ bottla ^ ckl^k^C^^M^L^'''^' 

of white wine; "firola n- 

▼omrf," white wine; "ii4- Blue lUa (WMt Indian), tha 

g rewB." bottle of red wine. ohild of a bUok wobuui bj ft 

And with napeot to panloloiu white man. The uuoe of ft 

•Saota, "breekj leg," itzong mulatto, one of the ohataotancf 

drink; " ean-de-moit, oaose- Alnaworth'a " J«k Bheppaid." 

pdtilne, tord-boTMiz," tank 

btandr. The teim Um rviit Bliie ftqiiftdnn, otM of tbe (Kaat 

mnat have been coined by Indian), a paiaon h»Tlng a oroaa 

aobar people, or by repentant "* the Indian breed. 

dinnkaida, whilat thoae othei- 

wlaa InoUned gave it tha food 

iffiellatira) erf "white TslTet," 

or "white Mtin," nnoonooioiulj H« bar* W jk nmni inmm hw, 

imitated bjftwiohdiamHirink- ^I^^JZ^^Z^^JT'' 

en, whan, after bftTing toned Which »« daj b* «iu witr rw. 

<ai wouM bORible atnH in an —7*. gMtfr Mittri BriidtUt. 

\aes (tblerea), IsmI (Anatia- 

lian), a boBhman'a bundle, the 

BhMft (oommon), tlie Boyal Hocae ontdde wrappar of whioh \» 

Gnaidi; tba Blneooat aoliool; K«aeiaIlT a Une blanket 

the oiewa of the Tanitr boM (Hnnay). 

noe— the dark Uua being the _. _ ^ , . _, , , . .. 

Oxtoid men, and tba Ught Mm ^™' ** '*^*^'fT*' ** ^ 

tbo.1 b«n Oambrid^; the down bya bold faont to oppea. 

ptdloa tone. ^ "cheek" or effronteu. 

=,^717.. c Idid DM ai. nil took »..«*; I 

W^wtBl-ittamr... w» Hit Boina to b. *VW by tfm.- 

Idb^i b«di (ocMiQ b, 

WOl ■nwUBcba lint thu tba OiftiH German, M(fai. The alerenth 

*^a^Xi!mia^tiiO;fArdATmi. commandment among thleTte 

in Oennaoy la " Dn aollat 

(Soeietr), "a at of tba Uim" Dlch nicht wrM{fm laaaen "— 

meani a fit ol depteaaion; it "Don't let TonraeU be U^fU" 

la abbrarlatad from the "Urn Dntoh ll^fird, a cnading fel- 

derUa," which aia aappoaed to low ; Uqfte, to bait at Alao 

D anHering from Dutch, «wrN«|f!D», to pot oot of 

oonntonanoe, to laoe down. 

(Fatteren' dang^ an axonaat 



:v Google 



Bluffer — Boarding sdtool. 



1 Nmf at tha 
" ucMcacfi " IS k«p Iroa tb* poblic tha 
tul modvim of tlw Burdfln.— ^prf //drtt: 

Bhifler (proriDcia]), va iiiDk«epeT, 
or Uudlord of a pnblio-houM. 
(NanUoii) , B boktBWBlu of B ship. 

Blii&ng (AmerlDBn, oardj) , betting 
high on poor oardt at poker, 
in the hopei of frightening the 
Other plBjera into going out. 
A oraftj plajer will often bIIow 
himself to be o*Ued for % 
•mall U«(f, so aa to estBhUab 
B repnUtion for doing it, in 
Older to lie bf and win a good 
■take when he has b reallj 
good hand, on wblcb he haa 
thni indnoed hi* antagonista to 
■a[f>oae that he is Unfit^. The 
KngHab equivalent for this tenn 
ia ■' biagglDg." 



Blnnt (thieveB), monejr. 

Wbsi Ihe iliiv coach pasK 



id the cKily uuDd whidt my gnv* lips 
funa-d 
Wu Uwml—n.a\ Ummtl 
—Lml L^Htn .- PmU CSfftrd. 



oh^rman of the Booth Be* 
Company, the bmona bubble by 
which a few f ortnnea we» won, 
and many fortonea wne lost, in 
i^aa I^ others It la thoi^ht 
that the word originated in tha 
French Ncixt. But UwK (aome- 
tlmas Tailed to Me UwK) ia 
more probably derlTed, aa tha 
latter ^ipellatlon in^iei, trom 
an alinaian to the blunt rim of 
cofna or to their hardneaa, aa in 
the phraae " hard oaah," " soft " 
being bank notes, and "ctUEa" 
oheqaes or bills. 

Biimted (popular, and thleveB), 
possessed of money. 

Bly-honka (tinker), a horw. 



BoMd, to (mlUtaiy), to boaow. 

BttKrd him (nantioal), a ool- 
loqnialism for 111 ask, demand, 
or Bccoat him (Admiral Smyth), 
Bhakspeare makes Folonina say 
of Hamlet :— 

" 111 hfrd kum pnailr." 
To "board him in the ■moke," 
means to take a penon by aar- 
prise, from the einiile of firing a 
broadside and taking advantage 
of tbe smoke to board. 

Boudinc achool (old cant), tha 
I given by thieves and 
similar ohBracters to Newgata 
or any other prison. "To go 
to boanluiy teioat" was to go 
to gaol. French thieves call a 



:v Google 



M "pMl" "nn amlnolM d» litMtoi 

«." And thi ™ 



diak froB nlcht tiU B> 



Boat (tblOTM), origliuUjtotiatt*- 
port, the teim la now ft|ipliad 
to pauml aarritQdo. To "get 
tht bout" or to "be boattd" Is 
to be Matenoed to k long term 
of Impriaonmeut eqsivKlent to 
tnnipoitU:ion under th« old 
■TMem (Hotten). To boml witb 
ons ia to bo ■ partaBt Id iomo 
alma, to baft 



"Oomhii—lwitbyoBf "ya,*Bd 
I'l u wtut. tMr lut ni^it, dawn u 
• Alhur tn>k-Bp, b* hoBKl m Uoki 



(HllltHT). ft good &>■( ia a 
•oldier who spenda hla mom^ 
trmlj wltti hla poorer oomiadea. 

Bob (gaoanl), a ahUling. Oilglii 
wiknowiL Fnhftpa from ft 
■hnHein aOnalon to (ha meanti^ 
of tot, fonoerltr bait for flah,tba 
odn bting loolwd apon tn tha 
Ught of ft bribe. " Bobstlak," 
old alang for ft lUllliig, wonid 
in that cue be the fiihiiig-iod. 
Compan with "pftlm-oil," both 
monejand brfbe,ftnd the S^enob 
•IftDg huilt de maint, same maau- 
teg. Alao with ffofttc, monej, 
from tba phiaae "gtainer 
la patta," to bribe. It U 
oniona to aota that M !■ a 
blow, and " blow" ilftog for a 
ahming. 

Tb* joUiHt fellov }nB (TB mat 



N«er hu ibt tat fc 



-Sird t^ finnbim. 

(Popnlar), bob/ ctopl the ra- 
■PODM to the raqneat "aar 
when," wfaila ^rita are being 
ponred Into oue'i glaas. 

** Jsi a nob," a ehillteg a head. 

Bob, in old alang, dgnified a 
ahopUfter'a uilatant, to wh«n 
the stolen gooda were pamad, 
and who carried them awft^. 
"All ia bob," icL, all ii aab. 
From ft Coniwall term bob, 
^aaaant, agrasabla. A variant 
of "allga7,"and "aQaeiene." 
" To ahlft one'a M," to go awa;. 

(Pnblio KJhoc^), "drj bob," 
a bo7 who devotei himaelf to 
orioket or football, or anj othar 
gwnea on " dry land," te oppo- 
dtioa to "wet bob," me who 
givee hinwelt np to boating. 

Tba IMcDdly rinbr batnu Xi«taid 
Mid AmaiB Ud ■»• oUb acD to ■ ooa- 
W« bmnm iha " m iti,,' to M* *b 
KlaD ^UBK, of ailbir oobboj, and k was 
Bii)TUriliaitha"di7M(' iboold Aow 
wbal tb*r OBld do.— r. OtOait: Im- 
tinml aMHUUT <^ M* Xi^Ulk La^ 

" D17 M " alio rafeia to frtdtleae 
ooition. 

RaaalKd to wk, lil» HtRaK *• 
Tba cheatim im, at iba twdfth. ■ dty 
-Emrt ifKtdfUr'i ICmla 



Bottachce (Anglo-Indian), a ooA; 
a ralgsr or alang ftttin cf t^ 



:v Google 



152 



BoUtr^Bobbish. 



Mrab, * high dlgnltwr at tb« 
Mongol ootut, * tutv kitd 
cwrer to lome gTMt mu. 
BMaekg oomoA, oook-honM.— 



Sadown Isauud ftndiBtmt* 



Bobbery (Anglo-Indiaii}. Tbli 
word oomof from tb» Bait, but 
lU origin U doDbtfnL The 
anthon of the "Anglo-Indian 
OIoiMij " deolue thU it la com* 
moo for Hindoa when in anzpriM 
or grief to exolalm, Bapnt 
orBapniapl "Ob, Father*!" 
Thia la Imitated in Anglo-Indian 
bj BoUary Bob I Ladles In the 
United States also sometimee 
•xolalm, "Fatheial" with or 
withoBt "meroifnl,"or "good" 
H K pnllx. BMtrf generallj 
aiguiflee » row, a dliturbanoe. 

"bobbelj" In |ddgiu BngUsh, 
bot it la very doubtful indeed 
wbethei it originated, aa some 
think, in the CantoneMfs-pt, a 
nolae. 

in bet m maa ibnH In a Ml»7 la 



Bobbin (oobumh). " Tfaof ■ ttao 
end of Um MMk." A phnwe 
eqidnlent to mjiag, "That'e th* 
end of tt," when all tlie thread 
i* wonnd off »MK> oi epooL 
The Vtvnoh aa; "Mre an boot 
de eon re W sew." (Ameriean), 
ieWut' wwatd, a alang ph ra aa 
meaning going ahont, ben and 
there, oaaoallj. It roae from 
the retrain of a aong irtilob waa 
IK^nlar in itfjo. In anoUiiK 
Irrio the following aUndon waa 
made toaiepert that UwEliig 
of Bdglnm had propoaed mar- 
riage to Uaa Baidett-Oontta 
and been lejeoted. 

Ba Um Kbt tf till BiW» >«t b aod 



Mux7 ben agta, I'll jut tM Ibt dvfli oe 



ItalMmcaoainlndia "pack," 
a paok of hoiindi or dogs of all 
Idiidi without diiUuotioa 



•Uiik uh* ii.— Am^ Piiftr. 

BMinQ ammd I* eridentlr 
a variation on "bobtilug np and 
down," rising and falling, hiare 
and there, like a Hahemaa'a 
bob In the water. 

Bobbbic (paUIo aohools), "dry 
bobbiitg " ^)pUes to all sports aa 



Bobbiib (oomnum), imait, spmoe, 
or in good order, fair. From 
a Oonrwall term M^ pkwMit, 
agieeablA 



:v Google 



BobbUs—Bobtad. 



"'Ov u* T<r, fMOcjitUlikt' 



Bobblea (popnlar), the toUioIea. 
From the nine word Bignifylng 
la CoinwaJl, stones, pebbles. 

Bobbr (genenl), m poUoBmui ; 
otfaeiwise " peelet, oop, or 
wyppei, bine-bottle, ^, Teeler, 
oiiulier, frog, fly -cop," Ac. 

TlH«fMy'«buiHt, 

Oh Ucbtcai ouur'i Euda 

Skv. 
"If !« not ■ thlqi <I«M, TOO ihoold 
do it yDandf,'' 

Bel, wben ddma nllinfcly put with thdi 

P«ir. 

Tb*r'n cntillcd to dum bdc nmni 
Ax th«irpa]r. 
Boll dos DM par BttUti to knoai oo 



uftd dieorderlj mohinSf has, 
time ont of ndnd, been called 
bj the nme oTobiiu, " ioW|r tha 



Bobby twister (thlevee' slaog), » 
burglar who vonld hedtata at 
nothing, ^TOn to ihooting uij 
polloeman who might be ende»- 
vonilng to oaptnra him. A 
noted MAt tiniter was the &• 
moo* borglai Feaoe, whose dlnr- 
nal **ootions were oeitainlf 
Id kee^dog with bis Dtune, aa ha 
wai ooDsideTed a highly respeoU 
able oitUen. He was, or pes- 
tended to be, a teetotaller, and, 
it is said, a member of the 
Salvation Aimf . His raspeot*- 
blUty ended on tbe gaUowst 

Bobtail (thieraa), good fellow. 



t '■—l^titn : PmU CS^ri. 



Bome thirty years ago tbe 
a in bine (jonnallstio) waa 



■till 

peeler," a fact which bears out 
the generally admitted origin 
of ioMy from Bir Robert Feel, 
to whom the establishment of 
the force was dne. In iSig, and 
who replaced the old " Charlies " 
(so called from Charles L,iD 
whose rdgn the system waa 
reorganiaed), who then acted 
aa oopstaMesand night- watchers 
In the metropolis. According 
to Hotten, the official sqnare- 
keepec, who is alw^a armed 
with ft oftDC to drln ftwaf idle 



Boba (sohools), hoge bear Jngs. 

OnlT lluH "Juaicn" uttadad ithosi 
oBu it mi to Udf i«r tbi ponicM of 
bead ud diH*c ud l«i( ctf bcv r« CDD- 
BunptiouinUKiiftBDOoo.— T'.i^.TVWbgl*: 
WUt I Rtmambtr. 



Bobtaa <old slang), a licaUona, 
Immodest woman of the T«ry 
lowest cbaraotn. One who ex- 
posed her person in public. Also 
an impotent MmmAm 



:v Google 



154 



Bob Wkita— Bogey. 



Bob White (Americu), • popnlar 
bnt Dot K 8l«iig auDe (or the 
qoAil, whose notei ue sappowd 
to resemble the worda Bob — 
Wkitt, with a paose bstweeQ the 
two words and « ttrong accent 
on the Wkitt. It li jut two- 
tbfids of the sMig of the whlp- 
poor-wilL 

TIm Americu brme hu ntcheil ha 
biidi <hniii(h the cycle of ihe jeer ; hu 
tl««»d to the " Ah Ag« WJUIt I ih Btt 
WUUf Ihu iriih the UU of the (pple- 
btOHom betini la fill tbt ta. — Miu- 
millmit'i ifypuiMi. 

Bodler (pn^Uctic), m blow on the 
■Idei of th« bodj, othenriM 
known a« a "lib-ioMter." 

BodUa (oommon), an old woid 
atUl in hm, with the mom of 
dirk, dagger. (Sporting), a par- 
■on who take! hia tnni between 
Ow iheeta on • night when the 
Jiotal hu twloe as manr Tidton 
as it can oomfortab^ lodge 
(Hotten'8 Dlctionat7). (Com- 
mon), to " lide bodiM," anj one 
dtting between two others In a 
oanlage, is caid t« "ride bod' 



liuirilliBfDeM M " be the ««U/ii - <^ ■vAc', 
ride (b dw DiiddkX ordered tlH )eha to 
drive to MidJImi Somi.—S/trta^ 
Tima. 

Bodr-dancs (thierei ' cant), tet- 
ters for the body, 

Bodg'ilafiffi are of two kinds. 
Each consists of a bsBTj Iron 
ring to go ronnd the waist, to 
whieh are attached In one case 
two bar* or heavy ohains, con- 
nected with the fetters round 



the ankles, in the other oaae a 
link at each aide attached to a 
handooff. Into theae the wrists 
are looked, and thus held down 
to the prisoner's sides. The 
latter are now onl j to be toimd 
in masenms.— Fmue. 



r (old), a balllir or 
runner ; a violator of the grave ; 
an undertaker. 

Bog (prison], the farm woAs at 
Dartmoor where mnoh land has 
been reclamed. £119 gang, the 
partj of Mmriots detailed for 
this work. (Common), a privy. 
Originall]' |u±iters' slang, bat 
nowrezj oonunon. "To beg," 
to ease oneedf. (Tlnkn), sea 



Bogey, often called bns-abeo, » 
word existing in difFerent forms 
in many langusgea. As both 
God and DevU jt»j be fonnd In 
iVu), Hevat, dirine, Diabelut 
and the gypsy ArasI or Ikdia 
(both meaning Ood only), so wa 
have the divinity as Bog In 
Russian, and In tlM Celtic bug, 
a spirit or speotie, while in 
Bnf^ish hitggt or h^ Is in two 
senses a terror, as the faaunis 
Bngge Bible and Spenser's 
" nurle Qneene " bear wltnees. 
Ihe bogey or bug-aboo is an 
imaginary horror or monstw 
with which vulgar, wicked, or 
foolish people ware, and perhaps 
still are, aocuitomed to frighten 
children at night. It Is probable 
that oioo is the common old 
Irish war-ciy, which was said 



:v Google 



Bogey — Bogus. 



to faa M tMri^ing ttut it wm 
toramij prohibited by law. 
TUa aim wu well-known and 
■Dooh talked of dnring tbe time 
of EUnbetlL On August a, 
1887, Mr. ConrtD^ in Pulia- 
mont invented a new form of 
tba word. 



ai A CDDibtniitioa odt f ^ j f itm mod fotcyun. 
MUnch.) He. W. U. Smilb and Hi. J. 
Maricy joined in the ^ipal to cIok tba 
1"— -'— — r-J-' ]miu£t GamUi. 

(CommoD), one'a Imndlord, 
called b7 the Frenob "Hon- 
■ienr Vantonr." (Stndios), a 
painting li said to be logtn when 
■ombie tint* predominate. 

Bogb (tinkei), to get, hold, make 
work. Tbiai^ipeaTatobeaTet? 
general aort of a verb. 

Bng MKOcea (oommon), potatoee, 
tromtlie faot that potatoes form 
the chief diet of Irish peasants. 

BoE-trottcr (now reoognlaed), an 
Irlab peasant, " Bog-trotting," 
^ipliad to an Bmetaldei, or to 
anjone who llTea among marshj 



Bogne, to (Amerioan), to apply 
one'a kU very earnestly, to make 
CToy effort. " I don't git mnoh 
done withoot I bogut right in 
along with the men" (Bartlett). 
Botg*, a bow, or a coarse in 
Dutch, is oied eiacUjr in this 



weDdcd," to tiy eTetythlng, to 
leave no stone nutnmed. Alao 
in Dntoh ttyen, to pride oaa's 
self oD emploTing energy in 

Bt^na {Amerioan), anything like 
a sham, a band, a oounterfeit, 
or a humbug. Bvgtu money. 



Ona of tba ttfui petilloni ia fimn at 
I putporUd t( ' 



The story which derives the 
name from one Sorghtti, who 
a geneiatlim ago flooded tha 
West with connterfeit money, 
is, like most American deriva- 
tive storiee given in news- 
papers, extremely donbtfuL As 
soon as an ezpreastoo beccmae 
popolar. Ingenious artists in 
literary n^pereJurit* at onoa 
manntactnre for it a history. 
Bcgui is from a cant term ap- 
plied to oonnterfdt coin. This 
word is widely onrrent in the 
United States, whence it has 
been recently Imported 1^ Kug< 
liah newipaper writers. Among 
the tinklers or tinkers, a kind 
of Scottish gypsies, bogiu means 
ooonterfelt coin, from hoglt, to 
oiake, and the Romany termi> 
nation <«. Wilson declares that 
there are nnmben of these tin- 
kers in America. Dr. C. Hackay 
Is of opinion that it was intro- 
duced In Amerloa by Irish immi- 
grants from boe, pronoonced 
bokt, deceit, tiaod. 



:v Google 



156 Ba/iH- 

Balm (Tftle CoUsge), a, baasU- 
tion, -or a pony trom Btlut, the 
name of well -known London 
pnbllidiera, who lamed a setlea 
of tzanolationB of the Claadc*, 
the Dse of these beooming tbtj 
conunoD In the State* ; a Solat 
waa general^ Bdopt«d aa a 
nama fot a ttanalatloo. 

Twu plaiy of ikiii wiifa a piod dol of 



Boiled ahirt (Anstrallan diggen) 
a dean ehlrt or "clean biled 
rag," u Hajk Twain pnta it, 
boUingbeing a primitiTe waj of 

JcJm lode hoiiH with ■ dcpniKd niipd. 

pnred Um lioa in the old dvd'i puh, ha 
fliv Ihq pnblnn, ■ blgaUd, frtuy-fAced 
BUI, B viUuDoiii k>w tonhEKl, ud ■ 
pricA-fiffaliaf look, waUring ap u>d down 
ilw mudih in ■ itUid Mrl.—A. C. 
Grmmi. 

Boilei^iilateil (American) origi- 
nated in iion-cUd. Utterlj Im- 
penetmble, lirealatlble, not to 
baaSeoted, 

He lan me k look of beiler^UUd n- 
r*auh, cUppcd on hit hit, ud mioff with- 
out laotber wonL-^JVr. and Xri. Stmiii: 



BolleTB (BoTal MiUtary Aoademr), 



Boiling or VSng (common), the 
" whole baSinff," the whole 
party, or entlie qoantity. 



A phiaM probttUj declTed 
from the Utoben, and a atew 
or broth of manj Ingndicnt^ 
It li a phiBoe more common 
uno&g Iriah *^a" among Bngllsli 
at Scotch people, thongh not 
wholly unknown to either. Tha 
Iriah prononnaiation la "biling" 
oi"bfIln'." The term ia exten- 
OiTelj nsed in America, and la 
aometlmes varied to the "whoU 
gridiron of them," ^^ed to a 
tmitj. The latter la Iiiah. 

Boilnin tek (pidgin), to boil tea. 

BloogT "T ^ I™ Mimmt jn iM, 
Boinpc one lint ^ofJUtrJUtt I (quid 1) 

TalkH dit H-no (Kmot) be ia t.vrj 
bow biilmm Ua.—Fidgiit TmOtt. 



An expaft id nuosnipbT dcdan* thai ■ 
pate Doae unuILr bdooai to (ha lalfiih, 
cold -batted mia; irtiilii the hiablr- 
coloondiAitf ii ***Mj^*w«rij> of thettd- 



Ibe mu vlw ii hopcf nJ that a free driak 

Originally a laige noae, poa- 
mbly from heak, old dang for a 
noae, or from the <M W"g'U'' 
locht, bote, a swelling. 

BoUr, bowler (mncheater), ettB 
felt hat 01 pot hat 

Bol^ (Hailboroi^b) la used by 
the papUa with the algnifioa- 

tion of pudding. 

Bolt, to (colloquial), to make a 
aadden and rapid moTement, for 
haste , alarm, perplexity , or oOkei 
caoce of expedition. ToMtone'a 
food is to swallow without maa> 



:v Google 



Bolt—Bfmatua. 



UosUon ; to Ml ia to mn Ktnj, 
to dacamp, to dlnpp«kr. TiM 
teno, aooordingto Oroae, la bor- 
TOwed frmn tbe rabbtt-wuren, 
beoaoM the nbblts belt when a 
font antera into tbelr bnirows. 
But the derlTatloii Is pmtwblj 
from bolt, the auctentuid DotTet 
obaoktft word for an know, aa In 
tba omrant prorerb "a fool'a 
Mt ia aoon ahot," ao that to 
Mt la to moTo aa awUtlf aa 
an anow. (Filaon), "getthig 
the bolt," being aentanoed to 
p«wl awTltDdeL 

"LoBC Bni BpMtt Ml" bfonu tba 
lyiap aihttic v rooking nad«r ihu on* 

WnUan sxpacti to b* ntoxxd to 

VMbI Mrritade.— XfT. /. W. Htnltf. 
JnHi^/nmJaa. . 

Bolted (naotjcal), "Vn been 
throngli the mill, grooud and 
IcUtd." That ia, "Ton can't 
gammon me ; I'm too old a bird 
to be oaaght with ohafl." BaUid 
in thia oaae dgnlflM aifted. 

Bolt-tn-tnn (London thlevM), 
boltod, run away, got away, 
one of the pana that oant and 
alang are ao food oL <y. "COB- 
BIB," " BlUIABD BLDV," ftO. 



woid ' bolt,' and merely a fan- 
cUnl variation verj common 
amongjIaiJl persona, there being 
in London a hmona Inn ao 
called. It ia customary when 
a man baa mn away from hla 
lodgli^, broken out of jail, or 
made any other andden move- 
t, to say ■ the £aU-wt-<un is 
' he's gone to the 



.SoU-Ja-AM' Instead of almidy 
aaying, 'be haa bolted,'" to. 



BoK the moon, to (oommon), to 
cheat the landlord by taUng 
away gooda or fomitnre wlth- 
ont paying the rant; literally to 
extlngnlah the moon and take 
advantage of the daikneae thna 
[Hodaoed. "Id shoot the moon" 
i* more common. 

Bolna (common), an apotheoary. 

BorabMj dock (Anglo-Indian), a 
amall Bah called the boiomelo 
or bombalow, which la canght 
on the Indian coasts. When 
dried it forms the well-known 
ilmilay dutlct, seen so freqoently 
among grooeia' deUoades in 
England. 

Bombo (naotioal), weak, oold 
pnnob. 



BcmMun (Amerioan), a Spanish 
word, originally applied to pro- 
Bt, benefit A profltable sUver 
mine or a share In It U a fon- 
onra. Now applied generally 
to money. 

At lut lb* tnin CUM, ind ib« (ord 



" MoHT t ' I ulud. 

"Yci; twatjp ilioaaiiid donan."— 

Bat > ttmaitf villi BilHoDi in it ii not 
iDdi tmy mtk.-JerifiUf'l Utmlkfy. 



:v Google 



158 BoKos— 

Booaa <popidar), ballM. Tba 



Sm* (n caUed Him uid UBM Ml*. ; ^ 

n> boa of ilwm all u* oiled ttmai, TUi word, MMOdlllg to tbe 

j!^*^: *^"— Moon 0*raw. ■!» ligiilfiw to 
«p[««baDd, to atnat, to t«to 

Bonce (thIoiu), tbe tasftd, called Into oiutod;, to " nab." Com- 

klao "oniBt, ohomp." Prom puv with the ncoch cant 

tenet, a nutrble of IttTger siie phnoe "ebvlebon," which Imw 

than ordinuy, used by boTS. tbe aame meaning. 

The French slang for haad, (Amaiioan cadets), to atiidj 

KI«, UteiaUy a martde, bean hai^; poasibljr a idajfal aOn- 

Ont this derlTatioD* sion to the more nnJTerssl slang 
meauiog of the rorb "to bomt," 

Bane (American), a fee ; to tone, the mining of conree being to 

to pa; a fee, or tmthet bribe, convey the idn of acquiring 

called bmt, at the cnstom- knowledge by /w«f— an ap- 

faonaa to indooe the officials Dot protxiata imding of the wotd 

to examine paseengers* luggage, fo, the oadete of Wert Pofait— 

or to let it off lightly. From bnt more probably from Bohn's 

the slang tone, derived either translations. For other derira- 

from the French bon, or, at tion, see Boosdkk. 
■niray snggeets, from the 

middle Knglish boon. This Bone box (cOd slang), the month ; 

word U used with the tense ^''^ *^^^ *^ °o* called the 

of good by BngUih vagabonds: " i'orie*" 

0, thdr hleroglyphlo for the Bone-emriier (Sooth African), a 

word, chalked bythem on honsee j^e^„ bo,^ ji^a for Hlllrn r bte 

.-J -_» g as a hint to _„». 



■nooeeding beggar 

(Ma«)nlo),aooirnptionofthe ,„*!!r"Jr™ " 

Hebrew word tor builder. ^j^ p«H«tiTc qoUity, y^ lu. not tb* 

(Common), to hone, to steal, -■—^"-^^—i:.^- -■■:-■-- , ^ 

to iWer, to purloin. Probably •<> *" ""'■^ '"• "« '™<i» of »« AfeicM 
derived from hm, good, or, by 



Uvaa ■WH rcquln Umi.trtaktni 



-If. SlMmlf. 



on a good thing. Boned (thieves), taken into one- 

tody. To 6oM is to t«ke what 
does not belong to one. There 
is therefore a wtn'ld of dry 



, Google 



Boned — Botie sJuwe. 



159 



h mrtn ttf Iq tlitt thlsf Sftjinff tbti 

be hM been timti or stdan by 
the polioemui when Uken Into 
ooatody. 



Booh {medical), tbe bomu of the 
hnDun sknU. " Do yon know 
joni iaa«t f " {.it,, are jon fami* 
liar with the anatomf of the 
human ikeleton. (Stock Ez> 
obange), Wiokcoi, Feaw ft Oo.'* 
•hare*. 




wbo hnnte for bones in diut- 
holee, M anj epot where refnee 
ia thrown. 

The J«H«r>Mrriiiid Il» B<id-Uik differ 

Bnl* in Ibtir pumiti Mttjiiim : LtnJai 

Latno-amdUt Ltadt» P—r. 

The tenn waa alao applied to 
a temrectionlak Cobbett was 
therefore called a hm<-{rruU«r 
beoaoM he brought the Temalne 
of Tom Paine from Amerioa 
(Hotten). 



(common), ezoewlTelj 
hopdeaal J laiy. 

a ghoet, a ehadowyand 
Impalpalde ipeotie or appari- 
tioa. 

Booe imude^ to (American 
oadeta), to frequent the gjmna- 
■Inm ; freqnently to take ezer- 
dee there. 



Boner (Winoheeter), a blow giran 
witb tbe flat on Uie loweat 
Tertebn. 



(Oommon), to rattle tbe h 
to play at dice. 



Bone ibaker (common), a name 
given to the old - tashlorfed 
bioTole, whlob waa a olnmij 
wood machine, and waa aaper- 
■eded by the etrider steel mft- 
chine, which la now being 
superseded in its turn I7 tbe 
■mailer " Safety." 

Bene dMTe, tbe sciatica or then- 
nwttc gout In tbe sdatlo uerre. 
According to Ur. Thomas Wright 
In bis Archaic Dictionary, the 
peasantry of Eimore had a charm 
tor the supposed core or relief 
of this malady, consisting in the 
repetition of tbe following dog- 
gerel lines as the patient lay on 
his back on the brink of a brook 
or river, with a staff by his side 
between him and the water. 
£«w i * w riibi, 

A« th* nMr nn» b; iha uons 
CoodencfciHMai. 



:v Google 



i60 



Btm» slamdmg—Bomo. 



M» ■T IT"" "g (AmarioHi oadat). 

to low .<-«H*ff. to "toayi-rf 

(Oi » oUw podtion (O. ■■ 
Wood: Unitod «««• Aimy). 

Book (AMtnliw bUoWdlowi' 
UMo), dM4. TU« word i« » 
jZdnwnrfthopldgln-Bngll^ 
rtofl^d with Mti« *^ •" 
vUoh iirtM«w»B !• ewriod on 
with tho bUota on rt^ttoB*. 



pntenoe, a 

of Kwoontlng tor whmt yo« 
really wiih to oonOMd; M » 
ipm who U*M b7 depmctetioa, 
will «tiU outwardly toUow •obm 
houat employment, h • (ta*. 
poiter, Bowraan." Ono who 
Jnrti^4oiio«ll7 *o«i«li or UMi 
other people; * *«»»«< or *'*' 



■A. C. Grmmt: ««• i*» " 



Booger, bin** (EJW'- Jt)^"™ 
bow, duok. dodge, to twirt or 

twn; ><'W*«'t't^^' "f; 
wUMng. ilni«t«r, crooked, evil, 
airtflrtad, awry. "0,,*^ 
rtkk"— "Tl>« evil eye. O 
J,^wMt"-"n«Iefth«id.' 

.'A MP *" '*" "•'^ 
arooked,eTUh«Mt." "^^ 
rikk o' the diom"— "The left- 
hand ride o! the roed." 

Boolnc (American o^«ta),*«iAw 
the adiotMit, a violent or Immo- 
de«toa«nmptionof*mUitar7 
air or bearingi * iwaggering 
loUitary flUlbnrter ; a Bombwrtet 
Fnrioeo. B<mi^ demerit, wid 
of a cadet who ftvoid« giving 
CMM lor being reported to the 
autl)oriliB«(O.B.Wood: United 
States Amy). 



anetioni; - 

thimblarig or throe owda; 
who pretenda to bny of * croon* 
pitcher or atieet modloine ven- 
dor ao u to entice pnwhaMM. 
In French, UmiMnr U one who 
te profiwe of oompUmenU and 
bowe; hence * swindler who 
tries to wheedle people ont of 
thdr money ; also * three-card 
trick Bharper. To ttmiirt lor a 
person, i» to corroborate any 
saeertlon he has made, or to re- 
late facte in the mort (avonrable 
Ught, in order to extricate him 
from a dilemma, or to further 
any object ho baa In view. 

(Common), to smash a man's 

hat over hia taea. a favonrite 

amnaement of London roDgba. 

Two joong mm "ho . , . vkW <1«* 

■niuciBBiU by t n uulinf tlw prefnww 

of thii itioBMil cofcfrboiue.— OA*»~ ' 



Bonnets ao blue (rhyming Blai«). 
Irish stew. 

Bono, good. (B!8at),*«mo Johnny, 
an Bngllahnuuk 



, Google 



Booby-hOck — Book-form. 



t6i 



Beobr-lHitcli (tUflTM), tlw polioe- 

Boobj'tn^ (Wii>eliastaT),tlifl door 
of A nxan li left open, and on 
tbe topara ^Aoed aome blgbooka 
■nd • wet sponge, h that when 
it ia pnahed the whole lalla ob 
the head of whoever opnu it. 
This tlme-hmonred apeoiea of 
pnwUcal jotdng li not confined 
to Win(dieetet. 

Baoki wn» dn—J, ttttji li-afi lauati, 
■iiblilUgm rcMond to tbtir k^dbiU* 

Boodfcree (Anitoalian bush 
alang), a bUoUdloVa word 
for "good," Inoofpotated into 
the ilMig of tha wUte. Deed 
prinoipallj In the pldgin-Sng- 
Uah, in which the whltea carry 
oo thair oouvenatioa with the 
blaokk ^ Tery oommoa word. 

WIw wu hiibu iba ^cblb 




Boodk (Amerioan), booty, piolt, 
perqnialtee, idnnder. Commonly 
DMd with regatdto KOTeiameut 
ttanaaotiooi, oontiaota, Ac, ^ 
whlob the pabUo ■ 



—Amtritmt Paftr. 

This wordlD the United State* 
)* ^ifiUed among thiere* enly to 
oomteifdtorbadBonay. The 



hootU* oantei ia the man irtio 
oaniee the oonnterfeit or 
" qneer,'* while the (horerpMsea 
It off. "At the flict algn 
of troQble the looUt oaRtw 
vaalahee, learlpg nothing to 
eliminate hi* oom-rogne " (New 
York BbdV Diotionary). 

(Amerlean poUttoal), iooiU 
ex[Jalned^ quotation. 

Id ttM StaU* dai taimfij uiad for dac- 
ti*E»«naf porjioflcm u knawii mi tttdtt, 

CtrmMa Mt'Mlat. 

BoodU IiH alao the dgnifioatira 
of propetty, wealth ; nnqnea- 
tlonably from the thitoh botitl, 
honaehold stnlt. Also an eatata 
lefebyperafmadeoeaMd. (Fopa- 
Ur), a Blnpid noodle (Hniray), 

Bo<dc (liteniy), the libretto of an 
opera. 

TUi i^KtwOl b* loUoinil by* DMT 
couk cpvs aSai "Cempin CaOlMT," 
br H. P«TT, Iba ittt bwv br U^D. 
JnliiiB pHTjuid P ■ "* " 



(Turf), 1 
beta againat oertaln hoteee 
mailed In a pocket-book made 
for that porpoee. ■'Makiiigaiaafc 
upon it," i« » ooomuHi pluaae 
that a man la pnipared to li^ 
the odd* against tha honaa ia » 
laee. " That doee not salt my 
iooifc," iA, does not aooord with 
my otlMraiiangementa (Hctten). 

Booked (common), disposed ot> 

Book-form (tnf), the rdatira 
powers of speed ci endaranoe 
of taea-hca:^ aa gaogad hy tba 



:v Google 



Bookies — Boomah. 



BootiW (tinf), the booknwkm. 



bnripwi or poUtioi. A gnat 
boom in oottoo nfm to u 
adTmaM in ^loe and gnatei 
■otivitj In the nuAet, whll« 
tha first nuuonr that a oeitein 
zaan will obtain a zkotalnation 
to olSoe nka7 be annonnoed in 



TmA Epaoa'i SprinCi «f>ln we trj 

Oar luck wilh ttMa uhI vith tmnei 
Oa'yti uutfaer MA, wbcn Ih 
The ninuiki el tbe GoiMu' couh*. 
—Bira i Fntdmm. 
Hk tMfbai batir, uwcU u tba unto 
raifiM,iriU biunyla baor o( Um daih 
of m g«ul r(llaw.-rb WWU. 

Books (Wlnoheater). There are 
piiiM given at the end of each 
half bj Lord Ba;e and Sele to 
the two lenion in eaoh diviiion. 
Tbeee are called the haria. To 
get ioDib ia to obt^ one of these 
ptlHS. WheoapvtordiTiBiou 
are HTing a lenon, the pnpOi 
ait at one end of " achotd," 
in three »wa; they aie then 
•aid b> be " ap to iaati." The 
Don alts In his ohalr with his 
aide towards them, and the 
" man " who ia easing the leason 



Boom (American), pioperly the 
dlftant vnuid ■■ of tbiuidor gra- 
dnallj inoreaaing in Intenii^. 
Thia word, tram being a faionr- 
Ite one in American oratory, 
began to be applied In iS8o to 
anj great adnmoe or riae in 




( Jonmallatlo), a toon refoa to 
the pnblioatitm In a uewB|>aper 
of aome corrMpoudenoe which 
wiU r^se up a polemic, and, by 
thua atbacting the attention of 
the public, increaca the nle of 
tbepi^jer. 

Tha lucB Dmitj TiUfrmfA tttm— 
"Oai DnckWi"— it (oi^ OB mttrOj, 

■ • ' ■> of itM Tl - 

(Nantical), to " top one'a Sooat 
olt," to be off or atart in a oer> 
ta^ direction. 

Boomah (Aiutralian), a rery large 
kind of kangvoa Thla word 
ia probably a miatake of Colond 
Uunday'i. He beard the kan- 
garoo called a boomer beoanae 
of Ita eaoRnone aiie : the wtnd 
wa* (trange to him, and he 



:v Google 



Boomah — Boom-passenger. 



163 



iiDAgiiied it to be K variety of 
kkDgMDD, end not ailang word 
expresdve of nie. 
An offiat ir» Vu DivDcD't Land 
told BK Ihu b* h«l aoca kDWd in that 

Ihxl bcBf ■ long mr from hooi. ba wu 



HIT pDrtion *rc«pt lb« tail, vbich ■Iod* 
wEii^Hd thinT pcAsds. Thii iptck* ii 
ailed iht twiuA, ud itjiiidi iboat htcb 
fed ia^'—Lint.-CtL ttttrndrnf. Omr 



I (American), ft TK7 big 
■pecimen, ft bsge niftke or k«n- 

Asd ibnld JOB Hk hov »ch ■ SM 

A micfaty hdDIVT pcv. 
So WMoj fljriiii doo onlipcd, 



a onne, bu "come borne to 
Tooit," at tecoUed on tbe head 
of Its ftntbor. Tbe title, "A 
Bourbon Ssomenui^," in an Ame- 
rican uewepqier, meaaa tbat 
the Demoontta have been tn- 
}iiied bj eome sobeme the; bad 
formed agalnat the Bapoblioatu. 



S (Anetraliftn), Ut- 
tiog or killing with a boome- 
lang. A elang participle, coined 
from the Datire word boome- 



_; (Atutnlian), large, aa- 
tonishlng. For deilTation lyt* 
BOOHZB. 
Losk u iliai I wrff to»a« I Ha ha* 



— /- B. St^keiu: Mmrwufiml BOl 

A TOiy great lie, a very Wg 
Baa; a vary long hit at etlokel 
woold be deamibed ■■ a tooMn-, 
Vt ft ngnlat laemer (lued by 
•■dangy" AnatnUani}. iLbo»m^r 
ia probably that wbich makee a 
big boom or ntdae, and eo «ome- 
thii« voy Ug. We have tbe 
nme metaphor la "ft great 

Boonwruc (Amarkaii), piopariy 
ft oarred flat weapon need by 
tbe natlTea In AoatiaUa, which, 
when thrown, tetama to the 
thrower. In American jonnal- 
ien the word ie frequently need 



Ha B wu^ug lu with bii "ilkiBiiig 
cfc,' bii bead up, bii viciou uciKOc dutlog 
ofllaowaDd Ibtn likea laipaDl'tEuic*.— 
A. C. Grant. 

Boocn-Jft-laiiy (American), a 
myiterlone elai^ word, which 

Bpanieb ^ouien, bnringaa, or 
what ia going on. 
TwB nfht in Iba mUdla <d tbmittmi^ 



rt an oTlha Choctaw triba. 



I aot. or falaabood, whioh, like 



:v Google 



1«4 



BoomUr — Boozt. 



to cnmlri alcmg, or ctuid on tha 
>ny^mf for oxfindM or vHuiish* 
ment (Hottea). 



t (AmerioBti), a 
•orabblng-bnuh. (New fork), 
Dntoh, hotnidtr, ft bnuh. "A 
rabbBTiftmbbing-bnuh. BonnBi 
to rnb with a bnuh," impl;liig 
dillgenoa Hence the Amerioan- 
Ism to JxHki it, to ioae into it, to 
i^tplj ona'a sel^ to aorub away 



Boost, to (Ametioan), to push np^ 
Gmerallj naed In the mom of 
giving ono a lift ; " give me • 
ioMt," aa one boy wheo olimb- 
lug a tree m>jb to auotber. 

The U 



Booth (thlevea), a bonae ) to " heaTe 
a boaA," to rab a honaa 

Boea-bonter. bam-ttonner 
(tbeMrical), a lond aotor, of the 
good old-tuhioDod "boiBe-dnng 
and Mwdutt" t7p& The late 
T. B, Ohattertoa naed to tenn 
It " gat aotUig." 



_' (militaiy), poniihiiient 
inflioted l^ the men with a ant- 
oiigle orattap. 



Boot-leg plan (AmericaD), by 
enaioa or triokerr, in reference 
to the MTing that " the beat It 
on the other leg," ic., not aa 



la woold nataial^iiBdantand 



ThBE b H modi oluihy eanxamti m 
Ion Dsw u then wu bcfon, Int la> 
beer, lluwshout Ibt Stue " for amSai 
pBTpHei onir," ud on Ibe tttt-ltg flam, 
utd uIdddi nu) opoly in lb* \trga Uimt 
in deluca of the Uiin.-Oiuhi /finU 

Boota (eororaoD), man at boj who 
cltana boote at an botoL The 
tann haa oeaaad to be elaog. 

Well, 1 ma do mr bat, the pM or Jh<i 



lliiiH 






A " bootoatoher " mw a pn>- 
Tinoialiam ai^ed to a man at 
an fun wboae dgty it was to poll 
oil tbe boota of traTellera. 

To " bnj anf one'a old baoU," 
tomanyorkeepaoaat-oB mia- 
tieaa. 

Boose (common), drink ; to boote, 
to drink heavflj. To be "on 
the fiooae," to ba out on a dmnknt 
jolllfioatioD, going from one 
publlo-honM to another. The 
word la derivable from " bocae," 
to drink deep or oaronae. In 
Wright'a Arohaio Dlcttonarj 
"booae" la defined aa mean- 
ing, In aome of the nual dla- 
tricta, a oattle " trongh," where 
klne and horsea drink. In War- 
wiolcahire and Ldoeateialditt 
the trough la called a " booBon." 
Some etymologists derive thii 
from the Hindoatani boon, diiuk, 
and cthara from the Dutch i«y> 
im, to tipple — with more leaaon, 
aa the term was good Engliah in 
the (outeenth century. 



:v Google 



TboDMB BBiman, in his " Ca< 

Teftt, 01 WueuiDg for Common 

CnrsBton," 1568, hu bcvtt for 

diiiik, and le boute for to diink, 

" I uy br ibc SalonuB I wiU Ugg ii of 

«ilhigi(«ofbEMin>H; then cut 10 my 

DOM wuch. Why, hul Ihou HUT lawn in 

lhybonielo4«Hr"— "I My by ih* man 

I will wrpeilaffwithaqun of good drink. 

lay whu you will to mc Why, hut 

Ihoa wiy mooey in (hy pant to dnnkf" 

To be booad, to be drank 

Booser, or booMf (popnlM), one 

fond of potiktlons, k drnnkard. 

Thii lundlord mi ■ invr Roat, 



Boosing diMt (thlerea), & bottle, 
a (popnlar), ft pnbUc- 



—Bosh. 165 

Bordc (old coot), ashilling. Fro- 
babl; oiiginftted In tba teim 
"bord,"former];adi)t7paid in 
f&iiB and nurketa for setting 
Qp tablet, boards, and ftalis. 



Bon, to (pi^^lictic), to drive an 
opponmt on to the ropee of the 
ring b7 sheer w^ht. 

HaUiHux tried IB if* down hi* 
oppoociit by main firvnEth ; Cnbh d«tcr- 
mbed to ptevcnt him it pontble by npeat- 

— Tlitmat Criti : Pmfiliiticm. 



BooziugtOD (Australian priaon 
slang), a dronkerf man. In 
Kngluid, Iiiutiington' (one who 
loshea or driolu) la the «qiiln- 
lenttwrm. 

Boozr (popnlu), partiallj tntoxl- 
oatod ; what the Tulgar oollo- 
qnialism calls the " worse for 
Uqaor," or " disguised In Uqaor." 
Formeilj not slang. 

Borak (colonial), to " polie borak" 
applied in colonial coDTenation 
to tlie operations of a person 
wlio pann flctitioui information 
Into the ears ot a crednloas 
listener {Nola and Qiurtft, 7th 
Seriee, toL iii. p. 476)- 



Boring (turf), when a hoiae in 
running hangs upon another so 
as to interfere with bis chance 
of winning, the process, whether 
Intentional on the part of the 
jock^ or the reeolt of the 
ezbanstion or bad temper of 
the animal, Is called boring. It 
ninallj leads to lecrimlnatiou, 
and occsdooally to disquallflc*- 
tion. 

Born weak (nantlcal), when a 
veasel Is feebly bnilt, she ll aatd 
to haTe been iom ueot. 



Thii (cntlcman whtipsal to hit comnde 

lbs (I bclWe III EaUcm dtrintion) 

■Ih nonofyUabk itA!—Tluidiirm]'! Tin 



:v Google 



i66 



"TU* mU-kDown wori b 
allegwl," MT tiw •atlwa at Uw 

Anglo- IndiHi niiiiMiij. "to ba 
taken from the TmUth teilt, 
dgniffit^ ampty, tkIii, luelees, 
ftcdtodhoiwe'iDictioiuzj); bot 
w« liBTS not baeu able to bac« 
Iti liiitoi7 (» Bnt ^pcannoa in 
Bi^Uah." Betk in ■ngU.h , and 
all otbai grPT dialeoti, meuia 
• noise or •oniid of Any kind, 
mnd ic klao oaed in *11 the • 
of the Tnrkiah woid 1 
enptineas, jiut u wa might mmj 
"that ia aU talk." "Hatch 
70QI boah," or "boabedn," atop 
you nolae, ia qnita the aame 
aa atop your heA. And aa the 
Bngliab gypay iaik. In bot, 
oomaa ntJMr nearer to the Kng- 
liah alang word than the Tnrkiah, 
it aeem* moat likely that the 
Bomany sappUed it. Baih or 
6diA in gypsy baa alw the 
meaning of mnso, and is vp- 
plied to a Tiolin. It was, and 
may yet be, a test of a "tia- 
Tsller'i" profloiency in gypay 
habila, or in the Bomany lan- 
guage, to pat to him the fol- 
lowing *ene; 



"Ocu rm mkkv R 






O can T«i pUy the fiddli t 
O OB yoa go u piuoB T 
O caa TUB cat thi wocxl t" 

The last line nta* to —- H"g 
■kewers or other artlolea of wood 
—the last tetoit for a gypoy 
when poor. 



Aat b gypay foe a TtaUD. A 
gnu many expra«ddtta oaad by 
the loweM class of actota are 
trmn the gjprj- Abo JBrtwaa. 

Bodi Iniea (sbowmai), liUcally 
Tiolin atringa, explained faj 



Bos-ken (trampe), a farm-bonae, 

Bo«^ (popular), drank ; from 
leitg, awalled, in hot, "tight." 



fn na the iwdl itimm baTlbi fib 

hmr tlH cnm ^Oa.—Htmry MmflHmi 
LtmJtm Lmim mr mm d tim LtmJtm. Pmr. 

Boas, an American M.nA ivrlTwibl 
term extensively nsed in Eng- 
land by all oil MBS in a varied of 



M JowiHTBa.— rtf WtMf Baikim, 



Yh mat ■ hta cook and ■ Ixaiur, 
don CabcB, eh I Wdl 1 luen I ui balK 



Uachphilolc^oal teaeanib has 



:v Google 



167 



OomplMe e^iDOti^y of this word, 
itbcdng held that it ia oounectod 
with ton, a round, salient piotq- 
boranoe whiab liset, k> tc speak, 
in a gnperior mannsT above tba 
stUTonnding ■orfaoe ; but moat 
philologistB agree in deiiTing it 
from the Dntoh Aooi^ mavter t 
dtn haat spetfen, to play the mas- 
tar, to domineer, ta lord it, 
the pronunciation of haau and 
tow beii^; the Mme, And this 
origin is borne oot bj the 
circDmstaace that the French 
argot has bemttte for the master 
of a boDse, rich dtiien. man of 
importance, which wasboirowed 
from Flemish vagabonds and 
thieves. In Norfolk bou Is nsed 
in the sense of master, or one 
who oan best and overcome an- 
other. In the North of England 
" bOBsock " and " bossy " mean 
large, fat, with a large bell;. 
The lost word bean a olose n- 
oemblanoe to the French hetm; 
bat of eonrse a ' ' bony " man and 
a iotfH difFer In reapeot of the 
position of the protaberanc& 

In America holt is also lued as 
an adjective with the sense of 
principal, la^e, fine, as a hat 
lot of apple*. 

HADiratinialuinllnilic "JHimiae,* 
ertbe "ita nnch" dip itinnigh mjfui- 
fCn i—P. Framit .- SmJdh mtdMaCMain. 

Bcti is often used as a verb, 

with the ilgni&oation to own. 

manage, sapeilntend, condnot. 

Our tallut durf, truliif the BlutioD 

■1 Dual, iDBiud npciB Ihg Nutioail An- 

(ban bdsi pUjMd u tba mBdmicB at i)h 



n f« the Qiitia.—Sftrtiiii Tim. 



gBEcd b uiirini u 

fcyini in ihc Heucu iiyk, b«on-bl 
beint nbslituHd for lud.— ^. frai^ii: 
SsddU and MatasBn, 

" SdMtd his own shoes," man- 
aged his affairs personaUr. 



The Anatrallan employ^ gene- 
rallj speaks of his master as the 
ioM, though he seldom would 
address him as iou except when 
the mast«r is really in the same 
station of life as himsetf. It is 
disrespeottnl to address a man 
as hon in Anstndla. The " Lar- 
rikin " la rather fond of prefac- 
ing his impertinenoeeto pasaen 
by with, " I say, Bott." 



"iheCap," H 

niff -(mcbed fonr^nch cslkn, in 
•<Tkd "juBpoU," ukI wu mhOai to 
BooriiB StRM OB tlK "Cup nifhl* urilb 
■• I nr. &u, how miKh fcritn ctHaMd t ' 
Iram, ta iadindBul irbs ni dm Is ba 
cnubad hf ■nUbcrint tliuKa Ihn^ ■ 
dflibemlcty Kmnd-in cycilui. 

-D. B. W. SUdm. 



:v Google 



"Tlw Ddky Smi; the 'tmhjr vhiir, 



-/.S-Stt^kmi: 



Ckbmen nso tba tenn wjtli 
tbs MUM of the " fuo," In Pari* 
le homyni* (wfalob bM abo all 
the other meMdngi ol ioM). 

Who h ■ imtdUBT On Rtnnibic 
from lb« UdiMd Cooninc Hwtiof tba 
H efih* raiutai viih lb* 



BoaiMBO, wed br J. B. Stcpbani, 
the AutnUan Mnnle poet, M an 
abbterlatioi) of "Bom Kaqga- 

RiBscd bjr ItH Cuhtn of Iba trib^ 




" Am of the abaiit^," maiter, 
manager of the place. 

The jomf mu who lira Dot fu fratt 
Bnidcu Road, who ^om ■ P. awl O. 
cup, uhI won A Q mtdal at the Poplar 
■■rir cioaEnf cobc*n, ibouLd hiT« MnitMd 
■bout 10- Wh ha lookiaf for tha fur 



S«tt of the ihow, I 
a theatie, mndo-haU, oiieoi, or 
a man who girea bq entertain- 



Hoa Leooota Biadky, mil known In 
Aiacrica, inll opn ihonlT b Lonloa, at 
■ Wot End ibvCr*. vilh a dcw plar 
callad " JtM," wriiMn b; tba autbon of 
"Uj Swaatbwt.' Boctaa C SuAbrd 
will ba int of tbii Bhow, of wbidi nport 
ipaaki hi^j.—MMiT Fru^tm. 



Hotit,toapoUil. 



— /. A. Sttf*im : iltrrm t mi BtU. 

BoMan (mmraon), ipeotaolea ; 
beoanae (apeolall; In the oase 
(rf ahort-dgtatad ponona) Cbej 
make one look " boi»«7sd " or 
eqidntliiK. or from the atnda on 
bonea' blinkeia. 

Bostoa (Amerioan), an expraa- 
alon vhioh owea moofa of Its 
meaning to the tone and accent 
with which It is attend. Some- 
timee it ia Boi^ag, the nasal 
Tankae form of the word. It 
i> meant to satiriae proTinoial 
vanity, and the peenliar form 
of prlggishoeaa whloh la de- 
olBTOd hj enTlona New Torkera 
and othen to be obaiaoteilatio 
of "the hob of the nnlTene." 
The dky of BoatoD ongQeaUon- 
abl^ la, aa regarda Utetai^ onl- 
tjxn, tar in adTanoe of any oit; 
in Amsrioa, a taot of nhioh its 
indwellera an by no meaua 
Ignorant. 

Boston cnlcbaw (Amerioan). It 
is declared by the dwellen In 
the other (donbtlaaa eniioni) 
oitiea of America that the In- 
habitanta of Boaton are ao [vond 
of thcdr "onltore," that how. 
ever ezoited or nnrvlythey maj 



:v Google 



BosloH—BoUU-halder. 



boooma, U17 penon oao at ones 
call them to order by Teferriiig 
to it In a letter from the Hab 
to the AtCd^e Trilnme tbere is 
ft detailed and appwently per- 
fectly tnrtWal narrative of two 
"ladiea," or at leant " women ol 
wealtb," who began to quarrel 
fnilOQtly in » >bop orer « conn- 
ter for a ihilling bandkerchiet 
The bjitanders, and finally all 
the people in the place, were 
Mon in a farions row, when a 
tall, dignified man, obeervlng 
that there wu a itranger pie- 
■ent, rectorod qoiet aa by a 
miracle. All that he did wai 
to otter in an abwnt-minded 
way, " Soitao ttilAaie — ahem 1 " 
There waa a indden illence — 
« marked penAatlon, aa if an 
eteotric cnirent had in a eecond 
■truck tmry heart — and the 
ladiei, forgetting the handker- 
obief, at once retreated. It is 
said that the police experience 
no difScnlty in (topping dog- 
flgbta, " plug-masMB," 01 rowi 
in the lowest tavema ; they 
have bat to C17, " la Ai* aasthe' 
tlcT la (Ait becoming Aiuton f " 
Happy the city wbcee dettao- 
tota cam find in tt no woraa 
■nbjeot of ridicole than its de- 
Totion to cnltoie. 

Botany B*r (Oxford), * name for 
Woreeater College, Oxford, given 
In reference to the altoation of 
the bnUdlng, which is at some 
distance from the centre of the 

(Prison ilang), penal aerritade 
generally, bnt going ont of nse. 



as transportation, which b^;an 
in 17S7, ceased in 1867. Setang 
Baf (now known aa New Soath 
Wales) first reeeired oonviota in 



Botch (old), a nickname for a 
tailor. From to baltk, to patch 
ap clnmaily. 

Bottle (sporting), it turned ont no 
bottU, did not torn out well, 
failed. (PopDlar), toOIc-headed, 

Bottle^WMd (prlnten), type that 
is thickened at the bottom or 
feet la tbiu deecrlbed. This dr* 
oonutanoe arisea from the fact 
of it bdng nom by continual 
tmpreaaion, and aometimea haa- 
tened by improper "planing" 
down or levelling, preparatory 
to laying the form on for print- 

Bottl«-taoIder (pngilistio), one of 
the seconds attending a priie 
Qght in tbe ring, who takes 
charge of tbe water bottle and 
holds tbe oombatant on his 
knees between theroonda, whilst 
tbe other sponges ftnd other- 
wise attends to him. 

Lord Palmeiston -was ao nick- 
named after a speech he made 
when Foreign Secretary. 

Lord laid Ihe dtpatuioii Ibit 

h« Briliih GorvmrncnL Dbdi 
ffocniUhip uhI jndgDKnt , uid thai & foad 
iaH cTiDdkigiii MlU-itUlv v** Dbligad 
ID b« bniu^I inbi pla)i. The pfanM 
Mllt-luUimt, bniTvmd fnm iha !■■■■• 






:v Google 



SoUk—Bounder 



< Hiitrrj ^ Onr 



BongliB, np in Ok (old}. In » 



Bottie of spruce (rhjiniDg aUiig), 
• deaoe, ilftng foi twopence. 

BottUnf (theatrioal), the nme m 
appUei to hobbin^. 

Bottom (common), spirit pUced 
in > glA» before wUet is poured 
in. 

(tip oonntij Anstnlian), the 
Bornbbj, awamj^ gtxnind La the 
bMom o( a depression or TKllej. 
Hoctlj OMd in componnda tncb 
■« ti-tree (teft-tree) Mtnn. 
Iilnl 



u blacked by Io-dk i«(fm nft 



Or&: 



On puD of bdng wholly uopped. 

~ZI. ff. (f. j-Aiifto; A Smmmtr 

£o((m»-gTowtIu is good Bog- 
liih lot grau growing on low 



BanBce (oommon), cheiT7-bnutd7. 
(Fopnlai and thieves), a boUj.oi 
•weU; a "lankftDunw," agrcat 
swell. To inmoe, to swindle^ 
to obeat b; blae reprasonta- 



You win EM BO dieqne or iiDTthiii( dia 
Hit of u, K roa had bctts mnl down 
o DovB- brtder the tat ; fead if yoa can't 
*■«« Ilie " JohDoia " OD the bau, yoall 



(AnMrican), toaacsd, dii- 
misMd, turned ont ; " gi*an the 
O. B.," i.t,, grand bowMt, to 
be taraad oat with great In- 
dignity. 



Bouncer (popular), i 
peraon wlio stalls whilst bar- 
gaining with a tradeeman, • 
large, stoat man or womaiL 

(Prison], a male oompanioa 
of a prostitute, who Ures on 
hot g^ns, and who, bj in- 
timidation and threats, extorts 
mone; from men whom she en- 



Botti (pi^Kilar), the colio. Fio- 
perlj small woima in the reo- 
twn of a horse. 

Bot^ (popular), oODoeited. (Nm- 
sa7), a ooDtiaotion for an in< 
fiut's posterior. The I^eitoh 
eqnJnbot is tut*. 



BonndnscheAt (old cant), abottlc^ 
probably from the noise made 
when opening it and drawing 
the coik, oi a comption of 
boi/titig-ehtiiL 



• (nnlTersit;), a slndent 
whoso manners are despieed t^ 
the soi-ifuaix UUe, or who Is 



:v Google 



Bounder — Bo ui-catcker. 



bejond the bonndHj of good 

Mlowahip; alM a dog-cail 
(Sodety), a nroU, a, Btrlinh 

fcdow, bat of A Tery vulgu 

typa. 

I aid nmcthlng one day ftbouc mr awn 
■tdi^aiHl ri»nmuked thu iT I ord cr pl 
tlu putioalvr hit 1 dflHnd I ihoDid b« 
takiB for ft bwMmUr; »nd whea I uked 
I'lULt Ihiu nKwit, iha (ud, "Ot^ ■ loCF, 
yon k»v.' Feeling tlul mr ifnaruca 
had bOMr be diiplajtd no fuither, I de- 
puted by the Dent atio.— St. Jmma't 



le vVf I jumped the hanmif 



^Bird »' FthJsm. 



Bourbon democnta (Ametican), 
kooording to tbeir RepobUcan 
opponents, the Democnta, eape- 
oiall; thoM of the Sonth, ate 
like the Boorbont, beoaoae they 
baTe "forgotten nothing, and 
leaned nothing," dnoe the wv. 

Booae, or boose ont (naval), a 
good toMM out ia a good fe«d, a 
" tightener." 

Bonainf-ken (old cant), tavern, 
«le-hon«e, modemiaed into 
"bootlug-ken." 






it ii 1UII7 

id iicenunlyi 



'ia BIT pbii (hill IbCT quii like my motlHr 



Bounce, twnce, or bnnc (old 
cant), a parse, and also for a 
piokpooket, A oomption of 
the Bnglish hougtt, wallet. 

Bonng nipper (old), apiokpocket, 
or, M thej were then called, 
" oat-parses." 

Bounty jumper (American), a 
soldier who deserts to enlist 
into another regiment for the 
sako of the bonnty. 



inuiiie-lltm."—Hanm*H : A Catial. 

It., "And let aimrto Lendon. w cat 
■ pune ^ 10 we ihiil b*vc moocT 'v the 

Forcing thinks the term is a 
gypsy corrnption of the Hindos- 
tani 60010, diink, and Uoaa, 
boose. AnwHi, or botumgat, 
in the slang of Fnmcb sailon. 
Is a drinking place or "loih- 
orib," from the Dotch bufttm. 

Bovine heart (medical), not the 
heart of an os, bat a bnman 
heart, which, owing to disease 
of one set of Talves, has become 
so maoh enlarged as to eqoal in 
■iie that of an ox. 

Bow-Oktcber (popular), a oormp- 



:v Google 



172 



Bovxry — Bowfy. 



onrl whioli tonnerlj waa worn 
twicUdoDthatcmplM. French 

in the case of fn'ostitntoa' bnl- 
lles), and Amarican ' ' spit- 

Bowerj boy (Amerloai), tpecUOlj' 
New York), for many jean the 
loogh or rowdy of Kew York 
waa called the Bweerg bof, from 
a atreet, the Boweiy (Dntcb 
Bometrie), which ha wm aup- 
poaed to pecnliarlj affect. 

When I fini bm il both the old Bowery 
TlicUn Had tha old Bfttiry iij ttat in 
iheir ctory- It wai About thai timelhu 

had n encDamcr with the Bmrry irj 

Th* cuslic udriu hi^ liaird of the 
Bnrery ity, %e th4 ttarj Bvei, and went 
to Ke him on hii mtiTE halh. He Toond 
bin kuiinf on > fin hrdnat, ud accoMed 
hin vith, " Mt friend, t nut lo (o to 
BioulnT." Wh«mpaat)MAf*ny^, 
dniwjni up ha ihoolden and takijif an- 
olbcT chev on Tui dfur, " Well, why 
the ^— don't yer f o, th*a T " — CkitMg* 

In New Toik other apeciee 
<A lOngha were tenned ' ' dead 
tabbita," "fin pointera," and 
" Water - Street lats ; " tha 
Tonghi of Baltimore were known 
aa "blood tubs" and "ping 
Dglle*," in Fhitadelpbia aa 
" shifflerB" and " moyamen- 
■inga," and in New Orleans as 
"tlgera" (New York Slang 
Diotionaiy). 

Bowled (Winobeater), arnony- 
mooa with " croppled," or " oroi 
pad," that is, tuned to for 



at the end of cloister time all 
below aenior part hare to repeat 
eight lessons, that is, from 150 
t0 40oUnea. 

Bowled out (thlerM). caarlcted ; 
a metaphor taken from cricket, 
where the batsman'a innings is 
conclnded for good when be is 
hotiltd out. 

A nun who hu ralkiwed the puftMi o u 
of thicTiiif Cbr nmc tin, when he is 
iiliimatelT taken, tried, and cooricced, ia 



Bovries (popular), shoes. 

Bowl ont, to (general), to pot ont 



Bowl tiie boop (rhyming slang), 

Bowly, bowi7 (Anglo-Indian), a 
welL These in India are often 
grand and besntifnl straotnres, 
the water being reached by 
broad flights of stain, with 
reating-plaoea here and there. 

To penoni not Eunitur with the Eait, 
nch an arduteclnnj abject u a trm-ltt 
mar Kern a ttrange jxrvenlDn of inae. 
Duitr ; but tha gnleful coolnae of all 



Hindq for the more altzactiva 
c of thcfiUte. ConBqnallr 
w dcAceDdioa flt^hia of which we ate now 
Bpcaldna, have often been niiic« etaborata 
and eapcovhe jnecee of aichitcctnre than 
any of the bniWocv above arooBd fetmd 



, Google 



— /Vijwm -' Ittdimm and 



ImlitmGIn- Aad m 



Bow* (lUDtica]), wldeiutbeitnH, 
bsriog large hipE and posteriors. 
To have a large " bft^e," auDe 



Bowse, or txniM iqi the jib 
(Dantical), an old phrase, meao- 
ing to tipple. "Boming his 
tib or jib " la uld of a man who 
has been drinking freely. 

Bowqtrit (old), the oose. The 
analog; ii erldenl between the 
most prominent part of the face 



Whih he Iha owHcr would c«H 

With ruJ] hudi from the lUtioa borac, 

Frain whidi ihiyd lun ai bremk of d>r, 

And do [he marking in ft dajr ; 

And ixill he cuiEiooed aaicli lo hc«d. 

And look out u be did proceed' 

" No", auad jounelTs, fcr if jdo *"■. 

Yeu*ll play ihe nuichicf with tb> OockL- 

i»"CiuUtJpjmtdttkirPnma.~ 

Boxed In (thieves), explained bf 



would nlwayi tn 
na.a<i1yforujr| 



Bow-wow (old), a contemptnons 
term for » man bom in Boston, 
HasB. It ii possible that this 
meaning was In the first place 
derived from teig-W M fl, a serrile 
personal attendant 

Box (aommoQ), to be in the wrung 
hex, to be mistaken. The ex- 
preesloD Is old, and has passed 
into the language. 



ttx.-—XUity, IJM. 

(Thieves), cell. 

InaJMofthcitDotjuj 

Ctfa hcBpea widow iht 

Fake awiy I 



bandid sua lockid llm* wioiu admi- 
la^ec 1i wms neck or Dothinc wilh him 
when he wu ouce teitd '■ (wba he 
VEitcnd a h«nc), and a rrrolver wu hii 
but ufcfiurd.— /■ Crwnuarf .- A Cnr 
etrttd Burglar, 

Box Harry, to (coomiercial tra- 
vellera), to go without dinner 
for want of the monej to pro- 
cure it, or having dinner and 
ten at one meal to save expense; 
Formerly, it is said, truants 
confined at school, withont fire, 
fought or boied a figure nick- 
named iforry (probably tbe 
devil), which bung in their 
room, to keep themselves warm. 
That may be tbe origin of the 
phrase. In Lincolnshire, lo box 
Harrji is to be caref d1 after being 
eitiavagaat. To box the devil on 
account of one's poverty strongly 
reminds one of the French " tirer 
le diable p«u' la queue," to be 
" hard np," 



, Google 



Box — Boys. 



Box hat <Miiiiiion), > ink b»t, 
tamed bIso « "eUnui^-pot." 



Box tbe jMnit, to (old), » teim 
to axpnw a Mcrat Tic& 

Box-mllali (Ai^lo-Indian), * 
tiTbrid Hindn word, from iolvf, 
oc the Engluh box, and wofo, a 
proDominal teimioation. A Aoc- 
(MflaA ia a Bmall pedlar, who 
Mill cheap warei, aod who oor- 
reapondi closely to manj of hU 
cOQtiai, tho pedllug gTpdea of 



Boy («ooietj>). champagne, pro- 
bably derived from the term 
" lively boy," which ia often ap- 
plied to a yoang man brimming 
over with '"^"'bI apirlts. 
Tabe 1«, chap, in tht Rojil Eachuif*, 

■ uiull, vcll-filUd olficE, irilk lue ct ttf. 

Snlublc tot uockbrokcr u ■olidtgr.— X., 

■E«iB, I Popc'i Hud Allcjr, E.C X. 
GUI Knd lu ptrliciilin al once, Pommeiy 

uViodoriifr, 



(Popular), a hamp on a man'a 
back. A honch, or bamp back 
nan is aometime* spoken of «i if 
beweretwopeTMnt — "bimand 

(Anglo-Indian and i^dgin), 
throogboat tbe Ea«t peraonal 
■erranta of any age ue called 
bast. Tbe aothoTs of tbe Anglo- 
Indian Qlosaaty obseire that 
similar uaea of tbe word are to 



be fonnd in tbe Tolgate, alao 
in the AiaUo, and Gemtta lit«- 
latnre, while Shakspeara makaa 
Fleelen aay — 

" Km <be ftT' ^o*! <)x ItVPC* 1 '>•■ 
'pradr icuiut IhiUviafiiniul* 

In pIdgin-Engllah a aerrant 
It tpjF, whilat kjr in the ofdi< 
nary senae li " one email toy." 
In Tonkin the word la naed by 
tbe French with a like algnlflca- 

Boycott, to (general), a now gene- 
lally accepted tenn, oaed with 
the aignifloation of to aond to 
Coventry, to etand alool The 
French equivalent is "mettre 

" Whr, Hibcl, dor, I hiK dm kcd joa 
tor Ihc 1«1 tfn lUr* : tmlfTva d<n'E ncui 
tottytrll RiiacDI Slnetf 

"Idoo't wut<ot<r«'f R^cnl Stmt. 
bat thcT puy wuu to EodKBtl ne.'— 
5>*rtA«- Timtt. 

From Captain Bt^cott, an 
Irish landlord, wbo lay nnder a 
kind of eieommDnicatlon, all 
labonren bring forbidden to 
work for bun under penalty of 
Bome fearful pnnishment. 

Boja (tnrf). tbe crowd of "lam- 
pen," " brief snatchera," "wri- 
■hera," " magsmen," " lorn- 
berers," and other rognea who 
flonriih on every raoeconrae. 

think lh*t then ii hardly ■ 
ID I'utEmll'i, or ens oat sf 
nudj-DUBcy bUoniiT, irho wooU 
wUtinjlj lubKribc lo ■ (and for the 



:v Google 



Boys — Branded. 



175 



The hagt U also a deaignAtlon 
occasionallj Applied to tbe ring. 
"He U not on terau with the 
hoyt," meuu thitt the person 
■Uoded to hM lost more money 
than he can pay, and doet not 
Tentore within hail of the book- 



a thieres), to 
get credit by swagger. To braec 
it thioiigb, to do a thing by 
sbeet impudence. 

Bncelets (polioa), bandonfis. Its 
eqniTalent is need in French 
alang. 

*■ Yoa'd bmcr dip t1» hrmaUlt on his, 
Jin.' Tb( fttknr on my Itfk pmlaad m 

Aimtbftk. 
"Ab, bal I dol' czdnimi] the dclce- 

liT«,»dilciilTtcuiD|thc tnBib[Lhf vietdk. 
"CtiiH, iM'l dip the trtaliO ob."— C. 
Simi : X^ma md Vag^tmA. 



Brace np, to (thieves), to pawn 
stolen goodj. Botten so defines 
it, bat Tau says ; '■ To dispose 
cf stolen goods b; pledging 
them for the ntmoit yon can 
get at a pawnbroker's is tenned 
' bracing them np.' " 



Bradcet'iniif (popnlar), a very 
ugly fsc«t mtg bring slang for 



Bimda (thieves), halfpence, QMHIC7. 
Hotten saji, frnidi, money ; 
Tau, "Bradi are halfpence, 
also money in general" Pro- 
perly k>adi are a kind of "*<!■ 
used by cobblers. 

"GrtmrtliinBt" 

"GnuylhUist Not ■ Jtb4 I'wdp ny 

DCKI. nic oM blol« ihu ■ BttiB' op ■ 

ibupeEun' hii ■duon." 
" Bui joa muit k' (Dt MBXthinst" 
"Vhtll, ye*-l Thu lucky 10 let oat 

without bein' Dude ■ (b«Dy niTidC"— 

Sptrtii^ Tima. 



Brain-pan (medical), the eknll- 
cap, the calvaria, also the sknll 
itself. (Common), the head, 
called also " nob, not, know- 
ledge-box. canister, cbump." 



Bramble -gelder. In SnSolk a 
derisiTe appellation for an agrt- 
onltniiit (Hotten). 



or, u ht himielf mpum d It, a ronr> 
p«ny h-ait—Cllarla DictHu: OUrtr 
TwUt. 

Branded ticket (nautical), a dis- 
charge given to an fntamooa 
man, on which bis character 
is given, and the reason he 
is tamed cut of the serrlce 
(Admiral Smytb). 



:v Google 



176 



Brandy — Brassy. 



BnaSj coatee, bnndf (Ai^flo- 
IndiaD), « clcwfc, » coat tor tbe 

BuxDi-kuni Kcmt to b« ■ kind of hy- 
brid ihiiiicd by Ihe Enjiliih vord "cnu." 
lhiiii(b itvrM imd ImrU m tnit PcnUn 
oonli for mioiu foniu nf jacket isd 
tuoie.— ^ Vitf-/sdhn GU—mty. 

Biandf -faced (popolai), rad f»ced. 
Is genenllj wid of one who U 
in the habit of drinking spirits 
in Bioess. 

Brandy pawnee (Anglo ■ Indian 
and English gTpaj), brand; and 
water. From pM, Hindu and 
Romany, for water. Id Bng* 
land " pam? " ts a common 
slang word tor water. 
I'n urry to rc yuD, (Enilcmcn, drioli. 

ing traitJ^ fatumtt. t< pUyi tbt denct 

wiih ou jtaBt urn in India — Thacktr^ : 

Tki J/tatttmti. 

Bnu-muh (army), bread broken 
ap and aoaked in ooSee or tea 
at breakfast, or tbe evening 
meal, which consists of dry 
bread only, as the regular ration, 
men in foods adding red ber- 
ri^E*! ^KE*! and other savooiy 
cendiments according to choice. 
See Floatiho Battkbibs. 

Biaaa (ooUoqnlal), impndenoe, 
"cheek," from the ImmoTable 
hud-set conntenance of a bold, 
impadent person, tbe front 
cTairain of tbe French expres- 
sion abbreviated into aanr U 
front lie . . ., to have the auda- 

%adi a nfU4 upon Rcwd, tlut tba Cbi^f 



It is said of an impudent per- 
son that his face baa been 
"nbbed with a irau candto- 
Btick," or that he is as "bold 






damned bud, and 

(Popular), mi 

Bui W.J trmn all vcDl u 
Old Mick, and ibc nal too, 
Fdc I backed SomnlD— 

Nci Suodar duuKT. 



work].- laid tlx 
can do bcucr than the gold wl 
Ibe fin," laid tha a 
Olinr Twill. 

Brasa bound and copper faatenedi 

(nantical), a term ^>pUed to a 
midshipman when in uniform. 

Braaaer (Blae Coat School), a 

bully. 

Bias* knocker, a ptuaae need 
among professional beggars and 

tramps to slgnif; the broken 
victniUs, wbicb they unwiilingly 
receive instead of money, and 
commonly throw away on the 
roadside as soon as they ore ont 
of eight ot the douors. 

Braaay (popnlar), Impadent. 

No, MiUer Cailk, Betty iMi loo Jnu^, 



:v Google 



Brazen-faced- — Break. 



Bread twgi (ftnny), those cod- 
iMOted with the Tictaalliiig 
dapaitment. Fonnerl? temed 
" mackws ; " French aoldien 



Bmd-idcker (Wioohestet), 
Doiniiial office, ecoiL ' 
bidJat trom fRggtng. 



1 (naatdcal), wi old 



Bmd, or bud t«ck (nantical), 
bUonU. Brtad being teimed 

'■■oft tact" 

Bicad and-botter fashion (proeti- 
totes), that Is, one (eUcb) npon 
another. It was said ot two 
penons caaght in the act that 
"the; wers Ijing biead-and* 
bnttei fashion." 

Bread-and-bntter wanhonae (old 
cant), Banelagh Gardens was so 
called. See Bkkad-Ahd-But> 
TIB FASBIOK. 



Bread-room jack (nantical), pur- 
ser's steward help. 

Break (prison), a colleotion made 
in aid of one awaiting trial 
□r recently discharged. Liter- 
ally, panse in street performance 
when Che hat goes TOQnd. 
The Bub got me up ■ fnroi (cmllECliDDl, 
uh] 1 got bHwecn five or wul font (lon- 
nipu).— Xn. /. Henltr: Jtltinp/rrM 



Bread barge (nantioal), the tra^ 
in which hiscnit is handed 

Bread-baaket (popolar), the 
stomach. 

. . . The pnbl id a floup iul 
drina rifht ihnwsh, cIoh u 
wiih ibt uduuiien, " Whu do jrou think 

tmAtn'—C.Khvltf- AUtitLtdu. 

When yen can't fill th* Jmrf-Aukf, 
■hni U : la u ilHp.— Xudli .- A'owr Mt 



Break or crack one's ^g, to 
(cricketers), to make one's first 
rnn, thus avoiding the "dnck's 



Breaking the balls (billiaids), 
conunencing the game. 

Breakinf ap of the speU, tbe 
(thieves), explained by quota- 
tion. Ftdc Spbll. 

Tkt hnmUmt ^ nf Oit iptU a Ihi 
Diihllj lemunation of the pcriornunce 
■t the Tlaln ^ojti, which ii reculerljr 
etlendtd by ptckpocket* of the Lows order. 



Break out all orer (American), a 
oonunon slang phrase, borrowed 
from tbe medical TooalHilai7, 
Xfans if a man wen in a great 



:v Google 



■78 



Brtai — Brewer's horse. 



rage. It might be SBid that his 
wrath broke out all orer him, or 
that he nulled from hii feet to 
hid eyes. In the foUowiiig anec- 
dote it is applied to an ezcesaiTa 
development at piet^. 

" ' GM don tha B[bh, wc'n pib( to 
iart funiljr ^nya.' ' Wh]r I in jroa 
■einl to lu« funilf pn^a bdon jou 
hnw nlifiont' ibi uktd. Crincr mid 
be noted it ud the minuter uid if hs'd 
da before be foE ll n he tboofbt ba*d do 
eAer hagotitWdhiKlt. Well, Criner 
BMld not CEI the idea into hit bevl. But 
GrifCB- Kudt IS il, nod in ■ few nelu 
Griov wu the (beet cue of relicioo I 
evtrdw. IlinlHtafatmrAim." 

Break diiiu, to(oommon), to bor- 
row money. The French ilang 
eqniTalent fi "donner nn oonp 
de pled dam lea junbeo." 

Break the moIaaMi jn;, to 
(American), to make a mirtaku 
and come to grief. 



Break the neck of anjthinc, to 
(Dommon), a phnse signi^lDg 
that the greater portion of auj 
taak has been accompUsbed. 

Bnakj - lej (popnlar), strong 
drink. The French slang aaya 
of a man who haa had too much 
drink that be haa " ime jambe 
de Tin." (Tbieves), a ■hiUiog, 
from the ezpreasion "to bre«k 
■him," which MCL 

Breaat fleet (old slang), Roman 
CatboUes were onoe known bj 
this name. So called from the 



Breeched (common), to be well 
off. The French say of a bank- 
rapt that he is onbreaohed, d^ 



Breeches (coUoqaial), a wife who 
onrpa her hniband's prerogatiTe 
if said to "wear the trecaU*." 
French, " porter la calotte." 

Breese {common), a quancl or 
disturbance— gweraUj " to kick 
np a iraat." 

BreezT (American), cod. 

Hot uncc the angina] enemy of meokiEHl 



'nrv chic (proixwaced ia thb iiutiim 
ditek) ai ihat uhibited 1>t Carter Hanl- 
Kn, Maror cf Oucafo, io cominj to New 

ntnt.~-Jfnr Yt* WtrU. 



Brevet-wife (common), an unmar- 
ried woman, who is represented 
as married to the man with 
whom she cohabits. 

Brew, to (Harlborongh), to Imtb 
some refreshment in the afta>. 
noon at about four o'clock. 

Brewer'a hone, old cant name 
foradmnkard. Amlgaritanxa 
on this sabjeot wu popnlar 
abont a hundred yean ago or 



:v Google 



Brian o' Linn — Brickfielder. 



179 



But u Buaihi el the jiai, 
I'd ukg UT fiU of baHH un^ 

And driiik Dp >ll Ibt hta. 
Who Owl wM dm, whu (hoold I do 

Hy Ibint is Bun^. 
I'd CM iqi aJI lb* ootki and bodl), 

(Kn DP ihi ihoM nod dH." 

gin- 
Brick (ooOoqnial), > term of 00m- 
ffieDdation a|^ed to * partl- 
oolul; hon««t, good, J0II7, 
braTB, or «pliitad pcnon. 

)v«d of huD higUr, koA 



It Is naed BometimeB with an 
adj«ctlTe prefixod, as an "out' 
and - ont hrU3c" a " regular 

Aootbcr bkBuliir wotd in tba UDhtnity 

■lui U ■ " rcb1« Md," lluu u, a joUt 
food ftUov, Htd bow tbc nraUt is locicalLj 
dedund u ■'""■**^ OHMfh. A hriik ii 



Identified 1:7 Uent-Col Uondsj 
with the "sontherl; bnnter," 
M amed from the brickdnitj 
feel of the grit with whlob the 
irind cbaigea itself aa it rolb 
up the atonn. 

In October iM. u t find by bit dhrr, 
1 wilHued ■ fax iniunct of a Docinnul 
tritlffiililf. AwaliEKd by Uk luriDI of 
thi <ruid I uniK and looked out. It wai 
brichl nooniifhl, or il muld ban btn 
bricbt bnc for the cloodi of dull, ubicb, 
iopelled fay a perfect bamcue. curled up 
rnm Ih* cwlb and abaolDtely DuAcd Ibe 
fair face of Ibe plaoeL pDlveriied tped- 

loo milet of SydDer, Hev put ihe keua 
high over the chiomey tope in lorid vbirl' 
windtiDow vhittiDownd. Ithadallth* 



barnn^ tb* fire. , , , 

One of the Ercalat niiema of the 
" KKKhtriy boiiMt " il that (mkane to all 

r the feicnal fbr a gcibtfsl 






yonr windows is probably ja' 
"good maD;" a (ood dud ie a lowet; but if you have aay refani for 
jeuy fallow with neri'ieadinf men, trgw a light and midiatioa, foe carpets, cbtDti, 
^jUOirmmMcJt.-HaliUria'i iUar- beolu, uid ether fumituR, yoa must n- 
trwUd MmgrnBiH. ligiOBSly ikiit up shop UBtil Ibe cbuleiad 

Ubeniofl^ baTing R^veDgered the meets at 
parlielc of diul, has Dudervtcd jta 
ETen then, howenr well fiittd 
may be the doon and window*, the volatD* 
atam will find their way er er ywb en, tO 
dielDrhapce of household and 
pensna) conjbrt.— Unif.-CaiCi Mtmd^ : 



It is eTidoit that the flgtuatiTS 
■BDM of the word i» in aUnnon 
to the ih^M of a inci. In 
TCnglith and other langnaffea 
■ti^htforwardneaa is alw^g 
identified with aqnareiMM. '~ 
answered ;od m eqnare aa a 
bridt." "He did It on the 



BricUdder or brickdnater (Aus- 
tralian), a dost storm, a kind 
of whirlwind frequent in Ana- 
tralia dnring the ranuner time. 



The clieule of QBOtmlaod ii Tcry hot. 
1b niBBMr Ihe beat it Indian | and it is a 
miHSI, that is to lay, an uhausling beat, 
whereas the luiiuacr temperatort in other 
pam of ADniaUa is CDD|HratiTely dry; 

in New Soulb Welee. but when Mct- 

jSiUrrj or dnM uonu an not bknrinc, 

-Pm/r TtUrntf*. 



:v Google 



Brick — Brie/s. 



Brick in the lutfconunon), intozl- 
c»t«d, top-haav7. Tha dariva- 
tloD U obviooB. 

BrickUyar'B ckrk (untiod), » 
coatemptDona eipresiioii for 
lubberlj people pretending to 
haring seen better dxje, hat 
who were forced to betake thsm- 
Nlvea to sea life. 

Bridge (oard-tbaipera), a. cheating 
tiiok at cardi, by which anj 
particulu cord Is cut by pre- 
vionilj during it. Frenob card- 
■haipen term it " faiie la pant." 

I>« found «l Ihe nj ihit Vuk« 
rdlow doci the lune. Il'i not thi cooimafi 
M^ thil neryWr knom. — Qter&i 
i-ntr: DtKtt^rrt Dmoi. 

To hndgt a persoD or tlirow 
him over tbe irwf^ is, in a gene- 
ral sense, to deceive him b7 be- 
trajing the conBdeooe he hat re> 
t>oaed in yon. In the game the 
confederates so plaj into each 
other's hands that the Tictim 
mnit ineritablj be "thrown 
over the brvigt." 

Bridle-cnll (old cant), a hlghiraj- 

A boDtj oT jCio looki u ((nil u tba ere 

of fe Srijit^cutt, KDd civq « nudi rut 
huppuKu lo tiu iuHTp *^ >^"U ^ ■■ nuiT 

Jn-UJim* iVild. 

Bnef (prison), a note or letter. 

"Jiut took whi( t'v« had leut mft. 
An order to (o ivcr the Bank at Eog. 
IukL" . . . 

*' Can't you liter the jn^ to admit 



Bri^ is a aorvlTal of an old 
Bnglish term of common eocled- 
Bstical use in the seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries: In 
French br^, both from the 
lAtin ifwu. See mbric in the 
Prayet-book. Here hn^i, cita- 
tions, and ezcommnnicaUoni 
are to be read. Briefi were 
ciroular letters issned b; 
authority asking fet oharitaUe 
oolleotiauB in all ohntchee. 

(ThieTes), a ticket, pocket- 
book, pawnbroker's daplioate. 
Sa I clainsd (Hole) Ibto, . . . ud 
gujal {»n) lo the rutItT fiulmy), and 
look B hrUfVa Londm Srid(e.— JCn. /. 
Hanltj: JuHtvJnm/mil. 



hii hat, a> be fracefullr ndined go tfa* 
■eal of a Ihird-clau carriage u the AicDt 

" ipedal," and leliunlr licked n juece td 
fried fiili, " these 'e ' 






re matched al Mffi, the [ 



Oh WBd jati boy ■ pound, thou bat of 

III nfund It vben the Cea«e« run 

—Hnun Om G4t-tttt Kin Agmim. 

Brief! (cardshaipen), cards con- 
Btrncted on a cheating prin- 
ciple. Like the German Briifi, 
which Baron BelDecken says 
was the name given to the cards 
manufactnred at Ulm, Brirf 
is also the synoiiyni for a oard 
in Oennan slang, and hntftn 
means to play at cards* 



, Google 



Brief snakhtrs — Brismela/i. 



I (thieTM), pick- Briaginr dtnni the houe (thw- 
pockets who devote their Att«i)- tdcal mnd jonmallitlc), tdldtliig 

tiou to pocket-booka on nee thoiideiB of appluiM. 

Brine on Toorbevsl (Aranioui). 
a conuDOQ form of challenf^ 
It i« said that »mudlbo]riDtho 
Fu West, who liTed in a place 
where beai-kiiling waa a faTonr- 
ite Bmnsetnent, waa veiy mnoh 
stmok at hearing for Uie fiist 
time the itoiy of Bllaha read 
from the Bible. The next iaj, 
while In his log-cabin home^ ha 
saw approaching an old man on 
whose pat« not a haJr could be 
seen. He haitilf took down hla 
father's rifle and loaded It, 
sharpened the famll7 bowle' 
knife, and roared at the ancient 
passer-bj, "Go up, then Bald- 
bead 1 " Then looking defiautlj 
Dp to heaven he cried, " Now, 
bring on four htarti" The 
Chieoffa Tribune (September 13, 
1S86) heads a deflant article to 
England with this exclamation. 



Brigh (thieves), pocket. Probablj 
from breeches, bat closer in form 
to the Gaelic briffit, whence the 
French braUt, breeches, and 
braj^etle or bragviMt, flap of 
breeches, which formed a con- 
venient receptacle for small 
articles when pockets had not 
d the poncb. 



Bright (freemasons), an adjeotfve 
applied to well-instmoted ma- 



Britn (old cant), a woman ; (com- 
mon), a Tlolent and irasoible 
woman. Brim, a very old Eng- 
lish word for aogr? or enraged. 
Is rapposed to be from the raging 
or roar of the sea. Anglo-Saxon 
brim, Stat, large on the shore. 

Sba imnd, iba nbuMd dk, aul «)»•<•< 

She'i a vuKD, iht'i ■ hrim, roDodi 1 ihe'i 
all ihu u buL 

it), an abau> 



Briny (popnlar), the sea. French 
slang, " la giande saUe." 



(old 



The hriwattm iworc I beat h« hiul«»], 
■nd K I laict for Bieddling.— /af utoni : 
Ckrytml. 



Briaket-beater (popnlai),a Roman 
Catholic (Hotten). 

BrinneUi (Anglo-Tiddlsh), the 
ceremon; of circnmciaion. A- 
; berU hmtloA, 
It of clniimcision. 



:v Google 



Bristol milk — Broody, 



dcnblr. At en* plua I kam oC, whm 
lliaj lunt a wuu] babr trerr PuriB, 
the bmilr MatHl bud bsooic ncfa ■ nui- 
•ucc wiib hi* binini ilul u llic Un 
hitmtlmk they ooiUdo't fct bhhi^ 

and if it hkdn't been bx tbv potmui callins 
IrtHB tlb* Cat and Tnimpet they'd dctct 



Bristol milk (old), sharrT. Bristol 
iraa the ohiel port «t which vea- 
•sla from Sptdn oaiTTing cugoea 
of thii wins DMd to aniv« — 
henoe the luune. 

Broach tiie ckret, to (pugilistic). 

Tvai DM tiU ih* touh nmid iaa tiarrt 



" Tba Draid * with Buy of hit paiagiapha, 
vrila lu thai Hr. W.. th< hndci e( Fair 
Alice, did nwimid abnt m M i —fM wd, 
■Dd thu Hr. K., Iha omMr •( PriKOa 

Brawl cottper (brewen), a paisaa 
«m^<7ad b7 biwrei t to DCigO* 
tiato with pnblicuu (Hott«n). 

Broad tmhiag (oud-*haip«n), 
playing at oardt, or doing the 
three-oard triok m laoe-ooaiMa, 



~Ttm CrM/i Mtmrrimi U Cmfna. 

Broad and shallow (popular), an 
epithet applied to the to-called 
" BrDod Church," in contiadii- 
tiuctlon to the "High" and 
" Low " Cbnrchet (Hotten). 



a nd hot 'at,' qaodi dH 
■aodaitb»*>— < r h«wM 
nnrinUtd. Bat h* pkyad it loo thick ■> 
BrithtDa thai inA-'—Sftrtii^ Timti. 

He tin look aMthsbouM* at Wat- 
wscth, aod sM «>«U while he to m oi« 

T^, Kag, «• Ca 

(thjeraa), a oard- 




Bzplalned bj 



BrOMlj (tailoTB), ■moogKast Bnd 
tailon broadcloth i« ao called. 
Also a general term loi cloth. 



■faiiul any further proHcatioo — if T«ie« 
there an, for tiow one hcan of iKHlunff 
bill the Brtmd Sttltm ; it ii the reifung 
cant word, and ouwu the takiDg all partin 



Broad brim (common), originally 
« Qoalcer, thus called from 
the peoallaT bat worn hj the 
"friends." Now nMd in refer- 
ence to qoiet, aadate men. 



" Broody workers are men 
who go ronnd selling TileBhodd; 
Btofl under tb« pretence that It 
is excellent material, which has 
been got ' on the cross,' that is, 
'stolen '"(Hotteu). 

(Thieres), bnadj/, anytliing 
worth stealing. 



:v Google 



Brock — BroomsUcks. 183 



Brock, to (Winohertar), t 


obiJir. 


wdaoed,-ta ttid to hkTO ktdm 


Utarmlly, to l»dg«r. 


From 


i>KW. The OernuuK mj stM 


frf»l,atodger. 




hBB " lost a Bhoa." -The uklc^r 
existiiig in each luigBage be- 


Brodnter fWInoharter], %. bollj. 


tween the phrue and the lan- 


Bnwan fAmertauiV (UMn 


ft.stn»ur 


guage of the stable la oniloiia. 



■hoea. From hnjpta, ooana BroUy (Winoherter), ■ corruption 

ahoes, which, acoording to Ken- of Dmbiella. The teim is nsod 

nett, are ihoes made of loogh gi^^ at the unlvenltifa. 

hide naed by the wUd Iriah. , „ ^^ do.i«„ .unji^ „ U» p.™. 

Iiiih brog, a ahoe, I am thu luuiu niao Im trmify mn ; 
1 hcvil a pu^hty wd, «Dd 1 un fna 

Broiled cmr, to eat (Ameri- ToonibuibuiuicnnlbtcuwithD. 

can]. A newspaper editor who —Fma^ F»ikt. 

i,„bliB.db,lI.pulj,o,oHo B^,^^ liartcu), rtld or 

«.Md.Mla<j»«..l»i|aTooU. „,^.,,^,. iw«s>mt.rm 

prtDdplj. dlll«mt fcm. tliD« j,^ ^^-Jj, h„^„„^ 

wbich h. nppoiUd • .hort i,„^,„„„^l,„„. 

tilDebBfOM,1<>aidtOMt»T<»M .7^ , ^ ^!^ „3^ v_ 

_ _,_ ,,1 ■ ^ "Oh I dool knew. He'd bc« hde- 

mm, mm lominoiilj "lo eU u,, „, ^j, „ „- ,u„a„ „„? 

crow. " Suni'i too trtrnki." — F, Frmadi ; 
SmUkmitJMttmaim. 

Broke (common), bard-np, n- 

dnoed to one'a laat ton. Broom It, to (old alang), to ran 

Tlxn mi k TQOiic ploDEcr, who nunlr 
atUulliT; 



Tb« ™ .K«, ^^ Broomatick (common), to be m«. 

And Ben crisd " CuTum I "^ "over the (roonuful," to 

riBbaMcd,*nib, baud— aFartlrr live aa man and wife without 

—Bird i Frt^am. being manied. 

Broke her b« {Americm), aald ''""^^^ b-i «» dnji. «»». «- 

of an nnmarried woman who ADd^Ii^iJidd.d djuna to th. lu< owk rf 

hai had a child. Id French doomitkk, 

theatrical alang, a ladj who la &* murr b; uking ■ Jgnp o'er ■ tntiit- 

mcnnte "ar mal an geaoD," the "**■ —imnUOy Ltrtmii 

result of %fa\a-paa. *™^' 

An alluaion to a mairiage 
Brokea. When a omponl at the oeremonj perfcnned b^ both 
IL M. Aoademj ia lednoed for partiGa Jumping over a broom- 
■ome Inegnlari^ or miaoondnot stick. 
he ia aaid to be ir»ifcen. 

Broomsticks (thieves), Inaolnnt 
Called also "qneer-ball." 
aw bail," "Jew bail," Jco. 



:v Google 



1 84 



Brosk — BrvwH Bess. 



" QnMr-bafl kn penOD* of no 
r^ate, hired to bail * prffODOr 
Inu^bailaUecMe. TbeaeiMB 
■n to b« had in London for 
a trUUng torn, utd aro called 
t ntrn Miti t " {Tanz*! (HoMatr). 

B(iaita(AiDeriaaa), brittle. Dntcta, 
JM*. baa, brittle. AHewTrnk 

Bndter-drip (popular), origlnaltT 
fellow.carpeDter. AMort gtaa- 
lal DOW aa brother tmdeaman of 

an y Mni^. 

Bratttcr nmt (popular), naed In 
tb« phtaae "ditto irMtr nutt," 
eqniTBleDt to t« fwi^w. Some- 
tiiata "ditto nnDt" whta ad- 




Brown (popolar), haUpenn/. 



had, Lhii Uvfl-loof daj, ooa 
lo buy ■ bil of brad with, let 



Aod our ibav wu chh b' tin bot 

—Gfjt X. Simi : BmOuil ^ 
Batjltn. 
I losk Parr't pilU, wbtcb tmmlbt ea 
TnuEbrt old ftgc ; and hen I un, mi jm 



Or - S»m=," or " Vula,- or " "SMit,' 
la duns v« Mllrdokrmdwri n nM. 

(Fopnlai), to boan, to nnder- 



Gvorrti "but not Brrmmt^." — ffn^^ 
fmfo-Sltry. 
And wfaen Atj ask bk tf 1 frvM« BBdi 



-T. X. 



Brother wtuOag (old alaag). 
" Be'a a bvtAcr ilaiiimg of 
mine^" if. be oohaUta with the 



Srimi: Tit Att^BttHme. 

Bfxnms and wbiatkn (thieres), 
axplainedbyqnotatiaii, "Brcmu 
mud mudcn an bad lulfpcfioe 
and farthing* (it ia a t«im naed 
hjncaiun") (Tanz'a Olooary). 

Brown Best (oommon), tbe old 
GoTemmeDt regulation mniket. 
Boldiera of all natiotu are food 
of giving namee of pereons to 
their weapons. The Frenob 
tioopen ■ometimea call their 
■word "Jacqaelins," and most 
□f the Aegt gum dnnng the 
sisge of Puis In 1S70 had been 
nicknamed in the same manner 
tj the wilora who manned tbe 
foits, their faToorite being a 
very laige gun called "Joaj- 
phine." " To hng bmm Btu," 
to aerre aa a priTate aoldier. 
(Rhjming slang), yea. 



:v Google 



Brown Bessie — Brum. 



■8s 



Bnnm Benie, ui old word for ■ 
woman of eatj or nneuy Tirtae. 
Aiao Uaek Bom. 



price, (or bow InU or m 

wmrliiic lovs, for IL mKy bc« hou irvttm 

Btuii.—Den'i FtfyJtmt, idji, 

"Btrm^ Ua6k Ben" was BTny 
popular soaadBlonfl ballad a c«n- 
tuij ago. 

Bnnra bill (old), the old weapon 
ol the Bngliih IntaiiitTy* 



Bmmie (whalen), the pdu bear. 

Brown Janet (nautical), a knap- 

aaok. 

Brown Joe (ihTming slang), no. 

Brawn p^ieniien (popular), ex- 
plained hy quotation. 

c nlcV (■ fWBblinc-boaK) ii 



whu n caU cdIt irrwm . 
funblLng, plftTinE for pcnc*, sod ■ 
Lmi bciBg ■ gnu £Ov — Mmyluw : ." 
Laitmrmdtiu LtmJtn Pttr. 



Stance, a poor woman bad been 
told (be had myztedma, and 
informed a leoond modioal man 
that her flrst doctor had said 
that ahs had got A^unieMtii; 
but, she added, be oonld not 
Ottieit 

Browi^ (thieree), a penuj. 
DoU* tH brtnmiu^ u w« csIL 'em Kai*- 



Brown btlk (common), ooDTer- 
■ation of an ezoeedlnglj proper 
cbamcter. 

Brown ^ri^iie, brows DtUt and 
fn America brown creettmi an 
attempt at the pronunciation of 
bronohitii, or the nomea fre- 
qnentlj given bj the lower 
ordere to that common Hinfune 
ThoH mUnomera are some- 
timet moet amnaing, as, for In- 



Mermiin 






Browae, to, to enjoy oneeell, to 
idle ^WQt, to loll In the eon. 
French fiiin nm Usint. The 
ezpreeiioa is mach used bj 
gentlemen cadets of the Royal 
Uilitarj Academy. In the 
United Statea, to eat here and 
there, now and then, an ex- 
pression of Abraham LJncoln'a. 

Bruiser (priwxn), the boU; who 
is a hanger-on of prostitute*. 

T1» intltir a [fat Dsmt uppnMch 
Is Dieknu' hss, Bill Sykcu. —MidUul 
Datiit : t^Mrafapm ■ Pritm Di*n- 

(Common), a p^^:ilist. (Pngiliv 

tic), a priie-Bghter. (Popnlar), 

one fond of fighting. 

C, wbo ii knowD in ilu DH(hboiufieDd 

u ■ "cnu bndar," pleaded tbU ba 

mad* a miUake. and thooghl Coowar was 

molefllLDg iha womaq, who he al» mistook 

for hii wife. He eocs Io jail for six weeks. 

—Btk*. 

Brum (Winchester), stingy, mean. 
Probably an abbrerii^on of 
Bmmmagem. (Popnlar and 
tbieres), a cooaterfeit coin. 
Also Birmingham. 



:v Google 



Brumfy — Brush. 



Bnmbf (AwtnlianX * wild bona. 



^fYi_ i^ipUed to AJiTthiDK vulnr 
or oaunteiteiL 

"niOH I»T tx AuMM^fHI or Uu- 

ebfats DiuiDcn. bat they ma'E fo don 



(Fopnlu), the laliaUtaiitt of 
Biimi&gbkm. tVaa " ffniinmi 



B«l> of tboi » 



(Bol-lookiii( ilpKH nmool ; bat il «» 
ronsh on Joe, ifter kwaf laonccs thick 
'qui ot Foar OhIu, whea ■ Sntm, iriMn 
h* clbswBl eu of Uw ny, mnaibd — 
"Dm'i ikink roo'n bt»ayb iij y ba- 



And >]] in eoatcuM thim^ Iha noti and 

budt 

■pelled Bnmiiglum, and ila 
flnt connection with snTtbing 
BpniloDB or aham oame from the 
KM»Ued Bromidgham groat, a 
oonnterfeit fooipenoj pieoe. 
It was nibMqiisntl; applied to 
ft penon who was neithsr Whig 
not Tor7 (HalllweU). 



Bronc (Amerioan), brought. A 
writer on Amerioaninn* la 
■lightij miftakam In Hjing that 
white men nse it aa a "-nrj 
mild jok&" It is -owj otttti » 
stinging iniolt, and the writer 
hM aeen a man in Boston vetr 
angi7 becaose fas wsa asked in 
jest, " Where -were jon inmg 
apT" The insult was In the 
intimation that the man was 
ftuniliai with or In the habit 
of niing raoh an ezpreasion. 



batons (popular), Brnth (popnlai), a hooM-psintw. 

Bnuh, to bxn ». (old), to have 
seznal interoonne, whan ^^ed 
to women ; also to run awaj. 

Bnuher (old slang), a bninpar. 
"To'drink a bnuker" wu to 
drinkfromafollglaBS, (Sobools), 
an abbreviation of " bum' 



oonnterfeit coin. 



Bntms (Stock Exobange), London 
and North Westeni Ballwar 
Mock. 



-AUi»;fftauSetmt$. 



Brnth np, to (Amerioan), to hnm- 
bng 01 fl»tt«i, to acoooth, 
ooneiliate. Bnuhing ap a Oat, 



:v Google 



Btydport dagger — Buck. 



187 



" prsnciiig," flitteriiig (Now 
Tork Slang Dictdonsiy). 

Brrdpoit dag^rer (old], ezpl^«d 
bj qnoUtion. 

Sttb'd with ■ Brydfart lUlfgtr, IhU il, 
huc'd or mcaied at lbs Eslknm 1 (he 
bat, if not the moo, htmpffix Ihe qauthjr 
oi frtHud) ffomn% about Brydpoft,^ 

Bnb, bnbbj (Americui), a term 
veiT commonlj applied to a 
littlo boj. It came from 
FNUujlTaala, where it waa 
derived from the Oerman iubt, 
which is oanunODlr ahbretiated 
to hub. 



^'Hovrmudi have TOO ffotiathabukT' 
' ' £i|hi ceati, ui. I did hava IhirtHD, 
t ^eKct foc ID tfrmiLBnHl fin a nci a l d]> 



Ay, hit imd Inibhy, I a,j. 

Lot* «f fatier, quv' ihe, are fio^nag. 

AlMabiothu. 

BnMwr (American), iqipUed to 
any womas (old or ronng) with 
fall, well-ronnded breasts, or 
hiUwj, whence the term. 

BabUe-bnff (old), a bamo. 

Babbler Jock(papiilaT], a toikey; 
a stupid, boasting persoiL 

Biibblinciqiieak(arm7],hotsoop. 
Fropeilj, bviiit and iqueai la a 
dish composed of pieces of cold 



boiled meat and greeoa, after- 
wards fried, which haTs thus 
Qnt bubbled in the pot, and 
then hissed or squeaked in the 



Bnba, bnbbiea 
woman's breasts. From hub, 
drink. 

Buck. This almost obsolete word, 
for what the French called a 
petil-nattit, and more recently 
dai» (liteialij fru^, has been 
giaduall J saperseded by " blood," 
" dandy," "maccaroni," "swell," 
"Bond Street loDoger," "«i- 
qnisite," "dnde," and "inaahar." 

(American, cards), a device 
for lecurtng a good anto at 
pokei or brag. The player 
whose torn it is to ante, instead 
of potting op money, puts Dp a 
knife, key, or any small article, 
saying, " I ante aiuob worth Is," 
or wbaterer snm be chooses to 
name. If be has not won it 
back himself when he retlras, ha 
must redeem it from the pos- 
sessor at the price named. The 
peculiarity of the buct is that 
whoever holds it mnst ante it 
when it comes to his tum. 
Whenever it is desired to bring 
the game to a close, a good 
Onish is secured by agreeing 
to "chase the buek home," i.e., 
whoever wins it has the next 
deal, and conseqaentlj ante* 
it. The game stops as soon as 
the back has been won back 
by the player who originally 
started it. 

(Cabdrivsm), a sham "fare" 



:v Google 



1 88 Bm 

in A cab. A tmek Is a man' who 
ridu in ft cab ostensiblj aa a 
legitimate fare, to enable the 
«*»*"" °" to proceed to Bome dea- 
tinatioD to which he ia not 
allowed to take an empt; cab. 
Han; of the aeml • private 
thon)iig;hIare* of London are 
cloeed to empty cab& 

Mr. , on brtulf of Ihe Unjud Cib 

froprictoFi' Protection AuociUioe, ttid 
it often oocumd ttut the men who were 
to conveyed wete buekt^-moi who nxle in 
m cab oueniiUr u l^tlcuta run. In 
reality Ihty aelB] in calluusn with Iba 
driver to evade the police repihuiont, espr- 
ciiUy with regard to lbeatiea.-^fa^>^ 

(Popnlai), a lixpeDce. The 
word is i&rely nsed by itself, 
bat as in the phrase, " two and 
a huiik." Here frequently " two 
and a kick." Foesibly from the 
gTpsj l6k (pioDoanced back), 
lack, as It is alwayi aaked for 
for lock. 

(Old alang), to "ran a IttA," 
to poll abad vote at an election. 
This phrase is of Irish origin. 

(Ameritwi), to b\uik ia to bait 
against, to oppose. 

YcT oughter be enhamed o' yene'f ler 
portecute ligioD in dis way. Wy how de 
work o' dc Lawd gwine tar praapcr when 
de white folki bticJu tTTpa it dii way I I'h 
"or ^d Satan got hii eve on 
TmtUtr. 



To rear np, to ^mp like a 
hicfe, to jomp and " oaTort." 
Applied to a pectdiar leaping of 
Western horses. Dutch, bokn 
moixn, to cnt capers; bok- 
tlavait, leap-frog. 

The term is itaed also in Sontb 
Atrica and Anstralia. 



Abool tba pkce lha| hicJit the leait. 
-D. S. W. StMdtn: A iiummir 

(Bankii^), "to bnek an ac- 
count" Is to make an aocoont 
balance without oanying it ont 
pioperlj, i.t., to cook the ao> 

(Calif oniian), in the Califor- 
nlan Tentaoolai this signiBea to 
plaj against the bank, aa, €.g., 
in faro, that is, to sweep Um 
tables, or clean ont or got the 
croupier. 
I don't like ysur hiok* at all, I'd imct 

agunm any hank yoo ran all mgliL-' 

Srtt /farti: tMriii Crmrv. 

(Winchester C<^ege), "to 
buek down " is to be Duhappy, 
whilst to "buek np" is to be 
glad. 

(Anglo-Indian), to talk %otia- 
ticaUy, to prate and chatter, to 
let one's tongue nmlooaa From 
the Bindn baJoA 



Afloericaa editor or an Under S e cr e tar y of 
Stale with dei|iiur. He belongi lo th* 
twelve foot liger achool, so pcfhapa ha 



Bnck- bail (thieres), hail given by a 
sharper for one of his own gang. 

Back fitch (otd), an old man of 
abandoned habits, bn old rtxii. 
A " butk face." an injured hna- 
band, allnding to the honu. 

Bnck or ^;lit the tiger, to 
(American), to gamble. Derived 
from the parti^colonred dinsiana 
or stripes on a gambling table. 



, Google 



Buckeen — Buckkorse. 



Tiut littla oil lawn, an th* li» sf ih< 
OlHD, Bndfoi^ «nd Wancn Rallniwl, 
and putlj ID PcODFrl**!^ vk^ P^t^ i^ 
M*w York, ii ibt (leUal poko-plii^ai 
pluc in die endrt ncRluni oilfield, ll 
b ■ uwB in vbidi ■!! ihi midnili 
"tmck tha latin ((rcr."— CUcw» Tri- 



BadcetfAme 
letter. (Common), to "gire the 
tuaict," to dimnisa, to dtamiw 
bom one's employ. 

H> vsc Mn tut kbSDt bcaiue KeMa 
hid (I'm bin Ih* h,t)ut.—Mn. CaiktU: 
Sjrtuuit Ltv€n. 

(Unlveni^), to hutktt u to 
MOOp tlie water Instead of poll* 
ing the oaf iteadilj and fairly 
thiongh. 

(Fopniu), to hitkel a person, 
to deceive, rain him. To kick 
the hwjbd, to die. 



U to be hnng on the bulk orbtMite 
bj the heels." 

Bucket ftfloat (rhTmlng slug), a 

Biicket«bop (American), a UuJut 
has in Aiaerica several mean* 
ings, all Indicating underhand 
or oonoealed dealings. Theterm 
1» applied to low groggeriea, and 
also to places which advertise 
aa below co«t flasbj goods 
which are sold at a la^ profit. 
liOw, swindling, gambling places, 
or lottery offices, also bear tliia 
name, and in Chicago it appear* 
from the following extract to 1m 
bome by broker eetablishmenta 
where "comets" are manipu- 
lated. 






it i> ib> r 



ulkidf aboDi ikUiv <*< tmeitU H«'> ■ 
Bice yoaat mu u k«p ■ cove', ipiriu 
up, utd ulk ihfHii ■ ' iksri liTc and ■ 
neFTT oat' '—C. KimgiUj: Aim Liclm. 

Dr. Brewer gives the follow- 
ing explanation : " A backet is 
a pulley. . . . When pigs are 
killed diey are hung by their 
hind \vfn on a bnoket , , , and 
oxen are hauled np by a 
pulley. . . . To Uck the hmikA 



affon to " bunt the kii€lut-Aafi.' 

(Stock Exchange), the office 
of an ontside broker of doabtful 
character. 

A dimpatable (ambling caie which 
came before the Diviiioaal Court yat&<day 
is Dotewonby foe tha remarlu mada do 
*' the vice of cambiiuc in ADduBiKl eharet" 
by two judge*. A gambls- had med a finn 
of htdut-tiat Iteepcn for proGti allcfcd 

tiona,^' and ihe bticr coolly pleaded tha 
ataiute afaiiul wacarins and gamiflf ia 



Bnckhorse (pogilJsUo). "A smart 
blow or box on the mu ; derived 
from the name of the celebrated 



:v Google 



Buckle — Budger. 



'bralser'" (John Bmitb, alias 
AieUorw, fought on the «tag« 
1733-^6)1 aooordlng to Hottan'i 
Diotionaij. 

Buckle, to (Scottish), to many, 
avnlgarinn osod bj H'TJittj in 
hii Imitation of » Scotch song, 
popnlar in the time ot Charlea 
IL, "Within a mile of Sdin- 
borgh Toon." The phisM is 
ftlU ontTcnt in BngUnd among 
the lower claaies, among whom 
to be " bnckled " not only mean* 
to be maTTied, but to be taken 
into cutodj. 

Bndcle-besx" l<A^)i * iiian who 
officiated aa a clargTman to per- 
form the marriage oeremonj in 
the Fleet Prison ; also a hedge- 
priest, who perfoma the cere- 
mony of marriage among tramps 
andgypdea. 

Buckled (thieTsa), imprisoned. 
French alang, bmeU. 



Bndder, a collar (New Tork Slang 
I '"^onarr). 

Buckn yun (West Indian). As 
in negro eyes " the white man," 
or bucln, is the synonym of 
•ometliing superior and beyond 
him in the scale of being, so 
the word has coma to mean 
ai^hlng good. Thus bvelsra 
jNMi, good yam; baetra cloth, 
good cloth. A"swangai«etrB" 



is a qtedaUy weU-dreaeed while 



Bucks (Weet Indian), the cogno- 
men of the aboriginal inliabi- 
tant* of British Oniana — the 
SoDthA 



Bud (American), a "sodetf " word 
for young lady debntantee, or 
"oome oaten," in their fint 



llwn*j DothiBf to tnulifoL to urn u 
bcuDIJAil girL I donlil if ut nan a 



n ibg fciili (TDothi) wen laiinc 
... bat me tb* ih^cs ud 
a of h-ii k»wi thu ihc id- 
IB of tbc kid iie'i woctli tmiliic 
I CUT IS fcl uid u hmd Id ■*( 
-Jta4p ■■ LHUr in ikt fftm Vtr* 



Bnd^(tbieTe«),«thief; especially 
one who sneaks into a shop 
and is locked in, thus getting a 
chance to admit an acoomfdioe. 
Formerly a pickpocket. Pro- 
bably from buigtt, btidigt, hidptl, 
a sack, pouch, wallet. A 
drink. 



Budge, the Meaking (old dang), 
robbing private houses of light 
small articlee, ssch as ooats, 
hats, Ac; now called "area 
Bneak"oT"hallsneak." "Budjt 
clothes," lambs' far formerly 
used for trimming the robes of 
Bachelors of Arts (Halliw^). 
Standing budft, a thief, soont, 
or spy. 

Bndser (thlerea), a drunkard. 



:v Google 



Budgerow — Buffer. 



191 



Bndferow (Anglo-Indiui). Hin- 
du, Jmjra. A I1MT7 k«elUaa 
bft^e, tonn«rl7 mnch QMd hj 
Boropeuu tnTelling on the 
Gangetio riven (Anglo-Iudian 

01<MEU7). 

Tlw tmjrm imki, tht Uitll^ Him, 

Or punuoi ihu giJbnt iwin 

WUh bvourint bnea, « doU or iIbw, 

—H. H. tfiluK im Stat»' Amaal. 

Bvdg^fig-ked (thierea), a pnblio 
hoiue, the " cots of the imig- 
ing-ktm " being the landlord. 



GwbMen, cdt-tfatvAL^ imdmM$Afj of 
(TVT dcnipiion. — SnnvHil Smiti ; 



Bndcat (Anglo-Iodian), from the 
Pernon iatbol, eril i«c«. A low 
fellow, a "bad lot," a bl«ok- 

Wbr Iha Skiiun (ilnll) dUa*! joa 
anob bcfan, ^» laxr ^(^ budM^ri t^ 
Anfli-In^mttGltaMry: Hit I>mmi Bum- 



(Old alang), to " Btand ht^," 
to bflv tbe bmnt, to pajr the 
piper; also "to boast," giren 
as a very old word bj- 
"Batman nppon Bartholome," 

To hvff, defined by Botten as 
simplr meaning to sweai to; 
bnt the following, from tbe New 
York Slang Dictionarf, gives the 
spirit of the wotd reiy aoon- 
ratelj: "Bnffii^ it bouie is 
twesiing point-blank to any- 
thing, abont the same as bluf- 
fing it, making a bold stand on 
no backing." 

Buffer (common), a man, a lA- 
low. 

But seed, ilov, with ttiff liab^ ttxu^ 

ins miKti, 
And InDfi Ihu licked the belloM- 

Dcndcr'B toudi. 
Yet ipriclitly ts the Kiuch both h^- 

—Tim CriU'i MnurUi I* Ciotrat. 



Illm 



■> Ibei 



Bnff (tramps), among the tramping 
frateinit; a iif^-boU is a dancing 
party, chaTacterised Yrj the in- 
deoenoj of those who attend it, 
the eettian* da r^twvr being that 
of onr first parents. 



Ttw I 



HI "hnff-ima" In 
b«h Kict— iiuocoit of clolhuic— 
Join, ilimiilKtcd aiih iiw whiikj 
\ aoiic of I fiddle ud ■ till vhiBlc 
u Grmmmd! tn Strmmgt Crm- 



Also a meny companion with a 
spiOB of the rogne in him, the 
FalstaS of a centu; ago. Btifir 
or bagard it a provincialism tat 
a foolish fellow. In Dntoh, iecf 
ot loeftr, means, acoording to 
the Qroot Wordenbook der 
Bngelsche en HederduTtsohe 
Jaalen of WllUam SeweU, "» 
rogne, knave, or wag," which la 
IdenUoal both in sound and 
ig with the BngUsli void 



:v Google 



192 



Buffer— Bug. 



fPopnhr), a dog, trotn the 
old oant word haft, • dog. (Old 
ant), ft nnnggler, k rogue, « 
olwat; tdM a dog. B^tr- 
nabber, a dog-stoler. (Kan- 
tical), htfftr, a naTj tenn for a 
boatmln'a mate, dim of whoae 
dotiea it waa to administer the 
"eat." From the obsolete 
Si^iah to htf, to atrlk& It 
baa been suggested, howerer, 
that bufiT is of Dutch origin. 
Teiriinck (Woordeuboek van 
Bargoenach) gives iaf, a blow ; 
itfcM, to strike with the fist, 
adding "KlanknabootMudidiol- 
inne Tan dagdijkMb gebiink 
in TlandemL" 

BidSe-beaded (popular), rtopid 



■rapid cnuon. — WytlitrUj : Plaht 

Bnfla (common), the 3rd regiment 
of foot in the British army. 
From their taolnga. 

Bn^ (common), intoxicated. 

FIcuDr wu Sh uhI I^^ when hi caiM 
boH lut tit!Bi.SUrlo Annb- Tki 

Bug: (American and English 
thieres], a breast-pin; htiggtr, 
a pickpocket, or one Who makes 
a special^ of snatching awaj 
bceast-pins, itads, Ao. ; bag- 
tiMter, the same. 



Ttm tag,, )k* bosDci, a^ nO-CIU 
—OmOiTnia. 



packet-boa^ 

(American and older English), 

bag, which in England is now 

limited to the dmex, politdj 

termed a Norfolk Howard, ia 

in America still applied to all 

nrieties of the CUepptow and 

maoj other inaeota. 

"Oh, Fnd, whut tbu liduag oumt 

Do jon think ii'i Ibc doth ntch — — 

wu nadiiic iboai bcfon ihe pal ni w 

bedt- "B«i«, tUs't be i liulc (tue. 

It'i onlr ■ tt^, uyhow. Marbe ii't am 

i»™ » iiie—iiolj ths bed-tkkiiii. " — Pkilm- 

(Old slang), to i^v, an old 
phrase in use at one time among 
joomeTmen hattera to signify 
the snbetitiitioii of good material 
with inferior stnS. Bailiffs who 
aooepted monej to dela; serrice 
of writs were also said " to Utg 
the writ." 

Bur 01 bncoTcr, to (thieve*), to 
deliTsi, give or hand over. Vanx 
instaocea : " He b^'d me a 
quid," Ct, ha gave me a guinea i 
"Wg ovtr the rag," t^, hand 
over the monej. 

Bogarocfa [American thierea), 
pretty (New York Slang Dictioo- 
aiy). 

Bng bUading (am;), white-wash- 
ing, a process calculated to 
ileitroy, or at least to rmnore 
the saperfldal tracea of Termin 



:v Google 



Bugging — Bulge. 



that «re a perfect peel In 
th« more witiqiiatod bftmcki, 
«^)eciall7 in warm climates. 

Bnwing (AmerioBu), taking 
money from » thief by a police- 
man. This indicates the ex- 
istence o( an old word "bag" 
for money as well as valu- 
ables. In Batch slai^, hatht 
la money. 

Bofi^^r (old cant), a leather bottle. 
It now signifles a gig or light 



Bng^ jnice (army), ginger ale. 
In America apjjied to very bad 

Baffle it, to (American cadet), to 
abstain from attending class and 
reciting until the bagle foands 
for otteotioo. 

Bnc walk (popular), a bed. 

Build, to (or it) (American), said 
of a man who is slow to moTo, 
or of an affair which reqafres 
great exertion. It is taken from 
a boy's trick of putting a coal 
ooder a tortoise to make it walk. 



" I hUTi ■ kiiet of 



aWeu- 



IH iaii diinLcr, bui I rrckon 



(Nautical), to " IwiU a obapel " 
is to torn a ship round through 

bad steering. 

Building qwts for sale (Amtd- 
can), used of any imperfect per- 

Built that way (common), "not 
haUt that my," not in one's line. 

Black Uoiuuclic •ddnus (he diTiniiT 
" Bob.' 



Smith can't Autct ; h« iio't 
ilUII iJi*l maj, ud Hiu Jam uy> thU 

Black Hoiuuche waluei dclightfullT' AU 
ef which mum thai Oic [ollowjni week u 
one of agiiiiT fo' younc S.. who moodUy 

tbsn.—Biri (' FrwtJam. 

Bulgarian atrocity (Stock Bx- 
cbauge], Tama and Rust«bak 
Railway 3 per cent, obligations. 

And we've rraiXy quire a crew ' 

But Iwcy, by the way, 
Now, in the Droenl dav. 
A Van 



Bulge (American), pn^ierly to 
tnilgt is to swell out, and ivilgt 
is a swelling or belly. In the 
Unit«d State* the words are 
extended and amplified in m«ny 
ways. Thus there is a story 
of a man who, being tried for 
shooting bis neighbour, pleaded 
that he had only aimed at the 
hulgt of his shirt where it 
" bagged out" above his trousers. 
"To get the h<iige" on a man, 
appears to mean to have the 
better of him. As iujpe conveys 
the idea of swelling or Inflation 



:v Google 



194 



Bulgfr—BuU. 



or ezpuuion, it 1j mnoh tued to 
IndicM« mignitnde or «ztniT»- 
ganoe. Thai to go " itd^mg 
aboDt" ooarojM the ume ide« 
■■ "ai^uiglDg" (irbioh see). 

Bulger. This Englisli word, signi- 
fying a la^e object or creatora, 
is moch more ezteusirelf used 
in the United States than in the 
mother- conntr;. " New Tork 
is a hulger of a place," said 
Colonel Crockett in 1835. At 
Frinoeton College (New Jeney) 
the largest and heaviest of the 
■tndents it familiarly called ttU- 
per. The n^ro minstiel word 
ialgMe, for a looomotiTe,appe«n 
to be a oompoond, the first part 
of which is derived rather from 
bulge than "bull," aa Imfdying 







Bulk and file (old), two thieves 
worUng together. The ImUc 
jostles the victim against the 
jUt, who roba him of his money 

Bolker (old coot), a street-walk- 
ing prostitnte 1 from "balk," 
that fonnerly signified the 
body. 

She mul mm talitr (when bcr -'"''"■ 
■R vom «!), At which Ende I hope u ttm 



Biil^( Winchester College), gene- 
rous, open-handed, as oppoadd 

Bull, now recognised and applied 
to a blunder, formerly meant 
any kind of rough, blundering, 
or foolish jest or trick, and is of 
the same root with btiUy in its 
sense of aolown or merry-maker. 
Old Dntoh baUoert (Skeat). "a 
jester or a gyber." Swedish 
biillra, to make a noise. B%iUtr 
io Anglo-Noiman means an 
eqnivocator at deceiver, which 
nnmist^ably indicates the ex- 
istence of htS in the modem 

Th> ttnt cue ii of r>l> hiOm, 
Bulh thH duD Bului and thu Ihwn wtn. 
—MS. CtaMH. yafmium 

The term (all- calf itself 
(Shakspeare), and (ain-diich, a 
stupid fellow (North Country), 
all indicate the association with 
blundering and stupidity which 
is implied by buU. The word 
was fliEt specially identified with 
Hibernian mistakes by Hiss 
Edgeworth in her " Essay on 
Irish Bulls." (Popular), » roar- 
ing horse. 

( Popular and thieves), a crown, 

an abbreviation of its former 

appellation, a boll's eye. 

. . . Then civ' mfl A Uitk money, four 

half hUli. wot Tou may call halfHZrowDt, 

and ics, hook U I — ChMria DidLtnt. 

(Prison), rations of roeat ; an 
uncomplimentary reference to 
the tooghness of the beef sup- 
plied. The French slang ha* 



:v Google 



Bull^BuU-dot€. 195 

bUitAt, to DMSt, from bidtt, a tanned htU-do^, aooomptuy 

pmjr. him. Their datir la to obMM 

(Stock BzobKiga), ezplBioed the oSeDder, vhoee lnga»iil7 

bj fint qaotktlon. In etading ckptnra gives rlM to 

tnSan a poaltd by tba temu Ml manj unUJiiig itoriec Muf a 

and "bai,~ Ibu bt onm Ha la Ih* lOUg noe tOO often «nds 111 

' =-!■ witb ih* SiodiEx- iluding their pray is an ootdd^ 

~----".. .1- whom thej have bo intcoMt u 



bawu not poOBMUmcaUMl ■"&(», Th» proctor'i ■itUit™. tsIiuIt calM 

■kin bd 

ud he wbe bgnctu, vi 

mmn Ibi lUck, >u aUtd & hilil b; 

w«y oT JininitHiB To iuU Am nuAM-h —H. M^htm'. Lmdtm Laitar aad ^t 

BOW 10 nil* itu [«ie* of oock wheH opv ^'"''" ''•••'■ 

Z?lS!l'^ T^'i^'^'.iLi! rf (Old '»^'»^)- * P***"!. "WW » 

HB «v«rT tn«t to rlnTM tiM piin of ' ,_ , , "' , * 
Bhort thlok revolver. 



WlKH luiU be nU bate* b« as^ tba 

bMM. 

AiunnioDm|iluiui«tbuh*hHllat (Nmatleal), the gn«t gnO 

■n hk Boa*T OiH^ i«mh liii i 00 tba trbioh ftAode " honied" in 

Sttdt &d»o^ A fiwd »i>»M«d to the offloen- mrdroom oaUn. 

hIe bin if he bad bMB alma or ■"bar"! _ , . . . j 1. 

•nd wu told " NoiibB, I wu u M.'- General term for main-deok 

AlUm: HtmSer^. gnno. 

(Amerioan thlevee), a looo- 
motlTe. 



Bull-dq; bluer (Anntoan), 
Bhort thick tavcdm. 

•d]M tondHd ■ blokc'i latbv 



"ok Ok Trail. '" ~ """' had ia bk hand, and piilad np laaMad a 

ItiMtr to/f-^lvMaMr, Hbo mU- 
BmH anil Gowfrltmins ilaoc). a "Yooas aaB, Idoa'i tUnk jrMCMbo 
' ' " "" otaDrMnintaBKandToa-dbMtHtUd*." 



" atag-danoe." -WoU.mt; In n Into tb* diow, wiU 

Ban>doc (nniverritr), one of the 

dotlea of the nnlvatatt; prooton BoU-^ttie, to (Ametloan), to oam< 

ia to promanada the town In pel a pencm to do anything, or 

■eaiob of oAeodIng nndergr*- to infiiienc« hla oondnot bf 

dnatM. Certain men, who aie onel^ or bmte force. It la 



:v Google 



196 



BuU-doze — Bulloeky. 



derlred from % Soatheni word 
"■— "'"g ft whip or cowhide, or 
■pedei of " knrbatch," made 
from the f^ut petut at b 
bulL It U nid that aegroca 
were whij^md almost to de*th 
with thii, or huU-doitd to make 
them vote the Demooiatio ticket. 
It i* now exteiuivet; nsed in the 
Unitad Statei, to expres* oom- 
psUon of ttxj kind, espedallT 
inpoUtioi. 



Bnllet (umj), dUohaigs npon 
the apot, withODt a moment's 
sotloe. 

(Frlntftn), we Dbt-df, and 
QVI. AoMrdlng to Savage's 
" IHotJoaai7 of the Art of 
Printing," 1841, a workman was 
■aid to have got the friiUd when 



without the OQctomaiy notloe 
on either aide; 

Bnllets (oarda), in American brag, 
are aoea ; tometimes oolled 
white Boee, in contradlatlnctioD 
to aoes made up bj holding 
biaggen. The highMt hand in 
the game ia three white (or real] 
aoea, the next higheat ia " two 
hvUttt and a bragger," which 
cannot, of oonrse, ooonr in the 
aame round In which tliree real 
acea are held, tbongh another 
player maj hold two other 
biJItU and a braver at the 



(Ameiloan), a reTolrer. 

ed to mean a pennader, aome- 

Dg to enforce an argnment 

peraonal violenoe. Tidx 



I (prorincial), a oomp* 
tion of " bnll fence," a tOtt 
fenoe able to keep bnlla ont of 
or in a field. 



Alao a atnpid fellow. 



BaU-monej, a Tnlgar phiaae for 
money extorted bj a ofaanoe 
witneea from the man detected 
in the flelda^ the wooda, the aea- 
■horc^ or other loady plaoe, in 
the aot of carnal oopolatlcn. 

Bnllock'a heart (printers), we 
TOKUr. Thla la a term of oon> 
tempt that pieaemen tpplj to 
aeingle "token," or order to 
print, of two handled and fiftj 
oopiea only, the loweet paying 
anmbei in the acale of prioea. 
Thia ezpreadon la dne to the 
oin^omatauoe that it ia not a 
"fat "but a "lean" job, hence 
the oomparlson to a hiUaafa 
ktart, which, onleaa aofferlng 
from "fat^ degeneiation," ia 









, Google 



BuOocky—Bulfy. 



197 



bnali an the beaTj hauling U 
done with fanllock -drags. It la 
quite A oomnum right op the 
coanti7 to «ee tc«m« of « dosen 
and apwarda. AJtoaUn in 
Anatralia are aa pTorerbial aa 
tw^eea or BlUingsgate flahwiTei 
in England for the f oioihleneeB 
of their lMUfaag& 

** WbflB joa Dnli* HokeptOjr*' quoth oh 
of tbcnabuiutii/fin^iBea, "keep on by 
thfl bnufa fioKC^ mod that wiU oka yoii 
ii|fat into iha (>p. G« hop, SRakj ; 
)kJkit-t^ SOmVirr—r. C. Went,- Xw 
t rm/ m ri am FrinU^t Kaftmkt, 

BaQ pvty, an aasembly, gather- 
ing, or dinner partj of men 

Boll pancher (Ameilcan), a word 
deflned •• foUom bj one who 
waahlnuelf of theeidling; — 



The attribute of honia to * 
oDokold ia of remote antiqal^, 
and li mppoaed by lymboUate 
of the Bchool of Creniet and 
Faber to be derived from the 
honu ot cattle, also of the new 
moon, at whloh time featlTala 
were held in Anyria, where all 
women were in common, and 
men who were among the ini- 
tiated bote the Hymbol and were 
compsredtooxen. Hoinaaawoni 
on the head were Bn^satire of 
feathen in a 01^ benoe AuU'a 
ftoAen (Charles O. Leland, 
n.a Notes). 

The Fienoh hare a oorraspond- 
Ing ezpreealon: "planter dee 
jdnmes de bma£" 



Fu DU (en 1 J'li p«r qoe'inphuit* 
Plnmei <U heenf t men f^apcma 1 



•iNDnh,! 

it, btJDc ttcndT lod tnutwonhy, *iid no 
Smka.—MfUj SitrrU: Tit K'attm 



BiiU'a-«ye vOlu (mnitarr), the 
■mall open-air tenta used by the 
Tolnnteer* at their annnal rifle 
oontest held on Wimbledon 



BntTafcaUien, horns. Todesorfbe 
a man as wearing MT* fnthtrt 



Bnll the cank, to (nantical), to 
ponrhot water Intoan empt^ mm 
puncheon, and let It ataod nntil 
it eztiaotB the spirit from the 
wood. The mirtnre is drank bj 
sailors in default of something 



■rith ribrnda; which hdni tin lndiH' vw, 
<■£« tQ iotisiBta that tb«T Bar twt pn^ 
haUr aden, aa mH ai bMnr, the tmUt 
fimOtr.—KlcliurJtni : CImriM ffvlrmi. 



BoU-trspc, thleres or swindlers 
who personate poUoemen (New 
York Slang Dictionary}. 

BnUj (American), often ^tplled 
in a commendable sense by the 
vnlgai ; as, for instance, a WUjf 
fellow, a iafly horse. 



:v Google 



ig8 



BuUy^BuUy-cock. 



Thtaipi^miittifm^itttfyiKmt.— 
" Ken," mid b<, " Slick, wtj tmlfy, 1 



■ tmSf MB IbraHil. after vhidi k 



AiUjT for yon, for ma, \a i 
oonunendatorT pbTMCL 



ht! Ttm 

This word lus two dlatlnct 
mwUngi: (1.)-^ bragpkrt, or » 
nuui who terriflea vid threatens. 
(i.) Tb« older form, itill com- 
mon, applied to «D7 pertoa or 
thii^ whloh li [oe-etiuneDtl; 
exoellent, t.g., a htJlg borse^ 
" that's MZp." The Bully Bot- 
tom of Sbakap««re implies a 
conplimeiit. Id Dntoh slang 
M has the cams moaiiiiig, a 
head, a leader; as one might 
m,-f, the btJlg of the crowd. 
Abo an intelligent person. 

den kop. Bol Tan de kit, man, 
of mewrter lan bet hnis," *•«., 
" A man with a good head, the 
master of a honse." The word 
oame into Dntoh as It did into 
German slang, from the Oer- 
■Dan-Eebrew, bat meaning lite* 
tallj man, bnt alwaTS nsed to 
Indicate a master, director, or 

(Common), a hiiljr, a stone or 
lamp of lead tied In the end of a 
bandkercbief (New York Slang 
Dictionarj). 

(Football), a scrimmage. 

a the 

D Uh 



Biill;r-t>^ (•im;), tinned meat; 
supposed to be made of old buH. 
The " lion ration," as it is often 
oalled, either fram its tough- 
ness, or the oasa of tin or other 
metal in which It is proBerred. 
(NautioBl), boiled beel 

Bnllj-boM (American), the land- 
lord of a sporting orib, tavern, 
or brothaL Derived in all pro- 
babHitr from baOf and tea, bat 
also agreeingremarkablj, thoogh 
bj chance, with the baai tmbot, 
or "master of the honse" of 
the Jews, which is oommoner 
as M hot; hence the Datch 
thiene' slang, b^Uteet (idtii), 
head man of an^ kind. This is 
of words 



Bnlty-bdA (old slang), a man re- 
tained b^ the keepers of btothtis, 
being paid by them to assist in 
enforcing ezorbitaiit demands 
on those freqaenting snch plaoes. 
Sometimes it was pretended that 
tbej were the hnsbands of soma 
of the Inmates, in order bj threats 
of exposure to extort money 
from simpletoiu supposed to 
have been discovered infagraia* 
deUito. 

Bnl^-cock (old slang), a man 
who, for the purposes d! robbery 
and theft, fomented a quarrel 
betwoMi people, to cloak his 
nebrloDS designs. 



:v Google 



BuUyrag — Bum-brusher, 



199 



BnUnafi: (Aineriou and XogllBli), 
to aboM, rerile, or M»ld rehe- 
meatlj. From the Datoh h*l- 
itr-nr, a blnatem ; (NUerami, 
to lago, to bliuter, to nnr ; hvl- 
dtrariff, blosteting, and raak, 
bittlDK. 

BMltji-nak 01 net, a braggart, 
ooctm In Shakspeue, vfaore it 
ii oertalnl; of Datoh origin, i.g., 
Mtcr*4rot>i, a bolileroiu fellow. 
fiMOro, SwedUb, to make a 



TIU C. C. Wdl, hci blowins ba up ; 
" Look 'en. Uicildi.'' htta," I'm 'angcd 
If tbcy 'kTa"! bin ud li 



To tiMi. to arrest a debtor. 

The word, aooording to Blaok- 
•tonB,laaooiTiiption of "boond" 
bams ; bnt this has been denied, 
as bnm baHift ue no more 
"bonnd" than other offloera of 
the law to do justice. Todd 
quotes paengea to pnn that it 
aroM from the pnraner catching 
hold of a man b; the tail or 
hinder part of hU garment. 

Btunble (common), a beadle, from 
Dickenj* character in "OUtct 
Twist," 

BnmUe'Xrew (jonmalistic), cor. 

Then ipaka iEm churmu Is Ibe nlE- 



BoQr-tn^ a bap for bolllea and 
blaokgnards ; applied to a man 
of mild and gentlemaolj ap- 
paaranoe and demeanour, who, 
if attaoked by a bnUy, shows 
OMatpeoted qiirlt, courage, and 
detwmisatlon, and proves more 
than a match for his assailant. 

Bom (paUio schools), a birching ; 
termed also a belting. (Aim;), 
" ofaen7 bnms," thehnssan, the 
aUoaian being obrions. The 
French obaasenrs go bj the 
nickname of cub rxwfwf. 

(Obsolete), h>M or " bnmmj," 
a oontiaction of bnm baiUS. 
Thns called becanse he follows 
the man he has to serve with 



[n Ua Jebn TniU, br tnd* ■ him ; 
WbcnEMdied 
Th* Devi] mtd. 



Sninbo (old), brandy, water, and 
sugar 1 also a negro term for 
the private parts of a woman. 



DiUTriBt n fcrced ts ton /up 
imiitr in 1117 om dtfenct, m condition 
wbich b«t iiuicd wiih s auB thai d*- 

lighted in tTTUiDT iDd blood.— 7*. Brum: 



Derived from the too com- 
mon pnctioe of p«dagognea 
who flog boys with or with- 
out reason. The historica] hvm- 
bnuiitrt date from the days 
of James I. of England and 
TI. of Scotland— whose tntor, 
Bnohanan, had no great«r re- 



:v Google 



zoo Bunt-brusktr — Btimttur. 

wptat tot his roT*! panon than the BagHth tenn alao dgnifled 

btt that of other bojs, except a thick ideca of wood, it ma 

on the infnqnent ocoadooa readily ^ipUed to a blockhead, 

when he Sogged him Ticail- In Frenoh, McJU, a log, has 

onaly — and from Dn. Bnibf, alao tha algnifloatioQ of Uo<di- 

Eeate, and Arnold In more mo- head, 
dam timea. In the Qloacaiy to 

the "Life and Adrentmoa of Bnmmareea, nnPaoogniaad 

Bamp^lde Uoore Carew " it la hangera-on at BOlingagate Tlah 

■aid that the word "flaybottom" Harket, who act aamiddlemen 

ia beatowsd upon a Bo^:iag pad- between the wholesale and re- 

agogne. It has been sn^eated **" dealari. and who make a 

that the word la a pon, and a profit ont of both parties The 

oomiptlon of piWotoww, lot- word ia nanall; derlred from 

ting blood, but tha word itaelt the French Sotiiuaiai*. the good 

glTM erldenoe of ite mora tide or ptodnot of the aea. 

hnmble origin. ~ ~ 

Bnm-diBrter (thieraa), hot bread j 

fuKJUrArumnuM ^mtobcMi Bnnusef (tDtf), a heaTy loaa. 

xaipKl in hotmur briha fim niifem- (Ameiioan),a alow, laayfellaw; 

oM intvUtuf of A. EnfiUi B«ii^ [^ the French argot, ciUt-<U«>l, 

_t_ il.li nldnblg &i« wu ata daily , ,__ 

, Mcb lUB noiTinc with hit »■ »»'»• 



■Hmry Mmr 



Bnmchlk (prorinoial), infarior tnttt. 
beer for luuTeat laboureia, su FnaeiKs la the ai^am of in>. 

tmrrr, Ko^bcn evi a verthkaa rollow, 

Bnm-cnrtaln (UnlTenity), abort t» laix to mrii, uo comdly to itsi, 
or ragged aoademloal gown. cm oa aa wM.-SerOmr'i MmOfy. 

(Amerloan), one who apongea 

npon hta aoqnaintancea. 

In OUUbmia, on who praftn to b* 

}sDciialiR>, and m otuk fin drinka, an 

called Ihamy hammtrt.—HttUm'i Die- 



f (aDboolbora), paper ; an ab- 



Bmn-fii^et (old), a reatleaa, vo- ___ 

eaay perion who oannot dt 

ftm. Btimmtr la of Pannaylvania 

origin, from the Oerman word 

Bnmkifl, or bmnpUn, a atupid bammttr, meaning tha aanMb 

lout, or nwtia rrom Old Dntoh Dorlikg the war the tenn waa 

homhat, a ti«a 'or log. Slnoe applied to the camp-fdlowera 



:v Google 



Bummer — Bumptious. 



sirtio toUowed 
the Federal snD7. These ii- 
regnlar lieroas, who BOmetiinee 
landend good aarrioe b]r flght- 
ing deapentely, Me conmiBmo- 
imted u indomitable mmiwidera 
in the '^ Breitaiuiui PiJIntlit " 

D*T ipiimd on, iej htuiM on, lallgpa 



r (tbektrical), » veiT foil 
house at a popolai perfonoanoe. 
The word bmnfer, for a fnll 
glsn of liquor, from which the 
theatrical tens 1« derived, wm 
in tlie eail; davs soppoaed to be 
derived from toatta drttnk to tbe 
health of the Pope, the " bon- 
pire " of all tme CathoUa Chiia- 
tlans. ThiA explauatioii Is no 
longer goMtBllf aooeptad, since 
the word ia rightly regarded aa 
s oormption of bombard, a drink- 
ing- Teoel, bat origlnallj aigni- 
fTing a cannon. 



Thia derintloa ia bonie otit 
bj the oinnimatanoe that the 
Frenoh call Maoa aglaaa of win* 
dnmk at a wine-ahop. 

Bnm perisher, or ilMTer, a ahnt- 
tailed ooat, tenned foae^itl in 
French slaiig. 



mplnc I 



I (nulTeitftj). In 



Foruhd* LeiriM IM* i 
Stoe ' ' 
Hunricfa 



Bm TDSM "HntCer GoOsE'— ud died 

HimH^ tt««Mng n (boating, nnl- 
Tenit7), oatohlng the boat in 
front and knocking against it, 
the boata being arftaged two 
lengths apart In the laoe in 
tbeir prariooa ordei of merit. 

The dwHiB of St. AibImih'i maldiig x 



the eight-oared noea at the 
nnirersltiea the competing boata 
■tart one behind the other at a 
giTen diatance. When a boat 
tiMi})« ((.«., tonchea any part of) 
the boat in front, it takea the 
other*! plaoe in the next noe. 
The Taoee are Blwajs rowed in 
two dlrisions, abont twdTO to 
fifteen in each, and the head 
boat in the lower dlriston is the 
laat boat in the flrst division, 
and la called the sandwloh boat. 
The first boat in the first divi- 
sion ia called the Head of the 
Kiver. 

Bump nipper {imlvarsltj), ex- 
plained by quotation. 

A JBM> nifft^, Ihu Ie, ■ fOppcT te cm- 
DODonis tlia &ciar iba bcu of enera)- 
Itffl lufmf , ID the kontulrkcts, " btuuped** 
or toochid Ih« boat o£ uothcr celkg* bn- 
nwdktdT in 6n».— CkAU*^ AAi Ad- 
wntern ^Mr. ytrd—l Gntn. 

Bnmptioiia (common), apt to take 
offence, quarrelsome withont 
adequate provooatton. Brident- 
I7 from " bump," which Bkeat 
derived from " boom," tomakea 
hollow soond. Doteh, tosiswn, 
one who roan or rescnnda at 
once, to awell op or boonoe. 

I htud that Mr. Shnp'i wif iOa't It 
Um,ad thu hi Hadn't b*» "horac*- 



:v Google 



BumsquaMUd— Buncombe. 



Bunaqoabbled (ABMriou), cimU 



Tba judfB Mid . 
modi ■IroidT. cot hi 
Ituidi, ind nuula hi 




7>-/«. 



Bm (AnerloMi), a fellow wbo 
OBimot be ahkken off. (Com- 
mon), to hkve the bttn, to get 
tlia bettot of, to nirpus. 

O Lori t ts Ihink I deHKd mrialf Beat 

At- 
Thii iDliiinia mat Mnly hu lh« Smt t 

Bmm (tnde), oommiHian from 
tndesmen and othera, black' 
mail, nmu ol mooej, of which 
both the emplt^er and employed 
Bra defrauded hj the middle 
man, through whoae haoda the 
money paam at aome time or 



oth«r prior toieaehlnglU daaU- 
nation. Id large theatna tbere 
mr« freqaentl)' fonr or ftta 
handred penooa taa.jioj*i in 
variotu departmenta. and the 
head of each depMbnent bcdd* 



Smm sua ; Til Cl»dtm»l-r. 



t (VKdetr), a Tery Till- 
gar expieMion in common nae 
■ni""g Bteo in aooiety for a 
toadj. One who ii a hanger-on 
and Batterer of great mm, and 
who will do their dirty work 
for tbem. In French, Ucb* 



(Tort), profit, Interert «a 
mone7. 
(Popular), mtmey. 



TIh boT* will 117 it on te Ohu '■■A. 
-L.L.mmdI~P. 

According to Eotten from inn 
or tenv*. probably the latter. 

Bnnccr (trade), one who htm«m tit 
exnota teaet (whlob see). 

Bmdi (common), a blow, (Ame- 
rioan), to ftaMA, to gather np, 
poraenp. 

Tb« Kuks JtHclW hii thick lip* to- 
tetba- lik» thi ■Rm-axl of ■ taaUa.— 
Mmw* TwMii,: TkiGiUiJAet. 

Bunch of 6.ttM (popular), the fiit. 

H'Aulifiii doa not teoi to Bpfnoua 
tha hoDoor at ttudioE up to Cmor 
■guo. H< HTi ha mn't ba nuij fcr 
ihnt BioDthi. Ona tuts of the Birminc- 
ham boy'i cpmliir aacsii to hara bMB 

weight champion, ft ij extrtmaLy im|W 
hablc thai M'ABliflc will e«ai«aiiiooaia 
within reuh of Cwncy'i inmik tf fira.— 
Sprrtittt lift- 

Bunco. Fufa BcBKO. 



oan), talking big, affeoting «n- 



:v Google 



Buncombe — Bitn^mg. 



H of ib« ^Ks U Nonli Cuotiu *Uii 



mmgnlloqiiBiioe. 
Ur. Bott«n hu nude the dlB- 
oorarj that " it mow from » 
•pBCOh made b; a Nortb Caro- 



The trath ia that theae are 
two woida, of the same sound 
bat of eotirelr dISerent ori- 
gin, and with different mean- 
ioga. One originated, it 1b said, 
a* fcOlowB (.vidt BarUett): A 
membei of the Honse of Be- 

p Wtf f Bt atiff, WbeQ ^ t!^*-Mng A 

windy apeecli about nottting 
then before the Houm, being 
asked why he did so, leplied 
that he waa speaking to or for 
Bmteomic Bnt long before this 
■toTj arose, it was usual in New 
BngUnH to express great ^>- 
ivobatlon or admiiatlon of any- 
thiog by callicg it tiintvn, and 
this was derired from the Cana- 
dian flench, "Le bnncam sa" 
(- U est bon comme fa"), '■ it 1* 
good as it Is." There was a 
negro song Bfty at sixty yean 
•go with this refrain; — "Bom- 
sell ge niBjy, lebranem sa." 
This is presnnted to be n^ro 
CuiDCk-Frenoh for " Mam'selle 
je marie, elle est bonne oomme 




irasbt ma lb* iniidliljr 



vaichittc Umrardi, kod ba Tbbcr fSK- 
aun TDB iaundaullT, l—iwiifin, er \t 
itBoaa, (9 u t> ba of BO mmok—A 
Pfit. : ttf Sxttrvmca y »€ War 



Ehmd (Anglo-Indian), an artifloial 
bftnkoiwbarf. 

" Tfals term is also naturalised 
In the Anglo-Chinese porta. It 
is thereappliad to the embanked 
quay abore the sbon of the aet- 
tlemanta" (An^o-Indian Qloa- 
•aiy). 

Bonder (Anglo-Indian). Persian 
tuador, a seaport landtng-i^aoe, 
harbour, oi onstom-honse. 

Bondlinff (old), a onstom of on- 
married people of different 
sexes, or Iotsts, sleeping to- 
gether, bnt with olothoe on, 
or nnder saoh conditions that 
coiUou Is sapposed not to take 
place. It has been described 
by Wright as Welsh, by Bart- 
lett as American, but it Is to 
be found anywhere, or every- 
where in the world among the 
commoner sort of people (and 
ocoasionaUj among the other 
class), when opportunity pr»- 
seutsitsalt Mr. Bartlett thinks 
it Is not now practised in the 
United States. He evidently 
does not know the Fennsyl- 
vanlan I>utoh or New England, 
where the onstom still prerails. 



:v Google 



20+ 



BufuBtHg — BtMtged. 



Wuhington Irrlng aetad latber 
nnUrij when he deaoribed 
bmidlinff u loiiiethliig which 
the Dutch leaned from the 
Tukeea, sinoe it was In full 
bloom In EoUmnd at the time of 
which he WTOtft, and U thai 
demibad "bj Sewel (1797) : 

" Qutttlon i* an odd way of 
wooing luaal In some tea towni 
or lalei of Holland, after this 
manner. When the wench la 
gone to bed, the fellow enten 
the room and lays hlmadf down 
in hii olothea npon the blankets, 
next unto her, with one window 
of the room open, and thni he 
talks with bet, Teiy InnooenUy 
— a* it ia reported." 

It ia said of a danuel in Con- 
neoticnt, who expectad her lorer 
to oome and imtdli with bar, 
that her mother hade her pot 
both her legi into a pHlow-oaae, 
and tje it roond her waiit 
The uazt morning ahe asked her 
if ahe had kept bei " limbe " in 
the bag, to which Hiaa Inoo- 
oeooe repllad, " Ha, dear, I only 
took DM ont." 



landlord of a beerhooM. 

A Par^i mmd a Bfrmti.—ViliuB the 
kit fcv Ton mtnl " bmiti ~ hm bvcn 
mult Peer*. Th«n a » paiticulir ottjvc- 
■ - ■ ■ ■ ■ .Lilulyu 



notharaaehly 

^. .,_it«d with IcEuLatiTd 

he wUl I 

to which thovBvha beccune Pevti (eovmUr 
devote thciuelTei. ead a beenge u u 
glorioiu u initituioii u ■ Pxncs. The 
only diOcoliT Hou to n U be thu: 
The title bewa tw ■ 



Mi co ndtti Boi — r>»a. 

A plckpoctet, ahaipei, a pmaa. 
ThiiTeiy old Sngliah cant wnd 
is still In lue among American 
thieTBs in the phiaae " to go 
frw);," which ia the same as "to 
go bang," derired from the pop- 
ping of a oork, or the htng of a 
barrel ; lost, gone. 



. widely bcBcficu] diviCT- 
tbstifhc, howerei. [hat the Qneni btndf 
will be eeuBBid wilh mwtbw ctcd if At 
iaa happen to hear ibM ihii abortiea hu 
" tfmtt immt'—Aiatrmtiii Jimrmal. 

(Fngilistio) to give, pass, hand 
over; "Wng orer the rag," 
band over the note. (Popular), 
in a pnblic-hoQBe game called 
" cod 'em," when one of the <^ 
podte party anapeota the ^ieet 
to be in any partioiUar hand, 
he places hia own orer it and 
exclaims "Utng it here," i*, 
' altnp. 




of cypnei with priie-fichtn*, it i 
erideat thet ban^ ney hive been the 
otiEia of it. A imta r*Jit* (or yitk\ 
mouu B diitoited. cmriiad, ec ia 'net ■ 
imfd^^. It aba newu leme, cnslnd, 
miaut.—Tk* Si^UtA GfftUt mU 



:v Google 



BuMg-juke — Bunko. 



To bong Is good BngUili for 
toolOM up. 

Bmc^nice (tUevu), port«r or 
I>«er (New ToA fikng iHo- 
tlonftij). 

Bank (Amaic^n), » wooden oaee 
or bench " which terres for a 
■eet by dA7 and a bed bj night " 
(BaiUett). In Ameilcft denote* 
genenSj » rongh bed or place 
for eleeplng. I>atch, "alaap 
^Qltli," k Mttle-bed, or prew- 
bed. Americaa, " to ftuii." 

. . . And B p«i enr Ihi nu of hb 
vofi^ by ujriD^ that bt wu confined to 

Kb^ltr: JtMOrmiiti. 

Bnoker (pqulu), beer. (Amerl- 
oen), iMge, tat, lemeckable. 
But of Bngland, bonier. Thlj 
word Boggeata » poadble origin 
^Btinoombe. 

Bunko, bnnco (Amerloao), from 
the Italian tomw, a benoh or 
bank, A game at oarda, like 
three-cefd monte, and Is nenally 
drnplye swindle. It iideaoribed 
bj Inipeotoi BTmes, Chief of 
DetectiTes in New Tork. mb- 
■tantiallj as follows. It is ap- 
parently so limine and honest 
that the shrewdest men are 
readilj indnced to try it, and 
are thtia fleeced. There are 
forty-thrae spaces upon a bunio 
" lay ont," foity-two are ntun- 
bered, and thirteen contain stars 
also (no prUes), one is blank, 
and the remaining twenty-nine 
re[«esent priie* ranging from 



205 

two to Bve tbonaend dollan. 
The game can be played with 
dice or cards. The lattei are 
numbered with a series of small 
nnmbers ranging from one to 
Biz, eight of which are drawn 
and oonnted, and the total re- 
preaents the nmnber .of the 
prise drawn. Shonld the TloUm 
draw a star onmber he is allowed 
the prlvil^e of drawing again 
by pDttlug Dp a small amoont 
of money. He is genarallT 
allowed to win at first, and later 
on the game owea him from 
$1000 to 95000 (i,&, from ^100 
to ^looo). This is when he 
draw* the oondltional piiie. 
No. 97. The conditions are 
that he most pat op $500 Cf loo), 
or as much as the dealer thinks 
he will stand. This Is explained 
to him a* neoessary to save 
what be has already woo, and to 
entitle him to another drawing. 
To inveigle men to play tiink, 
the most extraordinar7 pains 
are taken, and the bmie-steerere 
01 " tonta," who seek for victims, 
are selected from the most 
gentlemanly>looking, well-eda- 
cated pereons that can be found 
There are innomeiable instanoea 
of lawyers and others, who knew 
the world well, and who were 
perfectly on their guard as to 
bunio, being taken in by it, and 
half ndned. Its extraordinary 
vogue in the United States jns- 
tifies this detailed description 
of it as prmwtonituM, prmmunitiu. 
The writer is well acquainted 
with an Snglish gentleman who, 
while travelling in the United 



:v Google 



Bimimm — Bmrtt-betbtt. 



MTaliy nglsMdU lo djn tbalr 



or lu ppre w tbdr natonl oolimr. 

Brnikaiii. See Bitboombb. Thia wm for the mke of utii* 

foimity. Fkahiui In hair hu 

Bgnv grab (Ohdtenham College), Jw»yibeen»I«*tteinmilit«T 

gneiiiregeUblee,aalled"giaM'* m^. A» in the pwt e«ch oorpe 

UtbeBoralHUiUrrACMlemT. prided it*d( on iU own pecnllM 



BonoB (Anglo-Iiidiiii), ^ifdled to 
onj liambag, "anTthllig Soli- 
tione or fiutitknia," a onat, a 

GIOMI7V 



plgtaQ wad 
powdei, eo now there an legi- 
mente in which pnblic opinion 
demanda a hard and &at inle 
about hair. Few will tolnata 
whiaken ; Flocadill; weepen. 

Yob will in wiihia k wok if ihii ii Dondreaiiet, a* they were ODOe 

HTihioc "w« 1»" • t*mt^-OmVtU, caUod, an oninnallr despijed ; 

"-^ aadwhsntheboazdiapennitted 

WM17 (anny), *» ^ *<»», as is India, tto 

' an antartaln- dimeusioos and trimming an 

ment to which benerolant aonla ■>'l«° *^^ nbjeot of predM 

oooadoDally invite the aoldien npUatioM. SaHdmg meuit 

in a gairiMi], bat which has lonneiiy to stifle, from Burke, 

generally Raallw attraction* for '^^ **■ '"■1% ^ '^>9 'or 

them than tbooaateenotpnbllo- moiderbyBnAoostionof penont 

tiooa^ whoeebodieaheioldtaBiiigeoua 

for diaaeoting. 

Bout (oommon), an »pt<m, properly 

nOoaOfaa; to6>Mt,tajoMle. Bnta (tUarm), ohcat: hmMn, 

Bwindlen with dice and oaida ; 

Biinter(ooinmon),aitn>et-walUng j,^^ infected with Tenenal 

thief, a proatitnte. iiavue (Sew Tork Blang Wo- 

Banta. See Buhok. tionary). 

BttrldciAnatrallanooDTicta'alang}, Bnmer (old slang), an aoate form 
a whora. IntiodDoed Into Ana- of ^ certain stage of a oontagloiu 
tialla by the oonrioU tran- disease. 

But, to (Karlbvongh Collie), 
toflght. 

BtuUnK (*Tmy), dyeing the mona- 
taohe and whiaken. It was at Bnna-beebee (Anglo-Indian), « 
one time tbe outom for the great lady, a gnnda dame, a 
whole of tbe men in smart lady-fwelL (Qypey), ban babct. 



:v Google 



Bttrra- — Bushel. 



TUa k ■ Uod of ihv md kpptUd in 
Aafla-IndiiB •ocktr (o tba lidr vbo 
■ ritT.—Aiittt-/if 



Bnrn Uuuui (Anglo-Indian), ft 
giwid tekst, a big dinner. In 
EngUah gjpej, bOro hMtn, 
from tbe Mme Indian rootc 

Buna Mhlb (Anglo-Indian), the 
ohlef, oc bead, or maater. A 

Bnnt (sporting), Umlj paoo, amatt 
noa, apart. 

Ihain^ '* m fooA tmrtt" oih of tba hunt 
Ihc bodi " n|fat Hbd Momid " cf the padc, 

took k " rokal,- ud u MM Mkcd his it 

Ih had BHo ih* '' hut ukd hMmdft." 

" Ea, Bi, I iBed ■ doc chusg a h*n.~ 

" Which w»y wm dur irinfl' 

"Ah,iii,Iaui'tuQ'«ihu; ill I could 

M <nu ihe dec « hirisc tba Ilea of il.~ 



J {old oaat), " h t r|n ' iy a 
wife " aignlfiea tbe feast given 
by an Kpprentloe on tbe comple- 
tion of hie term of epprantloe- 
abip, and becoming r free man, 
to aet up In biuineea f or blnuelf. 
(Common), "iurjrin9amoU,"for- 
MkUog • wife or mlatreu. 



i), abbrefiation of 



batmdi PicodiUj Ciiciu ud Unc'i 
CroB. Sha snI)' lutad t da.j. Host pn- 
taftUj iba B«t irfth an offer of mair^^ 
ud doaad her connectian with ana hu ts 
f« another u '-gi-l—'" — f ■— J— Oar* 

(Theatrical), oontiaotiMi of 
" bniineBa." Fronoonoed bi*. 
The dramatlo action of r pUy 
is deaoribed In all wiitten patta 
as in*. The dnmb ahow de- 
scribed In Hamlet la all iu. 
Bit la alao applied to the oom- 
meroial affair* of tbe theatie. 
»* "good Um" or "bad bit." 
(Anglo-Indian), but/ "Bnongb I " 
"Hcddfaaidl" "Stop tberal" 
"That wiU doi" "Hold yooi 

(American), " to btMt," to 
punch, pnbablffrom "bont" 
"111 hcMTonrbead" la aoom- 
man threat. 

Bnalicd (up eonntrr Auatnlian), 
lost In tbe bosh or nnolearsd 
conntij primarily, and hence 
bewlldaed. 

Daman] wu on tbiM octujona ahnji 
BCCDBpooiod br (HM o( tba hojt, fix John 
feared that ha aught ft huAtd; bol ha 
hisuelf ud the o(ba bor want Hiianlalr. 
—A. C. Grmmt 

(Ckmunon), " b^Aed on," 
maoh [doased. " I am awfully 
bitMicd on," that takea my 

(Old alang), applied to a poor 
man withont money. "He's 
oompletely buAtd," i.t., daatl- 

tnte. 

Boahel, to (Amerioan), to repair 
Ooman M«Nn, to 
mead, henoe " busbeln," a 



:v Google 



Busktl-dtMy — Buss. 



Ullor'a -TT*-**"*. wluMe bui- 
neu it I* to ngali gumenta 
(Butlatt). 



(Weat Indikn], 
men who wiiiat kliva in Jhe 
" bach," leading ft& idle, dmIcm 



(AmerioBii), during tlu Civil 
Wkt gaetillM or iiragnUn 
were csUed *' bnihwaoken." To 
"bubvaok" a boat i* to dnw 
it along b; aatdng the boahca 
onthebanka. 

Batibj park (rbjining tlang), a 
lark. "A man who i* pooi i* 
nid to be ' in buAg fork,' or 
■ in tbepark '"(Vaox'B Hemoln). 

BniiiKn ttheatrioal), the more- 
menta of the aoUua, tlietr look 




ban I ncnnd B 

at hAvint to iioil il, 

fODili for Hk h allad by tboH in Uw 



(Low aoton), gating one's 
ll*iug on the road, bf ledta- 
tlona in t^roonu, loo. ; pro- 
bably from tiMbw. 
Bmtkbit B foina iau pnbBc-hnimi aad 



pnd* OM npoa mriml JoUoa, cood or ^^^ 

bwl, bal npoo tmiaua.Stmri^ Sf ("■mpa}, elnging. 

m wfaic^ khfe Buy h^pca u b«, ui >ctiw 
of Ubluna BcTnhudt'i trtm^ OAlnnUy 
mid her Ibiww.— Tlbvi. 



mica. — Ththtrtd .HhUry rfPmdmmU. 

(American), "the hwincM- 

end," the end of any object which 

lapDttopTactloaluM. Thehm- 

neH-end of a mnle ii his heels. 



I (popnlai), men who go 
about perfonning, dnging, vt 
playing in a low way is the 
etraeta oi in pnblic-hoDaaa. 

llKq Muy Jons hmppbied ta meet 

Jokq Btqwti, 
While T'nnfinf oo« day id tb« ■avM. 
Hii (btm to mttnctiirc, hii fiffon b aaar. 
So unlike conmoa JiuirFit wfti he. 



, Google 



BnM (tUeTM). a burglair. 

" Wutj Bin, btm OtT Roul. m. for i 
iiH^B.>THn,"D«iutluiWil]iun . . 
hM b«B GompeUcd u han Ih* ei)a(«BU 
huma in tha air Ko^ u ha It mnudtd 
)ara bnrgbiT, uid uddpatei tn ram' 
hud l>bov.-«(r. /. W, /TmJ^.'/X- 

tB(7&l HOitarr Acftdemy), to 
goon tlio hut, togo to town (or 



(American), a bajst, a froUc, 
A d«b»ach, a apree. The refei- 
enoo in the f oUowing pwagnph 
ia to an Ameiicau Uini«t«r to 
Hodoo, who wu nid to b»Te 
Indulged in k hi«l of unwonted 
nugnitnde. 

Ad Mtiih hu apptwtd ncauly upon 
" BmtM of Ihe Vicc-JPreBdcDtL" Same- 
thins npea Iba faute of FaRifa Uiii;ucn 

OmaiaHtwmU. 

(ThioTM), to hut, to inf onn, to 
" tplit ; " to otsnmit a bo^lar;, 
(Amerioan), to deatroj. 

TbcrwBbjrihi* tiaa jioad byalaiit 

cnnrd cf odicr Soulbam pabiu, who 

coacatt holkrin, " Hue the baU-bEMled 

aberlitiaBat, mkI hat up hii immonl ex- 

hAiliOD 1 "—A ritmnt IfarJ. 

Boater (popular), a tmaU new 

loaf, t«rni«d alao "bimteri" a 

"poiuy-wOTth of beea-wax and 

a poiuj lattter," ie., bread and 



(American), anything large io 
■ise, a drinking bout, a n'P" of 
great Arength. 



H> tackled iDBe gf tbdr R(alw Aubn 
■od Dkt throwed lHin.—Mtr* nwla.- 

(Autrallan), aontheilr baiUr, 
WHitherlr wind of great flo- 
lenoe. 

(Thierea), m burglar. 

(Common), anything largs, 
of extoftslM; a apart. 

At fraqacDt ioHiTili daring Iha dijr, 
the attic, ■"■■"**H by a lodda irapnls^ 
bnkB buck aod nude a deUmiined charge 
throngh the drinn, wiih tbcir heidi 
torBad hoBdrudL Wbencnr Iha losk 
place, the onnctr, after tnraiiig then 
nuid. can the aiob a »Hl(r at a HTei* 
pace dur'mi Iha Dcn half ham to take the 
aiad out of Ihaa—MUf^ .- mU Lifi 
md A-htmim in Oi AntnUimm Btuk. 

Wot odd* utcrall r We're jot dJOoa 1 I'm 

no^ bad at bottoid, an joit. 
Wdl, tbaak ye for Bothink, HIT joker. Ai 

knf ai I'n botUoo la hloc, 
I mean to nnp imnd a rare hmtltr, lark, 

lap, take the pidc of Iha fan, 
id, bottea or top, (sod « bad, keep mj 

"■ " •■rOnel 



Bnatle, a dress-improrer, the pro- 
toberance behind on a woman'a 
dresi. Before 1855 and 1856 
ladiee had begun to wear crino- 
line and skeleton skirts. Then 
came the \nMt, an artificial 
appendage Intended to produce 
the impreeaion that the wearer 
bad a full ^uce x luxinut or 
liaML Of late it haa assumed 
enonnoos dimensions, far snr- 
passing anything chaiacterlaUo 
of the moat fully dereloped 
Hottentot TeQu. 

" Notlung hu oatarippad the htttU la 
In ^gaatic srile for prodi^oa exceDcsca. 
Ii 11 maukabk thai thii farm of fiuhion. 



:v Google 



Bustle — BtiUer-Ettglisk. 




Ha it genoall; couldend, to 
jadgB by the tous ot the re- 
mark* and aneodotea in the aewa- 
papers, saan intolerable anaoy- 
•noe. He Iea*M with ereoj 



" Wha tb* AuAlf ilull hin taaa dt. 
Tflloptd lo iti probable limits tlw l»dr who 

tlon, if wM ebfltrvKtiaii. Our ftttcataoB 
■u lauly ailed lo> Jiulft sf.IlM poco- 
muic ipcctB. Tbii ii • cnR of the bulb 
nrioj, ud i> fiU«d 
ckTi;*]], abd ii wu ptopfllinc 
hdj beTon il. macb u ■ pcnm] 
■dvund by n Dane. Tbii tmllt n> ihe 
admirmtioa that diLT of ibe mtin city of 
ADgivta, She wonatDTm^oUadiiiBiicT. 

iu/b, tta> bautifal ctonu* ck«1)r reaeni- 
Ued k ninl Knsintr ccHIace with ■ tum- 
Nbc fixed M one tcA-'—Mitttrf rf tin 
BmtU ! Graniitrt IGn-iJ/rmi JmamaL 

(Popular), mnatsj. 
To itMdc, to tie up into 
bnndlcfl or to make bunches. 

Bnitled (common), confoBed, 



papers, booki, iweets, tmit, 
tojs, &&, all of which most be 
oarefnllT gnarded, or letniDed 
if not pmcbased, nndei the pen- 
altj of inomring that unlimited 
" sasa " in which youths of his 
class are irenerally so proflcimt. 
The f<^awing incident, frcm the 
Atrotl Aw iVcn, giies a faltb- 
fol pictnie ot the b 
offerod by the tnleAcr.-- 




buy hmU^-dDeeb, bat ihc i 
an with, " He an't h»c '' 



(Common), the king at cards, 
called ua ha^ in French slang. 

(Priscn), the hutdter is a niok- 
name for the doctor. Other. 
wise tenoed " lawboaes," 

Butcher's dog (common), " to lie 



BiU7'«ack (pc^olar), a caipet- 
bag. 

Bntcha (Anglo-Indian), the young 
of any ^^inmi 

Botcher, the (American), a boy 
who is allowed to pass through 
the line of "cars" or carriages 
on a railway for the purpose of 
felling a great variety of articles. 



like a buloier's iiag!' 
the beef without tonohing it, ia 
to lie beside a woman withcot 
sexual intercourset 

Butcher's mouniiitg (popular), a 

white hat with a moaming 

Bntler-EngUsh (Anglo-Indian), a 
kind of pidgin-Bnglish spokeD 
Id the Madras Presidency. 



:v Google 



BuUeier — Button-buster. 



Bntt^er, a abop, from the Italian 
bolUga. A eniloiu Taiiatlon of 
this word ia " butter-koi," 
GTpaj, Htttia or boodOn. 

Butter, to (aommcai], to pmiM a 
peTKm too flagiBctly ; " to pass 
the fruiter boat," Is to Indulge 
at pnblio dianen in laudator; 
toaata at the promlneat or dia- 
tingaiahed personB who are pre- 
vent. The phrase baa ita codd- 
terpart in the ScottiBb proverb, 
" Claw me and 111 cUw yon." 
From din, to pralae, and ligni- 
fying" Praise me and Illpiaisa 
yon." The Bngliih proverb, 
** Fine word! fruttrr DO paranipe," 
took its rise in a kindred idea. 

ni iulltr him, mut me. Notliiiig ctm- 
foTU K poor befjBT like & bit of pnjie wIhii 
■ ■ ■ -. KamltT^ T " 



Ymiiidd lllnriili TODi Yon Ai^ 
Util I'a a JBiCiaaf Ihe pc>C£,>in*hl 
—StUiit'i Firtumi, i«li. 
11h buidi and tb* hiHftlit llui ihvd 

—PmrKMm, iCm. 
WT mefii' bet u' di^ <i V*^i 

1 pud [be IWiVfit hite ; 
1^ bight vai dark, ud thnagh the pvlG 
I cDoldoM' buL courts ba-. 

Kit€rt Bumi : 0* IMt CmiKt Sttrt. 



file (old caot), a shop 

lifter. 

The nine c^l■dE7 whicb qBiliGa ■ 
null-ben, ■ hnil\e-taH, or tin/liKiMiuiJSIt 
(o JUT1TC at any de^rre of emiaeoce in hia 
profcnoD woald LOcewbc raiae a num ui 
■hal die wDtM otesn a moR boooorabla 
callmc- — Firtdin£: Jou ti t h t n Wiid- 



Biittock-baU(oldBlang),cohabita< 



Butter a bet, to (old alang), to 
increase It by twice or thrice ita 
fint amount. 

Buttered ban (old slang), a woman 
who, directly after cohabitation 
with one man, allows another 
to embrace her. 

Batter fiiiger>(oTicketen), an epi- 
thet applied to a " fielder" who 
does not hold a ball which he 
ought to catch. 

Butter flap (rhyming slang), a 
trap, light cait. 

Butterfly (nautical), a sulor's 
name for a river bo^e. 



Bnttockine-ehop (common), % 
brotheL The corrosponditig ex- 
pression in the French slang ia 
nu^oiin tie fittt*. 

Button (old cant), a shilling, now 
a bad one. (Streets), a decoy 
sham porcbaser. 

The Cheap Johni ban a mao or a bo; 
to ^oa'k after the bone . . - Bad aonietibea 
ata (airtohiirk or act u a jvf Am (decsr) 
to pvchaae the firtt lot of goodl put up. — 
H. Mayktm: LemJtn Lahtmr and Oit 



:v Google 



who ezcitoa the riiible &ciiltiw 
M ationgly Uuit the viditon 
laugh nnUl they bnnt tbdr 
botloiu. 
Bnttoner (eord-iharpen), » con- 
f«d«iate who euticoe " {dgeooB " 
Into plaTlng. 

Button 00 (pdut«n), bm Fan 
ON and Croppbb on. An 
expression freqnently nied by 
ptiDt«iB, eqniTklent to " nuikiug 
button*," " fltof the blaet," or 
" down In the damps." 

BnttoD poimd (prorinolal), nonej, 
literallf monej that can be 
pocketed. 



Lift and Ckmttr. 

Button np, to (Stock Bzcbknge, 
American). When in a falling 
market a broker has made an 
nnprofltable purohaBe, and keepa 
the matt«r aeoret, be U aaid to 



(Aimj),oomiade,ohiim. (Fo> 
polar}, » policeman'* awiirtint 

Buy n prop (Stock Kzohange), a 
recommendation algni^ing that 
the market ia flat and tkera U 
nobody to snpport it. 

Bny bia time, to (American). 
Before the war alaves often 
bought themaelTes free by ini- 
Bta]meutB, paying down so mock 
money at a ttated time. When, 
for Initance, a slave had thne 
paid half the money, half of 
his time would be hia own. It 
hi^pened tbna that a man <d 
colour who was half redeemed 
fall into a flood and narrowly 
escaped drowning. On being 
asked what hi* thonghts weie 

he replied that he (Moldn't help 
thinking what a fool a man waa 
to risk money " in snoh onauten 
property as niggers." Hany 
n^Toes alao hired their own 
time, paying ao mnoh p«T day 
or week for it, tmsting to ean 



Bnttj (Cheap Jacks), a partner. 
(ProTinoial), a Dompauion or 
partner in a piece of conttact 



A ».rf(r colUtr b OM who conlncu »ith 


tbe nine owner (o »iK the cul u >o 


■D«:h per ion, unploTDi adMrau 10 do 


lb* ■ctnil »Drk. Tbt wenl b rno tltt 


ci|»)>di*]ecL. A"boo.Tpd-b.t.Jlo- 


wrkr™.lile«]lT."wori<brolbn-." tn 


d» moulh. rf n.«ia o, rougb workmu 


"piJ- would won be drappai, .Bd*./(, 







Box or ban, to (common), to 
■bare equally what remain* to 
a bottle, or to ponr oat tbe last 
drops from a decanter. 

boRle bm—TUtkirv : y*mlr >^>^- 

(Amerfcan, aooording to Bart- 
lett, bnt quite as much English), 
to pick pocket* whUa engaging 
a Tictim in conversiition, or 
while a confederate doe* io, 
iA, while " buiing " to bim. 



:v Google 



Sue — Buesser. 



Stix tn thiares' slang was ori- 
ginaU; to whiBper; It la now 
common in the Huae of talking 
oonfldentially or earnestly to 



" And Toa totd him wT" 

"What wen rou nilinglod" 

aikrd Cor lite kiui of $5* uhI b« uid he 
didot li»i« a-'—Diiml Pm Prai. 

(Popnlai), to tkllc, to mako a 

Old battlc-bkc haudUa ■ Ut, 
Ami a (niflr jam^ WucoBnl in bamoda, 
luHlcd wot '% thought «' it 

— ftrJK*. 

Bnz-bloke (tbieres), a piokpocket, 

Bmc - core (Amtralian comicta' 
•laug), moat like^ taken ont to 
Aoatnlia hj ths oonrlots trans- 
ported thither. 

TftDX, in hia "Hemoin of 
OtMivict life in Anatralla," aaya : 
" Bu*-coM or ' bu-gloak,' a pick- 
pocket ; a penon who ia olevec 
at thia pisctioe is uid to be 
a 'good bos.'" 



(thleyee), » thief; 



" boners " or pickpocket. Alao 
»70niig pickpocket. 

Bnzfuppei'a BcaAtmj, a school 
in wlilch ]>oimg thieves were 
trained. Fignrea were dressed 
np and eipeiienoed tutors stood 
in TMlons difficult attitndes for 
the boya to practise npon. When 
oleTGT enoDgb tbej were sent 
on the streets. Diokena gives 
full puticulars of this old style 
of bnsiness In "Oliver Twist" 
(Hotten). 



Buzzard (American), an oppres- 
aive, arrogant person, jealous of 
riv^i7, and vindictive. The 
Wtg^ alladed to in the fol- 
lowii^ paragraph ia a celebr^«d 
thoogh not veiy snoceaafnl 
American weatber-propheb. 

Wiscioi pRHKHiom PnCetior Praetor 
"a huMMard eiDODS idectiui, denninag 



him blogcd.— CJUc^ Triinitt. 

Buzzard dollar (Americao), so 
called from the eagle on it, 
which CBpUoos critics think 
looks like a turkey-tviairtf. 



bmig plenty of unidl cbiuigc, u that if 
DDC is iDcliaed to give he cut find do u- 
e-ite. They wiU take ftnylhios yoo give 
Ihea, riom ■ nickel up to ■ JHMnf ilOmr, 
Slid took huppr-— Ctitiv' TriAumt, 

Bnazcr (thieves), a pickpocket. 



:v Google 



BuM-gloak — CaMage. 



Bon-^oak (<dd), a pickpocket. 



bulk ii, in tul, Bodiini baiB Ihui ■ 
hm^lnU—Lml LfUmt: Paul Clif- 
ford. 



HfGtorf^X ftTnlgarejacuMiou. 
Bj eoUy I a mM osth. 



Bj EpBm t (Amoioan), a mild oatb. 

One oi^ ihc wH coDC, fygum t 
FrOB iba ki^ for ■ glut d iwa. 



By Jingo I [<jommoii),uexo)ama- 
tion denatisg niipriM, indigiia- 
tton, deOauM. Bee Jihqo. 



I (oommoti), R bro- 
theL The teim arises 
from tbe fsot tlu.t 
four - wheeled cab« 



for certain porposea 

The French argot describes 
a lonr-nheoled cab aa bonU 



tljol. it 



Tbo« who c*n'i affoKl ■ 
at, iliu ■ oib, iKu k 
C £«b ; FtnUmt Grttm. 

(Tinker), a cabbage. 



Cabbage (tailon and dreesmakera). 
Ihia ii given as a cant word for 
prlfate theft bj dictionariea of 
the beginning of tbe nineteenth 
oentnij, bat it is nsed now In a 
■langT- smse only in reference 
to the pDrloining bj tailors of 
pieces of cloth. 

Did any ou enr ret hear of b working 
Uilsr who WM pnxrf igunit raisappropri*. 
■ioa of tut DcishbDDr'i goDdi, or,a9 be pUr- 



tulor being ifaunacd 
br hit fellovwackmcn, or vnniti br hb 
neilhboiin, oo eccauni at hii pRdUeaiso 
taiaiitmtit Vet wliu is i[ but uochn 
wctd {or"ibidl.'^—/.Gi-HAmttd:Sttnt 
CmrunfLtttdam. 

Formerl J tortope. 
Lops for the antiide of hii Rite hu 
But, for hii bout, he cuoel huTc it 



—Htrrkk: Ht^trUa. 



Torb, " to pniloin c 
as places of cloth, after cutting 
out a garment; property and 
originaUj to cnt off the heads 
of cabbages, and occasionally 
also BDCh as are not our own 
but belong to others." This de- 
rivation is borne oat by the old 
French oaitucr, to deceive, cheat, 



, Google 



Cabbagt'fuad — Cabobbbd. 



from (ofrif*, ft wbite-headed (m1>- 
CaUMgie-heAd (eommoii), a. kK- 




Cabbacer (oouunon), 
Foiiii«rl7 eaUi>s« 



CftbtMgie-tree mob (obcolete Ana- 
tnUiui alaag), now caU«d " lar- 
riklns," not quite eqniTXlent to 
tbe iiondou street rongh or 
loafer, becftOM tbej genenllj 
ftre or might be fn prosperoiu 
circnmataiices. Thus called on 
•oconnt of the emblem of tbefr 
order being tbe low-croirned 
oabbege'pttlm bat. 

Ttkov in Icbc IboDd m 
tt lb* Sydaey Tbwn, ■ ■ 
luio*B u lb* caUttt-tra 
whoa, in lb* ipiril af tb* 
fna Biighl vigbhUt wiih hw 
in onkr lo uki it m Uaod^ one 
CtL Mmmdmf : Omr ^iO^mEuv 

The modem larrikin baa ex- 
cbaoged tbe saUojw-lrcc for a 
black trideawake felt bat (bence 
Oklled tbe "larrikin bat"), wbiob 
be wean with iti bilm tamed 
down. Tbe clothes he mort 
aJteots are " abiny black," with 
a velvet collar, and hie boots 
ha*e ildicnlanslj high heela. 



Uoawin of the propeoutici of the aib- 
kmpt4J, he wai by (bem foriouily lunilcd 
fn* fie better nuoo, kppuenityj ihjio be- 
ciDH, Uk« " Kohk Pen^y," " be wore hi* 
be»« up."— ^^W.-CW. Mmtiaj: Our 



SsOM of Ibi meihodt at tayiiUHmr tn 
'eryvtful juh] corioiD. One If lo order 
L J^o to Ht itown ■ fkre jtt ■ T ene a n u rt 
or tavwn hftvioK ■ liack cotrvicain UMMber 
urect, uid lo iwul the rttus of Ibe telMr 
for m few mianteL Oa thii bcui| dnoe, 
the fider, kftcr pj mk i n g of Tdroiuiwiiti, 
decAmpt bytbKlexiE,to ibeloeiuitt indie 
nation of tbe dmer, wbo often oiiy IcAroi 
ihni tbe hirer hu debuided bin lifter 
wjdtinc ibr m ions tine hejood Ihiii wkudi 
he hu hca ukcd to iWr.—Gitir. 

Cabbj (general), driver of a cab. 
Ko wonder Lord Roosid Gover ii popn- 
'"u. Lut Dighl he praided 
e meeting of tbe Cihdriter^ Aoo- 
ud in Ikk ^eedi be remuked tbM 
ny> ■■» CMify whit be ailed iIh 
I aiKpciice, particiilulj if 
be diivcr wu kiod to hii 
-CMC 

Cable-b«iiKer (nantical), a person 
catching oysters in the rivet 
Medway, not free of the flsbery 
(Smyth). 



Cabob, kibob, khabanb (An^o- 
Indian), nsed in Anglo-Indian 
hoosebolda for any kind of roast 
meat. Properly it is applicable 
to small slices of meat on 
Ekeweti, with slices of onion 
and green ginger between tbem, 
tbe whole being seasoned with 
pepper and salt, batter, kc In 
ft plainer form it is common in 
Venice, and perhaps in all parts 
of Italy. 



:v Google 



2l6 



CaboodU — Cackling-ckeU. 



CmbM>dle(AiD«Ticui),&N«wEiig- 
Und exprMsLon, originilly used 
bj ooutlng nilOTS. It meuu 
the entire puty, ail the set or 
clique. It ii probablj a. aluig 
modlfioation of the fipaaish 
word eahSdo, which incaiu the 

CuUe (dmu), tlw dialogae of & 
plA7. Some act<ns seek to de* 
rive thif word from cualogj. 
It is, bowerer, fu mora likely 
to h»Te been derived bj the 
eqoeatriui peiformera, who in- 
tcodaoed BJid popnlariMd It, 
from the more bomelj "olack, 
olnok " of the humble barn-door 
fowl, after the proeeu of Ujring 



When msnagetof Aitlej'i, the 
great Dnorow, who Bbared the 
bktnd which hii onft hM 
always more or len entertAinad 
towards the actor, was wont to 
BpOfltrophlH the performers in 
hi* eqoeatrian diama after this 
faehion: "Come, I n^, joa 
" (see Hdhmbbb), 



the 'ooMi I " 

(Bongbs), talk. 
Ha wu (Ua U Ibe (kU^— AhcI. 

CKkle-chnckef (tbeatrioal), the 
prompter, whoae duty it te to 
"ohnok out" the words, i.t.. to 
prompt the actors when they 
fciget, or don't know the word* 
~4 matter of rare ooenrrenoe 
amongst the hierarchy of Eng- 
lish acton. As a rule, the 



theatre. Notwithstanding his 
prorerbial industry and ability, 
nnder no 00Dcatenati<») of dr- 
oomstancea haa a prompter erer 
been known to " give the 
word" at the precise moment 
when it U wanted. One of our 
moat famoDj stage-managers, » 
well-known tragedian, is wont 
to afSrm with grim hnmonr that 
be has obserred during a pro- 
longed ezperienoe that the Snt 
qnalifieation for a prompter is 
" not to know how to prompt." 

Cadkle merchatit (theatrical), the 
anthor of a pla;. 

Cackler (popular), talker. 

Tbc aptun wu ■ faod-lookini tStrw, 
isd M (Kxl hllDw, lev, " He un'I msch 
ot ■ tmcUiT," thaofhl Siuie, when Iber 
had HI tofcther for > lUlk wWm.—AHf 



OtcUer's ken (thleres), hen rooet. 

Ckckte-tub (common), a pnlpit 
Very old alang, but aUU in nie. 

" Jack, b* ■«• M choidi,' wU IbM, 
liftiiii Iwr trebniw) duUoiuly, " I dsa'l 
liffatlr know to wbftt tbop, uhI U'i loo br 
oC nuirbi, bkI t ain't |M ■ pnj«^4iook ; 
bnl I Kntt Ihiok if yctll Uimw Lucy*! 
cbiic lavhcel Be, 111 (d ud lit ludB A* 
tatUftal m Little BoImI am Snodii]'.— 



Ca^IlnC-chete (old cant), a towL 



:v Google 



Cackling-cove — Cadger. 



ra^Mwiy farti (old), «gg*. 

Cad (oommon). The word it 
hardlj sUiig in some of its 
MUMB. It has TBTions meanings 
aach aa omoibna oondactor. 

TIm ■pirilol pnpHaor, knawCnf Mr. 
BAriLa*! qulkfiatuo!!, ^iptMatfld him to 
t]u want office of c^d od Ihe »erj firu 
tppllcuiaa — SkiUlut h A» (T"** /"^nf 
OimmOiaCadi. 

An 'Arrj oratrMt bo; ; ft mean 
or Ill-bred tellow ; or one nilgsr 
in feeling, to be met with, like 
the mob, in every clasa of 
societj. Among a certain class, 
tradsnnen, merchants, work- 



Thiit; fcui (go, imd e 






At public schools and unl- 
Teraities the term applies to 
townsmen. Posiiblj deiiTCd 
from "cadger," or Irish eadai, 
fiutian,iBg. More probably from 
eaJet, need in a sensa of inferi- 
ority. "Caddee"isaproTineiftl- 
ism for under -servant, and in 
Fiance, in the provinces, tadti is 
a nickname sometimea given to 
a poor, half-witted hanger-on, 
to a young faim-servant, or to 
an ass. "Un tameox eadtt " is 
an expression used by the French 
in a contemptnona manner, 
and applied to a pony fellow 
who pnts on airs. It has been 
aoggestod that ead comes from 
the Scotch eadU, a term for- 



merly applied to the carriera of 
aedan-chaita. The character 
and occapation of these men 
were r^^arded with much oon- 

Caddr-hntcher (popular), ex- 
plained by quotation. 



Cade, the (society), the Burlington 
Arcade, At certain times of the 
day this covered walk is the 
loonge of fast men of the town 
and the better class of the demi- 



Cadge to, properly to Yieg ; sup- 
pcwed to be derived from caJgt, 
a basket carried by beggars, in 
the aame way that to l>eg is 
from "bag," originally to carry. 
Slangily applied to waiteia who 
hang about for a gratnity. 

Mr. hai, further, m^cDDCtUDUlioai 

OD Iht ucxIlcDH of the nilerm employed. 

sudeli of oirility.'-^jhirA'jv Tima. 

(Scholastic), to try and get 
pnpila or hints by ■>^«.ftirt*jff 



Ca^^-cloak (old cant), a b^gar. 

CaJgKtfk, cotttl, o 
Whip-jmck, pelliard, patrico . 
other will I luffn. —BtamifyUt Mtn 

Cartm. 

Cadger, properly a trickster, a 
tramp or vagabond who either 
begs or sells smalt articles by 
the way as he tramps from plaoe 
to place. 



:v Google 



Cogger — Cam. 



poODCtd oa b iha act gf n 
■Ddomad bcAcebi 



Stmtn CiBUt */LtmUm. 

qnotktioD. 

I syiT bm rcmuk thai udodih penok 
•r ay bon (Tula no ■ 
oulr ngardad ■■ b« vbo it knon 
tmdetr. Tlw ncuiiiif tbsy ut on Ui* 
word B aM lb* dictisnair muinc. The 
tmdftr with them u tha whmiDf befSBf — 
the cowftrdlf lapoetoc, who, being diiYca 

foa mbtnt bii boiiaeM with u eJec t a ti on 
of pfslixuidal homilitj, msd 
nea oT hn cwti anwonhiDcu ; 



I't* IM my liTing by CMlbE fortuu, umI 
b^CiDC uul emJfiiti. ud >uch lik*.— 

I don't HIT that ihey vtn all b i.t| M n— 
pnbaUy not nort than a third of Ihem 
wen— bat what ou ia vaia knked fat wai 
the "joLLy bcj:gar,'* the oft-quoted and 
tIeadfaAtly believed to .penonage wIm 
•ODtiii work became he can '^Diake" in a 
day three lima the wifea <t an hoocu 
ae ch a nic by the vmplc praccsa r£ tsdCp 
imt.—]. Ctm m wttd: /• Slm^ Crm- 

Sbuigilj appliad to oabmen 
when they m« off the rtak. oolicit- 
iDg fuw, or to wftlten who bMig 
Kboat and fawn for » gr&tDitj. 

Otdy (popnlar), a hat, from an 
old stjte i««embling a b«n«L 
"Okdi^'' pTOrinolal EogUih for a 
bairel or ■mall CMk. 



Caflte'stictatenatSoathAfiteu), 
bread or food of an; kind, aa 
diatingniahed from diluk. 

C«r, to (aohoolboTs), to iiriUU 

(HottCD). 

CMge (thieTBB), a priaon. 

Canr> to (miliUiy), to abatain for a 
oertaln time from liqnor. Omae, 
in bia "Clasiical Dictio&»i7ot 
thoVn]garTon|[ne,"Ba7B, "TUa 
la a military tenn used bj pri> 
Tate soldier*, ligm^lng a ioleinn 
TOW or reaolntion not to get 
dnink for a oertaln time, or, aa 
the term is, ' not till their eagf 
is ont,' whioh tow is aommonlj' 
obaerred with stiiotness ; " t.g., 
" I hsTe taggtd myMLF for six 
months," " Ezcoae me this time 
and I will tagg for a Tear." 
Tbli toiD is also io use in Soot- 



Cagmac (lK^n>^)> Krapa, odda 
and enda of butcher n««t, un- 
palatable food ; properly an old 



Cahoot, id (American), to be In- 
timately oouoemed witb any 
one In an affair. There can be 
little doubt that It dame from 
either the Dotoh Jfqratt or Ger- 
man EajHU, OT perh^ the same 
in Old Saxon, meaning a cabin, 
implying living or messing to- 
geU>cx. Fren(di takaU. a taorel, 
renders this more probable. 



:v Google 



Cake (Amerioan and proriuoial 
Bnglisli), a man without mnoli 
•enw, or one wanting io IdeM ; 
not ao tnooh a fool aa a mere 
nothing. A weaker form is ex- 
pressed bj saTtng, ' ' He's a eaJce 
only balf-baked." This expres- 
sion is moat freqaenllj heaid 
in Philadelphia. 

" To take the eait," to aor- 
paas, excel, to be flrat in any- 
thing Tbia coiocides oddly, 
tbongh entirely aocidentally, 
with a coDjeotnred meaning of 
the origin of Pretael (g- v.). 

He^ alwrnji up to doiDg ToOu, 
Hfl'l AhAyt OD tha wain ; 

Ht'i ttta proGl When he Jolta, 
On ihil " he uktt the taJU." 



C»ktj (popular), soft, foolish, or 
empty-headed ; from the pro- 
Tiooial Bnglish " oake," a fooUih 
feUow. 

Cakej-panntim- fencer (atieet), 
» atteet putrj-oook. 

Calftboose (Amerioan), from the 
Spanish talaboia, the common 
name for b watch-house or 
prieon, eepeoiaUy in New Or- 



Da t Id mf puikiB koie, 
An' diy juuscd at bu tn dc eitMem. 
—Jfifrr Smf. 

r«lj-nl«*«, to {American). Al- 
though it cannot be denied 
that many people in New Eng- 
land often QM the word aUmiUUt 
aa a synonym for "gaaas," to 



■Calico. 2 ig 

ezpTSH eroj form of thought, 
snob as "to esteem, snppoae, 
beliere, tblnk, expect, intend," 
Jcc., this la far from being uni- 
versally the oaae. OalcoIaHon 
eeta forth a more deliberate ao- 
tion of the mind, and is more 
associated with thought. A 
Yankee will generally calvulalt 
the chances of anything, when 
be would not guess them. CaU- 
lait, which is nothing bat the 
rasolt of i^d oonvemtion, 
may be heard in England as In 
America. 

Calf (cnnmon), an idiotlo or 
stupid person ; ed(f- headed, 

cowaidly. 

She hkd ■ (itluh lucr fbr ib( idikI- 
looluDf yoDiif ftf^wha had aa dsnally 
diignad himKlC — HamilUn AUU: 
Mrrait amd Mjtitrta. 

Calf-cllng;crs (popolai), ex^alned 

by quotation. 

^ Rqee-brcecba ven yoA f«ng om tt 







\tt u tlghi u ■ wonud sockina) wm 







Calf' s-head (popular), a whlte- 
faoed man with a large bead. 



m), weak, lean, 
lo BKh ■ pbca u Ibst 70U mKw bodr 
had nen] hare a food Sre u kcip il vana. 
—Nmtktmmtl BtiUr : CtUtfnia tfErmi- 



Ho«aihnwd, d 
qncuiancd a limple DuicfamaD ml of hii 
wcU-fcd uccd, and kft bin ioKcad a 



, Google 



220 



Calico-balfy — Calp. 



Calico-tMUj (Americui), » fr»- 
qnentAT of oaUoo-balls. Aboat 
fifty jMn ago in Philade]pbi> 
it was nsQal to speak ol balls 
frequented by fectoiy girls »* 
"alewen," uid the commoner 
kind ol grisettea aa eaiieo or 
dollar balls; hence raJMo-toUy 
baa come to signify, wben ap- 
plied to a Toang gentleman 
disalpttted or bat, one who goea 
anywhere for amusement. 

And I little hit nUaiallj: 
A pictuR-card-out-Df-lhe'puJt ydOAs nwDi 
And (raqiHiitIr mniic-luJl;. 

—Ctmcirt HmaStmc. 

C*Uca Twd (Anatnlian), aUnd of 
corral. The ezpretsioo is osed 
tfj drovers. 

CpUfoniia, CAliforoiuis, money. 

Tern generally applied to gold 

only (Hotten). 
Call (theatrioal), big e<^, a vann 

rtoall before the oartain. 

Chailer pIlTcd iriih all bii old aiiiiiu. 
tidn whI gncc, ud g« ■ tit ealU—Cttrit 
B.Simt: Hal ffa! 

To coU a piece ia to have it 

broDght on in rehearaal after 

a Brit performance with a view 

to alterations. 
(American), to have the ooU, 

to be preferred, have the chance, 

to be wanted. 



CkU-a^o (street patter), to leave 
ofl trying to sell anything and 
to remoTO to another spot, to 
desist. Also to give in, yield 
at any game or 1 



Calie (American thleTea* alang), 
a woman's gown. Gorman He- 
brew IcalU, a girl 



(American), a sere- 
nade after the fashion of a cba- 
rivari, in which old kettlee with 
sticks, gridirons, cows' hotna 
or tin boms, penny tmmpets, 
or anything that will make a 
horrible and discordant sound ia 
employed. It is poesibly from 
the Yiddish caBe, a bride, and 
means bride-thnmping or mak- 
ing a noise at a bridal, or bom 
"(»ll"and "thomp." 

Hwlnunn gM nuirifd. . . . Kit- 
BBUw't iKighboun thought it voald ba 
■ brifht thipg to Eive him a ealli*iktim- 



it under hii window 



■nd b 



diuker-beUl, aod 
bny«d on their bark honu Lili then ww ■ 
pause. Theo Hutmaim Hock hii bikd 
ouleo the winder and laid: "Fricodi, 
Ronuni, and re1low.ciiiKni I I thank ytn 
for the honour of this duuc>I tnac, whidk 







Call-party (bar), given in ball by 
stndeuta called to the bar in tbe 
Middle Tcm[le. 

Calp, kelp (old cant), a hat. 



:v Google 



Cambra — Canard. 



Cinbn (tinka), & dog. 



Cwnd's cofflpUat (oil?], tbe 
bnmp, i«., low spMla. 

Camett (UiieTM), » ahirt or 
chemise. From the Spanith or 
lUduu. Written aleo inuio, » 
An>c*n from the following 
qnotation. 



Cwiqt-liorse (AuatraliaD). This 
teiin, pBOollM to the But, to 
thus ezplBlned bj Hr. Unch 
Hotton:— 

Both my bnther mi FmiUt wBt Tcry 
•mid handi ■[ caitiiic otu, and Hity wcic 
both ridim fint-nu "CTmp-hona," » 1 
ntehcd [hem at woA wilh lh< gnteu 
inlcRA. A etim^Mtnt u ODa uxd for 
culting oat cillle sa ■ cuap, ind very fiw 
hom ve load at it ; bnl die perfonnuce 
of « renUy fiiil<Eui one ii ■ tight worth 
kcIdi. Each mui piclu hii beut, and 
edgei him gently lo the ouuida of Ih* 



draft-m 



. (miUtary}, 
empt; bottlei 4Dd hayonets, 
from the fitct that Id the exi- 
genoiea of milituj lite tbeie 
uiioles ue often used for the 



»[heiir 



Tha i 



11 Ihaai 



—Aiimtrik: Ratk m fd. 

Camister (popnlar), a deigy- 
man, from hto wearing a wbit« 
gownj "caminted," i.t., one 
who to drened with aihiit oat- 

Cunp, to (AnstTtilian), to floor, to 
put down. The metaphor here 
is the same as to "make," to 
"take a back seat;" totaxnp.ia 
make to utMp, implying that 
your rival cannot itand up to 
yon. According to Wright camp 
to a piovinclaliim meaning to 
oontend, from the Anglo-Saxon 



TbcR'i DOihinf out cm coik/ him ; 
He luu. la flct, Ifae •lonch and dros 
Which bullock.<lriw Mamp him. 
—H. KtmdmU: BOfy yitkm. 



Ill off Irom the camp, it makn th* 
uiBH uaperale Edbni lo rejoia the beid, 
and the (peed at vbich a buUsck an 
UnTil, and the activity oiib which ha 

AJetoKt AtutraHa, 

Can (American), a dollar ; a 
" canary " was very old Bngttoh 
■lang for a gold coin. A gold- 
piece to also called a " canary- 
bird " hi New York. 

Canard, now recogntoed. French 
tcMard, literally dnck, and meta- 
phorically false news. The 
first eanard to said to have 
been the famous story lllos- 
trating the roracity of docks. 
Thirty daoka were token, one 
was chopped up fine, feather* 
and all, and the others ate It. 
Then a second was minced, and 
ao on, till within an boor onlyona 
daok remained. Three similar 
stories are told by a French 
writer as to the origin of the 
term. Henoe eanordcr, to hom- 
bng or spin yanu. "Donner 
del emonb" is given in Hantel's 



:v Google 



Caftard — Camsier. 



DioUoui7(i8o8) wltb tb« meu- 
Ing of t« deodTS. 

' uid Hn. SMMt to ba 




and palled bjtwo penou (whoM 
hands an bnttered) to giTs it 
proper omslHtaM^, and th«m 
mixed and pulled again, till It 
beoomes true eandf. The term 
la tiaed in alang In many waTS. 

Thf imd sld-fuhiooBd lotBeciai 
kaawD u ■ aia^^iuV hubad BUR cr lea 
otm mini in ii)cut]> tliii iruun. Whu- 



. J by n., I 
(hni rim to Ihc Btnal siwr^, whI hu 
brought into p1«T tbc LmngipatiTg bcaLltcs 
of the " Loodoi Carapaadeu." — S/gri- 
MtTima. 

Cmbmxj (old), a sorerdgu, from the 
ooloor. Froich ttgiA, jaanet. 

CanUT-bird (common), a mil 
tre». (TbieTea), a pilmuer. 

Cwidle keepeis (Winchester Col- 
lege), the Inferiors (all those 
who are not prefects) who IWTe 
been longest in the school have 
certain priTileges, as wearing a 
" oow-shooter," or ronnd-top- 
pedhat. The j used to be called 
"jolly keepers." 

Candlettlck (Winohester CoUc^e), 
aoormptfouofoaudidat«. Those 
who go in for the college entrance 
exMDJnaUop are teemed eaitdie- 

lid*. 

Candlestids (Loodoii), the foun- 
tains at Trafalgar Square. 
Tbe* m hii pillir (Nelmi'O u 
Chuini-CroB, jiut by the cvUlalicit 
(Csuitaini),— J/ifriiw: LtaJtii Lttrmr 
amd llu LttUiK Pttr. 

Caady-poll (American), a mnify- 
puii is a put7 of both sazss at 
wliloh molasses orangaris boiled 



donoemic is tbe ran, im 
iiil(bt bin been tbeii 
BraMjn EmtU, 

Cane(common], "tolajOMeupon 
Abel ; " to best with a can& 

Cane niner (West ludUn], a 
hspf^-go-lncky fellow, one de- 
void of care and anxiety. From 
the olnnuustanoe that in " cane 
time " tlie negroes are ht and 
bt^i;^. As " fat as a Dig^r in 
cane time" has beoome pn> 
verbial in Antigua. 

Canefi (fiuhionable). In the 
summer of 1886, at several 
watering-places, almost ever; 
young lady carried a cone. It 
was orfginaUy an American 
fancy. 

a hat; also 



"eoniifaroap." 


Toming rmnd, I «« my nnrortna.,, 
beinr, a taaUr. u il m c»lled by iha 
(^.TT who I»d i. in thdr keepin,, iSLnd- 


(PugUistic), the bead. 



, Google 



Ctrnk — CammBer. 



223 



CUk (old), dimib, dleut. 

CunilMla (Okmbilclge), the tnln- 
ing-boaU tor the Cambridge 
trflvbnim or the rowen them^ 

Cannia-coTe (Aineriou), > dog> 
fancier. AwotdeoiMutlu New 
Yvk. In Dutch thieve*' alang 
the Latin word eanit i« used 
for a dog, bDt, aa the aooent 
tall* on the last syllable, it is 
thought to be detii«d from the 
French eamieh*. This lathe more 
probable a« the Dntoh word !■ 
limited to nnall dogs. 

Cannon (turf), the colUilon of two 
hoTBoa dQTing a race ; from bil- 
Uaida. Apparently on the titcui 
a ■«« principle, the jocke? bear- 
ing this name (Tbomaa Omuom) 
la oelebrated for his ■crapnlona 
and liotioarable aToidance of 
snohamish^ 
(Common), to 
Into oollldon. French slang 
MrwHbcler, liteiaUr to make a 
cannon at hllllarda. 

Roumc with pun ud tonr, tb* bor 
tammrmtd inlo Ihe nrj hud rf ■ poli™- 
BU, who hUxI bim-SUriv Bruit! 



Canon (thisTea), dmnk. 

Om nictit 1 wu wjlh Ibc mob, I e<^ 
Hun {dnmliX ikii banc (he fint tin*. 

KKn, 1 mad to drink bact.— //««/9 •' 
Jtmaet/frnJalL 

Onion, UteiallT baTing used 
the "oan" freely. 

The Frvich slang for a glass 
of wine la eoaoib CsaoMMr 



Is to drink wine at a wiu»«bop, 
or to be an habitnel tipfder; 
and M Mnowur Is to get drank. 
Cbnaoit Is a vei7 common word 
in German for a drinking-cnpta 
Henoe he la " canonised," he is 
" shot," *.<., he is drank. " Br 
ist gesohossen" (KSrte Pro- 
verbs), The word is natnrallT 
oonfiued with mm, Oerman 
KoMitt, a tankaid, and oofioa- 
eiMi^A, 01 "cannon" («.&, long 
boots), whiob are a common pafr. 
tern for tsjikards . 



a will 90 



—CtmmtmS^H^. 



Canoodle, to {KngHsh and Ameri-* 
oan), to fondle, pet, dally, bin 




Posdbly from " cannie, " gentlft 

Otnoodler (American), explained 
byqootation. 




:v Google 



Cant — Cape. 



Cut (piDgDiitie), blow, a " «mI on 
the oltopa," & blow on ttw faoe. 
(Tnmpa), oxplaiaed bj qnota- 
tloo. 

W* bnil» on window baain tbe bcaH 
WW food Sot m csai^-tbMt't khih toed — 
bnad or noat, ukd Ukejr wouldn't (ivc it 
•tt.—lttv*tw ! Ltmdm Lmtnr mmt Ot 

AlaoB gUt, u a " oont of togs," 
a gUt of olothlng. In these 
MiiMB, from eant, to divide, as 
used by JnsMT, p. 278. Hence 
conl, a aham. 

(Thierea), to oatit the cnea, 
to explain a matter, to tell a 

"Buoctu ihina. WbU wutlw 
jobT" '*A iHiidi lorikfi vmpvnjr't mlimc^ 

UlIiT."-^>» l*t Trmil 



11 (Sontli African}, a road- 
side taTen; natires often call 
aU Uuds of drink canteen. 

Canteen medal (amy), a good 
conduct stripe which is gained 
by absenoe from the defaulters* 
book. The tUosion impliee that 
the bearer owes his stripe rather 
to a strong head than good re- 
solation to keep awaj from the 

Can't say National InteUtEencer 

(American), oqoivalent to s^ng 
"he Is drunk," it being held 
that no one who is not sober can 
prononnoe the name of this very 
old and respectable Washing- 
ton newspaper. There is a 



story in which the phrase ori- 
ginated — or whioh originated 
from it, to the effect that a 
father in Washington who bad 
a dissipated son, always obl^ed 
him when he returned home at 
night to submit to thU test. U 
he said Saaal InieOaieer, he 
was obliged to sleep in the hay* 
loft of the stable. 
Canned (American), a Canadian. 
The origin of this word ai^ieats 
to be unknown. The derivation 
from QiKMiaigki, an Irishman, 
is far-Ietched and doabtfnL 
It may be possibly the first 
syllable of Ciinada, with an In< 
dian termination, but this is 
mere conjeoture, Ve or m^ is 
a common Algenkin ending to 
Donna. It is probably an Indian 
word modified. 



Canfvs tom (popular), tho por- 
tion of Wimbledon Common 
occupied by the flags of the 
riHemen when encamped there 
— within the flags. 

Cap (thieves), a false cover to a 
tossing coin. To mp, to assist 
as a confederate, especially of 
cardsbaipers. See Capfsb. 
(Universities), to tap tbe qund- 
rangle, to cross the area of the 
college, cap In band, in icvcrenco 
tn tho "fellows" who sometimes 
walk there. 

Cape cod turkey (American), unit 
Hsh. In the name way a " Yur- 
monlh capon" is a bloater. 



:v Google 



Capella — Cap. 



C«pdk (tlmarioil], RooU. Fram 



C^MOtI (ooater), dok, seedy. 
C^wr (Ameilcftn), a ddvloe, Ida*, 
at iDvuitiou. 

LxiItrT ■«! DsIt nikad tha Chi— 



" Tha propa captr," the last 
fuhloDable fancy, the latest 
" coMu >IA«' devloe," 

Ulod'ttadiiic li nov Ultf ym/rr SMfrr. 
"Tok* bold of ny left hud ud uU dm 
vliai I'll thlnVlnj gf," nU (ha luad oT 

yo," Mid the, trupini hii hand codtuI- 
^•riAf, " )mi Art ■fciftV-wj ibout takipg mq 
l« h»ir Pud." Siitimi la putt tftia.— 
BtttmHtnU. 






<StreeU), devioe, c 
for a living, 

"Ai» joojfflii'iiioiiin'T" "No." . 
"Tha vbu trnftr uc yoB up lol 
Crtamtd; Tlu Littli Rmgmxt^ffitt. 

Caper-Mtncs (oommon), to "i 
vaptr-^oM*;' to be haiiged. 

Capeia (thievM), "memliaiit 
captrt," & dancer. 

And By Mhtr, u I'n htud i^. 



C»pptx (American thlerei), ex- 
plained by qaotatioD. 
GubUwi «k ^Ued kai^fati of the (n« 

ckxh, ud ibtir Uiutcnanu, vbo an hoi 



Captofai Coppertbonie'B crew 
(dd BlangK irbeie ereiy one 
wiebee to rule the loaat, or to 
takeoi 



C^taioCfank (oldoant), faMd of 
a gang of highw^meu. 

Captain Hacknm (old dang), a 
blnatering bnllj, a Bombaates 

Captain UeBtenaiit (old dang), 
the fleeli of an old oall^ meat 
that waa neither Teal nor beet. 
Thia phiaae waa of milltaiy 
origin, and waa a simile drawn 
from the offlcei of that deno- 
mination. These men, whUe 
nnking as captains, only drew 
the pay of a Uentenant, and 
though not full OKptaiBM weie 
aboTe the Uentenanto. 

Captain Qoeenmba (old alaog), a 
man who was shabbily drened 
and ill-conditioned. 

rfp**'" Shaip (old slang), a 
ofaeat, blaokleg, or oommon 
gwindler. 

Captain Tftm (old slang), tha 
ringleader of a mob. Bome- 
times also the mob itself was io 
called. 

Cap 70Qr tncky (American 
thieves), raa aw^. 

Cap jonr aUn, to (thierea), to 
•trip naked. 



:v Google 



236 



Caravan — Carmy. 



1 ilaBe:), k kig* 
cmn of monoj, alto • peTKn 
■windled out of » Urge anonnt. 
(PngUlaUo), ft ntlm7 tnin, m- 
peolallr • train ezpreMlj cluu- 
t«i«d to oohtbj poople to « 
pilM flgbt (Hotton). 

CanLTanaerml (pngiUaUc), * nC- 



Ouvo (Wtnohwta), < 
quotation. 




Carcoon (Anglo-Indian), a oleik. 
from the Hahratta k^ltdK, a 
oleA (Anglo-Indian Qlosaaiy). 
Mt boKbctor't dikf urw- ■llMnd 



Card (popular), a ohanoter. A 
man ma; be a knowing, a down;, 
ram, or abifliag tard, or queer 
■ort of tard, aooordliig to olr- 



H ihu he tot na io. 



And, on ll» durg* of ( 
Wu bnaibt bdbn i 
H< duffed th> g 

So (MtT ifailluifi ha wu fioei]. 
Or «1h ■ monili wiih hud. 
— C. HrrJKtib : Ti4 Fryait ''"• 

(Common), a derice, nodn- 
taUng. A atrong Mnf, an nn- 
dertaUng likely to anooeed. On 
tbe «ardt, likely, probable. 

CanUnal (American), a lobster ; 
cardinal hash, lobster aalad 
(New York Slang Dictionary), 

(01d),alad7'eredoloak. Now 
mnllad rod wine. 



BoldwW/" 



Cadiciiet, c arii enM (American), 
U*^T tiicka, oapara. The d«al- 
Tallriiifiiiiii iiiiilj ami iniiiiiiiiimi 
to be doe toamaia reaemblanoe 
in aoimd, and an arbitcaij oom* 
Unation. Bartlett«nggeata«ara- 
coI( (ITrenoh), anagnuna bdng 
common in oolloqcial language. 
The old word earie-eot, or ovit- 
eof, a male cat or kitten, may 
bare inSuenoed the fwinatiaa 
of wHkiui. 

Caniea (popular), to heap up oa- 
naaee, flatteriea, oompUmoita^ 
and blandiahmenta, with tlia 
Tiew of deoeifiag the peiaona 
on whom they are larlahed. nia 
deilTatloD iafrom eonif or oa*r«, 
a hei^ cs pile of itonea. A 
aimUar idea led to the naa of 
thephnue, " pile ap tbe agony." 
Theword is alao "caimea," evi- 
dently from the gypey fcfeu, 
oftoi pronoanoed harmt, mean* 
Ing loTOi, likea, pete, Ac A 
U« or lant, which ia nearer 
to the Sanskrit, Ii a dedre, a 

Carney, flattery, hypocritical lan- 
guage. Supposed to be of Irish 
origin. To Minwy or come tbe 



:v Google 



Carmsk—~CafTmn~htaUer. 



227 



opfcobrioDv 

•ppeDation *pidlcd to & Nftdent 

it one of the Northern Stataa, 

Carnlah (thlerM), mntt, from the who kftar the dril Wftr of 

Italian cnnu; aaniMl-ken, a 1861-65 foaia^tA to the Booth 

thtorea' eatlDg-hoiiBe. In the foi tempoimij leddenoe, and 

n!«tiohBip>t"aanie''li tongfa the promotioii ot peraonal and 



C«»b(tliifcfa},tocnt. 



Caipet-bag recnU (>nD7), one ot 
the better claoa who Joiu with 
Caroon (coetennongen), flve ihll- hii ba^iag*^ whh other elothca 
Bnga. FoealblT tram the Italian in fact than thoM iniriilohbe 



Caipet loommon), to he called 
upon Uie eonwt, or to be c^r- 
IMta), to be Kwlded, leptinuud- 
ed, to have to gire an aooonnt 




Caipet-bagcer (popular), a tenn 
introdnoed Crom America. A 
man who seeka elecdon In a 
plaoa with whiob he haa no 
connection (T. L. O. Daries). 
0(iHxalrtrt-t^lffrrJy u poUtiuL knighEft' 
~ 1 hmd un 



Carpet-nnb (popular), oazpet- 
bag. 

A licOa 9 



Carpet tom-cat (mHitaiy), an 
offloei who ahowB mneh atten> 
tion to, and apends a great deal 
of Ms time in the company ot 
ladies. 

Canier (old), a tell-tale. (Tblerec), 
a icgne employed to look out 
and watch npon roads, at 
taTenu, &o., in mder to cany 
intonnatlon to his g^og- 

Cairier-^Seon (thlerea), a ewtn- 
dler, one who formerly used to 
cheat iotteiy office-keepers ; now 
Qwd among betting-men to de- 
BOribe one who mns from plaoe 
to place with commissions 
(HotMn). 



Synonymous with earpit-bag 



e (popniar), a shirt, a 



:v Google 



338 



Carrots — Casa. 



CmtoU, VMtntj-mh (otounon), 
mJtod to » Tad-hkiicd penon. 

" Han, ooa of yta bojn— JH, CmrrrU 
— nu lo Ih« ■Caai|ia«*t' ud ntl Mr. 
Kidd)! he'inDtad.* A durp, nd-luinil 
bd dwtal off wiih the bohce.— jr«t 
Ltmm: Lmtdmi Lmtl. 

Cmhj, to (old csQt), to tany the 
keg U nid of 0D« MtUj kugvrad. 
An ■lluioii tojtery ipiiita. 

CarfT com, to (ootnmoii}, to beu 
■aoe«w well mad eqiuilly. It it 
nid of » man who braaka down 
nnder a indden acoen of wealth 
— a mcoeMfol bone-ncfiig man 
and unexpected legatee* often 
do— or who become* ao aSected 
and Intolerant, that " he doemt 
vorry earn well " (Hotten). 

CiTf me oat I (American), ao 
eipresaion of inorednlitj or 
affected diagmt. It Implies 
feeling faint and reqniring to be 
carried oat into the freeh aii. 
It would be called forth b7 a bad 
pun, or an impoailble itorj, or 
" blowing ;" of ten preoeded b; 
"ob, good night," and eome- 
time* intensified b; the addition 
of " and leave me in the gutter." 

Cany on, to (oommon), to make 
lore to, to flirt openly. 

AIm to joke a peiTCn to exce«^ 
to baTe a great epree, to be 
UTel;r or arrogant, or act In any 
out of tbe waj manner. 

Theni* ■ line in ihc lift of nny jnonf 
bdy wha iIh fadl Uk* lurrying «. No 
nimv bov nudnt, *fid pioiu, imd trelT 
food • ^ BUT bft »d«ycoiDeiwlKinh» 
fcdi Ufa* doios foowitaiac lidiciiloa, nd 



Cart (torf). an ownai i* said to be 
"intheearl;''oreert*d^when hia 
bor*e ia prerented winning by 
aome band on tbe part of thoae 
in hia emplojinent. Instaooea 
are not wanting wbne the pob- 
lic have been pot "in tbe cart" 
by an owns who reaenta their 
interCBtenoa wttb bia field of 
^eoillation. 

(City.) When two or three 
fdlowa an playing at dominoaa 
or oarda, tba one wbo baa the 
lowest ecore bnt one, at any 
moment of the game, la Mid to be 
"intheoorl" Tbe lowest aoora 
ia oalled " on tbe tall-boaid." 

Alao raoe-oonrBe : " tia te r wd 
the eari," walked onr the 

Cnrted (old), lignifled taken to 
esecQiJon or whipped at tho 
cart's taa 



Cart-wheel (thieve*), flve-ahilling 
pieoe. Fr«aich slang has n>ii* it 
ierriir* laz a fivo-fiano pieoe. 

Carrel (Hew Toik thierce}, jea- 
loos. Probably meaning alao in 
love or wooing ; from earae; to 
make love to. Vidt EalUweU. 

Ca-aa (legal), a writ of Mpiu oA 

Casa, caaer, caner (costermon- 
gers and negro mlnstr«ds), a 
boose, Italian. (Theatrical), a 
boose. Frenob slang has saw 
with the same signification. 



:v Google 



Cucade or liu«<mt (theitrioal), 
•oenlo efleot at coDolndon of 
MMiM or performsnoe. <Fopa- 
bw), to tatcadt, to Tomlt. 

Case (American), a dollar, good 
or bad. In England a bad 
raown pI«o«. Hebrew, kt*^, 
fQTv, t|IJ^ ; henoe ia»A, a liead- 
piece {Lt., a ooin). and the Tld- 
diah eater, a crown, 

(TaDon), " tote of pioklw," a 
hopelaasaajs; "taeisthegreateBt 
COM erermotB," be Ic tbe worat 
man known, or, he ia a moat 
lemarkahle individnaL 

(01d),abrotbeL Alaoawater- 
oloMt. (lUerea), a honae. 

Caaer {thierra), «:zpl^«d I^ 
qnotatioa. Tidt Casb. 

So one mornuig I roonl I did not 

bm morclbu ■ «Mr(fi« ilBlliii*.!- 

amiv ■■ Jtttinpjrrm Ml. 

CMk (aooiet;), a biongham. 

Cms, caaaaa(thieTen and roughs), 
oheete. From the Italian eatia. 
It la reroBikable that thu, the 
oldest slang iat cheese, is still 
current among thleTea in New 
York. It is foand in nearl; all 
the Latin, Teutonic, and Celtic 
luigoages. Id old cant, ooMon. 
It it generallr sapposed to have 
been introdncad by the gTF^Bs. 
Hov'b mffpeck uid esatmt, and jdl of 



• of Dm d 



,:JmmICm 



oaat oC From sam^ to dia- 
oharge, oaihler. Latto, tatnrt, 
to break. 

Caat (popniar). Hen in email 
boata who want to be towed 
behind rteamera aaj "give na 
acait"{Hotten). 

Caatlean'a hotel (Anstralian 
thierea' patter), the Melbourne 
jail, so oaUed from Ut. J. B. 
CaatJean, the goremot of the 
Helboome jail. 



Primtlr'l KitfaJH. 

CMtle-nff (rbTming slang), a 
" flag " or f onrpenoe. 



Castor (common), a bioyole. Pro- 
peilj a small wheel. 

U.T. C , who banc diimi by ■ Udy 

•rboK cuiiiac* *" melcaed by ouli oo 
I, cUmlKd k>1iiiiiiIt dc 



Camiil (common), a tramp or 
poor man, who seeks ihelter 
at night at a workbonae. 

Ihavc,ultMriikorilu)eUD[tb*T«dv 
of daliuu KDiibiUlia, quoted il fall Iha 
Icrmiiii which my ruffianly vnM/ chamber 



CaMan. See Cabs. 

C a ■ ■ i e (printers), wrinkled, 
stained, or outside sheets of 
paper. Old provincial, <»*m», 



Cat (popniar), a drunken, flgbtii^; 
prostitute. ThepucfewfuM/ In 
Frenob, that. Generally termed 



:v Google 



230 Otf — CttA btL 

(BogMt), "mi old «<" ui 
(U lad; of raalidoQ* diii^o«i- 
tJon, vbo bM < 
Immfut, and ii ahrmjB ■ 

db7ai 




KMdetJ who BlWBT* (»• UM -CHtrm^ttUtraSmym^^iK 

tatrit of ft biKM Ukd ii teMtad M< JK>niiv(JUUV 

almiMt Uka one of tba bmilT, . 

H>d who, if > bMhdor, f« not C^ « twb, to (Amenoa). » 

lM>k«d upon a> » HWj .nKor f^.' "^™~°" *" i^***^."" 

ftw €M of the dft^iten. hrt behind .nd taking ■ndagiBtoj 

I*iDiid«g<«»lMeo(«bai. B*tWK«lift. 

tnu U wanted In a hany to Ml "Boh . wi« dn j—r fctWr dat- 

(Thi«*«B), ladj's mnlL To ^,^^ ^*^ 
"fiea a cat," to steal a mnfl. 

TogoonfcalsiidkittMi'-faimt- CatA a MMtcr, to (Auaten). 

ing, U itfHng pewter pots frmn Mine aa the KngiUt " to catch 

pnUioana. (Fopnlar), to " shoot aoab." 

the eat," to Tomit. (Taflors), si« i. ■« *.fc« h-d 0«««iW« 

to "whip the Ml," to work at Mnte-bTPMtB'Bbsowifonbtr ebb, 

priTate hoDSea. (iDlantrj), to \ taat—Smm SBdi : Tii C hdhmatir, 

"•boot the eat." to aonnd the *-/»«-i™,i 

bugle for dafMlten> drill. Catcfcoo •«»«, to(Ainarican), 

^ to meet one s aiqieiiot. 

Cat aod kitten* {tUerea), qnart Id m^ WoMn nBkae* ■ Bu whs 

andpiDtpotL ^itii*" "^ 



Cmtnwamponslr (Amerlean), 
aen»l7,aagertr,violenUj. "Ott- 



platdj defeated, utterly demo- Catc± bet (popdarX a bat made 
Uibed. fer the pnrpoae of enti^pii^ 



:v Google 



Cakhee — Cal^ party. 



lS0tApttltI7 

I. 

Cfttdwe dddgin-BogUBh), to get, 
hare, own, possess, hold " Vlj 
look-seo one pleeee men aatc\et 
chow-chow " — "1 BBw B men 
Mtlng." "HT«t(dlagw»ifo"— 
" I em — or em to be manled." 
"Hj no aaUhet one flin Inside 
•llo t'at honsa"— "I hare not 
CHie friend in all thet famiJj." 



one's chance when he Is trarel- 
llDg or morlng ebont. Also to 
catch nnaWEires. 



cu pUjr (I funt ; 
SappoKy j^tiem no lub mxt, tan no 

—tVaafti. 

Cnteb>'em-alive (common), paper 
smeared with a ttlokj sabstanoe 
tooalchfllee. 



oC raininh thai (ray holy pcnoiugE i 
fer m llT-inp. ud beoute whu ii 
oUcd in iIm niltu longdc ■ i 
'tm-aKtt, O.—Ctuirla DieMnu: i 
DrrrUI. 

Also a smaU-tootb oomb, 
allodtng to the tenants in the 
bair of dirtj people. 

Catch on, ts (common). Imported 
from iunerica; to accept sa 
offer, to noderstand. 

Xwdolph looked nlher puakd u fini 

Imt wb« bt did imtcA « to ihc Areh- 

bubop'i aHuinc, bt bwi ...__, 

on Oh b«k by hu pal ChanbcrlaiD, . 

pnnnt him froa cboking.— /V*y. FbUu. 

" Ton coloA oa," is an ln*itatioD 

to take one's torn, to follow snit. 

(Theatrical}, a plaj is said to 

be sovf M OK when snccessf iiL 

'CatA on the hop, to (common), 
to catch or find one bj taking 



Caterer (popnlar), poor, bad, of 
donbtfnl qnalitj. According to 
Hotten, from the Llngna Franca 
and Italian ooMm, bad. "Well, 
how's things: bonat" "Ko, 

Catfish deatb (American), ani^e 

by drowning. 

CdL "Pu" Donandoon't IHctthcpUy 
ofHunlii." H«u th> doqaeni aflin:- 

tin ilinpr : " I hiTc do jaticiKe, nncb 
Itu lympuhy, with ■ imtchcd wcdilinc 
nboioaiiroand jabberioir u diUpidiMd 

■ I, under bmu! moonlight ; evTrbulin(ly 



Ihm 



iin«, lu 



iving hii (weeihcnrt to Inii 
nad ■ laifitk dtmlk, by hit diBcniui 
Inalu."— CiUnvi) Frai. 



Cat4^ (common), weak drink. 

Cats' head (WinchesteT College), 
the £sg end of a shonldei of 
mntton. 



(huaped Cat** mcst (popular), the Inngs. 



Cats' par^ (familiar), a party to 
which none but those of the 
weaker sex are invited, and at 
which tea drinking and singing 
are indulged in. 



— la ■ r«r ]aAim.—SUmdiird. 



:v Google 



Cote* water — Caitlier. 



Caitf water (popaUr), gin, cat 
being bece maant (or womMi. 

r^l'i rt ill out (pailiMDentu;), 
one of Um three Miiior «ula in 
tba Hoiue of Lcffdi. 

Cnttliur (comnm), TOmltau^ 

Catde (popnlar), a Und One 
talki of men b«ii% " mm eat^," 
" queer odtic," jiut aa ono toUt* 
of a m«n being "a qneec flab" 
or " B doirn; bird." 

And tliii nH I'll lik* Is pmicli ha bod. 
—Kii^ilvGtfJtliiUz Htm W^ 



It mB<r be obearred tliat tba 
doriTBtion of the word bxim 
"oaolkan' la perfectly rational, 
and ba been accepted for noTB 
tban a oentair. Tbere li a pan 
implied in tbe name (" oaalkar," 
a trsmmdoiu itorj, an ana* 
irhslming fdlow) irbiob pn>- 
babl7 aided to mako it pofn- 



CnncM CMt tiw I7 (Amerioan}, 
« phrase borrowed from ball 
ptaj.bnt implied to being Cftogtit. 
Interriewed, or otberwin aireat* 
ed, while travelling. 



CaiwTW (American), lately intro- 
dnoed into BngUnd, origiDall; 
a meeting of politicians ca&ed 
together to debate npon the 
claim* of candidates for pcditi- 
cal ot monioipal office*, and 
^neing to act together on tlte 
day of electlcQ. 

WbU II iwmi ii, u popoUHr onder- 
•teod in EDiUnd, nrcdB no eipbuwiion: 
bDl Ihe carkHU thing Kbotit tbt word b 
lh« iKiiung iiupoaubUirr <^ >Kcrtunuic 
with Apr coUinly iti <vicin Hud derivB' 
li on. T)m BiplautiaD fcovilly pmi b 



"twilkcii'' of BoBaa, ■ 
■hoRlT bdon >b* Wv «( Indepaidmcc, 
ia aoivclr proooIiDE oppeution u Enf - 
lutd, ud llul thi word aroaa bua their 
UMtiBC* in (lu canlkcn' hooH cr " calk- 



Canik, to [naoticolt, to lie down 
on deck and sleep, with cloth«* 

fftf'Orm.r (foalety), a lie, derired 
from a " caoHur," a (tiff dram, 
that takes a oonaidenble deal 
of swaliowing, also *appoeed to 
be derived from "corker," » 
regular rtopper. (Common), 
aittff diam. 

TIm Hobik Mas jwn in bcaitO; in ■ 



■•TiunctloM of (b* FnacfHdGtnmiv 



:v Google 



CautWH — Cayuse. 



233 



Catrtiffii (gauftnl), M17 one who U 
pMnll&rlr dressed, pecoliv in 
bia tuiblts, or eccentrio, some 
ODB who makei himself ridicu- 
lous. Tbis word la m abbreri^ 
tioD of the ezpiwBlOD "aoantion 
to nukes." 



rnSHt*: TiiCim 

Also snytbii^ oat of the 
oommon way. 

Tbdt win ■mint Uiddktei— vbs led 
olT with ■ fint ioaingi of joi — br ciEht 
wicketi ii ui exuaph of od« of Ihfilr up- 
pna, uid wluE ii nlfu-ly calLcd m cmt^ 
tun.—Baiityi MtnlUf Uaiatmt. 

Caratiltiiig: (old), oopnlation. 
From the Lingua TtaxiCMtavaUa. 



CbM->a, ivoperly to "oalre- 
In," a pb»se introduced bj 
Dutch naTTies. Flemiab AO- 
oImh, to MiM-m. Frieiio mImw, 
to calve as a oow, also to t an -in. 
The fidliog portion of earth 
1* compared to a calf dropped 
bj a oow (Skeat). From early 
times glacisra were called hj the 
Datcb cows, and the icebergs 
which fell from tbem aalTe& 
The falUi^ of the berge was 
called oalTing. 

CaTort, to (American), to kick up 
the heels like a horse at play, or 
to act extnmgantlj. 



C&TC-io(American),tofBllin. "A 
metaphor taken," sa;s Hotten, 
"bom an abandoned raining 
shaft," bnt it was nsed la Ame- 
rioa before 1 849. Nowgenemll; 
applied to a b^nre, such as a 
bankmptcy, a ooUapae of stock 
specolatloue, or of political 
schemes. 



11 Ihcrt hAl htta A 

inpnnaaubl* routh* xa wonbip at 
iIk (hiinci of the pntty wimm.—Amtri- 

To move about In an i^mless 



ttHmrU-.Pimat*. 



(ap-conntrr Austra- 
lian), spelt also wUiMi, big, a 
word borrowed from the blacks, 
whloh baa passed Into bnsb- 
•lang, and is generally used by 



"TScni" lud StoK, puntuif to tba 
big booH, "Dobodr bu Lived la the 
*ai m 6m uM Tiumpjr^ — Ehai ii whM tha 
Uacki call it— ainct Mr. Coigrove wml 
. C. Grmitt: B<HM-t4/t i" 



Caston (theatrical), a wig. 
Cajnw (cowboys), a horse. 



:v Google 



Cu (thiaTM), eheew. Bm Cam. 
An CMj dope. As good m au, 
AMj to kcoomplitb. 

CedMT (priaoD), a pendl. 

writ* CHfT qniuur. H> providdl en'ir 
and KilieM(i(|)^>B« *Uch I wiDM Shu 

Centaur (turf), a bondiad pouuda. 

A Uula dicqna far 



Clui, chy, tdui (gjp^. giH. 
woman ; Baaaaj, oU, ft tamale 

CluiiniB, cbum, cbynu (g7p*7)t 
time. Boaar gives this word 
klao for " bOKTen." 

dwl(g7FSj),(iaonOD>ioadldU.'dk 
ac in chorch), a lad, a gTP'T- 
Hottsn ni7B thli waa the old 
Romauj turn for a man, b«t it 



Ccft (turf), mod In referfOiM to 
a racing erent ttaooght to be 
aboDt to luiTe a inooeaifiil Isnie. 
A nun vha vai banlnitd irith debt 
Heard t,i*T*mad horilybtbt. 
Bnl what tbould han *aa 
So badly did na 
Thai quiddj ihioHuihad ^''^tbt" 
—Biri,-Frtti*wu 

CertalotiM (printeri). Bm Uh- 
OKBTAINTUB. ATnlgarism ap- 
plied to infanta of the male mz. 



Chaffer {popular), tbe nurath; a 



Ckilava te7P*7). I toocb. 

Cbal drach (tinker), a knife. 

Chalk (turf), unknown or incom- 
petent. The names of moat 
jockeja are printed on alldM, 
which an kept readj at every 
raoe-meeting for insertion in the 
tel«g»ph-boatd. Foimnlr a 
certain namber of elate or black 
Blidea were nsed, n that Um 
name of a new jockej could at 
once be written thereon in cAoU^ 
Hence "a cAoU- jocke j " came 
to mean one unknown, or nn- 
favonrabl; known, to fame. His 
name waa not oonddeied worth 
printlikg. (Common), onksowu, 
obaonre. 



have « drink. 



CbaDc ■ fum (rbTmlng alsng). 



:v Google 



Chalks — ChatHpagne. 



drink* OMWomed in adrinUng 
boat, b; toribbling tlwm down 
with dua npon the mU. 



AIm "long ekotti," origlDaUj 
an expression nied by bmon 
onl7, •Unding to the obalk lines 



' t wiiliit mold up>a illmioe,' Eiowled 



Alao the l^s. To " walk one's 
dbOt," to go away. 

Hm priBiwr hM bbriaUd hb pilfrin'* 
•air, la qmk idcDiiSollir, aad penuobo- 



(Common), dbiU it op, put it 
to myacOoont. 

Cham (Kjpsy), cheek, leather, tin. 
Chammfrdino, a slap on the 

Cbwaberiain (Winchester Col- 
lie), the brewei of the college 
and school 

Chamber of Hottoib [hrliamea- 
tary), the PeereBBea' gallery at 
the House of Lordi, from it> 
being railed ronnd as if It con- 
tained obJeoUonable or repnl- 



Chalk, to (nwitioal). to make one 
pay his footing or stand treat 
At lea it is the enatom the Orrt 


l-hen could b« » doubt u la Ihe u- 
knowQ u lh> CUmitr>fHtrrtr,.~lMil, 


time a new comer goes np a 
mast for amne old hand to chase 
bin np and tary to get near 
eoongh to him to ataU Us 


Wtmt. 

ChMnm, (*»iet7), champ.en^ 
termed also " cham." oi " boy," 
andiometlmes"aM." 


oomer Is ezpeoted to pay toi a 
bottle of ram. 


ChampagBC Charley (popnlar). 
any dissipated man or notMl 



Chalk np^ to (AnstiBliati slang, leas 
frequent In England), to debit 
to a person. Undoubtedly the 
expcesalon arose from the cnstom 
of the keeper of an ale-honse 
Hf ""g a note of the Tarions 



drinker of " fin." The name of 
a song whioh qtpeared In 1868, 
which was set to a rery pleas- 
ing and original air. The origi- 
nal Ckaiiqi is said to bare been 
a wine-merchant, who was in 
the habit of mal 



:v Google 



236 



Champion — Chaptl. 



battles of dtamfo^M to aU hi« 



Cluunploti, very oommonlj aaod 
in Ametica to signif; pre-emi- 
nent; An exen>plu7 hnmbi^ 
ia described u " a d^mpiim 
fraad." A noiay csndidkte for 
office vu denonnoed bj & Chi- 
cago newspaper as "the ckaat- 
pioB gas-bag." 

Cluunp np, to (popnlar), to teai 
np, pnU upwards. 

O"*"*^ (tailors), one wbo exag- 
gerates, or lies. Also one wbo 
attempts anftbing and Is in- 
oompeteot. 

Chancery. To get a man's bead 
into eAanoery is to get It under 
;oar arm so as to pommel it 
at ease. The allusion is ob- 



Chaoce the dncka (popular), an 

ironical phiaeOEigDiffiiig "come 
what maj " (Hotten). 

Chance yonr arm (tailors), try, 
let it go, chance it. 



Chaney-eyed (popnlar). with bnt 
one eye, or eyes like those of 
a Chinese, as dUney is some- 
tlmee used aa a oormption of 
China. 


It >■ HK-hn I 
GmfUc 


.n»aT,wbonFl<iai(h< 
.•■«]l..jr«i~ori*«0- 
ilh w>opuiiio<ilh.-7a( 


Chant (old 1 


sant), an advertise- 



Chant, to (popular), to talk. In- 
form, cry np. sing ballads; Ac; 
eAofitwf-COTa 



Chantera (popnlar), ejnlalned b 



Al long u out aa nnnmber, toofl 
of meD hftvv poubbalated the hiffawajn 
in Ihe froHr monlht, ba[ luilD ncntlr 
Utcy wei« buruiabJy eMmtUrrt wkh a 
]cs«nd of coDUDC ikU lh« wmy ^thb Ubq. 
choter. Bat loog u eidxiKd id modvni 



Chanty (nautioal). "Then an 
two kinds of sett songs : those 
which are soDg at oMioerts and 
In drawing-rooms, and some* 
times, bot not veiy often, at 
sea, and those whicdi are never 
heard off shipboard. The Utter 
have obtained in this age tbe 
name of ctanty, a term which I 
do not recollect Aer having 
heard when I was following the 
life. It is obviously mannfao- 
tnred out of the French word " 
{W. CUtk RusseUj. 

Ch^tel (prlntera). As varions 
reterenoes are made to matters 
arising oat of the cAopd, it ia 
necessary to describe this inatl- 
totion. Tecbnically, it refers to 
tbe meetings of the workmen to 
disooss trade matters, to settle 
disputes, and to oonoider chari- 
table appeals, &c., and varions 
roles are enforced 'tor tbe guid- 
ance of the workmen and main- 
tenance of good feeling amongst 
It has been siu»- 



:v Google 



Ckaptl — Charm. 



tho Ont printing-pren in tbia 
ooBDtry to Weatmiiistw Abbey. 
Tha officers of these cbkpeli 
DsoftUy consist ol a **&ther'* 
and '■ clerk." 



2^7 

Charier (tbievBs), a. gold watob; 
probablj from the old w<»d 
Charieji, the w&toh or » w«t h- 
mu). (Tailors), the nap on a 
"faoed" oloth, also » lonnd- 
■hooldeied Sgnra. 



Chapper-cot [Anglo -Indian). 
Hindn, chajipaT-kSat, a bedstead 
witb coitains. 

Ctmpplt (BOcletj), a term of en- 
dearment in use among the 
" mashen" of woiety wb«n ad- 
dreering their friends and ao- 
quaintatices, macb in TOgae 
lately. A dandy. 



L 1 ul dw old tkmtfu.— 



Chftpt (old oant), thinty. 
Char (gypny), giaaa. 



Cbarlej Lancaster (rhyming 
slang), handkeroliief, pronounced 
" bandkentaer." 

CbarieT>|dtcber(thieTee),one who 
pl^s to win watcliea, or cbar- 
leys. A jpitektr is one who 
works the streets. In San 
Francisco in 1S49 there were 
open-air monte players who 
only took wstchea for a bet. 
A sharper who entices country- 
men into playing at some 
swindling game, snch as 
"prick the garter" or "thimble- 

Charity Pracot (rhyming ikog). 



Charge, to (Winchester College), 
to ran at all speed. 



Chariot-bozxing; (thieves), pick- 
ing pockets in an omniboi. 

Chailei, his friend (theatrical), 
the walking gentleman, or s«- 
OMidaiy interesting yonng man 



It wu tht dnty of ibi 
thi bomi, but Do Tokc of uij npliiiit 
CAariii Ud n jtt Hauted th< an ol 
Lamy.—run^iii Diet, rr tMt Situ- fi 

Charliea (Whiohester College), 
thlok'atring gloves, called thus 
from the Bev. Charles Orifflth. 
(Fopnlar), a woman's breasts, 
also " babbles," " dairies." 

Charm (thieves), a picklock. 



:v Google 



238 



Charpoy — Chaunted. 



Charpoy (Ad^ - Indian), «z- 
pUned bj qnotMioD. 

We mwt Hod dova to iha Imbbt, aad 
fM tahlM, diain, Mul Alai/fri(b*dKckdiX 
—tf. H. KtaaU: Mf Diart b, t„JU <■ 

Clutnhom, cbenhoin (tisktr), %. 



Chats (theatrical), propertMa ; 
Ehort for ohatteU. (Popular], 
Uoa. In thla smoe AaU ia pn>- 
bablj fiom cXatd, meauiuig 
catUs. 

<8took Ezobange), London, 
CbathuD, and Dorer Railway 



Charter the bar, charter Oie 
g rocen , to (Ameriaan), to bny 
all tho liquor Id » grofrgerj or 
" ram-mill" and gire it awaj 

freel; to all comen. This ia Chatta (Anglo-Indian), 
not an nnoommon ocoiurence brellL 

in the Soath and West. 




Chatterers (oonunon), the teeth. 



Chatter hroth (old ilang). a t«a 
party. 

Chat^ (pc^nhir), fllthy, looay. 
A ehi%, a lonsy penm ; a 
"ekottjr dow," a bed with rer- 
min. Yide Chats. 



Chat (thieves), a honae ; from 
chattels, or ohttean. 

E had not been al Salton ywj long bdbn 

Al^(hau>eXB when the had got ■ littk 
mr up the 4oable (tuning), I pnticd 
(wmi) iniD iha houM.— X». /. W. Han- 
lf!j.tth>e,/romJmL 

" That's the chat," the proper 
wotdstODie; the state or facts 

Hu the (CBEhiuD aor ri^l to be in 



Cbaimt or dutnt, to, to takemnth- 
lesa horse* to Eaiia and aell them 
bj false repreaentatlona. 
jKVFinlnDd and Tool HonboU . . . 



■m.—T»tKiinri I 

To cAiHiM the play, to ex- 
plain the tricks and derlcea of 
thieTea. 



:v Google 



Ckaunler — C/uapsufe. 



«39 



tr (rtreet), a miui who sell* 
twlladt, laat dTing ipeeohM, to.. 
In tho atreeta. Street bftllAd 

imiied fCDcnllr by b ciounter. The 



A dealer who takes worthleu 
boTMi to tain and uUb them 
bf &l«a repreaentationa. 

Chaimter-Ciill (street). There are 
tb;iiiBterB who canj on a trade 
In Londoa— though the head- 
qoacteta appear to be In Bir- 
mingham — who write bollada to 
order on taj anbject, to be song 
In the atreeta, on OTents that maj 
interest the public : miuders, 
execatloDS, elopements, breaches 
of promias, anicldea, or horrible 
railway aocidenta. The hoDO- 
lariom paid to these seU-at;led 
poets ia laid to tuj from bslf- 
a-down (the minimnm) to three 
half-crowns (the mazimnm). 

Qwnreriiic doans (theattioal), a 
prostitnte. dutiaering ia oant 
for aeznal intercourse. Also, 
"ocdnmbine, koofka." 

duutrerlng moll (old cant), a 
proetitate. 



nated aa "Qllea" or "Hodge," 
from the anppoaed preralenoe 
of these patronymics among tiM 
rural population. 
Thi fAovJocw, boDdndi of whon 

mn tht Eu-l'i Uunu, nued ■ ihonc. — 

Smvmf: H.MidUaU. 

Cbaw-bnckt (Anglo - Indian), a 
whip. Hindo, eAobui; gypaj, 

V« HLHiv d«j RjungiTui wai bnmflit 
fgrtb uid fiippcred, lb* due day be was 
bul en jt nlei oT bu feet, jre tbird daj 
ekMHi-hidU, Ml) ft 4th dnib'd iQl he could 
DW tfit, and kU 10 fona ■ wridni is onr 
UB«i for Ropas io,aia.—Halra. 

Chaw over, to (popniar), to repeat 
one'a wonis with a view to lidi- 
cnle (Hotten), 

ChAws or chorea (American), 
small job& The handj man 
doesdbrea. 



VerrwlTU 



be pefiomed, 
called " doins ekjnrt," in the umple Uif 
gatft of the rarm. Thii luckily applied 
oolr to Charlie and Mr. C, who, I belien, 
except durinc Ibe biuiot part of Lha jrcar, 
work the yoo acre farm wllboaL belp- 
" Doiof eAawi," by the way, meaju feed- 
ing the creatarei ataerally. — Piilli/i- 
H'tUi^: TrtHinfu/a Tndtrful. 



Chaw np, to (popular), to flniah 
one up. " Chawed up," done 



Cbawbacon (oonunon), a oountry 
down, a rough, rude, unedu- 
cated matio, a olodbof^r ; 
aometimea coUoquiallj detig- 



:v Google 



Cheat — CAtesemoHgers. 



CbektornDbblas-clmt (thieTM), 
the ^bUows. 



Chee (pidgin), long ; probably bb 
Abbreviation of mnehtt " mDch," 
"ChiM-boy no Btoppee cbee 



Cbee-che«, (gipsy), nothing. Urn, 
BUpBTflnoiu, alio oquiTalent to 
" b« dlant." 



Che«k(< 
pndence. Probably from the 
habit of impudent pencoii of 
putting their tongne in their 
etude 

AlLbough >he wu DHtho- KOod-kwIdnt 

And her viniHt, if luir, onknown and 

Sfac'd ■ d«i(enKU ejB, (nd ms eloqiinii 

And ■ eikttt thu htm MmMhinc 

Sf^mt Tima. 

AIM, ahare or portion. 
Cheeks (oonunon), the posterior. 
Cheekf taommon), impudent. 

BOT> gin mc ■ ggod dal olungyvice, 
IheTBn B voTf^jvi^.— Jf«>«n..' ttn. 
d*n LmitnramJ U4 LttiJtii Pim: 

CheeM (Rociety), ■• qnite the 
thttte," Taried to the " StUtOD," 
or "real Stilton," ■ynonymon* 
with quite the thing, from the 
Hindostani oi Anglo-Indian Ait, 



UUug. 

aa a deriaire nickname foi anj 
man who haa pietenidoiia to' 
being imart. (Scboola), aa 
adept; cme boy wiU talk of 
another being an awfnl ektem 
■t bowling, fivee, Latin veracM, 
fto. (R. H. Academy), hard 
eketat, eqaivalent to "hard 



at billiards, 
it, leave oK 



(Popnlu), cktat 
A oomptioa of 



HI, I ■ 



(Thierea), "tktat your barri- 
Un," hold yonr uoiae. (Nine- 
pins), the ball. 

He Atnl 111* duiugcd «I«h ikuuBing 
—CrtH m i d .- Tiit,Rar,&'Ci. 

Cheese boxes (Amerioan), the 
nickname given by irreverent 
ConfedemtoB to the iroodada of 
the HonitoT type then (at the 
time of the Civil War) juat 
invented. They, however, apoke 
even a* disrespectfoUy of their 
own nnsncceBaful attempts at a 
similar class of vessel, calling 
them " tindads." 

Cheese-cutter (common], an aqoi- 
Ilne nose; also a large, aqoare 
peak to a oap. Chtete-euittn, 
bandy legs. 

Cbeese-knire (army), sword. 



, once a popular 
name for the First Ufegnards 
(Botten). 



:v Google 



Cheese'toaster — Chew. 



Ch teie t o Mtcf (kmj), » iwoid. 



Che wy (gooiety), excellent, anurt. 
Tmried aomeUmei to "nr« Stil- 
ton," wUob might be nid to be 
tlie cqitan powei of cAcojr. 

Cbe • mnck (AmwiIou), food ; 
taken trom the Indluu of the 
Noith-We«t, knd now cnRUit 
•moDg the mineiB. 

Cherpin Uytnrer (tinker), bjok. 
" Cherjm Appa«n to be vnlgw. 
Ugattr wu on aecond thoogbt 
declared by Owen to be the right 
word." OmUo, UdtAar. — TKt 
&gptia. FwIc.Ltbbeih cazBPS, 
teUng fwtnnet. 

Cbenr (thierea), a young girL 

CbeRT-banu (onny). Vidt Bun. 



Chenr-nwiiT-bunboo (Ad^o-Id- 
dinn), ft beating,* term probably 
inrented by infferen witti very 
thick bidet Indeed. 

Cheny pie (common), thli term 
waa fonneily used with the 
•ense of the more modem 
" tut," or girL 

Chenr-pipe (thieves), a woman. 
Pipe U rhyming slang for ripe. 

CbenT-rip« (rhyming dang), a 



Cheatnnts (American and Bng- 
liah), an acclamation nsed in 
reference to ctale newa 

The Ihint'i gat lo bloanuB' lUlt, I ml 
■Inid jDu'd ytU ci£$limli u nu if I bU 
mnythia'.—Sfartii^ Tima. 

Chete (old cant], thia word waa 
eztenslTely used by the va- 
grant oluMi in reference to 
anything. Teeth were called 
" ctBcklDg " or " cmnohing 
t\tUt," BWine " granting elieUt," 
a knife a " cntting elutt," at 
the gallows a " hanging" or a 
"topping lAete." To strike 
some eJLett, to steal something. 

This word is used as an affix 
in the formation o( namaa 
(Tnmer), and is equiTalent, 
not to the gyp«y tngro, wbioh 
means an active agent, but to 
mgrte, denoting '* a thing." 
Thus nab-diat, a hat, literally 
a head-thing; a eaeUing^dUU, 
chicken ; kearinff - theUt, ears. 
Possibly of Gypsy-Indian origin 
in common with the Anglo-In- 



J in gypsy of "a rag, a 
bit, a piece." It may, however, 
be deriTed from the root of 
thattd; Jf. E. chatd, property 
(also cattle) ; Old Prench eatd. 
This woold lead to the Low 
Latin eapitaU (Skeat), but there 
Is possibly a different root in 
common with the Westmore- 
land Aal, a 
thing or bit. 

Chew (prison), a bit of tobacoo. 

A piec* u laiti u ■ bonc-bcu, alltd 
m c*iw, a R|iird«l u u iqiuttkiit fgc 



:v Google 



Gm mrrtd.- Gatt BitJi ai Ijun- 

(Ameriou), to «i«w tnmOt, 
eipreMlng Tezatlon. 

Sir, ^ TOO ka» li^ tiiily luk to bi 
laclL u KbooL Ccnld Otm nqHlt 1 
liu. U ta.-S/nm/UU R^tMiam. 

Chewgah b«K (AnstnUaa tdaok- 
feUowi), tho wild bee'i Mora of 



Chewitv the end (oommoD), the 
habit of chewing tobmoco. It It 
oniioiu to not« that amongrt 
tba tttmen u)d atock-keepen 
of Snirey tho cmJ ia called t, 
fuid— hei)0« perbapa " a gvuJ of 
tobaoco." 

Chewing the ng or fu (anny), 

grnmbllDg. 

So™ of tba "ImcnriDt blolia," fnm- 
■ml uionc whom will Ix the '-graiaai,' 
will, in nil pntubiUiT, be c/umimg Iki ng 
rrJkt—BnmUa Pmtltrfm: Lffi i» UU 
RamJa. 

Chew it, to (oowboTi), to oat. 

Chic (todetj), elegant, daahing, 
perfect. French, ehic. Tot the 
Tkiloaa ngnlficatlona of the 
French word, vidt Barrire'a 
" Atgot and Slang." 
On of ib> nsM Mt fimciinii tt iha 
piaaii Kuon in Puis wu iba diniKr (inn 
lut WfdiKkJsT b7 Ptincoi Ualhtldc— 

Chice. Yidt Shicb. 

Chicken (Anglo-IndiaD), embnii- 
deiy. Chiektn-willa, a pedlai 
of embroidery. Feraitu), cAOia, 
Alt needlework. 

(Ccmmon), a term, applied to 



■iVtbing joaag, amall, or ia- 
(i^CBiiti "ikidxn etakea," 
■mall paltry (take* (Hottea^ 

CUeken- botcher (old da^}, k 
ponlterar. 

Chicken fiKings (AnMrioao). 
BartlettdefiiMa tbia aaeUckan. 
bioaaaee, bat U 1* often need to 
denote obiokena pcei«ied inaar 
way. Tbe oouffion ezpraaaion 
" oom-bread and omnmon dolna, 
or wheat -bread and (4Mm- 
jCxtiu," InUmatee aa mncb. 

Chicken Nabob (old alang). If a 
man returned from India with 
a larger fortone than £sajaix> 
or j^ec^ooo he waa called a 
dudeat nabob. 

Chickericarr core (ooater), an 

exceedingly aharpman. 
ChMke (roogha), a atreet aalnte, 

a loud word ^ beat^ pnlae, a 

Noir }(iiB in ■ fU./J«— (ba 

JoIIt «• all Uh«, 
I'm off with ■ putT to dw Vic. 

Chicked (taihua), chaffed on> 
merdfolly. 

Chik, chick (gypey), dirt, clay, 
BBhee, Band. CkiOii eenai, ob- 
jecta of earthenirare. Sir 
eiOJUo. all dirty. 

" Babdaai Mdoi ikonTa, 
Tc Ui min iui d&k 
Su kilo mOllo wiHicur 
T* ptoo, aUla cUW— 
"I mt Ihcn nloo*, ind all oiia oonld i« 



, Google 



Children's shoes — Chincht. 



(An^o-Indian), ui abbrevia- 
tion of dUdw>, or f onr rnpeca. 

CUMrea'B ilioei (popnlu), to 
"make AiUrtn't Aoa," to be 
nude nought of (Hotten). 

ChSI, to (popnlar], to warm. 
From the expreMion to "take 
the o*ai off;" "ohUled beer" 
tat warmed boat It a ver; nsnal 

Chilo (pidgin Englltb), child. 

IHi«-Wuii, )h ph^rau n, 
Ha nDr wom diiU aflo Cutos, 
Hi ittal b* mMhe pickhnB mio, 
An' IhknR* cat b> bllu lio. 
Habeluw.cb<>wiip.u'"Kow,''I>aiH, 
"Hj-uooit: wlwrt he meojwtii bcl" 
— Tkt Stnt 9fFif '*''V- 

immneny (g7l«7). 

lething, aoTthlng. ZWtnandy 

CMMORjr, "OiTe me Kimethiiig." 

CUmiiqr (thievet), jnalslng a 
pMHMi or thing that la nn> 
woTthr, for the pnipoM of 
getting oS a bad bargain. 

CUmlejco (popolar), Plmlleo. 

UroB'n ttoppios 
Dowa in Wapp'iBf , 
RoHfli Row, or CkimUjK*. 



CUmnej ckopi (old ilang), a 
name given to a negro. 

C himn ey-pot (oommon), a eilk 



in a ftw Rconds in th* following lu 



nd it opn. Tba pUca oo it, bria 
nwaidi, a hat or th* " tid mtmj - f tt 
I,' isd lie Ihe foot earuen ef I( tofellw 
I Iht CTOwn of it. The ankle u pn. 
parvd maj then be Ihitrwn to the dtownlBf 
ixnon ; or. beller Hill, it nixj be uken to 

ymriHy Pmftr. 

Chimney - nraep (common), a 
black draught. 

CUo (American thierM), a chad ; 
probably an abbreriation of U»- 
ehttt. (American), to etia, to 
obat. 

Ha waa a woriw, aod liked nfMat 
belter than tofel into a dida oT joaa^ 
CDW-punchen aod t/ttm and ioth wilk 
them.— ^mdl.- Sad^t amd littttiim. 

((^pay>, to cot or write. TU* 
aoggeste the Indian cutting or 
graTingoU letters on palm-leavei^ 
In. {Hindo, cJImA, a aoar.) 
CiHMMdivri, a letter. 



China Street (thieres). Accord- 
ing to Vans, CAi'na Afreet i( 
a cant name for Bow Street, 
Covent Garden— where the 
celebrated police court i* 
dtcated. 

ChiDche, chinta, a bog. The 
anthora of the Anglo-Indian 
Qlouary say that "thia word 
ii now quiti obsolete both in 
India and Boglaod." Bnt It 
baa always been familiarly oted 
at it now !■ In the United Statea, 
not aa an eaphemism, but aa 



:v Google 



^iWt'OUM—~<^MtpM 



wofd. U ia ] 

"bog" wu originalljk BgniB- 

the and pariima potiia iam Ih 



CfaiB-diB(Fldgia-Eiigliifa),at«Rii (Oooiinan Bi^tuh}, talU^ 

darind finm the Mandarin ii«>iiliifjiiiiL 
(•tudard dialMt) ti'Mf, Ciiv; B«. m«. ^. .^ bi.^. i, i., a 

Chntoneac^cA'av, cA'n^,eqDiT»- ilf m i'. [iirl"'»— . 'titI' 

lantto "thank 70a," or apcdUa O thrr -8«lifa1 ctA _c la d* naJn 
"adieu" or adataUon. In "-a-rfc.B-p«». Mofc»l 

[ddgln it U DMd for wonUp, AlaodUtii^. 

pnjer. or to make a raqoeat. 

Ctafaiqna mW (krw tbeatrieal), 

CUa^faopper (popular), a blow Brepcnce. ritmi Uw Italian, 
under tho chin- 

^.. J. .. ^ ^**"" (mncheatec College), a 

CfafaK, dMoa, Choi, dwac ehanoe^ 
(gTpay), the Dtoon. 

^. .. Chfa-wair (common), officioai 

OiBgnKr, cUocera uuP"})! impertinenoe (Hotten). 
qaAi. Hindu. cUiyj, ^nrfc. 

Ch^ (American jooraalisii^. 
Local itema in newipapoa a 



{gTpay), oontraty. 



daf, and aometimca 
tne torn ii applied to the re- 
porter who collects them. It 
a onoe ■nggcetcd in a n 



Chink (thieve.), money. JT^^" '" ^''"•'T^.*^ 

' ' ^ the citf reporten iboDld be 



called " flve-Bix," and the local 
-™™.™-^ editor, ■■■orai-eigbt," in acoof. 

•Tk, Lttty U-m. dance with the well-known 

CUnkera (thievea), money. Ym, u 



To be ■ ihwp Ton omit oat iluiak. 
Bur b« A brick And fpoil jroor eJumk- 



B, Sir BartT-Barly? 



Scm, ci^— luT then snicfat. 



BuiucliiUHl.udlahiiitaifaat flcch, 1 kaeir u eaa ihu ibcr bad (at Kmd, 

So IM 0* MC jtm ckmktn. ud had tnicikad up Ukt ■ bnr of ^aah % 

—TfUr: PkU^ K«a ArtmUt. w I lud u Jim, ■• N» fm let a* do 

Alao bandonSi and ahacklaa SL?^ •"" ^- ^^ "^ 



:v Google 



Chip in — CkiL 



MS 



Odif io (AmwietD). Defined bj 
Bwtlett u meaning to oentari- 
bntflb He give* no etrmolog; 
foi tbe word. It hM sIm 
•notlier meaning, £&, to take 
abares In and oontribnte, as if 
ten men were all to thip tn on 
an J ondeitaking. Bnpposed to 
be derived from "ohips," the 
ootmten whloh represent money 
In gambling. As implTing oon- 
oealment, In a slangy Bsnae, it 
probably ma sometUng to tbe 
grp^ tkipper, to bide ; Hlndn, 
cAtpono. ran diipdtid. to bide 
tbe body, u., one's sell 

QUfiftt (Amerioan), livelj. Poa- 
aibly from " chippton^nB," 
"obip-mnk," or "ofaip-mnnk," 
» proTttbiall/ llvel; little aqnii- 
reli (WnwiH KrtatKt, or striped 
sqninel.) 

Chippy (oommon), nnwelL 



Chips (popular), inoaer. 

She "'■-■"-* Ibr H (b* (*1^ 
Ct^.dit I'm 

Also a 



■air4^ Fntdtmt. 

for a oar- 



CUfido (g7F>J)> * '>lrd. Ammmv 
Mrido, "the gfpfj bird," «.«., 
tbe water-wagtalL It la said 



wagtail he will soon after meet 
with gTpsles. JTdlo cUrido, a 
bladMrd or orow; lometlmea 
prownmoed dUUtM. 



ChUl, ahbU (grpsj), a star. 
OutiA or Mrhi, a star inBomanj, 
may poesibly have eometblng ia 
oommon wfUi tbe FersiBn «AtrU, 
meaning the skj, or tkingk, a 

Chirp, to (thierea and roughs), to 



I firmly rsolved to d^^, when t wh 
bikea bcibn iIm iaa|iurue to firfl vn- 
dcm, u liilic rf poHiblc— /. CnMB. 
a«f.- Tkt Lilllt Xmiamngba. 



Chifper (jottmaliBtic), a singer. 

Thfl fentl* dsuel infbviaed tbv votrn 
ncaliit ihu ifag csgld not ilecp u iil(lin 
tfaimgh tbinkijig ftbool bwalan, mud con. 



Chimper (popular), an additional 
glass. 

CUael, to (common], pioperlj to 
ont close ai in a'bargain, tK., 
to cheat in a small wa;; for in- 
stance, to try to sell second-band 
at Bcdled goods for new ones. 
(Whicbeetor College), to cheat ; 
a ekitd, a cheat. 

cut (Anglo-Indian), a letter, note, 
certifioata.orpass. Itisremarii- 
able that for nearly a oentnry 
different writers in India speak 
of tbe habit of writing notes on 
all occasion*, as if arery person 
In tbe ccnntry were a Hlcawber. 

trcnbla, bol tb* kdia •«mlD hlu tlku— 
Lthmfitm Mmirt (nk At^»^l„iint 



:v Google 



346 



CUn<thlOTM),»knlfe; fasmtlia 
KTps; to Mm, toftab. 



(dub*), OTd«n for drlnka, Jto., 
giToi M olalA 



CUttetlincs (old), tha thlrt frUi 



CUtti ^Tpar), nothing, trifling. 



Chhra feaccf (popular), * 
Mller of ohMp entler;. 



CUttr-fkced (popular), said of 
one who boa a chUdlih look, 
like a oUl OT in&nt. 

Chir (eriT) ^ !">*• pl*M, fix, 
throw. "C9Uvliaadiri"— "Put 
itln." "CW»ll« awl "—"Throw 
it away." " Ohi?ella o chiriclo 
mdii iMtia tan "— " She pata the 
bird into bia cage" (^K," tent"). 
To goad, ohase, drive aboat. 
In tbli aenae probablj' from ehiv, 
a aharp-pointed knife or goad. 
Henoe, the Sngllsh slang word, 
to "ehivy." "Ckit apH," to 
pat or throw np^ 

(Tinker and Romany], a point- 
ed knife. In gjpa? generall; 



CUvaliT (old), ooItioD. To do an 
aot of ehimUiy, to have con- 
nection with a woman. More 
modem ia to " ride," with the 
•ameaenee. OldFrcuohwriteia 



Choodate gmte (nantioal), a fariak 
N.W. wind off the Weat ludiea 
and Bpaniih Watn (BmTth), 

Cboke-jade (turf), a dip in the 
oooiae at Newmarket a tew 
hundred jarda on the Cambridge 
aide of Uie numing g^ in the 
Ditch. 

0. to get 



^ mr dorl Wbr, (in '« poddiss 
crtiK, okc, Add dumplinfi of toot on 
Dukidf u bfl ■DTB."— /'h. 

Choker (^laon), a oeU. ViA 
Choxj. 

IVmniBM* ^m pouis botohu 

pm oouidi tha door by tba primrni, ond 
u ■ rail he ou iDiBmirily isHcbad of u 
eUbr ter Mcaliiic food mtod^ be Her 
Utjan"! pwi. CVArr had do Una ht 
tbit OuDctij buriitfi— h( nUbcr Ulud it. 



:v Google 



Choker — Choops. 



247 



Halo 



Ml 



With fik ftiO mU^ tbu It 
Ai if bi'd nallond for m bn, 
Or br iniitikt, iba liitdia pokv. 

"WUta-ahilxr," a white tie. 

W( ban whu Huffenl olb ■ wb'te- 

titttr^Buata^y.—TJimdttr^: Tin 



pline. <3ie^ la Anglo-Uindn- 
ctani, derived from aAaait', the 
market - place near the gtite 
in which Orientali, like out 
mediKTali, lodged their cap- 
tive*. 

Chokidar (An^ Indian), a watch- 

dant. 



Britktn, BaeA Ijt/tr. 

Id prieona A«kt) refer* ipeoi* 
all7 to the pmiiihmtat oeU. 

(Anglo-Indian), a obair. 
IXa'i ibm tbvkU bvi b tvot borrm 
elatrrand uH ■» it na'l dA-framo 
HmiUmgiUG. VnuUlvt. 

Al*o a police station, a onstom 
or tcdl hODM. Hence watohing 
or mounCiDK snard li called 

Cttold, or ctiohde, the guard-room. 
The lock-Dp or prison for mli> 
oondneted or dmnken •oldters, 
which is part and parcel of the 
gcard-hoiuei and nnder the 
ohaige of the bairaok guard ; 
generallj a dark, gmssome 
place, with no f omitaie bat the 
guard bed, the "lltUe eoldat" 
of the Fienob anoj, a standing 
wooden erection, fixed, and on 
a slope, with a raised wooden 
ptnow at one end. It is the 
father of the plank bad, the 
011I7 bed ixx short-term pri- 
■oneta in modem prison disd- 



Chokra, chnckoroo (Anglo-In- 
dian), aboy, a jonnfcsteT, especi- 
ally one employed abont a hoose- 
bold, or a regiment. 



Mr daHini, Kcini like tb«. 
And «h« fslli an bol the doudi 
That hid* thr la« bom iim.~ 

Cbonkeys (popular), explained by 
quotation. 

CMtnlH^ arc ■ kind of mince nnl bnhH 
Id emit. — ifaykrw : LSK^SK LmAaur mnd 
llu Ltmdtit Ptrr. 

Cbooner (gypsy)' & kiM. Plnral, 

cAflmyo, kiue& 

" Si lOiii cUmfm titan iiiuhli 10 hi 
Tu nasi hab:h bodtakk, dtari a)l "— 
" If kijact of mine ven food to eat, 

Ygb ihodidn't t;a hdofrr loef, m^ 

Choopa (Anglo - Indian), keep 
silence; a oormpUon of Ai»- 



:v Google 



248 



Ckootak — Chons. 



Chaatth (Anglo-Indlaii), null, 
iuJffnldcuit 

Chop (pidgin and Auglo-Indiaa), 
properlj, a Mkl, aUmp, or Im- 
prearion. UMd t« Indioato 
qnality, u in "first diep," i.e. 
■tamped or bnuded, or marked 
•athabeat. Hindu, lA'Up. It 
la oaed on tha SMtem mu alao 
for ccrtUoate, paaa, lioenae, alg- 



Chopper, choppinc blow (boiiiis), 
a iIioTt, downwwd blow with tha 
knnoklaa, daHTored tnun tha 
elbow. Onaof tbemoatclomiT, 
IneffectiTe, and moat easily par- 
ried blowi that oonld be re- 
■orted ta It was nererthalaai 
a ^mnrite with Slaok (oham- 
plon, 1750-60). 

Chopper oo (printer*). A man 
whm miaenble or "down in 
tha dnmpa" is a^d to ban a 



Chop, to (tmf), to beat. Xaaez 
dialect, oiUip, to fiog. I^omsAcip 
or tluif, to cnt. 

AmthH B John DawBB'i Hilila It BkOj 
to h% wny liudj ban, aad tluc a» b 
Hftvlhoni, who cnfttad mdi a nm n t loQ 
trhu iha ditfftd th< iiiishij Sdubiuy 
■I York tb* y-i bi- ■ ~ - 



(Sport), to OQtatrip, oatoh. 



Chop-chop (pidgin), qnich, 
qnloklj, make haste, look ahaip. 
Oautoneee, Up • kSp; Uan- 
dailn, kip-kip. " In Um North- 
ern dialects kwai-kmai, qnick, 
quick, is more nioal" (Biihop 
Moole). 



Chopptne girt (old dang), a Tei; 
jonng female who eshibita 
aeznal preoooity. One who haa 
la eawKgisM, as the French alang 
hmnoronslj ezpreaaes it. 

Cboppj (Amertcan), ^iplied to a 
broken, hillooky oountj. 

Chopa (popnlar), the month. A 
" wipe in the dup*," a blow on 
tha taoe ; " down in the dupt," 
■ad. Ckopi is a nickname given 
b; sofaoolboTB to one who haa 
iraU-deTBlDiMd "»^""^— 

Chor, char (g7ps]t), graaa. Hindn, 
dutra, fodder. 

Chore isTW\ * thie^ to ateaL 
"Kal did tute eAora adoToI"-~ 
"Where did jm eteal thati" 
Hlndn, dutr, a thieL 

ChoTM (Amerioin), odd joba. A 
" choreman " I0 a handj man, a 
Jack of all ttadea. 

Tbdi dipotar wu imi, aad I aa ■ 
budr mu, B I took ^a^ plico. Tbin 
Bad* ■ low doUm <IoiDi iMiti imuML— 



:v Google 



Ckorimg — Chow-dum. 



Cluriiir (BoottUi thioTM), otMl- 
li^ Fiom the gjvtj. 



tha Turkish ehtooM, u Intar- 
prater, on Mwonot of % giOM 
frand oommitted b; one oa 
Turkish ntetohcnta In London. 

Chont (last Kid, London), an en. 

ent (Hotten}. 



Clwra isrvfii poor; also Amwa 
and tkinAr, poorer. " Mandj*! 
acAamfo" — "I em a poor men." 
Thla word ii confaeed with 
ehortdo, one not o( pore gjpsj 
blood, and atolen; t.g., dturtdo 
or foU oe' yitk, half and half 
also a pool pereon. 



"Oh, a 



tckUo; 






"Oli,Ii 

Chortle (popular), to bowL 

Cbottt-fakxry (Anglo-Indian), 
"little breakfast;" retrasbment 
taken earlj in the morning, 
Mtreeponding to the aoroial 
mint jolep orpM-piandial cock- 
tail ol Tliginia. An ante-break- 



aHami u. Eulj Tn. 



-ti'immf: Tnfi- 



Chovey (ooetermongers), a eht^ 

ChoriliMnl, chorihait (grpey], » 
witoh, a wUaid. Hindn, cAm> 
hani. "Hiridiiiblblmakamba 
bDtidIro tevelclioTihani" — " II7 
dear aont, I would like to b^ 
ocune a witch." 

Cbowdar (Anglo-Chineee), a fooL 

Chow-diaw (pidgiQ-Bnglish), to 
eat, or food of waj kind. Ihie 
Is the chief deflnitlou, bat the 
word Is also speclallj applied to 
a kind of sweet preterre made 
of manf things, and has thence 
been some whatincorreoUf taken 
to mean a medle7 of trifles of 
en; kind. Also oUv-cAo*, "to 
have a meal." In the Mandarin 
dialect Ai-fan, showing that the 
radical of the word means to 
eat, and not a mixture^ 

" Linet JkIi Honia, 



Choose (soboole). It is a regular 
tkomie, atgnifies It is a great 



(Common), to Amae, to cheat 
oat of one's share or portion. 
Sn^oaed to be deriTod from 



Iba olatul rcctuuuiu.— JTant Tmaim: 
ImitaittiaiHtmt. 

upccwllT to th< Indiniodtr of m aoixton 
of iliiDEi good, bwl. ud iadifemui of 
'a onoia txA bin oT budMo 



QMarUHyKnUm, iSjB. 



:v Google 



Chowimg — Ckuditd. 



Chowitv or ddppinc (thMtriMi), 
iTinoiiiTit tnHJTig, ermnbllDf. 

C hri ste nin g (tUeves), 
k watch li altering the 
nukar and nnmber. 



(Cambridgo UniTBr- 
Damtt givfln to the 
of Chrut'a College, 



X cf a on ctw« 9 Hk fad^ 



H< nddcDlr nnbUd naom Sti^Jim 
ud Fucsl'm " Wordi Hud Hose fcr ObI- 
dnn(ir>UAcci.''uil be ncwlrclMla^ 



Cunbridge. 

Chock (Wertmlnater School), a 
acboolboT'i treat. 

<Uilitar7).ineBl7braBd. (Nan- 
tical), hard ekudc, sea blccoit. 
(Popular), explained by qnota- 

tU)fL 

A liboom will nra ■ ftUow b> lU^ikei 
" ■ bcffu whq 4au drndt," cAmcA banc 
m bn-priod put cf tlu anu*.— .fteo- 

Alao bread and meat. 
(Common), the duuk, toniDg 
out of dootB, dlimlaaa]. 

And I >h*Il fd th> blooouBf tiwei u 
mil M (gwuca da^i — Sf*rtimt Tima. 

Chock, to (popular), to eat 

Ua aad hU mu wtn hinnf ■ snal 



M hli BU, " Clnek nmbo (cml plaitr) Dr 
a C»tmf/adl. 

To turn out of doon, naed 
■peciall; in tef ei«noe to drunken 
men f <»oIbl7 ejected from pnbUo- 



To cAaet or tJiMck vp, to gixe 
Qp the game or attempt, from 
the nutom of throirmg up the 
qtonge at a piiie fight. 



Cho^ and toM (popular), toealng 



ChocA a atan, to (thievea), «i- 
plained by qnotatjao. 



uf Wkr, 
keep cUw la me, ind oont what !'■ 
doinf. —Crtntwtrd: Jnw Kmit' ^«Mf 



■ [old alang], thoaa 
who dealt ilmaiiiacally In the 
Mle of llTlDgi were to callad. 

Chncktd (prtion], acquitted ot 
released. " 7, or the ohook for 
a olook," in«n1bed on a prison 
wall, meant that the writer ex- 
pected Beren yeara' penal serri- 
tade, If he was not aoqnitted, 
on the charge of ttniling a 



on two chugn of poko, oqIt out ■ wackt 
lor ■ dnf, apaca 10 ba IblHad or dn 



:v Google 



ChtckeJ—Chua. 



251 



(Fopnlu), dlaqipcdnted, thrown 
cwt. Mid, nptoTed. 

Ckm^td Apia, dkta e /i t d Afiip 1 
VhAtera iB»y luppfli 1 f« fell ihd Uiao, 
Vbamer 1 (o, it it liw* jt tb* Mum ■ 
JoDt nil ebKln^ XMh I 

—Ymntttr: C»MctlJ Agmim. 

OkuOtd in, into the baigmln. 
W«a M «c SB 'm yourdiT, CliuU< ; ■ 

rvflolu- old Dp Mid down iHrk. 
Tbu Pallb fm gnti*, miml sp vitli ■ old 
eoucry fur in a psfk, 



Cbndiiig ft cnrif (mlUtMj), 
pilng alok vlthODt c*iue. To 
"aback" a fit la & oommon 
alBDg expiBBBloii for conntcc- 
fBiting ooe, and the atrlf ouf 
b« tnceable to the cootortioiu 
•nd ooaruMoiia of the anppoeed 
■nSer«r, vbo Is all cnrled up u 
be list writhing on the bed or 
floor. 



Chncked np (prlMii), dlacbuKed 
from jalL 



ChickCT (orioketen), % bowler 
who throws the b*n lustesd 
of bowling it. Also one who 
voIoDteers to pi*;, and does not 
keep his promise. 

(Common], thud^tr, or ehteta' 
Mrt, » waiter or potman whose 
diit7 it i* to torn drnnkuds ont. 

Tb laMnltfn— tin cttuitr bit datj hu 



jollj (ooster- 
mongera), Ironieallj praliing « 
greenbom, or the goods of a 
oomiads. 

Chncklngr rocki (American], 
throwing stones. 

CbaticMuai (popnlar), a man 
with a la^e head, a dnnoe. 

Cbnck-me-doi (bird fanders), a 
TBriet; of singlng-blrd, lu imita- 
tion of ita notes. 



Tdk ■boat ja UMdhMX rabbuh with 

lliw ull-loU-liril-kiMU-lwi ; dwrdoBl 

li jw RSfkr good clwi|.iiv<te by «nr 



Inttwr 



It Ua-Om't bttn in lb* Strmt* Ctrntfrnv- 



•(eiiiclcr «■( to (Iw pnpi 
Ut oira pulr.— AhcA. 



Chuck the dnmmy, to (thierei), 
to feign an epileptlo attaok or a 
fit. In prisons the ezjseaaion 
applies to one who feigns an 
e^dleptio fit in order to be re- 
moved to the inflnuuj. 

Cbuff it (popolai), be oS. 



Chad In (popular), 1 
from the priie<flghtlng oostom 
of throwing a o^ Into the ilng. 
Nearly obsolete. 



ChaU (Anglo- Indian), n 
An abbreviation of the Hliido* 
stanee A-aBa, go along. 



:v Google 



353 

iC-np (<dd). 



ft cmMcm amongrt pilMnen Im- «1" ; r*~li irf U I— *•■ K«r* .Mr. 

ftm tapriwrnnent for debt wm Chan*, ■ tenn ol wi-l fm nw ff i' 

ftboUtlwd. WhMi ft iTMh mui "Mt <*««*." my dMi I 

wa« ftdmittad to thdr nnmber, ' -—™s j 

" > with 



(TUstm), to ",eikwB4 ft Tftck." 
viifa CHSunaiBO. 
poker, tonga, itiokB, ftud tftno*- 

panft For this ontioa the lid- dnrched (oommou), mftiried. 

tiftted prlMoer tad to pftj ■< it ft ■« no. fa &. «-«, I ft« 

(Hotten). t„ duBcba waaU ha rnoML' "Of 
cettm sal. iben'd bi m oo* to be 

Cbmrn^ (popular), ohlmner- e*ii«*^"-Jjt«»*i>ir r^—*. 

(An-iAm^, "70a little beMt" ot 

_, , , , , V "ftnimftL" Often used jeetinglT 

Cbmip (popnlftT), for ohBm. ^ «,n»««tion with Aow^^ 

rtacr, M cim^ girig, 
1I( doinf tlw iBwdiutT i<i^> ■ad fclUr- 

1b| milt « th> KoBip. 5hanI]iM."WboBHij«CBm(lbB(kI 

— /■unci. MypayimBaagKum,!*!— [*■ i>«nf, yon 

A hftrd'hcftded fellow; the off roHbcsdi'— 7^ zifJAic^ 
head. "Oil hiB<A«M(ti,"iiwMi«. 

Old 1.I.IIWMII ^ AA f^Mtf Chnszle, to (popnlar). cheat, <dt- 

Mnf.—Simi : Sttial KmitUma^ OOmntlt. 

(AmariOMi), ft et«aq>, ft fellow, (^ (Amerlou), a dgar. 

W« bdin ihu ba i> tbt mm Is p«t os ETtryfeUow^liih ■ lie 

tli«tBrfw{Di;ofaqI.whhb«« SMind /tni m cir bI tsBheaiii itd uA-xo. 

tup the bi( <:*»^i H»*.-Jtr» !-«» * r,„./,it, 
t/ft^m*! FtSet GttlU. 

,^ . Clndi (Americftn), to labdae, get 

ChmvoTwoodOilijiniDgalaiig}. the better of, extort, impoM 

Clm«k (rtr^ta), »pl.li>ed by ^'tl^^'tf'^JIltl.t^ 

qVOtfttion. O-WrAqhlMbH 

JS';:^r'^ji^.%^ii (Thie,«).topntthai«.woB 

tJmmi' (Um >l«a| tarn lot School Boud "J <»•• 

Sktufyrutc4i. C in ct ii ii ft M oHm (Amailaaa), 
plga, bMaoM a large qnaati^ 

CIraiilta (Amarioan), targe qnan- ot oUre oQ li manafaotiiiad o«t 

tltv, ot andnnaU lanL 



:v Google 



Cmdf — Clartt-jug. 



CiDder (M 
■piiita mixed with wltier or 
•oda water. (Bportiiig}, the 
emitr, the mniiiiig path. 

At Lord*' wickMi, a LDky Btidf* 
timJtr.—Fimiv FtUu. 

Cinder crajtber (popular), a ■ 



-L. H'fri: 
AMtrmSmi, PrimUr^ KtiftaJu. 

(Ihleree), to data, to ateaL 

Ciun bntdier (Amedcao), a man 
who opens olaaj. 



ntnndaboitt way. A long -jtxa. 
Cbcm CBM (thiBvea), alnnu 



City coDege (thlena), Newgate 



Chfl tig (beggan), a triok of 
beggaia to obtidn aim* bjOTer 
dTilitj^ 



Clack (popnlar), the tongne, 
qieeob; to diuk, to talk Idly, 
toobatter. 

Ctatik box(oainmon], agnmlou 



ivt »rt.~DitrmiU : t'tmitU. 

Clnaker (old oant), aOnr plate. 

Clapper (popular), tbe tongne; 
more eipeoiallj that of a loqna- 
oioaipenoiL 

Cl^per-dndccon (tHA nnt), a 
beggar bont, 

Clanu (Stock Szcbange), CUa- 
donian Bailwaj (took. 
Fa m hu* am Sanh) Mid Ctmrai, 
Obi N«uud Den* fix &]«. 

— ^Ute : ami Sa^i. 

Giant (pngOiatio), a term which 
baa beoome genetal for blood. 



Clacker (popnbw), talk, chatter, 
alao padding or pie crnst 



HhufTOB. BrJbiaTlwilL 



Cbu±-Ioft (popular), a poli^. 
Gladder (old), a male flirt. 



CUnma (popular), boiled tr«aole 
baldened. From " clog." 



WhU, oh wbU'i lb* Banint of tbu 

duippic'i blacluHd ejiti t 
Od hit elartl^, I uk job, whu'* llal 

-Bml^Fmdim. 



:v Google 



Classst — Ckymans. 



CkMT, chd7 (Anglo-IndlMi), a 
ooDuoon fortof pMaon, a t«Bt- 
^tolier, a obain-bMrer. 

Claw (priMFn), a la«b ot the oat^'- 



Oaw-hMBiiMr (oommoD), dnH 
ootX. In Fnooh alang, pwtM 
dcptt, or *yi(t. 

Tfci Mick fZ—^t m nw r cot .Mtm- 



<%1 cut that old Ear, wt 
■ ta twauT-fin flnv with the cM. 
I t/iftl h, a t¥trih 



ClaraMi«w(iniiobMtcrGol]cs")> 
olaan i h eata roimed]r th* 



Cku Uk date, to (popular), fa 
pay oil all deUi. 



Thoocli "lUi^iJmpa 



Qawi for brealtfut (priMn), a 
hDmoToni eiprestfoti for the 
Infllotloa <A the oat, whioli 
amwlly takei place in the 



—BmOad.- T*mUUt. 

Clear (tbioTM), dniQk. 



Clear ccTital (popnlar), spiriti 
genenllj, bat mora cornotlf 
knAuMmoDcottlauiotlK probab^ gin or whlBky only. 

trhcn be ii to hi«, u h> hjnuclf 

timwtfir tna^mH, i> Id Uu CleftTe (old ilang), one that will 

n,ni,h.^„i^,i <<«». i. Mid of wanton and 

forward woman, nch aa would 
throw thenuelTei at a msA witli- 
ont waiting tor famir to be 
asked of them. 



Clean (thieree), expert, Emart. : 
French, wt *oldal prvprt ii 



dericed (old), imposed apon. 

Cleriea blood (old), red ink. A 
a ezpneiion of Charles 



Dicltim: OBttr TwUI. 

Cleaii sUo (Anstralian), the term 
for nobranded and wild-bred 
oatUe which hare escaped U> 
theMrnbii 



Cl^maaa (old oant), artlflolal 
•ores made by beggars to tn- 
pose npon people. 



:v Google 



CUck (popalu), » blow; to «(Mfc, 

tORMtoll. 

Otab In the gob, blows on the 
mooth. 


...Wlutntlidcn 
How Ua is iIh bi 

■"-Si-,.. 


ittOBtbtDob. 

rod buku, eEUi in 
wCtmtMtmtfiU. 



CUdEer Qninting), a panMi in n 
printiog-offioa who i* at the 
ha*d of A oertaln niunbar of 
oompodton tot a putlcalai 
diilflcm of work or otharwiaa. 
It ia also naed In tbe sboemak- 
log tnwU. (Tndfl), « temmlo 
tODtet at a bounet-ahop, or tha 
•errant of a lalesman who otandt 
at the door. (Popular), a kuook- 
downblow. 

cut, to (thleTM), to atML 

CSDcb (popnlar and tUerea), to 
get tbe eJtooA, to be Impiiaoned. 

Clincher (geneisl), a settler. 



Tlw Tdlowlulnd flii at tb* bv. A 
wd IW " 'onM bwL-M'wrffp Wi/t. 

{Thieref ], a chain. 

CUnkeram (old), tha gad. From 
ttw ^dpriion oalledtbe "CUak" 

CUnk-fir (thlOTea), iteallng tu- 
kacds btnn pabUo-bonaea. 

Clipper (geneiat), eomething verj 
good, Tery tut, abore the aver- 
age. Derived from the iwift- 
Bailing shipa called opinnt and 
tea dlippert. 

TbsnDnulbaa DiwhotM bootfat, DM 
B kpac kef 'i Bct cf bona, isiiid tit, but 
■ mkr c^^p^ir; ■ elntinl 1 ■«• lUn 
(toB, Sam n U do.*—/ Cn mw— i : 
TII4Lilil,S. 



Clipping (general), ezoellent. 
A. "slippM^ ball," a "dipfing 
good cbaik" Fti( 



CUahpen (tinker), \ 
letting tilL 



Gunk (militai7), another tenn for 
gnard-how, derived oridently C"^ imtm). to faU; let blL 
from the Climk, one of the ancieDt 
London prisons, that of Weat< 
minster. Blr Walter Soott, in 
"Pererll of the Peak," makes 
Jem Clink one of the warders 
in Newgate. 

(Thieves), plate. 
Hewnldal ban baca habhkd bni ib« 

<pot l a c a i v a ' pnrad hia Balling the 

9 am.-C. /■■nkr: V^utmlid 



Doak-tiritchers(oldcaat), thieras 
who robbed pas«en-bj of their 
cloaks. The old French (ire- 



Clobber (popnlar and thleres), 
olothea. A oormptlon of that 
word, with a ohange of syllable. 



^ f nt f f (common), any thing or 
person that i* Brst-rate, eqaiva- 
lent to a " (tmuwr." 



IhiDC* (bat 70D ar* a ftatUcnan** valat 
Tbii will aaxHuil for jvui (osd cMfar.— 
SftrHnt Tima. 



:v Google 



CUMtrtd H^—Clotkts-pm. 



2S6 



of NswTMkor Pari*. Almj 

Clobbered up (popolK Mid Tid. ^Swtae to tht'toSi mir, .nd II 

gw),drMMdup. ttmjtaatowKOMtjtoQmmam 

"D'jM jaarn, U job mn t l i Htr w d mf ext«Dt Um OT* of Um utM or 

I ■healda'l mind nkiai jv 0011' Sha (be TtdDptnUJ, th^ an abla tO 
pnaUMd le l» piM ttH i. Ib bar ova 
wwdi, iha Bid, " 111 eoaa tUti m d i^ 



giMning at ervy atap, and 
daddadly ban tba admiUga 



(CommoD), laip taat. 



CMk (Xn^lab and Amerioan), a 



CWatar-raoab (Tnnehaatar Col- 
lege). Fonneriy in olaht«c< 
Ume two balTM of tba wbool 
wed to niah ttvn the anda of 
tba ichool at eacb otber. To 
run "oloiitan": when a man 
in junior part ia pot Into aenloT 
part wttboot potting thnogb 
Oock-cabn {nantloal), patfaot the middle mm b« U aald to 



Clod - craaben (Amerioan), an 
epithet need l^ Amarioaaa to 
deaoribe the latge feet wbioh 
the; bellere to be tbe obano- 
teilttiot of EngUahwomen as 
oonporad with- those of their 
own ODimtr?, an opinion ibamd 
b7 otber f or^gn critioa aa well ; 
bnt In remlit; the qneatlon i* 
one that reata wboll; on tbe art 
of tbe ahoemaker, and it Is a 
fact that Sngliab ladlaa of 
&sbion (who geuerall; abow 
grekter regard for the appeai- 
•noe of their nether extremltj, 
from the garter downward, than 
their mote hmntde and plain 
daten nanaU; do) out favovr- 
fbljoompara, in that t«tpeot at 
laaat, with an; of tha dato^, 



CMw, csloand (anny), plain 
olotbea aa diatinguiabed fnnn 
onifiam. Uoro parUoolarij In 
tbe infantr7, and the ezpreaaion 
" oolonrad " U probatd; inmloal, 
yJ^fa olotbea, or mnfU, being aa 
a rale leas strongly oolonred 
than tbe orimson liTery of tba 
Qoeen. The sqireBsion baa 
c^clal aanotion, howeTer, and 
la oftan need at oonrta-martial, 
when a priaoner ia charged with 
having " absented blmadf with- 
ont le»Te, nntil apprehended In 
'coloured dotbet,'" fto. &«. — 
ont of wiifonn, that ia to a^. 

Clotbaa-pin (American), that's 
tba sort of daUm^ I am, it;, 
that's tbe sort of man I an. 



:v Google 



Clotk-marht—Cfy. 



OoUi-iiiaAet (bid), a term for « 
bed, qnaint bnt not Btaag. 

MiiB, jvax lAm \ I hop« joor imAj ii» 
ins viU do yon » hvm; I find joo in 
boi Jul conw ost of tlH cMil-aHnb*.— 
Swifl! Prliti Cmnnmtiim. 

An old French oormponding 
term I« AoUt oux drapj; 

Ckmd-deaner (naDtfcal), on Ima- 
ginwy sail carried by a Tuikee 
bottom. 

Clout (oommon), a blow. A 
" dotU In the obopa," a bloir on 
the faoa. (Thleret), a pookot- 
liuidkerohlef. 



Oower (old OBnt), poesiblj allied 
to the Gaelic elt'oA, a baakst; 
t«nned "kipcj" b; KngUah 
thierea. 

Closer (old cant), one who at- 
tempted to share in the proflts 
of a robberj or a swindle In 
which be bore no part. 

TIhd ihcn'f m cltytr or toip, tTut dogi 



dub, to (mlUtaiy), to get a party 
of men or troops into a aontnsed 
mass tbrongb a blonder when 



To hii iHa ujr hooln t ihroir b, Add 
colbr hii dripnu ckar wwty, ^ H^* 

Old cant, dye, to take, to aalM, 
from old Bngllsh eUfa, claws. 
dy ie imivinoial for money. To 
take, steftl, money, pocket seem 
to be Interchangeable terma in 
Tarlons slang languages. 

dy In old cant had also the 
rignUoation of sack, baaket, 
poaaibly from Qaello diaX, 
basket. 

Cly«, CI7. to (old oant), to take, 
1 rfj. il»e.-r. 



G«fTj gu, the n 
Harmm CmMi. 

To ely ofF, to cairy away. 

Hm Bfi in our ikipper let'i elf off oor 

Aod baw«o in dcfliAC* a' th' H>rmui-b«(^ 
—Bnomt : /rviai Crrm. 

Also dy, to steaL 
Clf-raker (thleres), a pickpocket 



C^ (thieve*), pocket. 



Thid may be from oty, a pocket, 

as SDggestad, but It Is worth 

noting that in Dotch ttueve*' 

slang, JcUifiikktT is a thief who 

wanders abont, derired from 

fokker, one who goes abont, and 

Utif, sUver. Vidt Olt. 

Clj.bkiac (thicTee), ticking 

pookets. Vidt VkKB. 

'• WhM El cfy-fiMrngV . . . "Why, ■ 

pri£(uisr of vip€«, MsA muc -bono, uul 

ridiculfa, ud nKh."— /f. KntftUf- Rm- 

Clr the }efk, to (old oant), to 
■tand In the i^llory. 



:v Google 



258 Coaek- 

Cokcb (onirenitT ud public 
■ohool), tbe prints tutor b; 
whow aid astadflut ti "drlren" 
tliraiigb hla •sualutlon at the 
nolTenltj. It Ui now do longer 
peonllv to tho nnlTandtjr. 

H€ wu > ftndvit M Chrni dnnl lad 
B Fellow oT HotoB, ud In auly Uh wm 
K nn* tncewful cmcil U OifiinL'— 7]W 
WttU. 

A tutor not oonneoted with % 
OollegB is Minvtiinea tanned a 
"nml eoocL" 

(Oeneral and (port), to eoacA, 
toinstmctito "drive," to prepMe 
a man for an examination; a 
word whloli haa now almott at- 
tained to a reeognisad place In 
the language. 

ItMa tjrf him btfanlM gat MtKbobe 
•hip: ba oufhi la hin ukeo hoDowi 
Mm* Euur, bat ha wu UL-C. SBt! 

Al«o to inatruct In phTsloal 
acquiiementa, auoh aa boating, 
fto. 

Ma l»>] iJnulT been down icml timet 



Cnadiinff (oommon), Inatmoting. 
An almost recognised word- 
Then 11 DO iport whidi in hcftlthiar 

. . . than ivwing ondcr proper r aj f j H iy 

•nd lapanriakn. — SbaJsni. 

(Ragby), a flogging. 

Coach-wheel (popnlai and 
thleres), a crown piece ; French 
timg rout dt itrriirt. 

Coal, cok (oommiHi), money ; 
"post the eelt," pnt down ttia 



Caaliac (theatrical), a eoalaiv 
part, a part which la popolar 
with the aodlenoe — one which 
ellcita great applause; ccaUmg 
lines, telling ipeeches. 

It was onstomaty iome jean 
ago, when a young actor 
achJeTed a suooess in s part of 
this character, for some andent 
idiot to put a piece of ooal in 
the yonngster's dnaalng-place. 
One falls to see the tun of tUa. 

Botten aajB eealiitg, profitable, 
*ei7 good, la derired from soat. 



Coala (oom: 


mon), to 


"pull orer 


the«»i.," 


toaoold. 


(NanUcal), 


to "take 


one's eooli In," to 



Coal-tctrttle (Amerloan), a nfak- 
name for the peculiar bonnet 
worn bj Quakeresses, whkdi 
was exactly the ahape of an old- 
taahloned ooal-aontUe. Some 
years ago coal-acnttle bonneta 
were worn in England. FUt 
Leech's sketohea. 

ThenwuUiBSiwnlUd . . . ffmadi^ 
from the deplhi of her ctmi-icittlti boonat u 
Nicbolu.— £)(cb]U : NiduUi NicUAj. 



Cob, to (schoolboys), to oatoh or 

detect. CU la probably a oor- 

roptlon of the oant word " cop," 

from the gypsy hof, 

(Popular), to deoaiTe, bumbi^ 



:v Google 



Cob&U-coUer — Cockatoo, 



2S9 



CobUe-colter (tnmp« and gjp- 
siea), A t'oAvj. 

CoBW, aid BHat, toat th( iMlMrllir. 



Cobbled (KibooOKfjt), osnght oi 
detected. CMUad is k nrlatiou 
of "cobbed." Tide To Cob, 

CobUer (Autballui ■hMroi' 
slang), tba iMt iheep. This 
tens is verj widely ipread fn 
TietoriB. It U » pun of the 
■hearen. TbecoWcrUthemui 
with tbe loit, and tberefore thej 
call the latl iheep tbe eobbltr. 

Cochineal dje (pogiliatio), blood. 

H« would kindlj inqiitn of on* ffaitiv 

BU, "Whu d'ye uk for m ^Hit of ytmi 

aeiimimJtfyrr—C.BtJi: ytrdmmtGrwn. 

Cock (nciDg), "• eoA bone," 
properly a child's rocUtig-horae, 
ia a hone kept In the betting 
qootationi to deoelTe pnblie 
backen, though known to the 
private lajera against him that 
he boB no obanoe of winning. 

(Tailors), a good eotk, one 
who thoroiighl; nndentands 
how a garment ibonld be mad& 
k poor code, tbe lererse. 

(Thisres), an abbreviation of 



it is termed a eotk, and the 
thrower is allowed auotber tnm 

(Popular), to eoei, to nnoke 
(Hotten). 
Cock • balL to (oricketais), to 
throw a ball onder-handed, 

CoA-A-braaa (old oant), a oon< 
federate of oard-sbarpera wbo 
remains ontside the pnbllo- 
houae where they aie operating. 
When thej haye left, tock-a-hrai* 
protects their retreat bj mil- 
leading statements to the Tlotim 
on the direction taken by tbem. 

Cock-a-hoop (common), in bigb 
spirits 1 alluding to a Tictotioua 
cock crowing. This is borne ont 
by tbe Trench, "se dresser snr 
see ergots," to be elated or to 
look prond and defiant. 

Cock and ben chdi (common), a 
free and ea^ gathering where 
persons of both Msea are ad< 
mitted. One composed exoln- 
■iTely of males is a " stag par^,** 
whereas a gathering of femalea 
who do congregate for the par* 
pose of drinking tea and gossip- 
ing Is termed a "catparl^." 



pinched at tbe sidee. 
Cockatoo ( Aostralian np-eoantry). 
AUo toekatoo farmer or settler. 



(Pugilistic), a man knocked 
ont of time ; need In the phrase 
"knocked him a toek." From 
the expression "to knock Into 
a cooked hat." a small aettl 

(Printers), tidt Jkft and termed ceeiy. 80 called to 

TBBoff. When throwing or compare them with the common 

jeSng, ihonld one or more of snlphnr-ciested white oootniooi, 
the nine qoadrats not fall flat, which come down on the newly 
IiDl: lodge oEoeewiM •» anotber, sown oomOelda In myriads. 



:v Google 



Cockatoo — Cocks. 



Tha odimtM Itulcn or Ine aelBCtsn 
fiffal dopcfrntvLr for tb« pririkg* oC pu^- 
bt out EDj pi«c« of lukd Itacy ouj fucy. 
—Gnml: Bwik Lffi m Qmtnalimd. 



ImfrmiiHi nfAutrMm. 



Cocked YmX (Domnon), "knocked 
into a eooiad Aot," completely 
b«ftt«a, Bmuhed, ont of itu^M. 

Cocked Us too (thieves), dead. 

Cocked It (t^lora), enmliied it, 
Mw it, ipoke of It 



"I'm CD. raiuchtr' I hi. "Gir' n 
T«u 'and oa il, aiT pippin, ml cf ■ quid 

OB tamnxr-H. Simiu ! TJu BritiUK 

Cock-eje (popnlu), one who 

CocUes (popolBT), more aTttlgar- 
Ism tb&D alaiig. Literally the 
wrlnklea. 

In BcnnoDiUer not loof ago dure lived ft 

Sin ntdMcsciilu ofiBj heul, uhI Mucy 
m fas nunc 

—t/ancy Ftmitttm StUiir. 

Codtseyshire (tailors), London. 

Cock-qneaii, a fsmale ouckold, or 
a wife wfaoee hoiband goes with 
other women. A b^gai or 
olwat (Wright). 



Cockroacbea (old alang), to get 
totknaeha, a phnue used at 
one time to deeorlbe the pra«- 
tioe of BBcret vices. 

Codoobin tbop (printers), asmall 
printlng-offlee where commoa 
woA Is done, and when labour 
Is badly paid tor, is nsnally de- 
scribed as BQch. From the fact 
that some cheep priutera were 
noted for the iasne of fly-le*vca, 
on whloh were printed itorica, 
such as the " Death of Cook 
Bobin." 

Cocks (common pabliahii^ slang), 
Aooording to Hotten, " flotitioiis 
uarratlvea In veise or prose of 
mnrden, terrible accidents, Ac." 
The7 are the topical legends of 
the street. Hie suggestion that 
the term is derived from a 
" cooked " statement is very far- 
fetched ; that it came from a 
" eod ana bull stoiy " is at least 
ingenious. It is possible, thoi^^ 
not proved, that, as these nar- 
ratives were originally chiefly 
song in a dnll chant, the pro- 
verbially wearisome and mono- 
tonous songster, the oookoo, 
gave the original name to these 
(mi-minstrels sad their warsA 
The Dutch say of such a voca- 
list, " Hy lingt den Koekeeks 
lang," be sings the cuckoo's 
song— "he Ijarpa always npon 
the same string." 
(PngiUstio), blows. 



:v Google 



Cocksure — Coddom. 



261 



Cock-mre (popnlv), certain, oon- 
fldeot. Pnjublj an abbrerls- 
tion of " cockj-iuje," Lt., confl- 
dsnt, ■« » " oookj " fellow. It 
lua been sog^^eeted that the 
origlQ ought to be lODght Id the 
old practice of eook-throwiiig. 
SbakeipMre nsei the ez^easloii 
In the asDM of "snie aa tlie 
code of a flre-look." 



Cock-np (printen), a term for 
■aperioT lettera or flgnrei, rach 
as Died for abbreTwtioDi, ■.«. 
'*M'-"w"A',"fto, 



CockTtoo 

Coc^. Tide Cockatoo. 



CoccM-mit (( 
AeDOh lUng, U toeo. 

Cocnm (commoD Loudon ilaog, 
alao Tidduh). Id Hebrew 
a&ooAiMi, eiooAot, or oocAm, 
caattj, lekined, wiae, or a wise 
nan. Aooording to Hotteu the 
EngUsh duig term meaiu 
■hiewdness, ability, luck. 
"Jack'* got «oe«>M," he'i ufe 
to get on. Among themselTes 
Qerman thiOTea call one another 
by tfai* name. Mr. Hotten doea 
not recognise mj Hebrew oi^in 
for the word, and mggeita that It 
ta " allied to th« Soottlth Icei and 



mat SMaumoiuA, the wladom 
of Solomon. 

" WiB (nn «iii«i dciiH werii, sM, ■)• 
bjutu lenucht mil dkacAmoA, die w^ u 

PtIilltJItnmMn Yidditk TrmmUHtM ^ 
eu Hutu Pim/m, eiltd h Gramiamm. 

(Theatiioal), warineaa, ,to 
" flght 00011m," to be oaatiODS. 

(BookseUerB), a lUding scale 
of profit in the book trade in 
oases where the hooka are 
not marked, according to jonr 



Cod (popular), a fool; to cod, 
to chaB, hoaz. An idiom im> 
ported from the sister isle. 

5ba Ehnv ■ pUIce r^t id laf fmet. 

An] cold mc to depAit. 
1 tboochr ibat ihe w^i adding dh, 

Aod told her 1 thauld vutf. 
SIk lifted Dp hit kirely foot. 

And kicked meant oTtbolnp. 

—BamU; Oldjtma't GaL 

(TUeTes), a pone. OaelJo 
•Off. a bag. 

pallors), a dnmkard ; on the 
toA, drinking and n^lecting 
work. From aoddle, a ^0- 
Tindallam for to indolge. 

Codd (Charter hoDse), probablj 
from oodger, an old pennoner. 

Yooder nt eone thre ee eate old gentle. 
of the bo^tal, ... the 



mrtl, a thieres' landlord ; aooK- ^^ 



caddi.—T»atif^/: Til Htm 

Codding (Irish aohoolboTs), noo- 
eense, htunbng, chaff, 

Coddom (popular), explained bj 
quotation. 

eke adTut^e ot lli*l to 



:v Google 



•DooctL Tbty play Ibn* or fbor > lidc. 



Hotten glvM "eoiMaat, 
pnbUo-honw gMM. mnoh lileo- 
t«d by mad" 



Ctfdgiot; Job (t^Ioii), a gaimmt 
to repair. 

Cod-luher (thcBtrioal), a kind 
of mipender nwd by tight-iope 
d«noen, aorobata, pantomimista, 
ftc, to protect the omtcb. 
From anil, frblob aae. 

Cods (conunOD), the testtoles. 
Ood poparljr ii ft pad and bag 
for tba teatloUa, Qaelio eoit. 



Coffl (old oant), fallow. 



E baa, tifi.—T. Hiir 



CoffBO-tulU (oommoa}. Tbemoath 

la io terined, bot tba phnae 

ia nrely beard aov, baring 

giTen plaoe to olben. 

(AmericaLo), explained by 



CoSn^bJpo (uanUcal), any leafcy 
onuiky nnaeaworthy Tceeela, 

Co((old oant), a tooth. (Shupeie), 
toeop.tocbeatatdioe. (Scboola), 
to cheat at ezaminatitma by 
naing oriba or other aoucee <^ 
loformatioa. A perf eoUy leoog* 
niaed word In tbe aenaa of da- 
oeira. cheat generally; henoe 
«ap, loaded dice. 

C^e, Of Goag it, to (Amoican), 
according to BaiUett, refera to 
tlie habitual and exoeaaive naa 
of ardent ipiilta Cb^iia, to drink 
drama (Wright). B'nMi prorin* 
oiid Kngliih nwwa, a diam. 

Copiiflf tiie noae (naatiaal), 
mafcing oomfortalde OTei hot 
Dagoa or grog, l^iuu pronn- 
Oial KngH**! tiogu€, a diain. 

Coker. YicU Claukkb. 

Cold blood, a booaa Uoenaed for 
the aale of beer "not to be 
dnmk on tbe pvemiaea" (Hot- 
ten). 



Oh of lb* sUiiutBB CdIu, with th* 
buiali rcnlviDg ; tha ukjbu afimUU 
oc "peppet-boi."-*^. L. WUHmm,: 



French alang baa wtouliK d 
M^ for a mitntiliaoae^ 



Coffee.alK>p (popnlai), the W.C 



CoM coffee (common), 
(Oxford), a tnunpeiy altali. 

Cold comfort (tradera), aaid of 
articles aent ont on approval 
and returned. 



Cold deck (Amerioan), a prepared 
pack of oarda, ^yed on agreen 
board. 



:v Google 



Coid — Collaring. 



263 



Cold meat box (popnlai), a ooffin. 

Cold pig (popnlH). ft daah of cold 
water to waken an ladolent 
aenant ot laa^ person in tbs 



wIhd iIh wu in bed. Mr. Juda n- 
whu aUfit wn.~Dmlji Nan. 

(Thierea), a penoa who Iiaa 
been robbed of hli clothing: A 
oorpae. 

(Conunardal), retimed gooda. 

Cold ahake (Amerioan), a oold 
period of weather, alM naed 
■onMtimes in reference to ferer 
andagne. Aaafignraofapeeob 
it la applied to oold and raaenad 
oondncl. " It givM me the 
mU MoiM jut to lock at her— 
•he's eo fasea up an' dlgsei- 



Cold tMt (otmunon), brand;. la 
nae also during the last oentnr;. 
The SptBUtaT, TktUr, and O^ar- 
dtM* often aUode to a " keg " of 

MUtM. 

Cold V^ag (Amerioan oadet), to 
haTe » mU Ittnf , to have a ow- 
tain^, to be entire!; oonfident 
ctf anjthinff. 

Cold water annj (common}, a 
fitoationa name given to the 
fratmni^ ot teetotallns. 

j by U* 



D iha mU 



CoM writbont (ocnnnKn}, s^ta 
with oold water and wlthont 
■agar. 



Cole (pc^nlar), mone;. Tidt 

COAI. 

Uonmr, lb* wbolt af tha mM oah or 

SbtU bi ^KDI for tb< taoi of Ih* old 
vonu'iHolb 

Colfabia, a lAtinlied Irish 
phrase, iigoifring the closet of 
decenc;, applied aa a dang 
term to a plaoe of resort in 
Tilnlt; College, DnUin. 

CoUnderiea (sode^}, modem 
term for the Cclcuial Exhibition, 
naed as an abbreviation. 

Colla, cnllo (gypsj), a thing, 
thiogs. " ChiT yer miUm adre 
the wardo" — " Pitch jrou things 
into the waggon I " 

Orflar (oommMi}, " oot ot taOar," 
oat of cash, not in tnlniiig; 
a phrase borrowed from the 
stable Also oat ot work. 



lor hie dra- 



Otfrwi .- MiJtnjM Mitltr. 



"^ Collar dar (cdd), haogisg da;. 

CoUatlac the Ug bird (theatri- 
cal), getting hissed. An alln- 



:v Google 



S64 



CoUar — Coiotirs. 



don to * gooM's mods of ex- 
prewtog Migi7 dliwtlifaotlop. 



CoOv wotk (oommon), hard 
woA; an uphill Jonnuj. 



nn itUl feotMa nlla, oairijr *]] crUir 
■vnt, betvKB ilui ud the Uihi.— 7>>/- 
Itf: WiMt I Rtma-itt. 



Colleger (noirendt; and ichoola), 
the (qnare oap worn b; nnlTer- 
(itj msn, OT bj boji at pablio 
and ottiw Bohools. 

Coney (theatrloal). Acton and 
othen comie9ted with the stage 
■peak of the oolnmbine aa 

Cottj-wobbfea (popular), nmib- 
lings in the tntestinei ; the 
beUj>&che. A probable origin 
la coIlo-voUIci, the latter wotd 
tiom to mUble, i.t^ to shake 
from aide to aide. Bnt it ahonld 
be noted that coQjr is a provin- 
eialism for anything inegnlar, 
nneren, wtaof. 

Colo (^dgln), oold. 

H*b tib in n>b Und, 

EUb itof when n btloiia. 
Wbiit lini much hUt in-i-ir (fmt^, 
inherbeMrt), 

—Tkt Frimat i* Tmrtarj. 

Colonial (AnatnJian and Ameri- 
oan), nnaettled, beoanse In the 
taaXj dayi of the colonies men 



drewod and beharad mwonrea- 
lionallj, and life and proper^ 
wen by no means ao aeonte aa 
they aie now. Also nide, nnigh, 
lui^inlj, awkward, osed in thia 
sense more In England than In 
Aiut^alia. An iCn glialitn^n will 
■ay very or thorooghly MloMtoI 
in a contemptnoos way. 

CokMus (priie ring), the haud- 
keichlefs, displaying some de. 
flnite colour or pattern, oboeen 
by priia-flghten as theli dis- 
tingnishing badges on the day 
of a contest. The third "nlo 
of the ring," aa rerlsed by 
the PogiliBtio Asaooiation, lays 
down : — "That erery man shall 
be prorided with a handker- 
chief of a oolonr suitable to his 
own fancy, and that the seconds 
prooeed to entwine these hand- 
kerchiefs at the npper end of 
one of the centre stakes of the 
ring; that these handkerohieb 
shall be called the eoIoHrt, and 
that the winner of the battle at 
its conclnsion shall be entitled 
to their possessian aatlie tiophy 
of victory." 

Thisn was, among the greater 
favoniitea, the "bird-eye" wlp^ 
the wipe or handkarohlef of any 
oolonr with spots, bnt generally 
with white ground and Una 
spots; the "blood-red fancy," 
aUced; the "yeUowman," all 
yellow; the "yellow fMicy," 
yellow with white spots; the 
"cream fancy," with coloured 
pattern on a white gronnd j the 
"Une BiUy," with S white 
pattern on a bine gnnnd ; and 



:v Google 



man; more. Anoog the mlvwi 
qtedftll; aiaodftted with the 
twmM of puglUits Are the 
"Belober" (/««, the obMapton), 
d>ik blna gromid with ft ipot 
In the middle o( d&rket hne, 
•nd luge white epots; the 
"lUndal'a diui," green, with 
white epoti; "Eli^'a mMi," 
green, with yellow psttem. 

< Auatiallkn miner*), oiigioftll]' 
the gold Tlalble after wachlag, 
either good or poor eoloicr, m 
the CBM maj be, bat the ez- 
preMion is genenlly need that 
tbeie ia jut enough to thow 
the preaenoe of gold. 

ColqtuuroD (old out), a penon'a 
neck, nam eelt, Anglo-Nor- 
man for neck, sod jnorron, 
eant for bodj. Vid* QVAR- 
BOH. 

Colt, a jutymaii at bis dAnt; 
ptoperlj a person withoot ez- 
perience. (Orlokatera), a jonng 
Inexperienced player, a [so* 
feaiioDal at hla lint aeaaon. 
(Thlerea), a Tonng thief. 
(Popular), to tub, to make one 
pay for his footing. Hotteo 
givea the deOnitioo " to make a 
peraon free of a place, which 
Li done bj hi* standing treat, 
and sabmitting to be strnck on 
the aole of the fpot with a piece 
ofboaid." ThlsisaTeliooIthe 
old London 'prentice days, when 
it was an exaction of mcoej, 
nsoallj spent in ale, termed aoU 
ale, paid bj an apprentioe at the 
oommenoement and expiration 
of hia apprenttoeahlp. 



-Come. Z6$ 

Colt-man (American), a man 
who keeps hoiaea speoiaUj' for 
bmglars. 

ColnmUne (tbeatrieal}, a prosti- 



ColnmbdS (theatrical). Onewoold 
have thought that this iUna- 
trionsaaTigator would nataraUy 
be associated with aome new 
and snccessfal discovery, never- 
theless a "regnlar CtUvwibut" 
la tjnonjmous with hopeless 
" frost," or utter failnra. 

Comb-braah (old), a lady's maid. 

The maid wha u pracnl Ulemlcct a 



FuUiMg: Ttm/tna. 

Comb-cut (common), mortifled, 
like a oook di^^raoed \tj the 
depriTBtlon of Ua comb. 

Comb down, to (Aaatrallan), to 
Ul-treat, thiaah. like the 
Fienoh "donner nnepeigntfe." 

. . . Nundnc ho« h* had capped tb* 

Dtd oaOiaiafuAamttiilaittm 

to fifhtL^^. C GrmmL 

Combine the cat (nantlcal), the 
boatswain, or other operator, 
nmning his fingers through the 
cat-o'-^e-taila to separate them 
(Bmjth). 



The p to ceo called onMrn^ kU JkMir fcr 
didei.— CM*. 



Coow dowD to (common), to pay. 



:v Google 



266 Come — Common. 

Do Toa keep tha ■niikmu in dk- ComiCal (popalat), » napkin, 
uma wtul* t nttk to Iha pruBnar mi 

u ^««,-/«*«t«; cominj it St Os broiuls (<»rf- 



Come it ower, to (poimlK), to 
deoeivQ l^ wheedling, to mle 
bj BBiDinption of lapeiioiitjr or 
otherwiM. 

Dob'l uy (o trmt II fW > 



ahHpere), BxpUined bj qoots- 



^»>fH,» Comiogit«trona:(popnl»r),(»rry- 

Come it, to (thieves}, to inlonn ; ing thii^ to so nnieuonable 



klM to be quiet, 

HelKudgDeortl»Mb«HT<i>nplT. H« hen ihook hit hwl-Tighl Utde h* 

Itmiif TiUtTWtA. Bu ha lbaa(l)l iba wu iml mg il 

(Pngilirtic). to Bhow fem. "^ ""'J^ua, UtP^. 

tht h« impro^d. i. in good ""^.rLTby Mm^ZJ: 



BioT ,udifb(hu< 



tations, Bnch as a 
lo^o who prvUnd* t 



able ehaim.— JifW •" FrttJtm. Pmiut me, if Ton »Bd yoor two ftienda 

thiak of cnuiv wtial u TnlfulT caUid iM* 

Come aonae, to (pngilistlc}, to fU tMitr m hm, to mike yoo Bsdtf 

^1) KuKl Ihu vcn Iwt bMter ahudso ibt 

. , iaieotioo.-/. C««— rf.- ife* r«^&. 

JU il wa^ Mmmt Gaoijr "■"*»■»• """ 

Asd ilwre qnwled, like ■ nnla toned 
qoBB CD iu back. 
—Ttm CrOfi UnmUl « C*i«r™». 

Come thi»*«e (iddgiD-Bngli<hl, „,^„. 
anived here. "Jo«t now liab AndiBthai 
got two [decM ]on-hoaw man 



Come, to (popotu), to pnotiae, 

to nnderstand. Commoabomice (priaon), one who 

Wa ain't In br ooTMlrei ai crmt$ iliat makes aooiuationa of nnnatnnl 

dedga.— C m n » *« rf : Tag.Ri.^Cr. crima.emploTlngladiMdeoojB. 

(Pnxtitutei), refen to. GJBCD- To do mcW ynlt^aoii ihle mjagk a. 

l^on. "It '"•"' •pe'k irf Ihtaa BuiqM iiiiuhaa 




, Google 



Cotnmon — Compnuhre. 



267 



JtitiMil Dmrilt: Ltmtttjrtm a Pritt» 



Hsnl ■ eemmwdtm U 



1 doing:! (Ameilcaulraa), 
^•in, wholesome Jai% u distill- 
gniibed from d^nties. 

Commoner (old cutt), % novioa ; 

Commoner grab (Wlnobeator Col- 
ic^), a dinoM giTsn by college 
to oommouen wtien orioket 
nwtchei an orer. 



, to (Oxford Cniver- 
dtj). Two or more are Mid to 
»ea»mon,im when the; have their 
meak togrtber. Oomma»im,ng 
mean* itrictly that each ahonld 
bring hij *' conunoiu.'' 

Common Jade (arm;), low prostl- 
totof are thna termed by tha 
military in Woolwich, and.pro- 
batdj in other garriMtn towna. 

Common pings (American), the 
oommon rat of mankind — the 
el raXXol — eometimea the great 
unwashed, bnt more oommonlf 
vety ordinary people indeed, 
ndther the big-wigs nor the 
drega of sodety. 



HuywiU 



I tha dcpdn rf ifag 
3 mj cainldni tbil vc m 
' flufi <* whem the world 
01 ihen ii when tbcj bol 
-AW Ytrk Mtrtury. 



Agitate the »«M- 
m m A M t or, ring the bell. 



Communion bloke (priMa), a 
religtont hypooilte. 



Ctnnp. (piintera)- Vide Qallbt- 
sum. (Jraieislly ^pUed to 
oompodtora aa an abbreriatlon, 
bat originally the ihort term 
tor companion nied both by 
pressmen, who work In pair^ 
and by oompositorB who work 
In companionship*; nowadays 
accepted aa the abridgment of 
compositor only. 

Comped (printers), set up or oom- 
posed matter ; abbreriatlon of 
word composed. 

Competitloa wallah (Anglo-In- 
dlan), members of the Ciril 
Serrioe who have entered it I7 
the competitiTi 



Compo. (ptinten), abbreriation 
tat the composition of which 
printing rollers are made — 
principally of treacle and glue. 
(Nautloal), a sailor's monthly 
wage*. 

Compradore (pidgin), from the 
Portuguese donproiior, a par- 
chaser. Formerly nsed in 
India, where It originated, now 
in general nse only in Chinese- 
English. The aamprador of the 
present day is astewsrd or bot- 
ler, who manages all the house- 
hold affairs, supplying by oon- 
tnot, not only faniitiire and 
proTisions, but even sarraota. 



:v Google 



Con^resado — Consdmct. 



Aa: Hum Cm ted nUT » 



Coo (Wuohwter), from mtiiKet, 

A konckle — k blow cm the bead 
given by the knnoklea or auj 
bud rabaUnce. 

ConcnTW and costcxm (oud- 
■bupers), cuda oat la b parti- 
tionlw way, and tbiu oontiiTed 



CoQchera ( np-oonntry Anstialian), 
tame OT quiet cattl& 



Conlkb (woietj), 
genemlly of a piivata nAtnra. 

Confederate (Iozob), " yoa'ro 
tnlgbt; eofiMcrotc," a phiase 
naed by a Texan when he wlabai 
to expresa the stroogeEt posatble 
^protal of aome aeutimeiit or 

Coofidenoe dodge or buck (oom- 
moD), explained by extract 
tiom Awly Tdtffrajik;— 

"... Swindled bim ont of 
bia watcb and obala by moans 
of that ten tbonaond timei 
repeftted rogne'a devloe, the 
toi]Jideittt trick. It waa the 
old game pare and simple 
— tbe threadbare hoona-pocos 
of inTlting tbe vioUm, a per- 



fect ctranger, to 'oom« and 
bare a drink,' and while the 

in comes another man, wbo 
joins in tbe conversation, and, 
in a oasoal way, mentlona that 
ba baa just Inherited ■eraal 
tbcusand pounds, and tbat, aa 
a thank-offering, be should like 
to gJte away, by deputy, a few 
hnndieds to the deaerring poor, 
and is ready to band om tbe 
laigeaa there and then to any 
person who can show to bis 
aatiafaotion that be is of an 
nnsostriclona diapoeltlon ; tbe 
same to be proved by liis en- 
tmsting tbe money and jewdleiy 
be may happen to have about 
him to his, tbe benevolant lega- 
tee'a, keeping, while the latter 
goes away for baU-aa-booc or 
BO with the same." 

Congee, coqjee (Anglo-Indkn), 



Cook (common), ooml 

nil " deiMr afl* " lua k " nsos* : ~ 
Hii cHff dcTOid of bufc. 

-Attm: HntSermf*. 

" Oonky " ia aniokuame given 
by achoolboya to onewlthapn>> 
minent noie. Tbe great Duke 
waa called "Old Con^." 

Conscience (theatrical), a kind of 
association in a small company 
for the allotment of sbana in 
the profita, fto. The man who 
is Incky enongh to have a con* 
osm of his own, generally a 



, Google 



CoHsdettce — Conveyer. 



269 



he ni»7 act, must b« the le&ding 
man or Ant low oomediui, per- 
tuipa both. He beoomei the 
maaagcx, of oonne, and tbna 
hu one abkre for " flt-np," one 
tor KeDsi?, one aad a half for 
management, one for vardrobe, 
OHO and a half aa leadiiitg man ; 
and the Eome la given to the 
wife, who, of contBe, will not 
play Knjthing but the jnTcnile 
lead, bat Who at an; other time 
wonld be glad to pla; first old 
woman. Thai the manager 
takes ne«ilj all the proceedB. 



ker ((ociety), one 
who cannot proDonnee hia B'a 
and hia O'a. 

Cooaoo (pidgin), oonanL 

du ««<•■ mm, du nun no liwu 0»"T). 



oewal of a bargain, a apeonla- 
tlTS sals or pmohate. The 
preminm paid by a bayer of 
stock to the Beller, .when Dpon 
Belling da; he wlahea th« bar- 
gain to remain open. 

B kt&ddi for brgker, for ball Aod for bflar, 
Ci the OMlMxer Ihu'i fud by Iht bulL 
—AiJt^ ! Htam Scrmft. 



t (Winchester College), 
to be eentineM, la to be oh the 
sick-list. CcaUmmt work. Work 
done while on the uok-list. 

Continental damn (American), 
ft term applied at a very ear^ 
time in the Bepnblio to any- 
thing utterly worthless, and 
sappoaed to have originated In 
some allusion to the Oontinental 
cnrrency or American assignats. 
Not to care a «ontiii«nial, not 



Cooatkble (oommon), to ontrnn 
or overran the eotutalU, to get 
into debt. 

Huktc, Mf ctri, how &r hm Ton 
ovvTUD ttn esMMiaiit f 1 told him th&t 
lh< d(bt wnoonied u ilcvea poimdi.— 
SmtlUlt: XtJrria SmmUm. 



Convenient (old cant), a miatrasa. 
Conrey, to (thievea), to steal 

Bol u I un aack, I will ttnmji, cw 
biM, ud chcu Dpon SinpUdiu.— J/<P' 



Conanmab, fchanaama (Anglo- 
Indian). Persian, JMonMiasn, 
honae-atewardi or provider, or 
bntler. 

Tsy lifht I»d poBch.'— /wrwMMf : 
LttUn. 



Cotmyancer (thieree}, a thief, a 
pickpocket. 



nmon}, steal- 
ing; ploUng pockets. 
1'bt gtta youih who uwopHd to 

deouap with '* wsidi . . . wu po- 

pcrlj ponblwd for hu wnducr io tha ut 



JO (Btook Exchange), co 
rnptlon of oontinnation, a r 



Conreycr (old), a thief. The ex- 
pression la used by Shakapeare 



:v Google 



Cooked — Cooper. 



inXutgSieiardtl. TfaeFnnoh 

Hgot hu t' 

em^orifur, with a like signilloft- 

tion. 

Cooked (soolctj], dona, defeated, 
flnlihed up, e^banited. 

Cook bii KOOM, to (oommon), 
to km, rotn apenou. 

At la«IhS^'> lift hu doffed. ' 

Alao to wont one. 

Kllj'i too bif In tb> Watphali**! ^^ 
lunis, Toa'n tlx bar la ati Foabrooka'i 
/HK— C. £Mlr.- firtUmt Grtm. 

Cook, to (utlitt), to dodge np a 
piotara. ArUtta tay that a ^o- 
tnie will not teek when it !■ 
excellent and oncoiiTentional, 
and beyond ipeoioiu ImitaUon 
(Hotten). 

(CoUoqnUl), to piepare, tam- 
per with, aa to eemb aooonnts. 



TRT iKker-i 

LB off-diHflcc of aekinf tho 
n>Dmi.^l>«r<iiV TYiki. 

1 batt HIT Lid7, became iIm Km locked 
B7 (mM •cgobdu Ib the bower InlODa.— 
Pamh. 

Cool (oommon), used in tefeittnoe 
to a large entn of money. 
Snppoee rm dta*! f« dxpena ooeu. 

Bod loee jonr 0w/ buodnd by it. — Miu 

Edfuirrtk: Ltt» and Lam. 

Codaman (AnstTaliaii hlaokfel- 
lows), a word adopted from the 
black! by the wbitea to deeoribe 
a blackfellow'a drinkiiig tocmI, 
and then ^^lied geneiall;. 



. bwbnlna (Dvd* . . . undenilied 
ibere.— ^. Crmt: BatH i^fi in gmtmt- 

Coder (American), priaon. 80 
called on aoconnt of its b«ing 
a flt ^ace for getting aober or 
coding down ; 01 from eoobr, a 
laige tub, as in quotation. 

Ther tUM iHor mbUhi Um ta lb* 
(Wte-.-^. Ann.' SmUU tmi Jte> 

(Popular), a gtaM el bMt allot 
drinking ■pliit& Alaoawfanan. 

Cooo (American) , ahoTt for Taoooo, 
a man. The term Oiat becama 
genBral nearly &f^ year* agou 
A gone eooa (al«o Epgliih), one 
who la mined, loaL 

Coon'a age (American), a ray 
popolar ezpreasfoti to aigni^ a 
long time, the racoon being 
It^aided aa a rery long-lived 

w Ilia Jooei Inride lb* ■■■«■, 



Cooper, to (American), to ni 



■hipc ibe did ii dbr tliwi 
— Amiriema Ntw^aftr. 



, Google 



Cooper — CoPPits. 



271 



Theoopi, t 



FowiUj from a metaplioi, I 
cumot cooper, I oauoot gnsp, 
that la b^ond mj okpacions- 
ueai, comprebetiElon. SIse from 
<xM3>«ra((. with the Hiue of (Aaglo-IndUn), *Bp / b«w««i j 

"'"O"'- U abbrBvation of coprador. 

(ThlttTM), to de*tT07, spoil, 
forge; to coepa- m. mannikeT. CopJmiif (thieTe.). « WKning 
fo^ > ■igiutiir& Fti! CooF. cry when the police make their 



Coopered (taif), a hone that hu 
been hocuued or otherwise pnr- 
poeelj injured lo as to prevent 
him from rannlnK, wa« formerly 
•aid to be eoopertd. The ez- 
preeslon It sometimea lued now 
aa in quotation. 



Mt-Aout. 



JatumT Mnitr, *ba wu ta have hi) 
nsulvi, culltd oat ap-hiaigl lor, u fo« 
■ee, ■ Bra>fwiMaAiiint.—Oiil*t TrmU. 

Cop bniT (thfeTes), ths act of 
handing plnndei to a confede- 
rate, to aa to Iiave nothing 
about one when arrested. 



lob." " 



(Trampe), a eaopend plaoe, a 
house that has been spoilt by 
too many tiampa calling there 
(Hotten). 

Ceaptrtd, In the sense of fall- 
ing iI^ mined, is possibly allied 
to the Sootoh eoitp, to tnmble 



I'm ri|ht Tory right down to BT boou, ml 
■ prict. uhI I bcUcnd, " 'Ear. 'car I " 

Bnt Ihcy dofi'I Hf yuan Inilr wilh duS 
DDU the mn, mj doi Charlie, aa 



n. of." I did not nikdcnlaiHl 



lacrf. Suddaly I law Ihit* 
OH, a puddiog. and a lix- 
roll on ih< Soor.-^fpnAy 



Cooter. Titit CovTMS. 



Ita ought to "ave kibowt 
Bjr the Anryiun only, tha 
ofthaSocheriitt lot. 



(Sporting), to win, to get 
money; a dead cop, a sore 
method of arriving at this result. 

To «op U derived by Hotten 
from lAtin tapen; more pro- 
bably It comes from the gypsy 
h»p or Mp, to take ; Scotch, kep ; 
OaeUo, to^NM. 

Coppu (gypiy), blankets, eartf 

ings, tilec 



:v Google 



Copper — Corker. 



Copper, cop (popnlv uid tUere*), 
ft pallc«iiuii; from "to oop," 
which raa. 

"Then Ibna Hfftn came* " Ctf- 
jtfrt, cqlgtm, whalu* tlieyr" WitDco: 

"PcliaBBi, titai meaiiif.'-~StMiUard. 

Copperiieadi (AmericMi), pro- 
perly polsauooi Mipentai The 
tetta ma ^plied "tij tlttt F«d»- 
rait to the peace partj. 

Coppendui (Anstnllui ptlaati), a 
poUoamao. 

Copper ROK, tlie nUgM tenn for 
am# roiatta, the red, enlHged, 
plmplj noM of ohroDlo aloohol- 



Coppen (popalar), moath; eape- 
oiaUj A paiohed one after pota- 

A fdlow eut'l enjoy Mi bnakbtt mftcr 
—Hatha! Tun Bnmm mi OnfinL 

" Hot mppcrt" It a phnae for 
a montb parched fa; ezoe«slTe 
drinkiDg, or "•• di; at a lime 



Copper, to (gaming), when play- 
ii^; at luo, to oover a stake 
with a tmaU check, which 
dgniflea that the card telected 
is backed to lose, not win. 

Oh, d— n Squilol It Keoa 1ik< ihi'd 



MCA thai !■], ludE*ft Eocic dead acunfl 
■Bc— /'. Fmcit: SuMU mmi Utcatiu. 

Copna {Cambrit^ UnlTersIt;), 
lUking Latin at tahle, or limllar 
Impiopiietlet, are followed fay 
the infliction by the atudeuta of 



Cordnroj-road (American and 
AutTaUan), a road made (rf 
branohei and log* laid aide \rf 
ildeL The bianohet stand out 
like the rib* of oordmoy. 

Cork (oommon), a bankrupt 
"Probably," aayt Hottea, "In- 
tended to refer to his UghtneM, 
as being without ballast." 

(Pngilistlo), " to draw a «i»*" 
la to "tap the olaiet," Ca, to 
gire a bloody noae. 

(Army), CtfAain Cork, applied 
at meas when any one it slow 
in paaeing round the bottle. 

Corkaee (hotels], a mm chaiged 
per bottle to peisoni ^oviding 
their own wine. Thlt term oaa 
haidly be (Mnsidered as slang, 
but as a word nnreoogniiod by 
diotionariefc 

Coilter (theatrical). A r^nlar 
torktr is a dnSei ; an imbeolle j 
one who corks or bottles np 
another actoi't effects, or mina 
a play. 

(Snglith and American), 
something that closes ap or 
settles a queitioD ; tomething 
nnusnally large, remaikable. 

TIm Cnm Piina't landi'Ull wu ntbir 

No wendw Hi* HlfhneM nfiiwd lei ta 
p»T- — ftm. 

Also flrst-tate j at the top of 
the tree. 

Jake Kilrabi ii a cirttr, and ought to 
have the chani)Hanihip of tha world. — 
A'M r.rh MmOmmi PMa GatHU. 



:v Google 



Corks — Corpse-miver, 



Corks (popular), » butler, alhidliig 
to hli fnnotioiw. AIm mone; i 
ttuH^h originally * nutioal 
term, thia it nrj mvoh used 
bjpdnten. 

CoRied {oolloqcial), Intozioatod. 
Fn>m orar-Indalgenoe In drink 
stiong enough to "oom" ono 
(Wright). >>Fouibl7tromioak> 
lug or pfoklfng ooaself Ilka 
ear%ti beef," Mya Bottea. It 
baa been anggeated that tt la 
from the Eeltio torn, Fieooh 
aorni, a hoin oaed formerlj aa 
a drinking veaeel. Aa we aaj 
that a man la In hia " oopa," It 
la poaaible that oat yerj remote 
anceatora aaid of him that he 
waa homod or aonttd, bnt it la 
almoat beyond donbt that the 
term la an Amerioaniam from 
e»rn, a veiy common name for 
wUal?. (Taiteia), pleaaed. 

Comer (oommon), to get a eamar 
la to get the entire control of a 
stook, and ao make it impoaaible 
for Dtheri to oomplete their bar- 
galna or to purchase. 

H* hid bca mind up £i 



(London], the " Oomar," Tatter- 
aall'a horaa rapoaitoiy and bet- 
tlng-rooma, which was at Hyde 
Fkrk Coroei. (Thierea), a ahare 
— generally a ahare In the pro- 
oeeda of a robbeiy. 

Cornered (tallon). In an Inestri- 



■pends the money, and cant 
raiaa the amount to leleaae U 
wben wanted. 



Cornish dock (otty), 

" It frya in Ita own greaae." 

Cornatalka (Anatrallan), tbe 
•ettlera, eapeiiially the glrla, 
BO called beoaoae their aveng* 
height ia very great, tboogh they 



dib-diUd 




*' Hov li jm been, my <dd B 
ud h> BiiiNiBd hii an-iUmltn tiU Ibt 
old ipBtnl begu to danca lilia a tear 
<H) nd-hot mD.—Smm Slid: Tkt Cbd- 



WtaniU pmCT well, bat* cn>t qua- 
titT an ta hoifiiMl with CnftrmI Srrttt. 
—SUfft Mtmtln. 

Corpse provider, afaoetlona nanM 
forapbyaioian. 



—S/trtint Ttma. 

Corpser. Yidt To Ookpbs, 

Co ip s t re i lm (common), a dram 
^apiilta. 

Tbo* wu * inMnl null I6r*«tta*«li 



, Google 



Corps* — Ctmtiierfgti. 



274 

Corpie, to (thwtrioa]), to ooufuMt 
to pot out follow-»oto» \>j 
stiokiiig fut In tbo dlklopie; 
kiU A loeae throogh IgnonDoe, 
irilfnlDSM, ontnpiditj-. Aooii' 
trst«inps of thli kind !■ oallad 
" a rqiTilAt ooipwi." 

Corrobonc (op ooimtir Anitn- 
liu), to boU ; » word bairowod 
from the lutiTM, who thni omll 
OUB of their wild danoet. Whitca 
gniUBllj DM it In tbo •mim of 
dlctorbMioe, hecco it is ntd 
that a iMtUe torrehoit u when It 



CofTbangtu (pngilittiD), Udnld& 

Coth (popular and tUoTM), a (Uek 
of an; kind, bot moi« MpMiallj 
a poUceman'a fa«ton. From tbe 
g7P*7 hi^t, Dornipt form idik, 
meaning wood In an; form. 



watMing.plaaea for the moat 
part 

Cottda lo(d (ooBunoQ), a Man- 
obaat«T mannfaotnier or dealer 
laoottoo. 

CottooiqMlb, Maoohwtw (Hot. 
t«i). 



(•derated Dollar Bonda. 

Cotton, to (oommon), a oolloqiiial- 
tim in tba Mrnae of to like, Bgrw^ 
be attaobed (lltaraUr to adhere, 
oliug to, like ootton to cloth), 
but OMd in a alangy eenae as'in 
qooUtlon. 

Wat vtHo oooi Hadaa FoRac dab OM 



I, of an ibd IB nUor*, 



CoNBck (popular), a polioewan. 

Cottard (popnlar), the bead ; areiT 
old word, BMd b; Shakipeare 
In King Lear. 

Coater bloke (popular), a ooeter- 



Coocb • bociliead, to (old oaiit), 
to I»7 down to Bleep. 



Connd] of ten (popolar), the toea 
of a man who tnma U* feet 
inwud (Hotten). 

Connterfeit crank (old cant), a 
rogue who ihammBd epil^aj. 
From the German trant, nek 



:v Google 



CoutUeT'jumper — Covmt Garden. 



Conater-Jmnpvr <ooiiunoD), a 
■hopmu, M, dnpsr'a aaaiiUiit. 

"sir, yon ihoold knov tliu mr duck 
ii BM for 700.* " Whj,' niicl Ik, ■tilmi 



Coimter-skipper (popnUr), & tbtI- 
•lit of " aoDntar - jumpw," ft 



tn (pngfltetlo), to ctrike. 

—C. Btdt : VtrJamt Grow, 

Connt noMa, to (parllMnrntorr), 
to take the nnmbei of » diTi* 

Conntj crop (pdwn), ball 
■bortened to ftbost mi Inch, 
whiob lued to be the rule la all 
priaons, bnt !■ now oonBned to 
oontiots. The expreadon ii 
therefore now » mi«nomer, m 
oonntj prison* no bmger exist 
nnce tbe Ooremnent took ell 
oter in 1877, and prisoneis 
M« not the* cropped, •■ it 
would oontinne theii ponith- 
ment (7 marking them oat after 
their discba^e. 



Covple-bcsfgar (old cant), a 
fellow, who officiated t 
olergjuuui ia perfotminK 
tiagee in the Fleet prison. 



low 



Cotirt mwtial (Mhoolbt^), the 
piaottoe of tosting in a blanket 
for a piaatioal joke. 

Conter (popnlai), a MrarelgB. 
From E7pe7, »Mtt«, lUeiallj a 

Cote (popnlar and tblevea). In 
old oant, "oofe," "oniBn," a 
roan \ idso landlord* 

Ht'i ■ traa dof. Doa't Im lo^ Smc* 
■t uiy maBsi erpi.—DidMtu! OUmrr 

Bwdo, I SB that Bit oThh iIh wwJk 
■0 naeli mbtin.-'Tih- 

Thli word Rotten oonneota 
with " ooif," a North of England 
word foe a lout or awkward 
fdlow. This seeros to be borne 
out hj the droomstanoe that in 
most cant languages roan and 
fool are sTnonjmoiu, but it haa- 
been snggested to be more pro- 
bata^ from tbe Soman; eowa, a 
thing, the tetm being almost 
indefinite in Ite applioabilitjr. 
"It is," M?a Pott, "a general 
helper on all oooadous, 1« naed 
as a BubetantiTe and an adjao- 
tive, and has a far wider scope 
than the Latin ra. Thns sow 
mesuu that man ; towi, that 
woman." Tbe derivation from 
the German hapf, a head (not ap- 
plied direotlj to individoala ex- 
cept as in English), has also been 
niggested. (Aoatialian station), 
the wK, the master, or OTer- 



Corait Garden (old slang). This 
place seems to have acquired at 



:v Google 



276 



Covatt Garden — Con-boy. 



one ttme » moat nuflUTimbla 
notoiietr, tor it enterad oon< 
•idenbly into the viol oni dang 
of lift; 7«kn ago. Thn* "the 
CbMMf Gardkn ague " wu a cer- 
tain TeneraaldlMaaa; a"Cb«ml 
Oonlmabbeea' 

and proctitntea were nioknamed 
"OiwntOardnniuia." (BhTm- 
ing BlAng). a tartUng pronoimced 



Cover (tUerea], an aooompllce 
wbo "fionta" or ooTeraapUik- 
pooket while he it openting. 
(Amerfoan), to eottr, to drink. 



CoTCM (old cant), ex^ained bj 
quotation. 

with Ihccm and 



iaij. ~/.Partir: fmruemttd Cluinit- 

Corej (popnlai and thieves], a 
man or htyj. Vid* Cova. 

HuUd, bt onv' v)>U'* <^ mwl- 
i>Kil«>: OHmr TtrM. 

"Cu'c Tou nt*T B< tlut f"* tub 
aawl" "You'd only booM il iti did.' 
And tha Md^ wDl ban to mil.— Sit^t' 

Covins;, theft of jeweller; by 
palming it as a oonJDTOT doea. 

Can (g7P*7) <fot «A*o), thla; 
thlf person or thing. Qno, 
"this man;" oort, "thli wo- 



Com, con* <gn>^). » thing; 
often pronoQiioed offitfr, " up to 
all the opnw," np to all tho 
bloka, gamaa, derioaa, ok 
"xlga." 



praooMM; Comben (g7pq>), an Indde&t. 



Cow (nantloal), a gay wcaaan. 
Vadt4, In the Freuoh slang, baa 
the same ilgnifioatkiD. {Tntf}, 
one thousand poandfl. 

Cowmn. In oidinaiy slang a apj, 
a sneal^ a prying informer. It 
glren by the Fiee- 
I all nnlnitiated per- 
I. andis probably the Hebrew 
word eojim, IiU, a prieat, from 
the oppodtjon and oj^jresdoD 
whloh the Freemasons have en- 
dnred from the Catholic Cbnrob. 
C^OMM is not an nnoonunon tomi 
of " Cohen " as a name among 
Jews. The derlTation of Ob — 
from the Oreek nW, a dog, Is 
a gteat injnstiae to the Free- 
masons, who hare nerer re- 
garded or treated the nnini- 
tiatedasdoga. 

Cow and €mB (rhyming slang), to 
langb. 

Cow-Jmj (Amoricsn), cattle her- 
der or droTer of Teias and 
South -Western States. The 
term was applied dnring the 
mrolntionary war to so-called 
Tory partisans in the State of 
New' York, bat who were do 
bettec Uian brigands, plunder- 
lag both sides. 



:v Google 



Coweamp — Craci. 



Cowcftnqi (Amerioan), u^dained 
bf qnotation. 

■bn ncuMiT Mtled uocIidkd kept 
«ud lad nrd over bcrdi s( lone jKnted 
Tou attl*, whicb iratHl nloof tb* 
tint or OD tbt KUtM aboTB.— rif ^'mMV 



iogncotto prefeoti), and " J0II7- 
kaepa," or old •tndantB, 

CnlM (thieves), feet; to move 
Mie'a emit, to ran amy. 
I ci oii »d »crmhg»tthtlmilTTd. . . . 

1 movod D17 ermii like ft hill f^ d^ 

TrmU. 

Cow-chilo (pldgln-EngUah), a. (Dioe plaTSTB), a pali of acec 

girl, {,«., eow-ohild. A boy was 
termed hJl-ehSo. These terms Cmbalidlt (popiJar), ahoe^ 



Cow-cow ^dgin), to b« very 
Migry, to lotdd (Hotten). 

Coir Jnice (popular), milk ; the 
term is also used by a^ool- 

Cowli^ (popnlai), look of hali 
twisted forward from the ear, 
laiely seen now. 

Cow-oil, or cow>CTe«M dddgin), 
batter. Obsolete, but Utcmlly 
d from the Chinew. 



Conw, (HH Bi^ i&aa, pot tba tattlg or 
Ibc Una en y%iai [Umt ttii, nod ■ i«iiia 
■ad fjUnin in jaa i^j-mAHl.—UtTtliji ; 
/tUhpMmJmU. 

Cowaliooter (^VlnofaMtatCoQege), 
a Hmnd-topped hat, troin only 
bypnfects, "blnoheis" (nnk- 



Cuptun Cadibr, u be lond u c 
himHir, WW tka ermtk diot cf DolUhii 
—TnOk. 

(Spcat), a erode, an adept. 

Lawn teniui ■! Cubs . . . tha doin 

of tb* trackt, 'm koaw, inlaat dubj 



Tie ennonlinUT CnetuilaiH in Iho 
b«tiii| which drorc the ermdi fnm C to 4 
Co 10 to I the pisbt bcfbi* tbt nco. — 
Sftrtag Tima. 

(01d),a(raail^«i insane person, 

(Popular), a eraek, a proatitnte ; 
to oraoi np, to extol, to poS 
(obsolete BngUsh, bnt nsed In 
a slangy sense) ; in a cradk, in 
an Instant ; to vrmk, to inform. 

(ThievM), a oraot, a burglary. 

—Dtelmii OUvtr TwM. 
To eratk a cnib, to commit a 
bnrglary. 
I nam tofn&inaih to-oi^it. 
But, pab, doD*! crmck od aa. 



, Google 



2/8 Craei — Crvm. 

TtHoibiiHndDpudifaiiik.miui; CfiiAta(;acnMt(oommoi»),nibb- 

9Bt tlH»'i not put w« Gu tfuck m£a aad *_._ ^i^n^ i*. *i.- ^Atjil < <« ■ 

»(U7.-flt*«irotf«-TWrt ing«lMgiBtheworid; am^ 

tny • tid; wmr, meuw ooinB 

(Tbikar}, ar«l, ft ■tiok. Hot Torj wdL Thl« ia k rery oom- 

moD ezprtsiioD uoong the lowor 

oidcn (Hotten). 

Cnck a bottle, to (oommon), ia Cncklinc (Ouabridgs Uniw- 
drlak ft bottle of liqacw. ^^7)1 tbs thna Tclret ebipe 



n the aleere bj « 

Cnck *. wUd, to (thi«m). to otSt. Joh]i'aOoll«ge,CMnbridK(^ 

bOk. oftlled " hog*." 

Ceased nnt (oommoa), th* head Ciack-pat (Ameiiosa), pretan> 

of an InMDe penou. tloni, pet^, a snail paiaon of 

Ab othdiludc poK Uf Mr. 10 Uttla aooonat 

lift ^ hi. ' W-J h-d." CwWnX r«»«-e*:^Uth.rfflr... 

tba enba—frnm. whm I aO Kit luM ud Unv, 

Clacked 19 (common), rallied, Biiodnc^yM 
" gone to naaah." 

Cracker (oommon), an nntrath 

ooBMqtMut on boaetfnl or im- Crackaman (thieves), a bmg^. 

probable Btatementa. Tbeolder Sooh necnk dndua ib* ttim 

form Is *'oraoli^" aUudinff to MoBiifirfn*, 

"naoknp," to bnidl7 extol, poff fmrWrfj r^iarfi 

op. It bat been niggested that 

"otaok" ia from the Oaelio Cnun, crammer (oommon), a He. 

eroe, to talk. The Fwnoh mm «, uoh, (^^,4 , . . p,jw 1.7 ». 

orwM ii< a mild nntrath, or a bruUiiif trtHtha^kdMb^adyo^B.^ 

gaeoooade, aad in the latter ''■*=*■ 

•enee it t« (ynonTinoiw with n« mi lb* ermmmir I nid hiM, and 

«nMbr lie Baron do Oao is fanhamm ... I pibd k np k Ul — 

the French MnnohaiiMn, the Cm>m^. L^ftm^CM. 

hoM of a Tolome of trarela, who Toara«i,totie;alsotoaGqnii« 

gieeta with the moet marrdlooa or Impart inrtniotion hastilj in 

adTentnreii the type of a boaat- view of an approachii^ exami- 

till, guconading, •torj-tellw. nation. Thi« U an aJmoat le- 



ATtrrdcnr hi a 



, Google 



To traat tqi one, to plj h 
wttb blMhooda. 

(TToiTeni^), a aram, a ttm 




>r (oommon), i 
a Uai; one expert in "otam- 
ming," ^e^ rntrwitig havtilT 
okodidatee for examliMtlou ; the 
head of a "omnnlng" ecUb- 



Cnunped, crap ped {popular and 
thisrei}, Ulled oi hanged. 



Cnunp in ttie hand (papular), 
•Ungiseai or n 

Cramp wofde (oldo* 



To erap, to hang. 

(Printen), q^ed to "fde," 
or mized-up type, that a oom* 
podtoT neglect! to clear awaj ; 
eqniTaloit to the popnlar name 
tor excrement. 

(Fopnlai), to orap, to eaaa 



Cnpoj IgTpfj), atnnilp, a bntton 
OTuailhead. Sometlmaair^^. 

Crawl (taOora), one who niaa nn- 
dignUed meana to oniry bTonr 
with an emplorer or foreman. 



Craatanrejs (American). When 
a man'e eje la bloodshot, gener 
ndtr from dilnkli^ alocA^ he 
ia often oiled a bi^ with a 
mmhi I > tfe. The American 
onnhenT !■ Ttetj much laxget 
than the BngMiih Tariety, and 
beare a reeemblnnoe to an !■• 
flamed optio. 



Alio a oab which goee alowlj 
to pick np tmzta. A meu, eoo- 
t«mptible fellow. 

Oatholio (Hotteo). In Ameriea 
a natlxe of Inland, i^, Iriah 



Cruk. Tidt 
oaaiiK. <American\ Inaane, eo- 
oentdoioramonomuilao. (Old), 
gin and water. 

Cn^ (<M Mi>t)> numej ; the 



Wnntad ■ Kmal-aaSd. So vaBa^ 
•U^V* Fame LiJf- 

Cnue (common), need tn lefer- 
enoa to aajthlug In great vogne 
that ia " the nge " for the time 



:v Google 



Cnuy — Cribcracker. 



puMd. DiuWtlwntwS.iiadll.tMd 
■hor pboMcnplu uka tecMbv, nod Ih* 
dooblaplaw* aold HiBnAal fuioulT. — 



Cmyqaitt (Amerloui), properir 

• Milt nude of aU fcini^M of 

{Mtobet. . lipustiTsly a ooti- 
tawd aod mixed poUtiMl pHty. 



Ohi 



Cream lUck (popular), the penii. 

CrMuny (ocamnoa}, exoaUent. 

Cfe4>er (prison), one who onrriea 
taTonr t^ hjpooriaj and tale- 
bearing. 

Creepen (popnlai). Hoe. (Ameri* 
can), the feet. 






Cd, ahort for OriterlOo. 

Bnl tba TaBtb wM hud-lHBUd, ud 
•eoo he dspanod, 
And jmitni vwkj U iIh Cr£ 

Crib (popylar anS tUorea), a 



Tfaqr tir*"'*^ b dw lanUB ■ftcr 
tbcT )ud <»dud Ih* o«.-ir. f imaJJCr .- 



n i< Deed I7 otban In 
M f or a plaoe. 



itEiementaobng Ballwaj 



Vlh." 



(Sohooli), a llteial trautlatlon 
of an antbor. Foactblf from 
the meaaing of to vrA, to cntwd 
together, to oonfine in a amall 
■paoe, a« "caam," aynonTm of 
9rQi, or from tJie ilang signlflca- 
tlon to oboat, to pUfer. To crib, 
to oheat at an ejcaiiiiiia^oii bj 
niing a trib, more geoetallj to 
oheat bj plagiarj. [Common], 
to orib, given by Webster as a 
lecogniaed word bat used now 
in > alaiigr aense, to pilfer. 

Il b BM «eidu«, U Uu> It doM bcK 
■■B filu NoLat ... it b oliiKMadr 



(Old oaat), arSt. the stomach. 

CiiblMge-Gued (oommou), li nid 
of a peraon marked with the 
imall-poz. 

Crlbber (military), a gnmbler; a 
oaTaliy term evidently from the 
ezpreaston " orlb-blter," gtren 
to a botse wbloh gnaws at Ita 
orib or aumger, QuamlUog with 
Ub but meal and bis dlfflo&Ity 
in digesting it, 



Ciib-btter (oommon), an inrete- 
rate grumbler. Vidt Cubbba. 



Cribcmckcr (thlerea and popn- 
lar), a bm^ar. 



:v Google 



Crik^ — Crockets. 



CtiJnj IpoptiKi), Ml wolamatioii 



mptton of ChriiL 

"Wdl,I'BiMowedl'-li..ddod. "Thi. 



Ciiimiin (tinker), sheep. 

Crlnktun-cnuikiiBi (old slang), a 
womftn'i privUe parts. 



tiad tbit b> hul three 

Croak, to (tUerM), to die, to 
IdlL 

Croakumihire (old ilang). This 
nkknanie is raid to hAve been 
given to Moithnmbetlftnd be- 
cause of the dUBonltj people in 
that ooont; have in piononooing 
the lettei r, wbloh imparts a 



Crock (common), the or^iinal 
meaning Is that of a slow, 
worthless boTse, but in sooiet; 
it Is also applied SgnratJTelj to 
a slow, foolish, good-for-nothing 
person, as in the phnue, " that 
girl Is a regular eroet." In 
spotting and nniversltj lan- 
guage it is also need in Teferenoe 
to a duffer, a laiy bonglei. 
Tbt dcUoqncnu Mill rowed ibeir bkdei 



likeiL 






Croaker (old slang), a fonrpennj 
piece. (Common), one who 
takes a desponding view of 
«*er7thing, (Fopnlar), a beg- 
gar, a ootpse. 

Well ^ , , li won't pvrhapa Knd 7011 
good mi m crwmktr.—J. 



(Prison), the doctor. 
It Dun who had pot hii nuDfl lor Ibe 
idler" M crtaAir, woDld. ruUcpIt 
of bread IcH 



With reference to the origi- 
nal meaning of ilow, worthless 
horse, erotHe is allied, to -«rup, 
Anglo-Saxon ertopan, and old 
High Dutch krioeXan. Bnt it 1* 
oorlooa to note that in German 
slang Irig is a horse, and that 
the German roM, a hone, has 
given the ITrenoh n«*e, a slow, 
good.f oT-nothlng horse ; this 
woid being nsed with the same 
flgnialiTe meaning as oroot, 
applied to persons. 

Crocker (sporting), a spaniel em- 
plo7ed in beating imderwood 
for small gamck 

Crockets (Winchester College), 
the word for cricket. To "get 
ent «ro«b((("is to get out with 
a "duck's egg," that is, with* 
ont having made iby rnna. 
"Small «rMtoi" is,.the name 
given to a game placed with an 
india-rubber b^ and a plain 
deal bat about two inobea 
broad. 



:v Google 



CrocodSe — Cross. 



Crocodile (nniTtnl^), a girl*' 
■obool walking t«o and two. 

CncnSi creakns (popular and 
thierei), a quack; cronu- 
ohoTej, an apotbecaiy'i abop; 
oranu-pitcher, a itreet aeUer of 
medioinea. 

(Arm;), eneut, an aimj or 
naT7 aorgeon. ITiom "oroak," 
to die, whicb baa givan tbe 
priatm alang "oroafcer" for a 

Crone (dnnu), a olown. From a 
{tfOTindaliim, trormf, merry. 

Cronker (tailora), tha foreman. 

Cto<A (thieref and popular). On 
tha onak, by duboneat meana ; 
tbe TeTerae of "aqoare." Got 
on the cnak, ttolen. Hence a 
enak U a thief, both In England 
and America. 
Chicago (»•>*.— "Good oen, Jim.' 

, . . Fauov trtk.—" Wlai't opf— 

Tit-Biti. 
No cnml fcti utj gaoA ool of hii 

\iuMm.—DtmU Pnt Pnn. 



: (old alang), ■ dx- 
penny pteoa, bom loma of 
tbaaa ooina being mneh bat- 



a bcftTy falL Alao aaid of a 

man who « 

faUnia. 



imtTima. 

Croppie (^iaon), one who haa had 
hiahairoatinpriaon. Thet«m 
waa iqiplled to Iiiah i^tela in 
1789, and f ormeilT to thoae wlu) 
had their eara cnt off \sj the 
executioner. Foritana want by 
that name on acoount of tbeii 
abort hair. 

Cnppled {WInobeatw Collaga), 
to be er^flti ia to b« tnmed 
inaleaMW. 

CroH (tbievei). To be " on tbe 

croa," to be a thief; to get * 

thing on the cnu ia to obtain it 

anireptitioiuly. tbe rereiae of 

" on the aqoare." 

The TODDC WDDU ii Boa, aiid potafB 

■be mair be oa Uw erm, ud J" dsa't fa 

U BT Ihu wliel witb ■■-ri-f ud wjib 

ely-Udnf, uid mch like, ibe maya't be 

nnledumedBy.— /r.JTuvTiPr.' JtJWI- 

itt. 

Hencc^ a trvt^a tblef ; tennad 



Croop (popular), itomaeb; 
croph 



cwKi. ud at the knral of Iha b* •Pba 
toppctud pufiliuiL— /'■Mel. 



not paying hla billa to the boiaar, 
or ontting ch^el laotnrea, to. 



:v Google 



Cross — Crumpbr. 



Cron tiiMf (oMtonnongeis), a 
tbiel 

Craas core ud mollltlier 

(tblflTH), k mail and woman 
who M« in paitncnbip for pnr- 
poMi of robbeij. 

C r o M crib (thioTM and MOglu], 
a honae freqneated bj thiereft. 

Cr<»»<Dt, and tip ud sifter 

(American), "'"'"g tenna from 
Calif omla expraulTe of motfona 
or metboda in waahing gold 
Tbeae tenu wne at one tinw 



manjwaTa. 






(tblnrea), a tblerea' 



g (thierea), robbing 
kpenon of hia aoiif-idn; "from 
tha poaition of the anna in the 
net," wmja Hottan. Vide Tam. 

Cfoadns Qm danq>-pot (tailon), 
going to Amerioa. 

Cmu-kid, to (thierea), explained 

bj qnotation. 

\ ndo- am« to the cell «i^ emi- 
tUJtd (qncBiBBcd) mL—HntU^: JH- 



expected piece of lock, ic, 
•tniiething to eroie amt. " I 
hare a orow to poll with 70D," 
a complaint to make, or mia- 
nnderstanding to dear np. 
(Ametioan), to eat oraw, to 
recant, to hnmiUate oneadL 



—SI. /«ui' Gaittt. 

Crawder (dnker), a atiing. 
Crowdeia (theatrical), large aadi> 



Craw-eater (colonial), a lazy fel- 
low who will lire on anything 
mthor than work. 

Cmnfoot (priaon), the Oorem* 
ment mark of the broad arrow, 
which la stamped In black paint 
on ptiaon olothing as a meana 
of detection in case of escape. 



Cn^ (popular), food. 

Eos{dtal), brand. 

H* )ud hb la ud hat rolli 
lap;, wkilfl *« vert hattttiinj 
qa*na of m. pcany IgAf— 'oi 



(Chiiit 



CrOW(ttaleTe8),amanwhawatohea 
while anothei oieepa Intohoosea, 



Cnuniny (armj), dirty; applied 
amongst aoldlers to a maa'a 
appearanoe. (Thievea), with 
well-filled pockets Abo lon;^. 

A " cnuaatir dosa." 

Cnunpet fkce (popular), a face 
with smallpox maifa. 



:v Google 



Cmkk — Cujfy. 

a do >i>gai ibc bi Cuckoo (Moie^), a twA, 



Crntcli (Wloobwtsi Collage), a 
Dune given to the ■obool ou- 

Cry of tUdgS (popnlu), & graat 
munbai of tUiigB; "a eiy of 
pem." 

Cry HM>tcbM (American), a ilMig 
exclamatioD of mipriBe. IW 
deilmtioii U Improboblr ^ven 
M "Drime hatches." fijiome 
"ra;" Is ooDsldered at eqnlvk- 
lent to ChrlsU oi Christ, but 
the phraee la altogethei oboonre. 

Cnnher (popnlu), a polioeman; 



Cud (\nncbe«ter College), hand- 
■ome, prett7. Fnibabi; Imm 
tudoi. (Popular), a piece of 
tobacco obewed, a "quid." 

Cnddlinc (prUa-figbtoia), wtMt- 

Ung. 

Ii vu laid br mnc cbtiUbi that iIki* 
wma too mudi wTTVClinc gr, u ihey diUal 
i[, aiMU-r.—I'ami. 

Cne deqiiser (theatiiaal), aid of 
an aotor who la oaraleaE in tak- 
ing np hie v¥itt tberebj damag- 
ing the perfonnanoe. 

Ctu, to (tbieTei), to obtain gooda 
OB credit wbteb jon never 
mean to pay for, ajnaofmoiu 
mtb "going npon the letter 
Q," "the mace." 



tt't 'ard Imnckla i 
Uowad ifthu ut 



Crash, to (popnlai), to ran. Foa- 
^AAj from " beetle - anuber " 
(wMoh tee). 

Cnt>t (theatrical), the bead. 

Cnutj bean (old alang), a fop 
who makea up with paint and 



Coffer (mOltary), a lie ; apbmlng 
a a^ftr, telling an exaggerated, 
groasly Improbable ator;; one 
that nt^ or beata aaj atotj. 
(American tbleree), a man, rna- 
ttc. From old English cant 
cofi, or the Tiddlab b^, a 
■topid fellow; baffori, Hebrew 
fori 



Cuff ahooter (theatrioal), ut Im- 
podent and prenu&lng tTvo, who 
gives Mirt^ftlf airs, and tMnV* 
more of hla " * ™ff» " than ^*" 



C.T.A., (droTU and tntvelling 



CvBj, cnffM (Wfft Indian), : 
word geaeiallj q)plled t 



:v Google 



Cuffy — Ctmnek. 



285 



negtosBi and which wm 



among tbem. Litoiallj it 
iiieMu"Tl»iT8da7." Amongth* 
QshMk and Dohomer negroes 
orerj man rec«ivM a nam« 
from th« da; of the week on 
wbiob be la bom. Henoe the 
freqnenoT of Qnaahee, Oi^t, 
Juba, &0. The latest Ouget In- 
trodnoed to the British pablio 
was Sing Coffee CalooUL 

«^- 

bohu 



Cnling (thieves), an abbreriatton 
ot reticnllng ; inatehing rett- 
onles from the seats of oarriagea 



Colio (pidgin), a ciuio, a onriositT. 
The oommon term " coiio " was 
boiTowed from this OUnese ah- 
bieriation: 

r FloDK* (Fnoch- 



Evidently an abbreriatton <A 
" oullion," Fimoh touiUon. 

(Theatrical), acton sometimea 
address one another a« mOy, oi 
"laddie." 



n fnend of ■ weU-la 



wifc,DUboTt"l; 



., iMlfy."-BitH Fradmrn. 



CnUy %,'atfset (theatrical), the 
manager of a theatra. Ao- 
oording to Panmann. a bictber 



Ciun annezea (West Indian), the 
members of one's family. 

Cum-diaw (pidgin), a present of 
any kind, a gtatoity, apourioir* 
or tottfetiA. "According to 
Giles It U the Amoy pionnncia- 
tion (jboM-tid) ot two chanoten 
signifying 'gntefol thanks'" 
(Anglo-Indian Glossary). 



No* Iba dulcT ihiaa od 'cm, ] 
what fiuBou Ui(i Ihc oM hu oo.- 
wtrAi AmrM. 






OttUg bad formerly the signf- 
Scation of greenhorn, fool, dupe, 
milksop, and was a recognised 
word ; it Is nsed by Addison 
and otbeis. 

Voar rsjal mBj bu conimuu] 



Condtim (old), appliance for Uw 
proTentloQ of infection in sexnal 
interconrse. The word is oaed 
t^ the Qermans. Said to be 
deriTed from one Condom, who 
lived In the reign ot Queen 
Anne, and was noted for aelltog 
what is now called " French 
letters." French, eapnUi ang- 



:v Google 



Ciip — Cuss. 



286 

Ciqi Bad MKcr pblyen (thaatri- 
od), a term of derWon inTontad 
bj tlw paadmltta for tbe pnr- 
pOM of dflpnolatlng the mrtMa 
Maodatod with the pMtonu- 
■Doe of tha late T. W. Bobnt- 



Cnp-tn iBf (popnlat), a panon 
who prottMM to tell fortune* 
bj oxaminliig the groiuidt In 
teft or ooSee-cmp* (Hott«ii). 



Cnre (oommon), a onHoiu, eonan- 
trio, odd peraou. Imported 
from Amerioa ; wai lued with 
that MDW tweutj-Gre jean 
a^ Hon geoeiallj now a 
humorona, oomkalpenoii. De- 
riTed from an aooetitrio Ameri- 
can popular song called "The 
air*" 

Cnriona, to do (popalar), to do 
aajthlug oot of the ordinary, 
" Look at that man tnmblliig 
abont He'i doing wrioiu." 

Cnri Of (popular), be silent. 

Cnrnuits and plnma (rhyming 
■lang), thranu ^ tlang foi thro^ 



bable i^ that in the game ot 
Fope Joan the nine of diamond* 
li the pope, of whom the 8oat4ih 
have an eapedal hoRW, 

Cttraetor (<dd cant), a tiamp, 
vagabond. 



CmrencT (Aosttallan), pemon* 
bom in Auittalia, nativea of 
England being teimed "tbet- 
ling." 

Cnrro (gypay), a cup or tankaid. 

Cdtm of Scotland (Sootch), the 
nine of diamouda. Many de- 
ri*atiTM hare been raggMted, 
and Hotten cay* the moat pro- 



Csrtain (thMtrioal), a itniiig 
litaatloD at the end of an aot, 
which, when the mrloiB d«- 
*oeuda, elicits a bnnt of mp- 
plaooe, and oaotea the eartota 
to be taken np again. 

Cnctain-niser (^leatrical and 
jonmaliatic}, a short play per- 
formed before a more important 
one; OorrexpondstotheReneh 
" levet de ridean." 

"Lcwemnd Polida" waAfwodBod Ma 
mrten-rucfr MX tbi Open Cgmiqiia «a 
ThandcT-— rA( Si/int, 

Ciwe (Winohestor ColI«g«), a book 
In whioh the marks of each 
division are recorded. 

liter (popular), a 



Com (American), a m 



It is not alway* nsed dis- 
paragingly; a toogh mm la a 
bold, indomitable man. 



:v Google 



Cussa^uss — Cut. 287 

■ili rii-Sf ^J^'S^ U L™" Cnt and dried (thi«?M), the phnm 

-j—^k. i(..i_ ».u .. i_ lu reters to k robbety whloh hu 

been duly fanned. 

SoBH tiiH a(k« tb>t ■SUr irith ib* 

/ 1 _.^^„_\ .^1 r«aca, one of tha mob aid to mt, '* 1 ba¥« 

,^^ (AmericMi). evil- ^Tpi^^^^j^. ^ ;„™, 

To do » tbiDg oat of pore 

tumdauM U the suae h to do Cttt bene, to (old oaut), to dm 
It for mere mlaahief, withoat pleuknt woida. 

TMMD or ezoiue. Alio endA- 

^^ Cut capers, to (common), to be- 

h&ve In « diMTdeily, ^pioper 

Cut dead, ta (oommoa), to bmak 
off ell conneotion with an ao- 
Cnra ont, to (American), to nib- qoalntance or Mend. 
due or rflence an opponent b« h. «oid «t p. rt™ book. -iUi. 

bj overwhelming Berent; of gat Dr. WycticrliT, ud aDfortniiiiUlT b> 
tongue. " He muted him intt," bMd att tbu worthy lUmd in till on 
ifc, used inohrtoleat language "y'™--*™'': HmniCM^. 



(not nBcessarilj profane) a 



Cnt didoea, to, ejnonTmona with 



»«b.lljuillhilU.hl.. „„tcp.„,HotU»).' 

Cnatomer (oommon), generally Cnt dirt, to (American), to ran 

Dwdio(ii^phiaBeiaea''qaeer, away very rapidly, 

or ram nuto«<r;" a onrlone H. j™p up fc" Hniii-b* nrt *r* 

fellow, or one difflonlt to deal ud nin. 

with; an "Ogly OHttoner," a Whila Simbo fellow uMi vid hit 

dangeroDB person or animal. " '"'°' n™. 'u"'" 

(Amerioan thioreiX a rtotim. -f^^ Smf/it*9. 
Cat down (Amerioui), deprived, 

Cut (old), tip«y. (Society), a step, brought low. poor, 
a atage, as " ebe U a «M abore 

me." Cot in, to (society), take a share 
in, to tiy for. 

Cut a dline, to (popnlaz), to play Mom of ih> nodnu will cut Jl* fcr m 

pnnka, amoM oneaelf boieter- t*at.—Stifi MmpaiM. 

°'"*'' Cttt into, to (Winoberter CoUiee). 

I BDokc her hcnosu ud lomr hgr tO hit one on the beok With a 

win<, " ground aeh" or stick naed by 

*"«W '""™y'"'"™' prefects In the eiercUe of thdr 

-^tmt, fonotiona 



:v Google 



CtU—CmOmg. 



Cot It bt, to (popnlH), to thaw 
oB, ezaggsmte. 

nnwr'n DtUMnd b gnat knt, ud aa 



Cat of om'a Jib {( 

Kpptaimot. 

Cot ooe's hickr (pc^nlu), to p> 
Away, to nin off ; to maka a 
"Inokj" eKMpe (Ut /Oieiur 



Cid one's stick, to <i 
to deput; literally, . 
■tick for * Joiin]«7. Oi 
niptioii ol t^ tut/ ' 
p«ga, often done ia a grekt 

nvoffamuippHnd; and b; 

Ilwwhimrormknpal . . . 

. . . 1 Oed I— fut u I eosld 
I *«( I— ia fut, nfuB, wd it wi 



ft oor- 
tant- 



oocdlng to Taiu, wm ■{iplied to 
a man in Um habit of drawing m 
knlf B in a qwuraL 

Cut tiiat (popular), be quiet 

Cttt Um line (priDt«n), aee Lm> 
OH. Wbco a oompanlonihip of 
Dompoalton ftQ abort of work 
tbay ouC <A* Unt, ie., all tha 
men leare work till anfiDie&t It 
provided for the wbol& Tha 
nterenoe ii to the &ot that 
pieoe bftnda working in oom- 
panlonihip* ua pcdd bjr tba 
number of lines oomposed, ao- 
ooidlng to siM and width. 

Cnt the Uoe, atrinr, to (thiana), 
to od( a atoij ^ort, to and a 



Cnt MVKf, to (taUore), to ont 
a gannent in the height of 
fuhion. 

Cnt»am (pidgin), oortom ; a woid 
extenslTelyapplied tolaw, hahlt^ 
naage. "Dat blongy olo ent^ 
torn," is continnally heard from 
Chtoeee, when asked the reason 
foranjthing. 

So U Manger ela »|!>n>— which iwn 
Alio hM (kll'bulm) l«b fot Micka ia 
-A»nr -Id Ot M-rdU. 

Cutter (old), a ontpnna. Hotten 
sajB tbia ancient oant woid now 



Cntting: (Anitnllan and Amari- 
oan), separating oattla from a 
herd and lawoing them. 

I had been rnndihd with a tntnad 
nMfV' PODT, npoiud to be toe cf tb* 
bcM is tba nlkr. . . . Ii wai mIj 
eaeamrf, alter huTioi ibown him ■ csw 



Cnttiog Ua area (thlerea), getting 



Cnttinr hia own thraat (Stock 
Bxohange} is asid of a man who 
bnya or sella stock*, and imma- 
diatelj re-seUa or le-porchaoM 
them at « lois. 

Cutting Ua painter (naatioal) ia 
*aid of a man who makes off 



:v Google 



Cutting — Cymbal. 



289 



anddenlj or clandeaUnelr, ot 
dies. French mUoib hm the 
corTMponding upiMdon diro' 
tingtier with the aune MUM. 



Cnttiiic ahop (popnlu-), % pUoe 
where cheap Inferior goodi or 
material ue leUiled. 



Cnl; to (oommoa), to nn away. 
0«DeAU7to"«Mtaudniii." Ab> 
breriated from "euthie rtlok," or 
from aa Idea of ■eraanot^ Mpn- 
ratlon, aa In the phraM " ODttiiig 
one'i iMinter," going >w»;. 



(Tiade), to compete In biui- 
neea (Hottan). 

(Old cant), to ipeak. 
Cvttf (common), a abort-Btemmed 
oUj pipe. 

"Wo«'i lb* iMnwt- oitd tin maO- 
BU, whs hwt U^UHl ■ mltj, ud ml 
quinlr tf"'''"« il.—Aaumfrtk : Au n 'r / . 



Cnttlng'-tTade (trade), one oon- 
dncted on oompetitiTe principle*, 
where the proftta are yorj oloselj 
Bh>TBd (Hotten). 

Cnttlnp np (popular), acting in 
an eooentrlo or daring manner. 
To att up ihindiei waa the first 
tonn. The ezpieision ha* ex- 
tended to the Dnlted Btates. 

CotUe-boonif (old oant), a knife 
naed for ontting pnnea. 

Ciitto or cotter (g7par)> > P^we, 
bit, rag, or dropt OutUrt a* 
tritkno, "dropa of rain;" ytdt 
entter o' Itrinra, "one drop of 
ale." OtUteriitffnM, bit*, pieces. 
fnfrri, eqnlTate&t to a thing or 
one thing, like the "one piece" 
of Fidgln, i* often qnite need- 
leaalf poet-flxed to a noon in 
Bomany. (Hindn,tara,adTop.] 
Hence eutUr, » (gfM) pleoe, a 



Cnt np (oommon), vexed ; to evl 
mp, to coma np; generallj to 
torn Oct, wen or otherwiM; 
to become ; to ntC up well, mil* 
Cut up rAT. (Thieves), to 
imtvp,to divide the {dander. 

Cot Dp Eat, to (oommon), to 1mv» 
at one's death a good evtate. 

Cnt op roog^ to (oommon), to 
give rignsof great dlspleasnrei to 
become violent, evilly d' 



Cotupahloea, ahhidtea, to (popo- 
lar), to plaj trioka, pisnka 
(Hotten). 

Cot Tonr own srasa. to (priacn), 
gain yonr own living. 

CjnnlMl (tbievea), a watoh. 



:v Google 



ScOl I phr ibocbladk 
odd tiBo. I hiT* ■ Aw 
nendt aBKHic ib* Ift (daMdiTv), who 

JI7. Tba I trnkenpilKbiuudbniba 
ad phc< myicU is ■ niobla poBtiM. 
t p*jri will wlul* h luu. Nor ii U ilw 
olj WK7 ID which By fnenda ibfl Ut bid 
H ucAiL I hive bvt taxTf bus nU (sm 



D'l, the two (uiny), Bhort 1*7. 
The letidaa loft a soldier, part 
of wbow p*7 Is stopped by 
•sntenes of oonrt-nuxtUl for 
"■poating "or pawning hli kit. 
Hoverer large th« amoont to b* 



IB bt perfect imit u juapinc-nneL 
0«aersUf sappaaed to be de> 
rived from "adepts" bnt to daft 
meana to strike gmtly, uid 



to retain twopenoe, 3d., a* dutr 



In dabbing, one with a light 
tODoh, a eklUnl hand, a "good 
hand " at, hence expert in. 

In old cant the term "imn 
dabe" was applied to one ex* 
pert at rognei;. Uteiall;, a 
"good band;" ponlblj from 
Oennan tappe, flat, paw, and 
this ma; be tbe origin of the 
modem dob. The French dang 
has rioft, meaning master, obiet, 

(OoateimongBis' hack ilai^), 



I-« btca dsiiit awfd A* -wO, mi$ 
td (lot) or Mock, hma'l inde k ^cbbv 



D. H. F. {<70ling dang), really 
letters signi^ing a peonliar 
form of fork nsed for falojolee, 
and known as tbe "Doable Hot- Dab it np, to (thieves), to ocdiaUt 
low Forit." Applied to a b"~ _ . . 



Oftb. 



In tbe slang ot "water 
lais,' i,t,, river thierei who 
plonder the bodies of drowned 
persona, the bod; of a poor 
ragged woman ia called a imb; 
from dot, mlgarij need in eon- 
tempt for a woman, as a diit; 
daft, a dot, daft* being laga 

(Theatrical), abed. 

(Common), to be a daft at anj- 
thing ia to be more than osoaJlr 
expert at ik 



Dab ont, to (popular), to wash. 

Hk wile u Ah ^g^int adriBi^^ 
boHir of SaUuh leum 10 dat tmt 
bw loHtarT catna (om.-/. Gmmmmdi 
Umltraimtttt ^ LtmJmi Lift. 

DMfaater. rtd< Dab. 

Dab wMh. Among the lower 
olaaaes a daft whA is a Bnall 
intermediate waab between the 
la^eonea. 



:v Google 



Dace — Dago, 



291 



clolhs hufinc (0 drr at till Gn, *hM- 
cncdiTof the weak it wu; ■ODeoMaf 
tb« larf« iirfgolBT ^loily tufiof h*d what 



DKe(AinerIou),twooeiita. From 

DKlM-aaltee (tUem and oostei- 
mongBis), tenpeiuw. From tha 
Itelun djan jcrfdi. 
Wbu with or crippltdem isd ibj piMr, 

■ whecHat of ih7 pocr aid dad, ml] U«d 

ibe hnrnpHm of ■ Aala-WdK— JCHill .- 

Tb Otattr ami Oh HtartM. 

Dacoit (Anglo-IndlmnK a robbn 
belonging to an turmod gang 
whioh, aooordlng to law, miut 
oouiat of at leaat flra penoaa. 



In 



Dkd, duUr (pc^Dlai), father. 
Welth lad; Irish doiit, andbub 

Hs gKi Bon £U hi> 4W IVB7 dty. 

DU, <Udiia, dUo (gTpi7), of 
Hindu oii^n, fiither ; daddtbn, 
fathwlj, pertaining to a father ; 
"ap miio dadjekro warti" bj 
in; father'* hand I 

Daddle (popular), hand. 

Worr uaaptatd plwonl Tip m 
TBor dlHUEt.— C KinpIV! JtU^Lttir. 

(Bozing ilaag), the fist 
With ^aZOi lii|h npniHd, ud nail* 
held back. 




Daddr (tbeatrloal), ilw oomle old 
man of a oompan j. AooonUng 
to Hottan, a stags managM. 
At sham raSoa the dad^ ii a 
oonfederate who la, by prerlons 
anangement^ to win the prise. 
At oasnal wards the iUidd$ la 
the old jianper in oliaq;e. 

Dafff (popnlar), gin. Hotten 
■aj* : — "A tenn nsed by monthly 
noziee, who are alwayi extolling 
the virtues of Doiff^t dlHi, and 
who occaslonaDj oomf ort them- 
■elTes with a stronger medidne 
under D^i'» name. Of late 
j^m the term has been altend 
to 'soothing syrup,' " 

D«ftie (taflors), one who says (or 
doee) anything absurd. 

DacKe^<he^i (old), dirt ohe^i. 
"Nie D^ger waa a low ordinary 
in Holbom, referred to by Ben 
Jonson and others; the tan 
was probahly cheap and nasty " 
(T. h. O. DaTies, Supplementary 
English QlOBSary). 



Dag« (American), an Italian, de- 
dred by one authority bom the 
Spanish hidalgo, Aa the word 
has been for a long time In um 
among sailors, who ^iply it to 
Spaniards, F<»tiignesek and Ita- 
lians, bnt principally to the 
fonner, there is little donbt bnt 
that it comes from DUgo, whlob 
is almost equinUeat to Jack In 
the Spanish porta. 



:v Google 



Dags — Dakma. 



Daga (popular), % work, a job, a 
petformAiio«k "VWiajrmida^ 
tatjon," Lt., ril do yonr work 
for 70a. The word ti a oonqp- 
Otm of ttw old Bngllih and Low- 
land Booloh, and looal In many 
Bn^iih oonntiM ; dory, a day*! 
work, a« tn Uw rhTme— 



which U to cay, "I'D do my 
work before I atgne about it." 
The " Farmer'B Bueyolopndla," 
qaoted In Woroettei's Diction- 
ary, defloee "daig " or *Margiie " 
a« " the quantity of peat which 

wheel in a day." 

Dal, 4je igJVJ), a mother. JTys/ 
oh motherl Dgt$krt dye, ma- 
ternal grandmother. Bihdiif*, 
paternal giuidmother. 

Dai^ LctT, the, a nickname of 
the DaAy Tdtgr^lk, in alloaion 
proprietor, Mr. Lory 



DalriM (popnlar), a nlgat word 
forawoman'ibreasU. The alia, 
•ion 1j ofaTiona. 

Daiales (popnlai and thieree), 
boota. Ab^Tlatedbom "dalay- 
roote," which lee. 

And Ibcit lb«T ate u dtub u laloa, 
■nd B« tai CiacO' m larlDf andir Ih* 
MU). OhI hvu ■ b*u— wlthlhs'seU 
of tba copfnt'i daititt Jut is Irani of ny 

XMxj (popnlai), Jolly fellow. 




Daiaj-catter (oonunoo), a botaa 
that doea not lift ite feet miioh 
off the ground when trotting at 
galloping, or dmply a trotttng 

n* tm b Ibc tiiK laKS Ibr ■ hM^BCT : 



of Unl road (biimiv cuucr) fat a quail 
of dud u tlH uaiita^—SirW.Si^a: 

(Orioket), a ball bowled aU 
along the ground, instead of 
with a proper pitch. Though 
perfectly fair, they are eon* 
ddered bad form. Termed alio 



Daisy-kkker (ostlen], the name 
oaUen at inne aometimee give 
each other, 

DaiajToota (rhyming slang], boota. 

Tbt WindMr niriur vu luuioalr 
nfftMiiiC bu dvwIt vmmubcd pkCcol 



nddT Pan UulL 
'"En TOO an, lir; jonip in," ramd 
■bbr. "Sooner Otka jou un» l« 



Dalajrille (thlerea), the ooDntry. 
Dakma, to (thieve*), to sileaoe. 

I had u imkmia Iha blako M d«T *>>■ 
•»■■. PuMjp ctomd (gr it», aad IhM 



, Google 



n* aO th* iDod it don ni.-Om a 
TrM. 

Daiu (Dp-country AnatTalUo), . 
pond for watering oattlot Ibis 
U gener»U7 made by throwing 
ap ■ bulk korou a hollow or 
little goUy. Wben the floods 
oome the eeoi^ of the flood- 
water 1* iBVTented. 

Tha imla had bcca pouring don for 
w i ll, M if to Bake Bp fiirilwnHMr'i 
dlvacbt. It bad filkd t)u dmmu und 
doodtd tha cndu, ud the diowm mn 
Ibvuv ■ dmdn bonL—XkirUn G—d- 
ikiU! Wmif. 

Damber (old oant), Qrst doMitr- 
MTe, a head-man. 

Dame (Eton). At Eton the word 
ham* baa no referoioe to the 
weaker mx. Any person, other 
than « olaaclcal marter, who 
keepe « boys' boarduig-honse In 
Coll^a ti a Samt. Thni all 
matbematloal masters' hooses 
are Damat' bonse^ 
I uB thiinlijiil IS My thu I did oot 
UUBd Ih* ihow. Bal I happened to eee 
the Wofld oandiKtad bMi u hu Damti, 



I da Bot ihlak Ibe WoHd 
■KHuwiui public hrquiusCgnnichi.— 



SkUdtf Mumuitt if sum. 



■ pU)Pad,"c 



T. F. W. Comidi 
iBbaah tor ooi ooiooaiiw behlBd 
thu W7 (hup turn is tW Hl(li SDMI, 
*Ucb, OB •cmni cf in i 



dMHil(oldslang). A clerk 
in the Customs House, whose 
doty was to swear or olear mei- 
ohaadlse, used to guard against 
perjury by taking a previous 
oath merer to sweai tndy; he 



r (iohool), a suet podding 
In use at eobools, intiodnoed 
before meat to take off the 
edge of thoappettte. (Thieves), 
a shop tiU. To "draw a dost- 
ptr," to rob a tilL 

(Tailors), a "sweater," i«, 
one who gets as muoh work for 
a little pay as possible out of 



I Coiner (Eton), ex- 
Iilained t^ qnotation. 

a of oqr dooa. 



Damp-pot (taDors), the se<k 

Dattce, to (printers). If letters 
drop oat when the forme is 
lifted, the forme Is said U Atnee 
(Aoademy of Annoniy, B. Bolm^ 
I6SS). 

lOId), "locIafUKtheFadding- 
ton frisk," to be banged ; also 
termed " to donatQpon nothing." 
Fronoh "danser one danae oh 
i' n'y a paa d' plancber." 




hjbim 



Dancer oc dandns-nftstef 

(thiavea), a thief who gets on 
the roof of bouea and e&Mts 



:v Google 



Danctrs — Dang. 



an entnnoe bj a window. He 
hu of oonne to pl«k hii w^ 
oafsfolly, and to be m neat in 
hii itepa m k rfnwri'mr miUir 



thM b, fo DP th* a^n,—Ljtttm: m»t 

Dander (low), to get up one's 
dandtr, or to hare one's dandtr 
taleed, to get saddetilf into a 
paaslon ; to bnnt or flare npL 
From the Dotoh. 

TIh An and farj thai bhmd kk ha ajs 
I of htr dmmdtr bviaf 
7. Piimfuu, cUM h 



(Atnetioan). Tbiiwaid,origi- 
nailj KngUflh, *wH manifeetJj 
taken from the ordinar; word 
dowly, a fop, aa a tjpe of anj- 
tbing neat or fanolfol, has been 
greatly extended in America. 




(Anglo-Indian), a t 
alio a kind of banunock-litter, 
in which tnTSUen are oaiiled. 



There ta not the ilighteet 
proof that thia i« derived from 
laialag the eontf or dandtr at 
the loota of the hair, aa Bart- 
lett thinks, though Ajnericaai, 
milled t>j the reeamblanoe of 
•onnd, talk abont "Jonda- being 
rii." In Dntoh domUr li thon- 
der, and tp dondtm, i.*., to get 
the ilon<l«r np, la to bunt oat 
into a ndden rage, or, >■ 8ewd 
fFTplalug, "Uke 
■p^t ; " to flare np ; to 
OQt in wrath. 

Daadj (ooinan), a oonnteifelt 
gold aorendgn or half eoTerdgn. 
The Bpmioni coin is well made, 
and ita oompodtion Inolndea 
sonw pan gold. 

And kii BM in palti7pawu>"wun," 
wiih wUdillM joof wo^u ha* dMdinci, 



(Irish ),a imallghua of whii^. 

Dandr-tnuter (ot^nen), a ooiner 
who employe othcn to paaa 
ooonterf ett coin. 



■d mBpenad, ind a nady 



at publk^uoaia known to 




, lypa of &ca, d 

Kket bonad witli 
dol of lead innOar, a^ > i'm^rlr 
ftaHnLUr, opnlfld cd obb cam nw.^ 

r n-iirri- VmMli mif ffn-fulm 

Daaf it I (oommon), an enudn 
CUM, bat unlike ita pnto^pa, 



:v Google 



Danglers — DaHi. 



295 



Dra^^era (tbierea), » biuioh of 



—OnlUTraiL 

DaiUea (psiMii), baadonffa, Irona. 



tai I pot Ih* akr«to <n bim."— XaWk ; 

Kmtritt LsU tt Mimd. 

It la nid th4t hukdcnfla, luwd 
to bind two priaoiMn together, 
wwe called a Duby Mtd Jowl 



ran la lappoaed DOt to have 

exhibited hli real powers in 

pnbUa The sporting jonnwla 

are Uiullj constant In their en- 

deaTOnra to throw light on thla 

puUcolai form of darknsM. 

Tha prosit ynr il Ukdr Is be ncB»r- 

abl« ia ndiig msrda ai the yair of ur- 

priuL Tha fint fftTDoriui have Iknd 

1»dly. Ttw Dabr wu won by ■ ^v« 

ilfm,- TbAnus, who canicd off tha 

Gnod Prix kit Saturday, mi hudly ia 



(Amertcan), a oandidate who 
keep* hla Intentlona In the baok- 
gnmiid till he finds lu« oppoi- 
tnuitj-. 



Dkrbj (old ouit), lesdj mone;. 
DaA (oonunon), 



DaA It, to (tailon), to keep 



Daikmans (old oant), cighL 




td: Dick TtmHt. 
(FHson), "getting the dart," 
being oonlLned In an abwlately 
dark oelL Fiohablr aboUihed 
now. There waa one at Clsrken- 
wen Prlaon, bat it waa not used 
tor at laaat the laat ten feaze of 



Dufc cnltr (old ilang), a manied 
Bkan who fceepa a miatreas, bnt 
tor fear of deteotlon only Tlaita 
berNCnetlr. 

Dark ha*M (tnrf), a bone who 
haa n«T«gr ru^ «r who hating 



Daiknan'l budge (old cant), a 
man who allpa In Daobaerred 
Into a hoose io the daytime to 
give ready entianoe to hia ooo* 

Daika (nantioal), nights on which 
the moon doe* not ihlne — mooh 
looked to by rangglen (Ad- 
miral Smyth), 



:v Google 



296 Darky — Daty. 

DaAj (AnMofasui), negro. 

1b thna dAfi oi Khoolf jud 
muun for tb« ulound pcopl* tbt piim- 
ba sf tboM " who caiuM nU thaii ri(hi 
hADd tnma Lhalr Left will pnmmabljr 

BpidiyduniniJ.; bu brfon th. An^ DMh Bw wto, (Uih nw hnttoofc 

sfuti-bdlimlimaqaiuduipiHuiuioni "*" ™' "*•■ J"-™ •"/ uim*™, 

tbc dBda of ihinp thut at* put . . .— (MueleM evuioD of the boowtor 

Harftt>i Mf—imt. WOtd duDn, Qwd it ft ttnw 

•_n( k* "''••' P"*"" "^*" "" ""O™ 

AlMtwuigDt, h»hioii«W«thmnth(i7li«Todno» 

Dui»d,d>mlt«»mmoD).«oor. ***"'^ 

raption of ud onpbeminn f<rr i,,^^^ AtenAKA, dute (An^ 

duuii. Of AmnioM) origin. IiidlMi),girtode«*odto{lw«slng 

"Tmdina," coonTicplitd Jodathu. and proctitatlan tn the idol 

".Two dnili,' toulfi] ih* cauooHr; ^Jfpp^M MpMiallr of Sonttaam 

"wtiTi I cu ■« Jul u lood ddo- hen - — 

fcr fln omu • itw.' " No, too cuX' 

dmted Ih* Vuikec. " Tbtr* lio'I n plot 

sf ddc(, 'c*pl whu I'tt (m Id Ihu 'en 

hunl, Uiii Hd* of Orieuu. I'm imrtud ^,„„.^ .„_ „ „„ „ 

If tbm H.--iJ4»™i.; A»i «^^-«. which i. Mrir.tnMUtioo of thoHiodo" 

^'''*' Isrm. Tbac ^>peDdl(s of Ibc wanhq> 
gf Aphndiu wen th* bbo duos u th* 

Dull (tut), to twTe « iMk on n pbaokiiiD Kt^tdtM. ttpoudlr bu- 

noe is to exceed Uigelj the iioiiodiBdiiOldT.«»iD«Qt. (£'^.Dhil 

nwanlUoT'B ordinwy limit of V^'^} SuAj^«.B™«™diiidi. 

InTeatmwt. ondor th* bub* of aibw, cmionilr oar 

(Popular), to "ODt n dott," ihu of th* oMden Bcrptiui aOm^- 

k greet pende, dien . .. - - 






ini (irb altadwd to lb* pacod«*>— JValMH •- 



(African Coast foloii) a pre- ''""■™- 
■ent or giatnitj. Gniuea negro, q^^j, p^w), a »nlgar name for a 
'''**■ painter; properly a ooarselj 

01 " fact " penon. 

Sh* w*i --—"'—' to tod b Ufh Hh ■ 
d*fm of Toli^iiir of which her cDimtiT 
tcciipaiiloin would hura haB MhwwJ, . . 
Tb«c roaai ladin wtn An*tn.—Mla At, 117. nr y«€ ««, idd ibc, or ■ 

S ^ttrntrUn AlmfU. lU w ipoon ■tbcr. Ill ttk* njr rfo^ i|-* 

(Tut), ooe BOttitot Ue amait- 

a«H. D«vr Joan (naatloal), a mTthl- 

mth Bud Item I hold, dB>io< or ealoharaotwenppoeedto^lri^ 

rabuN«n>Hl«i,ihuMi. — -tcBi- the deptha of ooean. Datf 



:v Google 



Davy-^Daylighis. 



JmafU 



', the bottom of the 



It hM been IngenionBljr oou- 
Jeotnrad that the etm, whloh ia 
M> ottan the nilon' oemet«i7, 
WM oallod Jonah's lookcor, that 
the prophet's uune Wm comp- 
t«d into Janet, and Davj/ pre- 
flz«d M being K oommon luma 
In Wale* [ttoUt and ^lurte*). 
Poi other derivation, nif< Di. 
Charlw HaokaT** " QmUo Bt;- 
molooT of the ^»igH">* Xad- 
goage." 

Ballon aometimes call the 
deril "Old Ztefjr." Thla ap- 
peaia to be a dindnntlYe of 
derll. 
Vw in the KppetEiliaai fWoi him (thi 



Thetenn may baTe oilginatod 
{a moe oonJei^nTe) in an alia* 
■ion to Nell Ojim, one of tk» 
mistreaaea of Charlea II. <niok- 



oaUed Nebnohadnenai hj the 
Sonndbeadi), who wai credited 
with ereiy vioe bj the Xari 
of Boohester, and of whom he 

. . . Undwn M<I1t, 
Whon bit aploTmuI nM, witfi npcn 

Tooy&Hlihi 






li,lMtiIha 
DUM, ud Old Om^, u^ Dmgtjmtt.- 
StmOiri TlaDmitn. 

Dftry f***"g OD ttG coppcra for 

the paneaa (naaUcal), tba brew- 
ing of a atonn. 

DxTT'a amr, or David's tow 
(popular). "As drunk a« Awy't 
•e>," oompletelj drank. 

Oroae aaja :— " Darld UoTd, 
» Welshman, bad a aow with 
aiz 1^^; on one oocaaton ha 
brought some friends and aaked 
them whether tbej bad ever 
aem a sow like that, not know- 
ing that In hia absence his 
dranken wife bad tuned oat 
tba animal, and gone to lie 
down In the aty. One of the 
red that It waa the 
> he had erar be- 



arer "dmnk as a dnm, i 
wbeelbarrow, sowodrnnk, dnuk 
aa a fiab, aa a lord, aa a piper, 
aa a flddler, as a raL" 

Dn*fc (Anf^o-IndSan), tranaport, 
by means o!t nlayiof men and 
bOTsea; the m^L To lay a 
d«gi la to otganiae a poatalor 
transport serrioeL 

DuHdi ibe niub; at itjT-jS, when 
Hml roonc >uis«n> hul utlTtd is 
[jKtu, wboHHTTicca nn arientlT vUMd 
u. tlu fcoot, it a wd Ihiii ibs Haul of tba 
Dcputiiicat to which Ihtr hid npoftcd 
(hcnuelvu, directrd thcDi to icuiiediaHiy 



plUd," Would Toaki 

jod nufhi Jut u wta t«u m« to ut u 

•a.'— ^iV^/m'w C U nmr y. 

DaiA-bnngalow (Anglo-Indian), 
a reatlng-plaoe or honie for 

tnTellen. 



DajUgiUa (common), the space 
left in the glass, and between 



:v Google 



29S 



DayUghls — Ikad. 



UwliqaaraDdtbeiiiii; Dot per- 
mitted in nltra-ooimcil gkthtt- 
inga when a tosat ii to be dnmk. 
Thft way on mch occaaiom 
of the proposer o( the toaat wma 
" DO da^igXt* and no heel-tapa, 
bvt K fall bamper." 

(Popnlar), the e7ea ; to " du- 
ken one'a dai^ku," to give 9. 



Dead (tuf), oertalntj. 



) boiled."— Ab'i^'i 



Dead-AOiiM (moing) 1* Mid of a 
bOTse that ii Incapacitated from 
winning * nee through illness. 

Dead wm m tcnt-pej: (popnlar), 
fnnn the pegs bring bnried in 
the ground. 
FuvtCluman.— "Hallo. Bob; hard 



intend to pa; hii shan; ao 
unpiofltable qnngar. 

(Common), to be Atmi ieaf, to 
be nttetljr ezhuuted. 

Dead brake (cominmi}, ntterif 
Tvlned, pennlkee. (Ametieao), 
to itad hrtak, to ndn at a gam- 
bling game. 

Thii other, > nun whohid una' Icodtal 
■ c«rd, bat kunt the gaiK ovei-Dlffht aad 
ut otu ■ KTcd-boian' pLAjr vtlh tbe diicf 
gunblcn, nndcT the fin of their *— ^^-***, 
dtmd-irritt them, » thftt the^ qnittsd tbc 
cutap kufhcd m by their own piU. — i/. 
L. IViliuum .- A^*;^ A^ 

Dead cargfo (thierea), plonder 
that will not recompense for tbe 
risk entailed. 

Deader (aimy), a military fimenl. 

Dead finiab, tbe (op-ooiuitry 
Anitraliaa), ezoeHeot b^ond 
measure; in Cockney slang an 
" ont-and-onter." Death is a 
nattual metaphor for eomplete- 
nest, for exhatution' ta ezhans- 
tlTeneea ; dead Is a oommmi 
prefix, expressing the same idea 
in "dead on," "dead-nnta," 
" dead certain," " dead beat," 
" dead heat." 



whu'i Bp!" FlMT C— "Creu Scott! 
it'i s cue of down, nol up, deer h>>;r- 
He'i dMJ ti * Itnl-fit. PiHHMd him- 
•elf lut Di|hl."— ^nii. 

Varied to " dead aa a door- 
nail," or "dead as a herrlDg," 
" dead aa amall beer." 

Dead beat (American), an im- 
postot; a man who does not 



Dead-Jiead (American), one who 
etanda abont a bar to drink at 
the expense of others. 
Sittinr OB ■ bench ontwle tbepcfaidpd 

hold ue tl 



wceiing pleinlr the ■ciLDip 
m their ihuneloe featnna. 



, Google 



wddasto b* u)Md UdridkiOr Ibtauiic 



Deftd b^ (oommoD), exactly 
flvwL Two men who ue eqnal 
In muTtbing are sftid to be ■ 
diad haat; from 4 ladng ex- 



Dekd-hone (popnl>r), to "disw 
the dtad-lon*" I< doing woi^ 
paid for In adnnoe. The t«nn 
expUins iteelt. Usod alw bj 
niloi^ Admlnl SmTth m;i 
thkt " when thej oommenoe 
HMii<"g money agkin there it in 
some merohant shlpa a oeremonj 
performed of dngglng lonnd 
the dock u efflgy ol their frnit- 
lesa Uboor In the shape ol a 
hone, ninning him np to the 
jard-ann, and cotting him adrift 
to fall into the eea, amidft lond 
oheers." French printen oail 
this wtangtr dm tali, to eat salt 
park, that ii, something that 
BzcttM thirst; from the fact 
that workmen in this oaae, feel- 
ing ^xlDolined for work, pa; 
" e to (ho wine'ihop. 



Deadlr lirelr. to be (oommon), to 
be faotitionily or nunatiinUy 
Jolly. 

Desdly n ef ciy e en . the (thiere*), 
the gallows ; eafd also to bear 
(rnit all the year rontid. 

Dewl num (proTinolal}, ground 
rlalng higher on one aide of 
a wall than on the other. 
"There is so mnoh Aead mow 
that the hoose is always damp>" 
(Popular), a Boareorow; a 
man made of ragi. FoMtbiy a 
oormption of "dndman," from 
ouit term AmIi, for olothea, rags. 
Also an extra lo*f imngglad 
into the baaket by a baker's 
lofbybiiL 



Dead horaei (West Indian), 
■hooting stars. The supeiBtl- 
tjon of the negro mind ImaglDes 
that shooting stars are the 
spirits of horses that have been 
killed by falling orei iftvines 



DMtdnuui's \aA {thlerea), a tatSbj 
•oheme laid by swindlers to ex- 
tort money from the ralatiTea of 
a dsocMed person. 

Dead marine, dead Dum {popular), 
an empty bottle, implying that 
its contents have been alcohoUa 
The expreoslon donbtless arisea 
from the jealousy, dashed with 
a slight flBTOur of oontonpt, 
with which marines are re- 
garded by sailors on board 
ship. The phiaae snTrlTee in 
a famons old drinking-song, est 
to Ter7 spirited musio by Jack- 
•on of Bzetar — an admirable 
It of the ancient popolar 



:v Google 



Asd Iw wba win ihii ta 



Iter 



Tbe word wu fonneilj « 
Morjiw. whlob, being iu«d in > 
oompsn; at which William IT., 
then Diike ol OIknnce, wu 
prasent, gtre offence to aa 
offloet of that gallant corps, 
who aaked tin PriDO« what he 
meant b^ It "I mean bj 
marim," replied the Prince, 
with more readinsM than waa 
tiBDBl with him, " a good fol- 
low who baa done hia dntj, and 
U read; to do it again." The 
French term an empty bottle 

Dead meat trmin (common), a 
qwolal train oariTing ooipaea 
from Waterloo Station to the 
London NeoropoUi at Woking. 

Dead men's ahoea (oommon), pro- 
perty which can onlj be claimed 
after the deoeaie of the holder. 

Dead n^i (proriDoial), a cheat, a 
downright rogue. 

Dead nip (provinoial), the failure 
of any petty plan or tcheme. 

Dead anta on (popnlat Anatia- 
lian), Terr fond oL An ampU- 
Scatlon of the ordinary BogU^b 
ilang " nnta on." 

Dead •eh I (naval), i* «aid of a 
man in the Uat itage of intoxi- 



emai), atnight on. 
A rlfle-ehot talk* of the aiming 
being dtad-a» when the day 
ia BO raiim that he oan aim 
straight at the boll's eye instead 
of bsTing to allow to the right 
or left'for wind. He is aid to 
be dtad-otk himself when he la 
shooting rery weU. 

Dead, on the (ootomon), on tbe 
teetotal tack. Dead is often 
nsed as a strengtbeolag adjeo- 
tire, "dead pn^nr," "dead 



Dead ■eaioa (jontnallatio), tl 
time when nothing la g<dng oi 
For socdety this Is the snmme 
or during Ijsnt. 



Dwd rtick, to (theatrical), to 
■top, to break down utterly in 
themldstofaperfoimaiioa. The 
most eminent aotors hsTe be^ 
snbjaot to sndden and treaober- 
ODslapaet of memory. Haoready 
has been known to break down 
in Tirginlns— a ohuaoter be 
had acted thonsands of timesL 
Charles Kean has broken down 
in Othello and Helnotte. On 
the Brit night of " Henry IT." 
at the Qaeen'a Theatre, Fhelpe 
ttutk dtad OTieadttuti in Bout 
IT., and the aotor who played 
the Prince of Walea had to 
prompt hia royal btlior. 

Dead stock (common), nnsaleable 



:v Google 



TIh ym u nMt, who ni ■ c«tl«w, ibo*- 
iam Huk wnteh, ecntJolr BM man ihu 
d|bt Ton <M, hid ■ " dsv-'Ucht " box 



■oit dnallf iliiMi il. b«ld In hu hand a 
' ig tba di; ind tha hear.— /aiwi 



Dead swBC(tlileTei), plunder that 
oannot be got rid ol 

Dead to rigtita (polico slang), em- 
ployed bj detectivea when tbej 
haTe qnlte convicted a orimloal, 
and he ispontlTelT guilty. "I'tb 
got him dtad to righti." It is 
often smploTed In a mora gene- 
tal senae to indicate certainty of 

ginatedin Anerioa. 

Dsad 'im (thlereB), a honae nn- 
ooenided temponrily or alto- 

Hiiind ihcB 



brftnm ihrialuiis fiaB llw id« of CMtkif 
nantf antnl * Jtad 'ih, will Jni^ m tba 
Snt appo t Uiu ltT.— Jgrf «" FrttJrm. 

(Theatrical), a mper irbo plays 
for nothing. Tho |n<«>.»fc*« that 
are nude in dowda and full 
■cane* Is often aeeonnted for 
by the fiet that a soper who 
has attended all rahearsala b 
■biuited at a moment's notioe 
to make room tor the dtai '«a, 
who sometimes pays the soper 
master for the prfidlege of get- 
ting behind the scenes as welL 

(Popular), to make dmi 'wu, 
explained t^ quotation. 

Ku bu ■ doin w peck ■ Wi ; cdbh. 

quoulT ba DDK in ■ mauun depsnd upon 
ropia in snin, the miller, uut ilv baker ; 
and tbi« mie (henfoK teacbca the art and 
mynvry of makiaf what an called dtmd 
*nt : thai it. to chargv hoc ooly tor iAm 
il fix what jroa du nut. — 



Difrau: Lmark m 

Dead-wood eameat (American), 



tmpfiwmJaiL 



—Htnl^-.Jtt. 



(ThleTeB and ronghs), a half 
qnaitem loaf. (Turf), a horse 
that may be lud against as if 
he were dead ; possibly beoanse 
he Is act goii^ to mu, oeitalnly 
because he Is not intended to 




Dead wrong 'no (common), a 
dishonsst fellow, a cheat. 



II tbOB wbal TOH 
iriU — >fao*a hoooiiT and nctiKula b nn- 
qiKMioacd Id Ihdt own cbcia, bU wfc«, » 



mrtut 'urn. Flayi c 
pocketi and Ullle finfc 

ready pot op in bia 



Deal anit (popnlar), a deal cotBn 
saj^lied 1^ the parish. 

Duner (thierei), sbilUag. 

I know vhai I will do ; I iril] go to 
London Bridal miliar (railway) and taka 



, Google 



Detnur — /Vm. 



It hu bMo ntggMtod thkt 
rf w m r b from dM^, bnt mon 
probablr It U n ocnmptiou of 
tbe TIddiab iimk, % ootu. 



I VUle (old cut), the 
coimtTj; Deamta rStf stanipen, 

Deatti-hniiter (rtreet), a mui who 
will djing ■pMohea or oon- 
tMoloiu of eieonted oiiminali. 



Deadi on (Anrtnliui), good at. 
The meti^boT 1* probkblj that 
of completeuMB. Vid* Di&o 
Finish. "DtaA cw rabblU," 
wonld meui a very good nb- 
bit (hot; "dioCA OB peacbei," 
gnedj of peaobM. Tba phimse 
ia oonunon iu the nnited 
States, when a Imd; otbt fond 
of fiiiei7 is nid to be Ataili o» 



OebUtah (South AMoa), a penny. 

Deck (Anglo-Indiaii), a kx^ a 
peep. Hindu dtU-od, to look. 
" DAJio, joD ' bnd-maafa I ' " 
In English grpsy, tfiU. DiA- 
iug, from the gTpa; is ootnmoB 
ic«g^|«t» slang tor looking. 

(Amerioan), a pack ol oaidj. 
Ponnerlj used In England. 
From the eiprewlon "to diA 



Dean (old stang], a onwn-pieM ; 
from the motto on the edge^ 

Dee (tiampa], a pooket-book; 
termed "raader" bj tUerca. 
Probably an sbbreTiaticm of 
dinMMjp, which see. (Popular), 



Death-trap (joninaliBtio), a 
theatre or oUier place of amoae- 
ment made to contain large 
nnmbera of people, The ez- 
preedon became general after 
tbe burning of seteial such 
edifices in I ~ 



■(un> lion- !*'« iuR Mka ta lltrii 
mija^}— iIkb (.-ihc bUskcti froB By 
lodginti. Ill mil till jwi cook ool 
[Wail, liliSmrriiam„*Mt.i 

SHETDa.— He'll bvd mil, tMb. Fv* 
oDir EM niiM aid «i of hin,— ^At Jtr- 



Decn (Anglo - Indian). Amblo 
din, religion ; faJth. 




yoor rtiigJDD I ' A oaliTC vbo 
bear with m plAcid iiml* tlb« inlbr- 



, Google 



DtersiaJber — Demon. 



DeMns tt (taUon), hsiTTliic, 
keeping the h«ad down, anrinc 



out hk dMOF-kniTe aTiiI pi 
■boald TDK cHt HUT nfleaiof 



Dd (K7P«7), to ^Te, Uok; alio to 
hit, M «ne M78, "give It to 
him," but mora precdaelj dfB«r, 
done, draw; (Mfin, hitting or 
UoUng; rfalltnlobv, "RgtTin' 
of him;" ddUmtHgn, m hMN 
thatUoka. 

TMtbta (gjvfj], * gift. 

Ddlcate (beting impoaton), » 
■ham nibeoriptioa-book. 

Dell (old OMitlng), a Toongwoioh. 
Bnxne ("A Jovial Crew, or the 
HeiTj Baggan," 1653) givea 
thla irord. In Old Datoh slang 
dU, dd, aod iHU also mean a 
girL DiMeti, jaU de joit (Der- 
enbonrg). Thide, a Jewlah giil, 
eapaolallj a jomig ooe. In Qta- 
man-Hebrew dilla also means 
a maiden. It Is poealblB that 
aUf'daUy, la the «enM of phil- 
anderii^ and amorons trifling, 
is derired from diU or ddl. 
Final]]' the grpaj has dd (Ut. to 
give) in the aenM of aexnal 
onion, " DA adi^ o mini. " 

DeMl (Angto-Indtan), a broker. 
In EgTpta pedlar of old olothes, 



TIwhA 

tbei lantiuge u lyn. TbeH (a wU 
lijnad IrccDcci and araata^ftti wiit- 
infi,hMUiD( ihe hi ' ■ ■ ^ 



Detnl-rqi (old], a woman of 
qaeationable ohaiaotar— abbre- 
Tation of "deml-Kpatatlon." 

. ■ . uRai •uok, mtim and frwli . . . 
iUmi-npt utd lontiu. Binglc nh] uubsp 
aai.—<imarUrh Rnim. 

Dem keb (London}, a hanaom ; a 
"maaher" phiasafrom Gilbert'! 
" Wedding llamh." '• Let'a 
takea<iMM." 

Demmj dt (American cadet), a 
tomuRnan (oit, oltUen] who is 
dreased as a gentleman. 

Demon chandler (nantical). one 
who mpplles ship's storea of 
a worthless character— often 
Dtterl7 nnllt for nse and food. 



bTi he, " Wfabc'i your mDDdy !" 
BoHd sTTmlE, ikhojr I 



:v Google 



Demcns — Deux. 



tot poliea "ThB dnMM pot 
pincber on me," I wh Kppn- 

De mp rte r ed (oMont), hnng ; from 

"dempster," tfae execntioner, 
so called beoanae It wai hia 
doty to repeat the aentonoe to 
the pilBOner in open ooort. 
Thla WM diBContinned In 1773. 

Denoonce, to (American). In the 
West to pre-empt land, to aa- 
nooQce a title to it. 

Ins uouhI now. I'n i famijf j rf ii ill— 
k'l (11 miiK.— ^. Fnmcii.- SmtUlt tad 



Dep(popaIar),»depat7. (Chriet'a 
Hoipital), a Grecian. 

Derbr iMtHngt, or D.D.'s (Ams- 
rioan), a term applied to women 
who we«r Derb; hat<. 



The Ute d«i 


d«llT 


niMculiw tendency 








ladouhulHou^t 






of ■>! 




o^ud. 


IKWph 




.xlncribchcr. Tb. 


(iFl> .h. 


1 proniE 




up Ksi down Che.1. 


BUI St.e 




fur. 


iilunnd«)Fi,«rTaTed 


in nvRi'i 


«i<r h>u, « 


e now culled Dtrfy 


(ixKor 


V.riy 


Art 


mt,. Thi. ii oco- 


.k™llT 


■bbrcvi 


iat«] 




(on»« 


"ihcT. 


;C«i 


.£>.A."or "jIk'i 


.XEUI» 


• D.D.- 


~PAilculfl/ii. Tima. 



Derbyshire neck, a term for 
the goitrous neck, owing to it* 
prevalence in Derbjebite. 

Deirey (thleres), an eye-glass ; 
hence the expression nsed bj 
tailors to " take the dtmg," to 
quiz, ridicule. 



Derrick (old oaot). In the days 
prior to the appearanoe In pnbllo 
life of the better known J>^ 
Eetoh, Xlerriei signified tba 
hangman, from the supposed 
name of a then existing fnno- 
tionary. The word oocma in 
"Ihe Bellman of London," an 
old {day, pnblished in 1616, th« 
year of Shakspeara's death. 
" Ha rida drcoil with tb* dc*a and 

Dtrridk nut b* hii boa, ud Tybom tb* 

inn al which he will ■lighl.'' 

To dtrritlc, " a cant term for 
Batting ont on a small but not 
OTer-ciedltabls enterpriaa. The 
act Is said to be named from a 
Tybnm execntioner " (Admiral 
Smyth). 

Dcrwenter (AnatiBliao), a ocw 
Tiot 80 oalled from the Bivar 
Derwent, In Tasmania, whloh, 
like New South Wales and West 
Australia, was originally a oon- 
Tjct settlemeDt. (y. "Tande- 
monlan " and " Sydney -lidaT.'* 

Detpatchen (gsmobiing cheats), 
according to Hott«n false dloe 
with two sets of nambers, and, 
of oonrse, no pipe. So called 
becanse they bring the matter 
to a speedy lssn& 

Detrimentals (sodety), a very 
oommoQ term in society for 
those who are not well off, and 
therefore detrimental as hns- 



a (bid cant), twopenoe. 



:v Google 



Deril, > buriiter who does work 
for Rjiother, termed "devming." 
The devil gets Dp the caie (or a 
•enior in large pisctioe, geaeiall j 
withoDt auj i«Dittnei«tion. It 
Ii (Jmost ai*o an official detlg- 
lULtioD. The Attorney-Oeneral'i 
devil for the Tieasiir7 ii a pott 
of £iy>o * J^"- The Attor- 
nej-Geaeral haa ftl«o devilt In 
Chanoery, as, for iiutance, the 
"charity devil," for the matten 
in which he is offlciallj con- 
cerned, TheAttoney-Qeneral'i 
devil in the TreaEni?, altei • 
oertain probation, is often pro- 
moted to the benoli. He fa, in 
fact, a Bort of junior Attorney- 
Oenenl. On circnit, no one is 
allowed to devil for another nn- 
lesB he is a member of the same 
oironlt, and the bAirister for 
whom he d«vH* is aotnallj en- 
gaged in some other oonit on 
that oiionit (Hoggins). 

(Printers), a printer's JonioT 
apprentice or enand boy. 

(Utetary), explained by quo- 
tation. 
"Whoanjroar' I ukcd in dim*;. 



" A dml. ... I ^ve plot! uiil inadotti 
to pepnUr aulbon, lir. Writ* poeiry tat 
(boB, dn>p in rinuiai*, joko, wnk Bp 
ibiic iai(h iBawrial : in tbott, lii. 1 Jtvil 
forilHm.~~-Ctirrifl.SiwH: TJU^ia*r'i 
Gimt. 

Devil A plebe, to lAmericaa ca- 
dets), to victimise or revile a 
new cadet. 

DerU And Tom Walker, the 
(American), an old saying once 



30s 



a New Bngland to the 
effect that it "beats (is d^ril and 
Tom Walker," or " he tared as 
Tim WaOer did wtfA Ae devO." 
In the Harrelloiis Heposltory, ■ 
enrions colleotion of talesi manj 
of which are old Boston Legends, 
there is one of Tot» WaOier, who 
sold himself to lAe deviL The 
book was published abont 1831. 

DerU-dodger (popular), clergy- 



d«iiiid.-zi4«'/. 



Derila (common), small wheels 
soaked in resin, and nsed for 
lighting fires. 

Devil's among; the tailort, the 

(common), i.e,, there's a disturb- 
ance going on. " This phrase," 
says Mr. Bdwards, "aioae in 
connection with a riot at the 
Haymarket on an occasion when 
Dowton annoonced the perform- 
ance for his ben efitof a barleaque 
entitled ' The Tailor* : a Tragedy 
(or Warm Weather.' At night, 
many thoowods of jonmey- 
men ta]l<n« congr^ated In aod 
aronnd the theatre, and by riot- 
ous proceedings intermpted the 
performances. Thirty-three o( 
the rioters were brought np at 
Bow Street the next day. A 
full account of the proceedings 
wiU be found in Biegraphita 



:v Google 



3C« 



into gold. The loalag Mid And- 
iag of this tooth bj ■•raial 
panoni fcrau the anb jeot of » 



Dcfil's daws (pciMm), explained 

bj qaotatioD. 

A Seo<^ atp. worited uodtuifa^ and a 
pcir of ihoei, ODrnplucd 1)k nnifann of 



Devifi fdtm (old elug), k teim 
giTen bj fumen to the anr- 
Tejor's ohun, 

Dnil'a Hrefy (naaUsal), bUok end 
jellow. Prom tha ocdonn beinf; 
naod for monrniogorqBHmnline^ 



Deril'a dMigttcr (eommon), a 
scolding, shrefrlBb wUe. 

De*i]*a delight, a dirturbanoa or 
qnarrel of more than tiaaal 
Tebemenoe. To " kick np the 
dtviTi tUtigkt " ia to indulge in 
dmoken and obatreperoni Jovi- 
Blitj. 

Deril'a dnM, acrapa and renmanta 
of old woollen gannentt aent to 
the mill to be lemanufaotnred 
in the aembUnce of good cloth, 
commonl; known among mann- 
fBOtnren — who nas the word 
aatirioall; — aa "ahodd;." 

Deril'a golden tooth, the (Ameri- 
can). " One would think he'd 
found tlu dtvU'i golden tooA," a 
coDunoD MTiDg in Maasachn- 
•etta. Foanded on a story to 
the effect that Kidd, the pirate, 
ODCe obtained from the devfl 
his eje-tootb, which had the 
power of changing all metals 



Devil-acolder (popular)) a olergj- 

DeviTs abanMluwten (American), 
anicknamegiveo bj "tbeohnrcb 
mllitaid " to tbosa of the oloi- 
oal party who in the Hexican 
Wai belied their oloth and i^o- 
feaslon ; also to any penon 
l^Tonring onjost wai. 

Devil's teetb (oommonk dice. 



Devil to pay, tiie (ctmimon), an 
allusion to the l^endaiy tale* 
of the Middle Agei, in which. 
In exchange for the enjt^ment 
of onlimited wealth, power, or 
other earthly advantage, a man 
was aapposed to hate sold hia 
aonl to the deriL 

Devil to p«j and no pitch hot 

(nantical). Theaeamwhiohmar- 
gins the water-waya was balled 
the-derit" Why, only oanlkera 
oan tell, who perhapa fomid it 
sometimes difflcolt tor thdt 



:v Google 



Devotional — Dick. 



307 



kxila. The phraae, howorer, 
latum aerrloe ezpeotod, and no 
one readj to perform It. Im- 
patienoe and naught to ntlsfj 
it (Admlnl Sm;th). 

DerotioBal lu^ts (common) is 
■I^ed to a bone inclined to 
"nj hi* pn;en," that ia, apt 
to laU OB Ua iDieee. 

Dew-dtink (labouien), an oarljr 
diiok. French, "nna gontte 
poor tner le Tor," the woim 
being thoogbt to be mote than 
nanallj thlratf in the morning. 

Dnnhitcb (popolar), a M*era 
thiaahlng ; perh^M from " catah- 
tug one'a doe." 



i), mooe;. 

TIh trdti rcmid wilb ■ tin pkatv or 

« rojml diih^ovcr, ud coUflcu dita for 

lb* Imperu] ludLDtA. HeoJubita him- 
lelfkt football DDUcbaukd Church buaArt 
oa coDuduKtiob ol luQuig tba coiA for hii 
pat icheiiK.— Afiibrm Stdtlj. 

Bo called, t^t Hotten, from 
tbs knnokle bonea of sheep, 
which have been naed from 
the eaiUeat times for gambling 
ptupoMt when money was not 
obtainahle— in one particnlar 
gams fire being thrown np at 
a time and oanght on the back 
of the hand like baU-penM. 
Thia leasmUea the common 
children's game of " jackrtonee." 
The French oall It "Jen des 
osaeleta." (ThieTeB},"BBthjcnr 
dibi," show joui monej. 



"TotorntbehandaonbiaiKat- Dfck (miUtaiy). the paiifc 



Dial! (prison), membera of the 
criminal olaaa who Uve abont 
theSeren Dials Inljondon. 

Oiamood • cncUoff (Aoatrallan 
tbieTBS' patter), ttonebreaUng. 
The mebqihor is obvions, break- 
ing " those preolons atones." 

He aofhl ■ Buth uul had to mhile 
DV'™ "Cauiaau'i 



HouL'—Tit A 



In England, d 
refers to working in a ooaJ- 



DiU7, to (Amerioati thierea), to 



Dib(commOD),ap(»ti(»i or share. 



Dick, diU, to (gTpsj, alao oom- 
mon cant), to sae, to look. 
Hotten sajH thia la " North 
ooantrr cant," but It is found 
in all K7ps7 dialects. (Bindn, 
Mim.) Dikbmiivro, a look- 
Ing-glBSf, also dOiawaagH, both 
referring to anTthIng used in 
oonnecUon with seeing, such 
as speotadee, lorgnons, or tele- 
•oopes. The latter would be a 
Jflro-dtttnaotyrI — a fsr-aee- 
thiug. T« KWc diUatrit, yon 
should haTe seen it. 

Didk at Ihi Gaijcn (goriiu) 
Tba Garjcn rmnc] maody, 
Tirinc to 1*1 my mribea 



Dieli-Ula, to look black, 



:v Google 



308 



tHcker—Diddkr. 



frown; diA-dim, I uw (seldom 
heard) ; ditk-paU, look bMk, re- 



Dick in the gnta (thievet), 
weak, inferior, poor. A pun on 
the word "dicky," as bolt-in- 
tun is on " to bolt." 

Ditig, or IHek in Ike grttn, 
Ter7 bad or paltry ; aDytbing of 
an inferior qnality la said to 
bo a " Didy coaeem" (Vanx'a 
Hemolrs). 



DIck't 

(provinoial), anjitbiDg Btiange or 
peculiar. Thia phrase, which 
Barilatt olaimed aa an Ameii- 
cauiBm, is in reality an English 
provincial simile, and correctly 
given la, "At gtutr oi Diek't 
kattand made of pea straw that 
went nine times round, and 
would not meet at last" The 
origin of the phiase may be doe 
to the oddnesa of using saclr a 
material for the prupose. 

Dick, np to (popular), all right, 
ap to the mark, good and satis- 



It's 
Um, li 

Tu ill dict^ with poor Fuhcr tKek ; 
he'iDOBKin. 

-/■VfJ^Mr £««■>&■ 

(London slang), smart.aswell. 
(Popelar), explained by qao- 



Mt*r,Ti>ni 



,.~-j. 



LI tb« piuuforte- 



LifiDnfi. 

(Theatrical), "dtety domns," 
litoraUj a bad, poor house, one 
with a small audience^ 

Dkky btrda (theatrical), a generic 
term which ioclndes vocalista of 
every deseription, from Madame 
Patti down to a singer in the 
choms. 

DiddcTS (oommon), a woman's 
breasts. The word is really a 
provincial term for a cow's 
teats. 

Diddle, to (vulgar), to have sexual 
commerce. It signifies properly 
to " dredge ; " alto to cheat in 
an artful way. 



Ii dien jroutl hive the 

wiclKU iiickv 
r cut up, thiDugh lb* ii 



Diddler (common), an impecnnlans 
scamp, a swindler. See Joemy 
Diddler (Kenny's farce of " Rais- 



:v Google 



Didoes — Dikh. 



Ing th« Wind"), or hi* mora 
modeni prototype, Jingle^ in 
"Piekwlok." 

IXdoes. Vidt To Cdt Didobb. 

Die-br-the-bedgc (proTincial), in- 
forioi meat of <wttle which have 
died and not been slaughterad. 

Die In one's shoea, to (oommon), 
to be hanged. The metaphor la 
not bapf?, as men may die else- 
where than on the gallows with 



*' If Jvi do*" rctnmed BiU, *' I will fis 
DT ilitttn in row did'pUlc uid ibid it 
up will) ni."—0» tiU Trait. 

Aleo apora, or the sp^dee on 

Dig^:ers' dettffbt (New Zealud), 
large brown felt bat worn bj 
digger* in New Ze«laod 



['nadu)r,deftr boff Hidiw'cdutpAl I 

■iih Ibt Si. Jvma't jrouna mu 
Could drop ialo Dy Jiainft pmnukni; 



And tbert U U*Fuie, and Linmiant 
And lh*n ii Sir Cimabr Janlu, of [ha 



Dientkal (American), a frivoloae 
■nagnun for " identioal," bat 
often heard. 

Die, or dee (tbieTes), a pocket- 
book, but specially the doniniy 
or pooket-book atafled with flaah 
bonk bllla need by a " diopper." 

Die (conunon), a blow with the 
litt, or tips of fingers, aa "adijf 
in the eye," "a Aig in the ribs." 

Dig ■ (U7 under the lUii, to 
(popular), to abave at Each a 
time as to make it serve for two 

Die, ftiU (popnlar), the fall allow- 
ance of pay. 

Diners (popnlar), the Onger- 



cerain' my uyle aod my ipen- 

Digni^, a (West Indian), the 
name gixen by Bnropaans to a 
negro ball, the deoigDation being 
probably deiiyed from the Indi- 
crous pomposity of the u^to 
cbaiacter. Tbe blaoka are very 
chary of admitting strangers, 
and especially white people, as 
eye-witneesea. Oftentimes they 
degenerate into a scene of tbe 
wildeat debanQbery. 



-if^/rulHnli^. 
In Bngliab gypay the word is 



:v Google 



3IO 



Dildoes — Ding'bal. 



DiMoei, more commonly known 
now as " the broom handle." 
Ad iiutmmsnt made of vuloas 
■oft pliable snbstancea, and re- 
Mmbllog the m&lo pndBDdnm, 
Q«ed by women who, possessing 
strong timatoiy passions, knd 
forced to celibcte lives, are 
afraid of pregnancy following 
nataial copulation. In this con- 
nection the female pudenda is 
called "a btoom." 



luirtfci* 



Eilher Mji k tax. 
Twelve iHUtn neul fof Ihe nippon 
Oraced lechen of the court 
Wen ktcly burnt by iinpiout huHi, 



(Old slang), to dUdo, to play 
wantonly with a woman. 



Dilly (popnUr), a night-cart. 



Their awn AUfiiiei hive nothing 
value or inieresl jn Ihem, Some locks 
hair rolled up in thin ilipi of bark, pi 
Idbty bcloiiging 10 a deceaud Triend ; 
iricce or two of cryital fw magic purpo« 



. Cone. oM ann, 
r: uc we le ha** 



Dimber-dunber (old cant), very 
pretty ; a very clever ro^e ; 
bead of a gang. (Dekker gives 
doMiet, a nucal, rogue.) 

No diwiArr^mJKirr, anffkr, dancar, 
Prig of cacklcr, prig of pranccr. 

—Lift »/BamffyUi Mttrt Carrm. 

Dinunodt (popnlar), money. Tbe 
derivation is evidently from tbe 
email coin " dime," wortb tea 
cents in United States coinage. 

Dimmockiag-bag, a bag osed for 
collecting sabscriptioDS in small 
sums for any special object ; 
also the special savings bank 
of the individual who nsuallj 
boards his sixpence tor a patti- 
calar object, as at Christmas 
time for the Christmas feed. 

Dinahs (Stock Exchange), Edin- 
bargh and Glasgow Kailway 
Oidinary Stock. 

Dinarlj (theatrical), coin, money, 
borrowed from the Bpanisb 
dintro ,- " nantia dittmriy " signi- 



leir own upbringing, 
are authoritiei on luch things, pronounce 
human ; a primitive-loolting bone Ihh hook 
or two, and lonK Mring made of opoQuni 
hail— that b M.—A. C. Crmml. 

Dimber (old cant), pretty, neat. 






Ding-bat (American), 
The word din or di»g seams to 
indicate value in several lan- 
guages. £.g., in Yiddish, dindA 
nuMovnau, money queMiuis. 
t/in, Jadgmeot. (Yiddish), din 



:v Google 



Ding — Dirt-scrapers. 



3" 



MooonU. Id Dotoh, dimgtit, to 
pl«kd, to oh«apen ; iiMgbank, * 
jadge'f bench ; diitgar, one who 
pleads or chekpeiia. 

Ding; boj (old ouit), • rogne or 



Din^Hlanf (popnlBr), in good eu- 
□mL To "set tOooat ft thing 
diiig-4img " li to tackle It with 
Tlgonr. An oIlltentiTe redapU- 
catioa ol <(hv> to beat, to strike, 
•Dd bIm peilu^ in bUiuIod to 
the quick SDooewioD of Mroke* 
in lilting of ImUb. 

IMnged (Affl«rictui), exoeedingly. 
In tha Sonthera States a mui 
will 8^7 that ha worked iuigtd 
hud. Viia DnoaoMni. 

Oidcert, the cape and halla ; or, 
in the Frencti phnse, " gobeleta 
et mnsoades," need bj ooii' 

Didg-fdrj (prorlnt^), hoff or 
anger. A ilajig word ygrj com- 
moD in the prorinoes. " 8ha 
flonnoed awaj In a dinjf-/uiy." 

DinnOMd (Amerioan), a Western 
•qnlndent tor *' darned." In 
the Bonth It takes the form of 
"dinged." Thej are all enpbe- 




Dip (popular), a plokpooket ; to 
dip, to anest, convict, be pnt in 
anj way into tronble. 

(ThieTes), to dip, to pick a 
pocket, from the ordlnaiy sensa 
of the word. To dip a lob, to 
Meal the contests of a tOL Also 

Dipped In the wing (popular), 
winged, wonted. 
I'm nipptd ia ibe bud, I'm J^^ a UU 



Thu it wmched, foilixi 

Look u mj heul — en 

-CrcUHtrri, 

D^ipar, dipping bio 
* pickpocket. 

Off to Puii I ihall (o to I 
To the d^^hg Mtka * 



t (tbleres). 



bull* tbcm imdaimt* I'd ^vt 
Cuh: TTUCIiickiiiimryCtr,. 
nantical), the purser's boj. 



them all manner of needless 
questions relatire to their past 
lives and inqnlre olosely as to all 
their relations with women, Jta, 
either with a view to "-Mrg 
them appear immoral and dia- 
oreditable, or, sa is often real!; 
the case, to afFord to the conrt 
and ipeotators the exqoisita 



:v Google 



Dirty — Dispar. 



plea*ui« ot Meiiig ■ num or 
WOBUUI tortored vdA pat to 
BhuDB. A oriminal cub withont 
an; dtrt-teraping has become of 
Ittlie ver; esceptlooBl, both In 
BngUnd uid In Americ*. 

Dirty luJf hnmlKd (militu;). 
The y!*b Raiment wm called 
■0, partly from luLTliig black 
facinga which gave a aoinlire 
look to the untform. After the 
battle of Badajos it wsa changed 
to the "gallant half hundred." 

Dirty panic (commoti), a alnt. 

Dtacombobbermted (American), 
discompoied, npaet, " flnm- 



hecouldn'lipcak.— A'nl'cntA'xa. * 

Diacommon. or dt»coaimtute(ani- 
vcrsity), not to commDnicate ; 
thai in, to prohibit itadBota 
di'aling with certain tndesmea 
who have ttaoEgreased the mlet 
of the UniTenity, a species 
of excomnmnication oi " boy- 
cotting." 

Dimtdaed In liquor (oonunon), a 
common phiace in the veinaculat 
for one who ia slightly intoxi- 
cated. The expreaaion, though 
vulgar, ia not withoat merit, ae 
conveying the trath that a 
ilmoken man ia not playing a 
real part, bat baa aasnmed a 
gaise that ia falseand onnatuiaL 



ponent'i plan*. The woid wma 
used by the lata Earl of Derby 
on a memorable oooaaion, when 
he affirmed that inch and atioh 
a meaaore would "diA the 
Whigs." It baa been luppoaed 
that the word waa uaad in the 
Srtt instance aa a oormption of 
"daah," "dash" itself being an 
eaphemiim for " damn," aa In 
the mlgar oath, "daah my 
wig," for " damn my wig," bat 
to diA most probably ia only 
one of the many expteadons 
connected with the kitoben, aa 
" to cook hia goose," to " giw 
ooBaroaating," to"dobTown," 

DishclcMit (common), a dirty, un- 
savoury woman. When, how- 
ever, a man marries hia oook, 
and it is said that he has made 
a ni^ktn of a ditlulciit, no other 
meaning Is attributatda except 
that a " mtaaltianoe" has been 



Dlapv. The following exidana- 
tion ot this term Is given by 
W. H. David. "The word 
' sines,' the scholars' allowance 
of bread for breakout or sapper, 
and ditpar, bis portion of m«t, 
have their origin In a Winches- 
ter College ooatom which pre- 
vailed in the last century. There 
being neither ' batch ' nor roll- 
call at the College HaU in these 
days, the provision for breakfast 
was laid oat on a table, and the 
stronger took the lion's sbar^ 
andlefttbeweaker 'Bine*.' So 
again at dinner tbedoaUe plate 



:v Google 



Diss — Dmng-6ell. 



of me*t Ml to tbe former u ft 
nuitter of might, ftnd the on- 
eqnftl m<AtAj, tbe dt^tar, be- 
CMne the portion of the weaker 

Din (prlutera), ftbbieTtMion for 
distdbntion, i.i., printed off 
type— to be returned to It* re- 
■pecttve cases, uid re-composed. 

Diitcting job (tailon), m heftv; 
■itemtioD. 

Distiller (AostnlikD ooDTfota' 
slang), one wbo Is easily vexed 
and bettuja his obagrin. Vitle 
Cabbt thk Kao. Piobsblj not 
of colonial origin but Introdooed 
by tnuuportees. 

DitcA and ditdwr (Anglo- Indian), 
■lang terms ai^died in a dis- 
paiagii^ manner to Calcntta 
and tbe " Calcuttiana." 

DHe (American), "I don't oare 
A itita." Dntcb, (fwyt, a doit, 
half a farthing. "By gelykt 
bam oop en dojrf," there is not 
balf a farthing difference be- 



nttoeii a rait of olotbee made 
all of the same cloth, in French 
" nu complet." The term is 
pretty general. 

Dlt^ (popular), bag ; a ooimp- 
tlon of the tailors' phrase, "a 
dittobag," from the bag in which 
tbey ke^ miaoeUaneous artldes 
f or the r^air of their olotbea or 
shoes — for thread, tapes, bat- 
tons, needles, pins, naUs, Ac. 



An Oonyit* neully puunc thRnsh 
CuoD City an Sondar w» InTiud to (o 
A Uu pttuicntJATT Id chon^ lornca, uad, 
kCccpCLDC Ihfl iaritatifia, Ibtmd 315 ox^ 
ricu HKmbleit, ud uooDg tbm, pbirini 
:ha vboltD id th« choir, tbe ytyant lulisn 
who ihoc hit miitreiii tbrooflb ihc windov 



Dire into one'a a^i to (popnlar), 
to thmst one's hand in one's 

"Yo, I know, Unda, Ifi tiuj Abb. 
E K« yov through ibc kcTbolc Ibii ntom- 
Ing vhea ihc btoucht up joat ihaving 

Then Unde Ben JShW inlt Ut ikr 
uid brcoghl ep m nice bfi^ht Jubilee half- 

dollar, and Utile Willie weu off u> the 



Dive into the wooda, to (Ameri- 
can), a common figure of speech 
for hiding one's self. 

A fnole of Ibe Salnlwn Army hai 
innnlKl whu ii calleil Ihe "lalntiea 
LkB." VouDf men who haw tcco tbt 
female portion of (he vmy will not laek 
laliUioD is thii new form. TheyirillJVw 
■till deeper imU IMt vamdM wbdk Ebe army 

Diver (thieres), a pickpocket; 
he "dives into the skies" of 
other people. 

IHvide the hoBM with one'a wife, 
to, a qoaint saying which alg- 
uifies to torn her oot into the 



DMng-beD, a cellar lavcni. 



:v Google 



Divous — Dock. 



Oiwaat (g7l>7)> » ^7- hero 
diwtJce df«nu, tba gnat dsf 
of jadgmenL FroImUj ft con- 
tnction of dtadetkrQ, ^vlne. 

Diny ( Amerieui), to diTide, iluie, 
or partaka. 



tf ritOTT. ■ Ikllc piM tt 



—MmHUm Gmrrtr: A^or 



Do a gnr, to (thi«Tw), to n 

amj, to g«t out of the wa^. 
ll'i ■ fact to ba dcflond, Aoa^ il ami 



Do (popolsr), a ds li a band, an ^f^" >» 

UfMHOttl^Ebt 



Do, to (oomnian), to outwit, to pa; 
ont,toobaa(. <ThiaT«a),to<liia 
plaoa or orib, 1* to bnak Into a 
boue tor the pnrpoae of fteal- 

It 



(Popnlai and tUerea), "to ds 
ybr." to km. 

Tbt priuHnh^danituad thu Oa 
Kaatm bid biddK Ihtm la Jt /ir U. 

, tod Ihtn u [«k* awiy nvrlhina 

which b* BU(h> bun aboat bin*.— Au'^ 
Ttltfrmt/t. 

Do a bi^ to (popnlar), to < 

thing. 
Who I MkMl im whit abt'd I 

8h* mid, " I adaU 
IcanAeW 
Of amrlluiic ihal'i har*. 



iflksh to keep widna ^ bw. 
be vaT b> " tr,- bU wfav ■■-> I 

I lan to sect thcbobbr at the d 



Dobie (Anc^Indlan), a man wbo 
perfonni the f unctioiw of a 
washerwoman ; alao a washer- 



Dodc (old oant), to ddloww (Hai- 
man); B7p«7, tJiitcr. to wroog, 
laTlsh, Iniore. iMU«r or daeker 
U often nwd withont the t«r- 
minal " er." Tuner denrea it 
from the Qaello terroacL 

(Piintert). This la ooUoqoial 
for a man's weeklj UU or 
"pole," probably from the fiiot 
of its being anbject or liable to 
be "docked" or curtailed by 
the peraon appointed to check 
the bills. (WincbasterX to (Amt, 
to Mratch out ; to daek a book, 
to tear ont pagea from » book. 
(Popular), hospibO. 



:v Google 



Docker— Dodge. 



Docker (l»w}, a brief tat de(eDC« 
handed bj & prlfODOT Id tlie dock 
to BUT burisMr who tj tbe 
etiqD«tt« of the [vofeulon U 
bound to taks it, tX tbe mini- 
mum fee of a,^. 6d. 

Doctor, the (up-oountTy Am- 
tnlian), the men'a cook on a 
station. Tbe title of the m»n 
wbo ooncoota one kind of mix- 
tares and presciiptionB ia trana- 
ferred to one who pnetisea in 
•Dottier brancb of the profei- 
■ion, wbioh is thorotigiily char- 
aoteiiatic of Anatnllan dang. 

(Old), a deoootlon of milk and 
water, mm, and a iptolnK of 



" Hert,' mid ha, tikiiif khbe dice sdI 
of his pockeu, " here an the liitlc Jacitn 
wkkh ear* the dUWmpcn of iIh pum."— 

From to doctor, to poison, to 
taldfy, to adnlterate. 

Sb* dtdir'd tha punch, uid ihe dtttu'd 

the Dtgni, 
Tildiic cue not to put in fgtBcitnt lo 

—iKfU^ LitmU. 

"on one. 






n Iha old pn(.— 7*. 



(Fopnlac), to "keep A* doe- 
tor " i> Mid of a pabUcan wbo 
retaUji adulterated drinks. 

Dodderer (prorinclal), a ahaky, 
mmnbling old man. The old 
Kngllsh had to " doddle," aignl- 



tjing to tremble, to abake, itiU 
used bi the Nortb of Bngland. 
Ha (Di op OB aa oU onla which had 



French deddintr, which baa 
the root dad, osoilMton, In com- 
mon wltb the English eqaiva- 
lent ; Italian, dandoitrt, to rook, 
to shake gently. 

Doddj (provincial). This is ap- 
plied in Norfolk to any person 
of low ftatoie. Sometimee 
"Hodman dod," and "faoddy 
doddjf, all bead and no twdy." 
A " dod " ia prOTiooial for a rag 
of olotb, and to "dod" is to oat 



of thoaa JtJffmtttd elao- 
1 Tirini Bly nerve*, jnoil 




Dodge (oommon), a oliiver contrl- 
Tance; a conning, onderbanded 
trick. A recognised term, but 
used in many slangy sense*. 
Among the nqmeroos dodgt* re- 
sorted to by tricky or dishonest 
persons are the "pamplilet 
doigt." 
Tb< "pampUat ^a^' ii aa Mtabliriiad 

variety of tha befgiaC'lctler man cf trade. 

Two or Ihna anparti will chib tofathar 



, Google 



316 



Lhdge—Dog. 



post pamr-S'liner in one s( ibc huaU sf 
Micb people, Kod (tl him In llirow lo- 
■•tka- (gttjr ot fiftr P*g» on lb* paiti- 
«iilu mbject, payvv Ua nummU* wac«i 
for lb* ■waA.—TU-BiU. 

(TUevM), "delivered doi^iw." 

Airnd* 




inf bin h* mul uki 
Ibc bill u IHH paid, tbt cuMooHr replia 
Ihu he tiu dclivTTtd the ffoodi, tbftl thry 
an now io ihc poisemion of the poTchmcr, 
■ml Ihu if be isncbei Ihcm be wilt (it* 
him ia chUKO of Ibe police.— n;(- Ate. 

The " tidj dodgt," dntalDg 
op children lo that they look 
ttd7, and tlowl; walking about 
the atreete with thia genuine 
or borrowed family for begging 

To dodge, to track one In a 
■tealthy manaer. 
Tb«'> IH« ibe nulleM du((r in il 

an do ihai prcUT weU, I know. ... I 
wu ■ rrgahr cuicini umli when 1 wu u 
Khool.— fliI*«M.- 0/rIvr TWi', 

Dodger (common), a tricky per- 
son, ■ swindler. Diekent hax 
ImmortaliMd the word by hii 
character of the Artful Dodger 
la Oliver Twist. (Popnlar), a 
dram. (Provincial), a olght- 
cap, benoe the latter meaning. 
(Amerloao), thii term, meaning 
a Tonnd roll or pat of maite- 
bread, is apparently derived 
from the nme word at applied 



to any object ot a timUat ah^» 
(««., la ndgar ilmng, thep«u<|. 
In Dutch, dty or dagje (m mid- 
^ft dagff) moaiu a ihort Int of 
tope. J)«< or dii4< il also a hall 
of wo(4, cotton, kc, geneially 
■polled, decaying, or in a maaa. 

Dodo (old), a common azprearion 
for a fmiay old man, or de- 

Dod-rottedeat (American), a en- 
phemlstlc form ot cwearing ; 
■ometimee "dod-tetohed,'"'dod- 
gaated." 



ilh bUck whliken wu Enniinc 

X n big 'bfllUKB - wheel Bade ot 

botlto. — Smfmrr Imler 



O^ (eociety), a man ; a gay dti;. 
a jolly dog, a carelM* dog, tc. 
The word dag now hai come to 
mean in sooiety a gentleman of 
an amotoo* torn ot mind, who 
has great Bucceei among the 
ladies. 

(American), deg, dog-gamed, 
God and Ood damned, as 
it is popularly explained i it 
being believed that ikfr ia the 
word God reversed. "I'll be 
dogged" Is the common form, 
and it is really never nsed 
to serioualy signify anything so 
extreme as eternal condemna- 
tion. It il pouibly a New York 
word, and may therefore be de- 
rived from the Dntch dtmgat, 
to aiunmon to judgment, to 
arraign. If this be to, there 



:v Google 



Dog — Doing. 



Doc bitliv d^ (thMttical), ons 
actor DUgeneroiu]; ciltioUiiig 
■nother'i pertoi 



D^-CoUbt (oommon), ft stiff, 
■tend-op ooUai, one of th« kind 
mnoh in tftTOU kmong dandieo. 

Dog-dBfiwd (West American), 
a mild foim of iwearing. Pro- 
bably an eaphemism for God 



BM dEcUnd thil he maid bg df 
dmrtud if be wu (DJni 10 ran Mi iMeiior 
Oh calM d br HeH olWr phh) on ■■driT. 
inc lb* Hock hot fHtlm tttmi—dtmrd 
if ba would.— ^. FrmmU: Smddk mmd 

DOKKOT (Amertoan), a partial 
aoagiam of groggerj. A low 
drinkjiig place, a " ram-bnokot- 
■hop," a "dive," a "giD-mlll," 
a "booiiiig-keD,"a"n]m-ioile," 
a " dmnker;." 



ib*i 



ion vndanbojullyHid ■(& 
(BncUr or aUlilT of uj of Ih* oe 
Ther HI Id tKry «]r immau 



•rbo n 









II bav* cofM half «-doiHi tUg^ 
/i^keeptn, ■ crooked eji-g>(er, • poUcc- 
eonn ilijutt, *sd ■ ixilrowl lobbriit. 
Tan ot three Mher diatry'nrv'n and a 
kitib]riM orm and Van Pelt will U added 
bdbr* the Denocimtk DoouDalioiu ckiH. 
Tb« " Red* ' and the " ude-ahow ~ people 
wiD hanllir cWct any of Iheir men unlm 



Dor's body (nantical), a Und of 
peaao- padding. 

Dec-ahooter (Royml Hilitaiy Aca- 
demy). Cadeta thus tun a 
■tndeDt who acoeleratei, tbat 
1b, who, being prattj certain of 
not being able to obtain a com- 
misaioD in the engineen, or not 
caring for it, elects to join a 
■nperior clast before the end of 
the term. An alioalon to a 
Tolnnteer, called a iag-tkatttr. 

Doe's ooae (common), gtn and 
beer ; " eo called from the mii- 
tnn bring aa cold ai a dag't 
new," eay eeveial etjmologiBtE. 
It also if^ed to a man given 
towbltky. 



Dog'a Mtip (oommon), ndn water. 



DoBT stealer (oomiDon). a facett- 
ona a^>ellatioDfor a dog-deal«r, 
who it geneialljr ooneidend aa 
deeerringit 

Dogi'B tail (nantloal), a name lor 
the oonst«llatian Vm Hincw, 
or Little Bear. 



D<^-town (American), i 

ot prairie doga. 



Doioc a Uahop (army), tontng 
ont for paiade at abort Dotioe, 



:v Google 



318 



Doing — Doll. 



uidwlth imal] prapMfttJon for 
oleBoing np,4o. 

Dt^Dfl' ft bodk or doliiff A flUft 
(oommoD), kttendlng t« Datnra'i 

Dolac ■ nob (oiioiu «iid ihow- 
men), mkkiog • oollaotion of 
monej from apectetois (Frost's 
" Cirons Life "). 

Posslbl; from the g7pa7 Koft- 
btL 

TMat ■ Mar pitch {theatrical), 
sleeping in the open. Frenoh, 
"oonober k I'hOtel de U Belle 
^toil& 

Doing; it on the d. b. (oommoti). 
I eonld do it on my d. \., i.*., on 
my bead, Is a nlgar assantioe 
of being able to do a thing with 



Domg oat (American thieves), 
a device by which a thief, if 
urested with a confederate, 
plead* gnilty bat aoqnite the 



Doings (American), any kind of 
food, bnt in most instance! 
applied to that of an ordinaiy 



Doldnuna (nantical and ptorin- 
dal), tronble, low aidriU, wonl- 
ment. " Jaok in the DnUrvMs" 
was the title of a tale or nord 
Applied sometimea to a stormy 
plaoe, or where tbe weatbw or 
DaTigaUon Is bad. 

For llmi I iniiM luTcly die. 

And aj ■oul wl off la DtUrwm'i Ble, 

And cuiio HH d 



bun, 

—Tit Station MtrmMM. 
Tbe term seems to have be- 
come general Probably &om 
doU (with the sense of dolefnl), 
and a faoations inffiz, as in tan- 
trams. For other derivations 
vidt Tit. Charles Hackay'a 
"Gaelic Btymolt^y of the 
Snglish Langnage." 

Dole (Wincbeeter Oollege),a trick, 
stratagem! t^oni the Latin dolH*. 

DoUar(city), a Qie-shilling piece. 

DoUop (old slang), a lump, a 
share. To share, aoctsdiug to 
Hotten, derived from "dole 
up." to deal out in small por- 
tions. Diit«h, itA, a share. 

Thii old (il Died (o mcfw ■ vhadong lot 
ID A big pocket ihe had id her pctlkut, aad 
I uied to put awftj a d*U*f ia the bumm 
of uy ihitt, wbkh It wu tied naaA Ibe 

the porpose. But, Lor' blen yer, Hue- 
timei Ibe Ucued tnde wodM (o that 
■gsnolio' Ihit w* would both find our- 
•elm loaded up m do time.— Am Cirta 

DoU't chriatenin; (provincial), a 
party consisting entirely of 



:v Google 



Dolly— Dot 



319 



Dollf <popnlM'), ailly. boUih. 

"YaaanacUiuMi ■ link idia^" n- 
tanadBalk, " or too wonldo'l mdn luch 
■ lUfy ttiaiii."—OtctBU! Oar MtOmat 

(8ociet;),»daUy,«proititiit«, 
K atnet mlker, abort for i^olljr- 
mop ; «Uo » mlatzsM. 

Driok, uid dun, imd pip«t vdA plaj, 
KiiH vox dtUut lu^i uid AM,f. 

—Htrriek; H4^aid$t. 

Hon modBm U "mj tart" 
for " my ndatnas." 

(Anglo-Indian), Hioda, inli, 
ft pnMOt of fmlt, flowen, and 
■wMtmeats; also the daily ofler- 
Ing of flowen lunally made by 
the moUy (w»alX) called "the 
molly with his dally." In some 
paita of India the ((oUy haa 
grown Into an eztiavaganoe oon- 
■iating lometiniBa of bnahela of 
fruit, nnte, and oonfootionery, 
with bottlef of ohampagne and 
liqneon. 

(lailon), a bit of doth nsed 
aaaBponga, 

OoUj-mop (oommon), a tawdrily 
dieaMd servant girl, a leiiii- 
pnwUtate. 

DoUy-ibop {oommon), a pftwn- 
broker's shop of the poorett and 
loweat descrtption. From the 
Yiddish (U or (Jol. poor, wbioh 

a* a sign (or incb plaoee. 



1 per wt«k oo *hu they It 



Dam (Anglo-Indian), a rery low 
caste, representing some very 
old aboriginal noe. It was flrsT 
floggested by Charle* O. Leltiid 
that the origin of the Bom or 
gypsiei shonld be aonght is thia 
oaate, and recent Kaeaiolie* by 
Orieraon hare gone far to oon- 
firm the oonjectore. Tfans D 
and n are convertible in the 
Hlndn-gypey dialects, e.g., dot, 
a spoon, and rai. And white 
^iMa, ^mmt, and ^MMipooa 
mean in India a ^om, a female, 
^m, romni, roatntpaHO, or rvnai- 
pm have exactly the aune 
meaning in gypsy aa applied to 
gypsies and gypsydom. 



Do 



prond (American), eqai- 
valent to aaying that one ia 
oompllmeDted or made to feeC 



Domine Do-Uttle (old alang), the 
name of an impotent old man. 



intieal), ■ 
ejaculation," aaye Hotten, "of 
sailors when they reoeiva the 
last lash of a flogging." The 



thumper (tbeatiical), a 



■ (popular), the teeth. 
French along, jeu dt dcMuuM. 

Dommerar (old cant), a variety of 
tbe mendioaut tribe who pre- 
t«iid to be deaf and dumb. 



:v Google 



Domum — Domkey. 



Domum ball (WiDohMterColl^BX 
ft Iwll given b; the tnnnn- 
muitod oolite prefeoti on the 
ereoing after the "men" go 
borne for the V" 



Don, * oontnoUoD of tbe LbUd 
dMHXM. ItUftaniTenitjt«rm 
foi ft mftn wbo hma taken hU 
nuuter*! degree. It ia, how- 
em, genersUy confined to r«ai> 
dent ll.A.'a. 

Aa "OirfciRl H.A.' *riia:— "Tlu 
t mppoH, bwn alnyi 



(Winoheater), ft master. 

DoBft, donah {tbeftbieal), a girl, ft 
woman i from the Itftllui. The 
term ia alao nMd b; tnmpa, 
London roughs, fta 

Of Boana Ton'n ban te to xe 

Wban luria iport in clolhai loiiiurt, 

Ofcoum Tou've lecn lh« Futy Qnecn, 

ihvy call hcT MademDUellr, 
Wdl, perhipi yon won't bclwn lu bat 



Dmifcw (old), ft oottle stealer. 



DoM also meftos asbanated, 
Tailed to " dmt ap ; " Jmu for 
faimseU, lujnred or mined bim- 
■elt 
Lori Rudolph ii nndi tumakm if Iw 

friod hoc and [ben whobEUcraihu he 
biaJtmt/trbimK«.-Pmi/M»aGm^l*. 

Done brown (common), befooled, 
that is, oompletelj done. 

And tbej Hand al cadi other, ■■ aMicfa ai 
"HoHol ijollol heic'ianiiniDl 



Whu'i to be-doBcT Wi^n miwd all 
tbiftiDl 
Why, they'll liBfh at ladqoii a all onr 



Done-orer (popnUr), intoxlcftted. 



Wuted ■ ibillinl in Bood Stnet by 
■oinc to Harry Farain' " Aniuic Johe." 
Wby ArtiMicT And, emphatieaay, why 
JoktT Carkatnre of Aizdtoiy piclnrcH 
dffm tf dtmiA in coDiic joamaU vith 
utmoit regolaiity or many (las ycar^ — 
Sfrliv Tima. 

Donkey (nantical,) a Mftman'a box 
in which be keeps his olothesL 

(Pijoterf.) Compoaiton ftre 
Bometimee called dtmbfi bj 
pressmen by way o{ retaliation 
for calling them "pigs." 



, Google 



Donkey — Door. 



(Straata), "Vbo tbta» tli« 
dMfayr" ThliwuindrtlUU 
A oommrai abeet oiT In Hound*- 
dltoh Mid ths other Habrow 
quarter* of London when » man 
wearing a white hai makM hia 
■ppcanmoa. nte low Jews iwd 
orhkTea notion that no one but 
a Chriittui — Hkd oettainlj no 
Jew— erer weva « white hat. 
They »Ik> have a saTing that the 
Founder of Chriitiinlty stole the 
domktf on the back of which Be 
rode Into Jeraaalem. Henoethe 



(ConunoD), "Three mors and 
np goes the donity," that Is, 
three pennlei more and the dm- 
htf will go np the ladder. This 
pbnwe, need bj monntebanlu to 
denote that the peiformanoe 
wm begin when the nun re- 
quired la oomplats, ia often laid 
mooUnglj to a braggart to Im- 
^y diabellef in accounta of hla 
own wonderfal performaacea. 

Donkej-ildliv (popular), cheat- 
ing in weight and meaante. 

OnoBf (priaon), a woman. From 



Doo'a week (tailon), the week 
before a general holida;. 

Doo't go off before jou'atart 
(American ), a common ezhorta> 
tlon to any one not to be In 
"too predona" or too great a 



Oookerlag; (gypaiea), fortnne. 
telling; from dooirik, to pro- 
pheej. 

DooUe (theatrical), a penny ahow 
or nnlloenaed theatre, nauall; 
fitted ap In a large room or a 
oellai In a popnlona neighbour- 
hood. The eminent tragedian, 
Charlea DUlcn, emerged from 
one of theae In hla yonth, and 
handsome Conway, onoe the 
apoiled child of faahion, ad- 
mired and idoliaed by the bellea 
of Bath— notably by Madame 
Floul (Johnaon's Hr*. Ihrale) 
— found a temporary refoge at 
one of them when ^Tan from 
the patent theatre* by the bmtal 
persecaUon of "that feroolona 
literary niiBan, Theodore Hook " 
(Byton). There are three or 
foor performanoea a night at 
a dookit, and the aadlenoe ia 
uaually composed of javenile 
harlots and thievee. Many of 
theae plaoea of reeort atUI 
Bonrish at the Bast End. 

Oo<Aia'COTe, a fortonft-teller; 
from the gypay deektrvtg or 
rfwHifria, telling fortunes. 



BnMtrBna. 



:v Google 



Do over — Dosstrs. 



Do over (popnlu). Mid of any 
OM who Is Intinate (ounally) 
withftwoiun. 

Dope, to (Amviou). Dcfiag U 
the atapUring tneii with tobwMM 
prepMred in ■ pecaliar my, m 
the gTpalM of old wsa wont to 
OBB Dattim idiiHiiiiiMw. Fnun 
old OMitdopc, K ■impMou.diipe. 

NiH ool sf ta laloau ia Oh da^ 

Dopey (old out), & begBar'i trail ; 
the podaz ; tbe bnttooka ; Boot- 
tlo<, R dimp. 

Doru (SUwk Exohaagv), Sonth- 
Kutern lUUway Deferred Or- 
diiuu7 Stock. 

OoM (thlerea), * MmteiMW to im- 
pruooment. To gire e men hie 
dott, or pnnieh him. donbUeae 
comet from e dott of medicine, 
bat it ienot impoaaibletbe Yid- 
dish doM, dim or datt (Cheldelo), 
mMning the lew, hu inSaeaced 
the word in this peonliai cese. 
(Old cent), e borglary. 



DOM (trempe end popular), a 



ia ; or qeita ae Ukely,- be adds, 
■bttnatgrMvtlMfaaok. It i^ tow- 
ever, meet llkdj' fram natthw 
of tbeae. bet from tbe QmUo 



tnmpe very ollai Bed tta(tr 0BI7 
anOaUe ieatli«-plaee fOr tbe 

night — the noner biUny ^ifm 
to eeoDie a abetter in a low 
lodgtng-bonae," Aoooedliig to 
Dr. Brewer, " Dan is e haaaook 
foil of straw, a bed— piDpariy a 
straw bed, AMsrfiianoldwcvd 
for e bundle of haj or atmw." 
This derivation Is tbe more pro- 
bable, and is borne oat ^ tbe 
Freitch slang word |»«i, bed, 
from fiau, straw, etnw bed, 
whleb has ginn jmmsst to 
sleep, modemiaed into jinaw 
It aleo meeas ale^ 



ibh Aa, ud tlu u Si. Fucn^ — Tibr 
FnJKr; Sitelui fm SU^ Pint. 

Tbe author of "Sketobes in 
Shady Places " remarka :— " jDom, 
slang tenn for sleep — meaning 
to ' lie on tbe back.' On ei^ 
mination it will startle one to 
And how many of tbeee Tnlger- 
isms are derired diraotfy from 
tbe leemed languagee." 

Doeaer, the, tbe father of a 
bmily. From proriaclaliam doa. 



SUM o'clock tlw (nutr 

eoBlaRxlily inckHl in stw (Ud) for the 

nishl.— /■oAtfwa .' Lifi m i»i Ktmb. 

Dr. Cherl«e Haokey says:— 
"Uotten sD[poeee It to bederived 



Doeaers (oommon), u^tlaiaed bx 
qnotatiML 

TW'-ftVdrt' 

ttm,tadatap 'a t 
lb* iauB(t> uid in 



, Google 



Doss-house — Dotty. 32 

lod^C.A«>M with lb* doon epB iu(hi &>« Sine nad Nariivilk, Twl He w 
— d J»T.— g »wy» Jt. Simt : Him On Ptr pudoaad bn tb* luiv InMllatioa a 



e [tnmp* «iid thieret), 
* lodgtng-hoiue, npwtkDj thtt Do to tie to (American), tnst- 
oammon lodglng-boiUM wbera worthj, fit to uw>oiat« with, 

beds an tonipeaoe « night. Th. ool, .fc d™ gf dtb«i, th. d« 

thM will <E> «> (u to. an tbsw who bdim 
of ■Ucrioe- 



•nlorcK law aad ordn. Il will bi 
daj bx tba Rapublic wbn thii dut ibiU 
bmli of lh< ly' 




Jinmf (popular), degant; 
dofqi, in elegMit itjla. 
Joi Cipp BHle 1 

D iIh wholo thjag «tty ilM^- 
■ it,' wiiyoe, " j*w Ic'idi all 

othn c*fKliT."— Obnv* Trittmi. 

(Popular), mon^. 
An extremelr elegant cloak 
wae tonoBAj twnwd a i>^L "otter (low), a p«mj*.llner. a 
BebM perh^M the ezimuloo. "porter. 



Dot (nantlcal), a ribbon ; a dot 
dn^ a watch ribbon. 

Dot^ (popular), otacked, Eilljr. 



Dottle (popular), a well-oolonnd 
black ttuDp of a day pipci 



tbfl cbain, and ^^rpet 



Do the high, to (Oxford Uaiver- 

■tty), to widk np and down the "'^^■_„^ 

High Street on Bonday even- I'ncMtiiicjMulauiwi 

inga. Tbc bedMHd and lb* dnwi 

Do time, to (popular), to ■ 
ona'i time in priMn. 

Bo. i. abo.. fifty*™ ,™ old. u^ ^ appellation uMd for one'. 

hai a uksal rcpuoiim ai aa upcfl »>" °7 females of the lOWei 

OBcbBuiD. U* hai ahx cAw in Jolict, olaises OT pnMtitnle*. 



:v Google 



Doubk—DowM. 



I t^ not baa at Sum* wj ktm 



DoobM (UiIotm), ft apnriona OU- 
mond. 

DoogA, pnddliig »t poblio mad 
milUu7 acbooU. 

Dorer (hotel), ftidchaalU ; a 0(»- 
raptlon of " do over," la do 



Dovble-donhle, to put « the, » 
ptoowi wberefn a thief, bavlDg 
mmogad with other thieres to 
loM ft raoe, m Uut tbej idmj 
mbHj "iaj" ftgftliut him, de- 
odfea tb«m and nuu to win. 

Doable event (oomniait), propeiir 
ft tMshnicml t«nn nwd an tho 
tort wh«a » mftn beta on both 
■idM to UMt eithero 
— OMd in ft ilMngj M 




Double linet (naaticfti), ahipa' 
OMnftltlflo. From the mode of 
entering In booki ftt Llo;ds'. 

DonUei (prlnten). If a corapoal- 
tor repeats a line or MOtenoe in 
oompoilDg, he it siid to have 



Ooven (Stock IiohangeX Sosth- 
Eaeton BB0wajOrdinai7Sto(ik. 

Dowd (popular), for dowdy; 
aliowllj dnaeed. 



Dowlaa, aocordlng to Hottto, a 
linen-dnper. .DmcIm ii a kind 
of towelling. 

Dowlince (Bh r ew burj 8oho<d). 



Down (thioTBil, iiuidoion, alarm, 
or diaoovet7 which obllgae oue 
to deilit from the huainMa or 
depvdatlon he waa engaged in. 
(Popular), to be "dawn In," 
to be at a low ebb, lacking in, 
ont of. " Ansa in blunt," laok- 
ing mon^, "Dmtn npon one's 
lack," unfortunate. Ferbqia 
originally " doten In ooe's look." 
To be "(iown In the month," 
dejected, disconacdate, crert- 
fallen. 

But ulut luH yva BOt to ay Kgr imr- 
•^r, >]i]r roa ihoaU km « ben, ^mh 
n U* bhU, bnlth, bhint, ud mry- 
■hfaic tItBl—Ctmria DiiJmui OUttr 
TkM. 



:v Google 



Doom — Dowtiy. 



Dom oa the bad rack (Wwt 



Oa aU tl 



rtnr. 



Bst I ihaald dilicb Id ilMd|luarfth* 
Y« am doooKl to Iba DIBOM pcBpriMy [ 

Down ■ pit (tbMtrical), daapa> 
ntal; Mnlttan with » put. 




Downa, ttw (tUerw), TothUl 
Klelda' prlMm, 

Down ttw road (popular), •tj'lish, 
tn fuUowble BtfU. 

Down ta ttM sTonnd (Bngllili ud 
Amerioan), thoroughly, oom- 
pletelj; "right up to the handle," 
that anltB ma (totm (0 U« proMiA 
It impUet probably from top 
to bottom. 

OowDf (oommon), to do the 
dow»]/, to keep la bed in the 



Dewaad (Kngliih and Amertoan), 
oonqnerad, tiioked, ohaated. 
Uterallf not gettli^ tbe npper 



■1 1 hopa I'n DM •old, 'di ih* mth y< 

hkHtsUr 
"Tbt traih, ^I" 



Sba'd ■ coopli of pah in ih* " ptet 1 ' 
And ih« waaaaa wm inmid. 

Strrthig Thmi. 

Dowaer (popular), a d^ence. 
Aoooidlng to BaiTow from the 
Bjp«7 word tawM, or Uttle one. 
The word aeesw, bowercr, to be a 
variant of " dM&ar." which aee. 



{Popular and thleTea), onn- 

Vpgn bn>miu bnik so ■ Jt^nf 



" I npina job doa'l hmv whit ■ 
pri( bl' luil th< Dad(B mauBfiillT. 
"I u, I'd KOta Is 1m uiyihinf •!■• 
— »'• Chukf, n'l Fnin, le'i Silw, 
•HI Nucy, ■(.'• Bm. So wt dl an, don 
■alh*ds(. Aoiht'ni^JrmmitBit ct 
ihi lot ! '—JXctnu ; Oiimr Twitl. 

A "downy core," a oonnlDg 
fdlow, one wlio " knowi what'a 
o'dook." An alliuiOD to hia 
hafiug the npper hand In his 
dealing! with othen. 

Pimy liiiiliiiiiiiin Ibchir'uB; anBi 
Uka that im|Iu u ba wcnh a IbiniH le 
him.-/, Grmnmrtd! Dki TtrnfU. 



:v Google 



3J6 



Dmonjf — Drag, 



it la tawaDrolU, b ■ iwj pnttr far- 
fill— ■ii»i»iiili. ifiiliBiillil Ib« 

of lO ■ 1—0 Bsb H CB off fe<B Ihl HW 

body of the cattle, kBd dfna fiatlj ftVKy 
far k Ink diitucc, ud tkB ■DsHd •» 
•Biad. nb htlH ■odHH o/tia dnik 
■oh, iir BO bant wa tend idn B aaww 
br iodr, ud «H of tb* tea* ii toU a*- 




Dawaj BlUe (taOm), oannptk» inTvteriM of patMo Mid i 
ot DoQftj Bible; eqainkat to diM, in unrtli ig "ap to fe 
"MOordiiigtoOoakK.'' In loKUth dan^ 

Dewir (oaamaa), a wry great 
dakl, an exoeaa. Hotten nja 
tht« ia pcofaablj from tba gTpaj, 
but then U iMtbli« Uka it 
in BomaDj. It la jnat poa- 
alblj bom tba Tlddlifa demor, » 
thing (or wofd) ; A wr t a Mtfl. 
u>, capeiflDoaa tbinga. /Jhrh- 
wonld, like m, refer to pro- 
pertj. 

Dowier (populaz), a man wbotella 
toitnnei ; a kind ot witard who 
pretenda to be able to Had water 

D1S7 (oanting), a miabeaa, a 
"moll," generally osed in a 
diarepatafale aeiue, bat " In the 
West of Bagland women fre- 
quently caU their Uttle giria 
' doxies ' in a ^mill»T and en- 
dearing aenae " (Hotten). This 
pnbablj- li the original mean- 

Lutly I vm clove id my dur]i, mp 
t^Oj, mud Hill brin| her dodi.— ^.^A 4^ 
BatfyUt Mtn Cmrtm. 

Do yon see aiTthiiic gre«n In m7 
eye ? (popoUr), DoyoQ think that 
1 am to be taken in or gulled. 
"Green" ia a aTiionym for nn- 
•ophistioated, timple- minded, 
the eqidvalent in French being 
aonwoAon, a gherkin, alluding to 
the coloar. 

Drab (gTpay), polaon or medlolne ; 
"op to droi," knowing all the 



Dra« (low), 
when BT*"™*^ bj mm for a 
IroUo or a band. WhM a 
" moUj," oc yonng maa,dteaNa 
like a girl, for Immonl pur- 
posea, be ia nld to be "on 
the dng." In Bng^aod and 
America dr^balla are btfd, at 
frtiloh the young man an 
dreaaed like women, and wtanen 
Twy often like men. Somedny- 
balla, withoDt any of the fsmale 
element, aitd attended by aodo- 
mitee, take plaoe oooaaional^ in 

(Thieree), a tern of thr«e 
months' inqtrleonment, termed 



WdL HT, « I ml riyidf, I ee 

rfnv fix thM lot job. Oh, I bet 
■ Jnt ncwn thnc monlhi. 



, Google 



Drag — Draiv. 



327 



Fiaal StTvOmdi. 

(Fopnbv), to go upon m ira^, 
to go kbont f 01 pleamro. 
Alao ■ lore, trick, stratagem. 

Dragged (tailor*), behind time. 

DninvC (thievee), robbing pro- 
pertj Irom carta 01 oabs. (Pro- 
vlndal), dmggi^ • Umo, the 
ereniag of a ooontrj fair da;, 
when the yonng men be0n 
kiasiiig the giili and pnll them 
about. 

DraniBC ^"^ pnddinc (tailors], 
getting the nek Jost before 
Chrlitniaa. 

Draes^etaU (common), » dirtj, 
drankeu woman; a prostitoto 
of the lowest class. 

DngHnan (thieree), a thief who 
robs oarTiagea bj climbing op 
behind. 

Draia (common), a drink. 

X tlw bor." "id Tobr, Wf 
jluH ; " down viih it, iufr 
c«n. —Dicktm: OUmr TmM. 

WbcB 1 wu ■ yoang niu tf abeul t*a 
■nd liKDty, I Indeed in Llnta AirD 
Sued (ovi of R^oii Smu), uid hivinf 
iB*d« fTOI friends with the nighi bobbf , 



tiavellerB reaohed the (franu 
and brooks that formed the 
bead waters of the rtvw.'* 

(Nantical), the oook on board 
ship. 

Draper (old), alt-draper, a public- 
faoase keeper. The term leems 
to have a tkoetioaa origin, nn- 
less it be a oormption cf " ale- 
dropper." Shakqieare has aU- 
draptr for a publican. 

Drat it (popnlar), a femiBine ab- 
Jorgation exjoieesiTe of con- 
tempt or anger, eiToneoiisly 
■opposed to be a corraption of 
the Tulgar onrse, " God rot it I " 
It is a form of dnad^ or drtad 
and drad, fear or dread (Anglo- 
Sazon}. yj>rat occurs in Hers 
Fk>wman and Od; of War- 

Dmw (sporting and oommon). 
a strife which Is witboat result. 
From ** a drawn game." 

TIh lin* •KBH to ba nifli whn $11 
' intemuioiiAl " eoattxa wHi nd in ■ 
ymm. It if Uh uml hX9 of iBtanutionai 
liclRt nWcbn.— £<- Jmmtii Gtaittt. 

Said of au<r plaj, performance, 
or exhibition when It is a suc- 
cess and attracts people^ 



outhem suburb 



w rdigiou cDtcfpriie ir 



Dnina (American), a tribntary 
of a large river. Washii^toD 
Irrit^ in " Astarea " thus nses 
the phnue: "About noon, the 



:v Google 




(AmericMi), I W««t«ni letin 
•il^ed to tbe cattle which k 
cowboy MQploji oonld pick 
npi or plainlj steal, tor hl« 



of canl* in ■ radTonaiih. U^ the 
drmr wt wotth mHibiiil IboH <ii»i»l 
—jr. Frmmeu : SmJJJi mmd M^aatU. 

Small gladM^ glnu, or Tall«7B. 

Wc hid Itft Lbc au* txhinl, «i>d wtn 



ata*.~F. Frm 



: SiiMU *Md Mte- 



(OommoD), to iraie, to taka 
In. oircamTent 

(Uilitarj), to draw, an abbrv- 
viatlonol " to (trow the badger," 
explained by qaotaCion, 

A youof officvr oo fine joining wju lab- 
)«itd iokU htU of pnclLal jokinf. . . . 
Fncinl ic*luo< **> Lndtcd a noocnitBd 
iimiluljon. . . . lU iuua] aiAnifnuiHni 
wvifi i/rttving t mim who lud retanwd 
from mat t*i\j, ftdd " Bukifli h«7 "* of 
bin ruraitiin and piu p M i y . ... A pany 
or half^-dowi wild jouiif uhalicm. lol 
probabtf br a feuivc ca p t ai n , wQuLd, after 
a heavy fufcl niaht. proccad lo the 

•rwld be Bade to Hand in dw niddle of 
the rowa in hii nithl^fairt, and tint a 
conuc mi. OccaaiooallT, he iMuld be 



a bleady aet.—Difntt! Larngk m^ 

(UninnilT and popnlai), to 
Tsx, to iufniiate^ It la an- 
donbtedlj a metaphor from 
"drawing a badger," i«., Mnd- 
ing in a badger-terrier to worry 
bin ont ; which in it* tun ia 
proliabty a metaphor bom tbe 
badgeta being oocaaionally 
dragged oat by the bull-dog at 
badger-booDd. So in AnatnUa 
one epeaka of " drawing a 'poa- 

Dnw ft bead, to (American), Um 
Woatem honto- or trapper in 
taking aim doe* ao with d»> 
liberate preciiioa. He ilowlj 
lalaea the " front alght," whioh 
in appeaianoe I« like a bead, to 
aleral with the back eight, and 
when tbe two aie in a line he 
Immediately Urea — henoe tbe 
expresdon, and in oolloqnia) nee 
it haa ooue to aignl^ an attack 



:v Google 



" Wcban it, aDd sf Ih* b«*t "— 

Hinpliid; 
" Do Toa know bo* la nukfl it wo^ 
" Ob, ii in't ftr Dw, but— 
Hh lUCfl joongiiiiui 



-C. C. LiUmd. 

Dnw bOT <tnde), a snperior 
article m&rked at k low prie«, 
pUoed in hla window b; a ataop- 
keepei to attract cnftomen ; 
tiirt intended to be sold, but only 
to act aa a decoy to cheat those 
greedy crednlona people who like 
to make a good bai^ln. Thf» 
trick does not always snooeed, 
and nay genenlly be foiled 
by any obstlnata ctutomer who 
wQl persist, in spit* of re- 
foaai, to beoome posseBsed of 
tbe identical [d«oe of merohan- 
dlM that has tempted bia cnpl- 
dit?. 

Dntwinc (otndloa), artists call a 
water-coloDt fdctnre a dnw' 



■aw. 329 

Hu pnndpul wtuO, hovcnr, is lb* 
■It of Jrwmlitt 1*1 Jl*it. «• nidoul pa. 
■pactin, ut hiryBi, dectws, anil tncUi- 
Bua; i«b of wbom hu ■{■indpla of 
dmrins pccoUiir to bii tniU gr pnfer 
tiod, vbich aagbt ro bt ibonnifblr cov- 
pRbcDdad by tlH tmtaai. — Difnu: 

Dnwing die Qneen's irfctnrt 
(ttiieres), the ntanafaotore of 
Imm money. 

Dimw it miU (oommon), calm 
yonnelf, don't ezaggerate, Um 
raveise of " coming it too atniig." 
It has also tbe signification ex- 
plained by the qaotation. 

i b imd vh«B EhB 



Draw out, to (common), to elidt 
information or secret* from one. 
Frenoh, "tirerlesToradDnei t" 
He wu ■ bawr, ilni^lookuic Mlov, 



Dimwing a wipe (thteres), steal- 
ing a pooket-handkerohief from 
a person's pocket. 

Dnwinc hla wool (tailors), vex- 
ing, or causing any one to lose 
his temper. 

Ihmwing plaster (tailon), seek- 
ing to aooertaln a man's inten- 

Drawlng; tibe flata (popular), im- 
posing on ilmple-minded people. 



Dnw teetii, to, to wr«Bcb kuook- 
era and door-handlea from off 
stiest doora, a favonilte amnae- 
ment of medical atndenta of 
bygone days. 



Elia Stuky, ■ , 
WfVJ' xU' foniuHi ; in fact, Ka. Son- 
ley can "nJe jtai pluHt." Id ordtf, 
bowetcr, u do tbk locceMfUDy risa mot 
b> miniiud vkb (old— imUiig lea buof 
haty CA«i(h it Jrwm lit fl^ul. Hn, 



, Google 



fino bw thn* noollu.— r** CM*. 

Draw wonted, to (UUon), to fer- 
ment ■ qnurd. 

OnM A hot, to (ahopman), to 
«iobBag« utlolee ttolen from 
raopeotin enplo7«n. 

DrtaatA to UU (Ameriou), to be 
o*at-dna*ed ; Aqnlfkletit to "to 
be dieeaed todeMh," "diened 
to the nlnea." 

Wbto w* m* m ivotlemuL ttpcooof 
Alaof Bnkdway, with b ^idj urinle- 
inf^Ina by hii lide uid both Jmad 
OMAtttkivalsu'waiilct ht. km mv 
ba nn iImi ba uku > 



mtd: TJk, San Cmn 

Drink (Amerioan), » rirer. Ite 
■'big Drink" ia the < 
Westen tenn for Uie 
ripti 



Dr^frfng (oommon), m oonten^ 
tnow tenn ^tpUed to > oook, 
who ia not enotly k tordam 

Drirer'B pint {mlUtM?), a gkllon 
of «1b. DriToa of the •ttfUar 
are snppoaed to hkre large 
power* of abaoiptlon. 
Dran In (WinoheMor College). 
The four or five next beat plajera DrhB, to{raoliig),»<lr»«»howe 
_ ^ nrga him on with whip 



< of NumbB 



In a football team stand ready 
dr n aaed ao aa to take the plaoe 
of any player who la in any 
way Injured. They are a^d to 



« <i iuiy or dreaaln^ down 
(eommon), a beating, a defeat. 
It alao maana a aooldiog. 
If e*a I meet hbn ■din I will (in ^llII 

tuch ■ drurii^ fei b« hai Dot b«d ihii 

IUD7 ■ Oxy.—Mui Auttm: Simt *md 

SmiUBff. 

Dran-lo^er (prootltnta), ex- 
plained by quotation. 

They belofii Diutly ud «ntinly ta tha 
dnil in humu ihilpc who owot Ih* den 
■hU tha wralcbad hutM kwn n call bar 
"borne' Ydu would oenr dcean of (ha 
daplonbia depth of bar dcuilotton if yoa 



and apon. 

Drin tu r h c y i to toAractt to 
(popvlai), to reel from one dda 
to the other like a tipay man. 
Probably from the wobbling of 
the birda in qaeatlmi. 

Dris (thierea and gypelea), laoe. 
From the gypay itorin, thread 
or lace. "i>rirfeDoeT," a per- 
son who bnya or aeUa etolen laoe. 
A drii kemtta, a ahirt with a 
lacetrilL 



:v Google 



Drodtbtm — Dropped. 



DrameduT (thlerei), • bnngler. Drop the mooej pnrae. to (Anwri- 

oan), to Inonr % low, malra a 

On^ (Amflrtou), to gst the ikep nilat«ke. 

on a nun, to foraatall, get DaTbt Due he lul iua BiwCood, 

Bxrt ■dnatige. Thia phnue ™ "■■" ■■"'• "*" ■" ^^ *" "*Kr- 

lai|[e (dtiea upon nnmBpeotiiig cuT ind'un.—Jm-jenni. 
atnmgen, called tha drop gmme, 

which oonoiet* in pretendliiK to Drop the KtUM in, to (bOlon), 

fl&d % pooket-book or pnrae full to work the bnttMi-holea. 



of notei, whiob » confedeikta 

has dropped npoa tbe near ap- 

proaoh of a Ukelj vlotini. Sj 

•peoioiii nraeeeutaUoni tbe , , ^ , ^ , 

Itader mu^« to obUln good ""l^ ™i ff"?^'. •» *»!' 



Drop, to (thierea and popnlar), 
to leave, tarn aalde; to "drop 
the main Toby," to tarn off the 



money from the victim, who 
la aild to be dropptd on, tbe 
ootea being, of oooiae, oonnter- 



> knook him down; 
to drop on, to arrest laddenly, 
to abruptly interfere < 



felt. ' 'ont, to leprove, lay the re* 

Al«, u. h.™ th. 4>r on -po^WJllron. 

one. Thc(kI]ta'<liad,tbeidaIbcalikdMat 

Who —— — "-J to bold Ui hmdi up. But Ihli [ber uapped, Mud » Aim ilnf- 

ha rtfoud ukd Attampud to At*.w hU own /tfi^ for nukinf thli ^Ld muoka. 

nrstns', inLh tlM mull vf hmnni lira 'Stnt : TidJlt-a-tyini Of 

bttUata put thnxmh hio. Finnlpui gov Bmr^rr, 
•Kotad on Ciluihj H ■ fool for doc 

knowiiig whea > mu hmd [ha drwf so (AmenOUi), to low. 

hJoL-Crthny Ilhalrmtid Mfmtiat. g^ p,„, ^„ioj oKn hrfl for lUimwon 
MoodAy prf pAjtd to gal cren •□ tbair 

Drop in the CTC (old), to " have a pnTioiuii>«aoDihaGiifflDn-Urenmm, 

dm in (At nw," to be partially *"■>" " Hwiiiont L«>ding, near St 

intojioatei S^''.:^M™°^Tfi!^'^ 

O bilh. Colsoal, job dui ova roa bad I'ht MiuK^nlu ud St. Pul men (nra 

A ^1^ i« ftiar fjt, for when [ IcA jga tHg oddt od GUmore. and La looAd aambcn 

foa w« half lau urar.^^iiit/l : PtUU it ii eniaulad that Iha Uinnswu men 

CtmumtU^ dt^fti tSoos an the Gsht.^r(. l-tmit 

CMtDtrnxTrnt. 

Drop it (oommoD), oeue, leave (Common), to drof Into, to 

'^ thraah. 



:v Google 



Dropping — Drunk. 



DnppioK the aadior (noing) 
kM^log baok a hone In i 



(OU laolng), m Imwm «1mm 
fonlaga moro in an bngnlar. 



r, (brr wnald be aocwl of what 
u b« Hniad la ndui iluf ir^fimc 
tkt mdmr.—Sftr^tt Timtt. 

Dram (popular and thievM), a 
bonae or lodging. 



1 iHWL~/. Cntm m ^ : Die* Trmflt. 

I mm Hnufhl back to tbt old intm in 
StsBlflEldi, Mid aftit ■ drink with old 



DruM DWaoi also a itrMt, a 
road \ in the W«at of Snglaad 
a"dK>i>g." 

It ma; have come direotl; 
from the Bngliah gyps; ixtm 
(old form drm), which it, 
tral;, from tbe Greek ipoitin, a 
road. The origin of the old 
French oant word, inmt, which 
haa the some meaning, iji pro- 
bably identical. 

(Old), rent or ball. Prom 
the noice ol tbe entertainment 
a ball-room wa« called the 
" drupi-'room." 
TIh bonny houKnuid begins ti 




lum,fnUial hiMi bjibc band, vd lk«y 
WW fUd to K« bun \m^ Iroia ^xaofit, 
and a^sl bm a puff in Um Cnrbrjtmr- 
mU.-OmmJU, ffrrU. 

In ttila pengraph tbe editor 
of the Omalut WorU ntirieea 
a ooUeagne In a tlral news- 
paper. 

(ThiereB), a. thief who makea 
hie Tiotime ineendble bj giTing 
them a narcotic, or oaodng them 
to inhale ohlorofonn. Pro- 
bably a oormption of " dnin- 
mer" from ''dram." 



Drammer (tailors), troneers' 



it tbcB b7 takinf a wbiff at 
eadi, aftiT which he hudod tbcB la tlia 
ChiDaDwD. who rose (no the ooodi yawn- 
ing, and, lik< ma oalj hatf awabc, 
fUgimd toward) ihc tn, and ■« n- 
■ardinc it In uIbkc They wen Bet ■sins 
jtt : ih«T had conn fee a drwik, and 
wodM probablr InddtB In h 



, Google 



Dmnken — Dry. 



333 



ki (wldiBra), good 
idg«B. Daililvelj 
med, and Impljing that the 
badgai haro been gklned not 
bj aobiietj bnt bj tli« taonltf 
of oaiTTing liqoot welL 

DnnT Lane veslala (<dd). Drury 
I^ne, like Covent Oarde&, had 
at one Ume a reputation for 
iDunoialit; and debanobery 
rirsUing the Haymvket and 
Bogant Street of to-d>j. The 
oeighboarhood waa notorious 
aa the reeott and dwelling-place 
of women of the town, whether 
kept nditieuee or oommon 
barlola. They were called 
Drwty Zone vataU, and "the 
Dnrj Lane ague " wa« a loath- 
•ome Tenereal diaorder. 

DfJ twb. Vid* BOB- 

Qiy-bobUiv (Eton), criokettliig. 

"WiA-itMing," the term for 

river sports. Vide Bob. 

EnnRi^ylwwsahucuc: thiCainic 

wmM ^Eiued, uhl "Hatrf" ncit«d thft 

pvlcsD* wilh mpdi huccvb- Ti wai in 

April, when ■ lata ud Hm* Hood lud 

pat Ml md Ui A tirtlc jut«B[ic«I ouiT tt^- 



O17 haali (Anatrallan), a man who 
will not "ihODt," i.t., pkj for 
drinks. Vide Dxadhhao. 

Diy lodging: [lodging -bonse 
keepers), sleeping aooommoda^ 
tlon witbODt board. 



Oty nurse, to (nantioal), ia add 
of a junior offioer on board ahlp 
who advlMB an ignorant ob- 
tain, and inatmcta ^^tw in htf 



Diy shKTVi to (oommmi), to annoy 
one by violently mbtdng bis 
chin with the finger*. 

D17 np (popnlar, originally Ame- 
rican), hold yonr tongae ; Taried 
by "onrl ap," "pat a dapper to 
yonr mog," "rtop your jaw," 
and other equally elegant in- 
TitstioDi. (Theatrical), • dry 
up, a failure, the reverse of a 

WboevtT 11 ntpoHbic for the £ry r^ tt 
the Open Comique dows to be Mtim- 
cued from Itie^rick] toaety. — Bird ^ 

To dry tqi, to stlok, £«., to 
foiget the words of a part and 
breakdown. 

(Racing), to slacken pace 
throngh eibaostlon ; literally 
to be " pninped ont." 

Al Ibe dbtuKK be looked like winnliic 



i.t.—SftT*i<it Timt 






(Printers), to leave off work 
at dinner time or at night. 
Eometime* to dlMharge, or 
to leave a sitnation. 



D17, waUdnc (military), a irj 
walk or isaUHijr dry, ia the nn- 
Inteieetlng and veij dmaatefol 
promenade a soldier ia com- 
pelled to take when he leaves 
barracks alter working bonrs 
without a penny in his pocket. 



:v Google 



334 

D. T. (eotninaa), daUiivm tra- Due (prinlMm), ibott tar the ink- 

Diaiu, need rmj gmanUr i>j ' 

Anglo-Iiulkiis. tbe qwuititT gin 

Tb>T(Milaek,)A<r*Uacbe(D. T., 
nrhkdi Botbiag cba tlttt I koowdf cuicm 

thtm^-lm^MM TUi. Oucat, doCatS (tllMtliOftl), < 

i). r. bIm meuu JMtf 3Uc- <>^ o' "^T deoeripttML 

jp^ (TUwbb), a nUwMT tioket. 
Pnbftblj K ooiraptioo of ticket. 

Dnb.to(tUeve.),toopeii; "d«i So I .«* . A«/ b, L«u- b> s™^. 
the jigger, open the door. 

Hbtidui writes this " dn[k" /HItafi/rtm JtiL 

Towir « TUdcr a the liu*. ^M ibt _ 

tyMTT. tfiTiMH : CMHmt. Dnck (popolv), » handle of ■ci^m 

„ , . 1 1. , Li 1. ot meat sold to the poor. O^n- 

rJ^- * u^' '^ ■ •^"r^ ch.tt«).thef««. 
Aifr-laj, Tohhlng bODMs by piok- 

Ing the hKiks. " Dabber," an Out^ or duck"* egg (oicket). 

expert lock-picker. no riuiB ; an allnnon to tba 

To dub a jigser la a variaot of ehape of the nought. 

"Wrlkeai^." totat^open , ..^ «. „t^ *, ,; 

a door, and ihib In that aenae ' 
is from the meaning to strike. 
Aiiglo-Sazon AtUon. " 
dub. 

(Popular), to "diibnp,"t 

op. Provincial, dvbi, monej. (Stock Exchange). In tbe 

So that "diib np" wonld be the slang of the "House" a "lame 

exact rendering of the French dttek" is a de&alter. The ex- 

jfaoiMcr, to pay. (Anglo-Indian), preeslon is old. 

Aii, a small ooln. , nnrt>T"1 r-t. '>-l I itaiin Dnvba 
■ dmk, DOC dol m tbe pitaf* of tbe 

Dub at a knappiiie ji^er (old >Uor.— Wa^fAixcn. 

cant), a tompike-man. . „, j . ., > .^ . 

'• IT— i "lame dtuk" is said to 

DnU(Wtnoheater). Intheelaiig "waddle out cf the aUej," that 

of the boys of that public Bohool is,leaTethe Stock Bxobange aa 

this term hae the meaning of bankmpt. 

double. "n* ■uninf roob an dura, tin knam 
en rooki. 'Cbiuicc-«Uey buknipu wwidi* 

DnbMMB (old cant), a jailor. out "taiD.A«*..--C«TK*: /V*4r»«* 

Oh > rv. =.e . chi«l, . Jif,. o. . fiK "^■' *-««^«^ 

*^lltoJ^3T" '^^'^' ■" -^ DbA, dtrinc a (tUeyee), getting 

Tol.dt-roi. nnder the seat of a railway car- 

—w.H.AituvMTthijmckSii^pmtJ. rlage When the licket-oolleotOT 



:v Google 



Duck—Dudette. 



335 



oomM ronnd. 


M as to aTOld 


psjlBg the tm. Flom the 


ordiiiU7 meuiiiig of to dinck. to 


drop the bead 


ot penon sod- 


denly. 






gluDca of inleiH 




"DtM m </«:». , 


™ii- lU nttltr. 


ridlo' « A» chap. < 


« th.odDO. oaiB 


<h. Uoondn- «t do. 


n wi- lb* doM, lU 


UBOf the diiHo, ■ 


'hcK roB lUu, wid 


wh« r«> lil«. il "-l- 




wlul do ^ Ihkkl 





TTiia Tcnnf penoo had uipaUtAd thai 
BDIt iboBkl do (ha Ihb( piuper, wid be 
Barrivd m ft pair of white dmcJa. IIkk 



The word U also iis»d in 
England. 

Sometimes, bowover, a dis- 
tinction seems to be establisbed 
between dtkdt and dandy, the 
f omer being ooniideTed to apply 
taore to a biainless " muber." 

Vm a dandr 111 have jva ell lo knor, 
With ibe Udw I'm KTa nide : 

Thii ityle la nil aj own, with it I ctirj 



Tbe following quotation gives 
amnsii^ evldenoe of the anti- 
qolty of dudt. 

A OHRipoDdait U the Ntm Ytri 
Evtmiiit PmI tbain Ihu duda en of 
vcrr uideBi due. In the "EmDchiu" 



" rtsch ne dcnrn " HMoriety, ta the letii- 
Cection of the feminine onlooker of hii fm>- 
Goedinfi thnxi^ the wiodow.— \S'i«b«^; 

(Stock Sxotuuige}, Ajlesbar; 
Dairy Compan j shares. 

(Anglo-Indian), officials of the 
Bcnnbaj servic& 



D (old), a pedlar 
who sold articles of dotliing to 
ooontrj people. Yidt Duds. 



Which, liientljr nnitstcd into Eogliih, 
nuld ml;— "He Htned ■ JmU. be- 
cuiH he wei decked out in paiti-coloarcd 
doihee.'' or uiU bor litcnlly, " in ■ veel 

ofnuiycoloun.'' 

Dnde hamfatten (American), a 
saroastio allusion to tbe swell 
■nd " masher " pork-raiseis. A 
Urge number are located not a 
hundred miles from Chicago. 
Il leenii that the duJt Imniftiltn, after 
Iryint tariotu gmm« lo tkjp UDKcn, con- 
ceived the idea of makins up aa a couple 



Dnde (American), a swell or 

" masher," an overdressed man. 

Probably from the very old 

Bnglish cant dvdt, a garment. 

Ain't you one of theie d»da ai the 

Coknel brin|i down lonictinia fmni El 

Paeo and Silier. that wantl kettlei a' hot 

water to twelve e'clockT-^. Fruntit: 

SmddU tmdMxamH. 



limU PtSa CmtU. 



crow (HalliweU). 

Dndette, dndinette (American), a 
very yoni^; girl, a mere cbtt, 
who affects the airs and style of 



:v Google 



336 



Dudikabin — Duffer. 



loMn," Ut, to take llgbtiiiant. 
Thl« word wu foi a long time 
kept a grakt lecret bj tha 
g7P«ie«, and oae of them ma 
reprimsnded b; hi* trieudi Iot 
telling the writer. Itmeuwthe 
maktag » oleui Bweep of ereij- 
thlng Tkliuble In the honae, 
under pretence of propitiAtlng- 
the pUaeta, or of finding and 
attracting hidden trea«nre. Thi* 
latter it more tpeoiallj the Mc- 
aniAorD, or "great hnmbng." It 
^>peBxs to be connected with 
the Bngllih ilang - eqniTalent 
"Ughtment," from to lighten, 
to lelieTo of one's property, to 

DiuUiw(Aineiloan},Alad7"dDde." 

!/»■ - buHlled cjC'Cluiu, mad tbc 
Jmlima wha bajr ud luc Hum—PAOn- 
itltlumTimit. 

Dnda (thlevet), olothee. Scottish 
(iuti, a rag. 

K% I wu vjJkiDff down C3iBLp4ide m 
Dui came op u me uh] utd, "^ Look 
hvB, 1UU, lb* tooiHr ^D lUng theni 
dttdt amvf lh« loncer you will ke«p out of 
quod. I have been foUowini behind two 
privjtt* clothes delect ivH, end they ipolled 
you br your toci, » take my tip lo gel 
rid of Ihflm.-^ffviviiv Nma. 

Alsodd^ui. 
"DieD he look oul ■ lilile knife, 

Lei ■' bii dtuldin fa'. 
And ke w«i ike bnweAt gentlemen 

—Old Ballmd: Wt'll [out <ua Mmir 
m Snimg. lAUrilmltd U Kimf 
Jtma y. 1^ ScelUnd.\ 

T. Harmat) nsea the word 
with the meuning of linen 
clothe*. 



hedcn,!* nb ■ puetl cf theia^ tnm 

(Old), to "sweat dmdt," to 
pawn olotbea. A "dndmaa" 
li proTinoial for a acaiecrow ; 
literally a ragged fellow. 

Duff (thleree), Bptulooa. Men afc 
the JMff, paasen of false jewel- 
lery. To dvf, to Bell (poriOBS 
goods, often nnder the pKtenoe 
of their haTing be«ai amoggled, 
stolen, or fonnd. la London 
attempts at dyfiig are often 
made by rascals who oifer for 
ssle a worthleu meerscbanm 
pipe or ring, pretending they 
haTe just found it. VideTiJiTWaM. 

Duffer {oonunon). This word has 
two opposite meanings. A rank 
swindler, a clever cheat— "k 
word In frequent ose in tjDt 
to express cheats of all kinds." 
In Yiddish eveiy word which 
means olerer or wise also meaiM 
n^nery ; and in Yiddish dogtr 
is a shrewd, clever, very oiafty 
man (adjectire ifo^, from to* or 
tof, good) ; Datch thieves' slang 
d<^ar, a tramp, a seller of forged 
pictares. 

... Nor did ii nurk bin am u tbe 
prty of rintnlroiipen, pea and thimble- 
liggera, dtifftn, loutcn, or uy of thOH 

beller Vaamn to the fdHct—Didtfa ! 
MMtiin ChiatlmiL 

k worthless person, a atnpid 
man, an awkward, anakiUnl fel- 
low, a coward. 



, Google 



Dufftr — Duke. 



In thli Ikttef Bcuae the word 
ia connectad with iege, Asglo- 
SazoD, a. hxd ; An^Wi, ft sUly 
penon (Wiigtat) ; rfi^, a ooward ; 
d^, dt weak intellsct. Anglo- 
Smou ditdf, "aotiliii, Kbrardoi, 
itoUdns," from ifitAin.. Do^ls 
In niovt of it* liido-BnropeMi 
fonni B71101171110111 with stupid 
or atoUd. Qothio Aa/afi, duU or 
foolUh. 

(F<^nl&r), spnriona monej. 

•ix c«>d bobt, msA KCCniAmactaEcd her with 
ths duafi itic nnttd^ It ctqk oil' all 
lifbl, B I'v* bw bob kft (in drinlu ; ■« 1 
—Kr^i Fntdmu 

(Ifantical), « woman who 
auiata emngglen. 

Duffer out, to (Anstnlian), mining 
alaog. A re«f ia said to dngtr 
mU when the gold ia Dearljr or 
qaita a>haiut«d. 



Thotc 

tbronghoDt the New World, aa 
the Bev. W. Cartwrlgbt in bia 
" Autobiognqihy " aaja, "If bj 
chance we got a img-out to 
croia in oursel*ea and awim onr 
honea bj. It waa qniU a treat." 
Alao a roogh kind of stmctDre 
bnilt over an ezoaTstion. 
TIk bcw hoaic wai at best bur ■ modot 
lluto MinctBic, but UiyH vitucd ih* 



pluDi of wh ihintlc and tbe driring oT 
euh Bu] with profound lUi^utioa. In 
iha tpuicly Killed nciEbbourhood. wben 
ttiM£-»»tt mnd '* ihacki " rrtdomiiwtHl, ■ 
"JrmqH" bouaa, crrn tbocigh snail and 
unpnlaultnE, wu a ttnictun of iu mean 
imponann. When ti became Imown that 
Jack Mayne Inlcnded 10 plawn- thi " Iraot 
r thoroughly agreed 



I hat 






Mayne'ihcKiiicbiiildiql.^rytortiiw llwu:. 

Duke Hmnplirej (common), " to 
dine with Dvie Humphng," to 
go withoat dinner. Dr. Brewer, 
in his " Dlctioiuit7 of Phrase 
and Fable," saja : — " Hnm- 
phiej, Duke of Gloucester, ion 
of Heni7 IV., waa renowned for 
his bospitalitf. At bis death it 
was reported that a moanment 
wonld l>e erected to him in St. 
Paul's, bat his bod7 was interred 
at St Albana, When the pro- 
menadcrs left for diimer, the 
poor Bta;-beIiindB who had no 
dinner osed to a&j to the ga^ 
sparks who asked if tbe^ were 
going, that they wonld staj a 
little longer and look for the 
monument of the ' good duke.' " 
" Dining with the cross-le^;ecI 
knights" [the stone effigies of 
the Round Chnrcti) had the same 
signification. Uotten haa the 
tollowitig explanation ; — " Some 
vlaitors were inspecting the 
abbej where the remains of 
Hamphrey Duke of Oloncester 
He, and one of them was nnfor- 
tnnalel; shut in, and remained 
there loIiM while his companions 
were feasting at a neighbouring 
hoatelrj. He waa afterwards 
said to have dined with I>ukt 
Hum^krey, and the lajing even- 



:v Google 



338 



Duke — Dumb-cow. 



tnJIj paaeed into » prorerb." Dnker. Yidt Dooni. 
Vidt Halliw«U, who givM k 

better origin, ud one atipported DStt, dook (g7p«;); brcAth. 

bj all contemporary wrif "" u.-rf. ....i_i — jj 



Dnke of limbi (commoa), a 
tall, EpicdJe-shaiiked man ; the 
phrase «Uo implies awkvard- 
neu and tmcouttuen. 

Dnke of York (rbjming ilang), 
walk at talk. 

Dukes or ttooks (pedlar and 

tbievcs), th« hands ; from the 

fjpsj dil, Jook. which refers 

lopaltnUtryi "it Uinhisdook." 

meaning "it i« in hla fate," 

became " il is in Li;> band." 

Thin he iKgwi to path at ibuui. to 1 

U^ 1 >twld DM (d u ill if ht put hb 

rfirifi (hjindt) en mc, Tlirn he ninncd 

my nul Oicad) agiiiiHi iht nil ind sli»k 

iht vtpy life Dui bI nt.—fimliy: J,t- 

ne's ifiulw, to bribe. 



TogTeaso 
So ibc 



iUy I 



uy dtiit.- 



Nodi 



ih'-J'ttiv/'"'/»ii. 

To put up one's duia, to 
tight, to box. 

Briuin'i fou uill Lc ihrorni inlo 



Of uticr diuuy and dl 



^ndsrtii 


«ly< 










■ Ihalni 




•P>r,ill 


iVitldod 


.0-. 


iihoui. 


I wiihou 




iuk«, . 




«, 




ndcrypu 




>h.i»i 



Hudy Pauiaai my aitKM m p 
plUn Uk jfin .^i OldCjfiy. 

t.r., "1 lad ny bnalh numiiv afia [^ 
I«t- 

A spirit ; that which inapuva 
diyioatioQ or ptdmistij ', tbe 



I find tbu Ihc dmk» like ayKlf, *Efy 
modi (iTm to lyinc.— Cwii BtrrBm: 

Also pain, vexation, annof- 
ance. (According to the primi- 
tive Shamauic bith, all pain was 
earned by evil spirits.) 

DBkker. tlSk, dook, dookcr 

tgTP*Tl- ^ t^ f<ntiiiMS, to pain, 
grieve, chide ; rfflUrriot, grief, 
troable, a tanit ; diUm^ptit 
or daUxTftn, fortuDe - teDing, 
angary ; diUxro, coirowfoj. 
Uinda, tfoU, fanlt 



**rm.~Cfrtt Bmrrvw: Lantrr. 
Mokk DKiify dnkktr-^va k&'ro, rf: 
SoT Mindyam pen lu-iiiDdyau 
Ul lOlc litr u MJ^trim, |iU»- 

"Sh.ll I lell j-ourroRuiic loD, tiir 
Whit? lan'l! Oh, ycm,tcu. 
Den't yoa luigh at fanDiie-lclliiw. 
■iViu <riih ihsi Iht vorld b^a,.- 
-Pn/,tur E. a. FaimtP 

Dull In the eje (popular), into 

Dull swift (old), said of o 
gone on errands oi 

Dumb^ow (Anglo-Indian), al«o 
dvmb-ciMed (participle), to brow- 
beat, to cow, set down, 
" This is a capital 



e long 



:v Google 



Dumb-cow — Dung. 



o( Anglo-Indian dUlect. Dam 
Ichdna, • to eat one's breath,' is 
% Hindu idiom for ' to be silent' 
Hr. Hofaaon-Jobson conveita this 
into » tmi«iti*e verb, to dam- 
Ud«, >ud botb BpeUing ftnd min- 
ing being sSected bj Bogllsb 
inggeataoDS of Boiiiid, thia oomes 
Id Anglo-Indian uae to imply 
dMing and tilencing " (Anglo- 
Indian GI0SW7. 
DmnfoffEcd (literal?), coofuMd. 

Dnminock (low), the fundament ; 
otberwisa known oa "blind 
obeek." 

Dnmrnj (popolar), anytbing 
fictitione or sham, an individual 
of vacant mind, and. one bertft 
of speech. (Tailors), i, piece of 
cloth rolled tight and saturated 
wiUk oil; used for rubbing 
dotbes of a very bard natnre 
in places required to be cat, 
alto tbe ahean. to maki catting 
more easy. (Thiaves) , a pocket- 
book. Originally a book full of 
j&omnotea. 

He ii oujhl— h* muK "tland and di- 

Tben oul' irilh ih" rfwV. •nd off wilh 

Oh. lit I*"* I* Hilh Toby (bt (wr 1 
—AiiuwttM .* Rotiwird. 

A " rfuBiMy-hunter," a pick- 
pocket, whose speciality i» to 
steal pocket-books. 

Wo dumtm^bMMtr luJ fortu "> Hy, 
No kuKkJci w dtltly onM falM a cly. 



DnmiDT daiddle dodge (thieves), 
picking pockets in an omnibus 
under cover of a sham hand. 



Aikul by the friendly wvdet 
jlcmghL of ihe ' ' '" 

Ur. Moblx uid 



a rather Ihouihl thU 



IB an onudbui or a railway 



wear any kind of kxiK ^«1 « clou aa 
concediuDl ^ her i»t hand.—/. Cruif 
wrd: Dailj Tthgrmtk. 

DnlDp feocer (street), a man who 
hawks buttons. Dvmf is an 
old word for a leaden medal. 

Dumpoke ^nglo- Indian), a duck, 
boned, baked, and bigblj sea- 
soned. From the Persian dan- 
puiiU, "air-cooked," or baked. 
In English gypsy. pwt*( would 
be ftiikerd, from the same 



May 1 >™i»ri 10 ay "hm a (tntleoiao 
iDtherinr ai midDighi foe waat oT iht 
H« nrely puu 00 hii knee-br«th« and 

niii^. [vorkmen]) one who is com- 
peUed to accept lower wag«* 
after being oat on strike. Tbe 
TTOrd is tbe preterite ot tbe 
old English verb to "ding," \a 
beat down, one who & cfuKj or 
beaten, as in tbe old proverb, 
BtiU termed ScotUsb, "It's a 
sair dun? bairn that maaona 
greet." 



:v Google 



Dungaree — Dust. 



Dnagvee (Anglo-Iodiui), oom- 
moD, coMTM, low, vulgar. Tbe 
ntme of • diarepatable sabnrb 
of BoiDba;,uid alsoof aeoane 
Une cloth tiled for nilois' 
clothing. 

(popular), clotbM or 



Dtmnskiii (Amsricati thienB), a 
cb>ab«r-pot. Id Engluid, tb« 
inkter.clowt. 

Dnrluuii aun (old slang), a knock- 
kneed man was bo called, and 
via said to grind mnatard be- 
tween his knees. 

DniTTiiackcr (priron), female 
b«wk«r. From Uie gjjmj dori 
or dofia, threads or lace. 

Dust (commoD), mou;. Foedbl; 
for gold dutt. 

"Pul UdowD Is (he bill" Ii IticroDDlun 
of ill, 
Til ihii hu iIk ihopkniien ub. 

Buakn ntw tmii, la dovn wilh ynir 
dml. 
And hdp u loilHlrlla all Uwdoo. 



The term U old, it ocean fo 
ths*'I,dfeof Ken," 1690. "Down 
with tb« dint," pa.7 the money. 

If they did ijUai to tndc wIlli OinH 
wilh t he ^»r' iuUDtlr, 
- -'^- °-'-- did offer 

—Eadnr^t OhtrvmHtmi, 1671. 



mMtlriiMttdttehi 



Outer (taUon), i 

Dust Hole (oonunon), the Qoeen'B 
Theatre, Tottenham Cooit Road, 
■o called from tbe tact that 
half a eentaiy ago, when under 
the management of Mr. Olosaop, 
the d^ris of the the«lre wu 
■wept daily under the pit, and 
anlfered to aocnmnlata, to the 
great inconvenleDce of the 
audience, until tbe <fau( tale was 
crowded to repletion. The first 
French playa act«d in Londtm 
wer« given at this theabe, 
which, after many viclssitadeB 
of foitnne, became fashionable 
as the Prince at Wales', and is 
now the property of the Salva- 
tion Army. 

Dust ont of, to (American), to 
leave or depart. 

Uttlut^jtiknvlx, fandi Ibc dun oK 
TDBT ban. /nbiui— 1> ih« ibe kind of 
diui pap* wu liikinc 10 itireni M e ibour T 
ltHitf~vnai iiH»ujJ '/ftmuii He 
uid: "Dott than kxfe me.'AfDesI" 
Mttitr—Ka, it mi dm, Jnhuie ; but 
Ainei will dtut tut oF here Ifr-Bbfnnr 
n/xma%.—B»»tmt Gitbt, 

Dust, to {West American), to 
dinnoinit by allowing oneaelt 
to roll off to tbe soft gionnd. 

FicqiuBlly, iiiBetd of qnillinf them 
when thfT wtn turned looKi the hori 
would tit nitride of tbe netn they hnd 
bceD hoMina, end '^itay with Ihem" ni 
they went buckinf down tbe comi to- 
wnrdi thei^ Cellovi, ufliil the prvimiiy of 



, Google 



Dustbor — Dying. 



II off Dutch (popolu), & wife. 



Daatoor, dnatoorj (Anglti- 
Indian), a commission paid, 
^□emUj M B kind of bribe. 
PsMlau (Uid Hinda, da«(«r. cus- 

" Th»t commiMion or per- 
ceatAge on mooey pufifing in 
■oy cash trutsaotioo vbich 
Bticka to tbo flngera of the 
agent of pBTmeot" (Anglo- 
Indian QloSBar;). 



Wilh hii old D^lcJt 1(1111. 

So put br I»al4 and purr bf oeek. 

He tnmped it li*ek*io Loodim. 

Dntch anction (cheap Jacks), a 
method of selling good> with- 
oat InenrHng the penalties for 
selling wit boat a license. 



Dnaty (popnlar), "not ao <i»uly." 
not so bad 


Dutch dock, a bed-pan isaoealled 




b/nnraea. 


Thn> nd cloclu. cro puitt, .nd ■ 




.hit. d«g-I ■Oo'l don. » d«t,l- 


Dutch feaat (oommon), a dloner 




at which the host gets drank 


Dnstj, grit^, or stonj broke 


before hii guesU. 


(popniar), without a son. 




" I'n bem u BaiK u they mikr 'em in 


Dntchman'a breeches (nautical). 


lB)r [Lme, and youll ■urdllf believe il '■— 
[fail ID >'hovK whisper u m^^-'I'n 


two streaks of bine In a cloudy 
•iy. 


beCD Ihil brel«^-i(»nr. *M'I>. diatybr^i 






tawdt OBI of > p.1'. kick, if iber wu 
tbere. ud bU 'on r« >he pri« of '.If ■ 


or drinking where e?ery man 



Dtttch [military), to " do a Dutch," 
to rnn away, to desert. Pro< 
bably an allnsioa to " Dvtck 
eonrage." 



Djing; in a hone'a nightcap 
(popnlar], being bnng. Aborae's 
nightcap, i.e., a halter. 



:v Google 



[R (AnftrioKi), to get 
ip on i)DB> ear, to 



EaMiqiudce pratector (Ameri- 
fikn), urdaiiwd bj qaotoUon. 
It «u % dcUoosa bemv;*, ddC qscoi^ 

MCUd *iLb old Jamucz, and test ■ dcH- 



ItiCT ailed me bally bur. mhba' fn kcb 

nigh (hrcetbort TOin, 
And Bid [hiir I w» UghtDins who I em 

—li'w^ miKl Hitir UtH. 

E«rl of Coik (Irish), the Me of 
dmmoDds. ApcordiDg to Carte- 
ton, "It is the worst »ce and 
the poorest card in the pack, 
and U called the SaH of Cork 
becaiue he U the poorest iioble- 
maii in Ireland." 

Early riser {popular), the Tolgar 
name for an efficient aperient 
pill. The application of the 
term ia obnoua. 

Ear-inad {medical), the thickened 
ear {in its npper portion) found 
inMrnecaseaotinBanitj; hence 
the name. 

Euth bath (old), a* grave; to 
take an larih batk, to be dead 
and buried. Also to take a 
" ground sweat." 

Earthquake {Americas), hotUtd 
tartKquake, spirits, intoxicating 
liqnor of any Idnd. So called 
from the disorderlj motions at- 
tendant on intoxication, or an 
abbreviation of "tarthquaie pro- 



diink nbooftb of il, yvn 
iiwDtjil vbeUwr tl|c em ' 
cwBa ar oB^-^/fim ytrt S/mt. 

EuwiE (thieves), a clergTmaii. 

Eararigit^lir (oommoa), a rebnke 
Id private. Is said of a sneak- 
ing, tattling fel]ow-employ< wtio 
carrier little trifling eirors on 
the part of others to the Cftra of 
the govenwr. 

Eue, to (popoUr and thieves), U> 
rob. French slang, »oidiigtr. 

Eaaoa, to listen {New York Slang 
Dictionaiy). Saten is an Sng- 
lisb provincialism for eaves ; 
henoe Bua% from i 
[rfng. 



Easteij {cheap Jacks), explained 






t larsE viltagH or uull urm, 
D work whit Ml oLUd fiutny 
: bminHK.— jVn^tor ■ ii* >W 

Emmj (thieves), "make the cuU 
«a>y," kill the fellow. 

Eat ft fig' (rhjiming slang), to 
"crack a crib," i.e., to commit 
a bniglar?. 



:v Google 



Eat— Elephant. 



Eat one'i term*, to (legkl), to pre- 
pare for the bur ; to Mtend the 
reqnulte Damber Af dinnora in 



EgTptixn luU (rbyming Blaog), a 



Eat, to (American), & Wsstcm 
exprestioD, meanii^ not to cdn- 
(ume bat to provide food. 

C^ptin, do yoo itit in or do « mu 
oonelYof JCa/rouneKa, lo b* nre.— 
AwnrkaM Slrr^f 

Eats bis bead off (oommon), !« uid 
of a hone tliet remsiDE for a 
long time in tbe nible. Some- 
timee of semnta or otber* wbo 
have little to do. 

E«««s (AmcTioao thievet), a hen- 



Ebony optica (pugilistio), black 
ejM; cAony epliei alboniifd, 
black ejea painted white. 

Edge (b^on), "rtitehed Aft tbe 
atge"' refera to a glBM or pint 
not filled to the top ; " tide 
tttge," whisker*. A " thdrt top 
tdge " it a tom-Dp nose. 

Edgentra (back slang), aiange. 

Eggshaw (Anglo-Indian ),bnnd7; 
probftblj from the name of a 
brand. 



Eavesdropper (American tbleret), 
a chicken ttdef, or a low ineak 
or thief generally. 

Ebeoeser (Winchester College), 
a ball at ladjeets that hits the 
line and riaei high into tbe air. 

EbOfPf {poinlar), a bit of e6any, 



Eimn (back slang), a " moke " or 
donkey. 

Elbow «rooker (thieves), a hard 
drinker; from the phrase to 
" crook one'A ellmw," to drink. 
In French, " lerer le ooade," 
said of a hard drinker. 

Elbower (tbieres). a fngitire; one 
that "elbows," Le., tnms the 
corner, or get« oot of sight. 



Elbow shaker (old), gambler with 
dice. From 4hc expreaaioA " to 
■hake one ■ elbow." 

Elbow, to (tlilevc«)j to torn a 
comer, to get out of sight. 



Elephant (thievei), a victim pM> 
sbssed of much money. 

( Com men ), the rfipAaat, origin- 
ally an Americanism. We might 
compileavolnmeofthe Anndng 



:v Google 



Elephant — El/en. 



azplknatioui and UliutnUoiu 
of thij ezpTauion which have 
appeared In Americui newB- 
papers. To hsTe seen tlit 
tUpliant ia to have had a full 
experienoe of life or ol a certain 
sabject or object. There la a 
book b7"Doestlcka"'(MottltneT 
Thompson], oaUed "Seeti^ the 
Blepbant, ' ' devoted to describing 
"life" in New York, of which 
a reviewer remarked tliat tht 
rUphant, according to Ur. 
ThompaoD, appeared to be bad 
brand;. When a man had 
made an nntortunate ipecula- 
tioD be would u; that he had 
not onl; aeeo Ue «tcpiUiU hot 
felt him kick. The phrase 
aeema to have originated in an 
old ballad of a farmer who, 
while driving bis mare along 
the htgbwbj, met wltb a ehow- 
man'i elephai\t, which knocked 
him over, and Bpilt hia milk 
and deatro/ed hia eggs. The 
farmer oonaoled himaelf (or hia 
lou b; reflecting that be had 



H« <rha htd b«a ii 

cvDc niihiii4 u Ltw fore. 
TErribly he mmiilal en it>eiii--*BT iwfal 

nihil rou. 
— nkt Kitt mmd fmlt^Ciirjmaii. 

Montaigne atrangely enongh 
aeema to anggeat that "to aee 
tlu tUjAttnt" waa In hia time 
oonneoted with experienoe of 
life. He cites the foUowing 
from "Arrien. Hiat. Ind.," & 
17. 

"Aux lodct OriMUaa U ^aacU j 
outnl ta lin^Ji^n r c go tnm ^ n dn i oo, 

luarUt tt pnut ibudociiKr k qui tuy 

quBLqci* aloirt d'lTolf tut atia^a k 11 
biuUl pfix-" 

Thia then waa the Indian wa; 
of "aeeing tkt eUphaiU," and 
of paying, aa at the prosmit 
day, an enormoiu price for the 
alght. 

(Common), a girl ia aaid to 
"have aeen lA* di^aloHt" when 
abe has loat her obaaUty. 
French, "avoir vn le lonp." 



ntlud 



And he uid. " Now 



I tit </r>(ui— ncIlhCT 



In 1849-1850, to have been ti 
California and retomed was U 
have seen the lUphant. 

ThoK who lotd the bsndi hud viniitaed 



DC ak' ipiriti down tlur. 



They had wHbing cf Iht fViiiu(B— ihouch 

■iu t Iht; held the pLuii, 
Nothins Birthcrof fhe plctair nn in- 



Elfen, to walk on tiptoe Ugbtly 
(New York Slang Diatioiuu7). 



:v Google 



Embroider — Entire. 



h Iw a 



Conuiibt* EnduMi. ■ 



. Tboufh Iw 






Embroider (oommoD), to exag- 
gente, romaDce. In French, 

Ton IriBl to luke hinucV ippcu Id tn 
a bcro loo, uid tucnedcd to ionic ciieni, 
but thta be mlwayt hud m ny of 'm' 
hrtiJtrittg.—MUtilBtfi Pilat. 

Emperor (oommon), " dinnk aa 
•n mpfrar." The qninCetsence 
of IntoxioKtion. Ten times " a» 
drunk at a lord." The French 
va,j " saoul oomme trente miUe 
hommes." (Thieves), hence a 
drunken man. 



rmfrrvr't (!«>[. Ha 
vu in bu auitudcf, wd w* pinchtd hU 
ihimUe, ilaiig whI oniom.— Ck M< rmf/. 

En^ltT bottle (Univ. Cantab), a 
pensioner. Briated, in hia "Five 
Yeant In an English UnlTeTsitj," 
■ays, "They are popnlarlj de- 
nominated «Mp{y boUUi, the fint 
word of the appellation being 
an adjective, tboogh were It 
taken as a rerb there would be 
DO nntnith in It. " 

End (Amerioan), " to be all on 
tnd," to be very angry or 
irritated. From rising up, or 
joining np In a rage. Also 
apidied to a state of excite- 
ment, eapeoially of anticipa- 
tion. "They were all on end 
to see the President go by." 

Endjicott, to (jonmallstic), to act 
like a constable of that name 
who arretted a woman whom 
be thonght to be a prostitute. 



1 Engliih 

luiffiuge wLlh II new word ('f Emdmcttt, 

Gaivmmeat wctuld taJiic Ihii addiiioa to 
the dLctioiury very highlr. — Svtning 

The expression lived " ce qoe 
Tivent lea roses, I'eapaoe d'on 
matin," probably on acoonnt of 
certain facts proved In the course 
of a tubseqaent invettigtttion, 
and which showed that the eon- 
stable's name ought not to go 
down to posterity as that of an 
oppressor of fromankiod. 

EihIs, at loose (familiar). When 
a business is neglected, or its 



ditiou, it is said tobe ol lo(m emU, 

Enemj (common), used in tbe 
quaint bat not slangy phrase, 
"How goes the oumyf" i.t., 
what is tbe time t 

Eosign bearer (militaryl, a man 
witb a red and blotchy face 
arising from tippling. 

EnUwM (Amerioan), to excite en- 
thnaiasm, to be enthusiastic. A 
favourite word witb "gushing" 
clergymeo. " An objeot large 
enough to tnthuK an angel's 
souL" Entktutd, excited with 

EotiTe fiKure, tbe (American), to 
the fullest extent. A simile na- 
turally derived from expresting 
sums of mtmey by nnmemla 
or "fl^pures." Also the "big 
figure," tbe " whole flgnire." 



:v Google 



346 



E. P. — Excruciators. 



E. P. (clertcftl), 4 ■nxj common 
■bbreriatloD, meMU tbe " Eut- 
ward Position," adopted in por- 
tloni of the Commnnion Serrlee. 

EpMm ntcea (rhTmii^ slang), * 
pair ot biaoes. 

Eqnal to the Kcnoine Limbntser 

(American), a Etandard simile 
for aDjrthing nhlcb u userted 
to attain the maxinnm of bad 
am«Ua. Tbe German Limbarger 
cheese has, to those who are not 
accustomed to it. an intenael; 
disagreeable odour. 



Cnbttt in 1S17, and first oaed 
In Brixton Prison, fell soine- 
nbat into desnetnde, bat has 
been reriied In some prisona 
under the Ooreniment r^me, 
a« an instrument both of ntility 
for grinding oon, raising water, 
Ac., and ot real hard labour. 
The labour varied most nn- 
equallj, c.g., from 7500 fe^ 
aaoent in the day in LewM 
prison to 14.100 feet in Boston. 
This inequalitf and consequent 
injnatioe has now been r«- 



Erifb, 70Dn(c thlevM (New York 
Slai^ Dictionary). 

" li't ihe till ill ihem trijft duKa," 



ihii."— £>■ Iki Trmil. 



Europe moroliiff (Angio- Indian). 
When a man gets np late, that 
Is, at nine or ten o'clock, he is 
said to have a Surnpt morning. 
The ezpresalon explains itself. 

Evaporate, to (common), to mn 
away, to vanish. 

EverUitins atKircaae, the 
(thieves). The tiead wheel, 
originally Invented by Ur. 



EveiTtliinB: is lovelj, and ttw 
goose hane:a high (American), 
a phrase which became known 
dnriog the war, and which 
formed the Irarden of a popular 
song- It signifled that alt is 
going well. The goose Ji a 
synooym for terror or alarm. 
Thus, on tbe stage, "to be 
goosed" is to be hissed, and 
when At goot iattgi kiyk it is 
equivalent to saying that there 
Is DO defeat to fear. The phrase 
originated in Philadelphia. 

E«e (old), a white em, a haad- 



Excntdaton (London), the new* 
fashioned boot or shoe painf ally 
pointed. 



:v Google 



Execution — Face-making. 



iajfMj the Ud> txn TOwd Mm off 


Etc limpet, anothef 


to BliiR0f>-< ud i« hin ■ r»l ihinr V^ 


artiflcial eje. 


of pointed txcrtKiaiin (null thinciiu, 








j/.r(/v Timti. 


Eye-openera (Amerii 



Execntioa day (common), wash- 
ing day amongst the low«r 



Expectiiig (society), a common 
expression for a woman beicg 
in the fomilj way ; it is an 
abbroiiatlon for expecting her 
conSnement. 

Explaterate (American), to en- 
large apon, to hold forth, to 
explain and iUostrate fully. 
On thb 1 will tiflalirati. 
And nil ny new* pn/uicly itate. 

—/tl BotHty'' Cmmfaitn. 

From the obsolete English to 
txftatt, to nnfold. 

Extmnips (Winchester College), 
a corruption ot extempore. To 
"go np to books edmMjw" is 
to go np withont having pre- 
pared one'it lesson. " Extmm- 
pere," a jocose perversion o( 
extempore, has been used by 
old English anthors. 



vwion may indulge in julepe, cock- 
Uila, cobbkrt. r«[[lnnaltc«. fuili licldcn, 
tyK-apmtrs, flashes a' Light omg, bnndy 

limiUr beveragei.— £'. MacDtmotl : Tin 
Ftfxlar Guidi It tkt latmuUintMl Ex- 

Also a general term for any 
kind of intoxicatii^ drink. 

(Society), is said of anything 
out of the way. 



Eje water (popular), gin. 



lACE (popnlar), credit 
a pobliohoase. 
From one's pbysiog- 
nomy being known 
there ; or from face, 
eSronteiy, eonUdeoce. " To mn 
one's fatt," to obtain credit by 
effrontery. " He has no /act 
bat his own" (Grose), he has 



no coin (Jaeei in French slang) 
in hia pocket. 
Face eotrr (theatrical), the entrte 
or freedom of acoes* to a 



:v Google 



348 



Fmct (pi^ilistic), m blow <m the 




boe. 


ofthe"Bogae-ilUn:Ii.~ 


WhU. J»™, of /-«« uU B dadir 


F«de (UUor.). the mw warkii« 


TTiu ihc cnckttl jiwlMW cnck^I u 


in froDt of one. "AdianUie 


IbcrUL 


Uu," the ntMi woifciiig in 


-T.Mmrx. 


front of ODD to the right «c 


Bkxi, «aiti»« upri«l«. lippBi lh« fcl- 


left. "/«« rathe two thick," 


lev tymtir.—lmft:jiij Utndt- 


the iDdiridoal wotking imme. 


(Socletj). a. meUpboricaa 


diatelj behind one* fnoe-mate. 


knock dovn ; «e*ei« blow. 


Facings (t^lon), -rilk /aMv*" 


Th. H.1 of h» h..ir>E hit hi. k( If- 




Icrdfy hu pnxd i /iirr. — SftrtiMf 


breast of a cort. 



(Popolar), A tombler of whijkj 
punch. 

(Irish), > dram, a fnll glass. 
An old wonl for a bumper of 

(Thieves), % nan who places 
himself directly in the way of 
person* in pursuit of hid ac- 
compUcea. Formerlj/sMr meant 
an impudent fellow. 

Face tbe mnaic, to (popular), a 
pbrase no doubt of theatrical 
origin, and alludii^ to the tre- 
pidation (ometimes felt upoD 
facii^ tbe audience. The 
orchestra is generally placed 
in front of tbe audience, and 
consequently nearest the stage. 
To face At rnuiK is therefore Xa 
meet on emergency. Some- 
times it means " to show one's 
band," i.e., to make plain one's 
purpose. 

(American], to boldly meet a 
severe trial ; to nerve oneself 
up to go through a disagree- 
able emergency. Originally 
army slang, applied to men 



(popular), in military paiianoe 
the regular drill — " Faoe I " 
"Bight about facel" ftc tn 
popular slang, to giire one a 
scolding or call him t< 



VnmAc^m. 



Facing the knocker (tailors). 



Given In Wright's Frorincial 
Dictionary as a provincialism, 
and by Uotlan at a slang term, 
though it can hardly be con- 
sidered as such. Obs<dete in the 
sense of cherish, caress, fondle, 
and now a low ezpresaion for to 



:v Google 



Fad — Fagot. 



trifle, plaj the Addle. It has 
been suggested by > writer in 
the ConkiU Majtame that it is 
derived from " fidfad," a word 
that has been long in use, with 
mnch the same meaning tafad. 
In the sense of trifling, worth- 
less. It is derived from the 
Anglo-Norman fade, meaning 
originall; sad, faded, tainted, 
decoded. It seems to have 
been used at a vety early date 
to signif; tancifnl, whimsical. 

Fad cattle (old slang}, women ot 



manners. Robert Paa is the 
present king of the Scottish 
gypsies at Tetbolm. 

Fog, to (tbieveii), to beat. Ex- 
pressive of the trooble In giving 
a beating. 

(School), a yotiDg scholar who 
has to wait upon and do all 
sorts of little odd jobs for an 

Fogger (thieves), a small boy pnt 
into a window to rob the boose 
or to open it for others to rob ; 
called also " little suakesnuui." 

Fagot (popular), a bnndle of bits 
of the "aticldngs" (hence pro- 
bably its name), sold for food to 
the London poor (HotCen). But 
more probably from "fag-end." 
Also a term of contempt applied 
to a woman or child with re- 
ference originally to the slovenly 
garmente, the person being com- 
pared to a bundle of sticks 
loosely pnt together. The 
French fagoU signifies dressed 
in ill- fitting, badly matched 



Fu-gang, a gang of gypsies: 
Faa was a common name for 
gypsies — not assnmed, bnt often 
accepted by them. "Johnnie 
Faa, the Gipsy laddie," Is the 
title of an ancient popnlar bal> 
lad, reoonnting how a hand- 
some vagrant of that name ran 
off with the Conntess of Cossilis, 
who was enamoared of him for 
his manly, hearty, and winning 



Fagot briefs, bundles of worth* 
less papers tied up with red 
tape carried by unemployed 
barristers in the back rows of 
the courts to simulate briefs 
(Hotteh). 

Fagot TOte (politicians), votes 
given by electors expressly 
qiuUifled lor party purposes 
(Dr. Brewer). 

Evidently from the old term 
fagoU, "dummy" soldiers or 



:v Google 



Fagot — Falx. 



Milors who wei« hired to appeu 
kt tniuter and Bll np tbe oom- 



FaffOt, to, an ezpreuiou prop«r 
to robben; that is, to bind 
hand and loot (Bayer'i Dic- 
tiona^, 174S). It is cnrioua to 
not« the ooincideoce with the 
French cant /i^, a cootict ; 
from the circnautance that cod- 
fiots were all bound to one 
a chain when on their 



way to the h 

Faintt (schoolboyB), in vogne 
amongst echoolbof s to aipi«s« 
a wish temporarily to withdraw 
from participatioo in the par- 
Ucelar sport or game being 
played. It is generally onder- 
atood that this can only take 
place while In bonndl or out of 
danger. It is somewhat similar 
to the now almost obsolete term 
" wicket " in cilcket. 



Fair and tqnare (< 
est, honeety. 



Alto fair, tquart, and above 
pnmnrf.. 

1 will have none of thi« hale anA^txtntx 
bmiiKH. . . . I oiih ill. lhc'cFJiid<in< in 

'grnmJ.—Aiiamy Tnll^, 

Fairlick (Harvard University), a 
football tenn used' when the 
ball is fairly caught or kicked 
beyond bounds. 



" ymirik*)' kc cried, mill niul ha 

dmdfiil root. 
Amsd u ill pgiui wiib ihe wioatnl 

boot. ~HsrnMn/imma. 



Fair trade (thieves), smng^iog. 

Faithful, one of (he (oommon), a 
Uilor giving long credit. As 
this trade is in London, at all 
events, almost entirely in the 
bands of the Jews, they are 
sarcastically said to have joined 
the ranks of the/atlVU; or this 
when they allow long credit to 
a costomer, a practice which, it 
is to be feared, also often makes 
the old saying ooDceming them 
literally true— "his faith baa 
made him nnwhole," >.«., bank- 
rupt. 

Fake, a very undent cant word, 
possibly from fiuert, used in the 
honest sense of to do, to make, 
originally, bat afterwards in the 
dishonest one. Tbe word was 
popalaiised hy a song introduced 
in Ur. Ainsworth's novel "Rook- 
wood." It is Dsed with various 
significations, and in this respect 
exactly oorreaponds to the verb 
fairt of tbe French slang. 
(Thieves), to rob. 

Have long been in bed, and enjoying ■ 



, Google 



Fahe — Fakement. 



To do, to mkke, to oheai, 
Bwindlo, beg, molingor or oonn- 
terfelt Ulnen oi aoTM. to eocape 
bbenr and gkin the diet of tbe 




Also InTentioo, contriTuiae. 

Thu wu ou of the bat /Uh of ih* 
Anx, and ihere wu loD d nuKr in it 
too.— Arnf <' Fntdam. 

[C«rd-iluupen), m dodge. 

Now la Inm nm iHti fiiku with th* 
faraadi.— >!;<iv4uiV riKU. 

(Stage), /ilK ia anotbar term 
for ''make op" of a oharacter;- 
to fiikt, to pajnt one's face. 
Or uli wtiu thor ■(( i» [)»rll •con- 






' 'Pake avay, theie's no dowi), ' 
-go mi, there ii no one leoking. 
To "/akt a KjreeTB," to draw 
up a falM docnment, a begging 
letter t to "/ii« one's danga," 
to file tbrongb one's iron* ; to 
"j!(fa a atj," t« pick a pocket. 

(American ttueves), in addi- 
ti<» to the nsoal meaning, outr 
ting ont the wardB of a key. 

" FaJ^g tka iweettoer," ku- 
■lag, 

(Sporting), to boom or poison. 
To iDsert ginger under a hone's 
talL 

(American and English), false 
report, deeeption, pretence, 
tdind. 

. . . And tk» Buning the tw 
lidichloiu wKf il wu luiDcd wi 
Jmkt to dmw ■iIsiIUB lo it.- 



"I hcurd yoiu brother bed gone to 
Hew Yolk.'- 

"Oh, Ihu wu tJUi. He wu badly 
pnnbhed >■ (ootbull, and i> lyini low to 
fetch ap.'—Tlu ymk'i Ctmpatun. 



' I do not jfmitt (and uniling), t'm (weDI; 
—Birdt' Frtwdtm. 

In oonjaring, any nteohanioftl 
contrivance for the pettormBnoe 
of a tilck. 8c alio ina show, if, 
for example, an apparenQ; ordi- 
nary dinner plate bad a smJaU 
nick in it to iielp its beii^; 
poughtnn the point of a knife 
after being tossed into tbe air, 
the plate woiddbe/oio'- Again, 
bustling through a show of any 
kind undar diffiooltlea tttfully 
concealed from the speciatorM 
is/oittv; it. 

" Fakinji the duck," adoUer- 
ating, dodgery. 



the matk of 
the owner of n stolen object. 

Fakement, a word of gbneMl ap- 
plication among tbe lower ot' 
ders for the doing ot anytblifg ; 
trade, profeesicn, oontrtvance, 
invention. 

The.jUrn'i'' conn'd by knowing rodu 
Mut be well Lmwd le ylHL 

—Tit Lary UmL. 
(Thieves and vagrants), a falsa 
begging petition. 



:v Google 



FabenufU — Fall. 



Lawyw Bob iamt/miimimtt np ; lic'i 
TJu Vmitmr Trnpu. 

Anj diahoneM p«otI(M^ nrin- 

dling dod^, foigec7. 

I CBltNsud kli KqauBlMia . . . wid 
put bin up IB iba HUcft litl]>.AWimw/ 
)p iIh warU ; Jul ibowKl hio lo nil* 
l»o hiuidnd poondi . . . JuU by dcnitif 

Aba tha dvpodtloiw of • wit> 



Fskemeiite {theatrical), smaU 
propertlei or make-up, moh m 
a hare's foot, aii old whit« 
•tooking-top, idec« ol burnt 
cork, &a, al) jon can get in a 
"make-up" box, a cigar-box 
Cartaln pantomimistB are ac- 
ouitomed to call the proper- 
tie* used In the harlequinade 
faiemenlt. A good at«ry 6t 
Hacready, wboM loathing for 
the 'VeT7 name of elaog was 
notorious, Is told in oonnection 
with this aabjeot. When star- 
ring in ffamUt at Newcattle-on< 
T^e, the manager was short- 
banded, and an nnfortunate 
clown WM prested Into the 
service for Franoisoo, who 
■peaks the flrat line of the 
play. The poor psntomimist 
was waiting in great anxiety 
for the halberd or paitiian he 
was to oarry while moiuiting 
guard, and the pn>pert;-man 
who ought to have provided it 
was conapicuoni b; his abEence. 
The great Hac, grim and growl- 
ing, and more atiabilarious thao 
usual, opened Are with — 



alldajl Begin, ■ir.'bq:!!)," 
" Oan't bsgia, gnVoor," gaotb 

tha clown. 
" Br— wl)7 not, sir t ar— wIit 

'"Cos I ain't got mj /okt- 

"Yow what, sirt Good 
hearenil your what t" 

"Kj/aitmnU.- Here,I nf, 
onllj" {catohing eight ,«f tha 
property-man, who had jiwt pdt 
la an ^peataace], "hand over 
Vbo fxkrmtMt." 

The great Hao., tboronghty 
nonidnssed, growled to the ptw- 
pertj-mai) — 

"By all mean^ Hr. Cully, 
hand over the gentleman's .^fa. 
maUt, and let na begin tha 
rehearsal." 



Faker {popnlar and thierM). This 
word i« applied to a great 
variety of men—pedlan, woEk- 
men, thieves. From "to&ka." 
In Dutoh slang /iNU«r is a thief; 
jUktria Oermancant. 

(0roiu), a f<^^, a drooa 
rider or performer. 

(toptdar), a prOrtitnta'e lorar, 
boUy, 

Fmkea and ilnmboea (theatrical), 
one of the nomeronB synonyma 
awd by pantomimists to de- 
scribe properties. 

Fall of ttie leaf [old cant), hang- 
ing. Parker says, "The new 
mode of banging. The culprit 
Is brought upon a stage, and 
placed apon a leat When the 



:v Google 



Fall — Fancy. 



353 



ropaliDxd Bbont Ui iMok tba 
lokt bus, «nd the to&y Imm^ 
dlitel7 beoomM pcmdaot." 

Why, I nppoai fni know tlul ba mit 
^''**'^** down foe tba o>p 111 



Fam liv (tblevM), robbing a 
aton \rj pratendlng to emmtna 
goodi. But man «peolall7 to 
lob B jawoller br mcatu of s 
•tiokr nbftHioe Bttaobed toth» 
palm or fingsn, thiu sbrtiaotliig 
tha utiolea ihown. 

(thiaTM), itnn^ 



A Uttla tioH (Av lUi lyW iiiio U St. 
UuT Cnr (oc bdni Itnoi u Ihc hide of 

Falw hefMften (Amntoan), 



Ttw Kban* wind to pfirftctlciii. la 
■ha luxa biiitlH whieli tbtr VM^ tlw 
ifoAju cuTHdoff ibair nidnba in krc* 
yUW Un^fltrt, ud puMd tha Mr of 
tha booaa m llwir nr OM.— An KmiI 
JIMJMUi/ .fWfc* Own*. 

Fun, fan (UiIotm), Um hand. 

irdwrdei«dHlr>auc<i ax 111 b* 
b ror ■ itntcb at tk uA «c*dK— Oa 
MfTViaa. 

Ttw gypdM olaliti Ud* a> a Bo- 
iiiaii7 wwd and derln It (i«m 
/m, Btc, or tlw flre Ingen, al> 
tbongh Atb in Bomanr b^ong*; 



Fam, to (thleres], to handle ; froin 
the gT?!; J^ ta imtgri 

Fan (thieree), a wiUstooat. 

Fan, tofthiarea), to steal tiom tha 
penon. (Ftot. Cumberland), to 
feel, to find. 



Faa^ bfate (apoiting), a ipoiting 
man ; alio the &Tonied man of 
a low olan wmnan, or pniitl< 

tBt& 

Faa^ honae (proatltntea), a 
houe of Ul-iepnto. 



Famblea, fnmUea (ttlerea), the Fancy Joaqili (oommon), a youth 

'■-"■'- •'^-'-'— wbo !• aKHieral ^Totulte and 

pet among proatitatea. Also 



hands. FftftFAIC. 
Fam grnf (old oant), abaUsg 



Fanuy fflatniMnca (oowt>ojs)i 
whlakj. 

Family man {thleraa), on* of tha 
fratanitr of tbleras. Also a 
noalTar of atden goods or 



"Catdd,''a 
with fiMt « 
ltD..a 



Fane; man (paoetttntes), the lorn 
of a pmatitata. 

Bm lajr DMtkM UoM^ CO* 1m dar, 
FakannTl 

Ts IbtbMk did Imjimr m 



:v Google 



354 



Fanty — Farmer. 



Faocr piecM (oommoa), {mrti. Faa^r (oommon), Um tan. pod. 



Vaacf, Ow, th« tftTDmito puUmM 
of ■poitiiig men. 

Thrt bnlog >Dd nttini. and alter SxB* 
oTcVAav. u^ odM u put of lb* UBH- 
Bull of tba lem- onlen ii p*rl«l)T In*i 
bill ibcT eu DO kia(K b* dond u aBoof 

tha UBtuODBlB of tboK wbo CUDDt ■ffoH 

•o ply bifti piicxi sf idiniiiiciB la illtcil 



The word T«y aooti beoama 
■paoialiwd with i«fet«iioe to the 
da?otaa« of the piiie ring. 

llNTbanHd ID b* fiwat M tb* «>■ 



Paonj AdaoM (nknl), tinned 
mntton. 

Fanoj Blair (rhyming ilai^), tba 
hail. 

Fanqsl (Anglo.Chineae), a Knro- 
pean ; Utanltj foreign derlL 

Fantccc (popnlar), to b« "in a 
ngnlar^ab^," tobe poplexed. 
ambanuaad, to be at one'a witi^ 
end (ptorinoial En^^iih). 

Far back (taUon), an indlffannt 
an igaonnt par- 



Other Huawtng e^dained 1^ 
quotation. 



and nbbio.-/. Gntmmmd: Ttu Littlt 



legitimate ohUdrai are boatded, 
or rather ■tarred, for a glnn 



FancT work, to taka M (oom- 
mon). In general lue among 
milUnen, dreMmakers, and ahop 
gtrli, who nsort to Becret pcoe- 
titntlon to eke ont thali ■oan^ 
eamingt at Intimate work. U 
a girl known to be rwdTing 
Rnall wagee dreasa wbH and 
•eema to tiave plenty of money. 
It ia said ot her, ■• Oh, ihe takn 
in tano^r work," 

Fwminr (thierea], a beating, also 
ttealing. Crom-foMutig, steal- 
ing from the person with the 
■iioa orosaed, the right hand 




a» not <ii»/krmtTi 

dvei tU amiiJ 
orai-bvlth. 



:v Google 



Faskno — Fawney. 



355 



Fuhno, fufaoi. *»■*■<"■■< (BTpay), 
falae, ooiuiterfeit ; fittlati a»> 
ym(rt«i, IklM (gold} rings ; alio 
fiMmt fiuatf. IF^mtg i» CHlt- 
il>g) 

Put (oommoo). In want of mootj. 
SMine M " hard up." 

Pat (thlerea), nwoer. FMnob 
■lang, graittt. Fat onll, a rich 
man. (Frlnton), F«7lng tnk 
in oontndiitlncitjon to bad oc 
" lean " work. Thii paying 
woA ocnuist* of blank tpaoM 
in a page which are paid 
f OT at tli« aama tata as pag«a 
folly printed. Short lln« of 
rona Mt np in ^pe an alio 
conddered aa being ^ (Popa* 
lai), tid* Out it vat, Cdt up 
TAT. (Theafarieal), a part with 
good Dims and taOIng ritnation 
that glTea the player an c^poi- 
tnnlty of i^pearing to advan- 
tage ia Mid to be/v^ or to have 
fit. Wben an actor baa a part 
of thli kiiid,hl( o(dleagD«a aia 
wont to Miy "he'a got aU tfaa 
fat." (Frinoaton OoUege), re- 
mlttaooea of moiwy tortndoita. 
(Sngllsh and American), fyl 
thii^ iomethlng which la very 
profitable or " tat." 



Fattier (thisrca], a teoelTer ol 
atolen p r o perty . (Dnlfetri^), 
ybdcr of a c<^eee, Uiepneleotor 
who preaenta his men for de- 
greei and lepQBaenta the parents. 
(Printers), a pencn elected to 
preside as cbainnan to the 
"chapel" (which see) when held. 
He acta as a medium between 
master and men. (Naval), th« 
dockyard name given to the 
builder of a ship of the navy. 

FattMM (oommou), wealth. 

Tlml ■ mm who bM •o^srvd «> aiwqr 
ymt ai/iUmta iboaU dk In )ik(9bM 
Vtuaej.—S/rrtiae TUmti. 

Fawner (thtevea), a ring; also 



FnvBCf drapper (tbtev«s), one 
who praotisaa the ring-dnqiplng 
trick. rUt Faviibt Bio. 

Shallow fcDowi pid tht boof udfau 
thn cul tt lef, »ha». A n ■ «> Jnfiftrt 
(■iBBMa lb* flkU ud laka tb* T^A io.— 
Dmem^AntlkMH T/uVm^mrTrngm*. 

Fawnej rig: (thieves}, the ring- 
dropping trick. A rogne dmpa 
a valaeleas ring or other article 
of jewellery 'and when ha seea 
a petvon idckliig it op, claims 
half i or, ha pietanda to have 



:v Google 



356 FawHud 

Jut fovnd the utiole Mid cdt«r» 
It for sile to a psMer-by tt a 
low piio«. A few 7e*n ago 
theutiole odtered wh goMnlly 



Fnraled (tUerM], witb ringi, 
wauriug tlnga. 



Feadien (popular), money. Pro- 
balilf trom Um ptmwe to 



a word in N«w 1 



Fdl and didn%(tiJ]0T«) la mU of 



Feed (00 

Wboi b« did ^n m jtv' ba (hn^ 



(FootfaeU), to JM, to nppoil 

Feeder (thieraa), a eilTer epowi. 
(Nntioal), a tmall riTer &lUiig 
Into a large one, or iato a dook 
or float. Ftdtn In idlote' laa- 
gnagtt an the paedng epnrtt 
of laln wUoli "teed" a gala 
(Smyth). 

T^tHag gale (santJoal), a ttorm 
wUoh b on the increaae, eom^ 
tlmea gettli^ wona at each 
eneowkHt^egoall. When a gale 
freehena after rain it ii eatd to 
bare fed the gale (SmTth). 

Peek (popolai and thievM), a 
girl; from the Trenoh jBU, at 
the Italian j^Na. 

Feet (old), "to make /«( for 
ohildieii'i etoddnga," to beget 
ohUdreiL 

Feet C M emwita , a hnmorcnu ax> 
prOMioafW ahoee or boote. 



VtSaw-coai^ (printert), a term 
of faailllari^ need bj oompaal- 



FeQow-P. (prfaiten), a deilgna> 
tloD ^iplied to each other by 
appranUoea that have Immi 
bound to the Mate maitcr or 
Arm, whether in the paat or in 
the {seaant. In eome laiga 
offloea It la onatcMnary to haT« 



flIUw-P.'it and anoh renolMU 
are rerj aodabl^ and the b»- 
ditlona of a ftrm ais thoa 
handed down, 

FeB(thIeTeB],apn)atitiite. Amla- 



B Ai«lo-Sazoa fim ct >wi, 
mnd, dirt. Omipnra wUh the 



Farii mad and pnetltota. 



:v Google 



Fen — Fer^. 



357 



( Amotosnind prOTtnidal tag- 
lUh), m bof* arcUmaMon to «x- 
pif mmlng or prohlUtloii. 
"A»pad*,"(»"/ew ball," keep 
■*mf tba bftU i from En^ish 
" foioe o9," or vtij old Bngliih, 
fmd, mid off. BagUsli Imtb 
iiMtbawoid "telgD,"IdaoUne; 
mlw "feign U," leave oS. 

Fenn (tUeTee), » leoalnr of 
•tolao propeit; ; elao hia boBM 
or iliop. Piobkbl; from "/mm 



U Ibr bariac two iBBa.—Hmbr: Jtt- 
ttapJrtmJmO. 

Q. Furkar, in hIa "Tkriepttad 
Ctutraoten," nts; "In Fiold 
I«iie, where the handkerohlefi 
ai« outied, tlien an » Dumber 
of ehop* called 'Jtnet ehope,' 
where yon bn j say munbei." 

Paace-rldlnc (Araerioao), eaid of 
thoao who w^t to Ma which 
■ide It will p^ them to indorse 
•lid then when Tiotorj or mo- 
ooM Menu oeitaio, to throw Id 
tlielr lot with the winning aid& 



TU 



k BO* at i3mi rl^ niid 
t, ud Uiai tan b* tio JnKt-rUiif 
tbtrichtiQf four mmiacu of dkd bit 



Peace, rittinc on the. Although 
witfaoat donbt American In its 
laUr nngo, the Idea conveyed 
ia"atoldaathehiIla." Trench, 
In his "Bn^ith Fart and. Pra- 
■ent," p^e 300, pdnta ont bow 
ringnlai it is that not only i* 
the sama idea ambodled in the 



aata, vli., " sbaddllng with dis- 
torted less," bvt that It should 
also cany with it almost exactly 
the aame figmatlTa meaning a* 
the classical word. " To sit on 
the fence," In political cant par- 
laooe, is to wsit and see how 
thing* go before oommitting 
oneself to definite aotioB or 
partisanship. 



Sometimes the phrase Is varied 
with >' littiiig on both sidBa of 
the hedge." The expression is 
of Western growth, being trace- 
able to the care with which the 
■qnatter fences in his lot ; it alio 
being a point of vantage at the 
top of which, at the oloee of the 
day's work, he can smoke his 
pipe and snrrey his possession* 
while thinking out bis plans for 
the fatnre. 

Peace, to (thieves), to sdl stolen 
proper^, or take tt to a re- 
odver's. The term is old. 
Ii'i not ibg Cnt ttOH tbu I ban .^wc' 



Fencing; crib (thierea), a 
where stolen property o 
disposed oL 



Pers. to (Termont tJnivenitj), 
old Snglith/n^, to hasten, pro- 



:v Google 



358 



Ferguson — Fttdt. 



OMd, g(k As goiag ont of > 
lage. QfKtoMo 'KTfik t m. Vben 
K maa !■ oooUng down tmn 



tie !■ nld toftrg, 

Fe i y n on (oommoD), genenHj 
heud ez^Mted »«, "It'i ill 
Teiy well, Mr. Ftrgmon; yon're 
TB17 good-iookliig, but jod oui't 
come in." Said to be addreiwd 
to men who are not known at- 
tttnptlng to obtain adn^asioQ 
to "close" gambling - hooaei , 
or othoT baonta of diaalpatioo, 
where cloee watob 1* kept for 
fear of the police. There ia » 
■01^ which has this aentenoe 
for a lefiain. It waa vttij 00m- 
mon, and naed with many »p- 
pUoatioiM from 1845 to iSscx 

Ferict (thierw), a joung tMef 
who geta into a cxtal baige and 
throws coal over the dde to hla 
coofederatea. (Old), a tiadaa- 
man who, haTlng aappljed goods 
at rmnona prices on oiedlt, ood- 
tinnally dnna his c 
pajment. 

Perrkadotucr, a I 
blow, agood thrashing (Hotton). 
KTJdently doriTod from the Ita- 
Uan/an eadtn, to cause to fall, 
and duM, back. 

Fess, to (American nnlTeraity), to 
tail in reciting the lesson, to- 
gether with a mote appCAl tot 
no farther qnestions to be put. 
Tbe milita^ oadete at West 
Point also nse the word in a 
similar way. Old English ft**, 
to frighten, make afraid. 




FettA (oommon), a soooeas: to 
/«(«&, to pleaae^ to aionie liTaly 
Intareat, excite >dmiiBti<m. 

" Yob cxhbc ^i Io lb* vindov Mid H«Ch 
T«i bat, ud ay, * Logiiv ■!! fa, mj 
Lord;' ttau wOl jfttot ■o.'-^AM a" 

(Theatrical), is said of a pl^ 
or entertaininent whldi Anda 
great favour with the pnbUe 



Fetch a tafixliv. to (thierea), to 
be aerring cat coe'a anttenoe at 
a oonvlct establishment. 

Hill hf r V fw iWftr iUiit ud (nft U iki 



Qhiithun an SoiKUy pm foai oddcb gf 

PottLud ii Ih* ntM of tb* lot Iv IB Joka 

Farjiitkiiif a Jvr^ dx" k DO pbn 

—A TIUI/-I PrmlmcHm, fwM If 
tftrtliji! /tUimttAtm JaSt 



:v Google 



Fetch— FitUkr's g 



•od Mid, tat anuiqde, of tlM 
bocUM of diownad po^U. 

" Bnlki that COH am tbi &IU, lb«T 
■anlr A<bI 1^ hm." 

■"IUbo timj* fitdt ly nooar or 
kUr, bntit'i loaHtiwi ■ nak brfon n 
■M '««■"— J »/ B« W 7^M Amm. 

AIbo to iMtrnit oiu'a ctrength, 
to TSOorar from some IlliuM. 

P«tUB (pqpnlu), "in good /dcb," 
In good onl«i, well eqnipped. 
Alao In ft good *tat« of mind, 
jolly, or very dnmk. 

P«Ter-time (mnohester OoQage), 
the tlmB when ispemmin^ed 
oollege prefect* go for a fort- 
night into % riok-nram In order 
to " mng," that i*, to gire them- 
•elree np to bard rtad j. 

F«a (Hairow), the tueelled o»p 
worn b7 memben of % foothcll 
eleven. A member of th»t 

Flbbetw (thlerea), Ijing. From 
"So." 

And If Toa ooa* taJUitr, 

—TUttMrfMim. 

Fatbinc gloak {old oant), a pngi. 



Flbbine matcli (thi«T«e), i 
figbt. 






FibUa(i(boxlng), ttfH, npt$t«A 
blow*, delivered *t • abort 
dictaaoe. 



HaniUlMiliu m)r Mdc, ot in jUMvi 



Plb^ to (old oattt), to atrike, beet. 
(BoKiiig), to d^rer i^iid blowe 
at ft eboft dletanoe, 

Badicdl aapl*t»lr ia tb* duk 



Mn« tnlMd. jUi^ voffti, fiddlKl, 
•Isfivl, md ochniH UUnMad— Citfii- 
irrt Bib: Adnrntum ^f Mr. Vtt^ma 



Fickle Jolmiv Craw [Wect In- 
dian), one who does not know 
hie own mind. 

FUdle (Stook Bxohaage) a stz- 
teeuth part of £,\. 



(Thiereelpftwhlpi (Popnlar), 
a ihaiper ; the Scotch fJdU, 
Uw Itob; a Bixpence, powiblj 
from the ezpreiilon "fiddler's 
mone;," slxpeuoea. (Tailon), 
ieoond jiddU, an ' 



Fiddl»&ce (popular), a wiiened 



FUdler (pngiliBtio}, a pngUiat wbo 
depends more on his aotlvltjr 
than apon hi* atmigth oi stay. 
(Popnlar). a ahaiper, a cheat, a 
oareles*, dilatory person. Also 
aslxpeooe orfarthlng. 

Fiddler^ green (nantloal], a aort 
of •ennai ElyiiQm, where sailors 
mre represented as enjoying for 
ft "toll dne" those amenities 
for which Vapping, Cattle 



:v Google 



360 



FiOb—F^fa. 



nddle, to (tUnM). to guiUa and 
oooMqaeatlr to olM»b (Popv- 
Iv), tog«t ODe'a UtIiv bj doing 
■maU joba in the itraeto. To 
play npoti, to takt in. 

SlM'ididdkd ■•. ibi'i^dU mi, olgh 
—KiUm: BmBmd. 

(Cdmnum], to take UbortiM 
with a womBQ, (AoMitoan), to 
Intilgne, or Inttigne ciaftilT. 



ndder (tart), tuw wlu baoka tha 

"fleld" (wUoh tM)a(alMtaM 
bonek AlBOa"la;«a'''ar"book 



YMtliaa _. 

•Kuitritoad hia ia ?uk ItribcM iCi^ 

ndd-kna dwl: (popnlat), abakad 



(FngDlstio), to itdka. 

ndkm bona (tUerM), tMsTM 
who hare no apedtJitj, who 
wlU iteal ai^thlng. 



low London tliMODghlan lead- 
ing from tho foot of HoUmmd 
Ein to tho pnrlian* of ClBricMt- 
waU(Hott«n>, 

Field, to (WInobMlw OoUage). to 
Jnmp Into tbo water baton an- 
other goaa In, ao aa to aal>l 
him. (Tiiif),tobaaktha"lldd,'' 
which Ma. 



Field (eport), the mnun In any 
noe. ' (Turf}, the boraea in a 
nMM >■ oppowd to the tavonr- 
lt«. To"DlM>pthe;Uii"Unld 
of a hone that ontatrip* the 
reet, literall; "whipa" them. 
7idt To Chop. 



To ")•; agalmct the jWi," ia 
to back one horee agalmA all 
O0mer& (Hnattng), the ridon. 

The oij of the "jbM a ponj," 
meana that the lajer \a willing 
to bet eren monfy on the gona- 
nl maaa of immen against an; 
one oompatltor. The baokcn 



ndd, to lead tbe <i^), to aet an 
example which ia followed by 
all other*. Krldeutlj an adap- 
tation of the qptntlng [dmae. 

Fleiy lot (pc^nlar), a word whiob 
doea not mean In onilnair alai^ 
hot-tempered ao mnoh aa "tut" 
and lolliokliig. 

Bstr Ib'i tad-tesvMnd, thon^ bc't 
Bcta ».fitry Ui 

And be'i cool, llioivb wha ba'i ^nt- 
Inc hd'i % bar ibu foaa it bat. 



Fi-Ia'(l(««I), a writ of jlcrf. 
S«iAa», i*., a writ iTing for him 



:v Google 



FifoT' — FUe. 



361 



wbo hM raoovored U HUon of 
debt or dauuigM, to Iatj tha 
dobt or dauuigM agalnit whom 
thernoor e iy wm had, 

Pifer (taUon), » mUtooat-maker. 

^g (oommon), "tob«iQfBU>t!r," 
In fall diCM; fgmtUo, flgnred 
■Ilk, the fineet and most expen- 
Mva dren. Old Bngliah from 
the Italian (Halllwell). Dr. 
Brewer eajs thii term is a oor- 
nptlMi of the Italian Mjkee&t, 
In gala ooetome. Hotten thinka 
It majbe an allnaioatothellg- 
leaf of oar llist parenta. An- 
other bnt moTe probable etymo- 
logy U that It la taken from 
the word full Jig. (Sgnie) in 
taehion books. 

(Horeedealete), to Jig m bone 
ii to apply ginger to a horse to 
make him appear lively, to malce 
hlmoanyaflne tail 



eoBld A-U *'• «'4>U £> wlUtMi,.-r»* 



Fig leaf (oommon), 1 



(Fenolngl, the qtron oi _ 
pToteoting the lower part of 
the abdomen and the right 
thigh. 

incnre dancer (thleres), one who 
altan the nombon or flgmes on 
bank-notes. 

ngBre-head (nantioal), the tarn. 

Pigore man (studios), the pifai- 
olpal figure in a [dotiir& In 
Frenob artiste' language. Is 



FHaB (Anglo-Indian), fTp]* )n*fj 
by qootaUon. 

He u wbiiioBt of IxJiii yifVnMmn 



Figgtt (thlerea), wide Taqqxk. 

ngbtbt; tight (American), dmnk 
and quarrelsome. S^remely 

Id Hvm lubanlnied iajt ■ qnKUr of 
a dollAr mdld bor VDOOffa IDtlT nuvli to 
■Mkc w enUiiai? Bu j^iUay <4iU, but 
Mv it mold tiik* iba luf*r pan of a 



FUbett (popular), cracked in the 
fiitrt, slightly Insane. 

File (thievea), a piokpookat;j(Uis 
a very old English term of con- 
tempt for a worthless, disboneet 
person. Probably ' 
with " vile ■' or "deBle." 



Plg^ oae'a wdg^ In wlM cats, 
to (American), to be foU of 
oomage and " go." 



"The jCs is generally aooom- 
panied by the 'Adam tUer' 



:v Google 



3«» 



Fd» — F^tgKTsu^u 



ToaH fad Vjm 



nnd (Hbrow School), exiJrfr>ed 



mhki* 

It U thdi bnitnaw to JtwUe cr 

•nnp' tb« vlotim, «4illa tbs 

j0t ploki hii pftiTfci4 ud tim 

hiiiili tlM plmiidet to tb* Af l *"ii 

wbo iiMkM oS with U" (New 

ToA BUng DioUaaaiy). 
(COBunon), K duuiiiig or art- ,_ . .. 

MiMn. AlMiIl«Btje(;U-« bj qnot*ti«i- 

amrd^ (» dumb jS«, la FrnLch !>■ ■ '■'X' hona* ih« ua wll; Ibar 

■ixtlt^n jfiiiilr (ft R>n«w tarn ftigu^ - 
bS ■ ■•■■ of tlw orrsni' a|i|iar loT* *bo 
taka IK ud Ia«k&>t in gut rf tMi ran 



Finder (thiBTH), A tlilet ; OM wbo 
t at * nwAet. (Uni- 
veirity), tom oaed at CUna ten 
a mtiter In haJL 

Find-fiv (pnUio aoliook), a kind 
fUfmg tfana deainilbed. 




mHbnsh, to flatter, praiae Ironl- 
oally (Hottett). 



nUr (Lmdon), a ;roniig glrL 

At kM I'm iK ft link jfJ^ of Hj s 



(IltleTN), a danghter. Foa- Fine (ahopkeepcn), ontting tt^lM, 

ribl7 tram the Itallmn $^m, at obsatliig in vadoiia w^a, adnl' 

the Fienoh jCI*. Alio need terating aitlolea of food. 
geneiaUr for a Tonng woman ; 

in thia MUM probably deriTOd Fine-dfKwtiiK (tailcnX aooom- 

trom the name for a 70Bng pllabing an object without betng 



FimWfi fimliln (oomm^ a lame Pingwpoat (old), i 
exoue ; from to fimble, to fomble, 
and to (amble, to atDtter ; both Fingvnoiidi (thlerea), obtained 



, Google 



Finjy — Firfy. 



363 



■f m TJckpeckM.— /ftnitv .- Jthiittfitm 
JmiL 

AlMkmldwIf& 

I^i^ {Wliichest«r College), wid 
when an nnpleaBant or nuko- 
ceptable task had to be done by 
a nomber ot boja. He who 
mid the word ImI of all had to 
doit 

B tiH £iiniip, fitififtf (tbleres), a 
fite-pottnd note. Oennan-Jew- 
ich, pmuf. It la a proDim- 
dation of /I1V peculiar to Yld- 



Pinnicl^ (ooDUDon), from " flnnl- 
Un " (" fine " with a dinunative 
tumlnatlon), idlj bna;. 

Wa don't wiut to fCI inta inEaiudoul 
InaUa, bol vc nuu lajF thu UuicD u 
tEidi^ K uifla Jdvatjh—BirJ 4 Frwf 
Am. 

inmiiip ready (sporting), a Are- 
pound note. 

Mr ««» Tor pIkIdk the old 'qd llun 
it oo fcccooa t of hii having touched « 
JiwHtf nrndy—J^Ax ij K good old iportini 
mm and 1 Bkpect tko nt» fir« poaodi 
wni Joat Bop Ud ItHiaf huBic, «i lUhct 
giOias out.— Arrf *' Praitmt. 

Pipomj (thieree), a olasp knifa. 
The term ii in oommon nae in 
Anatialia, whn« it wai intio- 
dnoed br the conTlats. 



Plie and U^ {nantloal}, niok- 
name of the maatet-at-anu 
(SmTth). 

Fit« ■ aliis:, to (old), to drink a 
dnun ot spiiita. 

Fired (Amerioan), aireated, taken 

up, tlUIlAd odL 



Cn^ .- PUUJt^kU Prta. 



Fire eater (printers), a t«nn for 
quick oompotltors. Savage, In 
his "Dlotionarj of the Ait of 
Mnting," 1841, glvet thla t«nn. 
(Tailors), one who doesagreat 
amount ot work in a vary short 

Flre-eacape (popular), a olergr- 



Fire piimera (thieves), thieves 
who take advantage of a fire, or 
in the orowd, to plunder or [dck 



Fife (thieve*), danger. 



Fire tpenlela (military), soldiers 
who sit ronnd and cloae np to 
the barraok-room fire. They are 
supposed to be guarding it like 
laitlifnl dogs or spaniels. 

Fire-woifcs (tailors), a great di*- 
turbanoet a state of intense «x> 
dtement. 

Flr^ toodle (popular), to onddle 
or fondle ; to f/rK m the con- 



:v Google 



364 



Firmed — Five. 



Xnrj, niMU to b«kt, to ohu- 
tiM. In the nine waj tbe 
Fnnoh cBMHcr, Utonllf to 
cuus, maun mlK to b«ftt. 

Finned (thmtrie*!), weU firwitd, 
perfeot In tho "bndntu" aod 

^nt-dop (Americwi), uceUent, 
flnt-nto. In "Sun Slick In 
EngUnd," It It thm ezplAfned : 
" Thia phrase U med all through 
the Dnlted Statei m % (jnonjm 
tor flnt-iKte." Tho word etup 
If Ghineas for qnalitj. Helooka 
Ilka • frttrtkop artiola. Ftib 
Chop. 



IHnt flight (spcnrting), tlia Bnt 
panona at the finiah In any kind 
of lace^ In a foz-hnnt. 

Fint nifhten (jonrnaliatic), 

mn^cal or dramatlo oritioa who 

natonlly attend on flrst nights. 

The productioD of AnIOD Rubauuin'i 

'* Dvoun " in the thuminc Ruiud diakct 

U tl» oddlT-uiiiKl Jodnll Thtun, hu, 

■o br, baan llw cnlr sppoituDilT lor ^n 



Hore generallj people who 
make a point of attending tbe 
fliflt peTtormance of plaji. 



FInt n!|^ irrec^en (theatrloal), 
men who attempt to hlu down 
a play on Snt perf orm»noe. 

Flnt n^ (American}, at the be- 
ginning. 



Vu CNt. Toa CDold mutjbtlm^ 
m (rii in DuDOch, ud ■■ fbQ of ^t 
■1 ■ (u* iDOMtT.— Zl( GtUm »»Urr- 



Fiih (conuncxi), apenon ; aaed In 
Noh phmaea aa an odd, ft qneer. 
prime, tbj, looaejbA, fto. (Nan- 
tfcil}, a aealjJUk, » rough, blnnt. 
BpokenaMmaa. (TailoTa), piece* 
cut oat of garments to mak* 
them fit oloae. 

Fish mnrittt (gaming), the loweat 
hole at bagatelle. Alio known 
aa "Simon." 

Fiih, to (oommon), to flodeanttr 
to obtain fannr, to Ingnttate 
onea^, to 0DI17 faTOnr. He 
wlio doea it la a "flshet," a 
TCC7 o^fobriona epithet 

Fiahj (oommon), doubtful, ma. 
^dou. Implying di 
ai In ajMjr affair or " 



Fiit (tafiora), a "good Jbt," » 
olererworkiaan. (Fiinten), an 

Flit up, pot yoor (tiJIcnk M- 
knowledge your erTor. 

Fitter (thievee), a lockimitb who 
makes boiglan' keji. 

Flttioff np n ahow (rtndloa), 
amaglng an ait exhibition. 

Fit np (theatrioal}, a conoern, 
amall Dompany. 

Five fingen (cards), the Ove of 
tmmpa at the game of '* don." 



:v Google 



Firer (oommon), k flT»-poiind 

liaaj B birmlai .^fBvr hi 



FIth (popular), the Oct. Termed 

alM " boDoh otjtva." 
Whmbr ultho' u t» IbCT >>■*■ not 

Or, ncootdiDi u the biUin B, to iti^ 

Tllb IhairkprrH, 
I'm bdund Ihartll fcn ■chda milliog t*1 



(Low), » flght. 

Yon an nnUd u ih* conwr Ibr ■y&B 
. . . ltM7 Rnick Cok . . . uid b* wu 

FixlnKa (populv), honM lorai- 
tnre. (Amedcaa, SoKtlab, and 
AmtrkUBn], pai^haniAllk, kit, 
the Adjuikotfl to ftDj diflb. (Biuh- 
men), rtrong liqaor. 

Fbda to «ai (Amerloui), % Vlr- 
glnUDegroexpraoiloii. 0«ttiDg 
readj for meala. 

Fix tiw balloUbox, to (Ame- 
rican), to tamper vith the re- 
■I of an election. 



1uw&. 365 

(Amerioau), applied looeelj 
and alaogilj to a great namber 
of words Indioatii^ different 
Undt o( mmiTiBl action, moh aa 
to repair, arrange, put in wder, 
execnte in a eatlataotory manner. 
to 000k, write, ot do anfthli^ 
whatever. 

Fix tqi, to (American and Ant- 
tnllan), to settle, arrange. 

Uter in tht eralot Cogu biU wiiBM 
ihu (Ihr wu » D»d of hii inDc, u tha 
tf.—DMiIy Initr 



(Popular), lemonade, ginger 



Fixzer (tbeatrioal), a first-rate 
part ; " a regnlar jfaur " la a 
part toll of Ufe and eSerrei- 




Fix, to (old obit), to pat peo|de 
tn the handa of Juttioe, to appre- 



i)> flrst-rate, al- 
luding to the eSerreaoenoa ot 
champagne. 

Fiszle (Ameriean), taUiiTe. From 
the old Engliah ftdc, a flath, a 
hissing n<dM, aa of anTthlng 
which has expired In a Sash. 
PlBUrch uyi thu DenuBhonM Bula ■ 

^aaiBrJh*U of hii Snt 1imtiik.—Amirt. 

am HumnrlU. 



:v Google 



166 



FamU — Flatuub, 



ia to ntterl; tall, bnt a imo 
jUm vben he maiugM to get 
tlmni{ji Mawhow. 

Fifdt, to Hm with nodeat 
loloctuiM, to hemUta often, 
to deoUua flutllj. Omeially 
to misimdentuid the qaevtion 
(Tito mwiy MigMJM). 

AiImV has alao beoi defined 
M k aomewhat free traulatlon 
oi an fnbioate notenoe, or 
proring a propoaitloti fmn a 

Flabberdogax (theatrical), any 
words not in the part MJd bj 
an aotot whoM memoij faila 
him. Alao Impccfeot delivet? 

FlabberiiMt, to (conunoii), to 
attonnd, conf onnd. From gatt, 
old SnglUh, to frighten, and 



Flag; (popnlai), an i^toii. 



Persona who weartbdt apiona 
when not at work aia termed 
"jbj-fiaahen." 

PlaS^-abont, a low itnunpet (New 
York Slaog Dlotlonaiy). [Fro- 
TfaioUl), "flaok" or "Baoket," 
to flap abont 



FtaC Syinc (tallwa} la naed In 
Tefatenoe to a bill poated ap 
whan haoda are Mqidied. 

Fla^p (old oaot), a gMa^ oc 
tonrpenoe. 

"Whj, luit tbaiiui7lawreinilijbaiifa 
tabooHT" " Bu kjC^Bfi, > urn, avl K 

Ftav of deSaace b oat, tite 
(nantloal), a term in nae amoDgat 
aaOon to Impdy that a man ia 
drank, the allnaioD bedng to hia 
red, bloated taoe^ and tba png- 
na«itj dae to being wall jnimed 
with drink. 

Flags <piq)nlsT), clothea diTingin 
the open air and fifing in the 
wind. 

Ftag np (popnlai). " The jiag'a 
up " refeis to meuaea, vaiied to 
" I've got my grandmotheT," 
" my frienda." 

FliV-«n«xil>S (military), fiag- 
f^gnaHing, or aignal djilL 

Flam (oommon), obaolete Eng- 
Uah, but now oaed in a alangy 
sense; a lie, hnmbng, flattar* 
lngU& 

. . . Wha ^th 

H« grwnly oa tlH public A 

—K^rltfKtditfr: Wtrkt. 
I ilawlr iiKlt-*Ma iok-i JItm. 
On mrid (Uri lik* IhtH. 

[Amerloan Dnlrenity), to 
foML, to be partial to the aociety 
otladiea. 

Flanoela (Harrow), to get one'a 
JtimneU la to obtain promotivai 



:v Google 



Flannels — Flask. 



3«7 



to tlta Bohool, oricket, or foot- 
ball deren. (Rugby), At Bogby 
whan tha loluxil played football 
In wblts dnoki, the probation 
"o»p«" were allowed to wear 
jtaiMd*. At prMent, tboogh the 
whole lobool wear famnd*. the 
name retaiiu ita old algniflcation 
(Oni Pnblio School!). The tana 
bM now baoome general. 



tip tba tttadi, down with the 
dnst, (how tlM needfid, aptnt 
the rhino, fork, fork out, shell 

Fl^i, to (thIavM), to rob, to 
■windle; "to Jlap a jay," to 
■wlndleagree^ioni. Ttorajtap, 



Ftapdoodfe (Aineiioan),nonMnae, 
an Sngliah weat oonntry ax* 
praaicKi meaning nonriahmant 
for foolB, aa In qnotatleo. 



■boU ii, uhI get pat tbimch ■ 

feob' din. . . . Fi^Jmtti Ibtr oil it, 

whu (bob *» fed <n.—T. Hti^ui .- Ttm 



Fl^idoodlera (jonmaliftlo), char- 
latan namby'pambj political 
■ptaken, 

Fla^nien (priion}, tbe fint and 
second claaa of men in coDTiet 
prieoni, who are allowed for 
good bebaTioQi a pint of tea at 
night instead of gmeL 

Fl^iper (popular), band ; Jlappcr- 
ahakdng, liaad-abaking. 

Wondtrinf whctlwr , . , Hud if the 
joinbg pAlmi la ■ eiim wu tha ctu- 
taamrf ,^^ffrrtia3daa befim "toeini 



Flap Qw dlmmock, to (popnlai), 
topaj. Tenned also " to tonch 



FUre np (common), a jollification, 
anorgie. 

Flash, a reoognised word for 
alang, cant, thieres' lingo. Also 
old for ahowj bnt wunbetan- 
tial and vulgar, gandj bat 
tastelesB. The term explains 
itaeU aa i^iplyliig to anythiiig 
that gUtten, that "Oasbes." 
Also (pDrloiia, as a jhtk note, 
a forged bank-note. Thieres 
hare appropriated it and ap- 
plied It to themselTea or their 
avooations. In a sense of oom- 
mendatioD, with variona ilgnifi- 
oations^ snob aa good, knowing, 
dashing, jUuk toggery, elegant 

Soon then I mounlcil in Swell Stmt Rish, 
And qioited ajJUMal loggcrr. 

—A outBtHk : XtttmrtJ. 

Flatk mac Vide Flash- 
MAK. Aj(ii4imollisher,athiefa 



:v Google 



368 



fftTOQilte miftnn. "To patter 
faA," to talk In tUcms* lingo. 



(Oommon), a jUfft girl, a 
woman abont towi^ a ahowj 
pcofUtnte. 

In Anatralia/oA ia wed with 
the wnae of oonodtad, <nin- 
gloiioiu, dandified, foolhard;, 
nraggeilng. AnatnUaaH would 
call a nan;C(uA who began alog- 
ging at good bowling direotl; 
ha went in to hat, oi took np 
a ptdeoDona make bj the tall 
to knook ita head againat the 
wall, to. 

Flaah core [popniar and thlersa), 
a thiel^ ihaiper. 



Flaaberj (thierea), ele^ianoe, 
boaating talk, gieat showing off. 

Flash geoti7 (thieves), the higher 
olau of thierea. 

Oh, if mj hmdi adben lo cuh, 
Uj gform u Icul uc chu, 

And nnlj tun IbttvaA^jCul 
In qmccr dothei bnq ttcv. 

—LfUm: PmmlCllftfiL 

Flaah honae, ken, pannj, 
(thieves), a pUoe frequented 
bj thieVei; thiert^.boardlng- 
bonaek Also a biotheL 

Plaah jls (oorten), a favourite 
dance at a twopenny bop. 

Flaahlj (thlevea), elegantlj. 

Your fi>cl> t^ mxMJIaMf ti«.-TX( 



1 (thierea), a thlet Alao 
a froatitate's bnllr, thna da- 
Boilbed bj a. Parker In bia 
" Variegated Chaiaoten : "— 
" A j f aaHsMii U a fellow that 
Uvea upon the haoknsTed pfosU* 
tntioo ot an onf oitanate woman 
of the town ; few of them bnt 
what keeps a jbit&suit, and 
some of these despicable fellows, 
when their woman haa picked 
op a oonntrjr gentleman, or a 
dmnken pereon, will bounce 
Into the room and pretend thtrj 
have smprised joq with their 
wUs, and will beat jon, cc 
threaten to faiiog an aotion 
againat 701L Thus Intimliiatfril 
thaj extort your pnise from 700, 
or rob yon ot yonr watch," 

Flash of UghtniDK (tUerea), a 
glaaaof gin. 

Pmrttr: Vmri^aUdChnmcUtt. 

Fladi, to (popolai *nd tUevw), 
to show; "jbuh7onrdibai"ahow 
jonr money. 

Cocdm fxaattJlMi b; niflit tbc coetm 
ID the booniv k«iiK> — DiteMH£$ Amfikwr : 
Tit Vu^imr T*mtM. 

" To JtaA one'a ivories," to 
laagh. (Thlevea), " lo Jlaik tbo 
haafa," to vomit. (Common), 
"lo JUuh the dickj," to show 
the shltt front. 

Ftaahj blade (old cant), a fdlow 
who dtesaes smart (Gv Fukar). 

Flat (general), an Ineipertanoed, 
easily Imposed on person. 



:v Google 



Flat — Flats-yad. 



369 



To M*k ndi an uyhuB u ihu. 

(81karp«n),jlal-omtohiDg, swln- 
dlhig drnple-minded peopls or 
oonnttTmen, KenenUj bj mMiu 
of the oonfiduioe trick, or mdm 
BDoh ptimitiTe " dodge." 



:SiBt 



•a^Ltmdt*. 



Flat-footed (Ameriaan). Thant* 
% Terj liit«a«iUiig and acoDiKte 



daaeriptioii of fat-fmui, tj B. 
A. ProotoT, in hia "Amcrioui- 
lama," pnbUdtad In JTmnalw^ 



Fmch * 

Iht tr«di nuj ba in tbdi pcuurj nu 
iaf. A VteuchfitJ-flmt u ■ CDOtcmpinita 
fdlsw : bni MI hnt^aa^ai'/itl b ■ nu 
rbo RiiDdi finnlT tor hu p«ty- ^ ■ 



in 



.Whs 
tk* lud 



(Proatitatat), picking np a 
Jtat, finding a dlent. 



. IhcA] 



lU thin 



Flat-catcher (priaon), one who 
ndndlaa foolish or oon&ding 
persona bj aelllng painted apar- 
rom, pretending to have picked 
up a TAloable ring, the oon- 
fldence trick, Ao. 



FUtch<enore (coatomongen' 
back dang), baU-a-orown. 

"Whj, I'Te cleared ajto«A- 
atare a'leadj, bat kool eallop 
(look at the police), Dammn* 
(beolT)." 

Flat-feet (popular), a foot-aoldier ; 
applied genetall; to the Foot- 

Flat-Bih (popular), a dnll, atntid 



■he tMfntiiciBjtMl-/tQltiL' 

It m»7 be observed that /of. 
In the Knses of downright, reto- 
late, flrm, plain, direct, ttniight- 
(orwaid, or simple, is Dutch, and 
that plott Daiiiek means " plain 
Dutch " (Sewell). Plat afdaatt, 
oc jiat afuggen, ia to give a Oat 
refusal, or to refnae "right np 
and down." But the conneo- 
tioD between setting the foot 
down flrmlj or flat, and a deter- 
minate resolntion, maj probably 
be f onnd In most langnagea. 



Flat-more (thleres), the action of 
a fool, dupe. Any attempt that 
miscairiai, or any act of folly or 



FUta-yad (tallon), back slang 
naad by stock ontters, a day's 
enjcTmeut or JcdlUoatton. 
3 A 



:v Google 



Flal~ FlimmiHg. 



Flat tute (t^lon), 
ent jndgnenL 

Flatten ont, to (Americaii], "I 
jUUlmtd hiiQ out," i.t., I had tha 
best of him, of tha &^ament. 

{Jtikm).j(attvud<Mit, withoat 
reaoDioea of tui; kind, beaten. 

Flatter trap (thleres), the month ; 
called by Fieooh rogoee la <mt%- 



Flattr (popnUr], a rariaiit 
" flat," a greenhorn, • fooL 

Flattj-ken (thlerea), a pebllo- 
honee the landloid of which 
Is ignorant at the piaotices of 
the thieree and tramp* who fie- 
qnent it (Hotteu). 

Flax, to (Amerioao), to beat, 
pnnieb, to "give it " to any one 
severely in any way. " Fin It 
into him," let him have it hot. 
"Flaoka," blows or strokes 
(Keet). 

Flaj-bottomiat (oommou), a 
BchDolmaater, so called from 
his occasional office of bircher 
to nnmly or disobedient pnpils. 

Flea-bac (prize-flghtera), a bed. 
Id Frenah slang, pueier, {.«., a 
receptacle for fleas, 

Flemiab acconnt {Dantloal), a 
complicated and nnaatisfactoiy 
aoooont, one in which thoe Is 

adeflcit. 

Fleth and blood, brandy and port 
in eqnal qeantitieB (Hotten). 



very indilter- Fleab-baf; (common), a ahlrt. 



Fleal^ (Wincherter), a thick ent 
ont of the middle of a shonlder 
of matton. 

Fletches (prison), sporioos ocdns. 

Flicker (thieves], a glass; to 
jfiotir, to dtlnk ; from fiiAtt, a 
flask, a very old wtnd. 

Flick, to (thleres). to beat, to 
cut; "fink the panam," cat 
the bread. (Pcpniar), old ptk, 
old feUow. 

Filet (trading), perhajM the latest 
slang word intiodnced to signify 



(Popular), trickery, lu 
no fiit*, withont hnmbog, eeri* 
onslj. " In this sense." says 
Hotten, "$ia Is a softening of 

"lies." 

Tbu'i pot, dcv old p*], uid oaJIUt. 

(Printers), an ancient name 
for the [vinten' derila, from an 
old cant term for spirits atten- 
dant on magiolans, more par- 
ticnlarly applied to the boye 
who lifted the nawsps^ere from 
the press. 



theni dcvili, And HHiKtuiHi wmy 
ittici Jlin.—Aaidimj tf A 



_ J (Ame- 

rioao thieves' flash or slang), 
"ringing the 



:v Google 



Ftmmirtg- — FUp-flap. 



be paitl; deiiTed f lom " BimiT," 
ft buik-bill. Mid "flam," to 
cheat. But " Biiii>Bam," (or a 
Bhinj, deceptive cheat or trifle, 
is an old ezpresnon. 

FUtnp, to (tfaieres), tohostle and 
rob. Also refers to highway 
robbery, " to pnt on thejCimjj." 
/'ii'iH^'iV>">1'u"lo''>>»ft«bicb I have 

IKVCT pnctiMdi Hud corucqueplLr of vhich 

1 know Dothina.^/^- Kinfilry; RavtHt- 

Am. 

Al<o to atcAl by wrenohlng oS. 

H« loU ■■« H Bai ioAJIimful ■ TU^, 
mud plDdHd K •wtU sf « fawner. — f>ii- 
CM{( At^Utut: Tlu yulfmr Tttv^ 

FUmsf (jonmaUrtlo), paragraphs, 
Items o( nein. comments ; fTom 
tbe name of their prepBred 
copying-paper, used by news- 
paper reporters for prodnoing 
several copies at once. 



cSuUb. Occuoiullj tb< miiului mn 
taqn in Iba eitnnM.— .InW^ Tim 

(Thieves), bank note*. 



BbI lb* ri(ht nn oljtimif, all liciwd 
byHoataack. 

—/•^rltbh i-Vmb. 

The term Is now in common 



FUoc (common], pn^erly a kind 
o( dsjice. "To have bis /hi;," 
to lead a merry life. 
Id Loadoii he hai Kttlcd down; 
He mcaDi to tuva hu^^qf in tatm, 
A Ikde kiag vilhoul a cmwD. 

Wba findi the monejtr 
•-Daiaut : Tlu Cmt Mfiltrj. 

In the above the reference Is 
to Qensral Bonlanger. 

Flint (workmen), an operative who 
works for a " society " master, 
Le., tor full wages. In the early 
part or middle (1836-7, C.W.S.) 
of the present century, a strike 
for higher wages took place in 
London. The men who "held 
oot" were known as "flints," 
while those who snoonmbed re- 
ceived tbe opprobriooB name of 
"dungs." Both these names 
are nsed in Foote'e play, The 
ration. 

Flint into, to (American), varied 
to pour in. Are away, tumble on 
to, pitch into. There may be 
possibly fifty snob words more 
01 less in ns«^ meaning to go at 
something, to begin to act, to 
tackle anything. 



"WeU, I ihall ban a Gvb oa Whita 
Wingi, ud cfaau It," aod the Camtfoa- 
dni pal dowa hii Jtnmj, and emrbgdjr 
jttni.—S/*nime I ima. 

(Printers), an ezpreoilon nsed 
for telegraiA forms, or anythli^ 
written on thin paper. 



Flip-flap (popnlar), a peculiar 
rollicking dance indulged In by 
oostermongera when merry or 
excited. Also a kind of somer- 
sault in which the performer 
throws himself on bis hands 
and feet altemataly (Hotten). 
(Nantioal), tfaeaim. 



:v Google 



Flipper — FloaHng. 



Flipper (commoii), hand, origin- 
all; » Mllor'a expraerioa ; " tip 
me joai Jlipper," shftke hands. 

TIh iMlier» A lukr, had ODft voodm pla, 
H« knkfed mounifuL mt Ned, Ibcq Hid, 
■"ripui>«.r>fi»(T-.- 

Flippen, fliqipen, Teiy joimg 
girls ti»ia«d to rloa, genenlly 
for Uie amiueiDent of elderlf 
men; foppert Is » proTinoitdiam 
foi foang birds begliuiing to 
spread theii wings, 

FUrtina cop-all (popnlar), a girl 
genoallT, or ons too fond of 
men. "Ct^" bMtliasignlfic*- 
tlon of ostch. 

Floater (WIiit«oi)apel), a smaU 
saet diUDfdiiig pnt ioto sonp 
(Hotten). 

Floaters. The OonAiU M«fatmt 

glvoB the following ezplan»- 
tion : — " An Intorettlng, bat 
one would hope decsjing, olssi 
of voters ara the Jhaleri, the 
eleotor* whose snSnges are to 
be obtained for a peconiar; oon- 
ddentlon. There ia a story 
told of a candidate in sn Ameri- 
can towDsMp who asked one of 
the local party msnagers how 
manj Totws there were. ■ Foni 
hundred,' was the replj. ' And 
how manj JUatert t ' ' Fonr 
hnndred I ' Bomewhat aUn to 
the JUattrt are tbose wbo sit 
' on the fence '.—men with im- 
partial minds, who wsit to see, 
aa anotbei petty phiaae baa it, 
' how the cat will jnmp,' and 
whose ooDTiotions at last geno- 



lally bring them down on that 
side of the fence where are to 
be foond the biggest battalioma 
and the longest pnrsea. These 
JIaUtri and men ' on the fence ' 
nsed in the olden times to be tb« 
devoted adherenti of the ' man 
In the moon.' When an elec- 
tion waa near at hand It was 
noised abroad throngbont the 
coikstitneocy that the ' man in 
the moon' had arrived, and 
from the time of that augnsfe 
viaitor'i myiterioos arrival many 
of the free and independeot 
eleotora dated tbdr pO Mess twi 
of those politloal ptlnciideB 
whloh they manfnlly supported 
I7 their votes at the poll. Of 
coQise no candidate bribed — 
Each a thing was not to be 
thought of ; bnt still the money 
was oireolating, and votes were 
bought, and a« it was necwaaiy 
to Bx the respondbtUty npon 
some one, the whole bmlnesa 
was attributed to the action of 
the 'man in the moon.' " 

Floattnc academj (old eant), the 
hulk* ; " Duncan Campbell's 
Jhating atadtny," the bulks at 
Woolwich. 

Uy HD ii bobbted opoB lb* kf fcr 
thne ttmn so beard Dtnaii Ctmtttlfi 
Jbalmg fdtmj fgr uiiiiiac ■ eUok.— 
G.J'Mr*tr: VariitmbdCiiwiKUn. 

FkMtinff Utterlea (solcUen), Uts 
of br««d broken up and pat tn 
the evening tea. Whanaoldleia 
are under stoppages or other- 
wiae impeconlouB and unable 
to buy herrings, bacon, aau- 



:v Google 



Floating — Flop, 



ages, and other MT01U7 Mtiolea 
loT tbe Its meal, tbej are com- 
piled to do with floating bat- 
teries. See Slinoxbs. 

Floating hell (old alang). The 
balks ware ao called bf those 
who bronght thenualTes within 
the olntches ol the law. 

FhMk of aheep (domino ph^en), 
the tow of dominoes before a 
plajer (Banmaim). 

Flogxer (comfflon], a whip. 



Floored (ftiidiaa). Is a^d of a, 
pjotnre hutg on the lowect row 
*t the ExhiUtioa of the BoTal 



on the oontrary masters 70a, 
(SUtUea), a stroke that brings 
all thepina down. 

Floor, to. This word is recog- 
nised in the sense of to strike 
down, hence to put to silenoe 
bj some deoisive argnmedt or 
retort: giTon by Wright aa col- 
lege cant, with the sense of " to 
throw on the floor as done with ; 
henoetoflnishwitti." Gathered 
from the qootatioQ — 



tb* Ii(>il vid alcsul 
/btf" of tha pml imj, it u m bui7, 



Floff^off (popnlar), ■ man who 
1* carefol and penmioos ia said 
to hejloggmff, or saring his ooln. 



Floorer (pogiUatlo), a knook-down 
blow. [Common], anexpected 
news of an nnplBasaat natare ; 
a deoislTa argument or retort ; 
m qoestton which ntteri; emb«r- 



In the above the tme aense la, 
"I have mastered," Ac Dr. 
Brewer sayg ; "Thus we tay at 
the Dnirersitr, ' I Jloortd that 
paper,' i«,, answered merj qnes- 
Hon on It ; 'I Jhored that pro- 
blen,' did it perfectly, or made 
mys^ master of It." 

Floor-walker (American), a man 
emplojed in shops to ask those 
who enter what thej want, and 
direct them to the department 
where it i* sold. 

fuilw Bp Bnikdtn7. WlwD I cnlcrcd I 
■l^nuhed ihe /bar trtUtr, Mad tundinc 
him mj luipla, nid : "Hm you uy 
calico lika ihiiT" "Ya, ur." uid he. 
"Third comta to tb* rithl."—^>iH» JC. 



. ■ Tb«iDqiir7 



Flop (Tennont Unirersity), 



Aar "csM" pufsraancc bf which ■ 
nun ii toU ii ■ (Dsd^^, ud br ■ lAnua 
boomrtd rron the islt (nHitd ii " riahily 



:v Google 



Flonat — Fluky. 




Jftft tb« eamiDUtoD if ha fto » gDod 
BHuk by the nHuu. Oa»vi>a!&i JUfiVix 

tftriimmdOultml. 

Ploreat (WeatmlmUr), the tosat 
drank At the election diimera 
Mid other grekt oooaoioiit getie- 
rally trom the large tUvei cnp 
prDMDted bj Wuren BASting* 
Ksd other old Weetminitsn, ftnd 
oommoiilf known m the "Ele- 
phant Cup," from iti haadles, 
whfoh kra in the nbtftt of ele- 
phuta' hekdo. 



FlpS (nUnj ticket olerka), short 
change given bj mch. Tojh^ 
la to gi*a thort change. 

FlnS, to (popnlai), to take awaj ; 
alao to diaoonoGTt, pnt to «<l»»tfi*. 



Flow (American), one of the 
innnmenble STnonymi tor 
moner, or value. 

Flonnder, In the alang of water- 
lata — (.e., men who tiSe the 
pocket* of drowned people — ia 
the bod; of a poor, ragged, 

diowned man. 

Flonrist (old), Nznal InteroonTW 
indnlged in haatU;, or at onsea- 
Bonable peiioda. 




Fhiffingn (raHwa; ticket cleAa), 
the prooeeda from abort ohugft 
given b; them. 

Fbiff it (poptdar), a term at die* 
approbation, ImplTli^ " take it 
awaj, I don't want it " (Hott«a>. 

Fluke (general), a thing obtained 
hx ohanoe when tiTlng to get 
anothw. From a term at bil- 
liarda, playing to acore in one 
wa; and aooring In another. 
flatt, provinoialiam for a blow 
or itroke. A Jhiia at bllliaida 
waa origlnall7 « flying Btank* 
(Skeat). Dutch obtg. 

Thai eooditiou m dm ofttu fnlEIkd, 
Icu itll T«i: il U ■ happj /biii wbta 
ibrr *n.—eimdi : Prixta^ TkmU. 



CudcMriba wl 

WhUi %Jlmiif bh'i bne. 

And ■Imat Imow Ponter ftoai CwMi, 

And hrnal ■ doobt of N^eu. 



:v Google 



Flummocks — Flux, 



I <UU(H«), to apoU. 
Prob»bl7 a Tariant of "flom- 
win-r" to pttrplex or tdndtt'. 



t, to (popul&r), 

to perplex, oonfonnd, bewUder. 

My 'pmioe li, Sibudt. Ibu if roar 

fovwnor don't pRrv« a illeytu. hell b« 

*bu the luliuu all rcflulT ^m- 

(Ths&fHoal), to dlttreta, to 
Btmo]', to npcet an aotor lo 
hii budneso. Fort7 jt»t» ago, 
when the 1at« Charles Kean waa 
aoting "Macbeth" io Belfast, 
a itnptdi inattentiTe aotor kept 
the etage waiting tor Seyton, In 
"Macbeth," for a oonsldeiabla 
period. When the act waa orei 
he ma profoM with aerrile 
apologlea. Kean wae obdniate, 
and dlamiaied the fellow with — 
"Fooll fooll 70Q distreeaed — 
jon rained— joQ tortored— 700 



I (thierei), done np, 
■nn of a month in priaon (Hot- 
ten). 

Fba^ to (American), to die out, 
to glTe ont, to fail, to make a 
feeble effort and then collapse. 
Poaslblj a Hew York 01 New 
Jeraej (Frinoeton) word, from 
the Dntch JUnk,JUnitT,jUnikr», 
to "twinkle" or epaikle like a 
■tar, bright at one Instant and 
then inTlaible, It ts generallj 
dted in American colleges for a 
Mlnre in recitation. Id ajfunib 
tha ctndent at least makes an 
effort before he breaks down, 
bnt In a " dead jiusi" he makes 



none, and sim^ ■■"'»''"■. " Hot 
prepand." 



Flanke; (nautical), the lUp'a 
steward. (Amerioan), a man 
who ia nnBOqnainted with the 
secrets of the Stock Exchange, 
make* rash tentnres, and loses 
Ills money. The orlglnaljCimky, 
a footman, ia from the Fiencli 
jfongiur, to nm b? tha aide of 
(Skeat). 

Flnah (popnlar), full to the brim, 
that is, Intoxicated, noperij 
afflnent, abounding. 



GbU. 

When one has plenty of cash 
heissaidtobejfusil. 
lari, Stnl ni not -nrjjlmk la tuAf. 
—ArtmOmtl. 

Fteah in the fob (thieres), well 
anppUed with money. 

Flnah, to (popular), to whip, 

Plnatered (common), intozloated. 

Ftntter (popnlar), need in this 
phrase; " I'll hare a jbitttr for 
it," I shall do my utmost. To 
)hM«r, to teas with coins. 



Flutter, to (popnlar), to b 
anything. 



I for 



:v Google 



3;6 



fTy~Flyi»g. 



Fir(popnlBraiidtUeTM),kiiowiiig, 
wida-«ink«, wdl aoqiuliit«d or 
lunUlar wltb, TotMl in. 



F^rer (•port), & term deooUi^ 
ozodlMioe, 

TbaKc* 




ThMlu^UaUtlHltMiiH .. . 
Aim*. 

To ba jfy, to nndmuud, 

"DawtaMi wut,ud IwiapkTToa 
-Diait^ .■ Bltmk Htm 

Tin dwlliwr !■ Mid Is ba^^ at nay. 
thloc, lo b* op to CTCTTthing, ud don 
■t cnrTthlns. — />#»H ; £«i^4 amd 
Ltmrn. 

Ths tenn li prolwbl? from a. 
ilmlle nf«TTliig to nplditj of 
oompreheiuioa. To be j(y In 
NorthAmptonahire dgnlflei to 
be quick at taking oftenoo, U 
jl|n^ into • poMlon. A fy 
WM originallj k light ouriage 
for npid motioti ; snd Moudlt, 
i-e-. Jty, ia the Duna gtves to 
pennj boata on the 8ein« 
(Fopnlar), "to be on thejlp," to 
be oat for a da;'! pleaaQi& 

Fir l>7 '■V'ti to (popolu), re- 
moTiug the fnmitnTe hj nigbt 
to escape paying rent. "Shoot- 
ing the mooo," 

t icmtfBber OH niflit vbile ihaadDS tha 

We wm an in ■ tonible fn^[ ; 
The ludlord cane in ■ tinli too ncn. 
And woppad OBiylFrJtn.V*'- 
SiJatjiaMnui! S»»a^ tlU Xttn. 

Flj-cop (thierea), a ahaip poUoe- 



fFoottaai), to Uok a j^«r. to 
Uok the baU high np In tba 
all: (Common), to have acKoal 
Intaoonne wltbont diaroUag. 
(Bn^iah and Amarioao). • 
ohanoe Tentore, a riik or Ims- 
aid taken without mnoh fare, 
thooght, oommotilr i^ipUed to 
an oS-hand ^leoalation in itock. 

. vkhanafljl^attte 



Flyen (thia»e«), ahoea (New York 
Slang Dictionary). 

Flj-flat (turf), one who naUr 
know* little or nothing about 
raoing, but &aclM hinwdf 
thonnghlj initiated In aB it* 
mysteriaa. There are plenty 
of loboolmaaten alwaya ready 
to taaob him the lenon that 
" a little knowledge !■ a danger- 
oixa thing. " 

FlyitV * Uto (oommercial), draw 
Ing aooommodation bills. 

No doat* bat ha mi^ widkOBt anr frcM 

fl!Ib^ 
Han obtained it by ^iM we call .^^nv ' 
c, if be Gonlda'l ao 



do it, ha 



:v Google 



Ftying — Foggtd. 



Fljlsc bltu pig«OB (tU«Tea). 
" ThlevM whojiir tA* Una pvmt, 
Out 1^ who ftaa ]Md off 
houM, ttt out plp«a awsj , , . 
out a Imndredw^ht of lead, 
which ther wrap round their 
bodlM nazt to tho ■Un. Thia 
tb«7 oiOl k 'Uhle,' uid what 
they ctsdi and pnt In theii 
pookot* the; oall a ' teita- 
mant " (O. Farkei). 

Flyiac cam (thlerea). fellows 
who obtain mon^b; pretending 
topcmoni who have boannbhtd 
that tbejoan gtn them inf onoa- 
tira that will be the meana of 
TWOreringthdilortgoodi (New 
Tork Slang DicUonary). 

Piyiag figgtn (thlerea), tnni- 
plke^gBtee. 

Fiyiag marc (popular), a throw in 
wnatUng (Hotten). 

Fljiiv ■no** tobelna (soldlen), 
to be hungry and have nothing 
to eat 

Fljing rather high (oommon), 
intoxicated. A mote adraooed 
■tage is when the mbjeot ia 
"oomed." or on his "fourth," 
or has his " baok teeth afloat." 
"Rua^aed" or "boiling drank" 
means very mnoh intodoated. 



keeping ont of the way, bee 
" wanted " by th« polioa. 



Flytny (low), ouming ; jftna, da- 
oeit, a prorinoialism sane as 



Flj the kite, ta (thleTOi), to make 
one's exit bythewindow. TiiU 
Fltixq a ElTl. 

Ply, to (tUena), to toas vp;"lo 
j^ tha mags," to toes op the half - 
penoe ; " to jfy a window," to 
Uttawindow; "to;fy the bine 
pigeon," to steal lead off looEk 
" Fiji a Ute," «trfa Fltisq a 

ElTB. 

Fly to wol^a wot (pt^nlar), tally 

PveoBou I'm (M ■ bil dnd tf, boof 

pkddiac. aod KnofiBt'a dir rat, 
Bnl PoUtkd Picnla ncen <^u (o (hoi 

Ply-trip (pc^nlar), the month. 
Among ooatacmongen It may 
often be heaid when another 
of their fraternity ia mnunslly 
Toolf eroDS In ■boating his warea 
— " Shut np jaiafy-tnp." 



plok a 



Fob, to (old cant), 



Fataa, tap^ac tiw (medical), 
looonring a misoairiage. 



Plytaa:«t«tloner(rt»ot),ahawker Fagvy (nanUoal), an inralid aol- 
of ballada. dler or sailor. Properly a man 

becoming stn[dd with age. 



Fly low, to (popular), to ende 
obaerratlon, to keep quiet. 
Thlarea are said tofy Im* when 



Foned (tailon), pusslad, c< 
fused. Is Mid speoially of o 



:v Google 



378 



Foggmg—^Foot-biBtr. 



wbON toMoarj la at fkoU, « 
iCinktog." 



FoCtiBC (Mflwrny). IkTlng fog 



CnMBtTioal), gating throogli 
chm'i part anyliow, like a man 
loat In a fog. 



Ibwidid dt G>uH 
Cam* behind vitli A* fit'' 'hat aami 
lUthehnuu 

irroBdsci'lIiib^tiMUidtUHi , . . 
— ai4m.- Oamr Tmiil. 



FogDe(thim«a),Seroe,SaiT. Foa- 
dbljfrom ' ~ 



FogDa(oldaBat),tabaeoa "Wwm 
fogo, old wonl for ataneh," laTa 
Hottan. P«Mdblj from /y; 
>an miMc aiAftggagt, lauk 
graaiL TUa dariratlaD 1* bone 
out b7 ttaa aoalogj of " waad," 
anothar tann for tobaooa wjUi 
" to fog." Alao by FrcBoh mat 
irifit, h^ttin, for tobacco. 

Folk, to (footbaD). "Tofak''% 
ball ont of the aorimniBge ia 
to piok It vp with joaz haada 
bafon it ia faiilj oat of tb« 
aorinuDage, or to Uok it out of 
the aoilmniage baokwaida to 
one of 70111 own " behindi," 
to glre liim a ohaooa of a 
"ran." Donbtlan an imita- 
tion of "foke," braadlj pro- 
aonnoed in some prorinoial 
dialaot. 



From the Oerman wi^ a Folat (old oant), a plc^ooket, 
bitd'a eje, being alang for ohsat, 

pooket-handkeroIilBf, or more 
profaablj from Italian fi^ia, a 
pieoeof lUk oraatin. 



Focle • bnnter (thierea), piok- 
pookat, etaalaof haadkarohlefi. 

ifiiMir. "A jvat fit^*-*'"^'^" n. 

pUtd tb« Ban who had Olnv in chufc 
—Didmi: Olivtr Tmkt. 

FoEIKin (thlerei), a fuMj old 
fellow (New York Slang Dio- 
tiesoMxj). 

(Nantlcal). wine, beer, or 
apliita of Indifferent qnalit; ; in 
fact, an; kind of Uqaor (SmTtb). 



Foltow ma, lada (oommon), onrU 
hanging over a ladj'i shoulder. 
The Fienoh iM*tt-aW( ytmmt 
kommt refcn to ribbao* waving 
behind from a lady'a dreaa. 

FooUnc arratid (American), tti- 
Bing, not meaning bndneaa. 

A> U mada mciUrti an iba psppm 

or pBTlnBTI of acute ihowmcD, and tb« 
"KMt Aft a( Scir-DcfaKi' it b^oc 
n^ay ndiic«d ta ■ moaey-aukiiia farm 

Bj >]] aani tct w hiTC • ml B(hl ud 
•Up Ebii ammm.—i>mify Ttlttrafk. 

FooUUUer (American), a m7>te- 
riona b^g lo the great Tankee 



:v Google 



Fool-Ail/er—Footy. 



to bj «dltm M being "in 
town." Tha intanoatlaa U 
gananllj ocmfitA with m mni- 
ing to aomfl promiiMmt penoo 
that bia Uf is In dangu. 

St. Jeha of Kainu hti bt b b« 
••(fiaid.* Fioa thW ituwin n isfir, 
du V St. John (f Kuwi ud tlH>>/- 
l^f&r- era autt,- Iba ru wUl Or- Look 
«■! Ibc locki of • djvd moHmrlM. —A mt- 



Fetf a weddlnr (popolw), an 
UNmblags of women at wUch 
no man la praa an t. C^. HiH 
Coxmmox. The metaphor 
probablr ia that of a weddiog 
without a bridegTooin. 

Fooot (tblerea), azplalnad bj 
qootation. 

I fot bctniB An or lb fimt (bi*- 
wiifaa.—If*r$li3' ■ Jtllaio/rtm Jail. 

Gannan pfifid, pnwoanoed 

Footer (aohoDls), footbalL Tbere 
ara a unmber of alaug terma 
formed by charging the legiti- 
mate ending of wordi Into er. 
Tha onatom la aald to be derlTsd 
from Hanow. 

<UiilTenltlea), one who plays 
football aooording to tha Ragbj 



The Anb kbbon 



iala. Ho won't 
ha coald btip it, und won 
AJc*™i DocloT Cokno, 
1 ■ daepIlP rooud abjeclun 



ATr^UB. 

rand (old), an aiU- 
Bofal BOie In Imitation of a Uok 
from a horae, prodnoed with on- 
alaked lime, aoap, and a ideoe 
of (dd Iron, 

Foot-ridlng: (btoToHng). When a 

o joUat oannot ride hi* Ironateed, 

bnt la obliged to walk and wheel, 

H la called ybe<-nifHv. 

Alnady 1 nallH that tbon Ii |oia( 

to bft u BBch /M-rUm^aM utji^ng tot 

Iho Gut put of my jamaij.—TUmv 

Sm^iu: RtnU tluWrwtdmmmBiir^. 

FootHtC (Sonth Afrloa), be oSI 
An.apoatrophe to drlTa awaj 
inbnaiTa doge. Apparentlj a 
oompoond of the French ybntr^ 
proDonnoed/oot^ and toerA 

Foot acamp (old), a low fellow 
that itopa 70a with blndgeon, 
cntlaaa, or knife, and ill-treata 
yon (O. Parker). 

Foot wobUer (old), an Infantiy 
■oldier. Now termed a " wol>- 
bler," or " mnd-crtuher." 

Footf (American and BngUah), 
a foolish peiaoD, a "gooae." a 
"coot" It le an EngUah pro- 
Tlnolaliam aignifying trifling, 
mean, inferior, of little worth. 

of pnclico to tho ihip'i compuiy to tike 
her out from mideT thot^W^ butcrr.— 
Martymi: Pttr Simfit. 

FutHf Utaially meana " hafiog 
toota," ie., aettlinga, or drega, 
aa fiiab) oU. Henoe Ita appli- 
cation to anything Inferior or 



:v Google 



380 



Focfy — FontmtH, 



It 1 



gMtod, iMWBnr, thit /oety 
ocRDM fiom tha Franoh Jbtrtv, 
whloh Huong iu Tkrion* dgnl- 
floatiotia ha* thit of inferior, 

WOltlllMi. 

Foode (Amarioan), a man who is 
aMi]jl»iaitMiggfld,»fooL "Tliii 
Mmmon aUng woid, wUoli *p> 
paandsoM coa^oe^ nwanlng 
fl«ttsi7, okjoling, or tamnbog- 
ging, ii probablj dBrirod bom 
the Aa^o-Indlanybodln*, meui- 
ing qnito Um Mma thing. TUa 
ia In Ita tnni from the impara- 
tlve p'kwUo of tba Hindu nrb 
p'AujUnd. It U to be here 
lemarked tbat manj Hlnda 
wac6» oamo at an eulj date to 
the ports ol Boston and Salem 
direct from India, and not 
thioogli England. The preBx 
em is poBsiblT the Hindn tan, 
'love.' To (vi^Wtf, in Tankee. 
In fact means much the same 
•I 'to lOBah,' bnt it alM applies 
to bevUder, to lead one off the 
head, or simpl? to tool and oon- 
fitse, which all agrees with the 
Indian word" ("Ha of Anglo- 
Indian Terms," by C G. Leland). 

Fopdoodle (Amoloan), a sOlr 
fellow. " Come, don't be snch 
tfapdnoHe." This is prorlnidal 
Bnglish. 

Ponken (Wlnohertei School], 
water-oloeet. Probably becanso 
originsllT the place used was a 
field, teiined "toreacre," apro- 
TinclaUsm foi the headland of a 



nen^ and on leoa^ of lt4tw 



nisctaa agents, bnt with doable 
01 treble the cnrrent odds 
ma^ed thereon, in tef enuoe 
to the bone named. A plan- 
■Ihle latter Is sent with tba 
TODoher, and the TioUm Is In- 
f ORoed that on aooonnt of eailj 
inTeabn«nts made bj the flrm, 
the extra odds can be laid bj 
tbem, and a remittanoe to tba 
amonnt named, or part of it, ia 
leqaested. Of ooime, the fina 
"diles up" when olalma bo- 
oome bearj (Qotteu). 

Fon ooftdi vriwd (pc^nlar), halt- 



Foreman (taOora), a ** slcere- 
ontting fartman " is a cntta'a 
trimmer. " Kear the Jt m aaa . 
near the door," a cnttw's term, 
meaning the fartbN yon work 
from tlie foreman the better for 
yon. 

Fweman of Uie \ary (oommonl, 
■aid of a talkative man who wiU 
peisiHt in talking to the exolu- 
■lon of other*. 



no miiok^ utd wb 
Slug: I'll ttntrgri 



mm m Ot M •w) 
I cu I doT Nk* 
Briwo, ain't bf— 



:v Google 



Fork — Fortyrod. 



381 



PoA (tUavM), a [dokpooket ; fTom 
/onb, fingers. 

Fodcen (lunUea]), those who re* 
side in so^oita for the sake of 
sMaliiig dookjaxi stores, <x buy- 
ing them, knowiDg them to be 



ForUiiC (tailon), hnriTing over 
the work as U doing It with a. 
[dtohfork. Anglo-Suon, fori- 
trvta, to out or slash through. 

F01I1 00, to (American Unirenitj). 
To fart Mi to anything ta to ^i- 
propriate it to one's peiaonal use 



or ^«8iuned o^iabilitiM ; thus, 
" really in f»r» " means that ha 
is just now at bis best ; "oatot 
/Urm," that he ts not as good 
aa nsnal ; " lost his form," that 
he is more or less on the wane ; 
■• will show better farm," that 
he will Improve on bis recent 
performanoes ; " top/orai," that 
he Is ranked amongst the best 
of his day. (Common), "good 
form," " bad ferm " refer to be- 
havioor np or not np to a gener* 
ally accepted standard of good 
manners or morality. 
The hdshi if " b(d>nK " wu radMd 



Forla (popular and thieves), the 
flngers. In French argot, four- 
ekctia. In thieves' langnage/orl) 
is more specially allied to the 
fore and mlddla flngors used for 
idcUng a pocket. Formeriythe 

Foi^ to (oommra), to pay. 
■'HUrcouiUsDci. Ftri.~ Muur 



Porta (American UnlTeraitlea). 
At some college* the boaidlug- 
hoQHes for students are called 
yertfc 

Forty-^re (cowboys), a rerolvar. 

Portj-foot (popular), a short per- 
son. 

Fortj-Bfuta (popular), ashort per- 



(Thieves), (0 fmi, to piok a 
pocket by extracting an article 
with two fingers only. Id French 
argot, ml i la/ourvhtHt. 



Pof^-leren (American), of negro 
or^ln. This phrase slgnUes in- 



Nor ioa\ wiu)i ffriy'^Uvm iruks t 

jurio' u' upoundia' 
To pnn ■ niai<T bei ( ii|bl to im 



oxen, acting as a guide. 

Ponn (racing), an expression sig- 
nifying a hone's pr e sent, past, 



Portj-rod lightning (American), 
one of the innomeiable names 
given to whisky — meaning 



:v Google 



3" 



Fossed — Fourth. 



whiikr wbioh wiU UU like ■ 
rifle at forty TkTda. 



minen). 

FHricUHg 



to (AmtnllMi gold- 



n thft ckHj bbujrr 



Also in the old dlg^g da^a 
ybuieitH; WM getting a living 
by extnoting wlutt little gold 
there wu from the refuse wMfa- 
dirt which prevIODB minen had 
abandoned. So called from 
fonieiing, taking trouble. It 
being tireaome work (Halliwell), 

Foaaicker {Aostralian gold- 
minert), an allavlal mining ex- 
plorer. Also a miner who worka 
at holes abandoned by others. 



TothlirwoniDi 


Ut OHCDI 


u lo M ihc 


/«(ftVr bill bus 


■iKnblcB 


>i>. TnYd- 


Hoc b pun, but 


uullT worVim RP*- 




<t»N<<nhi> 


fwiDd. Euihboiti 




.iebillr,»i<l 


p™.U« hii fra,^ 


b»:c.c;l 


.Piufc-bb 


«liu,T>™t;™:!. 




io. «.d ho- 


&apoK4;fcbTom 




iinadiKnl 


iniorchofBiDcl 


UddMUO. 


r>;udon]y 


when u BbandjUKi of wus 


>nd cndliif 


dirt cocHiiKnl p 




Ih. mDCuI 



aacoa mim lh« dthaicc of better d 



Foned (thierea), thrown down 
(New Tork Blaug Dictlodary). 



Fool -wMther Jack (oaatical), 
a person whoee pieaenoe on 
board ship is sapposed to bring 

illlnok. 

Fomid on demerit [American 
cadet), baring more than the 
limit <ioo) (O. E. Wood. U.S. 

Fonod on maUi (Anwrioau cadet), 
to do badly at mathcnatloa — 
obrionsly a oompUon of " to 
toonder." 

Fonr eyea {popiUai), a siU^ tam 
tor a person who weaia an eye- 
glass or spectacles. 

Fonr-hoUd middlinsa (Win- 
chester College), walking shoe* 
of an ordinary kind. 

Fonr Muna and n bit of aoup 

(Udlors), a qnaint phtaae for 
troQser-maklng. 

Fourteen hundred (Stock Bx- 
ohange), a password naad when 
a stnnger is seen in the " bonaa." 
" So help an Got. Us, wbo b btt" 



}Diot procfcdL IndbcemcDt for tuch a Ufa 
ii lunl to find. Every pound ai Jbod baj 
Co be poised frodi fifiy to ■ bundnd milo. 

wbicb DfAt cui be pronded. Da^ fefter 
day. wtek after week, the pmtitnt/HncMr 
" n- CKek, fullr ■ " 



coiiM, mnd ibovted wiib nifht eod Biia, 
" Fnr/ma kttmdr*/i atw fivei I " A blia- 
dred Toic« niHstod the M fmi t uM es. 
cknwien,— .^ItiW; HnaiScraft. 

Fottrtii (Cambridge), the W.C. ; 
to " keep ^fimrlk," to go to the 



:v Google 



Fourth — Free-booktr. 



383 



W.O. Snppoaedtotlliidetathe 
fooitll oonrt at Trinity, a nnflll 
qnadnnglft devoted to leeton- 
roonu Mid other oonvenifliioes. 
(Common), a verj dnnken man 
ia aaid to be " on Maftxuik." 

Fointii eatate, the complete bodj 
of Joomallata of all detcdpUons. 
TUa term la mnoh nsed ajnong 
" linen " <Hotten). 

Four-wbtder (popnlu), a steak. 



P.P. (Wai Offloe), tormm p^eta ; 
a r^inlar phnue at the War 
Office when It U a qneatioti <a 
ref eiring to praoedliig oommiini- 
oationi, ko., on ao^ matter. 

Frac^ (Texaa), to rob (Bartlett); 
DntohthieTea'«laiig,A*U«<w<m, 



Praaaled out (Amerioan), ond In 
the Sonthern State*. Fi^ed, 
" biuled," or worn ont. 



Foirio ([ddgin), a fowl 

Fox (fearing), a oaut term for 
■word In the older achooli, 
from the "wolf" or fox mark 
borne by Solingeu bladei. The 
word "foxing," fn the oollo- 
qnlal senae of pretending, ia 
often applied to a iham oate- 
lesanesa In fencing, Intended to 
indnoe the adTeraary to " oome 
Ont " leal oantianal^. 

Foxed (old alang), Intoxloated. 
(Printer!) , atained or spotted 
booka or paper la deecrlbed thna, 
Csnaed bj dam|aiesB mostly. 

Fox, to (theatrical), to oriticiw 
a fellow actor's performance^ 
(Popular), to watch slily. (Ame- 
rioan pc^oe), to f<dlow or watoh 
Bliljr. 

W< bid ■ntnl ilKaboDi. H> *u 
jViWC nw, aad I wu jfcnaif lijm.—0*ify 

Fo - jok (pidgin), gunpowder ; 
Uterallj fire phjaic, fire medl- 



nrlidia di? |ot fitutli tat."— UncU 

Freak (Amerioan), men or 
women who make a living by 
exhibiting themaelves aa living 
BkeletouB, giants, dwaifa, and 
other freaks of natnre. 

" Whw ii Tcur iptcUlit]', ajfniaiV 
FnmA- — 'M'nlhemiuiwhorcaUrkDowa 

pbotOffTAphT QuBTler of it doLUr, Bf.' 
fJiiVtr.— "Ya; ^n n Ii*lf4-dt>«&. 

—CU£tt TTittOH. 

Free and easj, a smoUng party of 
any kind, the members of which 
meet at a pnblic-hoDse to drink, 
amoke, and alng. 



Then u* pintai lod pii 
roc fin bnadnd dolhn, at 
ElHBtR.'— lO-U 



:v Google 



384 



FrtekoUtr — Frtsk. 



FtMboldcr (comniin), • u 
OkUed k /rtAddtr wbMt hi« Bii>ibch>i.<v«t««»Ki<>tMhcld 
WiliWiU not lUow him to Tldt ofbloaiirfcbavitBd^Hacadul m- 

ii (tiiii4 w, ud it appcui to he pfOtr 

Frw bnCM (»ooirty), women who •«»*l--r™«*. 
do not ran atnUght, aie not 
rtrtooiu and tUthfol to their 
hnibandi. Orfginstad from 
the frtt lanea, who ouriod <ni 
ine^nlar ww&re. 



enta whmX fboold bi bhsi iftltiDC 
« Ihvy UT pot down wnoag th« 



kt fntman'i giioy," to drink at 

knother*! ezpenas. 

Fneourtln (veterinu;), ■ o»U 
which \a one of twina, the twlni 
being one of eftoh Mz; the Mxnal 
orgaoi of one or botli mre impel- 
feotl7 developed or diiferen- 
tlated, Bud the ^WMarfte ia 
oonaeqaoutlr alerile. 



Free of liimhler'a hall (oommon), 
a Mfing applied to one who it 
impotent. 

Free, to (thterea), to cteal; "(o 
fTt» ■ pnd," to (teal a hone. 

FrMM ont^ to (Engllah and Ame- 
rican), to pat ont, deprive of, to 
drive awaj by distant freeiing 
conduct and cold reaerve, which 
waa apparent!; the origin of the 

t alM oo JuM wid MuT Buns, 
t thovrhl I w«i bound to bUxc, 

But iIh tvt fini all AxTfi*^ >m nU, 
With that nmr-convined wmjv. 
—Stmt: TluOU-FilHamidBtmM. 



Freecer (popular), a wintar'a ^j. 
An Bton tallleaa jaoket. The 
^ipUoation ia obTiooa. 

Freese, to (American), to itid to, 
to tain, to liaTe a longing deaiie. 
I un roa I>«H (or mcmi bW« A* 
WHkwufvictobaintuBU*. TbonvM 
DO liAV iotuvcT diowD bctvacu Ji»f> 
ud Add DClHr thui mi^t odtt bctwcq 
uy mwu DtIds «>>ii«r OB to B bsvda. 
— iW^ /MW- Oou. 

(Common), to ^reoclo^ toati^ 
to, take, ateal; "aome one haa 
Jrau» to my watoh." 

Freacb cream (p(9alar and 
ttiieree), l»and;. 

French gout (papnlar),goaoiT)Kea. 



I (printeia), an Anglo- 
Fienoh printing machine ia 
generally termed thoa by the 
"mindera." 



dcnr tbfl "nft impvadiBbeiit "that lio»D« 
■ littk /w* u Ihc time of tbf uuUt.— 
Dmif Ttltn/t. 

(Ameiloan), forward, impa- 
" Hm PtfiT b«D u 



SujUU imd Mftc 



.~F. t 



innocent, Uiiophlati- 



:v Google 



Freshen — FrilUty. 



385 



WkU, Itwn'i 
i*toafrn\ do. 
OmiaUlftrU. 



a <]a^B( that ftlkn M 



(Tbievw), unlnitlBtod, green. 

Fretben one's mj, ta (nantickl), 
(o bony, qniekeo one's move- 
nuDta. From " fretb wk^," 
inoreued epeed through the 



Fmher (nnlTenlt;), k frMbnum. 

Frealuun'a Bible {onlTenl^), a 
hnmoroiu name for the Uai- 
venitj Calendar. 



Ln'a dmrch (Cambridge 
Unlvenit; ), the Pitt Frees, which 
from Ita ecoleelaatioal appear- 
auoe le liable to be mistaken for 
aohnicb. 

Fmhaun'a lAndnarlc ( Cun bridge 
UnireisitT). King's College 
Cbapel, BO called from Its being 
so sltDated as to form a beacon 
to lost and wandering freshmen. 



u'a rirer, the Cam above 
Newuham Mill, nsed for bathing, 
oanoeing, and MnlUng, bot not 
tor boai-iaoes. 



a varietj of mendicants. 
Thaafiatmatirmsriiiert, Ihdt ihipa 
wan dis*H<] ia iIm PUi» of Salubcry. 
Tbtae kTDd afcaufpilkn coiuitarfil (nu 
loHB OD tb* la.— /fAwu : Cm-mJ. 

Pret one's K^Bwd- to (popnlai), 
to liet about things, to get 
haiassed and worried, to the 
ebstdnte discomfort of oneself 
and those abont one. 



Pilar (printers). Vidt Honk. A 
light or "soabbj" patch in a 
printed sheet, oiring to bad dis- 
tribntlon of ink or dampness. 
Probabl; derived from Cazton's 
time when be set op his press 
In Westminster Abbey, and the 
reference is to a friar of holy 
orders, an individual of light 
clothing. 

It i* oorioos to note that 
French compositors use a simi- 
lar term, momc, a monk or friai, 

Fridi^-face (popular), a gloom;- 
looking man. Alluding to the 
meagre fare of Roman Catholics 
on Fridays. French " flgore de 



Frigate (common), a well-dressed 



Friff pie (old slang), a trifling, 
finnicking man. 

Frill (Anstralian popular), 
swagger, conceit. When a slangy 
Australian sees a person very 
conceited, or swaggering very 
mooh, he says, " He bas an 
awfol lot of ^iiU on," " He can't 
walk tta/riU," " He's stiff with 

FrilleiT (common), linen. 

And mrouiid her, in coafuiao, U7 odi 
fuluoa-|iliii4 dduiioi], 
Jtaijnlitrr, Ihe cnvniat ud btM. 
Bnt, hi diuib, n* Ouidi, for in dU'r- 
cm to lbs n*i=, 
FdrIkc ioAumuioa ii lapprOKd. 
—Sfirtimf Timu. 



2 B 



:v Google 



386 



Frisk — Frosty. 



Friak (sooiety), k dance, a hop; 

not a Ttrj oomnon sxpreaciciD, 

bat oocadonallj nasd. 

Tb* ihov U dnau ud jcwcb wu 
nmuk&bit, Ukd iha/ruk wu ■ Mlliuil 
■norm, mrrihini bcinj tbonxichlT mil 
dnot.— rii (f<rZ^ 

Friik, to (thieraa), to aearoh on 
thepeTMn; "tu/HUacly," to 
emjrt,; a pocket. 

FroE (popular), foot ; /t^footed, 

ftat-f ootw, a oontemponry tma 

used for thoM who go on foot 

(Popnlai and thierea), a police- 



to be ab ™™».. ^^ 

A-ProctOT). Dntch. ■ra(rU9< 
mirth, ^oUitj, gaie^. Th« 
American expreasi<m ja a literal 
tranalation of an old Now Tnk 
Datoh phraML 



/nt' will uil ■«.— • 

Frcvpng on (American), getting 
on. U«aa1l7 attribated to Oer- 
mani, and pocubl; derived from 
tome popalar misconception of 
fivgtn, to a«k, or an allusion to 
ta of a frog. 



K*rb<>,a 



o tee ovT rricndttapnut. 
i»t™«— how ]foo Jri^ti* 



All da liddla Dnuchn (if ■ ^ ihoui, 
Hejrhol SehBodenl Hm you knock 

—TIUmmiBrtmn: T/uDiuUdUntm 

Frogfandera (nautical), Dntcb- 
men (SmTth). 

Fr^amardi(oommoa), a method 
of oonTejing a violent prisoner 
to the police-station or guard- 
hoose. The recalcitrant one la 
carried face dowowarda, with a 
man holding eaoh limb. 

Frolic on a (American). "'Frolic, 
used for a paitjowa/rofi'a,' seema 



Froot (Winoheater School), angry, 
vexed, from " allrooted." 

Front, to (thleras). to oorcr at 
oonceal the opeiatiou of a pick- 
So D7 fm\ (ud, " FmU BC (am ^) 

«nd I will do hin for \x.-~H*nttf : Jtl. 

tinttfiwmJmiL 

Frootiapieoe (pugQiatio), the boe. 

Front {riece (theatrical), a short 
play or "curtain raiser" per- 
formed before a more important 

Al iht Cuetjr.aa ntit SUnrdi)' oce- 
ii<l, ■ Iho, " ZjI 4h" bjr III. r\Am, m ■ 
/nml/ua u " Fmikciiitaii." — £miuv 



FroM (society}, a Mlnre, a jl 



(Theatrical), a dead failure; 
" a/reX, a kiliing/rMC" (Popa- 
lar), a dearth of work. 

Froaty (ace (common), said of <m« 
whose face has been pitted and 
marked by small-pox. 



:v Google 



Frooat (Hurow), eztm alMp al- 
lowed in the momiug of Sou- 
dajg uid whole holidajB. 

Frow (old cant), « woman ; Datcb 

A Hub of li(htnin( ata 

Bfft tipt c*dl cuLI madfivtr, tir, 
En Ihe; lo chucth did pad 



—Full. 387 

Fuddle (popalAr), drink ; " oat on 
the fiiddU," ont on a daj'i 
drinking. VVom fiut^e, ui 
■ooepted term for drinking to 
excess ; from fidl, taj aa inter- 
poeition ol the letter d. The 
Scotch hare fiiU for dnmk. 

Fng, ta (ShrewsboTj), to stay in 
a olose, stuff J room. 



bilated, atrangled, gurotted, or 
spoilt. 

Fnimp (old cant), aa a wrinkled 
old woman, a witch, kc Frump 
nonmn to have some connection 
with the Dutch frommdn, to 
onim[de, and /row, to wrinkle ap 
the face, frown, •[q>ear angry. 
As a Terb it means to mock or 
insnlt, qoarrel with or annoj. 



Fry Tonr face, ga and (American 
and English), low slang ez- 
preiaion addressed to a thin* 
faced, lean man. Frobablj a 
tonn of " dry face." 
"G«i,]'DU "u BO pM, t* ami vry }inr 



Vry my Cica, indnd i 
t» to VT7, but jtta vu fot 



dulnii 

if Dod TO 

r»Roc» 



P ■harp [popolar). Sea*. 

Fnbscj (thleres), fat; fitbtty 
dnmmy, a well-filled pocket- 



Fuggy (BhrewsbDiy), stu^ ; from 
fojfo, an old word for stench. 

Fulhanu or fullans (old), loaded 
dice. " 80 called," it has been 
Boggeeted, "from the inbarb 
where the Bishop of London 
resides, which in the raign of 
Qaeea Bliubetb was the mott 
notorious place for blacklegs in 
all England." Dice made with 
a cavity were called "gonrd«" 
(■cooped out like the bottle- 
gonrdnsedforoope, bottles, &&), 
Thus those which were loaded 
maj have been called " full 
ones," hence fuUmu. Thoae 
made to throw the' high and 
low number* were respectively 
termed " htgb ftiUamt," and 
"low/ttflasu" 

FdU blaat (common), anything is 
t^d to be in full Uon when at 
its apogee. The alluiion is ob- 

FnU drire, fnll chisel, full aidit 
(American), at fnll speedi in full 
career ; an equivalent to " hie- 
kety B^t," "ili^ring and etaving 



:v Google 



388 FuU—f 

along," "twotliiit7,"*i)dotbei 
•jnonTiiu for ispiditj. 

Full brnme (printva), » oompon- 
tor that has been a " gran 
hand " (which see), and aeonrea 
a regular engagement, U In po«- 
■eaaion of ifnUframi. 

FttUied (thisrei), ootnmitted for 
triaL From the expresiIaDofttn 
uaed by maglatmtea. " fnll; 
oommittod." 

So I lot ran in, and *•« tiM U HuT><- 



I (tailoTfl), "not JWmm 
«iioi^h in the sleer* top," a 
deilBlTe answer to a threat of 
penonal chaatiaement. 

Fnmbles (thieTea), glovea. Ftdih 
famUtt ca Jamt, the handa; 



Fimk fgeneial), atate of n 
trepidation, feax. 




Dntoh tfalarea' aUng. 

Function (Mciety), jiKtj, ball, en- 
tertainment . From the Spasuh 
fiuuion, which ia Died to mean 
anj kind of meeting or per- 
fonnanoe. It oame from Hezioo 
tbrongh the American preaa. 

The Ducbua cf , who wu ctftuBl]r 

Fnnctior (Whicbeater College), 
the night-Ught burned Id oham- 



Fnoenl (American), " it'a not my 
fimtral," I don't care, it ia not 
my boaineaa, it in do waj con- 



Also to ^ni it. 

Amt ia deeland by some 
antboritlea to be a reoognised 
word. At any nte it is vulgar 
and need In a alangy sense in 
anoh pbraaee aa "to be in a 
/■Mi,'' "an awfn), mortal TWwb" 
This tenn, aocording to De 
Qnincey, originated among the 
BtoB "men." Probably from 
fank, to omit an offensiTe smell 
like certain animalfr when pnr- 
saed, or people who lose phy- 
sical control over themselTea 
when in a atate of great tenor. 
Tbia derintion seems to be 
home oot by the parallel F'rench 
Jairtr, to be afraid, shrink back, 
also " fairs dans sa calotte." 

Aiai, also a coward. 

In New York the word fimk 
ia oonnected with hnmbng, and 
"Peter Fnnk" is a kind of 
mysteiioDs spirit who inspires 
all Unds ol petty boaineaa tilcks. 



:v Google 



Punkiter (WlnohMter CoUege), 
one who ia kfnid. 

FnriE, to (WiDobestOT CoUege), 
to «xp«l. It U Mid that for- 
m«Aj "meti" who wen «z- 
pdled bad to go throngb "non 
lioet gate" when leaving the 
oollege for good, and their 
olotbea were seat after them on 
■ [dtchfork. U thii to true, 
le/urk it from the Latin ^brm, 
{dtobfork. Otherwiw the origin 
nui7 be tonnd in old Bngllah 
firki, to haiten on or ont It 
ha* alw> the algiiiflcatlon of to 
•end. Thne bo^t will mj that 
report* are furhid home bj the 
doctor. Alio to send on a mes- 



Fonneii (old slang), aldermen. 
An epithet derived from their 
robe* of office being trimmed 
with fur. 

F umhiif g j^ctnrea (studiM), [^ 
toraa painted bj the doieii for 



r — Gab. 389 

the trade of the Mme elaM a* 
"pot-boilen," 

Ftir ent (Winobester Cdlege), 
angrr; u., one withyiiroNt like 
an angrr aoimal. 

Fort tall (printen), sea Bat. 
A workman who aocepta work 
at an unfair honte to tho* 
termed, from the fact that a 

rat to^rrjf, 

Fnsh, to tilth eat (Amerioan), to 
waate, oome to nothing. Dotoh 
JWmI, a trUe, a worthless thing ; 
futaOm, to addle, foddl^ trifle, 
idle. 

Faatock (popular), a person who 
make* muoh fnak Fonnerlj a 
fat woman, from the provjntdal 
English " fnsoooking," lai^ and 
&t. 

Fnatiu (tbletres), wine; white 
futtian, ohampague. Compare 
with "red tape, white Telvet," 



Ffe-bnck (<dd), a sizpenoe. 



r Brob (popular), 
the month. This word 
U gl^ tj diotlon- 
I ailes ■* a reoognised 
, bat it is osed 
in a slangy sense, and ma; 
be considered as belonging to 
slang phraseology. It to derived 
from the QaeUo and Scotch gab 
orfi)t,month. Idle prating, loqna- 



An' aye h* c>e> tb* tomie dob 

Tb» titlw fkflpiii' luM, 
WhDa ihe hdd Dp hw (iHdir/^ 



:v Google 



GabMe — Gaff. 



Gabble tuuaSuHarj (Americui). 

MiU"— ttafl CongTMi of thfl 
United Btatea. thooKh In thi« 
nspeot it doei not leem to be 
wotM thuother utloulaMem- 

bUn. 


A BiU for <h« funotUMn of f«W&.- 
/.RmmULrwilL 



OcMlt \» % dlminntiTe of gah ; 
Danuh gaibitrt», to triQe, ]wt ; 
old Frenoh w gabber, to mock. 
From tbe ScnndliuiviBii galb, 
mocktTj, scoording to Littrd; 
Dntoh gaibtm, to jmbber. 

Gahj (common), a afrnpletoo, a 
fool oT ooontiy bnmpUn. (The 
HTnonym " gawonm " is naed in 
SomeiMtsblni.) Probabl; from 
" to gape ; " Doniah ffobe. This 
deriTfttion aeem* to be bone 
out hj the mnmlogoiu badaiid, 
booby, Idler ; from the low I^tin 
badare, to juMn, to giipe. 

Gad (g7ps7), • shirt ; (populmr), 
" npoD the j^uii" upon the 
sadden. It also signifies rest- 
less, going abont. 

I lut« DO very foad cpifdon flf Un. 
Clurta' nunerT-Byud. . . , Sbviiftlwa^ 
upon lite tmd.— Mia Aialnt : Amaaiuii. 

Gaddtng or piddiiis about 
Hotten says tbis is only to be 
heard now among the lower 
orders, bot in America it is still 



used by ererybodj. It dow not 
mou) merely " moiiiig aboat," 
bat going lieTe and there in an 
inegnlar way, maUtig short calls 
or brid pansee on tfae way. 




Gaddidgrtbe boar(p(iMilai), walk- 
ing abont witbont shoes. Same 
as " padding the boot" 

Gaff {American), a ated spnr 
Szed to the " heel" of a gam»- 
oock for fighting. Tnnx g^, 
B barbed Iron oi large flsbing- 
hook. 

Qafbig Is toadng, ptteUng, 
or throwing like a Ji^ler per- 
fanning. The gaf is a ilng 
worn on the foMfinger of the 
dealer. It has a sharp point 
(heuoe probably the name}, on 
the inner side, and the gambler 
when dtaliag from a two-oard 
box can deal ont the caid he 
ehoooes. Some^ howeTSr, are 
smart enough to do this triok 
without the gaf. It is oat of 
date. 

(Popnlar), a gtf or penny gtf, 
a low plaoe of entertainment. 
This term Is now nsed for any 
theatre or monc-hall, as the 
Greenwich gaf. This appears 
to be allied to gag (which see), 
or from gafit, to chatter. 



:v Google 



Gaff— Gag. 



wo « thnc tiiw m mak I ued to 
» iba Brit 'a Haiion, ar th> gaff 
.—NtrUif ! Jtllit^ /rtm 



(Tb«*tiic«]), to gnf, to per- 
form In low thMtrea. (Prison), 
R faf, A pcetoDoa, Impoatnre, 
In Fnnoh slang y^^ bai 
tba maaning of jcAe, dwelt. 
(Popular and tUeTea), " to 
blow the gaff" to diTolge a 



o Saith, u 



"Va; u Ih« /i^ blowDt" m Ih* 
njobds. 

" W4 lUTC lud « tclepun Eo ntmaDd 
Ik* ttiuiaa. "—Bvtmimg Smut. 

Oaf, in the lenae of imposture, 
and blow the gcf, teem to be 
from gafit, to obatter, oi are 
allied to gab vt gag (which 



Gtffer (athletes), he wlio traina 
I " primarilya Sbeffleld 
ninner— now be who 

does the same to any "ped" or 

pedestrian. 

Gsf (theatrical), in aotor's or 
■ingo's interpcJation In the text 
of aiday. 

» fHIIiIf iUa tnnblt fcr whu bi 
iBu m nl HnUm !■ ailed imamf— 
BBfiic Aioci thW an not ID i)h pm- 
punw.— /him /■•ow^ te lUmtrmtid 
Lmdm/ftrnt. 

K»Dj a plaT has been sared 
from otter mhi bj the self-poa- 
sesalon of the a^or or actress, 



who, finding himself or hereeU 
face to face with failure, has 
emitted some bright line, some 
appoflta rtpaT<a, whioh In one 
moment has conTerted defeat 
into Tiotory. 

On it* Srst production, the 
comedy of " The Jealons Wife " 
hung fire in the last scene, and 
was nearly going through alto- 
gether, until the qnlok-witted 
HiB. Cllre Improvised a gro- 
tesque fainting Bt, which evoked 
roar upon roar of laughter, put 
the audience Into a thoroughly 
good hnmour, gave Oarrick time 
to recover himself, and olti- 
mately ensured a triumphant 

fiimilarly Frederick Lemidtrfl, 
by sheer force of genius, com- 
bined with nnique and unrivalled 
effrontery, at a moment's notice 
con veiteda melcdtamatlo rufDan 
Into the incarnation of comedy, 
and created the oharscter of 
Bobert Macaire. 

^Dl Bedford's "I beliere 
yon. my boy." has timvelled all 
over the globe. Chinaman and 
Japanese have quoted it. to 
prove their knowledge of the 
BngUsh language. Two of the 
moat memontile gaga of which 
we have any rooord, ooourred 
in moment 

The famoas line at the end of 
the fourth act of "Rioheliei) "— 

" Oh ! for OB* Imir of T«ia t ' 
only leaped to his Up*, amidst 
the tmnnlt and excitement of 
the scene on tlte night of the 



:v Google 



392 



Gag— Gags. 



flnt repreMotktioD of the play 
at COTent OknUn. 

Simaarly, oo tbe lint tdght 
of "WerneT,"at Biistol. lu an 
agonj of pUemal angnlih, he 
mahed down to Oabor, and in a 
pietolng Toioe demanded : "Are 
yon a ^ther t " Then he whis- 
pered ; " Say Ko I " Oabor, 
taken oS hia guard, roared 
" No I " Bat Hacready roae 
above him with a wail of grief, 
which thrilled the heart of 
every auditor, aa he exolalmed : 
" Then jou cannot feel for mlaeiy 
like minel" At thoM wordi. 
the pit tOM at him. 

Probably one of the beat re- 
membeied, and one of tbe hap- 
|de«t interpolatlona, took place 
at Corent Qatden on the ooca- 
■ion of T. F. Cooke (tbe original 
William) taking hU fareweU of 
the etage. Having deeoribed 
the killing of the Bhaik, the 
veteian proceeded to Hiy — " We 
haoled him on deck ; we cut 
him open. And what do yon 
think we found in him I" The 
naoal reply ia, " Why, hia 
Innarda, of oonrae.** On this 
oceaalon, genial Johnny Toole, 
who tdayed Oaatbrain, replied : 
" I don't know what yon found 
in him, bnt I know what yon 
dtdfl't find in him. Ton didn't 
OndanotheiT. P. Cooke." Thia 
gof bnnght down the hooae. 
Like everything elee, gag la 
anbject to the general law of 
"the anrvival of the Stteat," 
all that 1« bright and appro- 
priate abides, all that ia Tnl- 
gar and Ini^tproptlate la awept 



away by tbe stem atage ntaaa- 
gw. 

To gag, to Interpdate. Oa/ 
ia old tor jaw, p*lat«. Thna to 
gmg ia qmonymow with "to 
jaw," bnt it ia poasibly allied to 
the old French gogtu (whence 
gagftaueri), a joke, from tbe 
Cdtio yoTueo, to deceive, deride ; 
and thla derivation seema to be 
■npported by the eignificatiOB 
attributed to gag in itngi"*" 
thieves' oant, {.<., a lie, and to 



Gage (old oant), a qnart pot ; 

from jra<y<>anieaauce. Written 

also 919c 

I lioina no U(e, but ft whdic gttft of 
tiwl^nwtKtQJWA.—Bramats/avimiCrtW' 

GMce 01 Eager, a man. Also 
tagtr. Qagir ia In all proba- 
bility the gypay word gorgi», 
meaning any man not a gjp^. 
Two oentnriea ago the Sug- 
liah gypaiea prononnoed fOHna^ 
"gago " {gaJt'dtlu), aa their bi^- 
len still do all over Enmpa. 
(Popolar), a?ap«, a atnall qoan- 
tity of anything. " Oagi," aaya 
Uottea, •■ was in tbe last oentmy 
a obamber nteuaiL'' 

Ganrv (theatrical), me who 
"gaga." VidtQAO. Aotorawera 
formerly termed gaggcrt. 

Gaga or {■tberings (Winoheater 
College), a name given to notes 
which the diflerMit. paita of 
Bohoc^ naed to write on the 
woik tiiey had done in the we^ 



:v Google 



GaU — GaBimaufiy. 



Lkmb naed the word tor plee«i 
of mntton fkt UuU mako o&o 
retoh or ohoka 

Gait (Amedoan thiom), Eunner 
of iftfitifig a liviiigt protcuioii, 

GalaiMT or faleny (old cant), a 
fowL From the Italisa p«IUm, 
now nied In the West of ^igUnd 
In the Bente of gninea-fowL A 
gallj-bird in Siumx U a wood- 

Galee (Anglo-Indian), alang for 
bad language. Hindn ffolL In 
BngliBh tSfPT gooUr or giUer 
ia a notse or tumult, and eSUr 
a talking or clatter of Word«. 

Gall (American), plnok, cheek, 
impudence, courage. 

Dmmltf—" Vol know tliu contcmiiiible 



him." i>milr^"Wtll,i>hii(daTou>liinlc 
lHhadth(fiiiVloi]ot<MliL]FT~ Brtmm— 
" M€ bu (b( fU to do uyttiuig." 



Gmllantj-ahow (oonunm), an «!• 
hibitioD In which black Sgarei 
are ihown on a white sheet to 
accompanjdialogaes. Oenerallj 
given at night b; " Fonch and 
Jndj " men (Rotten). From the 
Italian gala»li, fine, often ap- 
plied to small shows. 

GalleiT stroke (sporting), a stroke 
for effect; unlike " playing for 



393 

the gallerj," which has an al> 
most foigottentheatrloal origin. 
A galUrg ilrolce is derlred from 
the fact of so inanj gamea 
being witnessed from gallerlea. 
(CiicketersX a high bit up Into 
the air to take the fanoy of the 



Gallej aUves (printers), vide 
CoKPS. ComposlloTs are termed 
thus from the fact that thelc 
earnings, espeol^T in news- 
paper offices, depend on the 
nmnber of gaUiu done. A man 
to have a good " poll " mnst 
sIoM bard to set np a large 
nomber of ^oAus. Mozon, 1683, 
qootes this term. 



GalleTwest(Ameiioan). Thoogh 
it indicates an opposite diieo- 

Bs "^M>nt east," beinga strong 
superlative, as azpressiTe of 
greatoesa or magnitndet 

I hmn leen Ibc EKUrial $ai the VUlain, 
■nd [he IhibDe-Baciche, anl Wiodior 
Cutlc. ud IdU at Ihue lililc Aag-oaf 
am thm, bnl I'll be durncd if tbii oub- 
liihmnt of TOnn, HuiiH, don't knock uy 



Galli«d (Australian popular), 
frightened. 



nfrj (nantieal), a kind 
of stew made up of scraps of 
various kinds. Probably mean- 
ing the galley acrape (Holtoi). 



:v Google 



394 



GalUniptrs — GaBHfiHoms. 



GaSSaifptn (WMt Indian), * 
boatltnia nuua giren bj tha 
■MgroM to » T«i7 U^« and 
pntinaoloai kind of tnoaqnlto. 
Wltbont a mne Quuhia will 
tender Inforawtlon to tbeeff«at 
that tb«7 are the grandfathen 
of their ipMiea — vetemu In 
praotloe aind cunning. The 
ortglD of the word U obionre, 
exoept, perhapa, the "nip^ng" 
part of it. 

GkUipot (popular), an apothsearj, 
OthsTwiae a " ^itet pipe." 



G«Iloae(n 

rioaa), a Bjing attribvted to an 
Indian, who, on hting rtmtm- 
■tiated wilb fat hU gieat IntaM- 
petanoe on a certain oooatlon, 
replied: "What'iaT^baq^ren 
owAii; emtt" Alio ^ipUed to a 
miUionaire of grand idiaa, who 
thoDgb tingle refuaed to take a 
▼eij large TQla becanee it vea 
too amalL " Fine enoa^— 
what's a ffollat a/ ntm awiai 
mut" mnrmared the wonld-b* 
nllcT. 

Galhqier (anny), an aide-ds-camp. 
He is oontinoallj "on the more," 
ot " on tl» iBok," u Ctoadlani 



GaUinuit, to (oommon), to dance 
altendanoe upon women, to pla; 
the gallant OaUiaait la a got- 
mpUon of gallant, the proceae 
being the same ai in Samival 
from Samuel. AIm to roam 
abontforpleamre. The Italians 
bare «C<ire a juUa, to floatabont, 
be }07oni and baoyant. 
A id« Mag, iait td tH tha compulT 



GalUTate (American), triaUng or 
"Bgoiing" abouL A foim of 
"galliTant." 

Oh, H*r7 lud h littl* lunb, Rfardinf 
Tht tat fXHiior wu vhitt uid kinked 



I LiHic qiudruped liluwiK w» ihcn 

—TUBiU: ni OririHiU Dn/I 
^im Anciimt OUllMti/ JfS. 



Gallom or gaSioM (co 

vulgar word for "yerj," in nae 
In Amerioa and also in Sngland 
nntil It WM alffloat ■npenedad 
by "awfnl," and "dreadfol." 

I'm bud up ftx capiul— IB duft, . . . 
I am grnUnm hwil op be e>|ii>aL— /. 
Gr t rmtHti: Diet Tn^ii. 

In Bogland thla waa originaOj 
appliedto anjpenon orthing Bi- 
tremel; bad, "bad enough," tKj% 
Hotten, "to deeerre hanging." 
In the United Statu only ita 
extreme or anperlatire character 
hae been preserved. TheH^vnch 
slang has jio(fn««,v;.,9a^iM(old 
English), to signify a laaeally 
person ol either sex, an abbre- 
viation of "gibler de potenoe," 
or foUom-bird. 

GaUaptions (popular), delightfoL 



:v Google 



GcMus^-Camngf- 



GaSaB. Va* Oauawb. 

G«Kr alopM (old owl). broaohoB ; 
abbnrlated from "gilllgMklM," 
■, lint worn 1)7 Um Qkllta 
o Wright. 



GaOy jam (nmtloal), * bouing 
■tory. A mUIot ozproMM di«- 
balief by HTliig only y . y. 
(Hotteu). 



(Naotloal), a ywM-bg, » 1mm 
Umb, bat not w bad m to ooAt 
for dn^ (AdBlial Bwj^). 

Gameacaa (oomaoa), iidrit, 
I^Dok, Midimao*. An alBW«t 
raoogDlMd word. 



Gam* pallet (ootnmoii), a vaiy 
TOnDg prortltnU. or a glH who 
bj toVitj and f<»wardn«M ia 
slmoft oortain to beoome ona. 



Gaauy (papnlar), brava, plaoky. 

"YsbIIIhiIhCIih.- "Wdl,"(it«l 

Kr. Bul^, " WM if I >B ; Ibn'i nr 



Galoot, (nantioal), an awkward 
•oldiei, a aotnlqaet for a foniig 
awrliw. Id Ita early Bngllsb 
uae It Mams to b« " an infam- 
otti petsoB," and derited fram 
tbo Italian galealU, a gallej- 
■1bt«. It* meaning u a raw 
marina inrmn to indicate this. 
Applied In America very gene- 
rally aa an abttil*a term, often 
wlthoot any apeolal neanfog. 

" Vau I "* ht cmd, Mriluac the bar vith 
hb fiu, " In killed Iwtolr^m uei up 

«,dMK.niubBrfef,iiKiti«rSrti/»^-( Gaoimon the twelw, to (Awtnt- 
.k-i_> ■*pdum.iib.myn«nr iiM oomrtota' ilang), to daoaiva 



And tbu afala *• had lb* riac. 
or wtdch on poMt OHd IS iinE ; 
Ed thoft imji 'nm a f M m r j thiiVi 

Eb? Kallierl 
— C. H. Sta : Tkt Wiaiam^t Bttt. 

Gammoa aad patter (tUeraa), a 



—DttrwiiJ'nt Fm 



10 jury. 

A muk mrho hu bean tfiad b^ai 
coon and bj a planaiUt dofiaea 
dncad lb* JWT u acquit hiBi or It 



Game (aportlng), " to play the 
poaw" ia to do a thing thoronghly 
or properiy. Alio, lame ; from 
Welah «ai>i, Iriih ^i*, lame. 

Tlw Alii . . . bnlu dam with (ht 
laUiihar. WatrinfiOB bum oat lanih- 
bg, and ma thai Bacon had cot ilw fimi 



—Vam^i MtmMrt. 

Gasunj (tbeatrioal), old, ugly, 
poMA. From the Qaelio poat, 
lame, crooked, orbad. (Tramp*), 
bad, nnfaToniable, fo^ed, an 
Id " gammf •taS," bad itnll; 



:v Google 



J96 



Gammy — Gapes. 



"fmmmf mopniker," > forged 
dgnatnra; "gtmrnf people," 
people «bo «re bofUle to the 
tmnpa. HoUen nf* tlwt the 
hiOTdglTpblo QMd b7 beggan 
or oadgan to inUmate to thaw 
of the tribe oomiug «fter tbat 
tbing* mra not rerj faTonimble, 
is known bj Q or gaanny. A 
ir«H>jr-TUl (vtU<) it m town 
wliere the pcdioa laterfen with 
tiunp* or hkwkets. 

Quap (looietj), a oommon term 
for • monthly nnraa. Derived 
tram Suab 0>mp In " Meitio 
Chnulewit," a monthly anne 
famoni for her pmtj ombrellA 
•nd perpetokl teference to Hra. 
lUnia, a purely imaginary per- 
son, whose opii^D* always oon- 
flrmed hei own. (Common), ao 



Bat 1 HrioiHlT dcdan thit (but wrt d*T 
vtien I found myieLf urud«d unj dcuUta 
in u oot-of-tlH- nT TillnCE, If fin ihilliiifi 
would hare bonfhL wt ibB nuden, mott 
■1Dm[Mironi uid LcaDcr-fhtpod gimtft 1 
nsld hin paid doon tbf iBontT with 
dtUgbC— /. Grt nwtti: Tf, Xmf, 4* 



Gvag, fonl, putrid. From a kit- 
chen expression, aa ffony veni- 
son, that is, like high game. 




Gmi (old cant), mouth. 

Thii bowM u bcttv than nHS-boww, 
II KU th< pm ■ (inlln(. 

^Bma : J mini Cm. 



This is very old sImic, bat 
still in use in America. IVom 
the Italian psassni's, jaw, > jaw- 

Gatider, a married maiL A Tsiy 
(dd English term, bnt etm in Bse 
In Amerioa, where mg^KJer (also 
a "stag") partly means a gaUter- 
ing of men only. Oam dt r-moBth 
in Bngland la the time dnring a 
wife's oonflnement, so called, la 
Batten's opinion, from the free 
range whiob the hnahand haa at 
that time among the "geese." 
It may be remarked In this oon- 
neotion that gtet or gItKtt tn 
Dutch slang means a young 
girl, any gitl; also a laJly of 
pleasure. It it very ^obable 
that there is an nndsroiirTait 
of meaning in reference to 
these slang w&rds in the nnnecy 
rhyme:— 



Gader'a coach (old slang), a 
huidle on which at one time it 
was cnstomary to oonvey crimi- 
nali to the place of tt 






Gape-Med (oa 
to look at, 
meat ; a laiy fellow unmindful 
of hit work ^ said to be looking 
for gape-t€til (Hotten). 

G^pn [popolar), fit of yawning. 



:v Google 



Gapped — Garters. 



I (old dug], gettlDg tho 
wont of it. 7»)m old hunting 



397 

And tb* gtj imd giUuit Gma wx, 
iiiifl«-hukd«d, loft iQ copa 
With the Bna who diveutd tbc 
L.S.D. 

* ibr bifh-pricad gar^t 



ltfd.—Ritkmrim: GrmmJitm. 

0«id«a (London), fot I 
■nd otboa, Corent Qftrden 
Uarkot ; lor acton, Coreat 
Oardeu ThwtM. (ThisTea), to 
"pnt one in the gardeti," to 
ohMt K oonfodaate oat of hii 
BhveL 




—SfttHmgTbmt,. 



r (popnlu), wa awkward 
OOMhouuL "OMoDiSwdncr," 
la a most inmlting Bz|ireaiioa 
from a oalibj to a real coach- 
man (Hotten). The alltuloD ia 
to familiea who emploj the 
fordnwr as ooaohnuui. 

G*rdeti-(ont (old tlang], ex- 
idaiued bj quotation. 

WluB ;«■« ■» by wtwrinc u h 
coaaoaly Uli oat, t« iha pel, vhich, 
by DnwiT oT uHiiBUioa. Umt call Um 
cominoii gardtm f^-~Bmil^ : £rmmia. 

It miut be nid that Corent 
Gaideu had a bad npDtatioD. 
A " gaiden-wbon " was a low 
proatltQte. 

Gargte (oommon), a drink. The 
toim wBi first need bj medical 
atadenta. 

A luilr lamdaaioa lad « diplomuie 
OollwputoftlwiiiCBiiaDiUi. B., 



Gamlah (old slang), a fee exacted 
by the keeper* of gaoU from 
the prisonen for extra oomforta, 
real or Imaglnmy. In TorkaUTe 
thia term means footing money. 

Gamt (common], the head, or 
apper storey. To hare one's 
garret nufarnisbed ia to be • 
fooL 
A) Blm nikd ova tlKB, ud tltiy 

rolled owBlaa, 
While wbu'i aljed the "cUm" Oe* 

Gamter (thierea), a thief who 
gets on Uie roots of booses and 
effects an entrance by a garret 

Garriton back (army], a yoong 
lady broaght up in a garrison 
town, and who, according to 
the definition of an offloer, 
" kuowa all the officers by tbeir 
Christian namea." 

Gunttinc (oardsharpera), cheat- 
ing by oonoealing certain carda 
at the back of the neok (Hotten]. 
The allnalon ia obrions. 

(nantlcal), the irons or 



:v Google 



398 



Gas — Gaudy. 



-n* Pr«c h* *«aU • 



Bt Hr. Hdirr GucoifBi, u iIm bktt 

la wWiiat tiiitiBimt of it, m oaf mod 
■Oaarioiii, 



T» gat la to bonno* or bng ; 
to give gat, to Mold or ^ve b 
bMiting. (Fopokr), " ooiie of 
jooi old gai," do tiot brag, none 
ot TOOT noDMnssL Ot in old 
Fraaob (from LUln gmtiJere), 
idgiiifl«s » joke, mockei7; bat 
then it ftpparentlj no oonnec- 

Gm bag (oDmmoii), 
wordi and wind, 
"To gM" ud "ganlng," aa 
Qsed in Amerioa, mn the eqaiva^ 
laaU of the Franob blaguer and 
bloffut, Oermnn gatAalg. 

Gm plpM (priDtcn), bad rollen. 

Gnwj (oommoD), liable to "flare 
ap"a(anT offence. (Amerleui), 
talkatlTe, bonndng, fnll of wind 
AooordinK to Etoge (ffjnaob- 
giickn Worttrintct drr DtuUekat 
J^pTMAc) the word "gat" wu 
invented bj Van Heluant, the 
•lobTmiat. who died in 1744. 

Gatfr'WU (Oxford UniTenitT), a 
list of the Damee and time of 
ooming Id of tboce who retunt 
to UoUege after ten at oigbk 

Gatfrfue (sporting), a mock race 
got up not M mnch for the best 



V to win, aa tor the moa^ 
taken from the ^eotaton (Hot- 
ten). 

Gater (Wiaoheeter CoDege), a leap 
head lint into a "pot" or canal 



Gate, to (Unirndtj), to pimlah a 
student bj restricting bU free- 
dom of going outside the CoUego 
gateL 

The Dtu (an bioi a book of VinQ ts 
vriu Diu, wid f^ttd biB ht m frwliii|1n 
mAa hMll—T. at^Ut: Ttm ^rvnn mt 

Gatberinr tb« taxei (tailors), 
calling at workabopa when oa 

Gatmc. FhIe Qatk. 

Gats {8brewsbDT7 eobool), qnan- 
titj, number. 

Tlicr ■>« alltd op in pitt of dm* M 



Gatter (popnlar), porter. 

Lw atgrnlUr, qiu' ihi, in Aow^, 
Lnil ac ■ UA is tb> bailr «;. 

—WiiUmm Mafimm. 

It baa been soggested that 
the term ii from a play on 
"gater," meaning gate-keeper 
and porter; or from " gutter, " 
the conduit from which the 
beer Sows in pnblio-faoasea. 

Gandf (Oxford Unirenity and 
Inna of Coort), grand feaat, 
from gmtdnim. Also the annul 
dinner ot the fellows of a col- 
lie in memory of fonndera and 



:v Google 



Gaw/s — Geeeer. 



Cxmb (coatennongon), oheapred- 
■kinned apples. 

Gamtuj (prorinci*!), common 
HDODg tbe lower ordon. It 
mtutB m nwoey or hmlf-witted 



GkWpni (uAntlol), A Btnpid, idle 
fellow ; k " gkwonm " ii a pro- 
vinoiAliim with the wme aigoi- 
Bcation. 

Gmj (oomoioii), looH, diaelp«ted ; 
i>"ffOf womftu " or "gay girl," 
a prostitnto, " All ffojr," wide 



iki-idG.C.^C.ittbti 

nai is ihc cue. — T^rmMt Slmm ; 

GeebniiK (wttiTe word adopted 
b; the lettlara), an AlUtialiMi 

wUd-fmit 

Gee or eeC'-sree (common), » 
horatL From ;<v or ^ tip, to 
torn to the off side. 



G. B. (Amerloan), an abbreTietion 
of "graodboonoa," ie., a rejec- 
tion, dimiafal, or being tamed 
ont, or diiinberited. 
Mr<luluidl 
Han had a ronDd-abcnit, and he hat dii 

B«B (inn tbtC B.oo joai acceunl, 
Ur bt-be-beauiifuir 

—A C*ii/rndmM Ktmtma. 

G. C of C, the (American), the 
Qlorioaa Climate of Callforaia, 
and the Intellect of Booton, are 
mch stock phrase* in the United 
States, that academical writers 
have eoggested the eipediencj 
of redncicg them, like Anno 
Domini, to initials. 



ly miihap, tba plauUr 



(Popular), it won't gtt, it will 
not do. Prom a proTinoialiBm. 

Qtt-git dodge (oommocial), 
selling hone-flesh as animal 
food. 

ngcdtoipeakpUinJraxd wUhoul rcKTV« ; 
and unknomn dih lo lb« olhtr, thtr all 
■(rttd in the auaniK* thai (o Hair 
knawledfc th(/<(-/H dt^ft, a> Ihey called 
it, wai kcldom or eirer practiied by Lbvir 

bcLnf that it was inpowbl* to baffain 
with any one ftw a HfnUr mpplr.— /■ 
Gtmmud: liiUd Mrtttria. 

Geelde (Scottish tbieret), polioe- 



Coiraor D«l aiktd hw wbtn k ma, U 
thichib* rtpUfd, "B«tb*f«Ui.'' K* 
lid not uDdamand this at tha tima, bet 
rom the light vbich ha afUrvajda fat he 
jiew It 10 mean the po1Jcc-olfic&^^tfJ!rM 



Geezer (popular), wife, old woman. 
Dntch Blaug, gtat or gtat. a girl, 
a mistreas, vide Oasdis. Also 
a mMi derisiTel;. 

A mile to hli M /Mifr. 

— /. F. MiielaU: Jim*f JtJuant't 



:v Google 



Geneva — Genuine. 



Geaen print (uatitnl), gin. 



L.yhi 






Gentlenisa of three oata (popnlAr), 
wlthoDt. mone;, without wiue, 
withont Qumnen. 

Gentlenun'scofflpu^on (thievu). 



Gentlemeii tiAatical), tha mwa- 
tDAtea of ths E°i>room or cockpit 
— ••mat«e, midBhipnieii, derki, 
and okd«ta (Admlnl Smjth). 

Gentlemen of obaerntion (turf), 
an DDphemism for ' ' toata. " 



An*qiuUf unBjbiaofdK "Igmnc" 
rnttniiy, ud ibc ncht oT ii *■— »lhw of 
ihcH rrniltmnt afiturvmluit, u iIkt an 
more poliuljr called, Bndcr llw Rw el the 
" LinukiLiu," u oh dCiIk nu 



Gent (popular), • oontnctioD of 
gentleman, gSDendl; applied to 
a dr«ss7 fellow. OriKinated 
abODt 1847 from tailon' adver- 
UsementB. The gtnt was the 
'Any of that time. 
Lul lommer to BHf blon innt«d, 
MrAwHteonavuillwuit, 



(Old cant), mone; ; from ar- 
gent. 

Gentleman commoner (Oxford 
UniverHitj), t, stndeut who psja 
higher feet and dioea with the 
fellows of the ooU^e^ At Cam- 
bridge the phrase ia a " fellow 



GenUemen of the creen faMwe 
rOMl (gWDlcg), plonderen at the 
caid table, ahaipers (Dicksna* 
"Bleak House"); baaednponthe 
familiar phrase, "knighte of tha 
raed,"t.(., highwajmeni hence 
gaOleaten nf At gntn baixe rand 
is eqniTBlent to abeatiug gam- 
blers, OT sharpers — cards, d]c«^ 
and similar garoea being gme- 
rally plajed apoD tablea ooTered 
with green balie. 

Gentle, to (American, Waateni), 
to tame hoisea after the halter 
breakiDg, or rongh breaking in 



the coTTsli tfi gtni/t a 



GentiT core (oantiog), a gentle- 



Oh, if BIT handi adket ta aob. 
My gliiTa m at lew deu. 
Add nnlT hive the tuttryjinh 

—Lf!l*n: PMMlCliftrd. 

Gently mort (old cant), a ladr. 

Gemiifie, to (Winchester College], 
topraiae. 



:v Google 



Ceordie — Gerund-grinder. 



Gcordle [naatlo*]), » north coimtij 
ooUiu. 

Goot^B Home (prlntan), ft com- 
mon ezclamAtionuiiong printen 
to a penou who tella aome old 
s(oi7 M if it were new. 

Geocge t ow M Tdper, the {Ameri- 
oaa), njune of t. mTthical or 
imaginary nswipaper invantad 
t^ ftu editor when he wishes 
to pnblish origlnkl matter m 
bonowod. The name is only 
giren in Uloetration, any other 
may be snbetltnted. 

Qfiai^l»lJiier,rtsttctfally—"'fon- 
mu Hri « used half ■ column non if 

E£iar—"T<A\ him u oka Ihil utkls 
V* hAd OD Blainc'i vpeech dfty bdbn 70- 
Ivdlir, bicinnSng, 'ThefollovinEKUliiDC 
nvHwof Jin BUina'i late ibmin effort 
froB ths Jmtittirr Ttmr u to Uliutn- 

hiacua, wiih tha dumoI' ihc dnxn^iav 
F(4I^ iucncd in plm of tlu other 

Gcorgic (Eton), to Older a bo; 
to do a gtorgie m* a faroDrlte 
ponlahRiBnt with irat* Eton 
maotaia. It oonslsted in writ- 
ing ontabootSoolinea of I*tln, 
an operation wUcb took at 
leaat thna boon for the fastest 

Tfacq h* pollad hinielf Logetbtr, dathcd 
into iba houe asd upiuin, iriun b« 
(aoad Palmar Biuld, a fallow id infiiuie 
|aat aDd aoma durinc 

gmrrfie, juhI tbeo Biifhl for hit ffmmin 



ki (popular), bt^; 
otherwiw knows aa B Bats, in 
oppodtiooto FsliBipa, %.*., fieai. 

GenuMi Antes (rhyming alang), a 
pall of boots. 

Gerauun (common), saoMgea. 



aU of them employed at diScrcot nuuia- 
factoriei of gtrmmiu, '^collated head,'' 
and '* tfoaii hecf." chiefly for ispptruiff 
tfaoft iLEoaEad ID tha pooteit and Dual 
dcualy populated neif hbouriwoda — ai far 
ml 1 can make out there ia at pnaant no 
danger that our fcliAe pets will fo hunfiT 
bcciuH ti tha i^oLaal* coB*azwa of 
their faTHrita food Into lauafea. — /. 
Grmmmttd: Vtiltd Mjtttrkt. 

GcfTj (old oant). C. J. B. Tomei 
tnuuUtei thia m exorement, 
and deilTes it from the Latin 
gtrm, trifles, stuff, nonsense. 
It also ooDors in eaot a« jttr, In 
which case it i* shnply the 
gypsy j«r, jlr, the rectum, abo 
ezoiement, though /oJ is the 
common word for the latter. 
Where it occon aa itre, Hr. 
Tonei derivea it from the Gaelic 
wuirir, dtmg, whkh ia baldly ao 



Geny san (old cant), incidentally, 
hold yonr tongue. Literally, 

■ In your month. Modern 

Faridans wiU aay, "Tais to 
gnenle on ]'te o dedana." 

Cfn^rn, ilia nSan cl>« Ihea. 



:v Google 



402 Gtt—Ga set. 

Get agBioSt tha gune, to (Am*- "Yaai«,ai,"lwBrlwBad,''ilia>Bn 

Tkaui), • term boriowod from ?• ^ !* ^^J^^^^J^ "^ 

. " , , , en YoiBc ; lAs kuwi bat rtu ■!■■ of 

pOKer, bat In seuanl bM to -cgiBichiiikaiiiDtaibnclnditefTfaf 
(jgni^ taking riiks tn a&jthing. him.'— .4. C. Cm/. 



G«t ft grind on aaj otw, to 

(AmerioMi), to luve * joke on 
ft man, to i^j a trick, or to 
have " a good itorj " to tell 
against him, it being a popnlai 
btOief that •nything which 
aoDOT*, p>in(. or Texea a penou 
ia "wnart," or witty. 

Get ft tatt, to (ctleketen), to bowl 
three wickets in three consecn- 
tive b«U« ; originallj one was 
inppoeed to be pieaented with 
a new oocked bai when he bad 
achiered the feat. 

Get a Mt on, to [Amtnlian popn- 
lar), to have a spite si^mlnst. 
This is a wiaUon of the Bngliah 
" to make • dead-tet against." 

Get Bt, to (racing), to pat kort-de 
(oMioi, to compt. 'Oettlog 
at" meant originally getting 
access to a horse to injnie it, 
bnt It ha* also been transferred 
to those connected with the 
hone, the owner, the trainer, 
the lockej, the veterinary snr- 
geoD. Applied to them it meant 
the same as "get ronud," or 
"square," t.&, to oormpt into 
not nnning the horse fairly. 
Yroia ihia it has been applied to 
any kind of ooimptioi). For in- 
staoce rabid Tories have aocosed 
Ur. Gladstone of baviog been 
getaihj tbe IrUh Americana. 



Get tnnj (American), a kwo- 
motlve, called in BngUsli pap«- 
lar slang a "puffer." Also » 
railway train. 




Get off a keen, to (American 
cadet), to make a witty remark. 

Get one cold, to (Amariean). to 
have > man at advantage, to 
"beet him," to "have him dead 
to rights." To pin a man down, 
or to catoh him- To get one 
ton! (HS. Americanisms). 

Get-pemv (old slang), a paying 
speculation. It occurs in Eirk- 
man's " Wits or Sports upon 
Sports "(1673). 

Get set, to (cricket), to bc^ to 
play well, when the batsman ie 

" getting his eye in." 



:v Google 



Get—Gettit^. 



Get the lencOi of one's foot, to 
{pc^nlw), to nndttstand how to 
nutnage a parson. 

G«t tlw mitten, to (American 
UniveiRtiea), to be expelled 
bomooU^o. 

(Popolar), to be diacuded or 
jUted. 



Get the needle, to (cards), to lose 
maoh money at a game. (Com- 
mon), to get angry. 

And bucy ti^ nlwiB bring tuJe, Charlie 1 
Gaa mr llu mtiOr, thit da 

ind mil Dp lh« old ind the mw 1 
Bat if Ihc Sl Juko'a loung fCDllemiin 

I'll "lUnff" him for flftss aJ] round, him 
whine puter fuB hilt 'im to par. 

-Ptmti. 

Get there, to (Amerioan), to anc- 
ceed. A charaoteristiQ Ameri- 
can flzpreasion reiy freely used 
in coDTersatiOD. "The specn- 
Ution book'i rather «moky — but 
I'll get Iherr," means that tboogb 
the TODtnie is an[m>Diising at 
preeent It will prove profitable 
in the end. 

Get there with both feet, to 
(West American slang], to be 
yery loccessfuL 

Hv said aa ba'd bcvD gainbUr 
Iwo huodnd dollan ahead of 



Get the run, to (English and Ads- 
tralian), to be discharged. 

Get the sack or hec, to (common), 
to be discharged. As the "bag- 
man " is the traveller of the firm, 
very possibly logttllu bag means 
to be sent on one's travels. Qf. 
"get the sack," "get the ran." 
Compare also Oerman "einen 
korb bebommen, " toget a basket, 
to 1m dismissed. 
" Do ran know u whan 

ing t" replied tha Govenwi 

look an the illnitrioua pan 
of pcnuuion to gal ihe mi 



" No, ai 



Gettiiq; an'encore (l«ilora), hav- 
ing to rectify sometiiiDg wrong 
with yoor job. 

Gctticv into his wool, wooling: 
him (American), beating % 
■nan, assaolting him violently. 
A simile borrowed from the 
negroes, who in fighting attack 
the head and pnll the hair. 



Gettiiv <■" (torf), backing a horse 
for any particular race. The 
term nsoally Implies a more or 
leu hurried operation. 

Getting out {racing). laying 
against a horse previously 



:v Google 



Cfttmg — Ghaut. 



backed. Thia i« almait invari- my t*t^. !■« 

»bly done In hMt«. though per- h« iii&«««l ■« ih" «- <lid «« 






B often repented 
01 M leUnre thui ve moM 
■peoolatioiw. 



Get Dp and ifaut (American), ariaa 
„ . . , . , mud deput ; the tdeft beios that 

Getting tbo lensth of hii foot anian oTa bome ™««7d»rt 

(taUon), knowing what u pre- «» he goe* on the road. 

ferred, and acting aocotdlngl j. 

Vide 



Getting jonr band on him 
(tailors), not tnuting him, nia- 
pi^ni. 

Gel, to (American), to depArt 
battily. It ia genenll; in the 
form " yon jet/" i«., "b^one." 
TItare la alao an ezpreoiion, 
" yoQ bet I " meaning that yon 
may bet on it, or be rare of the 
matter in qneation. 



Iht viDdaw. BUI ht stubbed hii gun uhI 
drew m bend oo tbt bar^, nying, "Voa 
fttV Tba bars looked up. Asd kcuis 
ib( iron. nplM, " You bH," lod nxmoi. 
~7kt rmlf/BiUShmttr. 

Get-np (eommoDt, dresa, pure and 
■lm^«^ or dreta with mailed 
intention in, or mode of dresa- 
ing. To ^ Hfi well ia to be 
perfaotly diecaed. 
The Empren of AuMria 



Get Op one'a I^jmi, to (Ameri- 
can). When a man fe^ hia 
temper rising with a certain 
amount of determined ferocity 
he ia aald to fee] the Indian 
rialng in him. 

G. H. (printeii), aee Btisbo. 
These initial letteta owe tbeir 
origin to a oeitain Hr. Geoigo 
Home, a typographer, wlio waa 
in the habit of retailing atale 
newt. If a workman repeata a 
atory already known, an iiiti* 
maUon to hold bia tongne it con- 
veyed by nttering the omlnona 
letten Q. H. 

Ghutty (looiety). the oonunoneet 
emphatic woid of the day, dg- 
nifying bad, awful. 

GhMSt (Anglo-Indian), a landing- 
place, or path of deaoent to a 



honlisg wilboM her bn, the only Ihing 


"""■ 


Ihu teemed nmiie u Enclbh ere. ia ■ 




very perfect couunie lad /(<-■/.— 74^ 


tUml. 


WHd. 


And rron iti rool-hilli nolT l"Mb 


Theny in which he received ByciWI 


there be. 



—Bmritm: TrmmUmqHt^fCmimm. 



:v Google 



Ghee (Anglo-Iiidlaii), boiled bat- 
ter ; DMd in oookiiig tbroogh all 
India. 

" In most of the prigoni of 
H;^«T Ali It wss the custom 
(of Bnropeui prlEODers) to cele- 
bnto particolM da]«, when the 
f nnda permitted, with the loznrj 
of plantain fritt«n (tried b«ii- 
■itM), k dranght of iherbet, and 
a conTirlal aoog. On one occa- 
sion the old Scotch ballad " Uj 
wife baa ta'en tlia gte" was 
admiiablj siing and loodl; en- 
cored. It was reported to the 
Eelledar (oonunander of the 
fort) that the piiBooers said 
and rang throngh all the night 
of nothing bnt ghee. The Eelle- 
dar, oeittun that ditcovertea 
had been made regarding his 
malversation* in that aitlcle 
of garrison stores, determined 
to conciliate their seorscj by 
causing an abondant supply cf 
this nnaocnstomed Inznrj to 
be henoeforth placed within 
the r«Boh of their tarthing 
pnrohMM" (Wilkes' Historical 
Sketcbea, Anglo-Indian Qlos- 
"ry). 

Ghoit-racket (Amerioan), anj 
erent or namtire into which 
the spiritual or ghoetly element 



jfiouls. 40; 

Ghost mlUtv (theatrical), a term 
originally aptJied by an impe- 
conlons stroller in a sharing 
company to the operation of 
" holding the trcaanry," or 
paying the lalaries, which has 
become a stock taoetin amongst 
all kinds and descriptions of 
actors. Instead of Inquiring 
whether the treasury is open, 
they usually say — "Has the 
ghoil walked I " or " What I baa 
this thing appeared again t" 
(Shakspeaie). 
A no pl«r 

been pnduccd 
■ likely r 




Bordcnr. — Ckiem^ 71 

W« hSTa hid [h( (ilkB 
hen in oar town 1b*l jm r 
-tKuUV«M (/^L} Sat*'- 



(Commercial), In lai^ firms, 
when the clerk whose doty it 
is goes round ttie various de- 
partments paying wag««, it la 
common to my the gho^ «aU*. 

Ghonla (American], prying and 
apjing reporters for newspi^en 
who chronicle the meanest 
gossip of private life. The term 
originated In the " gbonlisb 
glee" of Prealdent Cleveland. 
The word yAoul is a great 
favourite with American news- 
paper writers, and is used in 
every gmnimatical form, as to 
ghoid, gkotiUr, gheuletl, and 
0lu>dtlle, a female ghonl, eepe- 
dally a blaokmail-levying pros- 
titate. 

TIm (Awb ^B Rportod thM Hn. 



:v Google 



406 



Ghoulish — Gigger. 



but Lkktd H« 



Tha/iUwEi wba hmint Hr. amluid in 
not onGHd (o the RipiiUiaii ptrn. Fu 
riDBiL A/Am/of ilicWuhintlao/'Hf 
npsntd Ibu Ihc ki of Hector had been 

ood, ukd hit (her) na] kx jdH 



Ghonliih ^tt (Americui], an «z- 
pTMsloD first nsed by President 
CleToUnd, which immadiatelr 
became a popular catcb-word. 
It may be obeerred that io the 
foUowiiig paiagiapb theie is a 
■lang ezpreBiioD In efery mu- 



Gib face (popolar), a heav?, ogly 
face. To " hang one'a gA" to 
pout the lover lip. Q\b u pro- 
perly the lower lip of a bone, 
or a bump or swelling. 

Gldeon'a band (American), a alang 
term for good-f^owehip, aeao- 
oiation, anicui for oaroueicg, ftc 
Tfae term oomee from a negro 
minstiel aong, the air and MniiA 
of the worda of which wei« 
originallj of a camp-meetjng or 
Uethodiet bTDiD. 
Oh, ke^ TOOT hat iipMi four btad. 



Some newfiaper with gk^miuk^H n- 
nurki Ihat the Pretideat UDdcftook to 
pull down hu VoB, bol Ihu Vat pnlln] 
hin down. It U cauin that be iqDUtcd. 



G. I. (printera), "genei^ indal- 
genoe," i.e., a birthday, holiday 
treat, and ie also the festive 
oooaaion when ao apprentice 
"oomea of his time," an eveiit 
signalised by mnob noise, and 
Qsnally followed by bread and 
obeeee and beer. Sometimes 
the words " great independ- 
ence " are attributed to theee 
letters on snob an occasion, 
•peoially referring to tfae iude- 
pendoice gained by the ap- 
pnnUee. 

Gib (prison and army), slang tor 
(^broltar, to which' transporta- 
tion ceased In 1875. (Nautical), 
aforelook 



re huuiat fbr a hoBe. 



Oh.ke.pToo' 
Th«t,wim.T 


hug 


■«.«•> the tcld« 


Ifi pienj Dcu 

irroobi 


dotVl 


i«aiTib»k 

(Ot.ta.driBk, 



Gift-hotiae (i^inteis), a house of 
calL Compositot* have their 
"gifts" also, or clnbe — a limited 
number of members being ad- 
mitted only, and their objects 
being to find employment or to 
provide for non-employment in 
tfae shape of a provident allow- 



G^ (pcpular), a futtdng, the 



Ciggcr (t^Ion), sewing-machine ; 
from " to gig," to make a 



, Google 



Gig-latttps — Ginger. 



407 



Gv-kmiw (oommon), spectaelae. 

A person irho weuv ■peoteclBs 

la Rometimea called gi^-taaip*. 

He hid dWHB bii Triad VcnUnI to be 

hiiptomptcr; lollullhe well'tnown /ijf 

lam/i el am htto formed, ■• it were, 11 

»WT focn" of utuoiMi.— C. BtJt: ytr. 



GUla (popnlu), the jawi, the &oe ; 
to ^ve a "bug in the gtiU," 
to rtilke one in the fao& Also 
a high or laige thirt oollar. 

Gilt (popolu), mone; ; from the 
QtiaaKLgM,TiaUAigdt. Ondu, 
in French ehopmen'i auistants' 
■laog, is the percentage allowed 
them on the rale. Sbakapeere 
baa punned on the word gilt. 

Hun for ibe/>7f of Piucc, 
Ocoili iodwdl 

(Thierw), • orowbar. 

GItt-cdged <Am«grioBa), aa Om best 
note-paper waa onoe slwaTayi^ 
tJgid, the tcnn paased to the 
Stock Bzehange to denote the 
paper or piomiaBory notei of 
the Sret olaaa, oo which there 
oonld ba DO riak. Henoe the 
eqtreaaion became general for 
anjthing eaperiatiTe. 



; "bu fat B 

o pkj the f 
>r UTwhcn tlie when Ton, Dick, and 
Htrrj UT uke ■ iaai.'—CAIcmiw Tri- 



Gilt<tiA (ooatomonger), monej 
'd by gold ooina. 



dmcrack (proTincial), a handj 
man, a nniveraal mechanio or 
Jackofalltradea. Inthiaaenae 
oommon In Northamptonihir& 
(Popular), a spmce peiaoo. 

Ciiiilet-«7ed (common), with very 
amall OTes. A oorreapoiidliig 
bat coarse expreasion in Fraucb 
■lang is " dea yeox en tron de 
pine." 



Gin and Goapd Gax«tte {^ota- 
nall5tic),7^lramHv^'t««rtaer. 
80 called from the fact of ita 
haTing lor a long period, In the 
earlj days of Ita extatenoe, de- 
voted a portion of Ita apace to 
the annooncementa of ita parti- 
oolar AiaiUU, and another to 
advertiEementa of works on theo- 
logj, and notices of t»eacheta at 
London Ghorche* and oh^)elB. 

Gingrer (tbeatrioal), an idiom de- 
riTed from the Tooabolar; ot 
the stablea. If an actor pli^ a 
part tamely, or ineSectlTdT, it 
is a common phrase to say ■• he 
wantBTi^cr." (Popalar),aman 
with red, yellow, or yellow- 
brownish-red hair. 

The mui thu 1 kmd n> u lair lu 






The Dun Ihu I auried'm 

TheiBMIthuIIOTediiwdaltcmiaataiiie, 
TIk nun ihu I Durritd ut ree]ii«i doih 

—T. C. LtmU: Tii Mum I Ltatd 
mmJ lit Umm I M^rrM. 



:v Google 



Gtngerbnad — Gm 



A giugtt, m ibowj, tut bona 
From a waltkncnni pnetiot of 



V (AusriQu), "woik- 

1 (common), a di*- Ing thingm ap," working bud 

p*ngl£g ap»tb«t tor too sbow^ mud tatageHcallj at uijUiiiic. 

■dommoit of UtiolM of ftmii- tU ApKfaa wn o« is tot bd-M 

tore, Mcttitectore, ko. laa tbunit^tonocvmalltift^ 

Tb» iiiiiiB an KB ■ulL ml too mcb '" ''*™ '*"' ■"■*■ *^ ''■^ "" 

- ^^ '■ - *" •■* -Hi inku>( ihiiisi m 






~fi. Fnt 



■ bit li.^. 



The FVeocb om tbe t«im " en "^^ ar)^ i* Irraii woiUng U 

pain d'4pic«" wjth a like rigid- *■ •'cttan sin. 

irM<i work," profoily ir^ ^^^IJIf^ "':^!]!;?**"' ^ 

deoomtion.oraBUp. (Thiew.), ««» F«oJlt oJ>«Fed topronde 

j,,^,,^^^ »" ^ " tho"glM«of«mrthingdMrt" 

„ o« d^ h«. *. ,^,„*™^.- W«egoinghoma 



ffiager-winp lAmerioan), b hot- 
tempered peraon, [articnlM'l; 
one with yellowlah or gioger- 
colonred hair. k. g imgtr-miiaf 
is al*o a nrj hard ginger 
blaooit. 

Ha (u* im cormd vltb Nan iDd ma, 
ud bv Utile fid nided htc apton is dab- 



of gin (HottenV 

Gip (thisre*), a thief, abbmiated 
fcom gjpe;. 

Gip^ (jonmallstio), a^daiiMd 
b; quotation. 

ColoKl Kibifaw. nU pnlMblT Mkk » 
bit ari(is>l intotioo of hanaf g^ ^^ 
/«j (u lh*» an lb. E(7ptiu Bldkn 
bcR) u Sukio.— TXr V'anbL 



Glngluun (oommcm], an ombrella. 
Hi mi on* of Ik* (nat unpaid and idf- 
alccled flock cf bypocrilca jdepi evviffe- 
liiB, and, with a f^Av'ajn in one bud and 
a bondk of tncu in tht other, ha aMfRd 
npaitDHOt.— An^*' Fru- 



U,toU 



••ru 



cme,"! 

gim It jron ; " in n«nah, ■' 
Tail t'eu donner ; " Italian, " To 
Ti lo dank," (American), <■ 
giat ii Bzteasird7 nsad to fcam 
aotive nrba of eztmnelj nriad 
fonna. "TsftetmUMmak^" 
to be olew at [oollting; " A 
fw on praTing," to ami In 
ptvjta. With certain pereona it 
i* naad ai traqnentljr ai 'Cx." 



:v Google 



Gbe «imr, to (Am«ri0Bn), to 
iiiftdTert«nti7 betn; or Injim 
ooe'a Bell. The duui who through 
forgettnlneas or maladroitDeas 
"Iflta ont " that he himself hai 
b«eD gnUt^ of something which 
he bad previoiul; condemned 
giTw himself amj ooiupica- 
Oiulj. Also to oommmiiaate a 
thing or to TlolBt« oonfldenea. 
It i« nid of a Yankee damsel 
in a nniverstty town that she 
once expressed great horror at 
the eoDdnot of certain girls with 
the students. " I was going," 
she s^d, " b; the College early 
the other motnlng, when I saw 
a great basket being let down 
with a yonng lady in it." Here 
the tale was intermpted, and 
when it was reenmed the fair 
narrator fo^fetfolly added — 
"Oh, yes I wasn't it awfnlT 
JQSt when aboDt ten feet from 
the ground the rope broke— 
and down 1 came 1 " " There 
yon gam yatrtilf avaf," re- 
marked a hearer. The expres- 
sion oame Into oommon nae about 
1868. In its original meaning 
tt wa« limited to fnadTertent 
betrayal. It Is now vagoely 



Give « wd^it, to (streetX to 
help a pcnoD in liftbig a heavy 



Bnl ■ft*r > dac I fsw Um tnt (left 
UnlbtcauM be OMd umol lo biu mr 



To gift lut means originally 
to acknowledge, and thns passes 
easily to mean U>e natural corol- 
lary of a oontesslon of Inferior- 
ity, relinquishing or submitting. 
Also used in Australia. 
AasrdiDilT after pobliaiien oa Fiidxy 
fit wu ■ bi-naklr v-V- ''i* ilcfiinn 
Flamt Crak Ckmuclti wa "ituhed 



Give 'em Jeade, a party wai-ory 
widely current In the Predden- 
Ual Campaign of 185& Fre- 
mont, the Republican candidate, 
had flftoen years before made 
a runaway match with Jessie, 
daughter of Thomas H. Benton, 
and the popular favour with 
whioh runaway malohea are apt 
to be regarded was made much 
ot in this case, the lady's name 
being freely need in song and 
story by her husband's political 
supporters. It wai^ however, 
in oommon nse a oentnry before 
Jessie Fremont was bom. It 
is probably an aliusion to the 
" rod of Jesse " in the Old 
Testament. 

Gift iim « cbaoce for Us wUto 
aUxj {Ametioan}, let him have 
a last ahanoe for, a forlorn hope, 
a fluke, give the man one more 
trial. A flgnre borrowed from 
the boys' game of marble*. 



Give tt a bom <oon)mon), "stop 
it," or " that'a atale." The 
metaphor la, of ooima, that of 
giving a dog a bone to atop his 



:v Google 



Glva It to (old out), to rob ; "I 
foM it to him for bia TMuler," I 
■tola hi* pookat-book. 

Give ^7-liich, to (Amtralimn and 
popular), to blow op, to toold in 
the mott immodente fMhion. 
The metaphor is from " blow- 
ing np" — Bometimes simplj "to 
■kj-Ugh"iB oMd. 

Give the colkr, to (Ameiidui), to 



Glasgow mapitnto, a mlt her- 
ring. When Goorge IT. lioted 
SootUad a wag placed eome 
salt hening* on the iron goaid 
of the oarriage belonging to a 
weU-known Glasgow magiatnt*, 
who made one of a deputation 
to reoeive bU Hajartj (Hottest. 

G1«M (thierea), an hour. 

G1«M work (oardshaipere). ex- 
plained by qaotation. 
"WhuoacuthtiffiBMVfiir- 



thtllK lo Ihe lowtt ccraB qf tin Uft ftlm, 
oppcKilc Ibc ihamli, mud nflios tbeoidi 
H dealt. Gamblm (cncimllT bwIc ibia 
by bu)dii| ihoH Knli lilvxrcd (tan (loba 



Give Ow word, to (theatrical), to 
prompt* 

Give M a mb of jour tfattmb 
(tallon), show me how jon do it. 

Giving ont (theatrical), annoaoo- 
iog in front of tbo oortain the 
performancei for the following 
evening — genetally done by the 
JnTonile Han, eometlmee the 
Ifanager, and very often by the 
Walking Oent, if ho is young 
and a tavoorite with the fair BOX. 

Giving: yoa « boU (tailors), doing 



DOW. uid i^djiT a mui mna bi 
c It iquwv jMck of canU uid d 
rk wilhoat ap 



Gksc (popular), glaa; "to stai 
the glatt," to break a window 
pane. Olam for glaM i« old 
KJP«r- 

GIftxiera (thiaret), the eyoa. 
(Anglo-Norman), gjoi, bright or 
bloo, allied to glao. 

ToonoHl with jnir/itai&n, I wmmt by 

iba niffio 
Tbu n m uunllol b]r ■ qcica cnSa. 

/.t., " Look out witb all jvar ejn, I 

le (common), naed to de- —— -»■ 

not* cheap olaret, from the olr- GKb (popular), tongae; "slacken 
onmstaooe that Mr. Qladstone jronrfltUi' 



:v Google 



andnadjofapMOh. VidtQAa. 
Glim (popular uid thIeTes), an 

Hanld t»c*p«l wiib tht loa of ■ r^im. 
-InfUOr LtgimJt. 

Jk Uffht Of fam^lft 

•■ DoDt wMkM nch « nw,- nM Sim. 
boliina tbt door. " Sbaw tgHim, Toby." 
—Ckmla Dkitmi: OUrtr Tmbt. 

"Doom the fftiM," blow tho 
candle out. (Nautical), ^{mu, 
■peotaolea. {Oommon), the^iM, 
gonorrhea. 

Glindadij (popular), angir- 



GUn loifc (be^iog-letter wrlten), 
a bagging petition giTing an 
aoconal of a Ore in wbioh eome 
retatlTe of the impostor is H^d 
to bare pariabed or been injured. 
A common dodge, bj wUoh 
the writer of tbia was onoe 
"taken In." 

GlmmKfinc mortc (old oant), a 
woman who solioited alma under 
tbe pretmce that abe bad lost 
all ber propert; bj fire. 

Globe raacefs (uaatloaJ), ■ lobri- 
qoet for the Bojal Haiinea. 



Globe-tfotten (oommon}, tra*el- 
len who have gone round the 



bcinfi that tbcr pl*r v 



gccoUric aditororiha JVm Ytrk T 
uil SBC* cwdbUu Am- llM F 
iha Uuiad SmiM, km (oo* lb* nondi of 
lb« Sntfiifa world'i prcH.— A. £. Wit- 
liami ! In tki Wild Wat. 

Glepft, tar (Wluoheater Collage), 
toaptt. 

Glorioos (popular), lutoiloat*d. 

dofT-Hole (popular), tbe ball for 
worship uaed b; mambera of tba 
Salvation Annj. So called ori- 
ginally from a cellar or uoder- 
gronnd place of meeting in 
Brighton. 

TlwH bouy-hBdad boSn 
And dciril^lodfiDf dnfln, 
Al tlH GUrrHfk in T«Ut SOM iIkt 



■ronCD and rounf girb 



WkcB ibiT >M Umv b Uh^ da or 
-BnmJiid, : Jlu Bri^Utn Gitty- 



Gtoret (ladng), "going for tba 
SfMo," betting with otter dla- 
legard to means of parment. 
The maxim laid down \sj Mon- 
trose that — 

*' EI4 other fcwi hu bte too mndi, 
Or hii Jmrti an oull, 
WhafcanlapUh 10 lb* isiich, 

may embody a sound pdicj in 
lOTB aSaiis, bat ia not to be 
commended to tbe (nrt apecn- 



m bull if be wu vel 



id. AlHOS lb( 



, Google 



»■!*■. wddw, =f MIT ««.AV>' 
au^—a, ind tka ni the (km Ihiiv u 
b* uid in ttmia of (!■ IJMi Ihu uc u>* 
■one far cnr.~%S>n«tv Tiiwi. 

Gkm tridc (Americui thieret), 
• *>riet7 of whM u knows in 
Fkrii u the "Tol k I'Am^- 
caine," or the taking in ■ din- 
bonett penon in mch % wttj 
u to make the " Tictim " think 
he ii cheating the one who is 
the master-thief, 

" The incceu of this game is 
dependent oa tba latent dis- 
honesty of the Ticttnu. The 
propertiei consist of a hand- 
some kid glove and a cheap ring 
with a stone In it The ring is 
stock in a Buger of the glove MRS 
to be most oonspicnons, and the 
two are dropped at the feet of a 
wonum as ibe is walking in the 
•treat. ' I beg yonr pardon,' 
the "crook" eiclMma, •joa'v* 
dropped yonr glover The 
woman would took at ft, per- 
ceive that there was a ring In 
it, and it she were dishonest 
would claim it. Then the crook 
woulddemnr. 'Uaybetbeglove 
did not belong to the lady-^ 
and now he noticed It, there 
was a ring In iti ■ The woman, 
five times ont of ten— for the 
thief leads faces easily— wonid 
say, 'I'm nire ifg mine— hut 
hare is something for yoorself 
and wonld give him five dollars 
for what she believed was a 
valuable solitaire " (PkOadtlBkia 
Prtn). 

Ghm (tailors), ashamed ; derived 
tfonhtless from the warm " tint " 



Gfae-pot (old cant), a clogy. 
man, becaose be joined moi and 
women in the bonds of matii- 
mony, glued or oemented them 

GtanqMh (popolar], sulky. 

Ghttteo (pugilistic), a hard l^htcr, 
one who never seems to have 
had enough fighting. 

Go (gtnerel), impetos, eneigy, 
spirit, vigonr, sttength of pnr- 
poee, a proceeding. This ori- 
gioally slang word has eMab- 
lished itself in the language by 
dint of general osefnUiesa and 
eipressivenesa. Its vulgar off- 
shoot " ^ it " is not likely to be 
equally sucoessfnl. 

Siai, (tIho <n cm to Victorv, tbaath 
liH air of inlcnt tacrgr and fr )w 
noiibcd. ibm i, tonabiat lUi ipiiali 
man xrongtj to Ihc Eofluh nJniL — 



7^ flrugv Q 



Uk bald ridJBf. 

oiuk* ikcbiil- 
iB ucidii( ihu 



lUnt llnv ana oT Ihe n 
LoDdgntn hare ns 
Mmkl} Afapitim. 

" A mm ju," a strange affair ; 
"• great ga." a remarkable or 
impottant affair; "all the go" 
much in vogue; "no go," im- 
possible ; *■ a pretty go," a 
Ironble, unfortunate drcnm- 
stance, scrape. 

(Turf), an owner or jockey are 
equ^ly said to be having or not 
having a ga, aeoording to theit 



:v Google 



■ ap po— d intanttotv with npud 
to ■ noe. Tbo hoiw, tboDgh 
Implioatad In tha ImiMotlon 
oa\j u a mon'or 1ms pMdve In- 
•tntment, is aljo thns Bpokeo of. 
(PopaUr), A 00, adriLk; teimed 
fonnerlj a ^o-dowa. 

So tbtf not on utking politio. paSnf 
ctfun, aod nppiog iHiiiLy and vrUcr, tmtil 

bolb paat.—SiiietfM fy Bn. 



Go and Uk a ball (Americui), 
a oomnuH) expnaaiaii which U 
Terr obanctwiatio of a peoplB 
u fauniiiar with lectures and 
pahlio diacntsioas as the Ame- 
ricana. It is addressed to a bore 
who talks a long time, or alware 
on some special sabjecb Such 
people who insist on delivcsiDg 



imptomptn laotiirM ate told to 



. Ltlmmd Harritta : MS. CMk- 
Htn if Amtrlaadimt—l/ffn 



Go abroad, to (popalar and 
thleres). formerly signified to 
bo transported. 

Tb* Anfol Dodis t*"f '^'oh 



Gottds (American), Peter Funks 
(which see). "Coppers" In 
gu&hling houMB. 

Go along (popnlar and thleres], 
> fool, also " go alonger.'" 

Go and boat jonnelf (roughs), 
eqaivalent to " joQ be Mowed ; " 



best dress. 

Go •• jon piMoe (athlstaa), a 
race in whloh tha oompetitora 
maj mn, walk, or rest aa Vbxj 
Dsoall; applied to the 
six days' " wobbles." 

Goatee (Americui), the peonliai 
kind of toft of hidr on the cbiD 
wom b; Americans and Irish 
Yankees. So called from It* 
BimUsnty to a goat's beard. In 
French slang ima, i.&, he-goat. 

GoBter (Ameriosa), drees. 

Gob (popnlar), a prorinoialism, 
but chiefly used bj sltuigy per- 
sons, the month ; a "spank on 
the fot," a blow on the month. 
SsllTa or mncDs. Q<i> Is often 
used for "gab" in the phrase, 
" gift of the jA." From the 
Gadlo gab, month. 

Go bock opoo, to (American), a 
very onrioos phrase, eqniTalent 
to betray in an nnexpeoted man- 
nor, but which has a certain re- 
finement of B{^UG«tioa which is 



:v Google 



dUBonlt to deMilb«. In mo«t 
cues it Intimates that the be- 
tnyer hM been a trusted friend, 
and that ingratitade form* m 
part of the description. In the 
"Breitmann Ballads" ve are 
told o( a candidate who bad lost 
tlie enUie vote of a amall town 
In wblob he confided, 

*' Tns long «r* h« tid know 
Vol nuke du rnnl filUd 



Gobble (American), to gobiU ap 
or deTOni it a well-known Eng- 
lish wotd. In the United States 
gobbling is olten speoiallf applied 
to the pnrohase of smaller or 
rival lailioade, intnranoe com- 
panies, &c, bj wealthier or 
shrewder rivals. Tbos when the 
Pemurlnnia Railroad Company 
&iled in its effort to purchase 
the Northern. Central, and other 
roads, it was announced by the 
newspapers that " It can't gobble 
its oompetitor." 

(Yale Univernty), to seize, to 
lay bold of, to collar. At Cam- 
bridge, however, " to gettU 
Oreek, " mean* to speak or study 
that langnage. "Yon may have 
seen him traversing the grass- 
plots 'gobbling Greek' to him- 



Gobbler (popular), a tnrkey-cock. 
In Scottish slang the bird is 
called a " bnbbly-jock." Her- 
man, in hia " Caveat," gives ^- 
lUr, a dock. 

Gob-itkk {nautical), a bom or 
wooden spoon. VitU Gob. 



Go by Walker's bos, to (oom- 
mon), to go on foot. 

God (common). The gallery peo- 
ple, who sit enthroned in high 
Olyropns, are called gudt. 
" The BriL," when iptculidB n EvBr^r 
Tdthi oat ■ teMS at \aal foa, euillecl, 

And Un. Line an cUb vel] for piitin, 

boK,ortad. 
A L^n* without ■ tunuiic in the puh 



Invariably the most sympa- 
thetio and enthasiastic, and not 
infrequently the most int^li- 
gent portion of the andienoe. 
Formerly, in many of the im- 
portant country theatres, the 
verdict of the gallery on the 
first night decided the snceess 
or failure of the seaacoi. "Up 
amongst the gaU," the upper 
gallery, termed by the French 
paradU, at poulaiUtr. 

(Printers), the nine qoadiata 
used in " jefflng " were tha* 
called. Ferh^M from Um fact 
that the player wonld be invok- 
ing the god of fortune, fto., in 
hU behalf. 

(Eton), one of the sixth form. 
K tnlix Eton ii fHotoUj in ■ men 



iuSe*ttii. 

God bless the Dnte of Ai^yle 
(popular), macb used bj tailors. 
This expression ia often used by 
a man when be rubs his hack 
against a poet or ptojeotion, 
for the purpose of allay ii^ tbe 



:v Google 



of hli back, when hli Hiigen 
cuinot lewb. It i« nid that 
oae of tha DnkM of Aqjie 
OMuad pocta to be areotad io 
oectAln p«it« of hi* domkin, •<> 
that «U p«nona tronbled wtth 
Ml Itching back might relievo 
tbeir tnflttiuga. ThU mut bo 



Goddni(Aiiglo- or UaUr-IiidiaD), 
an absnrd oomiptlon whiob iu«d 
to be applied \>j our ooiuitt7- 
men la the old aettUnieiita lu 
the Ualaj oonn tries to the joong 
women of the land. It ia the 
Hala^ gfdit, a virgin. 

Bt ttiib, with ■»(■ Tou^lnlbd to RU, 
Of nnl ntdilam ih* focM. 

DcUshifbll 

~W. Mandn : Mtm. 

(Common), a female Bitting 
In the gaUei7 of a theatre. 

fiad «C4hiUing gad witluD nach of a 



—KijtelHl Aidrtaa. 

Godfadwn (Amerioan), jnrrnien. 
The author of the New York 
Slang Diotionaij axplaina thia 
bj laying that tfaej name the 
degreoa of orime. 

Goda (tailon}, block pattenu, or 
pattema stored and priied by 
thoae unable to produce patterna 
thanualTea. 



-Go H. 41 S 

Go aaattr (Anerioaa), oew-be? 
■lang. A go, A Taliaa, ao oaUid 
beoanao tba oow-boj aeldon 
owna ntoh an object till ha bay* 
one to go to a oity, which ia 
geneially eaatwarda (CL Ldand 
Haniaon). 

Go^ Hn. (Amerioan Unincri- 
tlea), a cant phtaae to denote 



GofortlwClovw. Vidtdhovwa. 
Gdttgt-OB (common), proceed* 



TlHfi^i-aiiof hiradndi of jmn unca 
Ixtta-dvi tytm, that in *11 prababilicr ■)>■ 



G<rfng t0 pot (popular), to go 
to rain. Old metal-work, ftc, 
when too old for naa, ia aoU ta 
pot, ie,, melted down for other 
Daea. Tbia ia probably the ori* 
gin of the pbraaa. 

Go Into the Utcben, to (popular), 
to dilnk one's tea out of the 
■aacer; anaUnsiontotheTolgar 
method of drinking reiy corn- 



Go It (popalai), ODoe perfectly 
good English, bnt now a alang 
moda of aipreaalon naad as a 



, Google 



Go a—Goify. 



m;" Of, " A it, r<n oripplM, 
N«wgit«'a oa Sro." 




To ^ ■(, to act with energj, 
■pirit, fwleaalj. Intha qaot»- 
tlon It U I — -■ '- - "--- 




\ phnae 
J to act without doe 
thoagfat or deliberatiou. Bd- 
wardfSBjf: "It ii derived fi«m 
tba gune uf poket, when a 
ld>7er maj, if be choosca, go 
it hli»d, bj doobling the ' uite ' 
before looking at his cards, and 
if the other platen lefnM to 
•ee hii ' blind ' be wins the 
• ante.' " 

Go it, boots I go it, raci t 111 hold 
your bomwtl gbuigl (Ameri- 
oan), orlei of encootagsment to 
a man on foot or on honeback, 
" doing time." In England 
tliere i« alM the well-known 
"Ooit, ye cripple*, wooden leg* 
are cheap I " 

GoldtMcked 'nu (popular), bodj 



night-man. 



GolsD(ba(CamInidge UniTenit7\ 
litoiaUj the place of a ekoll. 
"but," sa^ the WatmintUr Jfc- 
vt'ni, " a particular part of the 
Unlterdt; Chmch U appropri- 
ated to the "heads" of the 
honaea, and it called palgeUta 
therefrom, a name which the 
•ppemnce of its oconpanta 
reoden pecoliail; fitting, inde- 
pendent of the pan." It alao 
signifletB hat. 

GoD (gamaa). the hand i derired 
from the Keltic Hence go(f, 
band-balL 

GoUop, to (common), to swallow 
greedily ; a comptiwi of " golp. " 

GoIIt> I7 KoUr (American^ a 
common inteiTection. Itisrery 
doabtfnl whether it is used 
enphemisticallv for God. Nor 
is It strictly tme, as Bartlett 
aays, that it is chiefly to bo 
heard among negroes, since it 
is qnite as common among boTs 
in New England or in the West. 



:v Google 



G.O.M. — Goner. 417 



Fonnerij oaed in the fonn "hj " It 1* ftll goM-^Kj with Iiim " 
golf " in England. la alio n oommon Idiom, maan- 

WI.Trt».*r*W,.l-aiMa,«.! I ing th*t hla day or tima ia 

luiarcH,udicu'iabi<kT«.-/'UMUV' '^^ ^ ***"- ^ "gonei aljo 
An ouMtm tm^u ifii^tm. natimllj rafos to auTthing or 

anibodT who hai «acapod or 
G.O.H. (general), ..t, grand old jlrf. 

man, a uiokname of Hr. W. E. 
Qladatone. It wa« flrat nsed 
b7 Ur. Bradlaogh in a apeech 
at Northampton. Since then it q^^ j„ (thaatrloal), critidaad, 
has become exceedingly popn- ^ ^„^ Botiowed from the 
Ur, being used derislvelj by the Americana. 

right hononiable gentleman's 
political opponents, and respect- 
fully, though familiarly, by thcee 
who look open bim as a leader. 
It ia DOW nsed faoetionsly in 
referenoe to any one. 

Each goat hu v'rmft ilmdjp futncd 
Far nil [hoc qulitiM unil* ia but oti* 



Gone offo 



Gfloe on (sodety), in love. Also 



I line ihu nal C.aW— llM cbi 
Who hen ihb crcniog may be » 



Gomen (Winchester College), an 
abbreTiatlon of "go homers," 

the clothes college " mm " wear "' 

when grfng home instead ot ""- •""•"i" m thm hr ihrir liudi 

gowna. In the old days "^ A™^#-ii<i«h»»-*ti-«»a-T 

sur* and hats waa a " peal ' „,, 

aimilarto "boot* and leathers." Bnt ifiucrihcr'dbciiiiiTEtThuiwsT, 

(AMMrmeana also a pewter dish. ifihtrk-wformTdbw r««*hiai 

Cohb (American), bnt also used —Srat. 

In Bngland to signify kiss, min, , , j_i 

orttrtiliniury. "Ooa-np-and Goner (popnlai), a dying per«m. 

"pens down " aw In thla mean- They lud »» cmmuiaa, wtikh n> 

log syuooymona. OnemayaUo Miwd in ihat joiof ""*>•■"«« *nom 

. "_ ,1... u V. I. . " imblie-hoaae, whm h» dniffM him. I 

baarthat It or ha ia a poa. n« hi. ooU tf« i i«™3S. »d -»«o 

oaae,"a "iPMugooee, a "foiM i .« b* n> ■ /hmt, I pui Un in ih* 

0000," "foiwbird," or "a^nMr." ohudiotsnT.'— JWfr Tii^rafk. 

2 D 



:v Google 



4l8 Gome—Good. 

Abo a bviknii* ^mmm. «r GoasB (AaMrinn UnbwritjL 
aar«wirtwLu''fa>««nBK." FUtOovn. 

G«>|^Cf.«.d^ 8..GOTO G«d (irintm), « .bbi.rt.tta, 
**""■ rfgood-niglit 

GoM vp (AnMrioui), lost, rained, 

bukropt. Good-fare. Jofan I (AmcckuiV 

•qatnlent to .U b goM^ kat. 
Goner (Amerioui], . rtnpid, erortr. 

focdkbMlow. 

"Hwib«fMQ>(HtWndbaii.iiidni Good f eUow (old), . wrellw. 

ht,' ikid llr. SUck wiib PHI ^m.-~Smim 

'"-'■ {-! ffij^^ "u tbcT Mid, tMcsa» k n «tll 

kiion thu Sir Eocv h^ b«a ■ /wrf- 

Goooiili or gaaaef [popokr), . J""" " "■ r»«J«--^«*«f .■ Sikmt- 
jonag fool or loot. ""MWr, 



u><»»dT; ItmMnt.bo.adel 



-i»BlHt:J 



Good Job too, ud ft (popnbik w 
em[AUIe vxpnuloa ^uppnhm- 



"Thk k U," ■»! Spoour, lb* pnd 
"And i^poiiDe I di* Cnt, d>H diuk 

I-IB |Dii« B to dUMMl lor the BH of 



{Thleree), . thief. Hotteo 'n^^^'Ujndltt^iauaaKatfm 

■*;> .a Bxp«st thief, . muter 7^ v^tk Itk dnid who* ib* ^puia 
of hi. craft. The W(«d b tst; ud iha arm 

old. RtfbHdoMae'astauifs/M^jM 



Undcntud, if jaa plow, I'a ■ tnvd' 

TlM/Hf^ all an BH Dm Gip^; 
By Iha nltla I Mm wha I'n uka bt 
t(i<f. 
And 1 iliag on mj back an oM kipiy. 
—Til Riftnt- 



-J. Sfmrt,.- A Gmd}^ Tt*. 



Gooda (ipOT^i^), men or bona.. 
Termed "goodgosd*" or "bed 
poadt " MMOtding to qii.lit7. 



VcO, il appoin that fint all be tIwiii Good OOrt (popnlu), need in .p- 

10 Cape Cokmr, rhm it efamA Addr nrobetfon o( mjt one. 

U. Ht umMd all that he'd rm^fltti ' ' 

Iron hia poor Bid&thar in di'iDwidiham Aod then the Prfac* id Vals wB 

— ««r]rblM»edihi«wr.-^/»rtn(crr.~». chaifcdwiih bcB.* «!<«»' Mrt; 



:v Google 



Good tiung (noiDg}, » prwumed 
cortAtntr in noiDg. Wben a 
hone on hU marita pnbltclj 
nbowa or pTfT»t«l7 Mcertalned 
it mippoMd to be soTe of wlDDing 
K rBc«, nioh erent is said to be 
a^ood ikimg for htm. The ima- 
gining of Uie people more often 
tnnu oat to be a tain than a 
geeAAing. 

Good wooOed {American), gifted 
with unfllnohing oonrag& Of 
late jean it haa tMCome the 
fMhion with the Western Ame- 
ricao edilofe to apeak of their 
part of the cooDtrj as " the wild 
and W00U7 Weat " 

Go olTea the ear, to (American), 

to be anddenlj initatod, to flj 

"What Bud* SsiMf* r^ *m ktrnr 
jmaimy, Mildnd f " ailud Amtj. 

"kaj' nptied >)» Hi^ Khoel t>H. 
" pliu* do M( ny ' to o4' 



Go or the bo<^ to (familiar), to 



Gooae (tallora), a name uaooiated 
from time immemorial with the 
large iron naed bj tailon for 

pTMSing. 

Goo tbcri y {common), a canard. 



•Ooose. 419 

Goooebeny, dtring or picking 
fpopnlai), to act aa cfaaperone 
or eaoort to joong oonplea on 
ocoadona when otherwise their 
being together woold not be 
quite the thing. The ohape- 
rone la cappoaed to pick joui 



aharp children, who are oaten- 
aibl; placed In ohaige of their 
elder aiatera when tbe latter go 
out shopping, bat who are in 
reality a check on an; chance 
of flirtation (Hotten). 

GoOMfOK (oommon), a gooee- 
berTf. In some diotionariea this 
is erroneoQtly claimed aa a mere 
provinoialiam. 

Goeier (popular), a Sniahing blow, 
one that "cooka bia gooae," 

Gootc, the (theatrical), hiaaing. 
It ia said that the hiaaing of 
a Sfoatt onoe aaved the Oapltol, 
bot, as the late Mr. Flancbj 
wiael; and wittU; observed, 
" that was a capital gwt." 
Thla, however, i> the onlj naefsl 
aibinatioQ on record, and it ia 
apocfTpli*^ In onr time we 
have anthentic arldence of a 
aingle instance of hissing lead- 
ing to a resolt of a very different 
character. Uacready was acting 
Mania at the Theatre Rojat, 
Edinbnrgb. Forest, tbe Ame- 
rican tragedian, arose from bis 
place in the boxes and hissed 
bia great rival. Sabseqneutly, 
daring HacresLdy'a farewell en- 
gagement in America in 1849, 



:v Google 



430 Gt 

tUa deplonfale Inoidant led to 
lioU In N«ir Toik, the odllug 
OBt of tba mOltuj, bloodshed. 
Ion of life, aaA lUcreulT'B pn- 
clpdtkM flight to BngUnd in 
diigiiiw. Hinin^ U now kbo- 
liahed In the SUtea. U an 
American kodience didikM a 
pla7, the aadltora qaietly get 
up and walk out. The odiooa 
coatom Etill preTkila In thia 
oonntrj, and flonriahea in fnll 
force on fliat nighta, when our 
audiencea derote thamaelTM 
with ardour to tha aprightly 
paatlme of autbor-baiting. 

There la a comic side to vnrj 
tragedj. Here is an illuatiatioQ 
of the oomedj of hisajog. A 
bunoDs low comedian, "afellow 
of infinite jert," receotl; de- 
ceased, while acting the Fint 
Witch in Macbtlk, f onnd hinwelf 
in BaeAi jiIcimij. and foigetfol 
of Ua part. In the incantation 
aoene, when he had spoken the 



Ua memor; failed Mm After 
agonlalng panse, be re- 



The andienoe were fnticoa at 
this ribald tampering with the 
text, and down oame the goam 
moat InatUy. 

" TUi KRUiil <ll tmt, 
Uaplniing M ihc SCMr't oi," 

aobend tlie comedian instaotl;. 
Fulling Umaelf together and 



losing np at tbe galli«7 with » 
■I7 wink, he pcooeeded— 

" Pnnkr Ktor, loM tb* wni. 
Twin Ui Side off Ua ■ (k«. 



The andaol^ of this quick- 
witted re^onsB ao Uckled Ute 
"gods," that th^ not 0UI7 
condoned the erring comedian's 
baokaUdinga, but gaTe him a 
heartj lonnd of af^tlaaae into 
the bargaiiL 

(Printers), poosc, a eurtaUment 
of the word " wayigoose, " which 
see. (Old cant}, a paiUcnlaz 
sTmptom in the Iw* Mama 
(Wright). 



Goow, to (popalar), to TOMS a man 
in the sense to make a fool ol 
him, hnmbng or deceive him, 
ma; uatorall; enough be derived 
from makiiig a gaota of him, 
Bnt ft is worth noting that in 
Dutch alang there is a word, 
geHaAeadier, or geese-sfaMran 
(Turlinok ezidaina that to iheu 
here means to swindle), whioh 
refers to a kind of impaatoia 
who go ahoat the connliT pt«> 
tending to be lespeotablebr^so- 
dowu tiadesDuai. 

(AoMiloan), to enlarge or 
repair boots, b; a prooeaa geaa- 
lallj known aa footing, iA, 1:7 
puttii^ in or adding ptooea of 
leather. As it la a Kew Toik 
word, It is probablj a tr 
from tha Dutch ;aa«, a 



:v Google 



Goose — Gospel. 



421 



which if almtwt idantickl with 
peMti, whole, entires The pro- 
vincial gatttim, to nuke whole, 
would thiu become ganten, to 
gooee. Bartlett Ingenloady si%- 
gMt« tbftt lo g«ote !■ derived 
f or distinottoa's sako from "to 
fox." 

(Commoo), to gnoi, to hlu, 
to "give the big bird." 

The dc&ncUnl, one DiJlu. hind Kvenl 
penoDt u t"" Mr. BninUT'i pe&r- 
nuDO. Un&nuiiuelr for Mr. DilLu, 



GonD, gmnn. Butlett give* thia 
as ga/itm, to wmtax over. It \a 
English, bat probably more fre- 
qnentl; heard at pruent in the 
United SUte*. 

the "miiDi" wiih Ehc compUiat thil tha 



Gotin, to {American n 
to eat Tondoiuly. 



GooM witlioiit gTETj (nautical), 
a Berere Btartlng, bo called be- 
caoM no blood foUowa Us in- 
fliction. 



Goree (American), gold dust, gold. 

Gorgw (pcpnlar), a gentleman, a 
weIl-4Tsa«ed man. A gorger or 
gargte — the two are often con- 
founded— Is the common gypsj 
word for one who is not a 
gTpey, and very often means 
with them a rye, a gentleman. 
Acton eoiDetimea call a manager 
a mJli-garger (The English 
Oypde* and th^ L anguage). 
(ThaatricalX the i 



Gorrf I by Goirrt (American), ■ 
common inteijection or donbt- 
foloath. 

GoKhena (Stock Eichange), the 
newly created jf j( per cent. 
Qovenunent Stock. 

A hidcou panic aeiud th« Stock Eic- 
change, (^w^bw wcnl down u Ao at a 
iin|le leap.— /■■hkA. 

Thia stock was so named after 
Ur. Goechen, the Chancellor ot 
the Exchequer, who created the 
Stock in AprU 1S88. 



GoiYMttolA Hall (Stock Ex- 
change), the nickname for the 
Stock Exchange, on aooonnt ol 
the marble walle. 



Goapel ahark (Canadian) , aparson. 

Gotpel thop (popnlar), a Hetbo- 
dist chapel (O. Davis). 
Aa uon aa I had procared a lodfins 



:v Google 



422 Goss-~Go to. 

G«M (popular), a bat. Frnn fo*- Go Hk lAote pile {gamadon), 
aoaur. (AnoioaiiX to "give an AmaiicMdam nataaliMd !■ 

«ae 70a," to injure or kilL ^t^^'^"^^ to pot all ooe'i moaeT 

OD a K^tarj ebaaos. 

Go tfaroagh not, to <thie?«i), to 
Gothsffl, GothuiItM (popnlar). [dniidaT a belplMB man of all 

The term OnUiam U tatiricaU; Talnablea npoD Um ; to (tzip 

applied to the dty of New York, blm ol aU be pone«ea. 
and it! iuhabitanta are called 

atOumUa. JQrt aa Londonera G« to BsUl and gtt yov ^"^ 
are oaUed "Cockneyt" First rii»«d. Thia ptatM deootef 

M called by Irring, abODt iSos. mantal dlaorder, and as the 

.witi.xn.ph»a waten of Batb were foroedy 
Ji itunp H wxxM in Rood lepote for tfae enrc <^ 

meotal denngemente, tbeMjing 
Implied tbat the penoo eo ad- 

_ „,^.-^I^ dieted wai bUIj or idiotie. and 

mT^H^: ShtulZ^^Aluriin SKitij. abonld pro ioM ffMiio do aoiDe- 

thii^ to got c ved. 
Got bin down dose wid fine 

(American). Thia mekn* tbat q^ ^ CoOeKc, to (old slang), to 
BTerything is known aboot a gotopttoon. 
man. In pngiliitio parlance a 

i^ttllngblow. g^ j„ p^ (American), eqd- 

Got bli eniel (popolar), dead or *^*"* »* "^^ " rubMab.' 

djiug "clear out, "abnt npj" an 

V™. Mrf fri«d, Mr. Softh-d-I ^^Z "■', "^f ^- " * 

kw-.r~«ll.m»*c-h«-.,^*.i,Tw./, bint to be ailent or to depart. 

I ntha Imncv.-/. Gmwmf J : Dit* Said In Now England to hare 

J'mfli. been flnt *ddre«Md to Ndm- 

cbadneuar. 
Got hii leg (tailon), obt^ned his 

confldonce. ^ ^ jj^^j^^ (AinMfc«, bnt of 

Got the bkU (tailor«), having the ■^"^ o'*?'")- *» •» ■ ■?*«* 
advantage. among aaUOTa— 

"Pnn bdl, HbU. mud Mdl&i, 

C« the gunble, to (tpotting), to G™i Lorf ddiwr m.- 

make a bat on some match or A Tnmwtw mumbctuRr 1^ Oi p*. 

rac& BdcotoTanilnwlilr/tlW/U^x. Th« 

pRudcot dida't fo, but tw nJotcd tb* 

Go tta wbote bo,, to. Tid, r,?ss,"'s'^si;:i,"£,£ 

noa. BODdit nw tbc nu lot hii tiniimw sad 



:v Google 



Go-to-meelings — Grabbers. 



Go-to-meetinsi {oonunon), Snn- 
day clothes. 

Go to kbmIi, to (conuDOQ), to Uil 
eoUrely, to ba minad. 

Jut Could ud SuIUtu Imyc ncbn) 

Tbg 6iit, lb* diuploo of thi "nK 

Wibuta." 
IfikH tnllUoo* wbm fail i^rouli {* ill 

—FimmeiaHfimi. 

Go Wider, to ( Ameiiaau), k Wastem 
•npbBinUiiifordMth. Oflndlu 
origin, uid kllualve of being pnt 
nndei the gnai of the waring 
pniilB, and also, It mxj be, 
•ometimes of being nndar the 
knee of a oonqnering enemj. 
Ibe idea and procees of reasoning 
if the same as when the Oennao 
DM* HnWrycAca to (dgulfy to 
perish. 

Poor H>*keja lilt thu bii lin( liad 
CBiiu, ADd koDirhif tlut ht itdiui gr timUt 
■OOOBF gr ImtB-, h« dcUrminHl lo kLI bii 
Ur* in^i.-Hmmiryf, IJu Imm CUr/. 

Go upon the dnb (thieTes), to go 
apon • bonsebreaking expedi- 
tion ; to open or pick tbe lock 
or [astenliige of a door. Vidt 
Dub. Dup oooor* in Ophelia's 
tttDglaHam.tet—'^Ditp the obam- 
ber door." 



Clyde, farmerly a great fishing 
vlUage. TennU alto " BUliitga- 
gate phHsant," or " Tarmontb 

Gorenuneitt ^gn-poat (old), the 
gallows. 

Gorenior (popular), a mode of 
addressing an nnknown parson. 
In Trench btMirgaott or jKOran. 
(Common), m; gotamor, my 
father. 

Goiric (prison), a oonntryman. 
Also a proTlndallna meaning 
both onekoo and fooL 

Ginrier( sporting), a deep-monthed 
dog; a hovler. To "gowle" Is 
a prOTlnolallsm for to bovl. 
French, gveuLtr. 



TIh tkrwt Bl Cunbridca had ■ food fux 
with lb* 'VuiilT, lb* ^nnu Juit wianiag 
by ■ (Sd to Vm.—Fmltaa Hiwi. 

Gnb(commoa),giaBpIng. In the 
United States a grab means a 
robbery or "a steal" 



Q (Scotch), « salt 
herring. From Oonrock on the 



(Cardi), • bcdsterona game of 
obanoe [jayed with cards. 

Grabbers (popolar), the hands. 
" Land ^rsUert" if a phraae that 
baa lately coma into popnlar use 



:v Google 



Grabben — Granger. 



in Inland ud BooUud to de- 
•Igute tha pcMwita afflicted 
with "Mrth hnngBr," or tbe 
anti-rant nwatsrs who wish to 
gi»b or hIh the land that doea 
not belong to tbem. 

Gnbby (militair), a foot-aoldiar. 
A tenn of contampt naed bj 
the monnted Mrticef. 

Grab, to (thieret), to aireBt. 

Tnnp il, mnp U, dt JqIIt Uo«b, 
Or ba^nMirf br dw boki n niy. 

Grace cuds (Iiiah), tbe liz of 



GndtMtra (torf), honea that have 
alnadjnm. 

Tilt ruki of ih* grmdtmitM •nil b* 

■rooiid, but b tb> meudiH tbe mnjotilT 
of Un tn^t itHplachucn mn en Ibeit 
Icfi.— X«^m. 

Graft (prison and popnlar), work ; 
to graft, to work. To graf is 
a pTorincialiam for "to 6i%" 
{grafl tMing a trench). Hence 
tbe alang •ignifloation. Thli 
derivation is supported by the 
French pioclitr, to work hard, 
literally "to dig." (American), 
to frqft, to snirontid the feet of 
old boots with new leather, oi 
to add new eole*. 



m [nantical), " blowing tha 
graitpmt," deleghig with water. 



Gnad hoteliam (joiunaUrtto), a 
word exprCMi** of Uring in ■ 







Grandificent (American), grand 
fni magnifioent. Also "gian- 
daoeoiu," " giandiferons." ftc, 
which BaitlMt charact«riae* vaj 
oorrectly as tactitions woida. 
The number of these maaitestlj 



vei7 grmt In the United States, 
bnt voy few of them sraTlTa. 
It would seem aa it slang to 
live moat grow naturally from 
needs and be developed by 



Me one's (com* 
men), to have a nlghtmaie. 
(Fopnlar), women of the lower 
class say they see or have their 
grmidmMtr when they have 
their menses. 

Grsng^ (American), the monbw 
of a political pwty formed abont 
1 87 5 in tbe Interaats of the West- 
ern giain-growing States, or of 
the agricnltmiats. The word 
Is now generally nsed to mcMi 
a ooontryman, a matic, or " a 
gentleman from the roial dis- 
tricts." 
Now ihii ptnoo KM a unapi 



:v Google 



Grape-viiu — Crasser. 



42s 




Gf^M-Tlse tdcgi^ih (Ameri- 
cajt). Dnring the war ezuitiiig 
MCODnU of b«tUes not tooght 
and of TiotoiiM not won were 
Mid to IwTe been oonnred by 
gnpt-vin* (or olotbeo-Une) tdf 
grifk (New Tork Slang Die 
tt(MUU7), bat the term wa* In 
earUei nae, meaning oewa ood- 
Tsjed In a myaterionB manner. 

Gmfar (American thierea), a 
amall dog who bf barking 
alarm* the tamOy. "Qrarien 
an more feared by bn^lan 
than gnni ot [M«U." 

GraM (oommon), "togotopnta," 
to die; "go to gran" be off, 
yon be banged. (PngiUaUcX 
"logo tojrroit," tofaU aptawl- 

. . . That be had further osed hii 



ORoyal Hmtaiy Academy), 
fnui, vagetablea. 

(Anurioan), beah mint or 
Unaj leave*, naed in making 
jnlepa. 

(Anatialian printon), tem- 
porary handa on 1 



The meUqihot probably ia from 
the proTarb abont gram — " The 
proM witbereth," Ao., which 
would imply temptnaiineai. 
There ia a printera' proverb, 
" A grait on new* waita dead 
men'a ahoea." The Atutratatian 
Priattn' Kttptate saya : " Thoee 
f.mm.r with newapaper work 
In the colouiea most often bare 
heard this gmeaone axiom. 
Now thia aaying, thongh evi- 
dently flgniatlve, doea not pre- 
•eot the nnial pleaalng ohar- 
aoteriatioa which wa aaaooiata 
with pastoral anbjecta, eapeoi- 
ally when they are contem- 
plated from a proper distance, 
aa beeomea the eye artiatio. 
Diaagreeable aa It may be to ac- 
knowledge the fact annoonoed 
in tbe above aying, however, 
BO mnch more so must it b« to 
have it verified In one's own 
person, be yon grau or prospec- 
tive dead man. Why are the 
grau or casual news hands not 
pnt on a more comfortable foot- 
ing " (Edward Pltigerald: Prin- 
ters' Proverbs). 

The ezproBsion has been im- 
ported from England, a gratt 
hand in Bngliah printers' par- 
lance being a composiloi th^ 
aoeepta oooasloDal work in dif • 
ferent offices. 

GrasB-cambera (nan Oc al), 
conntryman who enter tbe ser- 
vice from farmtng oonntles. 

GfaMcr (sporting), a bOL 

SoBM havi tciribla gratun ta -"— "-f 
uta Hm pifikiB— ^^ri rfAi Hmmt. 



:v Google 



Grasshopper — Gnn^. 



GnM In hli Bqiwr. SeeOuaa. 
(tblerw), the oonntrj. 



In AmeriOft and 
in India a prai*-«U«i !■ a 
manied woman tonponrilj 
Mpantad from bar bnaband. 
In the Slang Dictimarj of 
Rottan it it ezidained aa "an 
nnmanied mother, a daaerted 
mlatren," which ii rather donbt- 
fnL Low Oatman, gnt utJ n m. 
Alao ttok-mttwtr (Oerman). 

GtKTal, to (popolar), to confound, 
to pacplax, to bewilder. From 
le*elUi^ with the earth or 

Cmrd-cnulief (miUtai;), a aol- 
dier oompelled to tramp about 
a aqnare at debulter'a drill. 
Vidt Obqas. 

Gnittl'fiiDder (popalar), one anb- 
]BCt to lalli thiongb drunken 
habita. 

Gnnel-nah (popoki), a aoatobed 
faoe, gnecaU^ applied to a 
dninken paiam who baa bad a 
talL (SohooUM);!}, the Injniy 
to the kneat tiom a tall. 



to be buried then. Rwmj fngi- 
Uve dianght in the thaafaw niea 
from the ooliar tbrouAfa tUi 
opeaing. It la wid that Fawoett, 
when itage-managei at Corant 
Oaiden, lelinquiabed the part 
of the giavedigger {which ba 
had acted a qoartar of a ocntni7) 
in &Tonr of a jonnger aator, 
agalnat whom he bad a wpi%e. 
"Tou are tcij genetoua, Mr. 
Fkwoett," guahad the Toongater. 
" Not at all, siT— not at aS,' 
replied the Tetaian. Then tam- 
ing to a oronj, with a grin, ba 
growled in a grim adde: "That 
Infanal north eait wind tntn 
the grmn will oook bis gooaeL*" 

GntTejard (Ametloan), a " pd- 



great feroolty, or who aaaaoM 
to be desperadoea, aometlmaa 
boaat In America tbatthe^keap 
graveyard of theit own in wfaioh 
to bnrj their riotima, or <daa an 
aaieastiaaUr aaked irhain Hiiti 
oemeteriea are. In partkna td 
New England every tanner baa 
bli own tamil; g raM gai 'd on hia 
property, and the writer haa 
known an Inataooe in which a 
&tbeT made a preaaat — whieb 
was gladly aooeptad — to Ua 
children of a UtUe gramgard 
with two blank tombateme^ 
Thay kept It In ordar and naad 
It ai a playgroond. 



Gnm-tnip, the <tbeatrioal), a G iMj e j a fpopnlar), aterm rather 

large oblong tnp in the omtia looaely and nnmeanlng^y ^- 

of the atage, ao called beoaoaa plied aa a darlriva apdthat — 

" the fair Ophelia " Ii nppoaad "Ohl yonfra*|pf|«/ Howmaoh 



:v Google 



Cray — Great. 



gaifj doM jaai notb^r put on 



Gfltj (ihMpeTi), from tha g7p87 
pry, > hone, A hkUpeuDf with 
aithBt two " Iwada " or two 
"tkils," used foi cheating at 
pUoh sod toM. AUo called a 
pmf , braca the word. 

Gnt7-c<Mt panon, a lay impro- 
prUtor, or leMee of great ttthes 

(HottflDj. 

Gmya (popular), Hoe ; called b; 
the FMiob grtikadiert. 



Grgaae oiw'a dnke (thicTet), to 
gteauthe palm or band, "dnke" 
meanlDg band. 

On* or tvo dan ■nT <lu< I BO the 
ncki M HiicluwT. and h* uid, "Whai 
hvkIv too guyT" So I lud dui t did noi 

mid U ml all ri(hi. Soow of tb* mb 
kiHw hiB ud hid f HMn< jlu AkW.— 

GfMMT (Amerioan), a Hexioau. 



<Wlnoheat«r OoUege), "to give 
Um grta m r," to rub the bead 
hacd with the knuoklei. (Naval), 
an engineer, or anj other man 
emidojed in the itoke-room. 



Greuera (Royal Hllitary Aca- 
demj), fried potatoee, in ooatra* 
dlrtlnctiaa to " boUera," boiled 



Inal (Oxford UniTer- 
•it;), the Onal pabUo ^^mlna- 
ttou in honoars. OrmUr i« now 
properly oonfioed to claarioal 
hoQonrs. 

Great go (Cambridge UnlTcraity), 
the final and most important 
examination an nndergiadnate 
hne to paei* An earlier examina- 
tion is called the " Uttle go." 

Rod throafh Iha whole fin nlama 
Tolio, Idtia, prcviDiu u hit (olof up fur 
hu /mf f.— Tkr Slimi^M. 

Gnat pet (racing), a prophet. 

I enclow ■ link diculv km to nM la 
the *priDf of the procnl yaer, hu bm by 
a frrMi p*i (h* *aa1d havt 70a bclicrc), 
■ddrcHiDf fiDB the Strud, LoodoB, 
irhoH ««l«etiQM. had t rollDwcd, would 
br^kk ■ bank, DiDCh ka ■ privMt poTfc 
■^Birdi Fmdmm. 

Great Scott I (common and Ame- 
rican), probably derived from 
Oeaeral WinSeld Scott, once a 
candidate for the Preeidmoy, a 
man of inch great dignity and 
mlUtaiy style that he waa 
popnlariy known a« Fom and 
Featben. Toexplainthefollow- 
ing extract from an American 
newfpaper in which the wofd oc- 
cnn, it nnat be tmderatood that 
the BepaUicani in the United 
State* inaUt that aH the rongbs, 
ehooldei-hltten, and gamblert 
in the ooimtiT are "Demo- 



:v Google 



^8 Great- 

nnti" " When u« 70a going 
to-dayl" Baked % mmn of a 
Danooratb] ibetlff, " and whf 
U ooDrt adjoiutiad t " "Wbj, 
prwit Asa !" exclaimed that offl- 
dal, "doat 70a know there i* 
going to b« a priie-Sght to-da; 
In the next ooiintjl" The 
phnM haa been aocUinatieed 
in Bnglaad b; the ^nrita; 
Tima:— 

How (u)t ■1>*T ^atta, utd llHtca, ud 
Blow, 
Ai Ibcf ihiot in ibor ttntm^i 

And «• kow dWT •puU*-<^'*^ -^o"' 



Gnat moke (tbleree), Loodou. 

The CodcDcjn. from *• /™^ »™J», 



Grack. Asj langBBgcv diklact, er 
form of qieeeh that Uw oonmon 
peo{de did not uBdaUand, waj 
either oalled gibbenah or OiMt^ 
Thna the elang of the boggan, 
toampa, ngaboods, BTpriee, and 
tliieres ma known to the out- 
aide maUitnda *■ St. Oile*'a 
Ot«ek, or pedlar'i Oteek. 
"A»YonIikeIt,"whe 



heiaaikedwhat the mrstenooa 
■jUaUea "doe da 00** aigiiify, 
and glvea the eiplanatioo that 
it la a QnA invocstioi) to caD 
foola into a circl& " Due da 
me" i* geneiaU? explained aa 
I^tin IntentioDallr oompted 
(or by a 



Grant mnl (Ameiioaa), a mild 
oath, probably oolr a vaiiatioii 
of " great Scott." 



_, ... . Minf om of lb* 

■Inh'i tumX Ispot; iblndE noddy )ei 
ofBnT. Cfw/m/ IdunkltMitoom. 
—TtH Gaum Bmlitrjfy. 



Creefca (old), hlgbwsT<n«'>> <x 
knights of the road. The term 
now i» *4)pUed to sbaipera ; gntt 
In ITranch (not slang). Also ■ 
name given in deiision to the 
low Irish in London who rgdkn 
OaeUo. Vidt Okuk. 



Gred« )«d (««i*T). P«mlijr c^,«„„^),oot wideawake 
bend given to the body t^ u,«peri«,oed. "Do yon tee 
m^mo of a lanra bustle and —— i * 

by DO means new. It was used 

In the "Etonian" mora than half 

a oentary back. " In pflreon be 

was of the Gommon siae, with ^ol, 

•omethlng of the OrtiMm haul. H.blnA««idi 

oontiaoted donbtloH fromaedeo' 

tary babita." 



Fi^ifaUr At, u 



:v Google 



Greenbacks — Greetmuh. 



IbmymrtrmmatmlMiufi, G ' tml tii d. —Dictim ; OSrtr T-it. 

Aad oil I k Bikn Iba iBiijsr trf, 

*^'^5SC?#l!i&n^ G««iin«a (boUder.), » oontno- 
(or wlw ■pMnljrtw with otha 
GreentMcka <nni*e™lty), one of V^opW* monej. 
Todhimter'B nKthemmtical tezt- 

books, beoMiM •ome of them Greena (oomroon}, "to have ona'e 
Me bound in gieen cloth. (Ante- gretnt," to han Mznal inter- 

rlean), paper moDey. cooiee. 

(Mntan), a term In TOgne 
Green bac (common), a ]a.wjK. tor bad oi wom-ont printing 
" Wbat'a In the ;rem bagt" i^., raUen. 

what is the charge to be pre- 
ferred ^:ainat met G««i,to(Itoo School), tobefool, 
to oanae any one to ahoir ilm- 
Gfeeo E^oda opeiaton (Ame- pilcit;. 
rloan], the ooonteiteitcaa of 

gieenbuks, ' '"** ■O'b OM^Md « mtaj poiau 

pcnoful lo ByHtf, utd idiiK nild *"^f r*t 

TlH mnidc rdemd lo nbo mit »l i>rJ vo* mad* lo /ma at, u boyi taD U.— 
•B tx^Ht of iIh mtibodi. b™iqian«r», T. C. Bmi U Mm d : EUm, 1836-1141. 
and fuigi wlio hav« to lonf >ad with lo 
■lucb impunitr curicd on thc/rvn/aaA 

or Bwdui ftrttn. li nix) giR Uw Grecfl tutle, ts Hre op to [Ameri- 
■iu>ao(>MwdDuopcnionwhai»d ben can), to do, BUd give one's beet 

MtnuTj. viif!» its origin to turtle being 

regarded from the e^core'a 

Green gown, to ^rea (old ilaiig), point of tIbw > (odm AmmA*, 
to tumble on the graae. Ueed )uid the green &t the mart de- 
In an obscene sense. ilrable portion. 






And JahBii]i (an Jcbdt a jo 

Don io ihc fmu Vr >lic rint 

■hi* p«|>l*, obo, u hs(t(, AW m* It 
Gntabonat (driven), a derisive Uuirenm t»rlU. — Pmfm: Dtmu On 
term eometime* applied to an liliidi. 
omnlbns. "Get oat of the 

war ^^ *^*^ "^ jTttiJumte of Greenwich bwbeiB (popolar), re- 
jonnl" tailenotnuidtfoealledbeaHiaa 

the InhahlUnte of Oreenwich 



id (common). " He oomes *' shave the pite " in the neigh- 
fTom0ranlaMi,"beisiinM>pbia- bonrliood to aapply London with 
tlcMed. land (Dr. Brewer), 



:v Google 



GfvmwkU — Gr^. 



O m a m kb foeat (popalar), fot- 
m«rl7 » peiuiao«t>( the OtMft> 
wich NaTsl BoqdUL 

Graese (We«tiiilB«t«r School), k 
crowd. Id It>Uui gntta. 



Gnfs, llw ([aiiTtawia]], a >tat« of 
jBwniuK and liitUmuu. 

Grid (theatrical), a caotTaction of 
gridiron — the large open wood- 
work (tructore built over the 
fli«<, extending orer the whole 
stage, ao called became it ii 
conatracted exactly like a grid- 
iron. To the jfrid all the dead 
lines which bear the icenerj are 
attached. 

Griddle, to (street), to be a etreet 
■inger. Poasibly from Italian 
fridan, to CTj alond. 

Griddter (streets), a street singer. 
(Tinkers and tramps), a tinker. 
Probably from "gridiroD." 

Gridiron, the (nantical), the Star* 
and Stripe* of the United States. 
Also oaUed the "Stars and Bare." 
(Popolar), "tbewbolesriifirOTi," 
the whole party. (Common), a 
jfrUtiron, a Connty Court ■Dm- 
mons. Originally a BQiniQons to 
the Coart of Weatmlnster only ; 



from the Oiidiiesi Ama. n* 
GiaftOB CInb ie always known 
aa (be Grid or Gridwtm, that 



[riff (Augla - Indian), a 

Johnny Newoome. one not aa 
yet " in the wayi." The origin 
of thii word i* uncertain, bvt 
eomething reaembling it ia ap- 
plied In different Latin lan- 
guages to " oataiden," fmtign- 
ers, and the excluded oc mixed 
members of society. Thna in 
Loniaiana a gr\/U or grige it 
need, like the French gryfKt, 
for a midatto, or one of mixed 
dark blood (Bartlett). " I am 
Uttle better than an nnfledged 
grifin, aoeording to the faabion- 
able phrase here " (Uogh Boyd, 
1794)- 

(Anny), formeriy a young 

sabaltem io the Indian aerrioe. 

pEf4iickiiif is prttr, vtrj prtftf I 

■BM7 ny, if TOO hiiv« rva or 0mm vt ihm 

ngfat tort with too ; aU tbr gr^fimt ovabt 

lo hgnl toc«liei ihonfli.— /f. JTrngllir-' 

(Anglo-Chineee), a hmse treeh 
from the wilda. Alao a penon 
resident in China under three 

Gftffina, the reaidoe of n oootiact 
feast taken away by a contrac- 
tor, half the buyer's and half 
the seUer's (Dr. Brewer), 

Gric(thieTei),afarthing. (Ameri- 
can), to grig, Ua irritate, goad. 



:v Google 



Gr^ — OigMs. 4,31 

OTTtt FnbMlj bom griff. % TW Adodi-wdd ■'••■illUibotj 

man atb-€pmt o«d f or ad. -I^c^-.jf™,^ to £■««.. 

Itrit. m ■man •d). Thoi to -r—C^, Jf«-^toC-««». 
"olilTfj," to hunt abont, obaM, 

TBI. or aanoj, fa deri»ed from Griiid«T (■hoemakm), matoiUl 

«*<» (gJFT). » pointod knife, for BaUng booU and ahoM. 
to. 

■nu wnd BMriMiM. itiaid ». Crindtar nm (atndBBta), pn- 

TUnb I, ar'b^'iijait ttZfihu «■ paring for an OMunlna Mo n. 

pM fan, rait h op lota m tidl ud At U 

■t yofa.-Sam StUt: Hiima» Mrntmn. Qfind tf (00 

Grind (anlratritj), a lc»g walk. 
(Oambrldge), Uw OianohMter 



Grindatoae (oommon), ti 



-r Gogmagog HUli Oritd. A "withlii«noa*tothoyr<«i*»w," 

Udkmi i^MO of academical to koop him to U. woA. 
work. A plodding itndent who 

kaapaaloof from the oitial epoita Gringo <Am«rloan), a Spaibb 

and paatlmei. The (eny-boata word, oommtti In the Sontfa- 

at Cheaterton, wound acroaa bj Weat, or at ieatt well known, 

a wlnoh and obain, "to go over meaning a flat, new-oomer, 

in the ffrimd." (School*), to atnagei, an American 01 a 

grind, to work hard, to Oram for tonigQer. It correipondi in 

an esaminatlon. (Common), to Bome reapeota to the "griffin" 

haro aexDal intenxnuM. of India and China^ 



(popular), "to tske a 

ffrimdir" ia to make an inaolt- 

Ing geatnre b; qiplying the left 

thnmb to the ooee, and taming 

the right hand round it as if in 

the act of grinding an organ. Gtiiuiiiic athcbM (milUoen), «ald 

Abo " to take a stght." ot aewlng sloronlr done, wbaro 

the atltohe* are ao wido apart 
that tbvj bavs the apptatance 
of tows of teeth. 



GiiodMa (■ooiet;), prifato tntors. 
(Popular), the teeth. 



Thlin)aDdw«bii(>lMn---^BhiimoBt. Gripcs (popolar), oolio. 



So osmpldcly, ihu tx 



Gripea hole (Winchester OoU^e), 
a bole close to the boat-house, 
thus oalled beeanse the water 
there is verjoold. 



:v Google 



Cripper — Grootgf. 



Grlpp«f (popnlar), % i 



Gfit (Amarioan aod oommon), 
•piilt, oonnge, plnck, «Ddvr- 
•noe, detennination. The word 
U d«dT«d trom the hardneM of 
the ^rii of grindatonei, mill* 
atones, and pavii^-itooea, and 
other usee to whlob the moet 
datable laiidatane U ^plied. 

ir b* hadn'l h»l Iht dcu fril in him, 
msd ihowci] kii iceili uul «U*i, tbcr'd > 



Crag-bln H OM (oo 
idea on the faoa, « 

Croc SgU (annj), ■ diinUog 
partj. 

GfOgXT (oommon), imitodr like 
a dmnken man, generallj w^ 
plied to honea when thej be- 
oome weak and nmteady fram 
age and oTerwork. 

And u I>M P«, mansva, m aa W- 
tvcii ukd bmiicd, ukd trai altofctkcr ■> 



Grogkam (popular), a aony hone, 
one who ii "grogg;" or not 
film on bii legs. 



Grlzile-pot (popnlar), a snlkj 
obUd, one who ia coDBtantlj 
"grlHling," i<, whimpering, 
whiniog. 



GrMtta (naatioal), an allow&noe 
for each man per mentem, as- 
•igned fonnerlj to the chaplain 
for pay. 

Grog; (popnlar), to " hare grog on 
board," to be tipcy. 



Groom (gaming), a cronpier. 

Greovy (aodetj), settled inone'a 
babita, old-fog^rish, limited to 
certain Tlews. 



Afteu .UCDCC of atta ytait I h.n 


juu ntoriMd 


to EnfUi-L ... I D«nr 


M|Hr«l>obd» 


g.™i»b.o,."oh.ppr,- 




rii>d»d. luBputi-K* 


when ntuiDUic 




(sold bt poaible); m did 1 ioUwI u db- 


Hpalc m J twrd-cmcd and BHidcIl totODC 


^.■■pluoip.' 


• Six wkIk Kco I wu not 




« ttrou ronwd ■ put of 


IheEogL>thl«i 


CUCibulDO-.. . I Bib 


U« of ihtD, 1 


at TOD ihoold inlcr ftva 


whu u cooinc Lhlt I IS oM-rHhioDtd, 


prtjudiad, or 


bopclwly p^-orr-St. 


/uui'l Caxt 


U: Th. Cuifrt ^ Ot 


J/i.™. 







, Google 



Gnper — Growler 433 

Groyaf (popnlM), a bUnd mta, Cromer (popolu), % gmmbler. 

■a if iba kimpy 

mr— li thuTryyflftin Hnil ir «liinirliirini 

poanUdodauytlibcUkllaUrtlTiDtb* 

Hdahctkn Ufa cBtun duiof indrndtiali, 

. Tbii KHaa ud voluik bodi of oien 



Graoad, down to the (Mtanon], 
•nd thoroDglL 



r (untloil), ft ibip thkt 
1# Hftble to be nut agronnd 
tluongli bftd M 



(Orioket), ft bftU tlut la de- 
Uvemd along tbe gronud, ft 
"metk" or "gnh," 

Groond hog imj (Amaricui), » 
t«nii TBTj common tn the Ilid- 
dle fitfttet, -and thus expUined 
b J Butlett : — " Cftndlemaa , Feb- 
niaiy a, U oHett lo called in tbe 
Middle ftod Weetein BtatM bom 
a popolai belief that tbe appear- 
asce of the gmmd lug on that 
daj inwUott a Mtnm of oold 
weather." The ymimd Ao{r (a 
kind of marmot) bai erea ihown 
bimself at tlmea In poetry. 
TlaoiJi ihi/mii^ ^ ud enc» cntp 



Thoo^ ■ jx^at wave en 



rllHBi 



—RiitrtJ. Bm^tlUl Mmrcli. 



! TJu Onti tf ferula. 



GroBte, to (Uarlborao^ and 
Cheltenham Odlegea), to work 
hard. Also to go oat of an 
oranlng. In Torkihjre it is 
OMd with the aenae of to dig 
np with the moat like a hog. 

GfOstr (American), lU-te&iperBd, 
oroB»,Toxed, "grumpy." Orma- 
beaded, itapldlf noisy (Saa- 



bnJ, bit wiu fix np dal Brc'r Pn, Bit'r 
Bar. and Bn'r Bimanl unu Icr ran rot 
da BOa-as' Ur nwut IfoA al) pacarfj 
BiaV Rabbit, who ni powarfid tmt, 
"bom bcia' kf ogt, da;^ 1«k bin Ur bola 
da ballicli'boi — Dttnil Frtt Pnu, 

GfOTC of the Emnffeliat (oom< 
icon), a name for St. Jobn'a 
Wood. 

Gnmina: hia feathera (priaon), 
letting one'* hair and beard 
grow, a priTllege acoorded to 
conTjote for aDue months before 
their dlicha^e, that tbey may 
not be Dotloeable whan free. 

Gfoirier (ootBDioD), a foor- wheeled 
oab; ao called beoanse a man 
is aappoaed to growl and be 
disooateoted in one. Compare 
with " solkj'," a kind of gig. 
2 B 



:v Google 



Gnmkr — Grub-trap. 



(AmarioM)), "to woik tho 
grtxtUr," to MUd out a tin or 
A kettle to * oJoon for beer. 
Couldered ntbei low. 

Tlwi'i Ubthcr Hom Sovftr, m tin 
H> goo nil hikI briDfi La((r in u OHM 




"gnbUng ken," In tlw Uaging* 
of tnmpi Hid moodlauito, ii tbe 
workboDM, *Bd U •ooMtinea 
naed "iff the lower clavee foe 
an e«tii)g-bonM mr a oookalK^ 

GnbbeiT (popular), ui Mting- 
honee. (Tfaierea and timinpi), 
the woricbonaa. 

GnbbliiC hall (WluclMatar), the 
ball in wbioh ooUege " men " 
take tkdi meali. It is oppoa t* 



Gnbbf (pt^lai), diiij. 



owl MuMr B*tu. "SnKlliDf thc/mf 
lilH ■ old lad)F ■ (oins Ic luikeL' — 
Bidkm: Olistr T«i.l. 

"To gnih," to eat. Also to 
beg, to Eolicit alnu, etpeciallj 
food. (American nclTenitiea), 
a gnib is a Madent who works 
baid ; to grai, to atadj baid. 
(Cricket), a ffmb, a baU tbat 
la dellTond along the groond. 
Spet^allr nnderbaod bowlii^ 

Grab and bab, Tictnali and drink. 
The two wordi an of indigen. 
ant KngliEh origin. Orvi ia de- 
rived from the aotioti of digging 
DP roote foT edible pnrpoaea ; 
and iub or "bib" from Latin 
bibtrt, French bSxr, "Ham- 
ming btA " tormeTl; ligniGed 
iparkling ale, and is frequently 
mentioned in the cooTiTial days 
of the eighteenth century. The 



—Jitd: A BltkM- 

(Thiarea), food. DistinntiTe 
of *' grub." 

I paiLcnd io Sub like m one; lcMnriB(, 
—W.Mmfbu,: yUK^iSlmi^ 



Grab «takea (American). When 
miners become so poor that they 
are not able to fomiah the neoea- 
sarj tools and food with which 
to " go prospecting," a third 
party of sofflcient means offos 
to famish tools and pioTiaJons 
on condition that he is to have 
a certain interest in anything 
that may be fonnd (Bntter- 
wortb's " Zig-tag Journeys "). 

Grab-trap (popular), the month. 
A variant ia " potato-trapt" 



:v Google 



Gruel — Guerilla. 



Gnwl (M 
gmd" i* to b« well beaten, oi 



(Sporting), grud or ^nuUinj, 
a beating; 



Graelled (popular), ezhaDsted. 

Wndhun nn up by Ibc lUc of IhM finl 



initj jttuitSty, u 
wen u well frwiUnt ■> 
bcTdR ihcy g«i le the nil 
AUtnLtM. 



Bid tbu UuT 
nurponin 



And nun of J/n. Crwi^iL 

—OU Ballad. 
Tluy (honM ■« up the Dm ud Pal 

ioiteiid of op ths Rhina, 
And dip, apite J/rf. Gntrndji't frown, u 

tndy BriLijh brine, 
In ihon, Ihey flbontd reiolve to hb lb«i 

uiive land right thmugh, 
BcTore tfaey ty ibroul lo leek fmh icenei 



Grnnter (tailors), an habitual 
grumbler. 
(Oldoaut), abambftiliJI, apig. 

Hen'ifnjU!<ruid bleuer, wiih lilxir-tbe- 



Gmmble-ctita (popular), a perMD 
wbo \m alwaTs gmmbUiig. 



I (popular), to ba "all 
on the ffrwMet," to be discon- 
tented, in a inaiUng mood. 



t (low), pudenia wtdit- 
bri*. Termed alM>''snatoh-boi," 
"tnrtle," "maddikin," "moute," 
" monkey," " poaay." In French 
tlang "chat." 

Gnimpiah (common), ill-tempered, 
" grouty i" probably from " gmm " 

ir TOO blabber ot look gTMrnfiik, 111 
hin TOO iBmpped Ieb lime* <rm.—Mn. 
Trwihft: UUlutl Armtlrmt. 

Gnmdy, Hra., to be afraid of 
(Bociety), to be afraid ot tbe 
world'a opinion. Urt. Ormdg 
was a obaiacter in the comedy 
of " Speed the Flough." 

They CM Bad drink, and sleep nod nod. 
And Co to church on Sondey, 



—Jt. Bnmt : A Jnml Cm,. 
(Fopnlar), a policeman, termed 
also a " pig." 

Gnmtiiic cheat (old cant), a [ug. 

Grata (thievea), tea. 

Gndd)M( Anglo- Indian), an ass. "A 
donkey, literal and metaphorioal. 
Hindn jmUd. The coincidence 
of the Scotch ' cnddj,' baa been 
attributed to a loan from Hindi 
tbrongh tbe gypsies, who were 
tbe chief owners of the animal 
in Scotland, where It is not 
common. On the other hand 
this is ascribed to a nickname, 
Cnddy, for Cuthbert" (Anglo- 
Indian Glossary). The only word 
nsed at present bj gypsies In 
England for a donkey, ia_inaila 

Gnerina (Amerioan thieTes), a 
name applied by profeaslcnal 



, Google 



43« 



GueriOa — C-By. 



gamblen to fellows who "lUn 
mcben" (cheat the IgnonDt), 
when and where they cut. Thej 
do not like the regalar gunblen, 
bat try to beat th«B (t-c, get 
the better of them), Inform on 
then, and t«Il the mckers that 
they hare be«n cheated. 

GoeM what (Americao}, a game. 
Alio ^plied humoronel; to sd*- 
pioknu food, iDob ae i 



Goire CMC (<dd cant), % ngaa. 
ProbaUj a oomptioo of queer 

Gmrer (tbeatricaJ), flattery, ait- 

Gnif (Cambiidge), those t« whom 
the degree was alia wed,a]thoagh 
Inferior to jnoior optimes, bat 
tnperiortopcJlmeD. Sochwere 
formerly disqnaMed for the 
classical tiipoa. 

Gulf spin (American cadet), a man 
who is without iviDoiple of any 
kind, a worthiest fellow. 



Guldera (popular), reiiis. This 
word seems to have come from 
the gypsies, who derived it in 
tarn from the Slavoniao or 
Wallacbian xotdat. An English 
gypsy, on being asked what he 
■apposed voidttt meant, sog- 
gested that it was the same as 
vgdtn or teins. The French 
for reins ia gmdu. 

(old cant),a prost itute. 



Gninea-piga (Stock Exchange), 
diiectors of a pablio company. 
(Common), special jorymen. 
Also others whose fee i« a 
guinea, soch as doctors, veteri- 
nary surgeons — 

"Oh, oh,"erie<lP»t, "hoimyhiuKlitcho, 
Thou tumtm-fif, in buou tai bncchu. 
To Douna dm wcll.- 

~Cirmir: Dr. Sjittmj. 

(Anglo-Indian}, a nlcknamo 
given to midshipmen on board 
Indiamen in the last century, 
and still occasionally need. 



of that name ia deceived." In 
French slang a "gullible" man 
is pingavin, a bird more Muily 
deceived than the jvlL Id 
Dutch, fiM means soft, good- 
natared, easy to Impose on. 
" Hy is al te ?■«," he is far 
too yielding. From g^, eoft. 
" De w^ is gvl," the road is 
soft and yielding. To g^ to 
cheat, deceive. 

GuU-aharper (nantiool), one who 
preye npon simple or inezpe* 
rienced people or '■ gulls." 

Gnlly llole (oosters), the throat, 
or goUet ; termed also " red 
lane," '• gutter lane." (Oyp^), 
gvUo, the throat. 



:v Google 



Gully-raker — Gummy. 



Goltr-raker (np-coiuiti7 Aoitra- 
llaa), a oattle-whip. Th« meta- 
phor le doabtltM that of a m&n 
waUdiig down the oentrs of a 
gnllj, and commaiidliig both 
^M ot It With bla laih, like a 
man "coTeiing"thB whole net 
at lawn tennia when be itandi 
clow ap to Tollej. 

Ai the diT won on UwT amtaali bullocli- 
dnyi limliinf iloni heavilT in tbc nts of 
(be nad, the linle keg gf wUer it the lail- 
bouil twinging u iF it woold wrench out 
the staple it hung br, uid the driver >ppeel< 
inn ocauioneJlf u ume buUodc or olber 
br Dviit, rollowing up bi> ednonitkn bj 
m iweepiDK cot of hii gultr-rmJUr, jmd » 
lepoR like ■ mniket-ihal.— ^. C. Crmt: 
Buik-Li/i in Qnmulmiid. 

Gnlph or gulf, to (nnivenit;), to 
dicqnallfr. Vid* Qult. 
Bui I'm Mt K^ to let them /v//* me 

• Hcood tise ; thougb, tbef onght not to 

plough > man who'i been «l Huiow.— 

C. StJt: k'tnUml Grtiu. 

Gnlalt (proTlncial), "hold Tonr 
ffaUk," be quiet, hold your 
tongue. 

Gun (DnlTBTBitf and American), 
a trick, deo^on. "He was 
■peaking of the 'moon hoax' 
wlilcb gymmti 00 man; learned 
pbikiBOpben." Alio "grunma- 
Hon." The author of " A Toot 
throi^h Ooll^o" ■ayi: "Onr 
reoeptioD to college groimd was 
bj no means the moat botpit- 
able, ooniidering odt nnac- 
quain^mce with the mannen 
of the plaoe^ f or, at poor 'Treah,' 
we oooQ f onnd onradve* nbject 
to all manner of Aj trioki and 



■ puonutions ' from our pie- 
deoeMon the sophs." 

(Common), abnalTe language. 



JmtlUlli fmfi" PitUi. 
TofWH, to bunbng or decdre. 

Cnm-snim (Anglo-Indian), a kind 
of small dnmi or goog. "We 
hod supposed this word to be 
an InTsntioD of the late Charles 
Dickens, bat it seems to be a 
real Indian or Anglo-Indian 
word " (Anglo-Indian Qlossary). 



ffntnitifgj (common), to be ^m- 
magy, to be of a snarling, scold- 
ing disposttioD. Dickens has 
the character of Mrs. Onmmage 
In one of his works, the name 
of whom he evidentlj coined 
from this slang expression in 
the same waj that he gave the 
Borname of "Twist," ».«,, large 
appetite, to Oliver. 

GnnUBer (popular), explained b; 

quotation, 

t wn given to ondentend that the firit 
piaciici ■ llghiing pap had wii with a 



■ dof which had been a good one Id hit 

day, bat now wu old and toolhlcM 

/. G rw v m i tt J : Ltm-Lift D-M- 



J (popnlar), a person who 
has lost sll bis teeth and has 
nothing bet gnms to *' flash/' 
{.&, to show. (OnlTCrsltr), to 



:v Google 



438 



Gutmp — Gunmer. 



ttti fummf, to be in a pM^Kn- 

tico. (TUem), § 

cine. 



-T. Z. M'trt: 
HObSh /Vodrr*! Kmfmhir 



conpnbeuioii, iiit«Iligeficc ; 
niMf a^iaK, great intelligence 
or cmpicitj. (?aiai U a Yoik- 
tbire word lot e«mpf«IieDckMi 
or Dnderatandlng. GiniflwM is 
a reoogmsed word in Lowland 
Scotch, and not coniiderBd to 



(common), ooocefted. 
imption ukI gum^dtus f 



Gtim-mulier (popular), a Ava- 







Gtunncker (Anstnlian popular), 
a yoDi^ Aiutialian "native" 
(whiu). ao called, it li said, 
from their habit of eating the 
gum of the wattle tree, ao 
acacia gom verj mnch reaem- 
bling, in ita astringent qnalltiea 
and ita geneial appetuance, the 
gum arabio of commerce. 



Cnm-trec (nantical), "behaaae^ 
bis last gam<nt," it ta all np 
with him. 

Gna (popular), • thief, an alifan- 
▼iatioa of "gooofd).'' which 



(American), to 911a, to make 
a Tiolent effort, to ti7 bard to 
prodnoe an effect. "'Qaoninga 
stock,' " aaTi BaKlett, " is to nae 
BTeiy art to prodnoe a ' break,' 
when it is known tiiat a certain 
house is heaTily aapplied, and 
would be nnable to remst ao 
As it Is a New York 
word, it ma; poiaiblj be allied 
to the Datch goma, wfaioh means 
a violent push, 01 attack. As 
the word implies seoretlj ob- 
taining information, 01 finding 
ODt, it niaj alao be derived from 
the old Bnglisb gun, which has 



GmiBer (arm;), an artiUeiy olD- 



:v Google 



Gunny — Guts. 



G«aii7, gBdnr-tMC (Asglo-In- 
di>o), » Htok, nokiiig. In Eng- 
"■^ E7F"7 V« oi 0MnM Is 
also * bag of taj kind. Id 
ItaUkn gonna is a p«ttfoo*t. 

Gnoster (turf). ri<l« To Gun. 

Clip (Anglo-Indiin), the oommoa 
word MDODg BmopMos in India 
for pnttl«, gosaip, or tlttle- 



from day to day, vitb 119 ochcr wnuH- 
■BHU Ihin hKiini ths fn/YVi or IDHip 
or th< place— Jfn. SAimtt^i AhIM*- 
gnfkf. 

GoiTj (AmerioMi flshsimmi), de- 
oompooed Bpoiled omde oil, 
made from the liTen of ood or 
otber flab fBaitlett). Bancid 
oil. In Dutoli, guar mean* 
BpoODd, ai goor •iiU, apolled or 
tninod milk. The oil la nted 
for oowM work, lobrioatiDg 
whMli, and by tanners. 

GoftMT (Amerioan cadet), a (tont, 
short man, a "fatty." Xbe 
epithet la generaliy applied at 
Weit Point to the fatteat man 



Guber (oommon), one oTerflow- 
ing with aoitiment, with azag* 
gerated manifeatatioiu of ap- 



proTal, a rbtqwodiaei. 




vnw Ki 1 did Uu Sftnuday.' " 

Thai fWiAfr'r uftindicaia] suhuiiaim 
u qoencbal.— .f/frMv Timtt. 

GnihltJC (aommoD). According 
to feminine interpretation, the 
word guAvug iuuweia to the 
French phiase, " trop ezpamlf," 
and Ii more often nted in a 
repellent tlian in a landatorj 
■enae, bdng Iiabitnally applied 
to overstiained profeaaors of at- 
tachment, or eiaggented niani- 
featationa of approval. 

Got, to (Mshools), to eat more than 
la good for one. 



Gvah (oommon), exaggerated ahow 
of aenUment, or maoifwtatlon 
of a^ToraL 

Tbe E a damci pw jur y hu Hided, and 
nqr pnptriy. In a vcfdict of acquittal. 
Tba chait* oofhi dhw to ban been 
■■■da, and would oot ban biaa but far 
tbftt abaurd quality of f ac4 which la Id- 



Quoth Ralpbo, tiulr Ibat it M 
Haid miulu fee ■ man 10 do 
That hai but tatgmtt in 



(Artists),"no7i((tlnit." The 
ezpr«Mion ii pretty general, bat 
it ia more ipec^y lued byartiata 
to annoonoe their o|^lon tliat 
there La nothing in a picture. 



:v Google 



440 



Gutter — Gym-khana. 



Gitttef (Wiiiobeet«T College), a 
purl Into tha watar made t^ 
the *Ialeat contact at a bather'a 
bod7 with the wat«r when he 
taUa on Ui etomach. Freooh 
•ohoolboja oall thk " piqaer nn 
plat-TeDtre." (Binden), (he 
white epaoe between the page* 
of a book. (Common), to " lap 
the guOtr," to be in the last 
stage of intojdcatioii. 



ai of the wind. " Oy-wlod,' an 
arid Atj wind. Or a oorrnptiaa 
of ga. (Theatrical), to gwg b 
ew pU7 or aa 



In judpnoil on « dh pter hc 
Some ruf <1m poor pl*Tmilur'> bctt 



Cotter -duuoter (common), a 
■treMringet. 



or loob. From ttie efBg; of 
On; Fawkea, eairied aboat t^ 
Ktreet boja on Sth of Nonn- 
Gntter Una (popular), the niinaL ber. (Common), to ymg, to dia- 



GBtter-aliMh or Hdpe (popntar), a 
Tagabond child who prowli in 
the BtreetB, sent ont bj hia 
parent! to beg, if he baTe any, 
or begging on his own aoooont 
if be have none. 

Gnttle-thop (Bogbj), a pasuy- 

oook'a or tnok abop. 

W* cu hwilly brinK OOT poi to iniK 
Ihb word "puttytDok" u • MbnilsU 
Cot tha loni'<subliilie<l ud wtll-kDswn, 
Ihongh perhmps inakgiLpr. lune by which 
wckiKw ittch pUcU-^llftllf-ltl^.— X(- 
allttUtni t/Rt-tij. 

Gny (tbterss), 
a »«»," or tt 

SiUl li ii Ihi caniluit bnrdRi of Ilwit 
thoughu— '■ Ho" la di *tVl" A/*/ 
in«juu to chape. Tfav pHmAi difl&nlty u 
ihc nmifcloibu.— Aiwuiif JVw. 



o ran away. 



Greer or jltn;er (thlerea), a door. 
Orose has jigger, a latch or 
door; "dnb the figgfr" opaa 
the door; "gigyer dabber," the 
turnkey of a prison. A door, 
being for a thief an obstacle to 
be OTsroome, most be conaectad 
in his mind with the diTrrn nniim 
it creates when forced open, 
Lt., tbe creaking of the hinge*, 
clatter ot bolts, grinding of keja 
in tbe took. Hence the joobable 
origin of gigger or jiggtr, from 
the proTln^alisro to "gig," V> 
make a noise. French rognes 
call a door or gate ■»« Irardc, 
a prison door being for them a 
Acavy obstacle. It has lieoi rag- 
jested that jiggtr is a form ot 
the gypsy ttigga, a gat«. 

C9ni.4duuui (Anglo - Indian), a 
olnb or casino, Inclndiag a skat- 
ing -rink, lawn-tennis gronnd, 
and other amosementa. It was, 
nccordtng to the Angio-Indian 



:v Google 



Gym-khana — Had. 



GlocMij, tmkuowu twentj-Ore 
yean tgo. The word was in- 
veoUd in the Bombay Pre- 
■idencj, and was probabl; baaed 
npoa gtad^Uiana, " ball-bouic^" 
the name luaall; given in Hindu 
to an English iftcket-cooit. It 
Is alao a colonial term signify- 
ing a race-meeting got op by 
the military for gentlemen 

Gjp (Cambridge), a college ser- 
vant. Said to be derived from 
fp^, a Tnlttue. In reference to 
the said aervant's liberal inter- 
^etation of perqnisitee. This 



At Cunbridcvfr^, M Oiford "bcxhMi' 
ColL«giuu call the idle tooti 
Wbo fanuhn clMbo, on irnndi two. 
Abwtbi thtir tipi ud Inepi off diiiu. 
—C. Bt4t: ytrJMml Grttm. 

A more probable derivation 
is from n^sy, wbich haa given 
gip, a thief. 



lABBEN, hobben 

(gypey), food, meal. 
" Ffnaco mi • ddvel 
for a kOabto hib- 
beo I " thank my Lord 
tor a good meal I 

Hackamofc {Amerieau, Western), 
a head-stall for a bone^ " She 
went with only a Aaebu»or« to 
bring back a coD[de of ponies 
that were stiaying." 

S(|wio iIkii off u * twicmt oa (h* 
broiKbo iIh wu liduit. wiih otilj t. luuku' 
wttrt or hoid-VJill, (0 bring back ■ cotipl* 
of ponict that wtn ttxariiif frora ihe bancli- 
—F. Frntdi: SmMU mtJ Mietaiim. 

HscUe (popnlar],plack ; "toshoiv 
haddt," to be willing to tght. 
" Haoklee " are theloi^ f eathen 
on the back of a cook'a neck 



Hack, to (football). "Hacking" 
is a term used at f ootbaU to 
indicate an irregnlar and savage 
practice, no proper part of the 
game, and now taUinig into deana- 
tnde. 



Whik nnhliBf once not fv fton bin, I 

obicrrtd on turniiiE nnind 
A mu itdop and pnnnd to fuek op loiii*- 

tfain( frcu tbc Cfouad ; 
He cone* 10 Bc ukd then UT* >><•" Will 

ysn buy thli fold fine I " 
Said 1. " Ht lad, t «■'( «< Ao^-I w ii'i 

nowchihiiifr" 

—Smt'- Thati m Ctami tat 

ItflAlHU. 



:v Google 



Haddock — Hair-pin. 



Haddock (popolM), * pniie. Tbe 
tonn prob»bly b«loiig«d orlgin- 
ftllj to fl>b-b>wkan; 

Haddocks (Btock Exobange), 
Gnat Hoith of Sootlaud Ordl- 
DaiyStock. 

Had H, or hifn, oa toait, did him 
thoTonghlT, oompist«l7 finithed 
blm. (Pc^nlar), all Mrred np, 
•11 nady, prapwred. 

1 land bet, ihu wu cl«r. 
And oh, a« 4U « « twA lb* had, 
For I bonibt ha ■ diuoH] risf , 
Thai ih* TOT Boi diir ikt boiled amr 
Wiih OwWr <)>■ BUiba kbf . 

—Bmlladtj T. F. KttttH. 

Hag (WlnclMcter Collc^), an 
DDgncioiu epithet i^iplied to a 



Hacker (oostormoiigeTs). The 
kagi^ !■ to the fmlt and vege- 
table markete what tlie " Bua- 
maree " Is to the flah market— a 
jobber and ipecolator. 

Hair (commoD), "ke^ joarAair 
on," do not be eidted, keep 
jooi temper; varied to "keep 
jonr ehirt on." 
Whbth* 



" To take a tatr at tbe dog 
that bit jan," to take a dram 
In the montiag after a too free 
Indnlgenoe in Uqaw on tbe pre- 
Tioit* evening. 

But bt HDt, onr oi|bI U Ihe doi do 



It ia tontetimei mpjiiti to 

other homtaopathic [ weiliiiiti 

(0. Derlei). 

■uHioo ihu h(r na wm to b* coed 
by s "lUv or the dsf nbo b 



The MTing, which baa ba> 
come a recogniaed phraae, pm- 
bahlf originated in a bdief 
that a dog Iiite coold be cored 
by an application of tbe aaimal'i 
kair to the wonnd, or it inaj 
be a VBrdoD of the aajing, 
" Similia aimilibn* oiuaiitar." 
The French have tbe common 
phraae, " reprendre da poil de 
Ubtte." 



. Thb 



Hair-pin (Amerioan), a m 
odd expreadon becanM popular 
aboQt iSSo. It ia deriTed from 
a fancied reeemblanoe of tfae 
hnman Bgnre to a donble-tined 
hair-pin, Jtut aa in Shakepeata'a 
time a thin man wai compared 
to a forked radish. In America 
the dmile la popularly extended 
to clothes-peg* and tonga. It 
ia heard moat freqaently in tbe 
form, "That'e tbe kind of Mr- 
Aye, Ihit ii jiM ibe hmr-fi* 



Yen take i 



:v Google 



Half. 



Cul if tou'r only hnr-fua. 
Oh, theo, bcwue of tonfi 1 
—Cartyt/CimHi: A B^Ud. 

Half an eje (oautdcal), "seeing 
with haif su est," disoeroiog 

easily. 

H«lf-«4ttrpriM (London slang), a 
black eye. From a music-ball 

•ODg. 

Half-baked, toll- baked (pro- 
vincialism), laoking in intelli- 
gence. The French equivalent 
for this is, '■ 11 u'a pas la t«te 
bien cnite." 

H« trcued hi( couip h ■ nn of bum- 
Ibm luAiitic, ud u ther ht ■■< Devon, 
liatf-halHd.-C.Ki»ftk): WufwrnrdHn. 

Half-bord (old cant), a sixpence, 

Half-flr flata (tbieres' slatig), 
TODghs ready to be hired to do 
tbe dirtj work of thleveB. 

HaU-srown tbad (American), 
stnpid fellow. As the Oermans 
B»7, " Nicht mehr Verstand als 
do Rekrot im Ifatterleibe," 
no mora intelligence than an 
tmbom recruit. 



He Mid it wttfa ft limple toae kod hbtc 

• limpla mile, 
Yov tWTCT UT ■ li^ffrwuni tkmd 

onc-haJT u void af guiic. 

—Tilt Cram Old XtmM. 

Hatf-man (UDtieal), a landsman 
or boy in a coaster not deserv- 
ing the pay ot a " full man." 

Half-marrowa (naatical), inoom- 



Hatf-mooo (old cant), a periwig. 

Hatf-monniins (common), "to 
have one's eje in Aa^-moutWn^," 
to have a black eye. Latterly 
termed " half a soiprise," from 
a mnsio hall song, " Oh I what 
a sorpriae." 

Half-past kining' time, it'a (popn- 
lar), an impadent answer often 
made by a man or boy to a girl 
who asks bim what o'clock it is. 

If I hmV-tmit lattmt limt, toA tim* to 



ll'i alwiys half-pttt Idainf limi. aod 
—C. AnOttnf. BalUd. 

Such phrases as the above are 
generally snatches of popelar 
Eongs, or are often embodied in 

Halfrocked(popnlaT), half.vritted, 
siUy. 

Half leaa orer (common), half or 
indeed wboUj drnnk. Common 
at first among sailors, it has now 
Npread to all classes of the oom- 
monity. 

Thi Licaual Victiuilei han pmcnird 
> ucaad lifc-bo» u ItK K.N.I.t. OT 
onine ihe wiU be mumcd by k corkV 

crtw, wbo, tbcpQgh Ihey auy be toinciiina 



Half 'im (common), an abbrevia- 
tion for half a glass of whisky 
and water. 



:v Google 



Haa— Handicap, 



h of ill* Twt»d roB fM ■ 



Dnw,* 



II Ihii ihc deli- 
tKinocHoCiA^'iri.. When 
d RoBuo, ud ClurUc Moon, 
DM to mcDIioi the CalJcry ud Ihc Ruin- 
bow, tun Eogd link whiikiu u tvopoicc 
■ dDC. ibm wiU be pw lim in Flon 

HaU (UniTenit;), a general term 
Use the unnmon dinner serred 
in the college halls at a Dniver- 
ait7. Hence the verb " to AaU." 

Ha-loT (pidgin Cantonese), 
don I " Ua-lay, jon fella' top- 
aide dat go-down Ka-iofl bab 
got one plecee talkee to' jon ear- 



Hanaaeiing (printen). This ii a 
slang aiur e asi on naed bT com- 
poaiton to indicate oTcrcha^- 
Ing time woA— to charga man 
" boors " tlian actnaUy ei^aged 
on a partioular job tx woric and 
thus cheating, 

Hammenmith (popular). " he has 
bean at BammtrwmHk," be hat 
receiTed a teniflc thiuhing. 



Halres (Wincherter CoUege), half 
Wellington boots. Tbej are 



Hmm (American), a loafer. 



Hamlet (American), a captain ol 



In Scottish parlance, aooord- 
ing to Robert Bami, sometimes 
called a "rousing irhid," or in 
the London Teraacalara "whop- 
per," a " lapper," a "good "nn," 
in oontradistinGtion to a pettj 
falsehood, called b; ladies and 
children a " taradiddle." 

Hammer-headed (oodudod), 
■tnpid, doll, ohtose. Pouiblr 



—AOim : Htiat Scra/t. 
To beat, Ul-tnat 



Aiflyu 



Hampatead Heath uilar (popu- 
lar), a term of ridionle — no 
sailor at alL What the French 
call "marin d'ean doDoe," ci 

"amiialsniase." 

Hams alinmk (tailors), sldea of 
tronsers shmnk at thigh. 

Hand-em-down (prorinclal), a 
Nottbamptonshire terra for a 
second-hand garment. Correa- 
ponds to the French "dtero- 
cbes-moi ja." 

Handicap, to (common). This 
term, ai used in racings ia a re- 
cognised word. ItlsalaoiiBedin 



:v Google 



Handle — Hang. 



a m«Uphorio Ktue to lignif; 
to make even, to eqoaliee the 
ohance*. 

Handle (cohuhod), a poriOD with 
a Utle te 5aid to have a handU 
to bis name. Tbla is a very 
comnoD and dow reccf aUed 

Hand-me-down piftce (taUon), 
a repairing tailor's, uow often 
Btjled a "nevor-too-late-to- 

meud shop." 

RtCulM- kMMd-mu-dtfimi, (ltd DO mi»- 
!■](•— u|h— bow cu he up«l Ihe •oild 
to imUow ihu Bcdklial—Ditrtil Frtt 



Hand oat (Amerioan), an ei- 
prasion fully eiplainad in the 
following extract from "The 
Weatem Avemiu, or Toil and 
Travel in Further North Ame- 
rica," bj Morley Roberta — a 
work which should be read b; 
erery one before attempting to 
"ronghit" in the "West";— 
" Up to this time the; had alwaja 



Handseller (popular), a street or 
open-air vendor. 

Handiome, Americanism for 
grand or beantifql. " The Falls 
of Niagara are one of the 
hai\d*omxH things in tb« United 
States." "Teal indeed, they are 
Teiy degant." A siinilar abiue 
of the adjective is to be foond 
In Bach vulgar phrases ai " The 
cheese ia magnifetnl" "The 
hotter was jplciufuj," "The^ga 
were ;tr«-rafa," "The whole 
thing was mamUoui," "The 
liqnor was jjlorioiu," " The bread 
was hmvtifiU," or "What ajroMl 
oU time we bad of it." 

Handsome aa a laatyev't cocpw 
(American), a sarcastic compli- 
ment (C. Lelaud Harrison : MS. 



meals in the tents Handsomely (nautical), gently. 



with knives and forks and plates 
(separately], but here the cooks 
brought out a huge can of soup, 
some potatoes, great lumps of 
boiled beef, a pile ot plates, and 
a bucket of knives and forks. 
A ohoms of growls rose up from 
ns on all sides. . . . 8omeof the 
boys said it was a regular haiui 
out, and tbat we looked like a 
crowd of old bummers. Bum- 
mers is tb e American for beggars, 
and a hand out is a portion of 
food handed ont t 



Handsomely orer the bricks 

(nautical), go caatiously, have 

Handsprings (popular), to Qbuek 
Kindtpringi, to throw somer- 

Hang (common), " not to care a 
Aojij," aynnnvmous with " not to 
careaGg." Jiffg, or "Aanj^itl" 
denotes that the speaker does 
not care, is vexed, or disap- 
pointed. 



:v Google 



446 



Hangers — Hang. 



mildji't (ul » 
All t Csptwn Lh Buticr I wi'n IedIie 



k bob on ibMl bait Pi 



Hucen (popnlar), gloTes, gene- 
tbU7 wall worn, curled id the 
huiil, bat nerer pnt on. 

Hans-it'Ont to (priDten), to 
" (kolk " oQ B Job'-not to do 
juKioe when od time work. 

Hai^ it apk to (American}, to 
charge to ooe'i acoonnt, to pat 
down to credit, to ohalk it be- 
hind th« door. AIm Bnglish, 
llang U «p, Blat« It. 

Hanff of * tbinK, to get or ha.-n 

the (Engliih and American), to 
become f»nHll»r with, to leant 
the art, manner, or wa; of 
managing or using anjtbing. 
"I am bad at m; leatoii* jait 
now," laid a new pnpil apolo- 
Ketloallj, " bat I expect to 
do well aa sood as I've got 
tht Xang of the Eohool-bonBe. " 
BariJett derive* tbia, verj in- 
genlouslj', from the adjaating 
ot tools to their handles, which 
is known as hanging ; bat hang- 
ing in the sense of dependence, 
r^tionship, and adjastment, 

Indo-Bnropean langnagea, if not 
in all others. 



Hai^l-off (printen), an « 
nsed to conyej a rejectioa or 
BToidance of anTthing objec- 
tionable. To "keep off" or 
" fight shj " of anything. 



] RDKnbrr rbe d^c fnm the Fourth of 
July occnirini jut KAsvKnU, whjcb I 
a1>bnloil by > A>v rmt—Bntlmt: fim 



Used aa a verb, i 
treat, to have oi poasess, alao (o 
dwelt ; "from the ancient ciw- 
tom," sa^ Hotten, " of *'«"ging 
oat Biga&" 

ta/r' Mr. Pickwick npUcd tbu b« ni 



Valnre.— i>ibk(iu.- Pidmidt Pmftn. 

"Cc boD Edauard " ued ta lung ml— 
and hung v^— in a cold ukI bAm-likc«lri^rir 
in tba Rnc d'Amairdim.— AirW > FrM- 



Smbz, to (popolar and sporting), 
to be in a desperate state. Said 
when a man cannot tun one 
way or the other. Dntoh, " tos- 
Boben Aaa^ot en wnrgen," to be 
between banging and strang- 
ling. (American), " it all k^ttgi 
on him," it *U depends on him. 
In Dutch, " De laak iaiul aan 



Hang np ft bill, to (poUtknana), 
explained by qnotatioo. 

at Hurt of its ttftfa, and ib«i to 1>t it 



, Google 



Hang — Hap. 



Hang up hia bat (commoD), tc 
nuke one'E mU pennuientlr ei 
home, to board sod lodge in i 



She nplicd, " Mr. Spofi|<, I doo'l know 



Hang up ooe'a fiddle, to (Amert- 
can), to give up business, to 
Tsaigii, to desist, to retire horn 
pnblio into private life. 
Wben ■ nun Ioki hii leaiper, and ain'l 

ODoL he miihi u well ktrng ■/ UiJlMH. 

—Smm Slick. 
ir ■ nun mt fintJMwo Ii not in ■ fiir 

•poili, be raighl ■• well kimi tif hii 
/UUIl-^Danit Strmna. 

(CommoD), "to \ang up me'» 

jUile anywhere," to adapt one's 

self to cireunittanccs. 

Hang np. to (thieves), to rob with 
violence. American thieves use 
the expression "holdup" Fro- 
bablj from hoisting a man on 
one's back, by means of a rope 
ronnd his neck, while an ac- 
complice robs him. Freoch 
thieres oallthis mode of robbery 
" la faiie an pire FraDjois." 

iUok (gypsy). & wea 

Hankin (trade), trickery. To 
make common work i^pear to 
be the best quality. 

Haol^-panky, adroit nbatitu- 
tion, palming, slcight-of-haud 



447 

in legerdemain. The gypsiea 
□se AvclxNy and ihtiuty to signify 
deceit In Hindustani, the par- 
ent of gypsy, hogs^ prononnced 
hodea or honlcu, with the suffix 
ioicB (a box), means legerde- 
main. In gypsy, htukeny poka, 
or ponke*. means the adroit 
■Dbstitation by sleigh t-of- hand 
of a bundle containing lead or 
stones for another containing 
money or valoables. 

Htnk^pmnliy and hooB-poca) an euh 
one h»lf «lmo« puR HLudgiuioL— r** 
EmtHik Cjfiia ^id iluir Lanfimt'. 

Hankj-panky bloke or pile o' 
mag) {Ibeatncat), a conjuror. 

Han^-spankr (popular), dash- 
ing, in dashing style ; refers 
specially to garments. 



1 (coster), a chop. 

Hant, bannt (American), a ghost. 
It is possibly the Malay word 
hant, an evil spirit. 
" II nuil be Beck'i tntml,' nigteutd 



pmdiet. "it iaa look like ■ (hi>u.~— 
SUria. 


Bol dem iiiu , 
ya kindn Iskei ■ 
»d cbaxge inH. 


html,. Wld«i. den 
« ki» d»p d« body 
.t«eoi.woir.-f-(/. 



Han-tun (i^t^in), one bvndnd. 

H^ bartot, a jocose term for 
a woman's nnder-garmmta. 
Wrap • rateal is a similarly 
facetious term for a man's over- 
coat. Hap - hati'il has been 
modified or oomipted into haj- 



, Google 



Hc^portk — Hard. 



Ha'pottb o' 

HAbou Corpi 



n It, to (Americu), to 
it with «n7thiBg bj chance 
or aooidentallj. This phiaoe, 
like "to bi^ipeii in," it, "to 
ba^wn to c«ll In," " to dmp ju 
OD b; kocident," is evidently 
derired from the r^nUr Verb 
"to happen," bnt It ia worth 
noting that in Dntch Kappen 
meeiiB to match, or tnap. 



romif Mkr; ya raighi bn ktpt 
«I ( lick, till Otej nr boned -i 
u SIntiu: Ammd flu WrrU t. 



Hipper, Upper (g7P>7}, *« c*"T 
»w«7- Boppetxort, a policeman 
(one who cairiei awaj). 

Happ7-KO-hlck7 (common), ^vcn 
as a ilang term bj Hotten and 
others, bnt to be lonnd in 
Engliab diationaries of tbe 
banning of tbe eighteenth 
centorj as a recognised term 
nnder the form ''liappy-be- 
lnolc7," at haiard, go as it 
wili. French slang, " va commu 
je te poDsse." 

Happj Ktnnu (Aostralian popu- 
lar), throwing np one's foal. 
If a person feel* sick, feels his 
" dinner in his mouth," as Eng- 
lish people say, he will sa; that 
" he has the happg returat," 



(Ameiican rhTming Blang), 
iant ooai, sUtct and gold, hard- 
ware, false coin, hard taetil. 



Hard caM (American), a Teir 
oommon old-hahioned expres- 
don for a worthless, sbameleM 
man, or any one from wbeni 
nothing good can be expected. 
One niBj sometimee see in 
*> stores " lists of iorri coto hm^ 
npk {.£, of defaiJting debtors. 

A ptirifitd bod7 lui b«*ii 
Ohio. It ii DM ibc Aim kar^ 
bo com to licbl in that 
—DtlrmI Fnt Prtu. 



Hkfd cbeeie (Rojal Hilitar? 
Academj), varied si 
'■ what cheese ! " 

riifeCUKBBB. 

Hardeniiiff nuuket (ccnuDercial). 
The market is said to harden 
from tbe purchaser's point of 
view when prices advance. 
Also nsed when one's chances 
of eoccess are decreasiDg. 

Take i( aH tog*1h«r, hii ii Te wha bccDDunc 
■ mockery and ■ miicry. Thcmtrimonial 
nurlEfl was kMrdminff aipuEBE him. — 

I.e., the possibility of marriage 
vras decreasing. 



:v Google 



Haid liiiM (oommoii), ill Inok, 
budahlp. 

*jfrrf Uitu, iln'l ft, Chu-lu, aid ttarutrT 
A bbuy'i « bajDCy, dar boy, 

Aad fuu fcon thai ■ xiaeeK and • tky- 
Urk U vol I did mlva^ ■Q3^fi 

A AtR*t-nuli U BDHlbink iptcadacioui to 



Hard-monthed im' (popular), an 
obotlimw peiaoD, or one difficult 
to deal with. 

Hkrd neck (tailon), a great 
amount of cbeek and impn- 

Hard or aoft drinka (AmedcMi). 
Id the Doited State* uij lignor 
whicb la decidedly Intoiicatiiig 
li called Jiard, while soda-water, 
lemonade, root-beer, ginger- 
beer, and tU« like, are m/t. 
UkewiM the French call tbes« 
reipectlTely raidt, and dma. 

Hard row to boa (American), a 
Te(7 commoD phraae to exprees 
• bard taaL 

Capuia Ben dglwd. I Ihonilil utc 
Too w>i taaviDf ■ ktni rtm it ker, utd 1 
ihtia^t\SkttBoat!ii.—FrmitcaLaPrmtl: 
CmfUin Bni Cktitt. 

Hard-tbell (American ), t horonghlj 
orthodox, tuiTieldlng, " bide* 
booDd," or conserrattTB in reli- 
gion or polilics. The flnt persona 
known by thii name were the 
old-fashioned B^>tiit« in Oeor- 
gia, who regaided all reform* 
aa new-fangled bnoiea, ao that 
the; eren diaapproved of tem- 
perance. It is said that once 



» 449 

when there waa to be a great 
leligiooa revival, a member rose 
and said: — "Ihev to complain 
of Brother Smith. He Is a rich 
man, he la worth six or seven 
thousand dollars, and yet he 
has only contribnted one gallon 
of whisky towards this revival. 
Now I'm a pore man, biit, to up- 
hold the canse of Christ, 1 hev 
given a whole bsx'l of sperita, 
for when it comes to snstaining 
religion I'll jest do my level 
best." The name Aanf-MsU, or 
" hards," was given to a division 
in the Demooratlc party in 1 848. 
Both in religion and in politics 
the opponents of these " ortho- 
dox" parties were called "soft- 
shells." 

A Dmnbo' of iwirnming-bath propmton 
btm twcB fined in th> Unlied Sinio for 
opdung their eubliihmcnti bd Saiidir 
Duiniiiii. Tbt prMcculon wtn nrUin 
rclifiou (I) luDUia nho muidliued ■ 

Subliuh. G«iiiiiiK kmnlduU faulin. 
irho an mad on the lubjact of rtUgion. 
an luuallj diny in their hmlnu, and 
HnnfelT ignoK [Tie leil, " CIcaaLlDeaa u 
next to (odlioeaL --/'■.■. 

Hard ttnfT (np- country Anatra- 
lian), intoxicating llqnors. The 
bnahman has a great contempt 
for non-alcoholic llqaora. In- 
toxicating llqnors ha calls hard 
■dtf, as the only thing not too 
"•oft" for men. 



knowi enry one 


and < 


iWT on* 


ihim brhi.Chmdu.nu. 


1*. Each 


JriDk. are oiled fo. 


heu 




«u»t driak iard 


"Hf. 




t. HiibiuineBH 




iffet. He 


pHvale bo«le filled 


wilh 


.e>, &Dn 


,he(lll>hS.gl.Balt< 


irreee 


inD( pay- 



, Google 



Hard — Harromer. 



H«dt«ck(iMoUcal),tliIpbiMniiti. 

Al Ihil puticnlir BoBKnt I tlnsld tuK 
prrfcmd tome eofftc jtnd lutrd tmck to & 

Trmil. 



Hard np (commoD), mnting fur 
Boything, short of moDej, poor, 
varied to " hard up for cash." 

S.ii:h it <»nl wwnin't whim— ' 



one who bAckona, orden 70a off 
to the stocks. ViJc Bbul 

" It ia nrj probable ttwt Uua 
word waa derived from the name 
of the celebrated magistrate 
Harman, who waa as well 
IcDowD to all the thieves of Eiig> 
laud daring the reigs of Elln- 
beth, a« was George Borrow to 
the gTpaiea In that of Victoria " 
(Charles O. Leland: MS. Not« 
of Gjpsj Lore). 



(old c 



nt), 



—BirdtFr*i^a-i. 

Bi.r K he A«™r uft' •■VtTjr—Pil' 

(Popelar), a man who picks 
up cigar ends In the street. 

Hard-npaesa (commoD), a state of 
impoverishment. 
Bill in <iih*r di<iHci ihtrc ven rnqncni 



Hardware blokea (thieves), n 
of Binninghajn. 

Hare U (American thieves), : 



Harlequin (theatrical), a sove- 
reign. 

Hantuui beck (old cant), a con- 
stable. It has been snggested 
that Aarnwn httk is, literaltj, 



The BdU and RulSu Aj [Ik Hwwu 
b«k ind hmrmtrnt—Tlummt DtUhiT : 
L-Mcnu mmd CMndU Liiil. 

Fiom Aam, the back nprighl 
timber of a gate, sjnonjmon* 
vrith stock or poet ; and same 
Eulhx used in other cant words, 
SQch aa " lightmana," daj' ; 
" daikmans," night ; " raS- 
mans," hedges, boshes, woods; 
"togman," coat. 

Haro, hadro, hiloae (gTpsv). 
copper; kim, a copper, ut., a 
penny. 

Harper, an Irish shilling which 
bore the fignre of a harp, 
and was only worth ninepeaoe 
(Wright). " Harp " b a call at 
pitcb-aod-toss, also "moslc." 



f (theatrical), a term of 
derision need to describe a 
pathetic and powerful artiste, 
male or female, who is accDS- 
tomed to Aarrow the feelings of 
the audience. 



, Google 



Harry — HabJmay. 



fUny (oommoD), to pUy old 
Hany witii OM, I* aTiumjmoiis 
with to pla7 tlia darll, to annoy 
or nin on*. Old Harrt ia, of 
oODiBtt, the "old gwUemkn," 
UMderU. It haa been niggcMed 
that Barry li ttas word lairf; 
bnt it ia pouibla that it comes 
fiom to Aorrtr, to toment, to 
taai in ineoea, bo that Old HaTrg 
wonld llt«i«U7 m nn the old tor- 
mentor, the "aieh tormentor," 
"old scntch." Again, it may 
rimplj be the dlmlnatiTe of 
Henry, old "Niok" or Nichohw 
being another name for the 
deriL SailoTB often iwew " by 
the Lord Hany." 

HafiyBhiff (rbyming alang), sDnfL 

Hanyl Hanrl (prorincial), a 
deriilTe eiplatiTe addieaaed by 
workmen to tbeli matee when 
the latter are oTerladen. 

Harry Soph. Ttu* U given u a 
i«cogniMd term by Webtter, 
with the definition of a nniTCT' 
aity atndsnt at Cambridge who, 
having aofflcient standiiig to 
take the degree of B.A., declares 
himseU a candidate foradegree 
in law or phytic. Ttom ipl^a^ot. 

Hub (common), to make a hath 
of It, to JDmble together, to 
spoil ; to settle his Aorf, to kill 

(American eadete), a term 



paration of enpper in the rooms, 
snbseqiient to the extinction of 
lights, and eonteacy to rale. 



IKd nand to inlulf ih* nMnry •omII, 

And ill wtat tnimlh u l aumici InlL 

—Ti* Wat PtbU Ser»f B-k. 

Haslar !>■{■ (nautical), the nnieee 
of the naral hospital, Haslar, 

Hatches (nantioal), nnder Aotski, 
■efely stowed away, dead and 
bnried, in dlsttesa, trouble, or 
debt. 

Hatchet (tailors), a name rnlgarly 

appliedtoapl^oTngly woman. 
(Hantical), "to sling the Aa<«U(," 
to sulk ; ths reTsrse of to bnry 
the halehet or tomahawk, a prac- 
tice of Red Indians in time of 



Hatchet, to throw or allnc the 
(common), to tell lies, to " draw 
the long bow." 



Hatch, match, ai 
column (American and Joor- 
nallstic], a Tnlgai epithet to 
describe the births, marriages, 
and deaths anuonnoements in 
the press. An eqaJTalent la the 
cradle, altar, and tomb colomn. 

Hatch -tfaoke (Winchester Col- 
lege). The twm iignifles foim- 
der's days, which are holidays 
wltb Amen Chapel at ii AM. 
There are three in Long Half and 
two in Short Halt. Nobody need 
benptiU9A.M. TheWardenand 
Fellows on thcee days assemble 
and discuss college aflairt. 

Hatchway (oantieal), the month. 



:v Google 



Heod-beetUr — Heap. 



iBOnd of /W<av «■ ■ Am4 be mm 
-CalpaUm Ntwt. 

Heftd-beetler (woikmn), tbe 
bnllf of k worluhop. 

Heftd boy (BoTml UUitarr 
AckdemjX the senior nnder- 
olBc«T. 

Hesd-cook and bottle-msher 
(popnUr), ■ gsnerkl Berrknt. 

HMder (UUort), a notabiUtj. 



(American cow-boy 
■lang), a pillow or aoTthing put 
under the head at night (C, 
Lelaod Haniaon: MB. Ameri- 
canisnu). 

Head-qnaiten (tort), Kewmarket. 

Heftd-nila (popular), tho teeth. 
Originally k sea phrase, tbe head- 
nnb being tbe short rails ot the 
head extending from the back 
of the Sguie to the cat-bead. 

Whi1« 



portautpetaotiBge. Fromwrsaf, 
a boatswain, according ta Hot- 
ten. Bridentlj tbe same as the 
proTindal Acoct Sir Bag, a pnn- 
cipal, the diief agent ot actat 
inaoythlng. 

Hcada ont I (AsMrieau nniTer- 
■ity), a cry of alann aad wara- 
btg to be Ml gnard when a pro- 
fessor or master la near, and 
when any laA or spne la In 
progreea. 

Head alatiaa (ap-eonntry Anaiza. 
lian), the homeMead on an 
Aoatraliau station. Vide Bra- 
Tion. Tbe Acad notiait la the 
house oocnpied by tbe owner or 



Soce ibcypi 



Head robber (popular), a bntler. 

Hew! robbera (joaraaliatic), pla- 
giarists, those wbo «teal tbe 
work of other men'a brains. 



lion *n ioTuiaMr olhd. . . Tlw hauB 
wtn comforttbtr built, uid ot UimlnMr 
dnifn ; m imrfc (■rdm ikdMnfid thtm t 
cmpen coTcnd ihfi vcnDcUhl and «l- 
buUdmei, of vfauJi t^Lav were 1BU17 ; and 
Kiwi pKddocLm of gnmt «t«Dt, CDCudcd 
by tubituitiiLl poit akI mjl fcncs^ str- 
nundcd tha whole— .4. C. Grant : tmtJi- 
Li/i H Qmamltmd. 



Hwltbetiei (co 
slang abbrerlation for tbe 
Health Bxblbition. 



Tht D^lf Nna aaU^m. 



HMp, atnck all of r (popnlai). 



:v Google 



Hearing — Hedgehog. 



4S5 



Hearbic clmta <old cftnt), ths 
«ua, now tenncd "leMhen" 
or " logt." 

HMftbim. London cads, who 
fiod • Dtune (or ererjtblng, thus 
call a cigar, evidently a *er; 
cheap one. 

HeaTe a booth, to (thierea), to 
plunder a honse. Alio to 

HeaTCnlr coUar and Uppel 
(tailors), a nama gireu to collars 
or lappala that turn the wrong 
way. 

Heover (old cant), the breast, 
DOW called the " panter ;" henoe 
htmtn, persons in love. 

Heavj draffoona (Oxford Dniver- 
■Itj), bugs (Hotten). 

HaaTjr awell (oommon), a great 
■well. 

And Mr. Cnckit U ■ luae]i tmill, ui'l 
ht. rt^l—Ckaria Diittia: Otmr 
Tmtt. 

HeaT7 wet (common], strong malt 
liquor; princlpall7 nsed to de- 
•oribo porter, itont, or donble 
■tout, and somstlmet called 
treble X., beoanae designated by 
poblicaiM and brewers as XXX. 

To Iht BhH Pout Id lu fo, 
Th« will doudi of bua blow. 
And ear am well rorfci 
In s flood ef 4iM!r wv<. 



Hedge, to (tuf), to reverse on 

advantageous terms the prevlon* 

order o( a wager— «.;., If a per* 

•on takes loo to lo abont a 

horse for a future race, and 

■nbtequently lays 90 to lO 

against the same animal, he 

has hadgtd his money — he may 

win £\o, but cannot under any 

clronnutanoes lose. 

Yon rand luck ■ winner bdbn foa aa 

win ia aajr cut, tjttan of no flyttem. OF 

cmine, ■ honi cu be Uld igunU, or a 

bel mmrbeilf^rif^, bnllhlldoelDOIlpplT 

to IhelvekiDC of hortci oa a lyiltna. — Bird 

(Popular), to get away on the 
appearance of danger. 

Hedge-bottom attomer or teli- 
citor (legal). This Is applied to 
a person who, not beli^ himself 
a solicitor, or who, if he Is, has 
not taken out his c^tiflcate 
(or perhaps has been a aolicltor, 
but has bean struck off the 
rolls lor QDproteesioaal con- 
duct), sets up in bnsiiiess as a 
solicitor under the name of a 
man who is a solicitor, and thus 
evades the penalties attaching 
to those who act as solicitors 
without being duly qualtfled; 
because, although all the busi- 
ness is done in the name <rf 
another, yet be it is who is the 
real principal, introdDoiug the 
clients, doing the legal business, 
and pocketing the fees ; the 
other is only a dummy to be 
used as a egnie-hGad for evading 
the law. 

Hedgeht^, to (Northampton pro- 
vincial), to reveal, to open, to 



, Google 



456 



Htdgekog—Htd'tap. 



Mog to light, 
giving sTidanae in an Aidie 
Conrt nid 'tliB priio&el JUglgt- 
loggtir On being ukedwliM 
he meant, he taid tliat ' a letfpc- 
Ac>7 i*beti in watar opened; ead 
the man, when they gare him 
identj of beer, opened and told 
all he knowed.'" 

Hedg«r (tnif). Fub Hkdob. 

Thiita tuWihwIlabal whcD Ui pUiu 
UuM ba pUin lo mrj pvntv, ihvp. 



He'd play hit hand for all there 
waa ia It {American), a yvrj 
•ignifloant iDtimatlon that a 
man would make all that he 
ooold bj fair means or fool. 

" t vM moifhty hud iip Ht the tlfne — 
ba thai I ml jnM Boakeyms wltli the 

" You bit yw ! * ofed J«ke ttttm iIh 
nw in il. UThsw. "—F. Fnmth : Smdilt 



Heeler (Ajneriean), an aeomu- 
pUoB of the pooket-book drop- 
per. The ifder stoops belUnd 
the Tictim and strikes one of 
his heels m if bj mistake. This 
makes him look down, and so 
draws his attention to tbs 
pocket-book which lies on tbtt 
gionnd. The dnpe it abont to 
pok it np, when the dropper 
steps forward and claims half 
of whatever maj- be in the 
pocket-book, but olTen to i«- 
linqoish his share for a oertain 
sun, ten or twenty doUara. 
The dope, who has tak«i a peep 
and ascertajned that the dum- 
my is stoSed with bank-notaa^ 
pays the money, and then finds 
ont later Uiat he has bought 
conntetfeat bills. "Hmlen and 
strikers," men who beset can- 
didates for office to extort 
money from them on dira« 



(Winohester College), a jnmp 
into the wat^ feet fliat. ftenoh 
sohoolboyi oaU this "one chan- 



Heeled (Weatem American), 
armed, weaponed, well de- 
fended. An allusion to the 
practice of aiming the birds in 
oock-flghting with steel sporg. 
"Were both men ludtdt" i.t., 
wen they both armed. 

ir I'd hul ur ihow, rd tuvc dnwn 
Ml '«ii ri(ht a<H) — 1 wwlKt 10 let'blc 
b^: bill 1 hidn'l CM no WincboUr 



Heels, to tnro tqi <old), to die. 
also " to torn ap one's toes." 
Avariant was to "topple np the 



Heel-t^K a small qnantity of 
Uqnor left in the gUss bj any 



:v Google 



Htd-tap—HeU. 



one who drinks or pratenda to 
drink tbe honour of a propoMd 
tout. This was held Id the 
nltm ooDTiTial dayi ot ma not 
rM7 lemote Mioecton to he a 
mark of diareapMt or ot effl- 
mlnac;, and wm oR«n met b; 
the waroiag of " No ftcrf-topt." 
Also the fag end of a bottle. 

Nick togk off hu tuil-Uf, bowed, imihd 
Hum 



—iHftUih Lffdi. 

Htd-tft properly are pieces 
of leather futeued on the bot- 
tom of a boot or shoe when 
repairing the sole. Hence the 



He-foo (pidgin), a skr-rocket, lite- 
rally "a rise-fire" (Cantonese). 

Hef^ (Amerioan). Bartlett de- 
llnM this as " heavy " in the 
sense of weight. It is also used 
to indicate anything great, re- 
markable, or eitcaordinary in a 
" moral " as well as a physical 

Id onmt Ibcy knom mVial ■ perlDcefcd* 
(ipvlociinda} b, fmn ■coin' 'cm in ptctum, 
bnl lh«y nntr tcvd m rc»l m j ch i n *, and 
ii'd be > k^ tnu for -cml— rtdHi 
Slnm: Artmi Iki fftrid tn II SHytU. 

He 8:cit there with both feet 
(American), meaning that he 
was Tery SQCcessf oL 

Hfl uid Ai hfi'd bfl*n fUBbling. ukd wfti 
two handnd doUui ibad al the wbolc 
■ova. at iH Hurt mstk MA fnt u 
■tiutiAC ubd wu achl hundnd ftb«ad 
enCB. Bai be pl*r«l ■< off u nualC— /'. 



ladiea* school. The d 

tiom beif^, ■ young oow — oow 

beii^ a slang word fora woman 

— is ObviODS. 



Boo iciiKCTed, jroQ cmo'r impect them pro 
pcriy. NuI)«rIih*ltkK>koTaa*/£«r 
ftiddKk ia Sydney iiid uke my [nck.~— 
Mn. CmmfitU Rod: SiiU*ri ff Atu- 
«n/|-« Liyi. 

He^bJio (tUerea), itolen yam. 

H6kkft I hokki I (gypsy), haste t 
Possibly the original of "book 

Hell (tailora), the place where a 
tailor deposited his cabbage 
(Wright). 

Hell and Bdnora 1 (American), a 
pecnliar Interjection, signifying 
that while one startled at some- 
thing there is still something 
ridlculODS In the affair. "To 
kick up htU — and break things " 
is often ottered in qoite the 
same spirit 

Hell and toatmy (popnlar). To 
"play AdI oixf (oiRsty " withal^ 
one, to mln him ntterly. Ac- 
cording to Dr. Charles Hackay, 
this grotesqae expression pro- 
bably means to reduce a man to 
extreme destitatlon, or to bread 
and water, and if so, an etymon 
may be fonnd in the KelUc «(, 
drink, and (onwft ilama), a lamp 

Hell a-poppinc (American), « 
tremendooi row or dispute, no 



:v Google 



458 Hell- 

doabt from the propenaity o( 

thow who OM the ezpresuon tor 

uiDg their " ilx-shoolen " on 

the slightest provocation. 

Thtre wu kill * /^///V- One M1o» 

■lid ht hwl ropaj in * low with iht Idt 

»r off, . . . AiHHhti fellow wd Ihal )h 

hid not ■ yoanK bcair wiih ihc right (at 

liall iher "«•«. loo.— ^. FraMtU. SaJJIi 



■ old Dsti 



Itiinyninlh StreM « 



in IliKK 



polinnun.— /■<ii£bi!c#AM ;■'»!. (/'Vva 

Hell's mlDt (American). " A mint 
of monej " has led to describing 
a large qnantity of anythin); n* 
one. " Old B. has got a mixf ot 
houseii, as I hear," Hence krU'i 
mint, as a snperUtiTe of abnn- 



Cet Kired. Some at ibcn wcold joa a 
whillhtTldlL— ^. fnuKU: SadHt «». 



Hell-box (printers), thereccplacle 
for bad, broken, or "battered" 
letters, which are eventuallj 
melted doiTD. 

Hellioa (American), a very abu- 
■ive ward, uaed ia the Southern 
States, e<]aivalent to " devil or 
hell's own," Possibly a forra 
of bell -bound. 

Hell'i kitchen (American), a 
horrible slum. IldVs KUthtn, 
Murderer's How. and the ISurnt 
Kag are names of localities 
which form collectively tlie 
worst place in New York. 



He mokes hie fnn ptj [Ameriean), 
said of a very shrewd man, one 
for instance who keeps horse:, 
to ride and drive, jet maim^e!! 
BO well by "trading" that thev 
cost him nothing. A great 
sharper having said (o Lossing 
that it had cost him ten thou- 
sand dollars to see the world, 
Le«sing replied that fae feared 
that the world woold gUdly 
give quite as macb never to 
have seen him. 

Hemp, ToniiK (old), young scoun- 
drel deserving the g^ows. 



Hempen widow (thieves), one 
whose husband was hanged. 



or a Aru/11 noiWii ihc kid rorkni. 



Hen (American), a tcih 
tiess, girl or woman. 

Thii wat moK Ihvi J>ik a 



ccwhirh KundnlliliethttmliiiwaC 
pint iic« by ■ cyclone. Tb» Aem- 
ixxed eiKtly liv« minulB. Whii 
ifl miuirtd encilir iwo mdaeicht 



:v Google 



Htn-conv€ntion-~~Herring, 



459 



Herdic (Ameriam), « oanriaga for 
public oonveTauoe, tometbing 
iivn a iniAll omnlbtu. Tbejr 
wera iQTent«d Mid brooght into 
una Am. lue by a Hr. Heidio ol Fenuyl- 

-HM, w. Fi,u. „jni», wheooe the uune. They 

are now oommoo In moat Ame- 
ricui cities. 



n* aisbu in ipiiit U ■ pokB fUM, 

And with jib* ■Dd)ak«. ituKncrmcn 
Riln u (ht MUOa Ihu brioft hii 4m, 



pMty." 



(popnlnr), An u- 
romen ftt which 
i« prewnt. Also " ben- 



Honoft iBvi, IDu DecdL«i ID haT-DuniKiii, 
in hud to find, bu wt hin gnc la sor 
nidit, ud hit luiK u jMcph Cunll, 

Hu-Mcste (MuUcml). ft Ehlp In w "^ *""" * 
which the cmptaJn'a wife pUyi 
'a the 



^^ . , A whin ihirt b< atli a ffrt^W Airt 

i), k hOOM tor bcoBH HcRrord cutlc ha« irhiie bnt. 

•oldler*' wires. SimiUrly oltl anrlhing Hir^fird ihu ii 
irhiu 1 for uuqde. Htr^/ird didna and 

Ha» Rod chkfcfpM (thievn), ex- ^"^^ ^ CMTTim ii™ (»dct uiu 

plained bj qnotatioD. H^ji'rJmJ-PUUM^., f™. "c' 

■n«i imi mmd d^ini of Iht low Ltlmm4Hmrrim;MS.Amtriiaalimt.) 

lodgint-tuittiq v« Ibv publicuu' pewler 

nHum i th* Vina wkIi ui inu, Herc'f Inck (tailara), I don't 

th* imiUs Mckimi.—M^Mtm : Lmti*» bellere it. 



Herder [American). In the West, 
a white man who haa charge of 
a gang of Ohinaaa. 

I feand l*if> fUft of ChiouHn at 
work in ditffnni pljiccn, in cbarg* of n 
whita Bku who wu alied [he ktrJtr. Thil 
)ab la DM alwrnr* a liappy w. ulihooih 



adiooner (nanUcal) i« eqnare 
rigged, bat withont a top for> 
ward, and achooner rl^ed abaft ; 
oarrylng only fore-and-aft laila 
on the mainmBrt; in other 
phrase, ihe is a reuel with a 
brig'i torema«t and a achooner'a 
mainmast (Admiral Smyth). 

Herriot; (American), all bad, all 
alike. Hence the later ezprea- 
sioD "ULTdine," applied to a 
man who is exactly like all hla 
••■ociatea, a narrow- minded, 
average soit of person, who haa 
been packed away as it weta 
among others. 



:v Google 



46o 



Herring — High. 



Honing pitted (old), lankT. 

Heninff pood, the (cDminon), » 
tMoetiouM nuDe givea t« the 
Atlantic Ocean. Said to be of 
American ori^n, bnt now com' 
moulj used in both cootinetits. 

Everybody DOwadlYi h» reid J» iniik:h 
u (boat Ihe vo]- 



u>o» ftf i 



a Ttndtrfe^s. 

He'i pme north abont {luiitical) 
said of a tailor who has died 
from any cause bat drowning. 
ShakBpeare in "Twelfth Night" 
(Act iil. scene I) nses a some- 
what similar phrase, and which 
Keems to throw tome light upon 
theeipression as uted bj sailors : 
—"You are now tailed int" 
the norA ef my lad)» opinion, 
where you will haog; like an 
icicle on a DatchmaD'a beard, 
unless you do reclaim it by some 
laudable attempl.' 

HewgKg, the (American), name 
for an undeterminate. anlmowo 
mythical creature. 

Hick, counter ("'■' <^'>n' )■ a «upid 
clodhopper. 



HidcofT shirt ( Amerkui ), a. cbea{^ 
durable woollen thiit geaenll; 
worn b7 irorkii^ men, or bj 
those wbo diipesM with Uncm 
or mnslin. 



" Good bcavviB, 
of (be ctompa ic, " 1 

" Faiib an' I'm bniihi 



uked Mr. Nee 



in], an abbtciviatioa 



Hid (Am< 
of hideous. 
Used chiefly by girl*. " She's 
a perfect Aid." 

Hiding: (conuDon), a good hidimg. a 
serere beating with the " hide." 
or dried akin of an animal, 
formerly iised as a aconrge. To 
■■ cow-hide," or beat with a cow 
or ox -hide, is a common ecpre^- 
i^ion, and before the use of the 
revolver became nohappily pre- 



practice in the United States. 

The word has been erroneously 

ilerivcrt from the effect of the 

beating, the tkin or bide of the 

beaten person, and not from the 

material of the scourge itself. 

"Whti ri(hi hw ■ jaaer lik* t« <« 

iniccfpre?" the coal-heavs- retorted, Innt- 

in( lowiird the Oil iirmger. '- Vou may 

be ■ D.. but I will pvt VDo 1 (irf,./ roc 



Hicker (thieves), tipsy, not quite 
drnnlc, elated. Probably from 

hiccough. 

Hicke^ apltt Vide Fl-lu Dnivn 



And D^CT alLini 



:v Google 



High. 



Cbnich of England are often Ae- 
scrib«d disrespeatfully m being 
high and dry. Tbose of tbf 
Evangelical Cbnrch am per cou- 
tra dabbed "low and slow." 
(American), a simile borrowcfl 
from any article left on ttii: 
beach by a retreating tide. To 
be left without resources, to be 
quite Bbaodoned and helpit:»i. 

They ate like bnve men, k>n« (nd nil ; 
Ihty gobbled there and Ititn. 

CulUnt FmnDnt nun, 



High-bof, a High Tory and 
ChoTchman, supposed to favour 
Jacobitism (O. Davie). 

Hlgib fainting (American), bigh- 
Bown, extravagant, bombastic 
language, a gaj, impadent sort 
of fellow, a vulgar coxcomb. 
"There can be little doubt," 
says Mr. Bartlett. "of its de. 
rivation from bigb 'flighting.'" 
As for its coming, as Hotteu 
abaolutelj asserts, as If it were 
an established fact, from tbe 
Dut«h veriaotm (whicb word he 
does not translate), it is enough 
to My that vtriootcn means 
"to cast lots." It is very re- 
markable that there exists in 
yiddish the word hifdv/tttni, 
meaning eitiavogant language 



Tbe remarkable resemblance, 
as regards both sound and 
meaning, existing between tbesc 
words cannot fail to strike the 
reader. Of tale years, terms 
known more or less to all Jewt. 
eBpeciallyofthecommonerclas-, 
have be^n to work far more 
freely into American flang thmi 
is generally supposed. By as- 
sociating ki/du^^em with "faigh 
flighting," Ai^A/a/u(rn would be 
speedily evolved. It may be 
observed tliat in rapid i:onver- 
sation, the Hebrew or yiddish 
word becomes ki/ttufm or 
hifduftn, wbicli is a materiallv 
nearer approach to the well- 

The plirafie is now common 
in England. 

A piper in Ciniiniwii wis Hry nuch 
^•en LO kigM falaliii an Ihe lubjeel of 

liih Ihe foltuwing burletque ; " Thii ii u 
[lorioin country '- ft hu longer riten uid 
nore of theoi, juid they ue muddier and 



Higb fly, oa the (mendicants), 
begging on tbe high "toby" 
or high rood, and tramping over 
tbe country. Also operating na 
a begging-letter impostor. 



HiftlMfihm \% Num hci, Pouen, 
Schwank, Viak.—Dtr HtrritJ tKt Lani- 



High go (American Universily-y. 
a merry drinking-boat or frolic. 
"To get high" is to become 
tipKT and intoxicated. 



:v Google 



462 



High. 



Bi(fe bene (Anerican). It b 
connoDlj Mid ol anj oim wIm 
i* pattiog OQ airt m -~ntiiing 
k loft; or dignified toDo, that 
"beitaaiuikigkkonc'' SooK- 
Uui« eqairalent to it ii to be 
found in maaj langoagicL The 
French kbt "BioDter nir sea 
gnads cbcTaui " (not ilaog). 

Hijh .poka, propetl)- an ol.l 
Scottish pastime plajed in dif- 
ferent wajfc At » club or con- 
ri»ial gatheriiig ii that part of 
the CTening vbeo the pnncli- 
bowl is iutrodaced tcgether 
with unlimited liceikie^ 
Tbcn ht fgnnd the elm u Ugt jisti 
after upper, Juk RacclB tluulii.( cwh: 
»(> ud perfwminj feui of nrtnph ; 
u tminl br > cbonu of Bunckd 




To pUy tbe higkjinit, to take 
ap an arrogaiit position. 
In dayi 01 jon Ih* Lord of MUrult 
Pl»y«l .iry kigk jimla u the T«)t of 



Hicfa raited (poptiiai'\ iMt. A 
•eat near a fire b said to be i^ 
ToUtd wbra it gete too bot for 






luki aod hit niXliy pnnks. 



Higb nilkr 1 American), one vhc 
pUjs high, or who takes the 
lead. 




His# rape, on the (American), in 
a passion, Tei; load, taking on 
great airs. 

Hig* itepper (societj), a well- 
dressed girl, who has a good 
figure and is handsome, a awell 
of an J kind. 

Hi^ tariff lanpwge (Atnerioan). 
rhapsodical, magniloquent, or 
eitiavagant words. 



fair an' umiauGsikawd panncrs oir dy 
dal wa UgA Imxiff Unetiact.—BraJiUr 

High ti (American UuiversitT), a 
showy recitation. In use at 
WiUiwna CoUegfc At Harrird 
the equivalent is a " squirt." 



:v Google 



High — Hipped. 



463 



Hiffh toberi. 

tUevM' alaag, the Teiy hlghert 
order of " ^DoSt " 01 thieves, 
vbo go well dieued and fro- 
qacmt mtering'pUcei. 

Hlgfa tobj (old cut), the high 
road. "On tha \igK tobg," to 
tkktt to the road aa a A^A totjr- 
man or hlghwaymaii. 

/^V* '"h. which, in ucicnl nbbcr 
*lU(. nmni ibc high melrr uid Isiutt 
and ncklcti indulffCDCv which chumctcr- 
iHd Ibt uiiltncc of thoK bold bUdti who 
look to the road, wu nowhm niible,— 
/. C r-m—d: Dick TimfU. 

the a%ft, id Ibeii luaeud fubledeliBa- 
tiofu 0^ the madcnl guic of ki£k la^, uid 
tt the ndonbuMe doinii of ibe Knicfaii 
of the Roui, ipoul luch iQul-ihnlHDg ef- 
ftnlsni u " Nim my Doll)-, puis" "m1 
" OiDdi Dml ; " but what nut it be to 
linn to the lune bold itivei oot of the 
Bualh of ml "nuin( beri," loiiH of 
lb«, powblT. lb* deKenduu of the very 
haaa who rode "up Holbom Hill La 1 

watdi the attcoduit Ghiplaio wu uiter- 
iag, becune of Ibe wrj exciunEC of bob^ 
temn "chKa"* tikini pUce beloeen the 
■hen-fipe HHdcinf drirer, wheat art-teal 
wai the doomed man'i csfin, end the (tee- 
fal a»li that bad made holiday to lee the 
fu \—Snm Carta ^Ltm^m. 

Hit^-tooe aigget* (Amsrlcan), 
Heroes who have raised them- 
mItcb in social position, or in 
other waja bettered their oon- 
diUoD. 



rf*(r»-y. 



'MiUitf,. 



Blghwatef mft^ Dp to the (com- 
mod), op to the mark, an ex- 
pnMicm of approTal. 



High-wood (oonunui), properlj a 
name given to timber. "He 
Urea in i^fc-nootf," he oonoeaU 
himself, he has a seoret game. 

Hig^oldoa Sipo (Texaa), an ima- 
ginary malad j< 

Hike (London slang), to oarrj off, 
convej, arreet. "ZTUe, to swing, 
pot in motion, tow, throw, 
strike, to go awaj, hmrj" 
(Wright's DioUonai7). 

And Utirf DC oS B> HTt a> blc, 
Before the littiog masittrate. 
-S»mt:VlkmdmtfmlHf,ht. 

Hit Kellr (proTlnoial Hans), a 
mode of addreM among paiieii- 
bj in the Iile of Han. Kellr 
is the name borne bj a large 
nnmber of people in the island 
— benoe probablr ita deriratton. 

Hlndboot (common), the braeeh. 

Hind ooftchwbMl (popular), » 
orowu. In French slang a Stc- 
frano pleoe la tenned " rone do 
derrttre." 

Hing (Anglo -lodian), aataftetlda. 
It is remarkable that the Oer- 
mans call this abominablj smell- 
ing gnm iei/^tC\'dTi(k, Le., tttrau 
tltoMi, while the common gTP^ 
name for Tcdding e 



Hip (thieves), Aip inside, inside 
coat pocket ; kif onlsidek outside 
pocket. 

Hipped (common), ilL To be 
\ifip*A, to snSer from "a Bt of 
the blnea," or of brpoohondria. 



:v Google 



464 



H^pm — Hiv^. 



Hipper • SCO , ■ ■ - 

the eiMB owtain. H«tM In ""^ f™^ "^ ^ ^'^"T 1 r—T' 

n. ... I >. . .. ■■ m COBUC fam ton, hniwinc tkar Ab- 

aiMgow tbe g«d* tboot "Up ,„^r^uuiimg eu^^t^m. t, m 

with tbo hipftn I" J-BKt \ktuai »m CdlntaB.— JVo* f** 



Hi! MdM then (tailon), him, tbe 
indiridnalrafenedto. Arajiuit 
of " his nib*." 

Hla nlba (thMtrkal), himaelf , bis 
peraoD. Fiom tbo old Snglixh 
tub, the (ace, «]m> bom. 

W]i« tb* Piwlal'i cwnno urin> In 
fnial af Ibc churdi, >idi Albcn Kawkin. 

bUck u ku fkca, toi driiinf tb* (wo bit. 
Juaharinf " ■eBjbfOVD>,''(hcnisf>lhcnd 
aboal the dcKHB of tbfl uactuAtT m auwd 



Hits Un irt>ere be Brcs (Amcri- 
oi>)t E°** home, hsita hi* 
dcepeat fediuga, wounds hi» 
in bis domestic relations. 



Hhre, to {Amerioui odet), (o Steal 



vithont I _ 

kind" Is to be cangfat In a 




sohoolbojs and Ekench 

Hit tbe flat to (aawbo7i), 
oat on the piaLriaa. 

Hitched (AmBrioau), msiried. 
Liteialljr banessed. 

HItdi bones, to (Americao), to 
agree, to draw at pull w«ll to- 

bil u (U ont of doon. AAcr be poktd 
HTU Mitcitil lurtit tota^a.—SmrtltU. 

Hftch one'a team to the fence, to 
(American), to remain for any 
time In a place. 



Hired peifectlr biffid (Anterkan 
cadet), said of cadets who. 
who) beyond boonds or otber- 
wise tiansgreasiog the academy 
rules, are caught in JtagrmUt 
dttieto withont the least pos- 
sible chance of escape. 

Hiren [American), women a DUB 
who trarel with a swarm of 
JUitt de joit, geneially in Um 
Wild WMt, with a view to 
Tn».lrimj money by them. 

HMte, a stndent of St. Bet's. 



:v Google 



Hoafy — Hocus-pocus. 



46s 



Ha«hT,b7the(iuuitic»l),ajiu>n;- that the mTthioal porker in 

tnooa with " hang it I " qouliou im>glD«d Ua breakbit 

WAS coming, when 11 was nnlj 

Hobbled (thiere*), oommitted for the bntohet ^vpuing to UU 
triaL him. 



HobUer (nantlcal), a ooaat man 
of Kent, a bit of a imng^er 
and an nnlicensed idiot, erer 
ready for a job In either of 
these occnpationi. Also a man 
on land employed in towing 
a Tcssel by a rope (Admiral 
Smytb). 

Hobb^ (uniTersityJ, • ttanslation. 
Those who ase cribs in traciB- 
Uting from the lAtln, Greek, 
and other languages, aie said 
to ride AoCMo. 

Hob-jobber (street), a man or boy 
who loiteis about the streets 
waiting for small jobs, such as 
holding horses, carrying parcels, 

JM/y't bmiiM! no Yiona n taoM, no 
puab to caiij.—Tlu Gtal Cmdli. 

Hobaon-Jobaon (Anglo-Indian), 
a phrase peculiar to the British 
stddier, by whom it was io- 
Tented. It is In fact an Anglo- 
Saxon TOTsion of the wailings 
of the Hahommedaus, as they 
beat their breasts In the pro- 
cessions of the Moharram : 
Ya Haian, j/a Soltaim/ [Anglo- 
lodian Glossary). 

HoVt hoE tpiovincial Northamp- 
ton). WheD a person conjeo- 
tnres wrongly, he Is compared 
to ffab'i hog, a local story being 



Hock (American), caught. Oaoght 
In kaek la caaght by the heels. 
The last card In the box. Among 
thieves a man is la heck when 
be la in prison, bat when one 
gambler U caegbt by another 
smarter than himself and is 
b«at, then he is In kact. Down 
South (u&, in the Sonthem 
States), men are only pat In 
hack on the laee-traok^ In a 
/loel-game, if a man hits a card, 
he Is obliged to let hU money 
lie ontil it either wins or loses. 
Of course, there are nine hun- 
dred and ninety- nine chaocea 
against the player, and the 
oldest man living never yet saw 
him win, and thus he is caaght 
in kock (New York Slang Dic- 
tionary). 

The author of this work de- 
rives hoei clearly enongh from 
the Eogtisb slang term for a 
foot. It may be observed, how- 
ever, that hok In Dutch thieves' 
slang means credit or debt, 
which would furnish quite as 
good a derivation. 



Mocker, hikker (gypsy), to jump. 

Hocni-pocna (now recognised), a 
tenn applied originally to de- 
ception ol the eye by mean* 



:v Google 



466 



Hoaia-poeto — Hog. 



Bwd lor any formolaaf ohwHng, 
daluion, at bwnbng. Giabb 
("QlpdM' AdTO(»ta,"[L i8)M7i 



fwt «Ror. u in dotng thli thay 
•lmp]7 (idlow ths wotd f<w a 
Joka. That it U derired frmn 
ft bvrleaque lendaring of kee 
tat otrpM In tha lAtin Chutoh- 
•eniea Is a mara bit of oon- 
Jeotnral pbilologj. In th« Bo- 
iuu)7 toDgna tot or Adi !■ the 
root atgnifTiDg deoeit or lalae* 
hood In a terj extended Benw. 
" Quite a little faintly of words 
has oome Into TCngHah from 
^b* K7P*T ^""i itoB^Mi Awobtint, 
litkaf, uid kooter, all meantag 
a lie, deoeptloD, and humbug. 
Ur. Booai shows ns that Aooaj, 
to bewitch Uqoor with an opiate, 
and hoax are probabl; from the 
•ame root ; and I have no doobt 
that the eipreulon, ■ Yaa, with 
a Aoori,' meaning ' it la false,' 
oomei from the sam& 'Hookey' 
and 'Walkei' are of thla family" 
(" The English Gypriei," p. 8i ). 
Soc therafore means deceit or 
delnslon, and the English gypsy, 
like many Biodns, adds lu in 
a most arbitrary and irregnlar 
manner to any root whateier to 
make a noon. It Is sometimes 
even alOxed to English words, 
€.g., side-vf, a side. This glTcs 
Amu, a pore gipsy word. Aa 
ponu, it has probably BomethlDg 
in common as to its root with 
"pankey" iMe Haskxt-pak- 
KIT), as- a certain sleight-of- 
hand or " •nbstitntioD " cheat 



is called in gypay A«dkaf ysB> 
iw, or ti n fan y poles, tbe kt* 
ta being tbe oommMt wotd. 
That this U aunetiiiMa alM 
hmdcatf f«hu ot yea— My fcody 
can asoerlaln by aakJag the to* 
old gypay whom be najkj wsaf 
As a pnot of the aoniMliieaa d 
thia derlTation, it may be ob- 
serred that "bokee-p^ee" 
(which Is simply lioau- p pma, 
witbont tbe gypsy iiiiiiii Iwil 
nal), is 0ODim<m and Teiy eld 
slang, used flrstiy aa a magic 

times in any ai^ _ 
telliglble wordi. 

FUbtidH, flobbidw, biukcr b 
—Tit Xfmt VlAf Cmm 



Hod of mortar (rhyming alaag), 
a pot of porter. 

Hoe in, to (American nal*«ni^)^ 
to work with Tlgonr. French 
pioeker. 

H<V (P°P°l*'')r haU-a-«rowi>. 



Old cant for a shilling, also a 
sixpence. 

" ChsmpolliOD ■ Figeac, the 
brother of the famoos Cham- 
pollion, makee in his work on 
Egypt the foUowing obserra* 
tions: "Also it appears thara 
were (in Egypt) masses of gold 
bearing another sh^w than Ibat 



:v Google 



Hcg. 



467 



o[ tha rii^, fon iiut«DC« tfae 
form of X frog, of k cklf, of an 
ox, uid that it had thus become 
a onatom to reokoD w. puticnUr 
object as worth m manj oxen, 
Miotber u so numy oalrea, or 
■o many frogs, meaniag thereby 
certain knowti weight of gold " 
(Leigh Hnnt's Journal). 

H<^* (Anglo-Indian), to work, to 
da "That wont k»ga," that 
won't do. 

Hog and homiuj (American). 
Hog ii pork, and AMiinjp i« miUie 
or Indian com scalded, so that 
it <s white as rice, to which it 

bears when boiled a great re- 
semblance. As pork and Amu'ny 
are the two cheapest articles of 
food in the United States, the 
term is very generally used to 
express plain, common diet. 

H<^, h^ged (binden), said of 
a book which baa the back 
bulging out, from the bindiog 
having given wa;. 

Hoginiiuiy (old slang), a Tery 
young girl very depraved ; one 
who makes a free present of 
her person. From "Hogmena," 
Christmas and New Year's pre- 



Hogoo, strong smeU. This word, 
a corruption of the French 
AouC pedt, is given as slang by 
Hotten and others ; bnt it is 
to be fonnd in a dictionary, 
174S, as a recognised word. 



H(^ (Amerioan), a term aODe- 
times applied in Jest to the 
inhabitants of Chicaga (Old), 
to drive }iegt to market, to snore. 



mvlwl.— At^a .- PiliU Cmrmmtiim. 

KopHiti^. to coQcJi ft (old cant), 
to lie down, go to sleep. The 
phrase explains itself hagAead 
bting a term for body. 

Hc%, to (American), to cheat, 
humbug, to do for, to break. 
"Ga.''h«uid, "ro^my uo, ADdi^f tha 

knock '*■■ T ; bul th« 



oldm 



■ lillle li 



This is probably derived from 
Itoggtd, or broken, as applied 
to steamboats. It agrees with 
the Anglo-Indian Itoga, to do, 
but probably by mere acciden- 
tal coincidence. (Common), to 
have sexual intercourse with a 



Hog, to go the vbole. 80 uni- 
versally used as to be a recog- 
nised phrase. To do a thing, 
good or evil, thoroaghly and 
completely. This term became 
very common in America about 
1834. It was applied to those 
who approved entirely of Gene- 
ral JftcksoD's measures. It ii 
said to be derived from a story 
in a poem which was to be found 
in most American school read- 
ing-books, of the declaration of 
Mahomet that there is a por- 
tion of the swine which no true 
believer should eat. Bnt as they 



:v Google 



Hoiitlac (thleTMV Hottan do- 
floM tUi aa onlj ■hop-IUting. 
In AnarioM U« tann U ^- 
pU«i to a Tny peonUai kfnd 
of robbei7. To rob » 
two or thrae man gathar to- 
gatbcT, one of wbom itaDdB 
olOM to the wan and (be 

hla ihonldcn, while tbe thiid 
doei the Mune, B^longpiaelloa 
thl« can be done with gnat 
aaM, K) that a thief oaa enter 
a window ten or eren flfteen 
feet from the gronud. TUi U 
called the hoiit-la7. A houter 
meaiu bowerer a ihop-Ufter aa 
well, and alao a aot. 




4« Ho-gym—HoU. 

ooBldnotacreawUdipMttUa Hold, da job (LomIob daa^ 
waa ainoBg; than, the MuhI- fane jos aar iMn^ to ^^ « 

maui ata up the ^itiie ai 
ot " want U« «Asfa J^T." 

Ho>K)« (Anglo-Indian], oaed bj 
Antfo-- 

of anr 



th( boat, Hd aw ash ■ dv; a^ CB 
ikU af aiiTi« ■ 



Hold tbe atece, to (tbotriaJ). 
ianld of an esperiMioed actor 
who la fnllj at home <w the 
ttage, and alwaja """"—vlt 
Um attention of the andienoe, 
Coneqionda to the Frouh 
phiaoe, "aT<di daa planrhra " 

Hdd 1^ to (Amoican thieraa}, 

to molaat, rob with Tiolanoe. 

Two thiHa smo^bl in New Y«k, 



B<Ae7 -poker (■> 

for -nothing, oheatad, done. 
Tbia word ceema aa tegarda 
both meaning and (oaiid to have 
a lelatioD to the Tiddiih ordU- 
jwcJUft, a Tagabond, a tiamp. 
It ia from " bocni-pocue." 

A kind of inferior ice Bold 
in the atreeta and espacialij 
at race meatiiiga auumgtt the 
lower claaiea. i'"-«~ 

Hdd jour honea (Amoican), an 
Ho-bu-kwoh (pidgin, Dutch), i^jonotlon not to go too ffti. «r 
"Hollatid-nation." aartoomnoh. 



Didn'l I fWi TOO ftfiiiOMn fcr Icaii^ 
ny pUca nloH when it ns SB jQnr bal T 
Ybb cu't Mtf m .^ i»».-a«r d 



:v Google 



Holt — HoMg-hahng. 



469 



Oh, lutdynrlmiti, will yon. 



Hole (printen). According to 
Hozon, 1683, ftprinte printii^;- 
oDoe, where nnlioeiiaed booka 
were printed, was called a htit. 
The teim would appl; tt the 
proMtit day to a " cock-TObln " 
■hop. (Tnrf ), to be Id a hnU U 
to low or be defeated. 

Hole umI comer (populat), plot- 
ting conipiTBcy. The metaphor 
ia obTloiu — oonspiiatore are 
compelled to do their i^otUog 
Id holet and comerB. 



bs oBci. " No mon pkliin( sul th< 
WHdi oT ■ work lo qa«c thai u Uh 
iowen: I wnb ill Ih* eriiicium In nr 
|«pcr to ba * fur, ■qoBrc, ■od abov« 
^vaoV'—Amtknv Tnlltft. 

HolUs (Wlnoheiter School, a 



Holni'bolos (Dantical), the neok, 
the head; ia a hnny, belter- 
ikelter. 

H0I7 Joe <priBOD and nanttcal), 
Uie oliaidalu or any religiont 



reooren hli previoDa loiaea he 
"geta iem" on the da;, the 
week, or the year, aa the cose 
ma7 be. Strange to sa; this 
barren result ti asoallj regarded 
b; the achieTer thereof with 
gre«ter pride than the appar- 
ently more deeiiable proeesi of 
wiDning. 

Home bird ( common), a man lead- 
ing a ttsrj retired life, fond of 
his flrealde ; a milkiop. French 
eAatfft-b-MUcAe. 

Ho-midS (pidgin). Renters' Tele- 
gram Company U so termed in 
the Shanghai Directory. 

Homo-opathiae (American), to get 
bllla, {.<., petitions for anything, 
throngh the Legislatnre, or Con- 
gress, or a City Connall, by 
means of bills. ■.<.. bank-bills. 
This application of nnflta rint- 
[fbui is anfortnnately a role of 
praotioe, with few exceptions, 
espeoiallj in the L^lslatnraa, 
when a bill is brought forward 
which has "anything In It," lc, 
any money. 

Honest lajtin (American), a phrase 
eqairalent to "hononr bright." 
It is often heard among bo^s 
as a pledge of faith. 



HmctUtrry /tmm. 

HooKj (rhyming slang), money. 



Hetic^ahnc (pidgin and Anglo- 
Indian), AoAflf In Chinese means 



:v Google 



HoHg-hakmg — Hook. 



IMM It li puticnlul7 mp- 
pli«d to badliv aataUiahiDBiita, 
foielgii or aatlrB. Tb« Utter 
wcm the M-oalled fumg mer- 
oluuit* wbo had tb« monopoly 
of foreigiitrmde. Thtomanopolj 
wai kboliBhed In 1S43. 



■>!» an uuiRnblt for oo* aaMlMT, both 
to thi GoTtnuBcnt and 10 lonifn natiosa. 
-SlrCSImiHitii: Emttmttji I* Cibim. 

Hononr bt^M (common), <ai my 



Ulrfacolr UiDd ihai 

SmnI brataadn lA so tbc ^Dt wkk- 
oal |ia]v« f" ■bar ■'--'-- "j' f'tj 
Timn. 

He had ■hmad a qoKsB tf v^dcr 



Therm* 



Hoodlum (Ameiicftn), a Tagabond 
or longb, a loafer. It wu for 
a long time » Califotnuui vord, 
and U probably of Spanish origin. 
It may pouibly be the pidgin 
Eogli^ iiood latnt, good, ix., 
Tuy luy; {oAiU*^ Maodarin. 

Y^rtt J mdt MMt knodnd down aod acarly 
Ulkd u aod pricM in the Mnca ol Vr. 
■wllo, Fnncc, Un vtbcr day.— Ctic^c* 

In San Francisco Acotfluou ars 
a clMB of yoong fooli, ooires- 
pondlng In some decree to the 
Bngliih 'Arriea. The lucdtvm* 
walk the streeta aim in arm, 
Dpeetting ererything in their 
passage " jnct for the sake of a 
Urk." 

Hoodman (London slang), blind, 
"Yd," h« 11 



Hoodooed (American), rmdaeti, 
u, killed, done for, oaod op; 
Mwfoa, a term applied to the 
magic or aecreoy 
among the blacks. 

" Laps,' Bid tin. Pomr, bruc her 
biwd on mj ihonlder, " I'b Jktfdttmd am 
tun ai cgffi v* CQL Ftc hem traiiuiic 



Hoof it, to (tbieree), to ran »««y. 

HocJ one's bum, to (oommon), to 
kick one in the lown put ol 
the back. 

Hook (popnlar and tbievM), a 
I^ckpocket. 



iDOHBiiioB parlaim, laka sir adricaaad 
gBl TOOT tiTini boDotfTi "^T* ■ HTln i i ii t af 
whs B M pt uan penal Knititdt.-^J. W. 
Mrr^tj: Jt^ipfimm /mil. 



:v Google 



Frob«bl7 derived from hook- 
ing ut ktticle out bj the fiogera, 
which theoM aie called hMtt. 
Or an HbbreTiation of \oottr, 
old CADt for a thief who Bteols 
things banging Dp in shop* hj 
temoving them with » hook. 
Stealing bj me«08 of a hook 
ia still t>noti«ed bj a class of 
FMoeh thieves, who coll it "vol 
an bonlon" (n^ Baitire's Argot 
and Slang). The French popu- 
lar slang has troc (hook) fot a 
thief, thongh Utti^ is inclined 
to believe this is a contraction 
of aave (swindler). The an- 
cient " hooker " was also called 
"angler," which corresponds to 
the Italian cant ptteaUir, a 
thief, literal] J, a fisherman. 
Thns the literal hook has served 
as a metaphor for the English 
book, hooker, angler, the French 
croc, and the Italian pacator. 
The German cant has Attotm, 
to lie, deceive^ swindle, from the 
grpaj, though some derive it 
from kojcai, to higgle, retail; 
Mitt, a higgler, huokster, which 
may be tiaced to lialce, a hook, 
pedlars and porters on the con- 
tinent nsing a contrivance for 
carrying their bnrdens, termed 
eratkfU (hooks) in French, hence 
tredutair, a porter. 

(Fopniar), a Aoot, a catch, an 
advantage ; to take one's hoeic 
ra* Hook, to buhq oni's. 

Hooka-boidar (Anglo-Indian), a 
MTvant whose sole dnty it was 
to take care of the master's 
pipe. As the iooUl is now a 
thing of the part, the Iw^Utr 



has also passed awaj with It 
into the obsolete, so far as the 
pipe is concerned. 



Hooker (old cant), a thief who 
used to steal articles bom sh^« 
bj means of a book. 

I will uVc my princE't put fitlt iH 
thai itdll i»ppov hun, Dr any of vi, k- 
conling u tbcbstof nr ubiJiij; im win 

Iob<ibuK(lbruiTili'n(«ahram>i rufis, 
lutitn.-Sam/-/3iUiM,»rtCartw: Eiv- 
IM G^la' Oath. 

(American), a woman of easy 
Tirtae, generally one who pliea 
her trade on the streets. 

Hookej Walker (popniar), go 
away t be oS I Also an eja- 
culation of incrednlity ^nonj- 
mons with "get along with 
yon 1 " Many origins have been 
ascribed to this term, which 
natnrally explains itself by its 
connection with " hook it," Lt., 
"go away," and "walkaway." 

Hooking cow (West American), 
a cow that will slww fight, and 
try to toss the cowboya who 
are seeking to "ont her ont" 
from the herd. From the Eng- 
lish "to hook," said of an oz 
which tosses one. 

On </ i)w Ibniw *■* *W b l if iJ ■ 
<wib 'n f <fw, sod to ocapt iwr rcpeutd 
chufB loMd mlleursfiliir. — F. FtmacU : 

Hook it, to (common), to nu 
away. Ftifs Hook, to suxo 



:v Google 



Hook—Hoots. 




It bM been nigs«rt«d thtf U 
ia dariTsd from th« gjytj 
or kMa, hvxTj tiwKj, butcn. 

Rook, on ooe's own << 

Ml OBe'l ow 

■poniibDitT. 
TiMUUniMAu 



nwitepiww dnwn fntn tiw [«ao> 
tfca of tb« tah-eoKn oa tba 
Butcm oouti^ wfao hftBC tip the 
barring* and haddocks to diy ia 



Dapondant for ■ liring on 
ona'fl own rMonrcM or «iot- 
Uon*. OrlgliMllj Amerioon. 

SopiiUail H witk phyiie ir l Mrn»« I 
wwud it, ud ■KBUoaxl bi lo > IM of 
orfulHd liriniM kA jxt u th* ad of 
■hi* liiH IluT luia Bia oui (a CM BT UnD| 
tmt^rmm Jutk.— Mining Ntwt. 

Wliu, loot* HTsnl diT> )b Loadoa— 
#ivj«ifr^Ma Afwlitodfna lo wander, «ad 
vlth M «a> to pnnoct Taut—/. Crm*- 
■M^.' iHe* Tamfli. 

PoMibl7 from tbe tblerca' 
pbnM to hect, to itaal, thierii^ 
and getting a Uving being with 
tbem iTDODjmoni; or from 
h«ok, a oatob, M tbat on «««'( 
ovn luiok wonid mean llteraU;, 
llTtog oa what I catoh. It maj 
abo bo derired from an allusion 
to a meat book, nMt^>horioaUj 
meaning larder, itore. French 
antbon lia*e certainly naed It 
with that aiguillcation, and the 
Pianoh have the ezpiaarioa 



Hookem amvcr. an impoata wbo 
fedgn* aickneat, diaeaae, or cala- 
mity, and exliibita liia miMriea 
in tbe «treet« to excite ^Uj 
and charity. Tnta to haot, and 
nureUiiig, or pomStij frooD the 
gypey Aaatoiat, a cheit. 



WiihhiiBDdla. 
Te hit c&« BT * 



An aUnaion to a gate oB Ha 
bingeo. Oompaie with tbe oU 
lag^lah phraw, "to be oS tbe 



:v Google 



Hook — Hoosier. 



koet*," to be out of temper, 
Texed. French, "«ortit de ie» 
gonda," and " to pnt oil the 
hoot$," to vex, m&ke angij. 

Hook tlwp (Ameriou), a brothel, 
"hooker" being ■ proatitota. 
Heoh Hied bjEngliab lesidentB 
In Cbina. Posdblja comption 
o( " book shop." The En^b 
uid Frenob alauga have the cor- 
reapoDding "bottocUng ebop" 
u)d " DMgasin de fesaea." 

Hook, to sling one'i (popntsr), 
to depart, leave, ran awaj ; 
dmg ia a provinclaliam for to 
oaot *wj, to that the phraM 
meana Uterallj " take jonr book 
off," " let go ;oar bold." 



Hook, to take on 
to depart, leave, nui awaj. 



Irian tuti» in th* tqnn) ; " I ht, wtui 
de T*™ Inep coniiv to th« door lorT" 

" When thai hont ba(iiu to pnnce. thea 

Foaaibly an abbreviation of 
"take 70iir Jlociib off," that ia, 
let go ;DDr hold, or the aUuioD 
being to a boat'* book which a 
man wonld natnnllf be told 
to take off aa a algnal for de- 
partQTe. Thia anpposition ia 
atrengthened bj the aynoDT- 
moos expi«aaion to "allng one's 
toot," which aee. 

Hook, with a (eommon), naed in 
thia phtate to imply doabt or 



some reservation referring to 
an assertion ; " yea, with a hoot 
at the end of it." Dr. Brewer 
has "uiA a koai at th* md, yon 
suppose I assent, but mj assent 
is not likely to be given. The 
■ubjeot haa a Moot, or note of 
int«rrogatiOD (I), to denote that 
it is dnbions." 

" There la a gTpay story that 
a Romany had penniaalon from 
a gentleman to flsh in his pond, 
on oondition that he should only 
uaeabook. Bot the gyptj used 
a net, and emptied the pond of 
fisb. On being asked what kind 
of a hook he bad osed, he replied ; 
' It waa what we call in our 
language a kookabai,' i.e., a lie or 
a cheat, ffoot U here the root, 
aben Or open almplj indicating 
anonn"(C. G. Leland). 

HoohT> to do {popular}, the tp- 
plication of the thumb and Bn- 
gers to the noae in contempt. 

Hoop (American thieves), a 
ring. 

Hoosier (American), a nick- 
name given to natives of Ind lana. 
Bartlett cites from the Ptowi- 
dene* Jourwd a stoiy whloh 
baa the appearanoe of being an 
after- manufacture to suit the 
name, deriving haotier from 
"hasher," " from their primary 
capacity to still their oppon- 
ents." He also asserts that the 
Kentnokiana maintained that 
the 



:v Google 



474 



Hoosiir — ffcfpai. 



■ " who'i yew I " How- 
srar, the word originmUj wu 
not AoMMT At all, bnt Aooticratni or 
IomActmk, liBotitr being u kb- 
bieviation of thii. I out re- 
member thkt in 1834, having 
read ol Aooucn, and epokeu of 
tbem, a boy from the West oor- 
i«ol«d me, and (aid that the 
word wai properly Aosnimm. 
Tfaii would indioate a Spanldi 
origin (Charles O. Leland). 

Ofttiiiwilriicn tnmllini is the Wot. 
TIh ttnnatT Gndi ■ ktttin't nta ; 
la atbcr vAidi A budi-crB abu. 
Jut luta MMWili le pui Qocu Hub in. 

Hooter (AmerioBit), a comparatire 
for anything worthless or tri' 
fling. Bartlett ooQjeotnres that 
it is a oorraptlon ot tola, wbiob 
it aUo comntonly used in New 
Sngland in a similar manner. 



Ah. BUlir. )-» «d T«r nrort 


■ oat 


cu'l do > iM^UHBf the cirK 




ja. ihiBk ■jamtil.-PhilmJtitUm 


Zrmic 







Hooting; podding: <prOTinoial), 
plnm podding so soantily fnr- 
nlshed with raisins that they 
are uroastloaUy said to hoot at 
one another, 

H.O.P. (popniar), hop; on the 



to any kind of ball. FonDsdy 
"tohoppa"«ignified todanoe; 

I raDeBber bB Chrntinu, ■> m Stdt 
1^ mt ihc Pvk, be duced fioa c^l 
s'likick lill fvu.—Mia Amtttm: Stmm 
imd SauiHlitr- 

Said to be of American origin. 
The Ne* Tort Bmtld onoe, if 
not many times, pnblialied ao- 
oonnts of the particnlai' and 
unfashionable balls giren in 
that city noder the heading 
or caption of " Hop Intelli- 
gence." Bap for any kind of 
dance is, howerer, proTiodal 
Bngliih. 

(Pidgin],balt "Hygtveeeom- 
shaw Aap-doQa, aappaeey yoo 
make dat Ink-i-lis man wailo to 
look-ssa my shop." Bap, have, 
or has. While a Chinese is in 
the Orat stage ol pidgin-IEng- 
lish, as set forth in ttiat primary 
work, the Chinese " Tooabnlary 
of the Words in Use among the 
Ked-Haired People," he dm* 
hap, and in time advance* to 
Aol. In this work iap-Jam is 
given for have fashion (iob/anoa 
at a more advanoed stage], •.(., 
fashionable. Bap-pi-biit {tot 
pidgin) means have bosiness; 
hop-tai {Aoi dit), dead ; and Kep- 
liwu (Aoi line), leisure. 



a.O.P. 
Ofa, h«'i dicky, uid he'i qnicky, and 



Hop merchant <commco), a 

Hopped orer the broom (popn- 
lai], married or ran away to> 
gather. From an old belief that 



:v Google 



Hopper — Honuss. 



475 



■ kttptr.—TIa 



A tDairii^ vu legal if tba 
bride and bridej^ioom stepped 
or heppti over a broom. 

" The |irl Ihil I had hopcit lo hiir, 

Had boltHl wiih IL carpf ntcFi 
lnima.luiffide-trtJutrmim.nT:' 
— David D-rrn: A BalladifL. M. 
Thtmltn. 

Hopper (Epoiting), to go a Ji-ipptT, 

to go at A faat pace. 

TIk Utter u > fiirr got of Effie Dnn>, 
ukd with two iBCh unut nannu the 
euthl (a be ib 
CnmtfCimtltm 

(Aoglo-lDdlMi), A coIloqnUJ 
term ill Soatben iDdJA for ric« 
cakei. Tamil, ajipuH. 

.4j^i. oiled Ai/ym by >t» En|1iih. 
nrply iheir uamint irpul — Tmuni: 
Ciyltm. 

Hopping ifiles (provincial), a 
cripple. St. Giles was the pat- 
ron laiut of cripples. 

Ho|^ ([ddgiD),theChincseSaper- 
iotendent of Costoms at CaotoD. 
Giles Bk;>, " The term is laid to 
be a corruption of hoo jioo, tba 
Board of Revenue" (AnglO'Ia- 
dian Glossaiy). 



Hop the Charlie, to (• 

decamp. 

Hop the twig, to (common], to 
die. Like a bird which drops 
from its perch. 

The Enffliib mode « execotion dividei 
iueir into Im bnKhei. on both ol irhkh 
the nciinu muu i</ iii tmt.—Difnu : 
Ltm^ and Ltmm, 

Hon (g7F*r). OB lioor, a watch. 



Horizontal refreahmenti (oom- 
mon), carnal intercoDrsa with a 
woDien. In French slang a 
proatitnte is called Aoruonlolc, 
becaase "elle gagne saTietnr 
le dos." A similar expression 
in German is used bj Heine. 



Horn (American). "Tea, in a 
A»m." This is ottered as an 
expression of disbelief or te> 
fnsal. " In a hog's \am," as 
hc^s hare no horns. An ab- 
breviation of an old West of 
Englandphrase, "InaAomwhen 
the devil is blind." " ill give 
it 7on in a horn," i.-e., I shall 
not give it jon, possibly allud- 
ing to the imposstbilitj of keep- 
ing anjtbing In a born open at 
both ends, or to the wind blown 
out oC a horn. 

Hera, a dram, a glass of 
spirits. The word dates from 
the times when honu rather 
than glasses were used for the 
pnrposc. It is almost obsolete 
in England, but common in 
America. 



(Common). " to have the 
horn," to be in a state of Mznal 

Heraen (American thlevM), a 



:v Google 



HomswoggU — Horseshoe. 



Ronuwi^gla, to (AnwioBii), to 
bDntbag, delndf^ ndnoe, to. 
(English pnifiiiolal), iwaiei, de- 
odtfnl; ttMigd, fHturrt. 

Honcf (Americui, alao English), 
leoheroat, in k itUe of Mxnal 
dMlra, Inntt. 

HofTon (aoclvtr), deUrlDm tT«- 
mena. Darived from tha Bti of 
horror of Imaginaij thinga men 
hara in that condilloiL 



Id lb* hrrrtn ii the app*r Wudi- 

Hone coUu- (old), to die In • 
AoTM (oQw OT nightcap, t« be 
hangvd. (TailOTe),aueztTemel7 
long and irld« collar. 

Hone coppers (American). Thia 
t«nn i« speoiall; applied to men 
who cheat people by selling 
brokeu-down, but once flrat- 
olasahoiaea. 

HofM editor (Amatioan). In the 
United State* not only the 
[IT proprietor and dlreo- 
a newspaper ia called an 
editor, but sjso all who write 
(6r It, the chief reporter being 
"the oitj editor," end the r«- 
Tiewer "the llteraij editor," 
while the gentleman who tor- 
nishea the sporting news ia 
sometimes &oetioiislj termed 
the Aoraf edtlor. There Is also 
the real at lmaglnar7 "flghtlng 



editor," who is eoppoaed to be 
a man who "strikes fron tha 
shoulder" and rits amfonnded 
hj rerolTsrs and hsntii^ knires. 
Aocording to Pxai. aren the 
porter of an Americ*n news- 
papei shares tbe glory of " edi- 
torialism." The writer in &ct 
knowa an instaaoe in which tbe 
Janitor of an American jonmal, 
when in a mral oommnnitj, 
leoeiTed mnch aUcntion sad 
honour aa being " oonnsoted 
with the press." 

Horae flesh (printers), an ancient 
term, aoowding to Hozon, for 
"dead horaei" wUcb aee. 



Tincial), a fat Tnlgar virago, I 
*er7 masculine woman, qnite o< 
the loweat olaaa. 



Hors e - s hoe (common), tbe ptulsa- 
ifaoi /. In tbe earlieat Oriental 
mTtbologiee, all that indicated 
fmitf olneas, impregnation, loTei 
Ac, was regarded as oppoeed to 
the erU principle which aaught 
to oaose bairenness. Hence in 
manj conntries, not onlj tbe 
images of the pallos and of tbe 
female organ were worn as 
charms, bat also eTerytbing 
which in any w^ resembled 
them, sach u a bom, a per- 
forated stone, a ring, a anafli 



:v Google 



Horst-shoc — Hot. 



■hell. &c. AmoDg these aj-mbols 
tlie htiTte-thot occupies n con- 
«)>icuous place. Hence the be- 
lief that it forms aa amulet, 
tidU that it is lucky to find ooe. 
Id German the phrase " Sie bat 
cia Hnfeisen verloen" (she has 
lost a harf-thet) is equivalent 
to saying that ft girl baa been 
reduced. 

Horse-teetli (American), a man 
with hoTte'tttth is one that 
grasp?, grabs at, or gaiDS irhat 



Hone, the old (prison), for Horse- 
monccr Lano tiaol, built at the 
suggestion of John Howard, 
eloscd 1878. 



Horsey (common) applies to men 
who are great lovers of the 
borse or who altect a turf ap- 
pearance and conversation. Also 
to articles of dress which in cut 
and style recall those of turfites 
or persons whose occupations 
are connected with the horse. 

Hospital theep (up-cooutrj 
Anatralian), sheep suffering 
from some contagious disease 
which necessitates their removal 
from the test. 



capScd by ■ n«k of luifitai tlmf, ihip- 
hcidcd kr aooUl blicV tm.—A. C. Snut.* 
But* Lifi im Qiuoalmd. 

Hosa (American, Western), a 
brave, excellent man. 
"Wtll.oW h\\a-m,,cur,a Urn- it ■ 



aniidtr him ooc ef Ihc 
met— in ihon, a Am.— 



Hoss-fly (American), "old Asm- 
^j«," a familiar form ot ex- 
prL's^on, such as "Wall, old 
bo; I " in England. It ia of 
course a variation of " horse," 



Snyi 1, " BillKni, ytt haVn't px ■ 
wtll-balincnl mind." Sayi he, "Ya, 
[ have, dU] int-Jfy (he wu Ji low cuu^ 
y», I have. 1 hire a mind (hat baluicea 
in any diieciion th.11 the public rrtim.'' 
-ArltB.Mtll'Mni: ThtPrinat/Wmia. 

Hot(popuIar},exuheraot in Spirits, 
rowdy, fall of extravagance and 
fun, " a warm one." A hiA 'un, 
a fast man or woman. One who 

goes the pace. 

She', whil Shak^peare might call "a 



II i.i Nov, 



nber all ihe c 



(Society), a hot member of 
society is a man or woman 
who does not much care what 
he or she does, and acta most 
rules of decorum and morality 
on one side. 



:v Google 



478 



Hot coppen. VUU Coppkbs. 



HottentoU [Eut London), «i- 
plklned bjr qaotation. 

upurelr Loo], 



Quad 



II, thoD^ 



p lot tbao 

nnwl. ffttltnUlt ii Che |diT<iil wiy in 
Ibii dUtrict of doigniKiDC ■ fttukger, thai 
ii to wTi ■ tttwrga coru freni the Wot. 
—Cmrp K. Simt ■ //tm tlU Pptr Lif. 

Hot tic«r (Oxford), a miztue 
at hot-apiced ale and sherry 
(Hotten). 

Ho^ to make it (ooDunon), to 
mako it highly diragreeable. 

«T Touth u HDt out of Court 



jiutio, or Nhhu, maka U htt ba ■Cm 



luiico : bat K 

Hcpiiif Ud.— n# Crmtluc. 

Honnslow Heath (rbTming 
slang), th« teeth. 

Honse-bniiers, honse-knackets 
(popnlar), a yariety of the 
" (weater " tribe, Persoiu who 
let bad lodging* at a higb rent 
to the pooi. 



Bzohaikge),tbeStoekS 
" The probable origin of ibe v(wd 
Amm, a* applied to the Stock 
Ezohange, ii a* foQowa : — Pie- 
Tiooa to iSol, nbeo tb« jobben 
and broken (in GoTentmBit 
■ecnritlea) aaiembled, fora«bait 
period, in the Botonda of the 
Bank of Ei^land, a room wu 
rentodin a hoiue facing Battbo- 
lomeir I^ne. When a membei 
was not to be found in tlie 
Botunda it was said ' he is oret 
at tin haimJ' At a later period, 
when the members moved into 
their own bnilding, iumm now 
became a reeogmsed term, whick 
hae ooDtiuned in use nntil tbe 
present day" {Atkin'e "Hoiue 
Scrape"). 

HoreUer (nantical), a be«ch thief. 

How d'je do (popnlar), a regnlat 
Aow <ry« it), a Kgnlar row all 
round. A regular mes* or difi- 



U't knee (medical), a 
fwelUng oTer tbe knee-pan, 
dne to the enlargement of a 
bnnal no wbiob normally 
ooODi^eB that podtioo. 

Hook, the [Oxford TTniTenlty], 
Chriit Choicb, Oxford. (Stock 



HoiriiuE (common), great ; ae in 
a hmding tweU, a AomImjt cad. 



Hoxter (tbievea), an inside pocket 
Old English oxter. 
Tf o ilourd htxttr d; ulpa OQbld ttAf' 



, Google 



HubbU-bubbU — Hump. A79 

11m katltr coodMl in Ihc painrul ordol Hufy ((M CBOt), R tolrll, ft ViUflge. 
nt bcinc QMnptUwl to turn oul ot Ud U »n 

early hour, uti miucb op and dgwn under HnggfCf milgg^ (oantical), In its 

Ihe watchful eye of ft corpotai- — Ai6€rt ShaJupcAJUkn beuiiut DQA7 bikT9 

«.«*«.■ ^rr,(«rfJii«f. „,g^j aecretly, or in a olandes- 

Hnbble-bnbbU, tbe IndUn pipe, t'le manner, but iti uuitical 

tarmsd a " hookah," is thoi appliMtion U to eipteu anj- 

designated, from the noUe it tiling out ft orfw w done In » 

make« when being smoked slorenlywBj. 

(HotUn). 

Hiun-box (popular), apnlplt. Amn 

Hobt^ (commoD), husband. is to cajole, deceive. 

lum, on* r^ir diughter, yclepl Lus. Well, you puiih ball pri|, in yon for 

Mn. S. hu gml f«th in her worthy |n,|jn, J„ky, or {Mlerioi id (b* *— •- 

AbMt, and knowi hii book by hwrt,— ttsf—l^tln: PtOtmm. 
Madtrn SacUlji. 

Von m»y happenm the piei, x\ Biiihwo Hmnnier (popular), a nraKercT. 

To numUe an ■ lui yoa think >* ■'Isni ih* • iwtlll- 



r reelly Tail ID lee how you're to bluH. 


ihont down upon her and lenl out fton 


Should she ub ya<i oui lo lea, why ■ 




Ju«in< you would be 


maai of bead> ihat coiered liti ben] and 






But your danger you'll perceive, ihould 


"C'tnt, ChoUy; nht'i a kumrntrl' 




uid the fint tpeaker'i friead.— .^^ Lum 


Come acrou her hidiy ai Ihe door. 


GMt DimtmU. 







„ ., . ,._,,■_ Hufluning, given by Hotten and 

f^V'^"/ (American). je«t. ^^^^ ^ ^ ^^^^ ^^^ 1^ , p^^ 



inglj used to mean a person oj 



TJnoiaiism meaning strong i 



.object. "ThAti»%iud!UUrrf applied to drink, aid hea^. in 

above me, that beats me. ^^j^^ Utter sense It eiplalu 

"Dai'tchealin',- laid Johnny- "I'u itself, 
loing lo »tay vid *em lilt [ craduale. 
Uen'i nor* uotiel dai doy tell dtn you 

can find in de dime povelt. Say, you Hninp (commoD), to have tbe 

fellowi iMuU be 'i|Hr*d to htv about Aumii, to be low-spirited, dls- 

■L«*r<oioiriihiupi>ouBhd.cloudiin tresscd, mortified, aUndlng t 



Bchwiotoffiie.widnobalk 

and ftev. Dat'i wot kind ol a Miui/tttny 
■Uger 



tbe attitude ol one wbo li cast 



_, . ,.L. . . I * ». T.t wiinoutany more jaw, 

Hne, to (thieves), to belabour witb or youu siye an old buffu th. Mwh^. 

acudgeL —J'udCmJt: TitCaMtt/CriilHl. 



:v Google 



48o Hump — IgHomtmts. 

" To ha*e ona'a kmtp vp," to Hnaki. Thi* word U girat t^ 

ba oioM like a cat with Ita Hott«ti and othan h a du^ 

back Mt opk To Araip is a pro- tarm, but It i> a reoogniMd pio- 

Tluoiallaiii meaning to gminble, Tinofallsm, neaning k tniaer. 
and it naed in the ilaDgj Benee 

ot to ipoiL In America to Hmkr (Amerioan), good, ionj; 

hump ooaadf ia to pnpare "ereiTthing went off i— ly ," 

piompt); tor aa Mtack. went oS welL 

Hump die nngr> to (AnrtnUaa), Htiiit.inlbe(popalar),ngMdedaa 

to caii7 one'i loggage oit one's admittMl to a oinsle or amdetj. 

bwifc. "Heii M Uulmmt," haiaooe 



Hnntniff (tUerea), oaid-ihanditf. 

Huu (old cant), the ooiigraga> ^^ 

tion in a chnrch. HnAan (Anglo-Indian). • mea- 

Htmker (Ameiloan). one oppoaed 
to iffogie ei In poUttoa, cme op- HntMOd's tea (popakr), weak 
poaed to progie aa In ganewl. tea. 



am not hen (tallora}. Pmoaal— Hu k mt a tcwi iJ la joe 

I don't tee] inclined *« >«»"»■■»«>«"■>!«> rf"ilicb™iw,- 

i_ t . T _i.i. "•• ■»»■ «"« ™» Boocr MID klisa 

^TJ f' w«hior«,st««r if-.di.'.,o.ihJ 

to be left alone. dui ii nmM U to Tinr bmai to all 

'mwid ud hm lOM talk vUi Ba«i«r, 
Ictu (legal), a lawyer. A oor- tbiupaimdRabradnnU^t t/f*, 
mptlon of /yri« wMiAw. -^ -«'-««,. 7Mh«. 

Idea pot (thie»e«), the head ; alao Ignorwam Jmy (old mnt), tat- 

called " knowledge-box." "^'"^ *■ ■^'"V woe for a &aad 

J017. When a bill waa Ignore^ 

I detln (rbTnlng elang), a Ahl Instead ot writing acroat it "No 

trae bill," the Latin word ig»t. 

If not, irfij not! (Amerioan), a ramu, we do not know, waa 

peouliai oolloqnial expnadMi, emplojed— hence the laTing in 

u "WIU yoo take a drink— V qnertlon. « H yon And tlMt 

not, wAy naif " anTthing prooeeda troBt wrj 



:v Google 



Ignoramus — 77/ have. 



and malice, and not of doa pro- 
MOntion, yon maj acquit tba 
person that la ao wTongfoll; 
pTMeootod, and so jnitioe i« 
done between part; and part;, 
•0 an /^nommu Jitrg ma; not 
be or no DM." 

I cnen W* all tatkef (Ameri- 
can), a quaint saying indicating 
that all i« eqnall; good. It ti 
said that an old gentleman who 
was asked at a Thanksgiving 
dinner if be preferred the white 
meat or dark of the staodard 
disb, replied, " 1 don't care 
which ; I ffutu \t'» alt turtey." 

Ikej (popnlar), a Jew ; a cormp- 
tion of Isaao. Also said of any 
one who thinks himaolf know- 
ing, smart, and baa a great 
opinion of himself, 

111 eat mj head (popnlar), Tari- 
ant& " I'll eat my hat " (some 
enoneoosly think hat here la 
a comption of heart); "I'll 
eat my boots," " my head," &c. 
A boastful promise — an nn- 
m eantng way of eKpresalDgaome- 
th ing impossible ot achieTement . 
Ur. Qrimwtg in " Oliver Twist " 
baeked and confirmed nearly 
erery assertion he made with 
this handsome offer. 




k linlai, U pal tnlinlT wit of lbs qua- 
ti<n ■ Ttry thick ouiDf of povda.— 
Ditttmi! Olivtr TwIil. 

lUegttiniate (racing), an afaaard 
fonnnla nsed by the sporting 
preea as a synonym for steeple- 
chasing, bardie ■ racing, and 
bontera' Bat-iaces. Prerions to 
the eatablisbment ot the Orand 
National Hnnt Committee, these 
sports were unregnUted by »nj 
code of law, and nnrecognised 
by any racing tribunal, and 
were then properly regarded 
as iltrgiiinHiU. They are now, 
however, as mnch nnder rules 
as flat-racing ; nevertheless the 
term Ulegitiiiutte continues to be 
applied to tbem though it bas 
lost its force or signiBcance. 

lUtgitimMe season, also called 
the dead season, viz., the time 
between the weeks which In- 
cludes the 33nd November in 
one year, and that which in- 
cludei the sjth of March in the 
year following. No races under 
Newmarket rules are allowed 
during this period, whloh is 
obviously the most suitable for 
the other or so-called iiUgiti- 
mate branch of racing. 

I'll have Tonr gal I (street slang), 
a cry raised by street boys or 
roagbs when they see a fond 
coople together. In like man- 
ner, in small theatres in Paris, 
the pit will raise a cry of " 11 
rembrassera 1 " when a man and 
woman hre sitting together 
apart from others. 



:v Google 



4" 



I'll have — Improvers. 



i'U ktmt y9w gmil th4 nrchiu oiad, 

A> wUcb I ftll UKDMll. 

—BmUmd: Tkt Tliama Bmhnkmtnt 

111 bare jour tut (ibnet 017}. 

Tlwn !■ A cry that dmoi mt wild 
Which il, /'jU:Uw7nr:Ui( 

II Buka B» frd u nrmKH ihu, 
Wlm'ar Ih(T (IT, ritk^tfntrtiail 



ID ten jon * story of old Ho&er 
Horey lAmerioui}, nld laioas- 
tlully of a nunUve whloh bu 
nothing in ft. From a tvcj old 
nuTwr; Th7a« repMLted to ohil- 
dnn when thej >ni importnnkta 
to be told a ttorj. 

raullfmaittry 
OftU MtOUr Mmf, 

Aid DOW BIT tAarf% hf an 

Ahow h(r bndwr, ' 



a (WinohMter OoUegs), an 
abbreriation for " lUuminatioB." 
Od the lait Bonday night In 
"Short Half" before Qran 
Court wu thrown opon, oandlea 
were planted In templea or 
niobet ont In Uead'i wall. In 
thiioonalrtedthBiUHiiina. Thl* 
la now done in "Short. Halt" 
and the sfleot li enhanced by 
a blailng bonfire. 

I'm aflokt (rhyming alang), a boat. 
In-koy (pidgin Cantonese), not 

oogbt, %.€., yoQ sboold not. 

Uaed poUtely in accepting or 

asking a civility. 

Immediitfly sooner, if not bofon 
(American), a made-op {Juaae, 
bMtrd oooadonally among boy*. 



Immwise (American), esoclloat, 
or extremely good. Boch sad 
(neb a penon i« «ald to be an 
"MiiuiMt fellow," or liquor i* 
adTertised at uiewiMt, or a 
tailor notifle* that be ia "«■>< 
•WMt on panta," and a dreaa- 
maker that she ia " Miamae on 
lUiti," though abe does not 
boaat of b^ng "jawMiut in ber 

Imp. The iiap ia the devil of 
the deTil, or attom^-ge&oal'a 
devils. Tbereaiemanyof tbem, 
and baTo no poaition whatertf 
In the law. They only "dovU," 
or get op oaaei for the jonior 
oounad to the Treaaory, though 
in doing thii they often contrive 
to get work for themaelTea aa 
well; tboa there are many dsrila 
in the law. 

Impo. or Isqios. (aohoola), abbrft. 
viailon lot impoidtlon. At Cbd- 
tanham Collage both maatan 
and boya call (hla an "impot," 

Impost-taker (American thieret), 
a man who lenda money to 
thieves and gambler*, or proe* 
titotes, at very high rates of 

Im p roTera (tiade), yonng men 
learning a boainesa, and who 
enter into employment ohle^ 
with a view to qnallfy tbem- 
aelTcs for work. Ftds BuBTUL 

iu^ntn u< kepi, utd all Ih* nmliriM 
■R pnpuid by Ih> piofriMsr liwiilf, 

—AiPtrVtrmtmt ^a Chttmtt <■ »'M^ 



:v Google 



I'm sometktHg — Infanhy. 



483 



I'm — "■— *»''^ of A Ifatr iqrMlf 

(AiMriaui). It ia nld that ■ 
ocrtain geatlamao wbo wm 
giTBD to namtlnB extntordl- 
IUU7 esperlenoet, baring od 
ona oooadon told ■ yerj rn- 
markable inddeat of travel, 
then tuned to a Sootolunwa 
who was pnaent and asked 
Urn if he wa« not astoniihed. 
" Na, na," replied the Soot, " Tm 
hb that — Fm tomMMng a/alttar 
mtme." Tbii aajing haa be> 
oonte of late (1887) extremely 
popnlar In the Doited Btatw, 
BDd i» repeated without mero/ 
among "the nder aort" when- 
ever any one ia nupeoted of 
playing HonohaDaoi. 

In (oommon), to be m with one, 
to be eren with him, or be on 
intimate temu with him. In 
for tt, in trouble or difflonlty. 
(Americaa), to be ia it, a 
pbiaae ezj^eaalTe of taking an 
inteieat — peonnlaiy, personal, 
or mwital In anything. Uke 
"I'm on It," "I'm in it," ilgnl- 
tjiag that I hare a part In the 



A hoTM on pnblication of a 
bandio^ i« i^d. In deeoribing 
hla ptoepectiTe chance, to be 
in it, "not w it," or "right 
hang w It," aooording to the 
▼lew and judgment of the 
■peaker. The tame temu an 
ued during the progreM ot * 



In ft AUk (tiOkM), in a gre«t 

In ft tin-pot my (popnlar), In • 
wnaiij inferior, trifling mannflr, 

I lifhL DykiB( pip* ud I nt vp b bed* 

tim-ftt wff—Wm. Bunm! Bnnmf 
BiU. 

In deep wftter (American), In 
peonniaiy difficoltlei or in 
trouble; 




Indhridnallse, to (American), to 
identify a perion, to indicate 

No Udr of nfinanail B*a pefcoM to 



One may hear in the United 
States or read in tfaenewipapeis 
that person* are "indiridnal in 
their ordere," or hablta, it;, 

Inexpreiaiblen (soelety), a sham- 
modest ezpresslan for tronsem 

Infantry (popular), ohfldran. The 
Frenoh have the slang expres- 
sion, "entrer dans rinfuiterle," 
to become pregnant. Ught 



:v Google 



484 

hOa.'r 

tiTiej, fMit, or pvtj. 

Br'i lUbUi iDt « •* di (ik, 



Infi^r—Insidt. 



Isk-e-U (iiidgiu)^ belUi: 

lakaHocer (oommoa), a oli 
Joaiullft OT leporter. 



In giood ih^t (Ameriosa, knd 
well known in England), to b* 
"In good ah^ie'* U to bo qnlM 

Im Ch< Staff-— 'T*» MOl iaMMd- 
BM of the Ckr of Dadwiwd Etib Mov 

InUsUsh (Umon), qoiteatlioine 
and pleued. 

In Us iliell (talloni, not in a 
talking mood, (olkj, Ot com- 
pelled to retire. 

lalqnlty - oEc« (Amerioan], In- 
qoiij ofBoea or bnreaox which 
•dTortiM to And emploTniMit 
for goTemvBM, MrTaDte, Ao., 
and obtain sltaattoni for thorn 
on oondition of raoelTiiig fiom 
twenty to thlrtj per cent, of 
their flrat Tear's wages. Such 
" sifain " are common in hoa- 
dOD, and many are even wono 
than the wont in New York. 

Iqjnnbent (American), a phraM 
often used jocosely when a man 
asMrta that he has remained 
tme to bis prlDciples. It la 
said that an Indian when loet 
In the woods and unable to find 



■t the Vtwtfmptr Pn Fvd Dibbb ; 



hr tbt imiill^trt. —StrrHnf Timn. 

la^ (tallots), a nply giitti to * 
qnestlon It Is not desiiabte to 
annrer, " Who told yon that 
tale I " " InJcf." Slope n t ta r ' s 
term. Also oaed among book* 
•dler*, printer*, fto., as an cm- 

Imoceat {Amerioan thlerBs), a 
ootpse, an idiot, or a oonxlcA. 

Inside (pidgin-English), within, 
in, interior, heart, mind, soal, 
in the oonntty. " Ton beloogvy 
imart mtidk," yon are intelli- 
gent. A Chinese, many years 
ago, on being shown a ^otnre 
of a looomotire, at onoe ie> 
marked, " Hah got too mooh 
[denty all-nme itaidt," we 
have many such in the in- 
terior of China. On one ooca- 
■ion a ChineNi said " Hah got 
one piecee man, one pieoee 
gtrly room-iuidt.'' Boom-nuU» 
means within. 



:v Google 



Insitk — IntiTviewer. 485 

nMTTad. "Indde he hMrt" IT t« dvl (ft «■ at ihk pltn. joa 

loude sqiuttcr (AoftraUan up- u hoc fi 

oonntrj], ■ K|nktt«r (g, v.) in • iat.—Ht 

MtUod diatriot, nMd In tbe *"»• 
wilder puts of Anitnlla, the 
noitb of New Santb Ittim, the 



l oter r l cw cr (Ameiiowi), 1 



.»ri.»- . It ..J _™i •'hloh beg«n to come Into gu»- 

i««hemt«ritorT. ttd «T«d. ^ ^ .i^t ,880, or euUer. 

l«r« ue thoee who redde within _. „, ."" „. ... ™* 



tlie mergin ot MttUnieiiti, u 
dlatingoiabed from " pioneer" 
or " oatdde tqnetten." 



eminent (or enjr other) pereona, 
bj the lepmten of newipkpera, 
for the poipoee of extnwting 
infomiAtloii from them. Inter- 
,Sr^i2d."iS''B^ Tiewing in the United Stetee 
^ ' ■ luL wma dereloped into Ml Mi before 

the term oroned the wmter to 
Xnglend. But now the E^anoh 
JonnMliete eend their men to 
mUrticto poUttoik&B. 
At tbe kcvdC Htnoari DvuncnKc Cda. 




Loab Gleba-Democrat wdn ft bftdf* at 
whita •uin planed lo iha eou bpel vlih 

Imthatioa <An»erio«il. BerUett ■ •a™ «". •"! '™'^°« «'•'■ l'"™' ■- 

oalla thie * flub word ot recent GunB-DnoeitAT iKTsvaewma Com. 
intiodnotioii ma Applied to eoj "Illoll tbnHnrakt, 

pnralent pnotloe or thing. Kia(, Fubv, Rot>i i>*m- o^ *oiw<r 



attnet the notloe of Diokeni 



Let mt Bat banc In icDocwteo." 

1.1 ■_. -ij. . 41. Ti i._j *• •« SoiAad with hk tietiD, ach 

onbli flrrt rliit to the United f^,„rf„„h«.d^ hta e chei^ -Udi 

Btktee, dnce he made HMtin be pot in hit hu.buid, ud thu ewicd 

Chutlewit Inqnlre if (pitting ut fnnhcr boihn- with the nponen. 

WM an AmeHou inHiMion. TJ™" '^"^ "" IdMriW « Wlow, ^ 
Pmirm. 

Iflftnct Wt, to (Amerlbui), Keep tUi dwdc b joer hu, end yga 

originally and rtrtotlj '" to re- win a« be fin diuorbcd bj e repofWr. 

more from offloe. at a Member -CUtMtu mtmmr. 

ot Congreei b; lastmotiona Thia 1* what In American 

from a State Legiilatnre" parlanoe may be oalled bringing 

(BarUett); popnUrljitotonont interriewing "down to a Ane 

In almoet anj way, eipecially point." 

bj ^peal to a h^her antho- | monxd 10 the United Scus efter 

rity. «lmnT«n'>^«H*-*^*H™l'^*i»>°T 



:v Google 



486 



In th* buff— In the wind. 



•d Sl FuTt ted «M iMf 




In tte tmff (tailon), rtripped. 

Id tbtt out (oomman), to be m lii 
«art, la to be defnaded, aoiel t 
diMppolnted. Fidt Cast. 

la diowiBf ■ photo, 'in wJM la rcBect 
Thu Ihc |irl nay ban no Imiu tor an, 

So Ha ihu iho oiMdm'i fa^riy coma, 
Or you (uT find jroaneU' ia (Ac »r«. 

In the crook or click (tiilon), 
In the ftot of ODttjng. 

In the bole (printera). Thii t«iTa 
U applied to b oompodtor when 
he fa behind-hand in doting np 
hla oopj, and hli oompaniona 
that have taken anbseqvent 
<N>p7 await the cloaing-np of 
hia portion, that the maUng-ap 
into pages maj prooeed. 

In the know (oommon). the ez- 
preadon ezplaina itaell 



In tiie atmw (oommon), anid of 
mairied ladiea when aooonobed. 
Hotten ia wrong In t^jiag thii 
phiaaa t« coane in origin and 
metaphor, whatever it mar be 
now. ItiiinreaUtrTer7tdd,and 
datee baok to the daya when all 
BtoSed with absw. 
Even the hlgheat end moat 
exalted in podtion— Benrr VIIL, 
for example — laj upon straw, 
for Biand telli na that ••thm 
were directiona for certain per- 
Bona to examine ererj night the 
atiaw of the kfng'a bed, that 
no daggera might be coaeealed 
therein." 

In the swim. Hotten limita thia 
to bring io a ran of Inok, or in 
a good twim, beoanae angfara 
are in Inok when they And a 
•wte or "school" of Ssh. Bnt 
of late the t«im ia applied an- 
tinilj to behig what the Frenoh 
oaII"dans Is monTement" (abuig 
equivalent, " dans le train "\ in 
with the worid, in the enrrent 
excitement!, specnlationa, ideaa, 
and intereata of the age. 



:v Google 



It Oimah Irish. 



Into (popnlai), to be, walk, dip, 
drop mIo, to mtUok on«, flgbt 
him. (AiD«ricaii),abOTto^ want- 
ing, u "It vM all right into 
a TBid mbdag," "I fonnd.the 
aoooont oorreot Me fonz oanta." 
I tbMfhi I did pnttT w*n d*ll*BlB' an 




-£'. Zt/wrf Hmrrimm ! MS. 



^^ I. P. (1^), ft oomption of te 

Di.kfad-»ni^B«IU«*-b, f,„^^ expr^rion t«7 

£!l^ hT^ruThCrfd!! d^ '»^ ootnmon among tlw OM BaU«y 

v« M« Bnc P« foM wot beoa' ui hsT* banlatan. ItUadefenoe bom 

«» imttir».—UiKit Rtwtm. the priaooer oi Ui Mend* glTen 

t«.iMi«.. f» it^b /*™-<™i ^''^^ *" oo"""^ wIthoQt the 

Imtttflnw to drink (American). interrentioa of a aoUclter. 
The tollowliig expreadon* are 

all (tamped, endoiaad, and ap- Irlah corner (popolar), • ohOd 

proved In drinking oirolea ; — bom of Iilah paienta In an j 

/ bruu ^*^ "' ^''^ aonthem ooontlca 

/■nfow. Of England (Hottea). -ron'ra 

Iriahl" ia a ootamoa pbraaa 

wban a child or person i« la;- 

Ing ■ometbing not qnite Intel* 

U^Ue to the lUtener. 



whMni}«>uii 




IriUi, tadlu, Dntdi (American), 

all of thoM words are naed to 

■Ignlfy anger or arondog temper. 

Bat to nj that one has hta 

S^(iwri)UtHl "Indian up," impliet a great 

*™"''^'» "!;",■■ degree of TiodiotlveneM, while 

Will TOO trr ■ muto 1 J^ , ., , ..... 

wm>«udn.iiipT ^'"^ *™tl» 1« itQbboni bat 

• ■ Tlelding to teaaoB. 



:v Google 



Irishman — I say. 



mongen), the oimiiga muod. 



Iriab ttiMtre (mUltwy], » goaid- 
room or look-np in bamokn 

Iroo (meobudot), bad iron, owd 
in raf«retiD« to mnj b«d kSiir, 
failnie of ftnj kind. 

IraocUdl, baked piM, so crUmI 
from the umoar-plated oon- 
dftendM ol the ont«Ide onut. 
Of Amerioui orlglii, Duing 
the CItU Wu inmdad wm i^ 
piled to eterything well do- 
fsnded or hard. An "irotulad 
oath." A Bererelj Tlrtnoiu girl 
wu an trmaCad. 

Iron cow, the poinp ; ao oalled 
bj the milk dealan of London 
booaaaa It pioTldM them with 
the water for what la lome- 
timea called the atretohlng— 
that ia, the dUnUon aod adid< 
teiatlon — of the milk which 
thej aupply to their defmnded 



mm-of-war, but IMterir mdM 
to iiOD and inooUd ship* (Ad- 
mlnlBmTth). 

Irrig«te, to (AmerioaDk to drink, 
to take Uqnor or mfmehmnnt ; a 
■7iiou;niona aqn e aal on !■ ** to 
" Of Hexloan frantlar 



Iron bc« <pidgin), item, obdn- 
ivte, cmel, aerera; Cantonese, 
Xdnun; Uandailn,l'May[ar«». 
"He makee my one Hen /dee, 
too-mnchee bad heart he hab 
got," 

Iron maklag: (popnlar), oconpying 
a berth or billet In whloh moaej 
la to be put bj. 



Inicnte yoor caakl (AnecIoaB). 
Thia U beoomlng oonmon fai 
Si^laiid at an ioTltation to take 
adrink. 

■ buTdirfBlc b dn 



I anr, I seen him (Ameiioan), a 
Weatem phraae implying agree- 
ment, haimony, or good fellow- 
ship. 



I M7 (pidgin). '"The ChlncM 
mob need to call the iewgtt«ii 
aoldleia A'tayt oi / tuft, from 
their frequent me of the ex' 
preaaion. The French guniiw 
nsed to do the mme In Bou- 
logne. At Amoy the Ghlneaa 
wed to call out after fotoign- 
ers, Aiee, aitt 1 a tiadition from 
the Portugneteofwi,' Here r Id 
Jani the Preach are oalled b; 
the oatirea Ora»g-dttdfimg, lc, 
the cfltc»-c(«H people" (AJiglo- 
Indian GloMary). It b not 



:v Google 



/ sqj" — Ivories. 



489 



nnimal for oommon people in 
BngUnd ud Amariea to okll 
Fnnoluneii " ding-dongi " from 
the lame woida, knd In the 
latter ooniitt? boji cry after 
OeroMUU Nia «ii*» arouttf and 
WitjdHtl and gieet Italian! H 
"Johnny Dagoa" {vidt DaOO). 

to hia ptileta la? (Amariou), i« 
be all rlghtl Fiom a ooaiM 



lahkimmlsk (Unkeis), dnmk ; 



I shonld amile (American]. In 
tbii phiaw a itrong accent la 
laid 00 "ihonld." It come* 
comes from eaoh BxpreMione 
aa "Well, I tiumU thinkt" 
which an often left incomplete, 
bnt which when completed 
would be " that he ought t« 
be ashamed," or " that people 
woold know better," &«. It* 
gueral meaniog i« an intima- 
tion of nriviae. or mild con- 
tempt. It li mnoh used bj 
women, and la bellered to have 
originated in the eaborbs of 
Boston or in Brooklyn, New 
Tork. 
W« uiNd Jm Cipp Ik* Mbcr diT, 

And ukad It wklieui (dUc, 
" If mkcd 10 drink, irhu would jn 



Ui of FHng (eMt end), ooat 



Istnbbnl (Anglo-Indlao). "Tbla 
umal Hindu word for (table 
maj natntally be imagined to 
be a corruption of the English 
word. But it is really the Arab 
utoN, though that no donbt 
came la old times from the I^tin 
Ma&uIuM throngh some Byian- 
tine Oreek form " (Anglo-Indian 
Glossary ). 

(rhyming aling), the 



Itdiland (popnlar], BeoUand, al- 
luding to the ailment cansed by 
a diet of oatmeaL 

Item* (American thleres), tn 
gamblers' slang, looking at a 
party's hand and ooaveylng to 
an opposition player by signs 
what it contains. A looking- 
glass is aometlmea naed, or else 



It CMS (American}, it U all right. 
I agree with yon, it is welL 



It takea the gloss off (taUors), 

it takes away the profit, or 
materially detracts from its 

iToriea (popnlar), the teetb. 

TbcM una abject to laniiif ln(tlij 
pun; nhiuuli bon lh«d, mad ttAga 
BuAiftn uv Dolvicaaly uiythmf but 



ft third rcioiCH Iq it Kt of lovtlj ip 
iDd ft ftmnfa hdi ft particalftrlT ntftV 1 
-Jfidin, Stciit^. 



:v Google 



490 Ivorits— Jackaroo. 

" To fiaah yovr jwrte," to do look. (Oud-pUjen), obecb 

•bow TOOT te«b; 'towMhTonr mndoouattn. 
imritt," to drink. Alao dioft. 

(Bim»rdi), tho balb. "The P^ydr «°^ f*«»-i hr a. mi,,d 



r nm Duaij tar Dim, uia „ ^^ [, ,„ 
U agaliut him, or, Im hM Uidt.-«M«' F< 



put ftfter * j<idg«'i 
name, balng aknablve* 
viatlon for Jiutioe, 



in tboogh It be dona oor- 



Al anca llw bM Muted i»>M«r>- 1 ulkm, 
■bbrerlUlOQ ^lt SttamMMA Mtmimg fftm.. 
t0^" To jabber. In the ntm of to 

tftlk iodiatiDoU;, la ft perfactlj 

recognised word. 



• cnvdtd oa fmjr 



To tbi ilDpa il 

DerbydiT. 
Stnui ftinb in joar tboonodt fnwi htm- 



Jab, to (Bngllah uid Amerioan), 

to poke, 01 atlok with 0117 in- 

■tromeot, oommooly spelt job, 

la moatt7 naed In tbia aense. 

Ttm .- Y». Von nmailKr ihu Chu 

bttd Ovt Uliliuit tha (inf onlil ht HIT 

Bntn Irrinf teJ^A him, mid Ibeo b« Jiut 

nid, " Et to Brtiu I " ud c«mwl up hii 

ha with bii mMia3t.~/l4/nUicM<i. 

JaUwr, to, a word treqaentl; 
bat ralgnrljr naed in Bngjsnd, 
•nd ctlU oftener In America, to 
rnetn not to apeak badly, bnt to 
talk an; foreign language what- 



jKbble MA (DMtloa]), % ohopp7, 



Phila. 



Jack (Amerioan). It ia c 
among aohoolboTS 
delphia to addren a 
Jaet, and alao to apeak of « 
blnndeier or etupld fellow aa a 
Jaek — an abbreviation of jack- 



llH 



" What do yoa coma fjvmT' ml 
Dkllu BU tt ■ Dcifhbsur. " I'n 
Inai Ifaa &ir-[muid>." "Hst* 
jodca* of tin neck awarded Ibe pna 
10 tba bicECit Jackt' "They hare.' 
"Kd nr DDcle or mj fitba t« ilt' 



Jackutw (Qp-ooontiT Anatndian), 
the name tij wbioh 70iing m«n 
who go to the AnMnUan ooIobIm 
to piok np oolonial «iperienoa 



:v Google 



Jack—Jachshay. 



m dMlgnatvd [Qrant'« "Bnah 
Ufa;") Lika hettaroo, a sIbdk 
word coined on the modal at 
kuigsioo. 

Jack core (Americw tbicTM), a 
metui, low, snikll tellow. From 
Jack, mj nrj trifling coin or * 

Jackctinf (common), » thrublng. 
From the pbr>u, " to doit ane'a 
jacket." 



J«clE-la>tiie-pDlpit (Ameriowi), ■ 
mut who obtrodei himseU Into 
ft pUc« for which he It onfltied ; 
ae, for Instanoe, an ignorant 
fellow who preluida to preach 
or teach that of which he knowi 
nothing. 

Tba UltM csntribatioo (o lh< UitoiT 
el the RtbcUion ii rnm lb* ptB of Ihu 
eninenl Inilh-lalkr, Dm Piatt. In "R*- 
minuccnca o' Abrahu LidcdIii,* b*- 
tvccD tba conn al vhiii ha hu ban 
ftUoirtd to obtrude, he uyt at himaclf^ 
•■WroMutmulcH.ryUndil'rHSMt*." 
Of Ur. LiluLiitKBTC "TlHpTQKlat 
DCTcrrocfamne." That wu beamw Tin 



] ImtoKt ofthalK* 

Jack c«ner (Amerioan tbieres), 
a man who live* on the proeti- 
totioa of bit wife. A " ponce." 

Jack'iD'a-bOK (old nuit),> ibarper 
who robbed tiadeemen b; anb- 
ttitoting empty boxes lor othen 
full of money. 

Tllb /v*t-nt-M^Jt, or iblm dircLL [n 



The limile or torn ia eqiilTa- 
lent to the BngUsh "Jaok-io- 
offioch" 

Jack-in-the-«atcr (popular), an 
Attendant et the wBtermen'e 
etkin, on the river and lea- 
port towna, who doee not mind 
wetting hie feet for a cititomer*! 
oonvenieDoe (Hotteu). 

Jacks (thierea), seperior oonnter- 



Jack-in-the-bos (tbleTei), a email 
hot powerful kind of eorew, 
need bj bnrglara to break open 
aafea. Also a kind of firework. 



Ucaoad if [ know, though pcribabty «Da» 
body 'ad dmcktd 'em away tar lafny. 
Tbcy miD^E/drdb, Daind, but nf lar WTvnf 



Jack-ahay (np-oonntry Aaa> 
tralian), a tin qnart pot used 
for boiling tea Id, and oonMTed 



:v Google 



Jack— Jag. 



•0 M t« bdd H within a tin 
pint pot. 

Th* pwty, tlMnfaR, cury wiih ibcm 
a li^it bUakn Afwca, sond ^w^t iq 
ih* folda it vUdi b (uh lau'i nppcr 



Jack the painter (np-countij 

Aiwtialian), a mnoh adiiit«ntad 

green taa need in the bnih. 

Anelbw Dsumoiu ruioe »■ oT tba 

luh ii oiled Jmik lAt fmimUr, ■ nrr 

fnaa tik iad— i. La yiiidily efidtntly 

pndocad by a ducnM lua of tha coppv 

drrinf-iiuii is In minnfiictBiw. —LiaU. ■ 

CtitmtlMmmUy: OmrAmtifda. 

Jack np, to (Aoatralian), to throw 
ap, to abeadon ; -nrj pcobablj 
a mmptton of " ohDok." /oci 
itwp\i gennallr an expraaaioD 
of diignrt, t.g., when & whiit- 
idayer And* hli paitner*! hand 
at bad at hia own, and tella 
him to laj down his oaids. 



rifhit" Bn BT mau, "boi wall drln 
lifhl u' left ts Iha nil o< ihb iredc."— 
Gviwt ICaJet : A LUlk Tim Pbu: 

Jade (Amerioan thiavM), a long 



Jadoo (Anglo-Indian), oonjniiog, 
magto, boow-pooiia. Persian- 
Bind. >ada. 

Jadoognr (Anglo-Indian), Bind. 
jtuiagluir, oonJnTing-hoQM. 

" This is the term oommonlj 
applied bj tba natiToa to * 
Freemason'B Lodga, when there 



of an Italian prieM, who inti- 
mated to one of tbo present 
writers that he bad heard tha 
raising of tha devil was praetieed 
at Masonic meetings, and aaked 
bis friend's oinnion as to tha 
Cut. In Sonthem India tba 
lodge is called TaUi^vtUa-kowi. 
or ' Cot- head- temple,' becAose 
part of the rite of initiation Is 
mppoaad to consist in the can- 
didate's head bring ont oS and 
pat on again " (Angjo-Iudiaa 
OI0SSH7). 

" It is worth remaking. In 
oonneotlon with the imagined 
nTsterlee and toroerie* of tba 
Preemaaons' lodges, that wMle 
the tbeceopbiEta of England be- 
Uere that untold marrela of 
magio are practised in India, 
tba Eindoos on the other band 
aie all dim in tba &ltb that for- 
eigners^ and eepaoiallj Bngliih- 
men, eioel Id tbe black art, and 
lire In dailj secret into'Ooiusa 
with devils of all denominationB. 
' What Cometh from afar mj* 
pleasae best.' In popular folk- 
lore, tbe witches and failles 
always live tar away b«7ond 
the bine moontains, and goblins 
and satjn most be looked for 
in the wilderneM, in all cases 
anywhere bat at home" (Charies 
O. Leland). 

Jag (American), a bnoj, a whim ; 
also Intosloatlon, t^., " Jagged," 
dmuk, oc "to bate a>v «^" 



:v Google 



Jagger — Jampot. 



Ik it.— W m ^ y^ t' Ciitpimtt. 

J*n;«r (popnlu), A gauUemas. 

Jah (frMmuoo), eoutnctlon of 
JehonJi.nMd in the B^ degree. 

Jiif-Vhini (AiutlO'liidiMi), an 
EDglish-Indiaii word foi " jail," 
DBod in Uie Bomb«]> PreaideDO]'. 

Jakn (old alang), » prirj, • wi 
clMet, a place of oonveidenoa. 

Jun, rani (turf), one of ttiaalmoat 
innninemble gjT^sajm^ foi a 
turf certainty. RtaL jam luu 
been tlw caoM of 11MU17 wry 
facea. The expreaiion ia aot aa 
maoh In Togne aa formeil;. lUal 
jam Is oaed b; otber olataea of 
people to ezpresa eioeUence, ao 
alao "true marmalada." Qirli 
of the lower orden fometimei 
ftpply the term jam to sexual 
interoooiM. 

Jimborae (American), a word 
which would a^ear to be 
Anglo-Indian or gjpsj, refer- 
ring to something Terj nice 
or pleasant, bnt which is onlj 
oaed In the United States for 
a jollidoation or froUo, t.g., to 









Stiir, •!»• 


rtnl down dt ribbcr. 




/amirHl 




•«W|«n*du, 




/«-W/ 


SMiSflbB. 


iiihiD*lik.iald, 




/«*™/ 








/amir,./' 


The term ia DOW UMd In Bng- 



times jim-bont. Jam' or ja»- 
boH in gypsy conveys the idea 
of a gnat riot or ndaa. and the 
ot^n of jam aa signifying any- 
thing very apt or agreeable Is 
still obsoore. There is really 
very little ground, however, tor 
tb* Bomaoy origin of the word. 



Junes (thieves], a erowbai, a 
dignified form of the term 
"jemmy" for the same. Frenob 
thieves have the corresponding 

W« not to WIllcideA uid roaiid m doid 
'on, » I cult oul mnd ukid mr ikI to 
lead mt [hc>u«^ ud moa twirte, ud I 
wuil uid tunicd u ata-^HmUf ■■ Jit- 



Jmut io hii hud, ud nld ga-j.—Hm- 
Uj:J.ltim^fnmJml, 

Jtmmj. Vidi Jam, Bui. 

H« wu allow, and wu diOdM of «■ 



SMMv Tim... 

JunpM (Aoatralian], applied t« 
the vary high, highly staralwd 



:v Google 



Jampot— Jan. 



•Und-np ooQui ftflaeUd bj 
dmndlei, lomatimei u much u 

Wlm 1 na tuyinc at Queentdiff, the 

faihioiubk vrUcnnx-pUcc of UcLbonni^ 



ThaiB 



uincaoaortlia 






. _ a the houL 
*'0b, blow iboB Jstd," bft uid, "thej 
Auff flw wbok pliic4 up; It'i m b«d u 

" Wby, ■ia'l yen one Toons"'" ukid 
u aat u »*U cdaeuad 



■ (thieTM), ft go-be- 
tween; one who was interme- 
diu7 between a thiet and the 
"fenoe," or reeeiver of atden 
goods. An old word, from 
" janiu," i.e., donble-faced. 



e knife trick, tbe (oom- 
mon), to oat, oi ahorel one'ii 
food down with a koifei fnrtead 
of conveTing it to the month in 
an orthodox fashion with a fork. 
To eat peas with a knife Is to 
do tlu Japanae knift trieh. Tbe 
■ajing probablj arises from the 
(iDiilarlty of both the ohop- 
■tieka one to another, these 
■iticlea being eqaivalent to the 
knife and fork amongst the 
Japanese— henoe the parallel 
snggested between the indis- 
criminate use of the knife and 
fork, in the same manner as 
take* place in regard to the 
ohop>ttioka. 




tt^B^ — CtOigt WtrA md 



Jipanntng (popnlar), ezplalned bj 
qnotation. 

He mpfJicd bis 
Ur. Daiiliini dwtulBl u 
hii IiDtlEr-cuei." Tbe phiue, rnxkral 
iato pUin Enfliih, lieiiiSclh, cleudns b 
baoa.—Dicim: Olatr TmUt, 

Jirifk, jirika, jallico, *«. (gypfjX 
an ^iTon. The Tariaticos of 
this word are m 



Jkmkoe (Wellington College), a 



Jamj (common), tbe dzirai of a 
hackney coach. 

After luiqunc vo tva Lonaom iniciBC 
two KiUtkMi, he ailed t. cxh. 

" Where lo, tir!' uked ■he.wTV' 

"Gaiety buffet." 

And he b now vilUiic u bet lh*l h* 
hid the cheapen uhI quicleH cab dim 



Jaw (popular), talking. 

" Ne non jmm, I lell yoo." lud ifat 
fin! boy, wbDwu >tK>B(Erihiui JenyPupe, 
"Come CO home" (ihii u me, with • 
luK thai Bude my klumlder joioD cr^Li 
" I ihDuMn'i like u ga yon haln^ ny 
toUp. I 'ipeci ycoll be mrry ai«h kiUcd 
■rea yei fmbei d« fci hold on ya-.'— 
Crwmwtf .- Tit LUlU Rmfmimmffiia. 



:v Google 



Jawbone — Jiff. 



hMiid u jal, from jUa, he gam. 
AIm Anglo-Indlui jot I go t 



**frf'**** ^^^ iu duker ude, jtnd n^whoa 
» i*dd«r one LhAd when (ha wHfH af 
ptik*p* a wbalg yor pua into the tuuidi 

of doUarit which miihi hmTV been w pro- 

aubir invEuoi, 

fuD, m dnw poker ; ind Ui ncd; idbimt 
(«« ha hai Bothioc lo Livq od bal /aw 
irfiBf, tf.r.,c»dit, and lo otli kit j'^w, /-'., 
IW* OD oWii* till be ha> fot funhar ev- 
plormanl and ooia wafaa.— ^. SUmiir 
hUl! fnm Htmm It Htmi. 



Jlif (Ameriomii), « contomptaou 
word lor a penon. A •bun 
" iwell," » BlnpletoD. FUiTo 

Flap, 



idend in Iha Alchiaan, oi loo 
cDchia, eoontry! Why, 



rhere elH to rha covl 
■PkilmJt^Um Prwu. 



Ja.w-bmken [oonunon), haid 
word* to pionooiic& 



Jawing tackle (iwatioftl), oigMU 



Jaw, jas I (Anglo-Indiaa), go, ki 
go. English gjfjj»'* ofji- 



Jaw, to (popnlar), to talk miwh, 
bnt Mpecially to Mold, oom- 



Tlw dar ilm I (at naitkit waa iti 

of nr li'^ 
She uld I man'i fit u b* the hub 



and jumpid Dpoa 07 &ca> 



Jaw, to go, 
tiamp* or traTBUers, t.g., to 
jW on the tobj ot dmm, to 
go OD tba load. Prom the Ro- 
tamj >*», I go. Bomotimw 



" Jay-hawkBi" wu a term 
applied to matauden dnriiig th« 
Kaiitaa trotiblea, and extendod 
to othar bandits. 

TUl «( a baariar bkHr ta the bay [baa 
Iha eofpcraal ooei, and ha vowed to ra- 
(Bin hU property at any coU ; Uil Iha 

tf. In (act, [be "/v^bawken,' a* they 
pleanntly duhbod Iboucl'na, auginiDtad 
tboi rank! arcry iaj.—BiigU* BilL 

"To pla7 one for a ja^f," to 
mak« ft dap« of. Anj woid 
eqoiTslant to ignoramus or dolt 
mar !» inbstitnted Uaja.^. 

"I'ai a plain man I" he eaid, u b* 
■uode into the repuriBa' nan, and ihook 
the icidel (ma hii whiiken. "I'b a 
plain-cvcryday-inaD. with no book-htmfal* 
to apeak of, bst I don't propoag to let » 
ODe-boa [roeer'a dark flaj mt/trMMv' 
-^kiemit Tritmm. 

Jeff (pTfDt«n). The act of throw- 
ing with the qnadiats as one 
would with dloe. Nine om 
quadrats (nsnallj of ^oa bodf) 
are eeleoted, sfaakan op in the 
band, and thiowti on an Impos- 
ing snrffto*. ThiM "throws" 



:v Google 



496 



Jeff—Jmkins. 



ua allowed to aaoh plajw, 
aad onlj tike qntdimti thftt tiU 
with thsiT nioki ap pwawrt «<« 
oonntod. Thli qvtem 1j gMM- 
T«ll7 adoptad for detanuinlng 
tba ihan of good or bftd work 
at the and «[ a Tolnma, and 
aometlmea It la naed at a meau 
of gambling. 

JaUy, or an jellr (popular), a 
bnxom, good-looUng glrL 

Jem (old oaot), a ring. 

JwniiDft (oommon), a obamber 
QtenaiL noetu In Frenoh 
■lang. 

Jemiiiil OJemiayl BjrJlauBenrt 
(popular), a onrrent Interjaotiou, 
alao wall known In Holland. 
Teirllnok, In hi* Dlotionaiy of 
BaigoeuMh, mja that " Jetnenla 
U maral; a Taxiatlon of Jaaiu 1 
We atlU h«ai Jemsnla 1 Jee- 
menial Jnmenlal Zeemenla, jao- 
menit Sriatiial JeemeniaHarial 
Baa Jemanx, in Ondeimaaa." 

Jtmmjr (popnlai), a iheap'e head ; 
■ometimM called bjr the town 
nlmnl a " bloodjr j tmmf" on 
aoooont of the qnanUty of blood 
about it. 

MaaCT qiriiUr bid O* dath; diap- 
jiMi iiif for m Hw nuDutti, iha pnaiaLlj 
ranriMl vltli ■ pol of fonm mid ■ dUi 
tt ibnp'i bud 1 vbich cm occuion u 
Mml pIoUDt winid«B« OB I)m tiui U 



Tb(T bmil thniQih, uid bok and bar- 
but what a iiihl ullmt 



br lb* 

pUti ttaia- 



Jemmy do^ (men-o'-war), tha 
ahip'a ponlterer, 

\f3Batj Jed (Amerioan). Wb«i a 
b07 has not bnuhed hie hair, 
and it (tanda on end, he it called 
mJtmm.f JtA. In the old Ame- 
rican edttlraii of Uother Qooae'a 
Noraeij Shymet, Jtmmy Jtd ia 
repreaented in a rade woodoot 
at rnahtng from a thed with fait 
hair on end. 



Ofunwhbbid; 
And fl*w about. 



jtmay Jeaeaa^ (popnlar), 
dandy (Hotten). 



Itmmj O'GohUn (thaatrioal). a 



Jenkfan (jonraaUttlo), the name 
glren to the perion on tba ataS 
of the Montatg Ptal who lepetta 



:v Google 



Jtmy— Jerry. 



497 



the Coort newi^ utd give* bo- 
«oan(« of gnnd balli, &o. 

J«)^ (Americaii thiefca), a hook 
OQtheendafKftiok. (BilUuthi), 
B lodng hsikrd into the middle 
po<^t off t, b«U va inob or two 
from the rida caihion. (Fopo- 
lar), k hot-w«t«i bottle pat into 
» bed to keep a perwn'i feet 



JereiBf Diddter (common), an 
adapt at raising the wind, i«., 
at borrowing moiiej, eapeoiaUj 
at borrowing with no InMndon 
of repaTing. See the farce of 
" Saiaing the Wind " (Hotten). 



HBd ■ mu from Jirklu lo Jum.~/i>- 

A pri«on, a waterclotet, 
termed also a h<^ ihop, a hooae 
of office, a neoeuaiy, a Hooae 
of Cominona. 

Jericho 1 go to (oommoa), an 
eiolamatton of impatience — 
begone I In the Uanor of 
Blackmore, aboat leven milei 
from Chelmsford, King Henr? 
VIII. had a hooM which had 
been a priorj, to which he fre- 
qaently retired when he deaired 
to be free from dixtorbanoe. To 
Ihia place the name JerMo waa 
given •■ a diigniae, ao that when 
ao7 one Inquired for the king 
when he waa ini^nigtng himaelf 
in ■Titmai pleaaorea in Htntt, it 
J to Mj be WM 



"gonetoJeiioha" TheRev.W. 
Callander, Vicar of Blackmore, 
wrote io 188a, that the place 
"habitoally goei bj the name 
of the 'Jcoioho E»tate,' or the 
'BlaokmoreFriorj.' There la a 
brooklet rnnning throogh the 
village, which I hare heard 
called ' the Jordan.' " There 
aeema evidence that the phraae 
waa oaed in the time of Henry 
Vflf., bat it is not quite clear 
that it originated in the clr> 



Jerking (tow), maatorbation. 

Jerka (Americao), got the j«nb, 
has the delirlnm tremens, la 
uervoot, or under religions ex- 
citement at a camp-meeting. 

Jerk the tinkler (oommoa), other- 
wise " agitate the oammniii- 

'•/t* IMi timUtr." 'IIuh •rardi, in 
ptKin Enf liib, coBvoyed ma idjodcihii 10 
rinS ttu YM—Citrltt Didttiu: OUitr 
Twill. 

JeA, to. This word is need in 
the United SUtea io endleaa 
forms to express action, espe- 
clallTlf n^. 

I csa /ml a po« vith moj of tlwa 



Jerry. Thia word la oommott 
among the lower olasset of the 
great clUea of Sngland In anoh 
phraaea u j«rr]i- go -nimble. 



2 I 



:v Google 



Jerry — Jerusalem. 



liMOMd pobllo-hoDM wilb k 
bMk door entnoos ; waA jtrry- 
bnilder, m cheap «nd inferior 
builder who miu up thoM 
Eoiterable, ihowy looking t«oe- 
mAlitB, neither air-proof dot 
mtOT-prooI. Jtrrg Menu do- 
rinble from the gTfJ j»rr or 
j"rr(Le.,><w),thereotnin, whence 
its applic^on to dlaiThteBi, > 
back door, and all that ia dod- 
t«mpUble. From the Mine root 
we have the Qaelie jtrie, pro- 
nonnoed jartf, behind ; tbe 
Fiench derriirt. The Oaello 
word also cigniflei wretclied, 
•mLierabte, in which senM it ia 
■trictlj applicable to the Jerri/- 
bailder, and to the contemptible 
obaraotere popnlarlj know aa 
jtrry-gaeaka, A. jerry, a cham- 
ber ntenail, abbreviatloa of 
Jeroboam. (Thletea), a watch- 
chain. (Popnlai}, a roond felt 
bat or pot hat. (Frlntert), oa 
an appreotioe coming out of hia 
time it li cottomair to giTe 
him ttjtrry, in the ihape of aa 
mnoh noUe aa poadble. Chaaea 
and iron plates ((upended and 
beaten with ban of iron, to- 
gether with whiatUng and ratt- 
ling, are ooniidered the correct 
thing, and trnl^ a printing- 
ofBce aeemi a perfect panda> 
moniam onder aaofa drcom- 
stauoea. Hau>ai4iDbia"T7po- 
giaphia," 1815, deprecates aneh 
oratloDB. Tbe same practice ia 
babttoal in Frenoh printing- 
shopo, and ia oallad rMiJaoM. 

Jeny LTiidi (popnlat], a ^a 
bead pickled (Hotten). 



Jerrr nicUnff , aneakHig (tUorea), 
watch stealing. 



JitTfjinralr (common), a hen* 
pecked hnalMnd. From a char- 
acter in a pla^. (TIiioTea}, a 
stealer of watches. 

Jenej l^htnins (American). 
This is apple brandj, or apirlt 
diitilled from cider, wliich fi 
so called becaoae the beet ia 
made in the State of New Jeraey. 
It is also called apide-jack. 
But a noggin of Hgtining waa 
the "Bash" for a qnartem of 
gin a century ago. and it ia 
defined as sacb in Gecvge 
Farker'a Dictionary of 1789. 

TIm fini thinj thai vu done, 
Wu hukdiDf round the kid. 

Tbu ill mif bl nudi hu bdo. 
A tmtit o( UgAemiitt oat 

Bmi tipt adi cull and fisv, 
Ert th«y u chuch did pad. 

To hin it ihrincBcd Joe. 

-Lifi-t e^Utr. tT^. 

Ttiia ia intererting as showing 
that iws (Hindu, mKa'il,a faoe) 
at that time still retained in 
gypsy its earliest form. 



And «haff iba firla arouhd, 

I rid> Ibc bcal/H-n-w^M 

Tlial up Ibcn cui be fbood. 

" Hotfi Chaapnitii* Ouula]' Imm acain t 

Aad wbal'iTiHi>aaBi*I"tli*rCTT, 

" Ax tar dookex,' 1 nply. 
-OmmtrntmCktrt^tDtrnkit. AH^ 



:v Google 



Jerusalem— Jigger. 



I HW rows 'A1T7 with hli billTGOck on, 
Qnckcd trouKn oa hb ihighi, wil> 

knobbed nick umd, 
CUnb boB the fnwDd likt hi [uc up ■ 

And flop viib wKh bok toil inio hii nddic 
Ai Iboucb m bm]-b«s dropped dovq from 

ibc cToods, 
To lunl ind wind ■ ilcnr Jtrtaaiaa, 
And (bock iha wodd vith dumiy usnu- 

•bip- —PtoKh. 

DcnktT lidirf Kulcn will (iw iIm 

diasbtm rf Ibe uriMocncr ksoia id 

Rouen Row. A ihoiwEhbnd /<rwaiVn 

/#V " Mpentt >n bour.— /'■wjiy ^*ai. 



Jenmlem tbe ffoMen, Brighton ; 
■o Dall«d from tbe nambert of 
weklth; Hebrews wbo traqneat 
thl« wataring-pbtce. 

Jesse, Jessie (popular), of Ameri- 
can origin; to0veaiitanJnie,to 
aboM vehement);, 01 to thrash 
and belabour him BCTerd;. The 
eipresilon is eapposed to be 
intenslfled when, instead of 
Jtut, tbe worda "particDlar 

Jtnt," or "d d partionlar 

Ja*t" are used. The origin is 
nnbiown. A ajnonjmons ex- 
pression is to "give one fits," 
"particular fits," or "d— d 
puticular fits." Tbe original 
term appears to have been to 
j™. A gjpsj woold onder- 
stand by this to make a man 
go, or to clear him out, bnt this 
Is a veT7 donbtfnl deriTUiou, 
as is Hotten's, that Jant is 
sjnonynons with gat. " It is 
«Tidentl; deriTed from tbe al- 
lasicn in the Bible to Jesse's 
raloni and the aid which he 
rendered, a text oontinitallj re- 
peated among tbe Poritans " (a 
O. Leland, Notes). 



Jesuit (Cambridge), a member of 
Jesns College. 

Jet (old cant), a lawyer. 

Jew batter (American), goose- 
grease. 

Jib (Dnblin Vniversit;), a flrat- 
year man. (QTpey), htngnage. 
speech(Hinduln:Ai(). Alsoused 
in canting, " Drf savo jii raltdi 
o mosh I " — in what luiguage 
did the man talk 1 (Common), 
cut of one's jib. Tide Cor OF 
Oni'8 Jib. 

II lb* dislikei wbM lulon all ih« oil 
tfUuiri^.—Salt: St Xanmiti WtU. 

Jibb (tramps), tbe tongue. 



for 



Jibber the kibber, to (old cant), 
decoying vessels on shore 
plunder, by tying a lantern I 
horse's neck. From jMtr, 
horse that shrinks. 



Jiffesa (taUors), employer's wife. 

JlgeiT pokeiT (tailors), hnmbng. 

Jigger (canting and gypsy), a 
gate or dooi. One of tbe oldest 
cant words, given in Harman. 
Hr. Turner would derive it from 
tbe Welsh ^inldor, a gate, but 
it seems to come much nearer 
to the old gypay Uigga (also 
ttkta), a gate, Ac— there are 
many instances of Romany and 
Hebrew words which have nn- 
dergone much greater change 
into English than that of ritoj 
— or, as it is often pronoonced. 



:v Google 



Jigger— Jimne^. 



500 

«U47W. Tbo Wdib r^idur 
hw ita«U ft olMB afflsltr to tbe 
Booun; vtder, ft door, but 
gaodar cftn budlj be iftid to 
MMmblo gigs*'' (<^ JVS'')- *<* 
mncb M tfao lfttt«r teaemblea 
ttfvvo- (Bllliatdt), the net. 
(Piinten). Bee VlBOBUX. An 
ftTtiola Died by oompositon to 
hold the oop7 bj, and ftlao ftp- 
plied to ft mftll box with narrow 
dlrisioiu to hold odd 01 pecollftr 
torta in, that do not belong to 
the caaee thftt be ba* in qm. 

Jiggtt dnbbcr (tbloTei), ft tomker. 

JigC^red (popular), ao oath, 
eqaivalent to " blowed," or 
"danuMML" 

"Got him, JinT' Halm, don 
ksow," vjidalmod Uiv tny engcrlr. 

'* Halvot b« Jiofrtd," nund Jtirj, 
■tixincmjoUiwiiL "WbM'tb*lvaforf 
Ain't 1 bwn ft-huDtin' aner him erct tiac« 
hii iubcr coo* iHHHt Wuo'tllheSnl 



*' W4II, thcD," Hid ho, " Vm jigftrtd 
r 1 doo't H« you lumt I ' Thii paiulrj 
4* bdnf Jifgmd iw a Ibrourit* up- 



B« dl tldOM xoond hii gferdci ftt Sfanwt- 
bwT, iMcun* 1 Hid I'd \itjiatni if t 
■Mil, I doa't UUtv* 1 iboBld ban hul 



bahly from /jp, altled to >y, to 
split, i.*^ dertT07 (•nit Skeat); 
figger, to mon lapddlj. to nw 
ezertioD, aa in "jigytnd up." 



It ia laid the expreaaloD ftiOM 
from the (nffedng cftoted bj the 
ohigoe incect in tbe Weet Indlea, 
which borrolra In the feet of 
the bare-footed n^roee (T. L. 
O. DaTle*). Sailor* call tfaeM 
obigoaa jiggtn. But it i« pro- 



Jilt (tbtevea), > orow-bai. (Ameri- 
oan thieres), gpeciall; ^iplied 
to a giii who embraces and 
kisM* a man, ftad t^vora bi* 
e;et while her aooomplioe roba 

Jimfains, tlw [mxAak-j), delirinm 
tremeiu. Called alao the 
" ngliea " or " honon." 
Shoald JOD uk mc whence thciE bleu 

tjtt, 
WbcDce the thakiof and oatriEkn 
With tbe bomn of Axjim-fmmt. 

Jimmy. Thia word, which oame 
into DM at Cambridge Dal- 
Territ7 aome twentj jean ago, 
ia not found in print except in 
Mr. Besant'i worka. It hat 
three osea in oidinarr pftrlance, 
"tbftt'a aU jimmf." that'a all 

fifty jeara ago in Americ:*, 
meaning axaotlj, fit, aoitftbla. 
Id ihow parlaooe * jnuqr UMsna 
acocwding to tbe contoit a 
" fake," or a oonoealed oon- 



I AMoa), ft aetUer Id 



:v Google 



Jimpsecute — Job. 



Jimpa«cate {T«iu). In the 
Itatti TernaoulkT, tbis !■ the 
eqolTaleiit ojed, when k Tonng 
man goes to pe j his deTOira to 
the fair one, to Eignlfj the ob- 
ject of hie Bttenlioiu. She on 
the other band oalli her loTer 
K "joioy-epioy." 



Jin (gTpej). know (HiodD jtoe, 
also cJuuhwa, to tecogniee; 
jindm, often jinSwa, I know; 
jbut»a or juut, thoa knoweat ; 
/Hiif#M, I knew ; jinaben, know- 
ledge ; jtiMir!^ to know, a com- 
pound between the old form 
jmav, and the Zngliefa postfix 
"of It," to jin; jinovutcro, a 
learned or knowing man. On 
the Continent the Romany etill 
preMtrree the Hind, jan, " Jan- 
esa tn Romanes t" (Hungarian 
g7pe7),do«t then know RomaufT 
"Jsnel o baio Dewel ani Polo- 
pen," the great God in HeaTCD 
knowe (German Roman j). 

Oh dye Diiri ijt I 



JfavUnf jobnniea (Anglo-Indian). 
They term thoa a small flat, 
light straotsre which rana on 
wheela, and on which two or 
three lndi*iduala will sit with 
tbetr lega dangling over the 
■ides, the native driver sitting 



in front to guide the single 
boTM which dngt one of tbese 
jaimitive-looking Tehiclee. 

Jinked hia tin (popular}, rattled 
01 paid hi* money. 



— /. P. MUduU ! Jimmt^ Jtluuttli 



I Emil; Jlaka. Vidt HlOH JlKKS. 



Jiu^ (thieves), a Geneva watch. 

Jin-rick-aba, Jeany-ridc-ahnw 
(pidgin, both Chinese and 
Japanese), a very light vebiole 
drawn hy a man. Japanese 
jlu-m-aia. The Frenob in Ton- 
kin call it " pooise - ponsae." 
The jta-riCi-iAe has of late years 
extended to China and India. 
Hr. Giles states that the woid 
is a translation of three char- 
acters, signifying man, strength, 
cart, an exact equivalent, as the 
Amerioans in Japan at once dis- 
covered, of "Pull-man-car." 

The j'lnrtobAa is a great im- 
provement on the Bath -chair, 
enabling the man who acta 
horse to it to go Crom four to 
six miles an honr. 

JiT (gypsy), to live ; jivam, I live ; 

jiwin', Uting ; Jaabt», life. 

Airi o pOro ctiinii bOtidoita MifcAAi^ 
ihmJt kOihic-bakcno 'die o cIub*. — 

I.,., " In Iha old tin* nur mca Utid 
h^vilr IB lb* nBOo." 

Job, on the (tnrf), a hearse t* said 
to be or not to be en tA< jA, 



:v Google 



Job—Jogerring. 



MCOTding to Uw rappoMct in- 
tentioiu, bonMt or the nrene, 
of bii jooke;. 

IriviA] nmimiTinm, tv7 bblj (UhEnd 
vbfflher A puticuUr bone dvj wbt Baked 

J<A also mmiu a oommiirioti 
to bftck * hone; "he bu got 
the jtA," he has the putting on 
of the stable moiiej. (Thieres), 
« thieving aSkir, « murder. 

Id Kinii of the woni of Ihue deu lob- 
bvici BA pUnnedi imd ipoili diTided, utd 
•my iBbiliitiuiI knom full putknUn u 
10 bow lad when ihe>if *u dooe, or the 
"cribcncked.'-T-nn Ta^ 

(Popular), M17 affair; on Ou 
jtb, 00 dntj there ; the slavey 
on Ae jpb, t^e eerrant there. 
To be on {A« >)&, to eater into a 
thing heart and soul, with spiiit, 
to be whollj bent on tome un- 
dertaUng. 

And Any is &im lluJtt.-PtHKk. 
Almy* tm Ikt jtt yi Hit eompedioi in 



Job captain (luiTal), one who gets 
temporary appointment to a 

Jock (popular), the male organ of 
generation. (American thieTSB). 
"ja^eing it with a blgh-flyer," 
taking pleasure with a fane;- 



Joe (popular), a too marreilODS 
tale, B lie, or stale joke. Ab- 
brerlated from Joe Miller. The 



foil name is occawoaally need, 
as in the phraae, "I dcn't see 
the Jm HiUer of it," I don't see 
the wit (Hotten). " Not far 
Jot I" the refrain of a popolar 
song, ftqoiTalent to " Mot if I 
know it." (Ameiion nniTcr- 
sitj), a eatimet tCaitamM. Vidt 
Holt Jok. 

Joey (prison), a humbog. 

Ccnncb famllr belicre iboe diipliin 
of rcttgioi] on Uk part of (heir tfeliiTir.pn' 
Huen LD be sdoe ihuiu, laOins thorn wbo 
inda^ in LhsB hy (he nickouBc tljotyt. 
—tiaylm: CrimtHMl Frium ^Lamibm- 

(Fopnlar), a popolar s^Fnonym 
for down, derivahle from Jeeg 
Orimaldi, the great pantomina- 
ist. Also a fonrpenny piece. 
The term is from Sir Joseph 

TbcK [»ecei ere lud to have owed their 

bore Ibt nickoimi! ol J—yt.—Htmi tii u: 
Hilliry (/ llu Silwtr Ctimme* r/ EmgUxd. 
Coitn OF THB Rbalk.— 'Arry nnurb 
thai the Totiei ue kd by ■" Bob ~ (Cecil), 
the PuoeUiiei cad boa: 



nuke the moet of their }my. — PumdL, 

(NaTBl), a marine. 

JoCTil^; (theatrical), hoffoonery, 
and taking liberties with the 
text and with the andience^ 
a highly reprehensible practice 
amongst oertsin TCiy low oome- 

Jogeniae omey (theatrical), a 
musioiaiL From the Italian 
gioear, to ^ay, and tiasw, a 



:v Google 



John. 

John CotBftaj (Anglo-Iiiditui), m 
torn for tha Hononnble Kaat 
India Companj, which was often 
taken and used b; the naUres 
in dsTS of Tore. John wax mp- 
poMd to have a real eziatenoe ; 
but According to that charming 
DOTel "Pondaiang Hod," some 
of the Toptt voBoAt were un- 
certain whether John wbi a man 
or » woman. Those who were 
w> wicked 01 to donbt whether 
there w»e aoch a person, were 
■DM ere long to have lomethlng 
bftd h^tpen totbem. 

Jolmiiy (common), a swell ; a man 
belonging to a partjonlar Mt li 
one of the /oAwitM. TbeTonng 
man of the Axj. A fellow. 

Who thu Ida puHd ituoagh mr head. 



S03 

great simpleton; Jetm/mdrt, 01 
/ma fan, a deafdoable fellow. 

(Popular), m; girl, ta taj 
young man. 

(Irish), half a glass of whisky. 



A icDilomn urbo had mppmnily not 
wuhed hii Uce, sor Wt hii hair grow 
tincc hiilul Tiiii VtJthovBMta' Pmnn. 
vhieh u, I nndtnUDil, the pM u 



Jolumy-boao (Boat), the tobii- 
qoet by which, in the East, 
the English are Gommonlr de- 
signated. 



1 twirled BIT Ui^, wnlktd oi 
I nwli a/ftnir on ihe nM 
He Ipolu DM, bat hk foot ar 



/lAitny, with ita diminutiTe 
Jaek, is often used in all modem 
languages as a term of eon- 

Th< IlaUan Cuaail (pnnauBccd by <l» 



haf (i»k1 iDIo our laisiug* ai vfnaiT- 
Baui with afsol— ^XHy; uxl in onrTa- 
ucnlar w* ban Jadt^-all tiado, Cbcap 
}mtk, jack-pnddiof , and Jaek-an— none of 
tboc tilla bciztf confnred ai mulu of 
tofttL InG*nn»nfolk-lor« it liMlwaji 
a Hiaa who ii tb= model of folly or mb- 
piditT. The Spaoith, iLmLlarlT, baw the 
phnag, a Bttt-Jum—TUBUi. 

To this enumeiation might be 
added the Frenob Jtan-Jtan, a 



Jdm Ordeity (shows and g«it»), 
the showman's password to ent 
short the performance. Bald to 
be derired from Richaidson, 
the famous showman, with 
whom Edmnnd Eean served 
liis apprenticeship as an aero- 
bat. When Bicbaidson visited 
■■wakes and fairs, and market 
towns," with bis travelling show, 
upon fair days, the actors were 
sapposad to perform a melo- 
drama and a pantomime in halt 
on hour. When, however, the 
booth was crowded to repletion 
while the performance was 
actually going on Inside — the 
great showman was wont to 
remain OQtside on the Parade, 



, Google 



504 



Jekm. 



MntlBnallj InTittng the orowd 
to " wklk npt ud ba In tiiM. 
Jut a goln' ta bc^I" Ai 
•oon u he had gathared togetlMr 
•nooab people to Oil tho booth 
•gain, it wa* hU eiutom to ling 
ODt ovm the haade of tlw arovd 
within " Jack Ortarly," Upon 
hearing (hat atgnal the pet- 
totmen put the ataam on, the 
play and tha pantomime wan 
flala h ed In ten mlnntea, and 
Mie andlenoe was diagor^ at 
the fide doora, while the other 
atMamad in from the front 
Ui, DnttoD Cook derivae the 
phraaa from an earlier antboritj. 
In bli "Book of the Play" he 
rtatea: "The Ufe of Bdwin 
the actor, written by" {to 
qnote Maoanlay) '"that filthy 
and malignant baboon, John 
Williami, who oallad UmaeU 
Anthony Paaqnln,' and pah- 
Uabad late In the lart oentory, 
ooutalni the following paaiage : 
' When theaMo performeia 
Intend to abridge an act or 
pl^r, they an aoonatomad to 
aay. We will "John Aodley" it. 
The aiiylBg orlglnatad thoa : 
In the year 1749, Shnter waa 
nuwMr of a booth at Bartholo- 
mew ITair, in West SmithBeld, 
and it waa hi* mode to lengthen 
the exhibition, nntU a auffloient 
nombar of penona wen gathored 
at the door to fill the hooaa. 
Thii enut waa aignlSed by a 
fellow popping hia head in at 
the gallery door, and baUowing 
ont "John Andleyt" aa if in 
the aot of inqniiy, though the 
IntenUon waa to let Shatar 



wan in high arpeotatlon bdov. 
The Maaaqaenoe of thia noUfi- 
oaUm waa that the entertain, 
menti wen inatantly oonolndad, 
and the gatoa of the booth 
thrown opai for a new andi- 

Joho SmiUi, a (Amarioan and 
Xngliah). The fnqnent lecni- 
nnoe of thla name haa oanaed 
it to became a byword. Odm 
wtitti an Avioican editor aa- 
aerted that it was " no name at 
all," an aggriered Smith oid- 
lected and pabllahed the name* 
of the /olkn SmilJu who had 
diatingnlahed theniaelTea. It 
may be ramarked that in the 
baglaning of Tentonio nanea 
there wan bot three Jaii {Sul), 
the flnt nobleman — Smidt 
{8mi&), the first workman, and 
Thral (Thrale), the &rrt hkbonnr 



TiieSmia hnuljwlmilrnptMWd 
ill tba umj tt tba UiuBa. ukd M vh lamt 
thenwmapmrdioffoaiaib* Amraf 
Iha PotooK. Oo OM rf ih* nfncatd 
nUaiatfaal^ntoeic drriBB, vUefa tn* 



"Gumui Smlihl, lulr; Joan Sfnithi. 
Spun 1 Ju Saiidt, Hollud ; Ina 
Schmiajwcdd, Pehail; Jaw Snwt., 




:v Google 



JokH—Jotly. 505 

MU.J*." -U . ^^^ >» *« geiwwUy, depend, upon tlw 



»yu BiricnsbM 



D«'l 700 know what it is in Engliih T " 
" r»-l dm til Cm Smlf—PMil*- 

John Thonu <ooiiimon}, » flun^ 
kej; thep«nii. 



Joined Qw sane (popiUmi), > 
TnlgM phnM eqoinile&t to mj- 
ing that anj one bu beoome a 
thlet 



Tbea (ran Ibi door bt 




Ai drank u ercr b< c«i 

Sun nir hurt it broke ud no 1 

Since }<Auiajjm»td tlu£mti£. 

Joint (Amerloau), k pl«oe of pnb- 
lie raaort, generallj a " uloon," 
ft loom of ft Ter7 low ohuacter. 
From its hftTing been originally 
fto adjacent, adjoining, or joint 
room,aDanDeze. AUtheopinm- 
amoldng dena kept by Chineee 
In the United States are called 
opium joinU. To explain the 
following extract it should be 
ondentood that the obtaining 
ft licenae to sell liquor in the 
Amerioan cities often, If not 



CsnwKld ihu otdl* Ui aloon wm 
a " tonch/tin/," ii wu not nor 10 lad u 
If anmi or lh« Alowr. Ttioofli ■ (oad 
Dnomt. ba doBbilni Udn ih. Aklir- 
iBuiG "iadooaBca- back of Uoona and 
Wibon. 

(Common), to pot a penon's 
now ODt of jeiitt, to grleTonsly 
▼ex 01 disappoint him 

Joint working the {thlsTee). 
■wlndUng In the streeta with a 
lottery table, the indioator of 
whioh can be made to stop at 
any point by pieemre on a oon- 
oealed rod. 

JoUst (common), a man fond of 

playing practical jokes. 

On aiUriDf lb* rooa I had (i« iha 
boHic into tb> hand of a yoo^ uu, a 
•on of tbc hooH. Thii jrounf fillos wm 
a bit oT a>Ui(<, M wbm aboBI to uIh ou 
tbt (Ub iioppcr (tva ibc boltla be (aid la 
a joUr, &■ old Kaftr mnao, «bo Bood 
chualqr, "Sara.kODiraifc< burxidaMi- 
kar r»t~-(Saii, eoou and bmII tliU 
HUM M<ay~GUt: 



(Common), jMj U oMd 
■langily aa an ezpletlTe, signi- 
fying saperiatlvely, ma, he got 



:v Google 



506 



Jolly— Josh. 



jaUg vdl tiuuhed, oi JiiU$ 



Jolfj «■ « Mndboj, old ezprea- 
Bion. Th« "Thme J0II7 S«iid. 
bojt" li a taTern sign. Who 
the original gay and festire 
aranaritii was we have not dii- 
coTered. 



l-m,tij*U^Mtmia 






No muter whu ocean la bk, I Lui(h U 

CTCTTthinl. 
Allboafb I'm lika bt mMbcr, I'm tba 

iaufcofmjrpi. 



JoUt, by joHyt (American), an 
inteijaotion. Fouibly a modlB- 
catloaotgoit?! made b; French 
Canadians In asaociation with 

I ann Lncv an Indian ruimtd Tomiib. 
Hit fncodi mwU Tonah or Thomas into 
abcanrbyadflaiif /haA toU. Tomaquab, 
lh« Baw, hill but one «alh, il vai ^ 
/i^^/ What dciiy m Ihe Al[c«km or 
Kanuck mylhologr /ptij TcpmcDled, t 



diy "hal /•/// w 



d have 






(Popular), ta>oI^ a peisoa ia to 
"cIiaS"or "get at" him, or to 
hold him in ridicule. (Acrobata, 
&«.), rafera to the act of a friend, 
a confederate in the crowd, who 
puts in a good ahow of moner 
when the hat goea lonnd, wbiob 
10 retimed to him afterwBrda. 

JoUf) to chnck a (che^ Jack), to 
praise another's gooda, ao aa 
to entice the bystandeia Into 
bnjing. 

Jomer (popnlar and thieraa), a 
mjstresa, a sweetheart ; liteialtr 
a kiss, either from the K7F*7 
dtum«r, a kiss, or the Tiddiah 



Jonunk (shows, ka.), to be tair, 
to share eqcally. 

Joocer 1g7P*T>. to awake. 

Josey, to (American), to go, haateit 
on. Posalbl; inggested b; the 
Jewish slang /ostA, to go out, go 
forth, or from the g;ps7 j^Sm, 
ic, go liunj. 



plained Ihc idea at full Icpffth to mj friend- 
He liniord iicrtlT, aod ai il dawBed 
upon him, interjected approvingiF^/f^/ 
—C. a. LtUmd: AlfiUdm Kiln. 

JoUy, to (thieves), to Impose apon, 
to act as 8D accomplice or abet- 
tor. Now common, with the 
meaning to speak up for. 



oFlhem 



If hei 



orbatim 



Joah, to (American), to chafC, to 
make fan of, to quia. English 
pTuvincial, jatJbia, a coonti; 
clown ; jn£(, to cheat (Sossex). 
There is an ^MCiTphal origin 
of the phrase that a miner hav> 
lug been told b; a friend that 
Joshua once commanded the 
son to stand stiU and it obejed 
him, replied, " I guess 7011 can't 
come.rort over me 1 " 



:v Google 



" Km ycu bsy> Htn xay lod 



"OhMl /«<iiV tfacn ! Nol much." 
—F. Fnmtii; SaddU mmd MKcmtim. 
For tome anluiown reason & 
joA U mpposed, like b David, 
to ba always k sleep; penon. 
On the New York Stock Ei- 
Dhange, cajs Hedbury in "Men 
and HjBterles of Wall Street " 
(cited b7 Bartlett), if a member 
dropsaaleep, "/oiA IjoAl" cornea 
rouing from a doien longs, and 
the broker is awakened hj the 
cij. Thackei>7 seems to have 
associated jotk with fatDBsi and 
dnlneas In bis J»A Sedle;. 
Fossibl; the Cblnese JoA, or 
Bnddha, who is the Incarnation 
of stoutness and tianqnlllity, 
niggwted the word. 

Joakin. 0«nera]]; nsed to de- 
note a dull rustic or greenhorn. 
It would seem, boweTer, to be 
derived from the Yiddish or 
Gaiman • Hebrew jmoAch, to 
sleep, sleep; (■.<., stupid), or 
from >aMl«n, old; tinJMekeaUek, 

JosMT (popular), a s;nonpn for 
a "prosser" or sponge. A sim- 
pleton, a. "flat." 
Then u ^jHHt^a tukd. 

For, fai away; 






Far, Car away ! 



"Wbrn cf Pr»' 70D inccl 



Joss. 507 

Robabl; b«m "josUu," a 
lontorconntTTman. (Anttralian 
popular), a priest, the Chinese 
temples being called " iosa- 
honses" or "josses." Anstr*- 
lian slang designated those who 
ministered in them fouen, and 
then extended this term it had 
created to mean ministers of 
any religion. 

Th* RHRBd jMHr . . . Iiepl hb fill 
ia Foley fufaioa hamurioi (Ik pslpil. 



One tin Wan( he auliEe lUvel, 
Makee nop aae Di(ht ia jHi-*tmi, 
He ce ileepy, by'uby wakt 

Long ude tttjtri'lUuu 






oMd 



odalin. 

-TMi Jiaa Pit. 



Jpsa, joib (pidgin), Qod, a god, 
an idoL This, say the anthors 
of " HobsoD-Jobson," is a eor- 
niptioD of the Portngnese tkot, 
Ood, flrst taken up in the ^d- 
gin language of the Ghloeee 
porta from the Fortnguese, and 
then adopted from that jargon 
bj Enropeans as If the; had got 
hold of a Chinese word. " I 
know but little of thebr reU- 
gion," wrote Bockyer in 1711, 
"more than that ever; man lias 
a small joa, or god. In hto own 

He olo Bi* (bilw) nill aa maoM, 
He cbui<lufi/»f top^idee houae. 
Alio lim he Dakv Ji«u-pidfin, 
Wat yoD bokwci dUy liiisa. 

—MmrrCtt. 



:v Google 



508 



Joss — Juba. 



JoM- pidgin -num. Jon-heiue- 

maii (pidgin). "Thna also in 
pidgin, >eM-AoMMiM>, or jem- 
jiNJ^-mm, is a priMt or & 
iol«fioiiiT7"("HofaMn.JobMka," 
p. 354)- 

Pi((T knpc ilnvtii (fivwliig) 

ruulv u' CUtiliT, 

Nfift nch A [unT 

Since pici bccnn, 

/MMHit ht tiniln 

An' lalk " t« bt on IblMlcr." 

Wbn day tmlkex p( 1»k all-iuiKe like 



—Tki Rittl Pit- 

jQitick, ion-itick (iddgin), stick 
of fragrant powdeiad woods, 
combined witli a little gum, 
used b; Chinese as incense in 
their temple*. The ingredients 
for the powder «re the patduik, 
a sweet -smelling root from tbe 
Himalayas, and sandalwood. 
Aa' HilIt uiivn he lequu, 
" Mj to™ C 



Jounce, to (Ameiioan), to indent, 
impress npon, hit seTerel; and 
seddeely. 

Who wu foUowad ihonlr after by ■ nkut 

oohipiiy truup, 
Upon whoie (eUuiet psvcn; tuid>^iH</^ 

twr im lUnip. 

— nf Bmilmd ^Ckarily. 

Joumctd, smitten, enamoured. 

JoDnM7 (turf). The sense in 
which this word is used on the 
turf seems ratbet derived from 
the French jmrmtt than from 
the English jaurnt]/. " It is not 
his journey," means "it is not 



r (popnlar), 
a Scriptnre-ieader ; one of tbe 
subordinate staE of the gard- 
aOD chaplains or other religions 
minister who is only a ^mnwjp- 
ma» or casoal performer. 

Jower (American), a negro ex- 
pression for "jaw," talldjig, and 
qoarrelling. 



dude ter leek ei _ 

JtT tHCkyin' (U^cria^ an* wncki 

&BB.—Dr LtcUlmfir/t^, 

Joiri-snckiitg (papular), kissing. 

J.P., jDstioe of tbe Peace. Vul- 
garly a Joe Poke, or a Uarman- 
beck in old slang. 

Jnba, Cadjo, Quashee, Jumbo, 
&«. (American), Tliere are seven 
of these names in all given to 
negroes. Tbe reason why they 
were onoe so common is that in 
the ooontries near tlw Qninea 
coast every negro bean the 
name of the day of the week 
on wttlch he was barn. Eisg 
CoSee of Dahomey, as he was 
called, was really CnSee. He 
was, in full, Cnfiee Calcalli. It 
was, donlitiess, some knowledge 
of this fiiet whloh indnoed Defoe 
to christen Robinson Cnuoe's 
man Friday as he did. 

"Juba is a negro danoe omt- 
sisting in keeping time by strik- 
ing the feet on the fioor, and 
clapping the bands on the legs 
to the mnsio of tbe banjo" 
(Bartlett).; 



:v Google 



Jubilee — Jug. 



QuHtia la ao oallDd Eroin a 
iMgio luuiwd Q<M<A«f, wha flnt 
awde it known to white men. 
The FiMieh have the nama 
"Bambonla" (from a dance) for 

Jubilee, a new term for the be- 
hind, invented b; the EtaS of 
the .^ortti^ Tima or Bird o' 
Prtidom. 



a win ipnns ioiid*. Tbc tftugh VAt nU 
ep hit od* till h* («It hii itMf\ eld 
tHpptr bvitiiiig DO hii JuUia wiih thfl 
rtiTthmk pndBoa ef tha «va opoa ih< 
wild lu-ihim.— £in^ / FraJam. 

Jndiel, joak«l, jncko (gTPSr), a 
dog. BridenUy from jackal. 
When the gypaiea came to 
Borope, the; ^ve the namea of 
fiiiTH«u to which thay were ao- 
cnitomed to those resembling 
them. Tho* thej caUed a swan 
a soibM or pelican, and an ela- 
phant is In their langoacfe a 
boro %ak«ngn gry, a large-nosed 
horn. It ti remarkable that 
the gTpeies did not take a Hinda 
word in this instance. 

" Jackal is not apparentlj 
Anglo-Indian, being taken from 
the ToTkish diatSL But tha 
Persian tkagOl is close, and the 
Sanakrlt trip^, the howler, Is 
probably the first form. The 
oommon Hinda word Is gidar" 
(Anglo-Indian Qlouaiy}. 

Judge end J1117 (talloia), ahain 
trials for oSencee real or inia* 
ginai7, having but one object in 



Judge, the (AnMilcaa cadeta), 
the man who is tha most popular 
with hia fellow cadets. 

Jndj (Amerioan), a simpleton, 

BIII7, donkey, a fooL 

T^ coidqwdIt connoo coand] ytatm- 
d«Lj had ft bowL oi punch dawa al th« 
IiUnd, uid Ihtyall ludt/H^xi sflhun. 
iclvt*— UBnuL Til* DocloT ni pmuit. 
■sd Iha ChuT of Fotiu, with wbon aid 
thay niHd Ih> dnll, m tbu Doot of tha 
Jrmmalii fmsn^ wen wulinf.— /"lU/a- 
JilfltHi Smulmy Pmftr, 

It waa said of a man who 
was a oonTert to Jndaiim, that 
Punch and Jadyism would be 
more in his line ; bnt it la 
donbtfnl whether these words 
indicate the origin of the term. 
As It aeems to be New York by 
birth, it U possible that it owes 
I the Dutch jaoL, 
I qnite the same 



Jug (old), a t 

applied to a 1 



atnAJw£, — Ctnllevr 



DoD'iroabiKyihc"HiiDeaplojn]" bun- 

Aod ai roc O'Biiaa and hii bncchci, I'm 
gtad tha fool'a £a]Tjy iaja£. 

And I ihouihi, like a lot of tlx twiDi, 1 
iboald find oh ibul day in tba Sqnan. 

To jvg a person, to imprison 
hioL The writer remembera 
a Joke, in ooonectton with 



:v Google 



Sio 



Jtig— Jumper. 



tbis exprCHlcai, nude bj *. 
loraigii g«iitlem>n Id the pre- 
■encQ of Stoait Hill, who wu 
then ae«Ung to bring QoTernor 
Byre to jostioe for bi« share 
in the Jamaic* maancre. " To 
jug joni hare," he said, "you 
mutt first catch him." 

jn^^ins (spoTiiiig), an aspinut, 
usoallj joaog, and always more 
laigely provided with nioney 
than with brains. The lawful 
and longed-for prey of the turf 



The appellation, whioh la of 
recent origin, is never regarded 
as complimentaiy. Id common 
nse, with the meaning ol simple- 
ton, fool ; a form otjug. 

"Why dgn't he (K tlw po[[nillu,- 



Jug loops (popolai), sxpUined by 



1 Uk hair And vhuken of the oa^ 
tu of Don dnlwd fslk. 
be govcRhed by f**^'"" Soap 
liattjMg la^(x}K baij brai(ht Oisifbt 
oa to the templet, and (onKd udder) wooJd 
be the n^e, anachcr Kaaoa " tBriercrfl^^ 
nnld be the atjle. — Cnmntf : TV 

Jtikalo. jocko {gjsvli ■ ^°e- 

JnmlMrec (theatrical) jewelleiT. 

Jump (thieyes), a window. Vidt 
Baoe-johp. Deed also in 
America and Avstrslis. 

Jomp down [Canadian), the oon- 

llnea of civilisation. The idea 
involved is well pnt in the fol- 
lowing qnotaUon. 









We : 



ined for Bnndoii in iJ 



■rbicb m the September ot iSSl 
il toloniallj luwwn ai the jumf 
It u, the lut place ihai ia io 
nctton on the oocMiirta of what 
atilited life, And upon knviac 

of anieliledom.— ,4. Statrtltj 



When Taffdom and Gladitnoe jinc handi, 
And TBu nay maki a fair /Htfiiu oS 
Hairy. 



Jnmped-np (popular), conceited, 
arrogant (Hotteo). 



Jiioqter (popularX short smock- 
also nscd in ftockwombylaboaren,navvies, 
Ac Also a short external dnck- 
I look. frock worn by sail-makere, artt- 
™>«. ' fleers, and riK"" to preserve 
the clothing beneath. (Ame- 
rican), a rude sleigb made of 

™ f™,L. ,h.H ™, i„ .h. »pll°g«. « "™gli Pol™. '"th 
B toou tn«i oe >ii toe ^^ ^^^ tamed up They cost 

—Brtm4tiit Ballad. ^ery little, but are very naefuL 



:v Google 



Jumpers— Jumps. 



(Ullituj), white ouTU frock 
worn bj the men at gnn-diiU. 
AUo patrol jacket worn by 
gnnnen. 

Jumpers (American tUerea), men 
that rob honsee by entering 
windows. 

Jumping a claim (Amerloan), ob- 
tainlDK anything by fcand or 
■tntagem. Originally a West- 
em expression, signifying an 
attempt to oust a squatter or 
•ettler on new conntry, snoh 
baving by lawond ooitom a Brst 
claim on the laud. It has now 
come into -general use. 

JnmpiilC HoMtl (popular), an 
exclamation, probably of Ameri- 
can origin. 

Jumping off (tnrf), one of the 
earliast and most important 
aocomplishments with which a 
two-year-old oan be indoctrin- 
ated. In theoe days of short 
distance races, a hoise which 
has not been tanght to "jump 
oS," (.Cq to begin at a high rate 
of speed, has bat a poor chance 
with those properly Instructed 
in the art. Therefore, as soon 
aa a colt'e education haa so far 
progreased that he has learnt 
to obey the toaoh of the rider's 
hand as to walking, trotting, or 
cantering, his lessons lajumfuig 
qf begin. He soon learns how 
to use his muscles for a indden 
spring, and becomes as quick 
on bli legs as b cat. 



an old story of a man who tra* 
TeUed till he came to a preoipioa 
which bounded the world. 

JompioK over tlie fat pot (thea- 
trical), a stipulation made In the 
daj's gone by, that bU engi^ed 
should assist (as the music in 
Macbeth, Fiiarro, Rob Roy, 
Dance In Honeymoon, Qod save 
the Queen, ka.) in the old-fash- 
ioned pantomime Han in the 
UooD (now called the Shadow 
Fantomirae). When gas even 
was not oonvenient (Richard- 
son's show), the light was got 
by a large Same of burning fat, 
behind the sheet, and all, eaoh 
and every one, bad to contribute 
bis share of the work, and many 
a time the awkward, spiteful, or 
hall-drunken have knocked it 
over, not jumidng high enongb, 
and so finished the puf onnance. 



Jnmp off (American). This phrase 

is thus explained. 

Now ukd *(un the tmad utn of ■ 
Ul« ciul cim vou i}o Icci of ipkBdid 
wovdui read : bni uiivid u ih( eml, inn 
Hod you bava b«a (ndually unodiric 

woalil tall > >i»/ ^, with ■ nui of 
brtuh be1d« you, hiduif in all probaUlily 
■ coUection at lop, or » piUUI which, csm- 
ioc ml the boLIom of luch ■ jlinp, would 
*nd your rambl* for lh»l ii.j.—Pkillifff 
Wrtkp: Tntlmfi^mTtmJirJml. 

Jnaqia (popalar), to bare the 
fuu^pt, the delirium tremens ; 
also used in the sense of a 
erase, aa " He's got the Jubilee 



:v Google 



Jump. 



the right of oocDpuK7 fmm 
twTiog fint Mttled npon tba 



•'<Um.-gr>hidi 



'*How doyoaknoirXlut!" 

" 'Cm it (ina jou litfjamft," 

H( mil dowD Ic Ibt boilom of the 

hlu, i w T M thtlMfc— iS/»rtnv fnui. 

Jtunp Uk game, to (AmericAu). 
In gunblii^ or pokei sluig to 
nld a gambling den bj th« 
poliM (C. Iitlaud HairisoD'i 
US. CollMtioD of Anwrioan- 



L.IViUiamt: UOtWitdWttt. 
The word wu nsed b; S! 



wberein Macbeth 
with himMlf on the ezpedlsDcj 
of marcteriiig Donoau \MaAtik, 
Act L, BO. 7). 

"If the u 



Janp, to, to cheat, to atesl. This 
word la uwd In Xnglaod, but 
U more common In the United 
Statee. Dniing the great civil 
war it obtained great cnrrenoj 
in connection with the Impa- 
d«ut fianda of the meroenar; 
adfeDtoren — mostly newlj- ar- 
rived Iriab immigiants — who 
enlisted in the Federal anniea 
for the ooitqiieft of the Sonth, 
and received large same aa 
bounty-money, Tarying from two 
hundred and fifty to a tbou- 
HUid dollars, according to the 
oeeda of the State, and de- 
■erted within a few days after 
reoaiving it, and played the sams 
game in a distant dty, some- 
timea repeating the proceee aa 
many ai half-a-doien or a dnen 
timee. Theie evaders were 
called " bcnnty jyu^tri." To 
fump a claim, in the partiaUy- 
settled distrtota of the grMt 
West, la to fraudnlently attempt 
to dlspoaaeaa a squatter who has 



Wt'djmmf the Uf> IS cone." 

The word is still used by the 
lowest classes in London, in 
America, and Anatralia, among 
whom "to^MHpa crib" signifies 
to rob a boose ; and "to^inq>a 
bloke " signifies either to cheat 
him, violently plnnder him, Ul- 



Anyhow, Do* Gilpm, 
[hey meL— ^. Fnmtti! Sat 



"Santer" is nsed in French 
is the nme sense — "fafre le 
sant d'nne chose, est voler, on 
Bscamater one chose." (Popa- 
lar), to jump, to copoiate. In 

(Cape settlers), to jumf, to 
Bte^ An TCn gHfllr officer camp* 
iug oat was told to take care 



:v Google 



Jmiet (ocwtennongni), ■wiiilliiiii. 
piofenlona. "We d««lif^to 
•11 thftt's Mr to w— and that's 



Jiuttp — -Jttwaub. 515 

ttMj did not >Mi]» hi* oudle- job " ia not k nry oharitabla 

■tlok. (Anatnllui popular), to way of a^ing, I miild not ba 
■npplant In, to tak& The dit- In joni place. Jvniit la from a 
ferenoe between Jwt^ and proTindaUain meaning a mory- 
"ihake" li that "ahaka" im- maUnff. 

pUea stealing, and/wap doea not, 
A thief "ahakaa " joat watoh ; 
bat II 70a take a leat in a lail- 
waj-oandage, or oa a ooaoh that 
ia engaged by some one else, 
70a are onl; jampittf It, It 
was a Joke agaliut a crnataoean 
baohelor, an editor of a well- 
known JoDTTkal in a Hnn^ 
township, that he bad ptwjiti 
a bab7, tlie £aot being that In 
the Tear of ttie great flood a 
babj, alive and UoUng, and 
enahrlDBd in a gin-oase, had 
been deposited bj tlie waters 
on the Tenwdab-toof Just nndoi 
tiis bedroom window, 
(Hedloal), to try a dangerona 



doea, for all theii^frita" 

Jufc, Jaik (old oant), a saal. 
St&l onneDt amo«v tUerea in 
Amarioa, 

Jnat iriiat jon'ic dofay (Ameil- 
oan), » peonliar expreadon, 
often nnd in oonTenatlon. 
meaning that the sobjeot in 
hand ia of Importanoe. " When 
700 have a lioise like that in 
hand yon can't attend to anj> 
thing else bnt jtut ukat jmt'n 
doiiig." This was aocddentally 
orerheard at t' 
Hotel, London. 



TVOH do l-VutdytM CmrHr. 



■ l«d-pi»«.— ». trail St. 



JBva« oommonlj JUTO (gTF'Tlt ^ 

wife,womaB. Frapari7a7omig 

, woman (Fanlaa>«M> 

JoBlnttiw (naatleal), good ohear 

and JomflOBtloB: from a pro- JnwK* (Anglo-Indian), a refusal, 

,j,oialiam. HtarsllyinHindoatwilan answer. 

If a gentlman prapoeM to a 

JmUt, to {WinohMtv Ocdlaga), iaAj, and U lefsMd, ha Is said 



:v Google 



Kady—Ktg. 



jADT. ViitCua. 

Vjoa WHit lobar ■ ktuly 
in Pvu, y« mtm fo ta 
aaiia.—SfrrHi9 Tima. 

Kaffir (popnlu uid Tlddiih), » 
prtMtitula'i bully. Yiddish and 
Anbic,l^r,Mi Infidel, aconntrj 



iBpoitilioo (ram lb« SouA S«a l^udi, 
iiablr hind, birlr Dialed 
■I tba upinlioa of lb* 



Som IM ihgMd, nqia be buST- 
Uftny lelHl b*iid id chnppr, 
SuBH (ardcn-mu cut papPT- 
Bnptlor bab fot da day, 
iUo Tal-pini Imar my. 

Kaalta (Uok •!««)• " •U'^ 

KuttaecBo (bMk ibng), a (tink- 
lag one. 

KnribAt (AiiKlo-I&dtan),food, Ul^ 
nUlj lioe and 00117. 

Kariinption (American), a party, 
a Mt of people, a crowd, im- 
plying nnity, relationtblp, or 
nationality. Aa plien ooaon aa 
poitfix to other word*, «.;., 
■' gumption," " conniption," it 
may have been added In thia 
oaae to the 0«nnan-Hebraw 
wotd fawtM or trovn'm (plnial), 
ir the related. 



idcd ben yam 
CtJn Viiotii) Timtt. 

Kate (American thieves), a s 
bnsen- faced gtil or wo 
Kai, Dutch aUng, a bad wo 



K.D. (lainter*), abbrenation of 
the words iof iark, i.*., " dos't 
My anything about it." 

Keel-lutiiBiv {commMi}, a aocdd- 
Ing, aeoompauled bj peiaanal 
obaitUement. Prom Um old 
nautical cutom of pnnialiing 
oflendera by Uirowing tbem 
otretboard with a rope attacbec^ 
and hauling them up from 
nndar the ship'* ke«L 

bus bc*D a irt l l ^ m H mt ot ycr afiB T— 

K«el over, to (popular). People 
are aaid Id ted oar when by 
■ome miaf ortone or othei oanaa 
they eoffle to grief in their 
nndertakinga or plana, m ot m 
nmH "keel np^" "To go 
up the apovt," " to be de«d 
broke," "to be atnmped," are 
some of the innnmenble lyno- 
nymoDS expresdona f or the nm« 
idea. The expreaaion la oont- 



n iloBC Ek* tb* diTil, 
tsDiirtbalKyi 
be i( |»rf«tty WrI, 



Keg (American), M^aoity to hold 



:v Google 



Kun—Keep. 



dowa, ton b* WH dnmk. Wi'd been 
b«niif k ^ma, ud aj hig ni pnlty IuH 
Ua.— ^. FrmmcU: SmddU *md Mtaman. 

Keen (Americui cadet), m bnmor- 
on* atotj, a joke. 

Keen on Ccomnton}, intoot on, 
tutTing great Uldng (or, bdng 
In loTB with. 

Keep ft hotel, to (Araerlcan), a 
phiftM intiDuting adminittra- 
tlTO o^aoity. It U almoflt ani- 
lenall; ezpreued in the nega- 
tiTe, "He oan't tap a tiatd." 
The origin of it waa u follom. 
About twenty-fiTe jean ago a 
man named Ljncb, banjo per- 
toimer in a n^ro miUEtrel 
tronpe, loat bl« OTercoat in a 
hotel in Vlokaburg, Hluiulppt. 
As the landlord refoMd to pay 
him fo^ it, be revenged himself 
fox a long time aftw b; a bomor- 
ou dlalogoe in whiob the land- 
lord was mentioned, and all bis 
minor good qnslitlee were falth- 
follj enumerated, bnt wbioh 
were nentnlised b; the other 
interlocutor, who drawled ont, 
" Ta-as — bnt he oa-ant http a 
ko-idl" The exprcMion ia sUll 



oooDpier b then nid to http • 
pV(Hott«n). 

Keqt cnve, to (Eton), ezplahied 
by qnotation. 
Clili-facginj requind In lower bojt. 



mmiiig b; ■ vhiiile if hi ihonld door our 



Keep sloom (taOon), keep qniet 
(stookontter'a azpreealon). 



Keep that 4zj (American), keep 



Sul doo'l let >[ CDICT into )h»u bcut. 
Nen- lei tbcm fet n duDOB At jnor Hllti- 
DcDl ; iaf UtMi drr-—J'. Fnmcii : Saddtt 

Ke^ your ejes ekimwd (West 
American), keep yonr eye* open, 
be watcbfnl. 



Keep n pi^, to (Oxford), to have t>^ 



contain two bedobambera ha« 
•ometimes, when his ocdlep ii 
fnll, to allow the nae of one 
of them to a tieehman, who 
is called nnder theee cironm- 
•tanoee a "pig." The original 



n* 



lor otber apenijifi.— /. A. / 

Ko^ jour half ml Vidt Haib. 



:v Google 



Si6 



Ktep—Ketlk. 



iMMth. ham J mi hi, k bild'i Kcaavrd (t»ck ilang), drank. 



* Ii cmfttir (nardad Bt lb* 



■haip look- 



Keffel [AnMrkwi thleToi), a buwe. 
nvm the Ownum iapfML 



Keman. TiibOucMU. 



AlMfttMd. 

From Uono, Uan, KTpaj and 
Ori«tilal. This word KMi«nIl7 
hM k pi«Bi, M "bowiikg-ini," 
"■psd'Jtm," faJ. 

Ken-cracker, or ken-miUer 
(thlerw), « honMbreBker. 



Kerflop (Amaricau), aaothcs iana 
ol " kenl^ kMonae, kealcwli. 
keamwh, kewoah, keswollop," 
and Birallv mMnatopoetlc 
«ord> eipreedve of the falling 
at ftonei or the joniping of 
frog! into water. 



W it u ba did u, Bnin wilh lh« nccii- 
niUand vd^fat And impalae. b« at bat 
bootht tlw wbote tAUaloi|icBl atriaff down 
ia^li^, fon and biri;, npcm ibi dmod 
oowD cf hii andiUT. — F. F^mmdi : Smd- 



Kenn> to, (tinkv), to hit. strike, 
punch. 



rtthaj bixn and JoiapBi (dakar'i teoh) 

dovn to m J Ak (thi^tiX 
n' h-> (bitr mik* It. cgm. to Jbrp'* TW 

pea tpatA ^nr bcaX' 



/ (St Ollea), R blow on 
the bead inflicted with a poker, 
fuppoMd tobederiTed from the 
name of a nun who waa klUed 
Id that nuuuner, la ao enooenter 
among Irlih loogha in tme of 
the iliiiiii of Iioadaii. Compare 
the espreesioiii deriTed from 
proper uunet: to "burke," to 
" boTcott," and the Frenoh 
" watilniaer " (etd* Barrtte'a 
« Allot and Slai^"). 



Ke^li^> (Ameiioan), a word ex- 
preeehFe of faUiag flat on the 
ground, itiaight onward, ahead. 

Olba- ptople n doftil al IlHr »«ld 



d Dobodf wan^t (un' to Maud at the 
U to bar 'cs eat, aa if Ilwy did Ihcr'd 



Kettle (thIefM). a watoh ; fW 
Ulk, gold watch. 



:v Google 



Kettle — Kicking. 



S17 



. Thu ii bMUr liiui 



Kew <back •l«ng:}, a week. 

IChff^fi^ khui, cootttli (AjiglO' 
Indian), ■ place of ratidenoe, 
or itOTO-rooiii, entertainment. 
Vvdi Bnou Ehana. 



(NanUcal), iron or ironclad 

It k not BtBenDr kunrn ihu Ibc ibn* 
totpado cniien ■ . ■ tun bcm id tht 
OBBtracton' budi for Ilic put »b moatlu, 
and ilut all kindi of apcdioia hue biai 
iHsncd u. . . . Tka iB up w ii blr tndi. 
ODW ptan ofuppliriiis " ponldcs ' 10 ibdi 



—AUfkClmm^Liirt^liid. 

Khtibber (Auglo-IndlBn), newi, 
MpaoiaUr iporting newi (Ai*- 
Uo, Fer^an, Hind., Uabcr). 



"To pnt OA tlie hOnHk," to 
ran down, tlander, degnde. 
To pnt tlie kiboA 00 aojtbing 
li latterlj to pat an offeotoal 
Aap or end to It In thla Mnte 
it is apparenti; deilTed {rom 
the Tiddiirh faiiiu, •.<!., loUMMt, 
to reetnln, sappreaa, hold, put 
a ftop to. In the oommmi pio- 
nonoiatiOQ the word ia often 



Kick (popolar and tlileree), a 

Obi eld ftiatd . . . nyt Ihcj m raia- 
001 10 Ihe Uck.~-BirJ •■ Fntdtmi. 
Se I put oa tbi Iui(, mad than all b (b* 

dark, 
I riBad hli iidi of hU (Uim* «o An*. 



f toi la probaUy an abbnrla- 
tloa of tiat-pookrt {iid» Kicks), 
Uka aly-poaket, abort for aky- 
rocket (Common), explained 



Tha kick, or axpapca, ai a bint, 
Fnn DiBca b niUcain iahaw. 



—Pttm^FtOi. 

(Wort 



InaMet, 

American), a gradga. 
t bann't lOt aar ''^ ■(■^'■' Iha J aaa. 
I* hH maad n Uka a ■•nthnas.— ^. 




Kkkeraboo (Weat IndiM), a 001- 
rapUon of tiia e^trearionto 'Uek 
tbe bucket." FM«B 



iba Nik 'Airy' Klckfaig St wsiat (taHon), an 
' ihat'atadi*. muightlj fault at walrt in a 

■■^ ** *'*^ lOcUnc for Ike boftt (tailon). 



:v Google 



5 1 8 Kicking— Kid, 

lOckiiic for trade (UUor*), Kg^s- 



nddng strap (taUon), u elutic 
■tnp indde k habit lUrt. 



—iHfUdij Ltttmdi. 



IBck»,kictote«.kfckMe«(poim- 
IM u>d thie»w). breechB*. KM (popntar, yer7 < 
ttower.. From • metaphor London), » Bwdl. • m«her. 



RJmilaT to that which gaTe the 
wag*" 



__ Londoner meeting aoothv 

■■ ■- tW wo are," or tbe amatt^ 

dressed man might say, " Aint 

I an awful yid to-day T " Tbo 

"dnde" and tbe "mather" an 

really well-dresaed people, th* 

Kkk the atntEnc ont <rf one, to iU is rather a emarUT dreased 

(American), to ill-treat a per- person; also a policeman. 

■on, or to take tbe wind ont of Emy o« o<' die Brdiiu knwi tb« 

another's sails; to get tbs better 5eiioai-inuiioSccibyuuiiiic(.vidiibbiin 

,- ... htm evto mDR Ihuk their 

"'»'"■ ih. l-bb.. . 

I UB inToniMd thil, jodgcd br ihi 
tumlinl (f nocm, tha " Ua] ~ nen 
p.pw it the OM Ihirt whoop, iu owmid* „, ^ ,-:,■._. 

(othcU[.iirih(iBi>iuidUc*f(*(i<is^iiv fi(f,cheeBe;I;«f bardiSynonT- 

M< */ ibe other ftUow.— *«w K*"* moiuwitb"baidcbee«e,""baid 
WtrU. lines," DO lock ; a child. 

an abbMTlatioa for "kick tbe EvimmgNimi. 

bnOket," or tor "at his last •• served hb tin to the tr»]e,-i«aTMl 

kick." lh>BHl(erc«llT; "beee uitenrciDce 

he wu ■ Ud-m hi^.'-y. Gmmmmd: 

Kick, to ham the (sporting), to ^** ^"^■ 
have look. From a football (Popnlar and tfaieres), ei- 

pbrasA plained bj quotation. 

Kick .p ««mn..). c™..W, JSrTbfw^XiSS 
in«oeedlngs of a noisj nature. ijMrf.—Hlmdi'y: Ufi tmd A d mtm t u ra 
Vta, DM Her Uejenr'i -t-Jec" f™ ^' C*^/«*- 

.n end! of the ncth conung » « .he possibly from An^CK^axon 

.how. end 1»1ib lail in the *«* «> f— „ , . , , . 

J^Ji, tj/dliaH, to declare, make known; 

the primary meaning of Uif 
a pnffing speech, termed 
Udment," more probaUy 



:v Google 



patter of a fanckitar, and " gam- 
mon " being contidered 1711007- 
inoiu ; eompare the German 
Uibtit, to decelre, " gammon 1" 
from hslten, a bookater. Alto 
daoeption, hmnfang. 
t woB met m linlt miprwdi tbwfbn, 
tahtaromof lh«m murk. Id tb* wuia- 
nkibl* Unfuc* of ■ CBckMT of ifat 

—J. Grtnufj! TV, jr^, *• Ca 



teoratlj broken up (18S7) In 
London, waa babitDaU7 tUtad 
bj boTS and girls ; two of the 
fonner, who were Tei7 well 
dnased, and who appeuvd to 
be gentlemen's Moa, were onlj 
eight and ten 7eua of age, 
while the girli were of oorre- 
■pondin^7 tender Tcara. 



U u ana Uncntd ra ibi JHXOn cf lb* 



^'^ Kidle^ a bo7 or girl. 

Kidment (popnlar), pnfflng qieeoh 
of a Cheap Jaok, or otheia. 
Bomfaog, nonsense, deoeit, de- 
ception. Vide Kid. 



Kldtiej (Stock Bxcbai^), a fiao- 
tlonal part of one share. A oor- 
raptioo of a man's name Clad> 
ne7, who it first known to bare 
dealt nndn^ 

KidncT blow (poglllstlc), a blow 
planted In the abott ribe, In the 
phraseolog7 of the ling reporter. 
Often a backhander. 



Kidd&r (popnlar), tashionablj. 

KUdtefwiiik (popolar), a small 

•hop where are retailed the 

oommoditieB of a village store. 

OrigiDaU7 a kMU-n-ieink, from 

the offer made, with a wink, to 

give 70a something out of the 

Uddle or kettle. In the West 

conntr7, an ale-honse. Also a 

woman of nnstead7 habits Oh, rlfhl yoo an, ctmmmia I I'n tin 

(HottenV 5™ "^ l>"e^ I'" "anwi twe 

•n . > . . :..,.. . And I'n 'ti IcM 0' diuc*>, I ull 1 

iOddy (popolar and thioraa), a Ur-M\iDM,MaMa.MaimtAid. 



mr tU4r-~ 



Kiddy-ken Ithleres), a hoose fre- 
qDent«d b7 mere children, girls 
and bD7B. Dnring the past two 
7earB the increase of profligacy 
amoi% "kids" of both sexes 
has been very great. A house 



KU on, to (popnlar), to indte. 

K!d oneaelf, to (popnlar), to tane7 
oneself, to be conceited of a 
thing. One talks of a man 
Udding Mmnl/on bis moostache, 
01 a woman kidJing hertlf on 
her flgore or her oottome. 



:v Google 



■3d fir, oc Ud hv (tUmt). 



kad," whit iwv, ta aB^falling 




OM {taOon). bopdaMtr ipaOed. 

lODock {aMtioal), given by Wri>- 
aUt M ■ nnlt«d SUto Uam 
tot iniBii ■nohot, bnt UMd !■ 
laglMid with tba mwrofug of 
NuliDT. Alio " mod-hook." 

Kift(Iii«b),irailb«ftML. 

Knt«r (Awriom). "OntofUEtR- 
or tadttr," Omatiuad, m, ant 
of rapalr. Dntoh lirfiiimi^. 



A«. Thii i% bowVTBi, » doobt- 
tnl deriiKtion. PotdUj bom 
to Mt, to tnok up ; w that " ont 
of hiUtr" wonM UtanOlj mMa 
hanging lojMdT, benoo dlaor- 
dorad. 



A Uddimff hoiM, a «*'"""''"g 
bone, one wUoh pcetendj to 
beafiald, Ac. 

XU (g7p*7}, to plaj on an inatn* 



Klll-cow (popnlar), a graat 



Kinchcn morta (tUcraa), little 
glila tmined to pRMtitntiML 

yi™**" cofv (old cant], a man 
Uttleman. 



1^ (tUMM). e: 
Ion. 

ttiudi hf tbar moAtn, 
udduUia^i; and t^ i^ 
lli^ moaar Bmr — ■iMr'n 



, Google 



Kincob — Kipsy. 



Kfacob (Aiigl»-Indlaii). * twin 
whioh is beonnliig wall kDown 
In XnglHid for g<dd<bn>owle. 
Faniui-HlBdii, MnUwok For- 
iu«ri7CMlladM«MtU,*>od kno*" 
tn tlw Hiddto AgM to Snit^ a* 



Slider <AiB«ioaii), u U wan, 
In a mMiDBT, at titti a Iwhlon. 
SiKder-warttr (< pronoimaad M 
In iMi), an old aqnnlon vary 
o in New- ' 



a la from an SngUtfa 
proriiiciAlluii meaning Tathar. 



I (popnlAT), a faronr in 
tb« way ol enjoTment of the 
penon gnmted bj a woman to 
one of the other sex, or Indeed, 
the other way. There i« also 
a proverb of some standing— 
"After kisalng Domes greater 
Hnifnfff " and in this mdm the 
word i* Mill in vnlgai sooapt- 
anoe. The French have the ex- 
preedon, " avoir del bontdi poor 



Klngsman (ooatenaMigen}, ex- 
plained by qnotation. 



^loin an ^t'«g"«*' provlaoial- 
am. In Snffolk a nq« b Mid 
» Unl wben U doe* aot ran ont 
even from iti ooUi. 

Kip (pcvolar and thi«*ee), a bed. 
This la probably an abbravia' 
tion of tifxy, basket. French 
thieves call a bed pag^i, a oot- 
mption of "panler," basket, 
ftp had f ormwlj the Mgnifloa- 
tlon of house of ill-faaie, and 
to "tatter a Up" algnUled to 



Kip honae, a tramps' oi vagianta' 
lodging-honae. 

Kipay (thieves), a basket 

"Wub'i Ihat* ur eloUwr- "Vm, 
■Iwn't ■ cmnlouL" Se b* ttii: "Go 
ftod gH A ^/ty full a' il, and w« will gaj 
\aiat:—H*nUfzJiHapJnmJM. 

This word Is given as a reoog- 
nised term by a diotlonaiy of 
the fliat part of the eighteenth 
oentnry. The form Up« is still 
nsed aa a provincialiam for an 
oaier-baaket to oatoh fish. It 
has been anggeeted that Mpfy 
is from the Okl Bnglish or Nor- 
man En^ish fatpnire. In which 
case UfM woold only be an ab- 
breviation of the piimuy i*ptjt 
Bnt again U|m is tractile to 
the Anglo-Saxon Hjxm, to oatch. 
It moat further be noted that 
ibpiy, aometlmes fajxi, is gypay 
tor basket and a willow. Sipn- 
jbotil, willow wood, of Indian 



:v Google 



K^—KOt. 



top, to (popnlu utd thtoTN), to 
■Imp or lodge. Vidt Kmr. 

KiiUiag (thlsTM), bonMbmOring 
on Siiiid«>7 erenlag by finding > 
honM whlob bu been left on- 
tenantod while the oooupaDta 
are all at obnrcb (or Uric), or 
the sertant left In ebatge «>• 



Siky (popular), drank. 
KiMer (popular), the montb. 



lQMfai|:-ti^ (popular), tbe month. 

!%« off^ida of hk UMv^r^ 

—AlUm : //«■ Sermfi. 



lOit tf whvstlei, Sootob Preab?- 
teiUn for organ. 

Kit (popolar), the wfaolo kU of 
them, BjDOQTmoiu witb the 
"whole gtidiioo," the "whole 
boiling." ic, all the -gutj. 
(Old), a danolng-matter. From 
the kit at amall fiddle wUoh 
he OM* In hie avooatloaa. 

Kit ud boodle {Ajmerioan), the 
total or whole of anjtbing, a* 
the entire oompany. Bartlett 
■nggMte tbe Oerman htatd, a 
parte, as the original aoiuoe of 



Sngliab hiMd, a btudla." Bat 
aa it li a Hew ToA wotd ito 
origin ia to be eooght In tha 
Dntch buedd, pfonoonoed teed* 
[which aee), "»— "<"c p« n pai ^, 
or anjthlng Inhoited. 

Kht h enei a (thierei), thieree wbo 
oongregata in plaoea known •• 
tbteive' kltohena. Mr. Qieen- 
wood MjB that nob meeting 
plaoea for the dreg* and oot- 
eaate of eodetj — wboee mean* 
of UtIi^ is a mjsteiy to tmtj 
one bat tbelr intimate frlendi, 
and who are acOdom teen ab«Md 
nntll tbe ibades of evening baTe 
long atnoe fallen fryiit within 
thr«e minatea' walk tA tb* 
Strand and within two mlnntea' 
of Oorent Oeiden — in Drary 
I^ne in fact, or imther in lome ^ 
the lanei and narrow thorongb- 
farea leading oat of that main 
tboronghfare into Great Qneen 
Street. 



! (prlnten), a tomi of 
contempt tor the handa tint 
freqqent the kileken of the 
Oompoeitots' Socdet; honae — 
asnallj thoae on the provid^t 
fand, that prefer the amjkU relief 
given to honest labour. Thia 
tann does not appl^ to tbe 
genaine unemployed, bnt vtiij 
to the loaf era. 

Kite (popolar), a fool ; in Frendi 
^MC. (Common), flctitiona com- 
mercial paper. To kiu or tij 
a Idit, to raiae monar on * floti* 
tionibill. 



:v Google 



Kilt—Kn^k-boards. 



no A* Mki^ which lautf 
.—Mia EJeimtrtk : Ltt amd 



m Vu, f oimcriy t«niwd » pftpn 
<Ut«. Fljlng the K(c U maU- 
pbcnloal^ pnUlng a bill In dr- 
onlmtian. In Amerio* Imiot 



JTitiiif hu ml«o tlie dgnlfloi- 
tton of g^Df; aboat andtpeoD- 
Uting wUdlf. 



Kdackm (Stock Kioliuigv\ Har- 
TiMn, Baibw ft Gompauj Shww. 
(Bntohm^ Jta], the teetlol«e, 
also " knnekaT*." 

Kuqtped an hot "nil (;riia ring), 
got a haid knock. 

Kni^P'iV-J'nv <old ant), a 
tnnipike gate. 

Kn^, to (thlovei), to ateaL Fram 
to tnop, to blto off, break eboct. 
Derired from the Dntoh tnop- 
fo^ to blto, take, or oatoh hold 
ot (Popular), to oatch, lued In 
the phrase " Won't he iniaip It I " 
(Honntebanka and othen]^ to 
Ib^ the Blam to oatoh the elap 
of a lathe ot board. 



Iha Sou Gsardi.— rir Star. 

K lq;s (printen), a tann of dari- 
•iou applied to a pereon with 
knocked - kneei, or othenriM 
" ebakr on the idu," owing to 
the lege being ^lait aa In the 
lower portion of a oi^tal K. 

Klep (popnlar). a thief ; to IcUp, 
to eteal. Fnm JUcptMNOiua, the 
meaning of whloh ie now well 
known to all the lower olaasee 
who read the police new*. 



ihc pupk cm hu csncm thu h> hid 
HUB of ibtm up, dwr mc ki»*iDf hov 
N> kmmt thi ^*f.—Hlmdtt^ : Lift mmd 
Adsntu m ffm Ouaf Jmtk. 

(American), to Imap, to arrea^ 
corresponding to the BngUeh 

Knufc (old), a Mrage pereon. 
Now epelt mark, meaning an 
Informer. 

Knat (taikwaX a difficult taak, a 
tTTant, one not to be deoelTed, 
played with, or hoodwinked, 

KnSfe (army), a eword, 

Koife-baards (London elaag), the 
long, narrow aeat* for paiean- 
gere on the topa ot « 



:v Google 



Kmfisit—Knoc&ed. 



he*d. 



Knock abont the bob, to (popa- 
Ur), to pasi kboat tbe drink. 



Knodc down a cheque, to (np- 
conntry AoHtraliui). "A ijs- 
tem known w hnoelnng dam 
onc'i ehtqttt pnraUa aU over the 
unsettled parta of AottraUa. 
That ifl to aaj, a man with a 



(papular], a phrase 
among workmen to designate 
one who takes work leoratlj at 
borne, when tbe men are on 
strike, and aooepta lower pay 
than the regulatioa price de- 
manded b; his fellows. 



Knock (torf), "to take the iaodt." 
to lose more monej to the book- 
makers than one can pa j, and 
thus to be incapodtated from 
approaching the ring. 
"I'nhiidaladn 

Iha imttk,- or "it'i 

FrUr't BalBffl.-— £« 



T a siun of moiMT iit 
. hands it over 
to the pablioan, and calls for 
drinks for Wm—w u>d ^'^ 
friends, nuUl the pnblican tdls 
him he hae dnnk out his 
cheque. Of Oootm be nerar 
gets a dthe of hia money'B 
worth In any sh^m ec iraj — 
Indeed the kindest thing a pnb- 
lican can possibly do is to re- 
fuse blm sny more liqnor at 
a Tsry eariy stage of the pro- 
ceedings, for cheques for enoT' 
moos imonnts are frequently 
* knocked down ' in this way. 
A qoatter of the worth of them, 
if honestly dmnk out in Bash 
liqnor, would inevitably kill a 
whole regiment " (Finch Hat- 

ibc end of the aokhi, id >»c^ d*wm kit 
t**fM, u lb* phiue (oo, he does U bi 



Knocked all of a heap (popular), 
astonished, dumbfounded. The 
metaphor is that one is abso- 
lutely floored, knocked down in 
confusion by surprise. 



Knocked into a cocind hat 
(American and Bnglish). When 
a roond or high hat had been 
smashed, it was said to have 
been knocked into tbe shape of 
tbe thiee-oomered or oooked 
one. Yidt OOCKID Hat. 



:v Google 



Knocked — Knock-outs. 



liml. Th( Fnnch, ftom u imhilectiinil 
point oT Ticw, hm kmdad Et DJenur 
rnlV a adad hat u buttnd ud ihipe- 
Icv ai llkat of a puuh bejidlfl who hu 
b«n nuJlnated by ft uob of omtiaow 
\lta^n.--C.A.S^m: A TrifUBmrimry. 

Knocked ont (pagillatic), ei- 
haoiited, beaten, "tnetted ml 
of time," which see. 



(Tarf), a horse Is said to be 
knocked out in the betting irbeti 
he is so peraisteDt]; laid against 
that from short or oomparatirely 
short odds lie retires to an ont- 
side place. 

Knocked ont of time (pugilistic), 
to be so thoroughly beaten as 
to be unable to stand ap in tbe 
ring, or to keep time with his 
opponent, and receive a sncces' 
siOD of new blows and bmiaes. 

Knocked np (common), tired. 

Kttock-em-down bo^nen (popu- 
lar), anctioneeriDg. 

Knocker (common), up to tbe 
knodur, completely. 
I'm jgllr. lifht up lo Iho kiixkrr. 



mil H darin( the progro* of tht Efht, 
ud thit Ibo cclEbnIed ihucin- Mil rm- 

MiUhcU'i tcmbli \tSU—BirJt FrwuUm. 

Knochen (popular), small flat 
ourla worn OD the temples bj 
thieves at ~ 
Called also "sizeaL" 

Knock In, to (Oxford), to retam to 
one's o<^Iege after gate is closed. 

Knockiog^-ont (Oxford TTnirer- 
sity). All visitors, on leaving a 
ooUege after time, have to state 
in whose rooms the7 have been, 
that his gate-bill may be scored 
up for them. When a racke^ 
party takes place, the visiton. 
or " ont of college men," are 
goneiall; sapplied with a list of 
the naraes of the qnieteat men 
in college, so that the where- 
aboDta of tbe party may not be 
betrayed (Hotten). 



Knock-nw-down (popular), strong 
ale. 

Knock one down, to (Amerioan 
society), to introdac& 

*' Knock jvu dram lo lh»l dauT." !-€., 
" InDodun mo lo Ihat fine ^V—C. Lt- 
Umd Harriun: MS. AmtHtmiimi. 

Knock-onta. Folly explained •• 
follows In Diproee's " London 
Society." "The knUk-ovU are 
not peonliar to Ixindon, they 
abound everywhere, they are 
regular tiaders in one particular 
branch of merchandise, be It 
'old books,' 'articles of verta,' 



:v Google 



5«« 



Imwm. . . . Ikaj de Mt iaMt- 
gwaml p^tK Md M M«cfc a* 

tki? flMMk wd IfaN M Uio 
miMlMMj tor Ifaa to di^^ j 
tMrjadfaaMi. KBe*iB(iAat 
tk> anicta n wofU ik tb« tnde 
— vkkK if A* pn^Ktr k vat*- 
•U^viU IMA MM ttek Um 
giwml p«blk win (i*«--tter 

«M 0«lhU Iht iMt (Nblk bid- 



ten>«rito 'pabUc.' and tbw* 
Httla, U Um Bost bounasa 
~"~" pM>ibt«, vbo to to ba- 
roma Iba alti«aM pirniwao 
br a '*<>ft »■! as^ion.' Tba 
aitid^ n J a pictara, li pat op 
at tha puchaaad price by anj 
Pm» pan^i aotinc as aiictiatMar, 
and tb« original cost at, hj 
tan poaad^ m^ tetniaat* hy 
bidding «p to tvantT or tkirt;. 
Tba aoKMiBt abo*a Um ooat to 
placed in abool to foim a fond 
10 ba «qnall5 diridad amoagit 
all pnaenV . . . PropeitT 
boogbt in thlt I 
otiffinal poblio bid of a email 
amooBt. ha* oft^ nacibad to a 
hnadrad poniidB.'' 

Knock the qmts ntt, to (Amori- 
caa). Tbia ma con«nt in 
AnwrtoB aa long ago aa 185a 
It nuani to anrpaM, eonfonnd, 
gobaokwaida, baak 




to «ha—>lT w. n^ naj bo 
a bawl at dx, taa. at twaat; 
ladMdMla praant, wbi^ aftar 



(American), to enaoeiate, to 
«npt7, to knock dajlight out 
of ai^bod;. 

*''"''*'. to (pc^nlar), to make a 
giaat impnaitoD, to be Irie- 



Dida'l be ■*]» the iBapk k 
—Mmtii/fmUStmr-i 
JCmttfim. 



Kaofka (theatrical), a proatitnte ; 
•too " no^nr," whiob tee. 

Knout (pablio kImmIs], a piece of 
wax OD the end of a strii^ w 



It bj prefect* on dot;. 



I(mmtai7). The 
I to affilied in the annj to 
indiridnali, fonnd principallj 
among the older aoldiets, wbo 
Bnieai to be oontinnaHj anlter- 

«bo ate oonstantlj aeeking to 
aatis^ it at the expuiae of yonng 



■oUicft vkh bHlccL' 



1 led iwir t? •M 



:v Google 



Knowing — Knucks. 



Knowing co^^ (popular}. > *b11- 
informed penon, om in tha 



Dune Ruminr bud (inn iba eBc* to 
HBt of tiM kmmlmt ttra.—FimeA. 
rtdtCOVM. 

Know, in the (turf), to be <i> rtt 

blow U to bkT« a kDO«rlBdg« of 

• pBrtloolu 

tobegener- 

■Uj au fait In tori mjateiieo. 

Knoiriedce box (popular], tha 

hewL 

Know one'i way «bont; know 
one's WK7 roimd, to (lued In 
Anabalis more than in England), 
to be capable, knowing ; a meta- 
phor aoggeated by the helpleu- 
neu of tha man who does not 
know hia way; or perhapt b; 
the facilitle* offered to one who 
knowB hi« waj ronnd to an un- 
guarded point, BQoh aa a private 
entranoe, or a flank. 
Bsl tr«Di h* fawiH Ui w^ mini. 

Or gnnl IbiLl he U tiiij. 
That cuuwt ba the lUghtcit doubt, 

or BUlr'i lulb m BillT. 

~H. KtrndtU: BUfy Viekm. 

Knowi the ropes (pt^raUf], U 
wid el an old experienced work- 
man, or an; one who Is well 
Informed. Orlglnall; a sailots' 

Know the time of day, to Ipopn- 
lar and thleret), to be eiparl- 
•noed, oonning. 



Tha nung* miut haw UmA hv, (or m 
" doojr " Jaokinf booadir. 
Who eppeued lu iThe iiHW On Umu ^ 

Wm the bcunr of Ihn uuww, " If Jtm 
wuil to He (he dancer, 
1 can iotrodDca Tou to har nghl awm^.** 
~SfrriiMf Timi. 

Know jDor book, to (popular), to 
be ooirectl; informed, to be right. 
Ain'i JQ9 slad lometunaa u know, 
A lecond thought 7011 look 



Konckle down, to (whooliX to 
kneel down, properly to tub- 
mitto. 

KnudOed (taOon), bwod lewn. 

Knncktedtuter (oomm<Mi), oilgin- 
ally Amerioan. A ^eoe ot 
meUl with hole* for the Angers 
which oloae over it, and whiob 
ooTore the knaoUet. Thia in- 
■tiument, while protecting the 
knncklee, adds force to a blow 
■truok with it 
Stmck b7 ona of the Mlo«* «Ub a 



AIM a heary or gaudy ring. 
Knnckler (thicTei), a plokpooket. 

A mih — a hnsta — marriLy thao 
Bagiu tha buuUirt' nr. 
What an you thiini ahouit 

—Fimci. 

Knnckle, to (thlerei), to pick 
pockets. 



:v Google 



, Google 



