^A, 



n5? 



% 



^m\m^^ ^tfodi]V3jo>' <riuoNvsoi^ ^^mmm 



;^FCAllFOfiV ^OFCAllFOff^ 








^^ME•UNIVER% 




^TilJOSYSOl^"^ 



^lOSANCfU 

o 



AV\E DRIVERS//) 



^lOSANCElfj> 
S ^^ — ^^ 




^TilJONYSOl^ "^AilMINaJV^V 



^WE-UNIVEB% 




^lOSANCElfj-^ 




<ril30NVS01^ ^/Sa3AINa-3WV 



^;^iUBRARYQr^ 




^OFCAUFO/?^ 




^^Aavjiaii-^^J^ 



vr. 



-^UIBRARYQr -j^lllBRARYOc. 




^(^OJllYDJO^ ^.yOJIlVJJO'^ 



A\^EUNIVER5-//, 




<ril]DNYS01^ 



^•lOSANCfli 

O 

LL. 



^OFCAIIFOff^ 

o 




aofcalifo% 







AWEUNIVERVa 




<ril30N\'S01^ 



^lOSANCEli 

o 



^t^EUNIVERS/^ ^10SANCEI% ^^^HIBRARYQt ^^NNtLIBRARY* 




, ^W[ UNIVERS-ZA vj,lOSANCElfj> 




•< 
o 



.^,OFCAIIFO% .>;,0FCAIIF0/! 



*.^ 



^ ic? 



'^(i/ojiwD-jo'^ %oi\mi^'^ <rii30Nvsoi^ %a3AiNn3WV^ 



^OFCAIIFO/?^ ^OFCALIFORjj^ ^^V\EUNIVERSy^ 




^lOSANGElfX^ 

O 




>&AiivaaiiA^ ^^AavaaiT^^ <riiaoNvsoi=^ %a3AiN[i3WV 



^MEUNIVERS-//, 




o 
^i3l33NVS01^ 



^VlOSANCFlfj-;^ 




-^.^UIBRARYQ^ -^^UIBRARYq^ 




■^Aa3AINa-3WV^ ^(I/OJIIVOJO'^ '^<!/0JllV3J0'^ 




AMF UNIVERS-//, 




^lOSANCElfj^ 

O 




.>V;OFCAIIFO% 



^.OFCAllFOff^ 




<riuoNYsoi^ %a3AiN(i3WV^ ^OAavaan#' ^^Ayvaaii^^^ 



^lUBRARYO/;^ 



^^^l•llBRARYQ^ 



\\\EUNIVER% 



.vWSA.'JCElfX;> 
o 







^omm^^ 



'^nwmm^ 



'^/^il]AINa]WV 



-< 



, .\WE UNIVERVa 



^^lOSANCElfj> 

o 




<rii3aNvsoi^'' '^/sa]AiNn jw"^ 



^HIBRARYQ^ ^lllBRARYQ<^ 




%OJI1V3JO^ '^(tfOJIlVDJO'^ 



^«fllMlVFP^/> 



v.in<;.AMr.Flfr. 



.rvFTAiiFnPv. 



.,f\FrAiiFnPi/. 



Digitized by tine Internet Arcliive 

in 2007 witli funding from 

l\/licrosoft Corporation 



littpV/www.arcliive.org/details/communismofjolinrOOruskiala 



THE SOCIAL SCIENCE LIBRARY 



Edited by W. D. P. BLISS. 



THE 
COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN 



THE COMMUNISM 



OF 



JOHN RUSKIN 

OR 

"UNTO THIS LAST" ; TWO LECTURES FROM 

"THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE"; 

AND SELECTIONS FROM 

"FORS CLAVIGERA." 

EDITED BY 

W. D. P. BLISS. 



"For indeed I am myself a Communist of the old school — reddest also of the 
red." — "FoRS Clavigera." 



NEW YORK 

THE HUMBOLDT PUBLISHING CO. 

Clinton Hall, Astor Place. 




Copyright 1891, 

BY 

The Humboldt Publishing Co. 



stack Annex 
.Cag9 



R% ■ 
CONTENTS. 



PAGE. 

INTRODUCTION BY THE EDITOR, - - - vii 

BOOK I.— UNTO THIS LAST, ... i 

Preface, ------ 3 

Essay I. — The Roots of Honor, - - ii 

II. — The Veins of Wealth, - - 31 

III. — Qui Judicatis Terram, - - 46 

IV. — Ad Valorem, - - - - 66 

BOOK II.— TWO LECTURES FROM THE CROWN 

OF WILD OLIVE, - - - - 103 

Preface, ...... 105 

Lecture I. — Work, - - - - 119 

II — Traffic, - - - - - 151 

BOOK III.— SELECTIONS FROM FORS CLAVI- 

GERA, - - - - - - 177 

Preface by the Editor, - . - - 179 

I. — Communism, . . - - . 183 

II. — Freedom and Slavery, ... 188 

III. — Machinery, - - . - - - 189 

IV. — Taxes, ..... j^j 

V. — Clergymen, ..... 1^5 

VI. — Carlyle, ..... 197 

VII. — Expectants of Turnips, ... i^s 

VIII.— Rich? 199 

IX. — Interest, ..... 201 

X. — St. George's Company, - - . 213 

XI. — The End of the Whole Matter, - 225 



INTRODUCTION. 



''1~^0 you read Ruskin's Fors Clavigeraf^* Carlyle 
I J asked of Emerson, "there is nothing going on 
among us so notable to me." "I venerate him 
as one of the greatest teachers of the age ; ... he teaches 
with the inspiration of a Hebrew Prophet" — such was 
George EHot's estimate of Ruskin. Surely Ruskin needs 
no introduction to the world. The verdict of these two 
grand-jurymen in the court of letters is borne out by the 
testimony of witnesses from every portion of the globe. 
But of Ruskin's social teaching, of his message to society, 
of his gospel of the life in common, — of this we would say 
a word — not that he needs this either, but that we need it, 
— we need it to rightly appreciate and take home hb 
message to our hearts. 

The production of a true social form has been the 
supreme task given to the nineteenth century. What is 
Ruskin's place ; what his message ; what his contribution 
to the century? 

Ruskin is first and foremost a Teacher. He has not 
originated. He is not the originator of a new system, of a 
new order, even of a new philosophy. He says somewhere 



viii INTRODUCTION. 



of himself : " I have never appUed myself to discover any- 
thing, being content to praise what had already been 
discovered, so that no true disciple of mine will ever be a 
Ruskinian." He will be something better, his disciples 
add; he will be one of God's men, with truer, deeper, joy, 
seeing higher, diviner beauty in the world because Ruskin 
has shown it to him. Ruskin' s Gospel, says one of those 
whom Ruskin has clung to, is a gospel not of a " news ' ' 
but "like that of Jesus, a gospel of glad tidings." 

And let us not think it a disparagement to Ruskin that 
he was not an originator. Was Jesus Christ an originator? 
Did Christ establish a new order? Was Christianity aught 
but the simple flowering of old Jewish faith ? Did Christ 
come to destroy or to fulfill ? Fulfillment is the higher task. 
Many a man can see a truth, who cannot live it. Jesus 
Christ lived the truth. His new commandment was more 
literally a new command, the reissuing of old orders. Before 
Christ came men knew that they should love one another. 
The secret of Jesus was that he led men in the loving of 
their neighbors. Is not this the secret too of John Ruskin, 
not so much that he created Beauty, but that he leads men 
to love it, helps them to live it — true life, the beauty of 
Truth, the grace of Sincerity, the Gospel of Noble Things? 
In this high function of the Teacher, Ruskin, in his line, 
stands unapproached. 

But how does he do this? "There are diversities of gifts, 
but the same spirit To one is given by the 



INTRODUCTION. ix 



spirit the word of wisdom ; to another the word of know- 
ledge by the same spirit ; to another laith by the same 
spirit; to another the working of miracles; to another 
prophecy ; to another discerning of spirits ; to another 
divers kinds of tongues ; to another the interpretation of 
tongues:" is not this last best gift, Ruskin's gift? could any 
man ever interpret as does John Ruskin ? And is it not 
the best gift? Can anything be better than to take the 
truth of God and bring it home to the hearts and lives of 
men ? Was not this His gift who was ' ' The Word ' ' made 
manifest ? 

Here is Ruskin's power, Interpretation. Whether it be 
a Vision of St. Ursula, by Carpaccio, "A Bible of Amiens," 
or a bit of lapis-lazuli from "St. Mark's Rest," who can 
ever read it and find in it anything that John Ruskin has 
not found? Who after Ruskin's reading of it, can ever 
read it differently? 

And yet Ruskin is a true teacher. He teaches you to 
read. He refuses to be systematic. He reads a word here, 
a line there, but he bids you to do your own reading. He 
simply shows you how. This is Ruskin's gift, in all his 
writing. 

Now how does he apply this to Social Problems ? 

Is he not here too a teacher, — a teacher, not an 
originator, — and as a teacher, above all else an interpreter? 
He certainly is not an originator in Social Ethics. There 
is no social gospel according to Ruskin, in the sense of a 



IN TRODUCTION. 



Gospel according to Jean Jacques Rousseau. Ruskin is no 
Robert Owen, no Fourier, no Henry George, no Edward 
Bellamy. He is even different from William Morris ; he 
has created no Utopia. God's world is good enough for 
John Ruskin. His is the diviner task of interpreting 
God's laws for the world that is. He has chosen that 
better part of sitting at the feet of Truth and showing what 
it is to be true in social life, and that part shall not be taken 
from him. 

This means no disparagement to Utopia dreamers. 
They have their place. Do not you dare to despise them : 
child of the present, satisfied with the present, you who are 
doing nothing, not even dreaming, lying drunken with 
selfishness ; when you wake, only waking to speak frothy 
words of idle gossip. Utopias have their place, only it is 
not the highest place. As Mrs. Besant tells us: "There 
are two ways in which the scheme for future organization 
of industry may be constructed. Of these, by far the 
easier and less useful is the sketching of Utopia, an 
intellectual gymnastic in which a power of coherent and 

vivid imagination is the one desideratum 

The second way is less attractive, less easy, but more useful. 
Starting from the present state of society, it seeks to 
discover the tendencies underlying it, to trace those 
tendencies to their natural out-working in institutions." 

This was Ruskin's way. He reads not dreams; he 
reads the eternal in the present 



INTRODUCTION. xi 



But see how he reads — how differently from Carlyle. 
Both are seers ; both read the eternal in the present ; both 
find God everywhere. But Carlyle sees things as they are ; 
Ruskin sees things as they are and as they ought to be. 
Carlyle dwells in the eternal verities ; Ruskin shows how 
to transform negations into verities. Carlyle drives the 
plowshare of exposure through the hard crusts of society 
and social order. Into the yawning furrows, Ruskin drops 
the quickening seeds of truth. Where Carlyle is destruct- 
ive, Ruskin is constructive ; Carlyle burns to free man 
from the yoke of circumstance ; Ruskin leads man to truer 
life in serving the beautiful and true ; Carlyle dwells amid 
the smoke and thunders of Sinai's law ; Ruskin bids us live 
and love as children of the Father, full of grace and 
truth. 

Such is Ruskin' s place in the development of the 
Social form, a teacher, teaching not by law, but by sug- 
gestion, by quickening, by fertilizing, by example, not 
with system, but with lightning flash, radiating upon 
mind far vistas of the truth. To-day among the Socialists 
of the world not many will be found who in the views 
'they now hold call Ruskin Master, but many and many 
a thoughtful one will tell you that they were led to 
Socialism by John Ruskin. 

Second, his teaching. What does Ruskin teach ? What 
is his Gospel ? Like every true Gospel, it is a simple one 
and yet capable of infinite expansion, and of glorious 



xii INTRODUCTION. 

statement. The essence of his social teaching may perhaps 
be put in a single phrase, one of his own phrases: "There is 
no wealth but life, life including all its powers of love, of 
joy, and of admiration. ' ' 

From this simple teaching spring as from a comer stone 
all the noble pillars and portions of his structure. Because 
noble life is wealth, it follows with Ruskin, that that coun- 
try is the richest which nourishes the greatest number of 
noble and happy human beings ; that that man is wealth- 
iest, who, having perfected the functions of his own life to 
the utmost, has also the widest helpful influence, both 
personal, and by means of his possessions, over the lives 
of others. 

Moreover because life is wealth, it follows that only 
that which contributes life has a right to return in wealth, 
hence that interest, the return of money for the use of dead 
money is wrong, — that only those have a right to share in 
the products of industry who have put into the operation 
some industry themselves, some outgo of their own life. 

These two conceptions, the law of wealth and the law 
of service, run through all of Ruskin' s works, and from 
them what mighty truths he teaches! The one thought 
flashes out for example such a crystal phrase as that where 
he defines wealth as " the possession of the valuable by the 
valiant ; ' ' the other gives us his exhortation to English 
men and English women to become workers — "Soldiers 
of the Plowshare as well as Soldiers of the Sword." 



INTRODUCTION. xiii 



It will be at once seen whither such principles must 
lead. 

Ruskin taught from \}s\q.vs\, first, the great law of " Prop- 
erty to whom proper" — or that land and tools belong to 
those who can use them ; Secondly, that he who can should 
use his tools — use his tools to develop life, the highest life 
in himself and in others ; Thirdly, -\}!\2X this highest life can 
only be by cooperation instead of competition, the thought 
of what we can give rather than of what we can get, the 
thought of what we are rather than of what we have. This 
added to Ruskin' s teaching as regards art constitutes 
Ruskin's social system. His theory of art and his theory 
of society he never divorces because they were both part 
of his one theory of life. Of art he taught — he himself 
tells us — first, that the life of art is in religion ; secondly, 
that its food is in the ocular and passionate love of nature ; 
thirdly, that its health is in the humility of the artists. 
Applying this to his social teaching, his outcome was that 
Society should be a cooperation or communism of artists, 
submitting themselves humbly to the law of love, and in the 
joy of beauty working to produce the highest and the 
noblest that is in them. 

How near this is to Socialism is at once apparent — to 
Socialism, we say, not Communism or Nationalism. 

Ruskin, it is true, calls himself a Communist — in his 
own strong phrase, ' ' the reddest of the red ; ' ' but we 
believe that he was really much nearer to Socialism. In 



xiv INTRODUCTION. 



equality of property he did not believe. In creating his 
St. George's Guild he distinctly says that there should be 
"no equality upon it, but recognition of every betterness 
and reprobation of every worseness." This certainly is 
opposed to both Communism and Nationalism, but it is in 
exact accord with the great Socialist and Christian princi- 
ple of ' ' every man according to his work. ' ' In almost all 
things Ruskin is in accord with Socialism. He believes in 
government, in the State ; he believes in the cooperation of 
workers in the State ; he believes in award for worth ; he 
does not believe in interest; he does not believe in the 
capitalist ; he is the bitterest foe of the Wage System and 
of the Laissez faire political economy. 

Ruskin is not, however, a Socialist in all things. He 
is politically (in his writings) a Conservative, not a Radical. 
His Socialism is in form paternal, not fraternal. He would 
not seek for reform through political action. In all this 
he appears to be the very opposite of a Socialist. Socialism 
is essentially fraternal, not paternal. It is radical, not 
conservative ; it believes in political action ; it is democratic 
both in politics and in trade. Ruskin fails in this in part 
because of his education and environment, but even more 
because of his artistic temperament, which shrinks from the 
rough-and-tumble and often prosaic machinery of political 
life. The Gospel of Art has rarely been married to the 
Gospel of the Ballot Box. Hence politically Ruskin 
becomes reactionary, yet he is not truly reactionary. His 



INTRODUCTION. xv 



teachings are so radical, so incisive, so inspired with the 
true spirit of the noblest Socialism, that it must lead and 
already has led many of his disciples to strive for Socialism 
in the very political fields against which Raskin spoke. 
In his exaltation of work, in his teaching that work is holy, 
that work for money is not true work, that every man 
should be an artist and work in cooperation for the good 
of all, Ruskin teaches such essential Socialism as to condone 
all failure to see the necessity of political activity. 

Thirdly. His achievement. Ruskin is a successful 
teacher. His work has been to lead. Those misunderstand 
life who say that he has failed, because he has not developed 
a concrete community living according to his ideas. He 
has in truth been vastly more successful than if he had 
attempted to do this. He has breathed his spirit into men 
of all classes everywhere. Yet Ruskin attempted the 
concrete, although this not so much for the value of the 
concrete itself, as because, in trying to carry out his ideas, 
he could alone be consistent and, therefore, be a true teacher 
to the world. His St. George's Guild was an inevitable 
consequence of his teaching. ' ' No great arts are practi- 
cable," he had taught, "by any people unless they are 
living contented lives, in pure air, out of the way of unsightly 
objects and emancipated from unnecessary mechanical 
occupations. It is simply one part of the practical work 
I have to do in art teaching, to bring, somewhere, such 
conditions into existence and to show the working of 



xvi INTRODUCTION. 



them." He saw too that teaching by example was the 
best teaching. "The more I see of writing," he says, 
"the less I care for it; one may do more with a man by 
getting ten words spoken to him face to face than by the 
black-lettering of a whole life's thought." This from the 
writer of The Stones of Venice is testimony indeed. No 
wonder he strove to carry out his ideas. It is in this light 
and this light only that his industrial experiments must be 
viewed, simply as object lessons of his teaching. For this 
purpose, even at Oxford, he took the little company of 
students who would follow him and went out pick in hand 
to try and dig a road. What matter that the result was, 
according to his own half humorous confession, "about the 
worst road in the three kingdoms ; ' ' that was not the real 
result ; the real result was in teaching the nobility of manual 
labor, and that "food can only be got out of the ground, 
and enjoyment out of honesty. ' ' 

Ruskin's great experiment, however, was his St. 
George's Guild. There is no need here of lengthy 
description. In our selections from Fors Clavigera we 
have placed some of Ruskin's own statements of the objects 
and principles of the Guild. We give here but a few 
quotations from the valuable account of the Guild, found 
in Edward Cook's Studies in Ruskin. "It was in May, 
1 87 1," says Mr. Cook, "that the scheme was first made 
public. In the Fors for that month Mr. Ruskin called on 
any landlords to come and help him who would like 



INTR OD UCTION. 



better to be served by men than by iron devils^ and any 
tenants and any workmen who could vow to work and Hve 
faithililly for the sake of the joy of their home. All who 
joined St. George's standard were to do as Mr. Ruskin 
undertook to do, to give the tenth of what they had and 
what they earned, not to emigrate with, but to stay in 
England with and make a happy England of her once 
more. ' ' 

The Guild had an agricultural, an industrial and an 
artistic character. On land bought by the Guild, to 
which Ruskin himself largely contributed, an attempt was 
made to carry on an agricultural community according to 
Ruskin's "Laws of Life." Mr. Cook says of this : 

"The agricultural experiments of the St. George's Guild 
have not been a brilliant success. Perhaps they have not 
been given a fair chance. Perhaps the times and seasons 
have been unpropitious. But whatever explanations or 
excuses there may be, the fact remains that the St. George's 
farms have produced very little except a plentiful crop of 
disappointments. Mr. Ruskin has drawn many charming 
pictures of his ideal settlements ; but the realities have for 
the most part been either grim or grotesque, or (more 
often) both. The Guild is, however, the owner of several 
acres of land in different parts of the country, and there is 
some reason to hope that past failures will lead to future 
successes. If there are any disciples of Count Tolstoi who, 
having decided 'what to do,' are casting about for plots 



xviii INTRODUCTION. 

of ground on which to do it, they should communicate wil 
the Trustees of St. George's Guild." 

The industrial experiments of Mr. Ruskin have been 
the way of fostering village industries. Wrote Mr. Ruskin : 
"Whatever may be the destiny of London, or Paris, or 
Rome in the future, I have always taught that the problem 
of right organization of country life was wholly independent 
of them." 

Mr. Ruskin' s aim was not to organize industrial villages, 
but to revive, in existing villages, village industry. 

Foremost in work in this direction stands Mr. Albert 
Flemming's attempt, under Ruskin's influence, to bring 
back the old industry of the spinning wheel to the homes 
and villages in Westmoreland. In a measure it has suc- 
ceeded, as one can see by reading Mr. Flemming's own 
account of it, printed in Studies in Ruskin. 

Another experiment was the making of "St. George's 
cloth" in the Isle of Man, undertaken with Ruskin's help, 
by Mr. Egbert Rydings. A mill was built in romantic 
architecture by the St. George's Guild, the motive power 
being of course, in a Ruskinian mill, water and not steam. 
This too still exists, though it has passed into other 
hands than those of the Guild. 

The main concrete result of the St. George's Guild, has, 
however, not unnaturally, been artistic, in the creation and 
maintenance of the unique and beautiful Ruskin Museum 
at Meresbrook Hall, Sheffield. Of this, the other day, a 



INTRODUCTION. xix 



friend, once himself a devout Ruskinian and a member 
of St. George's Company, said to us, "The only outcome 
of Ruskin's Guild is a Peep Show." It was a shallow 
judgment. Undoubtedly Mr. Ruskin's teachings are of 
infinitely greater value than the Museum, but would the 
teachings be complete without their illustration in this 
characteristic shrine ? 

So much of John Ruskin. Of this little collection of a 
small portion of his teachings we need say but Utde. In 
the limited space at our disposal we have placed first, 
Unto This Last, as the best presentation, in brief space, of 
Ruskin's Political Economy, and as that, of all his writings 
which he himself calls "best," that is, the truest and most 
serviceable. Secondly, we have placed two wonderful 
essays on Work and on Traific, from The Crown of Wild 
Olive, as essays most needed to-day. Lastly, we have 
added what selections we could from Fors Clavigera, as 
containing some of Ruskin's noblest and most characteristic 
utterances on social themes. To these last we have prefixed 
a special preface. To the other books Ruskin himself has 
already furnished his readers with a preface. 

W. D. P. BLISS. 

Linden, May, 1891. 



i i 



BOOK I. 

UNTO THIS LAST." 



FOUR ESSAYS ON THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF 

POLITICAL ECONOMY. /I 



PREFACE 



THE four following essays were published eighteen 
months ago in the Cornhill Magazine, and were 
reprobated in a violent manner, as far as I could hear, 
by most of the readers they met with. 

Not a whit the less, I believe them to be the best, that 
is to say, the truest, rightest-worded, and most serviceable 
things I have ever written ; and the last of them, having 
had especial pains spent on it, is probably the best I shall 
ever write. 

"This," the reader may reply, "it might be, yet not 
therefore well written." Which, in no mock humility, 
admitting, I yet rest satisfied with the work, though with 
nothing else that I have done ; and purposing shortly to 
follow out the subjects opened in these papers, as I may 
find leisure, I wish the introductory statements to be within 
the reach of any one who may care to refer to them. So I 
republish the essays as they appeared. One word only is 
changed, correcting the estimate of a weight ; and no word 
is added. 

Although, however, I find nothing to modify in these 
papers, it is matter of regret to me that the most startling 
of all the statements in them, — that respecting the necessity 
of the organization of labor, with fixed wages, — should 
have found its way into the first essay ; it being quite one 
of the least important, though by no means the least certain, 



4 PREFACE. 

of the positions to be defended. The real gist of these 
papers, their central meaning and aim, is to give, as I 
believe for the first time in plain English, — it has often been 
incidentally given in good Greek by Plato and Xehophon, 
and good Latin by Cicero and Horace, — a logical defini- 
tion of WEALTH : such definition being absolutely needed 
for a basis of economical science. The most reputed essay 
on that subject which has appeared in modern times, after 
opening with the statement that "writers on political 
economy profess to teach, or to investigate,* the nature 
of wealth," thus follows up the declaration of its thesis — 
"Every one has a notion, sufficiently correct for common 
purposes, of what is meant by wealth. ... It is no 
part of the design of this treatise to aim at metaphysical 
nicety of definition.! ' ' 

Metaphysical nicety, we assuredly do not need; but 
physical nicety, and logical accuracy, with respect to a 
physical subject, we as assuredly do. 

Suppose the subject of inquiry, instead of being House 
law {Oikonomia), had been Star-law {Astronmid) , and that, 
ignoring distinction between stars fixed and wandering, as 
here between wealth radiant and wealth reflective, the writer 
had begun thus: "Every one has a notion, sufficiently 
correct for common purposes, of what is meant by stars. 
Metaphysical nicety in the definition of a star is not the 
object of this treatise;" — the essay so opened might yet 
have been far more true in its final statements, and a 
thousand-fold more serviceable to the navigator, than any 
treatise on wealth, which founds its conclusions on the 

* Which? for where investigation is necessary, teaching is 
impossible. 

^l Principles of Political Economy. By J. S. Mill. Preliminary 
remarks, p. 2. 



PREFACE. 



popular conception of wealth, can ever become to the 
economist. 

It was, therefore, the first object of these following 
papers to give an accurate and stable definition of wealth. 
Their second object was to show that the acquisition of 
wealth was finally possible only under certain moral condi- 
tions of society, of which quite the first was a belief in the 
existence and even, for practical purposes, in the attainability 
of honesty. 

Without venturing to pronounce — since on such a 
matter human judgment is by no means conclusive — what 
is, or is not, the noblest of God's works, we may yet admit 
so much of Pope's assertion as that an honest man is 
among His best works presently visible, and, as things 
stand, a somewhat rare one ; but not an incredible or 
miraculous work ; still less an abnormal one. Honesty is 
not a disturbing force, which deranges the orbits of economy ; 
but a consistent and commanding force, by obedience to 
which — and by no other obedience — those orbits can 
continue clear of chaos. 

It is true, I have sometimes heard Pope condemned 
for the lowness instead of the hight, of his standard : — 
"Honesty is indeed a respectable virtue; but how much 
higher may men attain ! Shall nothing more be asked of 
us than that we be honest ? ' ' 

For the present, good friends, nothing. It seems that 
in our aspirations to be more than that, we have to some 
extent lost sight of the propriety of being so much as that. 
What else we may have lost faith in, there shall be here no 
question ; but assuredly we have lost faith in common 
honesty, and in the working power of it. And this faith, 
with the facts on which it may rest, it is quite our first 



PREFACE. 



business to recover and keep : not only believing, but even 
by experience assuring ourselves, that there are yet in the 
world men who can be restrained from fraud otherwise than 
by the fear of losing employment ; * nay, that it is even 
accurately in proportion to the number of such men in any 
State, that the said State does or can prolong its existence. 

To these two points, then, the following essays are 
mainly directed. The subject of the organization of labor 
is only casually touched upon ; because, if we once can get 
a sufficient quantity of honesty in our captains, the organiza- 
tion of labor is easy, and will develop itself without quarrel 
or difficulty ; but if we cannot get honesty in our captains, 
the organization of labor is for evermore impossible. 

The several conditions of its possibility I purpose to 
examine at length in the sequel. Yet, lest the reader 
should be alarmed by the hints thrown out during the 
following investigation of first principles, as if they were 
leading him into unexpectedly dangerous ground, I will, 
for his better assurance, state at once the worst of the 
political creed at which I wish him to arrive. 

I. First, — that there should be training schools for 
youth established, at Government cost, f and under Govern- 
ment discipline, over the whole country ; that every child 

* "The effectual discipline which is exercised over a workman 
is not that of his corporation, but of his customers. It is the fear 
of losing their employment which restrains his frauds, and corrects 
his negligence." {Wealth of Nations, Book I., chap. lo.) 

t It will probably be inquired by near-sighted persons, out of 
what funds such schools could be supported. The expedient modes 
of direct provision for them I will examine hereafter ; indirectly, 
they would be far more than self-supporting. The economy in 
crime alone, (quite one of the most costly articles of luxury in the 
modem European market,) which such schools would induce, 
would suffice to support them ten times over. Their economy of 
labor would be pure gain, and that too large to be presently 
calculable. 



PREFACE. 7 

born in the country should, at the parent's wish, be per- 
mitted (and, in certain cases, be under penalty required) 
to pass through them ; and that, in these schools, the child 
should (with other minor pieces of knowledge hereafter to 
be considered) imperatively be taught, with the best skill 
of teaching that the country could produce, the following 
three things : — 

(a) the laws of health, and the exercises enjoined by 
them ; 

(<5) habits of gentleness and justice ; and 

{c) the calling by which he is to live. 

2. Secondly, — that, in connection with these training 
schools, there should be established, also entirely under 
Government regulation, manufactories and workshops, for 
the production and sale of every necessary of life, and for 
the exercise of every useful art. And that, interfering no 
whit with private enterprise, nor setting any restraints or 
tax on private trade, but leaving both to do their best, and 
beat the Government if they could, — there should, at these 
Government manufactories and shops, be authoritatively 
good and exemplary work done, and pure and true sub- 
stance sold ; so that a man could be sure, if he chose to 
pay the Government price, that he got for his money bread 
that was bread, ale that was ale, and work that was work. 

3. Thirdly, — that any man, or woman, or boy, or girl, 
out of employment, should be at once received at the nearest 
Government school, and set to such work as it appeared, 
on trial, they were fit for, at a fixed rate of wages determ- 
inable every year : — that, being found incapable of work 
through ignorance, they should be taught, or being found 
incapable of work through sickness, should be tended ; but 
that being found objecting to work, they should be set, 
under compulsion of the strictest nature, to the more painful 



8 PREFACE. 

and degrading forms of necessary toil, especially to that in 
mines and other places of danger (such danger being, 
however, diminished to the utmost by careful regulation 
and discipline) and the due wages of such work be retained — 
cost of compulsion first abstracted — to be at the workman's 
command, so soon as he has come to sounder mind 
respecting the laws of employment. 

4. Lastly, — that for the old and destitute, comfort and 
home should be provided ; which provision, when misfortune 
had been by the working of such a system sifted from guilt, 
would be honorable instead of disgraceful to the receiver. 
For (I repeat this passage out of my Political Economy of 
Art, to which the reader is referred for further detail *) " a 
laborer serves his country with his spade, just as a man in 
the middle ranks of life serves it with sword, pen, or lancet. 
If the service be less, and, therefore, the wages during 
health less, then the reward when health is broken may be 
less, but not less honorable ; and it ought to be quite as 
natural and straightforward a matter for a laborer to take 
his pension from his parish, because he has deserved well 
of his parish, as for a man in higher rank to take his pension 
from his country, because he has deserved well of his 
country. " 

To which statement, I will only add, for conclusion, 
respecting the discipline and pay of life and death, that, for 
both high and low, Livy's last words touching Valerius 
Publicola, ' ' de publico est elattis, ' ' f ought not to be a 
dishonorable close of epitaph. 

These things, then, I believe, and am about, as I find 

♦Addenda, p. 102. 

t " P. Valerius, omnium consensu princeps belli pacisque artibus, 
anno post moritur ; gloriA in^enti, copiis familiaribus adeo exiguis, 
ut funeri sumtus deesset : de publico est elatus. Luxere matronae 
ut Brutum." — Lib. II., c. xvi. 



PREFACE. 9 

power, to explain and illustrate in their various bearings ; 
following out also what belongs to them of collateral inquiry. 
Here I state them only in brief, to prevent the reader 
casting about in alarm for my ultimate meaning ; yet 
requesting him, for the present, to remember, that in a 
science dealing with so subtle elements as those of human 
nature, it is only possible to answer for the final truth of 
principles, not for the direct success of plans : and that in 
the best of these last, what can be immediately accomplished 
is always questionable, and what can be finally accomplished, 
inconceivable. 

JOHN RUSKIN. 
Denmark Hill, loth May, 1862. 



"UNTO THIS LAST/' 



ESSAY I. 
THE ROOTS OF HONOR. 

AMONG the delusions which at different periods have 
possessed themselves of the minds of large masses of 
the human race, perhaps the most curious — certainly 
the least creditable — is the modern soi-disant science of 
political economy, based on the idea that an advantageous 
code of social action may be determined irrespectively of 
the influence of social affection. 

Of course, as in the instances of alchemy, astrology, 
witchcraft, and other such popular creeds, political economy 
has a plausible idea at the root of it. "The social 
affections," says the economist, "are accidental and dis- 
turbing elements in human nature ; but avarice and the 
desire of progress are constant elements. Let us eliminate 
the inconstants, and, considering the human being merely 
as a covetous machine, examine by what laws of labor, 
purchase, and sale, the greatest accumulative result in 
wealth is attainable. Those laws once determined, it will 
be for each individual afterward to introduce as much of 
the disturbing affectionate element as he chooses, and to 
determine for himself the result on the new conditions 
supposed." 



12 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

This would be a perfectly logical and successful method 
of analysis, if the accidentals afterward to be introduced 
were of the same nature as the powers first examined. 
Supposing a body in motion to be influenced by constant 
and inconstant forces, it is usually the simplest way of 
examining its course to trace it first under the persistent 
conditions, and afterward introduce the causes of variation. 
But the disturbing elements in the social problem are not 
of the same nature as the constant ones ; they alter the 
essence of the creature under examination the moment they 
are added ; they operate, not mathematically, but chemi- 
cally, introducing conditions which render all our previous 
knowledge unavailable. We made learned experiments 
upon pure nitrogen, and have convinced ourselves that it 
is a very manageable gas : but behold ! the thing which we 
have practically to deal with is its chloride ; and this, the 
moment we touch it on our established principles, sends us 
and our apparatus through the ceiling. 

Observe, I neither impugn nor doubt the conclusions 
of the science, if its terms are accepted. I am simply 
uninterested in them, as I should be in those of a science 
of gymnastics which assumed that men had no skeletons. 
It might be shown, on that supposition, that it would be 
advantageous to roll the students up into pellets, flatten 
them into cakes, or stretch them into cables ; and that 
when these results were effected, the re-insertion of the 
skeleton would be attended with various inconveniences to 
their constitution. The reasoning might be admirable, the 
conclusions true, and the science deficient only in applica- 
bility. Modern political economy stands on a precisely 
similar basis. Assuming, not that the human being has no 
skeleton, but that it is all skeleton, it founds an ossifiant 
theory of progress on this negation of a soul ; and having 



'UNTO THIS last: 



13 



shown the utmost that may be made of bones, and con- 
structed a number of interesting geometrical figures with 
death's-heads and humeri, successfully proves the incon- 
venience of the reappearance of a soul among these 
corpuscular structures. I do not deny the truth of this 
theory : I simply deny its applicability to the present phase 
of the world. 

This inapplicability has been curiously manifested during 
the embarrassment caused by the late strikes of our work- 
men. Here occurs one of the simplest cases, in a pertinent 
and positive form, of the first vital problem which political 
economy has to deal with (the relation between employer 
and employed) ; and at a severe crisis, when lives in 
multitudes, and wealth in masses, are at stake, the political 
economists are helpless — practically mute ; no demonstrable 
solution of the difficulty can be given by them, such as may 
convince or calm the opposing parties. Obstinately the 
masters take one view of the matter; obstinately the 
operatives another ; and no political science can set them 
at one. 

It would be strange if it could, it being not by "science" 
of any kind that men were ever intended to be set at one. 
Disputant after disputant vainly strives to show that the 
interests of the masters are, or are not, antagonistic to those 
of the men ; none of the pleaders ever seeming to 
remember that it does not absolutely or always follow that 
the persons must be antagonistic because their interests are. 
If there is only a crust of bread in the house, and mother 
and children are starving, their interests are not the same. 
If the mother eats it, the children want it ; if the children 
eat it, the mother must go hungry to her work. Yet it 
does not necessarily follow that there will be ' ' antagonism ' ' 
between them, that they will fight for the crust, and that 



14 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN 

the mother, being strongest, will get it, and eat it. Neither, 
in any other case, whatever the relations of the persons 
may be, can it be assumed for certain that, because their 
interests are diverse, they must necessarily regard each 
other with hostility, and use violence or cunning to obtain 
the advantage. 

Even if this were so, and it were as just as it is con- 
venient to consider men as actuated by no other moral 
influences than those which affect rats or swine, the logical 
conditions of the question are still indeterminable. It can 
never be shown generally either that the interests of 
master and laborer are alike, or that they are opposed ; for, 
according to circumstances, they may be either. It is, 
indeed, always the interest of both that the work should 
be rightly done, and a just price obtained for it ; but, in the 
division of profits, the gain of the one may or may not be 
the loss of the other. It is not the master's interest to pay 
wages so low as to leave the men sickly and depressed, nor 
the workman's interest to be paid high wages if the small- 
ness of the master's profit hinders him from enlarging his 
business, or conducting it in a safe and liberal way. A 
stoker ought not to desire high pay if the company is too 
poor to keep the engine-wheels in repair. 

And the varieties of circumstances which influence these 
reciprocal interests are so endless, that all endeavor to 
deduce rules of action from balance of expediency is in 
vain. And it is meant to be in vain. For no human 
actions ever were intended by the Maker of men to be 
guided by balances of expediency, but by balances of 
justice. He has, therefore, rendered all endeavors to 
determine expediency futile for evermore. No man ever 
knew, or can know, what will be the ultimate result to him- 
self, or to others, of any given line of conduct. But every 



'UNTO THIS last: 



15 



man may know, and most of us do know, what is a just 
and unjust act. And all of us may know also, that the 
consequences of justice will be ultimately the best possible, 
both to others and ourselves, though we can neither say 
what is best, now how it is likely to come to pass. 

I have said balances of justice, meaning, in the term 
justice, to include affection, — such affection as one man owes 
to another. All right relations between master and opera- 
tive, and all their best interests, ultimately depend on these. 

We shall find the best and simplest illustration of the 
relations of master and operative in the position of domestic 
servants. 

We will suppose that the master of a household desires 
only to get as much work out of his servants as he can, at 
the rate of wages he gives. He never allows them to be 
idle ; feeds them as poorly and lodges them as ill as they 
will endure, and in all things pushes his requirements to 
the exact point beyond which he cannot go without forcing 
the servant to leave him. In doing this, there is no viola- 
tion on his part of what is commonly called "justice." He 
agrees with the domestic for his whole time and service, 
and takes them ; the limits of hardship in treatment being 
fixed by the practice of other masters in his neighborhood ; 
that is to say, by the current rate of wages for domestic 
labor. If the servant can get a better place, he is free to take 
one, and the master can only tell what is the real market 
value of his labor, by requiring as much as he will give. 

This is the politico-economical view of the case, accord- 
ing to the doctors of that science ; who assert that by this 
procedure the greatest average of work will be obtained 
from the servant, and, therefore, the greatest benefit to the 
community, and through the community, by reversion, to 
the servant himself. 



1 6 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

That, however, is not so. It would be so if the servant 
were an engine of which the motive power was steam, 
magnetism, gravitation, or any other agent of calculable 
force. But he being, on the contrary, an engine whose 
motive power is a Soul, the force of this very peculiar 
agent, as an unknown quantity, enters into all the political 
economist's equations, without his knowledge, and falsifies 
every one of their results. The largest quantity of work 
will not be done by this curious engine for pay, or under 
pressure, or by help of any kind of fuel which may be 
applied by the chaldron. It will be done only when the 
motive force, that is to say, the will or spirit of the creature, 
is brought to its greatest strength by its own proper fuel ; 
namely, by the affections. 

It may indeed happen, and does happen often, that if 
the master is a man of sense and energy, a large quantity 
of material work may be done under mechanical pressure, 
enforced by strong will and guided by wise method ; also 
it may happen, and does happen often, that if the master is 
indolent and weak (however good-natured), a very small 
quantity of work, and that bad, may be produced by the 
servant's undirected strength, and contemptuous gratitude. 
But the universal law of the matter is that, assuming any 
given quantity of energy and sense in master and servant, 
the greatest material result obtainable by them will be, not 
through antagonism to each other, but through affection 
for each other ; and that if the master, instead of endeavor- 
ing to get as much work as possible from the servant, 
seeks rather to render his appointed and necessary work 
beneficial to him, and to forward his interests in all just and 
wholesome ways, the real amount of work ultimately done, 
or of good rendered, by the person so cared for, will indeed 
be the greatest possible. 



''UNTO THIS last:' 17 

Observe, I say, "of good rendered," for a servant's 
work is not necessarily or always the best thing he can give 
his master. But good of all kinds, whether in material 
service, in protective watchfulness of his master's interest 
and credit, or in joyful readiness to seize unexpected and 
irregular occasions of help. 

Nor is this one whit less generally true because indul- 
gence will be frequently abused, and kindness met with 
ingratitude. For the servant who, gently treated, is 
ungrateful, treated ungently, will be revengeful ; and the 
man who is dishonest to a liberal master will be injurious to 
an unjust one. 

In any case, and with any person, this unselfish treat- 
ment will produce the most effective return. Observe, I 
am here considering the affections wholly as a motive 
power ; not at all as things in themselves desirable or 
noble, or in any other way abstractedly good, I look at 
them simply as an anomalous force, rendering every one of 
the ordinary political economist's calculations nugatory ; 
while, even if he desired to introduce this new element into 
his estimates, he has no power of dealing with it ; for the 
affections only become a true motive power when they 
ignore every other motive and condition of political 
economy. Treat the servant kindly, with the idea of turn- 
ing his gratitude to account, and you will get, as you 
deserve, no gratitude, nor any value for your kindness ; but 
treat him kindly without any economical purpose, and all 
economical purposes will be answered ; in this, as in all 
other matters, whosoever will save his life shall lose it, and 
whoso loses it shall find it.* 

*The difference between the two modes of treatment, and 
between their effective material results, may be seen ver>' accurately 
by a comparison of the relations of Esther and Charlie in Bleak 



1 8 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

The next clearest and simplest example of relation 
between master and operative is that which exists between 
the commander of a regiment and his men. 

Supposing the officer only desires to apply the rules of 
discipline so as, with least trouble to himself, to make the 
regiment most effective, he will not be able, by any rules, 
or administration of rules, on this selfish principle, to 
develop the full strength of his subordinates. If a man of 
sense and firmness, he may, as in the former instance, pro- 
duce a better result than would be obtained by the irregular 
kindness of a weak officer ; but let the sense and firmness 
be the same in both cases, and assuredly the officer who 
has the most direct personal relations with his men, the 
most care for their interests, and the most value for their 
lives, will develop their effective strength, through their 

House, with those of Miss Brass and the Marchioness in Master 
Humphrey' s Clock. 

The essential value and truth of Dickens's writings have been 
unwisely lost sight of by many thoughtful persons, merely because 
he presents his truth with some color of caricature. Unwisely, 
because Dickens's caricature, though often gross, is never mistaken. 
Allowing for his manner of telling them, the things he tells us are 
always true. I wish that he could think it right to limit his brilliant 
exaggeration to works written only for public amusement; and 
when he takes up a subject of high national importance, such as 
that which he handled in Hard Thnes, that he would use severer 
and more accurate analysis. The usefulness of that work (to my 
mind, in several respects, the greatest he has written) is with many 
persons seriously diminished because Mr. Bounderby is a dramatic 
monster, instead of a characteristic example of a worldly master ; 
and Stephen Blackpool a dramatic perfection, instead of a char- 
acteristic example of an honest workman. But let us not lose the 
use of Dickens's wit and insight, because he chooses to speak in a 
circle of stage fire. He is entirely right in his main drift and purpose 
in ever}' book he has written ; and all of them, but especially Hard 
Times, should be studied with close and earnest care by persons 
interested in social questions. They will find much that is partial, 
and, because partial, apparently unjust; but if they examine all the 
evidence on the other side, which Dickens seems to overlook, it 
will appear, after all their trouble, that his view was the finally right 
one, grossly and sharply told. 



"UNTO THIS last: 



19 



affection for his own person, and trust in his character, to a 
degree wholly unattainable by other means. The law 
applies still more stringently as the numbers concerned are 
larger ; a charge may often be successful, though the men 
dislike their officers ; a battle has rarely been won, unless 
they loved their general. 

Passing from these simple examples to the more com- 
plicated relations existing between a manufacturer and his 
workmen, we are met first by certain curious difficulties, 
resulting, apparently, from a harder and colder state of 
moral elements. It is easy to imagine an enthusiastic 
affection existing among soldiers for the colonel. Not so 
easy to imagine an enthusiastic affection among cotton- 
spinners for the proprietor of the mill. A body of men 
associated for purposes of robbery (as a Highland clan in 
ancient times) shall be animated by perfect affection, and 
every member of it be ready to lay down his life for the life 
of his chief. But a band of men associated for purposes of 
legal production and accumulation is usually animated, it 
appears, by no such emotions, and none of them is in 
anywise willing to give his life for the life of his chief Not 
only are we met by this apparent anomaly, in moral 
matters, but by others connected with it, in administration 
of system. For a servant or a soldier is engaged at a 
definite rate of wages, for a definite period ; but a workman 
at a rate of wages variable according to the demand for 
labor, and with the risk of being at any time thrown out of 
his situation by chances of trade. Now, as, under these 
contingencies, no action of the affections can take place, 
but only an explosive action of </waffections, two points 
offer themselves for consideration in the matter. 

The first — How far the rate of wages may be so 
regulated as not to vary with the demand for labor. 



20 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

The second — How far it is possible that bodies of 
workmen may be engaged and maintained at such fixed 
rate of wages (whatever the state of trade may be), without 
enlarging or diminishing their number, so as to give them 
permanent interest in the establishment with which they 
are connected, like that of the domestic servants in an old 
family, or an esprit de corpSy like that of the soldiers in a 
crack regiment. 

The first question is, I say, how far it may be possible 
to fix the rate of wages irrespectively of the demand for 
labor. 

Perhaps one of the most curious facts in the history of 
human error is the denial by the common political econo- 
mist of the possibility of thus regulating wages ; while for 
all the important, and. much of the unimportant, labor on 
the earth, wages are already so regulated. 

We do not sell our prime-ministership by Dutch 
auction ; nor, on the decease of a bishop, whatever may be 
the general advantages of simony, do we (yet) offer his 
diocese to the clergyman who will take the episcopacy at 
the lowest contract. We (with exquisite sagacity of polit- 
ical economy!) do indeed sell commissions, but not openly, 
generalships : sick, we do not inquire for a physician who 
takes less than a guinea ; litigious, we never think of 
reducing six-and-eightpence to four-and-sixpence ; caught 
in a shower, we do not canvass the cabmen, to find out 
who values his driving at less than sixpence a mile. 

It is true that in all these cases there is, and in every 
conceivable case there must be, ultimate reference to the 
presumed difficulty of the work, or number of candidates 
for the office. If it were thought that the labor necessary 
to make a good physician would be gone through by a 
sufficient number of students with the prospect of only 



''UNTO THIS LAST." 21 

half-guinea fees, public consent would soon withdraw the 
unnecessary half-guinea. In this ultimate sense, the price 
of labor is indeed always regulated by the demand for it ; 
but so far as the practical and immediate administration 
of the matter is regarded, the best labor always has been, 
and is, as all labor ought to be, paid by an invariable 
standard. 

' ' What ! ' ' the reader, perhaps, answers amazedly : ' ' pay 
good and bad workmen alike ? ' ' 

Certainly. The difference between one prelate's sermons 
and his successor's, — or between one physician's opinion 
and another's, — is far greater, as respects the qualities of 
mind involved, and far more important in result to you 
personally, than the difference between good and bad laying 
of bricks (though that is greater than most people suppose). 
Yet you pay with equal fee, contentedly, the good and bad 
workmen upon your soul, and the good and bad workmen 
upon your body ; much more may you pay, contentedly, 
with equal fees, the good and bad workmen upon your 
house. 

"Nay, but I choose my physician and (?) my clergy- 
man, thus indicating my sense of the quality of their work." 
By all means, also, choose your bricklayer ; that is the 
proper reward of the good workman, to be "chosen." 
The natural and right system respecting all labor is, that it 
should be paid at a fixed rate, but the good workman 
employed, and the bad workman unemployed. The false, 
unnatural, and destructive system is when the bad work- 
man is allowed to offer his work at half-price, and either 
take the place of the good, or force him by his competition 
to work for an inadequate sum. 

This equality of wages, then, being the first object 
toward which we have to discover the directest available 



22 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

road ; the second is, as above stated, that of maintaining 
constant numbers of workmen in employment, whatever 
may be the accidental demand for the article they produce. 

I believe the sudden and extensive inequalities of 
demand which necessarily arise in the mercantile operations 
of an active nation, constitute the only essential difficulty 
which has to be overcome in a just organization of labor. 
The subject opens into too many branches to admit of 
being investigated in a paper of this kind ; but the following 
general facts bearing on it may be noted. 

The wages which enable any workman to live are 
necessarily higher, if his work is liable to intermission, than 
if it is assured and continuous ; and however severe the 
struggle for work may become, the general law will always 
hold, that men must get more daily pay if, on the average, 
they can only calculate on work three days a week, than 
they would require if they were sure of work six days a 
week. Supposing that a man cannot live on less than a 
shilling a day, his seven shillings he must get, either for 
three days' violent work, or six days' deliberate work. 
The tendency of all modern mercantile operations is to 
throw both wages and trade into the form of a lottery, and 
to make the workman's pay depend on intermittent 
exertion, and the principal's profit on dexterously used 
chance. 

In what partial degree, I repeat, this may be r.o^essary, 
in consequence of the activities of modern trade, I d'l not 
here investigate ; contenting myself with the fact that ih its 
fatalest aspects it is assuredly unnecessary, and results 
merely from love of gambling on the part of the masters, 
and from ignorance and sensuality in the men. The 
masters cannot bear to let any opportunity of gain escapje 
them, and frantically rush at every gap and breach in the 



'UNTO THIS last:' 



23 



walls of Fortune, raging to be rich, and affronting, with 
impatient covetousness, every risk of ruin ; while the men 
prefer three days of violent labor, and three days of drunk- 
enness, to six days of moderate work and wise rest. There 
is no way in which a principal, who really desires to help 
his workmen, may do it more effectually than by checking 
these disorderly habits both in himself and them ; keeping 
his own business operations on a scale which will enable 
him to pursue them securely, not yielding to temptations 
of precarious gain ; and, at the same time, leading his 
workmen into regular habits of labor and life, either by 
inducing them rather to take low wages in the form of a 
fixed salary, than high wages, subject to the chance of 
their being thrown out of work ; or, if this be impossible, 
by discouraging the system of violent exertion for nomin- 
ally high day wages, and leading the men to take lower pay 
for more regular labor. 

In effecting any radical changes of this kind, doubtless 
there would be great inconvenience and loss incurred by 
all the originators of movement. That which can be done 
with perfect convenience and without loss, is not always 
the thing that most needs to be done, or which we are 
most imperatively required to do. 

I have already alluded to the difference hitherto exist- 
ing between regiments of men associated for purposes of 
violence, and for purposes of manufacture ; in that the 
former appear capable of self-sacrifice — the latter, not ; 
which singular fact is the real reason of the general lowness 
of estimate in which the profession of commerce is held, as 
compared with that of arms. Philosophically, it does not, 
at first sight, appear reasonable (many writers have endeav- 
ored to prove it unreasonable) that a peaceable and rational 
person, whose trade is buying and selling, should be held 



24 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKTN. 

in less honor than an unpeaceable and often irrational 
person, whose trade is slaying. Nevertheless, the consent 
of mankind has always, in spite of the philosophers, given 
precedence to the soldier. 

And this is right. 

For the soldier's trade, verily and essentially, is not 
slaying, but being slain. This, without well knowing its 
own meaning, the world honors it for, A bravo' s trade is 
slaying ; but the world has never respected bravos more 
than merchants ; the reason it honors the soldier is, because 
he holds his life at the service of the State. Reckless he 
may be — fond of pleasure or of adventure — all kinds of 
bye-motives and mean impulses may have determined the 
choice of his profession, and may affect (to all appearance 
exclusively) his daily conduct in it ; but our estimate of 
him is based on this ultimate fact — of which we are well 
assured — that, put him in a fortress breach, with all the 
pleasures of the world behind him, and only death and his 
duty in front of him, he will keep his face to the front ; and 
he knows that this choice may be put to him at any 
moment, and has beforehand taken his part — virtually takes 
such part continually — does, in reality, die daily. 

Not less is the respect we pay to the lawyer and physi- 
cian, founded ultimately on their self-sacrifice. Whatever 
the learning or acuteness of a great lawyer, our chief 
respect for him depends on our belief that, set in a judge's 
seat, he will strive to judge justly, come of it what may. 
Could we suppose that he would take bribes, and use his 
acuteness and legal knowledge to give plausibility to 
iniquitous decisions, no degree of intellect would win for 
him our respect. Nothing will win it, short of our tacit 
conviction, that in all important acts of his life justice is first 
with him ; his own interest, second. 



'UNTO THIS last:' 



25 



In the case of a physician, the ground of the honor we 
render him is clearer still. Whatever his science, we should 
shrink from him in horror if we found him regard his 
patients merely as subjects to experiment upon ; much 
more, if we found that, receiving bribes from persons 
interested in their deaths, he was using his best skill to 
give poison in the mask of medicine. 

Finally, the principle holds with utmost clearness as it 
respects clergymen. No goodness of disposition will excuse 
want of science in a physician or of shrewdness in an advo- 
cate ; but a clergyman, even though his power of intellect 
be small, is respected on the presumed ground of his 
unselfishness and serviceableness. 

Now there can be no question but that the tact, fore- 
sight, decision, and other mental powers, required for the 
successful management of a large mercantile concern, if not 
such as could be compared with those of a great lawyer, 
general, or divine, would at least match the general condi- 
tions of mind required in the subordinate officers of a ship, 
or of a regiment, or in the curate of a country parish. If, 
therefore, all the efficient members of the so-called liberal 
professions are still, sotnehow, in public estimate of honor, 
preferred before the head of a commercial firm, the reason 
must lie deeper than in the measurement of their several 
powers of mind. 

And the essential reason for such preference will be 
found to lie in the fact that the merchant is presumed to 
act always selfishly. His work may be very necessary to 
the community ; but the motive of it is understood to be 
wholly personal. The merchant's first object in all his 
dealings must be (the public believe) to get as much for 
himself, and leave as little to his neighbor (or customer) as 
possible. Enforcing this upon him, by political statute, as 



26 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

the necessary principle of his action ; recommending it to 
him on all occasions, and themselves reciprocally adopting 
it ; proclaiming vociferously, for law of the universe, that a 
buyer's function is to cheapen, and a seller's to cheat, — 
the public, nevertheless, involuntarily condemn the man of 
commerce for his compliance with their own statement, and 
stamp him forever as belonging to an inferior grade of 
human personality. 

This they will find, eventually, they must give up doing. 
They must not cease to condemn selfishness ; but they will 
have to discover a kind of commerce which is not exclu- 
sively selfish. Or, rather, they will have to discover that 
there never was, or can be, any other kind of commerce ; 
that this which they have called commerce was not com- 
merce at all, but cozening ; and that a true merchant differs 
as much from a merchant according to laws of modern 
political economy, as the hero of the Excursion from 
Autolycus. They will find that commerce is an occupation 
which gentlemen will every day see more need to engage 
in, rather than in the businesses of talking to men, or 
slaying them ; that, in true commerce, as in true preaching, 
or true fighting, it is necessary to admit the idea of 
occasional voluntary loss ; — that sixpences have to be lost, 
as well as lives, under a sense of duty ; that the market 
may have its martyrdoms as well as the pulpit ; and trade 
its heroisms, as well as war. 

May have — in the final issue, must have — and only has 
not had yet, because men of heroic temper have always 
been misguided in their youth into other fields, not recog- 
nizing what is in our days, perhaps, the most important of 
all fields ; so that, while many a zealous person loses his 
life in trying to teach the form of a gospel, very few will 
lose a hundred pounds in showing the practice of one. 



''UNTO THIS LAST." 



27 



The fact is, that people never have had clearly explained 
to them the true functions of a merchant with respect to 
other people. I should like the reader to be very clear 
about this. 

Five great intellectual professions, relating to daily 
necessities of life, have hitherto existed — three exist neces- 
sarily, in every civilized nation : 

The Soldier's profession is to defend it. 

The Pastor's, to teach it. 

The Physician's, to keep it in health. 

The Lawyer's, to eti/orce justice. 

The Merchant's, io provide for it. 

And the duty of all these men is, on due occasion, to 
die for it. 

"On due occasion," namely : — 

The Soldier, rather than leave his post in battle. 

The Physician, rather than leave his post in plague. 

The Pastor, rather than teach Falsehood. 

The Lawyer, rather than countenance Injustice. 

The Merchant — What is his ' ' due occasion ' ' of death ? 

It is the main question for the merchant, as for all of 
us. For, truly, the man who does not know when to die, 
does not know how to live. 

Observe, the merchant's function (or manufacturer's, 
for in the broad sense in which it is here used the word 
must be understood to include both) is to provide for the 
nation. It is no more his function to get profit for himself 
out of that provision than it is a clergyman's function to 
get his stipend. The stipend is a due and necessary 
adjunct, but not the object, of his life, if he be a true 
clergyman, any more than his fee (or honoraritini) is the 
object of life to a true physician. Neither is his fee the 
pbject of life to a true merchant. All three, if true men, 



28 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

have a work to be done irrespective of fee — to be done 
even at any cost, or for quite the contrary of fee ; the 
pastor's function being to teach, the physician's to heal, 
and the merchant's, as I have said, to provide. That is to 
say, he has to understand to their very root the quahties of 
the thing he deals in, and the means of obtaining or pro- 
ducing it ; and he has to apply all his sagacity and energy 
to the producing or obtaining it in perfect state, and 
distributing it at the cheapest possible price where it is 
most needed. 

And because the production or obtaining of any com- 
modity involves necessarily the agency of many lives and 
hands, the merchant becomes in the course of his business 
the master and governor of large masses of men in a more 
direct, though less confessed way, than a military officer or 
pastor ; so that on him falls, in great part, the responsibility 
for the kind of life they lead : and it becomes his duty, not 
only to be always considering how to produce what he 
sells in the purest and cheapest forms, but how to make 
the various employments involved in the production, or 
transference of it, most beneficial to the men employed. 

And as into these two functions, requiring for their 
right exercise the highest intelligence, as well as patience, 
kindness, and tact, the merchant is bound to put all his 
energy, so for their just discharge he is bound, as soldier 
or physician is bound, to give up, if need be, his life, in 
such way as may be demanded of him. Two main points 
he has in his providing function to maintain : first, his 
engagements (faithfulness to engagements being the real 
root of all possibilities in commerce) ; and, secondly, the 
perfectness and purity of the thing provided ; so that, rather 
than fail in any engagement, or consent to any deterio- 
ration, adulteration, or unjust and exorbitant price of that 



"UNTO THIS last:' 



29 



which he provides, he is bound to meet fearlessly any form of 
distress, poverty, or labor, which may, through maintenance 
of these points, come upon him. 

Again : in his office as governor of the men employed 
by him, the merchant or manufacturer is invested with a 
distinctly paternal authority and responsibility. In most 
cases, a youth entering a commercial establishment is with- 
drawn altogether from home influence ; his master must 
become his father, else he has, for practical and constant 
help, no father at hand : in all cases the master's authority, 
together with the general tone and atmosphere of his 
business, and the character of the men with whom the 
youth is compelled in the course of it to associate, have 
more immediate and pressing weight than the home influ- 
ence, and will usually neutralize it either for good or evil ; 
so that the only means which the master has of doing 
justice to the men employed by him is to ask himself 
sternly whether he is dealing with such subordinate as he 
would with his own son, if compelled by circumstances to 
take such a position. » 

Supposing the captain of a frigate saw it right, or were 
by any chance obliged, to place his own son in the position 
of a common sailor ; as he would then treat his son, he is 
bound always to treat every one of the men under him. 
So, also, supposing the master of a manufactory saw it 
right, or were by any chance obliged, to place his own son 
in the position of an ordinary workman ; as he would then 
treat his son, he is bound always to treat every one of his 
men. This is the only effective, true, or practical Rule 
which can be given on this point of political economy. 

And as the captain of a ship is bound to be the last man 
to leave his ship in case of wreck, and to share his last 
crust with the sailors in case of famine, so the manufacturer, 



30 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

in any commercial crisis or distress, is bound to take the 
suffering of it with his men, and even to take more of it 
for himself than he allows his men to feel ; as a father would 
in a famine, shipwreck, or battle, sacrifice himself for his 
son. 

All which sounds very strange ; the only real strange- 
ness in the matter being, nevertheless, that it should so 
sound. For all this is true, and that not partially nor 
theoretically, but everlastingly and practically : all other 
doctrine than this respecting matters political being false 
in premises, absurd in deduction, and impossible in practice, 
consistently with any progressive state of national life ; all 
the life which we now possess as a nation showing itself in 
the resolute denial and scorn, by a few strong minds and 
faithful hearts, of the economic principles taught to our 
multitudes, which principles, so far as accepted, lead straight 
to national destruction. Respecting the modes and forms 
of destruction to which they lead, and, on the other hand, 
respecting the further practical working of true polity, I 
hope to reason further in a following paper. 



" UNTO THIS LAST" 31 



ESSAY II. 
THE VEINS OF WEALTH. 

THE answer which would be made by any ordinary 
political economist to the statements contained in the 
preceding paper, is in few words as follows : — 
" It is indeed true that certain advantages of a general 
nature may be obtained by the development of social 
affections. But political economists never professed, nor 
profess, to take advantages of a general nature into consid- 
eration. Our science is simply the science of getting rich. 
So far from being a fallacious or visionary one, it is found 
by experience to be practically effective. Persons who 
follow its precepts do actually become rich, and persons 
who disobey them become poor. Every capitalist of Europe 
has acquired his fortune by following the known laws of our 
science, and increases his capital daily by an adherence to 
them. It is vain to bring forward tricks of logic, against 
the force of accomplished facts. Every man of business 
knows by experience how money is made, and how it is 
lost." 

Pardon me. Men of business do indeed know how 
they themselves made their money, or how, on occasion, 
they lost it. Playing a long-practiced game, they are 
familiar with the chances of its cards, and can rightly 
explain their losses and gains. But they neither know 
who keeps the bank of the gambling-house, nor what other 
games may be played with the same cards, nor what other 
losses and gains, far away among the dark streets, are 



32 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

essentially, though invisibly, dependent on theirs in the 
lighted rooms. They have learned a few, and only a few, 
of the laws of mercantile economy ; but not one of those 
of political economy. 

Primarily, which is very notable and curious, I observe 
that men of business rarely know the meaning of the word 
"rich." At least if they know, they do not in their rea- 
sonings allow for the fact, that it is a relative word, imply- 
ing its opposite ' ' poor ' ' as positively as the word ' ' north ' ' 
implies its opposite "south." Men nearly always speak 
and write as if riches were absolute, and it were possible, by 
following certain scientific precepts, for everybody to be 
rich. Whereas riches are a power like that of electricity, 
acting only through inequalities or negations of itself. The 
force of the guinea you have in your pocket depends wholly 
on the default of a guinea in your neighbor's pocket. If 
he did not want it, it would be of no use to you ; the degree 
of power it possesses depends accurately upon the need or 
desire he has for it, — and the art of making yourself rich, 
in the ordinary mercantile economist's sense, is therefore 
equally and necessarily the art of keeping your neighbor 
poor. 

I would not contend in this matter (and rarely in any 
matter), for the acceptance of terms. But I wish the reader 
clearly and deeply to understand the difference between 
the two economies, to which the terms "Political" and 
"Mercantile" might not unadvisably be attached. 

Political economy (the economy of a State, or of citi- 
zens) consists simply in the production, preservation, and 
distribution, at fittest time and place, of useful or pleasurable 
things. The farmer who cuts his hay at the right time ; 
the shipwright who drives his bolts well home in sound 
wood ; the builder who lays good bricks in well-tempered 



''UNTO THIS last:* 33 

mortar ; the housewife who takes care of her furniture in 
the parlor, and guards against all waste in her kitchen ; and 
the singer who rightly disciplines, and never overstrains 
her voice : are all political economists in the true and final 
sense ; adding continually to the riches and well-being of 
the nation to which they belong. 

But mercantile economy, the economy of "merces" or 
of "pay," signifies the accumulation, in the hands of indi- 
viduals, of legal or moral claim upon, or power over, the 
labor of others ; every such claim implying precisely as 
much poverty or debt on one side, as it implies riches or 
right on the other. 

It does not, therefore, necessarily involve an addition to 
the actual property, or well-being, of the State in which it 
exists. But since this commercial wealth, or power over 
labor, is nearly always convertible at once into real prop- 
erty, while real property is not always convertible at once 
into power over labor, the idea of riches among active men 
in civilized nations, generally refers to commercial wealth ; 
and in estimating their possessions, they rather calculate 
the value of their horses and fields by the number of guineas 
they could get for them, than the value of their guineas by 
the number of horses and fields they could buy with them. 

There is, however, another reason for this habit of mind ; 
namely, that an accumulation of real property is of little 
use to its owner, unless, together with it, he has commercial 
power over labor. Thus, suppose any person to be put in 
possession of a large estate of fruitful land, with rich beds 
of gold in its gravel, countless herds of cattle in its pastures ; 
houses, and gardens, and storehouses full of useful stores, 
but suppose, after all, that he could get no servants? In 
order that he may be able to have servants, some one in 
his neighborhood must be poor, and in want of his gold — 



34 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

or his corn. Assume that no one is in want of either, and 
that no servants are to be had. He must, therefore, bake 
his own bread, make his own clothes, plow his ov\n 
ground, and shepherd his own flocks. His gold will be as 
useful to him as any other yellow pebbles on his estate. 
His stores must rot, for he cannot consume them. He can 
eat no more than another man could eat, and wear no more 
than another man could wear. He must lead a life of 
severe and common labor to procure even ordinary com- 
forts ; he will be ultimately unable to keep either houses 
in repair, or fields in cultivation ; and forced to content 
himself with a poor man's portion of cottage and garden, 
in the midst of a desert of waste land, trampled by wild 
cattle, and encumbered by ruins of palaces, which he will 
hardly mock at himself by calling ' ' his own. ' ' 

The most covetous of mankind, would with small exulta-' 
tion, I presume, accept riches of this kind on these terms. 
What is really desired, under the name of riches, is, essen- 
tially, power over men ; in its simplest sense, the power of 
obtaining for our own advantage the labor of servant, 
tradesman, and artist ; in wider sense, authority of directing 
large masses of the nation to various ends (good, trivial, or 
hurtful, according to the mind of the rich person). And 
this power of wealth of course is greater or less in direct 
proportion to the poverty of the men over whom it is 
exercised, and in inverse proportion to the number of 
persons who are as rich as ourselves, and who are ready 
to give the same price for an article of which the supply 
is limited. If the musician is poor, he will sing for small 
pay, as long as there is only one person who can pay him ; 
but if there be two or three, he will sing for the one who 
offers him most. And thus the power of the riches of the 
patron (always imperfect and doubtful, as we shall see 



''UNTO THIS last:* 35 

presently, even when most authoritative) depends first on 
the poverty of the artist, and then on the limitation of 
the number of equally wealthy persons, who also want seats 
at the concert. So that, as above stated, the art of becom- 
ing "rich," in the common sense, is not absolutely nor 
finally the art of accumulating much money for ourselves, 
but also of contriving that our neighbors shall have less. 
In accurate terms, it is "the art of establishing the maximum 
inequality in our own favor." 

Now the establishment of such inequality cannot be 
shown in the abstract to be either advantageous or disad- 
vantageous to the body of the nation. The rash and absurd 
assumption that such inequalities are necessarily advan- 
tageous, lies at the root of most of the popular fallacies on 
the subject of political economy. For the eternal and 
inevitable law in this matter is, that the beneficialness of the 
inequality depends, first, on the methods by which it was 
accomplished, and, secondly, on the purposes to which it is 
applied. Inequalities of wealth, unjustly established, have 
assuredly injured the nation in which they exist during 
their establishment ; and, unjustly directed, injure it yet 
more during their existence. But inequalities of wealth 
justly established, benefit the nation in the course of their 
establishment ; and nobly used, aid it yet more by their 
existence. That is to say, among every active and well- 
governed people, the various strength of individuals, tested 
by full exertion and specially applied to various needs, 
Issues in unequal, but harmonious results, receiving reward 
or authority according to its class and service ; * while in 



* I have been naturally asked several times, 'vith respect to the 
sentence in the first of these papers, "the bad workmen unem- 
ployed," " But what are you to do with your bad unemployed work- 
men ? ' ' Well, it seems to me the question might have occurred to you 



36 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

the inactive or ill-governed nation, the gradations of decay 
and the victories of treason work out also their own rugged 
system of subjection and success ; and substitute, for the 
melodious inequalities of concurrent power, the iniquitous 
dominances and depressions of guilt and misfortune. 

Thus the circulation of wealth in a nation resembles that 
of the blood in the natural body. There is one quickness 
of the current which comes of cheerful emotion or whole- 
some exercise ; and another which comes of shame or of 
fever. There is a flush of the body which is full of warmth 
and life ; and another which will pass into putrefaction. 

The analogy will hold, down even to minute particulars. 
For as diseased local determination of the blood involves 
depression of the general health of the system, all morbid 

before. Your housemaid's place is vacant — you give twenty pounds 
a year — two girls come for it, one neatly dressed, the other dirtily ; 
one with good recommendations, the other with none. You do not, 
under these circumstances, usually ask the dirty one if she will come 
for fifteen pounds, or twelve ; and, on her consenting, take her 
instead of the well-recommended one. Still less do you try to beat 
both down by making them bid against each other, till you can hire 
both, one at twelve pounds a year, and the other at eight. You 
simply take the one fittest for the place, and send away the other, 
not perhaps concerning yourself quite as much as you should with 
the question which you now impatiently put to me, "What is to 
become of her?" For all that I advise you to do, is to deal with 
workmen as with servants : and verily the question is of weight : 
"Your bad workman, idler, and rogue — what are you to do with 
him?" 

We will consider of this presently : remember that the adminis- 
tration of a complete system of national commerce and industry 
cannot be explained in full detail within the space of twelve pages. 
Meantime, consider whether, there being confessedly some diffi- 
culty in dealing with rogues and idlers, it may not be advisable to 
produce as few of them as possible. If you examine into the history 
of rogues, you will find they are as truly manufactured articles as 
anything else, and it is just because our present system of political 
economy gives so large a stimulus to that manufacture that you may 
know it to be a false one. We had better seek for a system which 
will develop honest men. than for one which will deal cunningly 
with vagabonds. Let us reform our schools, and we shall find 
little reform needed in our prisons. 



"UNTO THIS last:' 37 

local action of riches will be found ultimately to involve a 
weakening of the resources of the body politic. 

The mode in which this is produced may be at once 
understood by examining one or two instances of the 
development of wealth in the simplest possible circumstances. 

Suppose two sailors cast away on an iminhabited coast, 
and obliged to maintain themselves there by their own 
labor for a series of years. 

If they both kept their health, and worked steadily, and 
in amity with each other, they might build themselves a 
convenient house, and in time come to possess a certain 
quantity of cultivated land, together with various stores 
laid up for future use. All these things would be real 
riches or property ; and supposing the men both to have 
worked equally hard, they would each have right to equal 
share or use of it. Their political economy would consist 
merely in careful preservation and just division of these 
possessions. Perhaps, however, after some time one or 
other might be dissatisfied with the results of their common 
farming ; and they might in consequence agree to divide 
the land they had brought under the spade into equal 
shares, so that each might thenceforward work in his own 
field and live by it. Suppose that after this arrangement 
had been made, one of them were to fall ill, and be unable 
to work on his land at a critical time — say of sowing or 
harvest. 

He would naturally ask the other to sow or reap for 
him. 

Then his companion might say, with perfect justice, ' ' I 
will do this additional work for you ; but if I do it, you 
must promise to do as much for me at another time. I 
will count how many hours I spend on your ground, and 
you shall give me a written promise to work for the same 



38 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

number of hours on mine, whenever I need your help, and 
you are able to give it." 

Suppose the disabled man's sickness to continue, and 
that under various circumstances, for several years, requir- 
ing the help of the other, he on each occasion gave a 
written pledge to work, as soon as he was able, at his com- 
panion's orders, for the same number of hours which the 
other had given up to him. What will the positions of the 
two men be when the invalid is able to resume work? 

Consider as a "Polls," or state, they will be poorer 
than they would have been otherwise : poorer by the with- 
drawal of what the sick man's labor would have produced 
in the interval. His friend may perhaps have toiled with 
an energy quickened by the enlarged need, but in the end 
his own land and property must have suffered by the with- 
drawal of so much of his time and thought from them ; and 
the united property of the two men will be certainly less 
than it would have been if both had remained in health and 
activity. 

But the relations in which they stand to each other are 
also widely altered. The sick man has not only pledged 
his labor for some years, but will probably have exhausted 
his own share of the accumulated stores, and will be in 
consequence for some time dependent on the other for food, 
which he can only ' ' pay ' ' or reward him for by yet more 
deeply pledging his own labor. 

Supposing the written promises to be held entirely valid 
(among civilized nations their validity is secured by legal 
measures*), the person who had hitherto worked for both 

♦The disputes which exist respecting the real nature of money 
arise more from the disputants examining its functions on different 
sides, than from any real dissent in their opinions. All money, 
properly so called, is an acknowledgment of debt ; but as such, it 
may either be considered to represent the labor and property of the 



UNTO THIS last: 



39 



might new, if he chose, rest altogether, and pass his time 
in idleness, not only forcing his companion to redeem all 
the engagements he had already entered into, but exacting 
from him pledges for further labor, to an arbitrary amount, 
for what food he had to advance to him. 

There might not, from first to last, be the least illegality 
(in the ordinary sense of the word) in the arrangement ; 
but if a stranger arrived on the coast at this advanced 
epoch of their political economy, he would find one man 
commercially Rich ; the other commercially Poor. He 
would see, perhaps with no small surprise, one passing his 
days in idleness ; the other laboring for both, and living 
sparely, in the hope of recovering his independence, at 
some distant period. 

This is, of course, an example of one only out of many 
ways in which inequality of possession may be established 
between different persons, giving rise to the mercantile 
forms of Riches and Poverty. In the instance before us, 
one of the men might from the first have deliberately 
chosen to be idle, and to put his life in pawn for present 
ease ; or he might have mismanaged his land, and been 
compelled to have recourse to his neighbor for food and 
help, pledging his future labor for it. But what I want the 
reader to note especially is the fact, common to a large 
number of typical cases of this kind, that the establishment 
of the mercantile wealth which consists in a claim upon 

creditor, or the idleness and penury of the debtor. The intricacy 
of the question has been much increased by the (hitherto necessary) 
use of marketable commodities, such as gold, silver, salt, shells, &c., 
to give intrinsic value or security to currency; but the final and 
best definition of money is that it is a documentary promise ratified 
and guaranteed by the nation to give or find a certain quantity of 
labor on demand. A man's labor for a day is a better standard 
of value than a measure of any produce, because no produce ever 
maintains a consistent rate of productibility. 



40 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

labor, signifies a political diminution of the real wealth 
which consists in substantial possessions. 

Take another example, more consistent w^ith the ordinary 
course of affairs of trade. Suppose that three men, instead 
of two, formed the little isolated republic, and found them- 
selves obliged to separate in order to farm different pieces 
of land at some distance from each other along the coast ; 
each estate furnishing a distinct kind of produce, and each 
more or less in need of the material raised on the other. 
Suppose that the third man, in order to save the time of all 
three, undertakes simply to superintend the transference 
of commodities from one farm to the other ; on condition 
of receiving some sufficiently remunerative share of every 
parcel of goods conveyed, or of some other parcel received 
in exchange for it. 

If this carrier or messenger always brings to each estate, 
from the other, what is chiefly wanted, at the right time, 
the operations of the two farmers will go on prosperously, 
and the largest possible result in produce, or wealth, will 
be attained by the little community. But suppose no 
intercourse between the land owners is possible, except 
through the traveling agent ; and that, after a time, this 
agent, watching the course of each man's agriculture, keeps 
back the articles with which he has been entrusted, until 
there comes a period of extreme necessity for them, on one 
side or other, and then exacts in exchange for them all 
that the distressed farmer can spare of other kinds of pro- 
duce ; it is easy to see that by ingeniously watching his 
opportunities, he might possess himself regularly of the 
greater part of the superfluous produce of the two estates, 
and at last, in some year of severest trial or scarcity, pur- 
chase both for himself, and maintain the former proprietors 
thenceforward as his laborers or his servants. 



''UNTO THIS LAST." 



41 



This v'ould be a case of commercial wealth acquired on 
the exactest principles of modern poHtical economy. But 
more distinctly even than in the former instance, it is 
manifest in this that the wealth of the State, or of the three 
men considered as a society, is collectively less than it would 
have been had the merchant been content with juster profit. 
The operations of the two agriculturists have been cramped 
to the utmost ; and the continual limitations of the supply 
of things they wanted at critical times, together with the 
failure of courage consequent on the prolongation of a 
struggle for mere existence, without any sense of permanent 
gain, must have seriously diminished the effective results 
of their labor ; and the stores finally accunmlated in the 
merchant's hands will not in anywise be of equivalent value 
to those which, had his dealings been honest, would have 
filled at once the granaries of the farmers and his own. 

The whole question, therefore, respecting not only the 
advantage, but even the quantity, of national wealth, 
resolves itself finally into one of abstract justice. It is 
impossible to conclude, of any given mass of acquired 
wealth, merely by the fact of its existence, whether it signifies 
good or evil to the nation in the midst of which it exists. 
Its real value depends on the moral sign attached to it, 
just as sternly as that of a mathematical quantity depends 
on the algebraical sign attached to it. Any given accumula- 
tion of commercial wealth may be indicative, on the one 
hand, of faithful industries, progressive energies, and pro- 
ductive ingenuities ; or, on the other, it may be indicative 
of mortal luxury, merciless tyranny, ruinous chicane. Some 
treasures are heavy with human tears, as an ill-stored 
harvest with untimely rain ; and some gold is brighter in 
sunshine than it is in substance. 

And these are not, observe, merely moral or pathetic 



42 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

attributes of riches, which the seeker of riches may, if he 
chooses, despise ; they are literally and sternly, material 
attributes of riches, depreciating or exalting, incalculably, 
the monetary signification of the sum in question. One 
mass of money is the outcome of action which has created, — 
another, of action which has annihilated, — ten times as much 
in the gathering of it ; such and such strong hands have 
been paralyzed, as if they had been numbed by nightshade : 
so many strong men's courage broken, so many productive 
operations hindered ; this and the other false direction 
given to labor, and lying image of prosperity set up, on 
Dura plains dug into seven-times-heated furnaces. That 
which seems to be wealth may in verity be only the gilded 
index of far-reaching ruin ; a wrecker's handful of coin 
gleaned from the beach to which he has beguiled an 
argosy; a camp-follower's bundle of rags unwrapped from 
the breasts of goodly soldiers dead ; the purchase-pieces 
of potter's fields, wherein shall be buried together the citizen 
and the stranger. 

And therefore, the idea that directions can be given for 
the gaining of wealth, irrespectively of the consideration of 
its moral sources, or that any general and technical law of 
purchase and gain can be set down for national practice, 
is perhaps the most insolently futile of all that ever beguiled 
men through their vices. So far as I know, there is not in 
history record of anything so disgraceful to the human 
intellect as the modern idea that the commercial text, ' ' Buy 
in the cheapest market and sell in the dearest," represents, 
or under any circumstances could represent, an available 
principle of national economy. Buy in the cheapest 
market? — yes ; but what made your market cheap? Char- 
coal may be cheap among your roof timbers after a fire, 
and bricks may be cheap in your streets after an earth- 



'UNTO THIS LASTr 



43 



quake; but fire and earthquake may not, therefore, be 
national benefits. Sell in the dearest ? — yes, truly ; but 
what made your market dear? You sold your bread well 
to-day ; was it to a dying man who gave his last coin for 
it, and will never need bread more, or to a rich man who 
to-morrow will buy your farm over your head; or to a 
soldier on his way to pillage the bank in which you have 
put your fortune? 

None of these things you can know. One thing only 
you can know, namely, whether this dealing of yours is a 
just and faithful one, which is all you need concern your- 
self about respecting it ; sure thus to have done your own 
part in bringing about ultimately in the world a state of 
things which will not issue in pillage or in death. And 
thus every question concerning these things merges itself 
ultimately in the great question of justice, which, the ground 
being thus far cleared for it, I will enter upon in the next 
paper, leaving only, in this, three final points for the reader's 
consideration. 

It has been shown that the chief value and virtue of 
money consists in its having power over human beings ; 
that, without this power, large material possessions are 
useless, and to any person possessing such power, compar- 
atively unnecessary. But power over human beings is 
attainable by other means than by money. As I said a 
few pages back, the money power is always imperfect and 
doubtful ; there are many things which cannot be retained 
by it. Many joys may be given to men which cannot be 
bought for gold, and many fidelities found in them which 
cannot be rewarded with it. 

Trite enough, — the reader thinks. Yes: but it is not 
so trite, — I wish it were, — that in this moral power, quite 
inscrutable and immeasurable though it be, there is a mone- 



44 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN R US KIN. 

tary value just as real as that represented by more ponder- 
ous currencies. A man's hand may be full of invisible 
gold, and the wave of it, or the grasp, shall do more than 
another's with a shower of bullion. This invisible gold, 
also, does not necessarily diminish in spending. Political 
economists will do well some day to take heed of it, though 
they cannot take measure. 

But further. Since the essence of wealth consists in its 
authority over men, if the apparent or nominal wealth fail 
in this power, it fails in essence ; in fact, ceases to be wealth 
at all. It does not appear lately in England, that our 
authority over men is absolute. The servants show some 
disposition to rush riotously upstairs, under an impression 
that their wages are not regularly paid. We should augur 
ill of any gentleman's property to whom this happened 
every other day in his drawing-room. 

So also, the power of our wealth seems limited as respects 
the comfort of the servants, no less than their quietude. 
The persons in the kitchen appear to be ill-dressed, squalid, 
half-starved. One cannot help imagining that the riches 
of the establishment must be of a very theoretical and 
documentary character. 

Finally. Since the essence of wealth consists in power 
over men, will it not follow that the nobler and the more 
in number the persons are over whom it has power, the 
greater the wealth? Perhaps it may even appear after 
some consideration, that the persons themselves are the 
wealth — that these pieces of gold with which we are in the 
habit of guiding them, are, in fact, nothing more than a 
kind of Byzantine harness or trappings, very glittering 
and beautiful in barbaric sight, wherewith we bridle the 
creatures ; but that if these same living creatures could be 
guided without the fretting and jingling of the Byzants in 



''UNTO THIS last: 



45 



their mouths and ears, they might themselves be more 
valuable than their bridles. In fact, it may be discovered 
that the true veins of wealth are purple — and not in Rock, 
but in Flesh — perhaps even that the final outcome and 
consummation of all wealth is in the producing as many 
as possible full- breathed, bright-eyed, and happy-hearted 
human creatures. Our modern wealth, I think, has rather 
a tendency the other way ; — most political economists 
appearing to consider multitudes of human creatures not 
conducive to wealth, or at best conducive to it only by 
remaining in a dim-eyed and narrow-chested state of being. 
Nevertheless, it is open, I repeat, to serious question, 
which I leave to the reader's pondering, whether, among 
national manufactures, that of Souls of a good quality may 
not at last turn out a quite leadingly lucrative one? Nay, 
in some far away and yet undreamed-of hour, I can even 
imagine that England may cast all thoughts of possessive 
wealth back to the barbaric nations among whom they first 
arose ; and that, while the sands of the Indus and adamant 
of Golconda may yet stiffen the housings of the charger, 
and flash from the turban of the slave, she, as a Christian 
mother, may at last attain to the virtues and the treasures 
of a Heathen one, and be able to lead forth her Sons, 
saying,— 

"These are my Jewels." 



46 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 



ESSAY III. 
QUI JUDICATIS TERRAM. 

SOME centuries before the Christian era, a Jew merchant 
largely engaged in business on the Gold Coast, and 
reported to have made one of the largest fortunes of 
his time (held also in repute for much practical sagacity), 
left among his ledgers some general maxims concerning 
wealth, which have been preserved, strangely enough, even 
to our own days. They were held in considerable respect 
by the most active traders of the middle ages, especially by 
the Venetians, who even went so far in their admiration as 
to place a statue of the old Jew on the angle of one of their 
principal public buildings. Of late years these writings 
have fallen into disrepute, being opposed in every particular 
to the spirit of modern commerce. Nevertheless I shall 
reproduce a passage or two from them here, partly because 
they may interest the reader by their novelty ; and chiefly 
because they will show him that it is possible for a very 
practical and acquisitive tradesman to hold, through a not 
unsuccessful career, that principle of distinction between 
well-gotten and ill-gotten wealth, which, partially insisted, 
on in my last paper, it must be our work more completely 
to examine in this. 

He says, for instance, in one place : ' ' The getting of 
treasure by a lying tongue is a vanity tossed to and fro of 
them that seek death :" adding in another, with the same 
meaning (he has a curious way of doubling his sayings) : 
"Treasures of wickedness profit nothing; but justice 



"UNTO THIS LAST." 47 

delivers from death," Both these passages are notable for 
their assertion of death as the only real issue and sum of 
attainment by any unjust scheme of wealth. If we read, 
instead of "lying tongue," "lying label, title, pretense, or 
advertisement," we shall more clearly perceive the bearing 
of the words on modern business. The seeking of death is 
a grand expression of the true course of men's toil in such 
business. We usually speak as if death pursued us, and we 
fled from him ; but that is only so in rare instances. 
Ordinarily, he masks himself — makes himself beautiful — 
all-glorious; not like the King's daughter, all-glorious 
within, but outwardly : his clothing of wrought gold. We 
pursue him frantically all our days, he flying or hiding from 
us. Our crowning success at threescore and ten is utterly 
and perfectly to seize, and hold him in his eternal integrity 
— robes, ashes, and sting. 

Again : the merchant says, ' ' He that oppresseth the 
poor to increase his riches, shall surely come to want." 
And again, more strongly : "Rob not the poor because he 
is poor ; neither oppress the afflicted in the place of 
business. For God shall spoil the soul of those that spoiled 
them." 

This "robbing the poor because he is poor," is 
especially the mercantile form of theft, consisting in taking 
advantage of a man's necessities in order to obtain his 
labor or property at a reduced price. The ordinary high- 
wayman's opposite form of robbery — of the rich, because 
he is rich — does not appear to occur so often to the old 
merchant's mind ; probably because, being less profitable 
and more dangerous than the robbery of the poor, it is 
rarely practiced by persons of discretion. 

But the two most remarkable passages in their deep 
general significance are the following : — 



48 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

' ' The rich and the poor have met. God is their maker. 
"The rich and the poor have met. God is their light." 
They "have met:" more Hterally, have stood in each 
other's way (obviaverunt). That is to say, as long as the 
world lasts, the action and counteraction of wealth and 
poverty, the meeting, face to face, of rich and poor, is just 
as appointed and necessary a law of that world as the flow 
of stream to sea, or the interchange of power among the 
electric clouds: — "God is their maker." But, also, this 
action may be either gentle and just, or convulsive and 
destructive : it may be by rage of devouring flood, or by 
lapse of serviceable wave ; — in blackness of thunderstroke, 
or continual force of vital fire, soft, and shapeable into love- 
syllables from far away. And which of these it shall be 
depends on both rich and poor knowing that God is their 
light ; that in the mystery of human life there is no other 
light than this by which they can see each other's faces, 
and live ; — light, which is called in another of the books 
among which the merchant's maxims have been preserved, 
the "sun of justice,"* of which it is promised that it shall 
rise at last with "healing" (health -giving or helping, 
making whole or setting at one) in its wings. For truly 

* More accurately, Sun of Justness ; but instead of the harsh 
word "Justness," the old English "Righteousness" being com- 
monly employed, has, by getting confused with "godliness," or 
attracting about it various vague and broken meanings, prevented 
most persons from receiving the force of the passages in which it 
occurs. The word "righteousness" properly refers to the justice 
of rule, or right, as distinguished from " equity," which refers to the 
justice of balance. More broadly. Righteousness is King's justice ; 
and Equity, Judge's justice; the King guiding or ruling all, the 
Judge dividing or discerning between opposites (therefore, the 
double question, "Man, who made me a ruler — f5/«a(Tr^f — or a 
divider — uemnr^c — over you?") Thus, with respect to the Justice of 
Choice (selection, the feebler and passive justice), we have from 
lego, — lex, legal, loi, and loyal ; and with respect to the Justice of 
Rule (direction, the stronger and active justice), we have from rego, 
— rex, regal, roi, and royal. 



"UNTO THIS last: 



49 



this healing is only possible by means of justice ; no love, 
no faith, no hope will do it ; men will be unwisely fond — 
vainly faithful, unless primarily they are just ; and the 
mistake of the best men through generation after genera- 
tion, has been that great one of thinking to help the poor 
by almsgiving, and by preaching of patience or of hope, 
and by every other means, emollient or consolatory, except 
the one thing which God orders for them, justice. But this 
justice, with its accompanying holiness or helpfulness, 
being even by the best men denied in its trial time, is by 
the mass of men hated wherever it appears : so that, when 
the choice was one day fairly put to them, they denied the 
Helpful One and the Just ; * and desired a murderer, 
sedition-raiser, and robber, to be granted to them ; — the 
murderer instead of the Lord of Life, the sedition-raiser 
instead of the Prince of Peace, and the robber instead of the 
Just Judge of all the world. 

I have just spoken of the flowing of streams to the sea 
as a partial image of the action of wealth. In one respect 
it is not a partial, but a perfect image. The popular 
economist thinks himself wise in having discovered that 
wealth, or the forms of property in general, must go where 
they are required ; that where demand is, supply must 
follow. He further declares that this course of demand and 
supply cannot be forbidden by human laws. Precisely" in 
the same sense, and with the same certainty, the waters of 
the world go where they are required. Where the land 
falls, the water flows. The course neither of clouds nor 
rivers can be forbidden by human will. But the disposition 
and administration of them can be altered by human fore- 
thought. Whether the stream shall be a curse or a blessing, 

*In another place written, with the same meaning, "Just, and 
having salvation." 



50 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

depends upon man's labor, and administrating intelligence. 
For centuries after centuries, great districts of the world, 
rich in soil, and favored in climate, have lain desert under 
the rage of their own rivers ; not only desert, but plague- 
struck. The stream which, rightly directed, would have 
flowed in soft irrigation from field to field — would have 
purified the air, given food to man and beast, and carried 
their burdens for them on its bosom — now overwhelms the 
plain, and poisons the wind ; its breath pestilence, and its 
work famine. In like manner this wealth "goes where it 
is required." No human laws can withstand its flow. They 
can only guide it : but this, the leading trench and limiting 
mound can do so thoroughly, that it shall become water of 
life — the riches of the hand of wisdom ; * or, on the con- 
trary, by leaving it to its own lawless flow, they may make 
it, what it has been too often, the last and deadliest of 
national plagues : water of Marah — the water which feeds 
the roots of all evil. 

The necessity of these laws of distribution or restraint is 
curiously overlooked in the ordinary political economist's 
definition of his own "science." He calls it, shortly, the 
"science of getting rich." But there are many sciences, as 
well as many arts, of getting rich. Poisoning people of 
large estates, was one employed largely in the middle 
ages ; adulteration of food of people of small estates. 
is one employed largely now. The ancient and honorable 
Highland method of blackmail ; the more modern and 
less honorable system of obtaining goods on credit, and 
the other variously improved methods of appropriation — 
which, in major and minor scales of industry, down to 
the most artistic pocket-picking, we owe to recent genius, 

•"Length of days in her right hand; in her left, riches and 
honor." 



'UNTO THIS last: 



51 



— all come under the general head of sciences, or arts, of 
getting rich. 

So that it is clear the popular economist, in calling his 
science the science par excellence of getting rich, must 
attach some peculiar ideas of limitation to its character. I 
hope I do not misrepresent him, by assuming that he 
means his science to be the science of "getting rich by 
legal or just means." In this definition, is the word "just," 
or "legal," finally to stand? For it is possible among 
certain nations, or under certain rulers, or by help of 
certain advocates, that proceedings may be legal which are 
by no means just. If, therefore, we leave at last only the 
word "just" in that place of our definition, the insertion 
of this solitary and small word will make a notable differ- 
ence in the grammar of our science. For then it will follow 
that, in order to grow rich scientifically, we must grow 
rich justly ; and, therefore, know what is just ; so that our 
economy will no longer depend merely on prudence, but 
on jurisprudence — and that of divine, not human law. 
Which prudence is indeed of no mean order, holding itself, 
as it were, high in the air of heaven, and gazing forever on 
the light of the sun of justice ; hence the souls which have 
excelled in it are represented by Dante as stars forming in 
heaven forever the figure of the eye of an eagle : they hav- 
ing been in life the discerners of light from darkness ; or to 
the whole human race, as the light of the body, which is 
the eye ; while those souls which form the wings of the bird 
(giving power and dominion to justice, "healing in its 
wings") trace also in light the inscription in heaven: 

"DILIGITE JUSTITIAM QUI JUDICATIS TERRAM." "Ye who 

judge the earth, give" (not, observe, merely love, but) 
"diligent love to justice :" the love which seeks diligently, 
that is to say, choosingly, and by preference to all things 



52 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

else. Which judging or doing judgment in the earth is, 
according to their capacity and position, required not of 
judges only, nor of rulers only, but of all men : * a truth 
sorrowfully lost sight of even by those who are ready 
enough to apply to themselves passages in which Christian 
men are spoken of as called to be " saints ' ' (/. e. to helpful 
or healing functions) ; and ' ' chosen to be kings ' ' {i. e. to 
knowing or directing functions); the true meaning of these 
titles having been long lost through the pretences of 
unhelpful and unable persons to saintly and kingly char- 
acter; also through the once popular idea that both the 
sanctity and royalty are to consist in wearing long robes 
and high crowns, instead of in mercy and judgment; 
whereas all true sanctity is saving power, as all true royalty 
is ruling power; and injustice is part and parcel of the 
denial of such power, which ' ' makes men as the creeping 
things, as the fishes of the sea, that have no ruler over 

them."t 

Absolute justice is indeed no more attainable than 
absolute truth ; but the righteous man is distinguished from 
the unrighteous by his desire and hope of justice, as the 
true man from the false by his desire and hope of truth. 
And though absolute justice be unattainable, as much 

* I hear that several of our lawyers have been greatly amused 
by the statement in the first of these papers that a lawyer's function 
was to do justice. I do not intend it for a jest ; nevertheless it will 
be seen that in the above passage neither the determination nor 
doing of justice are contemplated as functions wholly peculiar to 
the lawyer. Possibly, the more our standing armies, whether of 
soldiers, pastors, or legislators (the generic term "pastor" includ- 
ing all teachers, and the generic term "lawyer" including makers 
as well as interpreters of law), can be superseded by the force of 
national heroism, wisdom, and honesty, the better it may be for 
the nation. 

f It being the privilege of the fishes, as it is of rats and wolves, 
to live by the laws of demand and supply ; but the distinction of 
humanity, to live by those of right. 



" UNTO THIS last:' 53 

justice as we need for all practical use is attainable by all 
those who make it their aim. 

We have to examine, then, in the subject before us, 
what are the laws of justice respecting payment of labor — 
no small part, these, of the foundations of all jurisprudence. 

I reduced, in my last paper, the idea of money payment 
to its simplest or radical terms. In those terms its nature, 
and the conditions of justice respecting it, can be best 
ascertained. 

Money payment, as there stated, consists radically in a 
promise to some person working for us, that for the time 
and labor he spends in our service to-day we will give or 
procure equivalent time and labor in his service at any 
fiiture time when he may demand it.* 

If we promise to give him less labor than he has given 
us, we under-pay him. If we promise to give him more 
labor than he has given us, we over-pay him. In practice, 
according to the laws of demand and supply, when two 
men are ready to do the work, and only one man wants to 
have it done, the two men underbid each other for it ; and 
the one who gets it to do, is under-paid. But when two 
men want the work done, and there is only one man ready 
to do it, the two men who want it done over-bid each 
other, and the workman is over-paid. 

I will examine these two points of injustice in succes- 

* It might appear at first that the market price of labor expressed 
such an exchange : but this is a fallacy, for the market price is the 
momentary price of the kind of labor required, but the just price is 
its equivalent of the productive labor of mankind. This difference 
will be analyzed in its place. It must be noted also that I speak 
here only of the exchangeable value of labor, not of that of com- 
modities. The exchangeable value of a commodity is that of the 
labor required to produce it, multiplied into the force of the 
demand for it. If the value of the labor = :r and the force of the 
demand =y, the exchangeable value of the commodity is xy, in 
which if either x = o, or ^ = o, xy = o. 



54 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

sion ; but first I wish the reader clearly to understand the 
central principle, lying between the two, of right or just 
payment. 

When we ask a service of any man, he may either give 
it us freely, or demand payment for it. Respecting free 
gift of service, there is no question at present, that being a 
matter of affection — not of traffic. But if he demand pay- 
ment for it, and we wish to treat him with absolute equity, 
it is evident that this equity can only consist in giving time 
for time, strength for strength, and skill for skill. If a 
man works an hour for us, and we only promise to work 
half-an-hour for him in return, we obtain an unjust advan- 
tage. If, on the contrary, we promise to work an hour 
and a half for him in return, he has an unjust advantage. 
The justice consists in absolute exchange ; or, if there be 
any respect to the stations of the parties, it will not be in 
favor of the employer; there is certainly no equitable reason 
in a man's being poor, that if he give me a pound of bread 
to-day, I should return him less than a pound of bread to- 
morrow ; or any equitable reason in a man's being unedu- 
cated, that if he uses a certain quantity of skill and 
knowledge in my service, I should use a less quantity of 
skill and knowledge in his. Perhaps, ultimately, it may 
appear desirable, or, to say the least, gracious, that I should 
give in return somewhat more than I received. But at 
present, we are concerned on the law of justice only, which 
is that of perfect and accurate exchange; — one circumstance 
only interfering with the simplicity of this radical idea of 
just payment — that inasmuch as labor (rightly directed) is 
fruitful just as seed is, the fruit (or "interest," as it is 
called) of the labor first given, or "advanced," ought to 
be taken into account, and balanced by an additional 
quantity of labor in the subsequent repayment. Supposing 



UNTO THIS last:' 



55 



the repayment to take place at the end of a year, or of any 
other given time, this calculation could be approximatelx' 
made ; but as money (that is to say, cash) payment involves 
no reference to time (it being optional with the person 
paid to spend what he receives at once or after any number 
of years), we can only assume, generally, that some slight 
advantage must in equity be allowed to the person who 
advances the labor, so that the typical form of bargain will 
be : If you give me an hour to-day, I will give you an hour 
and five minutes on demand. If you give me a pound of 
bread to-day, I will give you seventeen ounces on demand, 
and so on. All that it is necessary for the reader to note 
is, that the amount returned is at least in equity not to be 
less than the amount given. 

The abstract idea, then, of just or due wages, as respects 
the laborer, is that they will consist in a sum of money 
which will at any time procure for him at least as much 
labor as he has given, rather more than less. And this 
equity or justice of payment is, observe, wholly independent 
of any reference to the number of men who are willing to 
do the work. I want a horseshoe for my horse. Twenty 
smiths, or twenty thousand smiths, may be ready to forge 
it; their number does not in one atom's weight affect the 
question of the equitable payment of the one who does 
forge it. It costs him a quarter of an hour of his life, and 
so much skill and strength of arm to make that horseshoe 
for me. Then at some future time I am bound in equity 
to give a quarter of an hour, and some minutes more, of 
my life (or of some other person's at my disposal), and 
also as much strength of arm and skill, and a little more, 
in making or doing what the smith may have need of 

Such being the abstract theory of just remunerative 
payment, its application is practically modified by the fact 



56 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 



that the order for labor, given in payment, is general, while 
labor received is special. The current coin or document is 
practically an order on the nation for so much work of any 
kind ; and this universal applicability to immediate need 
renders it so much more valuable than special labor can be, 
that an order for a less quantity of this general toil will 
always be accepted as a just equivalent for a greater 
quantity of special toil. Any given craftsman will always 
be willing to give an hour of his own work in order to 
receive command over half-an-hour, or even much less, of 
national work. This source of uncertainty, together with 
the difficulty of determining the monetary value of skill,* 

* Under the term "skill " I mean to include the united force of 
experience, intellect, and passion in their operation on manual labor : 
and under the term "passion," to include the entire range and 
agency of the moral feelings ; from the simple patience and gentle- 
ness of mind which will give continuity and fineness to the touch, 
or enable one person to work without fatigue, and with good effect, 
twice as long as another, up to the qualities of character which 
render science possible — (the retardation of science bv envy is one 
of the most tremendous losses in the economy of the present 
century) — and to the incommunicable emotion and imagination 
which are the first and mightiest sources of all value in art. 

It is highly sin2:ular that political economists should not yet have 
perceived, if not the moral, at least the passionate element, to be an 
inextricable quantity in every calculation. I cannot conceive, for 
instance, how it was possible that Mr. Mill should have followed the 
true clue so far as to write, — "No limit can be set to the import- 
ance — even in a purely productive and material point of view — of 
mere thought," without seeing that it was logically necessarjto add 
also, "and of mere feeling." And this the more, because in his 
first definition of labor he includes in the idea of it "all feelings of 
a disagreeable kind connected with the employment of one's 
thoughts in a particular occupation." True; but why not also, 
' ' feelings of an agreeable kind ? " It can hardly be supposed that 
the feelings which retard labor are more essentially a part of the 
labor than those which accelerate it. The first are paid for as pain, 
the second as power. The workman is merely indemnified for the 
first ; but the second both produce a part of the exchangeable value 
of the work, and materially increase its actual quantity. 

"Fritz is with us. He is worth fifty thousand men." Truly, a 
large addition to the material force ; — consisting, however, be it 



"UNTO THIS last:' 57 

renders the ascertainment (even approximate) of the proper 
wages of any given labor in terms of a currency, matter of 
considerable complexity. But they do not affect the 
principle of exchange. The worth of the work may not 
be easily known ; but it has a worth, just as fixed and real 
as the specific gravity of a substance, though such specific 
gravity may not be easily ascertainable when the substance 
is united with many others. Nor is there any difficulty or 
chance in determining it as in determining the ordinary 
maxima and minima of vulgar political economy. There 
are few bargains in which the buyer can ascertain with 
anything like precision that the seller would have taken no 
less ; — or the seller acquire more than a comfortable faith 
that the purchaser would have given no more. This impos- 
sibility of precise knowledge prevents neither from striving 
to attain the desired point of greatest vexation and injury 
to the other, nor from accepting it for a scientific principle 
that he is to buy for the least and sell for the most possible, 
though what the real least or most may be he cannot tell. 
In like manner, a just person lays it down for a scientific 
principle that he is to pay a just price, and, without being 
able precisely to ascertain the limits of such a price, will 
nevertheless strive to attain the closest possible approxima- 
tion to them. A practically serviceable approximation he 
can obtain. It is easier to determine scientifically what a 
man ought to have for his work, than what his necessities 
will compel him to take for it. His necessities can only be 
ascertained by empirical, but his due by analytical investiga- 

observed, not more in operations carried on in Fritz's head, than 
in operations carried on in his armies' heart. " No limit can be set 
to the importance of Wf'r^ thought." Perhaps not ! Nay, suppose 
some day it should turn out that "mere" thought was in itself a 
recommendable object of production, and that all Material production 
was only a step toward this more precious Immaterial one ? 



58 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

tion. In the one case, you try your answer to the sum like 
a puzzled schoolboy — till you find one that fits ; in the 
other, you bring out your result within certain limits, by 
process of calculation. 

Supposing, then, the just wages of any quantity of given 
labor to have been ascertained, let us examine the first 
results of just and unjust payment, when in favor of the 
purchaser or employer ; i. e. when two men are ready to 
do the work, and only one wants to have it done. 

The unjust purchaser forces the two to bid against each 
other till he has reduced their demand to its lowest terms. 
Let us assume that the lowest bidder offers to do the work 
at half its just price. 

The purchaser employs him, and does not employ the 
other. The first or apparent result is. therefore, that one 
of the two men is left out of employ, or to starvation, just 
as definitely as by the just procedure of giving fair price to 
the best workman. The various writers who endeavored 
to invalidate the positions of my first paper never saw this, 
and assumed that the unjust hirer employed both. He 
employs both no more than the just hirer. The only differ- 
ence (in the outset) is that the just man pays sufficiently, the 
unjust man insufficiently, for the labor of the single person 
employed. 

I say, "in the outset ;" for this first or apparent differ- 
ence is not the actual difference. By the unjust procedure, 
half the proper price of the work is left in the hands of the 
employer. This enables him to hire another man at the 
same unjust rate, on some other kind of work ; and the 
final result is that he has two men working for him at half 
price, and two are out of employ. 

By the just procedure, the whole price of the first piece 
of work goes in the hands of the man who does it. No 



"UNTO THIS last: 



59 



surplus being left in the employer's hands, he cannot hire 
another man for another piece of labor. But by precisely 
so much as his power is diminished, the hired workman's 
power is increased ; that is to say, by the additional half 
of the price he has received ; which additional half he has 
the power of using to employ another man in his service. 
I will suppose, for the moment, the least favorable, though 
quite probable, case — that, though justly treated himself, he 
yet will act unjustly to his subordinate ; and hire at half-price, 
if he can. The final result will then be, that one man 
works for the employer, at just price ; one for the work- 
man, at half-price ; and two, as in the first case, are still out 
of employ. These two, as I said before, are out of employ 
in both cases. The difference between the just and unjust 
procedure does not lie in the number of men hired, but in 
the price paid to them, and the persotis by whom it is paid. 
The essential difference, that which I want the reader to 
see clearly, is, that in the unjust case, two men work for 
one, the first hirer. In the just case, one man works for 
the fir^t hirer, one for the person hired, and so on, down 
or up through the various grades of service ; the influence 
being carried forward by justice, and arrested by injustice. 
The universal and constant action of justice in this matter 
is, therefore, to diminish the power of wealth, in the hands 
of one individual, over masses of men, and to distribute it 
through a chain of men. The actual power exerted by the 
wealth is the same in both cases ; but by injustice it is put 
all in one man's hands, so that he directs at once and with 
equal force the labor of a circle of men about him ; by the 
just procedure, he is permitted to touch the nearest only, 
through whom, with diminished force, modified by new 
minds, the energy of the wealth passes on to others, and so 
till it exhausts itself. 



6o THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

The immediate operation of justice in this respect is, 
therefore, to diminish the power of wealth, first in acqui- 
sition of luxury, and, secondly, in exercise of moral influence. 
The employer cannot concentrate so multitudinous labor 
on his own interests, nor can he subdue so multitudinous 
mind to his own will. But the secondary operation of 
justice is not less important. The insufficient payment of 
the group of men working for one, places each under a 
maximum of difficulty in rising above his position. The 
tendency of the system is to check advancement. But the 
sufficient or just payment, distributed through a descending 
series of offices or grades of labor,* gives each subordinated 
person fair and sufficient means of rising in the social scale, 
if he chooses to use them ; and thus not only diminishes 
the immediate power of wealth, but removes the worst 
disabilities of poverty. 

*I am sorry to lose time by answering, however curtly, the 
equivocations of the writers who sought to obscure the instances 

fiven of regulated labor in the first of these papers, by confusing 
inds, ranks, and quantities of labor with its qualities. I never said 
that a colonel should have the same pay as a private, nor a bishop 
the same pay as a curate. Neither did I say that more work ought 
to be paid as less work (so that the curate of a parish of two thou- 
sand souls should have no more than the curate of a parish of five 
hundred). But I said that, so far as you employ it at all, bad work 
should be paid no less than good work ; as a bad clergyman yet 
takes his tithes, a bad physician takes his fee, and a bad lawyer his 
costs. And this, as will be further shown in the conclusion, I said, 
and say, partly because the best work never was nor ever will be, 
done for money at all ; but chiefly because, the moment people 
know they have to pay the bad and good alike, they will try to 
discern the one from the other, and not use the bad. A sagacious 
writer in the Scotsman asks me if I should like any common scrib- 
bler to be paid by Messrs. Smith, Elder and Co. as their good 
authors are. I should, if they employed him — but would seriously 
recommend them, for the scribbler's sake, as well as their own, not 
to employ him. The quantity of its money which the country at 
present invests in scribbling is not, in the outcome of it, econom- 
ically spent ; and even the highly ingenious person to whom this 
question occurred, might perhaps have been more beneficially 
employed than in printing it. 



"UNTO THIS LAST" 6l 

It is on this vital problem that the entire destiny of the 
laborer is ultimately dependent. Many minor interests 
may sometimes appear to interfere with it, but all branch 
from it. For instance, considerable agitation is often caused 
in the minds of the lower classes when they discover the 
share which they nominally, and, to all appearance, actually, 
pay out of their wages in taxation (I believe thirty-five or 
forty per cent.). This sounds very grievous ; but in reality 
the laborer does not pay it, but his employer. If the work- 
man had not to pay it, his wages would be less by just that 
sum : competition would still reduce them to the lowest 
rate at which life was possible. Similarly the lower orders 
agitated for the repeal of the corn laws, * thinking they 

* I have to acknowledge an interesting communication on the 
subject of free-trade from Paisley (for a short letter from "A Well- 
wisher" at , my thanks are yet more due). But the Scottish 

writer will, I fear, be disagreeably surprised to hear, that I am, and 
always have been, an utterly fearless and unscrupulous free-trader. 
Seven years ago, speaking of the various signs of infancy in the 
European mind {Stones of Venice, vol. iii., p. i68), I wrote : "The 
first principles of commerce were acknowledged by the English 
parliament only a few months ago, and in its free-trade measures, 
and are still so little understood by the million, that no nation dares 
to abolish its custom-houses." 

It will be observed that I do not admit even the idea of reci- 
procity. Let other nations, if they like, keep their ports shut ; 
every wise nation will throw its own open. It is not the opening 
them, but a sudden, inconsiderate, and blunderingly experimental 
manner of opening them, which does the harm. If you have been 
protecting a manufacture for long series of years, you must not 
take protection off in a moment, so as to throw every one of its 
operatives at once out of employ, any more than you must take all 
its wrappings off a feeble child at once in cold weather, though the 
cumber of them may have been radically injuring its health. Little 
by little, you must restore it to freedom and to air. 

Most people's minds are in curious confusion on the subject of 
free trade, because they suppose it to imply enlarged competition. 
" Protection " (among various other mischievous functions) endeav- 
ors to enable one country to compete with another in the produc- 
tion of an article at a disadvantage. When trade is entirely free, 
no country can be competed with in the articles for the production 
of which it is naturally calculated ; nor can it compete with any 



62 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

would be better off if bread were cheaper; never perceiving 
that as soon as bread was permanently cheaper, wages 
would permanently fall in precisely that proportion. The 
corn laws were rightly repealed ; not, however, because 
they directly oppressed the poor, but because they indirectly 
oppressed them in causing a large quantity of their labor 
to be consumed unproductively. So also unnecessary 
taxation oppresses them, through destruction of capital, 
but the destiny of the poor depends primarily always on 
this one question of dueness of wages. Their distress 
(irrespectively of that caused by sloth, minor error, or 
crime) arises on the grand scale from the two reacting 
forces of competition and oppression. There is not yet, 
nor will yet for ages be, any real over-population in the 
world ; but a local over-population, or, more accurately, 
a degree of population locally unmanageable under existing 
circumstances for want of forethought and sufficient machin- 
ery, necessarily shows itself by pressure of competition ; 
and the taking advantage of this competition by the pur- 
chaser to obtain their labor unjustly cheap, consummates 
at once their suffering and his own ; for in this (as I believe 
in every other kind of slavery) the oppressor suffers at last 
more than the oppressed, and those magnificent lines of 
Pope, even in all their force, fall short of the truth — 

' ' Yet, to be just to these poor men of pelf. 
Each does but hate his neighbor as himself : 
Damned to the mines, an equal fate betides 
The slave that digs it, and the slave that hides." 

other in the production of articles for which it is not naturally cal- 
culated. Tuscany, for instance, cannot compete with England in 
steel, nor England with Tuscany in oil. They must exchange 
their steel and oil. Which exchange should be as frank and free 
as honesty and the sea-winds can make it. Competition, indeed, 
arises at first, and sharply, in order to prove which is strongest in 
any given manufacture possible to both; this point once ascertained, 
competition is at an end. 



"UNTO THIS LAST." 63 

The collateral and reversionary operations of justice in 
this matter I shall examine hereafter (it being needful first 
to define the nature of value) ; proceeding then to consider 
within what practical terms a juster system may be estab- 
lished ; and ultimately the vexed question of the destinies 
of the unemployed workmen.* Lest, however, the reader 
should be alarmed at some of the issues to which our inves- 
tigations seem to be tending, as if in their bearing against 
the power of wealth they had something in common with 
those of Socialism, I wish him to know, in accurate terms, 
one or two of the main points which I have in view. 

Whether Socialism has made more progress among the 
army and navy (where payment is made on my principles), 
or among the manufacturing operatives (who are paid on 
my opponents' principles), I leave it to those opponents to 



* I should be glad if the reader would first clear the ground for 
himself so far as to determine whether the difficulty lies in getting 
the work or getting the pay for it. Does he consider occupation 
itself to be an expensive luxury, difficult of attainment, of which 
too little is to be found in the world ? or is it rather that, while in 
the enjoyment even of the most athletic delight, men must never- 
theless be maintained, and this maintenance is not always forth- 
coming ? We must be clear on this head before going further, as 
most people are loosely in the habit of talking of the difficulty of 
" finding employment." Is it employment that we want to find, or 
support during employment ? Is it idleness we wish to put an end 
to, or hunger? We have to take up both questions in succession, 
only not both at the same time. No doubt that work is a luxury, 
and a very great one. It is, indeed, at once a luxury and a neces- 
sity ; no man can retain either health of mind or body without it. 
So profoundly do T feel this, that, as will be seen in the sequel, one 
of the principal objects I would recommend to benevolent and 
practical persons, is to induce rich people to seek for a larger 
quantity of this luxury than they at present possess. Nevertheless, 
it appears by experience that even this healthiest of pleasures may 
be indulged in to excess, and that human beings are just as liable 
to surfeit of labor as to surfeit of meat ; so that, as on the one hand, 
it may be charitable to provide, for some people, lighter dinner, 
and more work, for otiiers it maybe equally expedient to provide 
lighter work, and more dinner. 



64 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

ascertain and declare. Whatever their conclusion may be, 
I think it necessary to answer for myself only this : that if 
there be any one point insisted on throughout my works 
more frequently than another, that one point is the impos- 
sibility of Equality. My continual aim has been to show 
the eternal superiority of some men to others, sometimes 
even of one man to all others ; and to show also the advis- 
ability of appointing more such persons or person to guide, 
to lead, or on occasion even to compel and subdue, their 
inferiors, according to their own better knowledge and 
wiser will. My principles of Political Economy were all 
involved in a single phrase spoken three years ago at 
Manchester: "Soldiers of the Plowshare as well as soldiers 
of the Sword:" and they were all summed in a single 
sentence in the last volume of Modern Painters — " Govern- 
ment and cooperation are in all things the Laws of Life ; 
Anarchy and competition the Laws of Death." 

And with respect to the mode in which these general 
principles affect the secure possession of property, so far am 
I from invalidating such security, that the whole gist of 
these papers will be found ultimately to aim at an extension 
in its range ; and whereas it has long been known and 
declared that the poor have no right to the property of the 
rich, I wish it also to be known and declared that the rich 
have no right to the property of the poor. 

But that the working of the system which I have 
undertaken to develop would in many ways shorten the 
apparent and direct, though not the unseen and collateral, 
power, both of wealth, as the Lady of Pleasure, and of 
capital as the Lord of Toil, I do not deny : on the contrary, 
I affirm it in all joyfulness ; knowing that the attraction of 
riches is already too strong, as their authority is already 
too weighty, for the reason of mankind. I said in my last 



" UNTO THIS LAST." 65 

paper that nothing in history had ever been so disgraceful 
to human intellect as the acceptance among us of the 
common doctrines of political economy as a science. I 
have many grounds for saying this, but one of the chief 
may be given in few words. I know no previous instance 
in history of a nation's establishing a systematic disobe- 
dience to the first principles of its professed religion. The 
writings which we (verbally) esteem as divine, not only 
denounce the love of money as the source of all evil, and 
as an idolatry abhorred of the Deity, but declare mammon 
service to be the accurate and irreconcilable opposite of 
God's service : and, whenever they speak of riches absolute, 
and poverty absolute, declare woe to the rich, and blessing 
to the poor. Whereupon we forthwith investigate a science 
of becoming rich, as the shortest road to national prosperity. 
"Tai Cristian danner^ I'Etiope, 
Quando si partiranno i due collegi, 

L'UNO IN ETERNO RICCO, E L'ALTRO INOPK." 



66 ^rHE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 



ESSAY IV. 

AD VALOREM. 

IN the last paper we saw that just payment of labor con- 
sisted in a sum of money which would approximately 

obtain equivalent labor at a future time : we have now 
to examine the means of obtaining such equivalence. Which 
question involves the definition of Value, Wealth, Price, 
and Produce. 

None of these terms are yet defined so as to be 
understood by the public. But the last. Produce, which 
one might have thought the clearest of all, is, in use, the 
most ambiguous ; and the examination of the kind of 
ambiguity attendant on its present employment will best 
open the way to our work. 

In his chapter on Capital,* Mr. J. S. Mill instances, as a 
capitalist, a hardware manufacturer, who, having intended 
to spend a certain portion of the proceeds of his business 
in buying plate and jewels, changes his mind, and "pays it 
as wages to additional workpeople. ' ' The effect is stated 
by Mr. Mill to be, that "more food is appropriated to the 
consumption of productive laborers." 

Now, I do not ask, though, had I written this paragraph, 
it would surely have been asked of me. What is to become 
of the silversmiths? If they are truly unproductive persons, 
we will acquiesce in their extinction. And though in 

* Book I., chap, iv., s. 1. To save space, my future references 
to Mr. Mill's work will be by numerals only, as in this instance, I. 
iv. I, Ed. in 2 vols. 8vo. Parker, 1848. 



"UNTO THIS last:' 67 

another part of the same passage, the hardware merchant is 
supposed also to dispense with a number of servants, whose 
' ' food is thus set free for productive purposes, " I do not 
inquire what will be the effect, painful or otherwise, upon 
the servants, of this emmacipation of their food. But I 
very seriously inquire why ironware is produce, and silver- 
ware is not ? That the merchant consumes the one, and 
sells the other, certainly does not constitute the difference, 
unless it can be shown (which, indeed, I perceive it to be 
becoming daily more and more the aim of tradesmen to 
show) that commodities are made to be sold, and not to be 
consumed. The merchant is an agent of conveyance to the 
consumer in one case, and is himself the consumer in the 
other : * but the laborers are in either case equally pro- 
ductive, since they have produced goods to the same value, 
if the hardware and the plate are both goods. 

And what distinction separates them? It is indeed 
possible that in the "comparative estimate of the moralist," 
with which Mr. Mill says political economy has nothing to 
do (III. i. 2) a steel fork might appear a more substantial 
production than a silver one : we may grant also that 
knives, no less than forks, are good produce ; and scythes 
and plowshares serviceable articles. But, how of bayonets ? 
Supposing the hardware merchant to effect large sales of 

* If Mr. Mill had wished to show the diflference in result between 
consumption and sale, he should have represented the hardware 
merchant as consuming his own goods instead of selling them ; 
similarly, the silver merchant as consuming his own goods instead 
of selling them. Had he done this, he would have made his 
position clearer, though less tenable ; and perhaps this was the 
position he really intended to take, tacitly involving his theory, 
elsewhere stated, and shown in the sequel of this paper to be false, 
that demand for commodities is not demand for labor. But by the 
most diligent scrutiny of the paragraph now under examination, I 
cannot determine whether it is a fallacy pure and simple, or the 
half of one fallacy supported by the whole of a greater one ; so that 
I treat it here on the kinder assumption that it is one fallacy only. 



68 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN R US KIN. 

these, by help of the ' ' setting free ' ' of the food of his 
servants and his silversmith, — is he still employing produc- 
tive laborers, or, in Mr. Mill's words, laborers who increase 
"the stock of permanent means of enjoyment" (I. iii. 4). 
Or if, instead of bayonets, he supply bombs, will not the 
absolute and final "enjoyment" of even these energetically 
productive articles (each of which costs ten pounds)* be 
dependent on a proper choice of time and place for their 
enfantement ; choice, that is to say, depending on those 
philosophical considerations with which political economy 
has nothing to do?t 

I should have regretted the need of pointing out 
inconsistency in any portion of Mr. Mill's work, had not 
the value of his work proceeded from its inconsistencies. 
He deserves honor among economists by inadvertently 
disclaiming the principles which he states, and tacitly 
introducing the moral considerations with which he declares 
his science has no connection. Many of his chapters are, 
therefore, true and valuable ; and the only conclusions of 
his which I have to dispute are those which follow from his 
premises. 

Thus, the idea which lies at the root of the passage we 
have just been examining, namely, that labor applied to 
produce luxuries will not support so many persons as labor 
applied to produce useful articles, is entirely true ; but the 
instance given fails — and in four directions of failure at 

* I take Mr. Helps' estimate in his essay on War. 

t Also when the wrought silver vases of Spain were dashed to 
fragments by our custom-house officers, because bullion might be 
imported free of duty, but not brains, was the axe that broke them 
productive ? — the artist who wrought them unproductive ? Or again. 
If the woodman's axe is productive, is the executioner's? as also, 
if the hemp of a cable be productive, does not the productiveness 
of hemp in a halter depend on its moral more than on its material 
application ? 



''UNTO THIS LAST." 69 

once — because Mr. Mill has not defined the real meaning 
of usefulness. The definition which he has given — "capac- 
ity to satisfy a desire, or serve a purpose" (III. i. 2) — 
applies equally to the iron and silver ; while the true 
definition — which he has not given, but which nevertheless 
underlies the false verbal definition in his mind, and comes 
out once or twice by accident (as in the words ' ' any 
support to life or strength" in I. i, 5) — applies to some 
articles of iron, but not to others, and to some articles of 
silver, but not to others. It applies to plows, but not to 
bayonets ; and to forks, but not to filigree. * 

The eliciting of the true definition will give us the reply 
to our first question, ' ' What is value ? ' ' respecting which, 
however, we must first hear the popular statements. 

"The word 'value,' when used without adjunct, always 
means, in political economy, value in exchange" (Mill, III. 
i. 3). So that, if two ships cannot exchange their rudders, 
their rudders are, in politico-economic language, of no 
value to either. 

But "the subject of political economy is wealth." — 
(Preliminary remarks, page i.) 

And wealth "consists of all useful and agreeable objects 
which possess exchangeable value." — (Preliminary remarks, 
page 10.) 

It appears, then, according to Mr. Mill, that usefulness 
and agreeableness underlie the exchange value, and must 
be ascertained to exist in the thing, before we can esteem 
it an object of wealth. 

Now, the economical usefulness of a thing depends not 
merely on its own nature, but on the number of people who 
can and will use it. A horse is useless, and therefore 

* Filigree : that is to say, generally, omament dependent on 
complexity, not on art. 



70 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

unsaleable, if no one can ride, — a sword if no one can 
strike, and meat, if no one can eat. Thus every material 
utility depends on its relative human capacity. 

Similarly : The agreeableness of a thing depends not 
merely on its own likeableness, but on the number of 
people who can be got to like it. The relative agreeable- 
ness, and therefore saleableness, of " a pot of the smallest 
ale," and of "Adonis painted by a running brook," depends 
virtually on the opinion of Demos, in the shape of Chris- 
topher Sly. That is to say, the agreeableness of a thing 
depends on its relative human disposition.* Therefore, 
political economy, being a science of wealth, must be a 
science respecting human capacities and dispositions. But 
moral considerations have nothing to do with political 
economy (III. i. 2). Therefore, moral considerations have 
nothing to do with human capacities and dispositions. 

I do not wholly like the look of this conclusion from 
Mr. Mill's statements : — let us try Mr. Ricardo's. 

"Utility is not the measure of exchangeable value, 
though it is absolutely essential to it." — (Chap. I. sect, i.) 

♦These statements sound crude in their brevity; but will be 
found of the utmost importance when they are developed. Thus, 
in the above instance, economists have never perceived that disposi- 
tion to buy is a wholly moral element in demand : that is to say, 
when you give a man half-a-crown, it depends on his disposition 
whether he is rich or poor with it — whether he will buy disease, 
ruin, and hatred, or buy health, advancement, and domestic love. 
And thus the agreeableness or exchange value of ever>' offered 
commodity depends on production, not merely of the commodity, 
but of buyers of it ; therefore on the education of buyers and on all 
the moral elements by which their disposition to buy this, or that, 
is formed. I will illustrate and expand into final consequences 
every one of these definitions in its place : at present they can only 
be given with extremest brevity ; for in order to put the subject at 
once in a connected form before the reader, I have thrown into 
one, the opening definitions of four chapters ; namely, of that on 
Value(" Ad Valorem "); on Price (" Thirty Pieces "); on Production 
(" Demeter ") ; and on Economy ("The Law of the House "). 



"UNTO THIS last:' 71 

Essential in what degree, Mr. Ricardo? There may be 
greater and less degrees of utility. Meat, for instance, may 
be so good as to be fit for any one to eat, or so bad as to 
be fit for no one to eat. What is the exact degree of good- 
ness which is "essential" to its exchangeable value, but 
not "the measure" of it? How good must the meat be, 
in order to possess any exchangeable value ; and how bad 
must it be — (I wish this were a settled question in London 
markets) — in order to possess none? 

There appears to be some hitch, I think, in the working 
even of Mr. Ricardo' s principles ; but let him take his own 
example. ' ' Suppose that in the early stages of society the 
bows and arrows of the hunter were of equal value with the 
implements of the fisherman. Under such circumstances 
the value of the deer, the produce of the hunter's day's 
labor, would be exactly ' ' (italics mine) ' ' equal to the value 
of the fish, the product of the fisherman's day's labor. 
The comparative value of the fish and game would be 
entirely regulated by the quantity of labor realized in each." 
(Ricardo, chap. iii. On Value). 

Indeed ! Therefore, if the fisherman catches one sprat, 
and the huntsman one deer, one sprat will be equal in value 
to one deer ; but if the fisherman catches no sprat, and the 
huntsman two deer, no sprat will be equal in value to two 
deer? 

Nay ; but — Mr. Ricardo's supporters may say — he 
means, on an average ; — if the average product of a day's 
work of fisher and hunter be one fish and one deer, the one 
fish will always be equal in value to the one deer. 

Might I inquire the species of fish. Whale? or 
whitebait ? * 

* Perhaps it may be said, in further support of Mr. Ricardo, that 
he meant, "when the utility is constant or given, the price varies as 



72 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

It would be waste of time to pursue these fallacies 
further ; we will seek for a true definition. 

Much store has been set for centuries upon the use of 
our English classical education. It were to be wished that 
our well-educated merchants recalled to mind always this 
much of their Latin schooling, — that the nominative of 
valorem (a word already sufficiently familiar to them) is 

the quantity of labor." If he meant this, he should have said it ; 
but, had he meant it, he could have hardly missed the necessary 
result, that utility would be one measure of price (which he expressly 
denies it to be) ; and that, to prove saleableness, he had to prove a 
given quantity of utility, as well as a given quantity of labor ; to wit, 
in his own instance, that the deer and fish would each feed the same 
number of men, for the same number of days, with equal pleasure 
to their palates. The fact is, he did not know what he meant him- 
self. The general idea which he had derived from commercial 
experience, without being able to analyze it, was, that when the 
demand is constant, the price varies as the quantity of labor 
required for production ; or,— using the formula I gave in last 
paper — when y is constant, x y varies as x. But demand never is, 
nor can be, ultimately constant, if x varies distinctly ; for, as price 
rises, consumers fall away ; and as soon as there is a monopoly (and 
all scarcity is a form of monopoly ; so that every commodity is 
affected occasionally by some color of monopoly), jv becomes the 
most influential condition of the price. Thus the price of a painting 
depends less on its merits than on the interest taken in it by the 
public ; the price of singing less on the labor of the singer than the 
number of persons who desire to hear him ; and the price of gold 
less on the scarcity which affects it in common with cerium or 
iridium, than on the sunlight color and unalterable purity by which 
it attracts the admiration and answers the trusts of mankind. 

It must be kept in mind, however, that I use the word ' ' demand " 
in a somewhat different sense from economists usually. They mean 
by it "the quantity of a thing sold." I mean by it "the force of 
the buyer's capable intention to buy." In good English, a person's 
" demand " signifies, not what he gets, but what he asks for. 

Economists also do not notice that objects are not valued by 
absolute bulk or weight, but by such bulk and weight as is neces- 
sary to bring them into use. They say, for instance, that water 
bears no price in the market. It is true that a cupful does not, but a 
lake does : just as a handful of dust does not, but an acre does. 
And were it possible to make even the possession of the cupful or 
handful permanent (/. e. to find a place for them,) the earth and sea 
would be bought up by handfuls and cupfuls. 



''UNTO THIS LAST" 73 

valor; a word which, therefore, ought to be familiar to 
them. Valor, from valere, to be well, or strong (vyta/vw) ; — 
strong, in life (if a man), or valiant ; strong, for life (if a 
thing), or valuable. To be "valuable," therefore, is to 
' ' avail toward life. ' ' A truly valuable or availing thing is 
that which leads to life with its whole strength. In propor- 
tion as it does not lead to life, or as its strength is broken, 
it is less valuable ; in proportion as it leads away from life, 
it is unvaluable or malignant. 

The value of a thing, therefore, is independent of opinion, 
and of quantity. Think what you will of it, gain how much 
you may of it, the value of the thing itself is neither greater 
nor less. Forever it avails, or avails not ; no estimate can 
raise, no disdain depress, the power which it holds from the 
Maker of things and of men. 

The real science of political economy, which has yet to 
be distinguished from the bastard science, as medicine from 
witchcraft, and astronomy from astrology, is that which 
teaches nations to desire and labor for the things that lead 
to life ; and which teaches them to scorn and destroy the 
things that lead to destruction. And if, in a state of infancy, 
they suppose indifferent things, such as excrescences of 
shell-fish, and pieces of blue and red stone, to be valuable, 
and spend large measure of the labor which ought to be 
employed for the extension and ennobling of life, in diving 
or digging for them, and cutting them into various shapes, — 
or if, in the same state of infancy, they imagine precious 
and beneficent things, such as air, light, and cleanliness, to 
be valueless, — or if, finally, they imagine the conditions of 
their own existence, by which alone they can truly possess 
or use anything, such, for instance, as peace, trust, and love, 
to be prudently exchangeable, when the market offers, for 
gold, iron, or excrescences of shells — the great and only 



74 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

science of Political Economy teaches them, in all these cases, 
what is vanity, and what substance ; and how the service 
of Death, the Lord of Waste, and of eternal emptiness, 
differs from the service of Wisdom, the Lady of Saving, 
and of eternal fullness ; she who has said, ' ' I will cause 
those that love me to inherit Substance ; and I will Fill 
their treasures. ' ' 

The "Lady of Saving," in a profounder sense than 
that of the savings' bank, though that is a good one : 
Madonna della Salute, — Lady of Health — which, though 
commonly spoken of as if separate from wealth, is indeed a 
part of wealth. This word, ' ' wealth, ' ' it will be remembered, 
is the next we have to define. 

"To be wealthy," says Mr. Mill, is "to have a large 
stock of useful articles." 

I accept this definition. Only let us perfectly understand 
it. My opponents often lament my not giving them enough 
logic : I fear I must at present use a little more than they 
will like ; but this business of Political Economy is no light 
one, and we must allow no loose terms in it. 

We have, therefore, to ascertain in the above definition, 
first, what is the meaning of "having," or the nature of 
Possession. Then what is the meaning of "useful," or the 
nature of Utility. 

And first of possession. At the crossing of the transepts 
of Milan Cathedral has lain, for three hundred years, the 
embalmed body of St. Carlo Borromeo. It holds a golden 
crosier, and has a cross of emeralds on its breast. Admit- 
ting the crosier and emeralds to be useful articles, is the 
body to be considered as ' ' having ' ' them ? Do they, in 
the politico-economical sense of property, belong to it? If 
not, and if we may, therefore, conclude generally that a 
dead body cannot possess property, what degree and 



"UNTO THIS last:' 75 

period of animation in the body will render possession 
possible ? 

As thus : lately in a wreck of a Californian ship, one of 
the passengers fastened a belt about him with two hundred 
pounds of gold in it, with which he was found afterward at 
the bottom. Now, as he was sinking — had he the gold? 
or had the gold him ?* 

And if, instead of sinking him in the sea by its weight, 
the gold had struck him on the forehead, and thereby 
caused incurable disease — suppose palsy or insanity, — 
would the gold in that case have been more a " possession " 
than in the first? Without pressing the inquiry up through 
instances of gradual increasing vital power over the gold 
(which I will, however, give, if they are asked for), I pre- 
sume the reader will see that possession, or "having," is 
not an absolute, but a gradated, power ; and consists not 
only in the quantity or nature of the thing possessed, but 
also (and in a greater degree) in its suitableness to the 
person possessing it, and in his vital power to use it. 

And our definition of Wealth, expanded, becomes : 
"The possession of useful articles, which we can use.'' 
This is a very serious change. For wealth, instead of 
depending merely on a "have," is thus seen to depend on 
a "can." Gladiator's death, on a "habet;" but soldier's 
victory, and state's salvation, on a "quo plurimum posset." 
(Liv. VII. 6.) And what we reasoned of only as accumu- 
lation of material, is seen to demand also accumulation of 
capacity. 

So much for our verb. Next for our adjective. What 
is the meaning of ' ' useful ? ' ' 

The inquiry is closely connected with the last. For 

* Compare George Herbert, The Church Porch, Stanza 28. 



76 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN 

what is capable of use in the hands of some persons, is 
capable, in the hands of others, of the opposite of use, 
called commonly, "from -use or ab-use." And it depends 
on the person, much more than on the article, whether its 
usefulness or ab-usefulness will be the quality developed in 
it Thus, wine, which the Greeks, in their Bacchus, made, 
rightly, the type of all passion, and which, when used, 
' ' cheereth god and man ' ' (that is to say, strengthens both 
the divine life, or reasoning power, and the earthly, or 
carnal power, of man) ; yet, when abused, becomes ' ' Dionu- 
sos," hurtful especially to the divine part of man, or reason. 
And again, the body itself, being equally liable to use and 
to abuse, and, when rightly disciplined, serviceable to the 
State, both for war and labor ; — but when not disciplined, 
or abused, valueless to the State, and capable only of 
continuing the private or single existence of the individual 
(and that but feebly) — the Greeks called such a body an 
"idiotic" or "private" body, from their word signifying a 
person employed in no way directly useful to the State ; 
whence, finally, our "idiot," meaning a person entirely 
occupied with his own concerns. 

Hence, it follows, that if a thing is to be useful, it must 
be not only of an availing nature, but in availing hands. 
Or, in accurate terms, usefulness is value in the hands of 
the valiant ; so that this science of wealth being, as we have 
just seen, when regarded as the science of Accumulation, 
accumulative of capacity as well as of material, — when 
regarded as the Science of Distribution, is distribution not 
absolute, but discriminate ; not of every thing to every man, 
but of the right thing to the right man. A difficult science, 
dependent on more than arithmetic. 

Wealth, therefore, is "the possession of the valua- 
ble BY the valiant ; ' ' and in considering it as a power 



"UNTO THIS last:' 77 

existing in a nation, the two elements, the value of the 
thing, and the valor of its possessor, must be estimated 
together. Whence it appears that many of the persons 
commonly considered wealthy, are in reality no more 
wealthy than the locks of their own strong boxes are ; they 
being inherently and eternally incapable of wealth; and 
operating for the nation, in an economical point of view, 
either as pools of dead water, and eddies in a stream 
(which, so long as the stream flows, are useless, or serve 
only to drown people, but may become of importance in a 
state of stagnation, should the stream dry); or else, as 
dams in a river, of which the ultimate service depends not 
on the dam, but the miller; or else, as mere accidental 
stays and impediments, acting, not as wealth, but (for we 
ought to have a correspondent term) as "illth," causing 
various devastation and trouble around them in all direc- 
tions; or lastly, act not at all, but are merely animated 
conditions of delay, (no use being possible of anything they 
have until they are dead,) in which last condition they are 
nevertheless often useful as delays, and "impedimenta," if 
a nation is apt to move too fast. 

This being so, the difficulty of the true science of 
Political Economy lies not merely in the need of developing 
manly character to deal with material value, but in the fact, 
that while the manly character and material value only 
form wealth by their conjunction, they have nevertheless a 
mutually destructive operation on each other. For the 
manly character is apt to ignore, or even cast away, the 
material value : — whence that of Pope : — 

" Sure, of qualities demanding praise 
More go to ruin fortunes, than to raise." 

And on the other hand, the material value is apt to under- 
mine the manly character ; so that it must be our work, in 



j8 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

the issue, to examine what evidence there is of the effect of 
wealth on the minds of its possessors ; also, what kind of 
person it is who usually sets himself to obtain wealth, and 
succeeds in doing so ; and whether the world owes more 
gratitude to rich or to poor men, either for their moral 
influence upon it, or for chief goods, discoveries, and 
practical advancements. I may, however, anticipate future 
conclusion so far as to state that in a community regulated 
only by laws of demand and supply, and protected from 
open violence, the persons who become rich are, generally 
speaking, industrious, resolute, proud, covetous, prompt, 
methodical, sensible, unimaginative, insensitive, and igno- 
rant. The persons who remain poor are the entirely foolish, 
the entirely wise,* the idle, the reckless, the humble, the 
thoughtful, the dull, the imaginative, the sensitive, the well- 
informed, the improvident, the irregularly and impulsively 
wicked, the clumsy knave, the open thief, and the entirely 
merciful, just, and godly person. 

Thus far then of wealth. Next, we have to ascertain 
the nature of Price ; that is to say, of exchange value, and 
its expression by currencies. 

Note first, of exchange, there can be no profit in it. It 
is only in labor there can be profit — that is to say a ' ' mak- 
ing in advance," or "making in favor of" (from proficio). 
In exchange, there is only advantage, /. e. a bringing of 
vantage or power to the exchanging persons. Thus, one 
man, by sowing and reaping, turns one measure of com 
into two measures. That is Profit. Another by digging 
and forging, turns one spade into two spades. That is 
Profit. But the man who has two measures of corn wants 

* "<} Zet)f d^TTow ireveTOf." — Aris. Plut., 582. Itwould but weaken 
the grand words to lean on the preceding ones: — "5n rov flAot/rov 
Trapixu (ie?.Tiovac, dvdpag, koI t^v yvufitjv, kcH tt^v Idiav." 



UNTO THIS last:' 



79 



sometimes to dig ; and the man who has two spades wants 
sometimes to eat : — They exchange the gained grain for 
the gained tool ; and both are the better for the exchange ; 
but though there is much advantage in the transaction, 
there is no profit. Nothing is constructed or produced. 
Only that which had been before constructed is given to 
the person by whom it can be used. If labor is necessary 
to effect the exchange, that labor is in reality involved in 
the production, and, like all other labor, bears profit. 
Whatever number of men are concerned in the manufac- 
ture, or in the conveyance, have share in the profit ; but 
neither the manufacture nor the conveyance are the 
exchange, and in the exchange itself there is no profit. 

There may, however, be acquisition, which is a very 
different thing. If, in the exchange, one man is able to 
give what cost him little labor for what has cost the other 
much, he ' ' acquires ' ' a certain quantity of the produce of 
the other's labor. And precisely what he acquires, the 
other loses. In mercantile language, the person who thus 
acquires is commonly said to have "made a profit;" and 
I believe that many of our merchants are seriously under 
the impression that it is possible for everybody, somehow, 
to make a profit in this manner. Whereas, by the unfor- 
tunate constitution of the world we live in, the laws both 
of matter and motion have quite rigorously forbidden 
universal acquisition of this kind. Profit, or material gain, 
is attainable only by construction or by discovery ; not by 
exchange. Whenever material gain follows exchange, for 
e\ery plus there is precisely equal minus. 

Unhappily for the progress of the science of Political 
Economy, the plus quantities, or, — if I may be allowed to 
coin an awkward plural — the pluses, make a very positive 
and venerable appearance in the world, so that every one 



8o THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN 

is eager to learn the science which produces results so 
magnificent ; whereas the minuses have, on the other hand, 
a tendency to retire into back streets, and other places of 
shade, — or even to get themselves wholly and finally put 
out of sight in graves : which renders the algebra of this 
science peculiar, and difficultly legible : a large number of 
its negative signs being written by the account-keeper in a 
kind of red ink, which starvation thins, and makes strangely 
pale, or even quite invisible ink, for the present. 

The Science of Exchange, or, as I hear it has been 
proposed to call it, of "Catallactics," considered as one of 
gain, is, therefore, simply nugatory ; but considered as one 
of acquisition, it is a very curious science, differing in its 
ckta and basis from every other science known. Thus : — 
If I can exchange a needle with a savage for a diamond, 
my power of doing so depends either on the savage's 
ignorance of social arrangements in Europe, or on his want 
of power to take advantage of them, by selling the diamond 
to any one else for more needles. If, further, I make the 
bargain as completely advantageous to myself as possible, 
by giving to the savage a needle with no eye in it (reaching, 
thus, a sufficiently satisfactory type of the perfect operation 
of catallactic science), the advantage to me in the entire 
transaction depends wholly upon the ignorance, power- 
lessness, or heedlessness of the person dealt with. Do 
away with these, and catallactic advantage becomes impos- 
sible. So far, therefore, as the science of exchange relates 
to the advantage of one of the exchanging persons only, 
it is founded on the ignorance or incapacity of the opposite 
person. Where these vanish, it also vanishes. It is, there- 
fore, a science founded on nescience, and an art founded on 
artlessness. But all other sciences and arts, except this, 
have for their object the doing away with their opposite 



''UNTO THIS LAST" 8l 

nescience and artlessness. This science, alone of sciences, 
must, by all available means, promulgate and prolong its 
opposite nescience ; otherwise the science itself is impossible. 
It is, therefore, peculiarly and alone, the science of dark- 
ness : probably a bastard science — not by any means a 
divina scientia, but one begotten of another father, that 
father who, advising his children to turn stones into bread, 
is himself employed in turning bread into stones, and who, 
if you ask a fish of him (fish not being producible on his 
estate), can but give you a serpent. 

The general law, then, respecting just or economical 
exchange, is simply this : — There must be advantage on 
both sides (or if only advantage on one, at least no disad- 
vantage on the other) to the persons exchanging; and 
just payment for his time, intelligence, and labor, to any 
intermediate person effecting the transaction (commonly 
called a merchant) : and whatever advantage there is on 
either side, and whatever pay is given to the intermediate 
person, should be thoroughly known to. all concerned. 
All attempt at concealment implies some practice of the 
opposite, or undivine science, founded on nescience. 
Whence another saying of the Jew merchant's — "As a 
nail between the stone joints, so doth sin stick fast between 
buying and selling." Which peculiar riveting of stone 
and timber, in men's dealings with each other, is again 
set forth in the house which was to be destroyed — timber 
and stones together — when Zechariah's roll (more probably 
"curved sword") flew over it: "the curse that goeth 
forth over all the earth upon every one that stealeth and 
holdeth himself guiltless," instantly followed by the vision 
of the Great Measure; — the measure "of the injustice of 
them in all the earth" {avTrj fj adiKia avrdv kv ■nda'q ry y^), 
with the weight of lead for its lid, and the woman, the 



82 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

spirit of wickedness, within it ; — that is to say, Wickedness 
hidden by Dullness, and formalized, outwardly, into ponder- 
ously established cruelty. ' ' It shall be set upon its own 
base in the land of Babel." * 

I have hitherto carefully restricted myself, in speaking 
of exchange, to the use of the term ' ' advantage ; ' ' but that 
term includes two ideas ; the advantage, namely, of getting 
what we need, and that of getting what we wish for. Three- 
fourths of the demands existing in the world are romantic ; 
founded on visions, idealisms, hopes, and affections ; and 
the regulation of the purse is, in its essence, regulation of 
the imagination and the heart. Hence, the right discussion 
of the nature of price is a very high metaphysical and 
physical problem; sometimes to be solved only in a pas- 
sionate manner, as by David in his counting the price of 
the water of the well by the gate of Bethlehem ; but its 
first conditions are the following : — The price of anything 
is the quantity of labor given by the person desiring it, in 
order to obtain possession of it. This price depends on 
four variable quantities. A, The quantity of wish the 
purchaser has for the thing ; opposed to a, the quantity 
of wish the seller has to keep it. B. The quantity of 
labor the purchaser can afford, to obtain the thing ; opposed 
to j3, the quantity of labor the seller can afford, to keep it. 
These quantities are operative only in excess ; i. e. the 
quantity of wish (^) means the quantity of wish for this 
thing, above wish for other things ; and the quantity of 
work (^E) means the quantity which can be spared to get 
this thing from the quantity needed to get other things. 

Phenomena of price, therefore, are intensely complex, 
curious, and interesting — too complex, however, to be 

*Zech. v. II. See note on the passage, at page 120. 



''UNTO THIS LAST." 83 

examined yet ; every one of them, when traced far enough, 
showing itself at last as a part of the bargain of the Poor 
of the Flock (or "flock of slaughter"), "If ye think good 
give ME my price, and if not, forbear" — Zech. xi. 12 ; but 
as the price of everything is to be calculated finally in labor, 
it is necessary to define the nature of that standard. 

Labor is the contest of the life of man with an opposite; 
— the term ' ' life ' ' including his intellect, soul, and physical 
power, contending with question, difficulty, trial, or material 
force. 

Labor is of a higher or lower order, as it includes more 
or fewer of the elements of life : and labor of good quality, 
in any kind, includes always as much intellect and feeling 
as will fully and harmoniously regulate the physical force. 

In speaking of the value and price of labor, it is 
necessary always to understand labor of a given rank and 
quality, as we should speak of gold or silver of a given 
standard. Bad (that is, heartless, inexperienced, or sense- 
less) labor cannot be valued ; it is like gold of uncertain 
alloy, or flawed iron.* 

The quality and kind of labor being given, its value, 
like that of all other valuable things, is invariable. But the 
quantity of it which must be given for other things is 
variable ; and in estimating this variation, the price of 

•Labor which is entirely good of its kind, that is to say, 
effective, or efficient, the Greeks called "weighable," or «f«>c, 
translated usually "worthy," and because thus substantial and 
true, they called its price rtw, the "honorable estimate," of it 
(honorarium): this word being founded on their conception of true 
labor as a divine thing, to be honored with the kind of honor given 
to the gods ; whereas the price of false labor, or of that which led 
away from life, was to be, not honor, but vengeance ; for which 
they reserved another word, attributing the exaction of such price 
to a peculiar goddess, called Tisiphone, the " requiter (or quittance- 
taker) of death ; " a person versed in the highest branches of 
arithmetic, and punctual in her habits ; with whom accounts current 
have been opened also in modern days. 



84 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

Other things must always be counted by the quantity of 
labor; not the price of labor by the quantity of other 
things. 

Thus, if we want to plant an apple sapling in rocky 
ground, it may take two hours' work ; in soft ground, 
perhaps only half an hour. Grant the soil equally good 
for the tree in each case. Then the value of the sapling 
planted by two hours' work is nowise greater than that of 
the sapling planted in half an hour. One will bear no more 
fruit than the other. Also, one half-hour of work is as 
valuable as another half-hour ; nevertheless the one sapling 
has cost four such pieces of work, the other only one. Now 
the proper statement of this fact is, not that the labor on 
the hard ground is cheaper than on the soft ; but that the 
tree is dearer. The exchange value may, or may not, 
afterward depend on this fact. If other people have 
plenty of soft ground to plant in, they will take no 
cognizance of our two hours' labor, in the price they will 
offer for the plant on the rock. And if, through want of 
sufficient botanical science, we have planted an upas-tree 
instead of an apple, the exchange-value will be a negative 
quantity ; still less proportionate to the labor expended. 

What is commonly called cheapness of labor, signifies, 
therefore, in reality, that many obstacles have to be over- 
come by it ; so that much labor is required to produce a 
small result. But this should never be spoken of as cheap- 
ness of labor, but as deamess of the object wrought for. 
It would be just as rational to say that walking was cheap, 
because we had ten miles to walk home to our dinner, as 
that labor was cheap, because we had to work ten hours to 
earn it. 

The last word which we have to define is " Production." 

I have hitherto spoken of all labor as profitable ; 
because it is impossible to consider under one head the 



"UNTO THIS LAST." 85 

quality or value of labor, and its aim. But labor of the 
best quality may be various in aim. It may be either 
constructive ("gathering," from con and struo), as agri- 
culture; nugatory, as jewel- cutting; or destructive ("scatter- 
ing," from de and struo), as war. It is not, however, 
always easy to prove labor, apparently nugatory, to be 
actually so ;* generally, the formula holds good : "he that 
gathereth not, scattereth ;" thus, the jeweler's art is 
probably very harmful in its ministering to a clumsy and 
inelegant pride. So that, finally, I believe nearly all labor 
may be shortly divided into positive and negative labor : 
positive, that which produces life ; negative, that which 
produces death ; the most directly negative labor being 
murder, and the most directly positive, the bearing and 
rearing of children ; so that in the precise degree which 
murder is hateful, on the negative side of idleness, in that 
exact degree child-rearing is admirable, on the positive side 
of idleness. For which reason, and because of the honor 
that there is in rearingf children, while the wife is said to 

* The most accurately nugatory labor is, perhaps, that of which 
not enough is given to answer a purpose effectually, and which, 
therefore, has all to be done over again. Also, labor which fails of 
effect through non-cooperation. The cur6 of a little village near 
Bellinzona, to whom I had expressed wonder that the peasants 
allowed the Ticino to flood their fields, told me that they would not 
join to build an effectual embankment high up the valley, because 
everybody said "that would help his neighbors as much as him- 
self." So every proprietor built a bit of low embankment about his 
own field ; and the Ticino, as soon as it had a mind, swept away 
and swallowed all up together. 

t Observe, I say, "rearing," not "begetting." The praise is in 
the seventh season, not in anoprjro^, nor in ^rXaiu, but in 6iru(M. 
It is strange that men always praise enthusiastically any person 
who, by a momentary exertion, saves a life ; but praise very 
hesitatingly a person who, by exertion and self-denial prolonged 
through years, creates one. We give the crown "ob civem 
servatum ;" — why not "ob civem natuni?" Bom, I mean, to the 
full, in soul as well as body. England has oak enough, I think, for 
both chaplets. 



86 THE COMMUNIS Af OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

be as the vine (for cheering), the children are as the oHve- 
branch, for praise ; nor for praise only, but for peace 
(because large families can only be reared in times of 
peace) : though since, in their spreading and voyaging in 
various directions, they distribute strength, they are, to the 
home strength, as arrows in the hand of a giant — striking 
here and there, far away. 

Labor being thus various in its result, the prosperity of 
any nation is in exact proportion to the quantity of labor 
which it spends in obtaining and employing means of life. 
Observe, — I say, obtaining and employing ; that is to say, 
not merely wisely producing, but wisely distributing and 
consuming. Economists usually speak as if there were no 
good in consumption absolute.* So far from this being so, 
consumption absolute is the end, crown, and perfection of 
production ; and wise consumption is a far more difficult 
art than wise production. Twenty people can gain money 
for one who can use it ; and the vital question, for individ- 
ual and for nation, is, never "how much do they make?" 
but ' ' to what purpose do they spend ? ' ' 

The reader may, perhaps, have been surprised at the 
slight reference I have hitherto made to ' ' capital, ' ' and its 
functions. It is here the place to define them. 

Capital signifies "head, or source, or root material" — 
it is material by which some derivative or secondary good, 
is produced. It is only capital proper (caput vivum, not 
caput mortuum) when it is thus producing something 
different from itself It is a root, which does not enter into 
vital function till it produces something else than a root ; 
namely, fruit That fruit will in time again produce roots ; 

*When Mr. Mill speaks of productive consumption, he only 
means consumption which results in increase of capital, or material 
wealth. See I. iii. 4, and I. iii. 5. 



''UNTO THIS last:' 87 

and so all living capital issues in reproduction of capital ; 
but capital which produces nothing but capital is only root 
producing root ; bulb issuing in bulb, never in tulip ; seed 
issuing in seed, never in bread. The Political Economy of 
Europe has hitherto devoted itself wholly to the multiplica- 
tion, or (less even) the aggregation, of bulbs. It never saw 
nor conceived such a thing as a tulip. Nay, boiled bulbs 
they might have been — glass bulbs — Prince Rupert's drops, 
consummated in powder (well, if it were glass-powder and 
not gunpowder), for any end or meaning the economists 
had in defining the laws of aggregation. We will try and 
get a clearer notion of them. 

The best and simplest general type of capital is a well- 
made plowshare. Now, if that plowshare did nothing but 
beget other plowshares, in a polypous manner, — however 
the great cluster of polypous plow might glitter in the sun, 
it would have lost its function of capital. It becomes true 
capital only by another kind of splendor, — when it is seen, 
^ ' splendescere sulco," to grow bright in the furrow; rather 
with diminution of its substance, than addition, by the 
noble friction. And the true home question, to every 
capitalist and to every nation, is not, "how many plows 
have you?" — but, "where are your furrows?" not — "how 
quickly will this capital reproduce itself?" — but, "what will 
it do during reproduction?" What substance will it 
furnish, good for life? what work construct, protective of 
life? if none, its own reproduction is useless — if worse than 
none, — (for capital may destroy life as well as support it), 
its own reproduction is worse than useless ; it is merely an 
advance from Tisiphone, on mortgage — not a profit by any 
means. 

Not a profit, as the ancients truly saw, and showed in 
the type of Ixion ; for capital is the head, or fountain head, 



88 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

of wealth — the "well-head" of wealth, as the clouds are 
the well-heads of rain : but when clouds are without water, 
and only beget clouds, they issue in wrath at last, instead 
of rain, and in lightning instead of harvest ; whence Ixion is 
said first to have invited his guests to a banquet, and then 
made them fall into a pit filled with fire ; which is the type 
of the temptation of riches issuing in imprisoned torment, 
— torment in a pit, (as also Demas's silver mine), after 
which, to show the rage of riches passing from lust of 
pleasure to lust of power, yet power not truly understood, 
Ixion is said to have desired Juno, and instead, embracing 
a cloud (or phantasm), to have begotten the Centaurs ; the 
power of mere wealth being, in itself, as the embrace of a 
shadow, — comfortless (so also "Ephraim feedeth on wind 
and followeth after the east wind ;" or "that which is not" 
— Prov. xxiii. 5 ; and again Dante's Geryon, the type of 
avaricious fraud, as he flies, gathers the air up with 
retractile daws, — "I'aer a se raccolse,"*) but in its off- 
spring, a mingling of the brutal with the human nature : 
human in sagacity — using both intellect and arrow ; but 
brutal in its body and hoof, for consuming and trampling 
down. For which sin Ixion is at last bound upon a wheel 

* So also in the vision of the woman bearing the ephah, before 
quoted, " the wind was in their wings," not wings " of a stork," as 
in our version ; but " w//w," of a kite, in the Vulgate, or perhaps 
more accurately still in the Septuagint, "hoopoe," a bird connected 
typically with the power of riches by many traditions, of which that 
of its petition for a crest of gold is perhajjs the most interesting. 
The " Birds " of Aristophanes, in which its part is principal, is fiill 
of them ; note especially the " fortification of the air with baked 
bricks, hke Babylon," i. 550; and, again, compare the Plutus of 
Dante, who (to show the influence of riches in destroying the 
reason) is the only one of the powers of the Inferno who cannot 
sf)eak intelligibly ; and also the cowardliest ; he is not merely 
quelled or restrained, but literally "collapses" at a word; the 
sudden and helpless operation of mercantile panic being all told in 
the brief metaphor, "as the sails, swollen with the wind, fall, when 
the mast breaks." 



"UNTO THIS last:* 89 

— fiery and toothed, and rolling perpetually in the air ; — 
the type of human labor when selfish and fruitless (kept far 
into the middle ages in their wheel of fortune) ; the wheel 
which has in it no breath or spirit, but is whirled by chance 
only ; whereas of all true work the Ezekiel vision is true, 
that the spirit of the living creature is in the wheels, and 
where the angels go, the wheels go by them ; but move no 
otherwise. 

This being the real nature of capital, it follows that there 
are two kinds of true production, always going on in an 
active State ; one of seed, and one of food, or production 
for the Ground and for the Mouth ; both of which are by 
covetous persons thought to be production only for the 
2^ranary ; whereas the function of the granary is but inter- 
mediate and conservative, fulfilled in distribution ; else it 
ends in nothing but mildew, and nourishment of rats and 
worms. And since production for the Ground is only 
useful with future hope of harvest, all essential production 
is for the Mouth ; and is finally measured by the mouth ; 
hence, as I said above, consumption is the crown of 
production ; and the wealth of a nation is only to be 
estimated by what it consumes. 

The want of any clear sight of this fact is the capital 
error, issuing in rich interest and revenue of error, among 
the political economists. Their minds are continually set 
on money -gain, not on mouth gain ; and they fall into every 
sort of net and snare, dazzled by the coin-glitter as birds 
by the fowler's glass ; or rather (for there is not much else 
like birds in them) they are like children trying to jump 
on the heads of their own shadows ; the money -gain being 
only the shadow of the true gain, which is humanity. 

The final object of political economy, therefore, is to get 
good method of consumption, and great quantity of con- 



90 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN 



sumption : in other words, to use everything, and to use it 
nobly ; whether it be substance, service, or service perfect- 
ing substance. The most curious error in Mr. Mill's entire 
work (provided for him originally by Ricardo), is his 
endeavor to distinguish between direct and indirect service, 
and consequent assertion that a demand for commodities 
is not demand for labor (I. v. 9, et seq.). He distinguishes 
between laborers employed to lay out pleasure grounds, 
and to manufacture velvet ; declaring that it makes material 
difference to the laboring classes in which of these two ways 
a capitalist spends his money ; because the employment of 
the gardeners is a demand for labor, but the purchase of 
velvet is not.* Error colossal as well as strange. It will, 
indeed, make a difference to the laborer whether he bid 
him swing his scythe in the spring winds, or drive the loom 
in pestilential air ; but, so far as his pocket is concerned, it 
makes to him absolutely no difference whether we order 
him to make green velvet, with seed and a scythe, or red 
velvet, with silk and scissors. Neither does it anywise 
concern him whether, when the velvet is made, we consume 

* The value of raw material, which has, indeed, to be deducted 
from the price of the labor, is not contemplated in the passages 
referred to, Mr. Mill having fallen into the mistake solely by pursu- 
ing the collateral results of the payment of wages to middlemen. 
He says — "The consumer does not, with his own funds, pay the 
weaver for his day's work." Pardon me; the consumer of the 
velvet pays the weaver with his own funds as much as he pays the 
gardener. He pays, probably, an intermediate shipowner, velvet- 
merchant, and shopman ; pays carriage money, shop rent, damage 
money, time monev, and care money ; all these are above and 
beside the velvet price (just as the wages of a head gardener would 
be above the grass price) ; but the velvet is as much produced by 
the consumer's capital, though he does not pay for it till six months 
after production, as the grass is produced by his capital, though he 
does not pay the man who mowed and rolled it on Monday, till 
Saturday afternoon. I do not know if Mr. Mill's conclusion, — " the 
capital cannot be dispensed with, the purchasers can" (p. 98), has 
yet been reduced to practice in the City on any large scale. 



''UNTO THIS LASTr 



91 



it by walking on it, or wearing it, so long as our consump- 
tion of it is wholly selfish. But if our consumption is to 
be in anywise unselfish, not only our mode of consuming 
the articles we require interests him, but also the kind of 
article we require with a view to consumption. As thus 
(returning for a moment to Mr. Mill's great hardware 
theory*) : it matters, so far as the laborer's immediate 
profit is concerned, not an iron filing whether I employ him 
in growing a peach, or forging a bombshell ; but my 
probable mode of consumption of those articles matters 
seriously. Admit that it is to be in both cases " unselfish," 
and the difference, to him, is final, whether when his child 
is ill, I walk into his cottage and give it the peach, or 
drop the shell down his chimney, and blow his roof off". 

The worst of it, for the peasant, is, that the capitalist's 
consumption of the peach is apt to be selfish, and of the 
shell, distributive ; f but, in all cases, that is the broad and 

•Which, observe, is the precise opposite of the one under 
examination. The hardware theory required us to discharge our 
gardeners and engage manufacturers ; the velvet theory requires 
us to discharge our manufacturers and engage gardeners. 

t It is one very awful form of the operation of wealth in Europe 
that it is entirely capitalists' wealth which supports unjust wars. 
Just wars do not need so much money to support them ; for most 
of the men who wage such, wage them gratis ; but for an unjust 
war, men's bodies and souls have both to be bought ; and the best 
tools of war for them besides ; which makes such war costly to the 
maximum ; not to speak of the cost of base fear, and angry suspicion, 
between nations which have not grace nor honesty enough in all 
their multitudes to buy an hour's peace of mind with : as, at present, 
France and England, purchasing of each other ten millions sterling 
worth of consternation annually, (a remarkably light crop, half 
thorns and half aspen leaves, — sown, reaped, and granaried by the 
"science "of the modem political economist, teaching covetous- 
ness instead of truth.) And all unjust war being supportable, if not 
by pillage of the enemy, only by loans from capitalists, these loans 
are repaid by subsequent taxation of the people, who appear to 
have no will in the matter, the capitalists' will being the primary root 
of the war ; but its real root is the covetousness of the whole nation, 
rendering it incapable of faith, frankness, or justice, and bringing 
about, therefore, in due time, his own separate loss and punishment 
to each person. 



92 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

general fact, that on due catallactic commercial principles, 
somebody s roof must go off in fulfillment of the bomb's 
destiny. You may grow for your neighbor, at your liking, 
grapes or grapeshot; he will also, catallactically, grow 
grapes or grapeshot for you, and you will each reap what 
you have sown. 

It is, therefore, the manner and issue of consumption 
which are the real tests of production. Production does 
not consist in things laboriously made, but in things 
serviceably consumable ; and the question for the nation is 
not how much labor it employs, but how much Hfe it pro- 
duces. For as consumption is the end and aim of production, 
so life is the end and aim of consumption. 

I left this question to the reader's thought two months 
ago, choosing rather that he should work it out for himself 
than have it sharply stated to him. But now, the ground 
being sufficiently broken (and the details into which the 
several questions, here opened, must lead us, being too com- 
plex for discussion in the pages of a periodical, so that I 
must pursue them elsewhere), I desire, in closing the series 
of introductory papers, to leave this one great fact clearly 
stated. There is no Wealth but Life. Life, including 
all its powers of love, of joy, and of admiration. That 
country is the richest which nourishes the greatest number 
of noble and happy human beings ; that man is richest who, 
having perfected the functions of his own life to the utmost, 
has also the widest helpful influence, both personal, and by 
means of his possessions, over the lives of others. 

A strange political economy ; the only one, nevertheless, 
that ever was or can be : all political economy founded on 
self-interest* being but the fulfillment of that which once 

* " In all reasoning about prices, the proviso must be under- 
stood, ' supposing all parties to take care of their own interest.' " — 
Mill, III. i. 5. 



"UNTO THIS last:' 



93 



brought schism into the Policy of angels, and ruin into the 
Economy of Heaven. 

"The greatest number of human beings noble and 
happy." But is the nobleness consistent with the number? 
Yes, not only consistent with it, but essential to it. The 
maximum of life can only be reached by the maximum of 
virtue. In this respect the law of human population differs 
wholly from that of animal life. The multiplication of 
animals is checked only by want of food, and by the hostility 
of races ; the population of the gnat is restrained by the 
hunger of the swallow, and that of the swallow by the 
scarcity of gnats. Man, considered as an animal, is indeed 
limited by the same laws ; hunger, or plague, or war, are 
the necessary and only restraints upon his increase, — 
effectual restraints hitherto, — his principal study having 
been how most swiftly to destroy himself, or ravage his 
dwelling-places, and his highest skill directed to give range 
to the famine, seed to the plague, and sway to the sword. 
But, considered as other than an animal, his increase is not 
limited by these laws. It is limited only by the limits of 
his courage and his love. Both of these have their bounds ; 
and ought to have : his race has its bounds also ; but these 
have not yet been reached, nor will be reached for ages. 

In all the ranges of human thought I know none so 
melancholy as the speculations of political economists on 
the population question. It is proposed to better the 
condition of the laborer by giving him higher wages. 
"Nay," says the economist, "if you raise his wages, he 
will either people down to the same point of misery at 
which you lound him, or drink your wages away." He 
will. I know it. Who gave him this will? Suppose it 
were your own son of whom you spoke, declaring to me 
that you dared not take him into your firm, nor even give 
him his just laborer's wages, because if you did, he would 



94 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN 

die of drunkenness, and leave half a score of children to 
the parish. "Who gave your son these dispositions?" — I 
should inquire. Has he them by inheritance or by educa- 
tion? By one or other they must come ; and as in him, so 
also in the poor. Either these poor are of a race essentially 
different from ours, and unredeemable (which, however 
often implied, I have heard none yet openly say), or else 
by such care as we have ourselves received, we may make 
them continent and sober as ourselves — wise and dis- 
passionate as we are — models arduous of imitation. ' ' But, ' ' 
it is answered, ' ' they cannot receive education. ' * Why 
not? That is precisely the point at issue. Charitable 
persons suppose the worst fault of the rich is to refuse the 
people meat ; and the people cry for their meat, kept back 
by fraud, to the Lord of Multitudes.* Alas ! it is not meat 

* James v. 4. Observe, in these statements I am not taking up, 
nor countenancing one whit, the common socialist idea of division 
of property ; division of property is its destruction ; and with it the 
destruction of all hope, all industry, and all justice : it is simply 
chaos — a chaos toward which the believers in modem political 
economy are fast tending, and from which I am striving to save 
them. The rich man does not keep back meat from the poor by 
retaining his riches ; but by basely using them. Riches are a form 
of strength ; and a strong man does not injure others by keeping 
his strength, but by using it injuriously. The socialist, seeing a 
strong man oppress a weak one, cries out — "Break the strong 
man's arms;" but I say, "Teach him to use them to better pur- 
pose." The fortitude and intelligence which acquire riches are 
intended, by the Giver of both, not to scatter, nor to give away, 
but to employ those riches in the service of mankind ; in other 
words, in the redemption of the erring and aid of the weak— that is 
to say, there is first to be the work to gain money ; then the Sabbath 
of use for it— the Sabbath, whose law is, not to lose life, but to 
save. It is continually the fault or the folly of the poor that they 
are poor, as it is usually a child's fault if it falls into a pond, and a 
cripple's weakness that slips at a crossing ; nevertheless, most 
passers by would pull the child out, or help up the cripple. Put it 
at the worst, that all the poor of the world are but disobedient 
children, or careless cripples, and that all rich people are wise and 
strong, and you will see at once that neither is the socialist right in 
desiring to make everybody poor, powerless, and foolish as he is 
himself nor the rich man right in leaving the children in the mire. 



''UNTO THIS LAST" 95 

of which the refusal is crudest, or to which the claim is 
validest. The life is more than the meat. The rich not 
only refuse food to the poor ; they refuse wisdom ; they 
refuse virtue; they refuse salvation. Ye sheep without 
shepherd, it is not the pasture that has been shut from you, 
but the presence. Meat ! perhaps your right to that may 
be pleadable; but other rights have to be pleaded first. 
Claim your crumbs from the table, if you will ; but claim 
them as children, not as dogs ; claim your right to be fed, 
but claim more loudly your right to be holy, perfect, and 
pure. 

Strange words to be used of working people : "What ! 
holy ; without any long robes nor anointing oils ; these 
rough-jacketed, rough-worded persons ; set to nameless 
and dishonored service ? Perfect ! — these, with dim eyes 
and cramped limbs, and slowly wakening minds ? Pure — 
these, with sensual desire and groveling thought ; foul of 
body, and coarse of soul?" It may be so; nevertheless, 
such as they are, they are the holiest, perfectest, purest 
persons the earth can at present show. They may be what 
you have said ; but if so, they yet are holier than we, who 
have left them thus. 

But what can be done for them? Who can clothe — 
who teach — who restrain their multitudes ? What end can 
there be for them at last, but to consume one another? 

I hope for another end, though not, indeed, from 
any of the three remedies for over-population commonly 
suggested by economists. 

These three are, in brief — Colonization ; Bringing in of 
waste lands ; or Discouragement of Marriage. 

The first and second of these expedients merely evade 
or delay the question. It will, indeed, be long before the 
world has been all colonized, and its deserts all brought 



96 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

under cultivation. But the radical question is not how 
much habitable land is in the world, but how many human 
beings ought to be maintained on a given space of habitable 
land. 

Observe, I say, ought to be, not how many can be. 
Ricardo, with his usual inaccuracy, defines what he calls 
the ' ' natural rate of wages " as " that which will maintain 
the laborer. ' ' Maintain him ! yes ; but how ? — the question 
was instantly thus asked of me by a working girl, to whom 
I read the passage. I will amplify her question for her. 
"Maintain him, how?" As first, to what length of life? 
Out of a given number of fed persons how many are to be 
old — how many young ; that is to say, will you arrange 
their maintenance so as to kill them early — say at thirty or 
thirty-five on the average, including deaths of weakly or 
ill-fed children? — or so as to enable them to live out a 
natural life? You will feed a greater number, in the first 
case,* by rapidity of succession ; probably a happier number 
in the second : which does Mr. Ricardo mean to be their 
natural state, and to which state belongs the natural rate 
of wages? 

Again : A piece of land which will only support ten idle, 
ignorant, and improvident persons, will support thirty or 
forty intelligent and industrious ones. Which of these is 
their natural state, and to which of them belongs the 
natural rate of wages? 

Again : If a piece of land support forty persons in 
industrious ignorance ; and if, tired of this ignorance, they 
set apart ten of their number to study the properties of 
cones, and the sizes of stars ; the labor of these ten, being 
withdrawn from the ground, must either tend to the increase 

* The quantity of life is the same in both cases ; but it is differ- 
ently allotted. 



"UNTO THIS LAST" 97 

of food in some transitional manner, or the persons set 
apart for siderial and conic purposes must starve, or some 
one else starve instead of them. What is, therefore, the 
rate natural of wages of the scientific persons, and how 
does this relate to, or measure, their reverted or transitional 
productiveness ? 

Again : If the ground maintains, at first, forty laborers 
in a peaceable and pious state of mind, but they become in 
a few years so quarrelsome and impious that they have to 
set apart five, to meditate upon and settle their disputes ; — 
ten, armed to the teeth with costly instruments, to enforce 
the decisions ; and five to remind everybody in an eloquent 
manner of the existence of a God ; — what will be the result 
upon the general power of production, and what is the 
"natural rate of wages" of the meditative, muscular, and 
oracular laborers ? 

Leaving these questions to be discussed, or waived, at 
their pleasure, by Mr. Ricardo's followers, I proceed to 
state the main facts bearing on that probable future of the 
laboring classes which has been partially glanced at by Mr. 
Mill. That chapter and the preceding one differ from the 
common writing of political economists in admitting some 
value in the aspect of nature, and expressing regret at the 
probability of the destruction of natural scenery. But we 
may spare our anxieties on this head. Men can neither 
drink steam, nor eat stone. The maximum of population 
on a given space of land implies also the relative maximum 
of edible vegetable, whether for men or cattle ; it implies 
a maximum of pure air ; and of pure water. Therefore : a 
maximum of wood, to transmute the air, and of sloping 
ground, protected by herbage from the extreme heat of the 
sun, to feed the streams. All England may, if it so chooses, 
become one manufacturing town ; and Englishmen, sacri- 



g8 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN R US KIN. 

ficing themselves to the good of general humanity, may 
live diminished lives in the midst of noise, of darkness, and 
of deadly exhalation. But the world cannot become a 
factory, nor a mine. No amount of ingenuity will ever 
make iron digestible by the million, nor substitute hydrogen 
for wine. Neither the avarice nor the rage of men will ever 
feed them, and however the apple of Sodom and the grape 
of Gomorrah may spread their table for a time with dainties 
of ashes, and nectar of asps — so long as men live by bread, 
the far away valleys must laugh as they are covered with 
the gold of God, and the shouts of His happy multitudes 
ring round the wine-press and the well. 

Nor need our more sentimental economists fear the too 
wide spread of the formalities of a mechanical agriculture. 
The presence of a wise population implies the search for 
felicity as well as for food ; nor can any population reach 
its maximum but through that wisdom which "rejoices" 
in the habitable parts of the earth. The desert has its 
appointed place and work ; the eternal engine, whose beam 
is the earth's axle, whose beat is its year, and whose breath 
is its ocean, will still divide imperiously to their desert 
kingdoms, bound with unfurrowable rock, and swept by 
unarrested sand, their powers of frost and fire : but the 
zones and lands between, habitable, will be loveliest in 
habitation. The desire of the heart is also the light of the 
eyes. No scene is continually and untiringly loved, but 
one rich by joyful human labor ; smooth in field ; fair in 
garden ; full in orchard ; trim, sweet, and frequent in home- 
stead ; ringing with voices of vivid existence. No air is 
sweet that is silent ; it is only sweet when full of low currents 
of under sound — triplets of birds, and murmur and chirp 
of insects, and deep-toned words of men, and wayward 
trebles of childhood As the art of life is learned, it will 



''UNTO THIS LAST." 99 

be found at last that all lovely things are also necessary : — 
the wild flower by the wayside, as well as the tended corn ; 
and the wild birds and creatures of the forest, as well as the 
tended cattle ; because man doth not live by bread only, 
but also by the desert manna ; by every wondrous word 
and unknowable work of God. Happy, in that he knew 
them not, nor did his fathers know ; and that round about 
him reaches yet into the infinite, the amazement of his 
existence. 

Note, finally, that all effectual advancement toward this 
true felicity of the human race must be by individual, not 
public effort. Certain general measures may aid, certain 
revised laws guide, such advancement ; but the measure 
and law which have first to be determined are those of 
each man's home. We continually hear it recommended 
by sagacious people to complaining neighbors (usually less 
well placed in the world than themselves), that they should 
"remain content in the station in which Providence has 
placed them." There are perhaps some circumstances of 
life in which Providence has no intention that people should 
be content. Nevertheless, the maxim is on the whole a 
good one ; but it is peculiarly for home use. That your 
neighbor should, or should not, remain content with his 
position, is not your business ; but it is very much your 
business to remain content with your own. What is chiefly 
needed in England at the present day is to show the quan- 
tity of pleasure that may be obtained by a consistent, well- 
administered competence, modest, confessed, and laborious. 
We need examples of people who, leaving Heaven to decide 
whether they are to rise in the world, decide for themselves 
that they will be happy in it, and have resolved to seek — 
not greater wealth, but simpler pleasure ; not higher fortune, 
but deeper felicity ; making the first of possessions, self- 



lOO THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

possession ; and honoring themselves in the harmless pride 
and calm pursuits of peace. 

Of which lowly peace it is written that "justice and 
peace have kissed each other ; " and that the fruit of justice 
is "sown in peace of them that make peace ; " not "peace- 
makers" in the common understanding — reconcilers of 
quarrels ; (though that function also follows on the greater 
one;) but peace-Creators; Givers of Calm. Which you 
cannot give, unless you first gain ; nor is this gain one 
which will follow assuredly on any course of business, 
commonly so called. No form of gain is less probable, 
business being (as is shown in the language of all nations — 
TTwAetv from tt^Aw, irpdacg from "nepdcj, venire, vendre, and 
venal, from venio, &c.) essentially restless — and probably 
contentious ; — having a raven-like mind to the motion to 
and fro, as to the carrion food ; whereas the olive-feeding 
and bearing birds look for rest for their feet : thus it is said 
of Wisdom that she ' ' hath builded her house, and hewn 
out her seven pillars;" and even when, though apt to 
wait long at the doorposts, she has to leave her house and 
go abroad, her paths are peace also. 

For us, at all events, her work must begin at the entry 
of the doors: all true economy is "Law of the house." 
Strive to make that law strict, simple, generous : waste 
nothing, and grudge nothing. Care in nowise to make 
more of money, but care to make much of it ; remembering 
always the great, palpable, inevitable fact — the rule and 
root of all economy — that what one person has, another 
cannot have ; and that every atom of substance, of what- 
ever kind, used or consumed, is so much human life spent ; 
which, if it issue in the saving present life, or gaining more, 
is well spent, but if not, is either so much life prevented, or 
so much slain. In all buying, consider, first, what condi- 



'UNTO THIS LAST." iqi 



tion of existence you cause in the producers of what you 
buy ; secondly, whether the sum you have paid is just to 
the producer, and in due proportion, lodged in his hands ; * 
thirdly, to how much clear use, for food, knowledge, or joy, 
this that you have bought can be put; and fourthly, to 
whom and in what way it can be most speedily and service- 
ably distributed : in all dealings whatsoever insisting on 
entire openness and stern fulfillment ; and in all doings, on 
perfection and loveliness of accomplishment ; especially on 
fineness and purity of all marketable commodity : watching 
at the same time for all ways of gaining, or teaching, powers 
of simple pleasure ; and of showing ' ' baov kv datpodiXut 
yey' 5vetap" — the sum of enjoyment depending not on the 
quantity of things tasted, but on the vivacity and patience 
of taste. 

And if, on due and honest thought over these things, 
it seems that the kind of existence to which men are now 
summoned by every plea of pity and claim of right, may, 
for some time at least, not to be a luxurious one ; — consider 
whether, even supposing it guiltless, luxury would be 
desired by any of us, if we saw clearly at our sides the 
suffering which accompanies it in the world. Luxury is 
indeed possible in the future — innocent and exquisite; 
luxury for all, and by the help of all : but luxury at present 
can only be enjoyed by the ignorant; the crudest man 
living could not sit at his feast, unless he sat blindfold, 

*The proper offices of middle-men, namely, overseers (or 
authoritative workmen), conveyancers (merchants, sailors, retail 
dealers, &c.), and ordertakers (persons employed to receive direc- 
tions from the consumer), must, of course, be examined before I 
can enter further into the question of just payment of the first 
producer. But I have not spoken of them in these introductory 
papers, because the evils attendant on the abuse of such interme- 
diate functions result not from any alleged principle of modern 
political economy, but from private carelessness or iniquity. 



I02 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

Raise the veil boldly ; face the light ; and if, as yet, the 
light of the eye can only be through tears, and the light 
of the body through sackcloth, go thou forth weeping, 
bearing precious seed, until the time come, and the king- 
dom, when Christ's gift of bread and bequest of peace shall 
be Unto this last as unto thee ; and when, for earth's 
severed multitudes of the wicked and the weary, there 
shall be holier reconciliation than that of the narrow home, 
and calm economy, where the Wicked cease — not from 
trouble, but from troubling — and the Weary are at rest. 



BOOK II. 

TWO LECTURES ON WORK AND TRAFFIC 
FROM 

THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE." 



PREFACE 



TWENTY YEARS ago, there was no lovelier piece of 
lowland scenery in South England, nor any more 
pathetic in the world, by its expression of sweet human 
character and life, than that immediately bordering on the 
sources of the Wandle, and including the lower moors of 
Addington, and the villages of Beddington and Carshalton, 
with all their pools and streams. No clearer or diviner 
waters ever sang with constant lips of the hand which 
"giveth rain from heaven ;" no pastures ever lightened in 
spring time with more passionate blossoming ; no sweeter 
homes ever hallowed the heart of the passer-by with their 
pride of peaceful gladness — fain-hidden — yet full-confessed. 
The place remains, or, until a few months ago, remained, 
nearly unchanged in its larger features ; but, with deliberate 
mind I say, that I have never seen anything so ghastly in 
its inner tragic meaning, — not in Pisan Maremma — not by 
Campagna tomb, — not by the sand-isles of the Torcellan 
shore, — as the slow stealing of aspects of reckless, indolent, 
animal neglect, over the delicate sweetness of that English 
scene : nor is any blasphemy or impiety — any frantic saying 
or godless thought — more appalling to me, using the best 
power of judgement I have to discern its sense and scope, 
than the insolent defilings of those springs by the human 
herds that drink of them. Just where the welling of stain- 
less water, trembling and pure, like a body of light, enters 



I06 PREFACE. 

the pool of Carshalton, cutting itself a radiant channel down 
to the gravel, through warp of feathery weeds, all waving, 
which it traverses with its deep threads of clearness, like 
the chalcedony in moss-agate, starred here and there with 
white grenouillette ; just in the very rush and murmur of 
the first spreading currents, the human wretches of the 
place cast their street and house foulness ; heaps of dust 
and slime, and broken shreds of old metal, and rags of 
putrid clothes ; they having neither energy to cart it away, 
nor decency enough to dig it into the ground, thus shed 
into the stream, to diffuse what venom of it will float and 
melt, far away, in all places where God meant those waters 
to bring joy and health. And, in a little pool, behind some 
houses further in the village, where another spring rises, 
the shattered stones of the well, and of the little fretted 
channel which was long ago built and traced for it by 
gentler hands, lie scattered, each from each, under a ragged 
bank of mortar, and scoria, and bricklayers' refuse, on one 
side, which the clean water nevertheless chastises to purity ; 
but it cannot conquer the dead earth beyond ; and there, 
circled and coiled under festering scum, the stagnant edge 
of the pool effaces itself into a slope of black slime, the 
accumulation of indolent years. Half-a-dozen men, with' 
one day's work, could cleanse those pools, and trim the 
flowers about their banks, and make every breath of summer 
air above them rich with cool balm ; and every glittering 
wave medicinal, as if it ran, troubled of angels, from the 
porch of Bethesda. But that day's work is never given, 
nor will be ; nor will any joy be possible to heart of man, 
for evermore, about those wells of English waters. 

When I last left them, I walked up slowly through the 
back streets of Croydon, from the old church to the hospital ; 
and, just on the left, before coming up to the crossing of 



PREFACE. 



107 



the High Street, there was a new pubHc-house built. And 
the front of it was built in so wise manner, that a recess of 
two feet was left below its front windows, between them and 
the street-pavement — a recess too narrow for any possible 
use (for even if it had been occupied by a seat, as in old 
time it might have been, everybody walking along the street 
would have fallen over the legs of the reposing wayfarers). 
But, by way of making this two feet depth of freehold land 
more expressive of the dignity of an establishment for the 
sale of spirituous liquors, it was fenced from the pavement 
by an imposing iron railing, having four or five spearheads 
to the yard of it, and six feet high ; containing as much 
iron and iron-work, indeed, as could well be put into the 
space ; and by this stately arrangement, the little piece of 
dead ground within, between wall and street, became a 
protective receptacle of refuse ; cigar ends, and oyster 
shells, and the like, such as an open-handed English street- 
populace habitually scatters from its presence, and was thus 
left, unsweepable by any ordinary methods. Now the iron 
bars which, uselessly (or in great degree worse than use- 
lessly), enclosed this bit of ground, and made it pestilent, 
represented a quantity of work which would have cleansed 
the Carshalton pools three times over; — of work, partly 
cramped and deadly, in the mine ; partly fierce * and 

*"A fearful occurrence took place a few days since, near 
Wolverhampton. Thomas Snape, aged nineteen, was on duty as 
the 'keeper' of a blast furnace at Deepfield, assisted by John 
Gardner, aged eighteen, and Joseph Swift, aged thirty-seven. The 
furnace contained four tons of molten iron, and an equal amount 
of cinders, and ought to have been run out at 7.30 p.m. But Snape 
and his mates, engaged in talking and drinking, neglected their 
duty, and in the meantime, the iron rose in the furnace until it 
reached a pipe wherein water was contained. Just as the men had 
stripped, and were proceeding to tap the furnace, the water in the 
pipe, converted into steam, burst down its front and let loose on 
them the moken metal, which instantaneously consumed Gardner ; 



lo8 PREFACE. 

exhaustive, at the furnace ; partly foolish and sedentary, 
of ill-taught students making bad designs : work from the 
beginning to the last fruits of it, and in all the branches of 
it, venomous, deathful, and miserable. Now, how did it 
come to pass that this work was done instead of the other ; 
that the strength and life of the English operative were 
spent in defiling ground, instead of redeeming it ; and in 
producing an entirely (in that place) valueless piece of 
metal, which can neither be eaten nor breathed, instead 
of medicinal fresh air, and pure water ? 

There is but one reason for it, and at present a conclu- 
sive one, — that the capitalist can charge percentage on the 
work in the one case, and cannot in the other. If, having 
certain funds for supporting labor at my disposal, I pay 
men merely to keep my ground in order, my money is, in 
that function, spent once for all ; but if I pay them to dig 
iron out of my ground, and work it, and sell it, I can charge 
rent for the ground, and percentage both on the manu- 
facture and the sale, and make my capital profitable in 
these three bye-ways. The greater part of the profitable 
investment of capital, in the present day, is in operations 
of this kind, in which the public is persuaded to buy some- 
thing of no use to it, on production, or sale, of which, the 
capitalist may charge percentage ; the said public remain- 
ing all the while under the persuasion that the percentages 
thus obtained are real national gains, whereas, they are 
merely filchings out of partially light pockets, to swell 
heavy ones. 

Snape, terribly burnt, and mad with pain, leaped into the canal and 
then ran home and fell dead on the threshold, Swift survived to 
reach the hospital, where he died too." 

In further illustration of this matter, I beg the reader to look at 
the article on the " Decay of the English Race." in the Pall- Mall 
Gazette of April 17, of this year ; and at the articles on the " Report 
of the Thames Commission," in any journals of the same date. 



PREFACE. 



109 



Thus, the Croydon publican buys the iron raiUng, to 
make himself more conspicuous to drunkards. The public- 
housekeeper on the other side of the way presently buys 
another railing, to out-rail him with. Both are, as to their 
relative attractiveness to customers of taste, just where they 
were before ; but they have lost the price of the railings ; 
which they must either themselves finally lose, or make 
their aforesaid customers of taste pay, by raising the price 
of their beer, or adulterating it. Either the publicans, or 
their customers, are thus poorer by precisely what the 
capitalist has gained; and the value of the work itself, 
meantime, has been lost to the nation ; the iron bars in that 
form and place being wholly useless. It is this mode of 
taxation of the poor by the rich which is referred to in the 
text (page 136), in comparing the. modern acquisitive power 
of capital with that of the lance and sword ; the only differ- 
ence being that the levy of black-mail in old times was by 
force, and is now by cozening. The old rider and reiver 
frankly quartered himself on the publican for the night ; the 
modern one merely makes his lance into an iron spike, and 
persuades his host to buy it. One comes as an open 
robber, the other as a cheating pedlar ; but the result, to 
the injured person's pocket, is absolutely the same. Of 
course many useful industries mingle with, and disguise the 
useless ones ; and in the habits of energy aroused by the 
struggle, there is a certain direct good. It is far better to 
spend four thousand pounds in making a good gun, and 
then to blow it to pieces, than to pass life in idleness. Only 
do not let it be called "political economy." There is also a 
confused notion in the minds of many persons, that the 
gathering of the property of the poor into the hands of the 
rich does no ultimate harm ; since, in whosesoever hands it 
may be, it must be spent at last, and thus, they think, 



no 



PREFACE. 



return to the poor again. This fallacy has been again and 
again exposed ; but grant the plea true, and the same 
apology may, of course, be made for black-mail, or any 
other form of robbery. It might be (though practically it 
never is) as advantageous for the nation that the robber 
should have the spending of the money he extorts, as that 
the person robbed should have spent it. But this is no 
excuse for the theft. If I were to put a turnpike on the 
road where it passes my own gate, and endeavor to exact 
a shilling from every passenger, the public would soon do 
away with my gate, without listening to any plea on my 
part that "it was as advantageous to them, in the end, that 
I should spend their shillings, as that they themselves 
should." But if, instead of out-facing them with a turnpike, 
I can only persuade them to come in and buy stones, or 
old iron, or any other useless thing, out of my ground, I 
may rob them to the same extent, and be, moreover, thanked 
as a public benefactor, and promoter of commercial pros- 
perity. And this main question for the poor of England — 
for the poor of all countries — is wholly omitted in every 
common treatise on the subject of wealth. Even by the 
laborers themselves, the operation of capital is regarded 
only in its effect on their immediate interests ; never in the 
far more terrific power of its appointment of the kind and 
the object of labor. It matters little, ultimately, how much 
a laborer is paid for making anything ; but it matters fear- 
fully what the thing is, which he is compelled to make. If 
his labor is so ordered as to produce food, and fresh air, 
and fresh water, no matter that his wages are low ; — the 
food and fresh air and water will be at last there ; and he 
will at last get them. But if he is paid to destroy food and 
fresh air, or to produce iron bars instead of them, — the food 
and air will finally not be there, and he will not get them, 



PREFACE. in 

to his great and final inconvenience. So that, conclusively, 
in political as in household economy, the great question is, 
not so much what money you have in your pocket, as what 
you will buy with it, and do with it. 

I have been long accustomed, as all men engaged in 
work of investigation must be, to hear my statements 
laughed at for years, before they are examined or believed ; 
and I am generally content to wait the public's time. But 
it has not been without displeased surprise that I have 
found myself totally unable, as yet, by any repetition, or 
illustration, to force this plain thought into my readers' 
heads, — that the wealth of nations, as of men, consists in 
substance, not in ciphers ; and that the real good of all 
work, and of all commerce, depends on the final worth of 
the thing you make, or get by it. This is a practical 
enough statement, one would think : but the English public 
has been so possessed by its modern school of economists 
with the notion that Business is always good, whether it be 
busy in mischief or in benefit ; and that buying and selling 
are always salutary, whatever the intrinsic worth of what 
you buy or sell, — that it seems impossible to gain so much 
as a patient hearing for any inquiry respecting the substan- 
tial result of our eager modern labors. I have never felt 
more checked by the sense of this impossibility than in 
arranging the heads of the following three lectures,* which, 
though delivered at considerable intervals of time, and in 
different places, were not prepared without reference to 
each other. Their connection would, however, have been 
made far more distinct, if I had not been prevented, by 
what I feel to be another great difficulty in addressing 

•The Third Lecture in The Crown of Wild Olive, on War, we 
do not print from lack of space as not bearing directly upon the 
subject of this collection.— Ed. 



112 PREFACE. 



English audiences, from enforcing, with any decision, the 
common, and to me the most important, part of their 
subjects. I chiefly desired (as I have just said) to question 
my hearers — operatives, merchants, and soldiers, as to the 
ultimate meaning of the business they had in hand ; and to 
know from them what they expected or intended their 
manufacture to come to, their selling to come to, and their 
kiUing to come to. That appeared the first point needing 
determination before I could speak to them with any real 
utility or effect. ' ' You craftsmen — salesmen — swordsmen, — 
do but tell me clearly what you want, then, if I can say 
anything to help you, I will ; and if not, I will account to 
you as I best may for my inability." But in order to put 
this question into any terms, one had first of all to face the 
difficulty just spoken of — to me for the present insuperable, 
— the difficulty of knowing whether to address one's 
audience as believing, or not believing, in any other world 
than this. For if you address any average modem English 
company as believing in an Eternal life, and endeavor to 
draw any conclusions, from this assumed belief, as to their 
present business, they will forthwith tell you that what you 
say is very beautiful, but it is not practical. If, on the 
contrary, you frankly address them as unbelievers in Eternal 
life, and try to draw any consequences from that unbelief, — 
they immediately hold you for an accursed person, and 
shake off" the dust from their feet at you. And the more I 
thought over what I had got to say, the less I found I 
could say it, without some reference to this intangible or 
intractable part of the subject. It made all the difference, 
in asserting any principle of war, whether one assumed that 
a discharge of artillery would merely knead down a certain 
quantity of red clay into a level line, as in a brick field ; or 
whether, out of every separately Christian-named portion 



PREFACE. 



113 



of the ruinous heap, there went out, into the smoke and 
dead-fallen air of battle, some astonished condition of soul, 
unwillingly released. It made all the difference, in speak- 
ing of the possible range of commerce, whether one assumed 
that all bargains related only to visible property — or 
whether property, for the present invisible, but nevertheless 
real, was elsewhere purchasable on other terms. It made 
all the difference, in addressing a body of men subject to 
considerable hardship, and having to find some way out of 
it — whether one could confidentially say to them, "My 
friends, — you have only to die, and all will be right;" or 
whether one had any secret misgiving that such advice was 
more blessed to him that gave, than to him that took it. 
And therefore the deliberate reader will find, throughout 
these lectures, a hesitation in driving points home, and a 
pausing short of conclusions which he will feel I would fain 
have come to ; hesitation which arises wholly from this 
uncertainty of my hearers' temper. For I do not now 
speak, nor have I ever spoken, since the time of my first 
forward youth, in any proselyting temper, as desiring to 
persuade any one of what, in such matters, I thought 
myself; but, whomsoever I venture to address, I take for 
the time his creed as I find it ; and endeavor to push it into 
such vital fruit as it seems capable of Thus, it is a creed 
with a great part of the existing English people, that they 
are in possession of a book which tells them, straight from 
the lips of God, all they ought to do, and need to know. I 
have read that book, with as much care as most of them, 
for some forty years ; and am thankful that, on those who 
trust it, I can press its pleadings. My endeavor has been 
uniformly to make them trust it more deeply than they do ; 
trust it, not in their own favorite verses only, but in the 
sum of all ; trust it not as a fetich or talisman, which they 



114 



PREFACE. 



are to be saved by daily repetitions of; but as a Captain's 
order, to be heard and obeyed at their peril. I was always 
encouraged by supposing my hearers to hold such belief. 
To these, if to any, I once had hope of addressing, with 
acceptance, words which insisted on the guilt of pride, and 
the futility of avarice ; from these, if from any, I once 
expected ratification of a political economy, which asserted 
that the life was more than the meat, and the body than 
raiment; and these, it once seemed to me, I might ask 
without accusation of fanaticism, not merely in doctrine of 
the lips, but in the bestowal of their heart's treasure, to 
separate themselves from the crowd of whom it is written, 
"After all these things do the Gentiles seek." 

It cannot, however, be assumed, with any semblance of 
reason, that a general audience is now wholly, or even in 
majority; composed of these religious persons. A large 
portion must always consist of men who admit no such 
creed ; or who, at least, are inaccessible to appeals founded 
on it. And as, with the so-called Christian, I desired to 
plead for honest declaration and fulfillment of his belief in 
life, — with the so-called Infidel, I desired to plead for an 
honest declaration and fulfillment of his belief in death. 
The dilemma is inevitable. Men must either hereafter live, 
or hereafter die ; fate may be bravely met, and conduct 
wisely ordered, on either expectation ; but never in hesita- 
tion betw een ungrasped hope, and unconfronted fear. We 
usually believe in immortality, so far as to avoid preparation 
for death ; and in mortality, so far as to avoid preparation 
for anything after death. Whereas, a wise man will at 
least hold himself prepared for one or other of two events, 
of which one or other is inevitable ; and will have all things 
in order, for his sleep, or in readiness, for his awakening. 

Nor have we any right to call it an ignoble judgment, 



PREFACE. 



115 



if he determine to put them in order, as for sleep. A brave 
belief in life is indeed an enviable state of mind, but, as far 
as I can discern, an unusual one. I know few Christians so 
convinced of the splendor of the rooms in their Father's 
house, as to be happier when their friends are called to 
those mansions, than they would have been if the Queen 
had sent for them to live at Court : nor has the Church's 
most ardent "desire to depart, and be with Christ," ever 
cured it of the singular habit of putting on mourning for 
every person summoned to such departure. On the con- 
trary, a brave belief in death has been assuredly held by 
many not ignoble persons, and it is a sign of the last 
depravity in the Church itself, when it assumes that such a 
belief is inconsistent with either purity of character, or 
energy of hand. The shortness of life is not, to any rational 
person, a conclusive reason for wasting the space of it which 
may be granted him ; nor does the anticipation of death 
to-morrow suggest, to any one but a drunkard, the 
expediency of drunkenness to-day. To teach that there is 
no device in the grave, may indeed make the deviceless 
person more contented in his dullness ; but it will make the 
deviser only more earnest in devising, nor is human 
conduct likely, in every case, to be purer under the convic- 
tion that all its evil may in a moment be pardoned, and all 
its wrong-doing in a moment redeemed ; and that the sigh 
of repentance, which purges the guilt of the past, will waft 
the soul into a felicity which forgets its pain, — than it may 
be under the sterner, and to many not unwise minds, more 
probable, apprehension, that "what a man soweth that shall 
he also reap" — or others reap, — when he, the living seed 
of pestilence, walketh no more in darkness, but lies down 
therein. 

But to men whose feebleness of sight, or bitterness of 



116 PREFACE. 

soul, or the offence given by the conduct of those who 
claim higher hope, may have rendered this painful creed 
the only possible one, there is an appeal to be made, more 
secure in its ground than any which can be addressed to 
happier persons. I would fain, if I might offenselessly, 
have spoken to them as if none others heard; and have 
said thus : Hear me, you dying men, who will soon be 
deaf forever. For these others, at your right hand and 
your left, who look forward to a state of infinite existence, 
in which all their errors will be overruled, and all their 
faults forgiven ; for these, who, stained and blackened in 
the battle smoke of mortality, have but to dip themselves 
for an instant in the font of death, and to rise renewed of 
plumage, as a dove that is covered with silver, and her 
feathers like gold ; for these, indeed, it may be permissible 
to waste their numbered moments, through faith in a future 
of innumerable hours ; to these, in their weakness, it may 
be conceded that they should tamper with sin which can 
only bring forth fruit of righteousness, and profit by the 
iniquity which, one day, will be remembered no more. In 
them, it may be no sign of hardness of heart to neglect the 
poor, over whom they know their Master is watching ; and 
to leave those to perish temporarily, who cannot perish 
eternally. But, for you, there is no such hope, and there- 
fore no such excuse. This fate, which you ordain for the 
wretched, you believe to be all their inheritance ; you may 
crush them, before the moth, and they will never rise to 
rebuke you ; — their breath, which fails for lack of food, 
once expiring, will never be recalled to whisper against you 
a word of accusing ; — they and you, as you think, shall lie 
down together in the dust, and the worms cover you ; — and 
for them there shall be no consolation, and on you no ven- 
geance, — only the question murmured above your grave : 



PREFACE. 



li-j 



" Who shall repay him what he hath done? " Is it therefore 
easier for you in your heart to inflict the sorrow for which 
there is no remedy? Will you take, wantonly, this little all 
of his life from your poor brother, and make his brief hours 
long to him with pain ? Will you be readier to the injustice 
which can never be redressed; and niggardly of mercy 
which you can bestow but once, and which, refusing, you 
refuse forever? I think better of you, even of the most 
selfish, than that you would do this, well understood. And 
for yourselves, it seems to me, the question becomes not 
less grave, in these curt limits. If your life were but a 
fever fit, — the madness of a night, whose follies were all to 
be forgotten in the dawn, it might matter little how you 
fretted away the sickly hours, — what toys you snatched at, 
or let fall, — what visions you followed wistfully with the 
deceived eyes of sleepless phrenzy. Is the earth only an 
hospital? Play, if you care to play, on the floor of the 
hospital dens. Knit its straw into what crowns please you ; 
gather the dust of it for treasure, and die rich in that, 
clutching at the black motes in the air with your dying 
hands ; — and yet, it may be well with you. But if this life 
be no dream, and the world no hospital ; if all the peace 
and power and joy you can ever win, must be won now ; 
and all fruit of victory gathered here, or never ; — will you 
still, throughout the puny totality of your life, weary your- 
selves in the fire for vanity? If there is no rest which 
remaineth for you, is there none you might presently take? 
was this grass of the earth made green for your shroud 
only, not for your bed ? and can you never lie down upon 
it, but only under it? The heathen, to whose creed you 
have returned, thought not so. They knew that life 
brought its contest, but they expected from it also the 
crown of all contest : No proud one ! no jeweled circlet 



Ii8 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN 

flaming through Heaven above the hight of the unmerited 
throne ; only some few leaves of wild olive, cool to the 
tired brow, through a few years of peace. It should have 
been of gold, they thought ; but Jupiter was poor ; this was 
the best the god could give them. Seeking a greater than 
this, they had known it a mockery. Not in war, not in 
wealth, not in tyranny, was there any happiness to be found 
for them — only in kindly peace, fruitful and free. The 
wreath was to be of wild olive, mark you : — the tree that 
grows carelessly, tufting the rocks with no vivid bloom, no 
verdure of branch ; only with soft snow of blossom, and 
scarcely fulfilled fruit, mixed with grey leaf and thornset 
stem ; no fastening of diadem for you but with such 
sharp embroidery ! But this, such as it is, you may win 
while yet you live ; type of grey honor and sweet rest.* 
Free-heartedness, and graciousness, and undisturbed trust, 
and requited love, and the sight of the peace of others, 
and the ministry to their pain ; — these, and the blue sky 
above you, and the sweet waters and flowers of the earth 
beneath ; and mysteries and presences, innumerable, of 
living things, — these may yet be here your riches ; untor- 
menting and divine : serviceable for the life that now is ; 
nor, it may be, without promise of that which is to come. 

* fieXiToeaaa, didXuv Y IvtKtv. 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE 



LECTURE I. 

WORK. 

{Delivered before the Working Men's Institute, at Camberwell.') 

MY FRIENDS, — I have not come among you to-night 
to endeavor to give you an entertaining lecture; 
but to tell you a few plain facts, and ask you some 
plain, but necessary questions. I have seen and known 
too much of the struggle for life among our laboring popu- 
lation, to feel at ease, even under any circumstances, in 
inviting them to dwell on the trivialities of my own studies ; 
but, much more, as I meet to-night, for the first time, the 
members of a working Institute established in the district 
in which I have passed the greater part of my life, I am 
desirous that we should at once understand each other, on 
graver matters. I would fain tell you, with what feelings, 
and with what hope, I regard this Institution, as one of 
many such, now happily established throughout England, 
as well as in other countries ;— Institutions which are 
preparing the way for a great change in all the circum- 
stances of industrial life ; but of which the success must 
wholly depend upon our clearly understanding the circum- 
stances and necessary limits of this change. No teacher 
can truly promote the cause of education, until he knows 



I20 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

the conditions of the life for which that education is to 
prepare his pupil. And the fact that he is called upon to 
address you nominally, as a "Working Class," must compel 
him, if he is in any wise earnest or thoughtful, to inquire 
in the outset, on what you yourselves suppose this class 
distinction has been founded in the past, and must be 
founded in the future. The manner of the amusement, 
and the matter of the teaching, which any of us can offer 
you, must depend wholly on our first understanding from 
you, whether you think the distinction heretofore drawn 
between working men and others, is truly or falsely founded. 
Do you accept it as it stands? do you wish it to be modi- 
fied? or do you think the object of education is to efface 
it, and make us forget it for ever? 

Let me make myself more distinctly understood. We 
call this — you and I — a "Working Men's" Institute, and 
our college in London, a ' ' Working Men's ' ' College. Now, 
how do you consider that these several institutes differ, or 
ought to differ, from "idle men's" institutes and "idle 
men's" colleges? Or by what other word than "idle" shall 
I distinguish those whom the happiest and wisest of working 
men do not object to call the ' ' Upper Classes ? ' ' Are there 
really upper classes, — are there lower? How much should 
they always be elevated, how much always depressed? 
And, gentlemen and ladies — I pray those of you who are 
here to forgive me the offense there may be in what I am 
going to say. It is not /who wish to say it. Bitter voices 
say it ; voices of battle and of famine through all the world, 
which must be heard some day, whoever keeps silence. 
Neither is it to you specially that I say it. I am sure that 
most now present know their duties of kindness, and fulfill 
them, better perhaps than I do mine. But I speak to you 
as representing your whole class, which errs, I know, chiefly 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 121 

by thoughtlessness, but not, therefore, the less terribly. 
Willful error is limited by the will, but what limit is there 
to that of which we are unconscious ? 

Bear with me, therefore, while I turn to these workmen, 
and ask them, also as representing a great multitude, what 
they think the "upper classes" are, and ought to be, in 
relation to them. Answer, you workmen who are here, 
as you would among yourselves, frankly ; and tell me how 
you would have me call those classes. Am I to call them 
— would you think me right in calling them — the idle 
classes? I think you would feel somewhat uneasy, and as 
if I were not treating my subject honestly, or speaking 
from my heart, if I went on under the supposition that all 
rich people were idle. You would be both unjust and 
unwise if you allowed me to say that ; — not less unjust than 
the rich people who say that all the poor are idle, and will 
never work if they can help it, or more than they can help. 

For indeed the fact is, that there are idle poor and idle 
rich ; and there are busy poor and busy rich. Many a 
beggar is as lazy as if he had ten thousand a year ; and 
many a man of large fortune is busier than his errand-boy, 
and never would think of stopping in the street to play 
marbles. So that, in a large view, the distinction between 
workers and idlers, as between knaves and honest men, 
runs through the very heart and innermost economies of 
men of all ranks and in all positions. There is a working 
class — strong and happy — among both rich and poor ; 
there is an idle class — weak, wicked, and miserable — 
among both rich and poor. And the worst of the misun- 
derstandings arising between the two orders come of the 
unlucky fact that the wise of one class habitually contem- 
plate the foolish of the other. If the busy rich people 
watched and rebuked the idle rich people, all would be 



122 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

right ; and if the busy poor people watched and rebuked 
the idle poor people, all would be right. But each class 
has a tendency to look for the faults of the other. A hard- 
working man of property is particularly offended by an 
idle beggar ; and an orderly, but poor, workman is naturally 
intolerant of the licentious luxury of the rich. And what 
is severe judgment in the minds of the just men of either 
class, becomes fierce enmity in the unjust — but among the 
unjust only. None but the dissolute among the poor look 
upon the rich as their natural enemies, or desire to pillage 
their houses and divide their property. None but the 
dissolute among the rich speak in opprobrious terms of 
the vices and follies of the poor. 

There is, then, no class distinction between idle and 
industrious people ; and I am going to-night to speak only 
of the industrious. The idle people we will put out of our 
thoughts at once — they are mere nuisances — what ought 
to be done with them, we'll talk of at another time. But 
there are class distinctions, among the industrious them- 
selves ; tremendous distinctions, which rise and fall to 
every degree in the infinite thermometer of human pain 
and of human power — distinctions of high and low, of lost 
and won, to the whole reach of man's soul and body. 

These separations we will study, and the laws of them, 
among energetic men only, who, whether they work or 
whether they play, put their strength into the work, and 
their strength into the game ; being in the full sense of the 
word "industrious," one way or another — with a purpose, 
or without. And these distinctions are mainly four : 

I. Between those who work, and those who play. 

II. Between those who produce the means of life, and 
those who consume them. 

III. Between those who work with the head, and those 
who work with the hand. 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 



123 



IV. Between those who work wisely, and who work 
foolishly. 

For easier memory, let us say we are going to oppose, 
in our examination. — 

I. Work to play ; 
II. Production to consumption ; 

III. Head to Hand ; and, 

IV. Sense to nonsense. 

I. First, then, of the distinction between the classes who 
work and the classes who play. Of course we must agree 
upon a definition of these terms, — work and play, — before 
going further. Now, roughly, not with vain subtlety of 
definition, but for plain use of the words, "play" is an 
exertion of body or mind, made to please ourselves, and 
with no determined end ; and work is a thing done because 
it ought to be done, and with a determined end. You 
play, as you call it, at cricket, for instance. That is as 
hard work as anything else ; but it amuses you, and it has 
no result but the amusement. If it were done as an ordered 
form of exercise, for health's sake, it would become work 
directly. So, in like manner, whatever we do to please 
ourselves, and only for the sake of the pleasure, not for an 
ultimate object, is "play," the "pleasing thing," not the 
useful thing. Play may be useful in a secondary sense 
(nothing is indeed more useful or necessary) ; but the use 
of it depends on its being spontaneous. 

Let us, then, inquire together what sort of games the 
playing class in England spend their lives in playing at. 

The first of all English games is making money. That 
is an all-absorbing game ; and we knock each other down 
oftener in playing at that than at foot-ball, or any other 
roughest sport ; and it is absolutely without purpose ; no 
pne who engages heartily in that game ever knows why. 



124 ^^^ COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 



Ask a great money-maker what he wants to do with his 
money — he never knows. He doesn't make it to do any- 
thing with it. He gets it only that he may get it. ' ' What 
will you make of what you have got?" you ask. "Well, 
I'll get more," he says. Just as, at cricket, you get more 
runs. There's no use in the runs, but to get more of them 
than other people is the game. And there's no use in the 
money, but to have more of it than other people is the 
game. So all that great foul city of London there,— 
rattling, growling, smoking, stinking, — a ghastly heap of 
fermenting brickwork, pouring out poison at every pore, — 
you fancy it is a city of work ? Not a street of it ! It is a 
great city of play ; very nasty play, and very hard play, 
but still play. It is only Lord's cricket ground without the 
turf, — a huge billiard table without the cloth, and with 
pockets as deep as the bottomless pit ; but mainly a billiard 
table, after all. 

Well, the first great English game is this playing at 
counters. It differs from the rest in that it appears always 
to be producing money, while every other game is expen- 
sive. But it does not always produce money. There's a 
great difference between "winning" money and " making " 
it; a great difference between getting it out of another 
man's pocket into ours, or filling both. Collecting money 
is by no means the same thing as making it ; the tax- 
gatherer's house is not the Mint ; and much of the apparent 
gain (so called), in commerce, is only a form of taxation 
on carriage or exchange. 

Our next great English game, however, hunting and 
Bhooting, is costly altogether ; and how much we are fined 
for it annually in land, horses, gamekeepers, and game 
laws, and all else that accompanies that beautiful and special 
English game, I will not endeavor to count now : but note 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 



125 



only that, except for exercise, this is not merely a useless 
game, but a deadly one, to all connected with it. For 
through horse-racing, you get every form of what the 
higher classes everywhere call "Play," in distinction from 
all other plays ; that is — gambling ; by no means a beneficial 
or recreative game : and, through game-preserving, you 
get also some curious laying out of ground ; that beautiful 
arrangement of dwelling-house for man and beast, by which 
we have grouse and black-cock — so many brace to the 
acre, and men and women — so many brace to the garret. 
I often wonder what the angelic builders and surveyors — 
the angelic builders who build the " many mansions " up 
above there ; and the angelic surveyors, who measured that 
four-square city with their measuring reeds — I wonder 
what they think, or are supposed to think, of the laying 
out of ground by this nation, which has set itself, as it 
seems, literally to accomplish, word for word, or rather 
fact for word, in the persons of those poor whom its Master 
left to represent him, what that Master said of himself — 
that foxes and birds had homes, but He none. 

Then, next to the gentlemen's game of hunting, we 
must put the ladies' game of dressing. It is not the 
cheapest of games. I saw a brooch at a jeweler's in Bond 
Street a fortnight ago, not an inch wide, and without any 
singular jewel in it, yet worth ;^3,ooo. And I wish I could 
tell you what this "play" costs, altogether, in England, 
France, and Russia annually. But it is a pretty game, and 
on certain terms, I like it ; nay, I don't see it played quite 
as much as I would fain have it. You ladies like to lead 
the fashion : — by all means lead it — lead it thoroughly, lead 
it far enough. Dress yourselves nicely, and dress every- 
body else nicely. Lead the fashions for the poor first ; 
make them look well, and you yourselves will look, in ways 



126 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN 

of which you have now no conception, all the better. The 
fashions you have set for some time among your peasantry 
are not pretty ones ; their doublets are too irregularly 
slashed, and the wind blows too frankly through them. 

Then there are other games, wild enough, as I could 
show you if I had time. 

There's playing at literature, and playing at art — very 
different, both, from working at literature, or working at 
art, but I've no time to speak of these. I pass to the 
greatest of all — the play of plays, the great gentleman's 
game, which ladies like them best to play at, — the game of 
War. It is entrancingly pleasant to the imagination ; the 
facts of it, not always so pleasant. We dress for it, how- 
ever, more finely than for any other sport ; and go out to 
it, not merely in scarlet, as to hunt, but in scarlet and gold, 
and all manner of fine colors : of course we could fight 
better in gray, and without feathers ; but all nations have 
agreed that it is good to be well dressed at this play. Then 
the bats and balls are very costly ; our English and French 
bats, with the balls and wickets, even those which we don't 
make any use of, costing, I suppose, now about fifteen 
millions of money annually to each nation ; all of which, 
you know is paid for by hard laborer's work in the furrow 
and furnace. A costly game ! — not to speak of its conse- 
quences ; I will say at present nothing of these. The mere 
immediate cost of all these plays is what I want you to 
consider ; they all cost deadly work somewhere, as many 
of us know too well. The jewel-cutter, whose sight fails 
over the diamonds ; the weaver, whose arm fails over the 
web ; the iron-forger, whose breath fails before the furnace 
— they know what work is — they, who have all the work, 
and none of the play, except a kind they have named for 
themselves down in the black north country, where "play" 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 



127 



means being laid up by sickness. It is a pretty example 
for philologists, of varying dialect, this change in the sense 
of the word * ' play, ' ' as used in the black country of Birming- 
ham, and the red and black country of Baden Baden. Yes, 
gentlemen, and gentlewomen, of England, who think "one 
moment unamused a misery, not made for feeble man," this 
is what you have brought the word "play" to mean, in the 
heart of merry England ! You may have your fluting and 
piping ; but there are sad children sitting in the market- 
place, who indeed cannot say to you, ' ' We have piped unto 
you, and ye have not danced;" but eternally shall say to 
you, "We have mourned unto you, and ye have not 
lamented." 

This, then, is the first distinction between the "upper 
and lower ' ' classes. And this is one which is by no means 
necessary ; which indeed must, in process of good time, be 
by all honest men's consent abolished. Men will be taught 
that an existence of play, sustained by the blood of other 
creatures, is a good existence for gnats and sucking fish ; 
but not for men : that neither days, nor lives, can be made 
holy by doing nothing in them : that the best prayer at the 
beginning of a day is that we may not lose its moments ; 
and the best grace before meat, the consciousness that we 
have justly earned our dinner. And when we have this 
much of plain Christianity preached to us again, and enough 
respect for what we regard as inspiration, as not to think 
that "Son, go work to-day in my vineyard," means "Fool, 
go play to-day in my vineyard," we shall all be workers, in 
one way or another ; and this much at least of the distinction 
between "upper" and "lower" forgotten. 

II. I pass then to our second distinction ; between the 
rich and poor, between Dives and Lazarus, — distinction 
which exists more sternly, I suppose, in this day, than ever 



128 THE COMMUNISM OF- JOHN RUSK IN. 

in the world, Pagan or Christian, till now. I will put it 
sharply before you, to begin with, merely by reading two 
paragraphs which I cut from two papers that lay on my 
breakfast table on the same morning, the 25th of Novem- 
ber, 1864. The piece about the rich Russian at Paris is 
common-place enough, and stupid besides (for fifteen francs, 
— 12^. 6</., — is nothing for a rich man to give for a couple 
of peaches, out of season). Still, the two paragraphs printed 
on the same day are worth putting side by side. 

"Such a man is now here. He is a Russian, and, with 
your permission, we will call him Count Teufelskine. In 
dress he is sublime ; art is considered in that toilet, the 
harmony of color respected, the chiar' oscuro evident in 
well-selected contrast. In manners he is dignified — nay, 
perhaps apathetic ; nothing disturbs the placid serenity of 
that calm exterior. One day our friend breakfasted chez 
Bignon. When the bill came he read, 'Two peaches, i^V 
He paid. 'Peaches scarce, I presume?' was his sole 
remark. 'No, sir,' replied the waiter, 'but Teufelskines 
are.'" — 7>/^^ra/^, November 25, 1864. 

"Yesterday morning, at eight o'clock, a woman, passing 
a dung heap in the stone yard near the recently- erected 
almshouses in Shadwell Gap, High Street, Shadwell, called 
the attention of a Thames police-constable to a man in a 
sitting position on the dung heap, and said she was afraid 
he was dead. Her fears proved to be true. The wretched 
creature appeared to have been dead several hours. He 
had perished of cold and wet, and the rain had been beating 
down on him all night. The deceased was a bone-picker. 
He was in the lowest stage of poverty, poorly clad, and 
half-starved. The police had frequently driven him away 
from the stone yard, between sunset and sunrise, and told 
him to go home. He selected a most desolate spot for his 
wretched death. A penny and some bones were found in 
his pockets. The deceased was between fifty and sixty 
years of age. Inspector Roberts, of the K division, has 
given directions for inquiries to be made at the lodging- 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 129 

houses respecting the deceased, to ascertain his identity if 
possible." — Morning Post, November 25, 1864. 

You have the separation thus in brief compass ; and I 
want you to take notice of the ' ' a penny and some bones 
were found in his pockets," and to compare it with this 
third statement, from the Telegraph of January i6th of this 
year : — 

"Again, the dietary scale for adult and juvenile paupers 
was drawn up by the most conspicuous political economists 
in England. It is low in quantity, but it is sufficient to 
support nature ; yet within ten years of the passing of the 
Poor Law Act, we heard of the paupers in the Andover 
Union gnawing the scraps of putrid flesh and sucking the 
marrow from the bones of horses which they were employed 
to crush." 

You see my reason for thinking that our Lazarus of 
Christianity has some advantage over the Jewish one. 
Jewish Lazarus expected, or at least prayed, to be fed with 
crumbs from the rich man's table ; but our Lazarus is fed 
with crumbs from the dog's table. 

Now this distinction between rich and poor rests on two 
bases. Within its proper limits, on a basis which is lawful 
and everlastingly necessary ; beyond them, on a basis 
unlawful, and everlastingly corrupting the frame-work of 
society. The lawful basis of wealth is, thai a man who 
works should be paid the fair value of his work ; and that 
if he does not choose to spend it to-day, he should have 
free leave to keep it, and spend it to-morrow. Thus, an 
industrious man working daily, and laying by daily, attains 
at last the possession of an accumulated sum of wealth, to 
which he has absolute right. The idle person who will not 
work, and the wasteful person who lays nothing by, at the 
end of the same time will be doubly poor — poor in posses- 
sion, and dissolute in moral habit; and he will then 



I30 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

naturally covet the money which the other has saved. And 
if he is then allowed to attack the other, and rob him of his 
well-earned wealth, there is no more any motive for saving, 
or any reward for good conduct ; and all society is there- 
upon dissolved, or exists only in systems of rapine. There- 
fore the first necessity of social life is the clearness of 
national conscience in enforcing the law — that he should 
keep who has justly earned. 

That law, I say, is the proper basis of distinction between 
rich and poor. But there is also a false basis of distinction ; 
namely, the power held over those who earn wealth by 
those who levy or exact it. There will be always a number 
of men who would fain set themselves to the accumulation 
of wealth as the sole object of their lives. Necessarily, that 
class of men is an uneducated class, inferior in intellect, 
and more or less cowardly. It is physically impossible for 
a well-educated, intellectual, or brave man to make money 
the chief object of his thoughts ; as physically impossible 
as it is for him to make his dinner the principal object of 
them. All healthy people like their dinners, but their dinner 
is not the- main object of their lives. So all healthily 
minded people like making money — ought to like it, and 
to enjoy the sensation of winning it ; but the main object 
of their life is not money; it is something better than 
money. A good soldier, for instance, mainly wishes to do 
his fighting well. He is glad of his pay — very properly so, 
and justly grumbles when you keep him ten years without 
it — still, his main notion of life is to win battles, not to be 
paid for winning them. So of clergymen. They like pew- 
rents, and baptismal fees, of course ; but yet, if they are 
brave and well educated, the pew-rent is not the sole object 
of their lives, and the baptismal fee is not the sole purpose 
of the baptism ; the clergyman's object is essentially to 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 131 

baptize and preach, not to be paid for preaching. So of 
doctors. They like fees no doubt, — ought to Hke them ; 
yet if they are brave and well educated, the entire object of 
their lives is not fees. They, on the whole, desire to cure 
the sick ; and, — if they are good doctors, and the choice 
were fairly put to them, — would rather cure their patient, 
and lose their fee, than kill him, and get it. And so with 
all other brave and rightly trained men ; their work is first, 
their fee second — very important always, but still second. 
But in every nation, as I said, there are a vast class who 
are ill-educated, cowardly, and more or less stupid. And 
with these people, just as certainly the fee is first, and the 
work second, as with brave people the work is first and the 
fee second. And this is no small distinction. It is the 
whole distinction in a man ; distinction between life and 
death in him, between heaven and hell for him. You 
cannot serve two masters ; — you must serve one or other. 
If your work is first with you, and your fee second, work is 
your master, and the lord of work, who is God. But if 
your fee is first with you, and your work second, fee is your 
master, and the lord of fee, who is the Devil ; and not only 
the Devil, but the lowest of devils — the ' ' least erected fiend 
that fell. ' ' So there you have it in brief terms ; Work first 
— you are God's servants ; Fee first — you are the Fiend's. 
And it makes a difference, now and ever, believe me, 
whether you serve Him who has on His vesture and thigh 
written, "King of Kings," and whose service is perfect 
freedom ; or him on whose vesture and thigh the name is 
written, "Slave of Slaves," and whose service is perfect 
slavery. 

However, in every nation there are, and must always 
be, a certain number of these Fiend's servants, who have it 
principally for the object of their lives to make money. 



132 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

They are always, as I said, more or less stupid, and cannot 
conceive of anything else so nice as money. Stupidity is 
always the basis of the Judas bargain. We do great injus- 
tice to Iscariot, in thinking him wicked above all common 
wickedness. He was only a common money-lover, and, 
like all money-lovers, didn't understand Christ; — couldn't 
make out the worth of Him, or meaning of Him. He didn't 
want Him to be killed. He was horror-struck when he 
found that Christ would be killed ; threw his money away 
instantly, and hanged himself How many of our present 
money-seekers, think you, would have the grace to hang 
themselves, whoever was killed? But Judas was a common, 
selfish, muddle-headed, pilfering fellow ; his hand always in 
the bag of the poor, not caring for them. He didn't 
understand Christ ; — yet believed in Him, much more than 
most of us do ; had seen Him do miracles, thought He was 
quite strong enough to shift for Himself, and he, Judas, 
might as well make his own little bye-perquisites out of the 
affair, Christ would come out of it well enough, and he 
have his thirty pieces. Now, that is the money-seeker's 
idea, all over the world. He doesn't hate Christ, but can't 
understand Him — doesn't care for him — sees no good in 
that benevolent business ; makes his own little job out of it 
at all events, come what will. And thus, out of every mass 
of men, you have a certain number of bag-men — your "fee- 
first" men, whose main object is to make money. And 
they do make it — make it in all sorts of unfair ways, chiefly 
by the weight and force of money itself, or what is called 
the power of capital ; that is to say, the power which 
money, once obtained, has over the labor of the poor, so 
that the capitalist can take all -its produce to himself, except 
the laborer's food. That is the modern Judas' s way of 
"carrying the bag," and "bearing what is put therein." 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 



133 



Nay, but (it is asked) how is that an unfair advantage ? 
Has not the man who has worked for the money a right to 
use it as he best can? No; in this respect, money is now 
exactly what mountain promontories over pubUc roads 
were in old times. The barons fought for them fairly : — 
the strongest and cunningest got them ; then fortified them, 
and made everyone who passed below pay toll. Well, 
capital now is exactly what crags were then. Men fight 
fairly (we will, at least, grant so much, though it is more 
than we ought) for their money ; but, once having got it, 
the fortified millionaire can make everybody who passes 
below pay toll to his million, and build another tower of his 
money castle. And I can tell you, the poor vagrants by 
the roadside suffer now quite as much from the bag-baron, 
as ever they did from the crag-baron. Bags and crags 
have just the same result on rags. I have not time, how- 
ever, to-night to show you in how many ways the power of 
capital is unjust ; but this one great principle I have to 
assert; — you will find it quite indisputably true — that when- 
ever money is the principal object of life with either man or 
nation, it is both got ill, and spent ill ; and does harm both 
in the getting and spending ; but when it is not the prin- 
cipal object, it and all other things will be well got, and well 
spent. And here is the test, with every man, of whether 
money is the principal object with him, or not. If in mid- 
life he could pause and say, "Now I have enough to live 
upon, I'll live upon it; and having well earned it, I will 
also well spend it, and go out of the world poor, as I came 
into it," then money is not principal with him ; but if, 
having enough to live upon in the manner befitting his 
character and rank, he still, wants to make more, and to 
die rich, then money is the principal object with him, and 
it becomes a curse to himself, and generally to those who 



134 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

spend it after him. For you know it must be spent some 
day ; the only question is whether the man who makes it 
shall spend it, or some one else. And generally it is better 
for the maker to spend it, for he will know best its value 
and use. This is the true law of life. And if a man does 
not choose thus to spend his money, he must either hoard 
it or lend it, and the worst thing he can generally do is to 
lend it; for borrowers are nearly always ill- spenders, and 
it is with lent money that all evil is mainly done, and all 
unjust war protracted. 

For observe what the real fact is, respecting loans to 
foreign military governments, and how strange it is. If 
your little boy came to you to ask for money to spend in 
squibs and crackers, you would think twice before you gave 
it him ; and you would have some idea that it was wasted, 
when you saw it fly off* in fireworks, even though he did 
no mischief with it. But the Russian children, and Austrian 
children, come to you, borrowing money, not to spend in 
innocent squibs, but in cartridges and bayonets to attack 
you in India with, and to keep down all noble life in Italy 
with, and to murder Polish women and children with ; and 
that you will give at once, because they pay you interest 
for it. Now, in order to pay you that interest, they must 
tax every working peasant in their dominions ; and on that 
work you live. You, therefore, at once rob the Austrian 
peasant, assassinate or banish the Polish peasant, and you 
live on the produce of the theft, and the bribe for the 
assassination ! That is the broad fact — that is the practical 
meaning of your foreign loans, and of most large interest 
of money ; and then you quarrel with Bishop Colenso, 
forsooth, as if he denied the Bible, and you believed it ! 
though, wretches as you are, every deliberate act of your 
lives is a new defiance of its primary orders ; and as if, for 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 135 

most of the rich men of England at this moment, it were 
not indeed to be desired, as the best thing at least for them, 
that the Bible should not be true, since against them these 
words are written in it : " The rust of your gold and silver 
shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh, as 
it were fire." 

III. I pass now to our third condition of separation, 
between the men who work with the hand, and those who 
work with the head. 

And here we have at last an inevitable distinction. 
There must be work done by the arms, or none of us could 
live. There must be work done by the brains, or the life 
we get would not be worth having. And the same men 
cannot do both. There is rough work to be done, and 
rough men must do it ; there is gentle work to be done, 
and gentlemen must do it ; and it is physically impossible 
that one class should do, or divide, the work of the other. 
And it is of no use to try to conceal this sorrowful fact by 
fine words, and to talk to the workman about the honor- 
ableness of manual labor, and the dignity of humanity. 
That is a grand old proverb of Sancho Panza's, " Fine words 
butter no parsnips;" and I can tell you that, all over 
England just now, you workmen are buying a great deal 
too much butter at that dairy. Rough work, honorable or 
not, takes the life out of us ; and the man who has been 
heaving clay out of a ditch all day, or driving an express 
train against the north wind all night, or holding a collier's 
helm in a gale on a lee-shore, or whirling white hot iron at 
a furnace mouth, that man is not the same at the end of 
his day, or night, as one who has been sitting in a quiet 
room, with everything comfortable about him, reading 
books, or classing butterflies, or painting pictures. If it is 
any comfort to you to be told that the rough work is the 



136 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN 

more honorable of the two, I should be sorry to take that 
much of consolation from you ; and in some sense I need 
not. The rough work is at all events real, honest, and, 
generally, though not always, useful ; while the fine work 
is, a great deal of it, foolish and false as well as fine, and 
therefore dishonorable ; but when both kinds are equally 
well and worthily done, the head's is the noble work, and 
the hand's the ignoble ; and of all hand work whatsoever, 
necessary for the maintenance of life, those old words, ' ' In 
the sweat of thy face thou shalt eat bread," indicate that the 
inherent nature of it is one of calamity ; and that the ground, 
cursed for our sake, casts also some shadow of degradation 
into our contest with its thorn and its thistle ; so that all 
nations have held their days honorable, or "holy," and 
constituted them "holydays" or "holidays," by making 
them days of rest ; and the promise, which, among all our 
distant hopes, seems to cast the chief brightness over death, 
is that blessing of the dead who die in the Lord, that ' ' they 
rest from their labors, and their works do follow them." 

And thus the perpetual question and contest must arise, 
who is to do this rough work ? and how is the worker of it 
to be comforted, redeemed, and rewarded? and what kind 
of play should he have, and what rest, in this world, some- 
times, as well as in the next? Well, my good working 
friends, these questions will take a little time to answer yet. 
They must be answered : all good men are occupied with 
them, and all honest thinkers. There's grand head work 
doing about them ; but much must be discovered, and 
much attempted in vain, before anything decisive can be 
told you. Only note these few particulars, which are 
already sure. 

As to the distribution of the hard work. None of us, 
or very few of us, do either hard or soft work because we 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 137 

think we ought ; but because we have chanced to fall into 
the way of it, and cannot help ourselves. Now, nobody 
does anything well that they cannot help doing : work is 
only done well when it is done with a will ; and no man 
has a thoroughly sound will unless he knows he is doing 
what he should, and is in his place. And, depend upon it, 
all work must be done at last, not in a disorderly, scram- 
bling, doggish way, but in an ordered, soldierly, human 
way — a lawful way. Men are enlisted for the labor that 
kills — the labor of war : they are counted, trained, fed, 
dressed, and praised for that. Let them be enlisted also 
for the labor that feeds : let them be counted, trained, fed, 
dressed, praised for that. Teach the plow exercise as 
carefully as you do the sword exercise, and let the officers 
of troops of life be held as much gentlemen as the officers 
of troops of death ; and all is done : but neither this, nor 
any other right thing, can be accomplished — you can't 
even see your way to it — unless, first of all, both servant 
and master are resolved that, come what will of it, they will 
do each other justice. People are perpetually squabbling 
about what will be best to do, or easiest to do, or advise- 
ablest to do, or profitablest to do ; but they never, so fer 
as I hear them talk, ever ask what it is just to do. And 
it is the law of heaven that you shall not be able to judge 
what is wise or easy, unless you are first resolved to judge 
what is just, and to do it. That is the one thing constantly 
reiterated by our Master — the order of all others that is 
given oftenest — "Do justice and judgment." That's your 
Bible order; that's the "Service of God," not praying nor 
psalm-singing. You are told, indeed, to sing psalms when 
you are merry, and to pray when you need anything ; and, 
by the perversion of the Evil Spirit, we get to think that 
praying and psalm-singing are "service." If a child finds 



138 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

itself in want of anything, it runs in and asks its father for 
it — does it call that, doing its father a service? If it begs 
for a toy or a piece of cake — does it call that serving its 
father? That, with God, is prayer, and He likes to hear it : 
He likes you to ask Him for cake when you want it ; but 
He doesn't call that "serving Him." Begging is not 
serving : God likes mere beggars as little as you do — He 
likes honest servants, not beggars. So when a child loves 
its father very much, and is very happy, it may sing little 
songs about him ; but it doesn't call that serving its father ; 
neither is singing songs about God, serving God. It is 
enjoying ourselves, if it's anything; most probably it is 
nothing; but if it's anything, it is serving ourselves, not 
God. And yet we are impudent enough to call our beggings 
and chantings "Divine Service:" we say "Divine service 
will be 'performed' " (that's our word — the form of it gone 
through) "at eleven o'clock." Alas ! — unless we perform 
Divine service in every willing act of our life, we never 
perform it at all. The one Divine work — the one ordered 
sacrifice — is to do justice ; and it is the last we are ever 
inclined to do. Anything rather than that ! As much 
charity as you choose, but no justice. "Nay," you will 
say, "charity is greater than justice." Yes, it is greater ; it 
is the summit of justice — it is the temple of which justice is 
the foundation. But you can't have the top without the 
bottom ; you cannot build upon charity. You must build 
upon justice, for this main reason, that you have not, at first, 
charity to build with. It is the last reward of good work. 
Do justice to your brother (you can do that, whether you 
love him or not), and you will come to love him. But do 
injustice to him, because you don't love him ; and you will 
come to hate him. It is all very fine to think you can build 
upon charity to begin with ; but you will find all you have 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 139 

got to begin with, begins at home, and is essentially love 
of yourself. You well-to-do people, for instance, who are 
here to-night, will go to "Divine service" next Sunday, all 
nice and tidy, and your little children will have their tight 
little Sunday boots on, and lovely little Sunday feathers in 
their hats ; and you'll think, complacently and piously, how 
lovely they look ! So they do : and you love them heartily, 
and you like sticking feathers in their hats. That's all 
right : that is charity ; but it is charity beginning at home. 
Then you will come to the poor little crossing-sweeper, got 
up also, — it, in its Sunday dress, — the dirtiest rags it has, — 
that it may beg the better : we shall give it a penny, and 
think how good we are. That's charity going abroad. 
But what does Justice say, walking and watching near us? 
Christian Justice has been strangely mute, and seemingly 
blind ; and, if not blind, decrepit, this many a day : she 
keeps her accounts still, however — quite steadily — doing 
them at nights, carefully, with her bandage off, and through 
acutest spectacles (the only modern scientific invention she 
cares about). You must put your ear down ever so close 
to her lips to hear her speak ; and then you will start at 
what she first whispers, for it will certainly be, "Why 
shouldn't that little crossing-sweeper have a feather on its 
head, as well as your own child?" Then you may ask 
Justice, in an amazed manner, ' ' How she can possibly be so 
foolish as to think children could sweep crossings with 
feathers on their heads?" Then you stoop again, and 
Justice says — still in her dull, stupid way — "Then, why 
don't you, every other Sunday, leave your child to sweep 
the crossing, and take the little sweeper to church in a hat 
and feather?" Mercy on us (you think), what will she say 
next? And you answer, of course, that "you don't, because 
every body ought to remain content in the position in 



i^o THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

which Providence has placed them." Ah, my friends, that's 
the gist of the whole question. Did Providence put them 
in that position, or did you? You knock a man into a 
ditch, and then you tell him to remain content in the ' ' posi- 
tion in which Providence has placed him." That's modern 
Christianity. You say — " We did not knock him into the 
ditch." How do you know what you have done, or are 
doing? That's just what we have all got to know, and 
what we shall never know, until the question with us every 
morning, is, not how to do the gainful thing, but how to do 
the just thing ; nor until we are at least so far on the way 
to being Christian, as to have understood that maxim of the 
poor half-way Mahometan, ' ' One hour in the execution of 
justice is worth seventy years of prayer. ' ' 

Supposing, then, we have it determined with appropriate 
justice, who is to do the hand work, the next questions 
must be how the hand-workers are to be paid, and how 
they are to be refreshed, and what play they are to have. 
Now, the possible quantity of play depends on the possible 
quantity of pay ; and the quantity of pay is not a matter 
for consideration to hand-workers only, but to all workers. 
Generally, good, useful work, whether of the hand or head, 
is either ill-paid, or not paid at all. I don't say it should 
be so, but it always is so. People, as a rule, only pay for 
being amused or being cheated, not for being served. Five 
thousand a year to your talker, and a shilling a day to your 
fighter, digger, and thinker, is the rule. None of the best 
head work in art, literature, or science, is ever paid for. 
How much do you think Homer got for his Iliad? or 
Dante for his Paradise? only bitter bread and salt, and 
going up and down other people's stairs. In science, the 
man who discovered the telescope, and first saw heaven, 
was paid with a dungeon ; the man who invented the micro- 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 



141 



scope, and first saw earth, died of starvation, driven from 
his home : it is indeed very clear that God means all thor- 
oughly good work and talk to be done for nothing. 
Baruch, the scribe, did not get a penny a line for writing 
Jeremiah's second roll for him, I fancy; and St, Stephen 
did not get Bishop's pay for that long sermon of his to the 
Pharisees ; nothing but stones. For indeed that is the 
world-father's proper payment. So surely as any of the 
world's children work for the world's good, honestly, with 
head and heart ; and come to it, saying, ' ' Give us a little 
bread, just to keep the life in us," the world-father answers 
them, "No, my children, not bread; a stone, if you like, 
or as many as you need, to keep you quiet." But the 
hand-workers are not so ill off as all this comes to. The 
worst that can happen to you is to break stones ; not be 
broken by them. And for you there will come a time for 
better payment ; some day, assuredly, more pence will be 
paid to Peter the Fisherman, and fewer to Peter the Pope ; 
we shall pay people not quite so much for talking in Parlia- 
ment and doing nothing, as for holding their tongues out of 
it and doing something ; we shall pay our plowman a little 
more and our lawyer a little less, and so on : but, at least, 
we may even now take care that whatever work is done 
shall be fully paid for ; and the man who does it paid for 
it, not somebody else ; and that it shall be done in an 
orderly, soldierly, well-guided, wholesome way, under good 
captains and lieutenants of labor ; and that it shall have its 
appointed times of rest, and enough of them ; and that in 
those times the play shall be wholesome play, not in theat- 
rical gardens, with tin flowers and gas sunshine, and girls 
dancing because of their misery ; but in true gardens, with 
real flowers, and real sunshine, and children dancing because 
of their gladness ; so that truly the streets shall be full (the 



142 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

"streets" mind you, not the gutters) of children, playing in 
the midst thereof. We may take care that working-men 
shall have at least as good books to read as anybody else, 
when they've time to read them ; and as comfortable fire- 
sides to sit at as anybody else, when they've time to sit at 
them. This, I think, can be managed for you, my working 
friends, in the good time. 

IV. I must go on, however, to our last head, concerning 
ourselves all, as workers. What is wise work, and what is 
foolish work? What the difference between sense and 
nonsense, in daily occupation ? 

Well, wise work is, briefly, work with God. Foolish 
work is work against God. And work done with God, 
which He will help, may be briefly described as ' ' Putting 
in Order" — that is, enforcing God's law of order, spiritual 
and material, over men and things. The first thing you 
have to do, essentially, the real "good work," is, with 
respect to men, to enforce justice, and with respect to 
things, to enforce tidiness, and fruitfulness. And againat 
these two great human deeds, justice and order, there are 
perpetually two great demons contending, — the devil of 
iniquity, or inequity, and the devil of disorder, or of death ; 
for death is only consummation of disorder. You have to 
fight these two fiends daily. So far as you don't fight 
against the fiend of iniquity, you work for him. You 
"work iniquity," and the judgment upon you, for all your 
"Lord, Lord's," will be "Depart from me, ye that work 
iniquity." And so far as you do not resist the fiend of 
disorder, you work disorder, and you yourself do the 
work of Death, which is sin, and has for its wages. Death 
himself. 

Observe then, all wise work is mainly threefold in 
character. It is honest, useful, and cheerful. 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 



143 



I. It is HONEST. I hardly know anything more strange 
than that you recognize honesty in play, and you do not 
in work. In your Hghtest games, you have always some 
one to see what you call "fair play." In boxing, you must 
hit fair ; in racing, start fair. Your English watchword is 
fair-play, your English hatred, foul-play. Did it ever 
strike you that you wanted another watchword also, fair- 
work, and another hatred also, foul- work? Your prize- 
fighter has some honor in him yet ; and so have the men 
in the ring round him : they will judge him to lose the 
match, by foul hitting. But your prize-merchant gains his 
match by foul selling, and no one cries out against that. 
You drive a gambler out of the gambling-room who loads 
dice, but you leave a tradesman in flourishing business, 
who loads scales ! For observe, all dishonest dealing is 
loading scales. What does it matter whether I get short 
weight, adulterate substance, or dishonest fabric? The 
fault in the fabric is incomparably the worst of the two. 
Give me short measure of food, and I only lose by you ; 
but give me adulterate food, and I die by you. Here, 
then, is your chief duty, you workmen and tradesmen — 
to be true to yourselves, and to us who would help you. 
We can do nothing for you, nor you for yourselves, 
without honesty. Get that, you get all ; without that, your 
suffrages, your reforms, your free-trade measures, your 
institutions of science, are all in vain. It is useless to put 
your heads together, if you can't put your hearts together. 
Shoulder to shoulder, right hand to right hand, among 
yourselves, and no wrong hand to anybody else, and you'll 
win the world yet. 

II. Then, secondly, wise work is useful. No man 
minds, or ought to mind, its being hard, if only it comes 
to something ; but when it is hard, and comes to nothing ; 



144 ^^^ COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN 

when all our bees' business turns to spiders' ; and for 
honey-comb we have only resultant cobweb, blown away 
by the next breeze — that is the cruel thing for the worker. 
Yet do we ever ask ourselves, personally, or even nationally, 
whether our work is coming to anything or not? We 
don't care to keep what has been nobly done ; still less do 
we care to do nobly what others would keep ; and, least 
of all, to make the work itself useful instead of deadly to 
the doer, so as to use his life indeed, but not to waste it. 
Of all wastes, the greatest waste that you can commit is 
the waste of labor. If you went down in the morning into 
your dairy, and you found that your youngest child had 
got down before you ; and that he and the cat were at play 
together, and that he had poured out all the cream on the 
floor for the cat to lap up, you would scold the child, and 
be sorry the milk was wasted. But if, instead of wooden 
bowls with milk in them, there are golden bowls with 
human life in them, and instead of the cat to play with — 
the devil to play with ; and you yourself the player ; and 
instead of leaving that golden bowl to be broken by God 
at the fountain, you break it in the dust yourself, and pour 
the human blood out on the ground for the fiend to lick 
up — that is no waste ! What ! you perhaps think, ' ' to 
waste the labor of men is not to kill them." Is it not? I 
should like to know how you could kill them more utterly 
— kill them with second deaths, seventh deaths, hundred- 
fold deaths? It is the slightest way of killing to stop a 
man's breath. Nay, the hunger, and the cold, and the 
little whistling bullets — our love-messengers between nation 
and nation — have brought pleasant messages from us to 
many a man before now ; orders of sweet release, and leave 
at last to go where he will be most welcome and most 
happy. At the worst you do but shorten his life, you do 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 



145 



not corrupt his life. But if you put him to base labor, if 
you bind his thoughts, if you bhnd his eyes, if you blunt 
his hopes, if you steal his joys, if you stunt his body, and 
blast his soul, and at last leave him not so much as to reap 
the poor fruit of his degradation, but gather that for your- 
self, and dismiss him to the grave, when you have done 
with him, having, so far as in you lay, made the walls of 
that grave everlasting (though, indeed, I fancy the goodly 
bricks of some of our family vaults will hold closer in the 
resurrection day than the sod over the laborer's head), this 
you think is no waste, and no sin ! 

III. Then, lastly, wise work is cheerful, as a child's 
work is. And now I want you to take one thought home 
with you, and let it stay with you. 

Everybody in this room has been taught to pray daily, 
"Thy kingdom come." Now, if we hear a man swear in 
the streets, we think it very wrong, and say he "takes 
God's name in vain." But there's a twenty times worse 
way of taking His name in vain, than that. It is to ask 
God for what we don't want. Ht doesn't like that sort of 
prayer. If you don't want a thing, don't ask for it: such 
asking is the worst mockery of your King you can mock 
Him with ; the soldiers striking Him on the head with the 
reed was nothing to that. If you do not wish for His 
kingdom, don't pray for it. But if you do, you must do 
more than pray for it ; you must work for it. And, to 
work for it, you must know what it is : we have all prayed 
for it many a day without thinking. Observe, it is a king- 
dom that is to come to us ; we are not to go to it. Also, it 
is not to be a kingdom of the dead, but of the living. Also, 
it is not to come all at once, but quietly ; nobody knows 
how. * ' The kingdom of God cometh not with observation. ' ' 
Also, it is not to come outside of us, but in the hearts of 



146 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

us: " the kingdom of God is within you." And, being 
within us, it is not a thing to be seen, but to be felt ; and 
though it brings all substance of good with it, it does not 
consist in that: "the kingdom of God is not meat and 
drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy 
Ghost:" joy, that is to say, in the holy, healthful, and 
helpful Spirit. Now, if we want to work for this kingdom, 
and to bring it, and enter into it, there's just one condi- 
tion to be first accepted. You must enter it as children, 
or not at all ; " Whosoever will not receive it as a little 
child shall not enter therein." And again, "Suffer little 
children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of 
such is the kingdom of heaven." 

Of such, observe. Not of children themselves, but of 
such as children. I believe most mothers who read that 
text think that all heaven is to be fiiU of babies. But that's 
not so. There will be children there, but the hoary head 
is the crown. "Length of days, and long life and peace," 
that is the blessing, not to die in babyhood. Children die 
but for their parents' sins ; God means them to live, but 
He can't let them always; then they have their earlier 
place in heaven : and the little child of David, vainly 
prayed for; — the little child of Jeroboam, killed by its 
mother's step on its own threshold, — they will be there. 
But weary old David, and weary old Barzillai, having 
learned children's lessons at last, will be there too ; and the 
one question for us all, young or old, is, have we learned 
our child's lesson? it is the character of children we want, 
and must gjwn at our peril ; let us see, briefly, in what it 
consists. 

The first character of right childhood is that it is Modest. 
A well-bred child does not think it can teach its parents, 
or that it knows everything. It may think its father and 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 



147 



mother know everything, — perhaps that all grown-up 
people know everything; very certainly it is sure that it 
does not. And it is always asking questions, and wanting 
to know more. Well, that is the first character of a good 
and wise man at his work. To know that he knows very 
little ; — to perceive that there are many above him wiser 
than he ; and to be always asking questions, wanting to 
learn, not to teach. No one ever teaches well who wants 
to teach, or governs well who wants to govern ; it is an 
old saying (Plato's, but I know not if his, first), and as 
wise as old. 

Then, the second character of right childhood is to be 
Faithful. Perceiving that its father knows best what is 
good for it, and having found always, when it has tried its 
own way against his, that he was right and it was wrong, a 
noble child trusts him at last wholly, gives him its hand, 
and will walk blindfold with him, if he bids it. And that is 
the true character of all good men also, as obedient 
workers, or soldiers under captains. They must trust 
their captains ; — they are bound for their lives to choose 
none but those whom they can trust. Then, they are not 
always to be thinking that what seems strange to them, or 
wrong in what they are desired to do, is strange or wrong. 
They know their captain : where he leads they must follow, 
what he bids, they must do ; and without this trust and 
faith, without this captainship and soldiership, no great 
need, no great salvation, is possible to man. Among all 
the nations it is only when this faith is attained by them 
that they become great : the Jew, the Greek, and the 
Mahometan, agree at least in testifying to this. It was a 
deed of this absolute trust which made Abraham the father 
of the faithful ; it was the declaration of the power of God 
as captain over all men, and the acceptance of a leader 



148 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

appointed by Him as commander of the faithful, which laid 
the foundation of whatever national power yet exists in the 
East ; and the deed of the Greeks, which has become the 
type of unselfish and noble soldiership to all lands, and to 
all times, was commemorated, on the tomb of those who 
gave their lives to do it, in the most pathetic, so far as I 
know, or can feel, of all human utterances : ' ' Oh, stranger, 
go and tell our people that we are lying here, having obeyed 
their words." 

Then the third character of right childhood is to be 
Loving and Generous. Give a little love to a child, and 
you get a great deal back. It loves everything near it, 
when it is a right kind of child — would hurt nothing, would 
give the best it has away, always, if you need it — does 
not lay plans for getting everything in the house for itself, 
and delights in helping people ; you cannot please it so 
much as by giving it a chance of being useful, in ever so 
little a way. 

And because of all these characters, lastly, it is Cheerful. 
Putting its trust in its father, it is careful for nothing — 
being full of love to every creature, it is happy always, 
whether in its play or in its duty. Well, that's the great 
worker's character also. Taking no thought for the 
morrow ; taking thought only for the duty of the day ; 
trusting somebody else to take care of to-morrow ; know- 
ing indeed what labor is, but not what sorrow is ; and 
always ready for play — beautiful play, — for lovely human 
play is like the play of the Sun. There's a worker for you. 
He, steady to his time, is set as a strong man to run his 
course, but also, he rejoiceth as a strong man to run 
his course. See how he plays in the morning, with the 
mists below, and the clouds above, with a ray here and a 
flash there, and a shqwer of jewels everywhere ; that's the 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 



149 



Sun's play ; and great human play is like his — all various 
— all full of light and life, and tender, as the dew of the 
morning. 

So then, you have the child's character in these four 
things — Humility, Faith, Charity, and Cheerfulness. That's 
what you have got to be converted to. "Except ye be 
converted and become as little children" — You hear much 
of conversion now-a-days ; but people always seem to think 
they have got to be made wretched by conversion, — to be 
converted to long faces. No, friends, you have got to be 
converted to short ones ; you have to repent into childhood, 
to repent into delight, and delightsomeness. You can't 
go into a conventicle but you'll hear plenty of talk of 
backsliding. Backsliding, indeed ! I can tell you, on the 
ways most of us go, the faster we slide back the better. 
Slide back into the cradle, if going on is into the grave — 
back, I tell you ; back — out of your long faces, and into 
your long clothes. It is among children only, and as 
children only, that you will find medicine for your healing 
and true wisdom for your teaching. There is poison in 
the counsels of the men of this world ; the words they speak 
are all bitterness, "the poison of asps is under their lips," 
but, "the sucking child shall play by the hole of the asp." 
There is death in the looks of men. "Their eyes are 
privily set against the poor;" they are as the uncharmable 
serpent, the cockatrice, which slew by seeing. But "the 
weaned child shall lay his hand on the cockatrice den." 
There is death in the steps of men : ' ' their feet are swift to 
shed blood ; they have compassed us in our steps like the 
lion that is greedy of his prey, and the young lion lurking 
in secret places," but, in that kingdom, the wolf shall lie 
down with the lamb, and the falling with the lion, and * ' a 
little child shall lead them. * ' There is death in the thoughts 



150 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

of men : the world is one wide riddle to them, darker and 
darker as it draws to a close ; but the secret of it is known 
to the child, and the Lord of heaven and earth is most to 
be thanked in that * ' He has hidden these things from the 
wise and prudent, and has revealed them unto babes." 
Yes, and there is death — infinitude of death in the princi- 
palities and powers of men. As far as the east is from the 
west, so far our sins are — not set from us, but multiplied 
around us : the Sun himself, think you he now ' ' rejoices ' ' to 
run his course, when he plunges westward to the horizon, 
so widely red, not with clouds, but blood ? And it will be 
red more widely yet. Whatever drought of the early and 
latter rain may be, there will be none of that red rain. You 
fortify yourselves, you arm yourselves against it in vain ; 
the enemy and avenger will be upon you also, unless you 
learn that it is not out of the mouths of the knitted gun, or 
the smoothed rifle, but "out of the mouths of babes and 
sucklings" that the strength is ordained, which shall "still 
the enemy and avenger. " 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 151 



LECTURE II. 

TRAFFIC. 

{Delivered in the Town Hall, Bradford.) 

MY good Yorkshire friends, you asked me down here 
among your hills that I might talk to you about this 
Exchange you are going to build : but earnestly 
and seriously asking you to pardon me, I am going to do 
nothing of the kind. I cannot talk, or at least can say very 
little, about this same Exchange. I must talk of quite 
other things, though not willingly ; — I could not deserve 
your pardon, if when you invited me to speak on one 
subject, I willfully spoke on another. But I cannot speak, 
to purpose, of anything about which I do not care ; and 
most simply and sorrowfully I have to tell you, in the 
outset, that I do not care about this Exchange of yours. 

If, however, when you sent me your invitation, I had 
answered, "I won't come, I don't care about the Exchange 
of Bradford," you would have been justly offended with me, 
not knowing the reasons of so blunt a carelessness. So I 
have come down, hoping that you will patiently let me tell 
you why, on this, and many other such occasions, I now 
remain silent, when formerly I should have caught at the 
opportunity of speaking to a gracious audience. 

In a word, then, I do not care about this Exchange, — 
because ^^^ don't; and because you know perfectly well I 
cannot make you. Look at the essential circumstances of 
the case, which you, as business men, know perfectly well, 



152 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSI^IN. 

though perhaps you think I forget them. You are going 
to spend £2,0,000, which to you, collectively, is nothing ; 
the buying a new coat is, as to the cost of it, a much more 
important matter of consideration to me than building a 
new Exchange is to you. But you think you may as well 
have the right thing for your money. You know there are 
a great many odd styles of architecture about; you don't 
want to do anything ridiculous ; you hear of me, among 
others, as a respectable architectural man-milliner : and 
you send for me, that I may tell you the leading fashion ; 
and what is, in our shops, for the moment, the newest and 
sweetest thing in pinnacles. 

Now, pardon me for telling you frankly, you cannot 
have good architecture merely by asking people's advice 
on occasion. All good architecture is the expression of 
national life and character ; and it is produced by a prev- 
alent and eager national taste, or desire for beauty. And 
I want you to think a little of the deep significance of this 
word ' ' taste ; " for no statement of mine has been more 
earnestly or oftener controverted than that good taste is 
essentially a moral quality. "No," say many of my antag- 
onists, ' ' taste is one thing, morality is another. Tell us 
what is pretty ; we shall be glad to know that ; but preach 
no sermons to us." 

Permit me, therefore, to fortify this old dogma of mine 
somewhat. Taste is not only a part and an index of 
morality — it is the only morality. The first, and last, and 
closest trial question to any living creature is, ' ' What do 
you like?" Tell me what you like, and I'll tell you what 
you are. Go out into the street, and ask the first man or 
woman you meet, what their "taste" is, and if they answer 
candidly, you know them, body and soul. "You, my friend 
in the rags, with the unsteady gait, what do j/ou like ? " "A 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 



153 



pipe and a quartern of gin." I know you. "You, good 
woman, with the quick step and tidy bonnet, what do you 
like?" "A swept hearth and a clean tea-table, and my 
husband opposite me, and a baby at my breast." Good, I 
know you also. "You, little girl with the golden hair and 
the soft eyes, what do you like ? " " My canary, and a run 
among the wood hyacinths." "You, little boy with the 
dirty hands and the low forehead, what do you like? " "A 
shy at the sparrows, and a game at pitch -farthing." Good ; 
we know them all now. What more need we ask ? 

"Nay," perhaps you answer: "we need rather to ask 
what these people and children do, than what they like. If 
they do right, it is no matter that they like what is wrong ; 
and if they do wrong, it is no matter that they like what is 
right. Doing is the great thing; and it does not matter 
that the man likes drinking, so that he does not drink ; nor 
that the little girl likes to be kind to her canary, if she will 
not learn her lessons ; nor that the little boy Ukes throwing 
stones at the sparrows, if he goes to the Sunday school." 
Indeed, for a short time, and in a provisional sense, this is 
true. For if, resolutely, people do what is right, in time 
they come to like doing it. But they only are in a right 
moral state when they have come to like doing it ; and as 
long as they don't like it, they are still in a vicious state. 
The man is not in health of body who is always thirsting 
for the bottle in the cupboard, though he bravely bears his 
thirst ; but the man who heartily enjoys water in the 
morning and wine in the evening, each in its proper 
quantity and time. And the entire object of true education 
is to make people not merely do the right things, but enjcyy 
the right things — not merely industrious, but to love 
industry — not merely learned, but to love knowledge — not 
merely pure, but to love purity — not merely just, but to 
hunger and thirst after justice. 



154 ^^^ COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

But you may answer or think, "Is the liking for outside 
ornaments, — for pictures, or statues, or furniture, or archi- 
tecture, — a. moral quality?" Yes, most surely, if a rightly 
set liking. Taste for any pictures or statues is not a moral 
quality, but taste for good ones is. Only here again we 
have to define the word ' ' good. ' ' I don' t mean by ' ' good, ' ' 
clever — or learned — or difficult in the doing. Take a 
picture by Teniers, of sots quarreling over their dice : it is 
an entirely clever picture ; so clever that nothing in its kind 
has ever been done equal to it ; but it is also an entirely 
base and evil picture. It is an expression of delight in the 
prolonged contemplation of a vile thing, and delight in that 
is an "unmannered," or "immoral" quality. It is "bad 
taste ' ' in the profoundest sense — it is the taste of the devils. 
On the other hand, a picture of Titian's, or a Greek statue, 
or a Greek coin, or a Turner landscape, expresses delight 
in the perpetual contemplation of a good and perfect thing. 
That is an entirely moral quality — it is the taste of the 
angels. And all delight in art, and all love of it, resolve 
themselves into simple love of that which deserves love. 
That deserving is the quality which we call "loveliness" — 
(we ought to have an opposite word, hateliness, to be said 
of the things which deserve to be hated) ; and it is not an 
indifferent nor optional thing whether we love this or that ; 
but it is just the vital function of all our being. What we 
like determines what we are, and is the sign of what we 
are ; and to teach taste is inevitably to form character. As 
I was thinking over this, in walking up Fleet Street the 
other day, my eye caught the tide of a book standing open 
in a bookseller's window. It was — "On the necessity of 
the diffusion of taste among all classes. " " Ah, " I thought 
to myself, "my classifying friend, when you have diffused 
your taste, where will your classes be? The man who likes 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 155 

what you like, belongs to the same class with you, I think. 
Inevitably so. You may put him to other work if you 
choose ; but, by the condition you have brought him into, 
he will dislike the other work as much as you would your- 
self. You get hold of a scavenger, or a costermonger, who 
enjoyed the Newgate Calendar for literature, and ' Pop 
goes the Weasel ' for music. You think you can make him 
like Dante and Beethoven ? I wish you joy of your lessons ; 
but if you do, you have made a gentleman of him : — he 
won't like to go back to his costermongering." 

And so completely and unexceptionally is this so, that, 
if I had time to-night, I could show you that a nation 
cannot be affected by any vice, or weakness, without 
expressing it, legibly, and for ever, either in bad art, or by 
want of art ; and that there is no national virtue, small or 
great, which is not manifestly expressed in all the art which 
circumstances enable the people possessing that virtue to 
produce. Take, for instance, your great English virtue of 
enduring and patient courage. You have at present in 
England only one art of any consequence — that is, iron- 
working. You know thoroughly well how to cast and 
hammer iron. Now, do you think in those masses of 
lava which you build volcanic cones to melt, and which 
you forge at the mouths of the Infernos you have created ; 
do you think, on those iron plates, your courage and 
endurance are not written for ever — not merely with an 
iron pen, but on iron parchment? And take also your 
great English vice — European vice — vice of all the world 
—vice of all other worlds that roll or shine in heaven, 
bearing with them yet the atmosphere of hell — ^the vice of 
jealousy, which brings competition into your commerce, 
treachery into your councils, and dishonor into your wars 
— that vice which has rendered for you, and for your next 



156 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

neighboring nation, the daily occupations of existence no 
longer possible, but with the mail upon your breasts and 
the sword loose in its sheath ; so that, at last, you have 
realized for all the multitudes of the two great peoples who 
lead the so-called civilization of the earth, — you have 
realized for them all, I say, in person and in policy, what 
was once true only of the rough Border riders of your 
Cheviot hills — 

" They carved at the meal 
With gloves of steel, 
And they drank the red wine through the helmet barr'd ; — 

do you think that this national shame and dastardliness of 
heart are not written as legibly on every rivet of your iron 
armor as the strength of the right hands that forged it? 
Friends, I know not whether this thing be the more ludi- 
crous or the more melancholy. It is quite unspeakably 
both. Suppose, instead of being now sent for by you, I 
had been sent for by some private gentleman, living in a 
suburban house, with his garden separated only by a fruit- 
wall from his next door neighbor's ; and he had called me 
to consult with him on the furnishing of his drawing room. 
I begin looking about me, and find the walls rather bare ; 
I think such and such a paper might be desirable — perhaps 
a little fresco here and there on the ceiling — a damask 
curtain or so at the windows. "Ah," says my employer, 
"damask curtains indeed! That's all very fine, but you 
know I can't aflford that kind of thing just now!" "Yet 
the world credits you with a splendid income!" "Ah, 
yes," says my friend, "but do you know, at present, I am 
obliged to spend it nearly all in steel-traps ? " " Steel-traps ! 
for whom ? " " Why, for that fellow on the other side the 
wall, you know: we're very good friends, capital friends; 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 157 

but we are obliged to keep our traps set on both sides of 
the wall; we could not possibly keep on ^riendly terms 
without them, and our spring guns. The worst of it is, 
we are both clever fellows enough; and there's never a 
day passes that we don't find out a new trap, or a new 
gun-barrel, or something ; we spend about fifteen millions 
a year each in our traps, take it all together ; and I don't 
see how we're to do with less." A highly comic state of 
life for two private gentlemen ! but for two nations, it seems 
to me, not wholly comic? Bedlam would be comic, per- 
haps, if there were only one madman in it ; and your 
Christmas pantomime is comic, when there is only one 
clown in it ; but when the whole world turns clown, and 
paints itself red with its own heart's blood instead of 
vermilion, it is something else than comic, I think. 

Mind, I know a great deal of this is play, and willingly 
allow for that. You don't know what to do with yourselves 
for a sensation : fox-hunting and cricketing will not carry 
you through the whole of this unendurably long mortal 
life : you liked pop-gun^ when you were schoolboys, and 
rifles and Armstrongs are only the same things better 
made : but then the worst of it is, that what was play to 
you when boys, was not play to the sparrows ; and what 
is play to you now, is not play to the small birds of State 
neither ; and for the black eagles, you are somewhat shy 
of taking shots at them, if I mistake not. 

I must get back to the matter in hand, however. 
Believe me, without further instance, I could show you, in 
all time, that every nation's vice, or virtue, was written in 
its art : the soldiership of early Greece ; the sensuality of 
late Italy ; the visionary religion of Tuscany ; the splendid 
human energy and beauty of Venice. I have no time to 
do thb to-night (I have done it elsewhere before now) ; 



158 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

but I proceed to apply the principle to ourselves in a more 
searching manner. 

I notice that among all the new buildings that cover 
your once wild hills, churches and schools are mixed in 
due, that is to say, in large proportion, with your mills and 
mansions ; and I notice also that the churches and schools 
are almost always Gothic, and the mansions and mills are 
never Gothic. Will you allow me to ask precisely the 
meaning of this ? For, remember, it is peculiarly a modern 
phenomenon. When Gothic was invented, houses were 
Gothic as well as churches ; and when the Italian style 
superseded the Gothic, churches were Italian as well as 
houses. If there is a Gothic spire to the cathedral of 
Antwerp, there is a Gothic belfry to the Hotel de Ville at 
Brussels ; if Inigo Jones builds an Italian Whitehall, Sir 
Chistopher Wren builds an Italian St. Paul's. But now 
you live under one school of architecture, and worship 
under another. What do you mean by doing this ? Am 
I to understand that you are thinking of changing your 
architecture back to Gothic; and that you treat your 
churches experimentally, because it does not matter what 
mistakes you make in a church? Or am I to understand 
that you consider Gothic a pre-eminently sacred and 
beautiful mode of building, which you think, like the fine 
frankincense, should be mixed for the tabernacle only, and 
reserved for your religious services? For if this be the 
feeling, though it may seem at first as if it were graceful 
and reverent, you will find that, at the root of the matter, 
it signifies neither more nor less than that you have 
separated your religion from your life. 

For consider what a wide significance this fact has ; and 
remember that it is not you only, but all the people of 
England, who are behaving thus just now. 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 159 

You have all got into the habit of calling the church 
* ' the house of God. ' ' I have seen, over the doors of maijy 
churches, the legend actually carved, " This is the house 
of God, and this is the gate of heaven." Now, note where 
that legend comes from, and of what place it was first spoken. 
A boy leaves his father's house to go on a long journey on 
foot, to visit his uncle ; he has to cross a wild hill-desert ; 
just as if one of your own boys had to cross the wolds of 
Westmoreland, to visit an uncle at Carlisle. The second 
or third day your boy finds himself somewhere between 
Hawes and Brough, in the midst of the moors, at sunset. 
It is stony ground, and boggy; he cannot go one foot 
further that night. Down he lies, to sleep, on Wharnside, 
where best he may, gathering a few of the stones together 
to put under his head ; — so wild the place is, he cannot get 
anything but stones. And there, lying under the broad 
night, he has a dream ; and he sees a ladder set up on the 
earth, and the top of it reaches to heaven, and the angels 
of God are ascending and descending upon it. And when 
he wakes out of his sleep, he says, ' ' How dreadful is this 
place ; surely, this is none other than the house of God, 
and this is the gate of heaven." This place, observe ; not 
this church ; not this city ; not this stone, even, which he 
puts up for a memorial — the piece of flint on which his 
head has lain. But this//ar^/ this windy slope of Wharn- 
side ; this moorland hollow, torrent-bitten, snow-blighted ; 
this any place where God lets down the ladder. And how 
are you to know where that will be? or how are you to 
determine where it may be, but by being ready for it 
always? Do you know where the lightning is to fall next? 
You do know that, partly ; you can guide the lightning ; 
but you cannot guide the going forth of the Spirit, which 
is that lightning when it shines from the east to the west. 



l6o THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

But the perpetual and insolent warping of that strong 
verse to serve a merely ecclesiastical purpose, is only one 
of the thousand instances in which we sink back into gross 
Judaism. We call our churches "temples." Now, you 
know, or ought to know, they are 7wt temples. They have 
never had, never can have, anything whatever to do with 
temples. They are ' ' synagogues " — " gathering places ' ' — 
where you gather yourselves together as an assembly ; and 
by not calling them so, you again miss the force of another 
mighty text — "Thou, when thou prayest, shalt not be as 
the hypocrites are ; for they love to pray standing in the 
churches" [we should translate it], "that they may be seen 
of men. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, 
and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father," — 
which is, not in chancel nor in aisle, but ' ' in secret. ' ' 

Now, you feel, as I say this to you — I know you feel — 
as if I were trying to take away the honor of your churches. 
Not so ; I am trying to prove to you the honor of your houses 
and your hills ; I am trying to show you — not that the Church 
is not sacred — but that the whole Earth is. I would have you 
feel, what careless, what constant, what infectious sin there 
is in all modes of thought, whereby, in calling your churches 
only "holy," you call your hearths and homes profane ; and 
have separated yourselves from the heathen by casting all 
your household gods to the ground, instead of recognizing, 
in the place of their many and feeble Lares, the presence 
of your One and Mighty Lord and Lar. 

"But what has all this to do with our Exchange?" you 
ask me, impatiently. My dear friends, it has just every- 
thing to do with it ; on these inner and great questions 
depend all the outer and little ones ; and if you have asked 
me down here to speak to you, because you had before 
been interested in anything I have written, you must know 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. i6l 

that all I have yet said about architecture was to show this. 
The book I called ' ' The Seven Lamps ' ' was to show that 
certain right states of temper and moral feeling were the 
magic powers by which all good architecture, without 
exception, had been produced. "The Stones of Venice," 
had, from beginning to end, no other aim than to show that 
the Gothic architecture of Venice had arisen out of, and 
indicated in all its features, a state of pure national faith, 
and of domestic virtue ; and that its Renaissance architect- 
ure had arisen out of, and in all its features indicated, a 
state of concealed national infidelity, and of domestic cor- 
ruption. And now, you ask me what style is best to build 
in ; and how can I answer, knowing the meaning of the 
two styles, but by another question — do you mean to build 
as Christians or as Infidels? And still more — do you mean 
to build as honest Christians or as honest Infidels? as 
thoroughly and confessedly either one or the other? You 
don't like to be asked such rude questions. I cannot help 
it ; they are of much more importance than this Exchange 
business ; and if they can be at once answered, the Exchange 
business settles itself in a moment. But, before I press them 
further, I must ask leave to explain one point clearly. In all 
my past work, my endeavor has been to show that good 
architecture is essentially religious — the production of a 
faithful and virtuous, not of an infidel and corrupted people. 
But in the course of doing this, I have had also to show that 
good architecture is not ecclesiastical. People are so apt to 
look upon religion as the business of the clergy, not their 
own, that the moment they hear of anything depending on 
' ' religion, ' ' they think it must also have depended on the 
priesthood ; and I have had to take what place was to be 
occupied between these two errors, and fight both, often 
with seeming contradiction. Good architecture is the work 



l62 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN 

of good and believing men ; therefore, you say, at least 
some people say, "Good architecture must essentially have 
been the work of the clergy, not of the laity." No — a 
thousand times no ; good architecture has always been the 
work of the commonalty, not of the clergy. What, you 
say, those glorious cathedrals — the pride of Europe — did 
their builders not form Gothic architecture? No; they 
corrupted Gothic architecture. Gothic was formed in the 
baron's castle, and the burgher's street. It was formed by 
the thoughts, and hands, and powers of free citizens and 
soldier kings. By the monk it was used as an instrument 
for the aid of his superstition ; when that superstition 
became a beautiful madness, and the best hearts of Europe 
vainly dreamed and pined in the cloister, and vainly raged 
and perished in the crusade — through that fury of per\'erted 
faith and wasted war, the Gothic rose also to its loveliest, 
most fantastic, and, finally, most foolish dreams ; and, in 
those dreams, was lost. 

I hope, now, that there is no risk of your misunder- 
standing me when I come to the gist of what I want to say 
to-night — when I repeat, that every great national architect- 
ure has been the result and exponent of a great national 
religion. You can't have bits of it here, bits there — you 
must have it everywhere, or nowhere. It is not the 
monopoly of a clerical company — it is not the exponent of 
a theological dogma — it is not the hieroglyphic writing of 
an initiated priesthood ; it is the manly language of a people 
inspired by resolute and common purpose, and rendering 
resolute and common fidelity to the legible laws of an 
undoubted God. 

Now, there have as yet been three distinct schools of 
European architecture. I say, European, because Asiatic 
and African architectures belong so entirely to other races 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 163 

and climates, that there is no question of them here ; only, 
in passing, I will simply assure you that whatever is good 
or great in Egypt, and Syria, and India, is just good or 
great for the same reasons as the buildings on our side of 
the Bosphorus. We Europeans, then, have had three 
great religions : the Greek, which was the worship of the 
God of Wisdom and Power ; the Mediaeval, which was the 
Worship of the God of Judgment and Consolation ; the 
Renaissance, which was the worship of the God of Pride 
and Beauty ; these three we have had — they are past, — and 
now, at last, we English have got a fourth religion, and a 
God of our own, about which I want to ask you. But I 
must explain these three old ones first. 

I repeat, first, the Greeks essentially worshiped the 
God of Wisdom ; so that whatever contended against their 
religion, — to the Jews a stumbling block, — was, to the 
Greeks — Foolishness. 

The first Greek idea of Deity was that expressed in the 
word, of which we keep the remnant in our words "Z^z-urnal" 
and "Z>z-vine" — the god of Day, Jupiter the revealer. 
Athena is his daughter, but especially daughter of the 
Intellect, springing armed from the head. We are only 
with the help of recent investigation beginning to penetrate 
the depth of meaning couched under the Athenaic symbols : 
but I may note rapidly, that her aegis, the mantle with the 
serpent fringes, in which she often, in the best statues, is 
represented as folding up her left hand for better guard, 
and the Gorgon on her shield, are both representative 
mainly of the chilling horror and sadness (turning men to 
stone, as it were), of the outmost and superficial spheres 
of knowledge — that knowledge which separates, in bitter- 
ness, hardness, and sorrow the heart of the full-grown man 
from the heart of the child. For out of imperfect knowl- 



l64 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

edge spring terror, dissension, danger, and disdain ; but 
from perfect knowledge, given by the full-revealed Athena, 
strength and peace, in sign of which she is crowned with 
the olive spray, and bears the resistless spear. 

This, then, was the Greek's conception of purest Deity, 
and every habit of life, and every form of his art developed 
themselves from the seeking this bright, serene, resistless 
wisdom ; and setting himself, as a man, to do things ever- 
more rightiy and strongly ; * not with any ardent affection 
or ultimate hope ; but with a resolute and continent energy 
of will, as knowing that for failure there was no consolation, 
and for sin there was no remission. And the Greek 
architecture rose unerring, bright, clearly defined, and 
self-contained. 

Next followed in Europe the great Christian faith, which 
was essentially the religion of Comfort. Its great doctrine 
is the remission of sins ; for which cause it happens, too 
often, in certain phases of Christianity, that sin and sickness 
themselves are partly glorified, as if, the more you had to 
be healed of, the more divine was the healing. The prac- 
tical result of this doctrine, in art, is a continual contem- 
plation of sin and disease, and of imaginary states of 
purification from them ; thus we have an architecture con- 
ceived in a mingled sentiment of melancholy and aspiration, 
partly severe, partly luxuriant, which will bend itself to 

* It is an error to suppose that the Greek worship, or seeking, 
was chiefly of Beauty. It was essentially of Rightness and Strength, 
founded on Forethought : the principal character of Greek art is 
not Beauty, but Design : and the Dorian Apollo-worship and 
Athenian Virgin-worship are both expressions of adoration of 
divine Wisdom and Purity. Next to these great deities rank, in 
power over the national mind, Dionysus and Ceres, the givers of 
human strength and life : then, for heroic example, Hercules. 
There is no Venus-worship among the Greeks in the great times : 
and the Muses are essentially teachers of Truth, and of its har- 
monies. 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 165 

every one of our needs, and every one of our fancies, and 
be strong or weak with us, as we are strong or weak 
ourselves. It is, of all architecture, the basest, when base 
people build it — of all, the noblest, when built by the noble. 

And now note that both these religions — Greek and 
Mediaeval — perished by falsehood in their own main pur- 
pose. The Greek religion of Wisdom perished in a false 
philosophy — "Oppositions of science, falsely so called." The 
Mediaeval religion of Consolation perished in false comfort ; 
in remission of sins given lyingly. It was the selling of 
absolution that ended the Mediaeval faith ; and I can tell 
you more, it is the selling of absolution which, to the end 
of time, will mark false Christianity. Pure Christianity 
gives her remission of sins only by e?iding them ; but false 
Christianity gets her remission of sins by compounding for 
them. And there are many ways of compounding for 
them. We English have beautiful little quiet ways of buy- 
ing absolution, whether in low Church or high, far more 
cunning than any of Tetzel's trading. 

Then, thirdly, there followed the religion of Pleasure, in 
which all Europe gave itself to luxury, ending in death. 
First, bah masguis in every saloon, and then guillotines in 
every square. And all these three worships issue in vast 
temple building. Your Greek worshiped Wisdom, and 
built you the Parthenon — the Virgin's temple. The Mediae- 
val worshiped Consolation, and built you Virgin temples 
also — but to our Lady of Salvation. Then the Revivalist 
worshiped beauty, of a sort, and built you Versailles, and 
the Vatican. Now, lastly, will you tell me what we worship, 
and what we build ? 

You know we are speaking always of the real, active, 
continual, national worship ; that by which men act while 
they live ; not that which they talk of when they die. Now, 



l66 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

we have, indeed, a nominal religion, to which we pay tithes 
of property, and sevenths of time ; but we have also a 
practical and earnest religion, to which we devote nine- 
tenths of our property and six-sevenths of our time. And 
we dispute a great deal about the nominal religion ; but we 
are all unanimous about this practical one, of which I think 
you will admit that the ruling goddess may be best generally 
described as the " Goddess of Getting-on," or " Britannia of 
the Market." The Athenians had an "Athena Agoraia," 
or Minerva of the Market ; but she was a subordinate type 
of their goddess, while our Britannia Agoraia is the principal 
type of ours. And all your great architectural works are, 
of course, built to her. It is long since you built a great 
cathedral ; and how you would laugh at me, if I proposed 
building a cathedral on the top of one of these hills of 
yours, taking it for an Acropolis ! But your railroad 
mounds, prolonged masses of Acropolis ; your railroad 
stations, vaster than the Parthenon, and innumerable ; your 
chimneys, how much more mighty and costly than cathedral 
spires ! your harbor-piers ; your warehouses ; your ex- 
changes ! — all these are built to your great Goddess of 
"Getting-on;" and she has formed, and will continue to 
form, your architecture, as long as you worship her ; and 
it is quite vain to ask me to tell you how to build to her; 
you know far better than I. 

There might indeed, on some theories, be a conceivably 
good architecture for Exchanges — that is to say if there 
were any heroism in the fact or deed of exchange, which 
might be typically carved on the outside of your building. 
For, you know, all beautiful architecture must be adorned 
with sculpture or painting ; and for sculpture or painting, 
you must have a subject. And hitherto it has been a 
received opinion among the nations of the world that the 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 167 

only right subjects for either, were heroisms of some sort. 
Even on his pots and his flagons, the Greek put a Hercules 
slaying lions, or an Apollo slaying serpents, or Bacchus 
slaying melancholy giants, and earth-born despondencies. 
On his temples, the Greek put contests of great warriors in 
founding states, or of gods with evil spirits. On his houses 
and temples alike, the Christian put carvings of angels 
conquering devils ; or of hero-martyrs exchanging this 
world for another; subject inappropriate, I think, to our 
manner of exchange here. And the Master of Christians 
not only left his followers without any orders as to the 
sculpture of affairs of excliange on the outside of buildings, 
but gave some strong evidence of his dislike of affairs of 
exchange within them. And yet there might surely be a 
heroism in such affairs ; and all commerce become a kind 
of selling of doves, not impious. The wonder has always 
been great to me, that heroism has never been supposed to 
be in anywise consistent with the practice of supplying 
people with food, or clothes ; but rather with that of 
quartering oneself upon them for food, and stripping them 
of their clothes. Spoiling of armor is an heroic deed in all 
ages ; but the selling of clothes, old, or new, has never 
taken any color of magnanimity. Yet one does not see 
why feeding the hungry and clothing the naked should 
ever become base businesses, even when engaged in on a 
large scale. If one could contrive to attach the notion of 
conquest to them anyhow? so that, supposing there were 
anywhere an obstinate race, who refused to be comforted, 
one might take some pride in giving them compulsory 
comfort ; and as it were, "occupying a country" with one's 
gifts, instead of one's armies? If one could only consider 
it as much a victory to get a barren field sown, as to get 
an eared field stripped ; and contend who should build 



l68 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

villages, instead of who should "carry" them. Are not all 
forms of heroism conceivable in doing these serviceable 
deeds? You doubt who is strongest? It might be ascer- 
tained by push of spade, as well as push of sword. Who 
is wisest? There are witty things to be thought of in 
planning other business than campaigns. Who is bravest? 
There are always the elements to fight with, stronger than 
men ; and nearly as merciless. The only absolutely and 
unapproachably heroic element in the soldier's work seems 
to be — that he is paid little for it — and regularly : while 
you traffickers, and exchangers, and others occupied in 
presumably benevolent business, like to be paid much for 
it — and by chance. I never can make out how it is that a 
knight-errant does not expect to be paid for his trouble, 
but a pedlar-errant always does ; — that people are willing 
to take hard knocks for nothing, but never to sell ribbons 
cheap ; — that they are ready to go on fervent crusades to 
recover the tomb of a buried God, never on any travels to 
fulfill the orders of a living God ; — that they will go any- 
where barefoot to preach their faith, but must be well 
bribed to practice it, and are perfectly ready to give the 
Gospel gratis, but never the loaves and fishes. If you 
chose to take the matter up on any such soldierly principle, 
to do your commerce, and your feeding of nations, for fixed 
salaries ; and to be as particular about giving people the 
best food, and the best cloth, as soldiers are about giving 
them the best gunpowder, I could carve something for you 
on your exchange worth looking at. But I can only at 
present suggest decorating its frieze with pendant purses ; 
and making its pillars broad at the base for the sticking of 
bills. And in the innermost chambers of it there might be 
a statue of Britannia of the Market, who may have, perhaps 
advisably, a partridge for her crest, typical at once of her 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 169 

courage in fighting for noble ideas ; and of her interest in 
game ; and round its neck the inscription in golden letters, 
" Perdix fovit quae non peperit." * Then, for her spear, she 
might have a weaver's beam ; and on her shield, instead of 
her Cross, the Milanese boar, semi-fleeced, with the town 
of Gennesaret proper in the field, and the legend ' ' In the 
best market," and her corslet, of leather, folded over her 
heart in the shape of a purse, with thirty slits in it for a 
piece of money to go in at, on each day of the month. 
And I doubt not but that people would come to see your 
exchange, and its goddess, with applause. 

Nevertheless, I want to point out to you certain strange 
characters in this goddess of yours. She differs from the 
great Greek and Mediaeval deities essentially in two things 
— first, as to the continuance of her presumed power; 
secondly, as to the extent of it. 

First, as to the Continuance. 

The Greek Goddess of Wisdom gave continual increase 
of wisdom, as the Christian Spirit of Comfort (or Comforter) 
continual increase of comfort. There was no question, 
with these, of any limit or cessation of function. But with 
your Agora Goddess, that is just the most important 
question. Getting on — but where to ? Gathering together 
— but how much? Do you mean to gather always — never 
to spend ? If so, I wish you joy of your goddess, for I am 
just as well off" as you, without the trouble of worshiping 
her at all. But if you do not spend, somebody else will — 
somebody else must. And it is because of this (among 
many other such errors) that I have fearlessly declared 
your so-called science of Political Economy to be no 

*Jerem. xvii. 11 (best in Septuagint and Vulgate). "As the 
partridge, fostering what she brought not forth, so he that getteth 
riches, not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and 
at his end shall be a fool." 



I70 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

science ; because, namely, it has omitted the study of 
exactly the most important branch of the business — the 
study of spending. For spend you must, and as much as 
you make, ultimately. You gather corn : — will you bury 
England under a heap of grain ; or will you, when you 
have gathered, finally eat? You gather gold: — will you 
make your house-roofs of it, or pave your streets with it? 
That is still one way of spending it. But if you keep it, 
that you may get more, I'll give you more ; I'll give you 
all the gold you want — all you can imagine — if you can tell 
me what you'll do with it. You shall have thousands of 
gold pieces ; — thousands of thousands — millions — moun- 
tains, of gold : where will you keep them ? Will you put 
an Olympus of silver upon a golden Pelion — make Ossa 
like a wart? Do you think the rain and dew would then 
come down to you, in the streams from such mountains, 
more blessedly than they will down the mountains which 
God has made for you, of moss and whinstone? But it is 
not gold that you want to gather ! What is it ? greenbacks ? 
No ; not those neither. What is it then — is it ciphers after 
a capital I ? Cannot you practice writing ciphers, and write 
as many as you want? Write ciphers for an hour every 
morning, in a big book, and say every evening, I am worth 
all those noughts more than I was yesterday. Won't that 
do? Well, what in the name of Plutus is it you want? Not 
gold, not greenbacks, not ciphers after a capital I ? You 
will have to answer, after all, "No ; we want, somehow or 
other, money's worth.'' ^ Well, what is that? Let your 
Goddess of Getting- on discover it, and let her learn to stay 
therein. 

II. But there is yet another question to be asked 
respecting this Goddess of Getting-on. The first was of 
the continuance of her power ; the second is of its extent. 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE, 



171 



Pallas and the Madonna were supposed to be all the 
world's Pallas, and all the world's Madonna. They could 
teach all men, and they could comfort all men. But, look 
strictly into the nature of the power of your Goddess of 
Getting-on ; and you will find she is the Goddess — not of 
everybody's getting on — but only of somebody's getting 
on. This is a vital, or rather deathful, distinction. Examine 
it in your own ideal of the state of national life which this 
Goddess is to evoke and maintain. I asked you what it 
was, when I was last here ; * — you have never told me. 
Now, shall I try to tell you? 

Your ideal of human life then is, I think, that it should 
be passed in a pleasant undulating world, with iron and 
coal everywhere underneath it. On each pleasant bank of 
this world is to be a beautiful mansion, with two wings ; 
and stables, and coach-houses ; a moderately sized park ; a 
large garden and hot houses ; and pleasant carriage drives 
through the shrubberies. In this mansion are to live the 
favored votaries of the Goddess ; the English gentleman, 
with his gracious wife, and his beautiful family ; always able 
to have the boudoir and the jewels for the wife, and the 
beautiful ball dresses for the daughters, and hunters for the 
sons, and a shooting in the Highlands for himself At the 
bottom of the bank, is to be the mill ; not less than a 
quarter of a mile long, with a steam engine at each end, 
and two in the middle, and a chimney three hundred feet 
high. In this mill are to be in constant employment from 
eight hundred to a thousand workers, who never drink, 
never strike, always go to church on Sunday, and always 
express themselves in respectful language. 

Is not that, broadly, and in the main features, the kind 
of thing you propose to yourselves? It is very pretty indeed 

* Two Paths. 



172 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

seen from above ; not at all so pretty, seen from below. 
For, observe, while to one family this deity is indeed the 
Goddess of Getting-on, to a thousand families she is the 
Goddess of not Getting-on. ' ' Nay , ' ' you say, ' ' they have all 
their chance." Yes, so has every one in a lottery, but there 
must always be the same number of blanks. ' * Ah ! but in 
a lottery it is not skill and intelligence which take the lead, 
but blind chance." What then! do you think the old 
practice, that ' ' they should take who have the power, and 
they should keep who can," is less iniquitous, when the 
power has become power of brains instead of fist? and 
that, though we may not take advantage of a child's or a 
woman's weakness, we may of a man's foolishness? "Nay, 
but finally, work must be done, and some one must be at 
the top, some one at the bottom." Granted, my friends. 
Work must always be, and captains of work must always 
be ; and if you in the least remember the tone of any of 
my writings, you must know that they are thought unfit 
for this age, because they are always insisting on need of 
government, and speaking with scorn of liberty. But I beg 
you to observe that there is a wide difference between 
being captains or governors of work, and taking the 
profits of it. It does not follow, because you are general of 
an army, that you are to take all the treasure, or land, it 
wins (if it fight for treasure or land) ; neither, because you 
are king of a nation, that you are to consume all the profits 
of the nation's work. Real kings, on the contrary, are 
known invariably by their doing quite the reverse of this, — 
by their taking the least possible quantity of the nation's 
work for themselves. There is no test of real kinghood so 
infallible as that. Does the crowned creature live simply, 
bravely, unostentatiously? probably he is a King. Does 
he cover his body with jewels, and his table with delicates? 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 173 

in all probability he is not a King. It is possible he may be, 
as Solomon was ; but that is when the nation shares his 
splendor with him. Solomon made gold, not only to be in 
his own palace as stones, but to be in Jerusalem as stones. 
But even so, for the most part, these splendid kinghoods 
expire in ruin, and only the true kinghoods live, which are 
of royal laborers governing loyal laborers; who, both 
leading rough lives, establish the true dynasties. Con- 
clusively you will find that because you are king of a nation, 
it does not follow that you are to gather for yourself all the 
wealth of that nation ; neither, because you are king of a 
small part of the nation, and lord over the means of its 
maintenance — over field, or mill, or mine, are you to take 
all the produce of that piece of the foundation of national 
existence for yourself 

You will tell me I need not preach against these things, 
for I cannot mend them. No, good friends, I cannot ; but 
you can, and you will ; or something else can and will. 
Do you think these phenomena are to stay always in their 
present power or aspect? All history shows, on the con- 
trary, that to be the exact thing they never can do. Change 
must come ; but it is ours to determine whether change of 
growth, or change of death. Shall the Parthenon be in 
ruins on its rock, and Bolton priory in its meadow, but 
these mills of yours be the consummation of the buildings 
of the earth, and their wheels be as the wheels of eternity? 
Think you that "men may come, and men may go," but 
— mills — go on forever? Not so; out of these better or 
worse shall come ; and it is for you to choose which. 

I know that none of this wrong is done with deliberate 
purpose. I know, on the contrary, that you wish your 
workmen well ; that you do much for them, and that you 
desire to do more for them, if you saw your way to it 



174 ^-^^ COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

safely. I know that many of you have done, and are 
every day doing, whatever you feel to be in your power ; 
and that even all this wrong and misery are brought about 
by a warped sense of duty, each of you striving to do his 
best, without noticing that this best is essentially and cen- 
trally the best for himself, not for others. And all this has 
come of the spreading of that thrice accursed, thrice impious 
doctrine of the modern economist, that "To do the best for 
yourself, is finally to do the best for others. ' * Friends, our 
great Master said not so ; and most absolutely we shall 
find this world is not made so. Indeed, to do the best for 
others, is finally to do the best for ourselves ; but it will 
not do to have our eyes fixed on that issue. The Pagans 
had got beyond that. Hear what a Pagan says of this 
matter; hear what were, perhaps, the last written words 
of Plato, — if not the last actually written (for this we cannot 
know), yet assuredly in fact and power his parting words — 
in which, endeavoring to give full crowning and harmonious 
close to all his thoughts, and to speak the sum of them by 
the imagined sentence of the Great Spirit, his strength and 
his heart fail him, and the words cease, broken off for ever. 
It is the close of the dialogue called "Critias," in which he 
describes, partly from real tradition, partly in ideal dream, 
the early state of Athens ; and the genesis, and order, and 
religion, of the fabled isle of Atlantis ; in which genesis he 
conceives the same first perfection and final degeneracy of 
man, which in our own Scriptural tradition is expressed by 
saying that the Sons of God intermarried with the daughters 
of men, for he supposes the earliest race to have been 
indeed the children of God ; and to have corrupted them- 
selves, until "their spot was not the spot of his children." 
And this, he says, was the end ; that indeed ' ' through many 
generations, so long as the God's nature in them yet was 



THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE. 



175 



full, they were submissive to the sacred laws, and carried 
themselves lovingly to all that had kindred with them in 
divineness ; for their uttermost spirit was faithful and true, 
and in every wise great ; so that, in all meakness of wisdom, 
they dealt with each other, and took all the chances of life ; 
and despising all things except virtue, they cared little what 
happened day by day, and bore lightly the burden of gold 
and of possessions ; for they saw that, if only their common 
love and virtue increased, all these things would be increased 
together with them ; but to set their esteem and ardent 
pursuit upon material possession would be to lose that 
first, and their virtue and affection together with it. And 
by such reasoning, and what of the divine nature remained 
in them, they gained all this greatness of which we have 
already told ; but when the God's part of them faded and 
became extinct, being mixed again and again, and effaced 
by the prevalent mortality ; and the human nature at last 
exceeded, they then became unable to endure the courses 
of fortune ; and fell into shapelessness of life, and baseness 
in the sight of him who could see, having lost everything 
that was fairest of their honor ; while to the blind hearts 
which could not discern the true life, tending to happiness, 
it seemed that they were then chiefly noble and happy, 
being filled with all iniquity of inordinate possession and 
power. Whereupon, the God of Gods, whose Kinghood 
is in laws, beholding a once just nation thus cast into misery, 
and desiring to lay such punishment upon them as might 
make them repent into restraining, gathered together all 
the gods into his dwelling-place, which from heaven's 
center overlooks whatever has part in creation ; and having 

assembled them he said" 

The rest is silence. So ended are the last words of the 
chief wisdom of the heathen, spoken of this idol of riches ; 



176 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN 

this idol. of yours; this golden image high by measureless 
cubits, set up where your green fields of England are fur- 
nace-burnt into the likeness of the plain of Dura : this 
idol, forbidden to us, first of all idols, by our own Master 
and faith ; forbidden to us also by every human lip that 
has ever, in any age or people, been accounted of as able 
to speak according to the purposes of God. Continue to 
make that forbidden deity your principal one, and soon no 
more art, no more science, no more pleasure will be possible. 
Catastrophe will come ; or worse than catastrophe, slow 
moldering and withering into Hades. But if you can fix 
some conception of a true human state of life to be striven 
for — life for all men as for yourselves — if you can determine 
some honest and simple order of existence ; following those 
trodden ways of wisdom, which are pleasantness, and seek- 
ing her quiet and withdrawn paths, which are peace ; — 
then, and so sanctifying wealth into "commonwealth," all 
your art, your literature, your daily labors, your domestic 
affection, and citizen's duty, will join and increase into one 
magnificent harmony. You will know then how to build, 
well enough ; you will build with stone well, but with flesh 
better ; temples not made with hands, but riveted of hearts ; 
and that kind of marble, crimson-veined, is indeed eternal. 



BOOK III. 



SELECTIONS FROM 

"FORS CLAVIGERA." 

OR 

LETTERS TO THE WORKINGMEN AND LABORERS 
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 



EDITOR'S PREFACE. 



FORS CLAVIGERA contains at once the wittiest, the 
most characteristic, the most radical, and also some 
of the most exalted and religious writings of John 
Ruskin. The book, be it remembered, is not an essay, 
but a collection of letters written at stated times by their 
author to the workingmen of Great Britain. They are, 
therefore, what all letters ought to be, unfettered expressions 
of the writer's feelings, and thoughts, and mood at the time 
of writing. They show John Ruskin as he is or at least 
as he was when he wrote them. They give his passing 
thoughts, speaking now of a Yorkshire pudding, now of a 
Venetian ferry, now of a reading from Scott, now of a 
picture by Carpaccio, now of a newspaper clipping, now of 
a bit of Plato, now of a Hebrew Psalm, now of Tinteretto ; 
yet through it all runs deepest thought and most earnest 
spirit as to the true conception of society and the duty of 
living men and women in this actual modern world. No 
one can read these letters without having many and many 
a new thought suggested, many and many a new purpose 
conceived in his heart. No one knows John Ruskin who 
has not read these letters. 

The meaning of the name no one but the author himself 
can explain. We quote his own words from the second 
letter. "You may like to know, and ought to know, what I 
mean by the title of these Letters ; and why it is in Latin. I 



i8o PREFACE. 

can only tell you in part, for the letters will be on many 
things, if I am able to carry out my plan in them ; and that 
title means many things, and is in Latin, because I could 
not have given an English one that meant so many. We, 
indeed, were not till lately a loquacious people, nor a useless 
one ; but the Romans did more, and said less, than any 
other nation that ever lived ; and their language is the most 
heroic ever spoken by men. 

"Therefore I wish you to know, at least, some words of 
it, and to recognize what thoughts they stand for. 

"Some day, I hope you may know — and that European 
workmen may know — many words of it ; but even a few 
will be useful. 

* ' Do not smile at my saying so. Of Arithmetic, Geome- 
try, and Chemistry, you can know but little, at the utmost ; 
but that little, well learned, serves you well. And a litde 
Latin, well learned, will serve you also, and in a higher way 
than any of these. 

' ' ' Fors ' is the best part of three good English words, 
Force, Fortitude, and Fortune. I wish you to know the 
meaning of those three words accurately. 

"'Force,' (in humanity), means power of doing good 
work. A fool, or a corpse, can do any quantity of mischief ; 
but only a wise and strong man, or, with what true vital 
force there is in him, a weak one, can do good. 

"'Fortitude' means the power of bearing necessary 
pain, or trial of patience, whether by time, or temptation. 

"' Fortune ' means the necessary fate of a man: the 
ordinance of his life which cannot be changed. To ' make 
your Fortune' is to rule that appointed fate to the best 
ends of which it is capable. 

"Fors is a feminine word; and Clavigera is, therefore, 
the feminine of ' Claviger. ' 



PREFACE. i8i 

' ' Clava means a club. Clavis, a key. Clavus, a nail, or 
a rudder. 

"Gero means 'I carry.' It is the root of our word 
'gesture' (the way you carry yourself) ; and, in a curious 
by-way, of 'jest.' 

"Clavigera may mean, therefore, either Club-bearer, 
Key-bearer, or Nail-bearer. 

"Each of these three possible meanings of Clavigera 
corresponds to one of the three meanings of Fors. 

"Fors, the Club-bearer, means the strength of Hercules 
or of Deed. 

" Fors, the Key-bearer, means the strength of Ulysses, or 
of Patience. 

"Fors, the Nail-bearer, means the strength of Lycurgus, 
or of Law. 

' * I will tell you what you may usefully know of those 
three Greek persons in a little time. At present, note only 
of the three powers: i. That the strength of Hercules is 
for deed, not misdeed ; and that his club — the favorite 
weapon, also, of the Athenian hero Theseus, whose form is 
the best inheritance left to us by the greatest of Greek 
sculptors, (it is in the Elgin room of the British Museum, 
and I shall have much to tell you of him — especially how 
he helped Hercules in his utmost need, and how he invented 
mixed vegetable soup) — was for subduing monsters and 
cruel persons, and was of olive-wood. 2. That the Second 
Fors Clavigera is portress at a gate which she cannot open 
till you have waited long ; and that her robe is of the color 
of ashes, or dry earth. 3. That the Third Fors Clavigera, 
the power of Lycurgus, is Royal as well as Legal ; and that 
the notablest crown yet existing in Europe of any that have 
been worn by Christian kings, was — people say — made of 
a Nail. 



l82 PREFACE. 

"That is enough about my title, for this time; now to 
our work," 

We are able in this little volume only to quote a few of 
the more striking and suggestive passages. We have done 
so, placing the subject at the head of each selection. On 
three subjects only we have made selections of some little 
length : Interest, The St. George's Company, and the 
Summary of the Teachings of the whole book. The first is 
important because it strikes the key-note to all of Ruskin's 
social views, the substitution of a life of honest work, for a 
life of dishonest income from investment ; the second 
shows how Ruskin thinks it best and most practical to 
carry out this view of life ; the third gives us the whole 
oi Fors Clavigera in a nutshell, a most fitting ending to 
our collection of Ruskin's thoughts on Social Problems. 

—Ed. 



SELECTIONS FROM 

FOR.S CLAVIGERA, 



I.— COMMUNISM. 

FOR, indeed, I am myself a Communist of the old 
school — reddest also of the red ; and was on the very 
point of saying so at the end of my last letter ; only 
the telegram about the Louvre's being on fire stopped me, 
because I thought the Communists of the new school, as I 
could not at all understand them, might not quite under- 
stand me. For we Communists of the old school think 
that our property belongs to everybody ; and everybody's 
property to us ; so of course I thought the Louvre belonged 
to me as much as to the Parisians, and expected they 
would have sent word over to me, being an Art Professor, 
to ask whether I wanted it burnt down. But no message 

or intimation to that effect ever reached me 

And this is the last I will tell you for the present, of my 
new ideas, but a troublesome one : namely, that we are 
henceforward to have a duplicate power of political economy; 
and that the new Parisian expression for its first principle 
is not to be "laissez faire," but "laissez re-faire." 

I cannot, however, make anything of these new French 
fashions of thought till I have looked at them quietly a 
little. 



i84 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 



So to-day I will content myself with telling you what 
we Communists of the old school meant by Communism ; 
and it will be worth your hearing, for — I tell you simply in 
my "arrogant" way — we know, and have known, what 
Communism is — for our fathers knew it and told us, three 
thousand years ago ; while you baby Communists do not 
so much as know what the name means, in your own 
English or French — no, not so much as whether a House 
of Commons impHes, or does not imply, also a House of 
Uncommons ; nor whether the Holiness of the Commune, 
which Garibaldi came to fight for, had any relation to the 
Holiness of the "Communion" which he came to fight 
against. 

Will you be at the pains, now, however, to learn rightly, 
and once for all, what Communism is? First, it means 
that everybody must work in common, and do common or 
simple work for his dinner ; and that if any man will not do 
it, he must not have his dinner. That much, perhaps, 
you thought you knew ? — but you did not think we Com- 
munists of the old school knew it also? You shall have it, 
then, in the words of the Chelsea farmer and stout Catholic, 
I was telling you of in our last number. He was born in 
Milk Street, London, three hundred and ninety-one years 
ago, and he planned a Commune flowing with milk and 
honey, and otherwise Elysian ; and he called it the ' ' Place 
of Well being," or Utopia; which is a word you perhaps 
have occasionally used before now, like others, without 
understanding it ; — (in the article of the Liverpool Daily 
Post before referred to, it occurs felicitously seven times). 
You shall use it in that stupid way no more, if I can help 
it. Listen how matters really are managed there. 

The chief, and almost the only business of the govern- 
ment, is to take care that no man may live idle, but that 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 1 85 

every one may follow his trade diligently : yet they do not 
wear themselves out with perpetual toil from morning to 
night, as if they were beasts of burden, which, as it is indeed 
a heavy slavery, so it is everywhere the common course of 
life amongst all mechanics except the Utopians : but they, 
dividing the day and night into twenty-four hours, appoint 
six of these for work, three of which are before dinner and 
three after; they then sup, and, at eight o'clock, counting 
from noon, go to bed and sleep eight hours ; the rest of 
their time, besides that taken up in work, eating, and 
sleeping, is left to every man's discretion ; yet they are not 
to abuse that interval of luxury and idleness, but must 
employ it in some proper exercise, according to their 
various inclinations, which is, for the most part, reading, 

"But the time appointed for labor is to be narrowly 
examined, otherwise, you may imagine that, since there 
are only six hours appointed for work, they may fall under 
a scarcity of necessary provisions : but it is so far from 
being true that this time is not sufficient for supplying them 
with plenty of all things, either necessary or convenient, 
that it is rather too much ; and this you will easily appre- 
hend if you consider how great a part of all other nations 
is quite idle." 

' ' First, women generally do little, who are the half of 
mankind; and, if some few women are diligent, their 
husbands are idle: then," — 

We will stop a minute, friends, if you please, for I want 
you, before you read further, to be once more made fully 
aware that this farmer who is speaking to you is one of the 
sternest Roman Catholics of his stern time ; and, at the fall 
of Cardinal Wolsey, became Lord High Chancellor of 
England in his stead. 
" — then, consider the great company of idle priests, and 



I86 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

of those that are called religious men ; add to these, all 
rich men, chiefly those who have estates in land, who are 
called noblemen and gentlemen, together with their families, 
made up of idle persons, that are kept more for show than 
use : add to these, all those strong and lusty beggars that 
go about, pretending some disease in excuse for their 
begging ; and, upon the whole account, you will find, that 
the number of those by whose labors mankind is supplied 
is much less than you, perhaps, imagined : then, consider 
how few of those that work are employed in labors that are 
of real service ! for we, who measure all things by money, 
give rise to many trades that are both vain and superfluous, 
and serve only to support riot and luxury : for if those who 
work were employed only in such things as the conveniences 
of life require, there would be such an abundance of them, 
that the prices of them would so sink that tradesmen coidd 
not be m.aintain€d by their gains ;^' — (italics mine — Fair 
and softly. Sir Thomas ! we must have a shop round the 
corner, and a pedlar or two on fair-days, yet) — "if all those 
who labor about useless things were set to more profitable 
employments, and if all that languish out their lives in sloth 
and idleness (every one of whom consumes as much as any 
two of the men that are at work) were forced to labor, you 
may easily imagine that a small proportion of time would 
serve for doing all that is either necessary, profitable or 
pleasant to mankind, especially while pleasure is kept 
within its due bounds." 

So much for the first law of old Communism, respecting 
work. Then the second respects property, and it is that 
the public, or common, wealth, shall be more and statelier 
in all its substance than private or singular wealth ; that is 
to say (to come to my own special business for a moment) 
that there shall be only cheap and few pictures if any, in 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 187 

the insides of houses, where nobody but the owner can see 
them ; but costly pictures, and many, on the outsides of 
houses, where the people can see them : also that the Hotel- 
de-Ville, or Hotel of the whole Town, for the transaction 
of its common business, shall be a magnificent building, 
much rejoiced in by the people, and with its tower seen far 
away through the clear air ; but that the hotels for private 
business or pleasure, cafes, taverns, and the like shall be 
low, few, plain, and in back streets ; more especially such 
as furnish singular and uncommon drinks and refreshments ; 
but that the fountains that furnish the people's common 
drink should be very lovely and stately, and adorned with 
precious marbles, and the like. Then further, according 
to old Communism, the private dwellings of uncommon 
persons — dukes and lords — are to be very simple, and 
roughly put together — such persons being supposed to be 
above all care for things that please the commonalty ; but 
the buildings for public or common service, more especially 
schools, almshouses and workhouses, are to be externally 
of a majestic character, as being for noble purposes and 
charities; and in their interiors furnished with many 
luxuries for the poor and sick. And finally and chiefly, 
it is an absolute law of old Communism that the fortunes of 
private persons should be small, and of little account in the 
State ; but the common treasure of the whole nation should 
be of superb and precious things in redundant quantity, as 
pictures, statues, precious books ; gold and silver vessels, 
preserved from ancient times ; gold and silver bullion laid 
up for use, in case of any chance need of buying anything 
suddenly from foreign nations; noble horses, cattle and 
sheep, on the public lands ; and vast spaces of land for 
culture, exercise, and garden, round the cities, full of 
flowers, which, being everybody's property, nobody could 



1 88 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

gather; and of birds, which, being everybody's property, 
nobody could shoot. And, in a word, that instead of a 
common poverty, or national debt, which every poor 
person in the nation is taxed annually to fulfill his part of, 
there should be a common wealth, or national reverse of 
debt, consisting of pleasant things, which every poor person 
in the nation should be summoned to receive his dole of, 
annually ; and of pretty things, which every person capable 
of admiration, foreigners as well as natives, should unfeign- 
edly admire, in an aesthetic, and not a covetous, manner 
(though for my own part, I can't understand what it is that 
I am taxed now to defend, or what foreign nations are 
supposed to covet, here). But truly, a nation that has 
got anything to defend of real public interest, can usually 
hold it ; and a fat Latin communist gave for sign of the 
strength of his commonalty, in its strongest time, — 

" Privatus illis census erat brevis. 
Commune magnum." 



II.— FREEDOM OR SLAVERY. 

FREEMEN, indeed ! You are slaves, not to masters 
of any strength or honor ; but to the idlest talkers 
at that floral end of Westminster bridge. Nay, to 
countless meaner masters than they. For though, indeed, 
as early as the year 1102, it was decreed in a council at 
St. Peter's, Westminster, "that no man for the future 
should presume to carry on the wicked trade of selling 
men in the markets, like brute beasts, which hitherto had 
been the common custom of England," the no less wicked 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 189 

trade of ««a?<?r-selling men in markets has lasted to this 
day ; producing conditions of slavery differing from the 
ancient ones only in being starved instead of full-fed : and 
besides this, a state of slavery unheard of among the nations 
till now, has arisen with us. In all former slaveries, Egyp- 
tian, Algerine, Saxon, and American, the slave's complaint 
has been of compulsory work. But the modern Politico- 
Economic slave is a new and far more injured species, 
condemned to Compulsory Idleness, for fear he should 
spoil other people's trade; the beautifully logical condition 
of the national Theory of Economy in this matter being 
that, if you are a shoemaker, it is a law of Heaven that 
you must sell your goods under their price, in order to 
destroy the trade of other shoemakers ; but if you are not 
a shoemaker, and are going shoeless and lame, it is a law 
of Heaven that you must not cut yourself a bit of cowhide, 
to put between your foot and the stones, because that would 
interfere with the total trade of shoemaking. 
Which theory, of all the wonderful — ! 



HI.— MACHINERY. 

YOU think it a great triumph to make the sun draw 
brown landscapes for you. That was also a discovery 
and some day may be useful. But the sun had drawn 
landscapes before for you, not in brown, but in green, and 
blue, and all imaginable colors, here in England. Not one 
of you ever looked at them then ; not one of you cares for 
the loss of them now, when you have shut the sun out with 



190 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

smoke, so that he can draw nothing more, except brown 
blots through a hole in a box. There was a rocky valley 
between Buxton and Bakewell, once upon a time, divine as 
the Vale of Tempe ; you might have seen the Gods there 
morning and evening — Apollo and all the sweet Muses of 
the Light — walking in fair procession on the lawns of it, and 
to and fro among the pinnacles of its crags. You cared 
neither for Gods nor grass, but for cash (which you did 
not know the way to get) ; you thought you could get it 
by what the Times calls "Railroad Enterprise." You 
Enterprised a Railroad through the valley — you blasted its 
rocks away, heaped thousands of tons of shale into its lovely 
stream. The valley is gone, and the Gods with it ; and 
now, every fool in Buxton can be at Bakewell in half an 
hour, and every fool in Bakewell at Buxton ; which you 
think a lucrative process of exchange — you Fools Every- 
where. 

Observe. A man and a woman, with their children, 
properly trained, are able easily to cultivate as much 
ground as will feed them ; to build as much wall and roof 
as will lodge them, and to spin and weave as much cloth as 
will clothe them. They can all be perfectly happy and 
healthy in doing this. Supposing that they invent machin- 
ery which will build, plow, thresh, cook, and weave, and 
that they have none of these things any more to do, but 
may read, or cricket, all day long, I believe myself that 
they will neither be so good nor so happy as without the 
machines. But I waive my belief in this matter for the 
time. I will assume that they become more refined and 
moral persons, and that idleness is in future to be the mother 
of all good. But observe, I repeat, the power of your 
machine is only in enabling them to be idle. It will not 
enable them to live better than they did before, nor to live 



FORS CLAVIGERA. igi 

in greater numbers. Get your heads quite clear on this 
matter. Out of so much ground, only so much living is 
to be got, with or without machinery. You may set a 
million of steam-plows to work on an acre, if you like — 
out of that acre only a given number of grains of corn will 
grow, scratch or scorch it as you will. So that the question 
is not at all whether, by having more machines, more of 
you can live. No machines will increase the possibilities 
of life. They only increase the possibilities of idleness. 
Suppose, for instance, you could get the oxen in your 
plow driven by a goblin, who would ask for no pay, not 
even a cream bowl, — (you have nearly managed to get it 
driven by an iron goblin, as it is ;) — Well, your furrow will 
take no more seeds than if you had held the stilts yourself. 
But, instead of holding them, you sit, I presume, on a bank 
beside the field, under an eglantine ; — watch the goblin at 
its work, and read poetry. Meantime, your wife in the 
house has also got a goblin to weave and wash for her. 
And she is lying on the sofa, reading poetry. 



IV.— TAXES. 

DO you see, in The Times of yesterday and the day 
before, 22nd and 23rd June, that the Minister of 
France dares not, even in this her utmost need, put 
on an income tax ; and do you see why he dares not ? 

Observe, such a tax is the only honest and just one ; 
because it tells on the rich in true proportion to the poor, 
and because it meets necessity in the shortest and bravest 
way, and without interfering with any commercial operation. 



192 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

All rich people object to income tax, of course ; — they 
like to pay as much as a poor man pays on their tea, sugar, 
and tobacco — nothing on their incomes. 

Whereas, in true justice, the only honest and wholly 
right tax is one not merely on income, but property ; 
increasing in percentage as the property is greater. And 
the main virtue of such a tax is that it makes publicly known 
what every man has, and how he gets it. 

For every kind of Vagabonds, high and low, agree in 
their dislike to give an account of the way they get their 
living, still less, of how much they have got sewn up in 
their breeches. It does not, however, matter much to a 
country that it should know how its poor Vagabonds live ; 
but it is of vital moment that it should know how its rich 
Vagabonds live ; and that much of knowledge, it seems to 
me, in the present state of our education, is quite attainable. 
But that, when you have attained it, you may act on it 
wisely, the first need is that you should be sure you are 
living honestly yourselves. That is why I told you in 
my second letter, you must learn to obey good laws before 
you seek to alter bad ones : — I will amplify now a little 
the three promises I want you to make. Look back at 
them. 

I. You are to do good work, whether you live or die. 
It may be you will have to die ; — well, men have died for 
their country often, yet doing her no good ; be ready to 
die for her in doing her assured good : her, and all other 
countries with her. Mind your own business with your 
absolute heart and soul ; but see that it is a good business 
first. That it is com and sweet peas you are producing, 
— not gunpowder and arsenic. And be sure of this, liter- 
ally : — -you must simply rather die than make any destroying 
mechanism or compound. You are to be literally employed 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 



193 



in cultivating the ground, or making useful things, and 
carrying them where they are wanted. Stand in the 
streets, and say to all who pass by : — Have you any vine- 
yard we can work in, — not Naboth's? In your powder 
and petroleum manufactory we work no more. 

I have said little to you yet of any of the pictures 
engraved — you perhaps think, not to the ornament of my 
book. 

Be it so. You will find them better than ornaments in 
time. Notice, however, in the one I give you with this 
letter — the "Charity" of Giotto — the Red Queen of Dante, 
and ours also, — how different his thought of her is from the 
common one. 

Usually she is nursing children, or giving money. 
Giotto thinks there is little charity in nursing children ; — 
bears and wolves do that for their little ones ; and less still 
in giving money. 

His Charity tramples upon bags of Gold — has no use 
for them. She gives only corn and flowers; and God's 
angel gives her, not even these — but a Heart. 

Giotto is quite literal in his meaning, as well as figura- 
tive. Your love is to give food and flowers, and to labor 
for them only. 

But what are we to do against powder and petroleum, 
then? What men may do; not what poisonous beasts 
may. If a wretch spits in your face, will you answer by 
spitting in his? if he throw vitriol at you, will you go to 
the apothecary for a bigger bottle? 

There is no physical crime, at this day, so far beyond 
pardon, — so without parallel in its untempted guilt, as the 
making of war-machinery, and invention of mischievous 
substance. Two nations may go mad, and fight like harlots 
— God have mercy on them ; — ^you, who hand them carving- 



194 ^^^ COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

knives off the table, for leave to pick up a dropped sixpence, 
what mercy is there iox you? We are so humane, forsooth, 
and so wise ; and our ancestors had tar-barrels for witches ; 
we will have them for everybody else, and drive the witches' 
trade ourselves, by daylight ; we will have our cauldrons, 
please Hecate, cooled (according to the Darwinian theory), 
with baboons' blood, and enough of it, and sell hell-fire in 
the open streets. 

II. Seek to revenge no injury. You see now — do not 
you — a little more clearly why I wrote that? what strain 
there is on the untaught masses of you to revenge themselves, 
even with insane fire? 

Alas, the Taught masses are strained enough also ; — 
have you not just seen a great religious and reformed nation, 
with its goodly Captains — philosophical, — sentimental, — 
domestic, — evangelical-angelical-minded altogether, and 
with its Lord's Prayer really quite vital to it, — come and 
take its neighbor nation by the throat, saying, "Pay me 
that thou owest." 

Seek to revenge no injury : I do not say, seek to punish 
no crime : look what I hinted about failed bankers. Of 
that hereafter. 

III. Learn to obey good laws ; and in a little while, you 
will reach the better learning — how to obey good Men, who 
are living, breathing, unblinded law ; and to subdue base 
and disloyal ones, recognizing in those the light, and ruling 
over these the power, of the Lord of Light and Peace, 
whose Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, and his 
Kingdom from generation to generation. 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 195 



v.— CLERGYMEN. 

I HAD an impatient remonstrance sent me the other day, 
by a country clergyman's wife, against that saying in 

my former letter, ' ' Dying has been more expensive to 
you than living." Did I know, she asked, what a country 
clergyman's life was, and that he was the poor man's only 
friend. 

Alas, I know it, and too well. What can be said of 
more deadly and ghastly blame against the clergy of 
England, or any other country, than that they are the poor 
man's only friends? 

Have they, then, so betrayed their Master's charge and 
mind, in their preaching to the rich ; — so smoothed their 
words, and so sold their authority, — that, after twelve hun- 
dred years entrusting of the gospel to them, there is no man 
in England (this is their chief plea for themselves forsooth) 
who will have mercy on the poor, but they ; and so they 
must leave the word of God, and serve tables ? 

I would not myself have said so much against English 
clergymen, whether of country or town. Three — and one 
dead makes four — of my dear friends (and I have not many 
dear friends) are country clergymen ; and I know the ways 
of every sort of them ; my architectural tastes necessarily 
bringing me into near relations with the sort who like 
pointed arches and painted glass ; and my old religious 
breeding having given me an unconquerable habit of taking 
up with any traveling tinker of evangelical principles I may 



196 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

come across ; and even of reading, not without awe, the 
prophetic warnings of any persons belonging to that 
peculiarly well-informed "persuasion," such, for instance, 
as those of Mr. Zion Ward ' ' Concerning the fall of Lucifer, 
in a letter to a friend, Mr. William Dick, of Glasgow, price 
twopence," in which I read (as aforesaid, with unfeigned 
feelings of concern), that "the slain of the Lord shall be 
MAN-Y ; that is, man, in whom death is, with all the works 
of carnality, shall be burned up ! " 

But I was not thinking either of English clergy, or of 
any other group of clergy, specially, when I wrote that 
sentence ; but of the entire Clerkly or Learned Company, 
from the first priest of Egypt to the last ordained Belgravian 
curate, and of all the talk they have talked, and all the 
quarreling they have caused, and all the gold they have 
had given them, to this day, when still, "they are the poor 
man's only friends" — and by no means all of them that, 
heartily ! though I see the Bishop of Manchester has of 
late been superintending — I beg his pardon. Bishops don't 
superintend — looking on, or over, I should have said, — the 
recreations of his flock at the seaside ; and ' ' the thought 
struck him" that railroads were an advantage to them in 
taking them for their holiday out of Manchester. The 
thought may, perhaps, strike him, next, that a working 
man ought to be able to find "holy days" in his home, as 
well as out of it.* 

A year or two ago, a man who had at the time, and has 
still, important official authority over much of the business 
of the country, was speaking anxiously to me of the misery 
increasing in the suburbs and back streets of London, and 
debating, with the good help of the Oxford Regius Pro- 
fessor of Medicine — who was second in council — what 

* See \ 159, (written seven years ago), in Munera Pulveris. 



FOJ^S CLAVIGERA. 



T97 



sanitary or moral remedy could be found. The debate 
languished, however, because of the strong conviction in 
the minds of all three of us that the misery was inevitable 
in the suburbs of so vast a city. At last, either the minister 
or physician, I forget which, expressed the conviction. 
"Well," I answered, "then you must not have large 
cities," "That," answered the minister, "is an unpractical 
saying — you know we must have them, under existing 
circumstances." 

I made no reply, feeling that it was vain to assure any 
man actively concerned in modern parliamentary business, 
that no measures were "practical" except those which 
touched the source of the evil opposed. 



VI.— CARLYLE. 

READ your Carlyle, then, with all your heart, and 
with the best of brain you can give ; and you will 
learn from him first, the eternity of good law, and the 
need of obedience to it : then, concerning your own imme- 
diate business, you will learn further this, that the beginning 
of all good law, and nearly the end of it, is in these two 
ordinances, — That every man shall do good work for his 
bread ; and secondly, That every man shall have good 
bread for his work. But the first of these is the only one 
you have to think of If you are resolved that the work 
shall be good, the bread will be sure ; if not, — believe me, 
there is neither steam plow nor steam mill, go they never 
so glibly, that will win it from the earth long, either for you, 
or the Ideal Landed Proprietor. 



1 98 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 



VII.— EXPECTANTS OF TURNIPS. 

VIRTUALLY, the entire business of the world turns 
on the clear necessity of getting on table, hot or cold, 
if possible, meat — but, at least, vegetables, — at some 
hour of the day, for all of us : for you laborers, we will say 
at noon ; for us aesthetical persons, we will say at eight in 
the evening ; for we like to have done our eight hours' 
work of admiring abbeys before we dine. But, at some 
time of day, the mutton and turnips, or, since mutton itself 
is only a transformed state of turnips, we may say, as suffi- 
ciently typical of everything, turnips only, must absolutely 
be got for us both. And nearly every problem of State 
policy and economy, as at present understood, and practiced, 
consists in some device for persuading you laborers to go 
and dig up dinner for us reflective and aesthetical persons, 
who like to sit still, and think, or admire. So that when 
we get to the bottom of the matter, we find the inhabitants 
of this earth broadly divided into two great masses ; — the 
peasant paymasters — spade in hand, original and imperial 
producers of turnips ; and, waiting on them all round, a 
crowd of polite persons, modestly expectant of turnips, for 
some — too often theoretical — service. 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 199 



VIII.— RICH ? 

I HAD to go to Verona by the afternoon train. In the 
carriage with me were two American girls with their 

father and mother, people of the class which has lately 
made so much money suddenly, and does not know what 
to do with it : and these two girls, of about fifteen and 
eighteen, had evidently been indulged in everything, (since 
they had had the means,) which western civilization could 
imagine. And here they were, specimens of the utmost 
which the money and invention of the nineteenth century 
could produce in maidenhood, — children of its most pro- 
gressive race, — enjoying the full advantages of political 
liberty, of enlightened philosophical education, of cheap 
pilfered literature, and of luxury at any cost. Whatever 
money, machinery, or freedom of thought, could do for 
these two children, had been done. No superstition had 
deceived, no restraint degraded them : — types, they could 
not but be, of maidenly wisdom and felicity, as conceived 
by the forwardest intellects of our time. 

And they were traveling through a district which, if 
any in the world, should touch the hearts and delight the 
eyes of young girls. Between Venice and Verona ! Portia's 
villa perhaps in sight upon the Brenta, — ^Juliet's tomb to 
be visited in the evening, — blue against the southern sky, 
the hills of Petrarch's home. Exquisite midsummer sun- 
shine, with low rays, glanced through the vine-leaves ; all 
the Alps were clear, from the lake of Garda to Cadore, and 
to furthest Tyrol. What a princess's chamber, this, if 



200 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

these are princesses, and what dreams might they not 
dream, therein ! 

But the two American girls were neither princesses, nor 
seers, nor dreamers. By infinite self-indulgence, they had 
reduced themselves simply to two pieces of white putty 
that could feel pain. The flies and dust stuck to them as 
to clay, and they perceived, between Venice and Verona, 
nothing but the flies and the dust. They pulled down the 
blinds the moment they entered the carriage, and then 
sprawled, and writhed, and tossed among the cushions of 
it, in vain contest, during the whole fifty miles, with every 
miserable sensation of bodily affliction that could make 
time intolerable. They were dressed in thin white frocks, 
coming vaguely open at the backs as they stretched or 
wriggled ; they had French novels, lemons, and lumps of 
sugar, to beguile their state with ; the novels hanging 
together by the ends of string that had once stitched them, 
or adhering at the corners in densely bruised dog's-ears, 
out of which the girls, wetting their fingers, occasionally 
extricated a gluey leaf. From time to time they cut a 
lemon open, ground a lump of sugar backward and for- 
ward over it till every fiber was in a treacly pulp ; then 
sucked the pulp, and gnawed the white skin into leathery 
strings, for the sake of its bitter. Only one sentence was 
exchanged, in the fifty miles, on the subject of things out- 
side the carriage (the Alps being once visible from a station 
where they had drawn up the blinds). 

"Don't those snow-caps make you cool?" 

* ' No — I wish they did. ' ' 

And so they went their way, with sealed eyes and 
tormented limbs, their numbered miles of pain. 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 201 



IX.— INTEREST. 

NOW then for Mr. Fawcett: — At the 146th page of the 
edition of his Manual previously quoted, you will 
find it stated that the interest of money consists of 
three distinct parts : 

1. Reward for abstinence. 

2. Compensation for the risk of loss. 

3. Wages for the labor of superintendence. 

I will reverse this order in examining the statements ; 
for the only real question is as to the first, and we had 
better at once clear the other two away from it. 

3. Wages for the labor of superintendence. 

By giving the capitalist wages at all, we put him at 
once into the class of laborers, which in my November 
letter I showed you is partly right; but, by Mr. Fawcett' s 
definition, and in the broad results of business, he is not a 
laborer. So far as he is one, of course, like any other, he 
is to be paid for his work. There is no question but that 
the partner who superintends any business should be paid 
for superintendence; but the question before us is only 
respecting payment for doing nothing. I have, for instance, 
at this moment ;^i5,ooo of bank stock, and receive ;^i,2oo 
odd, a year, from the Bank, but I have never received the 
slightest intimation from the directors that they wished for 
my assistance in the superintendence of that establishment ; 
— (more shame for them). But even in cases where the 
partners are active, it does not follow that the one who has 
most money in the business is either fittest to superintend 
it, or likely to do so ; it is indeed probable that a man who 



202 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

has made money already will know how to make more ; 
and it is necessary to attach some importance to property 
as the sign of sense : but your business is to choose and 
pay your superintendent for his sense, and not for his 
money. Which is exactly what Mr. Carlyle has been 
telling you for some time ; and both he and all his disciples 
entirely approve of interest, if you are indeed prepared to 
define that term as payment for the exercise of common 
sense spent in the service of the person who pays for it. I 
reserve yet awhile, however, what is to be said, as hinted 
in my first letter, about the sale of ideas. 

2. Compensation for risk. 

Does Mr. Fawcett mean by compensation for risk, pro- 
tection from it, or reward for running it? Every business 
involves a certain quantity of risk, which is properly covered 
by every prudent merchant, but he does not expect to make 
a profit out of his risks, nor calculate on a percentage on 
his insurance. If he prefer not to insure, does Professor 
Fawcett mean that his customers ought to compensate him 
for his anxiety ; and that while the definition of the first 
part of interest is extra payment for prudence, the definition 
of the second part of interest is extra payment for mpru- 
dence? Or, does Professor Fawcett mean, what is indeed 
often the fact, that interest for money represents such 
reward for risk as people may get across the green cloth at 
Homburg or Monaco? Because so far as what used to be 
business is, in modern political economy, gambling. Pro- 
fessor Fawcett will please to observe that what one gamester 
gains another loses. You cannot get anything out of 
Nature, or from God, by gambling ; — only out of your 
neighbor : and to the quantity of interest of money thus 
gained, you arc mathematically to oppose a precisely equal 
flfmnterest of somebody else's money. 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 20J 

These second and third reasons for interest then, assigned 
by Professor Fawcett, have evidently nothing whatever to 
do with the question. What I want to know is, why the 
Bank of England is paying me ^^i, 200 a year. It certainly 
does not pay me for superintendence. And so far from 
receiving my dividend as compensation for risk, I put my 
money into the bank because I thought it exactly the safest 
place to put it in. But nobody can be more anxious than 
I to find it proper that I should have ;^i,2c>o a year. 
Finding two of Mr. Fawcett' s reasons fail me utterly, I 
cling with tenacity to the third, and hope the best from it. 

The third, or first, — and now too sorrowfully the last — 
of the Professor's reasons, is this, that my ;^i,200 are 
given me as ' ' the reward of abstinence. ' ' It strikes me, 
upon this that if I had not my ;^ 15, 000 of Bank Stock I 
should be a good deal more abstinent than I am, and that 
nobody would then talk of rewarding me for it. It might 
be possible to find even cases of very prolonged and painful 
abstinence, for which no reward has yet been adjudged by 
less abstinent England. Abstinence may, indeed, have its 
reward, nevertheless ; but not by increase of what we abstain 
from, unless there be a law of growth for it, unconnected 
with our abstinence. "You cannot have your cake and 
eat it." Of course not ; and if you don't eat it, you have 
your cake ; but not a cake and a half! Imagine the com- 
plex trial of schoolboy minds, if the law of nature about 
cakes were, that if you ate none of your cake to-day, you 
would have ever so much bigger a cake to-morrow ! — which 
is Mr. Fawcett' s notion of the law of nature about money ; 
and, alas, many a man's beside, — it being no law of nature 
whatever, but absolutely contrary to all her laws, and not 
to be enacted by the whole force of united mankind. 

Not a cake and a quarter to-morrow, dunce, however 



^04 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

abstinent you are — only the cake you have, — if the mice 
don't get at it in the night. 

Interest, then, is not, it appears, payment for labor ; it 
is not reward for risk ; it is not reward for abstinence. 

What is it? 

One of two things it is ; — taxation, or usury. Of which 
in my next letter. 

An impatient correspondent of mine, Mr. W. C. Sillar, 
who has long been hotiy engaged in testifying publicly 
against the wickedness of taking interest, writes to me that 
all I say is mysterious, that I am bound to speak plainly, 
and above everything, if I think taking interest sinful, not 
to hold bank stock. 

Once for all, then, Mr. Sillar is wholly right as to the 
abstract fact that lending for gain is sinful ; and he has in 
various pamphlets, shown unanswerably that whatever is 
said either in the Bible, or in any other good and ancient 
book, respecting usury, is intended by the writers to apply 
to the receiving of interest, be it ever so little. But Mr. 
Sillar has allowed this idea to take possession of him, body 
and soul ; and is just as fondly enthusiastic about abolition 
of usury as some other people are about the liquor laws. 
Now of course drunkenness is mischievous, and usury is 
mischievous, and whoredom is mischievous, and idleness is 
mischievous. But we cannot reform the world by preach- 
ing temperance only, nor refusal of interest only, nor 
chastity only, nor industry only. I am myself more set on 
teaching healthful industry than anything else, as the 
beginning of all redemption ; then, purity of heart and 
body ; if I can get these taught, I know that nobody so 
taught will either get drunk, or, in any unjust manner, 
"either a borrower or a lender be." But I expect also far 
higher results than either of these, on which, being utterly 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 



205 



bent, I am very careless about such minor matters as the 
present conditions either of English brewing or banking. 
I hold bank stock simply because I suppose it to be safer 
than any other stock, and I take the interest of it, because 
though taking interest is, in the abstract, as wrong as war, 
the entire fabric of society is at present so connected with 
both usury and war, that it is not possible violently to 
withdraw, nor wisely to set example of withdrawing, from 
either evil. I entirely, in the abstract, disapprove of war ; 
yet have the profoundest sympathy with Colonel Yea and 
his fusiliers at Alma, and only wish I had been there with 
them. I have by no means equal sympathy either with 
bankers or landlords ; but am certain that for the present 
it is better that I receive my dividends as usual, and that 
Miss Hill should continue to collect my rents in Marylebone. 
"Ananias over again, or worse," Mr. Sillar will probably 
exclaim, when he reads this, and invoke lightning against 
me. I will abide the issue of his invocation, and only beg 
him to observe respecting either ancient or modern denuncia- 
tions of interest, that they are much beside the mark unless 
they are accompanied with some explanation of the manner 
in which borrowing and lending, when necessary, can be 
carried on without it. Neither are often necessary in 
healthy states of society ; but they always must remain so 
to some extent; and the name "Mount of Pity," * given 

♦The " Mount " is the heap of money in store for lending with- 
out interest. You shall have a picture of it in next number, as 
drawn by a brave landscape painter four hundred years ago; and 
it will ultimately be one of the crags of our own Mont Rose ; and 
well should be, for it was first raised among the rocks of Italy by 
a Franciscan monk, for refuge to the poor against the usury of the 
Lombard merchants who g.nve name to our Lombard Street, and 
perished by their usury, as their successors are like enough to do 
also. But the story goes back to Friedrich II, of Germany again, 
and is too long^ for this letter, 



2o6 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

• 

still in French and Italian to the pawnbroker's shop, 
descends from a time when lending to the poor was as 
much a work of mercy as giving to them. And both lend- 
ing and borrowing are virtuous, when the borrowing is 
prudent, and the lending kind ; how much otherwise than 
kind lending at interest usually is, you, I suppose, do not 
need to be told ; but how much otherwise than prudent 
nearly all borrowing is, and above everything, trade on a 
large scale on borrowed capital, it is very necessary for us 
all to be told. And for a beginning of other people's 
words, here are some quoted by Mr. Sillar from a work on 
the Labor question recently published in Canada, which, 
though common-place, and evidently the expressions of a 
person imperfectly educated, are true, earnest, and worth 
your reading : — 

"These Scripture usury laws, then, are for no particular 
race and for no particular time. They lie at the very 
foundations of national progress and wealth. They form 
the only great safeguards of labor, and are the security of 
civil society, and the strength and protection of commerce 
itself Let us beware, for our own sakes, how we lay our 
hand upon the barriers which God has reared around the 
humble dwelling of the laboring man 

" Business itself is a pleasure, but it is the anxieties and 
burdens of business arising all out of this debt system, 
which have caused so many aching pillows and so many 
broken hearts. What countless multitudes, during the last 
three hundred years, have gone down to bankruptcy and 
shame — what fair prospects have been forever blighted — 
what happy homes desolated — what peace destroyed — what 
ruin and destruction have ever marched hand in hand with 
this system of debt, paper, and usury ! Verily its sins have 
reached unto heaven, and its iniquities are very great. 

"What shall the end of these things be? God only 
knoweth. I fear the system is beyond a cure. All the 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 207 

great interests of humanity are overborne by it, and nothing 
can flourish as it ought till it is taken out of the way. It 
contains within itself, as we have at times witnessed, most 
potent elements of destruction which in one hour may 
bring all its riches to nought." 

.... It may be, that as we fix our laws in further 
detail, we may add some of the heavier yokes of Lycurgus, 
or Numa, or John the Baptist : and, though the Son of 
Man came eating and drinking, and turning water into 
wine, we may think it needful to try how some of us like 
living on locusts, or wild honey, or Spartan broth. But at 
least, I repeat, we are here, in England, to obey the law of 
Christ, if nothing more. 

Now the law of Christ about money and other forms 
of personal wealth, is taught, first in parables, in which He 
likens himself to the masters of this world, and explains the 
conduct which Christians should hold to Him, their heavenly 
Master, by that which they hold on earth, to earthly ones. 

He likens himself, in these stories, several times, to 
unkind or unjust masters, and especially to hard and 
usurious ones. And the gist of the parables in each case 
is, "If ye do so, and are thus faithful to hard and cruel 
masters, in earthly things, how much more should ye be 
faithful to a merciful Master, in heavenly things ? ' ' 

Which argument, evil-minded men wrest, as they do 
also the other scriptures, to their own destruction. And 
instead of reading, for instance, in the parable of the Usurer, 
the intended lesson of industry in the employment of God's 
gifts, they read in it a justification of the crime which, in 
other parts of the same scripture, is directly forbidden. 
And there is indeed no doubt that, if the other prophetic 
parts of the Bible be true, these stories are so worded that 
they may be touchstones ol the heart. They are nets, 



2o8 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

which sift the kindly reader from the selfish. The parable 
of the Usurer is like a mill sieve: — the fine flour falls 
through it, bolted finer ; the chaff sticks in it. 

Therefore, the only way to understand these difficult 
parts of the Bible, or even to approach them with safety, is 
first to read and obey the easy ones. Then the difficult 
ones all become beautiful and clear : — otherwise they remain 
venomous enigmas, with a Sphinx of destruction provoking 
false souls to read them, and ruining them in their own 
replies. 

Now the orders, ' ' not to lay up treasure for ourselves 
on earth," and to "sell that we have, and give alms," and 
to "provide ourselves bags which wax not old," are per- 
fectly direct, unmistakable, — universal ; and while we are 
not at all likely to be blamed by God for not imitating Him 
as a Judge, we shall assuredly be condemned by Him for 
not, under Judgment, doing as we were bid. But even if 
we do not feel able to obey these orders, if we must and 
will lay up treasures on earth, and provide ourselves bags 
with holes in them, — God may perhaps still, with scorn, 
permit us in our weakness, provided we are content with 
our earthly treasures, when we have got them, and don't 
oppress our brethren, and grind down their souls with 
them. We may have our old bag about our neck, if we 
will, and go to heaven like beggars ; — but if we sell our 
brother also, and put the price of his life in the bag, we 
need not think to enter the kingdom of God so loaded. A 
rich man may, though hardly, enter the kingdom of heaven 
without repenting him of his riches ; but not the thief, 
without repenting his theft ; nor the adulterer, without 
repenting his adultery ; nor the usurer, without repenting 
his usury. 

The nature of which last sin, let us now clearly 
understand, once for all. 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 209 

Mr. Harrison's letter, published in the Fors for June, 
is perhaps no less valuable as an evidence of the subtlety 
with which this sin has seized upon and paralyzed the 
public mind (so that even a man of Mr. Harrison's general 
intelligence has no idea why I ask a question about it), 
than as a clear statement of the present condition of the 
law, produced by the usurers who are "law-makers" for 
England, though lawyers are not. 

Usury is properly the taking of money for the loan or 
use of anything (over and above what pays for wear and 
tear), such use involving no care or labor on the part of 
the lender. It includes all investments of capital whatso- 
ever, returning "dividends," as distinguished from labdr 
wages, or profits. Thus anybody who works on a railroad 
as plate-layer, or stoker, has a right to wages for his 
work ; and any inspector of wheels or rails has a right to 
payment for such inspection ; but idle persons who have 
only paid a hundred pounds toward the road-making, have 
a right to the return of the hundred pounds, — and no more. 
If they take a farthing more, they are usurers. They may 
take fifty pounds for two years, twenty-five for four, five for 
twenty, or one for a hundred. But the first farthing they 
take more than their hundred, be it sooner or later, is usury. 

Again, when we build a house, and let it, we have a 
right to as much rent as will return us the wages of our 
labor, and the sum of our outlay. If, as in ordinary cases, 
not laboring with our hands or head, we have simply paid 
say — ;^i,ooo — to get the house built, we have a right to 
the ;^i,ooo back again at once, if we sell it; or, if we let 
it, to ;^5C)0 rent during two years, or ^^ 100 rent during ten 
years, or J[^\o rent during a hundred years. But if, sooner 
or later, we take a pound more than the thousand, we are 
usurers. 



2IO THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

And thus in all other possible or conceivable cases, the 
moment our capital is ' ' increased ' ' by having lent it, be it 
but in the estimation of a hair, that hair's-breadth of 
increase is usury, just as much as stealing a farthing is 
theft, no less than stealing a million. 

But usury is worse than theft, in so far as it is obtained 
either by deceiving people, or distressing them ; generally 
by both : and finally by deceiving the usurer himself, who 
comes to think that usury is a real increase, and that money 
can grow of money ; whereas all usury is increase to one 
person only by decrease to another ; and every grain of 
calculated Increment to the Rich, is balanced by its math- 
ematical equivalent of Decrement to the Poor. The Rich 
have hitherto only counted their gain ; but the day is 
coming, when the Poor will also count their loss — with 
political results hitherto unparalleled. 

For instance, my good old hairdresser at Camberwell 
came to me the other day, very uncomfortable about his 
rent. He wanted a pound or two to make it up ; and 
none of his customers wanted their hair cut. I gave him 
the pound or two, — with the result, I hope my readers 
have sagacity enough to observe, of distinct decrement to 
me, as increment to the landlord ; and then inquired of 
him, how much he had paid for rent, during his life. On 
rough calculation, the total sum proved to be between 1,500 
and 1,700 pounds. And after paying this sum, — earned, 
shilling by shilling, with careful snippings, and studiously 
skillful manipulation of tongs, — here is my poor old friend, 
now past sixty, practically without a roof over his head ; — 
just as roofless in his old age as he was in the first days of 
life, — and nervously wandering about Peckham Rye and 
East Norwood, in the east winter winds, to see if, perchance, 
any old customers will buy some balm for their thinning 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 2il 

locks — and give him the blessed balm of an odd half-crown 
or two, to rent shelter for his own, for three months more. 

Now, supposing that ;^ 1,500 of his had been properly 
laid out, on the edification of lodgings for him, ;^5oo should 
have built him a serviceable tenement and shop ; another 
;^500 have met the necessary repairing expenses for forty 
years; and at this moment he ought to have had his effi- 
cient freehold cottage, with tile and wall right weather- 
proof, and a nice little nest-egg of five hundred pounds in 
the Bank, besides. But instead of this, the thousand pounds 
has gone in payment to slovenly builders, each getting their 
own percentage, and doing as bad work as possible, under 
the direction of landlords paying for as little as possible of 
any sort of work. And the odd five hundred has gone into 
the landlord's pocket. Pure increment to him ; pure 
decrement to my decoratively laborious friend. No gain 
"begotten" of money; but simple subtraction from the 
pocket of the laboring person, and simple addition to the 
pocket of the idle one. 

I have no mind to waste the space of Fors in giving 
variety of instances. Any honest and sensible reader, if 
he chooses, can think out the truth in such matters for 
himself. If he be dishonest, or foolish, no one can teach 
him. If he is resolved to find reason or excuse for things 
as they are, he may find refuge in one lie after another ; 
and, dislodged from each in turn, fly from the last back to 
the one he began with. But there will not long be need 
for debate — nor time for it. Not all the lying lips of com- 
mercial Europe can much longer deceive the people in 
their rapidly increasing distress, nor arrest their straight 
battle with the cause of it. Through what confused noise 
and garments rolled in blood, — through what burning and 
fuel of fire, they will work out their victory, — God only 



212 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN, 

knows, nor what they will do to Barabbas, when they have 
found out that he w a Robber, and not a King. But that 
discovery of his character and capacity draws very near : 
and no less change in the world's ways than the former 
fall of Feudalism itself 

In the meantime, for those of us who are Christians, our 
own way is plain. We can with perfect ease ascertain 
what usury is ; and in what express terms forbidden 

"And if thy brother be poor, and powerless with his 
hands, at thy side, thou shalt take his part upon thee, to 
help him,* as thy proselyte and thy neighbor; and thy 
brother shall live with thee. Thou shalt take no usury of 
him, nor anything over and above, and thou shalt fear thy 
God. I am the Lord, and thy brother shall live with thee. 
Thou shalt not give him thy money, for usury ; and thou 
shalt not give him thy food, for increase." 

There is the simple law for all of us ; — one of those 
which Christ assuredly came not to destroy, but to fulfill : 
and there is no national prosperity to be had but in 
obedience to it. 

How we usurers are to live, with the hope of our gains 
gone, is precisely the old temple of Diana question. How 
Robin Hood or Cceur de Lion were to live without arrow 
or axe, would have been as strange a question to them, in 
their day. And there are many amiable persons who will 
not directly see their way, any more than I do myself, to 
an honest life ; only, let us be sure that this we are leading 
now is a dishonest one; and worse (if Dante and Shak- 
speare's mind on the matter are worth any heed, of which 
more in due time), being neither more nor less than a 

* Meaning, to do his work instead of him. Compare Acts xx. 
35. "I have showed you all things, how that, so laboring, ye 
ought to support the weak." 



FOUS CLAVIGERA. 



213 



spiritual manner of cannibalism, which so long as we 
persist in, every word spoken in Scripture of those who 
"eat my people as they eat bread," is spoken directly of 
us.* It may be an encouragement to some of us — especially 
those evangelically bred — in weaning ourselves slowly from 
such habits. 



X.— ST. GEORGE'S COMPANY. 

AS I am now often asked, in private letters, the consti- 
tution of St. George's Company, and cannot, hith- 
erto, refer, in answer, to any clear summary of it, I 
will try to write such a summary in this number of Fors ; 
that it may henceforward be sent to inquirers as alone 
sufficiently explanatory. 

The St. George's Company is a society established to 
carry out certain charitable objects, toward which it invites, 
and thankfully will receive, help from any persons caring 
to give it, either in money, labor, or any kind of gift. But 

*Dear Mr. Ruskin, ^thjuly, 1876. 

I see that you intend to speak on the question of usury 
in next Fors. Would it not be well, since the Bishops of the 
Established Church have not a word to offer in defense of their 
conduct, to appeal to some of the other sects that profess to take 
the teaching of the Bible and of Christ for their guidance? The 
Wesleyans, for instance, teach that the Bible was given almost 
verbally by the Spirit of God ; and John Wesley says his followers 
are "/o die sooner than put anything in pawn, or borrow and lend 
on usuty." Perhaps if you were to challenge the President and 
Conference, and call on them either to state that they do not 
accept the teaching of Moses, David, and Christ on this matter, or 
to bring the sin clearly before the minds of the members of their 
body, you might force the question on the attention of the profess- 
edly religious persons in the country. 

A Reader of Fors. 



214 ^^^ COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSK IN. 

the Company itself consists of persons who agree in certain 
general principles of action, and objects of pursuit, and who 
can, therefore, act together in effective and constant unison. 

These objects of pursuit are, in brief terms, the health, 
wealth, and long life of the British nation : the Company 
having thus devoted itself, in the conviction that the British 
nation is at present unhealthy, poor, and likely to perish, 
as a power, from the face of the earth. They accordingly 
propose to themselves the general medicining, enriching, 
and preserving in political strength, of the population of 
these islands ; they themselves numbering at present, in 
their ranks, about thirty persons, — none of them rich, 
several of them sick, and the leader of them, at all events, 
not likely to live long. 

Whether the nation be healthy, or in unwholesome 
degradation of body and mind ; wealthy, or in continual 
and shameful distress ; strong, or in rapid decline of political 
power and authority, — the reader will find debated through- 
out the various contents of the preceding volumes of Fors. 
But there is one public fact, which cannot be debated — that 
the nation is in debt. And the St. George's Company do 
practically make it their first, though not their principal, 
object, to bring that state of things to an end ; and to estab- 
lish, instead of a National Debt, a National Store. (See 
the last line of the fifth page of the first letter of the series, 
published ist January, 1871, and the eleventh, and twenty- 
seventh, letters, throughout.) 

That very few readers of this page have any notion, at 
this moment, what a National Debt is, or can conceive what 
a National Store should be, is one of many evil conse- 
quences of the lies which, under the title of "Political 
Economy," have been taught by the ill-educated, and 
mostly dishonest, commercial men, who at present govern 
the press of the country. 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 215 

I have again and again stated the truth in both these 
matters, but must try once more to do it, emphatically, and 
intelligibly. 

A "civilized nation" in modern Europe consists, in 
broad terms, of (A) a mass of half-taught, discontented, and 
mostly penniless populace, calling itself the people ; of (B) a 
thing which it calls a government — meaning an apparatus 
for collecting and spending money ; and (C) a small number 
of capitalists, many of them rogues, and most of them 
stupid persons, who have no idea of any object of human 
existence other than money-making, gambling, or cham- 
pagne-bibbing. A certain quantity of literary men, saying 
anything they can get paid to say, — of clergymen, saying 
anything they have been taught to say, — of natural philos- 
ophers, saying anything that comes into their heads, — and 
of nobility, saying nothing at all, combine in disguising the 
action, and perfecting the disorganization, of the mass; 
but with respect to practical business, the civilized nation 
consists broadly of mob, money-collecting machine, and 
capitalist. 

Now when this civilized mob wants to spend money for 
any profitless or mischievous purposes, — fireworks, illumin- 
ations, battles, driving about from place to place, or what 
not, — being itself penniless, it sets its money-collecting 
machine to borrow the sum needful for these amusements 
from the civilized capitalist. 

The civilized capitalist lends the money, on condition 
that through the money-collecting machine, he may tax 
the civilized mob thenceforward forever. The civilized 
mob spends the money forthwith, in gunpowder, infernal 
machines, masquerade dresses, new boulevards, or anything 
else it has set its idiotic mind on for the moment ; and 
appoints its money collecting machine to collect a daily tax 



21 6 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

from its children, and children's children, to be paid to the 
capitalists from whom it had received the accommodation, 
thenceforward forever. 

That is the nature of a National Debt. 

In order to understand that of a National Store, my 
readers must first consider what any store whatever, ser- 
viceable to human beings, consists of. A store properly 
means a collection of useful things. Literally, it signifies 
only a quantity, or much of anything. But the heap of 
broken bottles which, I hear, is accumulating under the 
principal cliff of Snowdon, through the contributions of 
tourists from the summit, is not properly to be called a 
store ; though a binfuU of old wine is. Neither is a heap 
of cannon-balls a store ; * though a heap of potatoes is. 
Neither is a cellar full of gunpowder a store ; though a 
cellar full of coals is. A store is, for squirrels, of nuts ; for 
bees, of honey ; for men, of food, clothes, fuel, or pretty 
things, such as toys or jewels, — and, for educated persons, 
of books and pictures. 

And the possession of such a store by the nation would 
signify, that there were no taxes to pay ; that everybody 
had clothes enough, and some stuff laid by for next year ; 
that everybody had food enough, and plenty of salted pork, 
pickled walnuts, potted shrimps, or other conserves, in the 
cupboard ; that everybody had jewels enough, and some 
of the biggest laid by, in treasuries and museums ; and, of 
persons caring for such things, that everybody had as many 
books and pictures as they could read or look at ; with 
quantities of the highest quality besides, in easily accessible 
public libraries and galleries. 

* They may serve for the defense of the store, of course ; — so 
may the broken bottles, stuck on the top of a wall. But the lock 
of your cupboard is not the contents of it. 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 



217 



Now the wretches who have, at present, the teaching 
of the people in their hands, through the public press, tell 
them that it is not ' ' practical ' ' to attempt to bring about 
this state of things ; — and that their government, or money- 
collecting machine, must not buy wine, potatoes, jewels, 
or pictures for them ; but must buy iron plates two feet 
thick, gunpowder and red tape. And this popular instruc- 
tion is given, you will find, in the end, by persons who 
know that they could not get a percentage themselves, 
(without the public's coming to know it,) on buying 
potatoes or pictures ; but can get it, and a large one, on 
manufacturing iron, on committing wholesale murder, or on 
tying up papers with red tape. 

Now the St. George's Company propose to themselves, 
— and, if the God they believe in, lives, will assuredly 
succeed in their proposition, — to put an end to this rascally 
and inhuman state of things, and bring about an honest 
and human state of them, instead. And they have already 
actually begun the accumulation of a National Store of 
good and useful things ; by the collection and administration 
of which, they are not themselves to derive any gain 
whatsoever, but the Nation only. 

We are, therefore, at present, as I said at first, a com- 
pany established for a charitable purpose ; the object of 
charity being the entire body of the British nation, now 
paying taxes to cheating capitalists. But we hope to 
include, finally, in our ranks a large number of the people 
themselves, and to make quite a different sort of people of 
them, carrying out our company's laws, to the abolition of 
many existing interests and in abrogation of many existing 
arrangements. 

And the laws which we hope thus to see accepted are 
none of them new ; but have been already recommended 



21 8 ^ THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

by all wise men, and practiced by all truly prosperous 
states ; nor is there anything whatever new in the modes of 
administration proposed ; — and especially be it noted, there 
is nothing of the present leader's fancies, in any part or 
character of the scheme — which is merely the application, 
to our nationally diseased thoughts and practices, of the 
direct precepts of the true sages of past time, who are every 
one of them in harmony concerning all that is necessary 
for men to do, feel, and know. 

And we hope to establish these laws, not by violence, 
but by obeying them ourselves, to the extent of which 
existing circumstances admit ; and so gradually showing 
the advantage of them, and making them acceptable to 
others. Not that, for the enforcement of some of them 
(the abolition of all manufactures that make the air unwhole- 
some, for instance), we shall hesitate to use the strong 
hand, when once our hands are strong. But we shall not 
begin by street riots to throw down our neighbor's chim- 
neys, or break his machinery ; — though what we shall end 
in doing — God knows, not I, — but I have my own thoughts 
concerning it ; not at present needing exposition. 

The Companions, for the most part, will remain exactly 
in the condition of life they held before entering the Society; 
but they will direct all their powers, and some part of their 
revenues, in that condition, to the advance of its interests. 
We hold it shortsighted and ruinous policy to form separate 
institutions, or attempt the sudden establishment of new 
systems of labor. Every one of us must use the advantages 
he now possesses, whatever they may be, and contend with 
the difficulties arising out of his present position, gradually 
modifying it, as he can, into conformity with the laws 
which the Society desires may be ultimately observed by 
all its members. 



f 

FORS CLAVIGERA. « 219 

The first of our conditions of Companionship is Honesty. 
We are a company of honest persons, vowing to have no 
fellowship with dishonest ones. Persons who do not know 
the meaning of the word " Honesty," or who would in any- 
wise, for selfish convenience, tolerate any manner of 
cheating or lying, either in others or themselves, we class 
indiscriminately with the self-conscious rogues, for whom 
we have more respect ; and our separation from all such is 
to be quite manifest and unmistakable. We do not go 
into monasteries, — we seek no freedom of conscience in 
foreign lands, — we profess no severities of asceticism at 
home. We simply refuse to have any dealings with rogues, 
whether at home or abroad. 

I repeat, for this must be strictly understood ; we are a 
company of honest persons ; and will add to ourselves none 
but persons of that quality. We, for our own part, entirely 
decline to live by passing bad half-crowns, by selling bad 
goods, or by lying as to their relative quality. And we 
hold only such communication with persons guilty of such 
practices, as we should with any other manner of thieves or 
liars. 

It will follow that anything gravely said by a Companion 
of St. George may be, without investigation, believed ; and 
anything sold by one, without scrutiny, bought for what it 
is said to be, — of which recovery of old principles of human 
speech and commerce, no words can set forth the infinitude 
of beneficial consequences, when it is once brought about 
among a discernible and every day increasing body of 
persons. 

The second condition of Companionship is the resolu- 
tion, so far as we have ability, to earn our own living with 
our own hands, and not to allow, much less compel, other 
people to work for us : this duty being of double force, — 



220 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

first, as necessary to our own health and honor ; but much 
more, as striking home at the ghastly universal crime of 
modern society, — stealing the laborer's bread from him 
(making him work, that is to say, for ours, as well as his 
own), and then abusing and despising him for the degrada- 
tion of character which his perpetual toil involves;* 
deliberately, in many cases, refusing to encourage him in 
economy, that we may have him at our mercy to grind in 
the mill ; always selling as much gin and beer to him as we 
can persuade him to swill, at the rate of twenty-pence for 
twopence' worth, (see Letter XXVII.,) to fill our own 
pockets ; and teaching him pious catechisms, that we may 
keep him our quiet slave. 

We cannot, at present, all obey this great law concern- 
ing labor, however willing we may be ; for we may not, in 
the condition of life in which we have been brought up, 
have been taught any manual labor by which we now could 
make a living. I myself, the present Master of the Society, 
cannot obey this, its second main law ; but then I am only 
a makeshift Master, taking the place till somebody more fit 
for it be found. Sir Walter Scott's life, in the full strength 
of it at Ashestiel, and early at Abbotsford, with his literary 
work done by ten, or at latest twelve, in the morning ; and 
the rest of the day spent in useful work with Tom Purdie 
in his woods, is a model of wise moral management of 
mind and body, for men of true literary power ; but I had 
neither the country training of body, nor have the natural 
strength of brain, which can reach this ideal in anywise. 
Sir Walter wrote as a stream flows ; but I do all my brain- 

* See Letter XI. (November, '71,) pages 142 to 145, the most 
pregnant four pages in the entire series of these letters ; and com- 
pare that for January of this year, pp. 100 — loi, and for April, 
p. 170. 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 221 

work like a wrung sponge, and am tired out, and good for 
nothing, after it. Sir Walter was in the open air, farm- 
bred, and playing with lambs, while I was a poor little 
Cockney wretch, playing, in a dark London nursery, with 
a bunch of keys. I do the best I can, and know what 
ought to be ; and that is all the Company really need of me. 
I would fain, at this moment, both for pleasure and duty's 
sake, be cutting the dead stems out of my wood, or learn- 
ing to build a dry stone wall under my good mason, Mr. 
Usher, than writing these institutes of St. George ; but the 
institutes are needed, and must be written by me, since 
there is nobody else to write them. 

Any one, therefore, may be a Companion of St. George 
who sincerely does what they can, to make themselves 
useful, and earn their daily bread by their own labor : and 
some forms of intellectual or artistic labor, inconsistent (as 
a musician's) with other manual labor, are accepted by the 
Society as useful ; provided they be truly undertaken for 
the good and help of all ; and that the intellectual laborer 
ask no more pay than any other workman. A scholar can 
generally live on less food than a plowman and there is 
no conceivable reason why he should have more.* And 
if he be a false-hearted scholar, or a bad painter or fiddler, 
there is infinite reason why he should have less. My 
readers may have been surprised at the instant and eager 
assertion, as of a leading principle, in the first of these 
letters, (January, '71,) that people cannot live by art. But 

^ * Again, I have more myself— but that is because I have been 
ill-bred; and I shall be most thankful to take less, as soon as other 
people cease to be paid for doing nothing. People cry out upon 
me for asking ten shillings for a year's Fors ; but never object to 
Mr. Barber's paying his clerk a guinea for opening his study door 
to me five times, charging the same to St. George's account. (See 
Fors of April, pp. 186, 187, 188). 



222 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

I spoke swiftly, because the attempt so to live is among the 
worst possible ways they can take of injurious begging. 
There are a few, a very few persons born in each genera- 
tion, whose words are worth hearing ; whose art is worth 
seeing. These born few will preach, or sing, or paint, in 
spite of you ; they will starve like grasshoppers, rather than 
stop singing; and even if you don't choose to listen, it is 
charitable to throw them some crumbs to keep them alive. 
But the people who take to writing or painting as a means 
of livelihood, because they think it genteel, are just by so 
much more contemptible than common beggars, in that 
they are noisy and offensive beggars. I am quite willing 
to pay for keeping our poor vagabonds in the workhouse ; 
but not to pay them for grinding organs outside my door, 
defacing the streets with bills and caricatures, tempting 
young girls to read rubbishy novels, or deceiving the whole 
nation to its ruin, in a thousand leagues square of dirtily 
printed falsehood, every morning at breakfast. Whatever 
in literature, art, or religion, is done for money, is poisonous 
itself; and doubly deadly, in preventing the hearing or 
seeing of the noble literature and art which have been done 
for love and truth. If people cannot make their bread 
by honest labor, let them at least make no noise about the 
streets; but hold their tongues, and hold out their idle 
hands humbly ; and they shall be fed kindly. 

Then the third condition of Companionship is, that, after 
we have done as much manual work as will earn our food, 
we all of us discipline ourselves, our children, and any one 
else willing to be taught, in all the branches of honorable 
knowledge and graceful art attainable by us. Having 
honestly obtained our meat and drink, and having suffi- 
ciently eaten and drunken, we proceed, during the rest of 
the day, to seek after things better than meat and drink ; 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 



223 



and to provide for the nobler necessities of what, in ancient 
days, Englishmen used to call their souls. 

To this end, we«hall, as we increase in numbers, establish 
such churches and schools as may best guide religious 
feeling, and diffuse the love of sound learning and prudent 
art. And when I set myself first to the work of forming 
the Society, 1 was induced to do so chiefly by the con- 
sciousness that the balanced unison of artistic sensibility 
with scientific faculty, which enabled me at once to love 
Giotto, and learn from Galileo, gave me singular advantages 
for a work of this kind. More particularly, the course of 
study through which, after being trained in the severest 
schools of Protestant divinity, I became acquainted with 
the mythology of Greece, and legends of Rome, in their 
most vivid power over the believing minds of both nations, 
permits me now to accept with freedom and respect the 
concurrence of a wider range of persons holding different 
views on religious subjects, than any other scholar I know, 
at the present day, in England, would feel himself secure 
in the hope of reconciling to a common duty, and in 
uncontested elements of faith. 

The scheme, and elementary means, of this common 
education, I am now occupied in arranging and choosing 
as I best may.* In especial, I have set myself to write 
three grammars— of geology, botany, and zoology, which 
will contain nothing but indisputable facts in those three 
branches of proper human learning ; and which, if I live a 
little longer, will embrace as many facts as any ordinary 
schoolboy or schoolgirl need be taught. In these three 
grammars, {Deticaiion, Proserpina and Love's Meinie,\^\ 

*See Fors for January of this year, pp. 109, no. 
+ This book I shall extend, if time be ^iven me, from its first 
proposed form into a parallel one with the two others. 



224 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

shall accept every aid that sensible and earnest men of 
science can spare me, toward the task of popular education : 
and I hope to keep thankful records of the names of the 
persons who are making true discoveries in any of these 
sciences, and of the dates of such discovery, which shall be 
unassailably trustworthy as far as they extend. I hope also 
to be able to choose, and in some degree provide, a body 
of popular literature of entirely serviceable quality. Of 
some of the most precious books needed, I am preparing, 
with the help of my friends, new editions, for a common 
possession in all our school libraries. 

If I have powers fitted for this task (and I should not 
have attempted it but in conviction that I have), they are 
owing mainly to this one condition of my life, that, from 
my youth up, I have been seeking the fame, and honoring 
the work, of others ; — never my own. I first was driven 
into literature that I might defend the fame of Turner; 
since that day I have been explaining the power, or pro- 
claiming the praise, of Tintoret, — of Luini, — of Carpaccio, — 
of Botticelli, — of Carlyle ; — never thinking for an instant of 
myself: and sacrificing what little faculty, and large pleas- 
ure, I had in painting, either from nature or noble art, that, 
if possible, I might bring others to see what I rejoiced in, 
and understand what I had deciphered. There has been 
no heroism in this, nor virtue ; — but only, as far as I am 
myself concerned, quaint ordering of Fate ; but the result 
is, that I have at last obtained an instinct of impartial and 
reverent judgment, which sternly fits me for this final work, 
to which, if to anything, I was appointed. 

And for the right doing of it, and for all future work 
of the same kind, requiring to be done for the Society by 
other persons, it is absolutely needful that the person 
charged with it should be implicitly trusted, and accurately 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 225 

obeyed by the Companions, in all matters necessary to the 
working of the Society. He cannot lose his time in conten- 
tion or persuasion *, he must act undisturbedly, or his mind 
will not suffice for its toil ; and with concurrence of all the 
Society's power, or half their power will be wasted, and the 
whole perverted, by hesitation and opposition. His authority 
over them must correspond precisely, in the war against 
the poverty and vice of the State, to that of a Roman 
Dictator, in his war against its external enemies. 

Of a Roman '^Dictator,'' I say, observe : not a Roman 
' ' Emperor. " It is not the command of private will, but the 
dictation of necessary law, which the Society obeys : — only, 
the obedience must be absolute, and without question ; 
faithful to the uttermost, — that is to say, trusting to the 
uttermost. The practice of faith and obedience to some 
of our fellow-creatures is the alphabet by which we learn 
the higher obedience to heaven ; and it is not only needful 
to the prosperity of all noble united action, but essential to 
the happiness of all noble living spirits. 



XI.— THE END OF THE WHOLE MATTER. 

THE following series of aphorisms contain the gist 
of Eors Clavigera, and may serve to facilitate the 
arrangement of its incidental matter. 
I. Any form of government will work, provided the 
governors are real, and the people obey them ; and none 
will work, if the governors are unreal, or the people dis- 
obedient. If you mean to have logs for kings, no quantity 
of liberty in choice of the wood will be of any profit to 



226 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

you : — nor will the wisest or best governor be able to serve 
you, if you mean to discuss his orders instead of obeying 
them. Read carefully on this matter Letter XIII., pp. 
176 and 177. 

2. The first duty of government is to see that the 
people have food, fuel, and clothes. The second, that they 
have means of moral and intellectual education. 

3. Food, fuel, and clothes can only be got out of the 
ground, or sea, by muscular labor ; and no man has any 
business to have any, unless he has done, if able, the 
muscular work necessary to produce his portion, or to 
render (as the labor of a surgeon or physician renders), 
equivalent benefit to life. It indeed saves both toil and 
time that one man should dig, another bake, and another 
tan ; but the digger, baker, and tanner are alike bound to 
do their equal day's duty; and the business of the govern- 
ment is to see that they have dpne it, before it gives any 
one of them their dinner. 

4. While the daily teaching of God's truth, doing of 
His justice, and heroic bearing of His sword, are to be 
required of every human soul according to its ability, the 
mercenary professions of preaching, law-giving, and fighting 
must be entirely abolished. 

5. Scholars, painters, and musicians, may be advisedly 
kept, on due pittance, to instruct or amuse the laborer 
after, or at, his work ; provided the duty be severely 
restricted to those who have high special gifts of voice, 
touch, and imagination ;* and that the possessors of these 
melodious lips, light-fingered hands, and lively brains, do 

* Such limitation being secured by the severity of the required 
education in the public schools of art, and thought ; and by the 
high standard of examination fixed, before granting license of 
exhibition, in the public theaters, or picture galleries. 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 227 

resolutely undergo the normal discipline necessary to 
insure their skill ; the people whom they are to please, 
understanding, always, that they cannot employ these 
tricksy artists without working double-tides themselves, to 
provide them with beef and ale. 

6. The duty of the government, as regards the distribu- 
tion of its work, is to attend first to the wants of the most 
necessitous; therefore, to take particular charge of the 
back streets of every town ; leaving the fine ones, more or 
less, according to their finery, to take care of themselves. 
And it is the duty of magistrates, and other persons in 
authority, but especially of all bishops, to know thoroughly 
the numbers, means of subsistence, and modes of life of the 
poorest persons in the community, and to be sure that they 
at least are virtuous and comfortable ; for if poor persons 
be not virtuous, after all the wholesome discipline of povery, 
what must be the state of the rich, under their perilous 
trials and temptations?* — but, on the other hand, if the 
poor are made comfortable and good, the rich have a fair 
chance of entering the kingdom of heaven also, if they 
choose to live honorably and decently. 

7. Since all are to be made to labor for their living, and 
it is not possible to labor without materials and tools, these 
must be provided by the government, for all persons, in the 

* Here is just an instance of what might at first seem to be a 
jest; but is a serious and straightforward corollary from the 
eternally true fact stated by St. Timothy : "They that will be rich 
fall into temptation and a snare, and into many (oolish lusts, which 
drown men in destruction and perdition ; " and by Horace : 
" Quanto quisque sibi plura negaverit 
Ab Dis plura feret." 
The passage might at first be thought inconsistent with what is ' 
said above of the "degradation" which p>erpetual toil involves. 
But toil and poverty are two different things. Poverty ennobles, 
and secures ; toil degrades, and endangers. We are all bound to 
fulfill our task : but happy only if we can also enter into our rest. 



228 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

necessary quantities. If bricks are to be made, clay and 
straw must be provided ; if sheep are to be kept, grass ; if 
coats are to be made, cloth; if oakum to be picked, 
oakum. All these raw materials, with the tools for work- 
ing them, must be provided by the government, at first, 
free of cost to the laborer, the value of them being returned 
to them as the first-fruits of his toil ; and no pawnbrokers 
or usurers may be allowed to live by lending sea to fisher- 
men, air to fowlers, land to farmers, crooks to shepherds, or 
bellows to smiths. 

8. When the lands and seas belonging to any nation are 
all properly divided, cultivated, and fished, its population 
cannot be increased, except by importing food in exchange 
for useless articles, — that is to say, by living as the toy- 
manufacturers of some independent nation, which can both 
feed itself, and afford to buy toys besides. But no nation 
can long exist in this servile state. It must either 
emigrate, and form colonies to assist in cultivating the land 
which feeds it, or become entirely slavish and debased. 
The moment any nation begins to import food,* its 
political power and moral worth are ended. 

9. All the food, clothing, and fuel required by men can 
be produced by the labor of their own arms on the earth 
and sea ; all food is appointed to be so produced, and must 
be so produced at their peril. If instead of taking the 
quantity of exercise made necessary to their bodies by 
God, in the work appointed by God, they take it in hunt- 
ing or shooting, they become ignorant, irreligious, and 

, * It may always import such food as its climate cannot produce, 
in exchange for such food as it can ; it may buy oranges with com, 
or pepper with cheese. But not with articles that do not support 
life. Separate cities may honorably produce saleable art ; Limoges 
its enamel, Sheffield its whittles ; but a nation must not live on 
enamel or whittles. 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 229 

finally insane, and seek to live by fighting as well as by 
hunting ; whence the type of Nimrod in the circle of the 
Hell-towers, which I desired you to study in Dante. If 
they do not take exercise at all, they become sensual, and 
insane in worse ways. A^id it is physically impossible that 
true religious hiowledge, or pure morality, should exist 
among any classes of a nation who do not work with their 
hands for their bread. Read Letter XI. carefully. 

10. The use of machinery* in agriculture throws a 
certain number of persons out of wholesome employment, 
who must thenceforward either do nothing or mischief. 
The use of machinery in art destroys the national intellect ; 
and, finally, renders all luxury impossible. All machinery 
needful in ordinary life to supplement human or animal 
labor may be moved by wind or water ; while steam, or 
any mode of heat-power, may only be employed justifiably 
under extreme or special conditions of need ; as for speed 
on main lines of communication, and for raising water from 
great depths, or other such work beyond human strength. 

11. No true luxury, wealth, or religion is possible to 
dirty persons; nor is it decent or human to attempt to 
compass any temporal prosperity whatever by the sacrifice 
of cleanliness. . The speedy abolition of all abolishable 
filth is the first process of education ; f the principles of 
which I state in the second group of aphorisms following. 

* Foolish people are continually quibbling and stupefying them- 
selves about the word "machine." Briefly, any instrument is a 
machine so far as its action is, in any particular, or moment, beyond 
the control of the human hand. A violin, a pencil, and plow, are 
tools, not machines. A grinding or^an, or a windmill, is a machine, 
not a tool ; often the two are combmed ; thus a lathe is a machine, 
and the workman's chisel, used at it, a tool. 

t The ghastly squalor of the once lovely fields of Dulwich, 
trampled into mud, and strewn with rags and paper by the filthy 
London population, bred in cigar smoke, which is attracted by the 
Crystal Palace, would alone neutralize all possible gentlemanly 
education in the district. 



230 THE COMMUNISM OF JOHN RUSKIN. 

12. All education must be moral first ; intellectual 
secondarily. Intellectual, before — (much more without) — 
moral education, is, in completeness, impossible; and in 
incompleteness, a calamity. 

13. Moral education begins in making the creature to 
be educated, clean, and obedient. This must be done 
thoroughly, and at any cost, and with any kind of compul- 
sion rendered necessary by the nature of the animal, be it 
dog, child, or man. 

14. Moral education consists next in making the 
creature practically serviceable to other creatures, accord- 
ing to the nature and extent of its own capacities ; taking 
care that these be healthily developed in such service. It 
may be a question how long, and to what extent, boys and 
girls of fine race may be allowed to run in the paddock 
before they are broken ; but assuredly the sooner they are put 
to such work as they are able for, the better. Moral educa- 
tion is summed when the creature has been made to do its 
work with delight, and thoroughly ; but this cannot be until 
some degree of intellectual education has been given also. 

15. Intellectual education consists in giving the creature 
the faculties of admiration, hope, and love. 

These are to be taught by the study of beautiful 
Nature ; the sight and history of noble persons ; and the 
setting forth of noble objects of action. 

16. Since all noble persons hitherto existent in the 
world have trusted in the government of it by a supreme 
Spirit, and in that trust, or faith, have performed all their 
great actions, the history of these persons will finally mean 
the history of their faith ; and the sum of intellectual 
education will be the separation of what is inhuman, in 
such faiths, and therefore perishing, from what is human, 
and, for human creatures, eternally true. 



FORS CLAVIGERA. 



231 



These sixteen aphorisms contain, as plainly as I can 
speak it, the substance of what I have hitherto taught, and 
am now purposed to enforce practice of, as far as I am able. 
It is no business of mine to think about possibilities ; — any 
day, any moment, may raise up some one to take the 
carrying forward of the plan out of my hands, or to furnish 
me with larger means of prosecuting it ; meantime, neither 
hastening nor slackening, I shall go on doing what I can, 
with the people, few or many, who are ready to help me. 



THE END. 



HUMBOLDT LIBRARY OF SCIENCE 

is the only publication of its kind, — the only one containing popu- 
lar acientific wrorks at lo%v prices. For the most part it con- 
tains only works of acknowledged excellence, by authors of 
the first rank in the world of science. Such works are landmarks 
destined to stand forever in the hiatory of Mind. Here, in 
truth, is "strong meat for them that are of full age." 

In this series are well represented the writings of 

DARWIN, HUXLEY, SPENCER, TYNDALL, PROCTOR, 

CLIFFORD, CLODD, BAGEHOT, BAIN, BATES, 

WALLACE, TRENCH, ROMANES, GRANT ALLEN, 

BALFOUR STEWART, GEIKIE, HINTON, 

SULLY, FLAMMARION, PICTON, 

WILLIAMS, WILSON, 

and other leaders of thought in our time. As well might one be a 
mummy in the tomb of the Pharoahs as pretend to live the life of 
the nineteenth century without communion of thought with 
these its Master Minds. 

Science has in our time invaded every domain of thought and 
research, throwing new light upon the problems of 

PHILOSOPHY, THEOLOGY, 

MAN'S HISTORY, GOVERNMENT, 

SOCIETY, MEDICINE. 

In short, producing a revolution in the intellectual and moral world. 
No educated person, whatever his calling, can afford to keep him- 
self out of the main current of contemporary scientific research and 
exposition. 

The price of the several numbers is fifteen cents each (double 
numbers, thirty cents.) Subscription price, $3.00 per year, for 24 
numbers. 

The Humboldt Publishing Co.. 

28 Lafayett* Place, 

NEW YORK. 



= •» 



*: 



SPECIAL. 

The Humboldt Library is published 
semi-monthly, and supplied to subscribers 
in U. S., Canada and Mexico, at $3.00 per 
year, payable in advafice^ for 24 consecutive 
numbers. No extra charge for double 
numbers. To European Countries, Japan, 
&c. , the rate is $4. 00 yer year. 

The numbers for 1891 will be 143 to 
166 inclusive. Subscriptions will be taken 
to March ist, for the year, and can com- 
mence at No. 142 or 144, as the subscriber 
may elect. After March ist subscriptions 
commence with the number nearest to 
date of subscription. 

The back numbers of the Library are 
always in stock, and will be mailed to any 
address on receipt of price, 15 cents for 
single, and 30 cents for double numbers. 

All orders promptly filled, and books 
mailed on same day remittance is received. 
Payments can be made by Postal Note, 
Express Money Order, Registered Letter, 
or Draft on New York Banks, and are 

STRICTLY IN ADVANCE. 

Sample Copies 15 cents. (Double num- 
bers 30 cents.) Catalogues free. 






^^IIIBRARYQ^ 



, ^\AE UNIVERS/A ^lOSAN 



WtUiJIIlJ^i 



8 



CO 

so 

> 



University of California 

SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 

405 Hilgard Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90024-1388 

Return this material to tiie library 

from which it was borrowed. 






"^•AavaaiH^' ^^^WvaaiTT?^^^ "'jJiJONVsor 



r 



4^H 



I: 



vjclOSAf 

8 



o 



^WEUNIVERy/A vvlOSANCElfX^ 









^lllBRARYCk. 



^«ir imn/rnri 



_inr mrrir. 




^.!/0JI]V3J0'^ 



^<!/0dnV3J0^ 



3 1158 00978 2730 



^OFCAllFOff^ 



>;,.OFCAIIFO/?/^ 




^<?Aavaan-i'^ ^^Aavaam^ 



^WF IINIVER.5-/A 




o 



vvlOSANCFlfx^ 




'^/^ajAINO 3WV 



^^WEUNIVERS/,^ ^V:lOSAHCfl% 



r — ^ > o a, 

i , J£S0(£H|mreGION(a UBRMY FACILITY 





'^<!/0dnvD-5o'^ '^<!/0dnv3JO'^ 



ss^ 



^\^F■UNIVERS//, 







vvlOSAfJGElfr> 




''^/iildAINnjVW 



.^,0FCAIIF0% .S:OFCAUFO% 




^ 



^, 



^^AavaaiTi^ >&Aav}ian-^^ 



^^^lllBRARY(9/^ ^^^HIBRARYa<^ ^^WE UNIVERS/^ 




>:lOSANCElfj> 



^(SOJIWDJO'^ ^«!/0JnV3J0'^ <ril30KVS01^ %a3AINIlJUV' 




^^,OFCA1IFO% AOfCAllF0% 




A\^EUNIVER% 




^>:lOSANCfl% 




^0A8viiaii-i^ ^<?Aavaani^ -^TiijoNvsov^ "^/jadAiNa-awv 



AWEUNIVERJ//;^ A>:lOSANCElfX;A 



^HIBRARYOc. ^HIBRARYQ>- 



>i 



^ 



/Or-1 SMcrn Si irf 



