■eRKIltT 

LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY OP 
\ CAIIFOHNU 



L - 



^7- 



AN 

ENGLISH-MALAY 

DICTIONARY 



By 

Rev. W. G. SHELLABEAR, D.D. 

Author of "A Practical Malay Grammar," 
"Malay English Vocabulary" etc. 



All Rights Reserved 



SINGAPORE : 

Printed and Published by the Methodist Publishing House, 
1916. 



PREFACE 

The accomplisliment of the author's original intention, which was to 
produce an English-Malay Vocabulary containing some three or four 
thousand words, has been so long deferred through pressure of other literary 
i\'ork, that it has been thought better to abandon it altogether, especially 
in view of the fact that other vocabularies have appeared meanwhile which 
•supply the need for a limited word list. The scope of the original work 
•has therefore been greatly extended, with the object of producing not a 
mere Vocabulary but a Dictionary which would be as complete as possible. 

An intimate acquaintance with Favre's French-Malay and with Klin- 
kert's Dutch-Malay dictionaries, and tlie constant use of these valuable 
■works during a period of many years, has enabled the author to profit by 
the experience gained by these writers, and it is hoped that all the essential 
information contained in these more voluminous works will be found in 
this volume in a more convenient and accessible form. 

Subsidiary Exglisii Meaxixgs. 

The great defect of many dictionaries of Oriental languages is that 
in looking up an English word one finds a long list of unfamiliar equi- 
valents, without any indication as to the precise shade of meaning which 
is to be given to each. The English student is therefore quite at a loss 
as to which word he should select ; and similarly the Oriental student who 
is seeking the precise meaning of an English word finds so many almost 
synonymous equivalents in his own language that he is very little the 
wiser for his search. In order to obviate this difficulty as far as possible, 
we have followed the plan of the best English-French and English-German 
dictionaries, giving a number of English meanings wherever necessary for 
each English word, and arranging the Malay equivalents under these 
various headings. These English meanings have been taken in the main 
from Webster's International Unabridged Dictionary, and in the same order 
as they are found there, so Avhenever the student finds any ambiguity in 
these meanings he should refer to Webster's dictionary. The typographic 
arrangement of Eoman and Italic letters, and the placing of the subsidiary 
English meanings in parentheses, has been designed so that the particular 
meaning of the word of which the student is in search will readily meet 
the eye, and thus the necessity for reading through a whole column of 
meanings (such as will be found, for instance, in Klinkert's dictionary) 
will be a^■oided, thereby saving nnich time. 

Proxuxciatioxs of Exglisii Words. 

Anotlier feature which we believe is rather unusual in dictionaries 
of Oriental languages is that for the sake of Asiatic students we have 
given the pronunciation of every English word. These pronunciat;ion8 

208 



IV PREFACE. 

are based for the most part on Webster, but we have been careful to follo\r 
the English usage rather than the American, and for this purpose have 
consulted three or four other English dictionaries. This feature has added 
enormousl}' to the labour of the final preparation of the work, and i& 
responsible for some delay, but we believe that it will be greatly appre- 
ciated b}' Malay students and Malay-speaking Chinese. 

Dialectic Differences ix Malay. 

The Malay language is so widespread, and is spoken by such a variety 
of different races (Malays proper, Javanese, Sundanese, Achinese, 
Siamese, and Chinese) that the differences of dialect are very considerable. 
The Malay spoken on the three great islands of Borneo, Java and Sumatra 
is not by any means the same. There are variations in different parts of 
these islands, and along the coast of the Peninsula, the East Coast especial- 
ly differing from the West. But for the purpose of the English student 
of Malay or of tlie Malay student of English it is not at all necessary to- 
consider all the differences of dialect. For practical purposes there are- 
four main divisions of the Malay language. The first of these is the- 
pure Malay, which is spoken in Malacca and Johore and the opposite coast 
of Sumatra (Siak, Indragiri and Jambi) and is known to the Dutch as 
the Eiouw-Lingga Malay. This is the language of Malay literature, and 
is understood by educated Malays everywhere. Secondly should be placed 
the Malay spoken in the north of the Peninsula, w^hich may be called Perak 
or Penang Malay, and in which Kedah influences appear to predominate. 
Thirdly tliere is the Malay spoken by the Babas or Straits-born Chinese, 
which is a very distinct dialect, and is of great importance in a work of 
this kind, owing to the fact that the Babas nearly all speak English "as 
well as Malay, and that perhaps the majority of Europeans come in touch 
with them and learn Malay from them rather than from the Malays. And 
fourthly we have considered the* Malay spoken in the Netherlands Indies- 
as a separate dialect, and by this we mean not the so-called Batavia Malay, 
which contains a very large proportion of Sundanese words, but the Malay 
spoken in places so widely separated as Banjcrmasin, Pontianak, Palem- 
bang and Medan, whicli approximates more nearly to the pure Malay, and 
as compared with the Malay of Java contains only a small admixture of 
Javanese and Dutch words. For the benefit of Englishmen and Americans; 
living in the Dutch Indies, and for the increasing number of Chinese who* 
through the schools of the Tiong Hoa Iloe Koan are learning English, 
we have given a large number of the words whicli are in general use through- 
out Netherlands India. 

Help Received with the Dialects. 

The author has been very fortunate in being able to obtain valuable- 
assistance in regard to all these dialectic differences. The first draft of 
this dictionary from A to L was made in collaboration with a Perak Malay, 
Mr. Masohor"bin Kulop Endut, and the remainder with a Riouw Malay, 
Said Abdu'r-rahman. The latter has assisted with the final revision of 
the whole work, and having living for some years in Palembang, was of 



PREFACE. V 

great assistance in regard to the Netherlands Indies words. A great 
deal of help in regard to such words was also received from Mr. E. A. 
Van Wulven, who worked with the author all through the preparation of 
the first draft, turning up words in the Dutch and French dictionaries, 
and thus rapidly placing these sources of information at his disposal. 
Many valuable suggestions in regard to words used in the Dutch Indies 
have also been received from Mr. Goh Leng Inn, a Banjermasin Chinese, 
and in regard to Perak and Penang words, from Mohamed Said bin 
Mahomed Hussain, of Alor Star, Kedah, and from Mr. G, M. Laidlaw, of 
the Civil Service, who for many years was stationed in Perak, and from 
Mr. Hellier of the Education Department, who read the proof sheets with, 
his visiting teacher, Haji Osman, of Province Wellesley. It is to be 
regretted that pressure of time prevented the author from making use of 
a great number of Penang words suggested by Guru Abdu '1-aziz, a Penang 
man, who is a visiting teacher in Singapore. These valuable suggestions 
have been filed for use in a future edition, if such be required. Haji 
Mohamed Said, Secretary to the Sultan of Johore, has also read the proof 
sheets and made many helpful corrections and additions. All the work 
connected with the Baba dialect was done by Mr. Chew Cheng Yong, who 
translated the Baba version of the New Testament in collaboration with 
the author, and further help in regard to Baba words has been given by 
Mr. Goh Hood Keng, by Mrs. Chew Cheng Yong, and by the linotype 
operator who set the dictionary, Mr. Tan Keng Watt, who is himself a 
Baba. 

Malay Eoot Forms Used. 

In every Malay-English dictionary the Malay words are of necessity 
to be found only in their root forms, derived forms being grouped under 
the root heading. Similarly it has appeared to the author to be best 
in this English-Malay dictionary to give the Malay equivalents for the 
most part in the root form only. This is contrary to the plan adopted by 
Favre and by Klinkert, who under "couper^' and "snijden,^' for example, 
give memotorg, mergerat, memerggal, etc., and Klinkert feels it necessary 
to add (van potorg) (van kerat) (van perggal). It seems much simpler 
to give only the root, and to trust to the intelligence of the student to 
give the proper derived form when using the word. The author has made 
this innovation in spite of the fact that a Malay will give the words every 
time in the forms nimotorg, mrgrat, etc., rather than in the root form. 
For the proper use of the prefix m, and other derived forms, the student 
is referred to the author's Practical Malay Grammar. 

Derivations. 

It is customary in Oriental dictionaries to give derivations, and in a 
dictionary of Malay words the derivations are of unusual value, owing to 
the language containing such a large proportion of foreign words. In an 
English-Malay dictionary, however, the real importance of knowing the 
derivation of a word is merely to give an indication as to whether the word 
is likely to be known by the class of person to whom one is speaking or to 



VI PREFACE. 

whom one is writing. Thus words of Portuguese, English and Dutch 
origin are not much known except in the great centres of population, and 
Arabic words are for the most part only known to Mohammedans, and 
many of them only to those Malays who have some knowledge of Moslem 
literature. Some Arabic and Sanskrit words have, however, become so 
thoroughly incorporated in the Malay language by long usage that they 
are universally known, and are no longer to be considered as forieign words. 
In this work the derivation of such words is not given, as for instance, 
smoa, fihir, umor, hacha, etc. As regard Arabic, Sanskrit, Persian and 
Hindustani words, it has been thought convenient to omit the derivation 
from those words which are current to such an extent as to be known to 
the Baba Chinese. 

The Baba-Malay Dialect. 

The importance of this dialect, as being the business language of the 
Straits Settlements — the medium of communication of the Chinese mer- 
chants and shopkeepers with the Europeans on the one hand, and the 
Malays on the other, seems to justify the attention which is given to it in 
this work. Words and phrases which are not used by the Babas, and 
would be unfamiliar to them, and perhaps hardly understood, are marked 
with an asterisk [*], and those which are peculiar to them, being corrup- 
tions of the pure Malay or actually Chinese words, are marked (B). By 
this plan it is hoped to accomplish two purposes — (1) to make the 
dictionary useful to the Babas, and thereby introduce them to many Malay 
words which they do not know, and which would greatly enrich their 
vocabulary, and (2) to indicate to European students of Malay those words 
which are most commonly used in the colloquial language of the Settle- 
ments, which we think will be a great assistance to the vast majority bf 
those who come to these lands, and have no ambition to make a thorough 
study of the language as spoken by the Malays. A dissertation on the 
subject of " Baba Malay " will be found in the Appendix. 

Chinese "Loan" Words. 

A considerable number of Chinese words have become thoroughly in- 
corporated in the Malay language, and are well known to the Malays. 
Perhaps the most familiar are chat, chenterg, horgsi, locherg, loterg, sampan 
and siryJcek, certain terms connected with gambling, and words used by 
Chinese doctors, such as sergse, m.ek, po'ho, koyoJc, etc. The Chinese words 
used by the Babas form a far larger class, and a great number of these 
have not found a place in this dictionary, for where there is a Malay 
equivalent in common use among the Babas we have not thought it neces- 
sary to always give the Chinese word. Moreover the Babas use an immense 
number of Chinese words in connection with their marriage and other 
ceremonials, which we have not yet had an opportunity to collect. In 
order to make these loan words accessible to the student of Chinese, we 
have added in most cases the correct Chinese spelling with the tonal marks 
as they will be found in Douglas' Dictionary of the Amoy Colloquial, with- 
out which it would be exceedingly difficult to recognise them. It should 



PREFACE Vll 

be remarked that it would appear that nearly all the Chinese words which 
have come into the Malay language are from the so-called Hok-kien or 
Amoy dialect, and many of them have the Chang-chew sounds, so that the 
connection between the Baba pronunciation and the real Amoy sound as 
given by Douglas is not always evident to a person unfamiliar with the 
peculiarities of the Chinese dialects. For instance boeh is from the Chang- 
chew hoeh, and not from the Amoy heh; and paksui is from the Chang- 
chew phah-sui'^, which looks quite different to the Amoy phah-srg, though 
it is really the same. Similarly one would hardly guess that the word 
cliiau for oar could come from the Amoy cliiu^ if one were not acquainted 
with the Chang-chew sound, and it is not easy to recognise mrg-li in the 
Baba word muili. 

Arabic Words. 

To find an Arabic derivation from the sound of the word as it is 
pronounced by a Malay is almost as difficult as to discover the Chinese. 
This difficulty arises from the fact that the Arabic has two h's, and two 
t's, which the Malay pronounces just alike, and he makes very little if any 
distinction between h, q and kh, and between stn^ shin, sad and thd, all of 
which he sounds like our letter s. Consequently one often does not know 
where to look for a word in either a Malay or an Arabic dictionary. More- 
over many Arabic words are utterly mispronounced by Malays, having 
apparently been picked up from the spelling rather than the sound; thus 
to the average Malay who does not know Arabic wahyu becomes tvahi, and 
fatica has become ptua, the letter z is often changed to j, and where the 
accent in Arabic falls on the last syllable it is almost always changed to 
the penultimate, as in the very common words jawab and hitah, which in 
Arabic are jaicab and kitah. Hence in order to assist the student who 
desires to know the correct form of the Arabic words, and at the same 
time to avoid the use of letters with dots under them, we have adopted a 
system of spelling found in Faris' Arabic Grammar, using small capitals h, t 
for the Arabic hd, td and sad, and q for kaf, the other Arabic letters being 
represented in the usual way by th for tlid, kh for khd, dz for dzdl, z for 
zd, sh for shin, dl for dldd, tl for tld, and gh for ghain. Much of the 
dictionary was already in type before this arrangement was decided upon, 
and the necessary changes could not always be made, but as far as possible 
the Arabic spelling has been given wherever the difference from the Malay 
spelling is such as to make it difficult to find the word in a dictionary. 
Generally the Arabic form is not given more than once in a group of 
English words of similar meaning, so if not found under any particular 
word it should be looked for under similar English words on the same 
page. 

Persian and Hindustani Words. 

A considerable number of Persian words are to be found in the Malay 
language. Probably all of these have come to us through the Hindustani. 
Mr. Ishwar Das, the District Court interpreter, Singapore, was kind enough 
to give me some information in regard to a few words, and to lend me his 



Vlll PEE FACE 

copy of Forbes' dictionary, with the aid of which I have been able to trace 
several words to their original source. Further investigation along this 
line would certainly yield very interesting results. It seems quite possible 
that many Arabic words have also come to us through Hindustani. For 
instance, Forbes tells us that the Arabic word iiuqqah signifies a casket 
or box, and only in India does it have the meaning "pipe," from which 
the Malays get their word ogah. It is remarkable that the Arabic letter 
^ very frequently becomes g in Malay. I am told that this is the pronun- 
ciation in Hadramaut, whence most of the Arabs in this part of the world 
have come. 

Dutch and Netherlands Indies Words. 

Most of the words used exclusively in the Netherlands Indies, which 
in this work are marked (N.I.), are of Javanese origin, but a number of 
them are from the Dutch, sometimes in a very much corrupted form. As 
far as possible the correct Dutch spelling of such words has been given, 
which will be appreciated by English and Americans living in Netherlands 
India, and also by many of the English-speaking Chinese. When a word 
is simply marked (D.) without the (N.I.), it may be taken that it is 
generally knovra by Malays and Babas in the British possessions also. 
Some words, marked (D.) are really French, but have come into Malay 
through the Dutch, and the fact that such words are in most cases pro- 
nounced by the Dutch people with the French accent will account for the 
form in which they appear in Malay ; thus " gage " becomes gaji, " loge '"^ 
becomes losi, and " sergeant " is the Malay sersan. For many of the Dutch 
derivations I am indebted to Mr. van Wulven. In most cases where I 
have been in doubt in regard to any Dutch word I have referred the 
matter to him, but it is quite possible that some errors may have crept 
in for which he is not to be held responsible. 

Nautical Terms. 

Great pains has been taken to obtain the most complete and accurate 
renderings of nautical terms. For years past the author has besieged 
witli all sort of questions the Malay officers and sailors of the local boats 
on which he has made many coasting voyages. Boatmen at Malacca and 
in Singapore have supplied many words, but the greatest assistance has 
been rendered by Captain Matsum, the Indragiri pilot, who has been 
kind enough to spend many days in going carefully through all the material 
available, and explaining the Malay terms with the assistance of the dia- 
grams in a large book on seamanship. Unfortunately lack of time has- 
prevented a more thorough investigation of this interesting subject. 

Natural History. 

In regard to plant names the work of the Malay lexicographer has been 
immensely simplified by the splendid lists of Malay plant names published 
years ago" by Mr. H. N.Eidley in the Journals of the Eoyal Asiatic Society, 
Straits Branch, to which the author is indebted for practically all such 
material to be found in this work. The Malav names of birds, beasts, fishes 



PREFACE IX 

and reptiles have been much more difficult to obtain and to verif}^, but our 
thanks are due to Dr. Hanitsch, the Curator of the Eaffles Museum, Sing- 
apore, for his assistance in reading all the proof sheets and making some 
corrections. Latin names have only been given where it seemed necessary 
for the sake of a clearer identification. The words bur org, ihan, pohok, etc.^ 
which are usually prefixed by Malays to all names of birds, fish and plants,. 
have in most cases been omitted, and should be supplied by the student. 

Other Technical Terms. 

Our thanks are due to the Wardens of Mines in Perak, Pahang and 
Banka for their kindness in supplying the correct terms used in the differ- 
ent methods of tin and goldmining. Also to Mrs. H. B. Mansell and other 
ladies who have taken infinite pains to try and disco s'er and explain to a 
man the technology of iieedlework. In the matter of medical terms it is to 
be regretted that the Malay language is lamentably deficient, and even the 
anatomy of the human body appears to be somewhat vague in Malay ter- 
minology. The vocabulary of medical terms prepared by the late Dr. 
Gerrard being a mere complication from all the dictionaries does not help to 
decide " where doctors disagree." Dr. Lim Boon Keng was kind enough to 
read the ]:)roof sheets, and made a number of valuable suggestions, with 
special reference to the words in use by the Baba Chinese. Dr. Connolly 
began to revise the medical terms, but unfortunately his removal from 
Singapore put an abrupt termination to his work on the dictionary. It is 
to be hoped that some medical man will take up his special department of 
Malay literature and publish a monograph in the Journal of the Eoyal 
Asiatic Society. 

Our Printers. 

Great credit is due to the Methodist Publishing House for the rapidity 
and excellence of the work done in the printing of this dictionary. Over 
400 pages of the book were in type before a single sheet was printed off. 
Tliis enabled the author to send proof sheets for criticism to a number of 
persons, and to make an immense number of corrections which otherwise 
could not have been made. Thus it was possible to take full advantage of 
the experience gained during the progress of the printers' work. 

Acknowledgements. 

In addition to the works of Favre and Klinkert already referred to^ 
the author desires to acknowledge his indebtedness to Wilkinson's Malay- 
English dictionar}^, to which constant reference has been made in deter- 
mining the exact meanings of Malay words. A feiv Malay words given 
by Wilkinson which are not to be found in Klinkert's Malay-Dutch dic- 
tionary, second edition, and which are unknown to my Malay assistants 
and others of whom I have inquired, have been inserted with the sign 
(W.), which indicates that I have found no other authority for the use 
of the word. After the first draft was practically finished and while the 
printing was in progress, the parts of Winstedt's new English-Malay 
Dictionary were published from time to time, but as it seemed unfair to 
make use of Mr. Winstedt's material for a rival work which was in course 



X PREFACE 

of preparation practically at the same time, I have abstained from using 
any of the new words which have appeared in his dictionary, except in so 
far as I had already gleaned them myself from books published in the 
Malay Literature series and from other sources. The author's special 
thanks are due to Guru Hussain of the Kampong Glam Vernacular School, 
Singapore, and to his assistant teachers, who in the last few weeks of the 
final correcting of the proof sheets have answered innumerable questions 
in regard to many of the most difficult and almost unknown words, and 
■obscure dialectic forms. A great many of these difficult points have not 
by any means been settled to the author's satisfaction, and all, whether 
Europeans, Malays or Chinese, who use this dictionary, are cordially 
invited to assist in the detection of any mistakes which may be found, and 
to send their criticisms to the Book Editor of the Methodist Publishing 
House, Singapore. 



INTRODUCTION 



The Vowels. 

The five vowels have the continental sounds: — 

a as in father. o as in hole. 

e as the ey in they. ii as in rude. 

i as in ravine. 

In open syllables these vowel sounds have always a greater degree of 
intensity than in closed syllables. 

In addition to the above, there is in Malay, as in nearly all Oriental 
languages, another simple vowel sound which is often called the short 
vowel sound. In the different systems of Eomanizing, this short vowel 
sound has been variously represented by a, a, e, e, i, \, u, u; but all these 
different methods of representing this vowel sound are open to the great 
objection that they mislead Europeans and even natives into giving it an 
incorrect pronunciation, and in a dictionary they have the additional dis- 
advantage of giving rise to so much diversity and uncertainty in the 
spelling of words containing the short vowel that prolonged search is 
often necessary before it can be discovered which of these vowels has been 
used by the lexicographer to represent the short vowel in the particulail 
word which is being sought for. Experience has shown that the best w^ay 
to spell words containing the short vow^el wdth a view to helping the 
student to a correct pronunciation, is to omit the vowel altogether. The 
exact sound of the short vowel should be learnt if possible from a Malay; 
it is almost identical with the half-vowel sound in the first syllable of 
such words as " machine " and " balloon." 

When two vowels come together, both must be sounded, but the first 
must be run into the second: thus au has very nearly the sound of ow in 
" cow," as pismi, mau; and ai tas almost the sound of the English i in 
^' ice," as, surgai, pal'ai. 

Consonants. 

The Malay consonants are pronounced as in English, except that the 
r should always be sounded much more clearly and with more of a ring 
than in English. The consonant 7y represents a single sound in Malay, 
and should be pronounced like ng in " singer," never as in " single ; " the 
latter sound is represented in Malay by lyg ; thus the two sounds are found 
in the words: si-rya and siry-gah. The letter A- in Malay, when it occurs 
at the end of a word, is not sounded like the English Ic, but the syllable 
in which it occurs must be pronounced very short indeed, and the breath 
drawn in so as to produce the sliortening of the sound. The apostrophe 
at the end of a sylla])le indicates a similar abrupt sound. 

In the transliteration of the purely Aral)ic letters no distinction has 

been made between vl-) and i^ ; ^^ and ^^ ; -r and o ; or ^ and iS • 



xii INTRODUCTION 

The other Arabic letters have been transliterated as follows : — ^ ^h 
^ kh, J clz, j z, cr- sh, ^ dl, \i> tl, j^ gh, ^ f. The nasal 
letter 'ain c. wliieh changes its sound according to the vowel written 

with it, is represented bv a rough breathing (') placed before the vowel. 
The purely Arabic letters given above are very generally mispronounced 
by Malays, dz being pronounced as z, ih as s, and sometimes / as p, and 
z as y. 

Orthographic Signs. 

As already stated, the inverted comma represents the Arabic nasal 
letter 'ain. It is placed before the vowel which has the nasal sound, as in 
the words 'alam, 'ilmu, m'alim, do'a. 

The apostrophe represents the Arabic sign liamzah, both at the end 
of a word as' described above, and also in the middle of a word between 
two vowels, where it indicates that the voAvels must he pronounced separate- 
ly; this is also the case where the short vowel sound is followed by another 
vowel, as in the words s'isi, Vatas, t'akan, the liamzah being used in such 
cases in the Malay cliaracter. The apostrophe is further used to indicate 
an initial short vowel before the consonants m and n, as in the words 'mhek, 
'ntah, 'rggan, etc. 

The hyphen is used where a word is reduplicated, in compound words, 
or to separate from the words to which they are attached those prefixes, 
suffixes and other particles which do not form an integral part of the word 
itself ; these are : the preposition k-, the abbreviated numeral s-, the passive, 
prefix di-, the pronominal suffixes, -I'li, -mu, and -rya, and the particles 
-lah, -kali, -nah, -tali. The preposition di is distinguished from the passive 
prefix di- by tlie absence of the liyphen. 

Root Words and their Derivatives. 

In the Malay language a very large number of words are derived from 
root words by the addition of prefixes or suffixes. 

Some prefixes and suffixes are only used to form nouns, and others 
are used with verbs. The former are: 

Prefix p, which denotes the agent. 

Prefix p and suffix an, forming al)stract nouns from verbs. 

Prefix per and suffix an, forming verbal nouns from verbs. 

Prefix k and suffix an, forming nouns from adjectives and nouns. 

Suffix an forming nouns from verks, and usually expressing the thing 
which is affected by the action. 
The verbal forms are: 

Prefix her, whicli forms present participles with intransitive verbs. 

Prefix ter, which forms past participles. 

Prefix di-, which forms the passive voice. 

Prefix m, used with transitive verbs. 

Suffixes kan and i. which form transitive verbs. 



INTRODUCTION Xlii 

111 derived words formed with the prefixes her, ter, per, di- and h, 
the first syllable of the root undergoes no change, but with the prefixes 
7u and p the root in man}- cases changes its form. A reference to the 
following list of changes will usuall}^ enable the student to determine 
what the root is: — 

If the root commences with 

/, m, n, or r, it undergoes no change ; 

h, the prefix becomes mm or pm, as huka, mnihul'a: 

p, the prefix becomes mm or pm, and the initial p of the root is elided, 

as putus, mmnfus; 
d or j, the prefix becomes mn or pn, as dapat, mndapat; 
t or cli, the prefix becomes mn or pn, and the initial t or ch of the 

root is elided, as tar oh, mnaroli; 
g or h or a vowel, the prefix becomes miy or piy, as gall, mrggali; 
\, tlie prefix become mrg or pig, and the initial k of the root is elided, 

as haraig, mrgararg; 
s and sometimes ch, the prefix becomes mry or pnj, and the initial s 

or ch of the root is elided, as suroh, mryuroh. 

The Peculiarities of Baba Malay Explained. 

The following signs and abbreviations have been used in this dictionary 
in order to distinguish (a) those words which are peculiar to the Babas, 
and (b) those which they do not use. 

1. Words marked (B) are used by the Babas, and also of course by 
others who speak the colloquial Malay of the Straits Settlements, but are 
not used by Malays when speaking among themselves, and in many cases 
would not be understood by them. 

2. Words and phrases marked * are not used by Babas, and for the 
most part would not be understood by them. 

3. If words unfamiliar to the Babas are derived from some other 
Oriental language, then instead of the * they have the signs (Ar.) (Sk.) 
(Pers.) or (Hind.), according to the source from which they were derived. 
In some cases, however, where the Malay spelling is different from that of 
the language from which the word is taken, tlie spelling of the original is 
given, and then the absence of the * shows that the word is used by the 
Babas. 

4. Words of European and Chinese origin, marked (D.) (E.) (Eur.) 
(F.) (Port.) (Ch.), and also Tamil -words (Tarn.), are practically all 
familiar to the Babas. 

5. Words peculiar to the Xetherlands Indies (X.I.)? are not used by 
Babas in the Straits unless they also have the sign (B.). 

6. Nautical terms, and also many other technical terms, and the 
names of animals and plants, are for the most part unknown to tlie Babas. 

The differences in Baba pronunciation are not usually shown, as it has 
been thought better to adhere to a uniform system of spelling. The principal 
differences are as follows : ai becomes e, au becomes o or u, oh becomes o 
or u, ell becomes i, and ah becomes a, final h being never aspirated as it is 



XIV INTRODUCTION 

by Malays, / becomes ii, I'h becomes I', the verbal prefix per becomes her, 
and u sometimes becomes o, especially final id becomes ot. Where the 
changes are not regular as here indicated, the Baba pronunciation is often 
given as well as the Malay. 

Transitive verbs formed with the suffix -i, are not used by the Babas; 
these are not usually marked *, but the suffix -kan should in almost every 
case be substituted for the -i, except in the word mulai, which the Babas 
pronounce as a two-syllable word, 7nulai. 

In paraphrases the reader is expected to substitute Baba words where 
necessary; for instance, sama for the preposition al'an, and pada for hagi, 
satu macham for s-jnis in names of animals, plants, etc., prgajaran or 
kpandaian for 'ilmu in names of the scioiices {'ilmii meaning •'magic" in 
the Baba Malay), hal for pn in the translation of nouns expressing state 
or action, and so forth. Similarly in compound Avords and examples, as 
under the word " ear," the Baba woi'd kuyiig should be substituted for the 
Malay tlirga. 

It should also be noted that the verbal prefix m has a different use 
among the Babas to that of the Malays. In many words the Babas consider 
it an inseparable part of the word, as mnargis, mleleli, etc., the root forms 
taigis, leleli, etc., being never used by them. On the other hand the Babas 
often omit the m where it would be used by Malays ; for instance, Babas 
would say yajg trargkan instead of yaiy mnrargkan. The sign * does not 
always mean that the word is wholly unknown to the Babas, but that it is 
not used in the particular sense given, similarly 'ilmu is not marked (Ar.) 
under the word " magic," but under " science " it is so marked. 

Where the sign (a) is used to show that a word which is usually a 
noun is to be used adjectivally, that is to say is to follow a noun, it must 
be understood that the Babas would use purya, the word preceding the noun 
instead of following it : thus, for " the headman's house " the Malays might 
say rumah prgliulu, and the Babas prghulu punja rumali. 



BRIEF NOTES FOR READY REFERENCE. 

The root form of Malay word is given, as a general rule. 

The proper derived form to be used must be learned from the Grammar. 

The verbal form is given with roots which are seldom used as verbs, thusr 

mmanjanj, to stretch, from panjarg; mnyi, to step aside, from tyi. 
The derivation of foreign words familiar to the Babas is not given. 

Arabic Transliteration. 

h h q gh ' tl T dl s sh s z dz hh tl th t 

Accented letters a i u indicate alif yd and wdw respectively in the Arabic. 

^j jJ* J^jJ ^ -W- iw3 4jiJi» ^W j^'y^ ^Vf. 

dzikir Tain a qahiil saiijii Iclia'i sifat labiat uddlir mashhur 'dlam 

If the Malay spelling sufficiently indicates the letters, the Arabic spelling: 

is omitted. 
The Arabic form is given only once in a group of similar words. 

Notes on Baba Malay. 

Words marked thus : — 

Ar. Sk. Pers. Hind. Turk, are not used by Babas. 
Ch. D. E. Eur. Port, are generally known to Babas. 
N^.I. are not known by Babas unless also marked B. 
B. are peculiar to the Babas. 
!N'aut. are generally unknown to Babas. 

Changes in Pronunciation. 

ai to e, as pal^e, slise for pakai, slsai. 

au to o or u, as I'olu, piso for I'olau, pisau. 

oh to o or u, as suiygu, muso for singgoli, musoh. 

eh to i, as jerni, her si for jerneh, her sell. 

a to ak, as hapaJc, hukak for hapa, huka. 

i to ik, as hijik for hiji, also Icchik for Jcchil. 

kh to k, as ksiat, kabar for khasiat, khabar. 

i to p, as pikir, pakat for fiMr, fakai. 

u to o, as patoi, btol for patut, htul. 

per to ber, as bersgi for persgi. 
Words to be substituted. 

sama for akan. kerna for bagi. 

kasi for bri. hal for pri. 

saryat for amat. satu macham for s-jnis. 

suffix -kan for -i in transitive verbs. 
omit m after yarg, as yarg trargkan for yarg mnrargkan. 
use prgajaran or kpandaian for 'ilmu in sciences, 
use purya for possessive after words marked (a). 



ABBREVIATIONS, 



Ar. 

B. 

Ch. 


Arabic. 
Baba Malay. 
Chinese. 


a. 


used adjectivally, that i 
following a noun. 


D. 


Dutch. 


al)l)rev 


. abbreviated. 


E. 


English. 


adj. 


adjective. 


Eur. 


European. 


adv. 


adverb. 


F. 


French. 


art. 


article. 


O. 


Greek. 






Oram. 


Grammar. 


conj. 


conjunction. 


Hind. 


Hindustani. 


emph. 


emphatic. 


J. 


Johore. 


esp. 


especially. 


Jav. 


Javanese. 


euph. 


euphemistic. 


Kl. 


Tvlinkert. 


fig. 


figurative. 


L. 


Lascar. 






Math. 


Mathematical. 


gen. 


generally. 


Med. 


Medical. 


impers 


. impersonally. 


Mil. 


Military. 


int. 


interjection. 


X. I. 

Nam. 
P. 


Netherlands Indies. 

Nautical. 

Penano^. 


met. 
p.p. 


metaphorical, 
past participle. 


Pers. 


Persian. 


pi. 


plural. 


Pk. . 


Perak. 


prep. 


preposition. 


Port. 


Portuguese. 


pron. 


pronoun. 


Prov. 
E.G. 


Proverb. 
Eoman Catholic. 


q.v. 


wliich see. 


:S. 


Singapore. 


s. 


substantive. 


Sk. 


Sanskrit. 


si. 


slang. 


s.s. 


Straits Settlements. 


s. pi. 


plural substantive. 


Sum. 


Sumatra. 


V. aux. 


auxiliary verb. 


Tarn. 
Turk. 


Tamil. 
Turkish. 


V. i. 


intransitive verb. 


W. 


Wilkinson. 


V. t. 


transitive verb. 


X, 


used by Christians. 


* 


Not used by Babas. 



SHELLABEAR'S 
ENGLISH - MALAY DICTIONARY. 



A (a, emph. a), the article, satu, 
abbrev. to ■$-, which however is 
usually followed b^^ the numeral 
coefficient, according to the class 
of noun referred to, thus: 

^-batary (stem) with poles and 
other long objects, as, s-bataiy 
f/if/i, a tooth ; 

-s-hiji (seed) with small round 
things, as, fimha s-hiji, a bucket; 

■s-hilah'^ (splint) with knives, as, 
s-hilah pdaix), a sword; 

s-hntoh (curve) with rings and 
fishhooks ; 

^-huali (fruit) with books and 
large objects such as countries, 
houses and ships; 

s-buiir (grain) with grain, jewels 
and fruit; 

■<'el'or (tail) with animals; 

s-lilai* or s-lai with thin or flat 
objects, as clothes, paper, hair, 
etc.; 

^-l-aki (foot) with mushrooms and 
flowers ; 

-s-kayu (wood) of rolls of cloth: 

s-Jifmrj (piece) of objects which 
have been cut, as metals, planks, 
bread ; 

^-hunturn (bud) of flowers; 

4i-]ajns (fold) in stating the num- 
ber of thicknesses of the same or 
similar things; 

s'orarq (person) Avith beings su- 
perior to animals in the scale of 
creation ; 

s-pintu (door) with houses built in 
rows ; 

s- pot org (cut) =s-hp{rg; 



s-puchok (shoot) with letters and 

firearms ; 
s-targga (ladder) with native 

houses. 
s-turus (pillar) with rolls of coins, 
packets of native sugar, etc. 

Aaron (ar'/zn), s. Ilarun (Ar.). 

Aback (a-bak'), adv. (Xaut.) layer 
halsi (L.), layer timpa tiarg. 
Taken aback, terbinjorg. 

Abacus (ab'a-k«s), s. snipoa^, spoa^ 
(Ch. stg-pod"). 

Abaft (a-baff), adv. (Xaut.) di 
hial-aig, di buritan. 

Abandon (a^ban'dwn), v. t. (for- 
sake) iitggaU'an; (desert) buarg- 
Van. x\bandon a habit, bimrgkari 
'adat. To abandon one's self to 
one's fate, niDihuatgkan diri-rya. 

Abandoned (-d?/nd), adj. (for- 
saken) tertirggal, ktirggalan; (in- 
complete, of work) tei'bargai* ter- 
hrgkalai;'^ (deserted) terbuarg; 
(profligate) Iiichah, plonteh 
(X.I.). 

Abase (a-bas'), v. t. rndahhan, liina- 
lean, turunl-an. 

Abashed (a-bashf), adj. tersipu- 
sipu, l-malu-nmlimn. 

Abate (a-biit'), v. t. (lessen) hu- 
rarglmi; (reduce price) turunJcan 
lierga; (bargain) iawar. 

Abate, v. i. (decrease) rda, ber- 
liinarg-knra^g: (of water, slightly) 
susut; (considerably) surut; (en- 
tirely) Jcriig ; (of tidal waters) 
timpas;^ (of rain) tdoh, sidarg* 

Abatis (a-ba-t("'), s. prgniparg deri- 
pada dahan l-ayn, saiuar* 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ABATTOIR 



ABOMINATION 



Abattoir (a-bat-twar'), s. tmpat 

persiiihJeJian, tmpat mmhantai* 

paun (E.). 
Abbreviate (ab-bre'vi-at), v. t. 

pendel'lian, renikaslianj^ seiykat- 

I'an. 
Abbreviation (-a'sh?/n), s. potorg- 

an liuruf (Ar.), retyhasan,* lieja- 

'an reiyl'as* (Ar. liija'), perl-ata- 

'an pendel'. 
Abdicate (ab'di-kat), y. i. pcliat 

diri,^ turun deri-pada talclda h- 

raja an. 
Abdomen (ab-do'men or ab'do- 

1116^11), s. prot, isi prot. 
Abduct (ab-dukf), v. t. larikan, 

baira lari. 
Abeam (a-bem'), adv. (Xaiit.) di 

rusok. The wind is abeam, argin 

deri rusoTc, argin timha ruarg. 
Abel (a'bl), s. Ilahil (Ar.). 
Aberration (ab'er-ra'shim), s. 

(mental) irgatan kliru. 
Abet (a-bef), v. t. (assist) tolorg, 

bantu, serta'i,* hersiibahat. 
Abeyance (a-ba'ans), s. pertarggoh- 

anj^ In abeyance, terhnti, ter- 

targgoli,"^ terganionj. 
Abhor (ab-hor'), v. t. (detest) bn- 

cJii; (feel repuo-nance) gU-ghvan* 
Abhorrent (ab-hor'rent), adj. h- 

bnchian. 
Abide (a-bid'), v. i. (dwell) tirggal, 

diam,"^ dudok; (stay) tirggal, nan- 

ti, turggu; (remain stable) ttap. 

To abide by (adhere to), pgarg, 

pegarg (B.). To abide by a decis- 
ion, trima liukiim. 
Abide, v. t. (bear) tahan, drita 

(Sk.), targgorg ; (await) nantil'an. 
Ability (a-bil'i-ti), s. (power) 

kiiasa; (skill) kpandaian. To the 

best of his ability, drgan s-boleh- 

boleh-nja, dtgan s-brapa daya- 

upai/a-n/a. See able. 
Abject (ab'jekt), adj. (degraded) 

hina, kjir''^ (servile) rndah. 
Abjure (ab-jur'), v. t. (disavow) 



sa)gkalkan ; ( renounce ) m u rgkir, 
eigkarkan'^ (Ar, niunkir, inkar). 

Ablaze (a-blaz'), adj. berryala. 

Able (a'bl), adj. (clever, talented) 
pandai; (strong) kuat; (capable 
'of) berkuasa; (skilled) pahani, 
ahli (Ar.), taliii; as, able to speak,. 
tahu berkata-kata,* tahu chakap; 
able to swim, tahu bernarg. Ta 
be able to, boleh, dapat* larat, dan 
(P.), bisa (X.I.) ; as, tiada dapat 
masok, not able to enter. 

Able-bodied (-bod'id), adj. kuat, 
tgap, gagah. 

Ablution (ab-lii'shwn), s. pmbasoh- 
an. To perform religious ablu- 
tions, arnbil ai/er snibahyaig* ambil 
wudlu (Ar.) : (with sand) ber- 
taj/amum (Ar.). To perform 
ablutions after evacuations, ber-^ 
chehok, beristinja (Ar.) ; (of the 
whole body) mandi hadas kchil 
(Pers. obdast) ; (after coition) 
mandi hadas bsar;'^ (after touch- 
ing a pig or dog) sertu.'^' 

Abnegation (ab'ne-ga'shwn), s. 
sargkalan^ 8elf abnegation (self- 
denial), pr{ mnalian nafsu. 

Abnormal (ab-nor'nml), adj. tiada 
bevperaturan, plek,'^ ganjil, lain 
deri- pad a 'adat. 

Aboard (a-bord'), adv. (Xaut.) di 
kapal. 'To go aboard, naik kapah 
turun kapal, naik prahu, turun 
prah'u. 

Abode (a-bod'), s. tmpat tiiggal, k- 
diaman* kdvdokan.'^ 

Abolish (a-bol'ish), v. t. (do away 
iwith) hapuskan* hilargkan, tiada- 
kan; (annul, make void) batalkan^ 
Abolish a custom, buargkan 'adat. 

Abominable (a-bom'i-na-bl), adj. 
(odious) kbnchian; (loathsome) 
/»•//.* hina. 

Abominate (-nat), v. t. bnchi, luat,*' 
bnchi Jiihial. 

Abomination (-na'shj/n), s. k- 
bnchian. 



ate, ask, fim, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, lier, ferry; ice, it, firOj^ 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ABORIGINES 



ABSOLUTELY 



Aborigines (ab'o-rij'i-nez), s. pi. 
ora)y hul'it, omrg asal negri. 

Abortion (a-bor'sh?ai), s. (mis- 
carriage) kguguran anah; (im- 
mature product of fruits) huali 
hurol'. To produce abortion, nini- 
hiiaig anal'. 

Abortive (-tiv), adj. (premature) 
Ir/Liguran; (ineffectual, coming to 
naught) yarg ta'jadi, tiada liasil, 
hantut, hatal. 

Abound (a-bownd'), v. i. lempali, 
ramhak, jadi meicali, lachaJc* m- 
■lechah (B.), berjebah,* m'amur 
(Ar.). 

About (a-bowt'), prep, (concern- 
ing) deri-lial, fasal; (around) 
I'lilirg; (near) dl'at, liampir. 
About to (in the act of) lindak, 
mau. 

About, adv. (around) Uilirg ; (here 
and there) sana-sinl; (when mo- 
tion is implied) k-sana k-marij* 
(nearly) hampir; (approximately, 
more or less) kira-kira, agak-agak, 
gamak-gamak* Iheh kurarg, arg- 
(jaran, hararg; as, hararg diia-pidoh 
dpa panjaig-nja, about twenty 
fathoms long. To bring about, 
dataigkan. To set about, mula'i, 
midai (B.). Eound about, M/i/gr. 
To put about, (Xaut.) helok. 

Above (a-buv'), prep, (higher than) 
atas, di at as, tirggi deri-pada; 
(more than) Iheh deri-pada. 
Above all, tendama (Sk.). 

Above, adv. atas. Above-mention- 
ed, tersbot di atas. Over and 
al">ove, lain deri-pada- 

Aboveboard (-bord), adv. lyata- 
iyata, trus-tmrg. 

Abrade (ab-rad'), v. t. (of the skin) 
lecliet, glupas, Ilas."^ 

Abraham (a'bra-ham), s. Ibrahim 
(Ar.). 

Abrasion (-ra'zhi/n), s. lecliet, llas.'^ 

Abreast (a-bresf), adv. s-jajar,^ s- 



baris, bersairg. Four abreast, 
anipat s-baris, anipat s-ttar.* 

Abridge (a-brij'), v. t. pendekkan, 
re igkaskaii, * seiyka tkan. 

Abroad (a-brawd'), adv. (widely) 
rata; (outside, at large) di luar; 
(everywhere) sana-sini; (in for- 
eign parts) di negri asirg,* di 
negri orarg. To get abroad (of 
news), pchah kliabar. To live 
abroad, berdagatg, tirggal di negri 
oraig (B.). All abroad (con- 
fused), ssat-barat. 

Abrogate (ab'ro-gat), v. t. man- 
sukhkan (Ar.). 

Abrogated (-ed), adj. mansuhh 
(Ar.). 

Abrupt (ab-rupf), adj. (steep) 
churani; (hasty) digan gopoh, 
golot-golot.'^ 

Abruptly (-li), adv. gopoh-gopoh, 
serta-merta, golof-golot.''' 

Abscess (ab'ses), s. bisul, barah, 
clngkrerg;'^ (internal) sniharan."^ 

Abscond (ab-skond'), v. i. (hide) 
bersmbunji, smburyikan diri; (ab- 
sent one's self) lari. 

Absence (ab'sens), s. ktiada'an. 
During my absence, s-pnuirggalan- 

Absent (-sent), adj. tidak ada, 
tiada, tiada hadlir* (Ar. uddlir). 

Absentee (ab'sen-te'), yarg tiada 
hadlir (Ar.). 

Absent-minded (ab'sent-mind-ed), 
adj. itga-irga,^ Jalai, plupa.'^ 

Absolute (ab'so-lut), adj. (unres- 
tricted) tiada berhiigga; (com- 
plete, perfect) smpurna; (without 
exception) sahaja, s-mata-mata, 
skali. An absolute falsehood, 60- 
hor(} sahaja, s-mata-mata bohorg, 
bo/ionj skali, bohorg tnis, bohorg 
tgak-tgak.* An absolute impos- 
sibility, mustahil skali (Ar.), s- 
kali-kali ta'boleh jadi; see below. 

Absolutely (-li), adv. (wholly) s- 
mata-mata; (positively) skali-kali; 



ate, ask, am. final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, lis, minws, cure, injure, 

hiirry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ABSOLUTION 



ACCEPT 



(completely) habis, as, absolutely 
destroyed, hahis hinasa. 

Absolution (-lii'shwn), s. MjMsan 
den-pada salali, Fampunan. 

Absolve (ab-solv'), v. t. (remit) 
ampunl-an, mahapl'an (Ar. ma- 
'df) ; (set free) Ipasl'an. To ask 
to be absolved (from a debt), 
7nmta lialall'an.^ ! 

Absorb (-sorb'), v. t. (swallow np) j 
malcan, tian; (suck up) kisap, 
lap, ttapf (permeate) msra* ' 
To be absorbed, srap* jrap."^ | 

Absorbent (-?nt), adj. yarg mrg- j 
liimp, i/aiy mnJan. 

Absorption (-sorp'slu/n), s. pri 
mnjldsap. 

Abstain (ab-stan'), v. i. (forbear) 
tahani diri, jauhkan din; (refrain 
from) taubat deri-pada.'^ To ab- 
stain from intoxicants, pmtaryl-ari 
arah. 

Abstemious (-ste'mi-i^s), adj. ji- 
mat. 

Abstinence (ab'sti-nras), s. jimat. 
Total abstinence, lial mmaniarg' 
Van arah. 

Abstract (ab-strakf), v. t. (take 
away) hluarVan, cJiaboU'an. 

Abstract (ab'strakt), s. (epitome) 
rergli-asan* 

Abstract, adj. (as opposed to con- 
crete) batin (Ar.). 

Abstracted (ab-strakt'ed), adj. (in 
mind) inja-irga* 

Abstraction (ab-strak'shwn), s. (of 
mind) iiga."^ 

Abstruse (-stroos'), adj. dalani, 
raJisia, riisia (B.), 'umuni^ (x^r. 
gliiimum ?). 

Absurd (-serd'), adj. (nonsensical) 
karut; (incredible) mustahil 
(Ar.) ; (stupid) bodoJi; (of talk) 
repek, mrapelc (B.). 

Absurdity (-i-ti), s. perlwa yaig 
musialiil (Ar.), Tcbodohan, l-amt; 
see above. 



Abundance (a-bun'dans), s. Mem^ 
pahan, Inneiualian. 

Abundant (-dant), adj. mewah,, 
lenipah, larlmk* mlecliak (B.)v 
berjebali,'^' ni'amur (Ar.). 

Abundantly (-li), adv. digan A- 
I em pahan. 

Abuse (a-buz'), v. t. (misuse) ro- 
sakl-an, mlah pal'ai; (illtreat) an^ 
iai/ah-an, beigl'eig;* (revile) cher^ 
cka (Sk.), nsta (Sk.), hamun;* 
(with obscenity or rude words) 
■mak'i; (disparage) chJal-an;_ (ma- 
lign) 11 m pat. 

Abuse (a-bfis'), s. (reviling) cher^ 
clta (Sk.), nsta (Sk.), hamun,'^' 
mahi, as above; (immoral act) A*- 
mlahan, aniaya. 

Abusive (-iv), adj. puiali, pnf<la 
('Sk.), kasar. 

Abut (a-but'), v. i. rapat, bertempeh 

Abutment (-ment), s. (of a bridge) 
totglxat, alasan. 

Abyss (a-bis'), s. lobarg yarg tiada 
terduga [taboleh di-duga (B.)]. 

Abyssinia (ab'is-sin'i-a), s. negri 
TIabsliL 

Abyssinian (-an), s. orarg HabshL 

Academy (a-kad'e-mi), s. sholah^ 
till pat blajar 'ilmu.^^ 

Accede (ak-sed'), v, i. To accede to,. 
i<udi akan/^ sudihan, berknankan,'^ 
kabulhni* (Ar. qabuJ), yakan. 

Accelerate (-sel'er-at), v. t. Ikas- 
kan, sgrakan, baigatkan."^ 

Accent (ak'scnt), s. (manner of 
pronouncing) lidali, lafatl (Ar.) ; 
(incorrect or foreign accent) pe- 
laf : (stress) buiyi kras, tkanan 
suara. 

Accentuate (ak-sen'chu-at), v. t. 
(pronounce distinctly) kraskan bu' 
iyi; (make prominent) lyatakaUj. 
lb eh kan. 

Accept (-scpf), V. t. (receive) tri- 
ma, sanibot; (acquiesce) sudi, ka- 
bui:^' To accept responsibility 
for, saiggop. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

jnirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, its, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ACCEPTABLE 



ACCOUNT 



Acceptable (-sep'ta-b] ) , adj. (can 
be received) boJeli di-trima; 
(agreeable) herhian, yaiy di- 
sukai. 

Access (ak'ses), s. (admittance) 
dapat masok, izin masoh. 

Accessible (ak-ses'si-bl), adj. (ap- 
proachable) yaig holeh di-ham- 
piri* holeh di-masoMi, yarg snaiy 
rapat (B.) ; (obtainable) yairj ho- 
leh di-dapaii. 

Accession (-sesh'?m), s. (something 
added) tol'ol:; (to a throne) hal 
naih raja, hal naih I'vaja'an. 

Accessories (ak-ses'so-ris), s. pi. 
(of machinery) perkakas, alatan* 

Accessory (-ses'so-ri), adj. yarg 
mnjertai,'^ yarg mnolorg, yarg mm- 
hantu, s-Jcutu;* (in a bad sense) 
bersuhaliat. 

Accident (ak'si-d^nt), s. (mis- 
Ciiance) chlaka, mara,"^ kmalargan, 
mala-pstaka/^ halak (Ar. halo.'). 

Accidentally (-den'tal-li), adv. 
(unintentionally) hiikan digan s- 
rgaja; (by accident) tiha-tiha* 
aleh-alehf^ s-kuujotg-l'uryorg * top- 
top."^ 

Acclaim (ak-klam'), v. t. soral'Jcan. 

Acclamation (ak'kla-ma'shzai), s. 
sorak, tmpek. 

Acclimatize (ak-kli'ma-tiz), v. t. 
hiasakan pada haw a negri lain. 

Acclivity (-kliv'i-ti), s. churaman. 

Accommodate (-kom'mo-dat), v. t. 
(adapt) patiitkan, samakan; 
(oblige) tolorg; (adjust, settle) 
shaikan, slisekan (B.). To ac- 
commodate ten persons, viuat s- 
pidoh orary. 

Accommodation (-da'shMu), s. 
(supply of a want) pertolorgan; 
(lodging) tumpargan. 

Accompany (ak-kum'pa-ni), v. t. 
(go with) serta'i* ikut, kaivan- 
kan, tmani:* (escort) hantar; 
(escort royalty) iriig.^ 



Accomplice (-kom'plis), s. kaivan 
dalaia ksalalian, suhahat. 

Accomplish (-plish), v. t. (achieve) 
sampxiikan, JiasUkan* lakukan;* 
(complete) hahiskan, sudahkan, 
gnapn, shaikan, slisekan (B.), 
jlaska n , snt p u rnakan. 

Accomplished (-plisht), adj. her- 
plajaran* yarg ada plajaran (B.). 

Accomplishment (-plish-m<?nt), s. 
(completion) pighahisan, ksudah^ 
an; (scholastic attainment) pla- 
jaran, pndapatan* 

Accord (ak-kord'), v. t. (grant) 
hri; (harmonise) perstujukan/^ 
patuikan, slujukan (B.). 

Accord, v. i. (agree with) herstuju 
dm an. 

Accord, s. perstujuan, muafakat 
(Ar.), pakat. With one accord, 
drgan satii hati. Of one's own ac- 
cord, drgan kalian dak diri. 

Accordance (-ans), s. perstujuan. 

According as (-iug az), prep, s- 
perti, s-hgimana. 

According to (-ing too), prep. 
mnurut, atas; as, according to my 
opinion, mnurut hichara-ku;* ac- 
cording to the law of Moses, atas 
link urn Miisa. 

Accordingly (-li), adv. shah itu, 
oleli itu,* drgan yarg dmkian,'^ 
sperti yarg dnikian.'^ 

Accordion (ak-kor'di-'im), s. ko- 
dian (E.), harnionika (N.I.). 

Accost (ak-kosf), v. t. (speak to) 
tgur, sapa,* triak. 

Accoucheur (ak-ko6-sher'), s. hi- 
dan, dukun. 

Accouchment (ak-koosh'max), s. 
heranak, hersalin. 

Account (ak-kownf), s. (computa- 
tion) hilargan, kira-kira; (narra- 
tive)^ chrita; (importance) guna; 
(reason) shah. On account of, 
shah. To take account of, pduli, 
hirau,* anihil tahu. Of no ac- 
count, ta'hrat, retgan, alarg- 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, mim<s, ciire, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ACCOUNT 



ACORN 



l-palaty* On one's own account, 
atas pr entail sndiri, atas lial-iya 
.'^ndin. 

Account, V. t. (consider, deem) hi- 
laty, bilatyka?!, kirakun. 

Account, V. i. (render an account) 
hri kira-hira; (answer for) hri 
jawab. That accounts for it, itu- 
lah sbah-tya. To account for, 
njatakan, tratykan, hri shah. 

Accountable (-a-bl), adj. yary m- 
natyoiy. He is accountable, ia- 
lah yary mnaryyoiy, atas dia-Iah. 

Accountant (-ant), s. kra7ii kira- 
kira, tukary kira-kira, chai-hu (Ch.) . 

Accoutre (ak-koo'ter), v. t. Irykap- 
kan, alatkan (Ar.). 

Accoutrements (-ments), s. pi. 
alat (Ar.), khykapan, pakaian. 

Accredit (-kred'it), v. t. (give au- 
thority to) icakilkan, hri kiiasa, 
hnarkan; (put trust in) harapkan, 
perch ay a. 

Accretion (-kre'shzm), s. tamhali- 
an, tokok. 

Accrue (-kroo'), v. i. makiii her- 
tamhali, hertamhali-tam hah. 

Accumulate (-ku'mu-lat), v. t. 
(pile up) tinihonkan; (collect) 
himponkan/^ kumpolkan, kampory- 
kan; (materials for a building, 
etc.) ramu.* 

Accumulate, v. i. hertamhaJi-tam- 
hahj hertimhon-timhon. 

Accumulation (-la'shun), s. (act 
of accumulating) hal mryhimpon- 
kan;"^ (heap, mass) tinihonan, 
kumpoJan. 

Accuracy (ak'ku-ra-si), s. khtulan, 
khnaran. 

Accurate (-ret), adj. htul, hnar. 

Accursed (ak-kersf or ak-kers'ed), 
adj. clilaka, terkutok, terVanat 
(Ar.), hdhah (Pers.), maVun 
(Ar.). 

Accusation (ak'ku-za'shwn), s. tu- 
dohan* d'awa. 

Accuse (ak-kiiz'), v. t. tiidoli;* (in 



a lawsuit) d'awa; (blame) salali- 
kan, cilia. 

Accuser (-er), s. pnudoh,* pn- 
d'aiva,^ orary yary da'wa (B.), 
pn cilia. 

Accustom (-kus'twm), v. t. hiasa- 
kan. 

Accustomed (-t?ymd), adj. (wont- 
ed) hiasa, pacliak (N.I.) ; (ex- 
pert) taliii, maliir (Ar.) ; (habi- 
tual) lazim (Ar.). 

Ace (as), s. (in cards) sat. Within 
an ace, clinias,* njaris.'"^ 

Acerbity (a-ser'bi-ti), s. (of taste) 
klat; (of disposition) rryus,* hpyis. 

Ache (ak), v. i. herrasa sakit, her- 
rasa pdeh,* herrasa ryilu. 

Ache, s. sakit; (of the stomach) 
snak, niulas, sakit prot; (of the 

. muscles) sryal. 

Acheen (a-chen'), s. Aclieh. 

Achieve (a-chev'), v. t. (perform) 
sanipaikan, liasilkan,* lakukan;* 
(gain, obtain) heroleh,* dapat. 

Achievement (-ment), s. (comple- 
tion) pryhahisan; (successful ac- 
tion) pkerja'an yary liasil;* (he- 
roic) perhuatan perkasa (Sk.). 

Achilles tendon (a-kil'lez ten'- 
dwn), s. kiiry.* 

Aching (ak'ing), s. sakit, pdeli,* 
njilu; (of the emotions) sdeli. 

Achromatic (ak'ro-mat'ik), adj. 
tiada herwerna. 

Acid (as'id), s. asani. 

Acid, adj. niasam, klat, asam (B.). 

Acidity (a-sid'i-ti), s. asam, klat 

Acknowledge (ak-nol'ej), v. t. 
(own, admit) niryaku, herikrar 
(Ar.). 

Acknowledgment (-ment), s. 
(verbal) piyakuan, akuan, ikrar* 
(Ar. iqrar). 

Acme (ak'me), s. (supreme excel- 
lence) utama (Sk.), punchak. 

Acorn (a'korn), s. huali hraiyan 
hahi. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minus, cure, injure, 

hurry; f56d, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ACOUSTICS 



A.D. 



Acoustics (a-kows'tiks or a-koos'-), 
s. 'ilmu'^ pnrgaran/^ 'ilmu* huvji. 

Acquaint (ak-kwanf), v. t. (mako 
to know) hri tahu, kasi tahu (B.), 
hnalhan; (inform) mfalumkan 
(Ar). To be acquainted witii, 
tahu, hnal, paham, ramah drgan* 
herjinak-jinak'aii dnjan, hiasa 
drgari; (mutually) herhnal-hialan. 
To acquaint one's self with, dapat 
tahu. 

Acquaintance (-ans), s. (know- 
ledge) prgialiuan; (a person) h- 
nalan. 

Acquiesce (ak'kwi-es'), v. i. kahul* 
herhnaii, sudi. 

Acquire (ak-kwir'), v. t. beroleh* 
dapat, dapati. 

Acquirement (-ment), s. peroleh- 
an,"^ pndapatan. 

Acquisition (ak'kwi-zish'wn), s. 
(act of acquiring) pri mndapat: 
(the thing gained) perolehan* 
pndapatan. 

Acquit (ak-kwif), v. t. (release, 
discharge) Ipaslmi. To acquit 
one's self, lahukan diri,"^ berlaku. 

Acquittal (-tal), s. Mpasan. 

Acre (a'ker), s. elw, ekel; (the 
Malay acre) rloiy = li English 
acres. 

Acrid (ak'rid), adj. (of taste) 
pdar;'^ (of smell) mauiy/^ prat^^ 
hapak, trgek.* 

Acrimonious (ak'ri-mo'ni-ws), adj. 
herhati pdeh,"^ pahit, hrgis. 

Acrimony (-mo-ni), s. kpahitan 
hati. 

Acrobat (ak'ro-bat), s. orarg yarg 
buat pemiainan yaiy herbahya* 
orarg bermain buaian. 

Across (a-kros'), prep, (athwart, 
crosswise) lintarg ; (quite over) s- 
hwy, s-blah. To step across, 
mlarykah. To go across (a river), 
mnjbrarg. To come across (meet), 
bertmu drgan, jrmpak.^' 

Across, adv. lintarg, sbrarg. 



Acrostic (-tik), s. tka-tki. 

Act (akt), V. t. (feign) buat-buat, 
pura-pura. To act the fool, main 
gila. 

Act, V. i. (behave) berlaku, mlaku^ 
kan din;* (put forth energy) 6- 
kerja; (perform on the stage) 6er- 
main wayarg, lakon* (Jav.). To 
act for, mmargku. 

Act, s. perbuatan, pkerja'an, klaku- 
an. Act of parliament, undaiy- 
undarg negri. Acts of the Apos- 
tles, Kesali Perbuatan RasuJ-rasul. 

Acting (akt'ing), adj. (officiating) 
pmaigku. 

Action (ak'sh?m), s. (deed) per- 
buatan, pkerjaan, fe'el (Ar.) ; 
(behaviour) klakuan: (lawsuit) 
d'awaan, kes (E.) ; (fight, battle) 
pprargan. 

Actionable (-a-bl), adj. yary boleh 
di-d'awa. 

Active (-tiv), adj. (agile) pantas, 
targkas;* (working) yarg ber~ 
laku,'^^ yarg bkerja; {dLili^^nt) 
rajin, clierkas.* 

Activity (ak-tiv'i-ti), s. kpantasan, 
rajin, usaha. 

Actor (rdv'ter), s. anak-iuayarg , anak 
bargsawan, dalaiy.* Principal ac- 
tor, orarg muda. 

Actress (-tres), s. prempuan ivayary. 
Principal actress, sri paryyo7y. 

Actual (-chu-fll), adj. (real) surg- 
yoh, yary s-bnar-rya; (now exist- 
ing) yarg ada skararg. The actual 
state of affairs, halrehival yarg sah.* 

Actually (-li), adv. diyan s-suig- 
goh-7ya, btul-iya. 

Actuate (-at), v. t. grakkan, jalan- 
kan. 

Acumen (a-ku'men), s. 'akal yarg 
tajani, cherdek, kpintaran (X.L). 

Acute (a-kuf), adj. (pointed) ron- 
cheiy;* (shrewd) cherdek, tajam; 
(of sickness) tivk. 

A.D. (Anno Domini = in the year 
of our Lord) tarikh Msihi (Ar.), 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carr^; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, ciire, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ADAGE 



8 



ADMINISTRATION 



tahu7i Msihi, taliun orarg Kristen 

(B.). 

Adage (ad'ej), s. perl'ata'an oraty 
dliulu kala, bidal* ppatali,* p- 
?riaiah* 

Adam (dd'am)^ s. 7iabi Adam (Ar.). 

Adam*s apple (ad'amz ap'pl), s. 
Jkum (Ar. nulqum). 

Adapt (a-dapf), v. t. patiitkan, sa- 
uiakan, stujukan, suaikan* 

Adapted (-ed), adj. padan, patut, 
lat/ak, s-rasi, suai* 

Add (ad), V. t. (auoment) tamhah- 
kan; (in small quantities) tokok; 
(sum up) jmlahkan (Ar.) ; (ap- 
pend) samhon). 

Addendum (ad-den'dimi), s. sam- 
h organ. 

Addict (ad-dikf), v. t. hiasakan, 
iawani.'^ Addicted to vice, ter- 
iaivan oleh hawa-nafsu-nja* 

Addition (-dish'?/n), s. (increase) 
pnamhahan; (slight increase) to- 
kok; (sum) J7n1ah (Ar.) ; (an- 
nex) huhoiyan/^ samhorgan; 
(Math.) tambah. 

Additional (-al), adj. tambah, Ibeli 
lagi. 

Addled (ad'dld), adj. tmblaiy. 

Address (ad-dres'), v. t. (speak to) 
ff/ur, sapa;'* (direct in writing) 
ahmatkan (Ar.). 

Address, s. (speech, statement) per- 
chakapan, nchapan; (direction of 
a letter) 'alamat surat;* (place of 
residence) tmpat thy gal. Form 
of address, peraturan bhasa. 

Adduce (-dus'), v. t. sbotkan, bawa, 
purgut. 

Adept (ad'ept), s. oraig pandai, 
orarg ahli (Ar.). 

Adept (a-depf), adj. pandai, pa- 
ham, pintar (X.I.). 

Adequate (ad'e-kwet), adj. chukop, 
pada,* laj/ak, mnasabah (Ar.). 

Adhere (ad-her'), v. i. (stick) Ikat, 
jrekct;* (to a party) rapatkan 
diri; (to an opinion) ttap, berkuat. 



Adherent (-ent), s. (of a leader) 
murid; (of a party) sidarg.* 

Adhesive (-he'siv), adj. ya^g mlkat, 
Iket* jreket.'^ 

Adieu (a-du'), interj. tabek, slamat 
thggal, slamat jalan, salam 'alai- 
kum (Ar.). 

Adipose (ad'i-p5s), adj. Imak. 

Adjacent (a-ja'sent), adj. di sisi* 
di tpi, dkat, hampir* ra]Mt, b&i'-^ 
datnpi?g.* 

Adjective (aj'ek-tiv), s. (Gram.) 
nfah (Ar.). 

Adjoin (a-join'), v. i. bersamborg, 
berhuboig* rapat, bertempel.* 

Adjoining (-ing), adj. bersamborg 
digan, berhampiran drgan.^ 

Adjourn (a-jern'), v. t. (postpone) 
ta?ggohkan,* tempolikan,* gantvrg, 
pospon (E.). 

Adjourn, v. i. pchali, bersurai* 

Adjudge (a-juj'), y. t. (decide ju- 
idicially) huhumkan, putuskan Ml- 
kmnj (deem, consider) bilargkan, 
kirakan. 

Adjudicate (a-ju'di-kat), v. t. pu- 
tuskan hukuHi, jatohkan hukum. 

Adjunct (aj'ungkt), s. tempelan.^ 

Adjuration (aj'u-ra'shz/n), s. sum- 
pah . 

Adjure (a-jur'), v. t. suroh bersum- 
pah. 

Adjust (a-jusf), V. t. (fit) patid- 
kan, pasaig, rapatkan; (put in 
order) aturkan; (settle, as ac- 
counts, differences, quarrels) slsai- 
kan, slisekan (B.), jlaskan. 

Adjutant (aj'u-tant), s. ajudan 
(N.T.). 

Adjutant bird (herd), s. buroiy 
habi/^ 

Administer (ad-min'is-ter), v. t. 
(manage) aturkan, jalankan; 
(give out) bhagikan, bri. To ad- 
minister an oath, bri sumpali. 

Administration (-tra'sh?/n), s. 
(act of administering) peraturan; 
(the executive) pnjawatan,* pren- 



ate, ask, am, fin«l, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, miuMS. cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ADMINISTRATOR 



9 



AD VALOREM 



taJian^ Letters of administration, 

sumt Jcuasa psaka. 
Administrator (-tra-ter), s. yarg 

nnnjalankan, pmerentah, pnjawat;* 

(legal) Jcuasa, wal'il* (At. ivakil). 

Admirable (ad'mi-ra-bl), adj. teru- 

tarn a (Sk.), terpuji, elok, indah. 
Admiral (-ral), s. laksamana (Sk.), 

prglima laid. 
Admiration (-ra'shwn), s. lial mrg- 

indaJikan. 
Admire (ad-mir'), v. t. (prize liigh- 

l_y) indahkan; (regard with appro- 
bation) suka akan, herknan akan, 

gmar akan/^ hilargkan elok. 
Admirer (-er), s. yarg mnjindali- 

kan, yary mrgaseJti. 
Admissible (-mis'si-bl), adj. luhts, 

yarg holeh di-luliiskan, yarg boleh 

di-hri masok. 
Admission (-mish'2yn), s. (access) 

izin masok; (acknowledgement) 

prgakuan* To gain admission, 

dapat masok. 
Admit (-mif), y. t. (give entrance) 

hri masok; (receive) trima, sam- 

hot; (acknowledge, concede) mrg- 

aku, ikrar (Ar.) ; (allow) lulus- 

kan. 
Admittance (-tans), s. izin masok. 

No admittance, tgahan masok. 
Admitting that (-ting tli^t), conj. 

surggoli-pun, smntarg-pun.'^ 
Admixture (-miks'cliur), s. diam' 

puran, gaulan.'^ 
Admonish (-mon'isli), v. t. (re- 
prove, exhort) tgur, ajar, nasikat' 

kan; (warn) lararg. 
Admonition (ad'mo-nishW), s. 

nasihat, ajaran. 
Admonitory (ad-mon'i-to-ri), adj. 

yarg mlarargkan. 
Ado (a-doo'), s. susah. To make 

no more ado, tiada anibil susah 

lagi, tiada hirau lagi.* 
Adolescence (ad'o-les'sens), s. ba- 

ligh (Ar.), rmaja (Sk.), cliukop 

'umor. 



Adopt (a-dopf), v. t. (a view or 
policy) pileh, trima, pakai, ikut, 
turiit; (a child) airjkat. 

Adopted (-ed), adj.' Adopted child, 
anak argkat. 

Adoptive (-iv), adj. Adoptive fa- 
ther, bapa argkat. 

Adorable (a-dor'a-bl), adj. yarg 
jKitut di-smbah, yarg patut di- 
kasehi; see adore. 

Adoration (ad'o-ra'shtm), s. smbah. 

Adore (a-dor'), v. t. (worship) sm- 
bah; (love) kasehi, chinta. 

Adorn (a-dorn'), v. t. (decorate) 
hias,'^ Jiiasi* riaskan (B.) ; (beau- 
tify) elokkan, tambahi k'elokan.* 

Adornment (-ment), s. perliiasan, 
prasan (B.), k'elokan. 

Adrift (a-driff), adv. liaryut, ter- 
aporg-apoiyj^ teratorg-atorg* ber- 
haiyutan."^ 

Adroit (a-droif), adv. pandai, pan- 
tos, chakatan,''^ pintar (iST.I.). 

Adulation (ad'u-la'shwn), s. puji- 
pujian. 

Adulatory (-la-to-ri), adj. yarg 
sargat mmuji. 

Adult (ad'ult or a-dulf), adj. yarg 
sudah sanipai 'umor, chukop 
'urn or, baligh (Ar.) ; (of men) 
bujarg; (of women) dara. 

Adulterate (a-dul'ter-at), v. t. (de- 
base) laiichorgkan,* palsukan; (by 
admixture) champurkan. 

Adulterated (-ed), adj. lancliorg,^ 
palsu, champiiran. 

Adulterer (-er), s. laki-laki yarg 
berzina, ya^g bermukali* yarg ber- 
kndak. 

Adulteress (-es), s. prempuan yarg 
berzina, yarg berniukah,* yarg ber- 
kndak. 

Adultery (-i), s. zina, mukah,* kn^ 
dak. To commit adultery, ber- 
zina, bermtikah,* berkndak. 

Ad valorem (ad va-l6r'em), adj. 
yarg mnurut herga. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, ear; carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful) ; law, how, oil; thin then. 



ADVANCE 



10 



AFFABLE 



Advance (ad-vans'), v. i. (go for- 
ward) herjalan, mara* tampil* 
ma/u:* (step forward in fencing) 
sarah;* (increase in knowledge, 
age, etc.) naik, bertamhah; (in- 
crease in price) 7iaik. 

Advance, v. t. (bring to the front) 
hadapkan, tampilkan* jnajulwi;* 
(in rank) nail'kan; (earnest 
money) hri chrykram, hayer dim- 
hi; (the price) naikkaii herga; 
( wages ) pinjamkan. 

Advance, s. kmajuan* kmai'aan;* 
(earnest money) chiykram; (of 
wages) pinjaman. In advance, 
di hadapan, dliulu. 

Advancement (-ment), s. (pro- 
gress ) kmajuan ;* ( promotion ) 
naik paiykat. 

Advantage (ad-van'tej), s. (bene- 
fit) guna, faiddli, kbajikan;"^ 
(gain, profit) untoig, lata,* m- 
nafaat (Ar.). To get an ad- 
vantage, mriarg. To take advan- 
tage of (use), giinakan; (cheat) 
perdayakati* 

Advantageous (ad'van-ta'j?/s), adj. 
berguna, beruntorg, berfaidah. 

Advent (ad'vent), s. kdataiyan. 

Adventitious (ad'ven-tish'^s), adj. 
tiada s-mna-mna,^ datarg-datarg.^ 

Adventure (ad-ven'chur), s. per- 
kara yaig berbaliya, perkara yaig 
hairan. 

Adventurous (-i/s), adj. (daring) 
bratii kna bahya, nekatj* (risky) 
berbahya. 

Adversary (ad'ver-sa-ri), s. op- 
ponent) lawan; (personal enemy) 
stru;* (national enemy) musoh. 

Adverse (-vers), adj. (opposing) 
yarg mJawan; (of wind) sakal; 
(unpropitious) malaig, sial. 

Adversity (ad-vers'i-tij, s. kmala^y- 
an, cMaka, balak (Ar. bald'). 

Advert ( ad-vert'), v. i. i7yat {akan), 
knarg akan. To advert to, irgat- 
kan. 



Advertise (ad'ver-tiz), v. t. (an- 
nounce publicly) masohorka7i (Ar. 
7)tashhur), hi tahu, kasi tahu 
(B.), ivarwarkan* hebahkaii.* 

Advertisement (ad-ver'tiz-ment), 
s. notis (E.), kn/ata'an, 'alan 
(Ar.). 

Advice (ad-vis'), s. bichara, nasihat, 
runduyan,* ptyajaran; (of a doc- 
tor) ptua* (Ar. fatwa) ; (inform- 
ation) k/iabar, pkhabaran* 

Advisable (-viz'a-bl), adj. patut, 
berfaidah. 

Advise (-viz'), v. t. (counsel) bi- 
charakan, nasihatkan; (inform) 
brl taliu, m'alvmkan (Ar.). 

Advisedly (-ed-li), adv. drgan s- 
rgaja. 

Adviser (-er), s. pmbicliara, pna- 
,siJiat. 

Advocacy (ad'vo-ka-si), s. lial mm- 
bantu, lial mmhicliarakan. 

Advocate (-ket), s. luakil bichara,^ 
pgnam* loyar (E.). 

Advocate (-kat), v. t. (defend at 
law) toloig, bantu; (recommend) 
bicharakan. 

Adze (adz), s. patil;* (larger) rni^ 
bas,'^ chtam.* 

/Eolian harp (e-o'li-an harp), s. 
buloh prindu.* 

Aerated (a'er-at-ed), adj. (bub- 
bling) gigak, nierwap (B.), mn- 
dideJi, mndidi (B.). Aerated 
water, ayer manis, ayer lamnet{'E.), 

Aerial (ar'i-al), adj. argin (a), 
udara (a), di udara. 

Aeronaut (a'er-o-nawt), s. oranj 
naik, pundi-pundi terbarg.* 

Aeroplane (-plan), s. kapal terbarg, 
jntra terba?g* kapal udara.* 

.esthetics (es-thet'iks), s. pi. 'iU 
mu k'elokan* 'ilmu perhiasan* k- 
pandaian fasal rias (B.). 

Afar (a-far'), adv. janh. 

Affable (af'fa-bl), adj. laku manis, 
pramali, berbham, tergkah-laku Im- 
bot (B.). 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; 51d, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, ns, minMS, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



AFFAIR 



11 



AFRESH 



Affair (af-far'), s. (matter, con- 
cern) hal, perlwa; (business) 
pkerjaan. 

Affect (-fekf), v. t. (influence, 
move) grakkan; (feign) hiiaU 
biiat, pura-pura. To affect un- 
favourably, dataiy'kan cMaka. To 
be affected by, hna. 

Affectation (affek-ta'shwn), s. 
fergkah pura-pwa, muka-Timka. 

Affected (af-fektVd), adj. yaiy 
pura-pura laku-iya. 

Affecting (-ing), adj. yaiy mmhri 
raican/^ yary mmhri pilu, yarg m- 
milul'an, yaig mrawankan* 

Affection (-fek'sh^m), s. (love) 
kaseh, sayarg : (strong) msra 
(Sk.) ; (mental impulse, feeling) 
'chita-chita,'^ rasa, perrasaan haU; 
(disease) pryahit. To gain a per- 
vson's affections, amW liati oraig. 

Affectionate (-et), adj. pryayarg,"^ 
yarg mTyasehi;* (mutually affec- 
tionate) herl-aseh-Jcasehan. 

Affianced (af-fi'anst), adj. her- 
tiwarg. 

Affidavit (af-fi-da'vit), s. surat 
sumpali. 

Affiliate (af-fd'i-at), v. t. (adopt) 
argJcat anah: (attach to, unite 
with) huboigl'an drgan* 

Affinity (af-fin'i-ti), s. (kinship 
generally) persaudara'an,'^ Jcna- 
mrgna (B.), Jcrabat (Ar.) ; (con- 
nection) perdampiiganf^ hrapat- 
an,^ perliuboiyan. 

Affirm (af-ferm'), v. t. (ratify) 
tgohkan, ttapkan; (assert positive- 
ly) katakan drgan tntu, surggoh- 
kan, yakan. 

Affirmation (affer-ma'shi/n), s. 
ktgohan, kttapan, ktntuan. 

Affirmative (af-ferm'a-tiv), adj. 
yarg mryurggohkan, yarg mrgya- 
kan."^ 

Affix (af-fiks'), v. t. (annex) hu- 
borgkan; (fasten) Ikatkan, tarn- 



pal; (as a plaster) Ikapkan. To 

affix a seal, buboh chap. 
Afflict (-flikf), V. t. susahkan, an^ 

iayakan, seksakan, sakiti, liai^- 

kan* 
Affliction (-flik'shwn), s. ksusalian, 

seksa, balak (Ar. bald') ; (disease) 

ptyakit. 
Affluence (af 'flu-ens), s. (pro- 
fusion) klempahany* kmewahan; 

( wealth ) kkaya'a n . 
Affluent (-ent), adj. (abundant) 

me wall, lempali;'^ (rich) kaya. 
Afford (af-ford'), v. t. (give) bri; 

(stand, bear) tahan. Cannot 

afford, tiada mampu* tiada daya, 

ta' riipa. 
Affray (-fra'), s. perklahian, gadoh, 

pergadoh an, huru-hara. 
Affright (-frit'), v. t. kjotkan, bri 

takot, gntar'kan, pranjatkan, bri 

dalishat (Ar.). 
Affright, s. ktakotan, dalishat 

(Ar.), hebat (Ar. haibat). 
Affront (-frunf), v. t. bri malu, bri 

'aib (Ar.), 'aibkan (Ar.), biiat 

honar (Pers.). 
Affront, s. ararg di muka, 'aih 

(Ar.), honar (Pers.). 
Afghan (afgan), s. orarg Kabul 

(Ar.). 
Afire (a-fir'), adj. yaiy kna api. 
Aflame (-flam'), adj. berryah. 
Afloat (-fl5t'), adj. and adv. (float- 
ing) timhol; (adrift) haryut, ter- 

aporg-aporg;* (in circulation) ma- 

solior (Ar. mashhur). 
Afoot (-foot'), adv. berjalan kaki. 
Aforesaid (a-for'sed), adj. yarg 

tersbot di atas. 
Aforetime (-tim), adv. dliulu kola, 

pad a zaman dhulu, jman dliulu 

(B.). 
Afraid (a-frad'), adj. takot, rgri,* 

grun. 
Afresh (-fresh'), adv. lagi skali, 

kmhali, s-mula. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, ear, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, s5rry; iise, us, min^s, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin theu. 



AFRICAN 



12 



AGGRAVATION 



African (afri-kan), s. oraiy Kapri, 
oranj Jarggi,'^ otwg hitain. 

African marigold (mar'i-gold), s. 
burga talii aijam. 

Aft (aft), adv. (Xaut.) di Wakaig, 
di huritan. 

After (aft'er), prep, (of place) di 
blakarg; (following) migikut, m- 
nurut; (of time) Icmdian deri- 
pada, I pas, liabis, sudah; (ac- 
cording to) sperti, mnurut. kliex 
that, hmdian deri-^ada itu. After 
that — , s-tlah* hmdian deri-pada 
— . After eating, Ipas makan, 
habis makan. After 3 o'clock, 
Ifxis pukol tiga. What are you 
after? apa buat? One after an- 
other (successively) berganti-gan- 
ti, berturut-tuvut, bergilir-gilii'j* 
(in Indian file) berbuntut-buntut, 
berekor-ekov. After all (finally), 
akhir-iya (Ar.), lama-Mama an.* 
To go after, cliati, cJiarek (B.). 

After, adv. (of place) blakarg; (of 
time) kmdian. 

Afterbirth (-berth), s. uri. 

Afternoon (-n65n'), s. ptaiy, sore 
(X.I.) ; (noon to 3 p.m.) lohor* 
(Ar. tlohor) ; (3 to 6 p.m.) 'asar 
(At.) ; (6 to 6.30 p.m.) maghrib 
(Ar.). In the afternoon, pta^y- 
pfaiy. 

Afterthought (-thawt), s. fikiran 
yaig mndatarg. 

Afterwards (-werdz), adv. kmdian, 
kmdian den-pada itu, blakaiy, s- 
tlah itu,-" blakarg kali (X.I.). 

Again (a-gen'), adv. (back, in re- 
turn) kmbali; (once more) lagi s- 
kali; (moreover, besides) lagi, 
pnla. Over again, s-mula. Again 
and again, b&ndarg-ulatg. To 
do again and again, nlargkan. 
Now and again, kadary-kadary . As 
large again, dua kali bsar. Nev- 
er do it again, javgan skali-kali 
bvat lagi. To sleep again, balek 



tidor, tidor pida.* To happen 
again, mndua kali.'^ 

Against (a-gensf), prep, (upon, in 
contact with) pada, k-pada, akan;* 
(in opposition to) mlarggar, m- 
lawan. Over against, tntarg, dkat, 
di sisi.* Against the wind, m- 
njorgsorg atgin. The wind was 
against us, aryin salah. 

Agape (a-gap'), adj. (with astonish- 
ment) termatyu,* terblargu.* ' 

Agate (ag'et), s. 'akek kunirg. 

Age (aj), s. 'umor, usia (Sk.) ; 
(period, generation) zaman, jnian 
(B.). Of age, sudah sampai 
'iimor. Under age, blum sampai 
'umor. Middle age, sparoh 'umor. 
What is his age? brapa 'umor-tyaf 
The present age, zaman ini. Past 
ages, zaman dhulu. Twelve years 
of age, dua-blas tahun 'umor-iya. 
Age after age, zaman-ber zaman. 
He is of the same age as this man, 
'umor-iyo' s-baya oraiy ini. 

Age, V. i. jadi tua. 

Aged (a'jed), adj. tua. 

Agency (a'jen-si), s. wakil (Ar.), 
pkerja'an wakil* (Ar. wakil). 

Agenda (a-jen'da), s. pi. pkerja'an. 

Agent (a'j^nt). s. kuasa, wakil 
{kr.),aqen (N.I.) (B.). 

Aggrandize (ag'gran-diz), v. t. 
bsarkan, Ibehkan; (in rank) tiiggi- 
kan. 

Aggrandizement (ag-gran'diz- 

ment), s. kbsaran, klhekan, ktirggi- 
an. 

Aggravate (ag'-gra-vat), v. t. (in- 
tensify) bratkan, Ibehkan, tarn- 
bahi; (irritate) bn marah, sakit- 
kan hati, gusarij* (as animals) 
galakkan; (of diseases) bntankan. 

Aggravation (-va'shwn), s. (act of 
intensifying) hal mmhraikan, hal 
mlbehkan; (that which aggra- 
vates) pnambah; (that which ir- 
ritates) kmarahan; (of disease) 
bnian. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; iise, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



AGGREGATE 



13 



AIM 



Aggregate (ag'gre-gat), v. t. hum- | 
polkan, himpotd'cui. Aggregating | 
100 piculs, jmlah-nja* s-ratus 
pil-ul. 

Aggregate (-get), s. (assemblage) 
perkumpolan; (sum, total) jmlah 
(Ar.). In the aggregate, bersama- 
sania. 

Aggression (ag-gresh'wn), s. srajy, 
xerbu, tmpoli. 

Aggressive (-gres'siv), adj. yarg 
uinjvarg, yarg hndak mlawan. 

Aggressor (-ser), s. pnjraiy, yarg 
terdhulu mlarggar. 

Aggrieve (ag-grev'), v. t. diika- 
chitakan (Sk.), susahi, susahlwi 
hafi orarg, hri niashglnd (Ar.). 

Aghast (a-gasf), adj. terclirgarg, 
ferpranjat, grun. 

Agila wood (a-ge'la wood), s. gha- 
ill. 

Agile (aj'il or aj'il), adj. pxintas, 
taigl'as* 

Agility (a-jiri-ti), s. I'pantasan. 

Agitate (aj'i-tat), v. t. (move vio- 
lently) gonchaig; (disturb) ha- 
chau, hani;'^ (of liquids) I'ocliak; 
(discuss) hichaial-an. He was 
agitated, herdbar-lah hati-nja. 

Agitation (-ta'sh«n), s. (disturb- 
ance) gmpar, kacliau, hani-hiru,* 
nisoli :* (incitement) asuian, vsot- 
an (B.) ; (mental perturbation) 
kloh-JiSali* 

Agitator (-ta-ter), s. pigasut, pig- 
usot (B.), prgachau, prgachurn* 

Agnostic (ag-nos'tik), s. yarg tiada 
migtaliui akan Allah* yarg m- 
jyargkal al-an Allah. 

Ago (a-go'), adv. dhulu, lalu. Tavo 
years ago, dua tahim lain. How 
long ago? bra pa lama dliidu? 
Long ago, lawa dhulu, lama sudali. 

Agonize (ag'o-niz), v. i. (be in 
agony) rasa'i sigsara (Sk.) ; (strive 
earnestly) bermati-mati, migglu- 
por (B.) ; (with contortions of the 
body) ronfa.* 



Agony (-ni), s. seksa, srgsara (Sk.), 
'azab"^ (Ar. 'adziib). 

Agrarian (a-grar'i-an), adj. deri- 
lial ladarg. Agrarian law, undarg' 
vndarg chochok-tanam.* 

Agree (a-gre'), v. i. (be in unison) 
berstuju, muafakat (Ar.) ; (con- 
sent) kabul* sudi, berknan, redla 
(Ar.) ; (promise) berjanji; (be 
suitable, as food or medicine) s- 
rasi; (coincide) stuju, sama; as, 
jam, ini tiada sama, these clocks do 
not agree. 

Agreeable (-a-bl), adj. (to the 
senses) sdap; (to the mind) ber- 
knan; (willing) sudi, kabul;* 
(conformable) s-tuju. 

Agreement (-m^^nt), s. (contract) 
perjanjian; (harmony) muafakat 
(Ar.) ; (concurrence) perstujuan. 

Agriculture (ag'ri-kul-chur), s. 
'iJmu* pladaig, 'ihnu* bertanam, 
' ilm u berchoch ok-tanam . 

Aground (a-grownd'), adv. (Naut.) 
terkandas, tersadai; (cast ashore, 
wrecked) terdampar. 

Ague (a'gu), s. dmam kura, dmam 
gigU.'^ 

Ah (a), int. ah I hai! 

Aha (a-ha'), int. ivah! ambohi! 

Ahead (a-hed'), adv. (Naut.) (in 
front) di muka; (contrary, of 
wind) sakal; (in advance) di ha- 
dapan. To go ahead, berjalan 
dhulu. To go or get ahead of, 
mndhului; (surpass) alahkan* 
kalahkan (B.). To push a boat 
ahead, soroig. 

Ahem (a-hem'), int. daham. 

Aid (ad), v. t. tolotg, bantu. 

Aid, s. pevtolorgan, bantuan. 

Aide-de-camp (ad'd<?-kaN), s. ka- 
pif,'^ prgapit, prgiritg.* 

Aigrette (a'gret), s. jambul; (arti- 
ficial) tajok,* jumbai.* 

Ail (al), V. i. rasa sakit, sakit. 

Ailment (al'm^nt), s. pryakit. 

Aim (am), v. i. (by closing one 



rate, ask, am, finol, care, car, carry; eve. hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, ns, minus, cure, injure, 

hiirry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



AIM 



14 



ALEXANDER 



eye) hedeh;* (direct a missile 

or weapon) tuju; (endeavour) 

choha; (by magic) tileJc. 
Aim, V. t. tujukan, lialakan* 
Aim, 3. (intention) Icahandak, mak- 

Slid, kasad (Ar.), hajat (Ar.) ; 
(direction) liala,* tujuan. 
Aimless (iim'les), adj. ia'tntu liala- 

7ya/-' tatntu avail, tatntu tuju-iya. 
Air (ar), s, (atmosphere) udara, 

hawa; (air in motion) aiyin; 

(tune) lagu, ragam; (appearance') 

rupa, cliara. To take fresh air, 

mal'an argin, amhil angin. Airs 

(affected manner), muka-muka, 

ragam. To put on airs, mragam, 

bersikap,^ bersolek* 
Air, V. t. (expose to the air) atgin- 

kan; (expose to heat) diarg* 

gaiggarg; (expose to the sun) 

jmor; (hang on a line) sidai.* 
Air-bubble (-bub-bl), s. (as in 

glass) 7nerteli.* 
Air-cushion (-koosh-wn), s. hantal 

glniborg, hantal ghot."^ 
Airship (-ship), s. kapal terharg, 

kapal udara, helun herjntra (E. 

l)alloon). 
Air-tight (-tit), s. kjap,"" tiada 

holeli masok aiyin, taHlap.^ 
Airing (-ing), s. To take an airing, 

makan argin, amhil aigin. 
Airy (-i), adj. (open to the air) 

heranjin; (delicate of texture) 

hahis. 
Aisle (il), s. (passage between 

•seats) lororg antara kursi [krosi 

.(B.)]. . 
Ajar (a-jar'), adj. rrggaig, her- 

jarak.^' 
Akimbo (a-kim'bo), adv. berchkak 

pitggarg, hertlkan jmggaiy* 
Akin (a-kin'), adj. (of blood re- 
lations) ber.saudara, hersanak;"^ 

(similar to) s-rupa, s-macham, s'- 

akan-akan* 
Alabaster (alVbas'ter), s. hatu 

pualam* (Tam.). 



Alacrity (a-lak'ri-ti), s. (briskness) 

kpa n fasa n : ( cage rness ) yakin 
(Ar.). 
Alarm (a-larm'), v. t. (arouse to 

vigilance) jagakan, kjotkan; 
(disturb, cause excitement) ym- 

parkan; (frighten) gertakkan,' hri 

iakot, hri dahsliat (Ar.), kaget 

(X.I.). Alarmed, terpranjat, ier^ 

kjot, rgri^ 
Alarm, s. (fear) ktakotan, rgri,'^ 

gru n , dahsli at ( Ar. ) ; ( warning 

signal) smhoyan* 
Alarm clock (klok), s. jam smbo- 

yan,"^ jam piyjot tidor* 
Alarmist (-istj, s. prggertak, pm- 

ranjat, piygmpar. 
Alarum (a-lar'wm), s. smboyan* 
Alas (a-las'), int. ay oh, adolii, sa^ 

yarg, wahai.* 
Albatross (al'ba-tros), s. s-jnis 

hnrorg chamar yaig bsar skali.'^ 
Albeit (awl-be'it)^ conj. surggoh pun. 
Albino (al-be'no, u. s. al-bi'no), s. 

orarg sabon,* oraig balar;* (of 

buffaloes) halar.'^ 
Album (arbwm), s. buku kosorg 

bagi"^ gamhar, etc. \kerna (B.)]. 
Albumen (Td-bii'men), s. (white of 

an Qgg) put eh tlor. 
Alchemist (al'ke-mist), s. tukarg 

kimia (Ar.). 
Alchemy (-mi), s. 'ilmu kimia 

(Ar.). 
Alcohol (-ko-hol), s. pati arak,*" 

rachun arak (B.). 
Alcove (-kov), s. (recess in a room) 

chrok, anak bilek;* (garden bow- 
er) halai jamhaiyan,* pun j org* 
Alderman (awrder-man), s. sidarg 

majlis bandar * 
Ale (al), s. bir (E.). 
Alert (a-lerf), adj. (watchful) ber- 

irgat, jaga; (brisk) pantas, taiy- 

kas* 
Alexander (al'ekz-an'der), s. 7s- 

kandar (Ar.). Alexander the 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, s5re, sort, sorry; iise, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ALEXANDRIA 



15 



ALLEGORY 



G-reat, Isl^andar dzu 'l-karnain 
(Ar.). 

Alexandria (-dri-a), s. Ishandanali 
(Ar.). 

Algebra (iirje-bra), s. 'ilmu 'l-}ahr 
(Ar.). 

Alias (a'li-as), s. nama palsu. 

Alibi (al'i-bi), s. Jdrargan tiada ha- 
dlir pada tmpat di-tudoh* 

Alien (a'li-en or aryen), adj. (for- 
eign) dagatrj; (different, incon- 
gruous) Iain, herlainan. 

Alien, s. orarg asiiy* orary Muar- 
an,^ oratg dagatg. 

Alienable (-a-bl), adj. ya)g holeh 
di-jual. 

Alienate (-at), v. t. (transfer pro- 
perty) jual, smhkan; (the atfec- 
tions) janhlwi liati oraig. 

Alienation (-a'sli^/n), s. (of pro- 
perty) hal nuhjual, hal miyraWkan-; 
(of the affections) jauli liati, per- 
s t man * m ufa rraluh ( Ar . ) . 

Alight (a-lif), V. i. (spring down) 
ierjun, trujiai (B.), tunin; (of 
Idrds) Jiirggap. 

Alight, adj. terpasaig. 

Align (a-lin'), v. t. htull-an haris, 
htidl-an hanjar/^ lunisl'an jajar,^ 
htullx-an nirai.^ 

Alignment (-ment), s. haris yarg 
htul, hanjar yarg lurits;* (act of 
aligning) hal mmMull'ati hanjar.^ 

Alike (a-]ik'), adj. s-rupa, s- 
macliam, sama. Somewhat alike, 
akan-akan sama,* inau dkat sama 
(B.). 

Alike, adv. sama. 

Aliment (ari-ment), s. makanan, 
rjki (Ar. rizki), jerki (B.). 

Alimentary (-men'ta-ri), adj. yarg 
mnjadi makanan. 

Alimony (-mo-ni), s. hlanja, naf- 
kah (Ar.). 

Alive (a-liv'), adj. (living) liidop, 
berhayat (Ar.), henyawa; (lively) 
pantas, chakatan* To keep alive 
(as fire or affection), Jiidopkan. 



Alkali (arka-ll), s. garam ahu. 

All (awl), adj. (of persons or things 
considered individually) smoa, s- 
gala, somethnes followed by &- 
laka;* (more emphatic) sklian; 
(all over a surface) slur oh, as, 
slur oh bumi, all over the earth; 
sluroh badan, sluroh tuhoh* all 
over the body; (the whole of any- 
thing) s-gnap, as, s-gnap perhim- 
ponan, all the assembly; (of du- 
ration or length) s-panjarg, as, s- 
panjarg hari, all day; s-panjarg 
jalan, all the way. Other com- 
pounds of s- are frequently used to 
express all, as, s'isi rumah, all 
those in the house; diyan s-bulat 
hati, with all one's heart ; drgan 
s-habis-habis kuasa-rya, with all his 
power; drgan s-pnoh-pnoh, harap, 
with all confidence; s-malam-^na- 
laman, all night. All alone, s- 
batmg karah. All but, njaris/-^ 
hampir. All over, s-rata-rata 
tmpat; (prep.) sluroh, antero 
(^.I.). All sorts of, berbagai- 
bagai, plbagai,* serba. On all 
fours, mraigkak. All of them, 
ksmoa-nja. All at once, s-kali gas. 
All together, s-rmpak. All of a 
sudden, pada s-ktika. 

All, adv. (entirely) s-mata-mata."^ 

Allay (al-hV), v. t. (quiet) diam- 
kan; (appease) puaskan; (evil 
feelings) padamkan; (alleviate) 
kuratgkan, snargkan. 

Allegation (arie-ga'shwn), s. k- 
trajgan, akvan. 

Allege (al-lej'), v. t. katakan drgan 
tntu, lyatakan, tranjkan, inrgaku. 

Allegiance (-le'jans), s. stia,* bakti 
(Sk.). 

Allegorise (al'le-go-rlz), v. i. 'iba' 
rat kan, mesalkan, misalkan ((B.), 
klaskan (Ar.). 

Allegory (-ri), s. perumpamfi'an,* 
'iharat, mesalan (Ar. mithal), kias 
(Ar.). 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ALLEVIATE 



16 



ALONG 



Alleviate (al-le'vi-at), v. t. kiirary- 
kan, reniankan. 

Alley (al'li), s. lovoiy. Blind alley, 
loroirj s-krat, jalan huntu. 

Alliance (al-li'ans), s. (union) per- 
hvhonjan, perskutuaii;'^ (league, 
compact) perjanjian stia* mua- 
fakat (Ar.). 

Alligator (al'li-ga-ter), s. huaija. 

Alliteration (al-lit'er-a'slmn), s. 
ulargan liuruf yarg sama bunji.'^ 

Allocate (ril'lo-kat), v. t. hhagikan, 
untokkan. 

Allocation (-ka'shwn), s. (arrange- 
ment) peraturari'; (allotment) 
hhaqian, imtok. 

Allot (al-lof), V. t. (distribute) 
bhagikan, untokkan; (assign, ap- 
point) tntnkan. 

Allotment (-ment), s. bhagian, un- 
tok, habuan* 

Allow (al-low'), Y. t. (give, grant) 
bri, kasi (B.) ; (as a deduction) 
potoiy, tolak; (permit) luluskan,'^ 
bnarkan, Ipaskan, biar, kasi (B.) ; 
(acknowledge) migaku. To allow 
to leave, Ipas kJuar. 

Allowable (-a-bl), adj. (permis- 
sible) boleh di-bri, lulus;* (law- 
ful) halal. 

Allowance (-ans), s. (quantity al- 
lowed, of food) plabur,'* msara* 
{Kv. mushaharat) ; (of money) 
bJanja; (deduction) potorgan. 

Alloy (al-loi'), s. (compound of 
metals) panclia-logam'* (Tam.) ; 
(admixture) chanipuran. Gold 
alloy, snasa. 

Alloy, V. t. champur. 

Allude (-lud'), v. i. baiva cliakap; 
as, mmbaiva cliakap deri-lial sianu, 
to allude to Mr. so-and-so. 

Allure (-lur'), v. t. (entice by bait) 
umpankan; (by a decoy) pikat;* 
(by familiarising) jinak-jinakkan; 
(bv sounds) dkut* kesek* 

Allurement (-ment), s. umpan, 
pmikat* 



Allusion (al-lu'zli?/n), see allude. 

Alluvial (-vi-al), s. kukop* Allu- 
vial soil, tanak 'nap* 

Ally (rd-ir), v. t. liuborg, huboig^ 
kan. 

Ally (al'li), s. pmbantu, pnolonj, s- 
/t /////.* 

Almanac (awl'ma-nak), s. takwim 
(Ar.). 

Almeirah (al-mfra), s. almari^ 
Imari; (for crockery) grobokJ* 

Almighty (awl-mit'i), adj. yarg- 
VI alia kiiasa. 

Almond (a'm^nd), s. badani* The 
'Indian almond, ktapaig. AlmoncJ 
eyes, mata sepet. 

Almost (awl'most), adv. hampir^ 
dkat, njaris* chmas;* (almost hit- 
ting a mark) sipi. 

Alms (amz), s. sdkali, derma (Sk.) ; 
(poor rate, incumbent on Mos- 
lems) zakat (Ar.), To distribute- 
alms, dadar.'* 

Almsgiving (amz'giv-ing), s. mm- 
bri sdkaliy mndadar.'^ 

Almshouse (-hows), s. rumali luakaf 
bagi orarg miskin.* 

Aloe (al'o), s. (Aloe ferox) lidah 
buaga. Extract of aloes, jadam. 

Aloes-wood (al'oz-wood), s. (the 
fragrant wood found in knots on 
the karas tree, Aquilaria malac- 
cense) gharu. 

Aloft (a-loff), adv. di atas, k'atas; 
(Xaut.) di tiarg. To go aloft,. 
naih tiarg. 

Alone (a-lon'), adj. (solitary) tuig^ 
gal, s' orarg diri, terkoteig-ko^ 
tergr (only) saliaja. All alone, 
s-baiarg karah, s-batarg galah* 

Along (a-long'), prep, mnurut, as^ 
mnuriit jalan, along the road. 
All along the road, s-panjarg-pan^ 
jaig jalan. See below. 

Along, adv. (lengthwise) pada bu- 
jor;* (onward) k-hadapan. To 
go along the edge of, mnjusor; as, 
mtyusor pantai, along the shore. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; Ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, aore. sort, sorry; use, us, mim/s, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ALONGSIDE 



17 



AMAZE 



Along with, serta drgan, hserta. 

All along (of time), slalu, s- 

meiitatg: (of direction) s-panjarg. 
Alongside (-sId'), adv. di sisi*_ di 

tpi. To bring alongside, kpilkan.'^ 
Aloof (a-loof), adv. jauh sdikit. 

To hold aloof, tarelc diri. 
Aloud (a-lowd'), adv. drgan suara 

yaig ryarirg. 
Alpaca (al-pak'a), s. s-jnis I'ain 

biilu. 
Alphabet (arfa-bet), s. alif-ba-ta^^ 
Alphabetical (-bet'i-kal), adj. In 

alphabetical order, mnurut susun- 

an huruf* 
Already (awl-red'i), adv. memarg, 

sdia, sdia sudali. 
Also (awl'so), adv. and conj. pun, 

pida, juga, lagi. 
Altar (awTter or ol'ter), s. tmpat 

korban (Ar.), tmpat persmhlelian, 

mizhali^ (Ar. niidzhaii). 
Alter, V. t. ohahhan; (of position) 

aleli;"^ (amend, improve) pinda;* 

see CHANGE. 

Alter, V. i. herohah. 

Alteration (-a'slmn), s. obalian, 
pinda a7i.'^ 

Altercation (-ka'shzm), s. pertig- 
Icaran, perhantalian/^ perbabilan* 

Alternate (ol-ter'net), adj. yarg 
h erg anting anti, hergilir-gilir* her- 
slanj. Alternate days, slarg s-liari, 
hersJarg-slaig liari, lat s-liari. 

Alternate (ol'ter-nat), v. i. ganti- 
herganti, herganti-ganti, berlat-lat. 

Alternation (-na'shwn), s. per- 
gantian. 

Alternative (ol-ter'na-tive), s. (one 
of two things offered to one's 
choice) saJah satu; (thing offered 
in place of another) gantian. You 
may choose either alternative, bo- 
leli pileh salah-satu-nja. There is 
no alternative, tiada jalan lain. 

Although (awl-fAo'), conj. mski, 
mshi-pun, surggoli, surggoh-pun, 
jikalau. . . .skali-pun, as, jikalau 



sluroh tanah Jaiva itu skali-pun, 

although the whole of Java; padot 

Jial* as, although he is not guilty 

he professes to be so, ia mrgaku 

din-nja bersalah pada hal tiada 

bersalak. 
Altitude (al'ti-tud), s. tiiggi. 
Altogether (awl'too-gef/t'er), adv. 

s-niata-mata, skali. 
Altruism (al'troo-izm), s. hal mn- 

chari faidah orarg lain. 
Alum (al'^/m), s. taivas. 
Aluminium (-u-min'i-ian), s. s-jnis 

timah yaig amat reiyan. 
Alumnus (a-lum'n^/s), s. anak sko- 

I ah, murid. 
Always (awl'waz), adv. slalu, sn~ 

tiam (Sk.), snntiasa (Sk.), sdia^ 

kala iSk.), malar, ^ madary,* s- 

memarg. To be always doing, 

slaroh,^ mnjlaroh.^ To be always- 
using, IJarkan.'^ 
Am (am), see be. 
Amalgam (a-margam), s. cham- 

puran raksa. 
Amalgamate (-at), v. t. (of 

metals) chanipur drgan raksa; 

(combine, unite) huhorgkan,. 

satukan. 
Amalgamation (-a'shwn), s. (of 

metals) hal mnchampur drgan 

raksa; (combination) perhuboigan,. 

perchampuran. 
Amanuensis (a-man'u-en'sis), s.. 

juru-tulis. 
Amass (a-mas'), v. t. kumpolkan, 

himponkan,"^ timbonkan, kamporg- 

kan. 
Amateur (am'a-tur), s, oraig yarg 

bkerja atau bermain drgan tiada 

mnrima upah. 
Amatory (-to-ri), adj. yaig mn- 

dataiykan brahi,'^ deri-hal brahi,* 

drgan 'ashik, (Ar.). 
Amaze (a-maz'), v. t. chrgaiykan, 

bri hairan, t'ajiibkan (Ar.). 

Amazed, terchrgaiy, t'ajub (Ar.),. 

(Ar.), termargu-margu.* 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire,. 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hiirry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



AMAZEMENT 



18 



AMOUNT 



Amazement (-ment), s. hairan, 
chnjojy, fa Jul) (Ar.). 

Amazon (am'a-ZMn), s. soldado 
prempuan. 

Ambassador (am-bas'sa-der), s. 
utiisan* ival'il Jiraja'an* 

Amber (am'ber), s. amhar (Ar. 
'anhar). 

Ambergris (-gres), s. attibar, 'anhar 
(Ar.). 

Ambidextrous (am'bi-deks'triis), 
adj. i/arg targan-nja sama huat. 

Ambiguous (am-big'u-ws), adj. 
jjan) dim inana-rya, ya?y ta'tntu 
arfi-tya/umvm'^' ( Ai\ ghumiwi ?). 

Ambition (-bish'wn), s. h'iiyinan 
tirggi, liimmah iirggi* 

Ambitious (-ws), adj. .yaig irgiu 
akan Jchsaran atau I'uasa, yarg mn- 
chari nama, yaty herhirnmah tirg- 
gi* 

Amble (ani'bl), v, i. herjalan seiget. 

Amboina (am-boi'iia), s. Amhon. 

Ambulance (am'bu-kns), s. hreta 
hagi oratg sakit atau lul'a. 

Ambuscade (-bws-kad'), s. pasohan 
prgndap. 

Ambush (am'boosh), s. piyndap. 

Ambush, v. t. 'ndap, adarg* dtyan 
hershihujyi. 

.Ameliorate (a-meryo-rat or a-mer- 
i-o-rat), V. t. haikJci, pinda* 

Amen (a-men'), int. amin (Ar.). 

Amenable (a-men'a-bl), adj. (to 
law or government) dalam pr en- 
tail, dalaniA huJcum; (liable to 
trial) holeh kna hichara; (tract- 
able) snaty di-patah* suka mnurut 
ajaran, yaty mmgar kaia. 

-Amend (a-mend'), v. t. daikki, 
htnlkan, pin da.* 

-Amendment (-ment), s. perohah- 
an, pinda* pAndaan* 

Amends (a-mendz'), s. (compen- 
sation) halasan. To make amends, 
ganti krugian, hayar diat (Ar.). 

Amenity (a-men'i-ti), s. laku yary 
manis, Imali-lmbot. 



Amerce (a-mers'), v. t. dndakan. 
America (a-mer'i-ka), s. Amerika, 

negri Merikan. 
American (-kan), s. oraty Amerika, 

oraiy Merikan. 
Amethyst (am'-e-thist), s. hatu k- 

cliuhorg.* 
Amiability (a'mi-a-biri-ti), s. laku 

yaig manis, pigaselian. 
Amiable (-bl), adj. yarg manis 

lakii-iya, haik laku, herpryasehan. 
Amicable (am'i-ka-bl), adj. (friend- 
ly) hersahahat,* hersohat (B.), 

herstuju. 
Amid (a-mid'), prep, di try ah, di 

antara, dalam. 
Amidships (-ships), adv. (Naut.) 

di pminjganjan. 
Amidst (a-midsf), prep, di trgah, 

di antara, dalam. 
Amiss (a-mis'), adj. and adv. 

(wrong) salah; (improper) ta'- 

patut, tasnonoh; (out of order) 

takna. 'To take amiss, herkchil- 

liati. 
Amity (am'i-ti), s. persahabatan* 

perstujuan. 
Ammonia (am-mo'ni-a), s. garam 

knchiig kuda. Salts of ammonia, 

sadir* (Pers. nushddir), yarain 

cliiurn. 
Ammunition (am'mu-nisli''Mn), s. 

(military stores) alat pprargan;* 

(cartridges) patrum,* kertus,* 

plum, pel or (N.I.) (Port, pelou- 

ro). 
Amnesty (-nes-ti), s. ampun deri- 

pada krajaan, maliap hagi orarg 

derliaka. 
Among (a-mnng'), prep, di tiyah, 

di antara, dalam. 
Amongst (a-mungsf), = among, 

q. V. 
Amorous (am'o-rws), adj. hralii,* 

'asliik (Ar.). 
Amount (a-mownf), s. (total) jm- 

lah (Ar.) ; (quantity) baryak. 



•ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; iise, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



AMOUNT 



19 



AND 



Amount, v. i. (reach) jadi, sampai 
al'an.'^ To amount to (aggre- 
gate), jmJah (Ar.). It amounts 
to nothing, tiada herfaidali sat a 
pun, taapa guna-nja (B.). 

Amphibious (am-fib'i-ws), adj. yarg 
boleh liidop di laid dan darat pun. 

Ample (am'pl), adj. (spacious) 
Japai-g, Iga, luas; (sufficient) chu- 
I'op, pada* 

Amplify (-pli-fl), v. t. lanjutkan 
chnta, panjarglwi kalamj* shurah 
(Ar.). 

Amplitude (-tud), s. Uuasan, Tc- 
I a pa rg an. 

Amply (-pH), adv. (sufficiently) 
clml'op. 

Amputate (-pu-tat), v. t. 'krat, po- 
tonj, hodoigkan, kudorglwi (B.). 

Amputation (-ta'shz/n), s. lial 
miyrat. 

Amuck (a-muk'). To run amuck, 
amok. 

Amulet (am'u-Iet), s. iwgkal, 'azi- 
mat (Ar.). 

Amuse (a-miiz'), v. t. sukakan liati, 
bri tertawa, glikan hati. 

Amusement (-ment), s. (that 
which amuses) ksuka'an, kg mar- 
an* prggli hati;* (pastime) per- 
wainan. 

Amusing (-ing), adj. jmemawa* 
prggli hati, sronok.* 

An (an), see a. 

Anachronism (an-ak'ro-nizm), s. 
silap fasal peraturan masa.* 

Anaemia (a-ne'mi-a), s. kurarg da- 
rah, sriat (W.). 

Anaemic (-mik), adj. puchat Isi.* 

Anaesthetic (an'es-th'et'ik), s. hius* 
(Pers. Mhaush) ; (narcotics used 
by thieves) skuf,* pukaii. 

Analogous (a-naro-gus), adj. her- 
stuju, sama. 

Analogy (-ji), s. (resemblance) 
umpama (Sk.), perbandirgan, me- 
sal, misal (B.) (Ar. mithal), Hba- 
rat, tamsil* (Ar. tamthil). 



Analysis (-i-sis), s. hal mmbuka 
dan mmrel:sa sgala\ bliagian yarg 
mnjadikan s-suatu;* (Gram.) 
'irab (Ar.). 

Analyze (an'a-liz), v. t. pchahkan 
asal-nsid. 

Anarchist (an'ark-ist), s. orarg 
yarg ta'mau turut prentah, orarg 
derhaka. 

Anarchy (-i), s. hani-biru,* hiirii- 
hara, derhaka. 

Anathema (a-nath'e-ma), s. kutok^ 
sum pall, Vanat (Ar.). 

Anatomize (a-nat'o-miz), v. t. 
(dissect) lapah* prggal-piygal;* 
I (discriminate minutely) slidek,*' 
siasat (Ar.). 

Anatomy (-mi), s. 'ilmu slerali arg~ 
gota.^' 

Ancestor (an'ses-ter), s. nenek^ 
moyarg, datok-nenek* 

Ancestral (an-ses'tral), adj. (in- 
herited) psaka. Ancestral cus- 
toms, 'adat nenek-moyaig. An- 
cestral worship, hal mrymbali ne~ 
neli-moyaig. 

Ancestry (an'ses-tri), s. (ancestral 
lineage) asal; (race, descent) 
bargsa. Of noble ancestry, ber- 
bargsa, bargsawan,* turunan haik- 
baik (B.). 

Anchor (ang'ker), s. saidi. To cast 
anchor, buaig sauh, labohlcan sauli^ 
berlaboJi. To weigh anchor, borg- 
kar sauh. 

Anchorage (-ej), s. labohan, pla- 
bohan. 

Anchorite (-ko-rit), s. (hermit) 
oraig hertapa, zahid (Ar.). 

Anchovy (an-cho'vi), s. ikan bilis. 

Ancient (an'shent), adj. (aged) 
tua; (opposed to modern) dliulu 
kala: (of long duration) lama. 

And (and), conj. dan, pun, serta, 
drgan, lagi, sraya;* pun always fol- 
lows the noun or pronoun to which 
it refers. The conjunction is omit- 
ted in such phrases as: tua muda. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin f7?en. 



ANDIRON 



20 



ANNIHILATION 



old and young; siaty malam, day 

and night; anak-bini, wife and 

children : pergi anibil, go and get. 

Andiron (and'i-ern), s. galary kayu 

Anecdote (an'ek-dot), s. chrita, 
k'esali . 

Anemone (a-nem'o-ni), s. Sea 
anemone, hitran* 

Aneroid (an'e-roid), pnimhary u- 
dara.'^ 

Aneurism (an'u-rizm), s. hisul di 
urat darah, hrykak urat darah. 

Anew (a-nu'), adv. (over again) 
lagi s-kali, s-mula, pula, hmhali 
(X.I.) ; (in a new form) hharu. 

-Angel (an'jel), s. mla'ikat. The 
angel of death, malaku 'l-maid 
(Ar.). 

Angelic (an-Jerik), adj. mla'ihat 
(a), sperti mla'ikat. 

Anger (ang'ger), s. marah, amamh* 
panas liati, liaryat liaii,^ giisar* 
ryrin;* (resentful anger) gram; 
(of God or kings) murka (Ar.). 

Angle (-gi), s. (corner) pnjuru, 
hnchu* sudut;* (bend) siku. 

Angle, V. i. miya'il, pancliiry. 

Angler (-gler), s. prgail. 

Anglican (-gli-kan), adj. hyyris. 

Anglicize (-siz), v. t. buat cliara 
Irggris. 

Angry (ang'gri), adv. marali, gu- 
sar* lyrin;* (resentful) gram; (of 
God or kings) miirka (Ar.). To 
be angry with, gnsari* To be an- 
gry, vaik marah; (stronger) m- 
radarg, mmheraiy, riaik mradary, 
naik heraty; (of princes) her- 
siugut* 

-Anglo- (-glo), Irggiis. 

Anguish (-gwish), s. (physical 
pain) hisa, seksa, s?ysara (Sk.) ; 
(mental suffering) susah liati, k- 
susalian. 

Angular (-gu-ler), adj. (pointed) 
ranchojy* renchoiy;* (lean) ku- 
rus. 



Animadversion (an'i-mad-ver'- 

sh?/n), s. tguran, hardek,^' chla. 
Animal (an'i-mal), s. hinataig, hai- 

wan (Ar.). Wild animals in 

general, mergastiia (Sk.). Do- 
mestic animals, hinatatg jinak. 

Savage animals, hinatarg buas. 

Wild animals, hinatarg liar. 
Animal, adj. binaiarg (a), chara 

binatary. The animal, passions, 

liawa nafsu. Animal food, dagity. 
Animalcule (-markul), s. kjadian 

yary amat lialm, kuman, hama. 
Animate (-mat), v. t. (give life) 

hidopkan; (stimulate) yrakkan 

hati. 
Animated (-ed), adj. berliati hidop, 

c]ie?kas* pantas. 
Animation (-ma'sh?/n), s. ksgaran, 

rxnii yatg sgar. 
Animism (-mizm), s. perchaya 

akan s}iia?yat dan hantu. 
Animosity (-mos'i-ti), s. (hatred) 

bnclii; (enmity) perstruan* 
Animus {-mm), s. (intention) 

maksud, mat; (temper) marah. 
Anise (an'is), s. (Pimpinella ani- 

sum) jintan manis. Chinese anise 

(Illicium anisatum) adas manis. 
Aniseed (-i-sed), s. biji adas manis, 

biji jintan manis; see above. 
Ankle (ang'kl), s. perylaryan kaki.* 

Ankle bone, buku tali* mata kaki. 
Anklet (-klet), s. ylaiy kaki, kron- 

rJiofy. 
Annals (an'nolz), s. hikayat, tawa- 

rikh (Ar.), sjarah (Ar.). 
Anneal (an-nel'), v. t. spoil. 
Annex (-neks'), v. t. (affix) huboiy- 

ka/n, sambo rykan : (add) tamhahi. 
Annexation (an'neks-a'shtin), s. 

pfrhubofyan. 
Annihilate (an-m'hi-lat), v. t. ti- 

adakan, binasakan-r . tumpaskan, 

liapuskan, jhannani kan. 
Annihilation (-la'shtin), s. kbi- 

nasaan, k tiada'a n . * 



:ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; 51d, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, miuMS, cure, injure, 

hurry; fodd, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ANNIVERSARY 



21 



ANTERIOR 



Anniversary (ari'iii-ver'sa-ri), s. 

ulatgan iahuti, see axnual. 
.Anno- Domini (aii'no dom'i-nl), 

fakun. Tuhaa, taril'h Msihi (Ar.). 
Annotate (an'iio-tat), v. t. rn ana- 
Ian (Ar.), tafsirl-an (Ar.). 
Annotation (-ta'sh^/n), s. tafsir 

(Ar.). 
Announce (an-uowns'), v. t. Wia- 

harl'an, hri tahu, uialumkan 
.- (Ar.), siarkan, warwarkan* srii- 

kan.^ 
Announcement (-ment), s. khabar, 

perkhabaran, hrita (Sk.). 
Annoy (-noi'), v. t. usek, susahi, 

sakat^ 
Annoyance (-aiis), s. itsek, susah, 

sakat.-^ 
Annual (an'yu-al), adj. (each year) 

tiap-tiap s-iaJmn ; (lastiiifr a year) 

s-iahun. Annual assessment, cliu- 

kai s-tahun. Annual feast, kndiiri 

hoi* ( Ar. Haul - year) . 
Annuity (an-nu'i-ti), s. penchen 

(E.), pansiun (X.I.). 
Annul (an-nul'), v. t. (reduce to 

nothing) tiadakaii; ) (obliterate) 

hapuskari;* (make void) buaiykan, 

batalkan; (abrogate) mansukhkan 

(Ar.). 
Annular (an'yu-ler), adj. her- 

Hmjjai. 
Annunciation (an-nun'si-a'shzin), 

s. perkhabaran, brlta (Sk.). 
Anodyne (an'o-din), s. pnaivar, 

obat yaiy miyhilaiykan ksakitan. 
Anoint (a-noinf), v. t. mityakki; 

(with a cosmetic or perfume) 

urap, raksir 
Anomalous (a-nom'a-lws), adj. 

tiada bperaturan* ganjil, lain 

deri-pada 'adat, plek* 
Anomaly (-li), s. perkara yaiy lain 

deri-pada 'ad at. 
Anon (a-non'), adv. (soon) sgra. 

Ever and anon, kadarg-kadaixj, 

krap kali, krap-krap, srirg kali 

(KL). 



Anonymous {-i-mm), adj. tiada 
bernania. Anonymous letter, su- 
rat glap, svrat terbarg,* surat ra- 
chun aryin* 

Another (an-uf/t'er), adj. (one 
more) lagi satu; (different) lain. 
One after another, I pas salu satu, 
berturut-tarut, bertubi-tubi* One 
thing or another, tasatu satu. 

Answer (an'ser), s. jawab, sahutan, 
balasan. 

Answer, v. t. jaivab akan, sahuti. 
To answer a letter, balaskan surat. 

Answer, v. i. jawab, bri jawab, 
saliut. To answer for (be respon- 
sible), taiygorg, mrgaku, jamin. 

Answerable (-a-bl), adj. (respon- 
sible) ya^y miyaku, yary mnary- 
gory; (proportionate) s-kadar 
(Ar.). I am answerable for that, 
aku-lah yary mnaryyoiy lial itu, 
hal itu di atas aku. 

Ant (ant), s. smut. Flying ants, 
klkatu.* The large red ant, krryya. 
White ants (termites), anai-anai,* 
smut puteh (B.),rayap (X.I.). 

Antagonist (an-tag'o-nist), s. la- 
wan, strii.* 

Antagonistic (-nis'tik), adj. yary 
mlairan, berstru,* bantaJian.* 

Antarctic (ant-ark'tik), adj. kutub 
slatan* (a). 

Ant-eater (ant'et-er), s. tiyyiliry. 

Antecedent (an'te-sed'ent), adj. 
yary terdhulu, yaiy mndhnlui.* 

Antechamber (-cham-ber), s. bi- 
lek luar, balal mnanti.* 

Antedate (-daf), v. t. dhidukan 
liari-bulan. 

Antediluvian (-di-lii'vi-an), adj. 
yaiy dhulu deri-pada zaman nabi 
Noh. 

Antelope (-lop), s. kambiry hutan, 
kambinj yrun.* 

Antenna (an-ten'na), s. (pi. an- 
tenna?) smyut-suiyut,* patil.* 

Anterior (-ter'i-er), adj. (in time) 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin t^ien. 



ANTEROOM 



22 



ANYHOW 



yart) Urdhulu; (in place) yaty 

di hadapan. 
Anteroom (an'te-room), s. hileh 

luar, halai mnanti* 
Anthem (an'them), s. (Moslem 

chant of praise to God) dzikir 

(Ar.). National anthem, lagu 

hanjsa. 
Anther (-ther), s. hujojy sulor 

hunja.^ 
Ant-hill (ant'-hil), s. husut, porg- 

Anthracite (an'thra-sit), s. arajy 

bat a yary hras. 
Anthropology (an'thro-pol'o-ji), s. 

'ihnu'^ manusia. 
Anthropomorphism (-po-mor'- 

fizni), s. pnjlmaan (Sk.). 
Antic (an'tik), s. Jclakar, lawalc 

(P.). 

Antichrist (an'ti-krist), s. lawan 
Almaseli, Almasehu 'd-dajjal 
(Ar.), si-da jal* 

Antichristian (-kris'chan) , adj. 
yaty mJawan agama Msihi* {Jcris- 
ten (B.)]. 

Anticipate (an-tis'i-pat), v. t. (be 
beforehand) dhului; (foresee) 
irgat dliulu, sargha. I did not an- 
ticipate that it would rain, sahya 
ta'sargka hndah Imjan. 

Anticipation (-pa'shi/n), s. pn- 
dhiduan,* sargJca. To thank in 
anticipation, mniima I'aseh terlbeh 
dliulu. 

Antidote (an'ti-dot), s. pnaivar ra- 
cliun. 

Antimacassar (-ma-kas'ser), s. 
kain lapeh hpala. 

Antimony (-mo-ni), s. hatu Sara- 
ivak* hatu chlak* 

Antipathy (an-tip'a-thi), s. (ha- 
tred) bnclii; (repugnance) gli- 
glnian* gli-gman. 

Antipodes (-o-dez), s. sblali sana 
bumi; (something contrary) ber- 
lairian skali. 



Antiquarian (an'ti-kwar'i-an), adj, 
deri'lial perkara zaman* dhulu 
[jman (B.)]. 

Antiquated (-kwat-ed), adj. sudah 
tua, sudah lama, sudah 'umor. 

Antique (an-tek'), adj. tua, lama, 
zaman.'^ 

Antiquity (-tik'wi-ti), s. (ancient 
times) dhidu kola, zaman dhuhi,*' 
jman dhulu (B.), perba-kala 
(Sk.). 

Antiseptic (an'ti-sep'tik), adj. yaiy 
mrghilargkan busok. 

Antithesis (an-tith'e-sis), s. (of 
words) perbandlrgan;'^ (contrast) 
berlainan. 

Antler (ant'ler), s. tandok rusa 
yarg berchabaig, tandok berchrary- 
gah* 

Anus (a'nzis), s. klpasan* jubor*' 
(Ar. dubur). 

Anvil (an'vil), s. landasan,'^ plan- 
das.^ 

Anxiety (ang-zi'e-ti), s. (dis- 
quietude) khuatir, bimbarg, gon^ 
dah-gaidanu;'^ (eagerness) rindu, 
geraig (N.I.). 

Anxious (angk'sht/s), adj. (dis- 
quieted) kliuatir, bimhaiy, ber- 
gondah hati;'^ (desirous) rindu. 

Any (en'i), adj. and pron. bararg^ 
s-bararg; (one of a number) salah 
satu, salah s'orarg.^ At any time, 
bararg bda,'^ bila-bila pun (B.). 
Any kind of, s-baraig, s-nika* In 
many phrases this word requires- 
no equivalent in Malay, as, have 
you any more? ada-kah lagif I 
cannot bear it any longer, sahya 
taboleh tahan lagi. Any, with a ne- 
gative, is translated by the phrase,. 
satu pun tidak or tiada, as, I do 
not see any, satu pun tiada aku 
lihat. 
Anybody (-bod-i), s. barafg siapa, 

bararg s'orary* s'oratg pun. 
Anyhow (-how), adv. bgimana pun. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; lise, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ANYONE 



23 



APPEARANCE 



Anyone (-wnn), s. haraty siapa, 
hararg s'oranj/^ s'orarg pun. 

Anything (-thing), s. haraty apa, 
haranj s-suatn* apa-apa. Any- 
thing but (not at all), slcali-kali 
tidah. 

Anywhere (-whar), adv. hamry di 
mana pun, di niana-niana pun. 

Aorta (a-or'ta), s. urat nadi hsar,^ 
urat herdntyut.^ 

Apace (a-pas'), adv. clipat, sgra, 
IJcas. 

Apart (a-parf), adv. (separately) 
berasi'ty;* (independently) satu- 
satu, asirg-asiry; (separated by in- 
tervals) nggarg. To set apart, 
sblahlaan, asirgl'an.'^ 

Apartment (-ment), s. hilel-, Icamar 
(N.I.) (D.). 

Apathetic (ap'a-thet'ik), adj. lalai, 
alpa* tiada pduli, tiada herrasa. 

Apathy (-thi), s. alpa (Sk.), lalai. 

Ape (ap), s. J7iis muryit yaig tiada 
berekor. For various species see 

MONKEY. 

Ape, V. t. /«>«,* ajol% jajat (P.). 

Aperient (a-per'i-ent), s. pncha- 
liar,"^ obat pnjuclii prot, julap. 

Aperture (ap'er-chur), s. (hole) 
lobary, clilali, liargj* (opening) 
mulut; (width) bulca. 

Apex (a'peks), s. (top) hmunchaTc, 
punchak, merchu;* (tip) hujory. 

Aphis (a'iis), s. hiisin (Ch. ku-sin). 

Aphorism (afo-rizm), s. bidalf^ 
tlabai/^ ppatah.* 

Apiece (a-pes'), adv. satu-satu, 
masiry-masiry . One apiece, s'oraiy 
satu, s'oraiy s-biji, etc., see a. 

Apocalypse (a-pok'a-lips), s. hiya- 
taan, walii^ (Ar. wamju). 

Apocryphal (-ri-fal), adj. yary ti- 
ada sail. 

Apologize (a-poro-jiz), v. i. 7ninta 
am pun, niinta mahap (Ar. ma'af). 

Apology (-ji), s. (defence) sahut- 
an, jawab; (admission of wrong) 
perminta'an mahap (Ar. ma'df). 



Apollinaris (a-pol'li-nar'is), s. ayer 

blanda."^ 
Apoplexy (ap'o-pleks-i), s. saican 

terjun,'^ saivan barykai.* 
Apostate (a-pos'tet), s. murtad 

(Ai-.). 

Apostle (-si), s. rasul (Ar.). 

Apothecary (a-poth'e-ka-ri), s. tu- 
kaiy obat, pryadon obat,'^ apotek 
(N.I.) (D.). 

Appall (ap-pawl'), v. t. bri takot, 
bri dalishat (Ar.), bacliolkan,^^ ta- 
irarkan liati. 

Apparatus (ap-pa-ra'tws), s. per- 
kakas, alat (Ar.). 

Apparel (-par'el), s. pakaian. 

Apparent (-par'ent), adj. (plain) 
njata, tranj; (appearing to the 
eye) yaiy klihafan. Heir ap- 
parent, bakal waris^ (Ar. ivdrith). 

Apparently (-li), adv. rupa-nja, 
nampak-nja, pada lahir-nja* (Ar. 
tiahii'). 

Apparition (ap'pa-rish'i/n), s. pry- 
lihatan; (spectre) hantu. 

Appeal (ap-pel'), v. i. (beseech) 
minta; (refer to a higher court) 
baira bichara,* minta pindahkan 
bicliara, apil (E.) ; (call on an- 
other to vindicate one's rights) 
adu,* adukan lial. 

Appeal, s. (at law) apil (E.) ; (call 
for help) perminta'an. 

Appear (-per'), v. i. (come or be in 
sight) nampak, tampak,^ klihatan^ 
tlaliir {Aw) ; (come into notice, or 
above the surface of land or water, 
or as the sun rising) timbol, terbit. 
To appear before a judge, mry- 
liadap hakim. Appear, with the 
meaning to seem, is expressed by 
rupa-uja used impersonally, as, he 
appears to be drunk, mabok rupa- 
lya. It appeared to me, pada p- 
mandaiyan-ku. 

Appearance (-ans), s. (look, as- 
pect) rupa, baryun;^ paras, ^ 
me/i;* (thing seen) piylihat- 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; iise, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin t/ten. 



APPEASE 



24 



APPRECIATION 



an. To put in an appearance, ha- 
dllr'^ (Ar. liadlir). 

Appease (-pez'), v. t. (make quiet) 
snargkan, diamkan; (pacify) da- 
maikan, haikJian; (hunger or 
thirst) Mlarykan. 

Appellation (ap'pel-la'shwn), s. na- 
ma, sbotan, glaran, parggiJan. 

Append (ap-pend'), v. t. samborg- 
kan, iamhalii, huhoiykan. 

Appendage (-ej), s. tempelanj^ liu- 
hogan. 

Appendicitis (ap-pen'di-si'tis), s. 
pnjakit tali-prot yarg mnempel* 

Appendix (-diks), s. samborgan. 

Appertain (ap'per-tan'), v. i. hna- 
mrgna, sargkot dnjan, sabit drgan* 
(Ar. thdbit), berkna'an diyan. 

Appetite (ap'pe-tit), s. (desire for 
food) nafsii makan, slera;* (any 
strong desire) h'irginan; (craving, 
as for opium) ktagek* ktagehan 
(B.). 

Appetizer (-ti-zer), s. umpantkak,'^ 
untpan slera* prnbiika nafsu, pm- 
bitka si era* 

Applaud (ap-plawd'), V. t. (praise) 
puji; (by acclamation) sorak; (by 
clapping) bertpok targan. 

Applause (-plawz'), s. (shouting) 
sorak; (clapping of hands) tpok- 
tpok tanjan; (praise) puji. 

Apple (ap'pl), s. apel (E.), tufali* 
(Ar. tuffaH). Adam's apple, 
Ikum* (Ar. iiulqiim). Apple of 
the eye (pupil), anak mata,'^ biji 
mata (B.) ; (term of endearment) 
biji mata. 

Appliance (ap-plfans), s. perkakas, 
klrgkapan. 

Applicable (ap'pli-ka-bl), adj. yarg 
patut drgan, yarg kna, berkna'an!* 

Application (-ka'slmn), s. (act of 
applying) hal mmakai, hal mm- 
huboli, etc., see below; (close at- 
tention) usalia; (request) per- 
minta'an, surat perniolionan* prg- 
adiian. 



Apply (ap-plf), V. t. (put on) bu- 
boh, knakan; (of flat surfaces) 
Ikapkan; (use, employ) pakaij. 
qunakan. 

Apply, V. i. (make application) 
minta; (attend closely to) nsaha- 
kan dirt. It does not apply to 
me, takna-nirgna drgan aku, taapa 
kna sama goa (B.). To apply for,. 
minta, pohonkan.* 

Appoint (-point'), v. t. (fix by de- 
cree) titaJikan;* (assign, desig- 
nate) jadikan, tntukan, Itakkan-; 
(to a post) argkat; (equip) /ry- 
kapkan. 

Appointment (-ment), s. (act of 
appointing) hal mnitahkan,* hal 
vinntukan, etc., as above ; (station^ 
position, office) jawatan,* pgargan, 
peganjan (B.) ; (to meet) perjan* 
jian hndak bertmu.* 

Apportion (-por'shi^n), v. t. bhagi- 
kan, untokkan. 

Apportionment (-ment), s. (act 
of apportioning) hal mmhhagikan ; 
(thing apportioned) bhagian, un* 
tok, habnan* 

Apposite (ap'po-zit), adj. patut^ 
imdan, kna, berkna'an.* 

Appraise (ap-praz'), v. t. hergakan^ 
nilaikan herga,* taroh herga, tak^ 
sirkan (D.). 

Appreciable (-pre'shi-a-bl), adj. 
yarg boleh di-hergakan; (percept- 
ible) yaig boleh di-rasa, yaiy boleh 
nampak. 

Appreciate (-at), v. t. (estimate 
justly) taroh herga, nilaikan;* 
(esteem highly) indahkan, per- 
hergakan;* (raise in value) naik- 
kan herga; (be sensible of) tahii. 
tahu bezakan (Sk.). To appre- 
ciate a kindness, knargkan budi. 

Appreciate, v. i. (rise in value) 
naik herga. 

Appreciation (-a'sh?m), s. hal mrg^ 
indahkan, hal mnilaikan,* etc., as 
above. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; fo5d, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



APPRECIATIVE 



25 



ARBITRARY 



Appreciative (-a-tiv), adj. yarxf 

mrgindalilxan, yaiy nnynaix] hudi. 
Apprehend (ap'pre-hend'), v. t. 

(arrest) faiykap; (understand) 

mryerti, taliu, paham* da pat; 

(fear) ialot. 
Apprehension (-hen'shim), s. 

(fear) Ital'otan; (understanding) 

prgertian, pndapatan. 
Apprehensive (-siv), adj. ialcot. 
Apprentice (ap-pren'tis), s. oixuri 

yaiy masok perjanjian pada hlajar 

tiuatu pkerjaan, plateh* magary 

(X.I.). 
Apprise (-priz'), v. t. inahtml'an 

(Ar.), hri taliu, kasi taliu (B.). 
Approach (-pr5ch'), v. t. hampir,'^- 

hampiri* dkati,'^ dkat sama (B.). 
Approach, s. (act of drawing near) 

hal nnyhampiri;* (way of access) 

jalan ynasok. 
Approachable (-a-bl), adj. yarg 

hoi ell di-liampiri* 
Approbation (ap'pro-ba'sht^n), s. 

kbnaran^ kredla'an (Ar.) ; see ap- 
prove. 
Appropriate (ap-pr5'pri-et), adj. 

fxidan, patut, tayak, mnasahak 

(Ar.). 
Appropriate (-at), v. t. (for one's 

self) ambil hagi diri, pakaikan 

(B.) : (for a special purpose) tn- 

tukan. 
Approval (-proov'al), s. kahul* 

( Ar. qabid), khnaran, sudi, kredla- 
'an (Ar.) ; see below. 
Approve (-proov'), v. t. (sanction, 

ratify) Inarkan, kahiilkan;* (be 

pleased with) hei-knankan, redla'i 

( Ar.) ; (receive with favour) sudi- 

kan. 
Approximate (-proks'i-mat), v. i. 

hampir, dkat. 
Approximately (-met-h), adv. 

kira-kira, Iheh-kiimrg, agak-agak, 

gamak^gamak* 
Approximation (-ma'sh?m), s. lial 

mnjadi dkat. 



April (a'pril), s. hulan oraiy puteh 
yarg k' am pat. 

Apron (a'prim or a'pern), s. hain 
aias dada, band kerja, kain parg- 
ku;* (of a buggy) kain tutop 
hogi; (of a ricksha) kampo (Ch. 
kham-pd'). 

Apropos (ap'ro-po), adj. (oppor- 
tune) berstuju. Apropos of, tn- 
targ. 

Apse (aps), s. (of mosques) milirab 
(Ar.). 

Apt (apt), adj. (suitable) patut, 
padan; (habitually inclined) bia- 
sa; (qualified, expert) ahli (Ar.), 
pandai. Apt to forget, plupa,* 
lazim lupa,^' rajm lupa, kuat-kuat 
lupa. 

Aptitude (ap'ti-tud), s. kpatutan* 
kbiasa'an, kpandaian; see above. 

Aquarium (a-kwar'i-Mm), s. kolah 
kaclia bagi ikan-ikan.'^ 

Aquatic (a-kwat'ik), adj. yaiy hi- 
dop dalam ayer. Aquatic birds, 
buroig ayer. 

Aqueduct (akVe-dukt), s. sahiran, 
/Mnchuiarh; (for irrigation) tali 
ayer. 

Aqueous (a'kwi-?7s), adj. berayer. 

Aquiline (ak'wi-lln or -lin), adj. 
(of tlie nose) borgkok.* betykoh 
(B.). 

Arab (ar'ab), s. orarg 'Arab. 

Arabia (a-ra'bi-a), s. iiegri 'Arab. 

Arabian (-an), adj. 'Arab. The 
Arabian Xights, s-ribu satu ma- 
lam,'^ alf laila wa laila (Ar.). 

Arabic (ar'a-bik), s. bliam 'Arab. 
Malay written in Arabic characters, 
lijiruf Jawir Jawi. 

Arable (-bl), adj. yaiy di-bajak.* 
Arable land (dry), tanah bajak* 
tanah tiygala;* (irrigated) tanah 
satvah, btidarg.* 

Arbiter (ar'bi-ter), s. pmbichara* 
liakim. 

Arbitrary (-tra-ri), adj. (at one's 
own discretion) mnurut kahandak 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; lise, us, min«s, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ARBITRATE 



26 



ARISTOCRAT 



sndiri; (despotic, tyrannical) pry- 

aiiiaj/a* ilalim (Ar.). 
Arbitrate (-tmt), y. t. bicharalwi, 

putuskan bichara, nhuafak'atkan 

(Ar.). 
Arbitration (-tra'shwn), s. hal 

mmhicharahan^ Jial muafakatkan 

(Ar.). 
Arbitrator (-tra-ter), s. pmhichara, 

oraiy trgali, ptyaiitara.'^ 
Arbour (ar'ber), s. halai peraiyin- 

an/' puiijory* 
Arc (ark), s. hyhoiy, gloiy."^' 
Arcade (ar-kad'), s. sramhi hykory- 

aii."^ 
Arch (arch), v. t. hyhoiykanf (of 

the back) horgl'oH-an. 
Arch, s. hyltorg,'^' Iryl'oiy batii.'^ 
Archaeology (ar'ke-ol'o-ji), s. 'il- 

tnu'^' perkara zanian dhuhi. 
Archaic (ar-ka'ik), adj. yary dhulu 

kala. 
Archangel (ark-an'jel), s. piyhulu 

mlaikat. 
Archbishop (arch-bish'wp), s. bi- 

shop bsar, ktua bishop (X.). 
Archdeacon (-de'kn), s. padri yaiy 

mnolorg s'orarg bishop (X.). 
Arched (archt), adj. berhgk organ. "^ 
Archer (arch'er), s. oraig pnianah/^ 
Archery (-i), s. main panah, 'ilmu 

mmanah* 
Archetype (ar'ke-tip), s. chontoh 

yarg asal, tuladan. 
Archipelago (ar'ki-pera-g5), s. gn- 

giisan pulau;"^ (of small islands) 

tokorg pulau* 
Architect (-tekt), s. pmta rumah* 

tukarg plen (E.). 
Architecture (-tek-chur), s. 'ilmu* 

mmbuat rumah dan s-bagai-rya. 
Archives (ar'klvz), s. pi. surat- 

surat krajaan, sural asaUusul. 
Archway (arch'wa), s. jalan di ba- 

wah Irgkorg* 
Arctic (ark'tik), adj. sblah utara, 

sblah kutub utara;* see polar. 



Ardent (ar'dent), adj. (hot) panas^ 
hargat;* (passionate, zealous) ra- 
jin, bersuiggoh-hati, gatal tularg^ 
gerarg (X.I.). Ardent spirit. 
arak. 

Ardour (-der), s. (heat) hatyat* 
panas; (passion, zeal) rajin, usaha, 
gerarg (X.I.) ragap (N.I.). 

Arduous (-du-77s), adj. (involving 
toil) trok; (difficult) sukar* su- 
sail, mushlcil (Ar.). 

Are (ar), see be. 

Area (ar'i-a), s. (open space) hala- 
man, tmpat la/Mijg; (superficial 
extent) luas, kluasan/' (tract) 
bidaig. 

Areca (a-re'ka), s. (Areca catechu) 
pinarg. 

Arena (-na), s. (in a cock-fight or 
other contest) glarggaiyf' (field 
of battle) medan (Ar.maiddn). 

Argue (ar'gu), v. t. bantahkan* 6/- 
charakan. 

Argue, v. i. berbantah,* berbicliaraf' 
(dispute) bertrgkar. 

Argument (-gu-ment), s. (reason 
offered in proof) kiyata'an; (dis- 
cussion) perbantahan.* 

Argumentative (-men'ta-tiv), adj. 
(of persons) yaiy berbantah,'* yarg 
suka berbantali* bantalian;* (of a 
subject) yarg mndatargkan per- 
bantalian.'* 

Argus pheasant (ar'gws fez'ant), 
6'. kuau,* kuarg I'aya* 

Arid (ar'id), adj. kri^g, kkrirgan* 

Aright (a-rif), adv. btid, drgan s- 
btul-iya, drgan s-patut-n/a. 

Arise (a-riz'), v. i. (ascend) naik; 
(get up) bargun, bargkit; (from 
sleep) sdar, bargun tidor; (spring 
up) bijgkas;* (come above horizon 
or surface of land or water) tini- 
bol, terbit; (come into action or 
notice) tei'bit. 

Aristocracy (ar'is-tok'ra-si), s. 
bargsa baik, orarg bsar-bsar. 

Aristocrat (ar'is-to-krat), s. oraig 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, min?(S, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful) ;* law, how, oil; thin then. 



ARISTOCRATIC 



27 



ARROW 



hei^ba?ysa* anak laiTc-baik, orarg 

hsar-hsar. 
Aristocratic (-krat'ik), adj. lair)- 

sairan;^ herhargsa* harysa laih, 

bal'a haik. 
Arithmetic (a-rith'me-tik), s. 'ihmC^ 

kira-kim, 'ilmu* hitorgan, 'ilmii* 

liisah (Ar.). 
Ark (ark), s. (Xoalrs ark), halitra 

(Sk.); (ark of the covenant) ta- 

hut (Ar.), pti perjanjiau* 
Arm (arm), s. Irgan; (forearm, and 

often the entire limb) taryan. 

Arm of the sea, tlok. To fold the 

amis, pJok tuboh* plok targan 

(B.). To keep at arm's length, 

jaulikan. See also AR7^rs. 
Arm, V. t. hgkapkan drgan snjata. 
Armada (ar-ma'da), s. atgkatan 

kapal,'-^ klnjkapan kapal. 
Armadillo (ar'ma-dil'lo), s. trg- 

giJ'ng. 
Armament (-ment), s. klrgkapan, 

alat snjata (Ar.). 
Armchair (arm'char'), s. kursi 

targan,^ krosi targan (B.). 
Armenia (ar-me'ni-a), s. negri Ar- 

niini. 
Armful (arm'fool), s. s-ptgampu- 

an,* s-pargkuan,^ s-prgelek'an.^ 
Armistice (ar'mis-tis), s. perdamai- 

an smantara.^ 
Armlet (arm1.?t), s. pontoh^ 
Armour (ar'mer), s. plapek badan 

bagi ppmnian/^ bajii bsi, baju 

zirali (Hind.). 
Armourer (-er), s. tukaig snjata. 
Armoury (-i), s. gdorg snjata, tni- 

jjat sinipan snjata (B.). 
Armpit (arm'pit), s. ktiak, kelek 

(X.L). 
Arms (armz), s. pi. snjata, alat* 

ppraigan. -Small arms, snapary. 
Army (ar'mi), s. intra* bala-tn- 

tra* 'askar (Ar.). 
Aroid (ar'oid), s. (yam) kladi, 

lanibokf (larger) birah,* k- 

maharg* 



Aroma (a-ro'ma), s. ban, bau yarg 
haroni,* baa yaig ivaiyi. 

Aromatic (ar'o-mat'ik), adj. ha- 
roui* wargi. 

Around (a-rownd'), prep. Milirg. 

Around, adv. berkliliry. 

Arouse (a-rowz'), v. t. bargunkan, 
kjotkan, sdarkan, barykitkan. 

Arrack (ar'rak), s. arak. 

Arraign (ar-ran'), v. t. d'awa, tu- 
doll* 

Arrange (-ranj'), v. t. (put in or- 
der) aturkan; (fit together) rakit- 
kan* rapatkan, susunkan; (as the 
hair) dandan;* (as flowers in a 
bouquet, or jewels in their setting) 
karaiy; (adjust, settle) slsaikan, 
slisekan (B.) ; (determine) tntu- 
kan. 

Arrangement (-ment), s. aturan, 
peraturan, karargan, ktntuan; see 
above. 

Arrant (ar'rant), adj. s-mata-mata. 

Array (ar-ra'), v. t. (as troops) 
atur; (adorn) hiasi* riaskan 
(B.). 

Array, s. (order of battle) ikat 
prarg; (dress) pakaian. 

Arrears (-rerz'), s. pi. baki hutarg* 
The rent is in arrears, sewa dhulu 
bluni bayer. 

Arrest (-rest'), v. t. (seize) targ- 
kap; (hinder, restrain) tahan, 
tgali, laraig. 

Arrival (-ri'val), s. kdatargan. 

Arrive (ar-riv'), v. i. sanipai, tiba,* 
datarg. 

Arrogance (ar'ro-gans), s. som- 
boig, purgali,* tkbur (Ar. takab- 
bur). 

Arrogant (-gant), adj. somborg, 
dakar* piirgah* tkbur (Ar.). 

Arrogate (-gat), v. t. d'awa diri;* 
as, mnd'awa diri pandai* to arro- 
gate wisdom to one's self. 

Arrow (ar'ro), s. anak-jmnah, anak 
busor* 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, min?<s, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful) ;" law, how, oil; thin t/ien. 



ARROWROOT 



28 



ASCRIBE 



Arrowroot (-root), s. sacju hlari- 
da,'^ brolii* nhi garut. 

Arsenal (ar'se-nal), s. tnipat mm- 
huat snjata, gdoig snjalaj^ 

Arsenic (-nik), s. wamtyan (Jav.), 
brargan.'^ 

Arson (ar'sn), s. lial mmhakar ru- 
•mah drgan srgaja. 

Art (art), s. kpandaian, prgtahvan, 
hikmat (Ar.) ; (device) ujxiya* 
'akal; (branch of learning) 'il- 
mu* 

Artery (ar'ter-i), s. nrat nadi,^' iirat 
daraJi. 

Artful (art'fool), adj. clierdeh, pan- 
jaig 'akal, herakal, pintar (jST.I.). 

Article (ar'ti-kl), s. (clause of con- 
tract, etc.) bab {Ax.),fasal; (com- 
position) karaigan; (a distinct 
part) bliagian; (a particular one 
of various thinofs) perkara, bararg. 

Articulate (ar-tik'u-let), adj. yaig 
di-buiyikan dnjan traiy. 

Articulate (-lat), v. t. butyikan 
sat u -sat u. 

Artifice (ar'ti-fis), s. daya, 'akal, 
el ah- (Ar. mlah), elak (B.). 

Artificer (ar-tif'i-ser), s. tukarg, 
utas/^ pandai.'^ 

Artificial (ar'ti-fish'al), adj. per- 
buatan mamisia; '(feigned) pura- 
pura. Artificial flowers, burga 
kertas. Artificial teeth, gigi batii, 
gigi palsu, gigi tampal (B.) ; (the 
gold between teeth) sumbi gigi. 

Artillery (ar-til'ler-i), s. (cannon) 
7nriani; (soldiers who work the 
guns) soldado mriam, 'askar m- 
riam (Ar.). 

Artisan (ar'ti-zan), s. tukaig, tdas.'^ 

Artist (art'ist), s. (in general) pan- 
dai; (painter, sculptor) pnulis, 
prgukir, tukaig gambar, tukaig 
lukis. 

Artless (-les), adj. (unskilful) ku- 
rarg pan dai; (sincere, guileless) 
tuhis, hati jerneli* hati hnirg* 
hati bersi (B.). 



As (az), adv. and conj. (like) s- 
perii, laksana; (resembling) s'- 
umpama (Sk.) ; (in the same- 
manner) s-bginiatia; (while) ser- 
ta* sambil; (because, since) s~ 
daty ; (for instance) sperti, mesal- 
lya, misal-nja (B.) (Ar. mithal). 
xis. . . .as. . . ., sama . . . .sperti. . . 
As far as, sampai, liiigga,* s- 
hirgga, takat,* s-jauh.* A& 
foi", as to, akan.* As if, s'akan- 
akau,'^ s'olah-olali.'^ As it were,. 
pnaka/^ As large as, s-bsar. As- 
long as (of time), s-lama, s-Iagi. 
As much as, s-baiyak, s-brapa. As- 
soon as, serta/^ apabila/^ apakala.'^ 
As usual, bagai s-lama, bagai slalu^ 
As well as, sania sperti. You 
know as well as I, tuan sama tahu^ 
As yet, Jagi. As if it were nights 
s-laku liari sudali malam. The 
same as, sama sperti. The same as 
before, sperti sdiakala (Sk.), sperti 
s-lama. 

Asafcetida (as'a-fe'tid-a or -fet'i- 
da), s. (the gum of Ferula nar- 
thex) irggu. 

Asbestos (as-bes'tos), s. s-jnis batic 
yatg ialian api. 

Ascend (as-send'), v. i. t. (a hill„ 
ladder, throne) naik ; (a hill) 
daki;'^ (a tree) pan j at; (a river) 
inudek.'^' 

Ascendency (-en-si), s. prentah^ 
kuasa. 

Ascension (as-sen'shwn), s. hat 
naik; (of Mohammed) inirat*' 
(Ar. m'iraj). 

Ascent (-sent'), s. (act of rising) 
hal 7iaik; (slope) churaman. 

Ascertain (as'ser-tan'), v. t. dapat 
tah u. 

Ascetic (as-set'ik), s. orarg bertapa. 

Asceticism (-i-sizm), s. pertapa'an^ 
hal bertapa. 

Ascribe (as-krib'), y. t. bilargkan, 
agakkan, saiykakan. His death 
was ascribed to noison, di-sawka- 



ate, ask, am, final, care, ear, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire^ 

mirror: old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; f65d, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ASH 



'29 



ASSASSINATE 



I- an kna racliun. The book was 
ascribed to — as its author, — di- 
bilargJiWi prgaratg Jcitah itii. 

Ash (ash), s. nama pohoiv^^ kaiju di 
Eropah [pokol- (B.)]. 

Ash, s. ahu. 

Ashamed (a-shamcV), adj. rnahi, 
'aih (Ar.), tersipu-sipu. 

Ashen (ashVn), adj. (the colour) 
Mahu. 

Ashes (-ez), s. ahu. 

Ashore (a-shor'), adv. (on shore) 
di darat, mndarat;* (aground) 
terl'andas, tersadai;* (cast ashore, 
wrecked) terdamparj^ To go a- 
shore (Xaut.), naih, tiirun, naik 
k-darat. 

Ashy (ash'i), adj. (ash-coloured) 
klahu. 

Asia (a'shi-a), s. hniia Asliia."^ 

Aside (a-sid'), adv. (apart) her- 
asirg:* (to one side) di tpi, sblali. 
To lay aside, shWiJran, tpilwi. 
To set aside (annul), tiadakan, 
haialkan. To step aside, mnpi. 

Asinine (as'i-nin), adj. s-laku kal- 
dai, dgil, hodoli. 

Ask (ask), v. i. (request) minta, 
innta;* (inquire) hertanja, her- 
siial. 

Ask, v. t. (request) pinta* minta, 
miniakan, pohonkan;* (demand) 
tiintut; (question) tatya, tanja- 
kan : (invite) ajak, ajat (B.), 
Jaira,^ jmpot, sUakan;^ see in- 
vite. To ask a favour, srai/a* 
samhat (X.I.). To ask leave, 
minta izin. To ask leave to go, 
hennohon* minta diri* minta 
rokhsah (Ar.). To ask in mar- 
riage, pinatg."^' To ask for pay- 
ment of a debt, turggu, tag eh 

Askance (a-skans'), adv. (with a 
side glance) serorg, dugan ekor 
mataf^ (with suspicion) digan 
mnaroh shak.'^ To look askance, 
kerlirg,'^ jlirg. 



Askew (a-skiV), adj. and adv. se- 
rotg, gen jut, ^ bergut, erut* 

Aslant (a-slanf), adj. and adv. 
meriig, serget. 

Asleep (a-slep'), adj. and adv. ^i- 
dor; (of princes) herada;^ (of a 
top) ligat. Half asleej), terpikau^ 
pikau* 

Asp (asp), s. s-jnis iilar. 

Asparagus (as-par'a-gws), s. sjMroh 
kras"^ (E.) ; akar farsi^' 

Aspect (as'pekt), s. (appearance) 
pmandatgan* bargun* rupa; (po- 
sition, direction) liala* arali. A 
northern aspect, mrghadap k-sbJak' 
utara. 

Asperity (as-per'i-ti), s. (of sur^ 
face) grutu/^ mrggruiu (B.), ksat^ 
kasap;"^ (of taste) klat; (of cha- 
racttir) kasar, kras, kkrasan. 

Asperse (-pers'), v. t. (sprinkle) 
rnjis, sirani; (calumniate) chla-- 
kan, umpatkan, fitnahkan (Ar.). 

Aspersion (-per'shzm), s. lial m- 
rnjis, lial mnjimm, umpat, fitn-ah 
(Ar. ) ; see above. 

Asphalt (as'falt), s. bolnrg tanah."^ 

Asphyxia (as-fiks'i-a), s. Imas. 

Asphyxiate (-at), v. t. Imaskan. 

Aspirant (-pir'ant), s. oranj yaig- 
irgin, orarg yarg rindu. 

Aspirate (as'pi-ret), s. buiyi nafas^ 
buryi huruf " li.""^' 

Aspiration (-ra'shwn), 3. (sound) 
bunji huruf '' h;* (desire) Virgin^ 
an. 

Aspire (as-pir'), v. i. (desire, long 
for) irgin, rindu, gerauj (X.I.),. 
k pit gin (X.L). 

Ass (as), s. kaJdai. 

Assail (as-sal'), v. t. larggar, srarg^ 
serbu, amok. 

Assailant (-ant), s. orarg yatg m- 
Jarggar, plarggar,* prganiok.* 

Assassin (-sas'sin), s. pnibunoh 
churi.^ 

Assassinate (-at), v. t. bunoh mn^ 
clturi-churi, tikani dturi.* 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire,. 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; lise. us, mini/s, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ASSAULT 



30 



ASSUMED 



Assault (-sawlf), v. t. largqar, 
f^ratrj, serbu, aniok, tmpoh. 

Assay (-sa'), v. t. uji. 

Assemblage (-sem'blej) , s. per- 
kumpoJafi, perhimponan* 

Assemble (-bl), v. t. humpolltan, 
I'ampoTglx'an, h impo7ilwi.* 

Assemble, v. i. herhimpon,^ her- 
l-umpol, herkampo}y; (in crowds) 
herkrumun, hertbat* 

Assembly (-bli), s. perlcumpolan, 
perhim ponan* majlis. 

Assent (-sent'), v. i. (acquiesce) 
herhnari, habul (Ar.). To assent 
to (admit as true), bnarhan. 

Assert (-sert'), v. t. (state positive- 
ly) sbotkan, katakan drgan tntii; 
(maintain) irargkan. To assert 
one's self, tnjahkan diri* 

Assertion (-ser'shmi), s. sbotan, 
ktrargan. 

Assess (-ses'), v. t. (value) nilai- 
kan* taksirkan (D.) ; (tax) cliu- 
kaikan. 

Assessment (-ment), s. nilaian,^ 
cliukai inntu, chukai tanali, liastl 
tanah. 

Assessor (-ser), s. (legal) pmbantu 
hakim * kapitan liakim;* (of pro- 
perty) pnilai.^ 

Assets (as'sets), s. pi. (of a de- 
ceased person) lierta psaka; (of a 
bankrupt) baki lierta;'^ (entire 
property) modal, lierta. 

Asseverate (as-sev'er-at), v. t. kata- 
kan drgan smggoh, suiggohkan* 

Asseveration (-a'sh?m), s. pnjuig- 
gohari.'^ 

Assiduity (as'si-dii'i-ti), s. usalia, 
rajin, tkun, gerarg (N.I.). 

Assiduous (as-sid'u-ws), adj. rajin, 
bertknri, berusalia, geraiy (X.I.). 

Assign (as-sTn'), v. t. (appoint) 
tntukan ; (make over) srahkan. 

Assignation (as'sig-na'shwn), s. 
perimuan* {dtgari niat jaliat). 

Assignee (-si-ne'), s. (in bank- 
ruptcy) icakil (Ar.). 



Assignment (as-sin'ment), s. h* 
, tniuan, pnjrahan; see assign. 

Assimilate (-sim'i-lat), v. i. (be- 
come incorporated) msra ('Sk.), 
bersatu;* (digest) liadlam (Ar.), 
hanchor, cherna (Sk.) (N.I.)* 
siau (B.) (Ch.). 

Assimilate, v. t. (make sunilar) 
samakan; (absorb) srap; (as 
food) hanchorkan, hadlamkan 
(Ar.), cherna (Sk.) (N.I.). 

Assist (-sist'), V. t. tolonj, bantu, 
sertai.^ 

Assistance (-ans), s. pertolorgan, 
bantuan. 

Assistant (-ant), s. pnoloig, pm- 
bantu. 

Assizes (-siz'ez), s. pi. mahkamah 
bsar (Ar.), kot bsar (E.). 

Associate (-so'shi-et), s. (compan- 
ion) kawan, sahabat, sobat (B.), 
taulan/^ handai; (partner) rakan 
(Ar.) ; (member of an associ- 
ation) sidarg.'^ 

Associate (-at), v. i. berskutu* 
bersahabat* berkawan, bertman;* 
see above. 

Association (-si-a'sliwn), s. (con- 
nection) perhuborgan; (society) 
koiysi (Ch.), kJap (E. club), per- 
skutuan/^' sharikat (Ar.). 

Assort (-sort'), v. t. asiiy-asirgkan 
jnis-nja,'^ pileh jnis-iya. 

Assortment (-ment), s. (assorted 
things) baraig yarg terasirgf (a 
variety) berbagai-bagai jnis^' 

Assuage (-swaj'), v. t. (pain or 
grief) reiyankan, hilargkan; (heat 
or passion) kurargkan, sjokkan; 
(appetite) hUaigkan. 

Assume (-sum'),v. t. (take) ambil; 
(appropriate) pakai; (suppose) 
mtgka; (take for granted) trima, 
bnarkan.^ To assume responsibil- 
ity for, targgoig, sarggop. 

Assumed (-simid'), adj. (pretend- 
ed) pura-pura, muka-muka. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ASSUMPTION 



31 



ATOM 



Assumption (-siimp'shziii), s. (act 
of assuming) lial mrgamhil; (sup- 
position) saiyl'a. 

Assurance (-shoor'ans), s. (certain- 
ty) htntuan; (confidence) yahin 
(Ar.), Jcperchayaan;* (boldness) 
hrani; (guarantee ) prgakuan, grenti 
(E.) ; (insurance) inslmran, an- 
shuran (E.). 

Assure (-shoor'), v. t. (make cer- 
tain) tntulxan; (guarantee) mrg- 
ahu; (make true) surggohkan* 

Assuredly (-ed-li), adv. tntu, s- 
suiggoh-rya* 

Assyria (-sir'i-a), s. negri Aram 
(Ar.). 

Astern (a-stern'), adv. (N'aut.) (in 
the stern) di huritan; (behind a 
ship) di bJakarg; (backward) k- 
hlakarg. To go astern, undor. 

Asthma (as'ma), s. llah, ssak dada, 
sakit term rgali -m igali . 

Asthmatic (as-mat'ik), adj. sakit 
llah. 

Astonish (-ton'ish), v. t. hri liairan, 
chrrjatykan, t'ajuhkan (Ar.). As- 
tonished, hairan, terchrgarg, fajub 
(Ar.). 

Astonishment (-ment), s. liairan, 
chrgarg, fajub (Ar.). 

Astound (-townd'), v. t. (stun, stu- 
pify) birgoiykan, klirukan. 

Astounding (-ing), adj. hairaih 
'ajaib ( Ar. ) . 

Astray (a-stra'), adj. and adv. ssat, 
ksasar (X.I.). To lead astray, 5- 
satkan. 

Astride (-strld), adv. (as one rid- 
ing) terchapok/^ terclilapak;"^ 
(with legs apart) terkargkarg. 

Astringent (as-trin'jent), adj. (in 
taste) klat; (of medicine) pnahan 
buarg ayer.'^ 

Astrologers (-troro-jerz), s. pi. 
alilu 'ii-nujum (Ar.), sastrawan 
iSk.),ahUfalak (Ar.). 

Astrology (-ji), s. 'ilmu nujum 
(Ar.), 'ilmu falak (Ar.). 



Astronomer (as-tron'o-mer), s.. 

oranj yaig tahu 'ilniu* bintaig. 
Astronomy (-mi), s. 'ilmu* bin^ 

targ. 
Astute (us-tiit'), adj. panjary 'akal,. 

clierdek, bijak.* 
Asunder (a-sun'der), adv. berchrai, 

berasiig-asirg* Wide asunder,. 

jaiih jarak-iya.^' Tq fall asunder,. 

jatoh pchah-blah. 
Asylum (a-srhan), s. (refuge) tni- 

pat berlindorg. Lunatic asylum,. 

rum all sakit gila, hospital gila. 
At (at), prep, (in proximity to) diy 

pada, dkat; (in some state, con- 
dition, or employment) dalam,. 

trgah, as, dalam sntausa, at peace; 

trgah bkerja, at work; (of time) 

pada, as, pada mula-rya,* at first. 

In many phrases "at"" has no- 

equivalent in Malay, as, at all, 

skali-kali; at first, dliidu, mula- 

mida; at last, kmdian, akhir-rya 

(Ar.) ; at least, s-kurarg-kurarg ; 

at once, serta-merta; at one, &er- 

stuju; at present, skararg; at 

■times, kadarg-kada rg. 
Atheism (a'the-izm), s. hal niniada^ 

kan Allah* 
Atheist (-ist), s. orarg yarg mniada- 

kan Allah.'^ 
Athirst (a-thersf), adj. berdhaga,'^' 

haus. 
Athlete (ath'let), s. oraiy yarg biasa 

bersnaml berlumba dan s-bagai- 

nja.'' 
Athletic (ath-let'ik), adj. pahlawan 

(Pers.), gagah. Athletic sports, 

lumba berlari. 
Athletics (-iks), s. pi. perlawanan 

lumba berlari. 
Athwart (a-thwarf), prep, and adv. 

lintarg, mlintarg. 
Atlas (at'las), s. kitab pta du?iia.* 
Atmosphere (at'mos-fer), s. udara^ 

hawa. 
Atom (at'ian), s. bnda"^ yarg bgitit 

hahis sampai ta'boleh di-bhagikan 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sdrry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



ATOMIZE 



32 



ATTESTATION 



lagi [baraiy (B.)], abu atyin* 
jarah* (Ar. dzarrah). To crush 
to atoms, hanchor-lidohkan* Not 
an atom, s-hiji ha>na pun t'ada* 

Atomize (-iz), v. t. Tianclior-luloli- 
l-anr 

Atone (a-ton'), v. i. (make repar- 
ation for) halasl'an; (stand as an 
equivalent for) gantil-an. 

Atonement (-ment), s. (reconcili- 
ation) perdamaianj (reparation, 
substitution) ganti, ganiian. 

Atrocious (a-tro'sh^/s), adj. ierlahi 
jaliat, terlalu bigis,"^ ierlalu brat, 
jaliat mmbakar.'^ 

Atrocity (a-tros'i-ti), s. jaliat mm- 
balcar,^ jahat mrgharg'usi/^' kbiyis- 
aii yatg amat saiyat.'^ 

Atrophy (at'ro-fi), s. I'urus hrhg, 
kunis inrbglm.* 

Attach (at-tach'), v. t. (by adhe- 
sion) ll'atkan, tampalkaii; (by 
pinning) smatTcan; (by tying) 
ikat, tambat; (by catching on a 
^eg or projection) sanjl'ot; (two 
similar things) hmbarkan: (con- 
nect) liuboiy, samborg; (by ties 
of love or self-interest) dampiry* 
sarykot; (seize by legal authority) 
taJian. 

Attachment (-ment), s. (to a 
friend or party) perdampiiyan,^ 
persahabatari;* (connection) sary- 
kotan, perhuboigan; (of pro- 
perty) lial mnalian. 

Attack (-tak'), v. t. laryyar, srary, 
aet'bu, amok, tnipoh, rmpoli/^ da- 
iaryi;'^ (of animals) /wr-w,* ter- 
kam; (of birds) prap;* (of evil 
spirits) rasok;* (of diseases) kna. 

Attack, s. ptyraryan, serbu, tmpoli, 
amok, latyyaran; see above. 

Attain (-tan'), v. t. (achieve) 
sampaikan, lakukan,* liasilkanf 
(gain) beroleh,* dapaf. 

Attainable (-a-bl), adj. yaty boUIi. 
disampaikarh, yary boleh di-dapati. 



,. I 



Attainment (-ment), s. pndapaU 
an, perolehan* 

Attar (after), s. minjak atar* (Ar. 
'a'mr). 

Attempt (at-temf), v. t. clioba, 
achy, pandu (Pk.). She made 
two or three attempts, dua tiga kali 
di-achu-iya. 

Attend (-tend'), v. i. (pay atten- 
tion) irgat; (be in attendance) 
layan;'^^ (be present) liadlir (Ar.). 
To attend to, pei'hatikan,* pduli- 
kan, plihara, bJa,* jaga. 

Attend, v. t. (accompany) liantar- 
kan, iriiykan;* (wait on) layani, 
layankan; (care for) plihara, bla,* 
jaga; (be present at) hadlir akan 
(Ar.). 

Attendance (-ans), s. (service) pla- 
yanan;'^ (presence) kahadliran 

'(Ar.). 

Attendant (-ant), s. (servant) p- 
layanf^ juak-juak,* kundary;* 
(companion) prgirirg,'^' tman;* 
(female) dayarg-dayaig, inaty,* 
knli po (B.) '(C'h.).' 

Attendant, adj. yarg hadlir (Ar.), 
yarg mlayan;* (consequent on) 
yarg miyerta'L* 

Attention (-ten'sh^n), s. ityatan, 
perhatian.^ To pay attention, 
tar oh iryatan, perhatikan. To 
pay attention to (be attentive), 
indahkan,* bena (Pers.) ; (con- 
sider important) brati, bratkan. 

Attentive (-tiv), adj. (intent) ber- 
tkun, beriryat-iryat;* (courteous) 
bcrbha-m, beradab (Ar.). 

Attenuated (-u-iit-ed), adj. (thin, 
slender) kurus; (less viscid) cha- 
'ir. 

Attest (-test'), v. t. (certify, wit- 
ness to) saksikan; (manifest) 
lyatakan, traiykan : (affirm to be 
true) su)yyohkan,* yakan. 

Attestation (at'tes-ta'shwn), s. h- 
saksian, kryata'an, ktraryan. 



ate, ask. am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, min/zs, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful) ;' law, how, oil; thin then. 



ATTIC 



33 



AUSPICIOUS 



Attic (at'tik), s. jmra,'^ UleTc dkat 
atap. 

Attire (at-tlr'), s. pakaian, per- 
liiasan.'^ 

Attire, v. t. (dress) Icnakan imkai- 
an; (adorn) Itiasi* riaskan (B.). 

Attitude (at'ti-tud), s. (noble bear- 
ing) sikap; (posture) gaya, ha- 
rgun;* (feeling, intention) male- 
Slid, kasad (Ar.), hajat (Ar.). 

Attorney (at-ter'ni), s. (legal 
agent) wakil (Ar.), kuasa. Power 
of attorney, surat kuasa, swat 
tcakil (Ar.). General power of 
attorney, sumt tcakil midlak* 
(Ar. icakil muilaq). 

Attract (at-trakf), v. t. (draw to) 
tarek : (influence the affections) 
Dirgamhil liati: (bring) hawa. 

Attraction (-trak'shzm), s. lial m- 
narek, kuasa mnarek, bamtrj yarg 
))inarek, pnarek.^ 

Attractive (-tiv), adj. yaix) mrg- 
anihil liati, yary ?nrggmarkan* 

Attribute (-trib'ut), v. t. (impnte) 
h ila tgkan ; ( asc ril^e ) sa lykakan ; 

see ASCRIBE. 

Attribute (at'tri-biit), s. sifat 
(Ar.). 

Attune (at-tiin'), v. t. s-talakan* 

Auburn (aw'bern), adj. perarg. 

Auction (awk'shwn), s. lelorg, lelarg 
(X.L). 

Auctioneer (-er), s. tukarg lelorg. 

Audacious (aw-da'shws), adj. (dar- 
ing) hrani, nekatf (impudent) 
hiadah (Pers.), latygar hliasa, ku- 
rarg ajar, kurarg adah (Ar.) ; (in- 
solent) hotgkak* 

Audacity (-das'i-ti), s. (daring) 
hrani, nekat:^ (impudence) hia- 

• dab (Pers.), laiggaran hliasa; (in- 
solence) horgkakr 

Audible (aw'di-bl), adj. yarg holeh 
di-drgar, kdrgaran* 

Audience (-ens), s. (act of hear- 
ing) pnrgaran; (interview) hal 
mrghadap; (assembly of hearers) 



sidarg majlis,* ■majlis. To grant 
an audience (interview), hri mrg- 
hadap. 

Audit (aw'dit), v. t. preksa {kira- 
kira). 

Auditor (-di-ter), s. (of accounts) 
pmreksa* kira-kira [orarg yarg 
preksa (B.)]; (hearer) pnrgar* 
oraiy yaig mnrgar. 

Auditorium (-tor'i-«m), s. (hall of 
assembly) riiniah tmpat orarg her- 
kumpol. 

Auger (aw'ger), s. gurdi, grodi 
(B.), hor (D.), prggerek. 

Aught (awt), s. hararg apa, haraiy 
s-suatii,^ apa-apa. 

Augment (awg-menf), v. t. tam- 
halii, Ihehkan, hanjakkan, hsarkan. 

Augmentation (awg'men-ta'shim), 
s. (act of augmenting) hal mnam- 
hahi, etc., as above; (thing added) 
tamhalian. 

Augur (aw'gur), v. i. (foretell from 
omens) tilck, mnilek (B.), tnorg ;* 
(betoken) iandakan. 

Augur, s. (soothsayer) pnnorg,^ p- 
nilek. 

Augury (-gu-ri), s. (art of divi- 
nation) ptno'tgan,,* 'ihnu sihir 
(Ar.) ; (omen, prognostication) 
pdah,* tanda, 'alamat, chogati* 

August (aw-gusf), adj. midia. 

August (aw'gwst), s. hidan agus,* 
hulaii orarg put eh yang k-dlapan, 
h 111 an Japan orarg put eh (B.). 

Aunt (ant), s. uiak saudara, mah 
puakan (P.). 

Auricular (aw-rik'u-ler), adj. deri- 
hal tliiga [kupirg (B.)], yaiy di- 
drgar. 

Auriferous (-rif'er-?/s), adj. yarg 
herisi 'mas. 

Auspice (aws'pis), s. (omen) p- 
dah,'^ tanda, 'alamat, chogan.* 

Auspicious (aws-pish'7/s), adj. her- 
tuah, heruntorg, herhhagia (Sk.). 
Auspicious moment, ktika yarg 
haik, saat yanj smpurna.* 



ate, ask, am, final, care, ear, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



AUSTER 



34 



AVIATION 



Austere (-ter'), adj. hras. 
Austerity (-ter'i-ti), s. (severit.y) 

lil-ms(ui. 
Authentic (aw-tlien'tik), adj. 

sunjgoliy^ hnar, sail. 
Authenticate (-ti-kat), v. t. hnar- 

I'au, "^niyf/ohJiWt* salil'an. 
Author (aw'ther), s. piyamiy, mn- 

aliif (Ar. ), yarg ampiuya chrita,* 

sahib (I l-hikayat (Ar.). 
Authoritative (aw-thor'i-ta-tiv), 

adj. dryan prentah, diyan huasa. 
Authority (-ti), s. (power) Iciiasa; 

(jurisdiction, dominion) prentah; 

(sanction) l-hnaran. 
Authorize (a\v'ther-iz), v. t. (em- 
power) hri huasa, wal'ill'an (Ar.) ; 

(sanction) hnarl-ari, hri izin; 

(make legal) sahkan. 
Autocrat (aw'to-krat), s. pmrentah 

yarg tiada tertyali* pmrentah yary 

viutiaV^ (Ar. mu'daq). 
Autograph (-graf), s. (original 

manuscript) nusl-liah (Ar.) ; (sig- 
nature) tanda taryan, Mas tan/an. 
Automatic (-mat'ik), adj. yaiy her- 

yrah sndiri-rya, herpsaicat* 
Automaton (aw-tom'a-ton), s. pa- 

to?y yaiy hn/e/i heryral', yainhar 

liidop. 
Automobile (aw'to-mo'bil or -mo- 

bel'), s. mat oka (E. motor car), 

mohil (X.I.). 
Autopsy (aw'top-si), s. liaJ mmljlah 

fiiayat. 
Autumn (aw't//m), s. mnsini hitaJi, 

muhiui htroli,"'^ perniulaati mvsim 

sjol'. 
Auxiliary (awgz-iryer-i), adj. ;;m- 

baniu, pnoloiy. 
Avail (a-vfil'), v. i. (he of use) her- 

yuna; (be of advantage) herfa'- 

idah; (have foi'ce) berkuasa. Of 

no avail, sia-sia, perch luiia. 
Available (-a-bJ), adj. yaiy boleh 

di-palm. 
Avalanche (av'a-lanch), s. ter- 



chhis* l-runiohan'^ (tanah atau 

ayer bhu.) 
Avarice (-ris), s. (desire to hoard 

weal til) kikir* chikil* kdkiit, lo- 

kek, bakhil (Ar.) ; (covetousnesss) 

tarn'a (Ar.), tmahak (B.), loba.*" 
Avaricious (-rish'i/s), adv. kikir,*- 

lokek, I am' a (Ar. Tarn' a), tmahak- 

(B.), loba^ 
A vaunt (a-vawnf), int. ryah,'^ 

ryah-lah,'^ inchit* 
Avenge (a-venj'), v. t. balas, balas- 

kan, belakan (8k.) ; (spitefully) 

baJa-'i dndam. 
Avenger (-er), s. pmbalas, pnuntut 

bela (Sk.). 
Avenue (av'e-nti), s. (approach) 

jalan masok; (bordered by trees) 

jalan naory.^ 
Aver (a-ver'), v. t. katakan dryan 

tutu. 
Average (av'er-ej), v. t. (reduce to 

a mean) ratakan, samakan; (divide 

among a number) hhayikan sama 

rata. 
Average, adj. (of medium size or 

cjuality) sdaty, pertryahan* sder- 

liana (Sk.). -General average, k~ 

rnyian yary di-htiayikan antara ka- 

pal dryan muatan.* 'Particular 

average, kruyian masiry-masirg.. 

On the average, pukol rata* piikol 

trus.* 
Averse (a-vers'), adj. tasuka, ta- 

ymar/'' ta'sudi. 
Aversion (a-ver'sh?ai), s. (repug- 

7iance) qli, yli-glma7i* yli-ymam 

(B.); (dislike) '6/<6'/it; (for food) 

muak.'' 'Vo have a feeling of 

aversion, ralat* (Ar. yhalaT). 
Avert (a-verf), v. t. (ward off) 

elakkan,, tjAskan, tatykiskan,* sa^ 

lahkan :* (turn away, the face or 

eyes) //aliiy* palis.* 
Aviary (a'vi-a-ri), s. kuroryan bu- 

ro'Hj, mtykaran bsar; see cage. 
Aviation (-a'shi/n), s. 'ilmu* ier^ 

baig. 



ate, ask, um, final, care, car, carry; eve, ben, recent, mere, her, ft'rry; ice, it, 
mirror; old, not, connect, 8<3re, sort, sorry; use, us, minj/s, cure, injure, 
hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful);* law, how, oil; thin tJicn. 



fire. 



AVIATOR 



35 



AZURE 



Aviator (-a-ter), s. pnaik* I'apal 
ierhary [oraty ijaty naiJc (B.)]. 

Avidity (a-vid'i-ti), s. (greediness) 
(jlojoh, bosorf (eagerness) rajin, 

geraty (NJ.) (B.)- 
Avocation (av'o-ka'sli«n), s. p- 

kerjaan, /in Hi avian. 
Avoid (a-void'), v. t. (keep away 

from) jauhkan cliri deri-pada; 
( abstain from ) pan ta lykan ; 
(evade) elakkan; (escape) J pas 

deri-pada, luput.^ 
Avoidable (-a-bl), adj. yarg holeh 

di-elah, yaiy holeh di-Iuput.* 
Avoirdupois (av'er-dn-poiz'), s. 

and adj. timhatyan Irygris. 
Avouch (a-Yowch'), v. t. (maintain 

as true) yakan,'^ suiggolil^anf^ 
(affirm) kalakan drgan tntu. 
Avow (a-vow'), V. t. (acknowledge) 

nugaku; (declare openly) lyata- 

kan. 
Avowal (-al), s. prgakuan. 
Await (-waf), v. t. nanti, nantikan. 
Awake (-wak'), v. t. hargunkan, 

sdarkan, hargkitkan* jagakan* 

ka-n jaga (B.), kjotkan. 
Awake, v. i. hargun, jaga, sdar, ter- 

kjot. 
Awaken (-n), v. t. hargunkan, sdar- 
kan, haiykitkanj^ jayakan* kasi 

jaga (B.). 
Awakening (-n-ing)^ s. hal mni- 

hargunkan, etc., as above. 
Award (a-ward'), v. t. putuskan hu- 

kuni, pufiiskan hicliara, jafohkan 

link urn. 
Aware (-wflr'), adj. (vigilant) her- 

iigaf-irgat; (conscious) sdar, tahu. 
Awash (-wash'), adj. sania aras 

drgan ayer;* (as a rock) her- 

rndam* 
Away (-wa'), adv. (at a distance) 

jauli; (absent) tiada, as, away 

fi-om home, tiada di rumah; (from 

a place) peryi, as in the phrases, 

haiva peryi, take away: sudah per- 

gi, gone away; suroh pergi, send 



away. To do away with, make 
away wdth, hinasakan, hilarykan. 
To throw away, huaig. 

Awe (aw), s. ktakotan, dahsliat 
(Ar.), hehat (Ar. haihat). 

Awesome (aw'swm), adj. yarg mm- 
hri dahsliat (Ar.). 

Awestruck (-struk), adj. gruJi. 

Awful (-fool), adj. (awe inspiring) 
hebat (Ar. haihat). 

Awhile (a-whil'), adv. s-hntar, s- 
ktika, s-jurus, s-saat (Ar.). 

Awkward (awk'werd), adv. jaty- 
gal/^ chaiyyorg, kekok. 

Awl (awl), s. piyochok. 

Awning (awn'ing), s. (of sail- 
cloth) chiri {1j.), tenda; (of mat- 
ting, moveable) kajaiy; (of mat- 
ting, fixed) jruhotgf (over a ped- 
dler's stall) srodorg;* (in front of 
a shop) perdah* Awning cur- 
tains, perdah/^ 

Awry (a-ri'), adj. seroiy, erut,* 
eraiy-erut* hetyut, genjut* 

Axe (iiks), s. (Malay pattern, the 
blade fastened to the handle by 
rattan lashings) hliorg; (the usual 
])attern) kapak. 

Axiom (aks'i-y/m), s. perkara yarg 
tertntu, perkara yarg ta'asaJi di- 
haiifahi* 

Axis (-is), s. (of the earth) halah 
humi;^ (of a top) paksi,^ pargsi. 

Axle (aks'l), s. gandar roda,* achi* 

(E.). 
Axle box (boks), s. gantary-gantarg 

roda,'^ kjMla roda, pusat roda, hu- 

yoiy roda (P.). 
Axletree (-tre), s. rasok kreta* 
Aye (a), adv. (always) s-lama-rya, 

s-lania-lama-nja; (yes) hahkan* 

ya. 
Azimuth (i1z'i-m?/th), s. sukatan di 

kaki Jatgit drgan sikii deri shlah 

(ifara/^ 
Azure (azh'ur), adj. hiru muda, 

hiru laut, hiru largit. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, iis, mim<s, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



BAA 



36 



BACKSTAY 



Baa (ba), v. i. (bleat as a sheep) 

Babble (bab'bl), v. i. (utter in- 
articulate sounds) repek* mrapek 
(B.), repet; (talk much) bletir, 
mletir (B.). clieclier* lyanjaJi,* m- 
iijeryeh (B.), chraniah.'^ 

Babbler (-bier), s. pletir*^ pnclie- 
cher* hihitwi,'^ pak mletir (B.), 
wak mletir (B.). 

Babe (bab), s. kanak-kanak, hudak 
kcliil, auak kchil. 

Babel (ba'bel), s. (the city) Bahil; 

. (confused sound of voices) hisirg, 
geger* uyar* rioh-rndah, see 

CHATTER. 

Baboon (ba-boon'), s. hrok di negri 
Afrika. 

Baby (ba'bi), s. kanak-kanak, hudak 
kcJiiJ, anak kchil. 

Babyhood (-hood), s. masa kchil. 
From babyhood, deri kchil. 

Babyish (-ish), adj. khndak-hudak' 
'an, kanak-kanak (a). 

Babylon (bab'i-h/n), s. neqri Ba- 
hil. 

Bachelor (bach'e-ler), s. hiijarg* 
truna,^ orarc) yarg hliun kahwin 
(B.). 

Bacillus (ba-sil'l«s), s. tumhohan 
halus-halus yarg dapat di-lihal 
diyari troporg, hama, which is pro- 
perly a small insect, hut is also 
used to mean pollen. 

Back (bak), s. hlakarg ; (between 
the shoulders) tanifmran lyamok;* 
(of a house, hill, island, etc.) 
halek. Back of the neck, trgkok. 
To turn one's back towards a per- 
son, hlakaigi."^ Lyin^i^ on one's 
back, terlntarg. 

Back, adv. (in the rear) di hlakaiy: 
(to the rear) k-hlakarg ; (to a for- 
mer place or condition) pulaig, 
knihali, halek. There and back, 
pergi-halek. Back and forth, ularg- 



aliig, ulanj-alek. To give back, 
kwbalikan, pulatgkan. To keep 
back, tahankan. 
Back, V. t. (force backwards) nndor^ 
kan; (support, aid) bantu, tolorg; 
(bet) hertaroh. To back water 
(rowing), ahah.* To turn a boat 
by backing water on one side,. 

Backache (bak'ak), s. sakit pirg- 

gaig. 
Backbite (-bit), v. t. nmpat, fitnah- 

kan (Ar.). 
Backbiting (-ing), s. umpat, filnak 

(Ar.). 
Backboard (-bord), s. (of a boai > 

liapan sandar, pnjandar.^ 
Backbone (-bon), s. tnlarg hlakarg; 

(the co(;cyx) tnlarg torgkerg,* tn- 
larg sulhi (Ar.). 
Backdoor (-dor'), s. pintu hlakarg^ 

pinlu mcdirg.^ 
Backgammon (-gam'mwn), s. /a- 

hal.'' 
Background (-grownd), s. (of a 

pattern) tanah dasar;'^ (of ground 

in the rear or behind) tanaJi shlah 

hlakaig. To keep one's self in the 

background, tarek diri. 
Backhanded (-handVd), adj. (with 

tlie back of the hand) drgan hla- 
karg targan; (indirect, insincere) 

sin divan. 
Backing (-ing), s. (lining) alasan; 

(support, aid) pnihantuan, per- 

toloigan. 
Backscratcher (-skrach-er), s. pn- 

chakar,^' pujgarok. 
Backsight (-sit), s. (of firearms) 

liar-liar.'^ 
Backside (-sld'), s. puiggorg, pan- 

lat, loigkerg. 
Backslide (-slid), v. i. tirggalkan 

'ibadat (Ar.). 
Backstay (-sta), s. (Xaut.) tni- 

berarg turui, tahan turut, perdi, 

tali lenjgarg. 



ate, ask, am, finol, care, ear, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire,. 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minits, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfooi (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



BACKSTITCH 



37 



BAIT 



Backstitch (-stich), s. lia* jaJiii 
bkia, stik^ (D. steek). 

Backward (-werd), adv. (with the 
back foremost) mmblakarx); (to- 
wards the back) k-blaJcarg ; (re- 
versely) sunjsanj. Backwards and 
forwards, ulaixf-alirg , ularg-alek. 

Backward, adj. (reluctant) tasudi, 
tasuka; (dilatory) leixjah; (behind 
hand) lamhat; (in growth) her- 
dil* eliding; (in learning) hurarg 
plajaran, kurarg kpandaian. 

Backwater (-waw-ter), s. olak* 
aj/er herolak* 

Backwoods (-w^oodz), s. hutan di 
ulu-uUi. 

Backwoodsman (-man), s. orarg 
ulu, orarg pargan."^ 

Backyard (-yard), s. halo man hla- 
I'arg* tanah di blakarg rumali. 

Bacon (ba.'k?in), s. dagirg babi sa- 
Jai, hem (E. ham), babi hem (B.). 

Bacterium (bak-ter'i-wm), s. (pi. 
bacteria) tumbohan halus-halus 
yarg dapat di-lihat dijjan tropoig, 
dan ada yarg mndatargkan piyakit, 
liama, see bacillus. 

Bad (bad), adj. (morally) jaliat; 
(defective) ta'baik, kurarg baik; 
(worn out, decayed, rotten) burok; 
(putrid) busok; (unfortunate) 
malarg, jaliat; (counterfeit) lan- 
clioig* palsii; (severe, of sickness) 
brat, trok, payah; (of wounds) 
parali. A bad egg (addled) tlor 
tmbjarg; (containing a dead 
chicken) tlor burgkus* A bad 
name, na?na jaliat, nama Ita* 

Badge (baj), s. (mark, token) tan- 
da, 'alamat (Ar) ; (of police or 
soldiers) marka. 

Badger (baj'er), v. t. nsek. 

Badger, s. 'iinjul (Ar.). 

Baffle (baffl), v. t. (check) talian- 
kan, tgalikan; (disconcert) birgorg- 
kan, klirukan; (thwart) skatkan. 
Baffling winds, argin beraleh-aleh* 
argin pancliaroba.^ 



Bag (bag), v. t. (put in bags) isi 
dalani karorg ; (capture) targkap, 
see CATCH. 

Bag, s. (of sack cloth) guni, goni 
(B.) ; (of palm leaves, with two 
corners, large) karotg; (smaller) 
kampit, sum /At ;'^' (with four cor- 
ners) bujam* kban;* (for bla- 
clian) toporg;* (of paper, for 
cakes, etc.) kmbal;* (for clothes, 
with wooden base) buntil;* (of 
rattan network) rajut;* (for 
money, small) opau (Ch. io-pau) ; 
(larger) pimdi-pundi, uncliarg;'^ 
(wallet) sitak,* bokclia (Turk.) ; 
(leather valise, European) bek 
(E.) ; (quantity of game) per- 
olelian* 

Bagatelle (bag'a-tel'), s. (a trifle) 
perkara yarg kcliil-kcMl ; (the 
game) meja bola smhilan. 

Baggage (bag'gej), s. baraig-bararg ; 
(of an army) perkakas prarg. 

Bagging (-ing), s. kain guni. 

Baggy (-gi), adj. Indur/^ ber- 
gdabir;* (as loose trowsers) 
gdobor/'^ 

Bagpipe (-pip), s. srunai pundi- 
pundi* 

Bah (bah), int. clieli. 

Bail (bal), v. t. (water) timba, 
chedokkan. To bail out a boat 
(Xaut.), timba ruarg. 

Bail, V. t. (give security for a prison- 
er) jaminkan, akukan, targgorgkan. 

Bail, s. jamin, prgakuan. 

Bailable (bal'a-bl), adj. yarg boleli 
di- jamin. 

Bailer (-er), s. (bucket) timba; 
(cup with a handle) gayorg, cheu- 
torg, chantiig* 

Bailiff (-if), s. (sheriff's deputy) 
mata-mata saman ; (overseer) man- 
dor bsar. 

Bailor (bal-or'), s. orarg jamin, pn- 
jamin. 

Bait (bat), v. t. (harass for sport) 
oja:* (feed, as horses) bri makan; 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; tliiu then. 



BAIT 



38 



BAND 



(furnish bait) umpani, buboh urn- 
pan. To bait a hook, kait umpan, 
buboh umpan, jatykit (W.). 

Bait, s. umpan; (for crocodiles) 
alir* umpan alir* 

Baize (baz), s. kain hmbli* l-amli. 

Bake (buk), v. t. (over a fire) pa^y- 
garg; (before a fire) garggarg; (in 
hot ashes) bmbam; (in an oven) 
bakar. 

Bakehouse (bak'hows), s. rumah 
bakar rati. 

Baker (-er), s. tukarg roti. 

Bakery (-er-i), s. rumah bakar roti 

Balance (bal'ans), s. (scales) nra- 
cha;'^ (steelyard) dachiig; (any 
apparatus for weighing) timbaig- 
an; (of an account) Ibeh, baki* 
(Ar. bdqi) ; (equipoise) f/imbal- 
an* 

Balance, v. t. (keep in equilibrium) 
timbarg, timbal;* (equal) sama'i; 
(adjust an account) slsaikan, slise- 
kan (B.). 

Balcony (bal'kon-i), s. anjorg* 
branda (Port.), sotoh (Ar.j, la'- 
pe'' (Ch. ICiu-pV'). 

Bald (bawld) adj. botak; (on the 
temples) suak ;'^ (from disease) 
suJah* bubus* bulus* 

Bale (bal), s. burgkusan, bandla 
(Eur.). 

Bale, V. t. ikat bandla. 

Baleful (bal'fool), adj. yarg mn- 
datarykan bnchana, yaty mmbinasa- 
kan, yary mmbri niudlarat (Ar.). 

Balk (bawk), s. (beam) rasok* ba- 
lak (D.). 

Balk, V. t. (frustrate) tahankan, 
skafkan, tgahkan. To be balked 
( d isappointed) , kaharajxin . 

Balk, V. i. (stand still) chandi* 

Ball (bawl), s. bola; (bullet) pluru; 
(of twine) buku; (pellet rolled be- 
tween fingers) gentel; (tlie Malay 
football) sefmk-raga. Ball of the 
eye, biji mata. Ball of the foot, 
ttgah tapak. 



Ball, s. (dancing party) pnarian, 
pesfa mnari (N.I.), majlis mnati. 

Ballad (bal'lad), s. sha'ir. 

Ballast (-last), s. (Naut.) tolak 
bara; (gravel) batu klikir. 

Ballet (-la), s. tandak s-kawan, tan- 
dak s-vmpak.* 

Balloon (bal-lo5n'), s. pundi-pundi 
mlayaig, belun (E.). 

Ballot (bal'M), s. undi mmileh, 
buah undi, surat undi. 

Ballot, V. i. buaty undi, miyundi. 

Balm (bam), s. (of resin) balsam 
(Ar.) ; (that which soothes) pna- 
war, pnjlipor* 

Balmy (bam'i), adj. (odoriferous) 
harom* waryi; (refreshing) yafy 
syarkan. 

Balsam (bawrsam), s. (balm of 
Gilead) balsam (Ar.). The water 
balsam, inai paya. A pink balsam 
growing on hills, inai batu. 

Balustrade (bal'us-trad'), s. (ma- 
sonry) kisi-klsi batu; (of wood) 
adan* skat, kelek-kelekan; (of a 
staircase) susoran taryya, pmyarg 
taiyya. 

Bamboo (bam-boo'), s. buloh, aur* 
bambu (B.). The hedge bamboo, 
buloh China. The large yellow 
])amboo, aur yadby.'^ Bamboo 
shoots, rborg. Joints of bamboo 
used as buckets or boxes, tabory. 
Longer bamboo buckets for carry- 
ing water, bach ok.* 

Bamboozle (-zl), v. t. tipu, bi7yorg- 
kan, perkonunkan* 

Ban (ban), s. (interdiction) laraiy- 
an, paniaty; (curse) kutok, sum- 
pah. 

Ban, V. t. (prohibit) pantarykan, la- 
rargkan; (curse) kutok, sumpahi. 

Banana (ba-na'na), s. pisarg. Ba- 
nana flower, jantojy pisary. Dried 
bananas, rim pi.* 

Band (band), s. (fastening) piy- 
ikat, ikatan : (ornamental ferrule) 
sanipak;* (strap, ring) rlaiy,* sini- 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, min//s, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, avvfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



BAND 



39 



BAR 



pai; (of musicians, European) 
ben (E.) ; (Javanese musicians) 
gamlan* 'Band of robbers, haivan 
pryanion, hunpolan piyamon. 

Band, v. i. (conspire) bermnafakat 
(Ar.), pal-at. 

Bandage (band'ej), s. (larofe) ba- 
rut; (small) balut, bbat, bbatan. 
Suspensory bandage (after circum- 
cision), taH lundaiy.'^ See bind- 
er. 

Bandage, v. t. band, balut, bbat. 

Bandbox (-boks), s. I'oiak Jvertas. 

Bandit (-it), s. piyaiaon. 

Bandmaster (-mast-er), s. hpdla 
ben (E.). 

Bandolier (ban'do-ler'), s. sandarg 
ptrinu* sandarg kertus* slepaiy* 

Bandy (bfind'i), v. t. baJas-mmbaJas. 

Bandylegged (-legd), adj. kali 
perglmr, hergkaig. 

Bane (ban), s, pmbinasa. yatg mm- 
baiva chlaka. 

Baneful (ban'fool), adj. yarg mm^ 
binasakan, yarg mndatargkan mu- 
dlarat (Ar.). 

Bang (bang), s. (a blow) tumbok, 
pain, pukol; (the sound, of large 
objects) gerdam-gerdom; (smaller, 
as doors and windows) dntam-dn- 
torn: (smallei* still) kertap-kertup ; 
(as iirearms) hitam-lniom ; (as the 
fall of a brass vessel) paig, porg ; 
see THUD. 

Bang, V. t. (strike) tumbok, pukol, 
palu : (so as to make a noise) dn- 
tomkan. 

Bang, V. i. (strike) berantok, teran- 
tok; (the sound) berdntom,. 

Bang, int. dntom. 

Bangle (bang'gl), s. glaig cliri,'^' 
wahri* (Tam.), glarg targan (B.). 

Banian (ban'yan or ban'yan), s. 
(Ficus indica) ara tampok pinarg* 
ara tandok * 

Banish (-ish), v. t. buarg negri, 
buarg bombai, tondorg,* jauhkan 
deri-pada negri. 



Banishment (-ment), s. pri kna 
buarg negri, pnondoigan* 

Banister (-is-ter), s. pmgarg targga, 
susoran targga. 

Bank (bangk), s. (establishment 
trading in money) berg (E.). 

Bank, s. (of a river or ditch) tbirg, 
t'pi; (steep slope) cliuraman, tu- 
pis;'^ (sand bank) btirg, busorg ;*' 
(separating rice fields) batas; (em- 
bankment, dike) bndorg.* 

Bank, v. t. (heap up earth) tambak, 
timbo7ikan. To bank a fire, ban- 
tu tkan api, pupok"^ a pi. 

Banknote (bfingk'nof), s. warg ker^ 
tas, not (E.). 

Bankrupt (-rupt), adj. jatoh, beiq- 
krap (E.), baiykrut'i^.I.) (D.). 

Bankruptcy (-si), s. hal jatoh. 

Banner (ban'ner), s. tmggul,* 
panji-panji,* bndera (B.). 

Banquet (bang'kwet), s. perjamu- 
an, pesta (X.I.). 

Bantam (ban'tam), s. ayam katek. 

Banter (-ter), v. t. bergurau, ber- 
jnaka,"^ bersnda,* lawak* 

Bantling (bant'ling), s. kanak-ka- 
uak. anak kchik (B.). 

Banyan, s. see banian. 

Baptism (bap'tizm), s. baptis, pm- 
baptisan (X.). 

Baptize (bap-tiz'), v. t. baptiskan 
(X.). 

Bar (bar), s. (to fasten doors or 
windows, short) slak, prganchirg; 
(long) srgkarg, palarg,"^ kayu 
palarg;^ (rails in a fence or gate) 
kayu udintarg, kayu rembat* 
pak pagar,"^ palarg;'^ (bamer) 
saivar,* rbal:* (grating of a win- 
dow) jerjak;'^ (closing the lower 
part of a window) kim-kisi;* (at the 
mouth of a river) alargan; (coun- 
ter over which liquors are sold) 
meja tmpat jual arak; (place for 
prisoners in court) kandarg; (the 
legal profession) pkerja'an pnolorg 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minits, cure, injure, 

huriy; f56d, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



BAR 



40 



BARN 



hicham, pl-erjaanloyar (E.). Bar 
iron, hsi bataty. 

Bar, V. t. (obstruct, as with a bar- 
rier) 'mjxiyr), skat, galaiy; (fasten 
with a bar) siykaty, kanchirg; (ex- 
cept) kchnalikan* 

Barb (barb), s. ruit,'^ duri pandan. 
Barbed wire, kawat berduri* dawai 
duri (B.). 

Barbarian ( bar-bar 'i-an), s. (un- 
civilized) orarg liutan, orarg ja- 
kun; (cruel, savage) oraiy b^yis, 
oraiy tlalim (Ar.), orarg kasar 
(B.). 

Barbarism (bar'ba-rizm) s. (un- 
civilized state) hal orarg hutan; 
(fault in langua<?e) perkataan 
kasar. 

Barbarity (bar-bar'i-ti), s. kbrgis- 
an, kkasaran (B.), perbuatan ja- 
hat-jahat. 

Barbarous (bar'ba-rws), adj. (un- 
civilized) kasar; (cruel) bryis, 
gararx), ganas.^ 

Barbed (barbd), adj. berruit,* ber- 
duri. Barbed wire, kawat berduri, 
dawai duri (B.), 

Barber (bar'ber), s. tukarg cliukor, 
tukarg guntivc). 

Barbet (bar'bet), s. burorg pkaka 
hutan,* buroiy pkaka riniba.* 

Bard (hard), s. prgararg sliavr. 

Bare (bar)^ v. t. buka, ddah, bryai.* 

Bare, adj. (deprived of coverino^, as 
the head or hills) yondol, lokosj* 
(of trees) reryyes,* lokos,* botak 
(B.) ; (naked) t1anja?y, boyil,* 
bulns;* (exposed, but not absolute- 
ly naked) terbuka, terddah; (only 
just) hanja,'^ chuma, as, only a 
bare livino^, Jtanja'^ chukop niakan 
sdhaja \churna (B.)]. 

Bareback (bar'bak), adv. tiada ber- 
plana,* tiada bersela.* 

Barefaced (-fasd), adj. (shameless) 
muka tbal, muka slaniba, muka pa- 
pan. 

Barefooted (-foot-ed), adj. tiada 



berkasut, kaki terbuka, berkaki 
ay am.* 

Bareheaded (-hed'ed), adj. yondol, 
tiada bertopi, tiada berkopiah. 

Barelegged (-legd), adj. btis ter- 
buka.* 

Barely (-li), adv. (merely) sahaja; 
(scarcely) njaris* ta', hampir ia' ; 
as, barely enough, liampir ta'clm- 
kop; barely escaped, igaris* ta'- 
dapat Ipas, hampir ta'lpas. 

Bargain (bar'gen), s. (agreement) 
perjanjian; (advantageous pur- 
chase) untoty; (some tiling bought 
cheap) bara?y murah. To strike a 
bargain, putuskan herya, ttapkan 
jualan. Into the bargain, Ibeh 
layi, basi.* 

Bargain, v. i. (to beat down the 
price) tawar. 

Barge (barj), s. (cargo boat) toty- 
kary, jonjkorgj* (Malay flat-bot- 
tomed boat) ktiap;* (Chinese 
boat) sampan- kotak; (pleasure 
boat for a raja) lanchaiy* yebeig,* 
prahu knaikan; (for his atten- 
dants) pelarg.* 

Bargepole (-pol), s. galah. 

Bark (bark), s. (of a tree) kulit 
kayu; (for tanning) kulit samak;* 
(sound of a dog) saJak, mryalah 
(B.), konjkorg; (the vessel) see 

BARQUE. 

Bark, v. i. (of a dog) salak, miyahh 

(B.), korgkorg. 
Bark, v. t. (remove the bark from) 

kopak, kupaskan; (in strips) soyak, 

siat, soyat;* (rub off skin) glu- 

pas. 
Bar-keeper (bar'kep-er), s. oraty 

jual arak. 
Barley (-li), s. shair (Ar.). Pearl 

bai'ley, bras B I an da. 
Barmaid (-mad), s. prempiian jual 

arak. 
Barm (barm), s. ragi. 
Barn (barn), s. (Malay rice store) 

hykiarg,* jlapaty,* brmban,* ba- 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



BARNACLE 



41 



BASTARD 



?o/i,* hruhoiy (P.)? lumhoiy 
(N.I.), see Bix; (any store) 
gdorg, gudarg, hygiian;* (shed) 
hanjsal. 

Barnacle (bar'na-kl), s. (sessile) 
teritip; (stalked) gugutan^' 

Barometer (ba-rom'e-ter), s. /?- 
nimharrj udara. 

Baron (bar'wn), s. suatu paigJcat 
haigsaican orarg Eropah, see duke. 

Baronet (-et), s. parglcat yaig di 
haiuah " baron/' 

Barque (bark), s. l^apal diia tiarg s- 
trgah. 

Barracks (bar'raks), s. haret (E.), 
riimah soldado, targsi (X.I.). 

Barrel (-rel), s. (cask) to)y, pipaf 
(of a gun) /ara,^. Double barrel- 
led gun, snapary dua laras, snapary 
knihar. 

Barren (-ren), adj. (childless) 
mandul,^ taheranak (B.) : (of 
land) kurus, darykal.'^ 

Barricade (-ri-kad'), s. skat, 'm- 
pary, saivar* 

Barricade, v. t. rhat,'^ 'mparg. 

Barrier (-ri-er), s. skatan, pagar, 
saicavf (leaves, etc., hung as a 
sign to bar the way) gawar* 

Barring (bar'ring), prep, (except- 
ing) mlainkan, haiya.* 

Barrister (bar'ris-ter), s. pguam* 
pnoloty Ucliara, loyar (E.), see 

LAWYER. 

Barrow (-ro), s. kreta sorory, kreta 
tolak. 

Barter (bar'ter), v. t. tukar. 

Basalt (ba'sawlt or ba-sawlt'), s. 
batu marmar hitam* 

Basal (ba'sal), adj. asal (a), deri' 
pada asal. 

Base (bas), adj. (morally low) kji,"^ 
busok (B.). 

Base, s. (foundation) alas; (pedes- 
tal) tapak: (the lower part, as of 
walls or pillars) kaki; (of trees) 

' pargkal; (essential part) pokok; 



(the metal which serves as a found- 
ation for plating) snam* 

Base, V. t. alaskan. 

Baseless (ba-s'les), adj. tiada her* 
shah, tiada heralas. 

Basement (-ment), s. terykat ru- 
mail yary masok k-tanah. 

Bashful (bash'fool), adj. kmalu- 
maluan, ksipu-sipnan, ta'lpas la- 
ku* 

Basil (baz'il), s. (Ocymum basil- 
icum) slaseh antan, ruku-ruku* 

Basin (ba'sn), s. (metal) hokor* 
hajan* loyarg ; (earthenware) 
maiykok, pasu, paso (B.). 

Basis (-sis), s. (principal compon- 
ent) i&w;' (fundamental principle) 
alas, pokok. 

Bask (bask), v. t. (in the sun) her- 
jm or. 

Basket (bas'ket), s. (coarse, open 
plaiting, as follows in order of 
size) kranjary, jaras,* raga,* krun^ 
tory,'^ kumhu,* jlondok,'^ tryka- 
lary;* (close plaiting) srok,* ha- 
kill, porykis, rantary,* tarykil,* 
kiidai,* tenoryf (carried on the 
back) galas, "^ rarykiry,'^' katary,* 
jaryki,* amborg,* yariry;* (in sets, 
one inside another) romhory; (on 
a pole for gathering fruit) sary- 
yorg;* (for setting round-bottomed 
pots in) Ikar. 'To begin to make 
a basket, taja.* 

Bass (bas), adj. (of the voice) w- 
rrykory,* bam (Ar.). 

Bassinet (bas'si-nef), s. (cradle) 
buaian rotan, bo-biie rotan (B.), 
ayiinan rotan,"^ 'ndul raya.^ 

Bast (bast), s. (of the banana tree) 
tali pisary, slisir;'^ (of palms) sam- 
pil* 

Bastard (bas'terd), s. anak ta'nikah, 
anak zina, anak gampary, anak 
snndal; (child of a concubine) 
anak yiindek. As a term of abuse, 
karam-zadah, anak liaram. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; Ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, mimts, cure, injure, 

hurry ; food, foot, awf ool (awful) ; law, how, oil ; thin then. 



BASTE 42 

Baste (brist), v. t. (cudgel) hantai, 
pukol, gasak; (in cooking) clie- 
rher* diyan Imak; (in sewing) 
jhijor, lari hnmy. 

Bastinado (bas'ti-na'do), s. ssah 
tapal' haki. 

Bastion (bas'chiin), s. slekoli kota* 
ktlum. (Tarn.). 

Bat (bat), s. (the large fruit bat) 
kluaiy, klambit;* (the common 
.small bat) kJlawar/^ klawar, kla- 
war-Jawar;'^ (a smaller species) k- 
tawah.^ 

Batavia (ba-ta'vi-a), s. Btawi. 

Batch (bach), s. (of bread) s-kali 
bakar; (group or collection of 
things) s-loiygok, s-rmpahj^ s-tom- 
pok; (of persons) s-kawan, s-kum^ 
pol. 

Bath (bath), s. (receptacle) haldi 
mandi;'^ (act of bathing) mandi. 

Bathe (baf/i), v. i. mandi; (of royal- 
ty) her sir am* 

Bathe, v. t. mandikan. 

Bathing cloth (ba^/t'ing clawth), 
s. kain hasalian, kain hasali, cliokin 
(Ch. chho'-kun), clnikin (B.). 

Bathos (ba'thos), s. perkara hsar- 
bsar di-tarafkan diyari yary hukan- 
hukan, s-hiryga mmhri tertaiva.* 

Bathroom (bath'rdom), s. tmpat 
mandi, hilek pe-rmandian, kamar 
mandi (j^.I.). 

Baton (bat'zm), s. toiykat khsaran 
i/ary di-pakai oleli prylima praig, 
torykat kpala hen (E. band) ; (po- 
liceman's) hlantan* torykat tvarifi 
(E. warrant). 

Battalion (ba-tal'ywn), s. pasokan 
s-rihu. 

Batten (bat'tn), s. hroti, kai/u pak* 

Batten, v. t. To batten down a 
hatch, tntop palkah (L.)^ tutop 
yladak. 

Batter (-ter), s. (in cooking) adon- 
an* hercliampnr tlor, susn, dan s- 
hagai-rya. 

Batter, s. (slope) churaman. 



BE 

Batter, v. t. (beat repeatedly) titeh, 
ktok, tiunbok; (demolish) rmok^ 
kan, hanchor. 

Battered (-terd), adj. (demolish- 
ed) rmok; (dented) Ikok, kniok- 
kmek* 

Battering-ram (-ing-ram'), s. p- 
numhok temhok kota. 

Battery (-i), s. (fort) kuhu, henterg 
(X.I.) ; (of artillery) pasokan m- 
riam; (electric) ohat talipon; 
(stamps for ore) pnumhok karary. 

Battle (bat'tl), s. praty, ppra7yan. 

Battle, V. i. herprary, herlawan. 

Battle-axe (aks), s. kapak pprargan, 
chipan* 

Battlefield (-feld), s. medan ppraty' 
an, padaiy pprargan. 

Battlement (-ment), s. kmunchdk 
temhok ijarg herchlah-chlah. 

Battue (bat'too) s. perhurvan. 

Bauble (baw^'bl), s. perhiasan yarg 
murali. 

Baulk (bawk), s. halak (D.), rasok* 
hatary kayu. 

Bawd (bawd), s. alku, harua, pinarg 
muda (P.). 

Bawl (bawl), v. i. hertriak-triak, pit, 
mnjret (B.), pkek, kriau (P.). 

Bay (ba), adj. (of horses) merah. 

Bay, s. tlok; (very small) suak;* 
(division of a structure between 
pillars) ruaig ;* (laurel tree) po- 
lion salam;* (prolonged barking) 
korgkorg. At bay '(facing assail- 
ant), hertalian, mlaivan, mnntary. 

Bay, V. i. (prolonged barking) kory- 
kory. 

Bayonet (ba'o-net), s. mata sary- 
kor* pdary snapary (B.). 

Bay window (win-do), s. jndela 
mrganjiir* iitgkap mryoroiy* 

Bazaar (b<2-zar'), s. (market) pasar, 
pkan* 

Be (be), v. i. (exist, be present) 
ada; (exist in a certain manner or 
relation) jadi; (take place, hap- 
pen) jadi; (as passive auxilliary) 



ate, ask, run, final, eare, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minus, care, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



BEACH 

kna, as, he was beaten, dia Jena 
pukol; (with present participles) 
tiyah, sdaiy, as, he is sleeping, dia 
trgah iidor. To be oft', pergi. Be 
off! njah-lah^^ hinchit* bemmhus, 
tlmijl'op-Jah.^^ 

Beach (beeh), s. pantai. 

Beach, v. t. (j^aut.) kandasJcan. 

Beachcomber (bech'kom-er), s. 
orarr/ bargsat, oraiy liaryvt. 

Beacon (be'kn), s. (pole on or near 
shore) bairup;'^ (to guide fisher- 
men) taiida, panchanj. 

Bead (bed), s. (perforated ball) 
manel'y manek-manek ; (of liquid 
or molten metal or glass) titekr 
'Coral beads, merjan* A string of 
beads for prayer, tasbeli (Ar.). 

Beading (bed'ihg), s. (ornamental 
edging) lis (D. lijst), kumai.* 

Beak (bek), s. (of a bird) paroh* 

Beaker (belv'er), s. (cup with a 
foot) piala* 

Beam (bem), s. balak (D.), batarq 
kayu : ( supporting floor- j oists ) 
rasok;^ (floor joists) glgar;"^ (wall 
plate) alarg* tutop tiarg; (roof 
tie beams) kasau;* (beam of a 
plough) targkai bajak, kmiidi ba- 
jak, targkai trggala (P.) (Pk.) ; 
(of a loom) psa;"^ (of an an- 
chor) bataixj sauli; (of light) sinar, 
clialiya; (width of a ship) bulta. 
On its beams ends (Naut.), ter- 
srendeig. 

Beam, v. i. bersinar. 

Beamy (bem'i), adj. (Naut.) bun- 
tak. 

Bean (ben), s. kacliarg. French 
beans, kacliarg pendek. Kidney 
beanSj kacharg bunchis* (D.)- 
Yam bean, ubi srgkitarg* Bean 
sprouts, kchambaJi* tauge (Ch. 
tdu-ge). 

Bear (bar), s. bruarg. The Great 
Bear, bintarg bidok* bintarg jorg* 

Bear, v. t. (carry) bawa, bawak 
(B.) ; (support, sustain) targgorg; 



43 BEAT 



(endure) tahan, drita (Sk.), targ- 
gorg; (bring forth children) ber- 
anak; (of royalty) bersalin; (bring 
forth fruit) berbudli, kliiarkan 
bnah. To bear arms, pakai snjata. 
To bear down (as a woman in 
labour), trati. To bear m mind, 
irgat. To bear malice, mnaroh dn- 
dam. To bear off, batva pergi. 
To bear with, sabarkaiv. To bear 
witness, bersaksi, naik saksi. Can- 
not bear, tiada lamt, tiada rut,*- 
taboleli tahan. See also under 

CARRY. 

Bear, \. i. (produce fruit) berbuah; 
(refer or relate to) kna-mrgna. It 
bears due north (Naut.), hala-n/a 
utara tpat. To bear away (Naut.), 
turut. To bear up (be firm), ber- 
ttap liati. 

Bearable (bar'a-bl), adj. yarg ter- 
drita (Sk.), yarg dapat di-tahan. 

Beard (herd), s. jarggot. 

Beard, v. t. lawan berhadapan, tn- 
targ, laivan bersnmka* 

Bearded (berd'ed), adj. ber jarggot. 

Beardless (-les), adj. tiada ber jarg- 
got. 

Bearer (bar'er), s. (one who car- 
ries) pmbawa; (at funerals) prg- 
nsoig may at. '^ 

Bearing (-ing), s. (deportment) 
gaya, bargun;* (good or noble ap- 
pearance) sikap;{hehsLYiouT} laku* 
tefykah-laku; (meaning) arti; (di- 
rection) hala;* (journals in ma- 
chinery) lobarg ganda roda.* 

Bearing rein (ran), s. ras lipat. 

Beast (best), s. binatarg, haiwan 
(Ar.) ; (wild animals in general) 
mergastua (Sk.). 

Beastly (best'H), s. (degraded) 
Z7Y,* liina, bagai binatarg. 

Beat (bet), v. t. (generally) pnkol, 
hntam; (with a stick) palu, blarg- 
korg;* (a heavy stick) godam;* 
(with something pliable) sbat, 
ssah; (slang words) gasak, balian,^ 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, more, her, ferry; ice, it, fire 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; iise, us, mim/s, cure, injure, 

hiirry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin th^u. 



BEAT 



44 



BEDAUB 



haliui* hdal, hantai; (with the 
iist) tumhol-; (as a woman) go- 
cJioh;* (grain in threshing, or 
clothes in washing, or as waves) 
hantuy; (as carpets) tbah;* (as 
drums) pukol, pain* titir* tpok; 
(in a mortar) tunihok; (on an 
anvil) tmpa, titeJc; (overcome) 
alafikan* kalalikan (B.). To 
beat down (in price), taivar. To 
beat lip (as eggs), pukol, haru* 
puiar, pudi;* (up and down) 
^njut. To beat the breast, tbah 
dada* tarn par dada, tpok dada. 
To beat time on a drum, teiykah* 

Beat, V. i. (throb) berdbar; (as wind 
or waves) tmpoJi, bantiry; (Xaut. 
= tack) berpal-iKil, buaty prai. 

Beat, s. (stroke) palu; (pulsation) 
dbar, dnryutj* (of music) sajak 
(Ar. saj'a) ; (round of a watch- 
man) sambanj* 

Beaten (bet'n), adj. (vanquished) 
kalah, tewas;* (of metal) tmpa' 
'an* tnifxiwan* 

Beating (-ing), s. (act of striking) 
hal mmukol, lial itimalu, etc., see 
beat; (pulsation) dnryut* dbar; 
(tacking) ber pal-pal, buaiy prai. 

Beatific (be-a-tif'ik), adj. yary 
minbhayiakan (Sk.), yarg nuyuka- 
kan. 

Beatify (be-at'i-fi), v. t. (regard 
as happy) bilarykan bhayia (Sk.), 
hilargkan untorg (B.) ; (make hap- 
py) bhayiakan (Sk.) ; (E.G.) ma- 
sokkan dalam bilaryan oraiy kra- 
mat. 

Beatitude (be-at'i-tud), s. (happi- 
ness) bhayia (Sk.), sntosa. 

Beau (bo), s. (dandy) si kachak, 
psolek,* bwai;* (lover) kkaselt. 

Beauteous (bu'ti-i/s), adj. elok,* 
inolek. 

Beautiful (-fool), adj. elok* molek, 
chantek, bayus; (of places) per- 
mai;* (of things, words or appear- 
ance) indah. 



Beautify (-fi), v. t. (make beauti- 
ful) elokkan;* (adorn) hiasi* 
riaskan (B.), adon* 

Beauty (bu'ti), s. k'elokan. Beauty 
spot, ialii lalat, taik lalat (B.). 

Becalm (be-kam'), v. t. tdolikan. 

Becalmed (-kamd'), adj. (i^aut.) 
kmatian aiyin. 

Because (-kawz'), conj. sbo^b, kerna. 
Because of, prep, oleli,* ohh sbab* 
deri sbab, fasal, lantaran (N.I.). 

Beche de mer (bash'de-mar'), s. 
trijxiiy, yaniat* liaisom (B.) 

(Ch.j- 

Becic (bek), s. soyok* isarat (Ar. 
ishdrat). 

Beckon (bek'n), v. t. soyok* bri 
isarat (Ar. ishdrat), isaratkan; (by 
waving the hand or some object) 
lanibai; (with the fingers) yamit;* 
(with one finger) knit. 

Becloud (-klowd'), v. t. klamkan,* 
ylapkan. 

Become (-kum') v. i. jadi, mnjadi. 
To become a Moslem, masok Islam, 
masok Mlayu. 

Become, v. t. (suit, match) padan. 

Becoming (-ing), adj. (appropri- 
ate) padan, patiit, kna, layak; (de- 
corous) snonoh. 

Bed (bed), s. (gen.) tnipat tidor; 
(of princes) peraduan;* (bed- 
stead) ranjaty, katil;* (made of 
wood) yta;* (raised platform for 
sleeping on) pntas;* (bridal bed) 
plamin,* ranjary kmantin (B.) ; 
(mattress) tilam; (of a river) 
paloty suryai;* (of gardens) 
petak; (foundation) alasan. To 
be in bed, tidor. Bed rock, batu 
hanipar,* dadur.* To go to bed, 
masok klanibu, peryi tidor* (speak- 
ing to a child) peryi bam.* 

Bed, v. t. (set in earth) tanani, 
bnam. 

Bedaub (be-dawb'), v. t. linnorkan; 
(slightly, as with the finger) pa- 
lit* chalit.* 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; iise, us, minus, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



BEDBUG 



45 



BEGGAR 



Bedbug (bed'biio), s. pijat-pijat, 

kutu- husoli, I'pindbri (N.I.), ha sat 

(B.) (Ch. hat-sat). 
Bedchamber (-cham-ber), s. hileh 

ticlor; (of prmces) hilek peradu- 

afi.'^ 
Bedclothes (-klo//tz), s. (sheet) 

diadar (Hind.) ; (covering) sli- 

niut, ghar.'" 
Bedding (-ding), s. (native) tikar- 

hantal; (mattress) til am; (for a 

liorse) hincha* 
Bedeck (be-dek'), v. t. hiasi* rias 

(B.). 
Bedew (-du'), v. t. 'mhunkan, ha- 

sahkaii sperti drgan 'mhun. To 

be bedewed, kna 'mhun, her'mhun. 
Bedim (-dim'), v. t. (make dim) 

kahuskan;* (obscure) klamkan.'^ 
Bedlam (bed'lam), s. (madhouse) 

rumah sakit gila; (place of up- 
roar) tmpat huru-liara. 
Bedouin (bed'oo-in), s. oiwg B- 

datri (Ar.). 
Bedpost (-post), s. tiatg katil,'^ 

iiaig ranjaiy. 
Bedraggle (be-drag'gl), v. t. glu- 

margkan. 
Bedridden (bed'rid-dn), adj. sakit 

fa'holeh haigun, sakit terhampar* 
Bedroom (-room), s. hiJek tidor; 

(of princes) hilek pemduan.^ 
Bedsore (-s5r), s. lechet'^ shah lama 

ferharirg [mlechet (B.)]. 
Bedstead (-sted), s. katil* ranjaty. 
Bee (be), s. (honey bee) Ihah; 

(smaller species) kliilut* kram* 

Ihah lalat (B.) ; (carpenter bee) 

kumharg. 
Beef (bef), s. dagirg Imhu. 
Beefsteak (bef'stak'), s. s-potoig 

dagirg Imhu, histek (E.). 
Beehive (be'hlv), s. rumah Ihali. 
Beehunter (-hunt-er), s. pawaig 

Ihah. 
Bee line (-Ini), s. jalan mmutus,"^ 

jalati mrintas,* jalan mrgat.* To 



make a bee line, mrgumharg (kum- 

harg). 
Beer (ber), §. hir (E.). 
Bees-nest (bez'nest), s. satwy Ihah, 

sialaigf' (abandoned) samharg.* 
Beeswax (-waks), s. lilin Ihah, li- 

lin samharg."^ 
Beet (bet), s. lohak hitam. 
Beetle (be'tl), s. kumhaig. 
Befall (be-fawF), v. t. datary atas, 

heriaku atas* kua. 
Befall, V. i. jadi, heriaku,"^ ter- 

doroiy,^' datary. 
Befitting (-fit'ting), adj. padan, 

patut, laijak. 
Befog (-fog'), V. t. kahuskaji.'^ 
Before (-for'), prep, (of place) di 

hadapan, dpan, di muka; (of 

time) s-hlum, dhulu deri-pada; 

(facing) tntary, hertntaryan drg- 
an. Before long, tiada hrapa 

lama, tiada herlanjut masa.* 
Before, adv. (of place) di hadapan, 

dpan, di niuka; (of time) dhulu; 

(earlier) Iheh dhulu, ter dhulu; 

(already) memary, sdia. As be- 
fore, sperfi sdiakala (Sk.), sperti 

s-lama. 
Before, conj. s-hlum, dhulu deri- 

nada. 
Beforehand (-hand), adv. ter- 

dhulu. 
Befoul (be-fowl'), v. t. chmarkan, 

najiskan, kotorkan. 
Befriend (-trend'), v. t. toloiy, 

hantu. 
Beg (beg), v. t. (ask) minta, pinta;* 

(make a petition) pohonkan.* To 

beg pardon, minta mahap (Ar. 

ma'df), minta am pun. To beg to 

be excused, minta diri.* 
Beg, V. i. (ask alms) minta sdkah, 

dadok,* kichak (Ch. khit chidh). 
Beget (be-gef), v. t. heranakkan. 
Beggar (beg'ger), s. oraiy yarg 

'mint a sdkah, oraty kichak (Ch.) ; 

(religious mendicant) fakir (Ar.), 

darwish (Ar.). 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire 
mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minjis, cure, injure ' ' 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



BEGGAR 



46 



BELIEVE 



Beggar, v. t. (make poor) papa- 
hut r (make iiiadeciuate, surpass) 
Jbehi. 

Beggarly (-li), adj. (poor) miskin, 
pajm;'^ (contemptible) liina, Ita* 

Begin (be-gin'), a'. i. t. mida'i; 
(ill weaving mats) laganj;* (in 
making baskets) iaja* 

Beginner (-er), s. orarg yary hharu 
Diulai, orarg hliaru hi ajar. 

Beginning (-ing), s. mida, per- 
mulaan, pargl-al, awal (Ar.) ; 
(origin) asal. From the very be- 
ginning, deri awal pertama-rya.* 

Begone (-gon'), int. ryafi,"^ 7yah' 
Jah/' ijichit* heramhvs, mrgam- 
hus (B.), pergi-lah. 

Begrime (-grim'), v. t. berslelveh- 
kan* 

Begrudge (-gruj'), v. t. (regret ex- 
penditure) sayarg. 

Beguile (-gH'), v. t. tipu, perdaya- 
I'arw^ smtkan. 

Behalf (-haf ), s. In behalf of, Ur- 
im, al'an/^ hagi pihal-.* 

Behave (-hav'), v. i. berlalcU; m- 
lal-ul^an diri, hawa dm. 

Behaviour (-yer), s. laku, hlahuan^ 
prargai, fe'el (Ar.), terghah-lahu, 
tlaiah."^ 

Behead (be-hed'), v. t. prggal* le- 
Jiir, panclioiy l^jxila, tndas'^ JcvaJa, 
potoiy Icpala, iampairf^ I'paJa, Icrat 
h-pala. 

Behest (-best'), s. liukum, psan; 
(of a king) titah.'^' 

Behind (-hind'), prep, di blakarg, 
di baleh'; (if motion is implied) 
Ic-blqlcarg , I'-balel-; as, he went be- 
hind the hill, dia pergi Jc-balc'c 
hidcit. Behind the door, di baleh 
jrintu. One behind another, ber- 
iiirg-irirg, berb\mtnt-bnntiit, ber- 
tnv da-ton da.* Beliind one's back, 
Had a s-tahn. 

Behind, adv. (of place) di blal-arg ; 
(towards the back) k-blakarg; (of 



time) blakarg, terkmdian. Left 

behind, ktirggalan. 
Behindhand (-hand), adv. (in 

time) terkmdian, terakhir (Ar.) ;, 

(tardv) lambat, lewat. 
Behold (-hold'), v. t. (look at) 

tergok, pandarg, kleli (P.) ; (see) 

lihat. 
Behold, int. tergok, tergok-lah. 
Beholden (-hold'n), adj. (bound 

in gratitude) yaig mnrima kaseh; 

(indebted) berliutaig kaseh. 
Beholder (-er), s. oraiy yarg m- 

lihat, pnenjok. 
Behove (-h5v'), v. t. patut, hndak,. 

liarus, wajib (Ar.). 
Being (be'ing), s. (existence) ^•'- 

adaan; (a living thing) kjadiun^ 

inakhlok (Ar.). 
Belabour (be-h"i'ber), v. t. (beat 

soundly) bantai, bdal, gasalc, hn^ 

tarn, tuhirg. 
Belated (-lat'ed), adj. lewat. 
Belay (-la'), v. t. (iSTaut.) tambat^ 

ikat. 
Belaying pin (-ing pin), s. 

(Xaut.) tol, tuli-tidi. 
Belch (belch), v. i. serdawa, sndawa 

(B.). To belch forth (emit), 

kluarkan, suiborkaih; (vomit) 

i^runtalikan. 
Beleaguer (be-le'ger), v. t. kpotyj, 

nilergkoryi. 
Belfry (bel'fri), s. batgun-bargun^ 

an loch erg, rvmah locherg. 
Belie (be-lV), v. t. dustakan (Sk.)^ 

hohorgkan. 
Belief (-lef), s. perchaya, imaii 

(Ar.) ; (creed, religion) agama. 

Jigama,* igama. 
Believe (-lev'), v. t. (regard as 

ti'ue) perchaya; (place confidence- 

in) liarap, yakinkan* (Ar. yaqln). 
Believe, v. i. (think, suppose) fikir,. 

saigka. To beUeve in (have re- 
ligions faith in), perchaya akan; 

(liave confidence in) yakinkan 

(Ar.). 



ate, ask, run, fiiifll, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire,. 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, ns, min?/s, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (av. ful) ; law. Low, oil; thin then. 



BELIEVER 



47 



BENEFACTION 



Believer (-er), s. (religious) orarjj 
hcriiiiaih (Ar.), omrg miCmin 
(Ar.). 

Belittle (-lit'tl), v. t. liinakan, hji- 
l-an,"^' l-chillnn, rndahhui, royan- 
I'an. 

Bell (bel). s. lochety, lonclierg* 
lintaf (cow-bell) kruntiiy* Icron- 
choty : (miniature bells) gii'uy- 



yii'uy.' 



i/ary 



Bellicose (berii-kos), adj, 

sid-a herprarg. 
Belligerent (bel-lij'er-ent), adj. 

j/aig herprarg. 
Bell metal (bermet-al), s. loyaig* 

gargsa* tnihaga prmggu* 
Bell-mouthed, adj. muhit terl-cliU' 

horq. 
Bellow (bel'lo), v. i. (of cattle) 

kuak"* m)guah'\f (of mankind) 

raorg, mraorg (B) : (of wind) 

dru, nindru (B.). 
Bellows (bel'loz), s. puputan* km- 

hman^'^ prghmhus/^ tiop-tiop apt 

(B.). 

Belly (-11), s. prot. 

Bellyache (-ak), s. sakit prot, sal-it 
mmulas, miilas, snak; see colic. 

Belly band (-hand), s. (of a horse) 
iali /jrot; (of children) harut; (of 
an elephant) tali rnut.^ 

Bellyful (-fool), s. To have one's 
bellyful, jmu, muak.^ 

Belong (be-long'), v. i. (be the pro- 
f3crtY of) jadi milek (Ar.), ani- 
piLujaf^ purya, in such phrases as, 
it belongs to me, aku-lah yarg am- 
purya dia, la-Jali milek-kii, itu 
mliya purya (B.) ; (be connected 
with) masok, jadi sidarg* jadi 
memher (B.), as, he belongs to 
that club, dia jadi sidarg perskutu- 
an ifn. 

Belongings (-ingz). s. Jierta hnda, 
hak (Ar.), milek (Ar.) ; as, these 
are my belongings, ini-lali hak 
sahya. 



Beloved (-luv'ed), s. kkaseh, chin- 
ia, ksayaiyan, huah liati. 

Below (-15'), prep, and adv. hawah, 
di hawah, terkhawah; (when mo- 
tion is implied) k-hawah : (down 
stream) shJah hilir. 

Belt (belt), s. (girdle) ikat pirg- 
garg; (with cla^p) tali pndirg ; (a 
long cloth) hrgkorg; (sword belt 
woin over the shoulder) sandaig.* 

Belting (belt'ing), s. (of machin- 
ery) tali psawat,* tali jntra. 

Beluchistan (be-l6o'chi-stan'), s. 
negri Balchi. 

Bemoan (be-mon'), v. t. (by wail- 
ing) ratapkan; (pity) kasehankan, 
ksiankan (B.) ; (lament) ssalkan. 

Bench (bench), s. (long seat) harg- 
ku; (trestle) kuda-kuda; (work- 
man's) rneja tukatg, meja hindu;* 
(judge's seat) kursi hichara: 
(court of justice) niajlis hichara, 
niahkawah (Ar. ). 

Bend (bend), v. t. (curve slightly) 
Intor,* hntorf' (sharply) hntok;"^ 
(bend down under pressure) Zn- 
diit* Idorg* To bend the knee, 
lipat lilt lit. To bend down (bow 
the head), tundokkan. 

Bend, v. i. (be crooked or curving as 
a river) Jergkoig; (as trees with 
wind) layah.'^ To bend down 
(the body), tundok: (boughs of a 
tree) Impai,* llai;* (with fruit) 
liiyot* To bend the body (side- 
ways) leiygok: (in any direction) 
Inyah.^ 

Bend. s. (in a stick, etc.) klok* 
kalok* hntok,'' hergkok (B.) ; (in 
a road or river) sJekoh/^' leigkok,* 
hliku* heigkok (B.) ; (in a kris) 
lok.* 

Beneath (be-neth'). prep, and adv. 
di hawah; (unworthy of) tiada 
layak, tiada pad an. 

Benediction (ben'e-dik'slum), s. 
hcrknt. 

Benefaction (-fak'shwn), s. (bene- 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hiirrj"; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin f/ien. 



BENEFACTOR 



48 



BESMIRCH 



fit conferred) I'hajikan, JchaiJcan 
(B.) ; (gift) I'lunia (Sk.), derma 
(Sk.). 

Benefactor (-ter), s. yarrj mmbuat 
khajihun, oranj demtawan (Sk.). 

Benefice (-fis), s. wakaf (Ar.). 

Beneficence (be-nefi-sens), s. 
(kindness) hniurahan; (good 
deeds) kbajil-an, khaikan (B.). 

Beneficent (-sent), adj. (kind) 
murah liati: (producing good) 
yarg uniihuat kbajikan. 

Beneficial (ben'e-fisli'ai), adj. her- 
f/iwa, herfaidah. 

Benefit (-fit), s. (favour, act of 
kindness) kurnia (Sk.), kbajikan; 
(advantage, profit) fa'idali, un- 
torg. 

Benefit, v. t. (be beneficial to) hri 
fa'idali, bri nntoiy. 

Benefit, v. i, (gain advantage) ft^r- 
oleJi tintoiy/'' dapat untorg, ber- 
untorg, berfa'idali. 

Benevolence (be-nev'o-lens), s. 
(good will) prgasehan, kmurahan; 
(act of kindness) kbajikan, kbaik- 
an (B.). 

Benevolent (-lent), adj. berprg- 
asehan, murah liati. 

Bengal (beng-gal'), s. negri Brg- 
gala. 

Bengalee (-i), s. orarg Biggali. 

Benighted (be-nlt'ed), adj. (over- 
taken by darkness) kmalaman, 
kgla])an, k^ilam an.^ 

Benign (-nln'), adj. Imbot liati, 
murah hati; (of diseases) rergan. 

Benignant (-nig'nant), adj. murah 
hati. 

Bent (bent), adj. (of the body 
backwards) kdek,* Idiiy;* (down- 
wards) borgkok : (sideways) berg- 
kok; (concave) hitek : (warped) 
Idirg f (up and down) borgkok- 
kdek;* (zigzag) biarg-bivt,* berg- 
karg-bergkok, bergkak-beigkokCB.) , 
kelaig-kelok;* (crooked) erut,* 
hergut. 



Bent, s. (tendency of the mind) 
rhndroig hati, chondrorg hati (B.). 

Benumbed (be-numd'), adj. 
(slightly) t<bar, kbas; (more) 

Benzine (ben-zen'), s. mhyak ben^ 

zin. 
Benzoin (-zoin'), s. (styrax ben- 
zoin) kiiumjaii, miijan (X.I.). 
Bequeath (be-kweth'), v. t. (by 

will) irasiatkan (Ar.) ; (leave to 

posterity) tiiggalkan. 
Bequest (-kwesf), s. luasiat (Ar.). 
Bereave (-revl), v. t. (deprive of) 

hilargkan, putuskan ; (by death, of 

children, etc.) pupnskan* 
Bereft (reft'), see bereave. 
Beri-beri (ber'i-ber-i), s. pryakit 

siiibap kaki, basal, '^'^ biri-biri. 
Berry (ber'ri), s. buali kchil, sperti 

km-untirg, mata kuchirg dan s- 

bagai-rya. 
Berth (berth), s. (appointed place) 

tnipat; (sleeping place) tmpat 

tidor, pntas;* (employment) pker- 

ja'an. 
Beseech (be-sech'), v. t. polion^ 

kan,* minta sargat, minta baryak^ 

banjak. 
Beset (-set'), v. t. (press in upon) 

impit, empet (B.) ; (surround)- 

lergkorg,* krumuni; (as enemies) 

kporg. 
Beside (-sTd'), prep, (at the side 

of) di sisi,* di fjn; (near) dkat;- 

(over and above) lain deri-pada^ 

To be beside one's self with anger^ 

lupakan diri. 
Beside, Besides (be-s!dz'), adv. 

(more than that) lain lagi, lagi 

pula: (moreover) tambahan pida,. 

lagi pun. 
Besiege (-sej'), v. t. kporg. 
Besmear (-smer'), v. t. lumorkan, 

palit;'^ (slightly) chalit.* 
Besmirch (-smerch'), v. t. chmar^ 

kan; (as reputation) busokkan 

nama. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire,. 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, niinj^s, cure, injure, 

hurry; f56<l, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



BESOT 



49 



BEVEL 



f 



Besot (-sot'), V. t. birgorgkan. 

Bespatter (-spat'ter), v. t. percheh 
drgan chmar; (intentionally) rn- 
jis chgan eh mar. 

Bespeak (-spek') v. t. (enorage be- 
forehand) tmpah, psan terdhulu; 
(indicate) njatakan. 

Besprinkle (-spring'kl), v. t. per- 
chelc, rnjis. 

Best (best), adj. and adv. ya^g haik 
skali, terlheh bail:, terlbeh utama 
(Sk.), terutama (Sk.). The best 
possible, s-baiJc^bail'-n/a. To do 
one's best to — , choba s-brapa 
boleli. 

Bestial (bes'chal), adj. cliara bina- 
iarg. 

Bestir (be-ster'), v. i. grakhan. To 
bestir one's self, bergolot-golot/^ 
bergJoUglot, bergopoli-gopoli. 

Bestman (best-man'), s. prgapit 
mmplai,^ pnjawat mmplai* pa- 
wai/"' pua-kia" (B.) (Ch. phod"- 
kid"). 

Bestow (be-str/), v. t. (store) sim- 
pan, taroh; (give) bri, kurniakan 
(Sk.), anugrahkan (Sk.), kasi 

(B.). 

Bestride (-strld'), v. t. kargkarg, 
cJiIapak^' clilapokf (step over) 
laigkahkan. 

Bet (bet), v. i. bertaroJi. 

Bet, s. ptarohan. 

Betake (-tak'), v. t. To betake one's 
self (resort to), pakai, gunakan; 
(go) pergi. 

Betel (be'tl), s. pokok sireh. 

Betel box (boks), s. tepak,* tmpaf 
sireh, bkas pinarg ;* (for princes 
and weddings) piian :* (hexa- 
gonal) sjnbi'ap:* (pouch of 7»?r/- 
kuarg) bujam,* epok;^ (of cloth, 
for a bridegroom) burgkusan. 
See also betel tray. 

Betel nut (nut), s. (the fruit of the 
areca palm) bnali pinarg. 

Betel pepper (pep'per), s. (piper 
betle) sireh. 



Betel tray (tra); 



(of metal) 



joronjf (witli a foot) chranaf 
(boat shaped) chrana bidok.* 

Bethink (be-thingk'), v. t. Bethink 
one's self, knarg, terknarg. 

Betide (-tid'), v. t. (happen to) 
berJaku alas. 

Betide, v. i. berlaku, jadi. 

Betimes (-timz'), adj. (early) siaig^ 
hari; (in good time) aical icaktu 
(Ar.), siarg-siaig. 

Betoken (-to'kn), v. t. (show by 
signs) tandakan; (indicate) ryata-- 
kan. 

Betray (-tra'), v. t. (give up by 
'treachery) srahkan drgan khianat 
(Ar.) ; (deceive) tipu, perdai/a- 
kan."^ To betray one's ignorance, 
njatakan kbodokan. To betray a 
secret, bukakan rahsia. 

Betrayal (-al), s. hal miyrahkan,. 
haJ ninipu, etc., as above. 

Betroth [-ivbth'), v. t. tunarg. 

Betrothal (-al), s. pertunargan. 

Betrothed {-ivbthA), adj. ber^ 
iiinarg. 

Betrothed, s. tunargan. 

Better (bet'ter), adj. Ibeli balk,, 
lagi baik; (in health) baik, sehat,. 
ryaman, smboh,* btali.'^ Better 
than, baik deri-pada, Ibeli boih 
deri-^pada. It were better, had 
better, rmak, arggor,"^ Ibeh baik 
(B.) ; as, rnmk mati deri-pada hi- 
dop, it were better to die than live. 
To think better of (person), in- 
dahkan Ibeh, tetyok Ibeh ada mata 
(B.) ; (an opinion) aleh bichara*' 
obali fikiran. To be better off,. 
berfaidah,"^ Ibeh snarg (B.). 

Better, v. t. (make better) baikki; 
(surpass) Ibehi. 

Between (be-twcn'), prep, antara, 
di trgah. Between. '. . .and. . . . ^ 
antara. . . .drgan 

Bevel (bev'el), s. senderg serorg. 

Bevel, V. t. serorgkan senderg. 



ate, ask, am, fincrl, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, s5re. sort, sorry; iise, us, mim/s. cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin t7ten. 



BEVEL GEAR 



50 



BILE 



Bevel gear (ger), s. gigi jnira 

serorg.'^ 
Beverage (bev'er-ej), s. niinuidan. 
Bevy (bev'i), s. (ot* jjersons) luiii' 

polan; (of birds) luwan.'^ 
Bewail (be-wal'), v. t. rataplan, 

lanjisi* mnafgkisl'an, triaM-an 

(P.). 

Beware (-war'), v. i. uyat, jaga. 
To beware of, jaga din deri-pada. 

Bewilder (-wil'der), v. t. hugorg- 
kan, Idirnkan, Merukan (B.), s- 
mll'an 'ak-al. 

Bewildered (-derd), adj. hiigoir), 
h-lh'u. kJeru (B.). 

Bewitch (-widi'), v. t. I'uakan ohat- 
guna, hikniaikan (Ar.), knakan 
sili'u* (Ar. .s'iiliV). 

Bewitched (-wieht'), adj. terkna 
obat-guna, terkna siliir (Ar.). 

Bewitching (-witch'inf^), adj. yaiy 
mnjukakan, yatg mnihrahikan.'^ 

Beyond (-yond'), prep, (on the 
further side) shlaJi, di halek: (of 
roads or Avater) shrarg; (in time) 
lewat deri-pada; (exceedinor) Ibeh 
deri-pada, terlauipau deri-fmda.^ 
To 2:0 beyond, lalui,'^ Ihehi* lam- 
paui,'^ hiiat terlampon pulak (B.). 

Bezoar (-zor'), s. gmala* guliga, 
mstika (Jav.), hnntat. 

Bhang (bang), s. (Cannabis indica) 
gauja. 

Bias (bi'as), s. (leaning of the 
mind) chndroty liati,'^ chondroig 
hati (B.) ; (slant) serorg. 

Bias. V. t. chndron/kan,'^ chondroig- 
kan (B.). 

Biassed (-ast), adj. hrat sblali. 

Bib (bib), s. kain lapek dada pada 
wakta makan. 

Bible (bl'bl), s. Kitab, Kitab Allah. 
The Mohammedans know only 
three divisions of the Bible, name- 
ly, the Law {Taunt), the Psalms 
(Zabur), and the Gospel (Infil). 

Biblical (bib'li-kal), adj. deri-hal 
Kitab Allah, Kitab Allah (a). 



Bibliography (-og'ra-fi), s. daftar 
ki tab-kit ab dan siirat-surat.'^ 

Biceps (bi'seps), s. buah Irgan, 
kurldiy-kucliirgj^ 

Bicker (bik'er), v. i. bertigkar. 

Bickering (-ing), s. pertiykaran. 

Bicycle (bl'si-kl), s. kreta lerery, 
kreta argin,^ baisikal (E.), kreta 
roda (B.). 

Bid (bid), v. t. (otl'er a price) ta- 
irar: (order) suroh; (invite) 
parggil, j input, cliia" (B.) (Ch. 
chhid'^). In such phrases as, to 
bid defiance, to bid one welcome, 
to bid farewell, bid can be repre- 
sented by bri. To bid fair (seem 
likely), rupa-nja mau, boleh di- 
harap. 

Bid, s. pnaivaran. 

Bide (bid), v. i. tirggal. 

Bide, V. t. (wait for) nantikan; 
(endure) tahan, drita (Sk.). 

Biennial (bi-en'ni-al), adj. yarg 
dua tahun skali, tiap-tiap dua 
tahun. 

Bier (ber), s. nso?gan,* jnazah 
(Ar.). 

Bifurcated (bi-fer'kat-ed), adj. 
berrhabarg. 

Big (big), adj. bsar, gdarg (Smn.), 
ago)g (Jav.). 

Bigamy (big'a-mi), s. baijoh* To 
conmut bigamy (of a woman), 
kmbarkan ■ Jaki, duakan laki, kah- 
icin dua laki (B.). To be in a 
state of bigamy (of a woman), 
bennadu. 

Bight (bit), s. (bay) tlok; (bend 
of knee or elbows) plipatan; (of 
rope, Xaut.) yobah. 

Bigot (big'wt), s. oraiy buta hati, 
oraig dgil deri-hal agama. 

Bigoted (-ed), adj. dgil deri-hal 
agama. 

Bigotry (-ri), s. hati dgil deri-hal 
agama. 

Bile (bll). s. (the secretion) hm- 
pdu; (anger) marah. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, ear, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, fr-rry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minj/s, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool fawful) ; law, how, oil; thin tJien. 



BILGE 



51 



BIRTH 



Bilge (bilj), s. (Xaiit) (flat part 
of a ship's bottom) prot kapal; 
(place for bailing) timha-ruarg. 
Bilge water (Naut.), ayer nianj. 

Bilingual (bl-ling'gwalj, adj. yaiy 
herb ham dim. 

Bilious (biry//s), adj. sahit lim- 
par'^ (passionate) pmarah; (ill- 
tempered) prrgus* prampus* 
hrgis (B.). 

Bilk (bilk) J v. t. tipu, perdayakan.'^' 
ponteig. 

Bill (bil), s. (of birds) parolif 
(billhook) paraig jargok;'^ (state- 
ment of account) surat hutarg, hit 
(E.), rekning (D.) ; (a draft of 
a law) nuskhah undarg-iindarg 
(Ar.) ; (placard) pikat, paR-at 
(B.). Bill of fare, daftar naum- 
nama mal'anan* 

Billet (bil'let), s. (of wood) s-krac 
kayn, baJian,^ tual:'^ (a note, short 
letter) surat retgl-as ;* (berth, 
position) pl'erjaan. 

Billet, V. t. tumpargl'an soJdado di 
rumali-rumah orarg. 

Billhook (-hook), s. pararg jargoh* 
paraig cliandoiq.^ 

Billiards (-yerdz), s. Uliad (E.), 
meja hoi a (Port.). 

Billion (-ytin), s. s-juta jutaj^' satu 
wilian milian (B.) ; (U. S.) s- 
rihu jiifa* s-rihu milian (B.). 

Billow (-15), s. omhak, glomharg, 
aJun* 

Billowy (-i), adj. herglomhaig, her- 
oinhaJ,-, heralun.* 

Billsticker (-stik-er), s. orarg yanj 
mnarnpal pllat [paR'at (B.)]. 

Bimonthly (bi-munth'li), ?i^]. yanj 
diia hulan s-l-ali. 

Bin (bin), s. (enclosed space) I'o- 
tah; (for rice) IcpoTc, Jcmhorg,"^ 
hhthor* Dust bin, torg sampaJi. 

Bind (bind), v. t. (tie, make fast) 
il-at: (tie up, tether) tamhat; (tie 
hands and feet or four legs) ra- 
pus,^ rempoigf-' (hands behind 



back) kilas; (tie in bundles) 
herkasl'an* ikat hergmal-gmal ;* 
(bandage) hahd, hhat; (as the 
edge of a mat or garment) om- 
pok/^ lapis: (as the spurs are 
bound on a fighting cock) hularg:*- 
(books) jelet* Utah (Ar. jilid), 
jahit huku (B.) ; (compel) paksa. 

Binder (bind'er), (that which 
binds) pigikat; (bandage) harut, 
kain hhat; (after childbirth) harut 
pavjaig: (book binder) tnkarg 
je/ef^ (Ar. jilid), tukarq jahit 
huku (B). 

Binding (-ing), s. (on edge of 
cloth) ompok;* (of a book) jelet'^ 
(Ar. jilid). 

Binnacle (bin'na-kl), s. (Naut.) 
rumah pdoman, rumah kompas 
(Eur.). 

Binocular (bi-nok'u-ler), adj. her- 
niata-dua. Binocular glasses, tro- 
ponj dua mata. 

Biography (-og'ra-fi), s. hikayaf^ 
kali ido pan orarg [chrita (B.)']. 

Biology (-ol'o-ji), s. Hhnu haiiaf 
(Ar.). 

Biped (bi'ped), adj. herkaki-dm. 

Birch (berch), s. nama pohon kayu. 

Bird (herd), s. hurorg, urggas."^ 
Ladybird, anal' cliina.'^ 

Birdcage (-bij), s. sargkar^ sig- 
karan (B.). 

Birdcatcher (-kach-^r), s. pmikat 
huronj. 

Birdlime (-iTm), s. gtah hurorg. 

Bird of paradise (uv par'a-dis), s. 
huronj chndrawaseh* hurorg indror- 
waseli (B.). 

Bird's nest (berdz'nest), s. saraig 
huroig. 

Birth (berth), s. (being born) jadi, 
kjadian, lahir (Ar. tldhir) ; (lin- 
eage, descent) asah kt unman; 
(origin) asal. Of high birth, 
hargsawan * berhargsa, orarg hsar^ 
hsar (B.). Of low birth, bargsa 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old. not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use. ns, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



BIRTHDAY 



52 



BLADDER 



rndah. A king by birth, raja her- 

axal. 
Birthday (berth'clii), s. liari jadi, 

Jiari Wiir'^ (Ar. tldliir), hari di- 

peranaJi'kan. 
Birthmark (-mark), s. tanda sama 

jadi, tanda deri inemanj* tanda 

bcranak (B.). 
Birthplace (-plas), s. tnipat tiun- 

jjah daraJi, ianali aijer, tmpat lahir 

(Ar.), tnipat chut-si (B.) (Ch. 

rJihut-sl). 
Birthright (-rit), s. (of primo- 
geniture) liak ksulotr/an. 
Biscuit (bis'kit), s. bisl-iit, mslcot 

(N.L). 

Bisect (bl-sekf), v. t. kvat dim. 

Bishop (bisli'op), s. bishop (X.) ; 
(in chess) (jajah. 

Bison (bi'son), s. sladatg Ameril^a. 

Bit (bit), s. (for horses) Iwy, Jc- 
harg,^' lagatn (Hind.) ; (piece) s- 
h'piiy, s-krat, s-chnipiry* s-chbis* 
s-tandi}y* s-joreiy;^ (a little) s- 
dilit. 

Bitch (bich), s. anjiry btina. 

Bite (bit), V. t. yiyit, uiyyis; (as 
birds and snakes) patoh, pagut, 
chatok; (as savage animals) to- 
A-a^-;* (as cattle) rayut;* (as in- 
sects or fish) Mit,'^' Mip* ktep 
(B.) ; (take hold, as an anchor) 
nialun; (take bait, as a fish) ma- 
I'an ka'il. To bite the lips, Idap 
bibir. 

Bite, s. (place bitten off) s-uryyis; 
(mark of the teeth) bl-am. Mos- 
quito bite, bkas Mip lyaniol', bin- 
tit* biniat. 

Biting (l)it'ing), adj. (sliarp, sar- 
castic) tajam. 

Bitter (bit'ter), adj. (of taste) pa- 
liit; (of pain) bim; (severe) kras, 
biyis; (of weeping) sdeh. 

Bitterly (-li), adv. (of weeping) 
tersdeli -sdeh, tersdan-sdan. * 

Bittern (-tern), s. purhory. 

Bitts (bits), s. (Xaut.) mut 



Bitumen (bi-tii'men), s. bolory ta- 

Bivalve (bl'villv), adj. isi-kararg 
yaiy bertaiykup, sperti kima,* ku- 
pary, lokan, tirani, kjxih, krarg, 
dan s-bagai-nja. 

Bivouac (biv'oo-ak), v. i. bernialani 
di tan ah. 

Blab (blab), v. i. bebel,* pchahkan 
rah si a. 

Blab, s. mulut bochor, orarg bebeU 
an* chu/mk psok* mulut clilu- 
par* 

Black (blak), adj. hitam, lyam; 
(gloomy, as the sky) rdop. Pitch 
blacky liitani lyam. Black under 
the eyes, berylatyyary hitam di 
niata.* A black eye, mata bakup.* 
Black and blue (of bruises), Ibani. 
The black substance used for stain- 
ing teeth, yrary,* baja.* The 
l)lack art, 'iJmu siliir (Ar.). 

Blackball (blak'bawl), v. t. buaiy 
undi tatrima.* 

Blackboard (-bord), s. papan hi- 
tam, papaii tulis. 

Blacken (blak'n), v. t. hitamkan; 
(the teeth) yraiy,* berbaja:* (the 
eyes) bevchlak; (the eyebrows) 
pantis.* 

Black eye (T), s. mata bakup.* 

Blackguard (blag'gard), s. (scoun- 
drel) oraiy kji,* orary busok, pn- 
jara (B.), orafy lucliah, orarg 
hu-lie; (vagabond) baigsat. 

Blacking (blak'ing), s. blargkiii 
(E.), blekking (B.). 

Black lead (-led), s. tras pensil.* 

Blackleg (-leg), s. pryelat. 

Blackmail (-mal), v. t. tiintut watg 
dryan paksa atau yertak, minta 
upah nnyimpan rahsia. 

Blacksmith (-smith), s. tukaiy bsi. 

Bladder (blad'der), s. (taken out 
and inflated with air) ylmbonjan; 
(urinary bladder) impat knchirg; 
(blister) tpoh, tmhotok.* 'Gall 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; iise, us, minjfs, cure, injure, 

hiirry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



BLADE 



63 



BLESSED 



bladder, pundi-ptindi Jinipdu* 
fin pat {sL hmpdu (B.). 

Blade (blad), s. (of grass) s-lai, s- 
hlai;*' (of a knife) niaia; (of an 
oar) daiin dai/oiy; (of a paddle) 
daun piyaijoli; (of an anchor) 
kukii sauli; (of a ploughshare) 
nai/am* Shonlder blade, tularg 
hlil-at,'^ tularg hahii. Blade of a 
propeller, daun I' i pas-lea pal. 

Blain (blan), s. hisul. 

Blame (blam), v. i. chla, salahkan, 
(hacliat, tarn pel'.* 

Blame, s. (censure) cMa, hclilaan; 
(fault) salali, l-mlalian, dosa. 

Blameless (blam'les), adj. tiada 
herclila, tiada hevsalali, suclii deri- 
pada salali . 

Blameworthy (-wer-///i), adj. ler- 
chla, salali. 

Blanch (blanch), v. t. putelihan, 

Blanch, v. i. ninjadi pucliat. 

Bland (bland), adj. Imali-lmhot, 
man is lahu. 

Blandishment (blan'dish-ment), s. 
pujok, cliumhu-chumhuan,* piijol'- 
rai/u.* 

Blank (blangk), adj. (empty) ko- 
sorg, ham pa;* (without writing) 
tiada hersurat; (without expres- 
sion, of the face) muka hatii. 
Blank cartridge, ptruni herisi obat 
saliaja, tiada berpluru. 

Blank, s. tmpat kosorg, tmpat la- 
■ parg. 

Blanket (blang'ket), s. (the fa- 
bric) kmhli* kamli; (bed cover- 
ing) slimut, ghar* ghar panas* 
slimut kamli. A wet blanket, ba- 
raig atau orarg yaig mnaivarkan 
liaii. 

Blarney (blar'ni), s. pujok. 

Blaspheme (blas-fem'), v. i. t. hu- 
jat* 

Blasphemous (blas'fe-m«s), adj. 
ijaig mrgliujat.* 

Blasphemy (-mi), s. liujat.* 



Blast (blast), s. (of air) limhiis; 
(from bellows) limbusan, puput- 

an;* (of steam) hnihusan wap; 
(sound) hnnji trompet; (blight) 

balak (Ar. bald') ; (explosion) 

I to pan. 
Blast, V. t. (cause to wither) layu- 

kan; (ruin) binasakan. To blast 

rocks, tembak bat a, bantunkan 

batu.* 
Blasting (-ing), s. kltopan, klayu- 

an, kbinasa'an, see above. 
Blatant (bla-tant), adj. yarg mn- 

jrit, ryamg. 
Blaze (blaz), s. njala. 
Blaze, V. i. berryala. 
Blaze, V. t. (mark trees) ranchali;* 

(make public) masoliorkan (Ar. 

maslihur), nialumkan (Ar.). 
Blazing (blaz'ing), adj. bernjala. 
Blazon (bla'zn), v. t. (make public) 

masoliorkan (Ar. masliliur) ; (em- 
hellish) liiasi* riaskan (B.). 
Bleach (blech), v. t. putehkan. 
Bleak (blek), adj. (cold) sjok, 

diigin;* (exposed) yarg kna argin 

sjok. 
Blear (bier), adj. Blear-eyed, mata 

bills, mata kabiir. 
Blear, v. t. kaburkan. 
Bleared (blerd), adj. kabur. 
Bleat (blet), v. i. 'mhek, bek. 
Bleed (bled), v. i. berdarali, kluar 

darali. 
Bleed, v. t. (by cupping) bkam* 

buarg daiali. 
Blemish (blem'ish), s. (defect) 

cliacliat, clidra (Sk.) ; (in 

character) kchla'an, cliacliat. 
Blend (blend), v. t. cliampur. 
Bless (hies), v. t. (invoke a blessing 

on) berkati; (make happy) blia- 

giakan (Sk.) ; (pronounce holy) 

kuduskan (Ar.) ; (praise, glorify) 

puji, bsarkan. 
Blessed (blesVd). adj. (worthy of 

adoration) terpuji; (happ.v, highly 

favoured) bliagia (Sk.). ' 



ate, ask, am, final, care, ear, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice it fire 
mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minus, cure, injure ' ' 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then ' 



BLESSEDNESS 



54 



BLOODY 



Blessedness (-nes), s. hhac/ia 
(8k.). 

Blessing (bles'ino:), s. (divine fa- 
vour, benediction) berkat; (means 
of happiness) hliagia (Sk.). 

Blight (blTt), s. (of insects) hiah;* 
(mildew) lapol', mlapok (B.), 
I'ulat* chndawan; (destruction) 
l-layuan, kbinasaan. 

Blight, V. t. laijukan, rosakkan. 

Blind (blind), adj. buta. Blind of 
one eye, buta s-blah. Blind alley, 
lororg s-krat, jalan buntu. Blind 
drunk, maboh biiiya slaseli.'^ Blind 
fool, clieme* (Ch. chhi"-mi). 

Blind, V. t. bidakan. 

Blind, s. (screen of bamboo or rat- 
tan) bidai; (of a palanquin) kerki 
(Tam.). Venetian blinds, tirgkap 
Upas, rap-rap (B.), tiiykap ram* 
(I), raam - window) . 

Blindfold (blind'fold), adj. berikap 
mata, bertkop mala;* (reckless) 
buta-tuli, babi buta* 

Blindly (-li), adj. To act blindly 
or recklessly, buat buta-tuli, mm- 
babi-buta* 

Blindman's buff (-manz buf), s. 
main CUina-buta,* tutop ibu,* 
main les,* main tutop mata (B.). 

Blink (blingk), v. i. klip mata, 
kijip fnata,* kjap mata* Blink- 
ing, terklip-klip. 

Blinker (-er), s. pnutop mata kiida. 

Bliss (blis), s. (blessedness) bhagia 
(Sk.) ; (joy) suka-chita (Sk.), 
suka-hati. 

Blister (blis'ter), s. (small, as a 
mosquito bite) bintat, bintil, bintel 
(B.) ; (larger) Ipoh, glmborg. 

Blister, v. i. IcheJi,* Icliop* mltop, 
Ipoli, (jhnborg; (by burning) 
Ichor,* Ichop,* Hop, Ipoh, bertm- 
bolok.* 

Blithe (hMth), adj. suka-hati, ber- 
suka-fMta (Sk.). 

Blizzard (bliz'zerd), s. argin ribot 
yarg amat sjok. 



Bloated (blotVd), adj. bigkak, sm- 
bap; (of the stomach) bunchit^ 
kmboig; (with pride) bonfkak* 

Block (blok), s. (of wood, sawn off) 
reja; (hewn) bahan* torgkoh* 
borgkali,* tualj* (for chopping 
on) J an das;* (mold for a fez) 
kalbot (Ay) ; (of tin) jorgkorg;* 
(pulley) takal (E.), kapi;* (ob- 
struction) skatan. Double block 
(Xaut.), takal dua mata. 

Block, V. t. (obstruct) srgkarg, skat; 
(stop up) timbus, kambus;* (of 
holes) sumbat. 

Blockade (blok-ad'), v. t. (of a 
port) kporg; (obstruct) skat. 

Blockhead (blok'hed), s. oraiy 
bodoli, orarg tolu, orarg drgu,* 
orarg torgorg.* 

Blockhouse (-hows), s. (Malay 
stockade) kubu. 

Block-tin (tin'), s. timah jorgkorg.* 

Blonde (blond), s. (of hair) perarg. 

Blood (blud), s. darali. Flesh and 
blood (relations), dagitrj darali. 
Blue blood, batgsa baik, darak 
puteh. His blood boiled, darah- 
lya mrgirap.* 

Bloodless (blud'les), adj. kuraiy 
darali. 

Bloodletting (-let-ting), s. buaig 
darali, bkain.* 

Blood money (mun'i), s. tbusan 
njawa, diat (Ar.). 

Bloodrelation ( -re-la 'sl^m), s. du- 
girg-darali, sanak-saiidara.* 

Bloodshed (-shed), s, (slaughter) 
pmbnnolian. 

Bloodshot (-shot), adj. Bloodshot 
eyes, mata merali, mata biji saga. 

Bloodthirsty (-therst-i), adj. ya>g 
suka mmbunoli, yarg lindak m- 
numpalikan da rah. 

Blood vessel (-ves-sd), s. urof 
da rah. 

Bloody (-i), adj. berdarah, her- 
lumor darah. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, 
mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 
hurry; f55d, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



fire. 



BLOOM 



55 



BLUSTER 



Bloom (bl5om), s. biitga; (on fruits) 
lapun buah* I'poJt huali* 

Blooming (-ing), adj. (flowering) 
berbufya; (healthy) bersehat. 

-Blossom (blos'swm), s. burga; 
(bud) Mdop, kuntnm; (of palm 
trees) mayarg; (of bananas) jan- 
iorg. In blossom, berburga, ber- 
}naijarg, berjantorg. 

Blossom, V. i. berburga: (of palm 
trees) bermai/atg; (of bananas) 
berjantorg. 

Blot (blot), V. t. (stain) choreiy, 
(honteig, slel'ehkanf (with blot- 
ting paper) lapkan, sapkan* tl-ap- 
JiWi. To blot out, liapu-^,'^ bunoli. 

Blot, s. iitek, titik (B.), clionteig. 
slel-eh.^ 

Blotch (bloch), s. clioreig: (on the 
skin, small) bintel' ; (white) pa- 
nan burga; (black) panau bsi; 
(white, on hands and feet) somJc. 

Blotter (blot'ter), s. pjglap surat. 

Blotting paper (-ting pa'per), s. 
kertas kmbanj. kerfas lap, kertas 
pdap* kertas tkap, kertas pntap* 
kertas sap.* 

Blouse (blowz), s. baju yarg di-pa- 
kai oleh prempuan oraty puteh 

Blow (bio), s. (with a stick) sbat, 
fxilu; (with the flat of the hand) 
trnpelerg, tarn par, spak; (with the 
side of the fist) parap, gochoh;*- 
(with the knuckles) tumbok, tin- 
ju* 

Blow, T. i. t. tiop; (with the mouth) 
hmbus; (wind instruments) tiop; 
(as w^hales) patgus;* (of bellows) 
pupiit* To blow awav (as the 
wind), layargkan, terbargkan. To 
blow out (a light), padani, tiop. 
Blown out of one's course 
(Xaut.), bias, rem pat. To blow^ 
up (swell), kniboig, glmbory; (ex- 
plode) Itop. To blow out (liquid 
from the mouth), smbur. To 
blow the nose, buarg iigus; (the 
sound) 'sarg,* ksatgj^ sih:* (with 



the lingers) Ic/rit irgus.* To blow 
over (as a storm), bias.* Eain 
blown in, tnipias. 
Blowpipe (blo'pip), s. (blow gan) 
suiiLpitan; (to intensify heat) 

Blubber (blub'ber), s. hnak pa us, 

niinjak ikan paus. 
Bludgeon (bluj'wn), s. blantan* 
Blue (bloo), adj. birii. Dark blue, 

biru tua. Light blue, biru muda. 

Sky blue, biru largit. Blue eyes, 

niata sabun, mata pasak,* mata 

yu.* Black and blue, biru Ibam. 

Blue blood, bargsa baik, darah 

puteh. 
Blue, s. (the pigment, indigo) nila, 

blau (D.) (X.L) 
Bluebottle (blo5'bot-tl), s. Mat 

hijau, laiyau hijau. 
Bluestone (-ston), s. trusi.* 
Bluff (bluf), adj. (steep) clnirani; 

(rough in manner) kurary bhasa, 

kasar. 
Bluff, s. (steep bank) tbiiy tirggi; 

( 1 ) raggadocio ) ge rtak, ug ut.* 
Bluff. V. t. gertak, ugut.* 
Blunder (blun'der), s. silap. 
Blunderbuss (-bus), s. pmuras.* 
Blunt (blunt), adj. tumpol, kurarg 

taiani, majal;* (unceremonious) 

kurarg bhasa. 
Blunt, V. t. tumpolkan. 
Blur (bier), v. t. (soil) kumalkan;* 

(of vision) kabvskan,* kabnrkan. 
Blurred (blerd), adj. (of vision) 

klam, kabur, kabus;* (of writing, 

by soiling) kumal;* (of colours, 

by wetting) turun. 
Blurt out (blert owt), v. t. katakan 

drgan bergolot-golot.* 
Blush (blush), s. bra muka,* ch- 

pua,* muka berobah (B.). 
Blush, V. i. berobah werna muka. 
Bluster (blus'ter), v. i. (of wind) 

bertiop knchaig; (of persons) 

rargah.* 
Bluster, s. rafgah.* 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minus, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin t^en. 



BOA CONSTRICTOR 



56 



BOIL 



Boa constrictor (bo'a kon-strik'- 
ter), ^. '</«/' ^(iii'd di Amerika. 

Boar (bor), s. habi jantan. Wild 
boar, hahi hutan. 

Board (bord), s. (timber) papan; 
(food) makanan; (council) ma- 
jlis, jmadh (Ar.). On board ship, 
di I'apal, naik kapal. Chess board, 
papan chatur* To go b}^ the 
board, hinasa. 

Board, V. t. (feed) hi makan; (a 
shi])) naik kapal. 

Board, v. i. (take meals) makan 
du/an hayeran. 

Boarder (bdrd'er), s. oiwy yary ?»- 
ninnijaiy, orarg yary mmhayer ma- 
kan. 

Boarding (-inor), §, (with planks) 
]ial mmiikol papan; (the planks) 
papan- dindirg, papan lantai; 
(feeding) lial mmhri makan. 
Boarding house, rumah mnum- 
parg. Boarding school, skolah m- 
numparg. 

Boast (host), V. i. mgahkan diri* 
hsarkan din, bermgah* chakap 
bsar, chakap mlamhorg, tvnjok 
patras/^ tunjok rarggi, mnjomhorg. 

Boasting (bost'ing), s. kmgahan;* 
(empty boasting) chakap argin, 
chakap raborg,^ chakap mlamborg. 

Boat (bot), s. prahu, sampan; (a 
large Malay sampan) gebeiy;* (at 
Malacca) jwahti nadir; (fishing 
boat) bidok;^ (river boat) ktiap;* 
(European, sailing boat) skochi 
(D.) ; (pleasure boat for rajas, 
also model boat, for offerings to 
the spirits) lancharg;* (a child's 
model boat) joiy. See also barge, 
CAXOE. Ferry boat, sampan tarn- 
barg. 

Boat hook (hook), s. bodok (E.) ; 
(forked for pushing away from 
branches in rivers) galalt sargga 
mara.* 

Boat house (hows), s. bargsal 
prahu. 



Boatman (-man), s. anak prahu. 

Boatswain (bo'sn), s. (Xaut.) qa- 
nil (E. gunner). Boatswain's 
mate, tandil, srarg, kasap. Boat- 
swain's chair, planchar, aram- 
aram. 

Bob (bob), V. i. (up and down mo- 
tion) tergmbut-gmbnt;* (on the 
surface of water) teratoiy-atorg ;*■ 
(in water) timboJ-Uyglam. 

Bob, s. (of the head) arggok; 
(plumb bob) batu tali sipat. 

Bobbin (bob'bin), s. (for lace-mak- 
ing) buah renda; (in weaving) 
anak torak,"^ pltiiy;* (for thread) 
buku bnarg, glendorg bnarg. 

Bobstay (-sta), s. (Xaut.) tali 
i org or. 

Bode (bod), v. t. It bodes no good,. 
tiada baik padah-nja.^ 

Bodice {ho^'h), ^^.bajukotorg;*^ (of 
Indian women) choli (Hind.), 
kutaig (X.I.). 

Bodily (-i-li), adj. deri-hal badan, 
badan (a) ; (corporeal, as opposed 
to spiritual) berlmbaga.* 

Bodily, adv. (entirely) s-mata- 
mata, skaU, habis. 

Bodkin (-kin), s. (stiletto) pnjo- 
chok; (tape needle) jarom pnjo^ 
chok. 

Body (-i), s. badan, tuboh;* (dead 
body, of mankind) mayat; (of 
animals) bargkai; (trunk, as dis- 
tinguished from the head and 
limbs) batarg tuhoh ;* (the ma- 
terial part, as opposed to the spiri- 
tual) Imbaga;* (a mass, a thing) 
bncla; (a corporation) perhimpo?i' 
CM, majJis, Imbaga: (a person) 
orarg, as, anybody, bararg s'orarg; 
nobody, s'orarg pun tidak. A body 
of troops, pasokan. 

Bodyguard (-gard), s. juak-juak.^ 

Bog (bog), s. paya gambut,* paya 
goyarg. 

Bogey (bo'gi), s. hantu, momok. 

Boil (boil), v. i. (be in ebullition) 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; f56d, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin tJierx. 



BOIL 



57 



BOOK 



mndideli, hual ; (Tiolently, with 
noise) glgak; (be in boiling water) 
rhus; (be excited with passion) 
mradarxj. 'To boil over, lemhak* 
ruap. His blood boiled, damli-nja 
))}igirap* 

Boil, V. t. (cook in water) rbus; (of 
rice) tanak;* (of leaves) chlor; 
(things in general) masak; (to 
softness) lodehf (in a double 
saucepan) Urn (Ch.). See steam. 
A hard boiled egg, tlor rhus, tlor 
niatrg (X.I.). A soft boiled egg, 
tlor S'trgah masak', tlor s-trgah 
matig (X.I.). 

Boil, s. hisul. Core of a boil, punat. 
A blind boil, hisul shu7i* 

Boiler (boil'er), s. (vessel) huali; 
(of copper) grenseig, dandaig;"^ 
(of a steamship) hailar (E.) ; see 
CM'LDROX, PAX. Boilcr plate, hsi 
papati, hsi hailar. 

Boisterous (bois'ter-«s), adj. (of 
wind) hicharg; (of people) ga- 
rarg; (stormy) glora* 

Bold (bold), adj. (brave) hrani; 
(too forward) hurarg malu, mul-a 
slamha, miil-a thai, muka chandi. 
To make bold, thallan muka. 

Boldfaced (bold'fast), adj. uiuka 
thai, muka slamha. 

Bollard (bol'lerd), s. (Xaut.) mut, 
niol (X.L). 

Bolster (bol'ster), s. hantal giillrg,^' 
hantal golek,'* hantal plok, hantal 
panjatg.^' 

Bolster, v. t. (prop with pillows) 
sndal ;'^ (suppoii;) sokotg; (aid) 
toloig. 

Bolt (bolt), s. (arrow) anak panah; 
(thunderbolt) halilintar,* panah 
ptir; (door fastening) kanchiiy, 
lachak,* slakf (of cloth) kagu. 
Bolt and nut, pasak skrup.* 

Bolt, V. t. (fasten with a bolt) slak,* 
kanchitg; (swallow whole) tlan, 
lulur.^ 



Bolt, V. i. (start or go suddenly) 
(hahot lari. 

Boltrope (-rop), s. (Naut.) ris. 

Bomb (bom), s. priok api. 

Bombard (bom-bard'), v. t. teni- 
haki, tenihaki drgan priok api, 
hdil. 

Bombardment (-ment), s. lial m- 
nenihak dtga?i mriam atau priok- 
api. 

Bombast (bom'bast), s. chakap 
hsar. 

Bombastic (bom-bas'tik), adj. her- 
hual hsar. 

Bona fide (bo'na fi'di), adj. and 
adv. surggoli, digan s-suiggoh- 
nja, sail. 

Bond (bond), s. (fastening) ikatan; 
(shackles) rantai, hlurggu,"^ ikat- 
an; (binding influence) prgikat, 
perhuhonan, tamhatan; (legalobli- 
gation) surat jamin, surat perjanji- 
an, surat akuan. In bond, kna ta- 
han s-hluni hayer chukai. 

Bondage (bond'ej), s. perliamhaan, 
tatranan.'^ 

Bondservant (-serv-ant), s. lianiha. 

Bone (bdn), s. tuJanj. A bone of 
contention, perkaia tn/karan. 

Bonfire (bon'fir), s. a/ji hsar, api 
tan da ksuka'an. 

Bonnet (-net), s. tojn niem-mem. 

Bonny (-ni), adj. cliantek, molek. 

Bonus (bo'ni/s), s. hageran kerna 
s-suatu k'untoigan, hadiah (Ar.). 

Bony (-ni), adj. bertulaig. 

Boo (boo), V. i. (make a noise to 
startle) sergah. 

Booby (boo'bi), s. ora^g hodoh, 
orarg drgu,"^ oraig tola. 

Book (book), s. (generally) surat, 
huku (E.) ; (religious and scien- 
tific works) kitah (Ar.). Ac- 
count book, surat kira-kira. Story 
book, huku chrita. Book of 
charms, surat pnstaka (Sk.), tib 
(Ar.). To bring to book, trnplak. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; iise, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin t/ien. 



BOOK 



5R 



BOTANIC 



Book, V. t. (register, enter in a 

book) S2iraU-an. 
Bookbinder (book'blnd-er), s. tu' 

l-arg jelet* (Ar. jilid), tukarg 

jnhit hul'u (B.). 
Bookcase (-kas), s. ahnari Vitab, 

alinari hul'u, grohoh surat* 
Bookkeeper (-kep-er), s. tukarg 

hira-hira, pnjurat kira-kira, tukarg. 

masok htik, chai-hu (Cli. tsdi-Mi). 
Bookrest (-rest), s. rehal (Ar.). 
Bookseller (-sel-er), s. pnjual ki- 

tab, oranj jiial huku. 
Bookworm (-werm), s. (insect) 

ggat : (person always readinor) 

orarg rajin mmhaclia. 
Boom (boom), s. (Xant.) an- 

darg-andajg ha wait, bom (E.) ; 

(obstruction to a haii)our) bataig; 

(holloAV sound) dguin. 
Boom, V. i. berdniom ;^ ■ (rise in 

value) naik herga. 
Boon (boon), s. kurnia ('Sk.), pm- 

brian. 
Boor (boor), s. (rustic) orarg dii- 

sun: (ill-bred person) orarg kurarg 

ajar, orarg liutau. 
Boorish (-ish), s. kurarg ajar, bia- 

dab (Pers.), kasar, cliroboli.'^ 
Boot (boot), s. sfKitu (Port.), spatu 

but (.E.). To boot, tamhalian 

pula. 
Bootblack (boot'blak), s. prggosok 

spatu, pmblargkin spatu* 
Booth (boo/7/), s. (for hunting) 

jruinbun,* buuibun;* (to live in) 

pondok, pondo7g,* dargau;* (stall 

in market) bargku. 
Bootlace (boot'las), s. tali kasut, 

tali Spain. 
Bootless (-les), adj. (unsuccessful) 

tiada berfa'idah, senian;* (use- 
less) sia-sia, perchuma. 
Bootmaker (-mak-er), s. tukarg 

spatu, tukarg kasut. 
Booty (-i), s. rampasan, jarahan* 
Booze (booz), v. i. minum mabok. 



Boozer (booz'er), s. pmahok, tahi 
arak. 

Borax (bdr'aks), s. tergkal (Sk.). 

Border (-der), s. (edge) tpi, piig- 
gir (N.I.) : (strip laid along the 
edge) birgkai* biral;* (of cloth) 
tpi, onrpok:* (of lace) biku;*" 
(boundary) smpadan, batasan.* 

Border, v. i. (be adjacent) bertem- 
jtel,* berdenipet* berdampirg f" 
(approach) hanipir* 

Bore (bor), v. t. (make a hole 
through) tbok, kerbok,* korok,*" 
krok; (with a sharp instrument) 
gerek; (make a hole in, but not 
necessarily tli rough) korek; (an- 
noy) jntukan; (bore the ears) 
tindek,* chochok kupirg (B.) ; (for 
oil or water) korek. 

Bore, s. (tidal flood) ombak bnaf' 
(hole, perforation) tboVan; (of a 
gun) liaig snaparg* lobarg snaparg ~ 
(a tool for boring) prggerek, gur- 
di, grodi (B.), bar,* biji nargka;*' 
(a tiresome person) prgharn, oraig 
mtgaru (B.). 

Borer (bor'er), s. (a larva which 
eats into wood) klarah ;* (marine 
worm) tmbetok:* (teredo navalis) 
kaparg.* 

Born (born), see bear. First born,. 
anak sulorg. Still-born, mati da- 
lam prot. To be born, jadi, tum- 
pah darah. 

Borneo (bor'ni-o), s. tanali Brunai^ 

Borough (biir'o), s. kampoig, ban^ 
dar krhil. 

Borrow (bor'ro), v. t. pin jam. 

Bosh (bosh), s. karut, perkataan 
sia-sia. 

Bosom (booz'wm), s. (breast) da^ 
da: (seat of affections) hati; 
(folds of dress) kendo jgan. 

Boss (bos), s. (knob) cliomhol_. 
boigkol* tombnl : (master) tuan^ 
kjjola. 

Botanic (bo-tan'ik), adj. derijiial 
'itmai tumboh-tumbohan. Botanic 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire^ 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minMS, cure, injure, 

hiirrv; food, foot, awfool (awful) ; law, how, oil; thin then. 



BOTANY 



59 



BOW 



Gardens (in Singapore), khun 
huiga. 
Botany (bot'a-ni) s. 'ibnu tumboh- 

iiDiibohan. 
Botch (boch),v. t. (patch) tampal, 
tainpoig;'^ (mar by bad work) 
rosakkan, ropak-rapekkan* 

Botch, s. (patcli) iampal, tamporg :* 
(clumsy work) sogeli* k repot, 
kloloh* kerja ropak-rapek.* 

Both (both), adj. kdua, kdtia-dua, 
dua-dua; (of the members of tlie 
body or things in pairs) kdua-blali, 
as, kdua-hlah mata, both eyes. On 
both sides, shJah-mnjhJali, kdua 
pihak. Both of them, kdua-uja. 
Both of us, kita kdua, kita berdua. 
Both mother ,and cJiild, atiak sbJah 
mak sbJah. 

Both, conj. Both, . . .and. . . ., baik 
.... baik . . . . , as, both men and 
women, baik laki-Jaki baik prem- 
puan. 

Bother (bo^/i'er), v. t. (annoy) 
iisek, garggukan,'^ susahkan; (dis- 
turb) liaru. 

Bother, v. i. (worry) khuatir. 

Bottle (bot'tl), ?.' botol (E.), ba- 
Jatgf^ (small) buli-bidi* 

Bottom (-turn), s. (lowest part, as 
of a hill) kaki; (of a hole) bawaJi; 
(the under surface, as of a vessel) 
pantat; (foundation) alas, lapek; 
(fundament) buntut, pantat, purg- 
gonj. Bottom upwards, Uurg- 
kop,* kpala di bawali (B.). At 
bottom (really), s-bnar-rga. To 
be at the bottom of, sbabkan, jadi 
haniii (B.). 'I'o go to the bottom, 
tigglam. 

Bottomless (-los), adj. tiada ier- 
dug a. 

Boudoir (boo'dwor), s. bilek bagi 
prenipuan. 

Bough (bow), s. (large) dahan; 
(main branch or fork) chabarg. 
See also branch. 



Boulder (bol'der), s. batu bulat 
bsar. 

Boulevard (b5o'le-vard), s. jalan 
bsar. 

Bounce (bowns), v. i. (hit and re- 
bound) aiubul,"^ lantun,* antnl,* 
pantidf' (spring unceremonious- 
ly) lompjat. 

Bounce, s. (rebound) ambul,'^ etc., 
as above; (bluster) rargah* 

Bound (bownd) s. (boundary) sm- 
padan; (limit) perhirgya^an, had 
(Ar.) ; (leap) lonipat. 

Bound, V. t. (limit) perhirggakan; 
hadkan (Ar.) ; (form a boundary 
of) smpadankan. 

Bound, V. i. (spring) lompat, lam- 
boig; (rebound) ambul,* antul,^ 
ttidaig. 

Bound, adj. and p.p. see bixd. 

Bound, adj. (N'aut.) (going to) 
lindak k-, mnujii. 

Boundary (bownd'er-i), adj. sm- 
padan, perliirggaan, prerggan* 
mtara,* watas (^.I.) ; (of rice 
fields) batas. 

Bounden (-n), adj. wajib (Ar.), 
ferdlu (Ar.), perj'u (X.I.). 

Boundless (-les), adj. tiada ier- 
hirgga, tiada bperliirgga'an, tiada 
berhad (Ar.). 

Bounteous (bown'ti-?/s), adj. (gen- 
erous) murah hati, dermawan 
(Sk.); (plentiful) leinpah,'-^ nie- 
ivali, m'amur- (Ar.). 

Bountiful (-fool), adj. = bounteous. 

Bounty (-ti), s. (generosity) kmu- 
raJian; (premium) hadiah (Ar.). 

Bouquet (boo-ka'), s. karargan 
binga. 

Bourne (boorn or born), s. sm- 
l)adati, pe rli i tgga 'a n . 

Bourse (boors), s. tin pat perniaga- 
'an broker (E.). 

Bout (bowt), s. (turn) giliran;* 
(contest) lawan. 

Bow (bow) V. i. (the head) tundok; 
(the body) mmbotgkok, soja (B.) 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, min^s, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



BOW 



60 



BRAID 



(Oil. (■]ihiu"'iid) ; (the whole body 
with the head to the ground) surg- 
Icor, sujud (Ar.), see bend. 

Bow, V. t. tundokkan, etc., as above. 

Bow, s. (of a ship or boat) lialuan; 
(overhanging bow of a kolek) 
saok. Clipper bow, haluan rbah. 
'Straight bow, haluan tgak. 

Bow (bo), s. (the weapon) ^xtnali, 
busor:'^ (of a violin) pnjgesek; 
(slip-knot) siinpol sentak, simpol 
hidop, simpol piileh;* (necktie) 
dad (D. dasje). Bow window, 
jndela imrjanjur.* 

Bowels (bow'elz), s. prot, isi prot, 
tali prot. The bowels of the earth, 
hati buDii. 

Bower (er), s. punjonj.^ 

Bowl (bol), s. (earthenware) marg' 
kok, pasii, paso (B.), glok, cliawan, 
eroig;^ (metal) bokor,^ batil* la- 
yaig, mrggan/^ sargku ;* (a coco- 
nut shell) tm pur org, dasar* clie- 
bok ;'^ (covered bowl) perni*^ mu- 
kun,^ maigkok, molorg.^ 

Bowl, v. t. (roll along) golekkan. 

Bowl, V. i. (play bowls) maiii pan- 
chaig;* (at cricket) 1 em par bola, 
rjam bola: (under hand) humban 
bola, umban bola.^ 

Bow-legged (bo'legd), adj. kaki 
pergkar, kejgkarg. 

Bowling (bol'ing), s. rtiain pan- 
char g."^ 

Bowls (bolz), s. main ^yancharg* 

Bowman (bo'mfl^n), s. pmanah. 

Bowsprit (-sprit), s. (N"aut.) chu- 
chor jip (E.), jolorg-jolorg, jorgor, 
bosprit (L.). Bowsprit shrouds, 
bosprit perdi (L.). 

Box (boks), s. (large) pit; this wo^xl 
is commonly used by Europeans 
for all boxes, but Malays use many 
other words, as (an empty packing 
case) iorg; (small rectangular 
box) kotak; (small box of light 
material) kpok-kppk; (small boxes 
with covers) chmbul* chpu, km- 



pu;* (receptacle made of a bamboo 
joint) taborg, gdaborg;* (of paper) 
kmbal;* (tobacco box) slpa, chlpa; 
(sireh box) tmpat sirek, tepak,*" 
puan;* (a box on the ear) tmpe- 
log; (driver's seat) terpul.*- 
Cash box, kotak dint. Money box, 
nndil* taborg, cJielerg/-' Also- 

see BKTEI. BOX. 

Box, v. i. (fight with the fists) ber- 
tinjii* bertum'hok, bersantak* 

Boy (boi), s. budak, budak laki-laki, 
bvdak jantan. 

Boyhood (boi'hood), s. masa kchil. 

Boyish (-ish), adj. kbudak-biidak- 
'an/^ sperti budak. 

Brace (bras), s. (prop) sokorg ; 
(Xaut.) brasan, tali bawatan; 
(pair) pasarg; (suspenders) tali 
sluar. 

Brace, v. t. (prop up) sokorg; 
(tighten) rganjkan, tgargkan; (in- 
vigorate) sgar; (strengthen) kiiat^ 
kan: (Xaut.) tar el' tali brasan. 

Bracelet (bras'kt), s. glarg, glanj 
taigan. 

Bracing (-ing), adj. (invigorating) 
yarg mnjgarkan. 

Bracken (brak'n), s. paku s-rakitj^ 
rsarn. 

Bracket (-^t), s. (shelf) para- 
para:'^ (triangular projection) 
siku-silxu.'^'' 

Brackish (-ish), adj. pay an. 

Brad (brad), s. paku halus, paku 
smat. 

Brad awl (awl), s. piygerek, pnjo- 
ch ok. 

Brag (brag), v. i. mgahkan diri, 
kmbor,"^ I air a. 

Braggadocio (brag'ga-do'shi-o), s. 
rhakap raboig* chakap mlam- 
borg, chakap somborg. 

Braggart (-gert), s. oraig yarg mm.- 
gall kan diri, pa' mlawa (B.). 

Brahmin (bra'min), s. brahman,, 
berman. 

Braid (brad), v. t. anjam, slam pit.*" 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire^ 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; lise, us, miuws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



BRAID 



61 



BREACH 



Braid, s. (of hair) slam pit ;'^ (fa- 
bric) pita (Port.). 

Brail (bral), s. (Xaut.) stirggi. 

Brail, v. t. (Xaut.) stirggi laijev, am- 
hit layer. 

Brain (bran), s. otal\ 

Brake (brak), s. (appliance to a 
wheel to check motion) lasirg,^ 
pnahan roda; (a fern) rsam, pa- 
Jxu a-rahit;'^ (thicket) smal'. 

Bramble (bram'l)l), s. pokoh duri. 

Bran (bran), s. ddak, husi (Hind.), 
aboh bras. 

Branch (branch), s. (main fork of 
a tree) chabaig; (large secondary 
stem) dahan; (small or tertiary) 
cliararg ; (of palm trees) pi pah: 
(of a river) anak surgai, sroVan :'^ 
(of a railway) chabarg; (of a fa- 
mily) sid'u bargsaf'' (of an asso- 
ciation) chawargan.'^' 

Branch, v, i. berchabarg ; (in many 
b ranches ) ra rggaJi , * ch ra rggah . * 
To branch off (diverge), mnjem' 
parg. To branch out (speak dif- 
fusively), rambarg. 

Brand (brand), s. (wood partly 
burnt) punt org, puntorg api; 
(mark of a hot iron) bkas star; 
(trademark) chap; (stigma) chla, 
tanda I'aliina'an. 

Brand, v. t. (with hot iron) star; 
(affix a mark) buboh chap; (stig- 
matize) chlakan. 

Brandish (-ish), v. t. (threatening- 
ly) achu; (in sword dance) la~ 
yani.^ 

Brand-new (brand'-nu'), adj. bha- 
ru sl-ali. 

Brandy (-i), s. brandi (E.), 

Brass (bras), s. tmbaga I'unirg; 
(bell metal) tmbaga loyarg, tm- 
baga prurggu.^ Sheet brass, tm- 
baga lapisan. 

Brat (brat), s. (contemptuously of 
a child) baJi-a.^ 

Bravado (bra-va'do or bra-va'do), 
s. rargah* gertal'. 



Brave (brav), adj. brani, perhasa 

(Sk.). 
Brave, v. t. tntarg drgan brani, Ian- 
da.'' 
Bravery (brav'er-i), s. (courage) 

I'branian, perl'osa (Sk.), laki-laM,. 

as, he wants to show his bravery,. 

dia mail innunjokkan laki-laki-iya ; 

(fine dress) perhiasan,"^ pakaian 

chantek. 
Bravo (bra'vo), int. sabas. 
Brawl (brawl), v. i.- bergadoh, ber- 

trgkar. 
Brawl, s. pertrgkaran, gadoli, huru- 

hara. 
Brawn (brawn), s. (muscle) dagiig 

pjal,"^ dagirg kja! ;^ (muscular 

strength) kkuatan; (of the boar) 

dagirg babi denderg, dagirg babi 

salai.* 
Brawny (brawn'i), adj. tgap-sasa,"^^ 

kual. 
Bray (bra), v. t. tiinibok, pipis, gi- 

liig : see grixd. 
Bray, s. jrit kaldai, pkek kaldai, 

kaldai pun/a triak (B.), kriau 

kaldai (P.). 
Braze (braz), v. t. ptrikaii drgan 

tmbaga \patrikan (B.)]. 
Brazen (bra'zn), adj. (of brass) 

tmbaga (a), deri-pada tmbaga;- 

(shameless, immodest) mnka tbah 

muka papan, muka slamba, miika 

kulit babi.'^ 
Brazenfaced (-fast), adj. muka 

tbal, muka papan, muka slamba,. 

muka kulit babi."^ 
Brazier (-zher), s. (worker in 

brass) tukarg tmbaga; (pan for 

live coals) kran,"^ ttgkararg* per- 

baraan,"^ tnipat bara, arglo (Ch. 

hatg-lo'). 
Brazil wood (bra-zil' wood), s.. 

(the wood of ctesalpinia sappan) 

kayu sparg. 
Breach (brech), s. (gap, opening) 

prohorg,^ pruak. Breach of faith, 

hal mrgobahkan stia. Breach of 



ate, ask, am, final, care, ear, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire^ 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; f5od, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin i/ien. 



BREAD 



62 



BREASTWORK 



contract, hal mir)ohahl-an janji, p- 
('hall janji (B.). Breach of the 
peace, perijadohan. Breach of 
etiquette, la^rjgaran hhasa, larrjgar 
'adat (B.). Breach of trust, Jcliia- 
nat (Ar,), pcliak amanat (Ar.), 
pchah liarapan. 

Bread (bred), s. roti; (native thin 
cakes) apani* apom (B.). 

Breadfruit (bred'froot), s. (the 
fruit of artocarpus incisa) huah 
sukun; (a variety without seeds) 
hulor/^ klueh (B.) (Jav.). 

Breadth (bredth), s. (distance from 
side to side) lehar; (open space, as 
between doorposts) hul^a; (extent 
of surface) hidaiy, I'luamnf (as 
opposed to length) lintaiy. The 
length and breadtli, hujor^ lintaiy- 
n/a Breadth of cliaracter, Huas- 
an kail. 

Break (brak), v. i. (by pulling) 
putus; (transversely, of long ob- 
jects) pata/i; (but not severed) 
serkah* skali ;* (in inecea) pel i ah; 
(in minute fragments) spai,* /•- 
mok; (by pressure from within, as 
an egg, when hatched) ttas* m- 
ntas (B.) ; (of a seam) rtas* m- 
rfas (B.) ; (with a jerk) ru7itas;* 
(of waves) hinjms. 'Yo break away 
(as a fish) rabut. To break 
down (as a carriage), rosah. To 
T)reak a fast, huka pua-m. To bi-eak 
off (desist), putus. To break open 
(as durians), merkah. To break 
up (disperse, as an assembly or 
crowd), pchah, bertmpiaran.^ To 
bi-eak up for liolidays (of a 
v^cbool), tut op. The dawn breaks, 
terbit fajar (Ar.). Heart broken, 
pchah hati. 

Break, v. t. (in the respective senses 
given above) putuskan, patahkan, 
pchahkan, rmokkan; (with a jerk) 
runtas* Break a custom, salahi 
'adat* larr/fjar 'adat. To break a 
liabit, buaicj 'adat. To break one's 



hea.rt, pchah hati. To break a 
horse, ajar kuda. To break in 
(tame), jinakkan. To break a 
journey at, sityijah di. To break 
a law, tarygar hukum. To break 
an oath, makan sumpah. To 
break off (as a bough), champory.* 
To break open (as durians), ch- 
kah* bnka (B.). To break a pro- 
inise, muiykir janji, obah janji. 
To break wind, kntut. 

Break, s. (interruption) kputusan; 
(pause) perhntian; (fracture) /> 
(hah an. 

Breakable (brak'a-bl), adj. (fra- 
gile) rapoh. 

Breakage (-ej), s. (thing broken) 
pcliahan, patahan. 

Breakdown (-down), s. (of car- 
J'iages, etc.) krosak'an, rntan. 

Breaker (-er), s. (waves) pclmhan 
omhak, hmpasan glonibary; (water 
cask) (Tsaut.) /;i/?« ayer, legir 
(D. leyyer). 

Breakfast (brek'fast), s. makan 
pagi, potor (Ar. futur). 

Breakneck (brak'nek)^ aclj. (dan- 
gerous) i/arg nwibaira merbahya* 
ya rg inn da ta igka n bah ya. 

Breakwater (-waw-ter), s. koia 
batu pndindity oinbak* batu tahan 
onibak (B.). 

Breast (brest), s. (chest) dada; 
(mammae) susu, tetek; (seat of 
consciousness or affection) hati, 
To make a clean breast of a thing, 
nnyaku raJisia atau ksalahan. 

Breast, v. t. (struggle with) (aivan, 
sotgsorg.* To breast the waves, m- 
iyory.wig ombak* mlawan ombak. 

Breast-bone (brest'bon), s. tularg 
pa pan dada. 

Breast-plate (-jjlnt), s. lapek-dada 

Breastwork (-werk), s. (fort) 
kubu, benteig (X.l.) ; (on a ship) 
a pit an. '^ 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, mini/s, cure, injure, 

Lurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin than. 



BREATH 



63 



BRIDLE 



Breath (breth), s. nafas. Out of 
breath, mnjah, termrgah-mixjah, 
churgap-chunjap. To draw a long 
breath, Uoh,"^ iarek nafas panjarg. 
To hold one's breath, talian nafas. 

Breathe (bre///), v. i. hernafas, 
tarel- nafas. To breathe one's last, 
putus lyawa. 

Breathless (breth'les), adj. ter- 
niKjah-intyah, ssal- nafas, senjliat 
nafa'i,* 'rgeh* ntrgeh.* 

Breech (brech), s. (hinder part of 
anythino^) pantat. 

Breechblock (brech'blok), s. Jvopah 
snaparg, kopah niriam. 

Breechcloth (-klawth), s. chawat. 

Breeches (brich'es), s. sluar, srual'^ 
(Ar. sartval), chlana (X.I.). 

Breechloader (brech'lod-er), s. (as 
snyder rifle) snaparg kopah; (as 
shot guns) snapam paiali, snaparg 
kulai* 

Breed (bred), v. i. (produce off- 
spring) heranak; (be pregnant) 
nirgandorg. 

Breed, v. t. (bring forth, beget) 
beranakkan; (bring up) &Za,* pli- 
harakan, piara: (cause, occasion) 
datargkan, adakan. Breed mag- 
gots, herulat. 

Breed, s. (race) hargsa; (variety, 
kind) haka, hneh. 

Breeding (bred'ing), s. (care of 
animals) pmlihara'an; (good man- 
ners) hliasa. 

Breeze (brez), s. argin. Land 
breeze, argin darat. Sea breeze, 
argin laid. iStiff breeze, aigin kn- 
cliarg. Moderate breeze, arcjin t- 
garg klai,^ argin sderhana (Sk.). 
Light breeze, argin spui-spui.'^ 

Brethren (hveth'ven), s. see bko- 

TITEK. 

Brevity (brev'i-ti), s. rergkas."^ 
Brew (broo), v. t. (as beer, etc.) 

masak; (plot, contrive) adakan, 

i>uat. 



Brewery (bro6'er-i), s. tnipat ma- 
sakhir (E.). 

Briar (brl'er), s. pokok mairar hu- 
tan. 

Bribe (brl!)), s. snap, soroig. To 
give a bribe, bri snap, tunibok 
rusok.* To receive a bribe, ma- 
kan snap, makan sororg* 

Bribery (brlb'er-i), s. hal bri aiau 
niakan snap. 

Brick (brik), s. /;^//«,* batu bata. 

Brickbat (brik'bat), s. pcJiahan- 
baia. blalian bata,"^ bata s-krat,. 
bata 'i-rhbis.'^ 

Brickkiln (-kiln), s. dapur bata, 
pnibakaran bata, tnipat bakar batu 
bata (B.). 

Bricklayer (-la-er), s. tukarg batu.. 

Brickwork (-werk), s. kerja tukarg 
batu. 

Brickyard (-yard), s. tnipat mm- 
buat bata. 

Bridal (brid'al), adj. prgantin (a). 
Bridal bed, plamin,* plaminan.^ 
tmpat-tidor kmantin (B.). Bri- 
dal procession, perarakan prgantin.. 

Bride (brid), s. prgantin prempuan,. 
kmantin (B.). 

Bridegroom (-groom), s. prgantin 
laki-laJd, mmplai (Tam.). 

Bridesmaid (biidz'mad), s. pra- 
van^ pigirirg prgantin prempuan, 
pnjau'at^ prqantin, prgapit prgan- 
tin. 

Bridge (brij), s. jmbatan, gertak r 
(footbridge) titi, titian ; (foot- 
bridge with handrail) titi ber~ 
adan,"^ titian Jawa:* (of a ship) 
bris (E.), branda: (of a violin) 
kuda-kuda. Bridge of the nose 
batarg tiidoig. Draw bridge, jm- 
batan argkat. Suspension bridge,. 
jmbatan gantorg. 

Bridge, v. t. buat jmbatan, buboh 
titian,* buat gertak."^ 

Bridle (bri'dl), s. kkaig,* karg. 

Bridle, v. t. pal-ai karg; (restrain, 
control) takan, klola'^ 



ate, ask, lim, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire^ 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, iis, min»/s, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



BRIDLRPATK 



64 



BROADSIDE 



Bridlepath (-path), s. jahn hcliil; 

(track of wild animals) dnai.'^ 
Brief (bref ), adj. retykas* sergkat* 

pendeh. 
Brief, s. (concise writin^^) rergTias- 

an* 
Brig (brig), s. Icapal lager hertiafy 

dua. 
Brigade (bri-gad'), s. Tcumpolarb 

dua-tiga pasol'an s-rihu soldado. 

See BATTALIOX. 

Brigand (brig'and), s. pnjamon, 
prompak. 

Brigandage (-ej), piyamonan. 

Brigantine (brig'an-ten'), s. kapal 
safu tiarg s-ttyah. 

Bright (brlt), adj. (shining, shed- 
ding light) traty-hndrarg* chmer- 
larg* gilarg-gniilatg* herchahya; 
(clear, transmitting light) trary, 
chrali :* (clear, as the sky) chua- 
(ha; (of colours) tua, chiiaclia;* 
(intelligent) rergan l-pala, trwy 
liati; (cheerful) hersuka liati, 
na;* (quick witted) tajam. 

Brighten (brit'n), v. t. tranjlcan. 

Brightness (-nes), s. tmty, chaliya, 
cliuaclm,^ kchrahan* See bright. 

Bright's disease (brits' diz-ez'), s. 
s-jnis pnjal'it huah pin/garg. 

Brilliancy (bril'van-si), s. chaliya, 
I'll at, chmerlarg/-' sinar. 

Brilliant (-yant), adj. (bright) 
rhmerlarg* herkilat-hilat; (splen- 
did, as persons, talents, etc.) pan- 
dai, mulia. 

Brim (brim), s. (of cups, plates, 
etc.) bihir: (edge, margin) tpi, 
pitggir (X.T.). 

Brimful (brim'fooF), adj. pnoJi, 
ipas/^ tpii.^ 

Brimstone (-ston), s. hlerarg. 

Brindled (brin'dld), adj. hlaiy. 

Brine (brin), s. ayer garam. 

Bring(bring), v. t. (convev, but not 
exclusively in the direction of the 
speaker) haiva; (fetch) amUJ : 
(conduct, bring with one) liantar, 



liantarkan ; (cause, produce) shdb- 
Ian, daiatgJi'an. To bring about, 
hawa, daiaigkan. To bring back, 
kmhaiiJiWh pulaiykan. To bring 
forth (produce fruit), hluarJcan; 
(young) heranaH-an; (make ma- 
nifest) kluavkan, terhitkan/^ lahir- 
kan (Ar. tlcViir). Bring in, haica 
masok. To bring on, hawa, datarg- 
kan. To bring to Mght, n/atakan. 
To bring to pass, adakan, sanipai- 
kan. To bring np, hawa naik; 
(rear) hia,* plihara, piara; (vomit) 
muntahkan. 

Brinjal (brin'jal), s. trorg. 

Brink (bringk), s. tpi, pimgir 

(X.I.). 

Briny (brin'i), adj. masin, asin 
(B.). 

Brisk (brisk), adj. pan fas, chpat. 

Brisket (bris'ket), s. dada hinataiy. 

Bristle (bris'sl), s. hidu kjor* 

Bristle, v. i. (of hair) chgat* r- 
iiiaig,* germarg :* (of larger ob- 
jects) cliracliak, herclirancliargan* 

Bristly (-sli), adj. kjor* 

British (brit'ish), adj. //^'.(/fis. See 

GIJEAT BEITATX. 

Brittle (-tl), adj. (hard substances) 
ra/joh, rtis;* (as wood) rput,* 
rpak* rpas;* (as toast) ratgup.* 

Broach (brdch), v. t. (pierce, tap) 
rliochok; (open) hiika: (publish) 
kluarkan, laliirkan (Ar. tlahir). 

Broad (brawd), adj. (wide) lehar; 
(extensive, of land, sea or river) 
luas, Iga; (of the chest or should- 
ers) hidarg ; (liberal) liafi Iga. 

Broadcast (brawd'kast), adj. ter- 
sppah, hcrtahiiran, herkaparan,* 
herhaitihoran, berieharan. 

Broadcloth (-klawth), s. mklilat 
(Pers.). 

Broaden (-n), v. t. Inaskan, lehar- 
knn, lapaigkan, Igakan. 

Broadside (-sId), s. (side of a ship) 
lamhorg, eren/an;* (discharge of 
all guns) iemhak s-rmpak* 



ate, ask, am, final, care, ear, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferrj--; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, ns, mini/s, cure, injure, 

hiirry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin tlicn. 



BROCADE 



65 



BRUNT 



Brocade (bro-kad'), s. sundus 
(Ar.), kain soigl-et. 

Brogue (brog), s. pelal. 

Broil (broil), s. f/nipar, gadoli, rioh- 
riidah. 

Broil, V. t. paignatii, {/aigfjatrj. 

Broiling (broiring), adj. (of heat) 
Irrk, panas trel'. 

Broken (bro'kn), adj. piiius, patali, 
prhah ; see bkeak; (in gaps, as 
teetli or a fence) roiyah; (of 
])ranches) sA-a// ;* (of water) her- 
l-ochal', Ji-onchah ;* (in liealth) hta 
lontol-;* (imperfectly spoken) pe- 
lat. Broken ground, iattali Ikak- 
ll'ok. Broken off (as branches, 
etc.) cliamporg* 

Broker (-ker), s. dalal (Ar.), 
rJian/ku/'' orarg yaig hevjual-hli 
haqi orarg lain, hrol-er (E.), malt' 
la'r (D.).' 

Brokerage (-ej), s. (commission) 
kanisen (E.), dalal (Ar.), komisi 

(x.r.) (D.). 

Bronchial (brono-'ki-al), adj. l-rorg- 
korg (a). 

Bronchitis (brong-ki'tis), s. ssak 
h'rorglidig, ssak dada. 

Bronze (bronz), s. tiuhaga snam, 
gaigm,'^ loyarg.^ 

Brooch (brocli), s. kromrg, kron- 
xarg* 

Brood (brood), v. i. t. (sit on ego-s) 
kraiii, mrgram; (think long and 
anxiously) ronseig,'*^ tfhirr (Ar.), 
pkir-fikir (B.). 

Brood, s. pruidiian* perindok'an.'^ 

Brook (brook), s. anak suiyai, 
fir ok' an* 

Brook, V. t. (bear, endure) tahan, 
drita (Sk.), taiggoiy. 

Brooklet (brook'kt), s. anak ai/er. 

Broom (br«55m), s. pryapii; (of 
straw) pryapu padi, piyapu ro- 
nian ;'^' (of coco-nut midribs) prya- 
pu lidi, piyapu kasar (B.) ; (of 
coco-nut fibre) pryapu sahot; (of 
kahorg fibre) piyapu ijok* 



Broomstick (brodm'stik), s. hatary 
pryapu. 

Broth (brawtli), s. sop (E.), tirn 
(Ch.) ; (chicken broth) kaldu* 
(Port.) ; (if it contains rice or 
other grain) hub or dagirg* 

Brothel (bro///'el), s. rumah prem^ 
puan jahat, rumah jalaiy, rumah 
panjarg* rumah suridal, rumah 
chakla (Hind.). 

Brother (bru^/;/er), s. saudara laki- 
laki; (elder brothei') ahatg, (polite 
form) kakanda;* (younger bro- 

, ther) adek, (polite form) adinda.'^ 
Half brother (of tlie same mo- 
ther), saudara anjiig; (of the 
same father) saudara s-hapa. 
Brother germau, saudara s'ihu s- 
bapa, saudara s-pancliar.* 

Brother-in-law (-in-law'), s. ipar, 
ipar dual;* (the relationship be- 
tween men who have married 
sisters) biros* targ-mui (B.) 
(Ch. targ-mrg). 

Brotherly (-li), adj. adek-beradeh. 

Brow (brow), s. (ridge over the 
eye) knirg, alls (X.I.) ; (fore- 
head) dahi. 

Browheat (brow'bet), v. t. gertak, 
ugut* 

Brown (brown), adj. hilaui manis; 
(light brown) peranj;* (reddish 
brown) erarg* 

Browse (browz), v. t. ragut* garg- 
gut* 

Bruin (broo'in), s. si bruarg. 

Bruise (brdoz), v. t. (of fruit) m- 
markan ;* (of flesh, discoloured) 
Ibamkan; (swollen) brgkak; 
(smaller) binchut. 

Bruise, s. mrnar* Ibam, brgkak, 
bincliut, as above. 

Bruit (broot), v. t. khabarkan, ma- 
sohor'kan (Ar. maslihur), siarkan. 

Brunette (broo-nef), s. mem orarg 
puteh yary berrantbot hitam. 

Brunt (brunt), s. trnpoh yojg kr'os. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, miniis, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



BRUSH 



66 



BUGGY 



rnipoh/'' To bear the brunt, Jena 
irol. 

Brush (brush), s. hms (E.), pmP^h 
pjiggosol', sili-ai (N.L) ; (brush- 
wood) sinak: (Malay tooth brush) 
psiigi* 

Brush, V. t. (/osol-, sapu; (the teeth) 
sw///,* f/osol' (B.). 

Brushwood (brush'wood), s. 
(small) smal-; (larger) rpoli* 
ramhiin/'' (secondary jungle) hlu- 
kar. 

Brusque (broosk), adj. praiy-prus,"^' 
rigus* prampus.'^ 

Brutal (broo'tal), adj. sperti hina- 
targ; (cruel) Ijrgis; (savage) qa- 
rarg. 

Brute (broot), s. (beast) Unataig. 

Brutish (broo'tish), adj. rsmi hina- 
taig. 

Bubble (bub'bl), v. i. mndideli, 
huah,'^ hohol' :^ (give a gurgling 
sound) glgaJi, glohoh,'^ i-ohok;"^ 
(as aerated waters) reneli,^^ in- 
map (B.). 

Bubble, s. (film inflated with air) 
glmhoig, hlmhorg (B.) ; (globule 
of air in a solid or liquid) merteh* 

Bubo (bu'bo), s. sakit klnjaran, 
hhalaw;* (under armpit) harah 
kllawarf' (syphilitic) margga. 

Buccaneer (buk-ka-ner'), s. prom- 
pak. 

Buck (1)uk), s. rum jantan, kamhirg 
j ant an. 

Buck, V. i. (of liorses) terlonchaU 
loncliat. 

Bucket (bukVt), s. (for baling) 
timha; (for carrying, of wood) 
torg; (of iron) haldi; (of bamboo 
or tin) clientotg, chantitg:* (of a 
joint of bamboo) tahotg: (of two 
or three joints) hacliok."^ 

Buckle (buk'kl), s. kpaJa tali pirg- 
ganj, kpala iali kidit ; (a metal 
plate) pndirg. 

Buckle, V. t. (fasten) ganchukan; 



(bend) Intor.'^ To buckle to„ 

haniiig tuJatg. 
Buckler (-kler), s. (small round 

shield) ntar-utar;* (square) k- 

lo7y:* (larger) primi. 
Buckram (-ram), s. kain rann 

kasar. 
Buckshot (-shot), s. aiggor sua- 

paig/^ kacharg-kacliatg/" pnahur 

bsar. 
Buckskin (-skin), s. kulit ruscr 

kijarg dan s-hagai-nja. 
Bud (bud), s. (of leaves or stem) 

tunas; (unopened flower) kun~ 

turn, kudop* 
Bud, V. i. hertunas, herkuntum,, her^ 

kudo p. 
Buddhism (bood'dizm), s. agama 

yarg di-ajar ohli s'orarg Hindu 

yarg berglar Buddha. 
Budge (buj), v. i. hergral', herkesut^ 

heranjak."^ 
Budget (buj'et), s. aiggamn hlanja^ 
Buff (buf), s. kulit Imhu atau ker- 

hau yarg Inibek. 
Buff, adj. fcerna kulit. 
Buffalo (buf'fa-lo), s. kerhau. 
Buffer (-fer), s. perkakas talian tm^ 

poll pada kreta api. 
Buffet (-fgt), V. t. (with the fist) 

tumbok; (^dth the open hand) 

tampar; (as waves) tmpoli, han^ 

tirg, pukoly limpas. 
Buffeting (-ing), s. tnipolian. 
Buffoon (buf-foon') s. ogak-ogak,,'^ 

alan-aJan,* oraig klakar* orarg 

jnaka,^ pnernawa * oraiy platuab 

(P.). 
Buffoonery (-er-i), s. klakar*" 

pkurak'an. 
Bug (bug), s. (bedbug) pijat-pijat^ 

kuiu buxok, kpindirg (N.I.), 

burnt (Ch. bat-sat) ; (varieties 

with a bad smell) piarygarg,*' 

rlinaigau.* 
Bugbear (bug'bar), s. mnmok. 
Buggy (-gi), s. bogi (E.), kreta 

bogl. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, feriy; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hiirry; f5od, foot, awfaol (awful) ;* law, how, oil; thin then. 



BUGLE 



67 



BUNG 



Bugle (bu'gl), s. trompet (E.), 

begol (E.) ; slompret (N.I.) ; 
(native horn) tuaiy-tuaix).* 
Bugler (-gler), s. pniop trompet, 

tuJi-a7X) tiop trompet. 
Build (bild), V. t. (of brick) ba- 
rn unkan, hit at J, ikat, hikin (B.) 

(X.T.) ; (of plank houses) diri- 

kan, tgakkan* To build up, 

l.tapkan, tgohkan. 
Builder (bild'er), s. tukarg huat ru- 

mah. 
Building (-ing), s. rumah, haiyun- 

aii. Building materials, ramu- 

ramnan.'^ 
Bulb (bulb), s. m lawarg. 
Bulge (bulj), V. i. (swell out) km- 

borg, kpolif (be protuberant) 

bonjol, bujal* jojol* gmbol* 

tombol,* tonjol* 
Bulk (bulk), s. (size) hsar, hsar- 

nja; (principal part) kbanjakan. 

To break bulk (Naut.), inula i 

pwggah. To load in bulk, mnat- 

kan tiada berburr^kus, lembamkan.^ 
Bulkhead (bulk'hed), s. (Naut.) 

dindirg petak kapal. 
Bulky (-i), adj. bsar, rinta)g.'^ 
Bull (bool), s. Imbu jantan, sapi 

jantan (X.I.). The wild bull, 

dadaig. 
Bull, s. (R.C.) surat prentah papa; 

(1)1 under) silap. 
Bulldog (bool'dog), s. s~jnis anjiig 

j/arg brani. 
Bullet (-let), s. plnru, pelor (N.I.) 

(F^ort. peloaro). 
Bullet-proof (-pro5f), adj. yarg 

fall an pliiru, yarg tiada di-makan 

plum. 
Bullfrog (-frog), s. katak btoigf" 

kodok btoig (B.). 
Bullion (-y//n), s. padu/^ Mas 

padu,^ gold in ingots, as opposed 

to mas urai, gold dust; also mas 

jorgkoig* 
Bullock (-lok), s. Imbu, lm.hu km- 

biri, Imbu kasi,* sapi (N.I.). 



Bullock-heart (-hart), s. (the fruit 

of Anona reticulata) huah nona, 

buah nona jantorg (B.). 
BulFs eye (boolz'i), s. (of a target) 

mata sasaran/* (lantern) lampu 

glap, plita glap. 
Bully (bool'li), v. t. (threaten) ger- 

tak, ugut;"^ (coerce) paksa. 
Bully, s. piygertak, pigugut* 
Bulrush (-rush), s. mndrorg,'^ ker- 

cliutf^^ kunipai.* 
Bulwark (-werk), s. (fortification) 

kota; (Naut.) berdu (L.) ; (de- 
fence) perlindofgan. 
Bumblebee (bum'bl-be), s. kum- 

haig. 
Bumboat (-bot), s. sampan pnjaja, 

gaigbot. 
Bump (bump), s. (swelling) brg- 

kak; (protuberance) benjol,'^ bon- 

jol; (blow) ant ok. 
Bump, V. t. 'nlakkan, antoklcan, ban- 

tirg. 
Bump, V. i. berntak, berantok, ter- 

an tok. 
Bumper (bump'er), s. jjiala pnoh 

nileinbak. 
Bumpkin (-kin), s. orarg hutan, 

orafg dusun.* 
Bumptious (-sh?/s), adj. yarg mm- 

baarkan diri, yarg mtgatas-rgataJi.* 
Bun (bun), s. roti kismis; (plain) 

roti manis, bludal.'^ 
Bunch (bunch), s. (tuft of grass, 

etc.) rumpun; (cluster of fruit) 

taigkai, rargkai, tandan, gugus* 

roigkol;"^ (l)ananas) sisir, sikat;* 

(keys) rargkai; (of cut flowers, 

etc.) jaras.'^ 
Bundle (bun'dl), s. (wrapped up) 

burgkus, bandla (Eur.) ; (tied up) 

berkas, ikat, kbat,^ gmaV^ 
Bundle, v. t. (wrap up) burgkus- 

kan, balutkan; (tie up) ikat, her- 

kaskan, kbat.* 
Bung (bung), s. (stopper) sumbat 

toiy; (the hole) mulut totg, lobarg 

toig. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, ciire, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin tUn, 



BUNGALOW 



68 



BUSHY 



Bungalow (ljiiii<>'o-a-]o), s. barg- 

la (Hind.). 
Bunghole (-hoi), s. see bung. 
Bungle (-^1), V. t. Imtaty-pul'arg- 

I'cin, h'usuil'an, I'opak-rapekkan. 
Bungle, s. sogeli,^ kerja lintarg' 

puhirg. kerja iamonoli, herja ta- 

kruan (^M.), kerja kmut. 
Bunion (bim'ywn), s. sakit buku ibu 

kaki. 
Bunker (biing'ker), s. kofak, peiak. 

Coal bunker, peiak araiy di kapal. 
Bunting (bun'tino^), s. kain bndera. 
Buoy (boi), s. plainpo7g* boya 

(Port.), bairup/^ wliich also 

means beacox, q.v. 
Buoy, V. t. (cause to float) iimboJ- 

kan; (support, sustain) tan/ g org ; 

(fix buoys) plain poigkan.'^ To 

buoy up one's spirits, itapkan hati. 
Buoyancy (boi'an-si), s. plamporg- 

an f (of spirits) hati rergan. 
Buoyant (-«nt), adj. (tendins: to 

-float) fimbol, laniporg ; (light 

hearted) rergan hati. 
Burden (ber'dn), s. (load) bban,'^ 

pikulan. targgorcjan: (something 

grievous) khratan ; (N^aut.) muat- 

an. Beast of burden, binatarg 

yaig mmbawa bban/^ binatarg arg- 

kat baraig (B.). 
Burden, v. t. bratkan. 
Burdensome (-swm), adj. brat, 

sukar* di-targgoiy, susah di-taiy- 

gorg. 
Bureau (bfi-ro' or bu'ro), s. (desk) 

nieja tulifi; (offiee) opis (E.) ; 

(chest of drawers) almari Jachi, 

hero* (Eur.). 
Bureaucracy^ (bu-rok'ra-si), s. 

pr en tall pgairai* 
Burglar (ber'gler), s. pnjamon ru- 

mah, orarg pchali pintu. 
Burglary (-i), s. hal mmcliah pintu. 
Burgomaster (l)er'go-mas'ter), s. 

prglniln bandar.'^' 
Burial (ber'ri-al), s. hal mrgubuV' 

kan orarg. Burial ground, pku- 



buran,* tanah kiibur. Burial 
service, talk in (Ar.). 

Burlesque (ber-lesk'), s. ajok yaig 
ninibri tertawa, jnaka."^ 

Burly (ber'li), adj. tgap, tgap- 
sasa.* 

Burn (bern), v. t. (set on fire) 
bakar, tunu;* (reduce to ashes) 
liarguskan, rntoig r (expose to 
heat) bakar; (scald) clilor; (with 
red-hot metal) sJar ; (with acids) 
btok:* (heaps of logs) priin.* 

Burn, V. i. (be on fire) kna api, di- 
niakan api ; (fiaine) berryala. 

Burn, s. (injury) Itika liargus;"^' 
(scald) Iclior,* Ipoh /'' chlor (B.). 

Burning (bern'ing), adj. (flaming) 
beriyala; (vehement) galak. 

Burnish (ber'nish), v. t. gilap/^ 
u/jain.* 

Burnt (bernt), adj. di-nia,kan api^ 
Iiar(/iis, Burnt offering, korban 
(Ar.). 

Burr (ber), s. (rough edge) grigis- 
an : (on the head of a chisel) 
pay org;* (prickly seed pod) buatt 
pulut-pnlut.'-' 

Burrow (hiir'ro), v. i. gorokf^ gctUr 
korek. krol\ 

Burrow, s. krok'an, lobarg binataig 
dalani tanaJi. 

Burst (berst), v. i. (explode) Itopr 
(break open, as pods) rkah, mer- 
kali: (as buds) kmbarg : (as 
seams) rtas; (break in pieces) 
berkai."^ 

Bury (ber'ri), v. t. tanam : (in a 
grave) kuburkan, kbumikan:'^ (of 
|)i"inces) niakanikan (Ar.) ; (im- 
bed) Imam. 

Bush (boosh), s. (thicket) smak: 
(shrub) gonipoiy.* 

Bushel (boosh'el), s. sukatan Irggris- 
= ()f gantarg. 

Bushy (-i), adj. (of trees) rendaig^ 
limb an* rampak:* (of eyebrows, 
etc.) Ibat : (of mane or tail) kin- 
barg, tbat. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



BUSINESS 



69 



CABAL 



Business (biz'nes), s. (occupation) 
kerja, plcerjaan, jawatan;* (com- 
merce) perniaga'an; (affair) per- 
kara, hal. To engao'c in business, 
berdagaiy* bemiaga. 

Businesslike (-llkj, adj. (system- 
atic) bperatuian. 

Bust (bust), s. patorg s-l-rat dada. 

Bustle (bus'sl), v. i. hersihol', ter- 
koch oh -*koch li, he rkin cli a ly-kirap, 
kclioh-hchah.^ 

Busy (biz'i), adj. (at work) sib ok, 
add kerja, fa man/, ta'slesa* 

Busybody (-bod-i), s. (a meddlinc^ 
person) prgachau, pij/ga^ggii* 

But (but), adv. prep, and conj. (ex- 
cept) han/a* cliuma, mlainkan; 
(on the contrary, yet, however) 
ttapi, akan ttapi. Xothln^ but 
leaves, tiada lain mlainkan daun 
sahaja. 

Butcher (booch'er), s. piymbleli, 
pnibantai,'^ pnjual dagirg. 

Butcher, v. t. smbleh, bantai, po- 
torg; (murder) bunoJi drgan brgis. 

Butchery (-i), s. pmbunohan drgan 
h>gis. 

Butler (but'ler), s. kpala playan,^ 
kpala boi, botUr (D.) (X.I.) ; (of 
princes)' pnjawat mntapan* bn- 
fara (Sk.). 

Butt (but), s. (cask) pipa (Port.); 
(tliicker end) paiykal; (target) 
mmr;* (of a rifle) biintut snaparg. 

Butt, V. i. (with the head) sondoJ : 
(with horns) tandok; (meet at the 
end) jjak* bertmu. 

Butter (but'ter), s. mntega (Port.). 

Butterfly (-fli), s. kupu-kupu; see 

MOTH. 

Buttermilk (-milk), s. dadeh/' 

tairu (Tam.). 
Butter tree (-tre), s. pokok srg- 

kawarg.^ 
Buttocks (but'toks), s. pi. puiygonj, 

paniat, toigkerg. 
Button (-tn), s. kanchirg baju, bu- 

targ (Port.). 



Button, V. t. kanchirgkan. 
Button-hole (-hoi), s. lohary bu- 

taig, mata jrok.'^ 
Buttonhook (-hook), s. chargkok^ 
Buttress (but'tres), s. pnjokorg 

tembok; (natural, at the base of 

trees) banir.^ 
Buxom (buks'wm), adj. tgap, tgap- 

Buy (bi), V. t. bli. To buy and sell, 
berjual-bli. To buy for another 
on credit, pialargkan.* To buy 
in order to sell again, raeli* 

Buzz (buz), V. i. (of the ears) ber- 
dsiig; (as a bee) berdrgorg. 

Buzzard (buz'zerd), s. The honey 
buzzard, Ian/ batek, laig boi-ek. 

By (bl), prep, (near) dkat, ham' 
pir:"^ (with, by means of, through) 
oleh, drgan; (in oaths) dmi* By 
and by, s-bntar lagi, lagi s-kjap. 
By day, pada siaig hari. By one's 
self, s'orarg diri. By the side of, 
pada sisi,"^ di tpi (B.). One by 
one, s'oraiy I pas s'oraiy, Ipas satu 
saiu, satu-satu. Day by day, s- 
hari-hari, s-hari k-s-hari. To go 
])y land, jalan mndarat, jalan 
darat. 

By, adv. (near) dkat; (passing) 
lalu; (past, beyond) Jargsorg. 

By-law (briaw), s. peraturan. 

Bypath (-path), s. jalan sempaigan, 
jalan sidit.^' 

Bystander (-stand-er), s. oraiy 
yarg berdiri dkat. 

Byway (-wa), s. jalan sulitr 

Byword (-werd), s. (proverb) per- 
umpamaan, bidal ;'^ (contemp- 
tuous saying) sin divan, tlabai.'^ 



Cab (kab), ?. kreta sewa. 

Cabal (ka-bal'), s. muafakat glap,'^' 

mvafakat jahat,'^' pakatan, siiba- 

hat^ 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, miuMS, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CABBAGE 



70 



CALENDAR 



Cabbage (kab'bej), s. Jcohis (E.), 
Ji-ohis tlor* 

Cabin (-in), s. (on a steamer) hileJc, 
hehen (E.), kamar (D.) ; (on a 
Malay boat) kuroiy* magun;* 
(small house) pondok. 

Cabinet (-et), s. (private room) 
hilek; (cupboard or chest of draw- 
ers) bei'o* (Eur. bureau) ; (advi- 
sory council) masliuarat (Ar.), 
majlis sgala rnniri* Cabinet 
council, inashuarat nuiU'i* Ca- 
binet minister, ahlu 'l-mashuarat 
(Ar.). 

Cable (ka'bl), s. tali sank, rantai 
sauh; (of coco-nut fibre) tali sa- 
bot; (measure of length) 100 
dpa; (telegraphic message) kawat. 

Cable, V. t. puhol kawat, pukol iali- 
grap (E.). 

Cablegram (-gram), s. pkJiabaran 
kawat, khabar kawat. 

Caboose (ka-boos'), s. (Xaut.) da- 
pur kapal. 

Cackle (kak'kl), v. i. (of fowls) 
kekek* kakak* mrgakak* ber- 
ktok; (when frightened) berkiok^^; 
(giggle) kekelc. 

Cackle, s. ktok, kiok", kekek, as 
above. 

Cactus (kak'tws), s. lidah jiii* li- 
dah badak* lidah buaya. 

Cad (kad), s. oraig kurarg ajar. 

Cadaverous (ka-dav'er-i/s), adj. 
pucliat Isu, puchat Isi,"^ puchat 
Iseh* puchat rimnai* 

Cadence (ka'dens), s. lagham 
(Ar.). In cadence, berlagham. 

Cadet (ka-def), s. bakal pgawai* 
Cadet corps, pasokan snldado bu- 
dak skolah. 

Cadge (kaj), v. t. inditg* mrg- 
bidiig (B.), bawa prot. 

Caesar (se'zer), s. kaisar (Ar.). 

Cafe (ka-fa'), s. rumah makan mi- 
num. 

CsL^^ (kaj), s. sargkar, kiirorgaii: 
Hrgkaran (B.). 



Cage, v. t. kurofg, 

Cain (kan), s. Kabil (Ar.). 

Cairn (karn), s. timhonan batu jadi 
tanda periigatan. 

Caisson (kas'son), s. 'mpaigan ayer, 
pintu ayer. 

Cajole (ka-joF), v. t. pujok, bujok* 
kechek. 

Caitiff (ka'tif), s. otwg kji* orarg 
jahat, orarg luchah. 

Cake (kak), s. (gen.) kueh (Ch.), 
prgananr jnadah* (Pers.) ; vari- 
ous kinds are, lempinj, wajek, do' 
del, bergkaig, surabai,'^' chuchor, 
jmput-jmpiit, biiyka, asida."^ Oil 
cake, hampas bijan, liampas klapa. 
Spoiige cake, bva,h idu, baidu. A 
cake of soap, s-buku sabon, s-kpirg 
sabon. Cake cutter, trap.* 

Cake, V. i. (as rice in a pot) ber- 
krak: (as mud) bertepek. Caked 
dirt, kredak, gredak (B.). 

Calabash (kal'a-bash), s. labu ayer, 
labu jantoig. 

Caladium (ka-la'di-i/m), s. kladi. 

Calamitous (ka-lam'i-ti/s), adj. 
7nalarg, cJilaka. 

Calamity (-ti), s. chlaka, mer- 
bahya,* kmalargan, mara* balah 
(Ar. bala'). 

Calcareous (k^l-kar'i-izs), s. den- 
pada batu kapur. 

Calculate (kal'lai-lat), v. i. t. (reck- 
on) kira, hitorg, bilargkan, hisab 
(Ar.), reken (N.I.) (D.); (on 
the fingers) main jari; (estimate, 
compute) arggarkan, taksirkan 
(D.). 

Calculation (-la'shi^n), s. kira-kira, 
bilargan, hitotgan, arggaran, taksir 
(D.j. 

Calculus (-bis), s. (Math.) satu 
jnis kira-kira; (Med.) batu kararg. 
Renal calculus, batu buah pirggarg. 

Caldron (kawl'drwn), see caul- 
dron. 

Calendar (kal'en-der), s. (arrange- 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; iise, us, minus, cure, injure, 

hurry; f5od, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin th^n. 



CALENDER 



71 



CANAAN 



ment of time) iarM (Ar.) ; (al- 
manac) fahvim (Ar.) ; (schedule) 
duftar {Av.),jdwal (Ar.). 

Calender, v. t. grus dn/an Jcela^y* 

Calf (kaf), s. aJiak Imhu; (of the 
leg) jantorg btis* hnah htis* prot 
kali (B.) ; (leather) Jcidit anaJc 
Imhu. 

Calibre (kal'i-ber or ka-le'ber), s. 
buJca niulut mriam aiau snaparg. 
The calibre of this cannon is 4 
inches, mulut mrmm iiii am pat 
inchi buka-nja. 

Calico (kal'i-ko), s. bJacliu; (print- 
ed) chit, chita. 

Calipers (-perz), s. jaryka. 

Caliph (ka'lif), s. khalifah (Ar.). 

Calk (kawk), v. t. see caulk. 

Call (kawl), v. t. (summon) parg- 
gil; (by shouting) laorg/'' ruah;'^ 
(as troops) krah;* (invite) jmpot, 
silakan;^ (remind of invitation) 
sonsorg :'^ (name) shot, namakan, 
glar: (arouse from sleep) parygih 
sdarkan, kjotkan, bargunkan; (en- 
tice birds) dkut* To call to 
mind, iigat, knarg. To call on 
(as God), sri;/-^ To call to pray- 
er, batg (Pers.). 

Call, V. i. (cry out) bersru* ber- 
triak; (make a short visit) Mrggah. 
To call on (visit), lawat, mlaivat 
(B.), ynjoiy;^' ziarah (Ar.) ; see 

VISIT. 

Call, s. (cry) tnak, sni* laorg :* 
(visit) shygahan, laivatan;* (in- 
vitation) jmpotan. To pay calls 
(mutually) , berdatarg-datarg. 

Calling (kawl'ing), s. (employ- 
ment) pkerja'an, jaivatan* pgarg- 
an* pegaiyan (B.) ; (act of call- 
ing) pnjruan^' 

Callosity (kal-los'i-ti), s. blularg* 

Callous (kal'lws), adj. (of the skin) 
mmbatu, mmbhdary ;* (in m.ind) 
kras hati, hati batu. 

Callus, s. blulan/* 

Calm (kam), adj. (of wind) tdoh; 



(of water) tnary; (of the mind) 

tnarg-hati, ttap-hati, sabar. 
Calm, s. kmatian argin, tdoh. 
Calm, V. t. (the elements) tdolikan; 

(the mind) ttapkan hati, snargkan 

hati. To calm one's self, tahan 

hati. 
Calomel (kat'o-mel), s. abu raksa."^' 
Caltrop (kal'trop), s. ranjau cham- 

yak,* ranjau mata ampat,* ranjau 

pons kaborg.* 
Calumniate (ka-lum'ni-at), v. t. 

nmpat, fitnahkan (Ar.), jahatkan, 

busokkan nam a. 
Calumny (karum-ni), s. umpat, fit- 

nah (Ar.). 
Calyx (ka'liks), s. klopak buiga. 
Calve (kav), v. i. beranak {pada 

Imbu saliaja). 
Cam (kam), s. roda psawat* yarg 

tiada bulat. 
Camber (kam'ber), s. Itgkorgan* 
Cambric (kam'brik), s. kain kasa 

(Ar. khamh). 
Cambium (kam'bi-?/m), s. slupat 

kayu* kulit nianis. 
Camel (kam'el), s. onta. 
Cameo (kam'i-o), s. gambar tim- 

boh 
Camera (-er-a), s. pti prgambil gam- 
bar, pti fotograp, pti pigamhil 

pta.* 
Camp (kamp), s. padary khemah, 

perkhemahan tntra.* 
Camp, V. i. berkhemah, bntarg khe- 

mall, pasarg khemah, berpondok. 
Campaign (kam-pan'), s. prary, p- 

prargan. 
Camphor (kam'fer), s. kapur ba- 
rns.* 
Can (kan),v. i. (able) boleli, dapat. 

dan (P.), bisa (N.I.) ; (have 

time) smpat. See able. 
Can, s. ten,* tin (E.), kalirg (X.I.). 

Water can, tmpat ayer. Oil can, 

tmpat miryak. 
Canaan (ka'na-ctn), s. neyii Ka- 

naan (Ar.). 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sdre, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CANAL 



72 



CANTONMENT 



Canal (ka-iial'), s. trusan* parit, 

saluran. 
Cancel (kanW), v. t. (mark out) 

paiwy,* pototy, hunoh; (with a 

cross) paiyhali; (annul, revoke) 

orak,^ hatalkan. 
Cancer (-ser), s. (Med.) kaijap api; 

(sign of the zodiac) sertan^ (Ar. 

sarTan). 
Candid (-did), adj. (sincere) tvlus, 

ehhJas (Ar.), hati htul (B.) ; 

(frank) lurus, trus-trarg. 
Candidate (-di-det), s. ahli yaiy 

lindak di-pileh atau di-lantek* 

orarg yarg mncliari pkerjaan. 
Candied (kan'did), adj. hersira, 

hersakar.'^ Candied peel, halwa* 

limau. 
Candle (-dl), s. dian;^ lilin. Eo- 

nian candles, matahr 
Candlenut (-nut), s. buak kms, 

buaJi kmiri/^ 
Candlestick (-stik), s. kalci-dianf^ 

kaki-lilm. 
Candour (-der), s. (smceritj) k- 

tulusan, puteh hail, hati htul, 

ekJilas* (Ar. ikhlds) ; (frankness) 

trus trarg.. 
Candy (-di), s. manisan, halwa.'^ 

Sugar candy, gula hatu. 
Candy, v. t. dra. Candied, her- 

sakar* hersira. 
Cane (kan), s. (rattan) rotan; 

(walking stick) torgkat. Malacca 

cane, smambu* Sugar cane, tbu. 

Cane work (as chair seats), mata 

punai. 
Cane, v. t. palu drgaii rotan, ^sali 

drgan rotan. To be caned, kna 

rotan. 
Canine (ka-nln'), adj. chara anjirg, 

anjirg (a). Canine tooth, gigi an- 
jirg, gigi a-mf' (of animals) gigi 

tarirg. 
Canister (kan'is-ter), s. /en/* tin 

(E.), bkas aya?i,* kalirg (N.I.). 



Canker (kang'ker), s. pkorg, elm- 

hok.* 
Canker, v. t. (eat away) makan da- 

lam: (corrupt) rosak, rosakkan. 
Cannibal (kan'ni-bal), s. orarg yaiy 

makan oraiy. 
Cannon (-ny/n), s. mriam, hdil hsar. 

Cannon ball, pluru mriani. See 

GUN. 

Cannonade (-ad'), v. t. tenihak 

drgan luriam. 
Canoe (ka-noo'), s. Z-o/^'A-; (dugout) 

jalur,'^ saguf^ (Pk.) ; (smaller) 

joiykorg,* 
Canon (kan'^ai), s. (rule) kamin 

(Ar.) ; (church official) pargkat 

padri. Canon law, liukum agama. 
Canonical (ka-non'i-kal), adj. yarg 

mnurut kanun (Ar.). Canon- 
icals, pakaian padri. 
Canonize (kan'wn-Tz). v. t. (R.C.) 

masokkan dalam hilargan orarg 

kramat; see saint. 
Canopy (-o-pi), s. twgkup,'^ laryit- 

lanjit; (in processions) payoiy 

uhor-uhor.* 
Cant (kant), s, serget. 
Cant, V. t. seigetkan. 
Cant, s. (hypocritical speech) per- 

kata'an pura-pnra. 
Can't - cannot (kant), tahohh. 
Cantankerous (kan-tang'ker-iAs) , 

adj. hantahan,'^ dgil, hirgal^' 
Canteen (-ten'), s. (vessel) tnipat 

hkal:^ (building) kdai hagi sol- 
dado. 
Canter (kan'ter), v. i. berlari miy- 

liamhvr. 
Cantharides (kan-thar'i-dez), s. 

dndarg.'^ 
Cantilever(krui'ti-le-ver),s. (brack- 
et) sikii-siku; (projecting beam) 

ra.'^ok miyanjur.* 
Cantonese (kan-to-nez'), s. orarg 

Mdkau, Cliina Knamiorg. 
Cantonment (kan-toon'ment), s. 

kanipoig yarg di-untokkan hagi 

soldado.^ 



ate, ask, am. final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, ns, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin */ien. 



CANVAS 



73 



CARAVAN 



Canvas (kan'vas), s. kain layer, 
hain mota.^ 

Canvass, v. t. (examine) preksa, 
slidek* To canvass for subscrip- 
tions, mnjajah mmmyut yuranf' 
mnjajah puiyut ivarg (B.). 

Canyon (kan'ywn), s. hiibali yaty 
sargaf chiiram, gaorg. 

Caoutchouc (kow'chook, u. s. ko5'- 
cliook), s. gtah, Icaret (N.I.). 

Cap (kap), s. sorghok, kopiah; 
'(white) ktayap* kopiah thai* ko- 
piah ha a. Percussion cap, kep 
(E.). 

Capability (ka'pa-biri-ti), s. kpan- 
daian, kuasa. 

Capable (ka'pa-bl), adj. pandai, 
herkuasa, ahli (Ar.). 

Capacious (ka-pa'shws), adj. luas, 
Iga, laparg. 

Capacity (ka-pas'i-ti), s. (extent of 
space) kluasan, klapargan; (abil- 
ity) kuasa; (condition, occupa- 
tion) pkerjaan. What is the 
capacity of this jar, hmpa muat 
impayan ini. 

Cape (kap), s. (promontory) tan- 
jo rg, hujorg tan ah; (garment) 
haJH liujan s-krat. 

Caper (kap'er), v. i. lompat-lompat, 
lonjak^onjak,'^ linjak-linjak* glin- 
janj.'^ 

Capillary (ka-pil'la-ri), s. umt yaty 
lialus s peril ranihid. 

Capital (kap'i-tel)j adj. (fi.rst_ in 
importance) terutama (Sk.), iau- 
kin (Ch.) (B.) ; (excellent) indali, 
elok, hagus. Capital punishment, 
hukuni niati. Capital letter, hu- 
ruf hmr* 

Capital, s. (chief city) ihu negri, 
kpala negri; (money) modal, po- 
kok; (of a pillar) kpala tianj. 

Capitalist (-ist), s. oraiy hermodal, 
orarg herherta. 

Capitulate (ka-pich'u-lat), v. i. 
srahkan diri. 



Capon (ka'pon), s. ayam kmhiri, 

ayani kasi* (Ar. khasi). 
Caprice (ka-pres'), s. ragam, teiy- 

kali, olahJ^ 
Capricious (-prish'z^s), adj. hati 

ntrambaig, hati tattap, haryak ra- 

gain, hanjak olah,* hanjak iergkah, 

hanjak chrewet (N".!.) (B.).' 
Capricorn (kap'ri-kom), s. (sign 

of the zodiac) jidyan (Ar.). 
Capsicum (-si-kwm), s. lada merah, 

chili, chabai (Jav.) ; (dried) lada 

kriiy, chili kriry. 
Capsize (kap-slz'), v. i. thuykup* 

terbalek. 
Capsize, v. t. tlurykupkan,* ter- 

halekkan. 
Capstan (kap'stan), s. (A^aut.) pu- 

taran saiih, putaran lawary, putar- 

an jaigkar (L.), kepsen (E.). 

Capstan bars, anak bari. 
Capsule (-sill), s. (pod) kulit hiji; 

(of a bottle) pniitop hotol; (for 

medicine) sarorg obat. 
Captain (-ten), s, kaptan, kpitan, 

nakhoda (Pers.), juragan (Jav.). 
Captious (-shws), adj. piyachat,* 

pnchla, suka chla (B.). 
Captivate (-ti-vat), v. t. hambat 

hafi,'^ ambil hati; (please) suka- 

kaji. 
Captive (-tiv), s. orary tawanan/'- 
Captivity (kap-tiv'i-ti), s. tawan- 

an.'^ 
Capture (kap'chur), v. t. taiykap; 

(in war) tatvan.^ 
Car (kar), s. kreta; (with two 

wheels) kreta s-krat.'^ Motor car, 

matoka. Tram car, kreta eleJc^ 

trik,* trem (E.). 
Carat (kar'at), s. timharyan per- 

mata; (of gems) krat; (of gold) 

mutu. 
Caravan (kar'a-van'), s. (company 

of travellers) kafilah (Ar.), arg-' 

Jcatan;"^ (covered vehicle) kreta 

pondok,^' kreta tmpat kdiarnan* 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry j food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CARAVANSARY 



74 



CARP 



Caravansary (-sa-ri),8. rumdk per- 
d^rjgahan, riimah wakaf (Ar.). 

Caraway (-wa), s. jintan, jmuju. 

Carbine (kar'bin), s. snapayg pen- 
dek. 

Carbon (-bon), s. ara?y. 

Carboy (-boi), s. huyorg Icacha. 

Carbuncle (-bung-kl), s. (Med.) 

• ptyakit raja, pkorg mas* pa'ipa;* 
(precious stone) hatu yakut 
(Ar.). 

Carcase (-kas), s. hargkai; (when 
putrid) danur; (swollen and float- 
ing in water) huntatxj.'^ 

Card (kard), s. (pasteboard) kertas 
thai; (playing cards) kartu* daun 
skopoiy* (D.)? daun trap (D.), 
dmin pakau (Ch.) ; (Chinese play- 
ing cards) datin chki, kertas chki 
(B.) ; (visiting card) kat (E.), 
karchis (D. kaartje), (XJ.). 

Card, V. t. s'lsir. 

Cardamom (kar'da-mwm), s. huali 
plaga, kapidaga* puar* 

Cardboard (kard'bord), s. kertas 
thai 

Cardinal (kar'di-nal), adj. teru- 
tama* Herhsar. Cardinal points 
of the compass (Xaut.), ibu mata 
pdoman, ihu mata argin. 

Cardinal, s. (E.C.) pargkat padri. 

Care (kar), s. (anxiety) khnatir 
(Ar. khawdtir) ; (attention, cau- 
tion, watchfulness) jaga, turggu, 
ifgat, pduU, himmat (Ar.) ; 
(charge, management) plihara, 
hla-pUhara* To take care, iigat- 
hgat, haik-haik. 

Care, v. i. pduli, bena* To care for 
(take care of), pliliara, jaga, hla;* 
(like, desire) suka, indahkan. 
What do I care? indah apa k- 
pada-kuf* apa sahya pduli (B.). 

Careen (ka-ren'), v. i. serget, me- 
rerg. 

Careen, v. t. (Xaut.) sergetkan, me- 
rergkan. 

Career (-rer'), s. (running) plari- 



an; (course of life) hal kahidop- 

an, pkerja'an, pncharian. 
Career, v. i. (of animals) lari turg- 

gary-iatggaig ; (of ships) jalan 

laju. 
Careful (kar'fool), adj. jimat, injat, 

chermat, baik-haik, jaga, ati-ati 

(N.I.). 
Careless (-les), adj. (negligent, in- 
attentive) ta' jimat, lalai, chuai,* 

alpa (Sk.) ; (heedless, indifferent) 

hgai,* klesa.* 
Caress (ka-res'), v. t. hlai,* pujok- 

chu7nbu,* tiinjok kaseh-sayarg 

(B.). 
Caretaker (kar'tak-er), s. orarg 

jaga; (of a mosque) noja (Ar.), 

'siak (P.). 
Cargo (kar'gd), s. muatan kapal 

a tan prahu. 
Caricature (kar'i-ka-tiir'), v. t. 

ejek. 
Caricature, s. gambar pnernawa,* 

gambar prgejek. 
Carnage (kar'nej), s. pmhunohan 

oiwg ramai. 
Carnal (-nal), adj. (pertaining to 

the body) deri-pada badan, her- 

njawa; (lustful) berhawa-nafsu, 

lucliah. Carnal passions, hawa- 

nafsu. 
Carnation (kar-na'shwn), s. burga 

tluki. 
Carnelian (kar-ne'li-an), s. batu 

'akek merah (Ar.). 
Carnival (kar'ni-val), s. permainan 

ramai-ramai, kelah* 
Carnivorous (-niv'er-ws), adj. yatg 

Diakan dagirg. 
Carol (kar'ol), s. ryaiyian, puji- 

pujian. 
Carousal (ka-row'zal), s. kltcchah- 

an. 
Carouse (ka-rowz'), v. i. minum 

niabok. 
Carp (karp), s. ikan gurami (Jav.). 
Carp, v. i. clda dtgan tiada bersbab, 

chari ksalahan. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, cany; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin t^en. 



CARPEL 



75 



CASK 



Carpel (kar'pel), s. pargsa. 

Carpenter (-pen-ter), s. tukarg 
kayu. 

Carpet (-pet), s. permaidani, ham- 
paran;* (smaller) hamhal;'^ (at 
weddings, etc.) puadai'^ (Tain.). 

Carriage (kar'rej), s. (vehicle) 
kreta; (deportment) sikap, ha- 
rguri* gaya. Carriage and pair, 
kreta jori. 

Carrier (kar'ri-er), s. oiwy pmhawa 
bararg, kuli kreta. 

Carrion (-un), s. dagiiy husok, harg- 
kai, daniir. 

Carrot (-n^t), s. lohak rnerali. 

Carry (-ri), v. t. (gen.) hawa; (on 
the head) jufijorg; (in the mouth) 
gorggorg; (on the shoulders) pi- 
kul; (between two or more per- 
sons) nsoig,^ aigkat (B.) ; (on 
the end of a stick over the shoul- 
der) tuil* tumpil* tuas* cha- 
kus* chrgknas* pikul (B.) ; (two 
burdens on a pole) kandar* gan- 
dar;'^ (astride on the shoulders) 
julaiyj* (on a sling over the shoul- 
der) sandargj* (on the back, pick- 
aback) dukorg, dokorg (B.) ; (on 
the back, in a basket) galas, ^ gon- 
dorg;* (in a scarf) pondorg;* 
(resting on the hip) kelek;* (un- 
der the armpit) kpitj^ kpet (B.) ; 
(in the folds of a cloth) kendorg; 
(in the womb) kandorg; (as a 
child in a sling on the breast) 
amhiii;'^ (support on both hands) 
ampu; (on the bent arms and lap) 
pargku; (on the palm of one 
hand) tatarg; (hot things tossed 
on the hand outstretched) tatirg;* 
(with the hand hanging down) 
hemhet, Ubit;* (as above, but 
smaller objects) jenjet, jenjerg;* 
(as a child in the arms) rempus* 
To carry by instalments or piece- 
meal, argkvt. To carry off, hawa 
pergi, hatva lari, rampas, sambar; 
(as a thief) tatirg. To carry on. 



jalankan, kerjakan. To carry 
out, (execute), lakukan,^^ jalan- 
kan. 

Cart (kart), s. kreta, grobak* pdati 
(K".!.). Cart load, muatan kreta. 

Carter (kart'er), s. sais kreta aigkat 
bararg, kuli kreta. 

Cartilage (kar'ti-lej), s. tidary ra- 
tuan,* tidaiy muda. 

Cartoon (kar-toon'), s. gamhar bsar. 

Cartridge (kar'trij), s. ptrum (D. 
patroon), kertus (F. cartouche), 
plum, pelor (X.I.) (Port, pe- 
iouro). 

Carve (karv), v. i. t. (sculpture) 
ukir; (as fretwork, perforated) 
sogekf (engrave) lukis; (as 
meat) kernai.* 

Carving (karv'ing), s. ukiran; (per- 
forated) krawarg, sogek'an* 

Cascade (kas-kad'), s. ayer terjun, 
jram.'^ 

Case (kas), s. (covering) sarorg, 
sanipid;'^ (box) pti, torg; (state, 
circumstance) hal, perkara; (law- 
suit) perkara, kes (E.). In any 
case, s-hgimana pun, apa macham 
pun (B.). In case, jikalau, jika 
s-kira-iya,"^ asal,^ kalau. 

Case, V. t. salut,* lapiskan. 

Casemate (kas'mat), s. bilek di 
bawah kubu. 

Casement (-ment), s. tirgkap, jn- 
dela. 

Cash (kash), s. tuarg, warg tunai. 
Cash box, kotak duit. 

Cash, V. t. To cash a cheque, tukar 
chek (E.). 

Cashew (ka-sh5o'), s. gajus, jambu 
smpal* jarggus"^ (?•)• 

Cashier (kash-er'), s. tukarg warg. 

Cashier, v. t. pchat.* 

Cashmere (kash'mer), s. kashmiri,* 
klamkari* kain bulu domba. 

Casing (kas'ing), s. salutan,* lapis- 
an. 

Cask (kask), s. torg, pipa* (Port.), 
Ze^tV* (D. legger). 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire 
mirror ; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry ; use, us, minws, cure, injure, ^ ' 
hurry; f65d, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CASKET 



76 



CATASTROPHE 



Casket (kas'k^'t), s. chmhol* chpu, 
chanda j)ti;* (for writing ma- 
terials) klamdan (Pers.) ; (cof- 
fin) (U. S.) /o/r/,* kraiida* pti 
oranj mati (B.). 

Casque (kask), s. l-loporg.'^ 

Cassava (kas-sa'va), s. ubi kayu. 

Cassia (kash'i-a), s. (the bark) ka- 
yu nianis; (leaves used as a pur- 
irative) sna makki* 

Cassock (kas'sizk), s. juhah* padri, 
bciju padri (B.). 

Cassowary (kas'so-wa-ri), s. huroixj 
kasuari. 

Cast (kast), v. t. (throw) lempar, 
lontar, lotaf;"^ (with a t\\nsting 
motion) halirg;* (lob) umhan;'^ 
.(upwards) lamhorg; (downwards) 
champak, hmpas, hantirg; (pour 
into a mould) tuarg. To cast an- 
chor, labohkan sauh. To cast 
away, buarg. To cast dice, parelij^ 
To cast down (deject), tawarkan 
liati. To cast lots, huaiy undi. 
To cast a net, tebar jala. To cast 
off (reject), tolak; (Naut.) Ipas. 
To cast out, buarg. To cast the 
lead, buarg prumj^ To cast a thing 
in one's teeth, bargkit. To cast up 
(of earth) tambak; (reckon) bi- 
larg, jmlahkan (Ar.). 

Cast, s. (act of throwing) pry- 
uniban;'^ (throw of dice) pmareh:^ 
(in a mould) tuarg. A cast in 
the eye, mata jiditg. 

Castanet (kas'ta-net), s. dandi* 
(Tam.). 

Castaway (kast'a-wa), s. orarg k- 
buargan, orarg yarg kna karam. 

Caste (kast), s. (class) batysa. 
Caste-mark, paiykah. To lose 
caste, jadi hina di mata oraiy. 
Half-caste (of Malays), Jawi per- 
anakan, Jaivi pkan. 

Castigate (kas'ti-gat), v. t. palu, 
seksakan. 

Casting (kast'ing), s. (of metal) 
iuargan. 



Casting-net (-net), s. jala; (with 

wide meshes) jala rambarg* 
Castle (kas'l), s. kota; (in chess) 

tir* To build castles in the air, 

mrgganiaig asap* aigan-argan 

kosorg* 
Castor (kas'ter), s. lererg* kaki 

ranjarg meja dan s-bagai-nja 

[roda (B.)]. 
Castor oil (oil), s. mhyak jarak. 

Castor oil plant, pokok jarak. 
Castrate (kas-traf), v. t. kmbii'i- 

kan, kasi* (Ar. kliaai). 
Castration (-tra'shwn), s. kmbiri. 
Casual (kazh'u-al), adj. yarg tiada 

di-mrgka,, yarg bukan srgaja. 
Casualty (-ti), s. kmalaiyan, ?iahas 

(Ar.)_. 
Casuarina (-a-re-na), s. pokok 'ru, 

pohon chnmra (Jav.). 
Cat (kat), s. kucliirg. Cat o' nine 

tails, jari ampai.* Wild cat, ku- 

ckiry hutan, kuchiiy jalarg (B.). 

The cat is out of the bag, kata 

sudah tlanjur, kata sudah terlarg- 

sorg. 
Cataclysm (kat'a-klizm), s. ayer 

ball: (great change) peridaran du^ 

niu* 
Catacomb (-k5om, u. s. -kom), s. 

kubur dalam goa bsar.* 
Catalepsy (-lep-si), s. pitarii. 
Catalogue (-log), v. t. daftarkan 

(Ar.). 
Catalogue, s. daftar (Ar.), pres 

koraih (N^.I.) (D. prijscourant) . 
Catamaran (-ma-ran'), s. (Naut.) 

(raft) rakit; (boat with out- 
rigger) prahu berkatir. 
Catapult (-pult), s. (used by boys) 

lay<tik (E.) ; (obsolete weapon) 

terbU.'^ 
Cataract (-rakt), s. ayer terjun, 

jram bsar;* (of the eye) slupat 

mata.* 
Catarrh (ka-tar'), s. slsma, sma- 

snia,'^ slesma (B.). 
Catastrophe (ka-tas'tro-fi), s. k- 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, mimts, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CATCH 



77 



CAUSE 



inalargan hsar, clilal'a, halah (Ar. 
bald'). 

Catch (kach), s. (fastenino-) gan- 
dm: (that which is caii^'lit) tairy- 
kapan, ijeroleJinn.'^ 

Catch, V. t. (seize) rhapai; (seize 
liastilj) samhar, i<emhar;^ (cap- 
ture) tanjkap; (with one hand 
(lowniwards) chkop; (in the open 
hand or A^essel) tadah; (in the 
mouth) targkup:'^ (under a ves- 
.sel) serkap, serkop; (capture in 
war) taivan* iatykap (B.). To 
I'atch birds (by snaring), mmikat; 
(with a net) innjarirg; (with bird- 
lime) iiirggtah. To catch fish 
(with nets), mnjala, mnjanig, 
mmukat, miifuykul, iiinjondorg.'^ 
To catch a ball, mnibot hola. To 
catch a train, da pat kreta api, kjar 
kreta api (B.). Caught by the 
flames, di-srggau oleli api* 

Catch, V. i. (be entangled or fas- 
tened) saigkot; (communicate, as 
fire or disease) jaigkit. 

Catching (kach'ing), adj. (infec- 
tious) berjargkit. 

Catechism (kat'e-kizm), s. kUab 
sual-jawab (X.). 

Catechist (-kist), s. prgajar (X.). 

Catechize (-kiz), v. t. (instruct) 
ajar drgan siial* iaiya dan jawab 
(B.) ; (interrogate) preksa, di- 
dek* 

Catechu (-chii), s. kacliu* 

Categorically (-gor'i-kal-li), adv. 
digan itap, digan tntu. 

Category (-go-ri), s. pargkat/taraf* 
(Ar. Taraf). 

Cater (ka'ter), v. i. bri bkal. 

Caterer (-er), s. pinbkal. 

Caterpillar (kat'er-pil-ler), s. idat; 
(large green) id at sntadu;* 
(hairy) idat bulu. 

Caterwaul (-wawl), v. i. mtyiau. 

Catgut (kat'gut), s. arpus* tali 
targsi* (Ch. thdry-si). 



Cathartic (ka-thar'tik), s. pncha- 
har* julap, obat pnjuchi prot. 

Cathead (kat'hed), s. (Xaut.) jary^ 
kar dewi (L.), karary balak. ' 

Cathedral (ka-the'dral), s. yreja 
bsar. 

Catheter (kath'e-ter), s. ptyochoh 
till pat knchiry. 

Catholic (-o-lik), adj. (general, 
universal) rata; (liberal minded) 
hatl Japan/. The Eoman Catholic 
Church, Perkumpolan oraixj Srani. 

Catholicity (-lis'i-ti), s. kJaparyan 
hail. 

Cat's-eye (kats'i), s. (stone) batu 
mata-'kucMiy, baiduri;* (the 
fruit) biiah mata-kuchiry. 

Cat*s-paw (-paw), s. (on the wa- 
ter) kracliakf (dupe, tool) anah 
taryan. To make a person one's 
cat's-paw, latidaskan tulary orary* 

Catsup, = KETcnur, q.v. 

Cattle (kat'tl), s. (oxen) Imhu, sapi 
(X.I.) ; (domestic animals) hi- 
dop-lndopa7i* Innataiy ijary piara 
di-ruma/i (B.). 

Catty (-ti), s. kati 

Caudal (kaw'dal), adj. ekor (a). 

Caul (kawl), s. (intestinal) raniek- 
ramekf (on the head of new born 
babe) saiiipul* tmbuni* 

Cauldron (kawl'drwu), s. (flat shap- 
ed) kawah; (larger) rncliak;^ 
(withi small mowih) kanchali;* (of 
brass) yrensery. 

Cauliflower (koFi-flow-er), s. kobis 
b'liiga. 

Caulk (kawk), v. t. (with flbre) 
pakal* klpatf' (with pitch) yala- 
yalakan* 

Cause (kawz), s. sbab, mtda, asal, 
Jantaran (X.I.) ; (lawsuit) per- 
kara, kes (E.). Without a cause, 
dryan tiada bei'sbab, tiada s-mna-^ 
num.* 

Cause, V. t. jffdiknn . datarykan, sbab- 
kan. 



^te. ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, rect-nt, mere, her, ferry;, ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CAUSELESS 



CENSURE 



Causeless (kawz'les), adj. diyati 

iiada hcrsbab, tiada s-mna-mna.'^' 

Causeway (-wa), s. jalan iambal'. 

Caustic (kaws'tik), adj. (corrosive) 

yaiy mmakan, yaiy mmhakar; 

(satirical) piyindir, mulut tajam. 

Cauterize (kaw'ter-iz), v. t. slar, 

hakar. 
Caution (-s]i?ai), s. (prudence) ji- 
mat; (care) irgat, jaga; (warn- 
ing) larargan, nasihatj^ amaran 
(Ar.). 
Caution, v. t. (warn) irgafkaii, na- 
sihntkwi, lararg, hri amaran (Ar.). 
Cautious (-shws), adj. herinjat- 

iiyat, herjimat. 
Cavalcade (kav'd-kad'), s. argkat- 

an yaig herhuda.'^ 
Cavalier (-a-ler'), s, soldado yarg 

herhiida. 

Cavalier, adj. (brusque) prarg- 

prus,^ ngus;'^ (haught)') somlorg. 

Cavalry {-a\-i\), s. soldado herkuda. 

Cave (kav), s. goa, goha, lohaig 

hatu, givrggarg* dalam hatu. 
Cave, V. i. To cave in (of earth), 
runtoli; (submit) srahkan diri, 
tundoh. 
Caveat (kaVi-at), s. surat tgahan. 
Cavern (kav'ern), s. goa, goha, iya~ 

rai* 
Caviare (kav'i-ar'), s. tlor truhoh 

asin. 
Cavil (-il), v. i. clila, cliari hsalahan. 
Cavity (-i-ti), s. Ikoh, grorggaigf 

(as a surface mine) lomborg. 
Caw (kaAv), v. i. gah-gah. 
Cayenne (ka-en'), s. Ca.yenne pep- 
per, Jada china, chahai (Jav.). 
Cease (ses), v. i. berhnti, hrenti 

(B.), pntus. 
Ceaseless (ses'les), adj. tiada her- 

hputumn, tiada herhnti. 
Ceaselessly (-li), adv. snntiasa,* 
sntiam (Sk.), tiada herhnti-rnti. 
Cedar (se'der), s. pohon araz (Ar.). 
Cede (sed), v. t. srahkan. 
Ceil (sel), v. t. pagukan* 



Ceiling (sel'ing), s. (of cloth or 
canvas) largit-laigit ; (of boards) 
para^^ pran,* pagu.'^ 

Celebrate (sel'e-brat), v. t. (hon- 
our) muliakan, bsarkan, irgatkan; 
(observe, as a fast) pgarg, peganj 
(B.) ; (perform) jalankan. 

Celebrated (-ed), adj. ternama. 
bernama, k nam a an,* terbilaig, 
termasohor (Ar. mashhur). 

Celebrity (se-leb'ri-ti), s. (renown- 
ed person) orarg yarg ternama; 
(fame) kmidia'an. 

Celerity (-ler'i-ti), s. kpantasan, 
pantas, clipat, chakatan.^ 

Celery (sel'er-i), s. dawn sadri (D. 
selderij), daun sop."^ 

Celestial (se-les'chal), adj. yarg di 
largit, deri largit, largit' (a,), deri 
shorga, shorga (a). 

Celibacy (sei'i-ba-si or se-lib'a-si)^ 
s. kbujargan, hal bujarg. 

Celibate (seri-bet), s. orarg bujarg. 

Cell (sel), s. (of prisons) bileh 
kchil, pefak; (of a police station) 
lokap (E.) ; (smallest element in 
living bodies) petak yarg halm- 
hahts dalam dagirg, kayu, dan s- 
bagai-nja. 

Cellar (sel'ler), s. korok,"^ gdoiy di 
bairah tanah. 

Cellular (-lu-ler), adj. berkotak- 
kotak, berbilek-biUk, berpetak- 
pefak. 

Cement (se-menf), s. kapur bain,, 
kapnr perkat, simen (E.). Port- 
land cement, kapiir hitam, kapur 
E TO pah. 

Cement, v. t. perkat. 
Cemetery (sem'e-ter-i), s. pkubur^ 
an, tanah knbur. 

Censer (sen'ser), s. perasapan,*" 
perbara'an,* perdupa'an,* tmpat 
bara. 
Censor (-sor), s. pmreksa surat. 
Censorious (sen-sor'i-?/s), adj. pi- 

eh la 
Censure (sen'shur), s. kchla'an. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fira^ 

mirror ; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry ; use, lis, min?<a, cure, injure. 

hurry; fo5d, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CENSURE 



79 



CHAIR 



Censure, v. t. chla, cherclia (Sk.). 
Census (sus), s. hanchi* 
Cent (sent) &. seii, duit (P.) (Pk.). 
Centenary (sen'te-na-ri or sen-ten'- 

ei'-i), s. uJatyan s-ratus iaJiun. 
Centennial (sen-ten'ni-al), adj. 

ijaiy s-mtus tahun s-kali. 

Centipede (sen'ti-ped), s. Upan, 

hlipan, Jialipan (B.), hlabaiy 

(X.I.) ; (a small phosphorescent 

variety) Umaijar; (a kind that 

•curls spirally) chackirg glarg- 

glary/^ nJat monjgohf^ (that 

curls in a ball) srggulorg. 

Centra! (sen'tral), adj. yaig di 

t rgah -t rgah, pmirggaig* 
Centralize (-iz), v. r. (bring to a 
centre) humpollwi k-tiyah, hawa 
h-tigali; (bring to one system) 
mtukan. 
Centre (sen'ter), s. trgali, pusat; 
(of a lathe) pa)gsi plarek* pargsi 
Inndu.^' Centre of a circle, pusat 
hulatan. 
Centreboard (-b5rd), s. (Xaut.) 

lunas liidop, gaiig. 
Centreing (-ing), s. rargka letg- 

kotgan* 
Centurion (sen-tur'i-wn), s. kpaJa 
s-rahis soldado, liiduhdlaig atas s- 
ratus 'askar (Ar.). 
Century (sen'chu-ri or sen'tu-ri), s. 

s-ratus tahun. 
Cereal (ser'i-al), s. pokok berhiji, 
sperti padi, jag org, gandom dan s- 
Imgai-nja. 
Cerebral (ser'e-bral), s. otak (a). 
Ceremonial (ser'e-mo'ni-al), adj. 
deri-hal istiadat,* deri-lial 'adat. 
Ceremonious {-m), adj. drgan isti- 

'adat* drgan 'adat. 
Ceremony (ser'e-mo-ni), s. aturan, 

pre7itah , istVadat* 
Certain (ser'tn or ser'ten), adj. 
tutu, tunai, yakin (Ar.). A cer- 
tain city, negri anu. A certain 
man, si-polan (Ar. fulan), si-anu. 
Certainly (-li), adj. ta'dapat-tiada. 



tntu, nschaya (Sk.), psti* pasti 

(B.). 
Certainty (-ti), s. ktntuan. 
Certificate (ser-tifi-ket), s. surat 

prgakuan, surat ktntuan, surat 

kiyataan, surat tan da, sartifiket 

(E.). 
Certify (ser'ti-fi), v. t. (make cer- 
tain) tntukan, yakinkan (Ar.) ; 
(testify) nugaku, ryatakau. 
Certitude (-tud), s. ktntuan. 
Cessation (ses-sa'shz/n), s. kputus- 

an, perJnitian. 
Cession (sesh'wn), s. srahan,* k- 

srahan."^ 
Cesspool (ses'p55l), s. plimhah* 

tumpuan lonjkaig.^ 
Ceylon (se-lon'), s. pulau 8 elan, 

pulau Srindit.^ 
Chafe (cliaf), t. i. (wear by fric- 
tion) gesek; (be vexed) shal* 
Chafe, V. t. (massage) unit. 
Chafed (chaft), adj. Uas,^ lechet, 

mJechet (B.), terklupas. 
Chaff (chaf), s. (husks) skam; 
(jesting) olok-oJok, cJiakap main- 
main (B.). 
Chaff, V. t. olok-olokkan. 
Chafing (chafing), s. (act of rub- 
bing) urutan. Chafing gear, 
(Xaut.) alasan tali. 
Chagrin (sha-gren' or shag'rin), s. 

sal' it liati. 
Chain (chan), s. rantai; (ornamen- 
tal, worn round the neck) kalorg* 
Chain, v. t. rantaikan. 
Chain gang (gang), s. oratg jel, 

orarg rantai (X.I.). 
Chain mail (mal), s. haja rantai, 

haju zirah (Ar.). 
Chain pump (pump), s. kinchir* 
Chain shot (shot), s. pluru hularg- 

balirg, pluru berrantai. 
Chain stitch (stich), s. jahitan bkia 

xargkot, kia satgkot.* 
Chair (char), s. kursi, krosi (B.) ; 
(chairman) kjxila maj'lis; (sedan 
chair) usorgan,* tandu,* kio (B.) 



•ate, ask, tim, final, eare, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not. connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minus, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CHAIRMAN 



80 



CHANNEL 



(Cli. kid). To take the chair, 
k paled' an majlis. 
Chairman (char'man), s. hpala 
■ma j lis, k'pala mitirg (E.), Mua 
mashvarat (Ar.), yarg di-pertua* 

Chaise (shaz), s. h'eta diia roda, 
hogi (E.). 

Chaldea (kal-de'a), s. negri 'Irak 
(Ar. 'iraq). 

Chalk (chawk), s. l)atu Tcapur; 
(prepared for schools) hapur hlan- 
da. 

Chalk-line (chawk'lin), s. hnarg 
ararg. 

Challenge (chal'lenj), v. t. (call to 
a contest) minta lawan, ajak her- 
adu; (defy) mhis* mrghisf 
(take exception to) ta'mau trima, 
tolak. To challenoje the truth of 
a statement, dustalwi* hoJiorgkan. 

Challenge, s. aduan, pmixj'kisan.'^ 

Chamber (cham'ber), s. l)ilel' tidor, 
l-ainar tidor (^.I.) ; (of princes) 
Mhh peraduan;'^ (legislative as- 
sembly) majlis. Chamber of Com- 
merce, majlis saudagar. 

Chamberlain (-len), s. mntri da- 
lam. 

Chambermaid (-mad), s. dayaig."^ 

Chameleon (ka-me'li-im), s. sum- 
pah-snmpah. 

Chamois (sham'wa), s. hamhiiy 
gunorg di Eropah. Chamois lea- 
ther (sham'i le^//'er), Jvulit kam- 
hirg Tcnnirg. 

Champ (champ), v. i. t. mamah. 

Champagne (sham-pan'), s. ayer 
arggor pof (X.I.), shampen (E.). 

Champion (cham'pi-wn), s. pah- 
lairan (Pers.), adi (Sk.), jolia7i 
(Pers.), liuluhalaig* piylima, 
pndel'ar.'^ 

Champion, v. t. (support) bantu; 
(protect) plihara. 

Chance (chans), s. nasih, witoirj. 
By chance (miexpcctedly), tiha- 
tiba* aleh-ahh/' datarg-datarg. A 



good chance (favourable oppor- 
tunity), palisa.^ 

Chance, v. i. jadi. 

Chancel (chan'sd), s. (niche in 
mosques, before which the imam 
stands) miltrab* (Ar. mini'db)^ 

Chancellor (-ler), s. mntri bsar. 

Chancery (-ser-i), s. mahkamah 
perd'awaan irarg/^ kot perkara 
watg (E. court). 

Chancre (sJiang'ker), s. mala kau/-^ 

Chandelier (shan'de-ler'), s. lampu 
bercltabarg. 

Chandler (clian'dler), s. tuli'arg 
dian/^ tukaig lilin. Ship's chan- 
dler, pmbkal kapal, kdai baraixf 
kapal. 

Chandoo (chan'do(3), s. madat^ 
eh and a. 

Change (chanj), v. t. (alter) obali; 
( substitute, exchange) tukar, sa-- 
lin, ganti, gilir:* (change posi- 
tion) aleh, jnndah; (as a liquid 
from one vessel to another) salin; 
(as the wind, voice, seasons, opin- 
ion, etc.) aleh ; (money) tukar ^ 
urup (X.T.). 

Change, v. i. berobah; (of the mon- 
soon) berkaleh musim* bertukar 
miisim. (.'hopping and changing, 
rncliah-rncliah ^' To change into^ 
berobah mnjadi, jlma mnjadi. 

Change, s. (alteration) perobahan-; 
(of the moon) peridaran;* (of 
clothing) persalinan; (small 
money) tukaran, urupan (X.I.), 
warg pchah; (silver money) si- 
lirg (E.). Change of life, ;9?<^ws 
daraJi . 

Changeable (cbanj'a-bl), adj. ber- 
obah -obalt : (fickle) rm-hah/^ lin- 
(■hah,f (of the wind) iMncharoba^ 
beraleh-alch. 

Channel (chan'nel), s. (deep part 
of a river) alur, glorg r^ (strait) 
slat: (groove) lurah;'^ (canal) 
trusan;* (means of transmitting) 
jalan. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car. carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; iise. us, minwa, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, avvfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CHANT 



81 



CHASE 



Chant (chant), v. i. t. tyatyi, her- 

dzlkir (Ar.). 
Chant, s. ryanjia7i, dzikir (Ar.). 
Chanticleer (chan'ti-kler), s. ayam 

jail tan. 
Chaos (krt'os), s. ga'ulan, cJtampur- 

an. 
Chaotic (ka-ot'ik), adj. cJiampur- 

ba ur, * chain pii r-gaiil. 
Chap (chap), v. i. t. rtak, pcliali; 
(of wide cracks, as earth) merhali. 
Chap, s. (jaw of animals) pipi; 

(fellow) oraig. 
Chapel (chap'el), s. greja hcliU. 
Chaplain (-len), s. padri, padri 

hagi intra /^ padri soldado. 
Chaplet (-let), s. (rosary of beads) 

tashek (Ar.) ; (head ornament) 

ja in a ig/-' gandek.'^ 
Chapter (-ter), s. fasal, hah (Ar.). 
Char (char), s. kerja upalian, kerja 

liai'i. 
Char, V. t. liaigus. 
Character (kar'ak-ter), s. (letter) 

liuruf (Ar.) ; (figure) aigka; 

(style of writing) tulisan; (qual- 
ity, disposition) tabi'at, prargai, 

praigi (B.), pA'er/t (Sk.). 
Characteristic (-is'tik), adj. yaig 

mnjatal-an praigai. 
Characteristic, s. 'alamat, tanda. 
Characterize (-Tz), v. t. njatakan, 

tunjokkan, tandakan. 
Charcoal (char'kol), s. araig. 
Charge (charj), v. i. t. (command, 

instruct) suroli, psan; (fix a 

price) tar oh herga; (load, fill) isi, 

isikan; (accuse) tudoh* d'awa; 

(attack) sraig, laiggar, tnipoh, 

serhu, Ivru,'^ amok. 
Charge, s. (order) psanan; (thing 

cared for) pgaigan; (accusation) 

d'aivaan, tudohan;^ (attack) 

sran), etc., as above. To have 

charge of, hla,^ jaqa. 
Chargeable (charj'a-bl), adj. yaiy 

holeh niasok kira, yarg boleh di- 

d'aiva. 



Charger (-er), s. knda prarg. 
Chariot (char'i-ot), s. rata* knaik- 

an/-' 
Charitable (-ta-bl), adj. (benev- 
olent, liberaJ) dermawan (Sk.)^ 
murah-hati; (lenient, favourable) 
herkasehan. 
Charity (-ti), s. (love) kasehr 
(liberality) kinurahan; (alms) 
derma (Sk.), knrnia (Sk.), sdkah,. 
zakat"^ (AT.zakat). See alms. 

Charlatan (shar'la-tan), s. oraiy 
yaig innd'awa diri-iya pandai^^ 

Charm ' (charm), s. (incantation, 
spell) pustaka (Sk.), mantra 
(Sk.), taigkal, siliir (Ar.), pna- 
war, jampi, obat guna; (attractive 
power) pmikat,"^ hikmat (Ar.) ; 
(object worn to avert mis- 
fortune) targkal, 'azimat (Ar.) ; 
(curse, evil influence) srapali/'^ 
sranah, tulali ;* (to prevent a 
marriage) plalau.* 

Charm, v. t. (by incantation) jam- 
pil-an, knakan hikmat;^ knakan 
'ilinu; (soothe, allay) taiuar; (de- 
light) siikakan, perkiiankan, ra- 
wankan/^ 

Charming (charm 'ing), adj. (in 
appearance) elok, moiek, jlitaf 
(as a view) permai/^ chant eh 
(B.). 

Charnel house (char'nel hows), s. 
tmpat miyimpan tulaig orarg mati. 

Chart (chart), s. pta laid. 

Charter (char'ter), s. surat prentah 
deri-pada krdjaan; (constitution) 

. surat k'adami; (of a ship) pajak 
kapal. 

Charter, v. t. (a ship) pajak. 

Charwoman (-woom-an), s. prem- 
puan upahan. 

Chary (char'i), adj. jimat, jaga, 
cJiermat. 

Chase (chas), v. t. (pursue) Jjuru^ 
kjar, usir,'* hamhat; (engrave) 
Inkis, nkir.* 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin i/ten. 



CHASE 



82 



CHEQUERED 



Chase, s. (the act) pniburuan; 
(thing hunted) perbni'uan. 

Chasm (kclzm), s. chlah hatu. 

Chaste (chast), adj. sitchi, herseh. 

Chasten (cha'sn), v. t. (punish) 
ajar, seksakan, liukuinkan; (pu- 
rify) sucliil-an, lialusl'an. 

Chastise (chas-tiz'), v. t. seksakan, 
ajar, liukumhan. 

Chastisement (ehas'tiz-ment), s. 
fiel'sa, ajaran, hukumanj (from 
God) kisas* (Ar. qisds). 

Chastity (-ti-ti), s. ksuchian, hal 
mnahan nafsii jirria (Ar.). 

Chat (chat), v. i. herhual, herhcka,"^ 
checheh,^ labir, mlabir (B.), 
omonj-omoixj (N.I.). 

Chattels (chat'tlz), s. herta-hnda. 

Chatter (-t^r), s. hmty, hechok* 

Chatter, v. i. (talk) hiiat hishy, huat 
bechok* grichuu^;* (of monkeys) 
reta-reta,^ krek;* (of the teeth) 
berantok,* glatok* glugut/^ 

Chatterbox (-boks), s. grmyau, 
petes.^ 

Chatty (-ti), adj. chramah.'^ 

Chatty, s. (earthen vessel) klalaigj^ 
garnoh,'^ kuja* gudu* dorak* 

Chauffeur (sho-fer'), s. pnjalan^ 
matoka, draiber matoka (E. motor 
car driver). 

Chaw (chaw), v. t. mamah, baham.'^ 

Cheap (chep), adj. murah. To be- 
come cheap, jatoh lierga. To 
make one's self cheap, murahkarh 
diri. 

Cheapen (che'pn), v. t. tauw. 

Cheat (chet), v. t. tipu, perdayakan, 
smu* knakan, kicliu* kechoh;* 
(in games) (■huraiy, elat, pn- 
churaiy (B.), prgelat (B.). 

Cheat, s. (fraud, deception) tipu- 
daya; (impostor) pnipu, pyyelat, 
pnchuraiy. 

Check (chek), v. t. talian, igah, 'm- 
pary; (verify, as accounts) preksa, 
aahehkan^ (Ar. saiiiii). 

Check, s. (in chess) shah'^ (D.) ; 



(restraint) tyahan; (order for 

money) chek (E.) ; (design in 

squares) chorak chatur* tapak 

chatur* chorak dam-dam (D.). 
Checkered (chek'erd), adj. ber- 

chorak tapak chatur* dam-dam 

(D.) ; (diversified) berobah-obah. 
Checkers (-erz), s. (the game) 

main dam {!).). See draughts. 
Checkerwork (-er-werk), s. chorak 

tapak chatur* chorak dam-dam 

(B.). 
Checkmate (-mat), s. shah-mat* 

(D. schaahuat). 
Checkmate, v. t. (defeat) alah- 

kail* kalahlcan (B.). 
Checkroll (-rol), s. daftar nama 

kuli* Stat (IST.I.) (D. staat). 
Cheek (chek), s. pipi; (impudence) 

m.na* 
Cheeky (-i), adj. mua* To be 

cheeky, dapat muka. 
Cheep (chep), v. i. chi"ap-chi"ap. 
Cheer (cher), s. (mirth) suka-hati, 

suka-chita (Sk.) ; (shout) sorak, 

tmpek. 
Cheer, v. t. (gladden) sukakan hati; 

(inspirit) bii hati' ttapkan hati; 

(applaud) soraki* 
Cheer, v. i. (shout) bersorak, ber^ 

tmpek. To cheer up, berttap hati, 

rayap (N.L). 
Cheerful (cher'fool), adj. ria* ber- 

suka-chita. 
Cheering (-ing), s. tmpek-sorak. 
Cheese (chez), s. keju (Port.). 

C-ream cheese, dadeh kriry.* 
Chemise (she-mez'), s. baju dalam 

panjaiy (pada prempuan), simes 

(E.).' 
Chemist (kem'ist), s. (seller of 

drugs) tukajy obat. 
Chemistry (-is-tri), s. 'ilmu kimia 

(Ar.). 
Cheque (chek), s. chek (E.). 
Chequered (chek'erd), adj. see 

CIIIXJKERED. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, c^rry ; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry ; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, mimis, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CHERISH 



83 



CHIMNEY 



Cherish (cher'ish), y. t. plihara. 

Cheroot (she-roof, u. s. che-root'), 

s. cJiruf, chrutii. 
Cherry (cher'ri), s. suatu jnis buah 

di Eropah. 
Cherub (cher'wb), s. l-aruh (Ar.). 
Cherubim (-ii-bim), s. pi. Tcarubiiui 

(Ai-.). 
Chess (dies), s. cliatur/^ gajali.^ 

To play chess, maiji chatur/'' main 

gajah/^ 
Chessboard (ches'bord), s. papan 

chatur/^ lolt clicdur,'^ papan dam 

(D.). 
Chessman (-in«ii), s. huali chatur* 

Chest (chest), s. saharah* hotak, 
pti plakai* pti bsar; (breast) da- 
da. Chest of drawers, &efo* 
(Enr. bureau), Imari lacM-lachi. 

Chestnut (ches'nut), s. poJcoh 
hrairjan. 

Chestnut, adj. (the colour) perarg. 

Chew (chu), y. i. t. (with front 
teeth) I'unjah; (with the grind- 
ers) mamah; (as a person without 
teeth) goiyeli, gonjel.^ To chew 
the cud, mamah hiak.^ 

Chick (chik), s. (chicken) anah 
ayaui; (window blind) hidai, hlat 
atglit-arghit,^ hre (N.I.). 

Chicken (chik'en), s. anah agam, 
ayam pranjganj. 

Chicken pox (-poks), s. cliachar 
ayer. 

Chicory (-er-i), s. Iwidahan (Ar.). 

Chide (chid), y. i. t. trghirg, her- 
deh* 

Chief (chef), s. (village headman) 
prghulu, hpala, Hna, latin f^ (in 
N. I.) ptgeran, 'dipati, pmharap, 
h'ia. See chieftain. 

Chief, adj. yarg terutama (Sk.), 
hpala. 

Chiefly (chefli), ady. terlheli pula, 
istimewa* terutama skali (Sk.). 

Chieftain (-ten), s. (Malays of 



higher rank than prghulu) orarg- 
kaya,^ datok. 

Chignon (sliin'yoN), s. sarggul, 
dput, konde (Tarn, kundai). 

Chilblain (chil'blan), s. j^cliah kulit 
sbab sjok. 

Child (child), s. (son or daughter) 
anak; (of princes) ptra* ptri; 
(an infant) anak mryusu, kanak- 
kanak; (from 4 or 5 3^ears of age) 
bvdak; (descendants) bani (Ar.). 
The children of Israel, bani 
Israel.'^ To be with child, mrgan- 
dorg, buntirg, hamil (Ar.). 
Child's play (easy task), mudah 
di-perbnat/^ snarq sahaja. 

Childbirth (child'berth), s. hal ber- 
anak, sakit beranak. 

Childhood (-hood), s. masa budak,. 
mam kchil. Second .childhood, 
balek budak, njanjok. From child- 
hood, deri kchil. 

Childish (-ish), adj. kbudak-budak- 
'an, rsmi budak-budak. 

Childless (-les), adj. ta'beranak; 
(of women) mandul.'^ 

Childlike (-lik), adj. sperti budak- 
budak. 

Chili (chiri), s. lada china, chabai 
(Jav.). 

Chill (chil), s. sjok. Chills and 
fever, dinam sjok, dmam kura, 
dmam gigil. 

Chill, V. t. (make cold) sjokkan; 
(cause to shiver) sramkan, gigiU 
kan; (discourage, depress) taivar- 
kan hati. 

Chilliness (chil'li-nes), s. sjok, 
sram. 

Chilly (-li)^ adj. sjok, dirgin,^ sram- 
sram sjok, srirg-sram.'^ 

Chime (chim), s. locheig beiiagu. 

Chimerical (ki-mer'i-kal), adj! yarg 
di-sargka-sargka, yarg di-ivaham- 
kan (Ar.). 

Chimney (chim'ni), s. chororg asap,. 
sromhoig> asap,* smprorg asap, som- 
prorg asap (B.). Lamp chimney^ 



ate, ask, am, final, care, ear, carry; eve, lien, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it fire 
mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; iise, us, minws, cure, injure ' *' 
hurry; f65d, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. ' 



CHIMNEY PIECE 



84 



CHOP 



choroty lampii, smproiy Jampu 

(N.I.), chimni (E.). 
Chimney piece (pes), s. pam di 

alas dapur* 
Chimney sweep (swep), s. orarg 

ijaig ninjapu cliororg. 
Chin (chin), s. dagu. 
China (chi'na), s. negri China; 

(porcelain) pi rgga 1 1 m aigkoh. 
China grass (gras), s. rami. 
Chinaman {-man), s. ora?g China; 

(Stiaits-born) China peranakan, 

Baba, Baba China; (Chiiia-born, 

unable to speak Malay) China 

totok ;'^ (new-comer) China siiy- 

kek (Ch. sin-kheh). 
China ware (war), s. pitggan matg- 

kok, imbikar.^ 
Chinchew (chin'clm), s. chinchu. 
Chinese (chi-nez'), adj. china. 
Chink (chingk), s. (gap) chlah, 

chlak (B.), rkahan: (the sound) 

dniirg, drirg/-' krnchirg. 
Chink, V. i. berdntirg, berdrhg.^ 
Chink, V. t. Unti/tg.* 
Chintz (chints), s. chita, chit. 
Chip (chip), V. t. takek, tokek* 

seinpak* serpeli* clionipis/^ 

chbis.^' 
Chip, s. (of stone) ktul;'^ (smaller) 

bukn : (of wood) fatal, '^ kpirg, 

rompis;^' (either stone or Avood) 

serpeli.* 
Chiromancy (ki'ro-man-si), s. (pal- 

inistry) tilek rtak targan. 
Chiropodist (ki-rop'o-dist), s. tu- 

karg kluarkan bnbnl* atau blulaig* 

di kaki. 
Chirp (cherp), v. i. chit chit, gri- 

c/iaii.'^ 
Chisel (chiz'el), s. pahat; (brazier^s) 

garg,* gogol;* (turners) mata 

plarek;* (stonecutter's) patiig.* 

Various kinds of chisel are, pahat 

sromborg,* pahat kuku, pahat pii- 

tar, pahat pmbunoh,'^ pahat jan- 

tan,"^ pahat lebar. 
Chisel, V. t. pahat, pahatkan. 



Chit (chit), s. (sprout) tunas; 
(small, insignificant person) ker^ 
dH.^- 

Chitchat (chit'chat), s. checheh."^'" 

Chitty (-ti), s. chti, clieti (B.). 

Chivalrous (shiv'al-rz/s), adj. per- 
kasa"^ dan beradat. 

Chivalry (-ri), s. (warriors) orarg 
pahlawan, orarg prarg; (gallantry 
and courtes}') klakiian perkasa* 
dan biidi bhasa. 

Chloroform (klor'o-form), s. obat 
bills-'' (Pers. bihaush), obat tidor 
(X.I.) (B.). 

Chock (ehok), s. pnjargga,* sndal* 
jriinaig.* 

Chockablock ' (chok'a-blok'), adj. 
(Xaut.) rapat-'rapat, habis rapat, 
clikar. 

Chock-full (-fool'), adj. pnoh ssak. 

Chocolate (-o-let), s. choklat 
(Eur.). 

Choice (chois), s. pileh, akJitiar"' 
(Ar. ikhfiar). 

Choice, adj. pUehan. 

Choir (kwir), s. kiunpolan oratg m- 
iyaiyi. 

Choke (chok), v. t. (strangle) ch- 
kek; (with rope) kujut; (with a 
lish bone) ktidargan :'^ (obstruct 
any passage) tinnpat,'^ kamhus,^ 
sbu ;'* (feel choked through fast 
eating) termigklan* nugklan. 

Choler (kol'er), s. (anger) marah; 
(of princes) murka (Ar.). 

Cholera (-a), s. kolera, ta'tin"^'' (Ar. 
Taiin), sakit mi(ntah-berak, ha- 
war. 

Choleric (-ik), adj. (irascible) Ikas 
NiaraJi. 

Choose (chddz), v. t. pileh, akhtiar- 
/.7//^* (Ar. ikhfiar). 

Chop (cliop), V. i. t. (cut by striking 
]"epeatedly) chncfiarg.^ chincharj 
(B.), chlis;'^ (one or more blows) 
tfak, pararg. To chop off, pfggal,* 
pancJiory. To chop up (as a car- 
case), pryyal,* lapah;* (in small 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror: old, not, connect, s6re, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CHOP 



85 



CINEMATOGRAPH 



pieces) chncharg. See cut. To 
chop and change, rncliah. 

Chop, s. s-l'pirg daglrrj. 

Chopper (chop'per), s. parmq, go- 

Chopping-block (-ping blok), s. 
kayii landas.^ 

Chopping-knife (nif), s. pararg, 
golol-.^ 

Choppy (-pi), adj. konchah* her- 
k'ochali-. Choppy waves, onibak 
saborg-m-njaboirj, omhah samhorg- 
iinyainhoig (B.), glomharg kpala 
Ii-ra,^' glomharg hunja Iparg.^ 

Chopsticks (-stiks), s. spit, sum pit 

Choral (kor'd), adj. njanjian, deri- 

hal niryaiyi. 
Chorus (-?/s), s. (of singers) kum- 

polan oranj ninjatyi; (of a song) 

ulatgan* 
Chord (kord), s. (in music) hunji 

s-tala.* 
Chore (chor), s. kerja kcliil, kevja 

hari. 
Christ (ki'ist), s. Almaseh (Ar.). 
Christen (kris'n), v. t. haptiskan 

(X.). 
Christian (kris'chrm), s. orarg m- 

silti,^ orarg kristian, orarg kristen 

(X.I.) : (I^oman Catholic) orarg 

srani, nasrani (Ar.). 
Christianity (kris'chi-an'i-ti), s. 

agama msihi* (Ar. masiiii); 

agama kristen. 
Christmas (-mas), s. liari jadi Al- 
maseh,'^ hari natal (K.C.), hari 

krismas. 
Chronic (kron'ik), adj. mrana, m- 

reiyeh/^ mrargai* idapan.^^ 
Chronicle (-i-'kl), s. kitab tawarikh 

(Ar.). 
Chronology (kro-nol'o-ji), s. Hlmu 

tawarikh (x\r.). 
Chronometer (-nom'e-ter), s. ;aw 

yanj htul waktu-nja Jjagi kapal, 

artoji kapal, horloji kapal (X.I.). 
Chrysalis (krisVlis), s. sarorg 



ulat ; (of the silk worm) indoiy'^ 

sutra. 
Chrysolite (-o-lit), s. ratna"^ chm- 

paka. 
Chubby (chub'bi), adj. sintal'^ 

m until. 
Chuck (chnk), v. t. (throw) cham' 

pak, huarg. 
Chuck, s. rag urn plarek.'^ 
Chuckle (chuk'kl), v. i. glakak, 

glak kak-kak.* 
Chum (chum), s. handai,* sohat- 

andai (B.), saliabat yarg rapat, 

sobat balk (B.). 
Chunk (clmngk), s. (of wood) s- 

krat; (of stone) torgkol; (small- 
er) ktul,'^ bukv. 
Church (cherch), s. (building) gre- 

ja; (a body of Christians) per- 

kumpolan (X) ; (the church uni- 
versal) eklisia (G.) (X.). 
Churchyard (cherch'yard), s. ha- 

laman greja. 
Churl (cherl), s. orarg hutan, oraiy 

kasar, orarg chrobohf (miser) 

orarg lokek. 
Churlish (cherl'ish), adj. (rude) 

kasar, chrobohf (stingy) lokek. 
Churn (chern), s. putaran mntega, 

jara.^' 
Churn, v. t. buat mntega; (agitate) 

kochak. 
Cicada (si-ka'da, u. s. si-ka'da), s. 

riarg-riarg. 
Cicatrice (sik'a-tris), s. parut,'^ 

bkas luka. 
Cider (si'der), s. iuak buah tufah 

(Ar.) ; see apple. 
Cigar (si-gar'), s. chrut, chrutu, 

rokok hlanda (X.I.). 
Cigarette (sig'a-ref), s. rokok, ro- 
kok kertas. 
Cinchona (sin-ko'na), s. pokoh 

kwirrin (E.), pokok kina (X.I.). 
Cincture (singk'chur), s. tali pirg- 

garg, ikat piiggarg, brgkorg. 
Cinder (sin'cler), s. ararg. 
Cinematograph (sin'e-mat'o-graf). 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, earry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it fire 
mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; iise, us, minws, cure, injure ' ' 

hurry; fdod, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. ' 



CINGALESE 



86 



CIVILIAN 



s. wayaiy gamhar, komidi gamhar 

(X.I.), wayatg glap. 
Cingalese (sing'ga-lez'), s. orarg 

Selan. 
Cinnabar (sin'iia-bar), s. hatu 



awi.' 



Cinnamon (-mun), s. kayu manis. 
Cipher (sl'fer)^ s. (the figure 0) 

aiyl'ci kosoryj^ argka not* noml)or 

kosorg (B.), mil (N.I.) ; (inter- 
woven letters) hiiruf hertaiyhupj* 

(secret writing) tulisan rahsia. 
Circle (ser'kl), s. 'bulatan,* bulat, 

limdar (N.I.). 
Circle, v. i. (move in a circle) her- 

idar* pusirg-piimy (B.) ; (as a 

hawk) leyar* 
Circle, v. t. (encompass) kliliryi* 
Circuit (-kit), s. (revolution) per- 

idaran;'^ (district) dairah (Ar.) 
Circuitous (ser-ku'i-ti/s), adj. in^ 

leiykoTc, mlemhory* 
Circular (ser'ku-ler), adj. mlery- 

korg, hertmu puncha,'^ hidat, hun- 

dar (N.I.). 
Circular, s. surat yarg di-peridar- 

kan,'^' saklar (E.). 
Circulate (-lat), v. i. (move in a 

circle) heridar/^^ herkitar;'^ (from 

place to place) herjalan, herlaku;'^ 

(of news) pcliali. 
Circulate, v. t. idarkan/^ kitarkan/^ 

jalankan kliliry. 
Circulation (-la'sh?7n), s. (act of 

moving round) peridaran* per- 

kitara?i;* (diffusion) laku; (of 

the blood) jalan darah. 
Circumambulate (ser'ki^m-am'bu- 

lat), V. t. slisir* kUlirgi* 
Circumcise (-siz), v. t. khatankan 

(Ar.), sunatkan. 
Circumciser (-er), s. mtidi?n* (Ar. 

niudzin). 
Circumcision (sizh'mi), s. khatan 

(Ar.), sunat. 
Circumference (ser-kum'fer-ens) , 

s. lilit hidaian, lergkarg* klilirg- 

rya (B.). 



Circumlocution (ser'kwm-lo-ku'- 

shim), s. perkata'an mlemhory*- 

perkaia'an lanjut* 
Circumnavigate (-nav'i-gat), v. t. 

hlayer kliliry, klilirgi* 
Circumscribe (-skrib'), v. t. hirgga- 

kan/-' hadkan (Ar.). 
Circumspect (-spekt), adj. iiyat^ 

jaga, saksama (Sk.). 
Circumstance (-stans), s. lial, pri,*- 

pri-lial, hal-ehwal'^ (Ar, anwdlj, 

pi. of HflZ). 

Circumstantial (-stan'shal), adj. 

yarg haiyak pri-lial-nja.'^ 
Circumvent (-vent'), v. t. perdaya- 

kan, elalikan. 
Circus (ser-kws), s. ivayaig kuda, 

komidi knda (X.I.), sarkas (E.), 

tvayarg sarkas. 
Cistern (sis'tern), s. kolah; (lar- 
ger) kolam. 
Citadel (sit'a-del), s. kota dalam. 
Citation (si-ta'shim), s. (summons) 

saman (E.) ; (quotation) purgid- 

an* shotan. 
Cite (sit), V. t. (summon) saman 

(E.) ; (quote) purgiit, shot. 
Citizen (sit'i-zn), s. anak 7iegri. 
Citizenship (-ship), s. liak anak 

negri,* hal mnjadi anak-negri. 
Citron (sit'n/n), s. limau hali. 
Citronelia grass (-el'la gras), s. 

srai. 
City (sit'i), s. negri; (fortified) 

kota; (sea port) bandar. 
Civet (siv'et), s. musarg-jhat. 
Civic (-ik), adj. negri (a), as, liak 

7iegri* civic rights. 
Civil (-il), adj. (polite) heradab 

(Ar.) ; (polite in speech) her- 

hham; (not official) preman. 

Civil action, d'aivaan perkara liak 

afnu lierta. Civil service, kerja 

kompni, kerja kraja'an. Civil 

Avai", praiy antara orarg s-negri. 
Civilian (si-vil'yan), s. orarg pre- 

7nan (D. vrijman). 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recfnt, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not. .connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, mimts, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin t/jen. 



CIVILITY 



87 



CLATTER 



Civility (-i-ti), s. adab (Ar.), hudi- 

bhasa. 
Civilisation (siv'i-li-za'sh»n), s. 

tamaddun (Ar.), l-ahalumn 'adat. 
Civilize (-Hz), v. t. haluskan kla- 

l-uan dan 'adaf. 
Civilized (-lizd), adj. bennudun 

(Ar.). 
Clack (klak), v. t. berbunji Moh- 

klok;* (of speech) bJetir. 
Clad (klad), v. t. berpakaian. Clad 

in blue, berpakaian biru. 
Claim (klam), v. t. (demand) tun- 
tat; (challenge as a right) d'awa, 

akui/^ 
Claim, s. (demand) d'awa, tuntut- 

an; (right, privilege) liak (Ar.). 
Claimant (klam'ont), s. oiwy yaiy 

mnd'awa, pnuntut* 
Clairvoyance (klar-voi'ans), s. 

aicas,"^ 'ihnu trus mata. 
Clam (klam), s. krarg. 
Clamber (klam'ber), v. i. rargkak, 

mraiykak (B.). 
Clammy (-mi), adj. (sticky) ber- 

hyas; (damp) hnbap, 'mbal;* (of 

the skin) Iket* bergtah. 
Clamorous (-er-us), adj. bertriak- 

tr'iak, bersorak-sorak. 
Clamour (-er), s. bisirg, rioli, rioh- 

rndah, iigar* geger.^ 
Clamour, v. i. bertriak-triak. 
Clamp (klamp), g. apitan,'^ pnclug- 

ka)ii.* 
Clamp, V. t. apit.* 
Clan (klan), s. kaum (Ar.), sukit,"^ 

suku-bargsa* 
Clandestine (khln-des'tin), adj. 

bersmbwiyi, mnchuri-churi, diam- 

diani. 
Clang (klang), v. i. gmmcliaiy* 

berdmrg* berdroty* berdriiy* 
Clang, s. krory-krary* dro)y-dmry* 

k rnch aiy-krnMiy, ym ratak* 
Clank (klangk), v. i. ymrncliary* 

klntaiy. 
Clannish (khan'nish), adj. yary ta'- 

man dliampur barysa lain. 



Clap (klap), V. t. (as the hands) 

tpok; (place suddenly on, as the 

hand on the mouth) Ikapkan. 
Clap, s. (of thunder) buryi ptir, gu' 

roh;' guntor (X.I.) (B.). 
Clapper (kiap'per), s. (of a bell) 

anak loclieig; (of wood) klntoiy; 

(turned by the wind) bolary-ba- 

lity* 
Claret (klar'et), s. s-jnis ayer ary- 

yor, aryyor tnerah. 
Clarify (-i-fi), v. t. jernelikan, 

bcrselikan, li niiykanj^ 
Clarionet (-i-o-nef), s. srunai, sroni 

(B.), Mar net (Eur.) . 
Clash (klash), v. i. (of sound) ym- 

rnrhary;* (collide) berlarggar, ber- 

antok, terantok; (contend) ber- 

diseh.* 
Clasp (klasp), s. (a catch) gancliu; 

(of a belt) pndiiy; (embrace) 

pJok ; (closer) dakap.* Clasp 

knife, pisau lipat. 
Clasp, V. t. (fasten) yanchukan; 

(embrace) plok; (more closely) 

dakap* 
Class (klas), s. . (group) parykat, 

taraf* (Ar. Taraf) ; (in school) 

kla.s, derjah (Ar.) ; (division) 

bhayian; (kind, variety) jnis, 

baiysn. 
Class, V. t. aturkan berparykat- 

parykat, a-siiykan berjnis-jnis. 
Classic (klas'sik), s. kitab yary ter- 

utania,^ kitab bhasa Grik dan Rom. 
Classical (-si-kal), adj. deri-hal 

bhasa Grik dan Rom, deri-hal bhasa 

yaty halus. 
Classification (-fi-ka'shiin), s. per- 

uturan sperti parykat atau jnis, 

paiykat. 
Classify (-fi), v. t. aturkan berpary- 

kat-parykat, asiiykan berjnis-jnis. 
Classmate (klas'mat), s. kawan 

m ?yaji. 
Clatter (klat'ter), s. Itap-ltop, ker- 

tap-kertop, krory-krary,* yrodah, 

yerdak-yerdok, yniratak;* (of 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire 
mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; i'lse, us, minws, cure, injure ' 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin f/ien. 



CLAUSE 



88 



CLIENT 



feet on a plank floor) gerdum- 

ijerdam. 
Clause (klawz), s. (in documents) 

bah (Ar.), fasal; (Gram.) ary- 

(joia pcrk-afaan* 
Clavicle (klav'i-kl), s. tulanj slarg- 

Claw (klaw), s. (of beasts and 
birds) kukii; (of crabs) spit; (the 
wliote foot of birds) chakar. 

Claw, Y. t. (grip with nails) cMau; 
(scratch with nails) garu,'^' garoJcj 
(of fowls) kais, chalw. 

Clay (kla), s. tanah Hat. 

Clean (klen), adj. Iterseh, perseli;* 
(morally) sudd, ta'bei^dosa (B.). 

Clean, adv. sl-ati, sl'ati-kali, s-mata- 
mata. 

Clean, v. t. cliuchi, herselil-an, suchi- 
l-an; (by washino-) txisoh ; (as cot- 
ton) J)ysar* To clean the teeth, 
hersugi/'' To clean rice or fish in 
w^ater, kosel-. To clean fish or 
vegetables for cooking, siaig* per- 
siarg (B.). Also see wash. 

Cleanly (kleu'li), adj. Jjerseh. 

Cleanse (klenz), v. t. chnchi, chu- 
chikaii, berseld'an. To cleanse 
one's self after defilement, ber~ 
siiclii, bercliebok, beristinja (Ar.) ; 
(ceremonially) anihil ai/er smhah- 
yarg; (from defilement of pigs or 
dogs) sertu.-^ See ablution. 

Clear (kler), adj. (transparent) 
Itnirg,* jerneh; (of the atmos- 
phere) clirah, chuacha; (evident) 
irarg, ryata, jlas; (keen, acute, as 
sight or mind) tajam, trarg; 
(])right) trarg-tmrarg ;* (free 
from blemishes or obstructions) 
tranj, jlati ;* (of sounds) trarg, 
tyarirg. Clear sky, cliuacha, cliua- 
rJia baik. 

Clear, v. t. iraiykan, chrahkan, jer- 
nphJmn, as above. To clear jungle, 
tbarg ; (undergrowth) tba><. To 
clear a path, rntas, rntis* 

Clearance (kler'ans), s. (act of 



clearing) ktrargan; (distance a- 

part) jarak* Port clearance, pa» 

btager. 
Clear-cut (-kut), adj. trarg. 
Clear-headed (-hed'ed), 'dd}. .tajairt 

'akat. 
Clearing (-ing), s. (in jungle) 

chrargf (felled, but not yet 

burnt) rba,^ 
Clear-sighted (-sit'ed), adj. mata 

tajam . 
Cleat (klet), s. tupai-tupai.'^' 
Cleave (klev), v. i. (stick) tkat; 

(unite by affection or interest) hu- 

bora, dampirg,'^ 
Cleave, v. t. btah. 
Cleaver (klev'er), s. pisau pmotonj 

dagirg. 
Cleft (kleft), s. chtah, chlak (B.) ; 

(made by cutting) takek. 
Clemency (klem'en-si), s. kmurah- 

an, bias. 
Clench (klench), v. t. pant; (the- 

fist) gnjgaml-an targan; (the teeth 

ktap. 
Clergy (kler'ji), s. padri, pndita 

(X.L). 
Clergyman (-man), s. padri^ guru 

agama, pndita (N.I.). 
Clerical (kler'i-kal), adj. padri (a)^ 

krani (a). Clerical dress, pakaian 

padri. Clerical work, pkerja'an 

krani. 
Clerk (klark, u. 8. klerk), s. juru^ 

tut is, krani. 
Clever (klev'er), adj. pandai, bijak,. 

cherdek, ahli (Ar.), pintar (N".I.), 
Cleverness (-nes), s. kpandaian, k- 

pintaran (N.I.). 
Clew (kl65 or klu), s. (ball of 

thread) tiikal;^ (hint) pertunjok^ 

'an; (Xaut.) kaki layer. 
Clew, V. t. (Xaut.) To clew up, s- 

tiuiqi tayer. 
Click (klik), Y.i. ktek, dtek.^ 
Click, s. ktek, dtek.'* 
Client (kli'ent), s. (at law) orarg 

yarg rnrgupah pguam,* oratg yarg 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; fo5d, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CLIFF 



89 



CLOSEHAULED 



paVai Joyar (E.) ; (in business) 
omfg berlatgganan* 

Cliff (klif), s. tbiig titygi, thirg yarg 
('hurani, churaman hukit. 

Climate (kli'met), s. hawa. 

Climax (-maks), s. (steady in- 
crease) pnamhahan; (highest 
]joint ) p iinch ok, * hnimcli ok. 

Climb (klim), v. i. t. panjat, naik; 
(hills) daki;"^ (of plants) jalar* 
lata, mlata (B.). 

Climber (klim'er), s. pmanjat, yarg 
mnjalar,^ yarg mlata, as above. 

Clinch (klinch), v. t. hergkokkan 
hirjoix) paku; (confirnij as an argu- 
ment) ttapkan. 

Cling (kling), v. i. (by twining 
round) 1)1 it; (adhere to) Ikat; 
(hold fast to) pant. 

Clinic (klin'ik), s. plajaran mrgohati 
oraig sakit. 

Clink (klingk), s. drirg,'^ dchirg* 
khri'ug, kltirg. 

Clinker (klingk'er), s. talii ararg 
hatu. 

Clinker-built (-bilt), adj. (Xaut.) 
tindeh-kaseh , pa pan herlapis, pa- 
pan hersirip. 

Clip (klip), V. t. (cut off) giintlrg; 
(clasp) chigkani. 

Clipper (klip'per), s. (for cutting 
hair) guntiig kuda; (Xaut.) kapal 
tkirg tiga yarg laju. Clipper bow 
(Naut.) Iialuan seroig, lialuan 
rbali. 

Clique (klek), s. perskutuan orarg 
yatg ta'mau Jjerramah-ramaha'n 
drgan orarg lain.'^ 

Cloak (klok), s. (garment) haju 
kllawarf (pretext, cover) pnu- 
doiy, piyaiuar.'^' 

Cloak, V. t. (conceal) tadoig, samar- 
kan* smhuiyikan. 

Cloakroom (klok'room), s. tmpat 
rinyimpan pakaian orarg ramai. 

Clock (klok), s. jam l)sar, jam din- 
dug* jam tembok (B.). 



Clockwork (klok'werk), s. psawat 
jam/^ pmwat arloji (1).), psawat 
horIoji\^.l.). 

Clod (klod), s. (of earth) gumpal; 
(of clay) kpal;* (a dolt) oiwg 
tola, orarg torgorg* 

Clodhopper (klod'hop-per), s. orarg 
hit tan, orarg kuratg ajar. 

Clog (klog), V. t. (obstruct) skat; 
(choke) kamhus,'* tumpat;"^ (un- 
pede) tahankan, tgah. 

Clog, s. (impediment) tgalian, p- 
numpat,'* (block of wood) pnjig- 
karg; (wooden sandals) trornpak, 
chakiak (Ch. chhd-kidh). 

Cloister (klois'ter), s. (covered 
walk) srambi; (monastery), ru- 
mah orarg berklialwat (Ar.), ru- 
rnah orarg rahib (Ar,). 

Close (kloz), V. i. (end) habis; 
(come together) rapat; (as a flow- 
er) kunchop. 

Close, V. t. (shut) tutop, katop; (the 
eyes) kjam, pjam;* (the hand) 
grggamkan; (the teeth or lips) 
ktap; (an umbrella) kunchop; (of 
bivalves) tatgkup;* (a hole or 
well) sbu* tintbus; (draw to- 
gether, unite) rapatkan; (con- 
clude, consummate) liabiskan, 
slsaikan, slisekan (B.), jtaskan.* 

Close, s. (conclusion) prghabisan, 
ksudahan, kjlasan;* (of a narra- 
tive) tarn at (Ar.) ; (precinct of a 
cat! led r al ) // alaman . 

Close (klos), adj. (near) dkat, ham- 
pir,'* rapat, berdampirg;"^' (nar- 
row) smpit; (stingy) lokek, etc., 
see below; (dense, compact) mam- 
pat, ttal;"^ (intimate) rapat, rafik 
(Ar.), ikrab (Ar. aqrdb). 

Closefisted (klos'fist'ed), adj. lokek, 
kikir, kdkut, chekel,* tatgkai jrirg, 
bakhil (Ar.), ayer di-grggam ta'- 
tiris (Prov.). 

Closehauled (-hawld'), adj. 

(Naut.) niiyorgsorg aigin. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, Her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; iise, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, avvfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CLOSEREEFED 



90 



CLUSTER 



Closereefed (-reft), adj. (Naut.) 
layer habis di-andah. 

Closet (Idoz'et), s. hileh hcliil. 

Closing (kloz'iiig), adj. yarg prg^ 
hahisan, yarg ahhir (Ar.). 

Closure (klo'zhur), s. Tcputusan 
mashuarat (Ar.). 

Clot (klot), s. huhu, gumpal, Icpal, 
kopah* 

Clot, V. i. herhiil'a, hergumpal, ber- 
bku^ 

Cloth (klawth or kloth), s. (the 
fabric) Jcain; (of a billiard table) 
lakan (D.) ; (spread on the floor 
at a meal) sufrah (Ar.) ; (clerical 
profession) parghat padri. Broad- 
cloth, sakhlat (Pers.), kain stg- 
klat (B.). Cloth of gold, kain 
hnaig mas. 

Clothe (klo^/t), V, t. pakai, pakaikan, 
knakan. 

Clothes (klo^/iz), s. pakaian, kain- 
baju. With only the clothes one 
has on, drgan s-lai s-pirggarg. 

Clothes-horse (klo^/iz'hors), s. 
sampaian^ kain. 

Clothes-line (-lln), s. tali pnjmor 
kain, ampaian* kain, tali pryidai* 
kain. 

Clothing (kldth'ing), s. pakaian, 
kain-bajii. 

Cloud (klowd), s. awan; (red) meqa 
(Sk.), teja (Sk.) ; (blemish) cha- 
chat. Eain cloud, awan miyan- 
dorg liujan. iStorm clond, pokok- 
argin.^ A cloud of smoke, kpulan 
asap* asap berkpui-kpul,* asap 
naik iahun-m nabun.* 

Cloud, V. t. (cover with cloud) saput 
aican;* (darker.) kabuskan,* glap- 
kan, klamkanf (stain) datargkan 
rh achat. 

Cloudless (klowd'les), adj. tiada 
berawan, chuacha balk, chuacha,* 
chrah. 

Cloudy (-i), adj. rdop, suram* imi- 
ramj'* (indistinct) kabus.* 

Clout (kiowt), s. (cloth) kain s-krat, 



kain s-climpirg f (patch) kain. 

tanipal; (a blow) spak, tampar. 
Clout, V. t. (patch) tampal, tain- 

porg/^ (strike) tampar, spak; 

(with nails) piikol pakii. 
Clove (klov), s. bujga chrgkeh, butgct. 

chitgkeh (B.). Clove hitch, tani- 

bat ay am. 
Cloven (klo'vn), adj. terblah. 
Cloven-footed (-foot-ed), adj. ber~ 

blah kuku. 
Clown (klown), s. (in a circus) 

orajg klakar, alan-alan,^ pran,"^' 

smar,* oranj la teak (P.) ; (rustic) 

orarg Initan. 
Qlownish (klown'ish), adj. s-lakit 

orarg hntan,* burok lakii,"^ terg- 

kah-laku sperti oraig hntan. 
Cloy (kloi), V. t. jmu,^ muak.^ 
Club (klub), s. (cudgel) blantan;"^ 

(longer) pmntoigf (in cards) kla- 

war; (association) perskutuan,* 

perkumpolan, Map v^.)- ^^^ 

MACE. 

Club, V. i. (unite) bersntu; (to pay) 

berte'yan (Ch. theh-ien). 
Club, V. t. pntorg,* pukol digan torg- 

kat, pargkorg. 
Clubfoot (klub'foot), s. pekok,*" 

cltepoh,* chepok (B.). 
Clubhouse (-hows), s. speles (D^ 

speelhuis). 
Cluck (kluk), V. i. berktok. 
Clue (klo5 or klu), s. (hint) per- 

tunjok'an, tanda, 'alamat, turut- 

turutan.'^ 
Clump (klump), s. (of wood, sawn 

off) reja; (hewn off) bahanf' (of 

trees) gompoig,* tompok, Mom- 

pok; (of grass or bamboos) mm- 

pun. 
Clumsiness (khnn'zi-nes), s. kchatg- 

goigan. 
Clumsy, adj. (awkward) jarggal,'^ 

chatggo)g; (of work) kloloh,* ta'- 

snonoh, rojmk-rapek.* 
Cluster (klus'ter), s. (of fruit on 

one stalk) taigkai, tandan, teig- 



ate, ask, am, finol, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, flre^ 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CLUSTER 



91 



COCK 



Ji-el* roryJcol;* (of grass, bamboos, 
etc.) rumpun; (of islands or 
separate fruits) gur/iimn;* (of 
trees or men) klompoh, tompok; 
(tied together) ranjkaL 

Cluster, V. i. herhrumun, herkum- 
pol, herdompak* herdempel/^ her- 
togkel* trergkel.* 

Clutch (kluch), V. t. (seize with 
hands) paut, cliapai; (in the closed 
fist) gig gam; (between finger and 
thumb) clirgkam; (in figliting) 
chkaii, cherkaiL, chiykauf^ arggau* 

Clutter (klut'ter), v. t. ropak-m- 
pek."^ 

Coach (koch), s. (carriage) kreta 
lamhaigan, kreta plargkin; (tu- 
tor) guru pmhantu; (trainer) 
orarg yarg mngajar kuda atau oraiy 
yaig herlumha. 

Coach, Y. t. ajar. 

Coachman (koch'man), s. sais, 
oraig ijarg mnjalankan kreta, kiisir 
(X.L). 

Coadjutor (ko'a-ju'ter), s. pnoloig, 
pm bantu. 

Coagulate (ko-ag'u-lat), v. i. her- 
huku, berhku* hergumpal, kntal. 

Coagulate, v. i. hkukan* kfitalkan, 
pkatkan. 

Coal (kol), s. (charred fragment, 
extinguished) araig; (still hot) 
bara api; (the mineral) araig batu. 
Coal gas, gas. Coal mine, galian 
ararg. Coal oil, miiyak tanah, 
miti/ak gas. Coal tar, miryak tar, 
(E.), miryak ter (D.), holorg.^ 

Coalesce (ko'a-les'), v. i. (unite) 
bevsatu. 

Coalition (-lish'wn), s. pakatan, per- 
s t uj u a n, p ersk u t uan.'^ 

Coarse (kors), adj. (of size) kasar; 
(of texture) ksat, kasap* grutu; 
(thick) tbal; (of words or actions) 
kasar, kahar (Ar.), tasnonoli, cliro- 
boh;'^ (rough workmanshi])) ta'- 
snonoh, gabas* sergiit.* 



Coarseness (kors'nes), s. kkasaran, 

etc., as above. 
Coast (kost), s. pantai, tpi laut, pirg^ 

gir (N.I.). Coast guard, klasi 

yarg mnjaga di tpi laut. Coast 

line, tlok rantau.'^ 
Coast, V. i. susar,^ rantau.* 
Coasting (kost'ing), adj. yarg m- 

ryusur. 
Coat (kot), s. baju; (long) jubah 

(Ar.) ; (layer) lapis. Coat of 

mail, baju rantai, baju zirah (Ar.). 

To wear the coat inside the sarong, 

berdagatg luar.* 
Coat, V. t. (with metal or cloth) sa- 

lutf' (with dirt) lumurkan, tepek; 

(with sugar) sira.* Coated as 

the inside of a cooking pot, ber- 

kredak. 
Coating (kot'ing), s. salutan/^ lapis. 
Coax (koks), v. t. pujok, bujok* 

cliumbu, kechek. 
Coaxing (koks'ing), s. pujok-rayu.* 
Cob (kob), s. (of maize) mmpulor;* 

(horse) kuda tu7ggarg yarg tgap; 

(lump) bnku. 
Cobble (kob'bl), v. t. tampal, tarn- 

poig.^ 
Cobbler (-bier), s. tukarg mmbaik- 

kan kasut, tukarg jdliit kasut. 
Cobblestone (-bl-ston), s. batu li- 

chin, batu ayer."^ 
Cobra (ko'bra), s. idar tdorg. 
Cobweb (kob'web), s. sararg labah- 

labah; (pi. in a house) sawatg.* 

Festooned with oobwel:)S, berslirat* 

dtgan sararg labah-labah. 
Coccyx (kok'siks), s. tularg torg- 

kerg.'^ 
Cochin China (ko'chin chl'na), s. 

negri Kamboja. 
Cock (kok), s. (fowl) ayam jantan, 

mandorg,* ayam jagok (N".!.) ; 

(tap) chratj^ pili ayer;* (ham- 
mer of a gun) pltop, pmtek,* 

ptek'a7i* Fighting cock, ayam 

saborg, ayam saborgan. 
Cock, V. t. (of small things, as a tail) 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use. us, minMs, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin t/ien. 



COCKADE 



92 



COGNOMEN 



JHfkit;* (of larger tilings) jorykit; 

(the eye) hUakhin uiata, jliry ; (a 

oiiii) ptek.* 
Cockade (kok-ad'), s. 'alamat deri- 

ixida pita di-pakai pada topi* 
Cock-a- whoop (kok'a-hoop'), adj. 

laica. 
Cockatoo (-too'), s. huroig kakak- 

tua. 
Cockatrice (-tris), s. idar jadi-jadi- 

an/^ 
Cockchafer (kok'cha-fer), s. s-jnis 

kuiiihan). 
Cockerel (kok'rel), s. anak aijam 

janfaii. 
Cockfight (-fit), s. saborgan ayani. 
Cockle (-kl), s. krary, lokan. 
Cockle, V. t. herkrut, herkdut* 
Cockleshell (-shel), s. siput krary, 

pni'uy piri* 
Cockney (-ni), s. anak neyri Lon- 
don. 
Cockpit (-pit), s. ylaiygarg; 

(Naut.) hUek bagi orary luka. 
Cockroach (-roch), s. Upas* ka- 

chuak (B.) (Cli. ka-tsoali). 
Cockscomb (koks'kom), s. (the 

tlower) hurya halon) ayam* hnrya 

jirgyeli ayam (B.) (Jav. jergger). 

See C()MJ{ a])d coxcomb. 
Cocksure (kok'sluir'), adj. tertniu, 

intu xkali. 
Cockswain (-sn), s. juru-mudi, 

sraig. 
Cocktail (-tal), s. niinuman her- 

chainpur arak. 
Cocoa (ko'ko), s. pokok choklat 

Coco, or coco palm (kcVko), s. po- 
kok njiur* pokok klapa. 

Coconut (-lint'), s. buah lyiur* 
budh klapa. Coconnt matting, 
I ill a r sabot. 

Cocoon (ko-ko6n'), s. mroiy idat; 
(of silk) indok* sutra. 

Cod (kod), s. s'-jnw ikan. Cod-liver- 
oil, niinjak ikan. 

Coddle (kod'dl), v. t. manjakan. 



Code (kod), s. peraturan sgaJa hu- 

kum, imdarg-nndary. 
Codger (koj'er), s. (miser) orarg 

lokek: (eccentric old man) ///a- 

lyok* pa' pandir.* 
Codicil (kod'i-sil), s. tambahan surat 

waxiat. 
Codify (ko'di-fl), v. t. aturkan hu~ 

kum ataii undaiy-undary. 
Coerce (ko-ers'), v. t. (restrain) 

tyahkaw, tahanl-an; (compel) pak^ 

m, kra-n, kraskan, y ay alii.* 
Coercion (-er'slu/n), s. pal'sa, kkras- 

an. 
Coercive (-siv), adj. yaty nimaksa^ 
Coeval (ko-e'val), adj. sama 'umor, 

s-umor, sama zaman. 
Coexist (ko'egz-isf), v. i. ada ber- 

sania-sania. 
Coextensive (ko'eks-ten'siv), adj. 

sama rata, sa)na luas. 
Coffee (kof'fi), s. kopi (D.), kahiua 

(Ar.). 
Coffeehouse (-hows), s. kdai kopL 
Coffeepot (-pot), s. kipsiau* (Ch. 

kip-sio), pochi kopi (D. potje). 
Coffer (kof fer), s. pti. 
Cofferdam (-dam), s. 'mpaiyan 

nirgrinikan ayer. 
Coffin (-fin), s. lory* larory,* kran- 

da (Sk.), pti orary mati (B). 
Cog (kog), s. (of a wheel) yiyi 

jntra;* (tenon) putiry. 
Cogency (ko'J6'n-si), s. kuasa dalam 

bic/iara. 
Cogent (-jent), adj. kiiat, berkuasa 

dalam bidiara. 
Cogitate (koj'i-tat), v. i. fikir, k^ 

naiy, tfkur (Ar.). 
Cognate (kog'net), adj. (allied by 

blootl) bersaudara, bersanak* s- 

dayiry s-darah; (of similar nature) 

s-jnis^ s-barysa, s-rnacliam. 
Cognizance (kog'ni-zans or kon'i- 

zans), s. prytahnan. 
Cognizant (-z^/nt), adj. S'taJiu.* 
Cognomen (kog-no'men), s. na?na 

kluarya* se" (B.) (Ch. .s'l"). 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, mini/s, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



COGWHEEL 



93 



COLLECTION 



Cogwheel (kog'weel), s. jntra ber- 

gif/i, rod a bergigi. 
Cohabit (ko-hab'it), v. i. (live to- 
gether) lirggal bersania-sama; (as 

liushand and wife) bersatu, s- 

I'tifJoran* s-pertidoran.* 
Cohabitation (-i-ta'slii/n), s. s- 

kdudolx'an. 
Coheir (ko-ar'), s. scuna s-waris. 
Cohere (ko-her'), v. i. berlinhorg, 

jreket:'" (logically) berstuju. 
Coherent (-eiit), adj. berhuboig, 

jreket;'^ (logically) berstuju, drgan 

pcraturan. 
Cohesion (ko-he'zhim), s. perhu- 

boigan, perdampugan,'^' lied m- 

Ikat, krapaian. 
Cohesive (-siv), adj. yarg ber- 

huhorg, yarg mlkat, yarg jreket.^' 
Cohort (ko'liort), s. pasokan soldado 

oraig Horn dludu kala. 
Coil (koil), V. t. lergkar, lergkarkan, 

JUitkan-; (ropes) lergkar, sarqli 

(U). 
Coil, V. i. berJergkar, berlilit, berblit. 
Coil, s. lergkar, lergkaran, lilitan, 

bliian, gulorg, sargli (L.). 
Coin (koin), s. (corner) pnjuru; 

(money) icaiji. 
Coin, V. t. (mint) tmpa warg,'^ tuarg 

warg, bikin irarg (B.) ; (invent, 

originate) adakan, reka. 
Coinage (koin'ej), s. hal mnrnpa^ 

inng, etc., as above. 
Coincide (ko'in-sld'), v. i. bersama- 

'an; (in place) s-tmpat, bertmu; 

(in time) s-masa;* (concur, agree) 

s-kata, s-turut, berstuju. 
Coincidence (ko-in'si-dens), s. per- 

saniaan, perstujuan, pertmuan. 
Coition (ko-ish'«n), s. jinia (Ar.). 
Coir (koir), s. sabot. Coir matting, 

tikar sabot. Coir rope, tali sabot. 
Coke (kok), s. tahl ararg batu. 
Colander (kul'an-der), s. tapisan. 
Cold (k5ld), adj. sjok, diigin-f (suf- 
fering from cold) kdirginan,* kna 

sjok. Cold chisel, pahat bsi. In 



cold blood, drgan liati sjok; (de- 
liberately) drgan srgaja. 

Cold, s. (absence of warmth) sjok, 
dirgin;* (catarrh) slsma, sma- 
sma,"^ slestua (B.). 

Cold-blooded (kold'blud-ed), s. (of 
fish, etc.) darali sjok; (hard-heart- 
ed) kras Jiati. 

Colic (kol'ik), s. sakit mmidas, chi- 
ka, snak, rujat.* 

Collaboration (kol-lab-o-ra'sh?m),, 
s. Jial bkerja bersama-sania. 

Collapse (kol-laps'), v. i. (as a bal- 
loon or jHieumatic tyre) kmpis; 
(as the sides of a well) runtoh, 
ruboh (B.) ; (fail completely) ha- 
bis rosak, hilarg Jargsotg. 

Collar (kol'ler), s. (of a coat) lehir 
baju, kalar (E.), krah (D. kraag) ;. 
(ornamental, of metal) Icha,* ka- 
lorg;* (for a dog) rlarg ;'^ (ring of 
metal or rattan) sintpai. Col- 
lar bone, tularg slargka,^ tularg 
chnak.* Collar stud, butarg dasi 
(D. dasje), kanchirg lehir. 

Collate (kol-laf), v. t. bandirgkan. 

Collateral (kr>l-lat'er-al), adj. ber- 
liuhorg, berdinnpirg,'^ berstuju. 

Collation (k^^l-la'shim), s. (act of 
collating) lial iivmhandirgkan'; 
(liglit meal) makan alas prot.^ 

Colleague (kol'leg), s. orarg yaig 
saina jairatan,'^ oranj yarg sarna 
kerja. 

Collect (kol-lekf), v. i. (assemble) 
/; crk um /)ol, b erh inipon.'^ 

Collect, V. t. (bring together) kum- 
polka u, li im po nka a^* ka mpo rgkan ;■ 
(pick up) kutip; (obtain pay- 
ment) purgut; (gather in heaps) 
lorggokkan; (material for build- 
ings, etc.) raniu.* 

Collect (kol'lekt), s. surat do'a. 

Collected (kol-Iekt'ed), adj. (calm, 
composed) sjok hati, diam, tnaig 
liati. 

Collection (-lek'shy/n), s. (act of 
collecting) hal rnrgumpolkan, -etc.. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire,. 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, f^ort, sorry; use, us, minus, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



COLLECTIVE 



94 



COMBAT 



as above; (the thing collected) 

kmmpolan, hiniponan* piuxjutan, 

ramuan;* (contribution of money) 

(juran* te'j/an (Ch. theh-ien). 
Collective (-tiv), adj. bersama- 

sama. 
Collector (-ier), s. prgumpol, p- 

muigut, piyutip.* Collector of 

l^and Ee venue, pmiuyut hasil 

tanali. 
College (kol'lej), s. sholah hsar^ 

skolali iitygi, madrasah (Ar.). 
Collegiate (kol-le'ji-et), adj. sholah 

hsar (a). 
Collide (kol-lid'), v. i. herlarggar, 

iemnfol% herantol','^' berlaga. 
Collier (koryer), s. orarg yarg mrg- 

gali araig, kapal yarg muat ararg. 
Colliery (-i), s. galian ararg. 
Collision (kol-lizh'uji), s. perlaig- 

garan, antoVan. 
Collop (kol'li/p), s. (of meat) s- 

hrat, s-potoig, s-ktul."^ 
Colloquial (kol-lo'kwi-al), adj. 

(used in conversation) dalam per- 

chakapan; (common or familiar) 

klaziman (Ar.). 
Colloquy (kol'lo-kwi), s. pertidoran. 
Collude (kol-lud'), v. i. herpakat 

diani-diant. 
Collusion (kol-lu'zh«n), s. pakatan, 

suhahat,^ tipu-daya. In collusion, 

s-pakat, hersuhahat* 
Colon (ko'lon), s. (large intestine) 

prot ilia, letgkar prot; (in writ- 
ing) fanda perhntian [ : ]. 
Colonel (ker'nel), s. prglima yaig 

mmreniakkan pasokan s-ribu oraig 

(regiment). 
Colonist (kol'o-nist), ora^g yaig 

dudok di negri asirg. 
Colonize (-niz), v. t. hulca negri 

hharu, pindah k-negrl bharu. 
Colonnade (-on-nad'), s. srambi. 
Colony (-o-ni), s. (the people) 

kiunpolan orarg yatg dudok di 

vegri asirg; (the country) kdudok- 

an orarg asirg. 



Colossal (ko-los'sal), adj. wnbarg* 
bagor,"" bsar skali, s'argat bsar, 
a mat bsar* 

Colossus (sns), s. patorg yarg amat 
bsar. 

Colour (kul'er), s. tverna, oma 
(B.). A coloured pattern, cho- 
rak, dondon* Of many colours, 
werna-werna, pancha-werna.'* 

Colours (of a regiment), bndera. 
To be seen in one's true colours, 
kdapafan bndi.* 

Colour, V. t. ivernakan; (by dyeing) 
chlop; (with whitewash) sapu ka- 
pur, labur;* (with paint) sapu 
chat. 

Colour, V. i. (blush) bra* iram* 
naik main. 

Coloured (-erd), adj. berwerna. 

Colourless (er-les), adj. (without 
colour) tiada berwerna; (trans- 
parent) jerneh, hnirg;* (vapid) 
tawar, ainbar.* 

Colportage (kol'por-tej or kol-por- 
taj'), s. hal mnjaja kitah. 

Colporteur (kol-por-ter') s. pnjaja 
kitab. 

Colt (kolt), s. anak kuda. 

Column (koYum), s. (pillar) tiary 
batu; (of troops) lajur;* (of a 
newspaper) ruargan;* (of smoke) 
kpnl* 

Coma (ko'ma), s. bias* (Pers. 
bihaush) ; (if respiration has 
ceased) slak. 

Comatose (ko'ma-tos or kom'a-tos), 
adj. terlalai, peigsan, tiada kha- 
barkan diri. 

Comb (kom), s. (for hair) sikat, 
sisir; (of a cock) balorg* jeiyger 
(Jav.), jin/geh (B.) ; (of honey) 
saraig; (when empty) sambaig;* 
(in weaving) sisir. 

Comb, V. t. sikatkan, sisirkan. 

Combat (kom'bat or kum'bat), v. t. 
lawan, larggar. 

Combat, v. i. berkWti, beradu. 



-ate, ask, am, finol, care, car, c^rry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, miuMs, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



COMBAT 



95 



COMMA 



Combat, s. praty, pprargan, per- 
la fcanan , perkiah ian . 

Combatant (kom'ba-tant), s. orarxj 
yatg berpratg. 

Combative (-tiv), adj. pmhantah,* 
yanj suka herklahi, gararg. 

Combination (kom'bi-na'shwn), s. 
perk ubo rgan, persk u t uan,^ cliam- 
puran. 

Combine (kom-bin'), v. t. liuhorg, 
huhoigkan, mtiikan, samakan, per- 
skutukan,'^ champurkan; see below. 

Combine, v. i. herhuhoig, hersatu; 
(confederate) berskutuj* berstuju; 
(by affinity) berchampur. 

Combustible (-bus'ti-bl), adj. bo- 
leli di-makan api, Ikas mnjala, 
snanj miyala. 

Combustion (-ch;m), s. kahargus- 
an. 

Come (kum), v. i. datarg, mari 
(P.) ; (arrive) sampai, tiba; (hap- 
pen) jadi. To come about, (hap- 
pen, result) jadi; (Xaut.) belok. 
To come across, jumpa, bertmu, 
jrrnpak/^ dapat. To come and go, 
pei*gi balek, lain lalarg/^ To come 
at (reach, gain), dapat, beroleh;* 
(attack) datanji."^ To come by 
(obtain), dapat. To come down 
(descend), turun; (be humble) 
jadi rndah. To come home, pu- 
larg. To come in, masok. To 
come in for, dapat, trima. To 
come last, chorot. To come loose 
(as plaster), glokak* To come 
near, liampir,^ datorig dkat. To 
come off (happen), jadi; (escape) 
Ipas; (as a garment) tanjgal* To 
come on (of storms), turun; (of 
fever) naik; (approach) ham'pir.'* 
To come out, kluar; (of news) 
pchah; (be known) ktara, ryata. 
To come round (change), ber- 
obah : (recover) siaman* seliat, 
sudah baik (B.). To come short, 
ta' sampai. To come to (recover), 
irgat akan dirt, siuman;* (reach) 



sampai. To come to grief, kna 
chlaka. To come to a head (of a 
boil), tumljoh*' bermata; (ma- 
ture) smpurna. To come to one's- 
self, sdar akan diri; (after faint- 
ing) siuman pula.* To come to- 
pass, jadi. To come together, ber- 
himpon* berkumpol. "To come 
true, jadi, sampai. To come up. 
(ascend), naik; (arise) bargun, 
terbit, timhol. To come up to 
(equal), samakan. To come up. 
with (overtake), susul/^ dapati."^ 
To come upon (befall), timpa; 
(attack) datargi.* 

Comedian (ko-me'di-^zn), s. pran* 
orarg yaig bermain wayaig prggli 
hati. 

Comedy (koni'e-di), s. wayarg pig- 
gli hati. 

Comeliness (kum'li-nes), s. k'elok- 
an, kcliantclcan. 

Comely (kum'li), adj. baik paras,, 
elok, chantek, molek. 

Comet (kom'et), s. bintarg berekor,. 
bintarg berasap, bintarg berbiintot 
(B.). 

Comfit (kumTit), s. liahra,'^ manis- 
an. 

Comfort (kum'fert), V. t. (console) 
hibur, lipiir (Jav.) ; (encourage) 
bri hati,^ ttapkan hati. 

Comfort, s. (consolation) pighibur- 
an; (freedom from pain or want) 
snarg, ksnargan. 

Comfortable (-a-bl), adj. snarg, 
sdap, strihaf^ (Ar. istiruTiat) . 

Comforter (er), s. prghibnr. 

Comfortless (-les), adj. ta snarg. 

Comic (kom'ik), adj. sloroh, yarg- 
nimbri tertawa, prggli-hati, luchu,'^ 
jnaka.^ 

Comical (-a\), adj. = comic, q. v. 

Coming: (kum'ing), s. kdatargan. 

Comity (kom'i-ti), s. budi-bhasa. 

Comma (kom'ma), s. tanda per- 
hntian [,]. Inverted commas, ian^ 
da perrhakapan [" "]. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire,. 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, mimts, cure. Injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



COMMAND 



96 



COMMIT 



Command (kom-mancV), v. t. (or- 
der) suroli, pmn; (of God) fir- 
man (Ar.) ; (of kings) titali;'^ (of 
princes or propliets) sahda (Sk.) ; 
(exercise anthority) prentah, pren- 
iahl'an; (guard, as a fort) lindorg. 

Command, v. i. berpsan, pgarg pren- 
la/i, pegarg jyi-eniak (B.). 

Command, s. (order) hukum, psan- 
aii, firman (Ar.), Utah* sahda 
(Sk.), as above; (autliorit.y) pren- 
iali. 

Commandant (korn'man-danf), s. 
ptgJima. 

'Commander (kom-mand'er), s. 
prghulu, hpala; (of an army) piy- 
lima. 

Commanding (-ing), adj. yarg m- 
mr entail ; (forceful) gagah. 

Commandment (-m^^nt), s. hiil-am, 
psanan. 

Commemorate (-mem'o-rat), v. t. 
itgail-an, hiarglwi. 

Commemoration (-ra'slum), s. 
periigatan. 

Commence (kom-mens'), v. i. mu- 
Wi, nrulai (B.). 

Commencement (-mcnt), s. mula, 
vermulaan, aual (Ar.), ami, parg- 
l-al. 

Commend (kom-mend.'), v. t. (com- 

* niit) stah, sralil'an; (recommend, 
entrust) ptarohJiUn ;'^ (praise) pu- 

ji- 
Commendable (-a-bl), adj. terpiiji, 

paint di-puji. 
Commendation ( kom'men-da'- 

sli/ai), s. pnji, I'pujian. 
Commendatory (kom-mend'a-to- 

ri), adj. gaig mniuji. 
Commensurable (kom-men'shur-a- 

1)1), adj. j/aig hoi eh- di-samali'an, 

padan. 
Commensurate (-et), adj. s-kdar,* 

■s-kadar* (Ar. qadar). 
Comment (kom'raent), v. i. (make 

a remark) shot; (explain) trarg- 



I'an, sJiiuatil'an (Ar.) ; (make an- 
notations) tafsirl-an (Ar.). 

Comment, s. shotan, tafm (Ar.). 
Xo further comment is needed, ia'- 
iisa/i shot lagi. 

Commentary (kom'men-ter-i), s. 
tafsir (Ar.). 

Commentator (-ta-ter), s. atiU taf- 
sir (Ar.). 

Commerce (kom'mers), s. (trade) 
perniagaan; (intercourse) per- 
ramahan.'^ 

Commercial (kom-mer'shal), adj. 
(carrying on commerce) herniaga, 
herdagaig ;* (pertaining to com- 
merce) perniagaan (a). Com- 
mercial house, korgsi saudagar. 
Commercial partner, rakan* 
Commercial scliool, skoJah per- 
niagaan. Commercial town, han- 
dur,'* pkan.* 

Commingle (-ming'gl), v. i. her- 
(It am pur. 

Commiserate (-miz'er-at), t. t. sa- 
garg, kaseliankan, kaseliani.* 

Commiseration (-a'shmi), s. sa- 
i/aig, kasehan, hlas-kasehan. 

Commissariat (kom'mis-sar'i-at), 
s. orarg-orarg yarg jaga hkalan sol- 
dado. 

Commissary (-sa-ri), s. (deputy) 
irakil, oraig herpsanan; (of troops) 
pgawai yaig jaga hkalan soldado. 

Commission (kom-mish'/vn), s. (act 
of doing) lial lumhuat; (charge) 
psanan; (written authority) surat 
pr entail; (brokerage or allowance 
in trade) kamsen (E.), upali da- 
lal* (Ar. dalal), komisi (X.T.) 
(IX). 

Commission, v. t. psankan. 

Commissioner (-er), s. ivakih* p- 
suroli-jaya.''^ 

Commit (kom-mif), v. t. (intrust) 
sialikan, amanaf kan (Ar.), ptaroh- 
kan;"^ (do, perpetrate) huat; 
(bind, pledge) targgorgkan alas. 
Yo commit to menu)ry, lia/xdkan* 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, min«s, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



COMMITMENT 



97 



COMMUNITY 



(Ar. liafadl). To commit one's 
self to do, tatggoKjkan s-suatu at as 
Jiri. 

Commitment (-ment), s. lial tn- 
njmhl'an, hal pnjaral'ati.'^ 

Committal (-ml), s. hal nuyrahl'an, 
hal rinnbuat. 

Committee (-ti), s. jaicatan hua- 
sa* hmiti (E.). 

Commode (kom-mod'), s. jamhan 
kur^l, pti jamhati, jamhan dudoh. 

Commodious (-i-//s), adj. (spa- 
cious) Iga, hi as, lajKvg; (service- 
aide) berg una. 

Commodity (-mod'i-ti), s. dagaig- 
an/^ baraig jualau. 

Commodore, (kom'mo-dor), s. lu- 
piian kapal yaig mnirentahl-art 
Iain-lain l-apal pula. 

Common (kom'm?/n), adj. (bcloiio-- 
jng to all) sania pcrolehan/'^ per- 
skutnan,^ 'am (Ar.) ; (usual) k- 
banjakan; (customary) klaziman 
(Ar.) ; (abundant) jebah,^' la- 
rhak,'^ mlechak (B.) ; (ordinar}^ 
not exceptional) kbanjakan; (in- 
ferior in quality) kurarg haik. 
<'ommon people, onifg hina-dina.'^ 
Common sense, 'akal-panjaig, hati 
prof. Ill eo\nuion, be rskuiu."^ Out 
ot' the common, bukan kpalarg, 
b u ka n a la fg-kpa la ig. 

Common, s. tanah oraig raniai, ta- 
nah wakaf (Ar.). 

Commonalty (-al-li), s. oratg k- 
batyakan, orarg hina-dina/^ 

Commonly (-ii), adv. (usually) 
biam-fya, memaig; (frequently) 
krap, krap kali. 

Commonplace (-plas), adj. kba- 
njakan. 

Commons (-m?/uz), s. (common 
f>eople) oraig kbanjakan, oraig 
hina-dina/^ (House of Commons) 
niajli'^ mashuarat oraig kbanjakan 
di negri England.^ 

Commonwealth (kom'm?/n-welth), 
s. prnreniahan oraty hanjalc. 



Commotion (kom-mo'shim), s. 
(violent motion) kachau; (of 
people) gmpar;^ hnru-hara; (of 
mind) kloh-ksali.''^ 

Commune (kom'mun), s. dairah"^ 
di nrgri Fransis. 

Commune (kom-mun'), v. i. ber- 
bichara, her mash uarat (Ar.) ; (re- 
ceive the Communion) makan Per- 
jannian Tuhan (X.). 

Communicable (-i-ka-bl), adj. (of 
diseases) yanj boleh berjargkit ; (of 
knowledge) yarg boleh di-bri iahu. 

Communicant (-IvYait), s. oraig 
ipirg makan rerjamuan Tnlian 

(X.). 

Communicate (-kat), v. t. (bes- 
tow) bri; (of God) knrnlakan 
(Sk.) ; (convey) baiva; (make 
known) bri iahu, nialumkan 
(Ar.). 

Communicate, v. i. (have inter- 
couj-se) berrhampur, bersatu, ber- 
ramah-raniahan f^ (be connected) 
berhuboig; (receive the Commu- 
nion) makan Ferjamuan Tuhan 
(X.). 

Communication (-ka'sh/ai), s. (of 
disease) hal mnjargkit; (of in- 
formation) briia (Sk.), khabar; 
( i] 1 tercourse ) pe rrama h a /? /* per- 
skutuan;-^ (connection) perhu- 
bofgan. 

Communicative (-ka-tiv), adj. 
yarg suka berkhabar, perraniah. 

Communion (-yim), s. (act of 
sharing ) persk u f uan ;* ( familiar in- 
tercourse) perramahanf' (fellow- 
si lip) persahabatan; (body of 
(Christians) perkumpolan (X.) ; 
(the Ijord's Supper) Ferjamuan 
Tuhan (X.). 

Communism (koni'mri-nizm), s. 
peraturan bagi mmperskutukan s- 
gala herta oraig.^^ 

Community (kom-mun'i-ti), s. 
(common possession) pershutu- 
anf' (a body of people) perk urn- 



ate, ask, am. final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; iise, us, mini/s, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



COMMUTABLE 



98 



COMPILATION 



polan; (^ocietv at large) oraty 
banjak. 

Commutable (kom-juut'a-bl), adj. 
yanj boleh di-iul'ar. 

Commutation (korn'mfi-tri'sh zm) , 
^. pviinkaran. 

Commute (kom-mut'), y. t. tukar; 
(a jmnislmu'iit) rergankan. 

Compact (-pakt'), adj. (firm) itap: 
(densely packed) mam pal, ssak, 
rapat: (solid) aniapr' mantap/'' 
pad II r pjal :'^ (of discourse) rerg- 
ka^r 

Compact (kom'])a,kt)^ s. perjanjian, 
pa ka I a II. 

Companion (kain-pau'vun), s. Im- 
wan, mil aha I , sohat, liandai/' so- 
hai andr (B.). faulan.'-' iman_^ 
rakanr n/aparg^' 

Companionable (-a-bl), adj. ra- 
mah-miiiali:^ 

Company (kum'pa-iii), s. (fellow- 
slii) ) ) pc rmJi a baiaii : ( assemblage 
of persons) pcrkumpolan. Mom- 
pok; (guests) jamnan f^ (associ- 
ation) pcrskuiuanj^^ mdarg/^ korgsi 
(Cli.) ^sh a rikah (At.) ; (of troops) 
pasokan. In company (travel- 
ling), hersa'iiig^' 

Comparable (kom'pa-ra-bl), adj. 
s-lara. s-lolok* s-hwndirg. 

Comparative (kom-par'a-tiv), adj. 
'(comparing) yani mmbandirg; 
(relative) drgan kdar-nja/^' digan 
kadar-rga'^ (Ar. qadar). 

Compare (kom-par'), v. t. bandhg, 
bandirgkan, folok;^ (liken) mn- 
paiiiakan. mniakati. 

Comparison f-pai-'i-sn), s. (act of 
comparing) hal mmbandiig : (state 
of Ijeing compared) bandirg, tara, 
toJok :* (similitude) perumpama- 
'an, iiK'stal (Ar. mithal), Mas 
(Ar.). Beyond comparison, tiada 
iara-tga. I lad a bandirg-iya. 

Compartment (-part'mrnt), s. 
pctak, kolak. 

Compass (kmn'pas), s. (limit, 



bonndary) swpadan, pcrhbgga- 
'an :'^^ (the instrument) pdoman* 
koinpas (E.). 

Compass, v. t. (go round) hlilirgi; 
(suri'onnd) kponj; (circumvent^ 
accomj)lJsli ) sampaikan. 

Compasses (-ez), s. pi. jargka* 

Compassion (kom-pash'zm), s. sa- 
yaig, bias. ka-<ehan : (of God) rah- 
wal (Ar.). 

Compassionate (-et), adj. her- 
kasp/ian, piyayarg^' bias kati; (of 
Clod) rah man (Ar.). rahim (Ar.). 

Compatibility (-imt'i-biri-ti), s. 
persiiijuan. 

Compatible (-bl). adj. herstuju, 
berstiijiian. berfiaiidan, padun. 

Compatriot (-pa'tri-ot), s. orayg s- 
tiegri. 

Compeer (-per'), s. bandirg, tara, s- 
baya. 

Compel (-pel'), v. t. pal-m, gagaJii,*' 
kraskan. 

Compendious (-pen'di-?^s), adj. 
rergka^.'^'' 

Compendium (-uin), s. rerykasan.*^ 

Compensate (kom'pen-sat), v. t. 
ha I as, ganii, si/eh.'^' 

Compensation (-sa'slmn), s. ganti' 
krugian, baJasan, imhoh;* (for 
mnrder) bargun* diaf (Ar.). 

Compete (kom-pet') v. i. lawan, 
ad II, bertandiig,^' bertandirg her- 
jaf (in a race) herkimba; (in 
wi-estling) gluf.'^' To compete at 
footljall, hertandiiy futboJ,* larvan 
main fuibol (B.). 

Competence (kom'pe-t^ns), s. (fit- 
ness) kpatuian, la yak:* (sufHcien- 
cy) k/>ada'an.'^' 

Competent (-tent), adj. (ade- 
quate) chid-op. pada:* (suitable) 
patui, layakr padan. 

Competition (-tisli'z/n), adj. per» 
lairanan, peraduan. 

Competitor (kom-pet'i-ter), s. la- 
van, onng yaig be radii-. 

Compilation (kom'pi-la'sli?/n), s. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror: old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

iiiirry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



COMPILE 



99 



COMPOSED 



lial mramu* surat; (that which is 
compiled) ranuian* surat. 
Compile (kom-pir), v. t. ramir 

■<urat. 
Complacency (-plfi'sen-si), s. sudi, 

lull herknan, kredlaan (Ar.). 
Complacent (-sent), adj. berknan, 

sudi, redla (Ar.). 
Complain ( -pla n' ) , y. i. ( murmur ) 
sKtgut^ rotok;^ (make accusation) 
adu. To complain of, tudoh/^ 
Complainant (-ant), s. prgadu, p- 

nudoh* pnd'awa. 
Complaint (-plant'), s. (murmur) 
•^Nrgutan; (illness) piyakit; (ac- 
cusation) ptgaduan, tudolwnj^ 
d'awaan. To make a complaint, 
migadii, klakh (N.I.) (D. klaag). 
Complement (kom'ple-m^nt), s. 
(that which completes) pig g nap- 
an; (full quantity) khgkapanf' 
(completeness) ksinpuniaan. 
Complete (kom-plet'j, adj. (noth- 
ing lacking) chukop, gnap, Irgkap; 
(perfect) snipurna; (finished, con- 
cluded) sudah, hah is, jlas, slsai* 
slise (B.). 
Complete, y. t. diukfjpkan, gnapkan, 
pnolii/^ smpurnakan, sudahkan, 
hahiskan, jlaskan,'^ slsaikan/^ slise- 
kan (B.), as above; (the stud.y of 
the Koran) khaianiMn (x\r.)'.' 
Completely (-li), adv. dtgan s- 
chukop-rya, dtgan s-pnoh-nja, drgan 
smpurna-nia, liahis, s-habis-hahis, 
s-pnoh'pnoh , s-mata^mata. 
Completion (-ple'sh^/n), s. (act of 
completing) piyudahanf (state of 
being complete) kmdahan, prg- 
hahisan, ksnipiirnaan; (of the 
study of the Koran) kJtatam 
(Ar.). . 

(kom'pleks), adj. (coin- 

h e rbagai-haga i. pa n ch a- 

(complicated) mgu-^ 



Complex 

posite) 
ragani;^ 
ragu.'^' 
Complexion 



(kom-plek'shmi), 



(of the face) aifer-inuka, sri-mnka; 
(general aspect) rapa, hal. 
Complexity (-pleks'i-ti), s. see 

COMPLEX. 

Compliance (-2)li'ans), s. klulnS' 

(/?//•' kkahidan* (Ar. qabul). 
Complicate (kom'pli-kat), v. t. 
kusutkan, kachauka?i, kJam-kahot- 
kan, ragukan.^' 
Complicated (-('d), adj. ragn- 
ragu/^ knsat, klam-kahoi; ier- 
simpol. 
Complication (-kfi'sh/yn), s. ragn:^ 
klam-h-abot, sunpolan, kusulan, 
champuran. 
Complicity (kom-plis'i-ti), s. pur- 

.^kutuan* snbahat,^ pakafan. 
Compliment (kom'pli-nipnt), s. 
(greeting) tabek, salam; (to a 
prince) smbah; (expression of 
approbation) piiji-pujian; (con- 
gratulation) perbhagia'an (iSk.). 
Compliment (-ment) v. t. (praise) 
puji; (congratulate) sboikan bha- 
gia (Sk.), bhagiakaif (Sk.). 
Complimentary (-men'ta-ri), adj. 

yaig mnuiji. 
Comply (IvMn-pir), v. i. (give con- 
sent) kabid^ (Ar. qabul)', lulus* 
To comply with (a request), sam- 
paikan, lorotgkanf' (a person) 
iurnf. 
Component (po'nent), adj. yaig 
nmjadikau. Component parts of 
the body, bhagian yarg mnjadikaii 
ha dan, aiggota. 
Comport (-port'), y. t. To comport 
one's self, ber/aku,'^' bawa din, 
lakukan diri."^ 
Compose (-poz'), y. t. (put to- 
gether) liuborgkan, rapaikan, re- 
kaf (form, constitute) jadi, jadi- 
kan; (by mental labour) kararg, 
ruchanakanf (of yerses) ik'at 
ipantun) ; (soothe, calm) tnarg- 
kan liati. 
Composed (-pozd'), adj. inarg liaii, 
sjok liati. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, ree^'nt, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire 
mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorrv; use, us, mini/s, cure, injure, ' 

hiirrv; food, foot, awfool (a^vful) ; law, how, oil; thin ^en. 



COMPOSER 



100 



CONCEDE 



Composer (-poz'er), s. pfl/ara}y; 
(of music) prgararg lagu. 

Composite (kom'po-zit, r. s. kom- 
poz'it), adj. (com pounded) cliani- 
puran. 

Composition (kooi'po-zisli'/ni), s. 
(act oJ' composing) lidl mrgaranf; 
(combination) reliaan,^ cliampur- 
an; (literary ) karaifjan: (settle- 
ment of debt) kjlasanJ^^ 

Compositor (kom-poz'i-ter), s. 
(printino-) prgatur Jniriif (Ar.). 

Composure (-po'zlini-), s. biaiy 
hati. 

Compound (koni-pownd'). v. t. (by 
combining) cliampiir, (pud: (as 
medicine) banrholi/^ pudif'' (ad- 
'just by agi-eement) slmihm drgan 
muafalal/'' 

Compound (kom'pownd), adj. ter- 
cltampur, terliahoig. Compound 
liouse, rurnali hampoig. Com- 
pound fracture, pataJi-rio'k,^ pa- 
tah-rmol-.'^i 

Compound, s. (mixture) cJiampur- 
an : (enclosure round a liouse) lia- 
laiaan, kamporg riimah. 

Comprehend (kom'pre-bend'), y. t. 
(include, comprise) muai, han- 
dorg; (understand) migerti, pa- 
h Clin , 7)1 afh um { Ar. ) . 

Comprehensible (-lien'si-bl), adj. 
yatg holelt di-kandorg , yaig dapai 
orarg mrgeiii. 

Comprehension (-hcn'slum), s. 
pigeriiau. 

Comprehensive (-hen'siv), adj. 
yarg hcrisi Imrgah, yaig miiat ba- 
npik, yarg ntfgandorg hanpdi per- 
kara, hws. 

Compress (kom-pres'), v. t. inain- 
pat, asak, 'int.* 

Compress (kom'pres), s. (bandage) 
haiiit. Cold compress, jarani.'-' 

Compressible (kom-pres'i-bl), adj. 
yarg holeh di-mampatj, yarg dapat 
di-rat/^ 



Compression (-presh'i/n), s. prg~ 
axaVan. pmampaian. 

Comprise (-prTz'), v. t. kandorg,*- 
muai, herm. 

Compromise (kom'pro-miz), s. 
(settlement) hal shai digari mna- 
fakatf' (prejudicial concession) 
hal ktia hndiana. 

Compromise, v. t. (settle by ar- 
biti'ation) slsaikan digan miia- 
fakal;'^' (endanger life or reput- 
ation) bawa bnrhana; (pledge) 
kiia masoh pajanjian; (connect 
with a crime) bahit, terbaUt (B.), 

Compulsion (kom-pursh«n), s. 
paksa. 

Compulsory (-so-ri), adj. (com- 
pelling) yatg nimaksa; (obliga- 
tory) hams, icajib (Ar.), ferdlu 
(Ar.), pei'lu (ISM.), yatg nisti 
(B.). 

Compunction (-pungk'shwn), s. 
sdeli di hati sbab miysaJ. 

Computation (kom'pu-ta'shz/n), s. 
hitorgan, bilaigaih, kua-kira, arg- 
garan. 

Compute (kom-puf), v. t. hilarg, 
hitoig, kira-kira, /r/.sY<?>* (Ar. Hi- 
mb), arggar. 

Comrade (kom'red), s. kaican, liati- 
dalf^ mhabut, see comj'axtox. 

Con (kon), v. t. blajar, luigaji. 

Concatenation (kon-kat'e-ua'- 

sb?m), s. beiiurid'tiirutaii, pa'* 
h uhoigan. 

Concave (kong'kav or kon'kay), 
adj. liiorgkornJ^ 

Conceal (kon-sel'), v. t. (hide) sm* 
binyilwi; (cover up) tntop, lin- 
dorgkan, Utiipr (withhold know- 
ledge) miliar.* 

Concealed (-seld') adj. tei'lindoig. 

Concealment (-sel'm^'nt), s. sm- 
binyi, peiimdoigan,, kmnmrav.* 

Concede (-sed'), v. t. (yield, sur- 
render) bri; (grant, permit) lu- 
luskan;* (acknowledge, admit to 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carrv; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire,. 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, ns, minxs, cure, injure, 

hiirry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin t/ten. 



CONCEIT 



101 



CONCORDANCE 



be true) mirjahu, berikrar (Ar. 
aqrdr) . 

Conceit (-set'), s. (idea, concep- 
tion) mjrjl'a, jihiran; (vanity) 
^omboiT], clioryl'ok, horghak* 
btr/ah* ' 

Conceited (-ed), adj. borgkah/^ 
bsar liaii, brrjah* dakar* To be- 
come conceited, dapat liati. 

Conceivable (-sev'a-bl), adj. yarg 
boleli di-saryka. 

Conceive (-sev'), v. t. mnjandorg, 
buntirgkan, haniilkan (A.T.) ; (form 
in the mi]id) rundirg* berronderg 
(B.), fikirkan, saigkakan; (under- 
stand, apprehend) dapat taliu, m- 
rgerti. 

Conceive, v. i. kandoig/^ mrgan- 
dorg, biuitirg, hamil (Ar.). 

Concentrate (kon's^n-trat), v. t. 
kvmpolkari k-trgah* iumpukanf^ 
rapatkan; (condense, as liquids) 
pkatka7i. 

Concentric (kon-sen'trik), adj. (of 
circles) yarg sama s-piisai. 

Concept (kon'sept), s. sargka, nin- 
dirgan* fikiran. 

Conception (kon-sep'sh?/n), s. (of 
the embryo) hal mrgayidorg ; (in 
the mind) rundifgan* fikiran, 
migka; (apprehension) pigeriian. 

Concern (-sern'), v. t. (relate to, 
affect) intarg,'^' kna-migna; {in- 
lerest) pduli; (be solicitous) kliua- 
fir (Ar. khawarir), bimbarg. 

Concern, s. (atfair) hal, perkara; 
(solicitude) kJivaiir; (business) 
perniaga'an. 

Concerning (-ing), prop, deri-hah 
faml, iniatg* aZ'^??.* 

Concert (kon-sert'), v. t. (plan to- 
gether) jxikat, muafalcatkan (Ar.), 
rundirgkan.^' 

Concert, v. i. /mkaf, bermuafakai 
(Ar.). 

Concert (kon'sert), s. (harmony of 
plan) mimfakat (At.), perstuju- 
an; (musical) buryi-bnyyian . 



Concertina (-ser-te'na), s. kodian 
{¥..). 

Concession (kon-sesh'?/n), s. (act 
of yielding) hal mmbri, hal mluluS' 
kan;* (a grant) izin deri-pada 
kraja'an. 

Conch (kongk), 5. ■'<untu jnis siput. 

Conciliate (kon-sil'i-at), v. t. jinak- 
kan, darnaikan/^ baikki, inuafakai- 
kan (Ar.). 

Conciliation (-a'slu/n), s. hal ?nn- 
jinakkan, etc., as above. 

Conciliatory (-a-to-ri), adj. yarg 
nwu mnjinakkan, etc., as alx)ve. 

Concise (-sis'), adj. retgkas* 

Conclave (kong'klav or .kon'klav), 
s. pakaian. sulif.'^ 

Conclude (kon-kliid'), v. t. (reach 
an end in reasoning) putuskan, 
iniukan; (end, fiaish) habiskan, 
xudahkan, shaikan/^' slisekan 
(B. ): (effect, bring about) Uap- 
kan. 

Conclusion (-klri'zh«u), s. kputus- 
an, kiniuan, pighabimn, pnjiiddh^ 
an, kilapan, as above; (of a book) 
ianiai (Ar.) : (of Koran studies) 
khaiain (Ar.). 

Conclusive (-siv), adj. (ending de- 
bate) yarg rnntutuskan; (convin- 
cing) yarg mrgyalcirikan* (Ar. 
yaqin). 

Concoct (-kokt'), v. t. (of food or 
drugs) siapkan,\champur, viasak- 
rnamk: (in the mind) adakan, 
rundirgkan,^' 

Concoction (-kok'slum), s. (of 
food, drugs) champuran; (men- 
tal) rvndirganj^' pakatan. 

Concomitant (kon-kom'i-tant), adj. 
yarg viryerta'i'/'' yarg nugikut. 

Concord (kong'kord), s. sjahtra 
(8k.), nniafakai (Ar.), perstuju- 
an. 

Concordance (kou-kord'ans), s. 
da:fiar^' sgala perkata'ari dalani 
kifab. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minus, cure, injure, 

hurry; foo.l. foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin /7jen. 



CONCOURSE 



102 



CONFECTIONERY 



Concourse (kong'kors), s. (a run- 
ning together) pertmuan; (assem- 
bly) perkumpolan, perkrumunan. 

Concrete (kon'kret or kong'kret), 
adj. (as opposed to abstract) la- 
hir* (Ar. iWiir). 

Concrete^ s. koiykret (E.). 

Concubine (kong'ku-bin), s. (if 
purchased) gundeh, chandehj* 
(free) hndalc. 

Concupiscence (kon-ku'pis-sens), 
s. hrahi/* 'asliih (Ar.). 

Concur (kon-ker'), v. i. (meet) her- 
tniu: (agree) lerstuju, lerhnan, 
Jcahiil'^- (Ar. qahul). 

Concurrence (kon-kur'rens), s. per- 
tm uan, ];)erstujuan. 

Concurrent (-rmt), adj. (agreeing 
in o})inion) herstuju; (agreeing 
in time) hermma-sama, s-masa* 

Concussion (-kiish'7/n), s. teranfoTc, 
largfjaran. 

Condemn (-dcnV), r. t. (pronounce 
guilty) salahl'afi; (judicially) hu- 
hiimkan, jatohlnn liuhum, Itakkari 
liuhum; (pronounce unfit) tolah, 
huarg. 

Condemnation (kon'dein-na'shim), 
s. (act of condemning) lial mrya" 
lahl'an, lidl migliul'umkan; (state 
of being condemned) liuhuman. 

Condensation (kon'den-sa'shi^n), 
s. lial nimampatlcan, etc., as below. 

Condense (kon-dens'), v. t. (make 
compa*-t) mampatlcan; (of li- 
quids) hitalkan; (reduce by eva- 
poration) liisaphan; (abridge) 
retgkadwi :'^ (steam into water) 
jadikan ayer. 

Condense, v. i. (become compact) 
maw pat: (as steam) mnjadi ayer. 

Condenser (-or), s. perkal'a^'i mm- 
huat ayer deri-pada wap. 

Condescend (kon'de-send') v. i. 
rndalikan dlri, tundok, sudi. 

Condescension (-sen'shun), s. hal 
m rndalikan diri; (courtesy) so- 
pan,'* hudi-hhasa. 



Condign (kon-dln'), adj. layak:^ 

pa flit, pad an. 
Condiment (kon'di-mmt), t?. n- 

lant, muihal, kichap. 
Condition (kon-dish'«n), s. (state) 

hal, pri,'^ pri-hal/* k'ada'an, hal- 

ehval'^ (Ar. aiiival, pi. of hdl) ; 

(essential quality) k'ada'an, sifat 

(Ar.) ; (stipulation) sharat (Ar.). 
Condition, v. t. (limit by condition) 

sjiaralkan (Ar.). 
Conditional (-al), adj. drgan .s7/rt- 

raf (Ar.), afas sharat (Ar.). 
Condole (kon-dol'), v. i. tumparg 

duka-rhiia'^ tumparg susdh-fiati. 
Condolence (-do'l^ns), s. tumparg' 

an duka-rhita,'^ tumpargan susak- 

hatl. 
Condone (-doji/), v. t. anipuukaa, 

mahapkan (Ar. ma'df). 
Conduce (-dfis'), v. i. hawa, hri, da- 
ta) gkan. 
Conduct (-dukf) v. t. (lead) hawa, 

hantarj (by the hand) pim.pin; 

(escort, attend) irbg;^ (manage, 

carry on) jalankan. To conduct 

one's self, haira diri, herlaku.^ 
Conduct (kon'dukt), s. (act of 

leading) hal mmhawa, hal rnn- 

jalankan; (deportment) ieigkali' 

taku, taku:* (behaviour) klakuan, 

pkerti (iSk.), fe'el (Ar.). 
Conductor (kon-duk'ter), s. pm- 

bawa, prghaniar, prganjur;'* (on 

trams) tukaig ieket (E.) ; (on 

estates) krani. 
Conduit (kon'dit), s. jmnchuran, 

saluran, parit di-ihat batu. 
Cone (kon), s. auatu Imbaga yarg 

kaki'iya bulat dan kmunchak-rya 

ran eh org, sperti baigunan kukus.'-' 
Confabulate (kon-fal)'ti-lat), v. i. 

berchakap-rhakap, om oig-o m org 

(X.T.). 
Confectioner (-fek'sh^/n-ei'), s. pn- 

jiud nianisan. 
Confectionery(-i), s. halwa/'' ma- 

nisan. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recrnt, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, min?/s, cure, injure, 

liurrv; fooc], foot, awfool (awful); "law, how, oil; tliin thon. 



CONFEDERACY 



103 



CONFORMABLE 



Confederacy (-fed'er-a-si), s. per- 

si' u t nan, * paka fa n . 
Confederate (-et), adj. herskidu/^' 

muafakat (Ar.), subaliat/r 
Confederation (-ri'>h?/n), s. per- 

sL'1/luan.'^ 
Confer (kon-for'), v. t. (bestow) 

h / /', Jv urniakan ( Sk. ) . 
Confer, v. i. herbichara, hernindirgf^ 

berronderg (B.), bermaslmarat 

(Ar.). 
Conference (kou'iV'r-6'iis), s. (act 

oi' considtiiig) hal berhkhara, etc., 

as above: (meeting) mashuarat 

(Ar.), mithy (E.). 
Confess (koii-fes'), v. t. (acknow- 
ledge) niKjaku, berikrar (Ar.), 

ikrarkan * ( Ar. aqrdr ) . 
Confession (-fesli'wu), s. ptyaku- 

an : (of faith) .shaliadat (Ar.). 
Confessional (-al), s. hal mrgaku 

dom, I in pat mrgaku dosa (R.C.). 
Confessor (-fes'ser), s. orarg yarg 

mnjaku iman-iya* padri yatg mig- 

ampiuii orarg yatg mrgaku dosa-tya 

(H.C). 
Confidant (kou'ii-dant'), s. orarg 

i/arg di-percliat/a'i, handai,^' sobat- 

ande (B.). 
Confide (kon-fld'), v. i. perchaya, 

liarap. 
Confide, v. t. plarolikan/^ ainanal- 

kan (Ar.). 
Confidence (koii'fi-dens), s. per- 

ckaya, liarap; (self-reliance) tgoli 

liati, brani. 
Confident (-d^nt), adj. (sure) tu- 

tu, ttap perchaya, yahin^^ {Ax. 

yaqhi) ; (self-reliant) tgoli^ hrani. 
Confidential (-den'slial), adj. 

( trustworthy ) k perch ay a' an, stia/'' 

boleh di'perchaya (B.) ; (secret) 

ralisia, rusia (B.), sulit/'' 
Configuration (kmi-fig'u-ra'shmi), 

s. nqm Inibaga.'^ 
Confine (kon'fin), s. perhirgga'anf^ 

•y hi pad an, ka wasa n . * 
Confine (kon-fln'), v. i. (limit) 



perhirygakan;'^ (restrain) tahan- 
kan; (shut up, inclose) piiyit* 
kuroiy. 

Confined (-find'), adj. (narrow) 
sin pit, plchck.'^ To be confined, 
beranak, bersaUn."'' 

Confinement (-fin'ment), s. (res- 
traint ) pi ryita /? ,* k u ro rga n : (child- 
birth) salit beranak. 

Confirm (-ferm'), v. t. (make firm, 
establish) ttapkan, kukolikan,'^' 
tgohkan; (make certain, verify) 
tntukan, miggohl-an, kul'ohkan'-^' 
yakan,'^ bnarkan, sabUkan* (Ar. 
thdbit). salikan. 

Confirmation (kon'fer-ma'shwn), 
s. kttapan, ktgohan, hal miyurg- 
gohkan. 

Confiscate (kon'fis-kat), v. t. ram- 
pas baratg larargan; (a pledge) 
lunchur* Confiscated, terhulur 
k-pada kraja'an,^ di-rampas, ram- 
pasan, di- papas. '^^ 

Conflagration (kon'fia-gra'sh?m), 
s. njnlaan a pi, kniaraVan'^' api, ju- 
largan* api. 

Conflict (kon'flikt), s. (c-ollision) 
tnipolian, perlawauan; (contest, 
battle) pprargan. 

Conflict (kon-flikf), v. i. (strilve to- 
gether) berlawan, berlaga, bantirg, 
Inipoli-mnmpoh; (contend, strug- 
gle) laican; (be contradictory) 
berlawan-lairan. 

Conflicting (-ing), adj. berlawan' 
la wan. 

Confluence (kon'flu-ens), s. (a 
running together) pertmuan; (of 
rivers) kuala; (of people) per- 
kumpolan, krumunan. 

Conform (kon-form'), v. t. (make 
like) srupakan : (bring into har- 
mony) stujukan. 

Conform, v. i. (be in harmony) ber- 
stuju; (submit) turut. 

Conformable (-a-bl), adj. (simi- 
lar) s-rupa, S'laku,"^' bersama'an; 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not. connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minus, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CONFORMATION 



104 



CONJUGATE 



(consistent with) mnurut, stuju 
(by an. 

Conformation (kon'for-ma'sliwn), 
s. (agreement) perstujuan; (ar- 
rangenie ii t ) pe ra t aran . 

Conformity (kon-fonn'i-ti), s. (re- 
semblance) permmaan; (con- 
gniity) perstujuan. 

Confound (kon-fownd'), v. t. (con- 
fuse) haru-hirukan ;* (mistake) 
mlah ambil; (pei-plex, dismay) ha- 
vliaul'an, bifyotrjkan, cktyaryhan, 
hUrul'an. 

Confraternity (kon'fra-ter'ni-ti), 
s. persahabatan. 

Confront (kon-lTimt'), v. t. (face, 
oppose) mrghadap; (put face to 
face) ^muk-al'an; (contrast) ban- 
diig. 

Confuse (-tuz'), v. t. (mix, jumble) 
kachau, k usut kwi, ragukan* halai- 
balaikan* cliampurkan.; (of the 
sight or mind) rnfjiamkan;* (per- 
plex) bugotgkan, klirukan. 

Confused (-t'uzd'). adj. see above; 
also klam-kabot, eliachau/^ bbar* 
lopak'lapek/^' i^KaUbamt, ■ porak* 
parek, silaig-miyilarg, champur' 
baur/' haru-biru.* ■kachau-bilau,^ 
lialai-baJai,^ rundu-randa;* (men- 
tally) pikau* gamam,^ malan.* 

Confusion (-fii'zh^.ai), s. see above. 

Confute (-fuf), v. t. salahi, salah- 
kan (B.), bantahi;'^ (silence) 
diamkan. 

Congeal (-jeF), v. t. bkukan.^' 

Congeal, v. i. berbku.^ 

Congee (kun'je), s. kanji. 

Congenial (kon-je'ni-al), adj. (sym- 



Congested (-jest'ed), adj. ssak. 
Conglomerate (-glom'er-et), adj. 

terhimpon* tertwibon. 
Conglomerate, s. timbonan, per- 

Inmponan.'^ 
Congratulate (-graeh'u-lat), v. t. 

inintakati slamat, sbotkan bhagia 

(Sk.), mtyuchap berkat, tumpaiy 

suka. 
Congratulation (-la'slizm), s. pry- 

uchapan slamat, hal mnumparg 

suka. 
Congratulatory (-la-to-ri), adj. 

ya}y rargudiap berkat. 
Congregate (kong'gre-gat), v. t. 

kumpolkan, hiniponkan* krumun- 

kan, karnpoiykan. 
Congregate, v. i. berkiunpol, ber- 

liimpoH,^ berkrumun, berkam- 

pofg. 
Congregation (-ga'shwn), s. per- 

kumpolan, perhimponan* jma'ah 

(Ar.). 
Congress (kong'gres), s. (assem- 
bly) perkumpolan; (conference) 

mashuarat (Ar.) ; (legislative 

body) majlis. 
Congruity (kong-groo'i-ti), s. per- 

s t uj uan, pe rsania'ati. 
Congruous (kong'groo-?^s), adj. ber- 

stuju, padan. 
Conical (kon'i-kal), adj. spedi 

baryunan kukus, tirus* lonchos. 
Conjectural (kon-jek'chur-al), adj. 

aqak-aqak, yamak-qamalc* tka- 

t'ka.''' 
Conjecture (-chur), v. i. agak, ga- 
xv^,.x- V. o^x-i*^ .^vA . c XXX- fiiak,'^ kira, sargka. 
pathetic) \aum%raigaC s^tuliM; \ Conjecture, s. saigka, agak, waliara 
(naturally adapted) padan, s-rasi, (Ar.). 

Conjointly 



patut; (agreeable) berknan di kati. 
Congenital (-jen'i-td), adj. deri 

m ula jadi, deri asal. 
Conger-eel (kong'ger el), s 

niaforg.'^ 
Congestion (kon-jes'ch;m), 

ssak'an. 



ikan 



/r- 



(-joint'li), adv. ber- 

sama-sauia. 
Conjugal (kon'ju-gal), adj. laki- 

blni (a). 
Conjugate (-gat), v. t. (Gram.) 

ahotkan sgala perobahan,* tasrif- 

kan (Ar.). 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minus, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin than. 



CONJUGATION 



105 



CONSEQUENTIAL 



Conjugation (-ga'shz/n), s. tasrif 
(Ar.), 'ilmu saraf* (At. sarf). 

Conjunction (kon-jungk'shim), s. 
(union, association) perhuhory- 
an; (of stars) 'pertmuan; (Gram.) 
prgliuhoiy perkata'an. 

Conjuncture (-chur), s. (connec- 
tion) perhuhoiyan; (combination 
of events) perstujuan hal-ehual."^ 

Conjure (kon-jur'), v. t. (implore) 
minta sargat, pohorikan.^ 

Conjure (kun'jur), v. t. (by magic) 
gunakan, jampikan, psunakan 
(Pers. afsun). 

Conjure, v. i. (with magic) pahai 
hikmat (At.), pakai 'ilnm; (jug- 
gle) her mam silap mata, hermain 
sulap.* 

Conjurer (-er), s. tuka7y silap, p- 
ryilap. 

Conjuring (-ing), s. silap mata. 

Connect (kon-nekf), v. t. huborg, 
satnborg; (as letters to form words) 
rargkai; (bring together) tmukan; 
(by tying together) tamhat; (in- 
volve) masok. 

Connect, v. i. berhuhoiy, hersam- 
hory, herkait. 

Connection (-nek'shwn), s. per- 
huhoryan, rarykaian, iambaian; 
(relation) kluarga* saudara. 

Connivance (-niv'ans), s. (over- 
looking) hal mndiamkan; (assent 
to a crime) s-tahu.* 

Connive (-niv'), v. i. (shut the 
eyes) balek mata, kjamkan mata, 
butakan mata. To connive at, 
biarkan, diamkan. 

Connoisseur (kon-nis-ser'), s. orary 
ahli (At.), 

Connote (kon-nof), v. t. (contain 
by implication) kandory. 

Connubial (-nii'bi-al), adj. laki- 
bini (a). 

Conquer (kong^ker), v. t. alahkanj^ 
tewaskan* mnary atas (B.) ; (sub- 
due) tundokkan, falokkan (Ar.). 

Conquer, v. i. mnary, jaya.* 



Conqueror (-er), s. yary mnary, 
yarg jaya."" 

Conquest (-kwest), s. kmnargan. 

Consanguinity (kon'san-gwin'i-ti), 
s. hal bersanak,'^' hal berkluarga.* 

Conscience (kon'shens), s. perrasa- 
'an hati, s-iahu haii.* 

Conscientious (-shi-en'shws), adj. 
yary mnurut perrasa'an hati, puteh 
hati,^- suchi hati. 

Conscious (-shz/s), adj. (having 
knowledge) berpiytahuan: (cog- 
nizant of) yary tahu; (possessed of 
one's faculties) sdar^ yary khabar- 
kan diri.* 

Conscription (kon-skrip'sht/n), s. 
hal mryrah,* prgrahan* 

Consecrate (kon'se-krat), v. t. (de- 
vote to sacred uses) wakafkan 
(Ar.), kuduskan'^ (At. qudus) ; 
(set apart to a sacred oflBce) Ian- 
tek.* 

Consecration (-kra'shtm), s. hal 
7nrykuduskan (Ai\), lantek'an.* 

Consecutive (kon-sek'u-tiv), adj. 
berturut-turut, benkut-ikui. 

Consensus (-sen'sz/s), s. perstuju- 
an. 

Consent (-sent'), v. i. (agree) ber^ 
stitju; (be willing) s-udi, berknan, 
suka, redla (Ar.). To consent to, 
liduskan,^ kabidkan* (Ar. qabul). 

Consent, s. (being of one mind) 
satu hati; (agreement) perstuju- 
an; (acquiescence) kredlaan (Ar.), 
sudi; (permission) izin. 

Consequence (kon'se-kwens), s. k- 
sudahan-iya, alchir-nja (Ar.), yary 
di-sbabkan,'^' In consequence of, 
deri sbdb. 

Consequent (-kwent), adj. yarg 
datary deri sbab, yary jadi oleh,* 
yary di-sbabkan.* 

Consequential (-kwen'shal), adj. 
(resulting) yary ikut, yary datary 
sbab: (pompous) sombory, bory- 
kak."^ 



ate, ask, am, finol, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minits, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin tTien. 



CONSEQUENTLY 



106 



CONSONANT 



Consequently (-kwent-li), adv. s- 
bab it a, oleh itu.* 

Conservation (kon'ser-va'slii/n), s. 
hal mmlikaml'an, pmlihara'an. 

Conservative (kon-serv'a-tiv), adj. 
yarg mmliharakan, yarg man sim- 
pan perJcara yaiy ada, yaiy ta'mau 
tul'ar 'adai. 

Conservator (kon-serv'a-ter or kon'- 
ser-va'ter), s. pmlihara, pgavjai* 

Conservatory (kon-serv'a-to-ri). s. 
rumah I'acha mnjimpan pokok s- 
paya jargan liia sjo'k; (school) 
skolah buiyi-bmyian dan s-hagaU 
iya. 

Conserve (kon-serv'), v. t. plihara' 
Jean, slamatl-an-; (preserve with 
sugar) biiat lialwa/^ hnat manisan. 

Consider (-sid'er), v. t. (think on) 
flir, fihirkan; (of the past) Jc- 
narg; (look on attentively) per- 
hatikan; (take into account) kira; 
(pay attention to) iiyat; (ponder) 
timbajg,; (estimate, regard) bilaiy' 
kan, sifatkan (Ar.). 

Consider, v. i. berfikir^ irgat, tim- 
ba)y. 

Considerable (-a-bl), adj. yarg 
patid dl-ugati, terbilatg; (of per- 
sons) bernama; (important) brat. 
A considerable amount, bbrajxi ba- 
Tyak. 

Considerably (-a-bli), adv. awat,"^ 
saigat, baiyak. 

Considerate (-et), adj. ya}y Urn' 
barg-^nnimhaiy , yaiy bcrirgat; (of 
other's feelings) yaiy mnimharg 
ram, yarg mnimbaiy hati. 

Consideration (-a'shtm), s. hal m- 
mikirkan, etc., see consider; (res- 
pect) honnat; (regard for others) 
hal mnimhary rasa; (reflection) 
timhaiyan, irgatan; (motive, rea- 
son)' sbab; (compensation, equi- 
valent) balasan; (gift) bayeran 
kasehan.'^ 

Considering (-ing),conj. pada hal,* 
sdarg, sbab. 



Consign (koii->In'), v. t. (transfer, 
deliver) srahkan; (send) kirini, 
hanfarkan: (assign, set apart) 
tntukan. 

Consignee (kon'sln-e'), s. yaty m- 
nrima kirimati. 

Consigner (kon-siu'er), s. yaig 
mryirim, prgirim,* orarg yatg 
kirini (B.). 

Consignment (-ment), s. hal ni- 
iglnm, kiriman. Goods on con- 
signment, sambotan dagaryan.* 

Consist (-sisf), v. i. (be composed 
of) di-buat deri-pada, jadi deri- 
pada, kandoiy, berlsi; (be founded 
on) daiaiy deri-pada; (be har- 
monious with) herstuju dryan. 

Consistence (-sis't^ns), s. (exis- 
tence) k'adaan; (solidity, firm- 
ness) ktgohan; (density) kpkafaii. 

Consistency (-tm-si), s. (stabil- 
ity) ktgohan; (harmony, congru- 
ity) /j^rA'ifi//?(a/?. 

Consistent (-tent), adj. (harmoni- 
ous) berdaju, bersama'an. 

Consistory (-to-ri), ^. perkumpolan 
padri, niajlis ktua-ktua. 

Consolation (kon'so-la'shim), s. 
ptyhiburan. 

Consolatory (kon-sol'a-to-ri), adj. 
yatg imghibur, piyhibnr, prylipur/^ 

Console (kon-sol'), v. t. hihnr, 11- 
pur-" (Jav.). 

Consolidate (kon-sori-dat), v. t. 
(make solid) bknkan,* kraskan 
(B.) ; (make dense or compact) 
mampatkan; (unite, combine) 
satukan, samakan, kumpolkan. 

Consolidate, v. i. jadi bku,"^ jadi 
kras, jadi tgoh. 

Consols (kon'solz), s. hutaiy kraja- 
'an Irggris. 

Consonance (kon'so-nans), s. (in 
music) tala;'^ (congruity) per- 
stujuan. 

Consonant (-nant), adj. (in music) 
bertala;'^ (agreeing) berstuju. 

Consonant, s. huruf-niaii* 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, cany; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CONSORT 



107 



CONSTRUE 



Consort (kon'sort), s. (companion) 

li-awan; (husband or wife) suaini/^ 

istri. In consort, bersama-sama, 

hersa'iry.^ 
Consort (kon-sort'), v.i. (associate) 

herkawan, hersahahaf, berskutu.'^ 
Conspicuous (kon-spik'u-zfs), adj. 

njata; (notable, eminent) masolior 

(Ar. mashhur). 
Conspiracy (-spir'a-si), s. pal'atan 

jahat, subahat.^' 
Conspirator (-ter), s. orarg yarg 

berpakai jaliat, orarg siihahat* 
Conspire (kon-spir'), v. i. (plot) 

berpakat, bersubahat;* (concur, 

agree) berstuju, bersama-sama. 
Constable (kun'sta-bl), s. (high 

official) pgairai;* (policeman) 

riiata-mata, upas (X.I.). 
Constabulary (kun-stab'u-la-ri), s. 

perkunipolam sgala mata-mata. 
Constancy (kon'stan-si), s. kttap- 

an, ktgohan: (fidelity) 5^ia.* 
Constant (-stant), adj. (not chang- 
ing) tunakf (continuous) ju- 

yo/^;* (permanent) ttap, kkal; 

(steadfast) kukoh* tgoh; (faith- 
ful) stia* Also negatively, tiada 

befobahj tiada berhnii, tiada brenti 

(B.), tiada put us. 
Constantinople (kon'stan-ti-n5'pl), 

3. Stambid (Turk. Istanbul), Kus- 

fantiniah (Ar.). 
Constantly (kon'stant-li), adv. sn- 

tiasa (Sk.), slalu, malar, ^ s-me- 

mavg/^ miylaroh.^ 
Constellation (kon'stel-la'shwn), s. 

gugusan bintarg/^- hlompok bin- 

taig. 
Consternation (-ster-na'shi^n), s. 

dahshat (Ar.), hebat (Ar. haibat). 
Constipate (kon'sti-pat), v. t. (stop 

up) sumbat, timhus, kambus;"^ (of 

the bowels) smblit. 
Constipation (-pa'shwn), s. kurarg 

laivas, kurarg jalan,* smblit, payah 

k-smgai* 
Constituent (kon-stit'u-ent), s. 



(component part) bhagian, anadr 
(Ar.). 

Constituent, adj. yarg mnjadikan, 
yarg mnntukan. 

Constitute (kon'sti-tut), v. t. (es- 
tablish, make up) jadikan, ada- 
kan; (appoint) tntukan, argkat. 

Constitution (-tfi'shz/n), s. (act of 
constituting) hal mnjadikarij, etc., 
as above; (state of being) k'ada-' 
'an; (physical qualities) sifat 
(x\r,), pri tuboh,^ hal badan; 
(temperament) tabiat; (prin- 
ciples of government) ¥ ada' an 
'pre?itah* 

Constitutional (-fll), adj. (of 
body) deri-pada sifat (Ar.), &er- 
Imbaga;'^ (of temperament) deri- 
pada tabiat; (of government) 
deri-pada prentah, deri-pada k'ada- 
'an* deri-pada hukum Imbaga* 

Constitutionally (-li), adv. see 
above. 

Constrain (kon-stran'), v. t. (se- 
cure, hold tightly) tahan; (com- 
pel, necessitate) paksa, gagahi,* 
kra-si, kraskan. 

Constrained (-strand'), adj. fjo. 
manner) ta'lpas laku. 

Constraint (-stranf), s. paksa, ga- 
gah,* kkrasan. 

Constrict (-strikf), v. t. chrut.* 

Construct (-strukf), v. t. (put to- 
gether) pasarg; (make) buat, tu- 
kargi,* bikin (B.) ; (build) bargun- 
kan, dirikan, tgakkan;'^ (arrange) 
kararg, aturkan. 

Construction (-struk'shim), s. (the 
act) Jial mmbuat, hal mmbargun- 
kan, etc., as above; (form, struc- 
ture) buatan, perbuatan, aturan; 
(explanation) kryata'an; (mean- 
ing) arti, m'ana (Ar. m'dna), 
ma'na (B.) ; see construe. 

Constructive (-tiv), adj. yarg mm^ 
buat, yarg mntapkan. 

Construe (-stroo'), v. t. trarghan, 
ryatakan, artikan. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire 
mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, mimo, cure, injure •' 

hurrj'; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CONSUL 



108 



CONTENT 



Consul (kon's?/!), s. Jconsol (E.), 
Iraki I k' raj a an. 

Consular (-su-ler), s. konsol (a). 

Consulate (-let), s. pargkat Jconsoh 
tin pat konsol hkerja. 

Consult (kon-sulf), v. i. berbichara, 
herrundi7ig* berrondety (B.), ber- 
mashuarat (Ar.). 

Consult, V. t. (ask advice) minta 
akhtiar (Ar. ikhtiar), minta fikir- 
an, minta bichara; (have regard 
to) if gat. To consult a horoscope, 
biika ramal (Ar.). 

Consultation (kon'sf^l-ta'shw.n), s. 
bichara, runditgan* mashuarat 
(Ar.). 

Consumable (kon-siima-bl), adj. 
i/a}g boleh di-blanjakan, yaiy boleh 
di-habiskan-, yang boleh di-maJcan 
api. 

Consume (kon-sum'), v. t. (des- 
troy) rosakkan, hanchurkan; (by 
lire) hatguskan; (use up) habis- 
kan; (expend) blanjakan; (waste) 
boroskan^; (eat up) makan habis. 

Consummate (-sum'met), adj. sm- 
puma, S'habis-liabis, s-gnap, skali. 

Consummate (kon'sum-mat), v. t. 
(complete, perfect) smpurnakan; 
(achieve) sampaikan; (finish) 
gnapi, habiskan, sudahkan, jlas- 
kan. 

Consummation (-ma'shim), s. ksm- 
purna'an, pighabisan, ptyudahan. 

Consumption (kon-sump'shun), s. 
(act of consuming) hal mrosak- 
kan, hal mrgharguskan, hal m- 
makan, etc., see consume; (state 
of being consumed) krosak'an, ka- 
hargusan, etc.; (phthisis) batok 
kriig, batok lo'sun (Ch. loh-sun). 

Consumptive (-tiv), adj. yarg m- 
rosakkan, yarg mrghablskan, etc., 
see coxsume; (of phthisis) kurus 
krirg. 

Contact (kon'takt), s. pertmuan, ^■- 
sntohan.* In contact, kna, ja- 
mah, jjak.* 



Contagion (kon-ta'jwn), s. hal mn- 
jargkit, pnjatgkitan. 

Contagious (-ji^s), adj. berjargkit. 

Contain (-tan'), v. t. (comprise) 
kandoig; (have capacity for) 
muat, berisi. 

Contaminate (-tam'i-nat), v. t. 
chmarkan,'^ najiskan (Ar.) ; (mo- 
rally) rosakkaii. 

Contemn (-tern'), v. t. chlakan, 
panda ig mudah,* pandarg ta'- 
mata. 

Contemplate (kon'tem-plat), v. i. 
termnoig, tfkur (Ar.). 

Contemplate, v. t. (view attentive- 
ly) perhatikan, amat-amatij* (me- 
ditate on) fikirkan, iigat-irgat ; 
(purpose, intend) niatkan, kahan- 
daki,* 

Contemplation (-pla'shwn), s. per- 
hatian, tfkur (Ar.) ; (intention) 
7iiat, maksud. 

Contemporaneous (kon-tem'po-ra'- 
ni-^s), adj. sama masa, satu za- 
man,"^ satu jman (B.). 

Contemporary (-ra-ri), adj. sania 
masa, satu zaman,* satu jman 
(B.). 

Contemporary, s. baya. The con- 
temporary of this man, 'umor-rya 
s-baya orarg ini. 

Contempt (kon-temf), s. (act of 
despising) hal mmandarg mudah;* 
(state of being despised) kahina- 
^an, kckla'an, kkjian.* Contempt 
of Court, mlaiggar prentah mah- 
kaniah (Ar.), 

Contemptible (-i-bl), adj. (mean) 
hina, terhina; (vile) kjL* 

Contemptuous (kon-temp'chu-ws), 
adj. ya?g mmandarg mudah,* yarg 
mrghinakan. 

Contend (kon-tend'), v. i. lawan, 
bertandirg;* (quarrel) berklahi; 
(fight) berprarg; (argue) berban- 
tah,* bertrgkar. To contend 
against, lawan. 

Content (-tent'), adj. (satisfied) 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, mintts, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin fhen. 



CONTENT 



109 



CONTOUR 



piias kati; (contented) sudi, ber- 

l-nan; (at rest) snairj. 
Content, v. t. (satisfy) puaslcan, 

chukopkan, padafi;"^' (plea^^) per- 

knankan, sudikan; (quiet) snaiy- 

kan. 
Content, s. (rest of luind) ksnairj- 

an; (satisfaction) kpuamn liati. 
Content (kon'tent), s. (that which 

is contained) isi, muatan. Table 

of contents, isi hitah, fahrasat* 

(Ar. fiJiirist), Contents of a let- 
ter, biuyi surat, isi surat. 
Contented (kon-tent'ed), adj. ber- 

knan, siidl, snarg. 
Contention (-ten'shim), s. per' 

laivanan, perkJahian, pertrgkaranj 

perbanta/uinj'* see coxtend. 
Contentious (-shws), adj. yarg siika 

mlawari, bantahan.'^ 
Contentment C-tent'm^int), s. (rest 

of mind) hmaigan; (satisfaction) 

kpuamn liati. 
Conterminous (-ter'mi-nws), adj. 

yatg sanicu sat a smjjadan, ber- 

dempet.^ 
Contest (kon-tesf), v. t. lawan, 

Icuygar; (by argument) bantali' 

kan;'^ (by law) d'awa. 
Contest, V. i. berlawan, berglutf^ 

beradu, bertandirg* 
Contest (kon'test), s. perlawanan, 

perfcmduyan* perglutan* per- 

banfahan* d'aiva'an; see above. 
Context (kon'tekst), s. perkataan 

yarg berdampug* perkataan hu- 

borgan; (text) nas (Ar. nass). 
Contiguous (kon-tig'u-ws), adj. 

bertmu, berdanipiig* berdempet* 

rapat dnjan. 
Continence (kon'ti-n^.ns), s. hal 

mnaliani diri, pri ninahankan naf- 

su. 
Continent (-nt^nt), adj. yarg m- 

naJiani din. 
Continent, s. btiua.* 
Contingency (kon-tin'jen-si), s. 

perkara yatg boleh judi. 



Contingent (-jent), adj. (possible) 
yarg boleh jadi; (dependent) ber- 
gantorg k-pada. 

Contingent, s. perkara yaig boleh 
jadi; (of troops) bhagian, pasok- 
an. 

Continual (-u-al), adj. kkal, ttap, 
ttialar,'^ tiada berhnti, tiada brenti 
(B.), tiada putii^s. 

Continually (-li), adv. (without 
cessation) sntiasa (Sk.), sdiakala 
(Sk.), malar, "^ tasadah-sudah, 
nientarg; (in repeated .succession) 
herfalii-talu^ 

Continuance (-ans), s. (perman- 
ence) kkaJ, kttapan, perkanja'rg- 
an.^ 

Continuation (-a/sh/m), s. (act of 
continuing) lial mrg'kalkan; (state 
of continuing) 1ml berkanjarg/^ k- 
ttapan; (prolongatio^n) lial mmaii' 
jargkan, lial miyarnbonj; (supple- 
ment) samboigan, pnarubaJian. 

Continue (kon-tin'u), v. i. (re- 
main) tirggal; (endure, last) k- 
kal; (go on in spite of difficulties) 
landa/* (be steadfast, persist) 
ttap, karar (Ar.) ; (run on) trus, 
largsorg, malar. '^^ To continue 
doing, liar kan. "^ 

Continue, v. t. (protract in duration) 
lanjutkan, panjaigkan, kkalkan; 
(add to in length) pan jargkan, 
tanibah; (s after to remain) ti^g- 
galkan; (keep on) slalnkan, talu- 
kan.* 

Continued (-ud), adj. kkal, tiada 
berhnti, tiada brenti (B.), trus, 
bertalu-tahij^ slalu. 

Continuous (-u-ws), adj. tiada ber- 
sla* tiada putus. 

Contort (kon-torf), v. t. (the face) 
erutkan, bergutkan; (the body) 
gliatkan/' liokka n.^ 

Contortion (-tor'shi/n), s. hal m- 
rgerutkan, etc., as above. 

Contour (kon'toor or kon-toor'), s. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry ; f 56d, foot, awf ool (awful) ; law, how, oil ; thin *7ien. 



CONTRABAND 



110 



CONTROL 



haris di pta yarg mryatdkan ihygi 
rndali tan all. 

Contraband (kon'tra-band), s. la- 
rarg lamrgan. 

Contract (kon-trrikf), v. t. (draw 
together, as a flower) huncliup- 
kan; (reduce, lessen) hckillwi, 
sntpitJiWh; (wrinkle) kdutkan,^ 
hrutl'an; (shrink) hcliut; (bring 
on, acquire) dapat. 

Contract, v. i. (draw together, as 
a flower) kuncMip; (wrinkle, of 
the face) herhrut; (of cloth or pa- 
per) kdut; (shrink) hchiit. 

Contract (kon'trakt), s. perjanji- 
an, I'onfreh (E.) ; (monopoly) 
pajak. 

Contraction (kon-trak'shi/n), s. 
(act of contracting) hal mrg- 
nncliupkan, hal mrgchilkan, etc., 
as above; (state of being con- 
tracted) ksmpiian, hal kuncliup, 
hal herkrut. 

Contractor (-ter), s. pmbororg, 
orarg yarg mmbuat kerja h or org'. 

Contradict (kon'tra-dikf), y. t. la- 
van kata, hantahi,'^ haiykaiy 
(Jav.). 

Contradict, v. i. sargkal. 

Contradiction (-dik'sh^m), s. (de- 
nial) pnjaiykalan; (gainsaying) 
hantahanf^ (inconsistency) per- 
hentoharti^ perslisehan, perheM- 
'an (Sk.). 

Contradictory (-dik'to-ri), adj. 
(denying) yarg mnjargkal; (op- 
posing) yarg mnibantahi;'^ (mu- 
tually contradicting) mlawan-la' 
wan, hersliseli, herheza (Sk.), her- 
lainan. 

Contradistinction (-dis-tingk'- 
shz/n), s. klainan, perhandirgan. 

Contrariwise (-ri-wiz), adv. her- 
mlahan, halek (B.). 

Contrary (-ri), adj. (adverse, of 
•wind) mkal/^ di muka; (in op- 
position ) mnntarg ; ( repugnant. 



opposed to) mlawan, hersalahan^ 
tastuju. 

Contrary, s. klainan. On the con- 
trary, bersalalian, berlainan, m- 
lainkan, halek (B.). To the con- 
trary, lain maksud, lain pihak.^' 

Contrast (kon-trasf), v. t. handirg. 
bandirgkan. 

Contrast (kon'trast), s. (state of 
being contrasted) perbandirgan ; 
l( dissimilarity) perbeza'an (Sk.),. 
bersalaJian. 

Contravene (kon'tra-ven'), v. t. 
lawan, larggar, salalri, lalid.^ 

Contravention (-ven'shzm), s. lial 
mlawan, hal miyalalii. 

Contretemps (kox'tr-tax'), s. (un- 
fortunate occurrence) kmalargan; 
(impediment) «?'fl7* (Ar. 'amdl)^ 
gndala (Sk.). 

Contribute (kon-trib'ut), v. t. bri^ 
yiiimika?!.'^'' 

Contribute, v. i. (give a share) 
bhagi; (assist) bantu, toloty. To- 
contribute to, bawa, datargkan. 

Contribution (kon'tri-bu'shz/n), s. 
bliagian, pertolorgan; (gift) pin- 
brian ; ( subscription ) yuran,'^' 
te'yan (Ch. theh-ien) ; (obli- 
gatory tax for the poor) zakaf^ 
(Ar. zakat). 

Contributor (kon-trib'u-ter), s, 
yarg mmbri, yarg mmbri te\jan\ 
yarg mmbri yuran;* (to a news- 
paper) pjyurat.'^ 

Contrite (kon'trit), adj. bcrtobat, 
sml. 

Contrition (kon-trish'z/n), s. iau- 
bat, kssalan. 

Contrivance (-triv'ans), s. (ar- 
tifice) upaya (Sk.), daya-npaya,* 
'akal; (device, invention) reka- 
'an.* 

Contrive (-triv'), v. t. upayakan* 
reka.* 

Control (-trol'), s. (that which 
checks) pnahan; (authority) pren^ 
tah. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minMS, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CONTROL 



111 



CONVEYANCE 



Control, V. t. (clieck, restrain) ta- 
han, pgatg, pcgatg (B.), Molaf 
(regulate, govern) preniahl'an. 

Controversial (kon'tro-ver'slio-l) , 
adj. yarg berhaniah,'^ yaix) bertrg- 
I'ar, 

Controversy (-ver-si), s. perban- 
tahan^' pertrg'karan, perdisehan. 

Controvert (-vert), v. t. bantalii,* 
bant all kan,'^' .^enipargkan .* 

Contumacious (kon'tu-ma'slu/s), 
adj. l-ras-kpala, dgiL 

Contumacy (-ma-si), s. dgil. 

Contumely (-me-lij, s. chercha 
(Sk.), nsta (Sk.). 

Contuse (kon-tfiz'j, v. t. (beat to- 
gether) tiimbol-; (bruise, as fruit) 
iiimarli'anJ^ 

Contusion (-tu'zh/m), s. (act of 
bruising) lial mnu.raboh; (bruise 
on fruit) inmarf (on tlesh, dis- 
coloured) Ibam. 

Conundrum (ko-nun'dr/mi), s. tka- 
tJii, pnerka.'^ 

Convalescence (kon'va-les'sens), 
s. ksmbolianf^ kpulehan. 

Convalescent (-s^nt), adj. smboli,"^ 
puleh, btalij^ 

Convene (kon-ven'), v. i. berkum- 
pol, berliwipon.^ 

Convene, v. t. kampolkan, hunpofi- 
kan."^ 

Convenience (-yens), s. (fitness) 
kpaiutan; (ease) ksnatgan; (con- 
venient time) icaktu laparg. 

Convenient (-yent), adj. (adapted 
to use) patut, layakj* (handy) 
snaiy; (timely, opportune) smpat, 
dapatJ^ 

Convent (kon'vent), s. riimah oraig 
berkhalwat (Ar.) {bagi prem- 
puan), rum ah rah'ib prempuan* 

Convention (kon-ven'sliwn), s. 
(usage) ^adat; (meeting) perkum- 
pohn, majlis; (agreement) per- 
janjian. 

Conventional (-al), adj. (sanction- 
ed by usage) beradat, klaziman 



(Ar.) ; (agreed npon) ijarg di- 
janji. 

Convergent (-ver'jent), adj, yaiy 
mnuju jmda s-tmpat, sahi tujuan. 

Converge (-verj'), v. i. tuju pada 
s-tmpat, bertmu, bertumpuJ^ 

Conversant (-ver'sant), adj. (in- 
timati'ly associated) perramali, 
berrainaJi-ra nmhan;* (well-inform- 
ed) fa/iK, ahli (Ar.). 

Conversation (kon'ver-sa'sli?m), s. 
( intercou rse ) pe rra m aha n ;* 

t ( si>eech ) pt utora n. pe rch akapan . 

Converse (kon-vers'), v. i. (have in- 
timate intercourse) r a m a h ; * 
(speak) brrchakap, bertutor, ber- 
kata-kala, omorg (X.I.). 

Converse (kon'vers), s. (inter- 
course) perramalian;^ (speech) p- 
tutoran, perchakapan. 

Converse, adj. terbalek. 

Conversely (-li), adj. ganti-her' 
ganti. 

Conversion (k(;n-ver'shwn), s. 
(change) perobahan; (change of 
religion) hal mnibaiva iman (Ar.). 

Convert (-vert'), v. t. (change) 
obah; (turn from one state to an- 
other) balekkan: (change a per- 
son's religion) masokkan agama; 
(excliange) iukar. 

Convert (kon'vert), s. oraig yarg 
mmbawa iman (Ar.), iiiuaJaf 
(Ar.). 

Convertible (kon-vert'i-bl), adj. 
yatg boleh. di-obahkan, yaig boleh 
di'tukar. 

Convex (kon'veks), adj. mhgkoig, 
bonjol, bergmbol. 

Convey (kon-va'), v. t. (carry) ba- 
wa; see carry for various methods 
of conveying; (transmit, com- 
municate) baica, dataigkan, saw- 
paikan; (transfer, make over, as 
property) srahlwi, tul-ar nama. 

Conveyance (-ans), s. (act of con- 
veying) hal mmbawa, hal mryam^ 
paikan, qxc; (that which conveys) 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, rec6?nt, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror ; old, not, connect, s5re, sort, sorry ; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin thQU. 



CONVEYANCER 



112 



COPPERAS 



pmhawa, pnawharg; (vehicle) A> 
naiJi-an/'' hrcia: (deed of transfer) 
surat ninuhir ncnna. 

Conveyancer (-an-ser), s. loijar 
yaty nwihiiat surat mnulcar nmna. 

Convict (kt>n-vikt'), T. t. (conYmce 
of error) tinplal', saJaMwi; (pro- 
nouiict' a legal sentence) linl-uni' 
Jean, jatohkan linkiim, putiiskan 
liuhiDu, Ualxl-an liiihnm. 

Convict (kon'\-ikt). s. orary salah, 
orarg rantai* oraty jel, orarg tu- 
topan (X.i.), handuan (Hind.) 

Conviction (kMj-yik'shwn), s. (act 
of cojiYincing) hal mnmplah; (act 
of sentencing) hal mrgliiikum'kan, 
hpntusan hul'um; (certainty of 
belief) yahin'^ (At. yaqin), kiniu- 
an. 

Convince (-viiis'), y. t. (of error) 
Unplah; (make certain) yakinhan 
(Ar.), tntukan. I was convinced, 
terpal'u-IaJi di-daJam hati-hu. 

Convivial (-viv'i-al), adj. hcrsulca- 
ria,'^' h erramai-ram aian. 

Convocation (kon'vo-ka'sli?An), s. 
peril uripon anf^ perl-umpolan. 

Convoke (kon-vok'), v. t. pargg'd 
herhmipon/^ himponlianj^ hum- 
polkan. 

Convoluted (kon'vo-lil-t^'d), adj. 
herUii-hUi. 

Convolution (-lii'sh?/n), s. gidorg- 
tm, hlitan. 

Convoy (kon-voi'), v. t. liantarl-an, 
irirgka?!* hersa'irg drgan.* 

Convoy (kon'voi), s. hal mrghan far- 
Jean, Jial di-haniarl'an ; (fleet or 
insim) aiglcatan/^ IdrgJcapan-* (es- 
cort) pighantar, prgirirg.'^ 

Convulse (kon-vuls'), v. t. (con- 
tract violently, as muscles) 
Jca7i; (shake) goncharg. 

Convulsion (-vul'shi/n), s. (dis- 
ease) saican, pitam; (shaking) 
goncliargan; (tumult) huru^iara. 

Convulsive (-siv), Q.di].tergoncliarg- 



igaq)' 



gonrliafg; (of laughter) glaJc- 

glak* glakal: 
Cony (ko'ni), s. Jcucliiig hianda. 
Coo (koo), Y. i. pram,* Jcuhiir.* 
Cook (kook), V. t. masak; (rice) 

tanal'f (by steaming) hnhus; (in 

a double boiler) Irgat/^ tim (Ch.) ; 

see also, boil, fry, etc. 
Cook, s. jui'ii'inasal'* tul-atg mosaic, 

Jnili (E.), chompoJc (Ch. tsorg- 

plio'). 
Cookery (kook'er-i), s. 7/wiw* nia^ 

sal'. 
Cool (kool), adj. (moderately cold) 

sjok, dhgln;'^ (lukewarm) suam/' 

(not hot) I'uraty panas; (self-pos- 
sessed) ttap liaii; (shady) tdoh^ 

rdop. 
Cool, V. t. sjol'kan, dirguikan;'* 

{vdih. a spoon) temhok;* (by 

fanning) hipaskan. To cool the 

head by wetting, herjaram.* 
Coolness (kool'nes), s. sjok, di^ 

ig'in.'* 
Cooly (koo'li), s. (labourer) Jculi; 

(house cooly) tukarg ayer. 
Coop (koop), s. (for poultry) sarg- 

kar ayam, serkap. 
Coop, V. t. (poultry) saiykarkan, 

serkapkan; (confine) pin/it,* ku^ 

roiy. 
Cooper (k5op'er), s. tukary tory. 
Cooperate (ko-op'er-at), v. i. kerja 

hersama-sama, serta'if^ hantu, to- 

lory. 
Cooperation (-a'shim), s. piriban^ 

tuan, pertoloryan. 
Coot (koot), s. ayam-ayam. 
Cope (kop), V. i. (encounter, meet) 

lerimu: (contend) lawan. 
Coping (kop'ing), s. latu kpala 

femhok. 
Copious (ko'pi-ws), adj. haryak, 

lempali/^ mewali; (of rain) Ihat. 
Copper (kop'per), s. tmhaya; tm- 

haga merah; (vessel) gren3erg^ 

Copper coin, duit tmhaga. 
Copperas (-os), s. trmL* 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire,. 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurrj; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin t;jen. 



COPPERPLATE 



113 



CORNICE 



Copperplate (-plat), s. tnibaga 
yary di-luhis, sural yarg terchap 
deri-pada tmlaga yarg di-lnhk. 

Coppice (kop'pis), s. hlukar. 

Copra (ko'pra), s. ryiur hrity,^ 
klapa I'rby. 

Copse (kops), s. hliikar, gomporg.'^ 

Copulate (kop'u-lat), v. i. hcr- 
stuboh* iersatu, herstidor/' s- 
pertidoran* 

Copy (kop'i), s. (transcript) tiru- 
anj^' salitmn; (individual book) 
kital), s-buah I'itah; as, two copies, 
dua bvali ; (pattern, model) iu- 
ladan, chontoh : (manuscript to be 
printed) nuskhali (Ar.). 

Copy, V. t. (transcribe) tiru,^ sal in; 
(imitate) turut, ikut. 

Copyist (-ist), s. vniru,* pryalin. 

Copyright (-rit), s. hah* prgararg 
atas Ji'arargan-itja. 

Coquet (ko-kef), v. i. buat-huat 
kaseh, berchiimbu-chiwihitan* 

Coral (korVd), s. kararg. Coral 
reef, kararg; (running out into the 
sea) tajur.* Coral rock, batu, ka- 
rarg. Brandling coral, kararg bii- 
rga. Eed coral, merjan* 'akek 
(Ar.). Soft coral (Alcyonaria), 
burga kararg. 

Corbel (kor'bl), s. batu pnjargga.* 

Cord (kord), s. tali, tali kchil. 
Umbilical cord, tali pusat. Cord 
for pegtop, tali alii* tali gasirg 
(B.). 

Cord, V. t. ikat, kbat* 

Cordage (kord'ej) s. (Xaut.) tali' 
tmali. 

Cordial (kor'di-d or kor'jal), s. 
bararg yarg mnjuk^kan hati; 
(liqueur) so pi* manis (D. zoopje 
= sip, dram). 

Cordial, adj. (hearty) digari surg- 
goh hati; (sincere) tulus; (tend- 
ing to cheer) yarg mnjukakan hati. 

Cordiality (kor'di-ari-ti), s. surg- 
goh hati, ktidusan. 

Cordon (kor'don), s. (badge of 



honour) pita kbsaran; (line of 
sentries) bar is pigawal,* ban jar 
prgawah* 
Corduroy (kor'du-roi), s. kain blu- 

du berlurali* 
Core (kor), s. (inner part) hati, 

wnipuliir;'^' (if hard, as wood) 

tra-s;* (of a boil) punat; (essence,. 

important part) pati; (of a 

mould) hati achiian. 
Coriander (ko'ri-an'der), s. ktnm- 

bar. 
Cork (kork), s. galnis (properly 

from the roots of the pidai tree) ;. 

(stopper); sumbat, pryunibat, p- 

njumpil (Jay.). 
Cork, V. t. sumbat, sumpil* rya^ 

rap.* 
Corkscrew (kork'skro5), s. pnarek 

sumbat,* pmbuka boiol, skrup- 

botol (B.). 
Cormorant (kor'mu-rrtnt), s. itek 

aypr. 
Corn (korn), s. (on the toes) blu^ 

laig jari kaki,* mata ikan; (on 

the sole) hiihul.* 
Corn, s. (a single seed) hiji, butir;* 

(cereals in general) biji-bijian. 

In America com is restricted to 

maize = jag org. 
Corn, V. t. (salt, as meat) -mrgr- 

garam, tar oh asin (B.). 
Cornelian (kor-ne'li-an), s. 'akek 

me rah (Ar.). 
Corner (kor'ner), s. (angle) pn- 

juru, huchu,* siku; (of a cloth) 

puncha; (of a mat) sudut;* (of 

the eye, outer) ekor; (inner) po- 

hon;* (of the earth) hujorg; (a 

nook) chrok, sudut.* Corner 

stone, batu pnjuru. 
Corner, v. t. ssakkwi. 
Cornet (kor'net), s. trompet, slom^ 

pret (N.L). 
Cornfield (korn'feld), s. ladarg, bn^ 

daiy;* (irrigated) sawah. 
Cornice (kor'nis), s. birai.* 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, s5re, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CORNUCOPIA 



114 



CORRUPT 



Cornucopia (kor'mi-kr/pi-a), s. 
I an dole 'alaniat kmeirahan. 

Corollary (kor'ol-la-ri), s. tiirut- 
an/^ bara?rj yarg di-shahl'an. 

Coronation (kor'o-iiri'slj//n), s. h- 
niah'olaan (Sk.). 

Coronet (kor'o-D^d). s. mahoia'^ 
orarg hatgmiran kiln den-pada 
raja, Dtal-oia kcMl (Sk.). 

Corporal ( kor'po-ral ) , s. I'opral 
(E.). Lance corporal, las hopral. 

Corporal, adj. (bodily) hadan (a), 
iuboli'^ (a), deri-hal tubohr^ (ma- 
terial, as o])posefl to immaterial) 
bernjaim; (as disposed to spiritual) 
brrlmbaga/^ 

Corporate (-ret), adj. (iucorpor- 
aied) berlmbaga'^ digati^ prentah 
It- raj a' an." (united, general) ber- 
xtuju, bcrsama'an. 

Corporation (-ra'slu/n), s. sidatg 
l/arg berlmbaga/^ majlis yaig ber- 
Imbaga.''' 

Corporeal (kor-por'i-al), adj. ber- 
Imbaga,,^" benyawa; see corpokal. 

Corps (kor, pi. korz), s. (of troops) 
pasokan. 

Corpse (korps), s. (hmnan) niayat, 
nrarg nial'i, jnazali (Ar.). 

Corpulence (kor'pn-jcus), s. gmolc, 
l-gino¥an, prot bunch it. 

Corpuscle (kor'pus-sl) , s. petah 
yarg haliis dalam darah dan s- 
bagai-tya, dzarmt (Ar.). 

Corral (kor-ral'), s. kandarg, pagar. 

Correct (kor-rekf), adj. btul_, bnar, 
sail, sahili^ (Ar. saiim). 

Correct, v. t. (make right) btulhan, 
bailchi,, salikan; (discipline) ajar, 
ajari;^ (by. advice or warning) 
patahf^ (connteract, as by medi- 
cine) tawar. 

Correction (-rek'slrwn), s. (act of 
correcting) lial mmMidkan, etc., as 
above;' (emendation) hbtulan, salt; 
(punishment) pigajaran, scksa. 

Corrective (-tiv), adj. yarg mm- 
btidlian, yarg nimbaikM. 



Correctness (-rekt'nes), s. JMuIart^ 
sail. 

Correspond (kor're-spond'), v. i. 
(Ix* like, coincide) bersama'an, ber- 
jmtufan, samafi, jadi s-rujm; 
(agree) berstnju; (by letters) ba- 
la-^-mrnbalas snraf. 

Correspondence (-^ns), s. (con- 
grnity) persama'an; (agreement) 
perstujiian; (by letters) hal balas- 
mmbalas surat. 

Correspondent (-^nt), s. piyuraf, 
pmhrifa/^ mukatih (Ar.). 

Correspondent, adj. bersama'an, 
bcrpafufan. s-rupa, berstuju. 

Corresponding (-ing), adj. ber- 
stujnan; (of vrords or sounds) 
sama buiyi; (of form) sania rupa; 
(of nature) sama jnis; etc. Cor- 
resix>nding with, mnasahali d?gan 
(Ar.), berbtulan dtgan."^ 

Corridor (kor'ri-dor), s. loroig da- 
lam rinnali. 

Corroborate (kor-rob'o-rat), v. t. 
(make certain) tntuhan; (make 
strong) I'liatkan; (establish as 
true) yakan* swrggolikan, bnar- 
kan. 

Corroboration (-ra'shwn), s. k- 
Inhian, khnaran, ksurggolian. 

Corrigible (kor'ri-ji-bij, adj. yarg 
boleh di-baikki, yarg boJeh di-btvl- 
kan. 

Corrode (kor-rod'), v. t. (eat 
away) makan; (rust) bri ber- 
karat: (consume) liahiskan, rosak- 
kan. 

Corrode, v. i. berkaraf. 

Corrosion (-ro'zlwn), s. kmakan- 
an/^^ karat. 

Corrosive (-siv), adj. yarg in- 
niakan, i/atg mmbri berkarat. 
( 'orrosive acid, ayer api. 

Corrugated (kor'ru-gat-ed), adj. 
beralur-alur* berlurah.* Corru- 
gated iron, zerg (E.), zhg (E.), 
I \ mall sari. 

Corrupt (kor-rupf), v. t. (make 



vate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minwa, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CORRUPT 



115 



COUNSEL 



putrid) hri husol-; (vitiate, de- 
base) roscMan; (by bribery) hri 
snap, 'mas'if (falsify) lanchorrj' 
I' an.* 

Corrupt, adj. (putrid) husol-; 
(spoiled, debased) rosal', hiiiasa; 
(depraved) I'ji* 

Corruptible (-i-bl), adj. yarg holeh 
mnjadi husol', j/arg holeh hinasa, 
fana* (Ar. fand'). 

Corruption (-rup'sli//n), s. (act of 
corrupting) lial mmhinasakan, hal 
mrosakl^an, lidl mmhri snap; (state 
of being corrupt) hal mnjadi hu- 
so'k, hrosaVan, I'l-jian/^ hal mma- 
I'an snap, see coerupt. 

Corsair (kor'sar), s. prompah, la- 
nun* 

Corset (-set), s. lutarg* (Jav.), 
choli (Hind.). 

Cortege (kor-tfizli'), s. perarakan. 

Coruscate (kor'us-kat), v. i. her- 
Jcerlap* 

Cosmetics (koz-niet'iks), s. pi. 
urap-iirapan;* substances used as 
cosmetics are: — hdal^, pupor* ho- 
reh* To use cosmetics^ herlidak, 
h er pupor * 

Cosmic (koz'mik), adj. deri-hal s- 
kiian 'alam* ^alam* (a). * 

Cosmology (koz-nioro-ji), s. ///m// 
Icjadian sl'lian 'alam.* 

Cosmopolitan (koz'nio-pori-t«n), 
adj. sluroh dunla (a), yanj tiada 
mlhelikan satu negri deri-pada yarg 
lain. 

Cosmos (koz'nios), s. s-gnap 'alam. 

Cost (kawst or kost) , v. i. (require 
an expenditure) daiaighan^ blanja; 
(cause a loss) hawa rugi, shahtwi 



rugi. 



To cost one's life, shahl'an 



mati.* It costs $10, herga-nja s- 
puloh rirggif. It cost me $10, 
sahya sudah hli s-puloh rirggit. 
Cost, s. (amount charged or paid) 
herga; (expense) hlanja, orgl'os 
(X.I.) (D. onl'osten) ; (loss, 
detriment) rugi. It will not re- 



pay the cost, tiada pularg modal. 

Cost price, herga hli. 
Costive (kos'tiv), adj. I'urarg jalan^ 

l-urarg lawas, smhlii. 
Costiveness (-nes), s. smhlit. 
Costly (kawst'li or kostTi), adv. (of 

great cost) hsar herga-nja; (ex- 
pensive) mahal; (precious) indah. 
Costume (kos'tiim or kos-tum'), s. 

palxiian. A complete costume,. 

prargg u* persalinan.* 
Cosy (ko'zi), adj. (sheltered) tdoh; 

(convenient) snarg. 
Cot (kot), s. (hut) pondoh, iratakf' 

(bed) tmpai tidor I'chil, 
Cottage (kot'tej), s. rumah I'cMl. 
Cotter (-ter), s. (wedge) haji.* 
Cotton (-tn), s. (cultivated, from 

Gossypium herbaceum) hapas; 

(from Eriodendron anfractuosum) 

kapoh; (from Trevesia sundaica) 

hahu-kahu;* (cloth) hain kapas; 

(unbleached) kain hlachu, Icain 

mnfah;* (prints) kain chit, kain 

chita; (thread) hnarg, hnanj ka^ 

/MS. Cotton wool, kapas. 
Couch (kowch), s. (bed) tmpat ti^ 

dor, katil* ranjarg, qta (Sk.), 

kaus* (E.). 
Couch. V. i. (lie concealed) hndap^ 

'ndap, migndap (B.). 
Cough (kof), s. hatok; (as a sign) 

daham. A\'hooping cough, hatoJc 

rjan* hatok llah, hatok sisek* 
Cough. V. i. hatok, herdaham. To 

cough up phlegm, kaliak. 
Could (kood), v.i. holeh, dapat,* 

smpat: see able. 
Coulter (kol'ter), s. nayam.* 
Council (kown'sil), s. (assembly) 

majlis, mashuarat (Ar.), ijnia 

(Ar.) ; (act of deliberating) hi- 

chara, mashuarat (Ar.). 
Councillor (-ler), s. sidaiy majlis. 

ahli mashuarat (Ar.) 
Counsel (-sel), v. t. hicharakan, na- 

sihatkan,* hri nasiliat.* 
Counsel, s. (consultation) hichara; 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

udrror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; fdorl, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin tJiQU. 



COUNSELLOR 



116 



COUPLE 



(advice.) iia^sihat,^ hichavd, sliur 
(Ar.) ; (purpose, design) ka- 
kandak, rnaksnd; (secret purpose) 
rahsia; (legal adviser) pmhichara, 
pnolotg b'uihava, pguanij^ To keep 
counsel, suapan ralma. To take 
counsel, herhichara, herrundirfj* 
berrondoy (B.). 

Counsellor (-ler), s. pmUcliara. 

Count (kownc), s. (reckoning) hi- 
lanjan, hitorgan; (charge, allega- 
tion) tudohan* d'awaan. 

Count, V. t. (enumerate) hilatg, hi- 
torg, kira, reken (X.I.) (t).), hi- 
sab* (Ar. nl^ab) ; (impute, as- 
cribe) bilargkan; (esteem, reck- 
on) bilaigkan, kirakan. To count 
on, Jiarap. It does not connt (in 
games), taachi* tapakai (B.). 

Count, s. /Mirgkat oraig baigsawan di 
Eropak = EAKL, q. v. 

Countenance (kown'te-nans), s. 
(appearance) riipa muka; (face, 
features) muka, paras,* wajah 
(Ar.), durja (Sk.). Out of coun- 
tenance, te rsipu-sipu. 

Countenance, v. t. (approve, fa- 
vour) bnarkan, perknaniwi; (aid) 
bantu, tolorg. 

Counter (-ter), s. (one who counts) 
pmbUarg; (in games) pi (Ch.). 

Counter, adj. (opposite) berhadap- 
an, yaig bertntarg; (adverse) yarg 
mJawan. 

Counteract (kown'ter-akf), v. t. 
(act in opposition) la wan; (hin- 
der) tgah, rintarg;* (neutralise, 
by charms or medicine) tawar, ta- 
tvari* 

Countercharm (-charm), s. pia- 
war. 

Counterbalance (-bal'ans), v. t. 
samakan brat, balas timhaigan, per- 
timhalkan* 

Counterfeit (-fit), v. t. (imitate) 
tiru* srupakan, samakan; (forge) 
lanch rgkan,* palsukan. 

Counterfeit, adj. (by imitation) 



tiruan;* (feigned) pura-piira; 
(forged) lanchorg,* palm (Tort.). 
Counterfeit coin, watg pals a j ivarg 
lanchorgan.* 

Counterfoil (-foil), s. kratan rasit 
atau chek yarg iirggal di buku. 

Counterirriitant (-ir'ri-tant), s. 
(fomentation) tirnfn. 

Countermand (-mand'), v. t. bafal- 
kail liukum, batalkan psan. 

Countermine (-min'), v. t. (fig.) 
batalkan digan smburyi, law an 
diam-diam. 

Counterpane (-pan), s. chadar 
(Hind.), spre (NJ.) (D. sprei). 

Counterpart (-part), s. saiyia. 

Cpunterpoise (-poiz), s. timbalan* 
la counterpoise, beriinibalan* 

Countersign (-sin), v. t. (endorse) 
inndimkan landa targan. 

Countersign, s. (signature) tanda 
targan yaig kdua; (watchword) 
sm boyan * ralisia. 

Countervail (-vaF), v. t. timbal.^ 

Countinghouse (kownt'ing-hows) , 
^.opis {E.),kantor (D.) (N".!) 

Countless (-les), adj. tiada ter- 
bilarg, tiada tpermana'i,* tiada ter- 
Imahkan (Ar.). 

Country (kun'tri), s. (region, very 
large) bnua;* (smaller) negri, ta- 
nah; (rural region) dustinj* (in- 
habitants, the public) isi negri. 

Country, adj. (rural) dusun; (rus- 
tic, unpolished) ulu, hutan. 

Countryman (-man), s. (compa- 
triot) oraig s-negri; (a rustic) 
orarg dusun,* orarg bukit. 

County (kown'ti), s. da'irdh (Ar.), 
jajahan,* desa (N.I.). 

Couple (kup'l), s. (two of the same 
kind) pasatg, jodoh; (married per- 
sons) klarimij* (if united or con- 
tiguous) bandorg;* (as two widths 
of a saroig) kampoh.* 

Couple V. t. (tie) tambat; (join) 
huhotg, jodohkan, samborg; (as 
railway carriages) kait. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



COUPLET 



117 



COVETOUSNESS 



Couplet (kup'Ict), s. slol-a/-^ pan- 
tun. 

Coupling (-ling), s. samlorgan, hu- 
hoirjan. 

Coupon (koo'pon or koo'poN), s. 
tel^et (E.), Icardiis (N.I.) (I). 
kaartjes). 

Courage (kiir'ej), s. hmni liati, Ic- 
hranian. 

Courageous (kiir-ri'ji/s), adj. hrani, 
perl'asa (Sk.), gagali. 

Courier (koo'ri-er) s. pnjuroli, su- 
rohan. 

Course (kors), s. (progress) per- 
jalanan, pJafjeran; (path travers- 
ed) jalan; (direction of motion) 
tujuan; (if straight) Igatf (pro- 
<;edure,behaYiour) laku* klakuan; 
(series of actions) gilirj* (part of 
a meal) mjian, Mdargan.f' (layer 
of masonry) susun, tindan/^' (pi. 
the menses) datarg hulan, liedl^ 
(Ar. haidl). In course, herturut- 
furut, hergilir-gUir* Of course, 
tntu, nschaya (Sk.), psti, pasti 
(B.), memarg. 

Course, v. t. huru. 

Course, v. i. lari. 

Court (kort), s. (yard) halantan, 
kompann (E.) ; (palace) istana; 
(retinue of king) ora/y dalam;* (of 
justice) tmpat hichara, mahkamah 
(Ar.), kot (E.) ; (judicial assem- 
bly), majlis hichara; (a judge) ha- 
kim. Supreme court or high court, 
mahkamah hsar* kot hsar, kantor 
Isar (X.I.). 

Court, V. t. (seek to gain favour) 
amhil hati; (woo) chiinibuf' (seek 
to obtain) chan. 

Courteous (ker'ti-Ms), adj. her- 
hhasa, hemdah (Ar.). 

Courtesan (ker'te-zan), s. sandal, 
prempuan jahat, prempnan jalaig, 
lonteh (N.I.). 

Courtesy (-si), s. hhasa, adab 
(Ar.). . 



Courtesy (kert'si), v. i. rndalikan 
diri mmhri hormat. 

Courtier (kort'yer), s. oraig dalam. 

Courtly (-li), adj. berbhasa, chara 
bhasa. 

Court-martial (kort'mar'shal), s. 
majlis bichara bagi soldado. 

Courtship (-ship), s. chumbu-chiim- 
buanr 

Court-yard (-3'^ard'), s. halaman, 
kompaiin (E.). 

Cousin (kuz'n), s. saudara. First 
cousin, saudara s-pupu. Second 
cousin, saudara dua pupu. 

Cove (kov), s, flok kchil, suah^^ 

Covenant (kuv'e-nant), s. perjanji- 
an, waad (Ar.). The covenant of 
marriage, 'al'ad nikah (Ar.). 

Covenant, v. i. berjanji, ber'akad 
(Ar.), herwaad (Ar.). 

Cover (kuv'er), V. t. (gen.) tutop: 
(with a cover or cloth) tudon/; 
(with a hollow vessel) suvgkop, 
serkop; (with something flat) t- 
kap; (overlay) salut/' turap;"^ 
(wrap) balut, sampulj^ ulas;* 
(with clouds or dew) saputj* (with 
mats or cloth) bokot;* (with a 
blanket) sli^nutkan; (completely) 
sluborg, kluboig* Utop;* (with 
water or light) liput;* (conceal) 
smbunjikan; (protect) lindoTg. 

Cover, s. tutop, tudoig, balut, sam- 
pul.'^ See above. 

Covering (-ing), s. tutop, tudoiy, 
pnutop. 

Coverlet (-let), s. slimut, chadar 
(Hind.). 

Covert (kuv'ert), adj. suUt,* ber- 
smbunji, glap, samar,^ bersamar.'^ 

Covet (-et), v. t. (desire earnestly) 
berkahandak, itgin, rindu; (in a 
bad sense) tarn' a* (Ar. Tam'a), 
tmahak (B.), loba.* 

Covetous (-us), adj. tam^a (Ar.), 
tmahak (B.), loba.^ 

Covetousness (-nes), s. tam^a 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 
, mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minus, cure, injure, 
hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



COVEY 



118 



CRANK 



(Ar.), ttnaJiah (B.), loha* l'- 
'ityinan, dhagi.^ 

Covey (kuv'i), s. piyraman, prin- 
dun* 

Cow (kow), s. Imhu htma. 

Cow, V. t. bri takot, takoti* bachoU 
kan^' hati, kchilkan hati. 

Coward (kow'erd), s. pnakoi, ba- 
chol.'^ 

Cowardice (-is), s. ktahotan, h- 
barhola?i.'^^ 

Cowardly (-li), adj. pnalcot, ba- 
cliol* 

Cower (kow'er), V. i. (crouch) tun- 
dok, 'ndap, hndap, miyndap (B.) ; 
(quail) bachol* 

Cowherd (-herd), s. gombala Imbu. 

Cowl (kowl), s. tudorg hpala pcida 
baju Mlawar;'^ (of a chimney) tu- 
dorg choroig, tudorg smprorg,* 
V^entilating cowl, pnarggoJc anjin.* 

Cowrie (kow'ri), s. bia* 

Coxcomb (koks'kom), s. (dandy) 
psolek,* orarg antunj* orarg ber- 
solek (B.). 

Coxswain (koks'n), s. srarg, juru- 
mudi, tekorg (Ch. tdi-koig). 

Coy (koi), adj. mahi, tersipu-sipu. 

Cozen (kuz'n), v. t. tipu, perdaya- 
kan* kichu.* 

Cozy (ko'zi), adj. (sheltered) tdoh; 
( comfortable ) snarg. 

Crab (krab), s. ktam, kpitirg. 
King crab, blargkas. Hermit crab, 
wnaig-umarg.'^ Land crab, hudarg 
gtak. 

Crabbed (krab 'bed), adj. prrgits.* 

Crack (krak), v. i. (burst open) 
blah, rkah, merkah; (break with- 
out separating) rtak; (make a 
sharp sound) rak,* rap, krtok,* 
krpak, krpokj (as a whip) berdtas. 
see CRACK, s. 

Crack, v. t. blah, blalikan, clikali,'^-' 
rkahkan-,'* merkahkan, rtakkan. 

Crack, s. (fissure) chlah, chJak 
(B.) ; (split) blah, rkah; (with- 
out opening) rtak; (the sound) 



rap, rak,* drap,"^ krap,^' Ikap,^' 

Hop, srak-srek* Uus. 
Cracked (kriikt), adj. (crazy) 

kpala argin, s-trgah tiaig/'' ksasar- 

an. 
Cracker (krak'er), s. (fireworks) 

ptas, merchwi; (biscuit) biskut 

(E.), roti kaUrg (X.I.). 
Crackle (-kl), v. i. krtak-krtek, k- 

rpak-krpok. 
Cradle (kra'dl), s. buai/^ buaian,'^ 

bo-bue (B.), ayuuan;'^ (with up 

and down motion) baai befnjutf 

(of a sarong) dondarg, bo-bue kain 

(B.) ; (hung from the roof) ^/z- 

dul;* (place of origin) tinpat asal. 
Craft (kraft), s. (skill) kpandaiafi; 

(manual art) utas,"^' pertukargan, 

pnclianan; (cunning) cherdek, 

'akal; (Naut.) prahu, kapaJ. 
Craftsman (krafts'man), s. iukarg, 

lit as/'' 
Crafty (kraft'i), s. cherdek, panjaig 

'akal. 
Crag (krag), s. bat a bmr yarg ter- 

jojol di atas gunotg. 
Cram (kram), v. t. (force in) asak, 

padatf' (fill with food) knryarg- 

kan; (force food into a child's 

mouth) jjalkan.'* 
Cramp (lafimp), s. (clamp) pnchrg- 

kam,* prgapit; (of the muscles) 

kantu,* simpol brgkaroig;"^ (of the 

Btomach) snak, mulas prot, rigat/' 
Cramp, v. t. (confine, contract) 5- 

sakkan: (restrain) tahankan; 

(hold with a cramjo) apit,* chrg- 

kam. 
Crane (kran), s. (the bird) buroig 

klahu,* burorg jnjatg;* (machine) 

tombak sagarg^' 
Crane, v. t. (stretch out, as the 

neck) jnjargkan/^ hulor. 
Cranium (kra'ni-?/m), s. trgkorak, 

batu kpala, tmpurotg, jmala (Sk.). 
Crank (krangk), s. pmutar, ergkol 

(L.). 
Crank, adj. (Xaut.) olerg. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injur% 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CRANNY 



119 



CREEK 



Cranny (kran'ni), s. clilali, cliroh. 

Crash (krash), y. i. (sound of ex- 
plosion) dntani, dntom; (of falling 
house) (jinnfanij* (of weapons) 
ijmrencheiyf' (of dishes) krarg- 
krorg;* (of falling tree) herpakj 
(of loud thunder or voice) ptir, 

Crash, s. (sound) see above; (ruin) 

Irom h'a n, Mnnasa'a n. 
Crate (krai), s. (large basket) Jcran- 

jarg ; (protective framework) sa- 

rorg. 
Crater (kra'ier), s. kairali gunoiy 

bcrapi. 
Craunch (krawnch), v. t. kerJcap- 

kerl'op. 
Cravat (kra-vat'), s. tali leliir, dasi 

(X.I.) (1). dasje). 
Crave (krav), v. t. pohonkan,^ mbu 

fa sargat; (long iov)rindu, irginj 

(of pregnant women) idam,* mrg- 

Idam (B.). 
Craven (kra'vn), adj. pnakot, ha- 

Craving (krav'ing), s. k'hg'man; 

(for opiiun^ alcohol, etc.), ktageh. 
i Crawl (krawl), v. i. (of animals) 

mlar/^ myap, mmyap (B.), lata; 

(as children, on all fom's) raiy- 

leak: (as a mass of maggots) ger- 

lit lit. 
Crayfish (kra'lish), s. udarg ka- 

raigf^ inidatg gtak* 
Crayon (kra'wn), s. kapiir hlanda 

pancliaiverna,'^ 
Craze (kraz), v. t. h'dargkan 'akal, 

hityo)gkan. 
Craze, s. (infatuation) cliondoig 

liati, kahandak, slap* 
■ Crazy (kra'zi), adj. (weak, shaky) 

Ihnrok; (demented) kpala atgin, 
gil<i hhasa/^ iigatan ta'ttap,, s- 
tigah tiaigj* (infatuated) slap* 
Creak (krek), v. i. herkiut"', kiaiy- 
kiuV\ kenyat-kenyui;'* (of oars). 
drap-drup* 
Cream (krem), s. kpala susu. 



Crease (kres), s. (wrinkle) knit, 
(in the skin) ktak* rtak; (mark 

of fold) hkas lipat. 
Crease, v. t. krutkan, kdutkan; 

(crumple) gumalkan.'^ 
Create (kre-af), v. t. jadikan, ada- 

kan. 
Creation (kre-fi'sh/m), s. kjadian; 

(created things) makJilok (At.), 
Creative (-tiv), adj. yatg tahu mrg- 

adakan* yaig holeh mn jadikan. 
Creator (-ter), s. pnjadi/^ yarg mn- 

jadikan, khalik (Ar.). 
Creature (kre'chur), s. makhlok 

(Ar.), khalayak (Ar.). A poor 

creature (spoken in pity) lianiba 

Allah. 
Credence (kre'd<?ns), s. percliaya, 

Jiarap. 
Credentials (kre-den'shalz), s. pL 

surat kryata'an, siwat khnaran, su- 

rat ktratgan. 
Credible (kred'i-bl), adj. kper- 

rhaya'afi, ydrg hoi eh di-perchaya. 
Credit (-it), s. (trust, confidence) 

percliaya, harap; (merit) jasa 

(Sk.), pahaJa; (in commerce) 

piutarg.'^ 
Credit, v. t. (believe, trust) harap, 

percliaya; (in bookkeeping) tolah 

hufarg, potorg hiitarg, piutargkan.* 
Creditable (-a-bl), adj. (praise- 
worthy) yarg terpuji; (bringing 

credit) yatg mmbri jam (Sk.) ; 

(honorable) kahormatan, yarg pa- 
tut di-honnati. 
Creditor (-er), s. oraig berpiutaig.'^ 
Credulity (kre-du'li-ti), s. percliaya 

yatg hukan-bukan. 
Credulous (kred'u-l?/s), adj. yaig 

Ikas perchaya. 
Creed (kred), s. (confession of 

faith) ptyakuan imati (Ar.), sha- 

Jiadat (Ar.) ; (faith, religion) 

iman (Ar.), agama. 
Creek (krek), s. tlok, suak^* anak 

suryaL 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, rece'nt, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

Biirror; old, not, connect, s5re, sort, sorry; use, us, minMB, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awf-^1) ; law, how, oil; thin tliftn. 



CREEP 



120 



CRITIC 



Creep (krep), v. i. (of animab) ra- 
yap, mrayap (B.), lata; (as 
snakes) jalarf (as lizards) mm" 
hiawak; (as children, on all fours) 
raiylcak; (move slowly) ralcap;"^ 
(stealthily, as a tiger) jlanak;* 
(as plants or vines) jalar,^ Tayap, 
lata, lilii. 

Creeper (krep'er), s. (plant) ahar, 
tanaman yarg mnjalar. 

Creepiness (-i-nes), s. t^ram, smut- 
sniutan, gli-gman/^ gli-gmam 
(B.). 

Creese (kres), s. A-m.* 

Cremate (kre-maf), y. t. halw ma- 
yaf. 

Cremation (-ma'slmn), s. hal mm- 
hakar may at. 

Creosote (kre'o-sot), s. pati miryah 
hiyu. 

Crepe (krap), s. Min stra herhdut; 
(Japanese) kain Jpiin; (Chinese) 
jo'se^' (Ch. jiau^-se). 

Crescent (kres'sent), s. hgkoigan'^ 
bulan. The Star and Crescent, 
bulan hi?itarg. 

Cress (kres), s. water-cress, smarg- 
gi* skti* 

Crest (krest), s. (tuft) jamhul; 
(artificial) tajok;^ (of feathers, 
erectile) clintoig;* (comb of a 
cock) halorg,^ je'^gger (Jav.), jirg- 
get (B.) ; (summit of a hill) 
merchu* Tcmimcliak; (heraldic) 
'alamat orarg hargsauwi.'^^ 

Crestfallen (krest'fawl'en), adj. 
sndu,^ hacliol^" 

Crevice (krev'is), s. chlah, chlak 
(B.). 

Crew (kroo), s. (assemblage) hum- 
polan orarg; (of a ship) mcah* 
prahu, anak praliu, 

.Crib (krib), s. (manger) palorgan/^ 
lawak4awak;* (child's bed) tmpat 
iidor hchil. 

Crib, V. t. (confine) kurorg; 
(cramp) smpitkan, asakkan; (pil- 
fer) choket.^ 



Crick (krik), s. kantu* simpol Irg- 
karoiy.* 

Cricket (krik'et), s. (the insect) 
ch)gkadok; (the game) main kri- 
kit\E.). 

Crier (krfer), s. pryru,'^ tukarg triah 
(B.). 

Crime (krim), s. (violation of law) 
dom, ksalahan; (iniquity) kjakat- 
an. 

Criminal (krim'i-nal), s. orarg sa- 
I ah. 

Criminal, adj. (guilty of crime) 
berdosa; (relating to crime) deri- 
Ml dosa, jnayah (Ar.). 

Crimp (krimp), v. t. (make wavy) 
ikalkan;* (entrap, as sailors oi 
coolies) chari klasi atau huli drgan 
tipu, larikan kidi. 

Crimson (krim'zn), adj. kirmizx 
(Ar.) ; (of the face) merah pa- 
dam. 

Cringe (krinj), v. i. tundokkan dirij 
(abase one's self) rndahkan diri. 

Crinkle (kring'kl), v. i. (in twists) 
berblit; (in wrinkles) herkdut, 
berkrut. 

Cripple (krip'pl), s. (lame) orarg 
temparg; (manned) orarg kodorg, 
orarg kudoiy (B.). 

Cripple, V. t. (maim) kodoigkan, 
(weaken) Imahkan. 

Crisis (kri'sis), s. (in disease oi 
danger) kmlut;* (decisive mo- 
ment) sa'at yarg smpurna.* 

Crisp (krisp), adj. (curly) kritirg, 
(of cooked food) garirg, rargup, 
kersai* pidan.* 

Crisp, V. t. kritirgkan, garirgkan, 
as above. 

Crisscross (kris'kros), adv. lintarg- 
piikarg, sUarg-mri/ilarg. 

Criterion (kri-ter'i-wn), s. (esta- 
blished rule) kanun (Ar.) ; (mea- 
sure, standard) kadar (Ar.). 

Critic (krit'ik), s. (reviewer) pry- 
lidek* prgcham;* (one who cen- 
sures) pnclila. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, ben, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, firOj 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 
hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thiu then. 



CRITICAL 



121 



CROSSLEQaED 



Critical (krit'i-kal), adj. (able to 

judge) yairj taliu hezakan (Sk.); 

(careful in judgment) pandai mfy- 

lideh;* (fault finding) pnchla; 

(at a crisis) pada sa'at* yang sm- 

puma; (in disease) pada kmlut;* 

(dangerous) berhahya. 
Criticize (-siz), v. t. (examine as a 

critic) chaml'an; (find fault 

with) cMa. 
Criticism (-sizm), s. ptychaman/^' 

kchlaian; as above. 
Critique (kri-tek'), s. piychaman.^ 
Croak (krok), v. i. (as frogs) 

krok;* (grumble) bersuiyut, ro- 

Croaker (krok'er), s. orarg ber- 
siuyut. 

Crochet (kro-sha'), s. kaitan. 

Crockery (krok'er-i), s. (glazed) 
phyyati-'maryl'oJc; (unglazed) p- 
riok-blaiya; (broken) tmbel'arj^ 

Crocodile (-o-dil), s. buaya. Cro- 
codile toars, mnaiyis piim-pura. 

Crone (kron), s. orary tua (prem- 
puan). 

Crony (kro'ni), s. liandai,^ sahahat 
yaty rapaf, sobat-ande (B.). 

Crook (krook), s. (curve, hook) 
kalol',^ piyait; (rod with hook at 
the end) yatichu; (for driving 
elephants) chaiyhok/^ kma (Sk.) ; 
(an artifice, trick) 'akal. 

Crook, v. i. berkalok.* 

Crooked (krookVd), adj. (not 
straight) bctykok, end ; (of a 
•sarong) penchoiy.^ Crooked busi- 
ness, kerja tipu. 

Croon (kroon), v. i. kidoty/-' mty- 
idoty.^ 

Crop (krop), s. (of a bird) tm- 
bolok; (of grain) perliuma'an/^ 
pnuaian;"^ (of fruit) ptek'an biiaJi, 
buah-buahan. 

Crop, V. t. (cut the ends oft') paiy- 

. kas;"^ (browse) yaiyyut;'^ (the 
hair as punishment) ray as. 



Croquette (kro-kef), s. katlit (E.), 

braaadel (J), frikkadel) (N.I.). 
Cross (kros), s. (gibbet) kayu ber- 

palaty,* pndpaiy* salib* (At. 

f^alib): (the sign) paiykah ; 

(badge) bintary. 
Cross, adj. (transverse) lintaiy, si- 
la ty; (ill-tem])ered) marali, mra- 

danj, rajok, mmjok (B.), rtyus,"^ 

jauli hati* krhil hati. 
Cross, V. t. (la}' athwart) lintaiy- 

kan; (traverse) Jahd* linias; 

(pass over a road or river) sbraiy; 

(thwart^ lintaryij^ To cross out, 

patykak^ paraiykan;^ bimoh. To 

cross the arms, plok luboh* plok 

taiyan (B.) ; (behind the back) 

srykUiy/^ To cross the feet, sry- 

kliry kaki/' kiau-ka (B.) (Ch. 

khmu-kha) . 
Cross, V. i. (lie athwart) liniary, 

silary; (pass over) sbrary, miy- 

brary. 
Crossbar (kros'bar), s. srykaty, 

kayu palaiy;^ kayu llntary, kayu 

rembat.^' 
Crossbow (-bo), s. terbil/'' 
Crossbreed (-bred), s. baka elf am- 

puran, batysa cfiampuran. 
Crosscut (-kut), s. (short road) 

jalan pintas,'^ jaJan pendek (B.). 

Crosscut saw, geryaji balak. 
Cross-examine (-egz-am'in), v. t. 

bersual-sual, slidek dtyan sual* 

slorykar.'^ 
Cross-eyed (Id), adj. mata juliry, 

(sliglitly) juliiy-julity ayer. 
Crossj^rained (-grand), adj. (of 

wood) urat mlintary; (of tempei') 

prus/^ pnyusJ^ 
Crossing; (-ing), s. (going over) lial 

mnjbrarg : (intersection) srykaiy 

autpat; (cross roads) sempary am- 

pat. 
Crossing-sweeper (-swep-er), s. 

oraiy yaiy niryapu jalan. 
Crosslegged (-legd), adj. bersih. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minims, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CROSSPIECE 



122 



CRUMBLE 



Crosspiece (-pes.), s. palarg,'^' srg- 

luig, kaiiu littfajy. 
Cross-purpose (-per'p?^s). s. At 

cross-purposes, berlainan mahsud. 
Cross-question (-kwes'chmi), v. i. 

bersual-sual/-' sli(fel' clrgan suah"^ 

Cross-road (-rod), s. jalan sem- 

pargan, semparg ampat. 
Cross-stitch (-stich). s. jaliitan iu- 

latg hhit/^ 
Crosstrees (-trez), s. (N"aiit.) du- 

la nj-duJarg, ioperg-toperg. 
Crossways (-waz). s. semparg. 
Crosswise (-wiz), s. linimg; (over 

the shoulder) shmparg, sleparg. 
Crotch (kroch). s. chlah; (between 

the legs) chlali I'argl'aig/^ chlah 

I'hgkmg; (at tlie end of a post) 

cliargap''-' 
Crotchet (krocliVt). s. iergkaliy m- 

gam. 
Crotchet3' (-1), adj. hcrtergkah, 

dire wet, hatyak ragam. 
Croton (kro't^/n). s, pudity,^' adal- 

adal."^ 
Crouch (kroweh), v. i. herdkam* 

'fidap, hndap, mrgndap (B.) ; (ser- 
vilely) surgkor^' 
Croup (kroop). s. (hindpart of 

horses) pinggory; (Med.) pryakit 

buloh-h uloh/'^ dorgkol-dorgkolJ' 
Crow (kro), v. i. (as a cock) her- 

kokok : (as a liaby) aynh,'^ mrg- 

agah (B.). 
Crow, s. (the bird) hvrorg gagak, 

bur org ditdatg:* (of a cock) ko- 

kok : (of a babv) agali,"^^ mryagali 

(B.). 
Crowbar (kro'bar), s. alahargka 

(Port.), pnnil. pncliorykil, pra- 

jarg^ 
Crowd (kro\rd). s. kumpolan. per- 

kurnpoJa)i, orarg ramai, orarg ha- 

tyak; (group of ])ersons) klompok, 

puak; (crush) ksmVa^i. 
Crowd, V. i. (press together, throng) 

berkumpol, herkrumun; (press 



forward) berduyimf^ (stand in a 
crowd) bertbai^' 
Crowd, V. t. (press, push) asak; 
(press together) mampat: (hll by • 
thronging) ssakkaiK 
Crowded (krowdVd), adj. pnult 

smk. 
Crown (krown), s. (royal headdress) 
inakota (Sk.) : (topmost part) 
p un ch ak, km u ncli ak, mei'chu;*' 
(of tlie head) vhun-ubiin* jmala 
(^Sk.). Cro\m land, tanah k- 
I raja' an, ianali kompui. Crown 
I prince, raja mnda, iurgku hsar, 
j iurgku rnakoia (Sk.). 
I Crown, V. t. (kings) laniek/^ ma- 
! kotakan (Sk.), iabaJkan (At.) ; 
I (consummate, complete) snipur- 
! nakan. 

, Crucible (kroo'si-bl), s. 7t- //?',* bkas 
j Ihorau/^ tmpat Iboran. 

Crucifix (-fiks), s. patoiq saliV 
I (Ar. 8a?i&). 

j Crucifixion (-fik'sli/zn), s, (act of 

crucifying) hal musalibkan (Ar.) ; 

(deatli by crucifying) kmaiian di 

kayu salib (Ar.j. 

Crucify (-fl), v. t. salibkan (Ar.). 

Crude (krood), adj. (uncooked, un- 

i ripe) mutah; (unfinished, nnpre- 

j pared) bakal* as, bakal mityak, 

I crude oil; (imperfect) tafsnipurna. 

Cruel (kro5'fl), adj. brgis. 
I Cruelty (-ti), s. kbryisan, aniaya. 
Cruet (-et), s. buli-bulir Crtiet 
stand, ttnpai chuka miiyak, tmpat 
lada garam. 
Cruise (krooz), v. i. (Xaut.) payar, 

jujalii laid an. 
Cruiser (krooz'er), s. (Xaut.) p- 
■raliu payar, kapal praig yarg mm- 
ayar. 
Crumb (kruni), s. (small frag- 
ment) rem all, "^^ chbis,"-' cliotek;*' 
(of ])read, as op])osed to crust) 
id roii. 
Crumble (krum'bl), v. t. lianclivr- 
kan. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ftTi-y; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, min?/s. cure, injure, 

hurry: food. foot, awf ool (avvful); law, ho-v\, oil; thin then. 



CRUMBLE 



123 



CULL 



berprai-prai* rput. 



Crumble, v. i. 

i-JnrjknraiJ^ 
Crumple (-pi), v. t. gumall-an* 

ronjokkai}. 
Crunch (krimcli), v. t. (as a dog 

enuii-he^ a bone) mamah. 
Crunch, v. i. I'erl-ap-Jcerhop, hrop- 

l-rap.'^ 
Crupper (knip'per), s. 'niban elcor,"^ 

taJi el'or. 
Crusade (kroo-sad'), s. (lioly war) 

pvarg sahil^ (Ar. sabll). 
Cruse (krooz). >. huU-buU* balarg* 
Crush (kriisli), s. (violent pressure) 

Crush, V. t. (bruise) mmarkan;* 
( reduce to fine particles) tiancliur, 
rmoh; (between two surfaces) im- 
pit, em pet (B.), peiyek; (in the 
hand) vama.^; (under wheels) ge- 
■lel', lerery f' (by stamping) ireh/^ 
hinjal' ; (as a python) clirot* 'rat;'^ 
(force hi) /Mdat;* (in a mortar) 
iumboh: (with a spoon) lecheh; 
(insects) tinda^s; (oppress) an- 
iayal-an. 

Crushed (krnslit), adj. hanchor- 
Inlohr nnok-rdam* luloh-lan- 
t(d-;*(oL the sjnrit) lianchor liati. 

Crust (krust), s. (hard outer sur- 
face) liulit; (of rice at the bottom 
of a pot) I'ml' uom; (in wine bot- 
tles) l-ladal-/' 

Crustaceous (krus-tri'sh?/s), adj. | 
berkidit hms. ! 

Crusty adj. (having a crust) ber- \ 
I'll (if ; (surly) pngiis.^' 

Crutch (krucb), s. toiglnt I'tial'. ; 

Cry (kri), v. i. (call out) x/v/,* \ 
triak, laorg:^ (with joy or in war) [ 
sorak, impel- : (clamour) krlau,^ I 
kdan :^' (wad) ratap; (weep) j 
iargis/^' mnaigh; (with pain or as I 
nnimals) jtit, mnjret (B.), pkek. \ 
To cry violently, till there is no 
sound, mnargis pi jar. "^ 

Cry, s. sru;^ triak, etc., as above. 



Crypt (kript), s. bilek dalam Irgkorg- 

an'^ kaki tembok. 
Cryptic (krip'tik), adj. tersmbunji. 
Crystal (kris'tal), s. hablur (Pers.), 

batu blauda.^ Kock crystal, ki- 

igarg* batu plumban.'^ 
Crystallize (-Tz), v. t. bkukati* 
Crystallize, v. i. mnjadi bku,* ber- 

astakuna (Sk.). 
Cub (kub), s. anah bruaig, anah 

hrimau, dan s-bagai-tya. 
Cube (kiib), s. batgutian* anam per- 

sgi, bnda anam persgi. 
Cubeb (ku'beb), s. lada berekor* 

Jada panjatg, kmutykus* tmukus* 
Cubicle (-bi-kl), s. bilek berdindirg 

s-krat. 
Cubit (-bit), s. //a.s'/a, hsta* sta* 
Cuckold (kuk'uld), s. orarg dayns 

(Ar. dayuth). 
Cucumber (kil'kimi-ber), s. timon, 

mntimon.'^ 
Cud (kud), s. To chew the cud, ma- 
mah biak* 
Cuddle (kud'dl), v. t. lendeh* 

ujOTykom* (W.). 
Cudgel (kuj'd), V. t. pntorg* p- 

Intoig. To cudgel one's brains, 

bantiig kpala. 
Cudgel, s. blanfan,'^' pmntorg* p- 

Jntorg. 
Cue (ku), s. (tail) ekor; (catch- 
word, hint) isarat (Ar. ishdrat) ; 

(for billiards) kiu-bola (E.). 
Cuff (kuf), s. (of a sleeve) sergserg- 

an baju, lipat hgan; (of a shirt) 

kalar hgan* (E.j. 
Cuff, s. (slap) sjmk, fampar; (on the 

face) impel. erg. 
Cuff, V. t. iampar, s/xik. 
Cuirass (kwe-ras'), s. Japek dada, 

baju bsi. 
Culinery (ku'li-na-ri), adj. deri-hal 

masak, masak-masak (a). 
Cull (ktil), Y.t. (select) pileh; 

(gather) ptek ; (by cutting with 

the linger nails) gnias.* 



ate, ask, am, finrtl, care, ear, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minus, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CULLENDER 



124 



CURIOSITY 



Cullender (kul'lpn-der)^ s. iapisan. 

Also CULAXJ)EK. 

Culminate (kul'mi-iiat). y. i. naih 
Ir-niercfiu/^ sampal k-tm/xit yarg 
t'nijgi sJcali 

Culpable (-pa-bl), adj. (wortliy of 
blame) pal id di-clila: (criminal) 
herdom. 

Culprit (-prit), s. orarg iudolian,^' 
orary yarg hna d'awa, orarg ier- 
d'mra, orarg salali. 

Cult (kult), s. (homage) haMi 
(8k.) ; (system of rites) ainran 
sitihahi/arg. 

Cultivate (knrti-vat), v. t. (bestow 
labour on) l-rrjalwi; (by digging) 
(hargiol; (by ploughing) hajah, 
frggala (Sk.) ; (as a new clearing) 
hid-a ianak; (plant) ianam; 
(make fertile) suhorlcan; (care for 
while growhig) 7;7a,* pliliara: (as 
arts and sciences) tiintid. 

Cultivation (-va'sh?oi), s. (tillage) 
pprli'uwaan/'' perlanaman, ianam- 
m nanam . 

Cultivator (-vu-ter), s. pJadatg/^' 
orarg berladarg, orarg her saw all. 

Culture (kiirchur), s. (act of cnl- 
ti\ating) lial rrngerjal'an, etc., see 
CT ltivate; (physical and mental 
improvement) hudi-hhasa, tainad- 
dun (Ar.) ; (refinement) JcahaluS' 
an. 

Cultured (-chnrd), adj. herhhasa, 
hahis, hermndun (At.) ; see above. 

Cumber (kum'ber), v. t. Iratlan, 
rembetkan f (obstruct) skaikan. 

Cumbersome (-s«m), adj. brat, 
rembet.* 

Cumbrous (-br;/s), adj. remhct.^' 

Cumin (-in), s. jintan. 

Cumulative (ku'mu-la-tiv), adj. 
h eriam bah -tain bah. 

Cunninj; (kun'ning), adj. (in- 
genious) pandai, ahli (Ar.) ; 
(crafty) clierdek. 

Cunning, s. cherdeh, kcherdek'an. 



Cup (kup), s. matgkok, chawanj 

(smaller) cliargkir; (of metal) 

baiil;'^ (with a foot) p'lala 

(Pers.). 
Cup, Y. t. bkani/^ chandok (X.I.). 
Cupboard (kub'berd), s. almari,. 

Imarl, grobok.* 
Cupidity (kii-pid'i-ti), s. Zo&a,* 

lam' a, (Ar.), tmahah (B.). 
Cupola (kii'po-la), s. (of a howdah) 

kop;"^' (dome) quhah (Ar. quh- 

bat). 
Cupping (kup'ping), s. bkam,*" 

chandok (N.I.). 
Cur (ker), s. koyok.''' 
Curable (kur'a-bl), adj. yaig dapat 

di-smbohkan,'^ yanj dapat di- 

obati, yarg boleh di-obatkan. 
Curacy (kur'a-si), s. patgkat padri 

pnolorg (X.). 
Curate (-et), s. padri pnolorg (X.). 
Curator (ku-ra'ter), s. pmlihara. 
Curb (kerb), s. (of a bit) raniai 

katg, raniai lagam; (of a well) 

ikat prigi: (of a path) batu prg^ 

ileal I pi jalan. 
Curb, v. t. iahankan, lairan, falok- 

kan (Ar.), igahkan. 
Curbstone (kerb'ston), s. batu prg- 

ikat tpi jalan. 
Curcuma (ker'ku-ma), s. (turmer- 
ic) kunjit: (imported) kumkuma 

(Sk.-). 
Curd (kerd), s. dadeh,^' taint 

(Tam.). 
Curdle (ker'dl), y. i. jadi bkuj^' ber^ 

bku/^ jadi tairu. 
Cure (kiir), s. (act of curing), k- 

smbohan;'^ (remedy) pnawar. 
Cure. V. t. (heal) s?nbo}ikan* obati, 

baikkan (B.) ; (restore) pnleli^ 

kan; (by salting) garami* tar oh 

asin (B.) ; (by smoking) salai;'^ 

(by heating over a fire) paiggarg; 

(in the sun) jmor. 
Curiosity (kur'i-os'i-ti), s. (inquis- 

itiveness) mlit:* (curious thing) 

plekJ' 



ate, ank, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire,. 

mirror; old, not. connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



CURIOUS 



125 



CUSTOM 



Curious (-Ms), adj. (makiii<? eager 
search) pnjiamt* (Ar. >w><at), 
prylidehf (strange, peculiar) 

Curl (kerl), v. i. (as a snake or 
rope) herletgl'ar, herhlit; (as 
paper or leaves) hrel'ut, hrulnd:* 
(backwards) Intel'; (of hair) 
il'al/^ hritiKj : (of the lower lip) 
jueh;* (as laths in a fire) rjlteh.'^^ 

Curl. V. t. letrjl'orVan, hliil'an, etc.. 
as above; (of the upper lip) jrotg- 
in;* (of the lower lip) juelil'an* 
chbeh;* (the hair with irons) dan- 
dan * 

Curl, s. bin. I'rel-uf. lenjkar, gidorg, 
l-elok.* 

Curly (kerri). adj. iM,* hritirg. 
A curly tail, hergloig* elcor. 

Curmudgeon (ker-miij'im), s. oraig 
lol-el', orarg likir* 

Currant (kfir'rant), s. I'lf^mis liilam 
I'chil. 

Currency (-r^n-si). s. (being cur- 
rent) Jial berJal'ii ;* (money in cir- 
culation) icaig yatg lal-u. 

Current (-r^nt). adj. yatg lalcu. To 
pass current, lal'u. The current 
month, hulan ini. 

Current, s. (of water) Itarus, ams. 

Currier (-ri-er), s. tuJcarg intyuclii 
I'ulit. 

Curry (-ri), s. gulai* laol', l-ari 
(Tarn.), 7na-'<al' rnijmli. Curry 
and rice, nasi gulai* nasi I'ari 
(B.). 

Curry, v. t. (of leather) cli uclil hulit; 
(of horses) garol% siJcat. To cur- 
ry favour, lerhol\* hermul-a-miil-a. 

Currycomb (-kom). s. pjggarok 
I'uda, I'erda'^ (Hind. I'arera). 

Curse (kers), v. t. I'utok, sumpali, 
sranah. 

Curse, s. l-nfoJ,-. sumpali, la'anat 
(Ar.), sranah. srapah* 

Cursed (kors'Vd), adj. sial, clilal'a. 

Cursive (ker'siv), adj. (of writmg) 
cliondorg. 



Cursory (-so-ri), adj. (hasty) go- 

poh, '/opoli-qapah:* (careless) /a- 
lai. 

Curt (kert), adj. (brief) pen del', 
reigl-as;* (rudely concise) tvidk 
herbham. 

Curtail (kcr-trd'), v. t. (cut the end 
oif) paigkas;^^ (shorten) pendeh-^ 
l-an, reigl'aslwi;'^ (reduce) hu- 
ratg/ran. 

Curtain (ker'ten), s. iirai (Tarn.) ; 
(for doors or windows) largsi, laig- 
se (B. ). I'ain pinin: (for mosqui- 
toes) I'lambu: (drapery against a 
wall) tabir;^' (in shadow plavs) 
I'lir* 

Curtsy (kert 'si), s. rndaJd-an dirt 
mmbri h or mat. 

Curvature (ker'va-chur). s, (stat« 
of being curved) hgkorgan. 
Curvature of the spine, borgl'ok. 

Curve (kerv). s. I'lok* bntok* Jig- 
l'ol\, Intek; (of a Iris) I ok;* (of a 
river) kelok* bliku* 

Curve, V. i. hgkok, Jigkoig* 

Curve, V. t. hgkokkan, hgkorgkan,*' 
betgkokkan. 

Curvet (ker-vef or ker'vet), v. i. 
(of horses) bertandak. 

Cushion (koosh'?/n), s. bantal; (for 
a cliair) tdam kum; (for seats in 
a carriage) tdam; (of billiard ta- 
bles) kosen (E.). State cushion, 
bantal sraga* chiu* 

Custard (kus'terd), s. sri-kaya^ 
sirelikaya. The custard apple^ 
buah sri-kaya, huah sirelikaya. 

Custodian (kus-to'di-(7n), s. pm- 
lihara, pnjimpan. 

Custody (kus'to-di), s. (care, pre- 
servation) pmlihara^an, pmbla- 
'an ;* (confinement) kurorgan, 
piigifan;* (act of guarding) prg~ 
airalan* 

Custom (-t«m), s. (hal»itiial prac- 
tice) biam, raJip;* (fixed usage) 
'adat. rsam : (manner, way) cliara; 
(ceremonial) istiadat ;* (habitual 



ate, ask, am, final, care, ear, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not. connect, sore, sort, sorry: use. us. niinMs, cure, injure. 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful) ; law, how, oil; thin t^ien. 



CUSTOMARY 



126 



CYGNET 



buying) perlairjgananf' (tribute, 
tax), diukai, hasil, hia (N.I.). 

Customary (-a-ri), adj. (according 
to usage) heradat, ter'adat; (con- 
ventional) I'laziman (Ar.) ; (ha- 
bitual) biasa, memaiy. It is 
cu.stoniary, 'adat-lah. 

Customer (-or), s. lanjgamw.'^' 

Custom-house (-hows), s. riimah 
chukai, impal bayer cliuhu. Cus- 
tom house officer, pgawai cliuhai, 
shahbandar (X.I.). Cu'stom 
house detective, ch cut erg (Ch. 
rliheig-te)g). 

Cut (kut), V. t. (sever) pot org; (in 
two pieces) blah; (a piece ott') prg- 
gal,* Ji'rat; (in several pieces) Za- 
pah/^ pfggaJ-ptygal; (in slices) hi- 
ris, didis* rarhel', snharg ;^ (cut 
the head or top oft') panchorg; (on 
a block) tndas;* (cut ends oft) 
patgl'as:^ (cut off limbs) hodorg, 
Iriidoig (B.) ; (nose) romporg; (by 
chopping) itak, pararg; (cho]D up 
,«^nlall) rhnchaiy, chincliarg (B.) ; 
(cut a notch) fakoh;* (a slight 
jiotch) takek; (a shallow incis- 
ion) tor eh; (a nick, so as to break) 
ktar; (cnt with scissors) guntirg; 
(^^'ith betelnut shears) kachip; 
(with a cln'sel) pahat; (with a 
knife drawn towards one) raeh, 
raek (B.) ; (di'awn away) raid; 
(cnt to a point) ranchotg;^ (trim 
oft roughness) paras; (cut in, en- 
grave) ukir,'^ liikis; (cut do^^'n, 
trees) tbarg; (cut half through for 
felling) serpeh;-^ (brushwood) 
tbas; (cut g]"ain) /?/«?".* ninuai 
(B.), ktam;* (cut cards) krat; 
(cut down, lessen) kuraigkan. To 
cut sliort, pendekkan. To cut 
stones, srodiJ^ To cut teeth, turn- 
boh gigi, tuniba gigi (B.). Cut 
and dried (ready), slap. Cut 
glass, kacha beramhr 

Cut, V. i. makan. 

•Cut. s. (gash, notch, etc.) see above; 



(wound) hika; (blow with whip, 
etc.) xbat. A short cut, jalan pin- 
///.v.'*" jalan pendek (B.). 

Cutaneous (ku-ta'ni-^/s), adj. pada 
kulif. 

Cutch (kiicli). s. karlia/^ gambir hi- 
taoi. 

Cuticle (ku'ti-kl), s. kulit ariJ' 

Cutlass (kiit'lrts), s. pdarg pendek. 

Cutler (-leu), s. titkarg pisau. 

Cutlery (-i). s. pisaa pararg dan s- 
bagai-nja. 

Cutlet (-let), s. s-potoig dagbg. 

Cutter (-ter), s. (one who cuts) 
pmotorg, etc., see cut; (Xaut., 
sloop rigged) skochi (D. schuitje). 
Cake cutter, trap. 

Cutthroat (-throt), s. pmbunoh, 
sanispjg (Ch. ?), buaya darat, 
baaga (X.I.). 

Cutting (-ting), adj. (sharp, chill- 
ing) sram-sram sjok; (sarcastic) 

Cutting, s. (act of cutting) hal m- 
niotoig, etc., see cut; (something 
cut olf) pot organ, kratan, etc., see 
cut; (twig cut for rooting as a 
new plant) aiggoran;^ (railway 
exca^'ation through a hill) jalan 
bertbok. 

Cuttlefish (kut'tl-fish), s. sotorg, 
rliotnek-rhoDiek/^ nn-s,^ guriia, 
kreta,* pomporg,'^ see octopus. 

Cutwater (-waw-ter), s. (Naut.) 
mok. 

Cycle (sl'kl), s. (interval of time) 
peridaran dunia* zainan* jman 
(B.), daur (Ar.) ; (bicycle) kreta 
lereig* kreta argin/^ kreta roda 
(B.), baAdkal (E.). 

Cyclone (sl'klon), s. topan (Ar. 
'van fan), ribol berpusirg; (whirl- 
wind) taorg.'^ 

Cyclopedia (si'klo-pe'di-a), s. ko- 
nnis 'ilmii (Ar.). 

Cygnet (sig'net), s. anak huroni 
jo gin ah (.l*ers.). 



.ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, min?/s, cure, injure, 

liurrv; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; tbin then. 



CYLINDER 



127 



DAMP 



Cylinder (sirin-der), s. hulaian to- 

Cylindrical (^i-liii'dn-kar), adj. 

i/arg biilai toral'/^ yatg hulat bu- 

loll* 
Cymbal (^im'brtl), s. clie^-cJie" (Ch. 

r///<e"); (small) dandi (Tarn.). 
Cynic (sin'ik), s. ptgoloh-ixjolol-, 

/'^^//^* yd^'J nitf/arf/l-al Ichail'an 

orary. 
Cynical (-i-krtl), adj. 'pigoloh-rgoloh. 
Cypher (si'fer), s. see ciphek. 
Cypress (si'pres), s. saru (Ar.). 
Cyst (sist), s. risa.^' 
Czar (zar), s. raja Fk.ima. 



Dab (dab), v. t. (with moist cloth, 

etc.) 'lap; (in order to dry) tl^ap; 

(give a soft blow) tpolc; (with the 

ting-er) chnlH: (with the beak) 

patol', paguir pagol- (B.), pe- 

gut J" 
Dab. s. lap, ipolc, cludii, patolc, as 

above. 
Dabble (dab'bl), v. i. (in water) 

Vbiir f-' (meddle) gaiggiir niasol' 

taigan. 
Daddy (dad'di), s. ;w', pal', irah. 
Daddy longlegs (long'legz)^ s. 

ayal'-aijak\--' 
Daft (daft), adj. bndoh, pandir/^ 
Dagger (dagVer), s. Itris; (bent) 

scwakf' (small) badeJc;'^ (very 

small) bladau/-' tumhoh lada; 

(broad and curved) jmhia (Pers. 

janbia). 
Daily (dri'li). adj. Itari-liari. 
Daily, adv. .^-lian-liari, tiap-tiap 

liari. s-bila)(j hari/^ saban liari 

(X.L). 
Dainty (dan'ti). adj. (to the taste) 

^dap, n'eniaf (Ar.), lazat (Ar.) ; 

(delicate, elegant, as a child) 

chomU, chain (>l (B.) ; (of texture) 

gba/^ 
Dainty, s. (delicacy) u'einat (Ar.), 

mahanan yarg sdap. 



Dairy (dar'i), s. ruinah mnal'org 
siL^u^' { in pat ninibuat mntega. 

Dais (da'is), s. rambat;'^ (royal) 
sirggasaiia (fSk.) ; (at weddings) 
plrana.'-' 

Dal (dal), s. hichan/ dal. 

Dale (dfil), s. Imbak. 

Dalliance (dal'li-rtns), s. rhumb iir 
saijatg (B.). 

Dally (-li), v.i . (waste time, trifle) 
lel-a: (delay) letgah; (caress) ber~ 
cliunibu/'^ sayarg (B.). 

Dam (dam), s. (mother of animals) 
mal', ibii; (barrier, bank or wall) 
bndoig,'''' 'mpargan, sl'atan. 

Dam, V. t. 'wparg, fbat^ skat. 

Damage (drim'ej), s. Icrosakan, 
bnchaiia, chdva (8k.), mudlarat 
(Ar.) ; (slight) chachat, jjas.'^'' 
To claim damages, tiuitvt hrugi-^ 
an. 

Damage, v. r. rosalr, bnchxinal-an. 

Damascening (dam'^s-sr'n'ing), s.. 
(of a kris) paniur.'^^ 

Damascus (da-mas'k//s), s. Dani- 
sh ek (Ar.). 

Damask (dam'flsk), s. klnikha 
(IVrs.). 

Dame (dam), s. incha'/-^' blbi (B.). 

Damn (dilm), v. t. (condenm) Jiu- 
kunikan,puia,^kaii hul'uin ; (curse ) 
kufok. Vanatkan, sumpahi. 

Damnable (dilm'na-bl), adj. (liable 
to damnation) patat di-hukuni- 
kan : (odions) kbnrhian. 

Damnation (dani-na'sh//n), s. (con- 
dciM nation ) hukaman. 

Damning (dam'-ing), adj. yatg m- 
tga lali ka n . * ga rg m rgh uku mka n . ' 

Damp (damp), s. (moisture) Im- 
bap: (fog) kabiit, wap: (depres- 
sion) bacliolr hati mororg (B.). 

Damp, adj. Inihap, ^mbal* Icholi;'^ 
(of tbe ground) ramhahf'' (and' 
sticky, as sugar) berlrgas. 

Damp. V. r. bamhkan, hnbapkan : 
(depress) barholkan hati."^-' Intah- 
kan. 



ate, ask, am. final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire^ 

mirror; old, not. connect, s5re, sort, sorry; use. us, minus, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin f/?en. 



DAMPEN 



128 



DART 



Dampen ( (Ijniip'n), v. t. same as 
aliOAo. 

Damper (-er), s. (in fliies) pnutop 
choronj : (that whieli depresses) 
pnibachol liati.^ 

Dampness (-nes). s. huhap, Icahut, 
ivap: = DAMP. q. V. 

Damsel (<irim'z(«'l), s. anal- dam, 
dai/anj/^ prawan,"^ gadis;* (atten- * 
dam ) dayaty-dai/anj. ] 

Dance (dans), y. i. tan','^ mnari I 
(B.). tandak (Jav.), bergamboh* ' 
(.Tav.) : (girls, in pairs) roiy- 
gerg : (spectator, witli a public 
dancer) cbenj;'* (Arab dance, in 
pairs) zafin (Ar.) ; (with bells 
on the feet) berjogi: (a sword 
<iance) pnchal':* (without weap- 
ons) silat; (with a dabus in each 
hand) berdabus-; (as insects) Ide- 
bafg.'^ 

Dance, s. /«/•/,* mnarl (B.), tandak, 
joqet, ganiboli,^ dansa (X.I.) 
(D.). Sword dance, pnclial'* 

Dancer (dan'ser), s. prenipuaa roig- 
gfrg, prrmpimn joget, anak jogei, 
bidtian^' 

Dancing; (-sing), s. Dancin*:^ <^irl, 
sec a.bove. 

Dandelion (drin'de-li-^ai), s. pU- 
man'^ (Kl.). 

Dandle (dan'dl). v. t. (swinging) 
ullt-:^ (tossing) tintaig. 

Dandruff (-druf), s. Idmunior/" 
klunomoh (B.). 

Dandy (-di), s. psolek,'^ oratg yaty 
bersoiek, si-kachak. 

Dandified (-fid), ad}. }>>!olfk.'^ ka- 

rluik. 

Danger (dan'jer), s. baliya, mam,* 
nwrbohi/a.'^' 

Dangerous (-?/s), adj. berbaliya; 
(of -ickncss) payali; (of a wound) 
fxiroh. 

Dangfe (dang'gl), v. i. (as tassels) 
iimbai/^ jrumbai,* jumbai;* (of 
the feet) beraijun kaki* juntai;* 
{m a broken arm) terkulai-ku- 



lai;* (as branches) hnpai;* (as a 
bat) sfggayid.'^ 

Dangling (-gling), adj. untal- 
antil,* untaig-antug,'^ kuntal-kan- 
til, kunfanj-katitiig,* klepak,* 
To sit with the legs dangling, ber- 
juntal. 

Dank (dangk), adj. Imbap. 

Dapper (dap'per), adj. kachak. 

Dappled (-pld), adj. rintek-rmtek, 
berrintek. 

Dare (dar), v. i. (be bold) brani. 

Dare, v. t. (challenge) ajak, mku;^ 
nngkisf (in order to make an- 
other fight, etc.) cliabarkan* 

Dare-devil (dar'devl), s. oraiy 
nekal,* oraig ta'fakot mati (B.), 
brani mryetan. 

Daring (dar'ing), adj. brani, per- 
kasa (Sk.), nekat.'* 

Dark (dark), adj. glap, Mamr 
(dull, gloomy) suram;* (of 
colour) fua; (of the sky) rdop, 
gobar* kbam;* (mysterious, hid- 
den) sullt;* (ignorant) jahil 
(Ar.) ; (atrocious) jahat. The 
dark ages, zaman jahiliat (Ar.). 
l*itch dark, gJap glita, glap mraba 
(B.). 

Dark, s. kgJapan, klamf (of night) 
sUamJ^^ 

Darken' (dark'n), v. t. glapkan, 
klanikan,* 

Darkness (-nes), s. kglapan, klam;* 
(of night) silani.'^ 

Darling (dar'ling), adj. yarg di- 
kasehi. 

Darling, s. kkasfli, rhinla, ksayarg- 
an, buah hati,* biji mata, ryawa; 
(of children) Umaigaw* (in ad- 
dressing a child) buntat, intan, 
gunoty. 

Darn (darn) , v. t. jrumat. 

Darning (darn'ing), s. jrumat; 
(Swiss or stocking-web darning) 
rnjnt. 

Dart (dart), s. (javelin) Inibity, 
chanipak'buaty,* pn dahan ;* 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror: old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minus, cure, injure, 
hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



DART 



129 



DEAD 



(smaller) sllr/ij* (of blowpipes) 
damaJi';* (for fishing) tohol'* 
sruit* 
Dart, V. i. (move quickly as a snake) 
lanchar;^ (dart forward) terpa; 
(dart out, as the tongue) jlir, 
julor; (as flame) julat;* (dart 
past) lintas. 
Dash (dash), v. t. (throw or strike 
violently) hntam, hantiig; (down- 
wards) limpas; (shatter) rmoh- 
I'an, hanchurhan; (spatter) per- 
ihek. To dash one's hopes to the 
ground, putus harap. 
Dash, V. i. (rush) tmpoli, luru* 

Dash, s. (rapid movement) tmpoli; 
(line or mark) haris. 

Dastard (das'terd), s. pnakot, oraixj 
bachoL* 

Dastardly (-li), adj. hachol* 

Data (da'ta), s. (facts) pri-hal,'^ 
hal-ehwal (Ar.). 

Date (dat), s. (tlie fruit) khurma 
(Ar.), konnah (B.). The date 
palm, pohofi khiirma (Ar.), pokok 
kormak (B.). 

Date, s. (epoch) zaman, jman (B.), 
masa* ktika, ivaktu; (day of the 
month) hari-hulan, farikh (Ar.). 

Date, V. t. huboh hari-bulan. L>ated, 
bprtarikk* (Ar. tarikh). 

Daub (dawb), v. t. (with mud) 
Inmorkan, chomorkan* ciiomot- 
kan: (with colour) cUontety, 
rltorerrj, Jahur* 

Daughter (daw'ter), s. anak prem- 
■puan. Grand- daughter, chucJiu 
prrmpvan. Step daughter, anak 
tiri prcmpnan. 

Daughter-in-law (in-law), s. 
ninantii prempuan. 

Daunt (dawnt), v. t. bacliolkan 
hali^ 

Dauntless (-les), adj. tiada ter- 
hachol hati-tiia,^ brani, perkam 
(Sk.), nekal^ 

David (da'vid), s. Baud (Ar.)._ 



Davit (da'vit or dav'it) (Naut.) 
dewi (E.), prggantorg skochi, pry- 
gantoiT] bot. 

Dawdle (daw'dl), v. i. lergah, leka, 
leiysan,^ betiamhat, chidas* ch-- 
leh* jalan termut-mut.^ 

Dawn (dawn), v. i. mula'i trary, 
terbit fa jar (Ar.). 

Dawn, s. tranj tanali, dinihari* 
fa jar (Ar.), suboh (Ar.). 

Day (da), s. (as opposed to night) 
siaty, siaiy^ hari; (period of 24 
hours) hari, s-hari s-walam; (age, 
period) zaman, jman (B.), masa.* 
All day, s-panjanj /lari, s-lian- 
harian.* Alternate days, ber- 
slarg hari. Day by day, s-hari- 
hari, tiap-tiap hari. Next day, 
esok, bcsok. Noon day, tryah hari. 
The day after to-morrow, lusa. 
'We day before yesterday, khnarith 
dhulu. The tliird day, tidat. 
The fourth day, lubin.'^ The 
fifth day, luban.'^ 

Daybreak (da'ljrak), s. fajar m- 
■njoysery.^'' 

Day-dream (-drem), s. argul.* 

Daylight (-lit), s. siaty, trarg 
siaiy. 

Daytime (-tim), s. s{a7y hari. 

Daze (daz), v. t. birgorgkan. 

Dazed (dazd), adj. biigorg, ksasar- 
an, nanar;* (on waking) terpikau- 
pikau;* (by confused motion) m- 
cham.* 

Dazzle (daz'zl), v. t. sUau, silau- 
kan. To be dazzled (of the eyes), 
berpndar.* 

Dazzling (-zling), adj. yilary- 
gm iJaig* chnierlarg.* 

Deacon (dr/kn), s. diakon (X.). 

Deaconess (de'kn-es), s. diakonis 
(X.). 

Dead (dod), adj. mall, wafat (Ar.) ; 
(of princes) maigkat;* (vulgar) 
manipus: (refined expressions) 
hilaig, krnbali* kmbali k-rahmat 
Allah,* mnirgyal,* mnirygal du- 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire 
mirror ;^ old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorrv ; use, us, minws, cure, injure, * 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



DEAD 



130 



DEBATE 



nm, puiui< vjawa. Dead ahead 
(Xaiit.). Ipat di-mul'Li. Dead 
body (of men ), mayat; (animals) 
hatykai. Dead calm (Xaut.) mati 
aiqin. J)ead heat, sri. Dead Ian- 
guatj-e. bhasa oranj dknla kola. 
Dead leaves, daun krivj. Dead 
letter (no authorlt}), hihtr/ kuasa. 
Dead low water, iimpas. Dead 
march, laqa pada masa mtykubor- 
kan oraiy* lagu oraty mail (B.). 
Dead shot, pandai mnemhak. 
Dead tired, /r?«./,* Iteh-ha. Dead 
water (Xaiit.), olak kmudi. To 
stop dead, berhnii skali. 

Dead, s. (dead persons) ormg inatl. 
The dead of winter, trgah, iiiimni 
sjok. Tlie dead of nii*-ht, ivaklu 
snnjap sanji pada malani. 

Deaden (ded'n), v. t. (as power, 
feelin<r oi- sonnd) liilaufkan, 

Deadhouse (-liows). s. bihk tmpat 
man of. 

Deadlock (-lok), s. skafan, terhnti 

Deadly (-li), adj. (fatal) yary mni- 
bawa mati, yary mmatikan. Dead- 
ly pale, puchat manai/^ puchat 
pudar* puchat bayi mayat (B.). 
Deadly enemies, musoh s-umor 
hidop. 

Deaf (def). adj. (wholly) tull, 
pkak'tvU (B.) ; (hard of Jiearingi 
pkak; (temporary) bjyap* big- 
ary:* (nn willing to hear) yary m- 
mkakkari ilirya. Deaf and dumb, 
hif^u dan tuli, bisu pkak. 

Deafen (dofn). v. t. inlikan. pkal'- 
kati. 

Deafness (-nes), s. ktidian, kpkak- 
'an, kbryapan.^ 

Deal (del), s. (share) hhayian : (of 
cards) pareh* chrykeh* rhiry- 
keh (B.). A good deal, sdikit ba- 
ryak.* baryak jnya. A great deal. 
haryak. To think a great deal of 
one's self, bsarkan dirt. 

Deal, s. (wood of the fir tree) kaya 
sro* (Ar.). 



Deal, V. t. (divide) bhayikan; 

(trade) berniaya; (behave) ber- 

lakii:* (cards) pareh* chtykek/' 

chirykeh (B.). To deal in, ber^ 

niayakan, berjual. To deal with,. 

jalan kan , b Icharakan . 
Dealer (del'er), s. oraiy berkdai,. 

orarg yary berniaya; (at cards) 

perdi^' chitykeh (B.). 
Dealing (-iug). s. laku,'^' klaknan^ 

terykah-IakiL Double dealing^ 

tipu-daya, pnsiiy-blit, putar-ba- 

Jek, putar-blit. 
.Dean (den), s. yum dalam skolah 

b.^ar. 
Dear (der), adj. (costly) mahalr 

(higbly valued) indah: (beloved) 

kkaxf'h. 
Dearth (dertli), s. (scarcity) K 

kuratyan; (famine) klaparan, k^ 

buloran, kholoran (B.). 
Death (deth), s. kinailan, maut; (of 

princes) marykaf,"^' kniarykaia.n*- 

Death angel, maliku 'l-ntant (Ar.),. 

Death rate, bilaryan oraty maii^ 

To be at the point of death, naib 

onibak, nazak* (Ar. naz'a). 
Death-bed (deth'bed), s. (time of 

death) ktika maut, ajal (Ar.). 
Death-blow (-bio), s. (event which 

dcsti'oys) kbinam'an, kpuiusan. 
Deathlike (-lik), adj. s-Iaku mati,*' 

spf'rtl mati. 
Death's-head (deths'hed), s. try- 

korak. 
Debar (de-bar'), v. t. (shut out) 

skatkan: (refuse, deny) tyah, la- 

ra ry : ( h i Jid e r ) ta h an . 
Debase (de-bas'). v. t. (make base > 

hluakau, rudahkau: (as coinage)* 

laurhotgkan.'^ 
Debatable (de-bat'a-bl), adj. yatg 

bohh di-bantahi,* yarg bolch bnat 

]n>rligkaran (B.). 
Debate (de-baf), s. pcrbanfahan.'^''- 

bahas* (Ar. baiiafh). 
Debate, v. i. (dispute) berbantah ,*" 

bertrykar; (discuss) herbichara^ 



ate, ask, am. final, care. car. carry; eve. hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire^ 

mirror ; old, not, connect, s^re. sort, sorry ; use. us, min?/s, cure, injure, 

hurry; fodd, foot, awfool (awful) ;' law, how, oil; thin th^t\. 



DEBATE 



131 



DECIMAL 



berrundity, herrondefg (B.), ber- 

akkfiar (Ar. ikhtidr), berbahas* 

(Ar. banath). 
Debate, v. t. bantahkan, bicharakan. 
Debauch (-bawcli'), v. t. (corrupt) 

rosakkan ; (.seduce) chaboli;* 

(rape) rurjulj^ 
Debauch. s. cliabol/^ liichah; 

(drunkenness) mabok. 
Debauchee (deb'o-she'), s. oraixf 

rhahoL* omnj Inrhah, pmabok, 

pprlohtch (NJ.). 
Debauchery (de-bawch'er-i), s. 

rhabol* luchah. 
Debenture (-ben'cliur), s. swat 

hutarg. 
Debilitate (-bil'i-tat), y. t. Imah- 

kan, it ell kail. 
Debility (-ti), s. klmahan, kltelian. 
Debit (deb'it), s. hutarg. 
Debit, V. t. ma-'iok hutatg, bri masok 

liulaig. 
Debris (da'bre), s. pchahan nimah, 

pchahari bat a. 
Debt (det), s. liutanj. Deep in debt, 

liulaig berkredak. 
Debtor (det'er), s. orarg berhufatg. 
Debut (da-boo'), s. hal pertaina kail 

Diasok ma j I is. 
Debutant (da'boo-tax'), s. orarg 

i/arg niasok niajlis pertama kali. 
Decade (dek'ad), s. s-pidoh ta/inn. 
Decadence (de-ka'dens), s. krosak- 

an, khurok'an. 
Decadent (-d^nt), adj. yaig tigali 

rnnjadi burok. 
Decalogue (dek'a-lo^), s. s-puloh 

in (k inn Mnsa. 
Decamp (de-kamp'), v. i. (depart 

suddenly) lari, atgkat kaki 
Decant (-kanf), v. t. tuaig per- 

Ja/ian-lahan, tnarg plan-plan. 
Decanter (-er), s. balarg,^ srahi,^ 

glok agcr, klalarg."^ 
Decapitate (-kap'i-tat), \.x. pan- 

cliotg, pargkas* pfggal lehir,'^ 

potoiq kpala (B.) ; (on a block) 



Decay (-ka'), v. i. jadi burok, jadi 
rput,'^ I'osak; (become putrid) jadi 
busok: (become too sott, of fruit) 
bonjor; (decline, grow less) ber- 
kurarg-kuraig. 

Decay, s. burok, kburok'an, krosak- 
'an. 

Decayed (-kad'), adj. burok, rput,* 
rpok (B.), busok, rosak. 

Decease (-ses'), s. kmatian, wafat 
(Ar.) ; (of princes) margkat.* 

Deceased (-sest/), adj. yaig mati, 
■i/aig Inhug, yaig mnitggah* yatg 
wafat (Ar.) ; (of princes) mar- 
hum (Ar.). The deceased, si mati. 

Deceit (-set'), s. tipu-daya. 

Deceitful (-fool), adj. pnipu, bi- 
da alt (Ar.). 

Deceive (-scv'), v. t. tlpu, perdaya- 
Av///,* ssatan, knakan. 

Deceiver (-er), s. pnipu, 

December (-sem'ber), s. bulan di- 
fie ni her, bulan oratg put eh yarg 
kdua-blas. 

Decency (de'sen-si), s. snonoh, 
sni rggah."^ 

Decent (-s^'ut), adj. (decorous) s- 
nonoh, snuggah;* (proper) patut; 
(fjiirlv o'ood) sdarg. 

Deception (de-sep'sliwn), s. tipu- 
daya. 

Deceptive (-tiv), adj. pnipu, yarg 
niiysatkan. 

Decide (-sTd'), v. t. tntukan, slsai- 
kan, sUsekan (B.) ; (render judg- 
ment) hicharakan, putuskan, pa- 
int kan. 

Decided (-si'd<^d), adj. (unmistak- 
able, clear) lyata; (without waver- 
ing) ttap; (fixed })iirpose) tntu; 
(resolute) tgoh. 

Decidedly (-li), adv. surggoh, tiada 
shak lagi (Ar.), tntu. 

Deciduous (-sid'u-;/,s). adj. (as 
trees) yaig luroh daun.^ 

Decimal (des'i-mal), s. (decimal 
fraction) pchahan perpulohan* 
pchahan s^puloh. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minus, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



DECIMAL 



132 



DECREE 



Decimal, adj. (by tens) s-pidoh 

s-puloh . 

Decimate (-mat), v. t. (destroy a 
large proportion) binasakan ha- 
ryak-hmjak. 

Decipher (de-sl'ler), v. t. hnlca 
ralisia tvlisan, hacha sural chakar 
ay am, ryaiakan. 

Decision (-sizh'/zn), s. (act of de- 
ciding) kputusan, kpatuian; (de- 
termination, choice) hicliara, 
ptua"^ (Ar. fatwa)y akhtiar (Ar. 
ikhtidr) ; '(quality of being de- 
cided) kigolian. 

Decisive (-sl'siv), adj. (able to 
decide) yanj mtylsaikan* yaiy sli- 
sekan (B.), yanj mnntukan; (re- 
solute) ttap. 

Deck (dek), v. t. (adorn) Idasif^ 
riaskan (B.). 

Deck, s. (Naut.) dek (E.), gladak; 
(at the stem or stern of a boat) 
lirggi, glmai; (along the edge of 
a boat) leper-leper; (two or more, 
one over the other) iirgkat. 

Deckhouse (dek'liows), s. (Xaut.) 
magun. 

Declaim (de-klam'), v..i. heriutor, 
ucliap. 

Declamation (dek'la-ma'sh?ni), s. 
ur/iapan. 

Declaration (-rri'sli?/n), s. (act of 
•declaring) W mnialumkan (Ar.), 
hal mryatakan; (announcement) 
knjata'an. 

Declare (de-klar'), v. t. (make 
known) hri iahu, m'aluwkan 
(Ar.) ; (publish) riiasoliorkan (Ar. 
7nas]ihnr), m'likan;^ (manifest 
plainly) ri)atakan; (assert, affirm) 
shotkan, kafakan clrgan. tnUi. 

Declension (-klen'shim), s. (slope) 
chondoig; (deterioration) k~ 
romk'an yarg hertamhah-tambah; 
(Gram.) tasrif (Ar.). 

Declination (dek'li-ua'shwn), s. 
(sloyx;) chondoig, chondrorg (B.) ; 
(deviation) hal mryernparg. 



Decline (de-klTn'), v. i. (bend, han^ 
down) tnndok; (slope downward) 
iiirun; (decay, diminish) ber^ 
kurarg-kurarg; (deviate) sempaig,. 
mnjemparg ; (refuse) ^rggan* 

Decline, v. t. (reject) 'iggankan,*" 
iolak; (Gram.) iasrifkan (Ar.). 

Decline, s. (falling oft') kkurargan ; 
(deterioration) krosak'an yanj 
b er tarn bah- ta?nbaJi; (wasting di- 
sease) kurus krirg, sakit mrana. 

Declivity (-kliv'i-ti), s. churaman^ 
chondoig, chondroig (B.). 

Decoction (-kok'shwn), s. (act of 
boiling) rbnmn; (extract) pati. 

Decollete (da-kol'le-tri), adj. ber^ 
kmhan. 

Decompose (de'kom-poz'), v. i. 
(dissolve) hanchur; (decay) jadi 
bur ok, jadi busok. 

Decomposition (de-kom'po-zish'~ 
«n), s. hal hanchur, pri mnjadi 
busok. 

Decorate (dek'o-rat), v. t. hiasi,"^ 
riaskan (B.), chvjkan (B.) (Ch> 

Decoration (-ra'sh?/n), s. perhias- 
an, prasan (B.) ; (mark of honour) 
bintarg kbsaran, pirgai."^ 

Decorous (dek'o-rv/s), adj. (seem- 
ly) snouoh: (polite) berbhasa. 

Decorum (de-kor'«m), s. snonoh,. 
budi-bhasa. 

Decoy (-koi'), s. (birds) pniikaf^ 
dnakf' (elephant) chvak* 

Decoy, v. t. (ensnare) iatgkap 
drgan iipu; (of birds) pikai; (by 
sounds) dkvt,* kesek/^ 

Decrease (-krcs'), v. i. kuraig, ber^ 
kuranj-kurarg, susut, Uirun, luak.*' 

Decrease, v. t. kuraujkan, turun^ 
kan. 

Decrease, s. kkuraigan, ksusuian. 

Decree (-kre'), s. (of God) firmarh 
(Ar.), takdir (Ar.) ; (of princes) 
sahda,* Utah ;* (of a court) A;- 
puiusan Itukuiu. 

Decree, v. t. (of God) firmankatt 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry ; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, f ^rry ; ice, it, f ire^ 

mirror; old, not, connect, scire, sort, sorry; use, us, niinws, cure, injure, 

liurrv; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



DECREPIT 



133 



DEFAULT 



(Ar.), takdirliiDi (xVr.), hiihimi' 
kan (B.) ; (oL* princes) sabda* 
titahl'an f (of a court) putuskan 
hukuin. 

Decrepit (-krep'it), adj. tua rental' 
leiak^ 

Decrepitude (-i-tud), s. klmahan, 
hal f/anf burok. 

Decry (-kri'), v, t. clila, salahkan. 

Dedicate (ded'i-kat), v. t. (for sa- 
cred uses) kuduskan (Ar.), talibis- 
kan (Ar.). To dedicate one's self 
srahkan din. 

Dedication (-ka'slnm), s. hal mtg- 
kudii.skan* (Ar. (ptdus). 

Deduce (de-dus'), v. t. datargkan 
fikiran, anib'd tinibargan, ambil k- 
putusan* 

Deducible (-du'si-bl), adj. yarg 
boleh di-da ta njka n . 

Deduct (-dukt/), v. t. (take away, 
subtract) tolak, potorg. 

Deduction (-duk'shim), s. (act of 
deducing) hal mndatargkan; (act 
of deducting) hal mnolak; (tliat 
whicli is deduced, inference) 
kputusan Umbatgan; (that which 
is deducted) yarg di-toJak, po- 
t org an. 

Deed (ded), s. (action) perhuatan, 
pkerja/an, feel (Ar.) ; (good 
deeds) 'amal (i\.r.) ; (sealed writ- 
ing) siirat yaig di-tniraikan.* 
Title deed, gran (E. grant), ku- 
brik (N.l.) \j). koop brief). 

Deem (dem), v.t. kirakan, saigka- 
kan, fikirkan, bilargkan. 

Deep (dep), adj. (far down) dalam : 
(as a bowl), woigkom,'^ jlok/^ 
f>rgga,'^ dalam (B.) ; (as the hol- 
lows of the eyes and neck) chrg- 
koig; (of the intellect, profound) 
dalam : (sagacious, cunning) cher- 
dek; (of colour) tva; (of sound) 
dalam., garau ;'^ (of sleep) II ap, 
liiryak* lyadar,"^ chndra.* Deep 
darkness, glap glila* glap mraba 
(B.). Deep distress, susah ier- 



lain sargat. Deep in debt, huiarg 
berkredak. Deep laden, sarat. 
Deep silence, snnjap. Deep in 
thought, tfkiir (Ar.), sarat w- 
mikirkan.* Deep water (deep 
])art of a channel or of the sea) 
aronjan * 

Deep, s. (deep water) tubir,^ lobok* 
ayer dalam-; (the ocean) lautan; 
(abyss) klburanJ^' The deep of 
night, jauh malam. 

Deepen (dep'n), v.t. dalamkan. 

Deepen, v. i. jadi dalam, bertambah 
daiam, wahin dalam. 

Deep-laid (dep'lad'), adj. di-ada- 
kan dry an cherdek. 

Deeply (-li), adv. dalam, satgat; see 

also DEEP. 

Deer (der), s. (sambur deer) riisa; 
(barking deer) kijarg, mnjanjan* 
(N.L); ( die vrotin, large) brgku- 



7iatg, 



napoh;"^ (small = mouse- 



deer) pi and ok, kanchil (Jav.) . 
Deer-hog (der'hog), s. babi-rusa. 
Deface (de-fas'), v.t. (injure, 

spoil) rosakkan; (obliterate) hi- 

lanjkan, hapuskan. 
Defacement (-raent), s. krosak'an. 
Defalcate (de-fal'kat), v. i. Ian- 

chorgkan kira-kira,* palsukan 

kira-kira. 
Defalcation (de'fal-ka'shi^n), s. 

Um ch rga n kira-kira . * 
Defalcator (def'al-kat-er), s. pZa/i- 

Defamation (def'a-ma'sliMn), s. 
umpat, fitnah (Ar.). 

Defamatory (de-fam'a-to-ri), adj. 
yatg nug umpat, prg umpat. 

Defame (de-fam'), v.t. umpat, 
fitnahkan (Ar.), jahatkan. 

Default (-fawlf), s. (omission, 
neglect) alpa,"^ lalai; (fault, ill- 
deed) ksalahan. In default of (in 
the absence of), kalau kuraig, sbah 
kiiada'an. Judgment by default, 
kpidusan hukuni sbab oraig tiada 
hadlir.^ 



ate, ask, am, finol, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws. cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



DEFAULT 



134 



DEFINITION 



Default, Y. i. alpa,* bersalah, as 
above; (fail to fulfil a contract) 
tiada mmpailian janji; (fail to ap- 
pear in court) tiada liadlir (Ar.), 
fad a pergi (B.). 

Defaulter (-er), s. oranj aJpa/^ yaijj 
tiada sampail-an janji^ yaiy tiada 
liadlir (Ar.). orairj salali; (defal- 
cator) planch org, '^ 

Defeat (-fef), s. (frustration) fc- 
tiada'an, I'hatalan; (loss in battle) 
Iralahan,^ Meirasan* I'alah (B.). 

Defeat, v. t. (frustrate) laialkan, 
tiadakan ; (overcome, vanquish) 
alahkan,'^ kalalikan (B.). To be 
defeated, alah,^ tewas/^ kalah 
(B.). 

Defecate (de'fe-kat), v. t. lerseli- 
I'au, hniigkan* jernefil'an. 

Defecate, v. i. l)uarg-ayer bsar, Ic- 
!<iugai hmr.^ 

Defect (de-fekf), s. ('deficiency) 
h'l'vrargan; (imperfection, blem- 
ish) fdila, (JiacJiat, cJidra (Sk.). 

Defection (-fek'shim), s. (apos- 
tasy) murtad (Ar.) ; (abandon- 
ment of all eg-iance) kliianat (Ar.). 

Defective (-tiv), adj. (wantino, 
lacking) hurarg; (imperfect) ia'- 
smpurna, clidm (Sk.), herchachat. 

Defence (-fens'), s. (act of defend- 
ing) hal mmliharahan, lial mn- 
jaga: (state of being defended) 
pmliham'an; (that ^iiich defends) 
/indotgan, paj/ojg;* (answer or 
])lea) jatrah: (vindication, justifi- 
cation) hal mmhnarh'an dlri. 

Defenceless (-les), adj. tiada ter- 
litidoig. tiada pmlihara. 

Defend (-fend'), v. t. (protect) pli- 
harakan, jagakan (B.) ; (shelter) 
/ifidofgkan: (guard) jaga; (of a 
lawyer) tolorg birhara. 

Defendant (-ant), s. (one who de- 
fends) pmlihara; (who answers a 
cl large) yarg kna tudoh* oraty 
tndohafi* yarg kna d'aiva. 

Defensible " (-fen'si-bl), adj. yaig 



holeh di'jaga'i, yaig holeh di-plv- 
harakan; (justifiable) yaig holeh 
di-hnarkan. 

Defensive (-siv), adj. yaig mmli^ 
harakan, yaig mnjaga. 

Defer (-fer') v. t. (put off) taiggoh" 
kan/^ gnntorgkan, tempohkan, 
posponl-an (B.) (E.) ; (delay) 
tempohkan, lamhatkan. 

Defer, v. i. (submit) turut. To 
defer to a person's wishes, turut 
kahandak oraig. 

Deference ('def'er-6?ns), s. (sub- 
mission) lial rnnurut; (respect) 
h or mat, tlalini (Ar.). 

Deferential (-en'shal), adj. yarg 
tcrlalu mmhri liormat. 

Defiance (de-fl'ans), s. hal mmrg-^ 
kis^* hal nimkis* 

Defiant (-ant), adj. yarg mmrgkis,* 
hi ail la Iran. 

Deficiency (-fish'en-si), s. kkurarg- 
an. 

Deficient (-^nt), adj. kuratg, ta'-^ 
chukop. 

Deficit (def'i-sit), s. kkuratgan 
irarg. 

Defile (de-fir), v. t. chmarkan,'^ kO" 
torkan; (ceremonially) ^lajiskan 
(Ar.) ; (rape) riir/al* rosakkan 
(B.). 

Defile, s. jurarg,* Imhah yaiy sriipit, 
gaing. 

Defilement (-ment), s. (act of de- 
filing) hal mnckniarkan,^ hal m- 
najiskan (Ar.) ; (dirtiness) ^- 
rhniarati* kotor; (pollution) iia- 
yV.v (Ar.). 

Define (-fin'), v. t. (fix the bounds 
ot) perhiiggakan :* (mark out dis- 
tinctly) fyatakan, tntukan; (fix 
the meaning) arlikan, ni'anakan 
(Ar. m'and). 

Definite (def'i-nir), adj. (fixed, de- 
terminate) terlnin; (exact) Mid, 

Definition (-jiish/y/n), s. (deter- 
mination) ktntiinn: (explanation) 
prgeriian. 



ate, ask, am, finol, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror: old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minits, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin tTien. 



DEFINITIVE 



135 



DELETE 



Definitive (de-iln'i-tiv), adj. (de- 
terminate) tedntu; (conclusive) 
liarg mwutusl-an. 

Deflate (-flat'), v. t. 'kmpiskan. 

Deflect (-flekf), v. t. pesory* vlion- 
dro i(jka n, he Kjkol'l'cin . 

Deflected (-^?d), adj. pencJiorg,'^' 
hen/h>k (B.). 

Deflection (-flek'slum), s. pesorg,"^ 
chondronj, heigkol'. 

Deflower (-flow'er), v. t. rugnl/'' 
rosak'hin (B.). 

Deform (-form'), v. t. chargr/akan* 
romkkan rupa (B. ). 

Deformed (-formd'), adj.. charg- 
ga:* (as a leaf) kretut;'^ (Immp- 
backed) horgkok: (ot tl5e arm) 
rhergkorg^^ cheigkok (B.) : (of 
lingers) krokoi : (of tlie foot) ler- 
piut* 

Deformity (-form'i-ti), s. chafgga* 

Defraud (-frawd'), v. t. iipn, per- 
ddi/akan.^ po ni e igka n . 

Defray (-fra'), v, t. bager, blanja- 
kan. 

Deft (deft), adj. pandai, panfa.>t. 

Defunct (de-fuuokt'), adj. mam pus. 

Defy (-fi'), v. t. mrgkis* mkis* 

Degenerate (de-jen'er-at), v. i. 
jadi kurarg haik. liUatg haka, rosak 
iahi'at, rosak prargai. 

Degenerate (-et), adj. kiiratg baik, 
liina, kji.^ 

Degeneration (-a'sli?/n), s. krosak- 
'an pratyai, lial ran jadi kuraig 
haik. 

Degradation (deir'rrt-da'slu/n), s. 
(act of degTadin^r) l^al mrnchaU 
kan, hal rnrnda/ikan, lial m t git in a- 
kan; (state ot bein<r de^iraded) hal 
ferprhatj^ krndahan, kahina'an. 

Degrade (de-grad')^ v. t. (reduce 
in rank) ttniinkan : (remove from 
< )tiice ) pch a i ;* ( in reputation ) rn- 
daJikan; (in character) hinakan. 

Degree (-gre'), s. pargkat; (Xaut. 
on a compass card) mata pdoman. 



By degrees, herpargkat-paiykaf, 

henrnsur-ansur.'^ 
Deification (de'i-fi-ka'sliiin), s. hal 

nijyainakan dfyan Allah. 
Deify (-fi), v. t. mntakan dtyan 

Tulian, horinati sania spertl yaig 

patid bayi Allah. 
Deign (dan), v. i. (think worthy) 

herknan, sudi; (condescend) tun^ 

dak, rndahkau diri. 
Deism (de'izm), s. ayama orary 

yaty perchaya Allah, tiaffi iiada 

perchaya Kitab. 
I Deist (-i"^t), s. oraty yary perrhaya 

Allah, dan iiada perchaya Kitab. 
Deity (-i-ti), s. (divinity) ktidian' 

an;'^ (a heatlien god) dewa, devi, 

ilah (Ay. pi. aJihah), The Deity, 

Allah. 
Deject (dc-jekf). v. t. taivarkan 

hati. 
Dejection (-jek'sh;/n), s. taivar 

hati. 
Delay (-la'), v. t. (put off) tary- 

yohkan* posponkan (B.) (E.) ; 

(retard) lambatkan, leryahkan : 

(hinder) yndalakan,^ aralkan* 

(Ar. 'aradl), tahankan. 
Delay, v. i. letgah, lamhat. 
Delay, s. (procrastination) leryah; 

(postponement) tempoh, farggoh :* 

(hindrance) «?•«/* (Ar. Uiradl)^ 

gndala^ (Sk. kndala). 
Delegate (del'e-gat), v. t. (send as 

ambassador) tiiuskanf^ (entrust 

with power) wakilkan. 
Delegate (-get), s. (person sent) 

utasan,^ surohan; (person elected) 

pilehan. 
Delegation (-ga'slnm), s. (act of 

delegating) hal m?gatuskan,f hal 

riiicakilkan ; (persons delegated) 

orarg utnsan^' oraig surohan, orarg 

pilehan. 
Delete (de-lef), v. t. hapuskan, 

bunoh, potorg, paraig ; (with a 

cross) paigkali. 



ate, ask, am, finrtl, eiire. car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; did, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, mim/s, cure, injure, 

Mrry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



DELETERIOUS 



136 



DELUGE 



Deleterious (del'e-ter'i-tfs), adj. 
yarg mndatargkan hnchana, yaix) 
inrosahkan, yaiy mmhinasakan ; 
(noxious) 7nabok. 

Deliberate (de-lib'er-at), y. i. tim' 
haiy, herbicJiara, fikir; (as a 
council) hermaslmarat (Ar.), her- 
rundirg, herronderg (B.), 1) crura-, 
iira.^ 

Deliberate (-et), adj. (with care- 
ful consideration) dryan heritgaU 
irgat; (cautious) jimat; (slow) 
perlakan-lalian,'^ plan-plan. 

Deliberately (-li), adv. see above; 
also (intentionally) digan sigaja. 

Deliberation (-a'sh/^n), s. iigat- 
irgat, timharg-mnimharg. 

Delicacy (del'i-ka-si), s. hsdapan, 
hihalusan, Idmalian, etc., as below ; 
also (dainties) n'emat (Ar.). 

Delicate (-ket), adj. (pleasing? to 
the senses) sdap, lazat (Ar.) ; 
(fine, not coarse) lialus, ghuj^ 
sni;* (slender) rampirg* tints j"^ 
(soft and smooth) Inihot; (of 
colour) muda; (refined, pjentle) 
lialus-manis, Iniah-lmhot; (of 
health) Imah, Ita iulatg* 'udzur 
(Ar.) ; (requirinp^ careful hand- 
ling) sukar,'^ mushkil (Ar.). 

Delicious (de-lish't/s), adj. (to the 
taste) sdap, lazat (Ar.), n'eniat 
(Ar.), enak (Jav.) ; (to the smell) 
liarum* tuarcji. 

Delight (-lit'), s. snkachita, k- 
svkaan, kgmaran;^ (of the sen- 
ses) n'emat (Ar.). 

Delight, V. t. sukakan, gmarkan.^ 

Delight, V. i. snka, gmar* herknan. 

Delightful (-fool), adj. yarg m- 
n/tikakan, yarg miggmarkan/'' 
sdap, lazat (Ar.). 

Delineate (de-lin'i-at),- v. t. tnlis, 
gamharkan. ptakan,* sifatkan 
(Ar.). 

Delineation (-a'sh/zn), s. (act of 
delineating) Jial nntuli^, etc., as 
above; (picture, representation) 



tulisan, gamhar, pta* sifat (Ar. 
si/rti). 

Delinquency (-ling'kwen-si), s. 
(omission of duty) lalai, k'dlpa- 
'an;"^ (fault) ksalalian; (crime) 
dosa. 

Delinquent (-kwent), s. (one who 
neglects his duty) orarg alpa;* 
(transgressor) omrg salah, orarg 
herdosa. 

Delirious (-lir'i-?/s), adj. terigan- 
igau,'^ mrapek (B.). 

Delirium (-wm), s. igau/^ mrapek 
(B.), igan-iga.uan,'^ lachau.* De- 
lirium tremens, glla mabok. 

Deliver (-liv'er), v. t. (liberate, set 
free) Ipaskan, luputkan/' hebas- 
kan; (from slavery) merdheka- 
kan;* (save) slamatkan; (give, 
hand over) srahkan, sampaikan; 
(give forth) kluarkan; (in child 
birth) sambot anak. To be de- 
livered of (bring forth), beranak- 
kan, lahirkan^ (Ar. tldhir). 

Deliverance (-ans), s. (rescue) 
klpasan, khiputan,'^^ kbebasan, sla- 
mat, kmerdheka'an;* as above. 

Deliverer (-er), s. yaig mlpaskan. 

Delivery (-i), s. (handing over) 
srahan, hal rnnjrah, hal nmjampai- 
kan; (style of utterance) bacha- 
'an, uchapafi; (childbirth) hal 
beranak. 

Dell (del), s. hnbah kcliil. 

Delta (del'ta), s. iauah 'nap* di 
kuala swgai, kuala yaig mrganjnr 
k-laut.* 

Delude (de-lfuV), v. t. tipu, per- 
dai/akan.* 

Deluded (-^d). adj. iperdaya* 

Deluge (del'uj), s. (overflowing of 
land) ayer sbak/^ ayer kojoh* 
'mpolian;* (rush of flood water) 
ayer bah.; (in Noah's time) tofan* 
(Ar. Taufan). 

Deluge, v. t. (overflow, overwhelm) 
liputi* jrami* tuiopkan (B.). 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carrj'; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; iise, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thiu then. 



DELUSION 



137 



DEN 



Delusion (de-liVzhwn), s. (decep- 
tion) tipti-daj/a: (state of bein.2; 
deluded) kssaian; (false belief) 
ssatan. 

Delusive (-siv), adj. yarg mrysat- 
kan. 

Delve (delv), v. i. gall, charghol, 
koreh. 

Demagogue (demVgog), s. prgasut 
orarghina-dina* piganjur r'ayat* 

Demand (de-mand'), v. t. (ask for 
with authority) tuntut; (for pay- 
ment of debt) turggu, tag eh;* 
(question) iatya, taryal'an; (re- 
quire, necessitate) wajib (Ar.) ; 
as, this affair demands an explan- 
ation^ wajib-lali mnjatal^an hal int. 

Demand, s. (askinpr with authority) 
tuntutan. It is in ^reat demand, 
sargat di-timint a/can dia; sargat 
di-kahandaki akan dia. Goods in 
demand, haratg yarg laku, dagarg- 
an yarg lakii;"^ also laris* and la- 
rap.* 

Demarcate (de'mar-kat), v. t. per- 
hirggakan* tntiikan smpadan, SU" 
kat tanah. 

Demarcation (-ka'shi^n), s. pei'- 
khgga'an*, smpadan. 

Demean (de-men'), v. t. (behave) 
lakukan; (debase, deajrade) hina- 
kan, kjikan* 

Demeanour (-er), s. (behaviour) 
klakiian, pkerti (Sk.) ; (bearing, 
mien ) sikap. 

Demented (-ment'ed), adj. nanar* 
ksasaran. 

Demerit (de-mer'it), s. (that which 
deserves blame) yarg patut di-chla, 
kchla'an; (fault) ksalalian. 

Demesne (de-men'), s. kamporg 
oraig hsar-hsar. 

Demigod (dem'i-f^od), s. chndra 
(Sk.). 

Demijohn (-jon), s. kndi kacha* 

Demise (de-miz'), v. t. (bequeath) 
tvasiatkan* (Ar. wasiyat). 

Demise, s. (transfer of the crown) 



kpindahan pargkat raja; (death 

of royalty) margkat* 
Democracy (de-mok'ra-si), s. preri' 

talian orarg ramai. 
Democratic (dem'o-krat'ik), adj. 

chara prentahan ramai. 
Demolish (de-mol'ish), v. t. rom- 

hak, rohoh, ruhoh (B.), ritntoh. 
Demolition (dem'o-lish'-wn), s. k- 

romhak'an, krobohan, kruntohan. 
Demon (de'mon), s. ji7i (Ar.) ; 

(evil spirits) hantu-shaitan ; see 

SPIRIT. 

Demoniac (de-mo'ni-ak), s. orarg 
yarg di-rasok jin* oraig yarg kna 
liantu. 

Demoniacal (dem'o-ni'a-kal), adj, 
hantu-shaitan (a). 

Demonstrate (dem'on-strat or de- 
mon'strat), v. t. (point out) tun^ 
jokkan; (show, prove) ryatakan, 
trargkan. 

Demonstration (dem'on-stra'shi^n), 
s. (exhibition) pertunjok'an; 
(proof) kiyataan, ktratgan. 

Demonstrative (de-mon'stra-tiv) , 
adj. yarg mryatakan, yaiy mmwg- 
kan. 

Demoralization (de-mor'd-i-za'- 
sh?/n), s. chabol* luchali; see be- 
low. 

Demoralize (-iz), v, t, (make im- 
moral) chabolkan,* luchahkan, 
kasi orarg jadi jahat (B.) ; (cause 
to lose heart) tawarkan hati, 
Irgit* Irgek (B.). 

Demur (-mer'), v. i. (pause, delay) 
bertarggoh;* (object to, take ex- 
ception to) 'rggan.* 

Demure (-mfir'), adj. sopan, sopan- 
santun.* 

Demurrage (-mur'rej), s. blanja 
sbab iarggoh.* 

Demurrer (-miir'rer), s. terhnti- 
an.* 

Demy (-mi'), s. ukoran kertas. 

Den (den), s. (cave) goa, grorg- 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, min«s, cure, injure 

hurry; f56d, foot, awfool (awful) : law, how, oil; thin then. 



DENIAL 



138 



DEPENDENT 



garg :* (squalid haunt) pondol'. 
Gambling den, logok judi. 

Denial (de-ni'al). s. (ne<ration) 
ktidak'an; (contradiction) bantak- 
an,* hal mmhantahi;* (refusal to 
grant) 'rggan* tgahan; (refusal 
to acknowledge, disavowal) pnjarg- 
l-alan, mnigkir (Ar. tnunhir). 

Denizen (den'i-zn), s. anak negri. 

Denominate (de-nom'i-nat), v. t. 
riatnai* namakan, hri nania, shot. 

Denomination (-nfi'sli^/n), s. (epi- 
thet) diotan; (name) nama; 
(class, category) jnis, paiglcat; 
(sect) madzhah (Ar.). 

Denote (-ndf), v. t. njatakan, ianda- 
Jcati. 

Denounce (-nowns'), v. r. (proclaim 
as guilt v) sahihl'an,tudoli:* (cen- 
sure) cilia. 

Dense (dens), adj. (crowded to- 
gether) heraxak-asak, ssak, rapat; 
(compact) jnampat; (of rain, 
fruit, etc.) Ibat; (of foliage) 
rimhun* rendarg; (stupid) diguj^ 

Density (den'si-ti), s. kssak'an^ 
krapafan, etc., as above. 

Dent (dent),' s. (hollow) Jkok, 
kmek* kpek;* (notch) smiibiig, 
somherg (B.). 

Dent, V. t. Indoig* Ikokkan, hmek- 
kan* sjunhirgkan, as above. 

Dental (den'tal), adj. gigi (a). 
JJental surgeon, doktor gigi, tukarg 

Dentifrice (den'ti-fris), s. nhat p- 
njugh'* podar gigi* ohai gigi. 

Dentist (den'tist), s. iukau] gigi. 

Dentistry (-tis-tri), s. pkerjaan 
tukarg gigi. 

Dentition (den-tish'y/n), s. twmhoh 
gigi. 

Denude (de-nud'), v. t. (make 
bare) tlanjaujkan, huka; (of hair 
or trees) gondolkan; (of leaves) 
luroh.* 

Denunciation '(de-nun'si-a'shi/n). 



an; see de- 



s. tiidolian* kchlai 

XOUXCE. 

Deny (-nf), v. t. (contradict, de- 
clai'o untrue) duHakan* haniahi* 
tidakkan, katakan hukan (B.) ; 
(refuse to grant, withhold) 'rg- 
gankan* tgah; (disown, disavow, 
repudiate) satgkal. 

Depart (-part'), v. i. (go away) 
pergi; (retire, retreat) undor; 
(start on a journey) herjaJan, her- 
toJak, berargkat (B.) ; (of prin- 
ces) berargkat; (pass away) hi- 
Jnrg: (die) mnirggal;* (take ones 
leave) bermoJion* winta diri* 
To depart from (foisake), tirggaU 
kan; (desist or deviate from) 

Department (-ment), s. (sul)divi- 
siou) b/iag'ian; (of official duty) 
jawatan,* pjabat kraja'an* pgarg- 
an, pkerja'an; (territory) jajaJi^ 
an.* 

Departure (-par'chur), s. (act of 
going) pnigian/^ pnirggalan; 
(death) kmatian; (abandonment 
of a plan or purpose) hal mnirg- 
ga/kan. A new departure, perkara 
i/aig bliaru. After my departure, 
s-pnltggalan-ku. 

Depend (-pend'), v. i. (rely) ber- 
ganto)g, chadanj;* (trust, confide) 
harap, perchaya. It all depends 
upon you, atas aigkau-lali perkara 
ini. It depends on the state of 
the tide, ikut pasarg surut-rya. 

Dependence (-ens), s. (state of 
depending) hal bergantorg, hal 
perchaya; (mutual relation) pri 
kna-mnjna; (subjection) pri faloh 
(Ar.). 

Dependency (-en-si), s. (subject 
state) negri yatg falok (Ar.). 

Dependent (-ent), adj. (hang- 
ing down) bergantoig; also see 
ttaxg; (relying on) bergantorg, 
herhamp, tiada bebas; (of nations) 
falok (Ar.). 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it fire 
mirror;^ old, not connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, iniuie. ' 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



DEPENDENT 



139 



DEPRESSION 



Dependent, s. andk hiiah; (retain- 
er) pryirinj/^ 

Depict (-pikf), v. t. (portray) ru- 
pal-an, gamharlwi, sifatkan (Ar.) ; 
(describe iu words) chritakan. 

Deplete (-plef), v. t. hmpal'an,* 
l-osorgk-an. 

Deplorable (-plorVbl), adj. 
(lamentable) yarg patut di-ssal- 
l-an; (calamitous) malarg, cMaka, 

Deplore (-plur') v. t. (feel sorrow 
for) hersusak alcan; (lament^ re- 
gret) ssaR-an. 

Deploy (-ploi'), v. i. t. (of troops) 
riggarg, rtggaigl-an. 

Deponent (-po'nent), s. orarg yarg 
hersal'S% yaig mmhuat surat sum- 
pah . 

Depopulate (de-pop'ii-lat), v. t. 
(destroy popid'ation) tumpaskan 
isi negri; (reduce population) 
hurargkan isi negri, sunjikan. 

Deport (de-port/), v. t. (carry 
away, transport) htiarg, pindali- 
kan, njahkan;'^ (behave) herlakii,* 
lakukan dlrij^ hawa diri. 

Deportment (-ment), s. (conduct) 
laku* kJakuan; (bearing) sHcap, 
hargun.* 

Depose (-pos'), v. t. (dethrone) 
pchat;'^ (testify) hersaksi, naik 
saksi. 

Deposit (-poz'it), v. t. (lay down) 
Itak; (put, place) buholi, taroli; 
(put away) taroJi, simpan; (com- 
mit, intrust) ptarolikan/^ sralikan. 

Deposit, s. (sediment, of earth) 
tanah 'nap;* (dregs) ham pas, kla- 
dak* krak (B.) ; (for safe keep- 
ing) ptarohan;* (as security) cha- 
garan* tcarg chagah (B.). 

Depositary (-er-i), s. pnaroh* 

Deposition (de'po-zish'wn), s. (act 
of deposing or depositing) hal 
her saksi, hal mm chat * hal mltak, 
etc., see above; (sediment) see 
deposit; (statement, declaration) 
hryata'aii. 



Depositor (de-poz'i-ter), s. orarg 
yarg ptarohkan* orarg yarg simpan 
warg (B.). 

Depository (-to-ri), s. tmpat p- 
tarohan* orarg ptarohan* 

Depot (dep'o, u. s. de'po), s. 
(warehouse) nudarg; (military 
station) tmpat kdiidokan soldado; 
(U. S.) tmpat perhntian kreta api. 

Deprave (de-prav'), yA. rosakkan, 
kjikan* 

Depraved (-pravd'), s. kji* rosak. 

Depravity (-prav'i-ti), s. kjahatan^ 
kkjian* chabol* luchah. 

Deprecate (dep're-kat), v. t. (ex- 
press disapproval) chia; (express 
regret) sbotkan pri tiada herknan. 

Depreciate (de-pre'shi-at), v. t. 
pandarg mudah* permiidahkan* 
pandarg rergan, pertidakkan, cha- 
pak* chuai* 

Depreciate, v. i. tiiruji herga. 

Depreciation (-a'shzm), s. hal m- 
mandarg rnudah, etc., see above. 

Depreciatory (-a-to-ri), adj. ya?g 
mmandarg mudah, etc. see above. 

Depredate (dep're-dat), v. t. samon, 
rampas, rompak* 

Depredation (-da'shwn), s. prya- 
monan, prampasan, prompak'an* 

Depress (de-pres'), v. t. (press 
down) tkan; (cause to sink) tim- 
dokkan; (bring down, humble) 
rndahkan: (sadden) sndukan* 
hrgokkan* mashghulkan (Ar.) ; 
(make dull, as trade) kurargkan; 
(lower, as the muzzle of a gun) 
tun jam* 

Depressed (-presf), adj. '(dis- 
pirited) susah hati, sndu* hrgok* 
mashghvl (Ar.). 

Depression (-presh'i/n), s. (act of 
depressing) hal mnkan, etc., see 
depress; (state of being depress- 
ed) krndakan, mashghid (Ar.), 
sndu* hrgok;* (cavity) kmek,* 
Ikok; (valley) Imbah. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



DEPRIVATION 



140 



DESCRIPTIVE 



Deprivation (dop'ri-va'shwn), s. 
(loss) krugian. 

Deprive (de-piiv'), v. t. (bereave, 
as of children) huluskan;^ (take 
away) rbot, rampas; (make an 
end of) putuskan, liilargkan; 
(debar, shut out from) tgali. De- 
prived of life, putiis-7yaiva. De- 
prived of office, terpchat* hilcny 
pairjkat (B.). 

Depth (depth), s. dalam. 

Deputation (dep'u-ta'shwn), s. (act 
of deputing) hal mwakillian, hal 
7nnisan; (delegation) oranj suroh- 
an, oranj pilehan. 

Depute (de-puf), v. t. (as agent) 
toaJcilkan, bri Iniasa; (commission) 
psan; (appoint) ttitul-an. 

Deputy (dep'u-ti), s. pmaiylm, 
orarg gantian. 

Derail (de-ral'), v. t. hochilhan'^ 
den landasan hreta a pi. 

Derange (de-ranf), v. t. (dis- 
arrange) I'acliau, husutl'an, haru- 
hirukan, * klam-kah o tkan . 

Deranged (-ranjd'), adj. (crazy) 
nanar* kmsaran. 

Derangement (-ranj'm^nt), g. 
haru-hiru* kJam-kabot, champur- 
haur* champvr-ganl. 

Derelict (der'e-likt), s. (abandoned) 
ktirggalan, tertirggal; (careless, 
neglectful) lalai, alpa (Sk.). 

Dereliction (-lik'sht/n), s. (aban- 
donment) lial wnirggalkan; (ne- 
glect) lalai, alpa (Sk.). 

Deride (de-rid'), v. t. (laugh at) 
tertawakan; (scoff at) olok-olok- 
kan. 

Derision (-rizli'wn), s. olok-olok. 

Derivable (-riv'a-bl), adj. yary 
daiarg, yarg holeli di-datargkan. 

Derivation (der'i-va'shwn), s. k- 
turunan, asal. 

Derivative (de-riv'a-tiv), adj. yarg 
terhit deri-pada* yaig daiarg deri- 
pada. 

Derive (-rlv'), v. t. (got from a 



source) dalntykan, ierbit* ber- 
ohhf (trace the derivation) 
iraiyknn kturunan. 

Derogate (dcr'o-ofit), v. i. To dero- 
gate from, kchilkan, kuraiykan. 

Derogatory (de-rog'a-to-ri), adj. 
yaiy miychilkan, yary mryhinakan, 
yary inrosakkan. 

Derrick (der'rik), s. (Xaut.) tiarg 
myaiy. 

Dervish (der'vish), s. orary per- 
iapa* oranj bertapa, darwis 
(Pers.). 

Descant (des-kanf) v. i. (sing) 
■ryanji; (discourse, comment) ber- 
kata-kata, bertufor. 

Descend (de-send'), v. i. (come or 
go down) turun; (plunge or jump 
down) terjun; (go down stream) 
liilir;''^ (to a humble state) twn- 
dok; (be derived from) turun. 

Descendant (-ant), s. kturunan, 
bneli, anak-chncliu, anak pinak.* 
The following words express des- 
cendants of the first five gener- 
ations, anak, cliucliu, cliichit, 
pint* onery-onery* or plat;* Ba- 
bas use olery-ohry for the fourth 
generation. 

Descent (-sent'), s. (act of descend- 
ing) hal mnnrun, hal mnerjun, 
hilir;* (attack) ptyraiyan;* (ex- 
traction, lineage) baka, bneh, k- 
turunan; (declivity) cliuraman. 

Describe (-skrib'), y. t. (draw, 
delineate) tulis, lukis, sifatkan 
(Ar.) ; (by words) chritakan, 
rnchanakan* pril-an,'* njatakan, 
trargkan. 

Description (-skrip'sh?m), s. (act 
of describing) hal mmdis, etc., as 
above ; (sketch, representation) 
tulimn, si fat (Ar.) ; (by words) 
chriia, knjaia'an; (class, kind, 
sort) jnis, bagai* macham.. 
Descriptive (-tiv), adj. yarg m- 
lyatakan. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car. carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



DESCRY 



141 



DESOLATION 



Descry (-skri'), v. t. (discern) 
nanipaJo, tampak;'^ (reco.i^nise) Ic- 
nal. 

Desecrate (des'e-krat), v. t. (divest 
of sacred office) pchat;'^ (profane) 
najiskan (Ar.), kjikan.^ 

Desecration (-kra'shwn), s. lial 
iiiiacJiat/^ hal innajiskan (Ar.). 

Desert (dez'ert), adj. suryi, hlati- 
tara* 

Desert, s. (solitary place) ianali 
siuyi; (uncultivated land) tandh 
hlantara* rimha hlantara,^ hidan 
hlantara;'^ (sandy plain) padary 
pasir. 

Desert (de-zerf), s. (reward) pa- 
haJ-a; (that which is deserved) 
patut, hpatutan, yarg laijak; 
(merit) jasa (Sk.). 

Desert, v. t. tirggalkan, huatykan, 
haiyaikan,'^ h rgkalaikan . * 

Desert, v. i. Jari; (and go over to 
the enemy) belot. 

Deserted (-ed), adj. kilty galan, ter- 
iirgyal. 

Deserter (-er), s. plari/^ pmhelot; 
see DESERT, V. i. 

Desertion (-zer'shwn), s. (act of 
forsaking) hal niniryyalkan; (ab- 
sconding) plarian. 

Deserve (-zerv'), v. t. patut mil- 
dapat, patut kna, harus kna, patut 
di — , as, patut di-hri parykat, he 
deseiTes promotion. 

Deservedly (-ed-li), adj. dryan s- 
patut-iya, diyan s-harus-rya. 

Deserving (-ing), adj. patut, harus. 

Desiccate (des'i-kat), v. t. krinjkan. 

Desideratum (de-sid'e-ra'ti^m), s. 
(lack, want) klcuratyan, fiajat 
(Ar.). 

Design (-zin'), v. t. (delineate) tu- 
lis, lukiskan, ptakan;* (designate, 
appoint) tandakan, tntukan; (cre- 
ate, jnvent) adakan; (intend, pur- 
pose) kaliandaki* niat; (of God) 
tahdir (Ar.). 

Design, s. tulimn, pta,'^ kaliandak, 



niat, takdir (Ar.), as above; also 
(intention) kasad (Ar.), maksud. 
By design, sryaja. Design for a 
house, rimha-rimba rumah,'^' plan 
rumah (B.) (E.). 

Designate (des'ig-nat), v. t. (mark 
out) tandakan; (show, indicate) 
tun j ok, njatakan; (name) ylar, 
nama'i,'^ shot; (appoint) tntukan; 
(select) pileh. 

Designation (-na'sh?/n), s. (act of 
designating) hal innandakan, etc., 
as above; (that which designates) 
tanda, kryata'an, nama, ktntuan, 
ylar an. 

Designedly (de-zm'gd-li), adv. 
sryaja, dryan sryaja. 

Designer (-er), s. pnulis pta* 
oraty yary mlukis, yary miyada- 
kan.* 

Designing (-ing) adj. haryak 'akal, 
cherdek, panjary 'akal. 

Desirable (-zlr'a-bl), adj. yaiy di- 
kahandaki, yary di-ymari,'^ yary 
di-sulcai, herknan. 

Desire (-zir), v. t. man, hndak, ka- 
handaki, sualak, suka; (earnest- 
ly) iryin, rindu; (request) minta, 
pohonkan/^ 

Desire, s. mau, kaliandak, suka, ¥- 
iiyinan, krinduan, niat, maksud, 
hajat* (Ar. iidjat), hasrat* (Ar. 
iia.srat). 

Desirous (-us), adj. herkahandak, 
suka, rindu. 

Desist (de-sisf), v. i. herhnti, Ipas. 

Desk (desk), s. (for writing) meja 
tulis; (lectern) inimhar^ (Ar. 
rninhar) ; '.(bookstand for Kor'an) 
rihal (Ar.). 

Desolate (des'o-let), adj. (uninha- 
bited) suryi; (forsaken) kilty yaU 
an; (desolated, ruined) rosak. 

Desolate (-lat), v. t. (lay waste) 
rosakka n, h inasakan . 

Desolation (-la'shtm), s. kbinasa- 
'an, krosak'an. 



-ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

niirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



DESPAIR 



142 



DETACH 



Despair (de-?]mr'), t. i. putus ha- 
rap, putus fl.va.* 

Despair, s. imtus liarap, putus asa.^ 

Despatch (-^pach'), v. t. see dis- 
patch. 

Desperado (des'per-a'do), s. oraiy 
qaraig, oranj nekat,'^' samseng 
(Ch/?). 

Desperate (-et), adj. (beyond 
hope) yarg putus harap; (of di- 
sease) tiaila tersnihoh,'^ taholeh 
haik (B.) : (reckless) tiada rmg- 
indalikaih hahya,'^ fa da irgat-irgat 
(B.) ; (very hazardous) sargat her- 
hahya. 

Desperation (-a'sih?/n), ?, (state of 
despair) ptl putus haraj), pri putus 
asa* 

Despicable (des'pi-ka-bl), Q(\j.liiua, 
terhiua, kji* 'a\h (Ar.). 

Despise (de-spiz'), v. t. liinakan, 
kjikmi* 'aibkan (Ar.), tiada mrg- 
indnhkan, pandaig inudali* te- 
rgok ta'mata (B.). 

Despite (-spit'), s. (spite) d}gki; 
(malicious auo-er) gram. 

Despite, prep, jikalau. . . .skali pun, 
muggoli pun. mski pun. Despite 
his youth, jikalau muda skali pun. 

Despoil (-spoil'), v. t. ram pas, sa- 
mon. 

Despond (-spoud'), v. i. tawar hall, 
jadi hacliol/'' 

Despondency (-^n-si), s. gondah* 
tawar liati. 

Despondent (-cut), adj. gondalt,'^^ 
goudah gaulana* tawar liati. 

Despot (des'pot), s. pmrentali yarg 
chukop kuasa-nja, pmrentali yaiy 
tiada terhiv/gakan* kuasa-nja, 
orarg tlalim (Ar.), ptganiaya. 

Despotic (des-pot'ik), adj. yarg 
tiada terhiiggakan* kuasa-nja, tla- 
lim (Ar.), prganiaya. 

Despotism (des'po-tizm), s. kuasa 
yarg tiada ierhi/yga* aniaya, tla- 
lim (Ar.). 



Dessert (dez-zerf), s. sajian* huah* 
buali dan marman, pnjuchi mulut. 

Destination (des'ti-na'shwu), s. 
(act of appointing) hal mnntukan; 
(purpose, ultimate design) ka- 
handak; (place aimed at) tmpat 
orarg hndak pergi, hujorg perjalarw 
an. 

Destine (des'tin), v. t. (appoint;^ 
determine) tntukan; (of God) 
takdirkan (Ar.), hukumkan (B.). 

Destiny (-i), s. (predetermined 
state, fate) nasib, untorg, untorg 
nasih; (God's fixed order) takdir 
(Ar.) ; (fixed time of death) aial 
(Ar.). 

Destitute (des'ti-tut), adj. (defi- 
cient, lacking) kurarg, kkuraryan- 
(needy, very poor) papa* miskin- 
pupa* tiada herupaf/a* barqsaf 
(B.). 

Destitution (-tCi'shzm), s. kkurarg^ 
an, k papa;' an,* hal bargsat (B.). 

Destroy (de-stroi'), *t. t. (pull 
down, as buildings) rornbak, roboh- 
kan, pcliah: (ruin, spoil) rosak^ 
kan. binasakan, punahkan;* (hring- 
to naught, annihilate) tiadakan, 
liapuskan, turn pas, jliannamkanx 
(put an end to, kill) habiskariy 
hilargkan. 

Destroyer (-er), s. pmbinasa; 
(Xaut.) kapal prarg kcJiil yary 
terlalu laju. 

Destruction (-strnk'sh?/n), s. k^ 
TO ui bak'a u , krosaVan, kb inasa'ari/ 

see DK.STROY. 

Destructive (-tiv), adj. yatg m* 
rosakkau, yarg mmbinasakan. 

Desuetude (des'we-tud), s. (dis- 
use) lial tiada pakai lagl; (eessa* 
tion) kputusan. 

Desultory (des'ul-to-ri), adj. (dis- 
connected) putus-putus, tiada ttap; 
(unmethodical) tiada bpcraturan. 

Detach (de-tach'), v. t. cliraikan,. 
asirgkan* sblalikan, pnchilkan,* 
lainkan. 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ioe, it, fire^ 

mirror; 51d, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use. us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; fo5d, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



DETACHABLE 



]43 



DEVELOPMENT 



Detachable (-a-bl), adj. (not 
lixed) wniJatarfi. 

Detachment (-ment), s. (of 
tro(>[)s) pasohan. 

Detail (de-tal'), v. t. rnchanakan,* 
hitah-an. satu-satu, prikanf^ butir- 
Jcan* 

Detail (de'tal or de-tal'), s. (parti- 
culars, small parts) sgala hal, hal- 
fhunl-^ (At. ouirdl, pi. of Ml), 
sf/ala pri-hal, hulir* In detail, 
satn-satn. 

Detain (de-tan'), v. t. (restrain, 
keep back, withhold) tgah, tahan; 
(delay) lamhatl-an- : (keep in cus- 
tody) pnjaraJi'an* IrurorgJcan. 

Detect (-tekf), v. t. (discover, find 
out) dapat, da pat tahu ; (brincf to 
light) njatakan. To be detected, 
kdnpatan hudl* kna taigkap, da- 
pat di -J ill at. 

Detection (-tek'shwn), s. pnda/mf- 
an, kiyata'an. 

Detective (-tiv), s. mata-mata glap. 
I Detention (-ten'slum), s. (act of 
detaining) lial mngali* Jial m- 
7iaJian : (state of being detained) 
1ml di'tgah, hal di -tahan, lial dl- 
lambatkan; (continement) phgit- 
an* kpnjara'an* hal kna j el (E.). 

Deter (-ter'), v. t. (prevent by fear) 
kjotkan, ftrekkan.^ 

Detergent (-jent). s. ohat ptyuchi. 

Deteriorate (de-ter'i-o-rat), v. t. 
hurokkan, rosakkan; (by friction) 
haiis. 

Deteriorate, v. i. bertamhah rosak, 
bertambah burok. 

Deterioration (-ra'shf/n), s. hal 
burok, k rosak' an, havs. 

Determinable (de-ter'mi-na-bl), 
adj. i/arg boleh di-tntukan. 

Determinate (-net), adj. tertnin. 

Determination (-na'?h?m), s. per- 
hirggaan.^ ktniuan. kpntusan, see 
below; also (intention, purpose) 
maksud. kasad'^ (Ar. qamd), niat, 
'azam (Ar.), hatkad {A.r. *itiqdd). 



Determine (-min), v. t. (fix limits) 
peril Ifggakan;* (settle) tntukan; 
(shape, prescril^e) sifatkan (Ar.) ; 
(ascertain) tntukan: (bring to a 
conclusion) ptituskan, sUalkan, 
.<li^ekan (B.) : (resolve, have fixed 
intention) tntukan, niatkan. 

Deterrent (-ter'rent), adj. yaig 
nitgrek* yarg mrgjot. 

Detest (-test'), v. t. bnchi, bnchi 
intuat. 

Detestable ,(-a-bl), adj. kbnchian. 

Detestation (de'tes-ta'shi/n), s. 
bnchi, gli-gm((n,^ gli-gmam (B.). 

Dethrone (de-thron'), v. t. pcJiat- 
kan deri-pada taklita kraja'an,*' 
iurunkan deri-pada taklita kraja- 
'an,"^ turunkan- deri-pada krosi raja 
(B.). 

Detonate (det'o-nat), v. i. Hop. 

Detonation (-na'slmn), s. Itopan. 

Detonator (-nfi-ter), s. kep (E. 
cap ) . 

Detour (dfi-toor'), s. jalan berblit. 

Detract (de-trakt'),' v. t. (take 
away) kurargkan, potorg; (de- 
fame) urn pat. 

Detriment (det'ri-iuf^nt), s. yaiy 
ill u data ufkan ruqi, bnchana, mu- 
diarat (Ar.). 

Detrimental (-men'tal), adj. yarg 
rn rosakka n , yarq m m bri mudlarat 
(Ar.). 

Devastate (dev'«s-tat), v. t. rosak- 
kan, binamkan, trgkarapkan* (Ar. 
kharab). 

Devastation (-ta'shun), s. krosak- 
'an, kbinasa'an. 

Develop (de-veVop), v. t. (make 
known or visible) njatakan: (give 
forth, produce) kluarkan; (to un- 
fold, as a bud) knibargkan; (cause 
to advance or increase) niajukan* 
luaskan, tambahi. 

Develop, v. i. (as a flower) kmharg; 
(as a leafbud) be mas;* (grow) 
tuniboh : (advance) maju.* 

Development (-ment), s. (act of 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire 

mirror: old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, miniis, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. 



DEVIATE 



144 



DIAL 



developing) hal miyalakan, etc., 
as above; (developed state) I'hm- 
hahjaii, kfumhohaii,, kmajiian,'^ 
Deviate (de'vi-at), v. i. (turn aside) 
semparg, mniempaiy, mnpi; (stray) 
ssat; (diver^^e) pcnchorg* len- 
choiy; (vary, as a compass) sni- 

Deviation (-a'sln/n), s. hal miijem- 
parg, iniysat, etc., as above. 

Device (de-vis'), s. (project, 
scheme) upaya* daya,* daya^ 
upayar (artifice) daya* 'alcal, 
elah* {At. iiilah) ; (emblematic 
design) Udamat (Ar.), rajali* 

Devil (dev'l), s. ihlis, setan (Ar. 
sfiai'vdn) ; (evil spirit) jin. 

Devil, v. t. (cook with Cavenne pep- 
per) delwlc'' (E.). 

Devilfish (-fish), s. doyalc r^ (small- 
er) Icreia* sotovj, see cuttlefish. 

Devilish (-ish), adj. cliara iblvi, 
sliaitan (a). A devilish business, 
pJcerja'an sliaitan. 

Devilry (-ri), s. Tdahuan yarg jaliat 
si- all, Ichnjisan. 

Devious (de'vi-?/.s), adj. yairj m- 
njemparg, yarg mlenchorg, seni- 
paig-si'ur. 

Devise (de-viz'), v. t. (invent, 
scheme) upayalvan/^ chari 'alcal; 
(work out) relca,"^ adakan; (give 
by will) wasiatkan* (Ar. wasiyat). 

Devoid (-void'), adj. (lacking) 
kurarg, herknraig, drgan iiada. 

Devolve (-volv'), v. t. (hand down) 
srahkan, pidargkan. 

Devolve, v. i. pidarg, jatoJi. 

Devote (-vof), v. t. (by vow) niat- 
kan; (consecrate) knduskan* 
(Ar. qudiis) ; (to destruction) 
tntiikan akan hinasa. To devote 
one's self (give attention to), her- 
tkun, hersurggoh-surggoh, her- 
iugas/^ 

Devoted (-ed), adj. (loyal) her- 
hakti (Sk.) ; (strongly attached) 



lersargkot hail ; (zealous) ia'at*" 
(Ar. laai). 

Devotee (dov'o-te'), s. oraig her-^ 
hakti (Sk.), orarg her'ihadat 
(Ar.). 

Devotion (de-vo'sht/n), s. (strong 
affection) kaseJi-sayaiy , chinta; 
(loyalty) hakti (Sk.); (in re- 
ligion) 'ihadat (Ar.) ; (prayer) 
do a, smhaliyaig (B.) ; (earnest- 
ness) tkmi, ta'af^ (Ar. Taat). 

Devotional (-fll), adj. berhakti 
{Sk.),hej'{badat\AT.). 

Devour (de-vowr'), v. t. (eat greed- 
ily) tlan, gasak, majoh,* char op :'^ 
(consume, destroy) makan hahis,. 
hinasakan. 

Devout (-vowf), adj. (pious) her^ 
hakti (Sk.), her ihadat (Ar.), her- 
iman (Ar.), mu'inin (Ar.) ; (sin- 
cere) surggoh hati, Udus hati. 

Devoutly (-li), adv. (piously) 
digan hakti (Sk.) ; (sincerely) 
drgan s-suiggoh-rya, drgan s-hnar" 
nja. 

Dew (du), s. 'mhun. 

Dewlap (dii'lap), s. glamhir, gla- 
hir.* 

Dewy (-i), adj. her'mhun. 

Dexterity (deks-ter'i-ti), s. kpantas^ 
an, dialcatan.* 

Dexterous (deks'ter-?zs) , adj. pan^ 
fas, cliakatan* ahli (Ar.). 

Diabetes (dl'a-be'tez), s. knchirrf 
man is. 

Diabolical (-boTi-kd), adj. chara 
iJjlis, amat hrgisf^ sargat hrgis. 

Diacritical (-krit'i-kal), adj. dia- 
critical marks, l^aris, nota* (Ar.. 
nuqTah), tanda hacha*an. 

Diadem (-dem), s. patam* tkan 
kimdai,'^' makota.* 

Diagnosis (dT'ag-no'sis), s. pndapat 
deri-lial prifakit. 

Diagonal (dl-ag'o-nal), adj. serorg. 

Diagram (dl'a-gram), s. pta,"^ gam- 
har: (magic) rajah * 

Dial (dl'al), s. mmka jam, hundar 



ate., isk, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire^ 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure. 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin tliQn. 



DIALECT 



145 



DIFFERENT 



yarg hermata sperti pdoman* 
8iin dial, jam pnirnbarg hayaiy- 
baijanj matahari. 

Dialect (diVlekt), s. (languaf^e) 
bhasa; (local varieties of speech) 
pelat. 

Dialectics (-lek'tiks), s. 'ihnu ba- 
has* {At. baiiath), Hhnn per- 
baniahan.'^ 

Dialogue (-lo^^), s. pertutoran, 
iuior-riinutor,* sual-jawab, clia- 
I'ap jawab pergi jaivab datarrj 
(B.). 

Diameter (di-am'e-ter), s. siy- 
harg,* baris mlintarg di iigah 
bulatan. 

Diametrically (dra-met'ri-kal-li), 
adv. diametrically opposed, lain 
skali. 

Diamond (di'a-m?md), s. Man, ber- 
lyan, bhjan (E. brilliant) ; (in 
cards) riin (D. ruiten). Dia- 
mond shaped, blah Hupat. 



Diaper (-per) 



(towel) tuala; 



(for infants) chawat. 
Diaphanous (dl-af a-m^s), adj. 

clirah. 
Diaphragm (dl'a-fram), s. slupat 

prot/^ 
Diarrhoea (dl'ar-re'a), s. sakit 

buaiy-buaig ayer, chirit (X.I.). 
Diary (di'a-ri), s. surat pJcerjaan 

s-hari-hari, jernal (E.), bulcu 

injatan Jcei'ja-l'erja. 
Diatribe (-tiib), s. perbantahan,'^ 

pertrgkaran. 
Dibber (dib'ber), s. tugal.* 
Dibble (dib'bl), v.t. tugal.* 
Dibbler (-bier), s. pnugal* 
Dice (dis), s. dadu (Port), buah 

dadu, buah pari/^ buah iindi* 
Dicebox (dTs'boks), s. Icpoh dadu, 

kotah dadu. 
Dictate (dik-taf), v.t. (utter for 

another to write) mehanakan* 

imla' (At.) ; (say authoritatively) 

suroh, inentahlcan. 



Dictate (dik'tat), s. hukuin, pren- 
tah. 

Dictation (dik-ta'sh?m), s. imla'^ 
(Ar. imla'), rnchana.* 

Dictator (-ter), *s. pmrentah yarg 
i'lada terhirggakan'^^ kuasa-nja. 

Dictatorial (dik'ta-t5r'i-al), adj. 
yarg kras preniah-rya. 

Diction (dik'shwn), s. rargkaian 
perkata'anf^ bhasa. 

Dictionary (-er-i), s. kamus'^ (Ar.. 
qamus). 

Dictum (dik't7/m), s. ptua"^ (An. 
fatica). 

Die (dl), V. i. mati; (of princes)' 
maigkat* ivafat (Ar.) ; (vulgar) 
mampus: (euphemistically) hi- 
larg, mnirggal,'* mnirggal dunia, 
pvtus njawa, sampai ajal (Ar.), 
kmbali* kmbalik-rahmat Allah ^■'^ 
(cease, be extinct, or extinguish- 
ed) liilanj, padam, putus. Die 
away, hilarg, Inryap. Die down 
(of a flame) mala p. "^ 

Die, s. (dice) buaJi dadu, buah 
paii,"^ buah undif (chance, ha- 
zard) undi.^' 

Diet (di'et), s. (food, victuals) ma- 
kanan, rjki (Ar. rzki), jerki (B.) ; 
(prescribed food) peraturan ma- 
kanan, makanan pantarg (B.). 

Diet, V. t. aturkan makanan, tntukan 
makanan, pantaig makanan (B.). 

Dietetics (dl'e-tet'iks), s. 'ilmu 
mnntukan makanan. 

Differ (differ), v. i. (be unlike) 
bersUseh, berlain-lain; (be dis- 
tinguished) berbeza,* berbeda; 
(disagree) tiada bersfuju; (dis- 
pute) berbantah,* 
Difference (-ens), s. perslisehan, 
klainan, perbeza'an,* perbantah' 
an,* farak (Ar.). The difiPerence 
is, bersalahan. 
Different (-ent), adj. lain, ber- 
sliseh, bersalaJian, asirg,* berbeza.* 
jnls-jnis, macliam-macham , ber-* 
bagai-bagai,* plbagai,* tiada ber- 



ate, ask, am, final, eare, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire 
mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, mimts, cure, injure * 

burry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin then. ' 



DIFFERENTLY 



146 



DILATE 



stuju; see DIFFER. A>rv ditferent, 
terlaJii jauh heza-tm,^ terJaJu jauh 
hn/a-fi/a. 
Differently (-li), adv. Jain pula. 
Differential (-en'slwil), adj. ya)y 
Ix'rs'liseh^ yarf/ mmhezalmn,^ j/ary 
fn/ainlwi. 
Differentiate (->lii-iit), v. t. heza- 
k'liN,'^ hedakini, lainkan, cmrgl'an.'^ 
Difficult (di.t"ii-ky/it), adj. (liard to 
do) .'iid-ar/^ pay ah; (attended Tvdth 
trouble) ^'nisah, mushJiil (Ar.) ; 
(arduous) hrat, Iras. Difficult to 
• >l)taiii, fiumh da pat, pa yah da pat. 
DjfHeidt to understaud, 'antum* 
{ At. g ha mum?). 
Difficulty (-k«.l-ri), s. Jcsul-aran* 
l-payahan, Isusahan, Hrafan, k- 
h-iaxan, as above. 
Diffidence (-d<?ns), s. sliak liati 

(Ar.). mala, sqan, see below. 
Diffident (-dent), adj. (distrust- 
ful of self) shah liaii (Ar.), ta'- 
ttap; (timid) I'uratg hrani; (}3asli- 
ful) main, sgan. 
Diffuse (dif-fuz'), v. t. (cause to 
spread, as a fluid) kmhaiyhan; 
(send out, scatter) liamburkan; 
(disseminate, as information) m^a- 
luriikan (Ar.), khaharkan; (as 
li oh t ) pa n ch arkan. * 
Diffuse, V. i. (of fluids) kmhaty; (of 
light) panchar: (of scents) smer- 
hak* merhak (B.). 
Diffuse (-fits'), adj. (widespread) 
ramharg; (verbose) midut ram- 
harg; (prolix) Janjut.^ 
Diffuseness (-nes), s. muhit ram- 

hatg. lanjiit perkafa'an.* 
Diffusion (-fu'zh?m), b. hal mrgm- 

batgkan, etc., see diffuse. 
Diffusive (-siv), adj. yarg rMym- 
ha.}g. yarg mmanchar, smerbak* 
merhak (B.). 
Dig (dig), V. t. (generally) gali; 
(wiih a hoe) chaiykol; (with sharp 
instrinnent) korfik ; (as in mining, 
liorizontally) clibah:* (poke with 



instrument ) chungkil. 



! pointed 
j chorhok. 
I Digest (di-jesf). v. t. (arrange) 
I aturkan; (assiniilate food) han^ 
; rhorkan, hadhamkan (Ar.), dwr- 
\ nakan (X.T.), kas^i siau (B.) 
I (Ch.); (think over) fikirkan; 
( (.-( >mpreheiul ) m igfrii. 
Digest (di'jest), s. peraturan hukum 

ata u un da rg-ii n darg . 
Digestible (di-jest'i-bl), adj. yatg 
/ka.'i hanchor, yatg Ikas hadham 
(Ar.). 
Digestion (-t-lu/n), s. lial mrgatur- 

kan, etc., see digest. 
Digestive (-tiv), adj. yarg mmhri 
hadham (Ar.). yarg kasi siau (B.) 
(Ch.). 
Digit (dij'it), s. jari. 
Dignified (dig'ni-fid), adj. sopan- 

mnfini,'' stedi (B.) (E.)'. 
Dignify (-fl), v. t. hsarkan, mulia- 

kan. hri hormat. 
Dignitary (-ter-i), s. orarg hsar. 
Dignity (-ti), s. (honour), kmulia- 
\iu, khsaran; (stateliness of man- 
ner) sopan-saniun.^ 
Digress (di-gres') v. i. (in writing 
or speech) halek, katakan lain per- 
kara. To digress from a subject, 
/ /' igga Ikan stn a n ta ra . * 
Digression (-gresh'i/n), s. pri m- 

rgafakan lain perkara. 

Dike (dik), s. (ditch) parit, alur;* 

(embankment) bndorg* tbirg; 

(ridges between rice fields) batas. 

Dilapidated (di-lap'i-dat-ed), adj. 

(of l)uil dings) rinbas* pchah; 

(generally) burok, rosah. 

Dilapidation (-da'shMn), s. hrosak- 

'an, kburok'an. 
Dilate (di-laf or di-lat'), v. i. 
(swell up) muai;* (as the eyes) 
bliak; (by inflation) kmboiy, glm- 
bonj : (grow wide) iiias; (speak 
I argel y ) lanjatkan perhata'an* 
panjargkan perkataan. 



ate, ask, am, finol, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minus, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin f/ien. 



DILATE 



147 



DIPLOMATIC 



Dilate, v. t. muaikanj^' Junhoiyl-an, 
iucuskan. 

Dilatory (diFa-to-ri), adj. leicjali, 
lainhaf, chnla.'i* clileli* 

Dilemma (di-lem'nia or di-lem'ma) , 
s. pmilehan antara diia perkara 
yaty ^siisah. 

Dilettante (diret-tan'te), s, orarg 
s-trgah masaV dalani pkerjaan. 

Diligence (diri-jeiis), s. rajin, 
nsalia (Sk.). 

Diligent (-jeut), adj. rajin, her- 
vsaha (Sk.), hertkun. 

Dilly-dally (dirii-dal'li), v. i. r7n/- 
las,"^ chleh/^ main-main saja (B.). 

Dilute (di-liif or di-lut'),, yA. cha- 
'irkan, champiirkan ayer. 

Dilute, adj. cha'ir. 

Dim (dim), adj. (lacking? britrlu- 
ness, of light) kJam, muram,^ 
suram;* (of colour) udamf' 
(hardly visible) kahus* sayupf'' 
(not seeing clearly) kabur: (mis- 
ty, indistinct) kahot, halam- 
halam.^^ 

Dim, V. t. klamkan,'^ kahuskan* ka- 
hurkan, kabotkan, as above. 

Dimension (di-men'slrwn), s. (mea- 
surement) likoran: (size) hsar; 
(extent) khiasan, klaparyan. 

Diminish (di-min'ish), v. t. (in 
quantity) kurargkan, luakkanf' 
(in size) krhilkan. 

Diminish, v. i. rda, susiit, kiirarg. 

Diminution (dim'i-nu'sh?/n), s. 
(act of diminishing) lial mnjurarg- 
kan, hal mtgrhilkan; (state of be- 
ing diminished) kkiiraigan, khiaJc- 
'an* k.wsidan. 

Diminutive (di-min'u-tiv), adj. 
kchil, stii,"^ lialus, kchik (B.). 

Dimness (dim'nes), s. klam-kahot, 
kabur, kalus* muram* suram;* 
see DIM. 

Dimple (dim'pl), s. chairak* cha- 
ir ak pi pi* 

Din (din), s. hisitg, bechok* irgar."^ 
iigar-batyar* rioh-rndah, ggak- 



gmpifa,'^ blianaf' in some senses 

the meaning may be ex])ressed by 

sound words, such as, gmrenchergj^ 

dram, Igal'-lgok,'^ etc. 
Dine (din), v. i. mal-an; (eat the 

principal meal) makan trgah Jiari, 

or;, rnal'an maJani ; (of princes) 

^•r/ ///«/).* 
Dinghy (ding'gi), g. (I^q'aut.) sam- 
pan, tonda, jorgkorg, samhoh 

(Pers.). 
Dingy (din'ji), adj. (soiled) cli- 

niar,^' kolor; (dusky colour) irerna 

paJa/' 
Dining (din'ing), s. Dining room, 

hih'k ?naka?i. Joining table, meja. 

makan. 
Dinner (din'ner), s. (principal 

meal) 7nakan irgah liari, or makan 

mala?}}. 
Dint (dint), s. Ikok, kmek.'^ By 

dint of, drgan kvasa. 
Diocese (dl'o-ses), s. jajalian yarg 

di-prentaJikan oleh s'oraig bishop 

(X.). 
Dip (dip), V. t. (insert in fluid and 

withdraw) chchali; (immerse) 

chlop; (as a glass dipped in water 

to fill it) bna}nkan; (lower a flag) 

iurunkan. 
Dip, V. i. (incline downwards) chon-^ 

dcng. To dip into a book, ba'Cha 

mlaiykan-laigkau,* bacha mlarg- 

kah-Ia}gkah. 
Diphtheria (dif-ther'i-a), s. saJcit 

kron]ko}gan. 
Diphthong (difthong or dip'- 

thong), s. dua buiyi berhubory. 
Diploma (di-plo'ma), s. surat k- 

traiigan de}'i-hal plajaran. 
Diplomacy (di-plo'ma-si), s. per- 

atni'an utu><-migutusf^ (tact) 

'akaJ-b udi. 
Diplomatic (dip'lo-mat'ik), adj. 
. (tactful) bijaksana,'^ ber'akaU 

budi. To have diplomatic re- 
lations, utus-mrgutus.'^ 



ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire,. 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, minws, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin tlmn. 



DIPLOMATIST 



148 



DISAPPOINT 



.Diplomatist (di-plo'ma-tist), s. 
■lUu.^an,'^ oranj pandai 7)iryu.tus.* 

Dipper (dip'per), s. (ladle) gayorr/, 
jnichedoh, ckentorg, sibur;* (small 
bucket) timha. 

Dire (dir), adj. (ill-omened) s'ml; 
(dreadful) dalishat (Ar.), haibat 
(Ar.). 

-Direct (di-rckf), adj. (straight) 
Inrus, biul, trvs; (sincere) tulus; 
(unambiguous) trus traiy; (not 
oblique) tpatj^ 

Direct, v. t. (point, aim) iuju; 
(point out) tanjoh; (regulate, 
govern) aturkaii, prentahhan; (or- 
der) suroh; (a letter) 'alamathan 

(Ar.). ■ 

Direction (-i'ek'sh?/n), s. (act of 
directing) lial wnuju, etc., as 
above ; (command, instruction) 
peraturan, prentah, psan, Imkum; 
(address) 'alamat sural f' (line) 
iu'jvan, Imla* aralt. 

Directly (-rekt'li), adv. drgan lu- 
rus. drgan tulus, trus traix), see 
DIRECT, adj.; (immediately) dnjan 
sgra, s-bntar itu juga, serta-rnerta. 

Director (-er), s. yarg mmrentah- 
l-an; (of a company) hpdla. 

Directory (-o-ri), s. I'itdb pandu.'^' 

Dirge (derj), s. lagu prindu,'-^ biji 
ratap* 

Dirigible (di'ri-ji-bl), adj. yaty 
boleh di-tujukan, berlcmudi. 

Dirk (derk), s. hris. 

Dirt (dert), s. (generally) I'lcotoran, 
kdtniaran:* (mud) lumpur, be- 
chak, bichah (B.), lechak;* (ex- 
crement) najis (Ar.), tahh'^ ia'ih 
(B.) ; (loose) sampah, sarap;* 
(dry and flaky) l-redak; (from 
tlie skin) daki. 

Dirtiness (dert'i-nes), s. kkotoran. 

Dirty (dert'i), adj. hotor, dtmar* 
najis (Ar.) ; (of water, turbid) 
hroli; (smeared with dirt) ber- 
lumor, rhotnol, berslekeh;* (after 
evacuation) srghelaf* 



Dirty, v. t. kotorkan, ch?narJcan, etc., 
as above. 

Disability (dis'a-bil'i-ti), s. ka- 
liHargan kuasa, pri tiada kua.^a, 
hlmahan. 

Disable (dis-a'bl), v. t. (deprive of 
force) Imahkan, kurargkan kua^a, 
liilanjkan kuasa; (cripple) kodorg- 
kan/-' kudorgkan (B.). 

Disabled (-bid), adj. (maimed) 
kodotg,'^ kadoig (B.) ; (of ships) 
rosak. 

Disabuse (dis'a-buz'), v. t. Ipaskan 
deri-pada silap atau tipu-daya. 

Disadvantage (dis'ad-van'tej), s. 
bnchana, rugi, mtidlarat (Ar.). 

Disadvantageous (dis-ad-van-ta'- 
j//s), adj. tiada berfa'idah, yarg 
iiiuibri iuudlarat (Ar.), yarg mn- 
datargkan bnchnna. 

Disaffect (dis'af-fekf) v. t. (a- 
lienate) jauhkan hati perstrukan* 
uiusohkaii (B.) ; (disturb the 
fimctions) kachau. 

Disaffected (-ed), adj. berstru* 
bermusoh (B.), jauli-hati. 

Disaffection (-fek'shwn), s. per- 
struan,'^ jauh-hati. 

Disagree (dis'a-gre'), v. i. (not 
agree) bersliseli, tiada berstuju; 
(be unlike) berlainan, berbeza* 
herbeda, tiada sama; (quarrel) 
brrslisfh; (be unsuitable, as food 
or medicine) ta's-rasi. 

Disagreeable (-a-bl), adj. (un- 
pleasant) tiada berknan, ta'sdap; 
(of smells) inaunj. 

Disagreement (-m^^nt), s. per- 
slisclian, ta'stujuan, perbeza'an* 
perbeda'an, mufarakai (Ar.). 

Disallow (disTil-low'), v. t. tiada 
bri, 'rggankan;'^ tolak, tiada lu- 
lus,'^ balalkan. 

Disappear (-ap-per'), v. i. Inryap, 
Isap, Jiilarg, ghaib (Ar.), pryap* 

Disappoint (-ap-poinf), v. t. (frus- 
trate) tahankan, tgalikan; (de- 
prive of hope) kchewakan, putus- 



•ate, ask, am, final, care, car, carry; eve, hen, recent, mere, her, ferry; ice, it, fire, 

mirror; old, not, connect, sore, sort, sorry; use, us, min?/s, cure, injure, 

hurry; food, foot, awfool (awful); law, how, oil; thin than. 



DISAPPOINTMENT 



149 



DISCOLOURATION 



l-an Imrap. Disappointed, A'a- 

harapcni* I: chew a. 
Disappointment (-m^nt), s. pri 

l-ah arapnn,^ l-chewaan. 
Disapprobation (dis-ap'pro-ba'- 

sh?/u). s. pri tiada herbnan, hal 

mjyalahJiWh, hal mnchla, kclilaan. 
Disapproval (dis'ap-proov'