


>- .U». « 






>^' 






i^^^'is 



■4' ^' 

'•^'"A't' '♦■'v.»'' * . 









I ' <■ 















UNIVERSITY 

OF PITTSBURGH 

LIBRARY 



^7 8't 



THIS BOOK PRESENTED BY 

Mrs. John McKirdy 
in memory of 
John McKirdy 



30,000 löttiett 

€tntoanbmrn in IPennsgltanten 

auö 

iJOtt 1727 bi^ 1776, 

mit Slngafce t>er Flamen i»er ©t^iffe, beö Sinfc^iffungöortcö «nb 
tc« ©atumö t>er Stnfunft in 'P^ilat)dpl)ia, 

nebjt 

0efd[)i(^tIii^en unfe anderen ^cmcrfungcn, 

foipic '^adjtueifitng 

»Ott me^r alö taufent» beutf4)en unb fvanjö|tfd)en S'^amett 
in S^ero g)orf »or bem ^ai)xc 1712. 

ason 

ajerfflifer nicl)rcr ]&iflorifd)en Sfficrfe. 



3weite öevlbeffertc unb öerme()rte ^tuflagc 

mit 

beutft^cr ^lc0cirfe|ttng. 



IPbilaöeIpbia : 
Sear^, ©tuart ßo., 

SRro. 9 Süb 3fieunte ©trafee. 



A COLLECTION 



OP UPWARDS OF 



rr 



m lillSAi M 



.1 



GERMAN, SWISS, DUTCH, FRENCH 



AND OTHER 



Immigrants in Pennsylvania 

]Proia:i IVZV to ITT"©, 

WITH A 

Statement of the names of Ships, whence they sailed, and the date 
of their arrival at Philadelphia, 

CHRONOLOGICALLY ARRANGED, 



TOGETHER WITH THE 



Ifecessary Historical and other Notes, 

ALSO, 

An Appendix containing Lists of more than one thousand German 
and French Names in New York prior to 1712, 

BY 

Prof. I. DANIEL RUPP, 

Author of several Historical Works. 



Second Revised and Enlarged Edition with German Translation. 



PHILADELPHIA : 

LEARY, STUART CO., 

No. 9 South Ninth Street. 
1G27 






Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1875, by 
IG. KOHLER, 
' In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington. 



Copyright, 1898, by 
EDWIN S. STUART. 



^-^ 



PREFACE TO THE IMPROVED EDITION. 



To meet the often-repeated requests of many who were 
anxious to ascertain, if possible, when such and such per- 
sons came to Pennsylvania, the Editor copied carefully 
the original Lists of the Names of German, Swiss and 
other immigrants on File in the Secretary's Office, at 
Harrisburg, and published an edition of Ä Collection 
of Thirty Thousand Names, &c,., in 1856.* 

The first edition is now out of print, and cannot be 
had at any price. From $5 to $7 have been paid within 
the last five years for second-hand copies. 

The second edition is a carefully revised one, and 
much improved. The names of males, not sixteen years 
of age, are inserted immediately under those above six- 
teen years old, instead of presenting them in the Ap- 
pendix, There have also been added enlarged Lists of 
names of first settlers at German town, of early settlers 
in Lancaster county, in Tulpehocken, Berks county, &c. 

This Collection contains upwards of Thirty Thousand 
Names, &c., and some historical and biographical notes. 
The present descendants of the early German, Swiss and 
French immigrants, now numbering millions, living in 
Pennsylvania, New York, Maryland, Virginia, and in 
the Western States, will be enabled, if they procure this 
Publication, to ascertain the time of their ancestors' ar- 
rival, and other facts of value to most of them. 



*Tlie first edition was published in a Monthly Serial of 24 pages. 
Soon after issuing the first number, the Editor received orders for the 
Collection from persons in New York, New Jersey, Maryland, Vir- 
ginia, North Carolina, Ohio, Kentucky and other Western States, 
and from persons in many counties in Pennsylvania. 

(V) 



VI PREFACE TO THE IMPROVED EDITION. 

It has been truthfully said : " That comparatively few 
of the living millions in the United States can tell when 
their forefathers came to this country." By the aid of 
this Collection, thousands of the descendants of early 
immigrants, can with certainty, determine the year of the 
arrival of their progenitors.* 

Among other objects had in view in publishing this 
Collection, is the preservation of names, which indiffer- 
ence or accident might have forever placed beyond reach. 

As many feel, naturally, curiously anxious to know the 
names of fellow-passengers, in crossing the ocean "in 
perils by sea," the Editor has sought to gratify this 
curiosity by the plan of arrangement adopted. 

This Collection may also lead to the rightful recovery 
of inheritance of money, held in abeyance, in the old 
country. It is not, however, presumed, that this, in it- 
self, is legal evidence, but it may aid materially in sug- 
gesting modes of proof to the right of such claims. 

I. DANIEL RUPP, 

43d AND HuKON Sts., West Philadelphia. 
1875. 



* The late Rev. Henry Harhmgh, B. JD., in a letter to the Editor, 
1856, said: "This Collection vrili place in the hands o( Subscribers 
the means of tracing their ancestors, which must prove a great satis- 
faction to all who have not, under a false training, grown indifferent 
as to their earthly origin. We are among those who believe that any 
who care not about their earthlv origin, care little as to anything 
higher. We are much mistaken if this work will not be much 
sought for." 



^mth im kxhmtxtm ^nflagt. 



^m ber oft J^on SStelcn wteberfjolten 5^arf)frage, welche gerne 
ju erfahren wünf(J)ten, wann tiefe ober jene ^erfonen fic^ in 
5>ennfi)banien niebergelaffen, jn entfpredjen, frf)rieb ber ^er^^ 
au^geber bte in ber Slmtßftube beö ^taat^-Sefretärö ju ^ax- 
risburg aufbewahrten Original ^Stften ber Flamen beutfd^cr, 
f(J)n)eijerifd)er unb anberer (Sinwanberer forgfältig ah unt 
»eriJffentlic^te biefelben in bem im 3a^re 1856 unter beni' 
2:itel „Sine ©ammlung öon über 30,000 S'lamen" 
u. f. tt). erf(^ienenen Sud)e * 

2)ie erfte Stuftage ift iti^t »ergriffen unb um feinen ^reiö 
ju befommen. 2llte ^remplare t)aben in ben legten fünf 
Sauren »on $5 hiß $7 gebracht. 

i)ie jweite 5Iuf[age erfu!)r eine forgfältigc Prüfung unb 
bebeutenbe 5Serbefferung. 2)ie Seamen ber männlid)en ßin= 
wanberer unter fe(^jet)n 3a^ren folgen (anftatt im 5tn^ang) 
gleich naä) ber Sifte ber über fec^jejn 3al)ve alten ^erfonen. 
©ne oerme^rte ^lamenlifte ber erften 5lnfiebler in 
©ermantown, in Sancafter dounti), in J^ulpe^ocfen, S3er!ö 
ß^ountp u. f. tö. ift biefer Stuflage beigefügt. 

2)iefe (Sammlung enthält über 30,000 9^amen ic, 
nebft gefcl)idbtlid)en unb biograp^ifc^en Stnmerfungen. — T}it== 
felbe ermöglidjt e^, ben j'e^t ju 2i)tillionen jä^lenben ^a6)- 
fommen ber frühen beutf4>en, f^weijerifd^en unb franjöfifd^en 
ßinwanberer, bie in ^ennfplyanicn, 5^ew ^jorf, 9)?ar»lanb, 
SSirginien unb ben rocftlii^en (Staaten wohnen, wenn fte fid) 
biefer SBerf anfc^affen, bie genaue ^dt ber Stnfunft i^rer 



* £)te crjle 2luflage erfc^teit tn mottatltd^cn Sflummern öon 24 «Settcrt, 
33alb nac^bem bte erjle 'iJiummer »erbrettet toax, famett Scj^eßungen für 
bte (Sammlung »on ^Perfonen tn 91etD gjorf, ^iJe» Serfej^, ^Kar^lanb, 
SBirgtnten, 9tprb=Siiroltnn, Df)to, Äentudv unb anbeten iveftttciicn (Staaten, 
nebji Btelen Sountie^ in ^Pennfvlöanten. 

(VII) 



VIII Wotttiii §ur btihtsBtxkn ^uflage. 

SSorfa'^ren unb anbere wid^ttge X()atfac^en, bte ben 9?Jetften 
»on großem 2Bcrt()e ftnb, ;^u eifal)ren. 

2Bai)r tft: „2)a§ üer|)ältm§mä§ic^ SSentge ber ijon ben in 
ben SSeretntgten (Staaten lebenben Ü)t{lItonen triffen, wann 
t^re SSoreltcrn tn btefe^ Sanb famen." Wlit |)iUfe biefer 
^ am m hing fennen J^aufenbe ber ^bfommlinge frütjer 
ßinwanberer mit ©ewi^^ett baö ^(a)x, tn bem t^re 5lt)nen 
angefommen ftnb, befttmmcn * 

il)te 35eröffentltrf)ung btefer ® ant m lung l^at einen ttjet^ 
teren ^mtd bartn, ba§ tn t^r bte 9lamen in i^rer eigentlirfjen 
urfprünglid) ricf)tigen germ entl)alten ftnb, welc()e burcf) 
©ieidjgiiltigfeit ober S^^ail tt>ol)l für immer aufcrt)alb jebeg 
^ereid)^ gefcmmen fein n^ürben. 

1)a SSiele eine natürlidie 9?eugierbe '^aben, bie ^amtn ber 
9)?itpaffagiere ju n>iffett, bie mit i^nen über baö 2)ieer famen 
unb mit i()nen bie ®efal)ren beö SBaffer^ burd)mad)ten, fo 
bemüt)te fid) ber ^eraueigeber, in bem i^on ibm »eifolgten 
^lane ber (Sint^eilung fold)e 9leugierbe ^u befriebigen. 

2)iefe Sammlung fann ebenfalls jur red;tmäfngen (Sr* 
langung einer im alten :2anbe „in Slnmartfdjaft gel^altenen" 
(Erbfc^aft 5?on ®elb führen, ^g wirb jebod) nidbt erwartet, 
ba^ baö ^ier ©ebotene an fid) felbft gefe^lid)e ^eweiö-Urfunbe 
fein foU, fonbern eö bürfte wefentlid) baju beitragen, SBege 
an bie ^anb ju geben, welche 33en)eife für bie 3fied;tmäf igfeit 
fold[)er 5lnfprüc^e liefern. 



1875. 



% Daniel fflupp, 

43fte unb |>uron=®trage, 2Bcjt=5)()t(atctijt)ta. 



* jDcr fcltgc ^Jajlor Dr. $etnnc| $arbai| fd^rtcb tn einem 23ricfe an ben 
Herausgeber com Sabre 1856: „Dtefe Sammlung ermöglicbt bie 
Unter fcb reiber, ibrc 3?ürfabrcn ju erforfcben, tcelcbeö Xenen, bie burd^ 
eine falf^ie örsicbung nic&t ganj glcid)güUig gegen ibre irbifcbe Slbjtam* 
mung geworben (inb, gro§eö i^crgtiitgcn ge»a(}ren mu§. S!Bir geboren ju 
2)enen, bie glauben, ba§ !£iejenigen, »eWje [icb nii^t um ibre irbifdie 
5tbftammung bcfümmern, ficb ebenfowenig um bi>^erc "Dinge flimmern. 
SBir tüiirben un^ febr tä'ufc^en, icenn biefe^ SBerf nic^t einen reifenbm 
Slbfa^ fänbe." 



CONTEITS. 



PAGE 

General Introduction 1 

Prolegomena ......... 39 

Names of Gennan, Swiss and other Immigrants ... 47 

Addenda 420 

Appendix: 

No. I. — Names of first settlers at Germantown and vicinity, 

from 1683 to 1710 429 

No. II. — Names of early settlers of Berks and Montgomery 

Counties, originally Philadelphia County, &c., &c. . 434 

No. III. — Swiss and German settlers in Lancaster County, 

from 1709 to 1730 436 

No. IV. — Names, age and occupation of those, who accom- 
panied Rev. Joshua Kocherthal, &c., &c. . . 439 

No. V. — Names and ages of the hesids of families remain- 
ing in the City of New York, 1710 . . . .443 

No. VI. — Names and ages of male children, apprenticed by 

Governor Hunter, 1710 to 1714 .... 445 

No. VII. — Names of male Palatines, above twenty-one years 

old, in Livingston Manor, N. Y., &c 446 

No. VIII. — Names of the first Palatines in North Carolina, 

as early as 1709 and 1710 449 

No. IX. — Names of males. Salzburgers, settled in Georgia, 

1734 to 1741 449 

No. X 452 

No. XI. — German settlement in North Carolina, 1709, 1710 454 

No. XII. — Germanna ....... 460 

No. XIII. — Names of males at New Rochelle in 1710 . 463 

No. XIV. — Names of early settlers in Tulpehocken, Berks 

and Lebanon Counties ...... 465 

No. XV. — List of members of the German Reformed Church, 

between 1735 and 1755 ...... 468 

No. XVI. — Four hundred and sixty-five names of German, 

Dutch and French inhabitants of Philad'aCo., &c., &c. 470 
Interpretation of Names ........ 479 

(IX) 



nljalt» 



©eite 

Slögcmttne Stnlettuttg ....♦♦♦♦ 19 

35orbemerfungen .......♦♦ 43 

9?amen ber beutfd^cn, fc^ttetjertfc|en unb anberen Sintoonberet ♦ 48 

3ufi^ 424 

Sln^angt 

9Jr. I. — 3lamtn ber erjien Slnftebler »on ©ermantotott unb Um= 

gcgenb »on 1683 btö 1710 .429 

^fJr. II. — 5tamen ber erftcn Slnjtcbler »on ben SounticS SBcrfö 

«nb SJiontgomcr^, urfprüngH(| 5't)tlabelpf)ia Sount? ic. jc. 434 
3lx, III.— ®c|»eijeri[c^e unb beutf4>e 5lnftebler in :^ancafter 

eount?, oon 1709 big 1730 ..... 436 
3lx, IV.— 5Ramen, Slltcr unb Seruföarten ©erer, tDelc^e fa^ox 

Sofua Ä'od^ertijal begleiteten jc. jc 441 

9lr. v.— gramen ber im 3ai)re 1710 in 9tew gjorf »erbleibenben 

3amilient)ä'upter unb beren Stiter .... 443 
«Rr. VI.— gZamen unb Sllter ber »on 1710 ii^ 1714 »on ®ou= 

»erneur punter in bie 2ef)re get{)anen Änaben . . 445 
3lx, VII. — Flamen ber männlichen ^Jf^tjer über einunbjtt5anjig 

3al)re alt jc. jc, in Siüingfton ^anox, 9?. gj. . . 446 
^x, VIII.— 9?amen ber erften ^Jfä'ljer in ^lorb'Sarolina in ben 

Sauren 1709 unb 1710 449 

gtr. IX.— stamen ber männlichen ©aljburger, bie ftc^ »on 1734 

big 1741 in Georgia niebergclaJTen l^abcn ... 449 

mx.X 453 

^x. XL— IDeutfcle «Hnftebelung in ««orb=Sarolina, 1709, 1710 457 

mx. XII.— ®ermanna 461 

«Rr. XIIL— ««amen ber 5)?änner ju ^m dtoä^tüt, 1710 . 46^ 
yix. XIV.— 9?amen ber erften Slnfiebler »on Julpefjocfen, Serfg 

unb Lebanon Scuntieö . . . . . . 465 

5tr. XV.— gifte ber 9)?itglteber ber beutfc^=reformirten Äir($c in 

ben 3al)ren 1735 bio 1755 468 

9?r. XVI. — SSier^unbert unb fünfunbfe($jig 9?amen beutfc&er, 

l)oßänbifcl)cr u. franäö[i[c|er Gin»ol)ncr »on 55l)ilab'a So. jc, 470 

ßrflärung son Xaufnamen 479 

(X) 



i^mctat ^nfrobudton. 

BRIEF NOTICES OF THE PRINCIPAL GERMAN, 

SWISS AND FRENCH SETTLEMENTS IN NORTH 

AMERICA, DURING THE COLONIAL ERA.* 



Love of fame, the desire to enlarge their dominion, eager to 
sway the sceptre over subjugated nations, influenced the ancient 
Germans to leave their hearths, and to achieve conquests, thus 
proving themselves, in days of yore, as in the middle ages, 
Herren der Welt, Lords of the World. 

At different periods, various causes and diverse motives in- 
duced them to abandon their Vaterland. Since 1606, millions 
have left their homes, the dearest spots on earth, whither the 
heart always turns. Religious persecution, political oppression 
drove thousands to Pennsylvania — to the asylum for the har- 
rassed and depressed sons and daughters of the relics of the 
Reformation, whither William Penn himself invited the perse- 
cuted of every creed and religious opinion. 

From 1682 to 1776, Pennsylvania was the central point of 
emigration from Germany, France and Switzerland. Penn's 
liberal views, and the illiberal course of the government of 
New York toward the Germans, induced many to come to this 
Province. — See Appendix No. X. 

In the first period of twenty years, from 1682—1702, com- 
paratively few Germans arrived : not above two hundred fami- 
lies, — they located principally at Germantown. They were 
nearly all Plattdeutsch, Low Germans, from Cleves, a Duchy 
in Westphalia, and an-ived in 1683-1685. Leaving their na- 
tive country at that time, they providentially escaped the deso- 
lation of a French war, which in 1689 laid waste the city of 
Worms, near which town they resided; ravaged the countries 



* In the Fireside History of German and Swiss Immigrants, a fuller 
account of these settlements is given. 

(1) 1 



2 GENERAL INTRODUCTION. 

for miles around, where the flames went up from every market 
place, every hamlet, every parish church, every country seat 
within the devoted provinces. When, in the same year were 
laid waste, Rohrbach, Laimen, Nussloch, Wissloch, Kirchheim, 
Bruckhausen, Eppelnheim, Wieblingen, Edingen, Necker- 
hausen ; and Handschuhsheim, in the Duchy of Baden, in which, 
says Kayser, Johannes Schad and Ludwig Kupp were consumed 
in the flames. — Kayser' s Schauplatz von Heidelberg, p. 505. 

Francis Daniel Pastorius, born at Sommerhausen in Franconia, 
Germany, Sept. 26, 1651, arrived at Philadelphia in the ship 
America, captain, Joseph Wasey, Aug. 20, 1683, with his fa- 
mily. He was accompanied by a few German emigrants : Jacob 
Schumacher, George Wertmueller, Isaac Dübeck, his wife and 
two children, Abraham and Jacob; Thomas Gasper, Conrad 
Bacher, alias Butter, and an English maid, Frances Simpson. 
Others soon followed Pastorius. (For a List of their names, 
and of the first settlers at Germantown, see Appendix No. I.) 
Pastorius located where he laid out Germantown the same year 
in which he arrived in Pennsylvania. The land of the German- 
town settlement was first taken up by him, the 12th of the 10th 
month (October) 1683. He commenced the town with thirteen 
families. In less than five years some fifty houses had been 
erected. 

The period from 1702-1727 marks an era in the early Ger- 
man emigration. Between forty and fifty thousand left their 
native country — " their hearths where soft afiections dwell." The 
unparalleled ravages and desolations by the troops of Louis XIV, 
under Turenne, were the stern prelude to bloody persecutions. 
To escape the dreadful sufiierings awaiting them, German and 
other Protestants emigrated to the English colonies in America. 

In 1705, a number of German Reformed, residing between 
Wolfenbüttel and Halberstadt, fled to Neuwied, a town of 
Rhenish Prussia, where they remained some time, and then 
went to Holland — there embarked, in 1707, for New York. 
Their frail ship was, by reason of adverse winds, carried into 
the Delaware bay. Determined, however, to reach the place 
for which they were destined — to have a home among the Dutch, 
they took the overland route from Philadelphia to New York. 
On entering the fertile, charming valley in Nova Caesaria, 
New Jersey, which is drained by the meandering Musconetcong, 
the Passaic and their tributaries, and having reached a goodly 



GENERAL INTRODUCTION. 3 

land, they resolved to remain in what is now known as the 
German Valley of Morrison county. From this point, the 
Gennans have spread into Somerset, Bergen and Essex counties. 
At Elizabethtown, where the first English settlement was 
made in New Jersey, 1664, there were many Germans prior to 
1730.* There was also a German settlement at a place known 
as Hall mill, which is some thirty miles from Philadelphia. | 

A well supported tradition maintains, that a Polish colony, consisting 
of two hundred Protestants, settled in the early part of the eighteenth 
century, in the valleys of the Passaic and Raritan rivers, in New 
Jersey. They were led by Count Sobieski, a lineal descendant of the 
wide-world-known John Sobieski, king of Poland, who routed the 
Tartars and Turks in 1683. The name Zabriskie, still found in New 
Jersey and New York, seems to be corrupted from Sobieski. — Bard's 
Rel. Am., p. 81. 

In 1708 and 1709, thirty-three thousand, on an invitation 
of Queen Anne, left their homes in the Rhine country for 
London, where some twelve or thirteen thousand arrived in the 
summer of 1708.| These were, for some time, in a destitute 
condition — wholly depending upon the charity of the inhabi- 
tants of the English metropolis. 

In the fall of 1709, one hundred and fifty families, consist- 
ing of six hundred and fifty Palatines, were transported, under 
the tutelar auspices of Christian De Graffenried and Ludwig 
Michell, natives of Switzerland, to North Carolina. As in all 
new countries, the Palatines were exposed to trials, privations 
and hardships incident to border life. One hundred of them 
were massacred by the Tuskarora Indians, Sept. 22, 1711. § 



* „Den 16. 3unt 1734, urn 10 Utjr ^IJJorgettg, fam i^ nac^ gltfabctö» 
tot»n, tt)o »tele Deutf^e hjoljnett. 1)tefer Drt tjt etliche 50?etlett lang, attein 
eg ftnb bte |)äufcr btöweilen fcbr weit «on etnanber entfernt."— 3Son 
ated: Ulfperger'ö «Jlacibrii^ten p. 159. 

f Rev. Michael Schlatter preached here in 1746. — Magazine of the 
Oerman Reformed Church, II., p. 266. 

J "There were books and papers dispersed in the Palatinate, with 
the Queen's picture on the books, and the title page in letters of gold, 
which, on that account, were called, 'The Golden Book,' to encourage 
the Palatines to come to England, in order to be sent to the Caro- 
linas, or to other of Her Majesty's colonies, to be settled there." — 
Journal of the House of Commons, England, XVI., p. 467, 468. 

§ The anniversary of this massacre was solemnized for many years 
as a day of fasting and prayer. — Williamson's N. C, I., p. 193, 194. 



4 GENERAL INTRODUCTION. 

The descendants of these Grermans reside in different parts of 
the State * 

North Carolina received constant accessions of German immigrants. 
In the first third of the last century came Tobler, and the Rev. Zuber- 
biihler, of St. Gaul, Switzerland, with a large number of his country- 
men, located in Granville county. Tobler was soon appointed Justice 
of the Peace. Besides these, many Germans moved from Virginia and 
Pennsylvania, seated themselves in the mountainous regions. Lincoln- 
ton and Stokes, as well as Granville county, were settled by Germans. 
In 1785, the Germans from Pennsylvania alone in North Carolina, 
numbered upwards of fifteen hundred persons. — Loher, p. 69. 

In 1707, a company of French Protestants arrived and seated them- 
selves on the river Trent, a branch of the Neuse. — Hale's Ü. S., p. 98. 

At the time these Palatines left England for North Carolina, 
the Rev. Joshua Kocherthal, with a small band of his perse- 
cuted Lutheran brethren, embarked at London, 1708, for New 
York, where they arrived in December, and shortly thereafter 
he, with his little flock, settled on some lands up the Hudson 
river, which they had received from the crown of England. Two 
thousand one hundred acres, granted by a patent, Dec. 18, 
1709.— Ö' Calahan's Doc. His. iV. Z, p. 591. The Queen also 
bestowed upon Kocherthal five hundred acres as a glebe for the 
Lutheran church. Newburg is the place of this settlement. f — 
Rev. Kocherthal, 1719. 

Tn the meantime, whUe those were transported to North Caro- 
lina, and to New York, three thousand six hundred Grermans 
were transferred to Ireland ; seated upon unimproved lands in 
the county of Limerick, near Arbela and Adair ; others, in the 
town of Rathkeale, where their descendents stul reside, and are 
known to this day, as German Palatines, preserving their time 
German character for industry, thrift and honorable dealing. 
Persons who have lately visited them say, " They are the most 
wealthy and prosperous farmers in the county of Limerick. "| 
They still speak the Grerman language.§ 



* See App. No. VIII. and No. IX. 

•f- Brodhead^s Documentary History of New York, V., p. 67. The 
names of those who accompanied Kocherthal have been preserved, and 
are kept in the archives of the State of New York. — See App. 
No. IV. for a list of these names. 

X Journal H. C. Eng., XVI., p. 465; Methodist Quarterly Review, Oct. 
No. 1855, p. 489. 

§ Fliegende Blätter, IL, p. 672. 



GENERAL INTRODUCTION. 5 

Of the large number that came to England, in 1708 and 
1709, seven thousand, after having suffered great privations, 
returned, half naked and in despondency, to their native coun- 
try. Ten thousand died for want of sustenance, medical attend- 
ance, and from other causes. Some perished on ships. The 
survivers were transported to English colonies in America. 
Several thousand had embarked for the Scüly Islands, a group 
south-west of England ; but never reached their intended des- 
tination. 

Ten sails of vessels were freighted with upwards of four 
thousand Germans for New York. They departed the 25th 
December, 1709 ; and after a six months' tedious voyage 
reached New York in June, 1710.* On the inward passage, 
and immediately on landing, seventeen hundred died. The 
survivors were encamped in tents, they had brought with them 
from England, on Nutting, now Governor's Island. Here they 
remained till late in autumn, when about fourteen hundred were 
removed, one hundred miles up the Hudson river, to Livingston 
Manor. The widowed women, sickly men and orphan-chüdren 
remained in New York.f The orphans were apprenticed by 
Governor Hunter, to citizens of New York and of New Jersey.J 

Those settled on Hudson river were under indenture to 
serve Queen Anne as grateftd subjects, to manufacture tar and 
raise hemp, in order to repay the expenses of their transporta- 
tion, and cost of subsistance, to the amount of ten thousand 
pounds sterling, which had been advanced by parliamentary 
grant. A supply of naval stores from this arrangement, had 
been confidently anticipated. The experiment proved a com- 
plete failure.§ There was mismanagement. 

The Germans, being unjustly oppressed, became dissatisfied 
both with their treatment, and with their situation. Governor 
Hunter resorted to violent measures to secure obedience to his 
demands. In this, too, he failed. One hundred and fifty fami- 



* John F. Watson in his Annals, Vol. II., p. 258, says — this was a 
six months' voyage. They embarked Dec. 25, 1709, arrived at New 
York, June 14, 1710.— Äee Brodhead's Doc. Eis. N. Y., V., p. 167. 

f For a list of the names of families that remained in New York, 
tee App. No. V. 

X For a list of the names of apprenticed children, see App. No. "P^I. 

§ For a list of names in Livingston Manor, see App. No.VI*;. 

1* 



6 GENERAL INTRODUCTION. 

lies, to escape the certainty of famishing, left, late in the autumn 
of 1712, for Schoharie Valley, some sixty miles north-west 
of Livingston Manor. They had no open road, no horses to 
carry or haul their luggage — this they loaded on rudely con- 
structed sleds, and did tug these themselves, through a three- 
feet-deep snow, which greatly obstructed their progress — their 
way was through an unbroken forest, where and when the wind 
was howling its hibernal dirge through leaf-stripped trees, amid 
falling snow. It took them three full weeks. Having reached 
Schoharie, they made improvements upon the lands, Queen Anne 
had granted them. Here they remained about ten years, when, 
owing to some defect in their titles, they were deprived of both 
lands and improvements. In the Spring of 1723, thirty-three 
families removed and settled in Pennsylvania, in Tulpehocken, 
some fifteen miles west of Reading. A few years afterwards, 
others followed them.* 

The other dissatisfied Germans at Schoharie, who did not 
choose to follow their friends to Pennsylvania, sought for and 
found a future home on the frontiers in Mohawk Valley. 

New Yoi'k was, at an early day, an asylum for the French Protest- 
ants, or Huguenots. As early as 1656, they were already numerous 
in that State ; ranking in number and wealth next to the Dutch. New 
Rochelle, situated near the shore of Long Island sound, was settled 
solely by Huguenots from Rochelle in France. "The emigrants pur- 
chased of John Pell 6,000 acres of land. One venerable Huguenot, it 
is related, would go daily to the shore, when, directing his eyes to- 
wards (the direction) where he supposed France was situated, would 
sing one of Marot's hymns, and send to heaven his early morning de- 
votions. Others joined him in these praises of their God, and remem- 
brances of their beloved native clime, from which they had been ban- 
ished by the merciless fires of persecution." — Weiss' His. of French 
Prot. Ref., IL, p. 304. 

In Ulster and Dutchess counties, many of their descendants still re- 
side. In Ulster are the descendants of Dubois, Dian or Deyo ; Has- 
broucq, orHasbrouck; Le Febre, Bevier, Crispell, Freir, &c. — For 
names of males at New Rochelle in 1710, see App. No. XIII. 

Queen Anne, who well understood the policy of England, to 
retain her own subjects at home, encouraged the emigration of 
Germans, sent some of those whom she had invited in 1708 
and 1709, to Virginia; settled them above the falls of the 
Rappahannock, in Spottsylvania county, where they commenced 



* For a list of names of first settlers in Tulpehocken, see App. No. XIV. 



GENERAL INTRODUCTION. 7 

a town, called Germanna. The locality was unpropitious. They 
moved some miles further up the river, " where they soon drove 
well."* From this settlement they spread into several counties 
in Virginia, and into North Carolina. 

Shanandoah and Rockingham county in Virginia were settled by 
Germans from Pennsylvania, prior to 1746. Many of their descendants 
still speak the German language. 

When George Washington and others were surveying lands in that 
part of Virginia, in April, 1748, "they were attended with a great 
company of people, men, women and children, who followed through 
the woods — they would never speak English ; but when spoken to, they 
all spoke Dutch (German)." — Spark's Washington, II., p. 418. 

In 1690, King William sent a large body of French Protestants to 
Virginia. In 1699, another body of six hundred Huguenots came to 
Virginia, under Philip Da Richebourg, and were assigned lands on the 
south side of James River about tv? enty miles from the present site 
of Richmond. — Howison's Virginia, II., p. 160, 161. 

Some of the names of the Huguenots have i»een handed down, such 
as Chastain, David, Monford, Dykar, Neim, Dupuy, Bilbo, Dutoi, Salle, 
Martain, Allaigre, Vilain, Sohlet, Chambon, Levilain, Trabu, Louca- 
dou. Gasper, Flournoy, Amis, Banton, Sasain, ,Solaigre, Givodan, 
Mallet, Dubruil, Guerrant, Sabattie, Dupre, Bernard, Amonet, Porter, 
Rapine, Lacy, Bondurant, Goin, Pero, Pean, Deen, Edmond, Benin, 
Stanford, Forqueran, Roberd, Brian, Faure, Don, Bingli, Reno, Lesueur, 
Pinnet, Trent, Sumter, Morriset, Jordin, Gavin. — Weiss' H. Fr. Pro. 
Ref. IL, p. 322. 

Because of relentless persecution and oppression in Switzer- 
land, a large body of defenceless Mennonites fled from the Can- 
tons of Zurich (the birth-place of Gessner, Zimmerman, Lava- 
ter and Pestalozzi) ; of Bern and SchaflFhausen, about the year 
1672, and took up their abode in Alsace, above Strassburg, on 
the Rhine, where they remained till they emigrated, 1708, to 
London, thence to Pennsylvania. They lived some time at Ger- 
mantown, and in the vicinity of Philadelphia. In 1712, they 
purchased a large tract of land from Penn's agents, in Pequa«, 
then Chester, now Lancaster county. Here this small colony 
erected some huts or log cabins, to serve temporarily as shelters. 
Here the time and again persecuted and oppressed Swiss, sepa- 
rated from friends and much that makes life agreeable, hoped 
to unmolestedly begin anew. Here, surrounded on all sides 
by several clans of Indians, they located in the gloomy, silent 
shades of a virgin forest, whose undisturbed solitude was yet 



* See App. No. XII. 



8 GENERAL INTRODUCTION. 

uncheered by the murmurs of the honey bee, or the twit^ 
terings of the swallow, those never-faiUng attendants upon the 
woodman's axe. For the hum and warbUngs of those, they had 
not only the shout and song of the tawny sons of the forest, 
but also the nocturnal bowlings of the ever watchful dog, bay- 
ing at the sheeny queen of night, as she moves stately on, 
reflecting her borrowed light. By way of variety, their ears 
v/ere nightly greeted by the shrill, startling whoop of the owl, 
from some stridulous branches overhanging their cabins, and 
bending to the breeze of evening, or by the sinister croakings 
of some doleful night songsters in the contiguous thickets. 

This Swiss settlement formed the nucleus, or centre of a 
rapidly increasing Swiss, French and German population, in the 
Eden of Pennsylvania.* 

Hereafter, the influent accession from the European continent 
steadily increased, so much so, as to excite attention, and create 
no small degree of alarm among the '■^fearful of that day."'f' 

It is stated, by a popular Annalist, upon the authority of another, 
that the first settlement in Lancaster county was made by some French 
families in 1704. — Watson's Annals, II., p. 112. 

The families named were still at Bittingheim, in the latter part of 
May, 1708 — and only arrived in New York late in December, 1708, as 
■ffill appear from the sequel. 

Mary Führe (Feree) of Bittingheim, High bailiwick of Germersheim, 
applied March 10, 1708, for a pass to come to the "Island of Penn- 
sylvania" — these are the words in the pass — „auf bte ^nful^'^ennfi^löantett 
per |)oUanb unb Snglanb fic^ ju begeben unb ntlba ju toot)nen »Drtjaben." 

She and her family also applied for a certificate of church member- 
ship, May 10, 1708, which sets forth that they were of La profession 
de la pure Religion Reformee, frequente nos sainies assembles, et participe 
ä la cene du Seigneur avec les autres fidUes. The certificate is signed by 
J. Roman, Pasteur et Inspecteur, attested by the clerk. 

Madam Feree, or Wemar, or Warembier, as she was called by all 
these names, her son Daniel Fiere, Isaac Feber, or La Fevre, and 
others, accompanied the Rev. Kocherthal to New York in 1708. Here, 
says current tradition, she remained till 1712. The records at Harris- 
burg show, that, Sept. 12, 1712, Maria Warenbiir, Wemar, or Fiere, 
at the instance of Martin Kendig had 2,000 acres of land confirmed 



* For names of first settlers in Pequa Valley, see App. No. III. 

f Since the days of James Logan, an influential man of the Pro- 
vincial Council, who, in 1724, said some unkind things of the Germans. 
In another work the Editor notices this charge more fully. Politicians 
have more than once, in their threnodies, complained to the Germans: 
"We piped, and ye did not dance." 



GENERAL INTRODUCTION. 9 

to her at Pequae. — His. Lan. Co. p. 102; O'Calahan's Doc. His. N. Y., 
III., p. 550. — For the names of those who accompanied Kocherthal, see 
App. No. IV. 

Scarcely had the Mennonites commenced making their lands 
arable, when they sent a commissioner, Martin Kendig, to Ger- 
many and to Switzerland, to induce others to come to Penn- 
sylvania. He was successful. There were large accessions to 
this new colony in 1711 and 1717 and a few years later. So 
great was the influx at this time of Swiss and German immi- 
grants, as to call forth, as already stated, public attention, es- 
pecially of those in office. 

Governor Keith, says the Record, " observed to the Board — 
the Governor's council — that great numbers of foreigners from 
Germany, strangers to our language and constitution, having 
lately been imported into this Province, daily dispersed them- 
selves immediately after landing, without producing certificates 
from whence they came or what they are, and, as they seemed 
to have first landed in Britain, and afterwards to have left with- 
out any license from government, or as far as they know, so, in 
the same manner, they behaved here, without making the least 
application to him or any of the magistrates. That, as this prac- 
tice might he of very dangerous consequence, since, by the 
same method, any number of foreigners, from any nation what- 
ever, enemies as well as friends, might throw themselves upon 
us." This was in 1717. 

This observation by Gov. Keith led to the adoption of a measure, 
which has prevented the loss of the names of upwards of thirty thousand 
of the first German immigrants to Pennsylvania.* His jealously of 



* The Editor wrote to the Secretary of the State of New York, and 
inquired of him whether similar Lists as those preserved at Harris- 
burg, are to be found in the Secretary's office at Albany. The follow- 
ing is the Secretary's reply : 

State of Nxw Yokk, Secretary's Office, \ 
Albany, July 18, 1856. J 

I. D. Rdpp, Esq. 

Dear Sir: — We have in our Office no Lists 
of the kind you refer to. We have indices of foreigners, who file what 
are called alien depositions, to enable them to hold real estate, and 
who have become citizens; but these would comprise a very small 
proportion of the entire number of immigrants, who are brought into 
the State. Yours, Truly, 

M. L. SCHERMERHORN. 



10 GENERAL INTRODUCTION. 

the Germans at this time, though he afterwards espoused their cause 
heartily, has been overruled to preserve the memory of the oppressed 
and persecuted.— See Col. Rec, III., pp. 29, 228. 

In 1719, Jonathan Dickinson remarked: "We are daily ex- 
pecting ships from London, which bring over Palatines, in num- 
ber about six or seven thousand. We had a parcel that came 
over about five years ago, who purchased land about sixty miles 
west of Philadelphia, and proved quiet and industrious."* 

After 1716, Germans, a few French and Dutch, began to 
penetrate the forest or wilderness — some twenty, thhty, forty, 
others from sixty to seventy miles, west and north from the 
metropolis. Large German settlements had sprung up at differ- 
ent points within the present limits of Montgomery and Berks 
counties. At Goshenhoppen there was a German Reformed 
church, organized as early as 1717.f Some Mennonites coming 
from the Netherlands, settled along the Pakihmom,ink,\ and 
Schkipeck (a) a few years later. 

Germans and French located on the fertile lands of Waldink (li) 
encompassed by hills. Here an opening was made for others — 
persecuted Huguenots. Amongst the prominent families in 
Oley were the Turcks or De Turcks, Bei-tolets, Berdos, De la 
Plaines, Delangs, Loras, Levans, Yoder, Keim, Herbein, Schaub, 
Engel, Weidner, Schneider, Alstadt. 

Abraham De Turck, of Oley, in a note to the Editor, March 1844, 
says: "My ancestors, Isaac Turck and De Turck by name, lived in 
France. They were of the so called Huguenots, on account of which 
they were obliged to flee to the city of Frankenthal in the Palatinate. 
Thence they emigrated to America, and, at the time of Queen Anne, 
they settled in New York in the neighborhood of Esopus. They moved 
to Oley in 1712. The patent of my land is dated 1712." — Hü. Berks 
Co., p. 88. 

Isaac Txirck, aged 23, husbandman, unmarried, was one of the 
number who accompanied Kocherthal. See App. No. IV. 

In this connection, though apparently out of place, it may be stated 
that nineteen of the number who accompanied Rev. Kocherthal, turned 
pietitU the first year; whereupon Kocherthal and Schiineman petitioned 
the Council, May 26, 1709, that these nineteen might be deprived of 



* These were some of those who had come to Pennsylvania upon 
the invitation of Martin Kendig. — His. Lan. Co., pp. 79-117. 

■j- German Reformed Messenger, Aug. 3, 1842. 

J Perkioming meaning at the Cranberry place, (a) Skippack, i. e. 
stinking pool of water. (6) Oley, by interpretation, a cavern, cell, also 
a tract of land, encompassed by hills. 



GENERAL INTRODUCTION, 11 

their atutmanee, "because they had withdrawn from the communion of 
the minister, and the rest of the Germans." June 18th a committee 
was appointed to inquire into the dispute between the Germans. June 
2l8t this committee reported, "That none of the allegations brough; 
against the pietüls had been proved before them, and that they should 
be cared for in like manner with the others." — O^Calahan's Doc. His. 
N. Y., III., p. 544. 

Among the early settlers of Alsace, or Elsace township, Berks 
county, were many French Reformed or Huguenots ; also Swedes 
who were Lutherans. 

"Tradition has it, that the Huguenots, German Reformed 
and Lutherans held religious meetings within a mile or two of 
Reading, and in conformity with the good custom of their fathers 
in Europe, conducted their worship in the evening as well as 
during the day." — Bücher. 

The Geimans were principally farmers. They depended more 
upon themselves than upon others. They vrielded the mattock, 
the axe and the maul, and by the power of brawny arms rooted 
up the grubs, removed saplings, felled the majestic oaks, laid 
low the towering hickory; prostrated, where they grew, the 
walnut, poplar, chestnut — cleaved such as suited the purpose, 
into rails for fences — persevered untiringly until the forest was 
changed into arable field. They were those of whom Governor 
Thomas said, 1738: "This Province has been for some years 
the asylum of the distressed Protestants of the Palatinate, and 
other parts of Germany ; and, I believe, it may truthfiilly be 
said, that the present flourishing condition of it is in a great 
measure owing to the industry of those people; it is not alto- 
gether the fertility of the soil, but the number and industry 
of the people, that makes a country flourish." — Col. Rec. iv. 315. 

England understood well the true policy to increase the num- 
ber of the people in her American colonies, — she retained at 
home her own subjects, encouraged the emigration of Germans; 
by this England was the gainer, without any diminution of her 
inhabitants. 

Unreasonable as it may seem, it was this class of Germans, 
that were so much feared, " whose numbers from Germany at 
this rate, would soon produce a German colony here, and per- 
haps such a one as Britain once received from Saxony in the 
fifth century." * 



♦ Watson's Annah, II., p. 25Ö. 



12 GENERAL INTRODUCTION. 

In 1719, some twenty families of Schwartzenau T'dvfer arrived at 
Philadelphia. Some settled at Germantown, others located on the 
Skippack, in Oley, at Conestogo and Miilbach, Lancaster county. 

About 1728 and 1729, the Germans crossed the Susquehanna, 
located within the present Hmits of York and Adams county, 
and made improvements under discouraging circumstances. 
Feudsj so common on the borders of States, existed between 
the people of Pennsylvania and Maryland — strife for ascendency 
among the rulers! Some were actually '■'■kansasd!" 

In 1736, Thomas Cressap of Maryland, made himself captain — 
headed some fifty "congenial spirits" for no other purpose, than to 
drive the Germans from their farms. To inspire his accomplices, he 
very generously proposed to divide the land owned and improved by 
the Germans, among his associates. To reward them for anticipated 
services, he promised each two hundred acres. The Germans were 
seized by force of arms — their houses demolished — and they themselves 
carried off and imprisoned, for no other reason than that they were 
subjects to the proprietory of Pennsylvania. — Col. Rec. iv. 09-122. 

As early as 1710-1712, German emigrants came to Maryland, settled 
in the region between Monocacy and the mountain, on the spot where 
Fredericktown was subsequently laid out by Patrick Dulany, 1745. 
This first settlement soon extended to the Glades, Middletown and 
Hagerstown. Between 1748 and 1754, twenty-eight hundred Germans 
were brought to Maryland, many of whom settled in Baltimore. — Rev. 
Zacharias' Centenary Sermon, 1847. Butler's History of Maryland, 
pp. 51, 52, 61, 02. 

The tide of emigration from the continent of Europe was 
strong. Various influences were brought to bear upon the in- 
crease of the influx. In Pennsylvania, the Neuländer, tools in 
the hands of shipowners, merchants and importers, contributed 
much to induce Germans to leave their homes. There was, 
besides these, another class, who were active in prevailing upon 
the inhabitants of Germany to abandon their country for the 
new world. These two classes, Neulanders and speculators, re- 
sorted to diverse arts in order to effect their purposes. They 
gave those, whom they desired to abandon their homes, assur- 
ances, endorsed by solemn promises, that the Poeis Arcadia 
had at last been found in America. To possess this, in Louisiana, 
on the banks of the Mississippi, several thousaiids left Germany 
in 1716 and 1717, under the leadership of the notorious John 
Law, who, instead of bringing them immediately on their arrival 
in America, to the promised Eden, on the banks of the Father 
of the Western Water, landed them on the pontines of Biloxi 
near the Mobile. Here they were exposed, without protection 



GENERAL INTRODUCTION. 13 

against their many foes, for five years. Not one of them entered 
the promised paradise. Two thousand were consigned to the 
grave. The pallid survivors — about three hundred, finally seated 
on the banks of the Mississippi, 1722, some thirty or forty miles 
above New Orleans. Law had, through his agents, engaged 
twelve thousand Germans and Swiss. The sad fate of those of 
Biloxi, was spread abroad, which deterred others from coming 
to participate in the promised blessings of the Elesyan fields, 
or to possess the Eldorado ! 

The three hundred on the Mississippi were very poor for some 
years. They had been reduced to the most extreme poverty. 
"From these poor, but honorable Grermans, have sprung," says 
Gat/arre, "some of the most respectable citizens of Louisiana, 
and some of the wealthiest sugar planters in the State." Their 
descendants forgot the German language, and have adopted the 
French ; but the names of many clearly indicate the blood cours- 
ing in their veins ; nevertheless more than one name has been 
so frenchified as to appear of Gallic parentage. The coast, so 
poor and beggarly at first, and once known as the German coast, 
has since become the producer and the receptacle of such wealth, 
as to be now known by the appropriate name of Cote d'or, i. e. 
Coast of Gold* 

Father Du Poisson, Missionary to the Arkansas, in 1727, in passing 
along here, visited Les Allemands, the Germans, May 10th. — "We ad- 
vanced six leagues, which is about as much as they can ever accomplish 
in ascending the river, and we slept, or rather encamped aux Allemands 
(at the Germans). These are the quarters assigned to the lingering 
remnant of that company of Germans most of whom had died of 
misery, some at the east,-)- and some on arriving in Louisiana. Great 
poverty is visible in their dwellings." — Early Jesuit Miss., II., pp. 236, 
262, 263, 267. 

In the spring of 1734, some Lutherans, known in history as 
Saltzburgers, from Saltzburg, a city of Upper Austria, arrived 
in Georgia. In Europe, they too had been the victims of bloody 
persecution. " They had been driven from their country and 
their homes, on account of their unswerving attachment to the 
principles of the Gospel." | 

* Gayarre's Louisiana, pp. 860, 361. Barbe Morbois^ His. La. 

f Near Dauphin Islands, twenty-five miles south of Mobile. — Brownes 
Illinois, p. 168. 

X Rev. A. P. StrobeVs His. of the Saltzburgers, p. 21 — a book that 
every German should have in his library. 

2 



14 GENERAL INTRODUCTION. 

This devotedly pious band of Christians was accompanied by 
their attached pastors, the Rev'ds. John Martin Boltzius and 
Israel Christian Gronau, and an excellent schoolmaster. Chris- 
tian Ortman. The Saltzburgers locat-ed in Effingham county, 
and styled their first settlement Ebenezer, to express their un- 
feigned gratitude to the Lord, who had been to them, "A strong 
rock; a house of defence, to save them."* 

The Schoolmaster was deemed no less important than the pastor. 
"The cause of education was not overlooked by the Germans. A fund 
was subsequently created for the schoolmaster's support; for our pious 
forefathers judged, and very correctly too, that no country can prosper 
in which provision is not made for the mental culture and improvement 
of the rising generation." — Strobel. 

This German colony received accessions from time to time, 
until they reached, prior to 1745, several hundred families. 
There were also many Germans residing in Savannah ; besides 
some forty or fifty Moravians in the same State, under the 
pastoral care of the Rev. David Nitschman. 

" The Moravians made no permanent settlement in Georgia. 
When the Spanish war broke out, they removed, almost to a 
man, to the State of Pennsylvania, because it was contrary to 
their religious faith to take up arms in any cause." f 

In 1738, some arrived in Pennsylvania and located at Beth- 
lehem. | "In 1740, those who had remained, left Georgia and 
joined their brethren in Pennsylvania. Thus the mission among 
the Indians in Georgia, aft«r a promising beginning, was at once 
suspended." § 

Before the Moravians came to Pennsylvania, a respectable 
number of Schwenckfelders had arrived, settling in Bucks and 
Philadelphia county, now Montgomery, Berks and Lehigh. The 
Schwenckfelders had intended, before leaving their homes in 
Europe, to embark for Georgia. They, however, changed their 
minds and established themselves in the asylum for the op- 
pressed, Pennsylvania. 

In 1732, Monsieur Jean Pierre Pury, of Neuchatel, Switzer- 
land, visited Carolina. Being encouraged by the Government 

* For names of males of first settlers, see App. No. IX. 
f StrobeVs Saltzburgers, p. 80. 

J For names of those who left Georgia and came to Pennsylvania, 
tee Addenda B. — Orantz' Brüder-Oeschichte p. 302. 
\ Loakiel, Part II., p. 6. 



GENERAL INTRODUCTION. 16 

both of England and Carolina, he undertook to settle a colony 
of Swiss there. In 1732, one hundred and seventy persons were 
transported. These were soon followed by others. In a short 
time the colony consisted of three hundred persons. They set- 
tled on the north bank of the Savannah, built a town called 
Pury&hxirgli^ about thirty-six miles above the mouth of the 
river. The colony still continued to increase. In 1734, Pury 
brought two hundred and seventy persons more from Switzer- 
land. All these were brought from Switzerland at the expense 
of Pury and several of his friends, who advanced him money 
for that purpose, he having spent the greatest part of his for- 
tune in the prosecution of that design, before he could bring it 
to execution. There were now nearly six hundred souls in this 
settlement. 

" This was done in pursuance of a scheme, proposed by Mr. 
Pury to the Assembly of South Carolina; his scheme was to 
people the southern frontier of Carolina with brave and laborious 
people, such as the Swiss are known to be. The Assembly 
highly approved of this scheme ; to assist him in the execution 
of it, they passed an act, August 20, 1731, which secured to 
him a reward of £400, upon his bringing over to Carolina a 
hundred effective men. In this act the Assembly promised also 
to find provisions, tools, &c., for three hundred persons for one 
year. Purysburgh in 1747, contained more than one hundred 
houses tolerably well built. 

In CoUeton county, on the north bank of North Ediston river, 
12 miles from its mouth, stands Wilton, or New London, con- 
sisting of 80 houses built by Swiss under the direction of Zu- 
berbühler, with leave from the Assembly. This town proved 
detrimental to Purysburgh, being in the heart of the country 
and near the capital ; it drew people thither, who did not care 
to go to Purysburgh," — Bowen's Geog. ii. 645. London edi- 
tion, 1750. 

From 1740-1755, a great many Palatines were sent to South 
Carolina. They settled Orangeburg, Congaree and Wateree.* 
In 1765, upwards of six hundred from the Palatinate and Swabia 
were sent over from London, and had a township of land set 
apart for them."!' 

* Ramsay's S. C. i. 3, 4. 

f Holme's American Annals, ii. 268. — Proceedings of the House of 
Commons, England, Aug, 1764. 



16 GENERAL INTRODUCTION. 

Many of the Dutch colonists, dissatisfied with their situation in 
New York, after the submission of the colony to the crown of Eng- 
land, repaired to South Carolina, and contributed by their industry 
to the cultivation of the province. The success that attended them 
induced more of their countrymen to follow their example. — Ramsay. 

In 1679, Charles II. sent at his own expense, in two ships, a com- 
pany of Huguenots to South Carolina, in order that they might culti- 
vate the vine, the olive, &c. In 1752, no fewer than sixteen hundred 
Protestants, chiefly French, settled in South Carolina. — Holmes ; Baird. 

In 1739, a number of Lutherans and German Reformed pur- 
chased a tract of land from General Waldo, and laid out the 
town Waldoborough, in Lincoln county, Maine. Bremen, a 
village in the same county, and Frankfort, in Waldo county, 
were undoubtedly laid out, or settled by Germans, as the names 
would indicate. During the Spanish and French war, in 1746, 
Waldoborough was laid in ashes by some Canadian Indians. 
Some of the inhabitants were massacred, others abducted. Not 
a few died from the ill-treatment received at the hands of the 
savages, — some made their escape, and were dispersed in Ca- 
nada. Waldoborough remained in ruins until 1750. In 1751, 
invited by those in authority, thirty German famuies, and m 
1752, fifteen hundred individuals from Europe, persons of means, 
settled in Maine. " The title of land from General Waldo prov- 
ing unsound, many left, the colony, and its numbers have never 
greatly increased." — Hazelius, pp. 34, 48, &c. Loher, 1772. 
"Some of them left Maine to join their countrymen at London- 
derry, South Carolina, but most of these repented of having 
taken that step, and returned to Maine, where their descendants 
are to be found to this day." — Baird. 

King George II. of Great Britain, held out strong induce- 
ments, through very liberal promises, to all who would emigrate 
into, and settle Nova Scotia, when a considerable body of Ger- 
mans, principally Hanoverians, left their country, embarked for 
America, landed at Chebucto bay, near Halifax, the capital of 
Nova Scotia, where fourteen hundred and fifty-three re-em- 
barked, and landed at Marligiiish, on the 7th of June, 1758. 
" Here they laid out the flourishing town of Lunenburg. Here 
they were doomed to experience the same resistance from the 
natives which the colonists at Halifax had met with, in settling 
the Peninsula; and the early history of the place contains little 
else than a constant succession of struggles with the savages, 
in which, notwithstanding the powerful protection they received 



GENERAL INTRODUCTION. 17 

from the Government, they lost many Hves. Their attempts at 
agriculture were therefore restricted within a very narrow com- 
pass, and the settlement of the adjoining country was retarded 
until the French power and influence in Nova Scotia were sub- 
dued." — Haliburton's His. Nova Scotia, I., p. 162 ; Murray's 
Brit.Amer ,11., i>. 55; iyöAer, pp. 68, 74; M'CuUoch's Urn., 
IL, p. 498. 

From 1735, settlements in Pennsylvania multiplied rapidly; 
extended over vast regions, west of the Saosquahanaunk,* 
whither the Scotch-Irish had led the way. The German settle- 
ments kept pace with the native. From the Susquehanna west- 
wards, in Cumberland Valley, they had located prior to 1765 
along the limpid Callapasscink (a), on either side of the 
sinuous SuNiPDUCKHANNET (b), and farther west, along the 
GUNNEUKISSCHIK (c) ; three principal streams, draining this 
fertile, highly improved district of country. 

The Kau-ta-tin-Chunk (d), extending from the Delaware 
hundreds of miles westwards, was not an insurmountable barrier, 
— that they crossed, and laid out farms, "where shortly after- 
wards they, their wives and children, were exposed to the torch, 
hatchet and scalping knife of the savages, and their midnight 
assault and slaughter." Hundreds fell victims to the relentlessly 
cruel savage, along the Blue Mountains, south and north of them 
and along the Susquehanna, as far north as Penn's Creek, from 
1754-1763, and even at a later period. Among the massacred 
were many Germans — more than three hundred in all. 

Germans massacred, north of the Blue Mountain, within Monroe 
county, among others, were: Guldin, Höth, or Huth, Bömper, Vana- 
ken, Vanflör, Schnell, Hartman, Hage, Brundich, Hellman, Gonderman, 
Schleich, Müller, Vandelap, Decker, Van Gondie, Brincker. South 
and north of the same mountain, within the present limits of North- 
ampton, Carbon and Lehigh — more than one hundred were killed. 
Among them were : Sohn, Klein, Bittenbender, Roth, Schaffer, Anders, 
Nitschman, Senseman, Gattermyer, Fabricius, Schweigert, Leslie, 
Presser, Depu. Along the same mountain, within the limits of Berks, 
Lebanon and Dauphin county — Reicheisdörfer, Gerhart, Neidung, 
Hug, or Kluck, Linderman, Schott, Kraushar, Zeissloflf, Wünch, 
Dieppel, Henly, Spitler, Nöcker, Maurer, Böshar, Fell, Kühlmer, 
Lang, Trump, Yäger, Sechler, Schetterly, Sauter, Geiger, Ditzler, 

* Susquehanna, i. e. Long-crooked-river. (a) Yellow breeches, the sig- 
nification of the Indian name is, Where-it-turns-back-again. (b) Cano- 
doquinet, i. e. For-a-long-way-nothing-but-bents. (c) Canoeocheague, 
i. e. Indeed-a-long-journey. (d) The Kittatiny or Blue Mountain. 

2* 



18 GENERAL INTRODUCTION 

Frantz, Schnebele, Mosser, Fincher, Hubler, Martloff, Wolf, Händsche, 
Weisser, Miess, Lebenguth, Motz, Noah, Winkelblecb, Zeuchmacher, &c 

Prior to 1770, tlie wilderness of Pennsylvania was penetrated 
beyond the Allegheny Mountains. Settlements were effected 
within the present bounds of Westmoreland and other western 
counties of this State. A number of German families had lo- 
cated on the Monongahela as far up as Redstone, Brownsville, 
Fayette county. Here settled the Weismans, Pressers, Verval- 
sons, Belongs, Jungs, Martins, Shutts, Peters, Schwartz, But- 
ters, Cackeys, Abrahams, and others,* whom that devoted min- 
ister of the cross, the Rev. John Conrad Bücher, visited in 
November, 1768. — Col. Eec, IX., p. 508 ; German Reformed 
Messenger, May 24, 1854 ; Rupp's History of Berks Co., p. 459. 
For names of many other Germans in Westmoreland county^ 
see the History of Western Pennsylvania, by the Editor. 



* The first Germans in Western Pennsylvania, located in Greene 
county. These were two brothers, the Eckerleins of Ephrata, who 
left there and settled in the depths of the wilderness, in 1745. — Chroni- 
con^jffAra^ense, pp. 158, 195, 197. Coi. Äec, V., p. 531. Prior to 1764, 
Wendel Braun, and his two sons, and Frederick Waltzer, located four 
miles west of üniontown. — Smith's Old Redatone, p. 25. 



lUIgemetne fittfettung. 

Äurje 53emerfungen über tit bebeutenfcften beutfc^cn, \d)WtU 

jenfc^en unt franjö|tfd[)m 5tnftebelungen in S^iortamertfa 

n)ä^rmt> bcr Solonialjett* 



Siebe nac^ 9lu^m, bag (Streben nacb 35ergrö§cning ibrer ^err* 
f(^aft unb bie 33cgterbc, i^r ©ccpter über unterjochten ?>ölfern ju 
fcbroingen, beeinflußten bie alten I)cutfdben ibren ^erb ju oerlajjen 
unb Eroberungen ju macben. Doburcb erroiefen fie ft(^ oor 5tlterö 
jDie im SJZittelalter aU bie „J^crren ber SBelt." 

3JJannigfaItig waren bie Urfadben unt 33ettteggrünbe, »etcbe 
fie ju »erfdbiebencn Seiten bewogen, ibr SSatertanb ju »eriajfen. 
<5eit 1606 bflben SJZiUionen ibrer ^eimotb, bent Jbeuerjien auf 
Srben, nacb bent fi^ bie ©eele immer wieber jurütffebnt, ben 
^üdfen jugefebrt. 9teligiöfe Verfolgungen unb ftaatli(^e Untere 
jocbung trieben laufenbe nacb ^^ennf^Ioanien, ber 3«fl«cbtöftätte 
für bie gequälten unb untertrücften ®öbne unb Jöc^ter ber 
Steformation, unb wobin aucb 2öiüiam ^enn felbft bie 55erfoIgten 
jeben Sefenntniffeö unb religiiJfer 2lnfcbauung einlub. 

S3on 1682-1776 war ^Jcnnfploanien ber Sentralpunf t ber 
(Jinwanberung üon 3)eutfcblanb, ^ranfreicb unb ber Si^wei}. 
5)enn'3 liberale Slnflc^ten unb ber böt^f^ unliberale SBeg, t»en tie 
Slegierung öon 9lew ?)orf gegen bie Deutfciyen eingefcblagen batte, 
bradbten »iele in biefe ^rooinj. (®iebe 5lnbang 9ir. X.) 

3n bem crflen 3ettabf^nitt öon 1682-1702 famcn öerbältniß- 
mä§ig nur wenige X)eutfcbe an: wobl nicbt mebr aU jwei bun* 
bert gamilien, bie ficb meiflcnö in ©ermantown nieberliefen. 'Die= 
felben waren beinabe fämmtlid) ^lattbeutfcbe au!3 dleöe, einem 
^erjogtbum in ^t\tp1^aitn, unt langten b^fr in ben Sab'^f« 
1683-1685 an, X)a fie ibr 33aterlant) ^u ber 3eit öcrliepcn, 
fo entgingen ftc, Dan! ber göttlicben 3?orfebung, ben Sßerbeerun« 



* 3n bem Sfficrfe " Fireside History of German and Swiss Immigrants" 
flnbet ber Stftr «mfajfenbere Slu^fiinft über bitfe Slnfiebflunfltn. 

(19) 



20 ^Ilgcmeme dinleiinng. 

gen beg fratt3örtfcf)en Äriegeö, mlä^tx 1689 bic ©tabt 2ßomt3 
gerftörte, in bercn S^lä^e fte gewohnt Ratten, unb ba^ 8anb nteilen=^ 
weit öernjüftetc. 55on jebem ^Jiarftfleden, »on jebem 2)övf(^en, 
öon |eber ^farrürc^e, öon jebem Sanbfi^c inner()alb bcr ungtü(f= 
liefen ^roöinjen lobertcn bie flammen empor. 3n bemfelkn 
3aBre rourben ebenfattö jerftört: 3fto^rbac^, Saimen, ^^lu^Ioc^, 
S^Cn^tcc^, Äir(^t)eim, 33ru(f Raufen , Sppeln^eim, äßieblingen, 
ßbingen, 9iecfer^aufen unb ^anbf^u^ö^eim im ^er3ogtt)um 
33aben, in tt5el(^em nac^ ^a^fer 3o^<inneö ©d)ab unb 2ub= 
h)ig 9lupp öerbrannt tt»orben ftnb. — ^a^fer'ö ®(^aup(a^ 
öon ^eibeltterg, ©.505. 

granj Daniel ^>aftoriuö, geBoren ju ©ommer^aufen in i^van^ 
fen am 26. ©ept. 1651, lanbete in ^^itabelp^ia mit bem ®(^iffe 
„Simerifa", Kapitän 3ofcp^ Söafe^, am 20. 3tuguft 1683 [ammt 
feiner gamilie. (Seine S3egteiter iuaren einige beutfc^e (£inn)an= 
berer: ^aUb (S(^u^ma(^er, @eorg Söertmüüer, 3f«af ^il^cd, 
grau unb jtvei ^inber, 5lbra^am unb ^atob, i^omaö ©afper, 
ßonrab 33u(^er, alias 9tutter, unb ein englifc^eö '3Kabd)en, 9iamenö 
granjeö ©impfon. Slnbere folgten ^aftoriuö balb nac^. (gür 
eine ?ifte ber Flamen unb ber erflen Slnfiebter öon ©ermantoron 
(te:^c Sln^ang ^v, I.) ^aftoriuö liep ft^ in bcmfetkn 3«^«, 
in bem er nac^ ^ennf^Iöanien gefommen, ba nieber, wo er ^ernac^ 
©ermantottjn grünbete. Der ®runb ju biefer 5tieberlaffung 
würbe öon i^m bereits am 12. Oftober 1683 aufgenommen. Den 
Anfang ber ©tabt machten breige^n gamilien. 3« weniger aU 
fünf Sauren waren fd)on fünfjig Käufer errichtet. 

Die ^eriobe öon 1702-1727 begeii^net einen ßeitabfc^nitt in 
ber ©efd^ic^te ber erften beutf(^en Sinwanberung. 3>i'i[<^en öier= 
jig unb fünfjig taufenb vertiefen i^re ^eimatt). Die beifpietlofen 
SSert)eerungen unb ^Berwüftungen ber 3:ruppen ^ubwig'ö XIV. 
unter Jurcnne, waren baö traurige 25orfpiet blutiger 2?erfoI= 
gungen. Um biefen f(^re(fU(^en Reiben, bie il)rer erwarteten, ju 
entgei)en, wanbertcn beutf(^e unb anbere 5)roteftanten nad^ ben 
engiifcben Kolonien in Imerüa au^. 

1705 flüd)tete ftcfe eine Stnjat)! Deutft^-JReform.irter, bie^wifc^en 
Sßolfenbüttel unb ^)alberftabt wofinten, na^ 5fieuwieb unb »on 
bort nad) -^oüanb, wo \k ftd) 1707 nad) 9lew glorf cinfc^ifften. 
aßibrige Jßinbe trieben i()r ©c^ifftcin bie Delaware S3a9 ^^inauf» 
Da fte ftc^'tf jcboc^ vorgenommen trotten, an bcn Ort ibrer 33e= 
ftimmung ju gelangen unb ii)re ^eimatt) unter bcn ^oUänbcrn 
ju fud)en, nal^men fte von ^t)i(abelpl)ia ben lieber lanbweg na«!^ 



9le» §)orf. 211« fie after baö cntjüdfenbe %i)al '^o'oa Safaria in 
9ten) 3erfe9 ju ©eftc^t befamen, »elc^eö burc^ ben ftc^ ötn[c^län= 
gelnben ^JiJZuöconetcong, ?)affaic unt> fceren Buflüffe getvänft irirt), 
unb guteö 2ant) gefnnben fatten, entfc^loffen pc [i^ bafdbft ju 
bteifeen. ©icfc ^lieterlajfung ifi je^t nnter bent stamen " German 
Valley oon ^Jtorrifon Sountp" befannt SSon biefem 5)unft 
verbreiteten fid^ t)ie Dcutfc^en über bie Sonntieö ©omerfet, 33cr= 
gen nnb Sflfer. 

3n Slifabet^town, ber erfien englifc^cn ^tieberlaffung im Staate 
^iero 3crfe9 »om 3a:^re 1664, gab eg öielc 2)eut[c^e fc^on »or 
1730.* Sn mm ^aU, einem öon g)^ilabelp^ia ettt>a breifig 
SlJleilen entfernten Drte, war ebenfalls einebentfc^c ^iieberlajfnng.f 

Sine »o^lbcörünbfte Ucberlteferung it^anpM, bag am Slnfang beö a^U 
jeltnten 3ai^r!^unbert« ftc& eine aüi jwet^unbcrt tjroteflantt[c|en ^clen he- 
ftet)enbc Solonte in ben Xtjäkrn beö 55af[atc unb 3iarttan in 9Zew Serfep 
niebergelaffen liabe. £){efelbe l)atte ben Orafcn (Sobieött ntm güt)rer, einen 
bireften Slbfömmling bcö Weltberühmten 5)o(enfönigg 3ot)ann (£obies?ft, 
ber im 3al)re 1683 oor SBien bie dürfen aufg C'a«>'t fi^lwö- 3Der in 
9?e» 3erfe9 unb ^m g)orf fic^ nod& finbenbe '^ame 3abri^He fc^eint eine 
»crborbene gorm »on ©obie^fi ju fein.— Bard's Rel. Am., p. 81. 

2lnf eine Sintabnng ber Königin SInna öertief en in ben 3^^^ 
rcn 1708 nnb 1709 breiunbbrei§ig tanfenb it)re Jpeimatt) in ben 
ai^cinlänbern, »on benen im ©ommer 1708 etira gwölf ober 
breije^n tanfenb in ßonbon anfamen.| !I)iefe 2ln!ömmlinge 
njaren eine 3eitlang in einer fotc^' ^ülflofen Sage, ba§ fie ganj 
unb gar »on ber SJlilbt^tigfeit ber 33e»o^ner ber J^auptftabt 
(Snglanb'ö abhängig fein mußten. 

3m ©pätja^r 1709 rourben ein ^unbert unb fünfjig pfäljif^e 
Familien, befle^enb auö fec^g :^unbert unb fünfzig (Seelen, unter 
ber 2luffi^t unb bem ©c^u^e beö S^riftian be ©raffenrieb unb 
Cubtüig ^O'Iic^ell, beibc (Sd^weiger öon ®eburt, nac^ 9iorb=Saro^ 



* "June 16th, 1734, at 10 o'clock A. M., I came to Elizabethtown, 
where many Germans reside. This place is several miles in length, 
but the houses are sometimes separated by a considerable distance." — 
Eeck, Ulsperger^s Nachrichten, p. 159. 

i 55aJtor m^ad Schlatter prebigtc %'m 1746. 

X „Sucker unb Leitungen tturben in ber 5>f<Jlj öcrbreitet. Sluf ben 
Suchern njar ber Königin Silb unb bn^ Jttelblntt mit golbenen 2?ucbftabcn 
oerjiert, tt>egb<ilb fie auc^ ba^ „golbene 23u(^" genannt würben. 3t)r ^'(Oid 
war, bie ^'fa'ser ju bewegen, nac^ Snglanb ju fommen, urn nad& ben 
Sarolinag ober anbcrn Sotonicn 3t)rer 5)?ajeftät aXi 5lnfteb(er geft^tcft ju 
»erben,"— Sournal beö englifc^en Untertiaufeö, XYL, ®, 467, 468. 



22 ^Ilgtmtint €inltitnng. 

lina gefanbt. SBie in alien neuen Säntcrn, fo waren auc^ tit 
^fäljer ^ier ^^riifungen, Entbehrungen unto SSefc^merfcen, »ie flc 
^rf) im ©renjleben fiet^ ^nfcen, au^gefe^t. X)ie Jugfarora 3nt>ia= 
ncr me^elten am 22. ©ept. 1711 ein ^unt)ert terfelben nietier.* 
2)ic Slbfömmlingc tiefer !Deutf(^en tt)ol)nen in »erf(^iet)enen J^ei* 
len beg (Staate^ jerftreut.f 

9torb'Sarolina erbielt einen beftänbtgen 3wflw§ »on beutf^en (Stnman- 
bfrern. 3m trften Tiritttbetl bea legten 3abrbunbert« fam Xoblax, unb 
jur ftlbtn 3"t liff fitb ^Jafior Bwberbübler »on St. ©alien mit einer 
flro§en Slnjabl feiner Sanböleutc in OranotUe Sount? m'eber. Zohlax »urbe 
balb barauf jum griebcnöricbter ernannt. 2lu§er biefen jogen »if le X)cutfcbe 
OUÖ 5Jennf9lüanten unb 2?irgtnten babin unb fcblugen tbren Söobnfi^ in 
ben gebirgigen (SJegenben auf. Sincolnton, ®tofeö, fotcie aucb ®ran»iHe 
County biben Deutfcbe colonifirt. X)te aui ^Jennf^loanien eingett5anbcrten 
Deutftben in 9?orb«Sarolina jä'blten 1785 allein über fünfjebn bunbett 
5)erfonen.— Sober, <S. 69. 

3m 3abrf 1707 langte eine (Sefellfcbaft franjöfifiier ^[roteftanten an, 
bie fid) am gluffc Jrent, einem 3lrm ber 5fJeufe, ben Drt ibrer 9iieberlof- 
fung »äblten.— 5)ale'« S3er. ®t., i». 98. 

3ur 3e't/ als* tk^^ SJfäl^er fid) üon Sngtant) nac^ 9lorb=Saro* 
lina einfd^ifften, ging auc^ ^^aflor Sofua Äoc^ert^al mit einer 
fleinen Jperbe feiner »erfolgten lut^erifc^en ©lauben^brüber in 
Sonbon äufö ®^iff (1708), um naä) 9ten) §)orf überjufegeln, 
wo fte auc^ im December teöfelben Sa^reö anfamen unt> fid^ turj 
barauf an ten oberen Ufern t>eö .^utfon auf einem ©trieben 
Sanbcg, »eld^eö i^nen bie Ärone @nglanb'g gefc^cnft ^tte,| an= 
ftcbelten. Die Königin gcnel^migte ^^aftor Äcc^ert^al »eitere 
fünf ^unbert Slder aU .Ktrd^engut für bie lut^erif^e ^irc^e. 9leu= 
bürg ijl ber Drt biefer 9tiebcrlaifung.§— ^aftor Äo^ert^at, 1719. 

Sßä^renb bicfc nac^ 9?orb*SaroIina unb 9iett) Sovf gefc^idt 
würben, fe^te man brei taufenb fec^ö ^unbert Deutf^e nac^ 3^= 
lanb über, jum S3ebauen uncultiöirten Sanbeö im Sountp Sime= 
rief in ber 9tä^e öon 2lrbela unb 2lbair; Slnbercn würbe tai 
©täbtc^en 0lat^feaIe jum Sßo^nort angewtefen, wo i^rc Stac^* 



* „Der 3abre3tag biefe« Slutbabö tourbe »iele 3abre lang mit gajitn 
unb Seten feftitib begangen."— SBilliamfon'ö 31. £., L, ®. 193, 194. 

i (Siebe Slnbang <«r. VIII. u. IX. 

X „3tDei taufenb ein bunbert 5lcfer laut föniglicben Sefebl«, 18. Decbr. 
1709."_O'Calahan's Doc. His. N. Y., p. 591. 

$ Srobbeab'ö Doc. ®efcb. »on m. §)., V., ©. 67. Die 9?amen »on 
Äotbertbal'ö Segleitern würben erbalten unb finb im ®ta«t0ar(i)i» ju 9?ejp 
Dorf ju finben.— (öiebe Slnbang ««r. IV. 



^Ugtmeint Äinleitnjtj. 23 

fommen flc^ noc^ ftnben unt |cuttge3 lagcg aU „teutfd^c 5)fäl= 
gcr" befannt finb, unt) alö foIcf)e auc^ t^rcm ächten beutfAeu 
S^arafter, bent g(ei§, ber SJtrt^fc^aftltc^feit unb tent e^rlicbcn 
ipanbein, treu cieMieben flnt». 9te{fenlie, mel^e biefelben fiirjUd) 
feefu(^t, fagen »on it)nen : „®{c fmb tic rei(^jlen unt> n)ot)l^bent= 
ften Sauern in 2imericf ßount^."* Diefclben fprcc^cn auc^ tie 
bcutfc^e ©prad^c nodj.f 

25on ber großen Slnja^I, W in ben 3a|wn 1708 unb 1709 
nadi Snglanb gefommen waren, fe^rten flcbcn taufenb, nad^bem 
ffe gro^c Selben au^geflanben, in !^alb nadtcm unb »crjjvcifcltem 
3ujtanb in i^r SSaterlanb guriicf. ^i^n taufenb ftarben au« 
9)^angel an 9ia^rungömittcln, ärjtlid^etn Seiflanb unb anbercn 
Urfac^en. Slnbere famen auf ©(Stiffen urn. !Dic noci^ Uebcrleben= 
ben rourben nac^ ben englifc^cn (Kolonien in Slmerifa gebrad^t. 
ßtlic^c taufenb njoUtcn nac^ ben fübwefllic^ t>on Snglanb ge= 
(egenen (SciK9=3nfeIn iiberfc^iffen, finb aber nie bafelbjl ange= 
fommen. 

S(^n (Schiffe waren mit über »ier taufenb Deutfc^en belabcn 
unb für 9lew g)orf beflimmt. 2lm 25. !Decbr. 1709 fegcitcn bie^ 
felben unb liefen im 3unt 1710 nac^ einer fec^ömonatlid)en l)öd)^ 
befc^roerlic^en 3Reife im Jpafen »on ^em ^oxt ein.| ^uf i^rer 
Steife in'« 3nncre turj nac^ bem 3lnlanben, ftarben pebje^n ^un= 
bert. Die Ucberlebenben fc^Iugcn i^r Sager in ßelten auf, welche 
fle »on Snglanb mitgebracht Ratten, unb gwar auf Glutting, bem 
|e|)igen ®o»ernor'ö 3<?tanb. i^ier »erblieben fic biö fpät im 
^erb^, aU etwa »ierje^n ^unbert nad^ Sioingöton ?Wanor, ^un= 
bert ^cikn am ^ubfon hinauf, »erlegt würben. T)ic »erwittweten 
grauen, IräufU(|en 9Jiänner unb 2öaifen blieben in ^ew §)ort.§ 
T)k 2öaifen gab ®ou»erneur J^unter bürgern »on 9lew §)or{ 
unb ^lew ^tx\i^ in bie Se^re. |1 

!Dic nac^ bem ^ubfon ©efc^icften waren unter SBcrpflic^tung, 
ber Königin Slnna alö get)orfame Untert^anen banfbarft ju bic* 



* Journal beg cngltfc&en Unterbaufe«, XVI., <©. 465; ?Wftl)ob. D.uar= 
Hxlx) mti\, Oft. 1855, ®. 489. 

t gitegcnbe Sölätter, IL, e. 672. 

X Sifie Srobbeab'ö Doc. ®efc|. 9f. W-, V., (5. 167. 

§ Sine 9lamtn«ltftc ber in 9tcn) 2)crf jurücfgeblicbenen Bamilttn finbet 
fiilj im Sln^ang 9tr. V. 

II 2Int)ang ^tt. VI. gibt eine S'Iamcnöliftc ber in bie ?tbrf gegebcuen 
Ätuber. 



24 allgemeine ^inleUitng. 

nen, %^m ju fod^en unb ^anf ju tauen, um bie öom Parlamente 
c|en)ät)rte ©umme oon je^n taufenb ^^funt» ©terUng, n?elc^e il)vc 
Ueberfa^rt foftete, ^urücfjuerftatten. "^an ^atte ertoartet, au[ 
foI(^e 2öeife baö ©cfeiffömagajin ju füllen. ®runb übler 2>er= 
waltung erroieö fic^ aber tiefer 33erfuc^ aU gänjli^ mißlungen.* 
!Die fo ungere^t unterferücften ©eutfc^en würben mit it)rcr 
Se^anbtung unb ?age unjufrieben. ©ouüerneur Runter griff 
gu gewaltt^ätigen 9}?a§regeln, um feinen 23efe^(en ®ei)orfam ju 
erzwingen. 2luA bieg mißlang il)m. 3ni ©pätberbft 1712 
brauen ein ^unbert unb fünfzig gamilien, um bem fiebern ^un= 
gertob ju entgegen, nac^ bem fei^jig Steilen norbweftlic^ »on 
Siöingöton 5Jianor gelegenen ©c^o^arie^I^al auf. S^a gab'3 
feine bur(^brod)ene ©trafen, feine ^ferbe, bie it)r ®epäcf getragen 
ober gejogen Ratten. T>kS lub man auf grobgejimmerte ©(^litten 
unb fc^Ieppte eö mit eigener ^anb bur(^ ben brei gu§ tiefen 
©c^nee, ber i^r 3?orwärt^fommen fe^r ^inberte. 36r Söeg führte 
bur^ baö X)icfi^t beö Urwalbeö, Dur^ beffen entlaubte Steige 
ber f(^neibenb >alte Sßinb pfiff unb bie fatlenben (5(i)neef(ocfen 
jornig burc^einanber iagte. X)ie ^Jieife bauerte brei ooüe Söoc^en. 
3n ©^o^arie angelangt, bebauten fte bie i^nen 'oon ber Königin 
3tnna »ertie^enen Sänbereien. ^ier »erweiltcn fte je^n öotlc 
3a^re, biö i^nen @runb eineö ^Berfe^enö in i^rer Urfunbe i^r 
fämmtlic^eö ?anb mit aßen 35erbefferungen entriffen würbe. 3nt 
grü^ia^r 1723 brachen brei unb brei^ig Familien auf unb 
fc^Iugen i^ren 2ßo^nort in lulpe^ocfen, etwa fünfje^n ^JJeilcn 
weftlic^ üon JReabing, auf. (Sinige 3a^re barauf folgten Slnberc 

nad^.f 

X)ie übrigen unjufriebenen T)eutf(^en gu (Sc^o^arie, bie i:^ren 
greunben nict)t nac^ ^ennfploanien folgen woüten, fuc^ten fi(^ 
im ?0^ofeawf X^ale eine gufünftige ^eimat^. 

yifro §)orf war fc&on früf)£ ein 3uf[uc|t6Drt für bte franäl)ftf(|en 55rotcfl= 
anten, gc»öt)nHc^ Hugenotten genannt, (geben 1656 tcaren btefelbcn jabl= 
retd) im ^sjtaate ijortianben. ^n ßaU unb ®ütern fanten fte ben |)ol= 
lönbern am nä'cbften. 9tew dioä)iü(, ba^ nabe ber lüfte ber «KWeerenge 
»on Song S^lanb gelegen ift, tcurbe au^fdilie^Iid^ üon Hugenotten auö 
gtoc^eUe in 3ranfrei($ gegrünbet. ,Xk Smigranten fauften »on Sotjn 
^ott 6ÜUÜ 2lcfcr Sanb. Sin ebrtoürbtger Hugenotte, fo erjäblt man, ging 



* 3m 5lnbang 9lr. VII. finbet fic^ eine 9?amengHjte btefer gamilten ja 
fitoing^ton Wanor. 

+ 3lnbang 5ir.XIV. gibt eine 9tamenöltfte ber erften 5lnfiebler i« Julpe» 
^oäen. 



^llgcmtine Umleitung. 25 

tägltc^ an btc ilujle unb, tnbem er fein 5luge granlretc^ ju rtd^tetc, fang er 
ctn^ öon 5J?arofö fiebern unb fd^tcfte fein 5)?orgcngebet jum Fimmel. 
Slnbere [ttmmtcu mit ein in baö 2ob itjrcö ®otteö unb in bic ßrinnerungen 
an il;r geliebte^ SBaterlanb, au3 bem fic bte graufamen gcuer ber äJerfol» 
gung »ertriefcen."— Jffiei§' ®cfc^. ber franj. pxoU 9tef., IL, ^, 304. 

3n ben Sountieö Uljler unb !Dut4>e§ tt)ot)nen noci& öiele i^rer 5lbfi)inm= 
Itngc. 3n Ulfter finben fic| bie (Sproffen i5on 2)uboiö, i)ian ober ©e^o, $aö= 
brcucq ober ^aöbroucf, Sa Sebre, Sßeoicr, dxi^peü, greir u. f. w.— ®iet)e 
bic ^tarnen ber mönnlic^en dintoo^mx öon 5tew Sloc^ette 1710, im Sln^ang 
^x, XIII. 

T)it Äönigtn 2lnna, welche tie ©taat^flug^eit Snglanb'ö auö= 
gejeic^net öerflanb, forgte fletö tafür, ta^ il)re eigenen Unter* 
tränen ju ^aufc blieben, tie ©eutf^en aber jur Stuöwanterung 
aufgemuntert »ürten. ®o fc^iifte fie einige »on tenen, tie fie in 
ten Sauren 1708 unt 1709 nac^ engtant gelocft ^atte, nac^ 
SSirginien, »o i^nen ein ©tüdf Santeö oberl^olb ter 2ßafferfälle 
teö 3tappa:^anno(f in ©pottfploania Sount^ angewicfen rourte. 
2)afelbj^ grünteten fie tie ©tatt ©ermanna. !Die @egent n?ar 
ungün^ig» (Sic jogen te^^alb einige 5Jiei(en ftromaufroärtö, roo 
fic bait ®Iü(f Ratten.* 3Son tiefer ^Zieterlaffung verbreiteten fie 
fic^ über mehrere Sountieö öon 35irginien unt 9?ort=(SaroUna» 

T)k Sountieg (B^ananioaf) unb Stodingbam in 23irginten tuurben öor 
1746 öon Deutfd^en aui ^Jcnnf^loonien angefiebelt. 25iele »on ibren 9tac^* 
fommen reben nocb bie beutfc^e ©pracbe. 

8113 ©eorge SBafbington unb 2lnbere im %pxil 1748 in jenem %t)eü 
SSirginien'g i^xt Sänbereien »ermaf en, „liefen ibnen ©cbaaren »on Män= 
nern, SBeibern unb Äinbern ju, bie ibnen bnrc^ bie SBälber nat^folgten unb 
nie englif(b fprac^en, aber, wenn angerebet, in beutf(^er ®prad()e ont»or= 
teten."— ©parfö SBafbington, IL, ©.418. 

1690 fibicfte Äbnig SBiaiam eine gro^c Slnjabl franjöfif($er 5)rotejianten 
nad^ 3Sirginien. ©ine »eitere ©cnbung oon fedjö bunbert Hugenotten fam 
unter ^i)ilm X)e Stii^ebourg na^ 33irginien. ^^mn nsurbe eine ©trecfe 
ßanbeg auf ber ©übfeite be^ 3iimeti=g(uffeö, ettua jwanjig Steilen öon 
ber je^igen Sage Stiimonb'^, angc^icfen.— |5ot»ifon'ö SStrginien, IL, 
(©. 160, 161. 

Sinigc ber 9tamen biefer Hugenotten finb unö erbalten toorben; j. 23. 
^)}a^ain, Dasib, ?0?onforb, D^^far, ÜZeirn, SDupup, 33ilbo, Dutot, ©alle, 
5Bartain, Slüaigre, ä>i(atn, ©obfct, Sb^^nibon, Seotlain, Jrabu, Soucabou, 
©aöper, glourno^, 5Irntö, Santon, (^afain, ©olaigre, ®i»oban, Stallet, 
Duc9, Sonburant, ®oin, fero, 55ean, Seen, Sbmonb, Senin, (^tanforb, 
gorqueran, 9{oberb, SBrian, gaure, X)on, 33ingli, dttno, Sefueur, ginnet, 
Xrent, ©umter, ÜiJJorrifet, Sorbin, ®a»in,— SBei§' ®efd^. ber franj. prot, 
diiU n., ©. 322. 



* (£iebe Slnbang ««r. XIL 



36 ^Ugtmetne dmltUsng. 

3n Sotge bcr unaufprli^en SBerfoIgung unb Unterbriicfung 
in ber (S(|tt)etj flo^ eine gro^c 9)^engc fc^u^Iofer SJlennontten 
auö bell Gantonen 3üric^ (bent ®ebnrtöort oon ®e^ner, Sit^^" 
mermann, 2aoater unb ^eftalojji), 33ern unb (Sc^ajf^aufen um'ö 
3a^r 1672 nflc^ bem ölfa§ nnb lie^ ftc^ oberhalb «Strasburg 
am 0l()cin nteber. 2?on ^ier manbcrten biefetben 1708 nac^ $on= 
bon unb üon bort nac^ ^ennfi^lüanten auö. ßtne 3eit(ang wobn* 
ten f(c in ©ermantoron unb in ber 9iä^e 5)^ilabelp^ta'ö. 1712 
fauften fle eine gro^e ©trecfc ßanbeö in ^equae, bamalö S^efter, 
je^t ^ancafler 6ount9, öon genu's 2tgenten an, worauf biefelben 
bann Bütten unb SBlod^äufer erri^teten, njel^c i^nen jeitweiltg 
ein Dbbac^ gewähren mußten, ^ier hofften bte immer unb immer 
njieber »erfolgten unb unterbrücEten (Sd)tt)ei3er, getrennt öon i^ren 
greunben unb fo manchen 5lnne^mli(^feiten biefeö Sebenäi, unge= 
^inbert üon 9?euem anfangen ju fönncn. 3tuf aüen «Seiten oon 
mehreren 3nbianerftämmen eingefd)Iof|'en, Ratten fle fi^ ba in ben 
büftern, ftiüen ©Ratten eine»? jugenblic^en Sßalbeö jurüdgejogen, 
bellen ungefiörte Sinfamfeit noc^ nic^t öon bem «Summen ber 
Sienc ober ben glügelfc^tägen ber Sc^malbe begrübt toorben war, 
welche bie nie fe^lcnben ^Begleiter ber 2lrt beö ^olj^aderö finb. 
SInftatt beö ^ummenö unb ©cfc^roä^eö biefer hörten fie nic^t 
btoö ben 9tuf unb ®efang beö rotl)braunen Sßalbeöfo^neö, fon* 
bem auc^ baä nä^tlic^c ®e^eul beö ftet^ wac^famcn ^unbcö, ber 
ber Höhten Königin ber S^a^t, wie fie fo ftattli^ ein^erjie^t unb i^r 
geborgte^ Sic^t toieberflra^It, nachbellt. Um einer gröjßeren iDZan* 
nigfaltigfeit Witten brang aud^ baö fc^riüe, erfd)rerfmbe (Dcfräc^je 
ber Sulc näd^tlic^ in i^rc D^ren, bie auf einem t)erborgcnen 2lfte 
über i^ren Bütten bie Slbenbluft cinfaugt, ober baö f^auerlid^e, 
näglid^e ©efc^rei eineö 9iac^toogeIg in feinem ftnfleren '5)irfid)t. 

T)iefe fc^weijerifd^e 9lieberlajyung bilbete ben ^noten^ ober 
3Jiittelpun!t einer fd^neU june^menbcn Seöölferung öon Sc^wei« 
3ern, granjofen unb 3Dcutfc^en im Sben ^cnnfplttanien'ö.* 

X)er öom europäifc^cn kontinente :^creinftrömenbc 3»*^<^<^^ 
mehrte pc^ beflänbig, fo baf er bie Stufmerffamfeit wac^ rief unb 
bei ben gurd^tfamen jcneö lageö ni^t geringe SBeforgni^ »er* 
urfac^te.f 



* t)it ^amtn ber trfien Slnftebler im ^Jfqw« ^t)*»!« ftnb im 2ln^ang 
9tr. III. angegeben. 

i <Btit ben lagen eint« 3ameö ?ogan, e ineö ttnf[u§rctc|en 5J?anne« im 
procinctalen Soncil, ber 1724 ben !l)eutf4)en \)oä)^ unfc^öne Dinge nad^"» 



^Ilgemtint dinltituitg. 27 

Sttt »olfat^ümltd^er ©cfd^iditfd^reibcr beridjtel auf bie Stliauptuttg timi 
flttberit, ba§ bit crfle ^tieberlajyung in Jancafler Sounti? int 3a^rf 1704 bfe 
ftmger franjöjif4)cn gamtlifit toar.— 9Batfon'3 Slnnalcn, II., <S. 112. 

üDte genannten Jamilten toarcn öntc '^ai 1708 nod^ in SBittfng^ftm 
unb famen erjt in ber legten Hälfte tei Wonatö X)ejbr. 1708, »te unten 
nod^ weiter gejeigt »erben wirb, in 9?em 2)orf an. 

SJfarie gittere (gerce) a\x€ Öitting^eim, Dberamt ®ermer^t)etm, jud&tf 
«m 10. ÜDtärj 1708 um einen 5)a§ nad^ mit ber 3lbftci^t „auf bie 3nful 
5)ennf9banien per ^oßanb unb Snglanb fic^ ju begeben unb allba ju 
Wol)nen öorbaben." 

5lm 10. ^ai 1708 erbat (tc p4) au(^ ein firci^lidde« 3eugni§ für ftd^ unb 
i^xt Oamilici ba^felbe beftätigt, ba§ „fie ber lautern reformirten Olauben«- 
If^re angeboren, unfere ijffentlidjen ©otteöbicnfte befud>t unb mit anbern 
©laubigen am ^a\)k bc« i)errn 5lntt)eil genommen t)aben." Unterjetc^inet 
iß ti »on 3. Stoman, 5)aflor unb Snfpeftor, unb beglaubigt »on einem 
©cibreiber. 

Örau geree, ober 2Bemar, ober SBarembier (Wie j!e genannt würbe) be« 
gleitete mit i^rcm ©o^ne X)aniel giere, 3faaf geber ober ia ge»re unb 
önbern im 3at)re 1708 ben f aflor Äoc^ert^al nac^ 9icw 3orf. |)ier foil 
fte biö 1712 geblieben fein. Die Urfunben ju ^arriöburg jeigen, ba§ am 
12. ©ept. 1712 burc^ bie a?ermittUmg »on «Kartin Äenbig, 5Äaria 2Ba- 
tenbuer, 2Bemar ober giere 2000 Slder 2anb ju ^equae jugefprod^en wür- 
ben.— ®ef*. 2anc. So., ®. 102. D'Sauatjan'o Doc. ®efd). 9t. 2)., III., 
(©. 550. Die ««amen ber Segleiter Äoc^ert^al'«, f. Sln^ang 9tr. IV. 

^aum Ratten bie 9JZennontten i^rc Sänbereten baubar gemad^t, 
fo fanbten fle fc^on 9Jiartiit heutig aU Seüotlntäc^tigten naÖ^ 
Dcutfc^tant) unt) ber (Sc^roetj, um anbere ju bewegen, nac^ ^enrt* 
fplöanien ju fommen. Sr ^atte großen Srfolg. 1711 unb 1717 
unb einige ^al^xt fpätcr erfuhr bie Solonie einen bebeutenben 
3uttja(^ö. ©0 ja^Ireic^ tt»ar bie Sinroanberung üon T)eutfc^en 
unb <ad^tt)eijcrn, bap, roie fc^on oben barauf ^ingewiefen, bicfelbc 
bcfonberä bei Seamten Sebenfen erregte. 

©0 crjä^It bie(5taatö=S^roni!: „®ouöerncur Äeit^ »ic« fein 
SoHegium, ben ®ouöerneurö=3ftat^, auf bie gro^e Sinjaiyt ber 
gremben aü€ ©cutfc^Ionb ^in, bie unfere (Spraye unb 3Serfaffung 
nic^t fennen unb fürjli^ in biefc ^^roüinj hereingebracht würben. 
Diefelbcn jerflrenen fic^ gteic^ nac^ i^rer 2Infunft, o^nc guöor 
f(^riftli(^ ju jeijien, tt»o^er fle fommen unb wer fie finb, unb wie 
fie ft^ in Sngla'ttb betragen, welc^eä fle o^ne Srtaubnip ber 3fle=» 

fagte, unb feiner 9?ac6bcter, bte nod& lu befiaupten Wagten, toai er nur unter 
garest auöfagtc, bat Ite SSergangenbett fefigejteUt, ba§ foldljeSerbad^ttgungen 
obne guten ©runb waren. 3" einem anbern 5Berf nimmt ber Sbitor »ofl' 
^änbigere 9totij »on bicfer Auflage, ^^olttifer babcn fc^on me^r aU ctn= 
mal bad ^lagelieb über bie Deutfc^en ange^immt: „SBtr ^ahtn eudd gc» 
Vftjfen unb ttjr wolltet nid^t tanjen." 



28 allgemeine €ntleilo«g. 

gierung öertaffen i^abtn, fo au(^ ^tcr, ba fte fic^ »ebcr Ui i^m 
no^ 6ei einer anfceren oBrigfcitIi(^en ^^erfon gemetbet. Solche 
^anblungöjtieife fönnte fi^ aU fe^r gefä^rlid) erroeifen, ba auf 
gleichem SBege irgenb eine beliebige 2tnja|I grember, »on welcher 
9Zation fie immer fein mögen, ?5rfunbe ober geinbe, unö guflrömcn 
möchte." (So gef^rieben 1717. 

Dtefc Semerfung bc^ ©ouöcrncurö Äett^ fül()rtc gur Slnnal^mc einer 
90?a§regcl, bie bag 2?erIorenge^en öon über brctptg taufenb '^amtn ber erften 
bcutf^en ötnaanberer in ^ennf^toanien uert)tnbcrtc.* ®ctn 5Jttgtrauen, 
baö er bamalg gegen bie Dcutfi^en begte, obtcobl er nadbber ibre Sntereffe 
eifrig öcrtrat, mu|te baju augfd^Iagen, ba§ bag (53ebä^tni§ ber Untcrbrücften 
unb 23erf olgtcn ntc^t auggetoifcbt »urbe.— ©iebe SoL 3tec., III., «5. 29, 228. 

1719 bemerfte 3onat^an Dicfinfon: „Jäglic^ erwarten mir 
(Srf)iffe 'oon Sonbon, bie »on fec^g hiä fteben taufenb ^^fäljer ^er= 
überbringen foHen. Sin 3;^eil berfelben fam öor etwa fünf Sö^ren 
l^erüber; biefelben tauften fic^ fet^jig 50^eilen ireftlic^ 'oon ^^ila= 
bet|j^ia Sanb an unb erweifen fid^ alö friebli(^e unb arbeitfame 
£eute."t 

^lac^ bem,3<i^« 1716 begannen bie 3)eutf(^en, etliche 5^««= 
jofen unb einige trenige ^otlänber, »ot)t jroanjig, brei§ig, öicraig, 
unb SInbere, fec^jig unb [itHi^ 'Mältn mit »eftlic^ unb nörblic^ 
»on ber ^auptftabt bie Sßälber ju bur^brec^en. @ro§e beutfc^e 
Stnftebelungen entftanben in ben je^igen 33erfö unb 2Jiontgomer9 
ßountieö. 3n ©ofc^en^oppen organiftrte ft(^ f(^on 1717 eine 



* SJerfaffcr btefc« fd&rteb an ben ©taatsfcfretär »on ^eto gorf, um üon 
tbm lu erfabren, ob ftcb folc^e Stjlen, toit bie ju C>antöburg erbaltcnen, auf 
bem SImtgjtmmer beö ©efretärö öon UZeto §)orf bcfänbcn, unb erbiett fol= 
genbe Slntwort: 

(Staat 9?eh) ^lor!, Slmtgjtube bcg (aefretärg, \ 
Sllban^, 18. 3uli 1856. / 

^crrn % D. g?u|3p. 

?teber $err ! 3n unfrer Dfficc baben hjtr feine Stficn 
ton ber 2lrt, welche fie angeben. SBtr baben »ob! Stegifter tjon grcmben, 
»cicbe eine eibltdbe Slugfage betreff« ibrer 5)erfon nieberlcgen, bie eg ibncn 
bann ermogltcbt, Itegenbcg (gtgcntbum ju ba'tcn unb Bürger ju nserbfi^; 
bieg iil aber tmmerbtn nur eine flctne 5lnjabl im g?ergtetd) jur ganjen ^7ia\\i 
Bon (Smigranten, bie in ben ^taat gebracht »erben. 

3br crgebenfter 

5)?. S. (Scbermerborn. 

t I^'iefe ftnb »on bencn, welcfte auf bie (Stnlabung öon ^Kartin lenbig 
na^ ^ennf^banien gefommen ttoren.— (SJef^. öon 2anc. So., <©. 79-117. 



§iHgtm£mt (Sinkiiung. 29 

ticutfcf)=reformirtc ©etnetntc* (Einige nicberbeutfc^e ^iJJennonitcn f 
He§en fl^ am ^afil)mominf entlang unb einige 3a^re fpäter am 
©^fipedf(a) niebev. 

I)eutf(^e unt) gran^ofen ivä()Iten fic^ bie fruchtbare ?an'Dfd)aft 
2öal)linf (b) ju i^rem 2ßol)nort. ^ier öffnete fi^ halt Stnbcren, 
ben »erfolgten Jpugenotten, eine ^eimat^. Unter ben t)eroorragen= 
ben gamilien in Dle^ waren : turd ö ober be Zuxäi, Sertoletö, 
33erboö, be la ^laine^, Detangö, Soraö, eeöanö, §)ober, ^eim, 
^erbein, (Sc^aub, Sngel, Sßeibner, @d)neiber, Sllftabt. 

2lbra{)am be Xnxä »on Die? ft^rtcb an ben ^crouögcbcr tn einem Wärj 
1844 batirten Briefe: „5)?ctne aSorältern, «Ramend ^^aaf lurcf, be %üxd, 
»obntcn in granfret^, waren »on ben fogcnannten Hugenotten, flüctttcten 
wegen 9ieltgton nai^ bcr 5)falj, in bte ®tabt granfentbal, üon borten 
wanberten [te auö nai| Slmcrifa, liefen [tcb ntcber im Staat 9iew 2)orf, 
in ber ©egenb Sfopu^, in ber 3eit ber Äönigin Slnna; jogen nac^ Die? 
um 1712. Da6 5)atent üon meinem Sanb iji 1712."— His. Berks Co., p. 88. 

3faaf Xüxd, ein Sanbmann, 23 Satjre alt, war einer ber Begleiter bcö 
5)aftorö tocbertbal.— Slnbang 9?r. IV. 

Ss mag bier bemcrft werben, obwobl eg etwa« auf er Drbnung crfdietnt, 
bag ncunjebn »on bencn, bie mit 'JJajtor tocbertbal waren, im erften 3abre 
5)ieti^en würben. |)ierauf erfucbten Äocbertbal unb ©cbüncmann am 26. 
^ai 1709 ben 9latb, biefen gjeunjebn ben Unterbalt ju entjiebcn „weil fie 
ficb bcr (^-eclforge beö "^rebigcrö unb ben übrigen 2)eut[(^en entjogcn 
batten." 5tm 18. 3uni ernannte man einen 2lugf^u§, um bie ©cbwierig' 
feiten unter ben Xeutfcben ju unterfud^cn. X)crfelt)e bericbtete am 21. 
3uni: „ba§ feine ber ben ^ietiften jur i!aft gelegten X)inge »or anbern 
erwiefen Werben tonnten."— D'Salaban'ö IDoc. ®ef(b. 9t. §)., HI-, ®. 544. 

Unter ben erften Slnfieblern »on Slfaf 3:oiDnf()i|), 33erfö Sount^, 
waren üiele fran3Öftfd^e 9leformirte ober Hugenotten, ebenfalls 
f(^it>ebif(^e Sut^eraner. ,ßlan crjä^lt, bap bie Hugenotten, 
2)eutfc^=9teformirte unb 2utl)eraner inner^lb einer ober jweier 
^Jteilen Xfon 3ieabing i^rc ©otteöbien^e gehalten unb ft(^ nac^ 
guter Söeife i^rer 35äter in Europa Slbenb^ fowo^l aU ben lag 
über üerfammelt ^aben." — 33u(^er. 

2)ie Deutfc^en roaren :^au))tfäc^tic^ 2anbleutc. ®ie tierlte^eu 
ftc^ me^r auf ftc^ felbft alö auf Stnbere. (Sie fc^wangen ben ^arft, 
bie Slrt unb ben ©i^lägel, unb mit i^ren fonnenoerbrannten 
Firmen rotteten fte bie SBuc^erpflanjen aus, faßten bie maicftäti= 
ft^en eilten unb bie fc^lanfen SBaünuf bäume, bie Äaftanien unb 



* German Ref. Messenger; Aug. 3, 1842. 

t ^crftoming betft ber ^retfelbeerc=55la^. (a) ®fipt^a(f, b. b- eine 
pinlenbe S3a|Terla(^e. (b) Die? b^i^t eine ^'ii)it, Beße, aucb eine oon 
^Bergen eingefcbloffene Sanbf^aft. 

3* 



30 §illg£in£tit£ ®inlthn«g. 

55appeln. 2Bag brauchbar wax, fpaltetcn fic ju ©c^ttjcllen für 
3äunc. 3^r unermübU^er Sifer ttjuf te feine «Sc^ranfen, Mi' er 
tie Qan^t roalbtge Jßiltni^ in urbare^ Sant) umgefd)affen I)attf. 
S5on i^nen fagte ©ouöerneur J^omaö im ^al)xe 1738: „"Dicfe 
5)rooin3 ^at feit 3iit)ren al^ 3wP[uc^^ftätte für »erfolgte 5>roteft^ 
anten ter ^falj unb anberer J^eile X)eutf^Iant>'ö getient, unb 
ic^ glaube mit 2öa^r^eit fagen ju fiJnnen, t)a§ fic i^ren gegcn^^ 
»artigen blü^enben 3ii^^"^ grö^tent^eilö tern gleite biefeiS 33ol' 
lea iu »erbanfen ^at. So ift nic^t tie ®üte teö S3ot»enö allein, 
fontern tie Stnja^I unt SIrbeitfamfeit eineö 3SoIteö, tie ein Sant 
tüo^I^abent machen."— 6oI. 9lec., IV., @. 315. 

Snglant öerftant feine 5)oUtif in ter fc^netlen 33eüöl!crung 
ter amerifanifc^en (Kolonien: feine Untert^anen behielt ei ju 
^aufe, betrieb hingegen tie SluöJtanterung ter !Deutf(^en. Sng* 
lant jog feinen ©eivinn tarauö, o^ne »on feinen (Sinwol^nern 
ju »erlieren. 

da mag unvernünftig fd^einen, taß man ängftlid^ auf tie 
©(paaren teutfc^er Sinroanterer fa^, „tie, wenn fie in fold^en 
9)iaffen ^erüberftrömen, eine teutfcbe Solonie ^ier grünten möc^* 
ten, unt öietleid^t eine folc^e, wie tie ter Slngelfac^fen im fünften 
3fl^r!^untert in 33ritannien."* 

3in 3abre 1719 famen etlt^e jwanjtg gamtlten ber ®4)tcar$fnau'3;äu= 
fer in ^^MJabflp^ia ak» Gtntge gogen nac^ ®ermantoh5n, anbete nai^ bem 
©4)t|jpadf in Die?, nad^ Sonejtogo unb 5!)?ülbad> in Sancafter Sount?. 

Um 1728 unt 1729 überfc^ritten tie Deutfc^en ten ©u^quc* 
l^anna unt liefen fic^ innerhalb ter je^igcn ©renjen ter ßountieg 
Sttamö unt gjorl nieter. !Dort ri^teten fie ft^/ obroo'^I unter 
öielcn ^intcrniffcn, ein. ®g entfpannen fic^, wie ei leiter oft 
gnjifc^en SehJO^ncrn ter ©ren^e ter gaU ift, get>ten jroifd^en 
ten SJ^arpIäntern unt ^^ennf^Iöaniern, unt Streit um tie Dber= 
l^ant unter ten t^ü^rcrn. 

Jbomaö Srcffa») »on TOar^Ianb mad^tc fid^ 1736 jum ^rtuptntann toon 
fünfjtg glct^arttgen öietfiern, lebigltdl) baju, um bte Deutfcfeen »on tl>rctt 
Sauereien gu jagen. Um feinen ®efeüen 5!JtutIj etttguflD§en, fd)Iu^ er 
»or, baö ?anb, toelc^eg bte Dcutfd^en angebaut Ratten, unter fie ju »ertbetlen. 
gür bte JU letficnben X){cnfle fofltc em jeber jtcet^unbert Slcfer erhalten. 
I)te Deutfc^en tsurben mit SBaffengewalt angegriffen, t^re SBo^nungen 
jcrjtort unb ftc »ertrieben unb gefangen genommen, unb ba« bloÄ auö bem 
©runbc, hjeil fte ber 0tegterung ^ennfvlsonten'« treu geblieben waren.— 
eoL 3?ec. iv., @. 69-122. 



* SBatfon'« Slnnalen, II , «5.255, 



allgemeine (Sinleitöttg. 31 

®d^on fn bett Satiren 1710-1712 famett Deutft^e na^ 5Rarölanb imb 
lit^tn pd^ in bcr ©eoieut jwtftljfn bcm 5}?onocac9 unb beit Sergen, ba, Jüd 
nac|t)er ^'atricf X'it'.anv (1745) J^rctricf town oudlegte, nteber. IDtcfelbcn 
be^nten ftt^ aber Wilb Hi lui* bcn öjlabe^, 5)?ibbIetoft5n unb .^agerötottjn 
fluö. 3t»<f*fn l'-'S II. 1754 föurben a^tunbjwanjtg ^unbert X)eut)'d|^c 
na^ ^^Tarvlant ticbmrfjt, i^on benen 33tele fic^ naü) Baltimore toanbten. — 
5Jafror 3act)artai?, %hc\>u-[t beim Ijunbertfien 3at)reöfep, 1847. 33utler'« 
@efc^. ». 9}ib., S. 51, 5>, 61, 62. 

T)it gfutö tcr 5ütomanbevung ttom europätf(^cn kontinent 
war mättt:;:^. (rinf(ü[fe üerf^tetencr Si^atur trugen baju bei, 
btefelbc nur noA ,}u öcrftärfen. 3« ^Jcnnfplöanicn waren ed bte 
iReuIänlier, Söt'vf^eucse in ter J^ant) tcr @(|ifföbcf{0cr, .Kaufleutc 
unt) Sntporteuro, n?e(d)e öiele "Deutfc^c bewogen, i^ren ^ert) ju 
ecrlaiJen. 2Iuf er tiefen gab ei noc^ eine »eitere Slaffe, bie fi(^ 
grope SDtü^e autl)at, ben Sinwo^ncrn ^Dcutfc^Ianb'ö Slu^manüe- 
Tungö* Oelüfte cinjuflöpen. Diefc jmei ©orten, bic 9Zeulänbcr 
ttnb ®peculantcn, nahmen 3uffud^t ju »erfd^iebenen ^unflgriffen, 
um i^ren Smtd auöjufü^ren. ®ic maciiten allerlei 55erfpre(^ungen 
unb [teilten ben beuten oor, in bcm neuen Sanb fliegen i^nen bie 
gebratenen lauben in'« 'Maul. Um biefeö ^^arabieg ju befi^en, 
folgten laufenbe bem berüchtigten 3o^n Saw in ben 3«^«n 1716 
ttnb 1717, um e^ in Souifiana an ben Ufern beö 5)tifjifjl)jpt ju 
ftnben. 2lnj^att bap er fte aber in'3 ocr^eipene oben brachte, lanbetc 
er biefelben an ben 2öajfern beö SBilori, na^e 9)?obiIe. günf 3a^rf 
lang waren fte ^ier obbad^loö Söinb unb Söetter auögefe^t. 9lic^t 
einer betrat baö öer^eipene 2anb. Swti taufcnb öerfc^Iang baö 
®rab. Die blajjen Ueberlebenben, brei :^unbert an ber ßa% hau-^ 
ten ftc^ f(^Iiepti^ am il^liffiffippi, etlid^c breipig ober öierjig Wti^ 
Icn oberhalb ^eto Drieanö, an. iam^i Slgcnten Ratten auf jwölf 
taufenb 1I)eutf(^e unb ©d^wei^cr gereci^nct; über ba« traurige 
®rf)icffal berer am 25iIori i)atti fl(i^ öerbreitet wie ein Sauffeuer, 
unb bie übrigen »on bem 2öagnip für bie öorgebilbetcn ®üter 
unb 53ef{0t^ümer abgefc^reift. 

3af)re lang befanben fic^ bie T)rei^unbert am SWifftfftpjji in 
bürftigen Umftänben. ®ie waren in ben äupcrflen 9lot^^anb 
öerfunten. „2lber,'' fagt Oa^arrc, „oon biefen armen, jebod) 
e{)rbaren X>eutfd|en flammen öielc ber angefe^enjlen Bürger Soui^ 
ftana'ö unb »iele ber rei^ftcn Bi^cferpflanjer im «Staate." 3t?v- 
5fia^fommen üergapen bie beutf(^e 'Bpvadit unb naftmen bie fran ^ 
3Öfif(^e an; aber bie 9?amen 5Sieler beuten Har auf ibv .'pei-iontniei!, 
obwohl man^c fo gaüiftrt ober franjöjlrt finb, la^ a \fijihü, 
aU wären fle öon frangöftfc^er ^erfunft. "Die Äüfti, iveld)c cl)< - 



32 ^Ilgtmeh« (ImkUang. 

tern fo arm unb bitrftig wax, unb tie „teutfi^e ^üfte" genannt 
itjurbe, ijat feitbem foI(|e 9te{(^tl)ümer ^eröorgebra^t unb in fi(^ 
aufgenommen, bap fie je0t unter bem geeigneten Xiamen Cote d'or, 
„©olbfüfte", befannt ift.* 

5lm 10. !Wat 1727 befuc^te SBater T)vi ^JotJTon, ein ju ben Slrfanfag ge= 
fanbter ÜJJifftonar, in [einer 2)ur^reife bie Deutfc^en. (£r fagt: „9Bir 
brangcn a(^tjcl)n 9!)?ei(cn föcit ben 5lug f)tnauf oor, etoa fo öicl, aU fie j[e 
ju ©tanbc bringen fönnen, unb [erlügen unfcr Sager bei ben T^tut^en 
nuf. Dicg finb bie 2lufcntt)altöj3lä0e, »elc^e ben Ueberreften ber 2)eutf^en, 
bie »om Sienb im Dftenf unb in Souifiana »erfc^ont geblieben, ongetoiefen 
tDorben finb. Oro^e 3lrmut() ijerrfd^t in i^ren SBo^nungen."— Early 
Jes. Miss., IL, (5.236, 262, 263, 267. 

3m grii^ja^r 1734 famcn bie (Satjfturger ?ut^craner (au& 
©aljburg, einem Jperjogt^um in Dejlreic^) in ©eorgia an. 2lu(^ 
fie l^atten in Suropa fc^merc 35erfoIgungen ju erieiben. „©ic 
nmrben au^ i^vev ^etmat^ vertrieben unb au3 bem Sanbc gejagt, 
tt)eil fie ben Se^ren beö Söangeliumö mit unöerrütfter Streue an= 
t)ingen."| 

X)iefc ernftc unb fromme ©efeUfc^aft öon S^riflen ttjurbc öon 
ü)ren ttjeuren ©eetforgern, ben ^aftoren Sodann 9J?artin Solving 
unb 3frael ß^riftian (Gronau, fammt i^rem aueigejeic^netcn 
©(^ulmeifter, ß^riftian Drtmann, l)egleitet. X)ie ©aljfcurger 
liefen fic^ in ßf^ngf)am Sount^ nteber unb benannten i^rc 2ln= 
fiebelung „(Ebenerer", um baburd^ i^rem ^errn i^ren aufrichtigen 
£)anf 3U fagen, ber il)ncn feit^er „ein ftarfer gelö'' geftcfen war 
unb il)nen „biä i^ier^er ge|)oIfen'' ^ötte. § 

Den ©i^ulmeifter backte man nidf)t weniger »it^ttg, atö ben 55firrer. 
„Die Srjiel)ungöfad()e tourbe üon ben Deutfcben nidit libcrfe^en. gür ben 
Unterftalt beg ©d&ulnteifterö f(^uf man nacb^er einen gonb; benn unfere 
frommen 33orfal)ren urt^ciUcn febr richtig, ba§ fein Sanb gebei|)cn fijnne, 
toelcbcö für bie geiftlic|)e ^Jflege unb Sluöbilbung beg auftoacbfenben ®t' 
fc^Iec^tg feine 33orforge treffe."— ©trobel. 

!Diefe beutf(^e Kolonie erfuhr einen Su^a^ö tion Sdt gu S^it, 
W fie no^ üor 1745 me:^rerc ^unbert gamilien jä^Ite. 3n (Sa= 
üanna^ mi^ntm ebenfatlg öielc X)eutfd)c; auper biefen befanben 
fic^ unter ber geiftlidjcn 5>flcgc beö ?paftorö SDaöib 9iitfd^mann 
noc^ oielc ^Wä^rifc^e Srüber im ©taate. 



* ®av)arre'g Souiftana, ®. 360, 361. SBarbc 9[WorbDig' ®efi$. ö. Souif. 

t 9Jal)e ben Dant>bin 3ni'eln, fünf unb gtuanjig 5D?eilen fübli(| öon 
53?obi(e.— Srofön'ö ^ilhm^, ®. 163. 

t 55aftor 21. 55. ©trobel'ö ßkf^. ber ©al^burger, ®. 21.— Diefeö 23uc^ 
[oUte ri(^ in ben C>änben jebcö Deutfcbcn befinben. 

§ Slnl^iang 9ir. IX. gibt bie ^^iamen ber erjien Slnftebler. 



^^Ulgcnwiiu CiukHuug. 33 

„£)ie ?!)?ä()rifc^en 33rüt)er grünbctcn feine bletbettt)e bliebet' 
lajfuncj in ©eorciia. "ÜU t»er ^xko, mit (Spanien au^Brac^, jogen 
ftc^ ft^ft »lue nad) ^Pcnnf^banien juriuf, mil cö gegen i^ren ®lan= 
Ben tierftiep, in irgenb einer ©rtd)e jn ben Sßajfen jn greifen."* 

3nt ^ai)n 1788 famen (Einige in ^ennf^Iüanien an unb liefen 
fic^ jn Set^Iel^em nieber.f „"Diejenigen, welche nod) in ©eorgia 
jnritcf gcbliekn waren, üerfie^en bai?feibe 1740 unb jogcn ju i()ren 
33rübern nac^ ^^cnnfploanien. @o würbe bie SOciffion unter ben 
3nbianern in ©eorgia nac^ einem oielöerfprec^enben Stnfangc 
hjieber aufgegeBen."| 

@()c bie 'i)}iäi)rif^en trüber nac^ ^^ennfplüanien famen, I)attc 
ftd) fc^on eine fceträd)t(i(^e 2lnjat)( ©c^roendfetber eingefunben, 
unb bie Sountieö ^udö unb |)l)i(abelpöia, je^t SOZontgomerp, 
fÖtxU unb l*e()ig^, auögemäi)It. So war it)re 2{l)ftc^t, bei il)rem 
Stbjug auö Suropa Georgia jujufteuern. «Sie änberten iC)r 53or= 
t)aBen unb wanbten fid)biefer3uf(ud)tä!ftätte aüer Unterbrüdtenju. 

1732 befuc^te ^err ^ean ^ierre ^ur^ öon 5'?eud)atel am ber 
©(^weij Carolina, unb, beeinflußt 'oon ben ^Regierungen Snglanb'ö 
unb Sarotina'iJ, unternal)m er eö, eine f(^weijerifc^e 5lnftebelung 
bafelBft ju grünben. Sin f>unbert unb fiebrig ^erfonen famen 
1732 herüber. 3bnen folgten balb anbere. ^urj barauf gä^Itc 
bie Solonie brci ^unbert ^en)of)ner. 2fn ben nörbti^en Ufern 
bc^ ©aoannaf) liefen fte ftc^ niebcr unb bauten etwa fec^ö unb 
breifig '3)teilen oberhalb ber 5Rünbung beö gluffeö eine ©tabt, 
Wel(|e fte ^^ur^^burg^ t)iepen. "Die Solonie öermei)rte ftd) 
jufe^enbö. ^ur^ brachte 1734 weitere jwei {)unbert unb ftebjig 
5)erfonen au^ ber ©^weij. 2)iefe famen fämmtü(^ auf Jloften 
i)ur9'ö unb einige feiner greunbe, bie it)m jur Siuöfü^rung feineö 
i?(aneö SJJittel an bie ^anb gaben, ba er fein ganjeg 35ermögen 
bereite baran gewanbt t)atte, noc^ e^e er benfelben ööüig öerwirf= 
Iid)t fai). 3e"^t befanben ftc^ beinat)c fei^ö ^unbert ©eeten in 
biefer 9lieberlaffung. 

„^err 5)ur9 t^at bieg infolge eineö öon i^m ber ©efefegebung 
öon ©üb^SaroIina gemachten Sntwurfg, bejfen nämtic^: baö 
füblif^c ©ren^tanb Sarolina'ö mit tapferen unb arbeitfamen 



* ©trobd'o ©aljburger, ®. 80. 

i !Dte 9?amcn bercr, bte ©eorgta öcrltc§en unb nac^ ^ennf^Iöanten toatt- 
berten, finb in ^n^a^ B entt)«Iten.— ®ran^' 23rüber=®efd^tc&tc, ®. 302. 

: Soöftel, Ib. II-. ®. 6. 



S4 §illgtmtmt dinltitang. 

Scuteit, toai befanntlic^ bie ©c^wei^er finb, ju fccöölfetn. T)it 
Slffcmfel^ jetgtc flc^ ganj mit biefem ^orfc^Iag ciHOerftantcn, unt) 
fcercitligte i^m am 20. Sluguft 1731 400 ^funb (Sterling, ttjenn 
er :^unticrt tüchtige Scanner naö) SaroUna bringe. 3« tiefem 
S3efc^Iu§ üerpflic^tete ftc^ bie 9legierung ebenfalls, brei ^unbert 
5)erfonen ein ^ai^v lang mit Unterhalt, Sßerfjcugen u. f. ro. ju 
tterfc^cn. 1747 f)atte ^urpöburg^ über ^untiert orbentlid^ ge= 
baute .^äufer. 

3n Sotteton Sount^, am nörbltc^en Ufer beö 9lort^ Sbtflon 
Oluffeö, 12 ^Weilen »on beffen SJiünbung, liegt Sßilton, ober 
9?eu Sonbon, mit ac^tjig Käufern, njelc^e bie «S^weijer mit Sr= 
laubnip ber 2ljfembl9 unter 3uberbü^Ier gebaut Ratten. £)iefer 
Ort ernjieö ftc^ nat^t^eilig für ^urpöburg^ wegen feiner Sage im 
5Jiittelpunft bed Sanbcö unb na^e ber J^aupt^abt. SSiete, bie nic^t 
na^ ^ur^öburg^ tüottten, jogcn ba ^in." — Soiven'ö ®eogr., ii., 
®. 645. Conboner 2ludgabe »on 1750. 

3n ben 3<i^rett 1740-1755 brachte man »iele ^^fätjer nac^ 
(Süb=SaroIina. 3« Drangeburg, Songaree unb Söateree festen 
fte ftc^ fefl.* Ueber fec^s ^unbcrt auö «Schwaben unb ber ^fa(,} 
würben 1765 »on Sonbon ^erübcrgefc^icft auf ein eigene für fie 
beftimmteg Joronf^ip.f 

SStele ber l^onänbifdicn Solontjlen, bie noc^ ber Ucbcrgabe ber Solonte 
on bie Ärone Gnglanb'ö mit tbrer ?aae in ^Je» g)or! ntdjt me^r jufrteben 
ttaren, brachen naä) ®üb*SaroIina auf unb ftcuerten burd^ i^rc 3Irbettfam= 
feit ntti^t wenig jum SBoblftanb ber ^roötnj bei. 3br Srfolg betoog anü) 
(tnbere tbrer Sanbölcute, ibrem Seifptele ju folgen.— Slamfa?. 

1679 fonbte Äarl II. in jwct (5(](>tjfctt eine Slnjnbl Hugenotten nacf» ®üb- 
Sarolina, um bafelb^ ben SBetnjiocf, bie Dltse u. f. i». gu |jflanjen. 9itc^t 
toeniger afö fetbjcbn bunbert ^Jroteftanten, meiftens granjofen, liefen ^iä) 
1752 in <Süb-SaroItna nieber. — ^olmeö ; Sairb. 

3m 3a^re 1739 tauften mehrere Sut^erancr unb !2Deutfcb=9le= 
formirte ein (Stücf ®runb öon ®eneral Sßalbo, unb legten barauf 
bie ©tabt Sßalboboroug:^ in Sincoln Sount^, 9Kaine, an. 53re= 
men, ein Dorf in bcmfelben Sount^, unb Ö^önfort in SBalbo 
Sount9 finb, wie auö ben 9lamcn erge^^t, jweifetöo^ne »on Dcut= 
fc^cn entweber angelegt ober angeftcbelt worben. 3>n Sflufe bcö 
fpanifc^^fran^öflfd^en Äriegeö würbe SBalboboroug^ burc^ bie 



* «Ramfa?'« !5üb»Sarol., i., <B. 3, 4. 

i |>oIme'd 2lm. Slnnalen, ü., @. 268.— SBerl^anblungen im engl. Unter« 
Ixiu«, 3lug. 1764. 



^Ilgtnwine ÄinUUnng. 35 

^onbe canabtfd^cr 3nbiancr 1746 jum 2tf(^enl^aufen. SBtcIe tet 
Sinnjo^ncr »urbcn niebergemadjt, anterc abgeführt. 9it^t rocnigc 
flarben infolge t»er graufamen Sel^anblung feitenö bcr 2ßtlbeit; 
einige entfamen bur^ tie gluckt unb jerftreuten fic^ in Sanaba. 
S3iö 1750 fetieb SOBalboboroug^ ein «Si^utt^aufen. 3nt 3ö^re 
1751 famen auf Sintabung bcr 9legierung brei^ig beutfc^c ga^ 
ntilien, unb 1752 fünfje^n ^unbert bemittelte ?eutc »on Suropa 
naä) 5D?aine. „X)a jebo(i^ ber 9tec^tötitel bcö ©eneral 2BaIbo ft(^ 
aU fe^Ier:^aft erwies, fo »erliefen Side bie Solonic. 3^re 53e' 
öölferung ndi)m nie bebeutenb ju." — ^ajeliu^, ®. 34, 48 k. 
Cö^er, 1772. „Sinige jogen ani 'Maim, urn mit i^ren 2anbg= 
leuten in Sonbonberr^, ®üb=SaroIina, ju h)o!^nen, »on benen 
aber bie 50'Zeiflen biefcn Schritt ^crnac^ bereuten unb na^ ?!Jiaine 
jurücffe^rten, »o fic^ i^rc 9tac^fommen jie^t nod^ ftnbcn." — 33airb. 

3luf gro§e 33crfpre4ungen beö ^önigö ®eorg II. öon ®ro^= 
Sritannien :^{n, welche er benen auöfe^te, bie nad^ 9looa ©cotia 
auöroanbern würben, machte flc^ eine bebeutenbe Slnja^l 3Deutf(^er, 
meifi J^anno»eraner, auf ben SBeg na^ 2lmeri!a, tvo fie in ber 
S^ebucto 33a9, na^e ^alifar, ber ^auptftabt öon 9?ooa ©cotia, 
anfamen. 2?ierje^n ^unbert unb breiunbfiinfjig f^ifften ftc^ n)ie=' 
ber ein unb lanbeten am 7. 3uni 1753 in SRarliguif^. „^ier 
legten fie bie blül^enbc Stabt Sünenburg an, fatten aber biefelbcn 
(©c^wierigfeiten au^jufte^cn, mit benen bie Soloniflen gu ^alifajr 
in Slnfteblung ber J^atbinfel ju fämpfen fatten, 'bit Ur^efc^id^tc 
ieneö Drteö erjä^It 'oon wenig Slnbercm, aU einer fortwä^renben 
Sßieber^olung »on kämpfen mit ben SJitben, in benen, ungead^tet 
ber fräftigen J^ilfe, bie i^nen bie 3tegierung fletlte, bo(^ 35iete i^r 
Men oerloren. getbbau Ratten ftc beö^alb nur innerhalb eng ge= 
gezogener ©renjen ju betreiben, unb bie Urbarmachung beö an- 
fto^enben SanbeiS mu^te überUegen bleiben, biö bie fran3Öftfd)c 
^Jla^t in SHo'oa Scotia gebrod^en war." — ^aliburton'ö ®cfc^. 
oon 9ioöa ©cotia, L, @. 162 ; SJ^urrap'iJ S3rit.=2tmer., IL, (s. 55 ; 
8ö^er, @. 68, 74; g«'Suüoct)'S Uni., II., ®. 498. 

SSon 1735 »erme^rten ftc^ bie Slnftebelungen in ^Jennfpbanicn 
5ufet)enb3 unb behüten fid^ über unabfe^are ©egenben, wefitic^ 
»on (Saoöqua^anaun!,* auä, wo^in i^nen bie f(^ottifrf>en 

* (Suöqutbanna, b. b. „Iang=flebügener»(Strom." (a) ®elbe ^oftn. 
T)tc Sebeutung beö tnbtantfc^en 9tamcnö tfi „®o ti ft(| tcieber jurücff 
brtbt." (b) Sanoboqutnet, b. i). „(Sine qro§f ©trede lang mc^tö a\i Krüm- 
mungen." (c) SanocD^eague, b. t). „<Äid>er eine lange Steife," (d) T)tx 
Ätttatin^ ober ,,33laue Serg". 



36 ^Ugem^injE ©inUitnttg. 

3rlättber t»en 2ßeg gezeigt t)atten. !Dic teutfc^en Sfiicterlaffungen 
fonntcn fic^, öerftärft buri^ I'te immert»ät)rent) ^uflie^eulDe Sin== 
iranberung, «tit t)en (£iugebcrenen mcffen. 33or 1765 ^^atten fte 
ftc^ meftti^ »om ©U£jquel)anna im 6umkrlantttf)al unto ten 
ilfcrn t)eö flamt SaUapafciu! (a) entlang, unt> anf Mben 
©eiten be;? ge[d)liingelten ©unipt)ucf:^annet (b), unto meiter 
nat^ 2ßeften am @unneufip(i)if (c), t»ret tiefe fruc^ttare 
©egent) Beipaffernbe ©tröme, niebevgetaffen 

!Der Äau = ta = tin = ßl)unf ( d), ter ft(^ »om !t)elan?are ^un= 
terte öon Wldkn weftioärtö jiet)t, toax il)nen fein unübertüinblii^cö 
^inberni^. ©ic [^ritten barüfcer l^intt»eg unb legten ba i()rc 
Hauereien an, „wo fte furj nac^^er fammt 2öeib unb Äinb bcr 
gaiJel, bem S3eit unb ©catpirmeffcr ber SBilben unb i^rem mitter= 
nächtlichen Singriff unb 23Iutt()aten auögefe^t waren." 3n ten 
3a^ren 1754-1763, unb noc^ fpäter, fielen ^unberte ben uner= 
fcittlic^ graufamen Sßilben gum Dpfer, unb bieg ben 33Iauen 
Sergen entlang in füblic^er unb nörblic[)er Stiftung, unb am 
©uöquefianna t)inauf bi^ ju ^enn'ö Sreef. Unter ben X)a^in= 
gef(!^Ia(^teten waren öiele !Deutf(^e — me()r aU brei ^unbert im 
©anjen. 

Unter ben erfc^lagenen 2)eutf(|en nörbltc^ »on ben Slaucn Sergen unb 
innerhalb Wonroe Sounti? waren: ®ulfcin, ^btb, ober $utl), Sömper, 
SSanafen, Sßanpr, ©(^nelt, ^artntann, ■^ctgc, Srunbtc^, Weltmann, ©onber» 
mann, ©c^letc^, ?!}tii(kr, 33anbcla)5, Derfcr, ^an ®onbte, Srtncter. Snner-- 
^alb ber Sountteö 2ct)tg{), 9?ort()am))tDn unb (Sarbon, fiibltcfejinb ncrbltc^ 
bcr Serge, fielen über Stnbunbert. Unter biefen waren: lisobn, Äletn, 
33tttcnbenber, JRotb, ©gaffer, Slnbere^, 5tttfcbmann, ®enfemann, ®rtttcr= 
mtter, gabrictuei, ©cbwetgert, Semite, ^'refi'cr, 2)e|^u. 3nnert)alb ber Soun= 
tieöSerfö, Lebanon unb 'Dauiit)tn,benfclbcn Sergen nttlang:9ietc^el0bbrfer, 
OJer^art, 9teibung, Älug ober Slucf, Sinbcrmann, lac^ott, Strau^^ar, ^d^' 
lojf, 2Blinc|, !Die|i))e(, |)enl9, <S)3itler, 9tbcfer, 5)?aurcr, Söö^ar, geU, 
ilitt)lmer, Sang, Jrumj), gä'ger, ©edbler, ©d^ctterl», ®auter, ©etger, 
3Dt^ler, gran^, @(|nebelc, ^Koffer, 8tn(|er, .Rubier, «Üiartloff, SBolf, $änb= 
fc|e, SBeiffer, 5D?tef, Sebengut^, 5!)?o^, 5tDa^, SBtnfelbleci, 3cucimac()cr 
«. f. w. 

35or 1770 war man in ber 5Bilbni§ ^ennf^banien'ö U^ über 
baö 2llleg^en9 ©ebirge ttorgebrungen. 3itner^lb ber je^igen 
©renjen »on 2ßeftmorelanb unb anberen weftlid^cn dountieg 
biefeö «Staate^ fceftanben feercitö Slnftebetungen. ©ine Stnjal)! 
beutfc^er gamilien l)atte ftc^ am Si)Zononga|)ela Mo t)inauf nac^ 
0tebftone, SSrownöüiüe, gazette Sount^, nicbergclaffen. Unter 
il)nen waren: 2ßeiömann, Treffer, 35eröalfon, Belong, ^uxiq, 
SJiartin, S^utt, 5^eter, <Sd)war^, gutter, Sactev, Slbra^am unb 



allgemeine Einleitung. 37 

anbere * njeld)e jener treue "Diener et)riftt, 5)aftor 3ot)ann(£on* 
rat» Sud) er, im 9by. 1768bcfuc^te.— (£o(.9^ec.,IX.,@. 508; 
German Reformed JMesscnger, 24. "Wai 1854; Stupp'ö @efd)id)te 
»on IBerfö 6o., ®. 459. Die Flamen »ieler anl»erer Deutfc^en 
in SBeftmorelant» (lountp ftni) in tier »om 33erfa)'fcr tticfcö ju[am= 
mengeftetiten ®e[(^id)tc oom njeftiic^en ^eunfpbanieu ju jtnt)en. 



* J)te crflen I^cutfdien im »ejlttc^en ^^ennfulüanffn It£§cn \iä) in (^jrecite 
Souttt9 ntebcr. G» toaren bie betten ä^rütcr gcferlein, tceld^c 1745 Gpln-ata 
»erliefen, um fid^ in ber Jtefc ber SBilberni^ einen neuen 2Boi)novt ,^u 
fuc^en.— Chronicon Ephratense, pp. 158, 195, 195. SoL9?ec., V., (2J.53L 
25or 1754 bauten ftc^ SBcnbcl 23raun mit feinen beiben ©ot^nen unb J}rie= 
txiit) aBal0er »ier 5JZeiIen h)ejilit| »on Uniontotcn an.— Smith's Old Red- 
stone, p. 25. 



PROLEGOMENA, 



TO WHICH THE SPECIAL ATTENTION OF THE 
READER IS RESPECTFULLY INVITED. 



Oebhans, Swiss, Dutch and French formed a large portion of the 
first settlers of Pennsylvania. Between forty and fifty thousand 
names of these Immigrants are to be found in the Records of the 
State — in Land warrants, Acts of naturalization, and in Lists of im- 
ported foreigners. Much time has been spent in laborious researches, 
to copy from these Records the names of Immigrants, and arrange 
them in chronological order ; especially, the names of those who came 
to Pennsylvania prior to 1727. As that Collection, embracing the 
period from 1682-1727, is not as complete as it might be, it is with- 
held from the public for the present. The Collection now published, 
embraces a period of fifty years, and contains upwards of thirty 
thousand names of the ancestors "0/ toiling millions." 

The great influx of these Immigrants began about the year 1707. 
Since then, thousands of Germans, Swiss and others bade their friends 
adieu, left their Vaterland, their homes — "the hearth where soft affec- 
tions dwell," — for this foreign country. So vast became their numbers 
in Pennsylvania, as to excite public attention as early as 1717, and, 
finally, to lead the provincial Council to adopt, Sept. 14, 1727, and 
enforce the following Resolution : 

*^That the masters of vessels, importing Germans and others from 
the continent of Europe, shall be examined whether they have leave 
granted them by the Court of Great Britain for the importation of 
these foreigners, and that a List be taken of all these people, their 
several occupations, and place from whence they came, and shall be 
further examined touching their intentions in coming hither; and that 
a writing be drawn up for them to sign, declaring their allegiance 
and subjection to the King of Great Britain, and fidelity to the Pro- 
prietary of this Province, and that they will demean themselves peace- 
ably towards all His Majesty's subjects, and observe and conform to 
the Laws of England and of the Government of Pennsylvania." — CoL 
Rec, in., pp. 29, 283. 

(39) 



40 PROLEGOMENA. 

Lists were taken bj the masters of Tessels, and attested as being 
" exact and true." These are still preserved in the Secretary's Office 
at Harrisburg. Many of them are triplicates. All have been carefully 
examined by the Editor. For convenience of reference, the Lists are 
designated in this Collection, A, B, C. 

A. The master's or captain's Lists contain the names of all male 
passengers above the age of sixteen, and some of them, the names of 
all the passengers. If any had died, or were sick, on the arrival of the 
ship, they are marked accordingly. 

B. This List contains all the names of males above the age of six- 
teen, who were made to repeat and subscribe the Declaration of alle- 
giance, with their own hands, if they could write, if they could not. 
the name was written by a clerk, and the qualified person made his 
mark. Lists A and B are preserved in detached papers. 

C. This List is an autograph duplicate of B, signed in the same way, 
and is preserved in Book form. 

List A was at the time of presentation, Sept. 21, 1727, to Oct. 19, 
1736, copied literatim into the Provincial Records — containing 2,536 
names. These were lately published by authority of the Legislature, 
** as a faithful and literal copy of the original," in the III. and IV. 
Colonial Records. The printed List does not present the true ortho- 
graphy of one-half of the autograph«, or the names written by the 
qualified persons themselves. This remark is not intended as invidious. 
It is a mere statement of the fact, that English scholars may not always 
be able to spell German names correctly.* 

B and C are made the basis of this edition. The orthography of 
cognomens, or family names, is given as in the autographs, or as written 
by clerks, though the latter do rarely present the correct spelling of 
German names. To distinguish names written by clerks, from auto- 
graphs, this mark (*) has been appended to the former. Some of the 



• Hundreds of instances might be cited fmni the printed Colonial Records to ens- 
tain the assertion. Two must suflRco. In September, 1727, a person subscribed the 
Declaration thus: G. M. Weis, V. D. M.— In tlie Col. Rec. III. 284, the name is printed 
G. M. Wey, V. D. M. Rev. Weis was bfirn at Stebbeck, in Neckarthal, Germany — 
graduated at Heidelberg — was for »ome years pastor of the German Reformed Congre- 
gation in Philadelphia — diedatGonhenhoppen 1T63. — Rupp's His. Lan Co.HoS. Rupp's 
Hi*. Lebanon Co. Ufi. In September, 17-28, another peraon subscribed the Declaration, 
Johann Canpar Stcever, S. S., Theol. Stud. In the Col. Rec. III. 331— Johan Casper 
Stefl'er jr. Kev Stoever was bom in Strassburg, Germany — was for many years a 
miniMtcr of the Lutheran Church at Lo)>anon— he died near that place, May 13, 1779, 
aged 71 years, 3 mouths and 2 days. His dfHcendants still reside in Pennsylvani». — 
Ruf/p'a Hii. (i/Rel. Denom. U. S. Ruj/p'a His. of York Co. 699. 



PROLEGOMENA. 41 

Gknnan cmtographa are difficult to decipher. When a doubt remains 
as to the orthography, a note of interrogation (?) has been added. 

In List A there are names of males above sixteen years old, marked 
»itk, which are not found in B and C, and some are marked dead. To 
complete this Collection, these names hare been added, and designated 
accordingly. Where this (§) is added to a name, it indicates the per- 
son was sick. 

Determined to make this publication as satisfactory as possible, the 
names of males under sixteen years of age have been copied with the 
utmost care, and will be presented in an Appendix, in which the cor- 
rect spelling of names, as far as can be ascertained by collating all the 
Lists, is represented. By adopting the plan pursued, several thousand 
names will be added, which would otherwise not have appeared. Foot 
notes have occasionally been added, for reasons fully explained in the 
Introduction. 

Some of the notes are of a historical, others of a biographical cha- 
racter. The most important are those containing the names of early 
settlers, who had landed at some port, other than that of Philadelphia, 
but who afterwards came into Pennsylvania, and whose descendants 
Btill reside here. An attempt has been made to place the diflFercnt 
spellings of names in juxtaposition, showing the orthography of the 
ancestor's autograph and that of his descendants, as in the case of 
the well-known Hiester family. An ancestor signed his name to 
the Declaration, Sept. 26, 1737, the time of his arrival, Joat Hikterr — 
ffittter is the orthography adopted by his descendants. 

It is not the only design of this publication to preserve names, 
which indifference or accidents might forever place beyond reach, or 
to lead to the recovery of rights to inheritances abroad, that might 
otherwise remain unestablished ; but to enable thousands to determine 
with certainty the time of their ancestors' arrival in Pennsylvania. — 
Prominent and intelligent individuals may be met with, who, when 
asked: When did your ancestors arrive? can give only a conjectural 
answer. The descendants of Mathias Smtsee, who, numbering in 
1845, 1,162 say: "Mathias, with his brother Qeorge and his sister 
Margaretta, emigrated to America about the year 1 738, or probably at 
an earlier period."* By the aid of this Collection, the year, month of 
arrival and day of his signing the Declaration can be determined. 
The eonjeetured time is seven years — "far from the mark!" 

• Minutes of the Centennial Celebration, held by the descendants of the Elde^ 
Mathias Smyser, May 3d, 1845, on the fann of Samuel Smyser, West Manoherte« 
Township, York Cooaty, P». 

4* 



3SorBemcrfitnöen, 

ttjelc^c bem Sefer jur aufm crffa men 3)urc^ficf)t bcfonber^ 
empfot)len ftnb. 



'l!eutf(|c, (Sd^tretjcr, ^oUänber unb Srnnäofen btlbcten einen großen 
Übeü ber erflcn Slnftebler ^Jennfgbantcn'^. 3*^ifc^en öterjt'g unb fünfzig 
taufenb 5?amen biefcr Sintüanberer [tnb int ©tnat^are^io auf6etDa|)rt, unb 
äwar in SanböoKmaci^tcn, 9?aturnlifiruitgö=2tctcn unb in giften angelangter 
grember. 3luögebel[)nte ^lac^forfc^ungcn, baö Slbfc^reibcn ber 9?amen ber 
Sluöhjanbcrer »on bicfen Urfd&riften, unb bie gefc^ii^tlic^c ^ufintttttei'fteßnng 
berfelben nal()men üiel 3ctt in Slnfprucf), unb befonbcrö ift bie^ ber gaÜ 
bei ben 9?amen bcrer, bie oor 1727 nac^ 5'c""f9lo<inifn famen. Tia bic 
©ammlung, tce(t|e bie ^Jamen ber in bem 3fitraum »on 1682-1727 
(Singeh5anberten in ftc|) f^lic^t, nic^t fo öotlfta'nbig ifl, alö fie gemalt hjerben 
fönnte, fo tüirb biefelbc wenigftenö für bie (Segenwart bem ^ublifum »or» 
enttialten. Die je^t »eröffentlic|te (Sammlung fc|liegt eine ^criobe »on 
fünfzig Salären in fi(^, unb enti^ält über brei^ig taufenb 5Zamen ber 2lf)tten 
emfiger ^IJJillionen. 

•Der gro^e Strom biefer Sintoanbevung tourbe pffig im 3<i^re 1707. 
©eitbem fjaben Jaufenbe »on ©eutfc^en, ©i^toeijern unb anberen ^Rationen 
tl)ren ^reunben bie $anb jum Slbfd^ieb gcrei^it, ii)t SSaterlanb »erlaffen 
unb if)re $cimat(), „beö $erbeö traute geuerjtd'tte", um in einem fremben 
Sanbe il)r ®lücf ju »erfuc^en. <So jat)lreic^ würben fte in ^^ennf^banien, 
bag fie f4)on im ^a^xt 1717 baö öffentliche Slugenmerf auf fic^ richteten 
unb enblid^ ben ^Jroßinjialratl) am 14. September 1727 jwangen, folgenben 
23efd^lu§ ju faffen unb burc^äufehen : 

„5)a§ bie Sapitaine »on Schiffen, auf benen ©eutfd^e unbSlnbcrc 
»on bem ge ft lau be Suropa'ö l)crübergebrad^t werben, unterfud^t 
werben foßen, ob fie für bie Sinfuljr fold^er Sremben »on ber 3?egierung 
(Snglanb'ö (Sr(aubni§ einget)oU f)aben, unb bag eine 2 i j^ e »on aßen bicfen 
beuten genommen werbe, nebfi it)ren Seruföarten unb ben Crten i^rcr $er- 
fünft, unb biefelben Weiter über bie 2lbfic()t i^reö ^ierl^erfommenö befragt 
»erben, unb bag eine ©c^rift jur Unterjeic()nung i^rerfeitö entworfen werbe, 
in ber fie it)ren ©c^orfam unb Untertf)ä'nigfeit gegen ben Äönig »on ©rog» 
SSritannien unb gegen ben Sefi^er biefer 55ro»inj i()re Jreue erflären, unb 

(43) 



44 J^orbtmtrknngt». 

ba^ fte (td^ ferner gegen aüe Untertfjanen Seiner ^Wajeftat friebli(f> 6ene^» 
men unb bte ®efefe Snglanb'ö unb ber Siegterung ^Jfnnfvloamen'ö be* 
folgen nnb gemä§ benfelben t)anbeln."— Sol. 9tec. III., ®. 29, 283. 

Si Pen »urben bemgemä^ »on ben Sdiiff^^Satjitainen angefertigt, 
toeli^e fie alö genau unb » a ^ r ju befc^reören fatten. I)iefe finb no* 
auf ber Slmt^fhibe be« ©taatjjfecretairss ju .^»arrieburg erhalten. Sßiete 
batjon finb breifac^i »or^anben. 2lfle »urben »om Herausgeber forg^ 
fältig unterfuddt. Slue Dliicfftc^t für Sequemlic^feit im 9lac^f(^lagen fmb 
bte Sijien mit A, B, C bejei4>net. 

A. Die Sabitaindliflen. Diefelben enthalten bie 9?amen «Her monn' 
lidden 55a|[(»giere über fedjijelin 3at)re, unb einige bie ^amtn fammtlic^jer 
3?eifenben. Diejenigen, toel^ie auf bem «Scdijfe jlorben ober franf ge- 
»oefen toaren, tourben na^i ber Slnfunft bemgemä§ bejeic^inet. 

B. Diefe Cifte enthält aüt üWannjtnamen über fec^je^n 3i^^re, bie i^ire 
$lnt)änglicl|)feit an i^re frühere ^Regierung ju »iberrufen unb i^iren ®et)or- 
fam gegen ben Äönig »on önglanb eigenl)änbig ju bezeugen Ratten; Fonnten 
jie nitit fd()reiben, [o unterjeic^nete ber 23eamte ben 9?amen, unb bie be» 
treffenbe ^Jerfcn fe5teii^r3ei(i^en bei. Die Si^en A unb B fmb 
ouf befonberen (©^riftflücfen aufbetoa^rt. 

C. Diefe Sifte i)l ein e i g e n ^ ä n b i g e « Duplieat »on B, unb t|l in 
SBu4iformat aufbetoa^rt. 

Die Sifle A toar |ur ^tit i^rer Sorjeigung »om 21. September 1727 
big 19. October 1736 iviä)^äilii^ für bie ^Jroöinjtal-Seric^te 
abgefc^rieben. Sie enthält 2,536 Dramen. Diefe würben fürjlic^ im 9Iamen 
ber ©efe^gebung im 23anb HI. unb IV. be« SoIoniaUSeric^t* aU eine 
gelreue unb bu4)fiäbli(i()e Slbfc^rift beö Original« eer» 
offentlic^t. Die gebrucften ?iften geben für bie C^ölfte ber eigenliänbig 
ober »Ott ben beauftragten ^erfonen gef4)riebenen 5?amen bie unrichtige 
Sc^reibtoeife. Diefe 23emerfung ifi aber aller ®el^öfpgfeit bar. <äi t»irb 
baburdd nur bie 2;t)atfacl(>e feftgefleßt, baf englift^e ®elet>rte beutfc^ie ^tarnen 
ni^t immer xiä)tii buc^flabiren fönnen.* 



* J^unbtrtt «on Sdfpieltn tonnten ton btn {oIenia('C(rl((t(n ungefütrt ntrben, um 
tit« |u btfiätigtn. 3»^ muffen genügen, ^m StfUmitr 1737 unterjet^nete eine $erfon 
bie lieclaraticn fo: ffi. 'SR. ®ei«, V. D. M.; im «olcnial-ißerictt III., 284, i(t ber Slame 
Sebrudt ®. 3Jl. SIBeu, V. D. M. fJaflor 3Bei* »urbe {u ©tebberf im Jledartfeol, DeuJfdjIanb, 
getoren, grabuirte (u ^cibelberg, nar einige ^a^rc lang ^aficr an ber beutfdj-rcfcrmirten 
Äirf^e in S^ftilabelpftia, unb ftarb 1763 {u ©cfdjenDcppen.— SRupp'« ®ef(t. ». £anc. (Ip. 255. 
SRupp'« ®ef4. B. £ebancn £o. 442.— 3m ©eptember 1728 unterjet(tnete eine anbere JJerfon 
Hefe Decloraticn fo: 3ebann gafpor €JcBer, 8. S., Stud, theol. 3n ben dolcnial-öe. 
rieten III., 331, 9o&an Jafper ©teffer fr. ^afler <Slö»eT Burbe in ©frafburg, t)eutf*= 
lanb, geboren, »ar oiete 3abre lang $rebiger an ber (utberifi^en jtiritc «u Lebanon, unb 
ftcrb am 13. 3Ral 1779 in ber «Rabe, im tüttcr pen 71 3>(ren, 3 S^onaten unb 2 XagtM. 



Iß^orbtmtrhungt«. 45 

B unb C finb bitfem 2Btrfe ju Ö3ruMbe gtltgt. Die ®d^rtib»tiff ber 
(5tgen= obtr gamtlifttnamcn tft tie ber Unterfc^rtft btr ^J^fonen felbf^, 
ober ber 2Ingefieütcn ; Untere jcbod) geben feiten bte richtige <B<^xtibtoti\t 
beutf4)er 5?amen. Um bie »on SlngejteUten gef^rtebenen 5?amen »on btr 
ftgenl>änbtgen 9iamenöunter)"cl()rtft ju unterfc^eiben, tfl erfleren ein 
«Stent (*) betgefe^t. ißtele ber beutfc^en Unterschriften ftnb l^öc^fl fc^tcierig 
)u entziffern. S53o ein 3»f «f«l bejüglit^ ber richtigen (»c^reibtceife obioaltet, 
ift ein grngejeic^en (?) ^injugefe^t. 

3n Sifte A finb bie 9?amen ber franfen unb »erflorbtnen männ- 
U6)tn yerfonen über fed()jel)n 3fl^re beigefügt, »»elc^e [litf in B unb C 
nidbt finben. Um biefe (Sammlung ju »eroollftänbigen, »ourben beö« 
Ijalb biefe 9tamen aufgenommen unb bemgemol bejeic^net. SBo ba« ^axa^ 
Qxa\>\)itiil)tn (§) ^t\)t, bebeutet ti, baf benannte ^ti^on f ran! toar. 

(jntfd^lojfen, biefe Sammlung mögli4>jl »ollftänbig ju madden, ftubet 
fic^ im 2lni)ang eine )}od)\t genaue Slbfc|rift ber 9?amen ber unter fecl()jel)n 
Sauren (le^enbcn 5J?ann«perfonen ; bafelbfl ift auc^ bie richtige Sctireib= 
loeife, toie fte bei SSergleic^ung aller Sijlen erfi^tlic^ ij>, angegeben. Durd^ 
$5erfolgung biefeö ^lan^ »»erben einige taufenb 9iamen me^r ^injugefügt, 
bie pc^ fonjl nic()t bitten einreiben laffen. 3tanbgloffen t»urben l^in unb t»ieber 
beigefeft au« Urfa^ien, bie in ber Einleitung toeiter auSeinanbergefe^t finb. 

Ginige ber ©loffen ober Semerfungen ftnb gefcliiddtlitlien, anbere bio- 
flraj)^if4>en Sl^arafter«. Die tpic^tigjlen ftnb bie, toelcbe bie Flamen »on 
frühzeitigen 2lnfteblem entl^alten, bie in einem anberen |i)afen, al« bem ju 
5)^ilabelt)^ia, angefommen unb nat^^er nadf ^ennf^lsanien eingewanbert 
pnb, unb beren 'Jla^hmmtti not^ |e^t Ijier »»otinen. Sluc^ ma^Jte man 
einen 33erfu4i, bie »erfdiiebenen «S^ireibtoeifen beöfelben 9lflmenö neben 
einanber ju jießen, um baburc^ |U jeigen, wie ber Slbne feinen «Ramen 
buc^flabirte, unb t»ie iljn bie 9ta(^fommen jept fi^reiben. Sin befannter 
gaU ift ber in ber $iefler=3amilie. 3^r (Stamm»ater unterjei^mete am 
26. (September 1737 feinen Stamen 3 oft $üflerr jur Declaration; 
feine Slbfömmlinge tiaben bie (St^retbt»eife $iefler angenommen. 

Der 3t»fff biefer Schrift ifl nidjit bloö, 9?amen gu er^jalten, tsel^e burtb 
®Iei(^gültigfeit ober ^ü^aü für immer unjugänglicti gemacht »»erben fönntcn, 
ober §ur Gntbctfung »on au«t»ärtigen Srbrei^ten ju führen, »»eld^e fcnfi 
unbegrünbet geblieben fein fijnnten, fonbern um laufenben ti ju ermüg- 
lieben, bie Slnfunft i^rer Voreltern in ^Jennfolsanien mit Oenouigfeit ju 
erfahren. ÜÄan fann oft ^eroorragenben unb uerflanbigen 55»rfonen begeg» 
nen, bie auf biegrage: SBann famen 3^t« ^^nen an"? nur eine 



©eine 5la*fommen »»Dnen n»4 in f ranfplsanitn.— 9lu(>p'« ®tf<i|- »« '«•• »tHtnuBBge« 
in Un Scr. @t. fRnff't ®ef((. «. ^eri Sd. 692. 



46 ^oxhtmnhnnQtn. 

unbefttmmte Stntwort ju gekn vermögen. Die 9?a(|fommen 'oon'^at^xai 
©nt^fer, bte 1845 1,162 jä{)Ucn, fagcn: „5Ratl)taö toanberte um'g 
Sd^r 1738, ober ttalrf^etnltd^ früher, mit feinem SBruber ßJeorg 
«nb feiner @c|»efler 50?argaretta na(| 2tmerifa auö."* ?!}?it |)ilfe 
biefer (Sammlung fann iai 3af)r unb ber 5}?onat bcr 5lnfunft, unb 
ber Xa$ bcr Unterzeichnung ber Declaration bcftimmt »erben. 2)ic m u t ^' 
«tägliche 3"t ifi fieben 3a^rf— t»eit ai »om 3*^1' 



* frototoH ber I)unbettiä6rigen geier, bic »on ben 9^ad)tommen be« Sleltcilen 5Wat6ta« 
©m^fer om 3. Wlai 1845 auf bent ®ut be« Samuel ©m^fer In 2Befi-anan$e|ier a^orenf^i)), 
9orf SountQ, ?l. 9., gehalten »urbe. 



NAMES 



OP 



German, Stes anb ot^er Immigrants. 



At a meeting of the Board of the Provincial Council, held 
at the Court House* in Philadelphia, Sept. 21, 1727, one hun- 
dred and nine Palatines appeared, who, with their families, num- 
bered about four hundred persons. These were imported into 
the Province in the ship William and Sarah, William Hill, 
Master, from Rotterdam, last from Dover, England, as by clear- 
ance from the officers of His Majesty's customs there. The said 
Master being asked if he had any license from the Court of 
Great Britain for transporting those people, and what their in- 
tentions were in coming hither, said that he had no license or 
allowance for their transportation other than the above clearance, 
and that he believed they designed to settle in this Province. — 
Col. Rec. III. 283. 

All male persons above the age of sixteen did repeat and sub- 
scribe their names, or made their mark, to the following Decla- 
ration : 

" We subscribers, natives and late inhabitants of the Palatinate 
upon the Rhine and places adjacent, having transported ourselves 
and famihes into this Province of Pennsylvania, a colony subject 
to the crown of Grreat Britain, in hopes and expectation of finding 
a retreat and peaceable settlement therein, Do solemnly promise 
and engage, that we will be faithfol and bear tnie allegiance to 
His present MAJESTY, KING GEORGE THE SECOND, 
and His successors, kings of Great Britain, and will be faithful 



* Immigrants were usually qualified at the Court House, occasion- 
ally elsewhere. October 15, 1766, at the dwelling house of John Law- 
rence, Mayor of Philadelphia. January 13, 1767, and October 6, 1767, 
at the Office of Thomas Willing, Esq. December 8, 1773, at the house 
of Peter Miller, Esq., in Philadelphia. — [Editor.) 

(47) 



48 NAMKS OF GERMAN, SWISS 

to the proprietor of this Province ; and that we will demean our- 
selves peaceably to all His said Majesty's subjects, and strictly 
observe and conform to the Laws of England and of this Province, 
to the utmost of our power and the best of our understanding." 



ganten 

btr 



beutst^tn, st^iörijerist^tn u,anhni^intomt!timr. 



S3ei einer im ©eric^t^^auö* ju ^^ilabelp|ta ont 21. «Sept. 
1727 gehaltenen ©crfammlung ted GoUegiumö teö ^^ro^in^tal^ 
Slat^eö erfc^tenen ein ^unfecrt unt) neun ^fäljer, welche mit i^ren 
gamiUen etwa öier ^unbert ^erfonen auömac^tcn, unb mit tcm 
«Schiffe SBiUiam unb (Sarat), Sapitain SÖiüiam ^iU, tton SRotter- 
bam über Doöer in Sngtant) mit Sriaubnif gur 21bfat)rt öon 
ben Beamten in (Seiner 50'Zajeflät B^Ü^aufc nac^ ber ^roüinj 
abgeführt rourben. 2luf bie "B^a^t an ben ßapitain, ob er öom 
englif(^en ^ofe 33olImac^t jur Ueberf^iffung bie[er Seute erhalten 
^aht unb au0 welcher Urfac^c biefelben ^erüber!ämen, antwortete 
berfelbe, ba^ er feine 53en>iüigung ober ßrlaubni^ für beren 
Ueberfa^rt ^abc al€ bie obgenannteöene^migung ber 3oUbeamtcn, 
unb bap er glaube, ba^ i^r SSor^aben fei, fic^ in biefer 5>ro»lnj 
nieber^ulaffen.— 6oL Slec. III. 283. 

SIÜc männti^en ^crfonen über 16 3a^rc wteberl^olten bie nad^* 
ftel)enbe X)ccIaration, unb biefelben unterzeichneten eigen^änbig 
mit i^rcm 9^amen ober i^rem äcic^en« 

„2öir, bie Untcrjeic^ncten, geboren unb weilanb jno^n^aft in 
bcr 5^falj am 9t^ein unb in ben angrenjcnben ^lä^en, unb nun 
fclbft fammt unferen gamtlien in biefe ^rooinj oon ^tnn^r)U 
x>anicn, eine ber Ärone Snglanb'ß ange^örcnbe Colonic, in bcr 



* öinwauberer tonxitn gftoötjnltct) im ©tri^itöbaufe qualtfictrt, gc Icj?tnt= 
heb anbfri?wo. Slm 15. Dftober 1766 im SBobnbaufe bfö 3obn Lawrence, 
Wavor öou ^^ilattWa. 13. 3anuar 1767 unb 6. Cftobcr 1767 tn ber 
ilmtijfiube bf« Xi^omai SBiaing, Gtfq. 8. I^ecember 1773 tm ^auft bfö 
•'pcrru 5)fter !Wtlifr ju "Pbi'abelpbtn.— (>?>trauögeber.) 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS. 



49 



Hoffnung unb bcm ®Iauben, balmier cine 3uflu<^t^ilätte unb eine 
friet>ltd)e 9ticberlaf[ung ju ftnbcn, aui?ge»rant)ert, ocrfprc^en unto 
»erpflic^ten unjJ, Seiner gegenioärtig regierenben ^Wajeflät, 
Äönig ©eor»; bem 3>^fitcn, unb X)ejfen 9ta(^foIgern, 
Königen oon ©rojpbritannien, Jreue unb 21n^änglid^feit berocifen, 
un^ bem Seflöer biefer ^rofinj treu erroeifen, unb unö gegen alle 
Untcrt^anen befagter 5)^aieflät frieblic^ benehmen ju »oüen, unb 
ju unferem beflen Sßiffen unb Sßitlen bie ©efe^e (Sngtanb'« unb 
biefer ^roüinj ju befolgen." 



a. M. Weis, V. D. M., a 

Rudolph Beyl, 

Sebastian Graff, 

Tobias Frey, 

Johan Peter Fritz, 

Jacob Jest, 

Rudolph Wellecker, 

William Kerry,* 

Jacob Bausel, 

Philip Rutschly, 

Elias Meyer, 

Johannes Leib, 

Hans Georg Ziegler, 

Henrich Meyer, 

Christoph Walter,* 

Johannes Huth, 

Philip Zigler,* 

Joseph Albrecht, 

Michael Bottle, 

Georg Petter, 

Johannes Barth, 

Hans Ernst Rudy, 

Hans Georg Hertzer, 

Jacob Meyer, 

Henrich Meyer,* 

Hans Philipp Schweickhardt, 



Philip Jacob Rheinlender, 
Johann Friderich Hilligass, 
Hans Michael Zimmerman, 
Johann Georg Schwab, 
Hans Bernhart Wolff, 
Johannes Eckman, 
Hans Martin Wellmer,* 
Hans Caspar Spangler, 
Hans Martin Will, 
Johann Jacob Cuntz, 
Hans Georg Welcker, 
Alexander Dübendöffer, 
Johan Friderick Rudi, 
Hans Michael Pfautz, 
Hans Michael Diel, 
Hans Jerg Anspacher, 
Georg Schumacher, 
Hans Georg Nögelle, 
Hans Georg Kremer, 
Andreas Holsbacher, 
Hans Adam Wilder,* 
Hans Georg Wolff, 
Hans Martin Liebenstein, 
Johan Henrich Hartman, 
Johannes Haberacker. 



a G. M. Weis was for many years a minister of the Gospel in the 
German Reformed Church in Pennsylvanift. 

ff ®. '^. 2Bfi« war »tflt 3altrc lang ein ^xtÜQtx Ui Scangeltum« 
in btr rtformirten Äirt^t. 



50 



NAMES OF GERMAX, SWISS 



In vol. iii. 284. Colonial Records, it is stated, "sundry of 
these foreigners lying sick on board, never came to be qualified." 
I have compared Lists A, B and C and find in List A, besides 
those given above, the following names : 

<5. 284 Scl. 9tec. III. l^cif t tS : „Sinige btefcr gremben, welche 
franf an 5Bort' lagen, n?urben nie qualiftdrt." 3<^ ^^^c ^ic 
Siflen A, B unt» C jufamtnenge|lellt, unb ftnbe au^cr ben oben 
angegebenen in £i|ie A nod) folgenbe: 



Benedict Strome,* 
Henericus Bell,* 
Daniel Levan,* 
WUlm Jurgeins,* 
Adam Henrich,* 
Sebastian Vink,* 
Hans Georg,* 
Hans Georg Bowman,* 
Hans Martin Shoemaker,* 
Hieronunus Müderd,* 
Jon Bamd Lerinstey,* 
Steven Frederick,* 
Hans Jacob Eckinan,* 
Hendrick Wittser,* 
Jacob Plause,* 
Johannis Strome,* 
Philip Swyger,* 
Jacob Swartz,* 
Christian Snyder,* 
Jacob Mast,* 
Johanes Bait,* 
Albert Swoap,* 
Abraham Beni,* 
Johan Willm i\Iey,* 
Johannes Hier,* 
Ulrich Sieere,* 
Jacob Swicker,* 
Philip Feruser,* 
Johan Wester, § 
Martin Prill,* 
Peter Seytz,* 



Bastian Smith,* 
Nicholas Adams,* 
Uhich Hetzell,* 
Henrich Gonger, § 
Clement Eise,* 
Philip Rödesell,* 
Uldrich Staffon,* 
John Tobias Serveas, 
Johan Hend Gyer,§ 
Johanes Barteleme,* 
Christopher Walter,* 
Hans Adam Stoll,* 
Hans Jerig Viegle,* 
Hans Jerig Eoadebas,* 
Christopher Wittmer,* 
Hans Mich Pagman,* 
Hans Mich Triell,* 
Hans Mich Weider,* 
Hans Jerrick Wigler,* 
Hans Fülkeysinger,* 
Hans Georg Kley, § 
Andro Saltzgerber,* 
Christopher Labengyger,* 
Hans Georg Schaub,* 
Johannes Tiebindorf,* 
Conrad Müder,* 
Hans Adam Beinder,* 
Abraham Fame,* 
Hans Georg Milder,* 
Rudolph WUhehn,* 
Johanes Michel Peepell.* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1727. 



51 



The following are reported as having died : 
!Die golgenten trerfcen aU geftorben berietet: 
Leonard Seltenrich, Jac. Müder, Christopher Milder and Hans 
Georg Ahmold. 



2) Sept. 27, 1727. Fifty-three Palatines with their families, 
about two hundred persons, imported in the ship James Good- 
will, David Crocket, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Fal- 
mouth, appeared, repeated and signed the Declaration. — Col. 
Bee. III. 284. 

©e})t. 27, 1727. !Drei unb fünfzig ^^fäljer, bie mit i^ren 5a= 
miUen, etwa jtvei :^unt)ert ^Jerfonen, auf t>em S^iffc Saineö ®ooli= 
jpttl, Sapitain Va'ciit Srocfet, oon iRotterbam über galmout^ ge= 
bra^t würben, erfdjienen, mieber^olten unb unterjetc^neten bie 
2)ecIaration.— (Sol. 3lec, III. 284. 



Michael Danner, 
Joseph Schurgh,* 
Georg Müller, 
Ulric Staufer, 
Peter Zug, 
Adam Kiener, 
Hans Kiener, 
Joseph Clap,* 
Christian Miller,* 
Georg Klapp, 
Hans Debalt Leteman, 
G^org Michael Kuntz, 
Hans Michael Kuntz, 
Michael Syegrist, 
Hans Langnecker,* 
Reinhardt Jung, 
Wilhelm Weygerdt, 
Abraham Ebersohl, 
Hans Michael Friedler,* 
Jacob Gass, 
Friederich Gass, 
Jacob Gass,§ 
Hans Müller, 
Jacob Arndt, 
Hans Hein,* 



Hans Häge, 
Hans Lieman, 
Jacob Weygerdt, 
Ulric Zug, 
Jacob Fritz,* 
Ulrich Kiener, 
Christian Weber, 
Georg Steinerger, 
Jacob Walder, 
Paul Hein, 
Henry Zeug, 
Jacob Siegel, 
Hans Purster, 
Henrich Wolff, 
Georg Valentin KIop, 
Johan Jacob Wälder, 
Christoph Kirchhoff, 
Michael Leiberth, 
Heinrich Eberli, 
Bartholomeus Siegrist, 
Johan Adam Volpel, 
Johan Ludwig Klop^ 
Hans Georg Koch, 
Johannes Müller, 
Joseph Müller, 



5a 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Bastian Muri, 
Jacob Gangwyer,* 
Hans Altorffler, 



Heinerich Schulte, 
Georg Zeug. 



3) Sept. 30, 1727. Seventy Palatines with their families, 
about three hundred persons, imported in the ship Molley, John 
Hodgeson, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Deal, appeared, 
repeiited and signed the Declaration. — Col. Rec. III. 287. 

(Sept. 30, 1727. ©iebjtg ?)faljer mit ihren gamilien, etwa 
brei ^untert ^erfonen, tie auf kern (Schiffe ^OJoUc?, Sapitain 3o^n 
j£)ofegcfon, »on SRottertam über iDeal gefommen fmt», erfc^iencn, rote* 
ier^oltcnunb unter jeic^neten tie I)ecIaration. — gol.9lec.III.287. 



Hans Stuber,* 
Andries Boms,* 
Johannes Krauas, 
Martin Hausser, 
Marx Fuchs, 
Hans Ring, 
Hans Mosser, 
Michael Krebil, 
Hans Kobel, 
Michael Frantz, 
Peter Gut, 
Ludwig Bortz, 
Andreas Ihllig, 
Felix Guth, 
Wygan Diell,* 
Hannes Steyer, 
Hans Guth sen., 
Henrich Fultz,§ 
Samuel Behr, 
Hans Ludwig Dederer, 
Hans Heinrich Bernhardt, 
Hans Georg Huber, 
Hans Leonard Hofiuan,* 
Hans Michel Guth, 
Michael Spowner,* 
Hans Georg Harger, 
Michel Schmidt, 
Burckhard Hoffimann, 



Michel Sebastian, 
Hans Georg Dieter, 
Georg Ludwig Gesell, 
Hans Jergle Schellenberg, 
Henrich Kauffmann, 
Michel Schenck,0 
Hendrich Kryebiel,0 
Frantz Stupp, 
Hans Jacob Bender, 
Hans Jerig Keel, 
David Mardtin, 
Jacob Marttin, 
Christian Veite, 
Jacob Scherer, 
Jacob Bahr, 
Hans Funk,§ 
Samuel Gut, 
Martin Kindigh, 
Ulrich Leib, 
Tobias Horch, 
Hans Mich. Aso,* 
Christian Miller, 
Johannes Büller, 
Aug-ustin Weder, 
Stephanus Reppert, 
Ulrich Schellenberger, 
Henrich Mayer, 
Samuel Oberholtz, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1727. 53 

Hans Jacob Kiedt, Christian Wenger, 

Christian Solderman,§ Hans Erick Feilter,* 

Rudolph Lanckes,* Joh. Matheis Egener. 

Hans Hooghstadt,* 

In List A are reported dead : 

Sifle A berietet aU tobt: 

Hans Ulrich Shumacher and Jacob Horrester. 



4) Oct. 2, 1727. Fifty-three Palatines with their families, 
about one hundred and forty persons, imported in the ship 
Adventurer, John Davies, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Plymouth.— CoZ. Rec. III. 288. 

In the printed Col. Rec. only twenty-seven names appear. 
In A fifty-five, in B thirty-two. — (Editor.) 

Oct. 2, 1727. !Dvei unb fünfzig ^fäljer mit iferen gamilien, 
etn>a ^unbert »ierjig ^erfonen, lamen auf bent Schiffe 5tt'0cnturer, 
Sapitain 3obn X)ai>iei5, »on Stotterbam über ^^I^moutt) an. — 
gol. 9tec. III. 288. 

3« ben flebrucften SoIoniaI = 33erid)ten fiinben fid) nur ficben 
unb jwanjifl 5^amen, in A fünf unb fi'mfjtg unb in B jroei unt 
brciftg. — (Herausgeber.) 

Johannes Lehman, Johann Peter Weissner, 

Michael Müller, John Can Harlacher,* 

Peter Shilling,* Christophel Miller,* 

Jacob Bauman, Jacques Simonet, 

John Seyham, Johaunis Ullerich, 

Johannes Kurtz, Johannes Beydeler, 

Nicklas Chron, Hans Adam Osser,* 

Jacob Wilhelmus, Mathias Risling,* 

Caspar Ney, Frans Baltzar Frans,* 

Jacob Leidy, Johann Peter Hess, 

Michael Eickert, Christopher Ulrick,* 

Peter Rule,* Christian Bickler,* 

Baltas Leim, Daniel Bowman,* 

Ulrich Riesser, Johan Dieter Borleman, 

Nocolas Keyser, Johann Jacob Stutzman, 

Christopher Ulrick,* Georg Christoph ^chstein. 

Besides these, who signed the Declaration, List A has the 
following : 

5* 



54 



NAMES or GERMAN, SWISS 



2tit§cr ten obigen, welche tie 
l^ält Sifte A itoc^ golgente: 
Ulricli Pitcha * 
Michael Thar,* 
Jacob Bowman,* 
Nicholas Kern, 
Hans Marteler,* 
Joost Coope,* 
Jacob Fisher,* 
Henry Smith,* 
Jacob Meyer,* 
Jacob Smith,* 
Jno. Sower,* 
Jacob Riser,* 
Jacob Filler, 
Hans Hisly,* 
Benedict Null,* 



^Declaration unterzeichneten, mU 

Leonard Rodennill,* 
Derrick Bowshower,* 
Hendrich Horlogh,* 
Jaspar Mingale,* 
Alexander Fritley,* 
Christian Frier,* 
Christoph Hoffman, 
Hans Haldeman, 
Christian Piger, 
Christo Exell,* 
Adam Pisher,* 
Jacob Hoofman,* 
Peter Boorlinger,* 
Hans York Heriser.* 



5) Oct. 16, 1727. Forty-six Palatines with their families, 
about two hundred persons, imported in the ship Friendship, 
of Bristol, John Davies, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes, 
whence the ship sailed June 20th. — Col. Rec. III. 290. 

In B are thirty names ; in A fifty-two, including sick and dead. 

SDct. 16, 1727. ©e^ö unb »ierjig ^faljer mit i^ren gamilien, 
ctrca jtuei fjunbert ^erfonen, famen mit bem ®(^iff grient[l)ip, 
»on SSri^ot, ©apitain 3o^n Daoicö, oon Siottertam, unt> am 
20. 3uni über Someö an.— eoI.=Sev. III. 290. 

3n B ftnt) breipig unt» in A jtcet unt> fünfjig Flamen, mit 
Sinf^Iuf ber Siotten unt) Äranfen. 



Peter Hagman, 
Jacob Hiestandt, 
Johannes Bense, 
Martin Scheleren,* 
Adam Liphart, 
Valentin Kratz, 
Hans Riess, 
Michel Eberhart, 
Nicolas Piere,* 
Christian Mayer, 
Peter Pixseler,* 



Peter Leeman,* 
Henrich Lohr, 
Illess Kassel, 
Niclaus Bücher, 
Nicklas Crösman, 
Peter Weide, 
Peter Eberhardt, 
Philip Reemer,* 
Johannes Schönholtzer, 
Johann Georg Hoffmann, 
Andreas Schwartz, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1728. 55 

Hans Jerig Lauman, Henrich Strickeller, 

Jeramia Miller, Johannes Hiestandt, 

Johann Georg Müller, Christian Creyebiel,* 

Matheis Schweitzer, Albrecht Bauman,* 

Jacob Sneppley,* Heinrich Schnebli, 

Johan Vincens Mayer, Michel Miller,* 

Johannes Kassel, Abraham Schwartz, 

Johannes Forrer, Johann Philip Ried. 

Besides these, who signed the Declaration, List A has yet: 

2lu^er biefcn, t»el(^c t»ie ^Declaration unterjeic^neten, enthält 
I2ijle A noc^ golgenbe: 

Jacob Hiestandt,* Michael Eberain,§ 

Ulrich Scheren, § Peter Hansberger, § 

Peter Folock, § Ulrich Leemer, § 

Peter Fennima, § Lodowick Bentze,* 

Jno. Crybile,§ Joseph Eberam,§ 

Christian Fide,§ Peter Clucksclear, § 

Nicholas Bogert, § Nicholas Chasrood. § 

In List A these are reported dead: 

2II0 tobt kriegtet !^iftc A: 

Andrew Urmi, Jacob Trycler, Jacob Snyder, Henry Croo, 
Jno. Overholser and Falkert Adest. 



6) Aug. 24, 1728. Eighty Palatines with their families, about 
two hundred persons, imported in the ship Mortonhouse, John 
Coultas, Master, last from Deal, whence the ship sailed June 
15th.— Co^. Rec. III. 327. 

According to List A two hundred and five persons were im- 
ported. Eighty males above sixteen, sixty-nine women and fifty- 
six children. — {Editor.') 

Slug. 24, 1728. 2lc^tj{g ^fäljer mit it)ren gamilien, etwa 
jt»ei lunbert ^erfonen, würben mit t»em ^»c^ijf 3)lorton()oufe, 
(Sapitain 3o|n ßoultaö, über !DeaI, üon j»o baä ®(^tf am 
15. 3uni abfuhr, i>erü6ergebrac^t.— goI.=33er. III. 327. 

^a&j Sifte A waren eö jtttei ^unbert fünfjtg ^erfonen : ac^tjig 
männlii^e über fec^je^n Sa^re, neun unb felsig roeibli^e unb 
fec^g unb fünfjtg Äinber. — (Herausgeber.) 
Georg Bechtell, Abraham Wolfi", 

Philip Noldt, Hans Erdt, 



56 



KAUES OF GKRMAN, SWISS 



Johannes Bär, 
Baltas Gen-inger,* 
Andres Kwy,* 
Stoph. Haltsbieller, 
Johannes Roth, 
Jacob Storm, 
Frederick Leader, 
Johannes Edesma, 
Uli Schiirch, 
Johan Scharch, 
Jacob Jost, 
Peter Denckelberg,* 
Vincent Stoufer,* 
Johannis Christ,* 
Frans Latshow,* 
Henrich Wilh. Dielinger, 
Johann Dietrich Hengst, 
Peter Mittelkauff, 
Christ. Newswanger,* 
Hans Weldgrau,* 
Johannes BöUa, 
Jacob Heidschuh, 
Bernerd Henssel,* 
Hans Michel Dettmer, 
Michael Saipell,* 
Johannes Weygandt, 
Johan Georg Doderer, 
Johan Georg Roth, 
John Jacob Hack,* 
Johann Michael Ranck, 
Johan Christoph Meng, 
Christ^ffel Bencker, 
Johannes Huber, 
Michael Köhler, 
Johan Stock, 
Johann Rör, 
Johan Herer,* 
Philip Engert, 



Derick Oordt,* 
Jacob Bmlasher,* 
Felde Kille,* 
Hans Frill, 
Johannes Bär, 
■ Jacob Wissel,* 
Hans HauflP, 
Rudolph Heller, 
Hans Philip, 
Jacob Coger,* 
Conrad Keer,* 
Jonas Köhler, 
Martin Schaub, 
Jacob Brunner, 
Johan Er, 
Ury Schiirch, 
Georg Schmidt, 
Hans Wolf Dielinger, 
John Heniy Raan, 
Henrich Eschelmann, 
Johannes Morgenstern, 
Johannes Kitsmiller,* 
Johannes Lägerhän,* 
Kasper Heydrukee,* 
Johan Jost Schmidt, 
Martin Vogelhiitter, 
Johannes Franckhauser, 
Johannes Naycommet,* 
Hans Martin Miller, 
Hans Leonard Miller, 
Denius Dunckelberg, 
Frederick Denckelberg, 
Johan Peter Molich, 
Gottfried Henke, 
Johan Albrecht Köhlei', 
Christopher Sullenger, 
Hans Jacob Miller.* 



7) Sept. 4, 1728. Thirty Palatines with their families, about 
©ne hundred persons, imported in the ship Albany, Lazarus 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS— 1728. 



57 



Oxman, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes, whence the 
ship sailed June '22^.— Col. Rec. III. 329. 

©ept. 4, 1728. Dreißig g)fäl3cr mit i^ren gamilien, etwa 
ein ^unltert 5>«foncn, famen mit tem ©c^tffe 2llban9, Sapitain 
JajaruiU Djrmann, t)on Siotterbam über Soweg, »eld^eö fie am 
22. 3uni öcrlic^en, herüber.— SoL^SÖer. III. 329. 



Simon Scholler, 
Casper Riedt, 
Jacob Weis,* 
^latheis Kopiin, 
Lorentz Belitz, 
Casper Hoot,* 
Conrad Duboy, 
Michel Keim, 
Hans Georg Metz, 
Georg Gerttner, 
Hans Miller,* 
Johan Carl Keil, 
Andrew Abiin,* 
Jan Blömen, 
Martin Calb,* 



Georg Frid V. Berbisdorff, 
Frid Christf. von Steysplatz, 
Johann Philip Glasser, 
Heinrich StelLfeldt, 
Friederich Eichelberger, 
Hans Jacob Donbach, 
Georg Wendel Biehel, 
Johannes Shönfeldt, 
Johan Daniel Bengel, 
Philip Shoman,* 
Hans Jacob Biehel, 
Alexander Zarthmann, 
Hans Georg Buch, 
Hans Jerick Riger,* 
Jerig Fred. Bergenstott.* 



8) Sept. 11, 1728. A number of Palatines with their fami- 
lies, about ninety, imported in the ship James Goodwill, David 
Crocket, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Deal, whence she 
sailed June 15th.— C'o^. Rec III. 331. 

®ept. 11, 1728. Sine %x\%aU ^faljer mit iftren gamilien, 
Jvot)l neunjifl, famen auf bem Schiffe 3ameö ©ootmill, Sapitain 
l^aüit Grocfct, 'ocn Slcttertam über Deal, roelc^eö bas ®d)iff axr. 
15. 3uni öcrlicp.— 6oI.=53er. III. 331. 



Ulrich Englert, 
Georg GraflP, 
Michael Neff, 
Hans Gurtz,* 
Isaac Werthon, 
Hans Martin Valck, 
Hans Mich. Rider,* 
Friederich Scholl, 
Sebastian Dörr, 
Bastian Ederle,? 



Leonard Hicker, 
Jacob Lentz, 
Johan Ruspag, 
Adam Sommer, 
Andreas Graff, 
Jacob Fuchs,* 
Jacob Herman,* 
Martin Moser, 
Jacob Bayer, 
Adam Engeler, § 



58 NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 

Jacob Kuhn, Andreas Strickli, 

Martin Valk,* Johan Leonhart Keller, 

Johann Caspar Stover, Johan Christof GrroflF, 

Missionaire. Philip Henrich Söller, 

Johann Caspar Stover, Johan Adam Mosser, 

S. S. Tlieol. Stud. Hans Jerick Seyler,* 
Johan Leonhart Holsteiner, Hans Urich Bontz,* 

Johan Egidius Grimm, Hans Jacob Schlauch, 

Matheus Fernsler, Hans Georg Medtler, 

Thomas Kopenhaver,* Jacob Meckling, 

Georg Schuhmacher, Michael Korr. 
Theobald Mechling, 



9) Aug. 19, 1729. Seventy-five Palatines with their families, 
about one hundred and eighty persons, imported in the ship 
Mortonhouse, James Coultas, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Cowes, whence the ship sailed June 21st. — Col. Rec. III. 367. 

2tug. 19, 1729. günf unt) IteBenjig 5>fäljer ntitit)rcn gamilien, 
tto^I ^unbert unt» ac^tjig ^erfoneit, brachte taö ©t^iff 9Jlorton= 
l^oufe, (S^apttain 3ameö ßoultaö, »on 3flottcrbain iiier Soroeö, 
m\6)zi eö am 21. 3uni »erlief.— SoL^Ser. IIL 367. 
Dielman Kolb, Rudolph Moor,* 

Michael Borst, a Uldric Root,* 



a Michael Borst, the Editor's maternal great-grandfather, who lived 
and, in 1741, died near Lebanon. — See Rupp's History of Lebanon Co., 
pp. 303, 304. 

a 5}?tc^ael 5Borfl, ber Urgro^öater bc3 ^erau^gcberö tnüttcrltc&erfeitö, 
tootinte bei Scbanon unb ftarb 1741.— ©tebe 9tupb'^ ®ffcib. »on ?cb. So., 
®. 303, 3U4. 

Note. — In the year 1729, Conrad Weiser left Schoharie with his wife 
and five children; Philip, Frederick, Anna, Madlina and Maria, set- 
tled near the present site of Womelsdorf, Berks County. He was use- 
fully employed in various capacities by the Government until within a 
few weeks of his demise. He died July 13, 1760, aged 63 years, 8 
months and 13 days. His remains rest near Womelsdorf. — Rupp's His. 
Berks Co., pp. 195, 222. 

5ln m c r f u n (?.— 3m 3abrc 1729 »erltef donrnb SOetfer ©cbobarte wnb 
jo(? mit feiner grau unb fünf Ätnbern in bie 9?a'be be^ je^igen 2Bomcl5' 
borf, 3?erf? So. Txt Stec^ierung öertoanbte ihn big furj oor feinem Jobc 
ju mnnriterlei Tieufien. Sr (larb am 13. 3uH 1760 im 3tlter »on 63 Sati- 
ren, 8 Wonaten unb 13 Jagen. Sein Seic^nam rubt in ber 9?ä't)e »on 
SBomelöborf.— 9iu|)))'ö ®ffc|. »on Serfg So., ©. 195, 222. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1729. 



59 



Carl Ernst Musselbach, 
Johan Philip Ranck, 
Konradt Worntz, 
Henrich Schlengeluff, 
Heinrich Dubs, 
Heinrich Blimm, 
Christ. Brown,* 
Andreas Meys, 
Jacob Obere,* 
Ulrich Groll,* 
Conrad Kilner, 
Rudolph Wälder * 
Simon Rohl, 
Baltzar Hör,* 
Georg Threhr, 
Hans MuUer, 
Casper Dorest, 
Johannes Hoock, 
Nicolas Peffel, 
Ultimer Schnebler,* 
Christ. KroU,* 
Jacob Crebil, 
Peter Wecher, 
Adam Orth, 
Johannes Reis, 
Michel Weber,* 
Nicolas Carver,* 
Valtin Keiser, 
Johannes Orde,* 
Wendel Wyant,* 
Richd. Fetter, § 
Jacob Reyer,§ 
Peter Weeger,§ 
Jacob SeUser, 
Friderich Marsh, § 
Andrew Bastian, § 



Jacob Fetter, § 
Moret Creeter,§ 
Hans Ulrich Vry,* 
Johan Niclas Printschier, 
John Daniel Worley,* 
Valentine Ficus,* 
Hans Michel Heides, 
Johan Stephan Riemer, 
Jacob Eschelmann, 
Abraham Kensinger,* 
Hans Michel Fröhlich, 
Hans Jacob Roodlys,* 
Hans Ulrich Hüber, 
Gerhai-dt Müller, 
Heinrich Zurtere, 
Jacob Bowman,* 
Johannes Müller, 
David Montandon, 
Georg Adam Weidel, a 
Christoph Schambach, 
Henrich Killhaver,* 
Reynard Halder,* 
Christ. Bumgarner,* 
Friederich Marsteller, 
Johann Peter Moll, 
Johann Middle,* 
Adam Bastian, § 
Henry Daniel Back, § 
Johann Georg Grossman, 
Georg Grossman, 
Christian Longenacre,* 
Mai-tin Alstadt,§ 
Philip Jacob Back,§ 
Hendrick Sneevele,* 
Jacob ^eH^, formerly of Pa. 
Jacob Seller, of German town. 



a Georg Adam Weidel, the paternal grand-father of Jacob Weidel, 
Esq., of Lebanon, Pa. 

a ®eorg 3lbam SBetbel, ber ®rof safer »aterfeitg beg ^txxn 3afob 3Bet- 
bei in fiebanon, $a. 



60 NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 

Jacob Reif and Jacob Seller were probably both Neuländer^ 
a class of persons fully noticed in Rupps Fireside Bi&tory of the 
Germans in Fennsylvania. Jacob Keif was once a conspicuous 
person in the early history of the German Keformed Church. 

In A are the names of fifty-five females ; among others, the 
wife of Jacob Reif, Veronica Reif; Eliza Seller, Anna Chris- 
tiana Schlengeluff, Apalis SchlengeluflF, Anna Barbara Ranck, 
Mary Ann Grossman. 

3acob 3fteif unb 3acofc ©etler waren »a^rfc^einlid^ ktbc 9leu== 
Iänt)er, cine 2lrt 2cute, welche in „SRupp'ö ®ef^. tcr 1)eutfc^en 
in ^ennf^Iioantcn für ben ^uöli(^en ^xtii" griintUc^ bemäntelt 
fint). 3öcob 9tcif »at feiner ^tii eine bctcutenbc ^^erfonlic^tcit 
in ber (SJefc^ic^te ber tieutfc^=reformirten Ätr^e. 

3n A ftnl) tie 5Ramen »on fünf unti fünfjig grancn; unter 
anberen: bic %xa\x »on 3acob Steif, 55eron{ca SReif; (Slifa (Seller, 
2lnna (it)riftiana (Schlengeluff, 2lpaliö «Schlengeluff, 2lnna Soar« 
bara 9iancf, ^ax'xt Slnna ßrö^mann. 



10) Sept. 15, 1729. Fifty-nine Palatines with their families, 
one hundred and twenty-six persons, imported in the ship Allen, 
James Craigie, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes, whence 
the ship sailed July 7th.— CoZ. Rec. III. 368. 

(Sept. 15, 1729. 9?eun unb fünfjig ^fäljer mit i^ren ^amx^ 
lien, ein bunbert unb fec^ö unb giüünjig ^^erfonen, brachte baö 
(S(^iff 2lllen, (Sapitain 3ameö Sratgie, »on iHotterbam über Sottjed, 
wclc^eö bag ©c^iff am 7. 3uli öerliep.— Sol.=23er. III. 368. 

Johannes Mack, Jacob Wiss, 

Veiten Mack, Jacob Snider,* 

Hans Gunde, Jacob Lesle,* 

Andreas Bony, Paul Lipkip,* 

Hisbert Benter,* Johannes Kipping, 

Pieter Lesle, Conrad Eill,? 

Jacob Bosserdt, Alexander jNIack, a 



a Alexander Mack sen., was bom at Schriesheim, in the Pnlntinnte, 
1G79. He married Anna Maria Kling of his nntive town. They hnd 
son« and diiughters: John Valentin, .Inhannes, Alexander. Christina 
and Anna Maria. Both dauphters died younjc His wife died in Ger- 
many 17:i'i. He settled near Germantown — died 17öö — buried iu the 
Brethren burying ground. The epitaph on liis tombstone is brief: Hier 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1729. 



61 



Alexander Mack, der jmige, 
Jacob Kalcklöser, 
Wilhelmus Kncpper, 
Johan Henrich Kalckgleser, 
Cliristophel Kalckgiässer, 
Johan Christ. Crobf, 
Hans Slaughters,* 
Hans Jacob Kiebel, 
ßinehart Hammer,* 
Johann Martin Kress, 
Johannes Meinterfeer,* 
Johannes Perger,* 
Andreas Kropp, 
Matheis Schneider, 
Mathias Ulland,* 
Georg Dieter, 
Alexander Dihll, 
Daniel Cropp,§ 
John Hissle, § 
Veiten Becker, 
Christian Matler, 
Ulrich (Ellen, 



Saml. Graller,* 
Joseph Bruiiner, 
Jcrrich Hoftait, 
Feltin Rafer,* 
Jacob Cropp,§ 
Job. Jacob Knecht, 
Georg Vetter, 
Philip Mich. Fiersler,* 
Hans Georg Klauser,* 
Christian Schneider, 
Johannes Fliickiger, 
Christian Kropf, 
Johannes Petenkoffer, 
Hans Georg Koch, 
Hans Caspar Kolb, 
Jno. Jacob Hopbach, 
Leonhart Amweg, 
Johannes Wightman,* 
Valentine Gerhart Hisle, 
Henrich Peter Middeldorff, 
Christian Ketzendander,* 



Heinrich Holtzsteiu. 
A contains six names of males under sixteen, also the names 
of thirty-nine females above sixteen ; among these are Agnus 
Kalklöser, Joanna Margaret Bony, Veronica Knepper, Anna 
Margaretta Mack, Philippina Mack, Anna Kipping, Sivilla Kip- 
ping, Johanna Kipping, Eva Bossert, Maria Kalklöser, members, 
with their husbands, of the Sckwartzenau- Täufer, of whom 
Alexander Mack sen. was Urheber, or founder, about the year 
1708. He seceded from Hochman, with whom he had co-ope- 
rated for some time, accompanying him in his religious visits in 



ruhen die Gebeine A. M., geboren 1679, gestorben 1735, seines Altera 
56 Jahr. 

a Slleranber ?Wacf feu. tourbe 1679 ju (acdrtedfjetm in bcr ^Jfalj 9e_&oren. 
Sr »ert)etratt)ete ftc^ mit 9Inna ^axia Ältng auö feinem ®eburt^ort. Äobne 
unb ZöüittT würben i^nen geboren: 3o^ann SSalenttn, 3o^ann£!S, 3Ilfran» 
ber, S^riftina unb 21nna 5)?arta. iBeibe %oä)Ux ftarben jung, ^dnt i^xan 
fiarb 1720 in Deutfci^lanb. Sr Iie§ fid^ na\)t ®ermantomn uteber, ftarb 
1735 unb liegt auf bem Srüber^Segräbni^Ula^e begraben. T-it ^ufdirift 
auf feinem @rab)lein ift: .f)ter ruljen bie ®ebeine 31. ^Jl., geboren 1679, 
geworben 1735, feine« Slltera 56 3at>r. 

6 



62 NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 

Germany and Switzerland. Some of the Täufer had come to 
America ten years before Mack. — Rupp's His. Relig. Den. U. S. 
A entölt fec^ö 9iamen ber '3)?anngperfonett über fc^3eön 3al)rc, 
eknfallö bte 9iamm üon neun unb breipig Sßeiböpevfonen über 
fec^je^n; unter bicfen ftub : Slgnus ^alflöfer, 3oanna ^O^argaret 
^Bonp, 33eronica ^nepper, 2Inna ^Jiargaretta ?!)?ad, ^()iHppina 
'^a.d, 2tnna dipping, (giötün dipping, 3ot)anna .Ripping, Söa 
Sojfert, SJlarta Italflöfer, mit i^ren 'SÖZännern gu ben (2cfcit>ar^c= 
nau=Jäufern gefiörenb, beren ©rünber ber ältere 2((ej:anber '^ai 
um'ö 3a^i^ 1708 war. Sr trennte ft^ »on ^oc^mann, be)'fen 
§!)?itarbeiter er eine ^t\i lang getüefen unb ben er auf feinen 9te- 
ligionörcifen nad) 2)eutf(^(anb unb ber (Sc^weij begleitet ^ttc. 
ß'intge ber Käufer iraren 3e^n 3abre oor Wad nac^ %mtxxia gc= 
fommen. — 9tupp'ö ®efc^. ber rel. 33en. in ben 35er. (St. 



11) Aug. 29, 1730. Palatines with their families, two hun- 
dred and sixty persons, imported in the ship Thistle, of Glas- 
gow, Colin Dunlap, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 
— Col. Rec. III. 283. 

3tug. 29, 1780. T)ai ©c^iff I^iftle öon ©laögom, Sapitain 
Sclin T)unlap, brachte ^fäljer mit i^ren Familien, jjrei ^unbert 
unb fe^jig 5^erfonen, toon Sflotterbam über Soroeö. — SoI.=S3er. 
III. 283. 

Valentin Grisemer, Hans Menigh, 

Johannes Dunckel, Nichol Fiser, 

Christof Batter, Johan Zwinger, 

Christian Leman,* Jacob Nagel, 

Jeremias Hes,* Ulrich Scherer, 

Joh. Georg Ludwig Hass, Philip Groscost,* 

Bernhart Siegmund, Casper Bittner,* 

Hans Jacob Dohl, Nickel Cünter, 

Johan Peter Ohller, Johannes Soberer, 

Johan Henrich Schmidt, Johannes Haus,* 

Caspar Fiehman, Phihp Hautz,* 

Steven Hemer,* Lorentz Hoff, 

Rudolph Draugh,* Thomas Hamma, 

Johannes Kun,* Jacob Stiffel, 

William Keim,* Wolfer Sperger,* 

Ludwick Delman,* Uhich Steyner,* 

Gerhart Zinn, Thomas Hes, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1730. 63 

Henrich Hes, Frederick Peifer, 

Hendrich Gutt,* Johannes Kepplinger, 

Caspar Krieger, Feite Meidelman, 

Christoph Anckenbrant, Dietrich Beidelman, 

Jean Henri Fortineaux,* EHas Meidelman, 

Frederich Reimer, Jacob Ammon, 

Peter Beswanger,* Johan Nickel Lukenbell,* 

Johan Caspar Schmidt, Hans Simon Mey, 
Johan Paulus Düttenhöffer, Henrich LukebiU, 

Johan Augustus Scherrer, Ludwig Mohler, 

Hans Greorg Hofman, Lönhart Hochgenug, 

Abraham Transu, Peter Federolff, 

Casper Hartman,* Peter Müller, a 

Christian Shram, Friederich Lienberger, 

Leonhart Köpplinger, Peter Frawiener, 

Rudolp Andreas, Bernhard Renn, 



a Peter Müller was a native of Oberamt Lautem, Germany. He 
graduated at Heidelberg. He was a man of profound erudition — of 
more than ordinary powers of mind — a finished scholar, as is evident 
from testimony born him by the Rev. Jedediah Andrews. In a letter 
dated Philadelphia, lOmo., (Oct.) 14th, 1730, " There is," says Andrews, 
"lately come over a Palatine candidate of the ministry, who, having 
applied to us at the synod for ordination, 'tis left to Tenant, Andrews 
and Boyd to do it. He is an extraordinary person for sense and learn- 
ing. We gave him a question to discuss about Justification, and he 
answered it, in a whole sheet of paper, in a very notable manner. His 
name is John Peter Müller, and speaks Latin as readily as we do our 
natural tongue." In 1735, he connected himself with the Siebentägers, 
of Ephrata. He died Sept. 25, 1796. His remains rest at Ephrata, 
Lancaster County, Pa. — Rupp's His. Lan. Co., p. 229. 

a 53eter UJiiitter tfl tm Dberamt Sautent in 3Deutfc^lanb geboren, ßr 
flrabutrte auf bcr ^eibelbergcr Untöerjiitat. Sr tt»ar ein 5D?ann »on ttcfer 
®clet)rfamfeit unb be[a§ au§erge»ö()nhcbe (SJctjleöfräfte, wie aixi bem 3f "9= 
nt§ beö ^aftor^ Sebebta'^ SlnbreWö erfti^tU(| tfi. 3tt einem, 5)f)tlabelp()ta, 
ben 14. Dct. 1730 battrten Srtefe fagt er: „(S3 tft fürjHc^ ein tt)eologt[^er 
Sanbtbat t)erübcrgefommen aug ber ^^o.\i, ber auf feine Slnmelbung bet ber 
(©^nobe jur Drbtnation an 3;enant, Slnbrewg unb So^b oerrotefen würbe. 
@r t|i eine au§erorbentIt^c ^Jerfönltd^fett, »ag 33erjlanb unb ®elet)rfamfett 
onbetrtfft. 2Bir legten tt)m eine grage bejüglic^i ber SJecbtfertigung »or, 
toel(|e er auf einem ganjen Sogen 5^apter auögejet^net beantwortete, 
©ein 9tame tji 3ot)n '33eter 5Rüßer uub er (priest Satcin fo fliegenb, tote lotr 
unferc 5)?utter[pracbe." 1735 »crbanb er fiii mit 'tiixi ©tcbentägern ju 
ßfljtata. Sr ftarb am 25. ®ept. 1796. ©eine Ueberrcfte ru^en ju (jpt)rata, 
Sancafter £o., $a.— 3tup|)'« ®efc|). 2anc. So., (©. 229. 



64 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Dietrich Kober, 
Georg Hutzel, 
Ludwig Hutzel, 
Georg Undetenard,* 
Carl Valentin Michaels, 



Christopher Henerich, 
Johann Matheis Theis, 
Michael Thomas, 
Christian Thomas. 



12) Sept. 5, 1730. Forty -five Palatines with their families, 
one hundred and thirty persons, imported in the ship Alexander 
and Ann, William Clymer, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Cowes.— 6W. Rec. III. 386. 

«Sept. 5, 1730, braute taö @(!^iff Sllcxanbcr unb Sinn, Sapi^ 
tain 2ßiUiam dimmer, »on 3lottert»am über Soweö fünf uiit> 
^jierjig ^^fäljcr mit i^rcn Familien, ettta ein ^untert unt dreißig 
^Perfoncn.— goI.-SBer. III. 386. 



Anthony Miller, 
Daniel Christman,* 
Adam Phillipot,* 
Martin Müller, 
John Peter Waller,* 
Frantz Blum, 
Jacob Müller, 
Fredrick Meyer,* 
Cari Keller, 
Eberhart Meyer, 
Adam Schüler, 
David Süsholtz, 
Martin Creiner, 
Marger Jerger, 
Michael Belscher, 
Conrad Stamm, 
Leopold Helligas, 
Mattheis Seltzer, 
Hans Gerham,? 
Michael Beyerle, 
Christof Steinlein, 
Hans Mich. Wiedes, 
Joban Carl Hornberger, 



John Adam Stadtler,* 
Hans Veltin Breneissen, 
Hans Lanciscus, 
Henrich Lanciscus, 
Johannes Herbert, 
Baltes Lanckhär, 
Michael Bürger, 
Hans Jacob Oberholtz, 
Martin Bücher, 
Johan Friederich Weber, 
Henrich Mai^te, 
Geo. Michel Breneissen, 
Johan Philip Enmiert, 
Peter Edelman,* 
Johannes Widner, 
Michel Ackermann, 
Rudolph Messerschmidt, 
Henrich Clemmer,* 
Johannes Klemmer, 
Johann Volckmann, 
Joh. Sebastian Graff, 
Hans Bartel Hornberger, 
Joh. Fried. Lanciscus. 



13) Nov. 30, 1730. Palatines with their families imported 
in the ship Joyce, William Ford, Master, from Boston. — Col. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1731. 65 

Rec. III. 3S9. In this ship there were twenty-eight males above 
sixteen years, six males under sixteen ; twenty-four females, of 
whom eight were under sixteen years. — (^Editor.) 

5]üü. 30, 1730. 5)fäl5cr mit ibren gamilicn fame« auf bent 
Sd^iff 3o9Cff Sapitain äßiüiam Jovt», »on SSoflon. — SoI.^Ser. 
III. 389. 2luf tiefem <Sct)iffc befantcn ^d) a^t unt jwanjig 
^Jianncpcrfoncn über fed^je^n, unt fei^^ unter fec^jc^n 3a^«tt/ 
au^crtcm »ier unt jwanjig grauen, »on tenen a^t unter fec^jc^n 
3a^ren rcaren. — (|)erau^geber.) 
Christian Miller, Johan Ludwig Heintz, 

Nicolas Swort,* Hans Jacob Bear,* 

Daniel Swort,* Friederich Elberscheidt, 

Hans Wichel,* Johann Adam Hofi", 

Joseph Dorami, Andreas Hoffmann, 

John Bear,* Hans Ulrich Mayer, 

Leonhart Kolb, Leonhardt Pfudere, 

Henry Shever,* Johan Michael Fischer, 

Egram Hall, Henrich Kilian, 

Johannes Cuntz, Johannes Oberbäck, 

Marck Nitzen, Zacharias Barth. 

A. G. Schultze, 

Passengers under sixteen years of age : 

Sleifente unter fec^je^n 3<»^«« • 

Hans Lenhart Schaffer, Lorentz Mayer, Christian Schwartz, 
Jacob Schwartz, Hans Schwartz, Ludwicli Weichel, Hen. Bär. 



14) Aug. 17, 1731. Palatines imported in the ship Samuel, 
Hugh Peircy, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 
Col. Rec. III. 410. Males, thirty-nine above sixteen, sixteen 
boys under sixteen; thirty-three women above sixteen, and 
twenty-one girls under sixteen. — (Editor ) 

Slug. 17, 1731. ^fäljcr, tie auf tern ®d^iffe (Samuel, Capi- 
tain .^ug^ ^eirc^, oon 3ftottertam über Sorccö gebracht wuvtcu. — 
Gol.-Ser. IIL 410. 'iD^ännlit^c neun unt trci^ig über fcAjelnt, 
unt fec^je^n unter fec^je^^n 3afei^cn; trci unt brctpig wfibu(I)e 
?)crfonen über fed)je^tt unt ein unt ^wanjig unter fc(^jcl)n. — 
f.Öerauögeber.) 

Job. Georg Kirschner, Philipp Knopp, 

John Fisher,"^' Casper Holtzhauseu, 

(i* 



66 NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 

Conrad Eckert, Johan Henrich Knopp, 

Ludwig Han, Johann Jacob Krauss, 

Johannes Metzger, Johann Jacob Scheibe, 

Jacob Wenst,* Johann Henrich Hammel, 

Conrad Möller, Frederick Babenmeyer,* 

Christo Ritter,* Lodwick Goodbrood,* 

Johannes Diterichs, Hans Georg Bender, 

Andreas Erlewyne,* Georg Sebald Madriger,* 

Johan Millbürger, Hans Georg Lohrman, 

Hans Bitter, Philip Friederich Vogel, 

Joh. Georg Koch, Johann Christoph Bauer, 

Barent Tisen,* Ludwig Sauermilch, 

Johannes Spengler, Johannes Stuntz, 

Georg Baiser Wentz, Hans Adam Warthman, 

Hans Georg Plüger, George Henderich, 

Johann Michael Gleim, Hans Georg Lohrman. 

Engelberd Schraidt, 

Passengers under sixteen years : 

Stctfenbe unter fed}jet)n Sauren : 

Martin Griesemer, Johannes Schraidt, Georg Kropp, Peter 
Knopp, Georg Hahn, Georg Han, Joh. Han, Carl Müller, Joh. 
Dietrichs, Abraham Warthman, Jac. Hofminich, Balzer Vogel, 
Henrich Mülberger, Georg Gutbrod, Anthony Schniding. 

In this ship came, according to List A, Ludwig Heck, his 
wife Mary and daughter Elizabeth. 

SOHt biefem «Schiffe tarnen nad) Sifte A gutiwig ^ecf mit feiner 
grau Tlav!) unb fetner Joc^ter Slifabett). 



15) Sept. 11, 1731. Palatines imported in the ship Penn- 
sylvania Merchant, Jno. Stedman, Master, from Rotterdam, last 
from Dover. — Col. Rec. III. 413. Males, fifty-seven above six- 
teen, twenty-five under sixteen ; females, fifty-seven above six- 
teen, thirty-three under sixteen. 

©ept. 11, 1731. ^ennf^bania W.tt&)axit, Sapttain 3o^n 
©tetman, 'oon Sflotterbam über^oöer, brachte ^fiiljer. — (SoI.= 
S3er. III. 413. ^Dtänner fteben unb fiinfjig über unb fünf unb 
jjuanjig unter fec^je^n; fieben unb fünfzig Söetber über unb 
brct unb bret§ig unter fe(^jet)n 3a^ren. 
Michael Geberth, Ludwig Wulheit, 

Michael Feder, Jacob Lanius, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1731. 



67 



Peter Smit * 
Abraham Sahler, 
Johan Niclas Weiss, 
Martin Boger, 
Georg Heinrich, 
Jacob Steiner, 
Christian Weiser, 
Johannes Diehl, 
Abram Freeman,* 
Friedrich Geberth, 
Friedrich Strubel, 
Valentin Schults,* 
Frantz Krück, 
Heinrich Krämer, 
Baltzer Seyler, 
Christoph Beier, 
Johannes Schenkel, 
Conrad Sybert, 
Nicklaus Fuss, 
Laurence Roodt,* 
Conrad Hoogh,* 
Jacob Mumma, 
Adam Sauer, 
Michael Geyger,* 
Johannes Rymert,* 
Johann Bartel Gucker, 
Hans Adam Kremer, 



Johann Michael Moll, 
Mai-tin Hunsecker,* 
Christian Schmidt, 
Hans Georg Kelchner, 
Christian Schmidt, 
Johann Georg Mayer, 
Joh. Georg Bergstrosser, 
Johan Henrich Schmidt, 
Johan Bernhardt Arndt, 
Christophel Moll, 
Johan Jacob Krück, 
Joh. Nicklaus Steinmetz, 
Hans Adam Echelen, 
Joh. Jacob Woltzhoffer, 
Valentein Schneider, 
Johann Philip Beyer, 
Hans Martin Schultz, 
Rudolph Gasman,* 
Johannes Rynert, 
Joh. Engelbert Lack, 
Johan Georg Schmidt, 
Burckhart Kiillmer, 
Johannes Bischoff, 
Johannes Shaak,* 
Andreas Beyer, 
Hans Michael Horlacher, 
Melchior Wistholtz. 



Passengers under sixteen : 

Sleifente unter ferf)je^n ^a1)vtn.x 

Bernhardt Geberth, Matthias Geberth, Gottl. Geberth, Chris- 
tian Krämer, Henrich Gehr, Adam Krämer, Christian Gehr, 
Georg Henrich Gehr, Jacob Mumma, Johannes Sahler, Jacob 
Arndt, David Arndt. 



16) Sept. 21, 1731.* Palatines imported in the ship Brita- 
nia, of London, Michael Franklyn, Master, from Rotterdam, 



* While the Synod of South Holland was in session in Dort, 1731, 
eight hundred exiled Palatines passed through the place to take 
ship at Rotterdam for America. They were visited by the whole Synod 



68 NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 

!;ist from Cowes. — Col. Rec. III. 414. One hundred and four 
nudes above sixteen, thirty -seven under sixteen; eighty -one 
temalea above sixteen, forty-five under sixteen — in all two hun- 
dred and sixty-nine. — (^Editor.) 

Sept. 21, 1731. X)ag ©d^iff SBritania oon 2ont>on, Sapitain 
SWid^ael granflpn, »on 3lottert»am über domeö, brad>te 5)fäljcr.* 
— SoI.=S3er. III. 414. Sin ^untert unt oter männliche ^erfonen 
ükr unb fleben unb trei§ig unter fcdbje^n, ein «nt» ac^tjig roeib* 
lic^e über unb fünf unb »ierjig unter fed^je^n. 3m ©anjcn jaei 
^unbert neun nnX> fec^jig. — (i^erauogeber.) 
Hisbertus Barsch, Michel Horsh,* 

Johannes Barsch, Daniel Hubert,* 

Henrich Geber, Christian Hubert,* 

Han Henrich Geber, Jacob Carl, 

Johannes Geber, Ulrich Keyser, 

Jacob Rasch, Henrich Kram, 

Lucas Vetler, Jacob Kobel, 

Henry Blicher,* Nicholas Känele, 

Leonard Bock,* Abraham Kern, 

Hans Böschung, Gotfried Kraft, 

Johannes JEgender, Valentin Kleim, 

Johannes Frey, Wilhelm Kerkes,* 

Joseph Beyer,* Michel Meyer,* 

Jacob Gunt,* Jacob Meyer, 

Hans Gumer, Jacob Mier, 

Rudolph Holsinger, Michel Mothes,* 

Hen. Herbertz, Johannes Batholommay Rieger, 

Jacob Hachman,* Hochteutscher Prediger^ a 

Johan Heistand,* Louis Trmothee, 

in a body and were famishad by them with provisions and medicines. 
After Christian exhortation, prayer and singing, they were dismissed 
with the assurance that they might rely upon the Church of Holland 
for support in their new abode. — Ger. Ref. Almanac, p. 22 for 1865. 

* SBäbrtnt» tit ©ipnobe »on Süb-^otlanb 1731 in Dortrttbt tbrt «Strung 
^atte, joflfn actt Ijunbtrt oertnebtnt 5'fiUcr burcb \>\t (Jtabt, urn in JRotttr» 
tarn auf Ö Schiff ju geben. Der ganjc geiftUcbf Äorptr bcfudjte jle, gab ibnen 
^iabrung^mtttcl unb Slrjeneim mit auf ben SBeg. 9?a(l) einer cbriftl. 2luf» 
munterung, (ijefang unb Qdtlti, »urben fie mit ber 93erpcbfrung entlaffen, 
ba§ fie fic^ auf bte Äirc^e ^oQanb'ö um Unterflü$ung in itirem neuen 
äCobnorte »erlajfen fönnen.— Deutfc^-ref. Äaltnber für 1865, <ä. 22. 

a Rev. Rieger was a native of Obcringelhcim, Palatinate, Germany. 
Ue Btudied at Basel and Heidelberg and had charge of several German 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1781. 



69 



Gelert Gelehren, 
Jacob Sevenköl,* 
Johannes Albert, 
^Uiraham Halshaus, 
John Henrich Bahn, 
Hans Michael Blattner, 
N'eitli Bruningher,* 
•lohan Jacob Beyer,* 
•lohan Adam Beyer,* 
Hans G-eorg Ebert, 
Hans Michel Ebert, 
Johannes Eschelman, 
Hans Michel Debilbissen,* 
Hans Georg Debilbissen,* 
Hans Michel Wilhelm, 
Hans Georg Friedle,* 
Hans Georg Gunt, 
Hans Michel Henning, 
Hans Lenhard Holtzapfel, 
Erasmus Holtzapfel,* 



Johannes K i rsch ner , 
Georg Dietrich Kohl, 
Wilhelm Lautermilch, 
Christian Lehman, 
Johann Philip Lutz, 
Hans Peter Lederman, 
Hans Jacob Mautz, 
Johan Thomas Meyer, 
Hans Henrich Martin, 
Johan Caspar Miintz, 
Christian Sliller,* 
Herman Miller,* 
John Nehs, 
Mathias Nehs jr., 
Hans Georg Nöss, 
George Passage,* 
Gab. Bösher,* 
Johannes Roth, 
Jacob Bohr, 
Matheis Smeisser,* h 



Reformed Congregations in Pennsylvania. He died at Lancaster. Pa., 
March 14, 1769, aged 62 years, 2 months and 4 days. His remains 
rest in the grave yard of the German Reformed Church, Lancaster 
City. — Rupp's History of Lancaster County, pp. 226, 460. 

a ^nftor SRieger war in Dbf ringcl^ftm in bf r ^falj geboren. Sr jhtbtrte 
tn SBafel unb ^cibclberg, bcbiente mebrere beutfd^=reformtTte (SJemetnben in 
^^ennfplöanien unb ftarb am 14. Warj 1769 in Sancajter, ^Ji-/ int 2llter 
v^cn fi'i 3ii^rcn, 2 iWonatcn unb 4 Jagen, ©ein 2etd»nam ru^t auf bent 
äircttiofe ber bfutfd)»reformtrten Üirdbt in ber Stabt Sancajler. — 9iu))t>'^ 
(i)ci'c^. »on \!ancafter So., ®. 226, 460. 

6 Matheis Smeisser was bom in Rugelbach, Germany, February 17, 
1715; on his arrival in Pennsylvania, he settled in York County, where 
he died 1778. He was one of the ancestors of the numerous Smysers, 
whose descendants now number upwards of twelve hundred. 

In List A appear the names of Barbara Smeisser, aged 50 years, and 
Margareth Smeisser, aged 20 years, the former undoubtedly the mother 
of, and the latter sister to Matheis, aged 16, and George Smeisser, 
aged 9 years, at the time of their amval. 

b 5Watbct<? Smeiffer, am 17. Februar 1715 tn 3?ugelba(6, t^eutfcblanb, 
geboren, lifp fich nacb fduer 9lnfunft in ^-^ennföbanten in 2)orf Sountg 
uieber, wo er 1778 ftnrb. 6r war einer ber iyorua'ter ber jaljlretc^en 
^m^fer, beren Stbfömmlinge jf^t über ^»clftiunbert jät)len. 

3n Sijle A erfc^etnt ber ^amt ^Barbara iämeilTer, 5() 3a^re aXi, unb 



70 NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 

Mich. Stocker,* Joh. Christian Sackreider, 

Christophe! Drübe, Joh. Michl Schrotner, 

Hans Vogler, Georg Willem Schwartz, 

Lenhart Fieohr, Henrich Ludwig Schwartz, 

Oswald Wald, Johann Adam Schröter, 

Caspar Weis, Valentine Siegmund,* 

Jacob Wirtz, Jacob Schumacher, 

Jacob Nehs,* Johannes Schmidt, 

Johann Adam Ruppert, Hans Martin Wetzell, 

Leonhart Steininger, Georg Wannmacher, 

Hans Georg Möller, Michael Ness, 

Joh. Leonhart Bihlmeier, Joh. Jacob Weynandt. 

Under sixteen: (Unter \eö^]d)n): — Peter Timothee, Ludwig 
Timothee, Carl Timothee, Daniel Geber, Peter Rasch, Nicholas 
Prey, Georg Michael Blattner, Hans Brunninger, Hans Adam 
Brunninger, Leohard Bock, Hans Michael Bock, Hans Bösch- 
ung, David Brecht, Casper Debelbissen, Henrich ^gender, 
Ludwig ^gender, Lorentz Friedle, Hans Georg Friedle, Hans 
Georg Gundt, Joseph Hirsch, Peter Hirsch, Johannes Kern, 
Hans Georg Kohl, Johannes Lehman, Rudolph Martin, Hans 
Jacob Nöss, Hans Jacob Roth, Georg Bindeissen, Justus Ru- 
pertus Schwartz, Johannes Schwartz, Johann Michael Schröter, 
Hans Georg Schröter, Johann Henrich Weide, Martin Wetzell, 
Johannes Moll, Conrad Henning. — Hans Böschung 39 years 
old, Barbara Böschung 37, Hans Philip Böschung 9, Anna 
Barbara Böschung 6, Christianna Böschung 3 years. 



17) Oct. 14, 1731. Palatines imported in the Snow Louther, 
Joseph Fisher, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Dover. — 
Col. Rec. III. 417. Thirty-three males above sixteen, fifteen 
under sixteen, and thirty females of difibrent ages, and two in- 
fants unbaptized — in all 81. — {Editor.) 

Dft. 14, 1731. 3m ©noJi? Souther, dapitain Sofep^ gif()cr, 
»on Stotterbam über X)ooer, famen ^Jfäljer an, — {5ol.=SBcr. III. 
417. 9J?ännU(^e brei unb brcipig über nnt fünf^e^n unter fe(^= 
je^n, unb brei^ig weibliche ^erfonen »erfi^iebenen Sttterg nebfl 
jwei {(einen ungetanften Äinbcrn: 81 im ©anjen. — (^erau^g.) 

'^ax<\ant\)a (Smct([er, 20 Salbre. ©rftcre tfi ttjofel He üWutter unb Se^tere 
t>te ©cbwefter beg fec|je!)nj[äbrtgen 5}?atbetö unb beö neunjiä'brigcn 
®eorg Smetffer. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1732. 



71 



Gottfried Lehman, 
Jacob Michael, 
Jacob Keesey,* 
Henrich Baum, 
PhiUp Eckford, 
Ulrich Michel, 
Jacob Holtzinger, 
Johann Christian Lehmann, 
Johan Wendel Grisse,? 
John Jacob Brunner, 
Johann Mathias Cramer, 
Hans Georg Hamerich, 
Philip Peter Visanant, 
Johan Peter Fissnand, 
Melchior Häyden,* 
Philip Kinss, 



Hans Bosch, 
Johannes UUerich, 
Jacob Snevely,* 
Christo Newbert,* 
Caspar Betschen, 
Georg Schöltz, 
Daniel Weisiger, 
Henrich Havervass, 
Christoffel Amborn, 
Anton Banckauff, 
Johan Nickel Schmid, 
Johann Conrad Franck, 
Frantz Philip Ulerich, 
John Christoph Knauer, 
Christ. Ernst Stägenmüller, 
Caspar Baumann. 



Dorst Hoste,* 

Under sixteen : (Unter fec^je^n) : — Johannes Gottfried Leh- 
man, David Giesse, Conrad Giesse, Ulrich Giesse, Jeremias Brun- 
ner, Johannes Albrecht, Michael Brunner, Henrich Brunner, 
Paul Hamerich, Johann Georg Merchand, Johann Ludwig 
Merchand, Johann Adam Fessingen, Johannes Straub, Philip 
Lorentz Michael, Jacob Holtzinger. 



18) May 15, 1732. Palatines imported in the ship Norris, 
Thomas Lloyd, Master, from Boston. — Col. Rec. III. 429. 

max 15, 1732. t)ai ©c^ijf '^^xxxi, ßapitatn 3:^oma3 Sto^b, 
brachte g)fä(3er »on ißüj^on. go(.=33er. III. 429. 
Casper Schirch, Johan Michael Siegmund, 

Martin Gasner, Joh. Dietrich Jungmann, 

Mathias Weber, Christian Kennenger,* 

John Phil. Weber, Johannes Herman, 

Johan Mancher, Valentine Westheber, 

Johannes Behn, Joh. Georg Liebenstein. 

Michael Andreas, 



19) Aug. 11, 1732. Palatines imported in the ship Samuel, 
of London, Hugh Piercy, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Cowes. — Col. Rec. III. 431. One hundred and six males above 
sixteen, thirty -four under sixteen; eighty -nine females above 



72 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



sixteen, and fifty under — in all two hundred and seventy-nine. — • 
(^Editor.) 

2tug. 11, 1732. ^fäljer njurben auf tern ©^iffe (Samuel 
»on Sonfcon, Gapttain ^ugb ^ierc^, »on 9lottert»am über Soroeg 
gebraut. — SoI.=Ser. III. 431. ©in^unfcert unb fe(^^ männliche 
^erfonen über unt »ier unt) breifig unter fei^je^n, nebft neun 
unt) ac^tjig weibUc^en über unt) fünfzig unter [edije^^n. 3nt 
(Sanjen groei ^unbert neun unt> fieben3ig. (.Herausgeber.) 



Martin Gerhard, 
John Bendler, 
Nicklas Körper, 
Laurentz Knoekel, 
Matheus Böckle, 
Ulrich Böchle, 
Samuel Brandt, 
John Heneberger, 
Michel Dirstein, 
Henrich Ebby, 
Gotfiied Stahl, 
Michel Georg, 
Johann George Nungesser, 
Georg Philip Windemuth, 
Hans Jacob Beclie, 
Christoph Böckle, 
Johan Jacob Behlerdt, 
Hans Georg Klingmann, 
Jacob Oberholtzer, 
Johan Adam Andress, 
Christ. Frantz sen.,* 
Samuel Scherer, 
Leonhart Döbler, 
Oswald Hostetter, 
Hans Muselman, 
Christ. Frantz jr., 
Friedrich Kieflfer, 
Jacob Crist,* 
Jacob Fleiser, 
Georg Döbler, 
Georg Bender, 
Jacob Stauffer, 
Martin Weigell, 



Johannes MUler, 
Christian Beudler, 
Hans Adam Neidig, 
Julius Dehr, 
Christian Biry, 
Andreas Müller, 
Christian German, 
Benedict German, 
Peter Balsbach, 
Jacob Knechell,* 
Martin Giller, 
Jacob Kieflfer, 
Ulrich Burkh alter, 
Jacob Gut, 
Hans Paulus Boger, 
Johannes Ziger, 
Georg Heyl, 
Peter Stey,* 
John Bumgardner,* 
Jacob Albrecht, 
J. H. Hartmann, 
Wendel Gerlach, 
John Helford,* 
Jacob Weyes,* 
Henrich Berret,* 
Jacob Gochnauer, 
Peter Frit, 
Andreas Shetler, 
Carl Seyl, 
Philip Wendel, 
Eliseus Mayer, 
Johannes Lentz, 
Johannes Brechbil, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1732. 73 

Johan Nickel Strass, Georg Ludwig Horning, 

Hans Georg Gödeke, Caspar Wartman, 

Joh. Leonhardt Kieffer, Georg Klingman, 

Frederich Mulchslager,* Johan Philip Eager, ? 

Michael Kreiden-, Hans Michel Balmer, 

Henrich Ramsauer, Christian Balmer, 

Johan Georg Glassbrenner, Friderich Aldorffer, 
Johan Sebalt Kremer, Anastasius Uhler, 

Wendel Brechbiihll, Hans Jerg Steger, 

Johan Georg Kleinhauss, Wendel Bernheisel, 

Hans Wendel Höll, John Bernheisel, 

Wilhelm Bergheimer, Hans Mich. Baumgertner, 

Andreas Slantzeberger, Hein Ulrich Fischer, 

Johannes Uhrich, Peter Schellenberger, 

Johan Peter Heylmann, Hans Georg Queichel, 

Joh. Leonhart Ziegler, Wendel Wörbel, 

Joh. Friederich Schütz, Augustus Wendell, 

Joh. Phillip Schütz, Peter Schneider,* 

Johan Jacob Erdman, Adam Hillegas. 

Under sixteen: (Unter fec^3el)n): — Henrich Böchle, Georg 
Ebby, Georg Stahl, Heinrich Eberle, Samuel Oberholtzer, Jo- 
hannes Frantz, Michael Frantz, Johannes Hosteller, Valentin 
Nungesser, Johannes Lentz, Abraham WoUschläg, Christian 
WoUschläg, Johannes Ramsauer, Philip Neidig, Gottlieb Heyl, 
Conrad Bergh, Jacob Kieffer, Michael Boger, Matthias Boger, 
Jacob Zerger, Georg Berger, Michael Albrecht, Georg Hartman, 
Jacob Bereth, Henrich Bereth, Caspar Bereth, Georg Schellen- 
berger, Georg Kremer, Friedrich Kremer, Gottfried Kremer, 
Johannes Wörbel, Michael Mayer, Adam Mayer, Christian 
Böhler. — Johann Sobald Kremer aged 32, Margaretta Kremer 
27, Georg 12, Friedrich 9, Gottfried 7 years old. 



20) Sept. 11, 1732. Palatines imported in the ship Penn- 
sylvania, Jno. Stedman, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Plymouth. — Col. Rec. III. 452. Seventy - three males above 
sixteen; women and children, of both sexes and different ages, 
ninety-eight — in all, one hundred and seventy-one. — (^Editor.) 

(Sept. 11, 1732. ^\i t»ein ©(^iffe gjennf^toanicn, Sapitain 
3o:^n ©tetman, »on 3tottert)am über ^»I^tnoutf) famen ^fäljer. 
SoI.=33er. III. 452, £)rei unt> ^ebenjig ntännU(i)e ^erfonen über 



74 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



fcc^je^n ; SBeikr unb Äinber öevfc^iebenen Stiterä neun unb a(^t* 
jig ; im ®anjen l^unbert unb iin unb ficbenjig. — (Herausgeber.) 



Adam Klingen, 
Joseph Caspering,? 
Jacob Giss, 
Conrad Frick, 
Michael Rein, 
John Jacob Buss, 
Michael Wüll, 
Johan Seleberger,* 
PhUip Frank, 
Jacob Rod, 
Simon Carle, 
Adam Louer,* 
Hartman Lauer,* 
Jacob Haus, 
Wendel Fiser, 
PhUip Kebelbe, 
Cornelius Kram, 
Hans Rootelee,* 
Johannes Weber, 
Conrad Schönig, 
Daniel Müller, 
Johannes Hoorle,* 
Paulus Ryter,* 
Henrich Ryter,* 
Georg Mertz, 
Michael Schnager,* 
Ditrich GauiF, 
Johannes Faas, 
Jacob Schaad,* 
Michael Capp, 
Gabriel Konigh, 
Carl Ohliger, 
Adam Zeyler,* 
Friederich Emy, 
Mathias Shaub,* 
Matthias ZoUicoffer, V. 



Hendrick Christian, 
Leonard Immel, 
Michael Immel, 
Geo. Michael Hohlstein, 
Hans Georg Graff,? 
Hans Georg Smit,* 
Hans G eorg Cuntz, 
Christofel Stedler,* 
Johan Georg Kauger, 
Matheias Hauser, 
Simon Peter Holsteiner, 
Hans Michel Much, 
Han Niclaus Müller, 
Johann Peter Strack, 
Benedict Eiselman, 
Michael Witmer,* 
Geo. Michel Schweinhart, 
Han Michael Krumrein, 
Wolf Copenhäer,* 
Michael Copenhäer,* 
Mattheis Menchen, 
Johann Georg Amend, 
Christian Steinbach, 
Albrecht Wolffgang, 
Paulus Linsenbigler, 
Hans Jacob Meyer, 
Johann Georg Bätz, 
Bernhart Wolffinger, 
Bastian Wagner, 
G eorg Friedrich Capp, 
Georg Palsgraff, 
William Chriesmerg,* 
Hans Lcond Conrad, 
Wendel Weinheimer, 
Hans Georo; Minhard. 



D.M., 



Under sixteen : (Unter fe^jcftnj: — Philip Ulrich, Jacob Ul- 
rich, Benedict Bartholomäus, Henrich Christian, Hans Kuntz, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1732. 



75 



Andreas Schweinhart, Christian Müller, Michael Müller, G-eorg 
Hottel, Henrich Hottel, Johannes Hottel, Johan Mayer, Rein- 
hart Mayer, Paul Reuter, Caspar Reuter, Michael Schweigharc, 
Peter Gunst, Bastian Wolfinger, Peter Wolfinger, Jacob Isaac, 
Friederich Isaac, Friederich Ermich. 



21) Sept. 19, 1732. Palatines imported in the ship Johnson, 
of London, David Crocket, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Deal. — Col. Rec. III. 453. One hundred and twelve males 
above sixteen, ninety-eight under sixteen ; ninety-eight females 
above sixteen, and eighty-five under sixteen — in all three hundred 
and thirty. — (^Editor.) 

(Sept. 19, 1732. ^fäljer auf tern (Sd)iffc 3o^nfon, Sapitain 
Daöit) dxoäet, auä Sonton, oon 9tottert»am über T)taL — SoI.= 
33er. III. 453. Jpunbert unt» jlüölf männliche über unt» ac^t unb 
neunzig unter fei^3e{)n; ac^t unt neuujtg raeiblic^e ^erfonen 
über unb fünf unt) ac^tjtg unter fec^je^n: tret ^unbert ireipig 
tm ®anjen. — (Herausgeber.) 



Hans Steinmann, 
Laurens Hartman, 
John Harwich, 
Paulus Wegerlein, 
Valtin Beyer, 
Henrich Sien, 
Conrad Behn,* 
Jacob Müller, 
Thomas Matern,* 
Andreas Overback,* 
Jacob Cruir,* 
Jacob Rouse,* 
Daniel Schew,* 
Isac Cuschuah,* 
Bernhart PeiFer, 
Conrath Bollon, 
Andreas Lohr, 
Lorentz Weber, 
Tobias Hegelle, 
Christoph Riss, 
Friderich Riss, 
Adam Hinder, 



Andreas Hemler, 
Nicolas Ewick,* 
Johan Ewick, § 
Joh. Henrich Baum, 
Ludwig Friedle, 
Anthorn Gilbert, 
Valentin Wield,* 
Nicolas Wield,* 
Adam Hummel, 
Fredrich Miller,* 
Johannes Dieter, 
Thomas Sander, 
Johanes Sofirens, 
Joh. Georg Steinmann, 
Hans Jacob Meiler, 
Johan G-eorg Meiler,* 
John Michel Lochtner, 
Hans Henrich Jegner, 
Valentine Renner, 
Joh. Martin Schilling, 
Johannes Mössinger, 
Mathias Brownwart,* 



76 



NAMES OF GERJIAN, SWISS 



Johan Jacob Rower,* 
Christof Ehrenhart, 
Johan Jacob Kuntz, 
Joh. Wilhehn KölHn, 
Joh. Conradt Scheimer, 
Joh. Martin Bullinger, 
Hans Martin Bullinger, 
Han Phil. Zimmerman, 
Johan Michel Deeter, 
Paulus Weinheimer, 
Johannes Bastian, 
Lorentz Bastian, 
Joh. Balthasar Bott, 
Joh. Phüipp Görich, 
Joh. Adam Werner, 
Joh. Valtin Umstadt, 
Joh. G-eorg Baltz, 
Nicolas Evelandt,* 
Joh. Martin Bauer, 
Johannes Ebermann, 
Johannes Albrecht, 
Johan Henrich Jung, 
Johan Adam Leberger, 
Bartholomeus Morth,? 
Johan Christoph Beyer, 
Lenhart Mumma, 
Lorentz Kuntz, 
Ludwig Leeman, 
Christoff Englert, 
Henry Oswald,* 
Leonard Weyer,* 
Laureutz Bawder,* 
Rudolph Bonner,* 



Henrich Appel, 
Pieter Derber,* 
Peter Gabele, 
Peter Seyler, 
Philip Smit,* 
Conrath Sieber, 
Jacob Tray,* 
John Shullmeyer,* 
Johannes Frey, 
Thomas Cryle,* 
Friederich Mayer,* 
Joh. Georg Sehm, 
Johannes Kreuel, 
Johannes Schmitt, 
Joh. Frid. Baumgardtner, 
Joh. Henrich Miller, 
Joh. Peter Schmidt, 
Joh. Jacob Neihaltzer, 
Han Georg Tray,* 
Michael SchuUmeyer,* 
Johannes Hannar,* 
Joh. Hen. Messerschmidt, 
Martin Caplinger,* 
Hans Wilhelm Brant, 
Christian Shneyder,* 
Conrad Schneider, 
Joh. Leonhardt Herman, 
Joh. Peter Genther, 
Johan Frantz Russ, 
Joh. Paulus Lederer, 
Joh. Georg Gumpp, 
Joh. Adam Kreil, 



Joh. Georg Oberkagler. 
Under sixteen: (Unter fcc^je^n): — Paulus Harwich, Jacob 
Harwich, Nickolaus Harwich, Jacob Wegerlein, Johan Jacob 
Müller, Johannes Oberbeck, Philip Oberbeck, Ludwig Schuey, 
Michael Mössinger, Paul Mossinger, Johann Bauer, Johannes 
Lauer, Herman Lauer, Henrich Weber, Martin Ebeland, Adam 
Vogel, Johann Kuntz, Friederich Riss, Jacob Umstadt, Conrad 
Stock, Jacob Ebeland, Johannes Eberman, Jacob Albrecht, 
Ludwig Albrecht, Conrad Sattler, Johannes Sattler, Anthoni 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1732. 



77 



Mumma, Michael Seyler, Valentin Seyler, Lorentz Sicher, Jo- 
hann Conrad Frey. 



22) Sept. 21, 1732. Palatines imported in the ship Pink 
Plaisance, John Paret, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Cowes. — Col. Rec. III. 459. Seventy-seven males above six- 
teen, twenty-eight under sixteen ; sixty-eight females above six- 
teen, and fifteen under sixteen — in all one hundred and eighty- 
eight. — {Editor.) 

©ept. 21, 1732. Stuf bem ©c^tffe ^inf ^laifancc, Sa|)ttatn 
3o^n 5)aret, üon Stottcrtam über Someö famen ^^fäljer.^— (SoI.= 
^er. III. 459. ©ieben unb fieben^ig männlid)e 5)evfonen über 
uiit) ai^t unt) jwanjtg unter fec^jc^n ; a^t unt) fec^jig »veiblid)e 
über unt) fünfje^n unter [ec^jct)n 3a^ren : l)unbert unb ad}t unt> 
ac^tjig im ©anjen. — (^erauögekr.) 



Georg Bast, 
Joh. Cline,* 
Melcher Feler, 
Bastian Budi, 
Christian Huber, 
Samuel Mayer, 
Martin Mayer, 
Jacob Schere, 
Paulus Hertzel, 
Hans Huber, 
Felix Fissler, 
Rudolph Reichert, 
Mathes Müller, 
Johan Philip Müller, 
Johannes Müller, 
Conrath Scharff, 
Daniel Stauffer, 
Hans Zimmerman, 
Hans G-eorg Wagner, 
Greorg Peter Knecht, 
Christian Besicker, 
Christian Martin, 
Johann Jacob Koch, 
Johannes Huisiner, 
■Tohan Frantz Fuchs, 



Balthasar Schönberger, 
Tobias Pechtluf,* 
Johan Fulker,* 
Carl Wagner, 
Jacob Kutz, 
Stephen Long,* 
Christian Strom,* 
Rudolff Christen, 
Peter Bicker,* 
Hans Stömply, 
Ulrich Stalley, 
Paulus Keyser,* 
Hans Danler,* 
Jacob Bloom,* 
Jacob Swisser,* 
Frantz Stadel,* 
Nicklaus Peni,? 
Andreas Wolff, 
Jacob Stauffer, 
Johan Landis, 
Hans Gesell,* 
Elias Wagner, 
Philip Ott, 
Ulrich Besser,* 
Hans Lechteni,? 



y* 



78 NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 

Haus Jacob Keyser, Hans Albrecbt Bücher, 

Matthias Kramer, Henrich Hertzell, 

Nicol Zimmerman, Hans Melchior Werffel, 

Ulrich Zimmerman, Nicolaus Carn,* 

Samuel Harnisch, Hans Ulrich Wagner, 

Andreas Pflückinger, Henrich Harstlich,* 

Christoff Albrecht Lang, Hans Leonhart Hertzell, 

Joh. Wilhelm Straub, Andreas Cramer,* 

Georg Bernhart Mahr, Michael Schärer, 

Joh. Philip Kistner, Johan Wolff Berlett. ? 

Joh. Adam Zimmerman, 

A. Sick : (Äranf) : — Johannes Gross, Nicolas Ish, John Jac. 
Felker, Ulrich Hottell. 

Under sixteen : (Unter fec^je^n) : — Hans Zimmerman, Chris- 
tian Zimmerman, Bastian Zimmerman, Jacob Mann, Hans 
Martin Huber, Jacob Huber, Jacob Born, Jacob Mayer, Chris- 
toph Mayer, Hans Dickleder, Hans Peter Stalley, Martin Marte, 
Johan Emanuel Brallion, Conrad Böchtold, Bastian Rudy, And. 
Stättel, Reinhart Reichart, Ulrich Wilhelm Kern, Jacob Treuer, 
Christoph Müller, Hans Georg Müller, Philip Müller, Jacob 
Baseaur, Joh. Bernhart Straub, Matthias Klein, Henrick Klein. 



23) Sept. 23, 1732. Palatines imported in the ship Adven- 
turer, Robert Carson, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 
Col. Rec. III. 455. Fift.y-eight males above sixteen, nineteen 
under sixteen; forty-three females above sixteen, and twenty- 
seven under sixteen — in aU one hundred and forty-seven. — {Ud.) 

(Sept. 23, 1732. '3)Ztt bem @^iffe 5ibijenturer, gapttain dioh. 
Garfon, »on JRottcrtiam über ßojt>eö famen ^fäi^er. — ßo(.=33er. 
III. 455. 2td)t unt) fünfji^ männHd)e 5>erfonen njaren über unto 
neunje^n unter fed)je^n; trei unto öter3tg weibUi^e über unb 
fteben unti jtranjtg unter fec^je^n: ^unbert fteben unt) »icr^ig im 
©anjen. — (Herausgeber.) 

Michael Brandt, Mathias Walder, 

Michael Gross, Han! Michael Müller, 

Johannes Artz,* Johan Georg Präuner, 

Georg Mosser, Friedrich Tendelspach,* 

Balthas Stüber, Hans Georg Able,* 

Andreas Kilian, Hans Martin Ranger, 

Andreas Horn,* Han Paulus Zantsinger, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1732. 



79 



David Holtzeder, 
Hieronymus Glantz, 
David Fischer, 
Michael Moser, 
Simon Meyer, 
Georg Unruh, 
Conrath Lang, 
Michel Potts, 
Johannes Schott, 
John Wingleplech,* 
Henrich Steger, 
Malteis Riegel, 
Henrich Lips, 
Michael Koogh,* 
Simon Gillinger,* 
Andreas Wise,* 
Georg Riegel, 
Conrad Clewer, 
Nicolaus Bar tie,* 
Tobias Moser, 
Andreas Schaup,* 
Leonhard Moser, 



Hans Leonart Gam, 
Lorentz Zwirner, 
Baltzar Bortner, 
Han Leonhard Nydy,* 
Johannes Heberling, 
Hans Jacob Gander, 
Daniel Kolmer, 
Mattheas Wagner, 
Hans Ulrich Hey, 
Bernhart Shertle,* 
Johannes Becker,* 
Paul Le Cene, 
Jean Le Cene, 
Vallentin Scheib, 
Nicholas Bogerdt, 
Johannes Grawius, 
Hans Georg Lehner, 
Han Melcher Stecher, 
Hans Michael Hagg, 



Georg Michael Mack, 
Hans Peter Steyger,* 
Leonard Aam, sick. 

Under sixteen : (Unter fe(^,5ei>n) : — Hans Adam Trump, Hans 
Michael Glantz, Hans Holtzeder, Bastian Mosser, Simon Mosser, 
Hans Georg Mosser, Georg Meyer, Hans Meyer, Georg Adam 
Steger, Hans Michael Potts, Hans Peter Heberling, Bastian 
Schönle, Hans Peter Winckelbleck, Lorentz Lessing, Johan 
Jacob Gander, Johann Georg Gander, Jacob Bortner, Simon 
Benedict, Johannes Artz. 



24) Sept. 25, 1732. Palatines imported in the ship Loyal 
Judith, of London, Robert Turpin, Master, from Rotterdam, 
last from Cowes. — Col. Rec. III. 456. 

@cpt. 25, 1732. SJtit bem ©d)iffe ^o^al Qubit^ »on Sonbon, 
Sapttatn 3fiobert 2:urpin, oon ^flotterbam über Soroeö famen 
^fäljer.— (£oL=Ser. III. 456. 



Andreas Gaar,? 
Jacob Steli, 
Matthes Baarsteyn,* 
Rudolph Brown,* 



Matthes Schmidt,* 
Henrich Papst,* 
Jacob Spansailer, 
Christian Reep,* 



80 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Peter Kreiter, 
Johannes Kreiter, 
Jacob MUler,* 
Henrich Göbell, 
John Auterbach,* 
Peter Rauch, 
Michael Peutz,* 
Jacob Küutzel, 
Joh. Christian Shultz, 

Minister, (aged 30), 
Johann Adam Gaar, 
Johan Michael Ebert, 
Johann Adam Abel, 
Johann Jacob Abel, 
Johan Georg Schmidt, 
Hans Philip Spansailer, 
Hans Peter Schäfer, 
Hans Burghart, 
Hans Georg Noll, 
Friederich Kühller, 
Hans Georg Wagner, 
Hans Georg Pelman,* 
John Michael Royer, 
Johann Carl Reyer, 
Fridrich Ehley, 
Jacob Lishire, 
Ludwig Happel, 
Conrad Fey, 
PhiHp Raup, 
Leonhart Hegeil, 
Bernard Walter, 
Henrich Acker, 
Wilhelm Berne,* 
Hans Kuntz, 
Paulus Müller, 
Cronomus Miller,* 
Hans Weldtli, 
Peter Saudter, 
Samuel Griffe,* 
Martin Heilman, 
Andreas Schenk,* 



Michael Emmert, 
Phil. Ernst Krüber, 
Geo. Mich. Rey,* 
Hans Georg Able, 
Johannes Vogel, 
Johannes Bentz, 
Jonas Wolf,* 
Lenhart Lotz, 
Marcus Jung, 
Henrich Leibacher, 
Johan Becker, 
Baltzer Conkell, 
John Geo. FurkiU,* 
Johannes Bintnagel,* 
Hans Georg Raub, 
Johan Shuman,? 
Georg Müller, 
Christian Gum, 
Friedrich Schäffer, 
Johannes Reep,* 
Casper Krämer, 
Conrad Walther, 
Jacob Pretz, 
Joh. Geo. F. Emmert, 
Joh. Martin Reier, 
Hans David Ely, 
Matthäus Schultz, 
Philip Ludwig Güfi,? 
Hans Georg Riser, 
Georg Adam Riser, 
Philip Jacob Acker, 
Johann Georg Rück, 
Hans Michl Criger,* 
Hans Georg Kuntz, 
Hans David Lentz,* 
Joh. Philip Sauter, 
Joh. Georg Hoffmann, 
Johannes Heilman, 
Martin Weybrecht, 
Joh. Geo. Obermüller, 
Georg Christoph Lay, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1732. 



81 



Johan Geo. Friederich, 
Johan Georg Honnig, 
Johann Veit Jorger, 
Geo. Michael Schmidt, 
Jacob Biihlmayer, 
Joh. Michael Hoffacker, 
Georg Peter Schultes, 
Johann Peter Kucher, 
Joh. George Nadderman, 
Hans Jacob Stambach, 
Joh. Friedrich Hesser, 
Joh. Fried. Burghart, 
A. Sick — George Ritter. 



Andreas Cochenderff, 
Hans Antoni Gasser, 
Hans Henrich Eckler, 
Johan Nicklas Rämer, 
Johannes Züsser, ? 
Hans Martin Bau, 
Hans Georg Tran, 
Johannes Schmeltzer, 
Johannes Rebmann, 
Han Martin Weybrecht, 
Hans Georg Birstler. 

Dead (tott) — Jacob Lishire. 



25) Sept. 26, 1732. Palatines imported in the ship Maiy, 
of London, John Gray, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Cowes. — Sixty-nine males above sixteen, one hundred and 
twenty-two women and children — in all 183. 

(Sept. 26, 1732. £)aö ©^iff ^ar^ öon Sonfeon, dapitain 
3of)n ®ra9, öon 9tottert>am über Soireö, trachte ^fätjer. — 9teutt 
un\> fec^jtg männliche ^erfonen über fec^3et)n, unb ein |)untiert 
unt) imx unt) smanaig Sßeiber unt ^inber — im ©anjen 183. 



Nicolas Staller,* 
Jacob Reitlershan, 
Conrath Miller, 
Dewald Käse,* 
Christian Kling, 
Jacob Stempel, 
Nicolas Stemple,* 
Jacob Haub,* 
Christoph Kiser,* 
Reinholt Ezle,* 
Cornelius Teele,* 
Daniel Billiger, 
Albrecht Strauss, 
Andreas Moser,* 
Casper Miere,* 
Jacob Wiirth, 
Georg Schüssler, 
Henrich Chesler * 



Jacob Walter, 
Jacob Walder, 
Herman Sin, 
Simon Müller, 
Winnale Cattler, 
Albrecht Hass, 
Carl Lisa,* 
Georg Kling, 
Johannes Werth, 
Michael Dörr, 
Pierre Fleury, 
Martin Ernst, 
Nicolaus Kint,* 
Han Georg Froschauer, 
Michael Ebennan, 
Hans Jacob Eberman, 
Johann Laudermilch,* 
Hans Adam Miller, 



82 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



G-eorg Phillip Pier, 
Joh. Jacob Dreibelbiss, 
Conrad Aberman,* 
Hans Georg Ebenno,* 
Hans Michel Walck, 
Hans Jacob Würth, 
Stephen Kennamer,* 
Johannes Mayer, 
Henry Cheesler,* 
Hans Jacob Cheesler,* 
Joh. F. Rauschenberger, 
Jacob Marcus Imler, 



Hans Georg Minier,* 
Hans Henrich Teny,* 
Hans Adam Robetes, 
Jean Louis d'Avier, 
Johann Georg Kohl, 
Hans Georg Embright,* 
Hans Peter Verley,* 
Georg Feite Pickel,* 
Hans Michel Mentz, 
Johannes Schaffner,? 
Johannes Huber, 
Christopher Bickel. 



Christian Minier,* 

A. Dead — Hans Georg Dörr, aged 16, Leonard Sable, 40, 
Hans Georg Smith, 44, and Baltas Click, 33, 



26) Sept. 30, 1732. Palatines imported in the ship Dragon, 
Chas. Hargrave, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Plymouth. — 
In aU 185. 

©ept 30, 1732. 3)^it bent ©c^iff X)ragon, Sapitain (S^rleg 
^argraüe, oon 0lottert>am üfcer 5)l9moutf, famen ^Pfäljer. — 3»« 
®an3en 185. 



Peter Matern,* 
Michel Dirr,* 
Christ. Hoffmann,* 
Jacob Leipersburger,* 
Hans Laabour,* 
George Road,* 
Leonhard Slosser, 
Leonhard Miller,* 
Peter Raudenbusch, 
Henrich Gruber, 
Johannes Witman, 
Jacob Klein, 
Peter Schlosser, 
Christian Huber, 
Hans Georg Hegi, 
Simon Belsner, 
Andreas Schlauch, 
Henrich Basler, 



Lenhart Bentz, 
Michael Graff, 
Tobias Ball, 
Georg Fantz, 
Georg Hayle,* 
Georg Seib, 
Ludwig Sype,* 
Frantz Seib, 
Henrich Klein, 
Joh. Friedrich Romich, 
Hans Georg Dirr,* 
Martin Weidknecht, 
Hans Adam Bender, 
Johan Adam Romich, 
Joh. Wilhelm Franck, 
Hans Jacob Schorck, 
Hans Peter Wolff, 
Johan Heerbürger, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1732. 



83 



Johannes Geiger, 
Johan Greorg Grreiaer, 
Job. Dietrich Greiner, 
Han Wilhelm Ziegler, 
Johannes Schreyiackh, 
Joh. Nicklaus Müller, 
Johan Phil. Hopmann, 
Johan Philip Schlauch, 
Hans Michel Reisner, 



Hans Rudolph lUig, 
Hans Maitin Kappler, 
Georg Ludwig Schütz, 
Christophel Beser, 
Johann Jacob Beyerle, 
Hans Ulrich Ber, 
Hans Georg Heill, 
Felix Brunner, 
Hans Georg Soldnier. 



A. Sick — Andreas Beetel, Wilhelm Keyser, Daniel Stein- 
metz, Johan Hagea, Jacob Hagea, Georg Tsober, George Bär, 
Henry Zowck, Laurence Bechtle, Nichlas Musloch, Dietrich 
Bücher, Jacob Dubbs, Wolfgang Birle, Friederich Engelhart 
Uhlmann. — Simon Baserer, dumb (fiumm). 



27) Oct. 11, 1732. Palatines imported in the ship Pleasant, 
J. Morris, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Deal. — In all 150. 

Oct. 11, 1732. T)aä Schiff ?)Ieafant, eapitatn 3ameö ^or= 
xiä, »on JHotterfcam über !DeaI, hvaä^ti^^älitx. — 3'« ©anjen 150. 



Henrich Spengler, 
George Bär,* 
Friedrich Bassler,* 
Ulrich Baduer, 
Johann Georg Senck, 
Baltzer Spengler, 
Jacob Friederich Klem, 
Johan Jacob Timanus, 
Ulrich Peters, 
Georg Hans Ped, ? 
Georg Spengler, 
Georg Keller, 
Henrich Roth, 
Jacob Padum, ? 
Henrich Eckert, 
Conrath Kolb, 
Felix Miller, ? 
Johannes Gamber, 
Friederich Notz, 
Johannes Moak,* 
Ulrich Basler,* 



Georg Mess,* 
Valentin Müller, 
Conrad Rowp,* 
Georg Michel Favian,* 
Isaac Raudenbusch, 
Matthias Jurian,* 
Hans Georg Falck, 
Phillip Schilling,* 
Conrad Glasbrenner, 
Jacob Hornberger,* 
Hans Peter Siegmund,* 
Hans Bern Kuntzer,* 
Hans Philip Kresler, 
Matheis Ambrossi, 
Hans Adam Schilling,* 
Joh. Casper Wenterott, 
Geo. Philip Schnatterly, 
Han Michel Schatterly, 
Hans Michel HoiFman, 
Johannes Taffelmeyer. ? 



84 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



A. Sick — Leonard Lutes, George Pisell, Conrad Ralsure, 
Peter Ralsure, Conrad Hellebrun, David Menner, Mich. Favon, 
Andrew Schweitzer, Jacob Frocli, George Karne, Johannes 
Kleffer, Christoph Sprecher, David Menein, J. Georg Passage. 



28) Oct. 17, 1732. Palatines imported in the ship Pink 
John and William, of Sunderland, Constable Tymperton, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Dover. — Sixty-one men above six- 
teen, one hundred and nine women and children of both sexes 
of diflFerent ages — in all 170. — (^Editor.) 

Oct. 17, 1732. 2Iuf bent ©d)tffe ^inf 3o^n unb 2BitIiam, 
öon (Sunberlanb, Sapitain SonftaMer Jpmperton, »on 9lotter= 
bam über 2)ooer, famen 5^fäljer. — (Sin unb fec^jig Scanner über 
fe(^3c^n, nebft ein ^unbert unb neun SBeibern unb Äinbern »er^^ 
[(^iebenen %[itxi — im ©anjen 170. — (Herausgeber.) 



Moretz Lorentz, 
C. Vielgar, ? 
Georg Albright,* 
Laurens Kieffer,* 
Jacob Brakebill,* 
Stephen Mattes,* 
Bartel Maul, 
Hans Emich,* 
Johannes Jagi, 
Johannes Nagel,* 
Peter Smidt,* 
Baltzer Gurlach, 
Christian Lau, 
Stephan Matz, 
Nicholas Paschon, 
Hans Georg Martin, 
Bernhard Weymer,* 
Hans Ehr. Vosselmann, 
Feiten Schydecker,* 
Johannes Deymcn,* 
Pieter Hayvigh,* 
Michael Weissel, 
Fridrich Wyssel,* 
Ludwig Johan Herr, 
Job. Philip lleiuhardt, 



Hans Peter Brechbill,* 
Benedict Brechbill,* 
Hans Brechbill,* 
Michael Blömhauer, 
Casper Willauer, 
Conrad Low,* 
Ludwig Hugel,* 
Jacob Weber,* 
Johannes Schook,* 
Abraham Dubo,* 
Adam Wilt,* 
Antoni Albrecht, 
Conrad Getts, 
Nicklaus Koger, ? 
Matheus Mauser, 
Gideon Hoffer,* 
Hans Riehl, 
Henrich Geck, 
Johannes Vögle, 
Jacob Henrich, 
George Veibert,* 
Han Georg Sprecher, 
Job. Michael Hoffman,* 
Job. Nicklaus Böschung, 
Hans Jacob Reyel, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1733. 85 

Georg Adam Stis,* Johan Paul Derst, 

Hans Georg Rohbach,* Mathias Rubichon, 

Job. Nicklaus Schmid, Philip Melchior Meyer, 

Hans Philip Gleis,* Job. Georg Wahnsidel, 

Sebastian Truekmüller,* Johan Peter Apfel, 

Johan Martin Schöffer, Johan Jacob Scherr. 

A. Sick — Frederick Kühler, Philip Melchner, Bartel Noll, 
Jac. Brechbill, Johan Vinterhelver, Philip Jac. Probst, Mich. 
Müller, Philip Dubo, Hans Woolf Doopel, Joseph Hously, 
Michael Probst. 

Under sixteen : — Nicholas Emich, Joh. Emich, Jacob Emich^ 
Johann David Heifer, Christopher Heifer, Andreas Böschung, 
Henrich Böschung, Johannes Weymer, Christ. Lau, Christian 
Bieber, Jacob Bieber, Joh. Schrögen, Jacob Lorentz, Jacob 
Reyel, Jacob Frey, Caspar Müller, Hans Müller, Mich. Müller, 
Peter Albrecht, Joh. Albrecht, Bernhardt Hublich, Michael 
Hublich, Michael Rihl, Michael Martin, Carl De Meyerer, 
Johann Rubichon. 



29) Aug. 17, 1733. Palatines imported in the ship Samuel, 
of London, Hugh Percy, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Deal. — Males eighty-nine above sixteen, females eighty-six ; males 
under sixteen, fifty-four, females sixty-two — in all 291. — (Ed.^ 

Slug. 17, 1783. Sluf tern ©c^iffe (Samuel »on ?ont»on, Sapi* 
tain ^ug^ ^erc^, »on JRotterfcam üBer 2)eal, famcn ^fäljcr. — 
9leun unt) ai^tjig männlidie unt) fed)3 unt) ac^tjig roetfelic^e ^er= 
fonen über fed)3e^n, unb »ier unt» fünfzig männliche unter, unt» 
jmei unt) fe(^jig toeiblic^c unter fec^jc^n — im ®anjen 291. — 
(^erauögekr.) 

Hans Peter Frey,* Mattheis Ley, 

Elias Theiler,* Hans Peter Beissel, 

Abraham Kuhn,* Michael Sturtzebach,* 

Friedrich Kuhn, Han Georg Strohauer, 

Jacob Rausher,* Johan Lechtenwallner, 

Christian Kröbs, Johan Jacob Zimmer, 

Henrich Bischof,* Hans Georg Ruch,* 

Peter Kuntz,* Johan Georg Ruch, 

Andreas Frey, Hans Jacob Ruch,* 

Friederich Leiby, Johannes Jacob Ritt, 

Michael Schmidt, Hans Leonhart Leher, 



86 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Hans Georg Peck,* 
Friederich Alldörffer, 
Hans Georg Wervel, 
Hans Leonard Wolff, 
Hans Casper Jost,* 
Hans Wolf Eiseman,* 
Hans Fries, 
Hans Werfe],* 
Martin Scheib, 
Solomon Miller,* 
Hans Jacob Hoff,* 
Kilian Sclimid, 
Christian Löffel, 
Milchor Wagner, 
Michael Probst, 
Andreas Wigner, 
Johann Kauffmann, 
Caspar Mülhouse,* 
Andreas Weltz, 
Jacob Fegely, 
Jacob Wenger, 
Johan Lorig,* 
Johannes Schnep,* 
Lorentz Schnepp, 
Martin Wanner, 
Henrich Beter, 
Henrich Roth, 
Peter Cornelius, 
Nicolaus Kan,* 
Marx Gleim, 
Elias Hasele,* 
Heinrich Haller, 
Jacob Krater, 

Sick — Han Jac. Gamooroon. 

Under sixteen : — Valentin Frey, Hans Peter Frey, Christian 
Frey, Hans Peter Strohauer, Philip Adam Thäler, Hans Martin 
Thäler, Hans Georg Kuhn, Michael Ruch Kuntz, Hans Georg 
Kuntz, Georg Ritt, Hans Jac. Ritt, Hans Georg Leitner, Hans 
Mich. Kämmerlin, Christopher Frey, Jacob Leiby, Hans Peter 
Beissel, Hans Jacob Beissel, Lenhart Wirbel, Älartin Scheib, 
Hans Georg Scheib, Christian Lang, Jacob Fischer, Jac. Fegely, 



Peter Drachsel, 
Henry Meder, 
Lorentz Seyboot, 
Hans Jacob Mathis, 
Johan Lenhart Weiss, 
Joh. Jacob Griesinger, 
Johan Philip Hötzer, 
Hans Kaspar Eysseman, 
Justus Simon Wagner, 
Han Jacob Kämmerlin, 
Hans Adam Lang, 
Han Michael Probst, 
Han Georg Zoller, 
Joh. Caspar Körber, 
Joh. Henrich Fischer, 
Joh. Henrich Adam, 
Joh. Wühelm Fischer, 
Hans Casper Brenner, 
Joh. Conrad Kämpff, 
Peter Ensminger, 
Christian Kämpff, 
Gilbert Kämpff, 
Jacob Gerckenhauser, 
Han Lehnard Eimiger, ? 
Joh. Peter Knöbell, 
Joh. Caspar Schaffner, 
Ulrich Flickiner,* 
Han Adam Stuckroth,? 
Valentin Sneider,* 
Hans Peter Mack,* 
Christian Danner, 
Henrich Fessler,* 
Han Bernhardt Trosteil, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1733. 



87 



Hans Georg Lövch, Joh. Schnepp, Lorentz Schnepp, Christian 
Wanner, Henrich Peter, Henrich Ensminger, Hans Philip Ens- 
minger, Friederich Kämpif, Wilhelm Ritt, Lorentz Cornelius, 
Michael Kahn, Hans Adam Dieminger, Marx Grieim, Henrich 
Haller, Philip Drachsel, Georg Drachsel, Jacob Drachsel, Gott- 
fried Drachsel, Peter Drachsel, Daniel Drachsel, Benedict Sey- 
boot, Georg Rössel, Georg Meder. 



30) Aug. 27, 1733. Palatines imported, — ship Eüza, of Lon- 
don, Edward Lee, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Dover. — 
Males fifty-eight above sixteen, females fifty ; males forty-one 
under sixteen, females forty-one — in all 190. — (Editor.) 

3tug. 27, 1733. Daö Schiff Stija öon Sonbon, ßapitain 
Sbroarb See, öon JHottertnm über Doöer, brai^te ^fäljer. — 
SJiännlic^c ^erfoncn adjt unl» fiinfjig, unt» weibliche fünfjig über 
fed)je^n; ein unb üierjig männliche unb ein unb loierjig weibliche 
unter fe^jeftn — im ©anjen 190. — (Herausgeber.) 



Johannes Kirschner, 
Johannes Mohn, 
Conrad Schott,* 
Johan Philip Saner, 
Joh. Michael Grauel, 
Johan Georg Petry, 
Michael Ruth, 
Carl Hetrich,* 
Henrich Slentz, 
Johannes Jung,* 
Ulrich Schuh,* 
Jaro Schuh, 
Johannes Loatz, 
Henrich Still, 
Simeon Linder, 
Simon Linder jr., 
Michael Faber, 
Aron Doganer,* 
Stephan Lauman, 
Jaques Bonet, 
Jacob Müller, 
Johannes Knoll,* 
Jacob Kobbler,* 



Frantz Weiss, 
Georg Ohr,* 
Johannes Ohr, 
Jacob Serber,* 
Jacob Serber jr., 
Jacob Hänrich, 
Jacob Zettle, 
Jacob Dellinger, 
Henry Stricker,* 
Baiser Metz,* 
Joh. Henrich Schotte, 
Johann Philip Faust, 
Johan Philip Faust, 
Joh. Henrich Dänig, 
Han Peter Hofiinan, 
Johan Peter Paust, 
Johan Philip Paust, 
Jacob Michael Eyb, 
Matthias Weidman, 
Geo. Friederich Anselt, 
Hans Georg Perger, 
Wolfgang Müller, 
Simon Schermann, 



88 NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 

Georg Scherman, Hans Georg Nordt, 

Johan Debalt Traudt, Andreas Klebsattel, 

Hans Martin Traudt, Georg Henrich Mertz, 

Johannes Herrgeröder, Johann Ulrich Gaul,? 

Joh. Henrich Dewess, Johannes Vögelin,? 

Joh. Philip Schmidt, Michael Reinhard.* 

Hans Jacob Metz,* 

Sick — Johann Joseph Faller, schoolmaster, Matthew Weid- 
man, Hans Georg Ley, Nicholas Sly. 

Under sixteen : — Conrad Kirschner, Joh. Georg Kirschner, 
Martin Mohn, Ludwig Mohn, Conrad Kobel, Johannes Schotts, 
Johan Jacob Paust, Johan Adam Paust, Joh. Henrich Paust, 
Michael Ruth, Johannes Hetterich, Johann Heinr. Hetterich, 
Wilhelm Hetterich, Hans Jacob Slentz, Michael Jost, Johannes 
Jost, Johann Peter Jost, Andreas Eyb, Hans jNIichael Lutz, 
Johannes Weidman, Christoph Weidman, Matthias Weidman, 
Simon Linder, Lorentz Linder, Michael Faber, Johann Tobias 
Bogner, Stephan Lauman, Jean Simeon Bonet, Jacob Müller, 
PhUip Scherman, Johannes Traudt, Johann Henrich Traudt, 
Casper Horsveldt, Philip Schmidt, Tobias Nordt, Joh. Friederich 
Dellinger, Mattheis Gaul. 



31) Aug. 28, 1733. Palatines, — ship Hope, of London, Dan. 
Reid, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — Males eighty- 
three above sixteen, females eighty-one; males and females two 
hundred and twenty-five under sixteen — in all 389. — (Editor.) 

Slug. 28, 1733. ^fäljer mit bent (Sd)iffe ^ope i)on Sonfcon, 
Sapitain 'Lmkl 3ftetl>, öon ^totterbam über Sotreö. — X)rei unt> 
ad)t]\Q männlichen ©efc^Ie^tö unt) ein unb ac^tjtg weiMic^en 
über fe^je^n; unter fc^je^n betberlei ©efi^Ie^tä jtoei ^untert 
fünf unt) aroanjig — im ©anjen 389. — (Herausgeber.) 
Ulrich Wissler, Hans Timberman,* 

Hans Steinman,* Joseph Flure, 

Peter Steinman, Johannes Flure, 

Hans Steinman, Christian Kerr,* 

Hans Rat, Michael Whitmer,* 

Ulrich Reinhardt, Ulrich Whitmer,* 

Hans Grumbacher, Peter Whitmer,* 

Christian Stouder,* Jacob Bürki, 

Nicholas Timberman,* Hans Snabley, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1733. 



89 



Friderick Becker, 
lliidol{)h Brock, 
Christian Reblet,* 
Barnard Keller,* 
Conrad Rauf,* 
Georg Richter,* 
Peter Aaroud,* 
Daniel Roth,* 
Frantz Klebsattel, 
Andreas Lauch, 
Herman Arand,* 
Peter Schmück, 
Henrich Umberger, 
Peter Sayler, 
Christian Johnle,* 
G-eorg Kreisseman, 
Andreas Besinger, 
Abraham Miller,* 
Jacob Bart, 
Henrich Tace,* 
Benedict Wise,* 
Michael Ably,* 
Jacob Rubman, 
Henrich Fegly, 
Barnard Fegely, 
Steven Slonacker,* 
Rudolph Schnebele, 
Peter Eschelman, 
Christian Eschelman, 



Hans Georg Brimmer, 
Christian Blank, 
Jacob Lachbaum, 
Heinrich Schmidt, 
Hans Georg Schreyack, 
Joh. Henrich Vonreth, 
Johan Adam Reistel, 
Han Geo. Eichelberger, 
Joh. Leonahart Stein, 
Hans Georg Kohler, 
Hans Georg Höffner, 
Johan David Deschler, 
Johan Jacob Mückli, 
Johan Carl Gramp, 
Bastian Tryster,* 
Han Leonhart LTmberger, 
Georg Michael Treitter, 
Hans Georg Gobel, 
Hans Jacob Gerber, 
Joh. Christopf Cumm, 
Joh. Ad. Simon Cumm, 
Martin Spitelmayer, ? 
Han Adam Spittlemire,* 
Wilhelm Krauss, 
Han Michael Steinbren, 
Abraham Kreutter, 
Hans Jacob Schreiber, 
Daniel Hiiselman, 
Jacob Schreyack, 
Han Michael Schreyack. 



Ulrich Loninacre jr.,* 
Hans Georg Weittner, 

A. Sick — Michael umberger and Jacobus Linck. 

Under sixteen : — Hans Peter Ebly, Hans Adam Ebly, Hans 
Michael Ebly, Hans Rollman, Hans Adam Linck, Jac. Eschle- 
man, Caspar Schnebele, itlichael Becker, Friederich Brock, 
Hans Reiff, Henrich Schmidt, Ludwig Busse, Geo. Huselman, 
Georg Adam Gobel, Jacob Gensman, Michael Klebsattel, Hans 
Georg Klebsattel. 



32) Sept. 18, 1733. Palatines, — brigantine Pennsylvania 
Merchant, of London, John Stedman, Master, from Rotterdam, 

8* 



90 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



last from Plymouth. — Seventy-one males above sixteen, fifty-six 
females ; and sixty-four males and females under sixteen — in all 
m.— (Editor.) 

(Sept. 18, 1733. T)a€ 3ftennfd)iff ^ennfploania SiJicrc^ant 
»on Sonbon, Sapitain 3oi)n (Stebman, uon 9lottert>am über 
5)It)mout6, ^atte 5)fäljer an 33ort). — Sin unt» jiieknjtg männliche 
unt) fei^ö unt» fünfjig weibliche ^erfonen über unb oier unt fcc^= 
jig mannli^en unt) weiblichen ©efi^Iec^tö unter fcc^je^n — im 
©anjen 191. — (Herausgeber.) 



Jobann Klemm, 
Gotlob Klemm, 
Georg Scholtz, 
David Scboltz, 
Johannes Naas, 
Pierre Marot, 
Andreas Kleim,* 
Georg Kleim, 
Georg Schalt,? 
Johannes Riegel, 
Johannes Riegel jr., 
Michael Walter, 
Georg Knop, 
Jacob Ott, 
Ludwig Ewalt, 
Michael Ludwig,* 
Daniel Ludwig,* 
Philip Schmyer, 
Peter Ruth,* 
Hans Lauer, 
Mattheis Gisch, 
Adam Vollmer, 
Ludowick Evaldt,* 
Frederick Götz,* 
Johannes Mihm, 
Peter Schmidt,* 
Paulus Seh äffer, 
Andreas Frey,* 
Bernhart Mauss, 
Andreas Bauer, 
Peter Straub, 



Friederich Glass, 
Jobannes Gordner, 
Mattbeus Büchler, 
Andreas Mosemann, 
Christian Mosemann, 
Hans Burcbard, 
David Burcbard, 
Johann Schönfeldt, 
Joban Aullenbacher, 
Job. Valentin Presse!, 
Carolus Burckbard, 
Job. Philip Weynandt, 
Joban Michael Ott, 
Alexander Gasser,* 
Job. Michael Staudt, 
Joh. Jost Oblwein, 
Philip Angelberger, 
Michael Seydenbender, 
Joban Daniel Endt, 
Joban Valentin Endt, 
Joban Peter Saling, 
Hans Georg Winter, 
Hans Martin Santer,* 
Johann Adam Beyer, 
Job. Christoph Igelsbach, 
Michael Kelcbner, 
Georg Bartbol. Schäffer, 
John Ludwig Sees, 
Hans Georg Hauk, 
Jobann Jacob Karst, 
Christian Hook,* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1733. 91 

Hans G-eorg Grondt, Johann Georg Grimm, 

Georg Adam Koch,* Henrich Schmidt. 

Justus Osterrath, 

A. Sick — Melchior Gronsaum, Henrich Reet, Jacob linger. 

Under sixteen : — Henrich Souchonet, Guilliam Marot, Philip 
Marot, Benjamin Marot, Daniel Marot, Hans Georg Ritt, Caspar 
Klemm, Abraham Riegel, Johannes Ewalt, Johann Schmyer, 
Johannes Gasser, Matheis Gasser, Joh. Ruth, Jacob Ruth, 
Peter Ruth, Georg Winter, Hans Winter, Andreas Stehliu, 
Johannes Stehlin, Matheis Stehlin, Jacob Schultz, Joh. Götz, 
Johannes Reuter, Peter Ingold, Jacob Frick, Paulus Schäffer, 
G-eorg Schäffer, Georg Stoubig, Christian Striebig, Joh. Schäf- 
fer, Christopher Frey, Christian Fischer, Jacob Straub, Peter 
Straub, Georg Hauck, Paulus Gardner, Andreas Büchler. 



33) Sept. 28, 1733. Palatines, — brigantine Richmond and 
Elizabeth, Christopher Clymer, Master, from Rotterdam, last 
from Plymouth. — Forty-four males above sixteen, thirty-four 
females; twenty-four males under sixteen and thirty-five fe- 
males — in all 137. — (Editor.) 

(Sept. 28, 1733. 2tuf bent 9tennfd)iffe 9tt(^mont) unb (SItfa* 
kt^,(iapitatttS^rifto|)^er SIpmer, oon JRotterbam über ^(i^moutt), 
tarnen ^fäljer. — 3Sier unb öier^ig ^iJiänner unb oier unb breipt^ 
i5rauen über, unb üier unb jiranjig männlichen unb fünf unb 
breif ig weiblichen ®ef(^(e^tö unter fe(i)jc^n — im ©anjen 137. — 
(Herausgeber.) 

Frantz Schuller, Ulrich Burghalter,* 

Jacob Greib, Mattheis Beck, 

David Mertz, Hans Schürer, 

Georg Lipp,* Jacob Christ,* 

Mattheus Bausser, Marcus Christ,* 

Matheis Bausser jr., Marx Bigler, 

Christian Bausser, Johannes Weber, 

Philip Mire,* Mattheis Resch, 

David Edelman,* Hans Michael Mertz, 

Adam Spohn, Hans Conrad Lipp,* 

Jacob Hennel, Philip Jacob Edelman, 

Michael Wise,* Johan Georg Schuster, 

Jacob Lebegood,* Johan Jost Heck, 

Jacob Herman,* Jacob Huntzecker, 



92 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Georg Schönmansgruber, 
Johannes WoUett, 
Henry Winterberger, 
Georg Angstet, 
Philip Dedigman, 
Johannes Rosenstiel,* 
Abraham Wotring.? 



Hans Jacob Utz, 
Hans Georg Utz, 
Hans Peter Somey,* 
Hans Jacob Somey,* 
Hans Peter Somey jr., 
Otto Fredrick Somey,* 
Joseph Schumacher, 
Johann Nicolas Seeger, 

A. Sick — Ludwig Rigerd. 

Under sixteen: — Johan Peter Mertz, Balthaser Edelman, 
Daniel Bausser, Johan Henrich Spohn, Johannes Schufiart, 
Johann Dan. Heck, Johan Jacob Lebenguth, Dewald Herman, 
Jacob Herman, Hans Herman, Hans Peter Herman, Hans 
Michael Somey, Johannes Somey, Hans Peter Burchhalter, 
Hans Henrich Seeger, Johann Christian Seeger, Anthony Beck, 
Job. Henrich Beck, Georg Angstet, Johannes Angstet, Philip 
Fahrismann, Hans Peter Wotring. 



34) Sept. 29, 1733. Palatines,— ship Pink Mary, of Dublin, 
James Benn, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Rotterdam, — 
Fifty-five males above sixteen, thirty-seven females ; thirty males 
under sixteen, forty-nine females — in all 171. — (^Editor.) 

©ept. 29, 1733. ^fäljer — ©(^iff ^inf mar^ »on DuHtn, 
Sapttain ^amcä 33enn, »on JHotterbam. — giinf unt> fünfzig 
männlichen nnt» fteben unt) trei^ig weiblichen ©efc^Iec^t^ übet 
fecb^e^n, unb fcrci^ig Knaben nnb neun unb tiierjig 5)Zät)^en unter 
fet^je^n — im ©anjen 171. — (J^erau^geber.) 



David Karcher, 
Gottfried Reich, 
Hannes Yorde, 
Andreas Dries,* 
Cornelius Dries,* 
Peter Dries,* 
Jacob Spengler,* 
Peter Hite,* 
Elias Stickler, 
Hans Georg Harlacher, 
Johann Adam Dries, 
Joiiann Michael Noll, 
Pliilip Thomas Trump, 



Johannes Wingertmann, 
Johannes Teutscher, 
Johann Peter Theusler, 
Johann Georg Riebell, 
Johann Arnold Billig, 
Johannes Stickler, 
Henrich Sauer, 
Christian Blaser, 
Jacob Franck, 
Friederich Funck, 
Michael Friedly, 
Nicolaus Soder, 
Andreas Ney, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1733. 93 

Christian Sooter,* Hans Michael Hammer, 

Georg Pfaffenberger, Johan Michael Dill, 

Greorg Pfaffenberger jr.,* Christian Retelsberger,* 

Georg Düry, Friederich Dörfflinger, 

Jacob Hoffman,* Hans Michael Keller, 

Asemus Rambach, Hans Jacob Berkel, 

Jacob Berkel,* Baltzer Breuninger, 

Nicolaus Moretz, Johan Adam Warner, 

Peter Apple, Geo. Friederich Köhler, 

Johannes Lap,* Johan Peter Gottel, 

Johannes Reichenbach, Johan Jacob Gottel, 

Johan Martin Braun, Johannes Slabach,* 

Philip Jacob Rothrock, Jacob Löscher, 

Johannes Rothrock, Joh. Henry Slabach.* 

A. Sick — Johannes Holtz. 

Under sixteen : — David Karcher, Hans Georg Yorde, Johan- 
nes Yorde, Balthasar Reich, Christopher Spengler, Johan Stick- 
ler, Adam Stickler, Henrich Stickler, Johann Philip Wingert- 
mann, Joh. Adam Blaser, Hans Martz Blaser, Nicolaus Blaser, 
Christopher Teutscher, Jac. Teutscher. S^^ One hoy of Funck, 
not baptized, seven weeks old. Hans Henrich Sauer, Johan 
Jacob Braun, Hans Michael Ney, Adam Pfaffenberger, David 
Hoffman, David Rambach, Hans Jacob Rambach, Hans Mich. 
Köhler, Hans Jacob Berkle, Hans Jacob Breninger, Peter 
Gottel, Rudolph Lapp, Dewald Schlabach, Hans Geo. Löscher. 



35) Oct. 12, 1733. Palatines, — ship Charming Betsy, John 
Ball, Master, from London. — Sixteen males above sixteen, twelve 
females; fifteen males under sixteen, twenty females — in all 
Q"^.— {Editor.) 

Oct. 12, 1733. ^fälaer,— ©Atff (Sftarming 33etfs?, (Sapitain 
3o^n 33att, öon Ronton. — ©ec^je^n 5)Zänner unb jmölf grauen 
über [e^ge^n; fünfje^n Knaben unb jroanjig ?iJtcit»d)en unter 
fec^je^n — im ®anjen 63. — (Herausgeber.) 
Johann Kettner, Peter Stocker,* 

Henrich Möcklei, Johannes Lang, 

Samuel Ludi, John Lang jr., 

Ulrich Leibegood,* Geo. Michael Kettner, 

Adam Spag,* Hans Peter Gruber,* 



94 NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 

Christian Andericli, Hans Paul Vogt, 

Johan Leibegood,* Nicholas Hetzel.* 

Nicholas Burger,* 

A. Sick — Wilhelm Imler. 

Under sixteen: — Johann Henrich Kettner, Henrich Adam 
Kettner, Martin Gruber, Adam Lebenguth, Jacob Lebenguth, 
Adam Spag, Philip Bürger, Georg Breidengross, Ludwig Imm- 
ler, Johannes Immler, Andreas Vogt, Caspar Vogt., Johann 
Georg Lang, Christopher Hetzel, Hans Jacob Hetzel. 



36) Sept. 12, 1734.* Palatines, — ship Saint Andrew, John 
Stedman, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Plymouth. — Eighty- 



* There is a slight discrepancy between the statement, in a German 
book, printed 1771, giving account of the voyage and anival of those 
imported in the ship Saint Andrew, and the original papers. From 
the book alluded to it appears the ship Saint Andrew, John Stedman, 
Master, was freighted with Schwenckf elders, followers of Casp. Schwenck- 
feld, bom in Lower Silesia, 1490. These left their homes in April 
1734, embarked at Altoona, Denmark, May 14, arrived at Philadelphia 
September 22, and on the 23d they declared their fealty: "On Sep- 
tember 23d all male persons above the age of sixteen had to appear 
in the Court House, in order to swear allegiance to the rules of the 
country, to wit: The King of Great Britain and His successors to the 
Crown of England. — Description of the Journey, ^c, pp. 450-461. These 
settled in Berks, Lehigh and Montgomery. — Rupp's His. Eel. Denom. 
U. S., pp. 663-667.— ÄMjojo's His. Berks Co., pp. 222, 427.— For a full 
account see Chapter Schwenckfelders, in Rupp^s History of the Germans 
in Pennsylvania. 

Here it may be noted, that these were not the first Schwenckfelders 
in Pennsylvania. September 18, 1733, a number of them arrived at 
Philadelphia, in the brigantine Pennsylvania Merchant; among these 
were Johann Klemm, Gottlob Klemm, Georg Scholtz, David Scholtz. 
It would appear they remained for some time in Philadelphia. Mr. 
von Beck in his Reise- Diarium von Ebenezer in Georgia nach den Nord- 
ländern, under date, Philadelphia, June 6, 1734, says: "Here are of 
all denominations and sects: Lutherans, Reformed, Episcopals, Pres- 
byterians, Catholics, Quakers, Tunkers, Mennonites, Sabbatherians, 
Seventh-day Baptists, Seperatists, Böhmists, Schwenckfeldians, Tuch- 
feldtians, Eucthelists, Jews andPagans, &c." — Ulsperger News, I, p.l56. 

* 33ctreff« ber %a\)xi unb Slnfunft bcr mit bent ©cfetffe Saint Slnbret» 
gebrauten ^Jerfonen pnbct (t(^ in einem 1771 gebrudten bcutfd^en Sudbe 
son ben Urfunben. 5?on bem angefüt)rten Suci^c fc^etnt eg, baö <S(|)tff 
i^atnt Slnbreto, SatJttatn Sotin (Stebman, [et mit ®ci)tBendfcibern, 9?a4)= 
fulger Hi 1490 in 9?teberfc|leften geborenen Sofpar ©^JWencffetb, belaben 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1734. 95 

nine males above sixteen, forty-one males under sixteen; women 
and female children one hundred and thirty-three — in all 263. — 
{Editor.) 

©ept. 12, 1734.* I^aij Sd)iif Saint ^vCuxtw, Sapitatn 3o()n 
©tetman, ttoii ylottevbam über ^3)l!9moutt), bra(^te ^fäljer, unt) 
jroar neun unt> arf)t]ii^ miinnltc^c über unt) ein unt) oierjtg männ= 
lic^e ^pcrfonen unter fcd)jet)n, nebft l)unliert nnb brei unt> tireipig 
2öeibern unb Jlinttern meiblic^en ®ef^Ie(^tö — im ©anjen 268.-^ 
(|)erauv?geber.) 

Christopher Wiegner, Caspar Jäckel, 

Georg Hübner, Melchior Hübner, 

Georg Kribel, Christoph Schubert, 

Baltzer Jäckel, Melchior Kribel sen., 

Georg Jäckel, Balthaser Hoffman,* 

Caspar Kribel, Melchior Kribel jr., 

Georg Ander, Georg Hoffman sen.,* 

Abraham Jäckel, Baltzer Hoffman jr.,* 

Georg Rein wald jr., Jeremias Jäckel, 

Hans Wiegner, Christoph Jäkele,* 

Georg Wiegner, Gregorius Meisther,* 

Baltzer Jäckel jr., Christoph Rein wald. 



aettjefeit. J)tefel6ett »erltefett tfjre $etmat^ im Slprtl 1734, gingen ju 
5lltona in "Dänemarf am 14. ÜOlat auf baö "Schiff, famcn am 22. ®ept. in 
5)t)i(abelpt)ia an unb am 23. gelobten fte Xreue: „Den 23. (September 
mußten alle 5}tannö=^erfonen, fo über 16 3at)r, auf ö 9iatt)l)au3, um bem 
^errn beö Sauber, nä'mli(^ bem Äönig »on ®ro§='8rittanien unb ®ucccf- 
l'ore^ ber Ärone önglanb'ö, bcn Sib bcr Ireue ablegen."— 3?eife=Sefc()rei= 
bung 2c., @. 450-461. Diefe Ue§en [tc^ in Sert^, Sebigf) unb ÜOZontgomer.) 
niebcr.— «Rupp'^ (Defd^. rel. 23en. ber SBer. St., ®. 663-667.— »tupp's 
©efc^. öon Serfg So., @. 224, 427. Sine einge^enbe 2lbl)anblung finbct 
fiel» in jRupp'e ®efc^. ber 2)eut|'c^en ^Jennf^banien'a, im lapitel „@(|njencf- 
felber." 

So h)äre auc^ bemcrfcnötuertl), ba§ biefe nic^t bic erften (gd^toencffelbet 
in 5)ennf9loanten [inb. 5lm 18. Sept. 1733 famen einige mit bem Schnell* 
fat)rev ^peunfplsania ^tx^ani in ^pt)ilabelpl)ia an, barunter waren 3ol)ann 
unb ®ottlob Älemm unb ®eorg unb T)a'c>\x> Sc^olß. S3 fi^eint, (di blieben 
fte eine 3«it lang in 5)l)ilabelp^ia. |)err oon Secf ft^reibt unter bem G. 
3uni 1734 über ^Pöilabelpbia in feinem Steife-Diarium »on Sbenejer iu 
©eorgia: „.$)ierftnb »on alten SRelivjionen unb Sccten: i;utbcr,iuer, JKe 
formirte, Söifc^oflii^e, ^reöbgterianer, Satt^olifen, Quader, Dniuylcr. 
^icnnonijtcn, Sabbatberianö, Sicbeutägcr, >Äepavatiftcn, t^ürmiiftc;:, 
t^d^wencffelbianer, Ju^felbtcr, SBo^lwünfdjer, 3uben unb ipeibcn, u. f. f. ~ 
Ulfpetgcr'ö 5ta^ric^ten, I, (5. 156. 



96 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Ilans Henrich Jäckel, 
Melchior Mentzel, 
Georg Mentzel, 
Georg AVeiss,* 
Caspar Heydrich, 
Georg Scholtze, 
Christoph Wiegner, 
Georg Anders, 
David Seibb, 
Christoph Seibb, 
Georg Heydrich, 
Georg Drescher, 
Melchior Meishter,* 
Baltzer Anders, 
Georg Scholtze, 
Caspar John, 
Friederich Schöps, 
Christoph Pauss, 
David Schubert, 
Wilhelmus Pott, 
Degenhart Pott, 
Peter Schämker,* 
Nicolas Dek,* 
Nicolas Winder, 
Ulrich Spies,* 
Peter Jäger,* 
Peter Treidel, 
Conrad Frey, 



Abraham Dihl, 
Melchior Neuman, 
Tobias Hertteranfft, 
Balthaser Heydrich, 
Christoph Neuman, 
Matthias Jäckel, 
Christopher Jäckel, 
Gregorius Scholtze, 
David Meschler, 
Christoph Drescher jr., 
Melchior Scholtze, 
Christopher Scholtze, 
Hein. Ludwig Urickhaus,? 
Bernhard Steinbach, 
Georg Bausche, 
Hans Hübener,* 
Wilhelm Witzen, 
Johannes Van Duliken,? 
Jacob Friederick Rieger, 
Johann Georg Rutz,? 
Valentin Veruch, 
Jacob Rumpfellt, 
Johannes Wildfang,* 
Jacob Wilhelmi, 
Johan Caspar Störller,* 
Johannes Senger, 
Matthias Marcker, 
Heinrich Bumpfeld. 



Valentin Dihl,* 

Sick — Christopher Knebel, David Hübner, Georg Reynold, 
David Jackie, Andreas Warner, Hans Martin Tryster. 

Under sixteen : — David Neuman, Abraham WiegTier, Georg 
Wiegner, Caspar Seibb, Andreas Heydrich, Georg Anders, 
Melchior Hübner, David Schubert, Peter Labach, Johann Wil- 
helm Pott, Johannes Pott, Georg Heinrich Ruth, Jacob Frey, 
Johann Henrich Deck, Johannes Deck, Johann Michael Wolf- 
gang, Johannes Wolfgang, Jacob Wilhelmi, Valentin Wilhelmi, 
AVilhelm Hertteranfft, Friederich Drescher, Johann Jacob Spies, 
Johann Nicolaus Steiner, Johann Jacob Steiner, Philip Freidel, 
Hans Georg Völcker, Johann Jacob Hildebrand, Clement Du- 
bach, Christopher Kribcl, Christonhcr Hühner, David Schubert, 



AND OTHER IMMIÜllANTS — 1734. 



97 



Georg Kribel, Christopher Hoffman, Christopher Reinhold, 
Melchior Wiegner, Christopher Meister, Balthasar Jäckel, Georg 
Hertteranft, Melchior Hertteranft, Christopher Heydrich. 



37) Sept. 23, 1734. Palatines imported in the ship Hope, 
Daniel Reid, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — Forty- 
nine males above sixteen, forty-five females; fourteen boys and 
seventeen girls — in all 125. — (^Editor.) 

@ept. 23, 1734. Daö ©c^iff Jpope, eapttatn ^Daniel 9(letb, 
»on Stotterbam über Soweä, brad)te ^fäljcr. — 9leun unt) üter^sig 
männliche unl» fünf unti öierjig metlüic^e ^erfonen über fec{)jet)n, 
unt» oierje^n Knaben unt) f{ebenjel)n SJJatx^en — im ©anjeu 125. 
(Herausgeber.) 



Jacob Bauman, 
Jacob HoflFer, 
Michael Gerber, 
Christian Huser, 
Michael Fickel, 
Ulrich Buhler,* 
Bernhart Richer,* 
Han Henrich HoiFman,* 
Han Jacob Fischbach, 
Johann Wilhelm Graff, 
Johan Albert Langerfeld, 
Gottfried Schierwager, 
Philip Esping, 
Johannes Keiser, 
Peter Stam, 
Christoph Rabe, 
Henrich Stettz, 
Zacharias Ahlbach, 
Johannes Jung, 
Jost Shmith,* 
Johannes Nöh, 
Georg Lübcken, 
Johannes Artger, 
Simon Kirbach,* 



Simon Beil, 
Joh. Henrich Otter, 
Antony Nobel, 
Antony Nobel jr., 
Johannes Richter, 
Christian Farnie, 
Johannes Keinsman,* 
Johan Adam Schroff, 
Johan Peter Gross, 
Joh. Henrich Klöckner, 
Aug. Henrich Kunstman, 
Joh. Henrich Heissman, 
Joh. Phüip Doldt,* 
Zacharias Flamerfeld,* 
Joh. Wilhelm Ahlbach, 
Joh. Peter Schmidt, 
Han Henrich Otterpach, 
Joh. Herbert Weberd, 
Joh. Arnold Reisch, 
Joh. Hen. Weschenbach, 
Joh. Geo. Antony Müller, 
Joh. Andreas Müller, 
Christian Otto Schultz, 



Cornelius Parät. 

Under sixteen : — Johann Caspar Kratz, Johann Philip Kratz, 

Nicholas Husar, Hans Michael Keiser, Anthony Heinsman, 

Johan Henrich Gross, Johan Gerhard Klöckner, Johann Wil- 

9 



98 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



helm Ahlbach, Johan Gerhard Ahlbach, Johann Peter Ahlbach, 
Herman Jung, Johann Jacob Noch, Johannes Lescher, Joseph 
Heinsman, Henrich Wilhelm ßeisch. 



38) May 29, 1735. Palatines and Switzers imported in the 
ship Mercury, William Wilson, Master, from Rotterdam, last 
from Cowes. — Sixty-four men, fifty-one women, thirty-seven boys 
and thirty -four girls — in all 186. — (^Editor.') 

SWai 29, 1735. ^^fätjer unb ©(^meijer mit t»em (Sd)tffe 5Jtcr= 
iMxX), (Sapitain Sßitliam 2öüfon, öon 3ftotterltam über Soroeö. — 
3.^icr unb fec^gig 5Jiänner, ein unb fünfzig }^x<xutn, fteben unb 
brci^ig jlnaben unb »ier unb brcipig 5!Jiäb(^en — im ®anjen 186. 
(^^erauogeBer.) 



Conrad Würtz, 
Jacob Beshar, 
Jacob Schenckel,* 
Heinrich Huber, 
Jacob Nefi; 
Jacob Täntzler,* 
Johann Weiss, 
Henrich Merk, 
Hans Meier,? 
Caspar Netzli, 
Jacob Frey, 
Jacob Meyer, 
Hans Huber, 
Conrad Naffe,* 
Hans Müller, 
Hans Ott, 
Johannes Heit, 
Henry Surber,* 
Abraham Weidman, 
Rudolph Weidman, 
Hans Jacob Radtgäb, 
Johan Ulrich Aner,* 
Baltzer Bessert, 
Caspar Schweitzer, 
Henrich Oswald, 
Jacob Perdschinger,* 
Henry Brunner,* 



Jacob Weidman, 
Hans Conrad Käller, 
Jacob Madler, 
Henrich Schreiber, 
Martin Shellberg,* 
Jacob Maurer.* 
Henrich Scheuchzer, 
Jacob Shellenberg,* 
Henry Mosock,* 
Jacob Wiest,* 
Rudolph Egg, 
Rudolph Walter,* 
Jacob Schmit,* 
Conrad Meyer,* 
Jacob Näff, 
Caspar Gut, 
Jacob Matz, 
Philip Klein, 
Hans Ulrich Amon,* 
Rudolph Aberly,* 
Jacob Conrad Naffe,* 
Caspar Plauler, 
Abraham Weckerly, 
Conrad Rütschi, 
Christoph Neumeister, 
Johannes Mölich, 
Henrich Forat. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1735. 99 

Sick — Kilian Mertz, Jacob Hornberger, Jacob Bücher, Hen- 
rich Müller, Conrad Zuppinger. 
The following are marked absent: 
X)te golgenben werten alö abttjcfenb Bejetc^net: 
Henry Gotschy, Johan Henrich Maurer, Henrich Zurber, 
Jacob Schmid, Melchior Meyer. 

Under sixteen : — Rudolph Gotschy, Moritz Gotschy, Rudolph 
Beschar, Rudolph Huber, Jacob Dentzler, Rudolph Dentzler, 
Abraham Dentzler, Abraham Dübendörffer, Hans Ulrich Brun- 
ner, Felix Ahner, Caspar Beschar, Henrich Beschar, Rudolph 
Beschar, Hans Matz, Hans Conrad Matz, Lenhart IMeyer, Jac. 
Meyer, Heinrich Frey, Hans Jacob Meyer, Jacob Hubler, Ru- 
dolph Dübendörffer, Jacob Weidman, Matthias Käller, Jacob 
Bücher, Hans Ulrich Zupinger, Jacob Walther, Hans Jacob 
Neff, Felix Schmidt, Hans Henrich Planier, Hans Jacob Plau- 
ler, Felix Metzger, Jacob Rütschi, Henrich Rütschi, Heinrich 
Mölich, Andreas Mölich, Gottfried Mölich. 



39) June 28, 1735. Palatinos imported in the brig Mary, of 
Philadelphia, James Marshall, Master, from London. — Thirteen 
men, ten boys, eighteen women and girls — in all 41. — {Editor.) 

Sunt 28, 1735. 21uf ber 33rigg max^ »on ^f)i(aterp^ia, Sa- 
pitain ^amt^ Wax^i^aU, »on Sonbon, famen 5>fälger. — Dreije^n 
9)Iänner, ge^n Knaben,, ai^tje^n grauen unt 5ität>d)en — im ®an' 
jen 41. — (J^erausigeber») 

Melchior Scholtze, Zacharias Friedrich, 

Henrich Boshart, Henrich Würchman, 

Peter Schwaab, Johannes Würchman, 

Andreas Brinker,* Jacob Weidmer, 

Wilhelm Gesel,* Solomon Rückstul sen., 

Andreas Widmer, Solomon Rückstul jr. 

Under sixteen : — Caspar Boshart, Henrich Boshart, Conrad 
Brünckner, Henrich Würchman, Jac. Wiedmer, Hans Brünck- 
ner, Henrich Rückstuhl. 



40) Aug. 26, 1735. Switzers, late inhabitants of the Canton 
of Bern, in Switzerland, imported in the ship Billander Oliver, 
Samuel Merchant, Master, from South Carolina. — Eighteen men, 
eighteen women, six boys and three girls — in all 45. — {Editor.) 



100 NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 

Slug. 26, 1735. ©c^ireijer auö bent Santon Sent auf tern 
©c^iffe 35illaitt)er DUoer, Sapitaiu ©amuel 9}?crd)ant, sion ©iit»* 
(Carolina. — ^d)tje()u 9)cäuner, ac^t3e()u SBeiber, fec^ö Änaben 
unt trei 5i}Zät>d)eu — int ©aitjen 45. — (Herausgeber.) 
Hans Bucher, Christian BrenhoUz,* 

Lazarus Wenger, Hans Michael Pingley, 

Hans Koller,* Hans Lüdenbörg, 

Christian Zwaller, Abraham Mdusslin, 

Johannes Marti, Ulrich Mischler, 

Jacob Stelly,* Christian Weber,* 

Ulrich Yilia,* Jacob Wilhelm Naath, 

Johannes Etter, Hans Leyenberger,* 

Peter Henckels, Hans Bücher jr. 

Under sixteen: — Benjamin Bücher, Christian Bücher, Jacob 
Koller, Peter Leinberger, Hans Weber, Christian Weber. 



41) Sept. 1, 1736. Palatines imported in the ship Harle, of 
London, Ralph Harle, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 
One hundred and fifty-six men, sixty-five women, one hundred 
and sixty-seven boys and girls — in all 388. — (Editor.) 

(Sept. 1, 1736. ?)fäl3er, bie mit bent ©c^iffe ^arlc öon Son* 
bon, Sapitaiit ^lalp^ .Iparle, »on Stotterbam über ßoweö famen. — 
din ()unbert fei^ö unb füitfjtg SJtanner, fünf unb fe^^ig grauen 
unb ein fcunbcrt fteben unb fei^jig Änaben unb 9)cäbc^en — im 
©anjen 388. — (Herausgeber.) 
Frantz Heckert, Andreas Jochim,* 

Johannes Krück, Vincent Schackie, 

Johannes Lorentz, Jacob Hostedler,* 

Abraham Tiegarden sen., Jacob Eysen, 

Johannes Hannewald, Hans Kuppele, 

Abraham Tiegarden, Frederick Beegel,* 

Jacob Gemling, Jacob Jayser, 

Georg ZeislofF, Andreas Kurtz, 

Wilhelm Hetterling, Frederick Memart, 

Daniel Nargarg,* Jacob Sontag, 

Nicklaus Trewer, Adam Seider, 

Michael Jochim,* Nilaus Lang, 

Karl Kern, Adam Boher, 

Nicklas Rebell,* Ludwig Lay, 

Jacob Amandus, Christian Erb, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1735. 



101 



Peter Rentsch, 
Matthias Speck, 
Dietrich Martin, 
Andreas Grimm, 
Nicolas Post, 
Heinrich Dubs, 
Joh. Van Laschet, 
Joh. Peter Van Laschet, 
Christian Van Laschet, 
Joh. Philip Wageman, 
Johan Philip Wick, 
Johan Valentin Voigt, 
Johan Mathias Voigt, 
Johan Daniel Braun, 
Johan Michael Graul, 
Geo. Nicolas Sysloop,* 
Johan Baltzer Zeisloop,* 
Johan Peter Nargary, 
Joh. Christophel Treber, 
Johann Georg Jäky, 
Leonhardt Cronbach, 
Rudolph Hackmann, 
Jacob Fellmann, 
Cornelius Weygandt, 
Hans Melchior Beyer, 
Andrias Nargang, 
Johannes Butler, 
Clemens Slottenbecker, 
Johan Jacob Weyl, 
Joh. Wilhelm Speck, 
Peter Slottenbecker, 
Johannes Willems, 
Heinrich Slottenbecker, 
Heinrich Gerhart, 
Joh. Jacob Daubenspeck, 
Andreas Haillman, 
Johan Mathias Bruch, 
Johan Peter Feglin,* 
Johan Georg Mein, 
Johannes Rothrock, 
Johan Jacob Barth, 



John Jacob Zyderman, 
Andreas Cratz, 
Jacob Libbert, 
Valentin Neu, 
Nicolaus M elcher, 
Eberhart Ebeler, 
Christian Schryack, 
Conrad Frankenberger, 
Johannes Rossinger, 
Daniel Meyer, 
Johannes Hess, 
Paulus Brunner, 
Christian Landes, 
Andreas Gross, 
Leonhart Jäger, 
Peter Rupp, 
Michael Noll, 
Johannes Meyer, 
Nicolas ^ngne, 
Caspar Meyer,* 
Ludwig Mauerer, 
Caspar Stelling, 
Dewalt Beyer, 
Johan Brand, 
Mathias Deck, 
Christian Suder, 
Johannes Gerber, 
Jonathan Heger, 
Mattheus Röser, 
Jacob Cuntz, 
Jacob HoUinger, 
Jacob Kochenauer,* 
Andreas Franck, 
Adam Wambolt, 
Johannes Fuchs, 
Gottfried Grüll, 
Michael Linder, 
Christoph Rudolpf, 
Peter Hironimus, 
Thomas Hummel, 
Johannes Schneider, 



9* 



102 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Johannes Zacharias, 
Balthaser Stephanus, 
Joh. Ludwig Weicker, 
Joh. Henrich Bniner, 
Johan Georg Basel, 
Joh. Ludwig Kammerer, 
Joh. Michael Weygell, 
Laborius Merschrath, 
Johannes E-issmann, 
Joh. Christoph Windemuth, 
Johann Georg Wambolt, 
Johann Georg Scheidler, 
Johann Conrad Grimm, 
Johann Adam Schauss, 
Zacharias Setzier, 
Johan Valentin Scherer, 
Isaac Adolphus Delb, 
Johan Jacob Christler, 



Johann Jacob Nuss, 
Johan Conrad Bab, 
Heinrich Wohlgemuth, 
Abraham Wohlgemuth, 
Joseph Wohlgemuth, 
Georg Adam Werner, 
Jacob Lädtermann, 
Johan Philip Müntz, 
Henrich Weydebach, 
Caspar Kupferschmidt, 
Johannes Franckeberger, 
Han Georg Handtwerch, 
Joh. Adam Hohenschilt, 
Johan Peter Wambold, 
Georg Michael Friedrich, 
Johan Peter Marsteller, 
Johan Georg Lehnert, 
Joh. Georg Windemuth. 



Christian Stöckly, 

Sick — Jacob Eysen, Abraham Saaler, Michael Hochsfädter, 
Ludwig Meyer. 



42) Sept. 16, 1736. Palatines with their families, in all 330, 
imported in the ship Princess Augustus, Samuel Merchant, Mas- 
ter, from Rotterdam, last fi-om Cowes. 

(Sept. 16, 1736. ^^faljer fammt iC)ren gamtlien, 330 art ter 
3ii^I, famen auf t)cm ©d)iffe ^rince^ Stuguftuö, ßapitain ©a^ 
niuel Wtxä^ant, »on Slotterbam ükr Goirteö. 



Georg Mayer,? 
Stephen Schust, 
Jacob Meyer, 
(üeorg Meyer,* 
Rudolph Essig, 
Wilhelm Huber, 
Jacob Müller, 
Simon Carl, 
Jacob Früh, 
Lorentz Früh, 
Leonhart Stein,? 
Lorentz Simon, 



Christian Simon, 
Friederich Gardner,* 
Henrich Meyer, 
Sebastian Graff, 
Daniel Hekendorn,* 
Bastian Stoler, 
Friederich Greier,* 
Martin Greider, 
Durst Thomme, 
INIartin Domey,* 
Hans Jacob, 
Durst Thomme, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1736. 



103 



Joseph Kratzer, 
Jacob Kese,* 
Rudolph Rauch, 
Hans Spiteler sen., 
Hans Spiteler, 
Nicolaus Tenne, ? 
Jacob Baire,* 
Hans Jacob,* 
Stephen Jacob,* 
Henry Books,* 
Christian Buchty, 
Abraham Jacke, 
Jean Comer, 
Hans Fiseler,* 
Nicolas Jewdie,* 
Job. Grabriel Lammle, 
Joh. Georg Baumgärtner,* 
Han Philip Fleckser,? 
Johan Georg Ritter, 
Johan Jost Dubs, 
Hans David Bilman, 
Hans Thomas Keer, 
Hans Michael Carl, 
Gottfried Lautermilch, 
Philipp GuUmann, 
Hans Michael Essig, 
Georg Abraham Essig, 
Johan Jacob Busch,* 
Han Nicolas Schmidt, 
Han Georg Trautman,* 
Hans Georg Graff, 
John Adolph Wenssel, 
Han Jacob Beitert, 
Christian Schenblein sen., 
Christian Schenblein jr., 
Han Hegendorn sen.,* 
Han Hegendorn jr., 
Han Jacob Greider,* 
Thielman Hirnschall, 
Hans Jacob Dups, 



Hans Georg Gerster, 
David Löwenstein, 
Sebastian Caquelin, 
Dieterich Caquelin, 
Jean Caquelin, 
Daniel Kommer, 
Dieterich Werlie, 
Hans Imberman, 
Hans Jacob Keller, 
Benedict Yühli, 
Christian Dappen,? 
Waltes Baumann, 
Hans Rudolph Erb, 
Melchior Detweiler, 
Jonas Joner, 
Jacob Joner, 
Hans Siber, 
Hans ZwaUe, 
Hans Stockie, 
Peter Binckly,* 
Hans Binckly,* 
Frangois Oriths, 
Nicholas Orich, 
Eneas Noel,* 
Joseph Noel, 
Jacob Altlandt, 
Peter Weyer, 
Christian Schiächten, 
Rudolph Baumgardner, 
Jean Frangois Chrestien, 
Collas Drasbart,* 
Johannes Keller sen., 
Jacob Christman, 
Michael Haalling, 
Marcus Merky,* 
Hans David Merky,* 
Nicklaus Mesling,* 
Johan Conrad Ganger, 
Georg Nicolas Ganger. 



Sick — Georg Maurer, Jacob Domme, Dietrich Marschall, 



104 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Hans Georg Knaab, Jacob Briiderle. Dead — Sebastian Car 
quelin, Hans Joner. 



43) Oct. 19, 1736. Palatines with their families, 110 persons, 
imported in the brigantine Perthamboy, George Frazer, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Dover. 

Oct. 19, 1736. ^\'cilyix mit t^ren gamilten, 110 5)crfoncn, 
famen auf bem S^nellfegler ^Jert^ambo^, Sapitain @eo. grader, 
oon Sftotterbam über T)ooer an. 



Abraham Beer, 
Johan Frantz, 
Johannes Siegel,* 
Jacob Keller, 
Caspar Struwel, 
Caspar Lambert, 
Georg Keg,* 
Paulus Andoni, 
Johannes Geier, 
Johannes Schier, 
Peter Kohl, 
Daniel Speth, 
Jacob Bleicher,* 
Peter Haas, 
Johannes Herr, 
Deobald Veit, 
Dirk Schütten,* 
Nicolas Stop,* 
Pierre D'Veau, 



Peter Apfelbaum, 
Joh. Georg iMicklein, 
Johan Ludwig Seib, 
Ludwig Stred. VoUsteller, 
Johan Philip Quickel,* 
Johan Peter Pritz, 
Joh. Michael Quickel, 
Francis Joseph Hornig, 
Joh. Caspar Schmidt, 
Friederich Bleibtreu, 
Johan Adam Rausch, 
Johan Jost Mohr, ? 
Johan Georg Quickel,* 
Joh. Chi'istian Heininger, 
Joh. Heinrich Schmidt, 
Abraham Dumbaldt, 
Ernst Fried. Dumbaldt, 
Gottfiied Eberhard. 



44) Aug. 30, 1737. Palatines imported in the ship Samuel, 
Hugh Percy, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 
In all 318. 



After this date none of the names of Palatines are pub- 
lished in the Colonial Records. — {Editor.^ 

21ug. 30, 1737. 318 5)fäljer mit bcm 'Skiffe (Samuel, (£api- 
tain ^ugl) ?)erc9, oon .^totterbam über ßorneö. 

fi®"" 9?a(^ tfiefem X)atum jrtcrben feine Xiamen t)er ^l)fäl3er me^r 
in t)en SoIonial=33eri(^ten oeroffentUdjt. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1737. 



105 



Abraliam Farui, 
Henrich Werlle, 
Christian Müller, 
Henrich Müller, 
Jacob Schober,* 
Peter Tost,* 
Nicolas Marret,* 
Jacob Kuntz, 
Benedict Tomas, 
Hans Ebler, 
Friederich From, 
Darius Ruff, 
Philip Becker,* 
Ludwig Bothner, 
Weyrich Rutisieli, 
Jacob Volck,* 
Johannes Ries, 
Jacob Offenbacher, 
Wilhelmus Beyer, 
Johannes Kohr, 
Henrich Guthard, 
Daniel Filbert, 
William Strub, 
Johannes Lang, 
Lorentz Becker, 
Lorentz Schreiber, 
Simon Mineehr,* 
Peter Minich,* 
Paul Frantz, 
Friederich Eberhart, 
Joseph Bischoff, 
Peter Budniger, 
Ulrich Bickell, 
Lenhart Glaser, 
Conrad Schütz, 
Nicolas Meyer,* 
Francis Fordene,* 
Michael Fortineh, 
Johan Georg Wichel, 
Johannes Schöffler, 
Johannes Drachsell, 



Johan Peter Drachsell, 
Christan Brengel, 
Andreas Aulenbacher, 
Hans Adam Staut,* 
Hans Georg Hüttner, 
Hans Michael Hetzer, 
Johann Georg Ziegler, 
Johan Jacob Kolb, 
Johan Friederich Kraffib, 
Johan Jacob Nuss, 
Heinrich Steinmetz, 
Johan Thomas Kern, 
Simon Hönninger, 
Michael Pfingstag, 
Hans Georg Laie,* 
Johann Georg Roth, 
Johan Christoph Meckel, 
Ludwig Kornmann, 
Johan Paul Geiger, 
Johan Valentin Lang, 
Johan Peter Stembell, 
Johan Jacob Eichholtz, 
Johannes Cashnetz,* 
Hans Jacob Castnitz, 
Hans Adam Biedniger, 
Johan Adam Schneider, 
Johan Georg Sauerbier, 
Johan Jacob Maag, 
Johan Lenhart Volck, 
Johan Heinrich Klein, 
Johan Nicolas Finck, 
Johan Adam Drumm, 
Johan Conrad Müller, 
Bernhart Womer,* 
Johan Christian Doli, 
Melchior Fordene,* 
Jacob Baum, 
Andreas Müller, 
Johannes Baum, 
Jacob Lower,* 
Michael Lower,* 



106 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Georg Weyrich, 
Peter Hugett, 
Jacob Lang, 
Jacob Wolff, 
Peter Wolff, 
Peter Bier, 
Johannes Haust, 
Ludwig Klein,* 
Johannes Staudt, 
Christian Ruth,* 
Johan Christian Daseher, 
Philip Penstenmacher,* 
Michael Spengler,* 



Johannes Peter Doll, 
Johan Wilhelm Welsch, 
Johan Jacob Welsch, 
Michael Schumacher, 
Johann Peter Licht, 
Wilhelm Rabenwalt, 
Johann Henrich Moll, 
Johann Jacob Kintzer, 
Johann Georg Geiss, 
Ludwig Becker, 
Johann Adam Löffler, 
Johan Jacob Staudt. 



45) Sept. 10, 1737. Palatines imported in the ship Snow 
Molly, John Howell, Master, from Amsterdam, last from Dover. — 
In all 95. 

Sept. 10, 1737. 5)färjer auf Dem ©c^iffe ©now ^oü^r ^ap^' 
tain 3ot)n ^otoeU, »on 2tmftert»am über S)oöer. — 3m ©anjen 95. 



Valentin Stober, 
Valentin Stober jr., 
Jacob Stober, 
Friederich Reitzel, 
Nicolaus Kachelriess, 
Michael Hertlein, 
John Winter, 
Jacob Meier, 
Job. Jacob Geyer,* 
Valentin Rohleber, 
Christophe! Gomer, 
Phil. Jacob Schaaff, 
Frederick Horn,* 
Job. Peter Han, 
John Mart. Fröhlich, 
Job. Jac. Schaaff, 



Hans Jonas Reitzel, 
Johan Christoph Grohmann, 
Johan Albrecht Schaller, 
Johan Georg Albert, 
Georg Albrecht Schaller, 
Johan Lenhart Wulfart,? 
Georg Simeon Christ, 
Hans Mich. Herdlein, 
Georg Fried. Wollenweber, 
Philip Gottleib Meintz, 
Johan Philip Kratzer, 
Johan Adam Gomer, 
Philip Adam Endler, 
Johannes Reitzmann, 
Johan Christoph Schäcke. 



46) Sept. 24, 1737. Palatines imported in the ship Virginus 
Grace, John Bull, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 
In all 225. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1737. 



107 



(Bept 24, 1737. ^Jfaljer mit bcm S^iffe SStrtuouä ©race, 
Sapitain 3o^n SuK, öon Slotterbam ubtt Sotweo. — 3m ©an* 
im 225. 



Antoni Riiger sen., 
Antoni Riiger jr., 
Jacob Schaub,* 
Isaac Hoffman, 
Hans HoiFman, 
Christoph Stauffer, 
Leonhart Heier, 
Rudolph Lützler, 
Bernard Haup,* 
Jacob Schwartz, 
Jacob Remel,* 
Jacob Graff, 
Jacob Rimy, 
Ludwig Born, 
Jacob Stokee,* 
Simon Stokee,* 
Jeremiah Smitt,* 
Peter Konder, 
Peter Staut,* 
Adam Weiss, 
Abraham Wize,* 
Michael Ulrich, 
Jacob Wolff, 
Adam Dill, 
Baltzer Hartsoc,* 
Christian Toll,* 
Jacob Croyter, 
David Bruch, 
Georg Heck, 
Hans Weis, 
Jacob Springer, 
Johannes Taskcr, 
Jacob Hubler, 
Christian Piner,* 
Henrich Grimm, 
Michael Carle,? 
Albert Lebolt, 



Burckhart Riiger, 
Isaac Hoffman jr., 
Martin Hegendorn, 
Johannes Stauffer, 
Hans Jacob Groller, 
Hans Jacob Kobler,* 
Hans Georg Schwartz, 
Hans Georg Reimmel, 
Albrecht Graff, 
Simon Schunck, 
Frederick Cromer,* 
Hans Georg Dillmann, 
Henrich Jacob Dillmann, 
Hans Michael Ulrich, 
Christian Bullinger,* 
Hans Georg Konder,* 
Rudolph Duckwell,* 
Jacob HoUinger, 
Andrew Sunwald,* 
Hans Georg Friederick, 
Friederich Kiester, 
Henrich Schwerdt, 
Jacob Bollinger, 
Wilhelm Fischer, 
Henrich Shamberger,* 
Henrich Crössman, 
Hans Georg Meyer,* 
Johan Jacob Conradt, 
Henrich Wideabach,* 
Johannes Weiss,* 
Henrich Engel, 
Johannes Hunsecker, 
Michael Rausch, 
Christian Bauer, 
Hans Jacob Inhof,* 
Simon Hunsecker. 



108 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



47) Sept. 26, 1737. Palatines imported in the ship Saint 
Andrew Cralley, John Stedman, Master, from Rotterdam, last 
from Cowes. — In all 450. 

(Sept. 26, 1737. 2luf tern i5d)iffe ©aint 2lnbrett) ©aüe^ famcn 
unter Sapitain 3o^n ©tetman »on 9tottert)am über Sott)ei8.450 
^fäljer. 



Jacob Kintzer, 
Jacob Niss, 
PhUip Hefft, 
Jacob Fries,* 
Philipp Fritsch, 
Peter Rapp, 
Caspar Hüter, 
Valentin Steinmetz, 
Georg Kern, 
Georg Schissler sen.,* 
Johannes Stöhr, 
Georg Schissler jr.,* 
Philip Stöhr, 
Georg Des, 
Georg Hefiit,* 
Jacob Lentz, 
Jacob Küster,* 
Nicolas Koch,* 
Andreas Smith,* 
Christian Meyer,* 
Johann Meyer,* 
Conrad Reich, 
Michael Brown,* 
Georg Wambold, 
Elias Ratgen,* 
John Spycker, 
Georg Rahn, 
Conrad Rahn, 
Philip Schmidt, 
Baltzer Beil, 
Georg Neihart, 
Lorentz Kayser, 
Conrad Wall, 
Jacob Werry,* 
Henrich Kreyter,* 



Peter Lin, 
Nicolas Scherer,* 
Henrich Smith,* 
Nicolaus Holler, 
Wilhelm Ohler, 
Paulus Lingel, 
Henrich Wisler, 
Georg Kocher, 
Johan Georg Kälsch, 
Michael Neihart, 
Johan Lenhart Jerling, 
Philip Lebengut,* 
Joh. Christian Bürger, 
Wilhelm Scheffer, 
Georg Hen. Wamboldt, 
Johan Conrad Jost, 
Johan Asinus Gerling,* 
Joh. Jac. Schindeidecker, 
Johannes Schnauber, 
Johan Georg Kläppinger, 
Tobias Böckell, 
Johannes Meyer, 
Jacob Neiswanger,* 
Hans Jost Meier, 
Hans Martin Amwäg, 
Nicolaus Scheyer, 
Nicolaus Biettel, 
Michael Andreas,* 
Johan Georg Schneider, 
Gerhardt Hübschman, 
Johan Jacob Lingel, 
Johan David Bühler, 
Johan Peter Spycker, 
Johannes Mevius, 
Johan Philip "Wisman, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1737. 



109 



Johan Friederich Heim, 
Jolian Ludwig Kolb, 
Johan PhiUp Seger, 
Bernhart DickhofF, 
Johan Jacob Rosenmann, 
Georg Fried. Neihart, 
Johannes Schlotter, 
Johan Georg Kuntz, 
Johan Christian Thron, 
Matthias Lederman,* 
Valentine Baumgärdner,* 
Johannes Altenberger, 
Johan Justus Erdmann, 
Johan Peter Drass, 
Johan Rudolph Henrich, 
Christopher Schaub,* 
Albrech Fig,? 
Ulrich Horn, 
Peter Weiland,* 
Martin Crou, 
Georg Conrad, 
Jacob Conrad, 
Daniel Zopff, 
Ulrich Sollberger, 
Christian Estu,* 
Mattheis Weber, 
Casper Heyser, 
Valentin Diebel, 
Casper Rabe,* 
Conrad Delp,* 
Johan Funck,* 
Peter Knepper,* 



Joseph Zolenberger,* 
Henrich Frantz, 
Andreas Held,* 
Adam Strauch,* 
Daniel Ries, 
Nicolas Ries, 
Jost Hiisterr, 
Christoph Krause, 
Johannes Dreichler, 
Johan Philip Streiter, 
Georg Caspar Zeigner, 
Johan Ludwig Wildanger, 
Johan Georg Gist, 
Johan Jacob Weiler, 
Daniel Zacharias, 
Christoph Schwenck, 
Georg Dietrich Helt, 
Johan Philip Steffen, 
Johan Herman Weber, 
Johan Henrich Märtz, 
Henrich Schieffler, 
Georg Ludwid Denner, 
Johannes Geltbach, 
Johan Philip Edinger, 
Georg Gernandt, 
Johannes Köhler, 
Friederich Schönfelder, 
Ernst Seydel, 
Abraham Wagner, 
Christoph Hübner, 
Joh. Herrn, von Basten, 

Candidatus S. Th. 



Nicolas Rattge,* 

SicJc — Dan. Hüster, Jac. Keim, John Erdman, John Appel. 
Absent — Georg Test, Caspar Heyser. 

48) Oct. 5, 17.37. Palatines, in all 231, imported in the bi- 
lander Townshead, Thomas Thompson, Master, from Amsterdam, 
last from Cowes. 

Dct. 5, 1737. 231 ^fäljer mit beni Hcinen ?aftf^iflre 3:oron^= 
^eab, Sapitain J^omaö J^ompfon, öon ^tmfterbam über ßoweij. 

10 



no 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Christian Ewig, 
Georg Egnel,? 
Conrad Holbe, 
Peter Schad, 
Jacob Wogel, 
John Peter Wilt,* 
Conrad Lauterbach, 
Peter Lauderbach, 
Johan Georg Joh, 
Johan Casper Neuer, 
Jean Corbo, 
Christian Fredrick, 
Simon Ersame,* 
Anthony Hidler,* 
Jacob Acker,* 
Balthasar Süsz, 
Peter Rausch, 
Valentin Kiffer, 
Georg Spengel, 
Johan Küstler,* 
Vincent Küster,* 
Casper Wendel, 
Andreas Epple, 
Georg Schutz, 
Conrad Preiss, 
Leonard Kugel, 
Georg Arnoldt, 
Christian Aspech, 
Elias Obelhart,* 
Peter Graff, 
Ludwig Frantz, 
Michael Balmer, 
Peter Wagner, 
Johan Schlieger,* 
Johannes Geseller, 
Conrad Rippert,* 
Peter Hotner, 

Sick — Balthasar Sies, 



Johannes Lowra,* 
Jacob Schantz, 
Sebastian Bisch,* 
Silvester Holber, 
Christian Friederich,* 
Johan Georg Heyer, ? 
Johan Georg Euler, 
Johan Casper Premauer, 
Eberhard Geschwind, 
Valentin Henneberger,* 
Hans Georg Friederich, 
Hans Georg Krause, 
Andreas Camerer, 
Peter Mahrsteller, 
Hans Georg Ehemann, 
Anthony Hempele, 
Hans Georg Mentzer, 
Wendel Zwecker, 
Hans Matthias Pfeil, 
Johan Jacob Sauer, 
Georg Friederich Arnoldt, 
Johannes Schlegel, 
Martin Pfatteicher, 
Conrad Reinhart, 
Johan ^gidius Hoffman, 
Johan Stephan Bernhardt, 
Hans Georg Bray, 
Hans Mich. Henneberger, 
Johan Michael Kärber, 
Johan Frantz Wühelm, 
Joh. Philip De Bertholt, 
Johan Peter Bonnet, 
Valentin Himmelberger, 
John Peter Ysterloh, 
Joh. Martin Dieffenbacher, 
Johan Georg Seger, 
Georg Casper Fernsler. 
Casper Wendel. 



49) Oct. 8, 1737. Palatines imported in the ship Charming 
Polly, of London, Charles Stedman, Master, from Rotterdam, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1737. 



Ill 



last from Plymoutn. — One hundred and five men, twenty-five 
boys, and one hundred and seven women and girls. — 237 pas- 
sengers. — ( Editor ) 

Oct. 8, 1737. i^fül^cr auf bcm ^rf)iffe ei)arming ^iZx) »on 
Confcou, Sapitaiit S()ar(eö ©tetimau, oon Stottertiam über f\x}= 
moutl). — Sin ^unbert m\\} fünf ilD^änner, fünf unb jwanjig Äna^ 
ben, unb ein {)untiert unt) fiekn Üßeikr unb 3]Rät»c^en. — 237 3iei= 
fenbe. — (.iperauögeber.) 



Johannes Beitzel, 
Hans Georg Götz, 
Michael Somer, 
Andreas Ziegler, 
Jacob Hubele, 
Gottlieb Reisinger, 
Heinrich Voltz, 
Jacob Sontag, 
Jacob Sontag jr., 
Johannes Krauth, 
Jacob Schumacher, 
Christian Geiger, 
Jacob Baumann, 
Marin Funck, 
Christian Hapeger, 
Joseph Habeger, 
Henrich Karli,? 
Georg Mauntz, 
Jacob Schantz, 
Hans Schantz, 
Hans Gerber, 
Hans Gerber sen.,* 
Hans HoU, 
Hans Kofi"el,* 
Isaac Holl, 
Wendel Holl, 
Hans Wenger, 
Christian Kurtz,* 
Jacob Miller,* 
Christian Müller, 
Valentin Jung, 
Benedict Lehman, 
Jacob Beiler, 



Jacob Mast, 
Ulrich Spiker,* 
Elias Schreiber, 
Peter Brucker, 
Claus Erb, 
Claus Erb jr., 
Johannes Erb, 
Adam Pfeiler, 
Jacob Dester,* 
Matthias Riechart,* 
Jacob Raisch, 
Georg Gross, 
Johan Martin Becher, 
Hans Peter Schipp, 
Hans Peter Bernhart, 
Johan Ludwig Heger, 
Hans Georg Heiss, 
Johan Heinrich Heiss, 
Johan Stephan Conrad, 
Hans Georg Heiss, 
Hans Peter Küder, 
Hans Martin Reisinger, 
Hieronimus Eberle, 
Hans Jacob Fachler, 
Johan Philip Bötzer, 
Hans Jacob Kauffmann, 
Hans Jacob Hobbecher,* 
Hermanus OrendorflP,* 
Thielmanus Weschenbach, 
Mattheis Hoifmann, 
Christian Lichte,* 
Peter Eschbacher,* 
Hans Michael Punch,* 



112 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Abraham Müller, 
Johann Jost Kunz, 
Hans Zimmermann,* 
Daniel Zacharias, 
Jacob Underkoffer, 
Michael Zurger,* 
Christian Hertzberger,* 
Nicolaus Schreiber, 
Christian Bürcki, 
Jacob Wilhelm Weiss, 
Johan Jeremias Jünghen, 
Johan Jacob Wetzel, 
Johan Valentin Haan, 
Frederick Hoffman,* 
Johan Georg Ilgenfritz, 
Johan Jacob Bester, 
Abraham Hann, 
Andreas Hagenbuch, 
Hans Georg Kubier, 
Johan Dietrich Branner, 
Peter Lohrmann, 



Lorentz Nolff, 
Wendel Heinrich, 
Dietrich Uhler, 
Andreas Weber, 
Christoph Krauth, 
Peter Freydinger, 
Ulrich Strickler, 
Jacob Schopff, 
Christopher Ecker, 
Thomas Schiri, 
Johannes Bowman,* 
Georg Ludwig Wagner, 
Valentin Uhler, 
Balthasar Huber, 
Georg Henrich Ernsperger, 
Johan Matthias Albrecht, 
Georg Titus Cap, 
Johannes Köhler, 
Hans Jacob Strickler, 
Georg Philip Fuhrmann, 
Georg Michael Düntz. 



Christian Gross, 

Sick — Abraham Dannahauer, Hans Georg Dannahauer, Hans 
Stephan Conradt, Georg Michael Hollinger, Johan Henrich 
Grimm, Hans Georg Bäcker. 

Under sixteen : — Abraham Dannenhauer, Paul Schumacher, 
Georg Schumacher, Adam Fachler, Johann Ludwig Sontag, 
Wilhelm Geiger, Abraham Kauffman, Joseph Karle, Christian 
Schantz, Hans Lehman, Abraham HoU, Jos. Wenger, Chris- 
tian Eschbacher, Benedict Lehman, Christopher Beiler, Peter 
Herschberger, Johann Georg Schreiber, Philip Schreiber, Chris- 
tian Erb, Friederich Hoffman, Hans Georg Ilgenfritz, Wilhelm 
Kieger, Georg Martin Cap, Christian Baumann, Johann Jacob 
Baumann. 



50) Oct. 31, 1737. Palatines imported in the ship William, 
John Carter, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Dover. — 180 
passengers. 

Oct. 31, 1737. 180 f fäljer tarnen auf tern Schiffe William, 
Sapitain 3ot)n ßarter, üon 3iüttert»am über 2)oöcr. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1738, 



113 



Michael Reuter, 
Jacob Vechtel,* 
Wendel Bohn, 
Johannes Schantz, 
Caspar Siirber, 
Peter SchäiFer, 
Johannes Grett,* 
Heinrich Rode sen., 
Henrich Rode jr., 
Daniel Rode, 
Dietrich Uhle, 
Matthias Switzer,* 
Jacob Hauer, 
Christian Miller, 
Jost Ficcus,* 
Niclaus Mufli, 
Christian Jagi, 
Andreas Kessinger, 
George Fitheim,* 
Jacob Krom,* 
Simon Schedel,* 
Thomas Bauer,* 
Michael Bauer, 
Philip Jacob Reuter, 
Hans Adam Kletle, 
Johannes Madlung, 
Johan Dietrich Uhle, 
Johannes Maurer, 
Hans Greorg Meister, 
Johan Fried. Muthhardt, 
Hans Michael Hauer sen., 
Hans Michael Hauer jr., 
Johan Michael Gesel, 

Sick — Friederich Will, 
Matthew Switzer. 



Johannes Küchle, 
Hans Peter Hauth, 
Joh. Theobold Schalck, 
Johan Nicholas Fischer, 
Hans Georg Becholtt, 
Johan Georg Kessinger, 
Johan Michael Boltz, 
Johan Carl Haifelee,* 
Johan Balthas Rathgeber, 
Johan Michael Spiegel, 
Johan Fried. Heinnoldt, 
Johan Peter Baumgertner, 
Geo. Hein Valen. Hencke, 
Conrad Braun, 
Joseph Keller,* 
Jacques Creuccas, 
Mattheis Schmidt, 
Theobald Lange,* 
Johannes Schwing, 
Johannes Miller,* 
Joh. Peter Wilms, 
Christian Winderbauer, 
Joh. Gerh. Brenner, 
John Casper Zunfft,* 
Hans Jacob Faber,* 
Hans Adam Faber, 
Georg Jacob Bentz, 
Johan Michael Nees, 
Johan Conrad Ernst, 
Heinrich Weidtmanu, 
Johannes Weidtmann, 
Johan Georg Beyer, 
Johan Wendel Ernst. 
Peter Fickus. Drowned (ertruitfen) 



51) July 27, 1738. Palatines imported in the brigantine 
Catharine, Jacob Philips, Master, from London. — 15 passengers. 

3uU 27, 1788. 15 ^Pfäljcr auf t)ein ©c^ncüfa^rer (Iat()arine, 
Sapitain 3aco& ^^iüpö, ooti 2ont)on. 

10* 



114 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Hans Boach,* 
Jacob Zuch, 
Hans Seiler,* 
Ulrich Seiler jr.,* 



Christian Zug, 

Hans Schneider sen.,* 

Hans Ludwig Falbeystan. 



52) Sept. 5, 1738. Palatines, in all 252, imported in the ship 
Winter Galley, Edward Paynter, Master, from Rotterdam, last 
from Deal. 

(Sept. 5, 1738. 3m ©anjcn 252 ^färjer auf bent ©c^iffc 
SBinter ®aüti), dapitain Sbiuart) ^a^nter, oon Siotterbam über 
Deal. 



Nicholas Elie,* 
Christoph Heller, 
Simon Heller, 
Johannes Roth, 
Henry Weishart,* 
Andreas Beier, 
Martin Beier, 
Johannes Light,* 
John Sauvage,* 
Lorentz Heim, 
Albrecht Eberhart, 
Gottlieb Eberhart, 
Wendel Drauth, 
Johannes Berntz, 
Ludwig Meyer,* 
Peter Wagner, 
Adam Mayer, 
Johan Jacob Stahl, 
Johan Peter Müller, 
Frantz Ludwig Barth, 
Abraham Körper, 
Johan Philip Bayer, 
Hans Adam Schreiner, 
Joh. Henrich Eschbach, 
Job. Michael Schreiner, 
Johan Wendel Laschett, 
Johan Michael Römer, 
Johan Friederich Hase, 
Johan Martin Mayer, 



Johan Wilhelm Mayer, 
Johan Philip Wagner, 
Johannes Wagner, 
Sebastian Zettlemeier,* 
Johan Philip Sebolt, 
Johan Nehs, 
Rudolph Schier, 
Johan Miller,* 
Conrad Shmit,* 
Phüip Beyer,* 
Philip Weber, 
Wilhelm Janss, 
Henry Teich,* 
Jacob Bin, 
Andreas Bin, 
Markes Miller,* 
Friederich Haas, 
Frantz Seel, 
Henrich Becker, 
Samuel Moch, 
Friederich Krafft, 
Melchior Stall,* 
Henry Feelt,* 
Adam Stoop,* 
Henry Klengler,* 
Georg Joughein,* 
Simon Deck,* 
Philip Beyer jr.,* 
Jacob Hee. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1738. 



115 



Peter Bücher,* 
Augustus Pönsy,* 
Jacob Thebelt,* 
Philip Harks,* 
Andreas Hoock, 
Wilhelm Best,* 
Casper Berger,* 
Conrad Dust,* 
Andreas Seim,* 
Georg Seiberth, 
Adam Wall, 
Julius Rübell, 
Jacob Venig, 
Jacob Runck, 
Christian Jani,? 
Laz, Palin, 
Jacob Saddler,* 
Jacob Bach, 
Stephan Lang, 
Hans Mich. Hochländer, 
Johan Peter Hoffman, 
Georg Hoffman, 
Jacob Barthelm, 
Nicholas Walter,* 
Hans Geo. Gerth, dumb, 
Johan Michael Knab, 
Mattheus Ulrich, 
Henrich Landgraff,* 
Johannes Jäger,* 
Johan Michael Busier,* 
Johan Martin Schreiner, 
Paulus Kirchner,? 
Joh. Daniel Trölich, 
Johan Michael Preis, 
Johan Christoph Wagner, 
Daniel Butterfass, 
Johan Jacob Krafft, 
Johan Adam Sehäffer, 
Georg Ernst Lintell,* 
Johan Jacob Hust,* 
Wilh. Zacharias Andich, 



Conrad Zimmerman, 
Hans Jacob Tatweiler, 
Johan Melchior Weiss, 
Han Nicolas Preis, 
Christophel Ambrüster, 
Hans Adam Heinder,* 
Andreas Frederick,* 
Geo. Martin Lohmüller,* 
Georg Andreas Stupp, 
Johan Jacob Müller, 
Johan Philip Weicker, 
Hans Philip Köhler, 
Johan Georg Faass, 
Johan Philip Faass, 
Johan Valentine Stocker, 
Joh. Balthas Sartorius, 
Joh. Valentin Lemerd,? 
Daniel Drumberg,* 
Johan Jacob Beyer, 
Friederich Fahrion, 
Adam Hoffmann, 
Charle Gillion,* 
Claude Charle, 
Isaac Vial, 
Matthias Gensle, 
Conrad Ettinger,* 
Henry Sturf,* 
Ludwig Fillinger, 
Johannes Ewert, 
Paul Prack, 
Henrich Bullinger, 
Johan Georg Hayd, 
Johannes Bechtolt, 
Georg Philip DoUinger, 
Frid. Ambrose Tranberg, 
Johan Michael Mattes, 
Georg Michael Hyltel, 
Johannes Cranester, 
Hans Georg Schmidt, 
Wilhelm Gelsendorf, 
Johannes Lingenfeldter. 



116 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



53) Sept. 9, 1738. Palatines, in all 349, imported in the ship 
Glasgow, Walter Sterling, Master, from Eotterdam, last from 
Cowes. 

®c|)t. 9, 1738. 349 ^fäl^er an ber 3af)I mit bent ©dnffe 
©(aögora, Gapitain SSalter (Sterling, »on Stotterbam über Sotöeö. 



Valentin Krantz, 
Melchior Glos, 
Ehrhard Kless, 
Johannes Zinn,* 
Philip Jacobs,* 
Nicolas Mock, 
Johannes Hüppel, 
Adam Albert, 
Nicolas Kleh, 
Debalt Guth, 
Philip Drumm, 
Daniel Staudt,* 
Peter Staudt,* 
Theobald Klee,* 
Conrad Wolff, 
Jacob Bernhard, 
Daniel Corell,* 
Gottfried Zerfass, 
Johannes Miller,* 
Daniel Schneider,* 
Johannes Dreher, 
Carl Neumann, 
Henry Lowrence,* 
Philip Gebhart, 
Peter Koch,* 
Jacob Mann,* 
Wilhelm Daub,* 
Jacob Grub, 
Thomas Schneider sen., 
Thomas Schneider jr., 
Johan Adam Schneider, 
Johan Philip Rihl, 
Matheis Fenstermacher, 
Wilhelm Fenstermacher, 
Johan David Diel, 
Johan Nicklas Fischer,* 



Johan Nicolas Wolff, 
Johannes Pontius, 
Johan Nicolas Rausch, 
Johan Philip Heintz, 
Johan Marx Heintz, 
Johannes Battelm, 
Johan Henrich Walter, 
Johan Bernhard Rauch, 
Johan Jacob Seibert, 
William Mombaur,* 
Christopher Kauffeld, 
Johan Nicklas Bower,* 
John Peter Bower,* 
Conrad Rebman,* 
Jacob Finstermacher, 
Johan Georg Mill,* 
Henrich Jacob Anspach, 
Henrich Radebaugh,* 
Sebastian Haupt, 
Heinrich Bömmer, 
Peter Jost, 
Johannes Jost, 
Johannes Kuntz, 
Wilhelm Diel, 
Jost Mitzier, 
Georg Klein, 
Jacob Tiel,* 
Philip Cunius, 
KUlian Noll,* 
Jacob Triess, 
Steplian Braun, 
Peter Engeil, 
Leonhart Georg,* 
Anthony Erford,* 
Johannes Boos, 
Johannes Ber";er. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1738. 



117 



Michael Luteinger,* 
Michael Müller * 
Peter Daub, 
Abraham Heintz, 
Albertius Koch, 
Michael Maurer, 
Martin Wall * 
Deobalt Weber, 
Georg Stohler sen.,* 
Georg Stohler jr.,* 
Bernhart Stohler, 
Johan Adam Bömmer, 
Philip Bartholomy, 
Johan Adam Steyn, 
Johan Henrich Koller, 
Johan Peter Oberkehr, 
Johan Wuhelm Gerhart, 
Johan Nickel Peck, 
Johannes Bobenheiser,* 



Andreas Bobenheiser, 
Johan Adam Hubert, 
Johannes Guckes, 
Johan Nickel Emrich, 
Johan Nickel Michael, 
Johan Frid. Michael, 
Hans Adam Millei-,* 
Johan Dieter Frey, 
Hans Adam Shade,* 
Frantz Carl Huyet, 
Johan Christ. Neuman, 
Christopher Bernhart,* 
Frantz Gildner, 
Thomas Gärniger,* 
Johan Adam Hartman, 
Heinrich Bernhard,? 
Mathias Stohler,* 
Bernhart Dahlheimer. 



54) Sept. 9, 1738. f Palatines imported in the snow Two 
Sisters, James Marshall, Commander, from Rotterdam, last from 
Cowes. — Forty-one men, thirty women, twenty-three boys and 
sixteen girls — in all 110. 

<Btpt 9, 1738. t ma tent (Seefd)iffe Zm Sifter«, 6omman= 
bant ^anxia 9Jiarft)att, »on Siotterbam ükr ßoroeö. — Sin unto 
»terjtg 9)länner, trei^ig SBeiber, bret unt> Jtuanjig ^nakn unt> 
fec^3e()n 9)Zät)c§en — im ®anjen 110. 

Johannes Dadinger, Hans Wendel Hoff,? 

Johan Wildermuth, Christophel Schneider, 

Melchior Schedle, Hans Georg Wagner, 

Dietrich Benedict, Hans Adam Heylman, 



f This year, 1738, Rev. A. G. Spanp;enberger, a Moravian, arrived 
from Georgia in Pennsylvania. Through him the Moravians were made 
attentive to the conversion of the Indians, having received some ac- 
counts of them through Conrad Weiser. 

t 3tt btcfcm 3at)rc, 1738, fam ^aftor 21. ®. ©pangenberger, ctn $crrn= 
buter, »on ®eorgta nad^ 5^« nnf^l'^^^ni^»- X'urc^ tljn würben bie |)crrnt)uter 
eetuogen, ber Sefeljrung ber Snbtaner met)r Slufmerffamfett ju fd^enfen, 
ba t(im ^ontab SBeifet oon t^nen erjä()lt ^aitt. 



118 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Wolfgang Braun, 
Johannes Solder, 
Jacob Häuser, 
Philip Friederich, 
Andreas Frey,* 
Leonhart Notz, 
Henrich Funck, 
Johannes Johe, 
Christian Everhart,* 
Philip Smit,* 
Simon Creysmeyer,* 
Matthias Keyger,* 
Balthas Bahret, 
Johannes Merckel, 
Hans Mich. Reiss, 



Hans Georg Greiser,* 
Hans Martin Halter, 
Johan Gotlieb Breuninger, 
Hans Martin Breuninger, 
Hans Michael Easterly,* 
Michael Friederich Zeyler, 
Hans Georg Brendel, 
Hans Georg Brücker, 
Johan Philip Brendel, 
Johan Henry Ptydenstock,* 
Johan Wilhelm Wentzel, 
Hans Georg Coon,* 
Johan Wolfgang Ünger, 
Johan Bernhart Reber, 



Johan Henrich Meyer, 
Under sixteen : — Johann Wilhelm Simon, Melchior Ruch, 
Friederich Schupp, Ludwig Holtzhefer, Hans Peterly, Christian 
Schenck, Jacob Dür, Hans Peter Ziegler, Johan Henrich 
Brendel, Hans Lenhart, Hans Geiger, Hans Michael Kuhn, 
Andreas Huber, Christian Schwartz, Hans Jacob Hoifer, Frantz 
Joseph Eileshauer, Hans Horst, Georg Friederich, Jacob Frey, 
Hans Grube, Peter Grube. 



55) Sept. 11, 1738. Palatines imported in the ship Robert 
and Oliver, of Dublin, Walter Goodman, Commander, from Rot- 
terdam, last from Dover. — 320 passengers. 

®ept. 11, 1738. S)aö ®d)iff fRoUxt unt £)lmv üon ^DuBIin, 
6ommant>ant SÖalter ©ootunan, »on ^totterfcam über 2)ooer, 
6rad)te 320 ^fäljcr. 

Melchior Kolp, 
Peter Kolp,* 
Johannes Förch, 
Peter Seubert, 
Johannes Röhrer, 
Melchior Yand,* 
Ludwig Boos,* 
Jacob Bricker,* 
David Nagle,* 
Gerhart Henry,* 
Nicolas Miller, 



Caspar Scheck, 
Lorentz Biesang,? 
Paulus Ballett, 
Peter Heydrich, 
Peter Kister, 
Alex. SchefFer,* 
Reinhart Alspach, 
Jacob Frantz, 
Matheis Aisbach, 
Paulus Bufle,* 
Philip Herzog, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1738. 



119 



Gottfried Betzele, 
Daniel Klingenschmidt, 
Christopher Heydrich, 
Michael Clementz, 
Johan Peter Phiel,* 
Johan Paulus Kutz, 
Johannes Trautmann,* 
Georg Michael Buch, 
Johan Adam Schnell,* 
Johan Gottfried Röhrer, 
Georg Michael Kolb, 
Johannes Huntzinger, 
Hans Mich. Torenberger, 
Valentin Schultz, 
Frantz Klingenschmidt, 
Johan Georg Friederich, 
Casper Weisgerber, § 
Johan Jacob Klunt,* 
Hans Caspar Dortst, 
Hans Adam Gesler,* 
Hans Jacob Reyman,* 
Hans Michael Reyman,* 
Adam Daniel,* 
Peter Heyel, 
Johannes Brown,* 
Tobias Steuer, 
Theobalt Schaffer, 
Theobalt Schaffer jr., 
Andreas Meyer,* 
Paulus Mosser,* 
Johannes Bricker,* 
Michael MüUer,* 
Jacob Dommer,* 
Johan Shneyder,* 
Andreas Bader, 
Hans Martin, 
Joseph Kensel,* 
Philip Tofort sen., 
PhUip Tofort jr., 
Henrich Shengle,* 



Conrad Hayt,* 
Peter Hayt,* 
Christian Grub, 
Theobald Fick, 
Anthony Biehler, 
Ulrich Bullher,* 
Peter Ruby,* 
Jacob Beck, 
Peter Reitenauer, 
Georg Gottfried, 
Adam Dick, 

Job. Christoph Welterich, 
Johan Nicolaus Schneyder, 
Johan Frid. Schneyder, 
Joseph Kentzeljr., 
Johan Philip Weiss, 
Johan Jacob Gugerle, 
Jacob KoppenheflFer,* 
Leonhart Nachbar,* 
Johan Nicolas Wolff, 
Henrich Thomme, 
Job. Jacob Schumacher, 
Johannes Schumacher, 
Johan Nicklas Holl,* 
Abraham Holl, 
Balthaser Reydenauer, 
Hans Georg Roth, 
Johan Philip Fehl, 
Johannes Eskusen,* 
Peter Eskusen,* (^Escoque,') 
Michael Shumaker,* 
Stephan Durabercher,* 
Johannes Schleyfard,* 
Johan Peter Karch, 
Johan Adam Graner,? 
Hans Martin Startzman, 
Hans Hen. Reitenauer, 
Christian Stetler, 
Johan Nicolas Nagle,* 
Christian Cassell.* 



120 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



56) Sept. 16, 1738. Palatines imported in the ship Queen 
EUzabeth, Alexander Hope, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Deal, England.— In all 300. 

®cpt. 16, 1738. 300 ^falser mit tern ©(^iffe Queen SUfa^ 
ktt), Sapitain Sllevanbcr ^ope, toon Stotterbam über 2)eal in 
Snglaub. 



Wilhelm Brant, 
Andreas Felsinger,* 
Andreas Lerch,* 
Peter Lereh, 
Johann Lerch, 
Christian Laubach, 
Eeinhart Laubach, 
Johan Ludwig Seipel, 
Johan Otto Yserloch, 
Johan Georg Bergman, 
Johan Bernhard Roth, 
Hans Otto Schlächer, 
Georg Casper Schlächer, 
Johan Jost Schlächer, 
Johannes Schimmel, 
Johannes Kunckel,* 
Caspar Lorch, 
Christoph Streter, 
Nicolas Fege,? 
Johannes Hetrich, 
Henrich Koch, 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Georg Loroy, 
Nicolas Winholdt,* 
Johan Schneider, 
Paul Geissel, 
Ernst Scharp, 
Georg Schai-p,* 
Ludwig Thomas,* 
Johannes Strohl, 
Johannes Bager, 
Johannes Starr,* 
Georg Dörr, 
Martin Weitzel,* 
Christoph Ried,* 



Johannes Stein, 
Henrich Zeller, 
Johannes Lörch, 
Johannes Schäffer, 
Johannes Moser, 
Nicholas Hyches,* 
Bernhart Lintze,* 
Georg Scharp,* 
Isaac Scharp, 
Theobald Schmidt, 
Conrad Ilergle, 
Casper Leap sen., 
Casper Leap jr., 
Johannes Alt, 
Carl Nagel, 
Henrich Wilhelm, 
Johannes Homan, 
Conrad Miller, 
Philippus Medh, 
Casper Scheffer,* 
Conrad Gobe, 
Jacob Ewald,* 
Johan Georg Schlächer, 
Johan Henrich Seitz, 
Johan Henrich Silvius, 
Johan Siegmund Henle, 
Johan Adam Shisler, 
Johan Peter Specht, 
Johan Henrich Weber, 
Johan Henrich Koch, 
Johan Gabriel Vogell, 
Johan Henrich Schmidt, 
Johan Peter Schmidt, 
Johan Carl Reichart,* 
Johannes Reiffschneider, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1738. 



121 



Joh. Con. Reiffschneider, 
John Michael Leroy,* 
Johan Marx Seypell, 
Johan Ulerieh Sibel,* 
Johan Georg EUinger, 
Johan Henrich Weiss, 
Johan Werner Wetzel, 
Daniel Eiglebonner,* 
Johan Conrad Stichel, 
Heinrich Schleucher, 
Christian Morietz, 
Johan Henry Hyches, 
Johan Henrich Nichter, 
Johan Martin Schwedener, 
Johan Georg Kunkel,* 



Heinrich Weitzel, 
Ernestus Schlegel, 
Johan Henrich Grist, 
Johan Henry Gabel,* 
Johan Casper Schreiber,* 
John Jost Sulsbach, 
Christian Nudhart,* 
Conrad Lieppert, 
Johannes Gunckel, 
Wilhelm Lieppert, 
Casp. David Dumernicht, 
Johan Gottwals, 
Johannes Rister, 
Nicolaus Schrack, 
Nicolaus Ziegler.* 



57) Sept. 19, 1738. Palatines imported in the ship The 
Thistle, John Wilson, Commander, from Rotterdam, last from 
Plymouth, England. — 300 passengers. 

(Sept. 19, 1788. 300 ^fäljer auf tern (Schiffe Zl)e l:()iftle, 
3o^n 2ßiIfon, 33efe^(ö^aber, »on 9tottert>am über 5)i9mout^, (£uc;I. 



Daniel Draichler, 
Wühelm Bischoff, 
Isaac Ommell, 
Valentin Heiss,* 
Jacob Kener,* 
Abraham Stetler, 
Jacob Sligh,* 
Thomas Reigh,* 
Johannes Gers,* 
Daniel Schneider, 
Lorentz Gutt, 
Andreas Neumann, 
Henrich Becholdt,* 
Johann Keller, 
Jacob Carle, 
Christian Lutz,* 
Caspar Lutz, 
Jacob Cloder, 
Johannes Hedrigh,* 



Johannes Cron, 
Jacob Meyer, 
Elias Zöller, 
Michael Thiel,* 
Michael Friess, 
Johannes Friess,* 
Martin Grimm, 
Johannes Krimm, 
Jost Freueller, 
Johannes Con,* 
Bernhart Smith,* 
Melchior Smith,* 
Conrad Riihmle, 
Christian Lotter, 
Paul Shiffer sen., 
Bernhart Shiffer, 
Paulus Shiffer jr., 
Philip Kuhn,* 
Valentin Wildt, 



11 



122 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Jacob Bender, 
Christian Brechbiill, 
Johannes Schligter, 
Christian Stettler, 
Peter Habacker,* 
Henrich Brightbill,* 
Georg EUas Amendt,? 
Peter Fonderburgh,* 
Valentin Fonderburgh,* 
Johan Adam Schneider, 
Joseph Keller,* 
Johan Georg Lotz, 
Johannes Weinmüller, 
Jost Birckenstock, 
Georg Michael Grötz,* 
Johan Leonhart Müller, 
Hans Georg Mayer, 
Joh. Jacob Schuhmann, 
Conrad Weymiller, 
Andreas Mendung,? 
Johan Simon Friess, 
Caspar Kühner, 
Hans Martin Biller,* 
Hans Jacob Pfarr,* 
Hans Adam Leidy,* 
Michael UnderkoiFer, 
Martin Mansperger, 
Johan Herman Schäffer, 



Joh. Hen. Riemenschneider, 

Henry Bartholom. Shaffer, 

John Rudolph Auchenbach,* 

Michael Hubach, 

Andreas Hannewalt, 

Johan Ludwig Müller, 

Johan Conrad Ziegler, 

Johan Peter Schneider, 

Nicolaus Freitag, 

Elias Nicolas Bender, 

Jacob Nicolas Bender,* 

Johan Philip Schmeltzer, 

Dietrich Six,* 

Johan Frank, 

Georg Günther, 

Peter Günther, 

Wendel Lentz, 

Johannes Wiest, 

Hans Meyer, 

Ulrich Segen,? 

Johann Rudolph, 

Jacob Kalladay,* 

Georg Mattheis Weiler, 

Jacob Hubach, 

Michael Ströbel, 

Hans Schmauss,? 

Joh. Mich. Geisselmann. 



58) Sept. 20, 1738. Palatines imported in the ship Nancy 
and Friendship, William Wallace, Commander, from Rotterdam, 
last from Dover. — Eighty-seven males above sixteen, and one 
hundred women and children — in all 187. 

(Sept. 20, 1738. ^^fäljer auf bent Schiffe ?tancj) unb f^rtenb^ 
f()ip, 33efef)(k?()al?er 2Bm. SSallace, öon Stotterbam über !Dooer. — 
©ieben unt» ac^tjig 9}tänner über fec^je^n 3a^re, unb ein ^unbert 
SÖeiber unb Mnitv — im ©anjen 187. 
Johan Bübinger, Michael Karcher, 

Jacob Rost,* Johannes Kulm, 

Stephan Glaser, Lorentz Debong,* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1738. 



123 



Johannes Negele, 

Adam Krebs,* 

Philip Stover, 

Heinrich Seibel, 

Adam Pence,* 

Jacob Wallrecht, 

Jacob Vollmer, 

Jacob Fulmer,* 

Tobias Dittis, 

Jacob Zorn, 

Michael Hubrich, 

Jean Granget, 

Casper Messner,* 

Leopold Jost, 

Georg Müller, 

Paulus Hirne,* 

Jacob Hime,* 

Jacob Stander, 

Jean Jurdan, 

Jacob Durie,* 

Nicolas Strauss, 

Jean Gausfres, 

Johan Wendel Braun, 

Valentin Schaller, 

Hans Georg Becher, 

Theobald Klinger, 

Johannes Hannecker, 

Abraham Ecker, 

Johannes Schreiber, 

Hans Peter Rausenberger,* 

Christian Meyer,* 

Theobald Sterner,* 

Hans Georg Buch, 

Johannes Schwartzwelder, 

Johannes Schaller, 

Hans Jacob Huber, 

Michael Messner,* 

Bartholomäus Bach, 

Hans Adam Bach, 

Hans Georg Hartman,* 

Johannes Schwanner, 

Hans Georg Mahler,* 



Johannes Stinglie,* 
Friederich Pfänder, 
Bernhart Matz, 
Hans Michael Brauch, 
Valentin Pence,* 
Christopher Weiss, 
Valentin Reintzel, 
Abraham Wendel, 
Adam Ritter, 
Peter Laucks,* 
Philip Sowber,* 
Jacob Schup,* 
Georg Kern,* 
Bernard Ege,* 
Jacob Ege, 
Friederich Karle, 
Sebastian Neas,* 
Henrich Hermes, 
Vite Bechtoldt, 
Jacob Wagner, 
Lorentz Hautz,* 
Marx Schmidt, 
Friederich Heyly,* 
Martin Speck, 
Christian Jung, 
Johannes Freyling,* 
Georg Michael Boret,* 
Joh. Georg Kaufiman, 
Eberhard DroUinger, 
Joh. Ad. Schwartzwälder, 
Christoph Wendel Jacoby, 
Johan Michel Ege, 
Adam DroUinger, 
Georg Daniel Henner,* 
Johannes Längle, 
Johannes Gensemer, 
Johannes Friederich,* 
Joh. Martin Karcher, 
Dan. Friederich Reinetz,? 
Hans Georg Bauch,* 
Hans Georg König. 



124 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



59) Sept. 20, 1738. Palatines imported in the ship Nancy, 
Henry Beach, Commander, from Rotterdam, last from Dover. — 

150 passengers. 

<Bept. 20, 1738. 150 ^fäfjer auf bent (Sd)iffe ^anc^, Sefe^= 
ligenter ^enr^ Seac^, »on Stotterbam über Dooer. 



Johannes Brientz, 
Johannes Baltzer, 
Jacob Lassall,* 
Michael Jacob, 
Henry Meyer,* 
Michael Scholl sen., 
Michael Scholl jr.,* 
Christoph Meyer, 
Henrich Kemper, 
Jacob Meyer, 
Johann Meyer,* 
Nicolas Onas,* 
Joseph Meyer,* 
Matheus Leazer,* 
Johannes Rollen,* 
Jacob Reese,* 
Philip Haimes, 
Philip Trap,* 
Peter Meesmer,* 
Jacob Klatz, 
Casper Mantz, 
Johan Peter Lautermann, 
Caspar Hoffmann, 
Christian Bergman, 



Johannes Betschler, 
Antonius Engelbret, 
Johannes Ehrholt, 
Ernst Hausknecht, 
Nicholas Robertus,* 
Ulrich Sheydecker,* 
Georg Michael Roth, 
Johannes Memminger,* 
Frantz Ackermann, 
Hans Michael Meyer,* 
Martin Peter j\Ieyer,* 
Martin Springenklee, 
Wilhehn Karst, 
Joh. Philip Bensch, 
Joh. Dieterich Hesselbeck,* 
Jacob Pavelieats,* 
Johannes Kastinitz,* 
Jacob ffisterlin, 
Jacob Barth, 
Johannes Bosch, 
Johannes Hass, 
Melchior Bellman,* 
Michael Kemperle. 



60) Oct. 12, 1738. Palatines imported in the snow Fox, Chas. 
Ware, Commander, from Rotterdam, last from Plymouth. — 95 
passengers. 

Dct. 12, 1788. 95 ^fäljcr auf tm «Seefc^iffe ^ox, SBefeljUgen^ 
t»er lljaxUi 2öarc, »on Sftotterbam über ^^Ipnioutl). 
Michael Grün, Martin Rein,* 

Jacob Balmer, Peter Hesterman,* 

Adam Heisser, Bastian Feite, 

Adam Ullrich, Michael Krieger,* 

Philip Hess, Jacob Stieger, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1738. 



125 



Adam Ulmer,* 
Thomas Keusch,? 
Johannes Asper,* 
Michael Potz,* 
Martin Cludy,* 
Hans Diebalt Drog, 
Georg Michael Balmer, 
Joachim Stober, 
Hans Martin Rein, 
Hans Georg Wüst, 
Hans Georg Pauth, 



Hans Georg Zimerly, 
Johannes Goldenberger,* 
Hans Georg Frey,* 
Jacob HoflPman,''' 
Christian Hohlmann, 
Philip Jacob Bub, 
Christopher Bub, 
Christian Kauff, 
Ulrich Hübster,* 
Hans Georg Fetter. 



61) Oct. 25, 1738. Palatines imported in the ship D&\^, 
Wm. Patton, Commander, from Amsterdam, last from Cowes. — 
180 passengers. 

Dct. 25, 1738. 180 ^fäljer auf bem (Schiffe I)ao9, eomman- 
tant 2Öi(liam fatten, »on ^Imflcrbam ükr ^oireä. 



Nicolas Hoffener, 
Andreas Born,* 
Valentin Alt, 
Valentin Nicklaus,* 
Christian Schmidt, 
Conrad Waldman,* 
Simon Lampert, 
Ulrich Reichart,* 
Georg Stoltz, 
Han Adam Jök,* 
Baltzer Lamport, 
Hans Timmer,* 
Michael Lange,* 
Jacob Hoffman,* 
Gottfried Braun, 
Johan Stephen Rausch,* 
Johan Jacob Kintzer, 
Johan Nicolas Theiss, 
Joh. Wendel Seibert, 
Johan Friederick Bartz, 



Johan Adam Schreyack,* 
Johannes Halftzmer, ? 
Johan Mattheis Scherer, 
Johan Casper Stein,* 
Johan Philip Wickert, 
Johan Henry Fleck,* 
Johan Henrich Scherer, 
Johan Friederich Stembel, 
Johan Valentin Fliegel,* 
Johan Georg Bickes, 
Georg Lutz,* 
Jacob Schräm,* 
Joh. Geo. Krebs, 
Joh. Bert. Sender,? 
Georg Schräm,* 
Hans Michael Tillshöffer,* 
Hans Jacob Schmuck,* 
Johan Andreas Kauffman, 
Johan Nicolas Kienser,* 
Johan Jacob Herbert. 



62) Oct. 27, 1738. Palatines imported in the ship Saint 
Andrew, John Stedman, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Cowes. — 300 passengers. 

11* 



126 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Oct 27, 1738. 2tuf t>em ®(^iffc ©t. Sintren), Sa^itain 3o^n 
©tetntan, »on Slotterbam über Soroeö, 300 ^^fäljer. 



Peter Light,* 
Jost Shumaclier, 
Hannes Hoffer, 
Stephan Ackerman, 
Conrad Nagel, 
Andreas Sin, 
Reinhart Bene,* 
Martin DelUnger, 
Christoph Berger, 
Martin Schwartz, 
WUhelm Risser, 
Christian Heinrich, 
Hans Wisler, 
Peter Rohm, 
Michael Messer, 
Johannes Hertt, 
Henrich Sauer, 
Christopher Leiss, 
Jacob Ottiner, 
Andreas Wacker,* 
Michael Syder,* 
Johannes Ambrecht,* 
Vite Ambrecht,* 
Johannes Utzman, 
Johannes Greber, 
Jacob Beyer, 
Jacob Stem, 
Henrich Hoffman, 
Christian Meyer,* 
Mattheus Hirt, 
Lorentz Kriger, 
Johannes Althauss, 
Johan Georg Kiehl, 
Johann Henrich Ertz, 
Frantz Herman Diel, 
Manus Sassemanhaus, 
Johan Jacob Kehler, 
Johan Georg Grauell, 



Johan Conrad Bittenbender, 
Johan Peter Spiess, 
Joh. Christopher Kintzel, 
Hans Jacob Künerein, ? 
Georg Conrad Schreier, 
Friederich Buckenmeyer, 
Joh. Thomas Eberhart, 
Hans Georg Behringer, 
Johan Henrich Wald, 
Johan Nicolas Stähler, 
Hans Jacob Shertzer, 
Joh. Arnold Shroder, 
Michael Hütenbrandt, 
Philip Martin Fusel, 
Georg Bernhart Lauman, 
Hans Jacob Kattermann, 
Hans Michael Schyver, 
Adam Hambrecht, 
Michael Scheissle, 
Hans Casper Hindertruther, 
Hans Jacob Esler, 
Hans Jacob Brauss, 
John Peter Voyzin, 
Georg Nicolas Mayer, 
Johannes Althauss, 
Johan Christ. Altoch, 
Bastian Bremer, 
Berdolf Meyer, 
Johannes Bosfeld,* 
Johannes Hoffman, 
Johannes Mercher, 
Johan K. Röser, 
Daniel Ribighaus, 
Johan Georg Althaus, 
Conrad Hambrecht, 
Hans Martin Waltz, 
Johan Georg Weber, 
Jost William Rlücher.* 



I 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1738. 127 

Sickf — Johannes Krieve, Casper Hukabach, Vict. Walter, 
Christ Wagner, Lewis Vansant, Simon Derrick, Jacob Walter, 
Johan Schenkel, Anthon Kiater, Samuel Beem, Peter Yosey, 
Christian Sauder, (leorg Grevener, Christian Trewett, Henrich 
Bahn, Elias Bald, Hans Ulrich Katerman, Hans Michael Shef- 
fer, Christian Stein Claither, Thomas Everhard, Hans Philip 
Smith, Martin Adam Brows, Ulrich Tow, Hans Georg Webber, 
Johan Neveling, Georg Bibighaus, Andreas Genberger, Jacob 
Welsh, Johan Heinrich Hoflman, Johan Jacob Wagner. 



63) Oct. 28, 1738. Palatines imported in the bilander Thistle, 
George Houston, Commander, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 
Forty-two men, thirty-six boys, sixty-four women and girls — 
in all 142. 

Dct. 28, 1738. ffdiitx auf bem ?afifd){ffe Zlji^k, Somman- 
tant ®eorg ^oufton, 'oon Stotterbam über Someö. — ßwd unb 
»ier^ig 5!J?änner, fed)ö unt> bretf ig Änafcen, unb öier unb fed)3ig 
Sßeikr unb SWäbc^en — im ©anjen 142. 
Jacob Lantz, Abraham Huntzicker, 

Michael Lantz, Peter Huntzicker, 

Johannes Gyser,* Johannes Kleingenny,* 

Peter Gyser,* Hans Martin Hertz, 

Conrad Mehriam,? Hans Nicolas Ensminger, 

Peter Coger,* Samuel Eberhart Kopp, 

Marcus Reminger,* Gottfried Harlacher,* 

Casper Maspeck,* Hans Peter Lantz,* 

Friedrich Müller, Hans Georg Dietz,* 



f Lloyd Zachary and Th. Bond, physicians, stated in a certificate, 
under date of October. 27, 1738: "We have carefully examined the 
state of health of the marines and passengers on board of the ship 
St. Andrew, Captain Stedman, from Rotterdam, and found a great 
number laboring under a malignant, eruptive fever, and are of the 
opinion, they cannot, for some time, be landed in town without the 
danger of infecting the inhabitants." — (Editor.) 

+ T)ii Slerjte Slo^b 3'i'^'"9 w"*^ 2:f). 23onb erflaren tn einem Serttftcat 
»om 27. Dctbr. 1738: „2Btr ^nben ben ®efunb|)ett£juftanb ber SRetfenben 
unb ©ecleute beg (S(4iffeö ®t. Stnbre», Sapitatn (Ätcbman, »on 3iotter= 
bam, genau unterfuctjt, unb gefunbcn, ba§ eine grof e Slnjabl an einem bijg= 
artigen, mit 2tuö[c^lag »erbunbenen %itbtt leibet, unb [inb ber 2lnfic|t, ba§ 
(ie öorbcrt)anb nt(|t an'g 2anb fönnen, o^ne bie 23e»o^ner anju^ecfen."— 
(^erau^geberO 



128 NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 

Johann Jacob Dietz, Friderich Sculpes,* 

Has Bern Stiganer,* Greorg Miller,* 

Hans Adam Fehler, Johann Georg Grob, 

Job. Wilhelm Bossler, Hans Jacob Sefiis,* 

Nicolas Liser, John Georg Lilie,* 

Christian Freiich,* Johann Georg Delpp, 

Ludwig IMeier, Ludwig Joseph Biehel, 

Henrich Jung,? Johan Peter Stegel, 

Christian Gysier, Hans Georg Lintz, 

Daniel Müller, Johan Georg Hess, 

3Iichael Burn,* Uhlerich Dietz, 

Friederich Brotsman, Michael Dietz. 

Under sixteen : — Peter Dietz, Michael Stockhalter, Daniel 
Mischlcr, Wilhelm Stockhalter, Ludwig Ensminger, Philip 
Christian Kopp, Hans Nicolaus Lantz, Johann Lantz, Michael 
Kocher, Ulrich Karle Klein, Johann Christian Keyser, Andreas 
Heinrich Klein, Andreas Seifuss, Hans Christopher Seifuss, 
Henrich Seifus, Friederich Jacob Jung, Ulrich Jacob Jung, 
Christopher Henrich Jung, Johannes Jung, Daniel Rehsauer, 
Hans Adam Braun, Jacob Henrich Brotzmann, Ludwig Kopp, 
Caspar Stückle, Daniel Skulpius, Hans Peter Lentz, Paul Her- 
bold, Hans Adam Herbold, Jacob Herbold. 

ß®"" After this date, no names of persons under sixteen years 
old appear in the Captains' List. 

Jl@" '^Ci.6) tiefem 2)atum geben bic Sapitainöliften tie Xiamen 
Mner unter [ed)3el)n 3a^ren alter 5)erfonen an. 



64) Oct. 30, 1738. Palatines imported in the ship Eliza- 
beth, George Hodgson, Commander, from Rotterdam, last from 
Cowes. — 95 passengers. 

Oct. 30, 1738. 95 ^fäl3er auf bem ©c^iffc (Slifabet^, Som- 
manbant ©eorg ^obgfon, üon Stotterbam über Soweö, 
Ludwig Nicola, Conrad Renner,* 

Johannes Mühr, Lorentz Raus,* 

Daniel Heenig, Philip Besa,* 

Christoph Egen, Friederich Kehler, 

Johannes Meisters, Mathias Poriger,* 

Conrad Neidigh,* Jacob Frantz,* 

Nicolas Hodely,* Jacob Gem, 

Johannes Carl, John Yeites,* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1738. 



129 



Matheis Christ,* 
Christian Lesch,* 
Mattheus Döbler, 
Elias Beringer,* 
Ludwig Pfantzler, 
Jacob Schiltknecht, 
Johan Georg Arnold, 
Philip Jacob Lendenberger, 
Conrad Wanneniacher, 
John Jacob Kesler, 
Matthias Bartholome,* 
Hans Ulerich Fritz,* 
Hans Georg Petery,* 



Georg Ernst Meyer, 
John Ludwig Potts, 
Hans Conrad Vogelman,* 
Hans Jacob Bener,* 
Andreas Rothenheffer, 
John Adam Kintzel, 
Hann Georg Windlinger, 
Hans Michael Deinie, 
Martin Degenbeck,* 
Ulrich Raudenbusch, 
Christoph. Theophil. Creutz, 
Georar Adam Yegold.* 



65) Nov. 9, 1738. Palatines imported in the ship Charming 
Nancy, Charles Stedman, Commander, from Rotterdam, last from 
Cowes. — 200 passengers. 

9^0». 9, 1738. 200 ^fäljer auf bent Schiffe ß^arming 9tanc9, 
33efe^tö^akr (St)arleg ©tetintait, oon ^iotterbam ixbtx Soweö. 



Jacob Dieterich,* 
Markus Tholhaver,* 
Jeremias Zämer,* 
Abraham Berlin,* 
Hans Etimers,* 
Samuel Schust,* 
Peter Kreitzer,* 
Andreas Kreitzer,* 
Christoph Abel,* 
Andreas Beyerle, 
Michael Klein,* 
Georg Hatz,* 
Christoph Trenkel,* 
Stephen Trenkel,* 
Jacob Corrt,* 
Conrad Fleck, 
Christian Miller,* 
Hans Bollman,* 
Hans Fletiger,* 
Nicklas Klagh,* 
Ludwig Klotz, 



Henrich Meiss, 
Hans Siegman,* 
John Siegman,* 
Ferdinand Dörtzbach, 
Christian Miller,* 
Henrich Kistner, 
Martin Utz,* 
Peter Butz, 
Jac. Wannemacher, 
Hans Geo. Strobel, 
Hans Christian Gerber, 
Hans Michael Rein,* 
Han Georg Reisser,* 
Hans Adam Didel,* 
Hans Philip Mauerer,* 
Hans Jacob Kuntz,* 
Hans Jacob Kuntz jr.,* 
Georg Michael Kerber,* 
Hans Jacob Berlin,* 
Georg Frederich Berlin,'* 
Johan Jacob Müller, 



130 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Joseph David Trissler, 
Peter Baldesberger,* 
Johan Adam Zeliman,* 
Abraham Hauswirth, 
Jacob Hochstetter,* 
Abraham Kunzig,* 
Christoph Siegman,* 
Georg David Boos,* 
Hans Georg Holtz,* 
Johan Michael Maurer, 



Hans Georg Siegman, 
Bernhart Siegman,* 
John Peter Waltz,* 
Johan Baltas Kneerster, 
Johan Henry Kepele,* 
Hans Georg Schenck, 
Joh. Stephan Guthman, 
Hans Jacob Shank,* 
Hans Henry Pohl,* 
Hans Jacob Müller. 



66) Dec. 6, 1738. Palatines imported in the snow Enterprize 
Lynell Wood, Master, from London. — 120 passengers. 

X)ec. 6, 1738. 120 g)fäl3er mit t)em ©ecfi^iffe (gnterjjrtae, ga= 
^)itain S^neü Sooob, öon Sonbon. 



Vincent Pieler,* 
Jacob Hertzel,* 
Conrad Hertzel,* 
Jacob Hertzel jr., 
Jacob Saxer,* 
Thomas Lang, 
Georg Nodhardt, 
Hans Jac. Vander Weyt, 
Johannes Richter, 
John Georg Weber,* 
Jacob Rothweiler, 
Jacob Mansinger,* 
David Mansinger,* 
Melchior Mantzinge, 
Fritz Böcker, 



Johannes Becker,* 
Hans Ruth,* 
Henry Berger,* 
Martin Greider,* 
Casper Horner,* 
Jacob Horner,* 
Caspar Keller,* 
Felix Hausecker,* 
Jacob Kestenholtz, 
Hans Rudi Bürgi, 
Martin Tschudi, 
Rudolph Meyerhoffen,* 
Hans Jacob Fröli, 
Hans Michael Müller, 
Matheis Baumgärtner. 



Sick — Friederich Erter and Jacob Hertzell. 



67) Jan. 10, 1739. Palatines imported in the bilander Lon- 
don, Joshua Pipon, Commander, from London. — 60 passengers. 

3an. 10, 1739. 60 ^fäl^er mit bem Saftfi^tffe 2ont)on, 33c= 
fe()Ie!t)aOer 3üf()ua ^ipon, »on Sont>on. 
Felix Lang, Henry Ortley,* 

John Long,* Jacob Bantz,* 

Henry Long,* Caspar Widter, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1739. 



131 



Marcus Koch,* 
Jacob Koch,* 
Martin Koch,* 
Peter Thomas, 
Michael Meyer,* 
Georg Hans Pfiester, 
Georg Henrich Pfiester, 
Johannes Gassmann, 



John Georg Albert,* 
Christopher Koch,* 
Michael Sautter, 
Johannes Thomas, 
Burghart Weaver,* 
Christopher Bader,* 
Jacob Dispionit. 



68) Feb. 7, 1739. Palatines imported in the ship Jamaica 
Galley, Robert Harrison, Commander, from Rotterdam, last from 
Cowes. — 320 passengers. 

geb. 7, 1739. 320 g)fä(aer auf bem ©c^iffe 3amatca ©alleij, 
Sefe^tö^aber S^lokrt ^arvifon, üon Siotterbam über Soweö, 



Jacob Müller, 
Hans Eppli, 
Henrich Hauser, 
Casper Mayer,* 
Peter Huber, 
Henrich Müller, 
Lenhart Fürer, 
Henry Galler,* 
Conrad Ackert,* 
Heinrich Ackert, 
Henry Better, 
Ulrich Schmidt,* 
Jacob Fehr, 
Hans Conrad Rösli, 
Johannes Wittersinn, 
Henrich Hostman, 
Hans Henry Angst,* 
Joachim Hanslay, 
Rudolph Baumer,* 
Hans Henrich Sommer, 
Hans Michael Schwinck, 
Christopher Müller, 
Adam Schwinck, 
Rudolph Decker, 
Conrad Bauchler,* 
Andreas Nabniger,* 



Jacob Schwärber,* 
Hans Moog,* 
Casper Freneir,* 
Jacob Kuntz, 
Hans Meier, 
Jacob Meyer, 
Hans Nüsli, 
Jacob Hina,* 
Henrich Otto, 
Henry Glattly sen.,* 
Henry Glattly jr., 
Felix Bossert,* 
Jacob Bossert,* 
Henry Meyer,* 
Felix Schutz,* 
Rudolph Schutz, 
Lawrence Rieger,* 
Henry Stally,* 
Henry Rokoop,* 
Bernard Riga,* 
Johannes Trenner,* 
Rudolph Kamp,* 
Johannes Scheibley,* 
Felix Leinbaker,* 
Henry Leinbaker,* 
Hans Zolinger,* 



132 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Jacob Dunkel,* 
Jacob Meyer,* 
Felix Clatley,* 
Henricb Gantz, 
Hans Anard,* 
Henry Scheibly,* 
Henry Brunder,* 
Rudolpb Shutz, 
Henrich Scbellenberg, 
Jacob Hopman,* 
Hans Jacob Hopman,* 
Felix Bachman,* 
Georg Brunder,* 
Christoph Weidman, 
Jacob Bücher,* 
Heinrich Bachman, 
Ulrich Swartzenberg,* 
Johannes Boshart, 
Hans Ulrich Hoffman, 



Jacob Baumann, 
Hans Jac. Baumann, 
Melchior Dünck,? 
Ulrich Bäuinger, 
Hans Bachman,* 
Henry Overholtz,* 
Hans Jacob Bäuinger, 
Hans Ulrich Näff, 
Hans Ulrich Meyer,* 
Hans Jacob Schaub, 
Heinrich Dünck, 
Hans Jacob Kern, 
Heinrich Kremer, 
Ulrich Nüssli, 
Jacob Nargang,* 
Henry Wert,* 
Casper Wideman,* 
Felix Frankfelder * 



69) Aug. 27, 1739. Palatines imported in the ship Samuel, 
Hugh Percy, Commander, from Rotterdam, last from Deal. — 
340 passengers. 

Slug. 27, 1739. 340 ^faljer im ©c^iffe ©antuel, 33efe|Iö^akr 
^ug^ ^erc9, »on ^lotterbam über TxaL 



Johannes Fischer,* 
Caspar Meth, 
Johannes Meth, 
Henrich Thorwarte, 
Michael Adam, 
Peter Rule,* 
Jean Daniel Bouton, 
Johannes BraunmUler,* 
Michael Schmohl, 
Johan Leonhart Hortung, 
Johannes Schneyder, 
Johan Georg Bartmann, 
Peter Welschans, 
Georg Freeman,* 
Matheis Claus,* 



Peter Steinman,* 
Conrad Hausman,* 
Frederick Gerhard,* 
William Gerhard,* 
Peter Grub,* 
Georg Sneyder.* 
Johan Lamenick,? 
Daniel Kockart,* 
Peter Moor,* 
Ludwig Geib,* 
Jacob Fuchs, 
Sebastian Doli,* 
Christian Seyfert, 
Philip Lentz, 
Johannes Beyer, 



AND OTHER IMMiaRANTS — 1739. 



133 



Paul Michael,* 
Michael Hahn,* 
Johannes Hahn, 
Michael Sinion, 
Simon Geres, 
Peter Schöffer, 
Adam Becker, 
Michael Miller, 
Michael Baur,* 
Lorentz Minich, 
Abraham Faust, 
Jacob Reiss, 
Philip Hirsch, 
Jacob Wolff, 
Michael Miller,* 
Christian Schug, 
Peter Scholl, 
Otto Riedy, 
Simon Drom, 
Peter Nickom,* 
Frederick Nickom,* 
Daniel Bürger, 
Paul Samsel, 
Nicolas Kniesel,* 
Peter Mombauer,* 
John Michael Bartmann, 
Johan Matheis Bartman, 
Johan Georg Heyer, 
Johan Lorentz Hänsell, 
Johannes Ermentraudt, 
Johan Philip Ermentraudt, 
Joh. Fried. Ermentraudt, 
Johan Peter Dressier, 
Joh. Daniel Cmb, 
Johannes Bischoff, 
Hans Adam Diehl, 
Johan Daniel Diehl, 
Carl Adam Diehl, 



Joh. Adam Sclmoidcr, 
Peter Schwenck, 
Abraham Hendrick,* 
John Nicolas Hendrick,* 
Johan Georg Nickel, 
Joh. Christ. Zimmerman, 
Joh. Henrich Ehrhard,* 
David Lautenbach,* 
Sebastian Guckert, 
Joh. Adam Klein,* 
Christian Schopffer sen., 
Christian Schopffer jr., 
PhUip Jacob Schell, 
Johan Henrich Freys, 
Johan Peter Priem, 
Johan Philip Serfass, 
Johan Peter Stüber, 
Johan Georg Schauss, 
Abraham Schreiner, 
Johan Christopher Ruth, 
Johan Georg Faust,* 
Johan Adam Müller, 
Johan Friederich Gabel, 
Johan Philip Gabel, 
Johan Jacob Kockert, 
Michael Mombauer,* 
Joh. Nicolas Mombauer,* 
Johan Jacob Riedy, 
John Peter Riedy,* 
Michael Helffenstein, 
Casper Doll,* 
Christopher Doll,* 
Joseph Bederie,* 
Joh. Bern. Bederie, 
Johan Philip Klein,* 
Joh. Adam Gottwals, 
Abraham Solomon,* 
John Nicolas Bach.* 



70) Aug. 27, 1739. Palatines imported in the snow Betsy, 
Richard Buden, Commander, fi-om Rotterdam, last from Deal. — 
190 passengers. 12 



134 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



2tug. 27, 1739. 190 ^fäljer mit feem @eef*iffe «Betf^, eom= 
ntanbant 0lirf)art) Subcn, öon Sftotterbam über I)ea(, 



Nicklaus Leinberger, 
Daniel Dalwig, 
Johannes Küner,? 
Martin Adam, 
Caspar Herde, 
Martin Barth, 
Peter Blaser,* 
Friederich Seitz,* 
Johannes Martin,* 
Georg Becker,* 
Jacob Berkel,* 
Conrad Becker, 
Valentin Becker, 
Valentin Ertel, 
Andreas Weldi,* 
Martin Haag, 
Conrad Graff, 
Jonas Klein, 
Matheis Hertsel,* 
Johannes Koch, 
Frantz Welchel,* 
Jacob Guth,* 
Jacob Lantz, 
Johannes Back, 
Jacob Ernst, 
Henrich Strickert, 
Michael Becker, 
Conrad Unbehand,* 
Martin Hoch,* 
Jacob Allen, 



Hans Jacob Geiger, 
Sebastian Unberhent,* 
Joh. Melchior Kiener, 
Johan Georg Scherer, 
Johann Peter Hoffman, 
Christian Rodenbach, 
Hans Michael Ernst, 
Hans Jacob Maron, 
Gerh. Henrich Schütz,* 
Geo. Wühelm Höcker, 
Johan Daniel (Esterlen, 
Johan Daniel Müller, 
Johan Hasselwanger,* 
Johan Peter Meyer,* 
Georg Daniel Schall,* 
Johannes Reinhardt, 
Johan Michael Roth, 
John Henrich Müler,* 
Andreas Engelhard, 
Friederich Ehrenfeichter, ? 
Joh. Gottfried Straube, 
Pierre Aubertien, 
Conrad Hackensmitt, 
Georg Friederich Schaffer,* 
Jacob Unbehand,* 
Valentin Unbehand,* 
Hans Martin Bär,* 
Johannes Weibell, 
Nicklas Leyberger.* 



71) Sept. 3, 1739. Palatines imported in the ship Robert 
and Alice, Walter Goodman, Commander, from Rotterdam, last 
from Deal. — Seventy-eight men, fifty-seven women and eighty- 
eight children — in all 213. 

(Sept. 3, 1739. ^fäljer famen auf bem Schiffe tRohext unb 
Mice, 33efet)Hgent)er Sßalter ©ootman, »on 9tottert)am über 



i 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1739. 



135 



Deal. — 2lc^t unb fleknjtg ^O^anner, fielen uut> fünfjig grauen 
unt) a<i)t unt» ac^tjig Mnt)tx — im ©anjen 213. 



Hans Schantz, 
Peter Riesser, 
Jost Ebersohl, 
Michael Hahn, 
Jost Diehl, 
Carl Schallin, 
Henrich Steiner, 
Johannes Steiner, 
Jacob Steiner, 
Caspar Shever,* 
Hans Müller, 
Samuel Brant,* 
Jost Brant,* 
Peter Bieber, 
David Schaffer, 
Jacob Stambach,* 
Jacob Smith,* 
David Miller,* 
Jacob Zerchert,* 
Matthis Obolt,* 
Hans Schants,* 
Georg Honi, 
Nicklas Honi,* 
Jacob Burgher,* 
Philip Burgher,* 
Bernhart Yauser,* 
Benedict Lesseir,* 
Christian Treit,* 
Theobald Cleiver,* 
Nicklas Fisher,* 
Christian Klein,* 
Lorentz Brua, 
Lorentz Biever,* 
Bastian Klein,* 
Jacob Gerry,* 
Theobald Con-el,* 
Johannes Müller, 
Benedict Bisser, 
Nicklas Lieser,* 



Christian Hirschi, 
Hans Jacob Schneider,* 
Nicolaus Ellenberger, 
Frantz Leyenberger, 
Hans Jacob Reiff,* 
Joh. Martin Hoffmann, 
Johannes Hoffmann, 
Johan Peter Hoffmann, 
Christopher Bollinger, 
Johannes Baumann, 
Hans Michael Reitenauer, 
Johan Martin Bohler, 
Johannes Havecker,* 
Joseph Kubhold,* 
Abraham Böchtel, 
Christopher Hovell,* 
Johannes Votrin, 
Johannes Beihn, ? 
Peter Hoffmann, 
Daniel Hoffmann, 
Johan Peter Volck, 
Abraham Welshans,* 
Samuel Helburgher,* 
Henry Bambergher sen.,* 
Henry Bambergher jr.,* 
Christian Erhart,* 
Christian Ellenberger, 
Hans Peter Treit,* 
Albreeht Vonderlind, 
Philip Martzloff, 
Adam Wilhelm,* 
Simon Mendinger,* 
Hans Adam Geri, 
Joseph Welschhans, 
Hans Mich. Diebolt, 
Hans Peter Gemberlin, 
Hans Mich. Diebolt,* 
Hans Michael Leiser, 
Johannes Ebersohl. 



136 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



72) Sept. 3, 1739. Palatines imported in the ship Friend- 
ship, William Vittery, Commander, from Rotterdam, last from 
Deal. — 150 passengers. 

©ept 3, 1739. 3(uf bent ©c^iffe 5nent»f()ip, Sommanbanr 
Söilliam Sitterp, oon S^ottertam über 3DeaI, famen 150 ^falger 



Johannes Mayer, 
Egidi Mayer, 
Michael Kraus,* 
Michael Blatner, 
Nicklas Schwartz,* 
Andreas Hack, 
Jacob Franck, 
Jacob Kübortz, 
Justinus Hoffman, 
Stephan Lasch, 
Johannes Wolfart, 
Conrad Florans,* 
Martin Beniger,* 
Jacob Loch, 
Johannes Loch, 
Johannes Nicol, 
Martin Leid,* 
Jacob Farne, 
Henrich Ullerich, 
Frantz Brossman, 
Michael Trolers, 
Veit Miller, 
Henrich Heyl, 
Conrad Schwartz, 
Leonhart Florer,* 
Lorentz Fridtel, 
Ludwig Hevener,* 
Johannes Werner, 
Wilhelm Werner, 
Martin Jack,* 



Johan Philip Illig, 
Balthassar Hissong,* 
Georg Jacob Burchert, 
Georg Ernst Bühler, 
Daniel Beinhart,* 
Joh. Michael Laub, 
Johan Jacob Franck, 
Georg Michel Bender,* 
Hans Peter Adich, 
Johan Conrad Engel, 
Anthony Fischbach, ? 
Philip Stambach, 
Georg Michael Wolf,* 
Johan Conrad Wolf,* 
Gottfried Christian, 
Hans Peter Müller, 
Peter Zimmerman, 
Christian Ehrgott, 
Georg Henry Hensell,* 
Philip Christoph Werner, 
Georg Thomas Heyl, 
Hans Thomas Heyl,* 
Bernhart Herholt, 
Johan Henrich Rump, 
Johan Veit Bachler,* 
Henry Bleistein,* 
Johan Conrad Philipin,* 
Hans Ad. Haushalder,* 
Joh. Nicolas Mauerer, 
IJenry Bleistein. § 



73) Sept. 3, 1739. Palatines imported in the ship Loyal 
Judith, Edward Painter, Commander, from Rotterdam, last from 
Deal. — 315 passengers. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1739. 



137 



©cpt. 3, 1739. 315 
bant Sbwart) fainter, 
Henrich Keffer, 
Gottfried Mang, 
John Georg Shup, 
Bartholomae leserding, 
Johannes Bollmar, 
Carl Heiser,* 
Erasmus Frantz,* 
Johannes Frantz,* 
Bastian Albert, 
William Albert,* 
Peter Martger,* 
Nicklas Weighel, 
Nicklas Schild,* 
Johannes Bebertz,* 
David Fortney,* 
Jost Liesser, 
Jacob Hough,* 
Valentin Shey,* 
Peter Kern, 
Martin Sebelie, 
Nicklas Small,* 
Christian Bohrbach, 
Jacob Bohrbach, 
Bernhart Warth, 
Matheas Eeemer,* 
Nicholas Beemer, 
Peter Becker, 
Jacob König, 
Ludwig Danney,* 
Philip Denigh,* 
Christian Hütter, 
Henry Bough,* 
Johannes Bupperter, 
Sebastian Jacoby, 
Henrich Wolffrum, 
Peter Bücher, 
Bartel Bücher, 
Carl Scholl,* 
Georg Laub, 



5)fäljer mit ber So^al 3ubitt), Sommon* 

öon SRotterbam über üDeat. 
Tobias Weber, 
Ludwig Mans,* 
David Weisser, 
Philip Riss, 
Abraham Staudt, 
Mathias Felden,* 
Martin Schaffner, 
Georg Michael Iserding, 
Johan Georg Ramseyer, 
Johan Nickel Bollmar, 
John Peter Lauch,* 
Joh. Philip Schneider, 
Hans Nickel Klein, 
Johan Frantz Albert, 
Hans Adam Teetze,* 
Hans Adam Haledii, 
Johan Christoph Frantz, 
Johan Nicklas Shild,* 
Johan Georg Threer,* 
Johan Peter Wolff, 
Johan Nickel Doli, 
Johan Peter Hauch, 
Caspar Leydäcker,* 
Johan Georg Burghart,* 
John Adam Small,* 
Henry Adam Klein,* 
Joh. Nicolas Schatteau, 
Johan Henrich Kohde, 
Johan Carl Hey, 
Johan Adam Reemer, * 
Johan Adam Tanny, 
Philip Hasselberger, 
Johan Jacob Tanny, 
Johan Nickel Kleh, 
Hans Adam Wolfirum, 
Hans Peter Bouger,* 
Philip Burghart,* 
John Jacob Stuhl, 
Adam Schiedenhelm, 

12* 



138 NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 

Johann Carl Geres, Henry Handwerck,* 

Johan Nickel Glesser, Nicklaus Hantwerck, 

Christopher Schmidt, Johann Dehlbauer, 

Nicklas Rodenburger, Georg William Thur,* 

Johan Georg Staudt, Hans Jacob Madori. 

Note. — On the 26th of December, 1738, a ship of 300 tons was cast 
away on Block Island, f This ship sailed from Rotterdam in August, 
1738, last from Cowes, England. John Wanton, the Governor of Rhode 
Island, sent Mr. Peter Bouse and others from Newport to Block Island, 
to see how matters were. On the 19th of January, 1739, these re- 
turned to Newport, R. I., reporting that the ship was commanded by 
Captain Geo. Long, that he died on the inward passage, and that the 
mate then took charge of the ship which had sailed from Rotterdam 
with 400 Palatines, destined for Philadelphia, that an exceedingly 
malignant fever and flux had prevailed among them, only 105 landing 
at Block Island, and that by death the number had been reduced to 
90. The chief reason alleged for this great mortality was the bad con- 
dition of the water taken in at Rotterdam. It was filled in casks that 
before had contained white and red wine. The greater part of the 
goods of the Palatines was lost. — Penn. Gazette, Feb. 8, 1739. 

Slnmetfung.— 2(m 26. I^eccmbcr 1738 f^citerte ein Sdttff »on 300 
Xonnen ©e^alt an 231ocf 3ölanb. i "Ciefeö «Sdjiff fegclte im Sluguft ooit 
Stottcrttam über ^mti in ©nglnnb. 3o|)n SBanton, ®cui3erneur »on 
9tt)obe 3ölanb, fanbtc ^crrn ^^eter Soufe unb anbere oon ^^^cwport nac^ 
33(ocf 3«(anb, nm ben B^iftanb ber Dinge ju erfnt)«n. 3tm 19. Sanuar 
1739 fcbrtcn biefc nad) viewport, "Si. 3., jurürf unb berichteten, ba§ Sa= 
^itain ®corg ?ong, ber bag <£(biff befeiiligte, auf ber ^erfafirt geftorben 
,'et unb bann ber 'Steuermann bie Leitung beg ©(^iffeg übernommen ^abc, 
,Belcfacg »on Siotterbam mit 400 ^'fa'lsern abgefatiren unb nadj ^'>bi(abcl))t)ia 
beftimmt gcttjefen fei; ba§ ein fet)r fdjlimmeg %\t^ix unb 9{ubr unter ihnen 
get)err[(it habe; ba§ nur 105 auf Slocf 3glanb (anbeten unb ba§ ber Sob 
auch bicfe auf 90 »erminbert h<ihf- ^'tf ^aupturfache beg Sieberö toiU 
man in bem f(^Iei^tcn SBaffcr finbcn, bag in 9totterbam gcfa§t unb in 
Öa'ffcrn, bie juoor rothen unb mi^in JBein enthielten, aufbewahrt toorben 
<oax. X)ie mciften ®üter ber ^'ffllj" gingen »erloren. — ^'ennf. (Baittti, 
3. geb. 1739. 



74) Dec. 11, 1739. Palatines imported in the ship Lydia, 
James Allen, Commander, from London. — 75 passengers. 



f Block Island lies in the Atlantic, soiith of the State of Rhode Island. It is eight 
miles in length and from two to four miles in breadth. It constitutes the township of 
New ShoreUam, Newport Co., B. I. There are no forests, the only fuel is peat. — i.d.r. 

t S8Io(f 3«Ianb ticgt Im Slttantifdjen SDcean, fiiblid) »om (Staate fR^obe S«IanK 3)89» 
felbe ifl adjt SReilen läng unb »onjroet bi« »ier ?^ei(en breit, unb bilbet bae äoronfbip SRe» 
©tprefeam, Jlercpcrt Sp., 9J. 5. m ifl »alblo«, bie einmctjner brennen £orf.— (5. D. K.) 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1740. 



139 



t)ec. 11, 1739. 75 ^^fäl^ev tarnen mitbem Skiffe S^bia, Som- 
mantant %\miS' 2lUen, »on ^ont»on an. 

Ludwig Frick,* Hans Jacob Hauser, 

Johannes Frick,* Hans Jacob Free,* 

Andreas Krug,* Hans Jacob Grop,* 

Ulricb Steiner, Johannes Schleiffer, 

Henry Seetz,* Johannes Weber,* 

Henry Seetz jr.,* Henrich Hobert,* 

Rudolph Bäi', Johannes Kagie,* 

Henry Grob,* Hans Ulerich Weber,* 

Caspar Frick,* Johannes Reittenaur sen.,* 

Hans Bär, Johannes Reittenaur jr.,* 

Heinrich Bär, Job. Conrad Fromm. 



75) Sept. 23, 1740. Palatines and Switzers impoi-ted in the 
ship Friendship, William Vittery, Commander, from Rotterdam, 
last from Cowes. — 120 passengers. 

(Sept. 23, 1740. 120 ^^fäl^er unb <5(^TOeijer auf bem ©c^tffc 
grient)f()ip, Sommantiant Sßiüiam ^Sitter^, üon 9iottertian> über 
ßon?e^. 



Johan Christy, 
Johann Mann, 
Johannes Kapp, 
Moritz Milhaus,* 
Bast. Schaub, 
Wittus Hartweg, 
Jacob Lübrick, 
Martin Schaup,* 
Heinrich Woher, 
Henrich Brobeck,* 
Gottlieb Briegner, 
Hans Frey,* 
IMartin Rauff,* 
Johannes Süss, 
Lenhart Witz, 
Heinrich Feger, 
Jacob Dägen, 
Derst Tschopp, 
Jacob Hensi,* 
Friederich Grieger, 



Friederich Gerahn, 
Andreas Eschenbach, 
Johan Thomas Reinhardf 
Rudolph Kürntglein, 
Hermanus HefFeling, 
Ludwig Wessinger,* 
Nicolaus Braubeck, 
Nicklaus Steinhauer, 
Jacob Stein hauer, 
Johannes Seiler,* 
Heinrich Spohnhauer, 
Hans Georg Schneider,* 
Henrich Unkenbacher, 
Hans Jacob Fetterley,? 
Hans Siebacher,* 
Jacob Siebacher,* 
Georg Anastasius Bern, 
Hans Lebemith, 
Marx Hüfrefege. ? 



140 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



76) Sept. 27, 1740. Palatines imported in the ship Lydia, 
James Allen, Commander, jfrom Kotterdam, last from Dover. — 
In aU 180. 

(Btpt. 27, 1740. 180 ^fäl^cr mit bent ©d)iffe S^bia, Som- 
manbant S'inteß Slüen, öon JHotterbam über 2)ooer. 



Simon Hirsch,* 
Christian Weber,* 
Christian Holenberger,* 
Arnold Schneider,* 
Nicklas Couwald, 
Johannes Wil. Beck, 
Johannes Arnold,* 
Christian Coos, 
Peter Altonius,* 
Philip Fritz,* 
Jacob Keyser,* 
Henry Keyser,* 
Michael Eichhart, 
Jost Lang, 
Matheis Käffer,* 
Philip Petry,* 
Philip Tülman, 
Daniel Schneider,* 
Daniel Lucas,* 
Christoph Geist, 
Matthias Fuchs, 
WUhelm Lang,* 
Johann Ditrich,* 
Johan Teis, 
Johannes Kichler, 
Arnold Schuman,* 
Caspar Wirth,* 
Nicklas Beyer,* 
Peter Lorentz,* 
Peter Lamm,* 
Heniich Reussen, 



Johan Georg Crässmann, 
Johan Georg Lohss, 
John Georg Torenberger,* 
Johan Herman Lehr,* 
Johan Jacob Hollenberger, 
Johan Jost Presen, 
Johan Wilhelm Folberg,* 
Johan Henry Beck,* 
Johan Jacob Beck,* 
Johan Henrich Tiewes, 
Christian Shwaigermeyer,* 
Peter Henry Shook,* 
Johan Michael Jacks,* 
Johan Nickel Beckeies, 
Johan Fried. Althoniuss, 
Johan Adam Fritz,* 
Ludwig Hartenstein, 
Johan Peter Loie, 
Johan Georg Brosius, 
Christopher Fuchs, 
Valentin Pracht,* 
Elias Gottlieb Stein, 
Johannes Berckhyser,* 
Johann Gerhart Schneider, 
Johann Adam Schneider,* 
Johan Peter Schuman,* 
Wühelm Heidebrand,* 
Johannes Kagelberger,* 
Johann Simon Denner, 
Abraham Kirchhoff, 
Johann Jost Plöhirer. 



77) Sept. 30, 1740. Palatines imported in the ship Samuel 
and Elizabeth, William Chilton, Commander, from Rotterdam, 
last from Deal, England. — In all 206. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1740. 



141 



(Sept. 30, 1740. 206 
SItfabett), Sommanbant 

Frantz Epgardt, 
Johannes Schnog, 
Peter Berger, 
Johannes Hoffman, 
Joh. Peter Anders, 
Paul Dünschman, 
Johan Christ Kraffeller, 
Johannes Theis Fiser,* 
Johan Christ. Schmidt, 
Johan Christ. Frantz, 
Johan Jacob Fischer, 
Christ. Peter Fischer,* 
Martin Schmidt, 
Philip Bosser,* 
Christian Kirbach, 
Georg Wilhelm, 
Friederich Löhner, 
J. Adam Luckenbach, 
Joh. Georg Rörich, 
Joh. Ernst Rörich, 
Joh. Moritz Kohn,* 
Herman Betzer,* 
Johannes Hadorn, 
Henricius Schneider, 
Jost Kremer, 
Theis Schneider, 
Conrad Hirsch,* 
Thomas Schneider, 



^fäljer auf bem (Sc^ijfe ©antuet unb 
Sßiüiam Sl)Uton, öon 9tottert>am über 

Joh. Peter Schneider, 
Joh. Henry Arth,? 
Johannes Wergraf, 
Christian Schumacher, 
Johan Wilhelm Klein, 
Carl Jacob Weymer, 
Johan Adam Meyer,* 
Johan Adam Schneider, 
Johan Adam Müller, 
George Wilhelm Kirbach,* 
Johan Friedrich Schneider, ' 
Johannes Brandenbürg, 
Johan Hubrecht Dimott,* 
Joh. Henrich Luckenbach, 
Johan Simon Erlogner, 
Johan Georg Eller, 
Joh. Gerhart Luckenbach, 
Joh. Adam Hammacher, 
Joh. Hubrecht Hammacher, 
Johan Peter Schreiner, 
Johann Theis Müller, 
Johan Adam Bender,* 
Joh. Peter Shoemaker,* 
Joh. Peter Harhaussen,* 
Johan Adam Rörich, 
Johan Bertram Klein, 
Johan Simon Hüller,* 
Hans Henry Müller.* 



78) Nov. 25, 1740. Palatines imported in the ship Loyal 
'Judith, Lovell Paynter, Commander, from Rotterdam, last from 
Deal. — 265 passengers. 

9?oö. 25, 1740. 265 ^fätjer famen mit bem ©c^iffe Jo^al 
Subita, Sommanbant Soüell 5)a^ntcr, oon 3ftotterbam über Deal. 

Anthony Keller,* Wilhelm Säur,* 

Christian Brentzer, Henry Thielbon,* 



142 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Andreas Beck, 
Conrad Sclineider, 
Georg Viantt, 
Jacob Kichler, 
Simon Wehr, 
Lenhart Gerhart, 
WUhelm Ohl, 
Johann Wolff, 
Henry Wagner,* 
Friederich Becker,* 
Peter Sheetz, 
John Henry Legire,* 
Johan Wilhelm Oster, 
Johan Abraham Haas, 
Johan Jacob Theobalth, 
Andreas llefschneider, 
Wilhelm Jost Becker, 
Johan Baltzer Hoffmann, 
Johan Nicolas Zoll, 
Justus Lindeman, 
Henrich Lindeman, 
Johannes Keilman, 
Wilhelm Schmidt sen., 
Wilhelm Schmidt jr., 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Valentin Schneider, 
Jacob Lindeman, 
Heinrich Brem, 
Jacob Breeni,* 
Valentin Krimm,* 
Jacob Krimm,* 
Ulrich Hartman, 
George Conrad,* 
Adam Maurer,* 
Conrad Wishong,* 
Peter Becker, 
Carle Gro, 
Johannes Werbel, 
Mathias Schmidt, 
Peter Grauel,* 
Conrad Schmidt, 



Johannes Adam, 

Johannes Wagner, 

Frantz Jost, 

Caspar Boner, 

Andreas Schmidt, 

Johannes Diehl, 

Philip Kauff, 

Johannes Ley, 

Jacob Wolff, 

Johannes Becht, 

Johannes Frantz, 

Conrad Schney, 

Philip Wishong, 

Jean Ganty, 

Peter Sell,* 

Johan Jacob Koch,* 

Johan Georg Schneider, 

Johan Nicolas Bröder, 

Johan Friedrich Engel, 

Johan Wilhelm Betz, 

Johan Dieterich Becker, 

Johan Bernhard See, 

Johan Abraham Bollenbacher, 

Johan Nicolas Fey,* 

Johan Ulrich Scheier, 

Johan Jacob Schertel, 

Johannes Müller, 

Johann Michael Busch, 

Johan Peter Diehl, 

Johan Peter Mohr, 

Herman Heyman, 

Johan Friederich Loritz, 

Friederich Wilhelm Nagel, 

Joh. Georg Gottschalck,* 

Isaac Dieterich, 

Johan Peter Wolff, 

Johann Georg Epple, 

Johan Georg Meier, 

Johan Wilhelm Esich, 

Johan Nicklas Haubt, 

Johan Peter Hans, 



AND OTHER IMMlÜllANTS — 1740. 



143 



Johan George Esling,* 
Jolian Peter Müller, 



Joli. Georg Seyter, 
Jacob Sell.* 



79) Dee. 3, 1740. Palatines imported in the ship Kobert 
and Alice, Walter Goodman, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Cowes. — 185 passengers. 

Dec. 3, 1740. 185 ^(äl^tx tarnen mit fccin ©duffe 'SloUtt unb 
Sllice, ßapitain SÖalter ©oobman, ocn aiottertam über Sottjeg. 



Johannes Seydel,* 

Johann Eader,* 

George Zohnleyter,* 

Andreas Höller, 

Andreas Sheyb,* 

Henry Steiner, 

Frederick Hanet,* 

Philip Balthaser Grossman, 

Johan Henrich Grossman, 

Johan Wilhelm Stadellmaner, 

Johan Georg Kramer, 

Ghristian Anderbach, 

Hans Michel Holschuh, 

Johan Jacob Radge, 

Johannes Brein, 

Peter Reppert,* 

Christoph Magel,* 

Daniel North,* 

Blastius Bear,* 

Antoni Feltman, 

Joseph Walther, 

Johannes Vogel,* 

Andreas Bentz, 

Johannes Biickell, 

Johannes Göttlich, 

Henrich Göttlich,* 

Rubert Reinbracht,* 

A. Kurtz, 

Henry Hanroth,* 

Philip Shamele,* 



Jacob Becker,* 
Jacob Gress,* 
Jacob Barthel, 
Johannes Bruch, 
Peter Grantzer,* 
Joh. Gaspar (Ether, 
Hans Theobald Grim,* 
Johan Jacob Diemer, 
Johan Henrich Neuman, 
Johann George Schmit,* 
Johan Adam Gass, 
Johan Jost Hensel, 
Joh. Wilhelm Volprecht, 
Joh. Friederich Fichthelm, 
Hans Jacob Green,* 
Johan George Smitt,* 
Johann Jacob Zimmerman, 
Johan Philip Heileger, 
Geo. Michael Lingeveldt,* 
Wilhelm Moritz Vitel, 
Johann Georg Rauch, 
Johan Melchior Hangerer, 
Christoffel HiUebrandt, 
George Philip Gress,* 
Conrad Schweighauser, 
Hans Martin Conrad,* 
Johan Christoph Beserer, 
Johan Nicklaus Hippel, 
Johan Peter Sebolt. 



144 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



80) Dec. 3, 1740. Palatines imported in the ship Samuel, 
Hugh Percy, Captain, from Rotterdam, last from Deal. — 175 
passengers. 

'Dec. 3, 1740. 175 f falser lamen mit tern ©^iffc «Samuel, 
Sapitaitt ^ug^ ^erc^, »on Stottcrbam über DcaL 



Johan Nickel Schmidt, 
Johannes Stool,* 
Gottfried Walter,* 
Georg Schwingel, 
Johan Nicolas Zerfass, 
Parthal Osterman,* 
Thomas Dörner, 
Nicklas Gruber,* 
Philip Leaber,* 
Jacob Fuchs,* 
Georg Maus, 
Andreas Miller, 
Philip Kreber, 
Henrich Kreber, 
Bastian Vey,* 
Joh. Peter Werner,* 
Peter Bischoff, 
Urban Aschenbrenner, 
Abraham Schellberg,* 
Johannes Zimmermann. 
Johan Nicolas Wuff, 
Joh. Nicolas Zimmermann. 



Nicklas Kuntz, 
Heinrich WolfiF, 
Johannes Schreiber, 
Conrath Schneiss, 
Johann König, 
Georg Born, 
Nicklas Zöller,* 
Peter Spengler,* 
Peter May, 
Jacob Maurer, 
Paulus Huey, 
Henry Giessler,* 
Georg Keyser, 
Samuel Taner,* 
Wilhelm Marx, 
Philippus Küpperter, 
John Adam Stump, 
Jacob Schuster,* 
Caspar Klöckner,* 
Johan Henrich Fröhlich, 
Adam Schneider, 
Georg Bombach, 
Johan Nicolas Schwingel, 

Sick — Ludwig Vivel, Peter König, Jacob Euperter, William 
Bishof, Thomas Fuse, Isaac Hencker, Joseph Neigh, Adam 
Bushart, Jacob Bley, Georg Kreger, Valentin Singrove. 

Dead — Mathias Klein. 

Note. — During 1739 and 1740 a number o{ Moravians came from 
Georgia into Pennsylvania, and settled at Bethlehem and Nazareth. 
For a list of these see Addenda, B. 

2Inmerfung.— 2Ba'f)rcnb 1739 unb 1740 fam ctite Stttjat)! $crrnt)uter 
öon Oeorgta na^ ^enn[t?Iüanten unb Hep ftcl ju ^iti)Ui)em unb 3laiaxtt\} 
nieber. Slbbenba B enthalt eine ^^iamenltfie. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1741, 



145 



81) May 30, 1741. Palatines imported in the snow Francis 
and Ann, Thomas Coatam, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
St. Christophers, f 

'Mai 30, 1741. ^fäljcr tanun auf tern ©eefc^iffe granciä 
uiit) Sinn, Gapitaiu J^oma^ Soatam, »on 3ftottertam über ©t. 
6^rtflo))t)erö. f 

Peter HoU, George Adam Koch,* 

Geo. Philip Clem,* Hans George Koch,* 

Johannes Immel, Samuel Georg Tössler, 

Jacob Kipper, Johan Conrad Schmidt, 

Martin Bittner,* Georg Adam Ernst, 

Michael Bigler, Johan Wendel Hornung. 
Johan Peter Herbei, 



82) Sept. 23, 1741. Palatines imported in the ship Marl- 
borough, Thomas Bell, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

(Sept. 23, 1741. ^fäljer famen mit tern ©cfeiffc SJlarlborougl), 
Sapitatn 2;^omaö Sett, »on 3lottert)am üBer Soweö. 



Peter Kuhn,* 
Job. Jacob Ick, 
Ulrich Naffzir, 
Johannes Ladsher,* 
Friedrich Meyer,* 
Jacob Hill, 

Johan Ludwig German, 
Johan Friederich Freyss, 
Johann Wilhelm Welsch, 
Johan Jacob Kuhn, 
Johan Georg Wagner, 
Johan Nicklas Beyer,* 
Simon Vogelgesang, 
Friedrich Zöllner, 
Michel Kreischer, 
Michael Seipert,* 
Peter Staudt, 
Lenhart Kleim * 



Bernhard Kapp, 
Daniel Simon, 
Johannes Doll, 
Johannes Meyer,* 
Jost Gasserd, 
Philip Kuntz, 
Jacob Bernhartt, 
Peter Deiss,* 
Abraham Hess, 
Johannes Kühl, 
Georg Ruth, 
Nicklas Martin, 
Philip Lein, 
Nicolas Süss, 
Peter Brent, 
Michael Swyng,* 
Johannes Kleim, 
John Nicholas,* 



f One of the British West India Islands. — Editor. 
t eine fcer britt[c^--t»e(liiibtf($cn Snfeln.— 5>ew«öseber. 



13 



146 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Johannes Horn, 
Caspar Modus,* 
Jacob Gerdheir,* 
Peter Kieffer,* 
Daniel Kieffer,* 
Michael Neumer, 
Johan Jacob Hegel, 
Johan Michael Welsch,* 
Johan Nickel (Ehl, 
Johan Daniel Gröninger, 
Georg Jacob Glug, 
Johan Jacob Nicolaus, 
Joh. Wilhelm Engelman, 
Johan Adam Kascht, 
Johannes Worscheber, 
Johannes Deiss, 
Joh. Jacob Kemper, 
Johan Peter Engel, 



Johannes Dielbohn, 
Friederich Bals Ratsnaith,* 
Johannes Kuhn, 
Joh. Ludwig Hen. Kohl, 
Peter Bartoleme,* 
Johan Tobias Rühm, 
Melchior Stahlman, 
Hans Nicholas Smith,* 
Henry Bernhart,* 
Joh. Nicolaus Schmucker;, 
Philippus Schneider, 
Anthonius (Ehler, 
Johan Adam Kamp, 
Joh. Ludwig Hanckstoin, 
John Jacob Person/,* 
Johan Jacob Dietz, 
Johan Karl FishahasoB* 
Johan Carl Metz.* 



83) Sept. 26, 1741. Palatines imported in the ship St Mark, 
Wilson, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 



®cpt. 26, 1741. ^fat^er fanten mit bent Schiffe (gt- ^axt, 
Gapitain Söilfon, öon Sfiotterbant über Soroeö. 



Nicklas Gebhard,* 
Peter Criling,* 
Conrad Stellweg,? 
Mathias Pols,* 
Jacob Matteis, 
Wilhelm Müller, 
Mattheus Borich, 
Johann Arnold Stecg, 
Johann Nicklaus Steeg, 
Hans Philip Auert, 
Johannes Von Erdre,? 
Johan Henricli Müller, 
Johan Peter Bernhart, 
Johan Henrich Müncker, 
Conrad Funck, 
Philip Mees,* 
Georg Davahrt, 



Ernst Braun, 
Nicklas Seyler,* 
Johannes Wieder, 
Wilbertus Lutz, 
Ulrich Weis,* 
Johannes Scherrer, 
Christoffel Stumb, 
John Harst,* 
Peter Jacob, 
JMichael Folber,* 
Hans Amweg, 
Philip Swiger,* 
Nickel Mensch,* 
Friederich Hertzog, 
Martin Becker, 
Philip Hass, 
Michael Riess, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1741. 



147 



Johannes Corell, 
Martin Edenborn,* 
Adam Rener,* 
Peter Hoffman, 
Hans Moore,* 
George Yearst,* 
Conrad Funck, 
Martin Leey,* 
Cenes Mook,* 
Abraham Deneey,* 
Philip Yeist,* 
Henrich Stahl, 
Johannes Scheider, 
John Shider,* 
Jacob Gerhardt,* 
Peter Gaberd,* 
Johan Johnloft,* 
PhiHp Kalbach, 
Conrad Dolch,* 
William Prickes,* 
Henrich Kroh, 
Michael Geest,* 
Johannes Engel, 
Lorentz Eranmach, 
Johan Herman Gell, 
Johan Martin Spegt, 
Joh. Adam Von Erden,* 
Johan Friederich Heinrich, 
Johan Adam Schmahl, 
Johann Conrad Michell, 
Johann Starffinger,* 
Johan Friederich Römer, 



Johan Wilhelm Hoffmann, 
Just Lorentz List, 
Joh. Adam Gundacker, 
Joh. Walther Fischbach, 
Johan Georg Schmaltz, 
Johan Caspar Ahls, 
Johan Nickel Steinert, 
Johan Philip Beick, 
Hendrick Korst,* 
Johan Georg Metz, 
Johan Jacob Corell, 
Johan Samuel Miihl,* 
Hans Jacob Meltzer,* 
Johann Philip Mann, 
Johann Henrich Mauerer, 
Leonhard Korn, 
Johann Niclas Hauer,* 
Johannes Bockius, 
Friederich Kleppert, 
Johann Jost Schneider, 
Johannes Kerstrich, 
Johann Vallstapp, 
Jacob Stoffelbein, 
Johannes Wehler, 
Johannes Schaum, 
Johannes Rehwalt, 
Christian Arhndarff, 
Adam Schreiber, 
Michael Dreydel, 
Philip Hoffman, 
Johann Christian Orendorff_, 
Johann Georo; Warth. 



84) Oct. 2, 1741. Palatines imported in the ship St. Andrew, 
Charles Stedman, Master, from Rotterdam. 

Oct, 2, 1741. ^fäljer tarnen mit bent ©d){ffe ®t. 5tnt)rctp, 
(iapitain S^arleö ©tebman, »on Siottcrtiam. 



Johan Conrath, 
Peter Buhl, 
Peter Voigt, 



Nieklaus Jungblud, 
Johannes Butterweh, 
Jacob Albrecht, 



148 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Ulrich Schömig, 

Philip Ulmer, 

Jacob Gerges,? 

Michael Will, 

Jacob Worst, 

Paulus Michael, 

David Delatter,* 

Nicolaus Bauer, 

Hans Uhlerich, 

Johannes Pfeil, 

Conrad Giesy,* 

Jacob Meyer, 

Johan Peter, 

Johan Philip, 

Frans Grau, 

Jacob Pfeiffer, 

Jacob Klein, 

Wühelm Gauff, 

Johannes Roll,* 

Nicklas Neezer,* 

Peter Müller, 

Jacob Aseby,* 

Jacob Meyer, 

Wilhelm Ludwig Becker, 

Daniel Henrich Elch,? 

Friederich Christian Becker, 



Carl Jung Eurvett, ? 
John Michael Behler,* 
Joh. Georg Daniel Kübortz, 
Carl Philip Wirtz, 
Johan Philip Ebärtz, 
Augustus Kauffmann, 
Hans George Lägner,* 
Johannes Anthoni, 
Joh. Michel Prenger, 
Ulrich Stambach, 
Hans Philip Hoffman,* 
Reinhart Böckney, 
Rudolff Steinman,* 
George Caspar Halle,* 
Lorentz Schwenk,* 
Johan Moritz Dupel,* 
Gotfried Orbig,* 
Joh. Nie. Schappert Bernhart, 
Bernhart Lachart, 
Valentin Sees,* 
Hans Rutschmann, 
Jacob Saltzberger,* 
Heinrich Weissmüller, 
Simon Henrich Höcker, 
Johan Henrich Walter, 
Hans Surber.* 



85) Oct. 12, 1741. Palatines imported in the ship Friend- 
ship, Alex. Thomas, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Dct. 12, 1741. ^fäl^er famen mit bem ©c^iffe grienbf^i^j, 
Gapitain 2(Iej:. Zi)oma^, ijon Stotterbam über Soweö. 



Paulus Müller, 

David Dreher, 

Jacob Diehl, 

George Hirt,* 

Jacob Herth, 

Joh. Geo. Wilhelm Berger, 

Andreas Hubert,* 

Johan Peter Braun, 

Wilhehn Erhart,* 



Johannes Erhart, 
Adam Enler, 
Valtein Scheck, 
Matheis Schreth, 
Jacob Lies, 
Peter Haldriter,* 
Daniel Hubert,* 
George Hubert,* 
Nicklas Bundry,* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1741. 



149 



Nicklas Klan,* 
Carl Schneyder,* 
Wilhelm Antes,* 
Valentin Embs, 
Cassimir Wessel,* 
Friederich Helwig, 
Peter Jung, 
Jacob Simon,* 
Adam Weber, 
Jacob Dinges, 
Peter Baal,* 
Peter Durny,* 
Johan Handeise, 
Johannes Melchior, 
Andreas Kranmer, 
Joh. Jacob Schack, 
Hans George Haldriter,* 
Philip Haldriter,* 



Caspar Rauland,* 
Nicklas Holtzleeder, 
Johan Georg Embs, 
Johan Caspar Schneider, 
Johann Georg Koch, 
Valentin Hohwerder, 
Johan Nickel Schuster, 
Johan Wilhelm Hoster, 
Johannes Fiehman, 
Wilhelm Zimmer,* 
Simon Jacob Boor, 
Johan Georg Riegel, 
Joh. Conrad Lechleiter, 
Daniel Korstmann, 
John Philip Ohger, 
Johan Jacob Schleiff, 
Joh. Christoff Schmuckheyde. 



86) Oct. 17, 1741. Palatines imported in the ship Molly, 
Thos. Oliver, Commander, from Rotterdam, last from Deal. 

Dct 17, 1741. g)fäl3cr fanten mit tern ©c^iffc 5«ott9, Som- 
tnantant Zf)oä, DUöer, »on ^lottertam über 3DeaL 



Joseph Hobian, 
Michael Miller,* 
Martin Giese,* 
Michael Boracker,* 
Jacob Rimli, 
Wilhelm Schwann,* 
Veldin Weissig,* 
Daniel Gillmann, 
Peter Godfried,* 
Johannes Müller, 
Peter Mantz,* 
Daniel Ecron, 
Michael Spindel, 
Christoffel Heine,* 
Michael Simon,* 
Johann Georg Druck, 
Johann Adam Scheib; 



John Nicklas Klein,* 
Johan Lenhart Beyer, 
Phil. Conrad Weydner, 
Johan Jacob Moltz, 
Johannes Stockschieger, 
Christian Commens,* 
Bartolomae Conselman,* 
John Frederick Schipp,* 
Johan Simon Hein, 
Johannes Mattheis, 
Johannes Zellman, 
Johan Michel Keyser, 
Michael Höpster, 
Matheus Kilian, 
Philip Daum, 
Herman Sauer,* 
Jacob Engelman, 



13* 



150 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Johan Ruddiss, 
Daniel Zinck,* 
Michel Säuberlich, 
Martin Regelman, 
Lenhart Lämmer,* 
Peter Krammer, 
Alex. Stockschleder, 
Henrich Becker, 
Samuel Spiegel, 
Joh. Michel Herb, 
Diterich Shweyzey, 
Conrad Riegelman, 
John Peter Siesler,* 
Matheus Meyer,* 
Bernhart Switzig, 
Joh. Peter Bender, 
John Geo. Hubeny,* 
Hans Georg Sterrles, 
Andreas Unger,* 



Johan Georg Küntzel, 
Sebastian Herlieman, 
Johan Jacob Gerst, 
Jacob Engellmann, 
Johan Jacob Kron, 
Johan Peter Eitergall, 
Hans Michel Schwartz, 
Joh. Henrich Schmitt, 
Johan Michel Krämer, 
Johan Henrich Weydner, 
Johan Michael Weicker, 
Georg Philip Ptiihl, 
Hans George Riegelman,* 
Johan Friederich Klein, 
Johan Christophel Stimbi, 
Johan Wilhelm Saner, 
John Lenhart Siesler,* 
Johann Caspar Gress, 
Johan Jacob Decker. 



87) Oct. 26, 1741. Palatines imported in the snow Molly, 
John Cranch, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Deal. 

Oct. 26, 1741. ^fäljer famen mit tern ©eefd)iffc 9Jiotl9, 
Sapttain 3o^n granc^, »on Stotterbam über Deal. 



Peter Schmitt, 
Jacob Schmid, 
Jacob Theis, 
Henrich Pfeil, 
Johannes Hess, 
Georg Funk,* 
Stephan Rub, 
Friederich Ott, 
Georg Keck, 
Joachim Berger, 
Peter Meyer,* 
Michael Jung, 
Peter Simon, 
Baltzer Hamman,? 
Anthony Adam,* 
Peter Metz,* 



Johan Heinrich Gräff, 
Johan Wilhelm Huey, 
John George Meylander,* 
Johan Peter Herbach, 
Johann Peter Haass, 
Joh. Geo. Wilhelm Küsterman, 
Joh. Theobald Brauchler, 
Valentin Benedict Hardt, 
Johan Michael Süs, 
Johannes Metzler, 
Hans Adam Sontag, 
Johan Philip Desch, 
Hans Peter Hess, 
Hans Dewald Siber,* 
John Gothart Armbriest,* 
Joh. Henrich Daniel, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1741. 



151 



Peter "Weber,* 
Johannes Ermel,* 



Theobald Weber, 
Hans Adam Cresman.* 



88) Nov. 7, 1741. Palatines imported in the snow Thane of 
Fife, William Weems, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Aber- 
deen, Scotland. 

9ioö. 7, 1741. ^fäljer fanien mit bent Seefc^iffe Zljunt of 
gifc, ßapitain Sßilliam Sßeemö, »on JHotterbam ühtx ^Oerteen, 
©c^ottlanb. 



Gabriel Jung, 
Jacob Fortine, 
George Creim,* 
Carl Grim, 
Adam Grim,* 
Johannes Boss,* 
Matteas Kolb,* 
Ludwig Essig, 
Peter Semier,* 
John Sebastian * 



Johann Bolander,* 
Johan Adam Kircher,* 
Vallentin Esman,* 
Valentin Winterstein, 
John Henry Bob,* 
Anthony Schneyder,* 
Lenhart Zarburger,* 
John Nicklas Kelch,* 
John George Weyman.* 



89) Nov. 20, 1741. Palatines imported in the ship Europa. 
Sfiot». 20, 1741. ^fäljer, W mit bem (Bdji^e Suropa anlangten. 



Joh. Mich. Marx, 
Paulus Furmann, 
Paul Furman sen.,* 
Dewald Shanck,* 
Caspar Rubelt,* 
Johan Jost, 
Peter Walmer,* 
Henry Kuhntz,* 
Henrich Udry, 
Johannes Henrich, 
Konradt Rahm, 
Simon Gross, 
Theobald Gross, 
Ludwig Breit, 
Andreas Lann,* 
Jacob Shneyder,* 
Philip Crentz,* 



Jacob Lomger,* 
Conrad Cornman, 
Philip Wirbel,* 
Henrich Ensminger, 
Joh. Christian Hausknecht, 
John Daniel Begly,* 
Johan Paul Bauer, 
Hans Arnold Meyer, 
Henrich Christman, 
Johan Jacob Löser, 
Johan Christian Löser, 
Hans Niclas Eisenhauer, 
Johan Peter Eisenhauer, 
Johann Isenhauer,* 
Hans George Shneyder,* 
Michael Haberstück, 
Henry Nicklas Hostein,* 



152 NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 

Johann Nicolaus Ander, Johan Andreas Krieger, 

Johannes Corell, Philip Nair,* 

Joh. Christoph Wagner, Peter Main, 

Johan Peter Schreiber, Johan Peter Krieger, 

Nicolaus Wagner, Johann Henrich Krieger. 

Note. — Count Nicolaus Ludwig Zinzendorf arrived at New York in 
the latter part of November, 1741. For a full account of Zinzendorf, 
see Rupp's History of Northumberland County, p. 391, and History o/ 
Northampton County, pp. 79, 86. 

Stnmerfung.— g^raf 9?tcoIau3 Subtotg öon 3injEnt"5rf f'^»" ^n ^f*» 
gorf gegen (ante ^Zoöember 1741 an. Sine »oUftanbtge 33et)anblung übei 
Btnjentorf ftnbet ber Sefer tn JRujjp'g ©efc&icttc »on 5^ort^umberlanb So., 
@. 391, unb 9tort|)ampton So., ®. 79, 86. 



90) May 28, 1742. Foreigners imported in the snow Catha- 
rine, Gladman, Commander. 

Wax 28, 1742. ^rembe, W mit bem ®ecfd)iffe Äat^arinc, 
ßommanbant ©labman, angefommen fint). 
Johannes Brücker, Matheus Wittgie, 

David Bischoff, Georg Kast, 

Michel Miesch,? Georg Emder, 

Henry Aimers, Georg Schneider, 

Nathanael Seidel, Joseph Möller, 

Jacob Lischy, a Friederich Post, h 

George Wiessener,* Gottlieb Petzold, 



a This was the Rev. Jacob Lischy, a Moravian minister, who offici- 
ated for several years as a German Reformed minister in York, Pa. — 
See Rupp's History of York County, p. 694. 

a Dteö tear fci^ox 3acob Stfc^9, ein ^errnttuter ®et|iHc^er, irel(|er 
einige S^brc als3 beutf^^reformirter ^'farrer in ^oxi, ^d., amtete. — ®ic^e 
Siupp'^ ©efc^idjte »on 2)orf So., ©. 694. 

b Post was an unassuming, honest German, a Moravian. In 1743 he 
accompanied the missionaries Pyrlaus and Senseman to Shekomeko, 
an Indian village bordering on Connecticut, where he married a bap- 
tized Indian woman. Having preached the Gospel among the Indians 
for several years, he was maltreated by being arrested at Albany and 
imprisoned in New York. After his liberation, he returned to Europe, 
1749. He afterwards returned to Pennsylvania, and while at Bethle- 
hem was prevailed upon, 1758, to carry a message from the Govern- 
ment to the Delaware, Shawanese and Mingo Indians in the West. — 
See Post's Journal of 1758 in Rupp's History of Western Pennsylvania. 
Edition of I8i6.— (Editor.) 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1742. 153 

John Adolph Meyer, Johann Leonhart Schnell, 

Johan ]?randmüller, Christian Werner, 

Paul Daniel Bryzelius, Joh. Christoph Heyne, 

Heinrieh Joachim Sensemann, Johan Georg Hey decker, 

Michael Tannenberger, Johann Reinhard Rona, 

Johan Georg Hardtner, Johann Michael Huber. 
Johann Philip Mauerer, 



91) Aug. 25, 1742. Foreigners imported in the brigantine 
Maiy, John Mason, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

2tug. 25, 1742. grembe famcn mit bem ©c^iteüfa^rer iJJiar^, 
fia^ttaln 3o^ti SJiafon, »on 9lotterbam über Soraeö. 

Valentin Kraft, Johann Philip Bertz, 

Daniel Etter, Johan Michael Zeister, 

Johannes Seivert,* John Henry Kookes,* 

Andreas Straub,* Constantinus Stilling, 

Martin Arnold,* Hans George Sneyder,* 

Jacob Reeder,* Johan Friedrich Ricker, 

Martin Schmidt, Christoffer Danner,* 

Georg Kiester, Jacob Baumann, 

Peter Burgener, Georg Friederich Heranus, 

Rupertus Bender, Johannes Bergerhoff, 

Peter Welch, Gerret van Kouten, 

Hans Trachsell, Jan De Mars, 

Abraham Liettel,* Peter Burckner,* 

Jacob Nägli, Christian Bugner. 



92) Sept. 3, 1742. Foreigners imported in the ship Loyal 
Judith, James Cowie, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 



b 5)oft trar ctn bcf^etbcncr, el)rHc!)cr Xeiitfc^er iinb $errn'()uter. 1743 
begleitete er bte ^Jifftonarc ^*T?r[äus? unb laenfemann nadi ©fjefomefo, 
einem Snbiancrborf, Xiai an Sonnecticut grenjt, »o er nnd) eine getaufte 
3nbtanerin t)t'iiatl)ete. 9?aa)bem cr ben ^nbianern mef)rere 3a{)re lang baS 
Söangelium ijerlünbigt f)atte, föurte cr bur^ (>kfangennet)mung ju Sllban^ 
unb Stnfperning in 9?eix> 3"^^ mi§banbelt. 9?ac& feiner Befreiung febrte 
er 1749 nai^ Suropa ,^uriidt. Stnt'ge 3cit nad)ber bcfuc^te er ^ennf^'loanten 
»Dteber unb toa'brcnb fctncö 2iufcntbaUi3 in 23ctblebem bewog tbn 1758 bie 
Stegierung, cine Sotfcbaft ben IDclaicarc, ®batoanefe unb 5D?tngo 3nbta= 
nern im '^SBeften ju überbringen.— Siebe ^'oft'^ Sournal »on 1758 in 
Stupp'« ©efcbicbte »om aBcftHc|en ^ennfvlöanien. ^iluögabe »on 1846.— 
(Herausgeber.) 



154 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



<Sc^)t. 3, 1742. gremtie famen mit bent ®^tffe Sopal 3ut»it^, 
Sapitain ^armi dotoie, öon 3flottert)am über Goweö. 



Bernhart Jansen, 
Kilian Fischel, 
Johan Fishel,* 
Georg Metzger, 
Gottfried Schnelie, 
Friederich Keher,* 
Wendel Vetter, 
Jacob Berentpeller,* 
Daniel Lang, 
Johannes Schultz, 
Johannes Hertens, 
Dieterich Hobbach, 
Reymund Laufflenter,* 
Johannes Dernheimer, 
Simon Wischhan, 
Friederich August, 
Johannes Lehn, 
Feibert Sochus, 
Simon Jonas, 
Jacob Taubetishel,* 
Johan Jacob Winterehle, 
Johan Peter Jung, 
Johan Jacob Schühler, 
Johan Georg ^V^eninger,? 
Wilhelm Anspach, 
Friederich Schollenberger, 
Johan Jacob Sheer,* 
Johan Paul Weytzel, 
Johann Henrich Dörr, 
Johann Michel Sternn, 
John Adam Turinger,* 
Johann Jacob Rath, 
Henricus De Ilooff, 
Friederich Germeijung, 
Joh. Andreas Strassbürger, 
Henrich Wolffskehl, 
Philip Henrich Erben, 



Johann Henrich Wagner, 
Theobald Nabinger, 
Johannes Lorentz, 
Philip Cronenberger, 
Peter Frey, 
Johannes Rab, 
Peter Klein, 
Ludwig Schott, 
Johannes Rühl, 
Zacharias Heller,* 
Friederich Pfeil, 
Johannes Fissel, 
Christofiel Heucher, 
Valentin Grün, 
Johannes Domie, 
Lorentz Place, 
Johannes Rühl, 
Peter Barth, 
David Schall,* 
Johan Jacob Grub, 
Johann Georg Jäger, 
Johann Lehnhart Führ, 
Johannes Peter Frey, 
Paulus Westenberger, ? 
Johann IMichel Paulis, 
Johann Baltzer Schäffer, 
Johann Valentin Gloninger, 
Hans Georg Shaffer, 
Samuel Fortinnix, 
Christoph Plantz, 
Christoph Bergman, 
Ludwig jMetzger, 
Gonrath Hartman,* 
Johannes Schumacher, 
Christoffel Geller, 
Jonas Furtuly,* 
Johann Simon GräflF. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1742. 



155 



9o) Sept. 21, 1742. Foreigners imported in the ship Francis 
and Elizabeth, George North, Master, from Rotterdam, last 
from Deal. 

(Sept. 21, 1742. gremte famen mit 'tcm St^ijfe granjiö unt> 
ßlifabetl), Sapitain ©eorge 9iortt), yon 3?ottcrt)am ühtx Deal. 



Michel Kolb, 
Michael Thesser, 
Johannes Withman, 
Ulrich Halber * 
Jacob Geiger, 
Johannes Eckel, 
Peter Rubel,* 
Jacob Klein,* 
Frederich Haussman, 
Nicklaus Walder,* 
Christian Newcomer,* 
Andreas Waltaich, 
Christian Henrich, 
Conrad Bassel,* 
Henry Cerber,* 
Christoph Schmidt,* 
Jacob Schenck, 
Paulus Daterer, 
Michel Coppelger, 
Johann Friederich lollgo, 
John Henrich StoU, 
Christian Adam Hbbel, 
Johan Michael Waidele, 
Johann Jacob Holbein, 
Joh. Michael Käschstler, 
Johann Henrich Stes, 
Hans Adam Klein, 
Ullrich Neuschwanger, 
Christian Newcomer jr., 
Johann Peter Waller, 
Christian Hiird, 
Hans Michel Fohl, 
Thomas Heunemeyer, 
John Gottfried Rieger,* 
Johann Georg Weith, 
Johan Peter Kochlein, 



Johann Wilhelm Worth, 
Johan Nicklaus Cuntz, 
Wilhelm Ruff, 
Martin Meyer, 
Peter Laaber,* 
Jacob Binder, 
Melchior Hirtzel, 
Jonas Metzger, 
Adam Säbert, 
Johannes Grob, 
Philip Shleyhouff,* 
Andreas Heintz, 
Hans Ewert, 
Johannes Schäfer, 
Conrad Gerhart, 
Heinerich Hirt, 
Anton Faust, 
Nicklaus Röhrig, 
Martin Kirschner, 
Peter Stam, 
Adam Odt, 
Adam Ott sen., 
Conrad Ott, 
Johannes Odt, 
Johannes Reusswig, 
Christian Rügner, 
Johannes Weber, 
Johannes Böhm,* 
Jacob Yoder,* 
Friederich Meyer, 
Jacob Kurtz, 
Jacob Guth, 
Peter Faust,* 
Conrad Bloss, 
Jacob Hanck, 
Johann Peter, 



156 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Moritz Zug, a 
Christian Zug, 
Johannes Zug, 
Christof Geiser, 
Hans Georg Binder, 
Hans George Shenk,* 
Matthäus Wendnagel, 
Samuel Wohlegemuth,* 
Hans Georg Knödler, 
Hans Michael Bauer,* 
Johan Matthias Plantz, 
Rudolph WoUenweiller, 
Hans George Ruthy,* 
Ludwig Jacob Friedburg, 
Johann Adam Stam, 
Johann Henrich Rengel, 
Johan Henrich Wolff, 
Johan Georg Schüssler, 
Nicolaus Gottschalck, 
Johann Peter Odt, 
Johann Henrich Odt, 
Johan Henrich Dessler, 
Leonhardt Michael Rüger, 
Johann Henrich Ahl, 
Johann Christian Homer, 
Johan Jacob Bohn, 
Christian Jotter, 
Christian Jotter jr., 
Christian Miller,* 
Johannes Knäg,* 
Johannes Gerber, 
Uhllerich Ställy,* 
Johan Adam Heydrig,* 
Johan Georg Faust,* 
Johan Henry Creesman, 



Johannes Walther, 
Hans Jacob Huber, 
Philip Deter Huber,* 
Johan Peter Köhler, 
Stephan Bopenmeier, 
Abraham Kolman, 
Johan Michel Truckenmüller, 
Jost Fuchs,* 
Henry Müler,* 
Ludwig Huber, 
Gabriel Köhler, 
Jacob Sarbach, 
Georg Schultz, 
Moses Binder,* 
Christian Ecket,* 
Andreas Bachman, 
Bernhart Kober,* 
Melchior Schauer, 
Abraham Gross, 
Johannes Koohn,* 
Martin Stouver,* 
Ludwig Schmaltzhaff, 
Georg Adam Müller, 
Hans Michael Kraffl,* 
Christian Dannewald,* 
Johann Henrich Schertz, 
Carl Philip Schultz, 
Hans Michael Doli, 
Johann Michael Bucher, 
Johann Michael Scitz, 
Abraham Schnutz, 
Matheus Massiman, 
David Rotheheffer, 
Christian Müller. 



a Moritz Zug was the grandfather of Shem Zoofc, of MifBin County, 
Pa., favorably known by his agrirultural essays in the Patent Office 
Reports within the last few years. 

a 3)?onfs 3u9 *»"f tjer ryro§öater 'con Sbem 3'"'f tjon 5)?tfflin Scunt^. 
fa., tex b'urd) feine 2Uifj"a'ge über 2ant<»trtt)fd)aft in ben ^atcnt'D^\ict' 
5Jerid)ten wabrenl) t>er legten paor 3a^re riitjmlic^ft bcfannt tft 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1742. 



157 



94) Sept. 24, 1742. Foreigners imported in the ship Robert 
and Alice, Hartley Cussack, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Cowes. 

<Bept. 24, 1742. ^i^emlie famen mit bent ©c^iffe Stotert min 
%lki, Sapitain 3)?artle9 Supcf, son 3flottert»am über Soweg» 



Philippus Bärger, 
Cornelius Miller, 
Friederich Müller, 
Ludwig Miller,* 
Conrad Pooff,* 
Veltin Paul, 
Philip Farenthal, 
Jacob Stübigh,* 
Hans Rub, 
Friederick Becker, 
Michel Axer, 
Michel Wolff, 
Johannes Heydt, 
Peter G-eris, 
Philip Geris,* 
Nicklaus Hartt,* 
Paulus Bang, 
Johannes Binackel, 
Adam Gucker,* 
Christian Gucker,* 
IMichel Weiss, 
Henry Stave,* 
Durst Ziegler, 
Johannes Ziegler, 
Johann Georg Christ, 
Georg Christian Ulrich, 
Johann Jacob Metzger, 
Johan Nicklas Hyl,* 
Johann Jacob Benedick, 
Hans Adam Christ,* 
Simon Jacob Tlieil,* 
Johann Georg Schissler, 
Hildebrand Heckman, 
Johann Philip Kercher, 
Johann Christoffel Peter, 



Johan Jacob Bome,* 
Simon Peter Diehl, 
Johan Friederich Heimer, 
Johann Henrich Werner, 
Johann Simon Drum, 
Johann Jacob Schmitt, 
Johann Casper Schell, 
Johann Michel Koch, 
Johannes Brosius, 
Joh. Abraham Brosius, 
Johann Georg Riess, 
Johann Jacob Riess, 
Johann Jacob Wagner, 
Jacob Weber, 
Jacob Stein, 
Lorentz Riess, 
Peter Herber, 
Johannes Herber, 
Andreas Harter, 
Johannes Kerch, 
Matheas Meyer,* 
David Weil, 
David Mackly,* 
Johannes Krape,* 
Peter Maus,* 
Andreas Kessler, 
Hans Adam Holdt,* 
Hans Adam Furtig,* 
Friederich Schmidt, 
John Jacob Zervin,* 
Philip Jacob Ehrenfelter, 
Adam Furchtig,* 
Joh. Paulus Reuther,? 
Hans Peter Woolf,* 
Hans Geo. Katzenstein,* 



14 



158 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Matlieis Heinrich, ? Michael Danner, 

Dietrich Danner, Hans Michael Spaar.* 

Note. — Rev. Henry Melchior Muhlenberg, D. D., Patriarch of the 
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, arrived from Charleston, 
S. C, at Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1742.— See Rupp's History of Berks 
and Lebanon Co., p. 433. 

Stnmcrfung. — ^aftor^enrv 5!)?eI(|tor !0?ül)lenberci, Dr. Theol. unb 
5)atriar(^ ber eüangclifdb^Iut^erifc^cn Äirc^c in Slmcrtfa, fam am 28. ^iJoöbr. 
1742 öon S^arlefton, ®. S., tn ?)^t(abel>)()ta an.— iStctje JRupp'ö ®cfc^. 
»on Scrfg unb Lebanon So., ®. 433. 



95) Aug. 30, 1743. Foreigners imported in the ship Francis 
and Elizabeth, George North, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Cowes. 

2tug. 30, 1743. gremte famen mit feem (Sd)iffc gi'önji^ unb 
Slifabet^, ^apitain ©eorge S^iortfe, oon 9tottertam über Sowcg. 



Hans Bücher, 
Henry Coughly,* 
Hans Zoblei, 
Rudolph Mertz, 
Hans Meier jr., 
Henry Rudolph,* 
Henrich Müller, 
Uhllerich Näff,* 
Henry Leer,* 
Casper Spery,* 
Henry Shwitzer,* 
Casper Crop,* 
Johannes Hug, 
Henry Naff,* 
Kilian Gild,* 
Hans Meyer,* 
Henry Rudsh,* 
Hans Heinrich Hübner, 
Hans Heinrieh Näff, 
Christopher Bosser,* 
Henry Weidman,* 
Henry Hebrecht,* 
Hans Gütinger, 
Hans Henry Naff,* 
Henry Baumgardner, 



Hans Jacob Naff,* 
Hans Heinrich Scheuerer, 
Hans Ulrich Bladman, 
Henry Leinbach,* 
Henry Poldesberger,* 
Hans Jacob Usser,* 
Heinrich Bauerdt, 
Rudolph Kleinpeter,* 
Jacob Wegmann, 
Peter Scheurer, 
Johannes Meier, 
Ely Wälder,* 
Henry Good,* 
Felix Leea,* 
Henrich Eck, 
Johannes Buch, 
Jacob Boumer,* 
Hans Kuhn,* 
Hans Dups, 
Johannes Bär, 
Jacob Bär, 
Henrich Grob, 
Henrich Hitz, 
Jacob Fi'anck, 
Henrich Suter, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1743. 



159 



Henry Zutter,* 
Heniy Shmit,* 
Daniel Harner, 
Hans Jacob ^V^iirst, 
Felix Hierlyman,* 
Johannes Bosor, 
Melchior Steheli, 
Lenhart Altcrfer Schmied, 
Henry DubydoriFer,* 
Felix Christ. Wagner, 
Hans Rurckons,^- 



Hans Jacob Meyer, 

Hans Jacob Rüttlinger, 

Lenhart Schnebeli, 

Henrich Schleypfer, 

Johannes Schildemrad, 

Jacob Bachman, 

Caspar Snabily,* 

Hans Jacob Pfister, 

Hans Ulrich Dinges, 

Hans Ulrich Hegnetsweiller. ? 



96) Sept. 2, 1743. Foreigners imported in the ship Loyal 
Judith, James Cowie, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

©ept. 2, 1743. gremtc tarnen mit tern (S(^iffe So^d Sut'iti), 
Sa))itain ^amt^ Soroie, »on Jlottertam über Soroeö. 



Bartel Zöller, 
Johannes Becker, 
Philip Christian,* 
Martin Dincky,? 
Johannes Lärer, 
Michel Seitz, 
Henrich Moag,* 
Jacob Maag, 
Johan Jacob, 
Johannes Kirst, 
Friedrich Feltberger, 
Lorents Laffersweiler, 
Nickel Runckel, 
Johan Runckel, 
Adam Brech, 
Johannes Jäger, 
Johannes Krämer, 
Daniel Märtz, 
Bernhard Lauffersweiler, 
Nicklaus Scherstenberger, 
Johan Conrad Schütz, 
Johann Georg Eppelman, 
Johan Jacob Gittelman, 
Johan Wendel Dannefelser, 



John Valentin Hammer,* 
Johann Wilhelm Becker, 
Johan Adam Moses, 
John George Miller,* 
Johannes Honig, 
Johan Peter Braun, 
Johann Philip Odewelder, 
Philip Carl Angel, 
Johan Adam Mohr, 
Johann Philip Beier, 
Johan Philip Gambach, 
Johan Adam Uehrbass, 
Johannes Gambach, 
Ulrich Freyhofer, 
Rudolff Buchy,* 
Wendel Horst, 
Valentin Wentz, 
Gerhart Fichker,* 
Bastian Bongart, 
Christian Weiss, 
Johannes Bott, 
Andreas \\''alter, 
Nicklas Keller, 
Adam Kappel, 



160 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Lorentz Sclimalil,a 
Adam Shmaal,* 
Jacob Haussman, 
Johannes Schreyer, 
Johannes Habersod,* 
Mattheas Hoffer, 
Shnon Küstener, 
Peter Koth,* 
George Fitterer,* 
Peter Miller * 
Jacob Möhner, 
Lorentz Hardt, 
Adam Schmahl, 
Wentz Schmahl, 
Valentin Grosch, 
Friederich Fichgus, 
Bernhart Becker, 
Johannes Becker, 
Johannes Bennes, 
Jacob Bentli, 
Jacob Keyser,* 
Philipp Hoffman, 
Johann Philipp Wentz, 
Christoph Weisskopff, 
Christopel Grossert, 
Johannis Schwindt, 



Johann Jacob Wilhelm, 
Johann Jacob Huth, 
Jacob Grosskopff,* 
Johan Henrich Scheurer, 
Hans Georg Sheyer,* 
Johan Adam Reyd,* 
Johann Jacob Petry, 
Johan Adam Fuchs, 
Johannes Brückbauer, 
Johannes Mondshauer,* 
Johann Phillipp Böhm jr., 
Johann Phillipp Böhm, 
Hans Wolf Waltz,* 
Andreas Weybrich, 
Hermanus H offer, 
Johann Philip Hardt, 
Johann Emrich Bott, 
Johan Georg Wolffskehl, 
Mattheus Butterfass, 
Nicolas Maneubach, 
Johan Phihp Schrieger, 
Joh. Philip Schrieger jr., 
Johann Henrich May, 
Johann Georg Story, 
Hans Heinrich Maag, 
Johan Balthasar Groh, 



a Lorentz Schmahl, a native of the Middle Palatinate, settled as a 
farmer six miles from York, Pa., where he pursued assiduously and 
successfully his calling to the close of his life, leaving four sons: Jacob, 
who, when young, moved to Baltimore, whose son, Col. Jacob Small, 
was Mayor of the city ; John Schmahl moved to and settled in Beaver 
County; Kilian and Lawrence remained in York. From the former, 
the greater part of the numerous Smalls in York County descend. — 
Rupp's History of York County, p. 743. 

a ?orcn^ <Sc^mat)l, in ber mittleren 55ffllj geboren, He§ fic^ aU Sauer 
fec^ö 55fetlen oon §)orf, ^a., nteber, too er fetnem^Seruf h\i jum Snbe fct= 
neg Sebenö treu unb eifrig oblag. (Sr batte »tcr ^bbne: 3afob, ber in fei- 
ner 3ugenbjiacb Baltimore jog unb beffen ©obn, (Sol. 3afcb <^ma{\, 
'^aviüx ber (stabt war; 3obn ®($mabl lte§ ficb in 23eav^er Sount? nteber; 
5tiltan unb Sorenj blieben in §)orf. 23on erfterem ftammt ber grö§cre Jbetl 
ber in glorf gount^ fo jablreicben ®maUg.— ^iuj)})'^ ©efc^i^te »on g)or! 
eount9, (5. 743. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1743. 



161 



Georg Fredericli Gribel,* 
Peter Schweikhartli, 
Johannes HoflFman, 



Lorentz Miller * 
Jolian Daniel Hoff, 
Job. Jacob Fossbendler. 



97) Sept. 5, 1743. Foreigners imported in the snow Char- 
lotte, John Mason, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

®e)3t. 5, 1743. ?5«nibe famen mit tern ®eefd)iffe S^arlottc, 
Gapitain 3oI)tt SJJafon, »on 9iotterbam über Sorocö. 



Adolph Eiler, 
Henrich Hant, 
Mattheis Basting, 
Henry Shoemaker,* 
Wilhelm Bretz, 
Jacob Bretz, 
Johannes Lees,* 
Johannes Lisch, 
Johannes Schiffer, 
Phillippus Maurer, 
Jacob Enck, 
Johannes Gross, 
Anthon Schnieder, 
David Dautderer,? 
Nicklas Wolfart, 
Henrich Eckenroth, 
Johannes Koch, 
Valentin Lörch, 
Johannes Riesset, 
Henrich Meyer,* 
Anton Zehmer, 
Gottlieb Werth, 
Johannes Bopp, 
Johannes Söhn, 



Johan Nickel Schnell, 
Johan Peter Schwager, 
Johann Philip Schnell, 
Johannes Ickrath, 
Johan Friederich Thor, 
Johan Jacob Enck, 
Job. Andoni Hellenthal, 
Johann Georg Miller, 
Johan Georg Herman, 
Johan David Schmidt, 
Johan Conrath Guthmann, 
Johan Balthaser Gir,? 
Johann Jacob Stamm, 
Johannes Niemand, 
Johann Henrich Mertz, 
Friederich Krämer, 
Johannes Hermann, 
Hans Georg Albrecht,* 
Mattheis Heimbach, 
Jacob Granable,* 
Johannes Albenächt, 
Johannis Clossheim, 
Johannes Ulmstadt, 
Johannes Mumrich. 



98) Sept. 20, 1743. Foreigners imported in the ship Lydia, 
James Abercrombie, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

(Sept. 20, 1743. grembe famcit mit feem ©i^iffc St)t)ta, (Sapi^ 
tain 3fl'neö Stijercrombie, öon 3flottcrt)am über Sotueö. 
Jost Folmer,* Johannes Benner, 

Johannes Bender,* Frantz Bricker, 

14* 



163 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Dietricli Fohl, 
Johannes Zepter,* 
Johan Christian Walther, 
Joh. Christian Rischstein, 
Joh. Henrich Hoffman, 
Johan Jacob Gucker, 
Johan Henrich Gucker, 
Simon Dreissbach, 
Johannes Weiler,* 
Johannes Hiinche, 
Dielman Schütz,* 
Johannes Ax, 
Hieronimus Weber, 
Konradt Wirdt, 
Johannes Jung, 
Hermanus Bruch, 
Johannes Gring, 
Johannes Faster, 
Peter Althen, 
Wühehn Hebbel, 
Henry Schwartz,* 
Matheus Lentz,* 
George Frieh, 
Conrath Kohl, 
Andreas Schmitt, 
Johannes Roth, 
Johannes Peltz,* 
Valentin Roth,* 
Jeremias Weidy,* 
Frantz Greulich, 
Casper Gastner, 
Henry Frey,* 



Johannes Bauer, 
Johannes Dorr, 
Philip Heger,* 
George Ament,* 
Johan Jost Dreissbach, 
Johan Ludwig Rudolph, 
Johan Peter Riihl, 
Johannes Blattenberger,* 
Johan Gerhart Weick, 
George Wilhelm Eckart,* 
Johan Wilhelm Eckroth, 
Joh. Wilhelm Krautter, 
Johan Adam Gaul, 
Johann Andreas Gutman, 
Joh. Nickel Seidenbach, 
Henrich Lepkiicher, 
Johan Philip Amendt, 
Johan Christian Neff, 
Joh. Bernhart Gesell, 
Johan Jacob Hacker,* 
Johan Georg Schwartz, 
Christian Harshy,* 
Joh. Friederich Sänger, 
Valentin Schmidt, 
Johan Nickel Sauer,* 
Johan Christoffel Looss,* 
Valentin Kletter,* 
Joh. Friederich Heyer, 
Valentin Heyer, 
Conrad Sallam,* 
John Goodman.* 



99) Sept. 26, 1743. Foreigners imported in the ship Rosan- 
nah, James Reason, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

«Sept. 26, 1743. gremte famen mit bent «Schiffe JRofanna^, 
Sapitatn 2<imti Sfleafon, »on SHottertam üt»er doroeö. 
Jacob Hoffman, Casper Kessler, 

Andreas Spring,* Hans Ferdinandt, 

Jacob Schäueffele, Casper Meier, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1743. 



163 



Jacob Fincky,* 
Rudy Keyser,* 
Johannes Jooghly,''' 
Henrich Christoph Heroldt, 
Hans Georg Bentzinger, 
Johan Wilhelm Satler, 
Hans Georg Stärner, 
Georg Christoph Schoch, 
Hans Georg Fuchs, 
Hans George Markwart,* 
Hans Martin Müller, 
Hans Conrad Bruner,* 
Jacob Schuster,* 
Hans Müller,* 
George Müller,* 
Gregorius Müller,* 
Hans Brunner, 
Henry Müller,* 
Martin Wirth, 
Johannes Fischer,* 
Jacob Prela, 
David Schatz, 
Friederich Stall, 
Jacob Leder, 



Samuel WoliF, 
Leonhart Ströbel, 
Andreas Strele, 
Christian Ilaller, 
Jacob Haller, 
Michael Wyland,* 
Henrich Burekart, 
Hans Jacob Gassner, 
Hans Ulerich Huber,* 
Hans Melchior Fischer,* 
Johannes Fischer jr., 
Bernhart Pflaugner, 
Hans Jacob Bemmler, 
Hans Jacob Hummel, 
Johannes Ketterman,* 
Georg ChristoflF Herais, 
Georg Philip Hummel, 
Hans Georg Kater, 
Hieronimus Henning, 
Hans Georg Etzweiller, 
Hans Leonhart Wyland,* 
Casper Bindschädler, 
Johannes Roodsman.* 



100) Sept. 30, 1743. Foreigners imported in the ship Phoenix, 
William Wilson, Commander, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

<Scpt. 30, 1743. Srentbe famen mit bem ©c^iffe ^l)öni):, Som= 
manbant SiMliiam Söilfon, öou Siottertam über Soiuee, 



WUhelm Hölty, 
Otto Hai, 

Lenhart Wintergress, 
Johannes Dandoner, 
Matheis Treuckel, 
Johannes Ungear,* 
Christoff Holwer,* 
Jacob Rubly,* 
Michael Bauer,* 
Michael Leavy, 
Johannes Schnee, 



Philip Reesher,* 
Philip Spegel, 
Jacob Gänsle, 
David Säusert,? 
Frederich Köhler, 
Jacob Siherrer,* 
Michael Eller, 
Isaac Will, 
Henry Meyer,* 
Dewald Hochstädt,* 
Johann Henrich Hauss, 



164 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Lorentz Protzmann, 
Henry Reydmeyer,* 
Paulus Behringer, 
Phillippus Bayer, 
Hans Micliael Stumpf, 
Joh. Nicklas Lohman, 
J. Ernst Reifisclineider,* 
Johannes Gänsle, 
Johan Frederich Esch, 
Johann Jost Köhler, 
Georg Klingmann, 
Johan Georg Sternbirger, 
Johan Valtin Beul, 
Johann Georg Schäffer, 
Friederich Miller,* 
Johan Henrich Wagner, 
Peter Handwercker, 
Benedict Nussbaum,* 
Jacob Geiger sen., 
Jacob Geiger jr.. 
Matheis Kent, 
Johannes Bär,* 
Johannes Stamm,* 
Peter Gör, 
Jacob Böm, 
Melchior Bär, 
Christophel Bär, 
Melchior Bär jr., 
Melchior Seydler, 
Daniel Schwartz, 



Henry Dornig,* 
Michael Masserly,* 
Daniel Mauss, 
Peter Bartolomes, 
Philipus Bartheus, 
Nicklaus Fey, 
Lorentz Cuntz, 
Georg Huber, 
Conrad Wirth, 
Adam Richman, 
Nicklas HoflPman,* 
Bemhart Mackler,* 
Henry Georg Nees,* 
Johann Niclas Gauer, 
Johann Jost Vetter, 
Michael Steckbek, 
Anthon Bensinger, 
Hans Adam Feibaum,* 
Conrad Feibaum,* 
Caspar Reithnauer,* 
Johannes Reudenauer,* 
Joh. Michael Füchthorn, 
Christian Rorbagh,* 
Johannes Nusbaum,* 
Johan Adam Herbes, 
Bernhart Müller, 
Hans Michael Miller,* 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Cal. August Erlwein.* 



101) Sept. 30, 1743. Foreigners imported in the ship Rolsert 
and Alice, Hartly Cussack, Commander, from Rotterdam, last 
from Cowes. 

«Sept. 30, 1743. gremtie famen mit t»em ©c^iffc S^toBert unb 
Sllice, ßornmantant ^artl^ ßaffucf, oon 9lottert»am üfeer Sottjeig. 

Johannes Zänei*, Johannes Good,* 

Simon Zenger, Joseph Ziebly,* 

Nicklas Baker,* Deobold Bauer,* 

Jacob Baker,* Jacob Shock, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1743. 



165 



Andreas Liess, 

Kasper Strom, 
Michael Deato, 
Johannes Shalley,* 
Christian Shalley,* 
Matheas Baum,* 
Johannes Schütz, 
Karl Schwartz, 
Johann PhUip Emig, 
Johannes Martin, 
Johann Philip Emig sen., 
Baltzer Schwerdt, 
Phillip Fredrick May, 
Joh. Ludwig Schalle, 
Hans Adam Shally*, 
Johannes Obenheyser, 
Nicklas Schreiber, 
John Heniy Butz, 
Johan Kolinangreuer, ? 
Jacob Schmidt, 
Hans Georg Stucki, 
Christoff Sheaneman,* 
Hans Jacob Koller, 
Peter Guthman, 
Samuel Landes, 
Conrad (Esterlen, 
Johannes Bender, 
Henry Gilbert, 
Hans Hardt, 
David Sarbach, 
Samuel Bechtel, 



Jacob Bucki, 

Abraham Derst, 
Mattheis Meier, 
Oswald Neff, 
Johannes Young,* 
Bardel Miller, 
Henry Fanner,* 
Felix Fanner,* 
Baltzer Gilbert,* 
Conrad Toll,* 
Uhich Cress,? 
Joseph Sheffer,* 
Hans Georg (Esterle, 
Christoff (Esterlin,* 
Joh. Ludwig Truckenmüller, 
Johann Georg Frey, 
Andreas Hemberger, 
Hans Georg Endes, 
Hans Michael Ott, 
Christian Müller, 
Hans Georg Müller, 
Henrich Stertzenacker, 
Philip Heinetsch, 
Hans Georg Begtel, 
Johan Georg Schwartz, 
Felix Zollinger, 
Heinrich Zwick, 
Wilhelm Spats,* 
Jacob GiUinger, 
Bernhart Gilbert. 



102) Oct. 7, 1743. Foreigners imported in the ship St. An- 
drew, Kobert Brown, Captain, fi-om Kotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Dct. 7, 1743. grembe famen mit t»em ®d)iffe <Bt Slntrew, 
ßapitdn diobext SBroivn, öon Eftotterbam über ßoiveö. 

Jacob Walter,* Ulrich Wechlid, 

Friderich Stoll, Adam Heyler, 

Johannes Moak,* Jacob Striey, 

Andreas Wollinger,* Joseph Hartman, 



166 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Johannes Häuser, 
Herman Busch, 
Greorg Gärtner, 
Lenhart Stein, 
Leonhart Dewalt,* 
Gottlieb Zigel,* 
Johan Mergel,* 
Gottlieb Schleer, 
Jacob Clausser,* 
John Nicklas Zeisinger,* 
Joh. Adam Gerber, 
Geo. Mich. Weiss Müller, 
Hans Georg Maurer, 
Johan Simon Kern, 
Hans Peter Gnimbach, 
Hans Michel Striey, 
Friederich Jayter, 
Georg PhUip Kürr, 
Hans George Eatter,* 
Hans Martin Fischer, 
Philip Jacob Buttman, 
Johan Michel Wagner, 
Hans Adam Sommer, 
Georg Friederich Zügel, 
Johann Jacob Ringer,* 
Daniel Meidinger, 
Jacob Eichhorn, 
Lenard Fuchs,* 
Andreas Güllam, 
Martin Ruth, 
Jacob Hesse,* 
Heinrich Brunner, 
Hans Burger, 
Ernest Amon,* 
Christie Casper, 
Johannes Ulerich,* 
Frederick Hubely, 



Johannes Mayer, 
Peter Werner, 
Johannes Widmann, 
Leonhardt Kern, 
Heinrich Wagner, 
Friederich Ziegler, 
Johannes Rieger, 
Anthon Knauss, 
Ludwigh Dewys, 
Abraham Hüller, 
Valentin Shutter,* 
Henry Shutter,* 
Jacob West,* 
Johannes Eberhart, 
Hyronimus Trauttmann, 
Bernhart Dübinger,* 
Joh. Ludwig Kraft, 
Hans Ulrich Hegli, 
Hans Jerg Backastos,* 
Hans Ulrich Jakly, 
Hans Ulrich Odt, 
Hans Henry Bossart,* 
Jac. Fried. Dochterman, 
Hans Jacob Goldner,* 
Hans Jerg Amon, 
Melchior Bührly, 
Johan Georg Wittmann, 
Hans Georg (Ehler, 
Michael Wolfgang,* 
H. Peter Fronkhousen,* 
Johan Henrich Knauss, 
Daniel Debüs, 
Joh. Henrich Gackenbach, 
Han Adam Zimmerman, 
Niclaus Kobelentz, 
Johan PhUip Schneider. 



103) Nov. 10, 174.3. Foreigners imported in the snow En- 
deavor, Thomas Anderson, Captain, from London. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1743. 167 

^ot), 10, 1743. gremt>e famen mit bent ©eefc^iffe Snbeatior, 
Sapitain Jl^omaö Slnterfon, oon Sonbon. 
Matheis Braunefelder, Matheis Braunefelder jr., 

Adam Schaub,* Hans Ulrich Schaub. 

Jacob Frounwalder,* 

Note. — Sometime in the summer of 1743, the ancestor of the Kel- 
KEES (Swiss) left his native country for America. His great-grandson, 
Rudolph F. Kelker, son of Frederick, has in his possession interesting 
family papers, from which the Editor has made some extracts. Among 
others is a certificate of church-membership, viz : L. B. S. 

It is shown by these presents, that Heinrich Köllicker, born in 1705 
at Herrliberg, on Lake Zurich, is the son of estimable parents, and 
has, by holy Baptism, been united with the Reformed Christian Church. 
Likewise, it is also the intention of Barbara Brätscheri, his wedded 
wife, together with their three sons and two daughters, all of good 
repute, as far as is known, to leave their fatherland of their own accord 
and emigrate to Pennsylvania or Carolina, in order there permanently 
to settle and herewith take with them their churchright for themselves 
and for their descendants. 

To this journey we wish them success, the divine blessing, health 
and the attainment of their object. For the sake of greater security 
I have written the above with my own hand and certified it with 
my seal. 

HANS CONRAD ZIEGLER, 
Herrliberg, \ Minister at Herrliberg 

the 8th day of June, 1743. J and Wezwyl. [l. s.] 

Family tradition says, they were 28 weeks in crossing the ocean. 
The date of their actual departure from Switzerland, and of their ar- 
rival in this country, and place of landing, are all (up to the present) 
unknown. As the name does not appear on the lists of immigrants to 
Pennsylvania, it has been surmised that they landed in Carolina. 
Henry Köllicker settled about four miles from Lebanon, now Lebanon, 
then Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, and we learn from the Records 
of the Church that he was an Elder in the "Berg Kirch," near Leba- 
non, in 1745. His son Anthony, and daughter Susanna are his only 
children supposed to have reached America with him. The others, it 
is believed, died before his arrival. 

3lnnterfuttg.— 3m ©ommer 1743 öcrltc§ ber 2tt)ne ber heifer (au^ 
ber ©Coweta) fein aSaterlaitb, urn na(^ 5tmertfa au^juwanbern. ©etn Ur= 
enfel, S^ubolp^ 5. Äclfer, (Sot)tt beö grtcbric^, befi^t tntcrejfantc gamt(tett= 
f($rtften, auö betten ber Cewu^gef'er Slu^jitgc machte. Unter benfelben tjl 
folgenbeö tl)m oon feinem ^Prebtger auögefteüte 3,^"9"i§ • 

Wii £egen»ertigen attefttren bag ^einrtc^ Äddtäer con $err(tberg am. 
3un($ ®ee geburtig, gebobren »erben oon ebrlic^en ©Item, tm jabr unfereg 
^etlanbö gejett 1705 unb burcb ben ^eiligen Sauff ber Sieformtrten Sbrift' 
It(|en ^ir^en etncerlctbet. Stem, Sarbara Srätf($eri fein ^\^mt\b famt 
3 ®öt)nen unb 2 Jöc^tern, alleg un»erliäumbte lent, fo »il im »üjfen, fre? 



168 NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 

unb ungcjtoungcn {xd) entfc^Iopn iljr 35atcrlanb ju »erlaffen unb nad^ 
55cnnfvlöanten ober Saniliua ju reifen; bafelbft fe^^aft niebcr ju laffen, 
^temtt tt)r 5)?annen unb ©cmetnbret^t für fi(^ unb tt)re 9iac|toninien 
mitnet)men. 

3n »el4)cr 9ietö tt)nen gliicf, fegen, cjcfunb{)eit unb erreic^ung t()reö 
3»ecf^ angetounfc^t »irb. 3" ntei)reren fic^er^eit t)ab ic| obtgeö mit ^anb 
unb bitfc^afft unberfe^t. 

$anö Sonrab 3^69'^^'^' 
^crrltberg, \ Pfarrer ju ^errltberg unb 

ben 8 tag ^euntonot 1743. j SBejw^l. fL. s.J 

(sine gamtlien=Ucberliefcrung fagt, ba§ btc Ueberfa()rt über ben Dcenn 
28 SBoctien in älnfpruc^ genommen \)ahi. I^aö genaue I:atum t^rer 2lb= 
reife »on bcr ec^weij unb i^rer Slnf'unft in btefem Snnbe finb, trie aucb 
bcr SanbungSpla^, bi^ auf ben heutigen Jag unbefannt. 'La ber 9tame 
auf ben giften ber Sinwanberer nac| $ennfvl»anien nic^t ftet)t, fo glaubte 
man, bicfclben feien in Sarolina gelanbet toorben; ^cnr^ Äöüicfcr lie§ fic^ 
ettoa mx SJfeilen »on Lebanon, bamalö gancafter, je^t Lebanon Sountv, 
^ennf^löanien, niebcr, unb auö ben ^eric^ten lernen wir, ba§ er 1745 ein 
Steüefter ber „*^erg»Äirc^e", na])t Lebanon, toar. 5)?an ift bcr Meinung, 
ba§ fein ^o^n 2Intt)on9 unb feine Zocbtex Sufanna bie einzigen mit it)m 
in SImerifa angetommenen Ä'inber unb ba§ bie übrigen »or feiner ^nfunft 
geftorben finb. 



104) Oct. 8, 1744. Foreigners imported in tte ship Aurora, 
Robert Pickeman, Captain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Dct. 8, 1744. gremte famcn mit bem Scf)iffe Slurora, ßapi* 

tain Stöbert ^idtman, »ort Stottertiam über ßotreö. 

Jost Vrevel, Pontius Wiern, ? 

Johan Dornbach,* Johann Christian Kell, 

Conrad Rörig,* Johan Adam Hirter, 

Job. Thieffelbach, ? Johan Adam Hierte,* 

Job. Phil. Fost,* Johan Henrich Bock, 

Daniel Foost,* Johan Adam Shog,* 

Peter Schäffer, Johan Chiist Wirth,* 

Pierre Aune, Johann Adam Wagner, 

Johannes Baker,* Hans Valtein Streder, 

Johan Besenger, Johan Georg Müller, 

Matteas Meyer,* Johan Adam Meyer,* 

Matteas Meyer jr.,* Job. Hermanus Frevel, 

Nicklas Meyer,* Johan Peter Sheeff,* 

Jean P. Pavon, Job. Wilh. Ganderman, 

Jobannes Michael,* Job. Henrich Rörich, 

Phillipus Fackert, Georg Wilhelm Berger, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1744. 



169 



Joh. Christian Berger, 
Joh. Wilhelm Sage, 
Mattheis Hem, 
Georg Nölen,? 
Godhart Lore,* 
Andreas Pichuoster, 
Jacob Scheyer, 
Johan Noll, 
Matthis Noll, 
Bernhart Neyzart,* 
Marcus Andres, 
Joh. Paul Krebs, 
Joh. Jacob Henn, 
Joh. Peter Henn, 
Joh. Hen. Dornbach,* 
Joh. Hiirfstenbach, 
Joh. Adam Geyer, 
Joh. Geo. Shuster,* 
Joh. Geo. Kell, 
Joh. Jac. Reyman,* 
Joh. WU. Weiss, 
Joh. Pet. Jung, 
Joh. Donis Shmit,* 
Joh. Wilh. Weyer, 



Joh. Adam Schumacher, 
Frantz Wilh. Kaulbach, 
Johan Konrad Weyre, 
Johan Wilhelm Lands,* 
Johan Christ Kohl,* 
Joh. Wilhelm Koch,* 
Johan Peter Weingerer, ? 
Johan David Dornbach, 
Joh. Peter Neytzert, 
Joh. Peter Feyzer, 
Johan Peter Meyer, 
Joh. Christof Stiegeier, 
Johan Georg Stiegeier, 
Johan Bastian Miller, 
Johan Henrich Häffer, 
Joh. Henrich Schlemer, 
Joh. Georg Schuster, 
Johan Peter Cheert, ? 
Johan Wilhelm Kell, 
Johan Ludwig Ehrman, 
Johan Martin Köhler, 
Johan Peter Strunck, 
Johan Matteas Dexter.* 



105) Oct. 20, 1744. Foreigners imported in the ship Phoenix, 
William Wilson, Captain, from Rotterdam, last fi-om Cowes. 

Dct. 20, 1744. grembe famen mit fcem Schiffe *pf)ömj:, (£api= 
tain Sßitliam Silfon, üon Stottevbam über Gowes. 



Henrich Hartmann, 
Johannes Herberth, 
Georg Schön,* 
Lorentz Erbach, 
Adam Fischborn, 
Antonius Fischborn, 
Nicklas Peteo, 
Theobald Klein, 
Conrad Fuchs, 
Andonius Weyrich, 
Mattheis Kolb, 



Philip Bretz, 

Martin Kolb, 

Lewalt Laub,* 

Jacob Rau, 

Johan Wendel Metzler, 

Johann Adam Wegel, 

Johan Adam ^lorgen, 

Casper Schneider, 

Joh. Philip Mauck, 

Johan Peter Götz, 

Christoph Westerberger, 



15 



170 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Joh. Georg Wahnsilier, 
Friederich Partemer, 
Johannes Schneider, 
Philip Wendel Klein, 
Johan Jost Tizler,* 
Joh. Henry Mattinger, 
Johan Herman Mohr, 
Joh. Nicolaus Wagner, 
Jacob Buchman, 
Georg Odt, 
Johannes Klein, 
Johannes Kuhn, 
Philip Krebe, 
Johannes Fliick, 
Paulus Eberhardt, 
Paul Schneider, 
Martin Etter,? 
Joh. Fiehlt, 
Conrad Hefling, 
Henrich Platt, 
Friederich Grosser, 
Wendel Benödes, 
Martin Kiester, 
Andreas Eshbacher,* 
Johannes Wayemer,* 
Johannes Dieckert, 
Friederich Stelwag, 
Peter Faust, 
Gerhardt Fircus, 
Jacob Stephen,* 
Jacob Wagner, 
Andi-eas Sorger, 
Conrath Jung, 
Friederich Huby,* 
Anthonius Höblich, 
Andreas Grübel, 
Henry Pad,* 
Bastian Morian, 
Heinrich Liess, 
Herman Decreiff,* 
Philip Flugh,* 



Rudolph Fiehl, 
Valentin Huss,? 
Johann Kuntz, 
Weymar Strunck, 
Valentin Winesheim, 
Jerg Wilhelm Staudt, 
Joh. Nie. Messersclimidt, 
Joh. Balthas Fischborn, 
Peter Tauschhaus, 
Gerhardt Schlosser, 
Friederich Michael, 
Johann Philip Andre», 
Christian Eberhart, 
John Georg Westberger,* 
Johan Nickel Hen, 
Friederich Huber, 
Johan Philip Wagner, 
Johan Reinhart Waltz, 
ChristoiFel Dinckenschiet, 
Johann Georg Schäffer, 
Fried. Christian MüDer, 
Johann Valentin Hue, 
Joh. Peter Breyvogel, 
Joh. Georg Meisenheim,* 
John Adam Klein,* 
Johan Philip Höflich, 
Johan Philip Kerchner, 
Johan Henrich Kuntz, 
Johan Adam Braun, 
Peter Philipp Hahn, 
Joh. Friederich Sauer, 
Johann Dierlhofl^ner, 
Philip Peter Grassert, 
Johan Peter Fuchs, 
Johan Peter Kolb, 
Christoffel Fiehl, 
Diellman Diekenschiedt, 
Anton Schneider, 
Philip Jacob Bäder, 
Johan Philip Roth,* 
Han Dewalt Seltenreich. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1744. 



171 



106) Nov. 2, 1744. Foreigners imported in the stip Friend- 
ship, John Mason, Captain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

9Ioü. 2, 1744. grembe famcn mit bent ©c^iffc grieut)fl)ip, 
Sapitatn 3o()n 5Jiafon, »on Slotterbam über Soweo. 



Herman Weber, 
Wilhelm Weber, 
Caspar Weber, 
Gerhart Will, 
Jacob Fughs,* 
Jacob Engel, 
Peter Bogert, 
Valentin Voyt, 
Georg Bernhart, 
Conrath Förster, 
Nicklaus Kusig, 
Jachim Joan, 
Christoph Koble,* 
Albrecht 3Iüller, 
Johannes Gräber, 
Johannes Moll, 
Peter Williar, 
Abraham Mischat, 
Peter Hann, 
Johann Wohlleben,* 
Dewald Sperk,* 
Georg Bieber, 
Johannes Bieber, 
Dewald Beaber,* 
Wolfgang Siess, 
Johannes Weber, 
Johann Schlögel,* 
Bernhart Roobe,* 
Johan Lobach,? 
Johannes Tieze, 
Philip Waghmer,* 
Dietrich Schattier,* 
Debalt Werner, 
PhUip ShaflFer,* 
Peter Gesell, 



Job. Adam Radebusch,* 
Johan Jacob Ferber, 
Anthonius Dillan, 
Job. Philip Ehrenhardt, 
Joh. Henrich Vätter, 
John Peter Cusick,* 
John Jacob Summer,* 
John Wilhelm More,* 
Theodoras Krahl,* 
Adam Schölkopf, 
Johan Wilhelm Reuel, 
Geo. Emig Haartz,* 
John Adam Haartz,* 
Johann George Weber, 
Johan Adam Weber, 
Andreas ReifFschneider, 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Johan Georg Schmidt, 
John Peter Noss, 
Michael Baumann, 
John Jacob Bildhous,* 
Johann Jacob Stoltz, 
Johan Georg Schädel, 
Johann Nickel Grob, 
Georg Konrad Grob, 
Heinrich Jacob Krebs, 
Johan Baltzer Köhler, 
Johann Michael Klein, 
Johann Ernst Solomo, 
Johannes Wildt, 
Heinrich Scheffer, 
Heinrich Scheffer jr., 
Henrich Fayerbach,* 
Henrich Koppelberger. 



172 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



107) Dec. 11, 1744. Foreigners imported in the ship Car- 
teret, Stevinson, Captain, from Rotterdam, lust from Cowes. 

"Dec. 11, 1744. grembe famcn mit tern (5d)tjfc (ivirttvet, vSapi= 
tain »oteoinfon, oon Sftotterbam über (Sowciä. 



Philip Stein, 
Jacob GraiF, 
Johannes Zörlin, 
Han Peter Schiihlein, 
Hans Henry Dobler, 
Hans Georg Klein,* 
Michael Haut, 
Johannes Dewalt, 
Rudolph Meeke,* 
Hans Forster,* 
Philip Bickler, 
Jacob Bickler, 
Walter Miller,* 
Valentin Young,* 
Michael Anthon,* 
Henry Shwenk,* 



Nicolas Herman,* 
Nicklas Steinmetz, 
Friederick Kop, 
Joh. Georg Schaaff, 
Albrecht Fried. Binder, 
Johan Philip Binder, 
Balthazar Armgast,* 
Christophel Weber, 
Jacob Lambrecht, 
Christoph Bittenbender, 
Johannes Mayer, 
Joh. Christian Rehkopp, 
Friederich Deobeld, 
Friederich Deobeld jr., 
Johannes Kautz, 
Wilhelm Jungck. 



108) Dec. 22, 1744. Foreigners imported in the ship Mas- 
cliffe Galley, Georg Durell, Commander, from Rotterdam, last 
from a port in Dorsetshire, England. 

T)ec. 22, 1744. grembe famen mit bem (3ct)tffe ^Ota^cliffe (3aU 
lei), ßornmanbant (S)eorg SDurett, »on 9tottertam über einen ^a= 
fen in 'Dorfetf^ire, Snglant». 



Christian StaufFer, 
Johannes Staube,* 
Jacob König,* 
[lenry Dochman,* 
Christian Coots,* 
Hans Lynter,* 
Stephan Kurtz,* 
Hans Eyer,* 
Jacob Engel,* 
Jacob Sharff,* 
Christian König,* 
Samuel König,* 



Christian Lang, 
Hans Lichti, 
Frantz Gernaudt, 
Valentin Heger,* 
Elias Dietrich, 
Christian Florig,* 
Jacob Höffling,* 
Conrad Notz, 
Conrad Meckes, 
Philip Haible, 
Johannes Meister,* 
Ulrich Gotter,* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1746. 



173 



Johann Jacob Meyer, 
Valentine Tallebach,* 
Christian Herford,? 
Lenhart Klopert,* 
Christian Krebill, 
Abraham Steiner, 
Adam Jacob Maurer, 
Johan Adam Gess, 
Leonhard Müller, 
Andreas Henr. Pattheuer, 
Michael Trahman, 
Joh. Melchior Bruder, 
Johan Adam Werntz, 
Philip Ludwig Werntz, 
Johan Jacob Werntz, 
Hans Greorg Graff, 
Hans Georg Schneider, 
Hans Adam Young,* 
Hans Peter Burye, 
Hans Georg Dewalt, 
Caspar Schertzer, 
Christian Mosser,* 
John Showalter,* 
Johannes Mosieman, 
Henry Thomas,* 



Bernhart Bear,* 
Philip Vetter,* 
Jacob Ebi, 
Jost Yotter,* 
Peter Jutzy,* 
Jacob ölüller, 
Peter Weiss, 
Peter Looh,* 
Peter Mayer,* 
Jacob Juncker, 
Elias Rieth,* 
Jacob Pregly,* 
Andreas Mosselman,* 
Hans David Em, 
Jacob Dauerschauer, 
Johannes Albrecht,* 
Johannes Sauder,* 
Christian Frätz,* 
Rudolph Hand,? 
Peter Wittmer, 
Henrich Schlichter, 
Rudolph Herdte, 
Josua Caspar Herdte jr., 
Rudolph Herdte jr., 
Geo. Wilh. Heydelbach. 



Note. — For 1745 no Lists found in the Archives. This year the 
Rev'ds Peter Brunnholtz, Herman Heinrich Lempke, J. N. Kurtz and 
J. H. Schaum, Lutheran ministers, arrived in Pennsylvania. — Rupp's 
Original History of Religious Denominations, S^c, p. 884; Stoever's Memoir 
of the Life and Times of Mühlenberg, p. 59. 

Jluntcrluii!;. — iBon 1745 fmb feine Stften tm Strd^t» aufbcttjatjrt, 3it 
btefem Satire famen bte lutfterifc^cn 55«l^orcn ^ettx 33runnl)o(ft, .^ermnnn 
frifinvic^ Scmpfc, 3- 9?. 5tur^ unb 3. $. ©c^aum in ^Jennf^ltjnmen an. — 
9tupp'ö Driginal=(5)cfc^t^tc religtof. Scncnnungcn jc., ©. 384 ; ©töuer'ö 
5)?emotr beö Seöenö iSlni)knhtxQ''i, ®. 59. 



109) Sept. 27, 1746. f Foreigners imported in the ship Ann 
Galley, William Wilson, Captain, from Rotterdam, last from the 
Orkneys, Scotland. 



f This year the Rev. Michael Schlatter, of St. Gall, Switzerland, 
embarked for America, June 1st, arrived at Boston July 21st, came to 

15* 



174 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



(Sept. 27, 1746. f Srcmbc famen mit bcm ©c^iffe Stnn ®aU 
le^, Sapitain Söitliam Söllfon, »on 3fiottcrt>am über feie Drfnepö, 
©d^ottlant). 



Philip Bohn, 
Johannes Bohn, 
Johannes Dammer, 
Christopher Thamer,* 
Thomas Hahn, 
Johannes Hahn, 
Conrad Räber, 
Carl Heyderich,* 
Caspar Heyderich,* 
Daniel Zwier, 
Johan Peter German, 
Johan Georg Godschalk,* 
Johan Baltzer Bohn, 
Johan Balthasar Damer, 
Christoph Hoffman,* 
Johan Ludwig Lauman, 
Johan George Knabe,* 
Rubert Harttoffel, 
Joseph Egenbrohen,* 
Johannes Kauffman, 
Michael Egolf, 
Michael Egolf jr., 
Simon Dohster, 
Martin Lauman, 
Heinrich Müller, 
Martin Blisky,* 



Johannes Ott, 
Johannes Sheck, 
Michael Batz, 
Jacob Wetzel, 
Jacob Ziegler, 
Andreas Endt, 
Johannes Kraus, 
Balthasar Stauf, 
Mattheus Hohl, 
Christian Lentz, 
John Lentz, 
Philip Ziegler, 
Christoph Lentz, 
Matheas Bleakly,* 
Conrad Dress, 
Michael Dieter, 
Johannes Sigle, 
Jacob Ziegly,* 
Christian Stram, 
Peter Reshe, 
Georg Stram, 
Georg Ruth, 
Georg Betz, 
Joseph Alber, 
Georg Hetrich, 
Jacob Dauttel, 



Philadelphia Sept. 6. He was one of the first missionaries and found- 
ers of the German Reformed Church in America. — Riipp's History of 
Berks County, p. 443; Rupp's History of the Germans in Fenna., Chapt. 
History of the German Reformed Church; Rev. H. HarbaugKs Memoirs 
of Rev. M. Schlatter. 

t 3n btefem 3at)rc f($tfftc [ic^ 5)rtftor 5i}?t_(^ael Schlatter »on ®t. ©alten 
ttt bcr ®cj)wetj am 1. 3unt nad^ 2Imertfa ein, ido er bann aui^ in 23ofton 
am 21. 3uli unb in 5^{iilabelpt)ia am 6. ©ept. anfam. Sr war einer ber 
erjien Wiffionare unb Scgrünber ber bcutfc^^reformirten Äirc^e in Slme- 
rtfa.— 3?upp'ö fycfd). »on Serfö Sc, ®. 443; Slupp'ä ®efcb. ber "Dent- 
feigen in ^Penn|\)Ioanicn, Sapitcl über bie Stcform. Äir^e; ^aftor $. $ar= 
i»oc^'ö (Srinnernngen an ^afior 50?. «Schlatter. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 17-i6. 



175 



Valentin Staffel * 
Hans Peter Dornhauer, 
Johannes Shock jr., 
Joh. Gottlieb Wehner, 
Johannes Hummel, 
Johan Adam Heindel, 
Hans Georg Bresthle, 
Joh. David Schaihing, 
Bernhart Bochner, 
Ludwig Falkenstein, 
George Shneering,* 
Johan Andreas Jetter, 
Hans George Trasher,* 
Hans Mich. Neuhauser, 
Johan Baltes Bücher, 
Christian Kauffmann, 
Abraham Rösch, 



Triederich Eichholtz, 
Joh. Wühelm Horst, 
Johann Schröter, 
Jacob Freymann, 
Caspar Schneider, 
Johannes Stoffel, 
David Küntzel, 
Geo. Albrecht Hillegass, 
Hans Grünewaldt, 
Michel Zimmerman, 
John Michael Sekel, 
Christian Wagner, 
Melchior Mill, 
Michael Sekel, 
Michael Klawer,* 
Mathias Streihl. 



110) Oct. 25, 1746. Foreigners imported in the Neptune, 
Thomas Wilkinson, Master, from Rotterdam, last from England. 

Dct. 25, 1746. grembe famm mit tem ©^iffe 9icptune, ßapi^ 
tain Ziiomai 2ßil!tnfon, üon Stotterbam übtx Snglant». 



Johannes Kauffeld, 
Arenue Consul, 
Henry Eller, 
Henry Miller,* 
Jacob Shnyder,* 
Johannes Heindt, 
Joh. Friedrich Windst, 
Joh. Fried. Windst jr., 
Johan Peter Funck, 
Johan Jacob Pfeiffer, 
Peter Sutter, 
Jacob Rauch, 
Jacob Bauman, 
George Kauffeld, 
Adam Kogh,* 
Daniel Jacob, 
Frantz Reynhart, 
Nicklas Felle,* 



Jacob Baab, 
Peter Willem, 
Johannes Gobel,* 
Jacob Steiner, 
Georg Weber, 
Michel Werntz, 
Jacob Huntz, 
Dewalt Angny,* 
Caspar Dewalt, 
Jacob Leisser, 
Carl Risch, 
Georg Ernst, 
Pierre Gerro,* 
Jean Duesto,* 
Säule Ruibec, 
Francoi Conrieu, 
Joseph Gerra,* 
Pierre Vaintvas, 



176 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Valentin Leonhardt, 
Jacob Bauman jr., 
Nicklas Kauffeld, 
Joh. Cliristoff Hausmann, 
Andreas Reinhart, 
Isaac Steiner, 
Job. Peter Langenberger, 
Wilhelm Baussman, 
Philip Ginder, 
Johannes Steiner, 
Job. Philip Reinhart, 
Lorentz Baussman, 
Henrich Steiner, 



Cbristoffel Pauscli, 
Conrad Conrath,* 
Philip Wissner, 
Henry Shneyder,* 
Job. Bernbart Fer, 
Christian Steiner, 
Peter Grosnickel, 
Michel Fischer, 
Johannes Breitenbacb, 
George Zimmerman, 
Job. Christian Leibrock, 
Friederieb Reinbart,* 
Alexander Gibbo.* 



Ill) Aug. 1, 1747. Foreigners imported in the bilander 
Vernon, Thomas Ricks, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Leith, Scotland. 

5Iug. 1, 1747. gvembe famen mit tern Saftfctiiffe 55crnon, Sa= 
pitain 3:l)omaö diid^, öon 9totterbam über Ceitb, ©(^ottlanti. 



Andreas Bürge,* 
Cbristoffel Bär, 
Jacob Steinbring, 
Christoff Cressel,* 
Dewald Sheyder,* 
Jacob Leesher,* 
Marx Ehli, 
Henry Goub,* 
Abraham Funck,* 
Jacob Shappy,* 
Felix Weiss, 
Henrich Startzman, 
Johannes Grünwald, 
Hans Michael Kuntz,* 
Heinrich Büttner, 
Hans Mich. Büttner, 
Samuel Witmer,* 
Tobias Wagbeman,* 
Job. Georg Meingästner, 
Hans Caspar Feerer, 
Johannes Rooghel,* 



Hans Jacob Shappy,* 
Hans Bickell, 
Jacob Schnebeli, 
Rudolph Hornecker,* 
Ulrich Hornecker,* 
Henry Herker,* 
Peter Bawman,* 
Johannes Wälder, 
Ludwig Weiter, 
Rudolph Huber, 
Georg Wampfler, 
Henrich Huber, 
Henrich Huber jr., 
Hans Friedt, 
Kilian Indorff, 
Heinrich Fiett, 
Wilhelm Otz, 
Hans Nickel Schmitt, 
Hans Wilhelm Weidner, 
Hans Henrich Weiss, 
Hans Bleigestuufer, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1747. 



177 



Rudolph Hornecker jr., 
Hans Jacob Wälder, 
Hans Henrich Walder, 
Hans Casper Wälder, 
Han Michel Eysenmann, 
Joh. Christian Wanipfler, 



Joh. Ludwig Wampfler, 
Ha)is Niclaus Bär, 
Jacob Steinbrachel, 
Hans Georg Schar, 
Friederich Wirtz. 



112) Sept. 24, 1747. Foreigners imported in the ship Lydia, 
William Tiffin, Captain, from London — inhabitants of Switzer- 
land. 

©ept 24, 1747. grembe famcn mit t)cm ®d)iffc ^pbia, Sapi^ 
tain Sßidiam Jifftn, öon Sonboit — 35emo{)nev bcr (3rf)»ei3. 

Johannes Vogel,* John Jacob Meishter,* 

Jacob Verner,* Hans Martin Wehrner, 

Hans Peiffer, Mich. Vogelfanger Tolly, 

Hans German, Hans Jacob Grüllmann, 

Peter Verner,* Daniel Heinrichs, 

Michael Meyer,* Georg Jacob Nudell, 

Henrich Danner,* Thom. Hen. Breymayer. 



113) Oct. 9, 1747. Foreigners imported in the ship Restau- 
ration, James Hall, Captain, from Rotterdam, last from Leith — 
inhabitants of the Palatinate and places adjacent. 

Dct. 9, 1747. ^''■enii'e tarmn mit tem ©c^iffe Steftauration, 
Sapitaitt 3ame^ ^aU, öon 3flottevt)am itfcer Scit^ — auö ber 5>falj 
unt) angren3ent)en Säntern. 



David Scherch, 
IMartin Lesch, 
Johannes Schanz, 
Nicolaus Miller, 
Tobias Pflieger, 
Leonhart Horein,* 
Johannes Knecht, 
Andreas Seitle, 
Hieronimus Greber, 
Johannes Löffler, 
Joh. Georg Sürmer, 
Joh. Georg Kühner, 
Martin Puenastag;, 



Johan Peter Beyl, 
Joh. Adam KauiFman, 
Hans Georg Jung, 
Jacob jM tiller, 
Jacob Röder, 
Philip Hinsch, 
David Dietterich, 
Martin Streicker, 
Andreas Riess, 
Thomas Zigler,* 
Jacob Houpt,* 
Georg Lertschle, 
Lucas Flak,* 



178 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Caspar Ber,* 
Jacob Endi, 
Georg Klees, 
Georg Rohrer, 
Johannes Yetter, 
Baltas Mauerer, 
Jacob Hacke, 
Michael Wagner, 
Peter Mosser, 
Peter Mosser jr., 
Hans Guth, 
Andreas Beyer, 
Jacob Wetzler, 
Simon Isbod,* 
Christian Eller, 
Johannes Fuchs, 
Jost Kobel, 
David Kobel, 
Peter Wittmer, 
Samuel Rosser, 
Jacob Beysely,* 
Michael Funck, 
Jacob Gross, 
Adam Tamas, 
Christian Rupp, 
Henry Righter,* 
Hans Lay, 
Michael Föss, 
Bernhart Beck, 
Georg Beyer, 
Martin Moll, 
Michel Meyer, 
Johannes Leonner, 
Job. Lorentz Sträueker, 
Christoph Wagner, 
Georg Fried. Klingel, 
Hans Georg Klingel, 
Heinrich RÖsch, 
Joh. Philip Busch, 
Job. Daniel Busch, 
Joh. Paulus Misser, 



Hans Adam Sebaldt, 
Hans Georg Torr, 
Joseph Bentzinger, 
Joseph Lobwasser, 
Johan Georg Wendel, 
Hans Georg Hoffman, 
Johan Peter Lutz, 
Johannes Schemmlein, 
George Wallmiller,* 
Heinrich Hauptman, 
Michael Hoffman,* 
Joh. Frantz Lemmlein, 
Job. Philip Stock, 
Job. Michael Weckesser, 
Philip Hebeisen, 
Johan Jacob Ebener, 
Christoph Homan, 
Friederich Rohrer, 
Conrad Bisecker, 
Joh. David Klemm, 
Joh. Gottfried Bohner, 
Michael Reinardt, 
Hans Georg Eberhartt, 
Hans Georg Shmitzer,* 
Joh. Phihp Hopff, 
Gottfried Rattenauer, 
Joh. Christoph Silberberg, 
Johannes Hermann, 
Johannes Feldmayer, 
Georg Muckenberger, 
Hans Leonard Butz, 
Hans Michel Schlauch, 
Christoph Mühleissen, 
Gottfried Lauerer, 
Andreas Bosshardt, 
Michel Schill, 
Balthes Zericher, 
Jacob Rösch, 
Mattheus Mauck, 
Jacob Hettler, 
Jacob Scherich, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1747. 



179 



Samuel Wendel, 
Christian Miihleissen, 
Geo. Friederich Kasper, 
Philip Jacob Mayer, 
Georg Daniel Eppler, 



Johannes Weissman, 
Hermanus Mumau, 
Johan Jacob Schof, 
Christian Tragher,* 
Christian Schneider. 



114) Oct. 13, 1747. Foreigners, inhabitants of the Palati^ 
nate and places adjacent, imported in the ship Two Brothers, 
Thomas Arnott, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Leith. 

Dct. 13, 1747. grembe auö ber ^falj unb ben angrenjenben 
Sänbern famen mit bent ©(^ijfe Ztoo Srot^erö, Sapitain Z^oma^ 
Slrnott, »on Stotterbam ükr 2dtl). 



Johannes Fuchs, 
Johannes Bosse, 
Johannes Adam, 
Johannes Buch, 
Peter Steinmetz, 
Johannes Opp, 
Jacob Arnold sen., 
Jacob Arnold jr., 
Mattheis Kern, 
Johannes Hermann, 
Johan Peterey, 
Georg Schantz,? 
Carl Baumberger, 
Johannes Eberhart, 
Nickolas Woolfe,* 
Henrich Kirch, 
Georg Kärch, 
Johannes Bischoff, 
Jost Fullmer,* 
Johannes Udner, 
Christian Eydam,* 
Henrich Julius, 
Daniel Sauerwalt, 
Johannes Scheffer, 
Johannes Enck, 
Jacob Hüppel, 
Johan Henrich Kuntz, 
Joh. Christof Müller, 



Johan Jacob Schmidt, 
Joh. Bernhart Schneider, 
Joh. Jacob Hilgert, 
Johan Peter Bausmann, 
Johan Philip Thomas, 
Johan Ernst Kurtz, 
Johan Frantz Hammer, 
Frantz Henrich Gress, 
Johan Georg Roth, 
Johan Peter Conradt, 
Johan Adam Kröber, 
Joh. Philip Klonninger, 
Joh. Leonhart Negele, 
Johan Conrad Momma, 
Johan Philip German, 
Frantz Peter Lorentz, 
Joh. Peter Meisteuch, 
Joh. Wendel Eberhart, 
Joh. Jacob Bischoff, 
Joh. Diet. Schmidt, 
Joh. Balthas Hieronymus, 
Joh. Frantz Hieronymus, 
Adam Ingebrand,* 
Georg Philip Groh, 
Philip Fidler, 
Henry Beyl,* 
Costinios Ortmann, 
Michel Reidenauer, 



180 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Sebastian Bauer, 

George Wendling, 

Anthon Aimrester,* 

Heinricli Scharff, 

Herman Woost,* 

Nicklas Gebhart, 

Dewald Knapff, 

(xeorgius Boronii, 

Johannes Schnepp,? 

Henrich Kern, 

Matheis Bischop, 

Johannes Böhm, 

Johan Seitzius, 

Johann Georg, 

Frantz GerHgh,* 

Paulus Dilgard, 

l^hUip Kolp, 

Ernestus De Switzerdediefryer. 

Johan Niclaus Sträitz, 

Joh. Christoph Strohman, 



Johan PhiHp Nachtgall, 
Johan Georg Huth, 
Joh. Valentin Harth, 
George Greenemeyer,* 
Johan Nickel Wüst, 
Frantz Michel Bischop, 
Johan Christoph Lehr, 
Johan Conrad Geib, 
Johannes Sassemanshause, 
Johan Jost Reese,* 
Joh. Jost Bebighausen, 
Georg Hen-mann, 
Frantz Willhan, 
Leonhart Müller, 
Baltzer Mohn, 
Uhllerich Moan,* 
Valentin Buchaker,* 
Adolff May, 
Conrad Waagenser. 



115) Oct. 20, 1747. 
last from Leith. 



Foreigners imported from Rotterdam, 



Oct. 20, 1747. gremte famen öon Stotterbam ükr Seit^, 



Johannes Gress, 
Peter Koch,* 
Henry Bawngwar,* 
Jacob Spring,* 
Jacob Frey, 
Niclaus Lantz, 
V/ilhelm Dauber, 
Adam Birger, 
Hans Sheyer,* 
Adam Schmitt, 
Johannes Meyer,* 
Charles Shmit,* 
Christian Wenger, 
Georg Schuster, 
Johannes Stumpf, 
Ludwig Tecker,* 



Hans Conrad Beck, 
Joh. Christian Petersohn, 
PhUip Henrich Seng, 
Jacob Allimang, 
Jacob Allimang jr., 
John Henry Schneyder, 
Jacob Schwanger, 
Johannes Wenger, 
Christoff Gottschall,* 
Hans Adam Furny,* 
Abraham Frantz, 
Hans Georg Lantz, 
Christian Gärtner, ? 
Hans Philip Baron, 
Sim. Con. Steinuth, 
Joh. WUhelm Yef,* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1748. 181 

G-eorg Wiilh, Hans Michel Kleim,* 

Henry Frantz, Hans Dewalt Leyty,* 

Peter Kennel,* Nicklaus Wenger, 

Peter Frantz, Henry Likwilder.* 

Johan Küstner, 



116) Sept. 5, 1748. f Foreigners imported in the ship Edin- 
burgh, James Rüssel, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Ports> 
mouth. 

@ept. 5, 1748. t grembc lamcn mit t)cm Sd)iffe SbinButgl), 
Sapitain ^amti Stuffel, »on Stotterbam iikr ^ort^moutt). 

Andreas Staut, Valentin Huth, 

Jacob Schumacher, Valentin Huth jr., 

Christoph Kumm, Valentin Sherer,* 

Lorentz Reyder, Valentin Müller, 

Dietrich Strubel, Felix Sautter, 

Adam Rauch,* Jacob Veirling, 

Johan Lorentz, Leuhard (Ehler, 

Thomas Kirch, Joh. Valentin Opp, 

Conrath Claus, eToh. Philip Schmitt, 

Sebastian Barthol, Joh. Adam Schuster, 

Peter Wingert, Joh. Stephan Franck, 

Philip Haller, Johan Peter Heger, 

Peter Pfeiffer,* Joh. Valentin Klages, 

Peter Ott,? Jacob Hilssheimer, 

Friederich Gerhardt, Joh. Philip Lorentz, 

Peter Döst, Joh. Valentin Lorentz, 

Lorentz Werthes, Adam Kirchner,? 

Simon Pilanus, Joh. Leonard May, 

Michel Gugesk * Frantz Peter May, 



f In 1748 several German Reformed ministers arrived in Pennsyl- 
vania. Aug. 13, 1748, Rev. Dominiciis Bartholomceus, and Rev. John 
Jacob Hochreuiener ; Sept. 15, Rev. Johann Jacob Leydig. — Dr. Bütt- 
ner'' s Reform. Kirche in America, p. 11; Rev. H. HarbaugVs Memoirs 
of Germ. Reform. Ministers in the tl. S. 

f 3m3iit)re 1748 fnmcn mebrcrc bfutfdj^reformtrtf rs3et[tltd)c in ^'enn» 
[^(»anien an. 2lm 13. Stugufi btc ^^aftorcn X)pnitnicuö Sartf)olcinä'uö unb 
3ol)ann Safob ^oc^reutener; am 15. eept. ^aftor 3ütt. 3afob £ei)bt'g.— 
!£)r. Siittner'g 9ief. B.\x^t in Slmcrifa, a. 11; 5^aftor $. ^arbac|)'^ Srin» 
nfrungen an bit beutfc^- reform. ®eifUic^en in ben 33er. «St. 

16 



182 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Joh. Wilhelm Gärtner, 
Joh. Peter Van Kannen, 
Joh. Jacob Brommer, 
Joh. Jacob Eyler, 
Johan Nickel Buch, 
Joh. Nickel Mayer, 
Joh. Nickel Leu,? 
Joh. Jacob Schlosser, 
Joh. Herman Clauss, 
Peter WU. Caffroth, 
Joh. Wilhelm Fuchs, 
Joh. Nicolas Döst, 
Caspar Franckfurther,* 
John Georg Kirshner,* 
Adam Anders, 
Melchior Brown,* 
Jacob Hoffman, 
Heinrich Merckel, 
Michel Theiss, 
Georg Jantz,* 
Matheas Krammer,* 
Bernhart Diehl, 
Reinhart Gaul, 
Johannes Diehl, 
Johannes Diehl jr., 
Conrath Graff, 
Balthes Erbach, 
Peter Schäffer, 
Jacob Julius, 
Peter Meetzler, 
Matheas Betz,* 
Phihp Mook,* 
Baltazar Essig,* 
Peter Krebs,* 
Ludwig Bronholtz,* 
Henrich Klatz, 
Adam Reem,* 
Martin Klein,* 
Abraham Stein jr., 
Peter Stein, 
Abraham Stein,* 



Henry Stein,* 
Valentin Reiner, 
Conrad Fritz,* 
Matheas Ebert,* 
Jacob Ebert, 
Esaias Carl,* 
Wilhelm Nick,* 
Johannes Upp, 
Conrath Buber, 
Johan Lorentz Herschfänger, 
Phil. Reinhart Gossler, 
Geo. Lenhart Krumrein, 
Johannes Weydenhauer, 
Baldazar Spitznagel,* 
Joh. Anton Bucholtz, 
Johan Peter Bronnen, 
Johan Michel Hoffner, 
Joh. Nickel Eberhart, 
Joh. Ulrich Hainman, 
Joh. Friederich Antes, 
Vallentin Kübatz, 
Justinus Scherer, 
Heinrich Scherer, 
Hans Georg Betz, 
Wilhelm Hans Mann, 
Nicolaus Müller, 
Johan Peter Weber, 
Christopher Weber, § 
Ludwig Lindenschmidt, 
Nicolaus Lenhardt, 
Georg Jacob Hartman, 
Michael Hartman, 
Philip Jacob Koch, 
Friederich Herget, 
Joh. Dan. Lindenschmidt, 
Dominicus Rädel, 
Michael Wagner, 
Johan Peter Michel, 
Jacob Schammo, 
Johan Julius Reem,* 
George Leuthenfer, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1748. 



183 



Greorge Erdmayer,* 
Paul Ulrich, 
Johannes Riehm, 



Johannes Foltz,* 
Adam Uffner.? 



117) Sept. 7, 1748. f Foreigners imported in the ship Hamp- 
shire, Thomas Cheesman, Captain, from Rotterdam, last from 
Falmouth. 

©ept. 7, 1748. t Srembe famcn mit bem ©c^iffc ^am))f()irc, 
Sapitain i^omas S^eegman, »on Slotterbam über gaImout$, 



Johannes Faust, 
Philip Hap,* 
Adum Mayer,* 
Johannes Bischoff, 
Michael Widman, 
Peter Ferdig,* 
Jacob Rühl, 
Johannes Mayer, 
Hartman Adam, 
Johannes Adam, 
Georg Steyerwald,* 
Conrath Maul, 
Johannes Deffithal,* 
Nicholaus Christ,* 
Jacob Runckel, 
Friederich Hammer, 
Tobias Schall, 
Jacob Holtz, 
Andreas Hollinger,* 
Caspar Höberling, 
Philip Merckel, 
Carl Engel, 
Philip Koch, 
Michael Basserman, 



Jacob Sherr, 
David Hag, 
Anthony Ermolt,* 
Frantz Grove,* 
Henrich Cron, 
Johannes Engel, 
Jacob Schmidt, 
Georg Lembcher, 
Christopher Rubi, 
Lorentz Wentzel, 
Wolfgang WolflF,* 
Jacob Hammer, 
Anselmus Schreiner, 
Andreas Miller,* 
Rev. Joh. Albert Weygand, 
Joh. Adam Wilhelm, 
Joh. Georg Stimmel, 
Johan Peter Schäfer, 
Adam Immerhausser, 
Johan Adam Schmid, 
Johan Jacob Bentz, 
John Georg Wäbeber, 
Hans Peter Kucheller, 
Hans Georg Hag, 



f In the same year the Rev'ds. Handschuh, Weygand, Kurtz, Schaum, 
and Klug, Lutheran ministers, arrived in Pennsylvania. — See Rupp's 
"H -izaaa ixxkrjffia, (the entire Church), p. 385. 

f 3n bcmfelbcn 3at)re famen fcte lut^ertfi^ett ©eiftltd^en $anb[c|ul), 
SBeVganb, ^ur^, ©c^aum unb Älug in 5)ennft)löanten an.— ©tet)e Sfupp'ö 
"H Ttaaa kxxXriaia, (He ganje Iirc|e), ®. 385. 



184 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Joh. Andi'eas Riegler, 
Job. Adam Müller, 
Johan Henrich Bott, 
Phil. Ludwig Hütig, 
Joh. Ludwig Wagner, 
Joh. Dietrich IMatthey, 
Johan Frantz Noll, 
Joh. Henrich Noll, 
Joh. Friederich Ritz, 
Joh. Anthon Maul, 
PhUip Wendel Helsel,* 
Johan Tobias Höltzel, 
Johan Michel Didah,? 
Johan Philip Baum, 



Johan Michel Ohrig, 
Johan Georg Wieil, 
Joh. Erhart Baumgertel,* 
Johan Henrich Krom, 
Joh. Caspar Lederholt, 
Joh. Wilh. Leymeister, 
Johan Daniel Hamm, 
Johan Georg Weittman, 
Philip Carl Piller, 
Hans Jacob Osterman, 
Philip Henrich Mohr, 
Johan Adam Weiss, 
Joh. Friderich Plotz. 



118) Sept. 7, 1748. Foreigners imported in the Mary Gal- 
ley, George Lawson, Captain, from London. 

©ept. 7, 1748. gremttc lamen mit fcer Tlaxi} ©aüe^, Sapi* 
tain ©eorgc Saiufon, »on Sonton. 



Niclas Deederich, 
Michael König,* 
Nicklas Thinges, 
Peter Edeborn, 
Nicolaus Wolff, 
Friederich Heff, 
Caspar Klehr, 
Peter Levan, 
Conrad Cunner, 
William Kohl,* 
Jacob Back, 
Georg Weber, 



Peter Hans Schneeder, 
Heinrich Schuhen, 
Johan Georg Roth, 
Joh. Gottfried Sommerlad, 
Johan Peter Rauch, 
Phil. Jacob Sommerlad, 
Johannes Hieppel, 
Abraham Geebs,* 
David Sudder,* 
Johan Adam Weber,* 
Johannes Willerich. 



119) Sept. 15, 1748. f Foreigners imported in the Two 
Brothers, Thomas Arnott, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Portsmouth. 



f In Sept. 1748, Peter Kalm, the Swedish Nat. Phil, came to Phila- 
delphia; he was born 1715, died 1779. — See Davenport's Biogr. Diet. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1748. 



185 



@ept. 15, 1748. t gremtie famen mit fccm (Sc^tjfc Stro ^xi>- 
t^erö, ßapitaiu3;^omaö2lrnott, »on9tottert)am über'9)ortömoutl). 



Johannes Herrmann, 
Peter Bier, 
Peter Bier jr., 
Johannes Knecht, 
{,'asper Kieffer,* 
Abraham Kieffer jr., 
Jacob Scherer, 
Jonas Eberst, 
Christoffel Heck, 
Nicolaus Clementz, 
Johannes Worner, 
Johannes Laubach, 
Jonas Somerlad, 
Johannes Stein, 
Jacob Hendel,* 
Jacob Hock, 
Michael Günter,* 
Johannes Heckert, 
Phillippius Stein, 
Johannes Koller, 
Conrad Köhler, 
Johannes Schlegel, 
Johan Burckhart Braun, 
Johan Casper Apffel, 
Johan Daniel Wirth, 
Johan Peter Deuig, 
Siegmund Bassermann, 
Joh. Friederich Hotz, 
Georg Carl Hotz, 
Johan Casper Engel, 
Johan Philip Steffan, 
Joh. Conrad Vieliman, 
Johan Conrad Rauch, 
Johan Just Ebeith, 
Johan Bakes Schäffer, 



Johan Peter Enogel, 
Johan Matheus Etter, 
Johan Caspar Räumer, 
Johannes Huntzecker,* 
Johan Friederich Reber, 
Johan Paul Junger,* 
Michael Reiffsnyder,* 
Joh. Georg Messerschmidt, 
Johannes Achtung, 
Ulrich Wirth, 
Ewalt Gantler, 
Johannes Waltz, 
Matteis Dilhart, 
Johannes Deyh, 
Candias Messert, 
Johannes Nees, 
Jacob Jirarden, 
Johannes Schlegel, 
Michael Hesler, 
Henrich Frantz, 
Georg Engel, 
Johannes Braun, 
Peter Bauber,* 
Jacob Niess, 
Augustus Peffer, 
Johannes Müller, 
Daniel Kober, 
Nicolaus Kuntz, 
Peter Feite,* 
Michael Berges, 
Carl ^lahrt, 
Philip Heim, 
Jacob Bretzius,* 
Jeremias Runckel, 
Daniel Angst, 



i 3m '5e)3t. 1748 tarn ^ettr Äalm, ber ((^webtfc^e 9taturforfd^er, na^ 
5)MIabe!pl)ta; er war geboren 1715 unb ftarb 1779.— ©te^e Dasenport'sJ 
f&im. I^ict. 

16* 



186 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Johannes Bitterwein, 
Johan Nicklaus Kindt, 
Johannes Gestner, 
Johann Jost Dörr, 
Johan Peter Messert, 
Conrad Alex. Haug, 
Johann Georg Fass, 
Joh. Daniel Schneider, 
Joh. Wilhelm Engel, 
Joh. Henrich Engel, 
Ludwig Daubnüstel,? 
Johannes Neuhauss, 
Joh. Wilhelm Müller, 



Philip Jacob Schäffer, 
Johan Philip Schwab, 
Joh. Henrich Specker, 
Joh. Michael Brücker, 
Johan Jost Runckel, 
Johan Peter Lenhart, 
Matheus Hütwohl, 
Han Adam Ströher, 
Joh. Mattheis Ströher, 
Michel Christman,* 
Johannes Stöhr, 
Johann Bouller,* 
Joh. Mattheis Ströhr. 



120) Sept. 15, 1748. Foreigners imported in the ship Ju- 
dith, James Tait, Captain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

®ept. 15, 1748. grembe famen mit tem (5d)iffe Sut'itt), ßa= 
pitüin 3ameö 3:ait, »on Sflotterfcam ühtx Sotveö. 



Conrad Hinkel,* 
Philip Knöbel, 
Augustus Eygenbrod, 
Henry Althaus,* 
Valentin Welcker, 
William Cuntz,* 
Christian Schmid, 
Johannes Stehr, 
Casper Amhyser, 
Friederich Gass, 
Erhart Miller,* 
Johannes Mayer, 
Hans Peter Shaller, 
Hans Michael Göhr, 
Johan Adam Leidig, 
Joh. Nicolaus Copia, 
Johan Adam Meyer, 
Christ Peter Sauerman, 
Joh. Lorentz Weygandt, 
Nicklas Ackermann, 
Joh. Michael Serfriedt, 
Christian Dapper,* 



Joh. Esaias Weisskob, 
Johannes Hassinger, 
Ulrich Rathmacher, 
Conrad Weigand, 
Valentin Ardt, 
Johannes Schall, 
Michael Ungar,* 
Johannes Schuey, 
Jacob Becker, 
Mattheis Lescher, 
Jacob Seyvert,* 
Peter Glick, 
Conrath Rhein, 
Thebus Spees,* 
Jacob Älotz, 
Johan Jacob Hassinger, 
Joh. Michel Baussmann, 
Phil. Anthon Sauermann, 
Joh. Peter Heckmann, 
Johan Georg Haster, 
Johan Henrich Beitzel, 
Paulus Bender. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1748. 



187 



Geo. Michel Wamkessel, 
Han Georg Arend, 
Heinrich Bub, 



Georg Melchior Stuber, 
Christophel Sauer, 
Job. Henrich Brosius. 



121) Sept. 16, 1748. Foreigners imported in the ship Pa- 
liena, John Brown, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

<Bept 16, 1748. grembe famen mit bcm ®(^iffe ^^ciliena, (Ea= 
)5itain 3o^n 53ron?n, »on Sflottertiam über ßomeö. 



Adam Kastner,* 
Jacob Beege, 
Jacob Heissel, 
Christoph Dang, 
Henrich Deissinger, 
Nicolaus Meisner, 
Peter Petermann, 
Valentin Katler, 
Conrad Weiss, 
Dietrich Sahl, 
Andreas Rudolff, 
Valentin Casser, 
Johannes Kunckel, 
Johann Kunckel jr., 
Georg Kuss, 
George Nutz,* 
Friederich Hofner,* 
Joseph Pfeind,? 
Erdman Koppe, 
Friederich Bosch, 
Martin Faunes, 
Sebastian Leininger, 
Ludwig Drackes, 
Carolus Peier, 
Johan Georg Entes, 
Hans Georg Romel,* 
Philip Peter Gniser, 
Valentin Rummel, 
Job. Henrich Erlenbach, 
Johan Georg Wack, 
Johan Peter Laus, 
Philip Carl Haas, 



Geo. Mich. Rothermel, 
Job. Caspar Hopper, 
Bertholomaus Scheib, 
Johan Conrad Bohner, 
Johan Peter Voltz, 
Pbüip Höffelbauer, 
Geo. Balthas Hoifelbauer, 
Georg Adam Neidig, 
John Adam Dieterich, 
Johan Ernst Kiesecker, 
Job. Gottfried Kunstman, 
Johan Jacob Marthin, 
Johan Jost Mertz, 
Job. Conrad Leininger, 
Johan Biedenbender, 
Joh. Philip Hertzel, 
Johannes Macht, 
Peter Mumma,* 
Peter Heissler, 
Johannes Miller,* 
Philip Wolfe,* 
Henrich Schwab, 
Johannes Göter,* 
Johannes Gether, 
Friederich Hagner, 
Bernhart Kuber,* 
Hans Kunckel, 
Matheis Berger, 
Jacob Haller, 
Conradt Bübelt, 
Johannes Habinger, 
Hendericb Kuyl,* 



188 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Hans Zöbeli, 
Jacob ^rig, 
Pierre Cellier, 
Jacob Margel,* 
Jacob Fans, 
Jost Kleiss, 
Hans Sillmann, 
Christoph Berth, 
Nicklas Womser,* 
Jacob Weber, 
Casper Gerster, 
Hans Wenger, 
Stephan Wenger,* 
Peter BergtoU, 
Christian Wenger,* 
Samuel Fries, 
Ludwig Eberling, 
Henrich Natter, 
Andreas Keller, 
Carl Blaser, 
Johannes HoU, 
Job. Nicolaus Weicker, 
Johan Jacob Müller, 
Georg Balthas Kleber, 
Geo. Philip Wuhlhauer, 
Joh. Friederich Forster, 
Han Adam Kunckel sen., 
Han Adam Kunckel jr., 
Johannes Summerauer, 



Antoni Winkotz, 
Adam Böhringer, 
Andreas Böhringer, 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Heinrich Summerauer, 
Georg Seidenspinner, 
Henrich Bücher Deiss, 
Casper Phil. Widerwenig, 
Henrich Zöbeli, 
Jacob Laudenberger, 
Jacob Bleckenstorfer, 
Hans Ulrich Bucher, 
Heinrich ^Rlüdtschi, 
Adam Hartmann, 
Joh. G. Bernhart Stögli, 
Job. Rudolph Grendel, 
Hans Yerick Miller,* 
Henrich Adam Müller, 
Michael Christmann, 
Johan Jacob Carle, 
Johann Kasper Carle, 
Johann Jacob Schäfer, 
Johan Nickel Kind, 
Michael Kessler, 
Joh. Christoph Speicher, 
Georg Adam Karnagel, 
Georg Adam Bauman, 
Jacobus Müller. 



122) Oct. 25, 1748. Foreigners imported in the ship Pa- 
liena and Margaret, John Govan, Captain, from Rotterdam, last 
from Leith. 

Dct. 25, 1748. grembe tarnen mit tnn '3d)i^c ^Palicna unt> 
5)?argaret, ßapitatn 3ül)n ©oüan, mi Siottcrtam über 2cit(). 

liudwig Pflüger, Hcniy Seeuiaii,* 

Henry Knobloch,* Michael Bilil, 

Dietrich Reinharth, Johannes Fantler,? 

Philip Zimmer,* Christian Hahn, 

Andreas Spieller,* Johannes Kneith, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1748. 



189 



Johannes Lantz, 
Jonas Dietz, 
Richard Langer,* 
Jacob Löffner,* 
Peter Groll, 
Hannes Klam, 
Grottfried Fremauer, 
Wilhelm Wagner,* 
Balzer Fleischer, 
Henrich Kropff, 
Peter Schmid, 
Carle Janckbach, 
Jacob Landes,* 
Antonius Brost, 
Balzar Schwab, 
Jacob Overkirsh,* 
Michael Overkirsch, 
Henrich Contter, 
Friederich Mauss, 
Henrich Busch, 
Johannes Busch, 
Wendel Keeffer,* 
Job. Nicolas Kornd'örfer, 
Carl Balthasar Kern, 
Johan Peter Nieth, 
Johan Henrich Phul, 
Johan Ludwia; Seeman, 



Friederich Panheimer, 
Johan Peter Nay,* 
Johan Jacob Mattheis, 
Johan Adam Gobe, 
Johan Michael Dietz, 
Johan Diel Wentz, 
Georg Henry Fuchs, 
Johannes Meininger, 
Johan Peter Han, 
Johan Friederich Geiger, 
Jan. Gottfried Stöy, 
Johan Adam Schneider, 
Job. Michael Dreyerliug, 
Job. Henrich Bentheis,? 
Job. Philip Schmäck, 
Johan Georg Schad, 
Job. Melchior Kräuter, 
Johan Peter Galler,* 
Johan Nicol. Polch, 
Joh. Michael Reinhart, 
Job. Matteis Gell,* 
Johan Casper Prach, 
Johan Jacob Hardt, 
Johannes Unverzagt, 
Johan Nickel Jung, 
Anton Hamscher, 
Johannes Boltz. 



123) Oct. 25, 1748. Foreigners imported in the ship Elhot, 
James Adams, Captain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 
240 persons, males and females. 

Dct. 25, 1748. gremfce famen mit bent ©c^tffe Güiot, Gapitaiit 
3ames5 Slbamö, »on 9tottertam über (Eoroeö. — 240 ^erfoneu. 



Heinrich Christian, 

Gottlieb Schwarth, 

Peter Rasch,* 

Jacob Hoffman,* 

Anthon Wolff, 

Job. Friederich Boserman, 

Johann Georar Wien, 



Johan Jost Kreuscher, 
Johan Philip Jantz, 
Johan Georg Bernhart, 
Carle Helwig, 
Gottlieb Bösler, 
Philip Yorbach, 
Jacob Drenth, 



190 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Matthäus Vorbach, 
Peter Buth,* 
Peter Hop,* 
Conrad Wysner,* 
Johannes Gross, 
Engel Jonas, 
Philip Kreischer, 
Johann Paulus, 
Jacob Kirch,* 
Nicolas Necum,* 
Nickel Niikom sen., 
Peter Nickum,* 
Johannes Jacoby, 
Johannes Staudter, 
Michael Jost, 
Conrad Gebhart, 
Conrad Benner, 
Johannes Degen, 
Jacob Teitz,* 
Jonas Hecht, 
Peter Klein,* 
Jacob Baum, 
Philip Welmslehr, 
Herman Beltz, 
Johannes Bintzel, 
Peter Marckert, 
Philip Windermeyer,* 
Anton Windermeyer,* 
Simon Frankenfeit,* 
Joh. Georg Toster,* 
Andreas Wolff, 
Conrad Henrich Eckhard, 
Georsr Peter Besel, 



Johan Martin Hoffman, 
Johan Martin Tusch, 
Johan Henrich Beriss, 
Johann Strohschneider, 
Johan Georg Ritz, 
Johan Nicklas Kreischer,* 
Johann Philip Biehl, 
Johan Anthon Simon, 
Johan Philip Breidenbach, 
Johan Georg Blumer, 
Joh. Nicolas Preire,* 
Nicklaus Hasselbach, 
Johan Jacob Gasser, 
Christo. Sam. Bildmann, 
Joh. Georg Rymisus,* 
Hans George Haas,* 
Johan Jacob Mertz, 
Johann Nickel Lang, 
Joh. Georg Schmucker, 
Henrich Anthon König, 
Joh. Peter Tressler, 
Joh. Reinhart Schwein, 
Joh. Daniel Miller, 
Jacob Christian Gleim, 
Johan Philip Peisser, 
Georg Adam Gossler, 
Joh. Conrad Gontler,? 
Johannes Heydenreyd,* 
Johann Adam Geyer, 
Georg Paul Geyer,* 
Georg Friederich Küper, 
Joh. Casper Grosmuck, 
Joh. Martin Bernheusel. 



124) Aug. 30, 1749. Foreigners imported in the ship Crown, 
Michael James, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 
In all 500 persons. 

3tuc5. 30, 1749. grembe famen mit t>em (5d)iffe Srown, Sa= 
))itain 'älZic^acl S^nieö, »on Stottertam üUt Soweö. — 2^ @an= 
gen 500 5)erfonen. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1749. 



191 



Hans Markly,* 
Claus Berschman, 
Hans Jacob Markly,* 
Hans Georg Markly,* 
Hans Erb, 
Martin Weaber,* 
Hans Heiney, 
Jacob Groff, 
Heinrich Seile, 
Jacob Sally,* 
Jacob Ruber, 
Henrich Buser, 
Frederick Bruker,* 
Michael Beler, 
Michael Danner, 
Henrich Buser, 
Hans Weber sen., 
Hans Weber jr.,* 
Henrich Spahr, 
Philip Schmid, 
Matheis Läpli, 
Hans Hawly,* 
Durst Hawly,* 
Martin Grurom, 
Jacob Giesie, 
Durst Düren, 
Hans Eumler, 
Henry Garster,* 
Jacob Seiler, 
Jacob Shootin,* 
Hans Stohler, 
IMartin Seyler,* 
Jacob Bohrer, 
Ernst Endress, 
Georg Vundi, 
Hans Madery,* 
Adam Weybel,* 
Jacob Weibel, 
Philip Onune,* 
Durst Amine, 
Matheas Seyler,* 



Hans Scholtes,* 
Hans Busser,* 
Jacob Domme,* 
Heinrich Thome, 
Adam Thome, 
Hans Mesemer,* 
Hans Georg GrofF, 
Hans Henrich Pahr, 
Johannes Ischadt, 
Samuel Neuschwander, 
Jacob Werenfels, 
Hans Jacob Ställy,* 
Joh. Emanuel Pfiffer,* 
Martin Meierhofer, 
Martin Tschudi, 
Jacob Schweitzer, 
Reinhart Gunstenhauser, 
Hans Jacob Blonk,* 
Johannes Tschuti, 
Friederich Swonder,* 
Adam Browbak sen.,* 
Adam Browbak jr.,* 
Heinrich Brabek, 
Martin Walleset,* 
Jacob Wiesener,* 
Baltzer Strowman,* 
Hans Flubacher, 
Johannes Shitzer,* 
William Derdamer, 
Henry Handshy,* 
Hans Ulrich Ehrenstieger, 
Lenhart Booser,* 
Christophel Seiler, 
Martin Schneider, 
Hans Jacob Hasler,* 
Hans Jacob Gass, 
Jacob WaUsener,* 
Daniel Messerly,* 
Hans Jacob Massener,* 
Lorentz Morty,* 
Johannes Marti, 



192 



NAMES OF OERMAN, SWISS 



Jaus Jacob Honegger, 
Martin Dätwyler, 
Hans Jacob Zaller,* 
Heinrich Schneider, 
Hans Ulrich Möstmer, 
Friederich Litzler, 
Hans Georg Reiniger, 
Hans Ruben Brubeck, 
Hans Dege, 
Henry Leety,* 
Daniel Lüdie, 
Jacob Tschopp, 
Henry Bruner,* 
Martin Tschop,* 
Johannes Seiler, 
Hans Lüte, 
Henry Shaffner,* 
Jacob Greider, 
Leonard Hey, 
Nicklaus Dill, 



Johannes Meyer,* 
Conrad Ziegler, 
Martin Herbster, 
Heinrich Buda, 
Bernhart Romstein, 
Sebastian Hassler,* 
Hans Jacob Greenblat,* 
Martin Greenblat,* 
Christoph WeesHn,* 
Mattheas Spitlcr sen.,* 
Mattheas Spitler jr.,* 
Hans Jacob Spitler,* 
Hans Greber, 
Joh. Ludwig Buda, 
Andreas Donner,* 
Uhllerich Feeler,* 
Hans Jacob Travtinger,* 
Abraham Houser,* 
Nicklas Makhold,* 



Joh. Nicolas Macholt. 
Sick — Jacob Furman, Hans Greber, Jacob Wurtz, Stephen 
Spenhover, George Sholtes, Hans Messner, Martin Gash. 



125) Sept. 2, 1749. Wirtembergers imported in the ship 
Chesterfield, Thomas Coatam, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Cowes. — In all 255. 

®ept. 2, 1749. 2ßürttem6erger famen mit bem Schiffe (S^efter= 
ftelt», 6aj)itain S^oma^ ßoatam, oon Sftottertam über Soraeö. — 
3m ©anjen 255. 



Gallus Guide, 
Johannes Maurer, 
Joseph Weidel, 
Johannes Keller,* 
Jaques Moris, 
jNIartin Waghter,* 
Friederich Gosner, 
Frantz Schweitzer, 
Nicolaus Reyer, 
Solomon Gansle, 
Jacob Reyer, 



Jacob Gast, 
Jacob Aller, 
Jacob Deible, 
Martin Schooler,* 
George Limbert,* 
Martin Getz, 
Georg Jäckel, 
Hans Jacob AUerth, 
Balthasar jMaurer, 
Jacob Schlotterer, 
Martin Schauwecker, 



SjR^^W^ 




^*rSI 




AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1749. 



193 



Baltas INIayer, 

Elias Ebirhardt, 

Ludwig Hoch, 

Josepli Eckert, 

Jacob Hauch, 

Conrad Wolf, 

Johannes Michael Christman, 

Christoph Wunder, 

Johannes Henche, 

Simeon Heritho, 

Ludwig König, 

Heinrich Seytter, 

Mattheis Schlatterer, 

Joh. Conrad Schlatterer, 

Hans Christ Beuthler, 

Hans Georg Kloss, 

Hans Georg Haisch, 

Hans Ebert Hordt, 

Johan Martin Hoyst, 

Mattheis Laudenschläger, 

Michael Tompprät, 

Jacob Keinthaler, 

Christoph Schäffer, 

Georg Fried. Fisher, 

Hans Jacob Haar, 

Hans Georg Hausehnann, 

Johan Georg Weiss, 

Philip Gübler, 

Michael Stierlo. 



Hans Conrad Schauwecker, 
Martin Schlotterer, 
Jacob Schlotterer, 
Phil. Georg Müller, 
Hans Mich. Lötterhe, 
Hans Conrad Katz, 
Maximilian Speidell, 
Hans Georg Speidell, 
Johan Jacob Kies, 
Christian Käpple, 
Johan Martin Beck, 
Balthas Zimmerman, 
Jacob Scheiffeler, 
Hans Bernhart Klotz, 
Bastian Meyer, 
Jacob Klotz, 
Gottfried Fuchs, 
Elias Steeb, 
Michael Steeb, 
Hans Stecher, 
Werner Sauder,* 
Joseph Seitz, 
Adam Wanner, 
Johannes Kleim, 
Joseph Hiller, 
Michael Fanz, 
Michael Kiele, 
Jacob Metzger, 
Christoph Gross, 
Simon Schmidt, 

Sick — Johannes Mayer, Sebastian Mayer, Hans Ulrich Sul- 
ler, Jacob Klotz. 



126) Sept. 2, 1749. Wirtembergers from Erbach, — ship 
Albany, Robert Brown, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Cowes. — 285 passengers. 

teept. 2, 1749. 285 SQitrttemberger »on Srbac^ !amen mit 
tent i5c^iffe '.Ulban^, Sapitatn S^okrt Srojun, »on 3flottert'a:n 
über (Soweg. 

17 



194 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Jotannes Scliinf, 
Johannes Gerber, 
Friederich Gätzinger, 
George Shwartz,* 
Joh. A. Winckler, 
Nickel Heist, 
Matheas Schouk,* 
Vallentin Edelman,* 
Hans Redman,* 
George Truke,* 
Wendel Scherr, 
Joh. Nicolaus Porrath, 
Joh. Philip Beyer,* 
Joh. Henrich Moths, 
Joh. Balthas Hetzler, 
Joh. Georg Kroft, 
Joh. Michel Kabel, 
Joh. Michael Kabel sen., 
Hans Peter Gembler,* 
Hans Mich. Gembler,* 
Joh. Hen. Blumenschein, 
Johan Peter Heist, 
Michel Beed, 
Joseph Scholl, 
Johannes Grauer, 
Christoph Nutts,* 
Johannes Buchter, 
Johannes Nibling, 
Adam Edelman, 
Gotlieb Volck,* 
Andreas Welker,* 
Johan Adam Joh, 
Johan Jacob Joh, 
Johannes Jotter, 
Augustinus Ginter, 
Peter SchäflFer,* 
Casper Walser, 
Frederick Lewy,* 
Johannes Müller, 
Adam Luick, 
Philip Lautenschleger, 



Phil. Jacob Kreysh,* 
Johannes Graber,* 
Christoffel Nagel,* 
Peter Brunner,* 
Joh. Adam Getz, 
Adam GeiTuan,* 
Adam Geisinger, 
Joh. Philip Gerg, 
Johannes Klinger,* 
Martin Rausch, 
J. Balthas Jegel,* 
J. George Folk,* 
Valentin Schuck, 
Martin Schäffer, 
Peter KUl,* 
Alexander Klinger, 
Nickolaus Beissel, 
Conrad Menges, 
Peter Brunner, 
J. Adam Beiffweg,* 
Joh. Philip Heist, 
Geo. Adam Ewald,* 
Joh. Philip laxthemer, 
Hans Jacob Wagner, 
Joh. Christof Kintzinger, 
Hans Georg Fischer, 
Joh. Martin Schuck, 
George Michael Herold,* 
Hans Martin Strein,* 
Hans Georg Dreher, 
Hans Georg Edelman, 
Joh. WUhehn Volck, 
Johan Peter Horg, 
Johan Michel loh, 
Hans Peter Jotter, 
Hans Conrad Rärich, 
Johan Georg Menges, 
Mattheus Nunnenmacher, 
Joh. Adam Heckman, 
Hans George Nagel,* 
Johannes Hiickman, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1749. 



195 



Joh. Wilhelm Süfer, 
Joh. Nicolas Delp,* 
Joh. Zacharias Erdroth, 
Joh. Georg Schäffer, 
J. Leonhart Meyer, 
Joh. Georg Dersler, 
Hans Adam Peetsh,* 
Joh. Antoni Walther, 
Hans Philip Krichbaum, 

Sick — Hans Kabel, Hans 
Hans Georg Hochzig. 



Johann Adam Gorm, 
Johan Leuhart German, 
Adam Laudenschlager,* 
Georg Michael Frantz, 
Philip Jacob Walther, 
Joh. Adam Krichbaum, 
Johan Adam Rausch, 
Johan Georg Rettig, 
Johan Wilhelm Krichbaum. 
Balthaser Schäffer, Peter Belman, 



127) Sept. 9, 1749. Palatines, — ship St. Andrew, James 
Abercrombie, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Plymouth. — 
400 passengers. 

(Sept. 9, 1749. 400 ^Jfaljer famen mit bem (5d)tffe ©t. %n- 
brett), gapt. S^meg SlbercromMc, »on 3ftottert)am üfeer ^I^mout^. 



Andreas Emmert, 
Joseph Bergtohlt, 
Arnold Kramer,* 
Johannes Mebel, 
Johannes Runkel,* 
Henry Hamer,* 
Adam Humberger, 
Jost Streilhoff, 
Jacob Linke,* 
Christian Halte, 
Peter Bauman,* 
Jacob Rohr, 
Peter Finger, 
Christian Graff, 
Christian Stauffer, 
Johan Schnebeli, 
Johannes Rohr, 
Johannes Woosing,* 
Michael Wagner, 
Christian Hasseler, 
Jacob Hertzler sen., 
Jacob Hertzler jr., 
Hans Dierstein, 



Johannes Böhner, 
Marcus Grull,* 
Jacob Kern, 
Johannes Haan,* 
Jacob Leydig, 
Samuel Meyer,* 
Peter Ihrich, 
Jacob Brandt, 
Johannes Berr, 
Ulrich Saufert, 
Daniel Saufert, 
Daniel Berr, 
Peter Wilhelm, 
Franz Jans, 
Johannes Heisser, 
Conrad Stichter, 
Joh. Friederich Emrich, 
Albrecht EUenberger, 
Samuel Kauffman, 
Christian Eschbacher, 
Casper Herschberger, 
Benedict Mellinger, 
Hans Rudy Frey, 



196 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Jacob Heistliberger, 
Job. Greorg Vallendin, 
Hans Michael Vallendin, 
Jobannes Blickesterfer,* 
Ulricb Blickestörfer, 
Jacob Mashberger sen., 
Johan Henricus Wenig, 
Job. Jacob Küblinger, 
Job. Daniel Küblinger, 
Peter Stenieman,* 
Bartbolomäus Voss, 
Johann Peter Lach, 
Christoph Weber, 
Bernhart Kessler, 
Johan Peter Druck, 
Friederich Neuboff, 
Job. Friederich Bohr, 
Andreas Keller jr., 
Andi'eas Keller sen., 
Henrich Casper Backe, 
Jobannes Corell, 
Job. Engelbert Morgenstern, 
Conrad Hoifmann, 
Baltzer Weinberger, 
Christian Kirschberger, 
Job. Wilhelm Franck, 
Ulricb Hackmann, 
Abraham Brübacher, 
Johan Adam Stahler, 
Job. Conrad Seybell, 
Hans George Garner,* 
Job. Henrich Gerndt, 
Henry Slawffer,* 
Valentin Stichler, 



Johannes Walder, 
Jacob Herbig, 
Valentin Haag, 
Jacob Esbelman,* 
Johannes Jung, 
Jobannes Funck, 
Christian Wenger,* 
Hannes Wenger, 
Jacob Eimann, 
Christian Fuchs,* 
Martin Spreng, 
Adam Heiweg, 
Jobannes Huth, 
Peter Ahles, 
Matheas Weise,* 
Ulrich Jordte, 
Christian Eschbacher, 
Johannes INIellinger, 
Jobannes Brübacher, 
Peter Eschelmann, 
Johannes Eppelman, 
Hans Jacob Weyse,* 
Johan Adam Dörr, 
Hermanius Heger, 
Simeon Zeberman, 
Johan Peter Krämer, 
Christoffel Henry, 
Jacob Weiss sen., 
George Shambacb,* 
Johannes Hackman, 
Henrich Stauffer, 
Uhellericb Staver,* 
Hans George Hobler, 
Jac. Fried. Debert Yäussler. 



128) Sept. 11, 1749. Foreigners imported in the ship Pris- 
cilla, WilUam Meier, Captain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 
299 passengers. 

(Sept. 11, 1749. 299 %vmit famcu mit tem Schiffe ^xiHxüa, 
(Sapitain Sßiüiam 9Jieier, »on 3tottert)am ükr fiotüeö. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1749. 



197 



Johannes Kraun, 
Johannes Miller,* 
Friederich Lier, 
Rudolph Bär, 
Henry Barr,* 
Henry Huber, 
Johannes Bur, 
Melchior Leeder,* 
Henrich Kunst, 
Jacob Stehli, 
Hans Merky, 
Hans Surber,* 
Hans Schneebly, 
Georg Funck, 
Ulrich Hohsteter, 
Johannes Weiss, 
Rudolph Huber, 
Jacob Huber, 
Jacob Bär, 
Jacob Baumann, 
Henrich Wollenweider, 
Hans George Isseller,* 
Müller Heinrich, 
Jacob Gützinger, 
Joh. Reinhardt ühl, 
Mattheis Gallman, 
Hans Rudolph Gallman, 
Hans Jacob Meyer, 
Hans Jacob Giibler, 
Jacob Bodeureider, 
Reinhart Scherer, 
Johannes HoiFecker, 
Joh. Philip Mühlhoff, 
Joh. Peter Mühlhoff, 
Johan Michael Boor, 
Joh. Nickel Lorentz, 
Johan Peter Franck, 



Urlch Hauber, 
Casper Pfester, 
Rudolp Naff, 
Jacob Näff, 
Casper Huber, 
Rudy Kuntz, 
Jacob Kuntz, § 
Hans Kern, 
Jacob Mawer,* 
Rudy IMawer,* 
Jacob Häuser, 
Jacob Shnabely,* 
Jacob Bart,* 
Friederich Shurp,* 
Johannes Shurp,* 
Paulus Schorb, 
Michael Franck, 
Hans Zubler,* 
Henry Meyer,* 
Joh. Ludwig Küstner, 
Joh. Philip Küstner, 
Georg Peter Dürr,* 
Joh. Jacob Walther, 
Joh. Henrich Beiger, 
Joh. Friedrich Frütschie, 
Johan Nickel Göbel, 
Joh. Michael Malfier, 
Joh. Matheis Bohr, 
Johan Adam Bohr, 
Joh. Matheis Ströher, 
Joh. Nicolaus Wedartz, 
Joh. Matheis Becker, 
Johan Nickel Neu, 
Joh. Adam Neu, 
Joh. Peter Müller, 
Henrich Rütschi, 
Joh. Burkhart Hoffmann. 



Friederich Stroh, 

129) Sept. 13, 17-19. Foreigners from Wirtemberg, Alsace 
and Zweibrücken, — ship Christian, Thomas Brady, Captain, from 
Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

17* 



198 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



©ejjt 13, 1749. SBürttemfcerger, Stfäffer unb SmibxMnex 
famcn mit fcem ©c^iffe Sf)rifttan, Sapitain I^omaei SBratp, »on 
9lottertam über ßoweö» 



Paulus Brod, 
Andreas Vogel, 
Friederich Erb,* 
Valentin Kern,* 
Christoph Ludwig, 
Ernst Münekel, 
Heinrich Albrecht, 
Frantz Ziegler sen., 
Frantz Ziegler jr., 
Benjamin Cuny, 
Adam Schneck, 
Johannes Schäjffer, 
Daniel Altik,* 
Wilhelm Hältz,* 
Joseph Ressener,* 
Andreas Braun, 
Karl Volden, 
Philip Kaupt,* 
Friederich Gelbach sen., 
Frantz Gelbach, 
Friederich Gelbach jr., 
Joh. Andreas Auler,? 
Hans Jacob Stotz, 
Hans Adam Hackman, 
George Ludwig Burg,* 
Johannes Mischeb, 
Martin Bernharth, 
Julius Christo Bachman, 
Hans Georg Michele, 
Johan Georg Erig, 
Joh. Caspar Geisinger, 
Joh. Ludwig Bäuerle, 
Michael Shoemaker,* 
Ludwig Maintzger, 
Joh. Phil. Hen. Hauer, 
Georg Michel Derr, 
Georg Hummel,* 
Jacob Hieman, 



David Pfautz, 
Michael Hauff, 
Weybegt Rupp, 
Christian Romich,* 
Michael Haupt, 
Johannes Tilly,* 
Matheis Ostertag sen., 
Matheis Ostertag jr.,* 
Abraham Selman,* 
Michael Rummel,* 
John Ehrait,* 
Baltasar Glisser,* 
Wilhelm Heyshe,* 
Martin Danner, 
Conrad Bosch, 
Matheis Weiss, 
Joseph Schmidt, 
Christian Limbacher, 
Johannes Reuter, 
Jacob Wälckly, 
Isaac Jung, 
Christian Ostertag, 
Balthasar Dock, 
Peter Gascha, 
Samuel Mosser, 
Jacob Ribelet, 
Henrich Dock, 
Hans Meck, 
Peter Hamman,* 
Philip Kugler, 
Antony Ecki, 
Jacob Rumel, 
Georg Bernhart Braun, 
Georg Michael Braun, 
Joh. Andreas Weckeffer, 
Joh. Jacob Datismann, 
Martin Schlachenhauff, 
Michael Hechelman, 



I 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1749. 



199 



Joh. Michael Mayer, 
Hans Georg Haffer, 
Hans Georg Haupt, 
Hans Georg Schumacher, 
Joh. Michael Sommer, 
Joh. Abrecht Eshelman,* 
Hans Georg Ungast,* 
Hans Jacob Über,* 
Hans Georg Merckly,.* 
Jacob Risternholtz, 
Johan Georg Limbacher, 
Johan Adam Ebert,. 
Johan Jacob Sim, 
Johannes Schmerber, 



Hans Peter Jung, 
Hans Peter Ribelet, 
Joh. Nicolaus Koch, 
Abraham Ribellet, 
Phil. Thomas Hull,* 
Christian Eichart, 
Johan Jacob Bamitz, 
Christian Glässer, 
Michael Hauswird,* 
Joh. Erhart Knappenberger, 
Christian Gutknecht, 
Martin Hisch,* 
Berhart Schweighart,* 
Hans Adam Krieger. 



130) Sept. 14, 1749. Foreigners from the electorate Pala- 
tinate, — ship Two Brothers, Thomas Arnot, Master, from Rot- 
terdam, last from Cowes. — 312 passengers. 

(Sept. 14, 1749. 312 ^falser famen mit fccm (Schiffe Zm 
35rot^er^, Sapitain I^omaö 2trnot, öon Slotterbam über Soweö, 



Weygand Schneider, 
Christian Humbold,* 
Jacob Gruber, 
Joh. Gerhart Schneider, 
Johan Peter Schneider jr., 
Johan Peter Shneyder sen.,* 
Teys Refy,* 
Michael Reyffener,* 
Peter Reiffener, 
Henry Wagner,* 
Peter Ammo, 
Philippus Löhr, 
Johannes Osseler, 
Johan Hermannis, 
Christian Birkingbey,* 
Jacob Cambeck, 
WUhelm Pfeiffer, 
Johannes Damftichs, 
Johan Beisbeker,* 
Peter Heinrich, 



Simon Höller, 
Johan Phillipus, 
John Vemisbaker,* 
Henry Weiler,* 
Johannes Hilbisch, 
Matheus Trawn,* 
Wilhelm Kusche, 
Johannes Böhmer, 
Ernst Schäffer, 
Wilhelm Ditz, 
Matheis Baker,* 
Joh. Balthas Shmit,* 
Joh. Christ Klein, 
Joh. Ludwig Schiess, 
Joh. Ernst Greiss, 
Joh. Adam Becker, 
Joh. Peter Hess, 
Christian Steltz, 
Joh. Jacob Carl, 
Johannes Dirwess, 



200 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Joh. Peter DiU, 
Bastian Braun, 
Johan Süsser, 
Wilhelm Helt * 
Joh. Days Rub, 
Joh. Christ Bub, 
Ernst Becker, 
Michael Durschman, 
Joh. Wilh. Jäger, 
Wilhelmus Jacobus Gruber, 
Johan Conrad Refi, 
Adam Henrich Prentz, 
Johannes Hermanes, 
Johan Henry Wagner,* 
Hans Peter Lehr,* 
Johan Jost Blecher, 
Johan Peter Miller,* 
Johan Jost Fischer, 
Johan Peter Hilfisch, 
Joh. Haubrich Löhr, 
Johan Peter Lay, 
Joh. Christ Löhmer, 
Joh. Albert Strecker, 
Johan Jost Shaifer,* 
Joh. Daniel Hoffman, 
Joh. Henrich Fuchs, 
Joh. Henrich Schmit, 
Greorg Jacob Wird,* 
Christian Matheis Göbeler, 
Johan Henrich Gruber, 
Johan Philip Sauer, 
Johan Peter Lupp, 
Johan Ernst Kramer, 



Joh. Balthasar Schmidt, 
Friederich Gottfried Schmidt, 
Johan Peter Schuman, 
Joh. Martin Schmitgen, 
Joh. Adam Schmitgen, 
Joh. Wilhelm Mallert, 
Joh. Martin Greiss, 
Joh. Jacobus Hoffman, 
Johan Peter Jung, 
Johan Adam Jung,* 
Joh. Philip Becker, 
Joh. Christ Badenheinner, 
Johan Peter Aller, 
Johan Peter Braun, 
Johan Georg Schultz, 
Johan Theis Durschman, 
Johan Jacob Haner, 
Johan Michael Gessel, 
Johan Julius Schmidt, 
Christoph Lentart,* 
Johannes Fonn, 
Johannes Küm, 
Henrich Schmieg, 
Joh. Deis Bäcker, 
Christian Baker,* 
Joh. Peter Stath, 
Johan Wilhelm Schmidt, 
Johan Christ Schneyder, 
Johan Adam Gemmer,* 
Johann Peter Seyn, 
Johan Wilhelm Jung, 
Johan Peter Schaaff, 
John Peter Miller.* 



131) Sept. 15, 1749. Palatines imported in the ship Edin- 
burgh, James Bussel, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Ports- 
mouth. — 380 passengers. 

(Sept. 15, 1749. 380 ^fäljer famen mit bem (Sd^iffe (Ebin= 
6urg^, Sapitain ^amti 9luffel, t»on 3tottert»am ixUv ^ortömoutt). 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1749. 



201 



Heinrich Conrad, 
Abraham Jung, 
Peter Lang, 
Georg Conrad,* 
Johannes Schmidt, 
PhiUp Mertz,* 
Herman Mauer, 
Jeremias Bär, 
Wilhelm Tuchembel, 
Valentin Scherer, 
Henrich Miedel, 
Adam Lambe,* 
Christoph Lambert, 
Phüip Diehl, 
Hannes Spicker, 
Julius Spicker, 
Johannes Bauer, 
Friederich Kliirr, 
Peter Laub,* 
Jacob Hamman, 
Georg Fengel, 
Peter Gübrit, 
Waller Schmidt, 
Valentin Heil, 
Jacob Wirth, 
Adam Bauer, 
Georg Wächter, 
Adam Goos,* 
Andreas Stein, 
Peter Tamerus, 
Johan Friederich Ditz, 
John Philip Hame,* 
Johan Jacob Becker, 
Philip Peter Becker, 
Nicklas Biedeman,* 
Daniel Sheimer,* 
Friederich Scheimer, 
Michael Scheimer, 
Johan Daniel Koller, 
Johann Henrich Lang, 
Johan Philip Dick, 



Joh. Friederich Martin, 
Johan Conrad Lutz, 
Johan Georg Meundel, 
Johann Jacob Schäffer, 
Johannes Rüdinger, 
Johannes Senffelder, 
Johan Henrich Schmidt, 
Valentin Petry, 
Adam Scheimer, 
Johannes Schwerdt, 
Johannes Laudenschläger, 
Johannes Schneider, 
Johan Georg Steiner, 
Christoph Ridlein, 
Georg Henry Risser,* 
Wilhelm Schwerber,* 
John Georg Hendershit, 
Phillipp Metzger, 
Heinrich Schmidt, 
Bernhart Scherer, 
Friederich Schwob,* 
Dewalt Schmidt, 
Samuel Kerch, 
Jacob Kerch, 
Nickel Renner, 
Michael Penss, 
Stofel Schuman, 
Michael Mauerer,* 
Christian Shmit,* 
Conrad Knepper, 
Johann Adam, 
Andreas Bieber,* 
Jacob Bieber,* 
Rudolph Rauch, 
Christian Axer, 
Stephan Leyer, 
Philip Dinges, 
Jacob Klein, 
Philip Bücke,* 
Peter Brauch, 
Philip Rickart,* 



202 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Henry Shmit,* 

Jacob Zerel,* 

Jacob Zinn, 

Simon Horch, 

Johannes Althaus,* 

Carl Sirer, 

Jacob Becker, 

Christian Egyr, 

Johannes Bender,* 

Henry Bender,* 

Wendel Essig, 

Friederich Dick, 

Conrad Miller,* 

Nicklas Grusius,* 

Jacob Kuhnan,? 

Fritz Schäfier,* 

Jacob Mohr, 

Gerlach Strich, 

Georg Land, 

Henry Zoll,* 

Henry Marsh,* 

Lothareus Pfannenbecker, 

Nickolas Seltzer,* 

Johan Peter Geis, 

Hans Jacob Tarnet, 

Frantz Nicolaus Faber, 

Henrich Faber, 

Johann Buchharner, 

Erasmus Bockius, 

Johan Nicklas Fellenberger, 

Mattheis Bolland, 

Christoph Gideon Myrteties, 

Nicklaus Eisenmänger, 

Johan Georg Klein, 

Simeon Charmely, 

Frantz Hartman, 

Johan Jacob Dästerr, 



Georg Michael Mauer, 
Georg Friederich Seil, 
Antony Hargesheimer, 
Joh. Wilhelm Schreiner, 
Johannes Dietz, 
Jacob Pfannkuchen, 
Conrad Schweitzer, 
Erasmus Althaus, 
Adam Diehhart, 
Benedictus Thom, 
Christoifel Klärr, 
Johannes von der Lindt, 
Johann Michel Lawall, 
Jacob Brubacher, 
Johan Adam Sachs, 
Johan Michel König, 
Johan Nickel Scheffer, 
Joh. Walther Schwob, 
Joh. Wilhelm Pfeil, 
Joh. Gerlach Huhn, 
Joh. Daniel Huhn, 
Samuel Neitlinger, 
Friederich Zerfass, 
Jacob Goodman,* 
Phillip Goodman,* 
Christian Bernhart, 
Joh. Martin Neubecker, 
Johannes Adler, 
Bastian Wenig,* 
Johannes Fritz, 
Henry Steinmetz, 
Friederich Conradt, 
Jacob Hattebach, 
Joh. Michel Hoffman, 
Johan Jacob Kapp, 
Johan Peter Weiler, 
Henry Shermillin.* 



132) Sept. 15, 1749. Foreigners from Zweibrücken, Nassau, 
Wirtemberg, and Palatinate, — ship Phoenix, John Mason, Mas- 
ter, from Rotterdam, last from Cowcs. — 550 passengers. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1749. 



203 



(Sept. 15, 1749. 550 2tu^Iänt)er öon S^tihxMcn, SRa^au, 
Sßüvttemberg unb t>er 5^fat,5 famcn mit bent ©i^iffe ^^önir, (ia= 
pitain 3o^n ^I^Zafon, »on Stotterbam über ßoroeö. 



Samuel Notoing,* 
Caspar Bruner,* 
Andreas Creiner, 
Henrich Lüta, 
Georg Härther, 
Jacob Anthoni, 
Nicklas Roath,* 
Nicklas Ricksaker, 
Andreas Tevental,* 
Simon Walter,* 
Johannes Grross, 
Conrath Jost, 
Jacob Schneider, 
Jacob Meserli, 
Joseph Han, 
Henrich Ginder, 
Michael Traxel,* 
George Traxel,* 
Henry Mishit,* 
Dewald Stecker,* 
Peter Gerret,* 
Ulrich Stoller, 
Georg Altman, 
Anthon Altman, 
Solomon Barher,* 
Theobald Kuntz, 
Niclas Eisseman,* 
Michael Koppel, 
Georg Caspar Heuss, 
Hans Ulrich Ott, 
Georg Waneumacher, 
Job. Ludwig Strauss, 
Samuel Wanenmacher, 



Joseph Kauffman, 
Georg Frantz Philippi, 
Hans Georg Windenauer, 
Hans Nickel Ott, 
Hans Adam Bauss, 
Hans Peter Rösser, 
Georg Adolph Kräber, 
Hans Lenart Hinckel,* 
John George Shneyder,* 
J. Rudolph Ginder,* 
Job. Jacob Mestenbach, 
Abraham Nonnemacker,* 
Hans Georg Cleiss, 
Bernhart Traxel,* 
John Jacob Mitshit, 
Johan Michel Schmidte, a 
Hans Peter Eichede, 
Hans Philip Bison, 
Hans Georg Eisseman,* 
Peter Eisenmann sen., 
Peter Eisenmann jr., 
Johan Nickel Koppel, 
Nicolaus Schneider, 
Jacob Keppel,* 
Paulus Keppel,* 
Peter Keppel,* 
Peter Isch, 
Christof Brunner, 
Daniel Duval,* 
Johan Drugrare,* 
Daniel Daam,* 
Jacob Dormeyer,* 
J. Lutwig, 



a Schmidte has ^^ Arzt" physician, appended to his name, indicative 
of his profession. — [Editor.) 

a (gd^mtbte fii^te, urn feinen Scruf anjujctgcn, „5lrjt" fctncnt 9?amen 
bet. — (Herausgeber.) 



204 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Henry Schauff,* 
Martin Klein, 
Jacob Klein,* 
Johannes Hort, 
Andreas Gratt, 
Johannes Great,* 
Georg Müller, 
Philip Miller,* 
Nicola Delon, 
Peter Grieger, 
Jacob Schneider, 
Michael Nike,* 
Jacob Nike,* 
IMattheus Krasch, 
Herman Batur, 
Jacob Batur, 
Marx Springel,* 
Christian Creesle,* 
Weirich Seltzer, 
Johannes Gross,* 
Felix Kley, 
Hans Reese,* 
Michael Shaffer,* 
Heinrich Luteer, 
Philip Laure,* 
Christian Weiss, 
Nicklas Bob, 
Jacob Walter,* 
Martin Walter,* 
John Bender,* 
Jacob Bieber, 
Jacob Jonger,* 
Samuel Spiger,* 
Jacob Altman, 
Wilhelm Altman, 
Han Job. Barhitz, 
Hans Georg Jundt, 
Johann Michael Mallo, 
John Frederich Hister,* 
Henrich Wilh. Mahhch, 
Samuel Dormeyer,* 



Hans Jacob Witmer,* 
Frantz Jacob Zühl, 
John Nicklas Miller,* 
Jeremias Schönbach, 
Jacob ZoUicker, 
Adam Grantadam,* 
Josephe Chavlier, 
Johan George Ker,* 
Josephe Courteuer, 
Abraham Scherdrong, 
Johan Georg Mölig, 
Johan Reinhart Keller, 
Conrad Wohlfehrt, 
Andreas Riitsieler, 
Daniel Greberger, 
Christopher Reger, 
Frantz Soal,* 
Francois Grandadam, 
Johan Adam Walter,* 
John Matheas Shöman,* 
Wilhelm Longhauer,* 
Anthony Nieve,* 
Christian Tathouer,* 
Christian Brost, 
Simon Roorig,* 
Johannes Roorig,* 
Johannes Geeber,* 
Daniel Roorig,* 
Anthoni Bieber, 
Hans Nickel Bieber, 
Hans Adam Herman,* 
Hannes Müller, 
Ulrich Kindlishberger,* 
Johannes Weller, 
Johannes Lamot, 
Stephan Alman,* 
Samuel Perquy,* 
Jacob Schmidt, 
Jacob Widmer, 
Hans Sölli, 
Hans Meier,* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1749. 



205 



Johannes Boushy,* 
Jacob Miller,* 
Christian Miller,* 
Peter Miller,* 
Johannes Keefer, 
Peter Rett, 
Jacob Misseler,* 
Joseph Mischler, 
Jacob Seiler, 
Christian Staufer, 
Jacob Klein, 
Martin Ritter,* 
Hans Lantz, 
Jacob Hornlie, 
Antoni Kratzer, 
Jacob Has, 
Simon Degler, 
Jacob Grratze, 
Jacob Hünler, 
Peter Kaufman, 
Johannes Riehm, 
Felix Sailor,* 
Greorge Bentz, 
Jacob Bence,* 
Johannes Sumer, 
Christian Summer,* 
Matheis Nafzger, 
Johannes Fame, 
Peter Crapy,* 
Jacob Stauch, 
Johannes Rupp, 
Jacob Rupp, 
Peter Nofsker,* 
Erhart Bom,* 
Philip Henkel,* 
Johannes Reber,* 
Daniel Rynolle, 
Christian Fischer, 
Nicolaus Dartwiller,* 
Daniel Dörtweiler, 
Martin Dartwiller,* 



Michael Wüsel, 
Hans Strubhar, 
Christoph Spanler,* 
Hans (xeorg Springer,* 
Michael Dormeyer,* 
Abraham Drachsel, 
Durst Deretinger,* 
Benedict Leman,* 
Job. Georg Steinroth, 
Anton Beavenaw,''' 
Francois Hognon, 
Job. Michael Steng, 
Job. Michael Heller, 
Friederich Wohlfahrt, 
Hans Georg Keim, 
Han Philip Grtinewalt, 
Sebastian Bissahr, 
Job. Ludwig Bentz, 
Christian Hartman,* 
Frantz Marshall,* 
Christian Schowalder, 
Rudolph Nafzger, 
Christian Kauffman,* 
Jacob Kauffman, 
Johannes Lans, 
Hans Georg Stauch, 
Abraham Kurtz, 
Anton von Gumden, 
Georg Christian Sim, 
Christian Kurtz, 
Jan Hendrick Reckman, 
Theobald Hoschar, 
Hans Peter Hoschar, 
Heinerich Hoschar, 
Andre de Grange, 
Georg Hertzog Dering, 
Kilian Zimmerman, 
Michael Ridelsberg,* 
Christian Hochstätter, 
Georg Hertzog, 
Peter Obersteg, 



18 



206 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Ulrich Hostetter'* 
Simon Steckel, 
Hans Schrantz, 
Conrad Wagner, 
Matheus Seygor, 
Peter Herb,* 
Jost Mayer, 
Jacob Mann, 
Frantz Griebel, 
Nicklaus Hochstätter, 



Johannes Schöndeman, 
Ulrich Rein hart, 
Ulrich Mischler, 
Ludwig Eerlman, 
Hans Nickel Mayer, 
Martin Obersteg, 
Casper Fretter, 
Conrad Altvater, 
Hans Michael Walther, 
Joh. Ludwig Gribeler. 



133) Sept. 19, 1749. Palatines and persons from the duchy 
of Wirtemberg, — ship Patience, Hugh Steel, Captain, from 
Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 270 passengers. 

(Sept. 19, 1749. 270 ^faljer unt» SBürttemkrgcr famen mit 
bent ©c^iffe patience, Sapitain ^ugt) <Bttel, »on ^totterbam übet 
(Soroeö. 



Engelbert Jung, 
Herman Schneider, 
Henrich Hartman, 
Jacob Ernst, 
Henry Righart,* 
Jacob Richart,* 
Johan Bauman sen., 
Johan Bauman jr., 
Andreas Hecker,* 
Christian Eslinger,* 
Michael Müller, 
Bernhart Müller, 
Andreas Müller, 
Friederich Rübman, 
Joh. Georg Bauman, 
Conrath Roger, 
Casper Kilian, 
Adam Keltinger, 
Georg Lutz, 
Georg Lindenmuth, 
Valentin Gramly,* 
Carl Kayser, 
Heinrich Magasch, 



Christoph Kylbach, 
Michael Schlör, 
Andreas Unangst, 
Johannes Steinseiffer, 
Hermanus Battenberg, 
Johan Jacob Grisse, 
Johan Michel Stoltz, 
Joh. Jost Zimmerman, 
Dielman Grydelbach, 
Johan Henrich Güthing, 
Johan Wilhelm Hart, 
Hans Henrich Wehler, 
Joh. Friederich Schello, 
Johan Georg Haifner, 
Georg Ludwig Sommer, 
Johan Jacob Bahr, 
Hans Adam Grämlich, 
Philip Jacob Ernst, 
Hans Adam Grämlich jr., 
Johan Martin Hasee, 
Hans Georg IMeeder, 
Joh. Wilhelm Ritt«lbach,? 
Joh. Adam Zangmeister, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1749. 



207 



Georg Fried. Zangmeister, 
Franz Georg Bacher, 
Hans Peter Liewel, 
Georg Henrich Urangst, 
Georg Peter Ghck, 
Joli. Chi-istoph QiUinger, 
Daniel Camp,* 
David Kamp, 
Christ Zimuiermun, 
Peter Spohn, 
Christoph Stroh, 
Mattheis Milling, 
Ludwig Liudeumuth, 
Martin Leeser,* 
Michel Billing, 
Wilhelm Bosch, 
Andreas Beuschlein, 
Andreas Fendig, 
Johannes Endress, 
Johannes Eulon, 
Martin Bawer,* 
Martin Riess, 
Ferdinand Reed,* 
Joseph Buyghart, 
Georg Koster, 
Johannes Eberts,* 
Jacob Glasser, 
Joseph Dummey, 
Samuel Ehring, 
Philip Herr,* 
Johannes Wagner,* 
David Keller, 
George Smith,* 
George HofFner,* 
Mattheis Heinlen, 
David Heinlen, 
Michael Okser,* 
Andreas Fohl, 
Joseph Hausser, 
Daniel Finck, 
Peter Finck, 



Peter Stetzier, 
Johannes Käst, 
Adam Ernst, 
Georg Peter Vogt, 
Joh. Casper Senghaass, 
Joh. Bernhard Fehr, 
Hans Georg Kantz, 
Hans Georg Martin, 
Hans Peter Uhrig, 
Hans Philip Brenner, 
Philip Adam Brenner, 
Hans Adam Ludwig, 
Hans Peter Ludwig, 
Georg Michel Roger, 
Hans Martin Yler, 
Hans Georg Hertel, 
Hans George Linemuth,* 
Joh. Christoph Wollet, 
Johan Adam Gessner, 
Johan Ludwig Barth, 
Friederich Dörflinger, 
Johannes Heillmann, 
Johan Peter Zimmerman, 
Joh. Friederich Gall, 
Johan Adam Diem, 
Johan Adam Hoffman, 
Georg Michel Gibler, 
Hans Georg Schuhmann, 
Georg Himmelberger, 
Joseph Kauflfman, 
Johannes SauerzapfF, 
Abraham Baumann, 
Gottlieb Baumann, 
Lorentz Seyfriedt, 
Bernhart Pangert,* 
Daniel Kurtz, 
Joh. Friederich Strauss, 
Johannes Feyler, 
Heinrich Häffner, 
Bernhart Schmidt, 
Andreas Müller. 



208 NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 

Sick — Johan Ebert Stein, Jacob Ludwig, Johannes Ender. 

Note. — At the same time the ship Patience arrived, two other ves- 
sels were about landing. In the Archives is found this Memorandum : — 
" The foreigners, in number 40, imported in the ship Francis and Eliza- 
beth, Captain Beach, being sickly, were not permitted to be landed. 
Likewise the foreigners, in number 58, imported in the ship Rachel, 
Captain Armstrong, were so sickly that it was thought dangerous to 
suffer them to land altogether; whereupon the sick were ordered to 
be separated from the well, and such as recovered, with the well, were 
to be qualified occasionally." 

Slnmerfung. — ^ux ^eit d^ bicfeö ®c^tff anfam, tuaren auc^ jivei 
anbtre am Sanben. 3n ben $(r($töen tft biefeö !Kemoranbum aufbetvabrt: 
„^cn auf bem ®($iffe 3ramti3 unb (SUfabctt), Sapttatn 23ead), befinblicbfii 
49 Sluölänbern, n)fl(^e fxäntüd) waren, tourbc baö Slnlanbcit uid)t erlaubt, 
©benfaüö ntc^t ben 53 gremben auf bent ©c^tffe 9tad)el, Sapttain Slrni- 
firong; btefe Htten [o febr, ba§ man c^ für gefa'tjrltd^ glaubte, fie übcrt)aupt 
nn'ö Sanb fommen ju lajfen. !E)ie Äranfen würben ijon ben ®ef«nbcn au^= 
gef^ieben unb jettweife, wenn fie genefen waren, qualtficirt." 



134) Sept. 25, 1749. Foreigners Jfrom Wirtemberg, Alsace, 
and Hanau, — ship Speedwell, James Creagh, Captain, from 
Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 240 passengers. 

(Sept. 25, 1749. 240 grembe »on Sßürttemfeerg, (£Ifaf unt) 
Jpanau famen mit tern ©(^tffe ©peeturell, Sapitaitt ^arrn^ Sreag^, 
»on Stottertam über Soweö. 
Peter Sadler, Jacob Ham,* 

Hans Müller, Andreas Ham,* 

Joseph Hengher, Jacob Miller,* 

Christian Hemler, Adam Layar, 

Dewald Metz,* Burghart Ertinger, 

Jacob Grryffing, Johannes Yowch,* 

Heinrich Zeiuer, Michael Kientz, 

Johannes Berth, Mattheus Sprutt, 

Johannes Weiss, Friederich Wentz, 

Michael Shak,* Johannes Hell,* 

Christoph Meyer,* Johannes Geradewohl,* 

Michel Meyer, Hans Jost Hausser, 

David Hamm,* Johannes Hausser, 

Adam Buchman,* Hans Georg Pfauty,* 

Jacob Wächter,* Joseph Freymiller sen.,* 

Hans Diebolt, Joseph Freymiller jr.,* 

Michael Kleim, Hans Jacob Held, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1749. 



209 



Ludwig Held,* 
Johannes Amstedt, 
Hans Morgedaller,* 
Andreas Grossweiller,* 
Job. Erhardt Müller, 
Johannes Tuckermann, 
Hans Jacob Schiedt, 
Joh. Friederich Lein, 
Johan Peter Källner, 
Joh. Michael Müller, 
Matheas Onzinger,* 
Ludwig Moser,* 
Gisbetus Ignatius Knipp, 
Johan G. Weydner,* 
Joh. Egydius Deschner, 
Hans Greorg Achenbacher, 
Georg Schütterlin,? 
Hans Jacob Stöss, 
Leonhart Ziffe,* 
Johannes Scherban, 
Phüip Seifert,* 
Jacob Fanheel,? 



Christoph Stornier,* 

Martin Wurffei,* 

Jacob Hecht, 

Andreas Töhms, 

Hans Plach, 

Hannes Plach, 

Georg Stöss, 

Isaac Vetter,* 

Isaias Grieb, 

George Silber,* 

Hans Armgast,* 

Andreas Herster,* 

Andreas Sauer, 

Andreas Flach, 

Samuel Stheryders, 

Han Jacob Hummerle sen., 

Han Jacob Hummerle jr., 

Hans Georg Wall, 

Mattheis Lorentz, 

Christian Strahling, 

Hendrick Wookman.* 



135) Sept. 26, 1749. Foreigners from Hanau, Wirtemberg, 
Darmstadt, and Eisenberg, — ship Eanier, Henry Browning, 
Master, from Rotterdam, last from , England. — 277 pas- 
sengers. 

(Sept. 26, 1749. 277 grembc 'oon ^anan, Söürttemfeerc;, Darm= 
jlabt unb Stfenberg famen mit tiem ©c^iffe Spanier, Sapitain 
J^enr^ ^Browning, »on Slottertam ükv , Sngtant». 



Johannes Raber,* 
Martin Katz, 
Jacob Katz, 
Martin Gloss, 
Philipp Dähn, 
Johann Schaller, ? 
Jacob Clem, 
Jacob Katz, 
Johannes Shnyder,* 
Jacob Boller, 



Sebastian Weitzel, 
Friederich Weitzel, 
Thomas Appel,* 
Jacob Grauel,* 
Christian Knipe,* 
Abraham Hess, 
Caspar Streader,* 
Dewald Schust,? 
Ekard Keyser,* 
Leonhart Keyser,* 



18* 



210 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Thomas Erich, 
Johannes Albrecht, 
Nicklaus Hess, 
Joh. Christoph Brüst, 
Christoph Heyndel,* 
P. Hans Haytzmer,? 
Johannes Landmann, 
Johan Wilhelm Ge3'er, 
Johan Conrad Riedel, 
Hans Jacob Sleuer, 
Johan Heinrich Weitzel, 
Johan Adam Appel, 
Joh. Philip Wygant,* 
Philip Lauterbach,* 
Conrad Lauterbach,* 
Johan Nicolaus Hess, 
Johan Ludwig Hess, 
Johann Henrich Ströder, 
Johannes Ströder jr., 
John Henry Streader,* 
Georg Christian Eberhardt, 
Johan Henrich Lehr, 
Joh. Friederich Hock, 
Johan Conrad Heck, 
Joh. Conrad Lutz, 
Hans Jacob Lutz, 
Mattheis Graff, 
Martin Lutz, 
Christian Lutz, 
Christian Mosser, 
Johannes Messert, 
Jacob Förster, 
Johannes Weber, 
Adam HopiF, 
Johannes Conrad, 
Johannes Shertel,* 
Michael Hcnckel,* 
Benedict Weiss, 
Carl Schermann, 
Peter Harting, 
Peter Becker, 



Joachim Vogel, 
Andreas Heerreder, 
Johannes Heerreder, 
Jacob Engel, 
Johannes Falick, 
Philip Sultzbach, 
Johannes Appel, 
Heinrich Eckel, 
Wilhelm Leberle, 
Johannes Hohn, 
Henrich Hartwich, 
J. Henry Shrefler,* 
Johannes Graber, 
Johan Steygerwaldt, 
Johann Landgraff, 
Melchior Gebhart,* 
Conrad Gebhart,* 
Erasmus Bosenberger, 
Johannes Krebs, 
Conrad Wagner, 
Johan Jacob Hettrich, 
Hans Melchior Hammer, 
Joh. Jacob Keich, 
Joh. Georg Trippner, 
Andreas Messert, 
Ambrosius Habermehl, 
Johan Heinrich Printz, 
Johann Henrich Peter, 
Fried. Wilhelm Geist,* 
Joh. Adam Fasnacht, 
Joh. Conrath Fassenacht, 
Joh. Henrich Leppieh, 
Joh. Philipp Lehnig, 
Johan Peter Feppel, 
Johan Casper Schmidt, 
Johan Conrad Geyer, 
Johan Henrich Geyer, 
Johan Georg Schultz, 
Joh. Michael Schmaltz, 
Joh. Peter Scharmann, 
Georg Ernst Schmidt, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1749. 



211 



Wolff Caspex' Geyer, 
Joh. Reinhart Rohrbach, 
Joh. Thomas Schmidt, 
Joh. Henrich Lorey, 
Joh. Michael Oberheuser, 
Johan Georg Hörtzel, 
Joh. Hemy Heppel,* 
Joh. Jacob Diinderich, 



Georg Ernst Maurer, 
Michael Reiffschneider, 
J. Michael Gunkel, 
Johan Peter Steygerwaldt, 
Johan Jacob Eckhardt, 
Johan Conrad Grail, 
Joh. Daniel Baueshar, 
Johan Philippus Jung. 



Sick — Johan Sans, Melchior Heppel, Johannes Michler. 



136) Sept. 26, 1749. Foreigners from the Palatinate and 
Zweibrücken, — ship Dragon, Georg Spencer, Master, fi-om Rot- 
terdam, last from Deal. — 563 passengers. 

®ept. 26, 1749. 563 grembc »on ter ^fal3 unt) Qf'^tiixMm 
tamm mit tient »S^iffe 3)ragon, (Sapitain @eorg ©pencer, oon 
Stotterbam über X)iaL 



Christoph Eich,* 
Johannes Gödtel, 
Christian Fuchs, 
Jacob Leber, 
Johannes Eckel, 
Georg Hostman, 
Johannes Hust, 
Bastian Leinthrick,? 
Simon Richter, 
Hans Gauifs,* 
Valentin "Weber, 
Johannes Weber, 
Jacob Weber, 
Anthony Ohber, 
Jonas Bohrer, 
Martin Sier,* 
Anthony Moor,* 
Jacob Wey,? 
Peter Heimbach, 
Henrich Brill, 
Jacob Brown,* 
Jacob Miller,* 
Adam Gerber, 
jMatheas Miller,* 



Bernhart Wacker, 
Friederich Minler,* 
Peter Sühn, 
Johannes Wagner,* 
Matheis Wagner, 
Johannes Zwalle,* 
Casper Zirn, 
Tobias Fey, 
Johann Diwall, 
Kilian Hagert, 
Antony Müller, 
Leonard Waller,* 
Adam Egart,* 
Jacob Bruner,* 
Adam Brommer 
Valentin Weber, 
Dewald Shnyder,* 
Johannes Ross, 
Johan Nickel Eich, 
Jolian Georg Fedel, 
Johan Peter Weyand, 
Johau Jacob Peterman, 
Joh. Christ. Heinrich Beck, 
Andreas Gustus Seytz, 



212 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Hans Katzeubaclier, 
Ludwig Haspelhorn,* 
Johan Philip Bauer, 
John Nicklaus Hayn, 
Joh. Nicklaus Reisinger, 
Joh. Peter Reisinger, 
Johan Peter Eckert, 
Philip Jacob Schmit, 
Joh. Heinrich Pengier, 
Philip Jacob Eger, 
Joh. Heinrich Sies, 
Johan Nickel Wentz, 
Jacob Byshall, 
Johan Georg Dellen, 
Wilhelm Hoffmann, 
Melchior Benedict, 
Michael Zyndelbach,* 
KUian Duvinger, 
Joh. Nicolaus Schneider, 
Johan Henrich Weber, 
Joh. Peter Schlarbst, 
Jacob Wendling, 
Friederich Schütz, 
Philip Jacob Schmidt, 
Georg Philip Härtung, 
Johann Martin Kolter, 
Friederich Schweickhart, 
Christian Hoffstättle,* 
Hans Georg Hartlieb, 
Michael Lenard,* 
Henry Weber,* 
Johan Valtin Weber, 
Jacob Kraus, 
Paulus Hartman, 



Joh. Heinrich Hartman, 
Michael Kilian,* 
Ludwig Heitz, 
Jacob Heitz, 
Jacob Ness, 
Martin Loroh,* 
Stephan Bauer, 
Jacob Frey,* 
Peter Dagon,* 
Georg Cump,* 
WUhelm Müller, 
Weyrich Beck, 
Jacob Roth, 
Jacob Fihr, 
Tobias Lawer,* 
Martin Föll, 
Johannes Partts,* 
Jacob Beck,* 
Johan Georg Ludwig, 
Philip Müller, 
Ambrosius Bender,* 
Frantz Wittman, 
Johan Georg Krauss, 
Johannes Dürr,* 
Johan Nieklas Shaffer,* 
Michael Schneider, 
George Jacob Shaffer,* 
Johannes Enders, 
Johan Friederich WidmaUj 
Balthaser von Können, 
Martin von Können, 
Jacob Weidler, 
Johann Henrich Eyrt, 
Anthoni (Ehler. 



137) Sept. 27, 1749. Palatines in the ship Isaac, Robert 
Mitchell, Captain, fi-om Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 206 pas- 
sengers. 

©ept. 27, 1749. 206 ?)fäl3er !amcn mit t)em (Sd)iffe ^\aac, 
ßa^itain 3ftokrt 5D^it^eÜ, öon Siotterbam ükr Soweö. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1749. 



213 



Kudolph Haberly,* 
Heinrich Greb, 
Hans Hug, 
Henry Grreb,* 
Felix Magli, 
Peter Becker, 
Andreas Linck, 
Velty Kurtz, 
Hans Kunrad, 
Albert Shutz,* 
Uhllerick Coppy,* 
Baltas Shreiber, 
Michael Fischer, 
Johan JahUer, 
Matheas Kehler,* 
Leonhart Lasher,* 
Conrad Weiss, 
Johannes Klippel, 
George Fisher,* 
Andreas Bussart, 
Jacob Klippel, 
Hans Rudolph Fisher,* 
Jacob Plehman, 
Johan Heinrich Grün, 
Michael Reedelmos,* 
Johannes Storm,* 
Hans Jacob Mägli, 
Rudolph Fries, 
Henrich Boshart, 
Johan Jacob Stucki, 
Johan Henrich Cramer, 
Joh. Christian ScheUa, 
Joh. Adam Shreiber,* 
Christian Mechel, 
Joh. Valentin Steinbring, 
Hans Adam Maurer, 
Johannes Henlein, 

Sick — Hans Conrath, 
Herman Haust. 



Johan Nickel Gerst, 
Johan Peter Rit, 
Johan Nickel Schäffer, 
Georg Adam Fischer, 
Joh. Casper Langenberger, 
Wendel Becker, 
Jacob Wissman,* 
Henrich Landes, 
Johannes Miller, 
Johannes Landert, 
Peter Mackhart, 
Frantz Hemmle, 
Christian Hemmle, 
Henrich Huber, 
Jacob Vesseler, 
Johannes Bauer, 
Philip Haber, 
Ludwig Krebs jr., 
Ludwig Krebs sen., 
Georg Schlosser, 
Johannes Wolff, 
Johannes Jungblud, 
Johan Adam Wolf, 
Matthias Echternach, 
Johan Friederich, 
Joh. Nicolas Senderling, 
Joh. Henry Wey ermann, 
Joh. Georg Schnabel, 
John Michael Stumpff, 
Joh. Daniel Weber, 
Heinrich Burckhart, 
Joh. Henrich Beck, 
Johan Henrich Kleine, 
Johan Georg Batz, 
Nicolaus Bricker, 
Joh. Simonus. Schreiner. 

Nicolaus Franger, ' Lorentz Haffner, 



214 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



138) Sept. 28, 1749. Foreigners from Basel, Wirtemberg, 
Zweibrücken, and Darmstadt, — ship Ann, John Spurier, Mas- 
ter, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 242 passengers. 

(Sept. 28, 1749. Srembe famen ana 5Bafel, JÖürttemfeerg, 
3tt>eibrü(fcn unt) ü^armftatt mit bent ©c^iffe 2lnn, Sapttain 
3o^n (Spurier, öon Stotterbam üBer ßott?eö. — 242 im ©anjen. 



Philip Laidys:, 
WUhelm Rubel, 
Johannes Danesus,? 
Heinrich Braun, 
Johann Spitler,* 
Jacob Swoob,* 
Johan Switzer,* 
Jacob Weeser,* 
Rudolph Viunt, 
Adam Schaulling, 
Daniel Schnebly, 
Heinrich Mock, 
Peter Eiser, 
Johannes Weber, 
Thomas Lubek,§ 
Wendel Keller,* 
Johannes Mertz, 
Andreas Scholl, 
Friederich Meyer, 
Hans Adam Hacker, 
Melchior Lippert, 
John Jacob Sutz,* 
Michael Hengst, 
Jean Thoulouzan, 
Johannes Straudman, 
Jacob LandgrafF, 



Hans Georg Schönperlen, 
Engelhardt Kutern, 
Johan Philip Falch, 
Lorentz Henger, 
Martin Eyer, 
G-raiF Hünner, 
Jacob Salathe, 
Jacob Tschudy, 
Blasius Hauck,* 
Melchior Anter, 
Conrad Renninger, 
Jacob Sheybethal,* 
Simon Kraus,* 
Adam Heinrieb, 
Christian Shott,* 
Johannes Sucher,* 
Jacob Weichert, 
Jacob Feeks, 
Martin Brabnith, 
Michael Breisah, 
Michael Gassler, 
Hans Nees, 
Henrich Vogt, 
Johannes Vogt,* 
Jacob Schnell, 
Adam Scharer,* 



Job. Friederich Zimmermann, Hans Kuhn,* 

Job. Michael Zimmermann, Hans Shutty,* 

Johannes Zimmermann, 

Johan Philip Weber, 

Jacob le Jeunes, 

Johan Paul Traub, 

Johan Adam Schwartzbach 

Johan Peter Beissel, 

Johan Georg Schreiner, 



Jacob Koller,* 
Gotlieb ^Valter, 
Conrad Mayer, 
Jacob Shupp,* 
Hans Ulrich Bussy, 
Joseph Gallmann, 
Bernhardt Hauck, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1749. 



215 



Georg Michel Scliuitz, 
Hans Rudolph Kittwiler, 
Johan Jacob Kreiss, 
Casper Derstenbecher, 
Hans Jacob Vogt, 
Johan Ewald Breyer, 
Hans Georg Huber, 
Georg Henrich Shott,* 
Joseph Schuülbein, 
Hans Michael Schuster, 
Jacob Sclmülbein, 
Hans Michael Hauck, 
Jacob Amman,* 



Hans Jacob Nees, 
Hans Michael Schwab, 
Johannes Hummel, 
Niclaus Motheri, 
Jan Paul Imno, 
Han Friedrich Schaffner, 
Jacob Schaffner, 
Jora Dangoranslo, 
Johan Philip Henneman, 
Sebastian Schneider,* 
Joh. Paulus Eystelohr, 
Johannes Dummer,* 
Sic/c — Thomas Lubek.* 



139) Oct. 2, 1749. Foreigners from Swabia, Wirtemberg, 
and Darmstadt, — ship Jacob, Adolph de Grove, Captain, from 
Amsterdam, last from Shields, England. — 290 passengers. 

Dct. 2, 1749. Stu^Iönber am ©djnjaben, SÖürttemkrg unt 
"Darmftattt !amcn mit l>em (Sd)iffe 3acob, Sapitain 2tt)olp() be 
©rooc, »Ott 5Imfterl>am über (5^ieit)ö, Snglant). — 290 in SlÖem. 



Friederich Buckel, 
Christoph Fürstner, 
Friederich Walles,* 
Conrad Bauster, 
Philip Storm,* 
Martin Wust, 
Michael Miller,* 
Georg Hoffman, 
Johan Jacob Sinn, 
Johan Georg Sinn, 
Hans George Keplinger,* 
Hans Georg Hoffman, 
Georg Christian Spängier, 
Johan Henrich Herget, 
Johan Christoph Kees,? 
John Georg Steigleder, 
George Bachert,* 
Joseph Ritter, 
Paul Lebing, 
Jacob Uhllerich,* 



Johannes Becker, 
Daniel Freysinger,* 
Conrad Reese,* 
Johannes Roth, 
Jacob Sinder, 
Peter Seyds,* 
Martin Treibel, 
Martin Erch, 
Georg Schweigers, 
Jacob Traudt, 
Jacob Rupp, 
Jacob Gilbert, 
Lorentz Hoch, 
Johann Jabbes, ? 
Johannes Neier, 
Marcus Gönner, 
Henry Rubert, 
William Hofman,* 
Matheis Hartman, 
Johannes Rohm, 



216 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Henry Kralimer, 
Jacob Kautzman, 
Johann Bauman, 
Adam Eichholtz, 
Valentin Villib, 
Friederich Becholt, 
Adam Shnyder,* 
Henry Wirdt, 
Christoph Heiply,* 
Phüip Stumpff, 
Peter Seyler,* 
Jacob Heibly,* 
Melchior Wolfart,* 
Joseph Volck, 
Johannes Folck,* 
Martin Dotter, 
Johan Conrad Lebing, 
Georg Michael Laubinger, 
Hans Greorg Krafft, 
Friederich Pfoersching, 
Jacob Fleischmann, 
Johan Henrich Knöss, 
Martin Bleymeyer, 
Georg Eberharth, 
Heinrich Hoffman, 
Job. Conrad Leitheiser, 
Eberhart Windmeyer, 
* Christian Fried. Häberlin, 



Hans Georg Bauer, 
Johan Georg Stein, 
Bernhart Gilbert, 
Simon Grossman, 
Hans Adam Fakler,* 
Hans Philip Schöster, 
Georg Carl Rubert,* 
Johan Henrich Rohm, 
Hans Georg Münig,* 
Joh. Georg Hunkinger, 
Gotfried Samuel Welper, 
Johan Georg Heinrich, 
Joh. Adam Hiltenbeittel,* 
Job. Martin Eichholtz, 
Joh. Wendel Kühner, 
Johannes Zimmermann, 
Joh. Michael Schneyder, 
Hans Michael Gandner, 
Johan Jacob Heil, 
Johann Adam Roth, 
Johan Georg Gröther, 
Melchior Vogelmann, 
Johan Georg Stömer, 
Hans Michael Gintner, 
Nicolas Dotter, 
Matheis Dotter, 
Claudt Reinaldt. 



Sick — Fried. Seydler, Baltaser Bauer, Johannes Hartman. 



140) Oct. 7, 1749. Palatines from Mannheim and Zweibrü- 
cken, — ship Lesbie, J. Balledium, Captain, from Rotterdam, 
last from Cowes. — 450 passengers. 

Oct. 7, 1749. ^fäljer famcn auö 5Rann^eim unb 3roe{tnüf= 
fen mit bem ©c^tp Jesbic, Gapttain 3- Saüetium, üon diottix^ 
tarn über Gotücö. — 450 im ©anjen. 
Conrad Valentine,* Martin Andreas,* 

Hannes Henrich,* Ulrich Ichle, 

Wendel Wahl, Johannes Hess,* 

Jacob Hamels,* Friederich Schott, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1749. 



217 



Johannes Eckman,* 
Henry Mohler,* 
Peter Klein,* 
Casper Klein, 
Friederich Fuchs, 
Anthon Koch,* 
Michael Shmeyer,* 
Peter Kraut, 
Philip Mauer, 
Peter Kuntz, 
Conrad Wolfe,* 
Martin Kind, 
Wendel Jung, 
Christophel Jung, 
Johannes Ritcher,* 
Friederich Mey, 
Baiser Schmit, 
Michael Klee, 
Philip Klein, 
Wendel Schmertzen,* 
Johannes Becker, 
Valentin Petry, 
Michel Huyet, 
Jacob Womer, 
Christian Melchert, 
Philip Karcher, 
Johannes Pfeil, 
Michel Cuntz, 
Jacob Strauss,* 
Michel Dinger, 
Peter Weber, 
Christoph Greigenberger, 
Peter Griinenwalt, 
Christoph Lesch, 
Johann Adam Mauer, 
Martin Vosener, 
Johannes Wessener,* 
Rudolph HoiFman,* 
Johan Philip Griessemann, 
Johan Herman Metz, 
Johann Jacob Metz, 



Johan Bernhart Neiman, 
Joh. Paul Rothgerber, 
Johan Peter Wickert, 
Johan Paul Wickert, 
Martin Schwenck, 
Johan Peter Stimmel, 
Johan Georg Kind, 
Johann Michael Messemer, 
Simon Baumgärttner, 
Gottfried Grünzweig, 
Hans Georg Scheistlen, 
Johann Diehl Klein, 
Johan Jacob Engler, 
Joh. Wilhelm Irrendt, 
Jacob HoiFman, 
Peter Imbsweiller, 
Anthoni Petersheimer, 
Jacob Harberger, 
Michael Wommer,* 
Christ. Adam Müller, 
Johan Jacob Ninies,* 
Johan Adam Correll, 
Johan Michael Deobalt, 
Johan Philip Matheis, 
Johan Nicolas Müller, 
Johan Jacob Walter, 
Gottfiied Finderer, 
Gottfried Kommell, 
Hans Georg Fischer, 
Jacob Cratz, 
Stephan Hepp, 
Georg Hepp, 
Johannes Müller, 
Valentin Behler,* 
Conrad Behler, 
Georg MüUer, 
Johannes Lang,* 
Andreas Supper, 
Jacob Mauerer,* 
Peter Grem,* 
Adam Stein, 



19 



218 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Philip Haubt, 
Jost Fischer, 
Peter Miller, 
Jacob Jäger, 
Georg Imich, 
Jost Engler, 
Jacob ]>Ieyer, 
Henry Boce,* 
Georg Martin Hausser, 
Bernhardt Hepp, 
Jacob Leonhart,* 
Johannes Harmonie, 
Hans Georg Brodbeck sen., 
Hans Georg Brodbeck jr.. 
Sick — Matheis Knauss, 
Philip Adam. 



John Rudolph Espidt, 
Johan Philip Supper, 
Johan Adam Dörffling,* 
Job. Reinhardt Böhm, 
Johannes Klossmayer, 
Johan Adam Bath, 
Friederich Bender, 
Christian Schneider, 
Nicklas Diemus,* 
Philipp Otto Wagner, 
Job. Ludwig Dengeiss, 
Nicolas Deterich,* 
Joh. Christoph Fackler. 

Bartholomae Mertz, George Shmit, 



141) Oct. 10, 1749. Palatines, persons from Wirtemberg, 
Durlach, and Zweibrücken. 

Dct. 10, 1749. gremte famen auö ter ^fafs, SBiirttemfcevg, 
!DurIa^ unb 3*i'ci^'^ürffn' 



Jacob Bock, 
Steffe Mansch, 
Johannes Beck, 
Henrich Bachman, 
Michael Kipp, 
Leonhardt Meyer, 
Georg Wagner, 
Henry Heyser,* 
Joseph Balick, 
Konrat Linss, 
David Bast, 
Georg Berger, 
Adam Wollmer,§ 
Reinhart Heiss, 
Heinrich Haifer, 
Jacob Adams,* 
Georg Conrad Bloss, 
Matheas Oberfeld,* 
Henrich Hübener, 



Bernhart Miller,* 
Andreas Gembler, 
Georg Friedrich Schmidt, 
Johannes Hanfwerck, 
Johann Michael Bast, 
Michael Steinborn, 
Johannes Ohlinger, 
Johann Peter Clemmentz, 
Wilhelm Arnold, 
Peter Arnold, 
Johannes Arnold, 
Georg Simon Bresler, 
Ludwig Herrmann, 
Jacob Kneiss, 
Nicklas Bresler,* 
George Bresler,* 
Michael Bahrt, 
Henrich Koch, 
Friederich Jung, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1749. 



219 



•Nickolas Simon, 
Christian Lentz, 
Michael Barth, 
Michel Schock, 
Jacob Shaak,* 
Peter Rap,* 
Ambrose Remly, 
Michael Messer, 
Matheas Keller, 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Philip Häny,* 
Conrad Geidlinger,* 
Ludwig Hach, 
Johannes Vogt, 
Daniel Bock, 
Andreas Vogler,* 
Baltzer Heyl, 
Johannes Barth, 
Hans Grätsch, 
Jacob Schantz, 
Carl Shantz,* 
Henry Miller,* 
Casper Dorn, 
Joseph Gebhart,* 
Adam Lotz, 
Johannes Koch, 
Georg Rögler, 
Johannes Kau, 
Jacob Stadtler, 
Jacob Tonner, 
Jacob Ulmer, 
David Kehm, 
Friederich Doll, 
Georg Breining, 
Jacob Brücker, 
Georg Crassan, 
J. William Shaak, 
Georg Jacob Wagner, 
Johannes Oberle, 
Johann Peter Oberle, 
Conrad Glück, 



Johan Georg Schreiber, 
Georg Henrich Wüst, 
Cornelius von Starweg, 
Johann Georg Hammer, 
John Jacob Messer,* 
Anthonius Gedelo, 
Hans Georg Huff, 
Johan Henrich Hettich, 
Johannes Scherrer, 
Jacob Schweinfiirth, 
Hans Michael Seitz, 
Johan Jacob Rahn, 
Michael Bastian, 
Nicolaus Schäffer, 
Johannes Uhllerich,* 
Georg Küher, 
Georg Adam Löble, 
Wilhelm Löble, 
Johannes Himmelreich,* 
Johan Jacob Weyden, 
Johan Philip (Ehlweiler, 
Peter Kratringer,* 
Georg Jacob Shierman,* 
Johan Georg Lutz,* 
Valentein Schallus, 
Bastian Shalles,* 
Hans Georg Kau, 
Henry Reinhart, § 
Nicklaus Moclotz, 
Job. Philip Hausman, 
Philip Martin Hammel, 
Jacob Schriffele, 
Bernhart Breininger, 
Stephan Tieffelmeyer, 
Christianus Hentz, 
Johannes Gelisen, 
Nicklaus Gelisen, 
Michel Brücker, 
Christian Seyder,* 
Georg Kremer, 
Edmundus ThoU, 



220 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Georg Reilenbach, 
Valentin Keller, 
Johannes Storm,* 
Jacob Kantz,* 
Michael Kantz,* 
Jacob Bertsch, 
Philip Bodomer, 
Andreas Ecker, 
Ruprecht Hang, 
Mathias Müller, 
Wilhelmus Savelkorl, 
Georg Christoph Müller, 



Nicolaus Forschberge, 
Georg Ludwig Hoffmann, 
Job. Peter Hickenauer, 
Job. Stephan Dietewig, 
Valentin Schweitzer, 
Johan Nickel Klein, 
Johan Michael Mintz, 
Christian Carl Brandt, a 
Johann Menle Brandt, 
Johan Christian Brandt, 
Job. David Wöpperck. 



142) Oct. 17, 1749. Palatines, Wirtembergers and Alsa- 
tians, (from Alsace,) — ship Dragon, Daniel Nicholas, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth. — 244 passengers. 

Dct. 17, 1749. ^fäljer, 235ürttemBcrger unt) Slfäffer famen 
mit bem ®(^iffc Dragon, Sapitain !Danie( Sf^icolaö, öon ^totter* 
kam über ^ortömout^. — 244 im ©anjen. 



Andreas Mohr, 
Martin Shrätter,* 
Nicklaus Brickner,* 
Conrad Roth, 
Felix Gartom,* 
Jacob Wolff, 
Andreas Hertz, 
Hans Danzel,* 
Henry Jacob,* 
Conrad Engel,* 
Philip Fischer, 
Valentin Bender, 
David Shantz,* 
Andreas Bircker, 
Stephan Purman, 
Peter Fischer,* 



Jacob Fisher, 
Andreas Kerschner, 
Johannes Müller, 
Johannes Sauter, 
Johannes Rumffel, 
Hans Georg Danbach, 
Wilibald Gambert, 
Wilhelm Monges, 
Hans Peter Voltz, 
Michael Schmidt, 
Christian Duchmann, 
Peter Tuchman,* 
Hans Michael Kuntz, 
Hans Georg Stambach, 
Job. Eberhart Balthas, 
David Kleidens, 



a This name is written in beautiful Roman Script, with the profes- 
sional appendix — Christian Carl Brandt, Chirurg. 

a Dtefer 9?nme tft in f(^öncr latetnt[c|)cr Sd^rift gefcfjrieben niit tern 
tjrofefftonellcn Xitel „S^trurg". 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1749. 



221 



Heinrich Kübarts, 
Johannes Stiebler, 
Johan Adam Stiebler, 
Hans Georg Burkhard, 
Johan Nicklas Wyner,* 
Johannes Waall,* 
Andreas Euerling, 
Wilhelm Hoffmann, 
Johan Jacob Alles, 
Johan Simon Groh, 
Heinrich Fischer, 
Jacob Griess, 
Peter Diehl, 
Abraham Keiler, 
Johannes Bigler,* 
Adam Sprengel, 
Jacob Kiefer, 
Simon Metziger, 
Peter Grow,* 
Conrad Shyd,* 
Georg Shyd,* 
Conrad Grumbach, 
Simon Eshbagh,* 
Jacob Grumbach, 
Casper Iba, 



Johannes Schmidt, 
Johannes Eberle, 
Johannes Gehr, 
Bastian Gernaut, 
Wilhelm Zimerle, 
Tobias Horein, 
Anthony Zürch, 
Balthas Schneider, 
Conrad Vieman, 
Johan Georg Krumlauf, 
Georg Henry Shyd,* 
Hans Michael Haudesch, 
Heim Heydersh,* 
Hans Mich. Haudenscheidt, 
Johan Adam Meier, 
Johan Martin Ferster, 
Joh. Andreas Wagner, 
Johan Henrich Theiss, 
Hans Michael Rosser, 
Geo. Hen. Witler Gründell, 
Johan Jacob Wirth, 
Johannes Hoffmann, 
Johan Georg Schneider, 
Phil. Lorentz Zimmerle, 
Arnold Klehass. 



143) Oct. 17, 1749. Foreigners fi-om the Palatinate, Wir- 
temberg and Rittenheim, — ship Fane, William Hyndman, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 596 passengers. 

Dct. 17, 1749. Stuölänber jiuö kr ^falj, Jßürttemkrg 
ttttt» 9titten^eim famen mit bem issi^iffe gane, Sapitain 2öitltam 
^^nbman, Sion diotkxiam über ßoireö. — 596 im ©angcn. 



Gottlieb Söhner, 
Tobias Manich, 
Jacob Schneider sen., 
Jacob Schneider jr., 
Leonhart Lang, 
Christian Reiner, 
Georg Reiner, 
Adam Seifert, 



Michael Biner, 
Casper Wagner, 
Paul Geiger, 
Jacob Stier, 
Christian Stein, 
Georg Geiger, 
Adam Hugly,* 
Ludwig Triber,* 



19^ 



222 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Mattheis Stier, 
Christoffel Graf,* 
Christoph Graf jr., 
Christoph Willet, 
Johan Martin Offner, 
Sam. Heniy Abentschon,* 
Reinhold Abendschön, 
Christian Abendschön, 
Gottlieb Baumgärttner, 
Christoph Altneth, 
Joh. Henrich Gerlach, 
Hans Georg Huber, 
Johan Georg Huber, 
Georg Michael Haas, 
Johannes Schilling, 
Johan Adam Keilinger,* 
Joh. Christoph Wethwein, 
Joh. Conrad Haussier, 
Jacob Plantz, 
Jacob Weyand, 
Heinrich Benner, 
Henry Mise, 
Arnold Althaus, 
Ludwig Benner, 
Johannes Benner, 
Herman Weber,* 
Jost Weber, 
Conrad Stenger, 
Conrad Crum, 
Konrath Kremer, 
Johannes Keim, 
Johannes Gross, 
Adam Spies, 
Wilhelm Shätz,* 
Jacob Klein, 
Johannes Pfeil,* 
Johann Graffhos, 
Jacob Hahn, 
Jacob Zeller, 
Conrad Zeller, 
Johannes Zeller, 



Michael Meyer, 
Martin Willer, 
Martin Faigile, 
Martin Pefferle, 
Johannes Herter, 
Jacob Kelling, 
Casper Zesseler,* 
Johannes Algeyer,* 
Andreas Scherle, 
Henrich Priest, 
Melchior Ram,* 
Christian Reiner, 
Paul Müller, 
Gottfried Tietz, 
Leonhart Jung,* 
Lorian Eisely,* 
Johannes Krämer,* 
Conrad Hirsh, 
Johan Leonhard Jung, 
Leonhardt Plantz, 
Johan Jacob Schneider, 
Georg Jacob Plantz, 
Jost Sasmanhaus, 
Daniel Marburger, 
Johan Henrich Rentzel, 
Jost Wilhelm Rentzel, 
Johan Henrich Schmidt, 
J. Engel Stolauan,* 
Johan Philip Stockmann, 
Johan Casper Klein, 
Johannes Klein, 
Daniel Benner, 
Johan Georg Zachrias, 
Martin Schneider, 
Christoph Schneider, 
Joh. Martin Hausser, 
Johannes Wahl, 
Johan Martin Hertz, 
Johan Martin Reisser, 
Christian Damselt, 
Christoffel Wimer,* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1750. 



223 



Hans Georg Mayer, 
Georg Friederich Höhn, 
Hans Georg Plocher, 
Samuel Beck,* 
Johannes Fisclier, 
Melchior Heckman, 
Johannes Schweitzer, 
Hans Jacob Botz, 
Hans George Kern,* 
HansNorffkoh,? 



Georg Philip Reiber, 
Hans Jacob Keller,* 
Melchior Rinehold, 
Job. Dietrich Reiner, 
Wilhelm Claussenius, 
Ulrich Heininger, 
Jacob Adam Kraut, 
Joh. Conrad Biehn, 
Joh. Friederich Stieg. 



144) Nov. 9, 1749. f Foreigners imported in the snow Good 
Intent, Benjamin Boswell, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Cowes. — 76 passengers. 

9^ot). 9, 1749. t 3tuölänt>er Urnen mit bent (£eefd)iffe ©oob 
3ntent, Sapitain 33enj. 33oön)etI, oon ^totterbam über SoweS. — 
76 im ©anjeu. 

Hans Georg Bössmer, 
Joh. Christoph Besmer, 
Johan Adam Kurtz, 



Johannes Hausman, 
Joseph Hausman, 
Paulus Hausman, 
Dietrich Mertz, 
Johannes Kreiner, 
Peter Hetzer, 
Mattheas Plenninger,* 
Ludwig Stumb,* 
Jacob Mäsner, 
Michael Jung, 
Georg Meyer, 
Peter Matter, 
Friederich Bassler, 



Johannes Heinninger, 
Jacob Heinninger, 
Hans Georg Hentzelmann, 
Christian Pfingstag, 
Georg Henrich Reinöhl, 
Jacob Reinholtz, 
Johannes Kessler,* 
Ludwig Werentz, 
Henry Seyder. 



145) Aug. 11, 1750. Foreigners imported in the .ship Pa- 
tience, Hugh Steel, Captain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes, 



f This year Rev. J. Conrad S/einer, a Swiss from the Canton Zurich, 
a German Reformed Minister, came to Ponusylvania. — Bilttner's Ref. 
Church, p. 11. — {Editor.) 

\ 3n btefcm 3at)re fam 53aftor 3. Souvafc «Steiucr, ein 'äd)wet,5er auü* 
bent Santon3ürid^ unb reform, ©eiftlic^cr, nac^ ^Penufvlitaiua.— Süttncr'o 
9lef. Mxäi^t, ®. 11.— ($erauSö«bev.) 



224 



NAMES UP GERMAN, SWISS 



Slug. 11, 1750. 2luölänber tarnen mit bcm ©(^iffc patience, 
(Sapitatn ^ug^ (Steel, »on Stottertam über Sotveö. 



Stephan Beck, 
Henrich Lentz, 
Peter Groff,* 
Cliristoff Bener,* 
Andreas Müller, 
Georg Schnedh, 
Jacob Jacoby,* 
Adam Jacobi, 
Matheis Jacobi, 
Peter Jacobi, 
Jacob Burkard, 
Jacob Bär, 
Jacob Conrath sen.,* 
Jacob Conrath jr., 
Daniel Miller, 
Jacob Reichert, 
Samuel Werner, 
Johannes Halm,* 
Peter Wieland, 
Hans Peter Treger, 
Jacob Heckendorn, 
Hans Peter Graff, 
Hans Jacob Groff,* 
Johannes Peter Klein, 
Johan Nickel Müller, 
Johan Nickel Cuntz, 
Joh. Wilhelm Fuchs, 
Joh. Christoph Orpertag, 
Johan Peter Fitz, 
Johan David Junge,* 
Joh. Henrich Leineweber, 
Joh. Conrad Wölffle, 
Christian Ulrich Lentz, 
Christoph Ketteman, 
Johan Georg Ketteman, 
Joh. Jacob Bappoldt, 
Georg Friederich Grob, 
Johan Georg Bader, 
Friederich Waltzer, 



Jacob Schwob,* 
Georg Loadig,* 
Geo. Adam Eekerdt, 
Joh. Peter Wohner, 
Balthasar Vetterman, 
Georg Hamen, 
Conrad Veiten, 
Jacob Mühleysen, 
Nicklas Mühleysen, 
Wilhelm Diedrich, 
Henrich Reinhardt, 
Johannes Roller,* 
Christoph Fritz,* 
Jacob Lentel, 
Henrich Georg, 
Christian Mener, 
Matheas Oberkirsch,* 
Nicklas Conrad,* 
Jacob Deremot, 
Abraham Ritner, 
Andreas Rost,* 
Paulus Reylandt, 
Johannes Eischby, 
Dewald Gerst,* 
Friederich Gerst,* 
David Smith,* 
Peter Poland,* 
Stephen Poland,* 
Peter Foltz, 
Jacob Dobeler,* 
Hans Kawffman,* 
Christian Shmitt,* 
PhOip Heiber, 
Jacob Keellenthal,* 
Michael Juncker, 
Johannes Palm,* 
Johannes Reichle, 
Casper Greiter, 
Anthon Derffus, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1750. 



225 



Carl Vollunte * 
Jacob Dannether, 
Hans Michael Melber, 
J. Michael Leidich, 
Johan Georg Bauer, 
Georg Adam Eckart,* 
Johan Christoph Kuntz, 
Johan Wilhelm Wann, 
Johan Arnold Reinhart, 
Johannes Nickel Henrich, 
Johann Peter Schütz, 
Johannes Adam Lauch, 
Johan Jacob Weirich, 
Johann Nickel Brod, 
Johan Michel Conrad,* 
Johan Nickel Hasber, 
Johan Jacob Lüsbes, 
Johan Peter Diedrich, 
Johan Nickel Jung, 
Philip Jacob Maurer, 
Johan Friederich Pfeil, 
Hans Georg Eslinger, 



Hans Georg Sing, 
Johan Conrad Bross, 
Johannes Baumgärtner, 
Hans Georg Nagel, 
Georg Friederich Haug, 
Johan David Gorges, 
Joh. Andreas Mühlschlägel, 
Joh. Adam Satson,* 
Johan Philip Ost, 
Johan Matheis Georg, 
Friederich Henrich, 
Johan Michael Leib, 
David Stadelmayer, 
Bartholomä Lentzinger, 
Johan Adam Fetzer, 
Johan Adam Stiehl, 
Joh. Albrecht Veiter, 
Johannes Esbenstein, 
Johan Adam Dentzell, 
Johan David Limbech, 
Johan Jacob Müller. 



146) Aug. 13, 1750. Foreigners imported in the ship Ben- 
net Galley, John Wadham, Master, from Rotterdam, last from 
Portsmouth. — 260 passengers. 

Slug. 13, 1750. grembe lamen mit bent ©c^iffe Sennet ©atle^, 
Sapttain 3o^k Sßat^am, öon 0totterbam üBer 5)ortöntouti). — 
260 im ©anjen. 



Jacob Lange,* 
Adolph Riehl, 
Isaac Gunst,* 
Jacob Dencker,* 
Georg Acker, 
Michael Gallater,* 
Carl Gustav, 
Johanes Koch,* 
Peter Bucks, 
Jacob Lazarus, 
Jacob Valentine,* 



Joseph Eck,* 
Christoff Grindler,* 
Adam Steffan, 
Wendel Insel, 
Martin Bender, 
Johannes Jacob, 
Peter Merckel, 
Gylyan Geused, 
Uhlerich Steiner,* 
Casper Stattler, 
Hans Bergher,* 



226 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Peter Gutman, 
Bejitz Horny,* 
Balzer Leibiock,* 
Bastian Ledig, 
Jacob Schäffer, 
Hans Rughty,* 
Nicklaus Mercklin, 
Peter Funck, 
Andreas Müller, 
Michael Kuntz, 
Hans Düringer, 
Johannes Bley,* 
Benjamin Kelhover,* 
Dewald Wantlin,* 
Friederich Beys,* 
Jacob Reiss, 
Johanes Hoon,* 
Hans Michael Beyer,* 
Hans Jacob Silander, 
Johan Georg Ott, 
Joh. Jacob Shützlin, 
John Friederich Ott,* 
Johan Jacob Wiippel, 
Johan Adam Bayer, 
Johan David Neumann, 
Michael Neumann, 
Hans Georg Baldes Pargel, 
Johannes Philip Schmit, 
Hans Peter Shrantz,* 
Heinerich Leininger, 
Johan Frantz Friess, 
Johann Michel Kloss, 
D. Carl Gottlieb Diesbergen, 
H. Jacob Sander,* 



Hans Georg Wetzel, 
Hans Georg Hallifas,* 
Hans Georg Schenckel, 
Johann Georg Süss, 
Hans Peter Peters,* 
Hans George Hoon,* 
Georg Friederich Hoon,* 
George Friederich Hetzel,* 
Hans Michael Hetzel,* 
Hans Michel Beber, 
Henrich Jacob Vandeburg, 
Christ off Ackerman, 
Hans Michael Both, 
Julius Friederich Vollandt, 
Johan Georg Eonister, 
Hans Georg Shlaybouer,* 
Hans Georg Beichart, 
Hartman Leibengut,* 
Christian Fried. Knauss, 
Hans Michael Hell, 
Hans Adam Miller,* 
Georg Jacob Brünsholtz, 
Benedict Peter, 
Adam Fixe,* 
Peter Lazarus,* 
George Lees, 
Diebolt Schwenck, 
Hans Mich. Leby,* 
J. Adam Printzholtz,* 
Hans Thomas Leininger, 
Hans Michael Bonet,* 
Johan Nickel Post, 
Joh. Phil. Jacob Schott, 
Johann Georg Hafer. 



Sick — Johannes Miller, Friederich Lauderbrunn, H. Nicklas 
Blader, Heniy Peter. 



147) Aug. 13, P. M., 1750. Ship Edinburgh, James Bus- 
sel, Master, from Botterdam, last from Portsmouth. — 314 pas- 
sengers. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS 1750. 



227 



2lu9. 13, 5i?ac^mittagi?, 
pxtain 3ameö 3tuffel, 'oon 
314 ^affajjiere. 
Johann Corngibel,* 
Johannes Beyer,* 
Johannes Beyer jr., 
Michel Hamburgeis,* 
J. George Kirshner,* 
Valentin Sösttel, 
Stoffel Bruning,* 
Ludwig Gassler, 
Jost Schneider, 
Thomas Kegel,* 
Thomas Klosse,* 
Henrich KIoss, 
Andreas Huck, 
Jacob Möler, 
Georg Schäffer, 
Johannes Wien, 
Michael Lemer, 
Daniel Klein, 
Jacob Schäfer, 
Johan Fasnacht,* 
Johannes Telcher,* 
Johannes Delcher, 
Jacob Werntz, 
David Herbster,* 
Jacob Lanish, 
Georg Heyle,* 
Jacob Loch, 
Casper Strohl, 
Andreas Ditz, 
Philip Conrad Aumüller, 
Johann Seybert Gertz, 
Johann Henrich Lotz, 
Johann Philip Heck, 
Casper Bröning, 
Joh. Peter Seyfert, 
Johan Georg Kabe, 
Johan George Flour,* 
Johann Geor»; Müller, 



1750. l^aä Schiff gbinburg^, 6a- 
aflottevbam über ^ort»moutl), brad)te 

Johan Adam Stein,* 
Johan Casper Rötter, 
Johann Georg Klein, 
Johan Philip Hölsel, 
Lorentz Baum, 
Christophel Spahr, 
Philippus Bücksell, 
Johannes Gertz, 
Johan Peter Leib, 
Johannes Feuerstein, 
Hans Georg Benninger,* 
Johan Herman Dippel, 
Johannes Eulert., 
Wendel Benninger,* 
Ludwig Pretzman, 
Frederick Brinkman,* 
Daniel Meerbagh,* 
Andreas Spielman,* 
Peter Sickenberger, 
Valentin Kreisch er, 
Henrich PilgTam, 
Peter Nees,* 
Peter Bohre, 
Andreas Keanig,* 
Carel Keanig,* 
Philip Shmith,* 
Nicklas Hirt,* 
Johannes Kniss, 
Christian Hafi"ner,* 
Jacob Flug,* 
Nicklas Spring,* 
Johannes Philips,* 
Andreas Bensell, 
Jacob Daunneberger, ? 
Jacob Merckle, 
Simon Merckle, 
Carl Stedt, 
Johannes Mohl, 



228 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Peter Marcus,* 
Conradt Böhm, 
Gottlieb Wyda,* 
Casper Mug,* 
Michael Heinle, 
Peter CoUep,* 
Conrad Haffer, 
Theobald Cuntz, 
Frantz Cuntz, 
Peter Spengler,* 
Johannes Shmit,* 
Severimus Sheffer,* 
Christian Kempt, 
Jacob Michael, 
Jacob Schaffner, 
Anthony Heanz,* 
Jacob Walter,* 
Ludwig Bauer, 
Nicklas Spiri, 
Nicklaus Bard, 
Henry Coller,* 
Philip Balbierer, 
Jacob Metziger,* 
Thomas Bough,* 
Philip Begtholt, 
Casper Conradi, 
Friederich Hoffmann, 
Johann Riidelbach, ? 
Valentin Chitzrieth, ? 
Casper Dieffebacher, 
Michael Matinger, 
Johannes Wölschläger, 
Johann Jacob Brang, 
Simon Peter Ternantz,* 
Johan Ulrich Daumer, 



Johann Grottlieb Rabi, 
Johann Martin Schäffer, 
Johan Georg Höltzer, 
Johan Chriötoffel Scharff, 
Samuel Falckenhahu, 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Johan Philip Stang, 
Johan Georg Dum, 
Johannes Haffner, 
Johannes Möller, 
Christoffel Möller, 
Johann Bernhard Christ, 
Johan Adam Huber,* 
Jacob von de Bait, 
Georg Fried. Heilbrunn, 
Johan Fried. Heilbrunn, 
Johan Daniel Bübel, 
Ludwig Schreiner, 
Wilhelm Schreiner, 
Christ. Sam. Bachmann, 
Joh. Ludwig Widtmann, 
Job. Ludwig Seysser, 
Johan Georg Esch, 
Hans Adam Wagner, 
Georg Adam Hobel, 
Ludwig Spannagel, 
Johan Adam Regel, 
Johan Henry Shöman,* 
Andreas Brandner, 
Georg Sebastian Krausser, 
Johan Ludwig Ehrhart, 
Johannes Fisser, 
Matthias Heiss, 
Johannes Wagner, 
Nicolaus Gerlach. 



148) Aug. 15, 1750. Ship Royal Union, Clement Nichol- 
son, Commander, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Slug. 15, 1750. Daö ©d)iff dio^al Union, ßornmanbant Sie- 
ntent 9]i^olfon, 'oon 5tottevbam über Gon>ei2, braute gremte. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1750. 



229 



Jacob Grob,* 

John Brenbauer,* 

Jacob Karner,* 

J. J. 0. Driesch, 

Adam Staub, 

Casper Schmidt, 

PhiUp Prike,* 

Hans Prike,* 

Conradt Arnoldt, 

Jacob Stehr, 

Hans Weertz,* 

Matheas Rost,* 

Anthoni Emrich, 

Daniel Braun, 

Martin Schrenck,* 

Andreas Haas,* 

Andreas Hotz, 

Adam Long,* 

Gottlieb Utz, 

Michael Eyrich, 

Matheas Eyrich,* 

Felix Jung, 

Johann Georg, 

Philip Eberhart, 

Jacob Steebly,* 

Martin Schmitt, 

Nickel Faust, 

Abraham Gerhart,* 

Jacob Shmith,* 

Peter Hambro, 

Nickel Fass, 

Matheas Fesbely, 

Johannes Hartman, 

Peter Mann,* 

Daniel Düdi, 

Johann Wilhelm Lochmann, 

Herman Schwamm, 

Frederick Schnitzer, 

Johan Conrad Scheffer, 

Stephan Mürlich, 

Christoffel German, 



Henrich Hauenstein, 
Hans Michael Bauersachs, 
Andreas Hertzog, 
Hieronymus Schleider, 
Gustav Friederich Schleider, 
Heinrich Holtzman, 
Michael Luttman, 
Hans Georg Young,* 
Johan Martin Schwartz, 
Peter Ulrich Bauer, 
Johann Georg Utz, 
Hans Adam Kautzmann, 
Bernhard CEsterle, 
Job. Friederich Glassbrenner, 
Johan Jacob Ebenth, 
Ludwig von der Schmidt, 
Matheis Bernhardt, 
Johann Michael Schul, 
Johann Adam Berger, 
G. Adam Renecker,* 
Hans Martin Wurtz, 
Philip Peter Theyl * 
Johan Georg Spiettler, 
Fried. Christ. Kappeberger, 
Joachim Wilhelm Storck, 
Johan Philip Kirschbaum, 
Johan Michael Hollich, 
Johann Peter Perster, 
Johan Friederich Brecht, 
Johannes Trümper, 
Simon Leyteker,* 
Jacob Beensly,* 
Henrich Müller, 
Wilhelm Discher, 
Jonas Vogt, 
Henrich Bauer, 
Andreas Roth, 
Friederich Süber, 
Johann Gelberee, 
Hans Shoub,* 
Martin Shoub,* 

2Ö 



230 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Philip Dick, 
Wendel Bretz, 
Philip Fuchs, 
Philip Lenius, 
Johannes Bauer, 
Valentin Fidler, 
Martin Rubbert, 
Christian Rust, 
Jacob Handshy,* 
Friederich Paff, 
Friederich Miesch, 
Johannes Miesch, 
Joseph Zug, 
Martin Imhoff, 
Johannes Willar, 
Jacob Urering,* 
Valentin Schmeltzer,* 
Anthon Kräber, 
Johannes Paffler, 
Peter Wolff, 
PhUip Welde, 
Johannes Grimb, 
Philip Wilhertzbach, 
Frantz Brunnholtz, 
Philip Jacob Stiimpel, 
Valentin Gr. Bast, 
Friederich Jacob Cuiumer, 
Georg Hoffmann, 
Hans William Statily,* 
Henry Ully Statily,* 
Johan Andreas Jüngst, 
Johan Peter Dick, 
Dielman Fuchs, 
Nicol Merckhilusser, 
Johan Dietrich Duey, 



Johann Christian Duey, 

Wilhelm Müller, 

Johann Millerschurl,? 

Johan Adam Kern, 

Johann Jacob H el wig, 

Johan Philip Ludwig, 

G. Michael Kraus,* 

J. Nickolaus Sanger, 

Johann Peter Schneider, 

Job. Nicolaus Wertingisch, 

Johannes Schnebli, 

Johann Adam Schmeltzer, 

Johannes Christ. Brammeret, a 

Philip Wendel Opp, 

Friederich Wolff, 

Johannes Gamber, 

Matthäus Bastenmeye, 

Kilian Ganther, 

Johann Peter Benner, 

Isaac Widmer, 

Johannes Rohr, 

Henrich Wolff, 

Jacob Crebler,* 

Achior Crebler,* 

Jacob Rorrer,* 

Jacob Rincker,* 

Melchior Keeper,* 

Friederich Keeper,* 

Johannes Züiid, 

Henry Smith,* 

Henrich Felty, 

Putliy Weyss,* 

Rudolff Sherrer,* 

Henry Trolly,* 

Jacob Bercher, 



a Johannes Christian Brammeret is an unusually -well written chi- 
rograph, having appended to it, '■'going through the land." No doubt, 
a mere sojourner. — [Editor.) 

a 'Sj\t\t ^anbf^rtft tft ungcnjüt)u{td) flitt unb bat ben 3wf<i5 • //fcurc^'i^ 
Sanb geljenb." S[i}abri'ct)einltc^ nur ein 9?ci[enber.— (^trauögcbtr.) 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1750. 



231 



Henry Weys,* 
Eudolff Widmer * 
Hans Scheurer, 
Weirich Wagner, 
Henry Brinker,* 
Jacob Thumy,* 
Caspar Waldy,* 
Philip Bruner,* 
Jost Funck,* 
Johannes Knob, 
Rudi Mauerer, 
Anthony Suder,* 
Henry Redlinger,* 
Joseph Shomony,* 
Gallus Fricker,* 
Henry Sifry,* 
Jacob Schüredt, 
Georg Prall, 
Jacob Waasser, 
Tobias Pfister,* 
Jacob Lostatter,* 
Jacob Lostetter jr., 
Conrad Tshakky, 
Johannes Turny,* 
Peter Balsam,* 
Abraham Arb sen.. 
Christian Mosser,* 
Johannes Housser,* 
Isaac Greber, 
Hans Jacob Meyer, 
Leonhardt VonruflF, 
Lenhart Froly, 
Rudolph Hemming, 
Hans Georg Meyer,* 
Conrad Kuntzly,* 
Henrich Koch, 
Hans Michel Neraeker, 
Hans Conrad Steinman, 
Hans Jacob Zöble, 
Joseph Lenggenhar, 



Melchior Winkelman, 
Jacob Haassler,* 
Abraham Hasseler,* 
Hans Georg Shan,* 
Uhlerich Bitsferker,* 
Johannes Weidman, 
Johannes Bimmesdörflfer, 
Abraham Imoberstiich, 
Heinrich Harneist, 
Hans Jacob Bär, 
Heinrich Aleiss, 
Ludwig Engel,* 
Solomon Cauffman, 
Uhllerich Waldmer,* 
Heinrich Bauinger, 
Andreas Shneyder,* 
Johannes Zöpner, 
Hans von Huber, 
Rudolph Guttinger,* 
Conrad Weydman,* 
Christian Pf äher, 
Conrad Bücher,* 
Caspar Bücher, 
Heinrich Haller, 
Friederich Alenbach, 
H. Nicholas HeUing,* 
Michael Singer,* 
Conrad Kramer,* 
Heinrich Boshart, 
Hans Georg Hennold, 
Felix Housser,* 
Rudy Hausser, 
Jacob Fischer,* 
Adam Cheseches,? 
Jacob Wäspy,* 
Johannes Waspy,* 
Joachim Diehrig, 
Johannes Schneider, 
Johann Casper Schaff, 
Johann Adam Meng, 



232 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Johan Nickel Jung, Hans Adam Seydler,* 

Friederich Specht, Johan Paul Glehas. 

Marked "on board." — Probably confined by sickness: 
SSegci^net „an 33oarb". — SSa^rfc^einlic^ wegen ^ranf^eit ju* 
rücfgc^alten: 

Hans Smith, Henry Wurtz, Philip Bauer, Henrich Ham- 
bach, Henry Bretz, Ludwig Bretz, Sander Sanger, Jacob Ure- 
ring, Lorentz Ampel, Henry Bousman, Anthony Samber, Chris- 
toph Eyerman. 



149) Aug. 21, 1750. Ship Anderson, Hugh Campbell, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Slug. 21, 1750. ®(^tff Slnberfon, Sapitain ^ug:^ ^amphtU, 
oon 9tottert)am ükr Soweö. 



Christian Botz, 
Ludwig Horst,* 
Johannes Gunderman,* 
Martin Weber, 
Peter Hentzel, 
Gottfried Büttner, 
Samuel Lüthy,* 
Christoph Metz, 
Johannes Shmit,* 
Jacob Rüter, 
Christian Widman, 
Oswald Dups,* 
Conrad Häuser, 
Gerhart Führ, 
Conrad Derr, 
Lorentz Hauck, 
Jacob Dengler, 
Valentin Maitlin,* 
Jonas Mütschler, 
Johannes Hebel, 
Johan Miller,* 
Johannes Schauerer, 
Christoph Miller, 
Michael Wagenmann, 
Gerhart Birkenbeyly,* 



Johannes Marquardt, 
Johannes Bretz, 
Johann Beck,* 
Matheas Weymer,* 
Jacob Lyme,* 
Henry Reinfeld,* 
Johan Engel Gonderman, 
Johann Henrich Fick, 
Johannes Peter Jung, 
Johann Henrich Cuntz, 
Johan Georg Schneider, 
Johannes Henrich Ham, 
Johan Jacob Sturm, 
Johan Christian Sturm, 
Johan Heinrich Schuster, 
Job. Heinrich Mauden, 
Johannes Ludwig Beel, 
Johan WUhelm Beel, 
Johan Daniel Rheiner, 
Johan Henrich Schneider, 
Johann Michel Huber, 
Johan Jacob Huber, 
Johan INIartinus Reinhardt 
Johann Georg Reichman, 
Johann Christian Rick, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1750. 



233 



Johan Baltzer Schmith, 
Christian Kauffman,* 
Hans Georg Singer, 
Johan Georg Miller, 
Johannes Jacob Blässer, 
Johann Philip Benner, 
Georg Deobalt Aner, ? 
Johan Philip Rambach, 
Hans Georg Rath, 
Johan Peter Weiss, 
Johan Christophel Bretz, 
Johan Wilhelm Britzing, 
Melchior Bruner.* 
Jacob Beaver,* 
Georg Melcher, ? 
Andreas Shaad,* 
Jacob Ackermann, 
Lenhart Zebolt,* 



Philip Pop,* 
Jacob Heillman, 
Johannes Naumann, 
Christoph Steiner, 
Conrad Plesher,? 
Urban Friebele, 
Johann Ludwig Etter, 
Johann Peter Batz, 
Johann Peter Becker, 
Johann Philip Noll, 
Johann Jacob Bop, 
Reinhart Hasenbürger, 
Johann Theis Schmidt, 
Johannes Schwartzhaud, 
Johann Gottlieb Naumann, 
Johan Conrad Ruff, 
Henrich Leuchthold. 



150) Aug. 24, 1750. Ship Brothers, Muir, Captain, from 
Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 271 passengers. 

Slug. 24, 1750. ©d)tff 33rot^erö, ßapitain S^uir, »on SHot- 
271 ^affagtere. 



terbam über Someä 
Adam Shnyder,* 
Adam Weaber,* 
'Erasmus Hess, 
Jacob Gerdner,* 
Johannes Koch, 
Johannes (Ehrle, 
Philip Kawtzman,* 
Christian Shott,* 
Jacob Keller, 
Johannes Wälder,* 
Joseph Nagel,* 
Abraham Schneider, 
Adam Mensch,* 
Abraham Glass,* 
Christian Fried, 
Johannes Friessner, 
Friederich Miller,* 



Peter Meyer,* 
Benedict Krieger, 
Andreas Frey, 
Casper Caarel,* 
Daniel Cabel,* 
Nickolas Rome,* 
J. Nickolas Holl,* 
F. Philip Holl,* 
J. Adam Lucas,* 
Johann Jacob Kimmel, 
John Lenard Miller,* 
Johann Leonhard Groh, 
Johann Peter Seger, 
Johann Henrich Keller, 
Johan Georg Keller, 
Johann Adam Körner, 
Johann Georg Weiss, 



20^ 



234 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Johann Philip Weiss, 
Johannes Blumenschein, 
Johan Georg Höring, 
Johann Georg Gans,* 
Johan Nickel Ganss, 
Johan Nicklaus Helm, 
Joh. Georg Scheunberger, 
Johann Matheis Schäffer, 
Jacob Friederich Sahn, 
Johan Peter Schmunck, 
Johan Georg Drear,* 
Hans Martin Sürfes, 
Hans Peter Müller, 
Johann Daniel Hoffmann, 
Johan Heinrich Hauck, 
Johann Georg Zerr, 
Johann Philip Hüller, 
Hans Georg Frey, 
Engelhart Wagner,* 
Jost Jacoby, 
Mattheis Miller, 
J. Jacob Freysh,* 
Martin Dreisbach, 
Martin Reich,? 
Martin Weaber,* 
Otto Dan. Neuer, 
J. Leon. Reish,* 
Hans Geo. Stauch, 



J. Jacob Reybolt,* 
Martin Ulmer,* 
Hans Geo. Ganshom, 
Johannes Stroll, 
G. Adam Bartholt,* 
Adam Eberle, 
Con. Israel Oberle, 
Joh. Hen. Leeseman, 
George Adam Barttel,* 
G. Michael Rommigh,* 
Hans Georg Ronmiigh,* 
Johann Jacob Schuster, 
Joh. Jacob Wagner, 
Johann Henrich Gamber, 
Georg Michael Gamber, 
Johann Peter Krämer, 
Johann Jacob Bernauer, 
Hans Philip Bender, 
Johan Georg Koop, 
Johann Adam Franck, 
Johan Conrad Schultz, chir.j 
Johann Georg Müller, 
Johann Adam Edelmann, 
Johan Peter Laudenschleger, 
Johan Ludwig Rauhzahn, 
Johan Peter Fölker, 
Georg Adam Young.* 



151) Aug. 28, 1750. Ship Two Brothers, Thomas Amt, 
Captain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Slug. 28, 1750. ©c^ijf %m 33rotf)erg, Capitain %t)mai 
Stmt, öon 3flottert)aitt über Solvex. 



Philip Peter,* 
Frederich Prophet,* 
Christopher Gerner, 
Johannes Kreutzwisser, 
David Metzger, 
Jacob Stein, 
Christoph Albrecht,* 



Peter Hergedt, 
Baltazar Löffler,* 
Stephan Kneisel,* 
Johannes Kerlinger, 
Daniel Sommer,* 
Johannes Battenfeld, 
Philip Battenfeld, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1750. 



235 



Sebastian Werner,* 
Leonhart Heichel,* 
Johannes Stoll, 
Johannes Böhmer, 
Lucas Schäffer, 
Johan Georg Huber, 
Johan Matheis Gerner, 
Hans Georg Gerner, 
Johann Adam Holtz,* 
Georg Michael Schupp, 
Hans George Seacoist,* 
Hans Martin Eche, 
Hans Adam Pfisterer, 
Hans Adam Pfesterer,* 
PhiUp Peter Huff, 
Hans Adam Battenfeld, 
Johann Heinrich Leibung, 
Johann Friedrich Thomas, 
Johann Jacob Schäffer, 
Johann Wilhelm Stoll, 
Johann Peter Böhmer, 
Johann Wilhelm Gölb, 
Johann Paulus Müller, 
Johann Wilhelm Schneider, 
Michael Meli, 
Jacob Roller, 
Martin Dups, 
Christian Matheis, 
Jacob Bosch, 
Andreas Wentz, 
Michael Waltz,* 
Jacob Kehle, 
Jacob Bloss, 
Johannes Becker,* 
Jacob Weis,* 
Martin Weis,* 
Jacob Daniel, 
Bernhart Berch,* 
Tobias Muller,* 
Tobias Müller jr., 
Matheus Brundle, 



Mattheis Seufried, 
Eberhart Bichel, 
Matheis Rössler, 
Jacob VoUtzer,? 
Michael Tybly,* 
Peter Martin, 
Mattheis Martin, 
Johannes Warner,* 
Lorentz Spatz, 
Henry Hillinger,* 
Mathias Berger,* 
Johannes Jung, 
Hans Martin Kollmer, 
D. Bernhart Rothbaus,* 
Hans Christoph Englerth, 
Jacob Adam Nonnenmacher, 
Hans Balthas Buck, 
Johann Jacob Klein, 
Hans Georg Sauerbreu, 
Johannes Billheimer,* 
Hans Adam Shmit,* 
Hans Georg Geltz,* 
Hans Georg Weiss, 
Johan David Bichel, 
Hans Georg Rudel, 
Johann Jacob Braun, 
Christoph Friedrich Reutter, 
Hans Georg Müller, 
Hans Wendel Seufried,* 
Joseph Seufried, 
Job. Christoph Breitzinger, 
Hans Georg Marich, 
Christoph Buckbeck, 
Hans Georg Dischler, 
Johan Friederich Risch, 
Christoph Meyer,* 
Hans Georg Saal, 
Philipp Dellinger, 
Joseph Stumbff, 
J. Daniel Printz. 



236 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Sick — J. Gottlieb Weniger, Baltazar Munster, Andreas Dürr, 
Hans Jacob JMetzsrer. 



152) Aug. 28, 1750. Ship Phoenix, John Mason, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 339 passengers. 

Slug. 28, 1750. ®(^iff m'öniv, (Sapitain 3ol)n ma\on, »on 
JRottcrbam über Soroeö mit 339 ^^üffagiercn. 



Erdman Schultz, 

Johannes Seltzer, 

Simon Peter, 

Christian Bernhardi, 

Jacob Saber,* 

Jacob Patz, 

Johann Georg Leyss, 

Johan Ludwig Schieber, 

Johan Nickel Vogelgesang, 

Johan Conrad Protzman, 

John Henry Weydigh,* 

Johan Georg Kalteisen, 

Jean Drapet, 

Caspar Bruner,* 

Michel Peter, 

Henrich Gerlart, 

Haus Wirheiner, 

Jacob Moog,* 

Ernst Böhm, 

Conrad Zellner,* 

Georg Betzier, 

Peter Seigendaller,* 

Ulrich Seigendaller,* 

Johannes Peter, 

George Hultzler,* 

Jacob Sheel,* 

Jacob Prison,* 

Henry Yeal,* 

George Yure,* 

George Saling,* 

George Kop,* 

Jacob Werly,* 

Conrad Hay,* 



Dewald Theil,* 
Jacob Beb, 
David Frarry,* 
Jacob Muni jr.,* 
Jacob Muni sen.,* 
Debolt Beck, 
Peter Dinck, 
Henry Herman,* 
Michael Cuntz,* 
Andreas Hotz, 
Georg Hauss, 
Peter Schmitt, 
Jacob Riffel, 
Peter Erhart,* 
Dietrich Erhart,* 
Debalt Frantz, 
Frantz Anton, 
Georg Gees,* 
Joseph Waltz, 
Philip Hind,* 
Jacob Anthoni, 
Solomon Phillips, 
Johan David Schmitt, 
Johan Wilhelm Hertzog, 
Johan Jacob Peter, 
Michael Forbringcr,* 
Heinrich Eberhard, 
Johann Wilhelm Weiss, 
Johan Gottfried Rüger, 
Carl Ernst Rüger, 
Georg Siegenthahller, 
Johan Jacob Reich, 
Philip Jacob Volandt, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1750. 



237 



Hans Michel Nothsteiu, 
John George Debald,* 
Henry Haberman,* 
Michael Lehman, 
Christian Muni,* 
Conrad Muni,* 
Hans Ulrich Schleppi, 
Andreas Muni,* 
Christopf Durrenberger,* 
Michael Berger,* 
Hans Jacob Seuter, 
Nicklaus Yeisly,* 
Johann Georg Herman, 
Andreas Diemer, 
Johan Friederich Röhn, 
Dewald Kuntz, 
Johan David Ziffel, 
Johannes Zurbrück, 
Martin Buchman,* 
Jacob Buchman,* 
Georg Hans Anthoni, 
Nicklaus Jacob, 
Georg Friederich Lintz, 
Johannes Meyer,* 
Carl Seusterditz, 
Christoph Fischer, 
Adam Hiltenbrandt, 
Abraham Shopffer,* 
Martin Burchhardt, 
Michael Straub, 
George Lindeman,* 
George Hatzinger,* 
Henry Meyer,* 
Michael Kapp, 
Ulrich Fooks,* 
Dewalt Fooks,* 
George Lohr,* 
Jacob Werner, 
Peter Bern, 
Nicklaus Hegi, 
Jacob Haber, 



Peter Schirmer, 

Hans Braun, 

Valentin Mochel, 

Heinrich Müller, 

Jacob Paule, 

Johannes Lips,* 

Abraham Enderly,* 

Christian Gross, 

Carl Heiser, 

Jacob Heck, 

Johan Solomon,* 

Jacob Meyer,* 

Jacob Fisher,* 

Adam Weiss, 

Paul Weber, 

Johan Grimm, 

Hans Müler,* 

Godlieb Bobe,* 

George Matler,* 

Henrich Presler, 

Debalt Farringer,* 

Killian Jaac,* 

Conrad Hefer,? 

Georg Voltz, 

Martin Jost,* 

Philip Finck,* 

Michael Fischer, 

Gottlieb Thurm, 

Nicklaus Kiffer,* 

Jacob Schoch, 

Philipp Ferber, 

Andreas Engel, 

Peter Will, 

Hans George Eter,* 

Anthoni Grieser, 

Georg Henrich Etter, 

Jacob Friederich West, 

Johannes Wedel, 

Johan Friederich von Bohr, 

Joh. Andonus von Bohr, 

Gottfried Thiele, 



238 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Christophel Pfuller, 
Johan Otmansdorff,* 
Jacob Laubenliauer, 
Michael Shalleberger,* 
Ernst Jacob Dippberger, 
Michael Lederman, 
David Dieterich, 
Christian Andrae, 
Johann Jacob Heiser, 
Gottfried Peuckert, 
Johan Tobias Zimmerman, 
Friederich Zimmerman,* 
Joh. Michael Heuschkell, 
Joh. Christof Heuschkell, 
Benjamin Heuschkell, 
David Ensminger, 
George Reinhart,* 
Hans Heinrich Nacht, 
Abraham RithmüUer, 
Paneratius Reichhelfc, 
Hans Weckerling, 
Adam Huberling,* 
Philip Friederich Winther, 
Johan Georg Malle, 
Andreas Wittenmeyer, 
Joseph Gerber, 
Johannes Phillipi, 
Johannes Phillipi jr., 
Andreas Phillipi, 
Christian PhUipy, 
Hans Jacob Liebenguth, 
Hans Jacob Liebenguth jr., 
Peter Liebenguth, 
Johann Jacob Leininger, 
Nicklaus Jost, 



Hannes Gerber,* 
George Shep,* 
Dewalt Nagel,* 
Caspar Shmit,* 
Georg Clauss, 
Christian Gurdner,* 
Johannes Philipi, 
Marx Dahleth, 
Christian His,? 
Hans Blasser,* 
Hans Deterig,* 
George Viet,* 
Jacob Kloti, 
Philip Stock, 
Ulrich Eggler, 
Sirach Schultz, 
Hans Wagner,* 
Adam Reistebacher, 
Ludwig Wohlfahrt, 
Joseph Peter Bauer, 
Georg Engelhart,? 
Ludwig Wittenmeyer, 
Heinrich Sterchi, 
PhUipp Waletein, 
Joh. Gottfried Zichelhart, 
Wilhelm Ehrman, 
Thomas Shlighter,* 
Nickolaus Shlighter,* 
Han Geo. Dierenberger, 
Paulus Christian, 
Hans Georg Ludwick, 
Peter Haberstick,* 
Johannes Steckel,* 
Hans Georg Schultz, 
Jacob Guntzerhausser. 



153) Aug. 31, 1750. Ship Nancy, Thomas Cautom, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 270 passengers. 

2lug. 31, 1750. ©d^iff ^lanc^, ßapitain Z^omai (Eantom, 
»on 9tottert)am über (Sotreö mit 270 S^eifenten. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1750. 



239 



Johannes Vollmer, 
Daniel Bohset, 
Martin Müller, 
Lorentz Schcnck, 
Joseph Stähle, 
Friederich Gans, 
Johann Grans, 
Thomas Gans,* 
Georg Heuling, 
Johannes Zweigle, 
Michael llieder, 
Andreas Brauer, 
Michel Hensel, 
Johannes Heide, 
Christoph Kendtel, 
Johannes Glasser, 
Jonas Raub, 
Friederich Weiss, 
"Wilhelm Gettling, 
Geo. Hen. Lutz, 
Joh. Bernhardt Riede, 
Balthas Federhoff, 
Bernhart 3.ockenstihl, 
Daniel Haubersack, 
Joh. Conrad Raisch, 
Joh. Tobias Rudolph, 
Hans Georg Hetle, 
Martin Jommel, 
Johan Georg Bauer, 
Joh. Bernhart Wünsch, 
Johann Georg Sieger, 
Johann Georg Müsse, 
Geo. David Schneider, 
Hans Georg Kuhm, 
Johan Jacob Cantz, 
Han Georg Beiterman, 
Hau Jacob Beiterman, 
Joh. Fried. Unrath jr., 
Geo. Henrich Lutz jr., 
Geo. Wilhelm Marx, 
Joh. Geo. Marx, 



Christian Fautz, 
Joh. Jacob Weiss, 
Michael Förster, 
Jeremias Horngacher, 
Christian Hornberger, 
Andreas Rahnfelder, 
Beruhart Gilbert,* 
Christoph Wetzel, 
Frantz Kühlwein, 
Jacob Würth, 
Andreas Singel, 
Johann Herholt, 
Christian Blosser,* 
Johannes Low, 
Christian Giebeler, 
TUman Creutz, 
Johann Gitting, 
Johannes Rehbach, 
Johannes Jung, 
David Nuss, 
Philip Grabeman, 
Immanuel Bager, 
Henrich Wil. Stiege!, 
Joh. Ludwig Traber, 
Han Georg Benner, 
Joh. Nicklaus Gilbert, 
Joh. Jacob Gobel, 
Joh. Georg Gilbert, 
Johan Jacob Baum, 
Hans Georg Gilbert, 
Han Adam Herbalt, 
Joh. Philip Hautz, 
Han Jacob Gilbert, 
Joh. Jacob Barth, 
Jost Henrich Wehler, 
Joh. Peter Gutelius, 
Joh. Jacob Brumbach, 
J. Daniel Sheyder,* 
Dilmanus Weissgerber, 
Johan Peter Kleim,* 
Joh. Henrich Comrath, 



240 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Johan Henrich Klein, 
J. Henry Seidensticker,* 



Johan Henrich Jung, 
Joh. Georg Braunsberg. 



154) Sept. 12, 1750. Ship Priscilla, WilUam Wilson, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 210 passengers. 

<Bept 12, 1750. ®d)iff ^rt^JcüIa, Sapitain Sötmam Söilfon, 
»Ott Siottcrtiam ükr Soweö. — 210 Stdfenbe. 



Christian Reutzel, 
Johannes Grack, 
Conrad Grack, 
Peter Hartman,* 
Nicklaus Weininger, 
George Cunkel,* 
Andreas Schuster, 
Valentin Born, 
Nicklaus SchäfFer, 
Johannes Guckel, 
Johannes Rauck, 
Johannes Mayer, 
Conrad Hertzog, 
Kaspar Oberdorff, 
Daniel Resseler,* 
John Henry Ritzel,* 
Joh. Wilhelm Reutzel, 
Friederich Steinberger, 
Han Mich. Wissner sen., 
Han Mich. Wissner jr., 
Joh. Henrich Rössler, 
Geo. Henrich Rasch, 
George Ernst Rish,* 
Joh. Georg Keyser, 
eToh. Georg Rössler, 
Joachim Gottschalck, 
Eberhart Steygerwaldt, 
Johan Adam Börner, 
Georg Ernst Becker, 
Han Andreas Kachel, 
Johannes Stang, 
Johannes Huth, 
Wilhelm Adelman, 



Johannes Mauss, 
Andreas Oberdorff, 
Friederich Shnyder,* 
Johannes Ommerth, 
Valentin Corngiber,* 
Henrich Lotz, 
Michael Roth,* 
Thomas Bertholt,* 
Peter Günder, 
Johannes Plott, 
Johannes Heyl,* 
Georg Waihdel, 
Ludwig Shmith, 
Balzer Jäger, 
Johannes Föller, 
Balthazar Filler,* 
Johannes Lamb,* 
Carl Russ,* 
Andi'eas (Etzel, 
Joh. Jacob Newman,* 
Wendel Lawmeister, 
Johan Straushaar, 
Balthazer Simmons,* 
Christian Hartting, 
Johan Melchior Orth, 
Johan Adam Roth, 
Joh. Baltzer Stockel, 
Ernst Phil. Kirscher, 
Johannes Schuman, 
Johann Peter Muth, 
Nicklas Berninger,* 
Melchior Kleinfelter,* 
Johannes Möller, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1750. 



241 



Joh. Simon Oberdorff,''' 
Carl Miller,* 
Johannes Diemer, 
Joh. Michael Stoflel,* 



Joh. Henry Rulley,* 
Simon Schierher, 
Conrad Rossler, 
Joh. Henrich Liff. 



155) Sept. 29, 1750. Ship Osgood, WiUiam Wilkie, Cap- 
tain, from llotterdam, last from Cowes. — 480 passengers. 

«Sept. 29, 1750. eci)iff DcniooD, eapitain Sßimam 3Bilfic. 
öon Stotterbam über (Eome^. — 480 JHeifente. 



Hendrich Bronk,* 
Yerrick Wisht,* 
Jacob Wist,* 
Laurantius Wüst, 
Jacob Wüst, 
Christoph Shmit,* 
Michael Shmit,* 
Johannes Greiner, 
Conrad Toll,* 
Georg Becker, 
Johannes Seyl, 
Jacob Clauser,* 
Henry Clauser,* 
Nicklaus Burg,* 
Nicholaus Hörner, 
Friederich Hörner, 
Han Geo. Hautzenbieler, 
Andre Baudemont, 
Hans Adam Kney, 
Valentin Petermann, 
Wilhelm Humbert, 
Heinrich Hörner, 
Johannes Schwab, 
Gabrial Leydy,* 
Friederich Reist, 
Gottlieb Kauifman,* 
Mattheis Schnepp, 
Bartolomaeus Eppler, 
Hans Baltas Otz, 
Han George Zigler,* 
Joh. Martin Neher, 



Joh. Georg Speidel, 
Michael Peterman,* 
Georg Dick,* 
Christian Faas,* 
Jacob Krebs,* 
Eder Deghe,* 
Jacob Schoch, 
Peter Stotz, 
Ludwig Sotz, 
F. Schweitzer, 
Rudolph Christi, 
Jacob Keamigh,* 
Jacob Glohser, 
Lorentz Dobbler,* 
Ludwig Readwile,* 
Georg Ulrich, 
Philip Jacob, 
Durst Cantick,* 
Frederich Kuntz, 
Michel Bele, 
Ludwig Bitzer, 
Ludwig Eiszele, 
Hans Netischeh, 
Ludwig Moritz, 
Friederich Gauss, 
Johannes WolfFer, 
Christian Schmoller, 
Anthony Shnyder,* 
Jacob Frasch, 
Matheas IMeyer,* 
Michael Eusinger, 



21 



242 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Heinrich Dietmar, 
Christian Eyserloh, 
Emanuel Brittschedt, 
Christian Heussler, 
Michael Heinrich,* 
Andreas Knodler,* 
Christian Knotz, 
Sebastian Rayster, 
Johan Michael jr., 
Christoph Albrecht, 
Conrad Bender, 
Johannes Schnell, 
Joh. Fried. Sautter, 
Jacob Schneider, 
Georg Scheufläen, 
Christian Schuhler, 
Jacob Scheufläen, 
Hans G-eorg Crietz, 
Han Martin Wolffer, 
Andreas Herther, 
Johannes Moritz, 
Joh. Michael Rietweill, 
Johan Arnold Kuntz, 
Johannes Dinges, 
Conrad Wittman, 
Gottlieb Mittelberger, 
Nicolaus Haugendobler, 
Joh. Wendel Ackerman, 
Joh. Georg Ackerman, 
Han Bastian Eberhard, 
Loren Marque Daudt, 
Hans Georg Marti, 
Joh. Georg Ludwig,* 
Hans Martin Waltz, 
Hans Jacob Binder, 
Johann Georg Gauss, 
Hans Georg Meyer,* 
Han Martin Kienstein, 



Han Mart. Kienstein jr., 
Joh. Henrich Binder, 
Joh. Christian Seindel, 
Joh. Gottfried Richter, 
Joh. Gottolb Hoppe, 
Han Geo. Koberstein, 
Johann Martin Kast, 
Jacob Fried. Kümmerley, 
Han George Fackler,* 
Han Georg Knodler, 
Han Geo. Schweigarth, 
Han Georg Murr, 
Han Georg Kreutz, 
Hans Geo. Schnawffer,* 
Han Mich. Dentzer, 
Joh. Daniel Bosch, 
Valentin Heygis, 
Georg Heigis, 
Mattheis Miller, 
Christian Stotz, 
Bernhardt Rust, 
Jacob Ehele, 
Jacob EUheim, 
Jacob UhUerich,* 
Andreas Hertcher,* 
Hans Jac. Shanker,* 
Louis Gerizeh, 
Johan Jacob Bosch, 
Hans Georg Hutekunst, 
Johan Peter Bender, 
Johan Peter Bender jr., 
Johan Philip Mofhel,? 
Hans Ludwig Zimmerman, 
Hans Georg Mofhel,? 
Hans Ludwig Stein, 
Hans Martin Müller, 
Philipp Joseph Schilling, 
Hans Georg Basch. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1750. 



243 



156) Sept. 17, 1750. 
Captain, from London. 

(Sept. 17, 1750. (Sc^ 
^apleton, »on itJonton 

Christoff Reushaw,* 
Joseph Reiff,* 
Peter Millend,* 
Ludwig Falck, 
Jacob Winkler,* 
Hans Stuber,* 
Nicklas Dick,* 
Hans Stohl,* 
Hans iimmich,* 
Hans Stuber,* 
Jacob Furrer,* 
Jacob Dick,* 



Brigantine Sally, William Hassleton, 

neHfaljrer ©atl^, dapitaitt SBiUiam 

Hans Uhlerich Winsh,* 
Johan Gottfried Kiele, 
Hans Christian Scheffeler, 
Friederich Schärschier, 
Johannes Kuhn, 
Hans Georg Keller, 
Christoff Coblet,* 
Christian Stober, 
Hans George Frey,* 
Hans Knerr,* 
Jacob Miller,* 
Abraham Yarsing.* 



157) Nov. 3, 1750. Ship Brotherhood, John Thomson, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 300 passengers. 

5^00. 3, 1750. Schiff 33rot^er(}oot», Sapitain 3o^n 2:i)omfon, 
»on 9lottert)am über 4on?eö. — 300 Steifenie. 



Conrad Laubsher,* 
Johannes Schaffer, 
Simon Minch, 
Teobalt WUliahr, 
Matheis Hoffner, 
Jacob Stark,* 
Jacob Sicher,* 
Peter Sicher, 
Mattheis Brückert, 
Johan Jacob Laubscher, 
Johann Nicolaus Schaffer, 
Johann Elias Wüüahr, 



Johan Adam Heys,* 
Georg Friederich Bayer, 
Johann Peter Brickli, 
Johann Jacob Maag, 
Hans Georg Schaufler, 
Johann Nicolaus Meck,a 
Pierre Paris, 
Isaac Paris, 
Henrie Jeune, 
Michael Swing,* 
Johannes Schock, 
Peter Hahn, 



a Died at Harrisburg, April 16, 1803, aged 71 years, 4 months and 
4 days. He was the Editor's wife's Proavus. 

a «Starb ju ^arrtöburg am 16. Stpril 1803 m einem 2llter oon 71 3al)' 
ren, 4 90?onaten unb 4 3;agen. Sr \x>cix itx Urgroguater iix grau beö 
$erau0geber^. 



244 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Jacob Frey, 
Michael Seitz, 
Johannes Albreeht,* 
Johannes Kreuss, 
Nicolaus Bonn, 
Johannes Bonn,* 
Nicklas Weisman,* 
Michael Weisman,* 
Paul lemel, 
Wilhelm Trün, 
Philip Leister, 
Hans Ziesser, 
Nicklas Leyster,* 
Peter Bassler, 
Joseph Bassler, 
Jacob Bassler, 
Jacob Schowalter, 
Henry Stigel,* 
Peter Fahren, 
Joseph Fahren, 
Johannes Rub,* 
Jacob Lichty,* 
Johannes Mast, 
Peter Stuky,* 
Hans König,* 
Hans Zorr,* 
Joseph Meyer,* 
Michael HöUey, 
Peter Fisher,* 
Philip Feillem, 
Michael Wurm,* 
Ludwig Fetzer,* 
Peter Knabe,* 
Hans Blauch, 
Hans Knebel, 
Michael Stuky,* 
Hans Siegrist, 
John Jost Shwalb,* 
Johan Jacob Woikemer, 
Peter Ratenbürger, 
Joh. Henrich KübUnger, 



Joh. Christoffel Hembel, 
Sebastian Käppier, 
Christian Däublin, 
Johannes Lehman, 
Johannes Showalter, 
Christian Showalter, 
Peter Lugenbiehl, 
Christian Eidenes, 
Christian Bleich, 
Heinrich Schwartz, 
Christian Kauffman, 
Johann Philipp Eckeil, 
Johan Jacob Lösch, 
Johannes Rohrer, 
Johan Adam Stohr, 
Johannes Schneider, 
Johannes Bassler, 
Jacob Schowalter sen., 
Peter Schowalter, 
Simon Wisham,* 
Christian Rub,* 
Jacob Bürth, 
Johannes Holly, 
Nicolaus Mihller, 
Christian Furrer,* 
Andreas HoUey, 
Peter Delebach, 
Christian Neycomer,* 
Johan Georg Beck, 
WUhelm Werner,* 
Hans Gundelfinger,* 
Jacob Naftziger, 
Christian Knebel,* 
Hans Hertzler, 
Johannes Hertzler, 
Johann Jost Weigandt, 
Georg Daniel Orth, 
Melchior Geissert, 
Jacob Mössinger, 
Jacob Berg, 
Jacob Reif,* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1750. 



245 



Georg Weiss, 
Jacob G-raf, 
Jacob Behr, 
Hans Funck, 
Paul Roth,* 
Christian Neuman, 



Martin Funck, 
Georg Rebschleger, 
Jacob Hausser, 
Nicolaus Schmidt, 
Johannes Hausser, 
Johan Georo; Bauer. 



158) Nov. 30, 1750. Ship Sandwich, Hazelwood, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 200 passengers. 

9^0». 30, 1750. «Schiff ©anbiüid), CSapitain .^a3eltt)0üt), üon 
Stottcrbam über ßoweg. — 200 9tetfente. 



Jacob Simre, 
Johan Ludwig, 
Peter Sallatin,* 
Christian Fiess, 
Jacob Rumel,* 
Daniel Fahrne, 
Joseph Klöpster, 
Jacob Traub, 
Heinrich Schmidt, 
Johannes Koch,* 
Adam Weygel, 
Daniel Debuss, 
Henry Hartzel,* 
Johannes Moll, 
Hans BoUinger, 
Andreas Meutz, 
John Eshbach,* 
Paulus Grouudler,* 
George Brech,* 
Johannes Leitz, 
Philip Gassman, 
Michael Möggy,* 
Henrich Stumpf, 
George Casper,* 
John Martin,* 
Henry Haan,* 
Peter Mantz, 
Casper Peter, 
Johannes Reel,* 



Jacob Breys, 
Jacob Shmit,* 
Michael Frankhauser, 
Johann Georg Gass, 
Georg Philip Rumel, 
Johan Philip Körgert, 
Leonhart Rupperter, 
Johannes Willdanger, 
Mattheis Wilfanger, 
Martin Dcinberger, 
Johannes Knauss, 
Johannes Weygel, 
Johann Peter Gläffer, 
Nicolaus Lorentz,* 
Peter Huffshmit,* 
Jacob Bollinger,* 
Johannes Fuchs, 
Johan Peter Lamberty, 
Hans Adam Biebel, 
Joh. Christoph Laubach,* 
Joh. Bernhardt Kessler, 
George Christ. Deull,* 
Georg Philip Teul, 
Joh. Henrich Wäydemann, 
Johan Adam Gross, 
Georg Adam Wagner, 
John Georg Wagner, 
Kasper Ristnach, 
Wendel Hermann,* 

21* 



246 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Friederich Schenckel, 
Johan Jacob Koch, 
Johannes Fleisher,* 
Michael Fiinfrock, 
Peter Shmit,* 
Martin Nazurus,* 
Philip Leher, 
Ulerich Tuxly,=^ 
Rolandt May, 
Georg (Ess, 
Daniel Bricker, 
Moritz Wöber, 
Jacob Spitler, 
Martin Piere, 
Jost Habgehes, ? 
Friederich Schor sen., 
Friederich Yor jr., 



Hans Weber, 
Michael Schor, 
Nicklaus Schande, 
Job. Friederich Eager, 
Job. Anthon Schwartz, 
Job. PhUip Schwartz, 
Job. Anthonius Körner, 
Christian Hagen, 
Konrath Imboff, 
Lorentz Shmitly,* 
Michael Hans Peter, 
Jacob Behrt,* 
Wolfgang Job. Henhey, 
Engelhart Yeiser, 
Gottlieb Beckley,* 
Caspar Mayer. 



159) Aug. 26, 1751. Ship Anderson, Hugh Campbell, Mas- 
ter, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes, — fifty Roman Catho- 
lics. — 236 passengers. 

31ug. 26, 1751. <3^iff 2lnt>erfon, (Sapitatn ^ug^ Sampbell, 
»on 9tottert»am über dom^, — fünfgig 3fiömifc^=^^at^o(if(^c. — 236 
9tetfent»e. 



Lorentz Durst,* 
Mathias Rost,* 
Jacob Maud,* 
Joseph Strosle,* 
Hans Martz,* 
George Hoozer,* 
Sebastian Greim, 
Adam Greim, 
Hans Riter, 
Peter Klein, 
Martin Clain,* 
Joseph Voltz, 
Hans Adam, 
Hans Shaver,* 
Pbüip Kinder,* 
Andreas Hyder, 



Peter Wehrner, 
Hans ScheflPer, 
Michael Morith,* 
Lorentz Leble, 
Jost Stroh, 

Hans Georg Hummerle, 
Johannes Frick, 
Hans Georg Hook, 
Michael Chrisback,* 
Johannes Bower,* 
Ludwig Werner,* 
Job. Friederich Geyer, 
Peter Breelinger, 
Anthony Yauble,* 
Abraham Rinebart,* 
Ulrich Bernhart,* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1751. 



247 



Hans Jacob Bemath, 

Hans Georg Schneider, 

Michael Dannerinborgen sen., 

Michael Dannerinborgen, 

Johannes Zimmer,* 

Hajis Casper Stiindter, 

Joseph Kiebell, 

Georg Arbengast, 

Hans Michael Koonts,* 

Michael Sommer, 

Matheis Flach, 

Lorentz Shiney,* 

Michael Barle, 

Michael Weidt, 

George Reyser,* 

Adam Storch,* 

Otto Haase, 

Johannes Fürster, 

Henrich Fürster, 

Valentin Clamdy, 

George Miller,* 

Joseph Wittemer,* 

Hans Petersheim, 

Christoph Fleur, 

Hans Straub,* 

Hans Metz,* 

Christian Ritz, 

Adam Gehrich, 

Peter Weber, 

Jacob Meier, 

Jacob Minjan,* 

Bastian Nögle, 



Johannes Geiger, 
Daniel Miller,* 
Henrich Erferdt, 
Joseph Joram, 
Henry Demanche,* 
Johan Jost Franck, 
Carl Wiederholt, 
Bartholomäus Weid, 
Valentine Loomyer, 
Joh. Abraham Arbeiter, 
Job. Christian Schauer, 
Wilhelm Hammer, 
Joh. Kilian Feltmann, 
Johannes Seyffarth, 
Joh. Michael Deininger, 
Hans Georg Spang, 
Dominique Fleur, 
Jacob Tschieringer, 
Joh. Dietrich Hostender, 
H. Michael Metz, 
H. Martin Vaudalin, 
Joh. Caspar Jungmann, 
Jeremias Taubenheim,* 
Matthias Schwartzwelder, 
Hans Georg Felber, 
Johannes Hildebrand, 
Johan Georg Reichwein, 
Joh. Christoph Ohle, 
Joh. Michael Gistelbarth, 
Johan Christian Alter, 
Augustus Milchsack. 



160) Sept. 5, 1751. Ship Shirley, James Allen, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Orkney, Scotland, — three Roman 
Catholics. — 288 passengers. 

®ept. 5, 1751. @^iff ©^irlep, Sapitafn pameö Mm, oon 
JRotterbam über Drfne^, S^ottlant), — trei 9tömi[^=^at^oIifc^e. 
2B8 3fleifent)e. 



248 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Leonard Maas, 
Johannes Fähr, 
Mattheus Keuffer, 
Henry Uhrer,* 
Heinrich Wagner, 
Jacob Huth, 
jMichael Schneider, 
GottUeb Roth,* 
Johannes Heiss, 
^Michael Weiss, 
Hans Greorg Betz, 
Christoff Ludewig,* 
Georg Jacob Fisar,? 
Johan Michael Sholty, 
Joh. Georg Schumacher, 
Johan Caspar Spring, 
Johan Martin Kroll, 
Johan Philip Wagner, 
Hans Georg Klobly,* 
Johann Georg Curr, 
Johan Lorentz, 

Georg Giebler, 

Heinrich Crafft, 

Thomas Geiner,* 

Friederich Zinn, 

Georg Schürth, 

Jacob Schauckert, 

Jacob Shack,* 

Henrich Curr, 

Martin Leyer, 

Nickolas Mildeberger,* 

Lorentz Ludwig,* 

Ludwig Schüttler, 

Fredrick Sheiz,* 

George Frantz,* 

Georg Kleeh, 

Johann Grosskopff,* 

Daniel Pracht,* 

Georg Baisbach, 

Georg Kreuller, 

Andreas Kuhn,* 



Christoph Gnässle, 
Burkhart Heinrich, 
Wendel Miech, 
Isaac Paris, 
Johannes Ney,* 
Stephan Schertzer, 
Samuel Shweyart,* 
Baizar Henning,* 
Veit Meister, 
Conrad Sampel, 
Johannes Gilbert, 
Frederick Krafft, 
Christian Mook, 
Christian Sholl,* 
Lenhart Sumer,* 
Michael Arnold,* 
Dietrich Böhm, 
Peter IMugler, 
Christian Riger,* 
Frederich Gross, 
David Frank, 
Hans Martin Seyfeird, 
Georg Adam Stör, 
Hans Adam Grämlich, 
Joh. Bernhard Shrank,* 
Hans Georg Schrauck, 
Johann Michael Wagner, 
Johannes Jacob Braun, 
Hans Andreas Zilling, 
Geo. Conrad Schweighart, 
Hans Adam Franck, 
Johan Friedrich Teibz,* 
Hans Henrich Kautzmaun 
Georg ]\Iichel Walcker, 
F. Johannes Schweitzer, 
Hans Stephan Martin, 
Georg Simon Baum, 
Johann Georg Gassinger, 
Johann David Herbst, 
H. George Ney,* 
Hans Jacob Schoch, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1751. 



249 



Johan Henrich Schirm, 
Johann Martin Seltzer, 
Hans Georg Wurteberger,* 
Christoph Horlacher, 
Georg Slichel Gretter, 
H. Michael Wurtenberger,* 
Johann Georg Kühlein, 
Johan Conrad Beyrer, 
Hans Jacob Fogelmann,* 
Michael Fägelman,* 
Johann Michael Sommer, 
Friederich Wielandt, 
Frederich Shwartz,* 
Johann Georg Büntzinger, 
Georg Martin Carle, 
Hans Michel Ott, 
Jacob Bernard Danecker,* 
Johannes Keys,* 



Melchior Lauall,* 
Hans Georg Hand,* 
Gabriel Rössler,* 
Johan George Epson,* 
David Edlinger, 
Francis Edelberger, 
Ludwig Ernst, 
Michael Fölix,* 
Jacob Sheyder,* 
Hans Shauman,* 
Jacob Gerringer,* 
Johan Michael Leytecker,* 
Melchior Reysal,* 
Andreas Schmeltzer,* 
Christopher Ederly,* 
Johan Elias Horrst, 
Nickolas Mittelburger.* 



161) Sept. 9, 1751. Ship Patience, Hugh Steel, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes, — eight Roman Catholics. — 
255 passengers. 

Sept. 9, 1751. (S(i)iff patience, Sapitain Jpug'^ (Steel, ocn 
JRotterfcam über Sotueö, — ac^t 3fiöm.=Jl'üti)cltfc^e. — 255 Steifenbe. 



John Hendrick,* 
Pierre Balmas, 
Diewald Hig, 
Andreas Bleshor,* 
Daniel Tien, 
Jacob Wenigard,* 
Stephen Deer,* 
Abraham Wild, 
Isaac Reno, 
Matthieu Moret, 
Daniel Ehart, 
Christian Gran,* 
Michel Farckart, 
Johannes Bock,* 
Christian Gaily,* 
Jacob Wolf, 



Jacob Wolf, 
Philip Hering, 
Jacob Enckisch, 
Philip Gob,* 
Blasius Isele, 
Michael Wieder, 
Martin Erdman, 
Jacob Stöhr, 
Ludwig Rimmel) 
J. Peter Andrea, 
Peter Haubert,* 
Peter Thomas,* 
Frantz Host,* 
Peter Haut,* 
Georg Ludwig Math, 
Eberhart Chappelie, 



250 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Jean Henri Tien, 
Johann Andreas Bersch, 
Johannes Strohsehneider, 
Johan Fried. Strohschneider, 
Michael Strohschneider, 
Hans Michael Mauer,* 
Hans Georg Worthlin,* 
Hans Worthlin,* 
Jacob Danninger, 
Michael Mauch, 
Samuel Pauser, 
Hans Peter Enck, 
Christian Gabriel Conver, 
H. George Gerhart, 
Johan Henrich Hering, 
Philip Wendel Höring, 
John George Reely, 
Johann Georg Babb, 
Johann Andreas Hütig, 
Philip Carl Jüdii, 
Johann Andreas Becher, 
Carl Anton Bergman, 
Johann Christoph Wieder, 
Johann Georg Ruoif, 
Johan Diterich Weitzen,* 
Johann Henrich Weitzel, 
Johann Frantz Huber, 
Hans Peter Huber,* 
Peter Martin, 
Joh. Deitschmall, 
J. Henry Dietzel, 
Jacob Martin,* 
Michel Drabach, 
J. Adam Trarbach,* 
Jacob Trarbach,* 



J. Peter Thomas,* 
Conrad Miller,* 
Henry Müler,* 
Nicola Matter, 
Johannes Rust, 
Daniel Hess,* 
Jost Karger,* 
Melchior Spery,* 
Johannes Block,* 
George Block, 
Nicklas WolflF,* 
Peter Wolcher,* 
Friederich Mobs, 
Bernhard Bauer, 
Philip Conrad Zeiler, 
Johann Henrich Stöhr, 
Johan Martin Freitag, 
Georg Henrich Joseph, 
Johann Peter Müller, 
Johann Henrich Dull, 
Johann Philip Haubert, 
Johann PhUip Litz, 
Hans Peter Shutz,* 
Johan Nicol. Bass, 
Joh. Adam Oberkii'ch,* 
Johannes Schwarbach,* 
Johann Jacob Weyll, 
Johann Peter Holderbaum, 
Johan Adam Barthnies, 
Johan Peter Ströher, 
Johann Georg Scherbeann, 
Hans Adam Didrich, 
Jacob Leibrock, 
Christian Lindner,* 
Petrus Trauenstack, 



162) Sept. 14, 1751. Ship St. Andrew, James Abercrombie, 
Captain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes, — eight Roman Ca- 
tholics, ten Mennonites, the remainder Calvinists. — 230 passen- 
gers. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1751. 



251 



^tpt. 14, 1751. (5d)i[f ®t. 
crombie, öon S^otterbam über ß 
jc'^n 5JZennontten, t»ie Uebrigen 
Johannes Lenn, 
Peter Eckman,* 
Wendel Hanst, 
Peter Berringer,* 
Jacob Brandt, 
Martin Shwab,* 
Jacob Kimmel, 
Adam Kimmel, 
Christoph Foth, 
Jacob Stahl, 
Johannes Ehrman, 
Michael Spengler, 
Thomas Vreytach,* 
Valentin Daubenberger, 
Ludwig De wait,* 
Georg Ludwig Stutzenberger, 
Peter Jacob Weiss, 
Rudolph Schoppi, 
Henrich Seydenbender,* 
Johann Philip Kimmel, 
Johann Henrich Lohmann, 
Georg Henrich Rösch, 
Hans Peter Henrich, 
Philipp Ihringer, 
Johann Conrad Bäuerle, 
Hans Georg Spengler,* 
Johann Peter Schmeher, 
Johann Michael Friedle, 
Johan Jacob Daubenberger, 
Hans Georg Hitman,* 
J. Philip Liss,* 
Johannes Frick,* 
J. Jacob Shumber,* 
Augustus Hub, 
Valentin Kimmel, 
Melchior Selb, 
Caspar Wilghart,* 
Albrecht Reinhardt, 



5tntire», Sapttatn ^amti W>n= 
on?e^, — ac^t 9iömifrf)=Jlat^oItfc^e, 
Galüiniften.— 230 iRcifenbe. 
Andreas Lemel, 
Peter Arnold,* 
Albrecht Dederer, 
Friederich Biebler, 
Tacitus Geiger,* 
Alexander Holder, 
Martin Bender,* 
Martin Dietz, 
Peter Bininger,* 
H. Matheus Miller,* 
Kilian DestermüUer, 
J. WUliam Volck, 
Conrad Erich,* 
J. Adam Diersen,* 
Gottlieb Ihrich, 
Abraham Gusman, 
Hans Mauerer,* 
J. Wendel Shwob,* 
Johannes Frick,* 
Stephan Rigler, 
Andreas Kramer,* 
Hans Georg Scheu, 
Joseph Bender, 
Joseph Ehrman, 
Weybrecht Nushagen,* 
J. Adam Kirschbaum, 
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 
Hans Georg Uhrich, 
Johann Jacob Selig, 
Johann Georg Hub, 
Johann Ludwig Ziegler, 
Georg Adam Allbrecht, 
Johan Georg Threer, 
Johann Georg Kochendörffer, 
Johann Philip Teutsch, 
Hans Peter Strein, 
Johann Frantz Biebler, 
Johann Georg Schäffer, 



252 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Johann Georg Feick, 
Hans Adam Better,* 
Georg Peter Hüter, 
Joh. Christoph Steirschildt, 
Johan Henrich Eisenmenger, 
Johan Friederich Mindisch, 
Georg Simon Schramm, 
Georg Thomas Henneberger, 
Peter Henrich Eysenmenger, 
Johann Jacob HaiFner, 
Johan Conrad Friedle, 



Johann Adam Stückle, 
Johann Gottfried Stückle, 
Johann Dietrich Sauer, 
Johann Daniel Betz, 
Johann Georg Weiss, 
J. Balth. Eysenmenger, 
Michael Casper Fuchs, 
Johannes Georg Bäcker, 
Johann Georg Lasch, 
Georg Michael Weeber. 



163) Sept. 14, 1751. Ship Duke of Bedford, Kichard Jef- 
ferys, Master, from Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth, — nine 
Ptoman Catholics, one hundred and twenty Calvinists. — 260 
passengers. 

(Sept. 14, 1751. ed)tff ^u!e of Scbfort?, ßapitain Stic^art) 
Seffer^ö, oon 3ftottert)am über 5)ortömoutf), — neun JRömifc^=Äa=^ 
tl^oiif(^e, ein I)untiert unb 3tuanjtg Salötniften. — 260 Sleifenbc. 

Friederich Zabooy,* Michael Huth,* 

Friederich Zabooy jr.,* Joseph Fuchs, 

Johann Henrich Weickel,? Frantz Bruner,* 



Hans Michel Scherster, 
Abraham Beck, 
Isaac Wengert, 
Andreas Beck,* 
Nicklas Münder,* 
Samuel Weiss,* 
Adam Koch sen., 
Adam Koch jr., 
Michel Koch, 
Andreas Knauer, 
Johannes Knauer, 
Christian Reich, 
Caspar Scherffig, 
Andreas Schäffer, 
Michael Pisserth, 
Georg Fetzer, 
Peter Gerbrich, 
Valentin Huth, 



Erhart Grimm, 
Jacob Hobler,* 
Abraham Holl, 
Christian Gally,* 
Christoph Heller, 
Henrich Heller, 
Caspar Müller, 
Philip Liebcner,* 
Jacob Thürig,* 
Henry Shloder,* 
Caspar Metz,* 
Henry Derker,* 
Johannes Bender, 
Valentin Shaffer,* 
Peter Weber, 
Johannes Weber, 
Peter Blügner, 
Henrich Lümmel, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1751. 



253 



Michael Heyler, 
Simon Burchhart, 
Jobannes Dewetten, 
Jacob Vaser, 
Jacob Lallemand, 
Johann Georg Beck, 
H. Michael Meyer * 
Johan Jacob Zigler,* 
Joh. Michael Koch,* 
Johan Melchior Rudi, 
Hans Peter Knauer, 
Caspar Weinmer,* 
Georg Balthes Wecker, 
Christoph Albert, 
Matthäus Fetzer, 
Johan Henrich Krebs, 
Michael Gerbrich, 
Johann Adam Koller, 
Hendrick Courpenning, 
Jeremias Geiger, 
Joh. Renuigius Spiegel, 
Christian Künther, 
Johann Gottlieb Zinck, 
Johan Peter Kammer,* 
Friederich INIutschler, 
Valentin Mutschier, 
Johan Christian Lentz, 
Johannes Schmuck,* 
Hans Georg Bender, 
Johan Georg Bender jr., 
Johann Marcus Beck, 
Johannes Kleinpeter, 
Hans Peter SchifFarth, 
Martin Mattheis Schielie, 
Georg Adam Krauss, 
Georg David Reinhard, 
Hans Michael Knab,* 
Johann Lorentz Stindtler, 
Johann Philip Schmidt, 
Johan Georg Stotz, 
Johan Jacob Gehemann, 



Johan Georg Burckhardt, 
Johann Andreas Heldt, 
Johann Adam Schick, 
Johann Wendel Weichstnir, 
Johann Philip Diehl, 
Lorentz Hünckel, 
Hans Peter Kelinsteller, 
Jacob Rewold,* 
Christoph Zieger,* 
Andreas Jund, 
Peter Herr, 
Georg Kleinpeter, 
Nicklaus Schultz, 
Rudolph Hoffer,* 
Johannes Schäffer, 
Peter Grauel,* 
Martin Müller, 
Andreas Kolb, 
Christian Krebs, 
Jacob Klein, 
Paulus Sherly,* 
Jacob Gally,* 
Johannes Stumpp, 
Jacob Geiger, 
Carl Shaffer,* 
Nicklas Shmith,* 
Jacob Hildebrandt, 
Solomon Heisch, 
Hans Georg Resh,* 
Martin Henrich, 
Hans George Miller,* 
IVIatthias Röckhele, 
Hieronimus Kömmele, 
Hans Jacob Kurtz, 
Hans Georg Hauser, 
Johann Jacob Fischer, 
Mattheus Schöllhorn, 
Johann Ludwig Einsei, 
Johan Peter Heygiss, 
Peter Ludwig Häyer, 
Hans Georg Klein,* 



22 



254 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Friederich Würtli, 
Jolian Martin Heugeld, 
Johann Martin Fleischman, 
Henrich Bernhardt Diener, 
Johann Adam Brentzinger, 



Johan Adam Pole,* 
Hans Georg Mercker, 
Johann Adam Stock, 
Johan Henrich Haber, 
Nicolas von Münchler. 



164) Sept. 16, 1751. Ship Edinburgh, James Bussel, Mas- 
ter, — ten Roman Catholics. — 345 passengers. 

(Sept. 16, 1751. ®d)iff St)tnburc|^, (Sapitain 3antcö JRuffel, 
je^n 9tömifc^=Äat^oIifc^e.— 345 S^eifenbe. 



Jacob Bauer, 
Peter Maurer, 
Lorentz Kuntzman,* 
Conrad Zanck,* 
Johannes Gottges, 
Gottlieb Wagner, 
Wilhelm (Erdter, 
Conrad Bachman, 
Henrich Katz, 
Casper Wisser, 
Henry Stumpff, 
Johannes Doren, 
Peter Fleck,* 
Joseph Hombro, 
William Saltzman, 
Henrich Pfeffer, 
Johann Adam Allan, 
Philipus Jacob Wagner, 
Johann Jacob Huser, 
Hans Adam Müler, 
Hans Michel Gerber, 
Johann Henrich Ginterman, 
Johann Henrich Völckner, 
Johann Jacob Völckner, 
Adam P. Kness, 
Frantz Wühelm Jerholtz, 
Johann Peter Mengen, 
Johann Henrich Stein, 
Wilhelm Kupferschmied, 
Hans Adam Matter, 



Hans Henrich NoU, 
Johann Adam Walther, 
Georg Matter, 
Jacob Keisser, 
Andreas Keyser,* 
Jacob Matter, 
Michel Hardman, 
Balthasar Jung, 
Lorentz Schweissguth, 
Peter Prim,* 
Andreas Wier,* 
Nicolaus Schoppert, 
Hieronimus Textur,* 
Abraham Schnell,* 
Nicholas Lindeman,* 
Peter Pfliester, 
Henrich Pfliester, 
Christian Luther, 
Christian Scheib, 
Michel Weber, 
Nickel Weber, 
Johannes Henrich,* 
Michael Burger,* 
Johannes Ort,* 
Peter Schlosser, 
Wilhelm Weigerich, 
Frantz Highart, 
Martin Schuh, 
Frederick Greenewald,* 
Cari Smith,* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1751. 



255 



Peter Lang, 
Carl Schell, 
Peter Rhein, 
David Rhein, 
Adam Kober, 
Christian Kober, 
Michel Bauerman, 
Johannes Schlater, 
Christian Hahn, 
Peter Dötzter, 
Nicholas Mathias,* 
Martin Maties, 
Johannes Mathias,* 
Friederich Melil, 
Johann Wilhelm Heintz, 
Philip Friederich Meyer, 
Hans x\dam Ferber, 
Georg Justanus Noll, 
Wilhelm Adam Wolff, 
Georg Christophel Brem, 
Johann Gottfried Kroh, 
Johann Wilhelm Ferber, 
Henrich Wilhelm Kochler, 
Johann Michel Eberth, 
Johann Philip Ebert, 
Johann Nicolas Ebert, 
Johann Georg Schnell, 
Johann Michel Stemler, 
Johann Nickel Weber, 
Johann Nickel Weber jr., 
Johann Peter Stilling, 
Johann Abraham Dauber, 
Johann Friederich Conrad, 
Johann Nickel Henrich, 
Johann Georg Reinheimer, 
Johann Friedrick Gräff, 
Joh. Nicklaus Weyerbacher, 
Isaac Weyerbacher, 
Johannes Weyerbacher, 
Johann Andreas Wagner, 
Joh. Wilhehn Gräff, 



Johann Friederich Fahss, 
Heinrich Adam Scherer, 
Jacob Zilchart,* 
Johann Henrich Rhein, 
Hans Adam Kober, 
Johann Jacob Muller, 
Johann Nicklaus Ker, 
Johan Valentine Brenighoff, 
Johan Philip Brenighoff, 
Johan Friederich Brenighoff, 
Johann Nicklaus Mehl, 
Johann Wilhelm Nagel, 
Johann Conrad Jost, 
Abraham Wenbacher, 
Haus Georg Käst, 
Jacob Inder,* 
Simon Burchart,* 
Johannes Arbengast, 
Jacob Fridrich, 
Jacob Hoover,* 
Frans Hoover,* 
Johannes Schmid, 
Johannes Klein, 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Jacob Funck, 
Anthony Blum, 
Nicklas Zegler,* 
Johan Reys,* 
Zachary Reys, 
Blasius Weg,? 
Georg Walcker, 
Johann Philip Küster, 
Johann Michael Heuler, 
Philip Hasselbacher, 
Johannes Schneider, 
Johan Jacob Bitter, 
Jacob Shnaudy,* 
Johan Nicklaus Marheffen, 
Georg Segman,* 
Christian Steyerwaldt, 
Daniel Lehmbacher, 



256 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Christoph Metz, 
Henrich Daniel Deitt, 
Johannes Schleich, 



Pliilipp Henrich Weis, 
Israel Burchart, 
Johann Nickel Schmidt. 



165) Sept. 16, 1751. Ship Nancy, Thomas Coatam, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam, — one Roman Catholic. — 200 passengers. 

Sept. 16, 1751. ®d)iff ^f^anc!?, Gapitain Jöomaö ßoatam, 
»Ott 9tottetbam, — ein iHömifc^=Äatl)oUfc^er. — 200 3fleifenl)C. 



Jacob Guth, 
A. Conrad Köder, 
Conrad Köder, 
David Mäuerle, 
jVIichael Friess, 
Johannes Hackeier, 
Johannes Hopif, 
Michael Capp, 
Andreas Berensteher, 
Jacob Kauifmann, 
Elias Bär, 
Jacob Kennely,* 
Conrad Mäurly, 
Jacob Scheible, 
Sebastian Schnell, 
Andreas Messerschmidt, 
Hans Wuchter, 
Andreas Bitinger, 
Christian Nagel, 
Jacob Kapp, 
Daniel Kapp, 
Hans Jacob Klett, 
Johann George Rösch, 
Hans Georg German, 
Hans Georg Mäuerle, 
Johann Friedrich Rooss, 
Johann Friederich Würster, 
Johann Martin Lang, 
Johan Georg Goonner, 
Hans Jacob Pfester, 
Hans Michel Schnauster, 
Johann Jacob Supper, 



Hans Fredrick Brendley,* 

Jacob Fredrick Sooper, 

Hans Georg Reinthaler, 

Johann Henrich Fischer, 

Johann Ludwig Nonnemacher, 

Hans Georg Reynthaller,* 

Johan Jacob Scherick, 

Johann Michel Rühl, 

Hans Georg Schnell, 

Johan David Weissmann, 

Michel Mauser, 

Johann Mauser, 

Johannes Heydel,* 

William Swindel,* 

Jacob Haug, 

Elias Mayer, 

Hans Mayer, 

Jacob Haag,* 

Johannes Kimmerlein, 

Conrad Steiger, 

Wilhelm Hammer, 

Daniel Keuler, 

Johannes Keuler, 

Johannes Kohler, 

Jacob Raub, 

Hans Hay, 

Baltzer White, 

Hans Bernhardt Messerschmidt, 

Hans Jacob Wizer, 

Hans Georg Köder, 

Hans Martin Kimmerlein, 

Hans Martin Mohr, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1751. 



257 



Hans Conrad Steiger, 
Hans Georg Schnell, 
Hans Georg Reiclienäelier, 
Hans Martin Entiemann, 
Johannes Kircher,* 
Johann Lorentz Wilhelm, 



Johann Philip Gerig, 
Johann Friederich Billinger, 
Michael Schmidt, 
Johann Hay, 
Johann Balthasar Geyer. 



166) Sept. 16, 1751. Ship Brothers, William Muir, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam. — 200 passengers. 

©ept. 16, 1751. ©c^iff 33rotf)erg, Sapitain mUiam Tliiix, 
»on 9tottert>am. — 200 Sleifcntc. 



Johannes Leinberger, 
Henry Shneyder,* 
Johannes Bieber, 
Joseph Kennel,* 
Paul iNIercker, 
Henrich Seistel, 
Friederich Millefelt,* 
Erhart Millefelt,* 
Michel Bieber, 
Henrich Bieber, 
Christoph Weber, 
Georg Hackir, 
Peter Abert, 
George Mader, 
Valentin Walter, 
Michael Oberly, 
Andreas Klein, 
Peter Moore,* 
Peter Dingis,* 
Peter Heyser,* 
Johannes Seyfarth, 
Johann Jacob Zigenfiiss, 
Johann Philip Schneck, 
Joh. Melchior Swerer,* 
Hans Jacob Farnie, 
Hans Adam Wagner, 
Friederich Entzminger,* 
Johan Jacob Schmidt, 
Johannes Schmidt, 



Johannes Schnitt, 
Johann Nicolaus Merckel, 
Georg Conrad MeflPet, 
Philip Brentz, 
Johann Jacob Ahlem, 
Johan Adam Stein, 
Johannes Zössler, 
Ludwig Friedland,* 
Johann Michel Mohr, 
Johann Jacob Blum, 
Johan Jacob Maul,* 
Joh. Peter Sheesler,* 
Johann Georg Hötzele, 
Jacob Ludwig, 
Martin Wolff,* 
Henry Wolff,* 
Adam Adams,* 
Friederich Kirchner,* 
Christoff Heuer, 
Christoph Hauck, 
Jacob Hauer,* 
Sebastian Nagel, 
Jacob Lehme, 
Jacob Heit, 
Joachim Nagel, 
Georg Obermeyer, 
Michael Weber, 
Andreas Mohr,* 
Georg Meintzer, 



22* 



258 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Conrad Menser,* 
Anthony Graff,* 
David Bietcli,* 
Michael Bietch,* 
Jacob Roth,* 
Ludwig Weltnes, 
Jacob Ritter, 
Daniel ZoUer, 
Jacob Frantz, 
Christian Peter, 
Joh. Jacob Gerling,* 
Valentin Blumenstein,* 
Johan Wendel Beylstein, 
Joh. Georg Kirchner,* 
Bernhard Hauer,* 
Martin Mäintzer, 
Johann Michael Hause, 
David MusgnusT, 



Michael Raub, 
Johann Georg Stählein, 
Anthony Hauer, 
Anthony Nagel jr., 
Anthony Nagel sen., 
Hans Georg Kappes, 
Hans Georg Dillman, 
Johannes Munster, 
Hans Georg Uhlerich, 
Johan Adam Heiser, 
Georg Bastian Eigelberger, 
Ludwig Schlincker, 
Johannes Monitzer,* 
Friederich Daniel Müller, 
Georg Hoffheintz,* 
Ludwig Bender, 
Johan Henry Past, 
Henrich Mag. 



167) Sept. 21, 1751. Ship Two Brothers, Thomas Amet, 
Master, fi-om Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 239 passengers. 

<Bept 21, 1751. ®d)iff Zwo S5rotf)erö, Gapitain Zf)oma€ 
2Irnet, üon Stottertiam übix SoTOeg. — 239 3'^eifenbe. 



Johannes Bausum, 
Philippus Bausum, 
Johannes Decker, 
Johannes Rahn, 
Jacob Jung, 
Abraham Jung, 
Johan Steinmetz,* 
Georg Romel, 
Jacob Pander, 
Melchior Jung, 
Joh. Christ. Fried. Wolff, 
Christofel Gerhart, 
Johann Henrich Decker, 
Melchior Jung, 
Caspar Steinmetz,* 
Johan Jacob Steinmetz, 
Johan Christian Lupp, 



Johan Wühelm Staudter, 
Joh. Michael Lung, 
Johan Georg Etzler, 
Christian Rohr,* 
Johannes Stauffer, 
Simon Weier, 
Andreas Brendle, 
Georg Lupp, 
Johannes Lupp, 
Adam Lung, 
Caspar Augenstein, 
Ludwig Beickle, 
Gregorius Richter,* 
Henrich Arndt, 
Carl Lohe, 
Johannes König, 
Daniel Becker, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1751. 



259 



Johannes Hein, 
Johannes Henrich, 
Johannes Orth, 
Valentin Fey, 
Johannes Lappe, 
Andreas Grätz, 
Anthonius Seemisch, 
Conrad Christian,? 
Jacob Eberhart, 
Philipp Thomas, 
Philipp Hetz, 
Ludwig Gleissinger, 
Johannes Werbung, 
Georg Straub, 
Jacob Fegert, 
Mattheis Hunolt, 
Wilhelm Hunolt, 
Jacob Schauer,* 
Simon Lung, 
Johannes Shrout,* 
Baltzer Kentzler,* 
Henry Matheas, 
Nicolaus Stoltz, 
Johannes Bentz, 
Han Martin Sehers, 
Jacob Heinberger, 
Wolfgang Rüttichell, 
Johann Georg Schneck, 
Johan Philip Eyster, 
Caspar Kalckglösser,* 
Henrich Kalckglösser, 
Georg Henrich Solinus, 
Johann Wilhelm Weyman, 
Hans Michael Herzog, 
Hans Georg Schmitt,* 



WUliam Maltzberger,* 
Johan Conrad Kreger,* 
Johannes Becker, 
Johann Georg Henrich, 
Johannes Heintz, 
Johan Henrich Heym, 
Johan Jost Giersbach, 
Johann Daniel Hoifman, 
Johan Henrich Gring,* 
Johann Henrich Hartman, 
Johann Georg Decker, 
Johan Jacob Hoffheintz, 
Johan Henrich Ebes,? 
Joh. Henry Mauerbach,* 
Job. Henrich Nicodemus, 
Johan Jost Gring, 
Philip Henrich Nöll, 
Johan Martin Bender, 
Johan Michael Wieg, 
Johan Daniel Will, 
Johan Adam Schmidt, 
Johan Friederich Perlet, 
Martin Christoph Röder, 
Johannes Kristmann, 
Johannes Molssberger, 
Friederich Klarwein, 
Joh. Christoph Georgey, 
Fried. Wilhelm Herman, 
Joh. Wilhelm Weinandt, 
Johan Jacob Göbler, 
J. Gerhart Zimmerman, 
Johan Henrich Adam, 
Joh. Gerhart Schuhmacher, 
Joh. Wilhelm Cromberg, 
Joh. Wilhelm Bodenheimer. 



168) Sept. 23, 1751. Ship Neptune, James Wier, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 154 passengers. 

(Sept. 23, 1751. ©c^iff 5fieptun, ßapitain 3ameö Söicr, 'oon 
Slottertant über Soweö, — 154 3fteifent»c, 



260 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Anthoui Weinnert, 
Jacob Hetzel, 
Johannes Gics, 
Michael Wennert,* 
Adam Weiser, 
Jlattheus lippoth, 
J. Conrad Koch, 
Johannes Manderbach, 
Johannes Müller, 
Jacob Pool, (Puhl),* 
Johannes Greis, 
Henrich Gerhart, 
Johannes Schütz, 
Nicolas Keybolt,* 
Johannes Busch, 
Johannes INIeyer, 
Michael Lauffer, 
J. Michael Lauffer, 
Johannes Vetter, 
Johannes CExle, 
Johannes Beer, 
Paulus Granin ger, 
Johannes Hombert, 
Johannes Baker,* 
Balthas Gressmann, 
Matheis Lutz, 
Job. Engl. Cünrad, 
Johannes Geistweit, 
Job. Georg Christ, 
Johann Thomas,* 
Andreas Steyger,* 
Everhart Thomas,* 
Henry Zimmerman,* 
Jost Henry,* 
Job. Phil. Sesberger, 
Job. Ebert Steyner,* 
Job. Engel Bücher, 
Christian Schmidt, 
Christian Haffer, 
Johannes WUhelm Seyn, 
Joban Phillippus Böhmer, 
Joban Wilhelm Böhmer, 



Joban Heinrich Vetter, 
Joban Friederieb Gettner, 
Joban Bernbart Beatt, 
Johann Georg Seckel, 
Joban Alexander Schütz, 
Joban Ludwig Klein, 
Joban Conrad Wulleweber, 
Joban Christ. Zimmerman, 
Joban Henrich Kochling, 
Joban Henrich Greiss, 
Joban Philip Anhorn, 
J. Henry Tillman, 
Jobann Peter Schaaff, 
Joban Nickel Weber, 
Johannes Peter Reusel, 
Johannes Engelbertb Jung, 
J. Jost Walter,* 
J. Friederich Shreiber,* 
J. Henry Sbmitt,* 
Joban Philip Krum, 
Philip Henry Sholtz,* 
Joban Jacob Gonderman, 
Hans Jacob Müller, 
Joban Michel Nisch,? 
Joban Christian Baum, 
Joban Christian Benner, 
Joban Christian Leidtorff, 
Job. Phil. Daniel Pfeiffer, 
Georg Andreas Carle,* 
Herrn. Adolph Schoppenmeyer, 
Joban Henrich Bucher, 
Jobann Pjgidus Hecker, 
Johann Christian Schmidt, 
Jobann Henrich Schmidt, 
Joban Henry Beinhart,* 
Johannes Henrich Peiffer, 
Job. Peter Flick, 
Job. Philip Flick, 
Johan Martin Flick, 
Job. Christian Zimmerman, 
Gerlach Paul Flick. 



AND OTHER IMMIdlRANTS — 1751, 



261 



169) Sept. 24, 1751. Sliip Neptune, John Mason, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 284 passengers. 

®ept. 24, 1751. ^5d)itf ^Icptuu, (Sapitatn 3ol)n SJiafon, üon 
9tottert)am über (Sowcö. — 284 3ieifent)e. 



Christian Armbrüster, 
John Pieters, 
Conrad Newmeyer,* 
Henderich Boons,* 
Jacob S hey CO,* 
Philip KHnger, 
Abraham Pons, 
Johannes Horing, 
Johannes Hering,* 
Johannes Saum, 
Johannes Redig, 
J. Adam Ewig,* 
Melchior Trautmann,* 
Bernhart Jagel,* 
Adam Pfeiifer,* 
Christoph Cotz,* 
Georg Kleinbach,* 
Michael Link,* 
George Crope,* 
Johannes Henrich, 
Frantz Horn, 
David Maisheller,* 
Johannes Gessner, 
Elias Emminger,* 
Conradt Schmidt, 
Jacob Frith, 
Jacob Gruber,* 
Conrad Rawher,* 
Balthaser Hess,* 
George Kimmel, 
Johannes Hock,* 
Johannes Geiss, 
Daniel Erhart,* 
Peter Binger, 
Andreas Miller, 



Jean Pierre Arnoul, 
Leonhart Mentzinger, 
Hans Georg Anstein, 
Johann Ludwig Höring, 
Henrich Lautenschleger,* 
Johann Bernhart Göth, 
Johann Adam Trinckliauss, 
Johann Adam Wirdeberger, 
Johann Georg Erhardt, 
Johann Philip Meyer, 
Joh. Michael Knotz,* 
Jacob Walter Wagner,* 
Conrad Scheffnit, 
Johan Wilhelm Grell, 
Johan Georg Schäfer, 
Johann Peter Schindel, 
Johann Adam Geiss, 
Martin Heckendorn,* 
Andreas Drüchsel, 
Johann Georg Eisenbeiss, 
Wilhelm Göttman, 
Hans Georg Heisy, 
Hans Georg Spohn, 
Johann Adam Heiss, 
Johan Georg Heiss, 
Tobias Daumiller, 
Johann Peter Trautmann, 
Christoph Hollobach, 
Joh. Adam Issener,* 
Andreas Reybold, 
Friederick Zimmerman, 
Jacob Zettelmeyer,* 
Georg Zettelmeyer,* 
Caspar Spann, 
Jacob Bogus, 



Johannes Laurentius Schmidt, Henry Deutch,* 
Med. et Chirg Doctor. Clementz Frey, 



262 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Jacob Summer,* 
Ludwig Knoll, 
Nicklaus Schey, 
Adam Weys,* 
Caspar Kessler,* 
Johannes Welt, 
Jacob Nagel, 
Christoph Schropp, 
Johannes Vetter, 
Stephan Herth, 
Henrich Hall, 
Casper Hoffmann, 
Casper Hoffman jr., 
Jacob Buch, 
Jacob Buch jr., 
Johannes Lemer,* 
Georg Schill, 
Andreas Berlib,* 
Conrad Bower,* 
Jacob Frey,* 
Baltes Laub, 
Jean Coulties, 
Georg Creesh,* 
Conrad Schäffer, 
Siegmund Cosia, 
Benedict Ervig,* 
Henry Shröder,* 
Michael Sattler, 
Frederick Sullinger,* 
David Kullem, 
Jacob Peteiman,* 
Peter Klases, 
Georg Eppenzeller, 
Georg Adam Weys,* 
Johannes Schniringer, 



Lorentz Schniringer, 
Johann Georg VoUert, 
Heinrich Eyssenmenger, 
Johann Michel Hag, 
Johann Georg Heist, 
Johan Ludwig BUger, 
Johann Jacob Gottwalt, 
Antonius Lambrecht, 
Johan Jacob Artzt, 
Joh. Daniel Scharmann, 
Johan Jacob Schneider, 
Christian Hoffman,* 
Conrad Seihoff, 
Christoph Vanterberg,* 
Johan Conrad Essy,* 
Martin Schaickel, 
Joseph Lehmann, 
Ewald Trummaner,* 
Jacob Höllerman, 
Albrecht Schleppy,* 
Johan Georg Must, 
Joseph Zugmayer, 
Phillip Mallycoat,* 
Johan Bernhard Schäffer, 
Johan Leon. Trautman, 
Joh. Wilhelm Müller, 
Johan Peter Klump, 
Joh. Michael Dür, 
Joh. Georg Hummer, 
Uhllerich Schwenckel,* 
Ludwig Klemmer, 
Martin Kagel, 
Michael Hahn, 
Hans Georg Stehle. 



170) Sept., Wednesday, the 25th, 1751. Ship Phoenix, John 
Spurrier, Captain, from Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth, Eng- 
land.— 412 passengers. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1751. 



263 



mittmö:), ben 25. ©ept. 
(Spurrier, »on ^tottertam 
^ajfagtere. 
Martin Maurer, 
Jacob Bauer, 
Christian Laufaner, 
Michael Meyer, 
Georg Volpp, 
Antoni Stehrn,* 
Georg Stirn, 
Conrad Höffler,* 
Jacob Jordan, 
Andreas Roth, 
Jacob Heegy, 
Albert Schneck, 
Michel Hoffman, 
Christian Pfeiffer, 
Martin Wagner, 
Martin Engelberth, 
Balthas Widenmeyer, 
Martin Ziegler, 
Peter Denier, 
Martin Ludi, 
Martin Herter, 
Jacob Rosli,* 
Hans Rosli,* 
Georg Rosli,* 
Jacob Riger,* 
Georg Bänssle, 
Simon Widmayer, 
David Herrmann, 
Carle Hey,* 
Albrecht Heu, 
Mathias Laufer, 
Jacob Pfeiffer,* 
Georg Hollinger, 
Jacob Wörner, 
Peter Hoffman, 
Michael Hudere,* 
Jacob Veigenbaser, 
Conrad Host, 



1751. (S^iffP)öm).-, SapitainSo^n 
über ^ortömout^, Snglant). — 412 

Bernhard Brand, 
Baltzer Bümbel, 
Matheis Bastian, 
Anthoni Blesinger,* 
Johannes Conrad Lauer, 
Georg Matias Weig, 
Johann Adam Bauer, 
Hans Georg Weber, 
John Georg Käppis, 
Hans Michael Baunich, 
Job. Michael Lerchenzieler, 
Hans Jacob Schletzer, 
Philip Ernst Wagner, 
Johan Melchior Mils, 
Johan Friederich Fürber, 
Job. Valentin Hoffman, 
Johann Conrad Frech, 
Job. Balthas Schölhorn, 
Job. Michel Schumacher, 
Johann Georg Kiderer, 
Michael Lautenschlager, 
Johann Conrad Krügele, 
Johan Tobias Hang, 
Andreas Hildenbrandt, 
Hans Jacob Stambach, 
Hans Georg Betsch, 
Ludwig Teussel, 
Hans Georg Hagele, 
Johan Gottfried Schmelzer, 
Hans Jacob Geis, 
Johann Gottfried Fuchs, 
Hans Georg Schotebecker, 
Georg Friederich Baisch, 
Christian Küchler, 
Johannes Gramm, 
Michael Bossert, 
Michael Kaucher, 
Mattheis Hipscher, 



364 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Johann Georg Gehringer, 
Albrecht Hübscher, 
Baltus Schlichter, 
Gottlieb Lunenmacher, 
Johannes Dietrich, 
Friederich Veit Schanss, 
Friederich Dannwolff, 
Joseph Böhringer, 
Samuel Dirstein, 
Elias Stocki, 
Graff Hannold, 
Christoph Lück, 
Jacob Geigle, 
Martin Off, 
Jacob Hauber, 
Matheus Kern, 
Jacob Huber, 
Jacob Hauher, 
Jacob Alt, 
Samuel Hitzer,* 
Georg Hetzer, 
Frederick Heins, 
Jacob Seiler,* 
Jacob Waltz, 
Georg Teuffell, 
Philip Müller, 
Mathias Diesch, 
Jacob Harz, 
Christian Neuffes,? 
Thomas Fisher,* 
Jacob Fischer, 
Michael Laver,* 
Dieterich Löffler, 
Mattheus Walter, 
Heinrich Fritz, 
Baltes Beyer, 
Abraham Hausser, 
Georg Ziegler, 
Jacob Walder,* 
Michael Müller, 
Friderich Wogt,* 



Jacob Hermann, 
Michel Ernst, 
Michael Wörnner, 
Matheis Schimpff, 
Michael Mayer, 
Simon Breuer, 
Friederich Hirsch, 
Philip Poutmant, 
Georg Carle, 
Joh. Siegmund Kühler, 
Christ. Friederich Weyler, 
Franciscus Stür, 
Mattheis Plocherr, 
Jacob Buckel, 
Johannes Albrecht, 
Hans Jacob Kiechner, 
Johannes Waltschmidt, 
Johannes Hauer, 
Christian Blaser, 
Johannes Bathgeb, 
Martin Eilting, 
Bernhardt Schneider, 
Hans Conrad Küchli, 
Hans Georg Christein, 
Christian Christein, 
Peter Christein, 
Johannes Demuth, 
Friederich Kerchel, 
Philipp Jacob Geis, 
Johan Adam Stoltz, 
Jean Diedier Moret, 
Jacob von Können, 
Lorentz Schmiedt, 
Georg Michel Weimann, 
Matheis Haufstein, 
Jacob Hermann jr., 
Andreas Eissenhardt, 
Johan Michel Wörnner, 
Christian Schmidt, 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Jacob Bürkhardt, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1751. 



265 



Joh. Georg Fried. Bayer, 
Gabriel Wächter, 
Adam Hettinger, 
Theophilus Hiibbertz, 
Samson Mittelberger, 
Georg Baumann, 
Michael Altrich, 
Konrad Leuser, 
Michael Leuttel, 
Hans Georg Ehr man, 



Jonas Rupp, a 
Christoph Hofman, 
Phillipp Müller, 
Balthas Schwinkes, 
Hans Jacob Meyer, 
Johan Jacob Wornner, 
Hans Georg Blesser,* 
John George Blazer,* 
Hans Georg Bläser jr. 



171) Oct. 4, 1751. Ship Queen of Denmark, Georg Parish, 
Commander, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 252 passengers. 

Dct.4, 1751. @(^iff Queen of Denmart, ßornntantiant ®eorg 
?)arif^, »on 3tottert)om über SowciS. — 252 9teifent)e, 



Christoph Berg, 

Georg Wolff, 

Hartmann Fritz, 

Daniel Meyer, 

Baltzer Martin, 

Valentin Brock,* 

Jacob Wolff, 

George Bicker, 

Balzar König,* 

Johann Friederich Hering, 

Georg Jacob Ullrich, 

Michael Kremer, 

Hans Georg Erbolt, 



Melchior Zigler,* 
Martin Shewerman,* 
Hardlie Sallade, 
Jacob Georjan, 
Hans Georg Martin, 
Jacob Kugel,* 
Hans Suter, 
Jacob Regennas, 
Johannes Wagner,* 
Peter Rehrer, 
Heinrich Stohler, 
Johannes Oxeman,* 
Johannes Martin, 



a Jonas Rupp, the Editor's paternal grandfather, was born Octbr. 
23d, 1729, at Reihen, near Sinsheim, Grand Duchy of Baden. From 
1751 to 1772 he lived in Lancaster Co., now Lebanon Co., in 1772 he 
moved to Cumberland Co., six miles west of Harrisburg. He died 
May 21st, 1801. His remains rest in the graveyard at Friedens-Kirch, 
three miles east of Mechanicsburg. 

a 3onaö 9?u})p, bcr ®roföater be^ ^erauögekrö »aterfett«, »urbe am 
23. Dctbr. 1729 in 5lei{)en, na^e (Stn«|ctm, im ©roperjogtttum Sabtn, 
geboren. «Bom 3a^re 1751 bio 1772 toot)nte er in gancafter So., W 2e= 
banon So., 1772 iog er nac^ Sumberlanb So., fec^^ 5)?eilen toejtlic^ »on 
^atrtöburg. Sr ftarb am 21. ^ax 1801. ®einc Ocbcine rut)cn auf bem 
tir(ii()of ber grieben^fird^e, brei 5D?eiUn öfHic|) »on 5Jie(|anic0bur0. 



266 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Jacob Geesseler,* 
Andreas Fridli, 
Stephan Bieg, 
Andreas Roth, 
Nicklas Rippel, 
George Happes,* 
Durst Grüner, 
Jacob Joder,* 
Hans Blanck, 
Hans Heizer,* 
Henry Süss,* 
Michael Meyer,* 
Christian Blanck, 
Wilhelm Bosch, 
Friederich Ruthy, 
Johannes Shulty,* 
Bastian Mengell, 
Caspar Fisher,* 
Conrad Fisher,* 
Martin Fries, 
Andreas Lantz, 
Conrad Weiss, 
Hans Geisser,* 
Henrich Seitz, 
Jacob Stehli, 
Heinrich Stehli, 
Jacob Shob,* 
Nicklas Weiss,* 
Heinrich Grell, 
Georg Wolff, 
Friederich Dirkerhoff,* 
Johann Michel Hartmann, 
Heinrich Bachman, 
Johann Philip Bieg, 



Johannes Carmane,* 
Georg Grauss, 
Conradt Schneider, 
Johann Henrich Graff, 
Christian Bernhart, 
Hans Schneeberger, 
Hans Jacob Weiss, 
Marx Oberhäussle, 
Hans Ulerich Hess, 
Casper Schneider, 
Johannes Schaad, 
Hans SchaUenberg, 
Johannes Eymeyer, 
Martin Dreysbach, 
Johan Friederich Mertz, 
Johan Henrich Hoffman, 
Hans Henrich Wiest, 
Hans Henry Shneyder, 
Johannes Pampus, 
Antonius Stütte, 
Johan Wilhelm Friess, 
Jacob Ruthlinger, 
Heinrich Stehli, 
Weinbert Tschucki, 
Johannes Strub, 
Joh. Friederich Steiner, 
Friederich Lander,* 
Johannes Possert, 
Johann Friederich Mentzer, 
Georg Schweyler, 
Hans Älelchior Anderegg, 
Valentin Meyer, 
Daniel Wolff, 
Anthony Carmone.* 



172) Oct. 7, 1751. Ship Janet, WilUam Cunningham, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 220 passengers. 

Dct. 7, 1751. ©i^iff ^amt, Sapitatn SBitliam Sunning^am, 
»on 3tottcrt)am über Soweö. — 220 Steifende. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1751. 



267 



Johannes Waller,* 
Michael Hollstein, 
Peter Ganns,* 
Peter Rossburger,* 
Phüip Pfeiffer,* 
Mathias Pfeiffer,* 
Adam Jacobi, 
Marx Breinig, 
Adam Beckebach,* 
Caspar Beckebach,* 
Peter Ulmer, 
Georg Welter, 
Kilian Hausser,* 
Nickolas Steyn,* 
Henry Carle,* 
Martin Bigler,* 
Georg Bigler,* 
Johannes Lap,* 
Christ. Peifer, 
Stephen Zweyer,* 
Eberhart Kreiling, 
Michael Alt,* 
Adam Jordan, 
Jacob Holtz,* 
Carl Wagner, 
Abraham Konig,* 
Philip Enes, 
Jacob Neiman, 
Leonhart Buckel, 
Johannes Hahn, 
Wilhelm Ewig,* 
Michael Leonhart,* 
Matheas Nass,* 
Henry Haushalter,* 
Heinrich Friedle, 
Melchior Krautter, 
Jacob König, 
Enoch Weber, 
Jacob Sprecher, 
Jacob Weimmer,* 
Dewald Storch,* 



Jacob Diether, 
Ehrhardt Thürwäehter, 
Leonhart Simon,* 
Georg Adam Beckenbach, 
Johan Georg Beckenbach, 
Georg Bernhart Beckenbach, 
Johan Valentin Sommer, 
Nickolas Eshwyn,* 
Jacob Hauswirth,* 
Jacob Kämmerer, 
Heinrich Hetzel, 
Johann Nickel Stumm,* 
Johannes Kauffraann, 
Johan Adam Best, 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Johan Peter Schang, 
Andreas Altendorff, 
Johan Lenardt Gösel, 
Johann Jacob Lapp, 
Job. Christoph Weysbach,* 
Han George Zweyer,* 
Hans Adam Diem,* 
Han George Odewalt,* 
Joh. Andreas Engelman, 
Georg Jacob Schirmer, 
Michael Wahrlich, 
Hans Conrad Bauman, 
Johann Georg Geisler, 
Johann Nicklas Wolff,* 
Johan Valentin Boss, 
Johan Jost Shweiger,* 
Johann Jacob Weltz, 
Johann Simon Schober, 
Eberhart. Gochnat, 
Abraham Bitilion, 
Johann Georg Busch, 
Johann Michael Hoffmann, 
Philip Jacob Hagenbucb, 
Matheus König, 
Hans Jacob Hübbert, 
Christoph Ketteman, 



268 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Hans Georg Sprecher, 
Philip Jacob Kiinbe, 
Jacob Hahn, 
Friederich Humbert 
Diewald Matter, 
Jacob Gallman,* 
George Shend,* 



Jacob Shaffer,* 
Hans Georg Wallhuter,* 
Johann Georg Steiner,? 
Philip Jacob Humbert, 
Johann JMichael Drion, 
Philip Jacob Meder, 
Andreas Kisselberg.* 



173) Oct. 16, 1751. Ship Duke of Wirtemberg, MontpeHer, 
Captain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 406 passengers. 

Dct. 16, 1751. ec^iff 3Dufc of Sßtrtemberg, eapitain Ü^ont- 
gelier, üon Stotterfcam ükr Soweö. — 406 Steifende. 



Ludwig Heinrich, 
A. Mattheis, 
Theodor Larber, 
Johannes Wissner, 
Andreas Schlenckfer, 
Ulrich Bräitinger, 
Conrad Ram,* 
Jacob Umensetter, 
Jacob Umensetter,? 
Christoph Sündel, 
Mattheus Reich, 
Michael Weyhenger, 
Johannes Schott, 
Christian App, 
Friederich Zoller, 
Johannes Gräuttler, 
Friederich Hering, 
David Duett,* 
Andreas Leadercr,* 
Johaimes Doli,* 
Martin Dohl, 
Johannes Notz, 
Peter Strückel, 
Martin Ecker, 
Johannes ]\Ieiger, 
Eberhardt Martin, 
Leonhart Behl, 
Balthas Götz, 



Jacob Schäffer, 
Bernhart Frick,* 
Graff PUlab,* 
Jacob Greiner, 
Georg Christoph Reichle, 
Johann Andreas Mayer, 
Johann Georg Mayer, 
Johan Andreas Mayer jr., 
Johann Adam Meckle, 
Johann Georg Weisser, 
Johann Georg Maisch, 
Christian Gertzinger, 
Jacob Ludwig Cäppele, 
Johan Conrad Held, 
Johannes Brodbeck, 
Johannes Weyhenger, 
Georg Wilhelm Bantlion, 
Christ. Friederich Bantlion, 
Hans Georg Schäffer, 
Hans Georg Dute,* 
Conrad Eisenhardt, 
Georg Adam Schlegel, 
Christophel Schlegel,* 
Sebastian Wunder, 
Johannes Wunderlich, 
Johann Georg Hoch, 
Mattheus Sabererick, 
Joseph Brendlinger, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1751. 



269 



Georg Adam Franckenberger, 

Georg Michael Kern, 

Conrad Klingemej'^er, 

Joh. Conrad Leibbrand, 

Georg Adam Gaab, 

Hans Jacob Baum, 

Daniel Baumann, 

Conradt Grietzinger jr. 

Conrad Merckle, 

Friederick Keppert, 

Jacob Zerch, 

Johannes Winter, 

Martin Ebbly,* 

David Ansel, 

Jacob Beyerly,* 

Friederich Wibel, 

Jacob Stahlman, 

Joseph Ahner, 

Adam Herman, 

Jacob Jüngling, 

Jacob Scherrer,* 

Johann Nadem,? 

Ulrich Hirschmann, 

Matheus Hirschman,* 

Johannes Stucky,* 

Jacob Schwartz, 

Johannes Augenstein, 

Simon Nagel, 

Philip Nagel, 

Michael Deiss, 

Johannes Mayer, 

Johannes Mayer jr., 

Johannes BischoflF, 

Bernhardt Merkle, 

Michael Fritz, 

Ludwig Fritz, 

Casper Meyer,* 

Peter Printly,* 

Christian Fuchs, 

Joseph Karg, 

Jacob Karg, 



Michael Bosch, 
Michael Bosch jr., 
Jacob Esch, 
Baltas Folck,* 
Christoph Folck,* 
Conrad Stöhr, 
Philip Müller, 
Stephan Katz, 
Michel Waltz, 
Martin Brodbeck, 
Conrad Grietzinger,* 
Johannes Brodbeck, 
Dieterich Kämmerer, 
Peter Kämmerer, 
Christian Kämmerer, 
Johann F. Brodbeck,* 
Johan Georg Sendel, 
Hans Georg Winter, 
Hans Georg Heim, 
Hans Georg Wehr, 
Christ. Gottlieb Scheiberle, 
Hans Peter Path,? 
Joh. Friederich Dorff, 
Joh. Michael Zehntbauer, 
Johannes Schultheiss, 
Andreas Hirschman, 
Johan Adam Hirschman, 
Hans Michael Moser, 
Mattheus Dullnick, 
Johann Georg Häman, 
Johan Friederich Stiess, 
Hans Georg Augenstein, 
Philip Jacob Werner, 
Hans Ludwig Both, 
Hans Philip Roth, 
Hans Martin Bischon,? 
Lorentz Wessener, 
Hans Adam Meyer, 
Hans Martin Fisser, 
Michael Hirnneise, 
Hans Georg Hirnneise, 

23* 



270 NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 

Michael Heimle, ? Benedict Funck, 

Johann Georg Dürr, Abraham Eckert, 

Jacob Widdenniann, Andreas Huttich, 

Michael Katz, Conrad Gensly, 

Hans Georg Schneider, Friederich Heyl, 

Johan Bardel Gottwalt, Johannes Eberhart,* 

Hans Bernhart Frantz, Johannes Eberhart jr., 

Johann Jacob Waltz, Hans Georg Schinck, 

Andreas Weidhorn,* Michael Wolff, 

Hans Georg Eckert,* Andreas Kappler,* 

Michael Werner, Hans Georg Ege. 
Wilhelm Koch,* 

Note. — In a communication from Rev. S. S. Schmucker, D. D., to 
the Editor, March 18th, 1856, it is stated, the Rev. John Dietrich Mat- 
thias Heinzelman and Rev. Emanuel Schultz, Lutheran Ministers, ar- 
rived in Pennsylvania in the year 1751. — [Editor.) 

2tnmerfung.— 3n enter 5)iittt)et(ung »om 18. Wdxi 1856 öon ^nftor 
Dr. S. S. (gc^muder an ben Herausgeber fagt bcrfelbe, ba§ bie Iutf)erif(ien 
®ctfHtd^en 3ot). SDtctrtc^ 5[)Jatt^iaS |)ctnjelmann unb ©manuel Sci^ul^ im 
3al)re 1751 in ^^fnnf^lüania ongefommen ftnb. — (Herausgeber.) 



174) Sept. 15, 1752. f Ship Two Brothers, commanded by 
Thomas Arnot, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 



f Rev. Michael Schlatter, having revisited Germany, returned to 
America — arrived at New York, July 28th, 1752, accompanied, says 
Lewis Mayer, D. D., in his History of the German Reformed Church, 
in America, by six young ministers of the Gospel — Revds. Wilhelm 

Stoy, Johannes Waldschmidt, Theodore Francken feld, Rubel, 

Wissler, and Philip Wilhelm Otterbein. The latter was for many years 
a minister of the German Reformed Church. He is regarded, gener- 
ally, as the founder of that now numerous denomination, " The United 
Brethren in Christ." 

"Rev. Otterhein was, says Lewis Mayer, more attentive to internal 

piety than to external forms In his person, Mr. Otterbein was 

portly and dignified; in his manner, urbane and affectionate, and of 
child-like simplicity. He had been well educated ; and to the close of 
his life read Latin authors with as much ease as those in his vernacular 
tongue. His piety was unfeigned and glowing; his preaching solemn 
and impressive." — Rupp's Hist, of Berks Co., pp. 445, 446. 

P. W. Otterbein was born in Dillinberg, Nassau, Germany, Nov. 6, 
1726. He died in Baltimore, Md., Nov. 17, 1813. He had, it is said, 
a peculiar attachment to Jacob Wagner's family of Eibelshausen, who, 
it is thought, emigrated to America at the time Otterbein came. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1752. 271 

(BepL 15, 1752. t ®d)tff Zm 35rot^erö, kfepgt »on I^o» 
ma0 kmot, »en 9tottcrt)am über ßorocö. 

Georg Eisenmenger, Paulus Böhm, 

Friederich Mäyer, Johan Deiswers,* 
Joh. Christo Friederich Kohler,Conrad Hahns,* 

Kilian Eisenmenger, Casper Krämer, 

Jacob Müller, Johannes Wilhelmus, 

Christoph Arnoldt, Adam Beck, 

Nölgen Kremmer, Johannes Jacob, 

Peter Schock,* Anthon Sheyed,* 

Peter Hommer,* John Antoni Statt,* 

Paulus Gross,* Wendel Frey, 

Philip Bornn,* Thomas Grämlich, 

Wilhelm Huner,* Jacob Lips,? 

Jacob Müller, Gottfried Kappes, 

Conrad Winegarden,* Casper Lichtenberger, 

Bertram Behm,* Michael Dietrich, 

Paulus Huders,* Joseph König,* 

Moritz Hene, Johannes Metzem,* 

Jacob Anders,* Borkhardt Unangst, 

Johannes Gerhardt, Jonas Pool,* (Puhl), 

Peter Dilss, Jacob Heibach, 

Jost Ferschbach, Joachim Sodt,? 



t 9tac&bem 5)aftor Wdml ©d&kttcr Dcutfc&lanb einen 33efud& «bge« 
jiattet, fe^rte er am 28. 3ult 1752 totebct nac^ 9?m gjor! jurucf. «Ottt tl)nt 
Famen, na(^ Dr. goia^er'ö ®e[($tcf)te ber reformirten Äirt^e in Slmerifa, 
fec^6 junge ^Hebiger, nämlict) aBil()elm ©to!?, 3o^)anneö 2Ba(bfd)mibt, 

Jbeobor Srancfenfelb, JRubel, 2Bt§Ier unb W^m aCilticlm 

Dtterbein. gelterer war üiele 3at)rc lang ein @ciftlid)er in ber bculfclj« 
reformirten Sircpe. Sr wirb ge»öt)nlict) für ben ®rünber ber jc^t jat)lrci= 
cl)cn ^Benennung ber „^bereinigten SBrüber in dtjrifto" angefeben. 

„«Pajitjr Dtterbein, faat gouiö ^')la\)n, legte mef)r ®e»ic^t auf innere 

grömraigfeit, aU auf äußere ^orrn 3n feinem 5leu^eren ttar er ftattlict) 

unb würbiü, im Umgang fjijflic^ unb tiebreid), unb üon finblicber ßinfalt. 
(är war gut gefcliult,\inb lag gegen Gnbe feine« Sebeng lateinifc^e (2*rift= 
[teuer m"^tt berfclben gertigfeft, wie bie in feiner 5Jlutterfprac^e, tsceinc 
grömmigfeit war unget)cud)eU unb eruftf)aft5__ feine ^vecigt würbei^oll unb 
gewaltig."— Stupp'ö ®efd). öon 23erf3 So., ^^. 445, 446. 

55. 2B. Dtterbein würbe in 5)iüinberg im ^laffauifc^en geboren unb ;swar 
am 6. gtoübr. 1726. (£r ftarb in Baltimore, 5JJb., am 17. 5toi)br. 1813. 
Man fagt, ba§ er eine befcnbere S!3orliebe für Safob S3agner'ö gamilie ju 
(äibelötiaufcn tiattc, welche, toic man glaubt, iur 3eit, alö ©tterbein fam, 
tta(|) Slnierifa auewanberte. 



272 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Johannes Lutz, 
Conrad Welder, 
Joh. Silas Bonn,* 
Joh. Peter Bon, 
Johann Martin Gans, 
Johann Peter Lentz,* 
Johan Peter Schock,* 
Leopoldt Valentin Gross, 
Johannes Henrich Metz, 
Johann Friederich Beck, 
Georg Michael Eberly, 
F. Conrad Leberling,* 
George Michael MiDer,* 
John Peter Rodebagh,* 
John Peter Blom,* 
Diedrich Wilhelm Dischong, 
Johan Wilhelm Ahlbach, 
John Peter Blom sen., 
John Christian Ottinger,* 
Herbert Schumacher, 
Johann Christian Hoffman, 
Wilhelm Peterwelles, 
Johan Wilhelm Meyer, 
Conrath Schneider, 
Joh. Herbert Lör,* 
Joh. Antonius Krämer, 
Johan Adam Imboten,* 
Johan Gottfried Kring, 
Johann Christian Seyler, 
Johann Jacob Beyer, 



Johan Christ. Eulenber, 
Joh. Christ. Lichtenthäller, 
Johann Christ. Meyer, 
Johan Paulus Seehl, 
Johan Steffy Drybler,* 
Johan Peter Hauer, ? 
Johan Christian Albirger, 
John Jacob Qlilgarden,* 
Johann Henrich Wirth, 
Hans Henrich Münch, 
Johann Wilhelm Böttger, 
Johann Georg Metzger, 
Georg Andreas Raab, 
Georg Michael Gebhart, 
Johan Gerlach Meyer, 
Johan Georg Spiess, 
Conrad Leinenberg,* 
Nicolas Leinenberg,* 
Jacob Dilss, 
Moritz Wüh. Dills, 
Joh. Peter Aller, 
Joh. Wilh. Weller, 
Johan Sebastian Onangst, 
Johan Peter Schmidt, 
Simon Ludwig Himroth, 
Johan Herbert Wingert, 
Wil. Henrich Brandenburger, 
Johan Thomas Schumacher, 
Johan Peter Putterbach. 



175) Sept. 19, 1752. Ship Edinburgh, James Rüssel, Cap- 
tain, from Amsterdam, last from Cowes. 

©ept. 19, 1752. ®cf)iff Sbinburg^, (Sapitain 3amc3 9tuj[el, 
öon SImfterbam über Soiveö. 

Peter Renau, Franciscus Dilier, 

Johan Valentin, Michel Kümell, 

Henry Hollinger,* Leonhart Claus, 

Paulus Harting, Siegfi-ied Billing, 

Frantz Renau, Martin Harsch, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1752. 



273 



Jacob Heerd,* 
Jacob Beck, 
Paulus Schmidt, 
Nicolaus Mayer, 
Jacob Fried, 
Paulus Mauerer * 
Wilhelm Keller * 
Christoph Hummel,* 
Paulus Walter,* 
Peter Müh, 
Jacob Küber,* 
Johannes Roth, 
Friederich Roth, 
Johannes Bauer,* 
Georg Shneyder,* 
Georg Zerman, 
Michael Fetzer,* 
Christian Shneid,* 
Christian Wenger, 
Leonhard Lauter, 
Sebastian Waas, 
Johann Georg Denier, 
Jacob Bildman, 
Joh. Samuel Huth, 
Georg Casper Bohrmann, 
Johann Martin Schnepf, 
Georg Leonhardt Pfiister, 
Johannes Bernhardt,* 
Michael Hibscher,* 
Johan Georg Bauman, 
Johannes Krieharst,? 
Andreas Gabriel Dietrich, 
Johan Wilhelm Trautwein, 
Bartholomäus Lederer, 
Georg Antony Schebble, 
Johan Carl Häyer, 
Johan Jacob Helm, 
Johan Friederich Kiess, 
Hans Martin Kirschman, 
Martin Kuntzman,* 
Hans Michael Weismeyer,* 
Christoph Hardtmann, 



Adam Christoph Behning, 
Johannes Schwartz,* 
Hans Jacob Roth, 
Johann Christoph Bentz, 
Stephan Nerlinger,* 
Johan Christian Benish,* 
Sebastian Dreher, 
Jacob Friederich Blaser, 
Jos. Bernhard Speth,? 
Johan Jacob Häydt, 
Johannes Zürn, 
Georg Schild,* 
Jacob Hauser, 
Jacob Rincker, 
Isaac Buck,* 
Jacob Meysel,* 
Johannes Gemser, 
Carl Horn, 
Friederich Rosslein,* 
Leonhardt Rosslein,* 
Adam Stock, 
Andreas Fetzer,* 
Friederich Fens, 
Michael Dür, 
Joseph Shennal,* 
Frantz Fischer, 
Johannes Hendel, 
Johan Adam Schwartz, 
Joh. Friederich Huss,* 
Johann Jacob Kerffer, 
Johannes Hüthler, 
Heinrich Ottinger, 
Jacob Wietdemann, 
John Adam Rey,* 
Michael Friederich, 
Johann Rischerd, 
Valentin Brüttschiett, 
Johannes Schweller, 
Hans Jacob Seltzer, 
Joseph Shünal,* 
Christoph Bauer.* 



274 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Sick on Board (franf an 35ort)) : — Johannes Kerlin, Erhart 
Kuhrbocker, Baltzer Fahringer, Jacob Müller, Johannes Jung, 
Caspar Deilinger, Jacob Weiler, Michael Karch, Jacob Roth, 
Georg Braun, Michael Schäffer, Conrad Guth. 



176) Sept. 22, 1752. Ship Brothers, William M'Nair, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

(Sept. 22, 1752. ©i^iff 53rot^erg, (Eapitain mUiam m'^aix, 
oon Siotterfcam über Goroeö. 



Johannes Stauch, 
Carl Fuchs, 
Martin Karch, 
Andreas Leisser, 
Peter Hellman, 
Jacob Seltzer, 
Johannes Unruh, 
Daniel Utz, 
Stephan Goss, 
Johannes Eckert, 
Peter Bechtel,* 
Peter Seig, 
Johannes Bab,* 
Jacob Miller,* 
Bastian Hellman, 
Andreas Ott,* 
Georg Lentz,* 
Samuel Herrmann, 
Johan Michael Lindemuth, 
Johann Peter Schwartz, 
Johannes Edelman, 
Hans Adam Heckman, 
Wilhelm Heckman, 
Joh. Conrad Kriechbaum, 
Job. Jacob Rudisielie, 
Johann Jacob Winter,* 
H. Nicolaus Bemnger,* 
Johan Jacob Wilhelm, 
Johan Peter Gabel,* 
Hans Adam Gerig,* 
Haus Peter Edelman,* 



Georg Jacob Ehresmann, 
Georg Henrich Grämlich,* 
John George Edelman,* 
Lenhart Herteil, 
Antonius Müller, 
Jacob Lorentz, 
Hans Schüberli, 
Matheis Geyler, 
Andreas Geyler,* 
Hans Gergerich, 
Michael Lupp, 
Jacob Ybach sen., 
Jacob Ybach, 
Diebolt Dietrich, 
Hans Moltz, 
Peter Bensei, 
Mattheis Haas, 
Jacob Braun, 
Johannes Sommer, 
Peter Hickman, 
Philip Seydelman, 
Conrad Heylman,* 
Külian Pührer, 
Joseph Scheffer,? 
Johann Georg Schmeltz,* 
Johann Georg Ester, 
Han Georg Edeler,* 
Johann Erhard Lobstein, 
Hans Georg Dammer,* 
Hans Georg Mauss, 
Philip Jacob Gottßchalck, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1752. 



275 



Anthony Zimmermann, 
Hans Ulrich Beutler, 
Abraham Billing, 
Heinrich Rahausser, 
Hans Georg Sommer, 
Hans Georg Holtzschuh,* 
Johannes Coins,* 



Hans Adam Leh, 
Hans Georg JMarquard,* 
Andreas Rotenbiirger, 
Hans Jacob Merckel, 
Hans Jacob Hage, 
Hans Adam Schnäbele, 
Hans Jacob Burghen.* 



Sick — Jacob Lasch, Johann Nicklas Schneider. 



177) Sept. 22, 1752. Ship Halifax, Thomas Coatam, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Sept. 22, 1752. ©c^iff ^ali^av, Sapitain X^omaö Soatam, 
»on Slottert'am über SoweiS. 



Ghristophel Witmer, 
Philip Engel, 
Nicolas Köhler,* 
Friederich Eberhart,* 
Martin Decker, 
Johannes Griese, 
Hans Feltz, 
Anthony Zinck,* 
Johannes Paulus,* 
Christian Herman,* 
Jacob Olenthin, 
Philip Hoffman,* 
Bartholomge Evar,* 
Jonas Imschmiedt, 
Peter Reeb, 

Johan Melchior Brombach, 
Johan Conrad Blecher, 
Johann Georg Kuntze, 
Michael Springer, 
Johann Georg Kreybach,? 
Johannes Josephus Roth, 
David Sasmanhaussen, 
Hans Georg Doctor,* 
Johan Jacob Bersey, 
Johan Ludwig Bersey, 
Johan Jacob Brucker,* 
Hans Michael Geyer,* 



Hans Michael Hammer, 

Hans Philip Elter, 

Han Jac. Serber Zimmerman, 

Friederich Fleckstein,* 

Henry Meyer,* 

Peter Duweiler, 

Heinrich Maag, 

Lorentz Dürr,* 

Philip Hirdt, 

Jacob Müller, 

Jacob Sürber, 

Heinrich Zolli, 

Henry Kuntz,* 

Ulrich Kreyser, 

Caspar Wincker,* 

Henrich Mercki, 

Friederich Hörsch, 

Johannes iMeyer,* 

Johannes Jordan,* 

Johann Rudolph,'' 

Friederich Kammer, 

Jacob Klein, 

Jacob Schaaff, 

Johannes Gehr,* 

Matheas Roth,* 

Otto Pegy,* ^ 

Martin Vaniinger,* 



276 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Michael Wentz, 
Anthony Kush,* 
Jacob Hanick,* 
Friederich Schaaff,* 
Matheis Kientz, 
Jacob Dietrich, 
Jacob Juncker, 
Peter Wendung, 
Andreas Stöber,* 
Michael Conradt, 
Jacob Hisner,? 
Johannes Riegeler, 
Augustus Urban, 
Joseph Held,* 
Joseph Rubel,* 
Georg Rubel,* 
Johannes Patt, 
Martin Hutter,* 
Leonhart Weidman, 
Hans Jacob Müller, 
Conrad Müller, 
Johannes Sürber, 
Hans Jacob Rümmen, 
Hans Heinrich Weiss,? 
Hans Conrad Wirth,* 
Hans Casper Schladter, 
Wilhelm Haussaman, 
Hans Michael Eigel, 
Georg Hans Dietrich, 
Johann Philip Goress, 
Johann Georg Weber, 
Hans George Gleysler,* 
Jacob Weissenberger,* 
Johannes Müller, 



Johan Ludwig Ache, 
Hermannius Ache, 
Joseph Weigandt,* 
Lorentz Reinhart,* 
Martin Brungart, 
Joh. David Wildenmuth, 
Georg Wilhelm Müller, 
Johann Jacob Hess, 
Georg Ludwig Marburger, 
Johann KraflFthorn,* 
Johannes Jacob Ache, 
Johan Henrich Gutting, 
Hieronimus Spies, 
Johannes Michael, 
Johannes Schreiber, 
Joh. Daniel Steinseiffer, 
Hans Henrich Kauffer, 
Hermanus Limper,* 
Joh. Michael Kantzer,* 
Johan Jacob Brentz, 
Johan Georg Büssung, 
Johann Dieterich, 
Joh. Jacob Müller, 
Johan Wennertblecher, 
Johan Michael Bäcker, 
Ulerich Glökil,* 
Johannes Meyer, 
Conrad Ziegler,* 
Joseph Altheer, 
Jacob Gross, 
Hans Nickel Quinrin,? 
Johan Nicklaus Hoffman,* 
Johan Nicklaus Farringer,* 
Joseph Onzemiller.* 



Paulus Schäffer,* 

Sick — Jacob Roth, Henrich Frey, Christian Bi-uchhart, Jo- 
hannes Bruchhart, Matheis Müller, Daniel Fischer, Hans De- 
wald Wandlin, Hans Georg Mauser, T. Nieklas Mauser, Lud- 
wig Gross, Johannes Köttring, Peter Bring, Johannes Ludwig, 
Johannes Ewers, Hieronimus Schneider, Georg Adam Schütz, 
Haus Jacob, Michael Gross. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1752. 



277 



178) Sept. 23, 1752. Stip St. Andrew, James Abercrom- 
bie. Captain, from Rotterdam, last from Plymouth, England. 

(Sept. 23, 1752. ©c^iff ©t. Stnbre», Sapltaln 3ame3 mer= 
crombie, »on Stotterfeam über ^lt)mout^, ©nglant». 



Jacob Baltzer, 
Henrich Horn, 
Hans Dommi, 
Andreas Bartruff, 
Ulrich Scherch,* 
Abraham Zety,* 
Jacob Orth, 
Philip Becker,* 
Christian Bühler, 
Valentin Becker,* 
Andreas Lintz,* 
Ulerich Zercher,* 
Daniel Blim, 
Ulrich Scherr, 
Leonhart Bremer,* 
Jacob Blanck,* 
Nickolus Blanck,* 
Mathias Ecks,? 
Johannes Ruts,* 
Nicolas Buch,* 
Hans Blanck,* 
Joseph Grropff, 
Ulrich Hauser,* 
Leonard Hedly,* 
Ulrich Fischer, 
Johan Friederich Zeller, 
Hans Martin Zeller, 
Johan Christoph Rissel, 
Hans Martin Hang,* 
Dewalt Billman,* 
John Philip Krimb,? 
Philip Killinger,* 
Jacob Hiestandt, 
Johannes Webrecht, 
Johan G-eorg Knoch, 
Ludwig Spannagel, 
Gabriel Spannagel, 



Hans Georg Naffzer,* 
Wilhelm Reiter, 
Johan Jacob Bauer, 
Jacob Kauffman,* 
Johan Henrich Kräss,* 
Johan Valentin Kräss, 
Daniel Reinhold, 
Christian Schmücker, 
Johan Jacob Boltz, 
Dorstius Alleman,* 
Job. Michael Mauerer, 
Job. Bernhart Eytel, 
Ulrich Lautenbach, 
Joseph Gall, 
Jacob Fried, 
Philip Wissler, 
Johannes Moll, 
Peter Moll, 
Dietrich Schmitzer, 
Eberhart Luttman, 
Michael App, 
Christian Stäbler, 
Christian Meyer, 
Henrich Schenck, 
Heinrich Gebhart, 
Jacob Lutz, 
Andreas Zorn, 
Jacob Schäffer, 
Christoph Carl, 
Christian Lutz, 
Simon Kricht, 
Peter Adam, 
Friederich Planck, 
Jeremias Eberle, 
David Aller, 
Philip Schauer, 
Friederich MüUer. 



24 



278 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Ulrich Stauffer, 
Simon Brand,* 
Frantz Kamman,* 
Daniel Gerhart,* 
Michael Eindesweiler, ? 
Johan Georg Grämlich, 
John Georg Küffer,* 
Frantz Jacob Haussier, 
Bastian Bohrman, 
Jacob Bernhart Friederich, 
Johann Peter Lang, 
Georg Adam Eberth, 
Hans Georg Bader, 
Johan Georg Kupper, 
David Katterman, 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Sick — Jacob Forney. 



Hans Jacob Bemer, 
Martin Steinbrenner, 
Jacob Steinbrenner, 
Matheus Baritschwerd, 
Joh. Leonhart Keuchert, 
Hans Michel Hattenbach, 
Johan Georg Hattenbach, 
Hans Jacob Eberle, 
Johan Michael Schlencker, 
Johan Heinrich Riedel, 
Christoph David Schauer, 
Johan Georg Eberle, 
Hans Georg Heiss, 
Hans Georg Piesch,* 
Johan Peter Bangman, 
John Caspar Ginter. 



179) Sept. 23, 1752. Ship Ann Galley, Charies Kenneway, 
Captain, from Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth, England. 

(Sept. 23, 1752. (5d)itf 2tnn ©aüep, Sapitatn e^arleg Äcn= 
neivap, öon Stotterbam ükr ^^ortömout^, ßu^Iant). 



Bartholomae Eibach, 
Andreas Braun, 
Philip Heyd, 
Sebastian Eschbalt,? 
Wilhelm Conrad, 
Jacob Mattler, 
Andreas Kissel,* 
Michael Obrist, 
Johan Friederich Pendtner, 
Albrecht Hofmeister, 
Johan Ludwig Büschler, 
Johannes Jacob Rau, 
Eberhart Christoph Schret, 
Joh. Henrich Kuntz,* 
Johan Georg Steiner, 
Johan Georg Rihm,? 
Henry Angculy, 
Martin Schall, 



Martin Wolfif, 
Ulrich Spohn,* 
Balthaser Mante, 
Joseph Mayer, 
Rudolph Schaub,* 
Simon Zeiner,* 
Nicklas Leydecker,* 
Peter Spengler,* 
Henry Valentin,* 
Peter Campo, 
Jean Pigonie,* 
Clementz Ober, 
Georg Ludwig, 
Michael Meck,* 
Michael Muth, 
Thomas Jeidler, 
Christian Muor, 
Peter Inäbmit, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1752. 



270 



Michael Schwar, 
Jacob Butz,* 
Martin Müller, 
Johan Elias, 
Phillip Bleck, 
Christian Tomm,* 
Jacob Müller, 
Jost Martin Waltz, 
Jolian Valentin Seidel, 
Johan Friederich Springer, 
Johan Gabriel Springer, 
Johan Casper Spolin,* 
Martin Georg Wahl, 
Friederich Reiclienerder, 
Hans Georg Hipp, 
Daniel Nonnenmacher, 
Ludwig Conrad Schneider, 



Joh. IMichael Miller,* 
Hans Georg Schaal, 
Joh. Georg Spengler,* 
Benedict Spetzfendem, 
Hans Georg IMeck,* 
Hans Martin INIack, 
Han Georg Schley,* 
Johan Conrad Schenck, 
Hans Georg Baltzer,* 
Joh. Jacob Wintzberger, * 
Joh. Georg Schwinederer, 
Johan Friederich Braun, 
Johan Georg Braun, 
Georg Jacob Schneider, 
Hans Georg Schwartz, 
Wilhelm Conrad, 
Rudolph Schoff. § 



180) Sept. 26, 1752. Ship Richard and Mary, John Moore, 
Master, from Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth. 

(Btpt 26, 1752. ©c^iff 9it(^art) unb Waxi), Sapitain 3ot)n 
?[Roore, öon Sflotterbam über ^ortömoutt). 



Peter Wönner, 
Peter Emmert, 
Casper Baltzer,* 
Johannes Weyant,* 
Johann Diehlbeck, 
Michael Behm,* 
Nicklas Bernhart,* 
Peter Hollebach,* 
Andreas Harn,* 
Gabriel Armbriester, 
Johannes Conrath, 
Jacob Daniel Scherrer, 
Henrich Jacob Knerr, 
Johan Daniel Allsbach, 
Johan Nicklas Karcher,* 
Johan Georg Gensheimer, 
Johan Georg Emmerich, 
Johan Philip Taules, 



Johan Henrich Kipp, 
Johan Philippus Hoffman, 
Johan Peter Roller, 
Joh. Peter Pfankuchen, 
Georg Reit,* 
Henrich Scheidbach, 
Nicklaus Winchel, 
Martin Schmitt, 
Michael Schleyer, 
Michael Roth,* 
Jacob Schuckman, 
Johannes Becker, 
Johannes Was, 
Elias Schmidt, 
Andreas Jäckle, 
Friederich Saamm,* 
Nicolas Samm, 
Adam Samm, 



280 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Theobald Becker, 
Peter Huth,* 
Ludwig Schmidt,* 
Conrad Miller,* 
Peter Bär,* 
Henrich Mosser, 
Michael Graff, § 
Jacob Klar, 
Andreas Petri, 
Adam Bernhart, 
Dewalt Grub, 
Daniel Cramer, 
Michael Lauetz, 
Baltzer Dickhans,* 
Johannes Küstner, 
Georg Seider, 
Casper Lademan, 
Antonius Walter, 
Joh. Henrich Stanhenner, 
Joh. PhUip Werntz, 
Joh. Benedictus Müller, 
Johan Henrich Scher, 
Joh. Theobald Bauer, 
Philip Jacob Kehle, 
Johan Jacob Siegfried, 



Johan Henrich Hummel, 
Johan Adam Derting, 
Dewalt Dannfeltzer, 
Johan Nickel Hembt, 
Johan Georg Beck, 
Martin Holtzhausser, 
Johan Thiel Herman,* 
Henrich Müssemer, 
Johannes König, 
Jacob Steinbach, 
Henrich Bierbauer, 
Jost Schönwaldt,* 
Simon Schumacher, 
Johan Georg Haudt, 
Johan Wilhelm Stuber, 
Johan Friederich Stuber, 
Johan PhUip Stuber, 
Hans Georg Eheller, 
Johan Wilhelm Stricker, 
Georg Peter Eckel, 
Simon Herrmann, 
Hans Jacob Gebhardt, 
Peter Leonhard Henkenius, 
Joh. Henrich Henkenius, 
Michael Hoffman.* 



181) Sept. 27, 1752. Ship Anderson, Hugh Campbell, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth. 

©ept. 27, 1752. ©^iff Stnberfon, ßapitain ^ug^ dampUU, 
»on 9tottert>am über ^ortömout^. 



Leonhart Bender, 
Christoph Mauerer, 
Uerlich Volck,* 
Georg Riegert, 
Peter Willer, 
Jacob Beiltel, 
Johan Martin Schweitzer, 
David Haussman, 
Hans Georg Marquart, 
Johannes Strätter,* 



Johannes Weill, 
Michael Heim, 
Daniel Krütter, 
Philip Euler, 
Peter Pfeü,* 
Philipp Kress, 
Michael Schmidt, 
Peter Dückherdt, 
Friederich Steinle, 
Georg Wetzel, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1752. 



281 



Christian Dürz, 
Nicolaus Schunder, 
David Weyfaller, 
Chiistoph Usterle, 
Michael Schelling, 
Martin Betz, 
Andreas Gäss, 
Andreas Eppler, 
Johannes Kurtz, 
Pierre Lageau, 
Johannes Altig,* 
Adam Weisbarth, 
Johannes Weber, 
Andreas Weg, 
Peter Ansell,* 
Christoph Gisterer, 
Moritz Bauer, 
Thomas Knissel, 
Johannes Deissher, 
Wilhelm Garein, 
Gottlob Herman.-* 
Michael Ritter, 
Thomas Piel,§ 
Christian Peistly,* 
Jacob Blessing,* 
Jacob Kriser, 

Jeremias Lud. Engelmann, 
Johannes Schneder, 
Mattheis Knügel, 
Nicklaus Wenschler, 



Leonhardt Gnärr, 
Christian Rapman, 
Johannes Waltz, 
Wilhelm Fried. Schumann, 
Carl Friederich Muckenfus, 
Simon Zimmerman, 
Jacob Friederich Fischer, 
Johan Georg Breymeyer, 
Wilhelm Christoph Kesebohref;. 
Johan Friederich Fuchs, 
Christoph Bothacker, 
Andreas Scheibling, 
Joh. Caspar Windesch, 
Joachim Bräuchle, 
Johannes Washer, 
Johan David Harlacher, 
Johan Georg Maul, 
Johan Jacob Beltz, 
Georg Michael Beltz, 
Johan Jacob Fussbec,? 
Hans Michael Kretel, 
Georg Ernst Lindenberger, 
Joh. Georg Reist,* 
Joh. Georg Schiiger, 
Joh. Friederich König, 
Matheus Kühbauch, 
Joh. Friederich von Rahden, 
M. Jacob Fried. Schertlein, 
Balthas Triett, 
Friederich Masser. 



182) Sept. 27, 1752. Ship President, 
tain, from Rotterdam, last from England. 



Dunlop, Cap- 



©ept. 27, 1752. ©d)iif ^raftfeent, Sa?)ttoin Dunlop, »on 
Stotterbam über Snglant. 

Joh. Martin Cranmiller, 
Georg Christoph Kuss, 
Johan Martin Huber, 
Johannes Folmer, 
Georg Albrecht, 



Johannes Enttiger, 
Johannes Laufer, 
Hans Bauer, 
Johannes Lutz, 
Johan Georg Schneider, 



24* 



282 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Michael Riiss, 
Jacob Nast, 
Gottfried Stauch,* 
Michael Fischer, 
Wilhelm Schneider, 
Carl Killuge, 
Wolfgang Heftier, 
Conrad Huber, 
Johan Briining, 
Michael Gantner,* 
Jacob Ruppert, 
Solomon Wessle, 
Jacob Müller, 
Christoph Strobel, 
Adam Sorg, 
Johann Faber,* 
Peter Baltzly,* 
Jacob Wildt, 
George Wild,* 
Andreas Weste, 
Frederich Shwenk,* 
Jacob Long, 
Mattheis Baser, 
Georg Duwerter, 
Jacob Threx, § 
Frantz Tulpenbaum,* 
Henrich Hassler,* 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Bernhart Upp, 
Johannes Dauchbes,? 
Johan Georg Haas, 



Hans Martin Shrang, 
Johan Martin Pfeiffer, 
Philip Jacob Nass, 
Michael Pfadermiller, 
Ulrich Michael Bauer, 
Johan Georg Haitberger, 
Ulrich Haitberger,* 
Georg Friederich Scherthlen, 
Johan Peter Erman, 
Bernhart Höhneise, 
Hans Georg Lessig, 
Christoph Schmid, 
Johan Georg Weidich, 
Caspar Beintzighoster, 
Johann Georg Wagner, 
Johann Henrich Kostenbades, 
Johann Christoph Peter, 
Johannes Schnecke, 
Melchior Beltzhuber, 
Hans Georg Looser, 
Johann Jacob Long, 
Johannes Schwencke, 
Adam Augermeyer, 
Martin Schillinger, 
Johan Bernhard Bauer, 
Andreas Schwartz, 
Hans Georg Baser, 
Johannes Schärthle, 
Georg Friederich Hengel, 
Philip Samuel Pühl. 



183) Sept. 27, 1752. Ship Nancy, John Ewing, Captain, 
fi-om Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

®ept. 27, 1759. ®c^tjf S^ianc^, ßapitain 3o^n Swing, »on 
Sflotterbam über Somcö. 

Jacob Schweiler, Samuel Müsse, 

Jacob Schmidt, Philip Mall, 

Jonas Bastian,* Johan Friederich Danninger, 

Georg Hauher, Jacob Mussgenug, 



AND OTUER IMMIGRANTS — 1752. 



283 



Carl Fr. Biebert,? 
Philip Jacob Wunder, 
David Xander, 
Johann Michael Hauss, 
Konradt Weiss, 
Andreas Bastian, 
Georg Wenig,* 
Matheis Deibel,* 
Friederich Baisch, 
Jacob Baish,* 
Christoph Breisser, 
Johannes Butz, 
Michael Eyroh,* 
Joseph Stünde!, 
G-eorge Grass,* 
Jacob Dietrich, 
Joseph Bernhart,* 
Joseph Bernhart jr.,* 
Hans Kintz,* 
Johannes Shwitzer,* 
Jacob Zinchffer,? 
Jaque Peirot, 
Jaque Molan, 
Michael Doser, 
Balthas Baumm, 
Christoph Embich, 
Israel Eberlin, 
Philip Fallen, 
Valentin Hagner, 
Ludwig Erich, 
Martin Fromm, 
Andreas Jäger, 
Henrich Schlachter,* 
Christoph Mast,§ 
Paul Waag, 
Rudolph Klaar,* 



Hans Stöts, 
Jacob Kautz jr., 
Job. Philip Bietrighoffer, 
Adam Friederich Weiss, 
Jüh. Georg Friederich Bayer, 
Jacob Bauerschmiedt, 
Jacob Bauerschmied jr., 
Georg Friederich Jauss, 
Christoph Rothbaust, 
Johann Andreas Roth,* 
Johann Friederich Uhlandt, 
Jacob Armbrüster,* 
Georg Michael Spatz, 
Jacob Stützmann, 
Johann Ludwig Seiler, 
Christian Bamberg, 
Johannes Herrmann,* 
Hans Georg Kautz, 
Hans Jacob Lersch, 
Frantz Saltzman, 
Peter Halteman,* 
Johan Martin Doser, 
Christian Mühlheim, 
Jos. Jacob Ernst, 
Hans Jacob Neustätt, 
Hans Georg Heilikel, 
Georg Balthas Ernst, 
Casper Underweg, 
Johann Marx Klopfer, 
Joh. Martin Rüdelmayer, 
Herman Matsh,* 
Georg Friederich Schwartz, 
Hans Georg Krebs, § 
Hans Paul Henrich, 
Johann Georg Braun, 
Johannes Griess. 



Captain, 



184) Oct. 4, 1752. Ship Neptune, John Mason, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Oct. 4, 1752. >5d)iff 9itptune, Sa^Jttaiu 3o^n 'iSla^on, ^oii 
9lottert)am über Sowcsi. 



284 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Adam Hartman, 
Valentin Letman, 
Christophel Feichtner, 
Nicolas Boron,* 
Johann Ludwig Leib, 
Hans Michel Gutknecht, 
Hans Michael Dock, 
Hans Georg Hartman, 
Nickel Nählich, 
Henry Henly,* 
Georg Mewes, 
Christian Schmidt, 
Johannes Bernhart, 
Stephan Nicklaus,* 
Georg Werner, 
Michael Hoak,* 
Stoffel Hussung, 
Daniel Stattler,* 
Daniel Conrad,* 
Anthony Roth, 
Johannes Conrad, 
Casper Fell,* 
Paul Hoffmann, 
Jacob Schwartz, 
Adam Pence,* 
Nicklaus Höh, 
Michael Busch, 
Matheus Andrae, 
Wendel Biesel,* 
Jacob Haberstich, 
Balthasar Schwartz, 
Paulus Seip, 
Theobald Schwartz, 
Philip Seip, 
George Meyer,* 
Jacob Kuhn,* 
Thomas Straub, 
Johannes Hortig, 
Johannes Kress, 
Henry Kress, § 
Caspar Kress,* 



Carl Kress,* 
Nickolas Schall, 
Andreas Schall, 
Conrad Rösch, 
Jacob Zieget, 
Simon Schmitt,* 
George Unckel, 
Johannes Feyly,* 
Matheas Ebener, 
Johann Jacob Wolff, 
Hans Peter Hertzog, 
Johan Valtin Walter, 
Hubert Baumgärtner, 
J. Christian Bohnenblust, 
Hans Nicolaus Pesser, 
Hans Georg Kurtz, 
Joh. Jacob Becker, 
Johan Henrich Nöl, 
Hans Georg Kucher, 
Georg Friederich Köal^, 
Philip Jacob Roth, 
Christian Rohrbacher, 
Christian Hoffmann, 
Johann Georg Werner, 
Philip Christian Wellef, 
Joh. Sigmund Hagelga^](j, 
Johann Jacob Dietrich, 
Johann Michel Harfer, 
Johan Adam Wild, 
Wilhelm Trautmann, 
Christian Haberstich, 
Hans Georg Schwartz, 
Wilhelm Stauch, 
Michael Hutzner, 
Johan Adam Tictz,* 
Dewalt Witterspohn,* 
Johan Peter Asseim, 
Nickolas Schall jr.. 
Christopher Blumer, 
Johan Georg Weber, 
Johan Philip Griech,* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1752. 



285 



Johann Jacob Friess, 
Hans Adam Weber, 
Georg Lautenschläger, 
Johan Michael Heinecke, 
Johan Adam Heinecke, 
Nicklaus Schweyer, 
Johann Sebastian Gross, 
Johann Andreas Gross, 
Johan Henrich Niess, 
Johan Wilhelm Schneider, 
Joel Dormeier, 
Andreas Dormyer,* 
Jacob Dormyer, § 
Peter Schneider, 
Conrad Schneider, 
Samuel Schultz, 
Ludwig Küster, 
Philip Wentzel,* 
Johannes Geiss,* 
Mattheis Haller, 
Peter Molsbach, 
Johannes Schäffer, 
Henry Lipps,* 
Johannes Nickellas, 
Joseph Bernhart, 
Christian Lauer, 
Peter Uhrich, 
Johannes Züplie, 
Johannes Hirni, 
Johannes Arris, 
Johannes Glass, 
Hans Kuntzi, 
Georg Meyer,* 
Ulrich Sterchi, 
Christian Sterchi, 
Michael Spatz, 
Michael Hessler,* 
Johannes Blockinger. 
Ulrich Feitz,* 
Peter Shneyder,* 
Peter Dunter,* 



Johannes Hoffer sen., 
Johannes Hoffer jr., 
Nicolas Lotz, 
Jacob Gross, 
Johannes Kautz, 
Johannes Conrad Streuber, 
Gebhart Bertholt, 
Georg Philip Küster, 
Job. Henry Lohmiller, 
Johann Georg Rübsaamen, 
Johann Georg Jung, 
Johannes Hufnagel, 
Job. Michael Schmidt, 
Johann Philip Haffner, 
Christophel Keller, 
Heinrich Schäffer, 
Johan Philip Breuning, 
Johan Adolph Gilman, 
John George Nicholas, 
Peter Zöngrig,* 
Johann Jacob Baumann, 
Johann Michael May, 
Johann Casper Domm, 
Johannes Schwatzer, 
Johan Heinrich Heiss, 
Job. Adam Arris, 
Johann Jacob Hipge, 
Friederich Zurbüchen, 
Johan Philip Müller, 
Johann Peter Müller, 
Valentin Lautenschläger, 
Johan Georg Kriegenmeyer, 
Johan Wilhelm Lotz, 
Johannes Lohmöller, 
Christoph Ensling, 
Johann Peter Schmidt, 
Johan Daniel Becker, 
Christian Kautz, 
Johannes Diehl, 
Johan Caspar Kindt, 
Johann Georg Nonyus. 



286 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



185) Oct. 11, 1752. Ship Forest, Paterick Ouchterlony, 
Captain, from Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth. 

Oct. 11, 1752. ®^iff goveft, (lapitain 5)atcricf Du^terloiip, 
»on Stotterfcam über ^ortömoutt). 



Michel Danner, 
Johannes Schreiner, 
Johann Jacob Wilbrandt, 
Johan Georg Englerdt, 
Jacob Reinardt, 
Balthas Maute, 
Peter Sauder, 
Johannes Rubemiller,* 
Peter Pfeill, 
Jacob Heller, 
Peter Girstohber, 
Johannes WolflP, 
I. Daniel Junger, 
Conrad Feuch, 
Johannes Hirschman, 
Valentin Braun, 
Johannes Clauss, 
Johannes Schell, 
Johannes Tillman, 
Conrad Jung, 
Christoph Gerhardt, 
Jacob Notz, 
Johannes Lademacher, 
Johannes Helters, 
Henry Kahlbach, 
Johannes Amgontert, 
Caspar Hubert, 
Johannes Schoyrer, 
Hans Erling, 
Jacob Digel, 
Michael Englest, 
Johannes Hayner, 
Mattheis Miller, 
Johannes Mayer, 
Johannes Huss, 
Henrich Creutz, 
Wilhelm Creutz, 



Daniel Leicht,* 
Joh. Jacob Swartz,* 
Joh. Jacob Lerch, 
Johann Engelschreter, 
John Henry Shram,* 
Jacob Tillinger,* 
Emanuel Heintz, 
Johan Jost Georg, 
Christoph Stattel, 
Hans Georg Bader, 
Johan Ludwig Henner, 
Johan Peter Schönfelter sen., 
Johan Peter Schönfelter jr., 
Johann Georg Hoffmann, 
Johann Caspar Fitting, 
Johann Adam Schissler, 
Friederich Jacob Kuntz, 
Johann Adam Wolff, 
Johan Cari Wolff, 
Johan Dietrich Schwartz, 
Georg ]\Iartin Vott, 
Hans Georg Suliger, 
Christian Scheckenberger, 
Johann Conrad Wack sen., 
Johan Conrad Wack, 
J. Henry Herman, 
Johan Junges Jung, 
Johann Peter Clossmeyer, 
Johann Conrad Hay, 
Johann Henrich Wiesteir, 
Johann Christ. Reis, 
Johann Peter Jung, 
Johann Georg Leuder, 
Johann Jacob Vaymer, 
Johann Simon Schreyer, 
Adam Leonhart Schreyer, 
Johan Peter Steinbach, 



AND OTHER LMM [GRANTS — 1752. 



287 



Johan Henrich Humerich, 
Johann Georg Hänner, 
Joh. Teis Reichel, 
Johan Friederich Gass, 
Johan Engel E,öder, 
Johann Philip Weller, 
Georg Henrich Gross, 
Hans Martin Wiser, 
Johan Leonard Harriger, 
Johann Georg Oltenwaldt, 
Johan Michael Büntzel, 
Johann Dietrich Riess, 
Hans Adam Werner, 
Sick — Matheis Bader, 



Johann Peter Sprecher, 
Michael Bitzer, 
Mattheis Bitzer, 
Johannes Retter,* 
Peter Grimm, 
Michael Kegereiss, 
Johannes Adam Adam, 
Jean Christoph Marekel, 
Johan Georg Benck, 
Johann Peter Archbiss, 
Johann Martin Walter, 
Johann Henrich Beil, 
Johannes Jacob Dowart. 
Nicolaus Ruth, Conrad Luntz, 



Jo- 



hannes Teis, Henrich Gross, Christian Freilich. 



186) Oct. 16, 1752. SnowKetly, Theophilus Barnes, Com- 
mander, fi'om Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth. 

Dct. 16, 1752. (Seef^iff ^etl^, Sommanfeant a:^eo))^Uuö 
SBavneö, öon 9tottert)ant über ^ortömout^. 



Friederich Jarquart, 
David Welsch, 
Wilhelm Lenhardt, 
Christian Closs, 
Philip Bideljung,* 
Daniel Klein,* 
Joseph Mey, 
Johannes Gachon, 
Leonhart Seuffert, 
Georg Schneyder, 
Johannes Hen, 
Andreas Heck, 
Henrich Miller, 
Christian Wentz, 
Johan Bluth, § 
Philip Scheffer, 
Philip Albrecht, 
Caspar Bauer, 
Andreas Mack, 
Christian Sand, 



Georg Brauss, 
Christoph Süss, 
Joseph Weber, 
Henrich Weidner, 
Jacob Hän,* 
Georg Wolff, 
Jacob Weide, 
Martin Grün, 
Michael Baker,* 
Johan Dieter Marckbach, 
Johann Daniel Mütschler, 
Johan Conrad CEsterich, 
Johan Conrad Ruth, 
Johan Christian Burg, 
Johan Christophel Volck, 
Johann Peter Niedenthal, 
Johann Jacob Nunymeyer, 
Johann Philip Schneider, 
Johan Wilhelm Strempel, 
Jonas Rindevdust, ? 



288 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Johan Joacliim Tölcker, 
Johan George Frey, 
Johann Georg Hertranft, 
Johan Michael Leid, 
Johan Jacob Decker, 
Johann Peter HöU, 
Johann Jacob Müller, 
Johann Henrich Heyl, 
Phihp Jacob Mack, 
Johann Tobias Ebele, 
Joh. Daniel Weisenberger, 
Georg PhUip Lied, 
Conrath Thomas Lied, 
Philip Carl Schenckel, 
Georg Michael Egert,* 
George Michael Hain,* 
Johan Jacob Heintz, 



Nickolas Salladin,* 
Friederich MüUer, 
Henry Hess, 
Georg Gass, 
Jacob Heyl, 
Henry Süs, 
Georg Weide, 
Nicklaus König, 
Peter König, 
Abraham Sontag, 
Johannes Kallenberger, 
Hans Georg Brenner, 
Jacob Shuster, 
Philipp Schenckel, 
Heinrich Schenckel, 
Balthaser König. 



187) Oct. 20, 1752. Ship Duke of Wirtemberg, Daniel 
Montpelier, Commander, from Rotterdam, last jfrom Cowes. 

Dct. 20, 1752. (5d)iff Dute of Sßirtemberg, eommanfcant 
£)aniel 9JJontpeUer, »on 9tottert)ain über Soweö. 



Jacob Guth, 
Michael Stöhr, 
Georg Ziegler, 
Jacob Bosch, 
Michael Meng, 
Christian Zürn, 
Johannes Kleiss, 
Mathäus Kibler, 
Tobias Baab, 
Johannes Blickly,* 
Tobias Mick,* 
Christian Lutz, 
Mattheis Bruder, 
Johannes Wehing, 
Balthasar Lotz, 
Jacob Schaibler, 
Friederich Stöhr, 
Friederich Kilgus, 



Matheis Zeiger,* 
Hans Hemiger, 
Heinrich Schwab, 
Christian Drion, 
Friederich Dehm, 
Matheus Stahl, 
Michael Fohme,? 
Johannes Lemle, 
Michel Lömle, 
Jacob Wessener, 
Matheus Lang, 
Johann Michael Guth, 
Johan Georg Guth, 
Samuel Banher, 
Johan Martin Bat, 
Conrad Feuerbohnen, 
Jacob Bemhart Schwab, 
Johann Friederich Gross, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1752. 



289 



Immanuel Fred. Weckerlin, 
Johannes Scliwartzwölder, 
Anthony Katterer,* 
Johannes Deschler, 
Johann Ludwig Über, 
Johann Michael Fissler, 
Johann Georg Fissler, 
Hans Georg Kellner, 
Hans Jacob Kellner, 
Sebastian Wegner, 
Johann Fritlauf,? 
Johann Conrad Hesser, 
Jacob Simon Vogler, 
Johannes Schwartz, 
Jacob Michel Hei, 
Hans Georg Heitzman, 
Johannes Seitz, 
Michael Hauer, 
Johannes Fachmeyer, 
Michael Goodner,* 
Johann Jacob Lauman, 
Johann Georg Ott, 
Johannes Miller, 
Michael Bach, 
Jacob Bauman, 
Christian Braun, 
Andreas Gering, 
Matheis Bruchli,* 
Joel Waltz, 
Georg Haber, 
Friederich Mag, 
Michael Hart, 
Peter Haller,* 
Jacob Hewass, 
Jacob Schuler,* 
Jacob Weyn,* 
Martin Haug, 
Asaph Lantz, 
Jacob Heitter, 
Johannes Braun, 
Johannes Braun jr.. 



Jacob Mass, 
IMartin Lang, 
Jacob Stehly, 
Jacob Lanck,* 
Jacob Morhardt, 
Jacob Gündner, 
Jacob Walter, 
Mattheis Wessener, 
Jacob Beyerly, 
Jacob Braun, 
Jacob Braun sen., 
Mark Mattheis, 
Christian Haas, 
Jacob Bub,* 
Christian Stahl, 
Mattheis Van, 
Hans Geo. Zinkblei, 
Elias Finslaimer,? 
Johannes Zinsser, 
Michael Leichs,* 
Johannes Leichs,* 
Hans Michael Schatz, 
Johannes Raible, 
Hans Martin Raible, 
Christian Getz, 
Christian Ziegler, 
Johannes Kugler, 
Johannes Lochmeier, 
Albrecht Walter, 
Johannes Shutz, 
Christian Karch, 
Joseph Bontaux, 
Friederich Schmeltzle, 
Ulrich Scheermesser, 
Christian Singer, 
Mattheis Kirsch, 
Friederich Gasser, 
Johannes Ijeix, 
Hans Martin Lang, 
Hans Georg Fritz, 
Andreas Wasserman, 



25 



290 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Friederieli Schmidt, 
Augustia Stahl, 
Johannes Vigeld, 
Christian Hebling, 
Georg Haflner,* 
Johannes Hetzel, 



Anthoni Burell, 
Johannes Fleit,* 
Johann Jacob Masser, 
Hans Georg Haak, 
Hans Georg Göttle, 
Christoph Fried. Biller. 



Sick — Johan Jacob Keyser, Michael Frick, Hans Jacob Van. 



188) Oct. 23, 1752. Ship Bawley, George Grove, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Plymouth. 

Dct. 23, 1752. ©c^iff Satvle^, ßapitatn ©eorgc Oroöe, üon 
3tottcrt)am über ^^^^niout^. 



Adam Ship,* 
Adam Tesch,* 
Heinrich Klein, 
Jacob Wann, 
Christoph Eeyter, 
Christian Metzger, 
Johannes Heil, 
Georg Heil, 
Peter Schwab,* 
Johannes Bauss,* 
Hans Bauss, 
Johannes Koch,* 
Jacob Hottenstein, 
Johannes Schmit,* 
Moritz Schadig,* 
Jacob Frey,* 
Daniel Hätzel, 
Gottfried Schutz, 
Andreas Haag, 
Michael Rüttger, 
Andreas Jauch, 
Martin Jäger,* 
Henry Bauth,* 
Peter Simmon, 
Andreas Vey,* 
Michael Kitz, 
Kilian Bauer, 
Baltzer Simon,* 



Andreas Berge, 
Conrad Ahster, 
Valentin Stall, 
Henrich Simon, 
Georg Hartman, 
Andreas Höhl, 
Christian Hügel, 
Nicolaus Böhm, 
Johannes Roth, 
Justus Derbert, 
Stephanus Lotz, 
Johannes Lotz, 
Ulrich Miller,* 
Georg Braun, 
John Georg Bager,? 
Henrich Peter Tesch, 
Philip Henrich Gross, 
Joh. Friederich Gackly, 
Job. Michael Breiner, 
Melchior Katteman,* 
Leonhart Bauman.* 
Hans Georg Schmitt,* 
Georg Wilhelm Dönges, 
Conradt Dönges, 
Johan Friederich Wübel, 
Joh. Nicklaus Graushar, 
Johannes Graushar, 
Bernhart Mauer, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1752. 



291 



Job. Wilhelm Engesbach, 
Johan Adam Zey,* 
John George Wendel, 
Johann Georg Gross, 
Nicholas Miller,* 
Johan Henrich Cress, 
Johannes Müller, 
Nickolas Griiffenstein, 
Hans Peter Lein, 
Johann Simmon, 
Johannes Thurm,* 
Daniel Machleit, 
Joh. Philip Titshler,* 
Johannes Glassier,* 
Wilhelm Gottlieb Jaysser, 
Johan Georg Strobig,* 
Johannes Lincker,* 
Joh. Georg Eberly, 
Leonhart Spang, 
F. Peter Bauer, 
Johan Nicklas Ott, 
Andreas Frischkorn, 
Joh. Nicklas Staus,* 
Jacob Gumeringer,* 
Hans Georg Steedinger, 
Joh. Philip Fretz, 
Lorentz Haushalter, 
Joseph Burgstahler, 
Johannes Seitz, 
Michael Lang, 
Matheis Miller,* 
Jacob Neiell,? 
Matheis Krön, 
Conradt Endres, 
Friederich Kera,§ 
Elias Most, 
Philip Fisher,* 
Daniel Schmidt, 
Leonard Gohl, 



Elias Gohl, 
Johannes Stocker, 
David Jung, 
Christian Kress, 
Michael Wilhekn, 
Andreas Brauss, 
Carl Bentz, 
Johannes Stehr, 
Philip Caryess,* 
Gottfried Weyland, 
Johannes Hebeisen, 
Christian Herrmann, 
Johannes Möller, 
Johannes Bohn, 
Christoph Hancker, 
Hans Georg Mock, 
Hans Georg Wächter, 
Johan G ottlieb Fröhlich, 
Georg Henrich Bentz, 
Johan Jacob Schuppert, 
Johann Georg Wunderlich, 
Hans Georg Gardner,* 
Georg Friederich Klein, 
David Hottenstein, 
Georg Eberhart Döring, 
Lenhard Schweitzer, 
Jacob Schweitzer, 
Joh. Nickolas Bender, 
Johannes Ommerth, 
Jacob Sultzberger, 
Georg Adam Kern, 
Johan Henrich Gattung, 
J. Henry Staubach,* 
Theobaldus Eberhardt, 
Johan Tobias Kenner, 
Job. Conrad Trünckler, 
Georg Christoph Steiuertz, 
Jost Henrich Möller. 



292 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



189) Nov. 2, 1752. Ship Phoenix, John Spurrier, Comman- 
der, from Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth. 

^o'o. 2, 1752. <Sd)iff 5^^önir, Somntantsant 3o^« «Spurrier, 
»on 9tottert>am nbiv ^ort^moutl). 



Bastian Kender,* 
Lorentz Michel, 
Georg Höre, 
Johannes Riess, 
Peter Ahlemann, 
Heinrich Becker, 
Conrad Ross, 
Joachim Strover, 
Thomas Geissler, 
PhUip Herdel, 
J. Jacob Shellbecker,* 
J. Henry Sholtes,* 
Jacobus Sautranck, 
Johann Henrich Schleich, 
Johann Jacob Wetzel, 
Joh. Baltzer Kleinschmidt, 
Hans Michael Fries, 
Philip Jacob Höre, 
Matheis Wilhelm Heming, 
Johann Michel Wissler, 
Johann Wolf Wissler, 
Johann Casper Wissler, 
Johan Henrich Katzbach, 
Joh. Philip Schelbacher, 
Johan Wilhelm Bäcker, 
Johan Michael Bürger, 
Johannes Stehlert, 
Johannes Wassum,* 
Leonhart Wassum,* 
Christoph Kuhn, 
Frantz Ihmme, 
Philip Kurtz, 
Abraham Eduman, 
Johannes Schmid, 
Johannes Schmid, 
Andreas Bauer, 



Stephan Bauer, 
Michel Bauer, 
Hans Seubert, 
Georg Hörner, 
Andreas Seuberth, 
Peter Dihm, 
Jacob Bauer, 
Andreas Drach, 
Veit Garrecht, 
Friederich Hii-sch, 
Michael Hoffman, 
Johann Bausch, 
Conrad Kurtz, 
Adam Rochia,* 
George Bier,* 
Michael Leiberich, 
Jeremias CEsterlein, 
Jacob Gibler, 
Nicklaus Strauss, 
Johannes Hörner, 
Ludwig Wejuatius,? 
Lorentz Kuntz, 
Andreas Dressler, 
Peter Ross, 
Andreas Hörauff, 
Georg Müller, 
Johannes Fintzel, 
Jacob Wolff, 
Andreas Eyrich, 
Andreas Büttel, 
Hans Fertig, 
Joh. Georg Höh, 
Hans Philip Dosch, 
Johan Conrad Wassum, 
Joh. Georg Wassum,* 
Hans Christoph Schlesman, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1752. 



293 



Johan Ludwig Feister, 
Johan Christian Heydt, 
Johannes Satzman, 
Hans Michel Uetzel,? 
J. Jacob Grötzelman, 
Johan Adam Einner, 
Joh. Melchior Hörner, 
Joh. Jacob Hörner, 
Jacob Oberdorff, 
Veit Fetterling, 
Hans Thomas Dihm, 
Hans Caspar Haag, 
Ludwig Haltemeyer,* 
David Haltemeyer,* 
Hans Melchior Stieffei, 
Hans Adam Stieffei, 
Joh. Georg Sauselin, 
Johan Georg Wimmer, 
Johan Friederich Berger, 
Joh. Phil. David Spindler, 
Joh. Henrich Kinsel, 
Joh. Conrad Duntz, 
Hans Peter Meyer,* 
Johan Caspar Wisener, 
Johan Michael Schrom, 
John Christoph Weydner, 
George Adam Frederick, 
Johan Nicklas Klein, 
Johann Peter Weichell, 
Johan Christoph Bütner, 
Christian Tobias Hensel, 
Hans Georg Egenschweller, ? 
Johan Friederich Volck, 
Joh. Henrich Schlessman 
Hans Georg Hand, 
Johan Michael Lutz, 
Hans Michael Beck, 
Johan Nicklaus Ott, 
George Hoppengartner,* 
Conrad Onkel,* 
Andreas Aleberger,* 



Michel Schülein, 
Johan Eissendal, 
Christoph Schaad, 
Nicolaus Weyant, 
Michael Hundt, 
Philip Sieur,* 
Sebastian Leybolt, 
Johannes Kraus, 
Nicklas Ingelhoff, 
Johannes Scholthes, 
Johannes Weisgerber, 
Johannes Endress, 
Johannes Miller,* 
Jacob Danner, 
Christian Schäffer, 
Valtin Ehrhart, 
Johann Schäffer, 
Christoph Waltz, 
Barthel Schötzlie, 
Andreas Klein, 
Simon Beleni,? 
Carl Schmid, 
Hans Gerbrich, 
Hans Georg Seil, 
Andreas Seil, 
Jacob Krächman, 
Jacob Will, 
Tobias Ketter, 
Joseph Sommer, 
Johannes Hotman, 
Loreutz Heffner, 
Johann Heffner, 
Johannes Honnig, 
Lorentz Rörich, 
Peter Fleischer, 
Peter Müller sen., 
Hans Georg Lang, 
Hans Georg Fintzel, 
Hans Martin Franck, 
Johann Peter Reeg, 
Nicklas WeitzenhöUer, 



25* 



294 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Carl Ludwig Mäckelburg, 
Johan Melchior Stader, 
Paulus Jacob Wolff, 
Caspar Beuschlein, 
Hans Henry Forster,* 
Baltzer Lantz, 
Hans Adam Scliäffer, 
Hans Peter S chaffer, 
August Henrich Schröter, 
Johan Henrich Mönch, 
Hans Adam Höh, 
John Ludwig Bender, 
Johan Gi-eorg Strauss, 
Christoph Kuhlemann, 
Joh. Conrad Btitefisch, 
Johan Martin Noll, 
Carl Fried. Dan. Christian, 



Johan Adam Hardel, 
Johan Georg Kallemeyer, 
Lorentz Joseph Dennschertz, 
Hans Greorg Engelbert, 
Joh. Christoph Schaber, 
Joh. Niclaus Schlessman, 
Joh. Stephanus Horn, 
Johan Philip Eich, 
Hans Georg Büttel, 
Hans Antonius Seger, 
Joh. Ferdinandus Leiss, 
Johann Heinrich Muth, 
Heinrich Fleischer, 
Christian Denner, 
Joh. Peter Müller, 
Hermanvis Cronenbere, 



Johan Conrad Stödter. 
Sick — Andreas Drach, Johan Heyser, Johann Leonhart 
"Wieder, Johan Henrich Scholtes, Henrich Bed, Joh. Henrich 
Koch, Michael Küchel, Henrich Kuhn. 



190) Nov. 3, 1752. Ship Queen of Denmark, Georg Parish, 
Commander, from Hamburg, last from Cowes. 

9toö. 3, 1752. (5d)iff £}ueen of IDenmarf, Sommant>ant 
®eorg 5>arif^, oon Hamburg über ßotr*e^. 



P. Wortman, 
Christopher Pabst,* 
Zacharias Bach, 
A. Dietrich Schell, 
Johan Zwiebeller, 
Andreas Schott, 
Jacob Schott, 
P. Matheis Abel, 
Lambrecht Philip, 
Johan Egen, 
Magnus Schröder, 
Peter Bruns,* 
Johann Schlüter, 
Simon Marcus,* 
J. Jacob Lauten,* 



Andreas ülsch, 
Conrad Schäffer, 
Georg Gärtner,* 
Christian Nagel,* 
Michael Stahl, 
Hen. Van Hoven, 
Johan Croyer,* 
Joachim Harloff,* 
Christoph Meyer, 
J. Fried. Lutzer,* 
Ernst Hornäffer,* 
Christ. Wilgenson,* 
J. Henry Shultz,* 
Henrich Magnus, 
Joh. Ernst Heim, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1752. 



295 



Peter Weis, 
Joh. Ohnschild,* 
H. Mich. Menneke,* 
Joh. Adam Gartner,* 

F. Christo Torson,* 
H. Fred. Laub,* 
Zacharias Straubel,* 
Frantz Schütz, 
Johan Meyer,* 
Friederich Schreyer,* 
Henrich Burehard Gabriel, 
Georg Thomas Gimpel,* 
Georg Christian Fischer, 
Casper Friederich Lutz, 
Hans Zacharias Longer,* 
J. Christian Morgenroth, 

G. Leopold Heinig, 
Georg Gottlieb Fass, 
Johan Casper Oberman, 
G. Henrich Herold,* 
Johan Adam Stoltze, 

J. Nicolas Tränckner, 
J. Daniel Metzler, 
Joachim Henrich Detloff, 
Hans Casper Batram,* 
Nicholas Daniel Nas, 
Johan Henrich Bauer, 
Joh. Casper Fried. Grummet, 
L. Ludwig Winckler, 
Christoph Ludwig Grummet, 
M. Friederich Kippenberg,* 
Georg Christoph Günder, 
Georg Christoph Mück, 
H. Zacharias Hagelberg, 
Georg Michael Hamscher, 
J. Christian Nesselroth, 



Christian Henrich Habicht, 
Henrich Andreas Nagel, 
Hen. Jacob Struckmeyer, 
Joh. Henrich Sackman, 
Joachim Andreas Bräutigam. 
Joh. Sebastian Voght, 
Joh. Joachim Görtier, 
Christ. Dietrich Meyer, 
Johan Georg Golhell, 
Henrich Caspar Putscher, 
J. Martin Röttger, 
Joh. Valentin Dantius, 
Johan Carl Menneke, 
Henrich Nothdarf,* 
J. Christo Schletz,* 
Casper Gab. Miller,* 
Joh. Geo. Barfuss, 
Christ. Ludwig Munt, 
Carl Fred. Grobler, 
Christian Henrich, 
Fried. Solomon Weis, 
Friederich Zimmer, 
Dietrich Volkman, 
Johannes Bibe, 
Joh. Henrich Sänger, 
J. Andreas Hornäffer, 
Dietrich von Bieren, 
Joh. Gottfried Zerhiger, 
Johan Daniel Eckebert, 
Hen. Rudolph Stoltze, 
Joh. Friederich Grassier, 
Joh. Bartho. Nühlhahn, 
Casper Henrich Grimm, 
Joh. Georg Reinhold, 
Johan Zacharias Jahn, 
Johan Christoph Winter. 



Georg Christian Klem, 

Sick — Joh. Henrich Hefthar, J. Thomas Kuhn, Gottfried 
Wilhelm Allhelm, Johannes Minck, Johan Gustavus Kuntz, 
H. Christian Willfeld, Georg Christian Mayer, Johan Friederich 
Günter, Johan Ernst Holland, Georg Friederich Tesch, Johan 



296 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Henrich Klem, Henrich Rudolph Nagel, Christoph Mayer, 
David Morson, Grottfried Reinknecht, Joh. Ernst Simon, J. 
Friederich Berghaus, Friederich Albrecht Scheller, Joh. Hen- 
rich Wendel, David Henrich Heyer, Nicklaus Ruel, A. Matheis 
Molin, Hans Georg Breihahn, Johan Ludwig Schlottennan, 
Johan Adolph Flock. 



191) Nov. 8, 1752. Snow Louisa, John Pittcairne, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

9?oö. 8, 1752. (5eef(^iff 2ouifa, Sapitain 3o:^n ^ittcairne, 
»on Stotterbam über Sotueö. 



Michael Deeg, 
Matheus Kepstner, 
Christoph Kuntz, 
Jacob Holder, 
Uhich Meyer, 
Johannes Feiler, 
Johannes Meyer, 
Johannes UUman, 
Casper Krieger, 
Adam Pabst,* 
Christian Hofman, 
David Mellinger, 
Jacob HoflPmann, 
Frantz Carl von Campe, 
Hans Georg Hausser, 
Hans Georg Reisch, 
Johan Herman Rosenblatt, 
Johan Leonardt Kopp, 
Johan Christian Friess, 
Johann Martin Holder, 
Johan Michael Geiger, 
Hans Georg Lantzer, 
Georg Michael Schmidt, 
Albrecht Michael Felder, 
G. Friederich Hottenbacher, 
Hans Adam Statell,* 
Wilhelm Fortenbacher, 
Johannes Geiler, 
Leonhardt Schindler, 



Conrad Schindler, 
Johannes Romig,* 
Frantz Schmid, 
Konrad Hepfoh, 
Balthaser Scholl,* 
Peter Diem, 
Georg Gobel, 
Christoph Gülberth, 
Joseph Beyrer, 
Tobias Stahl,* 
Christian Kast, 
Johannes Schneider, 
Jacob Hag, 
Johannes Bader, 
Johannes Hoss, 
Jacob Grieg, 
Georg Karr, 
Friederich Schrader, 
Hans Michael Carl, § 
Johan Georg Koch, 
Johann Peter Scholl, 
Johann Georg Sturm, 
Georg Baltzer Schelling, 
Johann Georg Gilbert, 
Johann Jacob Kuckhen, 
Johann Jost Bruno, 
Johan Georg Laubin ger, 
Andreas Gilbert, 
Jac. Balthasar Volcampe,* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1752. 



297 



Hans Georg Kautz, 
Joh. Philip Schwartländer, 
John PhUip Welsh,* 
Johann Georg Meyer, 
Georg Philipp Bock, 
Hans Michael Schmidt, 



Georg jNIichael Müller, 
Johann jMichael Path, 
Johan Martin Haussleither, 
Johan Jacob Stoll, 
Georg Christian Nüsser, 
Simon Leitel Huber. 



192) Nov. 22, 1752. Ship Phoenix, Reuben Honor, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

5fioö. 22, 1752. <5^iff ^^öni):, Sapitatu 3teu'&cn ^onor, öon 
Stotterbam über Sotveö. 



Peter Antel,* 
Josias Schertzer, 
Johann Klass, 
Jacob Hüwit, 
Rudolph Hoffman, 
Michael Burgin, 
Ulrich Nüssly, 
Friederich Weiler, 
Leonhart Uller, 
David Zimmermann, 
Lambert Smyets, 
Johannes Mohr, 
Johannes Roth, 
Valentin Scheurich, 
Jacob Scheurich, 
Christoph Dosch, 
Ludwig Henrich Nussbürckel, 
Johan Adam Lotz, 
Johan Nicklas AUhäll,* 
Johann Peter Gittin, 
Georg Christoph Bauman, 
Johan Adam Geiger, 
Johann Henrich Breser, 
Jean Jaques le Roy, 
Han Georg Rohrer, 
Johan Henrich Becker, 
Jacob Friederich Schneider, 
Johan Philip Albert, 
Frantz Joseph Pfeifer, 



Johan Matheis Scheurich, 
Johan Martin Dostman, 
Hans Michael Adelman, 
Ludwig Weimer, 
Johannes Frölich, 
Philip Jacobi, 
Hans Shneyder jr.,* 
Jean Botisnion, 
Christian Kuhbach, 
Daniel Gingenhan, 
Abraham Peter, 
Michael Peter, 
Paul Walleysen,* 
Jacob Ogli, 
Johannes Statler,* 
Bartholomeus Hoffman, 
Augustin Fieng, 
Abraham Frioth, 
Henrich LoUeninger, 
Andreas Kutz, 
Johannes Fischer, 
Jacob Gartman, 
Jacob Grauss, 
Christian Roth, 
Rudolph Döbely, 
Johann Schaidt, 
Henry Geisler,* 
Joseph Imfeid, 
Ulrich Ott, 



298 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Rudolph Egy, 
Jacob Haller, 
Johann Waltz, 
David Jugnal,* 
H. Weytzel * 
Peter Gilliona,* 
Daniel Lawall, 
Henry Straub, 
Jacob Guyer, 
Matheis Krauth, 
Johannes Duff, 
Peter Jung, 
Wilhelm Albert, 
Simon Schneider, 
Christoph Henrich, 
Jacob Lüper, 
Johannes Heltenmeyer, 
Burchard Zendmeyer, 
Joh. Jacob Winter, 
Johann Georg Suber, 
Guiliam Silbirit, 
Johann Adam Speck, 
Johann Georg Heck, 
Johann Georg Gingenhan, 
Hans Georg Dosh,* 
Johann Peter Lehmann, 
Jean Michel Lanblene, 
Johan Peter Conveer, 
Hans Michael Claus, 
Johann Jacob Schelling, 
Johan Georg Merckling, 
Hans Georg Zaimger, 
Johann Michel Ihl, 
Johann Henrich Schaff, 
Johann Thomas Beck, 



Johann Burckhard, 
Hans Georg Meyly, 
Mich. Friedrich Buch, 
Johan Peter Pfannkuchen, 
Johan Adam Klein, 
Michael Ullmann, 
Hans Michael Hoff, 
Georg Nebeling, 
Johan Ludwig Lawall, 
John David Henkel, 
Hans Michael Lutz, 
Hans Martin Scheurich, 
Adam Le Roy, 
Johan Peter Frembes, 
Johann Georg Roth, 
Johan Rudolph Ferrer, 
Georg Henrich Kop, 
George Henry Koch, 
Georg Bernhart Kapp, 
Johan Michael Christian, 
Martin Johann Bauer, 
Hans Jacob Back,* 
Johan Melchior Ensle, 
Daniel Kuhn, 
Piere Guillons, 
Frantz May, 
Kilian May, 
Anthon Weinbrener, 
George Hoffman,* 
Wolfgang Winebrener,* 
Johann Jacob Miller,* 
Johann PhUip Straub, 
Michael Schäffer, 
Johann Rudolph Graff, 



Johan Theobald Closs. 
Sick — Johannes Lenschy jr., Haus Georg Backofen, Thomas 
Leyerig, Johan Ludwig Mickel, Johann Dietrich Eckel, Jacob 
Reigert, Jacob Döbly, Hans Georg Beicht, Georg Hinleer, 
Abraham Freilich, Jacob Lupfer, Johan Gottfried List, Jacob 
Scheywisch. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1753. 



299 



193) Sept. 8, 1753. Ship St. Michael Michael, Thomas 
Ellis, Commander, from Hamburg, last from Cowes. 

(Sept. 8. 1753. ©ctyiff ®t mi^att md^ad, eommanbant 
Slt)omaö Slltö, »Ott Hamburg über Someö. 



John Henry Deer,* 
Joh. Fried. Deer,* 
Henry A. Deer,* 
Christian Warner,* 
Peter Gunckel,* 
Andreas Shweishelm, 
Andreas Böger, 
J. George Saxe, 
Johannes Rehr,* 
Friederich Rauberg,* 
Wilhelm Latink,* 
Christian Latink,* 
Lorents Shüler, 
J. Henry Krape,* 
J. Peter Millberg,* 
J. Christian Heyl, 
Michael Kind, 
Christoph Wegener, 
Conrad Eichler, 
Ludwig Topper, 
Christian Aterholt,* 
Johannes Resch, 
Ehler Herse, 
Andreas Linden, 
Herman Inbuss, 
Henrich Meyer, 
Fred. Henrich Barthals, 
John Jacob Port, 
Joh. Josephus Meinersen, 
John Henry Keller, 
John Henry Gross, 



Johann Henrich Ahrens, 
Joh. Henrich Billingesleben, 
J. Henry Messershmit,* 
J. Friederich Fischer, 
Johann Christian Sachse, 
Johan Nicklaus Rehcopp, 
J. Caspar Latink,* 
J. Henry Seydling,* 
J. Friederich AUter,* 
J. Andreas Vogt, 
G. Christoph Warinken,* 
Conrad Henry Sander,* 
Clas Casten Kroger, 
Johann Daniel Klemm, 
Hieronimus Eichler, 
H. Christoph Gall, 
Joh. Hen. Eberhart Hensen, 
Joh. Benedictus Breittenfeldt 
Friedrich Henrich Stern, 
Johann Gerhart ölayer, 
Hans Henry Tete,* 
Frantz Con. Rose, 
J. Henry Ratiker,* 
J. Henry Gutjahr,* 
Johann Kirscher, 
Matheis Kersher,* 
Johann Erich Reuter, 
Johan Friederich Sachse, 
John Henry Saxe, 
Christian Wilhelm Coli, 
George Wilhelm Hooker.* 



Richey, Captain, 



194) Sept. 10, 1753. Ship Beulah, - 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

(Sept. 10, 1753. ©c^iff 33eula^, Sapitain 3Hic^e9, öon flotter- 
bam über Someö. 



300 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Jac. Bishop Berger,* 
Job. Georg Rab, 
Vinsintzius Beggari, 
Johan Perass, ? 
Friederich Züron, 
Christian Scheitt, 
Stephan Lay, 
Andreas Lay, 
Moses Bauer, 
Simon Walther, 
Peter Über, 
Thomas Dich, 
Friederich Gruber, 
Jacob IMichel, 
Baltius Zweyk,* 
Christoph Zweig, 
Conrath Schief, 
Ludwig Schick, 
Andreas Frey, 
Jacob Stein, 
Friederich Cast,* 
Hans Georg Wilt, 
Albrecht Heckman, 
Georg Arnolt, 
Michel Kuhn sen.,* 
Michael Kuhn, 
Sebastian Hoffman,* 
Johannes Hoffman,* 
Valentin Korn, 
Martin Bürger, 
Lorentz Hössert, 
Hans Waltz, 
Martin Hedinger, 
Johan Michael Greffenstcin, 
Stephan Frantz Volch, 
Georg Friederich Volch, 
Johan Michael Bauer, 
(xeorg Friederich Braun, 
Johann Simon Schmieg, 
Johann Friederich Freund, 



Johann Matheus Braun, 
Johann Henrich Hoffmann, 
Georg Heinrich Alter, 
Johann Jacob Alter, 
Johann Albrecht Fessler sen., 
Johann Albrecht Fessler, 
Johann Andreas Fessler, 
Georg Conrad Braun sen., 
Johan Stephan Riegler, 
Georg Conrad Bi'aun, 
Johann Michael Krauss, 
Johann Georg Braun, 
Johann Matheus Mayer, 
Henrich Martin Ebele, 
Johan Philip Vohleder, 
Johan Michel Ungerer, 
Johan Philip Berberich, 
J. Friederich Hiltzbeck,* 
Georg Friederich Schweitzer, 
Johann Henrich Gebert, 
Johan Georg Ziegler, 
Johan Michael Lang, 
Johan Christoph Nitz, 
Johann Peter Bauer, 
Johann Friederich Bauer, 
Johann Wilhelm Ruth, 
Georg Scholler, 
Peter Truckeumiller,* 
Jacob Sammit,* 
Andreas Klein, 
Georg Schimmel, 
Job. Jacob Keppner, 
H. Adam Brenner, 
Job. Ernst Sattelthaler, 
Job. Andreas Schmieg, 
Georg Henrich Scbäffer, 
Georg Friederich Schall,* 
Johan Michael Franck, 
Job. Ludwig Sommer, 
Johan Georg Dietz, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1753. 



301 



Georg Christoph Dietz, 
Hans Georg Kamm, 



Georg Ludwig Rosenmüller, 
Geors; Michael Däueber. 



195) Sept. 11, 1753. Ship Queen of Denmark, Geo. Parish, 
Captain, from Hamburg, last from Cowes. 

(Sept. 11, 1753. <Bä^i^ Cueen of IDenmarf, Sapitain ©eorg 
5!>arif ^, öon Hamburg über Sot»eg. 



Caspar Krönberg, 
Ludwig Raflfgarn,* 
Henry Bergfeld, 
Georg Bossman, 
Thomas Fugnicht,* 
Ernst Delitz, 
J. Ernst Kort,* 
John Ewald,* 
Christian Arrent,* 
P. Zangenberg, 
Ludwig Brail,* 
J. Henry Frey, 
Lorentz Petry,* 
Andreas Grotheim,* 
Nicolaus SchäflFer, 
J. Jost Werning,* 
Johannes Taubert, 
David Albrecht, 
J. Jacob Voigt, 
J. August Freyberg, 
J. Friedrich Desern,* 
Christoff Endike,* 
J. George Gerang,* 
George Fischer,* 
Christian Heippe,* 
Christian Luig,* 
Wilhelm Brenner, 
Johann Reichman, 
Christoph Gut jr.,* 
Johann Valentin Elte, 
Hans Georg Disseler,* 
Johan Henrich Mastenberg, 
H. Christopher Shadike,* 



Dieterich Proptenslad,* 
Jost Henrich Bebe, 
Job. Friederich Ungar,* 
J. Andreas Rudolph,* 
J. Andreas Balthauer,* 
Job. Henry Engel,* 
Hans Herman Arrent,* 
Johann Christian Tenne, 
Johan George Distner,* 
J. Valentin Neimeyer,* 
Ludwig. Wil. Bockrantz, 
Anthon Bartbol. von Brunck, 
Job. Carl Rauscbenbach, 
Job. Wilhelm Schiele, 
Johann David Fischer, 
Johan Christian Bolle, 
Johan Valentin Rausch, 
Johan Christian Schneider, 
Jost Henry Kinige,* 
Job. Christoph Gobrecht jr., 
Georg Wilhelm Reburg,* 
Job. Christian Gobrecht, 
Frantz Henrich Ernst, 
Johann Ernst Blanssart, 
Geo. Wilhelm von Lüde, 
Johann Dingler, 
Christian Gollstäd,* 
Wilhelm Krelss, 
Peter Fred. Niemeyer, 
Nicolaus Christian Otto, 
Job. Friederich Wambeck,* 
Henrich Julius Boths. 

26 



302 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Sick — Johan Ludwig Starck, Greorg Demme jr., Friederich 
Jordan, J. Dietricli Welde, Hans Herman Brand, Christoph 
Weidener, Joh. Philip Preising, Christian Neiss, Johan Georg 
Müller, Erhart Reindel, Christoph Gut sen. 



196) Sept. 14, 1753. Ship Edinburgh, James Rüssel, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth. 

(5cpt 14, 1753. ®^iff ebtnburg^, (Sapitain ^amti fRu^d, 
toon Slotterbam über ^ort^mout^. 



Johann Achintopfs,? 
Michael Halberstadt, 
Julius Brecker, 
Samuel Maus, 
Peter Miller,* 
Dewald Creutz,* 
Johannes Miller,* 
Abraham Miller,* 
Jacob Braun, 
Philip Lantz, 
Philip Mülhof, 
Conrath Kleim, 
Jacob Dewalt, 
Conrath Guth sen., 
Conrad Guth, 
Andreas Hesterich, 
Peter Schuh, 
Heinrich Schupp, 
Jacob Müller, 
Bastian Mohr, 
Michael Lang, 
Ludwig Busch, 
Adam Hamscher, 
Joseph Zwieshig, 
Carl Arnth, 
Andreas Scher, 
Georg Marthin, 
Johannes Limberger, 
Peter Steiner, 
Philip Henry Gabel, 
Johann Jacob Harn, 



Johann Jacob Wissinger, 
Philip Jacob Mühlhoff, 
Michael Zimmerman, 
Johann Georg Kuhn, 
Johann Adam Kreischer, 
Johann Sebastian Kreischer, 
Ernst Christoph Adam, 
Johann Jacob Ross, 
Conrad Klenter,* 
Johann Peter Bade, 
Johannes Schwalb, 
Balthaser Pemeller, 
Johann Jacob Beck, 
Johann Reinhardt Rahmer, 
Johann Georg Jost, 
Johann Friederich Vogeler, 
Johann Christoph Mauerer, 
Christoph Treydel, 
Jacob Kauffmann, 
Johann Nickel IMichel, 
Johann Georg Leonard, 
Conrad Wagner, 
Christian Jutzener,* 
Johannes Herguth, 
Johann Nickel Jacoby, 
Johann Nickel Jacoby sen., 
Johann Peter Jacoby, 
Wilhelm Stein, 
Jacob Krier,* 
Carl Bernhart, 
Peter Kuntz, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1753. 



303 



Jacob Schott, 
Johannes Laffer, 
Peter Rodtler, 
Friederich May,* 
Jacob Threye, 
Jacob Zombro, 
Jacob Knab,* 
Philip Preiss,* 
Johan Rauffbem,* 
Jacob Bauer, 
Jacob Bachman, 
Jacob Heck, 
Daniel Heck, 
Peter Beder, 
Samuel Wertz, 
David Schmitt, 
Beiann Lantz, 
Martin Greldt, 
Peter Klein, 
Wilhelm Spira, 
Johannes Fellentzer, 
Adolph Meyer, 
Daniel Hann, 
Jacob Bollinger, 
Johannes Stötzel, 
Philip Weber, 
Andreas Harnstein, 
Ulrich Wäber, 
Johannes Frey, 
Bernhart Beck, 
Matheis Ehhalt, 
Martin Braun, 
Conrad Foltz, 
Marcus Angst, 
Paulus Hartman, 
Greorg Göhringer, 
Ludwig Folmer,* 
Friederich Jäckle, 
Christoffel Renner, 
Valentin Hoffmann, 
Jean Pierre du Corbier, 



Johann Adam Böhm, 
Valentin Kohlmann, 
Theobald Angene, 
Friederich Schwartz, 
Philip Henry Lein, 
Johann Jacob Bachman, 
Lorentz Bachman, 
Eberhart Schmitt, 
Ludwig Jung,* 
Johann Entzmenger,* 
Johann Bientzel, 
Joh. Henry Bintzel,* 
Johannes Bintzel,* 
Paulus Spirandin, 
Jacob Bollinger, 
Johann Kraffgoss, 
J. Henry Shrohr,* 
Peter Flickinger, 
Joh. Christ. Huffnagel, 
Johan Georg Weyshaar, 
Johann Georg Steinbock, 
John Henry Wunderling, 
Justus Henrich Weber, 
Conrad Mentzinger, 
Johan Wilhelm Wäber, 
Johannes Kornhaas, 
Johannes Rechtlos, 
Johannes Buchstel, 
Christian Fischer, 
Gregorius Büsche, 
Friederich Hartman, 
Wilhelm Hartman, 
Friederich Weidmeyer, 
Andreas Huttenbach, 
Jeremias Hüsterle, 
Johan Christian Dörr, 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Heinrich Adam Hoffman, 
Georg Melchior Hiebner, 
Johannes Auer,* 
Jacob Knödel, 



304 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Adam Roser, 
Johannes Kreiner, 
Jacob Polweller,* 
Henrich Strack, 
Jacob Miller,* 
Jacob Ott, 
Philip Lehrer, 
Johan Georg Märcker, 

Sick — Triederich Kramer 
Henrich E-odhaf, Friederich 



Paulus Hochstrasser, 

Valentin Fleck, 

Johan Michael Hauber, 

Johann Conrad Metz, 

Friederich Stephan, 

Elias Kneller, 

Solomon Gabel, 

Johan Jacob Albert.* 
, Michael Decker, Rudolph Weide, 
Hartman. 



197) Sept. 17, 1753. Ship Patience, Hugh Steel, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

©ept. 17, 1753. <3^iff patience, ßapitain ^ug^ ©tcel, tion 
Siotterbam über ßottjeö. 



Gottfried Haberly, 
Jaques Balme, 
Paul Caffarel, 
Mortier Türe, 
Jaques Gouriie, 
Lorie Nerien, 
Jacob Gerhart,* 
Adam Seihs, 
Jacob Fisher,* 
Jaque Berger, 
Joseph Knittel, 
Johannes Singer, 
Jacob Borman, 
Friederich Jensei, 
Michael Scheible, 
Charles Shommet,* 
Martin Käyser, 
Martin Jauss, 
Pierre Gautier, 
Jean Bonnet, 



Elias Nastes,? 
Jaque Bac, 
Jacob Singquet, 
Lenhart Heller, 
Pierre Armin Jean, 
Jean Pierre Chappelle, 
Jeremie Chappelle, 
Pierre Rouchon, 
Henri Rouchon, 
Jean Jacjues Servai, 
Michael Rüstler, 
Job. Georg Knidel, 
Hans Georg Feller, 
Jean Richardon, 
Hans Georg Sholter,* 
Georg Valentin Reinhardt, 
Andreas Münchinger, 
Fried. Haux, a 
Johannes Würmle, 
Gottlieb Heinrich Harindus, 



a To this name is prefixed Ehw. Dom., i. e. Eev. Mr.; thus: Ehw. 
Dom. Fried. Haux. — (Editor.) 

a aSor btefem 9tamen ftcl)t (Sf)». Dom., b. \i. 55aflor 5rtcb. $aur.— 
(^eraußseL'cr.) 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1753. 



305 



Hans Conrad Hogoodus, 
Hans Georg Bross, 
Ferdinand Würtz, 
Friederich Reinholdt, 
Christoph Hehr, 
Johann Caspar Gross, 
Johann Georg Strödinger, 
Johannes Preyss, 
Daniel Stauber, 
Jacob Banchle, ? 
3Iichael Aller, 
Johannes Bodner, 
Hans Hentzinger, 
Johannes Hiller, 
Philip Weiss, 
Bernhart Jung, 
Henrich Kendel, 
Matheas Heber, 
Tobias Kurch, 
Johannes Kleintopf, 
Johann Jackobi, 
Adam Winhart, 
Johannes Breinig, 
Casper Hassler, 
Peter Gröbil, 
Bastian Erig,* 
Peter Landig,* 
Leonhard Schauer, 
Peter Bühler, 
Michael Gerber, 
Simon Gerber, 
Christoph Schmit, 

Sick — Isaac Grad, Christoph Larg, Christian Bauer, 
Georg Leib. 



Etienne Brenn, 
Jacob Gerber, 
Gabriel Lausch, 
Michel Rom, 
Georg Martin Kreidler, 
Johannes Schweitzer, 
Get)rg Michel Descher, 
Jacob Ochsenreiter, 
Johan Friederich Werner,* 
Job. Friederich Ochsenreiter, 
Job. Friederich Stähle, 
Johan Caspar Sieg, 
Georg Adam Wiet, 
Hans Georg Roller, 
G. Wilhelm Rieser, 
Christoffel Klein topf, 
Hen. Christo. Bleicherodt, 
Job. Matthias Schmidt, 
Hans Georg Schättinger, 
Hans Georg Adtelberger, 
Philip Adtelberger, 
Hans Adam Schäffer, 
Heinrich Hackmann, 
Hans Michael Mann, 
J. Dietrich Steinbrecher, 
J. Lenhait Gerwig,* 
Sebastian Knartsch, 
Johan Daniel Rau, 
Samuel Bosser man, 
Friederich Osswald, 
Johan Georor Federhoff. 



Ha 



198) Sept. 17, 1753. Ship Richard and Mary, John Moore, 
Commander, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

©ept. 17, 1753. (Schiff Slic^arb unb mar's}, Sommanbant 
3o^tt 9}loore. »on ^lottcrtiam über Sowcg. 

26* 



306 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Joseph Phillipp, 
Ulrich Seuberlich, 
Peter Juncker, 
Joh. Martin Jacob, 
F. Wüh. Zürn, 
Joh. Knabschneider, 
Geo. Adam Schober, 
Johan Caspar Gayer, 
Hans Michael Rau, 
Johan Jacob Gayer, 
Johan Henrich Juncker, 
Johan Carl Siegle, 
Johann Ernst Juncker, 
Johan Christian Kniess, 
Martin Sührer, 
Andreas Diehm, 
Johannes Siglin, 
Conrad Lampater,* 
Joseph Lampater,* 
Johannes Lampater,* 
Joseph Wild, 
Casper Weschune,? 
Adam Stall, 
Adam Grim, 
Abraham Lang, 
Michael Vollmer, 
Friederich Kucher, 
Josephus Friederich, 
Peter Janson, 
Paulus Bäutigam, 
Joh. Ernst Nagel, 
Christoph IMahl,* 
Johannes Kuchen, 
Han Jacob Adam,* 
J. Georg Metzger,* 
Peter Rahm,* 
Adam ObendorflF, 
Peter Hitschner, 
Jacob Schlauchtet, 
Johannes Sack, 
H. Albert Homer,* 



Johannes Schreiber, 
Jacob Wittmann,* 
Paulus Hopp, 
Valentin Schobig, 
Christoff Waltz, 
Christoph Heinickel, 
Peter Nass, 
Christophel Gref, 
Peter Seiler, 
Johannes Hollscheit, 
Johannes Gürtz,* 
Simon Sark,* 
Johannes Peroing,* 
David Reiff,* 
Philip Hammerschmit,* 
Joh. Nicolaus Schubert, 
Joh. Michael Schubert, 
Joh. Casper Wurm, 
Johan Georg Stump,* 
Georg Friederich Pflieger, 
Joh. Georg Maisch, 
Joh. Georg Gelinder, 
Hans Martin Gelinder, 
Hans Jacob Kemmerli, 
Johan Adam Körner, 
Joh. Georg Gerstenmayer, 
Georg Friederich Weiss, 
Joh. Lenhart Zembt,? 
Carl Friederich Weydo,§ 
Joh. Christoph Herth, 
Joh. Daniel Druss 
C. Friederich Hutman,* 
Joh. Friederich Hess, 
Joh. Friederich Satler,* 
Joh. Wilhelm Engelhardt, 
Georg Paul Langenbach, 
Hans Ludwig Mall, 
Hans Georg Kreis, 
Joh. Henrich Oberlender, 
Johan Adam Wolff, 
George Nicklas Straus,* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1753. 



307 



Joh. Philip Stein, 
Joh. Christoph Beck, 
Joh. Conrad Steinmetz, 
Joh. Henrich Müller, 
Joh. Michael Spannagel, 
Georg Adam Wittmann, 
Johann Georg Klein, 
Hans Barthel Heck, 
Hans Geo. Schöllhammer, 
Johan Caspar Auen, 
Ernst Wilhelm Kageroth, 
J. Gottfried Knapper,* 
Georg Friederich Heininger, 



Hans Adam Oswald,* 
Johan Georg Bick, 
Johan Peter Ruhter, 
Herman Weyskirk,* 
Michael Kolb, 
Jacob Schenck, 
Johannes Schmit,* 
H. Georg Gramly,* 
Hans Georg Seydelmeyer,* 
Philip Grindelmeyer,* 
Hans Georg Harst, 
Joh. Matheus Pfanner, 
Joh. Georg Braun. 



199) Sept. 19, 1753. Ship Leathley, Lickey, Captain, 



from Hamburg, last from Cowes. 



Sept. 19, 1753 
bürg über Soroe^. 

Anercus Foil, 
Christian Schlemer,* 
Christoph Amelon,* 
ChristoiFel Termel,* 
J. Christoph Bömer,* 
H. Henry Coffer,* 
Caspar Hillebrecht,* 
C. Rudolph Rechner, 
Daniel Lange, 
Henry Busman,* 
Henry Neymeyer, 
Andreas Busman,* 
J. Carsten Thorman,* 
Ludwig Schmit,* 
J. Henry Hinsey, 
Michael Uhl, 
Christian Ramberg, 
Henry Shreeder,* 
Hiram Alleman, 
Johan Heneman,* 
Henry Werner, 
J. Henry Probe,* 



Schiff Seat^Iep, (Sa^jitain Sicfe^, öon Jpam- 



Conradt Shmit,* 
Friederich Veiher,* 
Valentin Wegmeyer, 
John Henry Hening,* 
Johan Peter Koch, 
J. Wilhelm Voss, 
J. Dieterich Sehr,* 
Joh. Gottfried Golde, 
Christophel Schlencker, 
Fried. Wilhelm Schlencker, 
Frantz Hen. Schlencker, 
Christ. Andreas Nichtedt, 
Joh. Ludolph Wehmeyer, 
Joh. Andreas Meyer, 
Johan Just Müller, 
Hans Henry Busman,* 
Ernst Henrich StöUe, 
Joh. Philip Fertinbach, 
Johan Stats Koch, 
Joh. Christoph Appache, 
Johan Nicklaus Klein, 
Casper Ludwig Siwert, 



308 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Johan Henrich Siwert, 
Jolian Christian Ale, 
J. Cort Halster, 



Georg Casper Hoppener, 
And. ChristoflP Meinsken, 
Joh. Fried. Christian Alleman. 



200) Sept. 24, 1753. Ship Neptune, John Mason, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

(Sept. 24, 1753. ©c^iff Neptune, Sapitain 3o:^n 5}?afon, »on 
9tottertam über ßotüeö. 



Friederich Melcher^ 
Johann Wilhelm, 
Peter Dümmig, 
George Keytel,* 
Joh. Michael Schärphlein, 
Georg Nicolas Weugäterr, 
Johan Georg Wenckert, 
Hans Michael Rather, 
Peter Keytel,* 
Sebastian Höre, 
Peter Klünth, 
Nicklas Hebling, 
Sebastian Werlein, 
Michael Kretz, 
Andreas Bolch, 
Philip Riessei", 
Andreas Schneffer, 
Jacob OberdoriF, 
Joh. Peter Riess, 
Georg Weiss, 
Johannes Ross, 
Conrad Winckler, 
Michael Hollenbach, 
Caspar Dollmann, 
Johannes Riess, 
Nicklas Hollebach, 
Simon Irst,? 
Georg Falock, 
Georg Leming, 
Melchior Eisnert, 
Johannes Fleischer, 
Christian Reysing,* 



Michael Hollenbach, 
Philip Weiss, 
Adam Hauck, 
Peter Lennich, 
Sebastian Hämer, 
Joh. Adolph Ott, 
Johannes Schreiner, 
Wilhelm Würtz jr., 
Wilhelm Würtz sen., 
Joh. Georg Raab,* 
Bernhart Shop,* 
Andreas Crieby, 
Sebastian Riess, 
Casper Henkel, 
Johannes Hue, 
Geo. WUh. Morash,* 
Andreas Hommer,* 
Jacob Beyer, 
Lorentz Friederich Croy, 
Georg Schwenckert, 
Johannes Trump, 
Bartel Raunberger, 
Johann Michael Werlein, 
Johan Georg Schwab, 
Joh. Christoph Breitenhardt, 
Joh. Philip Eyrich, 
Joh. Michael Erdners, 
Joh. Michael Heidt, 
Johan Paul Schwab, 
Hans Adam Dierhein, 
Johan Adam Sauer, 
Johann Georg Wunder, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1753. 



309 



Johann Michael Desch, 
Joh. Lenhart Wiittninger, 
Joh. Sebastian Hammeter, 
Joh. Christujih Feemhaber, 
Joh. Philip Mewe, 
Hans Jacob Winckler, 
Hans Thomas Winckler, 
Johan Georg Hollenbach, 
Joh. Bernhardt Pahosuch, 
Johan Nicklas Saul, 
Johan Georg Harmoff, 
Georg Peter Fuchs, 
Joh. Nicklaus Heckser, 
Hans And. Weickert, 
Ephraim Benedict Kaubel, 
Georg Henry Bauer,* 
Johan Thomas Lennich, 
Hans Georg Stautz, 
Hans Casper Fuchs, 
Hans Georg Carl Volck, 
Joh. Henrich Graf, 
Joh. Georg Conrad Hinck, 
Johan Caspar Schnerr, 
Johan Adam Saull,* 
Hans Michael Hörner, 
Johan Georg Oberdorff, 
Johan Georg Beck, 
Hans Michael Koller, § 
Johan Meyer,* 
Jacob Schaffer, 
Andreas Sahm, 
Baltzer Oberdorff, 
Georg WoUf, 
Adam Scheck, 
Paulus Plitz, 
Jacob Scholl, 
Christoph Büttel, 
Johannes Horn, 
Balthaser Seuberth, 



Hannes Schnepper, 
Nicklas Reinhart, 
Nicklaus Beringer, 
Christoph Horn, 
Martin Semmel, 
Michael Seubert, 
Simeon Bürger, 
Jacob Willier,* 
Johannes Stihling, 
Peter Höbling, 
Carl Mildy,* 
Hans Schreck, 
Andreas Seuberth, 
A'^alentin Oberdorff, 
Christian Ernst Nieman, 
Johan Heinrich Ord, 
Johan Christian Keyser, 
Johan Michael Seelig, 
Johann Adam Bolch, 
Johann Adam Schatz, 
Joh. Henrich Schlösser, 
Georg Philip Roth, 
Philipp Hoffman, 
John Slichael Schatz, 
Johan Peter Stumpf, 
Baltzer Georg Christian, 
Georg Philip Bürger, 
Johann Peter Flick, 
Johann Paulus Platz, 
Johan Philip Meyer, 
Johann Bernhart Saull, 
Johannes Burkhardt, 
Hans Meckelein sen., 
Johan Henrich Meckelein, 
Hans Meckelein, 
Johann Michael Wassern, 
Johan Adam Schantz, 
Adam Nicolaus Platz. 



310 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



201) Sept. 24, 1753. Ship Peggy, James Abercrombie, Com- 
mander, from Rotterdam, last from Plymouth. 

(Sept. 24, 1753. (Schiff '^(QQV), Sommant)ant 3ameö 2iber= 
crombie, oon 3tottertiain über ^^Ipntoutt). 



Martin Bauer, 
Christian Roth, 
Johannes Lutz, 
Christoph Frantz, 
Christoph Hast, 
Michael Voltz, 
Holfern Holtzman, 
Jacob H. Herly,* 
Johannes Hütterly, 
Jacob Miller, 
Casper Miiuele, 
Fortunatus Geney,* 
Nicklas Schreck,* 
Johan Andreas Buch, 
Christian Friederich Panse, 
Johan Jacob Kautz, 
Johann Adam Zweuer, 
Johannes EiminghofF, 
Johann Carl Erhardt, 
Johannes Bachman, 
Johan Casper Nill, 
Johan Michael Schumacher, 
PhiUp Leonard Schwartz, 
J. Greorge Pluner,* 
Johan Adam Oberweiler, 
Carl Friederich Waag, 
Casper Schaff, 
Jacob Hohr,* 
Michael Ban, ? 
Johann Forttmeier, 
Johannes Steinman, 
Ignatius Vogt, 
Johannes Fibs, 
George Baker,* 
Jacob Eberhart, 
Conrad Wiettemeyer, 
Jacob Armschild,* 



Wilhelm Gonder, 
Peter Heiss, 
Jacob Hetrich, 
George Lange, 
Michael Midler, 
Diebolt Sorg, 
Conrad Jäger, 
Michael Brauer, 
Martin Beck, 
Jacob Schmidt, 
Georg Matzon,* 
Johannes Wälder, 
Jacob Berger, 
Valentin Schäffer, 
Philip Krebs, 
Jacob Grininger, 
Jacob Hirsch, 
Carl Ebersohl, 
Henry Hassler, 
Abraham Correll, 
G. A. Daser, 
Conradt Huber, 
Martin Schneider, 
Philip Jacob Meyer, 
Joseph Graff, 
Isaac Müller, 
Anton Cantzle, 
Jacob Nagel, 
Carl Degreiff,* 
Jacob Haller, 
Philip Zorge, 
Hans Michel Zomel, 
Carl Weinmiller, 
Georg Philip Ziegler, 
Jean Frans Battez, 
Johan Jacob Zucker, 
Georg Anton Linder, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1753. 



311 



Johan Andreas Sclirodlie, 
Johan William Engel, 
Hans Jacob Steigelmann, 
Johan Jacob Kleinbub, 
Job. Michael Hero,* 
J. Dieterich Oppenheim, 
G-. Wühelm Albrecht, 
Henrich Philipp Brumm, 
H. George Leysig,* 
Friederich Dannwind, 
Joh. Theobald Sternberger, 
Johan Michael Sorg, 
Johan Martin Bettinger, 
Johan Jacob Blecker, 
Georg Peter Delp, 
Joh. Wilhelm Kempff, 
Joh. Wolfgang Zeilen, 
Johannes Francisculur, 
Peter Casper Schön, 

Sick — Johannes Rudel, 
J. Jacob Selwinger, Paulus 



Johan Jacob Walther, 
Georg Adam Geiss, 
Nicklas Turmeyer,* 
Georg Adam Siegrist, 
Michael Feierstein, 
Joh. Georg Sautter, 
Jos. Conrad Haussman, 
Joh. Nicolaus Bartholomae, 
Johan Casper Rumetsch, 
J. Georg Schweickhart, 
Georg Christ. Reinholdt, 
Joh. Friederich Engelhart, 
Joh. Wolfgang Leiter, 
Johan Adam Schackh, 
Johan Friederich Uebel, 
Johan Carl Jacqueart, 
Johan Conrad Kagel, 
Johann Christian Krebs. 

Johan Jac. Müller, Nicklas Harter, 
A. Daser, J. Casper Weitzenfelder. 



202) Sept. 26, 1753. Ship Brothers, William Main, Com- 
mander, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

©ept 26, 1753. <5d)iff Srot^erö, Sommantant 2Bm. Wlain, 
öon Siotterbam über Soweö. 



Peter Eysenbreit, 
Christian Diem, 
Matheis Blocher, 
Michael Wäsener, 
Johannes Karch, 
Jacob Haipser, 
Ludwig Fischer, 
Lorentz Kölcket, 
Daniel Wunderlich, 
Melchior Minalt, 
Johannes Kuss, 
Burckhart Bindeman, 
Melchior Rieckhed, 
Johannes Jödder, 



Friederich Mergel,* 
Philip Hoffman, 
Jacob Hester, 
Lenhart Diterich, 
Christoph Müller, 
Jacob Müller, 
Friederich Müller, 
Ludwig Hertz, 
Johannes Strohm, 
Martin Flisterer, 
David Kind, ? 
Andreas Keyser, 
Isaac Vendner, 
Paulus Bohler, 



312 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



iMichael Setzer, 
Stephan Kreidler, 
Jacob Mann, 
Johannes Koch, 
Johannes Zaberer, 
Stephan Keybolt,* 
Nickolas Miller,* 
Hans Greorge Hop,* 
Hans Jacob Finfleher, 
Michael Schittenhelm, 
Martin Shittenhelm,* 
Johann Casper Koch, 
Hans Georg Hay, 
Johann Simon Jäger, 
Hans George Baltsondei'weg,* 
Georg Christoph Eberle, 
Johan Ludwig Wcltz, 
Philip Jacob Kreidler, 
Johan Martin Kreidler, 
Johan Philip Freher, 
Christoph Jacob Käucher, 
Johan Philip Kliestadt,? 
Hans Wendel Huber, 
Georg Friederith Reinhard, 
Johan Paul Sehott, 
Hans Georg Marsteller, 
Hans Georg Frauenfelder, 
Georg Friedrich Andrae, 
Georg Alberth Dill, 
Melchior Fliesbach, 



Eberhart Sallener,? 
Georg Peter Wilhelm, 
Friederich Henrich Knabe, 
Lenhardt Beckermann, 
Christoph Schenck, 
Hans George Mann, 
Bernhart Schneider, 
Friederich Lay, 
Johannes Weyerbacher, 
Mattheis Röstlin, 
J. Andreas Ehrman, 
Johann Casper Marburg, 
Johannes Limbach,* 
Johannes Herlein, 
Philip Geyer, 
Jacob Mann, 
Friederich Leinbach, 
Friederich Künstler, 
Johannes Steidle, 
Johannes Mann, 
Jean Hartman, 
Martin Schneider, 
Michael Schneider, § 
Hans Georg Fischer, 
Johan Jacob Müller, 
Hans Georg Mann, 
Hans Georg Schweitzer, 
Georg Jacob Schramm, 
Jacob Schweitzer, 
Valentin Klein. 



203) Sept. 27, 1753. Ship Windsor, James Good, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

(Sept. 27, 1753. ©c^tff SBinbfor, Gapitain 3antcä ®oob, ücn 
Stottcrbam über Soweö. 



Rudolph Banuinger, 
Marcus Tomer,* 
Daniel Schneider, 
Martin Fazler, 
Christian Schober, 



Sigmund Bondeli, 
Henrich Pfister, 
Johannes Gräber, 
Henry Boner,* 
Christian Deiss, 



AND OTHER IMJIKJRANTS — 1753. 



31o 



Daniel Speck, 

Ciispar Lutz, 

Heinrich Sättel, 

Samuel Sättel, 

Christian Keller, 

Johannes Thomas, 

(}eorg Hoff, 

(ieorg Mossbach, 

Casper Cabbas,* 

Johan Nicklin, 

J. Jacob Martin, 

Philip Rice,* 

Simeon Reiss, 

Jacob Reive,* 

Henry Eschrich,* 

Job. Peter Diehm, 

Jacob Shrey,* 

Adam Libhart, 

J. Wilhelm Tistel,* 

Job. Jacob Boshart, 

Job. Reinhart Batz, 

Job. Martin Kietzmiller, 

Johan Ludwig Beck, 

Georg Stephanus Wallhauer, 

Johann Georg Mann, 

Johann Georg Schmidt, 

Johan Wilhelm Cromer, 



Reinhart Dietrich Kercher, 
Johan Ferdinand Lehrer, 
Johann Christoph Rein, 
Hans Georg Lutz, 
Job. Martin Truckenmüller, 
Hans Adam Schatzman, 
Henrich Gottfried Murr, 
Johan Peter Hörn, 
Johann Joachim Jaysor, 
Johann Jacob Friess, 
Johann Peter Grub, 
Johan Peter Eltz, 
Michael Milberger, 
Johannes Baumann, 
Johann Casper Diehl, 
Johan Jacob Osterwald, 
Wilhelm Berckhäuser, 
Georg Friederich Steidgers, 
Johan Jacob Striby, 
Johann Philippus Pix, 
Simon Peter Strauch, 
Andreas Grünau, 
Nicklas iMensch, 
Adam Hoppacher, 
Johann Georg Betz, 
Johann Michael Hobbär, 
J. George Sommer. 



204) Sept. 28, 1753. Ship Halifax, Thomas Coatam, Cap 
tain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Sept. 28, 1753. ©^iff -^paüfar, ßapttain I^omaö ßoatam, 
•oon 3^ottcrtam über ßomci?. 

Daniel Ammon, 
Andreas Staub, 
Felix Gerber, 



Friederich Keener,* 
Johannes Colle,* 
Heinrich Thönei, 
Ludwig Luther, 
Adam Syroa,* 
Andreas Seydlle,* 
Daniel Brenner, 
Henrich Merki, 



Jost Conrad, 
Andreas Ingan,* 
Johannes Kuhn, 
Conrad Bornn, 
Christoph ^Veber, 



27 



314 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Christian Banner,* 
Paulus Wolflfe, 
Jacob Rein, 
Johannes Buch, 
Johannes Bassert, 
Johannes Wagner, 
Isaac Budeman, 
Talio Repair,* 
Andreas Hath,? 
Christoph Schütz, 
Joseph Schmitt, 
Jacob Streder, 
Johannes Happener, 
Gottfried Streidtz, 
Johannes Haass, 
Henrich Kohn, 
Ludwig Würtz, 
Johannes Henckel, 
Johannes Mayer, 
C. Friederich Maag, 
Christian Heillmann, 
Johannes Peter Hann, 
Georg Michael Vollerman, 
Georg Michael Megerth, 
Georg Baldas lingerer, 
Johannes Danwisch, ? 
Solomon Hartman, 
Heister Hängärten, 
Michael Grossclaus,* 
Rudolph Meyer,* 
Jost Fischbach, 
Bernhart Sehmid, 
Paulus Weygant, 
Daniel Zacharis, 
Mattheis Zacharis, 
J. Henry Stoffel, 
Herman Göbel, 
Johan Georg Becker, 
Hans Michael Gock, 
Joh. Daniel Haga, 



Joh. Ludwig Hesser, 
Joh. Caspar Weiss, 
Ludwig Henrich Karcher, 
Johan Jacob Welter, 
Joh. Georg Stöcker, 
Johan Conrad Hess, 
Johan Georg Moritz, 
Johann Georg Schräster, 
Johan Conrad Betis, 
Johan Georg Hinroth, 
Johan Georg Prost, 
Johann Georg Krauskob, 
Johan Georg Fillibs, 
Johan Peter Heun, 
Jacob Ringwald, 
Martin Slayer, 
Johannes Heyr, 
Nicolaus Kremer, 
Georg Bishoff,* 
Mattheus Gromlich, 
George Führung, 
Adam Fays, 
Michael Laub, 
Jacob Urban, 
J. Georg Steyb,* 
Johannes Laub, 
Johannes Theis, 
John Adam Bald, 
Johannes Achenbach, 
Johann Jost Schmidt, 
Johan Georg Sanborn, 
Johan David Drüber, 
Christian Rohrbach, 
Peter Katzenmeyer, 
Hans Nicklas Borger, 
Johann Casper Koch, 
Johan Adam Forsch, 
Gottfried Körschnöck, 
Adam Milchsack, 
Johannes Georg Henny. 



Sick — Christopher Getzelman, Jacob Meyer, Felix Miller, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1753. 



315 



Johannes Monbauer, Jacob Kreyder, David Beistel, Jacob 
Schaafbahn, Johannes Schwartz. 



205) Sept. 28, 1753. Ship Two Brothers, Thomas Arnot, 
Captain, from Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth. 

Sept. 28, 1753. ®d)iff Zm S3rot^erö, ßapitain Zi)üma& 
2lrnot, »on 9flottcrt»am über ^orti?ntoutl). 

Johan PhiHp Gesseler, 
Johan Wilhehn Müller, 
Johan PhiHp Dill, 



Johannes Späth, 
Mattheis Dischong, 
Wilhelm Dischong, 
Frantz Klein, 
Conrad Liitziug, 
Leonhart Jjiitzing, 
Johannes Wagner, 
Martin Jung, 
Johannes Müller, 
Debalt Bosseng,* 
Peter Stauber, 
Johannes Lein,? 
Johannes Wirtz, 
Job. Philip Fus, 
William Tillboner,* 
Johannes Grau, 
J. Georg Volck, 
J. Joachim Seebert, 
J. Adam Kohlman, 
Hieronimus Bruner,* 
Michael Hotman, 
Jacob Hering, 
John Friederich Schuy, 
Rudolph Zimmerman, 
Job. Jacob Helpfish,* 
Johan Henrich Lutsch, 
Johann Theis Schütz, 
Job. Henrich Heesman, 
Johan Frantz Koch, 
Johan Philip Heyman, 
Johan Peter Jung, 
Johan Matheis Schneider, 
Christian Tressenstütt, 



Johan Adolph Gesseler, 
Johann Peter Hahn, 
Johan Adam Wirth, 
Johann Adam Meyer, 
Job. Gerhard Müller, 
Johan Jung Richler, 
Johannes Elias Arnoldt, 
Johan Adam Pfetzer, 
Johannes Schneider, 
J. George Winter,* 
Johannes Neydig,* 
J. Adam Lang, 
Heinrich Schmaus, 
Conrad Shmaus,* 
Johannes Schmaus, 
Matthias Nied, 
J. Adam Shwartz,* 
J. Wilhelm Shütz,* 
Johannes Feck, 
J. Henry Jackel, 
J. Georg Jäckel, 
Israel Wetzfeld, 
Johannes Jung, 
Joseph Beck, 
Conrath PfiUibs, 
Johannes Schey, 
Jacob Hann, 
Johannes Seiser, 
Johannes Pauly, 
Friederich Kroh, 



316 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Joli. Valentin Wieber, 
Jacob Kohl, 
Johan Kohl, 
Friederich Hamman, 
Johan Leonhart Müller, 
Johan Adam Pabst, 
J. George Bechtol, 
Johan Peter Koch, 
Job. Nicklaus Lehnes, 
Johan Stephan Dieter, 
J. Jacob Eisenhauer, 
Joh. Wilhelm Hardtstang, 
Johan Adam Schmit, 
Johann Baltaser Götz, 
Johann Adam Götz, 



J. Ludwig Shook,* 
Johannes Peter Halt, 
Johannes Wirthsman, 
Johann Philip Schneider, 
Johan Georg Bechtoldt, 
Johan Wilhelm Schäffer, 
Joh. Paulus Shaffer,* 
Franciscus Schmidt, 
Johan Philip Klein, 
Johan Christian Zuprian, 
Joh. Henrich Heymann, 
Joh. Henrich Sägnisch, 
Elias Conrad Stegman, 
Johan Georg Seiffert. 



206) Sept. 29, 1753. Snow Rowand, Arthur Tran, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

®cpt. 29, 1753. ©eefc^iff iRottjant), Sapitain Strt^ur Zxan, 
oon SHotterbam über ßomeö. 



Philippus Schmidt, 
Daniel Flender, 
Joh. Peter Weyel,* 
Johannes Buchner, 
Christian Mann, 
Jonas Mann, 
Ludwig Lupp, a 
Johann Georg Starck, 



Johan Wilhelm Jung, 
Johan Peter Meyer, 
Job. Z. Schruntz, 
Bernhart Pfeiffer, 
Martin Helfeysen,* 
Joh. Phil. Siesfass, 
Johannes Seibach, 
Johan Engelpruck, 



Johann Christian Weinbrenner,Joh. Jacob Hass, 
Johan Stephan Klöckner, Frantz Zeiller, 

Christ. Henrich Grab, Conrad Becker, 

Johan Deis Greb, Johannes Seibach,* 



a Rev. Ludwig Lupp, a German Reformed Minister at Lebanon, Pa., 
from 1786 to 1798. He was bom January 7, 1783, and died June 28. 
1798. His remains rest in the German Reformed grave yard at Le- 
banon. — See IL HarhavglCs Lives of German Reformed Miriisterii. 

n ^^aftor ?ut>»ig ?upp tear ooti 1786 \>\i 1798 tieutfd)-refennirter ßjcifi- 
lidjer ju Sebonen, $a. (Er toax am 7. pnn. 1733 geboren ur.b ftarb am 
28. 3uni 1798. (Seine Q5ebctne ru^en tm bcutfc^=refcrmtrten Ätrcb^pfc ju 
Lebanon. — ®ie^e S^axhojifi 2ebenöbcfc|retbungen reform. Oeiftlic^er. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1733. 



317 



G. Peter Bear * 
(leorge Hoover,* 
David Giessler, 
Jacob Hetering,* 
Peter Müller, 
.Johannes Miller, 
Joh. Hen. Brutz, 
Johan Hindert,* 
Joh. Conrad Grra, 
Christian Rübsamen, 
Joh. Henry Held, 
Johannes Thomas, 
Johannes George, 
Johannes Freund, 
Philip Pool,* 
Peter Kolb, 
Philip Schuman, 
Jacob Shütz,* 
Sebastian Weber, 
Johannes Keller, 
Jacob Böller,* 
Theiss Lauer, 
Henrich Lauer, 
Johan Frantz, 
Henry Wastenhaber,* 
Johannes Schäffer, 
Matthias Schütz, 
Martin Diel, 
Henry Kampffer,* 
Johannes Kregeloch, 
Christian Mann,§ 
Paulus Crum, 
Johan Friederich Schmidt, 
Johan Philip Sonner, 
Johan Christian Greebel,* 
Joh. Wilhelm Böhmer, 
Johan Peter Kbll, 
Joh. Martin Buckner, § 
Johan Henrich Buchner, 
Johan Theis Eraud, 
Jost Henrich Melier, 



Johan Philip Seye,? 
Joh. Heinrich Böhm, 
Johan Elias Steneroloh,? 
Johan Peter Schlämacher, 
Christian Blickensdorffer, 
Jost Blickensdorffer, 
Joh. Jacob Lingenfelter, 
Johan Peter Rach, 
Johann Theis Hissgen, 
Joh. Gerhart Humbel,* 
Johan Henrich Helt, 
Johan Engel Thomas, 
Joh. Georg Georg, 
Joh. Georg Knörtzer, 
Johan Christ. Bentz, 
Johan Philip Späth, 
Joh. Henrich Späth, 
Joh. Bastian Heun, 
Joh. Henrich Schäffer, 
Joh. Gerlaeh Schäffer, 
Wilhelm Becker Grün, 
Joh. Henrich Kicherman, 
Johan Theis Kicherman, 
Joh. Wilhelm Schäffer, 
Johan Theis Schmidt, 
Joh. Henrich Felger, 
Joh. Henrich Strunck, 
Johann Peter Leiss, 
Johan Theis Rübsamen, 
Joh. Christ. Stahl, 
Joh. Gerlach Stahl, 
Bastian Shneyder,* 
Matheus Zimmerman, 
Johannes Crum, 
Andreas Ecker, 
Johannes Creutz, 
Henry Panix,* 
Hermanus Zimmerman, 
John Peter Krammer,* 
Johan Engel Braun, 
Johan Peter Braun. 



27* 



318 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



207) Oct. 1, 1753. Snow Good Hope, John Tnimp, Captain, 
jfrom Hamburg, last from Cowes. 

Oct. 1, 1753. ®eefd)tff ®oob ^ope, Sapitain 3»'^« Srump, 
öon Hamburg über SoiDee. 



Ulrich Reling, 
Peter Knobe,* 
H. George Becker, 
J. Henry Klapper, 
J. Henry Niederhut,* 
Andreas Feigner, 
Christoph Michael, 
Christofel Ohms,* 
Christofel Ahllborn,* 
J. Henry Nederman,* 
Johan Kinerimen,* 
Simon Shroder,* 
Jeremias Pflug,* 
Christopher Pok,* 
EUas Au, 
J. Henry Worm, 
Christian König, 
Conrad Hartman, 
Christoph Reinman, 
Christoph Kneply,§ 
Simon Eberle, 
Jacob Riemann, 
Gerdt Hurrelman, 
Joh. Peter Piigner, 
Carl Ahlbora, 



Joh. Hen. Christo Runcker, 
Hans Henry Steedeberger,* 
J. Henry Selligman,* 
Joach Conrad Steinwehn, 
Johan Peter Dippel, 
H. Andreas Wigman, 
Joh. Erich Schneeberg, 
Johan Georg Laumann, 
Hans Christoph Engel, 
Henrich Christoph Diedrich, 
Johan Jacob Niecke, 
Joh. Henrich Ziegeler, 
Joh. Andreas Forster, 
J. Christoph Leman,* 
Hans Joachim Meissner, 
Joh. Gottlieb "Wecker, 
Joh. Urban Kaulitz, 
Joh. Christoph Mohmeyer, 
Joh. Theodor Martini, 
Justus Carl Wil Martini, 
Joh. Wilhelm Röber, 
Joh. Christian Bachman, 
Jean Jaque Lapierre, 
Joh. Andreas Friederichs, 
Georsr Henrich Doieges. 



208) Oct. 2, 1753. Ship Edinburgh, James Lyon, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Oct. 2, 1753. ©(^iff Siinburg^, Sapitatn 3amcg Spon, »on 
S^otterbam über ßoweö. 

Joh. Engel Jung, Joh. Henrich Otto, 

Joh. Conrad Scherer, Joh. Philip Schneider, 

Joh. Hen. Knodt, Friederich Römer, 

Friederich Köhler, Johannes Denig, 

Joh. Georg Christoph Hering, Johannes Rudrauf, 
Joh. Henrich Wessing, Wilhelm Cossler, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1753. 



319 



Philip Wagner, 

Gottfried Krum,* 

Andreas Gerlach, 

Urban Schaddell, 

Johannes Heyl, 

Henry Gimper,* 

Anthon Keusch, 

Christian Dotter, 

J. Henry Cronro, § 

Anthon Gersterkorn, 

Friederich Schrieg, 

Christian Jauch, 

Jacob Looss, 

J. Peter Lehr, 

J. Jacob Wiesser, 

Joh. Adam Krum, 

Michael Hauss, 

J. George RosdorfF, 

Joh. Wilhelm Buhl, 

Joh. Georg Stalil, 

J. Dan. Maunshagen,* 

Andreas Schnyder, 

Johannes Aurandt, 

Joh. George Shwartz,* 

Johannes Jüngst, 

Adam Klöckner, 

Christophel Hebener, 

Johannes Renschmit, 

Daniel Schlappy, 

Georg Schäfi'er, 

J. Peter Meyer,* 

J. Christian Schmit,* 

Michael Tasch, 

Anthon Krim, 

Johan Schneider, 

Johannes Fregele, 

J. Peter Kirchhöflfer, 

J. Wilhelm Wisser, 

Joh. Wilhehn HöflFer, 

Jost Henrich Weyerhaussen, 

Joh. Friederich Schall, 



Joh. Gottfried Höhle, 
Philip Valentin Kurseli, 
Joh. Solomon Heim, 
Johan Georg Müller, 
Johann Peter Baldus, 
J. George Friedrich Löser, 
Andreas Erdman Leinan, 
Johan Wilhelm ^hl, 
Joh. Wilhelm Steer, 
Johan Conrad Schneider, 
Johann Georg Looss, 
Johan Jacob Katz, 
Johann Daniel Ruppert, 
Johann Henrich Kuntz, 
Johan Henrich Printz, 
Johan Philip Göbel, 
Johan Jacob Schweitzer, 
Johan Jacob Hoffman, 
Johann Georg Schneider, 
Joh. Ludwig Schweitzer, 
Joh. Baltzer Ducker, 
Joh. Gerlach Born Hütter, 
Johan Anthonius Hun, 
Joh. Friederich Weitzeil, 
PhUip Hen. Arndorff, 
Johan Gerlach Klein, 
Joh. Gerlach Muttersbaeh, 
Joh. Wilhelm Stump, 
Joh. Henrich Steinseiffer, 
Joh. Georg Kinsel, 
Joh. Conrad Orndorff, 
Joh. Wilhelm WuUenweber, 
Johan Georg Wäller, 
Joh. Wilhelm Weiler, 
Hieronimus Schneider, 
Ernst Ludwig Krauss, 
Johan Henrich Stoltz, 
Johan Peter Stoltz, 
Johan Georg Schneider, 
J. Gerlach Wisser,* 
F. Conrad Schmit, § 



320 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Johannes Müller, 
Johannes Graff, 
Johan Peter Orndorff, 



Joh. Henrich Jung, 
Joh. Jost Schlappig. 



209) Oct. 3, 1753. Ship Louisa, John Pittcairne, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Dct, 3, 1753. ©i^iff Souifa, Sapitain 3o^n pittcairne, »on 
JHotterbam über Someö. 



Conrad Kühl, 
Balthaser Vorbach, 
Ernst Jacoby, 
Mathias Becker, 
Philip Klein, 
Johann Dach, 
Johannes Buhlman, 
PhilUppus Zech, 
Johannes Preyss, 
Christian Weber, 
Andreas Kratz, 
Johannes Fuss, 
Hans Georg Jansy,* 
Christophel Schöpf, 
Friederich Heyer, 
Conrad Röberling, 
Johannes Wärffer, 
Joh. Georg Braun, 
Stephan Riel, 
J. Henry Wemeyer,* 
Friederich Dürck, 
Johannes Müller, 
Philip Lutrich, 
Henrich Schmidt, 
Herman Emrich, 
Johannes Bauman, 
Peter Tran,* 
Johannes Leipp, 
Peter Mauer, 
Lothering Richan, 
Henry Fleck, 
Carl Emrich, § 



Jacob Henendorff, 
Philip Brendtle, 
Benedictus Neidlinger, 
Johan Philip Hehnel, 
Johan Adam Dach, 
Joh. Georg Hemmersbach, 
Johan Peter Spielman, 
Johan Christian Lauer, 
Joh. Wilhelm Rück, 
Georg Wilhelm Hard, 
Johan Georg Grub, 
Johan Peter Stadel, 
Johann Philip Innlab,* 
Johann Carl Vöttel, 
Johann Albert Maurer, 
Johan Conrad Strott, 
Johann Henrich Schmit, 
Johan Philip Hinnlaub, 
Georg Adam Mandel, 
Johan Christian Mandel, 
Johann Jacob Neiman, 
Henrich Wilhelm Becker, 
Johan Christian Schweiler, 
Johan Peter Grub, 
Johan Philip Wachs, 
Georg L. Gundrum, 
Hans Michael Müller, 
Hans Cansfluderman, 
Joh. Georg Hasselbacher, 
Johan Peter Nickel, 
Johann Peter Schmick, 
Philip Friedrich Warth, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1753. 



321 



Georg Friederich Iloolböck, 
Johan Henrich Seeberger, 
Johan Greorg Zeulaub, 
Johannes Blocher,* 
Michael Pflocher, 
Andi-eas Heister, 



Achilles Stau, 

Curl Veny,* 

Joh. Wilhelm Völbel,* 

Joseph Geiger, 

Friederich Zillow,* 

Hans George Friere.* 



210) Oct. 3, 1753. Ship Eastern Branch, James Nevin, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth. 

Oct. 3, 1753. Schiff dauern 58ranc^, Sa^jitain 3ameö Stcöin, 
öoit 9iottcrt)am über '3)ortömoutl). 



Johannes Dutt, 
Johan Brey, 
J. Martin Fanau,* 
Sebastian Stanzer, 
Christoph Curfes, 
Joh. David Fuss, 
Conrad Fausser, 
Christ. Mäusfall, 
Henrich Leiner, 
Jacob Schmidt, 
Sebastian Schaber, 
Johannes Hopff, 
Ulrich Stierlein, 
Johannes Löbss, 
Jacob Anthoni, 
Johannes Lieck,? 
Peter Bilhinger, 
Jacob Schneider, 
Johannes Kirme,* 
Johan Christian, 
Ludwig Christian, § 
Gottlieb Müschlitzj 
Matheis Stoll, 
Friederich Schäffer, 
Pete.' Klees, 
Tobias Wandel, 
Christoph Wölffe, 
Wilhelm Decker, 
Daniel Parisien, 



Friederich Glasser, 
Johannes Glasser, 
Adam Dornberger, 
Jacob Weininger, 
Henrich Stollzol, 
Johan Michael Böller, 
Johan Friederich Bleich, 
Johan Martin Feyl, 
Joh. Andreas Lohrman sen., 
Joh. x\ndreas Lohrman, 
Johan Martin Kielman, 
Hans Ulrich Stohonen, 
Hans Michel Ketterer, 
Georg Wilhelm Sehlatterer, 
Christoph Henrich Spiegel, 
Michel Ludwig Feitter, 
Georg Philip Feuerstein, 
Johan Michel Schöneck, 
Hans Georg Dehts, 
Johann Caspar Hopff, 
Joh. Henrich Krauss, 
Johan Georg Förg, 
Johan Jacob Reneb, 
Joh. Philip Vogelgesang, 
Johan Georg Beck, 
Hans Philip Klein, 
Johan Loreutz Siegrist, 
Georg Friederich Taxis, 
Michael Hörmann, 



322 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Johann Michael Brodbeck, 
Georg Eysemann, 
Johann Ludwig Hellers, 
Johannes Dörflinger, 
Johan Nicklaus Zeitz, 
Hans Georg Heintzelman, 
Philip Daniel Gross, 
Johannes Bonner, 
Hans Georg Schenck, 
Joseph Haanelam,* 
Casper Kreiter,* 
Michael Basseler, 
Conrad Hadt, 



Andreas Schnabel, 
Michael Vogel,* 
Andreas Deg, 
Joseph Crisby,* 
Jost Peter, 
Johan Peter Lorie, 
Friederich Deeg, 
Jacob Friederich Schenck, 
Jacob Schmertzka, 
Johan Conrad Giessler, 
Hans Georg Michael, § 
Johan Conrad Ludwig, 
Henrich Friederich. 



211) Nov. 19, 1753. Ship Friendship, James Seix, Master, 
from Hamburg, last from Cowes. 

9ioo. 19, 1753. ®(^iff grienbf ^ip, Sai)itain ^arm^ <Biix, »on 
^amfcurg über SoiDCg. 



Johann Petz, 
Gottfried Nebe, 
Johan Tabel,* 
George Kneeling,* 
Christoph Wächter, 
Valentin Beyling, 
Johan Volks, 
Christophel Auhagen, 
Gottfried Förster,* 
Gottfried Leman,* 
Jacob Bramer, 
Andreas Blötz, 
Conrad Hage, 
Andreas Singneitz, 
H. Ulrich Rössel, 
Christoph Matthesen, 
Joachim Dietrich Mohl, 
Adam Stein, 
Andreas Gerlach, 
Lorentz Rüschle, 



Joh. Heinrich Schneider, 
Job. Fred. Franciscus Soi-sini, 
Christ. Henrich Lutterman, 
Joh. Fried. Landgraff, 
Joh. Henrich Reventlau, 
F. Michel Lorentz, 
Conrad Henrich Törentz, 
Johan Andreas Klein, 
Johan Georg GörtUer, 
Johann Christian Zeise, 
Johan Peter Schmit,* 
Henry Jacob Noll, 
Joh. Henrich Comülder, 
Joh. Henrich Bauermeister, 
Hen. Christoph Delikamp, 
Johan Friederich Pelss, 
Andreas Henrich Lanneger, 
Johan Hartman Emmel, 
Joh. Henrich Sammann, 
Joh. Henrich Paffland. 



Johan Lorentz Vogel, 

Sworn sick on board whose names are not in the List. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1754. 



323 



^U txant an Sorb beeifcigt, beren ^amm abtx nid^t auf 
t»cr Sifte ftiib. 



212) Sept. 14, 1754. Ship Nancy, Ewing, Captain, from 

Kotterdam, last from Cowes. — Inhabitants from Lorraine, f 

(Sept. 14, 1754. ©c^iff 9]anct), Sajjitain Swing, oon 3totter* 
bam über Someö. — Sintvot^ner »on 2ott)ringen.t 



Abram Huguelet, 
Antoni Hogar, 
Charles Huguelet, 
Jeania Quepic, 
Johannes Adolphf, 
Peter Rämmy,* 
Simon Keppler, 
Johannes Seyser, 
Friederich Kramer, 
Abram Joray, 
Johannes Bär,* 
Abraham Gobat, 
Frederick Showay,* 
Peter Smith,* 
Carl Steiss,* 
Thomas Bauer, 
Adam Maine, 
Michel Haag, 
Christian Colly, 
Christoffel Weiss, 
Jacob Müller, 
Johannes UU, 
Pierre Vautie, 
Franc La Mero, 



Pierre Griene, 
Abram Duille, 
Georg Got, 
Pierre Dechin, 
Philip Hasslinger, 
Philip Spannseiler, 
Wilhelm Bahr,* 
Frantz Bahr,* 
Christian Boss, 
Caspar Biegel,* 
Jean Mathiat, 
Georg Dessloch, 
Alexandre Guille, 
Jacob Bauer, 
Jacob Brautwald, 
Joh. Georg Steubesant, 
Mattheus Schendt, 
Nicklaus Schwartz, 
Johan Jacob Voll, 
Joh. Daniel Meyländer, 
Adam Le Roy, 
Abram Le Roy, 
Ludwig Keiner, 
Abram De Die, 



f Lorraine, an old province in the North-East of France, and since the 
treaty of peace, at Frankfort, 1871, again became attached to Germany 
In ancient times this name was applied to the countries of Germany 
and the Netherlands, northward to the mouth of the Rhine. — (Bd.) 

i Sot^rtngen, cine o(te beutfc^e ^rostrtj, jtorböjiltc^ ijon granfret'c^ ge= 
legen unb fett bem granffurter ^rieben 1871 »teber mit Deutfc^lanb öer= 
bunben. 3n alter ^eit mixie biefer 5?ame ben Sa'nbern Deutfc^lanb'g unb 
ber 9?ieberlanbe beigelegt, wel^e nörbli^ »on ber 5)fünbung be^ 9lf fin^ 
logen,— (Herausgeber.) 



324 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Albert Otto Steg, 
Johan Peter Wedel, 
Johan Henrich Stentz, 
Christoph Scharlle,* 
Hans Michael Conradt, 
Johann Adam Wagner, 
Henrich Eisenhuth, 
Michael Klenck, 
Joh. Daniel Zimer,* 
Joh. Conrad Zäumer, 
Johan Jacob Kuntzmann, 
Johan Dietrich GompfF, 
Johan Jost Lap, 
Jean Pien'c Monin sen., 
Jean Pierre Monin, 
Johan Jacob Wilier,* 
Johan Nickel Bauer, 
Jaque Barberat, 
David Marchand, 



Jean Jaque AUemand, 
Johan Henrich Häusser, 
Michel Aniacher, 
Valentin Heidenberg, 
Jean Christoph Pechin, 
Joh. Gottfried Herring,* 
Alphonse Louis Willemin, 
Abram Rathend, 
Frantz Philip Weis, 
J. N. Pechin, 
Daniel Fischer, 
Gabriel Seger, 
Jean Periter,* 
Johannes Schelling, 
David Putner,* 
Jean Periter jr.,* 
Johan Thomas Bernhard, 
John Pierre Bellie,* 
Johannes Shullobak.* 



213) Sept. 14, 1754. Ship Barclay, John Brown, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — Inhabitants fi-om Alsace 
and Lorraine. 

(Sept. 14, 1754. (5d)iff Sarclap, Sapitain 3o^tt SBroron, tiun 
gtotterttam über Soweö. — ginwo^ner »on Slfa^ unb Cot^ringen. 



Georg Voltz, 
Abram Duton,* 
Nicklaus Bauer,* 
Johannes Craus, 
Daniel Weiss, 
Ludwig Haas, 
Nicklas Ash,* 
Georg Schmit,* 
David Pfeiler, 
G. Peter Lange,* 
Jacob Traub, 
Michael Rüeb, 
Jacob Kräber, 
Friederich Schenck, 
Tobias Reisener, 



Joseph Miller,* 
H. Peter Engels,* 
Ludwig Schuster, 
Johannes Karch,* 
Matheus Reuchler,* 
Andreas Kreissel, 
Martin Hechler,* 
Michel Eissge, 
Bastian Rust,* 
Joseph Sudtner, 
Nicklaus Ehrhardt, 
Johannes Köhler, 
Michael Hauch, 
Ludwig Stanger, 
Georg Näwiss,* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1754. 



32Ö 



Johannes Jüngst, 
Jacob Geissler, 
Johan Connitli 3I(K;k, 
Greorge IMiohacl F.-mtzer,* 
John Adam Fass,* 
Michael Hostman, 
Nicolus Steiuuian,* 
Jean Pierre Rottei, 
Joh. Adam Traub,* 
Georg Peter Bock, 
Christoph Inpierman, 
Bernhard Winder, 
Valentin Zaneichel,* 
H. George Hechler, 
Samuel Tallebach,* 
H. Michael Unangst,* 
Lorentz Schönman,* 
Joh. Friederich Haller,* 
Wilhelm Jacob Fack,* 
Philipp Kattenmann, 
Bernhart Mirbach, 
Christian Hoffbauer, 
Johan Carl Greiss,* 
Frantz Ludwig Uehle, 
Georg Waff'unong,* 
Johann Adam Dörr, 
Johannes Schnarrenberger, 
H. Georg Haff"ner, 
Hans Georg Stauch, 
Michael Kornwaltlier, 
Bernhart Ochsenbacher, 
Hans Michael Berr, 
Johan Martin Unangst, 
Johan Conrad Ber, 
Johannes Bahs, 
Andreas Baum, 
Gottlieb Nagel, 
Matheis Schreiner, 
Johan Backofen, 
Johan Schranck, 



Caspar Ganz, 
Michael Knecht, 
Jacob Bockhle, 
IMartin Schranck, 
Peter Thum, 
Frantz Rot ham,* 
Matheas Wagner,* 
Han Nickel Kiinel, 
Otto Biirgestrass, 
Michael Stauch jr., 
Jacob Eichely, 
Philip Hentzer, 
Wilhelm Zetzel, 
Bernhart Meyer, 
Christoph Gans, 
Matheus Alt, 
Andreas Stauch, 
Bernhart Rebhuhn, 
Hans Georg Feyl, 
Jacob Rathacker, 
Joh. Jacob Strohmenger, 
Helfrich Knieriemen, 
J. Michael Seiflfer, 
Christoph Laichinger, 
Dewald Braunholtz, 
Hans Georg Fuchs, 
Johannes Schuman, 
Ludwig Beruh. Zwissler, 
Joh. Christian Juuss, 
Joh. Nicklaus Martin, 
Sebastian Muschler, 
Johan Jacob Rauch, 
Michael Stauch sen., 
Philip Jacob Griedler, 
Mattheus Fautz, § 
Michael (Erthler, 
Hans Michael Bleich, 
Johan Jacob Seitz, 
Johannes Kleinfeld. 



28 



326 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



214) Sept. 25, 1754. Ship Adventure, Joseph Jackson, Cap- 
tain, from Hamburg, last from Plymouth. — Inhabitants from 
Franconia. "j" — 245 passengers. 

(Sc))t. 25, 1754. ®(^iff Slböenture, Sapttain 3ofcp^ 3rtcffon, 
»on Hamburg über ^Ipmout^. — (Sinwofiner »on gtanfen.f — 
245 meifcnbe. 



Johann Hartmann, 
Christian Schäflfer, § 
Johan Georg liger, 
Andreas Weiss, 
Johannes Weiss, 
Johannes Andriola, 
Frantz Hautuss, 
Christian Letzbeyer,* 
Johannes Veil, 
Joh. Andreas Hoffner, 
Joh. Adam Kohlass, 
John George Shmit,* 
Hans Peter Rehvan,* 
Johan Philip Wagner, 
Johannes Andriola sen., 
Johan Jacob Weinman, 
Johan Adam RoUbach, 
Joh. Conrad Spongenberg, 
Johannes Fritz, 
Johannes Keim, 
Balthaser Raab, 
Johannes Reidiger, 
Joseph Gasser, 
Philip Michael, 
J. Zacharias Stokel, 
Herman Massemer, 
Anthon Lembach,* 
Christian Nehrlich, 
Henrich Urich, 



George Kohle, 
J. Jacob Cornelius, 
Johannes Liebrich, 
Johannes Didrich, 
Joh. Jost Will, 
Joh. Nickel Bech, 
Caspar Schreiber, 
Johannes Ditmar, 
Philip Thiringer,* 
Joh. Georg Shmit,* 
Johannes Mardersteck, 
Christian Funck, 
Johan Eberth, 
Adolph llrbach, 
J. Friederich Ebnie,* 
Georg Steinweg, 
Johannes Rütiger, 
Georg Stein weg jr., 
Christian Gasser, 
Johan August Straube, 
Johan Georg Gütsell, 
Joh. Christoph Diemer, 
Joh. Dietrich Baltdauss, 
Johan Christian Eser, 
Joh. Henrich Neumann, 
Joh. Michael Weiss, 
Joh. Henrich Kohrman, 
Johan Georg Jung, 
Joh. Daniel Franck, 



f Franconia, an old duchy, afterwards a circle of the Germanic Em- 
pire, between Upper Saxony and Lower Rhine, Swabia, &c. — {Editor.) 

i ^ranfen tft etn nlteö C>crjDAtf)unt unt> toax na^f)er ein Äretö beö bcut= 
fc^cn 9Jetc^ei5. So liegt jwi[(|)en Dberfac^fen, bein unteren 9?t)etn, «Si^toaben 
w. f. w.— (-^erauogeber.) 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1754. 



327 



J. Philip Tamhöffer, 
Joh. Jacob Reuneck, 
Joh. Wilhelm Schaf,? 
Joh. Gottfried Nagel, 

Minist. Candit.a 
Johann Jost Heck, 
Johan Jacob Rühlein, 
Joh. Martin Gardert, 
Joh, Frid. Ermetraud, 
Joh. Martin Matterstek,* 



Joh. Nicklaus Handt, 
Joh. Georg Rausch, 
Joh. Matthias Müller, 
Joh. Henrich Ruppel, 
Joh. Christoph Müller, 
Johan Conrath Con,? 
Joh. Leonard Rohrmann, 
Math. Andonius Rütiger, 
Nicklaus Gorshbotte.* 



215) Sept. 30, 1754. Ship Richard and Mary, John Moore, 
Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — Inhabitants from 
the dukedom of Whtemberg, — six Roman CathoUcs. — 230 pas- 
sengers. 

(Sept. 30, 1754. «Schiff gti(^art) unt SJlar^, Gapitain 3o^n 
5Jioore, 'i:!m 9totterbam über Soroeö. — Sinroo^ner oom ^erjog* 
t^um Sßürttemberg,— fec^S 3ftömi[d)=^at^oItf^e.— 230 9leifentic. 



Michael Fischer, 
Conrad Fischer, 
Caspar Kust, 
Hans Casper Geyer, 
Michael Staiger, 
Johannes Schnerenberger, 
Andreas Ziiickh, 
Jacob Zinckh, 
Christoph Zinckh, 
Gottlieb Tuche,? 
Jacob Saltzer, 
David Kohl, 
Michel Wolff, 
Jacob Adam, 
Jacob Wolff, 
Ludwig Strobel, 
Johannes Bether, 
Adam Knoblior * 



George Heisel, 
Georg Heisel jr., 
Martin Schmidt, 
Henrich Kost, 
Jacob Blessing, 
Friederich Deiler, 
Friederich Burr,* 
Jacob Marier, 
Johannes Wetzel, 
Casper Hincke, 
Jacob Steudtle, 
Jacob Busch, 
Wolfgang Ulmer, 
David Wolff, 
Christoph Walters, 
Jacob Zuch, 
Jacob Ramsberger, 
Christian Zinck, 



a Joh. Gottfried Nagel is written in a very bold Latin script. — {Ed.) 
a 3o^. ßjottfrteb S^tagel tft in \t\x beutltd^er latetntfc^er ®c^rift flef(i()rie= 
ben. — (|>erau^9eber.) 



328 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Michael Wolff, 
Johannes Hohl, 
Georg Hohl, 
Johannes Lauer, 
Georg Grau, 
Daniel Stumpp, 
Johannes Schlotz, 
Valentin Lemuu,* 
Herman Founedus, 
Henrich Kägele,? 
Johannes Schauer, 
Christian Kramer, 
Jacob Schnerenberger, 
Johannes Gürthner, 
Michael Libelt, 
Hans Martin Müller, 
Johan Michael Strobel, 
Michael Welthe, 
Jacob Welthe, 
Ludwig Müssi, 
Johannes Schiessle, 
Hans Georg Bether, 
Hans Georg Weite, 
Hans Georg Meyer,* 
Jacob Adam Wendel, 
Michael Herman, 
Christoph Fleisser, 



Georg Fried. Dockesladel, ? 
Johannes Machler, 
Hans Martin Schäffer, 
Johan Georg Busch, 
Jean Jac. Foulquier, 
Joh. Michael Mössinger, 
Daniel Blumenschein, 
Ludwig Zimmermann, 
Anthonius Schmidt, 
Joseph Feinrür, 
Joh. Christoph Beyrle, 
Mattheis Süss, 
Hans Georg Ramsberger, 
Wolfgang Wolff, 
Georg Friederich Dietz, 
Johan Caspar Dietz, 
Georg Adam Engeil, 
Hans Georg Meyer,* 
John Martin Alisch, 
Hans Georg Heidle sen.. 
Hans Georg Heidle, 
Hans Georg Rössel, 
Hans Friedrich Klinger, 
Georg Ludwig Kraft, 
Ludwig Wilhelm Heller, 
Friederich Reninger, 
Johannes Bernhard. 



21 G) Sept. 30, 1754. Ship Brothers, William Muir, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — Inhabitants from the 
Palatinate and Mentz, — seven Roman Catholics, twenty-seven 
Mennonites. — 251 passengers. 

«Sept. 30, 1754. ®d)ttf Srotberö, eapttain mtxiam g}?uir, 
»on 9iottert>am über ßoroeei. — (£inn)ot)ncv ber '^\al] itnt» »on 
SSlain^, — fleben &iömt[d5=Äat^oIifc^e,.fteben unt gwanjig ÜJJenno* 
niten. — 251 ^paffagiere. 

Joh. Georg Kol, Conrad Wagner, 

Johannes Miller,* Daniel Sander, 

Joh. Peter Hahn, Conrad Mercky, 

Johannes Aller, Johannes Klein, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1754. 



329 



Henry Weidman, 
Jacob Bernhard, 
Wilhelm Staut,* 
Joh. Ansthoch, 
J. Greorg Lucker, 
Carl Heinrieh, 
Jacob KauiFman, 
Johannes Schädel, 
Michael Rasch, 
Jacob Huber, 
Henrich Graff, 
Valentin Noldt, 
Jacob Shable,* 
Johannes Küny, 
Johannes Forrer, 
Jacob Brubacher, 
Johannes Schöri, 
Peter Weitzel, 
Anthony Weitzel, 
Stephan Weber, 
Frantz Burghart, 
Joseph Zieff, 
Jacob Pfister, 
Daniel Ott, 
Valentin Urlettig, 
Hans Greorg Krauss, 
Frederick Andreas, 
David Hemgerberer, 
Christophel Volckrath, 
Johannes Bartel Misihni, 
Johan Georg Humbert, 
Philip Jacob Späth, 
Georg Christoph Dauber, 
Johan Conrad Schmidt, 
Johan Diehl Kleinman, 
Johan Balthas Schmidt, 
Johann Tiel Werss, 
Johann Peters Werss, 
Hans Jacob Geist, 
Johann Georg Spies, 
Johan Nicolaus Stimmel, 



Joh. Lud. Ernst Schiller, 
Abraham Mellinger, 
Johannes Herschberger, 
Johannes Eicher, 
Georg Michael Schultz, 
Abraham Hackman, 
Joh. Jacob Brubacher, 
Michael Burghart, 
Georg Ludwig Meittinger. 
Johan Christian Trump, 
Hans Georg Zieff,* 
Friederich Beher, 
Augustus Schaad, 
Heinrich Zumbrun, 
Christian Wolst,* 
Johannes Ritschart, 
Hans Müldaler, 
Joh. Wolfgang Möhring, 
Balthas Reiner, 
Christian Eicher, 
Abraham Bleistein, 
Johann Georg Diemes, 
Johan Valentin Webel, 
Hans Jacob Schaffner, 
Joh. Christian Wittmer, 
Joseph Lemann, 
Jacob Dettwiller, 
Martin Herman, 
Adam Kuntzel, 
Philip Metzger, 
Johannes Frey, 
Jacob Becker, 
Peter Frey, 
Wendel Gilbert, 
Johannes Seithss, 
Philip As, 
Caspar Knag, 
Johan Jacob Wittmer, 
Christian Huber, 
Johannes Müller, 
Abraham Strickler, 



28* 



330 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Oswald Andreas, 
Leonliart Krumbein, 
Johann Georg Becker, 
Hans Mich. Koppenhäffer, 



Wilhelm Eschelman, 
Henrich Hcistandt, 
Joseph Bubickofer, 
Johannes Kantz. 



217) Sept. 30, 1754. Ship Edinburgh, James Rüssel, Mas- 
ter, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — Inhabitants from the 
Palatinate and Wirtemberg, — five Roman Catholics, and one 
Mennonite. 

(Sept. 30, 1754. ©d^iff (Sbinfcurgft, (Sapitain 3ameö 3iup, 
'oon Stottertam über Somcö. — (Sintüo^ner bcr ^fatj unb 2ßürt* 
temkrg'ö, — fünf 3töm{f(^*Äat^o(i[c^e unt) ein ?0^ennonite. 



Jacob Schlotter, 
Henrich Weil, 
Herman Grerlach, 
Georg Hilt, 
Johannes Hirsch, 
Philippus Spetzius, 
Christophel Gühtt, 
Melchior Schimpf, 
Paulus Löshorn, 
Herman Summer,* 
George Wessig,* 
Anthon Petry, 
Andreas Wegel, 
Ludwig Rahm, 
Casper Zahn, 
Andreas Dein, 
Philip Besteres, 
Johannes Bott, 
Johannes Lincker, 
Jacob Ludwig, 
Andreas Hübner, 
Rudolph Drack, 
George Lohr, 
Friederich Wilhelm Frich, 
Georg Eberhart Mühl, 
Johan Henrich Pfeiffer, 
Johan Conrad Schäppler, 
Johan Henrich Blecker, 



Johan Georg Wilhelmi, 
Johan Peter Walschner, 
Johannes Matthäus, 
Bernhard Matthäus jr., 
Bernhard Matthäus, 
Georg Henry Rahm, 
Conrad Wüchart, 
Johannes Ludwig, 
Conrad Ludwig,* 
J. Jost Bingeman, 
Friederich Schimpf, 
Daniel Vetzberger, 
Heinrich Walther, 
J. Henry LangsdorflP, 
Engelhard Ludwig, 
Ludwig Winckler, 
Joh. Jacob Schmess, 
Balthasar Faulstick, 
Casper Erb, 
Johannes Haubt, 
Peter Hecht, 
Conrad Lohr, 
Philip Ludwig, 
Johannes Huber, 
Conrad Bauer, 
Conrath Enders, 
Johannes Weber, 
Georg Kopp, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1754. 



331 



Adam Strehm, 
Valtin Beltzer, 
Henrich Huey, 
Casper Weber, 
Jacob Kern, 
Matheus Kern, 
Michael Wentz, 
Christoph Essig, ■ 
Peter Paul, 
Adam Maurer, 
Johann Henle, 
Michael Georg, 
Conrad Grim, 
Johannes Grim, 
Conrad Philips, 
Georg Grim, 
Peter Kiel, 
Conrad Mieser, 
Werner Tickel, 
Peter Tickel, 
Hans Deme, 
Jacob Giebel, 
Georg Diel, 
Ernst Menge, 
Peter Pigger,* 
Reinhart Weiss, 
Conrad Geysel,* 
Herman Geysel,* 
George Sorge, 
Jacob Hoifman, 
George Bcirstler, 
Jacob Fondenie, 
Samuel Haubt, 
Joh. Nickel Haubt, 
Jacob Hammerstein, 
Valentin Ulrich, 
Eberhard Diehl, 
Henrich Wenckler, 
Henrich Gebhart, 
Peter Weissman, 
Joh. Daniel Krug, 



Adam Bochteldt, 
Joh. Henrich Strehm, 
Heinrich Hock, 
Anthoni Hecht, 
Johan Georg Weitzeil, 
Christoph Rebele, 
Georg Henrich Haas, 
Anthon Merckell, 
Johann Chrunz, ? 
Joh. Conrad Schneider, 
Andreas Krauthamel,* 
Joh. Sebastian Fritz, 
Joh. Dan. Langsdorff, 
Joh. Conrad Langsdorff, 
Friederich Hildebrand, 
Herman Matheus, 
Johannes Bender, 
Joh. Conrad Bender, 
Conrad Schneider, 
Johannes Rupp, 
Johannes Kemmerer,? 
Heinrich Lupp, 
Peter Derdler, 
Johannes Menge, 
Lorentz Albahn, 
Gerhardt Allbahn, 
Jacob Hellebrich, 
Christoph Hellebrich, 
Johannes Geisel, 
Hans Conrad Diehl, 
Frank Baltzer Schalter, 
Johannes Knaab, 
Joseph Nadtheimer, 
IMichael Künstler, 
Georg Renner, 
Jacob Renner, 
Henrich Herter, 
Johannes Becker, 
Casper Becker, 
Henry Stecker, 
Jacob Renner jr., 



332 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Hans Michael Esper,* Johannes Schmeh, 

Georg Grottfried Volcker, Hans Georg Kroh.* 

Christian Merckell, 

Sick — Philip Sommer, Philip Riess, Philip Tauberman, Georg 
Metzger, Jacob Rehble, Johannes Kopping, Henrich Peterson, 
Casper Ziegler, Georg Holl, Mathias Ludwig. 



218) Sept. 30, 1754. Ship Neptune, Ware, Captain, 

from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — Inhabitants from Darmstadt 
and Zweibrücken, — four Roman Catholics. 

(Sept. 30, 1754. ©c^iff «Reptune, Sapitatn 2öare, uon JHot- 
tcrt»am über Sotveö. — Seh)Dt)ner oon !Darm[tat)t unb 3wei= 
brücfen, — öier 9tömifc^=Äatl)oIif^e. 



George Meyer,* 
Jacob Bersding, 
Mathias Heiner, 
Andreas Bingel, 
Gottfried Gebhard, 
Georg Boltz, 
Johannes Rebe, 
Friedrich Schneider, 
Georg Hofl'man, 
Daniel Stegner, 
Johannes Hoch, 
Henry Klein, 
Philip Wilt, 
V. Brücker, 
Jacob Wcynant, 
Friederich Preis,* 
Jacob Weynant jr., 
Johannes Schober, 
Phillippus Frey, 
Christian Rietz, 
Philip Wild, 
Georg Hechler, 
Benedictus Forster,* 
Henry Schaffer, 
Valentin Dalick, 
Christoph Speck, 
Job. Georg Decher, 



Geo. Mich. Vitzthum, 
Georg Michel Lohr, 
Job. Henrich Brumbach, 
Job. Henrich Kurcht, 
Job. Adam Michael, 
Johann Peter Decher, 
Johannes Schuman, 
Job. Georg Traxel, 
Job. Thomas Bisshantz, 
Georg Jacob Haussman, 
Johann Carl Hermsdorff, 
Hans Adam Beckenhaub, 
Johan Bernhard Meek, 
Johan Adam Edelman, 
Job. Nicklaus Hauer, 
Phil. Friedrich Wünger, 
Hans Adam Bleier, 
Job. Paul Gemberling, 
Hans Nickel Ensminger, 
Job. Carl Gemberling, 
Aug. Sigfried Eichler, 
Eberhart Kriechbaum, 
Philip Jacob Fbsig, 
Job. Henrich Schneider, 
J. Adam Angold, 
Philip Dietrich, 
Peter Rubel, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1754. 



333 



Conrad Wagner, 
Valentin Cleinentz, 
Christian Hoch, 
Heinrieh Cappis, 
Johannes Bbckel, 
Jeremias Herbei,* 
George Weyman, 
Jacob Graulich, 
Henry Shneyder,* 
Christian Bauer, 
Peter Stotzel, 
Michael Miller,* 
Friederich Betz, 
Christian Andreas, 
Henrich Holtzhausser, 
Friederich Betz, 
Conrath Nie, 
Henrich Haun, 
Johannes Schmitt, 
Johannes Lentz, 
Frederick Brand, 
Andreas Riehl, 
Jacob Becker, 
Jacob Sehoff, 
Peter Step,* 
Ludwig Herring, 
Daniel Schrein, 
Conradt Wirl, 
Reinhart Stein, 
David Miller,* 
Peter Shamar,* 
Johannes Keyset, 
Wilhelm Grauss, 
Johannes Volck, 
Henry Hain,* 
Burchart Shneyder,* 
Philip Lang, 
Peter Hilliger, 
Arnold Becker, 
Philip Becker, 
Georg Beiger, 
J. Henry Shneider,* 



Joh. Christian Wissbach, 
Joh. Georg Grundloch, 
J. Jost Stuberling,* 
Johannes Kleinbehl, 
Johan Philip Nold, 
Joh. Philip Kolb, 
Joh. Bernhart Wolff, 
Joh. Philip Bresel, 
Joh. Georg IMentz, 
J. Adam Thomas, 
J. Peter Schrot, 
Daniel Hoffman, 
Johannes Bartenbach, 
Balthaser Bergmann, 
Joh. Michael Schrot, 
J. Jacob Zimmerman, 
G. Michael Andreas, 
Johan Henrich Hauff, 
Abraham Holtzhausser, 
Adam Höllerman, 
Johannes Keller, 
Johan Peter Haun, 
Johan Christian Haun, 
Joh. Nicklaus Eitenmüller, 
Johannes Herman, 
Joh. Peter Scheuerman, 
Reinhold Scheretz, 
Joh. Conrad Meiger, 
Joh. Georg Kribel, 
Joh. Philip Dietz, 
J. Jacob Dorsham,* 
Johann Georg Gack, 
Valentin Gosper, 
John William Kurtz, 
Johan Peter Denger, 
Ludwig Gach, 
Martin Neimiger, 
Joh. Heni'ich Grantz, 
Johan Michael Rapp, 
Johannes Krayly,* 
Johan Just Gack, 
Conrad Scherrer. 



334 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



219) Oct. 1, 1754. Ship Phoenix, John Spun-ier, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — Inhabitants from Franconia, 
the Palatinate and Zweibrücken, — seventeen Roman Catholics, 
twenty-five Mennonites. — 554 passengers. 

Oct. 1, 1754. ©^iff ^^öniF, Giipitaiu 3o()n Spurrier, »on 
Stotteriam über Gome^. — (5tnttJo()uer granfen'ö, t>er ^^ai^ unt) 
3Jtietbrü(fen'g, — fiebenje^n 9tömi[(^^Äatl)Dlif^e, fünf unt) jn)an= 
jig ?0^ennoniten. — 554 ^affagierc. 



Johannes Jung, 
Jacob Schneider, 
Ludwig Gröttgen, 
Abraham Stein, 
Peter Streier, 
Peter Henrichs, 
Philip Wesger, 
Hans Reisch, 
Ufrich Fesel, 
Johannes Alberth, 
Johannes Gebhart, 
Johannes Sauer, 
Johannes Andreas, 
Peter Müller, 
Lorentz Alberth, 
Daniel Doss,? 
Hans Kisecker, 
Johannes Beck, 
Andreas Hath, 
Andreas Fertig, 
Johannes Hilbert, 
Johannes Schafiier, 
Lenhardt Ott, 
Henrich Ott, 
Adam Gieg, 
Michael Bertrie, 
Matheus Stumpf, 
Adam Miller,* 
Georg Schäfier, 
Peter Schäifer. 
Adam Dihm, 
Peter Heiges, 
Heinrich Dann, 



Caspar Jost, 
Andreas Schmidt, 
Andreas Gerberich, 
Valtin Hörner, 
Carl Henrich Werckhäusser, 
Johan Nickel Dibs, 
Johannes Henrichs, 
Jost Schonauer, 
Michael Fletter, 
Lorentz Mangel, 
Burckhardt Küch, 
Marcus Weidinger, 
Frantz Weidinger, 
Hieronimus Grünewald, 
Hans Adam Sauer, 
Hans Michael Sauer, 
J. Michael Teubel,* 
J. George Ruttenwalder,* 
Joh. Lenhart Binzel, 
Joh. Bernhard Bob, 
John Georg Bob, 
J. Henry Unckelbach,* 
Christofiel Sebum, 
Andreas Schwartz, 
G. Philip Epsenhaar, 
Hieronimus Gieg, 
Jean Jaque Aiquel, 
Jean Pierre Zoisin, 
Johannes Hartman, 
Nicolaus Bindder, 
Casper Oberdorfi", 
Hans Senifbeber, 
Andreas Brüschlein, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1754 



335 



Thomas Dihm, 
Hans Adam Dihm, 
Thomas Biemmer, 
Melchior Weppert, 
Johan Georg Katz, 
Andreas Cunckel, 
Peter Cunckel, 
Joh. Heinrich Müller, 
Martin Sentiner, 
Johannes Grabel, 
Heinrich Haag, 
Michael Seitner, 
Dietrich Gerharfc, 
Balthas Holl, 
Lorentz Riites, 
Matheis Reinhart, 
Conrad Kern, 
Lorentz Cramer, 
Johannes Hertz, 
Martin Shreyer,* 
Valentin Keyser, 
Peter Thomass, 
Ludwig Cuntz, 
Caspar Haas, 
Michael Krühl, 
Hartman Haas, 
Matheas Pop, 
Andreas Ferdig, 
Johannes Geyman, 
Simon Bechler,* 
Johannes Beyl,* 
Andreas Grub,* 
Philip Wagner, 
Jacob Fries, 
Frederick Christian, 
Daniel Ditloh, 
Peter Guth, 
Ludwig Schott, 
Peter Ney, 
Georg Bau, 
Dietrich Weirig, 



Wilhelm Weiss, 
Peter Rohrbach, 
Wilhelm Alberth, 
Andreas Hüter, 
Wendel Kremer, 
Daniel Schmidt, 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Nickel Neuman, 
Beinhart Wolff, 
Nicklaus Schindtelman, 
Joh. Philip Schindtelman, 
Balthaser Rabanus, 
Abraham le Roy, 
Baltzer Schneider, 
Lorentz Sandmann, 
Henrich Messerschmidt, 
Joh. Nicklaus Armhiener, 
Georg Philip Diehl, 
Johann Helffer Cramer, 
Johan Peter Fischer, 
Bernhart Thomass, 
Wilhelm Metzger, 
Johan Jacob Holder, 
J. Nicklas Gerhart, 
Philip Adam Paulus, 
Jacob Schneider, 
PhUipp Schuch, 
Johannes Schneider, 
Hen. August Grimier, 
Joseph Reinhard, 
Jacob Bernhart, 
J. Wilhelm Zwib,* 
Johann Jacob Angst, 
Phil. Friederich Schäffer, 
Bernhart Franckfürter, 
Nicklas Lehmer, 
Joh. Henrich Sackss, 
Johann Lehmer, 
Hans Peter Schott, 
Johannes Kauffman jr., 
Johannes Kauffman, 



336 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Abraham Edinger, 
Adam Heinbach, 
Johan Georg Gerlach, 
Thomas Hunsicker, 
Daniel Hunsicker, 
Joh. Adam Batziuss, 
Joh. Daniel Pfeil, 
Joh. Albrecht Stimmel, 
Johan Peter Stimmel, 
Michael Dietrich, 
Jacob Herman, 
Peter Dörrnis,* 
Jacob Miller,* 
Adam Schmit,* 
Henry Shedle,* 
Henry Hather,* 
Peter Biehl, 
Daniel Biehl, 
Georg Friess, 
Philip Hess,? 
Adam Müller, 
Christian Koch, 
Johannes Zinn, 
Ludwig Wird,* 
Conrad Dewa,* 
Friederich Miller,* 
Johannes Veith, 
Peter Dick, 
Nicklas Paul, 
Elias Jentes,* 
Henry Gielman,* 
Daniel Führer, 
Peter ^shelman,* 
Hans Jantz, 
Joseph Wanger, 
Ulrich Engel, 
Frantz Zechler, 
Ulrich Richty, 
Hans Schwartz, 
Hans Schütz,* 
Christoph Pantzly,* 



Peter Balzey, 
Christoph Widerich,* 
Peter Schwartz, 
Christian Schwartz, 
Nicklaus Moser, 
Georg Hartwieg, 
Lorentz Enders, 
Christoffel Müller, 
Friederich Herman, 
Johan Georg Tinius, 
Joh. Henrich Schmitt, 
David Schröder, 
Jacob Rathebach, 
J. Nicklas Lorentz, 
Gerhart Martins, 
Johann Michael Sauer, 
Georg Magnus Conrad, 
Wendel WendeUng, 
J. Lenhart Burchart, 
Matthias Müller, 
Jacob Theissinger, 
Christian Brengel, 
Jacob Brengel, 
Jacob Hussing,* 
Christian Conrad, 
Wilhelm Becker, 
Christian Brächtbül, 
Christian Führer, 
Nicklaus Schantz, 
Hans ^schliman, 
Jost Neuenschwander, 
Hans Uelireist, 
Ulrich Burckhalter, 
Hans Jacob Moser, 
Hans Burckhalter, 
Christian Burckhalter, 
Sebastian Neuenschwander, 
Ulerich Newcomer,* 
Christian (jeimmer, 
Christian Geimmer jr., 
Abraham Brechbühler, 



Christian Newcomer,* 
Christian Helhoff,* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1754. 

Bartholomais Beringer. 



337 



220) Oct. 16, 1754. Ship Peggy, James Abercrombie, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — Inhabitants from the 
Palatinate and Wirtemberg, — ten Roman Catholics. 

Dct. 16, 1754. ©c^iff 5^eggt), Sa))itain ^amts Stbercromlne, 
öon ^totterbam über Someö. — Stnwo^ner bcr ^falj unb 2öürt= 
temkrg'ö, — 3el)n 9lömtf(^=Äat()olif(i)e. 



Marcus Weckfort, 
Henrich Hust, 
Frantz Stichling, 
Wendel Warner, 
Ferdinand Frantz, 
Jacob Freyberger, 
Peter Gebel, 
Andreas Bonjour, 
Jacob Shutt,* 
Georg Kohl, 
Henry Rubrecht, 
Bernhart Egel, 
Jacob Frey, 
Abraham Trestel, 
Peter Wudo, 
Johannes Luppoldt, 
Hans Luppoldt, 
Matheus Zenaldt, 
Friederich Koch, 
Johannes Hasser, 
Matthäus Die, 
Friederich Hausehl, 
Andreas Heckenleib, 
Michael Koster, 
Johann Daniel, 
Johannes Hummel, 
Joseph Boger, 
John Shuster,* 
Stephan Kraus, 
Johannes Wersum, 
Martin Haas, 



Johannes Class, 
Michael Krebs, 
Johannes Ricker, 
Jacob Thum, 
Hans Glee,? 
Johannes Meyer, 
Johannes Meyer, 
Michael Klein, 
Hans Schule, 
Michael Koller, 
John Carl Krumholtz, 
Antony Kettinger, 
Balthasar Wisser,* 
Christ. Henrich Fiedler, 
Georg Adam Dürstler, 
Hans Michael Shmit,* 
Hans Philip Flachs, 
Jacob Friederich Mayer, 
Johan Valentin Meyer,* 
Daniel Hingerer, 
Hans Georg Kraus, 
Georg Schweiger, 
Michael Schenck, 
H. George West,* 
Hans Martin Tram, 
Hans Georg Tram, 
Ludw. Fried. Freisinger, 
Hans Georg Armbrüster, 
Joh. Adam Schnelleberger, 
Jacob Hikenleibly,* 
Matthias Wassermann, 



29 



338 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Hans Georg Zinn, 
Jacob Henrich Pluhan, 
Georg Henrich Bauer, 
J. Johannes Herrmann, 
Johan Friederich Linck, 
Hans Michael Dies, 
Joh. Conrad Möschler, 
H. Michael Hüpbisch, 
John George Braucher, 
Henrich Ludwig Worn, 
Hans Georg Ratze, 
Johannes Schumacher, 
Johannes Biecheler, 
Michael Wuster, 
Johannes Walckher, 
Lorentz Martin Scherer,? 
Michael Rossnagel, 



Christian Reck sen., 
Georg Nickel Reck, 
Christian Reck jr., 
Hans Meyer,* 
Martin Marckel,* 
Johannes Vaubel,* 
Johannes Butz, 
Wilhelm Reichly,* 
Adam Grund,* 
Christoph Gress, 
Johan Adam Pfisterer, 
Georg Adam Grombeer, 
Johann Peter Schlemb, 
Johann Georg Kress, 
Hans Georg Schiettinger, 
Georg Peter Kochen dörffer, 
Jacob Andreas Sprecher. 



Sick — Georg Weber, Johan Friederich Hauser, Melchior 
Jordan, Anthon Wallbeyer, Jacob Graaf, Johan Georg Kreyer, 
Michael Tietz, Jacob Eberhart. 



221) Oct. 21, 1754. Ship Friendship, Charles Ross, Cap- 
tain, from Amsterdam, last from Gosport., England. — Inhabitants 
from Franconia and Hesse, — seven Roman Catholics. 

Dct. 21, 1754. ©Aiff grienbff)i^ dapitain St)arleö 5Rü§, 
»on SImfterbant über ®oöport, Sngtanb. — Sintüo^ner »on gran= 
!en unt> Jpeffcn, — fteben 9tömifc^=^at()oltfAe. 



Gabriel Reber, 
Johannes Zeller, 
Joseph Weissert, 
Albrecht Miller,* 
Martin Shnyder,* 
Jacob Feiner,* 
Gregorius Grim, 
Deis Dersch, 
Andreas Bommer, 
Johannes Manckell, 
Henrich Steller, 
Johannes Koch, 
Johannes Schmitt, 



Philip Schweiger,* 
Jacob Stahl, 
Conrath Spenner, 
Lorentz Althart, 
Johannes Immel, 
Christoph Stedtler, 
Moritz Göbel, 
Georg Steiner, 
J. Friedei'ich Korn, 
Johannes Harff, 
Johannes Frey ling, 
Johannes Wihrrem, 
Henrich Reyel, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1754. 



339 



Adam Neubeck,? 
Joh. Christoph Lang, 
Johannes Shellenberger,* 
Joh. PhiHp Schöberger, 
Johan Georg Weissert, 
Johann Jost Berger, 
J. Henry Cautz,* 
Johann Wedelscheider, 
Reinhard Werkheiser, 
Johan Peter Hasbach, 
Joh. Dietrich Kalckbrenner, 
John George Shmit,"^' 
John Michael Hoch, 
Johan Georg Hen, 
Johan Casper Freyberg, 
Johann Georg Stahl, 
Johann Michael Stahl, 
Joh. Balthaser HarflF, 
Johan Henrich Euhricheim, 
Johan Henrich Schmidt, 
Johan Wilhelm Mohr, 
Johan Jacob Mohr, 
Henrich Wilhelm Müller, 
Georg Friederich Auger, 
Joh. Wilhelm Becker, 
Joh. Marcus Weylthöffer, 
Johannes Straull, 
Johannes Beuber, 
Balthaser Stittz, 
Christian Diehl, 
Martin Bender, 
Carl Wender, 
Johannes Müller, 
Jacob Fries, 
Philip Seybolt, 
Anthon Russ, 
Nicklas Rab, 
Johannes Vogt, 
Georg Krug,* 
Bernhart Spesser, 
Reinhart Schmitt, 



Johannes Ammon, 
Conrad Schmitt, 
Peter Klein, 
Baiser Saltzer, 
Johannes Kick, 
Peter Stein, 
Peter Buss, 
Johannes Buss, 
Philip Luar,* 
Anthon Dauber, 
Johannes Nold, 
Henrich Scherr, 
Johannes Mebür, 
Georg Pott,* 
Mattheus Diehl, 
Johan Philip Schreidt, 
Johan Jacob Laux, 
Johannes Seybolt, 
Nicolaus Heister, 
Joh. Wilhelm Bender sen., 
Johan Philip Bender, 
Konrad Freitenberger, 
Joh. Henrich Rathschlag, 
Joh. Michael Reinhart, 
Wil. Henrich Lautenber, 
Johan Conrad Krug, 
Matheus Achenbach, 
Herman Wetzler, 
Reinhard Kuntz, 
Johannes Riell, 
Conrath Langsdorff, 
Arnold DannhöflFer, 
Johann Peter Bernhardt, 
Heinrich Esch, 
Johannes Weber, 
Johannes Schaffstall, 
Joh. Daniel Büshart, 
Johannes Danneheim, 
Johan Georg Meyreiss, 
Johan Henrich Vos, 
Johann Georg Vos, 



340 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Joh. Henrich Scheid, Johan Ludwig Bernhart, 

Henrich Peter KöUmer, Johan Christian Schmidt. 

ßick — Friederieh Stein, Johannes Müller, Michael Dinges. 



222) Oct. 21, 1754. Ship Bannister, John Doyle, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — Inhabitants from Wirtem- 
berg, Westphalia and the Palatinate, — four Roman Catholics. 

Dct. 21, 1754. ©c^iff 23annifter, Sapitatn 3o^n 2)o9le, 'oon 
fRotkvtiam über Soiueö. — Sinmo^ner »on S3ürttemf>erg, 2ßeft= 
p^alen unb ber ^falj, — mx 3tömif(^=^at^oIif(^c. 



Jacob Horman, 
Bastian Wittmer, 
George Wittmer, 
Andreas Eberharth, 
Hans Michael Miller,* 
Johan Peter Rademacher, 
Joh. Conrad Jauch, 
Matheis Heinlein, 
Johannes Kintsch, 
Konrath Weber, 
Johannes Geisler, 
Joseph Cormet,* 
Martin Torward,* 
Martin Torward jr.,* 
Jaques Talraon, 
Jaques Caral, 
Jaques Caral, 
Simon Ege,* 
Adam Ege, 
Balthes Müller, 
Christoph Diger,* 
Georg Wirst, 
Peter Butz, 
Philip Modi,* 
Johannes Weber, 
Johannes Benner, 
Joh. Peter Kebler,* 
Matthias Buchman, 
Valentin Jäger,* 
Joh. Jacob Wolff, 



Joh. Peter Wolff, 
Abraham Gehr, 
Adam Mirtorum,* 
Conrad Kemp,* 
Johannes Delp, 
Peter Meister,* 
Ludwig Lang, 
Elias Hartmann, 
J. Peter Weber,* 
Johannes Weber,* 
Leonhart Weber,* 
Conrad Gildner,* 
Jacob Ludwig Beimling, 
Georg Reissdorff, 
Joh. David Krauss, 
Christoph Scharfrichter, 
Friederich Schiebel, 
Alexander Finck,* 
G. Daniel Uhll,* 
Hans Mich. Bühlheim, 
Hans Georg Ruass, 
Hans Jacob Ruass, 
Johannes Laucher, 
Joh. Michael Schickel, 
Philippe Rouchon, 
Johan Valentin Keller, 
S. Bastian Geyer,* 
Phylippe Sarijons, 
Hans Georg Dölcker, 
Johan Jacob Weber, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1754. 



341 



Johan Georg Jäger, 
Joh. Nicolaus Derscher, 
Nicklaus Baserman, 
William Leeb,* 
J. Henry Ashman,* 
Job. Conrad Georg, 
Job. Jacob Modi,* 
Job. Georg Hofman, 



Job. Burebart Häusser, 
Joban Nickel Mick, 
Cbristoflel Müller, 
Joban Henricb Müller, 
Georg Wärtbmann, 
Wenzel Boltescbwag, 
Joban Adam Gebbart, 
Jolian Peter Emricb. 
Sick — Joban Cbristopb Boreil, Jobannes Bernhard Wench, 
Johannes Fiedler, Jacob Kress, Pierre Tolman. 



223) Oct. 22, 1754. Ship Henrietta, John Ross, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — Inhabitants from Franconia, 
Wirtemberg and Hesse, — three Roman Catholics. 

Dct. 22, 1754. ®d)iff .t)enrietta, (Sapitatn 3o^n Slop, »on 
Stotterbam über Soweg, — Sinmot)ner »on granfen, Sßürttemkrg 
unt) Reffen, — brei 3^ömifd)=.^atl)oIifd)e. 



Johannes Keipp, 
Christian Schwartzwelder, 
Jacob Seyboldt, 
Peter Dietrich, 
Georg Stöhr, 
Jacob Knödler, 
Noah Hagy,* 
Simon Pier,* 
P. Henry Pier,* 
Philip Badert,* 
Jacob Volmer,* 
Hartman Rausch,* 
Friederich Haysner, 
Jacob Haysner,* 
Peter Stroh, 
Philip Gruss, 
Simon Higdal, 
Conrad Bohl, 
David Ernstmeyer, 
Simon Leible, 
Jobannes Karch, 
Balthas Thüringer, 
Christoph Sauther, 



Georg Vetter, 
Georg Franck, 
Elias'Tomm,* 
Michael Tomm,* 
Albertus Roosin, 
Peter Franck, 
Jeremias Eckert, 
Ludwig Zucker, 
Michael Kohr, 
Joseph Schmidt, 
Jobannes Koch, 
Jacob (Ehler, 
Jacob Sebner, 
Joban Christoph Preiss, 
Jacob Kaltmiller,* 
Job. Bernhard Ressing, 
Joban Reinhard Steiner, 
Joban Daniel Pier, 
Joban Georg Reith, 
Jacob Scbiefferdecker,* 
Joban Georg Herbst, 
Georg Adam Klee, 
Hans Mich. Scheer, 



29* 



342 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Joh. Henrich Schwalbacli, 
Job. Caspar Stropp, 
Johan Georg Bader, 
Joh. Anthon Graff, 
Joh. Georg Neuinan,* 
Georg Henrich Beck, 
Johan Michael Peter, 
Johannes Rothenbiirger, 
Johan Georg Schneider, 
Joh. Georg Franck, 
Conrad Schlemmer, 
Johan Adam Rohlandt, 



Albrecht Schweinfarth,* 
Johannes Reinhart, 
Joh. Wolrath Krüger, 
Johan Georg Helges, 
Georg Friederich Stübert, 
Joh. Henrich Günther, 
Bernhard Speck, 
Johan Philip Beuerle, 
Hans Jacob Mayer, 
Johan Georg Ihle, 
Gottfried Ludwig.* 



224) Oct. 22, 1754. Ship Halifax, Thomas Coatam, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — Inhabitants from Wirtem- 
berg, Hesse, Franconia and the Palatinate, — ten Roman Catholics. 

Dct. 22, 1754. ©c^iff ^alifaj:, ßapttain liyomaö Soatant, 
öon JRotterbam über Sotveö. — ^ctüo()ner öon Söürttemkrg, 
Reffen, grantcn unl) t>er ^fala, — je^n 9tömi[(^=Äati)oIifc^e. 



Johann Haas, 
Johann Förch, 
Hans Georg Merling, 
Johan Georg Best, 
Michael Schneck, 
Leonhard Schmith, 
Bongi'e Nietzel,* 
Bastian Geringer,* 
Henry Heinnisch,* 
Albrecht Rabenstein, 
Anthoni Sultzer, 
Andreas Schober, 
Johan Gunderbusch,* 
Johann Reckert, 
Conrad Büchler, 
Hans Oberzeller,* 
Bernhard Kreith, 
Anthony Gruber,* 
Lorentz Senkeler,* 
Michael Klein, 
Johannes Geiger, 



Elias Gordan, 
Jacob Darm, 
Georg Richter,* 
Gustavus Reeb, 
Jacob Strach, 
Johann Ihle, 
Jacob Grassei,* 
Adam Breck, 
Henrich Heiss, 
Nicolaus Felix, 
Andreas Frantz, 
Anthony Dirner, 
Conrath Casper, 
Peter Zegels, 
Jacob Wolfinger, 
Jacob Weis, 
David Blanck,* 
Jacob Stegman,* 
Martin Rarr,* 
Henrich Wereni, 
Anthony Braun, 



AND OTUER IMMIGRANTS — 1754. 



343 



Michael Poobagh,* 
Johannes Hoch, 
Martin Briell, 
Johannes Schwab, 
Joh. Michael Kleinschrot, 
Peter Matheis Ganshon, 
Joh. Georg Getinbaur,? 
Hans Georg Obevholtzer, 
Joh. Philip Hofmann, 
Joh. Wolfgang Dietrich, 
Joh. Michael Tristers, 
Joh. Michael Abelman, 
Joh. Michael KauiFman, 
Hans Adam Schmidt, 
H. Friederich Schmit,* 
Johan Caspar Wahl, 
Johan Georg Riess, 
Johan Michael von Berg, 
Paulus Fussweg, 
H. Thomas Schlösser,* 
Hans Georg Ihle, 
Johan Jacob Roth, 
Johan Nickel Wetterhardt 
J. Jacob Wetherholt,* 
Hans Adam Haner,* 
Johann Michael Koch, 



Joh. Henry Amrein,* 

Hans Jacob Ferre,? 

Joh. Fried. Albrecht Biirckert, 

Johan Simon Schelberger, 

Joh. Leonhard Ilgenfritz, 

Johan Adam Ewa, 

Valentin Weebehandt, 

Johan Daniel Heck, 

Johan Christian Guth, 

Johan Dietrich Brecht, 

Hans Michael Swenk,* 

Christophel Heil, 

Johannes Bachman, 

Johan Jost Koch, 

Joh. Henrich Briehll, 

Hans Martin Schierch, 

Hans Jacob Dirner,* 

Johan Georg Maull,* 

Joh. Bernhart Willer, 

Philip Gresel, 

Jacob Lang,* 

Martin Pfeiffer, 

Hans Georg Schütz,* 

Jacob HanengTath, 

Joh. Lenhart KochendÖrffer, 

Hans Michael Diissing;. 



Martin Dorscliheimer, 

Sick — Martin Volckmeyer, Johan Michael, Matheis Tar, 
Nicolaus Remberger, Andreas Schopp, Nicolaus Geringer, Johan 
Henrich Haas, Johan Albrecht Henrich. 



225) Oct. 23, 1754. Snow Good Intent, John Lasly, Cap- 
tain, from Amsterdam, last from Gosport. — Inhabitants from 
Hesse, Hanau, the Palatinate, and a few from Switzerland, — 
seven Roman Catholics. 

Dct.23, 1754. ©eefc^iff @oot intent, (Sapitatn 3of)n iaßlt), 
»on 2tmftert>am über ©oöport. — 33eit>o^ner öon -"peffenr ^anau, 
t»cr ^falj unt) einige auö t>er ® ^metj, — ftcbcn 9tömifd}=^'at^oIifc^e. 

Friederich Holtzappel,* Conrad Heyser,* 

Johannes Linck,* Johannes Heyser,* 



344 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Jost Marthin, 
Johannes Ortt,* 
Casper Schwing, 
Paulus Fabin, 
Johan Fillibich, 
Andreas Zwanzger, 
G. Friederich Klein, 
Andreas Schäfler, 
Peter Staub,* 
Matheas Staub, 
Christian Meyer,* 
Conrath Aumtiller, 
Johannes Aumtiller, 
Johannes Bock,* 
Johannes Lang,* 
Johannes Vogel, 
Conrad Loray,* 
Anthon Zollmann, 
Johannes Glück, 
Christoph Kopp,* 
Friederich Deussinger, 
Mich. Leinberger,* 
Mich. Rehbock,* 
Nicklas Tillman,* 
Frantz Peter Schultz, 
Marcus Anthon Schultz,* 
Job. Nicolaus Hoffmann, 
Job. Bernhart Heckardt, 
Johannes Wohlemder, 
Ludwig Hen. Krutter, 
Johan Georg Goss, 
Johan Christoph Lang, 
Job. Bernhart Rost, 
Job. Wilhelm Weiss, 
Job. Jacob S chaffer, 
Johan Wilhelm Lieber, 
John Valentin Henkel,* 

Sick — Frantz Jacob Miller, 
Sommer. 



John Peter Lob,* 
Johan Georg Hoff, 
John Jost Meyer,* 
Job. Peter Bleichenbacher, 
Georg Friederich Walber, 
Job. Caspar Loray, 
Georg Henrich Vogel, 
Job. Wilhelm Christian, 
Job. Wilhelm Becker, 
Johan Adam Zollmann, 
Job. Henrich Schwärtzel, 
Johann Teitzwortzer, 
Johann Teitzwortzer jr., 
Job. Philip Klück, 
Job. Georg Hinckel,* 
Nicholas Resch,* 
Jacob Koller,* 
Friederich Stüntzel, 
Friederich Pepler, 
Lorentz Arnold, 
Johannes Hauck, 
Wilhelm Arnold, 
J. Friederich Nebel,* 
Philip Rieth,* 
Balthasar Frietz,* 
Peter Asper, 
Johannes Abachlender, 
Johan Adam Blihle, 
Johan Christian Heintz, 
Johannes Breidenbach,* 
Job. Philip Kleiss, 
Johannes Stephanus,* 
Sam. Friederich Rügerr, 
Job. Caspar Bock, 
F. Reinhardt Fischer,* 
Chi'istian Scheldt. 

Johan Wilhelm Niese, Michael 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1754. 



345 



226) Oct. 26, 1754. Brigantine Mary and Sarah, Thomas 
Brodrich, Captain, from Amsterdam, last from Portsmouth. — 
Inhabitants from Franconia, Wirtemberg and the Palatinate, — 
.six lioman Catholics. 

Oct. 26, 1754. ©c^netlfegler 'Maxi) unb ©ara^, Sapttatn 
3:{)omaö iBrobrid), »on 5tmftcrt»am über ^ortömout^. — (Stnit»o^= 
ner 'oon grauten, Sßürttemkrg unt» ter ^falj, — fec^g 9tömifd|= 
.U\it()oItfc^e. 



Jacob Visser, 
Michael Lehn,* 
iMichael Wenhart,* 
Adam Breydinger,* 
Carl Menges,* 
Peter Volck,* 
Jacob Störner, 
Jacob Shumbert,* 
Adam Schaffer, 
Jacob Haller,* 
Joseph Dohner, 
Anthony Bohr, 
H. Peter Carel,* 
Nicholas Seewald,* 
Anthon Kling, 
Nicolaus Carl, 
Johannes Boll, 
Peter Edelman, 
Herman Neyman,* 
Lorent Mauerer,* 
Peter Menges, 
Jacob Carel,* 
Johan Christoph Heiss, 
Joh. Wilhelm Schneider, 
Nicolaus (Ellenschläger, 
J. Adam Schwllbel,* 
Joh. Bernhart Kessler, 
J. Conrad Menges,''' 
Johan Georg Briucker, 
Hans Greorg Aeuchler, 
Johan Nickel Lehr, 
J. Michael Schlauch,* 
J. Dieterich Zieller,* 



Johannes Brunner, 
Joh. Jacob Helm,* 
H. Adam Beybolt,* 
Nickolas Leberman,* 
Johannes Edelmann, 
Johann Bartman, 
Georg Adam Kaiser, 
Philip Sommer,* 
Hans Peter Menges, 
Johann Georg Menges, 
Adam Menges, 
Jacob Schmit,* 
Matheas Krauss,* 
Michael Hubert,* 
Peter Wevgand,* 
Michael Wirth,* 
Friederich Volck,* 
Conrad Geyer,* 
Peter Schnurr,* 
John Ihrig,* 
Adam Neidig, 
Josfc Reichel,* 
Samuel Löfe,* 
David Löfe, 
Philip Naab, 
Hertz Kiest,* 
Johannes Pfeiffer, 
Martin Kistner, 
Johannes Reist,* 
Georg Schöff, 
Peter Joh, 
J. George Krauss,* 
Joh. Peter Krauss,* 



346 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



J. Leonhart Neidig,* 
Hans Adam Meister,* 
Job. Adam Weber,* 
H. Philip Hartman,* 
Johan Philip Kuhl, 
J. Leonhart Trumheller,* 
Hans Peter Joh,* 
Philip Jacob Schwenck, 
J. Adam Heckman * 



Georg Lud. Nonnenmacher, 
Bastian Schraader, 
Daniel Neidig, 
Johan ]\Iichael Schall, 
Joh. Bernhart Mayer, 
Job. Leonhart Kistner, 
Job. Jost Schletz,* 
Johan George Michel, 



Johan Jacob Helm, 
Sick — Joh. Georg Edelman, Hans Edelman, Jost Witt, Hans 
Schnellenberger, Georg Kauflfman, Johannes Breslauer. 



227) Nov. 7, 1754. Ship John and Elizabeth, 



Harn, 



Captain, from Amsterdam, last from Portsmouth. — Inhabitants 
from Hanau, Wirtemberg and the Palatinate, — eleven Roman 
Catholics, one hundred and twenty Protestants. — 330 passengers. 
9tot). 7, 1754. ©c^tff 3o^n unl» Slifabet:^, dapttain ^am, 
»on 5lm|lert)am über 5^ortömout(). — öintüo^ner »on ^anau, 
Söürttemfcerg unb ber ^falj, — eilf 3ftömifc^=.^at^oUf^e, l^untert 
unt) swanjig ^roteftanten. — 330 Sleifentie. 



Nicklaus Lang, 
Conrad Herman, 
Wendel Fritzius, 
Georg Hochreitter,* 
Henry Wölfling,* 
Martin Krebs, 
Henry Eyler,* 
Nicolaus Desch, 
Johannes Nees. 
Johannes Winholt,* 
Johann Schillers, 
Leonhart Peteri, 
Berthold Henry Pott,* 
J. Georg Birckenmeyer,"* 
Carl Friederich Schultz, 
Job. Fried. Thebards, 
Johan Henrich Schmid, 
Melchior Meichler,* 
Johannes Roley,? 
Friederich Adam Derst, 



Martin Reinharth, 
Job. Georg Gerner,* 
Job. Gebhart Leichtheisser, 
Johan Georg Heck, 
Jacob Ammon,* 
Georg Meissner, 
Johannes Klein, 
Herman Henger, 
Theobald Pein, 
Johannes Hahn, 
Christian Kramer, 
Jacob Wagner, 
Paul Hoffman, 
Jacob Ende, 
Wilhelm Shneyder,* 
Johannes Roth, 
Johannes Blecber, 
Georg Uder, 
Christoph Menge!,* 
Martin Cachler, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1754. 



347 



Johannes Weygandt, 
Michael Scheck, 
Burchart Hentz,* 
Johannes Shuster,* 
Nicklaus Klein, 
Friederich Margel, 
Johannes Flinner, 
Johannes Mäning, 
Johannes Horatz, 
Henry Shneyder,* 
Michael Homan, 
Michael Krug, 
Peter Fischer, 
Henry Bachy,* 
Albert Schunck, 
Adolph Flohri, 
Christian Aldt, 
Johannes Rentz,* 
George Flohri,* 
Michael Schmit,* 
Jacob Gander, 
Philip Boger,* 
Andreas Schwartz, 
Jacob Dogent,* 
Adam Bartholomoe,* 
Joseph Debeer,* 
Daniel David Heiner, 
Bartholomi La Gneau, 
Johan Jost Süsser, 
Johannes Heldraanu, 
Johannes Meister, 
Joh. Henrich Schmidt, 
Joh. Ernst Fronheuser, 
Johannes Schumacher, 
Daniel Leuckel, 
Henrich Dresbach, 
Philip Achebach, 
Jean Jaque Kifie, 
Joh. Henrich Franck, 
Johannes Gräffenstein,* 
Georg Wilhelm Schneider, 
Johan Adam Männig, 



Casper Darner, 
Michael Staub, 
Michael Neyff,* 
Joh. Adam Zehnen, 
Jacob Werthmiiller, 
Johan Martin Lösch, 
Joh. Georg Klillmann, 
Joh. Jacob Schlotzer jr., 
Joh. Jacob Schlötzer sen., 
Johan Wendel Lent, 
Johann Georg Fey, 
Johann Peter Hauss, 
H. Georg Miller,* 
Hans Georg Abel, 
Joh. Michael Uhting, 
Jacob Bernhardt, 
Hans Nicolaus Dech, 
Andreas Gebhai-t, 
Hans Georg Kleinpeter, 
Johannes Därendinger jr., 
Johannes Därendinger sen., 
Johan Henrich Schuster, 
Henry Schwartzenbach,* 
Christian Hauswirth, 
Joh. Wendel Königsfeldt, 
Joh. Nicklaus Seidel, 
Jacob Wenigart, 
Christoph Mey,* 
Carl Gleim, 
Christian Keller, 
Daniel Pflidt, 
Jacob Müller, 
Joh. Conrad Geil, 
Joh. Peter Bannot, 
Johan Philip Klein, 
P. Christian Gross,* 
Joh. Jacob Gross,* 
Joh. Andreas Götz, 
Johann Georg Schütz, 
Johann Peter Herrmann, 
Joh. Valentin Brünckmann. 



348 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Sick — Caspar Fahrenstock, Johan Adam Nees, Richard Nees, 
Hans Minnich. 



228) Dec. 13, 1754. Ship Neptune, William Malam, Cap- 
tain, from Hamburg, last from Cowes. — Inhabitants from Ham- 
burg, Hanover and Saxony. — 149 passengers. 

Dec. 13, 1754. et^iff 5^eptune, Sapttain Sßiüiam ^aiam, 
»on Hamburg über Sowe«. — 33eivo()ner tton Hamburg, ^annoöer 
unt) Sat^fen. — 149 ^ajfagiere. 



Andreas Schindler, 
Gottfried Ficke, 
J. Andreas Knochen,* 
Nieolaus Albers, 
Joh. Georg Bolich, 
J. Gottlob Basler, 
Anthon Günther, 
Wilhelm Antheis,* 
Ludwig Leib, 
Adam 3Iüller, 
Conrad Zorn,* 
Elias Israel,* 
B. Christian Barkel,* 
Joh. Ernst Ziegler, 
J. Peter Usbeck, 
J. Christoph Urich,* 
Joh. OfFenhäuser, 
W. Claar,* 
Johannes Lebentraut, 
J. Christian Kucher,* 
Walter Wittmann, 
J. Caspar (Errig,* 
J. Christian Kühnman, 
Christian Kalckbrenner, 
Friederich AViederhohl, 
Johann Holler,* 
Christopher Guitelman, 
Joh. Henrich Schäffcr, 



Johan Simon Kahler, 
Hen. Anthon Bestenbast, 
Joh. JMartin Martine,* 
Joh. Christoph Zachriss, 
Julius Casper Strebig,* 
Joh. Christian Werlisch, 
Andreas Jacob Emeyer, 
Johan Henrich Weidner, 
Jerome Diederich Solfon, 
Georg Christoph Maschcat, 
Joh. Christian Schrader, 
Joh. Gottlob Küntzelman, 
Joh. Abraham Glimpff, 
Christian Gebhart Ziegler, 
Johan Henrich Schiesse, 
Conrad Schnogheim, 
Johan August König, 
Jac. Friederich Shröder, 
Henrich Frid. Stammann, 
Christ. Hen. Jacobi, 
Georg Hen. Heller, 
Joh. Philip Alberti, 
Joh. Julius Sorge, 
Joh. Gottfried Ritter, 
Johann iVrntbcrgcr, 
Juhn Kotter,* 
Peter Henry Trotz, 
Johan Philip Stein.* 



229) Oct. 7, 17."),"i. Ship Neptune, George Smith, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Gosport. — 226 passengers. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1755, 



349 



Dct. 7, 1755. @d)iff 9Teptune, Sapitain ©eorgc 8mitf), con 



Stotterttam über ©Deport. 

Reimer Landt, 
Bodo Otto, 
Christian Ocker, 
Philip Grieg, 
Israel Josep, a 
Henrich Metz, 
Joseph Steinman, 
Christian Reutter, 
Jacob Bertsh, 
Nicklaus Rein, 
Jacob Würtz, 
Friederich Dietz, 
Peter Finck,* 
Thomas Ilütz, 
Albrech Shabert,* 
Jacob Stierle, 
Adam Wenigeck, 
Hans Reinger, 
Michael Blaass, 
Johan Kaiser, 
Wühelm Walder, 
Casper Ulerich, 
Christian Stöhr, 
Hans Buch, 
Jacob Buch, 
Michael Wer, 
Michael Wörer, 
Christoph IMayer, 
Friederich Ege, 
Johannes Schitz,* 
Andreas Missner, 
Mathias Preissgärtaer, 



-226 :}^eifent)e. 

Georg Peter Hasser, 
Christoph KauiFman, 
Joh. Ludwig Dantzebecher, 
Joh. Adam Chretschenbach, 
Thomas Dantzebecherj* 
Joh. Casper BittoniF, 
Joh. Conrad Eirheim, 
Georg Friederich Dillman. 
Johan Henrich Finck, 
Henrich Henckell, 
Gottfried Zergiebel, 
Sebastian Schmidt, 
Casper HinderstieflP, 
Hans Michael Krauss, 
Johannes Biendser, 
Michael Schindel, 
Joh. Jacob Schock, 
Joh. Casper Zincke, 
Christ. Ludwig König, 
Joh. Henrich IMöser, 
Hans Georg Schneider, 
Hans Georg Schefier, 
Christian Baumann, 
Conrad Baumann, 
Johannes Erbshusser, 
Andreas Höfflinger,* 
Mathäus Obergefäll, 
Johan Nickel Gast, 
Johann Christian Gast, 
Philipp Jacob Bär, 
Joh. Peter Hickman, 
Joh. Adam Helmställer, 



a This name is written in Hebrew. The final letter Pe, having a dot 
inscribed, I have written Josep; for reason known to those who read 
Hebrew. — (Editor. ) 

a Dtefer ??ame tji in f)ebräti'd^er Shrift. 5)a ber ©d^lugbuc&ftak Pe 
(junfttrt ift (Taijefd) Sene), fo f)abe ic^ 3ofct^ gef^rteben, unb jrear au^ä 
fBrünben, »elcbe Xtejentgen, tie in ber fiebräifc^en ^praciic t^ewanDert ftnb, 
willen. — (■.5)erau^geber.) 

30 



350 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Johannes Steiney,* 
J. Philip Fischer * 
Sebastian Senlieder, 
Conrath Müller, 
Johannes Walther, 
Friederich Adam, 
Christian Bausman, 
Matheas Weis, 
Henrich Emert, 
Johan Fetter, 
Friederich Schirdt, 
Georg Klinger, 
Jean Frentier, 



Johan Michel Komer, 
Johan Melchior Hirth, 
Georg Christ. Webrecht, 
Johan ölichael Weise,* 
Adam Lorentz Dietrich, 
Johannes Schneider, 
Jacob Albrech Haass, 
Bernhart Eilsheimer,* 
G. Michael Schwab,* 
Hans Georg Keller, 
Johann Georg Volck, 
Joh. Georg Blanckenbiller, 
Samuel Fraatsrach. ? 



230) Nov. 1, 1755. f Ship Pennsylvania, Charles Lyon, Cap- 
tain, from London. 

9^00. 1, 1755. t ©c^tff ^Jennf^bania, Sapitain S^rte« g^on, 
»on ?onbon. 



Friederich Ley dig,* 

Lorentz Seitz, 

Andreas Rietel, 

Georg Friederich Weber, 

Johannes Jung, 

Joh. PhiUp Fischer, 

Conrad Timpe, 

Joh. Heinrich Albers, 



Johan Valentin Reuter, 
Georg Ludwig Hochheimer, 
Johan Georg Koch, 
Joh. Daniel Bräutigam, 
Joh. Henrich Fischer, 
Joh. Melchior Hornung, 
Johan Just Hopman, 
Andreas Nicolaus Sailing;. 



231) Nov. 10, 1756. Snow Chance, 
tain, last fi-om London. — 109 passengers. 



Lawrence, Cap- 



f The Rev. John Conrad Bücher, a name associated with Church and 
State in this country, came to Pennsylvania in 1755, resided for some 
time at Carlisle, then a frontier settlement. He died, while pastor of 
the German Reformed Church of Lebanon, at Millerstown (Annville), 
Aug. 15, 1780. — See Rupp's History of Lebanon, p. 459; HarhaugKs 
Lives of German Reformed Ministers. 

\ ^aflor 3obn Sonrab 58u4er, ein in ^\x6:it unb (Staat in biefcm Sanbc 
t»ot)lbefannter 9?ame, fam 1755 nac^ ^'cn^f^t^f'"'«" it"ti njotjntc eine 3"*=" 
lang in Srtrti?(e, bag bamalg no(^ eine ®ren;;anficblung tear. (£r jlarb am 
15. 2Iuguft 1780 alö '^a\ti>x ber beutfd&'reformirten Äirc^e ju Sebancn 
in SliJitlereitoion, j'e^t SlnnoiHe. — ®iche JRupp'^ ©efc^ic^te »on Lebanon, 
(©. 459; |)arbac^'ö geben^befi^reibungen ref. ©eiftli^er. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1756, 1761. 



351 



9?oo. 10, 1756. ©ecfd)iff 
bonbon.— 109 JRcifentc. 
Bernhard Uelilein, 
Paulus Kamp,* 
Ehrhardt Conradt, 
Georg Doll, 
Leouhard Dürr, 
Georg Ludwig Eberle, 
Caspar Bernhart, 
Johann Andreas Kliinck, 
Johann Peter Klunck, 
Johann Michael Kuhn, 
Simon Hengel, 
Nicklaus Hahn, 
Michael Müller, 
Nicklas Pauly, 
Johannes Sombero, 
Baltes Schinf,? 
Adam Schmidt, 
Johan Sack, 
Friederich Schöff, 
Frantz Waner, 
Casper Biener, 



Glance, Sapitain ?atürcncc, ü6cr 

Johannes Weytzel, 
Friederich Walther, 
Christian Segnitz, 
Johannes Haas,* 
Valentin Dürr, 
Georg Ludwig Crucius, 
Hans Wolff Gundel, 
Wolfgang Nicolaus Heymann, 
Johann Peter Körner, 
Johann Heinrich Klöpper, 
Johan Valentin Panzer, 
Joh. Wilhelm Stiernkorb, 
Johan Georg Schmidt, 
Johan Georg Weining, 
Johann Peter Weber, 
Johan Nickel Wagner, 
Joh. Nickel Basserman, 
Christian Pauli, 
Hans Epplinger, 
Rudolph Fulleweiler,* 
Johan Michael Wagner. 



232) Oct. 21, 1761. t Snow Squirrel, John Benn, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Oct. 21, 1761. t ©eeff^iff ©quirrel, Sapitain 3o^n 33enn, 
öoit 9totterbam über Sotueö. 

Peter Mischler, Nicolaus Schweitzer, 

Eberhart Disinger, Georg Vogelgesang, 

Christophel Bamberg, Wilhelm Becker, 

Johannes Beyerle, Hans Eckardt, 

Andreas Graff, Henrich Holtzapfel, 

Stephan Danner, Job. Jacob Vogelgesang, 

Daniel Schaab,* Friederich Probst,* 

f Owing to the hostilities between France and England, German 
immigration was completely suspended from 1756 to 1761. — [Editor.) 

t SBä()renb ber 3af)re 1756 big 1761 boite bie beutfdje Stntoanberung 
wegen bcr jtBtfc^ctt %xanlxt\ä) unb Sngtanb befteljenben lac^trierigfetteit 
ganj auf.— (Herausgeber.) 



352 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Friederich Lieberknecht,* 
Caspar Knoblauch, 
Valentin Annawaldt, 
Johan Simon Mayer, 
Johann Wilhelm Serger, 
Johann Conrad Serger, 
Joh. Nickel Hertzler, 
Johan Nickel Becker, 



Georg Friederich Rohrer, 
John Henry Diessinger,* 
Johann Jacob Hackman, 
Johann Friederich Diehl, 
Johann Nicolaus Diehl, 
Johan Ludwig Probst, 
Johan Jacob Probst, 
Johann Dietrich Taub. 



233) Oct. 5, 1763. Ship Richmond, Charles Young Husband, 
Captain, from Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth. — 1 62 passengers. 

Del. 5, 1763. ®d)itf 9fti(^mont), Sapitain dijaxU^ gjouiij^ 
."puöbanb, üon Stottertiam ükr ^ort^moutl). — 162 SReifenfcc. 



Joh. Jacob Peiffer, 
Johannes Zimmerman, 
Johannes Schütz, 
Johannes Klappert, 
Johannes Schütz, 
Rudolph Hehr, 
Peter Gatz, 
Jacob Gatz, 
Heinrich Daum, 
Ludwig Agricola, 
Johannes Schneider, 
Joseph Fischer, 
Frantz Mültz, 
Georg Bender, 
Conrad Betis,* 
P. Pautz, 
Joseph Bohn,* 
August Hemerlein,* 
Johannes Hänner, 
Paul Grin, 
Henrich Dietz, 
Peter Götz, 
Johannes Claus, 
Daniel Paulus, 
Peter Humberd, 
Jacob Otho, 
Jost Heintz, 



Johannes Basel,? 
Casper Müller, 
Andreas Dress, 
Wühelm Eck, 
Andreas Mertz, 
Matthias Lockner, 
Henry Wagner,* 
Johann Daub, 
John Sollberg,* 
Martin Hasch, 
Johannes Just, 
John Marbes,* 
Johannes Schaff, 
Henry Banroth,* 
Georg Bastian,* 
Johan Jacob Hoffmann, 
Johann Theis Cromm, 
Johann Herman Klappert, 
Johann Engel Becker, 
Johann Michael Becker, 
Johan Henrich Schneider, 
D. Dieterich Burchardt, 
Andreas Holtzmann, 
Johan Thomas Noll, 
Friederich Schönleber, 
Johan Daniel Royscher, 
Johann Georg Hibler, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 17G3, 



353 



Johann Henrich Niess, 
Joh. Philip Wahrenholtz, 
Johann Jost Hänner, 
Johann Jost Dietz, 
Johan Christian Scheldt, 
J. Henrich Lack, 
Johann Henrich Paulus sen., 
Johann Henrich Paulus, 
Johann Friederich StüU, 
Johann Michael Matz, 
Hermanus Janler, 
Wilhelm Völtmer, 
Johann Georg Giesberg, 
Johann Peter Giesberg, 
Johannes Engel Giesberg, 



Hermann Donat, 
Johann Engelhut, 
Jacob Glässner, 
Lorentz Kuöri, 
Heinrich Beinöller, 
^lartin Schaffner,* 
August Eissinger,* 
Dilmanus Becker, 
Phillipp Warner, 
Jacob Bergmann, 
Friederich Bergmann, 
Georg Friederich Huber, 
Johan Henrich Wensell, 
Conrath Wolff, 
Johannes Wickel. 



234) Nov. 1, 1763. Ship Chance, Charles Smith, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 193 passengers. 

5toö. 1, 1763. ©c^iff Stance, Sapitdn S^arteö ©mitl), öon 
Slottcrbam über Sot»eö. — 193 3lcifente. 



Joseph Seifferdt, 
Valentin Gänssel, 
Philip Casner,* 
David Goltir, 
Johannes Ludy, 
Georg Ebert, 
PhUip Schappert, 
Nicolaus Schappert, 
Henrich Aisbach,* 
Philip Schmit, 
Jacob Spielman, 
Casper Huber,* 
Georg Günther, 
Jacob Jentz, 
Johannes Gern, 
Andreas Feger,* 
Jacob Baltzel, 
Carl Baltzel, 
Adam Samuel,* 
Georg Jantz, 



Georg Fischer, 
Jacob Schädt, 
Johannes Dorst, 
Jacob Schlick, 
Jacob Behr, 
Peter Wolff, 
Christian Wangolt, 
Friederich Arnold, 
Peter Krafft, 
Adam Schmid, 
Michael Schmidt, 
Daniel Zütter, 
Balthasar Zütter, 
Henry Schwantz,* 
Johannes Weller, 
Johannes Engelbert, 
John Henry Müler,* 
Anthon Hausam, 
Martin Braun, 
Samuel Müller, 



30'' 



354 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Johannes Sehellenberger,* 
Henrich Deberts H ausser, 
Jean Henri Gaijdon, 
Johann Georg Vetter, 
Joh. Jacob Schnorss, 
Johannes Schnorss,* 
Johan Peter Kessler, 
Johan Christian Schwab, 
Phihp Zumstein, 
Johan Georg Dorneh, 
Georg Ludwig Kesselrinck, 
Bernhard Ranhert, 
Johann Nickel K otter, 
Johann Georg Mühlheim, 
Johann George Henninger, 
Georg Jacob Baltzel, 
Johann Peter Hauck, 
Hans Peter Studi, 
Michael Becker,* 
Hans Georg Zeiner,* 
Michael Zeiner,* 
Johan Henry Shuntz,* 
Johann Michael Altz, 
Jacob Ebersohl, 
Johann Jacob Sonntag, 
Johann Jacob Hoffman, 



Johan Valentin Hauck, 
Georg Henrich Flanckenhardt, 
Johannes Dörbaum, 
Friederich Wilhelm Stahl, 
Johann Benedictus Grieben, 
Johann Wendel Fackler, 
Johan Thomas Gil, 
Johannes Jacob Hud, 
Johann Peter Munner, 
Johann Engel ffirter, 
Johan Eckart (Erter, 
Jost Henrich Schmidt, 
Johann Henrich Keil, 
Johannes Becker, 
John Bernhart,* 
Michael Stoffel, 
Heinrich Monges, 
Samuel Cjrriaci, 
Balthaser Christ, 
Johannes Strätzer, 
Johann Ernst Thiel, 
Valentin Nicodemus, 
Michael Spielman,* 
Emanuel Meisterer,* 
Nicolaus Wistadius, 
PhUip Georg Kneiht. 



235) Nov. 25, 1763. Brigantine Success, William Marshall, 
Captain, fi'om Rotterdam. 

9ioö. 25, 1763. ©d)netlfegler iSucce^, (Japitain 2öit(tam 
SWarfftaü, ooit Sfiotterbam. 



Abraham Neu, 
Jacob Helm, 
Leonhardt Wass, 
John George Bauman,* 
Anton Näryes, 
Johann Kayser, 



Johann Henrich Hedrich, 
Johan Jacob Müller, 
Charles Christman,* 
Mathias Christman,* 
Joh. Matheis Steffen, 
Johan Henrich Fetzer. 



236) Nov. 25, 1763. Ship Pallas, Richard Milner, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 198 passengers. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 17G4. 



355 



«JfJoo. 25, 1763. ®d)iif %>aüai, dapitain dix^att) müncv, yon 
atotterbam über Soiueö. — 198 3iei[ent)c. 



Isaac Droqunt, 
George Kuhnele, 
Conrad Mayer, 
Georg Wagner, 
Johannes Sclimidt, 
David Jansohn, 
Jacob Weissert, 
Johannes Schaaff, 
Ludwig Amaus, 
Gottlieb KoU, 
Peter Opp, 
Johann Wendel, 
Martin Helder, 
Jacob Hauser, 
Lewis Stutz,* 
Jost Vohl, 
Johannes Georg, 
Jacob Heintz, 
Henrich Flick, 
Henrich Graff, 
Johannes Blum, 
Henrich Just Röhrig, 
Georg Friederich Hammer, 
Ulrich Bürckholder, 
Georg Wilhelm Janson, 
Johann Henrich Strauch, 
Friederich Holtzhausser, 
Michael Braun, 
Conrad Scherer, 
Johann Georg Höchst, 
Martin Schneider, 
Johannes FriehruflF, 



Wilhelm Bleiniger, 
John Henry Miller,* 
Johan Martin Merck, 
John Henry Freind,* 
Johann Conrad Kryser, 
Johann Jacob Schweitzer, 
Johann Adam Hoffheintz, 
Johann Daniel Hoffheintz, 
Wilhelm Ritter, 
Georg Thomas Gerhardt, 
Peter Schütz, 
Caspar Beider, 
Andreas Obmann, 
Lorentz Obmann, 
Martin Steffen, 
Henry Pfeiffer, 
Baltzer Schock, 
Friederich Hüttner, 
Philip Faust, 
Philip Miller,* 
Christian Pfeiffer, 
Valentin Seipel,* 
Peter Wercken,* 
Abraham Senner, 
Jean Andrie Stockinger, 
Jean Louis Seiz, 
Johann Georg Prestel, 
Leonhart Frischkorn, 
Johann Schittenhelm, 
Johann Christian Schreiber, 
Gerlach Witteustein. 



237) Aug. 8, 1764. Ship Chance, Charles Smith, Captain, 
from Rotterdam. — 208 passengers. 

Slu^. 8, 1764. (5d)tif (S()ance, Sapitain SC)arIeö <Biniti), üon 
9lottert»am.— 208 ^leifente. 



356 



NAMES OP GERjMAN, SWISS 



Sebastian Bender, 
Peter Neyer,* 
Henry C. Shiel,* 
Johannes Schneider, 
Phihp Shiffere,* 
Balthas Kappes, 
Valentin Metzger, 
Bernhard Ginger, 
Johannes Strenger, 
Michel Bändele, 
Adam Wanner, 
George Sleig,* 
Matheus Roth, 
Friederich Altherr, 
Philip Brogli, 
Johannes Tandt, ? 
Peter Grosh,* 
George Haag, 
Andreas Anion, 
Ludwig Schad, 
Johannes Rittesheim, 
Antoni Vogt, 
Andreas Scholl, 
Peter Arandt, 
Jacobus Arandt, 
Peter Krapff, 
Michael Bremich, 
Joh. Ludwig Dexheimer, 
Daniel Dexheimer, 
Johann Peter Schmidt, 
Johann Philip Thoma, 
Johann Adam Schiffer, 
^Johann Martin Hes, 
Joh. Michael Habtüzel, 
Joh. Friederich Müller, 
Johann Georg Haass, 
Georg Peter Beck, 
Johann Wilhelm Weiss, 
Johann Jacob Sties, 
Johann Nickel Mayer, 
Johau Herman Mayer, 



Johan I*eter Durst, 
Georg Leonhart Stutz, 
Johannes Gerhard, 
Stephan Freundt, 
Johan (xeorg Gebhardt, 
Johannes Wench, 
Johan Jacob Grob, 
Johan Jacob Schiffer, 
Matheus Bremich, 
Johan Stephan Saam, 
Johann Adam Bremich, 
Johann Georg Hundt, 
Philip Abraham Hornich, 
Johannes Kelter, 
Jacob Eckfeldt, 
Heinrich Schäffer, 
Peter Zürn, 
Philip Blum, 
Andreas Bartel, 
Johannes Wahl, 
Andreas Meisch, 
Ludwig Feter, 
Joseph Gaser,''' 
Peter Rücker, 
Peter Haas, 
Johannes Theissen, 
Philip Will, 
Ludwig Huber, 
Georg Gielberth, 
Friederich Ringer, 
Michael Wilhelm, 
Johan Georg Strein, 
Friederich Wahl, 
Herman Zonnerer, 
Simon Descher, 
Johan Christian Descher, 
Johannes Späth, 
Johannes Rick, 
Johann Georg Theiss, 
Friederich Hoffman, 
Daniel Weniger, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1764. 



357 



Frantz Schwartz, 
Matthias Kempe, 
Andreas Druckenbrodt, 
Georg Scherer, 



Johannes Weinberger, 
Sebastian Seyberth, 
Valentin Bauer, 
Geo. Wendel Zimmerman. 



238) Sept. 19, 1764. Ship Polly, Robert Porter, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — Six Roman Catholics. — 184 
passengers. 

©ept. 19, 1764. Schiff Voüi), Sapitain Stöbert forter, wn 
Stottertam über Soroe^. — ©e^ö 9tömifc^:=^at^o(ifi^e. — 184 
Steifenbe. 



Bernhardt Beck, 
Nichl Shluhtes,* 
Johannes Schadt, 
Friederich Galle, 
Hans Grimm, 
Joh. Jacob Reudt, 
Jacob Berchel, 
Joh. Jacob Mann, 
Christian Bergman,* 
Caspar Wenger, 
Jacob Wenger, 
Nicklaus Lugebül, 
Joh. Daniel König, 
Geo. Adam Graif, 
John Martin Stoll, 
Johannes Beiser, 
Johannes Eulman, 
Peter Steigelman, 
Christian Lang,* 
Johann Christoph Schmidt, 
Joh. Jost Schreckenangst, 
Johann Jacob Graff, 
John Melchior Hollebach, 
Johan Georg Schmidt, 
Johann Peter Trein, 
Johann Georg Eller, 
Joh. Casper Güttenberg, 
Joh. Michael Bergman, 
Johan Friederich Strass, 



Johan Conrad Strass, 
Johann Carl Laubach, 
Johan Henrich Ehls, ? 
Johan Georg Weyckel, 
Johan Nicklas Franck, 
Johan Adam Franck, 
Johan Henrich Schell, 
John George Schwaab, 
Johan Nickel Heibst, 
Peter Marks,* 
Andreas Grebiel, 
Peter Grebiel, 
Leonhart Bauer, 
Conrad Bauer, 
Antoni Jutz, 
Peter Dietrich, 
Adam Mishell,* 
Carl Schmidt, 
Anthoni Weite, 
Frantz Peter Hacket, 
Johan Valentin Dumm, 
Joh. Fried. Zimmermann, 
Peter Thormeyer, 
Anthon Noschang, 
Johan Mathias Hoffman, 
Christian Ernst Beschler^ 
Jacob Neblinger, 
Wilhelmus Moser. 



358 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



239) Sept. 20, 1764. Ship Sarah, Francis Stanfield, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth. — 230 passengers. 

(Sept. 20, 1764. ®(^ijf ®ara^, Sapitain granciö (Stanfielt, 
öon 9tottertain über ^ort^mout^. — 230 ^teifenbe. 



Paul Hoffman, 

Godfrey Keyser, 

Conrad Bischoff, 

Georg Scherer, 

Michael Lauth, 

Adam Gottel, 

Peter Gottel, 

Henrich Eich, 

Theobold Lehman, 

Jacob Hoch, 

Israel Grob, 

Peter Schwaab, 

Peter Hüb, 

Theobold Weber, 

Adam Lüdy, 

Frantz Kettering, 

Christian Meyer,* 

Jacob Allspach, 

Daniel Frick, 

Conrad Frick, 

Michael Hoffecker, 

Jacob Kieffer, 

Joh. Peter Weber, 

Leonhard Lenckner, 

Johann Büthenfeldt, 

Andreas Vollprecht, 

Johannes Weite, 

Michael Funck, 

Martin Hoffman, 

Georg Jacob Scherer, 

Johan Ludwig Betz, 

Johan Urban Betz, 

Johan Adam Schaff, 

Friederich Conrad Scheffer, 

Henrich Wettern,? 

Theobold Itzberger, 

J. Henry Kisauer,* 



Christian Främdling, 
Jacob Altvatter,* 
Johann Jacob Kaufinan, 
Simon Friederich Schober, 
Johannes Spielman, 
Johan Daniel Fuhrman, 
Daniel Dausman,* 
Philip Hoffecker, 
John George Hubacher, 
Johan Michael Thran, 
John George Drachsel, 
Henrich Ochssenbecher, 
Hans Georg Schyre, 
Johann Henrich Hoff, 
Hans Dietrich Hoff, 
Johann Georg Grossglass, 
Johann Matheis Dibel, 
Johann Friederich Küchner, 
Johann Philip Weide, 
Jacob Schantre, 
Jacob Feiock,* 
John Schuster, 
Michael Metzger, 
Jacob Gänsel, 
George Fischer, 
Johannes Finniger, 
Johannes Dörr, 
Johan Herman, 
Carl Gerhardt, 
Peter Kuhn, 
Areud Krissing, 
Wendel Sheets,* 
Christel König, 
Georg Schog, 
Georg Riehm, 
Johannes Hitz, 
Johannes Gass, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 17G4. 



359 



Johannes Blitz, 
Oswald Rap, 
Peter Grottel, 
Moritz Master, 
Johann Christ. Schaub, 
Johannes Georg Specht, 
Conrad Fischer, 
Jacob Trein, 
Heinrich Schreiner, 
Martin Rauch, 
Johan Henrich Fashaus, 
Johann Wilhelm Weber, 
Johann Jost Strack, 



Johann Peter Ottershelt, 
Johannes Hegenstill, 
Frantz Thomas Hartman, 
Johan Christoff'el Bintz, 
George Henry Hartman, 
Johann Georg Wetzel, 
Johann Philip Kuhn, 
Henrich Nickel Raque, 
Hans Christ. Raque, 
Johann Daniel Löhr, 
Conrad Schäffer, 
Johan Peter Steiler, 
Johann Michael Jung. 



240) Sept. 26, 1764. Ship Brittania, Thomas Amot, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam. — 260 passengers. 

@ept. 26, 1764. ©(^tff 33rittania, eapitain S^omaö 3trnot, 
üon 9lottert»am. — 260 S^eifente. 



Christoph Heger, 

Johannes Einzopp, 

John Weber, 

Augustus Weiss, 

Nicholas Smith,* 

Daniel Rieg, 

Theobald Roth, 

Martin Jetter, 

Andreas Vogt, 

Johannes Gitt, 

Jacob Gitt, 

Adam Fink, 

L. Herschheimer, 

Jno. Geo. Reiff,* 

Johann Baum, 

Casper Erhardt, 

Gottfried Lampart, 

Job. Paulus Grabsteinbrenner, 

Andreas Ketteman, 

Georg Michael Schmitt, 

Johann Henrich Wölker, 

Georg Haudler, 



Friederich Zäntler, 
Johan Carl Schmitt, 
Georg Philip Karwin, 
Georg Adam Zepp, 
Henrich Marschheimer, 
Jacob Tieschmar, 
Johan Wilhelm Werger, 
Georg Michael Oeltinger, 
Adolph Carl Schneider, 
Philip Lautenschläger, 
Thomas Wagner, 
Christian Schellman, 
Johannes Waibel, 
Stephan Waibel,* 
Adam Miller,* 
Andreas Freyberger, 
Justus Lechleider, 
Carl Garaus, 
Valentin Stettier, 
Jacob Masohlder, 
David Sehneider, 
Christian Fleckstein,* 



360 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Peter Wiser, 
Johannes Wambach, 
Jacob Schäfer, 
Johannes Hoch, 
Peter Paulus Leicht, 
Joh. Andreas Velck, 
Joh. Valtin Horter, 
Joh. Adam Rau. 
Erhard Bodenstein, 
Joh. Friedrich Koch, 
Phil. Henry Miller,* 
Jacob Brückert, 
Christoph Brückert, 
Johannes Kalbfleisch, 
Abraham Messer, 
Fried. Jocheim,* 
Christian Eberhard,* 
Andreas Jäger, 
Georg Lehner, 
Georg Lambarth, 
Georg Kuntz, 
Henrich Wegner, 
Jacob Bätzerlein, 
Christian Rupp, 
Nicklas Staller,* 
Friederich Bachman, 
Dietrich Gerhart, 
Christoph Keller, 
Johann Bernhart Oth, 
Johann Andreas Schmidt, 
Christian Haushalter, 
Georg Heinrich Schmitt, 
Johannes Georg Freyberger, 
Johann Martin Ott, 



Johann Frluderich Vogel, 
Georg Wilhelm Schmitt, 
John Conrad Wambach, 
Johann Philipp von Nieda, 
Johan Friederich Mopps, 
Gerhart Steinbreucker, 
Georg Friederich Helids, 
Johann Georg Graff, 
Johann Adam Graff, 
Johann Georg Cautz, 
Georg Valentin Dengen, 
Joh. Philip Seidenstricker, 
Johann Jacob Schmidt, 
Philip Henrich Engel, 
Johan Philip Racke, 
Johann Henrich Spitzer, 
Johann Andreas Spitzer, 
Johan Friederich Beyermeister, 
Johan Dietrich Hauck, 
Hans Georg Schusterdreher, 
Johann Philip Schösser, 
Henry Seidenstricker,* 
Hans Michael Lampart, 
Johann Ludwig Schäffer, 
Joh. Henrich Fabricius, 
John George Menges,* 
Johann Michel Michel, 
Christian Sachsman,* 
Hans Adam Taxler, 
Jacob Bartscherer, 
Hans Michael Rosser, 
0. P. Dieter Ticker,? 
Martin Bühler. 



241) Oct. 3, 1764. Ship King of Prussia, James Robinson, 
Captain, from London. — 94 passengers. 

Dct. 3, 1764. Schiff Äing of f ruffia, eapitain Barnes d\0' 
binfon, t)on Sonbon. — 94 3teifent»e. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1764. 



361 



Jacob Vadel, 
Henrich Schell, 
Johann Müller, 
Jacob Weber, 
Gerlach Gran, 
Philip Rescher,* 
Ludwig Schell, 
Sem. Urckart, 
Frantz Schweitzer, 
Johan Nickel Herst, 
Andreas Zinck,* 
Johannes Stutz,* 
Wendel Apffel, 
Georg Schlemb,* 
Henrich Strohm, 
Georg Appel,* 
Georg Ridle, 
Paul Schreck, 
Nicklas Scherrer, 
Christian Wickert, 
Albertus H äffer, 
George Kenttner,* 
Elias Appel,* 
Jacob Specht, 
Christian Appel,* 
Georg üoU,* 



Johann Peter Vadel, 
Johann Georg Ther, 
Georg Peter Deisevt, 
Christian Weber, 
Johannes Ott, 
Matthias Hendrich,* 
Job. Philip Rauschkopf, 
Philip Jacob Breszler,* 
Johan Nicolaus Dippel, 
Johan Philip Steinmetz, 
Johan Philip Matter, 
Ernst Ludwig Reinbold, 
Georg Schwerdt, 
Thomas Salade, 
Johan Georg Ernst, 
Joh. Nicolaus Schwerdt, 
Michael Salade, 
Johan Peter Fischer, 
Philip Jacob Suder,* 
Johannes Delb, 
Georg Michael Hart,* 
Johan Martin Heidt, 
Johann Georg Gantz, 
Johann Nickel Wagner, 
Johannes Häffer, 
Job. Philip Mühlmichel. 



242) Oct. 20, 1764. Ship Richmond, Charles Young Hus- 
band, Captain, from Rotterdam. — 224 passengers. 

£)ct. 20, 1764. (Schiff 3fttci)mont), Sapitain d^axUi gounj^ 
.^uöbant), öon Sflotterbam. — 224 Sleifentie. 



Jacob Nill, 
Friederich Gebberdt, 
Jacob Sherber,* 
Christoph Weber sen., 
Christoph Weber, 
Bernhart Schneider, 
John AUman, 
Samuel Starck, 
Johannes Anpert, 



Daniel Weichel,* 
Johann Christian Thiel, 
Johann Peter Gerhard, 
Johann Georg Diebert, 
Eberhard Kirsheyer,* 
John George Pullman,* 
Johan Conrad Kauffman, 
Johann Adam Sebeinzer,* 
Johann Martin Anpert, 



31 



362 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Joh. Wendel Bartholmae, 
John Adam Heckman, 
Michel Halm, 
Conrad Jacoby, 
Jacob Hasbirch, 
Wendel Runckel, 
Albert Giilcher, 
jMichel Reiser, 
Frantz Kuhn, 
Balthas Steiner, 
Sebastian Stier, 
Johannes Glück, 
Samuel Stauffer, 
Henrich Kurtz, 
Georg Taub, 
Michael Reiner, 
Gottfried Schott, 
Daniel Sätzler, 
Johannes Seitz, 
Michael May, 
Paul Kober, 
Peter Müller, 
Jacob Metz, 
Henrich Allman, 
Abraham Jacob, 
Jno. Geo. Ord,* 
Jno. Geo. Haffner, 
Conrad Minger, 
John Erlenheiser,* 
Jacob Kleh, 
Jacob Schneyder, 
Michel Becker, 
Jacob Breisch, 
Christian Jung, 
Jacob Bardon, 
Wilhelm Feickert, 
Nickel Kämerer, 
Peter Hardtman, 
Peter Hanner,? 
Adam Rieth, 
Nickel Götz, 



Michael Mayer, 
Gottlieb Börckle, 
Georg Stattler, 
Wendel Heiss, 
Johann Peter Schell, 
Valentin Hackenbach, 
Johann Friederich Henrich 
Friederich Hirschfeldt, 
Matheich Koch Weber, 
Joseph Breisch, 
Christoph INIartin Henerdt, 
Hans Georg Kurtz, 
John Geo. Geiger, 
Hans Georg Hagenbach, 
John Martin Knobloch, 
Nicklas Lächner, 
Johann Andreas Kolb, 
Michael Reidebach, 
Johan Philip Müller, 
Johann Adam Schütz, 
Wendel Gutdänder, 
Johannes Mensch, 
Johann Michel Stoff, 
Joh. Jacob Engelhardt, 
Wolfarth Reinhart Edinger, 
John Peter Beckel, 
Johannes Jacob Quandel, 
Johannes Jlenrich Harn, 
Johannes Erlenheiser, 
Frederick Kühlman, 
Georg Leonhard Pfeiffer, 
Hans Michael Wills, 
Johan Nickel Grimm, 
Peter Reidebach, 
Hans Michael Henrich, 
Conrad Dieffenbacher, 
Johann Dietrich Heiss, 
Philip Friedrich Müller, 
Wilhelm Spengler, 
Johan Peter Chypfeius, 
Johan Adam Weber, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1764. 



363 



Johan Balthaser Häusser, Johann Nickel Reidenbach, 

Johannes Spengler, Melchior Edinger. 

Joh. Christopher Ulrich Kenser, 



243) Oct. 27, 1764. Ship Hero, Ralph Forster, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowcs. — 500 passengers. 

Dch 27, 1764. @c^iff ^ero, (Sapttain Stalp^ gorfier, üoii 
JRottertam über Someö. — 500 3tetfcnt»e. 



Johannes Hufer,* 
Jacob Karch, 
Johannes Weiss, 
John Berg, 
Andrew WolflF, 
Jacob Hass,* 
Peter Müller, 
Georg Siel, 
Jost Meyer, 
Greorg Etter, 
Jacob Lossle, 
Matheis Petter, 
Jacob Hauck, 
Johannes Hauck, 
Peter Schauer, 
Peter Scheide, 
Martin Herwald, 
Gustavus Schlosser, 
Peter Wedel, 
Gottfried Eppling, 
Friederich Eppling, 
Johannes Will, 
Daniel Strickler, 
Michel Shub,* 
Lazarus Herby 
Jacob Hönich, 
Johannes Ludwig, 
Johannes Gress, 
Jacob Schibb, 
Conrath Dörr, 
Johannes Dürr, 
Lorentz Dürr, 



Dietrich Jäger, 
Philip Ecker, 
Michael Philipi, 
Adam Philipi, 
Johannes Deehr, 
Adam Fägle, 
Adam Neiss,* 
Ulrich Eyman, 
Johann Georg Wagner, 
Johannes Welsch, 
Johann Andreas Schad, 
Johann Christian Gemet, 
Leonhard Büchler, 
Wilhelm Henrich Biege], 
Johann Lorentz Beck, 
Johann Adam Rudolph, 
George Adam Weickel, 
John Reinhard Cauffman,'' 
Henrich Schwerdt, 
Jacob Sauerheber, 
Johann Schuman, 
Rudolph Schuman, 
Christopher Radebach, 
Johannes Fuhrmann, 
Johan Ludwig Sewaldt, 
Martin Heylman, 
Johann Georg Wetzel, 
Johann Adam Wausch, 
Johannes Dage,? 
Johann Ernst Daniel, 
Johan Adam Seyberth, 
Hans Georg Götz, 



364 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Johann Michel Walter, 
Johan Philip Kiintsch, 
Abraham Fetter, 
Jacob Düssardt, 
Johann Michael Klein, 
Hans Nickel Bauer, 
Johannes Hoffmann, 
Johannes Fellman, 
Johannes Ring, 
Joh. Georg Weydenmeyer, 
Urban Weidenmaier, 
Eberhardt Weydenmeyer, 
Nicholas Anthony, 
Ludwig Freibiirger, 
Johann Jacob Gross, 
Conrad Bingman, 
Peter Nickles, 
Johannes Gerent, 
Adam Meyer, 
Paulus Pauly, 
Henrich Fuchs, 
Johannes Frietsch, 
Michael Scheff, 
Georg Wintz, 
David König, 
Conrad König, 
Georg Wilhelm, 
Egidius Jung, 
Henrich Sohl, 
Nicholas Ott, 
Johannes Seilheim, 
Joseph Hertol, 
Georg Heyman,* 
Martin Schupp, 
Andreas Reck, 
Simon Fischer, 
Bernhard Steiner, 
Jacob Kiportz, 
Joseph Renau, 
Henrich Baum, 
Johaunes AVittisr, 



Henrich Roth, 
Michael Nieth, 
Gottlieb Nieth, 
Georg Sachs, 
Georg Deg, 
Michael Walter, 
Samuel Schober, 
Andreas Michael, 
Michael Schaffer,* 
Martin Heitz, 
Nicolaus Breidebach, 
Daniel Brennemann, 
Christian Brubacher, 
Jacob Seitz, 
Daniel Joder, 
Rudolph Kägy, 
Peter Grebil, 
Georg Altschuh, 
Johann Georg Adam, 
Johann Nickel Raab, 
Johan Adam Bruchhauser, 
Johann Henrich Lutz, 
Friederich Haffner, 
Abraham Schantz, 
Conrad Haftenträger, 
Jacob Kauffman, 
Johann Henrich Heyl, 
Johann Georg Heyl, 
Johann Conrad Heyl, 
Johann Jacob Heyl, 
Johann Peter Hoffstadt, 
Johann Jacob Leiman, 
Johann Henrich Bausch, 
Johann Valtin Becker, 
Christian Schowalder, 
Jost Dettweiler, 
Johann Michael Breidebach, 
Georg Philip Pettry, 
Carl Ludwig Baum, 
Johannes Prenser, ? 
Melchior Weydenmeyer, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1764. 



365 



Johann Daniel Franck, 
Johann Georg Scherer, 
Albrecht Schumacher, 
Benedictus Galle, 
Johann Philip Gättman, 
Johann Gottfried Weiss, 
Johann Ludwig Weber, 
Johann Michael Hirschlag, 
Johannes Kugelwerth, 
Johann Martin Klein, 
Johannes Kiester, 
Johannes Kundelmanu, 
Christian StaufFer, 
Henrich Schneider, 
Johan Henrich Lannert,* 
Adam Herman, 
Nicholas Ueberroth, 
Johann Jacob Nagel, 
Valentin Volck, 
Peter Harris,* 
Georg Bortz, 
Nickel Herisch, 
Adam Ruth, 
Peter Ambrose, 



Peter Ziefus,* 
Peter Jung, 
Christopher Hess, 
Simon Klos, 
Jacob Klamm, 
Abraham Petter, 
Johann Glasser, 
Älichael Büttner, 
Philip Beck, 
Johann Adam Buch, 
Friederich Lofinck, 
Hans George Baumantz, 
Herman Wittscher, 
Georg Peter Zenteler, 
Johann IMichael Nagel, 
Johann Andreas Unangst, 
Michael Resmeyer, 
Georg Michael Klamm, 
Georg Simon Rieger, 
Johann David Schaadt, 
Friederich Würtzbacher, 
Johann Henrich Schöneberger, 
Johann Martin Mäder, 
Conrad Höldebrand. 



244) Nov. 5, 1764. Ship Jeneffer, Georg Kerr, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 247 passengers. 

9100. 5, 1764. ©c^ijf 3eneffer, Savitain ®eorg Äerr, »on 
Stotterbam über (Soweö. — 247 Sfleifenbc. 



Johannes Futerman, 
Hans Perger,* 
Frantz Krämer, 
Jost Rauter, 
Frantz Krämer, 
John Jäger, 
Antonius Cromm, 
Henrich Cromm, 
Simon Georg, 
Georg Schön, 
Peter Hürstraan, 



Andreas Braum, 
Johannes Ochsa, 
John Cond. Steibel, 
Jno. Geo. Upper,* 
Jno. Diet. Fehring, 
Thomas Weller, 
Johannes Rübelandt, 
Friederich Decker, 
Jno. Charles Hetrig, 
Martin Scheller, 
Johann Wantzbach, 



3V 



366 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Christian Roth, 
Johann Ludwig Degen, 
Johann Philip Endres, 
Johann Gottfried Meyer, 
Johan George Leininger, 
Frantz Rübsamen, 
Johann Martin Neb, 
Johann Tönges Cromm, 
Johann Christ. Lindorff, 
Johann Best Weber, 
Johann Gerlach Traut, 
Johann Gerlach Finck, 
Johann Peter Weber, 
Johann Wilhelm Strunck, 
Johann Henrich Au, 
Johann Peter Petery, 
Johann Georg Reyman, 
John George Faust, 
Johann Jacob Schlosser, 
Joh. Dieterich Schmidt, 
John Christ. Fuhrsbach, 
Jost Henrich Frantz, 
Johann Jacob Frantz, 
Johann Wilhelm Frantz, 
Johannes Volck, 
Gottfried Stock, 
Conrad Braun, 
Christian Zimmer, 
Jacob Landes, 
Johannes Landes, 
Ulrich Bieber, 
John Miller, 



Henrich Stöckel, 
Nicklaus Meisset, 
Jacob Meisset,* 
Philip Schmidt, 
Jno. Wm. Miller, 
John Schwab, 
Christian Hantzel, 
Abraham Schapler, 
Jacob Werns,* 
Stephan Petri, 
Peter Grebihl, 
Joh. Engel Stöhr, 
Johann Christ. Heusser, 
Johannes Georg Reusch, 
Johann Andreas Wentzell, 
Johann David Mehn, 
Johan Adam Steinwax,* 
Johann Henrich Gihl, 
Valentin Schuster, 
Hans Georg Vuter, 
Hans Georg Schmidt, 
Johann Michael Braun, 
Heinrich Wilhelm Gruck, 
Johann Henrich Helensteuer, 
Johann Adam Bieger, ? 
Johann Jacob Batz, 
Balthasar Dieffenbaeh, 
Johannes Gerhard Klein, 
Johan Wilhelm Weynan, 
Jacob Brennemann, 
Johann Peter Hachenberg, 
Johann Wilhelm Klein. 



245) Nov. 5, 1764, Ship Prince of Wales, James Edgar, 
Master, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 131 passengers. 

9?oö. 5, 1764. ©c^tff prince of 2BaH ßapitain Sameö 
@l>gar, »on Stottertmm über Soweö. — 131 9tcifent»c. 

Peter Römen, Casper Fries, 

Johannes Muth, Ludwig Mader, 

Philip Becher, Peter Julien, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1764. 



367 



Philip Golb * 
Carl Uhl, 
Nicolaus Booss, 
Henrich Happel, 
Jacob Dorsheimer, 
Peter Dörr, 
Johannes Eckel, 
Peter Rorbach, 
Peter Harbarger, 
Paul Bichler, 
Christofifel Schneit, 
Johannes Schertzer, 
Johannes Strack, 
x\dani Henneberger, 
Johann Philipp Bittman, 
Jacob Schenckweiler, 
Conrad Korffmann, 
Georg Wilhelm Resler, 
Johannes Manderfelth, 
Georg Peter Hessler,? 
Charles Norheimer,* 
Wilhelm Henrich Kuss, 
Johann Nicklas Schneider, 
Johann Valentin Schneider, 
PhUipp Mittmann, 
Johannes Schnell, 
Wilhelm Stuntz, 
Johannes Stuntz, 
Georg Jäger, 
Adam Kaiser, 



Carl Stoltz, 
Johannes Orth, 
Gottlieb Becker, 
Philip Barth, 
Peter Wann, 
Adam Gless,* 
Peter Umstatt, 
Jacob Petry, 
Georg Schmit, 
Sebastian Thiel, 
Thomas Polhaus, 
Peter Hesler, 
George Horster, 
Martin Seybert, 
Johann Conrad Stoltz, 
Johan Jacob Mattheis, 
Johan Christoph Pruch, 
Peter Laubenstein, 
Johan Peter Laubenstein, 
Johann Philip Schuey, 
Jacob Espenschied, 
Georg Schäffer, 
Henrich Rihm, 
Peter Cärius, 
Georg Adam Dückel, 
Christopher Heidrich, 
Henrich Berninger, 
Johannes Schneider, 
Joh. Burchardt Culman, 
Johannes Weisgerber. 



246) Nov. 10, 1764. Ship Boston, Matthew Carr, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 203 passengers. 

9^üö. 10, 1764. (Sd)iff Softon, ßapitain 9}?att^en3 daxv, oon 
0totterbam über Soiueö. — 203 Steifente. 

Henrich Spahr, Philip Glass, 

Johannes Schwerm, Johannes Kessler, 

Anthony Boley, Peter Wentz, 

Johannes Wentz, Peter Kendemer,? 

Johannes Walther, Georg Reideuauer, 



368 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Johannes Pflaum, 
Diebolt Lertz, 
Andreas Koppel, 
Lorentz Jung, 
Ludwig Scheffer, 
Michael Georg, 
John Scheffling, 
Diebolt Beit, 
Ja que Depre, 
Isaac Bertsch, 
Adam Lampart,* 
Johan Andreas Fuchs, 
Henrich Bachmann, 
Johan Casper Keipper, 
Johann Peter Schahl, 
Johan Georg Muth, 
Johan Valentin Dickes, 
Hans Georg Büttner, 
Johan Carl Boley, 
Georg Dannefeltzer, 
Hans Adam Hartman, 
Nickolaus Reidenauer, 
Andreas Schneider, 
Simon Peter Baidemann, 
Christian Jacob Klein, 
Johann Teobald, 
Lewis Shimfassel, 
Johan Philip Weytzel, 
Henrich Herbach, 



Frantz Lambert, 

Christian Mühleisen, 

Peter Castermann, 

John Lampart,* 

Jacob Buss, 

Henry Bauer,* 

Michael Week,* 

Peter Halm, 

Justus Eckhard, 

Henry Scheffer,* 

Henrich Fuchs, 

Peter Geiss, 

Peter Fuchs, 

Henrich Fuchs,* 

Nicklas Hittel, 

Peter Steffen, 

Johan Nickel Weck, 

Jacob Conrath, 

Andreas Baussmann, 

Rupertius Waller, 

Bernhart Döss, 

Philip Jacob Bausmann, 

Casper Bernhardt, 

Wilhelm Bernhardt, 

Johann Diter Bledel, 

Conrad Fried. Bientelheimer, 

Johann Georg Stättler, 

Johannes Sponknöbel, 

Philip Gerber.* 



247) Dec. 4, 17G4. Snow Tryall, John Clapp, Master, from 
Rotterdam, last from Plymouth. — 48 passengers. 

Dec. 4, 1764. ®eefd)iif Xr^atl, ßapitain 3oI)n Glflpp, yen 
3lotterbam über ^^Ipmout^. — 48 3teifent)c. 

Jacob Keppel,* Philippus Stein, 

Georg Bender, Johannes Jung, 

Andreas Emrich, Bastian Bender, 

Johannes Greast, Anthony Opp, 

Johannes Bender, Carl Dost, 

Henrich Strocher, Johan Daniel Gross,* 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1765. 



369 



Heinrich Laiitzenheisser,* 
Peter Lautzenhäusser, 
Abraham SchäfFer, 
Christopher Mathias,* 
Johannes Roscher, 



Niekolaus Aberthal, 
Johann Jacob Enck, 
Johannes Gaull, 
Kaspar Schönbruck, 
Valentin Braun. 



248) Aug. 24, 1765. Ship Polly, Robert Porter, Master, from 
Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 211 passengers. 

Slug. 24, 1765. ©d)iff g)oII^, Sajjitain ^Robert porter, «on 
3lottert»am über Sonjeö. — 211 ^cifenbe. 



Jacob Huntzicker,* 

Andreas Heintz, 

Jacob Nägele, 

Jacob Gray, 

Joseph Stecher, 

Jacob Gemberling, 

Christian Wuuuer, 

Conrad Hauenstein,* 

Elias Werner, 

Joh. Adam Friedrich Doll, 

Jacob Gremberling sen., 

Georg Jacob Hauenstein,* 

Christoph Spriegel, 

Joh. Leonard Devil,* 

Andreas Ehresmann, 

Andreas Buchhecker, 

Lorentz Gronninger,* 

Joh. Michael Gronninger,* 

Peter Sigrist, 

Conrad Munch, 

Jacob Mays,* 

Peter Zeiler, 

Jacob Wunder, 

Elias Wigandt, 

Jacob Fans,* 

Peter Gram, 

Jacob Treuttle, 

Jacob Schultz,* 

Jacob Behr,* 

Samuel Behr,* 



Jacob Thorwarth, 
Jacob Hetzel, 
Jacob Schneck, 
George Stadtler,* 
Henrich Hopff, 
Friederich Hippel, 
Georg UfFer,? 
Christian Maurer, 
Rudolph Mambeck, 
Johannes Voltz, 
Johannes Müller, 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Michael HoiF, 
John Mich. Bishop, 
Johannes May, 
Jacob Müller, 
Anthony Rhein,* 
Michael Mensebach,* 
Peter Gress,* 
Johan Bernhart Dietrich, 
Gottfried IMünch, 
Georg Adam Bressler, 
Michael Widerick,* 
Valentin KaufFmann, 
Georg Simon Haushalter, 
George Adam Teis,* 
Christoph Dieterich, 
Henrich Wilhelm Mayer, 
Henrich Berthgiss, 
Christian Häuffrer, 



370 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Johann Philip Harttung, 
Jacob Schwenck,? 
Paulus Sturm, 
Johannes Rathacker, 
Christoph Ginähle, 
Hans Georg Schneck sen., 
Hans Georg Schneck, 
Christopher Hanmüller, 
Johan Jacob Hanmüller, 
Johann Bardtmann, 



Johann Jacob Hofelen, 
Johann Georg Hoff, 
Johann Jacob Schressel, 
Johann Nickel Fischer, 
Johann Wilhelm Bender, 
Frantz Arnold Lein, 
Martin Klaubach,* 
Johan Jacob Mohr, 
Johan George Kahler, 
Peter Rudolph.* 



249) Sept. 9, 1765. Ship Chance, Charles Smith, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 216 passengers. 

(Sept. 9, 1765. ©c^iff Stance, ßapitain d^arleö <Bm\% »Ott 
Sflotterbam über ßowes. — 216 9tetfent)e. 



Peter Kebbler,* 
Georg Krebs,* 
Charles Grim,* 
Jacob Müller, 
Jacob Geiger, 
Peter Schmidt, 
Jacob Deinius, 
Johannes Schissler, 
Caspar Roth, 
Henrich Lambert, 
Balthas Breitenbühr, 
Johann Georg Bauer, 
Tobias Hafferstock, 
Christopher Kessler,* 
Jacob George,* 
Johannes Fecher,* 
Daniel Meyers,* 
John Dauchawirt, 
Jacob Krafft, 
Henrich Kägel, 
Jacob Guth, 
John Klein, 
Jacob Kendel, 
Jacob Kehl, 
Johan Erendorff, 



Christian Höhl, 
Eberhard Lüttig,* 
Michael Heyl, 
Martin Weber, 
Israel Bockreider, 
Friederich Keller, 
Peter Beixitsch,* 
Nicklaus Ludi, 
John Dinius, 
Jonas DUl, 
Christoph Kettering, 
Wendel Schanck, 
Johannes Preiss, 
Rudolph Brengel, 
Jacob Kebbel, 
John Russ, 
Valentin Röbach, 
Isaac Frantz, 
John Geo. Firer, 
Michael Hütler, 
Matheis Hora, 
Michael Müller, 
Joh. Georg Philip Lessig, 
Johann Christian Lessig, 
Johan Gottlieb Gampffer, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1765. 



371 



Valentin Metzger, 
Georg Christian Müller, 
Johan Philip Melter, 
Michael Kettenring, 
Johan Jacob Kettenring, 
Joh. Georg Paul Christmann, 
Johann Wilhelm Nützer, 
Philip Henrich Mayer, 
Joh. Christophel Kurtz, 
Joh. Wilhelm SchäflFer, 
Joh. Conrad Escher, 
Joh. Wendel Gübeller, 
John Henry Reichard, 
Matheis Hartmeyer, 



Joh. Adam Graeim, 
Johannes Ernst Kaps, 

Apothicaire, 
Johan Friederich Weyrer, 
Joh. Burchard Kreis, 
Joh. Henrich Gernardt, 
Joh. Michael Seltzer, 
Abraham Breitenbüher, 
Johann Philip Müller, 
Johan Daniel Müller, 
Johannes Giedelmann, 
Johan Michael Hoy er, 
Christian Brützius. 



250) Sept. 19, 1765.. Ship Betsey, John Osman, Comman- 
der, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

©ept. 19, 1765. ©c^iff Sßetfep, Sommantant 3o^n O^man, 
öon JHotterbam über Soweö. 



Ludwig Barer, 
Jacob Frietz, 
Daniel Cobbit, 
Henrich Pfeiffer, 
Jacob Idler, 
Isaac Gassman,* 
Henrich Hermann, 
Johan Matheus Dollmann, 
Michael Löwenstein, 
,Hans Michael Brattier, 
Johan Jacob Brattier, 
Phil. Gottfried Mathias, 
Abram Schming, 
Martin Becker, 
Jacob Zekerr, 
Wilhelm Schäfer, 
Joh. Georg Pletz, 
Peter Schneider, 
Wilhelm Freund, 
Joh. Ebert (Erter, 
Johann Gastlied, 



Daniel Zwigart, 
George Schiff, 
Peter Garthner, 
Michael Zehner, 
John Heins, 
Martin Hegner, 
Jacob Hauss, 
Benedict Schmit,* 
Hans Merckle, 
Johannes Wolff, 
Jacob Blaus, 
Darius Strauss, 
Jacob Hiller, 
Martin Ostertag, 
Christian Wehr, 
Andreas Heckel, 
Jacob Licht, 
Josua Metzger, 
Da\dd Gottschall, 
Conrad Schuler, 
Johannes Braun, 



372 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Johann Henrich, 
Benjamin Gassmann, 
Gottfried Grumbach, 
Joh. Carl Gabriel, 
Hans Georg Ochs, 
Jacob Friederich SchäflFer, 
Gottlob Jacob Löffler, 
Johan Jacob Thiel, 
Johann Georg Schneider, 
Johan Henrich Ohrendorff, 
Johan Adam Schneyder, 
Johann Christian Betz, 
Johann Adam Arnsterger, 
Stephan Höpffer, 
Philip Jacob Stockel,* 
Lorentz Rinckle,* 



Hans Georg Frietz, 
Abraham Gleding, 
Johan Philip Müller, 
Johannes Riemer, 
Georg Deschner, 
Johannes Peter Zepper, 
Johan Jacob Birki, 
Friederich Heckel, 
Johan Buben Weller, 
Johan Nickel Licht, 
Johan Conrad Lang, 
Johan Henrich Clement, 
Johan Philip Schreder, 
Philip Peter Laplace, 
Johan Friederich Ernst, 
Jacob Rockenbäuch. 



251) Sept. 21, 1765. Ship Myrtilla, James Cayton, Captain, 
from London. — 81 passengers. 

®ept. 21, 1765. (Schiff ^^rtida, ßapitain 3amcg ßa^ton, 
öon Sonton. — 81 Sleifente. 



Martin Schmidt, 
Christian Hauss, 
Jacob Kapp, 
Martin Frey, 
Martin Behr, 
Philip Behr, 
Jacob Dieterich, 
Johannes Burgholdter, 
Samuel Funck, 
Christian Burgholdter, 
Andreas Friederich, 
ChristofFel Dieterich, 
Jacob Burgholdter, 
Henrich Keller, 
Adam Eckel, 
Jacob Meyer, 



Henrich Frey, 
Johannes KrebüU, 
Jacob Räumann, 
Ulerich Wissler, 
Jacob Wissler, 
Henrich Küny, 
Joh. Michael Meyer, 
Sebastian Nill, 
Ludwig Schehlman, 
Johann Christian, 
Josue Dedie, a 
Jean Dedie, a 
Abraham de Roche, a 
Jean Jaque Etienne, a 
Jean Richar Vierisard. a 



a Swiss-French Protestants. 

a (S(^weijerifc^»franjÖ[ifcl;e ^Jroteftanten. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1766. 



373 



252) Oct. 7, 1765. Ship Countess of Sussex, Thomas Gray, 
Captain, from Rotterdam. — 50 passengers. 

Oct 7, 1765. ®d)iff Sounte^ of ©uffej:, Sa})itain S^omag 
®ra9, »on Stotterbam. — 50 9teifent)e. 



William Hagher,* 
David Vohl, 
Rudolph KäphfFer. 
Henry Stephan, 
Greorg Michel Hertle, 
Joh. Thomas Metzler, 
Melchior Metzler, 
Jacob Sandemeyer, 
Christian Schneider, 
Conrad Brombach, 
Johannes Brombach, 
Andreas Hubert, 



Joh. Christ. Schönfelder, 
Frantz Carl Beaujacque, 
Joh. Leonhard Hirsch, 
Johan Theodor Hofius, 
Joh. Jacob Scheppach, 
Joh. Gottlieb Ponce sen., 
Joh. Gottlieb Ponce jr., 
Joh. Henrich Bender, 
Joh. Henrich Hepde,? 
Johan Henrich Meli, 
Joh. Christoph Schultz. 



253) Sept. 23, 1766. Ship Chance, Charles Smith, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 200 passengers. 

(Sept. 23, 1766. ©c^iff Stance, (Eapitain ßf^arleö ©mitt), 
»on Stotterbam übet Sotücö. — 200 9teifente. 



Conrad Störckell, 
Johannes Groll, 
Johannes Hoch, 
Peter Blass, 
Johannes Müller, 
Johannes Lipp, 
Johannes Conradi, 
Conrath Eurich, 
Jacob Reitzel, 
Henrich Gross, 
Nicholas Arnold, 
Johann Georg Freytag, 
Johan Friederich Altvetter, 
Johan Friederich Ulrich, 
Michael Sulheimer, 
Johann Georg Ernold, 
Johann Georg Eurich, 
Johan Peter Mehrling, 
Johan Henrich Kern, 



Johann Peter Fuist, 
Johan Franeiscus Faist, 
Johannes Meister, 
Johannes Vogt, 
Philip Blitz, 
Johannes Emrich, 
Martin Lantz, 
Johannes Graub, 
Joh. Georg May, 
Johannes Leis, 
Friederich Lüderitz, 
Joh. Adam Flick, 
John Haster,* 
Johann Borthlehr, 
Gabriel Becker, 
Henrich Frey, 
Johannes Mates, 
Zacharias Endres, 
Henrich Bossel, 



32 



374 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Paul Conrad, 
Andreas Weiss, 
Friederich Locher, 
Henrich Häher, 
Henrich Dewalt, 
Johannes Miesemer, 
Sebastian Heckman, 
Adam Schäffer, 
Peter Burgiug, 
Georg Tramp, 
Geo. Conrad Seip, 
Joh. Georg Weber, 
Heinrich Ehrhart, 
John Peter Tramp, 
Johan Hirschbirg, 
Johannes Kehl, 
Peter Weber, 
Simon Bichller, 
Joseph Schmidt, 
Johannes Reb, 
Christoph Huger, 
Johannes Huger, 
Johannes Weber, 
Anton MundorflF,? 
Francis Beler,* 
Joh. Christian Kunckel, 
Johan Jacob Vogler, 
Michael Grünewald, 
Johan Peter Hör, 
Johan Friederich Helm, 
Johann Adam 0hl, 
Johan Georg Seib, 
Joh. Benedict Schneider, 



Joh. Ludwig Waltmann, 
Joh. Nicklaus Seitz, 
Joh. Wilhelm Klöpper, 
Joh. Valentin Klöpper, 
Joh. Gabriel Gröber, 
Joh. Michael Weingärtner, 
Joh. Henrich Deetzel, 
Joh. Dietrich Koster,? 
Hannes Waldtmann, 
Joh. Daniel Frischmuth, 
Johan Nickel Martin, 
Georg Grämlich, 
Henrich Jüngst, 
Joh. Jacob Beinhart, 
Johan Peter Low, 
Joh. Friederiek Müller, 
Joh. Jacob Matzenbacher, 
Hans Georg Schnepp, 
Johan Wilhelm Seip, 
John Adam Sand, 
Johan Christoph Simon, 
Joh. Georg Zimmermann, 
Simon Peter Deubard, 
Christopher Unger, 
Philip Colman Rämlander, 
Johan Michael Kuh, 
Joh. Christoph Kämpff, 
John Michael Lauer, 
Johan Georg Ott, 
Johan Nicolaus Wiebel, 
Johan Georg Allsbach, 
Joh. Henrich Leuthäusser, 
Simon Gickert. 



254) Oct. 13, 1766. Ship Betsey, John Osmond, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes.^154 passengers. 

Dct. 13, 1766. ©c^iff Setfe^, (Sapitnin 3o^n D^monb, »on 
Stotterbam über Soweö. — 154 3leifeute. 

Johannes Breinckhart, Johannes Schmid, 

Nioolaua Bohler, Jacob Henckel, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1766. 



375 



IMichacl Ratli, 
Daniel Brenner, 
Joseph Stauch, 
Johannes Benner, 
Jacob Schaffer, 
Jacob Kauffmann, 
Joseph Singer, 
Grottlieb Geyer, 
Fred. Hoffman, 
F. Gr. Hirschmann, 
Johannes Maeyer, 
Johannes Dahm,? 
Jonas Barone,? 
Lorentz Boris,* 
Jacob Kern, 
Jacob Günther, 
Louis Robert, 
Johannes Höckert, 
Jacob Hahn, 
Jacob Wagner, 
Johannes Linck, 
Valentin Schürling, 
Peter Lütter, 
Michael Weiss, 
Johan Hage, 
Peter Reyt, 
Christoph WiUemann, 
Jacob Greuther, 
Christian Wolff,* 
Johannes Häuser, 
Johannes Mosser, 
Valentin Hamm, 
John Keller,* 
Peter Guite, 
Georg Bub, 
Jost Kuntz,* 
Daniel Zimmermann, 
Johan Hehuan Karle, 



John Jacob Karl, 
Johann Georg Becker, 
Johannes Gelessener, 
Jost Henry Volmer, 
Georg Schiltwächter, 
Johann Georg Volmer, 
Johan Georg Miller, 
Johann Jost Miller, 
Johann Georg Fiesser, 
Joh. Melchior Endlich, 
Joh. Henrich Bär, 
Joh. Henrich Frantz, 
Joh. Philip Lambach, 
Friederich Schittenhelm, 
Georg Michael Schäher, 
Johan Jacob Haussmann, 
Johan Bernhard Borst, 
Johann Henrich Fessler, 
Johann Jacob Fessler, 
Georg Friederich Immich, 
Henrich Frantz Feck, 
Johann Christoph Götz, 
Johan Georg Lichtenberger, 
Hans Martin Ziegler, 
Johan Georg Knell,? 
Johan Michael Keyser, 
Johan Michael Schäffer, 
Johan Filbert Gleh, 
Johannes Wüst, 
Lenhart Eckert, 
Johan Bernhard KÖrtz, 
Christian Frey, 
Philip Buchman, 
Lorentz Ladenberger, 
Joseph Haller, 
Christian Becker, 
David Wathman, 
Joh. Georg Schneyder. 



255) Oct. 16, 1766. Ship Palladium, Richard Hunter, Mas- 
ter, from Lisbon, Portugal. 



376 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Dct. 16, 1766. (S(^iff ^aüatium, gapttatn gtic^ort) punter, 
»on Siffabon, Portugal. 



Pedra Oberländer, 
Ignacio Onder, 
Francis Frey, 
John Meyer,* 
Francis Fisher,* 
Peter Polo,* 



Peter Schotter, 
Paul Abzieger, 
Carl Grissinger, 
Erhard Schlägel, 
Johannes Kreck. 



256) Oct. 18, 1766. Ship Polly, Robert Porter, Master, from 
Amsterdam, last from Cowes. — 181 passengers. 

Dct. 18, 1766. ©c^iff ^oU^, Sapitain 9tobert ^ovttx, »on 
Slmflerbam über Sowe^. — 181 Sfteifenbe. 



Christian Reiss, 

Georg Schättel, 

Nicolas Stoltzfus, 

Christian Stoltzfus, 

Jacob Holler, 

Jacob Heifer, 

John Brodnier, 

Jacob Diemer, 

Joh. Jacob Lentz, 

Johannes Reuther, 

Joh. Hen. Müller, 

Ernst Wilh. Christ, 

Johannes Geitling, 

Johan T. Lupp, 

John Edelmaan, 

Johannes Schwen, 

Johannes Bloch, 

Philip Walter, 

Peter Müller, 

John W. Herman, 

Hans Jacob Motz, 

Andreas Stetzel, 

Johannes Schräg, 

Valentin Weld, 

Frantz Schmidt, 

Michael Friederich Gutekunst, 



Michael Schättel, 
Johann Nickel Wems, 
Hans Georg Horn, 
Frantz Herman, 
John Georg Herman, 
Philip Henrich Hechs, 
Hans Georg Cuntz, 
Johan Philip Jacob, 
Hans Jacob Duchman, 
Johan Jacob Schreiner, 
Johannes Peter Stockmann, 
Johan Adam Widerstein, 
Johan Hen. Eissenberger, 
Johan Philip Gielberth, 
Johan Eberth Michael, 
Georg Friederich Steiner, 
Johan Georg Schreiber, 
Joh. PhUip Weltzheimer, 
Hans Georg Petry, 
Joh. Philip Schreiner, 
Georg Valentin Steiner, 
Joh, Henrich Herdel, 
John Conrad Erick,* 
Johann Jacob Henninger, 
Johan Caspar Trump. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 17G7. 377 

257) Nov. 4, 1766. Ship Sally, John Davidson, Mastci-, from 
Kotterdam, last from Cowes. 

^oX), 4, 1766. ©(^iff <Satt9, Sapitain 3o|n Dattitfon, »on 
JHotterfcam über Soipeö. 

Paulus Amecker, Georg Jacob Elsass, 

Johannes Lemp, Georg Friederich Göbss, 

Jacob Brandenberger, Joh. Georg Sturmfels. 

Christoph Henrich Augustinus, 



258) Jan. 23, 1767. Ship Juno, John Robinson, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Berwick-on-Tweed, England. — 36 
passengers. 

3an. 23, 1767. ©rf)iff 3uno, ßapitain 3o^n 9lobinfon, öon 
SHotterbam über 53ertpidf=on=Xn>cet>, Snglanb. — 36 Steifente. 
Johann Bekenne, Johan Georg Seuberth, 

Michael Götz, Johan Georg Huber, 

John Henry Hirsh,* Johann Henrich Kiesy, 

John Peter Böll, Joh. Hen. Holdinghaus, 

Johannes Moss, Johan Clemens Gulich, 

Joh. Hen. Lebe, Georg Mich. Kittelmeyer. 



259) Oct. 5, 1767. Ship Sally, John Osman, Master, from 
Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 116 passengers. 

Dct. 5, 1767. ®(^{ff ®atl9, Sapitain ^oiixi D^mon, »on 
9lottert)am über Someö. — 116 Sfleifcnbe. 
Henrich Kleiber, Adolph Dill, 

Georg Kleiber, Theobald Fischer, 

Georg Leidich, Adam Dörr, 

Jacob Durweeg, Christian Müller, 

Johannes Sommer, Andreas Sperling, 

Peter Wilrich, Leonhart Beyer, 

Stephan Tuchman, Johannes Kemperling, 

Philip Krimmel, Gabriel Leon, 

Joh. Emerich Adam, Georg Henrich Focht, 

Bernhart Eglin, Adam Knoblauch, 

Michael Gütchrel, Friederich Gamssendahl, 

Peter Auchementer, Martin Bornträger, 

Wendel Bernhardt, Joh. Theodore Hartman, 

Georg Bernhardt, Hans Georg Mattheis, 

32* 



378 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Christo. Ludwig Detweiler, 

Hans Adam Bauer, 

Johan Georg Würtzer, 

Johan Andreas Seuling, 

Georg Henrich Keitz, 

Adam Philip Kietz, 

Johan PhiUp Huff, 

WUhelm Diewalt, 

Johann Petrygandt, 

Joh. Conrad Bertsch, 

Joh. Nicklaus Weyandt, 

Georg Kilian Werth, 

Joh. Henrich Krafft, 

Joh, Nicolaus Ludwig, 

Joh. Michael Bast, 

Joh. Hieronimus Augustine, 

Johannes Müller, 

Joh. Jac. Heiser, 

Frantz Hoch, 

Jacob Eckenberger, 

Jacob Berndt,* 

Jacob Berndt jr.,* 

Henrich Weber, 

Nickel Huber, 

Caspar Acker, 

Adam Huber, 

Michael Miller, 

Adam Müller, 

Valentin Hoch, 

Philip Huber, 

Jacob Lein, 

Jacob Küffer, 

Jacob Kerst, 

Peter Diehl, 

Kunrad Heier, 

Peter Miller,* 

Frantz Wilhelm, 

Adam Reyter,* 

Jac^ Lambert, 



Walter Heyl, 
Jacob Zebalt,* 
Frederick Kass, 
Henrich Kiess, 
Jacob Görtlerr, 
Caspar Spies, 
Jacob Reder, 
Jacob Rummel, 
Hans Georg Graberth, 
Johann Adam Lechler, 
Johann Philip Lutz, 
Johann Simon Hoch, 
Joh. Bernhard Hoffmann, 
Hans Schonenberger, 
Philip Frölich, 
Johann Georg IMiller, 
Daniel Lauth, 
Jacob Luntz, 
Johann Adam Reb, 
Georg Adam Keffer, 
Johan Henrich Fückes, 
Hans Adam Palm, 
Wilhelm Reuter, 
Leonard Albrecht, 
Michael Klein, 
Peter Schweitzer, 
Hans Georg Buchman, 
Joh. Friederich Schlemb, 
Adam Eckenberger, 
Joh. Carl August Kiess, 
Johann Jacob Appel, 
Philipp Rottmann, 
Joh. Wilhelm Bonyneburg, 
Jacob Stellwagen, 
Johan Caspar Schneider, 
Phil. Lconhart Hartman, 
Balthaser Heinrich, 
Nickolaus Cabbett. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1767. 



379 



260) Oct. 6, 1767. Ship Hamilton, Charles Smith, Com- 
mander, from Rotterdam. — 302 passengers. 

Oct. 6, 1767. (Schiff .'pamilton, Gümmanbant S()ar(eö (Smit^, 
»on 9tottert>am. — 302 Stdfeutie. 



Christophel Henri tzy, 
Joh. Phil. Toninger, 
Geo. Leon. Zeller, 
Peter Roth rock, 
Friederich Satler, 
Nicklaus Schäffer, 
Michael Wambach, 
Johan Nicklaus Frick, 
Joh. Henrich Baydeman, 
Joh. Henrich (xrosshard, 
Joh. Friederich Anstbach, 
Johann Peter Grumm, 
Hans Michael Dreher, 
Andreas Dreher, 
Matheus Cuntz, 
Michael Merlock, 
Christ. Wineman,* 
Henrich Felty, 
Johannes Hoch, 
Peter Krassle, 
Peter Neuschwander, 
Peter Neuschwander jr., 
Peter Diether, 
Caspar Fitrius, ? 
Henrich Seyler, 
Johannes Weiss, 
Jacob Euher, 
Jacob Nuss, 
Leonhart Knor, 
Wendel Heuntz, 
Johannes Huber, 
Conrath Rau, 
Conrad Wächter, 
Jacob Veiock, 
Johannes Dis,? 
Phihp Baltzer, 
Joh. Nie. Smith,* 



Michael Endres, 
Conrad Henrich, 
P. E. Leonie, 
Georg Cuntz, 
Daniel Stollberger, 
Caspar Walter, 
Christian Steiner, 
Jacob Schneider, 
Johannes Hedinger, 
Johannes Schneider, 
Peter Seekatz, 
Adam Lotz, 
Henry Wagner, 
George Hoock,* 
Frantz Hopp, 
Ludwig Horst, 
Joseph Blisch, 
Leonard Gramm, 
John Vestermeyer, 
Joseph Schleser, 
Joh. Christ. Kirschenmann, 
Jacob Hochstrasser, 
Georg Jacob Baumann, 
Henrich Nickel Heynich, 
Geo. Michael Roth, 
Geo. Michael Vuss,* 
Joh. Nickel Stück, 
Joh. Michel Kulman, 
Christoph Seiler, 
Conrad Böhmer, 
Friederich Böhmer, 
Johann Georg Butz, 
Conrad Wagard, 
Michael Heuntz, 
Georg Jacob Süss, 
Christophel Shitertz,* 
Heinrich Walther, 



380 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Diebolt KelchofFner, 
Philip Christian Schrader, 
Johan Conrad Schlüpp, 
Johan GottUeb Bliimler, 
Friederich Möllinger, 
John Peter Hees, 
Johan Melchior Reuschling, 
Johan Friederich Heuntz, 
John Bernhard Hoch, 
Frid. Wilhelm Rauhman, 
Peter von Hulen, 
Johan Jacob Beuckler, 
Christoph Hartman, 
John Philip Menick,* 
John Adam Peck, 
Johannes Biircket, 
Johann Jacob Frick, 
Christian Winseher, 
Johan Georg Biss, 
Hartman Schneider, 
Peter Michael Klein, 
Martin Kalckhaufen, 
Johann Conrad Reiss, 
Georg Peter Stoffel, 
Johan Zacharias Donselt, 
Henrich Medart, 
Friederich Hert, 
John Ewig, 
Daniel Barch, 



Adam Humbert, 

Henrich Horn, 

Sebastian Ettel, 

Fried. Vogel, 

Michael Kiesser, 

Gottlieb Geiss, 

Jacob Badel,* 

Jacob Albrecht, 

Michael Erhart, 

Jacob Schell, 

Peter Bollinger, 

Johan Schultz, 

Andreas Neuman, 

Friederich Stimmel, 

Phil. Jacob Cuntzmann, 

Friederich Conrad Hoff, 

Casimir Bernhard Alberti, 

Georg Friederich Knobelloch, 

Frau W. Sehwig, 

Lorentz Schmidt, 

Johan Gottlieb Hauck, 

Johannes Fütter, 

Philip Eullmann, 

Hans Philip Bott, 

Quirinus Michael, 

Johan Peter Klatz, 

Mattheis Grässel, 

Joseph Dubernock.* 



261) Oct. 26, 1767. Ship Brittania, Alexander Hardy, Mas- 
ter, from Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth. 

Dct. 26, 1767. (Schiff Srittania, Sapitaiu Stiejranber ^art)9, 
üon Slotterbam über ^ortömout^. 
Johannes Han, Johannes Bauer, 

Casper Dietrich, Johannes Staub, 

Henrich Gorgi, Johannes Kunckel, 

Michael Göhler,* Henrich Kunckel, 

Johannes Hirsch, Friederich Stegel, 

Henrich Hesser, Adam Dieterich, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1767. 



381 



Johannes Kister, 
Johannes Keyser, 
Carl Hörig, 
Lorentz Schuster, 
Michael Güntzler, 
Jacob Plat,* 
Johannes Glück, 
Johannes Hem, 
Johannes Kleinpeter, 
Friederich Steygerwalt, 
Johann Peter Hoch, 
Johannes Steigerwalt, 
Friederieh Flehmann, 
Michael Jacob Bach, 



Johan Philip Falck, 
Leonhart Krämer, 
Johannes Kunckel, 
Johan Michael Alstat, 
Johannes Breiteubach, 
Valentin Breitenbach, 
Johan Henrich Bory, 
Johannes Christian, 
Johannes Köhler, 
Johannes Bach, 
Peter Schuster, 
Johan Peter Uhl, 
Matheus Köhler. 



262) Oct. 29, 1767. Ship Minerva, John Spuriers, ^Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 194 passengers. 

Oct. 29, 1767. ©c^tff g)?iners>a, (Sapitain 3o^n ©puricrö, 
i50tt Stottcrbam über Soroeö, — 194 3ftcifentte. 



Johannes Nauman, 
Johannes Nauman jr., 
Jeremiah Nauman, 
Nicholas Blacher, 
Johann Tetwelder,? 
John Miller,* 
Peter Schumacher, 
John Fischer, 
Johannes Houer, 
John Miller,* 
Jacob Hellman, 
Friederich Gaey, 
H. Hambach, 
Christian Faber, 
Valentin Faber, 
Jacob Faber, 
Jacob Gorsch, 
Peter Fuchs, 
Anthony Schoch, 
Job. Mausshaider, 
Jacob Weiss, 



Michael Buch, 
Jacob Drill, 
Henrich Laux, 
Jeremias Algeir, 
Philip Hitzler, 
Michael Seitz, 
Peter Müller, 
Valentin Stahl, 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Johannes Fusser, 
Jacob Hohlwein, 
Hans Georg Mayer, 
Hans Bernhart Mayer, 
Johan Peter Schumacher, 
Johann Simon Schuey, 
Joh. Dietrich Hennenberg, 
Johan Wilhelm Endres, 
Johannes Georg Hefer, 
Johan Jacob Zechiel, 
Joh. Valentin Kattinger, 
Georg Adam Teutsch, 



382 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Christian KaufFman, 
Joh. Matheis Schleemann,* 
Valentin Faber sen., 
Georg Wilhelm Meyer, 
Georg Adam Wetterbauer, 
Johan Martin Motzer sen., 
Johan Martin Motzer, 
Valentin Kamper, 
Johan David Bordili, 
Hans Georg Haaga, 
Conrad Schneider, 



Johann Georg Schäffer, 
Nicolaus Albrecht, 
Diterich Reidenmeyer, 
Nicodemus Ungerer, 
Johan Wolfgang Bolschner, 
Johun Daniel Wilhelm, 
Johann Jacob Lang, 
Johann Adam Pfeiffer, 
Johan Daniel Schmoltze, 
Johan Ludwig Dieterieh. 



263) Nov. 4, 1767. Brigantine Grampus, Henry Robinson, 
Commander, from Rotterdam. 

9ioo. 4, 1767. ©c^neüfegler ©rampue, Sommanbant ^cnr9 
3flobtnfon, »on S^lotterlDam. 



Adrian Granget, 
Christian Muinber, 
Peter Dertwa,* 
Nicolaus Müller, 



Johan Peter Gläkler, 
Michael Unseld, 
Johan Bernhard Weite. 



264) Nov. 10, 1767. Ship Sally, Patrick Brown, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 62 passengers. 

««oö. 10, 1767. e^iff @all^, gapitain ^atricf Srown, üon 
9totterl»am über ßoroeö. — 62 Steifenbe. 



Adam Hertzerger, 
Johannes Egel, 
Lorentz Huber, 
Hans Tschopp, 
Martin Wäller, 
Martin Stohler, 
Simon Stein, 
Friederich Bäntz, 
Conrad Hering, 
Johann Gänssle, 
Simon Boni, 
Valentin Neissel,* 
Henrich Dölle, 
Johannes Glotz, 



Johann Tschudy, 
Jacob Gobell, 
Martin Tschudi, 
Martin Müller, 
Daniel Ernst Hirach, 
Jacob Ersteberger, 
Johannes Hänner, 
Christian Althaus, 
Hans Michael Boni, 
Georg Fried. Weidmayer, 
Johannes Burman, 
Adrian Hablützel, 
Michael Länhart, 
Joh. Rudolph Bapp, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1768. 



383 



Martin Nicolaus Scliudy, Christoph Lochner, 

Georg Wächter, aus Memmin-l^hiliTp Jacob Fuchs, 

(jcn, Johan Christian Roth, 

Georg Carl Mandel, Henrich Schaab. 



265) Oct. 3, 1768. Ship Pennsylvania Packet, Robert Gill, 
Master, from London, f 

Dct. 3, 1768. Sd)iff 5>cnnf9löania ^aäd, Sapitain stöbert 
®iUf ooit l^onboiuf 
Martin Pontzius, 
Ludwig Brenner, 
Jacob Linder, 
Wilhelm Pynni, 
Jacob Koch, 
Jacob Kulmann, 
David Pontzius, 
Jonas Apfel, 
Jacob Mauss, 
Johan Georg Jung, 



Frans Peter Brenner, 
Reinhart Schell, 
David Higernell, 
Johannes Schumacher, 
J. Frantz Helm, 
Nicklas Kulmann, 
Hans Jacob Hoffman, 
Johan Georg Würtz, 
Johan Peter Müller. 



266) Oct. 10, 1768. Ship Minerva, Thomas Arnott, Master, 
fi"om Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth. — 247 passengers. 

Oct 10, 1768. ec^iff 9}fincr»a, (Sapitain i;()omaö 2trnott, 
»oil 5iottcrt)am über ^ortömoutt). — 247 3teifent)e. 



Johannes Mohr, 
Johannes Kunckel, 
Friederich Stapf, 
Rudolph Dersch, 
Wendel Engel, 
Philip Höhl, 
Jacob Höhl, 
Wendel Decker, 
Johan Strohbau, 



Johannes Busser, 
Michael Latsch, 
Ludwig Orth, 
Daniel Weber, 
Friederich Brand, 
Conrad Braun, 
Michael Wolff, 
Peter Karp,* 
Michael Ehrman, 



f In List B, the only one preserved, are found the names of only 
nineteen, although twenty-eight were to be qualified. Diligent search for 
the nine missing names has been made, yet without success. — (Editor.) 

t 3tt Stjte B, bcr etnjtg ertialtenen, finbcn |'tc& bte 9?amen »on nut neun« 
jc'^n, obglci^i a^t unb j»an;(tg qualtfiätrt roerben foüten. @^ würbe fletft'ij 
nacd ben »eriorenen neun gefudjit, jebcc^ otjne Srfolg.— (Herausgeber.) 



384 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Johannes Sostner, 
Philip Gruntzge, 
Christian Phiil, 
Henrich Müller, 
Georg Mühl, 
Jacob Frauenfelder, 
Johann Bernhardt, 
Michael Illgentz,? 
Christian Koch, 
Michael Schiesler, 
Jacob Clautsch, 
Jeremias Gleim, 
Thomas Seyberth, 
Jost Götz, 
Maximilian Netzert," 
Jacob Neu, 
Christian Echternacht, 
Frantz Hammet, 
Michael Lang, 
Erhard Giebelhauss, 
Paul Büchert, 
Johan Kiemer,* 
Joh. Peter Meier, 
Philip Scheckler, 
Johan Christian Heiland, 
Wilhehn Philip Knecht, 
Johan Jacob Höhl, 
Hans Jacob Rippas, 
Henrich Straumay, 
Johannes Schrath, 
Casimer Hembd, 
Conrad Lückhaub, 
Valentin Sandel, 
Johann Raffensburg, 
Johan Wolfgang Seybots, 
Johan Lenhard Wagner, 
Christian WUhelm Frütz, 
Joh. Andreas Wiest, 
Joh. Georg Mich. Strecker, 
Johannes Stückerdts, 
Joh. Georg Eisenman, 



Johan Christoph Weick, 
Johan Peter Graff, 
Joh. Balthasar Graff, 
Joh. Christian Steymenn, 
Joh. Balthaser Kroh, 
Johan Anthon Stephan, 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Joh. Conrad Rau, 
Georg Adam Rau, 
Paul Weitenbacher, 
Jacob Zimmerman, 
Johan Adam Meyer, 
Georg Henry Seyberth, 
Mathäus Kockenbauch, 
Philip Peter Hautz, 
Johannes Theis Müller, 
Philip Jacob Ohler, 
Johan Peter Merckel, 
Johann Mathias Müller, 
Johan Wilhelm Kleman, 
Georg Henrich Haug, 
Johan Jacob Walther, 
Johan Jacob Dietrich, 
Johan Jacob Härmaun, 
Johan Peter Sieffert, 
Michael Hieber, 
John Peter Meyer,* 
Josephus Hybler, 
Philip Sahl, 
Wilhelm Frühs, 
Michael Mauerer, 
John Hasselberger, 
Melchior Schmidt, 
Peter Obersheimer, 
Jacob Zoll, 
Peter Feitne, 
Georg Emmiger, 
Johan Wilhelm Paulus, 
Joh. Matheis Best, 
Joh. Georg Scheuerman, 
Johan Tobias Mohr, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 17G8. 



385 



Johan Valentin Krauss, 
Joh. Peter Schmidt, 
Joh. Nickel Huber, 
Joh. Philip Schleicher, 



Joh. Henrich Haubt, 
Johan Jacob Schaffner, 
Joh. Daniel Kauff, 
Johannes Scheyzer. 



267) Oct. 26, 1768. Ship Crawford, Charles Smith, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 205 passengers. 

Dct. 26, 1768. ©d)tff Srawfort), Sapitain S^rle« SmitI), 
oon 3flottcrt)am über Soroeö. — 205 JHeifentc. 



Gottfried Schlaug, 
Jacob Schmidt, 
Franc Gouche,* 
John Gersto,* 
Peter Farry, 
Johannes Schaffer, 
Georg Erlinger, 
Andreas TJssener, 
Conrad Scheffer, 
Johannes Schütz, 
Jacob Welcker, 
Johannes Welcker, 
Michael Welcker, 
Johannes Kreiter, 
Henrich Blum, 
Abraham Saruain, 
Isacque Dedie, 
Samuel Saldret, 
Abram Doisin, 
Jacob Stehm, 
Gottlob Schwartz, 
Henrich Herschberger, 
Philip Götz, 
Hannes Weickert, 
Georg Hoffmann, 
Martin Schnabel, 
Joh. Jacob Escher, 
Johan Samuel Amweg, 
Johan Georg Scher, 
Christian Aescher, 
Gabriel Aescher,* 



Jacob Echman, 
Joh. Jacob Kümmel, 
Johan Valentin Friehs, 
Johan Christophel Keller, 
Carl Ludwig Staudehauer, 
Georg Wilhelm Becker, 
Johan Philip Haass, 
Johan Dönius Frölig, 
Friederich Hoffmann, 
Fried. Samuel Heller, 
Johan Georg Grün, 
Jean Pierre Welle, 
Martin Gerhardt Utes, 
Johan Samuel Güdtner, 
Jacob Ulrich Siltzel, 
Johan Henrich Fohrman, 
Johann Philip IMichell, 
Michael V. Huber, 
Ignatius Zengerle, 
Joh. Friederich Schnabel, 
Joh. Conrad Schnabel, 
Daniel Spies, 
Conrad Frühs, 
Martin Paff, 
Joh. Philip Fries, 
Caspar Lütschy, 
Peter Galloe, 
Joh. Jacob Dietz, 
Joh. Hen. Leis, 
Ludwig Kiehl, 
Joh. Adam Staud, 



33 



386 



NAMES OF GEßilAN, SWISS 



Jost Hen. Müller, 
Philip Hoff, 
Isaac Cochet, 
Joli. Wil. Hartman, 
Job. Nick. Hartman, 
Sebastian Hinderle, 
Joh. Matthias Hartman, 
Georg Henrich Fischer, 
Emanuel Waltmann, 
Georg Jacob Waltmann, 
Johan Isaac Cochet, 



John Georg Bcilstein, 
Johan Wilhelm Diehl, 
Job. Nicklaus Heckmann, 
Job. Henrich Walterscher, 
Joh. Herman Obermeyer, 
Jost Henrich Schneider, 
Job. Erhardt Schneider, 
Georg Dietrich Cochet, 
Johan Henrich Strom, 
Johan Wilhelm Waltman, 
Andreas Gotthard Lobe. 



268) Oct. 16, 1768. Ship Betsey, S. Hawk, Captain, from 
Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Oct. 16, 1768. (Sd)iff SSetfe^, Sapitain ©. ^atot, öon 3ioU 
tcrtiam über Gomeö. 



Solomon Stenger, 

Peter Kammes, 

Jacob Andoni, 

Job. Philip Naahs, 

Jacob Berentz, 

Michael Bieber, 

Jacob Stenger, 

Jacob Naschi, 

Johannes Niess, 

Philip Münsch, 

Adam Anthony, 

Valentin Bieber, 

Johann Gerst, 

Jacob Bieber,* 

Gerhard Krug, 

Jacob Motz, 

Adam Steger, 

Andreas Hauck, 

Adam Horn, 

Frantz Schnell, 

Joseph Emrich, 

Jacob Stenger, 

Johan Gerhard Thiel, 

Jacob Anthony Manuwiller, 



Job. Matheis Mannwiller, 
Ch. Frantz Christman, 
Abraham Madsseil, 
Christian Seyfert, 
Johan Peter Gerhart, 
Nicklaus Rauscher, 
Theobald Pfaff, 
Peter Reissdorff, 
Jacob Schulheiss, 
Johan Philip Opp, 
Peter Armenbcfer, 
Johannes Schulheis, 
Johann Friederich Leich, 
Henrich Borckel, 
Johann Henrich Marx, 
Johann Nicklas Müller, 
Johannes Schweyer, 
Martin Weisshardt, 
Fried. Wilh. Hoffmann, 
Mathias IMüller, 
Daniel Stenger, 
Christian Kuntze, ? 
Wendel Günther, 
Georg Dupont, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1769. 



387 



Stephani Felix, 
Martin Felix, 
Michael Lang, 
Georg Schutt, 
Martin Bauer, 
Nicolas Shirra,* 
Valentin Müller, 
Jacob Mayer, 
Peter Sieber, 
Henry Bender, 
Peter Mennel, 
Hannes Grreissell, 
Friederich Mahler, 
Georg Mutz, 
Peter Driebler, 
Nicolas Gläzer, 
John Matheis, 
Jacob Scholl, 
Andreas Schmidt 
Johannes Gess, 
George Huber, 
Andreas Bach, 
Nicholas Hardt, 
Michael Raum, 
Henrich Zibig, 
Nickel Ber, 
Philip Gippel, 
Adam Klein, 
John Cottringer, a 
Johannes Felix, 
Christopher Kirchsettin, 



Hans Georg Honher, 
Johan Jacob Lorentz, 
Johan Georg Threin, 
Johann Nickel Lintz, 
Johann Nickel Lintz jr., 
Philip Micher, 
Johann Nickel Scholl, 
Philipp Schammo, 
Hans Adam Müller, 
Johannes Tedweiler, 
Friedrich Brandtohr, 
Johan Peter Frick, 
Hans Ludwig Herman, 
Michael Wilhelm, 
Daniel Gerhard, 
Hans Adam Schory, 
Michael Zimes, 
Johannes Pfau, 
Hans Georg Bau, 
Georg Wendling, 
Daniel Kämmer, 
Johann Peter Facquart, 
Joh. Henrich Hermann, 
Jacob Hausknecht, 
Joh. Hen. Krächmer, 
Adam Bernhart, 
Johan Adam Stenger sen., 
Georg Etelwein, 
Daniel Kämmer, 
Christian Stenger. 



269) Sept. 1, 1769. Ship Nancy and Sucky, William Keys, 
Captain, from London. 

(Sept. 1, 1769. ©c^ijf ^fianc^ unt) ©udf^, Sapitain Söltliam 
^tX)i, öon Sonbon. 

Friederich Roth, Jacob Grob, 

Wilhelm Usener, Joan Guilielmus Pythan, 

a John Cottringer was only qualified Feb. 14, 1769. — [Editor.) 
a 3oi[)n Sottrtnger tturbe erfi am 14. gebr. 1769 qualiftjirt.— ($era«^g.) 



388 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Joh. Balthaser Dernheimer, 
Job. Hen. Christoph Roth, 
Uli Schrack, 
Christian Roth, 



Nicklaus Ernst, 

Johann Greorg Wunder,? 

Johannes Gabriel. 



270) Sept. 29, 1769. Ship London Pacquet, James Cook, 
Captain, from Lisbon, Portugal. 

(Sept. 29, 1769. ©c^tff Sonton Racquet, Sapitain 3amcg 
goof, oon Sifabon, Portugal. 

Wentzel Serb, Hermanus Cazo,* 

Martin Long,* John Henry Block, 

Johannes Miller, Hen. Michael Dhämer, 

Thomas Brüst, Joseph Schmeuell, 

Martin Giitt, Frantz Gamb, 

Friederich Diess, Joel Franciscus Todf, 

Adrian Brüst, Job. Her. Fried. Lippenkan. 
Pitre Inder, 



271) Oct. 13, 1769. Ship Minerva, Thomas Amott, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth. 

Dct. 13, 1769. ©c^iff 9)iineroa, Sapitain Z^oma^ Strnott, 
»on 9totterbam über ^ortömout^. 



Andreas Heyer, 
Lorentz Heier, 
Friederich Grommel, 
Hans Georg Bopp, 
Conrad Bock, 
Job. Jacob Lentz, 
Michael Baus, 
Friederich Kesseler, 
Abraham Mellinger, 
Peter Ulrich, 
Philip Moses, 
Bernhard Karg, 
Phüip Seyfrit,* 
Joseph Farni, 



Jacob Farny, 

Jacob Müller, 

Michael Hertz, a 

Conrad Hoffman, 

Michael Neff, 

Michael Dosch, 

Daniel Scheffer, 

Jacob Berg, 

Johan Philip Hecker, 

Johan Georg Göltmann, 

Johan Christoph Ferdig, 

Philip Henrich Bohlender, 

Job. Matheis Katzenbach, 

Johan Nicklas Schaffer, 



a Michael Hertz, written in Hebrew, undoubtedly a Jew. — (Editor.) 
a ^idi)ail ^tx^ tft in t)ebrätfct)cr Schrift gefc^riebtn, unb ifl jweifelöo^ne 
itx 3lamt eineö 3uben.— (^eraueigcber.) 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 17G9. 



389 



Johan Theobald Emvich, 

Johann Adam Klein, 

Johann Adam Weiler, 

Johannes Theis Arnd, 

Joh. Henrich Mauderbach, 

Joh. Henrich Manderbach jr., 

Joh. Henrich Dischardt, 

Johann Wilhelm 8chu, 

Georg Friederich Rück, 

Johan Georg Zundel, 

Johann Nicklaus Döbler, 

Hans Georg Jacob, 

Jacob Musselmann, 

Jacob Sülger, 

Johan Matheus Dock, 

Johann Jacob Walter, 

Henrich Klein, 

Nickelas Weber, 

Nich. Bernet,* 

Jacob Diehl, 

Christoph Pasch, 

Jacob Fryer,* 

John Bolliek,* 

Heinrich Fentz, 

Johannes Herd, 

Christian Jung, 

Anthon Fuchs, 

Andi'eas Heger, 

Johannes Weber, 

Georg Siemath,* 

Joh. Jacob Fritz, 



Theobald Hess, 
Hans Vass. ? 
Peter Säwel, 
Manuel Eberth, 
Antoni Drexel, 
Johann Hemrier, 
Henrich Porster, 
Georg Martin Jentz, 
Theobald Schramm, 
Jacob Henrich Arnold, 
Philipp Conrad Haussier, 
Henrich Carl Steutz, 
Philip Peter Rothenheusser, 
Georg Henrich Ziegler, 
Johann Bernhard Frietzel, 
Daniel Naumann, 
Johannes Schneider, 
Johann Philip Frey, 
Johan Jacob Walther, 
Johan Henrich Pfeffer, 
Johan Casper Pauli, 
Johan Ludwig Wasser, 
Johan Christoph Scherrer, 
Johan Adam Stock, 
Joh. Andreas Strasbürger, 
Johann Adam Steuer, 
Johan Valentin Klein, 
Johan Jacob Kiefer, 
Johan Michael Rademacher, 
Johan Philip Hennstz, 
Stanislaus Matter. 



272) Oct. 24, 1769. Ship Crawford, Charles Smith, Com- 
mander, from Rotterdam. 

Oct. 24, 1769. ©d)iff Sraiüfort, GcmmanbantS^arlesSmitl), 
»DU 9totttn-t)am. 



Georg Rüncker, 
Michael Caff, 
Johannes Hinckel, 
Friederich Kneiss, 



Dieter Beyerle, 
Johannes Hoff, 
Peter Thorn, 
Wilhehn Nadler, 



33* 



390 NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 

Anthon Müller, Jost Henrich Thiel, 

Johan Adam Bariedet, Christopher Schmidt, 

Johan Wilhelm Stoll, Johann Theis Kempff, 

Valentin Hoffman, Johann Bernhart Kempff, 

Johann Wilhelm Flick, Johan Theis Miller.* 



273) July 27, 1770. Snow Neptune, Thomas Edward Wallis, 
Commander, from Lisbon, Portugal. 

3uH 27, 1770. «Seefc^iff 5fieptune, Sommantant I^omaö 
ßbwarti Sßaüiö, ücn Siffabon, ^ortugaL 

John Nuttler,* Georg Heinrich Cremer, 

Francicio Weytzer, Philip Jacob Michael, 

Johann Paul Karz, Johann Georg Bradtfisch. 
Jean Baptiste, 



274) Aug. 29, 1770. Brig Dolphin, George Stephenson, 
Captain, from London. 

Slug. 29, 1770. 33rtgg Dülpi)in, Sapitain ©eorge <Step^en= 
fon, »on Ronton. 

Joseph Solomon, Johann Jost Klein, 

Peter Miller,* Jean Siesrieux, 

George Alizon, Nicola Pavit, 

Jaque Monie, Piere Pavit. 



275) Sept. 10, 1770. Snow Rose, George Ord, Master, from 
Lisbon, Portugal. 

(Sept. 10, 1770. (Seefd)iff Siofe, Sapitain ©eorge Drl», »on 
^'ijfabon, 5)ortuga(. 

Johannes End, Johann Krüsser, 

Peter Mohr,* Petro Claude, 

xintoine Dore, Gille Sarier.* 
Louise Patier,* 



276) Oct. 1, 1770. Ship Minerva, Thomaa Arnott, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Oct. 1, 1770. (Sd)ijf 5Hineröa, dapitatn I^omae ^vnott, 
»on 2lottevt>am über Sojuei?. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1770. 



391 



Greorg Mengs, 
Michael Schmitt, 
Johannes Schell, 
Georg Müller, 
Jacob Kuntz, 
Jacob Marx, 
Valentin Hess, 
Philip Frantz,* 
Lorents Vix, 
David Ott, 
Georg Gelli,* 
Adam Bieber, 
Adam Wolff, 
Theobald Busch,* 
Jacob Greiner, 
Sebastian Heiss, 
Jacob Schmit,* 
John Leiffer,* 
Georg Luck, 
Jacob Luck,* 
Peter Schmit, 
John Weyer, 
Johannes Sprötz, 
Georg Jacob Sturm, 
Hans Georg Schell, 
Johann Georg Hammerer, 
Michael Nonnenmacher, 
Johann Georg Schnepp, 
Andreas Eyrich, 
Caspar Pletsch, 
Mathias Weber, 
Johann Peter Bössinger, 
Friederich Hehlhofher, 
Friederich Greiner,* 
Johan Georg Pfäll, 
Georg Heinrich Maurer, 
Johannes Scheib, 
Johann Georg Müller, 
Jacob Lück, 
Mathias Scheuermann, 
Christian Weiss, 



Johannes Becker, 
Martin Kerner,* 
Philip Preissman,* 
Johan Georg Bastian, 
Job. Henrich Bastian, 
Georg Nickel, 
Conrad Holstein, 
Heinrich Freyer, 
Jacob Paulus, 
Peter Miller, 
Michael Schock,* 
Philip Simon,* 
Jacob Heintz, 
Georg Wier,* 
Johan Frantz, 
Christian Schultz,* 
Michel Gerst, 

Jacob Coblentz, ^ 

Michael Schafter, 
Georg Ferber, 
Henrich Gärthner, 
Jacob DoU, 
Jacob Stambach, 
Dieterich Stambach, 
Johannes Gaul,? 
Andreas Kiefer, 
Johannes Humbolt, 
Georg Paul Freyer, 
Matheis Weidner, 
Philip Jacob Bessinger,* 
Wilhelm Schlemilch, 
Hans Georg Herrmann, 
Stephan Fünfrock, 
Michael Fünfrock jr., 
Hans Georg Mallo, 
Joh. Henrich Hornberger, 
Job. Geo. Zimmerman,* 
Hans Georg Weidman, 
Michael Kammer, 
Georg Henrich Braunig, 
David Hirschberger,* 



392 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Conrad Sebastian Koller, 
Jacob Philip Ham, 
Michael Pessinger,* 



Martz Olftheintz, 
Johan Henrich Wäldte. 



277) Oct. 30, 1770. Snow Brittania. Richard Eyer, Master, 
from Lisbon, Portugal. 

Dct. 30, 1770. ©eefc^iff SSrittania, Sapitain 9ti(^art) (59cr,j 
oon ^ijfabon, ^ortu^al. ' 

Z. Didiers, Guilliaume Mommaton, 

De Labeaume, Jean Vinettier, 

Jean Hissard, Matheis Kreis. 



278) Oct. 29, 1770. Ship Sally, John Osmond, Master, from 
Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 143 passengers. 

Dct. 29, 1770. ©c^iff Satl^, (Sapitain 3o^n £)gmont, öon 
JRottertiam über ßoujeö. — 143 3teifent)e. 



Job. Anton Frazer,* 
Christoph Müller, 
Francis Stein,* 
Job. Geo. Altefried,* 
Peter Joseph,* 
Paul Mingel,* 
Burchart Seipp, 
Daniel Solmer,* 
Johannes Ditman, 
Georg Christian Völcker, 
Dietrich Wilh. Bucking, 
Thomas Engelhardt, 
Johan Friederich Hester, 
Job. Jost Sasmanshaussen, 
Johan Krafft Achebach, 
John Henry Denner, 
Johann Henrich Eul,? 
Johan Jost Birckelbach, 
Andreas Lichti, 
Johannes Lichti, 
Johannes Criess, 
Jacob Schneyder, 
Jacob Schnell, 



Johannes Reichel, 
Henrich Weitherstein, 
Martin Hebeisen, 
Job. Georg Dentzel, 
Christian Furbi, 
Paulus Welbemeir, 
Henry Wernley, 
Johannes Bibighauss, 
Johannes Vollmer, 
Johannes Stick, 
Johannes Franck, 
Johannes Weyandt, 
Justus Schmidt, 
C. G. Hauck, 
Henricus Horn, 
Jacob Bühler, 
Peter Vogt, 
Jacob Hubacher, 
Paridon Petersen, 
Friederich Borsch, 
Rudolph Miller,* 
Hans Christian, 
Daniel Mise, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1770. 



393 



Christoph Beil, 
Johannes Graul, a 
Johan Henrich AiFterbach, 
Johan Henrich Weyand, 
Joh. Christopher Dietz, 
Johan Theobald Franck, 
Ludwig Daniel Stendli, 
Johann Nicklaus Walter, 
Johann Georg Schleicher, 
Johan Balthas Klein, 
Johan Henrich Klieberstein, 
Johann Adam Haar, 
Georg Andreas Wagner, 
Johan Christian Breitner,* 
Johann Nickel Haas, 
Johann Nickel Bach, 



Johann Jost Weyandt, 
Johan Christ, vom Hoff, 
Johann Peter Grub, 
Georg Ludwig Fischer, 
Johannes Bachneid, 
Johan Martin Gaul, 
Joh. Martin Baumann, 
Friederich Wilh. Baumann, 
Christian Aeschlimann, 
Johan Jacob Heinriegel, 
Baizar Heinriegel, 
Christ. Ludwig Heinriegel, 
George Emmert, 
Johannes Hothem, 
Johan Valentin Franck. 



279) Nov. 23, 1770. Ship Crawford, Charles Smith, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 60 passengers, including 

Newlanders. f 

gioo. 23, 1770. ®d)iff Srawfort», Sapitain 6f)arteö ®mtt(), 
»on Slotterbam über Sotöcö. — 60 9te{fentie, einf(^Ue§Ud) fcer 
9?eu(änt)cr. f 



Daniel Stauffer, 
Jacob Rohrer, 
Wilhelm Gramm, 
Johannes Hiestand, 
Cornelius Gramm, 
Tobias Hartmann, 
Peter Müller, 
Johannes Uff, 



Jacob Uff, 
Francis Kuhlman, 
Ernst Berg, 
Johannes Jauss, 
Henrich Haub, 
Andreas Gutting,* 
P. F. Droz, 
Jacob Geiger, 



a A memorandum on this list states, "nine absent of those to be quali- 
fied." — (Editor.) 

a (gtne Slnmerfung auf btefer Stfic fagt: „neun ber ju Qualtpjtrenben 
abtoefenb.— (^ernuögcbcr.) 

■|- Newlandp.rs, such persons as had been in Pennsylvania before. — 
See Rupp's History of Germans in Penna., Chap. '■^Neuländer." 

f 9teulänber finb fo((J)e ^^erfonen, bic [cfeon »orljer tn ^'ennf^lsanien 
gewcfen waren.— ®ic^c Stupp'o ®cf($ic^te ber 'Dfutf4)en tn ^ennf^löamen. 
Äab. „«Reulänber." 



394 NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 

Carl Wilhelm Keck, Georg Kleiderlein, 

Johannes Grinther, Johannes Hummy, 

Johannes Diehl, Onesimus Schwend, 

Carl Adolph Seitz, Heinrich Geiger, 

Andreas Serenius, Cornelius Braun. 



280) June 17, 1771. Ship Pennsylvania Packet, Peter Os- 
born, Master, from London. 

Sunt 17, 1771. ©c^iff ^ennfpbania ^aäü, (^apitain 5)eter 
Döborn, »on Sonton. 

Conrad Bachman, Philip Jacob Weiss, 

Abraham Mayret, Job. Georg Fried. Bechtel, 

Ludwig Rohrer, Johann Adam Bauth. 

Johannes Heyler, 



281) July 27, 1771. Brig America, William Copeland, Com- 
mander, from London. 

3uü 27, 1771. Srigg Stmerica, Sommanbant aBilliam (5o})C= 
lant», »on 8ont)on. 

Johannes Belmann, Johann Georg Helff, 

Johannes Hepp, Johann Dietrich Hepp, 

Justus Kornschur,? Job. Georg von Nieder, 

Lorentz Stahl, Job. Martin von Nieder,* 

Jacob Ruff, John Jacob von Nieder. 



282) Sept. 17, 1771. Ship Minerva, Thomas Arnott, Cap- 
tain, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 204 passengers. 

(Sept. 17, 1771. @(^iff SJJineroa, ßapitain Zl^omai Slrnott, 
»on Siottertiam über ßot»eö. — 204 Sieifenfce. 
Jacob Wentz, Henry Dieterich, 

Henry Spiess, Job. Barth. Rohm, 

George Miller, Johan Daniel Sehröder, 

Gabriel Gascha,* Wilhelm Friederich Seeger, 

Philip Müller, Carl Philip Ebcrt, 

Christian Kneber, Johan Henrich Schmaltz, 

Jacob Beier, Georg Jacob Stoltzel, 

Peter Hertel,* Johan Georg Jordy, 

Henrich Schäffer, Johan Peter Lutsch, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1771. 



395 



Johann Peter Kuntz, 
Johann Peter Heissler 
Jacob WeisS;* 
Caspar Osser, 
Conrad Osser, 
Jacob Jung,* 
John Werge,* 
Alexander Oranu, 
John Geo. Noth,* 
Jacob Wentz, 
Adam Wagner, 
Michael Waldenaus,* 
Wilhelm Hirsch, 
Friederich Hirsch,* 
Valentin Linn, 
Carl Welcker, 
Jacob Welcker, 
PhUip Hehck, 
Henrich Kurtz, 
Ulrich Käyser, 
Mattheis Engel, 
Andreas Hertziger, 
Friederich Dewald, 
Johannes Böst, 
Jacob ReifF,* 
Christian Graul, 
Michael Schmidt, 
Jacob Hanhor, 
Anton Glantz, 
Ludwig Stegner, 
Peter Kurtz, 
Jacob Laux, 
David Drexler, 
Petrus Meyer, 
Joh. Peter Lehr, 
Erasmus Busch,* 
Dionisius Busch, 
Henrich Weidlandt, 



Johann Geo.Friederich Scheller, 
Henrich Matterkens,* 
Johann Georg Christmann, 
Johan Henrich Sehe, 
Johannes Güntlert, 
Johannes Reinhold, 
Michael Pilerge,? 
Johann Michael Schmidt, 
Johan Jacob Meder, 
Andreas Hettmansterger, 
Johann Georg Stierle, 
Johann Michael Hoel, 
Friederich Seigmüller, 
Jacob Grünenwaldt, 
Johann Adam Malle, 
Johann Georg Süss, 
Johann Friederich Dorsch, 
Johan Conrad Roth, 
Johann Conrad Schneider, 
Hans Baltzer Peterman.* 
John Henry Peterman.* 
Johann Philip Schenckel, 
Valentin Saslavo Stadeeifcer, 
Theobald Leibrock. 
Philip Jacob May, 
Sebastian Marcker, 
Jacob Kuhlman, 
Adam Molitor, 
Johan Michael Straub, 
Jacob Huthmacher, 
Joh. Gerhard Kaltschmidt, 
Joh. Stephan Guck, 
Johan Jost Otterback, 
Joh. Erhardt Räyer, 
Philip Henrich Knapp, 
Philip Conrad Christ, 
Georg Christoph Hebebold. 



283) Sept. 19, 1771. London Packet, 
from Lisbon, Portugal. 



Cook, Captain, 



396 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



(Sept. 19, 1771. £ont)on '^adet, Gapitain Soof, »on Stffafeon, 
5)ortugaI. 

Henrich Berger, Michael Esteuer, 

Peter Schunke,* Michelle Devignair,* 

Paulus Gottlob Griell, Etienne Teisser, 

Gerardius Vestens, Pier Gabori.* 
Jean Baptiste, 



284) Oct. 31, 1771. Brigantine Recovery, Bull, Mas- 
ter, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Dct. 31, 1771. «Sc^neüfcgter Slecoöcrt), Gapitain 33u(I, »on 
Stotterfcam über (Eoiveö. 



John Havel, 
Jacob Schupp, 
Michael Gundery, 
Johannes Ortmann, 
Christian Furman,* 
Johannes Hei'schman, 
Paul Ackerman,* 
Philip Burbach, 
Daniel Niederhauss, 
Nicholas Becker, 
Peter Schneider,* 
Albert Delir, 
Christian Weber, 
Albertus Kratz, 
Johannes Benner, 
Andreas Schneider, 
Philip GräflF, 
John Martin,* 
Jacob Welsch, 
Wilhelm (Ertter, 
A'^alentin Thomas, 
Jacob SchäfFer, 
Michael Schaffer, 
Peter Becker, 
Johannes Schnell, 



Gottfried Lebrecht Schmidt, 
Johann Georg Reiss, 
Job. Henrich Ortmann, 
Gottfried Henrich Diehoff, 
Johannes Nicklaus Neu, 
Johann Michael Lahm, 
Christophel Zäntyes, 
Johann Peter Schneider sen., 
Johannes Peter Schneider, 
Johannes Christian Horster, 
Johann Jacob Denkircher, 
Jacob Henrich Wilhelm, 
Ludwig Schneider, 
Alexander Schumacher, 
Johann Nickel Welsch, 
Johann Jost Schneider, 
Johann Adam Leonhardt, 
Hans Jacob Schäff'er, 
Johan Conrad Spangenberg, 
Johannes Eckstein, 
Wilhelm Ernst Feibach, 
Johannes Schnell jr., 
Johann Martin Hisger, 
Johann Henrich Filger, 
Johann Jacob Becker. 



285) Nov. 19, 1771. Ship Tyger, Georg Johnston, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1771. 



397 



««00. 19, 1771. ©c^iff 
oon Stotterbam über Soivcö. 
John Kreble,* 
Peter Wagner,* 
Nicholaus Scheuerman,* 
Jacob Wagner,* 
Ludwig Schneider, 
Johannes Müller, 
Hans Georg Benner, 
Johann Jacob Beyerle, 
Sebastian Wille, 
Dominicas Heyrom,* 
Nicholas Grünenwald, 
Johann Lautenschläger, 
Peter Wasser, 
Adam Steiner, 
Henry Apple, 
Henry Webber, 
Anthony Klein, 
Nicholas Jost, 
Johannes Sigile, 
Matheis Fauth, 
Caspar Beyer, 
Johannes Motte, 
Nicklaus Köhler, 
Friederich Foltz, 
Jacob Burg, 
Jacob Hoffman, 
George Hann,* 
Nicholas Hoffman, 
Jonas Blesch, 
Jacob Ihrig, 
Gustavus Müller, 
Johannes Lupp, 
Peter Odern, 
Christoph StÖrner, 
Wilhelm Kumpf, 
Henrich Mülberger, 
Johannes Ihrig, 
Martin Grahn, 
Henrich Rickos, 



J^ger, ßapitain ©eorg So^^njlon, 

Johannes Weller, 
Johannes Nitzel, 
Leonard Kessler, 
Georg Volck, 
Johannes Schneider, 
Peter Kessler, 
Carle Benner, 
Johannes Benner, 
Martin Benner, 
Jacob Marx, 
Adam Grosshart, 
Peter Trexler, 
Michael Trexler, 
Jacob Kessler,* 
Conrad Haasse, 
Georg Michael Weiss, 
Job. Daniel Schwanfelder, 
Jacob Samuel Golde, 
Johann Nicolas Fuchs, 
Johann Michael Beltz, 
John Le Port, 
Georg Mich. Raffe nberger, 
Hans Georg Ackermann, 
Johann Wilhelm Fleck, 
Georg Simon Grün, 
Hen. Jac. Raubenheimer, 
Johannes Wucherer, 
Job. Hen. Lautenschläger, 
Johannes Willmann, 
Georg Henrich Kindle, 
Niclaus Samuel Golde, 
Johannes Waltman, 
Georg Friederich Küchle, 
Johann Christ. Jäger, 
Wilhelm Schmidt, 
Johann Peter Weill, 
Johan Georg Scheuermann, 
Johan Daniel Cleiss, 
Johann Michael Ihrig, 



398 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Johann Friederich Dörr, 
Georg Eissenriug, 
Johann Peter Schrig, 
Joh. Gottlieb Stein Becker, 
Johann Georg Horn, 
Johann Adam Low, 
John Bernard Leyer, 
Johan Caspar Lorentz, 
Hann Heinrich Zimmerman, 
Johan Wilhelm Schneider, 
Gottfried Kihnner, 
Johann Nickel Martin, 
Johannes Bernhardt Henn, 
Johann Ludwig Starck, 
Johann Adam Dracker, 
Johan Conrad German, 
Johann Bernhard Ragel, 
Johannes Peter Reusch, 
Conrad Meyer,* 
Johannes Schott, 



Lewis Ney, 

John Ney, 

Sebastian Dheuch, 

Johannes Schletzer, 

Martin Eberts, 

John Jorts,* 

Jacob Scheibly, 

Philip Egle, 

Adam Als, 

Christ. Jeremias Schmidt, 

Johannes Reusch, 

Conrad Radman, 

Johann Jacob Menges, 

Jacob Sanner, 

Johannes Niebel, 

Johan Georg Laudenschläger, 

Hans Mich. Lautenschläger, 

Conrad von Halt, 

Adam Eberhardt, 

Andreas Ehmer. 



286) Nov. 25, 1771. Ship Crawford, Charles Smith, Com- 
mander, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

5^00.25,1771. <5^iffdratDforli,SommanbantS^arIeö@mit^, 
toon Slottertam über Soireö. 

Michael Mohrlock, Jacob Friederich Höckhlen, 

Daniel Wolff, Johann Peter Kuch, 

Mathias Krauss, Johann Stephan Sulger, 

Gottfried StoU, Christoph Gottlieb Thieleman. 



287) Dec. 1, 1771. Brig Betsey, Andrew Bryson, Com- 
mander, from London. 

2)ec. 1, 1771. Srigcj Setfe^, Sommantiant Slnfere» Sßr^fon, 
öon Sonton. 

Jacob Frey, Johannes Schmidt, 

Jacob Schneider, Johannes Staub, 

Heinrich Meier, Jacob Kugler, 

Friederich Bänley, Heinrich Fichter, 

Jacob Bäy, Peter Stein, 

Jacob Stügger, Jacob Heer, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1772. 



399 



Henrich Dicke, 
Hermanus Dicke, 
Rudy Funck, 
John Koch, 
Wilh. Becker, 
Michael Frey, 
Johannes Heiutz, 
Johannes Flubacher, 
Jacob Flubacher, 
Heinrich Busser, 
Martin Thomme, 
Christophel Winder, 
Mattheis Füsselbaeh, 



Paulus Bauersachs, 
Johan Henrich Hester, 
Jacob Zimmerman, 
Jean Gaspard Hathe, 
Sebastian Strauman,* 
Conrad Schelerünthler, 
Wilhelm Schwhenneher, 
Johannes Klappert, 
Johann Martin Frey, 
Sebastian Harth, 
Daniel Volck, 
Martin Funck, 
Jacob Schumacher. 



288) Dec. 10, 1771. Ship General Wolfe, Richard Hunter, 
Commander, from Lisbon, Portugal. 

X)ec. 10, 1771. Schiff ®enera( 2BoIfe, (Jommantant fRiä^axt) 
Runter, öon Siffabon, 5>ortugaI. 

Charles Smith, Anton Emits, 

R. Berger, Nich. Biso,* 

Francs Pros, Joannes Baptista, 

Casper Trible,* John Fajon,* 

John Carle,* Johannes Schmitt. 



289) Feh. 24, 1772. Ship Hope, John Roberts, Captain, 
from London. — 26 passengers. 

geb. 24, 1772. (S(^iff Jpope, Sapitain 3o^n JHobert^, üon 
Soitbon. — 26 Steifenbe. 



Henrich Meisner, 
Hieronimus Henricii, 
Christian Schmidt, 
Christian Wohler, 
Phil. Wilh. May, 
Dietrich Muntzer, 
Friederich Hector, 
Theobald Klein, 
Lemuel Lober, 
Theobald Bastian, 
Martin Sudtne, 



Joh. Friederich Hönninger, 
Johan Ernst Ziegler, 
Johann Jacob Schweutzer, 
Johann Henrich Steitz, 
Johann Henrich Voigt, 
Johann Jacob Hartmann, 
Johann Andreas Fritze, 
Johan Ulrich Bayer, 
Johann Georg Trühauffer, 
Johann Georg Meyer, 
Johan Melchior Vast. 



400 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



290) Sept. 20, 1772. Ship Minerva, James Johnston, Com- 
mander, from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 97 passengers. 

©ept. 20, 1772. ©c^iff SJZinerüa, (Eommanfeant ^amt€ 3ot)n= 
fion, »on Siotterbam über dojue^. — 97 Steifende. 



Johannes Mayer, 
Caspar Wintz, 
Hans Plattner, 
Johannes Hauck, 
Hans Schuey, 
Ludwig Miller,* 
Gottlob Hempel, 
Henri Perret, 
Jacob Schaub, 
Christian Apffel, 
Henrich Schweitzer, 
Jacob Ballmer, 
Thomas MoU, 
Jacob Schwele, 
Frantz Beck, 
Heinrich Schäublin, 
Ulrich Henberger, 
Jacob Hofiacker, 
John Christian Fleit,* 
Hans Baltzer Biisch, 



Hans Peter Kämmer, 
Johan Martin Zimmer, 
Johan Friederich Ulmer, 
Johannes Wasling, 
Hans Casper Heier, 
Georg Henrich Dehn, 
Hans Jacob Moller, 
Johann Georg Kessler, 
Johann Da\ad Bennz, 
Johannes Schwerdle, 
John Arnoldus, 
Jacob Uberer, 
Martin Rudy, 
Wilm. Nycius,* 
Henrich Wissich, 
Hans Jacob Weier, 
Gottfried Zessemick, 
John George Stander,* 
Johann Georg Gehr. 



291) Oct. 16, 1772. Ship Crawford, Charles Smith, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Dct. 16, 1772. ®d)iff Sramfort), Sapitain ß^arte^ Smit^, 
öon giotterbam über Someö. 



Andreas Hoffman, 
Martin Hauck, 
Jacob Demmel, 
Johannes Fischer, 
Jacob Schwartz, 
Valentin Welcker, 
Gottfried Wittman, 
Friederich Beyer, 
Johannes Homer, 
Jacob Scherer, 
Gottfried Fechty, 



Christian Schlauch, 
Johann Werth, 
L. Smith,* 
Johannes Sauter, 
Jacob Abbiter, 
Henrich Vogel, 
Philipp Hamman, 
Andreas Weissart, 
Jonathan Linck, 
Frederick Feitmeyer, 
Christian Mohr, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1772. 



401 



Martin Wieton, 
Johannes Schmidt, 
Johannes Keitzi, 
Marx Schneider, 
Jacob Rupp, 
Samuel Schoch, 
Georg Franck, 
Christian Rettes, 
Wilhelm Baltzer, 
Henrich Zercher, 
Andreas Müller, 
Johan PhUip Fitting, 
Johan Christian Nerbler, 
Johan Theobald Merckel, 
Henrich Franckforther, 
Johann Peter Ochsner, 
Hans Martin Mayer, 
Johann Henrich Wagenhorst, 
Johann Carl Wagenhorst, 
Hans Georg Preis, 
Joh. Georg Warthman, 
John Henry Zimmerman, 
Matheus Lindenmeyer, 
Michael Warthman, 
Samuel Friederich Winter, 
Georg Martin Hüchtner, 
Michael Stauflfer, 
Jonathan Treuttle, 
Peter Hamman, 
Friederich Linck, 
Johann Georg Baum, 
Bernhardt Wieland, 
Andreas Holtzbarth, 
Johannes Buchmiüler, 
Henrich Weissmüller, 
Johann Christoph Scheibe, 
Jacob Friederich Lauser, 
Joh. David Ziegler, 
Joh. Jacob Eberly, 
Joh. Georg Einwächter, 



Johan Conrad Discher, 
Martin Möllinger, 
Johan Leonhard Fichler, 
Jacob Lautermilch, 
Albrecht Kümmerle, 
Johann Hebeisen, 
Johannes Beer, 
Peter Gälte, 
Johann Hess, 
Peter Lambert, 
Andreas Lambert, 
Joseph Stump, 
Michael Müller, 
Rudolph Seltzer, 
George Shuman,* 
Isaac Bergthal, 
John Gramer,* 
Martin Hirsch, 
Balthas Bertsch, 
Jonas Nothstein, 
Johann Gram, 
Joseph GraflF, 
Georg Henrich Maurer, 
Friederich Wilhelm Hess, 
Frantz Carl Widman, 
Johann Peter Harbach, 
Georg Friederich Betz, 
Johann Friederich Betz, 
Georg David Herrn, 
Philip Jacob Sartorius, 
Georg Michael Miller,* 
Friederich Linck, 
Abraham Köhler, 
Peter Weymer sen., 
Christoph Saudrich, 
Johann Wendel Wiegele, 
Georg Adam Zacharius, 
Jacob Schmidt, 
Johannes Quast, 
Frantz Peter Drexler. 



34* 



402 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



292) Oct. 19, 1772. Ship Catliarine, Sutton, Captain, 

from Rotterdam, last from London. 

Oct. 19, 1772. ©d)tff eat^arinc, ßapttain ©utton, öon 
3flotterliam über Sontton. 



Francis Stephany, 
Leonhard Müller, 
Ulrich Otho, 
Georg Keller, 
George Bardeck, 
Martin Schude, 
Francis Geisse, 
Frantz Heicks, 
Henrich Gerding, 



Charles Friederich Knöry,* 
Johan Caspar Koch, 
Christian Linderman, 
Gotthard David Flick wir, 
Henrich Richner, 
Frantz Fideli Schreckenbürger, 
Joh. Christoph Lotspeich, 
Peter Mohrmann. 



293) Oct. 19, 1772. Ship Pheba, 
London. 



Castle, Captain, from 



Dct. 19, 1772. (Schiff ^^tU, (Eapitain ßaftlc, »on bonbon. 

Nicholas Jacobson, . Joh. Reinhardt Schäbelle, 

Frederick Schröder, Joh. Friederich Bahlsdorf, 

Georg Rehfeld, Friederich Klette. 



294) Nov. 3, 1772. Ship Sally, John Osmond, Master, from 
Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

5f?oö. 3, 1772. ©c^iff ©a% eapitain 3o^n D^monb, »on 
9lotterbam über Soweg. 



Gerlach Hass, 
Joh. Geo. Ostertag, 
Daniel Weiss, 
Samuel Reiss, 
Carl Neier, 
Johan Freymu, 
John Holtz, 
Karl Geissler, 
Wilhelm Lehman, 
Christian Trautmann, 
Weygandt Rohr, 
Henrich Rolandt, 
Jacob Albrecht, 
Johannes Krom, 



Peter Rathenbach, 
Johannes Fritzinger, 
Jacob Michel, 
Wilhelm Reiss, 
Henrich Dieterich, 
Conrad Böder, 
Jean Halewyn, 
J. W. Lopfer, 
Jacob Theis, 
Christian Schmid, 
Matthias Pauli, 
Christian Reete, 
Johannes Theis Schnell, 
Nicolaus Trautwein, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1772. 



403 



Johann Jacob Eller, 
Wilhelm Henrich Ritter, 
Joh. Adam Matzenbacher, 
Ernst Henrich Fritzinger, 
Johan Matheus Böttger, 
Joh. Jost Langebach,* 
Johan Henrich Hartmann, 
Johannes Schieberstein, 
Johan Gerlach Lupffer, 
Johan Daniel Koffer, 
Johann Georg Rubbel, 
Johannes Peter Schneider, 



Johann Henrich Georg, 
Johan Georg Knebelbach, 
Philip Peter Schneider,* 
Burchard Heyer,* 
Nicklas Paulus, 
Hans Georg Hiderffer,? 
John Philip Bauer, 
Gottheb Schlichter,* 
Johan Jost Betz, 
Johann Georg Eull, 
Johann Wilhelm Meyer, 
Johan Nicolaus Schuhriem. 



295) Dec. 3, 1772. Ship Hope, George Johnston, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Dec. 3, 1772. (Sd)iff ^ope, (Sapitain ©eorgc 3o^nfton, pon 
9tottert)ant über Sot»eö. 



Henrich Lehr, 

Jacob Finck, 

Johannes Ohlwein, 

Johannes Hentz, 

Johannes Gösch, 

Peter Keller, 

Johannes Elgerth, 

Wilhelm Becker, 

Jacob Binckle, 

John Frickheffer,* 

Arnold Peters, 

Jacob Cacho, 

Joh. Zacharias Langbein, 

Johann Georg Pflinder, 

Philip Hardmanu, 

Johan Philip Miller, 

John George Geib,* 

Friederich Jacob Laux, 

Wilhelm Friederich Dampff, 



Georg Wilhelm Ber, 
Philip Martin Keilhauer, 
Georg Kirchner, 
Henrich Schuler, 
Johann Adam Funck, 
Paulus Huwes, 
Anthon Rausch, 
Anthony Auer, 
Jacob Masser, 
Christian Stucky, 
Georg Films, 
Isaac Heuman, a 
Friederich Steinha 
Justus Bottenfeld, 
Christian Sahm, 
Johann Jacob Pfautz, 
Johan Jost Frickheffer, 
Johan Jost Dalmer, 
Carl Ohlwein, 



a Isaac Heuman, written in Hebrew. — [Editor.) 

a 3fanc ^cuman ift i^ebrät[(| gefclrieben.— (Herausgeber.) 



404 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



296) Dec. 24, 1772. 
Master, from Rotterdam, 

Dec. 24, 1772. Srigg 
ftcr, »on Stotterbam über 
Gottfried Fisterer, 
Jacob Weltner, 
Jolin Weickel, 
Jacob Küster, 
Will. Kemp, 
Conrad Underseel, 
Jacob Nusser, 
Abraham Richards,* 
John Runkel, 
Jacob Hess, 
Johan Feierbrand, 
Friederich Hoffmann, 
Anthony Schäffer, 
Peter Nauätter, 
Johann Lemer, 
Ludwig Reinick, 
Bernhard Nickel,* 
Philip Suppert,* 
Friederich Winder, 
Christian Wenger, 
Georg Schwartz, 
Frantz Mentzer, 



Brig Morton Star, Georg Demster, 

last from Cowes. 

5Korton (Star, Sapitatn @eorg 2)em= 

Soweö» 

Johan Ludwig Maxeiner, 
Henrich Maxeiner, 
Andreas Stettling, 
Johannes Hamscher, 
Nicklaus Lüdermacher,? 
Jno. Jacob Nanecker,* 
Conrad Langebach, 
Ludwig Henrich Deisman, 
Johann Henrich Küntz, 
John Jacob Gerem, 
Wil. Ananius Turnez, 
Johann Georg Kessler, 
Johann Adam Eseh, 
Johan Heinrich Messert, 
Johan Gotfried Gressmehr, 
Johann Adam Stoll, 
Johann Jacob Pfeiffer, 
Johann Carl Miller,* 
Frantz Henricus Hegert, 
Johann Frantz Kelter, 
Johann Peter Ulrich, 
Jacob Niebergall. 



^1^ February 22, 1773, Francis Caspar Hassenclever, a merchant 
of Philadelphia, appeared before Richard Penn, Esq., Lieutenant 
Governor of Pennsylvania, and was qualified. The time of his arrival 
is not stated. — (Editor.) 

^^ 2lm 22. gebruar 1773 erf*tcn graitctö Safpar l^afencleöer, ein 
^anbelömann öon 55t)ilabelp^ta, »or 3ttc^arb 5Jenn, (Sfq., 2ieutenant=®ou= 
»erneur »on ^Jennf^lsanim, unb föurbe qualifijtrt. "Die ßiit [einer Slnfunft 
wirb ntc^t angegeben.— (Herausgeber.) 



297) April 30, 1773. Ship Pennsylvania Packet, Peter Os- 
borne, Commander, from London. 

Sipril 80, 1773. ®d)iff ^ennf^Ioania ^aäet, (iommant>ant 
^cter Döborne, üon Sonbon. 



AND OTHER, IMMIGRANTS — 1' 



405 



Edeme Halbon, 
Gerhard Meyer, 
Arnold Bodescer, 
Johannes Müller, 
Conrad Gabel, 
Charles Kliikner,* 
Henrich Kese, 
Philip Bahn, 
Adolph Strohl, 
Gottfried Hebauer, 
Joseph Burchhell, 



Pier Carle Pouponnot, 
Johan Friederich Riutelman, 
Johannes Hartman, 
Anton Le Roy, 
Johan Christoph Hebiegt, 
Andreas Kleinschmidt, 
Johan Philip Rieffenach, 
Christoph Reinche, 
Johann Daniel Lehmann, 
Sebastian Kleinschmidt, 
Friederich Basermann. 



Sutton, Com- 



298) April 30, 1773. Ship Catharine, - 
lander, from London. 

Slpril 30, 1773. Schiff Sat^arinc, Sommanbant ©utton, oon 
Sonton. 



Henry Mollwitz, 
Etienne Shoret, 
Pierre Factzedy, 
Philippe Sunbert, 
Ulrich Bastig, 
Jean Gourdain,* 
Johannes Schmitt, 
Henric Savet, 
Robert Hall, 



Ch. Friederich Oberländer, 
Johan Christoph Schweigerts, 
Henrich Conrad Boger, 
Job. Bar. Dondemand, 
Georg Baumann, 
Jean Daniel Pouriot, 
Simeon Meyland, 
Etienne Morlier, 
Ausustin Gao-e Mercier. 



299) May 31, 1773. Brigantine Dolphin, Arthur Hill, Com- 
mander, from London. 

'Mai 31, 1773. ©^netlfegler 3)oI|)t)tn, Sommanbant %xt^m 
.fjiö, oon Sonbon. 



Friederich Heyn, 
Georg Pfetzer, 
Henry Cautz, 
Jacob Grübe, 
Michael Horn, 
Niehl Bardoe, 
Mathäus Borelle, 
Johannes Engel, 
Andreas Heinlich, 



Nich. Heyer, 
Miehl Flyder,* 
Johann Martin Weber, 
Johann Georg Kuntz, 
Christian Bashedich,* 
Henrich Meister, 
Andreas Reinhardt, 
Henrich Arcularius, 
Philip Jacob Arcularius, 



406 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Ludwig Reinhart, 
Erhard Ahlemann, 
Johann Birstödt, 
Friederich Schleiff, 
Andreas Franck, 
Peter Kappus, 
Nicholas Grottman, 
Jacob Leshong, 
Friederich Frey. 



John Wiseman,* 
Christian Pfeiffer, 
Zacharias Bohret, 
Christopher Keeger,* 
Johann Georg Vogeley, 
Christopher Biege!,* 
Balthasar Paulssig, 
Eberhart Vareflfens.* 



300) June 4, 1773. Ship Carolina, Benjamin Loxley, Cap- 
tain, from London. 

3uni 4, 1773. <5c^iff Carolina, Sapitain Senjamin Sojrle^, 
»on Sonben. 

Gab. Valin, Johann Georg Egert, 

Louis Demarer, Johannes Andre^js Schmidt, 

Henericus Martin, Joachim HartkopfF,* 

John Ellers, Gilli Dautremer. 



301) Aug. 23, 1773. Ship Sally, John Osmond, Comman- 
der, from Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth. — 193 passengers. 

Slug. 23, 1773. ©c^iff ©atlp, (5ommaut>ant 3o^n D^moni), 
»on 9tottert)am über ^ortömoutö. — 193 Stetfcnte. 



Christopher Mingel, 
Mathias Ham, 
John W. Petri, 
Daniel Mesare, 
Ernst Mengeting, 
Joseph Shemmler,* 
Christian Leuthe, 
Heinrich Brüser, 
Herman Heldich,* 
Friederich BrieiF, 
Henry Beck, 
George Wolf, 
Phuip Keyser, 
Gerhard Nobel, 
Isaac Levi, 
Georg Reyninger, 



Bernhard Horning, 
William Übung,* 
Johannes Gadecke, 
Henrich Hilgert, 
Johannes Brücher, 
Albertus Schilack, 
Jean Peietrs, 

Mathias Friederich Däübler, 
Christian Ludwig Bussel, 
Carl Gottl(jb Fridler, 
Johann Mathias Hinck, 
Joh. Hen. Philip Ehr, 
Johann Georg Vanberg, 
Johan Frantz Fuchs, 
Johan Gottfried Fischer, 
Johann Peter Gübrich, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1773. 



407 



Johann Henrich Thielo, 
John Henry Bartram, 
Johann Carl Büttner, 
John Lorentz Tempel, 
Johann Conrad Hasemann, 
Johan Henrich Dreyman, 
Adolph Grottf. Carl Rose, 
Johan Friederich Kukuck, 
Christopher Schlachman, 
Johann Jacob Engel, 
Johann Jacob Müller, 
Johann Jacob Bastian, 
Johann Jacob Becker, 
Carl van Wuwenhuys, 
J. Christ. Schultz, 
Gr. Werner Himmel, 
Jno. Nich. Harm,* 
Burchardt Jung, 
Andreas Jung, 
Peter Lösch, 
J. Daniel Weismuth, 
Anton Hen. Ritter, 
J. Gottfried Nestler, 
W. DoUendorp, 
Ernst Paul Peter, 
John Daman,* 
Martin Hochmeyer, 
Mark Wolff, 
Pierre Demje, 
Adolph Unfug, 
Gottfried Vogel, 
John Feig, 
Theobald Stephan, 
J. Conrad Arnd, 
J. August Just, 
Frantz Mutschier, 
Johannes Braun, 
Andreas Wagner, 
Job. Adam Schmidt 
Andreas Hampe, 



Casimir Leitz, 
Frantz Frischtze, 
Tobias Göhnet, 
Ignatius Graffenberger, 
Conrad Maurer, 
John Kirshner, 
George Schenck, 
Bartel Metilmolske, 
Job. Emanuel Klos, 
Friederich Marcus Montelius, 
John Henry Hasper, 
John Henry Schwitger, 
Johan David Mandeler, 
John Bernhard Habner, 
H. Conrad Hieron. Schultze, 
Johan Christoph Bosse, 
Job. Gottlieb Strietzel, 
Job. Carl Rosenkrantz, 
John Vanderhuyst, 
John Henry Zelman,* 
Johan Peter Walter, 
Carl Enoch Schildbach, 
Job. Tobias Hess, 
Johan Friederich Beck, 
Johan Gottfried Neinrich, 
John Christoph Bautz, 
Francis van Bauch, 
Job. Conrad Brackmann, 
Valentin Christian Lehnig, 
John Herman Rudolph, 
Johann Andreas Merck, 
Johann Christian Merck, 
Johann Christoph Fasel, 
Johann Joachim Welsnack, 
John Valentin Kinberg,* 
Henry Fred. Sbuckers,* 
Henrich Wilhelm Busse, 
Job. Hen. Christ. Bremmer, 
George John Rauch, 
Andreas Fahrenkorn. 



408 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



302) Sept. 18, 1773. Ship Brittania, James Peter, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. — 250 passengers. 

«Sept. 18, 1773. (5d)iff Svittonta, gapitain Sameö ^^eter, ooii 
3ftottert>am über Sonjeö. — 250 SReifenbe. 



Christoph Henri,? 
Daniel Genter, 
Simon Schunck, 
George Miller,* 
Johan Grein, 
Georg Adam Vogelsang, 
Johann Henrich Löhr, 
Johann Georg Ehrenfreid, 
Johann Dieterich Bönig, 
Hans Georg Klein, 
Paul Matz, 
Henrich Saner, 
Andreas Lob, 
Jacob Lück, 
Peter Eckel, 
Christian Becker, 
Johannes Mertz, 
Anthony Weber, 
Philip Conrad, 
Augustin Hes, 
Hans Frick, 
Henrich Schultz, 
Ludwig Gerlinger, 
Christian Leibich, 
Jacob Deque, 
Christian Schütz, 
Adam Kämminger, 
Christophel Orth, 
Mich. Runckel, 
Andreas Ott, 
Johannes Aal, 
Daniel Spiess, 
Dan. Geo. Jung, 
Michael Jung, 
Philip Bönning, 
Jacob Wenner, 
Jacob Schott, 



Johannes Daub, 

Michael Ruff, 

Christian Neil, 

Martin Kramer, 

Ludwig Kramer, 

Joseph Schaak, 

Christoph Henckel, 

Thomas Baumann, 

Bernhart Webert, 

Philip Runckel, 

Bernhard Schmitt, 

Jacob Wenner, 

Jacob Neu, 

Stofel Neu, 

Wilham Rockenbrod,* 

Hans Georg Weyl, 

Johannes Reinhardt, 

Johan Friederich Cammerlich, 

Johan Henrich Herbst, 

Johan Nicklaus Bastian, 

Johann Jacob Waiblinger, 

Philipp Aberthüne, 

Jacob Schauffler, 

Johann Peter Schott, 

Traugott Leberecht Behzer, 

Johann Georg Kramer, 

Johan Nickel Reuthnauer 

Johan Philip Pflieger, 

Johan Jacob Beheling, 

Johan Martin Kramer, 

Johan Georg Kramer, 

Johan Philip Tück, 

Johan Conrad Emich, 

Johann Adam Engertt, 

Johann Conrad Netscher, 

Carl Anton Maas, 

Johann Daniel Roth, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1773. 



409 



Joh. Georg Wenner, 
Joh. Jeremias Bouuing, 
Mermannus Schüler, 
Johann Georg Gunckel, 
Johann Carl Wentzel, 
Johann Georg Huss, 
Georg Martin Eberhardt, 
Johan Balthaser Kinimer, 
Johann Adam Ki'amer, 
Johann Simon Linck, 
Johann Georg Linck, 
Johann Nickel Staudt, 
Johann Friederich Becker, 
Johan Christian Fabritzius, 
Johannes Welthshans, 
Joh. Michael Kirschbaum, 
Hans Adam Weiss, 
Johan Wilhelm Franck, 
Hans Geo. Slettebauer,* 
Joh. Michel Ellig, 
Gottlieb Mayer, 
Michel Haas, 



Peter Haas, 
Michael Jung, 
Wilhelm Voltz, 
Jacob Hertz, 
Jacob Degen,* 
Franc Smith,* 
Henry Erb, 
Daniel Schütz, 
Jacob Schneider, 
Michael Kieffer, 
Jacob Schneider, 
Johann Georg Haffer, 
Conrad Voltz, 
Andreas Hirsch, 
Georg Henrich Geck, 
Adam Schmel, 
Johan Michael Füscher, 
Andreas Gröner, 
Johann Georg Reiner, 
Adam Schneider, 
Johan jNIichael Thome, 
Michael Sath. 



303) Sept. 21, 1773. Ship Catharine, James Sutton, Com- 
mander, from London. 

Sept. 21, 1773. (S^iff Sat()aviue, Sommanbant 3ame3 ®ut= 
ton, öon Bonbon. 



Georg Lufft, 
Johann Schrecka, 
Philipp Wild, 
Johannes Sander, 
Casimir Delbig, 
Johannes Klein, 
GeorK Baucher, 



Jac. Lud. Videbant, 
Conrad Trippel, 
Henrich Andreas Meyer, 
Johan Henrich Becker, 
Christian Tihn, 
Michael Habach, 
Martin Eberhard. 



304) Sept. 27, 1773. Ship Union, 



Bryson, Master, 



from Rotterdam, last from Portsmouth. — 247 passengers. 

«Sept. 27, 1773. ©c^ijf Union, Sapitain Sr^fon, »on diottcx-- 
bam ükr $>ortcimoutl). — 247 Stcifcnbc. 

35 



410 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



Christophel Leinn, 
Balthaser Hammer, 
Johannes Brand, 
John Gennett,* 
John Peter Fuchs, 
Ludwig Bachman, 
Daniel Bernhard, 
Valentin Götz, 
Christian Götz, 
George Shreier,* 
Jacob Smith,* 
Johannes Schütz, 
Johannes Bauss, 
Johannes Kiffer, 
Johann Peter Schauer, 
Johannes Wicke, 
John Philip Diffebach, 
John Henry Dambeller, 
Johan Michael Lenhardt, 
Georg Philip Gruber, 
Johann Jacob Hörner, 
Georg Adam Wendel,* 
John George Störtzemeyer, 
John Adam Zeitz, 
John Michael Clements, 
Johan Zacharias Conradt, 
Johan Henrich Bauch, 
Johan Lenhart Ihrig, 
John Zimmerman, 
Johannes Adler, 
Joh. Adam Krausser, 
Johan Spannman, 
Jacob Arnoldt, 
Rüben Stier, 
Ludwig Schenckel, 
Johann Kroscher, 
Hannes Schmidt, 
Phil. Dan. Greiss, 
John George Sheffer,* 
Johannes Firnhaber, 
Christian Beck, 



Friederich Grames, 

Nicklaus Bachert, 

Andreas Fischer, 

Wilhelm Spies, 

Johann Pfeiffer, 

Herman Spies, 

Wilhelm Busch, 

J. Leonard Rodel, 

J. George Erig, 

Joh. Bounjuin, 

Johannes Batz, 

Conrad Marsdorff, 

C. Varlet, 

Joh. Egel, 

Joh. Geo. Egel, 

John Hartman, 

Johannes Herstein, 

Georg Hartman, 

Jacob Garste, 

Wilhelm Stickel, 

Johannes Schäffer, 

Philip Andreas Hadt, 

Johan Matheis Flach, 

Johan Jacob Aurandt, 

Johann Philip Donnges, 

Johann Valentin Stegmüller, 

Henrich Valentin Storches, 

Johan Peter Schmid, 

Johan Philip Hauck, 

Johann Adam Reichert, 

John George Holtzschuh, 

Jacob Niclaus Firnhaber, 

Andreas Friederich Schwentzel, 

Johann Georg Leonhardt, 

Johann Leonhard Göttmann, 

Johann Peter Stöhr, 

Jacob von Lahnen, 

Johann Gottlieb Metzger, 

Johann Henrich Weber, 

Johann Philip Gräber, 

Johann Henrich Brausser, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1773. 



411 



Philip Peter Grruber, 
Johann Georg Steilhener, 
Johann Joachim Gruber, 
Johann Adam Hartman, 
Johann Nickel Horn, 
Johann Nickel Schmaus, 
Adam Rosmeissel, 



John Conrad Riecheis,* 
Johann Jacob Hoof, 
Johann Jost Lenhard, 
Georg Adam Buckel, 
Johan Wilhelm Krüger, 
Johannes Wilheiser. 



305) Oct. 1, 1773. Ship Hope, George Johnston, Master, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Dct. 1, 1773. Schiff ^ope, Sapttain ©eorgc 3o^nfton, »on 
Stotterbam über Soweö. 



Andreas Dengler, 
Matthias Wall, 
Matthias Wexler, 
Jonas DoUinger, 
Johann Peter Weber, 
Johann Jost Busch, 
Johan Henrich Busch, 
John Christian Guth, 
Henry Steinbring, 
Michael Stumpf, 
David Niess, 
John Karn,* 
Christian Keberling, 
Michael Bauman, 
Andreas Oberdorff, 
Jost Althaus, 
Graff Weyand, 
Conrad Gerhard, 
Fried. Sölchel, 
Henry Meyer,* 
Johannes Huss, 
Georg Wunderlich, 
Johannes Hesse, 
Franz Schmidt, 
Andreas Annletz, 
Jost Welckel, 
Philip Peman, 
Friederich Röser, 
Henry Miller,* 



Johannes Strackbein, 
Leonhardt Schmidt, 
Jacob Schlatter, 
Job. Hen. Klein, 
Niciaus Henrich Stephan, 
Johannes Wilhelm Carle, 
Johann Jost Bruch, 
Johann Carl Mattis, 
Carl Ferdinand Conrad, 
Johann Michael Conrad, 
Johann Bernhart Rau, 
Johann Michael Oberdorff, 
Job. Fried. Sasmanhäuser, 
Johann Wilhelm Seemann, 
Joh. Jeremias Ballenberger, 
Job. Wilhelm Eckhardt, 
Job. Christoph Thiel, 
Philip Adam Schuck, 
Johan Lorentz Dihm, 
Johan Michael Hirsch, 
Johann Henrich Dau, 
Johann Conrad Jung, 
Johann Ludwig Hantz, 
Johann Friederich Welckel, 
Johann Michel Seydel, 
Johann Georg Seidel, 
Job. Hen. Sasmanshaus, 
Johan Ludwig OfBeler. 



412 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



306) Oct. 22, 1773. Ship Charming MoUy, Robert Gill, 
Master, from Rotterdam, last from Plymouth. 

Dct. 22, 1773. ©c^iff e()armiug ^lo^, eapitain diohtxt 
©iü, öon JRotterbam über ^(pmoutt). 



Christian Ernst, 
Nicola Chaillot, 
Valentin Dietz, 
Thomas Krebs, 
Cassimir May, 
Johannes Steckel, 
Friederich Wilhelm, 
Johan Lechleitner 
Pierre Miloh, 
Mathias Astimer, 
Engelbert Classen,* 
Andreas Emmrich, 
Johann Patteiss, 
Johann Martin Fuchs, 
Johan Henrich Hensle, 
Hans Adam Weitzel, 
Johan Michael Fuchs, 
Joh. Conrad Leonhard, 
Johann Philip Berg, 
Joh. Friederich Frey tag, 
Johan Ludwig Schwens, 
Johann Christian Letten, 
Johannes Eberhart Ohl, 
Johan Jost Blecher, 
Johann Henrich Wentzel, 
Joseph Friederich Honstein, 
Jacob Elgart,* 
Henry Dayberer,* 
Christian Schönfeld, 



Daniel Weibel, 
Jacque Dubret, 
Caspar Geissinger, 
Friederich Dietrich, 
Henrich Kleyn, 
Friederich Müller, 
George Reinhart, 
Caspar Adam, 
Johannes Hartman, 
Johannes Hoch, 
Christian Lambert, 
Jacob Graff, 
Arius Schulicus, 
Johann Daniel Bonn, 
Friederich Baltzer Scherer, 
Nicholas Zutheimer,* 
Joseph Cauffman,* 
Johannes Friederich Braun, 
Johann Friederich Vogel, 
Johann David Steinmann, 
Johann Georg Vogel, 
Johann Peter Geyer, 
Johann Adam Lang, 
John Peter Ermolt, 
Carl Heiniich Hartig, 
Bernhard Bauer, 
Johann Georg Müller, 
Johann Georg Theys. 



307) Oct. 25, 1773. Ship Crawford, Charies Smith, i\Iaster. 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Dct. 25, 1773. ednff Grawfovb, Gapttain di^axUS' Smitl), 
'oon Sflüttevbam über (Sowe^. 
Johannes Bud, Jacob Trewitz, 

Christian Mertel, Joh. Jost Mätz, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1773. 



413 



John Sclilichter, 
Joh. Math. Weber, 
Wilhelm Schneyder, 
Joh. Bap. Nouu, 
Andreas Zahele, 
Joh. Geo. Steiner, 
Johannes Klappert, 
Henrich Ober, 
Johannes Geistweit, 
Joh. Nickel Thomas, 
Joh. Philip Kees, 
Killian Keller, 
Jno. Wm. Humer,* 
Johann Fürst, 
David Reich,* 
Daniel Meyer, 
Johannes Diebler, 
Christian Meyers,* 
Johann Henrich Dittman, 
Johann Jost Strackbein, 
Johann Conrad Triewitz, 
Johannes Peter Stahl, 
Johannes Henrich Kiel, 
Johan Friederich Manalther, 
Johann Henrich Achen, 
Johan Carl Gentzheimann, 
Carl Christ. Fried. Cist, 
Johann Henrich Graff, 
Joh. Georg Birckelbach sen. 
Joh. Georg Birckelbach, 



Jacob Henrich Bast, 
Johann Georg Pteichman, 
Johan Henrich Schumacher, 
Joh. Siegesmund Stedtekorn, 
Georg Philip Zissle, 
Ludwig Güthing, 
Johan Ludwig Becker, 
Johann Ulrich Sieffner, 
Johan Peter Bostweiler, 
Michael Müller, 
Adam Michael, 
Matthias Höffer, 
Wilhelm Schöler, 
Henry Brum,* 
George Lebank,* 
John Fisher,* 
Joh. Geo. Hartman, 
Wilhelm Walther, 
Adam Hamm, 
Andreas Hild, 
Johannes Petermann, 
Johann Henrich Dörner, 
Johann Georg Schneider, 
Johann Henrich Loos, 
Hans Henrich Schreiner, 
Johan Jacob Schwissfurth, 
Johan Henrich Hoffman, 

ohannes Demandt, 
Joh. Daniel Schweitzer, 
Joachim Stremmel. 



308) Nov. 23, 1773. Snow Neptune, Thomas Edward Wal- 
lace, Master, from Lisbon. 

9loö. 23, 1773. ©eefc^iff Sf^eptunc, ßapitain Z^üma€ Sbivart 
2ßaüace, von ßijjabon. 

Joseph Lefran, Anthony Sinclair,* 

Charles Cassell, Joseph Martin. 

William Blach, 



35* 



414 



NAMES OP GERMAN, SWISS 



309) Nov. 24, 1773. Ship Fame, James Duncan, Master, 
from Lisbon. 

'^o'o. 24, 1773. ©c^iff game, Sajjttain Sameg 'Duncan, öon 
Sifl[abon. 

Geo. Shavere,* Daniel Shapue. 

John Martine,* 



310) Dee. 7, 1773. Ship dementia, Patrick Brown, Master, 
from Lisbon. 

2)ec. 7, 1773. @(^tff Slementia, Sa)>itain ^rttricf Srotvn, 
»on ?if[abon. 

John Pesser,* Francis Villeneaue,* 

Charles Zemmer, Francois Pechenet, 

Maro Seroni, Francis Duchand. 
Joseph Louvat, 



311) Dec. 8, 1773. Ship Montague, William Pickels, Com- 
mander, from London. 

Dec. 8, 1773. (5(^tff2«ontague, eommanbant2ßimam5)irfeIg, 
»Ott 2ont)Ott. 



Jacob Fürst, 
Friederich Waltz, 
Peter Andreas, 
Joh. Ludwig, 
Phillippe Engroth, 
Jacob Rissner, 
John Henry Lau, 
Johan Friederich Pieckert, 
Christian Hallitschke, 
Joh. Wendel Andreas, 
Johan Adam Handel, 
Johan Heinrich Krauel, 
Mathias Conrad, 



Friederich Eberle, 
Joachim Neubaier, 
Joseph Walcker, 
Joseph Wagner, 
Joh. Matthey, 
Johannes Fessler, 
Joh. Friederich Zinckenritz, 
Traugott Gottfried Mayer, 
Georg Ludwig Kelmold, 
Anthon Henrich Gnäschler, 
Johann Adam Schanckweiler, 
Johan Georg Speiser, 
Johann Christian Duncker. 



312) Aug. 15, 1774. Snow Sally, Stephen Jones, Captain. 

5lug. 15, 1774. ©eefc^iff <BaUt), Sapttatn *3tep^en 3one«. 
Conrad Bernhard,* John Ulrich,* 

Conrad Seifert, John Sauter,* 



AND OTIIEH IMMIGRANTS — 1774. 



415 



Michael Lillienthal,* 
John George Gesel,* 



Joh. William Sauter,* 
John Diehl. 



313) June 21, 1774. Brigantine Nancy, Thomas Armstrong, 
Master, from Hamburg. 

3um 21, 1774. ©c^ueUfegler 9lanc9, Sapitain J^omaö 2lnii== 
ftrong, »on Hamburg. 

Christopher Fuse,* Joseph Lorentz Herrmann, 

Herman Schuman, John Matthias Bauer, 

Cornelius Welck, Carl Friederich Müller. 
Johan Fried. Matz,* 



314) June 21, 1774. Ship Charming Molly, Robert Gill, 
Master, from London. 

3um 21, 1774. (Schiff Smarming moüi^, dapitaiit Stöbert 
®ill, »on Sonbon, 



Henrich Kiintzel, 
Laurens Frost, 
Christian Heyll, 
Peter Stephan, 
Georg Fried. Frick, 
Johannes Schwende, 
Joh. Henrich Moser, 



Georg Jacob Weiss, 
Georg Paulus Merckle, 
Christian Langspech, 
Carl Christoph Nicht, 
Johan Georg Schneegantz, 
Johan Georg Tritzlen, 
Joh. Ludwig Bettmann. 



315) Sept. 30, 1774. Ship Union, Andrew Bryson, Captain, 
from Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

«Sept. 30, 1774. «Schiff Union, ßapitain 2lnbrett) SBr^fon, 
t»on Slottertam über Sowcö. 



Caspar Nuyne,* 
Georg Rummell, 
Heinrich Dörr, 
Andreas Schneynow,* 
Johan Wilhelm Müller, 
Johan Martin Schweickart, 
Matthias Wild, 
Carl Eurfiir, 
Johannes Fuchs, 
Adam Seibert, 



Nicklas Grauss, 
Hartman Winck, 
Bernhard Schwing, 
Philip Jung, 
Philip Klein, 
Michael Klein, 
Jost Leibinger, 
Carl Steinmetz, 
Johannes Had, 
Jacob Boss, 



416 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Adam Stam, 
Laux Kochges, 
Philipp Müller, 
Jacob Eyler, 
Christian Rossin, 
Jost Spengler, 
Alexander Ott, 
Peter Kuner, 
Leonhart Opp, 
Friederich Gantz, 
Nicholas Bayer, 
Samuel Schenck, 
Fabian Kortz, 
Peter Schimmel, 
Johannes Schaum, 
^ * ^ Rütticher, 
Jacob Yoltz, 
Christian Witmer, 
Friederich Weyler, 
Matheis Feiring, 
Friederich Bayer, 
Daniel Hickert, 
Martin Weimer, 
Nicklas Sirer, 
Peter Wallman, 
Peter Sietz, 
Johann Walter, 
Heinrich Thering, 
Johann Anthon Kühl, 
Johannes Heimbach, 
Heinrich Heidt, 
Abraham Stoffel Jacoby, 
Caspar Steinmetz, 
Heinrich Steinmetz, 
Carl Böhringer, 
Michael Müller, 
Friederich Kölheffer, 
Adam Koningsfeld, 
Philipp Thiebautz, 
Job. Bartholomeus Ney, 
Johan Greorg Gottfried, 



Johan Adam Pecht, 
Peter SpiTickmann, 
Nicklas Fitincher, 
Johann Zimmermann, 
Nicklaus Schneppenhäusser, 
Philip Jacob Wagner, 
Valentin Beyer, 
Henrich Adam Weltman, 
Johann Detweiler, 
Gotthold Fried. Enslin, 
Johan Friederich Streuet, 
Johan Adam Schiott, 
Johannes Stoffel, 
Friederich Bergman, 
Johan Carl Reutzheiner, 
Peter Schwabeland, 
Johan Adam Friederich, 
Johann Gotthelf Paul, 

Zimmermann, 
Michael David Esch, 
Christ. Wilh. Rathardt, 
Johannes Becker, 
Christoph Eufer, 
Melchior Wickert, 
Johann Georg Bauer, 
Valentin Göttert, 
Johann Nicolehrs, 
Johan Adam Steinbach, 
Johann Adam Miller, 
Jacob Heibenzeter, 
Friederich Hehl, 
Nicholas Guit,* 
Joseph Futsch, 
Ulrich Webber, 
Jacob Leber, 
Ludwig Au, 
Johan Kurtz, 
Daniel Wolff, 
Georg Eckhart,* 
Michael Schilling, 
Jacob Gucker, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1774. 



417 



Christoph Herbster, 
Heinrich Engelfiied, 
Friederich Freytag, 
Martin Schwartz, 
Caspar Uhl, 
Friederich Beyerly, 
Johannes Carohs, 
Johannes Holtz, 
Israel Leypold, 
Michael Müller, 
Johann Nicolaus Quast, 
Johan Adam Leber, 
Carl Christian Loris, 
Ludwig Schwabeland, 
Christian Schwabeland, 
John Georg Baltz, 



Johan Conrad Eiselen, 
John George Kutter, 
Johann Jacob lloth, 
Johann Jacob Medert, 
Friederich Schäumenkessel, 
Johan Daniel Nisler, 
Johann Christian Wilms, 
Johann Jacob Dieterle, 
Johann Adam Stock, 
Georg Jacob Haussier, 
Georg Adam Marggrander, 
Christian Glaufliegel, 
Erhardt Freytag, 
Leonard Kroneman, 
Johann Georg Müller. 



316) Oct. 29, 1774. Snow Patty and Peggy, Robert Hardi, 
Master, from Lisbon. 

Dct. 29, 1774. (Seef^iff ^att^ unb ^egg^, Sapitain ^lobert 
^art»t, »on 2i|Ja6on. 

Jono Moraublez,* Jabopet Hoquedas, 

Jono Contono,* Manuel Rodrigue, 

Franco Barkeka, Francisca Rabane, 

Jono Cameti,* Hipolito Poncelly,* 

Jiram Cloter,* Juan Domingo,* 

Fran. Boz, Juan Hinanso.* 



317) Oct. 31, 1774. Ship Sally, John Osmond, Master, from 
Rotterdam, last from Cowes. 

Dct. 81, 1774. ©c^iff ©all^, (Sapitatn 3o^n O^moni), »on 
9lottert)am über Soweö. 

Johann Jacob Welcker sen., 

Johann Jacob Welcker, 

Frederick Mayer, 

Joh. Peter Cronenberger, 

Balthaser Eberhardt, 

Peter Köhler, 

Joseph Shem,* 



Christian Müller, 
Christian Ehmig, 
Hanö Keller, 
Ludwig Seltz, 
Andreas Bühler, 
Caspar Miller, 
Joh. Maximilian Hake 



418 



NAMES OF GERMAN, SWISS 



Jacob StoflP, 
Georg Katz, 
Geo. Habel, 
Adam Segel, 
Peter Löwenberg, 
Philip Löwenberg, 
Diewalt Klein, 
Wilhelm Bramer, 
Peter Bartheleus, 
Ludwig Fihter, 
Johannes Kiinsinger, 
Johannes Sehäffer, 
Daniel Zittel, 
Jacob Klein, 
Joel Klein, 
Anthony Weber, 
Christian Laros, 
Pierre Maison, 
John Henry Klein, 



Johann Philip Weber, 
Johann Jacob Sunckel, 
Christoph Griebela, 
Christian Schudieck, 
Henrich Oberkircher, 
Christian Rommel, 
Friederich Löwenberg, 
Carl Bartholomae, 
Michael Bartholomae, 
Georg Schaltzindt, 
Johann Paul Thomas, 

Teicfigräbcr, 
Johann Conrad Schmidt, 
Friederich Cronberger, 
Wilhelm Wenner, 
Johann Georg Burckhard, 
Conrad Bindenberger, 
Jacob MussRenusr. 



318) Jan. 16, 1775. Ship Catharine, John Baron, Comman- 
der, from London. 

3an. 16, 1775. (S^iff daüjaxine, Sommantiant 3»^« 33aron, 
öon Ronton. 

Caspar Beaufort, 
John Adam, 
Da^äd Zuber, 
Thomas Klenee, 



Joh. Georg Fried. Wagner, 
Johan Jacob Holtzer, 
Joachim Jacob Brandt. 



319) Oct. 9, 1775. Ship King of Prussia, William Potts, 
Master, from Rotterdam, last from Falmouth, England. 

i:ct. 9, 1775. ©d)iff ^ing of ^ruffia, eapttain Sßiüiam 
5)ottei, ijoit iRotterbam über galmout^, Sngfant. 
Ludwig Eller, Joh. Lilian Booss, 

Georg Bernhardt, Jacob Kohlman, 

Jacob Müller, Philip Weber, 

Nicolaus Sandmeier, Johann Segwalt, 

Johannes Obersheimer, Johan Friederich Huey, 

Joh. Georg Linns, Georg Conrad Busch, 



AND OTHER IMMIGRANTS — 1775. 



419 



Conrad Tresenreutlier, 
Johann Georg Weyell, 
Johann Wilhelm Schilack, 
Johann Michael Tannezer, 
Johann Philip Kohlman, 
Johann David Weber, 
Johann Michael Hans, 
Johann Peter Heissheiner, 
Joh. Paul Lein, 
Thomas Rentzheimer, 
Johannes Eckenberger, 
Valentin Hoch, 
Nicholali Rudy, 
Nicolaus Grall, 
Matthias Kössler, 
Leonhard Götz, 
Carl Ritter, 
Johannes Fauth, 
Michael Kramer, 
Carl Eller, 
John Seip, 
Jost Alstatt, 
Casper Nickel, 
Johan Herrman, 
Christian Vätter, 
Jacob Vätter, 
Jacob Teutzel, 
Conrad Becker, 



Jacob Jost, 
Thiels Zerfas, 
Nicol. Heustang, 
Ludwig Weiss, 
Johannes Rentzheimer, 
Johan Nickel Wendeling, 
Johann Nickel Meyer, 
Johan Friederich Meyer, 
Henricus Denner, 
Joh. Jacob Schmidt, 
Johannes Kriedelbach, 
Joh. Valentin Mündel, 
Stephanus Spach, 
Nicklaus Zimmer, 
Nicolaus Borman, 
Philip Peter Müller, 
Johan Ernst Kessler, 
Joh. Jacob Knabenschus, 
Christian Weissbach, 
Friederich Schönholtz, 
Georg Friederich Grawan, 
Johan Jacob Grawan, 
Johan Simon Schiars, 
Johannes Sahler, 
Peter Horbach, 
Jacob Henrich Krammer, 
Christian Gottfiied Willert. 



420 ADDENDA. 



ADDENDA A. 



The SchicencTcfelders are called after Caspar Schwenckfeld 
von Ossing, a Silesian Knight, and counselor to the Duke of 
Liegnitz, Prussia. Schwenckfeld was a contemporary with Luther, 
Zwingli and other Reformers, and had his adherents, who were 
tolerated by the German Emperors, in the arch-dukedom of 
Silesia, especially in the principalities of Taur and Liegnitz, for 
nearly two hundred years. They, like many others, had to en- 
dure persecutions in 1590, 1650, 1725, when they were com- 
pelled to seek shelter in Upper Lusatia, Saxony, under the pro- 
tection of the Senate of Görlitz, and also of Nicolaus Ludwig 
Zinzendorf, who had them under his protection about eight years, 
when they resolved to emigrate and seek a home in Georgia; 
but on arriving in Holland they were persuaded to go to Penn- 
sylvania. Some came over in 1733, but the gi'cater part in 
1734.— See pp. 90, 94, 95, 96. 



ADDENDA B. 



For the following List, furnished by the Rev. Levin T. Reichel, 
Salem, North Carolina, I am much indebted to Prof John Beck, 
of Litiz, Pa., (died 1872) who not only pointed to the source, 
whence it could be obtained, but also very kindly engrossed the 
Mss. List at the request of the Editor. 

I. Arrivals of Moravians from Georgia in Pennsylvania, 
from 1737 to 1747 — a period of ten years. 

Note. — Some ministerial brethren, as Bishop Spangenberg, Bishop 
Nitschmann, Peter Böhler, &c., are omitted in this List, as they were 
no actual settlers, but returned again to Europe, or to other fields of 
activity of the Moravian Church. Ministers and Missionaries are in 
Italics. 



ADDENDA. 421 

A. D. 1737. — Georg Neiacr, born in Moravia, emigrated 1737 
to Georgia, thenco to Pennsylvania, died 1784 ; Gottlieb Demuth, 
Gottfried Haberecht, died 1784 ; George Waschke, his wife and 
mother; Gotthart üemutli, David Jag, David Tanneberger, the 
celebrated organ-builder ; John Tanneberger, son of David T. — 
descendants near Lebanon. 

A. D. 1740. — Anton Seifferf, returned to Europe; Martin 
Mack, died 1784 at St. Croix; George Zeisberger, Rosina Zeis- 
berger, David Zeisberger, an Indian Apostle, died 1808 at 
Goshen, Ohio; John Bahner, died 1785 at St. Thomas, one of 
the West India Islands ; Hannah Hummel, afterwards Bahner's 
wife. 

A. D, 1742. — Hagen, Büninger — his descendants in N. Y. 

A. D. 1743. — James Burnside, born in Ireland, died 1755 
near Bethlehem, where his remains rest. Twice Representative 
of Northampton County in the Assembly. 

A. D. 1744.— Hussey. 1745.— Brownfield. 

II. Arrivals of Moravians from Europe in Pennsylvania, 
from 1739 to 1749 — a period of ten years. 

A. D. 1739. — Christian Henry Rauch, in New York, died 
1763 at Jamaica. 

A. D. 1740. — Andrew Eschenbach, David Nitschmann, first 
proprietor of Bethlehem estate, died 1758 at Bethlelxem; 
Christian Frölich, died 1776 at Bethlehem. 

A. D. 1741. — Gottlieh Büttner, died 1745 at Checomeko, 
N. Y. ; John Wilhelm Zander, died 1782 in Holland; John 
Christian Pyrleeus, died 1785 in Germany; Count Zinzendorf 
only on a visit; Abraham 3Ieinung, died 1769 at St. Thomas; 
David Bruce, was from Scotland, died 1749 at Wechquatiisch. 

A. D. 1742. — Peter Böhler and wife, returned to Europe; 
David Bishop, Michael Mikseh, Joachim Senseman, died 1772 
at Jamaica — descendants in Pennsylvania ; Michael Tenneberger, 
David Wohmit, John Brucker, died 1765 at St. Croix; Paul 
David Beyzelius, a Lutheran minister, died 1771 ; Heinrich 
Almerson, George Hartin, John Brandmüller, died 1777 at 
Bethlehem; John Adolph Meyer, Oioen Rice, died 1778 in 
England — descendants in Bethlehem ; Thos. Yarrell — descend- 
ants in Lancaster, Pa.; Robert Huss, John Turner, Samuel 

36 



422 ADDENDA. 

Powell, Joseph Powell^ died 1774 at Sichern, N. J. ; Nathaniel 
Seidel, a Bishop, died single 1782 at Bethlehem; Gottlieh 
Pezold, died 1762 at Litiz; Philip Meurer, died 1757 at Done- 
gal; Leonhard Schnell, Frederick Post, Indian Missionary, 
(see Collection, p. 152, Note,); George Schneider, Matthew 
Wittke, George Wiesner, George Kaske, George Heidecker, 
John Reinhard Sommers, Joseph Möller, John Huber, George 
Eister, Joseph Shar, Hector Gerahold, died 1788 ; John Okely, 
Wilham Okely, Christian Werner, Jacoh Lischy, (see Collec- 
tion, p. 152) ; John Christoph Heyne, Andreas, (colored). 

A. D. 1742. — Congregation at Bethlehem Organized. David 
Eurhert and wife, died 1788 at Bethlehem; A. J. Kohn, 
J. C. Franke, M. Liebisch, from Moravia; Schnell. 

A.D. 1743. — In December, one hundred and twenty persons 
arrived at New York, who moved to Bethlehem and Nazareth ; 
among these were thirty-three young couples, who had been 
married, all on the same day, at Herrnhaag, May 27, 1743. 

Note. — The letter N appended to a name indicates that the individual 
settled at Nazareth, Pa. 

A.D. 1743. — Wohmit and wife, Abraham Kessler, N; H.Bie- 
fel, N; John Tobias Hirse, N; G. Kremer, John Henry Möller, N, 
died 1760 at Bethlehem; M. Reuz, died 1753 at Oldman's 
creek, on the pulpit ; Christian Fritsch, N; Matheus Otto, doctor 
at Bethlehem ; Gottfried Grabs, N ; Wolfgang Michler, died 
1785 at Hebron — descendants in Easton; Gottlieb Anders, N; 

Herser, Aimers; John Münster, from Moravia; Geo. 

Christ, N; M. Hanke, Schaub ; Geo. Zeisberger and wife, 

died 1780; G. Hantsch, died 1756; Christian Hopfher, died 
1760; John Jorde, N; J. Christian Weinest, N; G. Hicke; 
Matheus Schropp, N, died 1766 at Salem, N. C. ; Jonas Wilson, 

Ostian, Dugion, Jno. Schaub, N; John Brandmüller, 

returned from Europe whither he had gone 1742 ; J. G. Nix- 
dorf, died 1785 at Bethlehem, Pa.; Anton Wagner, died 1786 
near Emaus; James Greening, D. Kunkler, N; A. Demuth, 

from Moravia ; Schütze, Brosch, M. Böhmer, 

Hanke, Opitz; George Ohneherg, N, Missionary in 

St. Croix; Matheus Weiss, N; John Mozer, N; J. M. Micke, N; 
G. Bertsch, N; John Michler, N; P. Göttge, N; Andrew Krem- 
ser, N; Schober, Harding, Oerter, Doh- 

ling, Cook, Thomas Schaaf, N; Jacob Behringer, Thomas 

Fisher and wife, N; Lighton, Jasper Paine ; Richard 



ADDENDA. 423 

Udey, first English Missionary in Dobbs Parish; M. Krause, 
died 1775 at Salem, N. C 

A. D. 1744. — Abraham Reinke, Bishop, died 1760 — his 
grand-son, Moravian Minister at Litiz, his grand-daughter, wife 
of Prof. John Beck. 

A. D. 1746.— J. F. Cammerhof, died 1751 at Bethlehem; 

Hendrup, Wacke, Westmann, Gottschalk, 

S. Bosun. 

A. D. 1747. — The members of the Moravian Church in the 
region of Bethlehem numbered 316, viz: at Bethlehem 163; 
Nazareth 42; Frederickstown 23; Gnadenhütten 11; Gnaden- 
thal 18; scattering 59. 

A. D. 1749. — Dec. 12, the following twelve married couples 
moved from Bethlehem to Nazareth : 

Everet Emerson ; Paul Fritsch, born in Moravia ; Ehas Teex, 
born in Upper Lusatia, Germany ; Gottlieb Berndt, do ; Jacob 
Hafner, Switzerland ; Gottfried Schnitze, Lower Silesia ; Hein- 
rich Pritsche, do ; Wenzel Bernhard, Bohemia ; John Schmidt, 
Upper SUesia; Geo. Gold, Moravia ; Melchior Schmidt, Moravia. 

III. A List of unmarried men, who arrived at Bethlehem, 
September 14:th, 1753. 

Ludolph Gottlieb Backoff, born in Lüneburg; Christoph 
Heinrich Bachmeyer, Friedensburg ; Frederick Beyer, Silesia ; 
Hans Martin Calberlahn, Norway ( surgeon) ; Ludwig Christoph 
Dehne, Wernigerode ; Jacob Eyerie, Wirtemberg ; George Chris- 
tian Fahricius, Denmark, was murdered, Nov. 21, 1755 ; Jacob 
Fries, Denmark, died 1793 at Bethlehem; George Wenzel 
Golkowsky, Süesia (surveyor), died 1813; Joseph Haberland, 
Moravia; Jacob Herr, Wirtemberg; Samuel Hunt, Yorkshire, 
England; Jacob Jürgensen, Finland; Henry Krause, Silesia; 

Otto Christian Krogstrup, Denmark, pastor there; Joseph 
Lennert, Breisgau; Albertus Rudolph Rusmeyer, Lüneburg; 

George Solle, Denmark, formerly a minister; Christian Frie- 
derich Töllner, Pomerania; Peter Worbasse, Juttland; Chris- 
tian Widsted, do; Peter Weicht, Silesia; Charles Frederick 
Ziegler, Pomerania; Jacob Till and his wife, Moravia, died 1783 
at Bethlehem ; G. Stephen Wolson, Thüringen. 



424 %usuti 



3«fa^ A. 



!Die<3(^it)encffeIt)ertt>ert)cnnac^ Safpar©(^tDendffeIt) öonOffIng, 
einem f(^Ief(f(^en 9tttter unt) 9tat^ fceö -^erjogö »on !2iegni^ in 
3)reufen, genannt, «©c^mencffelt) toax ein ßeitgenoffe :2utt)er'ö, 
3tt>ingli'ö unt> anberer 9teformatoren. ßr ^atte Stn^änger, tie 
»on ben t)cutf(^en ,$laifern gebulbet mürben unb ft^ im @rof = 
:^erjogt^um ©d^Ieften, befonberö in ben gürftent^ümern 3;aur 
unb 2iegni0, na^c an jmei t)unbert 3at)re fortpflanzten. 2ßic 
üiele Slnbere, fo Ratten auc^ fie in ben 3n^ren 1590, 1650 unb 
1725 3SerfoIgungen ju erbulben unb nac^ ber Dber=2aujt0 in 
©ac^fen, unter ben @(^u^ beö ©enatö ju ®örli^ unb beg ©rafen 
9?icotaug SubJötg 'oon ßinjenborf, ^u flicken, welcher fie a^t 3a|)re 
lang bcfc^ü^te. ©ie entf^Ioffen ftd^ aujsjuwanbern unb eine 
^eimat^ in ©eorgia ju fuc^en; man belet)rte fie jeboc^ auf i^rer 
^eifc burc^ ^ollanb, ft(^ in ^Jennfi^banien an^ufiebeln. Sinjelne 
famen 1733; jebo(^ bie gro§e «OZajfe erft 1734.— (Sie()e ®. 90, 
94, 95, 96. 



3«fa^ B. 



!Die folgenbc Sifte »on ^aftor ^eoin J. 9leic^el in ©alem, 9?orb= 
ßaroUna, t^abc ic^ ^rof. 3o^n 33e(f »on 8iti3, ^ennf. (geftorben 
1872) 3U »erbauten, welcher nic^t nur bie £}uetlc angab, in ber 
fie ju ftnben tt>ar, fonbern auf bie SSitte beö ^erauögeberia bie= 
felbe auc^ für biefeö Sßert jurec^t machte. 

I. 2ln!unft ber ^errn^uter 'oon ©eorgia in ^enn = 

ft)I»anien in ben 3al)v*en 1737 big 1747 — ein 

3ei träum x^on ]tl)n 3<Jt)ren. 

Slnmcrfung. — Stntgc ficiftliiie '-Bviiber, aÜ 23tfc&of ©pangcnbcrg, 
23tfc^of 9?ttfc^mann, *Petcr iBbt)lcr u. f. w., feblen in btffer l'tfte, ba bte= 
ff Iben \ifi) etge nt(ic|) nic^t niederließen, fonbcru »icber nad) Guropa i^urücf- 
fe^rten, ober iin anbcreö Slrbcttöfelb ber ^errn^uter-Üiri^e auffud^ten. 
5)rebiget unb 3Ätffionare finb mit gefperrter ^^rift gebrurft. 



^«sat§. 425 

1737. — ©cor 9 ^^eifer, in 5JZä^ren getioren, manberte 1737 
nac^ Georgia au& unt» üon ta na^ ^ennf^banten, unb ftarb 
tort 1784'; ©ottlieb X)emut^, ©ottfriet» Jpabmc^t, ftarb 1784; 
®eorg 2öaf(^fe, feine grau unb 9J?utter; ®ottt)art)t X)emut^, 
!Daüil) 3<i9/ X)aoit) Sanneberger, ber berül)mte Orgelbauer; 
3ot)ann 3:anneberger, ©o^n »on iJauib 5. — 91ad)fomnten nat)e 
Sebanon. 

1740. — Slnton ©eiffert, teerte nac^Suropajurücf; ?0^ar = 
tin ?0^acf, ftarb 1784 ju @t. Sroir; ®eorg Bei^^f^gc'^/ iRofina 
3ei^berger, ^aöib 3ciöberger, tear 3nbianer=5lpDfteI, ftarb 
1808 gu ®of&en, D^io; 3o^ann 33a^ner, ftarb 1785 ju 
(St. J^omaö, einer ber Jüeftinbifd)en ^n\ein ; J^anna^ Jpummel, 
l^ernac^ 33at)ner'ö grau. 

1742. — ^agen, Süninger — 9iad)fommen in ^tero Soff. 

1743. — 3aineö Surnfibe, in 3i"Iflnb geboren, ftarb 1755 na^e 
SBet^Ie^em, njo feine ©ebeine ruben. Stt^ei ^«^ 2tbgeorbneter 
»on Sf^ort^ampton Sount^ in ber ^tjfembl^. 

1744.— ^uffe9. 

1745.— 33roronfteIb. 

II. 2ln*unft »on Jperrn^utern in ^ennfploanien 

aug Suropa »on 1739 bio 1749 — ein 3eitraum 

»on je^n 3fl^re»t- 

1739.— SI)ri|lian .f)cinrid) Stauc^, in ^lito 2)orf, ftarb 
1763 ju 3flmaica. 

1740. — 2tnbrea3 Sfd)en'bac^, Da»ib5'titfc^monn, ber erfte 
SBeft^er »on Sigent^um in Set^le^em, ftarb 1758 ju S3ett)le^cm ; 
(S^riftian grölid), ftarb 1776 ju SBet^le^em. 

1741.— ©ottlieb Süttner, ftarb 1745 ,^u (Sbecomcfo, 
««.§).; 3oftann2öiIbeIm3auber, ftarb 1782 in ^oüanb; 
3o^ann S^riftian ^»rläuö, ftarb 1785 in 3)eutf erlaub; 
@raf 3iJ^jenborf, auf einem 33efud)e; 5lbra^ant '>3ltu 
nung, ftarb 1769 ju (£t. Ibomaö; Da»ib S3rucc »on ©d)ott^ 
lanb, ftarb 1749 ju 2öed)quatüfd). 

1742. — ^et. Söller unb gran, febrten nac^ Suropa jurücf ; 
S)aüib 33if(|of, 2J?ic^aeI ?}?iffe|, 3o*id)im ©en fe maun, ftarb 
1772 3U 3flin<iica — ^iac^fommen in 5)ennf»t»anien ; 5)'cic^ael 
Jenneberger, Dauib Sßo^mit, 3i?M"»t SBruder, ftarb 1765 

3G* 



436 ^usatj. 

gu <Bt. groiv; ^aul I)aüit) Sc^^eliug, ein (ut^crtfd^et 
©eiftlic^er, ftarb 1771 ; ^etnrtc^ 5l(merfon, ®eo. Jpartin, 3 o ^ a n n 
Sranbmüner, ftarb 1777 ju 33et^Ie(iem; 3ot)ann 5lt)oIp^ 
9}?e9er, Droen 9^ice, ftarb 1778 in (Snglanb — ^'lac^fommen 
in 33et^W)em; Zi^omaä parrel! — ^tacfcfommen in Sancafter, ^a. ; 
3bbert^uf, 3o^ann Jurner, ®am. ^Poroctl, 3ofep^ ^omell, 
ftarb 1774 ju (s:>i(^em, 9i. 3«; 9lat^aniel (5eit)cl, ein 
5Öif^of, ftarb 1782 unöer^eirat^et ju Set^Iebem; ©ottüeb 
'Pejolfe, ftarb 1762 3U 2iti3 ; ^biHp "^tuxtx, ftarb 1757 
ju!Donegai; öcon^arb Schnell, grieterlc^ ^oft, 3«= 
t»iancr=2>?ifftonar, (fte^c ®. 152, Slnmerfung) ; ®eorg ©d^neiter, 
5)Zatt§äug 2öitt!e, ®eorg Sßieeincr, ®eorg Äaefe, ®eorg ^eibedfer, 
3o^ann Steinhart) (Sommer^?, 3ofcp^ Woütv, 3o^ann ^uber, 
@corg Sifter, 3ofepfe ®^ar, Rector ©cmboU, ftarb 
1788; 3o^ann Dfett>, SBil^elm Ofel^, e^riftianSJerner, 3a cob 
gif(^9, (fie^e (Seite 152), 3ct&ann S^riftop^ ^e^ne, 2lnt>reaö 
(farbig). 

1742. — ®emeint>e ju 33et^Ie^em gegründet. 3)at)tti 
^urbert unbgrau; er ftarb 1788 ^n33et^Ie^em; 21.3- ^o^n, 
3. S. granfe, SJZ. Siebifd), yon ^CRa^ren; Seined. 

1743. — 3^ ^December famcn ein buntert uni> brei^ig ^erfonen 
in 91en? 2)orf an, welche nad^ 23ct^le^em unt 9?ajaret| jogen; 
unter biefen befanben fi^ brei unb brei§ig junge ^aare, tt)el(^e 
fämmtlic^ am 27. 'JOtai 1743 ju .5)errn()aag getraut loorben waren. 

Slnmerf ung. — ©er bcm Flamen betgefügte Sud^ftabe 9? jetgt, ba§ bie 
'oetreffcnbf ^exion jtc^ in 9?ajaretb nteberHe§. 

1743.— SBo^mit unb grau, 5lbrabam Äe^Ier, 9i ; ^. 33iefel, ^ ; 
3o^ann Jobiaö ^irfe, 5^; (3. Bremer; 3o^ann Jpeinric^ 
gn on er, 91, ftarb 1760 ju 33ct^Iel)em ; 5)?. gteuj, ftarb 1753 
auf ber Äanjel ju Dtbman'g greet; et)riftian gritfd), 91; Wat- 
t^uö Dtto, Strgt in 33etöle^em; ©ottfrieb ®xaU, 91; Söolf- 
gang ?Wi(^Ier, ftarb 1785 ^u Hebron — 9la^!ommen in 
Safton; ©ottliebStnberö, 9i; ^erfer, Stlmer^ ; 3obann ?!«ünfter, 
9on ?Olä^ren; ®eorg Shrift, 9i; iJi. ^anfe, lic^Aaub; ®eorg 
3eigberger unb grau, er ftarb 1780; @. 6antf(^, ftarb 1756; 
e^riftian Jpöpfncr, ftarb 1760; 3ol)anncg 3orbe, 91; 3- Shrift. 
2ßeinefl, 91; ®. ^ide; 9JZattbäug ®*rop)>, 9?, ftarb 1766 ju 
®alem, 9t. S.; 3onaö Söilfon, Dftian, !Dugion, 3o|iann 
©c^aub, 9Z; 3o^anneö SSranbmüUcr, febrte »on Suropa, ba^ er 
1742 befuc^t, jurüdf; 3- ®- 9tirborf, ftarb 1785 ju Set^kbem; 



nxxsut^. 427 

3lnton 2Bac|ner, flarft 1786 nal}e ßmauö; 3iic»^ ©reeninci, 
2). fünfter, 5^1; 2(. T)emutft, oon SlJia^ren; ©c^ii^c, S3rof^, 
S)*?. S3öftmer, S^ank, Vp\^; ©eori} D^nebcrg, 9i, ^cifftouar 
gu ®t. Groir; 5TJtim)äuö Jßeif?, 91; 3oftann g«o,?cv, 91; 3-^. 
9}Ncfe, 91; ©. SBertfc^,^; 3ot)anu ^3)Zi(^Ier, 9i; ^. ®öttge, 91; 
2lnt)reflö Ä'remfer, 91; ^d)okr, .'öarbing, Dertcr, "1)0^111:9, Goof, 
3:t)omaei ®d)aaf, 9?; 3iico^ 33e^ringer, Ji)omaö gif^cr unt) 
grau, 9?; ?tc|l)ton, 3afpcr ^aiue; Stictyart) Uöle^, erflerenc;= 
lifter 9)tifftonar in 'Dobb^ ©prcngcl; 5K. .^raufe, jiarb 1775 
3U Salem, 91. G. 

1744 —mva^a m meinte, 33if(^of, fiarb 1760; fein Gnfcl 
ift ^errnbuter ©eiftlt^er ju Sitij, feine Gnfelin tie grau t>eö ^rn. 
«Prof. 3ü^inn Secf. 

1746.— 3.g.Ganimerl)of, flarb 1751 ju Set^te^em ; ^cnbrup, 
Sßacfe, 2öeftmann, ©ottfd^alf, @. Stofun. 

1747. — Die ^itgliefeer bcr ^crrn'^uter ©emeinbe in ter 9^ä^c 
«Bet^le^em'ö ^ä^Iten 316, nämlic^: ju Set^Ie^cm 163, ^a^a^ 
retft 42, grebcricfötown 23, ©naben^üttcn 11, ©nabent^al 18, 
jerflreut 59. 

1749. — 2(m 12. December jogen folgende jwijlf »er^eirat^etc 
^aaxe oon SBett)Icl)em nac^ 9lajaret^ : 

Söeret Gmerfon; ^aul gritfc^, in Mäbren geboren; Gliaö 
Jeer, in ber Dber=Sauftfe geboren; ©ottlieb 23ernt)t, ebenfaüß; 
3acob ^afner, anä ber ®d)it»ei3; ©ottfrieb Srf)ul|ic, auö 9^icber= 
©c^Ieften; ^einri(^ gritfd)e, bo; 2[öcn5;eI55ern^arb, auö S3öl)men; 
3o^ami <Sd)mibt, auiJ Dbcr^Sc^ieftcn; @eorg ®oIb, auäi Wdi)' 
ren; Sytel^ior ©(^rnibt, ebenfaüi? auö '2J?ä^ren. 

III. gifte bcr unoer^eiratbeten 9J?änncr, bic am 
14. ©ept. 1753 ju Sßctl^te^em angcfommcn finb. 

?ubJvig ©otttieb Sac^off, geboren ju JüneBurg ; Gbrift. 
.'Öeinrid) 33ad)mc^er, griebenöburg ; griebric^ 33c9er, ©d)Iefien; 
^anö 9}larttn Ga(berta()n, 9lDrn:)egcn (SBunbarjt) ; Submig 
Gl)riftopl) Dcbnc, 2ßcrnigcrobc; 3acob Sj)erle, SBürttemberg ; 
®eo. Gi)riftirtn gabriciuji, Dänemarf, ipuvbeam 21.9Ioö. 
1755 ermorbet; 3«cc*& gric^, Dänemarf, ftarb 1793 ju 
33ctf)(e^em; ®corg Söenjel ©olfomöft), (Sd)(efien (2anbmef[er), 
jlarb 1813; 3ofept) ^abcrlanb, '3J?ä:^ren; S^icob ^err, 2Bürt= 
tcmBerg; Samuel ^unt, ^orff()ire, Snglanb; 3flcob 3«rgenfen, 



428 ^usat^. 

ginnlanb ; ^einrid^ jlraufc, Scfeleficu ; D 1 1 o ß () r i ft i a n ^ r o g= 
ftrup, T)änemarf, borticjer ^aftor; 3t>fep^ Sennert, 33rei^gau; 
5lUertu^ 9tuboIpf) .^usmeper, I'ihteburg; @eo. ©ölle, 
!Dänemar!, fvüt)cr öieiftltc^cr; (I()riftian griebric^ JöU^^ 
ner, Sommern; ^eter 5Bovba[fe, 3üt(ant; St)riftian Sßitfteb, 
3ütiant); ^eterSBeic^t, (^(^lefteu; Ä'avl grtebrtd) 3ie3ler, ^om* 
mern; ^acoh %iü unt» grau, 9}?äl)ren, ftarb 1783 ju ^et^le^em; 
®. <Btcp^m Sßolfon, J^üringen. 



APPENDIX. 429 



APPENDIX mm^i 



No. I. 

NAMES OF FIRST SETTLERS AT GERMANTOWN 
AND VICINITY, FROM 1683 to 1710. 

S^lamen ber erften Stnftetler imju ®crmanton)n unb Umöegenb 
öpn 1683 bi0 1710. 

Names having an asterisk (*) attached were naturalized by an Act 
of Assembly, 1708-1709. 

©t'e mtt einem ©tern (*) bejetc^neten stamen »urben 1708-1709 
iüXfi) 2lffemM9»23efc^lu§ naturaltfirt. 

Francis Daniel Pastorius,* Isaac Dilbeck,* 
Jacob Schumacher, Tunes Künders,* a 

Georg Wertmüller, Arents Klincken, b 



a Denis Kundors, or Conrad. — Pastorius had an interview with Con- 
rad at Crefelt, April 12, 1683, on his way to America. The first religious 
meeting by Quakers, or Friends was held at Conrad's house, German- 
town, 1688.— Proud's Penn., I, p. 220. 

a 2)entö Äunborö, ober Sonrab. — ^^ai^ortuö l^atte Sonrab ju Srefelt 
flm 12. Slprtl 1083 auf feinem 9Begc naji^ Slmerifa gcf|.^roc^en. I^te erftc 
gotteöbtenftUi^e 3ufammenfunft ber SHuafer ober greunbc »urbe 1683 xv. 
6onrab'^ $auö in ®ermanto»n gel)aUen. — ^^roub'ö ^'ennf., I, ®. 220. 

b Arents Klincken came from Holland with William Penn, in his 
first voyage, 1682. He became acquainted with Penn in Holland. 
Klincken built the first two-story house in Germantown ; Penn was 
present, and partook of the raising dinner. The same old house stood, 
1855, on Justus Johnson's premises. Klincken died at the age of 
eighty, and left a son whose name was Anthony Klincken, "the great 
hunter." — Watson's Annals, II, p. 20. 

b 2Irentö Älincfen fam mit 2Bttltam ^inn nuf beffen erjte SRetfe 1682 
»on ^oHanb, wo er mit ^cnn befannt ivorbcn tear. @r baute baö erfte 
|ttcijiöcftge ®ebäube in ßkrmantonjn ; ^'enn tear jugegen unb bettjetltgtc 
ftd^ an bem bei ©elegenbctt bcö Sluffcbtagenö btefe^ ^aufeg bereiteten 5e|t= 
eifen. 1855 ftanb nocb bnöfclbe alte ^am auf 3«[tuö 3o_t)nfon'^ ®runb= 
ftüd. Ältncfen jlarb tm 3ilter »on 80 3at)ren unb ^interttep einen ©obn, 
Slnt^on? Ältncfen. „ber gro^e SBaibmann."— SBatfon'g Slnnolen, II, (£.20. 



430 



APPENDIX. 



Thomas Gasper, 
Cuiirad Bacher, alias Rutter, 
Dirk op den Graff, 
Herman op den Graff, 
Abraham Isaac op den Graff, 
Lenert Arets,* 
Reinert Tisen,* 
Wilhelm Strepers,* 
Jan Lensen,* 
Peter Keurlis, 
Jan Simens, 
Johannes Bleickers,* 
Abraham Tunes,* 
Wigard Levering, 
Gerhard Levering, 
Jan Lücken, 
Johannes Jawert,* 
Conrad Conrads, 
Johannes Kunders, 
Dennis Kunders,* 
Matheis Kunders,* 
Johan Kunders,* 
Dirk Keyser,* 
Peter Keyser,* 
Johannes Döden,* 
Casper Hödt,* 
Cornelius Werts,* 
Henrich Selen,* 



Walter Simens,* 
Dirk Jansen jr.,* 
Richard van der Werff,* 
Johannes Streper sen.,* 
Cornelius Siverdts jr.,* 
Peter Schumacher,* 
Georg Schumacher,* 
Isaac Schumacher,* 
Jacob Schumacher jr.,* 
Mattheis van Bebber,* 
Cornelius Vandergach,* 
Peter Clever,* 
Georg Gödschalk,* 
Hannes Reinhart van der Sluys,* 
now (je^t) Vanderslice, 
Adrian van der Sluys,* 
Johan van der Heggen,* 
Gödschalk van der Heggen,* 
Casper Kleinhoof,* 
Heinrich Buchholtz,* 
Herman Tuyman,* 
Paul Klümges,* 
Johannes Klümges,* 
Johannes de Wees, 
Cornelius de Wees, now Dewes, 
Mattheis Neus,* now Nice, 
Johannes Neus,* 
Claus Rüttynghuysen,* a 



a Claus or Nich. Rittenhouse settled, says Horatio Gates Jones, Esq., 
on the eastern bank of the Wissahickon, south of Germantown, where 
he erected, on a small stream, which empties into the Wissahickon, 
about a mile from the Schuylkill River, the first paper mill in British 
America. He died about 1730, and was the grand-father of David 
Rittenhouse, the Philosopher, who was born April 8, 1732 and died 
June 26, 1796. 

a Slauö ober ^t(^clfl^ 3flittenfeauö ftebeltc nac& ber Stngabe »on ^oratio 
@atc3 Soneö, Sfq., auf bent o^lic^en Ufer beö JJBiffatitäün, fübltc^ »on 
(SJermantoTOit, nteber, tto er an einem flctncn J^lujte, »eldier etwa eine 
SD?ctIe oberl)alb be« ©cfeuolftüö fic^ in ben SBiffabicfon ergiept, bie erfie 
^apiermüt)le in ^Britifc^ Slmerifa erbaute. UmV^ 3at)r 1730 ftarb er. ®r 
war ber ®ro§oater beö ^t)ÜDfoi)l)en Daüib 9itttent)aui3, welcher am 8. Slprtl 
1732 geboren würbe unb am 26. 3uni 1796 geftorben ift. 



APPENDIX. 



431 



Gerhart Küttynhuysen, 
Matthias Rüttynhuyseu, 
Henrich Küttynhuysen, 
WilHam Küttynhuysen, 
Casper Stahls,* 
Heinrich Tubben,* 
Wilhelm Hendricks, 
Henrich Hendricks,* 
Lorentz Hendricks,* 
Gerhart Hendricks, 
Heinrich Kesselberg,* 

now Casselberry, 
John Rebenstock,* 
Peter Verbyman,* 
Johan Heinrich Carstens,* 
Casper Carsten, 
Johannes Kadwitzer, 
Johannes Conrads sen.,* 
Johannes Gorgas,* 
Henrie Bartels,* 
Senwes Bartels,* 
Johannes Krey,* 
Andreas Krämer, 
Thomas Böter, 
Wilhelm Krey,* 
Conrad Jansen,* 



Everhart in Hoffe,* 
Herman in Hoffe,* 
Gerhard in Hoffe,* 
Peter in Hoffe,* 
Peter Jansen,* 
Johannes Schmidt,* 
Thomas Echelwich,* 
Johannes Scholl,* 
Peter Scholl,* 
Gabriel Sentner,* 
Hey wart Hapon, 
Conrad Hermann Born, 
Dirk Vankolk, 
William Potts,* 
Mattheis Tison,* 
Jacob Keiner, 
Jacob Engeil,* 
Paul Engell,* 
Paul Wulff, 
Andreas Söplis, 
Jacob Isaac von Pedden, 
Arnold Kassel, 
Johannes Kassel, 
Jacob Isaacs, 
Herman Dorst, a 
Heinrich Zimmermann * b 



a Herman Dorst died suddenly near Germantown, a bachelor, past 
80 years of age, Oct. 14, 1739; he lived for a long time in a house by 
himself. — Penn. Gazette. 

a German 'Sorft ftarb plö^ltcb nat)e ßicrmantoton al6 Suttcigcfelle »on 
über 80 3abrcn ben 14. Dct. 1739; Innge %\^xt lebte er abgefc^lcjjcn in 
einem ^aufe allein.— ^ennf. ®ajettc. 

b Heinrich Zimmermann came to Pennsylvania 1698. He returned 
to Europe for his family, which he brought over in 1706, to German- 
town. In 1717 he removed to Chester County, now Lancaster. His 
son Emanuel was bom 1702 in Switzerland. Emanuel died in 1780. — 
Rupp's History of Lancaster County, p. 126. 

b $einri(i 3ti^"^f'^i"i"" ^^^"^ 1698 nacft ^'ennf^lüanten itnb reifte ua^ 
Öuropa juriid, iim feine f^amih'c %\\ bolen. 1706 langten fie in @erman= 
toh5n an. 1717 jog er nach Sbefter, je^t ?ancajter Sownt^. (£ein i^otin 
©manuel würbe 1702 in ber 'Scbwei,^ geboren unb ftarb 1780. — Stupp'ö 
®cfc|i(|te »on Sancafter Scunt^, ®. 126. 



432 



APPENDIX. 



Philip Christian Zimmermann, 

David Scherges, 

Hufert Papen, 

Jan Silans, 

Jonas Potts, 

Jacobus De la Plaine, 

Simon Andreas, 

Thomas Potts jr., 

Cornelius Bom, 

Isaac Schefer, 

Enneke Klosterman, 

Claus Tamson, 

Johannes Küster, 

Albertus Brandt, 

Johannes Pettinger, 

Jacob Peines, 

Reinhart Herman, 

Anthony Loof, 

Martin Seelen, 

Lorento Marcus, 

Christian Wammer, 

Hans Peter Umbstat, 

Daniel Falkner, 

Johan Heinrich Mehls, 

Georg Müller, 

Johann Cornelius Cotweis, 

Conrad Cotweis, 



Peter Kenlis, 

Anthoni Jerghjes, 

Johan Döden, 

Ludowic Christian Sprogel,* 

John Henry Sprogel,* a 

Mattheis Frank, 

Hans Heinrich Mehls, 

Heinrich Kassel, 

Andreas Hartzfelder, 

Johan van der Wilderniss, 

Johannes van Leer, 

Joseph Baumstädt, 

Johannes Kelpius, 

Johannes Seelig, 

Heinrich Bernhardt Küster, h 

Daniel Lutkins, 

Ludwig Aderman, 

Andreas Boney, 

Heinrich Frey, c 

Johannes German, 

Peter Scharbon, 

Mattheis Nezelius, 

Johannes van der Wert, 

Wilhelm Baumann, 

Paul Küster, 

Paul Rüttynghuysen, 

Arnold von Bossen, 



a The Sprogels were naturalized by special Act of Assembly, passed 
1705.— Coi. Eec, II, p. 184. 

a Die ©progclg würben 1705 burc^ einen befonberen 2lpmblv=Sefc|Iu§ 
naturaliftrt.— Sol.=Ser., II, ®. 184. 

b Heinrich Bernhardt Küster, a native of the town of Blomberg, 
in Lippe-Detmold. He came to Germantown 1689, and was the first 
German and English preacher there. — Loher, p. 39. 

b ^einrtc^ 35ernl)arb Äüftcr, gcbovcn in ber Stabt SBIomberg, Sippe» 
Dctmolb. 1689 fam er nai^ ©ermantown, unb h5ar ber erfte beutf4)e unb 
englifc^e 55vebigcr bafelbft.— Söt)er, ©. 39. 

c Heinrich Frey had been in Pennsylvania before 1682. — Hallische 
Nachrichten, p. 664. 

c |)cinri(^ J^re? t»ar »or 1682 in ^Jennf^Isanien gewefen. — $allifc|c 
9?ac^ri(|)ten, (5. 664. 



APPENDIX. 433 

Isaac von Sintern, Jürgen Jacob Jacobs» 

Doctor Christopher Witt, a Wilhelm Hosters, 

Joseph Paul, Hans Gi'aaf,* b 

Reiner Peters, Philip T. Lehnemann, c 



a Doctor Witt was an Englishman and came to this country 1704. 
He was noted as a famous conjuror, and died 1765. — Watson's An- 
nuls, II, p. 22. 

a r-oftor 2Bttt, ein Snglä'nber, fam 1704 in bicfeg ?anb «nb war ein 
berüt)mter SBa^irfager. Sr ftarb 1765.— SBatfon'ö Slnnakn, H, ®. 22. 

b Hans Graaf came to Germantown 1696. He settled afterwards in 
Chester County, now Lancaster, took up, as by date of warrant, 1716, 
in Pequse, lUOO acres of land; on a second warrant, Nov. 22, 1717, 
a large tract of land in Earl Township, Lancaster County. The old 
homestead on this tract is now owned by Levi W. Grove, a lineal 
descendant of Hans. — Rupp's History of Lancaster County, p. 133. 

h ^ax\i ®raaf fam 1696 nad^ ®ermantot»n. 9Jacbt)er He§ cr ficfc in 
ffhcjtfr, jeht 5?ancafter (Sounti), ntebcr unb natjm, »te bte Urfunbe bcfagt, 
1716 taufenb Slder «on in ^Jcqna ju crwerbenbcm Sanbe, unb ert)te[t am 
22. 9iD0. 1717 burc& einen jwctten SSoUmaditöbrtef eine gro§c «Strccfe 
Sanbeö in Sari 3;ott5nff)tp, Sancaftcr Sonntt). T)\t alte ^^eimftattc auf bte=' 
fern Üanb ift jefit im 53cftß »on Seüi 2B. (Srcöe, ein Slbfömmling in geraber 
Sinie üon ^an^. — SRupp'^ ®efc^. »on Sancafter Sount?, <©. 133. 

c Philip T. Lehnemann was for some time private secretary to 
William Penn. — Löker, p. 39, Proud, Watson, Deutscher Pionier, Col. 
Rec. II, p. 493, Penn. Archives, I, p. 63. 

c 55i)iHpb 2;. Scbncmamt war eine geraume ^t\i ^^rioat^Sefrctär beö 
SBiaiam 5)enn.— Sober, ®. 39, 5)roub, ffiatfon, ©eutfc^er ^Jionier, Sol.- 
23er., II, ©. 493, ^ennf. ^^rc^ice, I, (©, 63, 



37 



434 



APPENDIX. 



No. II. 

NAMES OF EARLY SETTLERS OF BERKS AND 
MONTGOMERY COUNTIES, ORIGINALLY PHILA- 
DELPHIA COUNTY, 
who were naturalized January 9, 1729 to 1730; 
SOME FROM BUCKS COUNTY, FROM CHESTER, 
AND FROM THE CITY OF PHILADELPHIA. 
Votes of Assembly, III, p. 131. 

'^^mtn ter evften 5tnftebler von ten dountieö S5erf^ unb 

3)^ontgomm% urfprüngli4) ^l^tlabdp^ta ßounti;, 

juclt^e öom 9. 3flnuflr 1729 an V\i 1730 naturaliftrt würben; 

einige öon ^ucfö ß^ountt), »on ß'fjefter unb »on ber ©tabt 

^^ilabelp^ia. 

3i:&fitmmungcn bcr Sljfembl^, III, ©. 131, 



Peter Wentz, 
Martin Kolb, 
Dielman Kolb, 
Jacob Kolb, 
Micbael Ziegler, 
Paul Fried, 
Hans Danweiler, 
Valentin Hun sicker, 
Jacob Schreiner, 
Johannes Kooken, 



Jacob Herman, 
Gerhart Clemens, 
Christian Zimmerman, 
Jacob Metz, 
Bastian Schmidt, 
Martin Gmelin, 
Ulrich Mayer, 
Christian Bauman, 
Abraham Schwaark, 
Hermanus Küster. 
From Berks County. 



Johan Joder, 
Johan Joder jr., 
Philip Kielwein, 
Jost Joder, 
Hans Hoch, 
Peter Endreas, 
Johan Dietrich Kreiner, 
Peter Balio, 
Abraham Levan, 
Isaac Levan, 
Nicholas Lescher, 



David Kauffman, 
Jean Bartolett, 
Hans Martin, 
Georg Martin Schenckel, 
Jonathan Herbein, 
Johan Bauman, 
Arnold Huffnagle, 
Johannes Langenecker, 
Johannes Buchwalter, 
Johann Eckstein, 
Isaac Vansintern, 



APPENDIX. 



435 



Johannes Dewalt End, 
Johan Georg Bentzel, 
Blasius Daniel Mackinet, 
Mathias Adam Hogennöd, 
Hans Rupp, 
Lorentz Belitz, 
Johan Nicholas Kressman, 
Christopher Funk, 
Johan Georg Reif, 
Johan Isaac Klein, 
Peter Reif, 
Johan Jacob Scharch, 
Johan Joseph Scharch, 
Antonius Halman, 
Gerhard Peters, 
Johannes ölayer, 
Johannes Schaffer, 
Jacob Seltzer, 
Johannes Lefeber, 



Georg Raus, 

Georg Jäger, 

Samuel Guldin, 

Christopher Guldin, 

Heinrich Pannbecker, 

Hans Siegfried, 

Samuel Hoch, 

Johann Schneider, 

Georg Merkle, 

Hubbert Cassell, 

Peter Traler, 

Heinrich Schaut, 

Jacob Hottenstein, 

Daniel Langenecker, 

Hans Jacob Bechtel, 

Melchior Hoch, 

Georg Bechtel, 

Jost Henrich Sassamanhaussen. 



Front Buchs County. 

Georg Bachman, 
John Dreistel. 



Jacob Klemmer, 
Jacob Sauder, 
Philip Geisinger, 

Note. — As early as 1709 John Bleicher was naturalized. — Col. Rec, 
II, p. 494. 

2tn merf u ng.— 3o|ann 23(et(|er »ar 1709 Itxtiti nahirah'firt.— Sol.= 
23er., II, (S. 494. 



Christian Mory, 
Johannes Roth, 



From Chester County. 

Casper Acker, 
Jacob Acker. 



From the City of Philadelphia. 

Marcus Kuhl, Johann Becker, 

Johau Keller, Abraham Kintzing. 
Jacob Karsdoop, 

From Philadelphia County. 1734 to 1735. 

Anthony Benezet, jMartin Bitting, 

Abraham Zimmerman, Conrad Kerr, 

Christian Weber, Conrad Küster, 

Nicholas Keyser, Jacob Dubre, 



436 



APPENDIX. 



Andreas Kreber, 
Ludwig Bitting. 

Co. 1734 to 1735. 



Anthony Zadouski, 
Hans Jacob Dubre, 
Hans Bingeman, 

From Chester 
Grerhart Braunbeck. 

From Lanca&ter County. 
Jolian Georg Bard, Frederick Elberstadt, 

Joiian Casper Stover, Peter Ensminger, 

Michael Weilder, Jacob Herschberger. 



No. III. 

SWISS AND GERMAN SETTLERS IN LANCASTER 
COUNTY FROM 1709 to 1730. 

®cf)n5eijertf(^e unt> fceutfd;e 3tnftebler in Sancafter ß^ountp 
»on 1709 W 1730. 



1709: 
Johann Rudolph Bundeli, 
Martin Kendig, 
Jacob Müller, 
Hans Graff, 
Hannes Herr, 
Martin Oberholtz, 
Hannes Funck, 
Michael Oberholtz, 
Wendel Bauman, 
Hans Meylin sen., 
Hans Meylin jr., 
Martin Meylin, 
Samuel Gulden, 
Johan Rodölf van der Werff, 
Daniel Herman, 
Christian Brenneman, 
Johan Georg Trellinger, 
Hans Mayer, 



Hans Haigy, 
Christian Herschi, 
Hans Pupather, 
Heinrich Bär, 
Peter Lehman, 
Melchior Brenneman, 
Benedictus Witmer, 
Heinrich Funck, 
Christopher Franciscus, 
Michael Schenck, 
Johannes Landes, 
Ulrich Hauerich, 
Emmanuel Herr, 
Abraham Herr, 
Hans Huber, 
Isaac Kauffmann, 
Melchior Erisman, 
Michael Müller, 
Christopher Schlegel. 



APPENDIX. 



437 



1712: 

Hans Georg Schutz, 
Martin Keuinger, 
Michael Bachman, 
Jacob Hochstetter, 
Jacob Kreider, 
Benedictus Veuerich, 
Jacob Kreutzer, 
Jacob Böhm, 
Hans Faber, 
Martin Urner, 
Theodorus Eby, 
Johannes Lein, 
Heinrich Zimmerman, 
Emanuel Zimmerman, 
Gabriel Zimmerman, 
Johannes Schenck, 
Michael Danegar, 
Marcus Oberholtz, 
Christian Stein, 
Edward Riehm, 
Joseph Steinman, 
Siegesmund Landtart. 

1719: 

Ulrich Brechbül, 
Christian Mosser, 
Andreas Schultz, 
Samuel Hess, 
Peter Yorde, 
Hans Tschantz, 
Johannes Hauser, 
Francis NeflP sen., 
Francis Neif jr., 
Georg Kendig, 
Johannes Burchhalter sen., 
Johannes Burchhalter jr., 
Abraham Burchhalter, 
Michael Bauman, 
Johannes Hess, 



Johann Friederich, 
Christopher Brenneman, 
Martin Harnish, 
Joseph Buchwalter, 
Felix Landes, 
Heinrich Neff, 
Michael Meyer, 
Peter Baumgärdtner, 
Melchior Hoffarth, 
Johannes Brubacher, 
Jacob Nüssly, 
Hans Schnebele, 
Jacob Guth, 
Johannes Wolschlegel, 
Jacob Meyer, 
Joseph Steinman, 
Daniel Eschleman, 
Christian Bülman, 
Johann Henrich Neff jr., 
Abraham Herr, 
Jacob Beyer, 
Hans Jacob Schnebele, 
Ulrich Roth, 
Rudolph Meyer, 
Carl Christopher, 
Henrich INIusselman, 
Mattheis Schleiermacher, 
Jacob Kurtz, 
Johan Ulrich Huber, 
Johannes Lichty, 
Johannes Stampfer, 
Peter Neucomer, 
Johan Henrich Bär, 
Jacob Weber, 
Heinrich Weiser, 
Johannes Weber, 
Georg Weber, 
David Langenecker, 
Abraham Meyer, 
Ulrich Hauser, 
Johannes Meyer, 



438 



APPENDIX. 



Heinrich Musselman, 
Michael Schenck, 
Peter Eby, 
Johannes Guth, 
Christian Steiner, 
Adam Brandt, 
Johan Jacob Lichty, 
Caspar Lauman, 
Friederich Stein, 
Johannes Schwaab, 
Bastian Rayer, 
Jonas La Ru, 
Simeon König, 
Eberhardt Riehm, 
Hans Graff, 
Johannes Rupp, 
Philip Dock, 
Johannes Weidman, 
Christian Lang, 
Michael Albert, 
Wilhelm Albert, 
Leonard Bender, 
Georg Miller, 
John Buschong, 
Nicholas Kendel, 
Johannes Hagey, 
Charles Keller, 
Stephen Remslaerger, 
Ludwig Dettenborn, 
Jacob Bär jr., 
Christian Lauer, 
John Leiberger, 
Michael Becker, 
John Peter Kueher, 
John Liebach, 
Bartholomew Schäfer, 
Casper Stump, 
Jacob Becker, 
Tobias Bickel, 
Peter Ruth, 
George Klein, 



Paul Tittenhoffer, 
Matthias Teis, 
Georg Ludwig Horst, 
Sebastian Graff, 
John Henrich Basler, 
Matthias Jung, 
Jacob Schlauch, 
Heinrich Michael Tmmel, 
Felix Miller, 
Martin Weybrecht, 
Friederich Eichelberger, 
Sebastian Fink, 
Hans Adam Schreiner, 
Christian Lang, 
Casper Filler, 
Antony Bretter, 
Leonhard EUenmacher, 
Andreas Bersinger, 
Jacob Hartman, 
Theophilus Hartman, 
Benjamin Witmer, 
Abraham Witmer, 
Johannes Binckley, 
Turst Buchwalter, 
Valentin Hergelrat, 
John Stettler, 
Leonhard Ramler, 
Leonhard Heyer, 
Peter Schell, 
John Nohacker, 
Nicholas Miller, 
Johann Hauck, 
Thomas Koppenheffer, 
Christian Lehman, 
George Unruh, 
Jacob Schäfer, 
Valentine Keffer, 
Casper Rieth, 
Christian Mahenschmidt, 
Nicholas Kutz, 
George Weyrich, 



APPENDIX. 439 

Christoplier Ley, Johannes Blum, 

Jacob Lauer, Ex-asmus Buchenmeyer, 

Hans Mohr, George GraflF. 



No. IV. 

NAMES, AGE AND OCCUPATION OF THOSE WHO 

ACCOMPANIED REV. JOSHUA KOCHERTHAL, 

who settled on lands on Q,uassick Creek, then Dutchess 

County, N. Y., in the Spring of 1709.* 



Rev. Joshua Kochei'fhal, aged 39; Sibylla Charlotta, his 
wife, 39 ; their oliildren, Benigna Sibylla, 10 ; Christ. Joshua, 7 ; 
Susanna Sibylla, 3. — Kocheithal was furnished with 1 barrel of 
lime, 3 gouges, 2 formers (kind of chisel), 1 grind-stone, 1 s(juare, 

1 rule, 1 compass and several pieces more. 

Lorenfs ßchwisser, aged 25, husbandman and vinedresser; 
Anna Catharina, his wife, 26 ; their daughter, Johanna, 8. — He 
was furnished with 1 grind-stone, 1 square, 1 little gimlet, 

2 augers, 1 smoothing plane, besides several pieces more. 
Henrich Rennau, aged 24, stocking weaver, husbandman and 

vinedresser; Johanna, his wife, 26; their children, Lorentz, 2; 
Heinrich, 5 months old, and two sisters of Mrs. Rennau, Susanna 
Liboscha, 1.5; jMaria Johanna Liboscha, 10 years old. — He re- 
ceived 1 cross cut saw, 1 mitre block, 1 adze, 2 augers, 1 gimlet, 
besides several small pieces. 

Andreas VoJck, aged 30, husbandman and vinedresser; his 
wife, Anna Catharina, 27 ; their children, Älaria Barbara, 5 ; 
Georg Hieronymus, 4 ; Anna Gertrauda, 1 . — He received 1 cross 
cut saw, 1 smoothing plane, 1 whipping saw, a set of gouges, 
besides several pieces more. 

Michael Weignnd, aged 52, husbandman; his wife, Anna 
Catharina, 54; their children, Anna Maria, 13; Tobias, 7 ; 



* In 1710, April 20, these where furnished by Queen Anne, through 
Melchior Guelch, a Palatine joiner, with implements, &c. — Doc. His. 
N. Y., V, pp. 52, 53. 



440 APPENDIX. 

Georg, 5. — He received 1 large file, 1 smaller one, 1 mortising 
chisel, 1 auger, besides several small pieces. 

Jacob Weber y aged 30, husbandman and vinedresser ; his wife, 
Anna Elisabeth, 25 ; their children, Anna IMaria, 5 ; Eva Elisa- 
beth, 1. — He received 1 box with knife, whitelead and compass, 
1 adze, 2 gouges, 1 mortising chisel, besides several pieces more. 

Johan Jacob Plettel, aged 40, husbandman and vinedresser ; 
his wife, Anna Elisabeth, 29; their children, Margaretha, 10; 
Anna Sara, 8 ; Catharina, 3. — It appears that Mr. Plettel, hus- 
band of Anna Elisabeth, had died prior to April 20, 1710, 
when these implements were distributed. It is recorded "to 
widow Plettel," 1 whipping saw, 1 great hammer, 1 gimlet, 
1 tenant saw, besides several pieces more. 

Johannes Fischer, aged 27, smith and husbandman ; his wife, 
Maria Barbara, 26 ; one child, Andreas, 6 months old. — He 
received 1 tenant saw, 1 gimlet, 1 hammer, 1 small file, 1 hatchet, 
1 jointer, besides several small pieces. 

Melchior Guelch, aged 39, carpenter and joiner; his wife, 
Anna Catharina, 43; their children, Magdalena, 12; Heinrich, 
10. — He received 2 full sets of carpenter's tools. 

Peter Rose, aged 34, cloth weaver ; his wife, Johanna, 45 ; 
no children. — He received 1 glue pot, 1 wimble, 1 hatchet, 1 little 
hammer, 2 augers, 1 jointer, besides several pieces more. 

Maria Wemnrin, widow, 37 years of age; her daughter, 
Catharina, 2. — She received 1 smoothing plane, 1 file, 1 hatchet, 
besides several small pieces more. 

Isaac Feber (Ae Fever), aged 33, husbandman; his wife, 
Catharina, 30; their son, Abraham, 2 years old. — He received 
1 broad axe, 1 little hatchet, 1 smoothing file, 1 rule, 1 former, 
besides several pieces more. 

Note. — Isaac Le Fever was born March 26, 1669, and died in Lan- 
caster County, Pa., 1736. His son, Abraham, was born April 9, 1706. — 
/. D. R. 

Z>a?uWi^ie/-o,aged32, husbandman; his wife, Anna Maria, 30 ; 
their children, Andi-eas, 7 ; Johannes, 6. — He received 1 broad 
axe, 1 square, 1 mitre block, 1 tenant saw, 1 jointer, besidc'.s 
several small pieces more. 

Herman Schilneman, aged 28, clerk, unmarried. 

Isaac Tiirck, aged 23, husbandman, unmarried. 

Note. — In 1711, Isaac Tiirk left New York, went to Pennsylvania 
and settled at Oley. — History of Berks County, p. 231. 



APPENDIX. 441 



91amcn, 5tltcr unb 58mtfeartcn Xerer, trd(^e ^aftor 3ofua 

^oä)txi\)ai begleiteten imD im giüt)jal)r 1709 jiä) am Slluafftcf 

dreef, tamalö 2)ud)e^ ß^ounti), 9^ g., nieterlie^en * 



5)aflor 3ofua itoc^ert^al, 39 3a^re alt; feine grau 
oibpUa S^arlotte 39; ibre Äinber, 33entgna (Sib^üa 10; 
(i()rtftian 3o[ua 7; «öufanna ©ib^Ua 3. — Äoc^ert^al t)atte ein 
ga§ Äalf, 3^of)lmet§e(, 2 (»tcmmeifen, 1 Schleif ftein, 1 SBinfelmap, 

1 JHid}tf4eit, 1 Äompa§ unti einige weitere *5tüde. 

S r en j © c^ » i f f er , 25 ^abxe, ?antmann unti Jöeingärtner; 
feine grau 5tnna Katharina 26; it)re 2oct)tcr 3ot)anna 8. — Sr 
toax au^geftattet mit 1 ©AIcifftein, 1 Sßinfelma§, 1 Heinen 33ot)= 
rer, 2 Stangenbohrern, 1 ^pianirbobel, aujßer anteren ©tüdcn. 

^einri^ 3fiennau, 24 3ai)re, ©trumpfrocber, Santmann 
unt) Sßeingärtner ; feine grau 3Dbanna 26; ibre Jlinber, '^oren^ 

2 3fl^re; ^einric^ 5 9J?onate alt, unt) jroei ©c^roeftcrn oon grau 
9tennau, ©ufanna ^ibofc^a 15, unb 'üJiaria 3o^anna Jibofcba 
10 3a^rc alt.— er erhielt 1 Sirfelfäge, 1 Sßintelblocf, 1 ^o^lavt, 
2 Stangenbohrer, 1 9iageIbo^rer, au^er einigen anberen fleinercn 
©tücfen. 

5lnt)rcaö 35oI(f, 30 3flt)re, ?antmann unt) ©eingärtner; 
feine grau 2lnna Äatfearina 27 ; i^re hinter, Waxia 33arbara 5 ; 
®eorg ^ieronpmuö 4; 9tnna ©ertrub 1. — Sr erhielt 1 3ii'fel= 
fage, 1 ^lanirjyobel, 1 33rettfäge, ein ^laar .^ol)(meifet, nebft 
anberen 2öerfjeugen. 

9)?i^ael Söeiganb, 52 %ihxt, Janbmann; feine grau 
Slnna Äat^arina 54; i^re Jlinber, Sinna ^Hcaria 13; Jobiaö 7; 
®eorg 5. — 3^nt jourbe jugctbcilt 1 gro^e geiie, 1 fieinere, 1 2od)^ 
Ibeutel, 1 33o^rer, nebft anbcren ©tücfen. 

3afob SJeber, 30 ^al)xt, l'anbmann unb Sßeingärtner ; 
feine grau Slnna (Slifabeth 25; i()re Äinber, Slnna SJJaria 5; 
Söa (Slifabct^ 1. — 3()'" 9^'^ '"^i" 1 .^"äfti^en mit ^Hejfern, 33lei^ 
njei^ unb Sompa§, 1 ^o|tart, 2 ^o^Imeifel, 1 Soc^beutel, nebft 
anberen ^itücfen. 



* 2lm 20. Slprtl 1710 tourben btcfelben »on bcr Königin 9lnna burd^ 
5)?eI(i&tDr ®ü(c^, einem ^fäljcr 2;tfc^Ier, mit SBerfjeitgen u.f.w. »erfe^en.— 
£)of. ®cic^. 5i. 2)., V., ®. 52, 53. 



442 APPENDIX. 

3o:&ann3afot>^tette(, AO^a^xe, Sanbmann unb 2ßettt= 
gärtner; feine grau 2(nna Glifabct^ 29; it)rc ^tnber, ?i}tavga= 
retl)a 10; 2lnna ©ara 8; J^atl)anna 3. — ^^ fc^etnt ta§ ^crr 
5)IetteI, @ema()l fcer Lintia CSUfaktl), fd)on »or bem 20. 3(pril 1710 
geflorben mar, an meinem Jage bte 2öcrf3eugc öcrtt)ct(t irurbcn. 
Der Seric^t fagt, „ter 3ßittwe ^Icttcl" 1 33rettfäge, 1 großer .Jam- 
mer, 1 ^Jagelbo^^rer, 1 ®ttd)fäge unt) anterc ©tücfe. 

3o6annc0 gifc^er, 27 ^ilm, (5d)miet> unt) Sldcrmann; 
feine gvau ^^IJtaria ^Barbara 26; ein Äint», 2tnt>reaö, 6 9}tonate 
alt. — Sr ert)ie(t 1 Sot^fiige, 1 5^ageIbo'^rer, 1 Jpammer, 1 fleinc 
^iUe, 1 Seil, 1 ®(^Üi^t^o6eI, nebft einigen anderen (Stücfen. 

Tleldjiov ©üirf), 39 3a()re, Bii^i^ermann unb Jifc^ter; 
feine grau Slnna ^atbarina 43; i^re Äinber, ?Dtagt>aIena 12; 
Jpeinrid) 10, — ör ert)ielt ein üotlftänbigeö boj^pelteö 3^'"'"^^* 
mann^=.^ant>mer!i33eug. 

5)eter 3flofe, 343a^re, 3;u(^mac^er; feine5rau3o^anna45; 
feine Äinber. — (jr erl)ielt 1 Seimpfanne, 1 Sßintelbo^rer, 1 23eil, 
1 fleinen Jammer, 2 S3o^rer, 1 ©latt^obel, nefcfl anderen (Stüdfen. 

SJiaria 3öe marin, Söittwe, 37 ^af^xe ; i^re Jcx^ter Äat^a* 
rina 2. — ®ic erl)ielt 1 ©latt^obel, 1 geile, 1 S3ei(, neBft einigen 
anberen fleincn ©egenftänten. 

3faaf gcber (Se getier), 33 ^a^xi, Stdermann; feine grau 
^at()arina 30; it)r ©o^n Slbra^am 2. — Sr erhielt 1 treite 2trt, 
1 Heiner 53eii, 1 ®(attfeile, 1 Sßinfelma^, 1 ©temmeifen, nebft 
einigen anbercn ©tüdfen. 

Slnmerf ung.— 3faaf Se Oe»er tourbe am 26. üDlärj 1669 geboren unb 
ftarb 1736 in Üancafter (S.o., ^cnnf'^banicn. «Sein (So^n 2tbrat)am tuurbc 
am 9. Stprtl 1706 öcboren.— 3. D. 3t. 

Daniel giero, 32 ^ai)Xi, Sanbmann; feine grau 2Inna 
Waxia 30; it)re ^'inbcr, Sinbrcaö 7; St^öanucö 6. — ör erhielt 
1 breite 2lrt, 1 2ßinfclma^, 1 JßinMMotf, 1 ?od)fäge, 1 ®Iatt- 
i^obd, nebft einigen auberen Stürlen. 

^ e r m a n n S d) ü n c m a n n , 28 3*J^)W/ Su(^()alter ; unöcr= 
^firatf)et. 

3faaf lürcf, 23 3i^t)re, ?aubmann; unoerfeeirat^et. 

2lnmerfung.— 1711 i>frlte§ 3faaf Jürf g?cw gorf, hm nad^ ^enn* 
fvlöanten unb Heß ftc^ in Dln; niebcr.— ©cfc^. »on ''Sixti So., ©, 231. 



APPENDIX. 

No. V. 



443 



NAMES AND AGES OF THE HEADS OF FAMILIES 
REMAINING IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK, 1710. 

^amtn fcer tm 3oire 1710 tn 9?cn) §)orf ^txUdUn'om 
^amilten()äiipter unb teven Sllter. 



The fomiiles, whose names appear, were widows, 
i^^ üTie grauen, bereit 5?amcn f)kx »orfommen, toaren 2Bittt»en. 
Hans Wilhelm Stuckrath, 37, Ludwig Burs, 32, 



Anna Worniser, 30, 
Nicklaus Jung, 32, 
Frantz Lucas, 
Mattlieis Bronck, 50, 
Johannes Jung, 32, 
Baltzar Wenerich, 40, 
Benedictus Wenerich, 32, 
Anna Apolona Siegner, 44, 
Johannes Planck, 43, 
Hans Adam Zollner, 52, 
Andreas Richter, 47, 
Anna Maria Mengel, 27, 
Maria Margarotha Scher, 21 
Peter Gerlach, 37, 
Hieronimus Klein, 38, 
Anna Catharina Erb, 44, 
Magdalina Baum, 29, 



Georg Ludwig Leicht, 56, 
Johann Henrich Neukireh, 36, 
Anna Almerod, 67, 
Johann Henrich Leicht, 24, 
Johann Henrich Gossinger, 31, 
Friederich Maul, 31, 
Christopher Dannermarker, 28, 
Anna Marg. Dannermarker, 58, 
Andreas Elich, 37, 
Johannes Engeil, 31, 
Michael Paffer, 32, 
Michael Storr, 38, 
Joh. Diet. Wannenmacher, 28, 
Conrad Lein, 56, 
Peter Appelman, 42, 
Anna Maria Bender, 44, 
Arnold Falck, 36, 



Maria Catharina Born Wasser, 26, Anna Kunegunde Russ, 44, 
Maria Catharina Schütz, 40, Johannes Kautz, 40, 



Anna Maria Cramer, 38, 
Maria Nies, 38, 
Frances Basch, 40, 
Susanna Beyer, 30, 
Sitonia Melcli, 41, 
Anna Catharina Batz, 38, 
Anna Eliza Rorbaal, 34, 
Anna Elizabeth Schultz, 22, 
Conrad Friederich, 52, 
Johan Philip Greisler, 40, 



Maria Catharine Hebmann, 40, 
Anna Maria Sack, 30, 
Johann Mattheus Keiser, 23, 
Johannes Trillhauser, 23, 
Bernhardt Sickard, 25, 
Johann Wilhelm Schneider, 28, 
Valentin Bressler, 41, 
Andreas Weidknecht, 40, 
Johannes Bär, 40, 
Melchior Dausweber, 55, 



444 



APPENDIX. 



Elizabeth Lainpert, 47, 
IMaria May, 45, 
Georg Römer, 30, 
Ulrich Simmendinger, 38, 
Christian Kasselman, 36, 
Johann Dieterich Schatz, 38, 
Anna Elizabeth Maul, 42, 
Peter Wickhaus, 32, 
Veronica Zwick, 39, 
Johannes Lorentz, 43, 
Caspar Hartwig, 39, 
Magdalena Off, 32, 
Anna Eva Morrell, 48, 
Michael Henneschied, 36, 
Johann Peter Fuchs, 31, 
Anna Maria Held, 50, 
Dieterich Fiebersbach, 21, 
Christopher Werner, 35, 
Johann Paul Badner, 19, 
Elizabeth Müller, 42, 
Nicolaus Heisterbach, 53, 
Elizabeth Noll, ß6, 
Appalonia Lintz, 40, 

In all, males and females of 
3ufammen 430 5>erfonen, 9 
2lltcrg. 



Johanna Zenger, 33, a 
Anna Maria Gabel, 34, 
Benedictus Kühner, 36, 
Anna Elizabeth Lauch, 42, 
Margaretta Schmidt, 27, 
Daniel Teffer, 30, 
Margaretta Messer, 50, 
Maria Galete, 38, 
Simon Vogt, 31, 
Johann Wilhelm Feiten, 30, 
Hermanus Hoffman, 30, 
Ludolph Korning, 50, 
Bernhart P]kel, 53, 
Johannes Täuble, 38, 
Catharina Müller, 36, 
Job. Jacob Starrenberger, 45, 
Johann Friederich Neff, 34, 
Anna Catharina Grau, 40, 
Heinrich Schmidt, 54, 
Daniel Schumacher, 30, 
Philip Peter Grauberger, 29, 
Johannes Roschman, 33. 

different ages, 430 persons, 
fiänner unt> grauen öerfc^iebenen 



a This poor widow was the mother of three children, John Peter, aged 
13, Anna Catharina, 10, and Johannes, 7. Her son, Peter Zenger, was 
apprenticed to William Bradford, printer in New York ; and afterwards 
became owner of the N. Y. Weekly Messenger. He was indicted for 
libel, 1734, on which Hamilton, a lawyer from Philadelphia, pleuUed 
his cause. — Doc. Hist. N. Y., Ill, p. 565. 

a X)tefe arme SBtttwc »ar btc üOtuttcr son brei Äinfcrn : 3o()aun yctcr, 
13 3al^re alt, Slnna Sat^arina, 10, unb 3ot)nnuci?, 7. 3t)r ^cbn, "iVtcr 
^enger, tourbe ju einem X)ru(ier in 9iem gjorf, 9iamcne 5Bm. ^rabfcv;. 
in bte Se^re get^an unb nai^^er felbft Sigcnt^iimer be^ N. Y. Weekly 
Messenger. 1734 tourbe er wegen 33erlä'umbung anfieflogt, bet »e(($er 
ßJelegen^ett Hamilton, ein SIbüofat öon ^^ilabel})t)ia, feine ^a^t fiit)rte. — 
Dof. m^' ^' Sv "I-. ®. 565. 



APPENDIX. 



445 



No. VI. 

NAMES AND AGES OF MALE CHILDREN APPREN- 
TICED BY GOVERNOR HUNTER, 1710 to 1714. 

Sflamen unb 5t(ter ter i?on 1710 biö 1714 t)on @ou»crneur 
punter in t>te ^el)re get^anen Knaben. 



Johan Philip Lepper, 12, 
Georg Friederich Weiser, 13, 
Daniel Artopee Weiser, 12, 
Philip Daniel Weiser, 13, 
Johan Paul Denbig, 7, 
Hans Georg Kuhns, 8, 
Hans Philip Kuhns, 15, 
Adam Greiner, 13, 
Hans Georg Bär, 
Joh. Ludig Trorit (Trauert), 9, 
Henrich Porter (Bortner), 14, 
Hans Bastian Gatian, 12, 
Joh. Bernhart Ruropaw 

(Rorbach), 10, 
Johann Conrad Otteene,? 9, 
Frederick Otteene,? 7, 
Hans Georg Schweitzer, 12, 
Johan Conrad Petre, 12, 
Peter PfeiflFer, 6, 
Georg Kastner, 13, 
Gerhardt Lamberton, 12, 



Hans Gerhart Löser,? 10, 
John Peter Zenger, 13, 
Thomas Reich, 12, 
Jacob Berleman, 10, 
Johann Paul Schmidt, 12, 
Georg Schneider, 15, 
Joh. Con. Matheis Horner, 15, 
Jacob Eysterberg, 3, 
Hans Henrich Schütz, 8, 
W. Webber, 8, 
Jonah Schmidt, 10, 
Johannes Schütz, 10, 
Christian Engel, 12, 
Arnold Schweedt, 13, 
Jacobus Brauer, 14, 
Peter Lohn,? 9, 
Nicholas Dietrich, 14, 
Peter De Mott, 13, 
Johann Wühelm Schmidt, 14, 
Jacob Berleman, 11 
Simon Helm, 12. 



The whole number apprenticed, males and females, was 75. 
Die gan^e ^n^a^, Änaben uitt) SJiabc^en, betrug 75. 



446 



APPENDIX. 



No. VII. 

NAMES OF MALE PALATINES, ABOVE TWENTY- 
ONE YEARS OLD, IN LIVINGSTON MANOR, N. Y., 
IN THE WINTER 1710, AND SUMMER 1711. 

Sfiomen tcr männltd)en ^Häljcr über ein unt> ^wanjtg ^a\)xt 

alt, wc\ä)i im ®luter 1710 unb ©ommer 1711 

in €tinnöftoii SJcanor, 9t. g)., waren. 



Johann Christopher Gerlach, 

Peter Maurer, 

PhilUp Müller, 

Johann Georg Spannheimer, 

Johan Friederich Casselmann, 

Johann Löher, 

Friederick Merkel, 

Georg Schäffer, 

Johann Adam Friederich, 

Valentin Bender, 

Brandau, 

Schäifer, 

Arnold, 

Wilhelm, 

Henrich Hoffmann, 

Georg Höhlen, 

Heinrich Scherman, 

Valentin Wohlleber, 

PhUip Wohlleber, 

Peter Wagner, 

Johann Henrich Krantz, 

Johannes Straub, 

Frantz Keller, 

Johannes Becker. 

Joh. Friederich Gantermann, 

Phihp Kilmer, 

Heinrich Mann, 

Thomas Ehrman, 

Albert Friederich Marterstock 



Augustin Voschell, 
Peter Voschell, 
Johannes Eberhard, 
Peter Wohlleber, 
Anthony Kremer, 
Herman Hostman, 
Stephan Fröhlich, 
Johannes Franck, 
Andreas Ross, 
Joseph Reichart, 
Melchior Tausweber, 
Rev. Joshua Kocherthal, 
Jacob Mond, 
Matheus Schleimer, 
Georg Wilhelm Kiel, 
Peter Becker, 
Valentin Falkenberg, 
Wilhelm Müller, 
Johannes Ritzbach, 
Peter Keiseler, 
Johann Wilhelm Kieffer, 
Johan Henrich Schräm, 
Peter Egner, 
John Michael Emrich, 
Georg Henrich Stubenrauch, 
Peter Diebel, 
Christian Mäyer, 
Peter Oberbach, 
Henrich Mohr, 



APPENDIX. 



447 



Conrad Martin, 
Adam Hardel, 
Gottfried Fidler, 
Jacob Demuth, 
Gottfried lliegel, 
Hieronimus Scheib, 
Nicolaus Keriier, 

Dietricli, 

Weiden, 

Hieronimus Weller, 
Johann Conrad Weiser, 
jNIattheus Reinbolt, 
Johann Peter Dopff", 
Johann Jacob Reisch, 
Carl Nehr, 
Heinrich Jung, 
Werner Deichert, 
Georg Müller, 
Friederich Bellinger, 
Heinrich Wiederwachs, 
Georg Mathias, 
Christopher Hagedorn, 
Frantz Finck, 
Andreas Schütz, 
Peter Hagedorn, 
Niclaus Weber, 
Wilhelm Georg, 
Friederich Schäffer, 
Anthony lehard, 
Johann Peter Lein, 
Johann Jacob Munsinger, 
Johannes Leyer, 
Jacob Kuhn, 
Henrich Mattheis, 
Nicolaus Eckert, 
Martin Dülenbach, 
Nicolaus Föller, 
Jacob Schnell, 
Jacob Webber, 
Wilhelm Nelles, 
Johannes Geissler, 



Georg Briegcl, 

Johannes Schäffer, 

Georg Dachstiidter, 

Johannes Zeissdoif, 

Heinrich Mayer, 

Capt. Joh. Christopher Fuchs, 

Johann Wilhelm Tliales, 

Johan Wilhelm Scheff, 

Christian Bauch, 

Peter Heidt, 

Henrich Hammer, 

Michael Ittich, 

Johann Keyser, 

Jacob Kopp, 

Paulus Dientzer, 

Melchior Foltz, 

Johannes Segendorff, 

Philip Laux, 

Abraham Langen, 

Johan Jacob Schultz, 

Johann Wilhelm Hambach, 

Nicolas Laux, 

Nicolaus Göttel, 

Capt. Hartman Wiudecker, 

Johann Wilhelm Dill, 

Peter Spies, 

Herman Bitzer, 

Johannes Schuc, 

Johann Wilhelm Schneider, 

Jacob Bast (Borst), 

Johannes Blass, 

Johan Wilhelm Kammer, 

Johannes Bonroth, 

Johannes Bernhard, 

Sebastian Fischer, 

Nicolaus Heyd, 

Henrich Klein, 

Henrich Balthasar Stuper, 

Caspar Bauch, 

Hans Henrich Zeller, 

Johannes Zeller, 



448 



APPENDIX. 



Samuel Kuhn, 

Jacob Ess, 

Gerhart Seh äffer, 

Ulrich Bruckhart, 

Conrad Kuhn, 

Friederich Mentegen, 

Samuel Kuhn, 

Valentin Kuhn, 

Heinrich Winter, 

Johann Georg Reiffenberg, 

Johann Wilhelm Linck, 

Johan Martin Netzbach, 

Johannes Weiss, 

Johann Adam Walborn, 

Johann Heinrich Ahrndorff, 

Daniel Busch, 

Johan Henrich Conradt, 

Henrich Bellinger, 

Johannes Schneider, 

Marcus Bellinger, 

Philip Schäffer, 

Johann Kraut, 

Christian Sittenich, 

Johann Henrich Schmidt, 

Johann Philip Zerbe, 

Nicolaus Ruhl, 

Adam Michael Schmidt, 

Conrad Meissinger, 

Thomas Ruffener, 

Jacob Dinges, 

Henrich Fehling, 

Johan Jost Petry, 

Johannes Lantz, 

Lorentz Zerbe, 

Peter Rieth, 

Conrad Schütz, 

Joseph Saab, 

Georg Rieth, 

Gottlieb Fidler (Fitler), 

Johannes Rieth, 

Johan Peter Pacht, 



Sebastian Pisas, 

Andreas Walbom, 

Antonius Scharf, 

Sebastian Fischer, 

Christian Lauer, 

Johann x\dam Lesch, 

Georg Auspach, 

Ludwig Wilhelm Schmidt, 

Paulus Reidkopff, 

Rev. Job. Friederich Hager, 

Johann Peter Kneskern, 

Jacob Mauck, 

Philip Peter Grauberger, 

David Huppert, 

Conrad Schauerman, 

Henrich Sechs (Sex), 

Friederich Ball, 

Jacob Kobel, 

Jacob Werner, 

Johannes Schultheis, 

Reinhart Schäffer, 

Johannes Rosclunan, 

Cari Uhl, 

Baltzer Anspach, 

Conrad Keller, 

Johann Georg Schmidt^ 

Conrad Goldman, 

Georg Bender, 

Johann Henrich Uhl, 

Thomas Schumacher, 

Peter Schmidt, 

Johannes Schwall, 

Georg Ludwig Koch, 

Veit Müsig, 

Georg Kirchner, 

Christian Hills, 

Rudolph Stahl, 

Gottfried Wolfen, 

Leonhart Anspach, 

Georg Zeh, 

Andreas Kapp, 



APPENDIX. 



449 



Jacob Löwengut, 
Johannes Noäcker, 
Jacob Katterman. 



Jolianu Philip Theis, 
Martin Zerbe. 



No. VIII. 

NAMES OF THE FIRST PALATINES IN NORTH 
CAROLINA, AS EARLY AS 1709 and 1710. 

SfJamen ber evftm Pfäljer tn ^f^orb^^cyarolina in ben 3öl)ren 
1709 unb 1710. 



Pheneyer, 


Mohr, 


Müller, 


Granatha, 


Eslar, 


Ibach, 


Risched, 


Riesenober, 


Gramm, 


Moritz, 


Walcker, 


Hubbach, 


Ender, 


Riemer, 


Tetsche, 


Bieber, 


Bucher, 


Margert, 


Huber, 


Ament, 


Schneider, 


Kinsie, 


Wolff, 


Lutz, 


Regene, 


Köhler, 


Bühlmann, 


Simons, 


Gärtner, 


WalHs, 


Schtlffer, 


Rieser, 


Buset, 


Genest, 


Gesibel, 


Reigert. 


These were 


still living in 


i 1714. 




©iefetben lebten mä) im 


3a^re 1714, 





No. IX 

NAMES OF MALES, SALZBURGERS, SETTLED IN 

GEORGIA, 1734 to 1741. 

(Sources: Ulsperger Nachrichten, Vol. I, pp. 2307-2310.) 

Slamen bcr männlii^en ©ciljburger, bte |t^ yon 1734 bt^ 

1741 in ©eorgia niebergelaffen ^aben. 

(Queaen: Ulsperger 9Iac|rtc|tert, 23b. I, ©. 2307-2310.) 



First Transport. 

Rev. Job. Martin Boltzius, 
Samuel Leberecht Boltzius, 



(Srfle Ueberfa^rt.) 

Rev. Israel Christian Gronau, 
Peter Gruber, 

38* 



450 



APPENDIX. 



Thomas Gschwandel, 
Leonhart Rauner, 
Matthias Rauner, 
Georg Schweiger, 
Thomas Schweighoffer, 



Martin Hertzog, 
Christian Leimberger, 
Simon Reiter, 

Christ. Ortman, schoolmaster, 
(©(^ulmeifter). 



In this transport there were 20, including males and females. 
2luf tiefer Uefcerfa^rt waren 20, mit Stnfc^Iuf ter männlichen 
unt) lueiMic^en ^^erfoncn. 



Second Transport. 

Simon Steiner, 

Ruprecht Kalcher, 

Thomas Pichler, 

Stephan Rottenberger, 

Matthias Burgsteiner, 

Ruprecht Burgsteiner, 

Ruprecht Eischberger, 

Matthias Brandner, 

Veit Lemmenhofer, 

Barthol(5mäus Rieser, 

Balthasar Rieser, 

Georg Rieser, 

Veit Landfelder, 

Hans Maurer, 

Thomas Bacher, 

In this transport there were 
^uf feiefer UeBerfaI)rt waren 



(3t»eite Uefcerfa^rt.) 

Georg Kogler, 
Ruprecht Riedelsperger, 
Johannes Riedelsperger, 
Christian Riedelsperger, 
Georg Sanftleben, 
Gabriel Bach, 
Bartholomäus Zant, 
Christian Hessler, 
Jacob Sehartner, 
Georg Brückner, 
Ruprecht Zimmermf^A. 
Paul Zittrauei-, 
Carl Sigismund Ott, 
Heinrich Bischof. 

59 in all. 

im ©anjen 59. 



Third Transport. (X)rttte Uekrfa^rt). 



Hans Schmidt, 
Hans Flörel, 
Johann Spielbiegler, 
Johann Cronberger, 
Leorihard Grause, 
Michael Rieser, 
Gottlieb Rieser, 
Joseph Ernst, 
Johann Ludwig Ernst, 
Joh. Friederich Helfenstein, 
Johann Jacob Helfenstein, 



Jeremias Helfenstein, 
Johannes Helfenstein, 
Friederich Müller, 
Johann Paul Müller, 
Peter Arnsdorf, 
Hans Krüsy, 
Friederich Nett, 
Michael Schneider, 
Joh. Georg Schneider, 
Peter Arnsdorf, 
Andreas Grimmiger, 



APPENDIX. 451 

Frantz Hernberger, Gottlieb Christ, 

Cari Flörel, Johann Pletter, 

Peter Reiter, Ambrosius Züblin, 

Martin Lackner, Jacob ZübHn, a 

Matthias Zettler, C. E. Thilo, M. D. 
Joseph Leitner, 

There were 59 in this transport. 

59 famen mit tiefer %Oi^xi. 

Fourth Transport, which arrived in June, 1741. 
(35icrte Uefeerfa^rt, bte im 3uni 1741 anfam.) 

Andreas Piltz, Conrad Künlen, 

Caspar Gramwetter, Johannes Künlen, 

Martin Lackner, J. Ludwig Mayer, chirurgus, 

Georg Eigel, Johann Georg Mayr, 

Lorentz Ludwig Eigel, Mattheus Bacher, 

Johann Lorentz Eigel, Peter Kohleisen, 

Georg Glaner, Georg Klammer, 

Johann Frantz Eigel, Johannes Maurer, 

Samuel Eigel, David Eysperger, 

Balthasar Bacher, Johannes Scheraus, 

Michael Haberer, Johann Georg Kocher, 

Abraham Haberer, Johan Scheraus jr., 

Bernhard Glocker, George Kocher, 

Ruprecht Schrempf, Veit Lechner, 

Sebastian Glocker, Ruprecht Lechner, 

Paul Glocker, Job. Georg Mayre jr., 

Simon Riser, Johann S chefler. 

There were 63 persons in this transport. 

5ü^it tiefer UeBerf(^iffung famcn 63 ^erfonen. 



a Ambrosius and Jacob Züblin were two brothers from St. Gall, 
Switzerland. — ülsperger Nachrichten, I, p. 2310. See also Part II, pp. 
900 and 1832. 

a SImbroftuö unb Sacob 3wf'Ittt toaren jwet Sriibcr axxii St. (Datlcn tr. 
bcr ©c^toeij.— Ulöperger 9Zacbvicbteit, I, <a, 2310. Siebe m6) %\)ti\ II, 
©. 900 unb 1832. 



452 APPENDIX. 

No. X. 



"Though," says Peter Kalm* "the Province of New York 
has been inhabited by Europeans much longer than Pennsylva- 
nia, yet it is not by far so populous as that colony. This cannot 
be ascribed to any particular discouragement arising from the 
nature of the sou, for that is pretty good; but, I am told of a 
very different reason, which I will mention here. 

"In the reign of Queen Anne, about the year 1709, many 
Germans came hither, who got a tract of land from the English 
government, which they might settle. After they had lived 
there some time, and had built houses, and made corn-fields and 
meadows, their liberties and privileges were infringed, and, un- 
der several pretences, they were repeatedly deprived of parts of 
their land. This at last roused the Grermans. They returned 
violence for violence, and beat those who thus rolibed them of 
their possessions. But these proceedings were looked upon in 
a very bad light by the government. The most active people 
among the Germans being taken up, they were roughly treated, 
and punished with the utmost rigor of the law. This, however, 
so far exasperated the rest, that the greater part of them left 
their houses and fields, and went to settle in Pennsylvania. 
There they were exceedingly well received, got a considerable 
tract of land, and were indulged in great privileges, which were 
given them forever. The Germans, not satisfied with being them- 
selves removed from New York, wrote to their relations and 
friends, and advised them, if ever they intended to come to Ame- 
rica, not to go to New York, where the government had shown it- 
self so unecjuitable. This advice had such influence that the Ger- 
mans who afterwards went in great numbers to North America, 
constantly avoided New York and always went to Pennsylvania. 

" It sometimes happened that they were forced to go on board 
of such ships, as were bound for New York, but they were 
scarce got on shore, when they hastened on to Pennsylvania, 
in sight of all the inhabitants of New York." — Peter Kalm's 
Travels in America, in 1747 and 1748, Vol. I, pp. 270, 271. 

* Peter Kalm, a Swedish natural philosopher and traveler, was bom 
at Ostro Bothnia in 1715, traveled from 1748 to 1751 in North America, 
and at a later period in Russia ; he became Professor of Botany at 
the University of Abo, and died 1779. 



APPENDIX. 453 

„Dbfc^on Die ^xo'ouii ^m §)orf," [ao(t 9)etcr Äalm,* „met 
länger üon (Europäern bejvc()nt ift, aU ^pcnnfiplöanien, fo ift fic 
t)od) nod) lange nid)t fo beivobnt, wie jene Solonie, Vni !ann 
feinem befonbcrcn i^in'Dernilg, »el^eö in t)er 33e[c^affcnl)eit tiec! 
33ol)cnö liegt, ^ugrfAvicbcn werben, tenn terfelbc ift giemli^ gut; 
aber ein ganj autorcr ©runt) TOuric mir angegeben, ben ic^ i)ier 
mittl)ei(en mü. 

„äßä^rent ber S^egierung t>er Königin 5lnna, um'ö 3a^r 1709, 
famen oiele T)eutfd)e ^ierl)er, n?el(^en bie cnglifc^e Ärone ein ©tüd 
l'anb 3um einbauen 5utl)cilte. ^ioc^bem fic eine ßeitlang bafelbft 
geitJO^nt unb Käufer, gruc^tfelber unb Söiefen erbaut unb ange= 
legt ^ttcn, griff man in ibre greit)eit unb S^lec^te ein, unb nat)m 
unter »erf^iebenen 55orn?änben i^nen njieber^olt J^eile i^reö San= 
beö ttjeg. 3)ieö erregte bie !Deutfc^ett enblic^. ©ie oergalten ©e^ 
»alt mit ©enjalt, unb »ergriffen fic^ an Denen, bie it)nen it)r 
Seflj^t^um raubten. Die Stegierung na^m biefeö i^orge^en übel 
auf. Die Jüc^tigften unter ben Deutf^en mürben in'ö @efäng= 
ni^ geftedt, ^art be^anbelt unb ibnen bie äu^crfte ©träfe bes 
©efe^eö feeigemcffen. Dices erbitterte bie übrigen berma^en, ba§ 
bie 9)?eiften"^auö unb ^of ocrlic^en unb nad) ^ennfplüanien 
sogen, ^ier mürben fte fe^r gut aufgenommen ; fie erhielten ein 
bebeutenbei^ ©tüd ?anb, unb er^ebtid)e 9iec^te mürben if)nen für 
immer jugetf)eilt. Die Deutf(^en, bamit nic^t jufrieben, felbft 
ytew §)orf oertaffen ju Baben, fc^rieben i^ren 35ermanbten unb 
greunben, unb gaben ibnen ben diat^, baf, menn fte je na^ 
Slmerifa auömanberten, fte ^iem g)orf (dienen foEten, beffen 3fle= 
gierung ftc^ fo ungered)t crmiefen f)abe. Die Sßarnung mar oon 
folc^er iragmeite, ba§ bie ®d)aaren Deutfc^er, bie ^ernac^ nad) 
9iorb=2lmerifa jogen, 9]em glorf ftetö mieben unb ^ennf^Iöanicn 
aU Drt i^rer 9?ieber(affung mäblten. 

„3umeilen gefcfca^ e^, ba§ fie an Sorb »on ©i^iffen famen, 
mel(^e nac^ 9?em §)orf fteuerten; faum maren fte aber angclanbet, 
fo eilten fte im 2InbUd aller SSemo^ner Sion ^m glorf na^ ^enn= 
fplöanien.''— 5)eter Äalm'ei gf^cifen in Stmerifa, in ben ^aijxen 
1747 unb 1748, 53b. I, ©. 270, 271. 



* 5)cter ^alm, ein fc^wcbtfc^er 91a altjl unb JRctfettbcr, 1715 in Dftro 
Sotbnten geboren, retötc üon 1748 biö 1751 in 9?Drt)-2lmertfa unb \)ixmä) 
in 9?uglanb. Serfclbe tourbe ^rofeffcr an ber Unicerfität ^bo unb ftarb 
im 3a^re 1779. 



454 APPENDIX 

No. XL 

GERMAN SETTLEMENT IN NORTH CAROLINA, 
1709, 1710. 



" The population of North Carolina was increased, near the 
beginning of the eighteenth century, by two small colonies of 
Protestants, French and Grermans. A colony of French Hu- 
guenots, encouraged by King William, had come to America in 
the year 1690, and seated themselves at the ManaJdntown, in 
Virginia, above the falls of James River. Not well pleased with 
the lands they first occupied, and the greater part of Carolina 
being unappropriated, they removed to the southward and seated 
themselves upon Trent River, with Rybourg their pastor, 1707. 
They were sober, fragal, industrious planters, and in a short 
time became independent citizens. 

The German colony was from Heidelberg and its vicinity, on 
the Rhine. Those unfortunate people had suffered persecution 
from time to time, because they could not change their reli- 
gious opinions, so as to be in constant agreement with the ruling 
prince. The elector palatine, Frederick II., embraced the Lu- 
theran faith. Frederick III. became a Calvinist. Lodovic V. 
restored the Lutheran Church ; his son and successor became a 
Calvinist. That prince was succeeded in the government by a 
Catholic family, who oppressed the Protestants. 

Those people had also the misfortune to live between power- 
ful rivals, who were often at war. In the year 1622, count Tilly, 
the imperial general, took the city of Heidelberg and put five 
hundred of the inhabitants to the sword. In the year 1G34, the 
city was taken by Louis XIV., and many of the inhabitants 
killed. In the year 1688, it was taken a second time by the 
French, who laid the inhabitants under a heavy contribution, 
after which, at the approach of the imperial army, they blew 
up the citadel and reduced the city to ashes. The city, being 
rebuilt, was taken again by a French army, who committed it 
to the flames in the year 1693. The inhabitants, men, women 
and children, about fifteen thousand, stripped of their property, 
were turned into the fields by night. Upon the retreat of the 
French army, the inhabitants were again prevailed upon to re- 
build the city, being promised liberty of conscience and exemp- 



APPENDIX. 455 

tion from taxes for thirty years. After some time the elector, 
who seems to have believed that promises made to heretics should 
not be observed, begau to persecute his Protestant subjects. The 
French army having again crossed the Rhine, the distressed 
Palatines, persecuted by their prince and plundered by a foreign 
enemy, fled to England, about six thousand of them, for pro- 
tection, in consequence of encouragement they had received from 
Queen Anne, by proclamation, 1708. 

Having pitched their tents at a small distance from London, 
they were supported at public expense, until they could be 
shipped oflF for Ireland or the colonies. Christopher de Graf- 
fenried and Lcivis Michell were attempting about this time, to 
mend their fortunes by purchasing lands in some of the British 
colonies. Michell had been several years in America,* and had 
obtained some knowledge of the country. 

Note. — Michell was originally employed by the Canton of Bern iu 
Switzerland, to search for a large tract of vacant land on the frontiers 
of Pennsylvania, Virginia or Carolina, to which they might send a 
colony. He spent some years in exploring the country. There was no 
scarcity of mountainous land, such as those people are accustomed 
to ; but they desisted from the project. 

The lords proprietors of Carolina had agreed with those gentle- 
men, April, 1706, that ten thousand acres of land should be 
laid off for them in one body, between Neuse and Cape Fear, 
they paying twenty shillings for every hundred acres, and sis- 
pence the yearly quit-rent. The Surveyor General was also in- 
structed to lay off an additional tract of one hundred thousand 
acres, which was to be reserved twelve years. One of them was 
to be gratified by a title, when he should pay the usual price 
for five thousand acres of land. De Graffenried made the pur- 
chase and was created a baron. This company, having secured 
the lands, wished to make them productive by settling them 
with tenants; and the poor Palatines presented themselves as 
an object of speculation. Commissioners had been appointed by 
the Queen to collect and receive muney for the use of the Pala- 
tines, and to provide them with settlements. Graffenried and 
Michell covenanted with those commissioners, that they would 
transport to North Carolina six hundred and fifty of the Pala- 
tines (about one hundred families) ; that they would lay off for 



* Rupp's History of Lancaster County, pp. 70, 71. 



456 APPENDIX. 

each family two hundred and fifty acres of land, to be held five 
years without cost, and from that period at the annual rent of 
two-pence currency per acre. The Palatines were to be supplied 
twelve months with necessary provisions, to be paid for at the 
end of the following year ; and they were to be furnished, gratis, 
with tools sufiicient for building houses. It was also stipulated 
that, within four months from their arrival, they should be pro- 
vided with a certain number of cows, hogs and sheep, which 
were to be paid for at the end of seven years ; and half the re- 
maining issue was to be returned in lieu of interest. 

The commissioners allowed five pounds sterling per head, for 
transporting the Palatines ; and those people, who had each of 
them, young and old, received twenty shillings of the charitable 
collections, made throughout the kingdom, lodged that money 
in the hands of Graffenried and Michell, to be returned to 
them in Carolina.* The Palatines arrived in December, 1709, 
at the confluence of the rivers Neuse and Trent, where they 
erected temporary shelters until they could be put in possession 
of their lands. The place on which they encamped was called 
New Bern, from Bern in Switzerland, where Graffenried was 
born. The Palatines had too much reason to complain of their 
trustees; for Graff'enried, in whose name the lands were taken 
up, returned to Switzerland without giving them a title to their 
settlements. He mortgaged the lands to Thomas Pollock for 
eight hundred pounds sterling ; and they passed to the heirs of 
that gentleman. 

Note. — Pollock, by a letter to Graffenried, Feb. 16, 1716, offered to 
return to him the land, fifteen thousand acres, if he would re-pay the 
money. 

The Palatines in the meantime, being industrious and living 
in a country where land was plenty and cheap, increased in 



* The commissioners were John Philips, Alexander Cairnes, Theo- 
dore Janson, White Kennet, John Camberlin, Frederick Store, Mi- 
caiah Perry. 

The article of agreement was dated Oct. 10, 1709, in the eighth year 
of Queen Anne. 

There were six hundred poor Palatines; — ninety-two families. 

This article was signed by the seven commissioners ; Christopher 
De Graffenried and Lewis Michell, in the presence of William Taylor 
and James De Pratt, Oct. 21, 1709. 



APPENDIX. 457 

number and acquired property. After many yeai-s, upon their 
petition to the king, tliey were in some measure indemnified, 
by a grant of land, ten thousand acres, free from quit-rents for 
ten years." 



Deutfc^e ^(nftebelung in S^oib^^aroltna, 1709 unb 1710. 



„'Die 33et>ölferung öon 9lorb=SarüIina tt>urt>c gegen Stnfang 
teö ai^tje^nten 3fl^r^w«^ertö burc^ jroei fletne Kolonien fran= 
jöftfc^er unt) beutfc^er ^roteftanten öerme^rt. ßine Solonie 
franjöfifc^er Hugenotten xoax 1690 auf BwfP^^wc^ t>eö Ä'öntgö 
2ßi(^eim nad) Slmerifa gefommen unt) ^atte fic^ am ?0?anaftntotün 
in 3Sirginien, ober^alfc ter gäüe tiä 3amei?=gluflfei3, niebergelaffen. 
T)a fte mit fcen 2änt»ereten, tie fie anfang« befaf en, nid^t jufrictcn 
ft»aren, unt» t)a t>er gröfere 3:t)eil Sarolina'ö unöeräu§ert mar, 
hradcjen fte öon ^ier auf unt) sogen fübli^ nac^ bem Jrent^gluffe, 
n)o fie ftc^ 1707 mit i^rem ^aftor ai^bourg festen. (Sie waren 
nü^terne, fparfamc unt) fleißige ^flanjer, tie in turner Qtit 
unabt)ängige Bürger hjurten. 

!Die t)eutf(^e Solonie war auö Jpeitelberg unt ter Umgegent) 
am Sfl^ein. Diefe ungtücflic^en 2eute Ratten 5BerfoIgungen ju 
ertulten, weil fte i^ren ©laukn nic^t mit jetem regierenten 
^rinjen änbern wotlten. ©er Äurfürft grietric^ II. oon ter 
§)fal3 war ein Sut^eraner; «^netric^ III. wurte ein Satöinift; 
Vutwig V. fteüte tie lut^erifd)e Äir^e wieter ^er; fein (Sol)n 
unt ^l'ac^folger wurtc ein ßabinift; tiefem wieter folgte cinr 
fat^oUfc^e gamitie, wetc^e tie ^roteftanten untertrücfte. 

Sbenfatlö Ratten fte taö Unglüd, jwifc^en jwei mächtigen 
9Zeknbu^Iern ju wohnen, tie oft gegen einanter ju gelte lagen. 
3m 3a^rc 1622 na^m ®raf %i^, ter faiferti^e ©eneral, tie 
©tatt ^eitelberg unt ri^tete fünf()untert ter 33ewot)ner turd)'ß 
©c^wcrtt ^in. 2utwig XIV. na()m tie (Statt 1634 unt lic^ 
öiele ter Sinwo^ner meterl)auen. Sßieterum wurte fie 1688 öon 
ten Sr^njofen eingenommen unt l)attceine f(^were ©umme ®eltcö 
gu beja^len. 2llö tie faiferlic^e 5lrmee angefommen, fprengten fic 
tie geftung unt brannten tie (Statt nieter. 1693, alö tie (Statt 
wieter aufgebaut war, eroberten tie granjofen tiefelbe jum trit* 
ten 9J?ale unt gaben fie ten glammen preiö. X;ie Sinwobner, 

39 



458 APPENDIX. 

ettra fünfjcftntaufenl), Wanmr, Sßeiber unb Winter, njurtien, 
nac^bem i^nen Slüeö geraubt, in ter 9tac^t in tie gelber ^tnauö 
pejagt. 9iacö bent Sitücf^ug beö franjöftfc^cn ^cereö Iie§en ftif) 
t)ie SiniDofiner, unter 3?erfpre(^ung von ®en.n[fenöfreit)eit uub 
Befreiung »cn ^Steuern auf ibrei^tg 3a£)re, bereten, t)te (Statt auf':^ 
^tcue aufjubauen. Stnige ^dt darauf fing ber .^urfürft, mcldcicx 
Äckern geleiftete 35erfprec^en für nid)t tnnbenti ötclt, an, feine 
prote^antifc^en Untertt)anen ju »erfolgen. !Dte fran5Öftfd)c 5Irmce 
liatte ten d\i)dn bereite roieter ü6crfd)ritten; ba flogen bie »on 
i^rem dürften verfolgten unb 'oom gcinbe peplünberten ^fäljer, 
etwa fec^ätaufenb an ber ^aU, nad) Snglanb, um nad) bem 
öon ber Königin 2lnna im ^ai^vi 1708 ergangenen (Sriap bafelbft 
@c^ui^ ju ftnben. 

3^re 3eite i)atten fie eine Heine <5trecfe aufer^atb Bonbon auf= 
gefc^tagen, mo f[e auf öffentli^e Soften erhalten würben, biö man 
ffe nai^ 3i"fanb ober ben Sotonien beförbern fonnte. 61)riftopl)er 
be ©raffenrieb unb ^oniö Wiö^ili »erfuc^ten ju biefer 3eit burc^ 
Stnfauf »on 2anb in ben britif(^en Kolonien i^r ®IM ju machen. 
9)ii(^eti tvar mehrere 3a^i"e in SImerifa* gewefen unb ^atte ftc^ 
einige Äenntniffe bcg Sanbeö »erfc^afft. 

2lnmcrfung. — Wtc&eU toar anfangt öom Santon Sern in ber (Sc&toetj 
beauftragt, eine gro^c ®trccfe leeren i!anbcö an ben ®renjcn üon ^txin^ 
f^löanten, Q3irginten ober SaroHna ju fui^en, auf bem ber Santon eine 
Volonte grünbcn fönntc, 3Jlid^tü braute mehrere 3abre mit Unterfui^ung 
beö Sanbe^ ^u. "Ca tear fein 5>?angel an gebirgigen (Scgcnben, trie fte 
jene Seutf gctoöt)nt finb ; aber ber ^ian würbe aufgegeben. 

Xiic ©runbl)crren von Carolina ^tten mit biefen Ferren ein 
Uebereinfommen getroffen, bafi je^ntaufenb 2lcfer für fte an einem 
©tü(i gttjifi^en 9ieufe unb Sape gear, gegen Sejablung von 
3it>an3ig ©chiding für je ^unbcrt StiJer unb fec^S 5^ence aU jäi)r= 
liefen (Srbjinij, abgemejfcn werben. IDer ®eneraI=3nfpeftor würbe 
ebenfalls angewicfen, eine weitere gläc^c 2anbcg von I)unbert= 
taufenb Slcfer abzulegen, we((^e für jwötf 3a^te 3urücfget)alten 
werben fotiten. Siner »on i^nen foüte nad) 2lbjat)Iung beö ge= 
wö^nlic^en ^reifeö für fünftaufenb Stcfer Sanbeö einen S^rcntitel 
befommen. ;De ©raffenrieb erfüllte bie Sebingung unb würbe 
jum ^aron er()oben. ^f^ad^bem biefe @efeüf(^aft bie Sänbereien 
erworben Ratten, war i^r ^med, fte burc^ bie Seoölterung mit 
^äd)tern erträgH^ ju matten; unb ba boten ftc^ bie armen ^fä(= 
jcr 3um 53?ittel ber ©peculation. DieÄiJnigin l^atte Seöoümäc^tigtc 

* SRupp'^ ®efc|). öon Sancajler So., «ö. 70, 71. 



APPENDIX. 459 

ongeflcllt, um ©elt» für W ^fäf^er ju fammetn unb t^nen ju 
einer ^ieberlaffung ju öerl)clfen. ©rajfcnrtet) unb 'üO'Jic^eÜ mad)= 
ten eg nun mit bicfen 33eöoUmä^tigtcn ab, bap biefclbcn fec^ö= 
l^unberi unb fünfjig üon ben ^''fäi3crn, ettt?a I)unbert gamilien, 
nac^ 9?orb=SaroIina fc^ijften, njcfd)en ftc baö ?anb, jeber Familie 
3njeil)unbert unb fünfjig 2lder, bie erften fünf ^ci^xc lang unent=^ 
gelblich unb öon ber 3eit an ju jtrei ^cnce Mourant per Slder 
abgeben wollten. Sml^ ?Wonate lang fotiten bie ^^fäl^er mit 
Sebenömitteln üerfe^en werben, bereu Scja^Iung erft am @nbe 
beö barauf folgenben 3at)reö fällig würbe; ebcnfalliS foKten ftc 
unentgelbli^ mit ben jur Srbauung i^rer Käufer nöt^igcn @f= 
rätöen auögerüftet werben. @ö ftanb ebenfaüö im 5Bertrag, bap 
fte innerhalb oier 'SJtonate nac^ i:^rer Slnfunft mit einer beftimm= 
ten Stnjabl Äübe, ©c^weine unb ©c^afe oerfeben werben fotltcn, 
bie erft nac^ 33erlauf oon ffeben S'^^ffn ga^^lbar würben, ©tatt 
ber 3ntereffcn fotiten fte bann bie Hälfte ber ^f^ac^juc^t jurü(!= 
erftatten. 

gür Ueberfc^iffung ber ^fätjcr gcflatteten bie S3eöollmä(^tigten 
fünf ^funb (Sterling auf ben ^opf ; unb fol(^e, welche, jung ober 
alt, jwanjig Scfeitling öon ben im ganjen Äönigreic^ erhobenen 
milbtl)ätigen ßoHeftionen erl)ielten, gaben baö ®elb in bie .f)änbc 
©raffenrieb^ö unb S)?i^cll'g, um eö i^nen in Carolina wieber 
gurücfjuerpatten.* 

3m !l)ecember 1709 famcn bie ?)fäl3er am 3ufammenflu§ ber 
gtüffe 5^eufe unb Streut an, wo fte fi(^ Jpütten auffc^lugen, big 
fte in ben 33ep^ ibreö ^'anbcö gelangen fonnten. i)en Drt, wo 
fte i^re Sßo^nungen auffd)lugen, Riefen fle 9iew 33ern narf) 
35 cm in ber ©d)wei3, bem ©eburtöort ©raffenrieb'g. 2)ic 
5)fäljcr ^^atten gute Urfrt(^c ju flagen, ba ©raffenrieb, auf beffcn 
Manien bag Sanb aufgenommen worben war, nad) ber ©d)weij 
3urüdfel)rte, olnie ibnen ein @runbred)t ju i^ren Slnftcbelungen 
JU geben. Gr »crfd)ricb bie Sanbereien bcm J^omaö ^^oHocf für 

* Die 5BcoD(lniä'd)tigtcn waren Sobn ^(»tltp«, Sllcranber Sntrnc^, 3;t)eo. 
Sanfon, SBJjite Äcnnet, 3ot)n Stiamberltn, ^^xtitrid <Bt\ixt, 5J?tcatat) ^Jerrip. 

Die SSertrngSurfunbe tr»ar batirt: ben 10. Dct. 1709, im ad^ten Sa^rc 
ber 3tegterung ber Äöuigin Slnna. 

"Die 3«t)( ber armen ^ftäljer betrug ^i^ii^vintttt; — jtuet unb neunjtg 
Familien. 

Diefe Urfunbe war uutcrjeicijnet »on ben ftcbcn 23eöDttmäc^ttgten; 
Sbriftopb" be ©raffenrieb unb ^out^ 5}?ti|eß, in Öjegentoart öon 2BiÜtam 
Jailor unb 3ameß be ^i'ratt, ben 21. DU. 1709. 



460 APPENDIX. 

W (Summe tton ad)t{)unt»ert ^funt) (Sterling, mlä^t bann öuf 
bte ßrben biefeä SJZannes übergingen. 

31 tt m e r f u n g.— 3n einem »on $oüocf an (Sjraffenricb gerichteten (Sc|irct= 
bcn öom 16. (Februar 1716 trug er tt)m bie fünfjeijntaufent» Slcfer Joieber 
an gegen 9{ücfja|)lung beö Äaufpreifeg. 

X>k ^fiiljer, bie inbeffen baö au^gebe^nte unb fcitligc Sanb 
fleißig bearbeiteten, nahmen an Slnja^I ju unb erttiarfcen ftc^ 
S3eft0tt)um. 9lac^ öielen 3a6ren mürben fie auf eine Sitte an 
ben MniQ burc^ eine (Sc^enfung yon jel)ntaufenb Slder, bie auf 
je^n 3Ä^re frei öon Srbjinfen twaren, gemiffermapen entfc^äbigt." 



No. XII. 
GEKMANNA. 



" Beyond Col. Spotswood' s Furnace, above the Falls of Rap- 
pahannock River, within view of the vast mountains, he has 
founded a town, called Germanna, from some Germans sent 
over by Queen Anne, who have now removed further up the 
river. Beyond this is seated by Germans from the Palatinate, with 
allowance of rich land, who thrive very well, and live happily, 
and entertain generously. These are encouraged to make wines ; 
which by the experience, particularly of the late Robert Bev- 
erly, who wrote the History of Virginia, was done easily and 
in large quantities in those parts ; not only from the cultivation 
of wild grapes, which grow plentifully and naturally in all the 
lands thereabouts, and in the other parts of the country, but 
also from the Spanish, French, Italian and German vines." — 
Hugh Jones' Present Condition of Virginia, published 1724. 

Col. B^rd, writing of Germanna in 1732, says : " This famous 
town consists of Col. Spotswood's enchanted castle on one side of 
the street, and a baker's dozen of ruinous tenements on the other, 
where so many German families had dwelt some yeai's ago, but 
have now moved ten miles higher up, in the forks of Rappahan- 
nock, to land of their own." — Iloioe's His. Col., pp. 475, 476. 

Rockingham and Shenandoah Counties are inhabited by many 
of German origin, who still speak the language of their ancestoi-s. 



APPENDIX. 461 

Shenandoah Valley, in the vicinity of Harrisonburg, was almost 
exclusively settled by Germans from Pennsylvania, prior to 1748. 
A traveler through this part of Virginia, during the French 
and Indian war, writes : " The low grounds upon the banks of 
the Shenandoah River are very rich and fertile. They are chiefly 
settled by Glermans, who gain a sufl&cient livelihood by raising 
stock for the troops, and sending butter down into the lower 
parts of the country. I could not but reflect with pleasure on 
the situation of these people, and think, if there is such a 
thing as happiness in this life, they enjoy it. Far from the bustle 
of the world, they live in the most delightful climate and richest 
soil imaginable. They are every where surrounded with beauti- 
ful prospects and sylvan scenes; — lofly mountains, transparent 
streams, falls of water, rich vallies and majestic woods, the whole, 
interspersed with an infinite variety of flowering shrubs, con- 
stitute the landscapes surrounding them. They are subject to 
few deseases, are generally robust, and live in perfect liberty. 
They know no wants, and are acquainted with but few vices. 
Their inexperience of elegancies of life precludes any regret 
that they have not the means of enjoying them; but they 
possess what many princes would give half their dominions 
for — health, contentment, and tranquillity of mind." — Howe's 
Coll of Va., p. 468. 



©crmotinft. 



„T)raufen üter DBerfl ©pot^ttjpob'ö (Etfcnfc^ntelge, oBer'^atfe 
ter gäücbeö JRappa^annod^ghiffe^, im SlnMid ber unabfe'^baren 
©efcirgc, ^at er eine ©tabt gegrünbet, Sf?amcnö ©ermanna, 
fo genannt naö) einigen öon ter Königin Stnna ^erübergef^icften 
!X)entf(^en, bte je^t weiter tien glu§ i)inauf gejogen ftnb. Sßeitcr 
brausen ttto^nen Deutfc^e ani t»er ^falj auf reichem SSoten, bie gut 
fortfomnten, glücfUc^ leben VixCt> freigebig betPtrt^en. ©iefe Mtern 
SOSeine, bag no.&) (Fvfai)rnng, befonberö beö üerftorbenen Stöbert 
SBeoerl^, »etd^er bie ©efc^id)te »on 5?trgtnten gefc^rieben, lei^t 
öon ©fatten ge()t unb in jenen I()eilen au^ in bebeutenben £^uan= 
titäten, nid)t nur au^ bcn in jener ©egenb unb angrengenben 
Sänbern fo ^äuftg unb üppig njac^f^-nben tvilben Jrauben, fon= 

39* 



462 APPENDIX. 

t>ern rtU(^ son ben fpanifc^en, fran5Öftf(^en, itatientfc^en unb bmt= 
fc^en diebm." — ^ug^ 3one3' ^t^iQt 3wf^änbe in 33irgtnien, 
^erau(?c(egeben 1724. 

Dberfl 5Bprb [agt in einem (Schreiben über ©ermanna 1732 : 
„X)iefeö mertwürbtge ©täbtd)en befielt aus Dberft ®potött)oob'^ 
bcjanbertem (»c^Ioffe auf ber einen @cite ber ©träfe unb einem 
!Du^enb unb ettid)en alten »erfattenen Bütten auf ber anberen, in 
benen frütjer tbm fo öiele beutf(^e gamitien gewohnt hatten, 
welche aber jc^t ^tijn ^EReilcn fiuf aufroärtö in bie ®abeln beö 
9iappal)annocf gebogen ftnb, auf il)r eigeneö Sanb." — ^oive'g 
®efc^. ber Sot., ©.475, 476. 

■bie Sountieö Siocfing^am unb ©^enanboa^ ftnb öon 5>ielcn 
beutfc^er Stbfunft bewo'^nt, bie noc^ bie ®praci)e i^rer 2If)nen 
reben. Vaä ®benanboat) = 2;^at in ber 9?a(ibarf(^aft üon 
^arrifonburg würbe faft aueifc^lieplit^ nod) öor 1748 lion "Deut^ 
fc^en auö ^ennf^löanien angefiebelt. Siner, ber roä^renb beö 
fran3ijfif(^en unb inbianifc^en Äriegeä burc^ biefen J^eit 33ir= 
ginien'ö gereift toav, fd)reibt: „X)ic an ben Ufern beö ©^cnanboa^ 
gelegenen 9iicberungen ftnb fet)r reii^ unb frud)tbar. !DicfeIben 
finb ^auptfäc^Iic^ oon IDeutfd^en angebaut, bie burd) 3ie^en üon 
33orrat!^ für bie 2;ruppen unb bur(| Lieferung t»on SButter nac^ 
ben niebercn Ii)eilen beö Sanbeei fic^ einen genügenben Unterhalt 
crtrerben. 3^ fonnte nur mit '35ergnügen über bie Sage biefer 
Seute nac^ftnncn, unb benfen, ba§, trenn e^ in biefem Seben 
©lüdfeligfeit gibt, fie biefelbe befi^en muffen. 2ßeit üom ©etöfe 
ber 2ßelt entfernt, wohnen fie im präd)tigften ^Uma unb auf 
bem reic^ften S3oben, ben man fic^ beulen fann. Ueberaü ftnb fie 
mit ben t)errli(^ften 2tugft(^ten unb 2öalbgruppen umgeben — ^ol)e 
S3erge, ftlber^etle ©tröme, Söafferfäüe, reii^e Jplcr unb maje^ 
ftätif(^e ffiälbcr, mit einer 3n?ifd^enfaat üon buftenben, blüt)enben 
@cfträud)en aller 3trt, bilben bie fte umgebeube Sanbfc^aft. ©ie 
ftnb nur ivenigen Äranf^eiten unterworfen, geivöl)nUc^ »on fräf= 
tigem 2leu§eren unb leben in ööüiger greil)eit. ©ie tennen feinen 
5}?angel unb ffnb mit wenigen Saftern bcfannt. 3()re Unerfahrene 
beit in ber Sleganj bes; 2cbenä f^Iiept icbeö 53ebauern, baf fte 
nic^t bie ?0^ittel jum ®enuf berfelben ^aben, üon felbft auö; 
il)r X^eil jeboc^ ift ein ®ut, für bag bie gürjlen bie ^älfte i^rer 
®üter geben würben: ®efunb()eit, 3ufi^iebenbcit unb ©eelcn* 
ru^e." — ^owe'ö ©ammlungen »on 35a., ©. 468. 



APPENDIX. 



463 



No. XIII. 

NAMES OF MALES AT NEW ROCHELLE IN 1710. 



New Rochelle, in West Chester County, N. Y., was early 
settled by Huguenots from Rochelle, a seaport-town of France. 
The following list embraces the names of all the males, ages 
annexed to the names, living in New Rochclle, December 9, 
1710. The Editor can vouch for the tnie spelling of names — 
they have all been carefully copied. 

Seamen ier S)länner ju 9?em Sfiodietle, 1710. 

9lcn) 9to(^e((e in 2Beftd)efler Souutp, 9?. 5)., luurbe frü^c tton 
J^ugcnotten axxi Sflo^elle, einem Seehafen granfretd)'ö, ange= 
flebelt. £)ic nac^ftc^enbe Sifte enthält tie 9iamen aüer am 9. X)ec. 
1710 3U 9tett» 3ftod)eIIe töo^nentien männlid^en ^erfoncn, nebft 
beigefügtem i^efeenöatter. 



William Le Conte, 52, 
William Le Conte jr., 16, 
Jean Le Conte, 6, 
Alexander AUear, 50, 
Peter AUear, 15, 
Philip AUear, 8, 
Jean AUear, 3, 
Isaac AUear, 1, 
Peter Vallow, 47, 
Josiah Le ViUien, 48 
Peter Le ViUien, 9, 
John Le ViUien, 4, 
Peter Martine, 45, 
Andreas Nodden sen., 73, 
Andreas Nodden jr., 34, 
John Rannoo, 46, 
Stephen Rannoo, 22, 
John Rannoo, 3, 
Andrew Jan'o, 45, 
John Jarro, 13, 
Andrew Jarro jr., 11 
James Jarro, 3, 



John Mannion, 45, 
Peter Fmteer, 22, 
Isaiah Vallow sen., 72, 
Peter Vallow, 10, 
Daniel Bondett, 58, 
WiUiam Landering, 13, 
Zachariah Angevine, 46, 
Zachariah Angevine jr., 6, 
Daniel Angevine, 2, 
James Moreye, 55, 
Daniel Moreye, 9, 
Ffrancis Le Conte, 45, 
Josiah Le Conte, 13, 
John Teast, 54, 
John Lambert, 52, 
Isaiah Baddo, 46, 
Isaiah Baddo jr., 12, 
Andris Barrett, 63, 
John BaiTctt, 25, 
Barnabas Barrett, 16, 
Andris Barret jr., 13, 
Peter Angevine, 44, 



464 



APPENDIX. 



Lewis Angevine, 8, 
John Barrett, 50, 
John Barrett jr., 7, 
Gabriel Barrett, 6, 
Peter Barrett, 50, 
Peter Brittain, 28, 
Peter Brittain jr., 3, 
Anthony Leppener, 24, 
John Claance, 1, 
John Neffveile, 69, 
Josiah Neffveile, 18, 
Lewis Guion sen., 56, 
Isaac Guion, 25, 
John Lammon, 28, 
James Fflanders, 46, 
James Fflanders jr., 4, 
Peter Fflanders, 1, 
Paul PiUon, 40, 
Paul Pillon jr., 14, 
James Sycar, 34, 
John Sycar, 3, 
Robert Bloomer, 76, 
James Mott, 15, 
Thomas Mott, 9, 
Fredk. Bolt, 36, 
Peter La Boue, 12, 
Daniel Sycar, 40, 
James Sycar sen., 75, 
Daniel Sycar jr., 12, 
John Sycar, 11, 
Peter Sycar, 9, 
Andrew Sycar, 3, 
Peter Parcout, 47, 
John Parcout, 15, 
Andrew Parcout, 9, 
John Couton, 52, 
John Couton jr., 15, 
Peter Couton, 12, 
Frederick Scurman, 80, 



Jacob Scurman, 40, 
Jacob Scurman jr., 11, 
Miles Scurman, 6, 
Peter Symon, 47, 
Peter Symon jr., 12, 
Charles Fruttye, 56, 
Oliver Bayley, 52, 
Peter Le Doof, 46, 
Daniel Le Doof, 14, 
Peter Le Doof jr., 8, 
John Le Doof, 5, 
Andrew Le Doof, 4, 
Ffrancis Geenar, 45, 
Frederick Scurman, 4.3, 
Daniel Rennoe, 55, 
TheophUus Ffurtye, 68, 
John Sarineer, 
Stephen Garrien, 46, 
John Murro, 46, 
Peter Murro, 9, 
John Murro, 13, 
John Martine, 25, 
Peter Frederick, 68, 
Peter Sluce, 18, 
Peter Frederick jr., 26, 
John BouUie, 35, 
John Boullie jr., 5, 
Daniel Bonnett, 45, 
Daniel Bonnett jr., 17, 
John Bonnett, 15, 
Peter Bonnett, 5, 
Josiah Hunt, 43, 
Josiah Hunt jr., 15, 
John Bon Repo, 47, 
.Blanch Bon Repo, 13, 
Gregory Guyion, 44, 
Gregory Guyion jr., 7, 
Peter Dais, 48. 



APPENDIX. 465 



No. XIV. 

NAMES OF EARLY SETTLERS IN TULPEHOCKEN, 
BERKS AND LEBANON COUNTIES. 



As early as 1723, tliirty -three families of Germans, who had 
come to New York 1710, settled in Schoharie 1713, left there 
and located on Tulpehocken Creek; among these were: 

9?amett ber erften 5tnftebler ooit 2;ulpe{)orfen, ^txU unb 
Sebanott ß^ountteö. 

©c^on im ^a.;Xt 1723 tiefen p^ breiftg beutfc^c gamtlten, 
bie 1710 nac^ 5'ien) §)orf gefommen unb 1713 na^ (St^oijavte 
gejogcit ttarcn, am Stülpet) ocf en = glu^ nieber; unter biefen 
waren : 

Johannes Lantz, Johan Peter Pacht, 

Peter Rieth, Sebastian Pisas, 

Conrad Schütz, Andreas Walborn, 

Lorentz Zerbe, Antonius Scharf, 

Joseph Saab, Sebastian Fischer, 

George Rieth, Christian Lauer, 

Gottfried Fitler, Johan Adam Lesch, 

Johan Nicolas Sch'dflFer, George Anspach. 
Johannes Rieth, 

In 1728, others from Schoharie settled here. 

2tnbcrc öon ©c^o^aric liefen ftc^ 1728 ^ierfelbjl nieber. 

Leonard Anspach, Georg Zeh, 

Johan Jacob Holsteiner, Andreas Kapp, 

Johan Philip Schneider, Jacob Löwengut, 

Philip Theis, Georg Schmidt, 

Casper Höhn, Johannes Nöcker, 

Michael Lauer, Jacob Werner, 

Jacob Katterman, Heinrich Six. 
Conrad Scharf, 

Note. — In 1729, Conrad Weiser left Schoharie with his wife and 
five children, Philip, Frederick, Anna, Madlina and Maria, and settled 
near the present site of Womelsdorf, one mile east of the town. He was 
usefully employed in various capacities by the Oovernment of Penn- 



466 



APPENDIX. 



sylvania, until within a few weeks of his death. He died July 13, 1760, 
aged 63 years, 8 months and 12 days. His earthly remains moulder 
in their narrow house, near Womelsdorf. — See Rupp's History of Berks 
County, pp. 195-222. 

The first settlers in Tulpehocken were Lutherans and German Re- 
formed. Rev. Tobias Wagner was the first pastor of the Lutheran 
Congregation. The following is a List of the members of the Tulpe- 
hocken Church, from 1743 to 1746: 

?lttmerf ung. — 1729 öerUe§ Sonrab 2Betfer ®c^of)arie mit feiner ^xau 
unb fünf Ätnbern, 5^t)iH|3p, griebric^, Stnna, 5]?agbalena unb iSlaxia, unb 
fiebelte ftc^ in ber 5?at)e ber gegentuarttgen Sage »on SDomelöborf, eine 
^OJeilc ijftlic^ öom (2täbt($cn, an. Stö furj »or feinem lobe letftete er ber 
9iegterung ijon ^ennf^loantcn auf i^erfc^tcbcnerlet 2Beife treue £)tenfte. 
5tm 13. Suit 1760 jiarb er im Stiter ijon 63 3a{)rcn, 8 5!ÄDnaten unb 12 
3;agcn. ©eine Oebeine ru^en in tt)rem engen |)auö bet SBomelöborf. — 
®tf()e Stupp'ö @ef4). oon 23erf3 Sount?, ®. 195-222. 

"Die erftcn ^nftebler in Sutpet)Dcfen tcaren Sut^eraner unb Oleformtrie. 
5)aftor Jobtag SBagncr tear ber crftc «Seelforger ber Sut^crtfd^en ©emetnbe. 
Öolgenbeö ift eine Sifte ber SJiitglteber ber Xulpeijorfen^Äirc^e »on 1743 
bt^ 1746: 



Sebastian Fischer, 
Michael Nef sen., 
Erasmus Dunkenmayer, 
Martin Höcker, 
Peter Hohnsteiner, 
Valentin Urich, 
Thomas Koppenhofer, 
3Iichael Erhardt, 
Georg Graf sen., 
Friederick Kapp, 
Andreas Kapp, 
Keinhold Eset, 
Johannes Rickmüller, 
Leonard Grau, 
(Christoph Kaylor, 
Joh. Georg Brigel, 
Joh. Georg Lechner, 
Andreas Graf, 
Martin Stupp, 
Christian Laur, 
Jacob Fischer, 
Georg Unruh, 
Johannes Immel, 
Andreas Kreutzer, 



Christian Walborn, 

Andreas Saltzgeber, 

Martin Batorf, 

Joh. Heinrich Boy er, 

Georg Anspach, 

Joh. Adam Lesch, 

Joh. Peter Anspach, 

Joh. Georg Kohl, 

Nicolaus Dek, 

Joh an Heinrich Dek, 

Johannes Anspach, 

Leonard Anspach, 

Joh. Phil. Schneider, 

Balthas Anspach, 

Joh. Leonhard Hollsteiner, 

Georg Brosius, 

Abraham Lauk, 

Michael Müller, 

Joh. Nich. Schwengel, 

Andreas Wolf, 

Michel Koppenhofer, 

Simon Carle, 

Joh. Phil. Gebhardt, 

Michel Hof jr., 



APPENDIX. 



467 



Johann Schoss, 
Abraham Nef, 
Andreas Wigner, 
Joh. Mich. Müller, 
Joseph Keller, 
Peter Gebhard, 
Jacob Löwengut., 
Joh. Martin Kapp, 
Johan Martin Cass, 
Geo. Vitus Cass, 
Joh. Michel Kapp, 
Joh. Georg König, 
Doratha Ertzbergerin, 
Margretha Basler in, 
Niclaus Hafner, 
Philip Moderer, 
Joh. Müller, 
Joh. Adam Lang, 
Peter Kreutzer, 
Nichlas Gaucher, 
Jacob Katterman, 
Peter Zerb, 
Johannes Graf, 
Heinrich Schupp, 
Georg Graf jr., 
Joh. Adam Christ, 
Philip Kunz, 
Georg Pfafenberger, 
Wilhelm Leitner, 
Frederick Süss, 
Margr. Kreutzbergerin, 
Johan Kistler, 
Anna Cath. Daurin, 
Melchior Dehler, 
Mavg. Cath. Christian, 
Franciscus Brosmann, 
Joh. Kastner, 
Anna Elisabeth Lenin, 
Hermanus Batorf, 
Jacob Lesch, 
Leonhard Feg, 



Joh. Geo. Goldmann, 
Joh. Gotfried Röhrer, 
Joh. Jacob Köhler, 
Anna Barb. Riedin, 
Daniel Schneider, 
Joh. Adam Müller, 
Joh. Peter Müller, 
Heinrich Gruber, 
Jacob Muller, 
Conrad Scharf, 
Christian Gruber, 
Johan Dieter, 
Joh. Valentin Lang, 
Jacob Mautz, 
Christoph Besher, 
Joh. Georg Lauk, 
Andreas Kraft, 
Stephanus Umbenhauer, 
Joh. Kettner, 
Joh. Casper Stöver, 
Geo. Michel Kettner, 
Conrad Ernst, 
Adam Scharf, 
Gottfried Fiteier, 
Michel Schauer, 
Eva Martinin, 
Martin Pfateicher, 
Jacob Zorn, 
Philip Straus, 
Adam Schauer, 
Johannes Zerbe, 
Jacob Zerbe, 
Adam Schmidt, 
Adam Ulrich, 
Leonhard Müller, 
Johannes Waidmann, 
Balthas Süss, 
Georg Albert, 
Martin Waidman, 
Daniel Huber, 
Georg Klein, 



468 



APPENDIX. 



Jacob Klein, 
Jacob Heil, 
Hartman Vertries, 
Leonhard Hof, 
Job. Georg Heü, 
Peter Raa, 
Henrich Rothe, 
Johannes Bauer, 
Job. Adam Oberlin, 
Geo. Eichelberger, 
Michel Spieger, 
Mattbeus Albrecht, 
Job. Peter Kucber, 
Georg Steitz, 
Job. Sigmund Herle, 



Georg Zeh, 
Wendel Heil, 
Friderich Ruth, 
Georg Günter, 
Valentin Herchelroth, 
Adam Stump, 
Henrich Majer, 
Geo. Bartel Schäfer, 
Franz Wenrich, 
Johannes Haak, 
Georg Wenrich, 
Johan Henrich Basler 
Job. Holman, 
Job. Jac. Ertzberger, 
Christian Anbauer. 



No. XV. 

LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE GERMAN REFORMED 
CHURCH, BETWEEN 1735 and 1755. 

€iftc fcer 3}Jitölicber bcr tcutfc|=^reformtrtm Ätrc^e in bm 
3aM 1735 bi^ 1755. 



Johannes Bassler, 
Jonas La Ru, 
Johan G. Zöller, 
Wilhelm Hoster, 
Hartman Zöller, 
Friederich Klopp, 
Georg Huber, 
Johan Thomas, 
Michael Spengler, 
Johannes Petrus, 
Nicholas Gelbert, 
Johannes Zollner, 
Jacob Itzberger, 
Nicklaus Miüler, 



Johannes Müller, 
Peter Becker, 
Peter Loch, 
Jonas Fortuny, 
Johannes Lein, 
Johan Adam Stein, 
Jacob Dinges, 
Christian Orndorff, 
Jacob Simon, 
Michael Gunkel, 
Jacob Keller, 
Johan Jacob Müller, 
Peter Summois, 
Georg Dollinger, 



APPENDIX. 



469 



Johan Wilhelm Hoster, 

Abraham Lebbo, 

Peter Spycker, 

John Adam Forne, 

Henrich Marsteller, 

Jacob Rammler, 

Johannes Reiif, 

Wilhelm Leitner, 

Johan Greorg Stahlschmidt, 

Nicklaus Simon, 

Michael Kor, 

Peter Mayer, 

Jacob Rössel, 

Johan Henrich Herchelroth, 

Jacob Seifert, 

Johan Diehm, 

Henrich Koppenhöffer, 

Conrad Hartman, 

Henrich Ludwig, 

Daniel Maurshagen, 

Johan Peter Pappel, 



Isaac Mayer, 
Joh. Adam Dieffenbach, 
Adam Forrer, 
Peter Wenkelbley, 
Baltzer Noll, 
Jacob Gröninger, 
Conrad Goldman, 
Henrich Schmidt, 
Philip Ziegler, 
Valentin Schuler, 
Casper Kor, 
Johan Michael Becker, 
Michael Sänger, 
Jacob Walter, 
Conrad Schwartz, 
Georg Deys, 
Johann Dätweiler, 
Martin Schell, 
Augustus Wilhelm, 
Jacob Zufall, 
Lorentz Wolff. 



Note. — May 10, 1728, inhabitants of Colebrook Dale petitioned 
Governor Gordon, praying for relief against what they suffered, and 
were likely to suffer, from the Indians, who had fallen upon the back 
inhabitants about Falkner'' s Schwamm and Goshenhoppen. — Pa. Arch., I., 
p. 213. 

Slntncrfung. — 2tm 10, ?[)?at 1728 retd^ten bte 33eh)of)ner »om Sole^- 
broof'Xöat an ©ouoerneur (53orbon eine Stttfchrift ein, in ber 7° i|)" 
erfuc^tcn, tt)nen 2l&()ülfe ju ocrfc^affen »on ben Slngrtjfen, bie [ie öon ben 
Snbtanern ju letben fatten, »eld^e bereitö über bte ^)tnteren SSemo^ner nat)c 
Salfner'ö ©c^ttjamm unb ®oft)enl)uppen hergefallen t»aren. — 
5)ennf. Street», I., ®. 213. 



John Roberts, 
John Pawling, 
Henry Pfannebäcker, 
W. Lane, 
John Jacobs, 
D. Bais, 
Israel Morris, 
Benjamin Frey, 



Jacob Opdegräf, 
Richard Adams, 
George Boger, 
Adam Sollom, 
Dielman Kolb, 
Martin Kolb, 
Gabriel Schüler, 
Anthony HoUman, 



40 



470 APPENDIX. 

Jolin Isaac Klein, Hans Ulrich Borge, 

Hans Detweiler, Jolin Mayer, 

William Bitts, John Frot, 

Heinrich Ruth, Paul Frot, 

Hubrecht Cassel, Wm. Smith, 

Henrich Fenttinger, Peter Rambo, 

Christian Weber, David Yung, 

Gerhart de Hesse, Christopher Schmidt, 

Lorentz Sinsemore, Gerhart Clemens, 

Richard Jacob, Mathias Tyson (Deisen), 

Herman Rupert, Peter Janson, 

Betu Bohn, Yost Heid, 

Jacob Conrads, Christian Allbach, 

Christian Neuschwanger, Hans Reif, 

Conrad Cresson, Daniel StauflFer, 
Jacob Kolb, 

and numerous others (uni »iele antcrc). 



No. XVI. 



FOUR HUNDRED AND SIXTY -FIVE NAMES OF 

GERMAN, DUTCH AND FRENCH INHABITANTS 

OF PHILADELPHIA COUNTY, 

who owned land, and paid quit-renta prior to 1734. 

Note. — Quit-rent, a reserved rent in the grant of land, by the Pro- 
prietary, by the payment of which the landholder was to be freed from 
other taxes. Quit-rents were not uniform; they varied from one shil- 
ling sterling per hundred acres, to six shillings />«r annum, and in other 
instances more. 

SSier'^unbert unb fünfunbfed)ö^^tg 5'^amen fceutfd)er, f)ollän^ 

bifcf)er unb fianjiJftfdjer (Stnwo^ner »on 

^f)tlabelpl;ia (Jounti;, 

»elc^e Sanb befa^cn unb oor bent 3al)re 1734 Srbjinfen jal^tten. 

Slnmerfung. — ©rbjtnö tficinc refcrüirie Stcntc bet bent Iktertrncien 
coit ^anb burcb ben ®igentt)üincr, buvd) bereu 3'iblung ber 5-^äc^ter »on 
aUett nnberen laren befreit luurbc. (£rb,^tiifen tt>aren nid)t gletc|)fi)rnitg ; 
fte »aritrten t>ou einem @d)t(!inij (Sterling per Ijunbert Sldfer bio ju [cc^ö 
(»djiUtngen j[ät)rltc|), unb in anberen gälten met;r. 



APPENDIX. 471 

Amity Toion&hip. 
Johan Jacob Roth, 100 acres, Jacob Weber, 110, 
Daniel Womelsdorf, 200, Georg Ander, 200, 

Elias De Hart, 100, Simon De Hart, 100. 

Bihury Township. 
Joseph Van Pelt, 180. 

Bristol Township. 
Christian Peterman, 50, Abra'm Schuhmacher, 50, 

Johannes Lücken, 300, Mathias Lücken, 150. 

Cresheim Totonship, late part of Germantown. 

Wühelm De Wees, 150, Peter Zell, 60, 

Johannes Conrad, 100, Dirk Rebenstock, 50, 

David Müller, 100, Peter Rüttynhuysen, 100, 

Heinrich Zell, lOO', Jacob Zell, 90, 

Cornelius Neus, 50, Hans Schelly, 25, 

Michael Acker, 25, Leonard List, 20, 

Anna Rupp, 100, Johan Streper, 150, 

Anthony Tunis, 150, Joh. Georg Rieser, 27. 

Cheltenham Township. 
Georg Schuhmacher, 100, Isaac Schuhmacher, 20. 

Georg Herman, 50, 

Colehrook Township. 
(Number of acres not given.) 
Daniel Stauffer, Hans Bauer, 

Jacob Buchwalter, Peter Beidler, 

Michael Bauer, Jacob Herman. 

Upper Dublin Township. 
Dirick Tison, 100, Johannes Herman, 100, 

Dennis Cunrad, 100, Wilhelm Lücken, 200. 

Johannes Conrads, 200, 

Franconia Township. 

Johannes Frey, 150, Johan Griesman, 40, 

Jacob Oberholtzer, 150, Conrad Küster, 100, 

Jost Pfannenkuch, 100 Michael Bang, 75, 

Joseph Althaus, 141, Jacob Fuhrman, 140, 

Uly Hunsberger, 150, Johannes Hentz, 100, 

Leonard Christoleer, 200, Ludwig Zerkel, 100, 



472 



APPENDIX. 



Johannes Wilhelm, 50, 
Henrich Rosenberger, 100, 
Jost Schindler, 140, 
Christian Mayer, 150, 
Abraham Keif, 200, 
Jacob Hunsberger, 50, 
Georg German, 100, 



Frederick 



Johannes Neus, 200, 
Joh. Hein. Hageman, 100, 
Henrich Stover, 100, 
Henrich Stettier, 140, 
Adam Barsteller, 25, 
Joh. Georg Sprogel, 120, 
Johannes Kraus, 150, 
Jacob Fauts, 100, 
Joh. Geo. Schwenhart, 100, 
Gotlieb Herger, 80, 
Wilhelm Frey, 150, 
Geo. Phil. Dotterer, 150, 

(The number of acres 
Christian Getzendonner, 
Paul Hippel, 
Christian Schneider, 
Michael Bastian, 
Daniel Frantz, 
Joh. Geo. Ganser, 
Martin Husacker, 
Michael Hill, 
Ludwig Dotterer, 



Frederick Gädschalk, 150, 
WUhelm Hauk, 100, 
Henrich Zerkel, 50, 
Michael Hentz, 100, 
Georg Hertzeil, 50, 
Frederick Scholl, 100. 

Township. 

Joh. Georg Kraus, 22, 
Christian Stettier, 50, 
Martin Funk, 160, 
Ludwig Englehart, 100, 
Henrich Schmidt, 80, 
Michael Kraus, 150, 
Bakus Fauts, 100, 
Frederick Reymer, 100, 
Michael Herger, 200, 
Joseph Graaf, 100, 
Michael Dotterer, 150. 



are not given in the following.) 
Johannes Herb, 
Christian Müller, 
Jacob Mecklin, 
Jacob Fuchs, 
Georg Trumbauer, 
Abraham Pfenning, 
Michael Hendricks, 
Adam Hill, 
Johannes Dilbeck. 



Germantown. 



Abraham Kauffman, 50, 
Georg Wammer, 10, 
Gotfried Lehman, J, 
Henrich Holtzapfel, 70, 
Samuel Kerschner, 50, 
Andreas Keyser, 50, 
Johan Georg Knorr, 50, 
Christian Wammer, 75, 



Paul Engle, 50, 
Jacob Keyser, 4, 
Dirick Keyser, 3, 
Georg Hass, 20, 
Johannes Mack, 2, 
Henrich Friederick, 1, 
Gotfried Liebgieb, 13, 
Lorentz Blitz, 15, 



APPENDIX. 



473 



Bernhard Rieser, 80, 
Isaac Van Sentern, 18, 
Joh. Theobald Ent, 5, 
Jacob Bauman, 8, 
Johannes Bartel, 20, 
Christopher Meng, 15, 
Peter Schuhmacher, 50, 
Alexander Mack, J, 
Mathias Adams, 70, 
Johan Lückin, 1^, 
Dirick Jansen, 100, 
Jacob Müller, 50, 
Casper Steinbrenner, 50, 
Anthony KHnken, 100, 
Joh. Friederik Ochs, 25, 
Georg Traut, 28, 



Joh. Jac. Pallard, 31, 
Joh. Peterkoffer, |, 
Johannes Gorgas, 30, 
Peter Becker, 23, 
Baltzer Traut, 25, 
Johannes Eckstein, 25, 
Joh. Adam Gruber, l4, 
Johannes Bechtel, 20, 
Christopher Säur, 6, 
Joh. Henrich Kalckleser, 42, 
Herman Theen, 50, 
Christopher Funk, 50, 
Nicholas De Laplaine, 7, 
Benj. Schuhmacher, 20, 
Henrich Pastorius, 260, 
Georg Bentzel, 15. 



Hanover Township. 



Stoffel Witraan, 100, 
Johannes Benner, 50, 
Benedict Mentz, 50, 
Frederich Reichard, 150, 
Christian Eyster, 100, 
Claus Braun, 100, 
Melchior Hoch, 100, 
Samuel Musselman, 50, 
Henrich Wenger, 50, 
Johan Linderman, 100, 
Cornelius De Wees, 24, 
Michael Schenk, 50, 
Georg Küster, 100, 
Peter Lauer, 100, 
Andreas Gräber, 150, 
Balthaser Huth, 150, 
Henrich Kollman, 150, 
Jacob Weizler, 150, 
Daniel Schöner, 100, 
Elias Äff, 50, 
Mathias Bender, 100, 
Andreas Kepler, 100, 
Johannes Allbach, 100, 



Jacob Hoch, 100, 
Jacob Arner, 100, 
Jacob Bechtel, 200, 
Mathias Christman, 100, 
Garret De Wees, 100, 
Mathias Otto, 50, 
Joh. Henrich Sprogel, 556, 
Johan Bingeman, 200, 
Jacob Dunkel, 150, 
Ludwig Bitting, 150, 
Henrich Bisbing, 150, 
Georg Saalicht, 150, 
Henrich Rieder, 150, 
Francis Stupp, 50, 
Friedrich Hillegass, 150, 
Daniel Lubbar, 100, 
Henrich Saalicht, 150, 
Michael Schell, 150, 
Jacob Mayer, 100, 
Jacob Hiestandt, 150, 
Johannes Zell, 100, 
Georg Geiger, 50, 
Ludwig Bethsill, 100, 

40* 



474 



APPENDIX. 



100, 



Philip Knecht, 50, 
Mathias Herman, 100, 
Adam Spengler, 50, 
Peter Rothermel, 100, 
Jacob Grus, 100, 
Henricli Dehring, 100, 
Henrich Antes, 150, 
Henrich Bitting, 100, 
Hans Martinius, 50, 
Simon Krebs, 100, 
Jacob Müller, 100, 
Barnibus Tothero, 100, 
Georg Raudenbusch, 150, 
Johannes Huth, 150, 
Philip Lubbar, 100, 
Daniel Borleman, 100, 
Conrad Kolb, 150, 
Stoffel Wagenseiler, 150, 
Rudolph Mauerer, 150, 
Nicholas Insell, 100, 
Valentin Geiger, 100, 
Martin Beiting, 100, 
Adam Herman, 100, 
Wendel Keit, 100, 
Peter Conrad, 100, 
Michael Schmidt, 50, 
Jacob Schweitzer, 100, 

(The number of acres are not given in the following.) 

Nicholas Hensy, Stephen Reymer, 

Johan Adam Plank, Adam Müller, 

Herman Fischer, Joh. Georg Welcker, 

Hans Leymeyer, Jacob Schmidt, 

Michael Krebs, Jacob Jost, 

Martin Merkle, Ludwig Burghart. 

Limerick Township. 



Philip Brandt, 100, 
Adam Ochs, 140, 
Nicholas Jost, 70, 
Jacob Mayer, 100, 
Henrich Krebs, 100, 
Jost Freyer, 100, 
Paul Hill, 100, 
Casper Kemp, 100, 
Bastian Reifschneider, 100, 
Joh. Georg Georg, 100, 
Georg Noth, 100, 
Henrich Acker, 50, 
Wilhelm Kehle, 100, 
Martin Zentler, 150, 
Johannes Eyster, 60, 
Jacob Schäfer, 50, 
Johan Reicheisdörfer, 
Jacob Frey, 100, 
Johannes Schneider, 150, 
Anthony Hinckle, 100, 
Georg Hallenbach, 150, 
Georg Steiger, 100, 
Mathias Ringer, 150, 
Johannes Dunkell, 100, 
Casper Singer, 50, 
Christopher Schlegel, 50. 



Peter Umbstat, 250, 
Adolph Pennybecker, 250, 
Hieronimus Has, 250, 
Stephan Müller, 170, 



Johannes Umbstat, 250, 
Henrich Reiner, 100, 
Lorentz Rinker, 50, 
Martin Kalb, 150. 



APPENDIX. 



475 



Maxatany Township. 
(Number of acres not given.) 



Jacob Hottenstein, 

Peter Andreas, 

Jacob Levan, 

Jacob Kemp, 

Wilhelm Gross, 

Casper Wink, 

Christian Mahnenschmidt, 

Jacob Hill, 

Isaac Leonard, 

Peter Trexler, 

Hans Hage, 

Oley 

Georg Jäger, 250, 
Johannes Joder jr., 300, 
Sebastian Graaf, 100, 
Jacob De Plank, 100, 
Andreas Bally, 200, 
Johannes Bertolet, 200, 
Christopher Bittle, 100, 
Isaac Levan, 230, 
Johannes Joder, 200, 
Jost Joder, 150, 
Peter Schubert, 200, 
Englo Peters, 150, 
Nicholas Lescher, 150, 
Arnold Hufnagel, 200, 
Martin Weiler, 100, 
Martin Allstadt, 150, 
Peter Fornwald, 100, 

Perhlomen and 

Henrich Pennybecker, 150, 
Anthony Hallman, 100, 
Julius Kassel, 90, 
Abraham Schwartz, 100, 
Jacob Scheimer, 100, 
Peter Jansen, 150, 
Martin Kolb, 100, 



Johannes Siegfried, 
Nicholas Kutz, 
Abraham Timberman, 
Jost Hen. Sasseman, 
Andreas Fischer, 
Henrich Hartman, 
Michael Müller, 
Hans Kleimer, 
Henrich Schade, 
Jeremiah Trexler, 
Bastian Ferr. 

Township. 

Adam Weidner, 100, 
Johannes Hoch, 300, 
Philip Kühlwein, 200, 
Jonathan Herbein, 200, 
Samuel Guldin, 200, 
David Kauflfman, 300, 
Martin Schindel, 100, 
Johannes Engelhardt, 150, 
Peter Bingeman, 100, 
Peter Bally, 100, 
Abraham Levan, 150, 
Samuel Hoch, 150, 
Johannes Schneider, 200, 
Johannes De Turk, 300, 
Johannes Leinbach, 250, 
Abraham Eschelman, 150, 
Rudolph Hiegler, 250. 

Sh !ppa ck Townsh ips. 

Johannes Fried, 200, 
Jacob Merkle, 200, 
Paul Fried jr., 100, 
Valentin Hunsecker, 100, 
Johan Van Hussen, 50, 
Hermanus Küster, 150, 
Hupert Kassel, 60, 



476 



APPENDIX. 



Georg Merkle, 150, 
Jacob UpdegrafF, 100, 
Paul Fried, 100, 
Michael Ziegler, 100, 
Peter Kolb, 100, 
Henrich Dentlinger, 100, 
Benjamin Frey, 100, 



Hans Detweiler, 100, 
Mathias Jansen, 50, 
Leonard Van Hussen, 25, 
Peter Pennybecker, 100, 
Hans Heiser, 100, 
Arnold Van Hussen, 50. 



Providence Township. 



Johannes Beidler, 100, 
Conrad Kubell, 150, 
Conrad Knoss, 48, 
Jacob Schrack,* 250, 
Jacob Müller, 80, 
Han Nicholas Crisman, 200, 
Bastian Müller, 100, 



Dirk Ramsauer, 100, 
Henrich Holtzstein, 60, 
Conrad Stein, 15, 
Herman Indohavcn, 200, 
Jacob Boblitz, 80, 
Anthony Vandersluice, 100, 
Joh. Greorg Wagemüller, 30. 



Roxhurro Township. 



Wilhelm Levering, 150, 
Jacob Seltzer, 100, 
Daniel Bergenthaler, 80, 
Claus Rüttynhuysen, 50, 
Henrich Schaub, 100, 

Sulford 
Peter Kuntz, 100, 
Valentin Crates, 100, 
Hans Michael Wägly, 100, 
Hans Wolleberger, 100, 
Ulrich Stoffe, öl), 
Dewalt Jung, 100, 
Hans Adam Mauerer, 100, 
Jacob Kehler, 100, 
Andreas Haake, 120, 
Hans Weyerman, 50, 
Henrich Ruth, 100, 



Jacob Levering, 50, 
Arnold Baml^erger, 80, 
Johannes Mack, 18, 
Peter Rinker, 46. 

Totonship. 
Hans Reif, 100, 
Hans Klemmer, 100, 
Jacob Hoffman, 100, 
Hans Georg Bucher, 100, 
Jacob Reif, 150, 
Vincent Mayer, 100, 
Johannes Jansen, 150, 
Henrich Schlinglauf, 50, 
Johannes Lebo, 100, 
Johannes Kemper, 100, 
Galy Heffelfinger, 150, 



* Jacob Schrack arrived from Germany, 1717, and located at the 
place now called The Trappe. He died 1742, aged 63 years. — Uallische 
Nachrichten. 

* 3afob ©c&racf langte im 3al)re 1717 ijon 'Deutfc&Ianb an unb too()ute 
tn bein jc^igen X r a |) p e. Sr ftarb 1742 im 63[ten Sebenöj'afjre.— |)aUi|'4»c 
*Jia4)ri4)tcu. 



APPENDIX. 



477 



Christian Kroll, 50, 
Isaac Klein, 130, 
Mathias Hass, 100, 
Samuel Mayer, 100, 
Martin Hildenbeidel, 50, 
Christian Lehman, 100, 
Jost Cope,* 100, 
Christopher Ankibrant, 100, 
Ludwig Schäfer, 100, 
Christian Allebach, 150, 
Gabriel Scholer, 150, 
Philip Rieth, 100, 
Andreas Lederach, 150, 
Thielman Kolb, 150, 
Nicholas Haldeman, 100, 
Georg Keif, 100, 



Johannes Scholl, 100, 
Christian Jüngling, 20, 
Haus Wendell Iloffer, 100, 
Abraham Titlo, 50, 
Andreas Schwartz, 150, 
Michael Moll, 50, 
Christian Stauffer, 120, 
Hans Mayer, 150, 
Christian Mayer, 100, 
Samuel Mayer jr., 50, 
Henrich Funk, 150, 
Hans Mayer jr., 100, 
Jacob Koch, 100, 
Jacob Landes, 150, 
Hans Fried, 100, 
Joh. Henrich Schneider, 100. 



Towamoncin Township. 



Christian Weber, 50, 
Jacob Frey, 200, 
Peter Tison, 100, 
Gerhardt Schräger, 100, 
Abraham Luken, 200, 
Velty Kaufenheisen, 22. 



Jacob Frül, 100, 
Nicholas Lescher, 150, 
Peter Weber, 150, 
Christian Brenneman, 150, 
Herman Gädschalk, 100, 
Henrich Frey, 50, 
Jellis Jellis, 22, 

Springfield Township. 

Christopher Ottinger, 85, Georg Gantz, 40. 

Henrich Schneider, 50, 

Worcester Township. 
(Number of acres not given.) 

Lorentz Schweitzer, Johannes Van der Sluys, 
Conrad Conrads, (now Vanderslice), 

Stoffel Timberman, Henrich Schweitzer, 

Jacob Engel, Johannes Lefever, 



* Jost Cope arrived at Philadelphia, Oct. 2, 1727, with the ship 
Adventurer, Capt. John Davies. — See pp. 53, 54. 

3oji Sope langte am 2. Oct. 1727 mit bcm (Schiffe Slböeuturer, Sapt. 
3o^n iJaütc^, in 5)^iIabelp|)to m.—^\t\)t <£. 53, 54. 



478 APPENDIX. 

Adam Vanfussen, Conrad Vanfussen, 

Henrichi Rüttenhuysen, Daniel Christman. 

Peter Keyser, 

WMtpaine Township. 

Philip Böhm, 200, Henry Levering, 100, 

Henry Conrad, 201, Peter Indehaven, 100, 

Jacob Jost, 80, John Merckle, 100. 
Jacob Levering, 100, 

Whitemarsh Township. 
Henry Bartinstal, 170, Nicholas Stiegletz, 150, 

Adam Kettler, 170, Ludwig Knoss, 100. 

Mooreland Township. 
Joh. Van Buskirk, 180, Garret Winecoop, 200, 

Joseph Van Buskirk, 150, Herman Yerkes, 150. 

Plymouth Township. 
Johannes Redwetzer, 200, Peter KroU, 100. 



INTERPRETATION OF NAMES. 479 



Interpretation of Baptismal Names 

OCCURRING IN THE 

gollccfion of '^^hitf "^^oxi^anb ^amc^. 

(SrHärung öon ^aufnamen, mldjt in ber Sammlung 
üon 30,000 ^amm üorfommen* 



AARON, a teacher ; Hebrew, literally one that is exalted above 

the vulgar or common people. 
ABRAHAM, father of many nations ; Hebrew, from ab, father, 

and raham, many nations, or multitudes. 
ACHILLES, one that mourns or grieves — F. Pichler. It is 

a Greek name, by which the son of Peleus and Thetis was 

known, who signalized himself at the siege of Troy. 
ACHOR, Achior, trouble, disturbance of mind ; Hebrew, akhor, 

troubling, or akhan, he that troubles. 
ADAM, earthy man ; Hebrew. This name may be derived 

from dam, blood, adam, red, or to be red, in the sense of 

beauty, or beautifiil, i. e. red man, beautiful man. 
ADELBERTH, Ethelbert, of noble birth ; Gothic, ^del, adel, 

noble, and Anglo-Saxon, li/t'd, heorth, berth, birth, the con- 
dition in which a person is born. 
ADOLPH, Adolf, a noble helper; Gothic and Anglo-Saxon, 

hyJpan, helpan, holjjeji, holph, help, hence helper. 
ADRIAN, Hadrian, one from the Gulf of Venice ; Greek origin. 
aEGEDIUS, Egidius, Giles, vigilant, wakeful ; Greek, and may 

be derived from the verb egeiro, to stir up, animate, to waken. 
ALBERTUS, Albert, Albrecht, same as Adelberth. 
ALEXANDER, one who aids, or defends ; Greek, from alexo, 

alexeo, to defend, and aner, andros, nom. pi. andres^ a man, 

men ; one who protects men. 
ALFRED, all peace; Anglo-Saxon, eal, (Greek, holos, all, the 

whole) and freoh, freod, fread, fred, peace. 



480 INTERPRETATION OF NAMES. 

ALPHONS, Alphonse, Alphonso, Olphonso, blessed, happy, 
one that is blessed — F. Pichler. This name may be derived 
from the Greek holos, olos, all, and phone, phones, sound, 
voice — literally, "all spoken of," much renowned. If de- 
rived from the Gothic alfanz, alefanz, alifanz, alafanz, the 
name signifies "a jovial man." — "Jetzt merk' ich den ale- 
fanz." — Wackemagel. 

AMBROSIUS, Ambrose, imaginary food of the gods; Ger- 
manice, Götterspeise ; Greek, from ambrosios, a, on, immor- 
tal, but mostly as appertaining to the immortals, sacred to 
the immortals, the food of the gods. 

AMOS, one who bears a burden — F. Pichler. Burdensome, 
burdening, with stammering tongue — Heubner; Hebrew. 

ANANIAS, the cloud of the Lord, or the Lord will answer — 
M. T. Bernler. 

ANASTASIUS, a convalescent, one rising from the dead; 
Greek, anistemi, part, anastesas, arouse, arise; anastasis, a 
rising up from sickness. 

ANDREAS, Andries, Andrew, a courageous man, one strong 
and stout; Greek, aner, andros, a man, hence andria, as 
manhood, manly courage, manly feeling — it occurs Andro. 

ANTON, Anthon, Anthony, not to be valued, one who is in- 
estimable — F. Pichler. It may be derived from the Greek 
verb antheo, to attain the highest pinnacle, hence anthos, 
eos, antheon, the excellence of anything — occurs Andoni. 

AREND, a tenant-farmer; Germanice, Pächter; Russian, 
arenda, hence the English arendator, a farmer of the farms. 
It might be derived from the Greek aroo, to plough, sow; 
Latin, aro, aras, arare, to plough, to till. Ovid says: arati, 
agri, farmed fields. 

ARIOVIST, honorable— F. Pichler. 

ARIUS, martial, valiant ; Greek, from areios, arieou, excellent, 
strong, valiant. 

ARNOLDUS, Arnold, an honorable hero— F. Pichler. From 
the Gothic aere7i, aehren, am, hence ehren, and old, asld, 
haeld, held, hero. 

ASAPH, one who assembles the people; Hebrew, from the 
verb asaph, to gather, to collect, to assemble. 

ASEMUS, without a mark, note or stamp; Greek, from a, 
privative, without, and sema, sematos, a sign, mark, note, 
stamp; Germanice, zeichenlos, ungewöhnlich. 



INTERPRETATION OF NAMES. 481 

AUGUSTUS, Augustinus,* Gustav, noble, sublime, elevated, 
increasing; Latin, from augeo, to augment, increase, elevate. 

AUE.ELIUS, the golden one, one most excellent; Germanice, 
goldener — F, Pichler. Latin, derived from aurum, gold, 
hence aureus, golden. 

BALTHASAR, Balthas, Baltzer, Baldis, counselor of war; 
Germanice, Kriegsrath — F. Pichler. It may be derived from 
the Gothic haltha, daring, bold, audacious; Anglo-Saxon, 
heald, bald, bold. lornandes, in defining this word, gives its 
Latin synonymn thus, baltha, audax, as audax viribus, 
der auf seine Stärke pochet. 

BARTHOLOMÄUS, Bartholomew, a valiant son— F. Pich- 
ler ; a son who stays the water — Heubner. It may be de- 
rived from the Hebrew, Chaldaic and Syriac bar, son, and 
Greek, tolma, boldness, courage, from the root ; or the verb 
talao, to have boldness: undertake, hazzard, dare, support, 
sustain ; or fi-om the Hebrew tal, bear, support. This name 
occurs abbreviated, as Bardel, Bartel, Barthe, Bard. 

BENEDICTUS, Benedict, a blessed one; Latin, from bene, 
well, and dico, dicere, dixi, dictum, to speak, hence bene- 
dictus — occurs abbreviated Bene, Beni. 

BENJAMIN, son of fortune— F. Pichler. Son of the right 
hand, or most beloved son — Heubner. Derived from the 
Hebrew ben, son, and jamin, the right side, or the right 
hand. 

BERNHARD, Bernhardt, Bernard, a robust child, born robust; 
Anglo-Saxon, hi/ran, baern, beran, berand, born, and heard, 
hard or robust — abbreviated Barni. 

BERTHOLD, Berchtold, Berdolf, Berdolt, worthy age, one 
worthy by reason of his age; Gothic, berth, verth, werth, 
worth, excellence, worthy; and Saxon, aelde, eald, old, ad- 
vanced in years — occurs Berd, Bert. 



* This name is variously written and abbreviated ; it occurs once : 
Costiniös Ortman, p. 179. This is undoubtedly intended for Gustinus, 
Augustinus, unless it be derived from a Greek word, kostos, kostou, an 
aromatic plant. — [Editor.) 

* Dtefer 5[?ame toivb «erfc^tebenartig gcfc^rieben unb abgefiirjt; er fommt 
einmal auf lÄtite 179 Dor— Softiiiiöö Ortmaun. S)iefeg tft c^ne 3wetfel 
für OufttnuS, Slugufttnuö, gemeint, wenn cd ntc^t üon bem griccötfcben 
Sßorte kostos, kostou, (eine »no^Iriec^enbe ^flanjc) abgeleitet njtrbl — 
(|)eraudgeber.) 

41 



482 INTERPRETATION OF NAMES. 

BERTHRAM, Bertram, Berdram, a stately hero, a grand 
champion — F. Pichler. 

BLASE, Blasius, a royal one, a king — F. Pichler. It may be 
derived from the Swedish hlasa; Saxon, hlaze, to make 
known, hence generally known as a king. 

BODO, a hero, a commander — F. Pichler. 

BONGRE, good will ; French, hon, good, and gre, will. 

BURCHARD, Bui-ghardt, Burkhart, one that is energetic — 
F. Pichler. 

CAROLUS, Charles, see Karl. 

CARSTEN, Karsten, a small farmer; probably from the old 
German, karsten, to hoe, to till the ground. One who tills 
the ground is called Haker, in some parts of Germany, a 
small farmer. 

CASPAR, see Kaspar. 

CLAUDIUS, Claude, one that Hmps, or one who is lame; 
Latin, claudus, Germanice, hinkend. Proverb, Fides clauda, 
lame faith. 

CLAUS, see Nicolaus. 

CHRISTIAN, christian, a follower of Christ; Greek, from 
chrito, to anoint, christos, the anointed; in Hebrew, Mes- 
siah — it occurs Christly, Christel, Christ. 

CHRISTOPHER, a bearer of Christ; Greek, christos, christ, 
and phero, I bear away, bear, carry, from pherein, to bear 
or carry — it occurs Christoph, Christof, Stoffel, Stoffe. 

CLEMENTIUS, Clemens, Clement, one who is benign, or in- 
dulgent; Latin, clemens, gentle, mild, tender hearted, in- 
dulgent — written Clem, Klemm, Klemens. 

CONST ANTINUS, Constantino, one who is steadfast, firm, im- 
movable, resolute; Latin, constans, firm, enduring, stable — 
sometimes occurs Constant, Cons, Konstans. 

CORNELIUS, one that is strong, horn-like ; Latin, from cor- 
nus, a horn, hence corneus, corneolus, horn-like. The horn 
is often used as a symbol of power, or strength. The princi- 
pal defence and strength of many animals are in their horns. 

COSTINICES, see Augustus and Note there. 

DAGOBERT, Degenhart, a stately, magnificent hero — Pichler. 

DANIEL, judgment of God, a righteous judge: God is my 
judge — Heubner; Hebrew, dan, judge, and Chaldaic, el, God. 

DARIUS, he that informs himself; conqueror, subduer — 
Heubner. 



INTERPRETATION OP NAMES. 483 

DAVID, well beloved, dear ; commander, governor — F. Pichler ; 
Hebrew. 

DIELMAN, see Thielman. 

DIETRICH, Derrick, a patriot, or friend to the people — F. 
Pichler. The vulgar write Dieter ; sometimes Ditrich, Tiet- 
rich, Dirk. 

DIONYSIUS, divinely touched ; Greek, probably derived from 
dios, divine, celestial, and the verb nusso, to touch, prick, 
spur. 

DOMINICUS, Dominique in French, belonging to the Lord ; 
Latin, Dominus, the Lord, as Dominicae habitationes, habita- 
tions belonging to the Lord. 

DURST, Dorst, if derived from the German Durst, it is thirst. 

EBERHARD, Everhard, well reported, one that is strong and 
energetic — F. Pichler; Anglo-Saxon, aefre, efre, efer, eher, 
ever, constant, immovable; and heard, hard, unyielding, 
never yielding, immovably ; unyielding. 

ECKART, Eckard, Ekard, one who is faithftil, one that has 
been proved — F. Pichler ; Anglo-Saxon, and may be derived 
from eacon, to increase, or to complete, and heard, hard, un- 
yielding. 

EDMUND, a generous protector, a noble defender — F. Pichler ; 
Anglo-Saxon, aedel, prefixed to the old German miind, a 
compound word, like the vor, für, for, and mund, as in Vor- 
mund, guardian, protector. 

EDUARD, Edward, a noble watchman, truth-keeper; Anglo- 
Saxon, aedel, contracted, asd, noble, weardian, loard, a guard, 
or watch, act of guarding. 

EGBERT, faithful and kind, one that is true and friendly — 
F. Pichler; Anglo-Saxon. 

EGIDIUS, see Aegidius. 

EGINH ARD, one who has proved himself faithftil, or who has 
been tested by experience — F. Pichler; Anglo-Saxon. 

ELIAH, God the Lord, the strong Lord ; God my strength — 
Heubner; Hebrew, eliah, eliiahu, Jehovah is my God; 
Elisua, Ulishuah, God is my salvation; Hebrew, elishaa, 
God is salvation. 

EMANUEL, Immanuel, God with us ; Hebrew, ijn, with, in 
conjunction with; manu, us; el, God — literally, God united 
to man. 



484 INTERPRETATION OF NAMES. 

ENGrEL, a messenger, one who is sent; Greek, angehs, a mes- 
senger, one who announces anything directly, or indirectly. 
Several names occur compounded of the prefix angel, and the 
affix berth, bright, fair, as Angelbert, and hart, hort, shield, 
rock, or defence, as Engelhart. 

ENOCH, one who is consecrated, dedicated, or disciplined; 
Hebrew, channok, initiated, or initiating. 

EPHRAIM, fruitful, that brings, or bears much fruit; Hebrew, 
e/raim. 

ERASMUS, worthy of being loved ; Greek, erasmios, amiable, 
lovely, from erao, to love tenderly. 

ERDMANN, Erdman, earth-man ; Anglo-Saxon, eardf eorih, 
yrüi, earth, and loian, mann, man. 

EHRH ARD, Erhart, high-minded, magnanimous ; Gothic or 
Gernjan, Ehre, Ehr, honor, and heard, card, hard, unyield- 
ing, literally, over-honorable — of various orthography, Erhat, 
Erart, Erert. 

ERICH, Ehrenreich, highly honorable, full of honor; German, 
from Ehre, Ehren, honor, honors, and reich, rich, wealthy, 
opulent. 

ERNESTUS, Ernest, Ernst, serious, one that is grave or stern ; 
Anglo-Saxon, earnest, geornest, earnest ; Germanice, ernstlich. 

ETIENNE, French; Stephan, Stephanus, Stephen, a crown, 
one who is crowned ; Greek, Stephanos, a crown, a wreath, a 
garland; from stepho, I crown, I decorate with a crown, 
hence stephanoo, I bestow a crown, I crown. 

I'] WALD, one who is strong, vigorous, stout, able-bodied — 
F. Pichler. Probably old German, ewalt, e, ge, and wait, 
{potentia in Latin) power, strength — Gewalt, power, force, 
authority. Er ist in seiner Gewalt, he is in his power. 

FABIAN, Fabius, one who delays, one who is dilatory. Per- 
haps, one who imitates Q. Fabius Maximus, avoiding battle. 
It occurs only once or twice as a Portuguese baptismal name. 

FELIX, fortunate, happy, prosperous; Latin, felix, felicisy 
happy. Vir Felix, a happy man. 

FERDINANDUS, Ferdinand, meritorious, full of merit, well 
deserving — F. Pichler; old German, f er dienen, verdienen, 
to deserve, or earn merit, verdienend, deserving merit. 

FIDELIS, faithful, true, honest, loyal, trusty; Latin, as Fi- 
delis in amicitiis, true in friendship. 



INTERPRETATION OP NAMES. 486 

FILBERT, Fillibert, Wilbertus, Philibert, most renowned, 
most illustrious — F. Pichler. 

FORTUNATUS, fortunate, prosperous, successful, propitious ; 
liatin, fortuna, fortune, success, hence /ortunatus, fortunate. 

FRANQOIS, Franco, the first is French ; Franco is Italianized, 
and is the Frantz. 

FRANTZ, Franciscus, Francis, a freed man, freeman — uncon- 
strained, generous, ingenious ; French, franc, franche, free, 
frank, candid, sincere, open, without dissimulation. 

FRIEDRICH, Friederich, Frederick, peaceable, peaceftil, 
abounding in peace; German, Friede, peace, reich, rich, 
abundant, or abounding in — occurs written Frieder, Fritz, 
Fried, Fred. 

G-ABRIEL, man of God, God is my strength ; Hebrew, from 
gahar, to be strong, and el, God; gahriel, man of God, "a 
strong man of God." 

GAGE, testimony, pledge, pawn, token, proof; French. 

GALLUS, a leader, or chieftain ; Latin. This name occurs only 
once as a French baptismal name. 

GASPER, French, see Kaspar. 

GEORG, George, a farmer, one who tills the earth; Greek, 
georgos, georgios, a husbandman, an agriculturalist — occurs 
strangely spelled, Yerrick, Jerg, Jurg, Yerg. 

GERHARD, Gehrhart, Gerhart, a pian of strength, one strong 
and mighty — F. Pichler. Probably derived from the old Ger- 
man ger, spear, lance, javelin, and the Anglo-Saxon heard, 
hard, powerful, forceable — one who wields the spear forcibly. 

GERLACH, Gerlauch, illustrious, eminent, high ; old German, 
gerlauch, erlauch, erlaucht, as Eure Erlaucht, your highness, 
same as Durchlaucht, now in general use. 

GIDEON, one that bruises or destroys, one that cuts off in- 
iquity ; Hebrew, from gada, to cut down, destroy, cut off, 
break in pieces, hence Gideon. 

GILBERT, same as Filbert, which see above. 

GILLES, a Portuguese name, same import as Aegedius, which 
see above. 

GOTTFRIED, Godfrey, Geoffry, peace of God; German, Gott, 
God, and Fried, Friede, peace. 

GOTTHART, Gotthort, Gotthirt, inheritance of God, defence 
of God; old German, Gott, God, hart. Hart, a rock, shield, 
or safe retreat. Afein Hort, my rock — Ps. 28, 1. Eort is also 

41* 



486 INTERPRETATION OP NAMES. 

something precious, a treasure or inheritance, something to be 
carefiillj preserved. Den himmlischen Hort, den Gott seinen 
Soldenern wül geben dort — Basler Chronik, A. D. 1561. 

GOTTHELF, Gotthülf, God-help; German, Gott, God; hü/, 
half, hülfe, help, assistance, support. 

GOTTHOLD, God-gracious, merciful, propitious; German, 
Gott, God; hold, gracious, affectionate, favorable. 

GOTTLIEB, God-pleasing, beloved of God; German, Gott, 
God; lieb, dear, beloved, pleasing, agreeable — same as Theo- 
philus. 

GOTTLOB, God be praised; German, Gott, God; lob, praise, 
eulogy. 

GRAFF, Graf, an earl, a count ; German — occurs only once or 
twice as a baptismal name. 

GREGORIUS, Gregor, Gregory, one who is lively, sprightly ; 
one who is watchful, vigilant; Greek, from gregoreo, to 
watch, to be vigilant, to be awake ; from egdro, to awaken, 
to stir up, to animate. 

GUILLIAUME, Portuguese, see Wilhelm. 

GUSTAVUS, see Augustus. 

GYLLYAN, see Kilian. 

HECTOR, commander, lord, ruler, master, or one who arrests 
and holds fast — F. Pichler ; Greek. 

HEINRICH, Heinerich, Henrich, Heniy, a courageous man, 
a spirited hero — F. Pichler. Probably from the Anglo-Saxon 
hentan, hsen, hent, to seize, to lay hold of, to conquer, or to 
overcome, as hasn, hentan, sich einer Sache bemächtigen, and 
ricca, ric, rich, possessing a large portion, literally, possessing 
a large portion of courage, to overcome. It may be derived 
from the Greek enorea, manly courage, vigor — abbreviated 
Hein, Heintz, Hintz. 

HELFRECHT, help-right, a suitable assistant ; Anglo-Saxon, 
hi/lp, helpan, to assist, hence help, or assistance, and riht, 
reht, German recht, right, fit, suitable, proper, becoming, at 
a convenient time. Helfrecht, locally used, is " the right of 
selling unredeemed pledges." 

HENRICHS, same as Henry, which see above. 

HERRMANN, Herman, Herrmanns, Arminius, a war-man, 
one who is valiant; lord-man, master-man, one who subdues; 
Gotliic, gerr, ger, spear or lance, and manna', Anglo-Saxon, 



INTERPRETATION OF NAMES. 487 

man, mann, man, the man, the lord, or chief, who wields the 
lance.* 

HERTZOGr, Herzog, a duke, a sovereign prince, a chief, a 
prince; German. 

HIERONYMUS, Jerome, an ecclesiastic, a person in orders, 
consecrated to the service of the church and the ministry of 
religion ; Greek, from ieros, consecrated, and nemo, to pasture 
and rule, hence nomas, an ordinance, divine law, custom. 

HIPOLITE, Hipolito, occurs as a Portuguese baptismal name, 
from Hippolitus; Greek, ippolutos, from ippos, horse, and 
luo, luso, to loose, slacken, set at liberty, hence lutos, loosed, 
susceptible of being loosed. 

HIRAM, exalted life, the most high liveth — Heubner; exalta- 
tion of life ; Hebrew, hiram, herem, something devoted to 
Jehovah. 

HUBERT, Hubrecht, -one who is renowned, famous, or cele- 
brated — F. Pichler; Anglo-Saxon, höh, hub, Uft, lifting, 
raised, exalted ; and riht, reht, recht, right, proper, suitable, 
fit — suitably exalted. 

IGNATIUS, Ignace, one that is ardent, fiery, one who glows 
with joy; Latin, ignis, fire, igneus, fiery, glowing. 

ILLES, Hlos, one who squints, a person aflfected with strabism ; 
Greek, illos, the eye, Ulis, one who rolls the eyes, from illo, 
to look askance. 

IRENiEUS, Irene, one who is peaceable; Greek, eirene, es, 
peace, concord, calmness, rest. 

* The Romans called die Deutschen Germans, from their warlike 
and valiant mode of thinking, a name which the Tungi, a body of 
German warriors, first bore, and was subsequently applied to all their 
race, to express their warlike manners, and thus to impress their ene- 
mies with terror. This name was willingly adopted by the Germans, 
as a name of honor. The man, whose heart is in the proper place, is 
proud of the honorable title, "^ German" A Herrmann. 

* T)te 3)cutfiiien hjurbcn »en ben Stomern tocgen x^xtx fricgerifc^cn unb 
bra»cn Dcnfweife ©ermanen genannt, ein 5tame, toelc^cn bie Jungt, tin 
beutfc^eö ^rtegcrtiolf, juerft führten, unb »cldjer alien ©tammen ber gan» 
jen 9ta9e beigelegt njurbc, urn t^re frtcgenfc!&en ©ttten barjulegcn unb 
baburcfe it)ren gftnben ©dbrecfen etnjuflö§cn. !i)iefcr 9?ame tourbe »on ben 
!Deut[(|en alö St)rennante gerne angenommen, Der 5[J?ann, beffen ^erj 
am rechten 3(cc{ p^t, tft ftolj auf ben e^rcntiaften Slitel; Sin 2)eutfc|(ev, 
ein Herrmann. 



488 INTERPRETATION OF NAMES. 

ISAAC, Isaque, French ; laughter, or the son of laughter, son 
of joy ; Hebrew, itsak, he laugheth. 

ISRAEL, prince of God — Heubner. One who prevails with 
Grod ; Hebrew, tsrael, a wrestler with God. 

JACOB, Jaque, French; a supplanter, " who, with his hand, 
took hold on the heel;" Hebrew, iakohh, a supplanter. 

JEREMIAS, Jeremiah, Jeremie, French ; one exalted of God, 
exaltation of the Lord; Hebrew, irmia, irmiahu, Jehovah 
setteth up. 

JEROME, French, same as Hieronymus, which see above. 

JOACHIM, Joiakim, the resurrection of the Lord — Heubner. 
The Lord will arise, God will help ; Hebrew. 

JOEL, WÜ1, purpose ; a beginner — Heubner. He that wills or 
commands; Hebrew, ioel, Jehovah is God. 

JOHANNES, John, Jean, French; Juan, Portuguese; the 
mercy of the Lord, the grace of the Lord; Hebrew — it 
occurs in various spellings, Johann, Johan, Han, Hans, Han- 
nes, Jan; it seems to be a sort of Lieblingsnamen, occur- 
ring in this Collection, upwards of eight thousand times, 
alone or connected with some other baptismal name, as Han 
George, Johann Jacob, Han Niclaus, Hans Peter, Hannes, 
Johann. 

JONAH, Jonas, a dove — Heubner. He that oppresses ; He- 
brew, ionah, plural ionim, a dove ; sometimes a word of en- 
dearment. 

JONATHAN, the gift of God— Heubner. Given of God, a 
faithful friend ; Hebrew. 

JOSEPHUS, Joseph, Josephe, Portuguese, addition, increasing ; 
Hebrew, iasap, ioseph, to add, to increase, enlarge, to give 
or bestow in abundance. 

JOSIA, Josias, Josiah, the Lord burns, the fire of the Lord, 
essential, or real Lord ; Hebrew. 

JOSUA, Jesua, Joshua, a saviour, a helper, the Lord the 
Saviour; Hebrew, ioshiahu, Johovah healeth. 

JULIUS, Julian, a soft^haired young man, one who is pubes- 
cent; Latin, Julus, from the Greek ioulos, the first down on 
the cheek or chin. 

JUSTINUS, Justus, Just, Jocelyn, Jocelin, sometimes Yost, 
in German, one that is just, honest, upright; Latin, y^.^^ws, 
from jus. Vir Justus, ein gerechter Mann, a just man. 



INTERPRETATION OP NAMES. 489 

KARL, Carle, Charles ; one who is strong, vigorous, powerful — 
F. Pichler. Old German or Gothic, chart, vir maritus, a 
married man, harl, vir senex, an old man; Anglo-Saxon, 
carl, ccfvl, masculus, masculine, having the qualities of a 
man, strong, robust, bold, brave. 

KASPAR, Kasper, Casper, Jasper, Gasper, French; a royal 
treasurer ; first Lord of the treasury — F. Pichler. Probably 
derived from the old German cassa, casse, kasse, a money-box 
or treasury, and per, per an, bear an, hyren, to bear, to pos- 
sess and use as power, to exercise ; to act in any character. 

KILIAN, Killian,* one who quiets, soothes, assuages, pleases, 
captivates by words — this is its meaning, if derived from the 
Greek keleo. If Kilian is corrupted from the Hebrew chilion, 
which signifies finished, complete, perfect, it may then be 
derived from khillah, to complete, finish ; or from khalah, 
to be completed or finished — it occurs Gyllyan. 

KONRAD, Konrath, Conrad, a counselor, a person who gives 
advice, one who is consulted by a client in a law case — F. 
Pichler. It may be derived from the Anglo-Saxon cene; 



* Kilian, Killian — this name occurs frequently ; its meaning I do 
not certainly know. The introduction of it into Germany is historic- 
ally known. Kilian was an Irish bishop, and an apostle or missionary. 
Accompanied by eleven others, he crossed to the continent, and by his 
zealous, evangelical preaching in Germany, he persuaded Gozbert, 
governor of the city of Wurtzberg, and many others to embrace 
Christianity. He suffered martyrdom, A. D. 689. The cathedral 
erected in Wurtzburg, in the eighth century, is called St. Kilian. He 
was a contemporary with Saints Wolfram, Willebrand, Trudo, Lambert, 
Kunibert, Suidbert, Wigbert, Sturmio, Magnoald, Theodor Kempten, 
Offo Offonzell, Landolin, Corbinian Freissing, Emmeran, &c. — MentzeVs 
Gesch. d. Deutschen, p. 160. 

* Lilian, 5ltlltan — fciefcr 5?ame fommt (läufig üor, atlEtn tc^ fnnn feine 
SBebeutung mit ®etut§t)cit iüd)t angeben. I)ie (£infit()rung be^felben in 
J)eutf(^lanb \\t gcfctjiditlicfe bcfannt. Äilian t»ar ein irlä'nbifd^er Sif(^of 
«nb ein 2lpoftel ober ?0?ifficnar. 3}on eilf Stnberen begleitet, reigte er nnc^ 
bent Beftlanbe, unb burc|) fein eifrige^ unb t)eilbringenbeö ^Jrtbigen brachte 
er ®ojbert, (Statthalter »on SBüräburg, unb »iele Slnberc bal)in, bem 
St)riftentt)um ju bulbigen. 6r ftarb ben 5)?ärt9rertob im 3al)re 689. T.it 
Äatt)cbrale, lueldie im achten Sabrbunbert ju SBürjburg erbaut tturbe, 
t»arb St. Lilian genannt. (£r tear ein 3fitgenoffe ber ^eiligen SBolfram, 
SBiflebranb, S^rubo, Sambert, Äunibert, ©uibbert, 2Bigbert, ®turmio, 
5D?agnoaIb, Jbfobor Kempten, Cffo Dffonjell, Sanbolin, Sorbinian greif» 
fing, Gmmeran, jc— ÜÄengel'ö ®efc^. ber fceutfc^en, ®. 160. 



490 INTERPRETATION OP NAMES. 

HoUandish, keen, pronounced koon; German, kühn, bold, 
keen, penetrating, and rath, consultation, advice, counsel — 
it occurs Kunrad, Conrat. 

LAURENT US, Lorentz, Laurence, Lawrence, one that has 
been crowned, or laureated by way of eminence, or distinc- 
tion ; Latin, laurus, laurel tree ; laurea, a laurel leaf; lau- 
reatus, crowned with laurel, mit Lorbeer gekrönet. 

LAZARUS, assistance of God — Heubner. " The word lazarm," 
says A. Barnes, " is Hebrew, and means a man destitute of 
help." — Com. in loco. 

LEBERECHT, Lebrecht, live right ; German, from lebe, live 
thou, and recht, right. 

LEMUEL, God to them ; Hebrew, from lahem, to them, and 
el, God. 

LEOPOLD, one who is courageous, daring, intrepid ; one that 
is magnanimus ; Greek, from leon ; Latin, lea, lion, and pro- 
bably from polleo, es, ere, pollens, to be mighty, powei-ful. 

LEVI, who is held and associated; Hebrew, from lavah, to 
adhere to any one, to be joined to any one. 

LORENTZ, see Laurentus above. 

LUCAS, Luke, light, luminous, shining bright ; Greek, leukos, 
bright, clear, conspicuous, limpid, white lucid ; derived from 
leusso, to shine, cast light. 

LUDOLPH, a helper, an assistant — F. Pichler. 

LUDOVIC, Ludwig, Louis, Lewis, one who is renowned, cele- 
brated or famous — F. Pichler. 

LUTHER, venerable, respectable, reverend — F. Pichler. 

MARCUS, Marx, Mark, a shearer or barber, a cleanser or 
dresser — Heubner; polite, shining; one who contends, a 
champion, a warrior, or a combatant — F. Pichler ; a smith's 
hammer — Bernler ; Hebrew, mara/c, to scour, polish, furbish, 
to cleanse, purify; morak, to be cleansed. 

MARTINUS, Martin, a hero, a man of distinguished valor, 
intrepidity or enterprise in danger, a great illustrious or ex- 
traordinary person — F. Pichler. Latin, from Mars, in hea- 
then mythology, the God of war. 

MATTHEUS, Matthew, one that has been bestowed, one who 
is given ; Chaldaic, mattan, a present ; Hebrew, mattanah, 
a gift. 

MATTHIAS, Mathias, the gift of the Lord — sometimes occurs 
Matheis, Matteis, Matis, Toys, Deys, Theis, Deis. 



INTERPRETATION OP NAMES. 491 

MAXIMILIANUS, Maximilian, the greatest; Latin, from 
magnns, great, major, greater, maximus, greatest. 

MELANCHTON, black-earth ; Grreek, melas, black, dark, and 
chton, the earth. In German Schwartzerd, which was his 
first name. At the advice of Reuchlein,* his teacher, Schwartz- 
erd changed his name, according to the custom of the learned 
at that time, into the Greek name Melanchton. 

MELCHIOR, a royal person, one of royalty — F. Pichler. 
Probably derived from the Hebrew malakh, to reign, to be a 
king; Chaldaic, melekh, king, and hor, or, riches, wealth, 
substance, sufficient, enough — occurs Melcher, Melchor. 

MICHAEL, Michel, Michal, who is like unto God?— Heubner; 
who is perfect; Hebi'ew, derived from mi, who? ca, as, like, 
and el, God; michael, who is as God? 

MORITZ, Maurice, dark-colored, auburn, an auburn person — 
F. Pichler; Greek, mauroo, to darken; mauros, dark — it 
occurs Moret. 

MOSES, one who has been taken out of the water; Hebrew, 
from masha, to seize, to draw ; moseh, Moses, drawn out. 

NICOLAUS, Nicklas, Nicholas, victory of the people ; Greek, 
from nikao, to conquer, be victorious; nike, nikos, victory, 
and laos, the people, nation, crowd, multitude — occurs Nick- 
las, Nickel, as in Hann Nickel, also occurs Nicola. 

NOAH, repose, rest, consolation ; Hebrew. 

ONESIMUS, profitable, useful, one that proves profitable; 
Greek, from ono, onemi, oneso, to profit, to aid, onesimos, 
profitable. 

OSWALD, Oswalt, manager, administrator, steward — F. Pich- 
ler; literally a dispenser, one who administers; German, or 
Gothic, OS, aus, out, (as in spenden, ausspenden, to distribute, 
administer); walten, to rule, to govern, to dispose of, to dis- 
tribute: toalter, ruler, manager. 



* John Reuchlein was a learned German, born in 1450, and died 
1552; he was the fii'st who introduced the study of the Hebrew among 
modem christians. 

* 3ofennn Steudfelctn war ein bcutfd^er ®ele^rtcr, geboren 1450, gcfiorben 
1552. @r tear ber (Srfie, welcher tit l^ebrätfi^e Spraye unter ben banta« 
Itgen Sfirijien etnfü|)rte. 



492 INTERPRETATION OF NAMES. 

OTTO, Otho, father of the family, economist, manager — F. 

Pichler; Grothic, otto, atta, fadar, father.* 
PAULUS, Paul, small, little, diminutive ; Latin, paulus, small, 

little, same as parvus, small ; vir paulus, a small man ; pv^r 

parvus, a small boy. 
PETRUS, Peter, Pierre, French ; a rock, ein Fels — Heubner ; 

rock or stone ; one that is immovable or firm ; Greek, petros, 

a stone or rock, hence the word petra in Greek, a stone, a 

rock. The French word pierre, Peter, and pierre, rock or 

stone, are spelt alike, e. g. su ei Petros, kai api tautei tci 

petrai — es Pierre, et que sur cette pierre. Petros and Pierre 

are masculine, and petra and pierre feminine. 
PHILLIPPUS, Philipus, Philip, a lover of horses — Heubner; 

a knight — F. Pichler; Greek, philippos, that delights in 

horses; fond of riding; üom philos, a lover, a friend, and 

hipjios, a horse. 
REINHARD, same as Richard. 
REMIGIUS, an oarsman, a rower, a navigator — F. Pichler; 

Latin, from remigo, are, to row, to impel a vessel or boat on 

water. 
REUBEN, Ruben, who sees the son, vision of the son; 

Hebrew, from raah, rao, rau, to see, perceive with the eye, 

and ben, a son. 



* Otto, atta, fadar, father of a family, means literally, one who be- 
gets, provides and governs his children; the word "■father" in various 
languages, conveys a similar idea — as in the Sanscrit pitr, Zend pata, 
Persian pader, Latin pater, Italian padre, French pire, Greek pater, 
Ancient German fatar, German Vater, Anglo-Saxon faeder, Swedish 
fader, HoUandish vader, Irish athair, Welsh tad, Russian otetz, Polish 
ojciec, Bohemian otec, Finnish isa, Hebrew ab, Arabic abon, Malaie 
bappa, Coptic babb, Spanish padre, Britannic taad, Icelandic bader, 
Dalmatian otcse, Croatian ozhe, Lusatic wosch, Hungarian atyanc, &c. 

* Dtto, atta, fadar, SSflter einer ^inttlte, bebcutet e igentltd& : (Jtncr, 
tccld^er fetite Ätnber jeugt, für fte forgt unb btefclbeit regiert. I)aö SBort 
„SBater" bebeutet in ütclerlei «Sprachen baöfelbe, j. S.t ®anfcrtt pit', 
jenbtfc^ pata, perftfc^ pader, Iatetntfc| pater, ttaltentfc^ padre, franjoftfcl) 
pfere, grtct^ifc^ pater, nU^bcutfc^ fatar, bcutfc& 25atcr, anglo-f.icfefifcb faeder. 
fd)»ebifd) fader, {joKänbifc^ vader, trid'nbifcb athair, wrtfd) tad, rufjlfii 
otetz, polutfc^ ojciec, bÖtjinif^) otec, ftnntf(^ isa, ^cbraifcb ab, arnbifc^ 
abon, malaifcl bappa, cDpttfc^ babb, fpani[c() padre, brttti|c| taad, tglän= 
bifc^ bader, balmatif4> otcse, croatifc(> ozhe, laufi0tfc(> wosch, ungarifdj) 
atyanc 2C. 



INTERPRETATION OF NAMES. 493 

RICHARD, richly honored; Saxon, from ric, ricca, rich, 
eareiiy eredj eard, honored. 

ROLANDT, Roland, one who is honest, a just man — F. Pich- 
ler; probably Gothic* 

RODOLPHUS, Rudolphus, Rudolph, Ralf; in HoUandish, 
Roelf, a counselor, adviser; any person who gives advice; 
but properly, one who is authorized, by birth, office, or pro- 
fession, growing out of that relation, to give advice to an- 
other, in regard to his future conduct and measures — Ein 
Rathgeher, einer der Jemanden Glründe vorführt, seinen 
Verstand zu gewinnen, um ihn zum Nachdenken zu bringen. 
Probably derived from the old German rsed, raet, Rath, 
consultation, advice, counsel, and Anglo-Saxon helpan, hylp- 
an, hylph, hulf; German, Hiilf, HiUfe, help, to help, to aid, 
to assist; aid, assistance. 

RUPERTIUS, Rupert, Robert, red-beard; Gothic. 

SALOMO, Solomon, peaceable, peaceful, peaceful ness; Hebrew, 
slielcy quietness, peace, prosperity; Chaldaic, shleah, rest, 
tranquility; shiomin, peaceable. 

SAMUEL, asked of God, heard of God; Hebrew, shmuel, 
heard of God; from shama, to hear, and el, God. 

SEBASTIAN, august, exalted, elevated; Greek, from seho, 
Sepso, to venerate, to stand in awe; sebas, veneration, sebas- 
tos, venerated, worshipful, venerable, august. 

SEM, Sema, Shem, a name, renown ; Hebrew, shem, a name, 
authority, fame, renown, a good name- a rumor, report, a 
monument. 

SETH, a law — Heubner ; put, or who puts ; Hebrew. 

SEVERIMUS, more earnest, one who is very austere or stern ; 
Latin, from severus, stern, earnest, serious, austere, as severvs 
Judex, an austere judge. 

SIEGFRIED, victory of peace, peace-conquest ; German, Sieg. 
victory, triumph, and fried, Friede, peace. 

SILAS, or Silvanus ; the former is a contraction of the latter — 
one who loves the woods, or delights in the forest; Greek, 

* A distinguished general, Feldherr, mentioned in German history, 
A. D. 778, was called Roland, whose fame has been spread by ancient 
and modern poets. 

* 3n b« bcutfd^en ®cf4)tc^te tourbc SRoIanb um'ö ^ai)x 778 ali tin 
auögejetAneter gclb^crr bejci^net, beffen 3lu^m »on ben altextn unb 
neueren X)ic^teitt »erbrettet tcurbe. 

42 



494 INTERPRETATION OP NAMES. 

silas etiam silovanos, hence the Latin sylvanus, the god of 
the woods; sylva, woods. 

SILVESTER, Silvius, one who lives in woods, or country; 
Latin, derived from sylva, woods; Sylvestres homines, Bau- 
ernleute, peasants; musa sylvestres, or musa sylva, a peas- 
ant's song, ein Bauernlied. 

SIMEON, Simon, heard, one that is heard; Hebrew, shamea, 
to hear; shimon, a hearing. 

STANISLAUS, praiseworthy constancy, glorius stability, laud- 
able firmness ; Greek, stasis, a fixed state, immovable, con- 
stant; Latin, status, fixed, certain, hence stanis, and laus, 
praise, from laudo, I praise. 

STEPHANÜS, Stephan, Stephen, a crown, crowned; Greek, 
from stepho, stepso, to crown, to decorate with a crown; 
stephanoo, to crown ; Stephanos, a crown, a wreath, a garland — 
occurs Stefan, Steffy, Stefi", Steven. 

TACITUS, silent, tacit; Latin, tacitus, a name from Cajus 
Cornelius Tacitus, a celebrated Roman historian, orator and 
statesman under Vespasian, Titus and Domitian. He was 
born A. D. 56. 

TALIO, occurs as a Portuguese baptismal name; retribution, 
remuneration, recompense; may be derived from the Latin 
talio, talionis, retribution. 

THEOBALD, Theobold, one that is valiant, bold, brave, valor- 
ous; a compound name, from the Greek theos, a god, a 
prince, a ruler, a judge, a person in station or office, and 
Anglo-Saxon, heald, bald, bold — occurs Debald, De wait, 
Diewald, Siebald, Siebalt, Siebold. 

THEODOR, Theodore, gift of God; Greek, theos, God, and 
doreo, doreso, to bestow anything as a gift ; doron, a gift, a 
present. 

THEOPHILUS, see Gottlieb above. 

THOMAS, twin, a twin brother ; Hebrew, from taam, a twin, 
to be doubled, and Hiphel, to bear twins ; in Greek Didy- 
mus, from didumos, double, two-fold ; dis, twice, and from 
the root doo, dosi; didomi, doso, to give, to offer, to present. 

TITUS, honorable, illustrious, noble ; Greek, tio, tiso, to esti- 
mate, to value, to esteem, to prize, to honor ; titos, honorable. 

TOBIAS, the goodness of the Lord ; God's kindness ; Hebrew. 

TRAUGOTT, trust God, confide in God ; German, trauen, to 
trust, to rely upon, to have confidence in, and Gott, God. 



INTERPRETATION OP NAMES. 495 

ULRICH, Ulric, Ulrique, French ; one who is richly endowed, . 
of strong and vitiorous intellect; endowed with reason — F. 
Pichler. May be derived from the Gothic olos, ull; Greek, 
olos; Latin, ullus; Anglo-Saxon, 3el, all; wholly, complete- 
ly, and ricca, ric, rich, possessing a large portion — it occurs 
Uldrich, Uly, Ury, Ullerich. 

URBAN, polite, courteous, urbane ; Latin, urbanus, urhanitas, 
urbane, urbanity, politeness. 

VALENTIN, Valentine, strong, powerful, a man of valor, one 
of strong affections; Latin, from valeo, valere, to be healthy 
and strong; valens homo, a strong person — occurs Felty, 
Feiten, Velde, Valtin. 

VINCENT, one who conquers, or overcomes ; (same as Victor, 
which occurs abbreviated Vict.) ; Latin, from vinco, vincere, 
to conquer. 

VITE, celerity, speed, quickly, fast, nimble ; French, as j>ar- 
ler vite, to speak fast. 

WALTHER, Walter, one who governs or rules; German, 
walten, to rule, to govern, to manage; Walter, a manager 
or ruler. 

WENCESLAUS, victory of the people or subduer of the 
people — F. Pichler — occurs Wendel, Wentz, Wenslas, Wen- 
zel. Perhaps derived from the Latin vinco, vincere, to con- 
quer, and Greek, laas, the people.* 

WILHELM, William, Guilliaume, Portuguese; a defender of 
many, a potent shield, a strong protector — F. Pichler; An- 
glo-Saxon, from willa; Gothic, wilja, determination, ability, 
power, and helma, helm, a defensive armor. 

WOLFGANG, an assistant, a helper — F. Pichler, 

ZACH ARIAS, Zachariah, the memory of the Lord ; Hebrew, 
zakhar, think of, remember; zikharon, memory, remem- 
brance ; z'khariah, Jehovah remembereth. 



* Wenceslaus is a Bohemian name, written Wenceslaw, and is de- 
rived from wenec, wreath of honor, chaplet of honor ; and slawa, praise, 
honor, celebrity, glory, hence one that has been crowned with glory. 

* SBcnjeglauä t(t ein bötjnüfcber 9?ame unb Wtrb Wenceslaw gefd^rteben ; 
ti toitb abgeleitet »on wenec, ©f)renfran;(, unb slawa, 9tut)m, (£|re, 23e- 
tii^mt^ett, ®lorie ; olfo Siner, ber mit ©i)ren gefrönt ift. 






^'i-l^f:^^ 






I, .'I 



; I , •<- 









^4' 



;^r>i 



'S'r 1, Sir 



'15 



i$ 



/ / J V »■ 




r> 1 

- , 1 






J. (X 






J •- ifj -^ t» w'li 






m 



»" ^, ii-sx'; 






',« l^"" t:' 



•!:!hii 






