MATH0 
STAT. 



Edward Bright 





Mathematics Dept 



r 






A COURSE 

OF 

PURE MATHEMATICS 



CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 

C. F. CLAY, MANAGER 
LONDON : FETTER LANE, E.G. 4 



NEW YORK : THE MACMILLAN CO. 

BOMBAY \ 

CALCUTTA L MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD. 

MADRAS J 

TORONTO : THE MACMILLAN CO. OF 

CANADA, LTD. 
TOKYO : MARUZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHA 



ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 



A COURSE 

OF 

PURE MATHEMATICS 

) 

BY 
G. H. HARDY, M.A., F.R.S. 

FELLOW OF NEW COLLEGE 
SAVILIAN PROFESSOR OF GEOMETRY IN THE UNIVERSITY 

OF OXFORD 
LATE FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE 



THIRD EDITION 



Cambridge 

at the University Press 

1921 



VU 




First Edition 1908 
Second Edition 1914 
Edition 1921 



PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION 

NO extensive changes have been made in this edition. The mosfc 
important are in 80-82, which I have rewritten in accord 
ance with suggestions made by Mr S. Pollard. 

The earlier editions contained no satisfactory account of the 
genesis of the circular functions. I have made some attempt to 
meet this objection in 158 and Appendix III. Appendix IV is also 
an addition. 

It is curious to note how the character of the criticisms I have 
had to meet has changed. I was too meticulous and pedantic for 
my pupils of fifteen years ago: I am altogether too popular for the 
Trinity scholar of to-day. I need hardly say that I find such 
criticisms very gratifying, as the best evidence that the book has 
to some extent fulfilled the purpose with which it was written. 

G. H. H. 

August 1921 



EXTRACT FROM THE PREFACE TO 
THE SECOND EDITION 

THE principal changes made in this edition are as follows. 
I have inserted in Chapter I a sketch of Dedekind s theory 
of real numbers, and a proof of Weierstrass s theorem concerning 
points of condensation ; in Chapter IV an account of limits of 
indetermination and the general principle of convergence ; in 
Chapter V a proof of the Heine-Borel Theorem , Heine s theorem 
concerning uniform continuity, and the fundamental theorem 
concerning implicit functions; in Chapter VI some additional 
matter concerning the integration of algebraical functions ; and 
in Chapter VII a section on differentials. I have also rewritten 
in a more general form the sections which deal with the defini 
tion of the definite integral. In order to find space for these 
insertions I have deleted a good deal of the analytical geometry 
and formal trigonometry contained in Chapters II and III of 
the first edition. These changes have naturally involved a 
large number of minor alterations. 

G. H. H. 

October 1914 



781474 



EXTEACT FEOM THE PEEFACE TO THE 
FIEST EDITION 



book has been designed primarily for the use of first 
year students at the Universities whose abilities reach or 
approach something like what is usually described as scholarship 
standard . I hope that it may be useful to other classes of 
readers, but it is this class whose wants I have considered first. 
It is in any case a book for mathematicians: I have nowhere 
made any attempt to meet the needs of students of engineering 
or indeed any class of students whose interests are not primarily 
mathematical. 

I regard the book as being really elementary. There are 
plenty of hard examples (mainly at the ends of the chapters) : to 
these I have added, wherever space permitted, an outline of the 
solution. But I have done my best to avoid the inclusion of 
anything that involves really difficult ideas. For instance, I make 
no use of the principle of convergence : uniform convergence, 
double series, infinite products, are never alluded to : and I prove 
no general theorems whatever concerning the inversion of limit- 

d*f d*f 

operations I never even define 5-%- and =-4-. In the last two 

cxdy dydx 

chapters I have occasion once or twice to integrate a power-series, 
but I have confined myself to the very simplest cases and given 
a special discussion in each instance. Anyone who has read this 
book will be in a position to read with profit Dr Bromwich s 
Infinite Series, where a full and adequate discussion of all these 
points will be found. 



September 1908 



CONTENTS 



CHAPTER I 

REAL VARIABLES 
SECT. *AGE 

1-2. Rational numbers . . . . . * -.-. , 1 

3-7. Irrational numbers . . . -; * "~ 

8. Real numbers . 13 

9. Relations of magnitude between real numbers . .15 
10-11. Algebraical operations with real numbers .... 17 
12. The number x/2 ..*... . 19 
13-34. Quadratic surds ... . .. ,, . 19 

15. The continuum ......... 23 

16. The continuous real variable ; 26 

17. Sections of the real numbers. Dedekind s Theorem . . 27 

18. Points of condensation . . . . 

19. Weierstrass s Theorem . V ." . . . . 30 

Miscellaneous Examples 31 

Decimals, 1. Gauss s Theorem, 6. Graphical solution of quadratic 
equations, 20. Important inequalities, 32. Arithmetical and geometrical 
means, 32. Schwarz s Inequality, 33. Cubic and other surds, 34. 
Algebraical numbers, 36. 



CHAPTER II 

FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES 

20. The idea of a function 38 

21. The graphical representation of functions. Coordinates . 41 

22. Polar coordinates . ........ djfc- 

23. Polynomials . . . . ... &. 

24-25. Rational functions 4 " 

26-27. Algebraical functions ....- 4 9 
28-29. Transcendental functions ... ... 

30. Graphical solution of equations 58 

31. Functions of two variables and their graphical repre 

sentation ^ 



Vlll CONTENTS 

SECT. PAG!* 

32. Curves in a plane . . . . . . . 60 

33. Loci in space . . . . . , . . 61 

Miscellaneous Examples ...... 65 

Trigonometrical functions, 53. Arithmetical functions, 55. Cylinders, 
62. Contour maps, 62. Cones, 63. Surfaces of revolution, 63. Ruled 
surfaces, 64. Geometrical constructions for irrational numbers, 66. 
Quadrature of the circle, 68. 



CHAPTER III 

COMPLEX NUMBERS 

34-38. Displacements * 69 

39-42. Complex numbers -. .... . 78 

43. The quadratic equation with real coefficients . . . 81 

44. Argand s diagram . . . . . .. . . 84 

45. de Moivre s Theorem . . . .? ., . ... . 86 

46. Rational functions of a complex variable . .... . 88 

47-49. Roots of complex numbers . . . . . * 98 

Miscellaneous Examples . . . * . .... 101 

Properties of a triangle, 90, 101. Equations with complex coefficients, 
91. Coaxal circles, 93. Bilinear and other transformations, 94, 97, 104. 
Cross ratios, 96. Condition that four points should be concyclic, 97. 
Complex functions of a real variable, 97. Construction of regular polygons 
by Euclidean methods, 100. Imaginary points and lines, 103. 

CHAPTER IV 

LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 

50. Functions of a positive integral variable . . . .106 

51. Interpolation . 107 

52. Finite and infinite classes 108 

53-57. Properties possessed by a function of n for large values of n 109 

58-61. Definition of a limit and other definitions . . . .116 

62. Oscillating functions . 121 

63-68. General theorems concerning limits 125 

69-70. Steadily increasing or decreasing functions . . . l. il 

71. Alternative proof of Weierstrass s Theorem . . . 1, 34&lt; 

72 The limit of x n 1 34 

73. The limit of A +V .137 



74. Some algebraical lemmas ...... . Ib S 

75. The limit of n (#07-1). . 139 

76-77. Infinite series . _ .140 

78. The infinite geometrical series 143 

1 



CONTENTS IX 

SECT. PAGE 

79. The representation of functions of a continuous real variable 

by means of limits - . . . . . . . 147 

80. The bounds of a bounded aggregate ..... 149 

81. The bounds of a bounded function . . . . 149 

82. The limits of indetermination of a bounded function . . 150 
83-84. The general principle of convergence . . . . .151 
85-86. Limits of complex functions and series of complex terms . 153 
87-88. Applications to z n and the geometrical series . . . 156 

Miscellaneous Examples . . . . . . 157 

Oscillation of sinn07r, 121, 123, 151. Limits of n k x n , %/x, f/n, 



t , } a; n ,136, 139. Decimals, 143. Arithmetical series, 146. Harmonical 
n! \n) 

series, 147. Equation x n+l =f(x n ), 158. Expansions of rational functions, 
159. Limit of a mean value, 160. 

CHAPTER V 

LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A CONTINUOUS VARIABLE. CONTINUOUS 
AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS 

89-92. Limits as #-s-oo or x-*~ co ...... 162 

93-97. Limits as x+a ......... 165 

98-99. Continuous functions of a real variable .... 174 

100-104. Properties of continuous functions. Bounded functions. 

The oscillation of a function in an interval . . 179 

105-106. Sets of intervals on a line. The Heinc-Borel Theorem . 185 ^ * 

107. Continuous functions of several variables .... 190 

108-109. Implicit and inverse functions ...... 191 ,j^ 

Miscellaneous Examples . . . . . .194 

Limits and continuity of polynomials and rational functions, 169, 176. 

^m _ gin 

Limit of - , 171. Orders of smallness and greatness, 172. Limit of 

, 173. Infinity of a function, 177. Continuity of cos x and sinrr, 177* 
Classification of discontinuities, 178. 

CHAPTER VI 

DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS 

110-112. Derivatives . . ..... . . . 197 

113. General rules for differentiation ...... 203 

114. Derivatives of complex functions ..... 205 

115. The notation of the differential calculus . . . . 205 

116. Differentiation of polynomials ...... 207 

117. Differentiation of rational functions ..... 209 

118. Differentiation of algebraical functions . . .210. 



CONTENTS 

SECT. 

PAGE 

119. Differentiation of transcendental functions .... 212 

120. Repeated differentiation .... 214 

121. General theorems concerning derivatives. Rolle s Theorem 217 

122-124. Maxima and minima 219 

125-126. The Mean Value Theorem 226 

127-128. Integration. The logarithmic function ... 228 

129. Integration of polynomials ..... 232 

130-131. Integration of rational functions . . k .... . 233 

132-139. Integration of algebraical functions. Integration by 

rationalisation. Integration by parts .... 236 
140-144. Integration of transcendental functions ^ \ . .245 

145. Areas of plane curves . .- . . . . 249 

146. Lengths of plane curves .. . . * * , 251 

Miscellaneous Examples .*..:.. .:".... 253 

Derivative of x m , 201. Derivatives of cosz and siux, 201. Tangent 
and normal to a curve, 201, 214. Multiple roots of equations, 208, 255 
Rolle s Theorem for polynomials, 209. Leibniz Theorem, 215. Maxima 
and minima of the quotient of two quadratics, 223, 256. Axes of a conic, 
226. Lengths and areas in polar coordinates, 253. Differentiation of a 
determinant, 254. Extensions of the Mean Value Theorem, 258. Formulae 
of reduction, 259. 



CHAPTER VII 

ADDITIONAL THEOREMS IX THE DIFFERENTIAL AND INTEGRAL CALCULUS 

147. Taylor s Theorem . 262 

148. Taylor s Series ....... 266 

149. Applications of Taylor s Theorem to maxima and minima . 268 

150. Applications of Taylor s Theorem to the calculation of limits 268 

151. The contact of plane curves . . . . . 270 
152-154. Differentiation of functions of several variables . . . 274 

155. Differentials f . . 280 

156-161. Definite Integrals. Areas of curves ^ 283 

162. Alternative proof of Taylor s Theorem .... 298 

163. Application to the binomial series 299 

164. Integrals of complex functions 299 

Miscellaneous Examples . . . . . . 399 

Newton s method of approximation to the roots of equations, 205. 
Series for cosx and smx, 267. Binomial series, 267. Tangent to a curve, 
272, 283, 303. Points of inflexion, 272. Curvature, 273, 302. Osculating 
. I conies, 274, 302. Differentiation of implicit functions, 283. Fourier s 
I integrals, 290, 294. The second mean value theorem, 296. Homogeneous 
functions, 302. Euler s Theorem, 302. Jacobiaus, 303. Schwarz s in 
equality for integrals, 300. Approximate values of definite integrals, 307. * 
Simpson s Eule, 307. 



) CONTENTS XI 

CHAPTER VIII 

THE CONVERGENCE OP INFINITE SERIES AND INFINITE INTEGRALS 
SECT. PAGE 

165-168. Series of positive terms. Cauchy s and d Alembert s tests 

of convergence ...... . 308 

169. Dirichlet s Theorem .313 

170. Multiplication of series of positive terms . . . . 313 
171-174. Further tests of convergence. Abel s Theorem. Maclaurin s 

integral test . . . 315 

175. The series Sn~ 8 . .319 

* 176. Cauchy s condensation test 320 

177-182. Infinite integrals . . . . . . . . .321 

183. Series of positive and negative terms 335 

184-185. Absolutely convergent series 336 

-~ 186-187. Conditionally convergent series 338 

188. Alternating series 340 

189. Abel s and Dirichlet s tests of convergence . . . 342 

190. Series of complex terms 344 

191-194. Power series 345 

195. Multiplication of series in general 349 

Miscellaneous Examples 350 

The series I,n k r n and allied series, 311. Transformation of infinite 
integrals by substitution and integration by parts, 327, 328, 333. The 
series Sa n cosn0, Sa n sinw0, 338, 343, 344. Alteration of the sum of a 
series by rearrangement, 341. Logarithmic series, 348. Binomial series, 
348, 349. Multiplication of conditionally convergent series, 350, 354. 
Becurring series, 352. Difference equations, 353. Definite integrals, 355. 
Schwarz s inequality for infinite integrals, 356. 



CHAPTER IX 

THE LOGARITHMIC AND EXPONENTIAL FUNCTIONS OF A REAL VARIABLE 

196-197. The logarithmic function 357 

198. The functional equation satisfied by log.T . . . . 360 

199-201. The behaviour of log# as x tends to infinity or to zero . 3GO 

202. The logarithmic scale of infinity . . . . . 362 

203. The number e 363 

204-206. The exponential function 364 

207. The general power a* . .366 

208. The exponential limit 368 

209. The logarithmic limit 369 

210. Common logarithms . . . . . . . . 369 

211. Logarithmic tests of convergence. ..... 374 



v 

xii CONTENTS 

SECT. 

212. The exponential series . 373 

213. The logarithmic series .381 

214. The series for arc tan x 332 

215. The binomial series . , . * . . 384 

216. Alternative development of the theory . . , 386 

Miscellaneous Examples . . . . . 337 

Integrals containing the exponential function, 370. The hyperbolic 
functions, 372. Integrals of certain algebraical functions, 373. Euler s 
constant, 377, 389. Irrationality of e , 380. Approximation to surds by the 
binomial theorem, 385. Irrationality of Iogi n, 387. Definite integrals, 393. 



CHAPTER X 

THE GENERAL THEORY OF THE LOGARITHMIC, EXPONENTIAL, 
AND CIRCULAR FUNCTIONS 

217-218. Functions of a complex variable . . . . . 395 

219. Curvilinear integrals . . . . 4 . . ; . . 395 

220. Definition of the logarithmic function .... 397 

221. The values of the logarithmic function . . . . . ; . 399 
222-224. The exponential function .. . . . . .. . 403 

225-226. The general power a* . , 404 

227-230. The trigonometrical and hyperbolic functions . . . 409 

231. The connection between the logarithmic and inverse 

trigonometrical functions 413 

232. The exponential series 414 

233. The series for coaz and sin z . . . . . . 416 

234-235. The logarithmic series 417 

236. The exponential limit 421 

237. The binomial series 422 

Miscellaneous Examples 425 

The functional equation satisfied by Log 2, 402. The function e 3 , 407. 
Logarithms to any base, 408. The inverse cosine, sine, aad tangent of a 
complex number, 412. Trigonometrical series, 417, 420, 431. Boots of 
transcendental equations, 425. Transformations, 426, 428. Stereographic 
projection, 427. Mercator s projection, 428. Level curves, 429. Definite 
integrals, 432. 

APPENDIX I. The proof that every equation has a root . . . 433 

APPENDIX II. A note on double limit problems 439 

APPENDIX III. The circular functions 443 

APPENDIX IV. The infinite in analysis and geometry . . . 445 



CHAPTER I 

REAL VARIABLES 

1. Rational numbers. A fraction r=p/q, where p and q 
are positive or negative integers, is called a rational number. We 
can suppose (i) that p and q have no common factor, as if they 
have a common factor we can divide each of them by it, and 
(ii) that q is positive, since 

pl(-q) = (-p)lq, (-p)/(-q)=p/q. 

To the rational numbers thus denned we may add the rational 
number obtained by taking p = 0. 

We assume that the reader is familiar with the ordinary 
arithmetical rules for the manipulation of rational numbers. The 
examples which follow demand no knowledge beyond this. 

Examples I. 1. Ifr and s are rational numbers, then r + s, r - *, rs, and 
rjs are rational numbers, unless in the last case s = (when r/s is of course 
meaningless). 

2. If X, w, and n are positive rational numbers, and m &gt; n, then 
X(?n 2 -ft 2 ), 2Xwm, and \(m 2 + n 2 ) are positive rational numbers. Hence show 
how to determine any number of right-angled triangles the lengths of all of 
whose sides are rational. 

3. Any terminated decimal represents a rational number whose denomi 
nator contains no factors other than 2 or 5. Conversely, any such rational 
number can be expressed, and in one way only, as a terminated decimal. 

[The general theory of decimals will be considered in Ch. IV.] 

4. The positive rational numbers may be arranged in the form of a simple 
series as follows : 



Show that plq is the [ (p + q - 1) (p + q - 2) + q]ih term of the series. 

[In this series every rational number is repeated indefinitely. Thus 1 
occurs as i, f ,,.... We can of course avoid this by omitting every number 

H. 1 



1 



^ , , REAL VARIABLES [l 

which has already occurred in a simpler form, but then the problem of deter 
mining the precise position of pjq becomes more complicated.] 

2. The representation of rational numbers by points 
on a line. It is convenient, in many branches of mathematical 
analysis, to make a good deal of use of geometrical illustrations. 

The use of geometrical illustrations in this way does not, of 
course, imply that analysis has any sort of dependence upon 
geometry : they are illustrations and nothing more, and are em 
ployed merely for the sake of clearness of exposition. This being 
so, it is not necessary that we should attempt any logical analysis 
of the ordinary notions of elementary geometry; we maybe content 
to suppose, however far it may be from the truth, that we know 
what they mean. 

Assuming, then, that we know what is meant by a straight 
line, a segment of a line, and the length of a segment, let us take 
a straight line A, produced indefinitely in both directions, and a 
segment A A l of any length. We call A the origin, or tJte point 
0, and A l the point 1, and we regard these points as representing 
the numbers and 1. 

In order to obtain a point which shall represent a positive 
rational number r=p/q, we choose the point A r such that 



A A r being a stretch of the line extending in the same direction 
along the line as A A l} a direction which we shall suppose to be 
from left to right when, as in Fig. 1, the line is drawn horizontally 
across the paper. In order to obtain a point to represent a 

~ATT" ~AT~ A A x A, 

Fig. 1. 

negative rational number r = s, it is natural to regard length as 
a magnitude capable of sign, positive if the length is measured in 
one direction (that of A^A-^, an d negative if measured in the 
other, so that AB = -BA ; and to take as the point representing 
r the point A- s such that 



1-3] REAL VARIABLES 3 

We thus obtain a point A r on the line corresponding to every 
rational value of r, positive or negative, and such that 



and if, as is natural, we take A A 1 as our unit of length, and write 
A A l = 1, then we have 

A A r = r. 

We shall call the points A r the rational points of the line. 

3. Irrational numbers. If the reader will mark off on the 
line all the points corresponding to the rational numbers whose 
denominators are 1, 2, 3, ... in succession, he will readily convince 
himself that he can cover the line with rational points as closely 
as he likes. We can state this more precisely as follows : if we 
take any segment EG on A, we can find as many rational points as 
we please on BO. 

Suppose, for example, that BC falls within the segment A! A.,. 
It is evident that if we choose a positive integer k so that 

k.BC&gt;l ........................ (1),* 

and divide A^A^ into k equal parts, then at least one of the points j 
of division (say P) must fall inside BC, without coinciding with 
either B or C. For if this were not so, BC would be entirely 
included in one of the k parts into which A 1 A 2 has been divided, 
which contradicts the supposition (1). But P obviously corre 
sponds to a rational number whose denominator is k. Thus at 
least one rational point P lies between B and C. But then we 
can find another such point Q between B and P, another between 
B and Q, and so on indefinitely ; i.e., as we asserted above, we can 
find as many as we please. We may express this by saying that 

BC includes infinitely many rational points. 



The meaning of such phrases as * infinitely many or an infinity of\ in 
such sentences as BC includes infinitely many rational points or there are 
an infinity of rational points on C } or there are an infinity of positive 
integers , will be considered more closely in Ch. IV. The assertion there are 
an infinity of positive integers means given any positive integer n, however 
large, we can find more than n positive integers . This is plainly true 

* The assumption that this is possible is equivalent to the assumption of what 
is known as the Axiom of Archimedes. 

12 



4 REAL VARIABLES [l 

whatever n may be, e.g. for n = 100,000 or 100,000,000. The assertion means 
exactly the same as we can find as many positive integers as we please . 

The reader will easily convince himself of the truth of the follo\ving 
assertion, which is substantially equivalent to what was proved in the second 
paragraph of this section : given any rational number r, and any positive 
integer ?i, we can find another rational number lying on either side of r and 
differing from r by less than l/n. It is merely to express this differently to 
say that we can find a rational number lying on either side of r and differing 
from r by as little as we please. Again, given any two rational numbers- 
r and s, we can interpolate between them a chain of rational numbers in 
which any two consecutive terms differ by as little as we please, that is to 
say by less than l/?i, where n is any positive integer assigned beforehand. 

From these considerations the reader might be tempted to 
infer that an adequate view of the nature of the line could be 
obtained by imagining it to be formed simply by the rational 
points which lie on it. And it is certainly the case that if we 
imagine the line to be made up solely of the rational points, 
and all other points (if there are any such) to be eliminated, 
the figure which remained would possess most of the properties- 
which common sense attributes to the straight line, and would, 
to put the matter roughly, look and behave very much like 
a line. 

A little further consideration, however, shows that this view 
would involve us in serious difficulties. 

Let us look at the matter for a moment with the eye of 
common sense, and consider some of the properties which we may 
reasonably expect a straight line to possess if it is to satisfy the 
idea which we have formed of it in elementary geometry. 

The straight line must be composed of points, and any segment 
of it by all the points which lie between its end points. With 
any such segment must be associated a certain entity called its 
length, which must be a quantity capable of numerical measure 
ment in terms of any standard or unit length, and these lengths 
must be capable of combination with one another, according to- 
the ordinary rules of algebra, by means of addition or multipli 
cation. Again, it must be possible to construct a line whose 
length is the sum or product of any two given lengths. If the 
length PQ t along a given line, is a, and the length QR, along 
the same straight line, is b, the length PR must be a + 6. 



3] 



REAL VARIABLES 



Moreover, if the lengths OP, OQ, along one straight line, are 
1 and a, and the length OR along another straight line is b, 
and if we determine the length OS by Euclid s construction (Euc. 
VI. 12) for a fourth proportional to the lines OP, OQ, OR, this 
length must be ab, the algebraical fourth proportional to 1, a, b. 
And it is hardly necessary to remark that the sums and products 
thus defined must obey the ordinary laws of algebra ; viz. 

a + b = b + a, a + (b 4- c) = (a + b) + c, 
ab = ba, a (be) = (ab) c, a (b + c) = ab + ac. 
The lengths of our lines must also obey a number of obvious 
laws concerning inequalities as well as equalities : thus if 
A, B, C are three points lying along A from left to right, we must 
have AB&lt; AC, and so on. Moreover it must be possible, on our 
fundamental line A, to find a point P such that A Q P is equal to 
any segment whatever taken along A or along any other straight 
line. All these properties of a line, and more, are involved in the 
presuppositions of our elementary geometry. 

Now it is very easy to see that the idea of a straight line as 
composed of a series of points, each corresponding to a rational 
number, cannot possibly satisfy all these requirements. There are 
various elementary geometrical constructions, for example, which 
purport to construct a length x such that x* = 2. For instance, we 




M 



Fig. 2. 



may construct an isosceles right-angled triangle ABC such that 
AB = AC=1. Then if BC=oc, # 2 = 2. Or we may determine 
the length x by means of Euclid s construction (Euc. vi. 13) for 
a mean proportional to 1 and 2, as indicated in the figure. Our 
requirements therefore involve the existence of a length measured 
by a number x, and a point P on A such that 



6 EEAL VARIABLES [l 

But it is easy to see that there is no rational number such that 
its square is 2. In fact we may go further and say that there 
is no rational number whose square is m/n, where m/n is any 
positive fraction in its lowest terms, unless m and n are both 
perfect squares. 

For suppose, if possible, that 



p having no factor in common with q, and m no factor in common 
with n. Then np 2 = mq z . Every factor of &lt;f must divide np 2 , and 
as p and q have no common factor, every factor of (f must divide 
n. Hence n = \q*, where X is an integer. But this involves 
m = \p 2 : and as m and n have no common factor, X must be unity. 
Thus in = p 2 , n q*, as was to be proved. In particular it follows, 
by taking n = 1, that an integer cannot be the square of a rational 
number, unless that rational number is itself integral. 

It appears then that our requirements involve the existence of 
a number x and a point P, not one of the rational points already 
constructed, such that A P = x, # 2 = 2; and (as the reader will 
remember from elementary algebra) we write x \/2. 

The following alternative proof that no rational number can have its 
square equal to 2 is interesting. 

Suppose, if possible, that pjq is a positive fraction, in its lowest terms, 
such that (p/20 2 = 2 or p 2 = 2q 2 . It is easy to see that this involves 
(2g j) 2 =2(p- &lt;?) 2 ; and so (2q p)/(p q) is another fraction having the 
same property. But clearly q&lt;p&lt;2q, and so p-q&lt;q. Hence there is 
another fraction equal to pfq and having a smaller denominator, which 
contradicts the assumption that p/q is in its lowest terms. 

Examples II. 1. Show that no rational number can have its cube equal 
to 2. 

2. Prove generally that a rational fraction pjq in its lowest terms cannot 
be the cube of a rational number unless p and q are both perfect cubes. 

3. A more general proposition, which is due to Gauss and includes those 
which precede as particular cases, is the following : an algebraical equation 



with integral coefficients, cannot have a rational but non-integral root. 

[For suppose that the equation has a root a/b, where a and b are integers 



3, 4] REAL VARIABLES 7 

without a common factor, and b is positive. Writing a/b for #, and multiply 
ing by 6* 1 " 1 , we obtain 



a fraction in its lowest terms equal to an integer, which is absurd. Thus 6 
and the root is a. It is evident that a must be a divisor of p n .\ 

4. Show that if p n =l and neither of 



is zero, then the equation cannot have a rational root. 
5. Find the rational roots (if any) of 

10 = 0. 



[The roots can only be integral, and so "T, + 2, 5, +10 are the only 
possibilities : whether these are roots can be determined by trial. It is clear 
that we can in this way determine the rational roots of any such equation.] 

4. Irrational numbers (continued). The result of our 
geometrical representation of the rational numbers is therefore to 
suggest the desirability of enlarging our conception of c number 
by the introduction of further numbers of a new kind. 

The same conclusion might have been reached without the use 
of geometrical language. One of the central problems of algebra 
is that of the solution of equations, such as 

#2=1, a? = 2. 

The first equation has the two rational roots 1 and 1. But, 
if our conception of number is to be limited to the rational 
numbers, we can only say that the second equation has no roots; 
and the same is the case with such equations as ot? = 2, at = 7. 
These facts are plainly sufficient to make some generalisation of 
our idea of number desirable, if it should prove to be possible. 

Let us consider more closely the equation # 2 = 2. 

We have already seen that there is no rational number x which 
satisfies this equation. The square of any rational number is 
either less than or greater than 2. We can therefore divide the 
rational numbers into two classes, one containing the numbers 
whose squares are less than 2, and the other those whose squares 
are greater than 2. We shall confine our attention to the -positive 
rational numbers, and we shall call these two classes the class L, or 
the lower class, or the left-hand class, and the class R, or the upper 



8 REAL VARIABLES [l 

class, or the right-hand class. It is obvious that every member of 
R is greater than all the members of L. Moreover it is easy to 
convince ourselves that we can find a member of the class L whose 
square, though less than 2, differs from 2 by as little as we please, 
and a member of R whose square, though greater than 2, also 
differs from 2 by as little as we please. In fact, if we carry out 
the ordinary arithmetical process for the extraction of the square 
root of 2, we obtain a series of rational numbers, viz. 

1, 1-4, 1-41. 1-414, 1-4142,... 

whose squares 

1, 1-96, 1-9881, 1-999396, 1-99996164,... 

are all less than 2, but approach nearer and nearer to it ; and by 
taking a sufficient number of the figures given by the process we 
can obtain as close an approximation as we want. And if we 
increase the last figure, in each of the approximations given above, 
by unity, we obtain a series of rational numbers 

2, 1-5, 1-42, 1-415, 1-4143,... 

whose squares 

4, 2-25, 2-0164, 2*002225, 2-00024449,... 
are all greater than 2 but approximate to 2 as closely as we please. 

The reasoning which precedes, although it will probably convince the 
reader, is hardly of the precise character required by modern mathematics. 
We can supply a formal proof as follows. In the first place, we can find 
a member of L and a member of 21, differing by as little as we please. For 
we saw in j^that, given any two rational numbers a and b, we can construct 
a chain of rational numbers, of which a and b are the first and last, and in 
which any two consecutive numbers differ by as little as we please. Let us 
then take a member x of L and a member y of J?, and* interpolate between 
them a chain of rational numbers of which x is the first and y the last, and 
in which any two consecutive numbers differ by less than S, d being any 
positive rational number as small as we please, such as 01 or -0001 or 000001. 
In this chain there must be a last which belongs to L and a first which belongs 
to R, and these two numbers differ by less than d. 

We can now prove that an x can be found in L and a y in R such that 
&lt;Z x l and y 2 -2 are as small as we please, say less than 8. Substituting j 
for 8 in the argument which precedes, we see that we can choose x and y so 
that y x&lt;\\ and we may plainly suppose that both x and y are less 
than 2. Thus 



4, 5] HEAL VARIABLES 



and since ,?; 2 &lt;2 and ^ 2 &gt;2 it follows a fortiori that 2 x* and ?/ 2 2 are each 
less than d. 

It follows also that there can be no largest member of L or 
smallest member of R. For if x is any member of Z, then # 2 &lt; 2. 
Suppose that # 2 = 2 S. Then we can find a member ^ of L 
such that #! 2 differs from 2 by less than 8, and so # x 2 &gt; # 2 or ^ &gt; x. 
Thus there are larger members of L than #; and as x is o^ 
member of L, it follows that no member of L can be larger than 
all the rest. Hence L has no largest member, and similarly R has 
no smallest. 

5. Irrational numbers (continued}. We have thus divided 
the positive rational numbers into two classes, L and R, such that 
(i) every member of R is greater than every member of L, (ii) we 
can find a member of L and a member of R whose difference is as 
small as we please, (iii) L has no greatest and R no least member. 
Our common-sense notion of the attributes of a straight line, the 
requirements of our elementary geometry and our elementary 
algebra, alike demand the existence of a number x greater than all 
the members of L and less than all the members of R, and of 
a corresponding point P on A such that P divides the points which 
correspond to members of L from those which correspond to members 
ofR. 



L L L LL 


RR R R R 


.... | j 1 j I 1 
A 


r 1 



Fig. 3. 

Let us suppose for a moment that there is such a number x, 
and that it may be operated upon in accordance with the laws of 
algebra, so that, for example, # 2 has a definite meaning. Then # 2 
cannot be either less than or greater than 2. For suppose, for 
example, that so 2 is less than 2. Then it follows from what pre 
cedes that we can find a positive rational number f such that f 2 lies 



10 REAL VARIABLES [l 

between # 2 and 2. That is to say, we can find a member of L 
greater than x\ and this contradicts the supposition that # divides 
the members of L from those of R. Thus x- cannot be less than 
2, and similarly it cannot be greater than 2. We are therefore 
driven to the conclusion that # 2 = 2, and that x is the number 
which in algebra we denote by \/2. And of course this number 
\/2 is not rational, for no rational number has its square equal to 
2. It is the simplest example of what is called an irrational 
number. 

But the preceding argument may be applied to equations 
other than x* 2, almost word for word ; for example to # 2 = N t 
where N is any integer which is not a perfect square, or to 

a; 3 = 3, a 3 = 7, a 4 = 23, 

or, as we shall see later on, to x 3 = 3x + 8. We are thus led to 
believe in the existence of irrational numbers x and points P on 
A such that x satisfies equations such as these, even when these 
lengths cannot (as \/2 can) be constructed by means of elementary 
geometrical methods. 

The reader will no doubt remember that in treatises on elementary algebra 
the root of such an equation as xftn is denoted by fln or n 1 ^, and that a 
meaning is attached to such symbols as 



by means of the equations 



And he will remember how, in virtue of these definitions, the laws of indices 

such as 

n r xn*=n r + 8 , (n r } 8 =n ri 

are extended so as to cover the case in which r and 5 are any rational numbers 
whatever. 

The reader may now follow one or other of two alternative 
courses. He may, if he pleases, be content to assume that 
irrational numbers such as \/2, ^3, . . . exist and are amenable to 
the algebraical laws with which he is familiar*. If he does this 
he will be able to avoid the more abstract discussions of the next 
few sections, and may pass on at once to 13 et seq. 

If, on the other hand, he is not disposed to adopt so naive an 
* This is the point of view which was adopted in the first edition of this book. 



5, 6] REAL VARIABLES 11 

attitude, he will be well advised to pay careful attention to the 
sections which follow, in which these questions receive fuller 
consideration *. 

Examples III. 1. Find the difference between 2 and the squares of the 
decimals given in 4 as approximations to x /2, 



2. Find the differences between 2 and the squares of 



r^ 



i, s, i, ti, u, n- 

1 * 

3. Show that if mjn is a good approximation to v/2, then (m-f-2)/(fl-f n) r 
is a better one, and that the errors in the two cases are in opposite directions. 
Apply this result to continue the series of approximations in the last 
example. 

.1 

4. . If x and y are approximations to x/2, by defect and by excess respec 
tively, and 2 - # 2 &lt; 8, if- - 2 &lt; S, then y-x&lt;. 

5. The equation # 2 =4 is satisfied by #=2. Examine how far the argu 
ment of the preceding sections applies to this equation (writing 4 for 2 
throughout). [If we define the classes Z, R as before, they do not include all 
rational numbers. The rational number 2 is an exception, since 2 2 is neither 
less than or greater than 4.] 

6. Irrational numbers (continued}. In 4 we discussed 
a special mode of division of the positive rational numbers x into 
two classes, such that a? &lt; 2- for the members of one class and 
# 2 &gt; 2 for those of the others. Such a mode of division is called a 
section of the numbers in question. It is plain that we could 
equally well construct a section in which the numbers of the two 
classes were characterised by the inequalities a? &lt; 2 and x 3 &gt; 2, or 
# 4 &lt; 7 and X A &gt; 7. Let us now attempt to state the principles 
of the construction of such sections of the positive rational 
numbers in quite general terms. 

Suppose that P and Q stand for two properties which are 
mutually exclusive and one of which must be possessed by every 
positive rational number. Further, suppose that every such 
number which possesses P is less than any such number which 
possesses Q. Thus P might be the property x 2 &lt; 2 and Q the 
property x* &gt; 2. Then we call the numbers which possess P the 
lower or left-hand class L and those which possess Q the upper or 

* In these sections I have borrowed freely from Appendix I of Bromwich s 
Infinite Series. 



12 REAL VARIABLES [l 

right-hand class R. In general both classes will exist ; but it may 
happen in special cases that one is non-existent and that every 
number belongs to the other. This would obviously happen, for 
example, if P (or Q) were the property of being rational, or of 
being positive. For the present, however, we shaft confine 
ourselves to cases in which both classes do exist ; and then it 
follows, as in 4, that we can find a member of L and a member 
of R whose difference is as small as we please. 

In the particular case which we considered in 4, L had no 
greatest member and R no least. This question of the existence 
of greatest or least members of the classes is of the utmost im 
portance. We observe first that it is impossible in any case that 
L should have a greatest member and R a least. For if I were 
the greatest member of L, and r the least of R, so that I &lt; r, then 
i (I + T) would be a positive rational number lying between I and 
r, and so could belong neither to L nor to R ; and this contradicts 
our assumption that every such number belongs to one class or to 
the other. This being so, there are but three possibilities, which 
are mutually exclusive. Either (i) L has a greatest member I, or 
(ii) R has a least member r, or (iii) L has no greatest member and 
R no least. 

The section of 4 gives an example of the last possibility. An example 
of the first is obtained by taking P to be a? 2 &lt; 1 and Q to be *# 2 &gt;1 ; 
here Z=l. If P is # 2 &lt; 1 and Q is x 2 &gt; 1, we have an example of the 
second possibility, with r\. It should be observed that we do not obtain 
a section at all by taking P to be x* &lt; 1 and Q to be # 2 &gt; 1 ; for the special 
number 1 escapes classification (cf. Ex. in. 5). y&gt; 1) 

7. Irrational numbers (continued). In the first two cases 
we say that the section corresponds to a positive rational number 
a, which is I in the one case and r in the other. Conversely, it is 
clear that to any such number a corresponds a section which 
we shall denote by a*. For we might take P and Q to be the 
properties expressed by 

x a, x &gt; a 

respectively, or by sc &lt; a and x ^ a. In the first case a would be 
the greatest member of L, and in the second case the least member 

* It will be convenient to denote a section, corresponding to a rational number 
denoted by an English letter, by the corresponding Greek letter. 



6-8] REAL VARIABLES 13 

of R. There are in fact just two sections corresponding to any 
positive rational number. In order to avoid ambiguity we select 
one of them ; let us select that in which the number itself belongs 
to the upper class. In other words, let us agree that we will consider 

A ~- " * " 

only sections in which the lower class L has no greatest number. 

There being this correspondence between the positive rational 
numbers and the sections denned by means of them, it would be 
perfectly legitimate, for mathematical purposes, to replace the 
numbers by the sections, and to regard the symbols which occur 
in our formulae as standing for the sections instead of for the 
numbers. Thus, for example, a &gt; a would mean the same as 
a &gt; a, if cc and a are the sections which correspond to a and a . 

But when we have in this way substituted sections of rational 
numbers for the rational numbers themselves, we are almost forced 
to a generalisation of our number system. For there are sections 
(such as that of 4) which do not correspond to any rational 
number. The aggregate of sections is a larger aggregate than that 
of the positive rational numbers; it includes sections corresponding 
to all these numbers, and more besides. It is this fact which we 
make the basis of our generalisation of the idea of number. We 
accordingly frame the following definitions, which will however be 
modified in the next section, and must therefore be regarded as 
temporary and provisional. 

A section of the positive rational numbers, in which both classes 
exist and the lower class has no greatest member, is called a 
positive real number. 

A positive real number which does not correspond to a positive 
rational number is called a positive irrational number. 

8. Real numbers. We have confined ourselves so far to 
certain sections of the positive rational numbers, which we have 
agreed provisionally to call positive real numbers. Before we 
frame our final definitions, we must alter our point of view a 
little. We shall consider sections, or divisions into two classes, 
not merely of the positive rational numbers, but of all rational 
numbers, including zero. We may then repeat all that we have 
said about sections of the positive rational numbers in 6, 7, 
merely omitting the word positive occasionally. 



s 



REAL VARIABLES [l 

DEFINITIONS. A section of the rational numbers, in which both 
classes exist and the lower class has no greatest member, is called 
a real number, or simply a number. 

A real number which does not correspond to a rational number 
is called an irrational number. 

If the real number does correspond to a rational number, we 
shall use the term rational as applying to the real number also. 

The term rational number will, as a result of our definitions, be 
ambiguous; it may mean the rational number of 1, or the corresponding 
real number. If we say that &gt; , we may be asserting either of two different 
propositions, one a proposition of elementary arithmetic, the other a proposition 
concerning sections of the rational numbers. Ambiguities of this kind are 
common in mathematics, and are perfectly harmless, since the relations 
between different propositions are exactly the same whichever interpretation 
is attached to the propositions themselves. From i&gt; and &gt;j we can 
infer &gt; J ; the inference is in no way affected by any doubt as to whether 
, J, and |- are arithmetical fractions or real numbers. Sometimes, of course, 
the context in which (e.g.} occurs is sufficient to fix its interpretation. 
When we say (see 9) that J&lt; V(i), we must mean by the real number . 

The reader should observe, moreover, that no particular logical importance 
is to be attached to the precise form of definition of a real number 3 that we 
have adopted. We defined a real number as being a section, i.e. a pair of 
classes. We might equally well have defined it as being the lower, or the 
upper, class ; indeed it would be easy to define an infinity of classes of 
entities each of which would possess the properties of the class of real 
numbers. What is essential in mathematics is that its symbols should be 
capable of some interpretation ; generally they are capable of many, and 
then, so far as mathematics is concerned, it does not matter which we adopt. 
Mr Bertrand Russell has said that mathematics is the science in which 
we do not know what we are talking about, and do not care whether what 
we say about it is true , a remark which is expressed in the form of a 
paradox but which in reality embodies a number of important truths. It 
would take too long to analyse the meaning of Mr Russell s epigram in detail, 
but one at any rate of its implications is this, that the symbols of mathe 
matics are capable of varying interpretations, and that we are in general at 
liberty to adopt whichever we prefer. 

There are now three cases to distinguish. It may happen that 
all negative rational numbers belong to the lower class and zero 
and all positive rational numbers to the upper. We describe 
this section as the real number zero. Or again it may happen 
that the lower class includes some positive numbers. Such a section 



8, 9] REAL VARIABLES 15 

we describe as a positive real number. Finally it may happen 
that some negative numbers belong to the upper class. Such 
a section we describe as a negative real number*. 

The difference between our present definition of a positive real number a 
and that of 7 amounts to the addition to the lower class of zero and all the 
negative rational numbers. An example of a negative real number is given 
by taking the property P of 6 to be x + I&lt;0 and Q to be #+1^0. 
This section plainly corresponds to the negative rational number - 1. If we 
took P to be # 3 &lt; -2 and Q to be 3?&gt; - 2, we should obtain a negative real 
number which is not rational. 

9. Relations of magnitude between real numbers. It 

is plain that, now that we have extended our conception of 
number, we are bound to make corresponding extensions of our 
conceptions of equality, inequality, addition, multiplication, and so 
on. We have to show that these ideas can be applied to the new 
numbers, and that, when this extension of them is made, all the 
ordinary laws of algebra retain their validity, so that we can 
operate with real numbers in general in exactly the same way 
as with the rational numbers of 1. To do all this systematically 
would occupy a considerable space, and we shall be content to 
indicate summarily how a more systematic discussion would 
proceed. 

We denote a real number by a Greek letter such as a, /3, 7, . . . ; 
the rational numbers of its lower and upper classes by the corre 
sponding English letters a, A ; 6, B\ c, C; .... The classes them 
selves we denote by (a), (A), .., 

If a and /3 are two real numbers, there are three possibilities : 
(i) every a is a b and every A&B\ in this case (a) is identical 
with (b) and (A) with 



* There are also sections in which every number belongs to the lower or to 
the upper class. The reader may be tempted to ask why we do not regard these 
sections also as defining numbers, which we might call the real numbers positive 
and negative infinity. 

There is no logical objection to such a procedure, but it proves to be incon 
venient in practice. The most natural definitions of addition and multiplication do 
not work in a satisfactory way. Moreover, for a beginner, the chief difficulty in the 
elements of analysis is that of learning to attach precise senses to phrases containing 
the word infinity ; and experience seems to show that he is likely to be confused by 
any addition to their number. 



16 REAL VARIABLES [i 

(ii) every a is a b, but not all A s are B s ; in this case (a) is 
a proper part of (6)*, and (B) a proper part of (A) ; 

(iii) every A is a B, but not all a s are b s. 
These three cases may be indicated graphically as in Fig. 4. 

In case (i) we write a = ft, in case (ii) a &lt; ft, and in case 
(iii) a &gt; ft. It is clear that, when 

a and ft are both rational, these ? (i) 

definitions agree with the ideas of 

equality and inequality between + (ii) 

rational numbers which we began 

by taking for granted; and that ? 1 (iii) 

any positive number is greater Fi g . 4. 

than any negative number. 

It will be convenient to define at this stage the negative a 
ot a positive number a. If (a), (A) are the classes which consti 
tute a, we can define another section of the rational numbers by 
putting all numbers A in the lower class and all numbers a 
in the upper. The real number thus defined, which is clearly 
negative, we denote by a. Similarly we can define a when a 
is negative or zero ; if a is negative, a is positive. It is plain 
also that ( a) = a. Of the two numbers a and a one is always 
positive (unless a = 0). The one which is positive we denote by 
| a and call the modulus of a. 

Examples IV. 1. Prove that = - 0. 

2. Prove that /3 = a, j3&lt;a, or /3&gt;a according as a=ft a&gt;ft or a&lt;/3. 

3. If a = /3 and/3 = y, then a=y. 

4. If a &lt; ft /3&lt;y, or a&lt;ft /3 ^ y, then a&lt;y. 

5. Prove that /3 = a -/3&lt; -a, or /3&gt; a, according as a = /3, a&lt;,3, 
or a&gt;/3. 

6. Prove that a&gt;0 if a is positive, and a&lt;0 if a is negative. 

7. Prove that a &lt; a | . 

8. Prove that 1&lt; v/2 &lt; v/3 &lt; 2. 

9. Prove that, if a and /3 are two different real numbers, we can always 
find an infinity of rational numbers lying between a arid /3. 

[All these results are immediate consequences of our definitions.] 
* I.e. is included in but not identical with (&). 



9, 10] REAL VARIABLES 17 

10. Algebraical operations with real numbers. We now 

proceed to define the meaning of the elementary algebraical opera 
tions such as addition, as applied to real numbers in general. 

(i) Addition. In order to define the sum of two numbers 
a and ft, we consider the following two classes : (i) the class (c) 
formed by all sums c = a + b, (ii) the class (C) formed by all sums 
C = A+B. Plainly c &lt; C in all cases. 

Again, there cannot be more than one rational number which 
does not belong either to (c) or to (C). For suppose there were 
two, say r and s, and let s be the greater. Then both r and s 
must be greater than every c and less than every (7; and so C c 
cannot be less than s r. But 



and we can choose a, b, A, B so that both A a and Bb 
are as small as we like; and this plainly contradicts our 
hypothesis. 

If every rational number belongs to (c) or to (C), the classes (c), 
(0) form a section of the rational numbers, that is to say, a number 
7. If there is one which does not, we add it to (C). We have 
now a section or real number 7, which must clearly be rational, 
since it corresponds to the least member of (C). In any case 
we call 7 the sum of a and ft, and write 

7 = a + ft. 

If both a and /3 are rational, they are the least members of the upper 
classes (A) and (B}, In this case it is clear that a-f/3 is the least member 
of (6*), so that our definition agrees with our previous ideas of addition. 

(ii) Subtraction. We define a ft by the equation 



The idea of subtraction accordingly presents no fresh difficulties. 

Examples V. 1. Prove that a + ( - a) = 0. 

2. Prove that a + 0=0 + a = a. 

3. Prove that a + /3 = /3 + a. [This follows at once from the fact that the 
classes (a+b) and (& + ), or (A+) and (B+A}, are the same, since, e.g., 
a-|-6 = 6-f a when a and b are rational.] 

4. Prove that a + (0 + y ) = (a + 0) + y. 

JI. 2 



18 REAL VARIABLES [l 

5. Prove that a - a = 0. 

6. Prove that a - = - (/3 - a). 

7. From the definition of subtraction, and Exs. 4, 1, and 2 above, it 
follows that 



We might therefore define the difference a-/3 = y by the equation -y+/3 = a. 

8. Prove that a- (/3-y) = a- /3 + y. 

9. Give a definition of subtraction which does not depend upon a previous 
definition of addition. [To define y = a ft, form the classes (c), (C) for which 
c = a-B,C=A-b. It is easy to show that this definition is equivalent to 
that which we adopted in the text.] 

10. Prove that 

II" -|/3|j:g|a/3|&lt;| 



11. Algebraical operations with real numbers (con 
tinued). (iii) Multiplication. When we come to multiplication, 
it is most convenient to confine ourselves to positive numbers 
(among which we may include 0) in the first instance, and to go 
back for a moment to the sections of positive rational numbers 
only which we considered in 4 7. We may then follow practi 
cally the same road as in the case of addition, taking (c) to be (ab) 
and (C) to be (AB). The argument is the same, except when we 
are proving that all rational numbers with at most one -exception 
must belong to (c) or (G). This depends, as in the case of addi 
tion, on showing that we can choose a, A, b, and B so that (7 c is 
as small as we please. Here we use the identity 

G - c = A B - ab = (A - a) B + a (B - b). 

Finally we include negative numbers within the scope of our 
definition by agreeing that, if a and /3 are positive, then 

(-a)/3 = -a& a(-/3) = -a, (-a) (-0) = a. 

(iv) Division. In order to define division, we begin by de 
fining the reciprocal I/a of a number a (other than zero). Con 
fining ourselves in the first instance to positive numbers and 
sections of positive rational numbers, we define the reciprocal of a 
positive number a by means of the lower class (1 /A) and the upper 
class (I/a). We then define the reciprocal of a negative number 
a by the equation l/( )= (I/a). Finally we define a//3 by 
the equation 



10-13] REAL VARIABLES 19 

We are then in a position to apply to all real numbers, rational 
or irrational, the whole of the ideas and methods of elementary 
algebra. Naturally we do not propose to carry out this task in 
detail. It will be more profitable and more interesting to turn 
our attention to some special, but particularly important, classes 
of irrational numbers. 

Examples VI. Prove the theorems expressed by the following 
formulae : 



OXa=0. 2. aXl = lXa = a. 3. ax(l/a) 

4. a/3 = /3a. o. a (/3y) = (a/3) y. 6. 

7. (a + /3) = + . 8. 



12. The number */2. Let us now return for a moment to 
the particular irrational number which we discussed in 4 5. 
We there constructed a section by means of the inequalities 
y? &lt; 2, a? &gt; 2. This was a section of the positive rational numbers 
only ; but we replace it (as was explained in 8) by a section of 
all the rational numbers. We denote the section or number thus 
defined by the symbol \/2. 

The classes by means of which the product of \/2 by itself is 
defined are (i) (aa), where a and a are positive rational numbers 
whose squares are less than 2, (ii) (A A ), where A and A are 
positive rational numbers whose squares are greater than 2. These 
classes exhaust all positive rational numbers save one, which can 
only be 2 itself. Thus 



Again 

(- V2) 2 = (- V2) (- A/2) = V2 V2 = (V2) 2 = 2. 

Thus the equation x* = 2 has the two roots \/2 and A/2. Similarly 
we could discuss the equations # 2 = 3, x 3 = 7, ... and the corre 
sponding irrational numbers V3, \/3, $7,.... 

13. Quadratic surds. A number of the form + \fa, where 
a is a positive rational number which is not the square of another 
rational number, is called a pure quadratic surd. A number of 
the form a \/b, where a is rational, and ^/b is a pure quadratic 
surd, is sometimes called a mixed quadratic surd. 

29 
- 



20 REAL VARIABLES [l 

The two numbers a&lt;Jb are the roots of the quadratic equation 



Conversely, the equation x 2 + 2px + q=0, where p and q are rational, and 
p z -q&gt;0, has as its roots the two quadratic surds -p*J(p 2 q). 

The only kind of irrational numbers whose existence was 
suggested by the geometrical considerations of 3 are these 
quadratic surds, pure and mixed, and the more complicated 
irrationals which may be expressed in a form involving the 
repeated extraction of square roots, such as 

V2 + V(2 + V2) + V{2 + V(2 + V2)). 



It is easy to construct geometrically a line whose length is 
equal to any number of this form, as the reader will easily see for 
himself. That irrational numbers of these kinds only can be con 
structed by Euclidean methods (i.e. by geometrical constructions 
with ruler and compasses) is a point the proof of which must 
be deferred for the present*. This property of quadratic surds 
makes them especially interesting. 

Examples VII. 1. Give geometrical constructions for 



2. The quadratic equation cu, i2 + 26#+c has two real roots t if 
b 2 -ac&gt;0. Suppose a, b c rational. Nothing is lost by taking all three 
to be integers, for we can multiply the equation by the least common 
multiple of their denominators. 

The reader will remember that the roots are {-,b^/(b 2 -ac)}/a. It is 
easy to construct these lengths geometrically, first constructing *J(b 2 -ac). 
A much more elegant, though less straightforward, construction is the 
following. 



* See Ch. II, Misc. Exs. 22. 

f I.e. there are two values of x for which aa; 2 -f 2bx + c = 0. If 6 2 -ac&lt;0 there 
are no such values of x. The reader will remember that in books on elementary 
algebra the equation is said to have two complex roots. The meaning to be 
attached to this statement will be explained in Ch. III. 

When 6 2 -rtc the equation has only one root. For the sake of uniformity 
it is generally said in this case to have two equal roots, but this is a mere 
convention. 



13, 14] 



REAL VARIABLES 



21 



Draw a circle of unit radius, a diameter PQ, and the tangents at the ends 
of the diameters. 





Q 



Q 



Fig. 5. 



Take PP = Za/b and QQ = c/26, having regard to sign*. Join P Q , 
cutting the circle in M and N. Draw PM and PN, cutting QQ in X and Y. 
Then QX and QY are the roots of the equation with their proper signsi. 

The proof is simple and we leave it as an exercise to the reader. 
Another, perhaps even simpler, construction is the following. Take a line 
AB of unit length. Draw BC= -2b/a perpendicular to AB, and CD=c/a 
perpendicular to BC and in the same direction as BA. On AD as diameter 
describe a circle cutting BG in X and Y. Then BX and BY are the roots. 

3. If ac is positive PP and QQ will be drawn in the same direction. 
Verify that P Q will not meet the circle if 6 2 &lt;c, while if b 2 = ac it will be 
a tangent. Verify also that if 6 2 = ac the circle in the second construction 
will touch BC. 

4. Prove that 



14. Some theorems concerning quadratic surds. Two 

pure quadratic surds are said to be similar if they can be ex 
pressed as rational multiples of the same surd, and otherwise to be 
dissimilar. Thus 



and so \/8, ^^f- are similar surds. On the other hand, if M and N 
are integers which have no common factor, and neither of which 
is a perfect square, &gt;JM and *JN are dissimilar surds. For suppose, 
if possible, 

V-ir-* A 

q V u 
where all the letters denote integers. 

* The figure is drawn to suit the case in which b and c have the same and a 
the opposite sign. The reader should draw figures for other cases. 

t I have taken this construction from Klein s Lemons sur certaines questions di 
geometric elementaire (French translation by J. Griess, Paris, 1896). 



22 REAL VARIABLES [l 

Then ,JMN is evidently rational, and therefore (Ex. n. 3) \ 
integral. Thus MN = P 2 , where P is an integer. Let a, b, c, ... 
be the prime factors of P, so that 



where a, y3, y, . . . are positive integers. Then MN is divisible by 
a 2 *, and therefore either (1) M is divisible by a 2a , or (2) N is 
divisible by a 2 ", or (3) M and N are both divisible by a. The last 
case may be ruled out, since M and N have no common factor. 
This argument may be applied to each of the factors a 2a , b 2 ?, c 2y , . . . , 
so that M must be divisible by some of these factors and N by 
the remainder. Thus 

Jf-PA N-Pf, 

where P^ denotes the product of some of the factors a 2a , b-P, c 2y , . . . 
and P 2 2 the product of the rest. Hence M and N are both perfect 
squares, which is contrary to our hypothesis. 

THEOREM. If A, B, C, D are rational and 



then either (i) A G, B = D or (ii) B and D are loth squares of 
rational numbers. 

For B- D is rational, and so is 



If B is not equal to D (in which case it is obvious that A is also* 
equal to (7), it follows that 



is also rational. Hence \/B and */D are rational. 



COROLLARY. // A + *JB = C+&gt;JD, then A- 
(unless *JB and *JD are both rational). 

Examples VIII. 1. Prove ab initio that ^2 and x/3 are not similar 
surds. 

2. Prove that &gt;Ja and *J(I/a), where a is rational, are similar surds 
(unless both are rational). 

3. If a and b are rational, then &lt;Ja + *Jb cannot be rational unless Ja and 
/& are rational. The same is true of *Ja Jb, unless a = b. 



14, 15] REAL VARIABLES 23 



4. If 

then either (a) A = C and B=D, or (6) A = D and J3 = C,or (c) JA, *JB, ^&lt;7, 
^/^) are all rational or all similar surds. [Square the given equation and 
apply the theorem above.] 

5. Neither (a + Jb) 3 nor (a - */b} 3 can be rational unless Jb is rational. 

6. Prove that if x=p + *Jq, where p and q are rational, then # m , where 
in is any integer, can be expressed in the form P+QJq, where P and Q 
are rational. For example, 



Deduce that any polynomial in x with rational coefficients (i.e. any expression 
of the form 



where a , ... a n are rational numbers) can be expressed in the form 

7. If a + v/&&amp;gt; where b is not a perfect square, is the root of an algebraical 
equation with rational coefficients, then a-*Jb is another root of the same J 
equation. 

8. Express l!(p+Jq) in the form prescribed in Ex. 6. [Multiply 
numerator and denominator by p - Jq.] 

9. Deduce from Exs. 6 and 8 that any expression of the form G (x)IH (x\ 
where G(x] and H(x) are polynomials in x with rational coefficients, can be 
expressed in the form P + QJq, where P and Q are rational. 

10. If p, q, and p 2 -q are positive, we can express J(p+*Jq) in the form 
t where 



1 1 . Determine the conditions that it may be possible to express J(p^ + *Jq\ 
where p and q are rational, in the form V^ + Vy, where x and y are rational. 

12. If a 2 - b is positive, the necessary and sufficient conditions that 



should be rational are that a 2 -b and ^{a + N /(a 2 -6)j should both be squares 
of rational numbers. 

15. The continuum. The aggregate of all real numbers, 
rational and irrational, is called the arithmetical continuum. 

It is convenient to suppose that the straight line A of 2 
is composed of points corresponding to all the numbers of the 
arithmetical continuum, and of no others*. The points of the 

* This supposition is merely a hypothesis adopted (i) because it suffices for the 
purposes of our geometry and (ii) because it provides us with convenient geometrical 
illustrations of analytical processes. As we use geometrical language only for 
purposes of illustration, it is not part of our business to study the foundations 
of geometry. 



24 REAL VARIABLES [l 

line, the aggregate of which may be said to constitute the linear 
continuum, then supply us with a convenient image of the 
arithmetical continuum. 

We have considered in some detail the chief properties of a 
few classes of real numbers, such, for example, as rational numbers 
or quadratic surds. We add a few further examples to show how 
very special these particular classes of numbers are, and how, to 
put it roughly, they comprise only a minute fraction of the infinite 
variety of numbers which constitute the continuum. 

(i) Let us consider a more complicated surd expression such as 



Our argument for supposing that the expression for z has a meaning might be 
as follows. We first show, as in 12, that there is a number ?y = x /15 such that 
2/ 2 =15, and we can then, as in 10, define the numbers 4 + ^/15, 4- v /15. 
Now consider the equation in z l , 



The right-hand side of this equation is not rational : but exactly the same 
reasoning which leads us to suppose that there is a real number x such that 
#3=2 (or any other rational number) also leads us to the conclusion that there 
is a number z l such that 2 1 3 =4+ v /li3. We thus define ^ = ^(4+^15), and 
similarly we can define 2 2 =4/(4 ^15) ; and then, as in 10, we define zz^z^. 

r v v&lt; &gt; -&gt; i + -v c i . &gt; * * ^ * 
Now it is easy to verify that 

2 3 = 3, + 8&gt; . \ $?* 

V And we might have given a direct proof of the existence of a unique number 
\z Buch that z 3 =3z+8. It is easy to see that there cannot be two such 
numbers. For if z i 3 = 3z 1 + 8 and 2 2 3 = 3%-f8, we find on subtracting and 
dividing by Zi~z 2 that Zi 2 +z 1 z 2 +z 2 2 =3. But if z l and z 2 are positive ^ 3 &gt;8, 
z 2 3 &gt;8 and therefore Zj&gt;2, 2 2 &gt;2, Zi 2 + z 1 z 2 + z 2 2 &gt; 12, and so the equation 
just found is impossible. And it is easy to see that neither z l nor z. 2 can 
be negative. For if zi is negative and equal to -r, is positive and 
3 -3+8 = 0, or 3- 2 = 8/. Hence 3- 2 &gt;0, and so &lt;2. But then 
8/&gt;4, and so 8/ cannot be equal to 3- 2 , which is less than 3. 

Hence there is at most one z such that z 3 = 32 + 8. And it cannot be 
rational. For any rational root of this equation must be integral and a 
factor of 8 (Ex. n. 3), and it is easy to verify that no one of 1, 2, 4, 8 is a root. 

Thus z 3 = 3-2+ 8 has at most one root and that root, if it exists, is positive 
and not rational. We can now divide the positive rational numbers x into 
two classes Z, A according as x 3 &lt; 3x + 8 or x 3 &gt; &v + 8. It is easy to see that 
if a? &gt; 3. + 8 and y is any number greater than #, then also y 3 &gt; 3y + 8. For 
suppose if possible y 3 &lt;3?/-|-8. Then since # 3 &gt;3# + 8 we obtain on sub 
tracting y 3 -tf 3 &lt;3(y-#), or y 2 + xy + x 2 &lt; 3, which is impossible; for y is 



15] REAL VARIABLES 25 



positive and #&gt;2 (since ^ 3 &gt;8). Similarly we can show that i 
and y &lt; x then also y z &lt; 3y -f 8. 

Finally, it is evident that the classes L and It both exist ; and they form 
a section of the positive rational numbers or positive real number z which 
satisfies the equation z 3 = 3z + 8. The reader who knows how to solve cubic 
equations by Cardan s method will be able to obtain the explicit expression of 
z directly from the equation. 

(ii) The direct argument applied above to the equation 
y? 3x + 8 could be applied (though the application would be 
a little more difficult) to the equation 

a? = x + 16, 

and would lead us to the conclusion that a unique positive real 
number exists which satisfies this equation. In this case, how 
ever, it is not possible to obtain a simple explicit expression 
for x composed of any combination of surds. It can in fact 
be proved (though the proof is difficult) that it is generally 
impossible to find such an expression for the root of an equation 
of higher degree than 4. Thus, besides irrational numbers which 
can be expressed as pure or mixed quadratic or other surds, or 
combinations of such surds, there are others which are roots of 
algebraical equations but cannot be so expressed. It is only in 
very special cases that such expressions can be found. 

(iii) - But even when we have added to our list of irrational 
numbers roots of equations (such as x? = cc-\- 16) which cannot be 
explicitly expressed as surds, we have not exhausted the different 
kinds of irrational numbers contained in the continuum. Let us 
draw a circle whose diameter is equal to A A l} i.e. to unity. It is 
natural to suppose* that the circumference of such a circle has a 
length capable of numerical measurement. This length is usually 
denoted by TT. And it has been shown f (though the proof is un 
fortunately long and difficult) that this number TT is not the 
root of any algebraical equation with integral coefficients, such, 
for example, as 

7T 2 = ??, 7T 3 = H, 7T 5 = 7T + U, 

* A proof will be found in Ch. VII. 

f See Hobson s Trigonometry (3rd edition), pp. 305 et seq., or the same writer s 
Squaring the Circle (Cambridge, 1913). 



26 REAL VARIABLES [l 

where n is an integer. In this way it is possible to define a 
number which is not rational nor yet belongs to any of the classes 
of irrational numbers which we have so far considered. And this 
number TT is no isolated or exceptional case. Any number of other 
examples can be constructed. In fact it is only special classes of 
irrational numbers which are roots of equations of this kind, just 
as it is only a still smaller class which can be expressed by means 
of surds. 

16. The continuous real variable. The real numbers 
may be regarded from two points of view. We may think of 
them as an aggregate, the arithmetical continuum defined in 
the preceding section, or individually. And when we think of 
them individually, we may think either of a particular specified 
number (such as 1, -J, \/2, or TT) or we may think of any number, 
an unspecified number, the number x. This last is our point of 
view when we make such assertions as ( x is a number , l x is the 
measure of a length , # may be rational or irrational , The x 
which occurs in propositions such as these is called the continuous 
real variable : and the individual numbers are called the values of 
the variable. 

A variable , however, need not necessarily be continuous. 
Instead of considering the aggregate of all real numbers, we 
might consider some partial aggregate contained in the former 
aggregate, such as the aggregate of rational numbers, or the 
aggregate of positive integers. Let us take the last case. Then 
in statements about any positive integer, or an unspecified positive 
integer, such as ( n is either odd or even , n is called the variable, 
a positive integral variable, and the individual positive integers 
are its values. 

Naturally a and n are only examples of variables, the 
variable whose field of variation is formed by all the real 
numbers, and that whose field is formed by the positive integers. 
These are the most important examples, but we have often to 
consider other cases. In the theory of decimals, for instance, we 
may denote by x any figure in the expression of any number as a 
decimal. Then # is a variable, but a variable which has only ten 
different values, viz. 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. The reader should 



15-17] REAL VARIABLES 27 

think of other examples of variables with different fields of varia 
tion. He will find interesting examples in ordinary life : policeman 
X) the driver of cab x, the year x, the xth day of the week. The 
values of these variables are naturally not numbers. 

17. Sections of the real numbers. In 4 7 we con 
sidered sections of the rational numbers, i.e. modes of division of 
the rational numbers (or of the positive rational numbers only) 
into two classes L and R possessing the following characteristic 
properties: 

(i) that every number of the type considered belongs to one 
and only one of the two classes ; 
(ii) that both classes exist ; 
(iii) that any member of L is less than any member of R. 

It is plainly possible to apply the same idea to the aggregate 
of all real numbers, and the process is, as the reader will find in 
later chapters, of very great importance. 

Let us then suppose * that P and Q are two properties which 
are mutually exclusive, and one of which is possessed by every 
real number. Further let us suppose that any number which 
possesses P is less than any which possesses Q. We call the 
numbers which possess P the lower or left-hand class L, and 
those which possess Q the upper or right-hand class R. 

Thus P might be x &lt; N /2 and Q be x &gt; ^2. II is important to observe 
that a pair of properties which suffice to define a section of the rational 
numbers may not suffice to define one of the -real numbers. This is so, for 
example, with the pair c x &lt; v /2 and x &gt; s /2 or (if we confine ourselves 
to positive numbers) with # 2 &lt; 2 and * x 2 &gt; 2 . Every rational number 
possesses one or other of the properties, but not every real number, since in 
either case v/2 escapes classification. 

There are now two possibilities!. Either L has a greatest 
member I, or R has a least member r, Both of these events 

* The discussion which follows is in many ways similar to that of 6. We 
have not attempted to avoid a certain amount of repetition. The idea of a section, 
first brought into prominence in Dedekind s famous pamphlet Stctigkett und 
irrationale Zahlen, is one which can, and indeed must, be grasped by every reader . 
of this book, even if he be one of those who prefer to omit the discussion of the j 
notion of an irrational number contained in 6 12. 

t There were three in 6. b / ^ 



28 HEAL VARIABLES [l 

cannot occur. For if L had a greatest member I, and R a least 
member r, the number \(l-\-r) would be greater than all members 
of L and less than all members of R, and so could not belong to 
either class. On the other hand one event must occur*. 

For let LI and Rj_ denote the classes formed from L and R by 
taking only the rational members of L and R. Then the classes 
L^ and R 1 form a section of the rational numbers. There are now 
two cases to distinguish. 

It may happen that L l has a greatest member a. In this case 
a must be also the greatest member of L. For if not, we could find 
a greater, say (S. There are rational numbers lying between a and 
ft, and these, being less than ft, belong to L, and therefore to L^ 
and this is plainly a contradiction. Hence a is the greatest 
member of L. 

On the other hand it may happen that L l has no greatest 
member. In this case the section of the rational numbers formed 
by L 1 and R! is a real number a. This number a must belong 
to L or to R. If it belongs to L we can shew, precisely as before, 
that it is the greatest member of L , and similarly, if it belongs 
to R, it is the least member of R. 

Thus in any case either L has a greatest member or R a 
least. Any section of the real numbers therefore corresponds to 
a real number in the sense in which a section of the rational 
numbers sometimes, but not always, corresponds to a rational 
number. This conclusion is of very great importance ; for it shows 
that the consideration of sections of all the real numbers does not 
lead to any further generalisation of our idea of number. Starting 
from the rational numbers, we found that the idea of a section of 
the rational numbers led us to a new conception of a number, that 
of a real number, more general than that of a rational number; 
and it might have been expected that the idea of a section of the 
real numbers would have led us to a conception more general still. 
The discussion which precedes shows that this is not the case, and 
that the aggregate of real numbers, or the continuum, has a kind 
of completeness which the aggregate of the rational numbers 
lacked, a completeness which is expressed in technical language 
by saying that the continuum is closed. 

* This was not the case in 6. 



17, 18] REAL VARIABLES 29 

The result which we have just proved may be stated as follows: 

Dedekind s Theorem. If the real numbers are divided into 
two classes L and R in such a way that 

(i) every number belongs to one or other of the two classes, 

(ii) each class contains at least one number, 

(iii) any member of L is less than any member of R, 
then there is a number a, which has the property that all the numbers 
less than it belong to L and all the numbers greater than it to R. 
The number a. itself may belong to either class. 

In applications we have often to consider sections not of all numbers but 
of all those contained in an interval (0, y\ that is to say of all numbers 
x such that /3 x ^ y. A section of such numbers is of course a division of 
them into two classes possessing the properties (i), (ii), and (iii). Such 
a section may be converted into a section of all numbers by adding to L all 
numbers less than /3 and to R all numbers greater than y. It is clear that 
the conclusion stated in Dedekind s Theorem still holds if we substitute the 
real numbers of the interval (ft y} for the real numbers , and that the 
number a in this case satisfies the inequalities /3 &lt;a^y. 

18. Points of accumulation. A system of real numbers, OP 
of the points on a straight line corresponding to them, denned in 
any way whatever, is called an aggregate or set of numbers or 
points. The set might consist, for example, of all the positive 
integers, or of all the rational points. 

It is most convenient here to use the language of geometry*. 
Suppose then that we are given a set of points, which we will 
denote by S. Take any point f , which may or may not belong to S. 
Then there are two possibilities. Either (i) it is possible to choose 
a positive number 8 so that the interval (f S, % + S) does not con 
tain any point of S, other than f itself f, or (ii) this is not possible. 

Suppose, for example, that S consists of the points corresponding to all 
the positive integers. If is itself a positive integer, we can take S to be any 
number less than 1, and (i) will be true; or, if is halfway between two 
positive integers, we can take 8 to be any number less than \. On the other 
hand, if S consists of all the rational points, then, whatever the value of , 
(ii) is true ; for any interval whatever contains an infinity of rational points. 

* The reader will hardly require to be reminded that this course is adopted 
solely for reasons of linguistic convenience. 

t This clause is of course unnecessary if does not itself belong to S. 



30 REAL VARIABLES [l 

Let us suppose that (ii) is true. Then any interval (f 8, f 4- S), 
however small its length, contains at least one point fj which 
belongs to 8 and does not coincide with ; and this whether f 
itself be a member of S or not. In this case we shall say that f is 
a point of accumulation of 8. It is easy to see that the interval 
(?~8, f+S) must contain, nojj_merely one, but infinitely many 
points of 8. For, when we have determined f 1} we can take an 
interval (f 81, f + 81) surrounding f but not reaching as far as f lt 
But this interval also must contain a point, say f a , which is a 
member of $ and does not coincide with f. Obviously we may 
repeat this argument, with f 2 in the place of f j ; and so on 
indefinitely. In this way we can determine as many points 



\ 



as we please, all belonging to S, and all lying inside the interval 

A point of accumulation of $ may or may not be itself a point 
of S. The examples which follow illustrate the various possibilities. 

Examples IX. 1. If S consists of the points corresponding to the 
positive integers, or all the integers, there are no points of accumulation. 

2. If S consists of all the rational points, every point of the line is a 
point of accumulation. 

3. If S consists of the points 1, J, , ..., there is one point of accumula 
tion, viz. the origin. 

4. If S consists of all the positive rational points, the points of accumula 
tion are the origin and all positive points of the line. 

1 19. Weierstrass s Theorem. The general theory of sets 
r S of points is of the utmost interest and importance in the higher 
branches of analysis ; but it is for the most part too difficult to be 
included in a book such as this. There is however one funda 
mental theorem which is easily deduced from Dedekind s Theorem 
and which we shall require later. 

THEOREM. If a set S contains infinitely many points, and is 
entirely situated in an interval (a, j3), then at least one point of the 
interval is a point of accumulation of 8. 

We divide the points of the line A into two classes in the 
following manner. The point P belongs to L if there are an 



18, 19] REAL VARIABLES 31 

infinity of points of S to the right of P, and to R in the contrary 
case. Then it is evident that conditions (i) and (iii) of Dedekind s 
Theorem are satisfied ; and since a belongs to L and /3 to R, 
condition (ii) is satisfied also. 

Hence there is a point f such that, however small be 8, f S 
belongs to L and f+S to R, so that the interval (f-5, +) 
contains an infinity of points of S. Hence f is a point of accumu 
lation of S. 

This point may of course coincide with a or /3, as for instance when a=0, 
$ = 1, and S consists of the points 1, |, ^, .... In this case is the sole 
point of accumulation. 



MISCELLANEOUS EXAMPLES ON CHAPTER I. 



1. What are the conditions that ax + by + cz=0, (1) for all values of 
a, y, z\ (2) for all values of x, y, z subject to ax+py+yz=0 , (3) for all 
values of x, y, z subject to both ax+$y + yz = Q and 



2. Any positive rational number can be expressed in one and only one 
way in the form 

&lt; * 1+ r J 2 + rTT3~ f " + i7273~7^I 

where aj, 2 -"j % are integers, and 

Oga lt 0&lt; 2 &lt;2, 0^ 3 &lt;3, ...0&lt;a fc &lt;. 

3. Any positive rational number can be expressed in one and one way 
only 7 as a simple continued fraction 



where a 1} 2 &gt; are positive integers, of which the first only may be zero. 

[Accounts of the theory of such continued fractions will be found in text 
books of algebra. For further information as to modes of representation of 
rational and irrational numbers, see Hobson, Theory of Functions of a Real 
Variable, pp. 4549.] 

4. Find the rational roots (if any) of 9# 3 - &v 2 -f 1 5x - 10 = 0. * 

5. A line AB is divided at C in aurea sectione (Euc. II. 11) i.e. so that 
AB . AC=C 2 . Show that the ratio A CjAB is irrational. 

[A direct geometrical proof will be found in Bromwich s Infinite Series, 
143, p. 363.] 

6. A is irrational. In what circumstances can - i . where a, b. c. d 

cA + d 
are rational, be rational? 






J 



32 REAL VARIABLES [l 

7. Some elementary inequalities. In what follows a 1? a 2 , ... de 
note positive numbers (including zero) and jt?, #, ... positive integers. Since 
ajP-a 2 P and !- 2 have the same sign, we have (af - a 2 *&gt;) (a^ - a 2 ) &gt;0, or 



........................ (1), 

an inequality which may also be written in the form 

+ 2 p + g &gt; /V + 
2 =\ 2 

By repeated application of this formula we obtain 




and in particular &gt; .............................. (4)&gt; 

When ;? = 2=1 in (1), or p = 2 in (4), the inequalities are merely different 
forms of the inequality af+af^Za&z, which expresses the fact that the 
arithmetic mean of two positive numbers is not less than their geometric 
mean. 

8. Generalisations for n numbers. If we write down the \n(n-l} 
inequalities of the type (1) which can be formed with n numbers a lt a 2 ,..., , 
and add the results, we obtain the inequality 



........................ (6). 

Hence we can deduce an obvious extension of (3) which the reader may 
formulate for himself, and in particular the inequality 

(7). 



9. The general form of the theorem concerning the arithmetic and 
geometric means. An inequality of a slightly different character is 
that which asserts that the arithmetic mean of a lt a 2 , ..., a n is not less 
than their geometric mean. Suppose that a r and a ? are the greatest and 
least of the a s (if there are several greatest or least a s we may choose any 
of them indifferently), and let O be their geometric mean. We may suppose 
&gt; 0, as the truth of the proposition is obvious when G= 0. If now we replace 
a r and a s by 



we do not alter the value of the geometric mean ; and, since 

/ + a 8 -a r -a s = (a r - G) (a, - (?)/ &lt; 0, 
we certainly do not increase the arithmetic mean. 

It is clear that we may repeat this argument until we have replaced each 
of a l , 2 , ..., a n by G; at most n repetitions will be necessary. As the final 
value of the arithmetic mean is G, the initial value cannot have been less. 



REAL VARIABLES 33 

10. Schwarz s inequality. Suppose that a lt 2 , ..., a n and 6 1? 6 2 , ..., b n 
are any two sets of numbers positive or negative. It is easy to verify the 
identity 

(2a A) 2 = 2 r 2 2a. 2 - 2 (a r b 8 - a 8 b r )\ 

where r and s assume the values 1, 2, ..., n. It follows that 



an inequality usually known as Schwarz s (though due originally to Cauchy). 
11. If a lf a 2 , ..., a n are all positive, and * n = a 1 + o 2 + . .. + , then 



(Math. Trip. 1909.) 

12. If !, 2 , ..., n and 6 15 b%, ..., 6 n are two sets of positive numbers, 
arranged in descending order of magnitude, then 



13. If a, 6, c, ... & and ^4, Z?, (7, ... K are two sets of numbers, and all of 
the first set are positive, then 



lies between the algebraically least and great ast of A, /?, ..., K. 

14. If Jp t Jq are dissimilar surds, and a+b *Jp+c */q+d J(pq}**0, 

where a, b, c, d are rational, then a = 0, 6 = 0, c = 0, d=Q. 

[Express *Jp in the form M+ N Jq t where M and N are rational, and apply 
the theorem of 14.] 

1 5. Show that if a *JZ + b ^/3 + c J5 = 0, where a, 6, c are rational numbers, 
then a = 0, 6 = 0, c=0. 

16. Any polynomial in Jp and V^ with rational coefficients (i.e. any 
sum of a finite number of terms of the form A (Jp} m (&lt;Jq} n ^ where m and n 
are integers, and A rational), can be expressed in the form 

a + b Jp + c V q + d &gt;Jpq, 
where a, 6, c, d are rational. 

17. Express**,- ~f , ,-, where a, b, etc. are rational, in the form 

a + e - 



where A, S, C&gt; D are rational. 
[Evidently 

Jq _ (a + b Jp + c Jq) (d+e Jp-fjq) __ a 



where a, /3, etc. are rational numbers which can easily be found. The required 
n. 3 



REAL VARIABLES [l 

reduction may now be easily completed by multiplication of numerator and 
denominator by e-Vjo. For example, prove that 



18. If a, b, x, y are rational numbers such that 



then either (i) x=a t y=b or (ii) l-ab and \-xy are squares of rational 
numbers. (Math. Trip. 1903.) 

19. If all the values of x and y given by 

ax 2 + Zhxy + by 2 = 1, a x* + 2k xy + b y 2 = I 
(where a, A, b, a , h , b are rational) are rational, then 

(h - A )2 _ ( a - a ) (6 - 6 ), (a& - a &) 2 + 4 (ah - a h] (bh 1 - b h] 
are both squares of rational numbers. (Math. Trip. 1899.) 

20. Show that N /2 and N /3 are cubic functions of N ^2 + x /3, with rational 
coefficients, and that ^2 ^6 + 3 is the ratio of two linear functions of 
x /2 + .v/3. (Math. Trip. 1905.) 

21. The expression 



is equal to 2m if 2m 2 &gt; a &gt; m 2 , and to 2 v /(a - wi 2 ) if a &gt; 2wi 2 . 

22. Show that any polynomial in #2, with rational coefficients, can be 
expressed in the form 



where a, 6, c are rational. 

More generally, if p is any rational number, any polynomial m ^p with 
rational coefficients can be expressed in the form 



where a , j, ... are rational and a = %p. For any such polynomial is of the 
form 



where the 6 s are rational. If Jc^ m 1, this is already of the form required. If 
Jc&gt;m- 1, let a r be any power of a higher than the (m l)th. Then r=\m + s, 
where X is an integer and 0^s&lt; m- 1 ; and a r =a xm+s =p x a s . Hence we can 
get rid of all powers of a higher than the (m l)th. 



23. Express (4/2 -I) 6 and (#2-l)/(#2 + l) in the form 
where a, b, c are rational. [Multiply numerator and denominator of the 
second expression by ^4- 4/2 + 1.] 



24. If 
where a, 5, c are rational, then a=0, 5 = 0, c = 0. 



REAL VARIABLES 35 

[Let y = f/2. Then # 3 = 2 and 

Hence 2c 2 + 26+a 3 =0 or 



Multiplying these two quadratic equations by a and c and subtracting, 
we obtain (a6-2c 2 )y+a 2 -26c=0, or y= - (a 2 - 26c)/(a6 - 2c 2 ), a rational 
number, which is impossible. The only alternative is that ab 2c 2 =0, 
a 2 - 26e = 0. 

Hence a6 = 2c 2 , a 4 =46 2 c 2 . If neither a nor b is zero, we can divide the 
second equation by the first, which gives a 3 =26 3 : and this is impossible, 
since ^/2 cannot be equal to the rational number a/6. Hence a6 = 0, c = 0, 
and it follows from the original equation that a, 6, and c are all zero. 

As a corollary, if a+&^2=Hc&lt;v/4 = d+e^/2+/&gt;/4, then a = d, b = e, c=f. 
It may be proved, more generally, that if 



p not being a perfect mth power, then a =ai = ... = a m _ 1 = j but the proof is 
less simple.] 

25. If A + $B=C+j/D, then either A = C, B=D, or and D are both 
cubes of rational numbers. 

26. If %A + $B + $C= 0, then either one of A, B, C is zero, and the other 
two equal and opposite, or JfA t j/B, $C are rational multiples of the same 
surd j/X. 

27. Find rational numbers a, 3 such that 



28. If (a-Z)3)6&gt;o, then 

3f 963 + a /a-6*\ sf 96 + ^ 



//a-6*\\ s/f 

v v"36-)/ + v r~ 



is rational. [Each of the numbers under a cube root is of the form 



where a and /3 are rational.] 

29. If a = Z/p, any polynomial in a is the root of an equation of degree n, 
with rational coefficients. 

[We can express the polynomial (x say) in the form 

where l it m ly ... are rational, as in Ex. 22. 

29 



36 REAL VARIABLES 

Similarly x 2 =l 2 + m 2 a+... +r 2 a (n ~ 1) , 



Hence L v x + L%x 2 + . . . + L n x n = A, 

where A is the determinant 

mi ... i 



m n ...r n 
and Zi, Z 2 , ... the minors of l lt 1 2 , ....] 

30. Apply this process to x=p+Jq, and deduce the theorem of 14. 

31. Show that y = a + bp 1 3 + cp 2/3 satisfies the equation 

# 3 - 3a/+ 3y (a 2 - 6cjo) - a 3 - 6 3 p - c 3 ^ 2 + Zabcp = 0. 

32. Algebraical numbers. We have seen that some irrational numbers 
(such as x/2) are roots of equations of the type 

a^x n + a^x n ~ l + . . . + a n = 0, 

\ where , a^ ..., a n are integers. Such irrational numbers are called alge- 

} braical numbers: all other irrational numbers, such as TT ( 15), are called 

transcendental numbers. Show that if x is an algebraical number, then so are 

kx t where k is any rational number, and x m n , where m and n are any integers. 

33. If x and y are algebraical numbers, then so are x-\-y&gt;x-y,xy and x\y. 
[We have equations a$x m + aiX m ~ 1 + . . . + a m = 0, 



where the a s and 6 s are integers. Write x+y=z,y = z-x in the second, 
and eliminate x. We thus get an equation of similar form 



satisfied by z. Similarly for the other cases.] 

34. If a n + a 1 #*- 1 + ...+a n = 0, 

where a , a 1} ..., a n are any algebraical numbers, then x is an algebraical 
number. [We have n + l equations of the type 

a 0&gt;r a r mr + ai tr a r m r~ l + ...+a mrir = (r = 0, 1, ..., ri), 

in which the coefficients , r&gt; a i, r&gt; are integers Eliminate a . a lt ..., a n 
between these and the original equation for x.} 

35. Apply this process to the equation x 2 - 2x V2 + V3 0. 
[The result is ^- 



REAL VARIABLES 37 

36. Find equations, with rational coefficients, satisfied by 



37. If # 3 = x + 1 , then # 3n = a H x + b n + cjx, where 



38. If # G +^ 5 -2. 4 -.r 3 +tf 2 + l=0 and y = A 4 -^ 2 4-^- 1, then y satisfies 
a quadratic equation with rational coefficients. (Afat/i. Trip. 1903.) 

[It will be found that y 1 + y + 1 = 0.] 



CHAPTER II 

FUNCTIONS OF HEAL VARIABLES 

20. The idea of a function. Suppose that x and y are 
two continuous real variables, which we may suppose to be repre 
sented geometrically by distances A^P = x, B^Q^y measured 
from fixed points A 0) B along two straight lines A, M. And 
let us suppose that the positions of the points P and Q are not 
independent, but connected by a relation which we can imagine 
to be expressed as a relation between x and y: so that, when 
P and x are known, Q and y are also known. We might, 
for example, suppose that y = x, or y=2x, or |#, or # 2 + l. In 
all of these cases the value of x determines that of y. Or 
again, we might suppose that the relation between x and y is 
given, not by means of an explicit formula for y in terms of as, 
but by means of a geometrical construction which enables us to 
determine Q when P is known. 

In these circumstances y is said to be a function of x. This 
notion of functional dependence of one variable upon another is 
perhaps the most important in the whole range of higher mathe 
matics. In order to enable the reader to be certain that he 
understands it clearly, we shall, in this chapter, illustrate it by 
means of a large number of examples. 

But before we proceed to do this, we must point out that 
the simple examples of functions mentioned above possess three 
characteristics which are by no means involved in the general 
idea of a function, viz.: 

(1) y is determined for every value of x\ 

(2) to each value of x for which y is given corresponds one 
and only one value ofy, 

(3) the relation between x and y is expressed by means of 
an analytical formula, from which the value of y corresponding to 
a given value of x can be calculated by direct substitution of the 
latter. 



20] FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES 39 

It is indeed the case that these particular characteristics are 
possessed by many of the most important functions. But the con 
sideration of the following examples will make it clear that they 
are by no means essential to a function. All that is essential is 
that there should be some relation between x and y such that to 
some values of x at any rate correspond values of y. 

Examples X. 1. Let y =x or 2# or \x or x 2 + 1 Nothing further need 
be said at present about cases such as these. 

2. Let #=0 whatever be the value of x. Then y is a function of x, for we 
can give x any value, and the corresponding value of y (viz. 0) is known. In 
this case the functional relation makes the same value of y correspond to all 
values of x. The same would be true were y equal to 1 or - \ or V 2 instead 
of 0. Such a function of x is called a constant. 

3. Let y = x. Then if x is positive this equation defines two values of y 
corresponding to each value of #, viz. Jx. If #=0, y0. Hence to the 
particular value 0- of x corresponds one and only one value of y. But if x is 
negative there is no value of y which satisfies the equation. That is to say, 
the function y is not defined for negative values of x. This function therefore 
possesses the characteristic (3), but neither (1) nor (2). 

4. Consider a volume of gas maintained at a constant temperature and 
contained in a cylinder closed by a sliding piston*. 

Let A be the area of the cross section of the piston and W its weight. 
The gas, held in a state of compression by the piston, exerts a certain pressure 
p per unit of area on the piston, which balances the weight TF, so that 

W=A Po . 

Let v be the volume of the gas when the system is thus in equilibrium. 
If additional weight is placed upon the piston the latter is forced downwards. 
The volume (v) of the gas diminishes ; the pressure (p) which it exerts 
upon unit area of the piston increases. Boyle s experimental law asserts that 
the product of p and v is very nearly constant, a correspondence which, if 
exact, would be represented by an equation of the type 

pv=a (i), 

where a is a number which can be determined approximately by experiment. 

Boyle s law, however, only gives a reasonable approximation to the facts 
provided the gas is not compressed too much. When v is decreased and p 
increased beyond a certain point, the relation between them is no longer 
expressed with tolerable exactness by the equation (i). It is known that a 

* I borrow this instructive example from Prof. H. S. Carslaw s Introduction to 
the Calculus. 



40 FUNCTIONS OF HEAL VARIABLES [ll 

much better approximation to the true relation can then be found by means 
of what is known as van der Waals law , expressed by the equation 



(ii), 



where a, /3, y are numbers which can also be determined approximately by 
experiment. 

Of course the two equations, even taken together, do not give anything 
like a complete account of the relation between p and v. This relation is no 
doubt in reality much more complicated, and its form changes, as v varies, 
from a for ^ nearly equivalent to (i) to a form nearly equivalent to (ii). But, 
from a mathematical point of view, there is nothing to prevent us from con 
templating an ideal state of things in which, for all values of v not less than 
a certain value V, (i) would be exactly true, and (ii) exactly true for all 
values of v less than V. And then we might regard the two equations as 
together denning p as a function of . It is an example of a function which 
for some values of v is denned by one formula and for other values of v is 
denned by another. 

This function possesses the characteristic (2) . to any value of v only one 
value of p corresponds : but it does not possess (1). For p is not denned as 
a function of v for negative values of vj a negative volume means 
nothing, and so negative values of v do not present themselves for considera 
tion at all. 

5. Suppose that a perfectly elastic ball is dropped (without rotation) 
from a height \gr l on to a fixed horizontal plane, and rebounds continually. 

The ordinary formulae of elementary dynamics, with which the reader is 
probably familiar, show that h = gt 2 if &lt;t &lt;r, h=\g (2r-t) 2 if rt &lt;3r, and 
generally 



if (2n- l)r&lt;&lt;(2w + l)T, h being the depth of the ball, at time t, below its 
original position. Obviously A is a function of t which is only denned for 
positive values of t. 

** 6. Suppose that y is denned as being the largest prime factor of x. This 
is an instance of a definition which only applies to a particular class of values 
of x, viz. integral values. * The largest prime factor of J 3 *- or of N /2 or of TT 
means nothing, and so our defining relation fails to define for such values of x 
as these. Thus this function does not possess the characteristic (1). It does 
possess (2), but not (3), as there is no simple formula which expresses y in 
terms of x. 

7. Let y be defined as the denominator of x when x is expressed in its 
lowest terms. This is an example of a function which is defined if and only 
if x is rational. Thus y = 7 if x - 11/7 : but y is not defined for # =^2, the 
denominator of ^2 being a meaningless form of words. 



20, 21] 



FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES 



41 



8. Let y be defined as the height in inches of policeman Cx, in the 
Metropolitan Police, at 5.30 p.m. on 8 Aug. 1907. Then y is defined for a 
certain number of integral values of x, viz. 1, 2, ... , N, where N is the total 
number of policemen in division C at that particular moment of time. 

21. The graphical representation of functions. Sup 
pose that the variable y is a function of the variable x. It will 
generally be open to us also to regard x as a function of y, in virtue 
of the functional relation between x and y. But for the present we 
shall look at this relation from the first point of view. We shall 
then call x the independent variable and y the dependent variable , 
and, when the particular form of the functional relation is not 
specified, we shall express it by writing 

y-/() 

(or F (x}, &lt;j) (x), i/r (x), . . . , as the case may be). 

The nature of particular functions may, in very many cases, be 
illustrated and made easily intelligible as follows. Draw two lines 
X, Y at right angles to one another 
and produced indefinitely in both direc 
tions. We can represent values of x 
and y by distances measured from 
along the lines OX, OY respectively, 
regard being paid, of course, to sign, 
and the positive directions of measure 
ment being those indicated by arrows 
in Fig. 6. 

Let a be any value of x for which 
y is defined and has (let us suppose) 
the single value b. Take OA = a, 
OB = b, and complete the rectangle 



Fig. 



OAPB. Imagine the point P marked on the diagram. This 
marking of the point P may be regarded as showing that the 
value of y for x = a is b. 

If to the value a of x correspond several values of y (say 
b, b , b"}, we have, instead of the single point P, a number of 
points P, P , P". 

We shall call P the point (a, b) ; a and b the coordinates of P 
referred to the axes OX, OY ; a the abscissa, b the ordinate of P , 
OX and Y the axis of x and the axis of y, or together the 



42 FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES [ll 

axes of coordinates, and the origin of coordinates, or simply 
the origin. 

Let us now suppose that for all values a of x for which y is 
defined, the value b (or values b, b , b", ...) of y, and the corre 
sponding point P (or points P, P t P", ...), have been determined. 
We call the aggregate of all these points the graph of the 
function y. 

To take a very simple example, suppose that y is defined as 
a function of x by the equation 

Ax + By + C = ........................ (1), 

where A, B, C are any fixed numbers*. Then y is a function of x 
which possesses all the characteristics (1), (2), (3) of 20. It is 
easy to show that the graph of y is a straight line. The reader is 
in all probability familiar with one or other of the various proofs 
of this proposition which are given in text-books of Analytical 
Geometry. 

We shall sometimes use another mode of expression. We 
shall say that when x and y vary in such a way that equation (1) 
is always true, the locus of the point (x, y) is a straight line, and 
we shall call (1) the equation of the Zocws, and say that the equation 
represents the locus. This use of the terms locus , equation of 
the locus is quite general, and may be applied whenever the 
relation between x and y is capable of being represented by an 
analytical formula. 

The equation Ax + By + G = is the general equation of the first 
degree, for Ax + By + C is the most general polynomial in x and y 
which does not involve any terms of degree higher than the first 
in x and y. Hence the general equation of the first degree repre 
sents a straight line. It is equally easy to prove the converse 
proposition that the equation of any straight line is of the first 
degree. 

We may mention a few further examples of interesting geo 
metrical loci defined by equations. An equation of the form 



* If Z? = 0, y does not occur in the equation. We must then regard y as a 
function of x defined for one value only of x, viz. x - C/A, and then having all 
values. 



21, 22] FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES 43 

or # 2 + 2/ 2 + 2Gx+ 2%-f (7 = 0, 

where G 2 + P 2 C &gt; 0, represents a circle. The equation 



(the general equation of the second degree) represents, assuming 
that the coefficients satisfy certain inequalities, a conic section, 
i.e. an ellipse, parabola, or hyperbola. For further discussion of 
these loci we must refer to books on Analytical Geometry. 

22. Polar coordinates. In what precedes we have determined 
the position of P by the lengths of its coordinates OM=x, MP = y. 
If OP = r and MOP = 0, 6 being an 
angle between and 2?r (measured in 
the positive direction), it is evident that 

x = r cos 0, y r sin 6, 

r = \/(# 2 + 2/ 2 ), cos 6 : sin 6 : 1 : : x : y : r, 
and that the position of P is equally well 



determined by a knowledge of r and 6. o * M 

We call r and 6 the polar coordinates Fi g- 7. 

of P. The former, it should be observed, is essentially positive*. 

If P moves on a locus there will be some relation between r 
and 6, say r =/(0) or = F(r). This we call the polar equation 
of the locus. The polar equation may be deduced from the (x, y) 
equation (or vice versa) by means of the formulae above. 

Thus the polar equation of a straight line is of the form 

rcos(# a)=p, 

where p and a are constants. The equation r = 2a cos 6 represents 
a circle passing through the origin ; and the general equation of 
a circle is of the form 

r 2 + c 2 - 2rc cos (6 - a) = A 2 , 
where A, c, and a are constants. 

* Polar coordinates are sometimes defined so that r may be positive or negative. 
In this case two pairs of coordinates e.g. (1,0) and (-1, TT) correspond to the 
same point. The distinction between the two systems may be illustrated by means 
of the equation lfr = l -ecos0, where Z&gt;0, e&gt;l. According to our definitions r 
must be positive and therefore cos0&lt;l/e: the equation represents one branch only 
of a hyperbola, the other having the equation -l\r = \-e cos 0. With the system 
of coordinates which admits negative values of r, the equation represents the whole 
hyperbola. 



44 



FUNCTIONS OF KEAL VARIABLES 



[n 



23. Further examples of functions and their graphical 
representation. The examples which follow will give the 
reader a better notion of the infinite variety of possible types of 
functions. 

A. Polynomials. A polynomial in x is a function of the 
form 

a Q x m + a^- 1 + ...+ a m , 

where a , a 1} ..., a m are constants. The simplest polynomials are 
the simple powers y x, a?, a?, . . ., x m , .... The graph of the function 
x m is of two distinct types, according as m is even or odd. 

First let m = 2. Then three points on the graph are (0, 0), 
(1, 1), ( 1, 1). Any number of additional points on the graph 
may be found by assigning other special values to x\ thus the 
values 

tf = i 2, 3,-i, -2, 3 



give 



= J, 4, 9, 



4,9. 





(0,0) 
Fig. 8. 



If the reader will plot off a fair number of points on the graph, he 
will be led to conjecture that the 
form of the graph is something 
like that shown in Fig. 8. If 
he draws a curve through the 
special points which he has proved 
to lie on the graph and then tests 
its accuracy by giving x new 
values, and calculating the cor 
responding values of y, he will 
find that they lie as near to the curve as it is reasonable to expect, 
when the inevitable inaccuracies of drawing are considered. The 
curve is of course a parabola. 

There is, however, one fundamental question which we cannot 
answer adequately at present. The reader has no doubt some 
notion as to what is meant by a continuous curve j _a_c_urve without 
breaks or jumps ; such a curve, in fact, as is roughly represented 
in Fig. 8. The question is whether the graph of the function 
y = # 2 is in fact such a curve. This cannot be proved by merely 



23] 



FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES 



45 



constructing any number of isolated points on the curve, although 
the more such points we construct the more probable it will 
appear. 

This question cannot be discussed properly until Ch. V. In 
that chapter we shall consider in detail what our common sense 
idea of continuity really means, and how we can prove that such 
graphs as the one now considered, and others which we shall 
consider later on in this chapter, are really continuous curves. 
For the present the reader may be content to draw his curves as 
common sense dictates. 

It is easy to see that the curve y = # 2 is everywhere convex to the axis of x. 
Let PO, PI (Fig. 8) be the points (x Qt x\ (a?i, V)- Then the coordinates of 
a point on the chord P Q Pi are # X# +/i#i, y=X# 2 -f-/*#i 2 &gt; where X and p. are 
positive numbers whose sum is 1. And 




so that the chord lies entirely above the curve. 

The curve y = x 4 is similar to y = x* in general appearance, but 
flatter near 0, and steeper beyond the points A, A (Fig. 9), 
and y x m , where m is even and greater than 4, is still more so, 
As m gets larger and larger the flatness and steepness grow 
more and more pronounced, until the curve is practically indis 
tinguishable from the thick line in the figure. 







ly=x* 






: A/=.2 


x 


III 


A 


*0v 


J 






o 



Fig. 9. Fig. 10. 

The reader should next consider the curves given by y=x m y 
when m is odd. The fundamental difference between the two 
cases is that whereas when m is even ( x) m = x m , so that the 
curve is symmetrical about OF, when m is odd ( x) m = x m , so 



46 FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES [ll 

that y is negative when x is negative. Fig. 10 shows the curves 
y = x, y = a?, and the form to which y x m approximates for 
larger odd values of m 

It is now easy to see how (theoretically at any rate) the graph 
of any polynomial may be constructed. In the first place, from 
the graph of y = x m we can at once derive that of Cx m , where C is 
a constant, by multiplying the ordinate of every point of the 
curve by C. And if we know the graphs of f(x) and F (#), we 
can find that of f(x) + F(x) by taking the ordinate of every point 
to be the sum of the ordinates of the corresponding points on the 
two original curves. 

The drawing of graphs of polynomials is however so much 
facilitated by the use of more advanced methods, which will be 
explained later on, that we shall not pursue the subject further 
here. 

Examples XI. 1. Trace the curves 3/=7# 4 , y=3# 5 , y=x l . 

[The reader should draw the curves carefully, and all three should be 
drawn in one figure*. He will then realise how rapidly the higher powers 
of x increase, as x gets larger and larger, and will see that, in such a 
polynomial as 



(or even # 10 -f SO^+VOCte*), it is the first term which is of really preponderant 
importance when x is fairly large. Thus even when #=4, a? 10 &gt; 1,000,000, 
while 30^&lt; 35,000 and 700^? 4 &lt; 180,000; while if #=10 the preponderance 
of the first term is still more marked.] 

2. Compare the relative magnitudes of x 12 , 1,000,000^, 1,000,000,000,000^ 
when #=1, 10, 100, etc. 

[The reader should make up a number of examples of this type for himself. 
This idea of the relative rate of growth of different functions of x is one with 
which we shall often be concerned in the following chapters.] 

3. Draw the graph of ax* + Zbx + c 

[Here y {(ac - 6 2 )/a} =a {x + (bja}} 2 . If we take new axes parallel to the 
old and passing through the point x= b/a, y = (ac b 2 )/a, the new equation 
isy = ax 2 . The curve is a parabola.] 

4. Trace the curves y =#3 -3# + l, y=# 2 (#-l), y=x(x-\} z . 

* It will be found convenient to take the scale of measurement along the axis 
of y a good deal smaller than that along the axis of x, in order to prevent the 
figure becoming of an awkward size. 



23, 24] FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES 47 

24. B. Rational Functions. The class of functions which 
ranks next to that of polynomials in simplicity and importance 
is that of rational functions. A rational function is the quotient 
of one polynomial by another : thus if P (x), Q (x) are polynomials, 
we may denote the general rational function by 



In the particular case when Q (x} reduces to unity or any other 
constant (i.e. does not involve x), R (x) reduces to a polynomial : 
thus the class of rational functions includes that of polynomials 
as a sub-class. The following points concerning the definition 
should be noticed. 

(1) We usually suppose that P (x} and Q (x) have no common factor x +a 
or xv + axv~ l + bxv-* + ...+k, all such factors being removed by division. 

(2) It should however be observed that this removal of common factors 
does as a rule change the function. Consider for example the function #/#, 
which is a rational function. On removing the common factor x we obtain 
1/1 = 1. But the original function is not always equal to 1 : it is equal to 1 
only so long as # =f=0. If # = it takes the form 0/0, which is meaningless. 
Thus the function xjx is equal to 1 if x^Q and is undefined when #=0. It 
therefore differs from the function 1, which is always equal to 1. 

(3) Such a function as 



may be reduced, by the ordinary rules of algebra, to the form 



which is a rational function of the standard form. But here again it must be 
noticed that the reduction is not always legitimate. In order to calculate the 
value of a function for a given value of x we must substitute the value for x 
in the function in the form in which it is given. In the case of this function 
the values x= 1, 1, 0, 2 all lead to a meaningless expression, and so the 
function is not defined for these values. The same is true of the reduced 
form, so far as the values - 1 and 1 are concerned. But x = and x = 2 give 
the value 0. Thus once more the two functions are not the same. 

(4) But, as appears from the particular example considered under (3), 
there will generally be a certain number of values of x for which the function 
is not defined even when it has been reduced to a rational function of the 
standard form. These are the values of x (if any) for which the de 
nominator vanishes. Thus (^ 2 -7)/(^ 2 -3^ + 2) is not defined when # = 1 
or 2. 



48 FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES [ll 

(5) Generally we agree, in dealing with expressions such as those con 
sidered in (2) and (3), to disregard the exceptional values of x for which such 
processes of simplification as were used there are illegitimate, and to reduce 
our function to the standard form of rational function. The reader will 
easily verify that (on this understanding) the sum, product, or quotient of 
two rational functions may themselves be reduced to rational functions of 
the standard type. And generally a rational function of a rational function 
is itself a rational function: i.e. if in z = P(y)IQ(y}&gt; where P and Q are 
polynomials, we substitute y PiWIQiW, we obtain on simplification an 
equation of the form z = P 2 (x)/Q 2 (x ). 

(6) It is in no way presupposed in the definition of a rational function 
that the constants which occur as coefficients should be rational numbers. 
The word rational has reference solely to the way in which the variable x 
appears in the function. Thus 



is a rational function 

The use of the word rational arises as follows. The rational function 
P (x)IQ(x] may be generated from x by a finite number of operations upon 
a, including^on^mjiltiplic^tipn of x by itself or a constant, ajddition of terms 
thus obtained, and division of one function, obtained by such multiplications 
and additions, by another. In so far as the variable x is concerned, this pro 
cedure is very much like that by which all rational numbers can be obtained 
from unity, a procedure exemplified in the equation 



3~ 1+1+1 

Again, any function which can be deduced from x by the elementary 
operations mentioned above, using at each stage of the process functions 
which have already been obtained from x in the same way, can be reduced to 
the standard type of rational function. The most general kind of function 
which can be obtained in this way is sufficiently illustrated by the example 



2 

which can obviously be reduced to the standard type of rational function. 

25. The drawing of graphs of rational functions, even more 
than that of polynomials, is immensely facilitated by the use of 
methods depending upon the differential calculus. We shall 
therefore content ourselves at present with a very few examples. 

Examples XII. 1. Draw the graphs ofy=l/x t y= I/a 8 , y = I/a 3 , . . . , 
[The figures show the graphs of the first two curves. It should be 

observed that, since 1/0, I/O 2 , ... are meaningless expressions, these functions 

are not defined for # = 0.] 



24-26] 



FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES 



49 



2. Trace y =#+(!/#), #-(!/*), # 2 + (l/# 2 ), # 2 -(l/# 2 ) and 
taking various values, positive and negative, for a and b. 

3. Trace 



4. Trace y = \l(x-a)(x-b\ !/(#-) (x-b) (x-c\ where a&lt;b&lt;c. 

5. Sketch the general form assumed by the curves y = \lx m as m 
becomes larger and larger, considering separately the cases in which m is 
odd or even. 





Fig. 11. 



Fig. 12. 



26. C. Explicit Algebraical Functions. The next im 
portant class of functions is that of explicit algebraical functions. 
These are functions which can be generated from # by a finite 
number of operations such as those used in generating rational 
functions, ^gether^jwSB) a finite number of operations of root ]] 
extraction. Thus 



-7T 



are explicit algebraical functions, and so is x m l n (i.e. yat m ) f where m 
and n are any integers. 

It should be noticed that there is an ambiguity of notation 

involved in such an equation as y = Jx. We have, up to the 

present, regarded (e.g.) \/2 as denoting the positive square root 

of 2, and it would be natural to denote by \/#, where x is any 

n. 4 



50 FUNCTIONS OF HEAL VARIABLES [ll 

positive number, the positive square root of a?, in which case 
y ^Jx would be a one-valued function of x. It is however 
often more^ convenient to regard *Jx as standing for the two-valued 
function whose two values are the positive and negative square 
roots of x. 

The reader will observe that, when this course is adopted, the 
function \jx differs fundamentally from rational functions in two 
respects. In the first place a rational function is always defined 
for all values of x with a certain number of isolated exceptions. 
But \jx is undefined for a whole range of values of x (i.e. all 
negative values). Secondly the function, when x has a value 
for which it is defined, has generally two values of opposite signs. 

The function tyx, on the other hand, is one-valued and defined 
for all values of x. 

Examples XIII. 1. V{(#- )(&-#)}, where a&lt;b, is defined only for 
a &lt; x b. If a&lt;x&lt;b it has two values : if x = a or b only one, viz. 0. 

2. Consider similarly 



3, Trace the curves y*=x, y 2 =&, y 2 =x 3 . 

4. Draw the graphs of the functions y = *j(&lt;#-x i \ y=bj{l - (# 2 /a 2 )}. 

27. D. Implicit Algebraical Functions. It is easy to 
verify that if 

J 






or if y = V# 

then 2/ 4 - (4i/ 2 + 4y + 1) a? = 0. 

Each of these equations may be expressed in the form 

y + E iy -^r...+R m =Q .................. (1), 

where R 1} R 2 , ..., R m are rational functions of x\ and the reader 
will easily verify that, if y is any one of the functions considered 
in the last set of examples, y satisfies an equation of this form. 



26, 27] FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES 51 

It is naturally suggested that the same is true of any explicit 
algebraic function. And this is in fact true, and indeed not 
difficult to prove, though we shall not delay to write out a formal 
proof here. An example should make clear to the reader the lines 
on which such a proof would proceed. Let 
x + \/x 



Then we have the equations 

_x -\-u-\-v-\-w 

y x u + v w 

u^ x, v* = x + u, w 3 = 1 + oo, 

and we have only to eliminate u t v, w between these equations in 
order to obtain an equation of the form desired. 

We are therefore led to give the following definition : a, function 
yf( x ) will be said to be an algebraical function of x if it is the 
root of an equation such as (1), i.e. the root of an equation of the 
m th degree in y, whose coefficients are rational functions of x. There 
is plainly no loss of generality in supposing the first coefficient to 
be unity. 

This class of functions includes all the explicit algebraical 
functions considered in 26. But it also includes other functions 
which cannot be expressed as explicit algebraical functions. For 
it is known that in general such an equation as (1) cannot be 
solved explicitly for y in terms of x, when m is greater than 4, 
though such a solution is always possible if m = 1, 2, 3, or 4 and 
in special cases for higher values of m. 

The definition of an algebraical function should be compared 
with that of an algebraical number given in the last chapter 
(Misc. Exs. 32). \- * (, 

Examples XIV. 1. If m = l, y is a rational function. 

2. If m = 2, the equation is f + R^ + R 2 = 0, so that 



This function is defined for all values of x for which R? &gt;4/? 2 . It has two 
values if R 1 2 &gt;4:R 2 and one if .# 1 2 =4 J ft 2 . 

If 7/1 = 3 or 4, we can use the methods explained in treatises on Algebra for 
the solution of cubic and biquadratic equations. But as a rule the process is 
complicated and the results inconvenient in form, and we can generally study 
the properties of the function better by means of the original equation. 

" 42 



52 FUNCTIONS OF HEAL VARIABLES [ll 

3. Consider the functions denned by the equations 



in each case obtaining y as an explicit function of x t and stating for what 
values of x it is denned. 

4. Find algebraical equations, with coefficients rational in #, satisfied by 
each of the functions 



5. Consider the equation y*=x z . 

[Here y*=x. If a? is positive, y=\/x\ if negative, ?/ = V ( - # ). Thus the 
function has two values for all values of x save #=0.] 

6. An algebraical function of an algebraical function of x is itself an 
algebraical function of x. 

[For we have 



where *+, (^)^-i +...+,$; 

Eliminating we find an equation of the form 



Here all the capital letters denote rational functions.] 

7. An example should perhaps be given of an algebraical function which 
cannot be expressed in an explicit algebraical form. Such an example is the 
function y defined by the equation 

y-y-tf = 0. 

But the proof that we cannot find an explicit algebraical expression for y in 
terms of x is difficult, and cannot be attempted here. 

28. Transcendental functions. All functions of x which 
are not rational or even algebraical are called transcendental 
functions. This class of functions, being defined in so purely 
negative a manner, naturally includes an infinite variety of \vhole 
kinds of functions of varying degrees of simplicity and importance. 
Among these we can at present distinguish two kinds which are 
particularly interesting. 

E. The direct and inverse trigonometrical or circular 
functions. These are the sine and cosine functions of elementary 
trigonometry, and their inverses, and the functions derived from 
them. We may assume provisionally that the reader is familiar 
with their most important properties *. 

* The definitions of the circular functions given in elementary trigonometry pre 
suppose that any sector of a circle has associated with it a definite number called its 
area. How this assumption is justified will appear in Ch. VII. 



27, 28] 



FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES 



53 



Examples XV. 1. Draw the graphs of cos x, sin #, and a cos x + b sin x. 

[Since a cos x + b sin x = /3 cos (x a), where /3=V(a 2 + & 2 )&gt; and a is an angle 
whose cosine and sine are a/*J(a? + b 2 ) and 6/v/(a 2 + & 2 ), the graphs of these 
three functions are similar in character.] 

2. Draw the graphs of cos 2 x, sin 2 x, a cos 2 x + b sin 2 x. 

3. Suppose the graphs of f(x] and /*(#) drawn. Then the graph of 

/ (x) cos 2 x + F(x) sin 2 # 

is a wavy curve which oscillates between the curves # =/(#), y = F(x). Draw 
the graph when / (x) = #, .F (a?) = x\ 

4. Show that the graph of cospx+cosqx lies between those of 
2 cos % (p - q) x and 2 cos ^ (p + &lt;?) #, touching each in turn. Sketch the 
graph when (p-q}l(p + q) is small. (Math. Trip. 1908.) 

5. Draw the graphs of x+ sin x, (l/#)+sm#, #sin#, (sin#)/#. 

6. Draw the graph of sin (I/a;)- 

[If y = sin (l/#), then ?/ = when # = I/WTT, where m is any integer. Similarly 
y = \ when d?=l/(2fH4*^)* an( i .y = ~l when #=l/(2m |) ?r. The curve is 
entirely comprised between the lines y= 1 and y=l (Fig. 13). It oscillates 
up and down, the rapidity of the oscillations becoming greater and greater as 
x approaches 0. For #=0 the function is undefined. When x is large y is 
small*. The negative half of the curve is similar in character to the positive 
half.] 

7. Draw the graph of x sin (l/. 

[This curve is comprised between the lines y= - x and yx just as the 
last curve is comprised between the lines y= 1 and y=l (Fig. 14).] 



V.H 



V 
V* 




Fig. 13. Fig. 14. 

* See Chs. IV and V for explanations as to the precise meaning of this phrase. 



FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES [ll 



8. Draw the graphs of ^ 2 sin(l/^), (l/#)sin(l/#), sin*(l/#), {asm (lfx)}* 9 
a cos 2 (I/a?) + 6 sin 2 (l/#), sin^ + sin (1/j;), sin # sin (I/a?). 

9. Draw the graphs of cos # 2 , sin # 2 , a cos x 2 + b sin # 2 . 

10. Draw the graphs of arc cos a? and arc sin x. 

[If #=arccostf, # = cos#. This enables us to draw the graph of a?, con 
sidered as a function of y, and the same curve shows y as a function of x. 
It is clear that y is only denned for -1 &lt;*&lt;!, and is infinitely many- 
valued for these values of x. As the reader no doubt remembers, there is, 
when - !&lt;#&lt;!, a value of y between and TT, say a, and the other values 
of y are given by the formula 2^7ra, where n is any integer, positive or 
negative.] 

11. Draw the graphs of 

tan a?, cot x t sec a;, coseca?, tan 2 a?, cot 2 a?, sec 2 a?, cosec a a?. 

12. Draw the graphs of arc tan a?, arc cot x, arc sec a?, arccosec^. Give 
formulae (as in Ex. 10) expressing all the values of each of these functions 
in terms of any particular value. 

13. Draw the graphs of tan (I/a?), cot (I/a?), sec (I/a?), cosec (I/a?) 

14. Show that cos a? and sin a? are not rational functions of x. 

[A function is said to be periodic, with period a, if f(x)=f(x + a) for all 
values of a? for which f(x) is defined. Thus cos^ and sin x have the period 
2 TT. It is easy to see that no periodic function can be a rational function, 
unless it is a constant. For suppose that 

/(*)-&gt;(*)#(*), 

where P and Q are polynomials, and that /(a?) =/(#+), each of these equations 
holding for all values of x. Let /(O) =y&. Then the equation P (^) - @ (#) = o 
is satisfied by an infinite number of values of x, viz. #=0, a, 2a, etc., and 
therefore for all values of x. Thus f(x) = k for all values of x, i.e. /(#) is a 
constant ] V\lft**V H^ 

15. Show, more generally, that no function with a period can be an 
algebraical function of x. 

[Let the equation which defines the algebraical function bo 

*/ + ,% -i + ...+ m =0 ........................... (1) 

where R lt ... are rational functions of x. This may be put in the form 



where P , P lt ... are polynomials in x. Arguing as above, we see that 



28, 29] 



FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES 



55 



for all values of x. Hence y k satisfies the equation (1) for all values of #, 
and one set of values of our algebraical function reduces to a constant. 

Now divide (1) by y-k and repeat the argument. Our final conclusion is 
that our algebraical function has, for any value of x, the same set of values 
&, , ... ; i.e. it is composed of a certain number of constants.] 

16. The inverse sine and inverse cosine are not rational or algebraical 
functions. [This follows from the fact that, for any value of x between - 1 
and + 1, arc sin x and arc cos x have infinitely many values.] 



29. F. Other classes of transcendental functions. Next 

in importance to the trigonometrical functions come the expo 
nential and logarithmic functions, which will be discussed in 
Chs. IX and X. But these functions are beyond our range at 
present. And most of the other classes of transcendental func 
tions whose properties have been studied, such as the elliptic 
functions, Bessel s and Legendre s functions, Gamma-functions, 
and so forth, lie altogether beyond the scope of this book. 
There are however some elementary types of functions which, 
though of much less importance theoretically than the rational, 
algebraical, or trigonometrical functions, are particularly instruc 
tive as illustrations of the possible varieties of the functional 
relation. 

Examples XVI. 1. Let y \x\ where \x\ denotes the greatest integer 
not greater than x. The graph is shown in Fig. 15 a. The left-hand end 
points of the thick lines, but not the right-hand ones, belong to the graph. 



2. y=x-[x\. (Fig. 156.) 



y -- \ 



- I 

,cVc 

b* K ; 




Fig. 15 a. 



Fig. 15 &. 



FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES 
}. (Fig. 15 e.) 4. y= 



y - 
*l - 



6. 



[n 

(Fig. 15 d.) 

i \ \^ 






Fig. 15 c. 



Fig. 15 d. 



7. Let y be defined as the largest prime factor of x (cf. Exs. x. 6). 
Then y is denned only for integral values of x. .If 

tf=l, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, ... , 
then y = 1)2j3)2)5&gt;3)7)2j3) 5jHj 3&gt;13&gt; 

The graph consists of a number of isolated points. 

8. Let y be the denominator of x (Exs. x. 7). In this case y is defined 
only for rational values of x. We can mark off as many points on the graph 
as we please, but the result is not in any ordinary sense of the word a curve, 
and there are no points corresponding to any irrational values of x. 

Draw the straight line joining the points (N- 1, JV) t (tf t ^V), where N is a 
positive integer. Show that the number of points of the locus which lie on 
this line is equal to the number of positive integers less than and prime to N. 

D. Let y = when x is an integer, y=x when x is not an integer. The 
graph is derived from the straight line y = x by taking but the points 

...(-1, -1), (0,0), (1,1), (2,2),... 
and adding the points (-1, 0), (0, 0), (1, 0), ... on the axis of x. 

The reader may possibly regard this as an unreasonable function. Why, 
he may ask, if y is equal to x for all values of x save integral values, should it 
not be equal to x for integral values too I The answer is simply, why should 
itl The function y does in point of fact answer to the definition of a 
function : there is a relation between x and y such that when x is known y is 
known. We are perfectly at liberty to take this relation to be what we please, 
however arbitrary and apparently futile. This function y is, of course, a quite 
different function from that one which is always equal to #, whatever value, 
integral or otherwise, x may have. 



29] 



FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES 



57 



10. Let y = 1 when x is rational, but y when x is irrational. The graph 
consists of two series of points arranged upon the lines y=l and y Q. To 
the eye it is not distinguishable from two continuous straight lines, but in 
reality an infinite number of points are missing from each line. 

11. Let y=# when x is irrational and y = J{(l -f-p 2 )/(l + g 2 )} when x is a 
rational fraction pfq. 



Fig. 16. 



The irrational values of x contribute to the graph a curve in reality dis 
continuous, but apparently not to be distinguished from the straight line y=&. 

Now consider the rational values of x. First let x be positive. Then 
\/{(l-fp 2 )/(l + &lt;? 2 )} cannot be equal to p/q unless p = q, i.e. x=\. Thus all 
the points which correspond to rational values of x lie off the line, except 
the one point (1, 1). Again, if p&lt;q, \/{(l+p 2 )/(l+? 2 )} &gt; pl&lt;l 5 if P &gt; & 
V /{(1 +p 2 )/(l + q 2 )} &lt;p[q. Thus the points lie above the line y=#ifO&lt;#&lt;l, 
below if x &gt; 1. If p and q are large, /{(! +P 2 )/(1 + 2 2 )} i s nearly equal to p[q. 
Near any value of x we can find any number of rational fractions with large 
numerators and denominators. Hence the graph contains a large number of 
points which crowd round the line y =x. Its general appearance (for positive 
values of x) is that of a line surrounded by a swarm of isolated points which 
gets denser and denser as the points approach the line. 

The part of the graph which corresponds to negative values of x consists 
of the rest of the discontinuous line together with the reflections of all these 
isolated points in the axis of y. Thus to the left of the axis of y the swarm 
of points is not round y=oc but round y= x, which is not itself part of the 
graph. See Fig. 16. 



58 FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES [ll 

30. Graphical solution of equations containing a single 
unknown number. Many equations can be expressed in the 
form 

/()-*(*) ........................... a). 

where/ (x) and &lt;f&gt; (x) are functions whose graphs are easy to draw. 
And if the curves 



intersect in a point P whose abscissa is , then f is a root of the 
equation (1). 

Examples XVII. 1. The quadratic equation ax 2 + 2bx+c=0. This 
may be solved graphically in a variety of ways. For instance we may draw 
the graphs of 



whose intersections, if any, give the roots. Or we may take 

y = a? t y=-(2bx + c)/a. 
But the most elementary method is probably to draw the circle 



whose centre is (-6/a, 0) and radius y(b*-ac)}/a. The abscissae of its 
intersections with the axis of x are the roots of the equation. 

2. Solve by any of these methods 



3. The equation x m +ax+b=0. This may be solved by constructing 
the curves yx m ^ y=-ax-b. Verify the following table for the number of 
roots of 



b positive, two or none, 
(0 



, 
or 



/TA jj ( a positive, one, 

(b) m odd -I , . 7 

Construct numerical examples to illustrate all possible cases. 

4. Show that the equation tan #=# + & has always an infinite number 
of roots. 

N^ 5. Determine the number of roots of 

v ^\ir^^- sin#:=tf, sin x = $x t sin^ = |^, Binx = ^x. 

6. Show that if a is small and positive (e.g. a = -01), the equation 



2 



x a = 7r sn 
has three roots. Consider also the case in which a is small and negative. 

Explain how the number of roots varies as a varies. 

(\ IA ", X * ^ 

r K ^V - S,- X *j \ ^. 

K 11 ^ w. A 



30, 31] FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES 59 

31. Functions of two variables and their graphical 
representation. In 20 we considered two variables connected 
by a relation. We may similarly consider three variables (x, y, 
and z) connected by a relation such that when the values of x and 
y are both given, the value or values of z are known. In this case 
we call z a function of the two variables x and y ; x and y the 
independent variables, z the dependent variable; and we express 
this dependence of z upon x and y by writing 

*/(*. *) 

The remarks of 20 may all be applied, mutatis mutandis, to this 
more complicated case. 

The method of representing such functions of two variables 
graphically is exactly the same in principle as in the case of 
functions of a single variable. We must take three axes, OX, OF, 
OZ in space of three dimensions, each axis being perpendicular 
to the other two. The point (a, b, c) is the point whose distances 
from the planes YOZ, ZOX, XOY, measured parallel to OX, OF, 
OZ, are a, 6, and c. Regard must of course be paid to sign, 
lengths measured in the directions OX, OF, OZ being regarded 
as positive. The definitions of coordinates, axes, origin are the 
same as before. 

Now let z=f(x,y). 

As x and y vary, the point (x, y, z) will move in space. The 
aggregate of all the positions it assumes is called the locus of the 
point (x, y, z) or the graph of the function z =/(#, y). When the 
relation between x, y, and z which defines z can be expressed in an 
analytical formula, this formula is called the equation of the locus. 
It is easy to show, for example, that the equation 



(the general equation of the first degree) represents a plane, and 
that the equation of any plane is of this form. The equation 



or x+ 7/ z x Gy + 2Hz + (7=0, 

where F 2 + 6r 2 -f H 2 - C &gt; 0, represents a sphere ; and so on. For 
proofs of these propositions we must again refer to text-books of 
Analytical Geometry. 



60 FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES [ll 

32. Curves in a plane. We have hitherto used the notation 

-/(&gt; a) 

to express functional dependence of y upon x. It is evident that 
this notation is most appropriate in the case in which y is ex 
pressed explicitly in terms of x by means of a formula, as when 
for example 

y = x~, sin x, a cos 2 x + b sin 2 x. 

We have however very often to deal with functional relations 
which it is impossible or inconvenient to express in this form. 
If, for example, y 5 y x = or a? + y 5 ay 0, it is known 
to be impossible to express y explicitly as an algebraical function 
of x. If 

a? + 7/ 2 + 2Gx + 2Fy + C = 0, 
y can indeed be so expressed, viz. by the formula 
y = -F+ V(^ 2 - & - 2 Gx - C) ; 

but the functional dependence of y upon x is better and more 
simply expressed by the original equation. 

It will be observed that in these two cases the functional 
relation is fully expressed by equating a function of the two 
variables x and y to zero, i.e. by means of an equation 

/(*,y) = o (2). 

We shall adopt this equation as the standard method of 
expressing the functional relation. It includes the equation (1) 
as a special case, since yf(%) is a special form of a function of x 
and y. We can then speak of the locus of the point (x t y) subject 
to /(a?, y) 0, the graph of the function y denned by f(x, y) 0, 
the curve or locus f(x y y} 0, and the equation of this curve or 
locus. 

There is another method of representing curves which is often 
useful. Suppose that x and y are both functions of a third 
variable t, which is to be regarded as essentially auxiliary and 
devoid of any particular geometrical significance. We may write 

=/(*), V = F(t) (3). 

If a particular value is assigned to t, the corresponding values of 
x and of y are known. Each pair of such values defines a point 



32, 33] FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES 61 

(sc, y). If we construct all the points which correspond in this 
way to different values of t, we obtain the graph of the locus 
defined by the equations (3). Suppose for example 

x a cos t, y = a sin t. 

Let t vary from to 2?r. Then it is easy to see that the point 
(x, y) describes the circle whose centre is the origin and whose 
radius is a. If t varies beyond these limits, (x, y) describes the 
circle over and over again. We can in this case at once obtain 
a direct relation between x and y by squaring and adding: we 
find that x* + y 2 = a 2 , t being now eliminated. 

Examples XVIII. 1. The points of intersection of the two curves whose 
equations are /(#, #)=0, &lt;j) (#, #) = 0, where / and &lt; are polynomials, can be 
determined if these equations can be solved as a pair of simultaneous equations 
in x and y. The solution generally consists of a finite number of pairs of 
values of x and y. The two equations therefore generally represent a finite 
number of isolated points. 

2. Trace the curves (#+y) 2 =l, xy = l, x 2 -y^ = l. 

3. The curve /(#, y)+A$(#, t/) = represents a curve passing through 
the points of intersection of/=0 and = 0. 

4. What loci are represented by 

(a) x=at + b, y = ct + d, (ft) a?/a = */(! + **), y/a=(l-* 2 )/(l-H 2 )&gt; 
when t varies through all real values ? 

33. Loci in space. In space of three dimensions there are 
two fundamentally different kinds of loci, of which the simplest 
examples are the plane and the straight line. 

A particle which moves along a straight line has only one I 
degree of freedom. Its direction of motion is fixed; its position! 
can be completely fixed by one measurement of position, e.g. by 
its distance from a fixed point on the line. If we take the line as 
our fundamental line A of Chap. I, the position of any of its points 
is determined by a single coordinate x. A particle which moves 
in a plane, on the other hand, has two degrees of freedom ; its | 
position can only be fixed by the determination of two coordinates. 

A locus represented by a single equation 

* =/O&gt; y) 

plainly belongs to the second of these two classes of loci, and is 
called a surface. It may or may not (in the obvious simple cases 



62 FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES [ll 

it will) satisfy our common-sense notion of what a surface 
should be. 

The considerations of 31 may evidently be generalised so 
as to give definitions of a function / (x, y, z) of three variables (or 
of functions of any number of variables). And as in 32 we 
agreed to adopt f(x, y) = as the standard form of the equation 
of a plane curve, so now we shall agree to adxypt 



as the standard form of equation of a surface. 

The locus represented by two equations of the form z =/(#, y) 
or f(sc, y, z) = belongs to the first class of loci, and is called 
a curve. Thus a straight line may be represented by two equations 
of the type Ax + By + Cz + D = Q. A circle in space may be 
regarded as the intersection of a sphere and a plane; it may 
therefore be represented by two equations of the forms 



(a- )2 + ( y - /3)2 + (z- 7 ) 2 = /r, Ax + By+Cz + D= 0. 

Examples XIX. 1. What is represented by three equations of the type 
/(*,jr,f)-01 

2. Three linear equations in general represent a single point. "What are 
the exceptional cases ? 

3. What are the equations of a plane curve f(x, y} =0 in the plane XOY, 
when regarded as a curve in space ? [/(#, y)=0j ? = 0.] 

4. Cylinders. What is the meaning of a single equation /(#, y)=0, 
considered as a locus in space of three dimensions ? 

[All points on the surface satisfy / (x, y} = 0, whatever be the value of z. The 
curve /(#, #)=0, z=0 is the curve in which the locus cuts the plane XOY. 
The locus is the surface formed by drawing lines parallel to OZ through all 
points of this curve. Such a surface is called a cylinder.] 

5 Graphical representation of a surface on a plane. Contour Maps. 

It might seem to be impossible to represent a surface adequately by a 
drawing on a plane ; and so indeed it is : but a very fair notion of the 
nature of the surface may often be obtained as follows. Let the equation of 
the surface be z=f(x, y\ 

If we give z a particular value a, we have an equation /(#, y) = a, which 
we may regard as determining a plane curve on the paper. We trace this 
curve and mark it (a). Actually the curve (a) is the projection on the plane 



33] 



FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES 



63 



XOY of the section of the surface by the plane z = a. We do this for all 
values of a (practically, of course, for a selection of values of a). We obtain 
some such figure as is shown in Fig. 17. It will at once suggest a contoured 
Ordnance Survey map : and in fact this is the principle on which such maps 
are constructed. The contour line 1000 is the projection, on the plane of the 
sea level, of the section of the surface of the land by the plane parallel to the 
plane of the sea level and 1000 ft. above it*. 



3000 




TOGO 
Fig. 17. 

6. Draw a series of contour lines to illustrate the form of the surface 



7. Right circular cones. Take the origin of coordinates at the 
vertex of the cone and the axis of z along the axis of the cone ; and let a be 
the semi-vertical angle of the cone. The equation of the cone (which must 7 

be regarded as extending both ways from its vertex) is # 2 +y 2 - 2 2 tan 2 a = 0. ^ 

8. Surfaces of revolution in general. The cone of Ex. 7 cuts ZOX in 
two lines whose equations may be combined in the equation # 2 =2 2 tan 2 a. 
That is to say, the equation of the surface generated by the revolution of 
the curve y = 0, # 2 =2 2 tan 2 a round the axis of z is derived from the second of 
these equations by changing # 2 into x 2 +y 2 . Show generally that the equation 
of the surface generated by the revolution of the curve #=0, xf(z\ round 
the axis of z, is 



9. Cones in general. A surface formed by straight lines passing 
through a fixed point is called a cone: the point is called the vertex. A 
particular case is given by the right circular cone of Ex. 7. Show that the 
equation of a cone whose vertex is is of the form/(z/#, z/y)=0, and that any 
equation of this form represents a cone. [If (x, y, z) lies on the cone, so must 
(X#, Ay, \z\ for any value of X.] 

* We assume that the effects of the earth s curvature may be neglected. 



FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES 



[II 



10. Ruled surfaces. 

composed of straight lines. 

The two equations 



Cylinders and cones are special cases of surfaces 
Such surfaces are called ruled surfaces. 



.(1) 



represent the intersection of two planes, i.e. a straight line. Now suppose 
that a, bj c, d instead of being fixed are functions of an auxiliary variable t. 
For any particular value of t the equations (1) give a line. As t varies, 
this line moves and generates a surface, whose equation may be found by 
eliminating t between the two equations (1). For instance, in Ex. 7 the 
equations of the line which generates the cone are 



#=2 tan a cos, 2/ 

where t is the angle between the plane JTOZand a plane through the line and 
the axis of z. 

Another simple example of a ruled surface may be constructed as follows. 
Take two sections of a right circular cylinder perpendicular to the axis and 
at a distance I apart (Fig. 18 a). We can imagine the surface of the cylinder 
to be made up of a number of thin parallel rigid rods of length I, such as PQ, 
the ends of the rods being fastened to two circular rods of radius a. 

Now let us take a third circular rod of the same radius and place it 
round the surface of the cylinder at a distance h from one of the first two 
rods (see Fig. 18 a, where Pq=h}. Unfasten the end Q of the rod PQ and 
turn PQ about P until Q can be fastened to the third circular rod in the 
position Q . The angle qOQ = a in the figure is evidently given by 



Let all the other rods of which the cylinder was composed be treated in the 
same way. We obtain a ruled surface whose form is indicated in Fig. 18 b. 
It is entirely built up of straight lines ; but the surface is curved everywhere, 
and is in general shape not unlike certain forms of table-napkin rings (Fig. 18 c). 





Fig. 18 &. 



Fig. 18 c. 



FUNCTIONS OF HEAL VARIABLES 65 



MISCELLANEOUS EXAMPLES ON CHAPTER IL 

1. Show that if y=f(x) = (ax + b )/(cx-d) then x=f(y\ 

2. If /(#)=/(-#) for all values of #,/(#) is called an even function. 
lif(x) =-/(- x\ it is called an odd function. Show that any function of x, 
denned for all values of x, is the sum of an even and an odd function of x. 

[Use the identity/(^) = H/(^)+/(-^)} + H/(^)-/(-^)}-] 

3. Draw the graphs of the functions 

3 sin .27 + 4 cos #, sin ( -^ sin x ) . (Math. Trip. 1896.) 
W* / 

4. Draw the graphs of the functions 



sin x (a cos 2 x + b sin 2 x), -^^ (a cos 2 # + b sin 2 a?), f -j- J . 

5. Draw the graphs of the functions a? [l/#], [#]/#. 

6. Draw the graphs of the functions 

(i) arc cos (2# 2 1) - 2 arc cos x, 

(ii) arc tan - - arc tan a - arc tan a?, 

1 CM? 

where the symbols arc cos a, arc tan a denote, for any value of a, the least 
positive (or zero) angle, whose cosine or tangent is a. 

7. Verify the following method of constructing the graph of /{&lt; (x)} by 
means of the line y = x and the graphs of /(#) and (a?) : take 0.4 =# along 
OX, draw ^5 parallel to OF to meet y = &lt;j&gt;(x) in 5, 5(7 parallel to OJT to 
meet yx in (7, CD parallel to OY to meet y=f(x) in D, and DP parallel to 
OX to meet AB in P; then P is a point on the graph required. 

8. Show that the roots of x 5 +px + q = are the abscissae of the points of 
intersection (other than the origin) of the parabola y = x 2 and the circle 

2 + (p - 



9. The roots of x* + -nx* -\-px z + qx + r = are the abscissae of the points of 
intersection of the parabola x 2 =y $nx and the circle 



10. Discuss the graphical solution of the equation 



by means of the curves y=x m , y= -ax*-~bx-c. Draw up a table of the 
various possible numbers of roots. 



11. Solve the equation sec + cosec d = 2*j2; and show that the equation 
sec + cosec = c has two roots between and 2rr if c 2 &lt;8 and four if c 2 &gt;8. 



II 



66 FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES [ll 

12. Show that the equation 



where n is a positive integer, has 2^ + 3 roots and no more, indicating 
their localities roughly. (Math. Trip. 1896.) 

13. Show that the equation $xsmx = l has four roots between - TT 
and TT. 

14. Discuss the number and values of the roots of the equations 

(1) cot#+#-fTr = 0, (2) .r&gt; + sin 2 # = l, (3) tan ^=2^(1+^ 
(4) sin#-# + # 3 = 0, (5) (l-cos#)tana-# + sin#=0. 

15. The polynomial of the second degree which assumes, when x=a, b, c 
the values a, /3, y is 



-- 
p -- y 



(a-b)(a-c) 

Give a similar formula for the polynomial of the (n-l)th degree which 
assumes, when x=a^ 2 , ... a n , the values a 1} a 2 , ... a n . 

16. Find a polynomial in x of the second degree which for the values 
0, 1, 2 of x takes the values 1/c, l/(c + l), l/(c + 2); and show that when 
its value is l/(c + l). (1/a^. Tn&gt;. 1911.) 



17. Show that if x is a rational function of y, and y is a rational function 
of x, then 



18. If ?/ is an algebraical function of x, then x is an algebraical function 
of y. 

19. Verify that the equation 



cos 



is approximately true for all values of x between and 1. [Take #=0, J, , 
^ 5 f ) 1&gt; an d use tables. For which of these values is the formula exact?] 

20. What is the form of the graph of the functions, 



21. What is the form of the graph of the functions z=sinx-\- siny, 



22. Geometrical constructions for irrational numbers. In Chapter I 
we indicated one or two simple geometrical constructions for a length equal to 
N /2, starting from a given unit length. We also showed how to construct 
the roots of any quadratic equation ao^ + 26a?+c = 0, it being supposed that 
we can construct lines whose lengths are equal to any of the ratios of the 
coefficients a, 6, c, as is certainly the case if a, 6, c are rational. All these con 
structions were what may be called Euclidean constructions ; they depended 
on the ruler and compasses only. 



FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES 67 

It is fairly obvious that we can construct by these methods the length 
measured by any irrational number which is denned by any combination of 
square roots, however complicated. Thus 



V7 // 1 7 + 3 X /11\ // 
V IV Vl7-3 N /li;~ V V 



is a case in point. This expression contains a fourth root, but this is of 
course the square root of a square root. We should begin by constructing 
A/11, e.g. as the mean between 1 and 11 : then 17 + 3&gt;/ll and 17 -3^/11) and 
so on. Or these two mixed surds might be constructed directly as the roots of 
^2_34# + 190 = 0. 

Conversely, only irrationals of this kind can be constructed by Euclidean 
methods. Starting from a unit length we can construct any rational length. 
And hence we can construct the line Ax + By + C 0, provided that the ratios 
of A, J3, C are rational, and the circle 



(or ,r 2 -t-2/ 2 H-2&lt;7#-f 2jfy+c = 0), provided that a, /3, p are rational, a condition 
which implies that a, f, c are rational. 

Now in any Euclidean construction each new point introduced into the 
figure is determined as the intersection of two lines or circles, or a line and 
a circle. But if the coefficients are rational, such a pair of equations as 



give, on solution, values of x and y of the form m + n*Jp, where m, n, p are 
rational : for if we substitute for x in terms of y in the second equation we 
obtain a quadratic in y with rational coefficients. Hence the coordinates of 
all points obtained by means of lines and circles with rational coefficients 
are expressible by rational numbers and quadratic surds. And so the same 
is true of the distance */{(#! # 2 ) 2 -f(yi-3/ 2 ) 2 } between any two points so 
obtained. 

With the irrational distances thus constructed we may proceed to construct 
a number of lines and circles whose coefficients may now themselves involve 
quadratic surds. It is evident, however, that all the lengths which we can 
construct by the use of such lines and circles are still expressible by square 
roots only, though our surd expressions may now be of a more complicated 
form. And this remains true however often our constructions are repeated. 
Hence Euclidean methods will construct any surd expression involving square 
roots only, and no others. 

One of the famous problems of antiquity was that of the duplication of 
the cube, that is to say of the construction by Euclidean methods of a 
length measured by ^2. It can be shown that ^2 cannot be expressed by 
means of any finite combination of rational numbers and square roots, and so 
that the problem is an impossible one. See Hobson, Squaring the Circle, 
pp. 47 et seq. ; the first stage of the proof, viz. the proof that ^2 cannot be a 
root of a quadratic equation ax 2 + 2bx+c = with rational coefficients, was 
given in Ch. I (Misc. Exs. 24). , 

** 5 _o 



68 FUNCTIONS OF REAL VARIABLES [ll 

23. Approximate quadrature of the circle. Let be the centre of 
a circle of radius R. On the tangent at A take AP=^R and AQ = ^R, 
in the same direction. On AO take AN=OP and draw JVM parallel to 
OQ and cutting AP in M. Show that 



and that to take AM as being equal to the circumference of the circle would 
lead to a value of ?r correct to five places of decimals. If R is the earth s 
radius, the error in supposing A M to be its circumference is le.ss than 11 yards. 

24. Show that the only lengths which can be constructed with the ruler 
only, starting from a given unit length, are rational lengths. 

25. Constructions for 4/2. is the vertex and S the focus of the 
parabola ?/ 2 = 4#, and P is one of its points of intersection with the parabola 
# 2 = 2#. Show that OP meets the latus rectum of the first parabola in a point 
Q such that SQ=j/2. 

26. Take a circle of unit diameter, a diameter OA and the tangent at A. 
Draw a chord OBC cutting the circle at B and the tangent at C. On this 
line take OM=BC. Taking as origin and OA as axis of x, show that the 
locus of M is the curve 



(the Cissoid of Diodes}. Sketch the curve. Take along the axis of y a length 
OZ&gt; = 2. Let AD cut the curve in P and OP cut the tangent to the circle 
at A in Q. Show that AQ=f/2. 



CHAPTER III 

COMPLEX NUMBERS 

34. Displacements along a line and in a plane. The 

real number x, with which we have been concerned in the two 
preceding chapters, may be regarded from many different points 
of view. It may be regarded as a pure number, destitute of 
geometrical significance, or a geometrical significance may be 
attached to it in at least three different ways. It may be re 
garded as the measure of a length, viz. the length A Q P along the 
line A of Chap. I. It may be regarded as the mark of a point, 
viz. the point P whose distance from A is x. Or it may be 
regarded as the measure of a displacement or change of position 
on the line A. It is on this last point of view that we shall now 
concentrate our attention. 

Imagine a small particle placed at P on the line A and then 
displaced to Q. We shall call the displacement or change of 
position which is needed to transfer the particle from P to Q the 
displacement PQ. To specify a displacement completely three 
things are needed, its magnitude, its sense forwards or backwards 
along the line, and what may be called its point of application, 
i.e. the original position P of the particle. But, when we are 
thinking merely of the change of position produced by the dis 
placement, it is natural to disregard the point of application and 
to consider all displacements as equivalent whose lengths and 
senses are the same. Then the displacement is completely speci 
fied by the length PQ = x, the sense of the displacement being 
fixed by the sign of x. We may therefore, without ambiguity, 
speak of the displacement [x\ *, and we may write PQ \x\. 

* It is hardly necessary to caution the reader against confusing this use of the J 
symbol [x] and that of Chap. II (Exs. xvi. and Misc. Exs.). 



70 



COMPLEX NUMBERS 



[Ill 



We use the square bracket to distinguish the displacement [#] 
from the length or number x*. If the coordinate of P is a, that 
of Q will be a + x ; the displacement [x] therefore transfers a 
particle from the point a to the point a + x. 

We come now to consider displacements in a plane. We may 
define the displacement PQ as before. But now more data are 
required in order to specify it completely. We require to know : 
(i) the magnitude of the displacement, i.e. the length of the 
straight line PQ ; (ii) the direction of the displacement, which is 
determined by the angle which PQ makes with some fixed line in 
the plane ; (iii) the sense of the displacement ; and (iv) its point 
of application. Of these requirements we may disregard the 
fourth, if we consider two displacements as equivalent if they are 
the same in magnitude, direction, and sense. In other words, if 
PQ and RS are equal and parallel, and the sense of motion from 
P to Q is the same as that of 
motion from R to S, we regard 
the displacements PQ and RS as 
equivalent, and write 




Fig. 19. 



Now let us take any pair of 
coordinate axes in the plane (such 
as OX, OF in Fig. 19). Draw a 
line OA equal and parallel to PQ, the sense of motion from 
to A being the same as that from P to Q. Then PQ and OA 
are equivalent displacements. Let x and y be the coordinates 
of A. Then it is evident that OA is completely specified 
if x and y are given. We call OA the displacement [x, y] and 
write 



* Strictly speaking we ought, by some similar difference of notation, to dis 
tinguish the actual length x from the number x which measures it. The reader 
will perhaps be inclined to consider such distinctions futile and pedantic. But 
increasing experience of mathematics will reveal to him the great importance of 
distinguishing clearly between things which, however intimately connected, are iioj; 
the same. If cricket were a mathematical science, it would be very important to 
distinguish between the motion of the batsman between the wickets, the run which 
he scores, and the mark which is put down in the score-book. 



34-36] COMPLEX NUMBERS 71 

35. Equivalence of displacements. Multiplication of 
displacements by numbers. If f and rj are the coordinates 
of P, and f and 77 those of Q, it is evident that 



The displacement from (f, 77) to (f , 77 ) is therefore 

[r-feVHJ 

It is clear that two displacements [a?, ?/], [# , y ] are equivalent 
if, and only if, x = a) ,y = y . Thus [a?, ?/] = [a? , y*] if and only if 

# = # , y = y ........................... (1). 

The reverse displacement QP would be [{ - f , 77 - 77 ], and it 
is natural to agree that 



these equations being really definitions of the meaning of the 
symbols [ f , 77 77], PQ. Having thus agreed that 

-[*y] = [-^-yl 

it is natural to agree further that 

afcy] = [0, #] ........................ (2), 

where a is any real number, positive or negative. Thus (Fig. 19) 
if OB = -OA then 



The equations (1) and (2) define the first two important ideas 
connected with displacements, viz. equivalence of displacements, 
and multiplication of displacements by numbers. 

36. Addition of displacements. We have not yet given 
any definition which enables us to attach any meaning to the 
expressions 



Common sense at once suggests that we should define the sum 
of two displacements as the displacement which is the result 
of the successive application of the two given displacements. In 



COMPLEX NUMBERS 



[m 



other words, it suggests that if QQi be drawn equal and parallel 
to P Q , so that the result of successive displacements PQ, P Q on 
a particle at P is to transfer it first to Q and then to Q 1} then we 
should define the sum of PQ and PQ as being P& . If then we 
draw OA equal and parallel to PQ, and OB equal and parallel to 
P Q , and complete the parallelogram OACB, we have 




Fig. 20. 

Let us consider the consequences of adopting this definition. 
If the coordinates of B are x , y f , then those of the middle point of 
AB are J (x + x ), % (y+y )&gt; and those of C are x+x, y+y. Hence 

[x,y] + [x ,y ] = [x + x,y + y ] (3), 

which may be regarded as the symbolic definition of addition of 
displacements. We observe that 

[x, y ] + [a?, y] = [x + x, y + y\ 

= [x + x , y + y"] = [&gt;, y] + [&gt; , 2/1 

In other words, addition of displacements obeys the commutative 
law expressed in ordinary algebra by the equation a + b = b + a. 
This law expresses the obvious geometrical fact that if we move 
from P first through a distance PQ 2 equal and parallel to P Q , 
and then through a distance equal and parallel to PQ, we shall 
arrive at the same point Q l as before. 



36] COMPLEX NUMBERS 73 

In particular 



Here [#, 0] denotes a displacement through a distance x in 
a direction parallel to OX. It is in fact what we previously 
denoted by [a?], when we were considering only displacements 
along a line. We call [x, 0] and [0, y] the components of [x, y], 
and [x, y} their resultant. 

When we have once defined addition of two displacements, 
there is no further difficulty in the way of defining addition of 
any number. Thus, by definition, 

[&gt;, y\ + [of, y } + 0", y"] = ([x, y] + [x , y }) + [&gt;", y"] 
= + # ,&lt;/ + y] + [&gt;", y"] = [x + # + a", y + y + y"]. 
We define subtraction of displacements by the equation 

[*, y] - IX 2/1 = [*, 2/1 + (- [^ y ]) ............ (5), 

which is the same thing as [x, y] + [- # , - y ] or as [# -x, y- y ]. 
In particular 

|&gt;,y]- [&gt;,y] = [0,0]. 

The displacement [0, 0] leaves the particle where it was ; it is 
the zero displacement, and we agree to write [0, 0] = 0. 

Examples XX. 1. Prove that 

(i) a |j8a?, j8y] = ft [ax, ay] = [aflff, a/ty], 

(ii) ([* y] + IX, 3/1) + [^ y 1 = [^ y ] + (K y } + K ^D 

(iii) 0, y] + [&gt; , y ] = [of, y } + [&gt;, y], 
(iv) (a+0) [a?, y] = o [ar, y]+^ [a?, yl 
( v) {[a?, y] + [a/, y*]} = a [a?, y] + a JV, /]. 

[We have already proved (iii). The remaining equations follow with equal 
ease from the definitions. The reader should in each case consider the 
geometrical significance of the equation, as we did above in the case of (iii).] 

2. If M is the middle point of PQ, then ~OM=%(OP+ OQ). More generally, 
if M divides PQ in the ratio /* : X, then 



3. If G is the centre of mass of equal particles at P lt P 2t ..., P n , then 



COMPLEX NUMBERS 



[Ill 



4. If P, Q, R are collinear points in the plane, then it is possible to find 
real numbers a, /3, y, not all zero, and such that 



and conversely. [This is really only another way of stating Ex. 2.] 



5. If ~AB and ^AC are two displacements not in the same straight line, 



and 



then a = y and (3 = 8. 

[Take A B 1 = a . A B, A C l = /3 . A C. Complete the parallelogram A B^ P^ C^ 
Then AP { = a . 5J2 + /3 . AC. It is evident that AP l can only be expressed 
in this form in one way, whence the theorem follows.] 

6. ABCD is a parallelogram. Through Q, a point inside the paral 
lelogram, RQS and TQ U are drawn 

parallel to the sides. Show that D U _, c 

RU, TS intersect on AC. 

[Let the ratios AT: AB, AR : AD 

be denoted by a, /3. Then 

AT=a.AB, ~AR=$.Al), 




S 



Let RU meet AC in P. Then, AT B 

since R, U, P are collinear, Fig. 21. 

AP= X - 1 



where /i/X is the ratio in which P divides R U. That is to say 

AD. 



But since P lies on AC, AP is a numerical multiple of AC , say 

TP=k . 1C=k . lB+k . ID. 
Hence (Ex. 5) a/*=/3X + /z = (X + /i) ^, from which we deduce 

a/3 



The symmetry of this result shows that a similar argument would also give 

I?/ = a ^l Z ^ 

if P is the point where TS meets AC. Hence P and P are the same point.] 
7. ABCD is a parallelogram, and Jf the middle point of AB. Show that 
DM trisects and is trisected by A C*. 

* The two preceding examples are taken from Willard Gibbs Vector Analysis. 



36, 37] COMPLEX NUMBERS 75 

37. Multiplication of displacements. So far we have 
made no attempt to attach any meaning whatever to the notion 
of the product of two displacements. The only kind of multipli 
cation which we have considered is that in which a displacement 
is multiplied by a number. The expression 

0, y} x [x, y ] 

so far means nothing, and we are at liberty to define it to mean 
anything we like. It is, however, fairly clear that if any definition 
of such a product is to be of any use, the product of two displace 
ments must itself be a displacement. 

We might, for example, define it as being equal to 
[x + x, y + y ] ; 

in other words, we might agree that the product of two displace 
ments was to be always equal to their sum. But there would be 
two serious objections to such a definition. In the first place our 
definition would be futile. We should only be introducing a new 
method of expressing something which we can perfectly well 
express without it. In the second place our definition would be 
inconvenient and misleading for the following reasons. If a is 
a real number, we have already defined a [x, y\ as [ax, ay]. Now, 
as we saw in 34, the real number a may itself from one point of 
view be regarded as a displacement, viz. the displacement [a] 
along the axis OX, or, in our later notation, the displacement 
[or, 0], It is therefore, if not absolutely necessary, at any rate 
most desirable, that our definition should be such that 

[a, 0] [x, y] = [ax, ay], 
and the suggested definition does not give this result. 

A more reasonable definition might appear to be 

[x, y} [x , y ] = [xx f , yy ]. 
But this would give 

[a, 0][x,y]=[ax, 0] ; 

and so this definition also would be open to the second objection. 

In fact, it is by no means obvious what is the best meaning 
to attach to the product [x, y] [x, y ]. All that is clear is (1) that, 
if our definition is to be of any use, this product must itself be 



76 



COMPLEX NUMBERS 



[III 



a displacement whose coordinates depend on x and y, or in other 
words that we must have 



AY here X and Y are functions of x, y, a? , and y ; (2) that the 
definition must be such as to agree with the equation 

[x, 0] [V, y ] = [xx f , xy] ; 

and (3) that the definition must obey the ordinary commutative, 
distributive, and associative laws of multiplication, so that 

[x, y] [x , y } = [of, y ] [x, y\ t 
([x, y-] + K y ]) [&gt;", y"] = [&gt;, y] [*", y"] + [x , y } [x", y"], 

0, y] (IX, 2/1 + IX , 2/"]) = K y] IX, 2/1 + K y] [*", y"], 

and [, y] ([x } y ] [x", y"]) = ([&gt;, y] K y ]) [^, y"]. 

38. The right definition to take is suggested as follows. We 
know that, if GAB, 00 D are two similar triangles, the angles 
corresponding in the order in which they are written, then 

05/(M = OD/OC, 

or OB . OC = OA . OD. This suggests that we should try to define 
multiplication and division of displacements in such a way that 

WI~OA = ODI~OC, ~OB .oc = ^A ."OD. 

Now let 




37, 38] COMPLEX NUMBERS 77 



and suppose that A is the point (1, 0), so that OA = [I, 0]. Then 

OZ.OB = [1,0][Z, F] = [2T, F], 
and so 



The product OB . 0(7 is therefore to be denned as OA # being 
obtained by constructing on 00 a triangle similar to OAB. In 
order to free this definition from ambiguity, it should be observed 
that on 00 we can describe two such triangles, OOD and OOD . 
We choose that for which the angle OOD is equal to A OB in sign 
as well as in magnitude. We say that the two triangles are then 
similar in the same sense. 

If the polar coordinates of B and are (/&gt;, 6) and (a, &lt;/&gt;), so 
that 

x p cos 0, y p sin 0, x a- cos &lt;/&gt;, y = o- sin c/&gt;, 

then the polar coordinates of D are evidently pa and #+&lt;/&gt;. Hence 

X = pa cos (6 + () = ## T/?/ , 

F = pa sin (0 + &lt;) = xy + y# . 
The required definition is therefore 

l&gt; 2/1 IX, y ] = [^ - yy &gt; ay 7 + 0&lt;1 ............ (6). 

We observe (1) that if y = 0, then X = ## , Y = xy , as we 
desired ; (2) that the right-hand side is not altered if we inter 
change x and x } and y and y , so that 

0, y] [V, y 7 ] = [of, y ] [&gt;, y] ; 
and (3) that 

{[*, y] + IX, 2/]} (X &gt; y"} = [* + &lt;? + 2/1 IX , 2/"] 

= [(a? + aO a; /x - (y + y 7 ) y", (x + a/) 7/ /x + (y + y } x"} 

= W - yy", x 



Similarly we can verify that all the equations at the end of 37 
are satisfied. Thus the definition (6) fulfils all the requirements 
which we made of it in 37. 

Example. Show directly from the geometrical definition given above 
that multiplication of displacements obeys the commutative and distributive 
laws. [Take the commutative law for example. The product UB . OC is OD 
(Fig. 22), COD being similar to A OB. To construct the product 0(7. OB we 



78 COMPLEX NUMBERS [ill 

should have to construct on OB a triangle BOD similar to AOC -, and so what 
we want to prove is that D and DI coincide, or that BOD is similar to AOC. 
This is an easy piece of elementary geometry.] 

39. Complex numbers. Just as to a displacement [x] along 
OX correspond a point (x) and a real number x, so to a displace 
ment [x, y} in the plane correspond a point (x, y) and a pair 
of real numbers x, y. 

We shall find it convenient to denote this pair of real numbers 
x, y by the symbol 

x + yi. 

The reason for the choice of this notation will appear later. 
For the present the reader must regard x + yi as simply another 
way of writing [x, y]. The expression x + yi is called a complex 
number. 

We proceed next to define equivalence, addition, and multiplica 
tion of complex numbers. To every complex number corresponds 
a displacement. Two complex numbers are equivalent if the 
corresponding displacements are equivalent. The sum or product 
of two complex numbers is the complex number which corresponds 
to the sum or product of the two corresponding displacements. 
Thus 

x+yi = x + y i (1), 

if and only if x = x , y y \ 

(x+yi) + (x + y i) = (x + x ) + (y + y )i (2); 

(x + yi) (x + y i) xx - yy + (xy f + yx) i (3). 

In particular we have, as special cases of (2) and (3), 
x + yi = (x + 00 + (0 -f yi), 
(x -f Qi) (x + y i) = xx + xy i ; 

and these equations suggest that there will be no danger of 
confusion if, when dealing with complex numbers, we write x for 
x + Oi and yi for + yi, as we shall henceforth. 

Positive integral powers and polynomials of complex numbers 
are then defined as in ordinary algebra. Thus, by putting x = x, 
y = y m (3), we obtain 

(x + yi) 2 = (x + yi) (x + yi) = x* - y* + 2xyi. 



38 ; 39] COMPLEX NUMBERS 79 

The reader will easily verify for himself that addition and 
multiplication of complex numbers obey the laws of algebra 
expressed by the equations 



yi + (x f + y i) = (a/ + y i) + (x + yi), 
{(x + yi) + (of + y i)} + (x" + y"i) = (x + yi) + {(of + y i) + (x" + y"i)}, 
(x + yi) (x f + y i) = (x r + y i) (x 



yi, 

(^ + /O + (^ + /O 0" + 2M), 
(a? + yi) {(x f + y i) (x" + y"i)} = {(a? + yi) (x + ^)) (^ + y"i\ 



the proofs of these equations being practically the same as those 
of the corresponding equations for the corresponding displace 
ments. 

Subtraction and division of complex numbers are defined as 
in ordinary algebra. Thus we may define (x + yi) (x f + y i) as 



(x + yi) + {- (x + y i)} =x + yi + (-x - y i) = &lt;&gt; - x ) + (y - y )i ; 
or again, as the number f -f rji such that 



Avhich leads to the same result. And (x + yi)/(af -f y i) is defined 
as being the complex number + rji such that 



or off - y t] + (x rj + y ) i = x + yi, 

^ x Z-y y^x, x tj+y %=y ............... (4). 

Solving these equations for and 77, we obtain 



This solution fails if a? and y are both zero, i.e. if a? + y i = 0. 
Thus subtraction is always possible; division is always possible 
unless the divisor is zero. 



80 



COMPLEX NUMBERS 



[III 



Examples. (1) From a geometrical point of view, the problem of the 
division of the displacement ~OB by ~OC is that of finding D so that the triangles 
COB, AOD are similar, and this is 
evidently possible (and the solution 
unique) unless C coincides with 0, or 
OC=0. 

(2) The numbers x+yi, x-yi are 
said to be conjugate. Verify that 

(x -{-yi) (x yi) = x^ +y 2 , 
so that the product of two conjugate 
numbers is real, and that 
x+yi 




Fig. 23. 
M ~^y 

40. One most important property of real numbers is that 
known as the factor theorem, which asserts that the product of two 
numbers cannot be zero unless one of the two is itself zero. To 
prove that this is also true of complex numbers we put x = 0, 
y = in the equations (4) of the preceding section. Then 



These equations give f = 0, 77 = 0, i.e. 

+.* -&gt; 0, 

unless x = and y = 0, or x + y i = 0. Thus x + yi cannot vanish 
unless either x + y i or f + rji vanishes. 

41. The equation i 2 = 1. We agreed to simplify our 
notation by writing x instead of x + Oi and yi instead of + yi. 
The particular complex number li we shall denote simply by i. 
It is the number which corresponds to a unit displacement along 
OY. Also 

# = H = (0 + li) (0 + li) = (0 . - 1 . 1) + (0 . 1 + 1 . 0) i = - 1. 

Similarly ( i) 2 = 1. Thus the complex numbers i and i 
satisfy the equation # 2 = 1. 

The reader will now easily satisfy himself that the upshot of 
the rules for addition and multiplication of complex numbers is 
this, that we operate with complex numbers in exactly the same 
way as with real numbers, treating the symbol i as itself a number, 



39-43] COMPLEX NUMBERS 81 

but replacing the product ii = i 2 by 1 whenever it occurs. Thus, 
for example, 

(x + yi) (x + y i) = xx + xy i + yx i + yy fi 
= (xx - yy ) + (xy f + yd) i. 

42. The geometrical interpretation of multiplication 

by i. Since 

(as 4- yi) i = y + xi, 

it follows that if x + yi corresponds to OP, and OQ is drawn equal 
to OP and so that POQ is a positive right angle, then (x + yi) i 
corresponds to OQ. In other words, multiplication of a complex 
number by i turns the corresponding displacement through a right 
angle. 

We might have developed the whole theory of complex 
numbers from this point of view. Starting with the ideas of 
x as representing a displacement along OX, and of i as a symbol 
of operation equivalent to turning x through a right angle, we 
should have been led to regard yi as a displacement of magnitude 
y along Y. It would then have been natural to define x + yi as 
in 37 and 40, and (x + yi) i would have represented the dis 
placement obtained by turning x + yi through a right angle, 
i.e. y + xi. Finally, we should naturally have defined (x + yi) x 
as xx + yx i, (x + yi) y i as yy + xy i, and (x + yi) (x + y i) as the 
sum of these displacements, i.e. as 

xx -yy +(xy 



43. The equations z 2 + 1 = 0, az* + Zbz -f c = 0. There is no 
real number z such that z* + 1 = ; this is expressed by saying 
that the equation has no real roots. But, as we have just seen, 
the two complex numbers i and i satisfy this equation. We 
express this by saying that the equation has the two complex roots 
i and i. Since i satisfies z* = 1, it is sometimes written in the 
form V(- 1). 

Complex numbers are sometimes called imaginary*. The 
expression is by no means a happily chosen one, but it is firmly 

* The phrase real number was introduced as an antithesis to imaginary 
number . 

H. 6 



82 COMPLEX NUMBERS [ill 

established and has to be accepted. It cannot, however, be too 
strongly impressed upon the reader that an imaginary number 
is no more imaginary , in any ordinary sense of the word, than a 
real number ; and that it is not a number at all, in the sense in 
which the real numbers are numbers, but, as should be clear from 
the preceding discussion, a pair_of numbers (x, y), united symbolically, 
\ for purposes of technical convenience, in the form a? + yi. Such 
a pair of numbers is no less real than any ordinary number 
such as J, or than the paper on which this is printed, or than 
the Solar System. Thus 

i = Q + li 

stands for the pair of numbers (0, 1), and may be represented 
geometrically by a point or by the displacement [0, 1]. And 
when we say that i is a root of the equation z* + 1 = 0, what we 
mean is simply that we have denned a method of combining such 
pairs of numbers (or displacements) which we call multiplica 
tion , and which, when we so combine (0, 1) with itself, gives the 
result (- 1, 0). 

Now let us consider the more general equation 

a,s 2 + 2bz + c = 0, 

where a, b, c are real numbers. If 6 2 &gt; ac, the ordinary method of 
solution gives two real roots 

{- b V(& 2 - ac)}/a. 

If 6 2 &lt; ac, the equation has no real roots. It may be written in 
the form 



an equation which is evidently satisfied if , we substitute for 
z + (b/a) either of the complex numbers i \J(ac b*)/a *. We 
express this by saying that the equation has the two complex roots 

{-bi ij(ac - b*)}/a, 

If we agree as a matter of convention to say that when 6 2 = ac 
(in which case the equation is satisfied by one value of x only, 
viz. -b/a), the equation has two equal roots, we can say that 
a quadratic equation with real coefficients has two roots in all 
cases, either two distinct real roots, or two equal real roots, or two 
distinct complex roots. 

* We shall sometimes write x + iy instead of x + yi for convenience in printing. 



43] COMPLEX NUMBERS 83 

The question is naturally suggested whether a quadratic 
equation may not, when complex roots are once admitted, have 
more than two roots. It is easy to see that this is not possible. 
Its impossibility may in fact be proved by precisely the same 
chain of reasoning as is used in elementary algebra to prove that 
an equation of the nth degree cannot have more than n real 
roots. Let us denote the complex number sc + yi by the single 
letter z, a convention which we may express by writing 
z = x + yi. Let / (z) denote any polynomial in z, with real or 
complex coefficients. Then we prove in succession : 

(1) that the remainder, when f(z) is divided by z - a, a being 
any real or complex number, is /(a) ; 

(2) that if a is a root of the equation f(z) = 0, then f(z) is 
divisible by z a ; 

(3) that if f(z) is of the nth degree, and f(z) = has the 
n roots a l} a a , ..., a n , then 

f(z) = A(z- dj) (Z - fife) . . . (Z - a n ), 

where A is a constant, real or complex, in fact the coefficient 
of z n in f(z). From the last result, and the theorem of 40, 
it follows that/ (2) cannot have more than n roots. 

We conclude that a quadratic equation with real coefficients has 
exactly two roots. We shall see later on that a similar theorem is 
true for an equation of any degree and with either real or complex 
coefficients: an equation of the nth degree has exactly n roots. 
The only point in the proof which presents any difficulty is the 
first, viz. the proof that any equation must have at least one | 
root. This we must postpone for the present*. We may, however, 
at once call attention to one very interesting result of this theorem. 
In the theory of number we start from the positive integers and 
from the ideas of addition and multiplication and the converse 
operations of subtraction and division. We find that these 
operations are not always possible unless we admit new kinds of 
numbers. We can only attach a meaning to 3-7 if we admit 
negative numbers, or to f if we admit rational fractions. When 
we extend our list of arithmetical operations so as to include root 
extraction and the solution of equations, we find that some of 

* See Appendix I. 

6-2 



84 COMPLEX NUMBERS [ill 

them, such as that of the extraction of the square root of a number 
which (like 2) is not a perfect square, are not possible unless we 
widen our conception of a number, and admit the irrational 
numbers of Chap. I. 

Others, such as the extraction of the square root of 1, are 
not possible unless we go still further, and admit the complex 
numbers of this chapter. And it would not be unnatural to 
suppose that, when we come to consider equations of higher 
degree, some might prove to be insoluble even by the aid of 
complex numbers, and that thus we might be led to the con 
siderations of higher and higher types of, so to say, hyper-complex 
numbers. The fact that the roots of any algebraical equation 
whatever are ordinary complex numbers shows that this is not the 
case. The application of any of the ordinary algebraical operations 
to complex numbers will yield only complex numbers. In technical 
language the field of the complex numbers is closed for algebraical 
operations . 

Before we pass on to other matters, let us add that all 
theorems of elementary algebra which are proved merely by 
the application of the rules of addition and multiplication are 
true whether the numbers which occur in them are real or com- 
plex, since" the rules- referred to apply to complex as well as 
real numbers. For example, we know that, if a and ft are the 
roots of 

az&gt; + 2& + c = 0, 



then + = -(26/a), = (c/a). 

Similarly, if a, /3, &lt;y are the roots of .- 

3cz + d = 0, 



then 

a + 13 + 7 = - (36/a), fa + yd + a/3 = (3c/a), a/3y = - (d/a). 

All such theorems as these are true whether a, 6, ... a, (3, ... are 
real or complex. 

44. Argand s diagram. Let P (Fig. 24) be the point (x, y\ 
r the length OP, and the angle XOP, so that 

x = r cos 6, y r sin 9, r = *J(a? + y 2 ), cos 6 : sin 6 : 1 : : x : y : r. 



43, 44] 



COMPLEX NUMBERS 



85 



We denote the complex number ae + yi by z, as in 
we call z the complex variable. 
We call P the point z, or 
the point corresponding to z\ 
z the argument of P, x the 
real part, y the imaginary 
part, r the modulus, and 
6 the amplitude of z\ and we 
write 



43, and 



= z , 



= !(&gt;. 

= am #. 



o 



X 

Fig. 24. 



When y we say that z is real, when x that z is purely 
imaginary. Two numbers x + yi, x yi which differ only in 
the signs of their imaginary parts, we call conjugate. It will be 
observed that the sum 2# of two conjugate numbers and their 
product ot? + 7/ 2 are both real, that they have the same modulus 
V(# 2 + y 1 } and that their product is equal to the square of the 
modulus of either. The roots of a quadratic with real coefficients, 
for example, are conjugate, when not real. 

It must be observed that 6 or am z is a many-valued function of 
x and y, having an infinity of values, which are angles differing by 
multiples of 2?r*. A line originally lying along OX will, if turned 
through any of these angles, come to lie along OP. We shall 
describe that one of these angles which lies between TT and I f 
TT as the prirwirjal^value of the amplitude of z. This de- j I 
finition is unambiguous except when one of the values is TT, 
in which case TT is also a value. In this case we must make 
some special provision as to which value is to be regarded as 
the principal value. In general, when we speak of the amplitude 
of z we shall, unless the contrary is stated, mean the principal 
value of the amplitude. 

Fig. 24 is usually known as Argand s diagram. 

* It is evident that \z\is identical with the polar coordinate r of P, and that 
the other polar coordinate 6 is one value of am z. This value is not necessarily 
the principal value, as defined below, for the polar coordinate of 22 lies between 
and 27r, and the principal value between - TT and TT. , . 



r v?^% 



86 COMPLEX NUMBERS [ill 

45. De Moivre s Theorem. The following statements 
follow immediately from the definitions of addition and multi 
plication. 

(1) The real (or imaginary) part of the sum of two complex 
numbers is equal to the sum of their real (or imaginary) parts. 

(2) The modulus of the product of two complex numbers is 
equal to the product of their moduli. 

(3) The amplitude of the product of two complex numbers is 
either equal to the sum of their amplitudes, or differs from it by 2?r. 

It should be observed that it is not always true that the principal value of 
^. am (zz 1 } is the sum of the principal values of am z and am/. For example, if 
z=z = -l+i, then the principal values of the amplitudes of z and z 1 are each 
v j ITT. But zz = 2i, and the principal value of am (zz } is -\ir and not |TT. 

The two last theorems may be expressed in the equation 
r (cos 6 + i sin 0) x p (cos (/&gt; + i sin $) r*A 

= rp {cos (0 + 0) + i sin (6 + (/&gt;)}, rr ^H 

which may be proved at once by multiplying out and using the , 
ordinary trigonometrical formulae for cos (0 + &lt;f&gt;) and sin (6 + $). 
More generally 
n (cos 0! + i sin X ) x r 2 (cos 2 + i sin 2 ) x ... x r n (cos 6 n 4- i sin n ) 

= rjr a ... r n {cos (0j + a + ... + 0) + i sin (0j + a + ... + n )}- 
A particularly interesting case is that in which 

n = r 2 = ... = r n = 1, 0! = 2 = ... = O n = 0. 
We then obtain the equation 

(cos + i sin 0) &gt;l = cos nO + i sin w0, 

where n is any positive integer: a result known as De Moivres . 
Theorem*. 

Again, if z - r (cos + i sin 0) 

then \\z (cos i sin 0)/r. 

Thus the modulus of the reciprocal of z is the reciprocal of the 
modulus of z, and the amplitude of the reciprocal is the negative of 
the amplitude of z. We can now state the theorems for quotients 
which correspond to (2) and (3). 

* It will sometimes be convenient, for the sake of brevity, to denote cos 6 + i sin & 
by Cis0: in this notation, suggested by Profs. Harkness and Morley, De Moivre s 
theorem is expressed by the equation (Cis0) n = 



41] 



COMPLEX NUMBERS 



87 



(4) The modulus of the quotient of two complex numbers is 
equal to the quotient of their moduli. 

(5) The amplitude of the quotient of two complex numbers 
either is equal to the difference of their amplitudes, or differs from 

it by 2?r. 

Again (cos 6 + i sin 6)~ n = (cos i sin 0) n 

= {cos (- 0) + i sin (- 6}} n 
= cos (- n6) + i sin (- nd). 

Hence De Moivres Theorem holds for all integral values of n, 

positive or negative. 

To the theorems (1) (5) we may add the following theorem, 
which is also of very great importance. 

(6) The modulus of the sum of any number of complex 
numbers is not greater than the sum of their moduli. 



pdv) 




P" 

Fig. 25. 

Let OP, OP , ... be the displacements corresponding to the 
various complex numbers. Draw PQ equal and parallel to OP , 
QR equal and parallel to OP", and so on. Finally we reach a 
point U, such that 



The length OU is the modulus of the sum of the complex 
numbers, whereas the sum of their moduli is the total length 
of the broken line OPQR...U, which is not less than OU. 

A purely arithmetical proof of this theorem is outlined in 
Exs. xxi. 1. 



88 COMPLEX NUMBERS [ m 

46. We add some theorems concerning rational functions of 
^ complex numbers. A rational function of the complex variable z 
is defined exactly as is a rational function of a real variable x, 
viz. as the quotient of two polynomials in z. 

THEOREM 1. Any rational function R (z) can be reduced to 
the form X + Yi, where X and Y are rational functions of x and 
y with real coefficients. 

In the first place it is evident that any polynomial P (x + yi) 
can be reduced, in virtue of the definitions of addition and multi 
plication, to the form A + Bi, where A and B are polynomials 
in x and y with real coefficients. Similarly Q(x + yi) can be 
reduced to the form C + Di. Hence 



R (X + yi) = P(X + yi)/Q ( X + yi) 

can be expressed in the form 

(A + Bi)l(G + Di) = (A + Bi) (G - Di)/(C + Di) (C - Di) 



AG+BD BG-AD. 

" 



which proves the theorem. 

THEOREM 2. If R(x + yi)=X + Yi, R denoting a rational 
function as before, but with real coefficients, then R(x-yi)=X- Yi. 

In the first* place this is easily verified for a power (x -f yi) n 
by actual expansion. It follows by addition that the theorem is 
true for any polynomial with real coefficients. Hence, in the 
notation used above, 



, ..__ 

~ ~- T " ~ 



the reduction being the same as before except that the sign of i 
is changed throughout. It is evident that results similar to those 
of Theorems 1 and 2 hold for functions of any number of complex 
variables. 

THEOREM 3. The roots of an equation 

a^ n + a^ n - J + . . . + a n = 0, 

whose coefficients are real, may, in so far as they are not themselves 
real, be arranged in conjugate pairs. 



46] COMPLEX NUMBERS 89 

For it follows from Theorem 2 that if x + yi is a root then so is 
x yi. A particular case of this theorem is the result ( 43) that 
the roots of a quadratic equation with real coefficients are either 
real or conjugate. 

This theorem is sometimes stated as follows : in an equation 
with real coefficients complex roots occur in conjugate pairs. It 
should be compared with the result of Exs. vnr. 7, which may be 
stated as follows : in an equation with rational coefficients irrational 
roots occur in conjugate pairs* . 

Examples XXI. 1. Prove theorem (6) of 45 directly from the 
definitions and without the aid of geometrical considerations. 

[First, to prove that | z + z \ &lt; | z \ + \ z \ is to prove that 
(x+xj + (y +/) 2 y (a 8 +3/ 2 ) + V(^ 2 +/ 2 )} 2 . 
The theorem is then easily extended to the general case.] 

2. The one and only case in which 

|*| + | + ...!*+ +.. -I, 

is that in which the numbers z, d, ... have all the same amplitude. Prove 
this both geometrically and analytically. 

3. The modulus of the sum of any number of complex numbers is not 
less than the sum of their real (or imaginary) parts. 

4. If the sum and product of two complex mimbers are both real, then 
the two numbers must either be real or conjugate. 

5. If a + bj2 + (c + dJ2)i=A + Bj2 + (C+Dj2}i, ^_ 
where a, &, c, o?, -4, B, C, D are real rational numbers, then 

a = A, b = B, c=C, d=D. 

6. Express the following numbers in the form A + Bi, where A and B are 
real numbers : 



where X and \i are real numbers. 

7. Express the following functions of z=*x+yi in the form X+ Yi, where 
Xand Tare real functions of x andy: 2 2 , z\ z n , \\z, * + (!/*), (a + /fe)/(y+8s), 
where a, /3, y, 8 are real numbers. 

8. Find the moduli of the numbers and functions in the two preceding 
examples. 



* The numbers a + ^/6, a-Jb, where a, 6 are rational, are sometimes said to be 
conjugate . 



90 COMPLEX NUMBERS [ill 

9. The two lines joining the points z= a, z = b and z = c, zd will be 
perpendicular if 



i.e. if (a-ty/(c-d) is purely imaginary. What is the condition that the lines 
should be parallel ? 

10. The three angular points of a triangle are given by 2 = a, z=&, z = y, 
where a, /3, y are complex numbers. Establish the following propositions : 

(i) the centre of gravity is given by z = % (a+/3-f y) ; 

(ii) the circum-centre is given ly\za\ = |z-/3| = | 2 - y | ; 

(iii) the three perpendiculars from the angular points on the opposite 
sides meet in a point given ty 

B 

(iv) there is a point P inside the triangle such that 

CBP=ACP=BAP=co, 
and cot co = cot A -f cot B + cot C. 

[To prove (iii) we observe that if A, E, G are the vertices, and P any 
point 2, then the condition that AP should be perpendicular to EG is (Ex. 9) 
that (z a)l($-y) should be purely imaginary, or that 



This equation, and the two similar equations obtained by permuting o, /3, y 
cyclically, are satisfied by the same value of z, as appears from the fact that 
the sum of the three left-hand sides is zero. 

To prove (iv), take EG parallel to the positive direction of the axis of x. 
Then* 

-&lt;7), /3-a= - 



We have to determine z and a&gt; from the equations 

) 



where Z Q) OQ, &&amp;gt; yo denote the conjugates of z, a, /3, y. 

Adding the numerators and denominators of the three equal fractions, 
and using the equation 

i cot o&gt; = (1 + Cis 2o&gt;)/(l - Cis 2), 
we find that 



^ 

^3yo - j3oy 4- y o - yo a + a ^o - a ^ 

From this it is easily deduced that the value of cot is (a 2 +6 2 +c 2 )/4A, 
where A is the area of the triangle ; and this is equivalent to the result given. 

* We suppose that as we go round the triangle in the direction ABC we leave 
it on our left. 



46] COMPLEX NUMBERS 91 

To determine z, we multiply the numerators and denominators of the 
equal fractions by (y -/3 )/(/3-a), (a - y )/(y - ), (&&amp;gt; - a )/(a - 7)5 and a &lt;*d 
to form a new fraction. It will be found that 



11. The two triangles whose vertices are the points a, b, c and #, y, z 
respectively will be similar if 



1 1 1 



=0 



[The condition required is that ABfAC^XYjXZ (large letters denoting 
the points whose arguments are the corresponding small letters), or 
(b-a)l(c-a) = (y-x}l(z-x\ which is the same as the condition given.] 

12. Deduce from the last example that if the points #, y, z are collinea.r 
then we can find real numbers a, /3, y such that a-f # +y = and ax + /3y +yz=0, 
and conversely (cf. Exs. xx. 4). [Use the fact that in this case the triangle 
formed by #, y, z is similar to a certain line-triangle on the axis OX&gt; and 
apply the result of the last example.] 

13. The general linear equation with complex coefficients. The 

equation az+/3=0 has the one solution 2= - (/3/a), unless a = 0. If we put 



and equate real and imaginary parts, we obtain two equations to determine 
the two real numbers x and y. The equation will have a real root if y = 0, 
which gives ax + b = Q, Ax + B=0, and the condition that these equations 
should be consistent is aB bA = 0. 

14. The general quadratic equation with complex coefficients. This 
equation is 



Unless a and A are both zero we can divide through by a + iA. Hence 
we may consider 

2 2 + 2 (b + ffi) z + (c+ (7^ = ........................ (1) 

as the standard form of our equation. Putting z=x+yi and equating real 
and imaginary parts, we obtain a pair of simultaneous equations for x and y, 
viz. 



If we put 
these equations become 2 _ ^2 = ^ 2^ = k. 



92 COMPLEX NUMBERS [ill 

Squaring and adding we obtain 



We must choose the signs so that 77 has the sign of k : i.e. if k is positive 
we must take like signs, if k is negative unlike signs. 

Conditions for equal roots. The two roots can only be equal if both the 
square roots above vanish, i.e. if A = 0, =0, or if c = 6 2 B 2 , CVbB. These 
conditions are equivalent to the single condition c + CY=(& + Z?i) 2 , which 
obviously expresses the fact that the left-hand side of (1) is a perfect square. 

Condition for a real root. If # 2 + 2 (b + Bi) # + (c + CY) = 0, where x is 
real, then # 2 + 2&.r-t-c = 0, 2/to + (7=0. Eliminating x we find thab the 
required condition is 

C*-4bBC+ 4c.fi 2 = 0. 

Condition for a purely imaginary root. This is easily found to be 
&lt;7 2 - bBC -4& 2 c=0. 

Conditions for a pair of conjugate complex roots. Since the sum and the 
product of two conjugate complex numbers are both real, b + Bi and c + Ci 
must both be real, i.e. Z?=0, (7=0. Thus the equation (1) can have a pair of 
conjugate complex roots only if its coefficients are real. The reader should 
verify this conclusion by means of the explicit expressions of the roots. 
Moreover, if b 2 &gt;c, the roots will be real even in this case. Hence for a pair 
of conjugate roots we must have =0, (7=0, b 2 &lt;c. 

15. The Cubic equation. Consider the cubic equation 



where O and H are complex numbers, it being given that the equation has 
(a) a real root, (b) a purely imaginary root, (c) a pair of conjugate roots If 
H=\+p.i, G = p + o-i, we arrive at the following conclusions. 

(a) Conditions for a real root. If /z is not zero, then the real root is - &lt;r/3/z, 
and o- 3 + 27X/iV 27/z 3 p = 0. On the other hand, if /i = then we must also 
have o- = 0, so that the coefficients of the equation are real. In this case there 
may be three real roots. 

(6) Conditions for a purely imaginary root. If /z is not zero then the purely 
imaginary root is (p/3/i) i, and p 3 - 27Ap, 2 p 27/x 3 o- =0. If p. = then also p = 0, 
and the root is yi, where y is given by the equation y* 3X?/ a- = 0, which has 
real coefficients. In this case there may be three purely imaginary roots. 

(c) Conditions for a pair of conjugate complex roots. Let these be x+yi 
and xyi. Then since the sum of the three roots is zero the third root 
must be - 2#. From the relations between the coefficients and the roots of 
an equation we deduce 



Hence G and II must both be real. 

In each case we can either find a root (in which case the equation can 
be reduced to a quadratic by dividing by a known factor) or we can reduce 
the solution of the equation to the solution of a cubic equation with real 
coefficients. 



46] 



COMPLEX NUMBERS 



93 



16. The cubic equation # 3 + i# 2 + a-tfc + a 3 = 0, where a-^A^ + A^i, . . . , has 
a pair of conjugate complex roots. Prove that the remaining root is 



unless J 



Examine the case in which A 3 = Q. 



1 7. Prove that if z 3 + 3Hz + G=0 has two complex roots then the equation 



has one real root which is the real part a of the complex roots of the 
original equation ; and show that a has the same sign as G. 

18. An equation of any order -with complex coefficients will in general 
have no real roots nor pairs of conjugate complex roots. How many con 
ditions must be satisfied by the coefficients in order that the equation should 
have (a] a real root, (6) a pair of conjugate roots ? 

19. Coaxal circles. In Fig. 26, let a, b,z be the arguments of A, J3, P 

Then am^l-aP*, 

if the principal value of the amplitude is chosen. If the two circles shown 



in the figure are equal, and z , z l} 
and A PB = 0, it is easy to see that 
z -b 



are the arguments of P , P 



am 



and 



= Tr-0 am 



-7T + 0. 



z 1 -a 
The locus defined by the equation 

am -- = 0, 

z-a 

where is constant, is the arc APB. By 
writing 7r-0, -0, -jr + for &lt;9, we obtain 
the other three arcs shown. 

The system of equations obtained by 
supposing that is a parameter, varying 
from -TT to +TT, represents the system of 
circles which can be drawn through the 
points A, B. It should however be ob 
served that each circle has to be divided 
into two parts to which correspond different 
values of 0. 

20. Now let us consider the equation 

\z-b 




Fig. 26. 



.(1), 



where X is a constant. 

Let K be the point in which the tangent to the circle ABP at P meets 
AB. Then the triangles KPA, KBP are similar, and so 
AP\PB = PK\BK= KA\KP = X. 



94) COMPLEX NUMBERS [ill 



Hence KA/KB = \ Z , and therefore K is a fixed point for all positions of P 
which satisfy the equation (1). Also KP 2 =KA.KB, and so is constant. 
Hence the locus of P is a circle whose centre is K. 

The system of equations obtained by varying X represents a system of 
circles, and every circle of this system cuts at right angles eveiy circle of the 
system of Ex. 19. 

The system of Ex. 19 is called a system of coaxal circles of the common 
point kind. The system of Ex. 20 is called a system of coaxal circles of the 
limiting point kind, A and B being the limiting points of the system. If X 
is very large or very small then the circle is a very small circle containing A 
or B in its interior. 

21. Bilinear Transformations. Consider the equation 

z=Z+a ....................................... (1), 

where z=x+yi and Z=X+Yi are two complex variables which we may 
suppose to be represented in two planes xoy t XOY. To every value of z 
corresponds one of Z, and conversely. If a = a+/3i then 



and to the point (#, y) corresponds the point (X, F). If (#, y) describes a 
curve of any kind in its plane, (X, F) describes a curve in its plane. Thus 
to any figure in one plane corresponds a figure in the other. A passage of 
this kind from a figure in the plane xoy to a figure in the plane XO Y by 
means of a relation such as (1) between z and Z is called a transformation. 
In this particular case the relation between corresponding figures is very 
easily defined. The (X, F) figure is the same in size, shape, and orientation 
as the (#, y} figure, but is shifted a distance a to the left, and a distance 
downwards. Such a transformation is called a translation. 

Now consider the equation 

*=PZ ..... * ...... .......................... (2), 

where p is real. This gives x = pX, y=pl r . The two figures are similar and 
similarly situated about their respective origins, but the scale of the (#, y} 
figure is p times that of the (X, F) figure. Such a transformation is called 
a magnification. 

Finally consider the equation 

2 = (cos &lt; + ^sin() Z .............................. (3). 

It is clear that \z\ = \Z\ and that one value of am z is am Z+ &lt;f&gt;, and that the 
two figures differ only in that the (#, y} figure is the (X, Y} figure turned 
about the origin through an angle &lt;j&gt; in the positive direction. Such a trans 
formation is called a rotation. 

The general linear transformation 

(4) 



46] COMPLEX NUMBERS 95 

is a combination of the three transformations (1), (2), (3). For, if | a \=p and 
am a = 0, we can replace (4) by the three equations 

z=z + b, z =pZ , Z = (cos (p + ism&lt;p)Z. 

Thus the general linear transformation is equivalent to the combination of a 
translation, a magnification, and a rotation. 

Next let us consider the transformation 

*=VZ ....................................... (5). 

If \Z\ = R and amZ^e, then \z\ = l/R and am z = -0, and to pass from 
the (x, y) figure to the (X, Y] figure we invert the former with respect to o, 
with unit radius of inversion, and then construct the image of the new figure 
in the axis ox (i.e. the symmetrical figure on the other side of ox}. 

Finally consider the transformation 



This is equivalent to the combination of the transformations 



i.e. to a certain combination of transformations of the types already con 
sidered. 

The transformation (6) is called the general bilinear transformation. 
Solving for Z we obtain 

_*-6 

cz a 

The general bilinear transformation is the most general type of trans 
formation for which one and only one value of z corresponds to each value of 
Z, and conversely. 

22. The general bilinear transformation transforms circles into circles. 
This may be proved in a variety of ways. We may assume the well-known 
theorem in pure geometry, that inversion transforms circles into circles 
(which may of course in particular cases be straight lines). Or we may 
use the results of Exs. 19 and 20. If, e.g., the (#, y] circle is 



and we substitute for z in terms of Z, we obtain 



, 
where 



b a-d b pd 

*-- 

a pc 



o- = -- , p= 



a pc 



X. 



23. Consider the transformations z = l/Z, z = (l+Z)/(l - Z\ and draw 
the (X, 7} curves which correspond to (1) circles whose centre is the origin, 
(2) straight lines through the origin. 



96 COMPLEX NUMBERS [ill 

24. The condition that the transformation z = (aZ+b}/(cZ+d} should 
make the circle # 2 + ?/ 2 = l correspond to a straight line in the (JT, Y) plane 

is \a = \c\. 

25. Cross ratios. The cross ratio faz Zt z 3 z 4 ) is denned to bo 



If the four points Zi, z 2 , z 3) z are on the same line, this definition agrees 
with that adopted in elementary geometry. There are 24 cross ratios which 
can be formed from 2 l5 z%, ^31 24 by permuting the suffixes. These consist of 
six groups of four equal cross ratios. If one ratio is X, then the six distinct 
cross ratios are X, 1 -X, 1/X, 1/(1 -X), (X- 1)/X, X/(X- 1). The four points are 
said to be harmonic or harmonically related if any one of these is equal to 
1. In this case the six ratios are 1, 2, -1, , 2, \. 

If any cross ratio is real then all are real and the four points lie on a 
circle. For in this case 

am 



(z 1 -z i )(z 2 -z 3 ) 

must have one of the three values TT, 0, TT, so that am {(z l z 3 )/fa - z^} and 
am {(z 2 - z 3 )/fa - 4)} must either be equal or differ by TT (cf. Ex. 19). 

If (ziZ 2 , Z 2 Z \) 1) we have the two equations 



The four points A^ A 2 , A 3 , A 4 lie on a circle, A l and A 2 being separated 
by A 3 and A 4 . . Also A 1 A 3 IA 1 A t =A 2 A 3 jA 2 A i . Let be the middle point of 
AsAi. The equation 



may be put in the form 
or, what is the same thing, 



But this is equivalent to OA l . OA 2 = OA 3 2 =OA^. Hence OA 1 and (9J 2 
make equal angles with A 3 A^ and OA 1 . OA 2 =OA 3 2 =OA^. It will be ob 
served that the relation between the pairs A l , A 2 and A 3 , A is symmetrical. 
Hence, if is the middle point of ^M 2 , A 3 and ^1 4 are equally inclined 
to AiAfr and J 3 . O AO AJ^O A^. 



26. If the points A lt A 2 are given by az 2 + 2bz + c=0, and the points 
A 3 , A 4 by a z 2 + 2b z + c =Q, and is the middle point of A 3 A 4 , and 
acf + a c - 266 = 0, then OA lt OA 2 are equally inclined to A 3 A 4 and 



46] COMPLEX NUMBERS 97 

27. AB, CD are two intersecting lines in Argaud s diagram, and P, 
Q their middle points. Prove that, if AB bisects the angle CPD and 
PA 2 = PB 2 = PC . PD, then CD bisects the angle A QB and QC 2 = QD* = QA.QB. 

(Math. Trip. 1909.) 

28. The condition that four points should lie on a circle. A 

sufficient condition is that one (and therefore all) of the cross ratios 
should be real (Ex. 25) ; this condition is also necessary. Another form 
of the condition is that it should be possible to choose real numbers 
a, /3, y such that 



1 1 

|8 y 



0. 



[To prove this we observe that the transformation Z= \\(z-z) is equivalent 
to an inversion with respect to the point 2 4 , coupled with a certain reflexion 
(Ex. 21). If z lt z%, z 3 lie on a circle through z 4t the corresponding points 
Z l = ll(z 1 -z i \ Z&lt;i=ll(zz-Zi\ ^3=l/(z 3 -z 4 ) lie on a straight line. Hence 
(Ex. 12) we can find real numbers a , /3 , y such that a +/3 -f-/ = and 
7(*i ~ z i) +ft /(z2 -z 4 ) + y /fo ~ z i)=Q&gt; anc * it is easv to prove that this is 
equivalent to the given condition.] 

29. Prove the following analogue of De Moivre s Theorem for real 
numbers : if fa^ fa, fay is a series of positive acute angles such that 



tan $, n + 1 =tan &lt;p m sec fa -{-sec fa n tan fa t 
then tan (p m + n = tan m sec (/&gt; rt + sec &lt; m tan (/&gt; , 

sec (/&gt; ?u + n =sec $ m sec &lt; rt +tan m tan (/&gt; n , 
and tan fa n + sec $ m = (tan fa -f sec fa) m . 

[Use the method of mathematical induction.] 

30. The transformation z=Z m . In this case r=R m , and 6 and me 
differ by a multiple of 27r. If Z describes a circle round the origin then z 
describes a circle round the origin m times. 

The whole (#, y} plane corresponds to any one of m sectors in the (X, Y} 
plane, each of angle 2-rr/m. To each point in the (x, y) plane correspond 
m points in the (JT, Y) plane. 

31. Complex functions of a real variable. If /(*), (0 are two real 
functions of a real variable t defined for a certain range of values of t, 
we call 

. ...... (1) 



a complex function of t. We can represent it graphically by drawing the 
curve 



H. 



98 COMPLEX NUMBERS [ill 

the equation of the curve may be obtained by eliminating t between these 
equations. If z is a polynomial in t, or rational function of t, with complex 
coefficients, we can express it in the form (1) and so determine the curve 
represented by the function. 

(i) Let z=a+(b-a)t, 

where a aiid b are complex numbers. If a = a + a i, 6=/3 + /3% then 
#=a + (/3-a), y = a + ($ - a ) t. 

The curve is the straight line joining the points z = a and z=b. The seg 
ment between the points corresponds to the range of values of t from 
to 1. Find the values of t which correspond to the two produced segments 
of the line. 

u If - 



where p is positive, then the curve is the circle of centre c and radius p. As 
t varies through all real values z describes the circle once. 

(iii) In general the equation z = (a + bt)j(c+dt) represents a circle. 
This can be proved by calculating x and y and eliminating : but this process 
is rather cumbrous. A simpler method is obtained by using the result of 
Ex. 22. Let z=(a + bZ)/(c + dZ), Z=t. As t varies Z describes a straight 
line, viz. the axis of X. Hence z describes a circle. 

(iv) The equation z=a + 2bt + ct* 

represents a parabola generally, a straight line if b/c is real. 

(v) The equation z = (a + 2bt + ct 2 )/(a + 2pt + yt*), where a, /3, y are real, 
represents a conic section. 

[Eliminate t from 



where A+A i=a, B + B i=b, C+C i=c.] 

47. Roots of complex numbers. We have not, up to the 
present, attributed any meaning to symbols such as tya, a mln , 
when a is a complex number, and w and n integers. It is, 
however, natural to adopt the definitions which are given in 
elementary algebra for real values of a. Thus we define tya or 
a 1/M , where n is a positive integer, as a number z which satisfies 
the equation z n = a ; and a mln t where m is an integer, as (a 1/n ) m . 
These definitions do not prejudge the question as to whether 
there are or are not more than one (or any) roots of the equation. 

48. Solution of the equation z n = a. Let 

a = p (cos &lt;j&gt; + i sin &lt;/&gt;), 
where p is positive and &lt; is an angle such that TT &lt; &lt; ^ TT. If 



46-48] COMPLEX NUMBERS 99 

we put z = r (cos + i sin 0), the equation takes the form 

r n (cos nd + i sin nO) = p (cos cf&gt; + i sin &lt;/&gt;) ; 
so that r n = p, cosn0 = coscf&gt;, sinft# = sin&lt; ......... (1). 

The only possible value of r is yp, the ordinary arithmetical 
nth root of p ; and in order that the last two equations should be 
satisfied it is necessary and sufficient that nd &lt;p + 2&?r, where k 
is an integer, or 

6 = (&lt;/&gt; + 2k7r)/n. 

If k=pn + q, where p and q are integers, and Qq&lt;n, the 
value of 9 is 2p?r + ((/&gt; + 2q7r)/n, and in this the value of ^? is a 
matter of indifference. * Hence the equation 

z n = a = p (cos (f&gt; + i sin 0) 

Aas 7i roofc ancZ n (wfo/, Driven by z = r (cos + i sin 0), where 
r = %p, = (4&gt; + 2^7r)/, (# = 0, 1, 2, . . . n - 1). 

That these n roots are in reality all distinct is easily seen 
by plotting them on Argand s diagram. The particular root 

\//3 {cos (&lt;t&gt;/n) + i sin ($/n)} 
is called the principal value of J/a. 

The case in which a=l,p = l,c/&gt; = is of particular interest. 
The n roots of the equation x n = 1 are 

cos (ZqTr/n) + i sin (2qir/ri) t (q = 0, 1, . . . n 1). 
These numbers are called the nth roots of unity; the principal 
value is unity itself. If we write co n for cos (2-Tr/n) + i sin (27r/n), 
we see that the nth roots of unity are 

1, a&gt; n , col... col~ l . 

Examples XXII. 1. The two square roots of 1 are 1, - 1 ; the three 
cube roots are 1, (-l + W3), J(-l-iV3)&gt; the four fourth roots are 1, 
i, 1, -i; and the five fifth roots are 

1, it x/5- 



2. Prove that 

3. Prove that (x+ya&gt;z + za%) (#+yo&gt;5+z&lt; 3 )=# 2 + ?/ 2 +;s 2 3/2 zx-xy. 

4. The nth roots of a are the products of the nth roots of unity by the 
principal value of %/a. 

72 



100 COMPLEX NUMBERS [ m 

5. It follows from Exs. xxi. 14 that the roots of 



are 



like or unlike signs being chosen according as is positive or negative. Show 
that this result agrees with the result of 48. 

6. Show that (x** - a 2 )/(# 2 - a 2 ) is equal to 
a-2o* cos 



- ^ cos 
[The factors of tf 2m - a 2 are 



The factor ff-aw^ is #+. The factors (tf-aco J, (x-a&lt;J*) taken together 
give a factor tf 2 -2a#cos(s7r/m) + a 2 .] 



7. Resolve a; 8 ** 1 -* + !, ^ + a J and ** + 1 + * +1 into factors - n a 
similar way. 

8. Show that x^ - Zx n a n cos + a 2 " is equal to 
* 2 - 2xa cos - + a 2 ^ - 2m cos 



[Use the formula 

^ 2 " - 2^a cos &lt;9 + a 2 " = {# - a w (cos 6 + iam 6}} [x n -a n (cos6- i sin 6)}, 
and split up each of the last two expressions into n factors.] 



9. Find all the roots of the equation # 6 -- 2x 3 + 2 = 0. (Math. Trip. 1910.) 

10. The problem of finding the accurate value of ^ in a numerical form 
involving square roots only, as in the formula * t t(-l+V*X is tho 
algebraical equivalent of the geometrical problem of inscribing a regular 
polygon of n sides in a circle of unit radius by Euclidean methods, i.e. by ruler 
and compasses. For this construction will be possible if and only if we can 
construct lengths measured by cos (2ir/ri) and sin (/) ; and this is possible 
(Ch. II, Misc. Exs. 22) if and only if these numbers are expressible in a form 
involving square roots only. 

Euclid gives constructions for n = 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 15. It is 
evident that the construction is possible for any value of n which can be 
found from these by multiplication by any power of 2. There are other 
special values of n for which such constructions are possible, the most inter 
esting being n = 1 7. 



48, 49] COMPLEX NUMBERS 

49. The general form of De Moivre s Theorem. It 

follows from the results of the last section that if q is a positive 
integer then one of the values of (cos 6 + ism 6) llq is 



cos (#/) + sin 

Raising each of these expressions to the power p (where p is any 
integer positive or negative), we obtain the theorem that one of 
the values of (cos -f i sin 0)^ is cos (pO/q) + i sin (pO/q), or that if 
a is any rational number then one of the values of (cos + i sin 6) a is 

cos a6 4- i sin ct&. 
This is a generalised form of De Moivre s Theorem (45). 

MISCELLANEOUS EXAMPLES ON CHAPTER III. 

1. The condition thatl triangle (xyz) should be equilateral is that 

[Let X YZ be the triangle. The displacement 1ZX is YZ turned through 
an angle TT in the positive or negative direction. Since Cis f7r = 3 , 
Cis(-f7r) = l/&lt; 3 =a&gt; 3 , we nave x-z=(z-y~] o&gt; 3 or x-z=(z y] w 3 . Hence 
# +y&lt;B 3 +zo&gt; 3 =0 or ^-fya&gt; 3 + za) 3 =0. The result follows from Exs. xxn. 3.] 

2. If X YZ, X Y Z are two triangles, and 

V rr T7/ r/t ~r7~V 7 V Y V V V 

2 6 . I /j =A Zi A = A I A. JL , 

then both triangles are equilateral. [From the equations 



say, we deduce 2 !/(/ - z ) = 0, or 2# 2 - ^y z 0. Now apply the result of the 
last example.] 

3. Similar triangles BOX, CAY, ABZ are described on the sides of a 
triangle ABC. Show that the centres of gravity of ABC, XYZ are coincident. 

[We have (^-c)/(6-c) = (y-a)/(c-a) = (0-6)/(a-6) = X, say. Express 
fj (x+y+z) in terms of a, 6, c.] 

4. If X, T, /?are points on the sides of the triangle ABC, such that 

BX/XC= CYI YA = AZ/ZB = r, 

and if ABC, XYZ are similar, then either r=l or both triangles are 
equilateral. 

5. If J , 5, C, D are four points in a plane, then 

4Z) . BC &lt; BD . CA + CD . AB. 



102 COMPLEX NUMBERS [ill 

[Let j?!, 2 2 , 2 3 , 2 4 be the complex numbers corresponding to ^4, B, (7, Z). 
Then we have identically 

(X l 

Hence 



6. Deduce Ptolemy s Theorem concerning cyclic quadrilaterals from the 
fact that the cross ratios of four concyclic points are real. [Use the same 
identity as in the last example.] 

7. If z 2 + z 2 = 1, then the points z, z are ends of conjugate diameters of an 
ellipse whose foci are the points 1, - 1. [If CP, CD are conjugate semi- 
diameters of an ellipse and S, H its foci, then CD is parallel to the external 
bisector of the angle SPH, and SP . HP= CD\] 

8. Prove that |a + 6| 2 +|a-6 2 =2{ja| 2 + | 6| 2 }. [This is the analytical 
equivalent of the geometrical theorem that, if M is the middle point of PQ t 
then 



9. Deduce from Ex. 8 that 

|a + V(a 2 -& 2 )Ma-V( 2 -& 2 )|= a + b\ + \a-b\. 
[If +V( 2 -& 2 ) = 2i, a-x/(a 2 -6 2 ) = 2 2 , we have 



and so (\z : | + |^ 2 |) 2 =2 (| a| 2 +| a 2 -6 2 1 + | b | 2 } = | a + 6| 2 + |a-6| 2 + 2 | 2 -6 2 |. 

Another way of stating the result is : if zi and z 2 are the roots of 
az 2 +2/32 +y=0, then 

K 1 + 1*2 



10. Show that the necessary and sufficient conditions that both the roots 
of the equation z 2 + az + b = Q should be of unit modulus are 



|a|&lt;2, \b\ = l } am 6 = 2 am a. 
[The amplitudes have not necessarily their principal values.] 



11. If ^ 4 +4ai^ 3 + 6a 2 ^ 2 + 4a 3 ^-|-a4=0 is an equation with real coefficients 
and has two real and two complex roots, concyclic in the Argand diagram, then 



12. The four roots of a a 4 + 4a 1 # 3 + 6a 2 # 2 + 4a 3 #+a4=0 will be harmonic 
ally related if 

0. 



[Express ^23,14^31,24^12,345 where Z 23i 14 = (z 1 - 2 2 ) (z 3 - 4 ) + fa -z 3 } (z 2 - 
and zi, z z , z z , z are the roots of the equation, in terms of the coefficients.] 



COMPLEX NUMBERS 103 

13. Imaginary points and straight lines. Let ax+by + c = Q be 
an equation with complex coefficients (which of course may be real in special 
cases). 

If we give x any particular real or complex value, we can find the corre 
sponding value of y. The aggregate of pairs of real or complex values of x 
and y which satisfy the equation is called an imaginary straight line ; the 
pairs of values are called imaginary points, and are said to lie on the line. 
The values of x and y are called the coordinates of the point (.t?, y}. When 
x and y are real, the point is called a real point : when a, 6, o are all real (or 
can be made all real by division by a common factor), the line is called a real 
line. The points x=a+{ti t y y + oi and xa-^i, y = y - 8i are said to bo 
conjugate ; and so are the lines 



Verify the following assertions : every real line contains infinitely many 
pairs of conjugate imaginary points ; an imaginary line in general contains 
one and only one real point ; an imaginary line cannot contain a pair of 
conjugate imaginary points : and find the conditions (a) that the line 
joining two given imaginary points should be real, and (6) that the point 
of intersection of two imaginary lines should be real. 

14. Prove the identities 

(x + y + z} (x + yo&gt; 3 + 20)3) (x +3/0)3 + za&gt; 3 ) = a? + f + z 3 - Zxyz, 
(x+y+z) 



15. Solve the equations 

(a 3 + 1) = 0, x* - 5ax? + 5a 2 # + (a 5 + 1) = 0. 



16. If/ (#) = a + !# -f . . . + a k x k , then 



a) being any root of x n =\ (except #=1), and \n the greatest multiple of 
contained in k. Find a similar formula for a +a +n x n + a 



17. If (l+x) n 
n being a positive integer, then 

^0-^2+^4 - = $ n cos Jrarr, p l -Pz+Ps - ... = $ n sin Inn. 

18. Sum the series 

x x* _ #3_ x nl3 

8!f-2i*51-5I 81 ^-8! + &lt; " + ^^TT 

n being a multiple of 3. (Math. Trip. 1899.) 



It is a complex number such that |tf| = l, then the point 
x=(at + b}l(t c) describes a circle as t varies, unless |c| = l, when it 
describes a straight line. 



104 COMPLEX NUMBERS [ill 

20. If t varies as in the last example then the point x=^{at + (b/t)} in 
general describes an ellipse whose foci are given by x 2 =ab, and whose axes 
are | a | + 1 6 1 and | a \ - \ b \. But if | a \ = \ b \ then x describes the finite straight 
line joining the points -*J(ab), J(ab). 

21. Prove that if t is real and z=P- I + J(t*-p\ then, when 2 &lt;1, z is 
represented by a point which lies on the circle % 2 +y 2 +x=0. Assuming that, 
when $ 2 &gt;1, v (^-* 2 ) denotes the positive square root of t*-t 2 , discuss the 
motion of the point which represents z&gt; as t diminishes from a large positive 
value to a large negative value. (Math. Trip. 1912.) 

22. The coefficients of the transformation z=(aZ+fy/(cZ+d) are subject 
to the condition ad bc=\. Show that, if c=4=0, there are two fixed points 

a, /3, i.e. points unaltered by the transformation, except when (a + d) 2 =4, when 
there is only one fixed point a ; and that in these two cases the transforma 
tion may be expressed in the forms 

0--a_ 7 ,^ : -a J_ 1 
*-/3 ^-/3 z-a~Z-a + 

Show further that, if c = 0, there will be one fixed point a unless ad, 
and that in these two cases the transformation may be expressed in the 
forms 

\ z = Z+K. 



Finally, if a, 6, c, d are further restricted to positive integral values (in 
cluding zero), show that the only transformations with less than two fixed 
points are of the forms (Ifz) = (1/Z)+ A , z = Z+K. (Math. Trip. 1911.) 

- 23. Prove that the relation z = (l+Zi}l(Z+i) transforms the part of the 
axis of x between the points z=\ and z=-l into a semicircle passing 
through the points Z= 1 and Z= 1. Find all the figures that can be obtained 
from the originally selected part of the axis of x by successive applications of 
the transformation. (Math. Trip. 1912.) 

24. If z = 2Z+Z 2 then the circle \Z\ = l corresponds to a cardioid in the 
plane of z. 

25. Discuss the transformation z=^{Z+(l/Z )}, showing in particular 
that to the circles JT 2 + F 2 =a 2 correspond the confocal ellipses 






"26. If (z + l) 2 = 4/Z then the unit circle in the z-plane corresponds to the 
parabola ^cos 2 |0 = l in the ^-plane, and the inside of the circle to the 
outside of the parabola. 

27. Show that, by means of the transformation z={(Z ci)l(Z+ci)} 2 , 
the upper half of the 2-plane may be made to correspond to the interior of 
a certain semicircle in the Z-plane. 



COMPLEX NUMBERS 105 

28. If z=Z 2 -l, then as z describes the circle \z\ = &lt;, the two corre 
sponding positions of Z each describe the Cassinian oval p 1 p 2 = , where 
pi, p 2 are the distances of Z from the points -1, 1. Trace the ovals for 
different values of K. 

29. Consider the relation az 2 + ZhzZ+ bZ 2 + 2gz + 2/Z+ c = 0. Show that 
there are two values of Z for which the corresponding values of z are equal, 
and vice versa. We call these the branch points in the Z and ^-planes re 
spectively. Show that, if z describes an ellipse whose foci are the branch 
points, then so does Z. 

[We can, without loss of generality, take the given relation in the form 



the reader should satisfy himself that this is the case. The branch points in 
either plane are cosec o&gt; and - cosec o&gt;. An ellipse of the form specified is 
given by 

\z + cosec o&gt; | -|- 1 2 - cosec G&gt; \ = C, 
where C is a constant. This is equivalent (Ex. 9) to 

z + ^( 2 2 _ cosec 2 w ) | + | z _ ^2 _ CQsec 2 M ) | = 

Express this in terms of Z."] 



30 If z=aZ n + bZ n , where m, n are positive integers and a, b real, then 
as Z describes the unit circle, z describes a hypo- or epi-cycloid. 

31. Show that the transformation 



_ 

cZ$ -(a di) 

where a, 6, c, d are real and a 2 + d z + bc&gt; 0, and Z Q denotes the conjugate of 
Z, is equivalent to an inversion with respect to the circle 

c (#2 +y 2) _ % ax -2dy-b=0. 
What is the geometrical interpretation of the transformation when 



32. The transformation 



where c is rational and &lt; c &lt; 1, transforms the circle | z \ = I into the boundary 
of a circular lune of angle ir/c. 



CHAPTER IV 

LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 

50. Functions of a positive integral variable. In 

Chapter II we discussed the notion of a function of a real 
variable x, and illustrated the discussion by a large number of 
examples of such functions. And the reader will remember that 
there was one important particular with regard to which the 
functions which we took as illustrations differed very widely. 
Some were defined for all values of x, some for rational values 
only, some for integral values only, and so on. 

Consider, for example, the following functions : (i) x, (ii) *Jx, (iii) the 
denominator of x, (iv) the square root of the product of the numerator and 
the denominator of #, (v) the largest prime factor of #, (vi) the product of 
fjx and the largest prime factor of x, (vii) the #th prime number, (viii) the 
height measured in inches of convict x in Dartmoor prison. 

Then the aggregates of values of x for which these functions are denned 
or, as we may say, the fields of definition of the functions, consist of (i) all 
values of #, (ii) all positive values of x, (iii) all rational values of x, (iv) all 
positive rational values of x, (v) all integral values of #, (vi), (vii) all positive 
integral values of #, (viii) a certain number of positive integral values of #, 
viz., 1, 2, ..., N) where N is the total number of convicts at Dartmoor at a 
given moment of time*, 

Now let us consider a function, such as (vii) above, which is 
defined for all positive integral values of x and no others. This 

* In the last case N depends on the time, and convict x, where x has a definite 
value, is a different individual at different moments of time. Thus if we take 
different moments of time into consideration we have a simple example of a 
function y = F (x, t) of two variables, defined for a certain range of values of t, viz. 
from the time of the establishment of Dartmoor prison to the time of its abandon 
ment, and for a certain number of positive integral values of x, this number 
varying with t. 



50, 51] FUNCTIONS OF A POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 107 

function may be regarded from two slightly different points of 
view. We may consider it, as has so far been our custom, as a 
function of the real variable x defined for some only of the values 
of x, viz. positive integral values, and say that for all other values 
of x the definition fails. Or we may leave values of x other 
than positive integral values entirely out of account, and regard 
our function as a function of the positive integral variable n, 
whose values are the positive integers 

1,2,3,4,.... 

In this case we may write 

y = &lt;/&gt; (n) 

and regard y now as a function of n defined for all values of n. 

It is obvious that any function of x defined for all values of x 
gives rise to a function of n defined for all values of n. Thus from 
the function y x^- we deduce the function y = n z by merely 
omitting from consideration all values of x other than positive 
integers, and the corresponding values of y. On the other hand 
from any function of n we can deduce any number of functions 
of x by merely assigning values to y, corresponding to values of x 
other than positive integral values, in any way we please. 

51. Interpolation. The problem of determining a function of x which 
shall assume, for all positive integral values of x, values agreeing with those 
of a given function of %, is of extreme importance in higher mathematics. 
It is called the problem of functional interpolation. 

Were the problem however merely that of finding some function of x to 
fulfil the condition stated, it would of course present no difficulty whatever. 
We could, as explained above, simply fill in the missing values as we pleased : 
we might indeed simply regard the given values of the function of n as all 
the values of the function of x and say that the definition of the latter 
function failed for all other values of x. But such purely theoretical solutions 
are obviously not what is usually wanted. What is usually wanted is some 
formula involving x (of as simple a kind as possible) which assumes the given 
values for # = 1, 2, .... 

In some cases, especially when the function of n is itself defined by a 
formula, there is an obvious solution. If for example y = &lt;$&gt; (n\ where (f) (n) 
is a function of n, such as n 2 or cos nir, which would have a meaning even 
were n not a positive integer, we naturally take our function of x to be 
y=*&lt;t&gt;(x). But even in this very simple case it is easy to write down other 
almost equally obvious solutions of the problem. For example 

y &lt;j&gt; (x} + sin xir 
assumes the value $ (n} for x = n, since sin ?i7r = 0, 



108 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 

In other cases (n) may be defined by a formula, such as ( l) n , which 
ceases to define for some values of x (as here in the case of fractional values 
of x with even denominators, or irrational values). But it may be possible 
to transform the formula in such a way that it does define for all values of 
x. In this case, for example, 

( !) = cos nir, 

if n is an integer, and the problem of interpolation is solved by the function 
cos xn. 

^T^\^- In other cases &lt;j&gt;(x) may be defined for some values of x other than 
jj^^ positive integers, but not for all. Thus from y=n n we are led to y_x x . 
This expression has a meaning for some only of the remaining values of x. 
If for simplicity we confine ourselves to positive values of #, then x* has 
a meaning for all rational values of #, in virtue of the definitions of 
fractional powers adopted in elementary algebra, j) But when x is irrational 
x* has (so far as we are in a position to say at the present moment) no 
meaning at all. Thus in this case the problem of interpolation at once 
leads us to consider the question of extending our definitions in such a 
way that of 6 shall have a meaning even when x is irrational. We shall see 
later on how the desired extension may be effected. 

Again, consider the case in which 

In this case there is no obvious formula in x which reduces to n ! for x=n, 
as x ! means nothing for values of x other than the positive integers. This 
is a case in which attempts to solve the problem of interpolation have led to 
important advances in mathematics. For mathematicians have succeeded 
in discovering a function (the Gamma-function) which possesses the desired 
property and many other interesting and important properties besides. 

52. Finite and infinite classes. Before we proceed further 
it is necessary to make a few remarks about certain ideas of an 
abstract and logical nature which are of constant occurrence in 
Pure Mathematics. 

In the first place, the reader is probably familiar with the 
notion of a class. It is unnecessary to discuss here any logical 
difficulties which may be involved in the notion of a class : 
roughly speaking we may say that a class is the aggregate or 
collection of all the entities or objects which possess a certain 
property, simple or complex. Thus we have the class of British 
subjects, or members of Parliament, or positive integers, or real 
numbers. 



51-53] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 109 

Moreover, the reader has probably an idea of what is meant 
by a finite or infinite class. Thus the class of British subjects 
is a finite class: the aggregate of all British subjects, past, 
present, and future, has a finite number n, though of course we 
cannot tell at present the actual value of n. The class of present 
British subjects, on the other hand, has a number n which could 
be ascertained by counting, were the methods of the census 
effective enough. 

On the other hand the class of positive integers is not finite 
but infinite. This may be expressed more precisely as follows. 
If n is any positive integer, such as 1000, 1,000,000 or any number 
we like to think of, then there are more than n positive integers. 
Thus, if the number we think of is 1,000,000, there are obviously 
at least 1,000,001 positive integers. Similarly the class of rational 
numbers, or of real numbers, is infinite. It is convenient to 
express this by saying that there are an infinite number of 
positive integers, or rational numbers, or real numbers. But the 
reader must be careful always to remember that by saying this 
we mean simply that the class in question has not a finite number 
of members such as 1000 or 1,000,000. 

53. Properties possessed by a function of n for large 
values of n. We may now return to the functions of n which we 
were discussing in 50 51. They have many points of difference 
from the functions of sc which we discussed in Chap. II. But there 
is one fundamental characteristic which the two classes of func 
tions have in common : the values of the variable for which they 
are defined form an infinite class. It is thisjact which forms the 
basis of all the considerations which follow and which, as we shall 
see in TEe next chapter, apply, mutatis mutandis, to functions of x 
as well. 

Suppose that &lt;j)(n) is any function of n, and that P is any 
property which &lt; (n) may or may not have, such as that of being 
a positive integer or of being greater than 1. Consider, for each 
of the values n 1, 2, 3, ..., whether &lt;f&gt;(n) has the property P or 
not. Then there are three possibilities: 

(a) (f&gt; (n) may have the property P for all values of n, or for 
all values of n except a finite number N of such values : 



110 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [IV 

(b) $ (n) may have the property for no values of n, or only for 
a finite number N of such values : 

(c) neither (a) nor (6) may be true. 

If (6) is true, the values of n for which &lt;&gt; (n) has the property 
form a finite class. If (a) is true, the values of n for which $ (n) 
has not the property form a finite class. In the third case neither 
class is finite. Let us consider some particular cases. 

(1) Let &lt; (ft) = ft, and let P be the property of being a positive integer. 
Then (n) has the property P for all values of n. 

If on the other hand P denotes the property of being a positive integer 
greater than or equal to 1000, then (p (n) has the property for all values of n 
except a finite number of values of ft, viz. 1, 2, 3, ..., 999. In either of 
these cases (a) is true. 

(2) If (ft) = ft, and P is the property of being less than 1000, then (6) is 
true. 

(3) If (ft) = ft, and P is the property of being odd, then (c) is true. For 
&lt; (n) is odd if n is odd and even if n is even, and both the odd and the even 
values of n form an infinite class. 

Example. Consider, in each of the following cases, whether (a), (6), or 
(c) is true : 

(i) $ (n) = n, P being the property of being a perfect square, 

(ii) $(ft)=&gt;n&gt; where p n denotes the ftth prime number, P being the 

property of being odd, 

&lt; (n)=p n , P being the property of being even, 
&lt; (n)=p n , P being the property $ (/&)&gt;, 
$ (n) = 1 - ( - 1) (I/ft), P being the property &lt; ()&lt;!, 
(n) = l - ( - l) n (I/ft), P being the property &lt;/&gt; (w)&lt;2, 
( vii) $ (ft) = 1000 (1 + ( - 1) 1 } /ft, P being the property $ (ft) &lt; 1, 
(viii) ^ (ft) = I/ft, P being the property $ (ft) &lt; -001, 
(ix) (ft) = ( - l) n /rc, P being the property | &lt;/&gt; (ft) | &lt; 001, 
(x) $(ft) = 10000/ft, or (-l) n 10000/?i, P being either of the properties 

&lt;(ft)&lt;-001 or | $ (n) | &lt; -001, 
(xi) (n)=(n- l)/(ft + l), P being the property l-0(ft)&lt;-0001. 

54. Let us now suppose that &lt;/&gt; (n) and P are such that the 
assertion (a) is true, i.e. that &lt;/&gt; (ft) has the property P, if not for 
all values of n, at any rate for all values of n except a finite 
number N of such values. We may denote these exceptional 
values by 

flj, W 2 , ..., Wjy. 

VM P r AU- cyO^r 



53, 54] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 111 

There is of course no reason why these N values should be the 
first N values 1, 2, ..., N, though, as the preceding examples 
show, this is frequently the case in practice. But whether this 
is so or not we know that &lt; (n) has the property P if n &gt; n N . 
Thus the nth prime is odd if n &gt; 2, n = 2 being the only exception 
to the statement; and l/n&lt; 001 if n &gt; 1000, the first 1000 values 
of n being the exceptions ; and 

1000 {1 + (- l)}/w&lt; 1 

if n &gt; 2000, the exceptional values being 2, 4, 6, ..., 2000. That 
is to say, in each of these cases the property is possessed for all 
values of n from a definite value onwards. 

We shall frequently express this by saying that $ (n) has the 
property for large, or very large, or all sufficiently large values of n. 
Thus when we say that &lt; (n) has the property P (which will as a 
rule be a property expressed by some relation of inequality) for 
large values of n, what we mean is that we can determine some 
definite number, ?? say, such that $ (n) has the property for all 
values of n greater than or equal to n . This number n , in the 
examples considered above, may be taken to be any number 
greater than n N , the greatest of the exceptional numbers : it is 
most natural to take it to be n N +l. 

Thus we may say that all large primes are odd , or that l/n is 
less than 001 for large values of n . And the reader must make 
himself familiar with the use of the word large in statements of 
this kind. Large is in fact a word which, standing by itself, has 
no more absolute meaning in mathematics than in the language 
of common life. It is a truism that in common life a number 
which is large in one connection is small in another ; 6 goals is a 
large score in a football match, but 6 runs is not a large score in a 
cricket match; and 400 runs is a large score, but 400 is not 
a large income : and so of course in mathematics large generally 
means large enough, and what is large enough for one purpose 
may not be large enough for another. 

We know now what is meant by the assertion (n) has the 
property P for large values of n . It is with assertions of this 
kind that we shall be concerned throughout this chapter. 



112 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [lV 

55. The phrase n tends to infinity . There is a some 
what different way of looking at the matter which it is natural to 
adopt. Suppose that n assumes successively the values 1, 2, 3, .... 
The word successively naturally suggests succession in time, and 
we may suppose n, if we like, to assume these values at successive 
moments of time (e.g. at the beginnings of successive seconds). 
Then as the seconds pass n gets larger and larger and there is 
no limit to the extent of its increase. However large a number 
we may think of (e.g. 2147483647), a time will come when n has 
become larger than this number. 

It is convenient to have a short phrase to express this unending 
growth of n, and we shall say that n tends to infinity, or n -&gt;- oo , 
this last symbol being usually employed as an abbreviation for 
infinity . The phrase tends to like the word successively 
naturally suggests the idea of change in time, and it is convenient 
to think of the variation of n as accomplished in time in the 
manner described above. This however is a mere matter of con 
venience. The variable n is a purely logical entity which has in 
itself nothing to do with time. 

The reader cannot too strongly impress upon himself that 
when we say that n tends to oo J we mean simply that n is 
supposed to assume a series of values which increase continually 
and without limit, There is no number infinity &gt;i such an 
equation as 

n oo 

is as it stands absolutely meaningless : n cannot be equal to oo , 
because ; equal to oo means nothing. So far in fact the symbol 
oo means nothing at all except in the one phrase tends to oo , 
the meaning of which we have explained above. Later on we 
shall learn how to attach a meaning to other phrases involving 
the symbol oo , bub the reader will always have to bear in mind 

(1) that oo by itself means nothing, although phrases con 
taining it sometimes mean something, 

(2) that in every case in which a phrase containing the 
symbol oo means something it will do so simply because we have 
previously attached a meaning to this particular phrase by means 
of a special definition. 



55, 56] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 113 

Now it is clear that if $ (n) has the property P for large values 
of n, and if n tends to oo , in the sense which we have just 
explained, then n will ultimately assume values large enough to 
ensure that $(n) has the property P. And so another way of 
putting the question what properties has &lt;f&gt;(n) for sufficiently 
large values of n ? is how does $ (n) behave as n tends to oo ? 

56. The behaviour of a function of n as n tends to 
infinity. We shall now proceed, in the light of the remarks 
made in the preceding sections, to consider the meaning of some 
kinds of statements which are perpetually occurring in higher 
mathematics. Let us consider, for example, the two following &gt; 
statements : (a) I/n is small for large values of n, (b) 1 (I/n) is 
nearly equal to I for large values of n. Obvious as they may 
seem, there is a good deal in them which will repay the reader s 
attention. Let us take (a) first, as being slightly the simpler. 

We have already considered the statement I/n is less than 01 
for large values of n . This, we saw, means that the inequality 
I /n &lt; 01 is true for all values of n greater than some definite 
value, in fact greater than 100. Similarly it is true that I/n is 
less than 0001 for large values of n : in fact l/n &lt; 0001 if 
n &gt; 10000. And instead of 01 or 0001 we might take 000001 or 
00000001, or indeed any positive number we like. 

It is obviously convenient to have some way of expressing the 
fact that any such statement as I/n is less than 01 for large 
values of n is true, when we substitute for 01 any smaller 
number, such as 0001 or 000001 or any other number we care 
to choose. And clearly we can do this by saying that however 
small 8 may be (provided of course it is positive), then I/n&lt;8 for 
sufficiently large values of n . That this is true is obvious. For 
I/n&lt; 8 if n&gt; 1/8, so that our sufficiently large values of n need j 
only all be greater than 1/8. The assertion is however a complex j 
one, in that it really stands for the whole class of assertions which 
we obtain by giving to 8 special values such as 01. And of course 
the smaller 8 is, and the larger 1/8, the larger must be the least of 
the sufficiently large values of n : values which are sufficiently 
large when 8 has one value are inadequate when it has a smaller. 

The last statement italicised is what is really meant by the 
statement (a), that I/ft is small when n is large. Similarly 
H. 8 



114 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [lV 

(b) really means "if &lt;/&gt;(ii) = l-(l/n), then the statement !-&lt; (?i) &lt; 8 
for sufficiently large values of n is true whatever positive value 
(such as *01 or 0001) we attribute to 8 ". That the statement (b) 
is true is obvious from the fact that 1 &lt; (n) = l/n. 

There is another way in which it is common to state the facts 
expressed by the assertions (a) and (b). This is suggested at once 
by 55. Instead of saying l/n is small for large values of n we 
say l/n tends to as n tends to oo . Similarly we say that 
1 (l/n) tends to 1 as n tends to oo : and these statements are 
to be regarded as precisely equivalent to (a) and (b). Thus the 
statements 

l/n is small when n is large , 

l/n tends to as n tends to oo , 
are equivalent to one another and to the more formal statement 

if 8 is any positive number, however small, then l/n &lt; B 
for sufficiently large values of n , 

or to the still more formal statement 

if 8 is any positive number, however small, then we can 
find a number n Q such that l/n&lt;8 for all values of n greater 
than or equal to n . 

The number ?i which occurs in the last statement is of course 
a function of 8. We shall sometimes emphasize this fact by 
writing ?i in the form n Q (8). 

The reader should imagine himself confronted by an opponent who 
questions the truth of the statement. He would name a series of numbers 
growing smaller and smaller. He might begin with -001. The reader would 
reply that l/?i&lt; 001 as soon as 72-&gt;1000. The opponent would be bound to 
admit this, but would try again with some smaller number, such as 0000001. 
The reader would reply that l/n&lt; -0000001 as soon as n&gt; 10000000: and so 
on. In this simple case it is evident that the reader would always have the 
better of the argument. 

We shall now introduce yet another way of expressing this 
property of the function l/n.~ We shall say that the limit of l/n 
as n tends to oo is , a statement which we may express symboli 
cally in the form 

lim - = 0, 



56, 57] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 115 

or simply lim (l/n) = 0. We shall also sometimes write 



as n -*- oo , which may be read l/n tends to as n tends to oo ; or 
simply l/n -* . In the same way we -shall write 

lim (l-iW, lim M --W, 
^oo \ n] \ n] 

or l-(l/n)-^l. 

57. Now let us consider a different example : let &lt;j)(n) ri*. 
Then n* is large when n is large . This statement is equivalent 
to the more formal statements 

if A is any positive number, however large, then n 2 &gt; A 
for sufficiently large values of n , 

we can find a number n (A) such that n 2 &gt; A for all values 
of n greater than or equal to n Q (A) . 

And it is natural in this case to say that n* tends to oo as n 
tends to oo , or ?i 2 tends to oo with n , and to write 



Finally consider the function &lt;(rc) = ?i 2 . In this case &lt;f&gt;(n) 
is large, but negative, when n is large, and we naturally say that 
* ri* tends to oo as n tends to oo and write 

_ W 2 -^ _ 00 . 

And the use of the symbol oo in this sense suggests that it 
will sometimes be convenient to write ?i 2 + oo for n 2 -* oo and 
generally to use + oo instead of oo , in order to secure greater 
uniformity of notation. 

But we must once more repeat that in all these statements 
the symbols oo , + oo , oo mean nothing whatever by themselves, 
and only acquire a meaning when they occur in certain special 
connectipns in virtue of the explanations which we have just 
given. 



116 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 

58. Definition of a limit. After the discussion which 
precedes the reader should be in a position to appreciate the 
general notion of a limit. Roughly we may say that &lt; (n) tends 
to a limit I as n tends to oo if &lt;/&gt; (n) is nearly equal to I when n is 
large. But although the meaning of this statement should be 
clear enough after the preceding explanations, it is not, as it 
stands, precise enough to serve as a strict mathematical definition. 

Ilt is, in fact, equivalent to a whole class of statements of the 
type for sufficiently large values of n, &lt;f&gt;(n) differs from I by less 
than 8 . This statement has to be true for 8 = 01 or *0001 or any 
positive number ; and for any such value of 8 it has to be true for 
any value of n. after a certain definite value n (8), though the 
smaller 8 is the larger, as a rule, will be this value n (8). 
We accordingly frame the following formal definition : 

DEFINITION I. The function &lt;f&gt; (n) is said to tend to the limit 
I as n tends to co , if, however small be the positive number 8, 
(f&gt; (n) differs from I by less than 8 for sufficiently large values of n ; 
that is to say if, however small be the positive number 8, we can 
determine a number ?? (8) corresponding to 8, such that (f&gt; (n) differs 
from I by less than 8 for all values of n greater than or equal to n Q (8). 

It is usual to denote the difference between c/&gt; (n) and I, taken 
positively, by | &lt;/&gt; (n) I . It is equal to &lt;f&gt; (n) I or to I &lt;f&gt; (n), 
whichever is positive, and agrees with the definition of the 
modulus of (/&gt; (n) - I, as given in Chap. Ill, though at present 
we are only considering real values, positive or negative. 

With this notation the definition may be stated more shortly 
as follows : if, given any positive number, 8, however small, we 
can find n (8) so that \ (f&gt; (n) I \ &lt; 8 when n j f w (8), then we say 
that c/&gt; (n) tends to the limit I as n tends to oo , and write 

lim &lt;/&gt; (n) = I . 

n-*-&lt;x&gt; 

Sometimes we may omit the *?&-*&lt; ; and sometimes it is convenient, for 
brevity, to write $ (ri)-*-l. 

The reader will find it instructive to work out, in a few simple cases, the 
explicit expression of n as a function of d. Thus if (x) = ljn then = 0, and 
the condition reduces to l/n&lt;d for n&gt;n Qt which is satisfied if w =l+[l/8J*. 
There is one and only one case in which the same n will do for all values of d. 

* Here and henceforward we shall use [#] in the sense of Chap. II, i.e. as the 



greatest integer not greater than x. 



&gt; 



58-60] 



POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 



117 



If, from a certain value JV of n onwards, &lt; (n) is constant, say equal to C, then 
it is evident that $ (n) (7=0 for n^N, so that the inequality \&lt;f)(n)-C\ &lt;8 
is satisfied for n&gt;.N and all positive values of d. And if | &lt;f)(n) l\ &lt;d for 
n&gt;.N and all positive values of S, then it is evident that &lt; (n)=l when n &gt;xV, 
so that $ (T&) is constant for all such values of n. 

59. The definition of a limit may be illustrated geometrically 
as follows. The graph of &lt; (?i) consists of a number of points 
corresponding to the values n = I, 2, 3, .... 

Draw the line y = I, and the parallel lines y I 8, y= 
at distance 8 from it. Then 

Km (j&gt; (n) = I, 



y=l-8 



Fig. 27. 

if, when once these lines have been drawn, no matter how close 
they may be together, we can always draw a line x = n 0t as in the 
figure, in such a way that the point of the graph on this line, and 
all points to the right of it, lie between them. We shall find 
this geometrical way of looking at our definition particularly 
useful when we come to deal with functions defined for all values 
of a real variable and not merely for positive integral values. 

60. So much for functions of n which tend to a limit as n 
tends to oo . .JVe must now frame corresponding definitions for 
functions which, iike the functions w 2 or ?i 2 , tend to positive or 
negative infinity. The reader should by now find no difficulty in 
appreciating the point of 

DEFINITION II. The function $(n) is said to tend t o + oo 
{positive infinity) ivith n, if, when any number A, however large, 
is assigned, we can determine n (A) so that &lt;p (n) &gt; A when n ^ n Q (A); 



118 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 

that is to say if, however large A may be, &lt;/&gt; (ri) &gt; A for sufficiently 
large values of n. 

Another, less precise, form of statement is if we can make 
&lt;/&gt; (n) as large as we please by sufficiently increasing n . This is 
open to the objection that it obscures a fundamental point, viz. 
thaT &lt;/&gt; (n) must be greater than A for all values of n such that 
n = n (A), and not merely for some such values. But there is no 
harm in using this form of expression if we are clear what it 
means. 

When &lt;f&gt; (n) tends to + oo we write 
(/&gt; (n) -* + oo . 

We may leave it to the reader to frame the corresponding 
definition for functions which tend to negative infinity. 

61. Some points concerning the definitions. The reader 
should be careful to observe the following points. 

(1) We may obviously alter the values of $(ft) for any 
finite number of values of n, in any way we please, without in 
the least affecting the behaviour of $ (n) as n tends to oo . For 
example l/n tends to as n tends to oo . We may deduce any 
number of new functions from l/n by altering a finite number of 
its values. For instance we may consider the function &lt;/&gt; (n) which 
is equal to 3 for n = l, 2, 7, 11, 101, 107, 109, 237 and equal to 
l/n for all other values of n. For this function, just as for the 
original function l/n, lim $ (n) = 0. Similarly, for the function 
&lt;/&gt; (n) which is equal to 3 if n = 1, 2, 7, 11, 101, 107, 109, 237, and 
to ft 2 otherwise, it is true that c/&gt; (n) -* + oo . 

(2) On the other hand we cannot as a rule alter an injutite 
number of the values of &lt;/&gt; (n) without affecting fundamentally its 
behaviour as n tends to oo . If for example we altered the function 
l/n by changing its value to 1 whenever n is a multiple of 100, 
it would no longer be true that lim &lt; (n) = 0. So long as a finite 
number of values only were affected we could always choose the 
number ?? of the definition so as to be greater than the greatest 
of the values of n for which &lt;/&gt; (n) was altered. In the examples 
above, for instance, we could always take n &gt; 237, and indeed we 
should be compelled to do so as soon as our imaginary opponent 



60, 61] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 119 

of 56 had assigned a value of S as small as 3 (in the first 
example) or a value of A as great as 3 (in the second). But 
now however large n Q may be there will be greater values of n for 
which &lt;j&gt; (n) has been altered. 

(3) In applying the test of Definition I it is of course 
absolutely essential that we should have | &lt;/&gt; (n) I &lt; 8 not merely 
when n = n but when n = n Q) i.e. for n and for all larger values 
of n. It is obvious, for example, that, if &lt;/&gt; (n) is the function last 
considered, then given S we can choose w so that \(f&gt;(n)\&lt;8 when 
n = n : we have only to choose a sufficiently large value of n 
which is not a multiple of 100. But, when n Q is thus chosen, it 
is not true that &lt;f&gt; (n) \ &lt; S when n ^ n : all the multiples of 100 
which are greater than ?? are exceptions to this statement. 

(4) If &lt;f&gt; (n) is always greater than I, we can replace 
\&lt;f&gt;(n) l\ by &lt;j&gt;(ri) I. Thus the test whether I/n tends to the 
limit as n tends to oo is simply whether ~L/n&lt;8 when n = ^ . - 
If however (/&gt; (n) = ( I) n /n, then I is again 0, but $(ri) l is some 
times positive and sometimes negative. In such a case we must 
state the condition in the form | &lt;/&gt; (n) I \ &lt; 8, for example, in 
this particular case, in the form | $ (n) \ &lt; 8. 

(5) The limit I may itself be one of the actual values of 
(f) (n). Thus if &lt;/&gt; (n) = for all values of n, it is obvious that 
lim (/&gt; (n) 0. Again, if we had, in (2) and (3) above, altered 
the value of the function, when n is a multiple of 100, to 
instead of to 1, we should have obtained a function &lt;f&gt; (n) which 
is equal to when n is a multiple of 100 and to I/n otherwise. 
The limit of this function as n tends to x is still obviously zero. I 
This limit is itself the value of the function for an infinite number 
of values of n, viz. all multiples of 100. 

On the other hand the limit itself need not (and in general will 
not) be the value of the function for any value of n. This is . 
sufficiently obvious in the case of &lt; (n) = 1/n. The limit is zero ; 
but the function is never equal to zero for. any value of n. 

The reader cannot impress these facts too strongly on his 
mind. A limit is not a value of the function : it is something 
quite distinct from these values, though it is defined by its relations 



LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 

to them and may possibly be equal to some of them. For the 
functions 

* = 0, 1, 
the limit is equal to all the values of &lt;/&gt; (n) : for 

&lt;fr(n) = l/n, (-l)/w, l + (l/w), 1 + {(-!) 
it is not equal to any value of &lt;/&gt; (w) : for 

&lt; (n) = (sin Jwr)/ra, 1 + {(sin J?wr)/7i} 

(whose limits as w tends to oo are easily seen to be and 1, since 
sin \n-7r is never numerically greater than 1) the limit is equal to 
the value which c/&gt; (n) assumes for all even values of n, but the 
values assumed for odd values of n are all different from the limit 
and from one another. 

(6) A function may be always numerically very large when 
n is very large without tending either to + oo or to - oo . A 
sufficient illustration of this is given by $ (n) = ( l) n n. A function 
can only tend to + oo or to - oo if, after a certain value of n, 
it maintains a constant sign. 

Examples XXIII. Consider the behaviour of the following functions 
of x as n tends to oo : 

1. &lt; (ri)=n k , where k is a positive or negative integer or rational fraction. 
If k is positive, then n k tends to + oo with n. If k is negative, then lim n k = 0. 
If k = 0, then n k = 1 for all values of n. Hence lim n k = I . 

The reader will find it instructive, even in so simple a case as this, to 
write down a formal proof that the conditions of our definitions are satisfied. 
Take for instance the case of &gt;0. Let A be any assigned number, however 
large. We wish to choose n so that n k &gt;& when n&gt;n . We have in fact only 
to take for n any number greater than #A. If e.g. &=4, then w 4 &gt; 10000 when 
rc&gt;ll, n*&gt; 100000000 when ft &gt; 101, and so on. 

2. &lt;fr(n)=p nt where p n is the nth prime number. If there were only 
a finite number of primes then (n) would be defined only for a finite number 
of values of n. There are however, as was first shown by Euclid, infinitely 
many primes. Euclid s proof is as follows. If there are only a finite 
number of primes, let them be 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, ... N. Consider the number 
1 + (1 .2.3.5.7.11 ... N}. This number is evidently not divisible by 
any of 2, 3, 5, ... N t since the remainder when it is divided by any of 
these numbers is 1. It is therefore not divisible by any prime save 1, and 
is therefore itself prime, which is contrary to our hypothesis. 

It is moreover obvious that (n)&gt;n for all values of n (save n = I, 2, 3). 
Hence (n) -* -f oo . 






61, 62] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 121 

3. Let (ft) be the number of primes less than ft. Here again &lt; (ft) --+ oo . 

4. (ft) = [aft], where a is any positive number. Here 

and so on ; and &lt;f&gt; (ft) -* + o . 

5. If (ft) = 1000000/ft, then lim &lt; (n) =0 : and if ^ (ri) = ft/1000000, then 
i/r (%)- -f oo . These conclusions are in no way affected by the fact that at first 
&lt;f&gt; (ft) is much larger than ^ (ft), being in fact larger until ft = 1000000. 

6. &lt; (ft) = l/{ft - ( - l) n }, ft - ( - 1), n{l-(- l) n }. The first function tends 
to 0, the second to + oo , the third does not tend either to a limit or to -f oo . 

7. &lt;(ft) = (sinft#7r)/ft, where 6 is any real number. Here \&lt;$&gt;(ri)\ &lt;l/ft, 
since sin nBir | &lt; 1, and lim $ (ft) = 0. 

8. (f) (ft) = (sin ft#7r)/ N /ft, (a cos 2 n6 + b sin 2 nff)ln t where a and 6 are any real 
numbers. 

9. $(ft) = sinft#7r. If B is integral then &lt;(ft) = for all values of ft, and 
therefore lim $ (ft) = 0. 

Next let 8 be rational, e.^. 6=plq, where p and &lt;? are positive integers. . 
Let n = aq + b where a is the quotient and b the remainder when n is divided 
by q. Then sin (npirlq) = ( l) ap sin (bptrjg), Suppose, for example, p even ; 
then, as n increases from to q 1, &lt; (ft) takes the values 

0, sin (jOTT/y), sin (2p7rlq\ ... sin {(y l^Tr/g). 

When ft increases from &lt;? to 2&lt;? - 1 these values are repeated ; and so also 
as ft goes from Zq to 3q 1, 3^ to 4^ 1, and so on. Thus the values of (ft) 
form a perpetual cyclic repetition of a finite series of different values. It is 
evident that when this is the case (ft) cannot tend to a limit, nor to + oo , 
nor to - oo , as n tends to infinity. 

The case in which 6 is irrational is a little more difficult. It is discussed 
in the next set of examples. 

62. Oscillating Functions. DEFINITION. When &lt;f&gt; (n) does 
not tend to a limit,, nor to + oo , nor to oo , as n tends to oo , we 
say that &lt;/&gt; (n) oscillates as n tends to oc . 

A function (f&gt;(n) certainly oscillates if its values form, as 
in the case considered in the last example above, a continual 
repetition of a cycle of values. But of course it may oscillate 
without possessing this peculiarity. Oscillation is denned in a 
purely negative manner : a function oscillates when it does not do 
certain other things. 



122 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [IV 

The simplest example of an oscillatory function is given by 

$(n) = (-!)", 

which is equal to + 1 when n is even and to 1 when n is odd. 
In this case the values recur cyclically. But consider 



the values of which are 
-1 + 1, l + (l/2), -l+(l/3), l + (l/4), -I + (1/5),.... 

When n is large every value is nearly equal to +1 or 1, and 
obviously &lt; (n) does not tend to a limit or to + oo or to co , and 
therefore it oscillates: but the values do not recur. It is to be 
observed that in this case every value of &lt;/&gt; (n) is numerically less 
than or equal to 3/2. Similarly 

(w) = (-!) 100 + (1000/w) 

oscillates. When n is large, every value is nearly equal to 100 
or to 100. The numerically greatest value is 900 (for n = l). 
But now consider &lt; (n) = (- l) ?l n, the values of which are - 1, 2, 
3, 4, 5, .... This function oscillates, for it does not tend to a 
limit, nor to + oo , nor to oo . And in this case we cannot assign 
any limit beyond which the numerical value of the terms does 
not rise. The distinction between these two examples suggests a 
further definition. 

DEFINITION. If &lt;f&gt; (n) oscillates as n tends to oo , then &lt;/&gt; (n) will 
be said to oscillate finitely or infinitely according as it is or is not 
possible to assign a number K such that all the values of $ (n) are 
numerically less than K, i.e. &lt;f&gt;(ri)\&lt; K for all values of n. 

These definitions, as well as those of 58 and 60, are further 
illustrated in the following examples. 

Examples XXIV. Consider the behaviour as n tends to oo of the 
following functions: 

1. (_i), 5 + 3(-l) tt , (1000000/-/0 + (-l) n , 1000000 (-!) + (Ijri). 
2. (-l) n n, 1000000 + (-l) n %. 

3. 1000000-%, ( -l) n ( 1000000 -?t). 

4. n {1 + ( - l) n ). In this case the values of (n) are 

0, 4, 0, 8, 0, 12, 0, 16, .... 

The odd terras are all zero and the even terms tend to +00: &lt; (n) 
oscillates infinitely. 



62] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 123 



5. ft 2 + ( I) n 2ft. The second term oscillates infinitely, but the first is 
very much larger than the second when n is large. In fact &lt; (ft) &gt; ft 2 - 2ft and 
ft 2 -2n=(ft-l) 2 -l is greater than any assigned value A if ft&gt;l + /v /(A + l). 
Thus $ (ft) -* -f- oo . It should be observed that in this case $(2&+l) is 
always less than &lt; (2&), so that the function progresses to infinity by a con 
tinual series of steps forwards and backwards. It does not however oscillate 
according to our definition of the term. 

7. sinft07r. We have already seen (Exs. xxm. 9) that &lt;(ft) oscillates 
finitely when 6 is rational, unless 6 is an integer, when &lt; (ft) = 0, &lt; (%)- 0. 

The case in which 6 is irrational is a little more difficult. But it is not 
difficult to see that &lt;f&gt;(n) sSll oscillates finitely. We can without loss of 
generality suppose 0&lt;0&lt;1. In the first place |(/&gt;(ft)|&lt;l. Hence &lt;j&gt;(ri) 
must oscillate finitely or tend to a limit. We shall consider whether the 
second alternative is really possible. Let us suppose that 

lim sin ndir = I. 

Then, however small 8 may be, we can choose ft so that sin ndrr lies between 
1-8 and l + d for all values of n greater than or equal to n Q . Hence 
sin (ft+1) 07T-sinft#7r is numerically less than 28 for all such values of ft, 
and so | sin07r cos (n + ^dn \&lt;8. 

Hence cos (ft + J) 6ir = cos ndir cos ^drr sin nQir sin B-rr 
must be numerically less than 8j \ sin -| 6ir |. Similarly 

cos (ft ^) 07r = cos ndrr cos | Bit + sin nOrr sin -| 6ir 

must be numerically less than 8/ \ sin \Bu \ \ and so each of cos nQ-rr cos \ BTT, 
sin ft#7r sin #?r must be numerically less than fi/ 1 sin #TT |. That is to say, 
cos nO-rr cos % ^?r is very small if n is large, and this can only be the case 
if cos ndn is very small. Similarly sin nQir must be very small, so that I 
must be zero. But it is impossible that cos ndrr and sin nBir can both be 
very small, as the sum of their squares is unity. Thus the hypothesis that 
sinft07r tends to a limit I is impossible, and therefore sin ndir oscillates 
as ft tends to oo. 

The reader should consider with particular care the argument 
cos nd-rr cos % BIT is very small, and this can only be the case if cos nQn 
is very small 5 . Why, he may ask, should it not be the other factor cos$#ir 
which is very small 5 ? The answer is to be found, of course, in the meaning 
of the phrase very^small as used in this connection. When we say (ft) 
is very smalf for large values of ft, we mean that we can choose ft so that 
&lt;(?i)"is numerically smaller than any assigned number, if n is sufficiently 
large. Such an assertion is palpably absurd when made of a fixed number 
such as cos#7r, which is not zero. 

Prove similarly that cos ndir oscillates finitely, unless 6 is an even integer. 

8. siiift#7r-h(lAO&gt; siiift^7r + l, sinft#7r + ft, ( l) n sin n6ir. 

9. a cosft$7T + 6 sin ^$77, sin 2 ft07r, a cos 2 nQir + b sin 2 n6n. 



124 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 



10. a + bn + (-I} n 

11. n sin ndn. If n is integral, then &lt;p (n)=Q, (w) -*(). If is rational 
but not integral, or irrational, then (ft) oscillates infinitely. 

12. 7i (acos 2 ft#7r + 6sin 2 ft$7r). In this case &lt;f)(n) tends to -f-oo if a and 
b are both positive, but to - GO if both are negative. Consider the special 
cases in which a=0, 6&gt;0, or a&gt;0, 6=0, or a=0, 6 = 0. If a and b have 
opposite signs &lt; (n) generally oscillates infinitely. Consider any excep 
tional cases. 

13. sin (ft 2 07r). If 6 is integral, then (ft)-^O. Otherwise &lt;f&gt;(ri) oscillates 
finitely, as may be shown by arguments similar to though more complex 
than those used in Exs. xxni. 9 and xxiv. 7*. 

14. sin (n ! BIT). If & has a rational value pfq, then n ! B is certainly 
integral for all values of n greater than or equal to q. Hence (n) -*-0. The 
case in which 6 is irrational cannot be dealt with without the aid of considera 
tions of a much more difficult character. 

15. cos (n ! 0?r), a cos 2 (n ! 6ir} + b sin 2 (n ! 0?r), where 6 is rational. 

16. an - [6ft], ( - l) n (&lt;m - [&&amp;gt;*]) 17. [ v /?0, ( - 1) B [vH V^ - [Jri\. 

18. 2%e smallest prime factor of n. When n is a prime, (n) n. When 
ft is even, (?i) = 2. Thus (ft) oscillates infinitely. 

19. The largest prime factor of n. 

20. The number of days in the year n A.D. 

Examples XXV. 1. If &lt;(^ + ao and ^(n)&gt;0(?i) for all values of 
n, then ^ (n) -* + oo . 

2. If (ra)-*-0, and | ^ (w) | &lt; | (w) | for all values of ?i, then ^ (i)-*0. 

3. If lim (n) \ = 0, then lim (w) = 0. 

4. If (ft) tends to a limit or oscillates finitely, and | A/A (11) \ &lt; | (?i) | when 
n&gt;,nQ, then ^(^) tends to a limit or oscillates finitely. 

5. If (H) tends to + GO , or to co , or oscillates infinitely, and 

f() !!.*&lt;*) I 

when %^w , then \^ (%) tends to + co or to -co or oscillates infinitely. 

6. * If (w) oscillates and, however great be n Ql we can find values of n 
greater than n for which \//- (ft) &gt; (ft), and values of n greater than n Q for 
which -^ (ft) &lt; (ft), then ^ (ft) oscillates . Is this true ? If not give an 
example to the contrary. 

7. If (n)-*-l as ft-*- co , then also (ft +&gt;)-, p being any fixed integer. 
[This follows at once from the definition. Similarly we see that if (ft) tends 
to + co or - co or oscillates so also does (n+p).~\ 

8. The same conclusions hold (except in the case of oscillation) if p varies 
with n but is always numerically less than a fixed positive integer ^V j or if p 
varies with n in any way, so long as it is always positive. 

* See Bromwich s Infinite Series, p. 485. % i^ \. t 

h 



62, 63] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 125 

9. Determine the least value of n Q for which it is true that 

(a) w 2 + 2ra&gt;999999 (ra&gt;w ), (6) n 2 + 27i&gt; 1000000 (w&gt;w ). 

10. Determine the least value of n Q for which it is true that 

(a) w + (-l) n &gt;1000 (rc&gt;Ho), (6) w + (-l)&gt; 1000000 (ra&gt;w ). 

11. Determine the least value of n Q for which it is true that 

(a) 2 +2&gt;A (n&gt;wo), (6) % + (-l) n &gt;A (ra&gt;w ), 

A being any positive number. 

[(a) 72 =[ V /(A + 1)]: (6) =1 + [A] or 2+ [A], according as [A] is odd or 
even, i.e. rc =l + [A] + |{l + (-l) [A] }.] 

12. Determine the least value of n Q such that 

(a) ^ 2 + l)&lt;-0001, (6) (l/^) + {(-l)y?i 2 }&lt;-00001, 
when n^n Q . [Let us take the latter case. In the first place 



and it is easy to see that the least value of % , such that (n+l)/n 2 &lt; -000001 
when w&gt;io, is 1000002. But the inequality given is satisfied by = 1000001, 
and this is the value of w required.] 

63. Some general theorems with regard to limits. 
A. The behaviour of the sum of two functions whose 
behaviour is known. 

THEOREM I. If $ (ri) and ^ (n) tend to limits a, b, then 
(f&gt; (n) + ^r (n) tends to the limit a + b. 

This is almost obvious*. The argument which the reader will 

* There is a certain ambiguity in this phrase which the reader will do well to 
notice. When one says such and such a theorem is almost obvious one may 
mean one or other of two things. One may mean it is difficult to doubt the truth 
of the theorem , the theorem is such as common-sense instinctively accepts , as 
it accepts, for example, the truth of the propositions 2 + 2 = 4 or the base-angles 
of an isosceles triangle are equal . That a theorem is obvious in this sense does 
not prove that it is true, since the most confident of the intuitive judgments of 
common sense are often found to be mistaken; and even if the theorem is true, 
the fact that it is also obvious is no reason for not proving it, if a proof can be 
found. The object of mathematics is to prove that certain premises imply certain 
conclusions; and the fact that the conclusions may be as obvious as the premises 
never detracts from the necessity, and often not even from the interest of the proof. 

But sometimes (as for example here) we mean by this is almost obvious 
something quite different from this. We mean a moment s reflection should not 
only convince the reader of the truth of what is stated, but should also suggest to 
him the general lines of a rigorous proof. And often, when a statement is 
obvious in this sense, one may well omit the proof, not because the proof is in 
any sense unnecessary, but because it is a waste of time and space to state in detail 
what the reader can easily supply for himself. 



7 



126 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 

at once form in his mind is roughly this : when n is large, &lt; (n) is 
nearly equal to a and ty (n) to b, and therefore their sum is nearly 
equal to a + b . It is well to state the argument quite formally, 
however. 

Let S be any assigned positive number (e.g. 001, 0000001, ...). 
We require to show that a number n can be found such that 

|(w) + f (n)-a-b &lt;S .................. (1), 

when n = n . Now by a proposition proved in Chap.^III (more 
generally indeed than we need here) the modulus of the sum of 
two numbers is less than or equal to the sum of their moduli. 
Thus 



It follows that the desired condition will certainly be satisfied -if 
n can be so chosen that 

\$(n)-a\ + \1r(n)-b &lt;S ............... (2), 

when nn Q . But this is certainly the case. For since lim &lt;/&gt;(n) = a 
we can, by the definition of a limit, find ?? x so that j $ (n) a \ &lt; B 
when n ^ n 1} and this however small B may be. Nothing prevents 
our taking 8 = S, so that | &lt;f&gt; (n) -a &lt; JS when n^n lt Similarly 
we can find n 2 so that | ty (n) - b \ &lt; ^8 when n^n 2 . Now take ?i 
to be the greater of the two numbers n i} n 2 . Then &lt; (n) a &lt; JS 
and | ^]r (n) b \ &lt; ^B when n = n , and therefore (2) is satisfied and 
the theorem is proved. 

The argument may be concisely stated thus: since lim$(?i) = a and 
lim \//- (ft) = 6, we can choose %, n 2 so that 

!$()- I &lt;J* (*i), I *(*)-& I &lt;J* (nnji 
and then, if n is not less than either HI or n 2 , * 



and therefore lim (^ (n) + ^ (n}} = a+b. 

64. Results subsidiary to Theorem I. The reader should 
have no difficulty in verifying the following subsidiary results. 

1. If &lt;/&gt; (n) tends to a limit, but ty (n) tends to + &lt;x&gt; or to oo 
or oscillates finitely or infinitely, then &lt;/&gt; (n) + ty (n) behaves like 
*&lt;n&gt; 

2. // (/&gt; (n) -^ + oo , and ^ (n) -+ + oo or oscillates finitely, 
then &lt;/&gt; (n) + -fy (n) -^ + GO . 



63, 64] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 127 

In this statement we may obviously change 4- oo into oo 
throughout. 

3. If &lt;f&gt; (n) -* oo and ^ (n) - oo , then &lt;/&gt; (n) 4- ^ (n) may 
ter^a 1 either to a limit or to + oo or o oo or may oscillate either 
finitely or infinitely. *-&gt; * *j "^5 ejOA* ^vj (TKSU. * - 

These ^ve^possibilities are illustrated in order by (i) &lt;(n)=?i, ^f(n}= n, 
(ii) &lt;()=*, ^(n)-n, (iii) &lt; (n) = n, +(n) = -n\ (iv) 0( w )- + (-l), 
^ (n) =n, (v) (%) = n 2 + ( l) n n, ^ (w) = - n 2 . The reader should construct j 
additional examples of each case. 

4. If &lt;p (n) -* 4- oo and ty (n) oscillates infinitely, then 
&lt; (n) + -/r (n) may tend to + oo or oscillate infinitely, but cannot 
tend to a limit, or to oo , or oscillate finitely. 

For \^ (n) = {$ (?i) + ^ (n)} - (w) ; and, if (%) + ^r(w) behaved in any of the 
three last ways, it would follow, from the previous results, that \//&gt; (n) -*- oo , 
which is not the case. As examples of the two cases which are possible, 
consider (i) &lt;t&gt;(n) = n\ ty(n) = (-\} n n, (ii) (j)(n) = n, ^-(n) = (-l) n n 2 . Here 
again the signs of + oo and GO may be permuted throughout. 

5. // &lt; (n) and ty (n) both oscillate finitely, then &lt;f&gt; (n) + ty (n) 
must tend to a limit or oscillate finitely. 

As examples take 

(i) 4&gt;M = (-m *() = (- 1)" +1 , (ii) *(*) = *() = (-!). 

6. If (j) (n) oscillates finitely, and ^r (n) infinitely, then 
&lt;t&gt;(n) + i{r (n) oscillates infinitely. 

For (n) is in absolute value always less than a certain constant, say K. 
On the other hand ^ (n), since it oscillates infinitely, must assume values 
numerically greater than any assignable number (e.g. 10/T, 100^, ...). Hence 
(f)(n)+^(n) must assume values numerically greater than any assignable 
number (e.g. 9^, 99#, ...). Hence &lt; (n)+^(ri) must either tend to +00 or 
- oo or oscillate infinitely. But if it tended to + oo then 



would also tend to +00 , in virtue of the preceding results. Thus (n)+ ^ (n} 
cannot tend to +00, nor, for similar reasons, to -co: hence it oscillates 
infinitely. 

7. If both &lt; (n) and ^r (n) oscillate infinitely, then (j)(n) + ^ (n) 
may tend to a limit, or to + oo , or to oo , or oscillate either finitely 
or infinitely. 

Suppose, for instance, that (%) = ( l) n n, while \js(n) is in turn each of 
the functions (-l) + 1 w, {l + (-l) w + 1 } n, -{l + (-l)"}n, (- l) n + 1 (w+l), 
( l) n n. We thus obtain examples of all five possibilities. 



128 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 

The results 1 7 cover all the cases which are really distinct. 
Before passing on to consider the product of two functions, we 
may point out that the result of Theorem I may be immediately 
extended to the sum of three or more functions which tend to 
limits as n -* co . 

65. B. The behaviour of the product of two functions 
whose behaviour is known. We can now prove a similar 
set of theorems concerning the product of two functions. The 
principal result is the following. 

THEOREM II. If Km &lt; (n) = a and Km ty (n) = b, then 

Km (j) (n) "v/r (n) = ab. 

Let (f&gt; (n) = + &lt;/&gt;! (n), ^(n) = b + ^ l (n\ 

so that Km fa (n) = and Km ^ (n) = 0. Then 

$ (n) ty (n) = ab + a^ (n) + bfa (n) + fa (n) fa (n). 

Hence the numerical value of the difference &lt;/&gt; (n) ty (n) ab is 
certainly not greater than the sum of the numerical values of 
a fa (n), bfa (n) } fa (n) fa (n). From this it follows that 

Km { $ O) ^ (n) - ab} = 0, 
which proves the theorem. 

The following is a strictly formal proof. We have 

!&lt;()* (*) - ab I = I a ^ (*) i + I b( t&gt;i ()! + ! & (*0 1 1 *i ( % ) I 

Assuming that neither a nor b is zero, we may choose n Q so that 



when n &gt;w . Then 



which is certainly less than 5 if 8 &lt; % \ a \b\. That is to say we can choose 
HQ so that | (n) ^(n) ab\&lt;8 when n&gt;n , and so the theorem follows. The 
reader should supply a proof for the case in which at least one of a and b is 
zero. 

We need hardly point out that this theorem, like Theorem I, 
may be immediately extended to the product of any number of 
functions of n. There is also a series of subsidiary theorems 
concerning products analogous to those stated in 64 for sums. 
We must distinguish now six different ways in which &lt;/&gt; (n) may 
behave as n tends to oo . It may (1) tend to a limit other than 






64-66] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 129 

zero, (2) tend to zero, (3a) tend to + oo , (36) tend to - oc , 
(4) oscillate finitely, (5) oscillate infinitely. It is not necessary, as 
a rule, to take account separately of (3a) and (36), as the results 
for one case may be deduced from those for the other by a change 
of sign. 

To state these subsidiary theorems at length would occupy, more space 
than we can afford. We select the two which follow as examples, leaving the 
verification of them to the reader. He will find it an instructive exercise to I 
formulate some of the remaining theorems himself. 

(i) If (n) -a- + QO and ^ (ri) oscillates finitely, then &lt; (ii) ^ (ri) must tend 
to + oo or to oo or oscillate infinitely. 

Examples of these three possibilities may be obtained by taking (ri) to 
be n and \^ (ri) to be one of the three functions 2 + ( - l) n , 2 - ( - l) n , ( - l) w . 

(ii) If &lt;f&gt;(ii) and ty(ri) oscillate finitely, then &lt;f&gt; (ri) ty(ri) must tend to a 
limit (which may be zero] or oscillate finitely. 

For examples, take (a] $ (ri) = + (n) = ( - 1), ^ 0( n ) = i + (_i) 
V^(w) = l-(-l) n , and (c) 0(w) = cosi7i7r, ^(ri) = am$nir. 

A particular case of Theorem II which is important is that \ 
in which ty (n) is constant. The theorem then asserts simply 
that lim k&lt;f) (n) = kci if lim $ (n) = a. To this we may join the 
subsidiary theorem that if &lt;f&gt;(ri)-*-+ao then k(f)(n)-++ao or 
k &lt;f) (ri) -*- - GO , according as k is positive or negative, unless k = 0, 
when of course &&amp;lt; (n) = for all values of n and lim k$ (n) = 0. 
And if $ (n) oscillates finitely or infinitely, then so does k&lt;f&gt; (n), 
unless k = 0. 

66. C. The behaviour of the difference or quotient of 
two functions whose behaviour is known. There is, of 
course, a similar set of theorems for the difference of two given 
functions, which are obvious corollaries from what precedes. In 
order to deal with the quotient 



we begin with the following theorem. 

THEOREM III. If lim (n) = a, and a is not zero, then 
r 1 1 

lim -j-r-T- = - . 

&lt;t&gt; (n) a 
Let (n) = a+ fa (n), 

H. 



130 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 

so that lim fa (n) = 0. Then 

J__l = | .() | 

(n) a | a \ j a + fa (n) \ 

and it is plain, since lim fa (n) = 0, that we can choose n Q so that 
this is smaller than any assigned number 8 when n = n . 

From Theorems II and III we can at once deduce the principal 
theorem for quotients, viz. 

THEOREM IV. If lim &lt;f&gt; (n) a and lim -fy (n) b, and b is not 
zero, then 



The reader will again find it instructive to formulate, prove, 
and illustrate by examples some of the subsidiary theorems 
corresponding to Theorems III and IV. 

67. THEOREM V. IfR{&lt;!&gt; (n), ^ (n), % (n), ...} is any rational 
function o/ &lt;(??), ^r (n), %(^), ... , i.e. any function oftJteform 

P {&lt;/&gt; (n), + (n), X (n), . . . }/Q [&lt;#&gt; (n), + (n), x (n), ...}, 
where P and Q denote polynomials in &lt;f&gt; (n), i|r (n), % (n), ...: and if 

lim &lt;j) (n) = a, lim \|r (n) = b, lim % (n) c, ... , 
and Q(a, b, c, ...)=j=0; 

then lim R {&lt;f&gt; (ri), ^ (n), % (n), . . .} = R (a, b, c, . . .). 

For P is a sum of a finite number of terms of the type 



where A is a constant and p, q, ... positive integers. This term, 
by Theorem II (or rather by its obvious extension to the product 
of any number of functions) tends to the limit fia p b q ..., and so P 
tends to the limit P (a, b. c, ...), by the similar extension of 
Theorem I. Similarly Q tends to Q (a, b, c, ...); and the result 
then follows from Theorem IV. 

68. The preceding general theorem may be applied to the 
following very important particular problem : what is the behaviour 
of the most general rational function of n, viz. 
Q ^_ 

~ 
as n tends to oc * ? 

* We naturally suppose that neither a nor & is zero. 



66-69] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 131 

In order to apply the theorem we transform S (n) by writing 
it in the form 



The function in curly brackets is of the form . JR [&lt;f&gt; (n)} , where 
0(n)=l/w, and therefore tends, as n tends to oo , to the limit 
R (0) = a /b . Now m,*-*-*- if p &lt; q ; n p-* = 1 and w ?-?-*- 1 if 
p = q ; and n*-?-*. + oo if p &gt; q. Hence, by Theorem II, 
lim 8 (n) = (p &lt; 5), 



S (n) - + oo (p&gt;q, a /b positive), 
S (n) -*- co (p&gt; q, do/bo negative). 
Examples XXVI. 1. What is the behaviour of the functions 



n+l 

as n-*~x&gt;l 

2. Which (if any) of the functions 



(w cos 2 ^w TT +sin 2 ^nir}l{n (cos^^mr + n sin 2 |WTT)} 
tend to a limit as n -- oo ? 

3. Denoting by (w) the general rational function of n considered above, 
show that in all cases 



, 
8(n) S(ri) 

69. Functions of n which increase steadily with n. A 

special but particularlyjimportant class of functions of n is formed 
by those whose variation as n tends to oo is always in the same 
direction, that is to say those which always increase (or always 
decrease) as n increases. Since - $ (n) always increases if &lt;f&gt; (n) 
always decreases, it is not necessary to consider the two kinds of 
functions separately; for theorems proved for one kind can at 
once be extended to the other. 

DEFINITION. The function &lt;/&gt; (n) mil be said to increase steadily 
with n if $ (n + 1) ^ $ (n) for all values of n. 

92 



132 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 

It is to be observed that we do not exclude the case in which 
&lt;/&gt; (n) has the same value for several values of n ; all we exclude is 
possible decrease. Thus the function 



whose values for n 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, ... are 

1,1,5,5,9,9,... 

is said to increase steadily with n. Our definition would indeed 
include even functions which remain constant from some value of n 
^ ^onwards; thus &lt;(n) = 1 steadily increases according to our definition. 
However, as these functions are extremely special ones, and as 
there can be no doubt as to their behaviour as n tends to oo , this 
apparent incongruity in the definition is not a serious defect. 

There is one exceedingly important theorem concerning 
functions of this class. 

THEOREM. // c/&gt; (n) steadily increases with n, then either 
(i) (j&gt; (n) tends to a limit as n tends to oo , or (ii) &lt; (n) -* + oo . ^ 

That is to say, while there are in general ^^alternatives as to 
the behaviour of a function, there are two only for this special 
kind of function. A 

This theorem is a simple corollary of Dedekind s Theorem 
(17). We divide the real numbers f into two classes L and R, 
putting f in L or R according as &lt;/&gt; (n) ^ f for some value of n 
(and so of course for all greater values), or &lt; (n) &lt; f for all 
values of n. 

The class L certainly exists; the class R may or may not. 
If it does not, then, given any number A, however large, &lt;/&gt; (n) &gt; A 
for all sufficiently large values of n, and so 

$ (n) -* + oo . 

If on the other hand R exists, the classes L and R form a 
section of the real numbers in the sense of 17. Let a be the 
number corresponding to the section, and let 8 be any positive 
number. Then &lt; (n) &lt; a + 8 for all values of n, and so, since 8 is 
arbitrary, $ (?i) ^ a. On the other hand $ (n) &gt; a 8 for some 
value of n, and so for all sufficiently large values. Thus 

a 8 &lt; &lt;j) (n) ^ a 



V\V&gt;f C 



69, 70] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 133 

for all sufficiently large values of n ; i.e. 

&lt; (n) + a. 

It should be observed that in general (n) &lt; a for all values of n ; for if 
&lt; (n) is equal to a for any value of n it must be equal to a for all greater 
values of n. Thus &lt; (n) can never be equal to a except in the case in which 
the values of $ (n) are ultimately all the same. If this is so, a is the largest 
member of L ; otherwise L has no largest member. 

COR. 1. If (f&gt; (n) increases steadily ivith n, then it will tend to a 
limit or to + oo according as it is or is not possible to find a number 
K such that $ (n) &lt; K for all values of n. v^c TWt Ut )%? (Wtv\ ^ 

We shall find this corollary exceedingly useful later on. ^ 

COR. 2. If (f&gt; (n) increases steadily with n, and &lt;f&gt; (n) &lt; K for 
all values of n, then $ (n) tends to a limit and this limit is less than 
or equal to K. 

It should be noticed that the limit may be equal to K : if e.g. 
&lt;f&gt; (n) = 3 (1/ri), then every value of &lt; (n) is less than 3, but the 
limit is equal to 3. 

COR. 3. If(f&gt; (n) increases steadily with n, and tends to a limit, 
then 

&lt;f&gt; (n) lim (f&gt; (n) 
for all values ofn. 

The reader should write out for himself the corresponding 
theorems and corollaries for the case in which cf&gt; (n) decreases as n 
increases. 

70. The great importance of these theorems lies in the fact 
that they give us (what we have so far been without) a means of 
deciding, in a great many cases, whether a given function of n 
does or does not tend to a limit as n -* oc , without requiring us to 
be able to guess or otherwise infer beforehand what the limitjis.__ If / 
we know what the limit, if there is one, must be, we can use the 
test 

| (/&gt; (n) - I &lt; 8 (n n ) : 

as for example in the case of (n) = 1/n, where it is obvious that 
the limit can only be zero. But suppose we have to determine 
whether 



134 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 

tends to a limit. In this case it is not obvious what the limit, if 
there is one, will be : and it is evident that the test above, which 
involves I, cannot be used, at any rate directly, to decide whether 
I exists or not. 

Of course the test can sometimes be used indirectly, to prove by means of 
a reductio ad absurdum that I cannot exist. If e.g. &lt;f&gt;(n} = (- l) w , it is clear 
that I would have to be equal to 1 and also equal to - 1, which is obviously 
impossible. 

71. Alternative proof of Weierstrass s Theorem of 19. The results 
of 69 enable us to give an alternative proof of the important theorem 
proved in 19. 

If we divide PQ into two equal parts, one at least of them must contain 
infinitely many points of S. We select the one which does, or, if both do, we 
select the left-hand half ; and we denote the selected half by P 1 Q^ (Fig. 28). 
If PQi is the left-hand half, P l is the same point as P. 



PI 


T 


QI 


p P 2 




Q 2 Q 



Fig. 28. 

Similarly, if we divide P\Q\ into two halves, one at least of them must 
contain infinitely many points of S. We select the half P 2 $ 2 which does so, 
or, if both do so, we select the left-hand half. Proceeding in this way we can 
define a sequence of intervals 

PQ, PI&, P a Q 2t PA, .-, 

each of which is a half of its predecessor, and each of which contains infinitely 
many points of S. 

The points P, P 1? P 2 , ... progress steadily from left to right, and so P n 
tends to a limiting position T. Similarly Q n tends to a limiting position T . 
But TT is plainly less than P n Q n , whatever the value ofn; and P n Q n , being 
equal to P$/2 n , tends to zero. Hence T coincides with T, and P n and Q n 
both tend to T. 

Then T is a point of accumulation of S. For suppose that is its 
coordinate, and consider any interval of the type (| d, +8). If n 
is sufficiently large, P n Q n will lie entirely inside this interval*. Hence 
(-$&gt; + $) contains infinitely many points of S. 

72. The limit of oc n as n tends to oo . Let us apply the 

results of 69 to the particularly important case in which 

$ (n) = x n . If x = 1 then $ (n) = 1, lim $ (n) = 1, and if x = then 

&lt;f)(n) = Q, lim (tt)=0, so that these special cases need not detain us. 

* This will certainly be the case as soon as PQj2 n &lt; 6. 



70-72] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 135 



First, suppose x positive. Then, since &lt;f&gt; (n + 1) = x&lt;p (n), (/&gt; (n) 
increases with n if x &gt; 1, decreases as n increases if x &lt; 1. 

If x &gt; 1, then x n must tend either to a limit (which must 
obviously be greater than 1) or to +00. Suppose it tends to a 
limit 1. Then Km &lt; (n + 1) = lim cf&gt; (n) = I, by Exs. xxv. 7 ; but 

lim &lt;f&gt; (n + 1) = lim x&lt;f&gt; (n) = x lim &lt; (n) xl, 

and therefore l=xl: and as x and are both greater than 1, this 
is impossible. Hence 

x n _^ _j_ QQ (#&gt; 1 ). 

Example. The reader may give an alternative proof, showing by the 
binomial theorem that x n &gt;l + n8 if 8 is positive and #=l + d, and so that 



x n -*- + oo . 

On the other hand x n is a decreasing function if x &lt; 1, and 
must therefore tend to a limit or to oo . Since x n is positive 
the second alternative may be ignored. Thus lim x n = I, say, and 
as above I = xl, so that I must be zero. Hence 



Example. Prove as in the preceding example that (l/#) n tends to + oo if 
, and deduce that x n tends to 0. 



We have finally to consider the case in which x is negative. 
If 1 &lt; x &lt; and x = y, so that &lt; y &lt; 1, then it follows from 
what precedes that lim y n = and therefore lim x n = 0. If x = 1 
it is obvious that x n oscillates, taking the values 1, 1 alterna 
tively. Finally if x &lt; 1, and x y, so that y &gt; 1, then y n tends 
to + x , and therefore x n takes values, both positive and negative, 
numerically greater than any assigned number. Hence x n oscillates 
infinitely. To sum up : 

&lt; (?i) = # n -- + oo (x &gt; 1), 

lim (n) = 1 (x = 1), 

lim (n) = (- 1 &lt; x &lt; 1), 

&lt;/&gt; (n) oscillates finitely (x 1), 

&lt;/&gt; (n) oscillates infinitely (x &lt; 1). 

Examples XXVII*. 1. If &lt; (n) is positive and (f)(n+I)&gt;K&lt;J&gt; (n), where 
K &gt;1, for all values of ?i, then (n) -*~+ oo . 

* These examples are particularly important and several of them will be made \ 
use of later in the text. They should therefore be studied very carefully. 



136 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [lV 



[For &lt;}&gt; (n)&gt; A&gt; (n-V) &gt;K 2 &lt;f&gt; (n - 2) ... &gt;A^~i &lt; (1), 

from which the conclusion follows at once, as AT n --oo .] 

2. The same result is true if the conditions above stated are satisfied 
only when ?i&gt;?? . 

3. If (j&gt;(ri) is positive and &lt; (?i + l)&lt;/f0(w), where 0&lt;K&lt;1, then 
lim (w) = 0. This result also is true if the conditions are satisfied only when 
n^n . 

4. If \&lt;f&gt;(n + l)\&lt;K\(j&gt;(n) when n&gt;n , and 0&lt;A"&lt;1, then lim &lt;j&gt;(n) = Q. 

5. If&lt;f&gt;(n} is positive and \im{&lt;f)(n + l}}/{(j)(n)} = l&gt;l, then (ft) -- + oo . 
[For we can determine n Q so that {$ (7? + !)}/{&lt; (ri)}&gt;K&gt;l when %&gt;w : we 

may, e.g., take A" half-way between 1 and 1. Now apply Ex. L] 

6. If lim {&lt;f&gt;(n + !)}/{&lt; (n)} = l, where I is numerically less than unity, 
then lim&lt;j)(n) 0. [This follows from Ex. 4 as Ex. 5 follows from Ex. 1.] 

7. Determine the behaviour, as ?i-^oc, of $(n}=ri x n , where r is any 
positive integer. 

[If #=0 then &lt;j)(n) = Q for all values of n, and &lt; (?I)H.O. In all other cases 






First suppose # positive. Then &lt;(?*)-* + oo if o?&gt;l (Ex. 5) and 0(w)-*-0 if 
#&lt;1 (Ex. 6). If #=1, then (%)=7i r -*-+oo . Next suppose x negative. 
Then | $(ri) \=n r \ x \ n tends to +00 if |#|&gt;1 and to if |^|&lt;1. Hence 
^ (n) oscillates infinitely if #&lt;- 1 and cf&gt; (n)-*0 if - 1&lt;^&lt;0.] 

8. Discuss n~ T x n in the same way. [The results are the same, except 
that &lt;(w)-0 when x=\ or 1.] 

9. Draw up a table to show how n k x n behaves as n -*- oo , for all real 
values of #, and all positive and negative integral values of L 

[The reader will observe that the value of k is immaterial except in the 
special cases when #=1 or -1. Since lim {(n + l)/n} k =I, whether Tc be 
positive or negative, the limit of the ratio $ (rc + 1 )/$(%) depends only on 
A , and the behaviour of (n) is in general dominated by the factor x n . The 
factor n* only asserts itself when x is numerically equal to 1.] 

10. Prove that if x is positive then $x+\ astt-*-co . [Suppose, e.g., x&gt;\. 
Then #, Jx t $x, ... is a decreasing sequence, and $x&gt;\ for all values of n. 
Thus $x+l, where ?&gt;1. But if Z&gt;1 we can find values of n, as large as 
we please, for which $x&gt;l or x&gt;l n ; and, since "-*- + &lt; as w-*-oo, this 
is impossible.] 

11. tfn-*l. [For n + \f(n + l)&lt;Vn if (w + l)&lt;ra + 1 or \l + (l/n)} n &lt;n, 
which is certainly satisfied if ?i&gt;3 (see 73 for a proof). Thus #n decreases 
as n increases from 3 onwards, and, as it is always greater than unity, it tends 
to a limit which is greater than or equal to unity. But if $n-*l t where &gt;1, 
then n&gt;l n , which is certainly untrue for sufficiently large values of n, 
since l n ln-*- + ao with n (Exs. 7, 8).] 



72, 73] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 137 

12. $(n !)- + 00 . [However large A may be, n ! &gt; A n if n is large enough. 
For if u n = A. n /n\ then n + 1 /w n =A/(ft+l), which tends to zero as ?i-*oo, so 
that u n does the same (Ex. 6).] 

13. Show that if - 1&lt; x &lt; I then 

ra(m-l) ... (m n+l) n __fm\ , 

Un= ~~ ^* 



tends to zero as w-*-oo . 

[If m is a positive integer, W B for n &gt; m. Otherwise 



unless #8=0.] 

(l\ n 
1 + - ) . A more difficult problem which 
/ 

can be solved by the help of 69 arises when &lt;j&gt;(ri) = {1 + l/n} n . 
It follows from the binomial theorem* that 



j , i , , 

" 1 " ^ 



1.2 n 2 1.2. .. 



The (j9 + l)th term in this expression, viz. 



is positive and an increasing function of n, and the number 

of terms also increases with n. Hence ( 1 + ) increases with n, 

\ ft/ 

and so tends to a limit or to + oo , as n -*~ oo . 
But 

1\ 1 1 



(&gt;+j) 



+... 



1.21.2.3 1.2. 3. ..7i 



f 1\ 

Thus ( 1 + - ) cannot tend to + x , and so 
\ n/ 



(l\ n 
1 + - ) = Q 
n) 

where e is a number such that 2 &lt; e ^ 3. 

* The binomial theorem for a positive integral exponent, which is what is used 
here, is a theorem of elementary algebra. The other cases of the theorem belong 
to the theory of infinite series, and will be considered later. 



138 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [lV 

74. Some algebraical lemmas. It will be convenient to prove at 
this stage a number of elementary inequalities which will be useful to us 
later on. 

(i) It is evident that if a&gt;l and r is a positive integer then 



Multiplying both sides of this inequality by a- 1, we obtain 

TLVu ( \fcfl ra r (a-l)&gt;a r -l , 

and adding r(a r - 1) to each side, and dividing by r (r+ 1), we obtain 



Similarly we can prove that 

r + l _r 

(2). 



It follows that if r and s are positive integers, and r&gt;s, then 

o-l 0.-1 l-f &lt; l-f 
r s r s 

Here 0&lt;/3&lt;l&lt;a. In particular, when 5=1, we have 

0) ..................... (4). 



(ii) The inequalities (3) and (4) have been proved on the supposition 
that r and s are positive integers. But it is easy to see that they hold under 
the more general hypothesis that r and s are any positive rational numbers. 
Let us consider, for example, the first of the inequalities (3). Let r=a/b, 
s=c/d, where a, 6, c, d are positive integers; so that ad&gt;bc. If we put 
a=y M , the inequality takes the form 



and this we have proved already. The same argument applies to the re 
maining inequalities ; and it can evidently be proved in a similar manner that 

a -K^o-l), l-j8-&gt;(l-/3) *1 ................... (5), 

if s is a positive rational number less than 1. 

(iii) In what follows it is to be understood that all the letters denote 
positive numbers, that r and s are rational, and that a and r are greater 
than 1, and s less than 1. Writing 1//3 for a, and I/a for /3, in (4), we 
obtain 

rf-Kfar-i (-!), l-^^- a-^) ............... (6). 

Similarly, from (5), we deduce 

a-l&gt;Sa- 1 (a-l), 1 - /S^S/S 8 " 1 (1 -/3) ............... (7). 

Combining (4) and (6), we see that 

ra r - l (a-l)&gt;a r -I&gt;r(a-I) ........................ (8). 



74, 75] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 139 

Writing x\y for a, we obtain 



(x-y} ..................... (9) 

if x&gt;y&gt;Q. And the same argument, applied to (5) and (7), leads to 

*- (x-y}&lt;x*-y*&lt;sy&gt;-i (x-y] .................. (10). 

Examples XXVIII. 1. Verify (9) for r=2, 3, and (10) for s=, $. 

2. Show that (9) and (10) are also true if y&gt;x&gt;0. 

3. Show that (9) also holds for r&lt;0. [See Chrystal s Algebra, vol. ii, 
pp. 4345.] 

4. If &lt;(w)-W, where l&gt;0, as n-*-oo, then $ fc -*Z fc , & being any rational 
number. &lt;\ rf^Y^&lt;* ^u- &lt;^&gt;* / -&gt;^" 

[We may suppose that &&amp;gt;0, in virtue of Theorem III of 66; and that 
^l &lt; &lt; &lt; 2, as is certainly the case from a certain value of n onwards. If 



or /- ( 

according as &lt;&gt;2 or &lt;&lt;. It follows that the ratio of | &lt;* Z*| and | ?| 
lies between & (^) fc-1 and * (20*" 1 . The proof is similar when &lt;k &lt;1. The 
result is still true when =0, if k &gt; 0.] 

5. Extend the results of Exs. xxvu. 7, 8, 9 to the case in which r or k 
are any rational numbers. 

75. The limit of n ($x - 1). If in the first inequality (3) of 74 we 
put r =!/(-!), s = l/n, we see that 



when a&gt;l. Thus if &lt;f&gt;(n) = n (#a- 1) then () decreases steadily as n in 
creases. Also (%) is always positive. Hence (n) tends to a limit Z as 
-* , and &gt;0. |^&gt; t | "i s 

Again if, in the first inequality (7) of 74, we put s = ljn t we obtain 



Thus l&gt;l -(l/a)&gt;0. Hence, if a&gt;l, we have 
lim *U/a -!)=/(&lt;), 

--00 

where /(a)&gt;0. 

Next suppose /3&lt;1, and let /3 = I/a ; then n (#/3 - 1) = - n (^fa - l)/#a. Now 
w/a-l)-^/(a), and (Exs. xxvn. 10) 

/v/a--l. 
Hence, if /3 = l/a&lt;l, we have 

n(^-l)^-/( a ). 
Finally, if # = 1, then w (^- 1) = for all values of w. 



140 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [IV 

Thus we arrive at the result : the limit 

lim?i(^-l) 

defines a function of x for all positive values of x. This function f (x} possesses 
the properties 

and is positive or negative according as x&gt; 1 or x &lt; 1. Later on we shall be 
able to identify this function with the Napierian logarithm of x 
Example. Prove that / (xy) =/(# ) +/ (y). [Use the equations 

76. Infinite Series. Suppose that.w(w) is any function of 
n defined for all values of n. If we add up the values of u(v) 
for v = 1, 2, . . . n, we obtain another function of n, viz. 

8(n) = u(I)+u(Z) + ... + u (n), 

also defined for all values of n. It is generally most convenient 
to alter our notation slightly and write this equation in the form 
s n = u 1 + u. 2 + ... +u n , 

n 

or, more shortly, s n = 2 u v . 

If now we suppose that s n tends to a limit s when n tends 
to oo , we have 

n 

lim 2 u v = s. 
This equation is usually written in one of the forms 

00 

the dots denoting the indefinite continuance of the series of u s. 

The meaning of the above equations, expressed roughly, is 
that by adding more and more of the us together we get nearer 
and nearer to the limit s. More precisely, if any small positive 
number & is chosen, we can choose n (S) so that the sum of the first 
n (8) terms, or any of greater number of terms, lies between s S 
and s + & ) or in symbols 

s S &lt; s n &lt; s + 8, 
if n = n (8). In these circumstances we shall call the series 

a convergent infinite series, and we shall call s the sum of the 

series, or the sum of all the terms of the series. 



75-77] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 141 

Thus to say that the series u l + u z + ... converges and has the 
sum s, or converges to the sum s or simply converges to s, is merely 
another way of stating that the sum s n = u + u 2 + + u n of the 
first n terms tends to the limit s as n -* oo , and the consideration 
of such infinite series introduces no new ideas beyond those with 
which the early part of this chapter should^already have made 
the reader familiar. In fact the sum s n is merely a function $ (n), 
such as we have been considering, expressed in a particular form. 
Any function &lt;f&gt; (n) may be expressed in this form, by writing 
4&gt; (n) = (!) + ft (2) - (1)} + ... + ft (n) -&lt;f&gt;(n- I)} ; 
and it is sometimes convenient to say that &lt;/&gt; (n) converges (instead 
of tends ) to the limit I, say, as n -&gt; oo . 

If s n -- + oo or s n -* oo , we shall say that the series u 1 -}-u 2 + ... 
is divergent or diverges to + 00, or oo , as the case may be. 
These phrases too may be applied to any function &lt;/&gt; (n) : thus if 
(j)(n) -*~+ &lt;& we may say that (/&gt; (n) diverges to + oo . If s n does 
not tend to a limit or to + oo or to oo , then it oscillates finitely or 
infinitely : in this case we say that the series u l +u 2 + ... oscillates 
finitely or infinitely*. 

77. General theorems concerning infinite series. When 
we are dealing with infinite series we shall constantly have 
occasion to use the following general theorems. 

(1) If Wj + t&jH-... is convergent, and has the sum s, then 
a + Ul -f u z + ... is convergent and has the sum a + s. Similarly 
-}-^ 2 4-... is convergent and has the sum 



(2) If w 1 + M 2 +... is convergent and has the sum s, then 
w-jn+i + w TO+2 -f . . . is convergent and has the sum 

s u 1 u 2 ... u m . 

(3) If any series considered in (1) or (2) diverges or oscillates, 
then so do the others. 

(4) If ^ 1 + u 2 + . . . is convergent and has the sum s, then 
kut + ku 2 + ... is convergent and has the sum ks. 

* The reader should be warned that the words divergent and oscillatory 
are used differently by different writers. The use of the words here agrees with 
that of Bromwich s Infinite Series. In Hobson s Theory of Functions of a Eeal 
Variable a series is said to oscillate only if it oscillates finitely, series which 
oscillate infinitely being classed as divergent . Many foreign writers use divergent 
as meaning merely not convergent . 



LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 

(5) If the first series considered in (4) diverges or oscillates, 
then so does the second, unless k 0. 

(6) ^ If Wj + u 2 + . . . and v l + v 2 + . . . are both convergent, then 
the series (u, + vj + (u 2 + v z ) + . . . is convergent and its sum is the 
sum of the first two series. 

All these theorems are almost obvious and may be proved at 
once from the definitions or by applying the results of 6366 to 
the sum * = Wj + w, + . . . + 1^. Those which, follow are of a some 
what different character. 

(7) Ifui+u 2 +... is convergent, then lim u n = 0. 

For u n = s n -s n - lt and s n and s n _i have the same limit s. 
Hence lim u n s s = 0. 

The reader may be tempted to think that the converse of the theorem is 
true and that if lim w n =0 then the series 2w n must be convergent. That this 
is not the case is easily seen from an example. Let the series be 



so that u n =lfn. The sum of the first four terms is 



The sum of the next four terms is i+ + ^ + .i.&gt;|=.| ; the sum of the next 
eight terms is greater than &=4, and so on. The sum of the first 

terms is greater than 



and this increases beyond all limit with n : hence the series diverges to + oo . 

(8) If Uj_ + u 2 + u 3 + . . . is convergent, then so is any series 
formed by grouping the terms in brackets in any way to form new 
single terms, and the sums of the two series are the same. 

The reader will be able to supply the proof of this theorem. Here again 
the converse is not true. Thus 1-1 + 1-1 + .. . oscillates, while 



or + + 0+ ... converges to 0. 

(9) If every term u n is positive (or zero), then the series 2w n 
must either converge or diverge to + oo . If it converges, Ms sum 
must be positive (unless all the terms are zero, when of course its 
sum is zero). 

For s n is an increasing function of n, according to the definition 
of 69, and we can apply the results of that section to s n . 



77, 78] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 143 

(10) // every term u n is positive (or zero), then the necessary 
and sufficient condition that the series 2w n should be convergent is 
that it should be possible to find a number K such that the sum of 
any number of terms is less than K; and, if K can be so found, then 
the sum of the series is not greater than K. 

This also follows at once from 69. It is perhaps hardly 
necessary to point out that the theorem is not true if the condition 
that every u n is positive is not fulfilled. For example 

1-1+1-1+.. . 
obviously oscillates, s n being alternately equal to 1 and to 0. 

(11) If u + u 2 + . . ., v l + v 2 + . . are two series of positive (or 
zero) terms, and the second series is convergent, and if u n ^ Kv ny 
where K is a constant, for all values of n, then the first series is also 
convergent, and its sum is less than or equal to that of the second. 

For if v l + v 2 + . . . = t then v l + v 2 + . . . + v n t for all values of 
n, and so ?^ + u 2 + . . . + u n ^ Kt ; which proves the theorem. 

Conversely, if %u n is divergent, and v n ^ Ku nt then 2v n is 
divergent. 

78. The infinite geometrical series. We shall now con 
sider the geometrical series, whose general term is u n = r n ~ l . In 
this case 



except in the special case in which r = 1, when 

s n = l + 1 + ... + 1 =n. 

In the last case s n -* + oo . In the general case s n will tend to a 
limit if and only if r n does so. Referring to the results of 72 
we see that the series 1 + r + ?- 2 + . . . is convergent and has the sum 
1/(1 r) if and only ifI&lt;r&lt; 1. 

If r = 1, then s n = n, and so s n -*- + oo ; i.e. the series diverges to 
+ oo . If r = 1, then s n 1 or s n = according as n is odd or 
even : i.e. s n oscillates finitely. If r &lt; 1, then s n oscillates infinitely. 
Thus, to sum up, the series 1 + r + r 2 + . . . diverges to + oo ifr^l, 
converges to 1/(1 r) if 1 &lt; r &lt; 1, oscillates finitely if r = 1, 
and oscillates infinitely ifr&lt; 1. 

Examples XXIX. 1. Recurring decimals. The commonest example 
of an infinite geometric series is given by an ordinary recurring decimal. 



1 



144 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 

Consider, for example, the decimal -21713 This stands, according tcrtne 
ordinary rules of arithmetic, for 

_2_ J_ 7 1 _3_ J^ _3_ _ 217, I?. //i 1 \_ 2687 
10 "*" 10 2 "*" 103 + 10 4 + 1Q6 T i 6 T i 7 + ~ 1000 + 10 5 / \ 10 2 / ~ 12375 

The reader should consider where and how any of the general theorems of 
77 have been used in this reduction. 

2. Show that in general 



...... (N/ r v -L 4 -* 

the denominator containing n 9 s and m O s. r ( p r L ^ 

3. Show that a pure recurring decimal is always equal to a proper 

fraction whose denominator does not contain 2 or 5 as a factor. 

ljfZ\ 

4. A decimal with m non-recurring and n recurring decimal figures is 

equal to a proper fraction whose denominator is divisible by 2 m or 5 m but by 
no higher power of either. 

5. The converses of Exs. 3, 4 are also true. Let r=p[q, and suppose first 
that q is prime to 10. If we divide all powers of 10 by q we can obtain at most 
q different remainders. It is therefore possible to find two numbers n^ and 
% 2 , where n 2 &gt;n 1} such that 10 Wl and 10 rl2 give the same remainder. Hence 
10 n - 10 %2 = 10" 2 (10 Wl - W2 - 1) is divisible by q, and so 10"- 1, where %=w 1 -w 2 , 
is divisible by q. Hence r may be expressed in the form Pj(lO n 1), or in the 
form \ 

t : trtr-l ^ P ^ P 

t^-.^y w + w* + -&gt; 

i.e. as a pure recurring decimal with, n figures. If on the other hand q = 2 a 5^ Q, 
where Q is prime to 10, and m is the greater of a and /3, then 10 m r has a de- A - 
nominator prime to 10, and is therefore expressible as the sum of an integer 
and a pure recurring decimal. But this is not true of 10 M r, for any value of 
p. less than m ; hence the decimal for r has exactly m non-recurring figures. 

6. To the results of Exs. 25 we must add that of Ex. i. 3. Finally, if k, 
we observe that ^ 

999 _ 

= !0 + 10~ 2 + 103 + " 

we see that every terminating decimal can also be expressed as a mixed 
recurring decimal whose recurring part is composed entirely of 9 s. For 
example, 21 7 = 2 169. Thus every proper fraction can be expressed as a 
recurring decimal, and conversely. 

7. Decimals in general. The expression of irrational numbers as 
non-recurring decimals. Any decimal, whether recurring or not, corresponds 
to a definite number between and 1. For the decimal 1 a 2 34... stands 
for the series 



78] POSITIVE INTEGKAL VARIABLE 145 

Since all the digits a r are positive, the sum s n of the first n terms of this 
series increases with n, and it is certainly not greater than -9 or 1. Hence 
5 n tends to a limit between and 1. 

Moreover no two decimals can correspond to the same number (except in 
the special case noticed in Ex. 6). For suppose that 1 a 2 3 ..., -b^b z ... are 
two decimals which agree as far as the figures a r _ 1? b r _ ly while a r &gt;b r . 
&gt;b r + I&gt;b r b r + l b r + 2 ... (unless 6 r + 1 , b r + 2 , ... are all 9V), and so 



It follows that the expression of a rational fraction as a recurring decimal 
(Exs. 26) is unique. It also follows that every decimal which does not 
recur represents some irrational number between and 1. Conversely, any- 
such number can be expressed as such a decimal. For it must lie in one of 
the intervals 

0, 1/10; 1/10, 2/10; ... ; 9/10, 1. 

If it lies between r/10 and (/ + 1)/10, then the first figure is r. By subdividing 
this interval into 10 parts we can determine the second figure; and so on. 
But (Exs. 3, 4) the decimal cannot recur. Thus, for example, the decimal 
1-414..., obtained by the ordinary process for the extraction of /2, cannot 



recur. 



8. The decimals 1010010001000010... and 2020020002000020..., in 
which the number of zeros between two 1 s or 2 s increases by one at each 
stage, represent irrational numbers. 

9. The decimal 11101010001010..., in which the nth figure is 1 if n is 
prime, and zero, otherwise, represents an irrational number. [Since the 
number of primes is infinite the decimal does not terminate. Nor can it 
recur: for if it did we could determine m and p so that m, m+p, m + 2p, 
m+3p, ... are all prime numbers ; and this is absurd, since the series includes 
m + mp.]* 

Examples XXX. 1. The series r m + r m + 1 + ...is convergent if - 1 &lt; r &lt; 1 
and its sum is l/(l-r)-l-r- ... -a-"*- 1 ( 77, (2)). 



2. The series r + r + i+ ... is convergent if - 1&lt; r &lt; 1, and its sum is 
1*1(1 - r) ( 77, (4)). Verify that the results of Exs. 1 and 2 are in agreement. 

3. Prove that the series 1 + 2r+2r+ ... is convergent, and that its sum 
is (l+r)/(l-r), (a) by writing it in the form -l + 2(l+r+r 2 + ...), (/3) by 
writing^ in the form 1 +2 (r + r*+ ...), ( y ) by adding the two series 
l+r + -; &lt;2 + ..., r +r 2 +.... In each case mention which of the theorems of 
77 are used in your proof. 

* All the results of Exs. xxix may be extended, with suitable modifications, to 
decimals in any scale of notation, for a fuller discussion see Bromwich, Infinite \ 
Series, Appendix I. 

H - 10 



146 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 

4. Prove that the arithmetic series 



is always divergent, unless both a and b are zero. Show that, if b is not 
zero, the series diverges to +00 or to -co according to the sign of b } while if 
6=0 it diverges to +00 or - oo according to the sign of a. 

5. What is the sum of the series 

(1 - r) + (r - r 2 ) + (? 2 -?-)+... 

when the series is convergent ? [The series converges only if - l&lt;r^l. Its 
sum is 1, except when r=l, when its sum is 0.] 

r z r z 

6. Sum the series ?- 2 + ^ + /, , 2 x 2 + .... [The series is always con 

vergent. Its sum is 1 4-r 2 , except when r=0, when its sum is 0.] 

7. If we assume that 1 4- r 4- r 2 + . . . is convergent then we can prove that its 
sum is 1/(1 -r) by means of 77, (1) and (4). For if l + r+r 2 + ... =s then 



S. Sum the series r+ 



when it is convergent. [The series is convergent if -l&lt;l/(l+r)&lt;l, i.e. if 
r&lt; - 2 or if r&gt;0, and its sum is 1 4-r. It is also convergent when r=0, when 
its sum is 0.] 

9. Answer the same question for the series 

r r r r 



~ 



10. Consider the convergence of the series 



and find their sums when they are convergent. 

11. If 0&lt;a&lt;l then the series a + air+a 2 r 2 + ... is convergent for 
0^r&lt;l, and its sum is not greater than l/(l-r). 

12. If in addition the series a Q + i + 2 + . .. is convergent, then the series 
ao _l_ air + a2r 2_|__ i s convergent for 0&lt;r&lt;l, and its sum is not greater than 
the lesser of a -f i + a 2 + ... and l/(l-r). 

13. The series 1 + 1 + 1~"2 + 1 2 3 + &gt; " 
is convergent. [For 1/(1 . 2 . . . n) &lt; 1 /2 n ~ l .] 



*7&&amp;gt; 79] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 147 

14. The series 

1 + lT2 + 1.2.3.4 + - l + l7273 + 1.2.3.475 + - 

are convergent. 

15. The general harmonic series 



where a and 6 are positive, diverges to 4- oo . 

,[Fartvl/(0+*ft)&gt;l/{ft(a+()}. Now compare with 
1G. Show that the series 



is convergent if and only if u n tends to a limit as n 



17. If ! + w 2 + 3 + ... is divergent then so is any series formed by 
grouping the terms in brackets in any way to form new single terms. 

18. Any series, formed by taking a selection of the terms of a convergent 
series of positive terms, is itself convergent. 

79. The representation of functions of a continuous 
real variable by means of limits. In the preceding sections 
we have frequently been concerned with limits such as 

lim $ n 0), 

-*) 

and series such as 

tfi (0) + u 2 (as) + ... = lim {^ (x) + u z (a) + ... + u n ()}, 

W-&gt; oo 

in which the function of n whose limit we are seeking involves, 
besides n, another variable x. In such cases the limit is of course 
a function of x. Thus in 75 we encountered the function 

f(x) = lim n (\/x 1): 

n-*-oo 

and the sum of the geometrical series 1 + x + # 2 + . . . is a function 
of x, viz. the function which is equal to 1 /(I x) if 1 &lt; x &lt; 1 and 
is undefined for all other values of x. 

Many of the apparently arbitrary or unnatural functions 
considered in Ch. II are capable of a simple representation of this 
kind, as will appear from the following examples. 

102 



148 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 

Examples XXXI. 1. &lt;$&gt; n (x) = x. Here n does not appear at all in the 
expression of &lt; n (#), and &lt;p (#) = lim &lt;f) n (x} x for all values of x. 

2. &lt; (x) = x/n. Here &lt; (x) = lim &lt;f) n (x} = for all values of x. 

3. &lt;p n (x} = nx. If # &gt;0, $ n (#)-*- + co ; if #&lt;0, (f&gt; n (x)-*--cc : only when 
4 =0has &lt;j&gt; n (x) a limit (viz. 0) as TI^OO. Thus ((#) = when # = and is 
not denned for any other value of x. 

4. &lt;&gt; n x = Inx, nx 



5. $ n (x} = x\ Here &lt;(ff) = 0, (-!&lt;#&lt;!); &lt;(#) = !, (#=1); and (a?) 
is not denned for any other value of x. 

6. &lt;(#) = #"(!-#). Here &lt;(#) differs from the &lt;j&gt;(x) of Ex. 5 in that 
it has the value when x l. 

7. (J) n (x) = x/n. Here &lt;/&gt; (#) differs from the &lt; (a?) of Ex. 6 in that it has 
the value when x= l as well as when # = 1. 

8. &lt;k(*0 = a"/(a + l). [0(^) = 0,(-l&lt;^&lt;l);^Cr) = ^(^=l);0Gr) = l, 
(#&lt; 1 or x&gt;I) , and 0(a?) is not denned when x= 1.] 

9. n (^)=^/(^-l), l/(^+l), !/(- 1), l/(s"+or), l/("-o?-). 

10. n (^) = (^ n -l)/(^ n + l), (w^ n -l)/(^ n -fl), (a? -%)/( +w). [In the 
first case ^(a?) = l when |a?|&gt;l, 0(^)=-l when |a?|&lt;l, (f&gt;(x) = when o?=l 
and ^&gt; (x) is not denned when x= l. The second and third functions differ 
from the first in that they are defined both when #=1 and when x 1 : the 
second has the value 1 and the third the value - 1 for both these values of x.~] 

11. Construct an example in which &lt;(#) = !, (|#|&gt;1); ^&gt; (*)= !, 

and &lt;(#) = (), (x=l and = -1). 



12. ^ n (a7) = *{(o*-l)/( a +l)} a , /(A* + 

13. B (a;) = {"/(a7) + flr(^)}/(+l). [Here &lt;#&gt; (x)=f (x\ (\ x \ &gt; 1) ; 
0(*)-^(*X (I*I&lt;1)J ^ W-itfW+^^Bi (^=1); ^d (a?) is undefined 
when x= 1.] 

14. &lt;^&gt; n (a;) = (2/Tr) arc tan (ra?). [^ (x) = 1, (^ &gt; 0) &lt;; (.r) = 0, (o?= 0) ; 
(jb(^)= 1, (#&lt;0). This function is important in the Theory of Numbers,, 
and is usually denoted by sgn x.] 

15. (j) n (x) = smnzir. [0(^) = when x is an integer; and &lt;(#) is 
otherwise undefined (Ex. xxiv. 7).] 

16. If &lt;(#) = sin (n!#7r) then ^&gt;(o?) = 0for all rational values of x (Ex. 
xxiv. 14). [The consideration of irrational values presents greater difficulties.] 

17. &lt;(.) = (cos 2 #71- ) n . [&lt;(#) = except when x is integral, when 

$M-W 

18. If ^Y &gt; 1752 then the number of days in the year JV A.D. is 

lim (365 + (cos 2 JMr ) n - (cos 2 ^N*Y + ( cos2 4 iu^"-)"}- 



79-81] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 149 

80. The bounds of a bounded aggregate. Let S be any system or 
aggregate of real numbers s. If there is a number K such that s&lt;K for 
every s of , we say that S is bounded above. If there is a number k such that 
s &gt; for every s, we say that S is bounded below. If S is both bounded above 
and bounded below, we say simply that S is boulided. 

Suppose first that S is bounded above (but not necessarily below). There 
will be an infinity of numbers which possess the property possessed by K ; 
any number greater than K, for example, possesses it. We shall prove that 
among these numbers there is a least*, which we shall call M. This number J/ 
is not exceeded by any member of S, but every number less than M is exceeded 
by at least one member of S. 

We divide the real numbers into two classes L and R, putting into L or 
R according as it is or is not exceeded by members of S. Then every belongs 
to one and one only of the classes L and R. Each class exists ; for any 
number less than any member of S belongs to L, while K belongs to R. 
Finally, any member of L is less than some member of S, and therefore less 
than any member of R. Thus the three conditions of Dedekind s Theorem 
( 17) are satisfied, and there is a number M dividing the classes. 

The number M is the number whose existence we had to prove. In the 
first place, M cannot be exceeded by any member of S. For if there were such 
a member s of /S, we could write *= Af+rj, where rj is positive. The number 
Af+fa would then belong to Z, because it is less than s, and to R, because it is 
greater than M\ and this is impossible. On the other hand, any number less 
than M belongs to Z, and is therefore exceeded by at least one member of S. 
Thus M has all the properties required. 

This number M we call the upper bound of S, and we may enunciate the 
following theorem. Any aggregate S which is bounded above has an upper 
bound M. No member of S exceeds M ; but any number less than M is exceeded 
by at least one member of S. 

In exactly the same way we can prove the corresponding theorem for an 
aggregate bounded below (but not necessarily above). Any aggregate S which 
is bounded below has a lower bound m. No member of S is less than m ; but 
there is at least one member of S which is less than any number greater than m. 

It will be observed that, when S is bounded above, M&lt; K, and when S is 
bounded below, m &gt; k. When S is bounded, k &lt; m &lt; M &lt; K. 

81. The bounds of a bounded function. Suppose that &lt; (ri) is a func 
tion of the positive integral variable n. The aggregate of all the values $ (n) 
defines a set S, to which we may apply all the arguments of 80. If S is 
bounded above, or bounded below, or bounded, we say that &lt; (n) is bounded 

* An infinite aggregate of numbers does not necessarily possess a least member. 
The set consisting of the numbers 

ill l 

2 3 " n 1 " 

for example, has no least member. 



150 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 

above, or bounded below, or bounded. If (71) is bounded above, that is to 
say if there is a number K such that &lt;p (n) ^ K for all values of n, then there 
is a number M such that 

(i) $ (n) ^ M for all values of n ; 

(ii) if 8 is any positive number then $ (n) &gt; M- 
This number M we call the upper bound of 
bounded below, that is to say if there is a number k such that $ (n) 
values of , then there is a number m such that 

(i) &lt;p (n) ^ m for all values of n ; 

{ii) if 8 is any positive number then $ (n) &lt; m + 8for at least one value of n. 
This number m we call the lower bound of &lt; (n}. 

If K exists, M&lt;K; if k exists, m &gt;&; and if both k and K exist then 




82. The limits of indetermination of a bounded function. Suppose ( \ ( 
that (n) is a bounded function, and M and m its upper and lower bounds. 
Let us take any real number |, and consider now the relations of inequality 
which may hold between and the values assumed by cf&gt; (n) for large values 
of n. There are three mutually exclusive possibilities : 

(1) &gt;(p(n) for all sufficiently large values of n; 

(2) ^ (j) (n) for all sufficiently large values of n ; 

(3) &lt;&lt;(ft) for an infinity of values of n, and also &gt;&lt;(ft) for an 
infinity of values of n. 

In case (1) we shall say that is a superior number, in case (2) that it is 
an inferior number, and in case (3) that it is an intermediate number. It is 
plain that no superior number can be less than m, and no inferior number 
greater than M. 

Let us consider the aggregate of all superior numbers. It is bounded 
below, since none of its members are less than m, and has therefore a lower 
bound, which we shall denote by A. Similarly the aggregate of inferior 
numbers has an upper bound, which we denote by X. 

We call A and X respectively the upper and lower limits of indetermination 
of $ (n) as n tends to infinity ; and write 

A=lim &lt;(%), X = lim$(7i). 
These numbers have the following properties : 

(1) wi&lt;X&lt;A^J/"; 

(2) A and X are the upper and lower bounds of the aggregate of intermediate 
numbers, if any such exist ; 

(3) if 8 is any positive numbej, then &lt; (n) &lt; A + 8 for all sufficiently large 
values of n, and $ (n) &gt; A 8 for an infinity of values of n ; 

(4) similarly (n) &gt; X - 8 for all sufficiently large values of n, and 
() &lt; X + 8 for an infinity of values of n ; 



81, 82] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 151 

(5) the necessary and sufficient condition that &lt; (ti) should tend to a limit 
is that A=X, and in this case the limit is I, the common value of X and A. 

Of these properties, (1) is an immediate consequence of the definitions ; 
and we can prove (2) as follows. If A=X = , there can be at most one inter 
mediate number, viz. I, and there is nothing to prove. Suppose then that 
A &gt; X. Any intermediate number is less than any superior and greater than 
any inferior number, so that X ^ | &lt; A. But if X &lt; &lt; A then must be 
intermediate, since it is plainly neither superior nor inferior. Hence there are 
intermediate numbers as near as we please to either X or A. 

To prove (3) we observe that A + 5 is superior and A-d intermediate or 
inferior. The result is then an immediate consequence of the definitions ; and 
the proof of (4) is substantially the same. 

Finally (5) may be proved as follows. If A = X = , then 



for every positive value of 8 and all sufficiently large values of ft, so that 
(ft) -&gt;. l. Conversely, if $ (ri) -* I, then the inequalities above written hold 
for all sufficiently large values of n. Hence I - d is inferior and l + d superior, 
so that 



and therefore A X &lt; 2& As A X ^ 0, this can only be true if A = X. 

Examples XXXII. 1. Neither A nor X is affected by any alteration in 
any finite number of values of &lt; (11). 

2. If (n) = a for all values of n, then m = X = A = M= a. 

3. If (f&gt; (n} = 1 In, then m = X = A = and M= 1. 

4. If $(ft) = (-l) n , then w = X=-l and \ = M=l. 

5. If $(w) = (-l) M M tnen m=-l, X = A = 0, M=l. 

6. If&lt;/)(70 = (-l) n {l + (l/w)}, then m=-2, X=-l, A = l, M=. 

7. Let (ri) = sin n6n, where 6&gt; 0. If 6 is an integer then m = X = A = M= 0. 
If is rational but not integral a variety of cases arise. Suppose, e.g., that 
6=plq, p and q being positive, odd, and prime to one another, and &lt;?&gt;!. 
Then &lt;f&gt;(n) assumes the cyclical sequence of values 

smQoTr/gO, sin (2/i7r/^), ...... , sin{(2q- Vprr/q}, sin (Zqpirlq), ...... 

It is easily verified that the numerically greatest and least values of (ri) are 
cos (77/2^) and cos(7r/2&lt;?), so that 

m = X= - COS (ir/2q\ \=^M=COs(ir/2q}. 

The reader may discuss similarly the cases which arise when p and q are 
not both odd. 

The case in which 6 is irrational is more difficult : it may be shown that 
in this case m = X= - 1 and A = M\, It may also be shown that the values 
of (ri) are scattered all over the interval ( - 1, 1) in such a way that, if is 



15*2 . LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 

any number of the interval, then there is a sequence ?i 1} ?i 2 &gt; ...... such that 

$(%)~*" as ^~*" * 

The results are very similar when &lt; (n) is the fractional part of n6. 

83. The general principle of convergence for a bounded function. 

The results of the preceding sections enable us to formulate a very important 
necessary and sufficient condition that a bounded function cf&gt; (n) should tend 
to a limit, a condition usually referred to as the general principle of convergence 
to a limit. 

THEOREM 1. The necessary and sufficient condition that a bounded function 
(j) (n) should tend to a limit is that, when any positive number 8 is given, it should 
to find a number n (8) such that 



for all values of % and n 2 such that ft 2 &gt; % ^ n Q (8). 

In the first place, the condition is necessary. For if &lt;f&gt;(n)-*-l then we 
can find n n so that 



when n &gt; n , and so 

a ................................. (i) 



when n t ^ HO an ^ n 2 = n o- 

In the second place, the condition is sufficient. In order to prove this we 
have only to show that it involves X = A. But if X &lt; A then there are, however 
small 8 may be, infinitely many values of n such that &lt;(w)&lt;X + 8 and 
infinitely many such that &lt; (n) &gt; A - 8 ; and therefore we can find values of 
HI and 7i 2 , each greater than any assigned number ?i , and such that 

(w 2 ) - &lt; (nj &gt; A - X - 28, 

which is greater than (A - X) if 8 is small enough. This plainly contradicts 
the inequality (1). Hence X = A, and so (j) (n} tends to a limit. 

84. Unbounded functions. So far we have restricted ourselves to 
bounded functions ; but the general principle of convergence is the same 
for unbounded as for bounded functions, and the words a bounded function 
may be omitted from the enunciation of Theorem 1. 

In the first place, if &lt;f&gt; (n) tends to a limit I then it is certainly bounded ; for 
all but a finite number of its values are less than + 8 and greater than 1-8. 

In the second place, if the condition of Theorem 1 is satisfied, we have 



whenever HI &gt;n and ^2 = ^0- Let us cnoose some particular value n^ greater 
than n Q . Then 

(n^ - 8 2 )&lt; (%) + 8 

when n 2 ^w . Hence &lt; (n) is bounded ; and so the second part of the proof of 
the last section applies also. 

* A number of simple proofs of this result are given by Hardy and Littlewood, 
" Some Problems of Diophantine Approximation", Acta Hathematica, vol. xxxvii. 



83-85] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 153 

The theoretical importance of the general principle of convergence can 
hardly be overestimated. Like the theorems of 69, it gives us a means of 
deciding whether a function $(ri) tends to a limit or not, without requiring 
us to be able to tell beforehand what the limit, if it exists, must be ; and 
it has not the limitations inevitable in theorems of such a special character 
as those of 69. But in elementary work it is generally possible to dispense 
with it, and to obtain all we want from these special theorems. And it will 
be found that, in spite of the importance of the principle, practically no 
applications are made of it in the chapters which follow.* We will only 
remark that, if we suppose that 



we obtain at once a necessary and sufficient condition for the convergence of 
an infinite series, viz : 

THEOREM 2. The necessary and sufficient condition for the convergence 
of the series u\ + u% + is that, given any positive number d, it should be 
possible to find n Q so that 

I ^+1 + ^+2 + ... + w na )&lt; 8 
for all values of n\ and n% such that 



85. Limits of complex functions and series of complex 
terms. In this chapter we have, up to the present, concerned 
ourselves only with real functions of n and series all of whose 
terms are real. There is however no difficulty in extending our 
ideas and definitions to the case in which the functions or the 
terms of the series are complex. 

Suppose that (f&gt; (n) is complex and equal to 
p (n) + ia- (n), 

where p (n), a- (n) are real functions of n. Then if p (n) and a- (n) 
converge respectively to limits r and s as n -* oo , we shall say that 
&lt;j&gt; (n) converges to the limit l = r + is, and write 

lim &lt; (n) = /. 

Similarly, when u n is complex and equal to v n + iw n , we shall say 
that the series 



is convergent and has the sum I = r + is, if the series 



are convergent and have the sums r, s respectively. 

* A few proofs given in Ch. VIII can be simplified by the use of the principle. 



154 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [IV 



To say that u l + u 2 + u s + ... is convergent and has the sum 
I is of course the same as to say that the sum 



converges to the limit I as n -&gt; oo . 

In the case of real functions and series we also gave definitions 
of divergence and oscillation, finite or infinite. But in the case 
of complex functions and series, where we have to consider the 
behaviour both of p (n) and of a- (n), there are so many possibilities 
that this is hardly worth while. When it is necessary to make 
further distinctions of this kind, we shall make them by stating 
the way in which the real or imaginary parts behave when taken 
separately. 

86. The reader will find no difficulty in proving such 
theorems as the following, which are obvious extensions of 
theorems already proved for real functions and series. 

(1) If lim (f&gt;(n) = l then lim (f)(n + p)l for any fixed value 
of p. 

(2) If u 1 + u 2 + ... is convergent and has the sum I, then 
a -f b + c + . . . + k + z^j + u 2 + . . . is convergent and has the sum 
a + b + c + ... + k + l, and u p+1 + u p+2 + ... is convergent and has 

the sum I u u 2 . . . u p . 

(3) If lim (f&gt; (n) = I and lim ^ (n) = m, then 

lim {(f) (n) + ty (n)} = l + m. 

(4) If lim &lt;j) (n) = I, then lim k&lt;j&gt; (n) = kl 

(5) If lim &lt;f&gt; (n) = I and lim \fr (n)=m, then wxi&lt;f&gt;(n)ifr(n)**lm. 

(6) If Wj + u 2 + . . . converges to the sum I, and ^ + v 2 + . . . to 
the sum m, then (M.J + v^ + (u z + v 2 ) + ... converges to the sum l+m. 

(7) If M! + u z + . . . converges to the sum I then ki^ + ku z + . . . 
converges to the sum kl. 

(8) If Wj + u 2 4- u 3 + ... is convergent then lim u n 0. 

(9) If MJ + u 2 + u 3 + . . . is convergent, then so is any series 
formed by grouping the terms in brackets, and the sums of the two 
series are the same. 



85, 86] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 155 

As an example, let us prove theorem (5). Let 



Then p(ri)-*~r, &lt;r(ri)-*~s, p (tt)W, &lt;r (w)W. 

But &lt;p (n) ^ (n) = pp - cro- + i (per + p &lt;r), 

and pp - o-o- -* rr - ss , p&lt;r + p a- - rs + r s ; 

so that (p (ri) ^ (ri) -* rr - ss + i (rs + r s), 

i.e. (p (ri) ^ (ri) -*- (r + is) (/ -f is ) = Im. 

The following theorems are of a somewhat different character. 

(10) In order that &lt;j&gt; (n) p (n) + ia- (n) should converge to 
zero as n -*~ oo , it is necessary and sufficient that 



should converge to zero. 

If p(ri) and &lt;r(ri) both converge to zero then it is plain that 
does so. The converse follows from the fact that the numerical value of p or 
&lt;r cannot be greater than v/(p 2 + o" 2 ) 

(11) More generally, in order that &lt;f&gt;(n) should converge to a 
limit I, it is necessary and sufficient that 



should converge to zero. 

For (p(ri)-l converges to zero, and we can apply (10). 

(12) Theorems 1 and 2 of 8384 are still true when 
$ (n) and u n are complex. 

We have to show that the necessary and sufficient condition that &lt;(?i) 
should tend to I is that 

|^W-^(i)l&lt;* .............................. (1) 

when ?i 2 &gt; HI ^n . 

If &lt;p (ri)-*-l then p (ri)-*r and a- (n)-*~s, and so we can find numbers 7i and 
n Q " depending on 8 and such that 

I P W -P W !&lt;H I cr(na) -r (nO |&lt;H 

the first inequality holding when n 2 &gt; n^ ^w , and the second when n 2 &gt; n^ ^n ". 
Hence 



when n%&gt;ni ~n , where n Q is the greater of n&lt;j and no". Thus the condition 
(1) is necessary. To prove that it is sufficient we have only to observe that 

I P (2)-p (%) 1^10 (* 2 )-0 (l) I &lt; S 

when w 2 &gt;% ^o. Thus p (n} tends to a limit r, and in the same way it may 
be shown that o- (ri) tends to a limit s. 



156 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [IV 

87. The limit of z n as n - x , z being any complex 

number. Let us consider the important case in which &lt; (n) z n . 
This problem has already been discussed for real values of z in 

72. 

If z* -* I then z n+l I, by (1) of 86. But, by (4) of 86, 
z n ^ = zz n -^zl, 

~ and therefore I = zl, which is only possible if (a) I = or (b) z = 1. 
If z = 1 then Km z n =l. Apart from this special case the limit, 
if it exists, can only be zero. 

Now if z = r (cos + i sin 0), where r is positive, then 
z n = r n (cos nO + i sin nO), 

so that | z n | = r n . Thus s n | tends to zero if and only if r &lt; 1 ; 
and it follows from (10) of 86 that 

lim z n = 

if and only if r &lt; 1. In no other case does z n converge to a limit, 
except when 0=1 and z n -* 1. 

88. The geometric series 1 + z + z* + . . . when z is 
complex. Since 



unless z\ y when the value of s n is n, it follows that the series 
1 -f # + z* + ... is convergent if and only if r \z &lt; 1. 
sum w/ie/i convergent is 1/(1 #). 

Thus if z r (cos 0+i sin 0) = r Cis 0, and r &lt; 1, we have 



or 1 + r Cis + r 2 Cis 2 (9 + . . . = 1/(1 - r Cis 0) 

= (lr cos + ir sin 0)/(l - 2r cos + r 2 ). 
Separating the real and imaginary parts, we obtain 

1 + r cos + r 2 cos 20 + . . . = (1 - r cos 0)/(l - 2r cos + r 2 ), 
r sin + ?- 2 sin 20 + . . . = r sin 01(1 - 2r cos 6 + r 2 ), 

provided r &lt; 1. If we change into + TT, we see that these 
results hold also for negative values of r numerically less than 1. 
Thus they hold when - 1 &lt; r &lt; 1. 



87, 88] POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 157 

Examples XXXIII. 1. Prove directly that (f)(n) = r n cosn0 converges 
to when r&lt; 1 and to 1 when r = I and 6 is a multiple of 2ir. Prove further 
that if r = l and 6 is not a multiple of 2ir, then &lt;(rc) oscillates finitely; if 
r&gt;l and 6 is a multiple of 27r, then &lt; (w)-^ + co ; and if r&gt; 1 and &lt;9 is not a 
multiple of STT, then $ () oscillates infinitely. 

2. Establish a similar series of results for $ (n) = r n sin w0. 

3. Prove that z m +z m + l + ... = z m l(l - z\ 



if and only if j s | &lt; 1. Which of the theorems of 86 do you uso ? 

4. Prove that if - 1&lt; r &lt; I then 

1 + 2r cos 6 + 2r 2 cos 20 + . . . = (1 - r 2 )/(l - 2r cos + r 2 ). 

5. The series 1 

converges to the sum 1 / (l - -^\ = 1 + z if \ z{(l +z)\&lt;l. Show that this 
condition is equivalent to the condition that z has a real part greater than -\. 

MISCELLANEOUS EXAMPLES ON CHAPTER IV. 

1. The function &lt;j&gt;(ri) takes the values 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, ... when 
7i = 0, 1, 2, .... Express &lt;p(n) in terms of n by a formula which does not 
involve trigonometrical functions. [&lt; (rc) = J (1 + ( - 1 } n + i n + ( - *)"}] 

2. If (ri) steadily increases, and ^ (ri) steadily decreases, as n tends to 
oo , and if ^ (n)&gt;&lt;j&gt;(ri) for all values of n, then both (ri) and ^ (w) tend to 
limits, and lim&lt;()^lim^(?0. [This is an intermediate corollary from 
69.] 

3. Prove that, if 



then (jf) (?i + 1) &gt; (?0 and ^ (n + 1) &lt; ^ (ri). [The first result has already been 
proved in 73.] 

4. Prove also that \^ (ri) &gt; (w) for all values of rc- : and deduce (by means 
of the preceding examples) that both &lt;f&gt;(ri) and ^(n) tend to limits as n 
tends to GO . * 

5. The arithmetic mean of the products of all distinct pairs of positive 
integers whose sum is n is denoted by S n . Show that lim ( n /?i 2 ) = l/6. 

(Math. Trip. 1903.) 

* A proof that lim {^ (n) - (n)} =0, and that therefore each function tends to 
the limit e, will be foiind in Chrystal s Algebra, vol. ii, p. 78. We shall however 
prove this in Ch. IX by a different method. 



158 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 



6. Prove that if Xi = %{x + (Alx}}, a^ifo + C^M)}* and so on, x and 
A being positive, then \\mx n =*JA. 

[Prove first that f n " IA = fe4^ .] 



7. If (ri) is a positive integer for all values of w, and tends to QO with n, 
then x tends to if 0&lt;#&lt;1 and to +00 if #&gt;1. Discuss the behaviour 
of 4? , as 7i-* co , for other values of x. 

8.* If a n increases or decreases steadily as n increases, then the same is 
true of (! -f a 2 + . . . + # n )M- 

9. If # n + i = */(+ # n ), an( ^ ^ an d #1 are positive, then the sequence x lt # 2l 
#3, ... is an increasing or decreasing sequence according as x\ is less than or 
greater than a, the positive root of the equation x*=x + k t and in either case 
x-*~a as ?i--co. 



10. If # + i = ^/(l+#n) and k and x\ are positive, then the sequences 
#i) #3&gt; x b-&gt; an ^ ^25 -^45 ^6? are one an increasing and the other a decreasing 
sequence, and each sequence tends to the limit a, the positive root of the 
equation # 2 -f x = k. 

11. The function /(#) is increasing and continuous (see Ch. V) for all 
values of sc, and a sequence #j, # 2 , # 3 , ... is denned by the equation 
#n + i=/(#n)- Discuss on general graphical grounds the question as to 
whether x n tends to a root of the equation #=/(#). Consider in particular 
the case in which this equation has only one root, distinguishing the cases in 
which the curve y=f(x) crosses the line y = x from above to below and from 
below to above. 

12. If #j, #2 are positive and # n + 1 = (^ n +-^n-i)j then the sequences # l5 # 3 , 
#5, ... and .a?2&gt; #4&gt; #6&gt; are one a decreasing and the other an increasing 
sequence, and they have the common limit J (xi + 2# 2 ). 

13. Draw a graph of the function y denned by the equation 



,. - ,,, , m . 

= hm - .* ^ . - (Math. Trip. 1901.) 

X +J. 



14. The function y= lim 



is equal to except when x is an integer, and then equal to 1. The function 

x n&lt;&gt;xsm*irx 



n-*-oo 



is equal to (5;) unless ^ is an integer, and then equal to 
15. Show that the graph of the function 



* Exs. 8 12 are taken from Bromwich s Infinite Series. 



POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 159 

is composed of parts of the graphs of &lt;(#) and ^(x), together with (as a rule) 
two isolated points. Is y denned when (a) x= 1, (6) x= - 1, (c) x = 1 

16. Prove that the function y which is equal to when x is rational, and 
to 1 when x is irrational, may be represented in the form 

y= lim s&lt;7?i{sin 2 (w! irx)}, 



TO-*- 00 



where sgnx- lim (2/7r) arc tan (nx\ 

as in Ex. xxxi. 14. [If x is rational then sin 2 (m ! 7r.r), and therefore 
sgn (sin 2 (m ! nx)},~is equal to zero from a certain value of m onwards : if 
x is irrational then sin 2 (m \ irx) is always positive, and so sgn (sin 2 (m ! irx)} 
is always equal to 1.] 

Prove that y may also be represented in the form 
1 - lim [lim (cos (m I 7rx)} 2n ]. 



17. Sum the series 
5 1 


5 1 


[Since 


i _if. 






18. If |*|&lt;|a|,then - = -- (l + - + - 2 + ...); 
2-a a\ a a 2 / 

andif ,|&gt;|a|,then -= 



19. Expansion of (^0+5)/(a2 2 +2^ + c) in powers of z. Let a, 3 
be the roots of az* + 2bz + c=0, so that a0 2 -f-2&.s + c = a(- a)(z-/3). We 
shall suppose that A, B, a, 6, c are all real, and a and unequal. It is then 
easy to verify that 

Az+B I 



_ 
a (a -ft) \z^a^ z-ft 

There are two cases, according as 5 2 &gt; ac or 6 2 &lt; ac. 

(1) If 6 2 &gt;ac then the roots a, ft are real and distinct. If \z is less than 
either |a| or |/3| we can expand I/(z a) and lj(zft) in ascending powers of z 
(Ex. 18). If \z\ is greater than either |a| or \ft\ we must expand in descending 
powers of z; while if \z\ lies between |a| and \ft\ one fraction must be ex 
panded in ascending and one in descending powers of . The reader should 
write down the actual results. If \z\ is equal to a or |/3| then no such 
expansion is possible. 



160 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A [iV 

(2) If b 2 &lt;ac then the roots are conjugate complex numbers (Ch. Ill 
43), and we can write 

a = pCis(p, /3=p Cis(-&lt;p), 
where p 2 = a/3 = c/a, p cos &lt;p = % (a + /3) = - 6/a, so that cos = - 



If 1 2 1 &lt; p then each fraction may be expanded in ascending powers of z. 
The coefficient of z n will be found to be 

Ap sin ncp + B sin { 



If |s|&gt;p we obtain a similar expansion in descending powers, while if \ z\ = 
no such expansion is possible. 

20. Show that if \z\&lt;l then 



[The sum to n terms is - __ , 2 - r .] 

21. Expand L](z-a) 2 in powers of z, ascending or descending according 

as \z\&lt; a | or |s|&gt;|a|. 

22. Show that if 6 2 = ac and | az \ &lt; \ b \ then 



a? 

where p n ={(-a) n /b n + 2 } {(n + l)aB-nbA}-, and find the corresponding ex 
pansion, in descending powers of 2, which holds when |a|&gt;|6|. 

23. Verify the result of Ex. 19 in the case of the fraction 1/(1 +z 2 ). [We 
have 



24. Prove that if \z\&lt;\ then 

^-^sin^ + l).}. 



25. Expand (l+z)/(l+z 2 \ (l + 2 2 )/(l + ^ 3 ) and (l + ^2 2 )/(l+^) in ascend 
ing powers of z. For what values of z do your results hold ? 

26. If a/(a + bz + C2 2 ) = 1 +p& +p 2 z 2 +... then 



(Math. Trip. 1900.) 
27. If lim s n = l then 



^ &gt;1 



lim 



[Let =? + #. Then we have to prove that (*i-K 2 + .-. + O/ w tends to 
zero if t n does so. 



POSITIVE INTEGRAL VARIABLE 161 

We divide the numbers ^, t 2 , ... t n into two sets t lt t 2 , ...,t p and t p + l , 
f p + 2, ) tn- Here we suppose that p is a function of n which tends to oo 
as %-ao, but more slowly than n, so that p-+-cc and p/n-*-0 : e.g. we might 
suppose p to be the integral part of Jn. 

Let be any positive number. However small 8 may be, we can choose 
n Q so that f p + 1 , fp + 2 * are all numerically less than %8 when ft&gt;ft , and so 



But, if A is the greatest of the moduli of all the numbers t lt t 2 , ..., we 
have 



and this also will be less than %8 when n&gt;n Q) if n Q is large enough, since 
p/n -*- as n-*- x . Thus 



when n&gt;n ; which proves the theorem. 

The reader, if he desires to become expert in dealing with questions about 
limits, should study the argument above with great care. It is very often 
necessary, in proving the limit of some given expression to be zero, to split it 
into two parts which have to be proved to have the limit zero in slightly 
different ways. When this is the case the proof is never very easy. 

The point of the proof is this : we have to prove that (ti + t z + ... + t n )/n is 
small when n is large, the t s being small when their suffixes are large. We 
split up the terms in the bracket into two groups. The terms in the first 
group are not all jsmall, but their number is small compared with n. The 
number in the second group is not small compared with n, but the terms are 
all small, and their number at any rate less than n, so that their sum is small 
compared with n. Hence each of the parts into which (t l + t2+... + t n )jn 
has been divided is small when n is large.] 

28. If &lt; (n) - (n - 1) -^ I as rc-*. oo , then (n)/n-^l. 

[If (ri) = s l +8 2 + ...+8 n then &lt;j&gt; (n}-&lt;$&gt; (n- !) = *, and the theorem re 
duces to that proved in the last example.] 

29. If *= (1 - ( - l) n }, so that s n is equal to 1 or according as n is odd 
or even, then (* l +*j+.,.+*)/n--! as ?I--QO. 

[This example proves that the converse of Ex. 27 is not true : for s n 
oscillates as M-*-OO .] 

30. If c n , s n denote the sums of the first n terms of the series 
then 



n. 11 



CHAPTER V 

LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A CONTINUOUS VARIABLE. 
CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS 

89. Limits as x tends to oo . We shall now return to 
functions of a continuous real variable. We shall confine our 
selves entirely to one-valued functions*, and we shall denote such 
a function by &lt;/&gt; (as). We suppose x to assume successively all 
values corresponding to points on our fundamental straight line 
A, starting from some definite point on the line and progressing 
always to the right. In these circumstances we say that x 
tends to infinity, or to oo , and write x ^ cc . The only difference 
between the c tending of n to oo discussed in the last chapter, and 
this tending of x to oo , is that x assumes all values as it tends 
to oo , i.e. that the point P which corresponds to x coincides in 
turn with every point of A to the right of its initial position, 
whereas n tended to GO by a series of jumps. We can express this 

* distinction by saying that x tends continuously to oo . 

As we explained at the beginning of the last chapter, there is 
a very close correspondence between functions f of x and functions 

I of n. Every function of n may be regarded as a selection from 
the values of a function of x. In the last chapter we discussed 
the peculiarities which may characterise the behaviour of a 
function $ (n) as n tends to oo . Now we are concerned with the 
same problem for a function &lt; (at) ; and the definitions and 
theorems to which we are led are practically repetitions of those 
of the last chapter. Thus corresponding to Def. 1 of 58 we 
have : 

* Thus *Jx stands in this chapter for the one-valued function + x Ar and not (as 
in 26) for the two-valued function whose values are +*Jx and - x /a?. 



89] LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS OF A CONTINUOUS VARIABLE 163 

DEFINITION 1. The function &lt;j&gt; (x) is said to tend to the limit I 
as x tends to GO if, when any positive number 8, however small, is 
assigned, a number x (8) can be chosen such that, for all values of 
x equal to or greater than x (8), &lt;/&gt; (x) differs from I by less than 8, 
i.e. if 

\$(x)-l &lt;8 
wlien x = x (8). 

When this is the case we may write 
lim &lt; (x) = I, 

a?-*-co 

or, when there is no risk of ambiguity, simply lim &lt;f&gt; (x) = /, or 
&lt;f&gt; (x) -*- 1. Similarly we have : 

DEFINITION 2. The function &lt; (x) is said to tend to oo with 
x if, when any number A, hoiuever large, is assigned, we can choose 
a number x (&) such that 

$ (x) &gt; A 
when x ^ x (A). 

We then write 

&lt;f&gt; (x) -^ oo . 

Similarly we define &lt; (x) -* cc *, Finally we have : 

DEFINITION 3. If the conditions of neither of the two preceding 
definitions are satisfied, then &lt;/&gt; (x) is said to oscillate as x tends 
to oo . If | &lt;/&gt; (x) | is less than some constant K when x = x^ t then 
4&gt;(x) is said to oscillate finitely, and otherwise infinitely. 

The reader will remember that in the last chapter we con 
sidered very carefully various less formal ways of expressing the 
facts represented by the formulae (ft (n) -* I, &lt;f&gt; (n) -* oo . Similar 
modes of expression may of course be used in the present case. 
Thus we may say that &lt;/&gt; (x) is small or nearly equal to I or large 
when x is large, using the words small , nearly , ( large in 
a sense similar to that in which they were used in Ch. IV. 

* We shall sometimes find it convenient to write +&lt;x&gt;, a;-*- + oo,0(o;)-*- + Go 
instead of oo , a;-*-oo, &lt; (#)- GO. 

t In the corresponding definition of 62, we postulated that | (n) | &lt;K for all 
values of n, and not merely when n &gt;. n Q . But then the two hypotheses would have 
been equivalent; for if |0()| &lt; K when w&gt;r? , then \&lt;p(n)\&lt;K for all values 
of n, where K is the greatest of 0(1), 0(2), ... , 0( -1) and K. Here the 
matter is not quite so simple, as there are infinitely many values of x less than XQ. 

112 



164 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS [V 

Examples XXXIV. 1. Consider the behaviour of the following functions 
x\ a* t [a], x-[x], [x\ 



The first four functions correspond exactly to functions of n fully dis 
cussed in Ch. IV. The graphs of the last three were constructed in Ch. II 
(Exs. xvi. 1, 2, 4), and the reader will see at once that [a?]-*- oo , x - \x\ oscillates 
finitely, and [#] + *J{x - [x]} -* co . 

One simple remark may be inserted here. The function $(x ) = x-[x] 
oscillates between and 1, as is obvious from the form of its graph. It is 
equal to zero whenever x is an integer, so that the function (f&gt; (n) derived 
from it is always zero and so tends to the limit zero. The same is true if 

(j) (x] = sin #77, &lt; (n) = sin mr = 0. 

/It is evident that &lt;(#)-*- or &lt;(#)-*-oo or ^ (#)-- oo involves the corre 
sponding property for $ (ri), but that the converse is by no means always 




2. Consider in the same way the functions : 

(sin#7r)/#, #sin#7r, (# sin #?r) 2 , tan^Tr, a cos 2 XTT + b sin 2 #71-, 
illustrating your remarks by means of the graphs of the functions. 

3. Give a geometrical explanation of Def. 1, analogous to the geometrical 
explanation of Ch. IV, 59. 

4. If (f&gt; (x)-**l t and I is not zero, then $ (x) cos XTT and $ (#) sin #?r oscillate 
finitely. If $ (#)-- oo or &lt;(#)-- oo, then they oscillate infinitely. The 
graph of either function is a wavy curve oscillating between the curves 
y =$(*) and y -$(#). 

5. Discuss the behaviour, as x-*~ oo , of the function 

y =f (x) COS 2 Xir + F (x] sin 2 xrr t 

where /(a;) and F (x} are some pair of simple functions (e.g. x and x 2 ). [The 
graph of y is a curve oscillating between the curves y=-j(x}, y=F(x}J\ 

90. Limits as x tends to oo . The reader will have no 
difficulty in framing for himself definitions of the meaning of the 
assertions x tends to oo , or x -&gt; oo and 

lim (x) =1, $ (x) -* oo , &lt;j&gt; (x) -^ oo . 

a:-*- co 

In fact, if x = y and &lt;p (x) = &lt;f) ( y) = ty (y), then y tends 
to oo as x tends to oo , and the question of the behaviour of 
&lt;j&gt; (x) as x tends to oo is the same as that of the behaviour of 
\lr (y) as y tends to oo . 



89-93] OF A CONTINUOUS VARIABLE 165 

91. Theorems corresponding to those of Ch. IV, 6367. 

The theorems concerning the sums, products, and quotients of functions 
proved in Ch. IV are all true (with obvious verbal alterations which the 
reader will have no difficulty in supplying) for functions of the continuous 
variable x. Not only the enunciations but the proofs remain substantially 
the same. 

92. Steadily increasing or decreasing functions. The definition C ( 
which corresponds to that of 69 is as follows : the function $ (x) will } 



be said to increase steadily with x if 0(^ 2 )=^&gt;(^i) whenever x^x-^. In 
many cases, of course, this condition is only satisfied from a definite value 
of x onwards, i.e. when x. 2 &gt;&\ #. The theorem which follows in that section 
requires no alteration but that of n into x : and the proof is the same, except 
for obvious verbal changes. 



If &lt;(#2)&gt;$&lt;X)&gt; tne possibility of equality being excluded, whenever 

i&gt; then &lt;(#) will be said to be steadily increasing in the 
We shall find that the distinction is often important (cf. 108 



ue, wenever 
he stricter sense. 1 1 
8 109). t V\ 

* f 



The reader should consider whether or no the following functions 
increase steadily with x (or at any rate increase steadily from a certain 
value of x onwards): x^-x, #+sin#, # + 2sin#, ^ 2 + 2sin^, [#], [#] + sin#, 
\x\+*]\x - [#]}. All these functions tend to oo as #- oo . 

93. Limits as x tends to 0. Let &lt; (x) be such a function 
of x that lim &lt;/&gt; (x) = I, and let y \\x. Then 



say. As x tends to oo , y tends to the limit 0, and i/r (y) tends to 
the limit I. 

Let us now dismiss x and consider ty (y) simply as a function 
of y. We are for the moment concerned only with those values 
of y which correspond to large positive values of as, that is to say 
with small positive values of y. And ^r (y) has the property that 
by making y sufficiently small we can make &lt;fy (y) differ by as 
little as we please from I. To put the matter more precisely, 
the statement expressed by lim (x) = I means that, when any 
positive number 8, however small, is assigned, we can choose 
XQ so that | &lt;p (oc) I &lt; 8 for all values of x greater than or equal X 
to a? . But this is the same thing as saying that we can choose 
7/0 = l/a? so that | i|r (y) I \ &lt; 8 for all positive values of y less than v ( 
or equal to y . 

We are thus led to the following definitions : 



166 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS [y 

A. //, when any positive number B, however small, is assigned, 
we can choose y Q (B) so that 



when &lt; y y (B), then we say that $ (y) tends to the limit I as y 
tends to by positive values, and we write 

lim &lt;f&gt; (y) = I. 

y++Q 

B. If, when any number A, however large, is assigned, we can 
choose 2/0 (A) so that 



when &lt; y &lt; y (A), /?&lt;?n we say /*a &lt;(?/) terccfo to oo as 
to &?/ positive values, and we write 



- oo . 



We define in a similar way the meaning of &lt; (?/) tends to 
the limit I as y tends to by negative values , or lim (f)(y) = l 
when y -^ . We have in fact only to alter &lt; y &lt; y (B) to 
?/ (5) = y &lt; in definition A. There is of course a corresponding 
analogue of definition B, and similar definitions in which 



as y -* + or y - 0. 

If lim 6(y) = l and lim &lt;b(y) = l, we write simply 

V ++0 y + -0 

lim 



This case is_so important that it is worth while to give a formal 
definition. f 

If, when any positive number S, however small, is assigned, we 
can choose y (8) so that, for all values of y different from zero but 
numerically less than or equal to y (B), &lt;/&gt; (y) differs from I by less 
than B, then we say that &lt; (y) tends to the limit I as y tends to 0, 
and write 

lim &lt; (y) = I 
y + o 

So also, if &lt; (y) -* co as y -* + and also as y -* 0, we say 
that &lt; (y) -* oo as ?/ -* 0. We define in a similar manner the 
statement that -*- co as -* 0. 



93, 94] OF A CONTINUOUS VARIABLE 167 

Finally, if &lt;f&gt; (y) does not tend to a limit, or to co , or to 
oo , as y -* + 0, we say that &lt;f&gt; (y) oscillates as y -* + 0, finitely 
or infinitely as the case may be; and we define oscillation as 
y -* in a similar manner. 

The preceding definitions have been stated in terms of a 
variable denoted by y : what letter is used is of course immaterial, 
and we may suppose x written instead of y throughout them. 

94. Limits as x tends to a. Suppose that &lt;l&gt;(y)-**l as 
y -* 0, and write 

y = x-a, &lt;j&gt; (y) = &lt;j&gt; (x - a) = ^ (x). 
If y -* then x -* a and ^r (x) -* I, and we are naturally led to 

write 

lim i/r (x) = l t 

*-&gt; 

or simply lim ty (x) = I or ^r (x) -* Z, and to say that &gt;|r (a;) tends to 
the limit I as x tends to a. The meaning of this equation may 
be formally and directly defined as follows: if, given S, we can 
always determine e(8) so that 



when &lt; x a \ ^ e (B), then 

lim (f&gt; (x) = L 

By restricting ourselves to values of x greater than a, i.e. by 
replacing 0&lt;\x a | ^ e (8) by a&lt;x a + e (8), we define * c/&gt; (#) 
tends to when x approaches a from the right , which we may 
write as 

lim &lt;p (x) = I. 

In the same way we can define the meaning of 

lim cf&gt; (x) = I. \ } 



Thus lim cf&gt;(x) = l is equivalent to the two assertions 

a;-*- a 

lim $ (a?) = I, lim &lt;jf&gt; (a?) = L \\ 

x-**a+Q a?-*-a-0 

We can give similar definitions referring to the cases in which 
&lt;(a?)-*-oo or &lt;(#)- x as -^-a through values greater or less 
than a ; but it is probably unnecessary to dwell further on these 
definitions, since they are exactly similar to those stated above in 



168 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS [V 

the special case when a 0, and we can always discuss the 
behaviour of &lt;j&gt;(%) as x-*-a by putting x a y and supposing 
that 7/^0. 

/f M 

95. Steadily increasing or decreasing functions. If there is a number 
^ 6 such that 0(# )^ &lt;(#") whenever a-e&lt;x &lt;x"&lt;a + , then &lt;(#) will be 
said to increase steadily in the neighbourhood of x=a. 

Suppose first that x&lt;a, and put y=\l(a-x}. Then y-^co as x--a 0, 
and &lt;b(x} = ty(y} is a steadily increasing function of y, never greater than $(a). 
It follows from 92 that &lt; (a?) tends to a limit not greater than $ (a). We 
shall write 

lim &lt;f(a?) = 0(a+0). 
JJ -* + () 

We can define (a - 0) in a similar manner ; and it is clear that 



It is obvious that similar considerations may be applied to decreasing 
functions. 



& If &lt;$)(x }&lt;$(x"}, the possibility of equality being excluded, whenever 
! a &lt;x &lt;x"&lt;a + e, then &lt;(#) will be said to be steadily increasing in the 



96. Limits of indetermination and the principle of convergence. 

All of the argument of 80 84 may be applied to functions of a con 

tinuous variable x which tends to a limit a. In particular, if $(#) is 

.4 bounded in an interval including a (i.e. if we can find e, .Xf, and K so that 

sHfr(x}&lt;K when a e &lt;# &lt; a + e) *, then we can define X and A, the lower and 

X upper limits of indetermination of (x} as #--, and prove that the necessary 

and sufficient condition that ^ (x}-*-l as x-~a is that X = A = . We can also 

establish the analogue of the principle of convergence, i.e. prove that the 

necessary and sufficient condition that (x] should tend to a limit as x-**a is 

that, when d is given, we can choose e (6) so that \ (o? 2 ) - $ (#1) j &lt; 



Examples XXXV. 1. If 



as x-*~ a, then (#) + ^ (a?) W + ^, $(x] ^(x}-+ll , and &lt;t&gt; 
unless in the last case / = 0. 

[We saw in 91 that the theorems of Ch. IV, 63 et seq. hold also for 
functions of x when #-*-oc or#---oo. By putting x\\y we may extend 
them to functions of ?/, when y-*-0, and by putting y=z-a to functions of 0, 
when 0-*-a. 

* For some further discussion of the notion of a function bounded in an interval 
see 102. 



94-97] OF A CONTINUOUS VARIABLE 169 

The reader should however try to prove them directly from the formal 
definition given above. Thus, in order to obtain a strict direct proof of the 
first result he need only take the proof of Theorem I of 63 and write 
throughout x for n, a for oo and 0&lt; \x - a &lt;e for n &gt;n .] 

2. If m is a positive integer then x m -*~Q as #-*0. 

3. If m is a negative integer then # m ---f oo as #^+0, while #"*- oo or 
^m^ + oo as x-*~-0, according as m is odd or even. If m = then x m \ 
and x m -*-\. 

4. lim (a + bx + cx 2 + ... +kx m } = a. 

5. lim \(a + bx+ ... -4-# m )/(a + /5#+ ... + K.^)} = a/a, unless a=0. Ifa=0 



arid a=t=0, /3=t=0, then the function tends to +00 or - oo , as #-*- + (), according 
as a and /3 have like or unlike signs; the case is reversed if #-* (). The 
case in which both a and a vanish is considered in Ex. xxxvi. 5. Discuss the 
cases which arise when a=t=0 and more than one of the first coefficients in the 
denominator vanish. 

6. lim x m = a m , if m is any positive or negative integer, except when a = 
*-* 

and m is negative. [If m&gt;0, put x=y + a and apply Ex. 4. When w&lt;0, 
the result follows from Ex. 1 above. It follows at once that lim P (x}-P (a), 
if P (x) is any polynomial.] 

7. lim R (x} = R (a), if R denotes any rational function and a is not one 

x-*&gt;a 
of the roots of its denominator. 

8. Show that lim x m =a m for all rational values of m, except when a=0 

v-^a 

and m is negative. [This follows at once, when a is positive, from the in 
equalities (9) or (10) of 74. For | x m - a m \ &lt; H \ x - a \ , where H is the greater 
of the absolute values of mx m ~ l and ma m ~ l (cf. Ex. xxviri. 4). If a is negative 
we write x= y and a= - b. Then 



97. The reader will probably fail to see at first that any proof 
of such results as those of Exs. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 above is necessary. 
He may ask why not simply put a; = 0, or x = a1 Of course 
we then get a, a/a, a m , P (a), R (a) It is very important that he 
should see exactly where ffiejis wrong) We shall therefore consider 
this point carefully before passing on to any further examples. 

The statement lim (f&gt;(x) = l 

x-*Q * 

is a statement about the values of &lt; (x) when x has any value 



170 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS [V 

distinct from but differing by little from zero *. It is not a statement 
about the value of &lt; (x) ivhen x = 0. When we make the state 
ment we_assert that, when x is nearly equal to zero, &lt;j&gt;(x) is nearly 
equal to I. We assert nothing whatever about what happens 
when x is actually equal to 0. So far as we know, &lt;f&gt; (x) may 
not be defined at all for # = 0; or it may have some value 
other than I. For example, consider the function defined for all 
values of x by the equation &lt; (x) = 0. It is obvious that 

Now consider the function ty (x) which differs from &lt; (x) only in 
that -fy (x) = 1 when x = 0. Then 

for, when x is nearly equal to zero, ty (x) is not only nearly but 
exactly equal to zero. But -^r (0) = 1. The graph of this function 
consists of the axis of x, with the point x = left out, and one 
isolated point, viz. the point (0, 1). The equation (2) expresses 
the fact that if we move along the graph towards the axis of y, 
from either side, then the ordinate of the curve, being always equal 
to zero, tends to the limit zero. This fact is in no way affected 
by the position of the isolated point (0, 1). 

The reader may object to this example on the score of 
artificiality : but it is easy to write down simple formulae repre 
senting functions which behave precisely like this near # = 0. 
One is 

N where [1 - x-] denotes as usual the greatest integer not greater 
than 1 - &. For if x = then ^ (x) = [!] = !; while if &lt; x &lt; 1, 
or - 1 &lt; x &lt; 0, then &lt; 1 - x* &lt; 1 and so ^ (x) = [1 - x 2 ] = 0. 

Or again, let us consider the function 

y = x/x 

already discussed in Ch. II, 24, (2). This function is equal 
to 1 for all values of x save x = 0. It is not equal to 1 when 
x = Q: it is in fact not defined at all for x = 0. For when we say 

* Thus in Def. A of 93 we make a statement about values of y such that 
Q&lt;y&lt;y Q , the first of these inequalities being inserted expressly in order to 
exclude the value w = 0. 



97] OF A CONTINUOUS VARIABLE 171 

that &lt;f&gt; (x) is defined for x we mean (as we explained in Ch. II, 
I.e.) that we can calculate its value for x = by putting x == 
in the actual expression of (f&gt; (x). In this case we cannot. When 
we put as = in &lt; (x) we obtain 0/0, which is a meaningless 
expression. The reader may object divide numerator and de 
nominator by x . But he must admit that when x = this is 
impossible. Thus y = as /as is a function which differs from y = 1 
solely in that it is not defined for x 0. None the less 

lim (x/x) = 1, 

for x/x is equal to 1 so long as x differs from zero, however small 
the difference may be. 

Similarly &lt;/&gt; (x) = {(x + I) 2 !}/, = x + 2 so long as x is not 
equal to zero, but is undefined when x = 0. None the less 
lim &lt;j&gt; (x) = 2. 

On the other hand there is of course nothing to prevent the 
limit of $ (x) as x tends to zero from being equal to &lt; (0), the value 
of $ (x) for x=Q. Thus if &lt;j)(x)=x then (0) = and lim &lt; (x) = 0. 
This is in fact, from a practical point of view, i.e. from the point 
of view of what most frequently occurs in applications, the 
ordinary case. 

Examples XXXVI. 1 . lim (x 2 - a 2 )/(# - a) = 2a. 

x-*-a 

2. lim (x m a m )/(# a) = ma m ~ ! , if m is any integer (zero included). 
*-* 

3. Show that the result of Ex. 2 remains true for all rational values 
of m, provided a is positive. [This follows at once from the inequalities 
(9) and (10) of 74.] 



4. lim (x 7 - %& + 1)/(^ - &B 2 + 2) = 1 . [Observe that x - 1 is a factor of 
x+l 

both numerator and denominator.] 

5. Discuss the behaviour of 



as x tends to by positive or negative values. 

[If m &gt; n, lim (x) = 0. If m = n, lim (x) = a /6 . If m &lt; n and n - m is 
even, (#) -*- + x or &lt; (x) - - co according as /6 &gt; or or /6 &lt; 0- Ifm&lt;n and 
n - M is odd, &lt; (#)-- + oo as #-*- + () and &lt;(.*?)--- co as .v-^-0, or &lt;(#)-*--oo 
as o;-- + and &lt;(#)-* + 00 as #-*-(), according as /6 &gt;0 or /6 &lt;0.] 



172 LIMITS OF FUNCTIONS [y 

6. Orders of smallness. When x is small x 2 is very much smaller, 
# 3 much smaller still, and so on : in other words 

lim(o; 2 /#) = 0, lim (#3/# 2 )=0, .... 

x-*-Q a;-*-0 

Another way of stating the matter is to say that, when x tends to 0, 
tf 2 , x 3 , ... all also tend to 0, but x 2 tends to more rapidly than x, x 3 than 
# 2 , and so on. It is convenient to have some scale by which to measure 
the rapidity with which a function, whose limit, as x tends to 0, is 0, 
diminishes with x, and it is natural to take the simple functions x, x 2 , x 3 , ... 
as the measures of our scale. 

We say, therefore, that (x} is of the first order of smallness if &lt; (x}Jx 
tends to a limit other than as x tends to 0. Thus 2x+3x 2 +x 7 is of the 
first order of smallness, since lim (2x + 3x 2 + x 7 )/x = 2. 

Similarly we define the second, third, fourth, ... orders of smallness. It 
must not be imagined that this scale of orders of smallness is in any way 
complete. If it were complete, then every function (x) which tends to zero 
with x would be of either the first or second or some higher order of smallness. 
This is obviously not the case. For example $(#)=# 7 / 6 tends to zero more 
rapidly than x and less rapidly than x 2 . 

The reader may not unnaturally think that our scale might be made 
complete by including in it fractional orders of smallness. Thus we might 
say that # 7 / 5 was of the th order of smallness. We shall however see later 
on that such a scale of orders would still be altogether incomplete. And 
as a matter of fact the integral orders of smallness defined above are so 
much more important in applications than any others that it is hardly 
necessary to attempt to make our definitions more precise. 

Orders of greatness. Similar definitions are at once suggested to 
meet the case in which &lt;j&gt;(x) is large (positively or negatively) when x is 
small. We shall say that &lt; (x) is of the &th order of greatness when x is small 
if $ (x )lx~ k =x jc (f)(x) tends to a limit different from as x tends to 0. 

These definitions have reference to the case in which #-*-(). There are of 
course corresponding definitions relating to the cases in which #-*&lt; or x-^a. 
Thus if #*&lt; (x) tends to a limit other than zero, as x-*-cc , then we say that 
cf)(x) is of the &th order of smallness when x is large: while if (x - ) fc &lt; (x) 
tends to a limit other than zero, as x-*-a, then we say that &lt; (x) is of the &th 
order of greatness when x is nearly equal to a. 



*7. lim v /(l+^) = Hm v /(l-.r) = l. [Put l+x=y or l-xy t and use 
Ex. xxxv. 8.] 

8. lim ( v /(l +#) - J(l - x)}/x=l. [Multiply numerator and denominator 



* In the examples which follow it is to be assumed that limits as x -* are 
required, unless (as in Exs. 19, 22) the contrary is explicitly stated. 



97] OF A CONTINUOUS VARIABLE 173 

9. Consider the behaviour of ( N /(l +x m ) - V(l - x m )}/x n as x-*~0, m and n 
being positive integers. 

10. 



12. Draw a graph of the function 



Has it a limit as #--0 ? [Here y=l except for # = 1, J, ^, J, when y is 
not denned, and y-*-l as #-*().] 



, . sm x ., 
13. lim ---- =1. 
x 



[It may be deduced from the definitions of the trigonometrical ratios* that 
if x is positive and less than \K then 



sin x 
cos#&lt; ------ 

x 



"- .. 



2 &lt;^ 2 Hence lim (l - ^^Wo, and lim ^^=1. 

o;^-+0\ * / -*-+0 * 

As is an even function, the result follows.] 
x 

:Ll2!f = i 15. i im &gt; !H^ 7 = a . I S this true if a = CH 



,. arc sin x r r&gt; . T 

16. lim - = 1. [rut# = sm v.j 

x 

tailor ,. arc tan cur 

17. lim = a, lim =0. 

x x 

cosec x cot x , ,_,.! + cos 

18. lim = k. 19. lim 

x x +i tan^ 7i 



* The proofs of the inequalities which are used here depend on certain pro 
perties of the area of a sector of a circle which are usually taken as geometrically 
iutuitive ; for example, that the area of the sector is greater than that of the 
triangle inscribed in the sector. The justification of these assumptions must be 
postponed to Ch. VII. 



174 



CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS 



[v 



20. How do the functions sin(l/#), (I/a?) sin (!/#), #sin(l/#) behave 
as #--0 ? [The first oscillates finitely, the second infinitely, the third 
tends to the limit 0. None is defined when #=0. See Exs. xv. 6, 7, 8.] 

21. Does the function 



tend to a limit as x tends to ? [No. The function is equal to 1 except when 
sin ( l/#) = 0; i.e. when #=!/-, 1 /-, ..., I/TT, l/2rr, .... For these values the 
formula for y assumes the meaningless form 0/0, and y is therefore not defined 
for an infinity of values of x near # = 0.] 

22. Prove that if m is any integer then [x]-*-m and # [#]-*() as 
.r-*-m + 0, ai:d [V]--wi-l, # [#]-*-! as #--m-0. 

98. Continuous functions of a real variable. The 

reader has no doubt some idea as to what is meant by a continuous 
curve. Thus he would call the curve C in Fig. 29 continuous, 
the curve C generally continuous but discontinuous for as = f and 




Either of these curves may be regarded as the graph of a 
function $ (x). It is natural to call a function continuous if its 
graph is a continuous curve, and otherwise discontinuous. Let us 
take this as a provisional definition and try to distinguish more 
precisely some of the properties which are involved in it. 

In the first place it is evident that the property of the 
function y = &lt;f&gt;(x) of which C is the graph may be analysed into 
some property possessed by the curve at each of its points. 
To be able to define continuity for all values of x we must first 
define continuity for any particular value of x. Let us there 
fore fix on some particular value of a?, say the value x = j- 



97, 98] CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS 175 

corresponding to the point P of the graph. What are the 
characteristic properties of &lt; (x) associated with this value of x ? 

In the first place &lt;/&gt; (x) is defined for x %. This is obviously 
essential. If &lt; (f) were not denned there would be a point 
missing from the curve. 

Secondly &lt; (x) is defined for all values of x near x = %\ i.e. we 
can find an interval, including x = f in its interior, for all points 
of which cj) (as) is defined. 

Thirdly if x approaches the value % from either side then &lt; (x) 
approaches the limit &lt;/&gt; (f ). 

The properties thus defined are far from exhausting those 
which are possessed by the curve as pictured by the eye of 
common sense. This picture of a curve is a generalisation from 
particular curves such as straight lines and circles. But they are 
the simplest and most fundamental properties : and the graph of 
any function which has these properties would, so far as drawing 
it is practically possible, satisfy our geometrical feeling of what a 
continuous curve should be. We therefore select these properties 
as embodying the mathematical notion of continuity. We are thus 
led to the following 

DEFINITION. The function &lt;j&gt; (x) is said to be continuous for 
x % if & tends to a limit as x tends to % from either side, and 
each of these limits is equal to &lt; (f). 

We can now define continuity throughout an interval. The 
function &lt;/&gt;(#) is said to be continuous throughout a certain 
interval of values of x if it is continuous for all values of x in that 
interval. It is said to be continuous everywhere if it is continuous 
for every value of x. Thus [x] is continuous in the interval 
(e, 1 *), where e is any positive number less than J ; and 1 and x 
are continuous everywhere. 

If we recur to the definitions of a limit we see that our 
definition is equivalent to &lt;j&gt; (x) is continuous for x^if y given 8, 
we can choose e (8) so that | &lt;(#)- &lt;(f) | &lt; S I/" = | #- ? | = 6 (3) . 

We have often to consider functions defined only in an interval 
(a, b). In this case it is convenient to make a slight and obvious 



176 



CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS 



change in our definition of continuity in so far as it concerns the 
particular points a and b. We shall then say that &lt;f&gt; (x) is con 
tinuous for x = a if &lt;f&gt; (a + 0) exists and is equal to &lt;/&gt; (a), and for 
x = b if &lt; (6 0) exists and is equal to &lt;/&gt; (6). 

99. The definition of continuity given in the last section may 
be illustrated geometrically as follows. Draw the two horizontal 
lines y = &lt;f&gt; (f ) - B and y = &lt; (f ) + 8. Then | (a) - (f) | &lt; 8 ex 
presses the fact that the point on the curve corresponding to x lies 



Fig. 30. 

between these two lines. Similarly | x f | ^ e expresses the fact 
that x lies in the interval ( e, +e). Thus our definition asserts 
that if we draw two such horizontal lines, no matter how close 
together, we can always cut off a vertical strip of the plane by 
two vertical lines in such a way that all that part of the curve 
which is contained in the strip lies between the two horizontal 
lines. This is evidently true of the curve C (Fig. 29), whatever 
value may have. 

We shall now discuss the continuity of some special types of 
functions. Some of the results which follow were (as we pointed 
out at the time) tacitly assumed in Ch. II. 

Examples XXXVII. 1. The sum or product of two functions continuous 
at a point is continuous at that point. The quotient is also continuous 
unless the denominator vanishes at the point. [This follows at once from 
Ex. xxxv. 1.] 

2. Any polynomial is continuous for all values of x. Any rational 
fraction is continuous except for values of x for which the denominator 
vanishes. [This follows from Exs. xxxv. 6, 7.] 



99] CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS 177 

3. njx is continuous for all positive values of x (Ex. xxxv. 8). It is not 
defined when x &lt; 0, but is continuous for x = Q in virtue of the remark made at 
the end of 98. The same is true of # */, where m and n are any positive 
inteers of which n is even. 



4. The function x m / n , where n is odd, is continuous for all values of x. 

5. Ijx is not continuous for .r = 0. It has no value for #=0, nor does it 
d to a limit as #--0. In 

by positive or negative values. 



tend to a limit as #--0. In fact ljx-+. + oo or I/a;-*- - oo according as A- 



6. Discuss the continuity of #-"/, where m and n are positive integers, 
for xQ. 

7. The standard rational function R ix] = P (x)jQ (x} is discontinuous for 
x=a, where a is any root of Q(jc ) = 0. Thus (# 2 +l)/(^ 2 -3# + 2) is discon 
tinuous for x=l. It will be noticed that in the case of rational functions a 
discontinuity is always associated with (a) a failure of the definition for a 
particular value of x and (6) a tending of the function to + oo or - oo as x 
approaches this value from either side. Such a particular kind of point of 
discontinuity is usually described as an infinity of the function. An infinity 
is the kind of discontinuity of most common occurrence in ordinary work. 

8. Discuss the continuity of 

J{(x -a)(b- x)}, V {(x -a)(b- x}}, J{(x - a)l(b - .-v)}, Z/{(x - )/(& - .r}} 

9. sin x and cos x are continuous for all values of x. 
[We have sin (x + /i) - sin #=2 sin %k cos (x + \h], 

which is numerically less than the numerical value of h.] 

10. For what values of x are tau#, cot .v, sec x, and coscc v continuous 
or discontinuous ? 

n - If /(y) is continuous for ;/ = ^, and &lt;f&gt; (x) is a continuous function of 
x which is equal to 9 when # = , then/{0 (x}} is continuous for #=. 

12. If (#) is continuous for any particular value of #, then any poly 
nomial in $ (x\ such as a (0 (#)} +..., is so too. 

13. Discuss the continuity of 

l/(acos 2 .?-f&sin 2 ^), v/(2 + cos #), x (l+sin#), 1/7(1 + sin. r). 

14. sin (1/.-C), ^-sin (l/^), and .v 2 sin (1 /.v) are continuous except for #=0. 

15. The function which is equal to a; sin (1 /A 1 ) except when # = 0, and to 
zero when ^7=0, is continuous for all values of x. 

16. \x\ and #-[#] are discontinuous for all integral values of x. 

17. For what (if any) values of x are the following functions discon 
tinuous : [.^J, yx], *J(x-\x\\ 

n. 



378 CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS [V 

18. Classification of discontinuities. Some of the preceding examples 
suggest a classification of different types of discontinuity. 

(1) Suppose that (x) tends to a limit as x+a either by values less 
than or by values greater than a. Denote these limits, as in 95, by (f&gt; (a 0) 
and (a + 0) respectively. Then, for continuity, it is necessary and sufficient 
that (x) should be defined for x = a, and that (a - 0) = (a) = (a + 0). Dis 
continuity may arise in a variety of ways. 

(a) (a 0) may be equal to (a+0), but 0(a) may not be defined, or 
may differ from (a- 0) and 0(a+0). Thus if $ (o?) = #sin (l/#) and a = 0, 
(0 - 0) = (0 + 0) =0, but O) is not defined for x = 0. Or if (a?) = [1 - a 2 ] 
anda = 0, (0-0) = $ (0 + 0) = 0, but 0(0) = 1. 

(j3) (a 0) and $ (a+0) may be unequal. In this case (a) may be 
equal to one or to neither, or be undefined. The first case is illustrated 
by (x) = \x\, for which (0-0)= - 1, (0+0)=0 (0) = ; the second by 
(# ) = [#] - [ _ x \ for which (0 - 0) = - 1, (0 + 0) = 1 , (0) = ; and the third 
by (.r) = [.?]+# sin (I/A-), for which (0 - 0) = - 1, (0 + 0) = 0, and (0) is 
undefined. 

In any of these cases we say that (x) has a simple discontinuity at 
x = a. And to these cases we may add those in which 0(#) is defined only 
on one side of x= a, and (a-0) or (a + 0), as the case may be, exists, but 
(#) is either not defined when x=a or has when x=a a value different from 
$(&lt;*-0) or 0(o + 0). 

It is plain from 95 that a function which increases or decreases steadily 
in the neighbourhood of x = a can have at most a simple discontinuity for x a. 

(2) It majr be the case that only one (or neither) of (a 0) and (a + (V 
exists, but that, supposing for example (a + 0) not to exist, (#)-- + 00 or 
(#)-- - oo as x-** a + 0, so that (x) tends to a limit or to + oo or to oo as 
x approaches a from either side. Such is the case, for instance, if (x) = \lx or 
(x} = 1/x 2 , and a = 0. In such cases we say (cf. Ex. 7) that x = a is an infinity 
of (x). And again we may add to these cases those in which (j?)-*- +QO 
or (#)-- ocas #-- a from one side, but (x) is not defined at all on the 
other side of x=a. 

(3) Any point of discontinuity which is not a point of simple discon 
tinuity nor an infinity is called a point of oscillatory discontinuity. Such 
is the point #=0 for the functions sin (I/a 1 )* C 1 /^) g i n (I/- 2 - 1 )- 

19. What is the nature of the discontinuities at x Q of the functions 



20. The function which is equal to 1 when x is rational and to when 
x is irrational (Ch. II, Ex. xvi^ 10) is discontinuous for all values of x. So too 
is any function which is defined only for rational or for irrational values cf x. 



99, 100] COXT1NUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS 179 

21. The function which is equal to as when x is irrational and to \ 
J{( l +P 2 )i( l + f)} when x is a rational fraction p/q (Ch. II, Ex. XVL 11) is 1 k 
discontinuous for all negative and for positive rational values of "#, but \ 
continuous for positive irrational values. 

22. For what points are the functions considered in Ch. IV, Exs. xxxi 
discontinuous, and what is the nature of their discontinuities ? [Consider, 
e.g., the function y = lim x n (Ex. 5). Here y is only defined when - 1 &lt;.?;&lt;! : 
it is equal to when -1&lt;^&lt;1 and to 1 when x=\. The points x=l and 
x= I are points of simple discontinuity.] 

j 
100. The fundamental property of a continuous function. 

It may perhaps be thought that the analysis of the idea of a con 
tinuous curve given in 98 is not the simplest or most natural 
possible. Another method of analysing our idea of continuity is the 
following. Let A and B be two points on the graph of $ (x) whose 
coordinates are # , &lt;/&gt;(# ) and x lt &lt;/&gt;(^) respectively. Draw any 
straight line X which passes between A and B. Then common 
sense certainly declares that if the graph of &lt; (x) is continuous it 
must cut \. 

If we consider this property as an intrinsic geometrical 
property of continuous curves it is clear that there is no real 
loss of generality in supposing \ to be parallel to the axis of x. 
In this case the ordinates of A and B cannot be equal: let us 
suppose, for definiteness, that &lt; (a^) &gt; &lt;f&gt; (a? ). And let X be the 
line y = 7;, where &lt; (a? ) &lt; 77 &lt; &lt;/&gt; (x^. Then to say that the graph 
of &lt;(#) must cut \ is the same thing as to say that there is a 
value of x between a- and x for which &lt;f) (x) = 77. 

We conclude then that a continuous function cj&gt; (x} must 
possess the following property : if 

&lt;/&gt;&gt; = 2/0, &lt;HO = yi&gt; 

and 7/0 &lt; 77 &lt; y l ,then there is a value of x between x and x-^for which 
(f&gt;(x) = 77. In other words as x varies from X Q to &\, y mast assume 
at least once every value between y Q and y l . 

We shall now prove that if &lt;/&gt; (x) is a continuous function of x in 
the sense defined in ^8 then it does in fact possess this property. 
There is a certain range of values of x, to the right of &, for which 
$(a )&lt;r). For &lt;(^ )&lt;?;, and so &lt;/&gt; (x) is certainly less than 77 if 



180 CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS [V 

(f&gt; (x) &lt;f&gt; (a? ) is numerically less than 77 c (# ). But since &lt; (a;) 
is continuous for X X Q) this condition is certainly satisfied if x is 
near enough to a? . Similarly there is a certain range of values, 
to the left of a?, , for which &lt; (a;) &gt; 77. 

Let us divide the values of a? between a* and x l into two classes 
L, R as follows : 

(1) in the class L we put all values f of # such that &lt; (a;) &lt; 77 
when x = f and for all values of a? between # and f ; 

(2) in the class R we put all the other values of a*, i.e. all 
numbers f such that either &lt; () = 17 or there is a value of a? between 
a? and f for which &lt; (a;) = 77. 

Then it is evident that these two classes satisfy all the 
conditions imposed upon the classes L, R of 17, and so constitute 
a section of the real numbers. Let f be the number corresponding 
to the section. 

First suppose &lt; (f ) &gt; 77, so that f belongs to the upper class : 
and let (/&gt; (f ) = 77 -f &, say. Then (f ) &lt; ?; and so 



for all values of f less than f , which contradicts the condition of 
continuity for x = f . 

Next suppose &lt;/&gt; (f ) = rj - k &lt;TJ. Then, if f is any number 
greater than f , either (/&gt; (f x ) ^ 77 or we can find a number " 
between f and f such that &lt;f)(j;")^rj. In either case we can 
find a number as near to f as we please and such that the corre 
sponding values of &lt;/&gt;(#) differ by more than jc. And this again 
contradicts the hypothesis that &lt;/&gt; (a?) is continuous for a? = f . 

Hence &lt;/&gt; ( ) = 97, and the theorem is established. It should 
be observed that we have proved more than is asserted explicitly 
in the theorem; we have proved in fact that f is the least value 
of x for which (f) (x) = rj. It is not obvious, or indeed generally 
true, that there is a least among the values of x for which a 
function assumes a given value, though this is true for continuous 
functions. 

It is easy to see that the converse of the theorem just proved is not 
true. Thus such a function as the function (x) whose graph is represented 



100-102] CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS 181 

by Fig. 31 obviously assumes at least once every value between (# ) and 
4&gt; ( x i) jet (#) is discontinuous. Indeed it is not even true that $ (#) must 
be continuous when it assumes each value once and once only. Thus let (x) 
be defined as follows from #=0 to #=1. If 57 = let (V) = 0; if 0&lt;o? &lt; 1 
let (#) = !-#; and if x=l let (#) = !. The graph of the function is 
shown in Fig. 32; it includes the points 0, C but not the points ^4, B. It 
is clear that, as x varies from to 1, (#) assumes once and once only every 
value between (0) = and 0(1) = 1 ; but 0f.r) is discontinuous" for^-=0 and 




Fig. 31. 




Fig. 32. 



As a matter of fact, however, the curves which usually occur in elementary 
mathematics are composed of a finite number of pieces along which y always 
varies in the same direction. It is easy^to show that if ?/ = (#) always varies 
in the same direction, i.e. steadily increases or decreases, as x varies from 
,r t , to tfj, then the two notions of continuity are really equivalent, i.e. that if 
(#) takes every value between (# ) and (^) then it must be a continuous 
function in the sense of 98 For let be any value of x between X Q and 
*i. As^| through values less than ,&lt;(#) tends to the limit 0(-0) 
( 95). Similarly as x-*~j; through values greater than , (x) tends to the 
limit (1 + 0). The function will be continuous for x= if and only if 



But if either of these equations is untrue, say the first, then it is evident that 
&lt;t&gt;(x) never assumes any value which lies between (-0) and (), which 
is contrary to our assumption. Thus (x) must be continuous. The net 
result of this and the last section is consequently to show that our commqrL- 
sense notion of what we mean by continuity is substantially accurate, and 
capable of precise statement in mathematical terms. 

101. In this and the following paragraphs we shall state and 
prove some general theorems concerning continuous functions. 



182 CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS [V 

THEOREM!. Suppose that &lt;(a?) is continuous for a? = f, and 
that &lt;/&gt;() is positive. Then we can determine a positive number e 
such that &lt;/&gt; (f ) ts positive throughout the interval (f e, 4- e). 



For, taking = &lt;() in the fundamental inequality of p. 175, 
we can choose e so that 



throughout (f e, f+ e), and then 

&gt;i*(f)&gt;o, 



so that &lt; (a?) is positive. There is plainly a corresponding theorem 
referring to negative values of &lt; (a?). 

THEOREM 2. //* ^&gt; (a?) is continuous for x = f, and &lt; (a;) vanishes 
for values of x as near to f 0,9 we please, or assumes, for values of 
x as near to f as we please, both positive and negative values, then 



This is an obvious corollary of Theorem 1. If &lt;/&gt; (f) is not zero, 
it must be positive or negative ; and if it were, for example, positive, 
it would be positive for all values of x sufficiently near to f , which 
contradicts the hypotheses of the theorem. 

102. The range of values of a continuous function. Let 

us consider a function &lt; (a?) about which we shall only assume at 
present that it is defined for every value of x in an interval (a, b). 



The values assumed by (f&gt; (x) for values of a;, in (, b) form an 
i aggregate S to which we can apply the arguments of 80, as we 
applied them in 81 to the aggregate of values of a function of n. 
If there is a number K such that $ (x) ^ K, for all values of x in 
question, we say that (/&gt; (x} is bounded above. In this case &lt;/&gt; (a?) 
possesses an upper bound M : no value of $ (x) exceeds M, but any 
number less than M is exceeded by at least one value of tf&gt;(x). 
Similarly we define bounded below , lower bound , bounded , as 
applied to functions of a continuous variable x. 

THEOREM 1. If&lt;f&gt; (x) is continuous throughout (a, b), then it is 
bounded in (a, b). 



102] CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS 183 

We can certainly determine an interval (a, f), extending to 
the right from a, in which &lt;/&gt; (#) is bounded. For since (/&gt; (x) is 
continuous for x = a, we can, given any positive number & however 
small, determine an interval (a, f) throughout which &lt;p (x) lies 
between &lt; (a) 8 and &lt;/&gt; (a) + 8; and obviously &lt;/&gt; (#) is bounded in 
}his interval. ^fy\^ ^U^+cT 

Now divide the points f of the interval (a, b) into two classes 
L, R, putting f in L if (j&gt; (f) is bounded in (a, f), and in J? if this 
is not the case. It follows from what precedes that L certainly 
exists: what .we propose to prove is that R does not. Suppose 
that R does exist, and let ft be the number corresponding to the 
section whose lower and upper classes are L and R. Since (/&gt; (x) 
is continuous for x = /3, we can, however small B may be, determine 
an interval (j3 ij, j3 + rj) * throughout which 

*09)-*&lt;f ()&lt;&gt;&lt;#) + & 

Thus $ (x) is bounded in (/3 ?;, $ + 77). Now /3 77 belongs to L. 
Therefore &lt;(#) is bounded in (a, /3 ?;): and therefore it is 
bounded in the whole interval (a, /3 4- 77). But ft + 77 belongs to .72 
and so &lt; (V) is rco bounded in (a, ft + 77). This contradiction 
shows that R does not exist. And so (f&gt; (x) is bounded in the 
whole interval (a, b), 

THEOREM 2. If &lt;j&gt; (x) is continuous throughout (a, b), and M 
and m are its upper and lower bounds, then &lt;/&gt; (x) assumes the values 
M and m at least once each in the interval. 

For, given any positive number S, we can find a value of x for 
which M- $ (x) &lt; 8 or 1/{M - &lt;j&gt; (x)} &gt; l/S. Hence 1/{M - &lt;j&gt; (x)} 
is not bounded, and therefore, by Theorem 1, is not continuous. 
But M&lt;f&gt;(x) is a continuous function, and so I/{M &lt;/&gt;(#)! is 
continuous at any point at which its denominator does not vanish 
(Ex. xxxvu. 1). There must therefore be one point at which 
the denominator vanishes: at this point (f&gt;(x)= M. Similarly it 
may be shown that there is a point at which &lt;/&gt; (x) m. 

The proof just given is somewhat subtle and indirect, and it 
may be well, in view of the great importance of the theorem, 
to indicate alternative lines of~~proof. It will however be con 
venient to postpone these for a moment f. 

* If jS = 6 we must replace this interval by (8-rj, j8), and p + rj by /3, throughout 
the argument which fo lows. 

f See 104. 



184 CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS [v 

Examples XXXVIII. 1. If $(#) = !/# except when # = 0, and &lt;/&gt;( = 
when .r = 0, then &lt;j&gt;(x) has neither an upper nor a lower bound in any 
interval which includes #=0 in its interior, as e.g. the interval ( 1, +1). 

2. If $ (x} = \lx- except when # = 0, and 0(o7)=0 when # = 0, then &lt;(#) 
has the lower bound 0, but no upper bound, in the interval (-1, +1). 

3. Let &lt;f&gt; (x} = sin (I/a:) except when # = 0, and &lt;f&gt;(x) = Q when x = 0. Then 
(x) is discontinuous for 57 = 0. In any interval ( 8, +8} the lower bound is 
1 and the upper bound 4-1, and each of these values is assumed by $ (x) an 
infinity of times. 

4. Let &lt; (#) = # - [.]. This function is discontinuous for all integral 
values of x. In the interval (0, 1) its lower bound is and its upper bound 1. 
It is equal to when #=0 or x\, but it is never equal to 1. Thus &lt;fi (x) 
never assumes a value equal to its upper bound. 

5. Let &lt;j)(.v) = when x is irrational, and &lt; (x) = q when x is a rational 
fraction pjq. Then (x) has the lower bound 0, but no upper bound, in any 
interval (a, 6). But if &lt;p (.#) = ( l) p &lt;? when x=p/q, then $ (#) has neither an 
upper nor a lower bound in any interval. 

103. The oscillation of a function in an interval. Let 

&lt;f&gt; (x) be any function bounded throughout (a, b), and M and m 
its upper and lower bounds. -We shall now use the notation 
M (a, b), m (a, b) for M, m, in order to exhibit explicitly the de 
pendence of M and m on a and b, and we shall write 

0(a, b) = M(a,b)-m(a, b). 

This number (a, b), the difference between the upper and 
lower bounds of &lt;/&gt; (x) in (a, b), we shall call the oscillation of &lt;/&gt; (x) 
in (a, b). The simplest of the properties of the functions M (a, b), 
m (a, b), (a, b) are as follows. 

(1) If a = c ^ b then M (a, b) is equal to the greater of M (a, c) 
and M(c, b), and m (a, b) to the lesser of m (a, c) and m (c, b). 

(2) M (a, b) is an increasing, m (a, b) a decreasing, and (a, b) 
an increasing function of b. 

(3) (a, b)^0 (a, c) + (c, b). 

The first two theorems are almost immediate consequences of 
our definitions. Let p be the greater of M (a, c) and M (c, b), and 
let B be any positive number. Then &lt;/&gt; (x) ^ /JL throughout (a, c) 
and (c, b}, and therefore throughout (a, b) ; and &lt; (#) &gt; /-t B 
somewhere in (a, c) or in (c, b), and therefore somewhere in (a, b\ 



102-105] CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS 185 

Hence M (a, b) = //,. The proposition concerning m may be proved 
similarly. Thus (1) is proved, arid (2) is an obvious corollary. 

Suppose now that /I/ a is the greater and M 2 the less of M (a, c) 
and M (c, b), and that m^ is the less and m 2 the greater of m (a, c) 
and in (c, b). Then, since c belongs to both intervals, &lt; (c) is not 
greater than AF 2 nor less than m. 2 . Hence M 2 ^ m 2 , whether these 
numbers correspond to the same one of the intervals (a, c) and 
(c, 6) or not, and 

(a, b) = M 1 - m 1 ^ M + M . 2 - m^ - m 2 . 
But (a, c) + (c, 6) = J/ x + M. 2 - n^ - m. 2 ; 

and (3) follows. 

104. Alternative proofs of Theorem 2 of 102. The most straight 
forward proof of Theorem 2 of 102 is as follows. Let be any number of 
the interval (a, 6). The function M (a, ) increases steadily with and never 
exceeds M. We can therefore construct a section of the numbers In 
putting in L or in It according as M(a, ) &lt; M or J/(#, |) = M. Let /3 be 
the number corresponding to the section. If a &lt; /3 &lt; b, we havo 



for all positive values of /, and so 

#03-17, 

by (1) of 103. Hence ( (#) assumes, for values of .r as near as we please to 
/3, values as near as we please to J/, and so, since (x) is continuous, &lt; (3) 
must be equal to M. 

If /3 = a then J/(a, a + ^^J/". And if 3 = 6 then 3/(a, 6-?;) &lt; Jf, and 
so M(b T], b}=M. In either case the argument may be completed as 
before. 

The theorem may also be proved by the method of repeated bisection 
used in 71. If M is the upper bound of (a?) in an interval PQ, and PQ 
is divided into two equal parts, then it is possible to find a half P } Q l in which 
the upper bound of (x) is also M. Proceeding as in 71, we construct a 
sequence of intervals PQ. P v Qi^ P^Qz, in each of which the upper bound 
of (x) is M. These intervals, as in 71, converge to a point T, and it is 
easily proved that the value of &lt;p (x) at this point is M. 

105. Sets of intervals on a line. The Heine-Borel 
Theorem. We shall now proceed to prove some theorems con 
cerning the oscillation of a function which are of a somewhat 
abstract character but of very great importance, particularly, as 
we shall see later, in the theory of integration. These theorems 
depend upon a general theorem concerning intervals on a line. 



186 CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS [V 

Suppose that we are given a set of intervals in a straight 
line, that is to say an aggregate each of whose members is an 
interval (a, /3). We make no restriction as to the nature of 
these intervals; they may be finite or infinite in number; they 
may or may not overlap*; and any number of them may bo 
included in others. 

It is worth while in passing to give a few examples /&gt;f sets of intervals to 
which we shall have occasion to return later. 

(i) If the interval (0, 1) is divided into n equal parts then the n intervals 
thus formed define a finite set of non- overlapping intervals which just cover 
up the line. 

(ii) We take every point of the interval (0, 1), and associate with the 
interval ( e, + e), where e is a positive number less than 1, except that 
with we associate (0, ) and with 1 we associate (1-f, 1), and in general we 
reject any part of any interval which projects outside the interval (0, 1). We 
thus define an infinite set of intervals, and it is obvious that many of them 
overlap with one another. 

(iii) We take the rational points p\q of the interval (0, 1), and associate 
with o the interval 



where e is positive and less than 1. We regard as 0/1 and 1 as 1/1 : in 
these two cases we reject the part of the interval which lies outside (0, 1). We 
obtain thus an infinite set of intervals, which plainly overlap with one another, 
since there are an infinity of rational points, other than p/q y in the interval 
associated with plq. 

The Heine-Borel Theorem. Suppose that we are given an 
interval (a, b), and a- set of intervals I each of whose members is 
included in (a, b). Suppose further that I possesses the following 
properties : 

(i) every point of (a, b), other than a and b, lies inside ]" at 
least one interval of I ; 

(ii) a is the left-hand end point, and b the right-hand end 
point, of at least one interval of I. 

Then it is possible to choose a finite number of intervals from 
the set I which form a set of intervals possessing the properties (i) 
and (ii). 

* The word overlap is used in its obvious sense: two intervals overlap if they 
have points in common which are not end points of either. Thus {0, -|) and (^, 1) 
overlap. A pair of intervals such as (0, ^) and (^, 1) may be said to abut. 

t That is to say in and not at an end of. 



105] CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS 187 

We know that a is the left-hand end point of at le ast one 
interval of /, say (a, a a ). We know also that a-^ lies inside at least 
one interval of /, say (a/, 2 ). Similarly a 2 lies inside an interval 
(a/, a 3 ) of /. It is plain that this argument may be repeated in 
definitely, unless after a finite number of steps a n coincides with b. 

If a n does coincide with b after a finite number of steps then 
there is nothing further to prove, for we have obtained a finite set 
of intervals, selected from the intervals of /, and possessing the 
properties required. If a n never coincides with b, then the points 
a l5 2 , a 3 , ... must (since each lies to the right of its predecessor) 
tend to a limiting position, but this limiting position may, so far 
as we can tell, lie anywhere in (a, b). 

Let us suppose now that the process just indicated, starting 
from a, is performed in all possible ways, so that we obtain all 
possible sequences of the type a lt a. 2 , 3 , .... Then we can prove 
that there must be at least one such sequence which arrives at b 
after a finite number of steps. 



a a j a x a 2 a 2 $ o 3 | Q I, b 

Fig. 33. 

There are two possibilities with regard to any point f between 
a and 6. Either (i) f lies to the left of some point a n of some 
sequence or (ii) it does not. We divide the points f into two 
classes L and R according as to whether (i) .or (ii) is true. The 
class L certainly exists, since all points of the interval (a, a x ) 
belong to L. We shall now prove that R does not exist, so that 
every point f belongs to L. 

If R exists then L lies entirely to the left of R, and the classes 
Z, R form a section of the real numbers between a arid, b, to 
which corresponds a number f . The point f lies inside an interval 
of /, say (f , f "), and f belongs to L, and so lies to the left of 
some term a of some sequence. But then we can take (f , f ") 
as the interval (a,/, a n +i) associated with a n in our construction 
of the sequence a lt a 2 , a 3 , ...; and all points to the left of f" 
lie to the left of a n+1 . There are therefore points of L to the 
right of f , and this contradicts the definition of R. It is 
therefore impossible that R should exist. 



188 CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS [v 

Thus every point f belongs to L. Now b is the right-hand 
end point of an interval of /, say (&,, b), and ^ belongs to L. 
Hence there is a member a n of a sequence a l} a 2 , a s , ... such that 
a n &gt;b l . But then we may take the interval (a n f , a n+l ) corre 
sponding to a n to be (6 l5 6), and so we obtain a sequence in which 
the term after the nth coincides with b, and therefore a finite set 
of intervals having the properties required. Thus the theorem is 
proved. 

It is instructive to consider the examples of p. 186 in the light of this 
theorem. 

(i) Here the conditions of the theorem are not satisfied the points 
1/n, 2/n, 3/w, ... do not lie inside any interval of I 

(ii) Here the conditions of the theorem are satisfied. The sot of 
intervals 

(0, 2 f ), (e, 3*), (2*, 4e), ..., (l-2 f , 1), 

associated with the points e, 2e, 3e, ..., 1 - e, possesses the properties re 
quired. 

(iii) In this case we can provo, by using the theorem, that there arc, 
if e is small enough, points of (0, 1) which do not lie in any interval of /. 

If every point of (0, 1) lay inside an interval of / (with the obvious 
reservation as to the end points), then we could find a finite number of intervals 
of / possessing the same property and having therefore a total length greater 
than 1. Now there are two intervals^ total length 2f, for which &lt;?=!, and \ 
q-l intervals, of total length 2e(^-l)/^ 3 , associated with any other value 
of q. The sum of any finite nuBrber of intervals of / can therefore not be , 
greater than 2e times that of the scries 

V i - ~L 113 

-^r e p +P+33+43+ 

which will be shown to be convergent in Ch. VIII. Hence it follows that, if 
e is small enough, the supposition that every point of (0, 1) lies inside an 
interval of / leads to a contradiction. 

The reader may be tempted to think that this proof is needlessly 
elaborate, and that the existence of points of the interval, not in any interval 
of /, follows at once from the fact that the sum of all these intervals is less 
than 1. But the theorem to which he would be appealing is (when the set of 
intervals is infinite) far from obvious, and can only be proved rigorously by 
some such use of the Heine-Borel Theorem as is made in the text. 

108. We shall now apply the Heine-Borel Theorem to the 
proof of two important theorems concerning the oscillation of a 
continuous function. 



105, 106] CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS 189 

THEOREM I. If c/&gt; (x} is continuous throughout the interval 
(a, b), tli en we can divide (a, b) into ajfcnite number of sub-intervals - 
(a, tfj), (#!, tf^X (#n&gt; &) ?n ea c ^ f which the oscillation of &lt;/&gt; (x) is 
less than an assigned positive number B. 

Let f be any number between a and 6. Since $ (#) is con 
tinuous for x=-%, we can determine an interval (f e, f + e) such 
that the oscillation of &lt; (a?) in this interval is less than 8. It is 
indeed obvious that there are an infinity of such intervals corre 
sponding to every f and every B, for if the condition is satisfied for 
any particular value of e, then it is satisfied a fortiori for any smaller 
value. What values of e are admissible will naturally depend upon 
f ; we have at present no reason for supposing that a value of e 
admissible for one value of f will be admissible for another. We 
shall call the intervals thus associated with f the ^-intervals of %. 

If f = a then we can determine an interval (a, a -f e). and so an 
infinity of such intervals, having the same property. These we 
call the ^-intervals of a, and we can define in a similar manner the 
^-intervals of 6. 

Consider now the set / of intervals formed by taking all the 
S-intervals of all points of (a, b). It is plain that this set satisfies 
the conditions of the Heine-Borel Theorem ; every point interior 
to the interval is interior to at least one interval of /, and a and b 
are end* points of at least one such interval. We can therefore 
determine a set / which is formed by a finite number of intervals 
of /, and which possesses the same property as / itself. 

The intervals which compose the set 1 will in general overlap 
as in Fig. 34. But their end 
points obviously divide up 
(a, 6) into a finite set of in- a b 

tervals I" each of which is 

included in an interval of / , and in each of which the oscillation 
of &lt;j&gt; (a) is less than B. Thus Theorem I is proved. 

THEOREM II. Given any positive number B, we can find a 
number rj such that, if the interval (a, b) is divided in any manner 
into sub-intervals of length less than 77, then the oscillation of,^(x) 
in each of them will be less than B. 

&lt;** 



190 CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS [V 

Take B l &lt; 5, and construct, as in Theorem I, a finite set of sub- 
intervals j in each of which the oscillation of &lt;f&gt; (x) is less than B lt 
Let 77 be the length of the least of these sub-intervals j. If 
now we divide (a, b) into parts each of length less than rj, then any 
such part must lie entirely within at most two successive sub- 
intervals j. Hence, in virtue of (3) of 103, the oscillation of &lt;/&gt; (a?), 
in one of the parts of length less than ?;, cannot exceed twice the 
greatest oscillation of $ (x) in a sub-interval j t and is therefore 
less than 2S 1? and therefore than B. 

This theorem is of fundamental importance in the theory of 
definite integrals (Ch. VII). It is impossible, without the use of 
this or some similar theorem, to prove that a function continuous 
throughout an interval necessarily possesses an integral over that 
interval. 

107. Continuous functions of several variables. The 

notions of continuity and discontinuity may be extended to 
functions of several independent variables (Ch. II, 31 et seg.). 
Their application to such functions, however, raises questions 
much more complicated and difficult than those which we have 
considered in this chapter. It would be impossible for us to 
discuss these questions in any detail here ; but we shall, in the 
sequel, require to know what is meant by a continuous function of 
two variables, and we accordingly give the following definition. 
It is a straightforward generalisation of the last form of the de 
finition of 98. 

The function cf&gt; (x, y) of the two variables x and y is said to be 
continuous for x = f , y = TJ if] given any positive number B, how 
ever small, we can choose e (B) so that 



when ^ x % \ ^ e (B) and ^ | y TJ \ ^ e (B); that is to say if we 
can draw a square, whose sides are parallel to the axes of coordinates 
and of length 2e (B), whose centre is the point (, vj), and which is such 
that the value of (f&gt; (x, y) at any point inside it or on its boundary 
differs from &lt; (f, ??) by less than B.* 

This definition of course presupposes that &lt;f&gt; (x, y) is defined at 
all points of the square in question, and in particular at the point 

* The reader should draw a figure to illustrate the definition. 



106-108] CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS 101 

(f, 77). Another method of stating the definition is this : &lt; (x, y) is 
continuous for #=f, y=r] if (/&gt;(#, y) -*-&lt;/&gt;(, v} when x-*~%, y~^y 
in any manner. This statement is apparently simpler; but it 
contains phrases the precise meaning of which has not yet been 
explained and can only be explained by the help of inequalities 
like those which occur in our original statement. 

It is easy to prove that the sums, the products, and in general 
the quotients of continuous functions of two variables are them 
selves continuous. A polynomial in two variables is continuous for 
all values of the variables ; and the ordinary functions of x and y 
which occur in every-day analysis are generally continuous, i.e. 
are continuous except for pairs of values of x and y connected by 
special relations. 

The reader should observe carefully that to assert the continuity of 
&lt;f) (x, y} with respect to the two variables x and y is to assert much more 
than its continuity with respect to each variable considered separately. It is 
plain that if &lt;f&gt; (x, y} is continuous with respect to x and y then it is certainly 
continuous with respect to x (or y} when any fixed value is assigned to ?/ 
(or a:). But the converse is by no means true. Suppose, for example, that 



\) 



when neither x nor y is zero, and (x, ?/)=0 when either x ory is zero. Then 
if y has any fixed value, zero or not, (j) (x, y} is a continuous function of ,r, 
and in particular continuous for x = ; for its value when x is zero, and it 
tends to the limit zero as x-*-0. In the same way it may be shown that 
$ (Xj y} is a continuous function of ?/. But &lt;f&gt; (x, y) is not a continuous function 
of x andy for x=0, y = Q. Its value when ^- = 0, y = is zero ; but if x and 
y tend to zero along the straight line y = ax, then 

$ (x, //) = r |^ &gt; Km $ (x, y} = -^ , T ^ 

which may have any value between 1 and 1. 

108. Implicit functions. We have already, in Oh. II, met with 
the idea of an implicit function. Thus, if x arid y are connected by the 
relation 

jl i -jgf-y-*-o ................................. (i), 

then y is an implicit function of x. 

But it is far from obvious that such an equation as this does rejdlyjlefine 
a function y of x, or several such functions. In Ch. II we were content to 
taKeTh is for granted. We are now in a position to consider whether the 
assumption we made then was justified. 



192 



CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS 



[V 



We shall find the following terminology useful. Suppose that it is possible 
to surround a point (a, 6), as in 107, with a square throughout which 
a certain condition is satisfied. We shall call such a square a neighbourhood 
of (a, 6), and say that the condition in question is satisfied in the neighbour 
hood of (a, 6), or near (a, 6), meaning by this simply that it is possible to find 
soiw square throughout which the condition is satisfied. It is obvious that 
similar language may be used when we are dealing with a single variable, the 
square being replaced by an interval on a line. 

THEOREM. If .(i) f(x,y} is a continuous function of x a, id y in the 
neighbourhood of (a, 6), 

(ii) /(a, &)=0, 

(iii) f(x,y) is, for all values of x in the neighbourhood of a, a steadily 
increasing function of y, in the stricter sense of 95, t$H ;^^&lt; t (x M* ) N^Vu* 

then (1) there is a unique function y = ^&gt; (x} which, when substituted in the 
equation f (x, y) = 0, satisjies it identically for all values of x in the neighbour 
hood of a, 

(2) (#) is continuous for all values of x in the neighbourhood of a. 

In the figure the square represents a neighbourhood of (a, 6) through 
out which the conditions (i) and (iii) are 
satisfied, and P the point (a, b). If we 
take Q and R as in the figure, it follows from 
(iii) that f(x, y} is positive at Q and negative 
at R. This being so, and f(x, y} being con 
tinuous at Q and at R, we can draw lines QQ 
and 111? parallel to OX, so that RQ is parallel 
to OY and f(x, y} is positive at all points of 
QQ and negative at all points of RR . In par 
ticular /(#, y] is positive at Q and negative at 
A , and therefore, in virtue of (iii) and 100, 
vanishes once and only once at a point P on 



Q 



Q 



Fig. 35. 



/&lt;"(/. The same construction gives us a unique point at which 
on each ordinate between RQ and R Q . It is obvious, moreover, that the 
same construction can be carried out to the left of RQ. The aggregate of 
points such as P gives us the graph of the required function y = (f&gt; (#). 

It remains to prove that (x) is continuous. This is most simply effected 
by using the idea of the limits of indetermination of (x) as x-*~a ( 96). 
Suppose that x-+-a, and let X and A be the limits of indetermination of -0 (x) 
as x-*~a. It is evident that the points (a, X) and (a, A) lie on QR. Moreover, 
we can find a sequence of values of x such that $ (.r)-*-X when .7;-*- a through 
the values of the sequence; and since / {#, (#;} = 0, and /(#,?/) is a con 
tinuous function of A- and y, we have 



Hence X = 6; and similarly A=6. Thus (#) tends to the limit b as x-**a t 
and so (.r) is continuous for x=a. It is evident that we can show in 



108-109] CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS 193 

exactly the same way that $(#) is continuous for any value of x in the 
neighbourhood of a. 

It is clear that the truth of the theorem would not be affected if we were 
to change increasing to decreasing 3 in condition (iii). 

As an example, let us consider the equation (1), taking a = 0, 6=0. It is 
evident that the conditions (i) and (ii) are satisfied. Moreover 



has, when x, y, and y are sufficiently small, the sign opposite to that of 
?/-/. Hence condition (iii) (with decreasing 5 for increasing ) is satisfied. 
It follows that there is one and only one continuous function y which 
satisfies the equation (1) identically and vanishes with x. 
The same conclusion would follow if the equation were 

y*-xy-y-* = 0. Vi *.,(.**} 

The function in question is in this case 

yf{i+*-V(i +*+*% 

where the square root is positive. The second root, in which the sign of the 
square root is changed, does not satisfy the condition of vanishing with x. 

There is pjiejaoint in the proof which the reader should be careful to ob 
serve. We supposed that the hypotheses of the theorem were satisfied *m 
the neighbourhood of (a, 6) , that is to say throughout a certain square 
* = # ^ + * , ^-e^y^fj + e. The conclusion holds in the neighbourhood 
of x a\ that is to say throughout a certain interval e! &lt; # ^ + ^ . There 
is nothing to show that the ^ of the conclusion is the e of the hypotheses, and I 
indeed this is generally untrue. 

109. Inverse Functions. Suppose in particular that /(a?, y) is of the 
form F(y] - x. We then obtain the following theorem. 

If F(y] is a function of y, continuous and steadily increasing (or decreasing}, 
in the stricter sense of 95, in the neighbourhood of y = b, and F(b} = a, then 
there is a unique continuous function y = &lt;fr(x) which is equal to b when x = a 
and satisfies the equation F(y} = x identically in the neighbourhood of x=a. 

The function thus defined is called the inverse function of F(y}. 

Suppose for example that y*=x, a = 0, 6 = 0. Then all the conditions of 
the theorem are satisfied. The inverse function is x=%y. 

If we had supposed that y^ = x then the conditions of the theorem would 
notjhave been satisfied, for y 2 is not a steadily increasing function of y in any 
interval which includes y = : it decreases when y is negative and increases 
when y is positive. And in this case the conclusion of the theorem does not 
hold, for y 2 =x defines two functions of x, viz. y ^Jx and y= *Jx t both of 
which vanish when #=0, and each of which is defined only for positive values 
of x, so that the equation has sometimes two solutions and sometimes none. 
The reader should consider the more general equations 



H. 



/ 



1.3 



194 CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS [V 

in the same way. Another interesting example is given by the equation 

y*-y-x = 0, 
already considered in Ex. xiv. 7. 

Similarly the equation &my = x 

has just one solution which vanishes with #, viz. the value of arc sin x which 
vanishes with x. There are of course an infinity of solutions, given by the 
other values of arc sin x (cf. Ex. xv. 10), which do not satisfy this condition. 

So far we have considered only what happens in the neighbourhood of a 
particular value of x. Let us suppose now that F(y] is positive and steadily 
increasing (or decreasing) throughout an interval (a, 6). Given any point 
of (a, b\ we can determine an interval i including , and a unique and con 
tinuous inverse function fa (x} defined throughout i. 

From the set 1 of intervals i we can, in virtue of the Heine-Borel Theorem, 
pick out a finite sub-set covering up the whole interval (a, b) ; and it is plain 
that the finite set of functions fa (#), corresponding to the sub-set of intervals i 
thus selected, define together a unique inverse function $ (x) continuous 
throughout (a, b). 

We thus obtain the theorem : if x = F(y], where F(y] is continuous and 
increases steadily and strictly from A to B as x increases from a to 6, then there 
is a unique inverse function y = $(x} which is continuous and increases steadily 
and strictly from a to b as x increases from A to B. 

It is worth while to show how this theorem can be obtained directly with 
out the help of the more difficult theorem of 108. Suppose that A &lt; &lt; B, 
and consider the class of values of y such that (i) a &lt;y &lt; 6 and (ii) F(y] &lt; . 
This class has an upper bound rj, and plainly F(rfi&lt;. If F(rj) were less 
than , we could find a value of y such that y &gt;rj and F(y}&lt;%, and T) would 
not be the upper bound of the class considered. Hence F(rj) = . The 
equation F(y} = has therefore a unique solution # = 77 = &lt;()&gt; sa J 5 an( ^ 
plainly 77 increases steadily and continuously with |, which proves the theorem. 

MISCELLANEOUS EXAMPLES ON CHAPTER V. 

1. Show that, if neither a nor b is zero, then 

ax* + bx n - 1 + ...+ = ax n (1 + t x \ 
where c x is of the first order of smallness when x is large. 

2. If P(x} = ax n +bx n ~ l + ...+, and a is not zero, then as x increases 
P(x) has ultimately the sign of a ; and so has P(x+\}-P(x\ where X is 
any constant. 

3. Show that in general 



where a = a/A, ft = (bA -aB)/A 2 , and e z is of the first order of smallness when 
c is large. Indicate any exceptional cases. 



CONTINUOUS AND DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS 195 

4. Express (ax 2 + bx + c)/(Ax 2 + Bx+C) 
in the form a + (ft fa;) + (y/x*) (l+ x \ 
where c x is of the first order of smallness when x is large. 

5. Show that lim *Jx{J(x+a}- Jx} = %a. 
[Use the formula 



X-*- 



6. Show that V(#+a)=V# + J(a/&lt;/#) (1 +e x ), where e x is of the first order 
of smallness when x is large. 

7. Find values of a and ft such that N /(cu? 2 -f 2bx + c) - ax - ft has the limit 
zero as x-*- QO ; and prove that lim x y(ax* + 2bx + c) - ax - ft} = (ac - 6 2 )/2a. 

8. Evaluate lim x 



9. Prove that (sec x - tan #)-*-0 as x-*~%n. 

10. Prove that (#) = 1 - cos (1 - cos x} is of the fourth order of smallness 
when x is small ; and find the limit of &lt; (#)/#* as x-+Q. 

11. Prove that &lt; (a?) =# sin (sin a?) - sin 2 x is of the sixth order of smallness 
when x is small ; and find the limit of &lt; (rf/x 6 as x-&gt;-0. 

12. From a point P on a radius 0^ of a circle, produced beyond the circle, 
a tangent PT is drawn to the circle, touching it in T, and TN is drawn per 
pendicular to OA. Show that NAjAP^l as P moves up to A. 

13. Tangents are drawn to a circular arc at its middle point and its 
extremities ; A is the area of the triangle formed by the chord of the arc and 
the two tangents at the extremities, and A the area of that formed by the 
three tangents. Show that A/A ^4 as the length of the arc tends to zero. 

14. For what values of a does {a + sin (!/#)}/# tend to (1) oo , (2) -x, 
as a?-^0? [To GO if a&gt;l, to -co if &lt;_l: the function oscillates if 
-ISaJSL] 

.15.^ If &lt;(#) = 1/0 when a?=p/q, and 0(*) = when x is irrational, then 
(x) is continuous for all irrational and discontinuous for all rational values 
of x. 

16. Show that the function whose graph is drawn in Fig. 32 may be repre 
sented by either of the formulae 

1 - x + [x] -[!-#], l-x- lim (cos 2n + 1 irx). 

17. Show that the function 0(#) which is equal to when #=0, to \-x 
when ()&lt;*&lt;, to \ when x = \, to f- A - when J&lt;#&lt;1, and to 1 when 
,r = l, assumes every value between and 1 once and once only as x increases 
from to 1, but is discontinuous for x=Q, x=$, and #=1. Show also that 
the function may be represented by the formula" 



13-2 



198 



DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS 



P along the curve from either side. We have now to distinguish 
two cases, a general case and an exceptional one. 




ON M NX 

Fig. 36. 

The general case is that in which ty is not equal to JTT, so that 
PT is not parallel to OF. In this case RPQ tends to the limit 
-v/r, and 

RQ/PR^tanRPQ 

tends to the limit tan &gt;|r. Now 

RQ/PR - (NQ - MP)/MN = {&lt;f&gt; (x + h) - $ (x)}/h ; 



and so 



r 
lim 



- 

* 



tan 



(1). 



The reader should be careful to note that in all these equa 
tions all lengths are regarded as affected with the proper sign, 
so that (e.g.) RQ is negative in the figure when Q lies to the left 
of P ; and that the convergence to the limit is unaffected by the 
sign of h. 

Thus the assumption that the curve which is the graph of 
&lt;f&gt; (x) has a tangent at P, which is not perpendicular to the axis of 
x, implies that &lt;/&gt; (x) has, for the particular value of x corresponding 
to P, the property that {&lt;f&gt; (x + h) &lt;j&gt;(x)}/h tends to a limit when 
h tends to zero. 

This of course implies that both of 

{0 (x + A) - $ (.*)}/*, {&lt;/&gt; (x - A) - (*)}/( - A) 

tend to limits when A--0 by positive values only, and that the two limits 
are equal. If these limits exist but are not equal, then the curve y = (f&gt; (x} 
has an angle at the particular point considered, as in Fig. 37. 

Now let us suppose that the curve has (like the circle or 
ellipse) a tangent at every point of its length, or at any rate every 



110, 111] DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS 199 

portion of its length which corresponds to a certain range of 
variation of x. Further let us suppose this tangent never per 
pendicular to the axis of x : in the case of a circle this would of 
course restrict us to considering an arc less than a semicircle. 
Then an equation such as (1) holds for all values of x which fall 
inside this range. To each such value of x corresponds a value of 
tan ^ : tan ^r is a function of x, which is defined for all values of 
x in the range of values under consideration, and which may be 
calculated or derived from the original function &lt;$&gt;(x). We shall 
call this function the derivative or derived function of &lt;/&gt; (x), and 
we shall denote it by 

Another name for the derived function of &lt; (x) is the differ 
ential coefficient of &lt; (x) ; and the operation of calculating 
&lt;f) (x) from &lt;f&gt; (x) is generally known as differentiation. This 
terminology is firmly established for historical reasons : see 
115. 

Before we proceed to consider the special case mentioned 
above, in which i/r = -|TT, we shall illustrate our definition by some 
general remarks and particular illustrations. 

111. Some general remarks. (1) The existence of a derived 
function &lt; (x) for all values of x in the interval a ^ x b implies 
that &lt;f&gt; (x) is continuous at every point of this interval. For it is 
evident that {&lt; (x + h) &lt;f&gt; (x)}/h cannot tend to a limit unless 
Hm &lt;/&gt;(# + h) = cf&gt; (x), and it is this which is the property denoted 
by continuity. 

(2) It is natural to ask whether the converse is true, i.e. 
whether every continuous curve has a 
definite tangent at every point, and 
every function a differential coefficient 
for every value of x for which it is 
continuous.* The answer is obviously 

No: it is sufficient to consider the 

^ \ 

curve formed by two straight lines Fj - g 37 

meeting to form an angle (Fig. 37). 

* We leave out of account the exceptional case (which we have still to examine) 
in which the curve is supposed to have a tangent perpendicular to OX: apart from 
this possibility the two forms of the question stated above are equivalent. 




200 DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS [VI 

The reader will see at once that in this case {&lt;/&gt; (x + h) &lt;f&gt; (x)}/h 
has the limit tan/3 when h-*~0 by positive values and the limit 
tan a when h -&gt;-0 by negative values. 

This is of course a case in which a curve might reasonably be said to have 
two directions at a point. But the following example, although a little more 
difficult, shows conclusively that there are cases in which a continuous curve 
cannot be said to have either one direction or several directions at one of its 
points. Draw the graph (Fig. 14, p. 53) of the function x sin (l/#). The 
function is not denned for #=0, and so is discontinuous for #=0. On 
the other hand the function defined by the equations 



is continuous for #=0 (Exs. xxxvu. 14, 15), and the graph of this function 
is a continuous curve. 

But &lt;(#) has no derivative for # = 0. For $ (0) would be, by definition, 
lim {$ (h) - &lt;p (0)}/A or lim sin (I/A) ; and no such limit exists. 

i It has even been shown that a function of x may be continuous and yet 

~ \ have no derivative for any value of .r, but the proof of this is much more 

^ difficult. The reader who is interested in the question may be referred to 

Bromwich s Infinite Series, pp. 490-1, or Hobson s Theory of Functions 

of a Real Variable, pp. 620-5. 

(3) The notion of a derivative or differential coefficient was 

suggested to us by geometrical considerations. But there is 

nothing geometrical in the notion itself. The derivative &lt; (x) of 

a function $ (x) may be denned, without any reference to any kind 

of geometrical representation of &lt;p (#), by the equation 



and &lt; (x) has or has not a derivative, for any particular value of x, 
according as this limit does or does not exist. The geometry of 
curves is merely one of many departments of mathematics in which 
1 the idea of a derivative finds an application. 

Another important application is in dynamics. Suppose that a particle is 
moving in a straight line in such a way that at time t its distance from a fixed 
point on the line is s = &lt; (t). Then the velocity of the particle at time t is 
by definition the limit of 



as A-*-0. The notion of velocity is in fact merely a special case of that of 
the derivative of a function. 



Ill, 112] DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS 201 

Examples XXXIX. 1. If $ (x} is a constant then &lt; (#) = 0. Interpret 
this result geometrically. 

2. If (f&gt;(x) = ax + b then $ (#) = . Prove this (i) from the formal de 
finition and (ii) by geometrical considerations. 

3. If (f) (x)=x m , where m is a positive integer, then $ (#) = 
[For &lt; (#) = lim 






The reader should observe that this method cannot be applied to #&gt;/, 
where p/y is a rational fraction, as we have no means of expressing (# + A)P/ 
as a finite series of powers of h. We shall show later on ( 118) that the result 
of this example holds for all rational values of m. Meanwhile the reader 
will find it instructive to determine &lt; (x) when m has some special fractional 
value (e.g. J), by means of some special device.] 

4. If (x) sin #, then &lt; (x) = cos # ; and if (#) = cos x, then 
&lt; (#) = - sin x. 

[For example, if $ (#) = sin #, we have 

{&lt; (#+A) - (#)}/A = (2 sin JA cos (x + JA)}/A f 

the limit of which, when k-&gt;-0, is cos a?, since lim cos (# + ^A) = cos # (the cosine 
being a continuous function) and lim {(sin A)/A} = 1 (Ex. xxxvi. 13).] 

5. Equations of the tangent and normal to a curve y=&lt;t&gt;(x). The 
tangent to the curve at the point (# , y ) is the line through (# , y ) which 
makes with OJTan angle ^, where tan \|^ = (# ). Its equation is therefore 



and the equation of the normal (the perpendicular to the tangent at the 
point of contact) is 

(y - yo) &lt; (#o) + x - ^o = o. 

We have assumed that the tangent is not parallel to the axis of y. In 
this special case it is obvious that the tangent and normal are X=XQ and 
y=y respectively. 

6. Write down the equations of the tangent and normal at any point of 
the parabola # 8 =4ay. Show that if # = 2a/wi, y = a/w 2 , then the tangent 
at # /o is .r 



112. We have seen that if (#) is not continuous for a value 
of x then it cannot possibly have a derivative for that value of x. 
Thus such functions as \\x or sin (I/a?), which are not defined for 
# = 0, and so necessarily discontinuous for x = 0, cannot have 
derivatives for # = 0. Or again the function [#], which is discon 
tinuous for every integral value of x, has no derivative for any 
such value of #. 



202 



DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS 



[VI 



Example. Since [#] is constant between every two integral values of #, 
its derivative, whenever it exists, has the value zero. Thus the deriva 
tive of [#], which we may represent by [#] , is a function equal to zero for 
all values of x save integral values and undefined for integral values. It 

is interesting to note that the function 1 -.- has exactly the same 

sm trx 

properties. 



We saw also in Ex. xxxvu. 7 that the types of discontinuity 
which occur most commonly, when we are dealing with the very 
simplest and most obvious kinds of functions, such as polynomials 
or rational or trigonometrical functions, are associated with a 
relation of the type 

(j) (x) -* + 00 

or &lt;f&gt; (x) -*- oo . In all these cases, as in such cases as those con 
sidered above, there is no derivative for certain special values of x. 







a Q 






/ 


Q K 






1 




\ 








V 




R 


_P 




R R 




p 


R P 


R 


- R R 


R 


P 






y 1 




/ 




\ 




\ 


\ 






Q 






a 


a s 






a) (I) (c) (d) 



Fig. 38. N /T, \ & ^ 

In fact, as was pointed out in 111, (1), all discontinuities of$(x) are 
also discontinuities of &lt;f&gt; (x). But the converse is not true, as we 
may easily see if we return to the geometrical point of view of 110 
and consider the special case, hitherto left aside, in which the graph 
of &lt;/&gt; (x) has a tangent parallel to Y. This case may be subdivided 
into a number of cases, of which the most typical are shown in 
Fig. 38. In cases (c) and (d) the function is two valued on one side 
of P and not defined on the other. In such cases we may consider 
the two sets of values of &lt; (x), which occur on one side of P or the 
other, as defining distinct functions fa(x) and fa(x), the upper 
part of the curve corresponding to fa (x). 



112, 113] DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS 203 

The reader will easily convince himself that in (a) 

as h -9-0, and in (6) 
while in (c) 






and in (d) 

(&lt;/&gt;! (a; + A) - & O)}//* 0) , {, (a? + A) - &lt; 2 (#)}//* -^+ oo , 

though of course in (c) only positive and in (d) only negative 
values of h can be considered, ajact which by itself would preclude 
the existence of a derivative. 

We can obtain examples of these four cases by considering the 
functions defined by the equations 

^5 y* = x, (b) f = -x, (c) 7/ 2 = #, (d) y* = -x, 
the special value of x under consideration being x = 0. 

113. Some general rules for differentiation. Through 
out the theorems which follow we assume that the functions 
f(x) and F(x) have derivatives / (X) and F (x) for the values of 
x considered. 

(1) // (/&gt; (x) =/(#) + F (x), then &lt;/&gt; (x) has a derivative 

f -/() +&gt;(&gt; 

(2) //"&lt;/&gt; (x) = kf (x), where k is a constant, then &lt;j&gt; (x) has a 
derivative 



We leave it as an exercise to the reader to deduce these results 
from the general theorems stated in Ex. xxxv. 1. \^ \ 

(3) If (f&gt; (x) =f(x)F(x), then &lt; (x) has a derivative 



For A faWlim- ^ " *" ^ \ v J ^ f " ^ " r ~ * 



204 DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS [VI 

has a 

/(*} 



(4) If $ (x) = f r , /*e/i (/&gt; (#) 7*as a derivative 



( - 



In this theorem we of course suppose that f(x) is not equal to 
zero for the particular value of x under consideration. Then 

/ / \ i -*- 

~ vv t(\\ $ W = lim T 

;V^M 5-WJ n 

f( } 

(5) If (/&gt; (x) = -. , then &lt;f&gt; (x) has a derivative ^~. 

\ I st\ 

f (x} F (x} f (x) F (x) ** V 

[F(x)Y ^ ~ ^ V 

This follows at once from (3) and (4). . 

7 * H V x v /%/ 

(6) 7/ 1 ^&gt; (ic) = F {/"(#)}, Me?i ^&gt; (x) has a derivative 



For let 







Then k+Q as ^0, and k/h-*f (a;). And 









r r 

= lim ^ - - - ^-^ x lim 
A; j 



This theorem includes (2) and (4) as special cases, as we see on 
taking F(x) = kx or F(x) = I/a?. Another interesting special case 
is that in which f(x) = ax + b : the theorem then shows that the 
derivative of F (ax -f b) is aF (ax + b). 

Our last theorem requires a few words of preliminary explana 
tion. Suppose that x = ^r (y), where ^r (y) is continuous and 
steadily increasing (or decreasing), in the stricter sense of 95, in 
a certain interval of values of y. Then we may write y = (/&gt; (x), 
where &lt;/&gt; is the inverse function ( 109) of -ty. 

(7) If y = (/&gt; (x\ where &lt;/&gt; is the inverse function ofty, so that 
x = ^r (y), and ty (y) has a derivative ty (y) which is not equal to 
zero, then &lt; (x) has a derivative 



113-115] DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS 205 

For if (/&gt; (x + h} = y + k, then k * as h-^0, and 



The last function may now be expressed in terms of x by means 
of the relation y = $ (x), so that &lt;fi(x) is the reciprocal of ty {&lt;f&gt; (x)}. 
This theorem enables us to differentiate any function if we know 
the derivative of the inverse function. 

114. Derivatives of complex functions. So far we have 
supposed that y = &lt;t&gt; (#) is a purely real function of x. If y is a 
complex function &lt;f&gt; (x) + i\jr (x), then we define the derivative of y 
as being &lt;$&gt; (x) + i-fy (x). The reader will have no difficulty in 
seeing that Theorems (1) (5) above retain their validity when 
&lt;/&gt;(#) is complex. Theorems (6) and (7) have also analogues for 
complex functions, but these depend upon the general notion of 
a function of a complex variable , a notion which we have en 
countered at present only in a few particular cases. 

115. The notation of the differential calculus. We have 
already explained that what we call a derivative is often called a 
differential coefficient. Not only a different name but a different 
notation is often used ; the derivative of the function y = &lt;/&gt; (x) 
is often denoted by one or other of the expressions 



Of these the last is the most usual and convenient : the reader 
must however be careful to remember that dyjdx does not mean \ 
a certain number dy divided by another number dx : it means 
the result of a certain operation D x or d/dx applied to y = (/&gt; (x) , i 
the operation being that of forming the quotient {&lt; (x + h) &lt; (x)}jh | 
and making h-*~Q. 

Of course a notation at first sight so peculiar would not have been 
adopted without some reason, and the reason was as follows. The denomi 
nator h of the fraction (0 (sc + h) - $ (#)}/A is the difference of the values x+ h, 
x of the independent variable x ; similarly the numerator is the difference of 
the corresponding values (#+A), (x] of the dependent variable y. These 
differences may be called the increments of x and y respectively, and denoted 
by 8x and dy. Then the fraction is &//&i % , and it is for many purposes 
convenient to denote the limit of the fraction, which is the same thing as 



206 DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS [VI 

&lt; (#) hy dy\dx. But this notation must for the present be regarded as 

(purely symbolical. The dy and dx which occur in it cannot be separated, 
and standing by themselves they would mean nothing : in particular dy and 
dx do not mean lim dy and lim &?, these limits being simply equal to zero. 
The reader will have to become familiar with this notation, but so long as it 
puzzles him he will be wise to avoid_it by writing the differential coefficient in 
the form D x y, or using the notation &lt; (#), &lt;f&gt; (x), as we have done in the 
preceding sections of this chapter. 

In Ch. VII, however, we shall show how it is possible to define the symbols 
dx and dy in such a way that they have an independent meaning and that 
the derivative dyldx is actually their quotient. 

The theorems of 113 may of course at once be translated into 
this notation. They may be stated as follows : 



(2) ify = tyi, 

( ) v y y\y*&gt; ien ^ x 



(6) if y is a function of x, and z a function of y, then 

dz dz dy 
dx dy dx 



Examples XL. 1. If y=y\ y^s then 



and if y = y^ ...y n then 
dy 

S- 

In particular, if y = z n , then dyldx = nz n ~ 1 (dzjdx) ; and if y=x n y then 
dyldx=nx n ~\ as was proved otherwise in Ex. xxxix. 3. 



115, 116] DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS 207 

2. If y=y l y 2 ...y n then 

l^ = i^l + I^2, + i^ 

y dx y 1 dx y 2 dx y n dx 

T ,. , .,. ^ 1 dy n dz 

In particular, if y = 2 n , then - -^- = 7- . 
y dx z dx 

116. Standard forms. We shall now investigate more 
systematically the forms of the derivatives of a few of the 
simplest types of functions. 

A. Polynomials. If &lt;/&gt; (x) = a,x n + a.x^ 1 +... + , then 
&lt; (/p) = naox"- 1 + (n-l) aix n ~ 2 + . . . + a n _j. 

It is sometimes more convenient to use for the standard form of a 
polynomial of degree n in x what is known as the binomial form, 
viz. 



2 x n ~*+ ... + a ft . 
In this case 



&gt; (a;) = n 
The binomial form of $ (x) is often written symbolically as 



and then &lt;/&gt; (a?) = n (a , a lt ..., rt^j^, I) 71 " 1 . 

We shall see later that &lt;/&gt; (#) can always be expressed as the 
product of n factors in the form 

&lt;t&gt; (a?) = a (x - aj (a? - cr 2 ) . . . (x - a n \ 
where the a s are real or complex numbers. Then 



the notation implying that we form all possible products of n 1 
factors, and add them all together. This form of the result holds 
even if several of the numbers a are equal ; but of course tl^en 
some of the terms on the right-hand side are repeated. The 
reader will easily verify that if 

(f) (x) a (x - a l Y lt (x - a 2 ) m * ... (x - a,) m , 
then &lt; (x) = a ^m l (x - a^- 1 (x - a 2 ) m * ...(#- a,)" 1 ". 



208 DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS [Vi 

Examples XLI. 1. Show that if $ (#) is a polynomial then &lt; (x) is 
the coefficient of h in the expansion of (x + A) in powers of h. 

2. If 4&gt;(%) is divisible by (x a) 2 , then &lt; (#) is divisible by x a : and 
generally, if &lt; (#) is divisible by (x a) m , then &lt; (#) is divisible by (x-a) m ~ l . 

3. Conversely, if $ (#) and (#) are 6o/i divisible by x - a, then &lt; (47) is 
divisible by (x- a) 2 ; and if $ (a?) is divisible by x - a and (x) by (#- a)"*" 1 , 
then (x) is divisible by (# - a)" 1 . 

4. Show how to determine as completely as possible the multiple roots 
of P(#)=0, where P (x) is a polynomial, with their degrees of multiplicity, 
by mer,ns of the elementary algebraical operations. 

[If HI is the highest common factor of P and P , H 2 the highest common 
factor of HI and P , // 3 that of Jf 2 an d P", and so on, then the roots of 
H l H 3 lff 2 2 =^ are the double roots of P=0, the roots of // 2 // 4 /# 3 2 = the freWe 
roots, and so on. But it may not be possible to complete the solution of 
ff^/Hf^Q, // 2 #4/#3 2 =0, .... Thus if P(*) = (ff-l)3(0s-a;-7) a then 
H l ff s /ff2*=afi-x- t J and H z ffi/ff 3 * = x-l ; and we cannot solve the first 
equation.] 

5. Find all the roots, with their degrees of multiplicity, of 



6. If ax t + Zbx+c has a double root, i.e. is of the form a(#-a) 2 , then 
2 (oA* + 6) must be divisible by # - a, so that a= - b/a. This value of x must 
satisfy a# a + 2&# + c=0. Verify that the condition thus arrived at is 



7. The equation !/(#- a) + l/(a;-6) + l/(a;-c) = can have a pair of 
equal roots only if a = b = c. (Math. Trip. 1905.) 

8. Show that ax* + 3 6.r 2 + 3 c# + d = 

has a double root if G f2 + 4 J ff 3 = 0, where H=ao-b\ G = a 2 d-3abe + 2b s . 

[Put a^+6=y, when the equation reduces to ( ?/ 3 -f 3ffy + Gf=0. This 



must have a root in common with 

9. The reader may verify that if a, ft y, -8 are the roots of 

a.r 4 + 4fo; 3 + 6c.r 2 + dx + e = 0, 
then the equation whose roots are 



and two similar expressions formed by permuting a, /3, 7 cyclically, is 

4&lt;9 3 - ( ? 2 0-# 3 =0, 

where g% = ae- 4bd + 3c 3 , ,9^3 = ce + 26ccZ - ad 2 - eb" 2 - c 3 . 

It is clear that if two of a, ft 7, 8 are equal then two of the roots of this cubic 

will be equal. Using the result of Ex. 8 we deduce that g&lt;? - 27# 3 2 =0. 



116, 117] DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS 209 

10. Rolle s Theorem for polynomials. // (x} is any polynomial, 
then between any pair of roots of &lt;j&gt;(x) = Q lies a root of (x} = 0. 

A general proof of this theorem, applying not only to polynomials but to 
other classes of functions, will be given later. The following is an algebraical 
proof valid for polynomials only. We suppose that a, are two successive 
roots, repeated respectively m and n times, so that 



where B (x] is a polynomial which has the same sign, say the positive si&lt;m, for 
a&lt;#&lt;/3. Then 

(^ 



say. Now F (a) = m (a - 0) (a) and F (0) = n (/3 - a) 6 (0), which have opposite 
signs. Hence F(x\ and so &lt; (#), vanishes for some value of x between 
a and 

117. B. Rational Functions. If 



where P and Q are polynomials, it follows at once from 1 13, (5) that 
R (x) = ^~~ ~ L^ ^ ) 

and this formula enables us to write down the derivative of any 
rational function. The form in which we obtain it, however, may or 
may not be the simplest possible. It will be the simplest possible if 
Q (x) and Q (x) have no common factor, i.e. if Q (x) has no repeated 
factor. But if Q(x) has a repeated factor then the expression 
which we obtain for R (x) will be capable of further reduction. 

It is very often convenient, in differentiating a rational 
function, to employ the method of partial fractions. We shall 
suppose that Q(x), as in 116, is expressed in the form 

Then it is proved in treatises on Algebra* that R (x) can be 
expressed in the form 



* See, e.g., Chrystal s Algebra, vol. i, pp. 151 et seq. 
u. u 



210 DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS [VI 

where H.(x) is a polynomial; i.e. as the sum of a polynomial and 
the sum of a number of terms of the type 



where a is a root of Q (a) = 0. We know already how to find the 
derivative of the polynomial : and it follows at once from Theorem (4) 
of 113, or, if a is complex, from its extension indicated in 114, 
that the derivative of the rational function last written is 

_ pA (x- of)^ 1 _ pA 

"(^o)*~" (^-a)* m 

We are now able to write down the derivative of the general 
rational function R (x), in the form 



Incidentally we have proved that the derivative of x 1 1 is mx m ~ l y 
for all integral values of m positive or negative. 

The method explained in this section is particularly useful 
when we have to differentiate a rational function several times 
(see Exs. XLV). 

Examples XLII. 1. Prove that 



_ - __ . 
dx \l +x*J ~~ (1 +tf 8 )* dx \ 

2. Prove that 

d atf + Zbx+c \ _ (ax + b} (Bx + C)-(bx+c) (Ax+H) 



3. If Q has a factor (#-a) m , then the denominator of R (when R is 
reduced to its lowest terms) is divisible by (x a) w + 1 but by no higher power 
of x -a. ^fiV - PfV\ / f* f \ t^ ^- A^f 

4. In no case can the denominator of R have a simple factor x-a. 
Hence no rational function (such as I/a?) whose denominator contains any 
simple factor can be the derivative of another rational function. 

118. C. Algebraical Functions. The results of the pre 
ceding sections, together with Theorem (6) of 113, enable us to 
obtain the derivative of any explicit algebraical function whatsoever. 

The most important such function is x m , where m is a rational 
number. We have seen already ( 117) that the derivative of this 



117, 118] DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS 211 

function is mx m ~ l when m is an integer positive or negative ; and 
we shall now prove that this result is true for all rational values 
of m. Suppose that y = x m = xP 1 *, where p and q are integers and 
q positive ; and let z = x l v, so that x = sfl- and y = gP. Then 



dx 

This result may also be deduced as a corollary from Ex. xxxvi. 
3. For, if &lt; (x) = x m , we have 



h-**Q n 

tin _ x m 

= lim ^- - = mx m ~\ 
$+x S~-x 

It is clear that the more general formula 

T- (ax + b) m = ma (ax + b) 1 

holds also for all rational values of m. 

The differentiation of implicit algebraical functions involves 
certain theoretical difficulties to which we shall return in Ch. VII. 
But there is no practical difficulty in the actual calculation of the 
derivative of such a function : the method to be adopted will be 
illustrated sufficiently by an example. Suppose that y is given by 
the equation 

3 + y" - Saxy = 0. 

Differentiating with respect to x we find 

* a y ( dy 

x " + y j ~ a (y + x i 

^ dx \ J dx 

T dy x* ay 

and so -^- ~ . 

dx y*- ax 

Examples XLIII. 1. Find the derivatives of 



2. Prove that 



a 4- 
3. Find the differential coefficient of y when 

(i) o^ 2 + 2/i.ry+&y 2 + 2#o; + 2/j/ + c=0, (ii) ^ 

142 



212 DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS [VI 

119. D. Transcendental Functions. We have already 
proved (Ex. xxxix. 4) that 

D x sin x = cos x, D x cos x = sin x. 

By means of Theorems (4) and (5) of 113, the reader will 
easily verify that 

D x tan x = sec 2 x, D x cot x = cosec 2 x, 

D x sec x = tan x sec x, D x cosec x = cot x cosec x. 

And by means of Theorem (7) we can determine the derivatives 
of the ordinary inverse trigonometrical functions. The reader 
should verify the following formulae : 

D x arc sin x = + 1/V(1 ~ # 2 )&gt; D x arc cos x = + 1/V(1 ^e 2 ), 

DZ arc tan a? = 1/(1 + x 2 ), D x arc cot # = 1/(1 + x-) } 

D x arc sec x = + 1/{#V(# 2 ~ !)}&gt; A arc cosec x + l/{#\/(# 2 1)}. 
In the case of the inverse sine and cosecant the ambiguous sign 
is the same as that of cos (arc sin x\ in the case of the inverse 
cosine and secant the same as that of sin (arc cos x). 

The more general formulae 
D x arc sin (as/a) = + l/\/(a 2 # 2 ), D x arc tan (x/a) = a/(# 2 4- a 2 ), 

which are also easily derived from Theorem (7) of 113, are also 
of considerable importance. In the first of them the ambiguous 
sign is the same as that ofa cos {arc sin (x/a)}, since 

a VU - O 2 /a 2 )} = V&lt;&gt; 2 - x 2 ) 
according as a is positive or negative. 

Finally, by means of Theorem (6) of 113, we are enabled to 
differentiate composite functions involving symbols both of alge 
braical and trigonometrical functionality, and so to write down 
the derivative of any such function as occurs in the following 
examples. 

Examples XLIV.* 1. Find the derivatives of 

cos m #, sin.*?, cos# m , sin^ m , cos (sin x\ sin (cos x\ 

cos x sin x 



.. - r, - , . r . 
.V(a 2 cos 2 x + 6 2 sm 2 x) 

x arc sin x + v/( 1 x 2 ), ( 1 -f ^ ) arc tan Jx Jx. 

* In these examples m is a rational number and a, b t ... , a, /3, ... have such 
values that the functions which involve them are real. 



119] DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS 213 

2. Verify by differentiation that arc siri x -f arc cos x is constant for all 
values of x between and 1, and arc tano7+arccot# for all positive values 
of x. 

3. Find the derivatives of 

arc sin V(l - # 2 ), arc sin (2^ ^(1 - # 2 )}, arc tan ( ^ 

\\-ax 

How do you explain the simplicity of the results ? 

4. Differentiate 

1 ax+b 1 ax+b 



5. Show that each of the functions 
Sarcsin J(^\ Cretan J(^\ arc sin VK -)(*- ffl} 



has the derivative 

6 Prove that 
rf 



arc cos 



//cos30\) // 

VVcos 3 *;/ V V 



^cos 6 cos 3^/ 

(Math. Trip. 1904.) 
7 Show that 



8. Each of the functions 
fa cos x 



arc cos r:T: I ) , ^ o^ ,* arc tan U / ( ^ T ) tan 



f //a-6 

IV (s+6 



has the derivative l/(a + b cos 07). 
9. If X= a + 6 cos 57+ c sin 07, and 

y= f . 2 _; ) 2_ 2 x arc cos 
then 



10. Prove that the derivative of F[f {$ (x}}] is F [f {&lt;f&gt; (a?)}] / (0 (#)} (^), 
and extend the result to still more complicated cases. 

11. If u and v are functions of x, then 

D x arc tan (ujv) = (vD x u - uD x v)/(u 2 + v 2 ). 

12. The derivative of y = (tan x + sec x} m is my sec a?. 

13. The derivative of y = cos x + 1 sin ^ is ly. 

14. Differentiate x cos a?, (sin#)/.r. Show that the values of x for which 
the tangents to the curves y=x cos a?, y=(sin #)/# are parallel to the axis of x 
are roots of cot x=x, tan #=.27 respectively. 



214 DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS [VI 

15. It is easy to see (cf. Ex. xvn.jT) that the equation sin .v=ax, where a 
is positive, has no real roots except #=0 if &gt;1, and if a&lt; 1 a finite number of 
roots which increases as a diminishes. Prove that the values of a for which 
the number of roots changes are the values of cos |, where is a positive root 
of the equation tan =. [The values required are the values of a for which 
y = ax touches y=sin #.] 

16. If (#) = # 2 sin (l/#) when x =4= 0, and &lt;f&gt; (0) = 0, then 

$ 0?) = ZK sin (l/.r) - cos (l/#) 

when #4=0, and &lt; (0)=0. ^nd ^ ^ ) is discontinuous for # = (cf. 111, 
(2)). 

17. Find the equations of the tangent and normal at the point (# , y ) 
of the circle j^+y ^a 2 . 

[Here y = /v /(a 2 -^ 2 ), dy\dx= -x\^(d i -x-\ and the tangent is 



which may be reduced to the form XX Q + yy Q = a 1 . The normal is xy Q - y? Q = 0, 
which of course passes through the origin.] 

18. Find the equations of the tangent and normal at any point of the 
ellipse (#/a) 2 + (#/&) 2 = l and the hyperbola (#/a) a - (y/6) 2 = l. 

19. The equations of the tangent and normal to the curve x = 
y = ^r (t\ at the point whose parameter is t t are 



120. Repeated differentiation. We may form a new function 
&lt;^ // (^) from $ (x) just as we formed &lt; (#) from (^). This 
function is called the second derivative or second differential 
coefficient of (a?). The second derivative of y=$(x) may also 
be written in any of the forms 

d*y 



In exactly the same way we may define the nth derivative or 
nth differential coefficient of y = &lt;/&gt; (a?), which may be written in any 

of the forms 

d \ n d*t/ 

y, . 



But it is only in a few cases that it is easy to write down a 
general formula for the nth differential coefficient of a given 
function. Some of these cases will be found in the examples 
which follow. 



119, 120] DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS 215 

Examples XL V. 1. If $(x}=x m then 

0W(^) = w (m-l)...(ra-n-fl) # "- . 
This result enables us to write down the nth derivative of any polynomial. 

2. If (f) (as) = (ax + b) m then 



In these two examples m may have any rational value. If m is a positive 
integer, and n&gt;m, then &lt;( w ) (#) = 0. 

3. The formula 



dx 

enables us to write down the nth derivative of any rational function expressed 
in the standard form as a sum of partial fractions. 

4. Prove that the nth derivative of 1/(1 # 2 ) is 



5. Leibniz Theorem. If y is a product ue, and we can form the 
first n derivatives of u and v, then we can form the nth derivative of y by 
means of Leibniz 1 Theorem, which gives the rule 



where suffixes indicate dift erentiations, so that u n , for example, denotes the 
nth derivative of u. To prove the theorem we observe that 



(u y) 2 

and so on. It is obvious that by repeating this process we arrive at a 
formula of the type 



for r=l, 2, ... Ti1, and show that if this 
is so then a n + i,r( } f r ?* = 1, 2, ... n. It will then follow by the 



n\ / 



principle of mathematical induction that Ui r = ( } for all values of n and 
in question. 

When we form (^^) n + 1 by differentiating (uv) n it is clear that the coefficient 
of u n + l - r v r is 







This establishes the theorem. 



216 DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS [VI 



6. The nth derivative of x m /(a?) is 
m ! m ! 



(-*)! (m 

.*(* 

T 

the series being continued for n 4- 1 terms or until it terminates. 

7. Prove that D x n cos x = cos (a? 4- \n-rr}, D x n sin x sin (x + 1? 

8. If y = ^4 cos ma- + ^ sin mx then D x 2 y 4- m 2 y = 0. And if 

y = A cos mx + B sin wi# -f P n (a?), 
where P n (x} is a polynomial of degree n, then 



9. If a; 2 D^y + a? D^ y + y = then 



[Differentiate n times by Leibnitz Theorem.] 

10. If U n denotes the nth derivative of ( Lx + M )/(^ 2 - ZBx + C\ then 



[First obtain the equation when ?^ = ; then differentiate 7i times by 
Leibnitz Theorem.] 

11. The nth derivatives of a/(a?+x^ an( i xi(a? + x 2 ). Since 






\ 



a 2 4- x 2 2 \a? ai x + aij * 
we have 

y^lt_l 

\i ((a?-ai) n + 1 

and a similar formula for D x n {a?/(a 2 + a: 2 )}. If p = \/(a? 2 4- a 2 ), and 6&gt; is the 
numerically smallest angle whose cosine and sine are a?/p and a/p, then 
x + ai*=p Cis 6 and x-ai=p Cis (- 0), and so * 



ZV* {a/( 2 + ^ 2 )} = {( - l)7i !/2i} p- 1 - 1 [Cis (O+ 1) &lt;9} - Cis {- (n 

= (- l) n n I (a; 2 + a 2 )-( n + 1 ) /2 sin {(w + l) arc tan (a/a?)}. 
Similarly 

2 ) ~ (n + 1)/2 cos {(n+l) arc tan (a/a:)}. 



12. Prove that 

A." {(cos a:)/a;} = {P n cos (a: + ^TT) + Q n sin (a? 



where P n and Q n are polynomials in ^ of degree n and w - 1 respectively. 
13. Establish the formulae 



_i = _ = __- 

dy~ /\dx) dy z dx*f \dx) dy* \dx* dx 



120, 121] 



DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS 



217 



14. If 3/2=1 andy r =(l/r!) 

1 I z 



f, *, = (!/*!) D x z, then 

1 ! ?/9 I 



Z 2 Z 3 



15. IfW(y, z, tt ) 



respect to #, then 



z u 



y" 



(Math. Trip. 1905.) 
, dashes denoting differentiations with 






dyldx =-(ax + hy +g)l(hx + by +/ ) 

- (abc + 2/#A - a/ 2 - &gt;# 2 - c/* 2 )/(/&lt; x + by +f}\ 



16. If 
then 
and 



121. Some general theorems concerning derived func 
tions. In all that follows we suppose that (j&gt; (x) is a function of x 
which has a derivative &lt; (x) for all values of x in question. This 
assumption of course involves the continuity of &lt;f).(x). ^ 

The meaning of the sign of &lt; (a?). THEOREM A. //* 
&lt; (# ) &gt; /ie?i &lt; (^ ) &lt; &lt;^&gt; (a? ) for all values of x less than X Q but 
sufficiently near to X Q , and &lt;/&gt;(#)&gt; &lt;/&gt;(# ) for all values of x greater 
than XQ but sufficiently near to x . 

For {(f) (x Q + h) &lt;f) (x )}/h converges to a positive limit &lt;f&gt; (ar ) as 
h-^Q. This can only be the case if c/&gt; (a? + h) $ (a? ) and h have 
the same sign for sufficiently small values of h t and this is precisely 
what the theorem states. Of course from a geometrical point of 
view the result is intuitive, the inequality &lt;/&gt; (x) &gt; expressing 
the fact that the tangent to the curve y = &lt;/&gt; (x) makes a positive 
acute angle with the axis of x. The reader should formulate for 
himself the corresponding theorem for the case in which &lt;/&gt; (x) &lt; 0. 

An immediate deduction from Theorem A is the following 
important theorem, generally known a^Rolle s Theorem; In view 
of _the great importance of this theorem it may be well to repeat 
that its truth depends on the assumption of the existence of the 

derivative &lt;f&gt; (x) for all values of x in question. 
Ihe"" 

THEOREM B. If (a) = and c/&gt; (6) = 0, then there must be at 

least one value of x which lies between a and b and for which 



There are two possibilities : the first is that &lt; (x) is equal to 



218 DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS [VI 

zero throughout the whole interval (a, b). In this case &lt; (x) is 
also equal to zero throughout the interval. If on the other hand 
&lt;p (x) is not always equal to zero, then there must be values of 
x for which &lt;/&gt;(#) is positive or negative. Let us suppose, for 
example, that &lt; (x) is sometimes positive. Then, by Theorem 2 of 
102, there is a value % of x, not equal to a or b, and such that $ (f ) 
is at least as great as the value of &lt; (x) at any other point in 
the interval. And &lt; (f) must be equal to zero. For if it were 
positive then &lt;(#) would, by Theorem A, be greater than &lt;/&gt; (f) for 
values of x greater than f but sufficiently near to f, so that there 
would certainly be values of &lt;/&gt; (x) greater than &lt;/&gt; (). Similarly we 
can show that &lt; () cannot be negative. 

COR. 1. If (f&gt; (a) &lt;f&gt; (b) = k, then there must be a value of x 
between a and b such that (f&gt; (x) 0. 

We have only to put &lt;/&gt; (x) k -fy (x) and apply Theorem B 
to ^ (as). 

COR. 2. If &lt; (x) &gt; for all values of x in a certain interval, 
then &lt;f&gt; (x) is an increasing function of x, in the stricter sense of 95, 
throughout that interval. 

Let X-L and x 2 be two values of x in the interval in question, 
and #! &lt; # 2 . We have to show that $ (x^) &lt; &lt;j&gt; (a? 2 ). In the first 
place &lt; (a^) cannot be equal to &lt;/&gt; (# 2 ) ; for, if this were so, there 
would, by Theorem B, be a value of x between x and # 2 for which 
&lt; ( x ) = 0. Nor can c/&gt; (# a ) be greater than &lt; (a? 2 ). For, since &lt; (X) 
is positive, &lt;/&gt; (#) is, by Theorem A, greater than &lt; (a^) when # is 
greater than a^ and sufficiently near to x lf It follows that there is 
a value x s of # between ^ and X* such that &lt; (x 8 ) = c^&gt; (^) ; and so, 
by Theorem B, that there is a value of x between x l and x. A for 
which $ (x) = 0. 

COR, 3. The conclusion of Cor. 2 still holds if the interval 
(a, b) considered includes a finite number of exceptional values of x 
for which $ (x) does not exist, or is not positive, provided $ (x) is 
continuous even for these exceptional values of x. 

It is plainly sufficient to consider the case in which there is 
one exceptional value of x only, and that corresponding to an end 
of the interval, say to a. If a &lt; x &lt; x 2 &lt; b, we can choose a + e 
so that a + e&lt;x l , and &lt;& (x) &gt; throughout (a + e, b), so that 
&lt;/&gt; (tfj &lt; &lt; (% 2 ), by Cor. 2. All that remains is to prove that 



121, 122] 



DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS 



219 



&lt; (a) &lt; &lt;/&gt; (ayj). Now &lt;/&gt; (X) decreases steadily, and in the stricter 
sense, as x-^ decreases towards a, and so 

&lt;/&gt;() = &lt; (a + 0) = Km &lt;/&gt; (X) &lt; &lt; (X). 

ce,-*-a+0 

COR. 4. //"&lt;/&gt; (#) &gt; throughout the interval (a, b), and (f&gt; (a) ^ 0, 
then cj&gt; (&) is positive throughout the interval (a, 6). 

The reader should compare the second of these corollaries very carefully 
with Theorem A. If, as in Theorem A, we assume only that &lt; fr) is positive 
at a single point #=# , then we can prove that &lt; (^i)&lt;^&gt; (#2) when x\ and # 2 
are sufficiently near to # and x &lt; X Q &lt; x z . For $ (x-fi &lt; &lt; (# ) and (a? 2 ) &gt; &lt; (^o), 
by Theorem A. But this does not prove that there is any interval including 
XQ throughout which &lt; (x) is a steadily increasing function, for the assumption 
that x l and x 2 lie on opposite sides of XQ is essential to our conclusion. We 
shall return to this point, and illustrate it by an actual example, in a moment 
( 



122. Maxima and Minima f We shall say that the value $() 
assumed by (/&gt; (x) when x = is ^maximum if &lt; (f ) is greater than 
any other value assumed by &lt;/&gt; (x) in the immediate neighbourhood 
of x=%, i.e. if we can find an interval (f e, %+ e) of values of 
x such that &lt; (f ) &gt;&lt;^&gt; (V) when f - e &lt; x &lt; and when f &lt; a? &lt; f + e; 
and we define a minimum in a similar manner. Thus in the figure 
the points A correspond to maxima, the points B to minima of 




B., 
Fig. 39. 

the function whose graph is there shown. It is to be observed that 
the fact that A s corresponds to a maximum and B^ to a minimum 
is in no way inconsistent with the fact that the value of the 
function is greater at B l than at A 3 . 

THEOREM C. A necessary condition for a maximum or 
minimum value of $&gt;(x) at x=% is that &lt;// (f) = 0.* 

* A function which is continuous but has no derivative may have maxima and 
minima. We are of course assuming the existence of the derivative. 



220 DERIVATIVES AND INTEGRALS [VI 

This follows at once from Theorem A. That the condition is not 
sufficient is evident from a glance at the point G in the figure. 
Thus if y = x 3 then &lt;f&gt; (x) = 3# 2 , which vanishes when x = 0. But 
x = does not give either a maximum or a