■^'t'JVT^veV'!)!' '---' Ji'' '■■<'. 









^ \>a- 





















sburg Uiiiversi 
::1i Association 



R :, 



■ ■■. ■ r- ^ , . i-« . . , r t 







. j>:. -. .^__!_-. 






^Lt' 













toomisburg University of PekVu&ylvania 

A Slato Syotern ot iligner EcJucaiion Ur.i j&i sity 






V t: 



■ u 



■;it^, 






1989 



Bloomsburg University 
Alumni Association 



Directory 



Bloomsburg University of Pennsylvania 

A State System of Higher Education University 



Compiled and Published by Carleton Graphics South Bend, Indiana 46624. Copyright Bloomsburg University Alurnni 
Association, Bloomsburg, PA 17815. All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced by any means 
transmitted electronically, or translated into a machine language. Use of the information contained in this book for 
commercial or solicitation purposes is expressly prohibited. Printed in the United States. Alumni Affairs Office. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

How to Use this Directory jv 

Message from President Ausprich v 

Message from Your Alumni President v 

Bloomsburg University vi 

Alma Mater vii 

Alumni Board of Directors viii 

About Your Alumni Association ix 

Awards and Honors x 

Distinguished Service Award Recipients xi 

Honorary Doctorates xii 

The University Medallion xii 

Athletic Hall of Fame xii! 

Table of Abbreviations xiv 

Campus Map and Key xv 

Alumni Population by State xvi 

Biographical Section 1 

Geographical Index 213 

Preferred Class Year Index 275 



HOW TO USE THIS DIRECTORY 

The 1989 Bloomsburg University Alumni Association Directory has been divided into three major sections which 
cover all the important information about our alumni. 

Biographical Section - This section lists all alumni alphabetically. It shows, when available, the full name and 
preferred class year, home address and phone number. Married alumnae are listed by their married names and maiden 
names. All professional data are preceded by a t showing current job title, firm name, address, and phone number. 

Geographical Index - This section lists the name and preferred class year of alumni by the city in which they 
live. You will be able to see who lives in your own town and it will be helpful for locating former classmates when 
you visit a new city. 

Class Year Index - This section lists all alumni by their preferred class year for their undergraduate work at 
Bloomsburg University. Married alumnae are listed by their name at the time of graduation, with their current name in 
parenthesis. The names of deceased alumni are included in this section and are indicated by a dagger (f). An asterisk 
(*) will appear following the names of those people for whom we have no address information. 

Accuracy - Complete biographical information has been included for all alumni who completed and returned their 
updated biographical questionnaire. Non-respondees are listed as maintained in the school files. Those alumni who 
have asked to be omitted from the directory are not listed. Neither the Publisher nor Bloomsburg University Alumni 
Association assumes any liability for incorrect information or unintentional typographical errors. All corrections should 
be sent to the Alumni Office, Bloomsburg University, Bloomsburg, PA 17815. 



A MESSAGE FROM PRESIDENT AUSPRICH 



Dear Friends: 

Alumni of Bloomsburg University are citizens of the world. Today, our 31,000 
alumni reside in cities and towns all across the United States and in more 
than 25 countries around the globe. 

Living in such a mobile society, you may have found it a little difficult at 
times to keep in touch with classmates and friends. It is my hope that this 
directory will help you find "lost" friends and serve as a network to help you 
reestablish contacts with those individuals who were a meaningful part of your 
experience at Bloomsburg. 

Wherever you are located, we hope you won't forget Bloomsburg — come , 
back and visit us often. You are an important member of our university family, 
and we welcome opportunities to renew acquaintances and hear more about 
you. It is with pleasure that we look forward to seeing you on campus soon! 

Sincerely, 

Harry Ausprich, Ph.D. 
President 




A MESSAGE FROM YOUR ALUMNI PRESIDENT 



Dear Alumni: 

It IS with great pleasure that the Bloomsburg University Alumni Association 
provides you with this valuable data base of alumni information during the 
150th birthday of the University. 

The introductory pages of the directory provide you with a mini-history of 
interesting facts about the University. The address and class information 
section will enable you to reestablish contact with friends and classmates. If 
you are new to your location, it will help you to determine how many alumni 
are located near you. 

One of the objectives of the Alumni Association is to keep a communication 
line open between all alumni and the University. We attempt to do this by 
conducting chapter meetings throughout the country. A gathering could be 
an informal evening in one's home, a picnic, or a dinner meeting. If possible, 
we will attempt to have the University represented at the get-together If you 
would be interested in initiating a reunion of alumni in your area, it's as easy 
as picking up your telephone and dialing the Fenstemaker Alumni House at 
717-389-4058. 

Use your alumni directory today! Why not consider setting up a chapter meeting in your area! 

Cordially, 

Mrs. Mary Anne Klemkosky '59 
Alumni Association President 




BLOOMSBURG UNIVERSITY 
1839-1989 



Bloomsburg University, a part of the State System of 
Highier Education, is a nnulti-mission institution tfiat was 
establishied originally as an academy, in 1839, in response 
to a community need for a scfiool to provide local 
youngsters with the elements of a classical education 
Through the stages of its development from a normal 
school to a teachers college to a multipurpose state 
college and finally to a university in 1983, the institution 
has retained its emphasis on liberal and career education. 
Its service area has been expanded to include all of 
Pennsylvania; its mission is to provide programs in liberal 
arts and sciences, business, teacher education, and 
health sciences. The College of Graduate Studies offers 
the Masters of Arts degree in six major areas, the Master 
of Science in six, and the Master of Education in 19. 
The Master of Business Administration and the Master 
of Science in Nursing degrees are also offered, and 
there are ten supervisory certification programs for 
teachers. In addition, Bloomsburg offers course work for 
a doctoral degree in elementary education in cooperation 
with Indiana University of Pennsylvania. Bloomsburg 
University's College of Extended Programs serves a large 
student population through nondegree credit courses, 
noncredit minicourses, off-campus classes, credit for life 
experience, and courses taught by public service television 
The University is fully accredited by the Middle States 
Association of Colleges and Schools and is approved 
by the Pennsylvania State Board of Education Its 
programs in education are approved by the National 
Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education. The 
nursing program is accredited by the National League 
for Nursing. The social work program is accredited by 
the Council for Social Work Education. The University 
receives recognition from the American Chemical Society 
for its chemistry programs, and several other departments 
have special recognition from professional organizations. 

The 177-acre campus is divided into a lower and an 
upper campus. The undergraduate enrollment is 
approximately 6,300; 5,470 (2,083 men and 3,387 women) 
are full-time students. The Bachelor of Arts degree is 
offered in anthropology, art history, art studio, biology, 
chemistry, economics, English, French, geography, history, 
mass communications, mathematics, music, philosophy, 
and theater. The Bachelor of Science is offered in 
accounting, adult health, biology, chemistry, clinical 
chemistry, computer and information science, earth 
science, business economics, finance, geology, health 
physics, interpreting for the deaf, management, marketing, 
mathematics, medical technology, nursing, office 
administration, physics, radiological technology, and social 
work. The Bachelor of Science in Education degree is 
offered in biology, business education, chemistry, 
communication disorders, communications, dental hygiene, 



early childhood education, earth and space science, 
elementary education, English, French, general science, 
mathematics, physics, social studies, Spanish, and special 
education. The University also offers an Associate of 
Science degree in health sciences. Preprofessional 
advisement and prerequisite course work are available 
for students interested in entering professional schools 
of dentistry, law, medicine, occupational therapy, optometry, 
pharmacy, physical therapy and veterinary medicine. 

Five-year (3-2) programs combining liberal arts and 
engineering study are offered in conjunction with 
Pennsylvania State University and Wilkes College. Students 
receive appropriate baccalaureate degrees from each 
university. A five-year Bachelor of Arts/Master of Business 
Administration program is available for chemistry, French, 
and Spanish majors who wish to enhance their career 
preparation with training in business. The University also 
has an affiliation agreement with Thomas Jefferson 
University for allied health programs in cytotecyhnology, 
dental hygiene, occupational therapy, and radiologic 
technology. A Scholars Program for talented freshmen 
and sophomores and a junior/senior honors program for 
superior students in the College of Arts and Sciences 
are available. 

The University has 345 full-time and 44 part-time 
faculty members. All are dedicated to academic excellence 
through effective teaching, and many hold the highest 
professional degree available in their discipline. 





Carver Hall 



ALMA MATER 



Far above the river winding 

Midst the mountains grand, 

Stands our school, so dear to students 

Far throughout the land. 

CHORUS 

Bloomsburg, Bloomsburg, Alma Mater 
Up on College Hill. 
Years to come shall find us ever 
True to Bloomsburg still. 



Far and w/ide though we may wander 
Still our hearts are true. 
To our hilltop Alma Mater 
We our pledge renew. 

CHORUS 

Ever seaward. Susquehanna 
Never resting flows. 
Ever upward, striving, climbing, 
Onward Bloomsburg goes. 



ALUMNI BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
1989-1990 



Officers 



Directors 



Mary Anne Klemkosky '59, President 
G. Thomas Hughes III 76, Vice President 
Nancy Feher Edwards 70, Secretary 
John J. Trathen '68, Ed.D., Treasurer 



Helen H. Cimbala '35 

Ruth Dugan Smeal '39 

C. Stuart Edwards '41, Ed.D. 

Mary Lou Fenstemaker John '45, Ph.D. 

Richard E. Grimes '49 

Nancy Swartz Lychos '52 

John S. Scrimgeour '53 

James B. Creasy '57, Ed.D. 

Dale A. Krothe '60 

Richard R. Lloyd '62 

Sandra Swetland Williams '66 

Peggy Burns '67 

Howard Ebersole '69 

Gary Seymour '71 

Albert J. Fagnani Jr. '74 

Suzanne Cromack McCabe '77 

Patricia A. Washeleski '79 

Donna L. Kinder '80 

Judy R. Wnght '82 

Scott P. Righter '84 

Gary C. Wilson '87 

John M. Walker '89 

Ex officio for one-year term 



Honorary Life Members of the Board 



Howard F, Fenstemaker '12 
Hervey B. Smith '22 
Edward F. Schuyler '24 
Earl A, Gehrig '37 
Clayton H, Hinkel '40 
Elwood M Wagner '43 
John W. Thomas '47 
Millard C. Ludwig '48 
Frank J. Furgele '52 



Orwigsburg 
Bethlehem 

Bloomsburg 
Catawissa 

Bloomsburg 

Bloomsburg 

Bloomsburg 

Bloomsburg 

Harnsburg 

Forty Fort 

Bloomsburg 

Bloomsburg 

Berwick 

Belle Mead, N.J. 

Somerset, N.J. 

Horsham 

Levittown 

Monroeton 

Jessup 

Kingston 

Plymouth Meeting 

Camp Hill 

Bloomsburg 

Philadelphia 

Lancaster 

Pittsburgh 



Bloomsburg 

Bloomsburg 

Bloomsburg 

Bloomsburg 

Bloomsburg 

State College 

Hamburg 

Millville 

Lakeville 



-viii- 



ABOUT YOUR ALUMNI ASSOCIATION 



Alunrini Board. Consisting of 24 directors elected to 
serve two-year terms, the board has seven standing 
committees: Awards and Recognition, Budget and 
Finance, Chapters and Student Relations, Legislative 
Affairs, Loans, Grants and Scholarships, Property and 
Special Events. Directors are nominated on the basis 
of several factors: Class year, gender, geography, 
interest or participation in activities of the Alumni 
Association and the University. 

Awards and Recognition. The Aiumm Association 

annually recognizes alumni by presenting Distinguished 
Service Awards, Young Alumni of the Year Awards, 
and Honorary Alumni Awards. All alumni are invited 
to submit nominations for these awards. 

Budget and Finance. The Alumni Association is 
guaranteed an annual budget by the Bloomsburg 
University Foundation, which conducts the Alumni 
Annual Fund along with the University's Development 
Office. 

Chapters and Student Relations. Chapter events 

of various types are annually held throughout 
Pennsylvania and the nation to bring BU alumni 
together. Your suggestions and participation are 
welcome. The Association co-sponsors the Husky 
Ambassadors, a select group of BU students, and 
sponsors corporate visits by students and the Senior 
Send-off Picnic. 

Loans, Grants and Scholarships. The McNinch 

Alumni Loan Fund, created by a bequest from Mary 
McNinch, had a cash balance on December 31, 1988, 
of $168,188.13 and outstanding loans of $18,454 04. 
Eligible students may borrow up to $400 in each of 



three semesters and repay the loan after graduation. 
Grants and scholarships are annually provided by 
the interest from the Centennial Loan and Scholarship 
Fund, which had a balance on December 31, 1988, 
of $189,195.14. Other perpetual scholarships are 
provided through the generous gifts of alumni or their 
families. 

Special Events. The two biggest days for BU alumni 
each year are Alumni Day, usually the last Saturday 
of April, and Homecoming, usually held in October. 
Class reunions at five-year intervals are held each 
year, with classes deciding whether they will return 
on Alumni Day or Homecoming. In addition, alumni 
are also invited back to campus for numerous 
academic, cultural and athletic events 

Alumni Fellow in Residence Program. Each 

semester alumni are invited to return to campus for 
a day or two to share their career experiences with 
current students and faculty. If you would like to 
participate in this program, contact the Alumni Office. 

Deans' Fund for Academic Excellence. 

Supported by alumni gifts, this fund annually provides 
grants for undergraduate student research and other 
programs to enhance the University's academic 
environment. 

Alumni Quarterly. Prepared by the Alumni Office, 
this publication is the mam communication link between 
the University and the alumni. The most popular 
section, the Class Notes, keeps alumni informed 
about the activities of their classmates and friends. 
You are invited to share your news by sending it to 
the Alumni Office, 



Bloomsburg University is committed to providing equal educational and employment opportunities for all persons without 
regard to race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, ancestry, life style, affectional or sexual preference, handicap, 
Vietnam era status as veterans, or union membership. The university is additionally committed to affirmative action 
and will take positive steps to provide such educational and employment opportunities. 



DISTINGUISHED SERVICE AWARDS 

The Distinguished Service Awards were established by the Bloomsburg University Alumni Association 
in 1948 to recognize alumni who have excelled in at least one area: Significant accomplishments in 
his or her profession: outstanding service to the University and/or the Alumni Association: or contributions 
to humanity. Since 1948, the Alumni Association has honored 91 alumni and admin