A 



MRS J. B. DAL 



UCSB LIBRARY 



INDIAN 



BY 



MRS. J. B. DALE. 



LONDON : 
THEOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING SOCIETY, 7, DUKE STREET, ADELFHI, W.C. 

NEW YORK: 
THE PATH, 144, MADISON* AVENUE. 

MADRAS 
PROPRIETORS OF THE THEOSOPHIST, ADYAR. 

1895- 




PLATE I. THE REFERENCE HAND. 



PREFACE. 



CHEIROMANCY, the art of foretelling the events 
of life by the lineaments of the hand, derived its 
name from the Greek word chciros, the palm, and 
umnteia, to foretell, whence it has been vulgarly 
called Palmistry as it is named in a recent Act 
of Parliament to forbid its practice for gain or 
reward. In Coleman's Mythology of the Hindoos, 
p. 202, it is written: "On the Buddha's foot is the 
mark called the 'chakravarti,' wheel or discus, 
which should have been on the palm of the hand, 
by which the sages at his birth divined that he 
would rise to considerable eminence." He says 
(p. 19): "Various data have been assigned to the 
period of Buddha's existence. The most correct 
seems to be about 550 B.C., whence, as the sages 
practised cheiromancy at Buddha's birth, its exist- 
ence must have been much earlier known among 
the Indians." " In the year 1652," writes Zadkiel, 
"the celebrated astrologer, Geo. Wharton, Esq., 
published a translation of 'a matchless piece' as 



VI PREFACE. 

he terms it, on the subject, written in Latin by 
Dr. J. Rothman." Since that period the art of 
cheiromancy has gradually fallen into disuse, 
chiefly from the extensive nonsense published by 
recent writers. One of the writers makes a 
shallow attempt to disprove the connection which 
exists between astrology and palmistry, while 
another says it is based on the principles of the 
Kabalah, the latter being nothing more than 
a mnemonical system of astrology. From the 
writings of Dr. J. Rothman and Geo. Wharton, 
Esq., I propose now to give, together with some 
of the choicest of those of the East, the principal 
matter, and to explain in the ordinary language 
used by palmisters such points as may require 
elucidation. Mr. Wharton, a careful student in 
these subjects, clearly proves that palmistry can 
only act in accordance with astrology, and that the 
art of cheiromancy cannot be relied upon beyond 
the period of from one to two years at most, for he 
observes in his preface, "What more convincing 
than if, by inspection made into the hand of any 
man, I truly pronounce this or that planet essen- 
tially dignified or angular in his geniture, or in 
such or such a position with other planets or stars, 
another unfortunate, afflicted or defected? Or if, 
on the contrary, by looking first into the geniture 
and considering therein the several positions of 



PREFACE. Vll 

the planets and their configurations one to another 
and with other stars, I tell him, and that distinctly 
and truly, the lines and signatures engraven upon 
his head or hand what, I say, is or can be more 
satisfactory than this to rational men, as touching 
the power and influence of the planets and stars 
upon these inferiors, and consequently of the 
lawful use and truth of the science called astrology, 
cheiromancy and metoposcopia, between which 
three sciences there appear to be such a secret 
coherence and harmony?" 

It is also written in the Book of Job, xxxvii. 7 : 
u ln the hand of all men he shall put a mark that 
everyone may know his own work"; but in our 
translation of the Bible it is written as follows: 
"In the hand of all men he putteth a mark that 
ever}- man may know his own work." This alone 
proves that Job believed in this science. 

The author does not claim that there is any- 
thing new in this work, although the method of 
translating and setting may be original. 



REFERENCES TO HAND. 



No. i. 

Name. Mount of Jupiter. 

Location. Root of forefinger. 

Interpretation. When very fully shown denotes 
pride, tyranny; when deficient in size denotes 
idleness and vulgarity; when there are concentric 
circles shown by the pores of the skin, here they 
indicate sure success in religion, marriage and 
monetary matters, ambition; broken circles or 
elongated, slightly less powerful; entirely void, no 
success thereby. 



No. 2. 

Name. Mount of Saturn. 

Location. Root of middle finger. 

Interpretation. When fully marked denotes wis- 
dom, prudence; when very full, taciturnity, sadness; 
when concentric circles are placed here success in 
all Saturnian affairs ; when absent or elongated the 
person will never make much headway with such 
things and persons. 



IO INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

No. 3. 

Name. Mount of the Sun, "Apollo." 

Location. Root of ring finger. 

Interpretation. When prominent it gives art, 
genius, intelligence; when very full, denotes a 
greedy and untruthful disposition; when flat or 
small, then it causes the person to be dull; when 
concentric circles appear here, the person will be 
very powerful, have riches and honour by the state, 
or marry a high-born person; elongated or none, 
shows the person will have mean preferment, or 
none, as the case may be. 

No. 4. 

Name. Mount of Mercury. 

Location. Root of little finger. 

Interpretation. When prominent and full, and 
with concentric circles thereon, it denotes science, 
inventiveness, wit and success in all Mercurial 
matters, as writings, professions, especially church 
and law, and journeys; when very large and with 
elongated circles, it denotes theft, lying, cunning; 
when flat or none, it shows a negative life, and un- 
fortunate in all above. 



No. 5. 

Name. Girdle of Venus. 

Location. A curved line from root of forefinger 
to root of little finger. 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. II 

Interpretation. When this line is clear it shows 
a natural desire for the opposite sex; when double 
it denotes an intemperate and lustful life; when 
broken, it shows terrible loss and infamy through 
lusts, a filthy person. 



No. 6. 

Name. Via Combusta. 

Location. Extends through hollow of hand to 
mount of middle finger. 

Interpretation. See Lines (8) page 36. 



No. 7. 

Name. Via Solis. 

Location. A curved line running from root of 
ring finger to the mount of the Moon. 

Interpretation. When straight and uniformly 
composed and well coloured, it promises the favour 
of great men and great honours; if dissected or 
uneven judge the contrary, or the frowns or ill 
favour of great people, with impediments in life or 
envy. 



No. 8. 

Name. Line of Fortune. 

Location. A line extending from the mount of 
Jupiter to the mount of Mercury. 

Interpretation. When long and with incisures, 



12 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

denotes that the principal members of the body 
are strong, constancy; if shorter crooked, the con- 
trary; if severed, the same; when it stops at the 
mount of Saturn, it shows a vain lying person; if 
it branches on mount of Jupiter it denotes honours; 
if single or without branches, it shows poverty and 
want. 



No. 9. 

Name. Liver line. 

Location. A curved line running through the 
palm of the hand, between the line of Fortune and 
the Life line. 

Interpretation. When straight and not dissected 
by obscure little lines, denotes a healthy body; if 
extending only to the hollow of the hand, or short, 
it denotes a short life, or full of disease; the longer 
this line, the longer may the life be; if cut at end 
poverty in old age. 



No. 10. 

Name. Line of Life. 

Location. A curved line running round the root 
of the thumb. 

Interpretation. When broad and uniform, de- 
notes a long and healthy life, and but few diseases; 
if slender, short or cut, or with little obscure lines 
running through, it denotes feebleness of body, 
sickness, short life, except line be strong; if slop- 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 13 

ing nicely to Liver line, and beautified in the angle 
with parallels or little crosses, it shows a good wit 
and even temper. 

No. n. 

Name. Line of Saturn. 

Location. A line extending from the wrist lines 
up to middle finger. 

Interpretation. If it extend to the middle finger 
it indicates profound meditations, and if fortunate, 
events in counsels and actions; if short (without 
other testimony) misfortunes; if bent towards the 
mount of the Moon, in the hollow of the hand, im- 
prisonment. 



No. 12. 

Name. Line of the Head and Brain, called by 
some the line of Health. 

Location. A line running from the wrist, or line 
of Saturn, and extending up to the mount of Mer- 
cury. 

Interpretation. If this line be uniform and not 
intersected, it forms with the line of Life and 
Liver line (sometimes called the Head line) a tri- 
angle on the plane of Mars, if of good colour, it 
denotes prudence, manly wit and fair fortune; the 
more perfect this triangle, the better will be the 
person's wit and courage; if obtuse it shows an 
evil nature and a rude man; no triangle shows a 
fool or a knave. 



14 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

No. 13. 

Name. L,ine of the Moon. 

Location. A line running from the line of Saturn 
and line of the Brain to the mount of the moon 
called sometimes the Via L,actea. 

Interpretation. This line being uniformly com- 
posed, proportionate and continued, denotes fortu- 
nate journeys both by land and sea; also a good 
brain, the favour of women (the mount of Venus 
being also unafflicted), a composed and graceful 
speech ; if it be cut or distorted it argues infelicity 
and proneness to lies; if whole and ascending up 
to little finger it denotes great happiness. 



No. 14. 

Name. Mount of the Moon. 

Location. The outside part of hand, opposite to 
root of thumb, between mount of Mercury and wrist. 

Interpretation. Imagination, refinement, poetry; 
if very large or full it denotes despair, caprice and 
almost lunacy ; when flat and hollow, denotes dul- 
ness, want of speech, positiveness. 



No. 15. 

Name. Plane and place of Mars. The mount 
of Mars. 

Location. The place of Mars is twice represented, 
one on the side of the palm by the mount of Mars, 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 15 

and the other in the palm between the line of Life 
and the Liver line, called the plane or place of 
Mars. 

Interpretation. The mount of Mars shows cour- 
age; when in excess, passion; when small, teme- 
rity. 

( Vide marks, etc., specially numbered.) 



No. 16. 

Name. Mount of Venus. 

Location. In the root of the thumb. 

Interpretation. Love of beauty and pleasure; 
where large, inconstancy, coquetry; when small, 
coldness. 



No. 17. 

Name. Dragon lines or Bracelets. 

Location. Lines to be found on the wrist. 

Interpretation. If double or triple and forming a 
right and continuous tract, it shows good composure 
of body; thrice, indicates health, wealth and pros- 
perity; a star or cross here shows tranquillity in 
old age; if a line extends to the mount of Moon or 
Mercury from Dragon lines, it shows esteem and 
life in a foreign country. 



No. 18. 

Name. Plane of Mensa, or place of Fortune. 
Location. The space between the line of Fortune 
and the Liver line. 



1 6 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

Interpretation. Great and broad and forming a 
nice figure, it declares a liberal man, magnanimous 
and long-lived; if small and narrow, it argues 
slender fortune, niggardliness and fearfulness ; a 
star or cross in this space, clear and well-propor- 
tioned, especially under the mount of the Sun, 
shows honours and dignities to follow. 



No. 19. 

Name. Egyptian Staff. 

Location. Just below chain of Fortune. 

Interpretation. Great renown in antiquities a 
great commander and ofttimes a great statesman, 
a lover of ancient research. 



No. 20. 

Name. Chain of Fortune. 

Location. Small crosses or stars between the 
line of I,ife and the Liver line, under the mount of 
Jupiter. 

Interpretation. These denote wit and an even 
nature; riches and honours, or wealth by position 
of noted kind. 



No. 21. 

Name. Sun place. 

Location. A small circle on the line of Life 
opposite to the mount of the Moon. 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. IJ 

Interpretation. The loss of eyesight; two circles, 
the loss of both e5 r es. 



No. 22. 

Name. Envy line. 

Location. A line running from the root of the 
thumb, near the Dragon lines, to the line of Saturn. 
Interpretation. Denotes envy. 



No. 23. 

Name. Perilous line. 

Location. A small line running from the Life line 
and passing through the point formed by the cutting 
of line of Saturn and Liver line. 

Interpretation. This indicates perils of all kinds, 
and disease, and sometimes sudden death or mis- 
fortune. 



No. 24. 

Name. Line of Friendship. 

Location. A small line starting from the line of 
Life, about midway, and passing through the Saturn 
and Liver lines, forming a small triangle, and ex- 
tending to the mount of the Sun. 

Interpretation. This shows honours and favours 
from great ladies of rank and fortune. 



No. 25. 
Name. Cross of Indigence. 



1 8 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

Location. A star on the Liver line or natural 
mean, near or on mount of the Moon. 
Interpretation. Poverty in old age. 



No. 26. 

Name. Path of Mars. 

Location. A small line running midway from 
line of Life to plane of Mars with a small star on 
or near the end. 

Interpretation. Hurts and wounds. 



No. 27. 

Name. Dragon's Head. 

Location. A star on Dragon line or Bracelets. 

Interpretation. Tranquillity in life, in old age. 



No. 28. 

Name. Dragon's Tail. 

Location. A line running from second Bracelet 
into the mount of Venus. 
Interpretation. Adversities from kindred or wife. 



No. 29. 

Name. Line of Mars. 

Location. A line running parallel with the line 
of Life on mount of Venus. 

Interpretation. This augments and strengthens 
the things signified by the line of Life; it particu- 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 19 

larly promises good success in war and a robust 
constitution. 



No. 30. 

Name. Mars Cross. 

Location. Cross or star on the mount of Mars. 

Interpretation. Fortunate journeys. 



No. 31. 

Name. Oracle of Jove. 

Location. The sign Jupiter under the mount or 
on the mount of Apollo. 

Interpretation. Denotes honours and ecclesias- 
tical dignities. 



No. 32. 

Name. L,ine of Calamity. 

Location. A small line running from line of I^ife 
up through second joint of thumb. 

Interpretation. This signifies a violent death and 
danger from married women. 



No. 33. 

Name. Cross bars. 

Location. Small lines on the second joint of 
thumb. 

Interpretation. This is an indication of conten- 
tion and brawling; small hair lines running hori- 



20 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

zontally to thumb shows riches in second part of 
life. 



No. 34. 

Name. Girdle of Pollux. 
Location. A ring round the thumb. 
Interpretation. This is an indication of hanging. 



No. 35. 

Name. First phalanx of forefinger. 

Location. Small lines running parallel with 
joint. 

Interpretation. Indication of inheritance. This 
phalanx hollow or curved upwards indicates ava- 
rice; if turned backwards, extravagance. 



No. 36. 

Name. Second phalanx of forefinger. 
Location. Small lines in the centre running ver- 
tical to joints. 

Interpretation. Indicates many children. 

No. 37. 

Name. Third phalanx of forefinger. 

Location. Small lines running vertical to joints. 

Interpretation. Denotes a jovial disposition. 
This finger thick at the root denotes a greed) r 
appetite. 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 21 

No. 38. 

Name. Small star or cross. 
Location. On third phalanx of forefinger. 
Interpretation. Shows an unchaste and lascivious 
life. 



Xo 39. 

Name. Small star 

Location. On second phalanx of middle finger. 
Interpretation. Denotes melancholy; a star near 
middle of third phalanx denotes unhappiness. 



No. 40. 

Name. A line with star at bottom. 
Location. A small line running throughout 
middle finger, with a star on third phalanx. 
Interpretation. Denotes folly and madness. 



Xo. 41. 

Name. Small lines running vertical to joitit. 

Location. Second phalanx of ring finger. 

Interpretation. Indicates fame, especially if a 
straight and \vell-defined line passes up the middle 
of the finger. 



No. 42. 

Name. Small cross bars. 

Location. Third phalanx of ring finger. 

Interpretation. Honours and riches. 



22 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 



No. 43. 

Name. Small cross or star. 

Location. On mount of Mercury close to joint. 

Interpretation. Eloquence. 



No. 44. 

Name. Two small stars or indented line. 

Location. On mount of Mercury, one below the 
other, or a clear indented line on mount of Apollo. 

Interpretation. The first indicates a brilliant 
mind. The line on mount of Apollo also shows 
a noted and brilliant mind, but the loss of a dear 
male friend, sometimes death of wife. 



No. 45. 

Name. Cross bars. 

Location. On second phalanx of little finger. 
Interpretation. Shows a thief or a very deceitful 
person. 



No. 46. 

^ Marriage lines. 
Location. Small lines on outside of hand on 
mount of Mercury. 

Interpretation. These, according to their num- 
ber, denote the number of husbands or wives 
should the widow line also appear; without it the} 7 
may mean lovers. 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 2J 

No. 47. 

Name. Crest of Hermes. 

Location. Small crosses or star on third phalanx 
of little finger, especially in the centre. 

Interpretation. Shows ingenuity and eloquence. 



No. 48. 

Name. Small concentric circles formed by pores 
of the skin. 

Location. On first phalanx of all fingers. 

Interpretation. Denotes that the person will be 
always earning or inheriting money all his life, and 
in fact it is one of the most successful signs in the 
hand for pecuniary success. 



No. 49. 

Location. On Mounts. 

Name. Concentric. 

Interpretation. The same on the mounts indicate 
money by or through persons or things indicated 
by the mount of the fingers, on the forefinger, a 
wealth}' partner; on the mount of Saturn, wealth 
by lands, house property, legacies; on the ring 
finger by successful business, or profession and 
fame ; on the mount of Mercury by writings, by 
profession, by eloquence, etc. Should these assume 
an elongated form, as seen on middle finger, 
then, if unbroken, the person will succeed by 
labour and many difficulties ; if none appear, then 



24 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

they will never succeed in pecuniary matters, 
unless the hand is otherwise very strong. 



No. 50. 

Name, Lapis Lazuli. 
Location. Tip of middle finger. 
Interpretation. Same as above on mount of 
Saturn but in foreign countries or from abroad. 



No. 51. 

Name. Lapis Lazuli. 

Location. On mount of Saturn or middle finger. 
Interpretation. Same as No. 50. 



No. 52. 

Name. Shell form shown by pores of skin. 

Location. On first phalanx of little finger. 

Interpretation. This is perhaps the best means 
of success, as shown above, in writing and speak- 
ing, etc., if other testimonies concur, but I prefer 
the complete circle. 



No. 53. 

Name. Corn or diamond loops. 

Location. On joints of fingers. 

Interpretation. Should the lines on the joints, 
between the phalanges of the fingers, take the form 
of a barleycorn or diamond, the person may expect 
many and unexpected advantages, but much de- 
pends on the sum of these lines when counted. 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 25 

No. 54. 

Name. Luna lines. 

Location. Near mount of Moon on outside of 
hand, below the Liver or Father line. 

Interpretation. Aptitude for travelling, a sailor, 
quietness, contentment, poetic imagination when 
regular ; cross bars here give discontent, sometimes 
suicide, a morbid imagination. 



No. 55. 

Name. Line of intuition. 

Location. A line running from the Liver line to 
the mount of the Moon. 

Interpretation. This shows poetic intelligence, 
seldom found except in highly imaginative and in- 
tellectual persons. 



No. 56. 

Name. Line of Temper. 

Location. A line running vertically from mount 
of Mars to mount of Moon. 

Interpretation. This denotes determination and 
decision. 



A SUMMARY OF JUDGMENT. 

(i) Observe the kind of hands from the front or 
inside. 

Short hands denote an impulsive judgment with- 
out analysis. 



26 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

Smooth hands denote impression, ability, inspi- 
ration, intuition. 

Hard, firm hands denote great energy and per- 
severance. 

Soft, loose hands denote a kind of debility or 
laziness, a disinclination to work. 

Knotted hands denote reflection, order, suc- 
cess. 

(2) Observe the fingers. 

Pointed. Forefinger (first), intuitive; middle 
finger (second), frivolous, light-hearted, gay; ring 
finger (third), artistic, testy, nice, refined; little 
finger (fourth), eloquent. 

Square. Forefinger (first), truthful, cautious; 
middle finger (second) ; grave, thoughtful ; ring 
finger (third), reasonable, a thinker; little finger 
(fourth), judicious. 

Spatulated. Forefinger (first), mystic, delighting 
in occult studies; middle finger (second), morbid, 
fanciful; ring finger (third), dramatic, sympathetic; 
little finger (fourth), mechanical. 

(3) Look at the nails on the hands. 

i. Narrow, indicate an irritable temper or as- 
piring spirit. 

2. Round and full, indicate learning and liberal 
views. 

3. Small, indicate pride, stubbornness, narrow- 
ness and bigotry. 

4. Broad and flat, indicate a mild and timorous 
disposition. 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 27 

5. Filbert-shaped, indicate refinement and cour- 
teous manners. 

Note. When the hand is allowed to open freely, 
the space between the first and second fingers, 
farthest apart, denotes independence of thought; 
third and fourth, independence of action, and if 
both are very wide apart, originality and self- 
reliance. 

If the thumb inclines inward, avarice; outward, 
generosity. 

(4) Observe the length and depth of the lines. 

(5) The quality, whether they are crooked or 
straight. 

(6) Observejvvhether they touch or cut other lines. 

(7) Observe whether they are touched or cut by 
other lines. 

(8) Their place and position. 

Note. The lines are sometimes lengthened until 
certain years of our life, while others are short- 
ened. At one time they may become pale, at 
another they become notably clear and red. The 
minor marks, such as are found on the mounts, 
sometimes quite vanish, and at other times they will 
assume different shapes and colours. Therefore 
the most studious in palmistry cannot attain a 
complete knowledge of the events of a life at 
once, because they come and go as nature, or 
the circumstances of life, change and twist, but 
can only read for a year or so in advance. These 
changes are caused, as before stated, by the pro- 



28 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

gressions and changing of the laws relating to 
nature, of which we are a part. 

THE HAND TO EXAMINE. 

The general rule in the East is that the right 
palm of the male and the left palm of the female 
ought to be examined. In either case take the 
hand in which the signs and lines are clearly 
shown. If they concur in both hands and appear 
clear and nicely marked they declare a constancy 
of fortune and health, etc. In the male generally 
the right hand is the fate hand or the positive 
hand, that is, events about to happen; while the 
left denotes the negative or those events which 
have come to pass or been accomplished by the 
person, or those just passing away. Judge the 
converse in the female hands. 

SIGNIFICATION OP ANIMALS, FLOWERS AND PRO- 
MISCUOUS MARKS FOUND ON THE HAND. 

These are principally formed by the smaller lines 
running with the pores of the skin. Great care 
must therefore be taken in determining these forms, 
because very much depends on their position. 
The numbers herein referred to have reference to 
Plate II of the hand which I have set apart for 
the express purpose of showing these marks and 
signs. 

The first space of the hand near to the mounts 
is that part which has principally to show the 
animal passions lusts and intrigues. 




PLATE II. 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 3! 

The second space, or the part of the hand 
between the girdle of Venus and the Table line, 
deals more specifically with love affairs or the spiri- 
tual side, while the former treats more on the phy- 
sical plane. 

These two, therefore, taken together, may be con- 
sidered the moral region of the hand. 

The next space between the Table line and the 
l,iver line may be called the mental and social 
region. 

The one following this may be called the com- 
mercial region or the wealth generally of the person. 

That space enclosed by the line of L,ife is the 
artistic or dramatic region. 

The right hand side of the hand separated by the 
line of Saturn denotes the positive nature, while 
the left hand portion is the negative or imagina- 
tive nature of the individual. 

If a fish or a similar figure be found at the root 
of the hand (No. i) it signifies great success in the 
world riches and many children. 

If a lotus flower or like-shaped figure be here, 
the person, if a female, will be sure to become a 
great lady, in fact almost a queen. If the same be 
on a male hand he will be sure to be renowned and 
great (No. 2). 

A serpent found here or on the wrist just above 
the Bracelet and near to the line of Saturn, the 
man will become a great warrior or hero (Nos. i 
and 3). 



32 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

An octagonal figure placed between the line of 
L,ife and the lyiver line will cause the person to be 
burdened with the possession of landed estates 
(No. 4). 

If conch, or marine shells, or an}' circular figure 
be found here (No. 5) they presage that the person 
will be a learned man, especially if they should be 
found on the first phalanx of the little finger (No. 
6), on the mount of Mercury (No. 7), or on the 
mount of the Moon (No. .8). 

Should the sign of a flag be found here, and par- 
ticularly on the mount of Mercury (No. 8) or on 
the palm of the hand (No. 9), the person will be a 
philosopher and a great thinker. 

A trident (No. 10), the three-pronged sceptre of 
Neptune or similar figure, the person rises to great 
fame, almost a prince or princess. If the trident 
be formed, but somewhat indistinct, he will not 
rise so high, but sure to have very important ap- 
pointments and be attached to royalty. He will 
also be very kind, generous, and likely to acquire 
fame. 

If in the male hand, or even on the female hand, 
there be anything like a spear or bow and arrow 
the person is sure to get a throne (No. n); and if 
all three, bow, arrow and lance together be there, 
the person is sure to be a king or queen (No. 12). 

Should the sign of a wheel and flag come together 
on the same hand the person will have riches and 
power, respect among his fellow-men, will be a 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 33 

great ruler or prime minister, and be noted or cele- 
brated for his wisdom and goodness (No. 13). 

If the sign of an elephant, which of itself is 
good (No. 14), or the sign of an earring (No. 15) 
and wheel (No. 16) appear on the same hand 
together, the person is likely to be an emperor or 
great personage. 

A hill (No. 17) or wristlet (No. 18) like a bough 
or something like the head of a man (No. 19), or a 
pitcher (No. 20), the person is almost sure to rise to 
the exalted position of a minister of state. 

If the sign of a barleycorn be found on the flat 
part of the thumb the person will spend life very 
happily and go through life easily (No. 21). Should 
the barley appear on the mount of Mars, in the 
centre of the hand, the person will be very intellec- 
tual, respectable and wise (No. 22). Should the 
form of the barley be found under any two fingers, 
especially on the mount of Saturn, the possessor 
will lead a happy life, honourable, have a good 
partner in marriage and have many children (No. 

23)- 

If the line of the Heart (or the line of Fortune 
in India) (No. 25), extend only to the mount of 
Apollo (the Sun), the person will scarcely live ten 
years. And should this line be broken in many 
places the person will die by drowning. But if 
another smaller line appear running parallel with 
the Heart line and which extends only to the mount 
of Apollo (No. 26), the person will meet his death 

c 



34 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

either by a fall from a house or a tree. Should, 
however, this line extend from the outside part of 
the hand to the mount of Jupiter, the life will be 
long and good, if not broken. 

If a line rises from mount of Venus to the first 
phalanx of the thumb he will be a commander of 
a large arni} r (No. 27). 

A vertical line on the mount of Jupiter, the pos- 
sessor will be a great diplomatist, but an irreligious 
person (No. 28). If this line appear on the mount 
of Saturn, he will be a prosperous man with a 
beautiful wife and have many children (No. 29). 

A line under the Sun denotes a trades person 
with a long life, but only rises to the middle class 
(No. 30). 

If a vertical and well-defined line appear on the 
mount of Mercury (No. 31), the person is likely to 
lead a long life in a foreign country. 

If the line of the Heart (Fortune line) goes to 
the mount of Saturn, he will live thirty years. 

If the Life line and the Liver line (called the 
Head line in England) be separated entirely, the 
female will either be seduced before marriage or 
have illegitimate children, or in both sexes be 
illegitimate themselves. 

If the palm of the hand be filled with numerous 
and indistinct marks or lines the person leads a 
very unhappy life. 

If a person have single lines or marks thus = 
between the phalanges on the joints of the fingers 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 35 

and when counted together make twelve, they will 
be happy, prosperous and rich for the most part of 
life. 

If they make thirteen he will be very unhappy. 

If they make fifteen he will be dishonest or a 
thief. 

If they make sixteen he will be a great gambler 
and cheat. 

If they make seventeen he will be guilty of de- 
bauchery and much wickedness. 

If they make eighteen the person will be very 
fortunate and religious. 

If they make nineteen he will be very clever and 
respectable. 

If the} r make twenty an enthusiast in religion. 

If they make twenty-one he will be a great poet 
and become famous. 

When these lines are joined at the ends and form 
the shape of a barleycorn or wheat, the fame and 
learning of the person depend on the number; one 
would be weak, two strong, and so on. If the lines 
just over the mounts be united at the ends, as 
described above, the person in whose hands the 
same appear will have riches and wealth, but gener- 
ally by marriage. If they be united over all four 
fingers the person will be very rich, over three less 
wealthy and so on. 

Small concentric circles, formed principally by 
the pores of the skin, on the points or first phalanges 
of the fingers and thumb, and these be not broken 



36 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

and appear the same on all four ringers and thumb, 
the person will be extremely famous and very 
powerful. 

Also on the outer ridge of the hand will be found 
various marks. 

All the marks above the Heart line indicate the 
number of wives, and all below the number of 
children, the short one indicates those that will 
probably die. 

The line around the lower joint of the thumb 
just above the mount of Venus, if well-defined and 
clear, and particularly if they bend thus > ' on the 
mount, denote the person to be famous as a sculptor 
or painter. 

If on the mounts of Jupiter, Saturn, Apollo 
Mercury, there be found concentric circles, and 
very complete, and in no way broken, the man will 
attain great wealth and power through marriage or 
marry some noted person. 

If at the end of the Hepatica or Liver line there 
so an opening like the tail of a fish, the person will 
have great happiness and riches. 

THE LINES. 

(1) The line of Life, which ought to be called 
the line of the Heart, embraces the root of the 
thumb. 

(2) The Liver or natural mean runs straight 
through the middle of the hand. 

(3) The line of the Head or Brain rises before 
the line of Life and extends towards the mount of 




PLATE III. THE LINES AND MOUNTS ON THE HAND. 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 39 

Mercury, forming a triangular figure in the palm of 
the hand the great sign of success and brilliancy. 

(4) The line of Fortune or Title line, which 
begins under the root of the little finger and extends 
towards the forefinger. 

(5) The Bracelet lines at the root of the hand, 
stretch across the wrist, and may be single, double 
or treble, etc. 

(6) The Sun line, called for clearness Via Solis, 
is a right line which begins at the mount of Apollo 
and stretches into the hollow of the hand after 
curving towards the mount of the Moon. 

(7) The line of the Moon, called the Via L,actea, 
runs upwards from the line of Saturn, through the 
mount of the Moon. 

(8) The line of Fortune or Saturn begins at the 
wrist lines, extends through the hollow of the hand 
to the mount of the middle finger. If this line be 
cut or severed it is called the Via Combusta ; when 
this line assumes a double line in the middle of the 
palm it is said that you do more good to others than 

yourself. 

THE MOUNTS. 

These are the fleshy or prominent parts under 
the fingers, called : 

(1) The mount of Venus, in the root of the thumb 

(2) The mount of Jupiter, in the root of the fore- 
finger. 

(3) The mount of Saturn, in the root of the middle 
finger. 



4O INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

(4) The mount of Sun (Apollo), in the root of 
the ring finger. 

(5) The mount of Mercury, in the root of the 
little finger. 

THE LINE OF LIFE. 

This line, broad, uniform, lively colour and a 
good length, denotes the party to be long lived and 
subject to few diseases. This line slender, short, 
cut or broken, or with obscure little lines, or pale, 
or blackish colour, denotes feebleness of body, 
sickness, short life. This line sloping nicely to the 
Liver line and forming a nice angle with parallel 
or little ciosses at the juncture, shows good wit and 
even temper, a sharp quick person and business 
man. 

Little branches in the upper part branching 
towards the Liver line signify riches and honour. 
These little lines running the opposite way towards 
the wrist denote poverty, deceit, unfaithful servants. 
Little confused hair lines in this line signify diseases. 

TIME OF EVENTS. 

Should they be found in the lower part of the 
hand the good or bad will be in early age. In the 
middle of the hand towards the hollow, in the 
middle age. If towards the Liver line, in declining 
age. 

Danger of death is threatened if this line be 
broken. 

To find the exact age this line may be divided 




PLATE IV. THE LINE OF 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 43 

into seventy parts, each part counting one year of 
life. 

The character Q in this line shows loss of an 
eye. This character double denotes the loss of 
both eyes. 

A line ascending from the line of Life (beneath 
the angle formed by the line of Life and the Liver 
line) to the line of Saturn, denotes an envious 
man, and shows also a perilous disease in that part 
wherein it touches the vital. So much the worse 
if it cut the line of Life or severs the mount. 

A line passing from the line of Life to the ring 
finger promises honours to follow by means of a 
lady of rank, or gain through favour. 

The line of Life thicker than ordinary at the end 
under the forefinger shows a laborious old age. 

THE LIVER LINE. 

This line being straight and not dissected by 
obscure little lines, denotes a healthy body. 

If it be short or broken and does not reach be- 
yond the hollow of the hand, it denotes diseases 
and a short life. 

The longer this line, the greater may the life be 
warranted. 

If cut at the end by a small intervening line, it 
threatens poverty in old age. 

When this line is very close to the line of Life, it 
denotes diseases of the heart, as palpitation, syn- 
cope, etc. 



44 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

If the space between the line of Life and the 
Liver line, especialty of the space between the 
Liver line and the line of Fortune, be broad, it 
shows prodigality. 

If the Liver line turn and wind several ways, un- 
equal, of a different colour and dissected, it bodes 
disease or obstruction in the liver, and hence the 
disease arising from its weakness. It also denotes 
covetousness and depravity of nature and wit; 
more especially if from under the region of the 
middle finger it extends towards the line of Life, 
thus making a short or narrow triangle. Where it 
is well drawn and of a good clear colour, it is a sign 
of a cheerful and ingenious disposition. 

If this line have a sister line it promises inheri- 
tances. 

If continued with some little hard knots, it fore- 
bodes manslaughter either perpetrated or to be 
perpetrated, according to the number of those knots. 

If a cross be found therein, under the region of 
the middle finger, it promises death at hand. 

If it ends with a fork towards the mount of the 
Moon, it is a sign of hypocrisy and evil manners. 

When it bends towards the Mensal it is a token 
of a slanderous tongue and envy. 

When it projects a remarkable branch through 
the line of Life unto the mount of Venus, and cuts 
or touches the line of Mars, especially if the line 
be of a ruddy colour, it warns to be guarded against 
thieves and intimates, fraud and deceit of enemies. 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 45 

This same branch shows also great heat of the 
liver, coming from Mars, whereby life is endan- 
gered. 

THE LINE OF THE HEAD AND BRAIN. 

If this line (ascending from its place with uni- 
form proportion) connect the line of the Liver and 
Life in a triangular form, having a lively colour 
and not intersected, it declares a person of admir- 
able prudence, and of a manl)' wit and fair fortune. 
The more perfect this triangle, the better shall the 
temper, wit and courage be. But if it be obtuse, it 
argues an evil disposed nature and a rude man. If 
there be no triangle, much worse, a fool, a prodigal 
and a liar, and frequently a short life. 

The nearer it approaches a right angle, and not 
acute, the better the person. But when the angle 
formed be very acute, especially when the lines of 
Liver and Life touch under the region of the middle 
finger, it argues covetousness. If not under the 
middle finger, it shows a keen, sharp and powerful 
wit, also a clever business person. 

The left angle (male hand), if it be made upon 
the natural mean in the mount of the Moon, and 
be a right angle by the line passing to the mount 
of Mercury, confirms goodness, and quality of the 
intellect. 

When the line of the Head and Brain throws out 
unequal and incomposed branches towards the 
mount of the Moon, thereby making unusual char- 
acters, it denotes in men weakness of brain and 



46 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

dangerous sea voyages; but in a woman frequent 
sorrows of mind and difficulties in child-bearing. 
Equal lines thus projected presage the contrary in 
both sexes, viz., in men, a clear and well-composed 
brain and frequent voyages, and in women cheer- 
fulness and felicity in child-bearing. 

The line of the Head has this peculiarity; if it 
project a cleft or a manifest star upwards to the 
cavea martis, it signifies boldness and courage; but 
if it let fall the same downwards, thefts and deceit- 
fulness. 

When the line of the Head is joined to the line 
of the Dragon's Head it promises a prudent and 
pleasant old age. The same throwing a branch in 
the shape of a fork towards the place of the line of 
Fortune signifies subtlety in managing affairs and 
craftiness either to do good or evil. 

If this character appears in or near the fork it 
gives riches and honours by means of ingenuity 

and arts. 

THE LINE OF FORTUNE. 

This line is also called the Table line. This line, 
when it is long enough and without incisures, argues 
a due strength in the principal members of man 
and denotes constancy. Judge the contrary if this 
line be short or crooked or is severed. When this 
line terminates under the mount of Saturn, it shows 
a vain and lying fellow. 

If it projects small branches unto the mount of 
Jupiter, it produces honours. Should this be a 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 47 

simple line on the mount of Jupiter, and void of 
any good marks or branches, it is a sign of poverty 
and want. 

If it severs the mount of Jupiter, cruelty of mind 
and excessive wrath. 

If it throws a branch between the forefinger and 
the middle, it threatens to a man a wound in the 
head, but to a woman danger in child-bearing. 

A small line running from the line of Fortune to 
the space between the middle and ring finger, 
denotes sorrow and labour. 

A line passing from the Liver line to the line of 
Fortune, forming an acute angle, brings sorrow 
and labour. 

Should there be no Liver line and the line of 
Fortune connected by a small line to the line of 
Life, it threatens a deadly wound. 

The absence of the line of Fortune shows a 
malevolent, contentious, faithless, inconstant per- 
son and of base conditions. 

Confused little lines in the line of Fortune denote 
sickness, and if under Mercury, in the first age; 
under the mount of the Sun in manhood; under 
the middle finger in old age. 

When certain points are observed in this line 
they argue lust and vigour of body. 

THE BRACELETS LINE. 

If this be double or treble and forming a right 
and continuous tract, it promises a good composure 
of body. 



48 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

The line which is nearest to the thumb, of a 
good lively colour, and unbroken, promises riches. 
Should this line be broken in the middle, crooked 
and very pale, it denotes debility of body and a 
want of all things. 

A cross or star placed here shows tranquillity of 
life in old age. 

If there be a star single or double or any lines 
near the mount of the thumb, in women they 
denote misfortune and infamy. 

A line passing from the Dragon line through the 
mount of Venus, presages adversities either by 
means of some kindred or a wife. 

A line running from the Dragon line to the mount 
of the Moon shows adversities and private enemies; 
crooked or distorted it increases the evil and shows 
long servitude. 

This line being clear and straight and extending 
as far as the region of the Moon, presages many 
journeys both by land and sea. 

If this line continues to the mount of Mercury it 
argues that the man will live in a foreign country 
in great esteem. If it extends to the Liver line it 
shows an honest behaviour and a long life. If to 
the mount of the Sun, single or double, it denotes 
great good and enables the man to govern and rule 
in great affairs. If it pass to the mount of Mercury 
it betokens a man fit for many things. If it does 
not extend to the mount of Mercury, but is broken 
about the middle and ends beneath that mount, it 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 49 

denotes an untruthful, tittle-tattling, discontented 
person. 

If this line ascends directly to the mount of 
Saturn, it denotes a good position of Saturn in the 
geniture; but if crooked and passes towards the 
Dragon line and the Liver line, it denotes a hard, 
covetous, and laborious man. 

THE VIA Sous. 

This line being straight and uniformly composed 
and well coloured, promises the favour of great men, 
and joyful honours; if dissected and uneven, judge 
the contrary, with various impediments and envy. 

THE VIA L,ACTEA. 

This line being uniformly composed, proportion- 
ate and continued, denotes fortunate journeys both 
by sea and land ; also a good brain, the favour of 
women (the mount of Venus being unafflicted), a 
composed and graceful speech. It it be cut or dis- 
torted it argues infelicity and lies; but if whole, 
ascending towards the little finger, it is a sign of 
great happiness. 

THE LINE OP SATURN. 

This line being fully and wholly protracted to 
the middle finger is an argument of profound medi- 
tations, and of fortunate events in counsels and 
actions. 

This line deficient is an evil sign portending 
many misfortunes, unless other positions favour it. 
If bending backward, into the hollow of the hand 



5O INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

towards the mount of the Moon, after the form of 
a semi-circle, threatens imprisonment. 

The line beginning from the line of Life and 
passing through the Liver line, to the mount of 
Saturn and if there it touch the Saturnia 
threatens imprisonment. 

MORALITY. THE GIRDLE OF VENUS. 

This line of itself, unless there be other testimony 
to counteract it, is sufficient to indicate fulness of 
nature to appreciate the opposite sex, while the 
want of it denotes (except in a measure given by 
the fulness of the mount of Venus, etc.) coldness, 
unnaturalness for the other sex, and usually a cold, 
insipid partner, a poor, neglectful mother or father. 
But if this line have a sister line, that is, a small 
line running parallel with the Girdle, it argues in- 
temperance and lust in both sexes and baseness in 
sexual matters a filthy person. If this line be 
divided or broken up by various lines it denotes 
losses and infamy by reason of these lusts. 

THE LINE OF MARS. COURAGE AND FORTITUDE. 

This line is sometimes called the sister line to 
the line of Life because it is often found running 
parallel with that line and denotes increased vital 
force courage, because it strengthens the heart 
and thus the energy. When clear and well-defined 
it presages a long and active life, with little or no 
diseases. People with this line will suffer largely 
from gout, rheumatism and apoplexy if they take 



IXDIAX PALMISTRY. 51 

stimulants of any kind, inasmuch as the person 
will have sufficient energy of himself, and all 
stimulation which will increase the vascular action 
will only impede and retard the heart's action, like 
too much oil to a machine. This line strengthens 
all things denoted by the line of lyife, and if clear 
and decided!}* red it promises great success in war. 

THE RULE TO TELL THE PLANETS. 

When a figure similar to that used by astrono- 
mers in designating the planets is found on the 
mount particularly set aside for that planet, as on 
the mount of Jupiter there is the figure Qj., and on 
the mount of Saturn there is the sign "j^, on Apollo 
the sign 0, on the mount of Mercury there is the 
sign Q, and on the thick part of the thumb you 
find a similar sign CJ) , on the mount of the moon 
the sign Q), on Mars' place the figure $, and so on, 
then they are termed benevolent. How far, how- 
ever, this is relevant to the subject I do not state, 
but I should rather advise the student to treat this 
with great care, although the marks given under- 
neath will be found of value when placed as indi- 
cated. 

The planets are considered unfortunate when 
confused lines, broken semicircle, gridiron marks, 
or signs contrary to the mounts indicated above, 
as Qj. to mount of Jupiter, and so on, are found on 
the mounts or places. 

Venus (9) is dignified when you find on her 



52 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

mount a clear star, or red furrows running trans- 
versely parallel. 

A jovial, merry nature is shown by fulness or 
elevation of the root of the thumb, but luxurious, 
amorous, graceful, cornel}', concupiscent, very 
honest, just and constant in friendship. 

Description when strong and full: the bod}' 
somewhat tall, skin clear, eyes pleasant and spark- 
ling, full of allurement and temptation. The hair 
is brown, light, crisp and soft, sometimes slightly 
waving in front or curling; a noble mind. The 
mind is ofttimes prone to boasting, and loves the 
society of ladies; an admirer of music, painting 
and beauty. 

Professions must be judged according to the 
strength or debility of the mount; it produces 
musicians, merchants for fancy goods, teachers, 
apothecaries, gardeners, etc. 

The mount weak, not elevated or badly marked, 
causes men to be inconstant, lascivious, vain. A 
cross near first joint of the thumb signifies an 
adulterer, or has had or will have a mishap through 
females. 

The place of Venus, void of incisures, flat and 
smooth-looking, shows an effeminate, rude and 
sorrowful person, or one foolishly and ridiculously 
addicted to merriment and jesting. 

THE PLANET MARS. COURAGE, WAR. 
Mars is fortunate (i) when line of Life is strong, 
deep, red and decently drawn ; (2) when a cross or 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 53 

star is found on his place, especially the palm of 
the hand. 

Description when strong: denotes full courage, 
often bold, dauntless, stout, warlike, contentious, 
firm of purpose, large and lusty appetite, imperious. 

Hair light brown or sand}*, yellow, often red. 

The eyes, blue or grey-green, which often grow 
red and terrible-looking when angry. 

Mars unfortunate: men, etc., are quarrelsome, 
violent, deceitful, angry natures produces thieves 
and murderers. 

Profession according to strength: generals, sur- 
geons, ironmasters or workers and tradesmen of all 
kinds who work with metal, as ironmongers, farriers, 
etc. 

Note. Mars has signification of wives, husbands, 
sons and friends (deceitful or otherwise). 

Diseases: he produces fevers, blisters, sore eyes, 
skin diseases, apoplexy, wounds, wicked thoughts. 

With Jupiter he affects the gall, the reins, back 
and liver. 

With Venus he affects the privy parts and sexual 
diseases. 

If Mars be strong females have largely constructed 
bodies and love men of rank; if Venus be strong 
men love women of rank; if weak they form attach- 
ments for servants, coachmen and inferiors. 

The sign fo placed in cavea of the hand threatens 
a fall from a precipice or some high place ; a fall 
is also indicated by the line of Saturn stopping 



54 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

or breaking on the mount of Mars (hollow of 
hand). 

Imprisonment: a crooked line ascending from 
mount of Mars to the mount of Saturn. 

Journeys and peregrinations denoted by a line 
running from plain of Mars (hollow of hand) down 
to the Bracelet lines and ending immediately below 
the mount of the Moon. 

THE MOUNT OF JUPITER. HONOUR, FAME, 
RENOWN, ECCLESIASTICAL, STATE, LAW. 

The planet is fortunate when (i) a star or double 
cross; (2) parallel lines or (3) line clearly drawn 
from line of Life to his mount. 

Description when fortunate : he signifies a noble, 
glorious, honest, benevolent, affable, honourable, 
merry, renowned, neat, just and equitable person; 
good-looking, formidable and happy, with beautiful 
hazel or blue eyes. 

Hair dark brown; grave gesture, modest, and 
faithful to their promises. 

Professions, etc.: great dignitaries, churchmen, 
lawyers or counsellors, statesmen or persons brought 
into contact with great men who are highly esteemed 
and loved. They favour their wives, sons, and all 
good men. 

Jupiter rules the liver, blood, ribs, lungs and 
gristles. 

Jupiter unfortunate when half a gridiron on his 
mount. This shows losses by powerful women. 
When generally unfortunate: when flat, flabby, 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 55 

with no good marks on it, interlaced with a lot of 
little hair lines, etc., he causes persons to lose their 
estates and brings about great calamities in money 
matters, although, if nothing else stops it, the 
person will usually recover it after he becomes 
strong. 

Diseases: when afflicted he causes troubles of 
the heart, cramps, inflammation of the lungs, windy 
spasms. 

Apoplexy indicated by a line transversely cut- 
ting his mount and extending towards the mount 
of Saturn (middle finger), and forming there a cleft 
or little lines. 

Splendid honours and fame, riches, public re- 
wards from princes and great men, a cross, espe- 
cially a clear and red star on the mount of Jupiter 
or Qj. marked thereon. 

THE MOUNT OF APOLLO. THE PLANET SUN. 
INGENUITY, PUBLIC HONOURS, BRILLIANCY, ETC. 

The Sun is fortunate same as in last planet. 

Description when fortunate: persons are faithful, 
ingenious, honoured, high-minded, wise, humane, 
religious, just, moderate, aged, and do all things 
wisely. 

He gives a well-set body with yellow or sandy 
hair, and rules the heart and e5*es, the diaphragm 
(bowels) and nerves. 

Description when unfortunate: the persons are 
proud and easily elated, manifesting their access 



56 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

to dignity by unjust means, boasters and im- 
modest. 

Diseases: he produces sore eyes and blindness, 
especially of right eye in man and left in a woman, 
and trembling of the heart, syncope, etc. 

Political honours: the Via Solis being uniform 
and of a clear good colour; it also gives the favour 
and grace of princes. 

Trouble and enmity from political and legal men 
when the Via Solis is confused and afflicted. 

THE MOON. TRAVELLING BY LAND AND SEA. 

When fortunate: good and clear marks near this 
mount, stars, etc. These persons are successful in 
journeys and messages and great prosperity in 
foreign countries; to a female felicity and happiness 
in bearing children. 

Ominous signs placed here show death and afflic- 
tion in childbirth. 

Description : the persons will be famous, honest 
and honourable, with well-set large bodies pro- 
portioned and pleasant. They travel by land and 
sea, and causes them to desire to lie or walk by the 
side of water rivers and running waters. 

When unfortunate principally known by pale and 
confused line on the mount of the Moon. 

The mount flat, soft and small, she causes per- 
sons to be inconstant in life and actions. 

Diseases: affects the brain, stomach and belly, 
and occasions paralysis, epilepsy, cancer, spots on 
the body, gripings and severe colds. 



INDIAN* PALMISTRY. 57 

THE PLANET SATURN. THE MOUNT OF SATURN. 

COUNSELS, MATHEMATICIANS, GRAVE THINKERS, 

INVENTORS, ETC. 

When fortunate: when the line of Saturn runs 
uniformly and clear to his mount or ft marked 
thereon. 

Saturn unfortunate when there are confused lines 
on his mount or contrary or unfortunate signs 
thereon. 

Saturn fortunate: men are silent, provident; 
good and profound, not always rich, counsels, grave 
meditators, somewhat melancholy, and generally 
have a foolish way of laughing and jesting. 

Description : they general!} 7 have a slender body, 
and rather tall, pale and feeble. 

Hair brown or blackish colour, yet sometimes 
sandy. The eyes are sunken. 

Trades, etc.: the}* are fortunate in agriculture, 
in minerals of all kinds, as mines, etc. They are 
somewhat careless of their wives and less addicted 
to sexual excesses, are^more grasping and tenacious 
than is just. 

When Saturn is unfortunate he makes persons 
sorrowful, laborious, sordid, humble, covetous, un- 
faithful, liars, unfortunate, malicious, oppressed 
with continual griefs and calamities. 

Diseases: he gives dangerous diseases, colds, 
coughs, melancholy, hypochondriacal complaints, 
dropsy, gout, falling sickness, quartan and hectic 
fevers. 



58 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

Accidents: he produces falls from houses, im- 
prisonment and danger of drowning. 

A deep line running from the space between the 
forefinger and middle finger to the line of Fortune 
and cutting or interrupting it, signifies a wound or 
disease in the lower part of the abdomen. 

THE PLANET MERCURY. THE MOUNT OP MER- 
CURY. STUDY, RESEARCH, SCIENCES, SPEAKING, 
ETC. 

When this planet is fortunate, men are ingenious, 
studious, scientific and searchers after secrets. 

Professions, trades, etc., according to his dignity : 
he produces orators, poets, eloquent speakers, per- 
sons ready to learn anything, mathematicians, mer- 
chants, sometimes crafty, variable people. 

When unfortunate he produces persons full of 
levity, liars, prattlers, thieves, cheats, inconstant, 
faithless, traitors, etc. 

Diseases: he produces madness, fury, acute 
fevers, etc. 

Signs of deceit and danger to life: the mensa 
sharpened by the concourse of the line of Fortune 
and the line of lyife or the I^iver line. The best 
sign is the mensa diverging, open at both ends and 
forming the figure ^ . 

Perfection of wit and science: a star placed (or 
other clearly-formed flowers or flag) in the mensa 
especially under the mount of Mercury or the Sun, 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 59 

MENSA. THE PART OF FORTUNE. 

When fortunate: liberal, magnanimous and long- 
lived people. The space between the line of For- 
tune and the L,iver line (called sometimes the 
line of the Heart and the line of the Head), and 
forms a nice figure. 

When unfortunate: small and narrow (by the 
approaching of these two lines), it argues slender 
fortune, niggardliness and fearfulness. 

Honours and dignities to follow by great and 
noble personages, when a star or cross appears in 
this space, clear and well-formed, especially under 
the mount of the Sun (see chapter on figures and 
flowers on hand). 

The sign of 2[ here promises prominent eccle- 
siastical dignities. 

Good fortune is denoted by the star or triple 
cross. Good and equal lines in this space denote 
a good fortune; evil or unequal lines the re- 
verse. 

The worst sign when no mensa is found, for it 
shows obscurity both of life and fortune. 

Misfortune and loss of honours when confused 
little lines appear here, the good is diverted, and 
anxieties and troubles threaten, to honours espe- 
cially, if under the mount of the Sun. 

Fortunate journeys: a cross or star on the 
outermost part of the mensa on or near the mount 
of the Moon is a sure sign. 



60 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

THE FINGERS. THE THUMB. 

Riches and honours shown by overthwart lines 
clear and red underneath the nail and joint of the 
thumb. 

A violent death or danger through a married 
woman, etc.: a line passing from the upper joint of 
the thumb to the line of 1,1 fe. 

A contentious nature: confused lines on the 
lower joint of the thumb; one always brawling and 
scolding. 

Death by hanging, etc.: a line surrounding the 
thumb at the middle joint. 

Riches and possessions to be worked for: equal 
furrows under the lower joint. 

Idleness and lack of energy: if the first and 
second joints are void of incisures. 

THE FOREFINGER OR INDEX FINGER. 

Inheritance: denoted by many overthwart lines 
in the top joint; these in the second joint show 
envious and evil-disposed persons. 

Issue, bad tongue: right lines running between 
the top and second joints declare in a woman 
a numerous issue; in a man bitterness of 
tongue. 

A jovial disposition: right lines in the joint 
near the mount of Jupiter. 

Unchaste and lascivious: in a female hand a 
star being placed in the joint near the mount of 
Jupiter. 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 6 1 

THE MIDDLE FINGER. 

An unhappy, melancholy and depraved mind: 
denoted by small gridirons or confused marks in 
the joints of this finger. 

Success with metals: manifested by equal lines. 

Drowning or violent death: this is denoted by 
a star in the joints of this finger. 

Folly and madness: a crossed line, extending 
from the root of this finger upwards through the 
whole length of the finger. 

THE RING FINGER. 

Great and noble fame denoted by a line ascend- 
ing unbroken from the mount of the Sun through 
the joints of this finger to the end. 

Honour and riches: this is shown by equal lines 
in the first joint (near the mount). 

Enmity of great men: denoted by overthwart 
lines here ; it is made late in life when these lines 
are intersected. 

THE LITTLE FINGER. 

The planet Mars has dominion over this finger. 
A strong and valorous person when strong and 
well fed. 

Note. From the joints of this finger as from 
the mount itself are judgments passed concerning 
merchandise and favours. 

Ingenuity and eloquence: a star in the first 
joint (near the mount of Mercury) shows this; it 
is also shown by a right line extending from the 



62 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

mount of Mercury to the end of finger, also a 
great speaker. 

Foolishness, etc.: denoted by obtuse and con- 
fused marks placed here. 

A thief and deceitful person: this is shown by 
confused and unfortunate marks appearing in the 
first and second joints of this finger. 

Perpetual inconstancy: this is shown by adverse 
lines in the last or top joint of the finger. 

Note. The number of wives and husbands are 
frequently indicated from the small lines passing 
from the outermost part of the hand to the mount 
of Mercury, but I consider the proper place is from 
the mount of Venus. 

If the end of the little finger does not reach so 
far as to touch the last joint of the ring finger, it 
signifies that the partner in marriage will be im- 
perious in all things. 

The mounts marked with good figures and char- 
acters show good and happy omens, being vitiated 
with confused or broken characters, etc., or lines, 
they always denote the contrary, unless they are 
restrained by other lines that be good. 

Chiromancers generally teach that the first joints 
near the mount of the finger indicate the early age, 
the second, the flourishing state of manhood, and 
the last old age. But our opinion is that the planets 
shown by the nativity of the persons do, in their 
proper order, manifest their marks and characters 
whether for good or bad. 





PLATE V. ALLEGED MARKS ON THE FEET OF THE 
BENIGN BUDDHA. 



INDIAN PALMISTRY. 65 

Note. A knowledge of astrology will prove an 
acquisition to the study of palmistry or any science. 

SIGNS ON THE HEAD. How TO READ THE FORE- 
HEAD. 

If a person has a broad forehead and takes the 
form of / ^~ > , a crescent, he was born of poor 
parents but is sure to be rich. 

If a prominent single vein or mark extends from 
the nose to the top of the forehead the person is 
born to immense wealth. 

If there are many similarly placed the person is 
very vicious. 

If the forehead is depressed in the middle he is 
very jealous and a lascivious or sinful man. 

If the forehead is narrow he is a great miser. 

If there be three furrows going across the head 
he is likely to live a long life, especially if they go 
over the eyes. 

If there be four such lines the person will be a 
commander or great potentate and live a very long 
time. 

Many indistinct lines on the forehead denote 
lewd persons. 

If there be any marks in the middle of the fore- 
head and they take the form of a crescent " x, the 
person will be very prosperous and fortunate. 

SIGNS ON THE FEET. 

If a crescent or elongated horseshoe mark appear 
on sole of the foot and the toes separated well from 

E 



66 INDIAN PALMISTRY. 

each other, the person will have a harsh temper and 
remain poor. 

If a female's toes are well set together and close, 
and has a wheel or flower mark on either or both 
feet, she will become a lady of rank and position. 

If there be an ear-shaped figure on the foot and 
without hair, or a little tuft, the person may expect 
to be successful in the world. 

THE ARMS. 

If her arms are very long she will be renowned 
and well-to-do. Short-armed persons generally 
remain poor. 



Women's Printing Society, Ltd., 66, Whitcoml) St., W.C 



NATURE'S FINER FORCES 

and their Influence upon 

HUMAN LIFE AND DESTINY. 

BY RAMA PRASAD, M.A. 

Cloth, 8vo. 4/6 net. 

" Of these excellent essays we cannot speak too highly ; they will 
prove a new revelation to our scientifically inclined readers and 
demonstrate conclusively the impregnable basis of ancient Aryan 
Science, which did not neglect the PSYCHIC and MENTAL DATA 
\\hich the modern scientific world MUST acknowledge ere long, 
and so enter upon an entire ' Reformation ' of its methods and 
hypotheses. The whole science of the Tatwas is founded on that 
which is termed ' Vibration ' or ' Motion ' and opens up possibilities 
which readers of ' THE SECRET DOCTRINE ' alone at present 
can foresee." Lucifer. 

The Dream of Ravan. A Mystery. 

Cloth, 8vo. 2/6 net. 



" It is beyond question that the unknown writer of this work was 
both a scholar and a mystic. That he had studied the Rdmdyana from 
the original texts and was a master of Vedantic psychology is amply 
manifested ; that he was a mystic himself and spoke of things that 
were realities to him and not mere empty speculations, is evident to 
every earnest student of Indian theosophical literature. In no other 
western publication have the three 'states' of man's consciousness 
been so strikingly and so intelligibly set forth as by our author. In 
this work the mystic and student of yoga will recognise many a home 
truth but slightly veiled, and many an important secret wholly 
disclosed." 



SOMNIUM SCIPIONIS 



Translated into English 

WITH AX ESSAY " THE Visiox OF SCIPIO " COXSIDERED AS A 
FRAGMEXT OF THE MYSTERIES. BY L. O. 

THE GOLDEN VERSES OF PYTHAGORAS. BY A. E. A. 
THE SYMBOLS OF PYTHAGORAS. BY S. A. 
One rot., cloth, 8vo. 2/6 net. 



"Not since 1804 has any English version of the two famous 
Pythagorean treatises included in this volume appeared in book form. 
Of their importance it is sufficient to state that they have been justly 
held in the highest esteem by Mystics from an early period to the 
present time. This has also been the case with the Sonnnum Scipionis 
or Vision of Scipio, Cicero's famous essay. L. O.'s able essay will be 
found most valuable to students." 

THE THEOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING SOCIETY, 
7, DUKE STREET, ADELPHI, LONDON, W.C. 



The Building of the Cosmos. 

BY ANNIE BESANT. 

Cloth, 8vo. Price 2/- net. 



"Sound; Fire; Yoga; and Symbolism are the t subjects treated 
of in this most excellent book. The essay upon Yoga, the Kingly 
Science of the Soul whereby a man may attain to that Divine Wisdom 
which is his birthright, deserves to be read of all men. To lovers of 
the Scriptures of the World the essay on ' Symbolism ' will appeal 
strongly and will be found most helpful, for in those Ancient Writings 
the most important truths are frequently veiled from the superficial 
reader by an allegory or a symbol, and in this essay the reader will 
find a clue to the method by which the study of symbols may be 
approached with beneficial results. Considerable light is thrown 
upon some of the very complex symbols pertaining to Indian 
Philosophies." 



THE YOGA OF CHRIST: or the Science of the Soul. 

WRITTEN DOWN BY A. K. G. 
EDITED BY F. HENRIETTA MULLER, B.A. 

Cloth, 8vo, 2/- net. Wrappers, i/- net. 



" This book appeals especially to that large class of devout souls 
who find neither satisfying Truth nor edifying practice in Modern 
Christianity ; who believe, nevertheless, that Christ had a message for 
them, and that somewhere hidden beneath the noise of words, and the 
misinterpretations of sectarians, a Truth, divine and living, may be 
found : to them the following pages will bring, if not the full radiance 
of Christ's illuminating Love, at least many valuable suggestions for 
thought, and aids in the solution of difficult problems. That Christian- 
ity, the religion which the West has made peculiarly its own, should be 
reverentially taught by ' an Indian ' from an Indian point of view, 
is in itself unusual, may be regarded as a happy omen of the ultimate 
breaking down of those barriers of Sectarianism which have hitherto 
been potent in dividing the English people from sympathetic com- 
munion with the natives of India." 



THE THEOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING SOCIETY, 
7, DUKE STREET, ADELPHI, LONDON, W.C. 






University of California 

SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 

405 Hilgard Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90024-1388 

Return this material to the library 

from which it was borrowed. 



8 

10-URl 



WUN051995 

JUL051995 



IIIIIIIHMM 

A 000621 016 5 




Univers 

Soutl 

Lib] 



