x Jjbris 

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 
LOS ANGELES 



Collection of 

Children's Books 





CHILDREN'S BOOK j| 

COLLECTION 

* 

* 
LIBRARY OF THE 

IVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA * 
LOS ANGELES 



THE 

ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 



THE ADVENTURES 



OF 



TOM SAWYER 



BY 

MARK TWAIN. 



THE AMERICAN PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

HARTFORD, CONN.: CHICAGO, ILL.: CINCINNATI, OHIO. 

A. ROMAN & CO., SAN FRANCISCO, CAL. 

1876. 



COPYRIGHT 

BY SAMUEL L. CLEMENS. 

1875- . 
All Rights Reserved. 




To 

MY WIFE 
THIS BOOK 

is 
AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED. 



PREFACE. 



Most of the adventures recorded in this book really occurred ; one or two were 
experiences of my own, the rest those of boys who were schoolmates of mine. 
Huck Finn is drawn from life ; Tom Sawyer also, but not from an individual he 
is a combination of the characteristics of three boys whom I knew, and therefore 
belongs to the composite order of architecture. 

The odd superstitions touched upon were all prevalent among children and slaves 
in the West at the period of this story that is to say, thirty or forty years ago. 

Although my book is intended mainly for the entertainment of boys and girls, I 
hope it will not be shunned by men and women on that account, for part of my 
plan has been to try to pleasantly remind adults of what they once were them- 
selves, and of how they felt and thought and talked, and what queer enterprises 

they sometimes engaged in. 

THE AUTHOR. 

HARTFORD, 1876. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 
Y-o-u-u Tom Aunt Polly Decides Upon her Duty Tom Practices Music The Challenge 

A Private Entrance 17 

CHAPTER II. 
Strong Temptations Strategic Movements The Innocents Beguiled 26 

CHAPTER III. 
Tom as a General Triumph and Reward Dismal Felicity Commission and Omission. ... 33 

CHAPTER IV. 
Mental Acrobatics Attending Sunday-School The Superintendent "Showing off" Tom 

Lionized 42 

CHAPTER V. 
A Useful Minister In Church The Climax 53 

CHAPTER VI. 
Self -Examination Dentistry The Midnight Charm Witches and Devils Cautious 

Approaches Happy Hours 60 

CHAPTER VII. 
A Treaty Entered Into Early Lessons A Mistake Made 72 

CHAPTER VIII. 
Tom Decides on his Course Old Scenes Re-enacted 79 

CHAPTER IX. 
A Solemn Situation Grave Subjects Introduced Injun Joe Explains 85 

. CHAPTER X. 
The Solemn Oath Terror Brings Repentance Mental Punishment 93 



XII CONTENTS, 



CHAPTER XI. 
Muff Potter Comes Himself Tom's Conscience at Work 101 

CHAPTER XII. 
Tom Shows his Generosity Aunt Polly Weakens 107 

CHAPTER XIII. 
The Young Pirates Going to the Rendezvous The Camp-Fire Talk 113 

CHAPTER XIV. 
Camp-Life A Sensation Tom Steals Away from Camp . 121 

CHAPTER XV. 
Tom Reconnoiters Learns the Situation Reports at Camp 128 

CHAPTER XVI. 
A Day's Amusements Tom Reveals a Secret The Pirates take a Lesson A Night Surprise 

An Indian War 134 

CHAPTER XVII. 
Memories of the Lost Heroes The Point in Tom's Secret 144 

CHAPTER XVIII. 
Tom's Feelings Investigated Wonderful Dream Becky Thatcher Overshadowed Tom 

Becomes Jealous Black Revenge ,. 148 

CHAPTER XIX. 
Tom Tells the Truth 158 

CHAPTER XX. 
Becky in a Dilemma Tom's Nobility Asserts Itself. 161 

CHAPTER XXL 
Youthful Eloquence Compositions by the Young Ladies A Lengthy Vision The Boy's 

Vengeance Satisfied 167 

CHAPTER XXII. 
Tom's Confidence Betrayed Expects Signal Punishment 176 

CHAPTER XXIII. 
Old Muff 's Friends Muff Potter in Court Muff Potter Saved 181 



CONTENTS. XIII 



CHAPTER XXIV. 
Tom as the Village Hero Days of Splendor and Nights of Horror Pursuit of Injun Joe 189 

CHAPTER XXV. 
About Kings and Diamonds Search for the Treasure Dead People and Ghosts 191 

CHAPTER XXVI. 
The Haunted House Sleepy Ghosts A Box of Gold Bitter Luck 199 

CHAPTER XXVII. 
Doubts to be Settled The Young Detectives 208 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 
An Attempt at No. Two Huck Mounts Guard 212 

CHAPTER XXIX. 
The Pic-nie Huck on Injun Joe's Track The " Revenge " Job Aid for the Widow 217 

CHAPTER XXX. 
The Welchman Reports Huck Under Fire The Story Circulated A New Sensation Hope 

Giving Way to Despair . 226 

CHAPTER XXXI. 


An Exploring Expedition Trouble Commences Lost in the Cave Total Darkness Found 

but not Saved .'.. 236 

CHAPTER XXXII. 
Tom tells the Story of their Escape Tom's Enemy in Safe Quarters 247 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 

The Fate of Injun Joe Huck and Tom Compare Notes An Expedition to the Cave Pro- 
tection Against Ghosts" An Awful Snug Place" A Reception at the Widow Douglas's, 252 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 
Springing a Secret Mr. Jones' Surprise a Failure 264 

CHAPTER XXXV. 
A New Order of Things Poor Huck New Adventures Planned 268 

CONCLUSION 275 



ILLUSTRATIONS. 



Tom Sawyer . . . Frontispiece 


PAGE 
17 

18 
19 

23 

25 
26 
28 
30 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
38 
39 
39 
40 
4i 
42 
44 
45 
47 
ST 
52 
53 
54 
55 
57 
58 
59 
60 
63 
64 
67 
69 




PAGE 
. . 7O 


Interrupted Courtship 


. 71 


Aunt Polly Beguiled .... 
A Good Opportunity .... 






Tail Piece .... 
The Grave in the Woods . 


. . 78 
. 79 
81 






'Tendin' to Business 


Robin Hood and his Foe . 
Death of Robin Hood 
Midnight 
Tom's Mode of Egress 
Tom's Effort at Prayer 
Muff Potter Outwitted 
The Graveyard 


. . 83 
. . 84 
. . 85 
. 86 
. 88 
. 91 
. 92 

Q-5 




Becky Thatcher 


After the Battle ..... 






Mary 


Disturbing Muff's Sleep . 
Tom's Talk with his Aunt 
Muff Potter .... 
A Suspicious Incident 
Injun Joe's two Victims . 
In the Coils .... 
Peter 
Aunt Polly seeks Information . 
A General Good Time 
Demoralized .... 


. . 9 8 

. TOO 
. IOI 
. IO2 

. 103 
. 106 

. 107 

. 108 
. . no 

. 112 


Tom Contemplating .... 




Boyhood 
Using the " Barlow " .... 




Tom as a Sunday-School Hero 




The Model Boy 


On Board Their First Prize 
The Pirates Ashore . . 


. II? 

. 118 


The Church Choir 


A Side Show 


Wild Life ..... 
The Pirate's Bath 


. 121 
121 


Result of Playing in Church . 
The Pinch-Bug 
Sid 
Dentistry 


The Pleasant Stroll 


. .124 


The Search for the Drowned . 
The Mysterious Writing . 
River View 


. 125 
. 127 

128 


Mother Hopkins 
Result of Tom's Truthfulness . 


What Tom Saw 


. . I3O 


Tom Swims the River 


133 



XVI 



ILL USTRA TIONS. 



PAGE 

Taking Lessons 134 

The Pirates' Egg Market . . . .135 
Tom Looking for Joe's Knife . . . 139 
The Thunder Storm . . . .141 

Terrible Slaughter 143 

The Mourner . . . . . . 144 

Tom's Proudest Moment . . . .147 

Amy Lawrence 148 

Tom tries to Remember . . . .150 

The Hero 152 

A Flirtation 154 

Becky Retaliates 155 

A Sudden Frost 156 

Counter-irritation 157 

Aunt Polly . . . . . .158 

Tom Justified ...... 160 

The Discovery i6i 

Caught in the Act 163 

Tom Astonishes the School . . . 165 

Literature 166 

Tom Declaims . . . . . 167 

Examination Evening .... 168 

On Exhibition 170 

Prize Authors . . . . . . 173 

The Master's Dilemma .... 174 

The School House 175 

The Cadet '.176 

Happy for Two Days .... 177 
Enjoying the Vacation .... 178 
The Stolen Melons ..... 180 

The Judge 181 

Visiting the Prisoner . . . .184 
Tom Swears . . . . . .186 

The Court Room 188 

The Detective 189 

Tom Dreams ...... 190 

The Treasure ...... 191 

The Private Conference .... 192 

A King ; Poor Fellow ! 194 

Business ....... 195 

The Ha'nted House 198 

Injun Joe igg 

The Greatest and Best . . . .200 
Hidden Treasures Unearthed . . . 205 



The Boy's Salvation . 
Room No. 2 ... 
The Next Day's Conference 
Treasures 
Uncle Jake 
Huck at Home 
The Haunted Room 
" Run for Your Life " 
McDougal's Cave . 
Inside the Cave 



PAGE 

. 207 

. 208 

. 209 

. 211 

. 212 

. 213 

. 214 

. 216 

. 217 

. 220 

Huck on Duty 221 

A Rousing Act 224. 

Tail Piece 225 

The Welchman ..... 226 

Result of a Sneeze 227 

Cornered 229 

Alarming Discoveries .... 232 

Tom and Becky stir up the Town . . 233 

Tom's Marks 234 

Huck Questions the Widow . . . 235 

Vampires ....... 236 

Wonders of the Cave .... 237 

Attacked by Natives . . . .238 

Despair 240 

The Wedding Cake 242 

A New Terror 245 

Daylight 247 

" Turn Out " to Receive Tom and Becky 248 

The Escape from the Cave . . . 249 
Fate of the Ragged Man . . . .251 

The Treasures Found .... 252 

Caught at Last 253 

Drop after Drop 254 

Having a Good Time .... 255 

A Business Trip 257 

"Got it at Last !" 261 

Tail Piece 263 

Widow Douglas 264 

Tom Backs his Statement . . .266 

Tail Piece 267 

Huck Transformed 268 

Comfortable Once More . . . .271 

High up in Society 273 

Contentment 274 




No answer. 

" TOM ! " 

No answer. 

"What's gone with that boy, I 
wonder? You TOM ! " 

No answer. 

The old lady pulled her spectacles 
down and looked over them about 
the room ; then she put them up and 
looked out under them. She seldom 
or never looked through them for so 
small a thing as a boy ; they were her 
state pair, the pride of her heart, and 
were built for "style," not service 
she could have seen through a pair 
of stove lids just as well. She 
looked perplexed for a moment, and 
then said, not fiercely, but still loud enough for the furniture to hear: 




i8 



TOM SA WYER 



"Well, I lay if I get hold of you I'll" 

She did not finish, for by this time she was bending down and punching 
under the bed with the broom, and so she needed breath to punctuate -the 
punches with. She resurrected nothing but the cat. 
" I never did see the beat of that boy ! " 

She went to the open door and stood in it and looked out among the tomato 
vines and " jimpson " weeds that constituted the garden. No Tom. So she 
lifted up her voice at an angle calculated for dis- 
tance, and shouted : 
" Y-o-u-u Tom ! " 

There was a slight noise behind her and she 
turned just in time to seize a small boy by the 
slack of his roundabout and arrest his flight. 

" There ! I might 'a' thought of that closet. 
What you been doing in there ? " 
" Nothing." 

" Nothing! Look at your hands. And look at 
your mouth. What is that truck? " 
"/don't know, aunt." 

" Well, / know. It's jam that's what it is. 
Forty times I've said if you didn't let tljat jam 
alone I'd skin you. Hand me that switch." 

The switch hovered in the air the peril was 
desperate 

" My ! Look behind you, aunt ! " 
The old lady whirled round, and snatched her 
skirts out of danger. The lad fled, on the 
instant, scrambled up the high board-fence, and 
AUNT POLLY BEGUILED. disappeared over it. 

His aunt Polly stood surprised a moment, and then broke into a gentle laugh. 

"Hang the boy, can't I never learn anything? Ain't he played me tricks 

enough like that for me to be looking out for him by this time ? But old fools 




A UNT POLL Y DECIDES UPON HER DUTY. 



is the biggest fools there is. Can't learn an old dog new tricks, as the saying is. 
But my goodness, he never plays them alike, two days, and how is a body 
to know what's coming? He 'pears to know just how long he can torment me 
before I get my dander up, and he knows if he can make out to put me off for a 
minute or make me laugh, it's all down again and I can't hit him a lick. I 
ain't doing my duty by that boy, and that's the Lord's truth, goodness knows. 
Spare the rod and spile the child, as the Good Book says. I'm a laying up sin 
and suffering for us both, / know. He's full of the Old Scratch, but laws-a-me ! 
he's my own dead sister's boy, poor thing, and I ain't got the heart to lash him, 
somehow. Every time I let him off, my conscience does hurt me so, and every 
time I hit him my old heart most breaks. Well-a-well, man that is born of 
woman is of few days and full of trouble, as the Scripture says, and I reckon it's 
so. He'll play hookey this evening, * and I'll just be obleeged to make him 
work, tomorrow, to punish him. It's mighty hard to make him work Saturdays, 
when all the boys is having holiday, but he hates work more than he hates 
anything else, and I've got to do some of my duty by him, or I'll be the ruina- 
tion of the child." 

Tom did play hookey, and he had a very good time. He got back home 
barely in season to help Jim, the small colored boy, saw next-day's wood and 
split the kindlings before sup- 
per at least he was there in 
time to tell his adventures 
to Jim while Jim did three- 
fourths of the work. Tom's 
younger brother (or rather, 
half-brother) Sid, was already 
through with his part of the 
work (picking up chips) for 
he was a quiet boy, and had 
no adventurous, troublesome 

A GOOD OPPORTUNITY. 

ways. 
While Tom was eating his supper, and stealing sugar as opportunity offered, 




* South-western for "afternoon." 



TOM SAWYER. 



Aunt Polly asked him questions that were full of guile,, and very deep for she 
wanted to trap him into damaging revealments. Like many other simple- 
hearted souls, it was her pet vanity to believe she was endowed with a talent 
for dark and mysterious diplomacy, and she loved to contemplate her most 
transparent devices as marvels of low cunning. Said she: 

"Tom, it was middling warm in school, warn't it?" 

" Yes'm." 

"Powerful warm, warn't it?" 

"Yes'm." 

"Didn't you want to go in a-swimming, Tom? " 

A bit of a scare shot through Tom a touch of uncomfortable suspicion. He 
searched Aunt Polly's face, but it told him nothing. So he said: 

"No'm well, not very much." 

The old lady reached out her hand and felt Tom's shirt, and said : 

"But you ain't too warm now, though." And it flattered her to reflect that 
she had discovered that the shirt was dry without anybody knowing that that 
was what she had in her mind. But in spite of her, Tom knew where the wind 
lay, now. So he forestalled what might be the next move : 

" Some of us pumped on our heads mine's damp yet. See? " 

Aunt Polly was vexed to think she had overlooked that bit of circumstantial 
evidence, and missed a trick. Then she had a new inspiration : 

" Tom, you didn't have to undo your shirt collar where I sewed it, to pump 
on your head, did you ? Unbutton your jacket! " 

The trouble vanished out of Tom's face. He opened his jacket. His shirt 
collar was securely sewed. 

"Bother! Well, go 'long with you. I'd made sure you'd played hookey and 
been a-swimming. But I forgive ye, Tom. I reckon you're a kind of a singed 
cat, as the saying is better'n you look. This time." 

She was half sorry her sagacity had miscarried, and half glad that Tom had 
stumbled into obedient conduct for once. 

But Sidney said: 

"Well, now, if I didn't think you sewed his collar with white thread, but it's 
black." 



TOM PRACTICES MUSIC. 21 



" Why, I did sew it with white ! Tom ! " 

But Tom did not wait for the rest. As he went out at the door he said : 

"Siddy, I'll lick you for that." 

In a safe place Tom examined two large needles which were thrust into the 
lappels of his jacket, and had thread bound about them one needle carried 
white thread and the other black. He said : 

" She'd never noticed if it hadn't been for Sid. Confound it ! sometimes she sews 
it with white, and sometimes she sews it with black. I wish to geeminy she'd stick 
to one or t'other / can't keep the run of 'em. But I bet you I'll lam Sid for that. 
I'll learn him ! " 

He was not the Model Boy of the village. He knew the model boy very well 
though and loathed him. 

Within two minutes, or even less, he had forgotten all his troubles. Not because 
his troubles were one whit less heavy and bitter to him than a man's are to a man, 
but because a new and powerful interest bore them down and drove them out of 
his mind for the time just as men's misfortunes are forgotten in the excitement of 
new enterprises. This new interest was a valued novelty in whistling, which he 
had just acquired from a negro, and he was suffering to practice it undisturbed. It 
consisted in a peculiar bird-like turn, a sort of liquid warble, produced by touching 
the tongue to the roof of the mouth at short intervals in the midst of the music 
the reader probably remembers how to do it, if he has ever been a boy. Diligence 
and attention soon gave him the knack of it, and he strode down the street with his 
mouth full of harmony and his soul full of gratitude. He felt much as an astron- 
omer feels who has discovered a new planet no doubt, as far as strong, deep, 
unalloyed pleasure is concerned, the advantage was with the boy, not the astronomer. 

The summer evenings were long. It was not dark, yet. Presently Tom checked 
his whistle. A stranger was before him a boy a shade larger than himself. A 
new comer of any age or either sex was an impressive curiosity in the poor little 
shabby village of St. Petersburgh. This boy was well-dressed, too well-dressed on 
a week-day. This was simply astounding. His cap was a dainty thing, his close- 
buttoned blue cloth roundabout was new and natty, and so were his pantaloons. 
He had shoes on and it was only Friday. He even wore a necktie, a bright bit 



TOM SAWYER. 



of ribbon. He had a citified air about him that ate into Tom's vitals. The more 
Tom stared at the splendid marvel, the higher he turned up his nose at his finery 
and the shabbier and shabbier his own outfit seemed to him to grow. Neither boy 
spoke. If one moved, the other moved but only sidewise, in a circle ; they kept 
face to face and eye to eye all the time. Finally Tom said : 

" I can lick you ! " 

" I'd like to see you try it." 

"Well, I can do it." 

" No you can't, either." 

"Yes I can." 

" No you can't." 

"lean." 

" You can't." 

" Can ! " 

" Can't ! " 

An uncomfortable pause. Then Tom said : 

" What's your name ? " 

" 'Tisn't any of your business, maybe." 

"Well I 'low I'll make it my business." 

" Well why don't you ? " 

" If you say much I will." 

"Much much much. There now." 

" Oh, you think you're mighty smart, don't you ? I could lick you with one 
hand tied behind me, if I wanted to." 

" Well why don't you do it ? You say you can do it." 

" Well I willy if you fool with me." 

"Oh yes I've seen whole families in the same fix." 

" Smarty ! You think you're some, now, don't you ? Oh what a hat ! " 

" You can lump that hat if you don't like it. I dare you to knock it off and 
anybody that'll take a dare will suck eggs." 

" You're a liar ! " 

" You're another." 



THE CHALLENGE. 



" You're a fighting liar and dasn't take it up." 
"Aw take a walk ! " 

"Say if you give me much more of your sass I'll take and bounce a rock off'n 
your head." 



" Oh, of course you will." 

"Well I will." 

" Well why don't you do it then ? 



What do you keep saying you will for ? Why 
don't you do it ? It's because you're afraid." 
" I ain't afraid." 
"You are." 
" I ain't." 
" You are." 

Another pause, and more eyeing and sid- 
ling around each other. Presently they 
were shoulder to shoulder. Tom said : 
" Get away from here ! " 
"Go away yourself! " 
"I won't." 
"/won't either." 

So they stood, each with a foot placed 
at an angle as a brace, and both shoving 
with might and main, and glowering at each 
other with hate. But neither could get an 
advantage. After struggling till both were 
hot and flushed, each relaxed his strain with 
WHO'S AFRAID ? watchful caution, and Tom said : 

"You're a coward and a pup. I'll tell my big brother on you, and he can thrash 
you with his little finger, and I'll make him do it, too." 

" \Vhat do I care for your big brother ? I've got a brother that's bigger than he 
is and what's more, he can throw him over that fence, too." [Both brothers were 
imaginary.] 
"That's a lie." 




24 TOM SAWYER. 



" Your saying so don't make it so." 

Tom drew a line in the dust with his big toe, and said : 

" I dare you to step over that, and I'll lick you till you can't stand up. Anybody 
that'll take a dare will steal sheep." 

The new boy stepped over promptly, and said : 

" Now you said you'd do it, now let's see you do it." 

" Don't you crowd me now; you better look out." 

" Well, you said you'd do it why don't you do it ? " 

"By jingo ! for two cents I will do it." 

The new boy took two broad coppers out of his pocket and held them out with 
derision. Tom struck them to the ground. In an instant both boys were rolling 
and tumbling in the dirt, gripped together like cats; and for the space of a minute 
they tugged and tore at each other's hair and clothes, punched and scratched 
each other's noses, and covered themselves with dust and glory. Presently the 
confusion took form and through the fog of battle Tom appeared, seated astride the 
new boy, and pounding him with his fists. 

" Holler 'nuff! " said he. 

The boy only struggled to free himself. He was crying, mainly from rage. 

"Holler 'nuff! " and the pounding went on. 

At last the stranger got out a smothered " 'Nuff! " and Tom let him up and said : 

" Now that'll learn you. Better look out who you're fooling with next time." 

The new boy went off brushing the dust from his clothes, sobbing, snuffling, 
and occasionally looking back and shaking his head and threatening what he 
would do to Tom the "next time he caught him out." To which Tom responded 
with jeers, and started off in high feather, and as soon as his back was turned the 
new boy snatched up a stone, threw it and hit him between the shoulders and 
then turned tail and ran like an antelope. Tom chased the traitor home, and thus 
found out where he lived. He then held a position at the gate for some time, 
daring the enemy to corne outside, but the enemy only made faces at him through 
the window and declined. At last the enemy's mother appeared, and called Tom 
a bad, vicious, vulgar child, and ordered him away. So he went away ; but he 
said he " 'lowed " to ' 'lay " for that boy. 



A PRIVATE ENTRANCE. 



He got home pretty late, that night, and when he climbed cautiously in at the 
window, he uncovered an ambuscade, in the person of his aunt ; and when she 
saw the state his clothes were in her resolution to turn his Saturday holiday into 
-captivity at hard labor became adamantine in its firmness. 





morning was 

come, and all the summer world was 
bright and fresh, and brimming with 
life. There was a song in every heart ;. 
and- if the heart was young the music 
issued at the lips. There was cheer 
in every face and a spring in every 
step. The locust trees were in bloom 
and the fragrance of the blossoms 
filled the air. Cardiff Hill, beyond 
the Village and above it, was green 
with vegetation, and it lay just far 
enough away to seem a Delectable 
Land, dreamy, reposeful, and inviting. 
Tom appeared on the sidewalk with 
a bucket of whitewash and a long- 
handled brush. He surveyed the 
fence, and all gladness left him and 
a deep melancholy settled down upon his spirit. Thirty yards of board fence 
nine feet high. Life to him seemed hollow, and existence but a burden. Sighing. 

26 



STJfONG TEMPTATIONS. 27 



he dipped his brush and passed it along the topmost plank ; repeated the 
operation; did it again; compared the insignificant whitewashed streak with the 
far-reaching continent of unwhitewashed fence, and sat down on a tree-box dis- 
couraged. Jim came skipping out at the gate with a tin pail, and singing " Buffalo 
Gals." Bringing water from the town pump had always been hateful work in 
Tom's eyes, before, but now it did not strike him so. He remembered that there 
was company at the pump. White, mulatto, and negro boys and girls were always- 
there waiting their turns, resting, trading playthings, quarreling, fighting,- skylark- 
ing. And he remembered that although the pump was only a hundred and fifty 
yards off, Jim never got back with a bucket of water under an hour and even 
then somebody generally had to go after him. Tom said : 

"Say, Jim, I'll fetch the water if you'll whitewash some." 

Jim shook his head and said : 

" Can't, Mars Tom. Ole missis, she tole me I got to go an' git dis water an' not 
stop foolin' roun' wid anybody. She say she spec' Mars Tom gwine to ax me to 
whitewash, an' so she tole me go' 'long an' 'tend to my own business she 'lowed 
she'd 'tend to de whitewashin'." 

" Oh, never you mind what she said, Jim. That's the way she always talks. 
Gimme the bucket I won't be gone only a minute. She won't ever know." 

" Oh, I dasn't Mars Tom. Ole missis she'd take an' tar de head off n me. 
'Deed she would." 

u She .' She never licks anybody whacks 'em over the head with her thimble 
and who cares for that, I'd like to. know. She talks awful, but talk don't hurt 
anyways it don't if she don't cry. Jim, I'll give you a marvel. I'll give you a 
white alley ! " 

Jim began to waver. 

"White alley, Jim! And it's a bully taw." 

" My ! Dat's a mighty gay marvel, / tell you ! But Mars Tom I's powerful 
'fraid ole missis " 

"And besides, if you will I'll show you my sore toe." 

Jim was only human this attraction was too much for him. He put down his 
pail, took the white alley, and bent over the toe with absorbing interest while the 



28 



TOM SAWYER. 



bandage was being unwound. In another moment he was flying down the street 
with his pail and a tingling rear, Tom was whitewashing with vigor, and Aunt Polly 




TENDIN' TO BUSINESS. 
was retiring from the field with a slipper in her hand and triumph in her eye. 

But Tom's energy did not last. He began to think of the fun he had planned 
for this day, and his sorrows multiplied. Soon the free boys would come tripping 
along on all sorts of delicious expeditions, and they would make a world of fun of 
him for having to work the very thought of it burnt him like fire. He got out 
his worldly wealth and examined it bits of toys, marbles, and trash ; enough to 
buy an exchange of work, maybe, but not half enough to buy so much as half an 
hour of pure freedom. So he returned his straightened means to his pocket, and 
gave up the idea of trying to buy the boys. At this dark and hopeless moment an 
inspiration burst upon him ! Nothing less than a great, magnificent inspiration. 

He took up his brush and went tranquilly to work. Ben Rogers hove in sight 
presently the very boy, of all boys, whose ridicule he had been dreading. Ben's 



S7^RA TEGIC MO YEMEN TS. 29 

gait was the hop-skip-and-jump proof enough that his heart was light and his 
anticipations high. He was eating an apple, and giving a long, melodious whoop, 
at intervals, followed by a deep-toned ding-dong-dong, ding-dong-dong, for he 
was personating a steamboat. As he drew near, he slackened speed, took the 
middle of the street, leaned far over to starboard and rounded to ponderously and 
with laborious pomp and circumstance for he was personating the " Big Missouri," 
and considered himself to be drawing nine feet of water. He was boat, and captain, 
and engine-bells combined, so he had to imagine himself standing on his own 
hurricane-deck giving the orders and executing them : 

" Stop her, sir ! Ting-a-ling-ling ! " The headway ran almost out and he drew 
up slowly toward the side-walk. 

" Ship up to back ! Ting-a-ling-ling ! " His arms straightened and stiffened 
down his sides. 

" Set her back on the stabboard ! Ting-a-ling-ling ! Chow ! ch-chow- 
wow ! Chow ! " His right hand, meantime, describing stately circles, for it was 
representing a forty-foot wheel. 

" Let her go back on the labboard ! Ting-a-ling-ling ! . Chow-ch-chow-chow ! " 
The left hand began to describe circles. 

" Stop the stabboard ! Ting-a-ling-ling ! Stop the labbord ! Come ahead on 
the stabboard ! Stop her! Let your outside turn over slow! Ting-a-ling-ling! 
Chow-ow-ow ! Get out that head-line! Lively now! Come out with your 
spring-line what 're you about there ! Take a turn round that stump with the 
bight of it ! Stand by that stage, now let her go ! Done with the engines, sir ! 
Ting-a-ling-ling! Stit! s'A't/ sh't!" (trying the gauge-cocks.) 

Tom went on whitewashing paid no attention to the steamboat. Ben stared a 
moment and then said : 

" Hi-jy// You re up a stump, ain't you ! " 

No answer. Tom surveyed his last touch with the eye of an artist; then he 
gave his brush another gentle sweep and surveyed the result, as before. Ben 
ranged up alongside of him. Tom's mouth watered for the apple, but he stuck 
to his work. Ben said : 

" Hello, old chap, you got to work, hey ? " 

Tom wheeled suddenly and said : 



TOM SA WYER. 



" Why it's you Ben ! I warn't noticing." 

"Say /'m going in a swimming, / am. Don't you wish you could? But of 
course you'd druther work wouldn't you? Course you would ! " 
Tom contemplated the boy a bit, and said : 

" What do you call work ? " 
" Why ain't that work ? " 
Tom resumed his whitewashing, and 
answered carelessly : 

"Well, maybe it is, and maybe it aint. 
All I know, is, it suits Tom Sawyer." 

"Oh come, now, you don't mean to 
let on that you like it ? " 

The brusji continued to move. 
"Like it? Wei) I don't see why I 
oughtn't to like it. Does a boy get a 
chance to whitewash a fence every 
day ? " 

That put the thing in a new light. 
Ben stopped nibbling his apple. Tom 
swept his brush daintily back and 
forth stepped back to note the effect 
added a touch here and there criti- 
' AIN'T THAT WORK? cised the effect aga i n _Ben watching 

every move and getting more and more interested, more and more absorbed. 
Presently he said : 

"Say, Tom, let me whitewash a little." 

Tom considered, was about to consent ; but he altered his mind : 
"No no I reckon it wouldn't hardly do, Ben. You see, Aunt Polly's awful 
particular about this fence right here on the street, you know but if it was the 
back fence I wouldn't mind and she wouldn't. Yes, she's awful particular about 
this fence; it's got to be done very careful; I reckon there ain't one boy in a 
thousand, maybe two thousand, that can do it the way it's got to be done. 




THE INNOCENTS BEGUILED. 31 

"No is that so? Oh come, now lemme just try. Only just a little I'd let 
you, if you was me, Tom." 

"Ben, I'd like to, honest injun; but Aunt Polly well Jim wanted to do it, but 
she wouldn't let him ; Sid wanted to do it, and she wouldn't let Sid. Now don't 
you see how I'm fixed ? If you was to tackle this fence and anything was to happen 
to it " 

" Oh, shucks, I'll be just as careful. Now lemme try. Say I'll give you the 
core of my apple." 

"Well, here . No, Ben, now don't. I'm afeard " 

" I'll give you all of it ! " 

Tom gave up the brush with reluctance in his face but alacrity in his heart. 
And while the late steamer " Big Missouri " worked and sweated in the sun, the 
retired artist sat on a barrej. iri the shade close by, dangled his legs, munched his 
apple, and planned the slaughter of more innocents. There was no lack of mate- 
rial ; boys happened along every little while ; they came to jeer, but remained to 
whitewash. By the time Ben was fagged out, Tom had traded the next chance to 
Billy Fisher for a kite, in good repair ; and when he played out, Johnny Miller 
bought in for a dead rat and a string to swing it with and so on, and so on, hour 
after hour. And when the middle of the afternoon came, from being a poor poverty, 
stricken boy in the morning, Tom was literally rolling in wealth. He had beside 
the things before mentioned, twelve marbles, part of a jews-harp, a piece of blue 
bottle-glass to look through, a spool cannon, a key that wouldn't unlock anything, 
a fragment of chalk, a glass stopper of a decanter, a tin soldier, a couple of tadpoles, 
six fire-crackers, a kitten with only one eye, a brass door-knob, a dog-collar but 
no dog the handle of a knife, four pieces of orange-peel, and a dilapidated old 
window-sash. 




TOM SAWYER. 



He had had a nice, good, idle time all the while plenty of company and the 
fence had three coats of whitewash on it! If he hadn't run out of whitewash, he 
would have bankrupted every boy in the village. 

Tom said to himself that it was not such a hollow world, after all. He had dis- 
covered a great law of human action, without knowing it namely, that in order to 
make a man or a boy covet a thing, it is only necessary to make the thing 

difficult to attain. If he had been a great 
and wise philosopher, like the writer of this 
book, he would now have comprehended that 
Work consists of whatever a body is obliged 
to do, and that Play consists of whatever a 
body is not obliged to do. And this would 
help him to understand why constructing 
artificial flowers or performing on a tread- 
mill is work, while rolling ten-pins or climb- 
| ing Mont Blanc is only amusement. There 
are wealthy gentlemen in England who 
drive four-horse passenger-coaches twenty 
or thirty miles on a daily line, in the sum- 
mer, because the privilege costs them con- 
siderable money; but if they were offered 
wages for the service, that would turn it into 
work and then they would resign. 




AMUSEMENT. 



The boy mused a while over the substantial change which had taken place in 
his worldly circumstances, and then wended toward head-quarters to report. 





m. 




again in this intrepid way. He said : 

"What, a'ready? How much have you done?" 
3 33 



presented himself before Aunt 
Polly, who was. sitting by an open 
window in a pleasant rearward apart- 
ment, which was bed-room, breakfast- 
room, dining-room, and library, com- 
bined. The balmy, summer air, the 
restful quiet, the odor of the flowers, 
and the drowsing murmur of the 
bees had had their effect, and she was 
nodding over her knitting for she 
had no company but the cat, and it 
was asleep in her lap. Her specta- 
cles were propped up on her gray 
head for safety. She had thought 
that of course Tom had deserted 
long ago, and she wondered at see- 
ing him place himself in her power 
'Mayn't I go and play now, aunt?'' 



34 



TOM SAWYER. 



" It's all done, aunt." 
"Tom, don't lie to me I can't bear it." 
" I ain't, aunt ; it is all done." 

Aunt Polly placed small trust in such evidence. She went out to see for 
herself; and she would have been content to find twenty per cent of Tom's 
statement true. When she found the entire fence whitewashed, and not only 
whitewashed but elaborately coated and recoated, and even a streak added to 
the ground, her astonishment was almost unspeakable. She said : 

"Well, I never! There's no getting round it, you can work when your'e a 
mind to, Tom." And then she diluted the compliment by adding, " But it's 
powerful seldom you're a mind to, I'm bound to say. Well, go 'long and play; 
but mind you get back sometime in a week, or I'll tan you." 

She was so overcome by the splendor of his achievement that she took him 

into the closet and selected a choice 
apple and delivered it to him, along 
with an improving lecture upon 
the added value and flavor a treat 
took to itself when it came with- 
out sin through virtuous effort. 
And while she closed with a happy 
scriptural flourish, he " hooked " a 
doughnut. 

Then he skipped out, and saw 
Sid just starting up the outside 
stairway that led to the back rooms 
on the second floor. Clods were 

PAVING OFF. handy and the air was full of them 

in a twinkling. They raged around Sid like a hail-storm ; and before Aunt 
Polly could collect her surprised faculties and sally to the rescue, six or 
seven clods had taken personal effect, and Tom was over the fence and gone. 
There was a gate, but as a general thing he was too crowded for time to make 
use of it. His soul was at peace, now that he had settled with Sid for calling 
attention to his black thread and getting him into trouble. 




TOM AS A GENERAL. 



35 



Tom skirted the block, and came round into a muddy alley that led by the 
back of his aunt's cow-stable. He presently got safely beyond the reach of 
capture and punishment, and hasted toward the public square of the village, 
where two " military " companies of boys had met for conflict, according to 
previous appointment. Tom was General of one of these armies, Joe Harper 
(a bosom friend,) General of the other. These two great commanders did not 
condescend to fight in person that being better suited to the still smaller fry 
but sat together on an eminence and conducted the field operations by orders 
delivered through aides-de-camp. Tom's army won a great victory, after a 
long and hard-fought battle. Then the dead were counted, prisoners exchanged, 
the- terms of the next disagreement agreed upon and the day for the necessary 




AFTER THE BATTLE. 



"battle appointed ; after which the armies fell into line and marched away, and 
Tom turned homeward alone. 

As he was passing by the house where Jeff Thatcher lived, he saw a new girl 



TOM SA WYER. 



in the garden a lovely little blue-eyed creature with yellow hair plaited into 
two long tails, white summer frock and embroidered pantalettes. The fresh- 
crowned hero fell without firing a shot. A certain Amy Lawrence vanished 
out of his heart and left not even a memory of herself behind. He had thought 
he loved her to distraction, he had regarded his passion as adoration; and 
behold it was only a poor little evanescent partiality. He had been months 
winning her; she had confessed hardly a week ago; he had been the hap- 
piest and the proudest boy in the world only seven short days, and here in one 

instant of time she had gone out of his heart 
like a casual stranger whose visit is done. 

He worshiped this new angel with fur- 
tive eye, till he saw that she had discovered 
him ; then he pretended he did not know she 
was present, and began to "show off" in all 
sorts of absurd boyish ways, in order to win 
her admiration. He kept up this grotesque 
foolishness for some time ; but by and by, 
while he was in the midst of some dangerous 
gymnastic performances, he glanced aside 
and saw that the little girl was wending 
her way toward the house. Tom came up 
to the fence and leaned on it, grieving, and 
hoping she would tarry yet a while longer. 
She halted a moment on the steps and then 
moved toward the door. Tom heaved a 
great sigh as she put her foot on the threshold. But his face lit up, right away, 
for she tossed a pansy over the fence a moment before she disappeared. 

The boy ran around and stopped within a foot or two of the flower, and then 
shaded his eyes with his hand and began to look down street as if he had dis- 
covered something of interest going on in that direction. Presently he picked 
up a straw and began trying to balance it on his nose, with his head tilted far 
back ; and as he moved from side to side, in his efforts, he edged nearer and 




' SHOWING OFF. 



TRIUMPH A ND RE WA RD. 3 7 

nearer toward the pansy; finally his bare foot rested upon it, his pliant toes 
closed upon it, and he hopped away with the treasure and disappeared round 
the corner. But only for a minutexonly while he could button the flower 
inside his jacket, next his heart or next his stomach, possibly, for he was not 
much posted in anatomy, and not hypercritical, anyway. 

He returned, now, and hung about the fence till nightfall, " showing off," as 
before ; but the girl never exhibited herself again, though Tom comforted him- 
self a little with the hope that she had been near some window, meantime, and 
been aware of his attentions. Finally he rode home reluctantly, with his poor 
head full of visions. 

All through supper his spirits were so high that his aunt wondered " what 
had got into the child." He took a good scolding about clodding Sid, and did 
not seem to mind it in the least. He tried to steal sugar under his aunt's very 
nose, and got his knuckles rapped for it. He said : 

" Aunt, you don't whack Sid when he takes it." 

" Well, Sid don't torment a body the way you do. You'd be always into that 
sugar if I warn't watching you." 

Presently she stepped into the kitchen, and Sid, happy in his immunity, 
reached for the sugar-bowl a sort of glorying over Tom which was well-nigh 
unbearable. But Sid's fingers slipped and the bowl dropped and broke. Tom 
was in ecstasies. In such ecstasies that he even controlled his tongue and was 
silent. He said to himself that he would not speak a word, even when his aunt 
came in, but would sit perfectly still till she asked who did the mischief; and 
then he would tell, and there would be nothing so good in the world as to see 
that pet model " catch it." He was so brim-full of exultation that he could 
hardly hold himself when the old lady came back and stood above the wreck 
discharging lightnings of wrath from over her spectacles. He said to himself, 
"Now it's coming!" And the next instant he was sprawling on the floor! 
The potent palm was uplifted to strike again when Tom cried out : 

" Hold on, now, what 'er you belting me for ? Sid broke it ! " 

Aunt Polly paused, perplexed, and Tom looked for healing pity. But when 
she got her tongue again, she only said : 



TOM SA WYER. 



"Umf! Well, you didn't get a lick amiss, I reckon. You been into some 
other audacious mischief when I wasn't around, like enough." 

^ ^v^^^^ vv - Then her conscience reproached 

I ^v^" : -xNs\V i^\ ' 11111^1^ >;> ner > an d she yearned to say some- 

\v^^ ^>^ : iSI^^^^^^^ thing kind and loving; but she 

i ?./- -.':;.:. -^ '-; ,. ; ^^xx^%, ' : '- judged that this would be con- 
strued into a confession that she 
had been in the wrong, and disci- 
pline forbade that. So she kept 
silence, and went about her affairs 
with a troubled heart. Tom sulked 
in a corner and exalted his woes. 
^He knew that in her heart his aunt 
was on her knees to him, and he 
was morosely gratified by the con- 
sciousness of it. He would hang 




. out no signals, he would take 

notice of none. He knew that a yearning glance fell upon him, now and then, 
through a film of tears, but he refused recognition of it. He pictured himself 
lying sick unto death and his aunt bending over him beseeching one little 
forgiving word, but he would turn his face to the wall, and die with that word 
unsaid. Ah, how would she feel then ? And he pictured himself brought 
home from the river, dead, with his curls all wet, and his sore heart at rest. 
How she would throw herself upon him, and how her tears would fall like 
rain, and her lips pray God to give her back her boy and she would never, 
never abuse him any more ! But he would lie there cold and white and make 
no sign a poor little sufferer, whose griefs were at an end. He so worked 
upon his feelings with the pathos of these dreams, that he had to keep swallow- 
ing, he was so like to choke ; and his eyes swam in a blur of water, which 
overflowed when he winked, and ran down and trickled from the end of his 
nose. And such a luxury to him was this petting of his sorrows, that he could 
not bear to have any worldly cheeriness or any grating delight intrude upon 



DISMAL FELICITY. 



39 




it ; it was too sacred for such con- 
tact; and so, presently, when his 
cousin Mary danced in, all alive with 
the joy of seeing home again after 
an age-long visit of one week to the 
country, he got up and moved in 
clouds and darkness out at one door 
as she brought song and sunshine in 
at the other. 

He wandered far from the .accus- 
tomed haunts of boys, and sought 
desolate places that were in harmony 
with his spirit. A log raft in the 
river invited him, and he seated him- 
self on its outer edge and contem- 
plated the dreary vastness of the 
stream, wishing, the while, that he could 
only be drowned, all at once and uncon- 
sciously, without undergoing the uncom- 
fortable routine devised by nature. Then 
he thought of his flower. He got it out, 
rumpled and wilted, and it mightily in- 
creased his dismal felicity. He wondered 
if she would pity him if she knew ? Would 
she cry, and wish that she had a right to 
put her arms around his neck and com- 
fort him? Or would she turn coldly away 
like all the hollow world ? This picture 
brought such an agony of pleasureable 
suffering that he worked it over and over 
again in his mind and set it up in new and 
varied lights, till he wore it threadbare, 
departed in the darkness. 




At last he rose up sighing and 



AC 



TOM SA WYRR. 




About half past nine or ten o'clock he 
came along the^ deserted street to where 
the Adored Unknown lived ; he paused a 
moment ; no sound fell upon his listening 
ear; a candle was casting a dull glow upon 
the curtain of a second-story window. Was 
the sacred presence there ? He climbed the 
fence, threaded his stealthy way through 
the plants, till he stood under that window; 
he looked up at it long, and with emotion ; 
then he laid him down on the ground 
under it, disposing himself upon his back, 
with his hands clasped upon his breast and 
holding his poor wilted flower. And thus 
he would die out in the cold world, with 
no shelter over his homeless head, no 
friendly hand to wipe the death-damps 
from his brow, no loving face to bend 
pityingly over him when the great agony 
came. And thus she would see him when 
she looked out upon the glad morning, and 
oh ! would she drop one little tear upon his 
poor, lifeless form, would she heave one 
little sigh to see a bright young life so 
rudely blighted, so untimely cut down? 

The window went up, a maid-servant's 
discordant voice profaned the holy calm, 
and a deluge of water drenched the prone 
martyr's remains! 

The strangling hero sprang up with a 

_^ i relieving snort. There was a whiz as 

of a missile in the air, mingled with the murmur of a curse, a sound as of 




COMMISSION AND OMISSION. 



shivering glass followed, and a small, vague form went over the fence and shot 
away in the gloom. 

Not long after, as Tom, all undressed for bed, was surveying his drenched 
garments by the light of a tallow dip, Sid woke up ; but if he had any dim idea 
of making any " references to allusions," he thought better of it and held his 
peace, for there was danger in Tom's eye. 

Tom turned in without the added vexation of prayers, and Sid made mental 
note of the omission. 






sun rose upon a tranquil world, 
and beamed down upon the peaceful 
village like a benediction. Breakfast 
over, Aunt Polly had family worship; 
it began wilh a prayer built from the 
ground up of solid courses of Scrip- 
tural quotations> welded together with 
a thin mortar of originality ; and from 
the summit of this she delivered a 
grim chapter of the Mosaic Law, as 
from Sinai. 

Then Tom girded up his loins, so to 
speak, and went to work to " get his 
verses." Sid had learned his lesson 
days before. Tom bent all his ener- 
gies to the memorizing of five verses, 
and he chose part of the Sermon on 
the Mount, because he could find no verses that were shorter. At the end of 
half an hour Tom had a vague general idea of his lesson > but no more, for his. 

42 



MENTAL ACROBATICS. 43, 



mind was traversing the whole field of human thought, and his hands were busy 
with distracting recreations. Mary took his book to hear him recite, and he tried 
to find his way through the fog : 

" Blessed are the a a " 

"Poor" 

" Yes poor ; blessed are the poor a a " 

" In spirit " 

" In spirit ; blessed are the poor in spirit, for they they " 

" Theirs " 

" For theirs. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
Blessed are they that mourn, for they they " 

"Sh " 

" For they a " 

" S, H, A " 

" For they S, H Oh I don't know what it is ! " 

" Shall! " 

" Oh, shall ! for they shall for they shall a a shall mourn a a blessed 
are they that shall they that a they that shall mourn, for they shall a shall 
what} Why don't you tell me Mary ? what do you want to be so mean for ? ". 

" Oh, Tom, you poor thick-headed thing, I'm not teasing you. I wouldn't do 
that. You must go and learn it again. Don't you be discouraged, Tom, you'll 
manage it and if you do, I'll give you something ever so nice. There, now, 
that's a good boy." 

"All right ! What is it, Mary, tell me what it is." 

" Never you mind, Tom. You know if I say it's nice, it is nice." 

" Youbet'you that's so, Mary. All right, I'll tackle it again." 

And he did " tackle it again " and under the double pressure of curiosity and 
prospective gain, he did it with such spirit that he accomplished a shining success. 
Mary gave him a bran-new " Barlow " knife worth twelve and a half cents ; and 
the convulsion of delight that swept his system shook him to his foundations. 
True, the knife would not cut anything, but it was a "sure-enough" Barlow, and 
there was inconceivable grandeur in that though where the western boys ever 



44 



TOM SA WYEK. 



got the idea that such a weapon could possibly be counterfeited to its injury, is an 
imposing mystery and will always remain so, perhaps. Tom contrived to scarify 

the cupboard with it, and was arranging to 
begin on the bureau, when he was called off 
to dress for