Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 



THE 



POWEE OP MOVEMENT 



PLANTS. 



By CHAELES^ DAEWIN, LL.D., F.E.S. 



A - 



ASSISTED BY 

FEANCIS DAEWIN, 



WITH ILLUSTRATIONS. 



NEW YORK: 
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, 

72 FIFTH AVENUE. 
1896. 



• p 



Authorized Edition. 



CONTENTS. 



Thtboductiok Page 1-8 

CHAPTER I. 

The Cibcumnutating Movements of Seedling Plants. 

Brassica oleracea, circumnutixtion of the radicle, of the arclied hypo- 
cotyl whilst still buried beneath the gi'ound, whilst rising above 
the ground and straightening itself, and when erect — Circumnu- 
tation of the cotyledons — Rate of movement — ^Analogous obser- 
vations on various organs in species of Githago, Gossypium, 
Oxalis, Tropasolum, Citrus, iEsculus, of several Leguminous and 
Cucurbitaceous genera, Opuntia, Helianthus, Primula, Cyclamen, 
Stapelia, Cerinthe, Nolana, Solanum, Beta, Eicinus, Quercus, 
Corylus, Pinus, Cycas, Canna, Allium, Asparagus, Phalaiis, Zea, 
Avena, Nephrodium, and Selaginella 10-66 

CHAPTER 11. 

Genebal Considebationb on the Movements and Growth of 

Seedling Plants. 

Generality of the circumnutating movement— Eadicles, their cir- 
eamnutation of service — Manner in which they penetrate the 
ground — Manner in which hypocotyls and other organs bieak 
through the ground by being arched — Singular manner of ger- 
mination in Megarrhiza, &c. — Abortion of cotyledons — Circum- 
DUtation of hypocotyls and epicotyls whilst still buried and 
arched — ^Tbeir power of rtniightening themselves— Bursting of 
the seed-ccats — inherited efifect of the arching process in hypo- 



366150 



VI CONTENTS. 

gean hypocotyls — Circumnutation of hypocotyls and epicotyls 
when erect — Circumnutation of cotyledons — Pulvini or joints of 
cotyledons, duration of their activity, rudimentary in Ox alia 
corniculata, their development — Sensitiveness of cotyledons to 
light and consequent disturbance of their periodic movements — 
Sensitiveness of cotyledons to contact Page 67-128 



CHAPTEB HI. 

Sbnsitivenbss of the Apex of the Eadiole to Contact and 

TO otheb Irbitants. 

Manner in which radicles bend when they encounter an obstacle in 
the soil — Vicia faba, tips of radicles highly sensitive to con- 
tact and other irritants — Efiects of too high a temperature — 
Power of discriminating between objects attached on opposite 
sides — Tips of secondary radicles sensitive — Fisum, tips of 
radicles sensitive — ^Effects of such sensitiveness .in overcoming 
geotropism — Secondary radicles — Phaseolus, tips of radicles 
hardly sensitive to contact, but highly sensitive to caustic and 
to the removal of a slice — Tropaeolum — Qossypium — Cucurbita 
— Raphanus— iE^culus, tip not sensitive to slight contact, highly 
sensitive to caustic — Quercus, tip highly sensitive to contact — 
Power of discrimination — Zea, tip highly sensitive, secondary 
radicles — Sensitiveness of radicles to moist air — Summary of 
chapter 129-200 



CHAPTER IV. 

The CiBCiMNUTATiNO Movements of the several parts op 

Mature Plants. 

Circumnutation of stems: concluding remarks on — Circumnutation 
of stolons : aid thus afforded in winding amongst the stems of 
surrounding plants — Circumnutation of flower-stems — Circum- 
nutation of Dicotyledonous leaves — Singular oscillatory move- 
ment if leaves of Dionasa — Leaves of Cannabis sink at night — 
Leaves of Gymnosperms — Of Monocotyledons — Cryptogams^ 
Ocncluding remarks on the circumnutation of leaves : generally 
tise in the evening and sink in the morning .. .. 201-262 



CONTENTS. VU 

CHAPTER V. 

Modified Circumnutation : Climbing Plants; Epinastio and 

Hyponastio Movements. 

Oircumautation modified through innate causes or through the Rction 
of external conditions — lunate causes — Climbing plants ; simi- 
larity of their movements with those of ordinary plants ; in- 
. creased amplitude; occasional points of difference — Epinastio 
growth of young leaves — Hyponastic growth of the hypocotyls 
and epicotyls of seedlings — Hooked tips of climbing and other 
plants due to modified circumnutation — Ampelopsis tricuspidata 
— Smithia Pl'undii — Straightening of the tip due to hy[X)nasty — 
Epinastio growth and circumnutation of the flower-peduncles of 
Trilblium repens and Oxalis carnosa Page 263-279 

CHAPTER VI. 

Modified Circumnutation : Sleep or Nyctitropic Movements, 
THEIR Use: Sleep of Cotyledons. 

Preliminary sketch of the sleep or nyctitropic movemeijts of leaves 
— Presence of pulviiii — The lessening of radiation the final cause 
of nictritropic movements— Manner of trying experiments on 
leaves of Oxalis, Arachis, Caiisia, Melilotus, Lotus and Mai-silea, 
and on the cotyledons of Mimosa — Concluding remarks on radia- 
tion from leaves — Small differences in the conditions make a 
great diflerence in the result — Description of the nyctitropic 
position and movements of the cotyledons of various plants — 
List of species — Concluding remarks — Independence of the 
nyctitropic movements of the leaves and cotyledons of the same 
species — Reasons for believing that the movements have been 
acquired for a special purpose 280-316 

CHAPTER VII. 

AIoDiFiED Circumnutation : Nyctitropic or Sleep Movements 

OF Leaves. 

Conditions necessary for these movements — List of Genera nnd 
Families, which include sleeping plants — Description of the 
movements in the several Genera — Oxalis: leaflets folded at 



• •• 



VUl CX)NT£NTS. 

night — Averrhoa: rapid movements of the leaflets — Porlieiaa: 
leaflets close when plant kept very dry — Tropseolum : leaves do 
not sleep unless well illuminated during day — Lupinus : various 
modes of sleeping — ^Melilotus: singular movements of terminal 
leaflet — Trifolium — Desmodium : rudimentary lateral leaflets, 
movements of, not developed on young plants, state of their 
pulvini — Cassia : complex movements of the leaflets — Bauhiuia: 
leaves folded at ni^ht — Mimosa pudica: compounded move- 
ments of leaves, effect of darkness — Mimosa albida, reduced 
leaflets of — Schrankia: downward movement of the pinnae — 
Marsilea: the only cryptogam known to sleep— Concluding 
remarks and summary — Nyctitropism consists of modified cir- 
cumnutation, regulated by the alternations of light and darkness 
—Shape of first true leaves Page 317-417 



CHAPTEE VIII. 

Modified Circumnutation : Movements excited by Light. 

Distinction between heliotropism and the effects of light on the 
periodicity of the movements of leaves — Heliotropic movements 
- of Beta, Solan um, Zea, and A vena — Heliotropic movements 
towards an obscure light in Apios, Brassica, Phalaris, Tropseo- 
lum, and Cassia — Apheliotropic movements of tendrils of Big- 
nonia — Of flower-peduncles of Cyclamen — Burying of the pods 
— Heliotropism and apheliotropism moditied forms of circumnu- 
tation — Steps by which one movement is converted into the 
other — Trans versal-heliotropismus or diaheliotropism influenced 
by epinasty, the weight of the part and apogeotropism — Apogeo- 
tropism overcome during the middle of the day by diaheliotro- 
pism — Effects of the weight of the blades of cotyledons — So- 
called diurnal sleep — Chlorophyll injured by intense light — 
Movements to avoid intense light 418-448 

CHAPTEE IX, 

Sensitiveness of Plants to Light : its transmitted effects. 

Uses of he'iotropism — Insectivorous and climbing plants not helio- 
tropic — Same organ heliotropic at one age and not at another — 
Extraordinary sensitiveness of some plants to light — ^The effecta 



CONTENTS. IS 

of light do not correspond with its intensity — Eftects of previonti 
illumination — Time required for the action of light — After-effects 
of light — ^Apogeotropism acts as soon as light fails — Accuracy 
with which plants bend to the light — This dependent on the 
illumination of one whole side of the part — Localised sensitive- 
ness to light and its transmitted effects — Cotyle*lons of Phalaris, 
maimer of bending — Results of the exclusion of light from their 
tips — Effects transmitted beneath the surface of the ground — 
Lateral illumination of the tip determines the direction of the 
curvature of the base— Cotyledons of A vena, curvature of basal 
part due to the illumination of upper part — Similar results with 
the hypocotyls of Brassica and Beta — Radicles of Sii.apisaphelio- 
tropic, due to the sensitiveness of their tips — Concluding remarks 
and summary of chapter — Means by which circumnuiation has 
been converted into heliotropism or apheliotropism Page 449-492 



CHAPTER X. 

Modified Ciecumndtation : Movements excited by 

Gravitation. 

Means of observation — Apogeotropism — Cytisus — Verbena — Beta 
— Gradual conversion of the movement of circumnutation into 
apogeotropism in Rubus, Lilium, Phalaris, Avena, and Brassica 
— Apogeotropism retarded by heliotropism — Effected by the aid 
of joints or puWini — Movements of flower-peduncles of Oxalis — 
General remarks on apogeotropism — Geotropism — Movements nf 
radicles — Burying of seed-capsules — Use of process — Trifolium 
subterraneura — Arachis — Amphicarpaea — Diageotropism — 
Conclusion 493-522 



CHAPTEK XL 

f/jCALisED Sensitiveness to Gravitation, and its Tbansmittbd 

Effects. 

3ensral considerations — Vicia faba, effects of amputating the tips of 
the radicles — Regeneration of the tips — Effects of a short ex- 
posure of the tips to geotropic action and their subsequent 
amputation — Kffects of amputating the tips obliquely — Effects 

• of cauterising tho tips — Effects of grease on the tips — Pisum 



CONTENTS. 

eativTim, tips of rac^icles cauterised transversely, and on theii 
upper and lower sides— Phaseohis, cauterisation and grease on 
the tips — Gossypium — Cucurbita, tips cauterised transversely, 
and on their upper and lower sides — Zea, tips cauterised — Con- 
cluding remarks and summary of chapter — Advantages of the 
sensibility to geotropism being localised in the tips of the 
radicles Page 23-645 



CHAPTEE XIL 

Summary akd Concluding Remarks. 

Mature of the circum nutating movement — History of a germinating 
seed — The radicle first protrudes and circumnutates — Its tip 
highly sensitive — Emergence of the hypocotyl or of the epicotyl 
from the ground under the fonii of an arch — Its circumuutation 
and that of the cotyledons — The seedling throws up a leaf- 
bearing stem — '1 he circumnutation of all the parts or organs — 
Modified circumnutation — Epinastyand hyponasty — Movements 
of climbing plants — ^Nyctitropic movements — M ovements excited 
by light and gravitation — ^Localised sensitiveness — Resemblance 
between the movements of plants and animals — ^The tip of the 
radicle acts like a brain 546-573 

Ihdex 574-593 



ERRATA. 



'Plage 3, foot-note, for Mr. Vine's read Mr. Vines*. 
„ 452, line 7 from bottom, for minntes read miDntfiw 



THE MOVEMENTS OF PLANTS. 



INTRODUCTION. 

The chief object of the present work is to describe 
and connect together several large classes of move- 
ment, common to almost all plants. The most widely 
prevalent movement is essentially of the same nature 
as that of the stem of a climbing plant, which bends 
successively to all points of the compass, so that the 
tip revolves. This movement has been called by 
Sachs "revolving nutation;" but we have found it 
much more convenient to use the terms drcumnutation 
and circumnutate. As we shall have to say much 
about this movement, it will be useful here briefly to 
describe its nature. If we observe a circumnutating 
stem, which happens at the time to be bent, we will 
say towards the north, it will be found gradually to 
bend more and more easterly, until it faces the east ; 
and so onwards to the south, then to the west, and 
back again to the north. If the movement had been 
quite regular, the apex would have described a circle, 
or rather, as the stem is always growing upwards, a 
circular spiral. But it generally describes irregular 
elliptical or oval figures ; for the apex, after point- 
ing in any one direction, commonly moves back 
to the opposite side, not, however, returning along 
the same line. Afterwai'ds other irregular ellipses 
or ovals are successively described, with their longer 



2 INTRODUCTION. 

axes directed to different points of the compass. 
Whilst describing such figures, the apex often travels 
in a zigzag line, or makes small subordinate loops or 
triangles. In the case of leaves the ellipses are 
gener.iUy narrow. 

Until recently the cause of all such bending move- 
ments was believed to be due to the increased growth 
of the side which becomes for a time convex ; that this 
side does temporarily grow more quickly than the 
concave side has been well established ; but De Vries 
has lately shown that such increased growth follows 
a previously increased state of turgescence on the 
convex side.* In the case of parts provided with a 
so-called joint, cushion or pulvinus, which consists of 
an aggregate of small cells that have ceased to 
increase in size from a very early age, we meet with 
similar movements; and here, as Pfeffer has shown f 
and as we shall see in the course of this work, 
the increased turgescence of the cells on opposite 
sides is not followed by. increased growth. Wiesner 
denies in certain cases the accuracy of De Vries' con- 
clusion about turgescence, and maintains { that the 
increased extensibility of the cell- walls is the more 
important element. That such extensibility must 
accompany increased turgescence in order that the part 
may bend is manifest, and this has been insisted on by 
several botanists ; but in the case of unicellular plants 
it can hardly fail to be the more important element. 
Oi the whole we may at present conclude that in- 



♦ Sachs first showed ('Lehr- 19, 1879, p. 830. 

buch,* &c., 4th edit. p. 452) the t *I^ie Periodischen Bewegun- 

intimate connection between tur- gen der Blattorgane,' 1875. 

gftscence and growth. For De | * Untersuchungen Uber den 

Vries* interesting essay, * Wachs- Heliotropismus,* Sitzb. der K. 

thumskriimmuiigt-n mehrzelliger Akad. der Wissensehaft. (Vienna), 

Organe/ see ' Bot. Zeitung,' Dec. Jan. 1880. 



INTRODUOTION. 3 

creased growth, first ov one side and then on another, 
is a secondary effect, and that the increased tur- 
gescence of the cells, together with the extensibility 
of their walls, is the primary cause of the movement of 
circumnutation.* 

In the course of the present volume it will be shown 
that apparently every growing part of every plant is 
continually circumnutating, though often on a small 
scale. Even the stems of seedlings before they have 
broken through the ground, as well a» their buried 
radicles, circumnutate, as far as the pressure of the 
surrounding earth permits. In this universally pre- 
sent movement we have the basis or groundwork for 
the acquirement, according to the requirements of the 
plant, of the most diversified movements. Thus, the 
great sweeps made by the stems of twining plants, 
and by the tendrils of other climbers, result from 
a mere increase in the amplitude of the ordinary 
movement of circumnutation. The position which 
young leaves and other organs ultimately assume 
is acquired by the circumnutating movement being 
increased in some one direction. The leaves of 
various plants are said to sleep at night, and it will 
be seen that their blades then assume a vertical 
position through modified circumnutation, in order 
to protect their upper surfaces from being chilled 
through radiation. The movements of various organs 
to the light, which are so general throughout the 
vegetable kingdom, and occasionally from the light, 
or transversely with respect to it, are all modified 



♦ See Mr. Vine's exceUent dis- Naturkunde in Wurtemberg,* 

cussion (* Arbeitcn des Bot. Insti- 1874, p. 211) on the curious movo- 

tuts in Wiiizburg,* B. II. pp. 142, ments of Spirogyra, a plant con- 

1 43, 1878) on this inti icate subject. sisting of a single row of cells,.aro 

Hofmeister's observations (* Jah- valuable in relation to this subject, 
reschrifte des Vereins fiir Vaterl. 



4 mTEODUCnON. 

forms of circumnutation ; as again are the equally 
prevalent movements of stems, &c., towards the zenith, 
and of roots towards the centre of the earth. In 
accordance with these conclusions, a considerable diffi- 
culty in the way of evolution is in part removed, fv.»r 
it might have been asked, how did all their diversified 
movements for the most different purposes first arise ? 
As the case stands, we know that there is always 
movement in progress, and its amplitude, or direc- 
tion, or both, have only to be modified for the good 
of the plant in relation with internal or external 
stimuli. 

Besides describing the several modified forms of 
circumnutation, some other subjects will be discussed. 
The two which have interested us most are, firstly, the 
fact that with some seedling plants the uppermost 
part alone is sensitive to light, and transmits an influ- 
ence to the lower part, causing it to bend. If there- 
fore the upper part be wholly protected from light, 
the lower part may be exposed for hours to it, and yet 
does not become in the least bent, although this would 
have occurred quickly if the upper part had been 
excited by light. Secondly, with the radicles of seed- 
lings, the tip is sensitive to various stimuli, espe- 
cially to very slight pressure, and, when thus excited, 
transmits an influence to the upper part, causing it to 
bend from the pressed side. On the other hand, if 
the tip is subjected to the vapour of water proceeding 
from one side, the upper part of the radicle bends 
towards this side. Again it is the tip, as stated by 
Ciesielski, though denied by others, which is sensitive 
to the attraction of gravity, and by transmission causes 
the adjoining parts of the radicle to bend towards the 
centre of the earth. These several cases of the effects 
of contact, other irritants, vapour, light, and the 



INTRODUCTION. 5 

attraction of gravity being transmitted from the ex- 
cited part for some little distance along the organ in 
question, have an important bearing on the theory of 
all sucH movements. 

Terminology. — A brief explanation of some terms which will 
be used, must here be given. With seedlings, the stem which 
supports the cotyledons (i.e. the organs which represent the first 
leaves) has been called by many botanists the hypocotyledonous 
stem, but for brevity sake we will speak of it merely as the 
hypocotyl: the stem immediately above the cotyledons will be 
called the epicofyl or plumule. The radicle can be distinguished 
from the hypocotyl only by the presence of root-hairs and the 
nature of its covering. The meaning of the word circumnu- 
tatitm has already been explained. Authors speak of positive 
and negative heliotropism,*— that is, the bending of an organ 
to or from the light ; but it is much more convenient to confine 
the word heliotr<*pism to bending towards the light, and to 
designate as apheliutropism bending from the light. There is 
another reason for this change, for writers, as we have 
observed, occasionally drop the adjectives positive and negative ^ 
and thus introduce confusion into their discussions. Diahelin- 
tropism may express a position more or less transverse to 
the light and induced by it. In like manner positive geotro- 
pism, or bending towards the centre of the earth, will be 
called by us geotropism; apogeotropism will mean bending in 
opposition to gravity or from the centre of the earth ; and dCa- 
jeotropism, a position more or less transverse to the radius of 
the earth. The words heliotropism and geotropism properly 
mean the act of moving in relation to the light or the earth ; 
but in the same manner as gravitation, though defined as '' the 
act of tending to the centre,' • is often used to express the cause 
of a body falling, so it will be found convenient occasionally to 
employ heliotropism and geotropism, &c., as the cause of the 
movements in question. 

The term epinasty is now often used in Germany, and implies 
that the upper surface of an organ grows more quickly than the 



* The highly useful terras of Frank : see his remarkable ' 6ei« 
Heliotropism aud Geotropism tmgc zur Pflanzenphysiologio, 
«reie tirst used by Dr. A. B. 1868. 



6 INTRODUCTION. 

lower surface, and thus causes it to bend downwards. Hypo* 
nasty is the reverse, and implies increased growth along the 
lower surface, causing the part to bend upwards.* 

Mthods of Ohservaticyii, — The movements, sometinjes very 
small and sometimes considerable in extent, of the various 
organs observed by us, were traced in the manner which after 
many trials we found to be best, and which must be described. 
Plants growing in pots were protected wholly from the light, 
or had light admitted from above, or on one side as the case 
might require, and were covered above by a large horizontal 
sheet of glass, and with another vertical sheet on one side. A 
glass filament, not thicker than a horsehair, and from a quarter 
to three-quarters of an inch in length, was affixed to the part to 
be observed by means of shellac dissolved in alcohol. The 
solution was allowed to evaporate, until it became so thick that 
it set hard in two or three seconds, and it never injured the 
tissues, even the tips of tender radicles, to which it was applied. 
To the end of the glass filament an excessively minute bead of 
black sealing-wax was cemented, below or behind which a bit of 
card with a black dot was fixed to a stick driven into the ground. 
The weight of the filament was so slight that even smaU leaves 
were not perceptibly pressed down. Another method of obser- 
vation, when much magnification of the movement was not 
required, will presently be described. The bead and the dot 
on the card were viewed through the horizontal or vertical 
glass-plate (according to the position of the object), and when 
one exactly covered the other, a dot was made on the glass-plate 
with a sharply pointed stick dipped in thick Indian-ink. Other 
dots were made at short intervals of time and these were after- 
wards joined by straight lines. The figures thus traced were 
therefore angular; but if dots had been made every 1 or 
2 minutes, the lines would have been more curvilinear, as 
occurred when radicles were allowed to trace their own 
courses on smoked glass-plates. To make the dots accurately 
was the sole difficulty, and required some practice. Nor could 
this be douH quite accurately, when the movement was much 
magnified, such as 30 times and upwards; yet even in this 
case the general course may be trusted. To test the accuracy 
of the above method of observation, a filament was fixed to an 



♦ These l^rms are used in the ' Wiirzburg Arbeiten,* Heft ii 
aoiise given them by Do Vries, 1872, p. 252. 



INTEODUOTION. 7 

inanimate object which was made to slide along a straight 
edge and dots were repeatedly made on a glass-plate; when 
these were joined, the result ought to have been a perfectly 
straight line, and the line was very nearly straight. It may be 
added that when the dot on the card was placed half-an-inch 
below or behind the bead of sealing-wax, and when the glass- 
plate (supposing it to have been properly curved) stood at a 
distance of 7 inches in front (a common distance), then the 
tracing represented the movement of the bead magnified 15 
times. 

Whenever a great increase of the movement was not required, 
another, and in some respects better, method of observation was 
followed. This consisted in fixing two minute triangles of thin 
paper, about ^ inch in height, to the two ends of the attached 
glass filament ; and when their tips were brought into a line so 
that they covered one another, dots were made as before on the 
glass-plate. If we suppose the glass-plate to stand at a dis- 
tance of seven inches from the end of the shoot bearing the 
filament, the dots when joined, will give nearly the same figure 
as if a filament seven inches long, dipped in ink, had been 
fixed to the moving shoot, and had inscribed its own course 
on the plate. The movement is thus considerably magnified; 
for instance, if a shoot one inch in length were bending, and 
the glass-plate stood at the distance of seven inches, the move- 
ment would be magnified eight times. It would, however, have 
been very difficult to have ascertained in each case how great 
a length of the shoot was bending; and this is indispensable 
for ascertaining the degree to which the movement is magnified. 

After dots had been made on the glass-plates by either of 
the above methods, they were copied on tracing paper and 
joined by ruled lines, with arrows showing the direction of the 
movement. The nocturnal courses are represented by straight 
broken lines. The first dot is always made larger than the 
others, so as to catch the eye, as may be seen in the diagrams. 
The figures on the glass-plates were often drawn on too large 
a scale to be reproduced on the pages of this volume, and the 
proportion in which they have been reduced is always given.* 
Whenever it could be approximately told how much the move- 
ment had been magnified, this is stated. We have perhaps 



♦ We are much indebted to he has reduced and engraved our 
Mr. Cooper fur the care with wliiuh diagrams. 



8 INTRODUCTION. 

introduced a snporfluous number of diagrams; but they tak9 
up less space than a full description of the movements. Almost 
all the sketches of plants asleep, <&c., were carefully drawn 
for us by Mr. Gteorge Darwin. 

As shoots, leaves, &c., in circumnutating bend more and 
more, first in one direction and then in another, they were 
necessarily viewed at different times more or less obliquely; 
and as the dots were made on a fiat surface, the apparent 
amount of movement is exaggerated according to the degree 
of obliquity of the point of view. It would, therefore, have 
been a much better plan to have used hemispherical glasses, 
if we had possessed them of all sizes, and if the bending part 
of the shoot had been distinctly hinged and could have been 
placed so as to have formed one of the radii of the sphere* 
But even in this case it would have been necessary afterwards 
to have projected the figures on paper; so that complete 
accuracy could not have been attained. From the distortion 
of our figures, owing to the above causes, they are of no use 
to any one who wishes to know the exact amount of movement, 
or the exact course pursued; but they serve excellently for 
ascertaining whether or not the part moved at all, as well as 
the general character of the movement. 



In the following chapters, the movements of a con- 
siderable number of plants are described ; and the 
species have been arranged according to the system 
adopted by Hooker in Le Maout and Decaisne's * De- 
scriptive Botany.' No one who is not investigating 
the present subject need read all the details, which, 
however, we have thought it advisable to give. To 
save the reader trouble, the conclusions and most of 
the more important parts have been printed in larger 
type than the other parts. He may, if he thinks fit, 
read the last chapter first, as it includes a summary 
of the whole volume ; and he will thus see what 
points interest him, and on which he requires the 
full evidence. 

Finally, we must have the pleasure of returning om 



INTBODUOTION. 9 

Sincere thanks to Sir Joseph Hooker and to Mr. W. 
Thiselton Dyer for their great kindness, in not only- 
sending us plants from Kevv, but in procuring others 
from several sources when they were required for our 
observations ; also, for naming many species, and giving 
us iuformation on various points. 



10 CUBGUMNUTAXXON of SEEDUNOS. Cb*f. I 



CHAPTER I. 

The Giroumnxjtating Moyeuents of Seedling Pla5T8. 

Bros^ica oleraoea, ciroumnutation of the radicle, of the arclied hypo- 
cotyl whilst still buried beneath the ground, whilst rising above the 
ground and straiglitening itself, and when erect — Circumnutakion 
of the cot} Ifcdons — Rate of movement — Analogous observations on 
various organs in species of Gitliago, Gossypium, Oxalis, Tro- 
paBolum, Citrus, ^sculus, of several Leguminous and Cucurbita- 
ceous genera, Opuntia, Helianthus, Primula, Cyclamen. StapeFa, 
Cerinthe, Nolana, Solanum, Bttu, Riclnus, Quercus, Corylus, Pinus, 
Cycas, Canna, Allium, Asparagus, Phalaris, Zea, A vena, Nephro- 
dium, and Selagiuella. 

The following chapter is devoted to the circum- 
nutating movements of the radicles, hypocotyls, and 
cotyledons of seedling plants; and, when the coty- 
ledons do not rise above the ground, to the movements 
of the epicotyl. But in a future chapter we shall have 
to recur to the movements of certain cotyledons which 
sleep at night. 

Brassica oleracea (Crticiferce). — Fuller details will be given 
with respect to the movements in this case than in any other, 
as space and time will thus ultimately be saved. 

Badiclt. — A seed with the radicle projecting '05 inch was 
fastened with shellac to a little plate of zinc, so that the 
radicle stood up vertically; and a fine glass filament was then 
fixed near its base, that is, close to the seed-coats. The seed 
was surrounded by little bits of wet sponge, and the move- 
ment of the bead at the end of the filament was traced (Fig. 1) 
during sixty hours. In this time the radicle increased in 
length from '05 to '11 inch. Had the fihament been attached at 
first close to the apex of the radicle, and if it could have re- 
mained there all the time, the movement exhibited would have 



Ohaf. L 



6BASSI0A. 



11 



been much greater, for at the close of our observations the tip, 
instead of standing vertically upwards, had become bowed 
downwards thi-ough geotropism, so as almost to touch the zino 
plate. As far as we could 
roughly ascertain by measure- * ^S- ^ • 

ments made with compasses 
on other seeds, the tip alone, 
for a length of only ^ to 
_i^ of an inch, is acted on 
by geotropism. But the trac- 
ing shows that the basal part 
of the radicle continued to 
circumnutate irregularly dur- 
ing the whole time. The 
actual extreme amount of 
movement of the bead at the 
end of the filament was nearly 
•05 inch, but to what extent 
the movement of the radicle 
was magnified by the fila- 
ment, which was nearly f inch 
in length, it was impossible 
to estimate. 

Another seed was treated and observed in the same manner, 
but the radicle in this case protruded '1 inch, and was not 

Fig. 2. 





Brassca oleriacea : circumnutation of 
radicle, traced on horizontal glass, 
from 9 A.M. Jan. 31st to 9 P.M. 
Feb. 2nd. Movement of bead at 
end of filament magnified about 
40 times. 





hrassioa oUracea : oircumnntating and geotropic movement of radicle, 
traced on horizontal glass during 46 hours. 

fastened so as to project quite vertically upwards. The filament 
was afl&xed close to its base. The tracing (Fig. 2, reduced by 
half) shows the movement from 9 a.m. Jan. 31st to 7 a.m. 
Feb. 2nd; but it continued to move during the whole of the 



12 CIBCUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. I. 

2nd in the same general direction, and in a similar zigzag 
manner. From the radicle not being quite perpendiculai- when 
the filament was aflSxed geotropism came into play at once; 
but the irregular zigzag course shows that there was growth 
(probably preceded by turgescence), sometimes on one and 
sometimes on another side. Occasionally the bead remained 
stationary for about an hour, and then probably growth occurred 
on the side opposite to that which caused the geotropic curva- 
ture. In the case previously described the basal part of the 
very short radicle from being turned vertically upwards, was at 
first very little affected by geotropism. Filaments were affixed 
in two other instances to rather longer radicles protruding 
obliquely from seeds which had been turned upside down ; and 
in these cases the lines traced on the horizontal glasses were 
only slightly zigzag, and the movement was always in the same 
general direction, through the action of geotropism. All these 
observations are liable to several causes of error, but we believe, 
from what will hereafter be shown with respect to the move- 
ments of the radicles of other plants, that they may be largely 
trusted. 

Bypocotyl. — The hypocotyl protrudes through the seed-coats 
as a rectangular projection, which grows rapidly into an arch 
like the letter U turned upside down [\ ; the cotyledons being 
still enclosed within the seed. In whatever position the seed 
may be embedded in the earth or otherwise fixed, both legs of 
the arch bend upwards through apogeotropism, and thus rise 
vertically above the ground. As soon as this has taken place, 
or even earlier, the inner or concave surface of the arch grows 
more quickly than the upper or convex surface; and this tends 
to separate the two legs and aids in drawing the cotyledons out 
of the buried seed-coats. By the growth of the whole arch the 
cotyledons are ultimately dragged from beneath the ground, even 
from a considerable depth; and now the hypocotyl quickly 
straightens itself by the increased growth of the concave side. 

Even whilst the arched or doubled hypocot} I is still beneath 
the ground, it circumnutates as much as the pressure of the sur- 
rounding soil will permit; but this was difficult to observe, 
because as soon as the arch is freed from lateral pressure the two 
legs begin to separate, even at a very early age, before the arch 
would naturally have reached the surface. Seeds were allowed 
to germinate on the surface of damp earth, and after they had 
fixed themselves by their radicles, and after the, as yet, only 



Chap. L PRASSICA. 13 

slightly arched hypocotyl had become nearly vertical, a glass 
filament was aflBxed on two occasions near to the base of the 
basal leg (i.e. the one in connection with the radicle), and its 
movements were traced in darkness on a horizontal glass. The 
result was that long lines were formed running in nearly the 
plane of the vertical arch, due to the early separation of the 
two legs now freed from pressure ; but as the lines were zigzag, 
showing lateral movement, the arch must have been circum- 
nutating, whilst it was straightening itself by growth along its 
inner or concave surface. 
A somewhat different metjtiod of observation was next followed : 

Fig. 3. 




> 



> 



•\ 



Brasstca oleracea : circumnutating movement of buried and arched hypo* 
cotyl (dimly illuminated from above), traced on horizontal glass during 
45 hours. Movement of bead of filament magnified about 25 times, 
and here reduced to one-half of original scale. 

as soon as the earth with seeds in a pot began to crack, the 
surface was removed in parts to the depth of "2 inch ; and a 
filament was fixed to the basal leg of a buried and arched hypo- 
cotyl, just above the summit of the radicle. The cotyledons 
were still almost completely enclosed* within the much-cracked 
seed-coats ; and these were again covered up with damp adhesive 
soil pressed pretty firmly down. The movement of the filament 
was traced (Fig. 3) from 11 a.m. Feb. 5th till 8 a.m. Feb. 7th. 
By this latter period the cotyledons had been dragged from 
beneath the pressed-down earth, but the upper part of the 
hypocotyl still formed nearly a right angle with the lower part. 
The tracing si ows that the arched hypocotyl tends at this early 



14 CIBCUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. I 

Bge to circumntitate irregularly. On the first day the greatei 
movement (from right to left in the figure) was not in the plane 
of the vertical and arched hypocotyl, but at right angles to it, or in 
the plane of the two cotyledons, which were still in close contact. 
The basal leg of the arch at the time when the filament was 
affixed to it, was already bowed considerably backwards, or 
from the cotyledons ; had the filament been affixed before this 
bowing occurred, the chief movement would have been at right 
angles to that shown in the figure. A filament was attached to 
another buried hypocotyl of the same age, and it moved in a 
similar general manner, but the line traced was not so complex. 
This hypocotyl became almost straight, and the cotyledons were 
dragged from beneath the ground on the evening of the second day, 

Fig. 4. 




Brassica oleracea : circnmnntating movement of buried and arched hypo- 
cotyl, with the two legs of the arch tied together, traced on horizontal 
glass during 33j^ hours. Movement of the bead of filament magnified 
about 26 times, and here reduced to one-half original scale. 

Before the above observations were made, some arched hypo- 
cotyls buried at the depth of a quarter of an inch were un- 
covered ; and in order to prevent the two legs of the arch 
from beginning to separate at once, they were tied together with 
fine silk. This was done partly because we wished to ascertain 
how long the hypocotyl, in its arched condition, would continue 
to move, and whether the movement when not masked and 
disturbed by the straightening process, indicated circumnu- 
tation. Firstly, a filament was fixed to the basal leg of an 
arched hypocotyl close above the summit of the radicle. The 
cotyledons were still partially enclosed within the seed-coats. 
The movement was traced (Fig. 4) from 9.20 a.m. on Dea 



Ohap. I. BBASSIOA. 16 

23rd to 6.45 a.m. on Dec. 25th. No doubt the natural move- 
ment was much disturbed by the two legs having been tied 
together ; but we see that it was distinctly zigzag, first in one 
direction and then in an almost opposite one. After 3 p.m. on 
the 24th the arched hypocotyl sometimes remained stationary 
for a considerable time, and when moving, moved far slower than 
before. Therefore, on the morning of the 25th, the glass fila- 
ment was removed from the base of the basal leg, and was fixed 
horizontally on the summit of the arch, which, from the legs 
having been tied, had grown broad and almost flat. The 
movement was now traced during 23 hours (Fig. 5), and we 

Fig. 5. 



Brassioa oleracea : circumLutating movement of the crown of a buried and 
arched hypocotyl, with the two legs tied together, traced on a hori- 
zontal glass during 23 hours. Movement of the bead of the filament 
magnified about 58 timesy and here reduced to one-half original 
scale. 

see that the course was still zigzag, which indicates a tendency 
to circumnutation. The base of the basal leg by this time had 
almost completely ceased to move. 

As soon as the cotyledons have been naturally dragged from 
beneath the ground, and the hyjKXJotyl has straightened itself 
by growth along the inner or concave surface, there is nothing to 
interfere with the free movements of the parts ; and the circum- 
nutation now becomes much more regular and clearly displayed, 
as shown in the following cases:— A seedling was placed ip 
front and near a north-east window with a line joining the 



16 CIECUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. I. 

two cotyledons parallel to the window. It was tlms left the 
whole daj so as to accommodate itself to the light. On the 
following morning a filament was fixed to the midrib of the 
larger and taller cotyledon (which enfolds the other and smaller 
one, whilst still within the seed), and a mark being placed 
close behind, the movement of the whole plant, that is, of the 
hypocotyl and cotyledon, was traced greatly magnified on a ver- 
tical glass. At first the plant bent so much towards the light 
that it was useless to attempt to trace the movement ; but at 
10 A.M. heliotropism almost wholly ceased and tho first dot was 

Fig. 6. 




Bnuska oleracea: conjoint clrcnmnutation of the hypocotyl and cotyledoni 
daring 10 hours 45 minutes. Figure here reduced to one-half original 
scale. 

made on the glass. The last was made at 8.45 p.m.; seventeen 
dots being altogether made in this interval of 10 h. 45 m (tee 
Fig. 6). It should be noticed that when I looked shortly after 
4 p.M the bead was pointing off the glass, but it came on again 
at 5.30 P.M., and the course during this interval of 1 h. 30 m. has 
been filled up by imagination, but cannot be far from correct 
The bead moved seven times from side to side, and thus de- 
scribed 3^ ellipses in 101 h.; each being completed on an 
average in 3 h. 4 m. 

On the previous day another seedling had been observed 
under similar conditions, excepting that the plant was so 



Chap. I. 



BRASSICA. 



17 



placed that a line joining the two cotyledons pointed towards 
the window ; and the filament was attached to the smaller coty- 
ledon on the side furthest from the window. Moreover, the 
plant was now for the first time placed in this position. The 
cotyledons bowed themselves greatly towards the light from 8 to 
10.50 A.M., when the first dot was made (Fig. 7). During the 

Kg. 7. 




Brjssica oleracea : conjoint circumnutation of the hypocotyl and cotyledons, 
from 10.50 A.M. to 8 A.M. on the following morning. Tracing made 
' on a vertical glass. 



next 12 hours the bead swept obliquely up and down 8 times 
and described 4 figures representing ellipses; so that it travelled 
at nearly the same rate as in the previous case. During the 
night it moved upwards, owing to the sleep-movement of the 
cotyledons, and continued to move in the same direction till 
9 A.M. on the following morning ; but this latter movement 
would not have occurred with seedlings under their natural 
oimditions fully exposed to the light. 
By 9.25 A.M. on this se<)ond day the same cotyledon had 



18 



CIUCUMNUTATION OF SEEPLINGS. Chap. 1 




begun to fall, and a dot was made on a fresh glass; The move- 
ment was traced until 5.30 p.m. as shown in (Fig. 8), which is 
given, because the course followed was much more irregular 

than on the two previous 
^^^' ^' occasions. During these 

8 hours the bead changed 
its course greatly 10 times. 
The upward movement of 
the cotyledon during the 
afternoon and early part 
of the night is here plainly 
shown. 

As the filaments were 
fixed in the three last 
cases to one of the coty- 
ledons, and as the hypo- 
cotyl was left free, the 
tracings show the move- 

Brassica oleracea : conjoint circnmnutation ^^^^ ^^ ^^^ ^^^g^ns COn- 
of the hypocoty I and cotyledons during joined; and we noW 
8 hours. Figure here reduced to one- wished to ascertain whe- 
third of the original scale, as traced on a ^her both circumnutated. 
vertical glass. xi, r 

Filaments were therefore 

fixed horizontally to two hypocotyls close beneath the petioles 
of their cotyledons. These seedlings had stood for two days 
in the same position before a north-east window. In the morn- 
ing, up to about 11 A.M., they moved in zigzag lines towards 
the light; and at night they again became almost upright 
through apogeotropism. After about 11 a.m. they moved a 
little back from the light, often crossing and recrossing their 
former path in zigzag lines. The sky on this day varied much 
in brightness, and these observations merely proved that the 
hypocotyls were continually moving in a manner resembling 
circnmnutation. On a previous day which was uniformly 
cloudy, a hypocotyl was firmly secured to a little stick, and 
a filament was fixed to the larger of the two cotyledons, aod its 
movement was traced on a vertical glass. It fell greatly from 
8.52 A.M., when the first dot was made, till 10.55 a.m. ; it then rose 
greatly until 12.17 p.m. Afterwards it fell a little and made a 
loop, but by 2.22 p.m. it had risen a little and continued rising 
till 9.23 P.M., when it made another loop, and at 10.30 p.m. was 
again rising. These observations show that the cotyledons laove 



Onr. L 



BBASSIOA. 



19 



Fig. 9. 



▼ertically up and down all day long, and as there was some 
Blight lateral moyement, they circumnutated. 

The cabbage was one of the fii*st plants, the seedlings of which 
were observed by us, and we 
did not then know how far 
the circmnnutation of the 
different parts was affected 
by light Young seedlings 
were therefore kept in com- 
plete darkness except for a 
minute or two during each 
observation, when they were 
iliumiDated by a small wax 
taper held almost vertically 
above them. During the first 
day the hypocotyl of one 
changed its course 13 times 
(see Fig. 9) ; and it deserves 
notice that the longer axes 
of the figures described often 
cross one another at right or 
nearly right angles. Another 
seedling was observed in the 
same manner, but it was 
much older, for it had formed 
a true leaf a quarter of an 
inch in length, and the hy- 
pocotyl was If inch in height. 
The figure traced was a very 
complex one, though the 
movement was not so great 
in extent as in the last case. 
The hypocotyl of another 
seedling of the same age was 
secured to a little stick, and 
a filament having been fixed 
to the midrib of one of the 
cotyledons, the movement of 
the bead was traced during 14 h. 15 m. (see Fig. 10) in darkness. 
It should be noted that the chief movement of the cotyledons, 
namely, up and down, would be shown on a horizontal glass- 
plate only by the lines in the direction of the midrib (that is. 




BrasHca oleracea : circumnutation of 
hypocotyl. in darkness, traced on a 
horizontal glass, by means of a fila- 
ment with a bead fixed across its 
summit, between 9.15 a.m. and 
8.30 A.M. on the following morn- 
ing. Figure here reduced to one- 
half of cnginal scale. 



20 



CIRCUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. L 



Fig. 10. 




ap and down, as Fig. 10 here stands) being a little lengthened 
or shortened; whereas any -lateral movement would be well 

exhibited. The present tracing shows 
that the cotyledon did thus move laterally 
(that is, from side to side in the tracing) 
12 times in the 14 h. 15 m. of observa- 
tion. Therefore the cotyledons certainly 
circumnutated, though the chief move- 
ment was up and down in a vertical 
plane. 

Rate of movement. — The movements of 
the hypocotyls and cotyledons of seedling 
cabbages of different ages have now been 
sufficiently illustrated. With respect to 
the rate, seedlings were placed under the 
Brassioa oleracea : cii- microscope with the stage removed, and 

cumnutation of a ... *. , ^ t . , 

cotvledon, the hypo- With a micrometer eye-piece so adjusted 
cotyl having been that each division equalled ^^ inch; the 
secured to a stick, plants were illuminated by light passing 
tal %1 ass *in "dark- through a Bolution of bichromate of potas- 
sium so as to eliminate hcliotropism. 
Under these circumstances it was interest- 
ing to observe how rapidly the circum- 
nutating apex of a cotyledon passed across 
the divisions of the micrometer. Whilst 
tr I veiling in any direction the apex generally oscillated back- 
wards and forwards to the extent of yj^ and sometimes of nearly 
f-^ of an inch. These oscillations were quite different from the 
trembling caused by any disturbance in the same room or by 
the shutting of a distant door. The first seedling observed was 
nearly two inches in height and had been etiolated by having 
been grown in darkness. The tip of the cotyledon passed across 
10 divisions of the micrometer, that is, -^ of an inch, in 6 m. 
40 s. Short glass filaments were then fixed vertically to the 
hypocotyls of several seedlings so as to project a little above the 
cotyledons, thus exaggerating the rate of movement ; but only a 
few of the observations thus made are worth giving. The most 
remarkable fact was the oscillatory movement above described, 
and the difference of rate at which the point crossed the divi- 
sions of the micrometer, after short intervals of time. For 
instance, a tall not-etiolated seedling had been kept for 14 h. 
in darkness ; it was exposed before a north-east window for only 



in 

ness, from 8.15 A.M. 
to 10.30 P.M. Move- 
ment of the bead of 
the filament magni- 
fied 13 times. 



OuA?. L GITHAGO. • 21 

two or three minutes whilst a glass filament was fixed vertically 
to the hypocotyl ; it was then again placed in darkness for half 
an hour and afterwards observed by light passing throush 
bichromate of potassium. The point, oscillating as usual, 
crossed five divisions of the micrometer (i. e. -j^ inch) in 
Im. 30 s. The seedling was then left in darkness for an hour, 
and now it required 3 m. 6 s. to cross one division, that is, 
15 m. 30 s. to have crossed five divisions. Another seedling, 
after being occasionally observed in the back part of a northern 
room with a very dull light, and left in complete darkness for 
intervals of half an hour, crossed five divisions in 5 m. in the 
direction of the window, so that we concluded that the move- 
ment was heliotropic. But this was probably not the case, for 
it was placed close to a north-east window and left there for 
25 m , after which time, instead of moving still more quickly 
towards the light, as might have been expected, it travelled 
only at the rate of 12 m. 30 s. for five divisions. It was then 
again left in complete darkness for Ih., and the point now 
travelled in the sa ue direction as before, but at the rate of 
3 m. 18 s. for five divisions. 

We shall have to recur to the cotyledons of the cabbage in a 
future chapter, when we treat of their sleep-movements. The 
circumnutation, also, of the. leaves of fully-developed plants 
will hereafter be described. 

Fig. 11. 





Cithago $egettiin: circumnutation of hypocotyl, traced on a horiiont&l 
glass, by means of a filament fixed tran>versely across its summit, from 
8.15 A.M. to 12.15 P.M. on the following day. Movement of bead of 
filament magnified about 13 times, here reduced to one-half the original 
scale. 

Oithago segetum (CaryophylleaB). — A young seedling was dimly 
Qluminated from above, and the circumnutation of the hypo- 




22 * CIRCUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. I 

C5otyl was observed during 28 h., as shown in Fig. 11. It moved 
in all directions ; the lines from right and to left in the figure 
being parallel to the blades of the cotyledons. The actual 
distance travelled from side to side by the summit of the 
hypocotyl was about 2 of an inch; but it was impossible to 
be accurate on this head, as the more obliquely the plant was 
viewed, after it had moved for some time, the more the distances 
were exaggerated. 

We endeavoured to observe the circumnutation of the coty- 
ledons, but as they close together unless kept exposed to a mode- 
pitely bright light, and as the hypocotyl is extremely heliotropic, 

the necessary arrangements were too 
^^' troublesome. We shall recur to the noc- 

turnal or sleep-movements of the cotyle- 
dons in a future chapter. 

Gossypium (var. Nankin cotton) (Mal- 
vaceffl).— The circumnutation of a hypo- 
cotyl was observed in the hot-house, but 
Go.<^8f/pium circumnu- the movement was so much exaggerated 

tal glass, from 10.30 view. It was, however, manifest that two 
A.M. to 9.30 A.M. on somewhat irregular ellipses were nearly 
following morning, completed in 9 h. Another seedling, 

by means of a fila- ■,,.'•,'■,. .■, , j j • 

ment fixed across 1 2 m. m height, was then observed durmg 
its summit. Move- 23 h.; but the observations were not 
ment of bead of fila- made at sufficiently short intervals, as 

rwToeTtfltillu- '^'"^ ^y ^^' f^^ *^°*« '" ^S- 12. and the 
minated from above, tracing was not now sufficiently enlarged. 

Nevertheless there could be no doubt 
about the circumnutation of the hypocotyl, which described 
in 12 h. a figure representing three irregular ellipses of unequal 
sizes. 

The cotyledons are in constant movement up and down during 
the whole day, and as they offer the unusual case of moving 
downwards late in the evening and in the early part of the 
night, many observations were made on them. A filament was 
fixed along the middle of one, and its movement traced on a 
vertical glass; but the tracing is not given, as the hypocotyl 
was not secured, so that it was impossible to distinguish clearly 
bc-tween its movement and that of the cotyledon. The coty- 
ledons rose from 10.30 a.m. to about 3 p.m. ; they then sank tiU 
10 P.M., rising, however, greatly in the latter part of the night 



Chap I. GOSSYPIUM. 2:3 



/ 



Th& angles above the horizon at wliich the cotyledons of another 
seedling stood at different hotirs is recorded in the following 
short table : — 

Oct. 20 2.50 P.M 25*^ above hcrizon. 

» 4.20 „ 22° 

„ 5.20 „ 15° 

„ 10.40 „ 8^ 

Oct. 21 8.40 A.M 289 „ 

» 11.15 „ 35° 

„ 9.11 P.M 10° below horizon. 

The position of the two cotyledons was roughly sketched at 
various hours with the same general result. 

In the following summer, the hypocotyl of a fourth seedling 
was secured to a little stick, and a glass filament with triangles 
of paper having been fixed to one of the cotyledons, its move- 
ments were traced on a vertical glass under a double skylight in 
the house. The first dot was made at 4.20 p.m. June 20th ; and 
the cotyledon fell till 10.15 p.m. in a nearly straight line. Just 
past midnight it was found a little lower and somewhat to one 
side. By the early morning, at 3.45. a.m., it had risen greatly, 
but by 0.20 a.m. had fallen a little. During the whole of this 
day (21st) it fell in a slightly zigzag line, but its normal course 
was disturbed by the want of sufficient illuihination, for during 
the night it rose only a little, and travelled irregularly during 
the whole of the following day and night of June 22nd. The 
ascending and descending lines traced during the three days 
did not coincide, so that the movement was one of circumnuta- 
tion. This seedling was then taken back to the hot-house, and 
after five days was inspected at 10 p.m., when the cotyledons 
were found hanging so nearly vertically down, that they might 
justly be said to have been asleep. On the following morning 
they had resumed their ijsual horizontal position. 

Ojalis rosea (OxalidesB) — The hypocotyl was secured to a little 
stick, and an extremely thin glass filament, with two triangles of 
paper, was attached to one of the cotyledons, which was '15 inch 
in length. In this and the following species the end of the 
petiole, where united to the blade, is developed into a pulvinus. 
The apex of the cotyledon stood only 5 inches from the vertical 
glass, so that its movement was not greatly exaggerated as long 
as it remained nearly horizontal ; but in the course of the day ii 
both rose considerably above and fell beneath a horizontal posi- 
tion, and then of course the movement was much oxaggorattxl 

3 



CIECUMHUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. 




Chat. L 



11 from 6.45 a.m. on June 17th, bi 
7.40 A.M. on the following morn- 
ing; and we see that during tho 
daytime, in the course <if il h, 
15 m., it travelled thrice down 
and twice up. After 5.45 p.u. it 
moTed rapidly downwards, ftiid 
in an hour or two depended Tetti- 
cally ; it thus remained all night 
asleep. This position could not 
be represented on the vertical 
glass nor in the figure hero given. 
By 6.40 A.M. on the following 
morning (18th) both cotyledons 
had risen greatly, and they con- 
tinued to rise until 8 a.m., when 
they stood almost horizontally. 
Their movement was traced dur- 
ing the whole of this day and 
until the next morning ; but a 
tracing is not given, aa it was 
closely fiimilar to Fig, 13, eicept- 
ing that the lines were more 
zigzag. The cotyledons moved 
7 times, either upwards or down- 
wards ; and at about 4 p.m. the 
great nocturnal sinking move- 
ment commenced. 

Another seedling was observed 
in a similar manner during nearly 
1 1 *' s-39'a."- 24 h., but with the dilTerenee that 

fi the hypocotyl was left free. The 

' j movement also was less magnified. 

;/ Between 8,12 a.m. and 5 p.m. on 

; the 18th, the apei of the cotyle- 

don moved 7 times upwards or 

lis rcaea: circuni notation of doivnwtirds (Fig. 14). The Uoc- 

jtyledoQs, the hypoootjl bcluj turnal sinking movement, which 

icnred to a sticki illumina- jg merely a great increase of one 

iDe-halfoforiglDaUtolet °^ '"''^ diurnal oscillations, com- 



ted froi 

menced about 4 
Oaalit FoWtvtuna. — This species is interesting. 



i the coty- 



Chap. L 



OXALIS. 



25 



ledons rise perpendicularly upwards at night so as to come into 
close contact, instead of sinking vertically downwards, as in the 
case of 0. rosea, A glass filament was fixed to a cotyledon, 
-17 of an inch in length, and the hypocotyl was left free. On 



Kg. 14. 



Fig. 15. 



/ 



*•«' 






rj8' 




Oxalis rosea : conjoint circumnutation of 
the cotyledons and hypocotyl, traced 
from 8.12 A.M. on June I8th to 7.30 
A.M. 19th. The apex of the cotyledon 
stood only 3j inches from the vertical 
glass. Figure here given one-hnlf of 
original scale. 



I'JO' 



Oxalis Vaidiviana : conjoint 
circumnutation of a cotyle- 
don and the hypocotyl, traced 
on vertical glass, during 24 
hours. Figure here given 
one-half of original scale; 
seedling illuminated from 
above. 



the first day the seedling was placed too far from the vertical 
glass ; so that the tracing was enormously exaggerated and tho 
movement could not be traced when the cotyledon either rose or 
sank much; but it was clearly seen that the cotyledons rose 
thrice and fell twice l^tween 8.15 A m. and 4.16 p.m. Early on 
•Jie following morning ( j une 19th) the apex of a cotykdon was 



26 CIBCUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. I 

placed ouly 1 J inch from the vertical glass. At 6.40 a.m. it 
stood horizontally; it then fell till 8.35, and then rose. Al- 
together in the course of 12 h. it rose thrice and fell thrice, as 
may be seen in Fig. 15. The great nocturnal rise of the coty- 
ledons usually commences about 4 or 5 p.m., and on the following 
morning they are expanded or stand hoiizontally at about 6.3C 
A.M. In the present instance, however, the great nocturnal rise 
did not commence till 7 p.m. ; but this was due to the hypocotyl 
having from some unknown cause temporarily bent to the left 
side, as is shown in the tracing. To ascertain positively that 
the hypocotyl circumnutated, a mark was placed at 8.15 p.m. 
behind the two now closed and vertical cotyledons; and the 
movement of a glass filament fixed upright to the top of the 
hypocotyl was traced until 10.40 p.m. During this time it 
moved from side to side, as well as backwards and forwards, 
plainly showing circumnutation ; but the movement was small 
in extent Therefore Fig. 15 represents fairly well the move- 
ments of the cotyledons alone, with the exception of the one 
great afternoon curvature to the left. 

Oxcdis corniculata (var. cuprtd). — The cotyledons rise at night 
to a variable degree above the horizon, generally about 45**: 
those on some seedlings between 2 and 5 days old were found 
to be in continued movement all day long ; but the movements 
were more simple than in the last two species. Thi« may have 
partly resulted from their not being stiflQciently illuminated 
whilst being observed, as was shown by their not beginning to 
rise until very late in the evening. 

OjuUs (Biophytum) senst'tiva. — The cotyledons are highly re- 
markable from the amplitude and rapidity of their movements 
during the day. The angles at which they stood above or 
beneath the horizon were measured at short intervals of time ; 
and we regret that their course was not traced during the whole 
day. We will give only a few of the measurements, which were 
made whilst the seedlings were exposed to a temperature of 22i*^ 
to 24i° C. One cotyledon rose 70° in 11 m. : another, on a distinct 
seedling, fell 80° in 12 m. Immediately before this latter fall 
the same cotyledon had risen from a vertically downward to a 
vertically upward position in 1 h. 48 m., and had therefore passed 
through 180° in under 2 h. We have met with no other instance 
of a circumnutating movement of such great amplitude as 180° ; 
nor of such rapidity of movement as the passage through 80** in 
12 m. The cotyledons of this plant sleep at night by rising 



Chap. I. 



TROP.ffl»LUM. 



27 



Fig. 16. 



vertically and coming into close contact. This upward move- 
ment differs from one of the great diurnal oscillations above 
described only by the position being permanent during the night 
and by its periodicity, as it always commences late in the 
evening. 

Tropseolum minus (?) (var. Tom Thumb) (TropsBoleas).— The 
cotyledons are hypogean, or never rise above the ^ound. By 
removing the soil a buried epicotyl 
or plumule was found, with its 
Bummit arched abruptly down- 
wards, like the arched hypocotyl 
of the cabbage previously described. 
A glass filament with a bead at 
its end was affixed to the basal half 
or leg, just above the hypogean 
cotyledons, which were again almost 
surrounded by loose earth. The 
tracing (Fig. 16) shows the course 
of the bead during 11 h. After the 
last dot given in the figure, the 
bead moved to a great distance, 
and finally off the glass, in the 
direction indicated by the broken 
line. This great movement, due to 
increased growth along the con- 
cave surface of the arch, was caused 
by the basal leg bending back- 
wards from the upper part, that is 
in a direction opposite to the depen- 
dent tip, in the same manner as 
occurred with the hypocotyl of 
the cabbage. Another buried and 

arched epicotyl was observed in the same manner, excepting 
that the two legs of the arch were tied together with fine silk 
for the sake oi preventing the great movement just mentioned. 
It moved, however, in the evening in the same direction as 
before, but the line followed was not so straight. During the 
morning the tied arch moved in an irregularly circular, strongly 
zigzag course, and to a greater distance than in the previous 
ca«e, as was shown in a tracing, magnified 18 times. The move- 
ments of a young plant bearing a few leaves and of a mature 
plant, will hereafter be described. 




Tropceolum minus (?): circum- 
nutation of buried and arched 
epicotyl, traced on a horizon- 
tal glass, from 9.20 A.M. to 
8.15 p.m. Movement of bead 
of filament magnified 27 
times. 



28 



OIBOUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. I. 



Citrus aurantium (Orange) (AurantiacesB). — The cotyledons 
are hypogean. The circunmutation of an epicotyl, which at the 
close of our observations was '59 of an inch (15 mm.) in height 
above the ground, is shown in the annexed figure (Fig. 17), 
observed during a period of 44 h. 40 m. 

Fig. J 7. 




Citrus aurantium: circumnutation of epicotyl with a Hlament fixed traii»« 
Tersely near its apex, traced on a horizontal glass, from 12.13 p.m. on 
Feb. 20th to 8.55 a.m. on 22nd. The movement of the bead of the 
filament was at first magnified 21 times, or 10^, in figure here given, 
and afterwards 36 times, or 18 as here given ; seedling illuminated 
irom above. 



^8ctUu8 hippocastanum (HippocastanesB). — Germinating seeds 
were placed in a tin box, kept moist internally, with a sloping 
bank of damp argillaceous sand, on which four smoked glass- 
plates rested, inclined at angles of 70^ and 65° with the 
horizon. The tips of the radicles were placed so as just to 
touch the upper end of the glass-plates, and, as they grew 
downwards they pressed lightly, owing to geotropism, on the 
smoked surfaces, and left tracks of their course. In the middle 
part of each track the glass was swept clean, but the margins 
were much blurred and irregular. Copies of two of these tracks 
(all four being nearly alike) were made on tracing paper placed 
over the glass-plates after they had been varnished ; and they 
are as exact as possible, considering the nature of the margins 
(Fig. 18). They suffice to show that there was some lateral, 
almost serpentine movement, and that the tips in their down- 
ward course pressed ^vith unequal force on the plates, as 



Chap. I. 



VICIA. 



29 



Fig. 18. 





the tracks varied in breadth. The more perfectly serpentmc 
tracks made by the radicles of Phaseolus multifloras and Vicia 
faha (presently to be described), render 
it almost certain that the radicles of 
the present plant circumnntated. 

Phaseolus multifloi'us (Legnminosie). 
—Four smoked glass-plates were ar- 
ranged in the same manner as des- 
cribed under ^sculus, and the tracks 
left by the tips of four radicles of the 
present plant, whilst growing down- 
wards, were photographed as trans- 
parent objects. Three of them are ^scdtuhjppocastinum'.oxii^ 

!» J.1 • J rni' M\\ rni. • lines Of tracks left on in- 

here exactly copied (Fig. 19). Their 

serpentine courses show that the tips 
moved regularly from side to side; 
they also pressed alternately with 
greater or less force on the plates, 
sometimes rising up and leaving them 
altogether for a very short distance ; 
but this was better seen on the 
original plates than in the copies. 
These radicles therefore were continually moving in all direc- 
tions — that is, they circumnntated. The distance between the 
extreme right and left positions 
of the radicle A, in its lateral 
movement, was 2 mm., as ascer- 
tained by measurement with an 
eye-piece micrometer. 

Vicia faha (Common Bean) 
(LeguminosflB). — tiadicU, — Some 
beans were allowed to germinate 
on bare sand, and after one had 
protruded its radicle to a length 
of '2 of an inch, it was turned 
upside down, so that the radicle, 
which was kept in damp air, 
now stood upright. A filament, 
nearly an inch in length, was 
aflBxed obliquely near its tip; and the movement of the 
terminal bead was traced from 8.30 a.m. to 10.30 p.m., as shown 
in Fig. 18. The radicle at first changed its course twice 



dined glnss-plates by ti|»f 
of radicles. In A the plate 
was inclined at 70^ with 
the horizon, and the radicle 
was 1 * 9 iuch in length, and 
*23 inch in diameter at base. 
In B the plate was inclined 
65° with the horizon, and 
the radicle was a trifle 
larger. 



Fig. 19. 




B. C. 

Phaseolus muitiflorus : tracks left 
on inclined smoked glass-plates 
by tips of radicles in growing 
downwards. A and C, plates 
inclined at 60°, B inclined at 
68° with the horizon. 



30 



CIRCUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. I. 



abruptly, then made a small loop and then a larger zigzag 
curro. During the night and till 11a.m. on the following 

Fig. 20. 




Vkia faba: circamnutation of a radicle, at first pointing yerti/allj up- 
wards, kept in darkness, traced on a horizontal glass, during 14 houn. 
Movement of bead of filament magnified 23 times, here reduced to 
one-half of original scale. 

morning, the bead moved to a great distance in a nearly straight 
line, in the direction indicated by the broken line in the figure. 
This resulted from the tip bending quickly downwards, as it 
had now become much declioed, and had thus gained a position 
liighly favourable for the action of geotropism. 

Fig. 21. 




O. 



D. 



ndi fdba : tracks left on inclined smoked glass-plates, by tips of radicles 
in growing downwards. Plato C was inclined at 63^, plates A and D 
at 71°, plate B at 75% and plate £ at a few degrees beneath the 
horifon. 



Chap. L VICIA. 81 

We next experimented on nearly a score of radicles by allowing 
them to grow downwards over inclined plates of smoked glass, 
in exactly the same manner as with -^sculus and Phaseolus. 
Some of the plates were inclined only a few degrees beneath 
the horizon, but most of them between 60° and 75° In the 
latter cases the radicles in growing downwards were deflected 
only a little from the direction which they had followed whilst 
germinating in sawdust, and they pressed lightly on the glass* 
plates (Fig. 21). Five of the most distinct tracks are here 
copied, and they are all slightly sinuous, showing circumnufcv- 
tion. Moreover, a close examination of almost every one of the 
tracks clearly showed that the tips in their downward course 
had alternately pressed with greater or less force on the plates, 
and had sometimes risen up so as nearly to leave them for short 
intervals. The distance between the extreme right and left 
positions of the radicle A was 0*7 mm., ascertained in the same 
manner as in the case of Phaseolus. 

Epicotyl. — At the point where the radicle had protruded from 
a bean laid on its side, a flattened solid lump projected "1 of an 
inch, in the same horizontal plane with the bean. This protuber- 
ance consisted of the convex summit of the arched epic-otyl; 
and as it became developed the two legs of the arch curved 
themselves laterally upwards, owing to apogeotropism, at such 
a rate that the arch stood highly inclined after 14 h., and 
vertically in 48 h. A filament was fixed to the crown of 
the protuberance before any arch was visible, but the basal 
half grew so quickly that on the second morning the end of the 
filament was bowed greatly downwards. It was therefore re- 
moved and fixed lower down. The line traced during these two 
days extended in the same general direction, and was in parts 
nearly straight, and in others plainly zigzag, thus giving some 
evidence of circumnutation. 

As the arched epicotyl, in whatever position it may be placed, 
bends quickly upwards through apogeotropism, and as the two 
l^s tend at a very early age to separate from one another, as 
soon as they are relieved from the pressure of the surrounding 
earth, it was difficult to ascertain i)ositively whether the epicotyl, 
whilst remaining arched, circunmutated. Therefore some rather 
deeply buried beans were uncovered, and the two legs of the 
arches were tied together, as had been done with the epicotyl 
of TropaBolum and the hypocotyl of the Cabbage. The move- 
ments of the tied arches were traced in the usual manner on 



82 OIBCUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. L 

two occasions daring three days. Bat the tracings made under 
8Qch nnnatoral conditions are not worth giving ; and it need 
only be said that the lines were decidedly zigzag, and that 
small loops were occasionally formed. We may therefore con- 
clade that the epicotyl circamnutates whilst still arched and 
before it has grown tall enough to break through the surface 
of the ground. 

In order to observe the movements of the epicotyl at a some- 
what more advanced age, a filament was fixed near the base of 
one which was no longer arched, for its upper half now formed 
a right angle with the lower half. This bean had germinated 
on bare damp sand, and the epicotyl began to straighten itself 
much sooner than would have occurred if it had been properly 
planted. The course pursued during 50 h. (from 9 A.M. Dec. 
2Gth, to 11 A.M. 28th) is here shown (Fig. 22) ; and we sea 

Fig. 22. 




Vicia faba : circnmnutation of yoang epicotyl, traced in darkness daring 
50 hours on a horizontal glass. Movement of bead of filament mag- 
nified 20 times, here reduced to one-half of original scale. 

that the epicotyl circumnutated during the whole time. Its 
basal part grew so much during the 50 h. that the filament 
at the end of our observations was attached at the height of 
•4 inch above the upper surface of the bean, instead of close 
to it. If the bean had been properly planttd, this part of the 
epicotyl would still have been beneath the soil. 

Late in the evening of the 28th, some hours after the above 
observations were completed, the epicotyl had grown much 
Btraighter, for the upper part now formed a widely open angle 
with the lower part. A filament was fixed to the upright basal 
part, higher up than before, close beneath the lowest scale-lika 
proooss or homologue of a leaf; and its movement was traced 



CUAP. I. 



LA.THYRUS. 



23 



during 38 h. (Fig. 23). We here again have plain evidence of 
continued circumnutation. Had the bean been properly planted, 
the part of the epicotyl to which the filament was attached^ the 

Fig. 23. 




Vwia faba : circumnutation of the same epicotyl as in Fig. 22, a little mor« 
advanced in age, traced under similar conditions as before, from 8.40 A.M. 
Dec. 28th, to 10.50 A.M. 30th. Movement of bead here magnified 
20 times. 

movement of which is here shown, would probably have just 
risen above the surface of the ground. 

Lathyrus nissolia (Leguminosse). — This plant was selected for 
observation from being an abnormal form with grass-like leaves. 

Fig. 24. 




Zathyrus ntssolia: circumnutation of stem of young seedling, traced in 
darkness on a horizontal glass, from 6.45 A.M. Nov. 22nd, to 7 a.m. 
23rd. Movement of end of leaf magnified about 12 times, here re* 
duced to one*half of original scale. 

The cotyledons are hypogean, and the epicotyl breaks through 
the ground in an arched form. The movements of a stem, 1*2 
inch in height, consisting of three intemodes, the lower one 
almost wholly subterranean, and the upper one bearing a short, 



84 



CIECUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. I. 



narrow leaf, is shown during 24 \i., in Fig. 24. No glass filament 
was employed, but a mark was placed beneath the apex of the 
leaf. The actual length of the longer of the two ellipses de- 
scribed by the stem was about • 14 of an inch. On the previous 
day the chief lino of movement was nearly a* right angles to 
that shown in the present figure, and it was more simple. 
Ccutsia tora* (Leguminosse). — A seedling was placed before a 



Fig. 25 




SfcLm 



Coisia tora : conjoint circumnutation of cotyledons and hypocotyli tracttd 
on vertical glass, from 7.10 a.m. Sept. 25th to 7.30 a.m. 26th. Figure 
here given reduced to one-half of original scale. 



♦ Seeds of this plant, which 
p:rew near the sea-side, were sent 
us by Fritz Muller from S. 



to 

Brazil. 



The 



seedlings 



did not 



flourish or flower well with us; 
they were sent to Kow, and were 
pronounced not to bo distinguish- 
able from C. tora. ^ 



Chap. 1. LOTUS. 35 

north-east window ; it bent very little towards it, as the bypo- 
cotyl which was left free was rather old, and therefore not highly 
heliotropic. A filament had been fixed to the midrib of one of 
the cotyledons, and the movement of the whole seedling was 
traced during two days. The circumnutation of the hypocotyl 
is quite insignificant compared with that of the cotyledons. 
These rise np vertically at night and come into close contact; so 
that they may be said to sleep. This seedling was so old that a 
very small true leaf had been developed, which at night was 
completely hidden by the closed cotyledons. On Sept. 24th, 
between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m., the cotyledons moved five times up 
and five times down; they therefore described five irregular 
ellipses in the course of the 9 h. The great nocturnal rise com- 
menced about 4.30 p.m. 

On the following morning (Sept. 25th) the movement of 
the same cotyledon was again traced in the same manner 
during 24 h. ; and a copy of the tracing is here given (Fig. 25). 
The morning was cold, and the window had been accidentally 
left open for a short time, which must have chilled the plant ; 
and this probably prevented it from moving quite as freely as 
on the previous day ; for it rose only four and sank only four 
times during the day, one of the oscillations being very small. 
At 7.10 A.M., when the first dot was made, the cotyledons were 
not fully open or awake ; they continued to open till about 9 a.m., 
by which time they had sunk a little benoath the horizon : by 
9.30 A.M. they had risen, and then they oscillated up and down ; 
but the upward and downward lines never quite coincided. At 
about 4.30 p.m. the great nocturnal rise commenced. At 7 a.m. 
on the following morning (Sept. 26th) they occupied nearly 
thp same level as on the previous morning, as shown in the 
diagram : they then began to open or sink in the usual manner. 
The diagram leads to the belief that the great periodical daily 
rise and fall does not differ essentially, excepting in amplitude, 
from the oscillations during the middle of the day. 

Lotus Jacohceus (LegimiinosfiB). — The cotyledons of this plant, 
after the few first days of their life, rise so as to stand almost, 
though rarely quite, vertically at night. They continue to act in 
this manner for a long time even after the development of some 
of the true leaves. With seedlings, 3 inches in height, and bear- 
ing five or six leaves, they roso at night about 45°. They con- 
tinued to act thus for about an additional fortnight. Subse- 
quently they remained hDrizontal at night, though still groon. 



36 CntCUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. L 

and at last dropped off. Their rising at night so as to stand 
almost vertically appears to depend largely on temperature; 
for when the seedlings were kept in a cool house, though thoy 
still continued to grow, the cotyledons did not become vertical 
at night. It is remarkable that the cotyledons do not generally 
rise at night to any conspicuous extent during the first four or 
five days after germination; but the period was extremely 
variable with seedlings kept under the same conditions; and 
many were observed. Glass filaments with minute triangles of 
paper were fixed to the cotyledons (li mm. in breadth) of two 
seedlings, only 24 h. old, and the hypocotyl was secured to a 
stick ; their movements greatly magnified were traced, and they 
certainly circumnutated the whole time on a small scale, but 
they did not exhibit any distinct nocturnal and diurnal move- 
ment. The hypocotyls, when left free, circumnutated over a 
large space. 

Another and much older seedling, bearing a half-developed 
leaf, had its movements traced in a similar manner during the 
three first days and nights of June ; but seedlings at this age 
appear to be very sensitive to a deficiency of light ; they were 
observed under a rather dim skylight, at a temperature of 
between 16° to 17 i° C. ; and apparently, in consequence of these 
conditions, the great daily movement of the cotyledons ceased 
on the third day. During the first two days they began rising 
in the early afternoon in a nearly straight line, until between 
6 and 7 p.m., when they stood vertically. During the latter 
part of the night, or more probably in the early morning, they 
began to fall or open, so that by 6.45 a.m. they stood fully 
expanded and horizontal. They continued to fall slowly for 
some time, and during the second day described a single 
small ellipse, between 9 a.m. and 2 p.m., in addition to the 
great diurnal movement. The course pursued during the 
whole 24 h. was far less complex than in the foregoing case of 
Cassia. On the third morning they fell very much, and then 
circumnutated on a small scale round the same spot ; by 8.20 
r.M. they showed no tendency to rise at night. Nor did the 
c«)tyIedons of any of the many other seedlings in the same pot 
rise ; and so it was on the f«illowing night of June 5tli, The 
pot was then taken back into the hot-house, where it was exposed 
to the sun, nnd on the succeeding night all the cotyledons rose 
again to a high angle, but did not stand quite vertically. On 
each of the above days the line representing the great noctomal 



Chap. L OYTISUS. 87 

rise did not coincide with that of the great diurnal fall, so that 
narrow ellipses were described, as is the usual rule with circum- 
nutating organs. The cotyledons are provided with a pulvinus, 
and its development will hereafter be described. 

Mimosa pudica (Leguminosse). — The cotyledons rise up verti- 
cally at night, so as to close together. Two seedlings were 
observed in the greenhouse (temp. 16° to 17° C. or 63° to 65° F.). 
Their hypocotyls were secured to sticks, and glass filaments 
bearing little triangles of paper were affixed to the cotyledons of 
both. Their mo cements were traced on a vertical glass duriog 
24 h. on November 13th. The pot had stood for some time in 
the same position, and they were chiefly illuminated through 
the glass-roof. The cotyledons of one of these seedlings moved 
downward in the morning till 11.30 a.m., and then rose, moving 
rapidly in the evening until they stood vertically, so that in this 
case there was simply a single great daily fall and rise. The 
other seedling behaved rather differently, for it fell in the morn- 
ing until 11.30 A.M., and then rose, but alter 12.10 p.m. again fell; 
and the great evening rise did not begin until 1.22 p.m. On the 
following morning this cotyledon had fallen greatly from its 
vertical position by 8.15 a.m. Two other seedlings (one seven 
and the other eight days old) had been previously observed 
under unfavourable circumstances, for they had been brought 
into a room and placed before a north-east window, where the 
temperature was between only 56° and 57° F. They had, more- 
over, to be pro'ecttd from lateral light, and perhaps were not 
sufficiently illuminated. Under these circiunstances the coty- 
ledons moved simply downwards from 7 a.m. till 2 p.m., after 
which hour and during a large part of the night they con- 
tinued to rise. Between 7 and 8 a.m. on the following morning 
they fell again ; but on this second and likewise on the third 
day the movements became irregular, and between 3 and 10.30 
P.M. they circumnutated to a small extent about the same spot ; 
but they did not rise at night. Neverthekss, on the following 
night they rose as usual. 

Cytisus fragrans (LeguminossB). — Only a few observations were 
made on this plant. The hypocotyl circumnutated to d con- 
siderable extent, but in a simple manner — namely, for two hours 
in one direction, and then much more slowly back again in 
a zigzag course, almost parallel to the first line, and beyond the 
starting-point. It moved in the same direction all night, but 
next morning b^an to return. The cotyledons continually 



38 CIRCUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. L 

move both up and down and laterally ; but they do not rise up 
at night in a conspicuous manner. 

Lupinus luteus (Legimiinosie). — Seedlings of this plant were 
observed because the cotyledons are so thick (about 03 of an 
inch) that it seemed unlikely that they would move. Our 
observations were not very successful, as the seedlings are 
strongly heliotropic, and their circumnutation could not he 
accurately observed near a north-east window, although they 
had been kept during the previous day in the same position. 
A seedling was then placed in darkness with the hypocotyl 
secured to a stick; both cotyledons rose a little at first, and 
then fell during the rest of the day ; in the evening between 
5 and 6 p.m. they moved very slowly ; during the night one 
continued to fall and the other rose, though only a little. The 
tracing was not much magnified, and as the lines were plainly 
zigzag, the cotyledons must have moved a little laterally, that 
is, they must have circumnutated. 

The hypocotyl is rather thick, about • 12 of inch ; nevertheless 
it circumnutated in a complex course, though to a small extent. 
The movement of an old seedling with two true leaves partially 
developed, was observed in the daik. As the movement was 
magnified about 100 times it is not trustworthy and is not 
given ; but there could be no doubt that the hypocotyl moved 
in all directions during the day, changing its course 19 times. 
The extreme actual distance from side to side through which 
the upper part of the hypocotyl passed in the course of 14d hours 
was only -^ of an inch ; it sometimes travelled at the rate of 
^ of an inch in an hour. 

Cucurbita ovi/era (Cucurbitacese). — Radicle : a seed which had 

Fig. 26. 




Cucurbita ov'f era : course followed by a radicle in bending geotropicnlly 
downwards, traced on a horizontal glass, between 11.25 a.m. and 10.25 
P.M. ; the direction during the night is indicated by the broken line. 
Movement of bead magnified 14 times. 

geiminated on damp sand was fixed so that the slightly curved 
radicle, which was only '07 inch in length, stood almost vertically 



Chap. L 



CUCURBITA. 



39 



upwards, in which position geotropism would act at first with 
little power. A filament was attached near to its base, and 
projected at about an angle of 45° above the horizon. The 
general course followed during the 11 hours of observation and 
during the following night, is shown in the accompanying 
diagram (Fig. 26), and was plainly due to geotropism ; but it 
was also clear that the radicle circumnutated. By the next 
morning the tip had curved so much downwards that the fila- 
ment, instead of projecting at 45° above the horizon, was nearly 
horizontal. Another germinating seed was turned upside down 
and covered with damp sand ; and a filament was fastened to 
the radicle so as to project at an angle of about 50° above the 
horizon ; this radicle was *35 of an inch in length and a little 
curved. The course pursued was mainly governed, as in the 
last case, by geotropism, but the line traced during 12 hours and 
magnified as before was more strongly zigzag, a^ain showing 
ciicunmutation. 

Four radicles were allowed to grow downwards over plates 
of smoked glass, inclined at 70° to the horizon, under the 



Fig. 27. 



Fig. 28. 





B. 

Cuctirbita ovifera: tracks 
left by tips of radicles 
in growing downwards 
over smoked glass- 
plates, inclined at 70° 
to the horizon. 




Cucurbita ovifera: circumnuta- 
tion of arched hypocotyl at 
a very early age, traced in 
darkness on a horizontal glass, 
from 8 A.M. to 10.20 a.m. on 
the following day. The move- 
ment of the *bcad magnified 
20 times, here reduced to one- 
half of original scale. 



same conditions as in the cases of ^sculus, Phaseolus, and 
Vicia. Facsimiles are here given (Fig. 27) of two of these 
tracbs; and a third short one was almost as plainly serpentine 
as that at A. It was also manifest by a greater or less amount 
of soot having been swept off the glasses, that the tijra had 
4 



40 CIECUMXUTATION OF SEEDLIKG& Chap. L 

pressed alternately with greater and less force on iJion. Then 
mofit, therefore, have been movement in at least two planes at 
right angles to one another. These radicles were so deb'cate that 
they rarely had the power to sweep the glasses quite clean. One 
of them harl developed some lateral or secondary rootlets, which 
projected a few degrees beneath the horizon ; and it is an im- 
portant fact tliat three of them left distinctly serpentine tracks 
on the smoked surface, showing beyond doabt that they had 
circumnutated like the main or primary radicle. Bat the 
tracks were SD slight that they could not be traced and copied 
after the smoked surface had been varnished. 

FJypf>cotyL — A seed lying on damp sand was firmly fixed by 
two crossed wires and by its own growing radicle. The cotyle- 
dons were still enclosed within the seed-coats; and the short 

hypocotyl, between the summit of 
Pig. 29. the radicle and the cotyledons, 

was as yet only slightly arched. A 
filament (*85 of inch in length) 
was attached at an angle of 35^ 
above the horizon to the ^de of 
the arch adjoining tlie cotyle- 
dons. This part would ultimately 
form the upper end of the hyx)o- 
cotyl, after it had grown straight 
and vertical. Had the seed been 
properly planted, the hyi)ocotyl at 
this stage of growth would have 
been deeply buried beneath the 
surface. The course followed by 

Cucurbita ovifera: circuranuta- ^^^ ^^ ^^ ^^le filament is shown 
tion of straight and verti- . i,- r t ^* 

cal hypocotyl, with filament m Fig. 28. The chief bnes of 
fastened transversely across movement from left to right in the 
its upi>er end. traced in dark- figure were parallel to the plane 

Tm "8"3o' ^M"r^3o'lrM: of the two united cotyledons and 

The movement of the terminal of the flattened seed; atd this 

bead originally magnified movement would aid in dragging 

abo^ 18 times, here only H ^^^^^ ^^^^ ^^ ^y^^ seed-COats, which 

are held down by a special struc- 
ture hereafter to be described. The movement at right angles 
to the alx)ve lines was due to the arched hypocotyl becoming 
more arched as it increased in height. The foregoing observa- 
tions apply to the leg of the arch next to the cotyledons, but 




UuAP. L CUCURBITA. 41 

the other leg adjoining the radicle likewise circiimnutatcd at tm 
equally early age. 

The movement of the same hypocotj'l after it had become 
straight and vertical, bat with the cotyledons only partially 
expanded, is shown in Fig. 29. The course pursued during 12 h. 
apparently represents four and a half ellipses or ovals, with 
the longer axis of the first at nearly right angles to that of the 
others. The longer axes of all were oblique to a line joining 
the opposite cotyledons. The actual extreme distance from 
side to side over which the summit of the tall hypocotyl 
passed in the course of 12 h. was • 28 of an inch. The original 
figure was traced on a large scale, and from the obliquity of 
the line of view the outer parts of the diagram are much 
exaggerated. 

Cotyledons. — On two occasions the movements of the cotyle- 
dons were traced on a vertical glass, and as the ascending and 
descending lines did not quite coincide, very narrow ellipses 
were formed; they therefore circumnutated. Whilst young 
they rise vertically up at night, but their tips always remain 
reflexed ; on the following morning they sink down again. With 
a seedling kept in complete darkness they moved in the same 
manner, for they sank from 8.45 a.m. to 4.30 p.m.; they then 
began to rise and remained close together until 10 p.m., when 
they were last observed. At 7 a.m. on the following morning 
they were as much expanded as at any hour on the previous 
day. The cotyledons of another young seedling, exposed to the 
light, were fully open for the first time on a certain day, but 
were found completely closed at 7 a.m. on the following morning. 
They soon l^egan to expand again, and continued doing so till 
about 5 P.M. ; they then began to rise, and by 10.30 p.m. stood 
vertically and were almost closed. At 7 a.m. on the third morn- 
ing they were nearly vertical, and again expanded during the 
day; on the fourth morning they were not closed, yet they 
opened a little in the course of the day and rose a little on the 
following night. By this time a minute true leaf had become 
developed. Another seedling, still older, bearing a well-developed 
leaf, had a sharp rigid filament affixed to one of its cotyledons 
(85 mm. in length), which recorded its own movements on 
a revolving drum with smoked paper. The obcervations were 
made in the hot-house, where the plant had lived, so that there 
was no change in temperature or light. The record commenced 
at 11 A.M. on February IBth ; and h om this hour till 3 p.m. the 



^ CIBCUMXUTATIOX OF SEEDLINGS. Cba¥. I. 

ootjledaa fell; it then rose rapidiv till 9 p.x., then yerj 
gradnall J till 3 ajl Febmaiy 19th, after which honr it sank 
gradnall J till 4^ p.x. ; bat the downward movement was inter- 
rnpted bj one slight rise or oscillation about L30 pjc After 
4lS0 p.x. (19th) the cotyledon rose till 1 a.m. (in the night of 
February 20th) and then sank Tery gradnally till 9^ a.m., 
when our observations ceased. The amount of noovement was 
greater on the 18th than on the 19th or on the Dooming of 
the2Qth. 

Cucurhita aurahtia, — An arched hypocotyl was found buried a 
little beneath the sur&ce of the soil ; and in order to prevent it 
straightening itself quickly, when relieved from the surrounding 
pressure of the soil, the two legs of the arch were tied together. 
The seed was then lightly covered with loose damp earth. A 
filament with a bead at the end was afi&xed to the basal leg, the 
movements of which were observed during two days in the 
usual manner. On the first day the arch moved in a zigzag line 
towards the side of the basal 1^. On the next day, by which 
time the dependent cotyledons had been dragged above the sur- 
face of the soil, the tied arch changed its course greatly nine 
times in the course of 14 J h. It swept a large, extremely irre- 
gular, circular figure, returning at m'ght to nearly the same 
spot whence it had started early in the morning. The line was 
80 strongly zigzag that it appareutly represented five ellipses, with 
their longer axes pointing in various directions. With respect 
to the periodical movements of the cotyledons, those of several 
young seedlings formed together at 4 p.m. an angle of about 60°, 
and at 10 p.m. their lower parts stood vertically and were in 
contact ; their tips, however, as is usual in the genus, were per- 
manently reflexed. These cotyledons, at 7 a.m. on the following 
morning, were again well expanded. 

La/jeiiaria vulgaris (var. miniature Bottle-gourd) (Cucurbi- 
taccae). — A seedling opened its cotyledons, the movements of 
which were alone observed, slightly on June 27th, and closed 
them at night: next day, at noon (28th), they included an 
angle of 53°, and at 10 p.m. they were in close contact, so that 
each had risen 26 i°. At noon, on the 29th, they included an 
angle of 118°, and at 10 p.m. an angle of 54°, so each had 
risen 32°. On the following day they were still more open, and 
the nocturnal rise was greater, but the angles were not measured. 
Two other seedlings were observed, and behaved during three 
days in a closely similar manner. The cotyledons, therefore* 



C'SAP. I. 



CUCUBLITA. 



43 



Fig. 30. 

A 



* iitir 



■ 

I 



open more and more on each succeeding day^ and rise each 
night about 30° ; consequently during the first two nights of 
their life they stand vertically and 
come into contact. 

In order to ascertain more ac- 
curately the nature of these move- 
ments, the hypocotyl of a seedling, 
with its cotyledons well expanded, 
was secured to a little stick, and a 
filament with triangles of paper 
was affixed to one of the cotyledons. 
The observations were made under 
a rather dim skylight, and the 
temperature during the whole time 
was between 17^ to 18° C. (63° to 
65° F.). Had the temperature been 
higher and the light brighter, the 
movements would probably have 
been greater. On July 11th (see 
Fig. 30), the cotyledon fell from 
7.35 A.M. till 10 A.M. ; it then rose 
(nipidly after 4 p.m.) till it stood 
quite vertically at 8.40 p.m. During 
the early morning of the next day 
(12th) it fell, and continued to fall 
till 8 A.M., after which hour it rose, 
then fell, and again rose, so that by 
10.35 P.M. it stood much higher than 
it did in the morning, but was not 
vertical as on the preceding night 
During the following early morn- 
ing and whole day (13th) it fell and Lagenaria vulgaris : circnmnu 



uty - 






13«» 




a.i». 



circunmutated, but had not risen 
when observed late in the evening ; 
and this was probably due to the 
deficiency of heat or light, or of 
l)0th. We thus see that the coty- 
ledons became more widely open at 



tation of a cotyledon, 1^ 
inch in length, apex only 4f 
inches from the vertical glass, 
on which its movements were 
traced from 7.35 A.M. July 
11th to 9.5 A.M. on the 14th. 
Figure here given reduced 
to one-third of original scale. 



noon on each succeeding day ; and 

tliat they rose considerably each night, though not acquiring 

a vertical position, except during the first two nights. 

Cucumis dudaim (CucurbitaceaB). — Two seedlings had opened 





44 CIBCUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. L 

their cotyledons for the first time during the day, — one to the 
extent of 90° and the other rather more; they remained in 
nearly the same position until 10.40 p.m ; but by 7 a m. on the 
foUowing morning the one which had been previously open to 
the extent of 90° had its cotyledons vertical and completely 
shut; the other seedling had them nearly shut. Later in the 
morning they opened in the ordinary manner. It appears 
therefore that the cotyledons of this plant close and ojien at 
somewhat different periods from those of the foregoing species 
of the allied genera of Cucurbita and Lagenaria. 

Opuntia basiluris (CacteiB). — A seedling was carefully ob- 
served, because considering its 
Fig. 31. appearance and the nature of the 

mature plant, it seemed very un- 
likely that either the hypocotyl or 
cotyledons would circumnutate to 
an appreciable extent. The coty- 
ledons were well developed, being 
•9 of an inch in length, "22 in 
breadth, and '16 in thickness. 
The almost cylindrical hypocotyl, 
now bearing a minute spinous bud 
on its summit, was only * 45 of an 
inch in height, and '19 in dia- 

Ojmniia basUaris : conjoint c\T- ^^^^^' The tracing (Fig. 31) shows 

crnnnutation of hypocotyl the combined movement of the 

and cotyledon ; HIament hypocotyl and of one of the coty- 

fo!fV''°^'^"'*'°*''^ IV"^^': ledons, from 4.45 p.m. on May 28th 

ledon, and movement traced . , , ai 01 x r\ xt. rtoxi. 

during 66 h. on horizontal to II A M. on the dlst. Onthe29tn 
glass. Movement of the ter- a nearly perfect ellipse was com- 

minal bead magnified about pio^(3^ Qn the 30th the hypocotyl 
30 times, here reduced to one- -, - ^r ^ 

third scale. Seedling kept in ^oved, from somo unknown cause, 
hot-house, feebly illuminated in the same goneral direction in a 
from above. zigzag line ; but between 4.30 and 

10 P.M. almost completed a second 
small elh'pse. The cotyledons move only a little up and down : 
thus at 10.15 P.M. they stood only 10° higher than at noon. The 
chief seat of movement therefore, at least when the cotyledons 
are rather old as in the present case, lies in the hypocotyl. The 
ellipse described on the 29th had its longer axis directed at 
nearly right angles to a line joining the two cotyledons. The 
6ctua.' amount of movement of the bead at the end of the 



/ 



Ohai>. L 



PBIMULA. 



45 



^- 



.-- < — 




filament was, as far as could be ascertaiued, about *14 of an 
inch. 

helianthus annuus (CompositsB). — The upper part of the 
hypocotyl moved during the 
day-time in the course ^'^Z- 32. 

shown in the annexed figure 
(Fig. 32). As the line runs 
in various directions, cross- 
ing itself several times, 
the movement may be con- 
sidered as one of circumnu- 
tation. The extreme actual 
distance travelled was at 
least '1 of an inch. The 
movements of the cotyle- 
dons of two seedlings were 
observed; one facing a north- 
east window, and the other 
so feebly illuminated from 
above as to be almost in 
darkness. They continued 
to sink till about noon, 

when they began to rise; but between 5 and 7 or 8 p.m. 
they either sank a little, or moved laterally, and then again 
began to rise. At 7 a.m. on the following morning those on 
the plant before the north-east window had opened so little 
that they stood at an angle of 73° above the horizon, and were 
not observed any longer. Those on the seedling which had 
been kept in almost complete darkness, sank during the whole 
day, without rising about mid-day, but rose during the night. 
On the third and fourth days they continued sinking without 
any alternate ascending movement; and this, no doubt, was 
due to the absence of light. 

Primula Sinensis (Primulacere).— A seedling was placed with 
the two cotyledons parallel to a north-east window on a day 
when the light was nearly uniform, and a filament was affixed 
to one of them. From observations subsequently made on 
another seedling with the stem secured to a stick, the greater 
part of the movement shown in the annexed figure (Fig. 33), 
must have been that of the hypocotyl, though the cotyledons 
certainly move up and down to a certain extent both during the 
day and night. The movements of the same seedling were traced 



Helianthus annuus : circumnutation of 
hypocotyl, with filament fixed across 
its summit, traced on a horizontal 
glass in darkness, from 8.45 A.M. to 
10.45 P.M., and for an hour on follow- 
ing morning. Movement of bead 
magniHed 21 times, here reduced to 
one-half of original scale. 



46 CIROUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. 1 

on the following day with nearly the same result; and there 
oan be no doubt about the circumnutation of the hypocotyL 

Fig. 33. 
> 




Frimuh Sinensis: conjoint circumnutation of hypocotyl and cotyledon, 
traced on vertical glass, from 8.40 a.m. to 10.45 P.M. MoTements ol 
bead magnified about 26 times. 

Cyclamen Persicum (Primulacejo). — This plant is generally sup- 
posed to produce only a single cotyledon, but Dr. H. Gressner * 
has shown that a second one is developed after a long interval 
of time. The hypocotyl is converted into a globular conn, even 
before the first cotyledon has broken through the ground with its 
blade closely enfolded and with its petiole in the form of an arch, 
like the arched hjpocotyl or epicotyl of any ordinary dicotyle- 
donous plant. A glass filament was affixed to a cotyledon, "SS 
of an inch in height, the petiole of which had straightened itself 
and stood nearly vertical, but with the blade not as yet fully 
expanded. Its movements were traced during 24i h. on a 

horizontal glass, magnified 50 
^'^g' 34. times ; and in this interval it 

described two irregular small 
circles ; it therefore circumnu- 
tates, though on an extremely 
small scale. 

OA 1- J X 7- Sfapelia mrpedon (Ascle- 

Stapeli'i sarpedon: circumnutation • -. v mi.' x v 

of hypocotyl, illuminated from piade»). — This plant, When 

above, traced on horizontal glass, mature, resembles a cactus. 
from 6.45 A.M. June 26th to 8.45 The flattened hvpocotyl is 

A.M. 28th. Temp. 23°-24<* C. ^ , , j • xi 

Movement of bead magnified 21 ^^^^y* enlarged m the Upper 
times part, and bears two rudimen- 

tary cotyledons. It breaks 
through the ground in an arched form, with the rudimentary 
cotyledons closed or in contact. A filament was affixed almost 




♦ * Bot Zeitung,' 1874, p. 887. 



Ohai. I. IPOMCEA. 47 

vertically to the hypocotyl of a seedling half an inch high ; and 
its movements were traced during 50 h. on a horizontal glass 
(Fig. 34). From some unknown cause it bowed itself to on6 
side, anJ as this was effected by a zigzag course, it probably 
circum nutated ; but with hardly any other seedling observed 
by us was this movement so obscurely shown. 

Jpomoea coerulea vel Pharhitis nil (ConvolvulacesB). — Seedlings 
of this plant were observed because it is a twiner, the upper 
internodes of which circumnutate conspicuously; but, like 
other twining plants, the first few internodes which rise above 
the ground are stiff enough to support themselves, and therefore 
do not circumnutate in any plainly recognisable maimer.* In 
this particular instance the fifth internode (including the hypo- 
cotyl) was the first which plainly circumnutated and twined 
round a stick. We therefore wished to learn whether circum- 
nutation could be observed in the hypocotyl if carefully observed 
in our usual manner. Two seedlings were kept in the dark 
with filaments fixed to the upper part of their hypocotyls ; but 
from circumstances not worth explaining their movements were 
traced for only a short time. One moved thrice forwards and 
twice backwards in nearly opposite directions, in the course of 
3 h. 15 m. ; and the other twice forwards and twice backwards 
in 2 h. 22 m. The hypocotyl therefore circumnutated at a re- 
markably rapid rate. It may here be added that a filament was 
affixed transversely to the summit of the second internode above 
the cotyledons of a little plant 3^ inches in height; and its 
movements were traced on a horizontal glass. It circumnutated, 
and the actual distance travelled from side to side was a quarter 
of an inch, which was too small an amount to be perceived with- 
out the aid of marks. 

The movements of the cotyledons are interesting from their 
complexity and rapidity, and in some other respects. The 
hypocotyl (2 inches high) of a vigorous seedling was secured to a 
stick, and a filament with triangles of paper was affixed to one 
of the cotyledons. The plant was kept all day in the hot-house, 
and at 4.20 p.m. (June 20th) was placed under a skylight in 
the house, aad observed occasionally during the evening and 
night. It fell in a slightly zigzag line to a moderate extent 
from 4.20 p.m. till 1015 p.m. When looked at shortly after mid- 
night (12.30 P.M.) it had risen a very little, and considerably by 



* ( 



Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants/ p. 33, 1875. 



CIECUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. I 

When again looked at, at 6.10 a.m. C2lBt), it had 
fallen largely. A new tracing 
was nijw begun (see Fig. 35), 
and Boun afterwards, at 6.42 
A.M., the cotyledon had risen a 
little. During the forenoon it 
was oliaerved about every 
hour ; but between 12.30 and 
6 P.M. every haif-hour. If the 
obeervations had been made at' 
tbese short inttrvala during the 
whole day, the figure would 
have been too intricate to have 
been copied. As it was, the 
cotyledon moved up and down 
in the course of 16 h. 20 m. (i e. 
between 6.10 a.m. aud 10.30 
P.M.) thirtetn times. 

The cotyledons of this aeed- 
ling sank downwards during 
both evenings and the early 
part of the night, but rose 
duriDg the latter pari As this 
is an unusual movement, the 
cotyledons of twelve other seed- 
lings were observed; they stood 
almost or quite horizontally at 
mid-day, and at 10 p.m. were 
all declined at various angles. 
The most usual angle was be- 
tween 30° and 35°; but three 
stood at about 50° and one at 
even 70° beneath the horizon. 
The blades of all these cotyle- 
dons had attaioed almost their 
full size, viz. from 1 to H inches 
in length, measured along their 
m:drihs. It is a remarkable 

Cotyledon witti petiola fact that whilst yOung— thftt 

1-6 inch ip length, ap» of blade is, when less than half an inch 
4-1 iDrli from the vertical glaEBi j„ length, measured, in the 
me mnnner— they do uot sinb 




OnAP. T. CERINTHE. 49 

downwards in the evening. Therefore their weight, which is 
considerable when almost fully developed, probably came into 
play in originally determining the downward movement. The 
periodicity of this movement is much influenced by the degree 
of light to which the seedlings have been exposed during the 
day; for three kept in an obscure place began to sink alnjut 
noon, instead of late in the evening ; and those of another seed- 
ling were almost paralysed by having been similarly kept during 
two whole days. The cotyledons of several other species cf 
IpomcBa likewise sink downwards late in the evening. 

Cerinthe major (BoraginesB). — The circumnutation of the 
hyiKXJotyl of a young seedling with the cotyledons hardly 

Fig. 36. 




Cerin^MB major : circnmnntation of hypocotyl, with tilament fixed across its 
summit, illuminated from above, traced on horizontal glass, from 
9.26 A.M. to 9.53 P.M. on Oct. 25th. Movement of the bead magnified 
30 times, here reduced to one-third of original scale. 

expanded, is shown in the annexed figure (Fig. 36), which 
apparently represents four or five irregular ellipses, described 
in the course of a little over 12 hours. Two older seedlings 
were similarly observed, excepting that one of theifl was kept 
in the dark ; their hypocotyls also circumnutated, but in a more 
simple manner. The cotyledons on a seedling exposed to the 
light fell from the early morning until a little after noon, and 
then continued to rise until 10.30 p m. or later. The cotyledons 
of this same seedling acted in the same general manner during 
the two following days. It had previously been tried in the 
dark, and after being thus kept for only 1 h. 40 m. the cotyledons 
began at 4.30 p.m. to sink, instead of continuing to rise till late 
at night. 




M CIBCUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap, t 

Nolana prostrata (NolanesB). — The movements were not 
traced, but a pot with seedlings, which had been kept in the 
dark for an hour, was placed under the microscope, with the 
micrometer eye-piece so adjusted that each division equalled 
•g^th of an inch. The apex of one of the cotyledons crossed 
rather obliquely four divisions in 13 minutes ; it was also sink- 
ing, as shown by getting out of focus. The seedlings were 
again placed in darkness for another hour, and the apex now 
crossed two divisions in 6 m. 18 s. ; that is, at very nearly the 
same rate as before. After another interval of an hour in dark- 
ness, it crossed two divisions in 4 m. 15 s., there- 
Fig. 37. fore at a quicker rate. In the afternoon, after a 
longer interval in the dark, the apex was motion- 
less, but after a time it recommenced moving, 
though slowly ; perhaps the room was too cold. 
Judging from previous cases, there can hardly 
be a doubt that this seedling was circumnuta- 
ting. 

Solanum lycopersicum (SolaneaB) — The move- 
ments of the hypocotyls of two seedling to- 
Sdanum lycoper- matoes were observed during seven hours, and 
sicwn: circum- there could be no doubt that both circumnu- 

"ocot'r ""^v^Ui" ^^^' "^^^^ "^^^^ illuminated from above, but 

ti lament fixed ^^ ^° accident a little light entered on one side, 

across its sum- and in the accompanying figure (Fig. 87) it 

mit, traced on may be seen that the hypocotyl moved t!b. this 

fr'I)m^?o*i mTo ^^^^ (*^® ^I^P^^ ^°^ ^" *^® figure), making small 

5 P.M. Oct. 24th. loops and zigzagging in its course. The move- 

llluminated ob- ments of the cotyledons were also traced both 

^*K "^^^ ^'®°* on vertical and horizontal glasses ; their angles 

ment of bead ^^^^ *^^® horizon were likewise measured at 

magnified about various liours. They fell from 8 30 a.m. (October 

35 times, here i7th) to about noon ; then moved laterally in a 

reduced to one- • j-^ ^^^ ^^ ^^^^ ^ p j^ y^ ^ ^ 

third of origmal .. , , i i-, ir.«rv , 

scale. they contmued to do so until 10.30 p.m., by 

which hour they stood vertically and were asleep. 
At what hour of the night or early morning they began to fall 
was not ascertained. Owing to the lateral movement shortly 
after mid-day, the descending and ascending lines did not 
coincide, and irregular ellipses were described during each 24 h. 
The regular periodicity of these movements is destroyed, as we 
shall hereafter see, if the seedlings are kept in the dark. 



OuAP. T. SOLANUM. fil 

Salanum palinacanthum, — Several arched hypoeotyls rising 
nearly *2 of an inch above the ground, but with the cotyledons 
still buried beneath the surface, were observed, and the tracings 
showed that they circumnutated. Moreover, in several cases 
little open circular spaces or cracks in the argillaceous sand 
which surrounded the arched hypoeotyls were visible, and 
these appeared to have been made by the hypoeotyls having 
bent first to one and then to another side whilst growing up- 
wards. In two instances the vertical arches were observed to 
move to a considerable distance backwards from the point where 
the cotyledons lay buried; this movement, which has been 
noticed in some other cases, and which seems to aid in extracting 
the cotyledons from the buried seed-coats, is due to the com- 
mencement of the straightening of the hypocotyl. In order to 
prevent this latter movement, the two legs of an arch, the 

Fig. 38. 





Soianum palinacanthum: circumnutation of an arched hypocotyl, just 
emerging from the ground, with the two legs tied together, traced in 
darkness on a horizontal glass, from 9.20 A.M. Dec. 17th to 8.30 a.m. 
19th. Movement of bead magnified 13 times ; but the filament, which 
was aflfixed obliquely to the crown of the arch, was of unusual length. 

summit of which was on a level with the surface of the soil, 
were tied together ; the earth having been previously removed 
to a little depth all round. The movement of the arch during 
47 hours under these unnatural circumstances is exhibited 
in the annexed figure. 

The cotyledons of some seedlings in the hot-house were hori- 
zontal about noon on December 13th ; and at 10 p.m. had risen * 
to an angle of 27° above the horizon ; at 7 a.m. on the following 



52 



CIBCUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. 



CHAi*, 1 



Fig. 39. 




morning, before it was light, they had risen to 59** aboTe the 

horizon; in the afternoon of the same day they were fonnd 

again horizontal. 
Beta vulgaris (Chenopodeae). — The seedlings are excessiyely 

sensitive to light, so that although on the first day they 

were uncovered only during two or three 
minutes at each observation, they all moved 
steadily towards the side of the room 
whence the light proceeded, and the trac- 
ings consisted only of slightly zigzag lines 
directed towards the light. On the next 
day the plants were placed in a completely 
darkened room, and at each observation 
were illuminated as much as possible from 
vertically above by a small wax taper. The 
annexed figure (Fig. 39) shows the move- 
ment of the hypocotyl during 9 h. under 
these circumstances. A second seedling 
was similarly observed at the same time, 
and the tracing had the same peculiar 
character, due to the hypocotyl often mov- 
ing and returning in nearly parallel lines. 
The movement of a third hypocotyl differed 
greatly. 

We endeavoured to trace the movements 

of the cotyledons, and for this purpose 

, , J X some seedlings were kept in the dark, but 

here reduced to one- , , ? . ^ . ,. 

third of original ^^^y moved m an abnormal manner ; they 
scale. continued rising from 8.45 a.m. to 2 p.m., 

then moved laterally, and from 3 to 6 p.m. 
descended ; whereas cotyledons which have been exjxjsed all 
the day to the light rise in the evening so as to stand verti- 
cally at night; but this statement applies only to young 
seedlings. For instance, six seedlings in the greenhouse had 
their cotyledons partially open for the first time on the morning 
of Noveml)er 15th, and at 8.45 r.M. all were completely closed, 
so that they might properly be said to be asleep. Again, on the 
morning of November 27th, the cotyledons of four other seedlings, 
which were Rurroundod by a collar of brown paper so that they 
received light only from above, were open to the extent of 
89°; at 10 p.m. they were completely closed; next morning 
(November 28tli) at 6.45 a.m., whilst H was still dark, two of them 



Betatu'garis: circum- 
nutation of hypo- 
cotyl, with filament 
fixed obliquely a- 
cross its summit, 
traced in darkness 
on horizontal glass, 
from 8.25 A.M. to 
5.30 P.M. Nov. 4th. 
Movement of bead 
magnified 23 times, 



uhap. l bicinus and QUERCUS. 58 

were partially open and all opened in the course of the morning ; 
but at 10.20 P.M. all four (not to mention nine others which 
had been open in the morning and six others on another occa- 
sion) were again completely closed. On the morning of the 
29th they were open, but at night only one of the four was 
closed, and this only partially; the three others had their 
cotyledons much more raised than during the day. On the 
night of the 30th the cotyledons of the four were only slightly 
rai^d. 

Ricinm Borhouiensis (Euphorbiaceae). - Seeds were purchased 
under the above name— probably a variety of the common castor- 
oil plant. As soon as an arched hypocotyl had risen clear above 
the ground, a filament was attached to the upper leg bearing the 
cotyledons which were still buried beneath the surface, and the 
movement of the bead was traced od a horizontal glass during 
a period of 34 h. The lines traced were strongly zigzag, and 
as the bead twice returned nearly parallel to its former course 
in two different directions, there could bo no doubt that the 
arched hypocotyl circumnutated. At the close of the 34 h. 
the upper part began to rise and straighten itself, dragging the 
cotyledons out of the groimd, so that the movements of the 
bead could no longer be traced on the glass. 

Querc'ts (American sp.) (Cupuliferapi). — Acorns of an American 
oak which had germinated at Kew were planted in a pot in 
the greenhouse. This transplantation checked their growth; 
but after a time one grew to a height of five inches, 
measured to the tips of the small partially unfolded leaves on 
the summit, and now looked vigorous. It consisted of six 
very thin internodes of unequal lengths. Considering these 
circumstances and the nature of the plant, we hardly expected 
that it would circumnutate ; but the annexed figure (Fig. 40) 
shows that it did so in a conspicuous manner, changing its 
course many times and travelling in all directions during the 
48 h. of observation. The figure seems to represent 5 or 6 
irregular ovals or ellipses. The actual amount of movement 
from side to side (excluding one great bend to the left) was 
about '2 of an inch ; but this was difficult to estimate, as owing 
to the rapid growth of the stem, the attached filament was 
much further from the mark beneath at the close than at the 
commencement of the observations. It deserves notice that the 
pot was placed in a north-east room within a deep box, the top 
of which was not at first covered up, so that the inside facing 



54 



CIKCUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. L 



tho windows was a little more illimiinated than the opposite 
side; and during the first morning tho stem travelled to a 
greater distance in this direction (to the left in the figure) than 
it did afterwards when the box was completely protected from 

light 

Fig. 40. 




Quercus (AinericaD sp.) : circum nutation of young stem, traced on hori- 
zontal glass, from 12.50 p.m. Feb. 22nd to 12.50 p.m. 24th. Movement 
of bead gieatly magnified at 6rst, but slightly towards the close of the 
obseryations — about 10 times on an average. 

Querctm robur. — Observations were made only on the move- 
ments of the radicles from germinating acorns, which were allowed 
to grow downwards in the manner previously described, over 
plates of smoked glass, inclined at angles between 65° and 69° 
to the horizon. In four cases the tracks left were almost straight, 
but the tips had pressed sometimes with more and sometimes 
with loss force on the glass, as shown by the varying thickness 
of the tracks and by little bridges of soot left Ewross them. 
In the fifth case the track was slightly serpentine, that is, the 
tip had moved a little from side to side. In the sixth case 
(Fig. 41, A) it was plainly serpentine, and the tip had pressed 
almost equably on the glass in its whole course. In the seventh 
case (B) the tip had moved both laterally and had pressed 



Chap. I. QUEBCUS AND CORYLUS. 55 

alternately with unequal force on the glass; so that it had 
moved a little in two planes at right angles to one another. In 
the eighth and last case (C) it had moved very little JateraUy, 
but had alternately left the glass and come into contact with it 
again. There can be no doubt that in the last four cases the 
ladicle of the oak circumnutated whilst growing downwarda. 

Fig. 41. 



B C 

Qwrctu rofmr: tracks left on inclined smoked glass-plates by tips of 
radicles in growing downwards. Plates A and C inclined At 65° and 
plate B at 68° to the horizon. 

Corylus aveUana (Cory lacese).— The epicotyl breaks through 
the ground in an arched form ; but in the specimen which was 
first examined, Mie apex had become decayed, and the epicotyl 
grew to some distance through the soil, in a tortuous, almost 
horizontal direction, like a root. In consequence of this injury 
it had emitted near the hypogean cotyledons two secondary 
shoots, and it was remarkable that both of these were arched, 
like the normal epicotyl in ordinary cases. The soil was removed 
from around one of these arched secondary shoots, and a glass 
filament was affixed to the basal leg. The whole was kept 
damp beneath a metal-box with a glass lid, and was thus illumi- 
nated only from above. Owing apparently to the lateral pressure 
of the earth being removed, the terminal and bowed-down part 
of the shoot began at once to move upwards, so that after 
24 h. it formed a right angle with the lower part. This lower 
part, to which the filament was attached, also straightened 
itself, and moved a little backwards from the upper port. Con- 
sequently a long line was traced on the horizontal glass ; and 

D 



M 



CIRCUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. I. 



Fig. 42. 



this was in parts straight and in parts decidedly zigzag, 

indicating circumnutation. 
On the following day the other secondary shoot was observed ; 

it was a little more advanced in age, for the upper part, instead 

of depending vertically downwards, 
stood at an angle of 45° above the 
horizon. The tip of the shoot pro- 
jected obliquely '4 of an inch above 
the jground, but by the close of our 
observations, which lasted 47 li., it 
had grown, chiefly towards its basej 
to a height of '85 of an inch. Tho 
filament was fixed transversely to 
the basal and almost upright half 
of the shoot, close beneath the lowest 
scale-like appendage. The circum- 
nutating course pursued is shown 

Corylus avellana: circumnuta- in the accompanying figure (Fig. 
tion of .1 young shoot emitted 42). The actual distance traversed 
^/™J^u l^Tv^^' ^^^' *P? from side to side was about '04 of 

of which had been iniured, . , 

an inch. 

Pinus pinaster (Conifersfr). — A 
young hypocotyl, with the tips 
of the cotyledons still enclosed 
within the seed-coats, was at first 
only -35 of an inch in height; but the upper part grew so 
rapidly that at the end of our observations it was • 6 in height, 




\ 



traced on a horizontal glass, 
from 9 A.M. Feb. 2nd to 8 
A.M. 4th. Movement ol 
bead magnified about 27 
times. 



Fig. 43 





Pinue pinaster : circumnutation of hypocotyl, with filament fixed across it? 
summit, traced on horizontal glass, from 10 A.M. March 21st to 9 A.M. 
23rd. Seedling kept in darliness. Movement of bead magnified abcu* 
85 times. 



Chap. L PINUS AND CYCAS. 67 

and by this time the filament was attciched some way down the 
little stem. From some unknown cause, the hypocotyl moved 
far towards the left, but there could be no doubt (Fig. 43) that 
it drcnmnutated. Another hypoootyl was similarly observed, 
and it likewise moved in a strongly zigzag line to the same side. 
This lateral movement was not caused by the attachment of 
the glass filaments, nor by the action of light ; for no light was 
allowed to enter when each observation was made, except from 
vertically above. 

The bypocotyl of a seedling was secured to a little stick ; it 
bore nine in appearance distinct cotyledons, arranged in a circle. 
The movements of two nearly opposite ones were observed. The 
tip (rf one was painted white, with a mark placed below, and the 
figure described (Fig. 44, A) shows that it made an irregular 

Fig. 44. 





Pinus pinaster: circumnutation of two opposite cotyledons, traced on 
horizonUl glass in darkness, from 8.45 A.M. to 8.35 p.m. Nov. 25tli. 
Movement of tip in A magnified about 22 times, here reduced to one- 
half of original scale. 

circle in the course of about 8 h. During the night it 
travelled to a considerable distance in the direction indicated 
by the broken line. A glass filament was attached longitu- 
dinally to the other cotyledon, and this nearly completed 
(Fig. 44, B) an irregular circular figure in about 12 hours. 
During the night it also moved to a considerable distance, in 
the direction indicated by the broken line. The cotyledons 
therefore circimmutate independently of the movement of the 
hypocotyl. Although they moved much during the night, they 
did not approach each other so as to stand more vertically thao 
during the day. 



58 CJRCTJMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Ohap. L 

Cycas pedinafa (Cycade»). — The large seeds of this plant in 
genuinating first protrude a single leaf, which breaks through 
the ground with the petiole bowed into an arch and with the 
leaflets iuTolutod. A leaf in this condition, which at the close 
of our observations was 2i inches in height, had its movements 
traced in a warm greenhouse by means of a glass filament 
bearing paper triangles attached across its tip. The tracing 
(Fig. 45) SiiOws how large, c(»nplex, and rapid were the circum- 

Fig. 45. 




C^cas p^inata : circnmDtitatioii of young leaf whilst emerging from the 
groiiod, feebly illuminated from above, traced on vertical glass, from 
b F.M. May 28th to 11 a.m. 31st. Movement magnified 7 times, here 
re<'viz<d to tvro-thirds of original scale. 

nutfttiiig movements. The extreme distance from side to side 
which it passed over amounted to between '6 and '7 of an 
inch, 

C'a/t/«^ Warsceioiczii (Cannaceje).— A seedling with the plu- 
mule projecting one inch above the ground was observed, but 
not under fair conditions, as it was brought out of the hot- 
hoiijfo and kept in a room not sufficiently warm. Nevertheless 
tlio tracing (Fig. 46) shows that it made two or three incom- 
plete irregular circles or ellipses in the course of 48 hours. The 
|4umule i« straight ; and this was the first instance observed 



CuAP. L 



A1.LIUH. 



59 



by us of the part that first breaks through the ground liot 
being arched. 

Fig 46. 




Camna Wardoewiczii : circunimitation of pluiniil« with filament atfixo*! 
obliquely to outer sheath-like leaf, traced in darkoess onhorizontal glias 
from 8.45 a.m. Kov. 9U) tu 8.1U a.m. 11th. Movement of bead luag- 
QiHed 6 times. 

AUinm cepa (Liliacea)).— The narrow green leaf, whieb pro- 
trudes from the seed of the comiuon onion as a cotyledon.* 
breaks through the ground in the form of an anh, in the same 
manner as the hypocotyl or epicotyl of a dicotyledonous plant. 
Long after the arch has risen above the surface the apex 
remains within the seed-codts, evi.iently absorbing the still 
abundant contents. The summit or cruwn of the arch, when 
it first protrudes from the seed and is still buried l)eneath the 
ground, is simply rounded; but before it reaches the surface 
it is developed into a conical protuberance of a white colour 
(owing to the absence of chlorophyll), whilst the adjoining parts 
are green), with the epidermis apparently rather thicker and 
tougher than elsewhere. We may therefore conclude that this 
conical protuberance is a special adaptation for bi-eaking through 
the ground,t and answers the same end as the knife-like white 
crest on the sunmiit of the straight cotyledon of the Graminea). 



* This is the expression used 
by Sachs in his * Text-book of 
Botany.' 

t Haberlandt has briefly de- 
Boribed (*Die Scliutzoiniiohtun- 
gen . . . Keirnpflanze/ 1877, p. 77) 
this curious struct uro and the 



purpose which it subserves. He 
fatates that good figures of the 
cotyledon of the oniou I avu Ijeen 
given by Tiitmann and by Saciis 
iu hilt * Experiiucutal Physiologie,' 
p. m. 



60 



CIRCUMXUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. 



Chap, t 



After a time the apex is drawn out of the empty seed-coats, 
and rises up, forming a right angle, or more commonly a still 
larger angle with the lower part, and occasionnlly the whole 
becomes nearly straight. The conical protuberance, wliich 
originally formed the crown of the arch, is now seated on one 
side, and appears like a joint or knee, which from acquiring 
chlorophyll becomes green, and increases in size. In rarely or 
never becoming perfectly straight, these cotyledons differ remark- 
ably from the ultimate condition of the archc-«i hypocotyls or 
epicotyls of dicotyledons. It is, also, a singular circumstance 
that the attenuated extremity of the upper bent portion 
invariably withers and dies. 

A filament, 1'7 inch in length, was affixed nearly upright 
beneath the knee to the basal and vertical portion of a 

cotyledon; and its movements were 
Fig. 47. traced during 14 h. in the usual manner. 

The t^-acing here given (Fig. 47) indi- 
cates circumnutation. The movement of 
the upper part above the knee of the Fame 
cotyledon, which projected at about an 
angle of 45° above the horizon, was 
observed at the same time. A filament, 
was not affixed to it, but a mark ^ 
placed benc'ith the apex, which 
almost white from beginning to w 
and its movements were thus traoecL 'J 
AUiumcepi: circ»m»n- figure descril^ed lescmbled pretty 

tation of b.isal half that above pi ven ; and this shows 
of arched cotvlcdon, v- *. i i. x • • xt_ i 

i .« .^A ;« ^o^w«^ .» «« chief seat of movement is in the ios : 

bcnced m darkness on 

iiorjzontal glass, from basal part of the cotyledon. 

8.15 a.m. to 10 P.M. Aspiragtts officinalis (AsparagesB).— 

Oct. 3i8t. Movement rpj^^ ^- ^^ ^ straight plumule or cotyledon 

about 17 times. (fo^ we do not know which it should be 

called) was found at a depth of *! inch 
l)ent'ath the surface, and the earth was then removed all round 
to the depth of 3 inch. A glass filament was affixed obliquely to 
it, and the movement of the bead, magnified 17 times, was traced 
in darkness. During the first 1 h. 15 m. the plumule moved to 
the right, and during the next two hours it returned in a roughly 
parallel but strongly zigzag course. From some unknown cause 
it had gn>wn up through the soil in an inclined direction, and 
now through apogeotropism it moved during nearly 24 h. in 




Chaj>. 1 



ASPABAGUS. 



61 



the same general direction, but in a slightly zigzag manner, 
until it became upright. On the following morning it changed 
its course completely. There can therefore hardly be a doubt 
that the plumule circumnutates, whilst buried beneath the 
ground, as much as the pressure of the surrounding earth will 
permit. The surface of the soil in the pot was now covered with 
a thin layer of very fine argillaceous sand, which was kept damp; 
and after the tapering seedlings had grown a few tenths of 
an inch in height, each was found surrounded by a little open 
space or circular crack ; and this could be accounted for only by 
their having circumnutated and thus pushed away the sand on 
all sides ; for there was no vestige of a crack in any other part. 
In order to prove that there was circumnutation, the move- 
Fig. 4S. 





A. B. 

Asparagus officinalis : circumnutation of plumules with tips whitened and 
marks placed beneath, traced on a Horizontal glass. A, young plumule ; 
' movement traced from 8.30 a.m. Nov. 30th to 7.15 A.M. next morning ; 
magnified about 35 times. B, older plumule ; movement traced from 
10.15 A.M. to 8.10 P.M. Nov. 29th ; magnified 9 times, but here reduced 
to one-half of original scale. 

ments of five seedlings, varying in height from 3 inch to 2 inches, 
were traced. They were placed within a box and illuminated 
from above; but in all five cases the longer axes of the fignras 
described were directed to nearly the same ]X)int ; so that more 
light seemed to have come through the glass roof of the green- 
house on one side than on any other. All five tracings re- 
sembled each other to a certain extent, and it will suffice to give 
two of them. In A (Fig. 48) the seedling was only '45 of an 



62 CIBCUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap, t 

inch in height, and consisted of a single intemode bearing a 
bud on its summit. The apex described between 8.30 a.m. and 
10.20 P.M. (i.e. during nearly 14 hours) a figure which would 
probably have consisted of 3j ellipses, hai not the stem been 
drawn to one side until 1 p.m., after which hour it moved back- 
wards. On the following morning it was not far distant from 
the point whence it had first started. 'J'he actual amount of 
movement of the apex from side to side was very small, viz. 
about jiffth of an inch. The seedling of which the movements 
are shown in Fig. 48, B, was If inch in height, and consisted of 
three inter nodes besides the bud on the summit. The figure, 
which was described during 10 h., apparently represents two 
irregular and unequal ellipses or circles. The actual amount of 
movement of the apex, in the line not influenj'od by the light, was 
•11 of an inch, and in that thus influen'^ed '37 of an inch. With 
a seedling 2 inches in height it was obvious, even without the 
aid of any tracing, that the uppermost part of the stem bent 
snc'essively to alt points of the compass, like the stem of a 
twining plant. A little increase in the power of circumnutating 
and in the flexibility of the stem, would convert the common 
asparagus into a twining plant, as has occurred with one speciefi 
in thisgenus, namely, A. scandena, 

Fhaluris Canarkusifi (Graminaii). — With the Graminead the 
part which first rises abovo the ground has been called by some 
authors the pileole; and various views have been expressed on 
its homological nature. It is considered by some great anthoti- 
ties to be a cotyledon, which term we will use with mt veotaring 
to express any opinion on the suhject.* It consists io the 
present case of a slightly flattened reddish sheath, teriuinating 
upwards in a sharp white edge; it mclo-es a true green leaf, 
whijh protrudes from the sheath through a slit-like orifice, 
close beneath and at right angles to the sharp edure on the 
summit The sheath is not arched when it breaks tlirough the 
gmund. 

The movements of three rather old see<Uifigs, alx)ut li inch 
in height, shortly before the protrusion of the leaves, were fir^t 
traced. They were illuminated exc usively from above; for, jis 
will hereafttr be shown, they are excessively sensitive to the 



• We arc indebted to t)»e Wpv. this suhjeet, togothor with f^ 
G. H. nslow for hii Hbstnict of the fereuces. 
views wUich have been lield oa 



CliAP. L 



PHALARIS. 



OS 



Fig. 49 




mark placed below the apex, 
traced on a horizontal glass, 
from 8.35 a.m. Nov. 2e)th to 
8.45 a.m. 27th. Movement of 
apex magnifi'd 7 tiine&, here 
reduced to one-half scale. 



action of light ; and if any enters even temporarily on one side, 
they merely bend to this side in slightly zigzag linQs. Of the three 
tracings one alone (Fig. 49) is here given. Had the observations 
l)een moie frequent diiriog the 12 h. 
two oval figures would have been 
de8crilied with their longer axes at 
right angles to one another. Ihe 
actual amount of movement of the 
apex from fide to side was about 
*3 of an inch. Tlie figures described 
by the other two seedlings resembled 
to a ceitain exttnt the one here 
given. 
A seedling which had just broken 

through the ground and projected ^'^Z o^T^utot wUb"; 
only ^th of an inch above the 
surface, was next observed in the 
same manner as before. It was 
necessary to clear away the earth 
all round the seedling to a little 
depth in order to place a mark 

beneath the apex. The figure (Fig. 50) shows that the apex 
moved to one side, but changed its coarse ten times in the 
coarse of the ten hours of observa- 
tion ; 8o that there can be no doubt 
about its circumnutation. The 
caose of the general movement 
in one direction could hardly be 
attributed to the entrance of 
lateral light, as this was carefully 
guarded against ; and we suppose 
it was in some manner connected 
with the removal of the earth 
round the little set dling. 

Lastly, the soil in the same pot 
was searched with the aid of a 
lens, and the white knife-like apex 
ofaspcdling was found on an exact 
level with that of the surrounding 
surface. The soil was removed all round the apex to tlie depth 
of a quarter of an inch, the seed itself remaining covered. The 
pot, j)rotect4Ki from lateral light, was placed under the micro- 



?w. 50. 




Pli'laris ^anariensls : circumnu- 
tation of a very young coty- 
ledon, with a mark placed 
below the apex, tracecl on a 
horizontal glass, from 11.37 
A.M. to 9.30 P.M. Dec. 13th. 
Movement of apex greatly 
magnified, here reduced to 
one-foi.rth of original scale. 



64 



CIRCUMXUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. L 



scope with a micrometer eye-piece, so arranged that each 
division equal le^l R^th of an inch. After an interval of 30 m. 
tiie apex was observed, and it was seen to cross a little obliquely 
two divisions of the micrometer in 9 m. 15 s. ; and after a few 
minutes it crossed the same space in 8 m. 50 s. The seedling 
was again observed after an intervalof three-quarters of an hour, 
and now the apex crossed rather obliquely two divisions in 10 m. 
We may therefore conclude that it was travelling at about the 
rate of -gigth of an inch in 45 minutes. We may also conclude 
from these and the previous observations, that the seedlings of 
Phalaris in breaking through the surface of the soil circum- 
nutate as much as the surrounding pressure will permit. This 
fact accounts (as in the case before given of the asparagus) for 
a circular, narrow, open space or crack being distinctly visible 
round several seedlings which had risen through very fino 
argillaceous sand, kept uniformly damp. 
Zea mays (Gramineae). — A glass filament was fixed obliquely 

to the summit of a cotyledon. 
Fig. 51, rising 2 of an inch above the 

ground ; but by the third morn- 
ing it had grown to exactly 
thrice this height, so that the 
distance of the bead from the 
mark below was greatly in- 
creiised, consequently the trac- 
ing (Fig. 51) was much more 
magnified on the first than on 
the second day. The upper 
part of the cotyledon changed 
its course by at least as much 
Zea mays : circumnutation of cotyle- as a rectangle six times on each 

doDjtraced on horizontal glass, from of the two days. The plant 

8 30 A.M Feb 4th to 8 a.m. 6th. ^^^ illuminated by an obscure 

Movemeut ot beau magnineu on an ,. , ^ . n 

average about 25 times. llg^^t ^^om vertically above. 

This was a necessary precau- 
tion, as on the previous day we had traced the movements of 
cotyledons placed in a deep box, the inner side of which was 
feebly illuminated on one side from a distant north-east window, 
and at each observation by a wax taper held for a minuto or 
two on the same side ; and the result was that the cotyledon •< 
travelled all day long to this side, though making in their course 
some couspicuous fiexmes, from which fact alone we might havo 




Chap. I. PHALARI8 65 

concluded that they were circumnutating; but wo thought it 
advisable to make the tracing above given. 

Eadicles. — Glass filaments were fixeJ to two short radicles, 
placed so as to stand almost upright, and whilst bending down- 
wards through geotropism their courses were strongly zigzag ; 
from this latter circumstance circumnutation might have been 
inferred, had not their tips become slightly withered after the 
first 24 h., though they were watered and the air kept very 
damp. Nine radicles were next arranged in the manner 
formerly described, so that in growing downwards they left 
tracks on smoked glass- plates, inclined at various angles between 
45"^ and 80^ beneath the horizon. Almost every one of these 
tracks offered evidence in their greater or less breadth in dif- 
ferent parts, or in little bridges of soot being 
left, that the apex had come alternately into Fig. 52. 

more and less close contact with the glass. In 
the accompanying figure (Fig. 52) we have 
an accurate copy of one such track. In two 
instances alone (and in these the plates were 
highly inclined) there was some evidence of 
slight lateral movement. We presume therefore 
that the friction of the apex on the smoked 
surface, little as this could have been, sutficed 
to check the movement from side to side of these ^ , , 

Zea viai/s: track 

delicate radicles. left on incliued 

Avena safiua (Gramineae). — A cotyledon, I2 smoked glass- 
inch in height, was placed in front of a north- Pj.*^® ,'^J; ^'P 

. . J 1 XI. i. r J.T- of radicle in 

east wmdow, and the movement of the apex growing down- 
was traced on a horizontal glass during two wards. 
days. It moved towards the light in a slightly 
zigzag line from 9 to 11.30 a.m. on October 15th ; it then moved 
a little backwards and zigzagged much until 5 p.m., after which 
hour, and during the night, it continued to m'lve towards the 
window. On the foll(twing morning the same movement was 
continued in a nearly straight line until 12.40 p.m., when the sky 
remained until 2.35 extraordinarily dark from thunder- clouds. 
During this interval of 1 h. 55 m., whilst the light was obscure, 
it was interesting to observe how circumnutation overcame 
heliotropism, for the apex, instead of continuing to move towards 
the window in a slightly zigzag line, reversed its course four 
times, making two small narrow ellipses. A diagram of this case 
will l)e given in the chapter on Heliotropism. 




66 CIKCUMNUTATION OF SEEDLINGS. Chap. I. 

A filament was next fixed to a cotyledoa only i of an inch in 
height, which was illuminated exclusively from above, and as 
it was kept in a warm greenhouse, it grew rapidly ; and now 
there could lie no doubt about its circumnutation. for it described 
a figure of 8 as well as two small ellips^es in 5i hours. 

Nephrodium moUe (Filioes). — A seedling fern of this species 
fig. 53. came up by chance in a flower- 

pot near its parent. The frond, 
as yet only slightly lobed, was 
only -16 of an inch in length and 
•2 in breadth, and was supported 
on a rachis as fine as a hair 
and '23 of an inch in height. A 
very thin glaf^« filament, which 
projected fur a length of '36 of 
an inch, was fixed to the end of 
the frond. The movement was 

;ir«pAro<tt«/n nK)/fe ; circamnutation g^ j^^jj, magi^jfied that the 
of very young frond, traced in /. • to ^ ^ - ,» 

darkness on horizouul glass, figure ( H ig. 53; cannot be fully 

from 9 A M. to 9. P.M. Oct. 30th. trusted ; but the frond was 

Movement of bead magnified 48 constantly moving in a compltx 

*™^'*' manner, and the bead greatly 

changed its course eighteen times in the 12 liours of observation. 

Within half an hour it often returned in a line almost parallel 

to its former course. The greatest amount of movement occurred 

between 4 and G r.ii. The circumnuta- 

Fig. 54. tion of this plant is interesting, liecause 

T — ^ the species in the genus Lygodium are 

J ^^v well known to circumnutale conspicuously 

^^ ^t^ and to twine round any neighbouring 

^'^N^^^J^V^X object 

Sclaginella Kravssii (?) : SehifjineUa Kraussii (?) (LycopodiaceSB). 

circumnutation of — A very joung plant, only '4 of an inch 

young plant, kept in jn height, had spruhg up in a pot in the 

darkness, triced fr:)m i i. i » j. « /» i «i 

8.45 a.m. to 10 PM. hot-house. An extremely fine glass fila- 

Oct. 31st. ment was fixed to the end of the frond- 

like stem, and the movement of the bead 
traced on a horizontal glass. It changed its course several 
times, as shown in Fig. 54, whilst observed during 13 h. 15 m., 
and returned at night to a point not far distant from tliat 
whence it had started in the morning. There can be no doubt 
ihat this little plant circumnutated 



CiiAP. n. OIBCUMNUIAXION OF SEESI.INQS. 67 



CHAPTEE n. 

GnriBAL G0NBIDERAT10N8 ON THE Movements and Grotttb or 

Seedling Plants. 

Generality of the circumimtating movement— Radicles, their cjrcum- 
notation of service — MaDner in which they penetrate the ground — 
Manner in which hypocotyls and other organs break through the 
ground by being arched — Singular manner of germination in Megar- 
rhiza, &c. — Abortion of cotyledons— Circumiiutation of hypocotyls 
and epicotyls whilst still buiied and arched — Their power of 
fetraightening themselves — Bursting of the seed-coats— Inherited 
effect of the arching process in hypogean hypocotyls— Circumnuta- 
tion of hypocotyls and epicotyls when erect — Ciicumnutation of 
cotyledons — Pulvini or joints of cotyledons, duration of their 
activity, rudimentary in Oxalis corniculata, their development — 
Sensitiveness of c >tyIcdons to light and consequent disturbance of 
their periodic movements— Sensitiveness of cotyledons to contact 

The circumnutating movements of the several paxts 
or organs of a considerable number of seedling plants 
have been described in the last chapter. A list is here 
appended of the Families, Cohorts, Sub-classes, &c.« 
to which they belong, arranged and numbered ac- 
cording to the classification adopted by Hooker.* 
Any one who will consider this list will see that the 
young plants selected for observation, fairly represent 
the whole vegetable series excepting the lowest 
cryptogams, and the movements of some of the latter 
when mature will hereafter be described. As all the 
seedlings which were observed, including ConiferS; 
Cycads and Ferns, which belong to the most ancient 



• As given in the ' (ieneral System of Botany,' by Le Maout and 
IVailsne, 1873. 



68 . CIKCUMNUTATIOX OF SEEDLINGS. Ck^. JL 

types amongst plants, were continually circuninu- 
tating, we may infer that this kind of movement is 
common to every seedling species. 

Sub-Kingdom I. — ^FliflBiiogamoiis Flantt. 

Class I.— DlCOTYLKDONB. 

Sub-class I — Angiosperma. 
Familv. Cohort. 

m 

14. CrucifercB. II. Parietales. 

26. CaryophyllecB, IV. Caryophtllalbbl 

36 MalvacecB. VI. Malyales. 

41. Oxalidew. VII. Geraniales. 

49. TropcBulecB, Ditto 

62. Aurantiacea:, Ditto 

70. HippocastanecB. X. Sapindales. 

75. Leguminosce. XI. Rosales. 

108. Cucurbit tceoB, XII. Passifloraleb. 

109. CactecB. XIV. Ficoidales. 
122. Composites. XVII. Astrales. 
135. Primulaceas. XX. Primulales. 
145. AsclepiaJccc. XXII. Obntianales. 
151. Convolvuiaccce. XXIII. Polemoniales. 
154. Borraginecc, Ditto 

156. NolanecB. Ditto 

157. SolanccB. XXIV. Solan ales. 
181. ChenopoliecB, XXVII. CiiENOiK)DiALEai 
202. Euphorbiacece. XXXII. Euphorbialegl 

211. Cupuliferce, XXXVI. Quernalbb. 

212. CorylacecB, Ditto 

Sub-class II. — Gymnosperms, 

223. ConifercB. 

224, CycadecB. 

Class II. — Monocotyledons. 

2. CannacecB. II. Amomaleil 

34. LiHacecB. XI. Liliales. 

41. AsparagccB. DiTTO 

55. GraminccB, XV. Glumalbb. 

Sub-King I'OM II. — Cryptcgamio Plants. 

1. Filices, I. FILICALE3. 

6. LycopodiacccB, DiTTO 



Chap. IL /LCTION OF THE RADICLE, fi9 

Badicles. — In all the germinating seeds observed 
by us, the first change is the protrusion of the 
radicle, which immediately bends downwards and 
endeavours to penetrate the ground. In order to 
ejBfect this, it is almost necessary that the seed should 
be pressed down so as to offer some resistance, unless 
indeed the soil is extremely loose ; for otherwise the 
seed is lifted up, instead of the radicle penetrating 
the surface. But seeds often get covered by earth 
thrown up by burrowing quadrupeds or scratching 
birds, by the castings of earth-worms, by heaps of 
excrement, the decaying branches of trees, &c., and 
will thus be pressed down ; and they must often fall 
into cracks when the ground is dry, or into holes. 
Even with seeds lying on the bare surface, the first 
developed root-hairs, by becoming attached to stones 
or other objects on the surface, are able to hold down 
the upper part of the radicle, whilst the tip pene- 
trates the ground. Sachs has shown* how well and 
closely root-hairs adapt themselves by growth to the 
most irregular particles in the soil, and become firmly 
attached to them. This attachment seems to be 
effected by the softening or liquefaction of the outer 
surface of the wall of the hair and its subsequent 
consolidation, as will be on some future occasion 
more fully described. This intimate union plays an 
important part, according to Sachs, in the absorption 
of water and of the inorganic matter dissolved in it. 
The mechanical aid afforded by the root-hairs in pene- 
trating the ground is probably only a secondary 
service. 

The tip of the radicle, as soon as it protrudes from 
the seed-coats, begins to circumnutate, and the whole 



• * Physiologic Vcgetalc,' 1868, pp. 199, 205. 



70 



ACTION C»F THE RADICLE. 



Obap. U 



growing part continues to do so, probably for as long 
as growth continues. This movement of the radicle 
has been described in Brassica, -^sculus, Phaseolus, 
Vicia, Cucurbita, Quercus and Zea. The probability 
of its occurrence was inferred by Sachs,* from radicles 
placed vertically upwards being acted on by geotro- 
pism (which we likewise found to be the case), for if 
they had remained absolutely perpendicular, the attrac- 
tion of gravity could not have caused them to bend to 
any one side. Circumnutation was observed in the above 
specified cases, either by means of extremely fine fila- 
ments of glass aflSxed to the radicles in the manner 
previously described, or by their being allowed to 
grow downwards over inclined smoked glass-plates, on 
which they left their tracks. In the latter cases the 
serpentine course (see Figs. 19, 21, 27, 41) showed 
unequivocally that the apex had continually moved 
from side to side. This lateral movement was small 
in extent, being in the case of Phaseolus at most 
about 1 mm. from a medial line to both sides. But 
there was also movement in a vertical plane at right 
angles to the inclined glass-plates. This was shown 
by the tracks often being alternately a little broader 
and narrower, due to the radicles having alternately 
pressed with greater and less force on the plates. 
Occasionally little bridges of soot were left across the 
tracks, showing that the apex had at these spots been 
lifted up. This latter fact was especially apt to occui 



* * Ueber das WacliBthum der 
Wiirzeln : Arbeiten das bot. In- 
9titul8 in Wiirzburg,* Heft iii. 
1873, p 4»;0 This nunw.ir, be- 
sides its iiitriubic and «;reat in- 
terest, des^Tvcs to be studied as a 
mcxlcl of careful iuve.sti Ration, 
and wo shall Itave occision to 
refer to it repeatedly. Dr. Fraids 



had previously remarked (*Bei 
tr'Hge zur Pflanzenphysiologie, 
18G8, p. 81) on the fact of radicles 
placed verticiilly upwards being 
uettd on by geotropism, and ho 
explflined it by the suppotfition 
that their grcwth was uot eqnaj 
on all sides. 



Chap. n. ACTION OF THE RADICLE. 71 

when the radicle instead of travelling straight down 
the glass made a semicircular bend; but Fig. 52 
shows that this may occur when the track is rectilinear. 
The apex by thus rising, was in one instance able to 
surmount a bristle cemented across an inclined glass- 
plate ; but slips of wood only :^q of an inch in thickness 
always caused the radicles to bend rectangularly to 
one side, so that the apex did not rise to this small 
height in opposition to geotropism. 

In those cases in which radicles with attached fila- 
ments were placed so as to stand up almost vertically, 
they curved downwards through the action of geotro- 
pism, circumnutating at the same time, and their 
courses were consequently zigzag. Sometimes^ how- 
ever, they made great circular sweeps, the lines being 
likewise zigzag. 

Iladicles closely surrounded by earth, even when 
this is thoroughly soaked and softened, may perhaps 
be quite prevented from circumnutating. Yet we 
should remember that the circumnutating sheath-like 
cotyledons of Phalaris, the hypocotyls of Solanum, 
and the epicotyls of Asparagus formed round them- 
selves little circular cracks or furrows in a superficial 
layer of damp argillaceous sand. They were also 
able, as well as the hypocotyls of Brassica, to form 
straight furrows in damp sand, whilst circumnutating 
ami bending towards a lateral light. In a future 
chapter it will be shown that the rocking or circum- 
nutating movement of the flower-heads of Trifolium 
suhterraneum aids them in burying themselves. It is 
therefore probable that the circumnutation of the tip 
of the radicle aids it slightly in penetrating the 
ground ; and it may be observed in several of the 
previously given diagrams, that the movement is 
more strongly pronounced in radicles when they first 



72 ACTION OF THE RADICLE. Obap. H 

protrudo fr')m the seed than at a rather later period ; 
but whether this is an accidental or an adaptiye 
coincidence we do not pretend to decide. Never- 
theless, when young radicles of Plta-sedus muUiflorus 
\^ere fixed vertically close over damp sand, in the 
exjjectation that as soon as they reached it they 
would form circular furrows, this did not occur, — a 
fact which may be accounted for, as we believe, by 
the furrow Ixiing filled up as soon as formed by the 
rapid increase of thickness in the apex of the radicle. 
Whether or not a radicle, when surrounded by soft- 
ened earth, is aided in- forming a passage for itself 
by circumnutating, this movement can hardly fail 
to be of high importance, by guiding the radicle 
ahmg a line of least resistance, as will be seen in the 
next chapter when we treat of the sensibility of the 
tip to contact. If, however, a radicle in its down- 
ward growth breaks obliquely into any crevice, or a 
hole left by a decayed root, or one made by the 
larva of an insect, and more especially by worms, the 
circumnutating movement of the tip will materially 
aid it in following such open passage ; and we have 
observed that roots commonly run down the old 
burrows of worms.* 

When a radicle is placed in a horizontal or inclined 
position, the terminal growing part, as is well known, 
bends down towards the centre of the earth; and 
Sachs t has shown that whilst thus bending, the growth 
of the lower surface is greatly retarded, whilst that 



* Sco.also, Prof. Hensen'sptnte- rovrs made by worms, 
ments (* Zeitsclnift fiir ^Vi8^^en, t ' Arbuiten des bot. Inst. 

Z«v)l.,' B. xxviii. p. .Sf)4. 1877) to Wurzburg/ vol. i. 1873, p. 461. 

the s.mie effect, lie pjoes so far See al>o p. H97 for the length of 

38 to believe that ro ts are able the growing part, and p. 451 oa 

to |>eiietrate tlic ground to a grwit the I'orce of geotropic-in. 
depth only by meaiiB of the bur- 



Chap. n. ACTION OF THE RADICLE. 73 

of the upper surface continues at the normal rate, 
or may be even somewhat increased. He has further 
shown by attaching a thread, running over a pulley, 
to a horizontal radicle of large size, namely, that 
of the common bean, that it was able to pull up a 
weight of only one gramme, or 15*4 grains. We may 
therefore conclude that geotropism does not give a 
radicle force sufficient to penetrate the ground, but 
merely tells it (if such an expression may be used) 
which course to pursue. Before we knew of Sachs' 
more precise observations we covered a flat surface of 
damp sand with the thinnest tin-foil which we could 
procure ('02 to -03 mm., or -00012 to -00079 of an inch 
in thickness), and placed a radicle close above, in sucli 
a position that it grew almost perpendicularly down- 
wards. When the apex came into contact with the 
polished level surface it turned at right angles and 
glided over it without leaving any impression ; yet 
the tin-foil was so flexible, that a little stick of soft 
wood, pointed to the same degree as the end of the 
radicle and gently loaded with a weight of only a 
quarter of an ounce (120 grains) plainly indented the 
tin-foil. 

Radicles are able to penetrate the ground by the 
force due to their longitudinal and transverse growth ; 
the seeds themselves being held down by the weight 
of the superincumbent soil. In the case of the bean 
the apex, protected by the root-cap, is sharp, and 
the growing part, from 8 to 10 mm. in length, is 
much more rigid, as Sachs has proved, than the part 
immediately above, which has ceased to increase in 
length. We endeavoured to ascertain the downward 
pressure of the growing part, by placing germinating 
beans between two small metal plates, the upper one 
of which Wiis loaded with a known weight ; and the 



74 ACTION OF THE RADICLE. Chap. It 

radicle was then allowed to grow into a narrow hole in 
wood, 2 or 3 tenths of an inch in depth, and closed at 
the bottom. The wood was so cut that the short space 
of radicle between the mouth of the hole and the 
bean could not bend laterally on three sides ; but it 
was impossible to protect the fourth side, close to 
the bean. Consequently, as long as the radicle con- 
tinued to increase in length and remained straight, 
the weighted bean would be lifted up after the tip 
had reached the bottom of the shallow hole. Beans 
thus arranged, surrounded by damp sand, lifted up a 
quarter of a pound in 24 h. after the tip of the 
radicle had entered the hole. With a greater weight 
the radicles themselves always became bent on the one 
unguarded side; but this probably would not have 
occurred if they had been closely surrounded on all 
sides by compact earth. There was, however, a 
possible, but not probable, source of error in these 
trials, for it was not ascertained whether the beans 
themselves go on swelling for several days after they 
have germinated, and after having been treated in 

the manner in which ours had been; 

'^' ^L ^^ namely, being first left for 24 h. in 

L q_ water, then allowed to germinate in 

J very damp air, afterwards placed over 

Outline of piece of the holc and almost surrounded by 

:n:i!i';'rttii •i-^'^p ^^^^^ ^^ ^ closed box. 

size) with a hole We succecdcd better in ascertaining 

the^ radicle ^U' a *'^^ foTce cxertcd trausvcrscly by these 
bean grew. Thick- radiclcs. Two wcrc SO placed as to 

uess of stick at ., iiii i • f,.i 

uarrow end '08 penetrate small holes made in little 

inch, at broad end sticks, OUC of which WaS CUt iuto the 

hoie*-i inX *" shape here exactly copied (Fig. 55). 

The short end of the stick beyond 
the hole was purposely split, but not the opposite 



Chap. II. 



ACTION OF THE RADICLE. 



76 



Fig. 56. 



end. As the wood was highly elastic, the split oi 
fissure closed immediately after being made. After 
six days the stick and bean were dug out of the damp 
sand, and the radicle was found to be much enlarged 
above and beneath the hole. The fissure, which was 
at first quite closed, was now open to a width of 
4 mm. ; as soon as the radicle was extracted, it imn^e- 
diately closed to a width of 2 mm. The stick was 
then suspended horizontally by 
a fine wire passing through the 
hole lately filled by the radicle, 
and a little saucer was sus- 
pended beneath to receive the 
weights ; and it required 8 lbs. 
8 ozs. to open the fissure to the 
width of 4 mm. — that is, the 
width before the root was ex- 
tracted. But the part of the 
radicle (only *! of an inch in 
length) which was embedded in 
the hole, probably exerted a 
greater transverse strain even 
than 8 lbs. 8 ozs., for it had split 
the solid wood for a length of 
rather more than a quarter of 
an inch (exactly •275 inch), and 

this fissure is shown in Fig. 55. Wooden pincers, kept closed by 

J., j.'1'j.i- * spiral brass spring, with a 

A second stick was tried in the hole (-U inch in diameter 

same manner with almost ex- 
actly the same result. 

We then followed a better 
plan. Holes were bored near 
the narrow end of two wooden clips or pincers (Fig. 56), 
kept closed by brass spiral springs. Two radicles in damp 
tand were allowed to grow through these holes. The 




and '6 inch in depth) bored 
through the narrow closed 
part, through which a radicle 
of a bean was allowed to 
grow. Temp. 50°-60° F. 



76 ACTION OF THE RADICLE. Chap. JI. 

pincers rested on glass-plates to lessen the friction from 
the sand. The holes were a little larger (viz. '14 inch) 
and considerably deeper (viz. -6 inch) than in the 
trials with the sticks; so that a greater length of a 
rather thicker radicle exerted a transverse strain. 
After 13 days they were taken up. The distance of 
two dots (see the figure) on the longer ends of the 
pincers was now carefully measured ; the radicles were 
then extracted from the holes, and the pincers of 
course closed. They were then suspended horizontally 
in the same manner as were the bits of sticks, and a 
weight of 1500 grams (or 3 lbs. 4 ozs.) was necessary 
with one of the pincers to open them to the same 
extent as had been effected by the transverse growth 
of the radicle. As soon as this radicle had slightly 
opened the pincers, it had grown into a jBattened form 
and liad escaped a little beyond the hole ; its diameter 
in one direction being 4*2 mm., and at right angles 
3*5 mm. If this escape and flattening could have 
been prevented, the radicle would probably have 
exerted a greater strain than the 3 lbs. 4 ozs. With 
the other pincers the radicle escaped still further 
out of the hole; and the weight required to open 
them to the same extent as had been effected by the 
radicle, was only 600 grams. 

With these facts before us, there seems little difiS- 
culty in understanding how a radicle penetrates the 
ground. The apex is pointed and is protected by 
the root-cap ; the terminal growing part is rigid, and 
increases in length with a force equal, as far as our 
observations can be trusted, to the pressure of at least 
a quarter of a pound, probably with a much greater 
force when prevented from bending to any side by the 
surrounding earth. Whilst thus increasing in length 
it increases in thickness, pushing away the damp 



Chap IL HYPOCOTYLS AND EPICOTYLS. 77 

earth on all sides, with a force of above 8 pounds in 
one case, of 3 pounds in another case. It was impos- 
sible to decide whether the actual apex exerts, relatively 
to its diameter, the same transverse strain as the parts 
a little higher up ; but there seems no reason to doubt 
that this would be the case. The growing part there- 
fore does not act like a nail when hammered into a 
board, but more like a wedge of wood, which whilst 
slowly driven into a crevice continually expands at 
the same time by the absorption of water; and a 
wedge thus acting will split even a mass of rock. 

Manner in which Kypocotyh, Epicotylsy dtc, rise up 
and break through the ground. — After the radicle has 
penetrated the ground and fixed the seed, the hypo- 
cotyls of all the dicotyledonous seedlings observed by 
us, which lift their cotyledons above the surface, break 
through the ground in the form of an arch. When 
the cotyledons are hypogean, that is, remain buried in 
the soil, the hypocotyl is hardly developed, and the 
epicotyl or plumule rises in like manner as an arch 
through the ground. In all, or at least in most of such 
cases, the downwardly bent apex remains for a time 
enclosed within the seed-coats. With Corylus avel- 
lena the cotyledons are hypogean, and the epicotyl 
is arched; but in the particular case described in 
the last chapter its apex had been injured, and it 
grew laterally through the soil like a root; and in 
consequence of this it had emitted two secondary 
shoots, which likewise broke through the ground as 
arches. 

Cyclamen does not produce any distinct stem, and 
only a single cotyledon appears at first ; * its petiole 



• This is the conHusion arrived considered by other botanists fli 

at by Dr. H. Gressner ('Bot. the first true leaf is really the 

Zeitung/ 1874, p. 837), who second cotyledon, whieliia greatly 

maintains that what has been delayed in its development. 



78 



HYPOCOTYLS, EPICOTYLS, ETC., Chap. It 




breaks tnrough the ground as an arch (Fig. 57). 

Abronia also has only a single fully 
developed cotyledon, but in this 
case it is the hypocotyl which first 
emerges and is arched. Abronia 
umhellata, however, presents this 
peculiarity, that the enfolded blade 
of the one developed cotyledon 
(with the enclosed endosperm) 
whilst still beneath the surface has 
its apex upturned and parallel to 
the descending leg of the arched 
hypocotyl ; but it is dragged 
out of the ground by the con- 
tinued growth of the hypocotyl, 
with the apex pointing downward. 
With Cycas pectinata the cotyledons are hypogean, 

and a true leaf first breaks 
through the ground with 
its petiole forming an 
arch. 

In the genus Acanthus 
the cotyledons are likewise 
hypogean. In A. mollis^ 
a single leaf first breaks 
through the ground with 
its petiole arched, and with 
the opposite leaf much less 
developed, short, straight, 
of a yellowish colour, and 

icanthua mollis: seedling, with th« >vith the pctiolc at first not 
s^Jc removed and t JTe radicles^cut half aS thick aS that of the 

off: r/, blade of first leaf begin- other. The Undeveloped 

nine to expand, with petiole still , „ . . x i i. x J 

partially arched; 6, second and leaf IS protected by Staud- 

oppoMte leaf, as yet very imper- j^^ beneath itS archcd fcl- 
f'ectlv developed ; c, hypogean o , ., . . . 

ooivrcdon on the opposite side. low ; and it IS an mstriic* 



Cyclamen Persicwn : 
seedling, figure en- 
larged : c, blade of 
cotyledon, not yet 
expanded, with arched 
petiole beginning to 
straighten itself; A, 
hypocotyl developed 
into a corm ; r, second- 
ary radicles. 



Fig. 58. 




CtaAP. n. BREAKING THROUGH THE GROUND. 79 

tive fact that it is not arched, as it has not to force 
for itself a passage through the ground. In the accom- 
panying sketch (Fig. 58) the petiole of the first leaf 
has already partially straightened itself, and the blade 
is beginning to unfold. The small second leaf ulti- 
mately grows to an equal size with the first, but this 
process is effected at very different rates in different 
individuals : in one instance the second leaf did not 
appear fully above the ground until six weeks after the 
first leaf. As the leaves in the whole family of the 
Acanthaceae stand either opposite one another or in 
whorls, and as these are of equal size, the great in- 
equality between the first two leaves is a singular fact. 
We can see how this inequality of development and 
the arching of the petiole could have been gradually 
acquired, if they were beneficial to the seedlings by 
favouring their emergence ; for with A. candelabrum^ 
spinosus, and latifolitis there was great variability in the 
inequality between the two first leaves and in the 
arching of their petioles. In one seedling of A, can- 
delabrum the first leaf was arched and nine times as 
long as the second, which latter consisted of a mere 
little, yellowish-white, straight, hairy style. In other 
seedlings the difference in length between the two 
leaves was as 3 to 2, or as 4 to 3, or as only -76 to 
• 62 inch. In these latter cases the first and taller leaf 
was not properly arched. Lastly, in another seedling 
there was not the least difference in size between the 
two first leaves, and both of them had their petioles 
straight ; their laminae were enfolded and pressed 
against each other, forming a lance or wedge, by 
which means they had broken through the ground. 
Therefore in different individuals of this same species 
of Acanthus the first pair of leaves breaks through 
the ground by two widely different methods ; and if 



80 HYPOCOTYLS, EPICOTiTLS, ETC., Qhap. H. 

either had proved decidedly advantageous or disad- 
vantageous, one of them no doubt would soon have 
prevailed. 

Asa Gray has described * the peculiar manner of ger- 
mination of three widely different plants, in which the 
hypocotyl is hardly at all developed. These were there- 
fore observed by us m relation to our present subject. 

Delphinium nudicaule. — The elongated petioles of 
the two cotyledons are confluent (as are sometimes 
their blades at the base), and they break through the 
ground as an arch. They thus resemble in a most 
deceptive manner a hypocotyl. At first they are 
solid, but after a time become tubular ; and the basal 
part beneath the ground is enlarged into a hollow 
chamber, within which the young leaves are developed 
without any prominent plumule. Externally root- 
hairs are formed on the confluent petioles, either a 
little above, or on a level with, the plumule. The 
first leaf at an early period of its growth and whilst 
within the chamber is quite straight, but the petiole 
soon becomes arched; and the swelling of this part 
(and probably of the blade) splits open one side of 
the chamber, and the leaf then emerges. The slit 
was found in one case to be 3*2 mm. in length, and 
it is seated on the line of confluence of the two 
petioles. The leaf .when it first escapes from the 
chamber is buried beneath the ground, and now an 
upper part of the petiole near the blade becomes 
arched in the usual manner. The second leaf comes 
out of the slit either straight or somewhat arched, but 
afterwards the upper part of the petiole, — certainly in 
gome, and we believe in all cases, — arches itself whilst 
forcing a passage through the soil. 



♦ • Botanical Text-Book,' 1879, p. 23. 



Chap. n. BREAKING THROUGH THE GROUND. 81 

Megarrhiza Californica. — The cotyledons of this 
Gourd never free themselves from the seed-coats and 
are hypogean. Their petioles are completely con- 
fluent, forming a tube which terminates downwards 
in a little solid point, consisting of a minute radicle 
and hypocotyl, with the likewise minute plumule 
enclosed within the base of the tube. This structure 
was well exhibited in an abnormal specimen, in which 
one of the two cotyledons failed to produce a petiole, 
whilst the other produced one consisting of an open 
semicylinder ending in a sharp point, formed of the 
parts just described. As soon as the confluent 
petioles protrude from the seed they bend down, as 
they are strongly geotropic, and penetrate the ground. 
The seed itself retains its original position, either 
on the surface or buried at some depth, as the case 
may be. If, however, the point of the confluent 
petioles meets with some obstacle in the soil, as 
appears to have occurred with the seedlings described 
and figured by Asa Gray,* the cotyledons are lifted 
up above the ground. The petioles are clothed with 
root-hairs like those on a true radicle, and they 
likewise resemble radicles in becoming brown when 
immersed in a solution of permanganate of potassium. 
Our seeds were subjected to a high temperature, and 
in the course of three or four days the petioles pene- 
trated the soil perpendicularly to a depth of from 
2 to 2J inches ; and not until then did the true 
radicle begin to grow. In one specimen which was 
closely observed, the petioles in 7 days after their 
first protrusion attained a length of 2| inches, and the 
radicle by this time had also become well developed. 
The plumule, still enclosed within the tube, was now 



♦ • American Journal of Science,' vol. xiv. 1877, p. 21 . 



62 



HYPOCOTYLS, EPICOTYLS, ETC., Ohap. H 



Fig. 58, A. 



•8 inch in length, and was quite straight ; but from 
having increased in thicki.ess it had just begun to 
Bplit open the lower part of the petioles on one side, 
along the line of their confluence. By the following 
morning the upper part of the plumule had arched 

itself into a right angle, and the 
convex side or elbow had thus been 
forced out through the slit. Here 
then the arching of the plumule 
plays the same part as in the case of 
the petioles of the Delphinium. As 
the plumule continued to grow, the 
tip became more arched, and in 
the course of six days it emerged 
through the 2^ inches of superin- 
cumbent soil, still retaining its 
arched form. After reaching the 
surface it straightened itself in the 
usual manner. In the accompany- 
ing figure (Fig. 58, A) we have a 
sketch of a seedling in this ad- 
vanced state of development; the 
surface of the ground being re- 
Megarrhiza Caiifornka : presented by the line G G. 

cSed fr^Ara'S ^'^^ germination of the seeds in 
reduced to one-half their uativc Califomian home pro- 

llVn s'-cd^oa't'st;: ceeds in a rather different manner. 
the two conHuent as WO infer from an interesting 

^co'lyi * a^nrld^de ; letter from Mr. Rattan, sent to us 
y, plumule; G G, ^y Prof. Asa Gray. The petioles 

surface of soil. . t i* .j j i»x 

protrude from the seeds soon after 
the autumnal rains, and penetrate the ground, generally 
in a vertical direction, to a depth of from 4 to even 
6 inches. They were found in this state by Mr. 
Rattan during the Christmas vacation, with the plu- 




Chap. II. BREAKING THROUGH THE GROUND. 83 

mules still enclosed within the tubes ; and he remarks 
that if the plumules had been at once developed and 
had reached the surface (as occurred with our seeds 
which were exposed to a high temperature), they 
Avould surely have been killed by the frost. As it is 
they lie dormant at some depth beneath the surface, 
and are thus protected from the cold ; and the root- 
liairs on the petioles would supply them with sufficient 
moisture. We shall hereafter see that many seedlings 
are protected from frost, but by a widely diflferent 
process, namely, by being drawn beneath the surface 
by the contraction of their radicles. We may, how- 
ever, believe that the extraordinary manner of germi- 
nation of Megarrhiza has another and secondary 
advantage. The radicle begins in a few weeks to 
enlarge into a little tuber, which then abounds with 
starch and is only slightly bitter. It would therefore 
be very liable to be devoured by animals, were it not 
protected by being buried whilst young and tender, at a 
depth of some inches beneath the surface. Ultimately 
it grows to a huge size. 

Ipomoea leptophylla, — In most of the species of this 
genus the hypocotyl is well developed, and breaks 
through the ground as an arch. But the seeds of the 
present species in germinating behave like those of 
Megarrhiza, excepting that the elongated petioles of 
the cotyledons are not confluent. After they have 
protruded from the seed, they are united at their 
lower ends with the undeveloped hypocotyl and un- 
developed radicle, which together form a point only 
about •! inch in length. They are at first highly 
geotropic, and penetrate the ground to a depth of 
rather above half an inch. The radicle then begins 
to grow. On four occasions after the petioles had 
grown for a short distance vertically downwards, the^ 



84 HYPOCOTYLS, EPICOTYLS, ETC^ Chap. IL 

were placed in a horizontal position in damp air in the 
dark, and in the course of 4 hours they again became 
curved vertically downwards, having passed through 
90° in this time. But their sensitiveness to geotropism 
lasts for only 2 or 3 days; and the terminal part 
alone, for a length of between '2 and '4 inch, is thus 
sensitive. Although the petioles of our specimens 
did not penetrate the ground to a greater depth than 
about J inch, yet they continued for some time to grow 
rapidly, and finally attained the great length of about 
3 inches. The upper part is apogeotropic, and there- 
fore grows vertically upwards, excepting a short 
portion close to the blades, which at an early period 
bends downwards and becomes arched, and thus 
breaks through the ground. Afterwards this portion 
straightens itself, and the cotyledons then free them- 
selves from the seed-coats. Thus we here have in 
different parts of the same organ widely different kinds 
of movement and of sensitiveness ; for the basal part 
is geotropic, the upper part apogeotropic, and a portion 
near tlie blades temporarily and spontaneously arches 
itself. The plumule is not developed for some little 
time ; and as it rises between the bases of the parallel 
and closely approximate petioles of the cotyledons, 
which in breaking through the ground have formed an 
almost open passage, it does not require to be arched and 
is consequently always straight. Whether the plumule 
remains buried and dormant for a time in its native 
country, and is thus protected from the cold of winter, 
we do not know. The radicle, like that of the. Megar- 
rhiza, grows into a tuber-like mass, which ultimately 
attains a gn^at size. So it is with Iponioea pandurata^ 
the germination of which, as Asa Gray informs us, 
ror^embles that of I. hptophyUa, 

The following case is interesting in connection with 



Chap, n BREAKING THROUGH THE GROUND. 85 

the root-like nature of the petioles. The radicle of a 
seedling was cut oflf, as it was completely decayed, 
and the two now separated cotyledons were planted. 
They emitted roots from their bases, and continued 
green and healthy for two months. The blades of 
both then withered, and on removing the earth the 
bases of the petioles (instead of the radicle) were 
found enlarged into little tubers. Whether these 
would have ha<l the power of producing two in- 
dependent plants in the following summer, we do not 
know. 

In Qixercus virens, according to Dr. Engelmann,* 
both the cotyledons and their petioles are confluent. 
The latter grow to a length "of an inch or even 
more ; " and, if we understand rightly, penetrate the 
ground, so that they must be geotropic. The nutri- 
ment within the cotyledons is then quickly transferred 
to the hypocotyl or radicle, which thus becomes 
developed into a fusiform tuber. The fact ot 
tubers being formed by the foregoing three widely 
distinct plants, makes us believe that their protection 
from animals at an early age and whilst tender, is one 
at least of the advantages gained by the remark- 
able elongation of the petioles of the cotyledons, 
together with their power of penetrating the ground 
like roots under the guidance of geotropism. 

The following cases may be here given, as they bear 
on our present subject, though not relating to seed- 
lings. The Hower-stem of the parasitic Lathrma 
squamaria, which is destitute of true leaves, breaks 
through the ground as an arch ;t so does the flower- 

* * Transact. St. Louis Acad. ground cannot fail to be pn'entl^ 

6c enoti." vol. iv. p. 190. facilitated by the extra- 'rdinary 

t The pafHiiiC of the flower- iiuantity of water secrettd at. thii 

Btou ol the Lutlirica throu^jh the p» riod of the year by the subler^ 



86 



HYPOCOTYLS. EPICOTYLS, ETO^ Chap. XL 



stem of the parasitic and leafless Monotropa hypopitys. 
With Helleborus uiger, the flower-stems, which rise up 
independently of the leaves, likewise break through 
the ground as arches. This is also the case with the 
greatly elongated flower-stems, as well as with the 
petioles of Epimedium pinnatum. So it is with the 
petioles of Ranunculus Jicaria, when they have to break 
through the ground, but when they arise from the 
summit of the bulb above ground, they are from the 
first quite straight ; and this is a fact which deserves 
notice. The rachis of the bracken fern (Fieris aqui- 
Una), and of some, probably many, other ferns, like- 
wise rises above ground under the form of an arch. 
No doubt other analogous instances could be found by 
careful search. In all ordinary cases of bulbs, rhizomes, 



ranean scale-liko leaves : not that 
there is any reason t.a suppose 
that the secretion is a special 
adaptation for this purpose : it 
probably follows from the yrcat 
quantity of sap absorbed in the 
early spring by the parasitic roots. 
After a long period without a-iy 
rain, the earth had become lighr- 
coloured and very dry, but it was 
dark coloured nnd damp, even in 
jiarts quite w«t. for a distance of 
at Ica^t six inches all round each 
flower-stem. The water is secreted 
by glands (tlcscribed by Cohn, 
* Bericlit. Bot. Sect, der Solile- 
fe^iscuen Gesell.,* 1876, p. 118) 
which line the longitndi ml 
cbannels running througli e i<;li 
scale-like leaf. A large plmt was 
dug up, washed so as to remove 
the earth, left lor some lime to 
drain, and then placed in tiie 
evening on a dry glB8s-[)late, 
covered with a bell-gin ss, and l\y 
next morning it I a I secreted a 
large pool of water. The pi te 
was wiped dry, and in the course 
of the succeLdina: 7 or 8 hours 



another little pool was secreted, 
and nfter 16 additional hours 
several large drops. A tmallt r 
plant was washed and placed in a 
large jar, which was left inclined 
for an hour, by which time no 
more water drained off. The jar 
was then placed upright and 
closed : after 23 hours twodmchms 
of water were <ollected from the 
bottom, and a little more after 25 
ad'litional hours. The flower- 
stems were now cut off, for they 
do not secrete, and the subter- 
ranean part of the plant was found 
to weigh 106-8 gr.ims (1611 
grains), and the water serr ted 
during the 48 hours wei.diod 
119 grams (1>3 grains) — that is, 
one-ninth of the whole weight of 
the plant, excluding the fl »wer- 
stems. We should rememb r that 
j)lants in a state of nature would 
jn-obably ^ecrete in 48 hours much 
njore than the above large amount, 
for rlieir roots would continue all 
the time absorbing sap from the 
pUmt on which they were pank 
sitio. 



Chap. n. BREAKING THROUGH THE GROUND. 87 

root-stocks, &c., buried beneath the ground, the surface 
is broken by a cone formed by the young imbricated 
leaves, the combined growth of which gives them ibrce 
suflScient for the purpose. 

With germinating monocotyledonous seeds, of 
which, however, we did not observe a large number, 
the plumules, for instance, those of Asparagus and 
Canna, are straight whilst breaking through the ground. 
With the GraminesB, the sheath-like cotyledons are 
likewise straight ; they, however, terminate in a sharp 
crest, which is white and somewhat indurated ; and this 
structure obviously facilitates their emergence from 
the soil : the first true leaves escape from the sheath 
through a slit beneath the chisel-like apex and at 
right angles to it. In the case of the onion {Allium 
cepa) we again meet with an arch ; the leaf-like coty- 
ledon being abruptly bowed, when it breaks through 
the ground, with the apex still enclosed within the 
seed-coats. The crown of the arch, as previously 
described, is developed into a white conical pro- 
tuberance, which we may safely believe to be a 
special adaptation for this oflSce. 

The fact of so many organs of diflPerent kinds — 
hypocotyls and epicotyls, the petioles of some coty- 
ledons and of some first leaves, the cotyledons of 
the onion, the rachis of some ferns, and some flower- 
stems — being all arched whilst they break through 
the ground, shows how just are Dr. Haberlandt's * 
remarks on the importance of the arch to seedling 
plants. He attributes its chief importance to the 
upper, young, and more tender parts of the hypocotyl 



♦ • Die Schutzei'irichtunjren in though oiir observations lead u» 

der Eutwickelunp^ dcr Keiiu- to differ on some poiutd from tho 

pdanze/ 1877. Wc h »vc learned author. 
much from this interesting essay, 

7 



88 HYPOCOTYLS, EPICOTYLS, ETC^ Chap IL 

or epicotyl, being thus saved from abrasion and 
pressure whilst breaking through the ground. But 
we think that some importance may be attributed to 
the increased force gained by the hypocotyl, epicotyl, 
or other organ by being at first arched ; for both legs of 
the arch increase in length, and both have points of 
resistance as long as the tip remains enclosed within 
the seed-coats; and thus the crown of the arch is 
pushed up through the earth with twice as much force 
as that which a straight hypocotyl, &c., could exert. 
As soon, however, as the upper end has freed itself, 
all the work has to be done by the basal leg. In 
the case of the epicotyl of the common bean, the 
basal leg (the apex having freed itself from the seed- 
coats) grew upwards with a force suflBcient to lift a 
thin plate of zinc, loaded with 12 ounces. Two more 
ounces were added, and the 14 ounces were lifted up 
to a very little height, and then the epicotyl yielded 
and bent to one side. 

With respect to the primary cause of the arching 
process, we long thought in the case of many seedlings 
that this might be attributed to the manner in which 
the hypocotyl or epicotyl was packed and curved 
within the seed-coats ; and that the arched shape thus 
acquired was merely retained until the parts in question 
reached the surface of the ground. But it is doubtful 
whether this is the whole of the truth in any case. 
For instance, with the common bean, the epicotyl or 
plumule is bowed into an arch whilst breaking through 
the seed-coats as shown in Fig. 59 (p. 92). The 
plumule first f rotrudes as a solid knob {e in A), which 
after twenty-four hours' growth is seen (e in B) to be 
the crown of an arch. Nevertheless, with several 
beans which germinated in damp air, and had other- 
wise been treated in an unnatural manner, little 



CHAP.n. BREAKING THROUGH THE GROUND. 89 

plumules were developed in the axils of the petioles 
of both cotyledons, and these were as perfectly arched 
as the normal plumule; yet they had not been sub- 
jected to any confinement or pressure, for the seed- 
coats were completely ruptured, and they grew in the 
open air. This proves that the plumule has an innate 
or spontaneous tendency to arch itself. 

In some other cases the hypocotyl or epicotyl pro- 
trudes from the seed at first only slightly bowed ; but 
the bowing afterwards increases independently of any 
constraint. The arch is thus made narrow, with the 
two legs, which are sometimes much elongated, parallel 
and close together, and thus it becomes well fitted 
for breaking through the ground. 

With many kinds of plants, the radicle, whilst still 
enclosed within the seed and likewise after its first pro- 
trusion, lies in a straight line with the future hypocotyl 
and with the longitudinal axis of the cotyledons. This 
is the case with Cucurbita ovifera; nevertheless, in 
whatever position the seeds were buried, the hypocotyl 
always came up arched in one particular direction. 
Seeds were planted in friable peat at a depth of about 
an inch in a vertical position, with the end from which 
the radicle protrudes downwards. Therefore all the 
parts occupied the same relative positions which 
they would ultimately hold after the seedlings had 
risen clear above the surface. Notwil hstanding this 
fact, the hypocotyl arched itself; and as the arch 
grew upwards through the peat, the buried seeds were 
turned either upside down, or were laid horizontally, 
being afterwards dragged above the ground. Ulti- 
mately the hypocotyl straightened itself in the usual 
manner; and now after all these movements the 
several parts occupied the same position relatively to 
one another and to the centre of the earth, which they 



90 HYPOCOTYLS, EPICOTYLS, ETC., Chap. IL 

had done when the seeds were first buried. But it may 
be argued in this and other such cases that, as the 
hypocotyl grows up through the soil, the seed will 
almost certainly be tilted to one side ; and then 
from the resistance which it must offer during its 
further elevation, the upper part of the hypocotyl will 
be doubled down and thus become arched. This view 
seems the more probable, because with Banunculus 
ficaria only the petioles of the leaves which forced 
a passage through the earth were arched; and not 
those which arose from the summits of the bulbs above 
the ground. Nevertheless, this explanation does not 
apply to the Cucurbita, for when germinating seeds 
were suspended in damp air in various positions by 
pins passing through the cotyledons, fixed to the 
inside of the lids of jars, in which case the hypo- 
cotyls were not subjected to any friction or constraint, 
yet the upper part became spontaneously arched. 
This fact, moreover, proves that it is not the weight 
of the cotyledons which causes the arching. Seedc 
of Hdianthus annuus and of two species of Ipomoea 
(those of J. bona nox being for the genus large 
and heavy) were pinned in the same manner, 
and the hypocotyls became spontaneously arched ; 
the radicles, which had been vertically dependent, 
assumed in consequence a horizontal position. In 
the case of Ipomoea leptophylla it is the petioles of the 
cotyledons which become arched whilst rising through 
the ground; and this occurred spontaneously when 
the seeds were fixed to the lids of jars. 

It may, however, be suggested with some degree of 
probability that the arching was aboriginally caused 
by mechanical compulsion, owing to the confinement 
of the parts in question within the seed-coats, or to 
friction whilst they were being dragged upwards. Bat 



Chap. H. BBEAKING THBOUGH THE GBOUND. 91 

if this is 80, we must admit from the cases just given, 
that a tendency in the upper part of the several 
specified organs to bend downwards and thus to be- 
come arched, has now become with many plants firmly 
inherited. The arching, to whatever cause it may be 
due, is the result of modified circumnutation, through 
increased growth along the convex side of the part ; 
such growth being only temporary, for the part always 
straightens itself subsequently by increased growth 
along the concave side, as will hereafter be described. 

It is a curious fact that the hypocotyls of some 
plants, which are but little developed and which 
never raise their cotyledons above the ground, never- 
theless inherit a slight tendency to arch themselves, 
although this movement is not of the least use to 
them. We refer to a movement observed by Sachs 
in the hypocotyls of the bean and some other Legumi- 
nosae, and which is shown in the accompanying figure 
(Fig. 59), copied from his Essay.* The hypocotyl 
and radicle at first grow perpendicularly downwards, 
as at A, and then bend, often in the course of 24 hours, 
into the position shown at B. As we shall here- 
after often have to recur to this movement, we will, for 
brevity sake, call it " Sachs' curvature." At first sight 
it might be thought that the altered position of the 
radicle in B was wholly due to the outgrowth of the 
epicotyl (e), the petiole (p) serving as a hinge ; and 
it is probable that this is partly the cause ; but the 
hypocotyl and upper part of the radicle themselves 
become slightly curved. 

The above movement in the bean was repeatedly 

seen by us ; but our observations were made chiefly on 

i^haseolus mvltijlorus, the cotyledons of which are like- 



• • Arbeiten des bot. Instit. Wiirzburg,' vol. i 1873, p. 408. 



92 



HYPOCOTYLS, EPICOTYLS, ETC., Chap. Ft 



wise hypogean. Some seedlings with well-deyeloped 
radicles were first immersed in a solution of perman- 
ganate of potassium; and, judging from the changes 
of colour (though these were not very clearly defined), 
the hypocotyl is about '3 inch in length. Straight, 
thin, black lines of this length were now drawn from 
the bases of the short petioles along the hypocotyls 



F.g.59. 




Vicia faha : gcrmiDAting seeds, suspended in damp air : A, with radicle 
growing perpendicularly downwards ; B, the same bean after 24 hours 
and after the radicle has curved itself; r, radicle; A, short hypocotyl ; 
(?, epicotyi appearing as a knob in A and as an arch in B ; p, petiole of 
the cotyledon, the latter enclosed within the seed-coats. 

of 23 germinating seeds, which were pinned to the 
lids of jars, generally with the hilum downwards, and 
with their radicles pointing to the centre of the 
earth. After an interval of from 24 to 48 hours the 
black lines on the hypocotyls of 16 out of the 23 
seedlings became distinctly curved, but in very 
various degrees (namely, with radii between 20 and 



Chap. IL BBEAKING THROUGH THE GttOUND. 93 

80 mm. on Sachs' cyclometer) in the same relative 
direction as shown at B in Fig. 59. As geotropism 
will obviously tend to check this curvature, seven 
seeds were allowed to germinate with proper pre- 
cautions for their growth in a klinostat,* by which 
means geotropism was eliminated. The position of the 
hypocotyls was observed during four successive days, 
and they continued to bend towards the hilum and 
lower surface of the seed. On the fourth day the/ 
were deflected by an average angle of 63° from a lino 
perpendicular to the lower surface, and were therefore 
considerably more curved than the hypocotyl and 
radicle in the bean at B (Fig. 59), though in the same 
relative direction. 

It will, we presume, be admitted that all leguminous 
plants with hypogean cotyledons are descended from 
forms which once raised their cotyledons above the 
ground in the ordinary manner ; and in doing so, it is 
certain that their hypocotyls would have been abruptly 
arched, as in the case of every other dicotyledonous 
plant. This is especially clear in the case of Phaseolus, 
for out of five species, the seedlings of which we 
observed, namely, P. muUiflorus, caracalla, vulgaris, 
Hernandesii and Roxhurghii (inhabitants of the Old 
and New Worlds), the three last-named species have 
well-developed hypocotyls which break through the 
ground as arches. Now, if we imagine a seedling of 
the common bean or of P. multijlorus, to behave as its 
progenitors once did, the hypocotyl (A, Fig. 59), in 
whatever position the seed may have been buried; 
would become so much arched that the upper part 
would be doubled down parallel to the lower part ; and 



• An instrument devised by on which the plnnt nndorolwcrvn- 
Snchs, consisting e.^sontiHllv of a tion is sn ntnit«-d : sec ' Wiiizburg 
tloMly revolving boiizoutal axis, Arbeiteu/ 1879, p. 20i). 



94 



EUDIMENTARY COTYLEDONS. 



Crap, n 



this is exactly the kind of curvature which actually 
occurs in these two plants, though to a much less 
degree. Therefore we can hardly doubt that their 
short hypocotyls have retained by inheritance a ten- 
dency to curve themselves in the same manner as they 
did at a former period, when this movement was highly 
important to them for breaking through the ground, 
though now rendered useless by the cotyledons being 
hypogean. Eudimentary structures are in most cases 
highly variable, and we might expect that rudimentary 
or obsolete actions would be equally so; and Sachs' 
curvature varies extremely in amount, and sometimes 
altogether fails. This is the sole instance knoT^n to 
us of the inheritance, though in a feeble degree, of 
movements which have become superfluous from 
changes which the species has undergone. 

Rudimentary Cotyledons. — A few remarks on this 
subject may be here interpolated. It is well known 

that some dicotyle- 
donous plants produce 
only a single cotyle- 
don; for instance, cer- 
tain species of Ranun- 
culus, Corydalis, ChaB- 
rophyllum ; and we 
will here endeavour to 
show that the loss of 
one or both cotyle- 
dons is apparently due 

Citrus aurantium: two young seedlings: ^0 a StorC of UUtri- 

c, larger cotyledon ; c', smaller cotvle- , . i • j 

don ; A, thickened hypocotyl ; / , radicle, mcnt being laid Up lU 

In A the epicotyl is still arched, in B it g^jj^^ other part, aS in 

has become erect. . , ~ , 

the hypocotyl or one 
of the two cotyledons, or one of the secondary radicles. 




Fig. 60. 




Chap. IL 



RUDIMENTARI? COTYLEDONS 



95 



Fig. 61. 



With the orange (Citrus aurantium) the cotyledons are 
hy|)ogean, and one is larger than the other, as may 
be seen in A (Fig. 60). In B the inequality is rather 
greater, and the stem has grown between the points 
of insertion of the two petioles, so that they do not 
stand opposite to one another ; in another case the 
separation amounted to one-fifth of an inch. The 
smaller cotyledon of one seedling 
was extremely thin, and not half 
the length of the larger one, so that 
it was clearly becoming rudimen- 
tary.* In all these seedlings the 
Hypocotyl was enlarged or swollen. 
With Abronia umbellata one of 
the cotyledons is quite rudimen- 
tary, as may be seen (c) in Fig. 61. 
In this specimen it consisted of a 
little green flap, -y'^t^i i^^ch in 
length, destitute of a petiole and 
covered with glands like those on 
the fully developed cotyledon (c). 

At first it stood opposite to the Abronin umbenata : seed- 

larger cotyledon ; but as the petiole i>ng twice natural size: 

iT *l 1 li. • J • 1 XT. c, cotyledon; c, rudi- 

01 the latter increased m length mentaiy cotyledon ; a, 

and grew in the same line with 

the hypocotyl (A), the rudiment 

appeared in older seedlings as if 

seated some way down the hypocotyl. With Abronia 

arenaria there is a similar rudiment, which in one 




enlarged hypocotyl, 
with a heel or projec- 
tion (^'').at the lower 
end ; r, radicle. 



• In Paehira aquatica^ ns de- 
tcrit)cd l*y Mr. B. I. Tivuch 
('.Tiiiirnal Linn. Scxj. Bot.* vol. 
xvii. 1878, p. 147), one of the 
bvfiogefln cotyledons is of ira- 
ii'vn>e size;' the other ia smBll 
atil K' on falls off; the pair do not 
altt ay a stand opposite. In another 



and very different water-plant, 
Trapa nafansy one of the cotyle- 
dons, filled with farinaceous 
matter, id much larger than the 
other, which is scarcely visible, 
as is fctated by Ang. de Candollci, 
* Plivsiologic \ eg.* torn. ii. p. S3% 
1832. 



96 RUDIMENTARY COTYLEDONS. Chap. 11 

epecimen was only -rro^l^ ^^^ ^^ another ^th inch ix\ 
length; it ultimately appeared as if seated halfway 
down the hypoeotyl. In both these species the hypo- 
cotyl is so much enlarged, especially at a rery early 
age, that it might almost be called a conn. The lower 
end forms a heel or projection, the use of which will 
hereafter be described. 

In Cyclamen Persicum the hypoeotyl, eren whilst still 
within the seed, is enlarged into a regular conn,* and 
only a single cotyledon is at first developed (see former 
Fig. 57.) With Banunculus ficaria two cotyledons are 
never produced, and here one of the secondary radicles 
is developed at an early age into a so-called bulb.t 
Again, certain species of Chaerophyllum and Corydalis 
produce only a single cotyledon; J in the former the 
hypoeotyl, and in the latter the radicle is enlarged, 
according to Irmisch, into a bulb. 

In the several foregoing cases one of the cotyledons 
is delayed in its development, or reduced in size, or 
rendered rudimentary, or quite aborted ; but in other 
cases both cotyledons are represented by mere rudi- 
ments. With Opuntia basilar is this is not the case, 
for both cotyledons are thick and large, and the 
hypoeotyl shows at first no signs of enlargement ; but 
afterwards, when the cotyledons have withered and dis- 
articulated themselves, it becomes thickened, and from 
its tapering form, together with its smooth, tough, 
brown skin, appears, when ultimately drawn down to 
some depth into the soil, like a root. On the other 

* Dr. H. Gressner, • Bot. Zei- Vaucl er's ncoount (* Hist Vhja^ 

iuT\g: 1874, p. 824. dcs Planh'8<rEurope/ torn i. 1841, 

t Irmisch, 'Boitiaj^e znr Mor- p. 14J0 '>f tlie vrtTminntion of the 

phologit- d<r PHunzen/ 1854, pp. seeds of Ki'veral species of Corr- 

11, 12; *Bnt. ZiKung/ 1874, p. dnlis, that iho bulb or tiibercii'lt 

805. bocrins to be formed at aii ex* 

X Dt'lpifio. *Rivista Bolanica,* trcmcly early ago. 
1877, p. 21. It is evident from 



Ch>p. il budibointary cotyledons. 97 

hand, with several other Cacteae, the hypocotyl is from 
the first much enlarged, and both cotyledons are 
almost or quite rudimentary. Thus with Gm^eus Land' 
heckii two little triangular projections, representing the 
cotyledons, are narrower than the hypocotyl, which is 
pear-shaped, with the point downwards. In Bhipsalis 
cassyilui the cotyledons are represented by mere points 
on the enlarged hypocotyl. In Echinocactus viridescens 
the hypocotyl is globular, with two little prominences 
on its summit. In Pilocereus HoulleUi the hypocotyl, 
much swollen in the upper part, is merely notched on 
the summit ; and each side of the notch evidently repre- 
sents a cotyledon. Stapdia sarpedon, a member of the 
very distinct family of the Asclepiadeae, is fleshy like 
a cactus ; and here again the upper part of the flattened 
hypocotyl is much thickened and bears two minute coty- 
ledons, which, measured internally, were only '15 inch 
in length, and in breadth not equal to one-fourth of the 
diameter of the hypocotyl in its narrow axis ; yet these 
minute cotyledons are probably not quite useless, for 
when the hypocotyl breaks through the ground in the 
form of an arch, they are closed or pressed against one 
another, and thus protect the plumule. They after- 
wards open. 

From the several cases now given, which refer to 
widely distinct plants, we may infer that there is some 
close connection between the reduced size of one or 
both cotyledons and the formation, by the enlargement 
of the hypocotyl or of the radicle, of a so-called bulb. 
But it may be asked, did the cotyledons first tend to 
abort, or did a bulb first begin to be formed? As 
all dicotyledons naturally produce two well-developed 
cotyledons, whilst the thickness of the hypocotyl and 
of the radicle differs much in difierent plants, it seems 
probable that these latter organs first became from 



98 CIBCUMNUTATING MOVEMENTS OF Chap. IL 

some cause thickened — in seyeral instances apparently 
in correlation with the fleshy nature of the mature 
plant — ^80 as to contain a store of nutriment sufficient 
for the seedling, and then that one or both cotyledons, 
from being superfluous, decreased in size. It is not 
surprising that one cotyledon alone should sometimes 
have been thus affected, for with certain plants^ for 
instance the cabbage, the cotyledons are at first of 
unequal size, owing apparently to the manner in which 
they are packed within the seed. It does not, how- 
ever, follow from the above connection, that whenever 
a bulb is formed at an early age, one or both coty- 
ledons will necessarily become superfluous, and conse- 
quently more or less rudimentary. Finally, these 
cases ofier a good illustration of the principle of com- 
pensation or balancement of growth, or, as Goethe 
expresses it, "in order to spend on one side. Nature 
is forced to economise on the other side." 

Circumnutation and other movements of HypocotyU 
and EpicotylSy whilst still arched and buried beneath 
the ground, and whilst breaking through it. — According 
to the position in which a seed may chance to 
have been buried, the arched hypocotyl or epicotyJ 
will begin to protrude in a horizontal, a more or 
less inclined, or in a vertical plane. Except when 
already standing v^tically upwards, both legs of the 
arch are acted on from the earliest period by apo- 
geotropism. Consequently they both bend upwards, 
until the arch becomes vertical. During the whole of 
this prcjcess, even before the arch has broken through 
the ground, it is continually trying to circumnutate 
to a slight extent ; as it likewise does if it happens at 
first to stand vertically up, — all which cases have 
l)con observed and described, more or less fully, in 
the last chapter. After the arch has grown to some 



Chap. U HYPOCOTYLS, ETC., WHILST AKCHED. 09 

height upwards, the basal part ceases to cireumnutatey 
whilst the upper part continues to do so. 

That an arched hypocotyl or epicotyl, with the two 
legs fixed in the ground, should be able to cir- 
cumnutate, seemed to us, until we had read Prof. 
Wiesner's observations, an inexplicable fact. He has 
shown* in the case of certain seedlings, whose tips 
are bent downwards (or which nutate), that whilst the 
posterior side of the upper or dependent portion grows 
quickest, the anterior and opposite side of the basal 
portion of the same internode grows quickest ; these 
two portions being separated by an indifferent zone, 
where the growth is equal on all sides. There may 
even be more than one indiflferent zone in the same 
internode ; and the opposite sides of the parts above 
and below each such zone grow quickest. This pecu- 
liar manner of growth is called by Wiesner "un- 
dulatory nutation." Circumnutation depends on one 
side of an organ growing quickest (probably preceded 
by increased turgeseence), and then another side, 
generally almost the opposite one, growing quickest. 
Now if we look at an arch like this {\ and suppose 
the whole of one side — we will say the whole convex 
side of both legs— ;-to increase in length, this would 
not cause the arch to bend to either side. But if the 
outer side or surface of the left leg were to increase 
in length the arch would be pushed over to the right, 
and this would be aided by the inner side of the 
right leg increasing in length. If afterwards the 
process were reversed, the arch would be pushed over 
to the opposite or left side, and so on alternately, — 
that is, it would circumnutate. As an arched hypo- 



♦ «Die undulirende Nutation Also pubUslied separately »ef 
dcp Iiiternodien/ Ahad. der Wis- p. 32. 
pmch* (Vienna), Jan. 17th, 1878. 



100 CIRCUMNUTATING MOVEMENTS OF Chap. II. 

cotyl, with the two legs fixed in the ground, certainly 
circumnutates, and as it consists of a single intemode, 
we may conclude that it grows in the manner de- 
scribed by Wiesner. It may be added, that the crown 
of the arch does not grow, or grows very slowly, for 
it does not increase much in breadth, whilst the arch 
itself increases greatly in height. 

The circumnutating movements of arched hypo- 
cotyls and epicotyls can hardly fail to aid them in 
breaking through the ground, if this be damp and 
soft; though no doubt their emergence depends 
mainly on the force exerted by their longitudinal 
growth. Although the arch circumnutates only to a 
slight extent and probably with little force, yet it is 
able to move the soil near the surface, though it may 
not be able to do so at a moderate depth. A pot with 
seeds of Solanum palinacanthum, the tall arched hypo- 
cotyls of which had emerged and were growing rather 
slowly, was covered with fine argillaceous sand kept 
damp, and this at first closely surrounded the bases of 
the arches ; but soon a narrow open crack was formed 
round each of them, which could be accounted for 
only by their having pushed away the sand on all 
sides ; for no such cracks surrounded some little sticks 
and pins which had been driven into the sand. It 
has already been stated that the cotyledons of Phalaris 
and A vena, the plumules of Asparagus and the hypo- 
cotyls of Brassica, were likewise able to displace the 
same kind of sand, either whilst simply circumnu* 
tating or whilst bending towards a lateral light. 

As long as an arched hypocotyl or epicotyl remains 
buried beneath the ground, the two legs cannot sepa- 
rate from one another, except to a slight extent from 
the yielding of the soil; but as soon as the arch 
rises above the ground, or at an earlier period if 



Chap. IL HYPOCOTYLS, ETC., WHILST ARCHED. 101 

the pressure of the surrounding earth be artificiallji 
removed, the arch immediately begins to straighten 
itself. This no doubt is due to growth along the 
whole inner surface of both legs of the arch; such 
growth being checked or prevented, as long as the two 
legs of the arch are firmly pressed together. When the 
earth is removed all round an arch and the two legs 
are tied together at their bases, the growth on the 
under side of the crown causes it after a time to 
become much flatter and broader than naturally 
occurs. The straightening process consists of a mo- 
dified form of circumnutation, for the lines described 
during this process (as with the hypocotyl of Brassica, 
and the epicotyls of Vicia and Corylus) were often 
plainly zigzag and sometimes looped. After hypo- 
cotyls or epicotyls have emerged from the ground, 
they quickly become perfectly straight. No trace is 
left of their former abrupt curvature, excepting in the 
case of Allium cepa, in which the cotyledon rarely 
becomes quite straight, owing to the protuberance 
developed on the crown of the arch. 

The increased growth along the inner surface of the 
arch which renders it straight, apparently begins in 
the basal leg or that which is united to the radicle ; 
for this leg, as we often observed, is first bowed back- 
wards from the other leg. This movement facilitates 
the withdrawal of the tip of the epicotyl or of the 
cotyledons, as the case may be, from within the seed- 
coats and from the ground. But the cotyledons often 
emerge from the ground still tightly enclosed within 
the seed-coats, which apparently serve to protect them. 
The seed-coats are afterwards ruptured and cast off by 
the swelling of the closely conjoined cotyledons, and not 
by any movement or their separation from one another. 

Nevertheless, in some few cases, especially with the 




102 RUrXURE OF THE SEED-COATS. Chap. IL 

Cucurbitaceae, the seed-coats are ruptured by a curious 
contrivance, described by M. Flahault.* A heel or 
peg is developed on one side of the summit of the 
radicle or base of the hypocotyl ; and this holds down 
the lower haK of the seed-coats (the radicle being 
fixed into the ground) whilst the continued growth of 

the arched hypocotyl forces up- 
wards the upper half, and tears 
asunder the seed-coats at one end, 
and the cotyledons are then easily 
withdrawn. The accompanying 
figure (Fig. 62) will render this 
description intelligible. Forty- 
one seeds of Ciicv/rbita ovifera 
were laid on friable peat and were 
covered by a layer about an inch 
in thickness, not much pressed 
down, so that the cotyledons in 
being dragged up were subjected 
to very little friction, yet forty of 
them came up naked, the seed- 
Dating seed, showing the coats bcmg left buried in the peat. 
heel or peg projecting This was Certainly dueto the actiou 

on one side from summit ^ . i i» i_ "x 

of radicle and holding ot the peg, tor whcu it was pre- 
down lower tip of seed- yentcd from actiug, the cotyledons, 

coats, which have been v n j.i 

partially ruptured by as WO siiall presently sce, were 
the growth of thearched jif^g^j ^p gtin eucloscd in their 

hypocotyl. ■• rm i 

seed-coats. Ihey were, however, 
cast off in tne course of two or three days by the 
swelling of the cotyledons. Until this occurs light is 
excluded, and the cotyledons cannot decompose car- 
bonic acid ; but no one probably would have thought 
that the advantage thus gained by a little earlier cast 



\1 



♦ • Bull. Soc. Dot. de France/ torn. xxiv. 1877, p. 201. 



Chap. IL BUPTUBE OF THE SEED-COATS. 103 

ing off of the seed-coats would be sufficient to account 
for the development of the peg. Yet, according to 
M. riahault, seedlings which have been preventetl 
from casting their seed-coats whilst beneath the 
ground, are inferior to those which have emerged with 
their cotyledons naked and ready to act. 

The peg is developed with extraordinary rapidity ; 
for it could only just be distinguished in two seed- 
lings, having radicles '35 inch in length, but after an 
interval of only 24 hours was well developed in 
both. It is formed, according to Flahault, by the 
enlargement of the layers of the cortical parenchyma 
at the base of the hypocotyl. If, however, we judge 
by the effects of a solution of permanganate of 
potassium, it is developed on the exact line of 
junction between the hypocotyl and radicle; for 
the flat lower surface, as well as the edges, were 
coloured brown like the radicle; whilst the upper 
slightly inclined surface was left uncoloured like the 
hypocotyl, excepting indeed in one out of 33 im- 
mersed seedlings in which a large part of the upper sur- 
face was coloured brown. Secondary roots sometimes 
spring from the lower surface of the peg, which thus 
seems in all respects to partake of the nature of the 
radicle. The peg is always developed on the side which 
becomes concave by the arching of the hypocotyl; 
and it would be of no service if it were formed on any 
other side. It is also always developed with the flat 
lower side, which, as just stated, forms a part of the 
radicle, at right angles to it, and in a horizontal plane. 
This fact was clearly shown by burying some of the 
thin flat seeds in the same position as in Fig. 62, 
excepting that they were not laid on their flat broad 
sides, but with one edge downwards. Nine seeds 
were thus planted, and the peg was developed in th« 
8 



l04 BUPTUEE OF THE SEED-COATS Chap, It 

same position, relatively to the radicle, as in the 
figure; consequently it did not rest on the flat tip 
ot* the lower half of the seed-coats, but was inserted 
like a wedge between the two tips. As the arched 
hypocotyl grew upwards it tended to draw up the 
whole seed, and the peg necessarily rubbed against 
both tips, but did not hold either down. The result 
was, that the cotyledons of five out of the nine seeds 
thus placed were raised above the ground still enclosed 
within their seed-coats. Four seeds were buried with 
the end from which the radicle protrudes pointing 
vertically downwards, and owing to the peg being 
always developed in the same position, its apex alone 
came into contact with, and rubbed against the tip on 
one side ; the result was, that the cotyledons of all 
four emerged still within their seed-coats. These cases' 
show us how the peg acts in co-ordination with the 
position which the flat, thin, broad seeds would almost 
always occupy when naturally sown. When the tip 
of the lower half of the seed-coats was cut off, Flahault 
found (as we did likewise) that the peg could not act, 
since it had nothing to press on, and the cotyledons 
were raised above the ground with their seed-coats not 
cast off". Lastly, nature shows us the use of the peg ; 
for in the one Cucurbitaceous genus known to us, in 
which the cotyledons are hypogean and do not east 
their seed-coats, namely, Megarrhiza, there is no 
vestige of a peg. This structure seems to be present 
in most of the otiier genera in the family, judging from 
Flahault's statements ; we found it well-developed and 
properly acting in Tnchosaiithes aripuina, in which we 
hardly expected to find it, as the cotyledons are some* 
what thick and fleshy. Few cases can be advanced 
of a structure better adapted for a special purpose 
than the present one. 



Chap. TL BUPTUBE OF THE SEED-COATS. 105 

With Mimosa pvdica the radicle protrudes from a 
small hole in the sharp edge of the seed ; and on its 
summit, where united with the hypocotyl, a transverse 
ridge is developed at an early age, which clearly aids 
in splitting the tough seed-coats ; but it does not aid 
in easting them off, as this is subsequently effected by 
the swelling of the cotyledons after they have been 
raised above the ground. The ridge or heel therefore 
acts rather differently from that of Cucurbita. Its 
lower surface and the edges were coloured brown by 
the permanganate of potassium, but not the upper 
surface. It is a singular fact that after the ridge has 
done its work and has escaped from the seed-coats, 
it is developed into a frill all round the summit of the 
radicle.* 

At the base of the enlarged hypocotyl of Abronia 
umbeUata, where it blends into the radicle, there is a 
projection or heel which varies in shape, but its out- 
line is too angular in our former figure (Fig. 61). The 
radicle first protrudes from a small hole at one end of 
the tough, leathery, winged fruit. At this period the 
upper part of the radicle is packed within the fruit 
parallel to the hypocotyl, and the single cotyledon is 
doubled back parallel to the latter. The swelling of 
these three parts, and especially the rapid development 
of the thick heel between the hypocotyl and radicle 
at the point where they are doubled, ruptures the 
tough fruit at the upper end and allows the arched 
hypocotyl to emerge ; and this seems to be the function 
of the heel. A seed was cut out of the fruit and 



♦ Our attention was Cilled to nt tl»e jnn tion of the radicle and 

this case by a brief statement by hypocotyl. This s-eed possesses a 

Nobbe in his ' Hapdbuch der very hard and tough coat, and 

Samenkunde,* 1876. p. 215, where would be likely lo leqiiire aid in 

a fignie isalso p:i\enof aseedling bursting and freeing the Cotyle- 

of Martvnia with a htel or ridj^e dons. 



106 RUPTURE OF THE SEED-COATS. Chap. IL 

allowed to germinate in damp air, and now a thin 
flat disc was developed all round the base of the 
hypocotyl and grew to an extraordinary breadth, like 
the frill described under Mimosa, but somewhat broader. 
Flahault says that with Mirabilis, a member of the 
same family with Abronia, a heel or collar is developed 
all round the base of the hypocotyl, but more on one 
side than on the other; and that it frees the coty- 
ledons from their seed-coats. We observed only old 
seeds, and these were ruptured by the absorption of 
moisture, independently of any aid from the heel and 
before the protrusion of the radicle ; but it does not 
follow from our experience that fresh and tough fruits 
would behave in a like manner. 

In concluding this section of the present chapter it 
may be convenient to summarise, under the form of an 
illustration, the usual movements of the hypocotyls 
and epicotyls of seedlings, whilst breaking through the 
ground and immediately afterwards. We may suppose 
a man to be thrown down on his hands and knees, and 
at the same time to one side, by a load of hay falling 
on him. He would first endeavour to get his arched 
back upright, wriggling at the same time in all 
directions to free himself a little from the surrounding 
pressure ; and this may represent the combined effects 
of apogeotropism and circumnutation, when a seed is so 
buried that the arched hypocotyl or epicotyl p*otrudes 
at first in a horizontal or inclined plane. The man, 
still wriggling, would then raise his arched back as 
high as he could ; and this may represent the growth 
and continued circumnutation of an arched hypocotyl 
or epicotyl, before it has reached the surface of the 
ground. As soon as the man felt himself at all free, hs 
would raise the upper part of his body, whilst still on 



Chap. IL CIRCUMNUTATION OF HYPOCOTYLS, ETC. 107 

his knees and still wriggling ; and this may represent 
the bowing backwards of the basal leg of the arch^ 
which in most cases aids m the withdrawal of the 
cotyledons from the buried and ruptured seed-coats, 
and the subsequent straightening of the whole hypo- 
cotyl or epicotyl — circumnutation still continuing. 

Circumnutation of Hypocotyls and Epicotyls, tvhen 
ered. — The hypocotyls, epicotyls, and first shoots of the 
many seedlings observed by us, after they had become 
straight and erect, circumnutated continuously. The 
diversified figures described by them, often during two 
successive days, have been shown in the woodcuts in 
the last chapter. It should be recollected that the 
dots were joined by straight lines, so that the figures 
are angular; but if the observations had been made 
every few minutes the lines would have been more 
or less curvilinear, and irregular ellipses or ovals, or 
jKjrhaps occasionally circles, would have been formed. 
The direction of the longer axes of the ellipses made 
during the same day or on successive days generally 
changed completely, so as to stand at right angles to 
one another. The number of irregular ellipses or 
circles made within a given time differs much with 
different species. Thus with Braasica oleraceay Cerinthe 
majoTy and OucurbUa ovifera about four such figures 
were completed in 12 h. ; whereas with Solanum palina" 
eanthum and Opuntia basilaris, scarcely more than one. 
The figures likewise differ greatly in size ; thus they 
were very small and in some degree doubtful in Stapelia, 
and large in Brassica, &c. The ellipses described by 
LcUhyrus nissolia and Brassica were narrow, whilst 
those made by the Oak were broad. The figures are 
often complicated by small loops and zigzag lines. 

As most seedling plants before the development 
of true leaves are of low, sometimes very low stature. 



108 CIRCUMNUTATIOX OF HYPOCOTYLS, ETC. Chap. It 

the extreme amount of movement from side to side 
of their circumnutating stems was small; that of 
the hypocotyl of Githago segetum was about "2 of an 
inch, and that of Cucuroita ovifera about "28. A 
very young shoot of Lathyrus nissolia moved about 
•14, that of an American oak '2, that of the common 
nut only *04, and a rather tall shoot of the Asparagus 
•11 of an inch. The extreme amount of movement 
of the sheath-like cotyledon of PhaJaris Canarieri'm 
was '3 of an inch ; but it did not move very quickly, 
the tip crossing on one occasion five divisions of the 
micrometer, that is, y^^th of an inch, in 22 m. 5 s. A 
seedling Nolana prostrata travelled the same distance 
in 10 m. 38 s. Seedling cabbages circumutated much 
more quickly, for the tip of a cotyledon crossed 
^^^th of an inch on the micrometer in 3 m. 20 s. ; and 
this rapid movement, accompanied by incessant oscil- 
lations, was a wonderful spectacle when beheld under 
the microscope. 

The absence of light, for at least a day, does not 
interfere in the least with the circumnutation of the 
hypocotyls, epicotyls, or young shoots of the various 
dicotyledonous seedlings observed by us ; nor with that 
of the young shoots of some monocotyledons. The 
circumnutation was indeed much plainer in darkness 
than in light, for if the light was at all lateral the 
stem bent towards it in a more or less zigzag course. 

Finally, the hypocotyls of many seedlings are drawn 
during the winter into the ground, or even beneath it 
so that they disappear. This remarkable process, 
which apparently serves for their protection, has 
been fully described by De Vries.* He shows that 



♦ * Bot. iZeitiinjr/ 1879, p. 649. burg/ Jahrg. xvi. p. in, as quotorl 
See also Winklir iu *Yerhandl. by Huberlandt, * SchutzeiDnchqn* 
dee Bot Vereins der P. Briuiden- gen der Keimpflunze,' 1877, p. 6A 



Obap. n. CIRCUMNIJTATION OF COTYLEDONfi. 109 

it is effected by the contraction of the parenchyma- 
cells of the root. But the hypocotyl itself in some 
cases contracts greatly, and although at first smooth 
becomes covered with zigzag ridges, as we observed 
with Grithago segetum. How much of the drawing 
down and burying of the hypocotyl of Opuntia hasilaris 
was due to the contraction of this part and how much 
to that of the radicle, we did not observe. 

Circumnutation of Cotyledons.— With all the dico- 
tyledonous seedlings described in the last chapter, the 
cotyledons were in constant movement, chiefly in a ver- 
tical plane, and commonly once up and once down in 
the course of the 24 hours. But there were many excep- 
tions to such simplicity of movement ; thus the cotyle- 
dons of Ipomoea casrvlea moved 13 times either upwards 
or downwards in the course of 16 h. 18 m. Those of 
Oxalis rosea moved in the same manner 7 times in the 
course of 24 h. ; and those of Cassia tora described 5 
irregular ellipses in 9 h. The cotyledons of some 
individuals of Mimosa ptidica and of Lotus Jacohseus 
moved only once up and down in 24 h., whilst those of 
others performed within the same period an additional 
small oscillation. Thus with different species, and 
with different individuals of the same species, there 
were many gradations from a single diurnal move- 
ment to oscillations as complex as those of the 
Ipomoea and Cassia. The opposite cotyledons on the 
same seedling move to a certain extent independently 
of one another. This was conspicuous with those of 
Oxalis seimtiva, in which one cotyledon might be 
seen during the daytime rising up until it stood 
vertically, whilst the opposite one was sinking down. 

Although the movements of cotyledons were gene- 
rally in nearly the same vertical plane, yet their 
upward and downward courses never exactly coin- 



110 CIRCUMNUTATION OF COTYLEDONS. Chap. II 

cided; so that ellipses, more or less narrow, were 
described, and the cotyledons may safely be said to 
have circumnutated. Nor could this fact be accounted 
for by the mere increase in length of the cotyledons 
through growth, for this by itself would not induce 
any lateral movement. That there was lateral move- 
ment in some instances, as with the cotyledons of the 
cabbage, was evident; for these, besides moving up 
and down, changed their course from right to left 12 
times in 14 h. 15 m. With Solatium lycopersicum the 
cotyledons, after falling in the forenoon, zigzagged 
from side to side between 12 and 4 P.M., and then 
commenced rising. The cotyledons of Lupinus luteus 
are so thick (about '08 of an inch) and fleshy,* that 
they seemed little likely to move, and were there- 
fore observed with especial interest; they certainly 
moved largely up and down, and as the line traced was 
zigzag there was some lateral movement. The nine 
cotyledons of a seedling Pinus pinaster plainly circum- 
nutated ; and the figures described approached more 
nearly to irregular circles than to irregular ovals or 
ellipses. The sheath-like cotyledons of the Gra- 
mineae circumnutate, that is, move to all sides, as 
plainly as do the hypocotyls or epicotyls of any dico- 
tyledonous plants. Lastly, the very young fronds of 
a Fern and of a Selaginella circumnutated. 

In a large majority of the cases which were care- 
fully observed, the cotyledons sink a little downwards 
in the forenoon, and rise a little in the afternoon or 
evening. They thus stand rather more highly inclined 
during the night than during the mid-day, at which 

I 

♦ The cotyledons, tliough bright Ac , 1877, p. 95), on the gradationa 
green, resemble to a certitin ex- in the LeguminoeiB between sob- 
tent hypogean ones; see the in- nerial and subterranetin ootylo- 
teresting discussion by Haber- dons, 
landt ('Die Schutzcinrichtungen/ 



Cahp. n. CIRCUMNUTATION OF COTYLEDONS. Ill 

time they are expanded almost horizontally. The 
circumnutating movement is thus at least partially 
periodic, no doubt in connection, as we shall hereafter 
see, with the daily alternations of light and daikness. 
The cotyledons of several plants move up so much at 
night as to stand nearly or quite vertically; and in 
tJiis latter case ihey come into close contact with one 
another. On the other hand, the cotyledons of a 
few plants sink almost or quite vertically down at 
night ; and in this latter case they clasp the upper 
part of the hypocotyl. In the same genus Oxalis the 
cotyledons of certain species stand vertically up, and 
those of other species vertically down, at night. In 
all such cases the cotyledons may be said to sleep, 
for they act in the same manner as do the leaves of 
many sleeping plants. This is a movement for a 
special purpose, and will therefore be considered in a 
future chapter devoted to this subject. 

In order to gain some rude notion of the proportional 
number of cases in which the cotyledons of dico- 
tyledonous plants (hypogean ones being of course 
excluded) changed their position in a conspicuous 
manner at night, one or more species in several 
genera were cursorily observed, besides those described 
in the last chapter. Altogether 153 genera, included 
in as many families as could be procured, were thus 
observed by us. The cotyledons were looked at in 
the middle of the day and again at night ; and those 
were noted as sleeping which stood either vertically 
or at an angle of at least 60' above or beneath the 
horizon. Of such genera there were 26 ; and in 21 of 
them the cotyledons of some of the species rose, and 
in only 6 sank at night; and some of these latter 
cases are rather doubtful from causes to be explained 
in the chapter on the sleep of cotyledons. When 



112 PULVINI OF COTYLEDONS. Chap. IL 

cotyledons which at noon were nearly horizontal, stood 
at night at more than 20° and less than 60° above the 
horizon, they were recorded as " plainly raised ;" and 
of such genera there were 38. We did not meet with 
any distinct instances of cotyledons periodically sink- 
ing only a few degrees at night, although no doubt 
such occur. We have now accounted for 64 genera 
out of the 153, and there remain 89 in which the 
cotyledons did not change their position at night by 
as much as 20° — that is, in a conspicuous manner 
which could easily be detected by the unaided eye and 
by memory; but it must not be inferred from this 
statement that these cotyledons did not move at all, 
for in several cases a rise of a few degrees was re- 
corded, when they were carefully observed. The 
number 89 might have been a little increased, for the 
cotyledons remained almost horizontal at night in 
some species in a few genera, for instance, Trifo- 
lium and Geranium, which are included amongst the 
sleepers, such genera might therefore have been added 
to the 89. Again, one species of Oxalis generally 
raised its cotyledons at night more than 20° and less 
than 60° above the horizon ; so that this genus might 
have been included under two heads. But as several 
species in the same genus were not often observed, 
such double entries have been avoided. 

In a future chapter it will be shown that the leaves 
of many plants which do not sleep, rise a few degrees in 
the evening and during the early part of the night ; 
and it will be convenient to defer until then the 
consideration of the periodicity of the movements of 
cotyledons. 

On the Pulvini or Joints of Cotyledons, — With several 
of the seedlings described in this and the last chapter, 
the summit of the petiole is developed into a pulvinus. 



FULVINI OP COTYLEDONS. 



113 



Fig. 63. 



cushion, or joint (aa this organ has been variously 
called), like that with which many leaver are provided- 
It consists of a mas,? of small cells usually of a pale 
colour from the absence of chlorophyll, and with ita 
outline more or less convex, as shown in the annexed 
figure. In the case of Oxalis 
tenailiva two-thirds of the 
petiole, and in that of Mi- 
mosa pudica, apparently the 
whole of the short sub- 
petioles of the leaflets have 
been converted into pulvini. 
With pnlvinated leaves (i.e. 
those provided with a pul- 
vinus) their periodical move- 
ments depend, according to 
Pfeffer,* on the cells of the 
pulvinus alternately expand- 
ing more quickly on one side 
than OQ the other; whereas 
the similar movements of 
leaves not provided with pul- 
vini, depend on their growth Oxaiisnsta: longuodin.! smmot. 

J " ., 01 a pulvinna on the sammlt 

being alternately more rapid of the petiole of a cotyiedou, 
on one side than on the drav-n with the oam««ii.ddB, 

niiignineil lb ljme&- p, p, pe- 
Other.f As long as a leaf tiole;/,libro-va^cu1sr bundle; 
provided with a pulvinus is V', 'ommcucfmcut of blade ol 

young and continues to grow, 

its movement depends on both these causes combined ;{ 
and if the view now held by many botanists be sound, 
namely, that growth is always preceded by the expan- 
sion of the growing cells, then the difference between 
the movements induced by the aid of pulvini and 




114 PULVINI OF COTYLEDOX8. Chap. 11 

without such aid, is reduced to the expansion of the 
cells not being followed by growth in the first case, 
and being so followed in the second case. 

Dots were made with Indian ink along the midrib 
of both pulvinated cotyledons of a rather old seedling 
of Oxalis Vcddiviana ; their distances were repeatedly 
measured with an eye-piece micrometer during 8J days, 
and they did not exhibit the least trace of increase. 
It is therefore almost certain that the pulvinus itself 
was not then growing. Nevertheless, during this 
whole time^ and for ten days afterwards, these coty- 
ledons rose vertically every night. In the case of 
some seedlings raised from seeds purchased under the 
name of Oxalis florihunda, the cotyledons continued 
for a long time to move vertically down at night, and 
the movement apparently depended exclusively on 
the pulvini, for their petioles were of nearly the same 
length in young, and in old seedlings which had pro- 
duced true leaves. With some species of Cassia, on 
the other hand, it was obvious without any measure- 
ment that the pulvinated cotyledons continued to 
increase greatly in length during some weeks ; so that 
here the expansion of the cells of the pulvini and the 
growth of the petiole were probably combined m 
causing their prolonged periodic movements. It was 
equally evident that the cotyledons of many plants, 
not provided with pulvini, increased rapidly in length ; 
and their periodic movements no doubt were exclu- 
sively due to growth. 

In accordance with the view that the periodic 
movements of all cotyledons depend primarily on the 
expansion of the cells, whether or not followed by 
growth, we can understand the fact that there is but 
little difference in the kind or form of movement 
in the two sets of cases. This may be seen by com* 



OhAP. n. PULVINI OF COTYLEDONS. 115 

paring the diagrams given in the last chapter. Thus 
the movements of ihe cotyledons of Brassica oleraeea 
and of Ipomoea cseruha, which are not provided with 
pulvini, are as complex as those of Oxalis and Cassia 
which are thus provided. The pulvinated cotyledons 
of some individuj-ls of Mimosa pvdica and Lottis 
Jacohaeus made only a single oscillation, whilst those 
of other individuals moved twice up and down in the 
course of 24 hours; so it was occasionally with the 
cotyledons of Cucurbita ovifera, which are destitute of 
a pulvinus. The movements of pulvinated cotyledons 
are generally larger in extent than those without a 
pulvinus; nevertheless some of the latter moved 
through an angle of 90°. There is, however, one 
important difference in the two sets of cases; the 
nocturnal movements of cotyledons without pulvini, 
for instance, those in the Cruciferse, Cucurbitaceae, 
Githago, and Beta, never last even for a week, to any 
conspicuous degree. Pulvinated cotyledons, on the 
other hand, continue to rise at night for a much 
longer period, even for more than a month, as we 
shall now show. But the period no doubt depends 
largely on the temperature to which the seedlings are 
exposed and their consequent rate of development. 

Oxalis Valdioiana. — Some cotyledons which had lately opened 
and were horizontal on March 6th at noon, stood at night ver- 
tically up ; on the 13th the first true leaf was formed, and was 
embraced at night by the cotyledons ; on April 9th, after an in- 
terval of 35 days, six leaves were developed, and yet the coty- 
ledons rose almost vertically at night. The cotyledons of 
another seedling, which when first observed had already pro- 
duced a leaf, stood vertically at night and continued to do so for 
11 additional days. After 16 days from the first observation 
two leaves were developed, and the cotyledons were still greatly 
raised at night. After 21 days the cotyledons during the day 
were deflected beneath the horizon, but at night were raised 4 S** 



116 PULVINI OF COTYLEDONS. Chap. IL 

above it. After 24 days from the first observation (begun after 
a true leaf had been developed) the cotyledons ceased to rise at 
night. 

O J alls (Bi'ophytum) Renftitiva, — The cotyledons of several seed- 
lings, 45 days after their first expansion^ stood nearly vertical at 
night, and closely embraced either one or two true leaves which 
by this time had been formed. These sellings had been kept 
ill a very warm house, aud their development had been rapid. . . 

OxuHs corm'ciilata.— The cotyledons do not stand vertical at 
night, but generally rise to an angle of about 45° aboye the 
horizon. They continued thus to act for 23 days after their 
first expansion, by which time two leaves had been formed; 
even after 29 days they still rose moderately above their hori*- 
zontal or downwardly deflected diurnal position. 

Mimosa pudica, — The cotyledons were expanded for the first 
time on Nov. 2nd, and stood vertical at night. On the 15th the 
first leaf was formed, and at night the cotyledous were vertical. 
On the 28th they behaved in the same manner. On Dec. 15th, 
that is after 44 days, the cotyledons were still considerably 
raised at night; but those of another seedling, only one day 
older, were raised very little. 

Mimosa ulbida. — A seedling was observed during only 12 days, 
by which time a leaf had been formed, and the cotyledons were 
then quite vertical at night. 

Tr 'folium suhterrawum. — A seedling, 8 days old, had its coty- 
ledons horizontal at 10.30 a.m. and vertical at 9.15 p.m. After an 
interval of two months, by which time the first and second true 
leaves had been developed, the cotyledons still performed the 
same movement. They had now increased greatly in size, and 
had become oval; and their petioles were actually '8 of an inch 
in length ! 

Trifolinm strictum. — After 17 days the cotyledons still rose at 
night, but were not afterwards observed. 

Lotus JacobcBtts. — The cotyledons of some seedlings having 
w^ell-developed leaves rose to an angle of about 45° at night; 
and even after 3 or 4 whorls of leaves had been formed, the co- 
tyledons rose at night considerably above their diurnal hori- 
zontal position. 

Cassia mimosoides. — The cotyledons of this Indian species, 
14 da\s after their first expansion, and when a leaf had been 
formed, stood during the day horizontal, and at night vertical. 

Cansiu s/; f (a large S. Brazilian tree raised from seeds sent ua 



Chap. IL PULVINI OF COTYLEDONS. 117 

by F. Miillcr). — The cotyledons, after 16 days from their first 
expansion, had increased greatly in size with two leaves just 
formed. They stood horizontally during the day and vertically 
at night, but were not afterwards observed. 

Cassia neghcta (likewise a S. Brazilian species). — A seedling, 
34 days after the first expansion of its cotyledons, was between 3 
and 4 inches in height, with 3 well-developed leaves; and the 
cotyledons, which during the day were nearly horizontal, at night 
stood vertical, closely embracing the young stem. The cotyle- 
dons of another seedling of the same age, 5 inches in height, 
with 4 well-doveloiped leaves, behaved at night in exactly the 
same manner. 

It is known * that there is no difiference in structure 
between the upper and lower halves of the pulvini of 
leaves, sufficient to account for their upward or down- 
ward movements. In this respect cotyledons offer an 
unusally good opportunity for comparing the structure 
of the two halves ; for the cotyledons of Oxdlis Valdi- 
viana rise vertically at night, whilst those of 0. rosea 
sink vertically ; yet when sections of their pulvini were 
made, no clear difference could be detected between the 
corresponding halves of this organ in the two species 
which move so differently. With 0. rosea^ however, 
there were rather more cells in the lower than in the 
upper half, but this was likewise the case in one speci- 
men of 0, Valdiviana, The cotyledons of both species 
(3^ mm. in length) were examined in the morning 
whilst extended horizontally, and the upper surface of 
the pulvinus of 0. rosea was then wrinkled transvei*sely, 
showing that it was in a state of compression, and this 
might have been expected as the cotyledons sink at 
night; with 0. Valdiviana it was the lower surface 
which was wrinkled, and its cotyledons rise at night. 

Trifolium is a natural genus, and the leaves of all 



♦ Pfeffor, * Die Period. Bcwogungun/ 1875, p. 157. 



118 PULVINI OF COTYLEDONS. CJhap. TL 

the species seen by us are pulvinated ; so it is with 
the cotyledons of T. subterraneum and strictuniy which 
stand vertically at night ; whereas those of T, resupi- 
natmn exhibit not a trace of a pulvinus, nor of any 
nocturnal movement. This was ascertained by mea- 
suring the distance between the tips of the cotyledons 
of four seedlings at mid-day and at night. In this 
species, however, as in the others, the first-formed leaf, 
which is simple or not trifoliate, rises up and sleeps 
like the terminal leaflet on a mature plant. 

In another natural genus, Oxalis, the cotyledons of 
0, Valdiviana, rosea, floribunda, articvJatay and sensitiva 
are pulvinated, and all move at night into an upward 
or downward vertical position. In these several species 
the pulvinus is seated close to the blade of the coty- 
ledon, as is the usual rule with most plants. Oxalis cor- 
nictdata (var. Atro-purpurea) differs in several respects ; 
the cotyledons rise at night to a very variable amount, 
rarely more than 45°; and in one lot of seedlings 
(purchased under the name of 0, tropseoloides, but 
certainly belonging to the above variety) they rose 
only from 5° to 15° above the horizon. The pulvinus 
is developed imperfectly and to an extremely variable 
degree, so that apparently it is tending towards abor- 
tion. No such case has hitherto, we believe, been 
described. It is coloured green from its cells con- 
taining chlorophyll; and it is seated nearly in the 
middle of the petiole, instead of at the upper end as 
in all the other species. The nocturnal movement is 
effected partly by its aid, and partly by the growth of 
the upper part of the petiole as in the case of plants 
destitute of a pulvinus. Fr m these several reasons 
and from our having partially traced the develop- 
ment of the pulvinus from an early age, the case 
seems worth describing in some detail. 



CtaAP. II. 



PULTINI OF COTYLEDONS. 



110 



When the cotyledons of 0. mrntculit-i were disBected out of a 
Boed from which they would soon have naturally emerged, no 
tniceof a pnlvinus could be detected; and oil the cells forming 
the short petioIe,7 in number in a longitudinal row, were of nearly 
equal size. Id seedlings one or two days old, the pulvinuB was 
so indistinct that we thought at first that it did not esist; but 
iu the middle of the petiole an ill-defined Iransverse zone of cells 
could be peen, which were much shorttr than those Itoth above 
and below, although of the same breadth with them. They 
presented the appearance of having been just formed by the 
transverse division of lot>ger cells ; and there can bu lit'le doubt 
that this had occurred, for the cells in the petiole which had 




been dissected out of the seed averaged in length 7 divisions 
of the micrometer (each division equalling IKS ram ), and were 
a little longer than those forming a well-develojied pulvinus, 
which varied between 4 and 6 of these same divisions. After a 
fsw additional days the ill-defined zone of cells becomes distinct, 
and although it does not extend across the whole width of the 
petiole, and although the cellsareof a green colour from contain- 
ing chlorophyll, yet they certainly constitute a pulvinus, which, 
as we shall presently see, acts as one. These small cells were 
arranged in longitudinal rows, and varied from 4 to7 in number; 
and the cells themselves varied in length in different [ arts of the 



120 PULVmi OF COTYLEDOXS. Chap. H. 

same pulvinus and in different individnals. In the accompany- 
ing figures, A and B (Fig. 64), we have views of the epidcrJuiB* 
in the middle part of the petioles of two seedlings^ in whicii the 
pulvinus was for this species well developed. They offer a 
striking contrast with the pulvinus of 0. rosea (see former 
Fig. 63), or cf 0. Vnldiviana. With the seedlings, falsely called 
0. troj ceoJoirfes, the cotyledons of which rise very little at night, 
the small cells were still fewer in numher and in parts formed 
a single transverse row, and in other parts short longitudinal 
rows of only two or three. Nevertheless they sufficed to attract 
the eye, when the whole petiole was viewed as a transparent 
object beneath the microscope. In these seedlings there could 
hardly be a doubt that the pulvinus was becoming rudimentary 
and tending to disappear; and this accounts for its great 
variability in structure and function. 

In the following Table some meisurements of the cells in 
fciirly well-developed pulvini of 0. corniculuta are given : — 

Seedling I day old, with cofyltdun 2*3 mm. in length. 

Divisions of 
Micrometer.f 

Average length of cells of pulvinus 6 to 7 

Length of longest cell below the pulvinus 13 

Length of longest cell above the pulvinus 20 

Seedling b d ys o/d, cotyledon H*l mm. in length, %oi h the ptUvmua 

quite distinct. 

Average length of cells of pulvinus 6 

Length of longest cell below the pulvinus 22 

Leng :h of longest cell above the pulvinus 40 

Seedling 8 days old, cotj/ledon 5 mm, in length, with a ti've leaf 
formed but not i,et expanded. 

Average length of cells of pulvinus 9 

Length of longest cell below the pulvinus 44 

Length of longest cell above the pulvinus 70 

Seeding 13 days old, cotjiedon 4*5 mm. in length, with a smiU 

true leaf fully decebpcd. 

Average length of cells of pulvinus 7 

Length of longest cell below the pulvinus 30 

Length of longest cell above the pulvinus 60 



• Longitudinal sections show pulvinus. 

that the forms of the epidermic f Each division equalled *008 

cwlls may be taken as a fair repre- mm. 
Bcntatiou of those constitutiiig the 



OHAi'. IL PULVINI OF COTYLEDONS 121 

We here see that the cells of the pulvinas increase but little 
in length with advancing age, in comparison with thosj of the 
l>etiole both above and below it ; but they continue to grow in 
width, and keep equal in this respect with the other cells otf 
the petiole. The rate of growth, however, varies in all parts 
of the cotyledons, as may be observed in the measurements of 
the 8-days' old soling. 

The cotyledons of seedlings only a day old rise at night con- 
siderably, sometimes as much as afterwards; but there was 
much variation in this respect. As the pulvinus is so indistinct 
at first, the movement probably does not then depend on the 
expansion of its cells, but on periodically unequal growth in 
the petiole. By the comparison of seedlings of different known 
ages, it was evident that the chief seat of growth of the petiole 
was in the upper part between the pulvinus and the blade; 
and this agrees with the fact (shown in the measurements above 
given) that the cells grow to a greater length in the upper than 
in the lower part. With a seedling 1 1 days old, the nocturnal 
rise was found to depend largely on the action of the pulvinus, 
for the petiole at night was curved upwards at this point ; and 
during the day, whilst the petiole was horizontal, the lower 
surface of the pulvinus was wrinkled with the upper surface 
tense. Although the cotyledons at an advanced age do not rise 
at ni j.ht to a higher inclination than whilst young, yet they have 
to pass through a larger angle (in one instance amounting to 
63°) to gain their nocturnal position, as they are generally 
deflected beneath the horizon during the day. Evon with the 
11-days* old seedbng the movement did not depend exclusively 
on the pulvinus, for the blade where joined to the petiole was 
curved upwards, and this must be attributed to unequal growth. 
Therefore the periodic movements of the cotyledons of 0. corni- 
cnlaia depend on two distinct but conjoint actions, namely, the 
expansion of the cells of the pulvinus and on the growth of 
the upper part of the petiole, including the base of the blade. 

Lotus Jdcobceiis, — The seedlings of this plant present a case 
parallel to that of Oxalis corniculata in some respects, and in 
others unique, as far as we have seen. The cotyledons during 
the first 4 or 5 days of their life do not exhitdt any plain noc- 
turnal movement ; but afterwards they stand vertically or 
almost vertically up at night. There is, however, some degree of 
variability in this respect, apparently dependent on the season 
tnd on the degree to which they have been illuminated during 



122 PULVINI OP COTYLEDONS. Chap. U, 

the day. With older seedlings, having cotyledons 4 mm, i» 
length, which rise considerably at night, there is a well -deve- 
loped pulvinns close to the blade, colourless, and rather nar- 
rower than the rest of the petiole, from which it is abruptly 
separated. It is formed of a mass of small cells of an average 
length of 021 mm. ; whereas the cells in the lower part of the 
petiole are about *06 mm., and those in the blade from '034 to 
•04 mm. in length. The epidermic cells in the lower part of the 
petiole project conically, and thus differ in shape from those 
over the pulvinns. 

Turning now to very young seedlings, the cotyledons of which 
do not rise at night and are only from 2 to 2^ mm. in length, 
their petioles do not exhibit any defined zone of small cells, 
destitute of chlorophyll and differing in shape exteriorly from 
the lower ones. Nevertheless, the cells at the place where a 
pulvinns will afterwards be developed are smaller (being on an 
average 015 mm. in length) than those in the lower parts of 
the same petiole, which gradually become larger in proceeding 
downwards, the largest being 030 mm. in length. At this early 
age the cells of the blade are about '027 mm. in length. We 
thus see that the pulvinns is formed by the cells in the upper- 
most part of the petiole, continuing for only a short time to 
increase in length, then being arrested in their growth, accom- 
panied by the loss of their chlorophyll grains ; whilst the cells 
in the lower part of the petiole continue for a long time to 
increase in length, those of the epidermis becoming more conical. 
The siogular fact of the cotyledons of this plant not sleeping at 
first is therefore due to the pulvinns not being developed at an 
early age. 

We learn from these two cases of Lotus and Oxalis, 
that the development of a pulvinns follows from the 
growth of the cells over a small defined space of the 
petiole being almost arrested at an early age. With 
Lotus Jacohmus the cells at first increase a little in 
length ; in Oxalis corniaulata they decrease a little, 
owing to seli-division. A mass of such small cells 
forming a pulvinus, might therefore be either acquired 
or lost without any special difiiculty, by different 
species in the same natural genus : and we know that 



Ohap. II. DISTURBED PERIODIC MOVEMENTS. 123 

with seedlings of Trifolium, Lotus, and Oxalis some of 
the species have a well-developed pulvinus, and others 
have none, or one in a rudimentary condition. As the 
movements, caused by the alternate turgescence of 
the cells in the two halves of a pulvinus, must be 
largely determined by the extensibility and subse- 
quent contraction of their walls, we can perhaps under- 
stand why a large number of small cells will be more 
efficient than a small number of large cells occupying 
the same space. As a pulvinus is formed by the 
arrestment of the growth of its cells, movements de- 
pendent on their action may be long-continued withou 
any increase in length of the' part thus provided; 
and such long-continued movements seem to be one 
chief end gained by the development of a pulvinus. 
Long-continued movement would be impossible in any 
part, without an inordinate increase in its length, if the 
turgescence of the ceHs was always followed by growth. 
Disturbance of the Pe^'iodic Movements of Cotyledons by 
Light, — The hypocotyls and cotyledons of most seed- 
ling plants are, as is well known, extremely heliotropic ; 
but cotyledons, besides being heliotropic, are affected 
paratonically (to use Sachs' expression) by light ; that 
is, their daily periodic movements are greatly and 
quickly disturbed by changes in its intensity or by 
its absence. It is not that they cease to circumnutate 
in darkness, for in all the many cases observed by us 
they continued to do so; but the normal order of 
their movements in relation to the alternations of day 
and night is much disturbed or quite annulled. This 
holds good with species the cotyledons of which rise 
or sink so much at night that they may be said to 
sleep, as well as with others which rise only a little. 
But different species are affected in very different 
degrees by changes in the light. 



124 DISTURBED PERIODIC MOVEMENTS. Chap. IL 

For instance, the cotyledons of Beta vulgaris, Solanum lyaoper' 
§icum, Cerinthe major, and Lupinus lutetu, when placed in dark- 
ness, moved down during the afternoon and early night, instead 
of rising as they would have done if they had been exposed to 
the light. All the indiyiduals of the Solanum did not bebaye 
in the same manner^ for the cotyledons of one Girconmntated 
about the same spot between 2.30 and 10 p.m. The cotyledons 
of a seedling of Oxalis cornictdata, which was feebly illuminated 
from above, moved downwards during the first morning in the 
normal manner, but on the second morning it moved upwards. 
The cotyledons of I.ottis Jacobceus were not affected by 4 h. of 
complete darkness, but when placed under a double skylight 
and thus feebly illuminated, they quite lost their periodical 
movements on the third morning. On the other hand, the 
cotyledons of Cucnrbita ovi/era moved in the normal manner 
during a whole day in darkness. 

Seedlings of Gifhago seg^um were feebly illuminated from 
above in the morning before their cotyledons had expanded, and 
they remained closed for the next 40 h. Other seedlings were 
placed in the dark after their cotyledons had opened in the 
morning and these did not begin to close until about 4 h. had 
elapsed. The cotyledons of Oxalis rosea sank vertically down- 
wards after being left for 1 h. 20 m. in darkness ; but those of 
some other species of Oxalis were not affected by several hours 
of darkness. The cotyledons of several species of Cassia are 
eminently susceptible to changes in the degree of light to which 
they are exposed : thus seedlings of an unnamed S. Brazilian 
species (a large and beautiful tree) were brought out of the hot- 
house and placed on a table in the middle of a room with two 
north-east and one north-west window, so that tbey were fairly 
well illuminated, though of course less so than in the hot-house, 
the day being moderately bright; and after 36 m. the cotyledons 
which had been horizontal rose up vertically and closed together 
as when asleep ; after thus remaining on the table for 1 h. 13 m. 
they began to open. The cotyledons of young seedlings of another 
Brazilian species and of 0. neglecta, treated in the same manner, 
behaved similarly, excepting that they did not rise up quite so 
much : they again became horizontal after about an hour. 

Here is a more interesting case : seedlings of Cassia tora in 
two pots, which had stood for some time on the table in the 
room just described, had their cotyledons horizontal. One pot 
was now exposed for 2 h. to dull sunshine, and the cotyledoM 



CJhap. R SENSITn ENESS OF COTYLEDONa 125 

remained horizontal ; it was then brought back to the table, and 
after 60 m. the cotyledons had risen 68° above the horizon. 
The other pot was placed during the same 2 h. behind a screen 
in the room, where the light was very obscure, and the cotyledons 
rose 63° above the horizon ; the pot was then replaced on the 
table, and after 50 m. the cotyledons had fallen 33°. Those two 
pots with seedlings of the same age stood close together, and 
were exposed to exactly the same amount of light, yet the coty- 
ledons in the one pot were rising, whilst those in the other 
pot were at the same time sinking. This fact illustrates in a 
striking manner that their movements are not governed by the 
actual amount, but by a change in the intensity or degree of 
the light. A similar experiment was tried with two sets of seed- 
lings, both exposed to a dull light, but different in degree, and 
the result was the same. The movements of the cotyledons of this 
Cassia are, however, determined (as in many other cases^ largely 
by habit or inheritance, independently of light; for seedlings 
which had been moderately illuminated during the day, were 
kept all night and on the following morning in complete dark- 
ness; yet the cotyledons were partially open in the morning 
and remained open in the dark for about 6 h. The cotyledons 
in another pot, similarly treated on another occasion, were open 
at 7 A.M. and remained open in the dark for 4 h. 30 m, after 
which time they began to close. Tet these same seedlings, when 
brought in the middle of the day from a moderately bright 
into only a moderately dull light raised, as we have seen, their 
cotyledons high above the horizon. 

Sensitiveness of Cotyhdons to contact, — This subject does not 
possess much interest, as it is not known that sensitiveness of this 
kind is of any service to seedling plants. We have observed cases 
in only four genera, though we have vainly observed the coty- 
ledons of many others. The genus Cassia seems to be pre-eminent 
in this respect : thus, the cotyledons of C, tora, when extended 
horizontally, were both lightly tapped with a very thin twig for 
8 m., and in the course of a few minutes they formed together 
an angle of 90°, so that each had risen 45°. A single cotyledon 
of another seedling was tapped in a like manner for 1 m., and it 
rose 27° in 9 m. ; and after eight additional minutes it had risen 
10° more ; the opposite cotyledon, which was not tapped, hardly 
moved at all. The cotyledons in all these cases became hori- 
zontal again in less than half an hour. The pulvinus is the most 
Bensitive part, for on slightly pricking three cotyledons with ft 



J 26 COTYLEDONS SENSITIVE Chap. EL 

pin in this part, they rose up vertically ; but the blade was found 
also to be sensitive, care having been taken that the pulvinus 
was not touched. Drops of water placed quietly on these coty- 
ledons produced no effect, but an extremely fine stream of water, 
ejected from a syringe, caused them to move upwards. When 
a pot of seedlings was rapidly hit with a stick and thus jarred, 
the cotyledons rose slightly. When a minute drop of nitric 
acid was placed on both pulvini of a seedling, the cotyledons 
rose so quickly that they could easily be seen to move, and 
almost immediately afterwards they began to fall; but the 
pulvini had been killed and became brown. 

The cotyledons of an unnamed species of Cassia (a large tree 
from S. Brazil) rose 31° in the course of 26 m after the pulvini 
and the blades had both been rubbed during 1 m. with a twig ; 
but when the blade alone was similarly rubbed the cotyledons 
rose only 8°. The remarkably long and narrow cotyledons, of a 
third unnamed species from S. Brazil, did not move when their 
blades were rubbed on six occasions with a pointed stick for 
30 8. or for 1 m. ; but when the pulvinus was rubbed and slightly 
pricked with a pin, the cotyledons rose in the course of a few 
minutes through an angle of 60°. Several cotyledons of 
C. neglecta (likewise from S. Brazil) rose in from 5 m. to 15 ra. to 
various angles between 16° and 34°, after being rubbed during 
1 m. with a twig. Their sensitiveness is retained to a somewhat 
advanced age, for the cotyledons of a little plant of C. > eghcta, 
34 days old and bearing three true leaves, rose when lightly 
pinched between the finger and thumb. Some seedlings were 
exposed for 30 m. to a wind (temp. 50° F.) sufficiently strong to 
keep the cotyledons vibrating, but this to our surprise did not 
cause any movement. The cotyledons of four seedlings of the 
Indian C. ylaucawere either rubbed with a thin twig for 2 m. or 
were lightly pinched : one rose 34° ; a second only 6° ; a third 
13°; and a fourth 17°. A cotyledon of C. florida similarly 
treated rose 9° ; one of C. corymhosa rose 71°, and one of the 
very distinct C. mimosoides only 6°. Those of C. pubcscerts did 
not appear to be in the least sensitive ; nor were those of C. 
V d(mi, but these latter are rather thick and fleshy, and do not 
rise at night or go to sleep. 

Smithia sevsitiva. —This plant belongs to a distinct sub-order of 
the LeguminossB from Cassia. Both cotyledons of an oldish 
seedling, with the first true leaf partially unfolded, were rubbed 
for 1 m. with a fine twig, and in 6 m. each rose 3^°; thoy 



Ohap. il to contact. 127 

remained in this position for 15 m., but when looked at again 
40'm. after the rubbing, each had fallen 14°. Both cotyledons of 
another and younger seedling were lightly rubbed in the same 
manner for 1 m., and after an interval of 32 m. each had risen 
30°. They were hardly at all sensitive to a fine jet of water. 
The cotyledons of .S. I'fandii, an African water plant, fire thick 
and fleshy ; they are not sensitive and do not go to sleep. 

Mimosa pudica and alhida. — The blades of several cotyledons 
of both these plants were rubbed or slight^ scratched with a 
needle duiing Im. or 2m. ; but they did not move in the least. 
When, however, the pulvini of six cotyledons of M. pudica were 
thus scratched, two of them were slightly raise* 1. In these two 
cases perhaps the pulvinus was accidentally pricked, for on 
prickiog the pulvinus of another cotyledon it rose a little. It 
thus appears that the cotyledons of Mimosa are less sensitive 
than those of the previously mentioned plants.* 

Uxidis aensifiu i. — The bla les and pulvini of two cotyledons, 
standing hoiizontally, were rubbed or rather tickled for 30 s. 
with a fine split bristle, and in 10 m. each had risen 48°; 
when looked at again in 33 m. after being rubbed they had 
risen 4° more ; after 30 additional minutes they were again hori- 
zontal. On hitting a pot rapidly with a stick for 1 m., the coty- 
ledons of two seedlings were considerably raised in the course 
of 11 m. A pot was carried a little distance on a tray and thus 
jolted; and the cotyledons of four seedhngs were all raised in 
10 m. ; after 17 m. one had risen 56°, a second 45°, a third almost 
90°, and a fourth 90°. After an additional interval of 40 m. three 
of them had re-expanded to a considerable extent. These obser- 
vations were made before we were aware at what an extraordi- 
narily rapid rate the cotyledons circumnutate, and are therefore 
h'able to error. Nevertheless it is extremely improbable that the 
cotyledons in the eight cases given, should all have been rising 
at the time when they were irritated. The cotyledons of ^halis 
Valdiviana and rosea were rubbed and did not exhibit any 
sensitiveness. 

Finally, there seems to exist some relation between 

• The sole notice which wo p. 865), •Mes colyl'dons du M 

have met with on the sensitive- pudira tendent a se laproelier pai 

nets of cotyledons, relates to Mi- leiirs faces superie vires lorsqu'on 

naosa; for Au/. P. De CundoHe les irrite.'* 
•ays (*PhyB. Veg.,' 1832, torn, ii 



128 SENSITIVENESS OF COTYLEDONS. Chap IL 

the habit of cotyledons rising vertically at night or 
going to sleep, and their sensitiveness, especially that 
of their pulvini, to a touch ; for all the above-named 
plants sleep at night. On the other hand, there are 
many plants the cotyledons of which sleep, and are 
not in the least sensitive. As the cotyledons of 
several species of Cassia are easily a£fected both by 
slightly diminished light and by contact, we thought 
that these two kinds of sensitiveness might be con- 
nected ; but this is not necessarily the case, for the 
cotyledons of Oxalis sensitiva did not rise when kept 
on one occasion for IJ h., and on a second occasion 
for nearly 4 h., in a dark closet. Some other coty- 
ledons, as those of Githago segetum, are much a£fected 
by a feeble light, but do not move when scratched by 
a needle. That with the same plant there is some 
relation between the sensitiveness of its cotyledons 
and leaves seems highly probable, for the above de- 
scribed Smithia and Oxalis have been called sensitiva^ 
owing to their leaves being sensitive ; and though the 
leaves of the several species of Cassia are not sensitive 
to a touch, yet if a branch be shaken or syringed 
with water, they partially assume their nocturnal de- 
pendent position. But the relation between the sen- 
sitiveness to contact of the cotyledons and of the 
leaves of the same plant is not very close, as may be 
inferred from the cotyledons of Mimosa pudica being 
only slightly sensitive, whilst the leaves are well 
known to be so in the highest degree. Again, the 
leaves of Neptunia oleracea are very sensitive to a 
touch, wliilst the cotyledons do not appear to be so in 
any degree. 



Ohap. m. SENSITIVENESS OF BADICLE8. 128 



CHAPTER IIL 

Semsitiyeness of the Apex of the Radicle to Contact avd to 

OTHER IbBIIANTS. 

Hanner iu which radicles bend when they encounter an obstacle in 
the soil — Vicia fuba, tips of radicles iiighly senriitive to contact 
and other irritants — Effects of too high a temperature — Power of 
disciiminatiu^ bulween objects attiicljtd on opposite sides — Tips of 
secondary radicles Sensitive — Pisum, lips of radicles 8en^itive — 
Effects of such sensitivene^JS in ov« rcoiniiig geotropism— Sccomlary 
radicles — Pl.aseolus, tips of roxlicL'S hardly sensitive to contact 
but highly sensitive to caustic and to the rem >val of a slice — Tro- 
proolum — Gossypium— Cucurbita — Raphanus — iEsculus, tip not 
sensitive to slight contact, highly sensitive to caustic— Quercus, 
tip highly sensitive to contact — Power of dscrimination — Zeu 
tip highly sensitive, secondary riidicles— Sensitiveness of radicles 
to moist air — Summary of chapter. 

In order to see how the radicles of seedlings would 
pass over stones, roots, and other obstacles, which they 
must incessantly encounter in the soil, germinating 
beans {Vicia f aba) were so placed that the tips of the 
radicles came into contact, almost rectangularly or 
at a high angle, with underlying plates of glass. In 
other cases the beans were turned about whilst their 
wtdicles were growing, so that they descended nearly 
vertically on their own smooth, almost flat, broad upper 
surfaces. The delicate root-cap, when it first touched 
any directly opposing surface, was a little flattened 
transversely ; the flattening soon became oblique, and 
in a few hours quite disappeared, the apex now point- 
ing at right angles, or at nearly right angles, to its 
former course. The radicle then seemed to glide in 
its new direction over the surface which had opposed 



J 30 SENSITIVENESS OF RADICLES. Chap. UL 

it, pressing on it with very little force. How far such 
abrupt changes in its former course are aided by the 
cireumnutation of the tip must be left doubtful. Thin 
slips of wood were cemented on more or less steeply 
inclined glass-plates, at right angles to the radicles 
which were gliding down them. Straight lines had 
been painted along the growing terminal part of some 
of these radicles, before they met the opposing slip 
of wood ; and the lines became sensibly curved in 2 h. 
after the apex had come into contact with the slips. 
In one case of a radicle, which was growing rather 
slowly, the root-cap, after encountering a rough slip 
of wood at right angles, was at first slightly flat- 
tened transversely : after an interval of 2 h. 30 m. 
the flattening became oblique ; and after an addi- 
tional 3 hours the flattening had wholly disappeared, 
and the apex now pointed at right angles to its former 
course. It then continued to grow in its new direc- 
tion alongside the slip of wood, until it came to the 
end of it, round which it bent rectangularly. Soon 
afterwards when coming to the edge of the plate of 
glass, it was again bent at a large angle, and de- 
scended perpendicularly into the damp sand. 

When, as in the above cases, radicles encountered 
an obstacle at right angles to their course, the terminal 
growing part became curved for a length of between 
• 3 and * 4 of an inch (8-10 mm.), measured from the 
apex. This was well shown by the black lines which 
had been previously painted on them. The first and 
most obvious explanation of the curvature is, that it 
results merely from the mechanical resistance to the 
growth of the radicle in its original direction. Never- 
theless, this explanation did not seem to us satisfactory. 
The radicles did not present the appearance of having 
been subjected to a suflScient pressure to account for 



Chap. in. SENSITIVENESS OF RADICLES. 131 

llieir curvature ; and Sachs has shown * that the 
growing part is more rigid than the part immediately 
above which has ceased to grow, so that the latter 
might have been expected to yield and become curved 
as soon as the apex encountered an unyielding object ; 
whereas it was thg stiff growing part which became 
curved. Moreover, an object which yields with the 
greatest ease will deflect a radicle : thus, as we have 
seen, when the apex of the radicle of the bean 
encountered the polished surface of extremely thin 
tin-foil laid on soft sand, no impression was left on it 
yet the radicle became deflected at right angles. A 
second explanation occurred to us, namely, that even 
the gentlest pressure might check the growth of the 
apex, and in this case growth could continue only on 
one side, and thus the radicle would assume a rectan- 
gular form ; but this view leaves wholly unexplained 
the curvature of the upper part, extending for a length 
of 8-10 mm. 

We were therefore led to suspect that the apex 
was sensitive to contact, and that an effect was trans- 
mitted from it to the upper part of the radicle, which 
was thus excited to bend away from the touching object. 
As a little loop of fine thread hung on a tendril or 
on the petiole of a leaf-climbing plant, causes it to 
bend, we thought that any small hard object affixed 
to the tip of a radicle, freely suspended and growing 
in damp air, might cause it to bend, if it were sensitive, 
and yet would not offer any mechanical resistance to 
its growth. Full details will be given of the experi- 
ments which were tried, as the result proved remark- 
able. The fact of the apex of a radicle being sensitive 
to contact has never been observed, though, as we sliall 



• * Ajbeiten Bot. Inst. Wuizburg/ Heft iii. 1873, p. 398. 



132 ' SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Chap. IH 

Uoreafter see, Sachs discovered that the radicle a little 
above the apex is sensitive, and bends like a tendril 
towards the touching object. But when one side of the 
apex is pressed by any object, the growing part bends 
away from the object; and this seems a beautiful 
adaptation for avoiding obstacles in the soil, and, as 
we shall see, for following the lines of least resistance. 
Many organs, when touched, bend in one fixed direc- 
tion, such as the stamens of Berberis, the lobes of 
Dionaea, &c. ; and many organs, such as tendrils, whe- 
ther modified leaves or flower-peduncles, and some few 
stems, bend towards a touching object ; but no case, 
we believe, is known of an organ bending away from 
a touching object. 

Sensitiveness of the Apex of the Radicle of Vicia faha, 
— Common beans, after being soaked in water for 24 h., 
were pinned with the hilum downwards (in the manner 
followed by Sachs), inside the cork lids of glass-vessels, 
which were half filled with water ; the sides and the 
cork were well moistened, and light was excluded. 
As soon as the beans had protruded radicles, some to a 
length of less than a tenth of an inch, and others to 
a length of several tenths, little squares or oblongs of 
card were affixed to the short sloping sides of their 
conical tips. The squares therefore adhered obliquely 
with reference to the longitudinal axis of the radicle ; 
and this is a very necessary precaution, for if the bits 
of card accidentally became displaced, or were drawn 
by the viscid matter employed, so as to adhere parallel 
to the side of the radicle, although only a little way 
above the conical apex, the radicle did not bend in 
the peculiar manner which we are here considering. 
Squares of about the ^th of an inch (i.e. about 1 J mm.), 
or oblong bits of nearly the same size, were found to 



Chap. IIL OF THE RADICLE OF THE BEAN. 133 

be the most convenient and effective. We employed 
at first ordinary thin card, such as visiting cards, or 
bits of very thin glass, and various other objects ; but 
afterwards sand-paper was chiefly employed, for it was 
almost as stiff as thin card, and the roughened surface 
favoured its adhesion. At first we generally used very 
thick "gum-water; and this of course, under the cir- 
cumstances, never dried in the least ; on the contrary, 
it sometimes seemed to absorb vapour, so that the bits 
of card became separated by a layer of fluid from the 
tip. When there was no such absorption and the card 
was not displaced, it acted well and caused the radicle 
to bend to the opposite side. I should state that 
thick gum-water by itself induces no action. In most 
cases the bits of card were touched with an extremely 
small quantity of a solution of shellac in spirits of 
wine, which had been left to evaporate until it was 
thick ; it then set hard in a few seconds, and fixed the 
bits of card well. When small drops of the shellac 
were placed on the tips without any card, they set into 
hard little beads, and these acted like any other hard 
object, causing the raclicles to bend to the opposite 
side. Even extremely minute beads of the shellac 
occasionally acted in a slight degree, as will hereafter 
be described. But that it was the cards which chiefly 
acted in our many trials, was proved by coating one 
side of the tip with a little bit of goldbeaters' skin 
(which by itself hardly acts), and then fixing a bit of 
card to the skin with shellac which never came into 
contact with the radicle : nevertheless the radicle bent 
away from the attached card in the ordinary manner. 

Some preliminary trials were made, presently to 
be described, by which the proper temperature was 
determined, and then the following experiments were 
made. It should be premised that the beans were 



134 



SENSITi\ENESS OF THE APEX Chap. UL 



always fixed to the cork-lids, for the convenience oi 
manipulation, with the edge from which the radicle 
and plumule protrudes, outwards ; and it must be 
remembered that owing to what we have called Sachs' 
curvature, the radicles, instead of growing perpendi- 
cularly downwards, often bend somewhat, even £is much 



c. 





Vhia faba : A, radicle beginning to bend from the attAcbed little sqaan 
of card ; B, bent at a rectangle ; C, bent into a circle or loop, with the 
tip beginning to bend downwards through the action of geotropUm. 

as about 45° inwards, or under the suspended bean. 
Tlierefore when a square of card was fixed to the apex 
in front, the bowing induced by it coincided with Sachs' 
curvature, and could be distinguished from it only by 
being more strongly pronounced or by occurring more 
quickly. To avoid this source of doubt, the squares 



Chap. IIL OF THE RADICLE OF THE BEAN. 135 

wore fixed either behind, causing a curvature in direct 
opposition to that of Sachs', or more commonly to the 
right or left sides. For the sake of brevity, we will 
speak of the bits of card, &c., as fixed in front, or 
behind, or laterally. As the chief curvature of the 
radicle is at a little distance from the apex, and as 
tlie extreme terminal and basal portions are nearly 
straight, it is possible to estimate in a rough manner 
the amount of curvature by an angle ; and when it is 
said that the radicle became deflected at any angle 
from the perpendicular, this implies that the apex was 
turned upwards by so many degrees from the down- 
ward direction which it would naturally have followed, 
and to the side opposite to that to which the card was 
afiBxed. That the reader may have a clear idea of the 
kind of movement excited by the bits of attached 
card, we append here accurate sketches of three ger- 
minating beans thus treated, and selected out of 
several specimens to show the gradations in the 
degrees of curvature. We will now give in detail a 
series of experiments, and afterwards a summary of 
the results. 

In the first 12 trials, little squares or oblongs of sanded card, 
1*8 mm. in length, and 1*5 or only 0*9 mm. in breadth (i.e. '071 
ot an inch in length and '059 or '035 of an inch in breadth) were 
fixed with shellac to the tips of the radicles. In the subsequent 
trials the little squares were only occasionally measured, but 
were of about the same size. 

(1.) A young radicle. 4 mm. in length, had a card fixed be- 
hind: after 9 h. deflected in the plane in which the bean is 
flattened, 50° from the perpendicular and from the card, and in 
opposition to Sachs' curvature ; no change next morning, 23 h. 
from the time of attachment. 

(2.) Eadicle 5*5 mm. in length, card fixed behind : after 9 h. 
deflected in the plane of the bean 20^ from the perpendicular 
and from the card, and in opposition to Saclis' curvature : after 
23 h. no change. 
10 



136 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Chap. HI 

(3.) Radicle 11 mm in length, card fixed behind: after 9 h« 
deflected in the plane of the bean 40° from the perpendicular 
and from the card, and in opposition to Sachs' curvature. The 
tip of the radicle more curved than the upper part, but in the 
same plane. After 23 h. the extreme tip was sh'phtly bent to- 
wards the card ; the general curvature of the radicle remaining 
the same. 

(4.) Radicle 9 mm. long, card fixed behind and a little 
laterally: after 9h. deflected in the plane of the bean only 
about 7° or 8° from the perpendicular and from the card, in 
opposition to Sachs' curvature. There was in addition a slight 
lateral curvature directed partly from the card. After 23 h. no 
change. 

(5.) Radicle 8 mm. long, card affixed almost laterally : after 
9 h. deflected 30° from the perpendicular, in the plane of the 
bean and in opposition to Sachs' curvature ; also deflected in a 
plane at right angles to the above one, 20° from the perpen- 
dicular : after 23 h. no change. 

(G.) Radicle 9 mm. long, card affixed in front : after 9 h. de- 
flected in the plane of the bean about 40f from the vertical, 
away from the card and in the direction of Sachs* curvature. 
Here therefore we have no evidence of the card being the 
cause of the deflection, except that a radicle never moves 
spontaneously, as far as we have seen, as much as 40** in the 
course of 9 h. After 23 h. no change. 

(7.) liiidicle 7 mm. long, card affixed to the back : after 9 h. 
the terminal part of the radicle dt fleeted in the plane of the 
bean 20° from the vertical, away fi-om the card and in opposition 
to Sachs' curvature. After 22 h. 30 m. this part of the radicle 
had become straight. 

(8.) Radicle 12 mm. long, card affixed almost laterally : after 
9 h. deflected laterally in a plane at right angles to that of the 
bean between 40^ and 50° from the vertical and from the card. 
In the plane of the l>ean itself the deflection amounted to b** or 
9° from the vertical and {rom the cartl, in opposition to Sachs* 
curvature. After 22 h. 30 m. the extreme tip had become 
slightly ourveil towards the card. 

(9.^ Card fixoil laterally : after 11 h. 30 m. no effect, the 
radicle l>eir.ir still almost vertical. 

i^lO.) Caril tixeil almost laterally: after 11 h. 30 m. deflected 
90^ from the vertical and from the card, in a plane inter* 
nicvliato lH?twcon that of the l)can itselt and one at rin^t 



Chap. III. OF THE RADICLE OF THE BEAN. 137 

angles to it. Eadicle consequently partially deflected from 
Sachs' curvature. 

(11.) Tip of radicle protected with goldbeaters' skin, with a 
square of card of the usual dimensions aflBxed with shellac: 
after 11 h. greatly deflected in the plane of the bean, in the 
direction of Sachs' curvature, but to a much greater degree and 
in less time than ever occurs spontaneously. 

(12.) Tip of radicle protected as in last case : after 11 h. no 
effect, but after 24 h. 40 m. radicle clearly deflected from the 
card. This slow action was probably due to a portion of the 
goldbeaters' skin having curled round and lightly touched the 
opposite side of the tip and thus irritated it. 

(13.) A radicle of considerable length had a small square of 
card fixed with shellac to its apex laterally : after only 7 h. 15 m. 
a length of '4 of an inch from the apex, measured along the 
middle, was considerably curved from the side bearing the card. 

(14.) Case like the last in all respects, except that a length of 
only '25 of an inch of the radicle was thus deflected. 

(15.) A small square of card fixed with shellac to the apex of 
a young radicle ; after 9 h. 15 m. deflected through 90° from the 
perpendicular and from the card. After 24 h. deflection much 
decreased, and after an additional day, reduced to 23° from the 
perpendicular. 

(IG.) Square of card fixed with shellac behind the apex of a 
radicle, which from its position having l)een changed during 
growth had become very crooked; but the terminal i)ortion 
was straight, and this became deflected to about 45° from 
the perpendicular and from the card, in opposition to Sachs* 
curvature. 

(17.) Square of card aflBxed with shellac : after 8 h. radicle 
curved at right angles from the perpendicular and from the 
card. After 15 additional hours curvature much decreased. 

(18.) Square of card aflBxed with shellac: after 8h. no eflfect; 
after 23 h. 3 m. from time of aflBxing, radicle much curved from 
the square. 

(19.) Square of card aflBxed with shellac : after 24 h. no effect, 
but the radicle had not grown well and seemed sickly. 

(20.) Square of card affixed with shellac : after 24 h. no effect. 

(21, 22.) Squares of card aflBxed with shellac: after 24 h.. 
radicles of both curved at about 45° from the perpendicular and 
&om the cards. 

(23.) Square of card fixed with shellac to young radicle : after 



138 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Obap. Ill 

91i. very slightly curved from the card; after 24 h. tip curved 
towards card. Kefixed new square laterally, atter 9 h. distinctly 
curved from the card, and after 24 h. curved at right angles frcm 
the perpendicular and from the card. 

(24.) A rather large oblong piece of card fixed with shellac to 
apex ; after 24 h. no effect, but the card was found not to be 
touching the apex. A small square was now refixed with 
shellac ; after 16 h. slight deflection from the perpendicular 
and from the card. After an additional day the radicle became 
almost straight. 

(25.) Square of card fixed laterally to apex of young radicle; 
after 9h. deflection from the perpendicular considerable; after 
24 h. deflection reduced. Eefixed a fresh square with shellac: 
after 24 h. deflection about 40° from the perpendicular and from 
the card. 

(26.) A very small S(j[uare of card fixed with shellac to apex of 
young radicle : after 9 h. the deflection from the perpendicular 
and from the card amounted to nearly a right angle ; after 24 h. 
deflection much reduced ; after an additional 24 h. radicle almost 
straight. 

(27.) Square of card fixed with shellac to apex of young 
radicle : after 9 h. deflection from the card and from the perpen- 
dicular a right angle; next morning quite straight Refixed 
a square laterally with shellac ; after 9 h. a little deflection, 
which after 24 h. increased to nearly 20° from the perpendicular 
and from the card. 

(23.) Square of card fixed with shellac; after 9 h. some 
deflection ; next morning the card dropped off; refixed it with 
shellac ; it again became loose and was refixed ; and now on the 
third trial the radicle was deflected after 14 h. at right angles 
from the card. 

(29.) A small square of card was first fixed with thick gam- 
water to the apex. It produced a slight effect but soon fell 
off. A similar square was now aflSxed laterally with shellac: 
after 9 h. the radicle was deflected nearly 45° from the perpen- 
dicular and from the card. After 36 additional hours angle of 
deflection reduced to about 30°. 

(30.) A very small piece, less than ^th of an inch square, of 
thin tin-foil fixed with shellac to the apex of a young radicle; 
after 24 h. no effect. Tin- foil removed, and a small square of 
sanded card fixed with shellac ; after 9 h. deflection at neailj 
right angles from the perpendicular and from the card. NesI 



CiiAP. lU. OF THE RADICl E OF THE BEAN. 139 

moming deflection reduced lo about 40° from the perpen- 
dicular. 

(31.) A splinter of thin glass gummed to apex, after 9 h. no 
effect, but it was then found not to be touching the apex of the 
radicle. Next moming a square of card was fixed with shellao 
to it, and after 9 h. radicle greatly deflected from the card. 
After two additional days the deflection had decreased and was 
only 35° from the perpendicular. 

(32.) Small square of sanded card, attached with thick gum- 
water laterally lo the apex of a long straight radicle: after 9 h. 
greatly deflected from the perpendicular and from the card. 
Curvature extended for a length of '22 of an inch from the 
apex. After 3 additional hours terminal portion deflected at 
right angles from the perpendicular. Next moming the curved 
]K>rtion was '36 in length. 

(33.) Square of card gummed to apex : after ]5 h. deflected at 
Dearly 90° from the perpendicular and from the card. 

(34.) Small oblong of sanded card gummed to apex: after 
15 h. deflected 90° from the perpendicular and from the card : 
in the course of the three following days the terminal portion 
became much contorted and ultimately coiled into a helix. 

(35.) Square of card gummed to apex: after 9 h. deflected from 
card : after 24 h. from time of attachment greatly deflected 
obliquely and partly in opposition to Sachs* curvature. 

(36.) Small piece of card, rather less than ^th of an inch 
square, gummed to apex: in 9 h. considerably deflected from 
card and in opposition to Sachs* curvature ; after 24 h. greatly 
deflected in the same direction. After an additional day the 
extreme tip was curved towards the card. 

(37.) Square of card, gummed to apex in front, caused after 
8 h. 30 m. hardly any effect ; refixed fresh square laterally, after 
15 h. deflected almost 90° from the perpendicular and from the 
card. After 2 additional days deflection much reduced. 

(38.) Square of card gummed to apex : after 9 h. much deflec- 
tion, which after 24 h. from time of fixing increased to nearly 
90°. After an additional day terminal portion was curled into 
a loop, and on the following day into a helix. 

(39.) Small oblong piece of card gummed to apex, nearly in 
front, but a little to one side; in 9 h. slightly deflected in the 
direction of Sachs* curvature, but rather obliquely, and to 
side opposite to card. Next day more curved in the same 
direction, and after 2 additional days ceiled into a ring. 



110 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Chap. HL 

(40.) Square of card guramcd to apex: after 9 h. slightly 
curved from card ; next morning radicle straight, and apex had 
grown beyond the card. Refixed another square laterally with 
shellac ; in 9 h. deflected laterally, but also in the direction of 
Sachs' curvature. After 2 additional days' curvature consider- 
ably increased in the same direction. 

(41.) Little square of tin-foil fixed with gum to one side of 
apex of a young and short radicle : after 15 h. no effect, but 
tin-foil had become displaced. A little square of card was now 
gummed to one side of apex, which after 8 h. 40 m. was slightly 
deflected ; in 24 h. from the time of attachment deflected at 90** 
from the perpendicular and from the card ; after 9 additional 
hours became hooked, with the apex pointing to the zenith. In 
3 days from the time of attachment the terminal portion of the 
radicle formed a ring or circle. 

(42.) A little square of thick letter-paper gummed to the 
apex of a radicle, which after 9 h. was deflected from it. In 
24 h. from time wlien the paper was affixed the deflection much 
increased, and after 2 additional days it amounted to 50^ from 
the perpendicular and from the paper. 

(43.) A narrow chip of a quill was fixed with shellac to the 
apex of a radicle. After 9 h. no effect ; after 24 h. moderate 
deflection, but now the quill had ceased to touch the apex. 
Eemoved quill and gummed a little square of card to apex, 
which after 8 h. caused slight deflection. On the fourth day 
from the first attachment of any object, the extreme tip was 
curved towards the card. 

(44.) A rather long and narrow splinter of extremely thin 
glass, fixed with shellac to apex, it caused in 9 h. slight 
deflection, which disappeared in 24 h. ; the splinter was then 
found not touching the apex. It was twice refixed, with nearly 
similar results, that is, it caused slight deflection, which soon 
disappeiired. On the fourth day from the time of first attach- 
ment the tip was bent towards the splinter. 

From these experiments it is clear that the apex of 
the radicle of the bean is sensitive to contact, and 
that it causes the npper part to bend away from the 
touching object. But before giving a summary of the 
results, it will be convenient l)rie fly to give a few other 
observations. Bits of very thin glass and little squaref 



Chap. UI. OF THE RADICLE OF THE BEAN. 141 

of common card were aflfixed with thick gum- water to 
the tips of the radicles of seven beans, as a pre- 
liminary trial. Six of these were plainly acted on, 
and in two cases the radicles became coiled up into 
complete loops. One radicle was curved into a semi- 
circle in so short a period as 6 h. 10 m. The 
seventh radicle which was not affected was apparently 
sickly, as it became brown on the following day ; so 
that it formed no real exception. Some of these trials 
were made in the early spring during cold weather in 
a sitting-room, and others in a greenhouse, but the 
temperature was not recorded. These six striking 
cases almost convinced us that the apex was sensitive, 
but of course we determined to make many more trials. 
As we had noticed that the radicles grew much more 
quickly when subjected to considerable heat, and as 
we imagined that heat would increase their sensitive- 
ness, vessels with germinating beans suspended in 
damp air were placed on a chimney-piece, where they 
were subjected during the greater part of the day to a 
temperature of between 69"^ and 72° F. ; some, how- 
ever, were placed in the hot-house where the tempera- 
ture was rather higher. Above two dozen beans were 
thus tried; and when a square of glass or card did 
not act, it was removed, and a fresh one aflSxed, this 
being often done thrice to the same radicle. There- 
fore between five and six dozen trials were altogether 
made. But there was moderately distinct deflection 
from the perpendicular and from the attached object 
in only one radicle out of this large number of cases. 
In five other cases there was very slight and doubtfnl 
deflection. We were astonished at this result, and 
concluded that we had made some inexplicable mis- 
take in the first six experiments. But before finally 
relinquishing the subject, we resolved to make one 



142 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Chap. IIL 

Other trial, for it occurred to us that sensitiveness is 
easily affected by external conditions, and that radicles 
growing naturally in the earth in the early spring 
would not be subjected to a temperature nearly so 
high as 70° F. We therefore allowed the radicles 
of 12 beans to grow at a temperature of between 
55° and 60° F. The result was that in every one of 
these cases (included in the above-described experi- 
ments) the radicle was deflected in the course of a few 
hours from the attached object. All the above re- 
corded successful trials, and some others presently to 
be given, were made in a sitting-room at the tempera- 
tures just specified. It therefore appears that a tem- 
perature of about, or rather above, 70° F. destroys 
the sensitiveness of the radicles, either directly, or 
indirectly through abnormally accelerated growth ; 
and this curious fact probably explains why Sachs, 
who expressly states that his beans were kept at a 
high temperature, failed to detect the sensitiveness of 
the apex of the radicle. 

But other causes interfere with this sensibility. 
Eighteen radicles were tried with little squares of 
sanded card, some affixed with shellac and some with 
gum- water, during the few last days of 1878, and few 
first days of the next year. They were kept in a room 
at the proper temperature during the day, but were 
probably too cold at night, as there was a hard frost at 
the time. The radicles looked healthy but grew very 
slowly. The result was that only 6 out of the 18 
were deflected from the attached cards, and this only 
to a slight degree and at a very slow rate. These 
radicles therefore presented a striking contrast with 
the 44 above described. On March 6th and 7th, when 
the temperature of the room varied between 53® and 
59° F., eleven germinating beans were tried in the 



Qbat. iu of the radicle of the bean. 143 

same manner, and now every one of the radicles 
became curved away from the cards, though one was 
only slightly deflected. Some horticulturists believe 
that certain kinds of seeds will not germinate pro- 
perly in the middle of the winter, although kept at a 
right temperature. If there really is any proper period 
for the germination of the bean, the feeble degree of 
sensibility of the above radicles may have resulted 
from the trial having been made in the middle of the 
winter, and not simply from the nights being too cold. 
Lastly, the radicles of four beans, which from some 
innate cause germinated later than all the others of 
the same lot, and which grew slowly though appearing 
healthy, were similarly tried, and even after 24 h. they 
were hardly at all deflected from the attached cards. 
We may therefore infer that any cause which renders 
the growth of the radicles either slower or more rapid 
than the normal rate, lessens or annuls the sensibility 
of their tips to contact. It deserves particular atten- 
.tion that when the attached objects failed to act, there 
was no bending of any kind, excepting Sachs' curva- 
ture. The force of our evidence would have been 
greatly weakened if occasionally, though rarely, the 
radicles had become curved in any direction inde- 
pendently of the attached objects. In the foregoing 
numbered paragraphs, however, it may be observed 
that the extreme tip sometimes becomes, after a con- 
siderable interval of time, abruptly curved towards the 
bit of card ; but this is a totally distinct phenomenon, 
as will presently be explained. 

Summary of the Results of the foregoing Encperiments 
on the Badicles of Viciafaba. — Altogether little squares 
(about 2^th of an inch), generally of sanded paper 
as stiff as thin card (between '15 and '20 mm. iu 
thickness), sometimes of ordinary card, or little frag- 



144 SESSmVISE^ OF the apex Cmmt. iil 

aenti of rerf thin s^I^^s. drc^ vere affixed at different 
ttm^ to one $i'ie of the ec^nical tips c^ 55 ladicles. 
The 11 lEi^'meiition<ed cases, bot not the pieliminaiy 
ones, are here inclu'lei The Sifjnaies. ic., were most 
eomiuonlv affixed itith shellac, bot in 19 cases with 
thick j^om-water. When the hitter was used, the 
^joares were sometimes foond, as previooslT stated, 
Uj be separated from the apex bv a layer of thick 
fluid, so that there was no contact, and conse- 
quently no bending of the radicle; and such few 
cases were not reconled. But in eyerv instance in 
which shellac was employed, unless the square fell 
off yery soon, the result was recorded. In seyeral 
instanc^^ when the sr^uares became displaced, so as 
to stand jiarallel to the radicle, or were separated by 
fluid from the apex, or soon fell off, fresh squares 
were attached, and these cases (described under the 
numVx.Ted paragraphs) are here included. Out of 
55 ra^licles experimented on under the proper tempe- 
rature, 52 became bent, generally to a considerable 
extent from the perpendicular, and away from the 
side to which the object was attached. Of the three 
failures, one can be accounted for, as the radicle 
becanio sickly on the following day; and a second 
was observed only during 11 h. 30 m. As in several 
coHrjs the terminal growing part of the radicle continued 
for Hoino time to bend from the attached object, it 
foriiuid its(ilf into a hook, with the apex pointing to 
tii(5 z(;nith, or even into a ring, and occasionally into a 
H|)ire or helix. It is remarkable that these latter cases 
oceurn;(l more fre([uent]y when objects were attached 
with thick gum-water, which never became dry, than 
when sh(;IIac was emplojed. The curvature was often 
welI-mark(Ml in from 7 h. to 11 h. ; and in one instance 
a semicircle was formed in 6 h. 10 m. from the time 



Chap. III. OF THE RADICLE OF THE BEAN. 14:5 

of attachment. But in order to see the phenomenon 
as well displayed as in the above described cases, it is 
indispensable that the bits of card, &c., should bo 
made to adhere closely to one side of the conical 
apex; that healthy radicles should be selected and 
kept at not too high or too low a temperature, and 
apparently that the trials should not be made in* the 
middle of the winter. 

In ten instances, radicles which had curved away 
from a square of card or other object attached to their 
tips, straightened themselves to a certain extent, or 
even completely, in the course of from one to two days 
from the time of attachment. This was more espe- 
cially apt to occur when the curvature was slight. 
But in one instance (No. 27) a radicle which in 9 h. 
had been deflected about 90^^ from the perpendicular, 
became quite straight in 24 h. from the period of 
attachment. With No. 26, the radicle was almost 
straight in 48 h. We at first attributed the straighten- 
ing process to the radicles becoming accustomed to a 
slight stimulus, in the same manner as a tendril or 
sensitive petiole becomes accustomed to a very light 
loop of thread, and unbends itself though the loop 
remains still suspended; but Sachs states* that radicles 
of the bean placed horizontally in damp air after 
curving downwards through geotropism, straighten 
themselves a little by growth along their lower or 
concave sides. Why this should occur is not clear; 
but perhaps it likewise occurred in the above ten 
cases. There is another occasional movement which 
must not be passed over : the tip of the radicle, for a 
length of from 2 to 3 mm., was found in six instances, 



'Arbeiten Bot Instit., Wurzburg,' Heft iii. p. 456. 



J46 SENSITIVENESS OP THE APEX Chap. UL 

after an interval of about 24 or more hours, bent 
towards the bit of still attached card, — that is, in a 
direction exactly opposite to the previously induced 
curvature of the whole growing part for a length of 
from 7 to 8 mm. This occurred chiefly when the first 
curvature was small, and when an object had been 
afiBxed more than once to the apex of the same radicle. 
The attachment of a bit of card by shellac to one 
side of the tender apex may sometimes mechanically 
prevent its growth ; or the application of thick gum- 
water more than once to the same side may injure it ; 
and then checked growth on this side with continued 
growth on the opposite and unaffected side would 
account for the reversed curvature of the apex. 

Various trials were made for ascertaining, as far 
as we could, the nature and degree of irritation to 
which the apex must be subjected, in order that the 
terminal gi^owing part should bend away, as if to 
avoid the cause of irritation. We have seen in the 
numbered experiments, that a little square of rather 
thick letter-paper gummed to the apex induced, 
though slowly, considerable deflection. Judging from 
several cases in which various objects had been affixed 
with gum, and had soon become separated from the 
apex by a layer of fluid, as well as from some trials 
in which drops of thick gum-water alone had been 
applied, this fluid never causes bending. We have 
also seen in the numbered experiments that narrow 
splinters of quill and of very thin glass, affixed with 
sliellac, caused only a slight degree of deflection, and 
this may perhaps have been due to the shellac 
itself. Little squares of goldbeaters' skin, which is 
excessively thin, were damped, and thus made to 
adhere to one side of the tips of two radicles ; one of 
these, after 24 h., produced no effect; nor did the 



Chap. III. OF THE RADICLE OF THE BEAN. 147 

other in 8 h., within which time squares of card usually 
act ; bnt after 24 h. there was slight deflection. 

An oval bead, or rather cake, of dried shellac, 
1*01 mm. in length and 0'63 in breadth, caused a 
radicle to become deflected at nearly right angles in 
the course of only 6 h. ; but after 23 h. it had nearly 
straightened itself. A very small quantity of dissolved 
shellac was spread over a bit of card, and the tips of 
9 radicles were touched laterally with it ; only two of 
them became slightly deflected to the side opposite 
to that bearing the speck of dried shellac, and they 
afterwards straightened themselves. These specks 
were removed, and both together weighed less than 
yj^ljth of a grain; so that a weight of rather less 
than 5^th of a grain (0*32 mgs.) suflBced to excite 
movement in two out of the nine radicles. Here 
then we have apparently reached nearly the minimum 
weight which will act. 

A moderately thick bristle (which on measurement 
was found rather flattened, being 0*33 mm. in one 
diameter, and 0*20 mm. in the other) was cut into 
lengths of about ^ih of an inch. These after being 
touched with thick gum-water, were placed on the tip 
of eleven radicles. Three of them were aflTected ; one 
being deflected in 8 h. 15 m. to an angle of about 90° 
from the perpendicular ; a second to the same amount 
when looked at after 9 h. ; but after 24 h. from the 
time of first attachment the deflection had decreased 
to only 19^; the third was only slightly deflected 
after 9 h., and the bit of bristle was then found not 
touching the apex; it was replaced, and after 15 
additional hours the deflection amounted to 26° from 
the perpendicular. . The remaining eight radicles 
were not at all acted on by the bits of bristle, so that 
we here appear to have nearly reached the minimum 



148 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Chap. IIL 

of size of an object which will act on the radicle of 
the bean. But it is remarkable that when the bits of 
bristle did act, that they should have acted so quickly 
and efficiently. 

As the apex of a radicle in penetrating the ground 
must be pressed on all sides, we wished to learn 
whether it could distinguish between harder or more 
resisting, and softer substances. A square of the sanded 
paper, almost as stiff as card, and a square of extremely 
thin paper (too thin for writing on), of exactly the 
same size (about ^th of an inch), were fixed with 
shellac on opposite sides of the apices of 12 suspended 
radicles. The sanded card was between 0*15 and 
• 20 mm. (or between • 0059 and • 0079 of an inch), 
and the thin paper only 0'045 mm. (or 0*00176 of an 
inch) in thickness. In 8 out of the 12 cases there 
could be no doubt that the radicle was deflected from 
the side to which the card-like paper was attached, and 
towards the opposite side, bearing the very thin paper. 
This occurred in some instances in 9 h., but in others 
not until 24 h. had elapsed. Moreover, some of the 
four failures can hardly be considered as really failures : 
thus, in one of them, in which the radicle remained 
quite straight, the square of thin paper was found, 
when both were removed from the apex, to have been 
so thickly coated with shellac that it was almost as 
stiff as the card : in the second case, the radicle was 
bent upwards into a semicircle, but the deflection 
was not directly from the side bearing the card, and 
this was explained by the two squares having become 
ceinented laterally together, forming a sort of stiff 
gable, from which the radicle was deflected : in the 
thiid case, the square of card had been fixed by 
mistake in front, and though there was deflection 
from it, this might have been due to Sachs' curvature . 



Chap. IIL OP THE RADICLE OF THE BEAN. 149 

in the fourth case alone no reason could be assigned 
why the radicle had not been at all deflected. These 
experiments suflBce to prove that the apex of the 
radicle possesses the extraordinary power of discri- 
minating between thin card and very thin paper, and 
is deflected from the side pressed by the more re- 
sisting or harder substance. 

Some trials were next made by irritating the tips 
without any object being left in contact with them. 
Nine radicles, suspended over water, had their tips 
rubbed, each six times with a needle, with sufficient 
force to shake the whole bean ; the temperature was 
favourable, viz. about 63^ F. In 7 out of these cases 
no effect whatever was produced ; in the eighth case 
the radicle became slightly deflected from, and in thf^ 
ninth case slightly deflected towards, the rubbed side : 
but these two latter opposed curvatures were probably 
accidental, as radicles do not always grow perfectly 
straight downwards. The tips of two other radicles 
were rubbed in the same manner for 15 seconds with 
a little round twig, two others for 30 seconds, and two 
others for 1 minute, but without any effect being pro- 
duced. We may therefore conclude from these 15 
trials that the radicles are not sensitive to temporary 
contact, but are acted on only by prolonged, though 
very slight, pressure. 

We then tried the effects of cutting off a very thin 
slice parallel to one of the sloping sides of the apex, 
as we thought that the wound would cause prolonged 
irritation, which might induce bending towards the 
opposite side, as in the case of an attached object. 
Two preliminary trials were made : firstly, slices were 
cut from the radicles of 6 beans suspended in damp 
air, with a pair of scissors, which, though sharp, 
probably caused considerable crushing, and no curva- 



150 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Chap. 1 a. 

ture followed. Secondly, thin slices were cut with a 
razor obliquely off the tips of three radicles similarly 
suspended ; and after 44 h. two were found plainly 
bent from the sliced surface ; and the third, the whole 
apex of wliich had been cut off obliquely by accident, 
was curled upwards over the bean, but it was not 
clearly ascertained whether the curvature had been at 
first directed from the cut surface. These results led 
us to pursue the experiment, and 18 radicles, which 
had grown vertically downwards in damp air, had one 
side of their conical tips sliced off with a razor. The 
tips were allowed just to enter the water in the jars, 
and they were exposed to a temperature 14°-16° C. 
(57^-61° F.). The observations were made at dif- 
ferent times. Three were examined 12 h. after being 
sliced, and were all slightly curved from the cut 
surface; and the curvature increased considerably after 
an additional 12 h. Eight were examined after 19 h. : 
four after 22 h. 30 m. ; and three after 25 h. The 
final result was that out of the 18 radicles thus tried, 
13 were plainly bent from the cut Surface after the 
above intervals of time; and one other became so 
after an additional interval of 13 h. 30 m. So that 
only 4 out of the 18 radicles were not acted on. To 
these 18 cases the 3 previously mentioned ones should 
be added. It may, therefore, be concluded that a thin 
slice removed by a razor from one side of the conical 
apex of the radicle causes irritation, like that from an 
attached object, and induces curvature from the injured 
surface. 

Lastly, dry caustic (nitrate of silver) was employed 
to irritate one side of the apex. If one side of the 
apex or of the whole terminal growing part of a 
radicle, is by any means killed or badly injured, the 
other side continues to grow ; and this causes the pan 



CiiAP. ra. OF THE RADICLE OF THE BEAN. 151 

to bend over towards the injured side.* But i: the 
following experiments we endeavoured, generally with 
success, to irritate the tips on one side, without ladly 
injuring them. This was effected by first drying the 
tip as far as possible with blotting-paper, though it still 
remained somewhat damp, and then touching it once 
with quite dry caustic. Seventeen radicles were thus 
treated, and were suspended in moist air over water at 
a temperature of 58 '' F. They were examined after 
an interval of 21 h. or 24 h. The tips of two were 
found blackened equally all round, so that they could 
tell nothing and were rejected, 15 being left. Of 
these, 10 were curved from the side which had been 
touched, where there was a minute brown or blackish 
mark. Five of these radicles, three of which were 
already slightly deflected, were allowed to enter the 
water in the jar, and were re-examined after an addi- 
tional interval of 27 h. (i.e. in 48 h. after the appli- 
cation of the caustic), and now four of them had 
become hooked, being bent from the discoloured side 
with their points directed to the zenith ; the fifth 
remained unaffected and straight. Thus 11 radicles 
out of the 15 were acted on. But the curvature cf 
the four just described was so plain, that they alone 
would have sufficed to show that the radicles of the 
bean bend away from that side of the apex which has 
been slightly irritated by caustic. 

The power of an Irritant on the apex of tlie Radicle 

* Ciebielski found this to be the peuded over water, with a thick 

case (* Untersuchungen iiber die layer of grea=.e, which is very 

Abwartskriimmung der Wurz;!,* injurious or even fatal to grow- 

1871, p. 28) after burning w.tb iiig parts; for after 48 hours 

heated platinum one siile of a five of these radicles were curved 

radicle. So did wo when we towards the greased side, two 

{minted longitudinaUy half of the rumainiug btraight. 
whole len^h of 7 radicles, sus- 

11 



152 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Chap. III. 

of the Bean, compared with that of Geotropism. — We 
know that when a little square of card or other 
object is fixed to one side of the tip of a vertically 
dependent radicle, the growing 2)art bends from it 
often into a semicircle, in opposition to geotropism, 
which force is conquered by the eflfect of the irri- 
tation from the attached object. Radicles were there- 
fore extended horizontally in damp air, kept at 
the proper low temperature for full sensitiveness, 
and squares of card were affixed with shellac on the 
lower sides of their tips, so that if the squares 
acted, the terminal growing part would cuiTe upwards. 
Firstly, eight beans were so placed that their short, 
young, horizontally extended radicles would be simul- 
taneously acted on both by geotropism and by Sachs' 
curvature, if the latter came into play ; and they all 
eight became bowed downwards to the centre of the 
earth in 20 h., excepting one which was only slightly 
acted on. Two of them were a little bowed downwards 
in only 5 h. ! Therefore the cards, affixed to the lower 
sides of their tips, seemed to produce no effect ; and 
geotropism easily conquered the effects of the irritation 
thus caused. Secondly, 5 oldish radicles, IJ inch in 
length, and therefore less sensitive than the above- 
mentioned young ones, were similarly placed and 
similarly treated. From what has been seen on many 
other occasions, it may be safely inferred that if they 
had been suspended vertically they would have bent 
away from the cards ; and if they had been extended 
horizontally, without cards attached to them, they 
would have quickly bent vertically downwards through 
geotropism; but the result was that two of these 
radicles were still horizontal after 23 h. ; two were 
curved only slightly, and the fifth as much as 40° 
beneath the horizon. Thirdly, 5 beans were fastened 



Chap. in. OF THE RADICLE OF THE BEAN. 153 

with their flat surfaces parallel to the cork-lid, so that 
Sachs' curvature would not tend to make the hori- 
zontally extended radicles turn either upwards or 
downwards, and little squares of card were aflSxed as 
before, to the lower sides of their tips. The result 
was that all five radicles were bent down, or towards 
the centre of the earth, after only 8 h. 20 m. At 
the same time and within the same jars, 3 radicles of 
the same age, with squaios affixed to one side, were 
suspended vertically ; and after 8 h. 20 m. they were 
considerably deflected from the cards, and therefore 
curved upwards in oppositioiito geotropism. In these 
latter cases the irritation from the squares had over- 
powered geotropism ; whilst in the former cases, in 
which the radicles were extended horizontally, geo- 
tropism had overpowered the irritation Thus within 
the same jars, some of the radicles were curving 
upwards and others downwards at the same time — 
these opposite movements depending on whether the 
radicles, when the squares were first attached to them, 
projected vertically down, or were extended horizon- 
tally. This difference in their behaviour seems at first 
inexplicable, but can, we believe, be simply explained 
by the diflference between the initial power of the two 
forces under the above circumstances, combined with 
the well-known principle of the after-effects of a sti- 
mulus. When a young and sensitive radicle is extended 
horizontally, with a square attached to the lower side 
of the tip, geotropism acts on it at right angles, and, 
as we have seen, is then evidently more efficient than 
the irritation from the square ; and the power of geo- 
tropism will be strengthened at each successive period 
by its previous action — that is, by its after-effects. 
On the other hand, when a square is aflBxed to a 
vertically dependert radicle, and the apex begins to 



154 SENSITIVENESS OF THE RADICLE. Chap. IIL 

curve upwards, this movement will be opposed by geo- 
tropism acting only at a very oblique angle, and the 
irritation from the card will be strengthened by its 
previous action. We may therefore conclude that the 
initial power of an irritant on the apex of the radicle 
of the bean, is less than that of geotropism when 
acting at right angles, but greater than that of geo- 
tropisnl when acting obliquely on it. 

Sensitiveness of the tips of the Secondary Radicles of the 
Bean to contact. — All the previous observations relate 
to the main or primary radicle. Some beans suspended 
to cork-lids, with their radicles dipping into water, had 
developed secondary or lateral radicles, which were 
afterwards kept in very damp air, at the proper low 
temperature for full sensitiveness. They projected, 
as usual, almost horizontally, with only a slight 
downward curvature, and retained this position 
during several days. Sachs has shown* that these 
secondary roots are acted on in a peculiar manner by 
geotropism, so that if displaced they reassume their 
former sub-horizontal position, and do not bend verti- 
cally downwards like the primary radicle. Minute 
squares of the stifif sanded paper were aflSxed by 
means of shellac (but in some instances with thick 
gum-water) to the tips of 39 secondary radicles of 
different ages, generally the uppermost ones. Most 
of the squares were fixed to the lower sides of the apex, 
so that if they acted the radicle would bend upwards ; 
but some were fixed laterally, and a few on the upper 
side. Owing to the extreme tenuity of these radicles, 
it was very difiicult to attach the square to the 
actual apex. Whether owing to this or some other 
circumstance, only nine of the squares induced any 



« Arbeiten Tot. Inst., Wurzburg,' Heft iv. 1874, p. 605-617. 



Chap. UL SENSITIVENESS OF THE RADICLE. 155 

curvature. The curvature amounted in some cases to 
about 45° above the horizon, in others to 90°, and then 
the tip pointed to the zenith. In one instance a 
distinct upward curvature was observed in 8 h. 15 m., 
but usually not until 24 h. had elapsed. Although 
only 9 out of 39 radicles were affected, yet the curva- 
ture was so distinct in several of them, that there could 
be no doubt that the tip is sensitive to slight contact, 
and that the growing part bends away from the touch- 
ing object. It is possible that some secondary radicles 
are more sensitive than others ; for Sachs has proved * 
the interesting fact that each individual secondary 
radicle possesses its own peculiar constitution. 

Sensitiveness to contact of the Primary Radicle, a little 
above the apex, in the Bean ( Vicia faba) and Pea {Pisum 
sativum). — The sensitiveness of the apex of the radicle 
in the previously described cases, and the consequent 
curvature of the upper part from the touching object 
or other source of irritation, is the more remarkable, 
because Sachs t has shown that pressure at the distance 
of a few millimeters above the apex causes the radicle 
to bend, like a tendril, towards the touching object. 
By fixing pins so that they pressed against the radicles 
of beans suspended vertically in damp air, we saw this 
kind of curvature ; but rubbing the part with a twig 
or needle for a few minutes produced no effect. Haber- 
landt remarks,^ that these radicles in breaking through 
the seed-coats often rub and press against the ruptured 
edges, and consequently bend round them. As little 
squares of the card-like paper affixed with shellac to 
the tips were highly efiScient in causing the radicles 
to bend away from them, similar pieces (of about Voth 



♦ •Arbeiten Bot. Instit., Wiirz- % 'DioSchutzeinrichtungender 

burg/ Heft. iv. 1874, p. 620. Keimpflanzo,' 1877, p. 25. 

t Ibid. Heft iii. 1873, p. 437. 



] 56 SENSITIVENESS OF THE Chap. Ut 

inch square, or rather less) were attached in the same 
manner to one side of the radicle at a distance of 3 or 
4 mm. above the apex. In our first trial on 15 radicles 
no effect was produced. In a second trial on the same 
number, three became abruptly curved (but only one 
strongly) towards the card within 24 h. From these 
cases we may infer that the pressure from a bit of card 
affixed with shellac to one side above the apex, is hardly 
a sufficient irritant ; but that it occasionally causes the 
radicle to bend like a tendril towards this side. 

We next tried the effect of rubbing several radicles 
at a distance of 4 mm. from the apex for a few seconds 
with lunar caustic (nitrate of silver) ; and although the 
radicles had been wiped dry and the stick of caustic 
was dry, yet the part rubbed was much injured and a 
slight permanent depression was left. In suoh cases 
the opposite side continues to grow, and the radicle 
necessarily becomes bent towards the injured side. 
But when a point 4 mm. from the apex was momen- 
tarily touched with dry caustic, it was only faintly 
discoloured, and no permanent injury was caused. This 
was shown by several radicles thus treated straighten- 
ing themselves after one or two days ; yet at first they 
became curved towards the touched side, as if they had 
been there subjected to slight continued pressure. 
These cases deserve notice, because when one side of 
the apex was just touched with caustic, the radicle, as 
we have seen, curved itself in an opposite direction, that 
is, away from the touched side. 

The radicle of the common peq, at a point a little 
above the apex is rather more sensitive to continued 
pressure than that of the bean, and bends towards the 
pressed side.* We experimented on a variety (Tori- 



• Sachs. * Arbeiten Bot. Institut, Wurzburg/ Heft Ui. p. 438. 



Chat. HL UPPEB PART OF THE RADICLE. 15? 

slUre Hero) which has a much wrinkled tough skin, 
too large for the included cotyledons ; so that out of 
30 peas which had been soaked for 24 h. and allowed 
to germinate on damp sand, the radicles of three were 
unable to escape, and were crumpled up in a strange 
manner within the skin ; four other radicles were 
abruptly bent round the edges of the ruptured skin 
against which they had pressed. Such abnormalities 
would probably never, or very rarely, occur with forms 
developed in a state of nature and subjected to natural 
selection. One of the four radicles just mentioned in 
doubling backwards came into contact with the pin 
by which the pea was fixed to the cork-lid ; and now it 
bent at right angles round the pin, in a direction quite 
different from that of the first curvature due to contact 
with the ruptured skin ; and it thus afforded a good 
illustration of the tendril-like sensitiveness of the 
radicle a little above the apex. 

Little squares of the card-like paper were next 
aflSxed to radicles of the pea at 4 mm. above the apex, 
in the same manner as with the bean. Twenty-eight 
radicles suspended vertically over water were thus 
treated on different occasions, and 13 of them became 
curved towards the cards. The greatest degree of 
curvature amounted to 62^ from the perpendicular; 
but so large an angle was only once formed. On one 
occasion a slight curvature was perceptible after 5 h. 
45 m., and it was generally well-marked after 14 h. 
There can therefore be no doubt that with the pea, 
irritation from a bit of card attached to one side of the 
radicle above the apex sufiSces to induce curvature. 

Squares of card were attached to one side of the tips 
of 11 radicles within the same jars in which the above 
trials were made, and five of them became plainly, 
and one slightly, curved away from this side. Other 



158 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Chap. Ill 

analogous cases will be immediately described. The 
fact is here mentioned because it was a striking spec- 
tacle, showing the difference in the sensitiveness of 
the radicle in different parts, to behold in the same 
jar one set of radicles curved away from the squares on 
their tips, and another set curved towards the squares 
attached a little higher up. Moreover, the kind of 
curvature in the two cases is different. The squares 
attached above the apex cause the radicle to bend 
abruptly, the part above and beneath remaining nearly 
straight ; so that here there is little or no transmitted 
effect. On the other hand, the squares attached to 
the apex affect the radicle for a length of from about 
4 to even 8 mm., inducing in most cases a sym- 
metrical curvature; so that here some influence is 
transmitted from the apex for this distance along the 
radicle. 

Pisum sativum (var. Yorkshire Hero) : Sensitiveness of 
the apex of the Radicle.— Jjittle squares of the same card- 
like paper were afiSxed (April 24th) with shellac to 
one side of the apex of 10 vertically suspended radicles : 
the temperature of the water in the bottom of the jars 
was 60°-61° F. Most of these radicles were acted on 
in 8 h. 30 m. ; and eight of them became in the course 
of 24 h. conspicuously, and the remaining two slightly, 
deflected from the perpendicular and from the side 
bearing the attached squares. Thus all were acted on ; 
but it will suffice to describe two conspicuous cases. 
Tn one the terminal portion of the radicle was bent at 
right angles (A, Fig. 66) after 24 h. ; and in the other 
(B) it had by this time become hooked, with the apex 
pointing to the zenith. The two bits of card here used 
were '07 inch in length and '04 inch in breadth. Two 
other radicles, which after 8 h. 30 m. were moderately 
deflected, became straight again after 24 h. Another 



Chap, in. 



OF THE RADICLE OF THE PEA. 



159 



trial was made in the same manner with 15 radicles ; 
but from circumstances, not worth explaining, they 
were only once and briefly examined after the short 

Fig. 66. 





A. 



B. 



Pisum sativum : deflection pn«hu*e(l within 24 hours in the growth of 
vertically dependent radicles, by little squares of card aftixed with 
shellac to one side of apex : A, bent at light angles ; li, hooked. 

interval of 5 h. 30 m. ; and we merely record in our 
notes " almost all bent slightly from the perpendicular, 
and away from the squares ; the deflection amounting 
in one or two instances to nearly a rectangle." These 
two sets of cases, especially the first one, prove that 
the apex of the radicle is sensitive to slight contact 
and that the upper part bends from the touching 
object. Nevertheless, on June 1st and 4th, 8 other 
radicles were tried in the same manner at a tempera- 
ture of 58°-60° r., and after 24 h only 1 wag decidedly 
bent from the card, 4 slightly, 2 doubtfully, and 1 not 
in the least. The amount of curvature was unaccount- 
ably small ; but all th^ radicles which were at all bent, 
were bent away from the cards. 

We now tried the eff'ects of widely diflferent tempera- 
tares on the sensitiveness of these radicles with squares 



160 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Chap. UI 

of card attached to their tips. Firstly, 13 peas, most 
of them having very short and young radicles, were 
placed in an ice-box, in which the temperature rose 
during three davs from 44° to 47° F. They grew slowly, 
but 10 out of the 13 became in the course of the three 
days very slightly curved from the squares ; the other 
3 were not aflected ; so that this temperature was too 
low for any high degree of sensitiveness or for much 
movement. Jars with 13 other radicles were next 
placed on a chimney-piece, where they were subjected 
to a temperature of between 68° and 72° F., and 
after 24 h., 4 were conspicuously curved from the 
cards, 2 slightly, and 7 not at all ; so that this tem- 
perature was rather too high. Lastly, 12 radicles 
were subjected to a temperature varying between 
72° and 85° F., and none of them were in the least 
affected by the squares. The above several trials, 
especially the first recorded one, indicate that the 
most favourable temperature for the sensitiveness of 
the radicle of the pea is about 60° F. 

The tips of 6 vertically dependent radicles were 
touched once with dry caustic, in the manner described 
under Vicia faba. After 24 h. four of them were bent 
from the side bearing a minute black mark ; and the 
curvature increased in one case after 38 h., and in 
another case after 48 h., until the terminal part pro- 
jected almost horizontally. The two remaining ra- 
dicles were not affected. 

I With radicles of the bean, when extended horizontally 
in damp air, geotropism always conquered the effects 
of the irritation caused by squares of card attached to 
the lower sides of their tips. A similar experiment 
was tried on 13 radicles of the pea ; the squares being 
attached with shellac, and the temperature between 
58°~60° F. The result was somewhat different; for 



ohap. in. 



OF THE BADICLE OF THE PEA. 



161 



these radicles are either less strongly acted on by 
geotropism, or, what is more probable, are more sen- 
sitive to contact. After a time geotropism always 
prevailed, but its action was often delayed; and in 
three instances there was a most curious struggle 
between geotropism and the irritation caused by the 
cards. Four of the 13 radicles were a little curved 
downwards within 6 or 8 h., always reckoning from 
the time when the squares were first attached, and 
after 23 h. three of them pointed vertically down- 
wards, and the fourth at an angle of 45° beneath the 
horizon. These four radicles therefore did not seem 



Fig. 67. 





A. B. 

Pwwn sativum: n radicle extended horizontally in damp air with a tittle 
square of card affixed to the lower side of its tip, causing it to bend 
upwards in opposition to geotropism. The deflection of the radicle 
after 21 hours is shown at A, and of the same radicle after 45 hours at 
B, now forming a loop. 

to have been at all affected by the attached squares. 
Four others were not acted on by geotropism within 
the first 6 or 8 h., but after 23 h. were much bowed 
down. Two others remained almost horizontal for 
23 h., but afterwards were acted on. So that in these 
latter six cases the action of geotropism was much 
delayed. The eleventh radicle was slightly curved 
down after 8 h., but when looked at again after 23 h. 
the terminal portion was curved upwards; if it had 



iri2 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Chap. IIL 

been longer observed, the tip no doubt would have 
been found again curved down, and it would have 
formed a loop as in the following case. The tweKth 
radicle after 6 h. was slightly curved downwards ; but 
when looked at again after 21 h., this curvature had 
disappeared and the apex pointed upwards ; after 30 h. 
the tadicle formed a hook, as shown at A (Fig. 67) ; 
which hook after 45 h. was converted into a loop (B). 
The thirteenth radicle after 6 h. was slightly curved 
downwards, but within 21 h. had curved considerably 
up, and then down again at an angle of 45° beneath 
the horizon, afterwards becoming perpendicular. In 
these three last cases geotropism and the irritation 
caused by the attached squares alternately prevailed 
in a highly remarkable manner; geotropism being 
ultimately victorious. 

Similar experiments were not always quite so suc- 
cessful as in the above cases. Thus 6 radicles, horizon- 
tally extended with attached squares, were tried on 
June 8th at a proper temperature, and after 7 h. 30 m. 
none were in the least curved upwards and none were 
distinctly geotropic ; whereas of 6 radicles without any 
attached squares, which served as standards of com- 
parison or controls, 3 became slightly and 3 almost 
rectangularly geotropic within the 7 h. 30 m. ; but 
after 23 h. the two lots were equally geotropic. On 
July 10th another trial was made with 6 horizontally 
extended radicles, with squares attached in the same 
manner beneath their tips ; and after 7 h. 30 m., 4 were 
slightly geotropic, 1 remained horizontal, and 1 was 
curved upwards in opposition to gravity or geotropism. 
This latter radicle after 48 h. formed a loop, like that 
at B (Fig. 67). 

An analogous trial was now made, but instead of 
attaching squares of card to the lower sides of the 



OkiAP. in. OP THE BADICLE OF PHASEOLUa 163 

tips, these were touched with dry caustic. The details 
of the experiment will be given in the chapter on 
Geotropism, and it will suffice here to say that 10 
peas, with radicles extended horizontally and not cau- 
terised, were laid on and under damp friable peat ; 
these, which served as standards or controls, as well as 
10 others which had been touched on the upper side 
with the caustic, all became strongly geotropic in 24 h. 
Nine radicles, similarly placed, had their tips touched 
on the lower side with the caustic ; and after 24 h., 

3 were slightly geotropic, 2 remained horizontal, and 

4 were bowed upwards in opposition to gravity and to 
geotropism. This upward curvature was distinctly 
visible in 8 h. 45 m. after the lower sides of the tips 
had been cauterised. 

Little squares of card were affixed with shellac on 
two occasions to the tips of 22 young and short 
secondary radicles, which had been emitted from the 
primary radicle whilst growing in water, but were now 
suspended in damp air. Besides the difficulty of 
attaching the squares to such finely pointed objects 
as were these radicles, the temperature was too high, 
— varying on the first occasion from 72° to 77° F., and 
on the second being almost steadily 78° F. ; and this 
probably lessened the sensitiveness of the tips. The 
result was that after an interval of 8 h. 30 m., 6 of the 
22 radicles were bowed upwards (one of them greatly) 
in opposition to gravity, and 2 laterally; the remain- 
ing 14 were not aflfected. Considering the unfavour- 
able circumstances, and bearing in mind the case of 
the bean, the evidence appears sufficient to show that 
the tips of the secondary radicles of the pea are 
sensitive to slight contact. 

Phaseolus mvltiflorus : Sensitiveness of the apex of the 
Radicle. — Fifty-nine radicles were tried with squares 



1(H SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Cuap. HI 

of various sizes of the same card-like paper, also with 
bits of thin glass and rough cinders, afiSxed with shellac 
to one side of the apex. Rather large drops of the 
dissolved shellac were also placed on them and allowed 
to set into hard beads. The specimens were subjected 
to various temperatures between 60° and 72° F., more 
commonly at about the latter. But out of this con- 
siderable number of trials only 5 radicles were plainly 
bent, and 8 others slightly or even doubtfully, from 
the attached objects ; the remaining 46 not being at 
all affected. It is therefore clear that the tips of the 
radicles of this Phaseolus are much less sensitive to 
contact than are those of the bean or pea. We 
thought that they might be sensitive to harder 
pressure, but after several trials we could not devise 
any method for pressing harder on one side of the 
apex than on the other, without at the same time 
offering mechanical resistance to its growth. We 
therefore tried other irritants. 

The tips of 13 radicles, dried with blotting-paper, 
were thrice touched or just rubbed on one side 
with dry nitrate of silver. They were rubbed thrice, 
because we supposed from the foregoing trials, that 
the tips were not highly sensitive. After 24 h. the 
tips were found greatly blackened ; 6 were blackened 
equally all round, so that no curvature to any one 
side could be expected; 6 were much blackened on 
one side for a length of about -j-'yth of an inch, and 
tliis length became curved at right angles toivards the 
blackened surface, the curvature afterwards increasing 
in several instances until little hooks were formed. 
It was manifest that the blackened side was so much 
injured that it could not grow, whilst the opposite 
side continued to grow. One alone out of these 13 
radicles became curved from the blackened side, the 



OBAP.m. OF THE RADICLE OF PHASEOLUS. 16£ 

curvature extending for some little distance above 
the apex. 

After the experience thus gained, the tips of six 
almost dry radicles were once touched with the dry 
caustic on one side; and after an interval of 10 m. 
were allowed to enter water, which was kept at a 
temperature of 65°-67° F. The result was that after 
an interval of 8 h. a minute blackish speck could 
just be distinguished on one side of the apex of five 
of these radicles, all of which became curved towards 
the opposite side — in two cases at about an angle 
of 45° — in two other cases at nearly a rectangle — and 
in the fifth case at above a rectangle, so that the apex 
was a little hooked ; in this latter case the black mark 
was rather larger than in the others. After 24 h. 
from the application of the caustic, the curvature of 
three of these radicles (including the hooked one) had 
diminished ; in the fourth it remained the same, and 
in the fifth it had increased, the tip being now hooked. 
It has been said that after 8 h. black specks could 
be seen on one side of the apex of five of the six 
radicles ; on the sixth the speck, which was extremely 
minute, was on the actual apex and therefore central ; 
and this radicle alone did not become curved. It was 
therefore again touched on one side with caustic, and 
after 15 h. 30 m. was found curved from the perpen- 
dicular and from the blackened side at an angle of 34"", 
which increased in nine additional hours to 54°. 

It is therefore certain that the apex of the radicle 
of this Phaseolus is extremely sensitive to caustic, 
more so than that of the bean, though the latter is 
far more sensitive to pressure. In the experiments 
just given, the curvature from the slightly cauterised 
Bide of the tip, extended along the radicle for a 
length of nearly 10 mm. ; whereas in the first set 



166 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Chap. HI 

of experiments, when the tips of several were greatly 
blackened and injured on one side, so that their growth 
was arrested, a length of less than 3 mm. became 
curved towards the much blackened side, owing to the 
continued growth of the opposite side. This differ- 
ence in the results is interesting, for it shows that too 
strong an irritant does not induce any transmitted 
effect, and does not cause the adjoining, upper and 
growing part of the radicle to bend. We have analo- 
gous cases with Drosera, for a strong solution of car- 
bonate of ammonia when absorbed by the glands, or 
too great heat suddenly applied to them, or crushing 
them, does not cause the basal part of the tentacles 
to bend, whilst a weak solution of the carbonate, or a 
moderate heat, or slight pressure always induces such 
bending. Similar results were observed with Dionaea 
and Pinguicula. 

The effect of cutting off with a razor a thin slice 
from one side of the conical apex of 14 young and 
short radicles was next tried. Six of them after being 
operated on were suspended in damp air ; the tips of 
the other eight, similarly suspended, were allowed to 
enter water at a temperature of about 65° F. It was 
recorded in each case which side of the apex had 
been sliced off, and when they were afterwards 
examined the direction of the curvature was noted, 
before the record was consulted. Of the six radicles 
in damp air, three had their tips curved after an 
interval of 10 h. 15 m. directly away from the sliced 
surface, whilst the other three were not affected and 
remained straight; nevertheless, one of them after 
13 additional hours became slightly curved from the 
sliced surface. Of the eight radicles with their tips 
immersed in water, seven were plainly curved away 
from the sliced surfaces after 10 h. 15 m. ; and with 



Geiap.HL of the radicle OF TROP^OLITM. 167 

respect to the eighth which remained quite straight, 
too thick a slice had been accidentally removed, so 
that it hardly formed a real exception to the general 
result. When the seven radicles were looked at 
again, after an interval of 23 h. from the time of 
slicing, two had become distorted ; four were deflected 
at an angle of about 70° from the perpendicular and 
from the cut surface ; and one was deflected at nearly 
90°, so that it projected almost horizontally, but with 
the extreme tip now beginning to bend downwards 
through the action of geotropism. It is therefore 
manifest that a thin slice cut oft' one side of the conical 
apex, causes the upper growing part of the radicle of 
this Phaseolus to bend, through the transmitted efiects 
of the irritation, away from the sliced surface. 

Tropaeolum majus: Sensitiveness of the apex of the 
Radicle to contact, — Little squares of card were attached 
with shellac to one side of the tips of 19 radicles, some 
of which were subjected to 78 F., and others to a 
much lower temperature. Only 3 became plainly 
curved from the squares, 5 slightly, 4 doubtfully, 
and 7 not at all. These seeds were, as we believed, 
old, so we procured a fresh lot, and now the results 
were widely difierent. Twenty-three were tried in 
the same manner ; five of the squares produced no 
effect, but three of these cases were no real exceptions, 
for in two of them the squares had slipped and were 
parallel to the apex, and in the third the shellac was 
in excess and had spread equally all round the apex. 
One radicle was deflected only slightly from the 
perpendicular and from the card ; whilst seventeen 
were plainly deflected. The angles in several of these 
latter cases varied between 40^ and 65° from the 
perpendicular ; and in two of them it amounted after 
15 h. or 16 h. to about 90°. In one instance a loop 

12 



168 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Chap. HI 

was nearly completed in 16 h. There can, therefore, 
be no doubt that the apex is higl ly sensitive to slight 
contact, and that the upper part of the radicle bends 
away from the touching object. 

Gossypium herhaceum: Sensitiveness of the apex of the 
Badicle. — Kadicles were experimented on in the same 
manner as before, but they proved ill-fitted for our 
purpose, as they soon became unhealthy when sus- 
pended in damp air. Of 38 radicles thus suspended, 
at temperatures varying from 66° to 69° F., with 
squares of card attached to their tips, 9 were plainly 
and 7 slightly or even doubtfully deflected from the 
squares and from the perpendicular; 22 not being 
affected. We thought that perhaps the above tempera- 
ture was not high enough, so 19 radicles with attached 
squares, likewise suspended in damp air, were subjected 
to a temperature of from 74° to 79° F., but not one of 
them was acted on, and they soon became unhealthy. 
Lastly, 19 radicles were suspended in water at a tem- 
perature from 70° to 75° F., with bits of glass or 
squares of the card attached to their tips by means of 
Canada- balsam or asphalte, which adhered rather better 
than shellac beneath the water. The radicles did not 
keep healthy for long. The result was that 6 were 
plainly and 2 doubtfully deflected from the attached 
objects and the perpendicular; 11 not being affected. 
The evidence consequently is hardly conclusive, 
though from the two sets of cases tried under a 
moderate temperature, it is probable that the radicles 
are sensitive to contact ; and would be more so under 
favourable conditions. 

Fifteen radicles which had germinated in friable peat 
were suspended vertically over water. Seven of them 
served as controls, and they remained quite straight 
during 24 h. The tips of the other eight radicles 



CnAF.in. OF THE RADICLE OF CUCURBITA. 169 

were just touched with dry caustic on one side. Aftei 
only 5 h. 10 m. five of them were slightly curved 
from the perpendicular and from the side bearing the 
little blackish marks. After 8 h. 40 m., 4 out of 
these 5 were deflected at angles between 15° and 65° 
from the perpendicular. On the other hand, one 
which had been slightly curved after 5 h. 10 m., now 
became straight. After 24 h. the curvature in two 
cases had considerably increased; also in four other 
cases, but these latter radicles had now become so 
contorted, some being turned upwards, that it could no 
longer be ascertained whether they were still curved 
from the cauterised side. The control specimens ex- 
hibited no such irregular growth, and the two sets 
presented a striking contrast. Out of the 8 radicles 
which had been touched with caustic, two alone were 
not affected, and the marks left on their tips by the 
caustic were extremely minute. These marks in all 
cases were oval or elongated ; they were measured in 
three instances, and found to be of nearly the same 
size, viz. § of a mm. in length. Bearing this fact in 
mind, it should be observed that the length of the 
curved part of the radicle, which had become deflected 
from the cauterised side in the course of 8 h. 40 m., 
was found to be in three cases 6, 7, and 9 mm. 

Cucurhita ovifera : Sensitiveness of the apex of the lla- 
dicle. — The tips proved ill-fitted for the attachment of 
cards, as they are extremely fine and flexible. More- 
over, owing to the hypocotyls being soon developed 
and becoming arched, the whole radicle is quickly 
displaced and confusion is thus caused. A large 
number of trials were made, but without any definite 
result, excepting on two occasions, when out of 23 
mdieles 10 were deflected from the attached squares 



170 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Chap. lU 

of card, and 13 were not acted on. Bather large 
squares, though difficult to affix, seemed more efficient 
than very small ones. 

We were much more successful with caustic ; but iu 
our first trial, 15 radicles were too much cauterised, 
and only two became curved from the blackened side ; 
the others being either killed on one side, or blackened 
equally all round. In our next trial the dried tips 
of 11 radicles were touched momentarily with dry 
caustic, and after a few minutes were immersed in 
water. The elongated marks thus caused were never 
black, only brown, and about J mm. in length, or 
even less. In 4 h. 3J m. after the cauterisation, 6 of 
them were plainly curved from the side with the 
brown mark, 4 slightly, and 1 not at all. The latter 
proved unhealthy, and never grew ; and the marks on 
2 of the 4 slightly curved radicles were excessively 
minute, one being distinguishable only with the aid 
of a lens. Of lU control specimens tried in the same 
jars at the same time, not one was in the least curved. 
In 8 h. 40 m. after the cauterisation, 5 of the radicles 
out of the 10 (the one unhealthy one being omitted) 
were deflected at about 90°, and 3 at about 45° from 
the perpendicular and from the side bearing the 
brown mark. After 24 h. all 10 radicles had in- 
creased immensely in length ; in 5 of them the curva- 
ture was nearly the same, in 2 it had increased, and 
in 3 it had decreased. The contrast presented by the 
10 controls, after both the 8 h. 40 m. and the 24 h. 
intervals, was very great ; for they had continued to 
grow vertically downwards, excepting two which, from 
some unknown cause, had become somewhat tortuous. 

In the chapter on Geotropism we shall see that 
10 radi(Jes of this plant were extended horizontally on 
and beneath damp friable peat, under which conditions 



CuAP.ra. OF THE RADICLE OF RAPHANU8. 171 

they grow better and more naturally than in clamp 
air; and their tips were slightly cauterised on the 
lower side, brown marks about ^ mm. in length 
being thus caused. Uncauterised specimens similarly 
pJaced became much bent downwards through geo- 
tropism in the course of 5 or 6 hours. After 8 h. 
only 3 of the cauterised ones were bowed downwards, 
and this in a slight degree ; 4 remained horizontal ; 
and 3 were curved upwards in opposition to geo- 
tropism and from the side bearing the brown mark. 
Ten other specimens had their tips cauterised at the 
same time and in the same degree, on the upper 
side ; and this, if it produced any effect, would tend 
to increase the power of geotropism ; and all these 
radicles were strongly bowed downwards after 8 h. 
From the several foregoing facts, there can be no 
doubt that the cauterisation of the tip of the radicle 
of this Cucurbita on one side, if done lightly enough, 
causes the whole growing part to bend to the opposite 
side. 

RaplumiLS sativus : Sensitiveness of the apex of the 
Radicle. — We here encountered many difficulties in 
our trials, both with squares of card and with caustic ; 
for when seeds were pinned to a cork-lid, many of the 
radicles, to which nothing had been done, grew irre- 
gularly, often curving upwards, as if attracted by the 
(lamp surface above ; and when they were immersed 
in water they likewise often grew irregularly. We 
did not therefore dare to trust our experiments with 
attached squares of card ; nevertheless some of them 
seemed to indicate that the tips were sensitive to 
contact. Our trials with caustic generally failed from 
the difficulty of not injuring too greatly the extremely 
fine tips. Out of 7 radicles thus tried, one became 
lK>wed after 22 h. at an angle of 60°, a second at 40° 



172 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Chap. HI 

and a third very slightly from the perpendicular and 
from the cauterised side. 

Msculus hippocastanum : Sensitiveness of the apex oj 
the Radicle. — Bits of glass and squares of card were 
affixed with shellac or gum-water to the tips of 12 
radicles of the horse-chestnut ; and when these objects 
fell oflf, they were refixed ; but not in a single instance 
was any curvature thus caused. These massive 
radicles, one of which was above 2 inches in length 
and '3 inch in diameter at its base, seemed insensible 
to so slight a stimulus as any small attached object. 
Nevertheless, when the apex encountered an obstacle 
in its downward course, the growing part became so 
uniformly and symmetrically curved, that its appear- 
ance indicated not mere mechanical bending, but 
increased growth along the whole convex side, due to 
th(B irritation of the apex. 

That this is the correct view may be inferred from 
the effects of the more powerful stimulus of caustic. 
The bending from the cauterised side occurred much 
slower than in the previously described species, and it 
will perhaps be worth while to give our trials in 
detail. 

The seeds germinated in sawdust^ and one side of the tips of 
tiie radicles were slightly rubbed once with dry nitrate of silver; 
aod after a few minutes were allowed to dip into water. They 
were subjected to a rather varying temperature, generally 
between 52^ and 58° F. A few cases have not been thought 
worth recording, in which the whole tip was blackened, or iu 
which the seedling soon became unhealthy. 

(1.) The radicle was slightly deflected from the cauterisod 
side in one day (i.e. 24 h.) ; in three days it stood at 60** from 
the perpendicular ; in four days at 90° ; on the fifth day it was 
curved up about 40" al)ove the horizon ; so that it had passed 
through an angle of 130° in the five days, and this was the 
greatest amount of curvature observed. 

CI.) In two days radicle slightly deflected; after sevun days 



CUAF.in. OF THE RADICLE OF ^SCULUS. 173 

deflected 09° from the perpendicular and from the cauteriseci 
ode ; after eight days the angle amounted to nearly 90°. 

(3.) After one day slight deflection, but the cauterised mark 
was so faint that the same side was again touched with caustic. 
In four days from the first touch deflection amounted to 78°, 
wiiich in an additional day increased to 90°. 

(4.) After two days slight deflection, which during the next 
three days certainly increased but never became great; the 
radicle did not grow well and died on the eighth day. 

(5.) After two days very slight deflection ; but this on the 
foarth day amounted to 56° from the perpendicular and from 
the cauterised side. 

(6.) After three days doubtfully, but after four days certainly 
deflected from the cauterised side. On the fifth day deflection 
amounted to 45? from the perpendicular, and this on the seventh 
day increased to about 90°. 

(7.) After two days slightly deflected ; on the third day the 
deflectiou amounted to 25° from the perpendicular, and thi3 
did not afterwards increase. 

(8.) After one day deflection distinct; on the third day i* 
amounted to 44°, and on the f »urth day to 72° from the perpen- 
dicular and the cauterised side. 

(9.) After two days deflection slight, yet distinct; on the 
third day the tip was again touched on the same side with 
caustic and tlius killed. 

(10.) After one day slight deflection, which after six days 
increased to 50° from the perpendicular and the cauterised side. 

(11.) After one day decided deflection, which after six days 
increased to 62° from the perpendicular and from the cauterised 
side. 

(12.) After one day slight deflection, which on the second day 
amounted to 35°, on the fourth day to 50°, and the sixth day 
to 63° from the perpendicular and the cauterised side. 

(13.) Whole tip blackened, but more on one side than the 
other; on the fourth day slightly, and on the sixth day greatly 
deflected from the more blackened side ; the deflection on the 
cinth day amounted to 90° from the perpendicular. 

(14.) Whole tip blackened in the same manner as in the last 
ease: on the second day decided deflection from the more 
blackened side, which increased on the seventh day to nearlj 
9Q^; on the following day the radicle appeared unhealthy. 

(15.) Here we had the anomalous case of a radicle bending 



174 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Chap. Ul. 

slightly towards the cauterized side on the first day, and con- 
tinuing to do so for the next three days, when the deflection 
amounted to about 9u° from the perpendicular. The cause 
appeared to lie in the tendril-like sensitiveness of the upper part 
of the radicle, against which the point of a large triangular flap 
of the seed-coats pressed with considerable force; and this 
irritation apparently conquered that from the cauterised apex. 

These several cases show bevond doubt that the 
irritation of one side of the apex, excites the upper 
part of the radicle to bend slowly towards the opposite 
side. This fact was well exhibited in one lot of five 
seeds pinned to the cork-lid of a jar ; for when after 
6 days the lid was turned upside down and viewed 
from directly above, the little black marks, made by the 
caustic were now all distinctly visible on the upper 
sides of the tips of the laterally bowed radicles. 

A thin slice was shaved ofif with a razor from one 
side of the tips of 22 radicles, in the manner described 
under the common bean ; but this kind of irritation 
did not prove very effective. Only 7 out of the 22 
radicles became moderately deflected in from 3 to 5 
days from the sliced surface, and several of the others 
grew irregularly. The evidence, therefore, is far from 
conclusive. 

Quercus rohur: S^-nsitiveness of the apex of the Radicle. 
— The tips of the radicles of the common oak are fully 
as sensitive to slight contact as are those of any plant 
examined by us. They remained healthy in damp air 
for 10 days, but grew slowly. Squares of the card- 
like paper were fixed with shellac to the tips of 15 
radicles, and ten of these became conspicuously bowed 
from the perpendicular and from the squares ; two 
slightly, and three not at all. But two of the latter 
were not real exceptions, as they were at first very 
short, and haidly grew afterwards. Some of the more 



UnAP. m. OF THE RADTOT.E OF QUERCUS. 



175 



Fig. G8. 



remarkable cases are worth describing. The radicles 
were examined on each successive morning, at nearly 
the same hour, that is, after intervals of 24 h. 

No. 1. This radicle suifered from a series of accidents, and 
acted in an anomalous manner, for the apex appeared at tirst 
insensible and afterwards sensitive to contact. The first square 
was attached on Ort. 19th ; on the 21st the 
radicle was not at all curved, and the square 
was accidentally knocked off; it was refixed 
on the 22nd. and the radicle became slijrhtly 
carved from the square, but tne curvature 
disappeared on the 23rd, wlien the square 
was removed and refixed. No curvature en- 
sued, and the square was again accidentally 
knocked off, and refixed. On the morning of 
the 27th it was washed off by having reached 
the water in the bottom of the iar. The 
square was refixed, and on the 29th, that 
is, ten da^ s alter the first square had been 
attached, and two days after the attachment 
of the last square, the radicle had grown to 
the great length of 32 inches, and now q^,^^^,. ra.licle 
the terminal growing part had become bent with square of card 
away from the square into a hook (see 
Fig. 68). 

No. 2. Square attached on the 19th ; on 
the 20th radicle slightly deflected from it 
And from the perpendicular; on the 2lRt 
deflected at nearly right angles ; it remained during the next 
two days in this position, but on the 25th the upward curva- 
ture was lessened through the action of geotropism, and still 
more so on the 26th. 

No. 3. Square attached on the 19th; on the 21st a trace of 
curvature from the square, which amounted on the 22nd to 
about 40°, and on the 23rd to 53° from the perpendicular. 

No. 4. Square attached on the 21st; on the 22nd trace of 
curvature from the square ; on the 23rd completely hooked 
with the point turned up to the zenith. Three days afterwards 
(i.e. 26th) the curvature had wholly disappeared and the apex 
poinded perpendicularly downwards. 

No. 6. Square attached on the 21st ; on the 22nd decideil 




attached to one side 
of apex, causing it 
to become hooked. 
Drawing one-half 
natural scale. 



176 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Chap. Ul 

though slight curyature from the square ; on the 23rd the tip 
had curved up above the hoizon, and on the 24th was hooked 
with the apex pointing almost to the zenith, as in Fig. 68. 

No. 6. Square attached on the 21st; on the 22nd slightly 
curved from the square; 23rd more curved; 25th consider- 
ably curved ; 27th all curvature lost, and the radicle was now 
directed perpendicularly downwards. 

No. 7. Square attached on the 21st ; on the 22nd a trace of 
curvature from the square, which increased next day, and on 
the 24th amounted to a right angle. 

It is, therefore, manifest that the apex of the radicle 
of the oak is highly sensitive to contact, and retains 
its sensitiveness during several days. The movement 
thus induced was, however, slower than in any of the 
previous cases, with the exception of that of -3isculiis. 
As with the bean, the terminal growing part, after 
bending, sometimes straightened itself through the 
action of geotropism, although the object still remained 
attached to the tip. 

The same remarkable experiment was next tried, 
as in the case of the bean ; namely, little squares of 
exactly the same size of the card-like sanded paper 
and of very thin paper (the thicknesses of which have 
been given under Vicia faba) were attached with 
shellac on opposite sides (as accurately as could be 
done) of the tips of 13 radicles, suspended in damp 
air, at a temperature of 65°-66° F. The result was 
striking, for 9 out of these 13 radicles became plainly, 
and 1 very slightly, curved from the thick paper 
towards the side bearing the thin paper. In two of 
tliese cases the apex became completely hooked, after 
two days; in four cases the deflecti(m from the per- 
pendicular and from the side bearing the thick paper, 
amounted in from two to four days to angles of 90°, 
72°, 60°, and 49°, but in two other cases to only IS** 
and 15°. It should, however, be stated that in the 



liHAP. IIL OF THE RADICLE OP ZEA. 177 

* 

case in which the deflection was 49°, the two squares 
had accidentally come into contact on one side of the 
apex, and thus formed a lateral gable ; and the deflec- 
tion was directed in part from this gable and in part 
from the thick paper. In three cases alone the radicles 
were not afiected by the difierence in thickness of the 
squares of paper attached to their tips, and conse- 
quently did not bend away from the side bearing the 
stifier paper. 

Zea mays : Sensitiveness of the apex of the Radicle to 
contact. — A large number of trials were made on this 
plant, as it was the only monocotyledon on which we 
experimented. An abstract of the results will sufiice. 
In the first place, 22 germinating seeds were pinned to 
cork-lids without any object being attached to their 
radicles, some being exposed to a temperature of 65^- 
66° F., and others to between 74° and 79° ; and none of 
them became curved, though some were a little inclined 
to one side. A few were selected, which from having 
germinated on sand were crooked, but when suspended 
in damp air the terminal part grew straight down- 
wards. This fact having been ascertained, little squares 
of the card-like paper were affixed with shellac, on 
several occasions, to the tips of 68 radicles. Of these 
the terminal growing part of 39 became within 24 h. 
conspicuously curved away from the attached squares 
and from the perpendicular ; 13 out of the 39 forming 
hooks with their points directed towards the zenith, 
and 8 forming loops. Moreover, 7 other radicles out 
of the 68, were slightly and two doubtfully deflected 
from the cards. There remain 20 which were not 
affected ; but 10 of these ought not to be counted ; 
for one was diseased, two had their tips quite sur 
rounded by shellac, and the squares on 7 had slipped 
60 as to stand parallel to the apex, instead of obliquc^lj 



178 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Cuap. HI. 

on it. There were therefore only 10 out of the 68 
which certainly were not acted on. Some of the 
radicles which were experimented on were young and 
short, most of them of moderate length, and two or 
three exceeded three inches in length. The curva- 
ture in the above cases occurred within 24 h., but it 
was often conspicuous within a much shorter period. 
For instance, the terminal growing part of one radicle 
was bent upwards into a rectangle in 8 h. 15 m., and 
of another in 9 h. On one occasion a hook was 
formed in 9 h. Six of the radicles in a jar containing 
nine seeds, which stood on a sand-bath, raised to 
a temperature varying from 76° to 82° F,, became 
hooked, and a seventh formed a complete loop, when 
first looked at after 15 hours. 

TJie accompanying figures of four germinating seeds 
(Fig. 69) show, firstly, a radicle (A) the apex of which 
has become so much bent away from the attached 
square as to form a hook. Secondly (B), a hook 
converted through the continued irritation of the 
card, aided perhaps by geotropism, into an almost 
complete circle or loop. The tip in the act of forming 
a loop generally rubs against the upper part of the 
radicle, and pushes off the attached square ; the loop 
then contracts or closes, but never disappears ; and 
the apex afterwards grows vertically downwards, being 
no longer irritated by any attached object. This 
frequently occurred, and is represented at C. The 
jar above mentioned with the six hooked radicles and 
another jar were kept for two additional days, for the 
sake of observing how the hooks would be modified. 
Jlost of them became converted into simple loops, 
like that figured at C; but in one case the apex did 
n(»t rub against tlie upi)er part ot* the radicle and thus 
remove the Ciird ; and it consequently made, owing 



GsAP. UL 



OF THE RADICLE OF ZHK. 



179 



to the continued irritation from the card, two complete 
loops, that is, a helix of two spires; which afterwards 
became pressed closely together. Then geotropism 
prevailed and caused the apex to grow perpendicularly 
downwards. In another case, shown at (D), the apex 



Fig. 09 







.C D. 

Z§a mayn: radicles excited to bend away from the little squares of card 

attached to one side of their tips. 

in making a second turn or spire, passed through the 
first loop, which was at first widely open, and in 
doing so knocked off the card ; it then grew perpen- 
dicularly downwards, and thus tied itself into a knot, 
which soon became tight ! 

Secondary Radicles of Zea, — A short time after the 
first radicle has appeared, others protrude from the 



180 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX CnA». ITL 

seed, but not laterally from the primary one. Ten of 
these secondary radicles, which were directed obliquely 
downwards, were experimented on with very small 
squares of card attached with shellac to the lower 
sides of their tips. If therefore the squares acted, the 
radicles would bend upwards in opposition to gravity. 
The jar stood (protected from light) on a sand-bath, 
which varied between 76° and 82° F. After only 
5 h. one appeared to be a little deflected from the 
square, and after 20 h. formed a loop. Four others 
were considerably curved from the squares a^ter 20 h., 
and three of them became hooked, with their tips 
pointing to the zenith, — one after 29 h. and the 
two others after 44 h. By this latter time a sixth 
radicle had become bent at a right angle from the side 
bearing the square. Thus altogether six out of the 
ten secondary radicles were acted on, four not being 
affected. There can, therefore, be no doubt that the 
tips of these secondary radicles are sensitive to slight 
contact, and that when thus excited they cause the 
upper part to bend from the touching object; but 
generally, as it appears, not in so sliort a time as in 
the case of the first-formed radicle. 

Sensitiveness of the tip of the Eadicle to 

Moist Am. 

Sachs made the interesting discovery, a few years 
ago, that the radicles of many seedling plants bend 
towards an adjoining damp surface.* We shall here 
endeavour to show that this peculiar form of sensitive- 
ness resides in their tips. The movement is directly 
the reverse of that excited by the irritants hitherto 
considered, which cause the growing part of the 



m i 



Arbcilen dcs Hoi. Institut., iu Wurzbiirg,* vol. i. 1872, p. 209. 



OflAi. ni. OF THE RADICLE TO MOIST AIR. 181 

radicle to bend away from the source of irritation. 
In our experiments we followed Sachs' plan, and sieves 
with seeds germinating m damp sawdust were sus- 
pended so that the bottom was generally iuclmed at 
40° with the horizon. If the radicles had been acted 
on solely by geotropism, they would have grown out 
of the bottom of the sieve perpendicularly down- 
wards; but as they were attracted by the adjoining 
damp surfa/*.e they bent towards it and were deflected 
50° from the perpendicular. For the sake of ascertain- 
ing whether the tip or the whole growing part of the 
radicle was sensitive to the moist air, a length of from 
1 to 2 mm. was coated in a certain number of cases 
with a mixture of olive-oil and lamp-black. This 
mixture was made in order to give consistence to the 
oil, so that a thick layer could be applied, which 
would exclude, at least to a large extent, the moist air, 
and would be easily visible. A greater number of 
experiments than those which were actually tried 
would have been necessary, had not it been clearly 
established that the tip of the radicle is the part which 
is sensitive to various other irritants. 

Phaseolus muUiJloi^us.— Twenty -niuG radicles, to which no- 
thing had been done, growing out of a sieve, were observed 
at the same time with those which had their tips greased, 
and for an equal length of time. Of the 29, 24 curved them- 
selves so as to c -me into close contact with the bottom of the 
sieve. The place of chief curvature was generally at a distance 
of 5 or 6 mm. from the apex. Eight radicles had their ti])s 
greased for a length of 2 mm., and two others for a length oi 
14 mm. ; they were kept at a temperature of 15°-1G° C. After 
intervals of from 19 h. to 24 h. all were still vertically or 
almost vertically dependent, for some of them had moved 
towards the adjoining damp surface by about 10°. They had 
therefore not been acted on, or only slightly acted on, by the 
damper air on one side, although the whole upper part wjis 
fi*cely exposed. After 48 h. three of these radicles became 



182 SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Cdap. ItL 

considerably curved towards the sieve ; and the absence of curva- 
ture in some of the others might perhaps be accounted for by 
their not having grown very well. But it should be observed 
that during the first 19 h. to 24 h. all grew well ; two of them 
having increased 2 and 3 mm. in length in 11 h. ; five others 
iucreased 5 to 8 mm. in 19 h. ; and two, which had been at first 
4 and 6 mm. in length, iucreased in 24 h. to 15 and 20 mm. 

The tips of 10 radicles, which likewise grew well, were coated 
with the grease for a length of only I mm., and now the result 
was somt 'w hat different ; for of these 4 curved themselves to 
tiic sieve in from 21 h. to 24 h., whilst 6 did not do so. 
Five of the latter were observed for an additional day, and now 
all excepting one became curved to the sieve. 

The tips of 5 radicles were cauteriseil with nitrate of silver, 
and alK)ut 1 mm. in length was thus destroyed. They were 
observed for periods varying between 11 h. and 24 h., and wore 
found to have grown well. One of them had curved until it 
curae into contact with the sieve ; another was curving towards 
it; wliilst the remaining three were still vertically dependent 
Of 7 not cauterised radicles observed at the same time, all had 
come into contact with the sieve. 

The tips of 11 radicles were protected by moistened gold- 
beaters' skin, which adheres closely, for a length varying from 
li to 2i mm. After 22 h. to 24 h, 6 of these radicles were 
clearly l)ent towards or had come into contact with the sieve; 
2 were sliglitly curved in this direction, and 3 not at all. All 
had grown well. Of 14 control specimens obseiTed at the same 
time, all excepting one had closely approached the sieve. It 
appears from these cases that a cap of goldbeaters' skin checks, 
though only to a slight degree, the bending of the radicles to 
an adjoining damp surface. Whether an extremely thin sheet 
of this substance when moistened allows moisture from the air 
to pass through it, we do not know, dne case indicated that 
tlie caps were sometimes more efficient than appears firom the 
alx)ve results ; for a radicle, which after 23 h. had only 
slightly approached the sieve, had its cap (1^ mm. in length) 
removed, and during tlie next 15 i h. it curved itself abruptly 
towards the source of moisture, the chief seat of curvature 
being at a distance of 2 to 3 mm. from the ajiex. 

Vtcid /xba. — The ti])s of 13 radicles were coated with the 
grease for a length of 2 mm. ; and it should be remembered 
that with these mdicles the seat of chief curvature is about 



Chap. UI. OF THE RADICLE TO 3iI0IST AIR. 183 

4 or 5 mm. from the apex. Four of them were examiDed after 
22 h., three after 26 h., and six after 36 h., and none had 
been attracted towards the damp lower surface of the sieve. 
In another trial 7 radicles were similarly treated, and 5 of them 
still pointed perpendicularly downwards after 11 h., whilst 

2 were a little carved towards the sieve; by an accident they 
were not subsequently observed. In both these trials the 
radicles grew well ; 7 of them, which were at first from 4 to 
11 mm. in length, were after 11 h. between 7 and 16 mm. ; 

3 which were at first from 6 to 8 mm. after 26 h. were 11 '6 
to 18 mm. in length ; and lastly, 4 radicles which were at first 

5 to 8 mm. after 46 h. were 18 to 23 mm. in length. The 
control or ungreased radicles were not invariably attracted 
towards the lx)ttom of the sieve. But on one occasion 12 out of 
13, which were observed for periods between 22 h. and 36 h., 
were thus attracted. On two other occasions taken together, 
38 out of 40 were similarly attracted. On another occasion 
only 7 out of 14 behaved in this manner, but after *two more 
days the proiwrtion of the curved increased to 17 out of 23. 
On a last occasion only 11 out of 20 were thus attracted. If 
we add up these numbers, we find that 78 out of 96 of the 
control specimens curved themselves towards the bottom of the 
sieve. Of the specimens with greased tips, 2 alone out of the 
20 (but 7 of these were not observed for a sufficiently long 
time) thus curved themselves. We can, therefore, hardly doubt 
that the tip for a length of 2 mm. is the part which is sensitive 
to a moist atmosphere, and causes the upper part to bend 
towards its source. 

The tips of 15 radicles were cauterised with nitrate of silver, 
and they grew as well as those above described with greased 
tips. After an interval of 24 h., 9 of them were not at all 
curved towards the bottom of the sieve; 2 were curved towards 
it at angles of 20° and 12° frota their former vertical position, 
and 4 had come into close contact with it. Thus the destruc- 
tion of the tip for a length of about 1 mm. prevented the curva- 
ture of the greater number of these radicles to the adjoining 
damp surface. Of 24 control specimens, 23 were bent to the 
sieve, and on a second occasion 15 out of 16 were similarly 
curved in a greater or less degree. These control trials are 
included in those given in the foregoing paragraph. 

Avena sativa. — The tips of 13 radicles, which projected 
between 2 and 4 mm. from the bottom of the sieve, many of 
13 



ISl SEXSITIVENESS OF THE APEX Chap. TIL 

them not quite perpendicularly downwards, were coated with 
the black grease for a length of from 1 to 1^ mm. The sievea 
were inclined at 30° with the horizon. The greater number of 
these radicles were examined after 22 h., and a few after 25 h., 
and within these intervals they had grown so quickly as to have 
nearly doubled their lengths. With the ungreased radicles the 
chief seat of curvature is at a distance of not less than between 
35 and 6'5 nam., and not more than between 7 and 10 mm. from 
the apex. Out of the 13 radicles with greased tips, 4 had not 
moved at all towards the sieve ; 6 were deflected towards it and 
from the perpendicular by angles varying between 10° and 35° ; 
and 3 had come into close contact with it It appears, therefore, 
at first sight that greasing the tips of these radicles had checked 
but little their liending to the adjoining damp surface. But the 
inspection of the sieves on two occasions produced a widely 
different impression on the mind; for it was impossible to 
l^ehold the radicles with the black greased tips projecting from 
the bottom, and all those with ungreased tips, at least 40 to 50 
in number, clinging closely to it, and feel any doul>t that the 
greasing had produced a great effect. On close examination 
only a single ungreased radicle could be found which had not 
become curved towards the sieve. It is probable that if the 
tips had been protected by gi*ease for a length of 2 mm. instead 
of from 1 to li mm , they would not have l)een affected by the 
moist air and none would have Ixicome cui'ved. 

Tritlcum vnlgare, — Analogous trials were made on 8 radicles 
of the common wheat ; and greasing their tips produced much 
less effect than in the case of the oats. After 22 h., 5 of them 
had come into contact with the bottom of the sieve; 2 had 
moved towards it 10° and 15°, and one alone remained perpen- 
dicular. Not one of the very numerous ungreased radicles 
failed to come into close contact with the sieve. These trials 
were made on Nov. 28th, when the temperature was only 4°*8 C. 
at 10 A.M. We should hardly have thought this case worth 
notice, had it not been for the following circumstance. In the 
beginning of October, when the temperature was considerably 
higher, viz., 12° to 13° C, we found that only a few of the 
ungreased radicles became bent towards the sieve; and this 
indicates that sensitiveness to moisture in the air is increased 
by a low temperature, as we have seen with the radicles of 
Vicia faba relatively to objects attached to their tips. But in 
the present instance it is possible that a difference in the dryness 



Chap. III. OF THE RADICLE TO MOIST AIR. 185 

of the air may have caused the differencx, in the results at the 
two periods. 

Finally, the facts just given with respect to Phaseolus 
miUtiJlorus, Vicia faha, and Avena sativa show, as it 
8e6ms to us, that a layer of grease spread for a length 
of li to 2 mm. over the tip of the radicle, or the 
destruction of the tip by caustic, greatly lessens or 
quite annuls in the upper and exposed part the power 
of bending towards a neighbouring source of moisture. 
We should bear in mind that the part which bends 
most, lies at some little distance above the greased or 
cauterised tip ; and that the rapid growth of this part, 
proves that it has not been injured by the tips having 
been thus treated. In those cases in which the radicles 
with greased tips became curved, it is possible that the 
layer of grease was not sufficiently thick wholly to ex- 
clude moisture, or tliat a sufficient length was not thus 
protected, or, in the case of the caustic, not destroyed. 
When radicles with greased tips are left to grow for 
several days in damp air, the grease is drawn out into 
the finest reticulated threads and dots, with narrow- 
portions of the surface left clean. Such portions 
would, it is probable, be able to absorb moisture, and 
thus we can account for several of the radicles with 
greased tips having become curved towards the sieve 
after an interval of one or two days. On the whole, 
we may infer that sensitiveness to a difi*erence in the 
amount of moisture in the air on the two sides of a 
radicle resides in the tip, which transmits some influ- 
ence to the upper part, causing it to bend towards the 
source of moisture. Consequently, the movement is 
the reverse of that caused by objects attached to one 
side of the tip, or by a thin slice being cut off, or by 
being slightly cauterised. In a future chapter it 
will be shown that sensitiveness to the attraction of 



186 THE EFFECT OF KILLING OR Chap. IU. 

gravity likewise resides in the tip; so that it is the 
tip which excites the adjoining parts of a horizontally 
extended radicle to bend towards the centre of the 
earth. 

■ 

Secondary Kadicles becoming Vertically Geo- 
tropic by the destruction or injury of the 
Terminal Part of the Primary Kadicle. 

Sachs has shown that the lateral or secondary 
radicles of the bean, and probably of other plants, are 
acted on by geotropism in so peculiar a manner, that 
they grow out horizontally or a little inclined down- 
wards ; and he has further shown* the interesting fact, 
that if the end of the primary radicle be cut off, one 
of the nearest secondary radicles changes its nature 
and grows perpendicularly downwards, thus replacing 
the primary radicle. We repeated this experiment, 
and planted beans with amputated radicles in friable 
peat, and saw the result described by Sachs ; but 
generally two or three of the secondary radicles grew 
4)erpendicularly downwards. We also modified the 
experiment, by pinching young radicles a little way 
above their tii)s, between tlie arms of a U-shaped 
piece of tlirck leaden wire. Tlie part pinched was 
thus flattened, and was afterwards prevented from 
growing thicker. Five radicles had their ends cut 
off, and served iis controls or standards. Eight were 
})inched ; of these 2 were pinched too severely and 
their ends died and dropped off ; 2 were not pinched 
enough and were not sensibly affected ; the remaining 
4 were pinched suflBciently to check the growth of 
the tenninal part, but did not appear otherwise injured* 
When the U-shaped wires were removed, after an 

• * Arbeitcn Dot. Institut., Wurzburg/ Heft iv. 1874, p. 622. 



Ohap. III. INJURING THE rrclMARY RADICLE. 187 

interval of 15 days, the part beneath the wire was 
found to be very thin and easily broken, whilst the 
part above was thickened. Now in these four cases, 
one or more of the secondary radicles, arising from 
the thickened part just above the wire, had grown 
perpendicularly downwards. In the best case the 
primary radicle (the part below the wire being IJ inch 
in length) was somewhat distorted, and was not half 
as long as three adjoining secondary radicles, which 
had grown vertically, or almost vertically, downwards. 
Some of these secondary radicles adhered together or 
had become confluent. We learn from these four cases 
that it is not necessary, in order that a secondary 
radicle should assume the nature of a primary one, 
that the latter should be actually amputated ; it is 
sufficient that the flow of sap into it should be 
checked, and consequently should be directed into the 
adjoining secondary radicles ; for this seems to be 
the most obvious result of the primary radicle being 
pinched between the arms of a U-shaped wire. 

This change in the nature of secondary radicles is 
clearly analogous, as Sachs has remarked, to that 
which occurs with the shoots of trees, when the leading 
one is destroyed and is afterwards replaced by one or 
more of the lateral shoots ; for these now grow upright 
instead of sub-horizontally. But in this latter case 
the lateral shoots are rendered apogeotropic, whereas 
with radicles the lateral ones are rendered geotropic. 
We are naturally led to suspect that the same cause 
acts with shoots as with roots, namely, an increased flow 
of sap into the lateral ones. We made some trials with 
Abies communis and pectinaia, by pinching with wire 
the leading and all the lateral shoots excepting one. 
But we believe that they were too old when experi- 
mented on ; and some were pinched too severely, and 



188 . THE EFFECT OF KILLING OR Chip. HL 

Rome not enough. Only one case succeeded, namely 
with the spruce-fir. The leading shoot was not killed, 
but its growth was checked ; at its base there were 
three lateral shoots in a whorl, two of which were 
pinched, one being thus killed ; the third was left 
untouched. These lateral shoots, when operated on 
(July 14th) stood at an angle of 8° above the horizon ; 
by Sept. 8th the unpinched one had risen 35°; by 
Oct. 4th it had risen i(y\ and by Jan. 26th 48^ and 
it had now become a little curved inwards. Part 
of this rise of 48^ may be attributed to ordinary 
growth, for the pinched shoot rose 12° within the same 
2:)criod. It thus follows that the impinched shoot 
stood, on Jan. 26th, 56° above the horizon, or 34° 
from the vertical ; and it was thus obviously almost 
ready to replace the slowly growing, pinched, lead- 
ing shoot. Nevertheless, we feel some doubt about 
this experiment, for we have since observed with 
spruce-firs growing rather unhealthily, that the lateral 
shoots near the summit sometimes become highly 
inclined, whilst the leading shoot remains apparently 
sound. 

A widely different agency not rarely causes shoots 
which naturally would have grown out horizontally to 
grow up verticjally. The lateral branches of the Silver 
Fir (-4. pedinata) are often affected by a fungus, 
jEcidium elatinum, which causes the branch to enlarge 
into an oval knob formed of hard wood, in one of 
which we counted 24 rings of growth. According to 
De Bary,* when the mycelium penetrates a bud be- 
gianing to elongate, the shoot developed from it 
grows vertically upwards. Such upright shoots after- 



• See his valuable article in are called in German ** Hexen 
*B()t. Zeituiio:,' 1867, p. 2.57, on besen," or " witch-broonis." 

these moiiatrouB growtiis, which 



Chap. IIL INJURING THE PRIMARY RADICLE. 189 

wards produce lateral and horizontal branches; and 
they then present a curious ai)pearance, as if a young 
fir-tree had grown out of a ball of clay surrounding 
the branch. These upright shoots have manifestly 
changed their nature and become apogeotropic ; for if 
they had not beeu afiected by the iEcidium, they 
would have grown out horizontally like all the other 
twigs on the same branches. This change can hardly 
be due to an increased flow of sap into the part; but 
the presence of the mycelium will liave greatly dis- 
turbed its natural constitution. 

According to Mr. Meehan,* the stems of three 
species of Euphorbia and of Portvlaca oleracea are' 
" normally prostrate or procumbent;" but when they 
are attacked by an iEcidium, they " assume an erect 
habit." Dr. Stahl informs us that he knows of several 
analogous cases ; and these seem to be closely related 
to that of the Abies. The rhizomes of Sparganium 
ramosum grow out horizontally in the soil to a con- 
siderable length, or are diageotropic ; but F. Elfving 
found that when they were cultivated in water 
their tips turned upwards, and they became apogeo- 
tropic. The same result followed when the stem of the 
plant was bent until it cracked or was merely much 
bowed.t 

No explanation has hitherto been attempted of such 
cases as the foregoing, — namely, of secondary radicles 
growing vertically downwards, and of lateral shoots 
growing vertically upwards, after the amputation of 



• * Proc. Acad. Nat. Sc. Phila- viously observed (* Flora,' 1878, 

delphia,* June 16th, 1874, and p. 324) that tlie underground 

July 23rd, 1875. shoots of Triticum repens bend 

t See F. Elfving's interesting vertically up when tlie pari s above 

paper in *Arbeiten Bot. Institut., ground are removed, and when 

in Wurzburg,* vol. ii. 1880, p. 489. thu rhizomes are kept portly iiu 

Carl ICraus (Triesdorf) had pie- mers.d in water. 



1 90 EFFECT OF KILLING PRIMARY RADICLE. Chap. IIL 

the primary radicle or of the leading shoot. The 
following considerations give us, as we believe, the 
clue. Firstly, any cause which disturbs the con- 
stitution* is apt to induce reversion; such as the 
crossing of two distinct races, or a change of con- 
ditions, as when domestic animals become feral. 
But the case which most concerns us, is the frequent 
appearance of peloric flowers on the summit of a stem, 
or in the centre of the inflorescence, — parts which, it is 
believed, receive the most sap ; for when an irregular 
flower becomes perfectly regular or peloric, this may 
be attributed, at least partly, to reversion to a primi- 
tive and normal type. Even the position of a seed at 
the end of the capsule sometimes gives to the seedling 
developed from it a tendency to revert. Secondly, 
reversions often occur by means of buds, independently 
of reproduction by seed ; so that a bud may revert to 
the character of a former state many bud-generations 
ago. In the case of animals, reversions may occur in 
the individual with advancing age. Thirdly and 
lastly, radicles when they first protrude from the seed 
are always geotropic, and plumules or shoots almost 
always apogeotropic. If then any cause, such as an 
increased flow of sap or the presence of mycelium, 
disturbs the constitution of a lateral shoot or of a 
secondary radicle, it is apt to revert to its primordial 
state ; and it becomes either apogeotropic or geotropic, 
as the case may be, and consequently grows either 
vertically upwards or downwards. It is indeed pos- 



• The facts on wliich tlie fol- xiv. On ptloric flowera, ohap. 

lowing conclusions are founded xiii. p. :-i2 ; and see p. 337 oD ttivu 

are given in * The Variation of position on the plant. With 

ATiimals and Plants under Domes- respect to seeds, p. 340. On re* 

tication,' 2nd edit 1875. On the version by means of budis, p. 438 

CRU^jes leading to revorsiin see chup. xi. vol. L 
cliiip. xii. vol. ii. and p. 59, chap. 



Chap. IIL SUMMARY OF CHAPTER. 191 

sible, or even probable, that this tendency to reversion 
may have been increased, as it is manifestly of service 
to the plant. 

Summary of Chapter. 

A part or organ may be called sensitive, when its 
irritation excites movement in an adjoining part. Now 
it has been shown in this chapter, that the tip of tlie 
radicle of the bean is in 4;his sense sensitive to the 
contact of any small object attached to one side by 
shellac or gum-water ; also to a slight touch with dry 
caustic, and to a thin slice cut off one side. The 
radicles of the pea were tried with attached objects 
and caustic, both of which acted. With Phaseolus 
muUiflorus the tip was hardly sensitive to small squares 
of attached card, but was sensitive to caustic and to 
slicing. Tlie radicles of Tropaeolum were highly sen- 
sitive to contact ; and so, as far as we could judge, 
were those of Gossypium herbaceum, and they were 
certainly sensitive to caustic. The tips of the radicles 
of Cucurbita ovifera were likewise highly sensitive to 
caustic, though only moderately so to contact. Ra- 
phanus sativus offered a somewhat doubtful case. 
With -^sculus the tips were quite indifferent to 
bodies attached to them, though sensitive to caustic. 
Those of Quercus robur and Zea mays were highly sen- 
sitive to contact, as were the radicles of the latter 
to caustic. In several of these cases the difference in 
sensitiveness of the tip to contact and to caustic was, 
as we believe, merely apparent ; for with Gossypium, 
Eaphanus, and Cucurbita, the tip was so fine and 
flexible that it was very difficult to attach any object 
to one of its sides. With the radicles of ^sculus, 
the tips were not at all sensitive to small bodies 
attaclied to them ; but it does not follow from this 



192 SUMMARY OF CHAPTER.* Chap. HL 

fact that they would not have been sensitive to some- 
what greater continued pressure, if this could have 
been applied. 

The peculiar form of sensitiveness wliich we are 
here considering, is confined to the tip of the radicle 
for a length of from 1 mm. to 1 • 5 mm. When this 
part is irritated by contact with any object, by caustic, 
or by a thin slice being cut off, the upper adjoining 
part of the radicle, for ^ length of from 6 or 7 to 
even 12 mm., is excited to bend away from the side 
which has been irritated. Some influence must there- 
fore be transmitted from the tip along the radicle for 
this length. The curvature thus caused is generally 
symmetrical. The part which bends most apparently 
coincides with that of the most rapid growth. The 
tip and the basal part grow very slowly and they 
bend very little. 

Considering the widely separated position in the 
vegetable series of the several above-named genera, 
we may conclude that the tips of the radicles of all, or 
almost all, plants are similarly sensitive, and transmit 
an influence causing the upper part to bend. With 
respect to the tips of the secondary radicles, those of 
Vicia faba, Pisiim sativum, and Zea mays were alone 
observed, and they were found similarly sensitive. 

In order that these movements should be properly 
displayed, it appears necessary that the radicles 
should grow at their normal rate. If subjected to a 
high temperature and made to grow rapidly, the 
tips seem either to lose tlieir sensitiveness, or the 
upper part to lose the power of bending. So it 
appears to be if they grow very slowly from not being 
vigorous, or from being kept at too low a temperature , 
also when they are forced to germinate in the middle 
of the winter. 



Cbai in. SUMMARY OF CHAPTER. 198 

The curvature of the radicle sometimes occurs 
within from 6 to 8 hours after the tip has been irritated, 
and almost always within 24 h., excepting in the 
case of the massive radicles of .^sculus. The curva- 
ture often amounts to a rectangle, — that is, the ter- 
minal part bends upwards until the tip, which is but 
little curved, projects almost horizontally. Occa- 
sionally the tip, from the continued irritation of the 
attached object, continues to bend up until it forms a 
lux)k with the point directed towards the zenith, or 
H loop, or even a spire. After a time the radicle 
apparently becomes accustomed to the irritation, as 
occurs in the case of tendrils, for it again grows down- 
wards, although the bit of card or other object may 
remain attached to the tip. 

It is evident that a small object attached to the free 
point of a vertically suspended radicle can offer no 
mechanical resistance to its growth as a whole, for the 
object is carried downwards as the radicle elongates, 
or upwards as the radicle curves upwards. Nor can 
the growth of the tip itself be mechanically checked 
by an object attached to it by gum-water, which 
remains all the time perfectly soft. The weight of 
the object, though quite insignificant, is opposed 
to the upward curvature. We may therefore conclude 
that it is the irritation due to contact which excites 
the movement. The contact, however, must be pro- 
longed, for the tips of 15 radicles were rubbed for a 
♦ hort time, and this did not cause them to bend. Here 
then we have a case of specialised sensibility, like 
That of the glands of Drosera ; for these are ex- 
quisitely sensitive to the slightest pressure if prolonged, 
bnt not to two or three rough touches. 

When the tip of a radicle is lightly touched on one 
side with dry nitrate of silver, the injury caused is 



19i SIBDIARY OF CHAPTER. Chap. m. 

very slight, and the adjoining upper part bends away 
from the cauterised point, with more certainty in most 
cases than from an object attached on one side. Here 
it obviously is not the mere touch, but the eflfect 
produced by the caustic, which induces the tip to 
transmit some influence to the adjoining part, causing 
it to bend away. If one side of the tip is badly 
injured or killed by the caustic, it ceases to grow, 
whilst the opposite side continues growing ; and the 
result is that the tip itself bends towards the injured 
side and often becomes completely hooked ; and it is 
remarkable that in this case the adjoining upper part 
does not bend. The stimulus is too powerful or the 
shock too great for the proper influence to be trans- 
mitted from the tip. We have strictly analogous cases 
with Drosera, Dionsea and Pinguicula, with which 
plants a too powerful stimulus does not excite the 
tentacles to become incurved, or the lobes to close, or 
the margin to be folded inwards. 

With respect to the degree of sensitiveness of the 
apex to contact under favourable conditions, we have 
seen that w^ith Vicia faba a little square of writing- 
paper afflxed with shellac suflSced^ to cause move- 
ment; as did on one occasion a square of merely 
damped goldbeaters' skin, but it acted very slowly. 
Short bits of moderately thick bristle (of which mea- 
surements have been given) aflixed with gum-water 
acted in only three out of eleven trials, and beads of 
dried shellac under ji^yth of a grain in weight acted 
only twice in nine cases ; so that here we have 
nearly reached the minimum of necessary irrita- 
tion. The apex, therefore, is much less sensitive to 
pressure than the glands of Drosera, for these are 
afiecied by far thinner objects than bits of bristle 
and by a very much less weight than g^^fth of a grain. 



Chap. III. SUMMARY OF CHAPTKB. 195 

But the most interesting evidence of the delicate 
sensitiveness of the tip of the radicle, was afiTorded by 
its power of discriminating between equal-sized squares 
of card-like and very thin paper, when these were 
attached on opposite sides, as was observed with the 
radicles of the bean and oak. 

When radicles of the bean are extended horizon- 
tally with squares of card attached to the lower sides of 
their tips, the irritation thus caused was always con- 
quered by geotropism, which then acts under the most 
favourable conditions at right angles to the radicle. 
But when objects were attached to the radicles of and 
of the above-named genera, suspended vertically, the 
irritation conquered geotropism, which latter power 
at first acted obliquely on the radicle ; so that the 
immediate irritation from the attached object, aided 
by its after-efiTects, prevailed and caused the radicle 
to bend upwards, until sometimes the point was 
directed to the zenith. We must, however, assume 
that the after-effects of the irritation of the tip by an 
attached object come into play, only after movement 
has been excited. The tips of the radicles of the pea 
seem to be more sensitive to contact than those of the 
bean, for when they were extended horizontally with 
squares of card adhering to their lower sides, a most 
curious struggle occasionally arose, sometimes one 
and sometimes the other force prevailing, but ulti- 
mately geotropism was always victorious ; neverthe- 
less, in two instances the terminal part became so 
much curved upwards that loops were subsequently 
formed. W^ith the pea, therefore, the irritation from 
an attached object, and from geotropism when acting 
at right angles to the radicle, are nearly balanced 
forces. Closely similar results were observed with the 
horizontally extended radicles of Cuourhita ovifera^ 



196 SUMMARY OF CHAPTER. Chat. III. 

when their tips were slightly cauterised on the lowei 
side. 

Finally, the several co-ordinated movements by 
which radicles are enabled to perform their proper 
functions are admirably perfect. In whatever direc- 
tion the primary radicle first protrudes from the seed, 
geotropism guides it perpendicularly downwards ; and 
the capacity to be acted on by the attraction of 
gravity resides in the tip. But Sachs has proved* 
that the secondary radicles, or those emitted by the 
primary one, are acted on by geotropism in such a 
manner that they tend to bend only obliquely 'down- 
wards. If they had been acted on like the primary 
radicle, all the radicles would have penetrated the 
ground in a close bundle. We have seen that if 
the end of the primary radicle is cut oflF or in- 
jured, the adjoining secondary radicles become geo- 
tropic and grow vertically downwards. This power 
must often be of great service to the plant, when the 
primary radicle has been destroyed by the larvae of 
insects, burrowing animals, or any other accident. The 
tertiary radicles, or those emitted by the secondary 
ones, are not influenced, at least in the case of the 
bean, by geotropism ; so they grow out freely in all 
directions. From this manner of growth of the various 
kinds of radicles, they are distributed, together with 
their absorbent hairs, throughout the surrounding soil. 
as Sachs has remarked, in the most advantageous 
manner ; for the whole soil is thus closely searched. 

Geotrojiism, as was shown in the last chapter, 
excites the primary radicle to bend downwards with 
very little force, quite insufficient to penetrate the 
ground. Such penetration is effected by the pointed 

* ^ ArbcitcD But. Institut., Wiirzburg,* Uefl i?. 1S74, pp. G05-6SL 



Chap. III. SUMJIARY OF CHAPTER. 197 

apex (protected by the root-cap) being pressed down 
by the longitudinal expansion or growth of the ter^ 
niinal rigid portion, aided by its transverse expan- 
giDn, both of which forces act powerfully. It is, 
however, indispensable that the seeds should be at 
first held down in some manner. When they lie 
on the bare surface they are held down by the attach- 
ment of the root-hairs to any adjoining objects ; and 
this apparently is effected by the conversion of 
their outer surfaces into a cement. But many seeds 
get covered up by various accidents, or they fall into 
crevices or holes. With some seeds their own weight 
suffices. 

The circumnutating movement of the terminal grow- 
ing part both of the primary and secondary radicles 
is so feeble that it can aid them very little in pene- 
trating the ground, excepting when the superficial 
layer is very soft and damp. But it must aid them 
materially when they happen to break obliquely into 
cracks, or into burrows made by earth-worms or larvae. 
This movement, moreover, combined with the sen- 
sitiveness of the tip to contact, can hardly fail to be 
of the highest importance ; for as the tip is always 
endeavouring to bend to all sides it will press on all 
sides, and will thus be able to discriminate between 
the harder and softer adjoining surfaces, in the same 
manner as it discriminated between the attached 
squares of card-like and thin paper. Consequently it 
will tend to bend from the harder soil, and will thus 
follow the lines of least resistance. So it will be if it 
meets with a stone or the root of another plant in the 
soil, as must incessantly occur. If the tip were not 
sensitive, and if it did not excite the upper part of the 
root to bend away, whenever it encountered at right 
angles some obstacle in the ground, it would be liable 



188 SL>13IABY OF CHARTER. Chap. Ill 

to be donbled up into a contorted mass. But we have 
seen with radicles growing down inclined plates of 
glass, that as soon as the tip merely touched a slip of 
wood cemented across the plate, the whole terminal 
growing part curved away, so that the tip soon stood 
at right angles to its former direction; and thus it 
would be with an obstacle encountered in the ground, 
as ^ as the pressure of the surrounding soil would 
permit. We can also understand why thick and strong 
radicles, like those of .^sculus, should be endowed 
with less sensitiveness than more delicate ones ; for 
the former would be able by the force of their growth 
to overcome anv sli«rht obstacle. 

After a radicle, which has been deflected by some 
stone or root from its natural downward course 
reaches the edge of the obstacle, geotropism will direct 
it to grow again straight do>\Tiward ; but we know that 
geotropism acts with very little force, and here another 
excellent adaptation, as Sachs has remarked,* comes 
into play. For the upper part of the radicle, a little 
above the apex, is, as we have seen, likewise sensitive ; 
and this sensitiveness causes the radicle to bend like a 
tendril towards the touching object, so that as it rubs 
over the edge of an obstacle, it will bend downwards ; 
and the curvature thus induced is abrupt, in which 
respect it differs from that caused by the irritation of 
one side of the tip. This downward bending coincides 
with that due to geotropism, and both will cause the 
root to resume its original course. 

As radicles perceive an excess of moisture in the air 
on one side and bend towards this side, we may infer 
that they will act in the same manner with res|)ect to 
moisture in tlie earth. The sensitiveness to moistoni 



• * Arbtitcn Bot Inst Wurzbuig,' Iloft iii. p. 456. 



Chap. IIL SUMMARY OF CHAPTER. 199 

resides in the tip, which determines the bending of 
the upper part. This capacity perhaps partly accounts 
for the extent to which drain-pipes often become 
choked with roots. 

Considering the several facts given in this chapter, 
we see that the course followed by a root through 
the soil is governed by extraordinarily complex and 
diversified agencies, — by geotropism acting in a 
different manner on the primary, secondary, and ter- 
tiary radicles, — by sensitiveness to contact, different in 
kind in the apex and in the part immediately above 
the apex, and apparently by sensitiveness to the 
varying dampness of different parts of the soil. 
These several stimuli to movement are all more 
powerful than geotropism, when this acts obliquely 
on a radicle, which has been deflected from its perpen- 
dicular downward course. The roots, moreover, of 
most plants are excited by light to bend either to or 
from it ; but as roots are not naturally exposed to the 
light it is doubtful whether this sensitiveness, which is 
perhaps only the indirect result of the radicles being 
highly sensitive to other stimuli, is of any service to 
the plant. The direction which the apex takes at each 
successive period of the growth of a root, ultimately 
determines its whole course ; it is therefore highly 
important that the apex should pursue from the first 
the most advantageous direction ; and we can thus 
understand why sensitiveness to geotropism, to contact 
and to moisture, all reside in the tip, and why the tip 
determines the upper growing part to bend either 
from or to the exciting cause. A radicle may be 
compared with a burrowing animal such as a mole, 
which wishes to penetrate perpendicJarly down into 
the ground. By continually moving his head from 
side to side, or circumnutating, he will feel any stone 
14 



200 SU]VIMARY OF CHAPTER. Chap. IIL 

or other obstacle, as well as any diflerence in the 
hardness of the soil, and he will turn from that side ; 
if the earth is damper on one than on the other side 
he will turn thitherward as a better hunting-ground. 
Nevertheless, after each interruption, guided by the 
sense of gravity, he will be able to recover his do^m- 
ward course and to burrow to a greater depth. 



Cup. IV. dBCUMNUTATION flOl 



CHAPTER IV. 

THB ClBCUHNTTATINO MOVEMENTS OF THE 8EVEBA1 PABTS OV 

Mature Plants. 

Circumnutation of stems: concluding remarks on— GircumiKatatiou of 
stolons : aid thus a£forded in winding amongst the stems of sur- 
rounding plants — Ciitsumnutfltion of flower-stems — Circumnutation 
of Dicotyledonous leaves — Sin-jular oscillatory movement of leaves 
of Dionjea— Leaves of Cannabis sink at night — Leaves of Gymno- 
sperms — Of Monocotvk<ions — Cryptogams — Concluding remarks 
on the circumDutatioD of leaves : generally rise in the evening and 
dnk in the morning. 

We have seen in the first chapter that the stems of all 
seedlings, whether hypocotyls or epicotyls, as well as 
the cotyledons and the radicles, are continually cir- 
cumnutating — that is, they grow first on one side and 
then on another, such growth being probably preceded 
by increased turgescence of the cells. As it was 
unlikely that plants should change their manner of 
growth with advancing age, it seemed probable that 
the various organs of all plants at all ages, as long as 
they continued to grow, would be found to circum- 
nutate, though perhaps to an extremely small extent. 
As it was important for us to discover whether this 
was the case, we determined to observe carefully a 
certain number of plants which were growing vigor- 
ously, and which were not known to move in any 
manner. We commenced with stems. Observations 
of this kind are tedious, and it appeared to us that it 
would be sufficient to observe the stems in about a 
score of genera, belonging to widely distinct families 
and inhabitants of various countries. Several plant? 



202 OIBCUMNUTATION OP STEMS. Chap. IV 

were selected which, from being woody, or for other 
reasons, seemed the least likely to circumnutate. The 
observations and the diagrams were made in the 
manner described in the Introduction. Plants in pots 
were subjected to a proper temperature, and whilst 
being observed, were kept either in darkness or were 
feebly illuminated from above. They are arranged 
in the order adopted by Hooker in Le Maout and 
Decaisne's * System of Botany.' The number of the 
family to which each genus belongs is appended, as 
this serves to show the place of each in the series. 

(1.) Iberis nmbellata (CrucifersB, Fam. 14).— The movement of 
the stem of a young plant, 4 inches in height, consisting of 
four intemodes (the hypocotyl included) besides a large bud 

Fig 70. 




Jberis umheilata: circumnutation of stem of young plant, traced from 
8.30 A.M. Sept. 13th to same hour on following morning. Distance of 
summit of stem beneath the horizontal glass 7*6 inches. Diagram 
reduced to half of original size. Movement as here shown magniHe I 
between 4 and 5 times. 

on the summit, was traced, as here shown, during 21 h. 
(Fig. 70). As far as we could judge the uppermost inch alone 
of the stem circumnutated, and this in a simple manner. The 
movement was slow, and the rate very unequal at different 
times. In part of its course an irregular ellipse, or rather 
triangle, was completed in 6 h. 30 m. 

(2.) Brassica oleracea (Cruciferse). — A very young plant, bearing 
three leaves, of which the longest was only three-quarters of an 
inch in length, was placed under a microscope, furnished with 
an eye-piece micrometer and the tip of the largest leaf was 



Ohap. IV. OmOUMNUTATION OF STEMS. 203 

found to be in constant movement. It crossed five divisions of 
the micrometer, that is, ^-J^th of an inch, in 6 m. 20 s. There 
conld hardly be a doubt that it was the stem which chiefly 
moved, for the tip did not get quickly out of focus; and this 
would have occurred had the movement been confined to the 
leaf, which moves up or down in nearly the same vertical plane. 

(3.) Linum usitatissimum (LinesB, Fam. 39;. — The stems of this 
plant, shortly before the flowering period, are stated by Fritz 
Muller ('Jenaische Zeitschrift,' B. v. p. 137) to revolve, or 
circumnutate. 

(4.) Pelarijonium zonah (GeraniacesB, Fam. 47). — A young 
plant, 7i inches in height, was observed in the usual manner ; 
but, in order to see the bead at the end of the glass filament 

Fig. 71. 

* 



Pehrgomum zonaU: ch'CumDutation of stem of young plant, feebly illu- 
minated from above. Movement of bead magnified about 11 times; 
traced on a horizontal glass from noon on March 9th to 8 A.ii. on 
the nth. 

and at the same time the mark beneath, it was necessary to cut 
off three leaves on one side. We do not know whether it was 
owing to this cause, or to the plant having previously become 
bent to one side through heliotropism, but from the morning of 
the 7th of March to 10.30 p.m. on the 8th, the stem moved 
a considerable distance in a zigzag line in the same general 
direction. During the night of the 8th it moved to some 
distance at right angles to its former course, and next morning 
(9th) stood for a time almost still. At noon on the 9th a new 
tracing was begun (see Fig. 71), which was continued till 8 a.m. 
on the 11th. Between noon on the 9th and 5 p.m. on the 10th 
(i.e. in the course of 29 h.), the stem described a circle. This 
plant therefore circumnutates, but at a very slow rate, and to a 
small extent. 

(5.) Tropceolum majus (?) (dwarfed var. called Tom Thumb) ; 
(QeraniacecD, Fam. 47). — The species of this genus climb by the 




204 



CIRCUMNUTATION OF STEMS. 



Chap. 17 



aid of their sensitive petioles, but some of them also twine 
lonnd supports; but even these latter species do not begin to 
oircomnutate in a conspicuous manner whilst young. The 

Fig. 72. 




•--^. 



Tropaoiwrn majns (?) : circumniitation of stem of jonng plant, traced on a 
horizontal glass from 9 a.m. Dec. 26th to 10 a.m. on 27th. MoTement 
of bead magniBed about 5 times, and here rednced to half of original 

scale. 

variety here troate 1 of has a rather thick stem, and is so dwarf 
that apparently it does not climb in any manner. We there- 
fore wished to ascertain whether the stem of a yonng plant, 

consisting of two in- 
*''^-^^- temodes, together 3*2 

inches in height, cir- 
cumnutated. It was 
observed during 25 h., 
and we see in Fig. 72 
that the stem moved in 
a zigzag course, indicat- 
ing circumnntation. 

(6.) Trifolium resupi" 
natum (Legmninoste, 
Fnm. 75). — When we 
treat of the sleep of 
j)lants, we shall see that 
the stems in several 
Leguminous genera, for 
instance, those of Hedy- 
sarum. Mimosa, Meli- 
lotus, &c., which are not 
climbers, circumnntate 
in a conspicuous manner. 
Wc will here give only a single instance (Fig. 73), showing 
the circumnutation of the stem of a large plant of a clover, 
Trifolium rcsupinatum. In the course of 7 h. the stem changed 




Trifolium res'ipinatum : circumnutation of 
stem, traced on vertical glass from 9.30 
A.M. to 4.o0 P.M. Nov. 3rd. Tracinjs: no^ 
greatly magnifiel, reduced to half of 
original size. Plant feebly illuminated 
from above. 



Chap. IV 



CIRCUMNUTATION OF STEMS. 



205 



its course greatly eight times and completed three irregular 
circles or ellipses. It therefore circumnutated rapidly. Some 
of the lines run at right angles to one another. 



Fig. 74. 




£i(bus (hyboid) : circumntitation of stem, tr«iced on horizontal glass, from 
4 P.M. March 14th to 8.30 a.m. 16th. Tracing much magnified, re- 
duced to half of original size. Plant illuminated feebly from above. 

(7.) Ruhus idceics (hybrid) (RosacesB, Fam. 76). — As we hap- 



Fig. 75. 



pened to have a young plant, 11 inches 
in height and growing vigorously, 
which had been raised from a cross 
between the raspberry (Rubits idoeus) 
and a North American Rubus, it was 
observed in the usual manner. During 
the morning of March 14th the stem 
almost completed a circle, and then 
moved far to the right. At 4 p.m. it 
reversed its course, jmd now a fresh 
tracing* was begun, which was con- 
tinued during 40 j h., and is given in 
Fig. 74. We here have well-marked 
circumnutation. 

(8.) Deutzla gracilis (SaxifragesB, 
Fam. 77). — A shoot on a bush about 
18 inches in height was observed. The 
bead changed its course greatly eleven n^„#_. ^^ „•?• 

^ o .^ jjeutzin gmciiK : circumnu- 

times in the course of 10 h. 30 m. 
(Fig. 75), and there could be no 
doubt about the circumnutation of the 
stem. 

(9.) Fuchsia (greenhouse vaR, with 
large flowers, probably a hybrid) (Ona- 
grariefB, Fam. 100).— A .vonnp: plant, 
15 inches in height, was observed during nearly 48 h. The 




tation of stem, Icept in 
darkness, traced on hori- 
zontal glass, from 8.30 
A.M. to 7 P.M.March 20th. 
Movement of bead origin- 
ally magnified about 20 
timps, here reduced to 
half scale. 



206 CIRCUMNUTATION OF STEMS. Ohap. IV, 

accompanying figure (Fig. 76) gives the necessary particulais, 
and shows that the stem circumnutated, thongh rather 
fllowly. 

Fig. 76. 




Fuch<:ia (garden rar.) : circnmuutation of stem, kept in darkness, traced 00 
horizontal glass, from 8.30 A.M. to 7 p.m. March 20th. Movement of 
bead originally magnified about 40 times, here reduced to half scale. 

. (10.) Cereus sp^ciocissimvs Tparden var., sometimes called 
Phyllocactus multiflorus) (CactesB, Fam. 109), — This plant 
which was growing vigorously from having been removed a 
few days before from the greenhouse to the hot- house, was 
observed with especial interest, as it seemed so little probable 
that the stem would circumniitate. The branches are flat, or 
flabelliform; but some of them are triangular in section, with 
the three sides hollowed out. A branch of this latter shape, 
9 inches in length and li in diameter, was chosen for oliserva- 
tion, as less likely to circumnutate than a flalxilliform branch. 
The movement of the bead at the end of the glass filament, 
affixed to the summit of the branch, was traced (A, Fig. 77) 
from 9.23 a.m. to 4.30 p.m. on Nov 23rd, during which time it 
changed its course greaWy six times. On the 24th another 
tracing was made (see B), and the Iwad on this day changed its 
course oftencr, making in 8 h. what may be considered as four 
ellipses, with their longer axes differently directed. The position 
of the stem and its commencing course on the following 
Horning are likewise shown. There can be no doubt that this 
branch, though appearing quite rigid, circumnutated ; bat the 



CUAP. IV. 



CIBCUMNUTATION OF STEMS. 



207 



extreme amount of movement during the time was very small, 
probably rather less than the g'o^h of an inch. 



Fig. 77. 



SrSO'am 



4^30'p.yn. 




rrt.m.-&5'!* 




Derjus specioctssinius : circumnutation of stem, illumiiiatetl from above^ 
ti'Aoea on a horizontal glass, in A from 9 a.m. to 4.30 p.m. on Nov. 
23rd; and in B from 8.30 a.m. on the 24th to 8 A.M. on the 25th. 
Movement of the bead in B mas:niHed about 38 times. 

, (11.) n*'d^ra 'lelix (Aialiacete, Fam. 114).— The stem is known 
to be apheliotropic, and several seedlings growing in a pot in 
the greenhouse became bent in the middle of the summer at 
right angles fiom the light. On Sept. 2nd some of these stems 
were tied up so as to stand vertically, and were placed before 
a north-east window; but to our surprise they were now 
decidedly heliotropic, for during 4 days they curved them- 
selves towards the light, and their course being traced on a 
horizontal glass, was strongly zigzag. Dui'ing the 6 succeed- 
ing days they circumnutated over the same small space at a 
slow rate, but there could be no doubt about their circumnuta- 
tion. The plants were kept exactly in the same place before the 
window, and after an interval of 15 days the stems were 
again observed during 2 days and their movements traced, and 



208 



CIROUMNUTATION OF STEMS. 



OUAP. IV. 



they were fuund to be still circumnutating, but on a yet smaller 
scale. 

(12.) Gaznr.iu rm^cns (Compositre, Fam. 122).— The circum- 
nutation of the stem of a young plant, 7 inches in height, as 
measured to the tip of the highest leaf, was traced during 
83 h.. and is shown in the accompanying figure (Fig. 78). Two 



Fig. 78. 



^; 



t.ni.S. 




e^4J3^mtL22r^ 



Ucrsy]>mi.2if 



Qazania rin.cns: circunmutation of stem traced from 9 A.M. March 2l8t 
to *i P.M. on 22n(i; i>lint kept in darkne.>i8. Movement of bead at th€ 
close of the observations magnified 34 times, here reduced to half the 
original scale. 

main lines may be observed running at nearly right angles to 
two other main lines; but these are interrupted by small 
loops. 

(13.) Azcdea Indica (Ericinf 83, Fam. 128). — A bush 21 inches 
in height was selected for observation, and the circumnutation 
of its leading shoot was traced during 26 h. 40 m., as shown 
in the following figure (Fig. 79). 

(14.) PlnmlKujo C'ipensis (Plumlmginere, Fam. 134). — A small 
lateral branch which projected from a tall freely growing bosh, 
at an angle of 35° above the horizon, was selected for ol)«er- 
vjition. For the first 11 h. it moved to a considerable distance 
in a nearly straight line to one side, owing probably to its 
having been previously deflected by the light whilst standing in 
the greenhouse. At 7.20 p.m. on March 7th a fresh tracing was 
begun and continued for the next 43 h. 40 m. (see Fig. 8U> 
During the first 2 h. it followed nearly the Fame direction m 
iK'foro. and then changed it a little; during the night it 
moved at nearly right angles to its previous couise. JSeixi 



Chap. IV 



OIRCUMNUTATION OF STEMS 



209 



day (8th) it zigzagged greatly, and on the 9th moved irregn- 
larly round and round a small circular space. By 3 p.m. on 
the 9th the figure had become so complicated that no more dots 
could l^ made ; but the shoot continued during the evening of 
the 9th, the 'whole of the 10th, and the morniug of the 11th to 



Fig. 79. 



Fig. 80. 




Azalea Tndica: circnm nutation 
of stem, illuminated from 
above, triced on horizontal 
glass, from 9.30 A.M. March 
9th to 12.10 P.M. on the loth. 
bat on the inornine of the 
10th only four dots were 
made between 8.:^0 A.M. 
and 12.10 p.m., both hours 
included, so that the circum- 
nutation is not fairly repre- 
sented in this part of the 
diagram. Movement of the 
bead here magnified about 
30 times. 




Plumhngo Capensis ; circumnti- 
tation of tip of a lateral 
branch, traced on horizontal 
glass, from 7.20 P.M. on 
March 7th to 3 P.M. on the 
9th. Movement of bead 
magnified 13 times. Plant 
feebly illuminated from 
above. 



circumnutate over the same small space, which wa<« only about 
the ^th of an inch ('97 mm.) in diameter. Although this 
branch circnmnutated to a very small extent, yet it changed its 
course frequently. The movements ought to have been more 
magnified. 

(1.5.) Aloysia citriodom ^'VerbenaccflB, Fam 173). — The follow- 
ing figure (Fig. 81; givefe the movements of a shoot during 



210 



CIECUMNUTATION OF STEMS. 



Chap. IV. 



31 h. 40 m., and shows that it circumnutaied. The boeli wad 
15 inchds in height 



Fig. 81. 




Aloysia cHriodora : circuinautatiou of stem, traced from 8 20 A.]f. on March 
22nd tc 4 p.m. on 23rd. Plant kept in darkness. Movement magnified 
about 40 times. 

(16.) Verbena melindrea (?) (a scarlet-flowered herbaceous var.) 
(Verbenaceae). — A shoot 8 inches in height had been laid hori- 
zontally, for the sake of observing its apogeotropism, and the 
terminal portion had grown vertically upwards for a length of 
1^ inches. A glass filament, with a bead at the end, was fixed 







sratfpM.tfi 



6*50' am JB^^-^ 



Verbena m-Ii d o-,; circuinnutailon of stem in darkness, traced on vertical 
glass, from 5.:50 p.m. on June 5th to 11 a.m. June 7th. Movement of 
bead magnified 9 times. 

upriglit to the tip, and its movements were traced during 
41 h. 30 m. on a vertical glass (Fig. 82). Under these circum- 
stances the lateral movements were chiefly shown ; but as the 
lines from side to «ide aie not on the same level, the shoot 



Chap. IV. CIBCUMNUTATION OF STEMS. 211 

must have moved in a plane at right angles to that of the lateral 
movement, that is, it must have circumnutated. On the next day 
(6th) the shoot moved in the course of 16 h. four times to the right, 
and four times to the left ; and this apparently represents the 
formation of four elUpses, so that each was completed in 4 h. 

(17.) Ceratophy/lum demersam (CeratophyllesB, Fam. 220). — An 
interesting account of the movements of the stem of this water- 
plant has been published by M. E. Kodier.* The movements are 
confined to the young internodes, becoming less and less lower 
down the stem ; and they are extraordinary from their amplitude. 
The stems sometimes moved through an angle of above 2o0° in 
6 h., and in one instance through 220° in 3 h. They generally 
bent from right to left in the morning, and in an opposite direc- 
tion in the afternoon ; but the movement was sometimes tempo- 
rarily reversed or quite arrested. It was not affected by light. 
It does not appear that M. Kodier made any diagram on a hori- 
zontal plane representing the actual course pursued by the 
apex, but he speaks of the " l^rauches executing round their 
axes of growth a movement of torsion." From the particulars 
above given, and remembering in the case of twining plants and 
of tendrils, how difficult it is not to mistake their bending to all 
points of the compass for true torsion, we are led to believe that 
the stems of this Ceratophyllum circumnutate, probably in the 
shape of narrow ellipses, each completed in about 26 h. The 
following statement, however, seems to indicate something 
different from ordinary circumnutation, but we cannot fully 
imderstand it. M. Eodier says : " 11 est alors facile de voir que 
le mouvement de flexion se produit d'abord dans les meiithalles 
superieurs, qu'il se propage ensuit*^, en s'amoindrissant du h(i,vi 
en has\ tandis qu'au contraire le mouvement de redressement 
commence par la partie inferieure pour se terminer k la parti e 
superieure qui, quelquefois, pen de temps avant de se relever 
tout a fait, forme avec Taxe un angle tres aigu " 

(18 ) Coni/drce. — Dr. Maxwell Masters states (* Journal Linn. 
Soc./ Dec. 2nd, 1879) that the leading shoots of many ConiferaB 
during the season of their active growth exhibit very remark- 
able movements of revolving nutation, that is, they circumnu- 
tate. We may feel sure that the lateral shoots whilst growing 
would exhibit the same movement if carefully observed. 



* 'Comptes Rendus,* April 30tli. 1877. Also a second notice 
published separately in Boinchanx, Nov. 12th, 1877. 



212 



OIBCUMNUTATION OP STEMS. 



Chap. IV. 



(19.) LUium auratum (Fam. LiliacesB). — The circmnnutatioD 

Fig. 83. 




f^s7^m^.^a^€un.te^ 



^tp.fns* 



ftaanLf^ 



Lilium aumiu'n: circnmnntation of a stem in darkness, traced on a horizontal 
glass, from 8 A.M. on March 14th to 8.35 A.M. on 16th. But it should 
be noted that our observations were interrupted between 6 P.M. on the 
14th and 12.15 p.m. on 15th, and the movements during this interval 
of 18 h. 15 m. are represented by a long broken line. Diagram reduced 
to half original scale. 

of the stem of a plant 21 inches in height is represented in the 
ahove figure (Fig. 83). 

Fig. 48. 





Cypertts altemifoUus: circumnutation of stem, illuminated firom aboWi 
traced on horizontal glass, from 9.45 a.m. March 9th to 9 P.M. on 10th 
The stem grew so rapidly whilst being observed, that it was not poesiblt 
to estimate how much its movements were magnified in the tracing. 

(20.) Cyprus dlternifdlv'S (Fam. CyperaceiB.) — A glass 



Chap. IV. CIBCUMNUTATION OF STEMS. 213 

filament^ with a bead at the end, was fixed across the summit 
of a young stem 10 inches in height, close beneath the crown of 
elongated leaves. On March 8th, l>etween 12.20 and 7.20 p.m.^ 
the stem described an ellipse, open at one end. On the follow- 
iog day a new tracing was begun (Fig. 84), which plainly shows 
that the stem completed three irregular figures in the course of 
35 h. 15 m. 

Concluding Ttemarlcs on the Circumnutation of Steins, — 
Any one who will inspect the diagrams now given, and 
will bear in mind the widely separated position of the 
plants described in the series, — remembering that we 
have good grounds for the belief that the hypocotyls 
and epicotyls of all seedlings circumnutate, — not 
forgetting the number of plants distributed in the 
most distinct families which climb by a similar move- 
ment, — will probably admit that the growing stems 
of all plants, if carefully observed, would be found 
to circumnutate to a greater or less extent. When 
we treat of the sleep and other movements of plants, 
many other cases of circumnutating stems will be 
incidentally given. In looking at the diagrams, we 
should remember that the stems were always growing, 
so that in each case the circumnutating apex as it 
rose will have described a spire of some kind. The 
dots were made on the glasses generally at intervals 
of an hour, or hour and a half, and were then joined 
by straight lines. If they had been made at intervals 
of 2 or 3 minutes, the lines would have been more 
curvilinear, as in the case of the tracks left on the 
smoked glass-plates by the tips of the circumnutating 
radicles of seedling plants. The diagrams generally 
approach in form to a succession of more or less 
irregular ellipses or ovals, with their longer axes 
directed to different points of the compass during the 
same day or on succeeding days. The stems there- 



214 CIKCUMNUTATION OF STOLONa Chap. IV 

fore, sooner or later, bend to all sides; but after a 
stem has bent in any one direction, it commonly 
bends back at first in nearly, though not quite, the 
opposite direction ; and this gives the tendency to 
the fonnation of ellipses, which are generally narrow, 
but not so narrow as those described by stolons and 
leaves. On the other hand, the figures sometimes 
approach in shape to circles. Whatever the figure 
may be, the course pursued is often interrupted by 
zigzags, small triangles, loops, or ellipses. A stem 
may describe a single large ellipse one day, and 
two on the next. With different plants the com- 
plexity, rate, and amount of movement differs 
much. The stems, for instance, of Iberis and Azalea 
described only a single large ellipse in 24 h. ; 
whereas those of the Deutzia made four or five deep 
zigzags or narrow ellipses in llj h., and those of the 
Trifolium three triangular or quadrilateral figures 
in 7 h. 

CiRCUMNUTATION OF StOLONS OR BuKNEBS. 

Stolons consist of much elongated, flexible branches, 
which run along the surface of the ground and form 
roots at a distance from the parent-plant. They are 
therefore of the same homological nature as stems; 
and the three following cases may be added to the 
twenty previously given cases. 

Fragaria (cultivated garden var.) : Bosacect, — A plant growing 
m a pot had emitted a long stolon ; this was supported by a 
stick, so that it projected for the length of several inches hori- 
zontally. A glass filament bearing two minute triangles of 
paper was affixed to the terminal bud, which was a little up- 
turned ; and its movements were traced dxuring 21 h., as shown 
in Fig. 85. In the course of the first 12 h. it moved twice up 
and twice down in somewhat zigzag lines, and no donbt tra- 
velled in the same manner during the night. On the foUowing 



OifAP. IV. CIRCUMNUTATION OF STOLONS. 



215 



morning after an interval of 20 h. the apex stood a little higher 
than it did at first, and this 8ho^ys that the stolon had not beeo 

Fig. 85. 



y 



lC^pm.i^ 



JUf4.5'a.rn 




7'4S'ajnJ9^ 



Fraqaria: circumnutation of stolon, kept in darkness, traced on vertical 
glass, from 10.45 a.m. May 18th to 7.45 A.M. on 19th. 

acted on within this time by geotropism ; * nor had its own 
weight caused it to bend downwards. 

On the following morning (19th) the glass filament was 
detached and reiixed close behind the bud, as it appeared pos- 
sible that the circumnutation of the terminal bud and of the 
adjoining part of the stolon might be different. The movement 
was now traced during two consecutive days (Fig. 86 \ During 
the first day the filament travelled in the course of 14 h. 30 m. 
five times up and four times down, besides some lateral move- 
ment. On the 20th the course was even more complicated, and 
can hardly be followed in the figure ; but the filament moved in 
16 h. at least five times up and five times down, with very little 



♦ Dr. A. B. Frank states (*Die 
Nftturliche wagcrechte Richtunoj 
von Pflanzenthcilen.* 1870, p. 20) 
tliat the stolons of this plant are 

15 



acted on by p^eotropisra, but only 
after a considerable interval of 
time. 



216 



CIRCUMNUTATION OF STOLONS. 



Chap. IV 



tPoi.m 



fO''S9p,mJ0'r 



\ 



\ 



lateral deflection. The first and last dots made on this second 
day, viz., at 7 a.m. and 11 p.m., were close together, showing 
that the stolon had not fallen or risen. Nevertheless, by com- 
paring its position on 
^'g- 8^* the morning of the 19th 

and 21st, it is obvious 
that the stolon had sunk ; 
and this may be attri- 
buted to slow bending 
down either fix)m its own 
weight or from gootro- 
pism. 

During a part, of the 20th 
an orthogonal tracing was 
made by applying a cube 
of wood to the vertical 
glass and bringing the 
apex of the stolon at suc- 
cessive periods into a line 
with one edge; a dot 
being made each time on 
tlie glass. This tracing 
therefore represented very 
nearly the actual amount 
of movement of the apex ; 
and in the course of 9 \u 
the distance of the ex- 
treme dots from one an- 
otlier was '45 inch. By 
the same method it was 
ascertained that the apex 
moved between 7 a.m. on 
*S*«.»i.5/^ the 20th and 8 a.m. on the 

Fi'itgarit : circumnutfttion of* the same stolon 21st a distance of '82 inch. 
as in the Ust fig„«,ob.erred in th. .ame j^ younger and ShottOT 
manner, and traced from 8 A.M. May 19th , , 

to 8 A.M. 21st. stolon was supported so 

that it projected at about 
45° alx)vo the horizon, and its movement was traced by the 
same orthogonal inothod. On the first day the apex soon 
rf»se above the field of vision. By the next morning it had 
punk, and tlio course pursued was now traced during 14 b. 
3u m. (Fig. 87). The amount of movement was almost the aaiM^ 




Tn.m.20 
M'^p.m.SO 




Chap IV. CIBCUMNUTATION OF STOLONS. 217 

from side to side as up and down ; and differed in this respect 
remarkably from the movement in the previous cases. During 
the latter part of the day, viz., between 3 and 10.30 p.m., the 

Fig. 87. 




iCf.am 



8*a.fn 

^ffcLm. 

f'Qqa*'\u : circumnutation of another and younger stolon, traced from 
8 A.M. to 10.30 P.M. Figure reduced to one-half of original senile. 

actual distance travelled by the apex amounted to 1*15 inch; 
and in the course of the whole day to at least 2*67 inch. This 
is an amount of movement almost comparable with that of 
fiome climbing plants. The same stolon was observed on the 
following day, and now it moved in a somewhat less complex 
manner, in a plane not far from vertical. The extreme amount 
of actual movement was 1*55 inch in one direction, and '6 inch 
in another direction at right angles. During neither of these 
days did the stolon bend downwards through geotropism or its 
own weight. 

Four stolons still attached to the plant were laid on damp 
sand in the back of a room, with their tips facing the north-east 
windows. They were thus placed because De Vries says * that 
they are apheliotropic when exposed to the light of the sun ; but 
we could not perceive any effect from the above feeble degree of 
illumination. We may add that on another occasion, late in the 
nmuner, some stolons, placed upright before a south-west window 



♦ • Arbeiten Bot. Inst., Wurzhiirg,' 1872, p. 434. 



218 CIRCUMNUTATION OF STOLONS. Chap IV. 

on a cloudy day, became distinctly curved towards the lights and 
were therefore heliotropic. Close in front of the tips of the 
prostrate stolons, a crowd of very thin sticks and the dried 
haulms of grasses were driven into the sand, to represent the 
crowded stems of surrounding plants in a state of nature. Thia 
was (lone for the sake of observing how the growing stolons 
would pass through them. They did so easily in the course of 
6 days, and tlieir circumnutation apparently facilitated their 
passage. When the tips encountered sticks so close together 
that they could not pass between them, they rose up and passed 
over them. The sticks and haulms were removed after the 
passage of the four stolons, two of which vere found U> have 
assumed a permanently sinuous shape, and two were stiU 
straight. But to this subject we shall recur under Saxifraga. 

Saxifraga sarmentosa (Saxifrageae). — A plant in a suspended 
pot had emitted long branched stolons, which depended like 

Fig. 88. 



I 



\. 



*^-. 




Sax'froffa sarmentosa: circumnutation of an inclined stolon, tmcod il 
darkness on a horizontal glass, from 7.45 A.M. April 18th to 9 A.M. on 
9th. Movement of end of stolon magnified '2'2 times. 

threads on all sides. Two were tied up so as to stand vertically, 
and their upper ends Ixjcame gradually bent downwards, but so 
slowly in the course of several days, that the bending was pro- 
bably due to their weight and not to geotropism. A glass filar 
nient with little triangles of pa|X3r was fixetl to the end of one of 
these stolons, which was 17J inches in length, and had already 
l»ocomo much l)ent down, but still i)rojected at a considerable 
an<rle above the horizon. It moved only slightly three times 
from side to side and then upwards; on the following day 



Chap. IV. CIBCUMNUTATION OF STOLONS. 219 

the movement was even less. As this stolon was so long we 
thought that its growth was nearly completed, so we tried 
another which was thicker and shorter, viz., lOi inches in length. 
It moved greatly, chiefly upwards, and changed its course five 
times in the course of the day. During the night it curved sc 
much upwards in opposition to gravity, that the movement 
could no longer be traced on the vertical glass, and a horizontal 
one had to be used. The movement was followed during the 
next 25 h., as shown in Fig. 88. Three irregular ellipses, with 
their longer axes somewhat differently directed, were almost 
completed in the first 15 h. The extreme actual amount of 
movement of the tip during the 25 h. was "76 inch. 

Several stolons were laid on a flat surface of damp sand, in the 
same manner as with those of the strawberry. The friction of 
the sand did not interfere with their circumnutation ; nor could 
we detect any evidence of their being sensitive to contact. In 
order to see how in a state of nature they would act, when 
encountering a stone or other obstacle on the ground, short 
pieces of smoked glass, an inch in height, were stuck upright 
into the sand in front of two thin lateral branches. Their tips 
scratched the smoked surface in various directions ; one made 
three upward and two downward lines, besides a nearly hori- 
zontal one; the other curled quite away from the glass; but 
ultimately both surmounted the glass and pursued their original 
course The apex of a third thick stolon swept up the glass in a 
curved line, recoiled and again came into contact with it ; it then 
moved to the right, and after ascending, descended vertically ; 
ultimately it passed roimd one end of the glass instead of over it. 

Many long pins were next driven rather close together into 
the sand, so as to form a crowd in front of the same two thin 
lateral branches; but these easily wound their way through 
the crowd. A thick stolon was much delayed in its passage ; 
at one place it was forced to turn at right angles to its former 
course; at another place it could not pass through the pins, 
and the hinder part became bowed; it then curved upwards 
and passed through an opening between the upper part of some 
pins which happened to diverge ; it then descended and finally 
emerged through the crowd. This stolon was rendered perma- 
nently sinuous to a slight degree, and was thickei* where sinuous 
than elsewhere, apparently from its longitudinal growth having 
been checked. 

Cotyledon umbilicus (Crassulaceae).— A plant growing in a pan 



220 OmcnMNCTATION OF STOLONS. Ohap. IT 

of damp mosB had emitted 2 atolons, 22 and 20 incbee in length. 
One of these 'waa euppoited, so that a length of 4} incfaea pn^ 
iected in a Btraight and horizontal line, and the movement 
of the apex was traced. The first dot was made at 9J.0 ajl 



Fig. 89. 




of atalon, traced from 11.15 *■■ 
t MluniiDflted fTom nbore. Ttr 
ength, the penultimate 3'35,aiiii 
the third 3 inches in length. Apex nf (tolon ttood at a distanc* of 
5 '76 inches from the Tertical glui ; but it wa* not pikujble to ascertai* 
hnw much the trnelnir una magnified, as it uu not knotro how great 
a length of the intcrnode cirtum nutated. 

the terminal portion soon hegan to hend downwards and con- 
tinued to do so until noon. Therefore a straight line, Tcry 
nearly as long as the whole figure here given (Pig. 89), wM firtt 
traced on the pliiss ; but the upper part of this line has not btea 
'^)pied in the diograin. The curvature occurred in the middle 



Chap. IV. 



CIKCUMNUTATION OF STOLONS. 



221 



of the penultimate internode ; and its chief seat was at the 
distance of li inch from the apex; it appeared due to the 
weight of the terminal portion, acting on the more flexible 
part of the internode, and not to geotropism. The apex after 
thus sinking down from 9.10 a.m. to noon, moved a Jittle to the 
left; it then rose up and circumnutated in a nearly vertical 
plane until 10.35 p.m. On the following day (26th) it was ol>- 

Fig. 90. 



Stii' aM^S^b 



i'3o: 



Ut9S^.j9.7n.2 




S^s'iLm. 



&*4i/a.m.2(f^ 



Cr2(yp.m.20h 




Oott^don umbilicus: circumnut.ition and downward movement of another 
stolon, traced on vertical glass, from 9.11 a.m. Aug. 25th to 11 A.M. 27th. 
Aj)ex close to glass, so that Hgurebut little magnified, and here reduced 
to two-thirds of original size. 

served from 6.40 a.m. to 5.20 p.m., and within this time it moved 
twice up and twice down. On the morning of the 27th the apex 
stood as high as it did at 11.30 a.m. on the 25th. Nor did it 
sink down during the 28th, but continued to circumnutate about 
the same place. 
Another stolon, which resembled the last in almost every 



222 CIKCUMNUTATION OF STOLONS. Chap. IV. 

respect, was observed daring the same two days, but only two 
inches of the terminal portion was allowed to project freely and 
horizontally. On the 25th it continued from 9.10 a.m. to 1.30 p.m. 
to bend straight downwards, apparently owing to its weight 
(Fig. 90); but after this hour until 10 35 p.m. it zigzagged. 
This fact deserves notice, for we here probably see the combined 
effects of the bending down from weight an" I of circumnutation. 
The stolon, however, did not circumnutate when it first began 
to l^nd down, as may be observed in the present diagram, and 
as was still more evident in the last case, when a longer portion 
of the stolon was left unsupported. On the following day 
(26th) the stolon moved twice up and twice down, but still con- 
tinued to fall ; in the evening and during the night it travelled 
from some unknown cause in an oblique direction. 

We see from these three cases that stolons or 
runners circumnutate in a very complex manner. The 
lines generally extend in a vertical plane, and this 
may probably be attributed to the effect of the weight 
of the unsupported end of the stolon ; but there is 
always some, and occasionally a considerable, amount 
of lateral movement. The circumnutation is so great 
in amplitude that it may almost be compared with 
that of climbing plants. That the stolons are thus 
aided in passing over obstacles and in winding between 
the stems of the surrounding plants, the observations 
above given render almost certain. .If they had not 
circumnutated, their tips would have been liable to 
have been doubled up, as often as they met with 
obstacles in their path ; but as it is, they easily avoid 
thejji. This must be a considerable advantage to the 
plant in spreading from its parent-stock ; but we are 
far from supposing that the power has been gained 
by the stolons for this purpose, for circumnutation 
seems to be of universal occurrence with all growing 
parts; but it is not improbable that the amplitude 
of the movement may have been specially increased 

• this purpose. 



Chap. IV. CIKCUMNUTATION OF FLOWEE -STEMS. 223 



CiRCUMNUTATION OF FlOWER-STEMS. 

We did not think it necessary to make any special 
observations on the circumnutation of flower-stems, 
these being axial in their nature, like stems or stolons ; 
but some were incidentally made whilst atteudiug 
to other subjects, and these we will here bi'iefly give. 
A few observations have also been made by other 
botanists. These taken together suflSce to render it 
probable that all peduncles and sub-peduncJes eir- 
cumnutate whilst growing. 

Oxalis ca/nosa.— The peduncle which springs frora the thick 
and woody stem of this plant bears three or foiu* su6-peduncles . 

Fig. 91. 




Oxalis carnosa: flower-stem, feebly illuminated from above, its circumnuta 
tion traced from 9 a.m. April 13th to 9 A.M. 15th, Summit of flowei 
8 inches beneath the horizontal glass. Movement probably magnified 
about 6 times. 

A filament with little triangles of paper was fixed within the 
calyx of a flower which stood npright. Its movements were 
observed for 48 h. ; during tlie first hnlf of this time the flower 
was fally expanded, and during the second half withered. The 
figure here given (Fig. 91) represents 8 or 9 ellipses. Although 
the main peduncle circumnutated, and described one largo and 



224 CIEOUMNUTATION OF FL0WEB-8TEM8 Chap. I\ 

fcwo smaller ellipses in the course of 24 h.^ yet the chief seat ol 
movement lies in the snb-peduncles, which ultimately bend 
vertically downwards, as will be described in a future chapter. 
The peduncles of OxcUis acelosdli likewise bend downwards, and 
afterwards, when the pods are nearly mature, upwards; and this 
is effected by a circumnutating movement 

It may be seen in the above figure that the flosrer-stem of 
0. carnosa circumnutated during two days about the same spot 
On the other hand, the flower-stem of O. aensitiua undergoes a 
str<mgly marked, daily, periodical change of position, when kept 
at a proper temperature. In the middle of the day it stands 
vertically up, or at a high angle ; in the aftemo »n it sinks, and 
in the evening projects horizontally, or almost horizontally, 
rising again during the night. This movement continues from 
the period when the floAcrs are in bud to when, as we believe, 
the pods are mature : and it ought perhaps to have been included 
amongst the so-called sleep-movements of plants. A tracing 
was not made, but the angles were measured at successive periods 
during one whole day; and these showed that the moveiueut 
was not cootinuous, but that the peduncle oscillated up and 
down. We may therefore conclude that it circumnutated. At 
the base of the peduncle there is a mass of small cells, forming 
a well- developed pulvinus, which is exteriorly coloured purple 
and hairy. In no other genus, as far as we knofv, is the peduncle 
furnished with a pulvinus. The peduncle of O, Ortegesii behaved 
differently from that of 0. sansitiva, for it stood at a less angle 
above the horizon in the middle of the day, than in the morning 
or evening. By 10.20 p.m. it had risen greatly. During the 
middle of the day it oscillated much up and down. 

TrifoUum suhierrantum. — A filament was fixed vertically to 
the uppermost part of the peduncle of a young and upright 
flower-head (the stem of the plant having been secured to a 
stick); and its movements were traced during 36 h. Within 
this time it described (see Fig. 92) a figure which represents four 
ellipses; but during the latter part of the time the peduncle 
began to bend downwards, aid after 10.30p.m. on the 24th it 
curved so rapidly down, that by 6 45 a.m. on the 25? h it stood 
only 19° above the horizon. It went on circumnutating in nearly 
the same position for two days. Even after the flower-heada 
have buried themselves in the ground thdy continue, as will 
hereafter be shown, to circumnutate. It will also be seen in the 
next chapter that the sul)-pcdunclcs of the separate flowers of 



Chap. IV. CIBCUMNUTATION OF FLOWER-STEMS. 225 

Trifolium repena circumniitate in a complicated course during 
Beveral days. I may add that the gynophore of AracJiis hypogcea^ 



Fig. 92. 



9fAffM.m 




iUf,30'fjn.249' 



Trifolium svbtenancum : main flower-peduncle, illumiuated from aboTti 
circnmnutation traced on horizontal glass, from 8.40 a.m. July 23rd 
to 10.30 P.M. 24th. 

which looks exactly like a peduncle, circumnutates whilst growing 
vertically downwards, in order to bury the young pod in the 
ground. 

The movements of the flowers of Cyclamen Persicum were not 
observed ; but the peduncle, whilst the pod is forming, increases 
much in length, and bows itself down by a circumnutating 
movement. A young peduncle of Maurandia semperflorens, 
H inch in length, was carefully observed during a whole day, 
and it made M narrow, vertical, irregular and short ellipses, 
each at an average rate of about 2 h. 'J5 m. An adjoining 
peduncle described during the same time similar, though fewer, 
ellipses.* According to Sachs t the flower-stems, whilst growing, 



'• * The Movements and Hnbits 
of Climbing Plants,' 2nd edit., 



1875 p. 68. 
t * Text-Book of Botany,' 1875^ 



226 CIRCUMNUTATION OP LEAVES. Chap. IV. 

of many plants, for instance, those of Brassica napus, revolve or 
circu(uuutate ; those of Allium porrum bend from side to side, 
and, if this movement had been traced on a horizontal glass, 
no doubt ellipses would have been formed. Fritz Miiller has 
described * the spoutaneous revolving movements of the flower- 
stems of an Alisma, which he compares with those of a climbing 
plant. 

We made no observations on the movements of the different 
parts of flowers. Morren, however, has observed t in the 
stamens of Sparmannia and Cereus a " frenJssement spontane," 
which, it may be suspected, is a circumnutating movement 
The circumnutation of the gynostemiuin of Stylidium, as de- 
scrilied by Gad, J is highly remarkable, and apparently aids in 
the fertilisation of the flowers. The gynostemium, whilst spon- 
taneously moving, comes into contact with the viscid labellum, 
to which it adheres, until freed by the increasing tension of the 
parts or by being touched. 

We have now seen that the flower-stems of plants 
belonging to such widely different families as the 
Cruciferje, Oxalidae, Leguminosa?, PrimulaceaB, Scro- 
phularinese, AlismaceaB, and Liliaceae, circumnutate ; 
and that there are indications of this movement in 
many other families. With these facts before us, 
bearing also in mind that the tendrils of not a few 
plants consist of modified peduncles, we may admit 
without much doubt that all growing flower-stems 
circumnutate. 

Circumnutation of Leaves : Dicotyledons. 

Several distiuiiuished botanists, Hofmeister, Sachs, 
Pfeffer, De Vries, Batalin, Millardet, &c., have ob- 

p. 70G. liinnjcus and Trevinmus plica fiicumnntation. 
(nrcoKHnj? to PfeffiT, 'Die Pe- ♦ 'Jciiuische Zeitdch.,* Bl ▼• 

liiKlihchen B.we*runjr«*n,' &c.. p. p. 133. 

H;>) btntc that the lluwer-stalks t 'V. Mom. de I'Acad. R. dt 

of TiiMiiy pl.iiits oi'onpy dilfennt BruxcUcs/ torn. xiv. 1841, p. X 
P'»aitioriM l»y iii^hr uml day, and | 'tiitzuu^bericht des bot. Vi»- 

vfo. shall 8i c ill the ehaplt;r on rei'is d'^r P. Breudenburg/ nd 

tl.e Sl(Hp of Plants that tills im- p. 84. 



CnvF. IV. 



DICOTYLEDONS. 



227 



served, and some of them with the greatest care, the 
periodical movements of leaves ; bat their attention 
has been chiefly, though not exclusively, directed to 
those which move largely and are commonly said to 
sleep at night. From considerations hereafter to be 
given, plants of this nature are here excluded, and 
\^ill bo treated of separately. As we wished to ascer- 
tain whether all young and growing leaves circumnu- 
tated, we thought that it would be sufficient if we 
observed between 30 and 40 genera, widely distributed 
throughout the vegetable series, selecting some un- 
usual forms and others on woody plants. All th(3 
plants were healthy and grew in pots. They were 
illuminated from above, but the light perhaps was not 
always sufficiently bright, as many of them were ob- 
served under a skylight of ground-glass. Except in a 
few specified cases, a fine glass filament with two minute 
triangles of paper was fixed to the leaves, and their 
movements were traced on a 
vertical glass (when not stated 
to the contrary) in the manner 
already described. I may repeat 
tliat the broken lines represent 
the nocturnal course. The stem 
was always secured to a stick, 
close to the base of the leaf 
under observation. The ar- 

mngement of the species, with Sarmcema purpurea : c\v,nru- 

the number of the Family ap- nutation of young pitcher, 
pended, is the same as in the 
case of stems. 



Fig. 93. 




traced from 8 A.M. July 3rd 
to 10.15 A.M. 4th. Temp. 
170-180 C. Apex of pitcher 
20 inches from glass, so 
movement greatly mng- 
nitied. 



(1.) '^arracenia purpurea (Sarra- 
poiu«, Fam. 11).— A young leaf, or 

pitclier, 8i inches in height, with the bladder swollen, bnt with 
the hood not as yet open, had a filament fixed transversely 



228 



CIRCUMNUTATION OF LEAVES. 



Chap. IV. 



Fig. 94 



across its apex ; it was observed for 48 h., and during the whole 
of this time it circumnutated in a nearly similar manner, but 
to a very small extent. The tracing given (Fig. 93) relates 
only to the movements during the first 26 h. 

(2.) filaudum luteum (Papave- 
racesB, Fam. 12).— A young plant, 
bearing only 8 leaves, had a fila- 
ment attached to the youngest leaf 
but one, which was 3 inches in 
length, including the petiole. The 
circumnutating movement - was 
traced during 47 h. On both days 
the leaf descended from before 7 a.m. 
until about II A.M., and then 
ascended slightly during the rest 
of the day and the early part of 
the night. During the latter part 
of the night it fell greatly. It did 
not ascend so much during the 
second as during the first day, and 
it descended considerably lower on 
the second night than on the first. 
This difference was probably due 
to the illumination from above 
having been insufficient during the 
two days of observation. Its course 
during the two days is shown in 
Fig. 94. 

(3.) Crambe maritima (Crucifer», 
Fam. 14). — A leaf 9 i inches in length 
on a plant not growing vigorously 
was first observed. Its apex was 
in constant movement, but this 
could hardly be traced, from being 
so small in extent. The apex, how- 
ever, certainly changed its course at 
to 8.30 A.M. I6th. Tracing least 6 times in the course of 14 h. 
not much magnified, as apex ^ ^qj.q vigorous young plant, bear- 

from fh:S:"'' '* """" ins only 4 leaves, was then selected. 

and a filament was affixed to the 
midrib of tlie third leaf from the base, which, with the petiole, was 
6 inches iu length. The leaf stood up almost vertically, but the tip 




Glawiuin luteum: circumnuta- 
tion of young leaf", traced 
from 9.30 a.m. June 14th 



Chap. IV. 



DICOTYLEDONS. 



229 



was deflected, so that the filament projected almost horizontally. 

And its movements were traced during 48 h. on a vertical glass, 

as sho>^Ti in the accompanying figure (Fig. 95). We here plainly 

see til at the leaf was con- „. ^^ 

Fig. 95. 



tinuftlly circumnutating ; 
but the proper periodicity 
of its mo\ ements was dis- 
turlKjd by its being only 
dimly illuminated from 
above through a double 
fikylight. We infer that 
this was the case, because 
two leaves on plants grow- 
ing out of dooi*R, had their 
angles above the horizon 
measured in the middle 
of the day and at 9 to 
about 10 P.M. on succes- 
sive nights, and they 
were found at this latter 
hour to have risen by an 
average angle of 9" above 
their mid-day position : 
on the following morning 
they fell to their former 
position. Now it may ht 
observed in the diagram 
that the leaf rose during 
the second night, so that 
it stood at 6 40 a.m. higher 



6^M)'ccjn.26^H 



S'.a.m} 



y\ 



7:50'a.m.a2r^ 




'sCp.m.SS¥ 



10'!80'f,m.8^ 



€i:5ffa.mS4!^ 




3'j9im£d,^ 



than at lO.'iO p.m. on the Crmihe man'tima: circumnutation of leaf, 
preceding night; and this disturbed by being insufficieutly illumi 

may be attributed to the 
leaf adjusting itself to the 
dim light, coming exclu- 
sively from above. 

(4.) Brcv-sica oleracra (CrucifcrsB). — Hofmcister and Batalin * 
j^tate that the leaves of the cabbage rise at night, and full by 
day. We covered a younp: plant, bearing 8 leaves, under a larpe 
boll-glass, placing it in the same position with respect to the 



nated from above, traced from 7 50 a m. 
June 28rd to 8 A.M. 25th. Apex of leaf 
15J inches from the vertical glass, so that 
the tracing was much magnified, but is 
here reduced to one-fourth of original scale. 



• Flora; 1873, p. 437 



230 CIECUMXUTATION CF LEAVES. Chap. rV 

light iu which it had long remained, and a filament was fixed 
at the distance of '4 of an inch from the apex of a young leaf 
nearly 4 inches in length. Its movements were then traced 
during three days, but the tracing is not worth giving. The 
leaf fell during the whole morning, and rose in the evening and 
during the early part of the night. The ascending and descend- 
ing lines did not coincide, so that an irregular ellipse was formed 
each 24 h. The basal part of the midrib did not move^ as was 
ascertained by measuring at successive periods the angle which 
it formed with the horizon, so that the movement was confiued 
to the terminal portion of the leaf, which moved through an 
angle of IP in the course of 24 h., and the distance trnvelleil by 
the apex, up and down, was between '8 and * 9 of an inch. 

In order to ascertain the efiect of darkness, a filament was 
fixed to a leaf oh inches in length, borne by a plant which after 
forming a head had pro luced a stem. The leaf was inclined 
44° above the horizon, and its movements were traced on a 
vertical glass every hour by the aid of a taper. During the 
first day the leaf rope from 8 a.m. to 10.40 p.m. in a slightly 
zipzag course, thi actual distance travelled by the apex being 
• G7 of an inch. During the night the leaf fell, whereas it ought 
to have risen ; and by 7 a.m. on the following morning it had 
fallen -28 of an inch, and it continued falling until 940 a.m. It 
then rose until 10.50 p m., but the rise was interrupted by one 
considerable oscillation, that is, by a fall and re-ascents During 
the second night it again fell, but only to a very short distance, 
and on the following morning re-ascended to a very short 
distance. Thus the normal course of the leaf was grcaily 
disturbed, or rather coniplttely inverted, by the absence of 
light; and the movements were likewise greatly diminished in 
amplitude. 

We may add that, according to Mr. A. Stephen Wilson * tlio 
young leaves of the Swedish turnip, which is a hybrid between 
Ji. vhrwea and raja, draw together in the evening so mnch 
"that the horizontal breadth diminishes aliout 30 per cent, of 
the daylight breadth." Therefore the leaves must rise con- 
siderably at night. 

(Jk) Diaiitlms ouyoj-hi/Uus (Caryoi)hyllca5, Fam. 26). — The 



♦ * Trans. Bot. Snc. Edinbiirjxh,' see Darwin. * AnimuU nnd Phmtt 
vol. xiii. p. H2. With respict to under Dtimesticatiuu/ 2nd i-di^ 

thf origin of the Swidish turnip. vol. i. p. 344. 



Chap. IV. 



DICOTYLEDONS. 



231 



terminal shoot of a young plant, growing very vigorously, was 
selected for observation. The young leaves at first stand up 
vertically and close together, but they soon bend outwards and 
downwards, so as to become horizontal, and often at the same 
time a little to one side. A filament was fixed to the tip of a 
young leaf whilst still highly inclined, and the first dot was 
made on the vertical glass at 8.30 a.m. June 13th, but it curved 
downwards so quickly that by 6.40 A.M. on the following 
morning it stood only a little above the horizon. In Fig. 96 



Fig. 96 



fW'-JS'p.mlB^ 




*jff*B^p,mJB^ 




e''4o'ajm.u^ 




l0P4^p.m.14f^* 



Dianthua caryophyllus: circnm nutation of young leaf, traced from 10.15 
P.M. June 13th to 10.35 p.m. 16th. Apex of leaf stood, at the close of 
our obsenrations, 8{ inches from the vertical glass, so tracing not 
greatly magnified. The leaf was 5 J inches long. Temp. 15^°-17J° C. 

the long, slightly zigzag line representing this rapid downward 
course, which was somewhat inclined to the left, is not given ; 
but the figure shows the highly tortuous and zigzag course, 
together with some loops, pursued during the next 2i days. 
As th3 leaf continued to move all the time to the left, it is 
evident that the zigzag line represents many circumnutations. 

(6.) Camellia Japonica (Camelliacese, Fam. 32). — A youngish 
leaf, which together with its petiole was 2* inches in length and 
which arose from a side branch on a tall bush, had a filament 
attached to its apex. This leaf sloped downwards at an angle 
of 40'^ l)eneath the horizon. As it was thick and rigid, and its 
16 



232 



CIECUMNUTATION OF LEAVES. 



Chap. 11 



Fig. 97. 



petiole very short, much movement could not be expected. 

Nevertheless, the apex chauged its course 
completely seven times in the course of 
llh h., but moved to only a very small 
distance. On the next day the movement 
of the apex was traced during 26 h. 20 m. 
(as shown in Fig. 97), and was nearly of 
the same nature, but rather less complex. 
The movement seems to be periodical, for 
on both days the leaf circumnutated in the 
forenoon, fell in the afternoon (on the first 
day until between 3 and 4 p.m., and on the 




Camellia Japonica ; cir- 
cnmnutation of leaf, 
traced from 6.40 
A.M. June 14th to 
6.50 A.M. 15th. 
Apex of leaf 12 
inches from the ver- 



tical glass, so figure second day until 6 p.m.), and then rose, 
consideraMy ma|. falling again during the night or early 

16^° C. morning. 

In the chapter on the Sleep of Plants 
we shall see that the leaves in several Malvaceous genera sink 

Fig. 98. 



tiSO'ajn^h 




J0:4^.pjtL 



!50'a.».25l^ 



Velargonium zonale : circumnutation and downward movement of young 
leaf, traced from 9.30 a.m. June 14th to 6.30 p.m. 16th. Apex of leaf 
9} inches from the vertical glass, so figure moderately magnified* 
Temp. 150-I6JO C. 

at night; and as they often do not then occupy a vertical 
position, especially if they have not been well illuminated during 



Chap. IV. 



DICOTYLEDONS. 



233 



Fig. 99. 



the day^ it is doubtful whether some of these cases ought not 
to have been included in the present chapter. 

(7.) Pelargonium zonule (Geraniacea), Fam. 47). — A young 
leaf, li inch in breadth, with its petiole 1 inch long, borne on 
a young plant, was observed in the usual manner during 61 h. ; 
and its course is shown in the preceding figure (Fig. 98). 
During the first day and night the leaf moved downwards, but 
circumnutated between 10 a.m. and 4.30 p.m. On the second 
day it sank and rose again, but between 10 a.m. and 6 p.m. it 
circumnutated on an extremely small scale. On the third day 
the circumnutation was more plainly marked. 

(8.) Cissm discolor (AmpelidesB, Fam. 67).— A leaf, not nearly 
full-grown, the third from the apex of 
a shoot on a cut-down plant, was 
observed during 31 h. 30 m. (see Fig. 
99). The day was cold (15°-16° C), 
and if the plant had been observed in 
the hot-house, the circumnutation, 
though plain enough as it was, would 
probably have been far more con- 
spicuous. 

(9.) Vicia faha (LeguminosjB, Fam. 
75). — A young leaf, 3 1 inches in 
length, measured from base of petiole to 
end of leaflets, had a filament affixed 
to the midrib of one of the two ter- 
minal leaflets, and its movements were 
traced during 51i h. The filament fell 
all morning (July 2nd) till 3 p.m., and 
then rose greatly till 10.35 p.m. ; but 
the rise this day was so great, com- 
pared with that which subsequently 
occurred, that it was probably due in 
part to the plant being illuminated 
from above. The latter part of the course on July 2nd is alone 
given in the following figure (Fig. 100). On the next day 
(July 8rd) the leaf again fell in the niorning, then circumnu- 
tated in a conspicuous manner, and rose till late at night; but 
the movement was not traced after 7.15 p.m., as by that time the 
filament pointed towards the upper edge of the glass. During 
the latter part of the night or early morning it again fell in the 
same manner as before. 




Cissus discolor ; circumnu- 
tation of leaf, traced 
from 10.35 A.M. May 
28th to 6 P.M. 29th. 
Apex of leaf 8| inches 
from the vertical glass. 



234 



CIECUMNUTATION OP LEAVES. 



Chap. IT. 



As the eyening rise and the early momJDg &!! were nntisiially 
large, the angle of the petiole aboye the horizon was measured 
Ab the two periods, and the leaf was found to haye risen 19* 

Fig. 100. 



€WB>^a.m.SV^\ 




€:4S'»m.^ 



Jiiwm4^ 



<rfJ^jp.m.2^ 



Vieia falyi : circumnutation of leaf, traced from 7.15 PJC. Jalj 2ad to 
10.15 A.M. 4th. Apex of the two terminal leaflets 7} inchea from tht 
vertical glass. Figure here reduced to two-thirds of original teak. 
Temp. 170-18° C. 

between 12.20 p.m. and 10.45 p.m., and to haye fiillen 2S^ W 

between tlio latter hour and 10.20 a.m. on the following morning. 

The main petiule was now secured to a stick dose to the 



Chap. IV. 



DICOTYLEDONS. 



235 



of the two temiinal leaflets, which were 1 *4 inch in length ; and 
the movements of one of them were traced during 48 h. (see 
Fig. 101). The course pursued is closely analogous to that of 
the whole leaf. The zigzag line between 8.30 a.m. and 3.30 P.M. 
on the second day represents 5 very small ellipses, with their 



Fig. 101. 



iO'^JSj^mi 



J9*4^'Ain.4^ 





v^scyoMLef 



Vich faba: circumnutation of one of the two terminal leaflets, the malQ 
petiole having been secured, traced from 10.40 a.m. July 4th to 10.30 A.M. 
6th. Apex of leaflet 6| inches from the vertical glass. Tracing here 
reduced to one-half of original scale. Temp. 16^-18^ C. 

longer axes differently directed. From these observations it 
follows that both the whole leaf and the terminal leaflets uudergo 
a well-marked daily periodical movement, rising in the evening 
and falling during the latter part of the night or early morning; 
whilst in the middle of the day they generally circumnutate 
round the same small space. 



236 



CIBCUMNTITATION OF LFAVE8. Chap. IV 




. Jul; ISth I 



(10.) Acacia refinoidrs (Ii^uminoaie).— The movement rf a 
yonng phyllode, 23 inches in length, and inclined at a consider- 
able angle above the horizon, was traced 
''« '°^' during 45 h. 30 ra. ; but in the flgnre here 

EiTen(Fig.l(l2),itaoircnmnntation is shown 
during ouly 21 h. 30 m. During part of 
thia time (viz., 11 b. 30 m.) the phyllods 
described a figure re- 
presentiEg 5 or 6 Kg. 103. 

small ellipses. The 
actual amount of 
movement in a ver- 
tical direction was '3 
inch. The phyllode 
Acada •itinofiti ; dr- rose considerably be- 
cDiDDDtation of n tween 1.30 P.M. and 
j-onoK ^ P|'tII^»^,«; 4 P.1I.. but there woa 
;o evidence on either 
aj of a regular pe- 
A(*i of phjUode 9 riodic movement. 

lei"-!/}" C. «<«"« (Leguminosw). 

— Plants were Taised 
from Eced purchased under this name. 
This is one of the species in this large 
genua, the leavea of which do not sleep 
at night. The petioles rise direct from 
the ground, and ore from 6 to 7 inchea 
in length. A filament was fixed to the 
midrib of one of the longer leaflets, and 
the movement of the wholeleaf was traced, 
as shown in Fig. 103. In the course of 
6 h. 30 m. tlie filament went four times up 
and three times down. A new tracing 
was then begun (not here given), and 
during 12] h. the leaf moved eight times ' 
up and seven times down; so that it 
described 7i ellipses in this time, and 
this is an extraordinary rate of movement. 
The summit of the petiole was then secured 
to a stick, and the separate leaflets were found to be « 
oircuranu fating. 




n of Jflif 
trued CD vartical 
glaa,froiD 10.15AJL 
to 6.45 PJf.; iA^ 
durinf 6 h. 30 M. 



Chap. IV. 



DICOTYLEDONS. 



237 



Fig. 104. 



(12.) Echeveria stoloni/era (Crassulacese, Fam. 84). — Th€ older 
leaves of this plant are so thick and fleshy, and the young ones 
60 short and broad, that it seemed 
Tery improbable that any circum- 
nutation could be detected. A fila- 
ment was fixed to a young upwardly 
inclined leaf, '75 inch in length and 
•28 in breadth, which stood on the 
outside of a terminal rosette of leaves, 
produced by a plant growing very 
vigorously. Its movement was traced 
daring 3 days, as here shown (Fig. 
104). The course was chiefly in an 
upward direction, and this may be 
attributed to the elongation of the 
leaf through growth ; but we see that 
the lines are strongly zigzag, and that 
occasionally there was distinct cir- 

cunmutation, though on a very small J^^^^ria stolonifera : circum- 
scale. 

(13.) Dryophyllum (vel Calanchoe) 
calycinuin (Crassulace®). — Duval- 
Jouve ('Bull. Soc. Bot. de France,' 
Feb. 14th, 1868) measured the dis- 
tance between the tips of the upper 
pair of leaves on this plant, with the result shown in the following 
Table. It should be noted that the measurements on Dec. 2nd 
were made on a different pair of leaves :— 




nutation of leaf, traced 
from 8.20 A.M. June 25th 
to 8.45 A.M. 28th. Apex 
of leaf 12\ inches from the 
glass, so that the movement 
was much magnified ; temp. 
230-24^° C. 





8 a.m. 






2 p.m. 






7 P.M. 


Nov. 16 . 


• 15 mm. 


• 


• 


. 25 mm. 


• 


• 


. (?) 


„ 19 . . 


. 48 „ 


• 


• 


. 60 „ 


• 


• 


. 48 mm 


Dec. 2 . . 


. 22 „ 


• 


• 


. 43 „ 


• 


• 


. 28 „ 



We see from this Table that the leaves stood considerably 
further apart at 2 p.m. than at either 8 a.m. or 7 p.m. ; and this 
Khows that they rise a little in the evening and fall or open 
ia the forenoon. 

(14) Drostra rotundifolia (DroseracesB, Fam. 85). — The move- 
ments of a young leaf, having a long petiole but with its tentacles 
(oi gland-bearing hairs) as yet unfolded, were traced during 
47 h. 15 m. The figure (Fig. 105) shows that it circumnutated 
largely, chiefly in a vertical direction, making two ellipses eacb 



238 



CIRCUMNUTATION OF LEAVES. Chap. IV. 



day. On both days the leaf began to descend after 12 or 
1 o'clock, and continued to do so all night, though to a 

very unequal distance on the 



Fig. 105. 



'4SpmTJ 



0^15 €LmJ^ 




10'^0'ji.mSf^ 



Drosera rotundifulM : circumnutation 
of young leaf, with filament fixed 
to back of blade, traced from 9.15 
A.M. June 7th to 8.30 A.M. June 
9th. Figure here reduced to one- 
half original scale. 



two occasions. We therefore 
thought that the moyement 
was periodic; but on observ- 
ing three other leaves during 
several successive days and 
nights, we found this to be an 
error; and the case is given 
merely as a caution. On the 
third morning the above leaf 
occupied almost exactly the 
same position as on the first 
morning ; and the tentacles 
by this time had imfolded 
suflBciently to project at right 
angles to the blade or disc. 

The leaves as they grow 
older generally sink more 
and more downwards. The 
movement of an oldish leaf, 
the glands of which were 
still secreting freely, was 
traced for 24 h., during which 
time it continued to sink a 
little in a slightly zigzag line. 
On the following morning, at 
7 A.M., a drop of a solution 
of carbonate of ammonia (2 
gr. to 1 oz. of water) was 
placed on the disc, and this 
blackened the glands and in- 



duced inflection of many of the tentacles. The weight of the 
drop caused the leaf at first to sink a little ; but immediately 
afterwards it began to rise in a somewhat zigzag course, and 
continued to do so till 3 p.m. It then circumnutated about 
the same spot on a very small scale for 21 h. ; and during the 
next 21 h. it sank in a zigzag line to nearly the same level 
which it had held when the ammonia was first administered. 
By this time the tentacles had rc-expanded, and the glands had 
recovered their proper coioar. We thus le^rn that an old lea' 



Ohap.iv. dicotyledons. 239 

circiimnutates on a small scale, at least whilst absorbing car- 
bonate of ammonia ; for it is probable that this absorption may 
stimnlate growth and thus re-excite circiminutation. Whether 
the rising of the glass filament which was attached to the back 
of the leaf, resulted from its margin becoming slightly inflected 
(as generally occurs), or from the rising of the petiole, was not 
ascertained. 

In order to learn whether the tentacles or gland-bearing hairs 
circumnutate, the back of a young leaf, with the innermost 
tentacles as yet incurved, was firmly cemented with shellac 
to a flat stick driven into compact damp argillaceous sand. 
The plant was placed under a microscope with the stage re- 
moved and with an eye- piece micrometer, of which each 
division equalled -5-^ of an inch. It should be stated that as 
the leaves grow older the tentacles of the exterior rows bond 
outwards and downwards, so as ultimately to become deflected' 
considerably beneath the horizon. A tentacle in the second 
row from the margin was selected for observation, and was 
found to be moving outwards at a rate of -^ of an inch in 
20 m., or yo^ of inch in 1 h. 40 m. ; but as it likewise moved 
from side to side to an extent of above 5^ of inch, the move- 
ment was probably one of modified circumnutation. A tentacle 
on an old leaf was next observed in the saaie manner. lu 
15 m. after being placed under the microscope it had moved 
about Yihsis of an inch. Daring the next 7i h. it was looked at 
repeatedly, and during this whole time it moved only another 
Y^ of an inch ; and this small movement may have been due 
to the settling of the damp sand (on which the plant rested), 
though the sand had been firmly pressed down. We may there- 
fore conclude that the tentacles when old do not circumnutate ; 
yet this tentacle was so sensitive, that in 23 seconds after its 
gland had been merely touched with a bit of raw meat, it began 
to curl inwai'ds. This fact is of some importance, as it appa- 
rently shows that the inflection of the tentacles from the stimulus 
of absorbed animal matter (and no doubt from that of contact 
with any object) is not due to modified circumnutation. 

(15.) Dionoea mibsciptla (Droseracess). — It should be premised 
that the leaves at an early stage of their development have the 
two lobes pressed closely together. These are at first directed 
back towards the centre of the plant ; but they gradually rise up 
and soon stand at right angles to the petiole, and ultimately in 
nearly a straight line with it. A young leaf, which with th«i 



240 



CIRCUMNUTATION OF LEAVES. 



Chap. IV 



Fig. 106. 




petiole was only 1*2 inch in length, had a filament fixed exter- 
nally along the midrib of the still closed lobes, which projected 
at right angles to the petiole. In the evening this leaf com- 
pleted an ellipse in the course of 2 h. On 
the following day (Sept. 25th) its niove- 
ments were traced dnring 22 h. ; and we 
see in Fig. 106 that it moved in the same 
general direction, due to the straightening 
of the leaf, but in an extremely zigzag line. 
This line represents several drawn-out or 
modified ellipses. There can therefore be 
no doubt that this young leaf circomna- 
tated. 

A rather old, horizontally extended 
leaf, with a filament attached along the 
under side of the midrib, was next 
observed during 7 h. It hardly moved, 
but when one of its sensitive hairs 
was touched, the blades closed, though 
not very quickly. A new dot was now 
made on the glass, but in the course of 
14 h. 20 m. there was hardly any change 
in the position of the filament. We may 
therefore infer that an old and only 
moderately sensitive leaf does not cironm- 
nutate plainly; but we shall soon see 
that it by no means follows that such 
a leaf is absolutely motionless. We may 
further infer that the stimulus frcnn a 
zontal srlaas in dark- touch does not re-excite plain cirounmii- 

ness from noon Sept. t^tion. 

24th to 10 A.M. 25th. a i-i. r n i i* t. j isi _a 

Apex of leaf 13J Another full-grown leaf had a filament 

inches from the glass, attached externally along one side of the 

so tracing consider- midrib and parallel to it, so that the fila- 

a y magni e . ment would move if the lobes closed. It 

should be first stated that, although a touch on one of the sensi* 

tive hairs of a vigorous leaf causes it to close quickly, often 

almost instantly, yet when a bit of damp meat or some solation 

of carlx)nate of ammonia is placed on the lobes, they dose so 

slowly that generally 24 h. is required for the completion of the 

act. The above leaf was first observed for 2 h. 80 m., and did 

not circumniitatc, but it ought to have been observed for a 




Doncea musdpuia: cir- 
cumnutation of a 
young and expanding 
leaf) traced on a hori- 



Chap. IV. DICOTYLEDONS 241 

longer period ; although, as we have seen, a young leaf com- 
pleted a fairly large ellipse in 2 h. A drop of an infusion of 
raw meat was then placed on the leaf, and within 2 h. the glass 
filament rose a little ; and this implies that the lobes had begun 
to close, and perhaps the petiole to rise. It continued to rise 
with extreme slowness for the next 8 h. 30 m. The position of 
the pot was then (7.15 p.m., Sept. 24:th) slightly changed and 
an additional drop of the infusion given, and a new tracing 
was begun (Fig. 107). Hy 10.50 p.m. the filament had risen 
only a little more, and it fell during the night. On the follow- 
ing morning the lobes were closing more quickly, and by 5 p.m. 
it was evident to the eye that they had closed considerably ; by 
8.48 P.M. this was still plainer, and by 10.45 p.m. the marginal 
spikes were interlocked. The leaf fell a little during the night, 
and next morning (25th) at 7 am. the lobes were completely 
shut. The course pursued, as may be seen in the figure, was 

Fig. 107. 

DwiUBd muscipula : closure of the lobes and circumnutation of a full-grown 
leaf, whilst absorbing an infusion of raw meat, traced in darkness, from 
7.15 P.M. Sept. 24th to 9 a.m. 26th. Apex of leaf 8J inche? from the 
Tertical glass. Figure here reduced to two-thirds of original scale. 

strongly zigzag, and this indicates that the closing of the lobes 
was combined with the circumnutation of the whole leaf; 
and there cannot be much doubt, considering how motionless 
the leaf was during 2 h. 30 m. before it received the infusion, 
that the absorption of the animal matter hiad excited it to 
circumnutate. The leaf was occasionally observed for the next 
four days, but was kept in rather too cool a place ; nevertheless, 
it continued to circumnutate to a small extent, and the lobes 
remained closed. 

It is sometimes stated in botanical works that the lobes close 
or sleep at night ; but this is an error. To test the statement, 
very long glass filaments were fixed inside the two lobes of 
three leaves, and the distances between their tips were measured 
in the middle of the day and at night ; but no difference could 
be detected. 

The previous observations relate to the movements of the 
whole leaf, but the lobes move independently of the petiole, and 



242 CIBCUMNUTATION OF LEAVES. Chap. IV. 

seem to be continually opening and shutting to a very small 
extent. A nearly full-grown leaf (afterwards proved to be 
highly sensitive to contact) stood almost horizontally, so that 
by driving a long thin pin through the foliaceous petiole close 
to the blade, it was rendered motionless. The plant, with 
a little triangle of paper attached to one of the marginal spikes, 
was placed under a microscope with an eye-piece micrometer^ 
each division of which equalled -g^ of an iuch. The apex of 
the paper-triangle was now seen to be in constant slight move- 
ment ; for in 4 h. it crossed nine divisions, or -g^ of an inch, 
and after ten additional hours it moved back and had crossed 
s^js ^ ^^ opposite direction. The plant was kept in rather 
too cool a place, and on the following day it moved rather less, 
namely, -g^ in 3 h., and -j^ in an opposite direction during the 
next 6 h. The two lobes, therefore, seem to be constantly 
closing or opening, though to a very small distance ; for we must 
remember that the little triangle of paper afi&xed to the marginal 
spike increased its length, and thus exaggerated somewhat the 
movement. Similar observations, with the important difference 
that the petiole was left free and the plant kept under a high 
temperature, were made on a leaf, which was healthy, but so old 
that it did not close when its sensitive hairs were repeatedly 
touched, though judging from other cases it would have slowly 
closed if it had been stimulated by animal matter. The apex of 
the triangle was in almost, though not quite, constant movement, 
sometimes in one direction and sometimes in an opposite one ; 
and it thrice crossed five divisions of the micrometer (i.e. y^ of 
an inch) in 30 m. This movement on so small a scale is hjudly 
comparable with ordinary circumnutation ; but it may perhaps 
be compared with the zigzag lines and little loops, by which the 
larger ellipses made by other plants are often interrupted. 

In the first chapter of this volume, the remarkable osciUatocy 
movements of the circumnutating hypocotyl of the cabbage 
have been described. The leaves of Dionsea present the same 
phenomenon, which is a wonderful one, as viewed under a low 
power (2-inch object-glass), with an eye-piece micrometer ci 
which each division (j^ of an inch) appeared as a rather wide 
space. The young unexpanded leaf, of wliich the circomnutatiiig 
movements were traced (Fig. 106), had a glass filament fixed 
perpendicularly to it; and the movement of the apex was 
observed in the hot-house (temp. 84® to 86® F.), with Dght 
admitted only from above, and with any lateral corrents of air 



dliAP. IV. DICOTYLEDONS. 243 

excladed. The •apex sometimes crossed one or two divisions of 
the micrometer at an imperceptibly slow rate, but generally it 
moved onwards by rapid starts or jerks of yoois ot y^, and in 
one instance of yq^q of an inch. After each jerk forwards, the 
apex drew itself backwards with comparative slowness for part 
of the distance which had just been gained ; and then after a 
very short time made another jerk forwards. Four conspi- 
cuous jerks forwards, with slower retreats, were seen on one 
occasion to occur in exactly one minute, besides some minor 
oscillations. As far as we could judge, the advancing and 
retreating lines did not coincide, and if so, extremely minute 
ellipses were each time described. Sometimes the apex remained 
quite motionless for a short period. Its general course during 
the several hours of observation was in two opposite directions, 
so that the leaf was probably circumnutating. 

An older leaf with the lobes fully expanded, and which was 
afterwards proved to be highly sensitive to contact, was next 
observed in a similar manner, except that the plant was exposed 
to a lower temperature in a room. The apex oscillated forwards 
and backwards in the same manner as before ; but the jerks for- 
ward were less in extent, viz. about y^i^^j inch ; and there were 
longer motionless periods. As it appeared possible that the 
movements might be due to currents of air, a wax taper was 
held close to the leaf during one of the motionless periods, but 
no oscillations were thus caused. After 10 m., however, vigorous 
oscillations commenced, perhaps owing to the plant having been 
warmed and thus stimulated. The candle was then removed and 
before long the oscillations ceased ; nevertheless, when looked at 
again after an interval of 1 h. 30 m., it was again oscillating. 
The plant was taken back into the hot-house, and on the 
following morning was seen to be oscillating, though not very 
vigorously. Another old but healthy leaf, which was not in the 
least sensitive to a touch, was likewise observed during two 
days in the hot-house, and the attached filament made many 
little jerks forwards of about y^^ or only y^ of an inch. 

Finally, to ascertain whether the lobes independently of the 
petiole oscillated, the petiole of an old leaf was cemented close 
to the blade with shellac to the top of a little stick driven into 
the soil. But before this was done the leaf was observed, and 
found to be vigorously oscillating or jerking ; and after it had 
been cemented to the stick, the oscillations of about ^Ans ^^ 
an inch stilJ continued. On the following day a little infasioa 



244 CIRCUMNUTATION OF LEAVES. Chap. IV 

of raw meat was placed on the leaf, which caused the lobes tc 
close together very slowly in the course of two days; and the 
oscillations continued during this whole time and for the next 
two days. After nine additional days the leaf began to open 
and the margins were a little everted, and now the apex of the 
glass filament remained for long periods motionless, and then 
moved backwards and forwards for a distance of about 7^^ of 
an inch slowly, without any jerks. Nevertheless, after wanning 
the leaf with a taper held close to it, the jerking movement 
reconmienced. 

This same leaf had been observed 2^ months previously, and 
was then found to be oscillating or jerking. We may therefore 
infer that this kind of movement goes on night and day for a 
very long x)eriod ; and it is conmion to young unexpanded leaves 
and to leaves so old as to have lost their sensitiveness to a 
touch, but which were still capable of absorbing nitrogenous 
matter. The phenomenon when well displayed, as in the young 
leaf just described, is a very interesting one. It often brought 
before our minds the idea of effort, cr of a small animal 
struggling to escape from some constraint. 
(16.) Eucalyptus resifii/era (MyrtacesD, FauL 94). — A young leaf, 

two inches in length together with 
Fig. 108. ^ ^Yie petiole, produced by a lateral 

shoot from a cut-down tree, was 
observed in the usual manner. 
The blade had not as yet as- 
sumed its vertical position. On 
June 7th only a few observations 
were made, and the tracing merely 
showed that the leaf had moved 
three times upwards and three 
downwards. On the following 
- , ^ . .^ day it was observed more fte- 

tation of a leaf, traced, A, from q^ently ; and two tracmgs weie 
6.40 A.M. to 1 P.M. June 8th ; made (see A and B, Fig. lOS), u 
B, from 1 P.M. 8th to 8.:^o A.M. a single one would have been too 

?r'l fhrhol'o'iriC':: «>mplicatei The ape. duuuM 

figures considerably magnified. "S COUrse 13 times m the COUTSe 

of 16 h., chiefly up and down, bat 
with some lateral movement. The actual amount of movement 
in any one direction was small. 
(17.) Vallia (garden var.) (Composits, Fam. 122). — ^A fine ycmng 





JlIAP. IV. 



DICOTYLEDONS. 



245 



leaf 51 inches in length, produced by a young plant 2 feet high, 
growing yigoronsly in a large xx>t, was directed at an angle ol 
about 45° beneath the horizoD. On June 18th the leaf descended 
&om 10 A.M. till 11.35 A.M. (see Pig. 109); it then ascended 
greatly till 6 p.m., this ascent being probably due to tlie light 

Fig. 109. 

'juf asTjunJa^ 



t*B'JO'aA 




DsAha : circumnatation of leaf, traced from 10 a.m. Jane 18th to 8.10 A.X. 
2(Hh, bat with a break of 1 h. 40 m. on the morning of the 19th, as, 
owing to the glass filament pointing too much to one side, the pot had 
to be slightly mored ; therefore the relative poisition of the two tracings 
is somewhat arbitrary. The figure here given is reduced to one-fifth of 
the original scale. Apex of leaf 9 inches from the glass in the line 
of its inclination, and 4| in a horizontal line. 

coming only from above. It zigzagged between 6 p.m. and 
10.35 P.M., and ascended a little during the night. It should bo 
remarked that the vertical distances in the lower part of the 
diagram are much exaggerated, as the leaf was at first deflected 
beneath the horizon, and after it had sunk downwards, the 
filament x)ointed in a very oblique line towards the glass. Next 



246 CIRCUMNUTATION OF LEAVES. Chap. IV. 

day the leaf descended from 8.20 a.m. till 7.15 p.m., then zigzagged 
and ascended greatly during the night. On the morning of the 
20th the leaf was probably beginning to descend, though the 
short line in the diagram is horizontal. The actual distances 
travelled by the apex of the leaf were considerable, but could 
not be calculated with safety. From the course pursued on the 
second day, when the plant had accommodated itself to the light 
from above, there cannot be much doubt that the leaves undergo 
a daily periodic movement, sinking during the day and rising 
at night. 

(18.) MuHsia clematis (CompositcB). — The leaves terminate in 
tendrils and circumnutate like those of other tendril-bearers; 
but this plant is here mentioned, on account of an erroneoua 
statement * which has been published, namely, that the leaves 
sink at night and rise during the ^y. The leaves which 
behaved in this manner had been kept for some days in a 
northern room and had not been sufficiently illuminated. A 
plant therefore was left undisturbed in the hot-house, and three 
leaves had their angles measured at noon and at 10 p.m. All 
three were inclined a little beneath the horizon at noon, but one 
stood at night 2°, the second 21°, and the third 10° higher than 
in the middle of the day ; so that instead of sinking they rise 
a little at night. 

(19.) Cyclamen Persicum (Primulaceffi, Fam. 135). — A young 
leaf, 1'8 of an inch in length, petiole included, produced by an 
old root-stock, was observed during three days in the usual 
manner (Fig. 110). On the first day the leaf fell more than after- 
wards, apparently from adjusting itself to the light from aboYO. 
On all three days it fell from the early morning to about 7 pjl, 
and from that hour rose during the night, the course being 
slightly zigzag. The movement therefore is strictly periodic. 
It should be noted that the leaf would have sunk each evening 
a little lower down than it did, had not the glass filament rested 
between 5 and 6 p.m. on the rim of the pot. The amount of 
movement was considerable ; for if we assume that the whole 
leaf to the base of the petiole became bent, the tracing would 
be magnified rather less than five times, and this wotdd give 
to the apex a rise and fall of half an inch, with some lateral 
movement. This amount, however, would not attract attentioii 
without the aid of a tracing or measurement of some kind. 



* The Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants.' 1875, p. 11& 



Chap. IY. 



DICOTYLEDONS. 



247 



(2(i.) AUamanda Schottii (ApocynesB^ Fam. 144). — ^The yonng 
leaves of this shrab are elongated, ivith the blade bowed so much 



Fig. 110. 



ifsdamJSf 




*40^CkttUi^ 



dfelammi Perskmm : drcumnutation of leaf, traced from 6.45 A.M. Jane Snd 
to 6.40 A.M. 5th. Apex of leaf 7 inches from the vertical glass. 

downwards as almost to form a semicircle. The chord — that 
iSy a line drawn from the apex of the blade to the base of th€ 
petiole — of a young leaf. 4f inches in length, stood at 2.50 p.m or 

17 



248 



CIBCUMNUTATION OF LEAYEa 



Chap. IV 



Tig. Ill, 



Dec. 5tli at on angle of 13^ beneath the horizon, but by 9.90 pjc. 

the blade had straightened itself 

so much, which implies the 

^ raising of the apex, that the 

V chord now stood at 37° above the 

Z horizon, and had therefore risen 

^ 60®. On the next day similar 

angular measurements of the 
same leaf were made; and at 
noon the chord stood 36° be- 
neath the horizon, and 9.30 pji. 
3}° above it, so had risen 39i°. 
The chief cause of the rising 
movement lies in the straighten- 
ing of the blade, but the short 
petiole rises between 4° and 5°. 
On the third night the chord 
stood at 35° above the horizon, 
and if the leaf occupied the 
same position at noon, as on 
the previous day, it had risen 
71°. With older leaves no such 
change of curvature could be 
detected. The plant was then 
brought into the house and 
kept in a north-east room, but 
at night there was no change 
in the curvature of the young 
leaves; so that previous expo- 
sure to a strong light is appi^ 
rently requisite for the periodi- 
cal change of curvature in the 
blade, and for the slight rising 

ment and circumnutation of a of the petiole. 

Terj jouDg leaf, traced from 10 (21.) Wigandia (Hydroleaoen, 

A.M. June 2nd to 9.20 A.M. June -p^j^ 149).— ProfeSSOr Ffefifer 

6th N.B.-At 6.40 A.M. on the informs US that the leave, of this 

5th it was necessary to move the *"*"***« »*o «**«• vu« &vimv«m v«. wus 

pot a little, and a new tracing plant rise in the evening ; bat as 

was begun at the i>oint where we do not knOW whether OT DOt 

two dots are not joined in the ^^^^ ^^ jg |. ^j^jg g^^ 

diagram. Apex of lea: 7 inches , ^ " , * » f ^ 

from the verticil glass. Temp. OUgllt perhaps tO be claSMd 

general 1 7 1 7 ^^^ 0. amongst sleeping plania. 



Ptiunia viohcea : downward more- 



Ohap. rv. 



DICOTYLEDONS. 



249 



(22.) Pttunia violacea (SolanesB, Fain. 157). — A very young 
leaf, only f inch in length, highly inclined upwards, was observed 
for. four days. During the whole of this time it bent outwards 
and downwards, so as to become more and more nearly hori- 
zontal. The strongly marked zigzag line in the figure on p. 248 
(Fig. Ill), shows that this was eflfected by modified circum- 
nutation ; and during the latter part of the time there was much 
ordinary circumnutation on a small scale. The movement in 
the diagram is magnified between 10 and 11 times. It exhibits 
a clear trace of periodicity, as the leaf rose a little each evening ; 
but this upward tendency appeared to be almost conquered by 
the leaf striving to become more and p. j^g 

more horizontal as it grew older. The 
angles which two older leaves formed 
together, were measured in the even- 
ing and iibout noon on 3 successive 
days, and each night the angle de- 
creased a little, though irregularly. 

(23.) Acanthus mollis (Acanthace«, 
Fam. 168). — The younger of two 
leaves, 2 J inches in length, petiole 
included, produced by a seedling 
plant, was observed during 47 h. 
Early on each of the three morn- 
ings, the apex of the leaf fell ; and 
it continued to fall till 3 p.m., on 
the two afternoons when observed. 
After 3 p.m. it rose considerably, and 
continued to rise on the second night 
until the early morning. But on 
the first night it fell instead of rising, 

and we have little doubt that this Acanthus mollis : circuTniiutti* 
was owing to the leaf being very tion of young leaf, traced 
young and becoming through epi- 
nastic growth more and more hori- 
zontal; for it may be seen in the 
diagram (Fig. 112), that the leaf stood 
on a higher level on the first than on 
the second day. The leates of an 
allied species (A, spinosus) certainly 

rose every night ; and the rise between noon and 10.15 p.m., 
when measured on one occasion, was 10°. This rise was chiefly 




from 9.20 a.m. June 14th 
to 8.30 A.M. 16th. Apex 
of leaf 11 inches from the 
vertical glass, so movement 
considerably magnified. 
Figure here reduced toone^ 
half of original scale. 
Temp. 15°-16i° C. 



250 CIBCOTINUTATION OF LEAVES. Chap. IV. 

or exclusively due to the straightening of the blade, and not to 
the moYement of the petiole. We may therefore conclade that 
the leaves of Acanthus circumnntate periodically, foiling in the 
morning and rising in the afternoon and night. 

(24.) Cannabis sativa (Cannabinese, Fam. 195). — ^We have 
here the rare case of leaves moving downwards in the evening, 
but not to a sufficient degree to be called sleep.* In the early 
morning, or in the latter part of the night, they move upwards. 
For instance, all the young leaves near the summits of several 
stems stood almost horizontally at 8 a.m. May 29th, and at 
10.30 P.M. were considerably declined. On a subsequent day two 
leaves stood at 2 p.m. at 21° and 12° beneath the horizon, and at 
10 P.M. at 38° beneath it. Two other leaves on a younger plant 
were horizontal at 2 p.m., and at 10 p.m. had sunk to 36° beneath 
the horizon. With respect to this downward movement of the 
leaves, Eraus believes that it is due to their epinastic growth. 
He adds, that the leaves are relaxed during the day, and tense 
at night, both in sunny and rainy weather. 

(25.) Pinus pinaster (CJonifersB, Fam. 223). — ^The leaves on the 
summits of the terminal shoots stand at first in a bimdle almost 
upright, but they soon diverge and ultimately become almost 
horizontal. The movements of a young leaf, nearly one inch in 
length, on the summit of a seedling plant only 3 inches high, 
were traced from the early morning of June 2nd to the evening 
of the 7th. During these five days the leaf diverged, and its apex 
descended at first in an almost straight line ; but during the two 
latter days it zigzagged so much that it was evidently circmnnn- 
tating. The same little plant, when grown to a height of 5 iocbes, 
was again observed during four days. A filament was fixed 
transversely to the apex of a leaf, one inch in length, and whieh 
had already diverg^ considerably from its originally upright 
position. It continued to diverge (see A, Fig. 113), and to 
descend from 11.45 a.m. July 31st to 6.40 am. Aug. Ist. On 
August 1st it circumnutated about the same small space, and 
again descended at night. Next monung the pot was moved 
nearly one inch to the right, and a new tracing was began (£}« 
From this time, viz., 7 a.m. August 2Dd to 8.20 Ajf. on the 4th, 



* Wo were led to observe this Flcra, 1879, p. 66. We regrat ttwt 

plant by Dr. Carl Kraus' paper, we cannot fally andentand parti 

* Beitrage znr KcntDiss der Bewe- of this paper, 
gungen Wachsonder Lauhbliittcr,* 



Chap. IY. 



DICOTYLEDONS. 



251 



the leaf manifestly circumnntated. It does not appear from the 
diagram that the leaves move periodically, for the descending 
oourse during the first two nights, was clearly due to epinastio 



d5'a,m.31'.* 




Fig. US. 



€'4A'whM 




e^MtanM^ 




8'20'ajn,4 



-7'0Lm,2^^ 



pimastcr: circumnatation of young leaf, traced from 11.45 A.M. 
July 3l8t to 8.20 A.M. Aug. 4th. At 7 A.M. Aug. 2Qd the pot was 
moyed an inch to one side, so that the tracing consists of two figures. 
Apex of leaf 14| inches from the vertical glass, so movements much 
magnified. 

growth, and at the close of our ohservations the leaf was not 
nearly so horizontal as it would ultimately Ix^come. 
Pinu$ austriaca. — Two leaves, 3 ioches in length, but not 



252 



CIRCUMNUTATION OF LEAVBa Chap. IV. 



quite fully grown^ produced by a lateral shoot^ on a young tree 
8 feet in height, were observed during 29 h. (July 31st), in the 
same manner as the leaves of the previous species. Both these 

leaves certainly circumnntated, making 
Fig. 114. within the above period two, or two and 

a half, small, irregular ellipses. 

(26.) Cycas pectincU^i (CycadesB, Fam. 
224). — A young leaf. Hi inches in 
length, of which the leaflets had only 
recently become nncnrled, was observed 
during 47 h. 30 m. The main petiole 
was secured to a stick at the base of the 
two terminal leaflets. To one of the 
latter, 31 inches in length, a filament 
was fixed ; the leafiet was much bowed 
downward, but as the terminal part was 
Ti upturned, the filament projected almost 

horizontally. The leaflet moved (see 
I Fig. 114) largely and periodically, for it 

\ fell until about 7 P.1L and rose daring 

the night, falling again next morning 
after 6.40 a.m. The descending lines 
are in a marked manner zigzag, and so 
probably would have been the ascending 
lines, if they had been traced thronghoat 
the night. 



O^caa pectinata : circum- 
nutatioQ of one of the 
terminal leaflets, traced 
from 8.30 A.M. June 
22nd to 8 A.M. June 
24th. Apex of leaHet 
7| inches from the ver- 
tical glass, so tracing 



ClRCUMNUTATION OP LeAYES: 

Monocotyledons. 

(27.) Canna Warscewiczii (Gannaeen^ 

^ Fam. 2). — The movements of a young 

not greatly niagnjHed, j^f^ g inches in length and 81 iD 

auct nere leuuceii to . jii j j i • 

one-third of original breadth, produced by a vigorous young 
icale; temp.l9°-2ioc. plant, were observed -during 45 h, 

50 m., as shown in Fig. 115. The pot 
was slided about an inch to the right on the morning of the 
nth, as a single figure would have been too complicated; but 
the two figures are continuous in time. The movement is 
periodical, as the leaf descended from the early morning untD 
alx)ut 5 PH., and ascended during the rest of the evening and 



Chap. IV. 



MONOCOTYLEDONS. 



253 



part of the night. On the evening of the llth it eircunmutated 
on a small scale far some time about the same spot. 

Fig. 11& 





Cmma Waraoetnczii : circnmnutation of leaf, traced (A) from 11.30 A.M 
June lOth to 6.40 a.m. llth ; and (B) from 6.40 a.m. llth to 8.40 A.M. 
12th. Apex of leaf 9 inches from the vertical glass. 

(28.) Iris pseudo-acorus (IridejB, Fam. 10). — The movements 
of a young leaf, rising 13 inches above the water in which the 
plant grew, were traced as shown in the 
figure (Fig. 116), during 27 h. 30 m. 
It manifestly eircunmutated, though 
only to a small extent. On the second 
morning, between 6.40 a.m. and 2 p.m. 
(at which latter hour the figure here 
given ends), the apex changed its course 
five times. During the next 8 h. 40 m. it 
zigzagged much, and descended as far 
as the lowest dot in the figure, making 
in its course two very small ellipses ; Iris pseudo-acorus : circum 
but if these lines had been added to nutation of leaf, traced 

the diagram it would have been too 
complex. 

(29.) (h'inum Cnpense (Amaryllidese, 
Fam. 11).— The leaves of this plant 
are remarkable for their great length 
and narrowness: one was measured 
and found to be 53 inches long and 

only 1*4 broad at the base. Whilst quite young they stand up 
almost vertically to the height of about a fuot; afterwards 




from 10.30 a.m. May 28th 
to 2 P.M. 29th. Tracing 
continued to 11 p.m., but 
not here copied. Apex 
of leaf 12 inches beneath 
the horizontal glass, so 
figure considerably mag* 
nified. Temp. 15°- 16° C. 



254 CIRCUMNUTATION OF LEAVES. Chap. IV. 

their tips begin to bend over, and subsequenily hang vertically 
down, and thus continue to grow. A rather young leaf was 
selected, of which the dependent tapering point was as yet only 
5h inches in length, the upright basal part being 20 inches high, 
though this part would ultimately become shorter by being 
more bent over. A large bell-glass was placed over the plant, 
with a black dot on one side; and by bringing the dependent 
apex of the leaf into a line with this dot, the accompanying 
figure (Fig. 117) was traced on the other side of the bell, dnring 
2i days. During the first day (22nd) the tip travelled laterally 
far to the left, perhaps in consequence of the plant having been 

Fig. U7. 





l0'J0'£.ni^ 



^^p.m.23^ 



Crinum capense : circumnutation of dependent tip of young leaf, traced oi 
a bell-glass, froni 10.30 P.M. May 22nd to 10.15 A.M. 25th. Figure not 
greatly magnified. 

disturbed ; and the last dot made at 10.90 P.M . on this day is 
alone here given. As we see in the figure, there can be no 
doubt that the apex of this leaf circumnutated. 

A glass filament with little triangles of paper was at tha 
same time fixed obliquely across the tip of a still younger leaf, 
which stood vertically up and was as yet straight. Its move- 
ments were traced from 3 p.m. May 22nd to 10.15 A.1C. 25th. 
The leaf was growing rapidly, so that the apex ascended greatly 
during this period ; as it zigzagged much it was clearly dromn- 
nutating, and it apparently tended to form one ellipse each 
day. The lines traced during the night were mach more vertical 
than those traced during the day ; and this indicates that the 
tracing would have exhibited a nocturnal rise and a ditinial 
fall, if the leaf had not grown so quickly. The movement of 
this same leaf after an interval of six days (May 81st), by whieh 
time the tip had curved outwards into a horizontal position^ 



Chap. IV. MONOCOTYLEDONS. 255 

and had thus made the first step towards becoming dependent, 
was traced orthogonically by the aid of a cube of wood (in the 
manner before explained) ; and it was thus ascertained that the 
actual distance travelled by the apex, and due to cir cum nutation, 
was 3| inches in the course of 20i h. During the next 24 h. it 
travelled 2i inches. The circumnutating movement, therefore, 
of this young leaf was strongly marked. 

(30.) Paneratium littorale (AmaryllidesB). — The movements, 
much magnified, of a leaf, 9 inches in length and inclined at 
about 45° above the horizon, were traced during two days. On 
the first day it changed its course completely, upwards and 
downwards and laterally, 9 times in 12 h. ; and the figure traced 
apparently represented five ellipses. On the second day it was 
observed seldomer, and was therefore not seen to change its 
course so often, viz., only 6 times, but in the same complex 
manner us before. The movements were small in extent, but 
there could bo no doubt about the circumnutation of the leafc 

(31.) Imatophyllum vel Olivia (sp. ?) (Amaryllidese). — A long 
glass filament was fixed to a leaf, and the angle formed by it 
with the horizon was measured occasionally during three suc- 
cessive days. It fell each morning until between 3 and 4 p.m., 
and rose at night. The smallest angle at any time above the 
horizon was 48°, and the largest 50°; so that it rose only 2° 
at night; but as this was observed each day, and as similar 
observations were nightly made on another leaf on a distinct 
plant, there can be no doubt that the leaves move periodically, 
though to a very small extent. The position of the apex when 
it stood highest was '8 of an inch above its lowest point. 

(32.) Pistia stratiotes (AroidesB, Fam. 30). — Hofmeister 
remarks that the leaves of this floating water-plant are more 
highly inclined at night than by day.* We therefore fastened 
. a fine glass filament to the midrib of a moderately young 
leaf, and on Sept. 19th measured the angle which it formed 
with the horizon 14 times between 9 a.m. and 11.50 p.m. The 
temperature of the hot-house varied during the two days of 
observation between lSh° and 23^° C. At 9 a.m. the filament 
stood at 32° above the horizon ; at 3.34 p.m. at 10° and at 
11.50 pm. at 55°; these two latter angles being the highest and 
the lowest observed during the day, showing a difference of 45°, 
The rising did not become strongly marked until between 

• * Die Lehre von der Pflanzenzelle/ 1867, p. 327. 



256 CIRCUMNUTATION OF LEAVES. Chap. IV 

6 and 6 p.m. On the next day the leaf stood at only 10^ atxive 
the horizon at 8.25 am., and it remained at about 15^ till past 
3 P.M.; at 6.40 p.m. it was 23°, and at 9.30 p.m. 58**; so that 
the rise was more sudden this evening than on the previous 
one, and the difference in the angle amounted to 48**. The 
movement is obviously periodical, and as the leaf stood on the 
first night at 55°, and on the second night at 58° above the 
horizon, it appeared very steeply inclined. This case, as we 
shall see in a future chapter, ought perhax)s to have been 
included under the head of sleeping plants. 
(33.) Foniederia (sp. ?) (from the highlands of St Catharina^ 

Fig. 118. 




Pontederia (sp. ?) : circumnutat;on of leaf, traced ^m 4.50 P.M. July fad 
to 10.15 A,u. 4th. Apex of leaf 16} inches from the vertical glan, so 
tracing greatly magnified. Temp, about 17^ C, and therefore rathar 
too low. 

Brazil) (PontederiacesB, Fam. 46). — A filament was fixed acrott 
the apex of a moderately young leaf, 7i inches in height, and 
its movements were traced during 42i h. (see Fig. 118). On 
the first evening, when the tracing was begun, and during the 
night, the leaf descended considerably. On the next morning 
it ascended in a strongly marked zigzag line, and descended 
again in the evening and during the night. The movement, 
therefore, seems to be periodic, but some doubt is thrown on 
this conclusion, because another leaf, 8 inches in height^ 
appearing older and standing more highly inclined, l^ehaved 
diffei-ently. During the first 12 h. it circumnutated over a 



Chap. IV. CIBCUMNUTATION OF CRYPTOGAMS. 257 

small space, but during the night and the whole following day 
it ascended in the same general direction; the ascent being 
effected by repeated up and down well-pronounced oscillations. 



Cryptogams. 

(34.) Nephrodium molle (Filices, Fam. 1). — A filament was 
fixed near the apex of a young frond of this Fern, 17 inches 
in height, which was not as yet fully uncurled ; and its move- 
ments were traced during 24 h. We see in Fig. 119 that it 

Fig. 119. 




I^tphrodiwn mollc : circumnutation of raohis, trnoed from 9.15 A.11. May 
28th to 9 A.M. 29th. Figure here given two-thirds of original scale. 

plainly circumnutated. The movement was not greatly magnified 
as the frond was placed near to the vertical glass, and would 
probably have been greater and more rapid had the day been 
warmer. For the plant was brought out of a warm greenhouse 
and observed under a skylight, where the temperature was 
between 15° and 16° C. We have seen in Chap. I. that a frond of 
this Fern, as yet only slightly lobed and with a rachis only '23 
inch in height, plainly circumnutated.* 



♦ Mr. Loomie and Prof. Asa 
Orav have described (* Botanical 
GazettP,' 1880. pp. 27, 43), an 
extremely curious case of moTe- 
ment in the fronds, but only in 
the fruiting fronds, of Asplenium 
trichomanes. They move almost 
aa rapidly as the little leaflets 



of Desmndium gyran^y alternately 
backwards and forwards through 
from 20 k) 40 degrees, in a plane at 
right angles to that of the frond. 
The apex of the frond describes *' a 
long and very narrow ellipse,*' so 
that it circumnutates. But the 
movement differs from ordinary 



258 CIROUMNUTATION OP CRYPTOGAMS. Coap. 17. 



Fig. 120. 



In the chapter on the Sleep of Plants the conspicuous circum* 
nutation of Marsilea quadrijoliata (Marsileacese^ Fam. 4) will be 
described. 

It has also been shown in Chap. I. that a very young Selch 

ginella (LycopodiacesB, Fam. 6), only '4 inch in height, plainly 

circumnutated; we may therefore conclude that older plants^ 

whilst growing, would do the same. 

(35.) Luntdaria vulgaris (HepaticflB, Fam. 11, Muscales). — 

The earth in an old flower-pot was 
coated with this plant, beanng 
gen^msB. A highly inclined frond, 
which projected 3 inch above the 
soil and was *4 inch in breadth, was 
selected for observation. A glass 
hair of extreme tenuity, '75 inch 
in length, with its end whitened, 
was cemented with shellac to the 
frond at right angles to its breadth ; 
and a white stick with a minute 
black spot was driven into the soil 
close l)ehind the end of the hair. 
The white end could be accurately 
brought into a line with the black 
spot, and dots could thus be suc- 
cessively made on the vertical 
glass-plate in front Any move- 
ment of the frond would of course 
be exhibited and increased by the 
long glass hair ; and the black spot 
was placed so close behind the end 
of the hair, relatively to the dis- 
tance of the glass-plate in front, 
that the movement of the end was 
magnified about 40 times. Never- 

tlon of a frond, traced from t^eless, we are convmced that our 
9 A.M. Oct 25th to 8 a.m. 27th. tracing gives a fiairly faithful re- 
presentation of the movements of 
the frond. In the intervals between each observation, the plant 
was covered by a small bell-glass. The frond, as already stated, 




circumnutntion as it occurs only 
whcD tho plant is exposed to the 
light; even artificial light **i8 



sufficient to excite motkm for t 

few minates." 



Chap. IV. CIKCUMNUTATION OF LEAVES. 259 

was highly inclined, and the pot stood in front of a north-east 
window. During the five first days the frond move-d downwards 
or became less inclined; and the long line which was traced 
was strongly zigzag, with loops occasionally formed or nearly 
fbrmed ; and this indicated circumnutation. Whether the sink- 
ing was due to epinastic growth, or apheliotropism, we do not 
know. As the sinking was slight on the fifth day, a new tracing 
was begun on the sixth day (Oct. 25th), and was continued 
for 47 h. ; it is here given (Fig. 120). Another tracing was made 
on the next day (27th) and the frond was found to be still cir- 
curanutating, for during 14 h. 30 m. it changed its course com- 
pletely (besides minor changes) 10 times. It was casually 
observed for two more days, and was seen to be continually 
moving. 

The lowest members of the vegetable series, the Thallogens, 
apparently circumnutate. If an Oscillaria be watched under 
the microscope, it may be Feen to describe circles about every 
40 seconds. After it has bent to one side, the tip first begins 
to bend back to the opposite side and then the whole filament 
curves over in the same direction. Hofmeister* has given a 
minute account of the curious, but less regular though constant, 
movements of Spirogyra: during 2i h. the filament moved 4 
times to the left and 3 times to the right, and he refers to a 
movement at right angles to the above. The tip moved at the 
rate of about 0*1 mm. in five minutes. He compares the move- 
ment with the nutation of the higher plants.t We shall hereafter 
see that heliotropic movements result from modified circum- 
nutation, and as imicellular Moulds bend to the light we may 
infer that they also circumnutate. 

Concluding Remarks on the Circumnutation 

OF Leaves. 

The circumnutating movements of young leaves in 
33 genera, belonging to 25 families, widely distributed 



♦ • Ueber die Bewegungen der 1880, vol. iii. p. 820) that the 

Faden der Spirogyra princeps : moveraents of Spirulina, a mem- 

Jabreshefte des Vereins fur vater- ber of the Odcillatorieje, are closely 

landische Naturkunde iu WUrt- analogous **to the well-known 

tember^,' 1874, p. 211. rotation of growing shoots and 

t Zukalalsoremarks (as quoted tendrils." 
in 'Journal B. Microscop. Soc./ 



260 CIRCUMNUTATION OF LEAVEa Chap. FV. 

amongst ordinary and gymnospermous Dicotyledons 
and amongst Monocotyledons, together with several 
Cryptogams, have now been described. It would, 
therefore, not be rash to assume that the growing 
leaves of all plants circumnutate, as we nave seen 
reason to conclude is the case with cotyledons. The 
seat of movement generally lies in the petiole, but 
sometimes both in the petiole and blade, or in the 
blade alone. The extent of the movement differed much 
in different plants ; but the distance passed over was 
never great, except with Pistia, which ought perhaps 
to have been included amongst sleeping plants. The 
angular movement of the leaves was only occasionally 
measured ; it commonly varied from only 2° (and pro- 
bably even less in some instances) to about 10° ; but 
it amounted to 23° in the common bean. The move- 
ment is chiefly in a vertical plane, but as the ascending 
and descending lines never coincided, there was always 
some lateral movement, and thus irregular ellipses 
were formed. The movement, therefore, deserves to 
be called one of circumnutation ; for all circumnuta- 
ting organs tend to describe ellipses, — that is, growth 
on one side is succeeded by growth on nearly but not 
quite the opposite side. The ellipses, or the zigzag 
lines representing drawn-out ellipses, are generally 
very narrow ; yet with the Camellia, their minor axes 
were half as long, and with the Eucalyptus more than 
half as long as their major axes. In the case of CissoSy 
parts of the figure more nearly represented circles than 
ellipses. The amount of lateral movement is therefore 
sometimes considerable. Moreover, the longer axes 
of the successively formed ellipses (as with the Bean, 
Cissus, and Sea-kale), and in several instances the 
zigzag lines representing ellipses, were extended in 
very different directions during the same day or on 



Chap. IV. CIBOUMNUTATION OP LEAVES. 261 

the next day. The course followed was curvilinear oi 
straight, or slightly or strongly zigzag, and little loops 
or triangles were often formed. A single large irregidar 
ellipse may be described on one day, and two smaller 
ones by the same plant on the next day. With Drosera 
two, and with Lupinus, Eucalyptus and Pancratium, 
several were formed each day. 

The oscillatory and jerking movements of the leaves 
of Dionsea, which resemble those of the hypocotyl of 
the cabbage, are highly remarkable, as seen under the 
microscope. They continue night and day for some 
months, and are displayed by young unexpanded leaves, 
and by old ones which have lost their sensibility to a 
touch, but which, after absorbing animal matter, close 
their lobes. We shall hereafter meet with the same 
kind of movement in the joints of certain GraminesB, 
and it is probably common to many plants while cir- 
cumnutating. It is, therefore, a strange fact that no 
such movement could be detected in the tentacles of 
Drosera rotundifolia, though a member of the same 
family with Dionsea ; yet the tentacle which was ob- 
served was so sensitive, that it began to curl inwards 
in 23 seconds after being touched by a bit of raw meat. 

One of the most interesting facts with respect to 
the circumnutation of leaves is the periodicity of their 
movements ; for they often, or even generally, rise a 
httle in the evening and early part of the night, and 
sink again on the following morning. Exactly the 
9ame phenomenon was observed in the case of coty^ 
ledons. The leaves in 16 genera out of the 33 which 
were observed behaved in this manner, as did probably 
2 others. Nor must it be supposed that in the remain- 
ing 15 genera there was no periodicity in their move- 
iTisnts; for 6 of them were observed during too short 
a period, for any judgment to be formed on this head^ 



262 CIRCUMNUTATION OP LEAVES. Chap. IV 

and 3 were so young that their epinastic growth 
which serves to bring them down into a horizontal 
position, overpowered every other kind of movement. 
In only one genus, Cannabis, did the leaves sink in 
the evening, and Kraus attributes this movement to 
the prepotency of their epinastic growth. That the 
l)eriodicity is determined by the daily alternations 
of light and darkness there can hardly be a doubt, as 
will hereafter be shown. Insectivorous plants are 
very little affected, as far as their movements are con- 
cerned, by light ; and hence probably it is that their 
leaves, at least in the cases of Sarracenia, Drosera, and 
Dionaea, do not move periodically. The upward move- 
ment in the evening is at first slow, and with different 
plants begins at very different hours ; — with Glaucium 
as early as 11 a.m., commonly between 3 and 5 p.m., 
but sometimes as late as 7 p.m. It should be observed 
that none of the leaves described in this chapter 
(except, as we believe, those of Lupintis speciosus) 
possess a pulvinus; for the periodical movements of 
leaves thus provided have generally been amplified 
into so-called sleep-movements, with which we are not 
here concerned. The fact of leaves and cotyledons 
frequently, or even generally, rising a little in the 
evening and sinking in the morning, is of interest as 
giving the foundation from which the specialised sleep- 
movements of many leaves and cotyledons, not pro- 
vided with a pulvinus, have been developed. The 
above periodicity should be kept in mind, by any one 
considering the problem of the horizontal position ol 
leaves and cotyledons during the day, whilst illmni- 
nated from above. 



OUF. V MODU'IED CIBOUMKUTATION. 2tib 



CHAPTER V. 

UoDiFiED GiBCtmNUTATioN: GLisdBiNa Plan 8 ; Epinastio and 

Hyponastic Movemhnts. 

Cux:umnntation modified through innate causes or through the action 
of external couditions — Innate causes— Climbing plants; similurity 
of tiieir raovemints with those of ordinary plants; increased iimpli- 
tude ; occasionHl points of diff<.ieuce -Epinastio giowth of yonng 
leaves — Hyponastic growth of the hypoootyls and epicotyls of seed- 
lings— Hooked tips of climbing and other plants due to modified 
ciruumnutation — Ampelopsis tricu«pidata — Smithia Pfundii — 
8truighttuing of the tip due to hyponasty — Epinastio growth and 
circumuutation of the fluwer-peduucles of Trifulium repens and 
Oxtdid camosa. 

The radicles, hypocotyls and epicotyls of seedling 
plants, even before they emerge from the ground, and 
afterwards the cotyledons, are all continually circum- 
nutating. So it is with the stems, stolons, flower- 
peduncles, and leaves of older plants. We may, there- 
fore, infer with a considerable degree of safety that all 
the growing parts of all plants circumnutate. Although 
this movement, in its ordinary or unmodified state^ 
appears in some cases to be of service to plants, 
either directly or indirectly — for instance, the cireum- 
nutation of the radicle in penetrating the ground, or 
that of the arched hypocotyl and epicotyl in breaking 
through the surface — yet circumuutation is so genenil, 
or rather so universal a phenomenon, that we cannot 
suppose it to have been gained for any special pur- 
pose. We must believe that it follows in some un- 
known way from the manner in which vegetable tissues 
grow. 

18 



264 MODIFIED CIBGUMNUTATION. C^hap. V. 

We shall now consider the many cases in which 
ciicomnutation has been modified for varions special 
purposes ; that is, a movement already in progress is 
temporarily increased in some one direction, and tem- 
porarily diminished or quite arrested in other direc- 
tions. These cases may be divided in two sub-classf s ; 
in one of which the modification depends on innate or 
constitutional causes, and is independent of external 
conditions, excepting in so far that the proper ones for 
growth must be present. In the second sub-class the 
modification depends to a large extent on external 
agencies, such as the daily alternations of light and 
darkness, or light alone, temperature, or the attraction 
of gravity. The first small sub-class will be considered 
m the present chapter, and the second sub-class in the 
remainder of this volume. 

The Circdmnutation op Climbing Plants. 

The simplest case of modified circumnutation is that 
offered by climbing plants, with the exception of 
those which climb by the aid of motionless hooks or 
of rootlets : for the modification consists chiefly in the 
greatly increased amplitude of the movement. This 
would follow either from greatly increased growth over 
a small length, or more probably from moderately in- 
creased growth spread over a considerable length of the 
moving organ, preceded by turgescence, and acting suc- 
cessively on all sides. The circumnutation of climbers 
is more regular than that of ordinary plants; but in 
almost every other respect there is a close similarity 
between their movements, namely, in their tendency 
to (lescril>e ellipses directed successively to all points 
of the compass — in their courses being often inter- 
rupted oy zigzag lines, triangles, loops, or small 



OkiAF. V. CLIMBING PLANTS. 265 

ellipses — in the rate of movement, and in different 
species revolving once or several times within the same 
length of time. In the same internode, the move- 
ments cease first in the lower part and then slowly 
upwards. In both sets of cases the movement may be 
modified in a closely analogous manner by geotropism 
and by heliotropism ; though few climbing plants are 
^eliotropic. Other points of similarity might be 
pointed out. 

That the movements of climbing plants consist of 
ordinary circumnutation, modified by being increased 
in amplitude, is well exhibited whilst the plants are 
very young ; for at this early age they move like other 
seedlings, but as they grow older their movements 
gradually increase without undergoing any other 
change. That this power is innate, and is not excited 
by any external agencies, beyond those necessary for 
growth and vigour, is obvious. No one doubts that 
this power has been gained for the sake of enabling 
climbing plants to ascend to a height, and thus to 
reach the liglit. This is effected by two very different 
methods; first, by twining spirally round a support 
but to do so their stems must be long and flexible ; 
and, secondly, in the case of leaf-climbers and tendril- 
bearers, by bringing these organs into contact with a 
support, which is then seized by the aid of their 
sensitiveness. It may be here remarked that these 
latter movements have no relation, as far as we can 
judge, with circumnutation. In other cases the tips 
of tendrils, after having been brought into contact with 
a support, become developed into little discs which 
adhere firmly to it. 

We have said that the circumnutation of climbing 
plants differs from that of ordinary plants chiefly by 
its greater amplitude. But most leaves circumnutate 



266 MODIFIED CIKCUMNUTATION. Ohav. V. 

in an almost vertical plane, and therefore describe very 
narrow ellipses, whereas the many kinds of tendrils 
which consist of metamorphosed leaves, make much 
broader ellipses or nearly circular figures; and thus 
they have a far better chance of catching hold of a 
support on any side. The movements of climbing 
plants have also been modified in some few other 
special ways. Thus the circumnutating stems of Sol' 
nanum dulcamara can twine round a support only 
when this is as thin and flexible as a string or thread. 
The twining stems of several British plants cannot 
twine round a support when it is more than a few 
inches in thickness; whilst in tropical forests some 
can embrace thick trunks ;* and this great difference 
in power depends on some unknown difference in 
their manner of circumnutation. The most remarkable 
special modification of this movement which we have 
observed is in the tendrils oi Echinocystis hb^a; these 
are usually inclined at about 45° above the horizon, 
but they stiffen and straighten themselves so as to 
stand upright in a part of their circular course, namely, 
when they approach and have to pass over the summit 
of the shoot from which they arise. K tbey had not 
possessed and exercised this curious po\*'er, they would 
infallibly have struck against the suuiinit of the shoot 
and been arreste.l in their course. J^h soon as one of 
tlioso tendrils with its three branches begins to stiffen 
itself and rise up vertically, the involving motion 
becomes more rapid; and as soon as it has passed 
over the point of difficulty, its notion coinciding 
with that from its own weight, causes it to fall into its 
previously inclined position so quickly, that the apex 
can be seen travelling like the hand of a gigantic clock. 



'The Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants/ p. 96. 



Ohap. V. BPINASTY AND HYPONASTY. 267 

A large number of ordinary leaves and leaflets and 
a few flower-peduncles are provided with pulvini ; but 
this is not the case with a single tendril at present 
known. The cause of this difi*erence probably lies in 
the fact, that the chief service of a pulvinus is to 
prolong the movement of the part thus provided after 
growth has ceased ; and as tendrils or other climbing- 
organs are of use only whilst the plant is increasing 
in height or growing, a pulvinus which served to 
prolong their movements would be useless. 

It was shown in the last chapter that the stolons or 
runners of certain plants circumnutate largely, and 
that this movement apparently aids them in finding a 
passage between the crowded stems of adjoining plants. 
If it could be proved that their movements had been 
modified and increased for this special purpose, they 
ought to have been included in the present chapter ; 
but as the amplitude of their revolutions is not so 
conspicuously difierent from that of ordinary plants, 
as in the case of climbers, we have no evidence on 
this head. We encounter the same doubt in the case 
of some plants which bury their pods in the ground. 
This burying process is certainly favoured by the 
circumnutation of the flower-peduncle ; but we do not 
know whether it has been increased for this special 
purpose. 

Epinasty — Hyponasty. 

The term epinasty is used by De Vries * to express 
greater longitudinal growth along the upper than 



* 'Arbciten des Bot. Inst., two terms as first used by Schim- 

in Wurzburg,* Heftii. 1S72, p. 223. per, and they have been adopted 

De Vries has slightly modified in this sense by Sachs. 
(p. 252; the meaning of the above 



268 MODIFIED CIBOUMNUTATION. Cbat. V 

along the lower side of a part, which is thus caused to 
bend downwards; and hyponasty is used for the reversed 
process, by which the part is made to bend upwards. 
These actions come into play so frequently that the 
use of the aboye two terms is highly convenient. The 
movements thus induced result from a modified form 
of circumnutation ; for, as we shall immediately see, 
an organ under the influence of epinasty does not 
generally move in a straight line downwards, or under 
that of hyponasty upwards, but oscillates up and down 
with some lateral movement : it moves, however, in a 
preponderant manner in one direction. This shows 
that there is some growth on all sides of the part, but 
more on the upper side in the case of epinasty, and 
more on the lower side in that of hyponasty, than on 
the other sides. At the same time there may be in 
addition, as De Vries insists, increased growth on one 
side due to geotropism, and on another side due to 
heliotropism ; and thus the eflfects of epinasty or of 
hyponasty may be either increased or lessened. 

He who likes, may speak of ordinary circumnutation 
as being combined with epinasty, hyponasty, the effects 
of gravitation, light, &c. ; but it seems to us, froit 
reasons hereafter to be given, to be more correct to 
say that circumnutation is modified by these several 
agencies. We will therefore speak of circumnutation, 
which is always in progress, as modified by epinasty, 
hyponasty, geotropism, or other agencies, whether 
internal or external. 

One of the commonest and simplest cases of epinasty is that 
offered by leaves, wliich at an early age are crowded together 
round the buds, and diverge as they grow older. Sachs first 
remarked that this was due to increased growth along theuppea 
Bide of the petiole and blade ; and De Vries has now shown in 
more detail that the movement is thus caused, aided slighl^ hf 



Chap. V. EPINASTY AND HYPONASTY. 269 

the weight of tbe leaf, and resisted as he believes by apogeo- 
tropism, at least after the leaf has somewhat diverged. In our 
.observations on the circumnutation of leaves, some were selected 
which were rather too young, so that they continued to diverge 
or sink downwards whilst their movements were being traced. 
This may be seen in the diagrams (Figs. 98 and 112, pp. 232 
and 2^9) ropresenting the circumnutation of the young leaves ot 
Acanthus mf'llis and I'da gonium zonale. Similar cases were ob- 
served with Drosera. The movements of a young leaf, only f inch 
in length, of Petutda violaaa were traced during four days, and 
oifers a better instance (Fig III, p. 248), as it diverged during 
the whole of this time in a curiously zigzag line with boiiie of the 
angles sharply acute, and during the latter days plainly circum- 
nutated. Some young leaves of about the same age on a plant 
of this Petunia, which had been laid horizontally, and on another 
plant which was left upright, both being kept in complete dark- 
ness, diverged in the same manner for 48 h., and apparently 
were not affected by apogeotropism ; though their stems were in 
a state of high tension, for when freed from the sticks to which 
they had been tied, the^ instantly curled upwards 

The leaves, whilst very young, on the leading shoots of the 
Carnation ( /Han thus caryophyllus) are highly inclined or vertical ; 
and if the plant is growing vigorously they diverge so quickly 
that they become almost horizontal in a day. But they move 
downwards in a rather oblique lim5 and continue for some time 
afterwards to move in the same dirtjction, in connection, we pre- 
sume, with their spiral arrangement on the stem. The course 
pursued by a young leaf whilst thus obliquely descending was 
traced, and the line was distinctly yet not strongly zigzag ; the 
larger angles formed by the successive lines amounting only to 
135°, 154°, and 163°. The subsequent lateral movement (shown 
in Fig. 96, p. 231) was strongly zigzag with occasional circum- 
nutations. The divergence and sinking of the young leaves 
of this plant seem to be very little affected by geotropism or 
heliotropism ; for a plant, the leaves of which were growing 
rather slowly (as ascertained by measurement) was laid hori- 
zontally, and the opposite young leaves diverged from one 
another symmetrically in the usual manner, without any up- 
turning in the direction of gravitation or towards the light. 

The needle-like leaves of Pinus pinaster form a bundle whilst 
young ; afterwards they slowly diverge, so that those on the up- 
right shoots become horizontal. The movements of one such 



270 



MODIFIED CIRCUMNUTATION. 



Chap. V. 



young leaf was traced duriug 4^ days, and the tracing here givoD 
(Fig. 121) siiows that it descended at first in a nearly straight 

line, bnt afterwards zigzagged, 



ng. 121. 




Pin-jto roister : epinastic downward 
movefij^nt of a young leaf, pro- 
duced by a yoiinj; plant in a pot, 
traced on a verticil glass under a 
sKyiiii^lit, from t).45 A.M. June 2nd 
to'U).40 P.M. 6tk. 



making one or two little loops. 
The diverging and descend- 
ing movements of a rather 
older leaf were also traced 
(see former Fig. 118, p. 251) : 
it descended during the first 
day and night in a some- 
what zigzag line ; it then cir- 
cumnntated round a small 
space and again descended. 
By this time the leaf had 
nearly assumed its final posi- 
tion, and now plainly circum- 
nutated. As in the case of the 
Carnation, the leaves, whilst 
very young, do not seem to be 
much *afiected by geotropiBm 
or heliotropism, for those on a 
young plant laid horizontally, 
and those on another plant 
left upright, both kept in the 
dark, continued to diverge in 
the usual manner without 
bonding to either side. 

With Cdbasa scanJenn, the 
young leaves, as they succeo- 
sively diverge from the lead- 
ing shoot which is bent to 
one side, rise up so as to pro- 
ject vertically, and they retain 
this position for some time 
whilst the tendril is revolving. 
The diverging and ascending 
movements of the petiole of 
one such a loaf, were traced on 
a vertical glass under a sky* 
light ; and the course pursued 
was in most parts nearly 
straight, but there were twc 



Ohap. V. EPINASTY AND HYPONASTY. 271 

well-marked zigzags (one of them forming an angle of 112°), 
and this indicates circnmnutation. 

The still closed lobes of a young leaf of Dionrea projected at 
right angles to the petiole, and were in the act of slowly rising. 
A glass filament was attached to the under side of the midrib^ 
and its movements were traced on a vertical glass. It circum- 
iiutated once in the evening, and on the next day rose, as already 
described (see Fig. 106, p. 240), by a number of acutely zigzag 
lines, closely approaching in character to ellipses. This move- 
ment no doubt was due to epinasty, aided by apogeotropism, 
for the closed lobes of a very young leaf on a plant which had 
been placed horizontally, moved into nearly the same line with 
the petiole, as if the plant had stood upright; but at the same 
time the lobes curved laterally upwards, and thus occupied an 
unnatural position, obliquely to the plane of the foliaceous petiole. 

As the hypocotyls and epicotyls of some plants protrude from 
the seed-coats in an arched form, it is doubtful whether the 
arching of these parts, which is invariably present when they 
break through the ground, ought always to be attributed to 
epinasty; but wh^n they are at first straight and afterwards 
become arched, as often happens, the arching is certainly due to 
epinasty. As long as the arch is surrounded by compact earth 
it must retain its form; but as soon as it rises above the 
surface, or even before this period if artificially freed from the 
surrounding pressure, it begins to straighten itself, and this no 
doubt is mainly due to hyponasty. The movement of the 
upper and lower half of the arch, and of the crown, was occa- 
sionally traced ; and the course was more or less zigzag, showing 
modified circnmnutation. 

With not a few plants, especially climbers, the summit of the 
shoot is hooked, so that the apex points vertically downwards. 
In seven genera of twining plants * the hooking, or as it has been 
called by Sachs, the nutation of the tip, is mainly due to an 
exaggerated form of circnmnutation. That is, tlie growth is so 
great along one side that it bends the shoot completely over to 
the opposite side, thus forming a hook ; the longitudinal line or 
zone of growth then travels a little laterally round the shoot, 
and the hook points in a slightly different direction, and so 
onwards until the hook is completely reversed. Ultmiately it 



• • The Movements and Habits of CliiDbing Plants,* 2ii(l ertit. p. IS. 



272 MODIFIED CIRCUMNUTATION. Gh\p. V. 

comes back to the point whence it started. This was ascertained 
by painting narrow lines with Indian ink along the convex 
surface of several hooks, and the line was found slowly to bo- 
come at first lateral, then to appear along the concave sarfiioe, 
and ultimately back again on the convex surface. In the case of 
Lonia-ra brachypoda the hooked terminal part of the revolving 
shoot straightens itself periodically, but is never reversed ; that 
is, the periodically increased growth of the concave side of the 
hook is sufficient only to straighten it, and not to bend it over 
to the opposite side. The hooking of the tip is of semce to 
twining plants by aiding them to catch hold of a support, and 
afterwards by enabling this part to embrace the support much 
more closely than it could otherwise have done at lirst, thus 
preventing it, as we often observed, from being blown away by a 
strong wind. Whether the advantage thus gained by twining 
plants accounts for their summits being so frequently hooked, 
we do not know, as this structure is not very rare with plants 
which do not climb, and with some climbers (for instance, Vitis, 
Ampelopsis, Cissus, &c.) to whom it does not afford any assist- 
ance in climbing. 

With respect to those cases in which the tip remains always 
bent or hooked towards the same side, as in the genera just 
named, the mo^t obvious explanation is that the bending is due 
to continued growth in excess, along the convex side. Wiesner, 
however, maintains ** that in all cases the hooking of the tip is 
the result of its plasticity and weight, — a conclusion which from 
what we have already seen with several climbing plants is 
certainly erroneous. Nevertheless, we fully admit that the 
Aveight of the part, as well as geotropism, <&c., sometimes oomo 
into play. 

Ampthpsis tricwpvlata. — This plant climbs by the aid of 
adhesive tendrils, and the hooked tips of the shoots do not 
a])pcnr to be of any service to it. The hooking depends chiefly, 
as far as we could ascertain, on the tip lieing affected by epinasty 
and geotropism ; the lower and older parts continually straight- 
ening themselves through hyponasty and apogeotropism. We 
UOieve that the weight of the apex is an unimportant element, 
l)0('auso on horizontal or inclined shoots the hook is often 
extended horizontally or even faces upwards. Moreover shoots 
frequently form loops instead of hooks; and in this case the 

* * Sitzb. der k. Akud. der Wittsensch./ Vienna, Jaa 1880^ p* 10. 



CbAP. V. 



EPINASTY AND HYPONASTY. 



278 



estreme part, instead of hang- 
ing vertically down as would 
follow if weight was the efficient 
cause, extends horizontally or 
even points upwards. A shoot, 
which lermiDated in a rather 
open hook, was fastened in 
* a highly inclined downward 
position, so that the concave 
Bide faced upwards, and the 
result was that the apex at first 
curved upwards. This ap- 
parently was due to epinasty 
and not to apogeotropism, for 
the apex, soon after passing 
the perpendicular, curved so 
rapidly downwards that we 
could not doubt that the move- 
ment was at least aided by 
geotropism. In the course of 
a few hours the hook was thus 
converted into a loop with the 
apex of the shoot pointing 
straight downwards. The 
longer axis of the loop was at 
first horizontal, but after- 
wards became vertical. During 
this same time the basal part 
of the hook (and subsequently 
of the loop) curved itself slowly 
upwards ; and this must have 
been wholly duo to apogeo- 
tropism in opposition to hypo- 
nasty. The loop was then 
fastened upside down, so that 
its basal half would be simul- 
taneously acted on by hypo- 
nasty (if present) and by apo- 
geotropism ; and now it curved 
itself so greatly upwards in 
the course of only 4h. that 
there could hardly be a doubt 
that both forces were acting 



Fig. P22. fTcuynJa^ 




itlf5ifa.^l4 V^iJwJirfJ^ 





WJC^^mM^ 



Sl^.m. 




SfSSfeim. 



9!flfraf»i3^J 



Anipelopsia tricuspidata : hyponaitio 
movement of hooked tip of leading 
shoot, traced from 8.10 A.M. July 
13th to 8 A.M. 15th. Apex of shoot 
5^ inches from the vertical glass. 
Plant illuminated through a sky- 
light. Temp. 1/^0-19° (^ Diagram 
reduced to one-third of original kcsIo 



274 



MODIFIED CLBCUMNUTATION. 



Ohap. T. 



Pig. 123. ^^} 



Bf^t/mJO^i 




e*40\*mJB 




€ra^<MnJ2^ 



an.nU2f^ 



Smithii Pfundh : kypouastic movement 
of the curved summitof astem, whilst 
straightening itself, traced from 9 
A.M. .July 10th to 3 P.M. 13th. Apex 
9} inches from the vertical glass. 
Diagram reiluced to one-fitHh of 
original scale. Plant illuminated 
through skylight ; temp. 17J°-19® C. 



together. At the same time 
the loop became open and 
was thus leoonverted into a 
hook, and this apparently 
was effected by the geotropic 
movement of the apex in 
opposition to epinasty. In 
the case of Am/elopsis htd&' 
racea, weight plays, as fiir as 
we could jndge, a more im- 
portant part in the hooking 
of the tip. 

In order to ascertain 
whether the shoots of A, tri- 
cuspidita in straightening 
themselves nnder the com- 
bined action of hyponasty and 
apogeotropism moved in a 
simple straight c«rarse, or 
whether they circnmnutated, 
glass filaments were fixed to 
the crowns of four booked 
tips standii'g in their natural 
position; and the movements 
of the filaments were traced 
on a vertical glass. All four 
tracings resembled each other 
in a general manner ; but we 
will give only one (see Fig. 
122, p. 273). Th3 filament 
rose at first, which shows 
that the hook was straighten- 
ing itself; it then zigzagged, 
moving a little to the left 
l^tween 9.25 ajt. and 9 p.11. 
From this latter hour on the 
13th to 10.50 A.M. on the fol- 
lowing morning (14th) the 
hook continued to straighten 
itself, and then zigzagged a 
short distance to the right 
But from 1 p.m. to 10.4Q pjl 
on the 14th tho moTement 



OtaAF. V. EPINASTY AND HYPONASTY. 275 

was reversed and the shoot became more hooked. During 
the night, after 10.40 p.m. to 8.15 a.m. on the 15th, the hook 
again opened or straightened itself. By this time the glass 
filament had become so highly inclined that its movements could 
no longer be traced with accuracy ; and by 1.30 p.m. on this same 
day, the crown of the former arch or hook had become perfectly 
straight and vertical. There can therefore be no doubt that the 
straightening of the hooked shoot of this plant is effected by 
the circumnutation of the arc'ied portion — that is, by growth 
alternating between the upper and lower surface, but prepon- 
derant on the lower surface, with some little lateral movement. 

We were enabled to trace the movement of another straight- 
ening shoot for a longer period (owing to its slower growth and 
to its having been placed further from the vertical glass), namely, 
from the early morning on July 13th to late in the evtning of the 
16th. During the whole daytime of the 14th, the hook straight- 
ened itself very little, but zigzagged and plainly circumnutated 
about nearly the same spot. By the 16th it had beco ue nearly 
straight, and the tracing was no longer accurate, yet it was 
manifest that there was still a considerablo amount of movement 
both up and down and laterally; for the cri)wn whilst con- 
tinuing to straighten itself occasionally became for a short time 
more curved, causing the filament to descend twice during the 
day. 

^mithia Pfundii,- The stiflf terminal shoots of this Legu- 
minous water-plant from Africa project so as to make a rectangle 
with the stem below ; but this occurs only when the plants are 
growing vigorously, for when kept in a cool place, the summits 
of the stems become straight, as they likewise did at the close 
of the growing season. The direction of the rectangularly bent 
part is independent of the chief source of light. But from 
ol)8erving the effects of placing plants in the dark, in which 
case several shoots became in two or three days upright or nearly 
upright, and when brought back into the light again became 
rectangularly curved, we believe that the bending is in part 
due to apheliotropism, apparently somewhat opposed by apogeo- 
tropism. On the other hand, from observing the effects of tying 
a shoot downwards, so that the rectangle faced upwards, we are 
led to believe that the curvature is partly due to epinasty. As 
the rectangularly bent portion of an upright stem grows older, 
the lower part straightens itself; and this is effected through 
hyponasty. He who has read Sachs* recent Essay on the vertical 



276 MODIFIED CIBCUMNUTATION. Ohap. 7, 

and in 'liued positions of the parts of plants* will see how diA- 
cult a subject this is, and will feel no surprise at our expressiiig 
ourselves doubtfully in this and other such case& 

A plant, 20 inches in height, was secured to a stick doee 
beneath the curved sunmiit, which formed rather less than a 
rectangle with the stem below. The shoot pointed away from the 
observer ; and a glass filament pointing towards the yertical glass 
on which the tracing was made, was fixed to ike convex surface of 
the curved portion. Therefore the descending lines in the figure 
represent the straightening of the curved portion as it grew 
older. The tracing (Fig. 123, p. 274) was begim at 9 a.m. on 
July 10th ; the filament at first moved but little in a zigzag line, 
but at 2 P.M. it l)egan rising and continued to do so till 9 p.il ; 
and this proves that the terminal portion was being more bent 
downwards. After 9 p.m. on the 10th an opposite movement 
commenced, and the curved portion began to straighten itself, 
pnd this continued till 11.10 a.m. on the 12th, but was interrupted 
by some small oscillations and zigzags, showing movement in 
different directions. After 11.10 a.m. on the 12th this part of 
the stem, still considerably curved, circumnutated in a con- 
spicuous manner until nearly 3 p.m. on the 13th ; but during all 
this time a downward movement of the filament prevailed, 
caused by the continued straightening of the stem. By the 
afternoon of the 13th, the summit, which had originally been 
deflected more than a right angle from the perpendicnlar, had 
grown so nearly straight that the tracing could no longer be 
continued on the vertical glass. There can therefore be no 
doubt that the straiglitening of the abruptly curved portion of 
the growing stem of this plant, which appears to be wholly due 
to hyponasty, is the result of modified circumnutation. We 
will only add that a filament was fixed in a different manner 
acro.«:s the curved summit of another plant, and the same general 
k'nd of movement was observed. 

TrifuUuvi lepctis, — In many, but not in all the species ai Tri- 
folium, as the separate little fiowcrs wither, the sub-peduncles 
bend downwards, so as to dc(x;nd parallel to the upper part of 
the main peduncle. In Tr. stibtrranfum the main peduncle 
curve i downwards for the sake of burying its capsules, and in 
tliis species the sub-peduncles of the separate flowers bend 



* * Urb(>r Orthotro|)o und Plu- ten dee Dot Intit, iu WftiabiniBr 
giotn)pc Pilaiizeuthuilo ;' *Aibci- Heft iL 1879, p. 226. 



OflA». V, HPINASTY AND HYPONASTY. 



277 



Fig. 124. 



B. 



^*a;jii 





:<MnJ0f 



0ii(fam.S^ 




9*S€MI$ 



t^ifolimn repens: circnmnn- 
tating and epiDastic move- 
ments of the sub-peduncle 
of a single flower, traced 
on a vertical glass under 
a skylight, in A from 11.30 
A.M. Aug. 27th to 7 A.M. 
80th : in B from 7 A.M. 
Aug. noth to a little after 
6 P.M. Sept. 8th. 




278 MODIFIED CIRCUMNUTATION. Chap. V. 

upwards, so as to occupy the same position relatively to the 
upper part ot the main peduncle as in TV. repens. This Ceu^ 
alone would render it probable that the movements of the sub- 
pciluncles in Tr. repens were independent of gcotropism. Never- 
theless, to make sure, some flower-heads were tied to little sticks 
upside down and others in a horizontal position; their sub- 
peduncles, however, all quickly curved upwards through the 
action of heliotropisra. We therefore protected some flower- 
heads, similarly secured to sticks, from the light, and although 
some of them rotted, many of their sub-peduncles turned very 
rJowly from their reversed or from their horizontal positions, 
so as to stand in the normal manner pamllel to the upper part 
of the main x)6duncle. These facts show that the movement is 
independent of gcotropism or apheliotropism ; it must there- 
be attributed to epinasty, wliich however is cnecked, at least as 
long as the flowers are young, by heliotropism. Most of the 
alxjve flowers were never fertilised owing to the exclusion of 
bees ; they consoquently withered very slowly, and the movements 
of the sub peduncles were in like manner much retarded. 

To ascertain the nature of the movement of the sub-pedoncle, 
whilst bending downwards, a filament was fixed across the 
summit of the calyx of a not fully expanded and almost upright 
flower, nearly in the centre of the head. The main peduncle 
was secured to a stick close beneath the head. In order to see 
the marks on the glass filument, a few flowers had to be cut 
away on the lower side of the head. The flower under obser- 
vation at first diverged a little from its upright position, so as 
to occupy the open space caused by the removal of the adjoining 
flowers. This required two days, after which time a new tracing 
was hegnn (Fig. 124). In A we see the complex circumnutating 
course pursued from 11.30 a.m. Aug. 26th to 7 a.m. on the 
30th. The pot was then moved a very little to the right, and 
the tracing (B) was continued without interruption from 7 A.1I, 
Aug 30th to after 6 p.m. Sept. 8th. It should be observed that 
on most of these days, only a single dot was made each morning 
at tiie same hour. Whenever the flower was ob-trved corefnlly, 
as on Aug. 30t!i and Sept. 5th and 6th, it was found to he cir- 
cumnutating over a small space. At last, on Sept. 7th, it 
began to l)end downwards, and continued to do so until after 
6 P.M. on the 8th, and indeed until the morning of the 9th, when 
its niovcniLuts could no longer be traced on the vtrtical glaas. 
It was C'lrefully observed during the whole of the Sth^ and by 



Chap. V. EPINASTY AND HYPONASTY. 279 

10.30 P.M. it had descended to a point lower down by two-thirds 
of the length of the figure as here given ; but from want of space 
the tracing has been copiei in B, only to a little after 6 p.m. On 
the morning of the 9th the flower was withered, and the sub- 
peduncle now stood at an angle of 57° beneath the horizon. If 
the flower had been fertilised it would have withered much 
sooner, and have moved much more quickly. We thus see that 
the sub-peduncle oscillated up and down, or circumnutattd, 
during its whole downward epinastic course. 

The sub-peduncles of the fertilised and withered flowers 
of Oxalis carnosa likewise bend downwards through epinasty, 
as will be shown in a future chapter; and theii downward 
course is strongly zigzag, indicating circumnutation. 

The number of instances in which various organs 
move through epinasty or hyponasty, often in com- 
bination with other forces, for the most diversified 
purposes, seems to be inexhaustibly great ; and from 
the several cases which have been here given, we may 
safely infer that such movements are due to modified 
circumnutation. 



19 



280 MODIFIED CIBCUMNUXATION. CmAt. YJ 



CHAPTKU VI. 

'MoviriTLV CiBCUMKTTATioN : Sleep OR Xtctitbopic MoYBMKirn, 
THEiB VtiEi Sleep of Gottleuons. 

Prclim'nary sketch of the sleep or njcti tropic moTemcnts of leaves — 
Pic8en(;e of ])ulYini — The less niug of radiation the final cauae of 
nyjtitn>pic movements — Manni-r of trying experiments on leaves of 
Oxali.s Arochls Ca^sin, Melilotuis bttiu and Marailea, and on the 
cotiK-d'insor Mtmo.>a— Concluding r^mnrks on radiation from leaves 
— Small diff« reiKCS in the coiid.tions make a grc»t diflferenfe in tlie 
result — Dohoiption of the nvcti tropic position un<l movements of 
tiie cutyl dons of various plantd — Liat of species — Coxoluding 
remarks — Indrpendence of the nxctitropic movements of the leaver 
and cotyledons of the Siime species— Reasons for believing that the 
movements liave been ucquiri d for a special purpose. 

The so-called sleep of leaves is so conspicuous a 
phenomenon that it was observed as early as the 
time of Pliny ;* and since Linnaeus published his 
famous Essiiy, ' Somnus Plantarum/ it has been the 
subject of several memoirs. Many flowers close at 
night, and these are likewise said to sleep; but we 
are not here concerned with their movements, for 
although effected by the same mechanism as in the 
case of young leaves, namely, unequal growth on the 
opix)site sides (as first proved by Pfeflfer), yet they differ 
essentially in being excited chiefly by changes of 
temperature instead of light ; and in being effected* as 
far as we can judge, for a different purpose. Hardly 
any one sup{)oses that there is any real analogy 



^ PfcffiT has given n clear and riodi.-clien Beweg^ngon der fila^ 
interest in<; sketch of the history torgano/ 1875, p. ItiS. 
Df tliid subject in his *Die Pe- 



Chap. VL SLEEP MOVEMENTS. 281 

between the sleep of animals and that of plants,* 
whether of leaves or flowers. It seems, therefore, 
advisable to give a distinct name to the so-called 
sleep-movements of plants. These have also generally 
been confounded, under the term " periodic," with the 
slight daily rise and fall of leaves, as described in the 
fourth chapter ; and this makes it all the more desir- 
able to give some distinct name to sleep-movements. 
Nyctitropism and nyctitropic, i.e. night-turning, may 
be applied both to leaves and flowers, and will be 
occasionally used by us ; but it would be best to con- 
fine the term to leaves. The leaves of some few plants 
move either upwards or downwards when the sun shines 
intensely on them, and this movement has sometimes 
been called diurnal sleep ; but we believe it to be of 
an essentially different nature from the nocturnal 
movement, and it will be briefly considered in a 
future chapter. 

The sleep or nyctitropism of leaves is a large 
subject, and we think that the most convenient plan 
will be first to give a brief account of the position 
which leaves assume at night, and of the advantages 
apparently thus gained. Afterwards the more re- 
markable cases will be described in detail, with 
respect to cotyledons in the present chapter, and to 
leaves in the next chapter. Finally, it will be shown 
that these movements result from circumnutation, 
much modified and regulated by the alternations of 
day and night, or light and darkness ; but that they 
are also to a certain extent inherited. 

Leaves, when they go to sleep, move either upwards 
or downwards, or in the case of the leaflets of com- 



• Ch. Royer must, however, be Nat.' (5th series), Bot voL !x 
czcLpuxl ; aee *• Annales das Sc 1868, p. 378. 



282 MODIFIED CIBCUMNUTATION. Chap. Vt 

pound leaves, forwards, that is, towards the apex of th<« 
leaf, or backwards, that is, towards its base ; or, again;, 
they may rotate on their own axes without moTing 
either upwards or downwards. But in almost every 
case the plane of the blade is so placed as to stand 
nearly or quite vertically at night. Therefore the apex, 
or the base, or either lateral edge, may be directed 
towards the zenith. Moreover, the upper surface of 
each leaf, and more especially of each leaflet, is often 
brought into close contact with that of the opposite 
one ; and this is sometimes effected by singularly 
complicated movements. This fact suggests that the 
upper surface requires more protection than the lower 
one. For instance, the terminal leaflet in TrifoUnm, 
after turning up at night so as to stand vertically, 
often continues to bend over until the upper surface is 
directed downwards whilst the lower surface is fully 
exposed to the sky; and an arched roof is thus 
formed over the two lateral leaflets, which have their 
upper surfaces pressed closely together. Here we have 
the unusual case of one of the leaflets not standing 
vertically, or almost vertically, at night 

Considering that leaves in assuming their nycti- 
tropic positions often move through an angle of 
90°; that the movement is rapid in the evening; 
that in some cases, as we shall see in the next 
chapter, it is extraordinarily complicated; that with 
certain seedlings, old enough to bear true leaves, 
ll»e cotyledons move vertically upwards at night, 
\0)il$t at the same time the leaflets movo vor- 
hrally downwards; and that in the same genus 
Hio leaves or cotyledons of some species more 
upwards, whilst those of other species more down* 
wards ; — from these and other such facts, it is hardly 
possible to doubt that plants must derive some 



Chap. VI. SLEEP MOVEMENTS. 283 

great advantage from such remarkable powers of 
movement. 

The nyctitropic movements of leaves and cotyledons 
are effected in two ways,* firstly, by means of pulvini 
which become, as Pfeffer has shown, alternately more 
turgescent on opposite sides; and secondly, by in- 
creased growth along one side of the petiole or 
midrib, and then on the opposite side, as was first 
proved by Batalin.f But as it has been shown by 
De Vries J that in these latter cases increased growth 
is preceded by the increased turgescence of the cells, 
the difference between the above two means of move- 
ment is much diminished, and consists chiefly in the 
turgescence of the cells of a fully developed pulvinus, 
not being followed by growth. When the move- 
ments of leaves or cotyledons, furnished with a pul- 
vinus and destitute of one, are compared, they are seen 
to be closely similar, and are apparently effected for 
the same purpose. Therefore, with our object in view, 
it does not appear advisable to separate the above two 
sets of cases into two distinct classes. There is, how- 
ever, one important distinction between them, namely, 
that movements effected by growth on the alternate 
sides, are confined to young growing leaves, whilst those 
effected by means of a pulvinus last for a long time. 
We have already seen well-marked instances of this 
latter fact with cotyledons, and so it is with leaves, as 
has been observed by Pfeffer and by ourselves. The 
long endurance of the nyctitropic movements when 
effected by the aid of pulvini indicates, in addition to 
the evidence already advanced, the functional imuort- 



• This distinction was first Dassen in 1837. 

pointed out (according to Pfeffer, f * Flora,* 1873, p. 433. 

Die Periodischen Bewegungen j * Bot. Zeitung,' 1879, Dea 

ier Blattorgaue,* 1875, p. 161) by 19th, p. 830. 



284 MODIFIED CIRCUMNUTATION. Gbaf. YI 

ance of such movements to the plant. There is another 
difference between the two sets of cases, namely, that 
there is never, or very rarely, any torsion of the 
leaves, excepting when a pulvinns is present ; * but 
this statement applies only to periodic and nyctitropic 
movements, as may be inferred from other cases given 
by Frank.t 

The fact that the leaves of many plants place 
themselves at night in widely different positions from 
what they hold during the day, but with the one 
point in common, that their upper surfaces avoid 
facing the zenith, often with the additional fact that 
they come into close contact with opposite leaves or 
leaflets, clearly indicates, as it seems to us, that the 
object gained is the protection of the upper sur- 
faces from being chilled at night by radiation. There 
is nothing improbable in the upper surface needing 
protection more than the lower, as the two differ in 
function and structure. All gardeners know that 
plants suffer from radiation. It is this and not 
cold winds which the peasants of Southern Europe 
fear for their olives-f Seedlings are often protected 
from radiation by a very thin covering of straw ; and 
fruit-trees on walls by a few fir-branches, or even by a 
fishing-net, suspended over them. There is a variety 
of the gooseberry ,§ the flowers of which from being 
produced before the leaves, are not protected by 
them from radiation, and consequently often fail to 
yield fruit. An excellent observer | has remarked 

* Pfeffcr, * Die P< riod. Beweg. Dew/ remarks that an exposed 

der Blatt()r<>:ane.* 1875, p. 159. tbermometer rises as soon as even 

t * Die Nat. Wa^ercchte Rich* a fleecy duud, high in the fikji 

tung von PilaDzcntheil(.n,* 1870, pa8>e8 over the zenith, 

p. 52. § * Loudon'tf Oardenex's Mag / 

X Martins in »BulI. See. Dot. vol. iv. 1828, p. 112. 

de France,' torn xix. 1872. || Mr. Rivera in 'GardeDet*! 

Welly, in his famous *• Essay on Chron.,' 1866, p. 782. 



Ckap. YI. USB OF SLEEP MOVEMENTS. 285 

that ono variety of the cherry has the petals of its 
flowers much curled backwards, and after a severe 
frost all the stigmas were killed ; whilst at the same 
time, in another variety with incurved petals, the 
stigmas were not in the least injured. 

This view that the sleep of leaves saves them from 
being chilled at night by radiation, would no doubt 
have occurred to Linneeus, had the principle of radia- 
tion been then discovered ; for he suggests in many 
parts of his * Somnus Plantarum ' that the position of 
the leaves at night protects the young stems and 
buds, and often the young inflorescence, against cold 
winds. We are far from doubting that an additional 
advantage may be thus gained ; and we have observed 
with several plants, for instance, Desmodium gyrans^ 
that whilst the blade of the leaf sinks vertically down at 
night, the petiole rises, so that the blade has to move 
through a greater angle in order to assume its vertical 
position than would otherwise have been necessary ; but 
with the result that all the leaves on the same plant 
are crowded together as if for mutual protection. 

We doubted at first whether radiation would afifect 
in any important manner objects so thin as are many 
cotyledons and leaves, and more especially aflect dif- 
ferently their upper and lower surfaces ; for although 
the temperature of their upper surfaces would un- 
doubtedly fall when freely exposed to a clear sky, yet 
we thought that they would so quickly acquire by 
conduction the temperature of the surrounding air, 
that it could hardly make any sensible difference 
to them, whether they stood horizontally and radiated 
into the open sky, or vertically and radiated chiefly 
in a lateral direction towards neighbouring plants and 
other objects. We endeavoured, therefore, to ascer- 
tain something on this head by preventing the leaves 



286 MODIFIED CIRCUMNUTATION. Chap. VI 

of several plants from going to sleep, and by exposing 
to a clear sky when the temperature was beneath 
the freezing-point, these, as well as the other leaves 
on the same plants which had already assumed their 
nocturnal vertical position. Our experiments show 
that leaves thus compelled to remain horizontal at 
night, suffered much more injury from frost than 
those which were allowed to assume their normal 
vertical position. It may, however, be said that 
conclusions drawn from such observations are not 
applicable to sleeping plants, the inhabitants of 
countries where frosts do not occur. But in every 
country, and at all seasons, leaves must be exposed to 
nocturnal chills through radiation, which might be in 
some degree injurious to them, and which they would 
escape by assuming a vertical position. 

In our experiments, leaves were prevented firom 
assuming their nyctitropic position, generally by 
being fastened with the finest entomological pins 
(which did not sensibly injure them) to thin sheets 
of cork supported on sticks. But in some instances 
they were fastened down by narrow strips of card, 
and in others by their petioles being passed through 
slits in the cork. The leaves were at first fastened 
close to the cork, for as this is a bad conductor, and as 
the leaves were not exposed for long periods, we thought 
that the cork, which had been kept in the bouse, would 
very slightly warm them ; so that if they were injured 
by the frost in a greater degree than the free vertiRai 
leaves, the evidence would be so much the stronger 
that the horizontal position was injurious. But we 
found that when there was any slight difference in the 
result, which could be detected only occasionally^ the 
leaves which had been fastened closely down suffered 
rather more than those fastened with very long and 



Chap. VL USE OF SLEEP MOVEMENTS. 287 

thin pins, so as to stand from 4 to f inch above tho 
cork. This difference in the result, which is in itself 
curious as showing what a very slight difference in 
the conditions influences the amount of injury in- 
flicted, may be attributed, as we believe, to the sur- 
rounding warmer air not circulating freely beneath the 
closely pinned leaves and thus slightly warming them. 
This conclusion is supported by some analogous facts 
hereafter to be giv^n. 

We will now describe in detail the experiments 
which were tried. These were troublesome from our 
not being able to predict how much cold the leaves of 
the several species could endure. Many plants had 
every leaf killed, both those which were secured in 
a horizontal position and those which were allowed to 
sleep — that is, to rise up or sink down vertically. 
Others again had not a single leaf in the least in- 
jured, and these had to be re-exposed either for a 
longer time or to a lower temperature. 

Oxalis acetoselhi. — A very large pot, thickly covered with 
between 300 and 400 leaves, had been kept all winter in tho 
greenhouse. Seven leaves were pinned horizontally open, 
and were exposed on March 16th for 2 h. to a clear sky, the 
temperature on the surrounding grass being - 4° C. (24° to 
25° F.). Next morning all seven leaves were found quite 
killed, BO were many of the free ones which had previously 
gone to sleep, and about 100 of them, either dead or browned 
and injured, were picked off. Some leaves showed that they 
had been slightly injured by not expanding during the whole 
of the next day, though they afterwards recovered. As all the 
leaves which were pinned open wt re killed, and only about a 
third or fourth of the others were either killed or injured, we 
had some little evidence that those which were prevented from 
assuming their vertically dependent position suffered most. 

The following night (17th) was clear and almost equally cold 
(— 3° to — 4° C. on the grass), and the pot was again exposed 
but this time for only 30 m. Eight leaves had been pinned out, 



288 MODIFIED CIKCUMNUTATION. Chap. VI. 

and in the moniing two of them were dead, whilst not a single 
other leaf on tlie manv plants was even injured. 

On the 23rd the pot was exposed for 1 h. 30 m., the tempera- 
ture on the grass being only - 2° C, and not one leaf was 
injured: the pinned open leaves, however, all stood from 
i to f of an inch above the cork. 

On the 24th the p.)t was again placed on the ground and 
exposed to a clear sky for between 35 m. and 40 m. By a mis- 
take the thermometer was left on an adjoining sun-dial 3 feet 
high, instead of being placed on the grass ; it recorded 25° to 
26° F. (- 3 3° to - 3-8° C), but when looked at after 1 h. had 
fallen to 22° F. (— 5*5° C.) ; so that the pot was perhaps exposed 
to rather a lower temperature than on the two first occasions. 
Eight leaves had been pinned out, some close to the cork and 
some above it, and on the following morning five of them (i.e. 
63 per cent.) were found killed. By counting a portion of the 
leaves we estimated that about 250 had been allowed to go to 
sleep, and of these about 20 were killed (i.e. only 8 per cent.), 
and about 30 injured. 

Considering these cases, there can be no doubt that the 
leaves of this Oxalis, when allowed to assume their normal 
vertically dependent position at night, suffer much less from 
frost than those (23 in number) which had their upper surfaces 
exposed to the zenith. 

Oxalis carnosa. — A plant of this Chilian species was exposed 
for 30 m. to a clear f-ky, the thermometer on the grass standing 
at — 2° C , with some of its leaves pinned open, and not one leaf 
on the whole bushy plant was in the least injured. On the 
16th of March another plant was similarly exposed for 30 m., 
when the temperature on the grass was only a little lower, viz , 
— 3° to - 4° C. Six of the leaves had been pinned open, and 
next morning five of them \iere found much browned. The 
plant was a large one, and none of the free leaves, which 
were asleep and depended vertically, were browned, excepting 
four very young ones. But three other leaves, though not 
browned, were in a rather flaccid condition, and retained their 
nocturnal position during the whole of the following day. In 
this case it was obvious that the leaves which were exposed hori- 
zontally to the zenith suffered most. This same pot was after- 
wards exposed for 35-40 m. on a slightly colder night, and 
every leaf, both the pinned open and the free ones, was killed 
It may be added that two po<s of 0. corniculata (var. Atra 



Chap. VI. USE OF SLEEP MOVEMENTS. 289 

piirpm*ea) were exposed for 2 h. and 3 h. to a clear sky with the 
temp, on grass — 2° C, and none of the leaves, whether free or 
pinned open, were at all injured. 

Arachis hypogoea. — Some plants in a pot were exposed at night 
for 30 m. to a clear sky, the temperature on the surrounding 
grass being — 2° 0., and on two nights afterwards they were again 
exposed to the same temperature, but this time during 1 h. 30 m. 
On neither occasion was a single leaf, whether pinned open or 
free, injured ; and this surprised us much, considering its native 
tropical African home. Two plants were next exposed (March 
16th) for 30 m. to a clear sky, the temperature of the surrounding 
grass being now lower, viz., between — 3° and — 4** 0., and all 
four pinned-open leaves were killed and blackened. These two 
plants bore 22 other and free leaves (excluding some very young 
bud-b'ke ones) and only two of these were killed and three some- 
what injured ; that is, 23 per cent, were either killed or injurtd, 
whereas all four pinned open leaves were utterly killed. 

On another night two pots with several plants were exposed 
for between 35 m. and 40 m. to a clear sky, and perhaps to a 
rather lower temperature, for a thermometer on a dial, 3 feet 
high, close by stood at - 3*3° to - 3*8° 0. In one pot three 
leaves were pinned open, and all were badly injured; of the 
44 free leaves, 26 were injured, that is, 59 per cent. In the 
other pot 3 leaves were pinned open and all were killed ; four 
other leaves were prevented from sleeping by narrow strips of 
stiff paper gummed across them, and all were killed ; of 24 free 
leaves, 10 were killed, 2 much injured, and 12 unhurt ; that is, 
50 per cent, of the free leaves were either killed or much in- 
jured. Taking the two pots together, we may say that rather 
more than half of the free leaves, which were asleep, were either 
killed or injured, whilst all the ten horizontally extended leaves, 
which had been prevented from going to sleep, were either killed 
or much injured. 

Cassia floribunda, — A bush was exposed at night for 40 m. to 
a clear sky, the temperature on the surrounding grass being 
— 2° C, and not a leaf was injured.* It was again exposed on 



• Cassia Isevigata was exposed injured. But when C, Ixvigata 

to a clear sky for .S5 ra., and G. was exposed for 1 h., the temp. 

calliantha (a Guiana species) for on the surrounding grass being 

60 m., the temperature on the between — 3** and — 4° C, every 

surrounding grass being — 2^ 0., leaf waa killed. 
and neither were in the least 



290 MODIFIED CIRCUMNUTATION. Chap. VI. 

another night for 1 h., when the temperature of the grass was 
— 4*^ C. ; and now all the leaves on a largo bush, whether pinned 
flat open or free, were killed, blackened, and shrivelled, with 
the exception of those on one small branch, low down, which 
was very slightly protected by the leaves on the branches 
above. Another tall bush, with four of its large compound 
leaves pinned out horizontally, was afterwards exposed (t^mp. 
of surrounding grass exactly the same, viz., — 4P C), but only 
for 30 ra. On the fo' lowing morning every single leaflet on 
these four leaves was dead, with both their upper and lower 
surfaces completely blackened. Of the many free leaves on the 
bush, only seven were blackened, and of these only a single one 
(which was a younger and more tender leaf than any of the 
pinned ones) had both surfaces of the leaflets blackened. The 
contrast in this latter respect was well shown by a free leaf, which 
stood between two pinned-open ones ; for these latter had the 
lower surfaces of their leaflets as black as ink, whilst the inter* 
mediate free leaf, though badly injured, still retained a plain 
tinge of green on the lower surface of the leaflets. This bush 
exhibited in a striking manner the evil eflfects of the leaves not 
being allowed to assume at night their normal dependent posi- 
tion; for had they all been prevented from doing so, assuredly 
every single leaf on the bush would have been utterly killed by 
this exposure of only 30 m. The leaves whilst sinking down- 
wards in the evening twist round, so that the upper surface is 
turned inwards, and is thus better protected than the outwardly 
turned lower surface. Nevertheless, it was always the upper 
surface which was more blackened than the lower, whenever 
any difference could be perceived between them ; but whether this 
was due to the cells near the upper surface being more tender, 
or merely to their containing more chlorophyll, we do not know. 
MMutus officinalis. — A large pot with many plants, which 
had been kept during the winter in the greenhouse, was exposed 
during 5 h. at night to a slight frost and clear sky. Four 
leaves had been pinned out, and these died after a few days ; 
but so did many of the free leaves. Therefore nothing certain 
could be inferred from this trial, though it indicated that the 
norizon tally extended leaves suffered most. Another large pot 
with many plants was next exposed for 1 h., the temperature on 
the surrounding grass being lower, viz., — 3° to — 4° 0. Ten 
leaves had been pinned out, and the result was striking, for 
on the following morning all these were found much iiyured or 



Oh^. vl use of sleep movements. 291 

killed, and none of the many free leaves on the several plant* 
were at all injured, with the doubtful exception of two or 
three very young ones. 

MdUoius Italica. — Six leaves were pinned out horizontally, 
three with their upper and three with their lower surfaces turned 
to the zenith. The plants were exposed for 5 h. to a clear sky, 
the temperature on ground being about — 1° 0. Next morning 
the six pinned-open leaves seem^ more injured even than the 
younger and more tender free ones on the same branches. The 
exposure, however, had been too long, for after an interval of 
some days many of the free leaves seemed in almost as bad a 
condition as the pinned-out ones. It was not possible to decide 
whether the leaves with their upper or those with their lower 
surfaces turned to the zenith had suffered most. 

Melilotus suavtolens. — Some plants with 8 leaves pinned out 
Were exposed to a clear sky during 2 h., the temperature on the 
surrounding grass being - 2° C. Next morning 6 out of these 
8 leaves were in a flaccid condition. There were about 150 free 
leaves on the plant, and none of these were injured, except 2 or 3 
very young ones. But after two days, the plants having been 
brought back into the greenhouse, the 6 pinned-out leaves all 
recovered. 

Mdiloius Taurica. — Several plants were exposed for 5 h during 
two nights to a clear sky and slight frost, accompanied by some 
wind ; and 5 leaves which had been pinned out suffered more 
than those both above and below on the same branches which 
had gone to sleep. Another pot, which had likewise been kept 
in the greenhouse, was exposed for 35-40 m. to a clear sky, 
the temperature of the surrounding grass being between — 3° and 

- 4® 0. Nine leaves had been pinned out, and all of these were 
killed. On the same plants there were 210 free leaves, which 
bad been allowed to go to sleep, and of these about 80 were 
killed, i.e. only 38 per cent. 

Melilotus PetitpitrTi ana. — The plants were exposed to a clear 
aky for 35-40 m. : temperature on surrounding grass - 3^ to 

- 4° C. Six leaves had been pinned out so as to stand about 
J inch above the cork, and four had been pinned close to it. 
These 10 leaves were all killed, but the closely pinned ones 
Buflered most, as 4 of the 6 which stood above the cork still 
retained small patches of a green colour. A considerable 
number, but not nearly all, of the free leaves, were killed or 
much injured, whereas all the pinned out ones were killed. 



292 MODIFIED CIRCUMNUTATION. Ouap YL 

Melilotus macrorrhiza, — The plants were exposed in the saina 
manner as in the last case. Six leaves had been pinned out 
horizontally, and five of them were killed, that is, 83 per cent 
We estimat-od that there were 200 free leaves on the plants, and 
of these about 50 were killed and 20 badly injured, so that aboul 
35 per cent, of the free leaves were killed or injured. 

Lotus aristata. — Six plants were exposed for nearly 5 h. tr» a 
clear sky ; temperature on surrounding grass — 1'6° C. Four 
leaves had been pinned out horizontally, and 2 of these suffered 
more than those above or below on the same branches, which 
had been allowed to go to sleep. It is rather a remarkable &ct 
that some plants of Lotus Jacohoeus, an inhabitant of so hot a 
country as the Cape Verde Islands, were exposed one night to a 
clear sky, with the temperature of the surrounding grass — 2® C, 
and on a second night for 30 m. with the temperature of 
the grass between — 3° and — 4° C, and not a single leaf, either 
the pinned-out or free ones, was in the least injured. 

Marsilea quadrifoliata. — A large plant of this species — ^the 
only Cryptogamic plant known to sleep— with some leaves pinned 
open, was exposed for 1 h. 35 m. to a clear sky, the temperature 
on the surrounding ground being — 2° C, and not a single leaf 
was injured. After an interval of some days the plant was again 
exposed for Ih. to a clear sky, with the temperature on the 
surrounding ground lower, viz., — 4° 0. Six leaves had been 
pinned out horizontally, and all of them were utterly killed. 
The plant had emitted long trailing stems, and these had been 
wrapped round with a blanket, so as to protect them from the 
frozen ground and from radiation; but a very large number 
of leaves were loft freely exposed, which had gone to sleep, 
and of these only 12 were killed. After another interval, the 
plant, with 9 leaves pinned out, was again exposed for 1 h., the 
temperature on the ground being agam — 4° C. Six of the leaves 
were killed, and one which did not at first appear injured after- 
wards became streaked with brown. The trailing branches, wh'ch 
rested on the frozen ground, had one-half or threeH^uarters of their 
leaves killed, but of the many other leaves on the plant, which 
alone could l)e fairly com])ared with the pinned-out ones, none 
appearod at first sight to have been killed, but on careful search 
VI were found in this state. After another interval, the plant 
with 9 knaves pinned out, was exiK)sed for 35-40 m. to a clear 
sky and to nearly the same, or perha])s a rather lower, tempcm* 
ture (for the thermometer by an accident had been left <» ■ 



Chap. VI. USE OP SLEEP MOVEMENTS. 293 

Bun-dial close by), and 8 of these leaves were killed. Of the free 
leaves (those on the trailing branches not being considered), a 
good many were killed, but their number, compared with the 
uninjured ones, was small. Finally, taking the three trials 
together, 24 leaves, extended horizontally, were exposed to the 
zenith and to unobstructed radiation, and of these 20 were 
killed and 1 injured ; whilst a relatively very small proportion 
of the leaves, which had been allowed to go to sleep with their 
leaflets vertically dependent, were killed or injured. 

The cotyledons of several plants were prepared for trial, but 
the weather was mild and we succeeded only in a single instance 
in having seedlings of the proper age on nights which were 
clear and cold. The cotyledons of 6 seedlings of Mimosa jmdica 
were fastened open on cork, and were thus exposed for 1 h, 45 m, 
to a clear sky, with the temperature on the surrounding ground 
at 29° F. ; of these, 3 were killed Two other seedlings, after 
their cotyledons had risen up and had closed together, were 
bent over and fastened so that they stood horizontally, with the 
lower surface of one cotyledon fully exposed to the zenith, and 
both were killed. Therefore of the 8 seedlings thus tried 5, or 
more than half, were killed. Seven other seedlings, with their 
cotyledons in their normal nocturnal position, viz., vertical and 
closed, were exposed at the same time, and of these only 2 were 
killed.* Hence it appears, as far as these few trials tell anything, 
that the vertical position at night of the cotyledons of Mimosa 
jmdica protects them to a certain degree from the evil effects of 
radiation and cold. 

Concluding Remarks on the Radiation from Leaves 
at Night. — We exposed on two occasions during the 
summer to a clear sky several pinned-open leaflets 
of Trifolium pratense, which naturally rise at night, 
and of Oxalis purpurea, which naturally sink at night 
(the plants growing out of doors), and looked at 

♦ We were surprised that It mny be added tliflt sicd'ings cl 

yo'.mg seedlings of so tropiral a the Indian Cassia pubescenn were 

plant as Mimosa pudica were ahle exposed for 1 h. 30 m. to a clear 

to resit, as well as they did, ex- sky, with the temp, on the sur- 

posiire for ] hr. 4.5 m. tu a clear rounding ground at — 2® C, and 

ijky, the tcmperHture on the sur- they were not in the least injured 
ruuuding ground being 29° F. 



^OX) 



t)ljv^ 






V*-" 






\xa^ 



tixe 



Aty. ^: .ted ^•^■ 



^\iicVi 









r- *r.. '*rvf i ^*,"^ "S. -^'^s; 



coivW* "'T, ve.««>» '"IJLe «^'*,.. d«i«! * 



i-s:^ 






ei 



t\iet ^^?^ 



rivetii 



^^ Ue ^^r uP^^-atA^ ox 
do- 



JtI 



A case* a^f ga^es »* t^6\ ^egtce. 






object 



t\ 

jse 
it. 

eave*^!*^^! ^e^ex ^ATef;^: conta«* 



ject 
>«^ IS tb^ "£tct«A tov^ ^Vt^ ^« "^^ 



as 



1ft 






\essen 



aJ^A 



^^ '' r^«s it is ^^^^!t^ close C-- Y^etVxet 



»^ 



VJe 



ictVotx 



the 



US^-r^r^s.-o^^.Tviji:.^ ^ 



its 






^ .v^re 19 *" . - =Vo«t\ ^1 _A.^ sM 



'°'Se Via-* 



att 






«*^leaft^! 



9» 






oti 



out^^ 



Chap. VT. USE OF SLEEP MOVEMENTS. 295 

exposed obliquely to the zenith, nevertheless had these 
lower surfaces less blackened than the upper surfaces 
which were turned injvards and were in close contact 
with those of the opposite leaflets. Again, a pot 
full of plants of Trifolium resupinatum, which had 
been kej^)t in a warm room for three days, was turned 
out of doors (Sept. 21st) on a clear and almost frosty 
night. Next morning ten of the terminal leaflets were 
examined as opaque objects under the microscope. 
These leaflets, in going to sleep, either turn vertically 
upwards, or more commonly bend a little over the 
lateral leaflets, so that their lower surfaces are more 
exposed to the zenith than their upper surfaces. 
Nevertheless, six of these ten leaflets were distinctly 
yellower on the upper than on the lower and more 
exposed surface. In the remaining four, the result 
was not so plain, but certainly whatever difference 
there was leaned to the side of the upper surface 
having suffered most. 

It has been stated that some of the leaflets experi- 
mented on w^ere fastened close to the cork, and others 
at a height of from | to | of an inch above it ; and 
that whenever, after exposure to a frost, any difference 
could be detected in their states, the closely pinned 
ones had suffered most. We attributed this difference 
to the air, not cooled by radiation, having been pre- 
vented from circulating freely beneath the closely 
pinned leaflets. That there was really a difference in 
the temperature of leaves treated in these two dif- 
ferent methods, was plainly shown on one occasion; 
for after the exposure of a pot with plants of MdUoius 
dentaia for 2 h. to a clear sky (the temperature on the 
surrounding grass being — 2° C), it was manifest that 
more dew had congealed into hoar-frost on the closely 
pinned leaflets, than on those which stood horizontally 

20 



296 MODIFIED CIRCUMNUTATION. Chap. TL 

a little above the cork. Again, the tips of some few 
leaflets, which had been pinned close to the cork, pjx)- 
ected a little beyond the edge, so that the air could 
circulate freely round them. This occurred with six 
leaflets of O.valis acetosella, and their tips certainly 
suffered rather less than the rest of the same leaflets ; 
for on the following morning they were still slightly 
green. The same result followed, even still more 
clearly, in two cases with leaflets of Meliloius officinalis 
which projected a little beyond the cork ; and in two 
other cases some leaflets which were pinned close to 
the cork were injured, whilst other free leaflets on 
the same leaves, which had not space to rotate and 
assume their proper vertical position, were not at all 
injured. 

Another analogous fact deserves notice : we observed 
on several occasions that a greater number of free 
leaves were injured on the branches which had been 
kept motionless by some of their leaves having been 
pinned to the corks, than on the other branches. This 
was conspicuously the case with those of Melilotus 
PetitpierreanUy but the injured leaves in this instance 
were not actually counted. With Aranhis hypogasa^ a 
young plant with 7 stems bore 22 free leaves, and of 
these 5 were injured by the frost, all of which were on 
two stems, bearing four leaves pinned to the cork- 
supports. With OxaJis carnosa, 7 free leaves were 
injured, and every one of them belonged to a cluster 
of leaves, some of which had been pinned to the cork. 
We could account for these cases only by supposing 
tliat tlic branches which were quite free bad been 
sli<^litly waved about by the wind, and that theii 
loaves had tlius been a little wanned by the sur- 
rounding wanner air. If we hold our hands motion 
less before a hot fire, and then wave them about. 



OiAP. VL SLEEP OF COTYLEDONS. £97 

immediately feel relief; and this is evidently An 
analogous, though reverse^l, case. These several facta 
— in relation to leaves pinned close to or a little above 
the cork-supports — ^to their tips projecting beyond it — 
and to the leaves on branches kept motionless — seem 
to us curious, as showing how a difference, apparently 
trifling, may determine the greater or less injury of 
the leaves. We may even infer as probable that the 
less or greater destruction during a frost of the leaves 
on a .plant which does not sleep, may often depend on 
the greater or less degree of flexibility of their petioles 
and of the branches which bear them. 

Nyctitropio or Sleep Movements op Cotyledons. 

We now come to the descriptive part of our work, 
an4 will begin with cotyledons, passing on to leaves 
in the next chapter. We have met with only two 
brief notices of cotyledons sleeping. Hofmeister,* 
after stating that the cotyledons of all the observed 
seedlings of the CaryophylleaB (Alsinete and Sileneae) 
bend upwards at night (but to what angle he does not 
state), remarks that those of Stellaria media rise up so 
as to touch one another ; they may therefore safely be 
said to sleep. Secondly, according to Ramey,t the 
cotyledons of Mimosa pudiea and of Clianthus Dam" 
piert rise up almost vertically at uight and approach 
each other closely. It has been shown in a previous 
chapter that the cotyledons of a large number of 
plants bend a little upwards at night, and we here 
have to meet the difficult question at what inclination 
may they be said to sleep? According to the view 
which we maintain, no movement deserves to be called 



• «Die Lehre von der Pflanzenzelle/ 1867, p. 327. 
t • Adansonia,* March 10th, 18G9. 



298 MODIFIED CIBCUMNUTATION. Chap. 71. 

nyctitupic, unless it has been acquired for the sake of 
lessening radiation ; but this could be discovered only 
by a long series of experiments, showing that the 
leaves of each species suffered from this cause, if pre- 
vente 1 from sleeping. We must therefore take an 
arbitrary limit. If a cotyledon or leaf is inclined at 
60° above or beneath the horizon, it exposes to the 
zenith about one-half of its area; consequently the 
intensity of its radiation will be lessened by about 
half, compared with what it would have been if the 
cotyledon or leaf had remained horizontaL This 
degree of diminution certainly would make a great 
difference to a plant having a tender constitution. 
We will therefore speak of a cotyledon and hereafter 
of a leaf as sleeping, only when it rises at night to 
an angle of about 60°, or to a still higher angle, above 
the horizon, or sinks beneath it to the same amount. 
Not but that a lesser diminution of radiation may be 
advantageous to a plant, as in the case of Datura 
stramonium, the cotyledons of which rose from 31° at 
noon to 55° at night above the horizon. The Swedish 
turnip may profit by the area of its leaves being 
reduced at night by about 30 per cent, as estimated 
by Mr. A. S. Wilson; though in this case the angle 
through which the leaves rose was not observed. On 
the other hand, when the angular rise of cotyledons or 
of leaves is small, such as less than 30°, the diminution 
of radiation is so slight that it probably is of no sig- 
nificance to tlie plant in relation to radiation. For 
instance, the cotyledons of Oeranium Iberieum rose at 
night to 27° above the horizon, and this would lessen 
radiation by only 11 per cent. : those o{ Linum Berei^r 
dieri rose to 33°, and this would lessen radiation by 
16 per cent. 
There are, however, some other sources of doubt witH 



Chap. VL SLEEP OF COTYLEDONS. 299 

respect to the sleep of cotyledons. In certain cases, 
the cotyledons whilst young diverge during the day to 
only a very moderate extent, so that a small rise at 
night, which we know occurs with the cotyledons of 
many plants, would necessarily cause, them to assume 
a vertical or nearly vertical position at night ; and in 
this case it would be rash to infer that the movement 
was effected for any special purpose. On this account 
we hesitated long whether we should introduce several 
Cucurbitaceous plants into the following list ; but from 
reasons, presently to be given, we thought that they 
had better be at least temporarily included. This 
same source of doubt applies in some few other cases ; 
for at the commencement of our observations we did 
not always attend sufficiently to whether the cotyle- 
dons stood nearly horizontally in the middle of the day. 
With several seedlings, the cotyledons assume a highly 
inclined position at night during so short a period of 
their life, that a doubt naturally arises whether this 
can be of any service to the plant. Nevertheless, in 
most of the cases given in the following list, the coty- 
ledons may be as certainly said to sleep as may the 
leaves of any plant. In two cases, namely, with the 
cabbage and radish, the cotyledons of which rise almost 
vertically during the few first nights of their life, it 
was ascertained by placing young seedlings in the 
klinostat, that the upward movement was not due to 
apogeotropism. 

The names of the plants, the cotyledons of which 
stand at night at an angle of at least 60^^ with the 
horizon, are arranged in the appended list on the same 
system as previously followed. The numbers of the 
Families, and with the Leguminosae the numbers of 
the Tribes, have been added to show how widely 
the plants in question aie distributed throughout the 



800 



MODIFIED CIBCUMNUTATION. 



Chap.VL 



dicotyledonous series. A few remarks will have to 
be made about many of the plants in the list. In 
doing so, it will be convenient not to follow strictly 
any systematic order, but to treat of the Oxalidae 
and the Leguminosse at the close; for in these 
two Families the cotyledons are generally provided 
with a pulvinus, and their movements endure for a 
much longer time than those of the other plants in 
the list. 



List of Seedling Plants, the cotyledons of which rise or sink ai 
night to an angle of at least 60° above or beneath the horizon. 



Brassica oleracea. CruciferfB (Fam. 

U). 
napus (as we are infoimed 

by Prof. Pfefler). 
Raphauus sativus. Cruciferse. 
Githago segetum. Gary ophy lies 

(Fam. 26). 
Stellaria media (according to Hof- 

meister, as quoted). Caryophyl- 

leae. 
Anoda Wrightii. Malvaceae (Fam. 

36). 
GoKsypium (var. Nankin cotton). 

Malvaceae. 
Oxalis rosea. Oxalidae (Fam. 41). 
—— floribunda. 



— articulnta. 

— Valdiviana. 
sensitiva. 



Geranium rotundifolium Gera- 

niaceae (Fam. 4-7). 
Trifolium subterrancum. I^gu- 

minosae (Fam. 75, Tribe 3) 

strictum. 

leucanthemum. 

Lotus omithopopoides. Legumi- 

nosae (Tribe 4). 

perfrg?inus. 

Jacobacus. 

Cliauthus Dampieri. Lecjumi- 

nosjL* (Tribe 5)-— according; to M. 

Uamey. 
Smithia sensitiva. Les^uminosac 

(Tribe «). 
Hfematozvlon Cami>echianuni. I^> 



guminosie (Tribe 13) — accord* 
iug to Mr. K. I. Lynch. 
Cassia mimosoides. LegnmiiuMa 
(Tribe 14). 
glanca. 

— florida. 

— corymbosa. 
>- pnbescens. 

— tora. 

— neglecta. 
~ 3 other Brazilian nnnamed 



?> 



Leguniino8» 
Leguminosa 
LeguminoMi 

Cocnrbitaee* 



species. 
Bauhinia (spw 

(Tribe 15> 
Neptunia oleracea. 

(Tribe 20). 
Mimosa pndica. 

(Tribe 21). 

albida. 

Oucurbita ovifera. 

(Fam. 106). 

anrantia. 

Lagenaria vulgaria. CucnrbitaceB. 
Cucumis dudMiro. CucurbitaceSb 
Apium petroselinnm. Umbellifer* 

(Fam. 113). 

— graveolens. 

Lact uca scariola. CJompoaitie (Faa. 

122). 
Helianthns annnot (?). Composita. 
Ipomoea ccrulea. CoBTohoiaoMi 

(Fam. 151). 

purpurea. 

— — bona-noz. 
cocci uea. 



Obap. vl sleep of cotyledons. 301 

List of Seedling Plants (continued). 



Solanum lycopersicum. Solaaeae 

(Fani. 157). 
Miinulus, (sp. ?) ScrophuIariQes 

(Fam. 159) — from information 

given us by Prof. Pfeffer. 
Mirabilis jalapa. Kyctagin^se 

(Fam. 177). 



Mirabilis longiflcra. 

Beta vulgaris. Polygoneae (Fam. 

179). 
Amaranthus caudatus. Amaraa- 

thacese(Fam. 180). 
Cannabis sativa (?). Cannabincie 

(Fam. 195). 



Brassica oleracea (CrucifewB). —It wafi shown in the first chapter 
that the cotyledons of the common cabbage rise in the evening 
and stand vertically up at night with their petioles in contact. 
But as the two cotyledons are of unequal height, they frequently 
interfere a little with each other's movements, the shorter one 
often not standing quite vertically. They awake early in the 
morning; thus at 6.45 a.m. on Nov. 27th, whilst it was still 
dark, the cotyledons, which had been vertical and in contact on 
the previous evening, were reflexed, and thus presented a very 
different appearance. It should be borne in mind that seedlings 
in germinating at the proper season, would not be subjected to 
darkness at this hour in the morning. The above amount of 
movement of the cotyledons is only temporary, lasting with plants 
kept in a warm greenhouse from four to six days ; how long it 
would last with seedlings growing out of doors we do not know. 

Raphanus sativus.—ln. the middle of the day the blades of 
the cotyledons of 10 seedlings stood at right angles to their 
hypocotyls, with their petioles a little divergent ; at night the 
blades stood vertically, with their bases in contact and with 
their petioles parallel. Next morning, at 6.45 a.m., whilst it 
was still dark, the blades were horizontal. On the following 
night they were much raised, but hardly stood sufficiently ver- 
tical to be said to be asleep, and so it was in a still less degree 
on the third night. Therefore the cotyledons of this plant (kept 
in the greenhouse) go to sleep for even a shorter time than 
those of the cabbage. Similar observations were made, but only 
during a single day and night, on 13 other seedlings likewise 
raised in the greenhouse, with the same result. 

The petioles of the cotyledons of 11 young seedlings of 
Sin ipis nigra were slightly divergent at noon, and the blades 
stood at right angles to the hypocotyls ; at night the petioles 
were in close contact, and the blades considerably raised, 
with their bases in contact, but only a few stood sufficiently 
apright to be called asleep. On the following morning, 



302 MODIFIED CIBCUMNUTATION. Chap. YL 

the petio'es diverged before it was light. The hypocotyl k 
slightly sensitive, so that if rubbed with a needle it bends 
towards the rubbed side. In the case of Lepidium sativum, the 
petioles of thti cotyledons of young seedlings diverge during 
the day and converge so as to touch each other during the 
night, by which means the bases of the tripartite blades are 
brought into contact ; but the blades are so little raised that 
they cannot be said to sleep. The cotyledons of several other 
cruciferous plants wt re observed, but they did not rise sufSciently 
during the night to be said to sleep. 

(HtJKjgo syetum (CaryophyllefiB). — On the first day after the 
cotyledons had burst through the seed-coats, they stood at noon 
at an angle of 75° above the horizon ; at night they moved 
upwards, each through an angle of 15^ so as to stand quite 
vertical and in contact with one another. On the second day 
they stoo«l at noon at 59° above the horizon, and again at 
night were completely closed, each having risen 31°. On the 
fourth day the cotyledons did not quite close at night. The 
first and succeeding pairs of young true leaves behaved in 
exactly the same manner We think that the movement in this 
case may be called nyctitropic, though the angle passed through 
was small. The cotyledons are very sensitive to light and will 
not expand if exposed to an extremely dim one. 

A nodu Wrlyli tii (Malvaceae) . — The cotyledons whilst moderately 
young, and only from 2 to '3 inch in diameter, sink in the 
evening from their mid-day horizontal position to about 35° 
beneath the horizon. But when the same seedlings were older 
and had produced small true leaves, the almost orbicalar 
cotyledons, now '55 inch in diameter, moved vertically downwards 
at night. This fact made us suspect that their sinking might 
be due merely to their weight ; but they were n jt in the least 
flaccid, and when lifbc^d up sprang back through elasticity into 
their former dependent position. A pot with some old seedlings 
was turned upside down in the afternoon, before the noc- 
turnal fall had commenced, and at night they assmned in op- 
lK)sition to their own weight (and to any geotropio action) an 
upwardly directed vertical position. When pots were thus 
reversed, after the evening fall had already commenced, the 
sinking movement appeared to be somewhat disturbed; but all 
their movements were occasionally variable without any apparent 
niuse. This latter fact, as well as that of the young cotyledons 
not sinking nearly so much as the older ones, doscnros notioa 



Chap. VL SLEEP OF COTYLEDONS. * 303 

Although the movement of the cotyledons endured for a long 
time, no pulvinus was exteriorly visible; but their growth 
eontinued for a long time. The cotyledons appear to be only 
glightly heliotropic, though the hypocotyl is strongly so. 

Go8sypium<irhoi'tum(^) (var. Nankin cotton) (Malvaceae). — The 
cotyledons behave in nearly the same manner as those of the 
Anoda. On Juno 15th the cotyledons of two seedlings were 
•65 inch in length (measured along the midrib) and stood hori- 
sontally at noon ; at 10 p.m. they occupied the same position 
and had not fallen at all. On June 23rd, the cotyledons of one 
of these seedlings were 11 inch in length, and by 10 p.m. they 
had fallen from a horizontal position to 62° beneath the horizon. 
The cotyledons of the other seedling were 1'3 inch in length, ai.d 
a minute true leaf had been formed ; they had fallen at 10 p.m. 
to 70° beneath the horizon. On June 25th, the true leaf of this 
latter seedling was *9 inch in length, and the cotyledons occu- 
pied nearly the t-ame position at night. By July 9th the cotyle- 
dons appeared very old and showed signs of withering ; but they 
stood at noon almost horizontally, and at 10 p.m. hung down 
vertically. 

Qossypiam herb iceum. — It is remarkable that the cotyledons of 

this species behave differently from those of the last. They were 

observed during 6 weeks from their first development until 

they had grown to a very large size (still appearing fresh and 

green), viz. 2^ inches in breadth. At this ago a true leaf had 

been formed, which with its petiole was 2 inches long. During 

the whole of these 6 weeks the cotyledons did not sink at night ; 

yet when old their weight was considerable and they were borne 

by much elongated petioles. Seedlings raided from some seed 

8ent us from Naples, behaved in the same manner ; as did those 

of a kind cultivated in Alabama and tf the Sea-island cotton. 

To what species these three latter forms belong we do not know. 

We could not make out in the case of the Naples cotton, that 

the position of the cotyledons at night was influenced by the 

Boil being more or less dry ; care being taken that they were 

not rendered flaccid by being too dry. The weight of the large 

cotyledons ot the Alabama and Sea-island kinds caused them to 

hang somewhat downwards, when the pots in which they grew 

were left for a time upside down. It should, however, be 

observed that these three kinds were raised in the middle of 

the winter, which sometimes greatly interferes with the prosier 

Dyctitropic movements of leaves and cotyledons. 



804 MODIFIED CIBCUMNUTATION. Gbap. VL 

Ciicurhitacece, — The cotyledons of Cucurbita aurantia and ovi- 
fera, and of Lage^mria vulgaris, stand from the Ist to the 3rd da^ 
of their life at about 60° above the horizon, and at night rise up 
so as to become vertical and in close contact with one another. 
With Cucumis dudaim they stood at noon at 45° above the hori- 
zon, and closed at night. The tips of the cotyledons of all these 
species are, however, reflexed, so that this part is fully exposed 
to the zenith at night ; and this fact is opposed to the belief 
that the movement is of the same nature as that of deeping 
plants. After the first two or three days the cotyledons 
diverge more during the day and cease to close at night. 
Those of Trichosanthes anfjuina are somewhat thick and fleshy, 
and did not rise at night ; and they could perhaps hardly be 
expected to do so. On the other hand, those of Acahihosicyog 
ho7'rida * present nothing in their appearance opposed to their 
moving at night in the same manner as the preceding species ; 
yet they did not rise up in any plain manner. This fact leads 
to the belief that the nocturnal movements of the above-named 
species has been iicquired for some special purpose, which may 
be to protect the young plimiule from radiation, by the close 
contact of the whole basal jwrtion of the two cotyledons. 

Giranium rotundi/oUum (Geraniace?v).T— A single seedling came 
up accidentally in a pot, and its cotyledons were observed to 
bend peripendicularly downwards during several successive 
nights, having been horizontal at noon. It grew into a fine 
plant but died Ix^forc flowering : it was sent to Eew and pro- 
nounced to bo certainly a Geranium, and in all probability the 
al)ove-named species. This case is remarkable because the 
cotyledons of G. clnereum^ Endressii, Ihericum, Richard&oni, and 
siibaml seem were observed during some weeks in the winter, 
and they did not sink, whilst those of G, Jb ricum rose 27° at 
night. 

Af'ium petroselinum (Umbellifene).— A seedling had its coty- 
ledons (Nov. 22nd) ahuost fully ex|xinded during the day ; by 
8.30 P.M. they had risen considerably, and at 10.30 P.if. wcm 
almost closed, their tips being only -^ of an inch apart. On 
the following morning (23rd) the tips were -^ of an inch apart, 



* Thip plant, from Dammara climber; it has boon described 

Ljiml ill S. Afrio.ii, ia rcmukalile in 'Tranauct lino. Boe.,* ixvii 

from Ixin*; t. c onn known mini- p. 30. 
bc-r of ti.c Fumily wliiob ib not a 



Chap. VL SLEEP OF COTYLEDONS. 806 

or more than seven times as much. On the next night the 
eotyledons occupied nearly the same position as before. On the 
morning of the 24:th they stood horizontally, and at night were 
60^ above the horizon ; and so it was on the night of the 25th. 
Bat four days afterwards (on the 29th), when the seedlings 
were a week old, the cotyledons had ceased to rise at night to 
any plain degree. 

Apium graveolens — The cotyledons at noon were horizontal, 
and at 10 p.m. stood at an angle of 61^ above the hori/.on. 

Lactuat scariola (CompositsB). — The cotyledons whilst young 
stood sub-horizontally during the day, and at night rose so as 
to be almost vei tical, and some were quite vertical and closed ; 
but this movement ceased when they had grown old and large, 
after an interval of 11 days. 

Heliaathus annuus (CompositsB). — This case is rather doubtful ; 
the cotyledons rise at night, and on one occasion they stood at 
73° above the horizon, so that they might then be said to have 
been asleep. 

Jpomoea ccerulea vel Pharhitis nil (ConvolvulaceaB).— The coty- 
ledons behave in nearly the same manner as those of the Ano la 
and Nankin cotton, and like them grow to a large size. Whilst 
young and small, so that their blades were from 5 to '6 of an 
inch in length, measured along the middle to the base of the 
oenti*al notch, they remained horizontal both during the middle 
of the day and at night. As they increased in size they began 
to sink more and more in the evening and early night; and 
when they had grown to a length (measured in the above 
manner) of from J to 1*25 inch, they sank between 55° and 70® 
beneath the horizon. They acted, however, in this manner only 
when they had been well illuminated during the day. Never- 
theless, the cotyledons have little or no power of bending 
towards a lateral light although the hypocotyl is strongly helio- 
tropic. They are not provided with a pulvinus, but continue 
to grow for a long time. 

Jj'omua j'urj>ure(i (vel Pharhitis hispida). — The cotyledons 
behave in all respects like those of /. ccerulea» A seedling with 
cotyledons '75 inch in length (measured as before) and 1*65 
inch in breadth, having a small true leaf developed, was placed 
at 5.30 P.M. on a klinostat in a darkened box, so that neither 
weight nor geotropism could act on them. At 10 p.m. one coty- 
ledon stood at 77° and the other at 82° beneath the horizon. 
Before being placed in the klinostat they stood at 15° and 29^ 



306 MODIFIED CIROUMNUTATION. Chap. VL 

beneath the horizon. The nocturnal position depends chiefly 
on the curvature of the petiole close to the blade, but the whok 
petiole becomes slightly curved downwards. It deserves notice 
that seedlings of this and the last-named species were raised at 
the end of February and another lot in the middle of March, 
and the cotyledons in neither case exhibited any nyctitropio 
movement. 

Ipora'ia hona-nox, — The cotyledons after a few days grow to 
an enormous size, those on a young seedling being 3i inches 
in breadth. They were extended horizontally at noon, and at 
10 P.M. stood at 63° beneath the horizon. Five days after- 
wards they were 4i inches in breadth, and at night one stood at 
64° and the other 48° beneath the horizon. Though the blades 
are thin, yet from their great size and from the petioles being 
long, we imagined that their depression at night might be 
determined by their weight ; but when the pot was laid hori- 
zontally, they became curved towards the hypocotyl, which 
movement could not have been in the least aided by their 
weight, at the same time they were somewhat twisted upwards 
through apogeotropism. Nevertheless, the weight of the coty- 
ledons is so far influential, that when on another night the pot 
was turned upside down, they were unable to rise and thus to 
assume their proper nocturnal position. 

Jpomia coccinea. — The cotyledons whilst young do not sink 
at night, but when grown a little older, but still only '4 inch in 
length (measured as before) and -82 in breadth, they became 
greatly depressed. In one case they were horizontal at noon, 
and at 10 p m. one of them stood at 64° and the other at 47° 
beneath the horizon. The blades are thin, and the petioles, 
which become much curved down at night, are short, so that 
here weight can hardly have produced any effect. With all the 
al)ovo spe<ics of Ipomoea, when the two cotyledons on the same 
seedling were unequally depressed at night, this seemed to 
deixind on the position which they had held during the day 
witli reference to the light. 

Sola h urn ti/copcrsiciim (Solanesa). — The cotyledons rise so 
mucli at night as to come nearly in contact. Those of S. pa^ina- 
canthum were horizontal at noon, and by 10 p.M- had risen only 
27° 30' ; but on the following morning before it was light th^ 
stood at 59° above tlie horizon, and in the afternoon of the Sftme 
diiy were again horizontal. The behaviour of the ootyleduns Of 
this latter species seems, therefore, to be anomalous. 



Chap. VL SLEEP OF COTYLEDONa 807 

MirahUis jalapa and longiflora (NyctaginesB).— The cotyledons, 
which are of unequal size, stand horizontally during the middle 
of the day, and at night rise up vertically and come into close 
contact with one another. But this movement with M, longiflcra 
lasted for only the three first nights. 

Beta vulgaris (Polygoneae). — ^A large number of seedlings were 
observed on three occasions. During the day the cotyledons 
sometimes stood sub-horizontally, but more commonly at an 
angle of about 60° above the horizon, and for the first two or 
three nights they rose up vertically so as to be completely 
closed. During the succeeding one or two nights they rose 
only a little, and afterwards hardly at all. 

Amaranthus cawJatus (Amaranthacess). — ^At noon the coty- 
ledons of many seedlings, which had just germinated, stood at 
about 45° above the horizon, and at 10.15 p.m. some were nearly 
and others quite closed. On the following morning they were 
again well expanded or open. 

Oanndbis sativa (Cannabinesa).— ^We are very doubtful whether 
this plant ought to be here included. The cotyledons of a large 
number of seedlings, after being well illuminated during the 
day, were curved downwards at night, so that the tips of some 
pointed directly to the ground, but the basal part did not appear 
to be at all depressed. On the following morning they were 
again flat and horizontal. The cotyledons of many other seed- 
lings were at the same time not in any way affected. Therefore 
this case seems very different from that of ordinary sleep, and 
probably comes under the head of epinasty, as is the case with 
the leaves of this plant according to ELraus. The cotyledons are 
heliotropic, and so is the hypocotyl in a still stronger d^ree. 

Oxalis. — We now come to cotyledons provided with a pulvinus, 
all of which are remarkable from the continuance of the nocturnal 
movements during several days or even weeks, and apparently 
after growth has ceased. The cotyledons of 0, rosea, flo/ibunda 
and urficidata sink vertically down at night and clasp the upper 
part of the hypocotyl. Those of 0, VaJdiinnna and a nsitiva, on 
the contrary, rise vertically up, so that their upper surfaces come 
into close contact ; aud after the young leaves are developed these 
are clasped by the cotyledons. As in the daytime they stand hori- 
zontally, or are even a little deflected beneath the horizon, they 
move in the evening through an angle of at least 90°. Theix 
implicated circumnutating movements during the day havf 



808 MODIFIED CIBOUMNUTATION. Chaf. VI 

been described in the first chapter. The experiment was a 
superfluous Dne, but pots with seedlings of 0. rosea and flonhuntim 
were turned upside down, as soon as the cotyledons began to 
show any signs of sleep, and this made no difference in their 
movements. 

leguminosce. — It may be seen in our list that the cotyledons 
of several species in nine genera, widely distributed through- 
out the Family, sleep at night ; and this probably is the case 
with many others. The cotyledons of all these species are pro- 
voided with a pulvinus ; and the movement in all is continued 
iuring many days or weeks. In Cassia the cotyledons of tlie 
ten species in the list rise up vertically at night and come 
into close contact with one another. We observed that those 
of 0. florida opened in the morning rather later than those of 
C. glauca and puhescens. The movement is exactly the same 
in (\ mimosoi'lts as in the other species, though its subsequently 
developed leaves sleep in a different manner. The cotyledons 
of an eleventh species, namely, C. nodom^ are thick and fleshy, 
and do not rise up at night. The circmnnutation of the coty- 
ledons during the day of C. tora has been described in the first 
chapter. Although the cotyledons of Smithia srnsitica rose from 
a horizontal position in the middle of the day to a vertical one 
at night, those of S. P/uhdli, which are thick and fleshy, did not 
sleep. When Mijn- sa pudlra and albida have been kept at a 
sufficiently high temperature during the day, the cotyledons 
come into close contact at night ; otherwise they merely rise up 
almost vertically. The circumnutation of those of M. jmdira 
has been described. The cotyledons of a Bauhinia from St 
Catharina in Brazil stood during the day at an angle of about 
5'^° above the horizon, and at night rose to 77°; but it is pro- 
bable that they would have closed completely, if the seedlings 
had been kept in a warmer place. 

Jjotus. — In three species of Lotus the cotyledons were observed 
to sleep. Those of L. Jacohceus present the singular case of not 
rising at night in any conspicuous manner for the first 5 or 
6 days of their life, and the pulvinus is not well developed at 
this period. Afterwards the sleeping movement is well dis- 
played, though to a variable degree, and is long continued. 
We shall hereafter meet with a nearly parallel case with the 
leaves of Sida rhombi/oHu, The cotyledons of L. (iebelii are 
only slightly raised at night, and differ much in this respec* 
frum the three sjKKiies in our list. 



Chap VL SLEEP OF COTYLEDONS. 309 

Triftdium, — The germination of 21 species was observed. In 
most of them the cotyledons rise hardly at all, or only slightly, 
at night ; but those of T. (jlomeratumy striatum and incai natum 
rose from 45° to 55° above the horizon. With T, subterraneum, 
Uucanthemum and strictum, they stood up vertically ; and with 
T, strictum the risin^j, movement is accompanied, as we stall see, 
by another movement, which makes us believe that the rising 
is truly nyctitropic. We did not carefully examine the coty- 
ledons of all the species for a pulvinus, but this organ was 
distinctly present in those of T. subterrmeum and strldum ; whilst 
there was no trace of a pulvinus in some species, for instance, in 
T, resu/nnatum, the cotyledons of which do not rise at night. 

Trifolium subterraneum. — The blades of the cotyledons on the 
first day after germination (Nov. 21st) were not fully expanded, 
being inclined at about 35° above the horizon ; at night they 
rose to about 75°. Two days afterwards the blades at noon 
were horizontal, ^vith the petioles highly inclined upwards; 
and it is remarkable that the nocturnal movement is almost 
wholly confined to the blades, being effected by the pulvinus at 
their bases; whilst the petioles retain day and night nearly the 
Bame inclination. On this night (Nov. 23rd), and for some few 
mcceoding nights, the blades rose from a horizontal into a 
vertical position, and then became bowed inwards at about an 
average angle of 10° ; so that they had passed through an angle 
of 100°. Their tips now almost touched one another, their 
bases being slightly divergent. The two blades thus formed 
a highly inclined roof over the axis of the seedling. This 
movement is the same as that of the terminal leaflet of the 
tripartite leaves of many species of Trifolium. After an interval 
of 8 days (Nov. 29th)- the blades were horizontal during the 
day, and vei-tical at night, and now they were no longer bowed 
inwards. They continued to move in the same manner for the 
following two months, by which time they had increased greatly 
in size, their petioles being no less than '8 of an inch in length, 
and two true leaves had by this time been developed. 

Trif' Hum strictum. — On the first day after germination the 
cotyledons, which are provided with a pulvinus, stood at noon 
horizontally, and at night rose to only about 45° above the 
horizon. Four days afterwards the seedlings were again ob- 
served at night, and now the blades stood vertically and were 
is contact, excepting the tips, which were much deflexed, so 
that they faced the zenith. At this age the petioles are curved 



310 MODIFIED CIRCUMNUTATION. Chap. VL 

upwards, and at night, when the bases of the blades are in can- 
tact, the two petioles together form a vertical ring surrounding 
the plumule. The cotyledons continued to act iu nearly the same 
manner for 8 or 10 days from the period of germination; but 
the petioles had by this time become straight and had increased 
much in length. After from 12 to 14 days the first simple true 
leaf was formed, and during the ensuing fortnight a remarkable 
movement was repeatedly observed. At I. (Fig. 125) we have 
a sketch, made in the middle of the day, of a seedling about 
a fortnight old. The two cotyledons, of which Be is the 
light, and Lc the left one, stand directly opposite one another. 

Fig. 125. 
Re 



^ 





I. II. IIL 



Trifolium strictum : diurnal and nocturnal positions of the two cotjledosi 
and of the first leaf. I. Seedling viewed obliquely from aboTe, durinic 
the day: Ec^ right cotyledon; Lc^ left cotyledon; F, first trae l«if. 
II. A rather younger secdliug, viewed at night: Sc^ right cotyledon 
raised, but its position not otherwise changed ; LCf lefl cotyledon mi<ed 
and laterally twisted ; F, first leaf raised and twisted so as to (kob the 
left twisted cotyledon. III. Same seedling viewed at night from tht 
opposite side. The back of the first leaf, F, is here shown instead of 
the front, as in II. 

and the first true leaf (F) projects at right angles to them. At 
night (see 11. and III.) the right cotyledon (Re) is greatly 
raised, but is not otherwise changed in position. The left 
cotyledon (Lc) is likewise raised, but it is also twisted, so that 
its blade, instead of exactly facing the opposite one, now standi 
at nearly right angles to it This nocturnal twisting movement 
is effected not by means of the pulvinus, but by the twisting of 
the whole length of the petiole, as could be seen by the curved 
line of its upper concave surface. At the same time the true 
leaf (F) rises up, fo as to stand vertically, or it even passes the 
vertical and is inclined a little inward& It also twists a little^ 
by which means the upper surface of its blade fronts, and 
almost comes into contact with, the upper surface of the twHted 



Ohaf. vl sleep of cotyledons. 311 

ieft cotyledon. This seems to be -the object gained by these 
Bingnlar movements. Altogether 20 seedlings were examined on 
successive nights, and in 19 of them it was the loft cotyledon 
alone which became twisted, with the true leaf always so twi