:i-..;-i^ 'mini 11 ; 



,y,p-NRLF 



*4 jilioM>ilMM 
"J iiii).*^'4~" 






*B 511 ma 




St<^^KSSSHI 




OF INDIA 



REVISED EDITION 



F. OE LA FOSSE MA 




|lglil#<)MMiHW 



mmmmmmmmmmmm 



f mM 9 iiiirif >' >mm > f $ mmmmmii^ 






HISTORY OF INDIA. 




MACMILLAN AND CO., Limited 

LONDON BOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS 
MELBOURNE 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY * 

NEW YORK BOSTON CHICAGO 
DALLAS SAN FRANCISCO 

THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, Ltdw 

TORONTO 



HISTORY OF INDIA 



BY 

C. F. DE LA FOSSE, M.A., Oxon. 



INDIAN EDUCATION SERVICE 



REPRISED EDITION 



MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED 
ST. iMARTIN'S STREET LONDON 

1918 




COPYRIQUT. 

First Edition 1902. - 
Reprinted March and July ly03 ; Feb., July, and Nov. 1904, 1905. 
Revised Edition, 1910, 1913, 1914, 1917 1918. 



* *> ^ '^ *, m 
^ * * * 






OLASfiOSV: PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
BY ROBERT MACLEHOSK AND CO. LTD. 



PREFACE. 

The continued demand for this small history has en- 
couraged the writer to undertake a complete revision of 
the work. In the present edition the major portion of 
the Hindu Period has been rewritten and the other periods 
carefully revised and brought up to date. But the lines 
upon which the book was originally designed have been 
scrupulously adhered to. It deals with events only which, 
are deemed to merit consideration in a general survey of 
the history of the country, and it remains, as far as it is 
possible to make it, a connected and consecutive account 
from the earliest times down to the present day. 

C. F. DE LA FOSSE. 

Oct 1909. 



419926 



CONTENTS. 



INTRODUCTION. 

BOOK I. 
THE HINDU PERIOD. 

CHAPTER PAGE 

I. The Vedic Age . . . . . , o 1 

a e c I t/ 

, , - 20 
26 

77 



11. Tks Age of the Brahmanas 

III. The Sutra I^eriod 

lY. The Buddhist Age 

V. Southern India . 



BOOK II. 
THE MUHAMMEDAN PERIOD, 

I. Afghan Rule , . 85 

II. Moghul Supremacy ....,<,, 121 

III. Decline of the Moghul Empire . , e , 170 

BOOK HI 
THE BRITISH PERIOD. 

I. Foundation of British Rule in India . , c 182 

II. The Governor-Generals of British India . . 213 

III. India under the Crown 300 

Index .......... 323 

Map India IN 1913 At end of Book. 



INTRODUCTION. 



The history of a country is largely influenced by its 
climate and physical features. India is no exception to this 
rule, and perhaps it would not be going too far to assert 
that the history of no country has been more profoundly 
affected thereby. Because of its fertility and its wealth in 
precious minerals and spices, it has from time immemorial 
tempted invasion ; while its very position, lying as it does 
to the south of the comparatively barren Central- Asian 
steppes, the breeding ground of hardy races of men, has 
laid it open to constant attack from the north. Although 
from east to west along its entire northern boundary there 
stretch the Himalayas, the most stupendous mountain range 
in the world, wave after wave of invasion has broken 
through the barrier and flooded the plains below. Long 
before the dawn of history streams of immigrants poured 
down the mountain passes, and from the earliest times of 
which anything is known the tale of invasion has been 
almost continuous. 

Towards the north-east the Himalayas gradually decline 
into hills that present no insurmountable obstacle to invaders, 
and from this side there must have been in early times a 
constant flow of immigration. The Turanians, as the 
early immigrants from the east are called, were a people 
akin to the Chinese. In course of time they penetrated far 
into the country ; for the peoples now dwelling in Eastern 
Bengal and Assam, and even for some distance down the 
coast of the Bay of Bengal, betray in their features distinct 
traces of Turanian origin. Bat beyond the fact that at 
some time Turanian people settled in India in large num- 
bers nothing whatever is known of their history. 



X INTRODUCTION. 

Bat while through the north-east barrier there was for 
many centuries in the long distant past a steadily flowing 
stream of immigration, history has recorded on the north- 
west frontier, particularly through the passes to the west 
of the Indus river, frequent and wide-spreading inundations. 
India has, indeed, been so continuously invaded from this 
side that at the present day among the three hundred 
millions that inhabit the peninsula there are literally 
hundreds of divisions of its people. It may with truth be 
said that, while innumerable races are represented, the 
intermingling has been so great that it has produced no 
predominant nationality throughout the whole. 

The tangle of races in the northern half is, as we might 
reasonably expect, far greater than in the southern, since it 
is from the north that invaders have almost always come. 
But tl;iere is another reason why the south has been less 
frequently overrun than the north. Within the peninsula 
itself there is a second mountain barrier, far lower than the 
first it is true, but still presenting a formidable obstacle to 
invaders. Though the Yindhya Range contains no lofty 
peaks it consists of a wide and pathless waste of rocks and 
jungle. So forbidding did its forests once appear that for 
long ages they served to check the progress of invasions, 
turning their waves eastward till, their force being spent, 
they subsided in the Gangetic plain. Therefore, while 
Hindustan, the country to the north of the Yindhyas has 
been from age to age the battle-ground of nations, the. 
Deccan, the country to the south, has enjoyed long spells of 
isolation. The sea too, which in modern times has rendered 
the Deccan so accessible to maritime nations, was a complete 
protection from attack on its other two sides by bands of 
primitive invaders. In consequence the peoples of the south, 
known collectively as Dravidians, from Dravida the old 
name of the Tamil country, retain' generally to this day 
certain well-marked characteristics. They are, as a rule, 
shorter and darker than those of the north, and the langup.ges 
which they speak are allied to one another and quite distinct 
from those spoken in Hindustan. Yery little is known of 
their early civilization, but it is certain that many of them 
had emerged from a state of barbarism long before they 
made their appearance in history. 



INTRODUCTION. xi 

Philologists distinguish between the Dravidians and still 
older races of men living in various parts of the Deccan, 
such as the Santals, the Gadavas and the Juangs. These 
primeval peoples speak tongues belonging to a great family 
of languages, known as Munda, a form of speech which, it is 
believed, was once used not only all over India proper, but 
over Further- India, the Malay Archipelago and Australia 
as well. They are black and stunted and some of them are 
among the lowest types of humanity. But it would not be 
safe to assume that the most degraded have always been as 
savage and debased as they are now. It is probable that 
some are remnants of peoples who had to retreat to the 
iuno-le to save themselves from extermination at the hands 

JO 

of stronger races, and it should not be forgotten that they 
have been for thousands of years outcasts and despised, 
maintaining a constant struggle for a bare subsistence. The 
ceaseless hardships of their existence may therefore be 
largely responsible for bringing them to their present pitch 
of degradation. But the distinction between Munda and 
Dravidian is, in the case of several of these early peoples, 
less marked than in others, and some appear to be blended 
of both races. All that we can at anyrate confidently 
assert is that throughout India there are two distinct types, 
one tall and fair and the other short and dark, and that the 
latter is the prevailing type in the Deccan. We may there- 
fore safely infer that the short dark peoples represent the 
earlier inhabitants and that the fair skinned races, of whom 
the vast majority are to be found in Hindustan, are descen- 
dants of later invaders. 



'' ,0 " B J i> '1 



00-^ I. THE HINDU PERIOD. 
CHAPTER I. 

THE VEDIC AGE. 

Absence of early historical records. There is 
no history of India, in the strict sense of the term, prior 
to the Muhammedan conquest. Its earliest inhabitants, 
knowii by the common name of non- Aryans to distinguish 
them from later immigrants called Aryans, were too little 
civilized in any part of the country to be able to record 
their history, and the Hindus, the peoples sprung from the 
union of the Aryan with non-Aryan races, seem never to 
have cared at all for posthumous fame. But from the 
sacred literature of the Hindus, portions of which relate to 
a time not later than 2000 years before the birth of 
Christ, can be pieced together a more connected story of 
human progress than has yet been compiled from the 
records of any other ancient nation. From it can be con- 
structed a wonderfully complete account of the gradual 
progress of their civilization and the development of their 
religion ; and from it something at the same time may 
be learnt of the evolution of society in early times. No 
stor}'- is more interesting, or from a historical point of 
view more important, than that which can be gathered 
from their ancient records. 

Aryan migration. The materials for the earliest 
accounts are supplied by the hymns of the Eig Yeda. 
This is the oldest work of the Hindus, and some of the 
hymns to the gods which it contains date back to a time 
not less than four thousand years ago. From it we learn 

H.I. U.S. A < 



f. c* 



2 .HlSTOjRY OF mpiA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

that the Aryan ancestor^ of the Hindus came as a con- 
quering race from the north down into India ; and by- 
comparing the language of the hymns with other languages, 
both ancient and modern, it has been proved beyond a 
doubt, that the men who composed those hymns belonged 
to a branch of a great race which conquered, and then 
combined with, the primitive peoples of Europe and 
Western Asia, forming in the course of time many distinct 
nationalities. The Aryan race may broadly speaking be 
divided into two branches, the European, from which 
sprang the Celts, Teutons, Slavs, Latins, and Greeks, and 
the Asiatic, represented by the Iranians or Persians, and 
the Indo-Aryans or Hindus. The Asiatic branch seems to 
have remained united longer than the European branch, so 
that the Indo- Aryan was the last offshoot to seek a new home. 
Aryan civilization. The immigration of the Aryans 
into India must have commenced about fifteen hundred 
years before the birth of Christ. Yet even in that 
early time the Aryans had made some consideral)le 
advance in civilization. They had already settled to 
peaceful pursuits, and while some families cultivated 
the land and practised agriculture, others wandered 
about with their flocks and herds to difl'erent pasture 
lands, leading what is called a nomad life. Not only 
had they domesticated cattle, sheep, goats, and dogs, 
but horses had also been subjugated to their use. But of 
all the animals which they kept, the cow was the 
one to which they attached most importance and of which 
every house-holder desired to possess a herd. Though the 
Aryan immigrants did not, like their Hindu descendants, 
regard it with peculiar reverence as a sacred animal, the 
cow played so important a part in their daily lives that it 
may be said to have been, even then, the characteristic 
animal of the race. But the Aryans were not a merely 
pastoral people, for they had made some progress in in- 
dustry, could weave and spin, build houses, and make boats 
and chariots. Gold and silver were not unknown to them, 
and in their wars they made use of swords and spears as 
well as bows and arrows. Their system of Government was 
patriarchal, that is, the family and not the tribe was the 
unit of society ; though they had learnt to unite for 



4 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

purposes of mutual protection under chiefs and leaders 
distinguished for prowess in battle. The father as the 
head of the family was its ruler and its priest combined. 
Their religion consisted in the worship of what was awe- 
inspiring, or what struck them as specially beautiful or 
beneficial in nature. They prayed to the sun and the 
clouds, fire and thunder, the dawn and the bright sky ; not 
looking upon them as objects of terror in which lurked 
malignant powers, but as instinct with bright and friendly 
spirits, worthy to receive their hymns of praise and ready 
to listen to their prayers for help and protection. 

The Rig Veda. Such were the Aryans during the 
time when they were working their way southward into 
India. At the time of which we speak the Rig Veda, which 
is our only source of information concerning them, had not 
yet been compiled, though certain of its earlier hymns were 
already in existence. The others from time to time were 
being composed during a period which lasted, roughly 
speaking, from 2000 B.C. to 1400 B.C. After the close 
of this period, known as the Vedic Period, the hymns 
were collected together, arranged, and compiled ; but as 
writing was as yet unknown, the whole had to be com- 
mitted to memory. At first they were handed down in 
the fajnilies of their composers orally from father to 
son, but as time went on a special class of priests arose 
whose duty it was to learn and recite the sacred texts. 
It is difficult, indeed impossible, to attempt now to 
arrange the hymns in their chronological order ; but still 
we are able to get from them a good deal of historical 
information regarding the changing manners and customs 
of the Aryans, and their struggles with the aboriginal 
inhabitants of Northern India for the possession of the 
land. 

The Rig Veda is divided by its compilers into ten 
Mandalas or books, and, with the exception of the first and 
the last two, these are each ascribed to different BisJiis, or 
sacred composers. The last book must have been com- 
posed considerably later than the others, for it difi*ers from 
them in certain important particulars : the ideas are less 
primitive, it reflects a more advanced stage of society, and 
deals with a more complicated ritual. It is necessary to 



THE VEDIC AGE. 5 

bear this in mind, otherwise it may give us wrong impres- 
sions of Vedic society and of the thoughts and feelings of 
the early Aryan conquerors of Upper India. 

Struggle with non- Aryans. We can gather a toler- 
ably clear idea of what was the state of North -Western 
India at the time of the Aryan invasion from the allusions 
in the hymns of the Eig Yeda to the native races with 
whom the Aryans came in contact. They found the country 
peopled by a dark-skinned race, in varying stages of 
civilization, who worshipped demons or evil spirits. The 
first bands of Aryans regarded them all with the liveliest 
abhorrence. Their colour, their shortness of stature, their 
flat noses, their gloomy and sometimes frightful supersti- 
tions, and their strange habits, excited the utmost repug- 
nance in the fair-skinned invaders. They looked upon 
them without distinction as unclean wretches whom it 
was a virtue to exterminate. 

At first when the invaders were few their advance must 
have been slow, and the resistance they met with stubborn. 
Even when they had firmly established themselves across 
the Indus, and had cleared tracts of country and settled 
down to the peaceful pursuits of husbandry, the aborigines 
hung about in the dense jungle on the outskirts of their 
colonies, and harassed the Aryan settlers. But the dark 
inhabitants of the land, however brave and cunning, could 
not effectually stay the march of the stronger and more 
hardy race, and they had to fall back or be exterminated. 
Gradually the Aryans extended their colonies over the 
Punjab, from the banks of the Indus to the Saraswati, a 
river that has now dried up, but which then flowed along 
the eastern boundary of the Punjab and through the deserts 
of Eajputana. 

As time wore on, and the fear of reprisals on the part of 
the aborigines whom they had dispossessed diminished, the 
Aryans began to look more tolerantly upon them. Not all 
the tribes with whom they came in contact were equally 
uncivilized, for in the Rig Yeda there are references to non- 
Aryan chiefs who possessed forts and castles. In point of 
civilization some of the peoples whom they conquered were 
probably even superior to the Aryans. For such as these 
the feeling of repugnance would not be quite so strong ; and, 



6 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

later, in the quarrels between Aryan tribes over coveted 
strips of territory, aboriginal chiefs are mentioned as lend- 
ing their powerful aid to one side or the other. 

Colonization. ^The Vedic period was a time of con- 
tinuous struggle. It was necessary that every man should 
be a warrior as well as a husbandman. Not only did the 
Aryans have to guard their villages, their cultivated 
fields and their cattle from the attacks of bands of maraud- 
ing aborigines, but, as they grew more numerous, they 
fought among themselves, and tribe disputed with tribe 
for the possession of coveted strips of country. Kingdoms 
at length sprang into existence, and chiefs ruled over 
territories which they had conquered from their neighbours 
and added to their own tribal settlements. 

Centuries must have passed while the Aryans were 
bringing the whole of the Punjab under their power and 
influence. Fresh streams of immigrants from time to time 
must have flowed from Afghanistan down the passes into 
India, merging with the early settlers or passing on to new 
tracts of country. Bands worked their way down the Indus, 
colonizing Sindh and Guzerat, and turning north-eastward 
found their way into Malwa. Others again settled in 
Kashmir, of whom some thence marched along the foot of 
the Himalayas into the United Provinces and beyond into 
Behar. Before the end of the period dealt with by the 
hymns of the Rig Veda the banks of the Jumna and the 
Ganges had been reached by exploring bands of Aryans. 
Here they found a still more fertile country awaiting 
conquest, and the tide of civilization ^ therefore swept 
eastward. 

Occupations. Before their coming into India we have 
seen that some of the Aryan families had already begun to 
practise agriculture. The fertility of the Indian soil must 
have given a new stimulus to cultivation ; and in the Eig 
Veda we find that agriculture became the main occupation 
of the people, though they still kept large herds of cattle 
and drove them out to pasture. Wheat and barley were 
the chief articles of their diet, but they did not disdain the 
use of animal food, and there are frequent allusions in the 
hymns to the killing of cattle and to the cooking of their 
fiesh for human consumption. They even made use of an 



THE VEDIC AGE. 7 

intoxicant, indulging freely in a fermented liquor made 
from the juice of a plant called Soma. In one of the 
hymns the process of preparing the juice is described as 
a sacred rite : more than this, Soma was even deified, and 
one whole book of the Rig Veda is dedicated to it. Their 
constant wars with the aborigines and with each other 
naturally turned their attention to the improvement of 
weapons and the construction of shields and protective 
armour. They were thus led to acquiring considerable 
skill in metal work ; and w^e hear of their putting it to 
other than warlike uses, for mention is made of metal 
ornaments, of golden crowns, necklaces, bracelets, and 
anklets. . 

Absence of caste, and freedom of women. / 
While the Aryans were colonizing the Punjab, there are 
two points concerning their social life of which it is 
specially important to take note : the one is the absence 
of caste distinctions, and the other is the social condition 
of women. There is no mention of such a system as caste 
in the Rig Veda, except in the tenth book, which, as has 
already been pointed out, was composed in a later age. 
Nor is there even a trace of the existence of hereditary 
divisions of the community corresponding in any way to it. 
There were indeed men and families famous for their skill 
in the composition of hymns, but the Rishis, as they w^ere 
called, had no special privileges. Every man from the 
highest to the lowest was a warrior and a husbandman. 
There is therefore both negative and positive evidence that 
caste restrictions did not then exist. The very word 
^ varna,' which came to denote caste, meant only colour at 
first, and was employed to distinguish the fair Aryan from 
the dark-skined aborigines. Regarding the position of 
women, what better evidence could there be of the freedom 
and respect they enjoyed, than that some of the sacred hymns 
of the Rig Veda were composed by them, and that they 
were considered worthy to take part with their husbands 
in the performance of the domestic sacrificial rites, to sing 
the holy hymns and tend the sacred fire kept burning on 
the hearth \ Women had not yet been reduced to a position 
of complete subjection to the male members of their family, 
cut off from all intercourse with the outside world and 



8 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

deprived of liberty ; for there is ample evidence in the 
hymns that the ' purdah ' system did not then exist. 

Religion. We have already seen that the Aryans at 
the time of their first coming into India worshipped the 
powers of nature. It will be necessary now to say a few 
words concerning the gradual progress of religious thought 
during the Vedic age. As time went on, there is no doubt 
that among the foremost thinkers of the race the belief 
was gradually gaining ground that all these phenomena of 
nature, which they worshipped separately, were after all 
but manifestations of the power of One Being, who had 
created all things and was sustaining all things. This 
lofty conception, however vaguely entertained, marks a 
great advance in the history of human progress. Those 
upon whom it had begun to dawn were on the threshold of 
great discoveries in the realms of thought, and accordingly 
we find that even in that early time the Aryans had begun 
to speculate profoundly concerning the mysteries of creation 
and of life and death. A change was coming over the race, 
and the more thoughtful among them, confined probably to 
a few families, eminent for their knowledge of religion and 
their proficiency in the performance of its rites, were form- 
ing themselves into a class apart from the community. In 
brief, a priestly aristocracy, reverenced for its purity and 
intellectual superiority, was gradually springing up in 
different localities. 

Compilation of three more Vedas. The Aryans 
were from the first a deeply religious people, setting great 
store by the due performance of rites and ceremonies, and 
as tl^eir civilization developed their religion also grew more 
complicated, and the ritual connected with it more exacting 
and intricate. This led in course of time to t^e compilation 
of three more Vedas, for special religious purposes ; the 
Sama Veda, containing a selection of hymns, the majority 
of which are to be found also in the Kig Yeda, intended 
to be chanted by priests on particular occasions ; the 
Yajur Yeda, containing formulas to accompany sacrificial 
ceremonials ; and the Atharva Yeda, containing magic 
incantations and prayers for success in the various affairs 
of life and charms to ward off evil. The last named deals 
with a later period of development, and it is probable 



THE COMING AGE. 9 

that the religion of the aborigines had by then gained a 
partial recognition among certain Aryan tribes ; for it is 
impossible not to suspect that many local superstitions 
found their way into this latest of the Yedas. It is 
historically important as exhibiting a profound change 
coming over the Indo- Aryan character. The bright and 
cheerful view of life reflected in the Rig Veda has in it 
begun to give place to a less hopeful outlook and a quiet 
resignation to destiny. 



CHAPTER II. 

THE AGE OF THE BRAHMANAS. 

The Brahmanas. But it is not from these new Yedas 
any more than from the Rig Veda that we can derive the 
histoiy of Aryan colonization beyond the Punjab. For this 
we must turn to another class of composition which sprang 
up in connection with the Yedas. In course of time the 
language of the hymns grew antiquated, and difficulties 
arose in regard to their meaning or the purposes for which 
they had been composed. Commentaries in prose were there- 
fore added to explain them, to show what was the origin of 
a hymn and the occasion of its use, besides setting forth 
the ritual connected with it. These prose works are called 
the Brahmanas and came in time to be looked upon as no 
less sacred than the hymns themselves. The Brahmanas 
were composed during the period with which we shall now 
deal. Mixed up with dry descriptions of rites and cere- 
monies, which have long since lost their significance, are 
passages which enable us to piece together a fairly con- 
nected account of the period of expansion which followed 
the subjugation of the Punjab. 

The kingdoms of the Doab. From the Brahmanas 
we learn that in course of time two kingdoms arose in the 
country between the Ganges and the Jumna. One in the 
neighbourhood of the modern Delhi, of which Indraprastha 
was the capital, was founded by a tribe called the Kurus, 



10 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

and another further eastward, with its chief cities at Kanauj 
and Kampilla, on the northern bank of the Ganges, was 
called the kingdom of the Panchalas. These two colonies, 
planted in a more fertile soil, gradually rose in power and 
glory till they surpassed the more ancient kingdoms in the 
North-West. 

Change of sentiment towards non-Aryans. As 
the Aryans migrated eastward, they came in contact with 
countless hordes of aborigines in various stages of civiliza- 
tion whom they could not have swept away even if they 
would. There are passages in the Rig Veda which can bear 
no other interpretation than that in the wars which Aryan 
bands waged against each other they did not always dis- 
dain the assistance of powerful non-Aryan chiefs. Political 
alliances were sometimes made, it would seem, with those 
who were willing to adopt the Aryan social and religious 
systems. It is possible that in this manner the colonization 
of the lands eastward of the Five Rivers was accomplished 
as much by peaceful means as by fighting with and attempt- 
ing to drive out the natives. One of the most celebrated 
of the Rishis, Vishvamitra, actually figures in the Rig Veda 
as the bard of a powerful n on- Aryan tribe, the Bharatas ; 
and it would appear that native converts were not infre- 
quently received into the Aryan community on equal terms 
with true-born Aryans, before the caste system had begun 
to crystallize. It is therefore not difficult to understand 
how by the intermingling of the two races non- Aryan 
beliefs and practices began to creep into the Aryan worship. 
In time the Aryan religion was greatly changed thereby. 
Though Aryan influence remained predominant, in the 
process of Aryanizing the native races the faiths and 
religious practices of the invaders underwent at length 
an almost complete transformation. 

Reaction against admission of native races to 
the Aryan community. Against this policy of con- 
ciliating the natives there was always arrayed a strong 
party among the Aryans themselves. In the Rig Veda a 
powerful tribe, called the Tritsu, living in the Punjab, is 
mentioned as the champion of orthodoxy and purity of 
blood, and they are represented as having gained a decisive 
victory over a combination of Aryan and non- Aryan tribes, 



THE AGE OF THE BRAHMANAS. 11 

which favoured the amalgamation of the two races. The 
legend of the fight between them may be entirely mythical, 
but it is clear from subsequent history that the party 
represented by the Tritsu eventually gained the upper 
hand. The origin of caste is lost in a mist of obscurity, 
but whatever may have been the other causes of its origin 
and development, there need be no doubt that, racial 
antipathy played at one time an important part in the 
formation of the system. Speaking generally, the admis- 
sion of non-Aryans into the Aryan social system was, when 
caste distinctions arose, granted only on their being willing 
to accept a position of inferiority in the community. 

Gradual absorption of non-Aryans. Thus in time 
there grew up a class in the Aryan community engaged in 
servile toil and occupying a humble and subordinate position 
to the men of pure descent. When the supply was limited, 
the class was too valuable to be maltreated ; but when it 
became numerous, as it must soon have done, it came to be 
looked upon as something vile ^nd worthless, which it was 
necessary to suppress by every possible means ; and many 
invidious distinctions were invented to differentiate the man 
of pure descent from the non- Aryan and the man of mixed 
parentage. Such as were not thought to be of pure Aryan 
blood were prevented from participating in the sacred rites, 
and were compelled to perform the meanest and most servile 
duties. They were taught that they had been created for 
servitude and to do such work as was degrading to true- 
born Aryans. Their position was not so utterly distasteful 
to them as might be supposed, for by accepting it they 
could attach themselves to the all-conquering Aryans, and 
in return were afforded their powerful protection. They 
felt pride in being associated, though in a humble capacity, 
with those who were recognized as possessing intellectual 
and spiritual superiority. It was an honour to be taken 
within the pale of Hinduism, as the transformed religion of 
the Aryan immigrants may now be called to distinguish it 
from the earlier faith ; for however degraded might be a 
man's position therein, he was at any rate vastly superior 
in the social scale to the unregenerate demon-worshipper of 
the jungle. Thus the mass of the indigenous inhabitants 
came in time to be absorbed into the Aryan social system. 



12 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

But here and there in spots remote from the track of civili- 
zation isolated remnants of the aborigines managed to pre- 
serve unmolested their ancient habits and beliefs. To this 
day in India there are tribes of non- Aryans who have never 
wholly come under the Aryan influence. Such are the 
Bhils of the Yindhiya hills, the Gonds of the Central Pro- 
vinces, and the Santals of the Raj-mahal hills. 

Origin of caste. The first distinction therefore that 
arose in the Aryan community was between the pure Aryan 
and the non-Aryan, in which latter class were included also 
the men of mixed descent. The distinction was at first 
mainly ethnological. But as the settlements grew and 
expanded into kingdoms, gradually class distinctions arose 
among the Aryans themselves. Two privileged classes 
sprang up among them, the sacerdotal and the military, 
denoting at first merely professional distinctions. Society, 
as it grew more complex, required a division of labour : 
that some of its members should perform the religious rites, 
some should fight its battles^ some should till its lands and 
some should do menial services. As among the ancient 
Egyptians and the Israelites, so amongst the ancient Indians 
professions tended to become hereditary, and were at last 
monopolised by particular classes of the community. Thus 
arose the Brahmans, the priesthood, formed of those who 
showed a special aptitude for the performance of rites and 
sacrifices ; the Kshattriyas, a military aristocracy formed of 
those belonging to kingly and noble families, whose ances- 
tors had led the Aryan hosts to battle against the aborigines; 
the Yaisyas, the mass of the people engaged in ordinary 
occupations, particularly in agriculture ; and the Sudras, 
composed of non- Aryans and those of mixed descent, who 
were the slaves and handicraftsmen of the community. 

The Brahmans. Mention has already been made on 
page 8 of the growth of a priestly aristocracy at the close 
of the Vedic period. In the age of expansion which 
followed, when rites were multiplied and sacrifices became 
more complicated, the priests, who alone knew how to 
perform them, came to be looked upon with ever-increasing 
reverence and respect. The sanctity of their lives, and the 
intellectual and spiritual superiority which they arrogated 
to themselves, set them apart from the rest of the 



THE AGE OF THE BRAHMANAS. 13 

community. At length when the priestly office was recog- 
nized as an hereditary one and the priestly families came 
to be regarded as sacred, almost divine honours were paid 
to the Brahman. 

The Kshattriyas. The Kshattriyas were at first 
merely^ the military leaders of the Aryans against the 
aborigines, but when the tribal was superseded by the 
kingly form of government, the distinction between the 
Kshattriya and the people whom his ancestors had led to 
battle grew more and more marked, so that it was felt to 
be unbefitting for one of the Kshattriya race to marry into 
any other class but his own. Thus at last the priests and 
the warriors were separated out from the people ; and to 
preserve the purity of their descent, they were absolutely 
forbidden to intermarry with any other class. The natural 
result of such a system was, that while the Brahmans and 
the Kshattriyas grew more haughty and exclusive, the 
people with no scope for social ambition grew less inde- 
pendent and less able to resist the imposition of debasing 
distinctions. 

The Vaisyas and Sudras. The Yaisyas, the body 
of the Aryan people, were during the period of the 
colonization of the Gangetic plain, one undivided caste, and 
shared with Brahmans and Kshattriyas the rites and privi- 
leges of the Aryan race. The Sudras, on the other hand, 
were excluded from these by the strictest rules. There was 
therefore still the main distinction between Aryan and non- 
Aryan ; and the conquerors, though subdivided by caste, 
still felt themselves to be one nation and one race. The 
Brahman, the Kshattriya, and the Vaisya had the Yedic 
religion in common, while the Sudra was rigorously kept 
out from all participation in its rites and sacrifices. 

Advance in civilization. During the period of the 
Brahmanas the vigour of the early settlers in the Punjab 
seems to have declined, and the new kingdoms growing up 
between the Jumna and the Ganges became the centres of 
Aryan civilization and culture. The conquerors of the 
Punjab, when not engaged in fighting with the dark- 
skinned aborigines, had been content to be cultivators, to 
plough their lands and tend their herds. But the colonists 
who settled in the Doab, as the country between the 



14 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

Ganges and the Jumna is called, were a more highly 
civilized race. Learning and the arts flourished among 
them, and in their hands the old simple faith developed 
into a gorgeous religion, adorned with stately rites and 
ceremonies and tended by multitudes of priests. The 
whole machinery of a system of state government was 
elaborated by them. Kings maintained armies, collected 
taxes and appointed officers to administer justice and look 
after the affairs of state. The people lived in towns and 
villages following the pursuits of agriculture and industry, 
and gradually developing those social customs which have 
been in all subsequent ages so marked a feature of Indian 
life. 

The Mahabharata. But the old warlike spirit was 
still strong within the race. While the struggles with the 
aborigines grew less and less severe, their struggles with 
each other for .coveted strips of country grew more bitter 
and intense. In the earlier Brahmanas the Kurus and 
Panchalas are mentioned as living side by side on the 
friendliest terms, equally prosperous and powerful. But 
in the later Brahmanas there are allusions to a fierce inter- 
necine war. The great Hindu epic, the Mahabharata, com- 
posed in a later age out of material some of which may be 
very ancient, celebrates the story of this conflict. Though 
quite unreliable from a historical point of view, this much 
at anyrate in it stands out as fact : that there was a great 
war in the Doab between the Kurus and the Panchalas for 
the possession of a particular strip of country, and that 
many kings and princes joined one side or the other. The 
picture that it paints of the manners and customs of those 
times makes it plain that while Aryan civilization had 
progressed, the race had lost nothing of the vindictiveness 
and passion for slaughter which had characterized its first 
encounters with the aborigines. 

The rise to power of three new kingdoms. As 
soon as the Doab had been conquered, bands of Aryans 
began to explore the country further east. A powerful 
y tribe, called the Kosalas, established a kingdom in Oudh. 
Another, called the Kashis, seized upon the country round 
about Benares, and a third known as the Yidehas peneti'ated 
into Behar. It is curious to note how each new kingdom 



THE AGE OF THE BRAHMANAS. 15 

growing up on freshly conquered ground, surpassed in power 
and civilization the older kingdoms lying to the westward. 
Those who were in the van of Aryan colonization, were also 
the most progressive in civilization. 

The Ramayana. The Eamayana, the other great 
Hindu epic, celebrates the exploits of a king of the Kosalas 
named Eama, who reigned at a place called Ajodhya. Un- 
fortunately, like the Mahabharata, it is almost valueless as 
history. But though it does not relate the events of any 
age, it throws much light upon the manners and the social 
condition of this tribe of Aryans dwelling on the outskirts 
of civilization. Rama, the hero of the epic, may be a wholly 
mythical person, but in its account of the society and 
religious customs of the Kosalas we can discern a 
change coming over the more advanced portion of the 
Aryan race. We may note along with more polished and 
refined manners the ascendancy gained by the priests over 
the rest of the community. The people of whom it tells 
are less vigorous than those of the Mahabharata, and have 
resigned themselves more completely to priestly domination 
in the affairs of state and in the rules which regulate their 
private lives. The old Vedic faith has been buried beneath 
a mass of rites and ceremonies ; and religion, which always 
played so important a part in the daily life of the Indo 
Aryans, has become the monopoly of priests. Dutiful and 
unquestioning obedience is rendered to their dictates by 
high and low alike. 

Videha. In the kingdom of the Videhas, however, 
lying to the east of Kosala, the Brahmans do not appear to 
have attained to such a complete mastery as in Kosala. 
Their pre-eminence in social and religious matters did not 
pass unquestioned, and learned Kshattriyas disputed the 
supremacy with them. The Videhas were a more in- 
dependent people, with political institutions which gave to 
them a share in the government of their country. Janaka, 
their most famous king, whose capital was at a place called 
Mithila in Tirhoot, is a different stamp of man to Rama, 
and though he may be no less mythical, yet he typifies 
a reaction which must have taken place in this kingdom 
against religious pedantry and dogmatism. 

Intellectual activity. Since at the time of which we 



16 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

are now speaking the political amalgamation of the native 
races with the dominant Aryan race was completed in the 
lands which the Aryans had colonized, the peoples of whom 
these kingdoms were composed may now be called collec- 
tively Hindus followers of the Hindu religion instead of 
being distinguished as hitherto by the terms Aryan and 
non-Aryan. The Hindus who dwelt along the banks of the 
Ganges and its tributaries were a very different people from 
the fierce warriors who had poured down from the north 
into the Punjab. They had attained by this time to a 
deojree of culture and refinement remarkable in those earlv 
times. The Brahmans were naturally in the forefront 
where development of mind and the increase of knowledge 
were concerned. They taught that learning was the highest 
and noblest possession of man, and established throughout 
the country schools of philosophy, theology and law. But 
it would be a mistake to suppose that learning was general, 
for it was only the leisured classes which could indulge in it. 
While the Brahmans and certain of the Kshattriyas spent 
their lives in acquiring it, the mass of the people, engaged 
in unremitting labour, remained steeped in ignorance and a 
prey to superstition. 

Brahman learning. The close study of the Vedas, 
handed down by word of mouth from generation to genera- 
tion in a language ever growing more obsolete, gave to the 
Brahmans in time an inherited power of mind, and raised 
them as a class immeasurably above the intellectual level of 
the rest of the community. The means of preserving un- 
impaired the text of their sacred compositions early 
engrossed their attention, and led them to an exhaustive 
examination of the structure of the language. They dis- 
covered not merely in this way for themselves the science of 
grammar, but carried it to an extraordinary degree of 
accuracy. The solution of difficulties of language and the 
interpretation of obscure passages in the hymns developed 
in them to a remarkable extent the qualities of ingenious- 
ness and subtlety. But their studies were not confined to 
the sacred texts alone, and they had energy to spare 
for scientific research. In the domain of natural philo- 
sophy the study of the stars seems first to have attracted 
their attention. The elements of astronomy were laid 



THE AGE OF THE BRAHMANAS. 17 

down even before the Rig Veda was compiled. In the age 
which followed considerable progress was made in it ; 
because it was found that without a knowledge of 
astronomy sacrificial rites could not be regulated. The 
time for commencing or ending them could not be deter- 
mined without a knowledge of the sun's annual course, and 
in some cases of the constellations also. A knowledge of 
the calendar, in fact, came to be an indispensable part of a 
priest's education. Logic and mathematics were also 
subjects of study and research among them, though they 
had not yet attained to any remarkable degree of pro- 
ficiency in them. Their chief delight, however, from the 
earliest times was in philosophy. Metaphysical speculation 
was to them an absorbing passion. The natural bent 
of their minds seems to have been towards it, and with 
such ardour did they pursue it, that they overlooked in 
favour of it subjects of more practical utility. From a too 
engrossing attention to it they acquired an abstracted and 
impractical habit of mind, to which in great measure is no 
doubt due their contempt of history, their backwardness in 
the cultivation of the aesthetic faculties and their neglect 
of political science. 

Sanskrit a secret language. But it must not be 
supposed that all the Brahman caste reached the same high 
intellectual level. Not a tithe of them probably at any 
time took part in the vigorous mental development and 
active inquiring spirit. The majority remained on a much 
lower plane and lived the life of the people, sharing with 
thpm their thoughts and beliefs. Sanskrit, in which the 
Yedic hymns and the Brahman^ were composed, though it 
had developed into a language of surpassing force and beauty, 
was no longer a living one. To the general mass of the 
people it was an unknown tongue. It had long since 
become a secret language of the priests; and, while it served 
them as an almost perfect medium for the expression of their 
thoughts, it served also to create an air of mystery around 
them and to confine the knowledge of the scriptures and of 
Brahman learning within the circle of their order. 

Change in character of Indo-Aryan race. Allu- 
sion has already been made to a profound change which 
had begun to come over the Indo-Aryan race towards the 

H.I.H.S. B 



18 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

end of the Vedic period. With the shifting of the centre 
of civilization from the Punjab to the Gangetic plain 
their character became transformed. From a hopeful and 
vigorous people they changed into a sad and mystical one. 
They gradually outgrew their simple worship of the deified 
powers of nature, and the sacrifice and all that it symbolized 
became of supreme importance. The earlier Brahmanas are 
wholly taken up with descriptions of sacrificial ceremonies, 
explanations of their hidden meanings, accounts of their 
origin and legends to prove their efficacy. This change was 
no doubt in great part due to the complete ascendancy gained 
by the priests in religious matters. The early Aryans, who 
sacrificed and prayed to their bright gods in their own 
homes, were content with a simple form of worship; but the 
Hindus of the Gangetic plain, by the aid of priestcraft, so 
overlaid the old faiths and beliefs of their forefathers with 
complicated ritual, that the gods were forgotten in the rites 
designed to celebrate them. In their superstitious venera- 
tion for forms and ceremonies they lost the spirit of the old 
Yedic religion. Yet they passionately clung to their ancient 
Vedas, regarding them still as the source of all religious 
inspiration and seeking with infinite labour and ingenuity 
to find in them authority for every act of worship and for 
every religious dogma which they enjoined. 

Pessimistic views of life. In the later Brahmanas 
the note of sadness becomes more strongly marked. Theo- 
sophic and religious speculations are alone regarded as of the 
highest import. But there is no return to the simple faith 
of Vedic times ; on the contrary, in place of the joyous 
religion of their ancestors, the Hindus have become im- 
pressed with a deep conviction of the misery of all earthly 
existence. A belief in the doctrine of metempsychosis, the 
passage of the spirit at death into another living body, 
whether of a brute or of a human being, has become 
general, and all that man is taught to hope for is reabsorp- 
tion into the universal All-in-One. Whence came this 
wonderful change 1 The enervating climate of the Gan- 
getic plain, and the barrenness of religious life to which 
their slavish devotion to forms and ceremonies had brought 
them contributed no doubt towards it, but are not in them- 
selves sufficient wholly to account for it. 



THE AGE OF THE BRAHMANAS. 19 

Non-Aryan influences. As they spread, no doubt, 
the Arj^an colonists came more and more under non- Aryan 
influence, and were infected with gloomy aboriginal beliefs. 
The further they migrated from their old homes, the more 
were they subjected to this influence and the more were 
their civilization, their religion and even their racial type 
liable to be modified thereby. There would always be the 
tendency for the lower strata of Aryan society to become 
merged in the non-Aryan portion of the community ; and 
the non-Aryan, while adopting the social customs and 
religious beliefs of the Aryan, would not be able to divest 
himself wholly of his own. It is a common belief all 
over the world among primitive peoples that disease is due 
to the work of malignant spirits. In a land so much 
ravaged by the forms of disease peculiar to tropical countries 
as India, it is natural that the belief in local spirits of a 
malignant disposition should have been common among its 
early inhabitants. When the Aryans came amongst the 
natives they found them haunted by the dread of demons 
supposed to be ever on the watch to injure those who 
neglected to propitiate them. To ward off their influence 
strange and often gruesome rites were devised. It is easy 
to understand how in this way those who advanced to 
settlements far removed from the strongholds of Aryan 
civilization came, to be infected by the prevailing demon 
worship. While they could not fail to perceive how much 
less than themselves the natives who propitiated the local 
spirits were ravaged by disease, they were not likely to 
perceive that it was merely because the indigenous people 
had gained a greater immunity by acclimatization and by 
adaptation to a jungle life. It must often have seemed 
to them that the natives escaped because they took pains 
to ward ofl" the anger of the fierce spirits who appeared to 
have the power, locally at any rate, to afflict mankind. 
We need not doubt too that the priests of the old gods, 
who are spoken of in the Rig Yeda as being skilled in the 
arts of spells and incantations, continued, in spite of the 
spread of the Aryan faith, to exercise a powerful influence, 
more particularly in times of drought, flood or sickness. 
Thus into the pure Aryan faith crept on all sides indigenous 
superstitions and strange forms and ceremonies, varying 



20 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

according to the ancient beliefs of different localities. 
There is also good reason for thinking that in the countries 
of Kosala, Kashi and Videha the Aryans came in contact 
with settled communities living under well organized systems 
of government, wealthy and as highly civilized as them- 
selves ; and that the conquerors, mingling and even uniting 
with the conquered peoples, adopted as time wore on many 
of their customs and beliefs. 

Transformation of national character. But what- 
ever were the causes of the change, the Hindus of the 
Middle Land towards the close of the Brahmana period 
had scarcely any characteristics left in common with 
their hardy Aryan ancestors of early Yedic times. Instead 
of a vigorous people rejoicing in their health and strength, 
we find a people prone to asceticism and lonely meditation. 
The Aranyakas, or Forest-treatises for the meditation 
of hermits, and the Upanishmh, or hidden doctrines 
regarding the destiny of the soul and the nature of the 
Supreme Being, to which the speculations of the Brah- 
manas gave rise, reflect a national character transformed 
almost beyond recognition. 



CHAPTER HI. 



THE SUTRA PERIOD. 



Aryavarta. We have seen the Aryan invaders first 
conquering bit by bit the land between the Indus and the 
Saraswati, next passing on to the colonization of Brah- 
marshidesa, the land of the Sacred Singers between the 
Saraswati and the Ganges, then spreading over Madhya- 
desa, the Middle Land, as far as Oudh, and finally expand- 
ing over the whole of Northern India to Behar on the east 
and the Vindhya hills in the south. To all this vast tract 
of country they gave the name of Aryavarta, the land of 
the Aryans, to distinguish it from Mlechcha-desa, the land 
of the unclean, which lay beyond. The period occupied in 
annexing and colonizing successively the different parts of 



THE SUTRA PERIOD. 21 

it must, roughly speaking, have been a thousand years, and 
lasted till about 1000 B.C. 

Mlechcha-desa. The era which now opens shows us 
Aryan civilization spreading to the south. Bands of Aryans 
had before this made expeditions beyond the Vindhya Hills, 
and holy men had penetrated into the jungles of Central 
India in search of solitudes in which to practise religious 
meditation. A few scattered settlements had already begun 
to spring up ; but the country beyond Aryavarta was still 
practically an unknown land. The conquest of Aryavarta 
had meant the spreading of the Aryan race over Northern 
India, but the colonization of the country which lay to the 
south meant the gradual Hinduising of the tribes that 
peopled the Peninsula. It was in effect a social rather than 
an ethnical revolution. The aborigines were not hunted 
down and slaughtered wholesale, nor even dispossessed of 
the land, but, coming under the influence of a stronger 
race, they learned to adopt its civilization and religion. 

Dravidian civilization. The Dravidians, as the 
indigenous inhabitants of Central and Southern India 
are, for convenience, often called, were made up of many 
races, and while some were still in the savage state, others, 
and especially those in the extreme south, had already 
emerged from a state of barbarism. The Aryan settlers in 
the jungles of Central India were no doubt aided in the 
work of clearing the fertile valleys by bodies of aborigines 
who migrated from their forest homes, and eventually lost 
their identity by becoming merged in the Aryan social 
system. But as the Aryans penetrated further south they 
came in contact with peoples not less civilized than them- 
selves, living in towns with settled forms of government. 
Here, as in the eastern portions of Aryavarta, a conflict of 
civilizations took place, and though the Aryan was the 
stronger and ultimately prevailed, the Dravidian did not 
succumb without leaving strong traces of its existence 
behind it. Thus by degrees the whole of India south of the 
Vindhya Hills came under Aryan influence. 

In the mixed race that arose from the union of Aryan 
with Dravidian the preponderating element was naturally 
the latter ; in some parts, perhaps, the population remained 
pure Dravidian, and there were no other traces of the 



22 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

Aryan but the adoption of his civilization and reh'gion. 
The mass of the people continued to use their own tongue 
then, as they still do, in Southern India. Indeed, the 
Tamils, the most important among them, possess a noble 
literature, some of it of great antiquity, that owes nothing 
whatever to Sanskrit. But the Hinduising of the Peninsula 
has never been quite completed, and here and there a few 
small and scattered tribes far removed from civilization still 
remain in the enjoyment of their primitive habits and 
beliefs. 

Spread of Aryan civilization over the Deccan, 
The Aryanising of the whole Peninsula must have taken 
many centuries. But by the fourth century B.C. the work 
had been practically finished, and Ceylon too had been 
brought under Hindu influence. Just as in Aryavarta, so 
in the Deccan, powerful states, organised after the Aryan 
pattern, arose, or grew out of existing Dravidian princi- 
palities. The kingdoms of the Cholas on the east coast, 
the Ch eras on the west, and the Pandyas in the extreme 
south, long remained famous in Southern India, but of 
their earlier history little or nothing is known. 

The Sutras. The period during which the Brahmanas 
were composed lasted, roughly speaking, down to the fifth 
century B.C. A reaction at length set in against the 
elaborate and pedantic style which had characterised it. 
Abridgment was felt to be necessary ; for the task of com- 
mitting to memory the sacred texts with their interminable 
descriptions of ceremonials and sacrifices, became too great 
a burden even for the highly trained minds of the Brah- 
mans. Treatises therefore were compiled which contained 
in a condensed form the learning, the science and the 
religious teachings of the Brahmanas. The Sutra, as 
the new style of composition was called, was as brief as the 
Brahmana had been verbose. It sought by means of 
aphorisms to compress as much meaning as possible into 
the fewest words, and thus frequently sacrificed perspicuity 
to brevity. 

It is important to notice one great distinction which was 
made between the Sutras and the works which had pre- 
ceded them. The Yedas and the -Brahmanas were looked 
upon as sacred and eternal and as having divine authority, 



THE SUTRA PERIOD. 23 

but the Sutras were never held to be other than the work 
of man. 

The different sacred schools of the Brahmans throughout 
the length and breadth of India turned to this style of com- 
position, so that there grew up a vast body of Sutras, some 
dealing with the details of Vedic sacrifices and religious 
ceremonials, some treating of manners and customs and 
others setting forth domestic rites and duties. The most 
important from a historical point of view are the Dharma 
Sutras. These ancient treatises on law and morality have 
been the material out of which the codes, erroneously sup- 
posed to have been the inventions of later Hindu legislators, 
such, for instance, as the Code of Manu, have been compiled. 

Progress of Learning. During the Sutra period the 
Hindus made considerable progress in the arts and sciences, 
and particularly in their knowledge of philosophy, grammar 
and philology. One of the most famous names connected 
with the age is that of Panini, the grammarian, whose 
home was somewhere in the Punjab. His Sanskrit grammar 
in the form of aphorisms, has ever since remained the 
standard authority and the type of a scientific treatise on 
this subject. But this period is chiefly remarkable for the 
systems of mental philosophy which were developed during 
it; This is not the place to enter into descriptions of the 
different schools of philosophy which arose, but it is 
necessary for the sake of the period which follows to say a 
few words about one of them. 

The Sankhya System of Philosophy. One of 
the first attempts to give a reasoned answer to the ques- 
tions about the origin of things and the destiny of man 
was made by Kapila, who lived probably not later than 
the seventh century B.C. The Sankhya system which he 
founded was like all other systems of Hindu Philosophy, 
derived from the teachings of the Upanishads. His object 
was to help mankind to escape from the life of suffering 
and pain which is the lot of all living things. He taught 
that this end can be gained only by the soul attaining to 
perfect knowledge. By knowing itself it will be freed 
from the body, and therefore from pain and misery. Vedic 
rites are useless for this purpose, and he rejects them 
altogether. The historical importance of Kapila's system 



24 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

is that it is an open revolt against Vedic rites and sacrifices. 
In the age which followed, its essential doctrines were 
popularised by a great reformer who made it the basis of 
his teaching. In the hands of Buddha it blossomed into a 
religion destined to exercise the profoundest influence on 
the history of mankind. 

Triumph of the Brahman caste. The spread of 
Hinduism over the length and breadth of India brought 
with it a great extension of the caste system. We have 
seen that in the preceding age there were only four castes, 
and that the Brahmans and the Kshattriyas had gradually 
acquired a complete ascendency over the rest. In the 
Sutra period the power and influence of the Kshattriya 
caste decayed. There are legendary accounts of fierce 
struggles between the two castes for supremacy. But the 
Kshattriyas had by this time declined from hardy warriors 
into a military aristocracy, resting on the traditions of its 
glorious past ; while the Brahmans, on the other hand, who 
claimed a complete monopoly of religion and learning, were 
ever growing more necessary to the community. We may 
believe, therefore, that if a war of extermination did at 
any time take place between Brahmans and Kshattriyas, 
the Brahmans were supported by the bulk of the com- 
munity. At all events, in the Sutra period the Brahman 
became supreme. 

Multiplication of castes. Under Brahman supremacy 
the number of caste distinctions was gradually multiplied, 
and the rules relating thereto became more rigid and 
oppressive. There were two influences at work which 
tended to increase the number of caste subdivisions. First, 
the tendency noticeable in all early societies for professions to 
become hereditary; and secondly, the gradual incorporation 
into Hinduism of non-Aryan tribes with peculiar habits and 
religious customs. Those who followed a profession, because 
their fathers had done so before them, jealously excluded 
outsiders from coming into competition with them, and 
gradually hedged themselves round with a number of rites 
and usages distinctive of their calling. Caste distinctions 
began to multiply most rapidly among the Sudras ; for it 
was this caste which included most of those who followed 
professions and the aborigines who entered within the pale 



THE SUTRA PERIOD. 25 

of Hinduism. It may therefore be readily understood 
how greatly during this period the system was extended. 
But besides growing more numerous castes became more 
exclusive. Keiigion was employed to tighten the bands 
which held the members of a caste together, and under 
Brahman influence restrictions were multiplied, and new 
restraints invented to hold the different castes and caste 
subdivisions asunder. 

.Objects of the caste system. There can be no 
doubt that at one time in the history of the Hindus caste 
was useful for holding society together ; that it was 
necessary for the preservation of social order; and that 
without it the non-Aryan element in Hinduism would have 
swamped the Aryan. It was necessary in the then state of 
society that there should be one class of men to whom it 
might look for guidance in religion and morality, a class 
that might hold aloft, uncontaminated by a baser civiliza- 
tion, Aryan traditions and beliefs. It was necessary also 
that there should be men who followed different profes- 
sions, that each- man should find his place and his work 
marked out for him from his birth, and that he should be 
held to his occupation by the strongest ties of religion and 
custom. Caste, in short, was necessary to the fullest life 
of those remote times, for it insured that the wants of 
society should be attended to and that its institutions 
should be preserved. 

Evils attendant upon it. But caste, while it served 
to maintain and spread Aryan religion and civilization, 
from its inflexibility and the inexorable nature of its rules 
was a system fatal to free and natural development. It 
stamped out individuality and confined genius and talent 
within the narrow range of a particular calling, and thus 
exercised a depressing and debasing influence on all but 
the highest caste. The lowly Sudra, born to a particular 
occupation, must pursue his life's work without hope of 
social improvement. If the Hindus thereby acquired the 
virtues of patience and resignation, it was at the expense 
of energy and ambition and all that makes for steady 
material progress. 



26 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE BUDDHIST AGE. 

Political Divisions of India. Towards the close of 
the seventh century B.C. the kingdom of Kosala had become 
the most important in all Aryavarta. It had conquered 
and annexed the kingdom of the Kashis to the south, and 
included all the territory lying between the Ganges and 
the Gandak, while to the north ib stretched far up into 
Nepal. Ajodhya, the ancient capital, which had been so 
long the scene of Brahman triumphs, and in which, indeed, 
their pride had reached its zenith, had been deserted by 
the rulers for Sravasti, a city in the extreme north. This 
change of capital, whatever may have been the cause, seems 
to have dealt a severe blow to Brahman prestige ; for from 
that time the Brahman caste, which had for so many 
centuries dominated the kingdoms of the Middle Land, 
began to wane in power and influence. 

New kingdoms established on the frontiers of Aryavarta 
had also meanwhile risen to importance. Of these the 
principal were Avanti in Malwa, of which the capital was 
Ujjain ; Gandhara, the modern Kandahar, including Eastern 
Afghanistan and the north-west corner of the Punjab, with 
its capital at a place called Takkasila (Taxila) ; and Vamsa, 
lying to the north-east of Avanti, with its capital at Kosambi 
Qn the banks of the Jumna. But to the south-east of Kosala 
a new kingdom was arising, destined to absorb them all. 
This was Magadha, in South Behar, ruled over by a 
Kshattriya dynasty of kings who held their court at 
Rajagriha, forty or fifty miles south of the Ganges. 

The Republican states. The sources of our infor- 
mation as to the state of India at this time are the Jain 
and Buddhist records, composed by disciples of two great 
religious reformers who arose in Northern India in the 
sixth century B.C. Including the kingdoms mentioned 
above there were altogether sixteen independent states, 
and of some of these the government was republican in 
form. In the republics the adult male population met 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 



27 



together in the principal town in a kind of parliament to 
transact the business of the state. They elected for a 
term of years one of their number, whom they called rajah, 
to preside over their meetings and to act as chief executive 
officer. In a similar manner the local affairs of each village 
were transacted by the assembled householders. Order 
was maintained throughout the state by a body of police 




Interior View of Karli. 

acting under the directions of the central authority. These 
republics were not named after towns or places, but after 
the principal clan within the territory. In one instance, 
that of the Vajjians, eight clans were included in one 
confederacy. The Vajjian state lay to the east of Kosala, 
and its capital was at Mithila, the city in which in an 
earlier age the learned Janaka was said to have held 
his court. The republic was a powerful one, and two of 
the clans included in the confederacy, the Videhans and 
the Lichchhavi; are frequently mentioned as playing an 



28 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

important part in the history of their time. But the fame 
of other tribal republics was eclipsed for all time, as we 
shall see, by that of the Sakyas, a small Kshattriya clan, 
who dwelt in a strip of country lying along the present 
border of Nepal and British territory. Their capital was 
at a place called Kapilavastu, the site of which has lately 
been identified in the Nepalese Terai to the north of the 
Basti district. 

The general state of the country, It is a point 
of much importance that no mention is made of Orissa 
in tlie Jain and Buddhist records, or of the country lying 
to the east of the modern Bhagalpur, or of the Deccan and 
Ceylon : though mention is made of " The Southern Road." 
From this we may infer that Aryan civilization had not 
yet reached those parts. The colonization of Southern 
India, though it must have commenced some time earlier, 
could not then have extended beyond the river Godavari. 
Even in Northern India the settlements were still widely 
scattered. There were few considerable towns and the 
villages were surrounded with primeval jungle. The plains 
were for the most part covered by dense forest. The Maha 
Yana, or Great Wood, is frequently alluded to as an inter- 
minable forest lying between and around the settlements, 
and making communication difficult and dangerous. 

Decay of Vedic Hinduism. The seventh century 
B.C. and the first half of the sixth is a dark period in Indian 
history. The bright and joyous spirit of the Vedic religion 
had been smothered under a complicated mass of ritual, and 
the very meaning of its hymns had been forgotten, while 
the priests were busying themselves with outward forms 
and ceremonies. A great gulf yawned between the masses 
and their spiritual leaders. The Brahmans, resting on the 
traditions of their glorious past, were intent only upon 
the aggrandisement of their own order and upon securing 
to it all the privileges they could ; and the people, whom 
in their intellectual arrogance they despised, left without 
guides and bound down by an iron system of caste, were 
sinking deeper and deeper into a state of ignorance and 
superstition. 

Gautama Buddha. But the dawn of a reformation 
was at hand even when the moral and religious state of 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 29 

the Hindus appeared most hopeless. In the city of Kapi- 
lavastu in the year 557 B.C. Mahama3^a, the wife of 
Suddhodana, Eajah of the Sakyas, gave birth to a son who 
was destined to eflf'ect that reformation. The child was 
named Siddartha, but in after years he came to be known 
more generally by his family name of Gautama or as 
Sakyamuni, the Sakya sage. From his youth upwards he 
was much given to study and contemplation, though he is 
said to have excelled also in manly exercises. His serious 
mind was early impressed with the vanity of all earthly 
gains and hopes, and his sympathetic nature was deeply 
stirred on behalf of the poor and lowly, ground down 
under the cruel and oppressive system of caste. He saw 
that what passed for religion, was a mere empty observance 
of forms and ceremonies, inwardly possessing nothing 
which could appeal to the hearts and imaginations of the 
people. So profoundly impressed was he with the need of 
a reformation that at length he determined to forsake his 
luxurious home and devote himself to the work of consoling 
and elevating mankind. 

His enlightenment. To this end he renounced ease 
and riches, wife, and child, and went forth into the world a 
beggar, to seek the salvation of his fellow-men. For many 
years he sought in vain for the key to the mysteries of 
human life. Neither learning nor penances could help him; 
but at last, when he had almost abandoned hope, the truth 
flashed upon him. Salvation lay in a well-governed life 
and love and pity for all living things. From henceforth 
he was Buddha the Enlightened, and he returned to the 
world to preach his gospel to all who would listen. 

His doctrine. He taught that salvation is within the 
reach of all, high and low caste alike ; that he who leads a 
pure life and helps his fellow-creatures has no need to 
propitiate the gods with sacrifice ; and that a man's present 
state is the result of his own acts, either in this, or in a 
former life. But as life must mean, even for the happiest 
of men, inevitably more of pain than of pleasure, it should 
be the object of a wise man to escape for ever from the 
weary round of existence, to gain the eternal rest of 
Nirvana, deliverance from being. This end can be attained, 
not through Yedic sacrifices and Brahman mediation, but 



30 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

by the practice of virtuous living, by kindness to all living 
things and by the suppression of the passions and desires. 
It is not difficult to trace in this the influence of Kapila's 
system of philosophy. 

The secret of his success. Throughout his life 
and teaching Buddha displayed no direct antagonism to the 
Brahmans ; though he would not recognise that there was 
any inherent difference between them and other men. It is 
doubtful indeed if he deliberately set out to found a new 
religion. It seems more probable that he meant at first to 
be no more than a social reformer and a moral teacher. He 
was deeply learned in the philosophy of the day, and much 
of what he taught was borrowed from that philosophy. 
The doctrine of transmigration, or metempsychosis the 
basis of his teaching he had learnt from his early Hindu 
teachers. What, then, was the secret of his success '? It was 
that he brought hope to a despondent people, by boldly 
announcing that all men might obtain salvation by charity 
and holy living. He was therefore listened to, as no 
teacher before had been listened to by them. Prince and 
peasant, Brahman and Sudra, Aryan and non -Aryan 
alike, flocked to hear his message.. The fame of his 
teaching spread far and wide, and those who came only 
out of curiosity, attracted by the story of his early 
life and its great renunciation, were influenced like the 
rest by his gentleness and his simplicity, and above all 
by his deep earnestness. Bimbisara, King of Magadha, 
who had been his early friend, and Pasenadi, King of 
Kosala, espoused his cause. His father, too, became one 
of his earliest converts. 

His missionary labours and death. Buddha's 
first appearance as a preacher was in the Deer Park near 
Benares, a city famous even then for its learning and 
devotion to religion. Within a few months he had gathered 
round him a host of enthusiastic disciples, w^omen as well as 
men, and many of these he sent out to preach his message in 
far distant places. He himself wandered throughout Oudh 
and Behar for the remainder of his life, preaching and con- 
verting the people to his faith. At the age of 80, while 
engaged in one of these missionary journeys, he was taken 
ill near a place called Kusinagara, about 80 miles east of 




Walker Ar Cockerel! sc. 



32 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

his native city, and there, teaching and exhorting to the 
last, he passed peacefully away. 
'Buddhism a social and religious reformation. 

Mt may seem strange that a religion which ignores the 
influence of a deity upon the destiny of man, and bids 

, him seek in the extinction of his individuality the only 
possible escape from the miseries of living, should have 
had so rapid and so wide an acceptance. But if we 
reflect that the religion to which the Hin'dus were then 
accustomed not only held out to them no hope, no 
alleviation of the miseries of life, but on the other hand 
lent its weighty sanction to the grinding tyranny of caste, 
Ave shall not wonder at the popularity this new creed 
achieved. A religion such as Buddhism that taught so 
noble an ethical code, that had within it so much of 
practical philanthropy and dealt so vigorously with the 
abuses of the time, could not in such circumstances fail to 
commend itself to the majority whom it sought to set free 
from their cruel bondage. 

Foundation of a monastic order. In order to 
extend his teaching and to assist his more zealous disciples 
in making progress towards the goal, Buddha established 
an order of ascetics. He himself had forsaken wealth, 
power and family, that he might not be drawn by them 
away from the path of right living, or for their sake desire 
to cling to life. He therefore urged such a mode of life 
upon earnest disciples, though he never insisted upon 
their adopting it. Self-suppression, abstinence and poverty 
were enjoined upon the members of this society. But in 
order to prevent enthusiasts from mortifying themselves in 
the manner of Hindu devotees, he was careful to, lay down 
rules regarding food, clothing and residence; remembering, 
no doubt, how, in the days when he was still searching for 
the truth, he had, all to no purpose, subjected his body to 
the severest penances. He therefore laid down for his 
disciples a middle path between pleasure and pain, by which 
man might attain to complete self-mastery without danger 
of injury to body or mind. Thus there sprang into existence 
in his lifetime an order of mendicants who dwelt together 
in monasteries, provided for them by wealthy converts and 
supported by the alms of believers, and who spent their days 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 33 

in exhorting each other to be steadfast in the path and in 
training themselves for the work of preaching and converting 
the people. Women as well as men were admitted to the 
Sangha or Society. Its members were known as Bhikkhus 
and Bhikkhunis, male and female mendicants. > The creation 
of such an order gave stability and vitality to the new 
religion, and more than anything else helped to keep 
together after Buddha's death those who had embraced tne 
faith. 

The attitude of the Brahmans towards the new 
faith. It may seem surprising that the Brahmans inter- 
fered so little with Buddha during his lifetime. It is 
probable that they regarded him at first as a mere reformer, 
and they therefore treated him with the same easy toler- 
ance with which they were accustomed to treat the many 
itinerant preachers and propounders of new philosophic 
doctrines that arose in different parts of India in those 
times. Later on they no doubt feared in face of their 
diminishing prestige to attack one whose influence was so 
far-reaching, and who was supported by powerful kings. 
But the Sangha he had founded, in that it admitted all 
classes of men and women without distinction of caste, 
aimed too direct a blow against Brahmanism to be over- 
looked. 

First two Buddhist Councils. Buddha's body was 
cremated, and his ashes reverently preserved. The fragments 
which were given to his Sakya kinsmen have, in confirma- 
tion of the story of his decease as told in the Buddhist 
chronicles, lately come to light. On the site of Kapilavastu 
a vase containing sacred relics has been unearthed with an 
inscription upon it setting forth that within are a portion 
of the remains of Buddha. But hardly had he passed away 
before dissensions and differences sprang up among his 
followers. To set these at rest, in the year 477 B.C. the 
leading Bhikkhus called together a council at Rajagriha, 
under the patronage of Ajatasutru, the powerful King of 
Magadha, the son and successor of Bimbisara, Buddha's 
early friend. At this council, at which 500 believers were 
present, the whole assembly chanted together the sacred 
laws of the faith to fix them on their memories. Harmony 
was thus for a time restored ; but one hundred years later 

H.I.H.S. c 



34 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

it was found necessary to hold another council at a place 
called Vaisali, the capital of the Lichchhavi clan, about 70 
miles north of Kajagriha; for differences had once more 
arisen. Meanwhile under the protection of the kings of 
Magadha the new religion was spreading far and wide. 

The rise of the Magadha Empire. Bimbisara, be- 
sides achieving fame as the patron of Buddha, is noteworthy 
as the king who layed the foundations of the great Magadha 
Empire by his conquest and arniexation of the Anga 
kingdom, lying to the east of his dominions. Its capital, 
Champa, a city far renowned for its beauty, was a place of 
great strategical importance, since it commanded the water- 
way down the Ganges as far as the modern Bhagalpur. After 
reigning for twenty-eight years Bimbisara is said to have 
abdicated in favour of his son, Ajatasutru, and to have then 
been imprisoned and starved to death by that ungrateful 
parricide. Ajatasutru enjoyed a long reign, and by success- 
ful attacks upon his neighbours added greatly to the size of 
his kingdom. With the growth of monarchical states there 
took place simultaneously a gradual disappearance of repub- 
lican forms of government. First Vidudabha, son and 
successor of Pasenadi, king of Kosala, in revenge for an 
insult to his family swept away in a general massacre the 
Sakya republic, two years before the Buddha's death; and 
later Ajatasutru destroyed the Vajjian republic by over- 
whelming the Lichchhavis and laying waste Vaisali. Kosala 
and Magadha in course of time between them absorbed all 
the surrounding states and thus brought themselves at 
length face to face with one another. A struggle for the 
mastery was inevitable, and though no details of it are 
recorded, the decline of Kosala marks the stages of a pro- 
tracted conflict. In time the whole territory comprised' 
roughly by Oudh and Behar passed under the sway of the 
kings of Magadha. 

Progress of the new religion. Bimbisara's dynasty 
came to an end early in the fourth century B.C. and w^as 
succeeded by that of the Nandas. The founder of this 
dynasty was of the Sudra caste, and, on that account 
perhaps, more favourably disposed to Buddhism than to 
Brahmanism. Under him and his eight sons the kingdom 
of Magadha grew to be the most powerful and the most 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 35 

extensive in Northern India, and with its growth the new 
faith also grew and prospered. Buddhism had this great 
advantage over Brahmanism, that it' availed itself of the* 
vernacular language to spread its teaching. It was thereby 
enabled to catch the ears of all. Wherever the Buddhist 
missionaries went they were listened to by eager crowds 
who had been shut out, by their lowly birth and their 
ignorance of Sanskrit, from the religion of the high caste 
Aryan. As they came with a peaceful message and sought 
to make their teaching acceptable only by gentleness and 
toleration, they stirred up little antagonism. 

Brahman influence still powerful. But it must 
not be supposed that the Brahmans lost their influence 
altogether; for this, even when Buddhism became the pre- 
vailing religion, never was the case. Brahmanism was 
simply deposed from its hegemony, but the Brahmans still 
maintained their influence over large masses of the people. 
The Hindus had been too long accustomed to look up to 
them as their hereditary spiritual leaders to put ofl" their 
awe and reverence for them. Moreover, Buddhism itself 
recognised the sanctity of the priesthood, and enjoined as 
much respect for Brahmans as for learned men of its own 
order. Its wise tolerance in this respect went far to disarm 
Brahman hostility. 

Jainism. A few years before the time that Buddha 
started to found his religion, another reformer had arisen 
whose doctrines, somewhat similar to those of Buddha, were 
yet destined to find a more permanent place among the 
religions of India. Mahavira, who was born at Vaisali, like 
Siddartha, was of noble birth, and like him also retired from 
the world. in early manhood to lead a life of religious medita- 
tion. After some years of abstinence and profound study 
light came to him as to the Buddha, and he went forth to 
proclaim his discovery to the world. He thereafter called 
himself a Jina or * Spiritual Conqueror,' and in the course 
of a long life, spent as an itinerant preacher, gathered round 
him a numerous band of devoted disciples whom he organ- 
ized into an order or society. Jainism never attained the 
wide popularity of Buddhism, but it is curious to note that 
while the followers of Mahavira are still to be found in small 
communities all over India, Buddhism, which as a religion 



36 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

once had so great a vogue, has practically disappeared 
from the country. 

' But we must leave the fortunes of Buddhism for a 
while and turn our attention to the Punjab, which after 
many centuries of obscurity once more became the scene of 
events important to India. 

THE PERSIAN AND GREEK INVASIONS. 

The Persian invasion. About the year 500 B.C., that 
is about the time when Ajatasutru was reigning in Magadha, 
Darius L, one of the greatest of the rulers of ancient Persia, 
sent an expedition under a general named Skylax into India 
by way of Afghanistan to explore the course of the river 
Indus. Skylax successfully accomplished his mission, made 
his way down to the Indian Ocean and sailed westward till 
he reached the Red Sea. His description of the country 
and its accessibility led Darius to send another expedition 
to conquer and annex it. No details of the struggle have 
been preserved, but the Indus Valley was quickly overrun 
and formed into a separate satrapy, or province of Darius's 
vast empire. It proved to be a most valuable acquisition, 
and at orte time the tribute which it yielded in gold alone 
was over a million sterling, the largest amount of revenue 
received from any satrapy, while it supplied a contingent of 
skilled archers for the Persian army. How long the Indus 
Valley remained subject to the Persian Empire is not known, 
but when the latter began to decline it was probably among 
the first of the satrapies to regain independence. At anyrate 
by the fourth century B.C. the Persian invasion had almost 
been forgotten in Northern India. 

Alexander invades the Punjab. In the year 327 
B.C. India was subjected to another invasion from the North 
West. Alexander the Great, King of Macedon, having com- 
pleted his conquest of the Persian Empire by the reduction 
of the fierce and warlike tribes of Central Asia, suddenly 
made his appearance in the neighbourhood of Kabul with 
his invincible army of Greeks, and summoned the princes 
of the Punjab to do him homage. He based his claim to 
their allegiance upon the shadowy ground that the Punjab 
as far as the Indus had been laid under tribute by Darius I. 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 



37 



about 180 years before, and that, though tribute had long 
since ceased to be paid or even demanded, yet the right to 
levy it had never actually been renounced. 

The Punjab was then split up into several principalities, 
owing a sort of allegiance to an overlord of the Kshattriya 






%-v\ v-WW \<^\v>. < V ^.^.^^^ s % 




Khyber Pass. 

caste who ruled the country lying between the Jhelum and 
the Chenab. At the time of Alexander's coming some of the 
petty kings, probably later immigrants from Central Asia 
known as Scythians, were in revolt against Porus, their 
Aryan overlord. Taxiles, the ruler of the country between 
the Indus and the Jhelum, whose capital was at Taxila upon 
the banks of the Indus in the Attock district, and the 
rebellious princes hastened with rich gifts to pay homage to 
Alexander, but Porus and the others took no notice of his 
summons. Since all had not acknowledged his authority, 
the warlike Alexander considered that he had received 
sufficient provocation to justify an invasion. Had it not 
been for the jealousy and intrigues of these factious princes 



38 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

against their overlord, the task of invading India would 
have been a much more formidable one. As it was, 
Alexander was able unmolested to march down the danger- 
ous Khyber Pass into the valley of Peshawar, to cross his 
army without opposition over the river Indus, and to use 
the country of Taxiles both as a source from which to draw 
supplies for his army and as a base of operations in the 
ensuing campaign. 

The battle of the Jhelum. After halting some time 
at Taxila to complete his preparations, Alexander marched 
towards the Jhelum, where he heard that Porus with all the 
forces he could muster was waiting to dispute his passage. 
Alexander drew up his army on the bank of the river 
opposite that of Porus. But on one wild and stormy night, 
under cover of the darkness, leaving a portion of his forces 
behind him so as not to excite suspicion, he himself with 
the main body crossed the river at a spot a few miles dis- 
tant. When the scouts of Porus informed him of what had 
happened, he immediately despatched his son with a con- 
siderable body of troops to check Alexander's advance. 
The son of Porus hurried forward gallantly to the attack ; 
but the rain had made the ground soft, and the chariots on 
which he placed so much reliance stuck in the mud and 
impeded rather than assisted him. In the battle which 
ensued, the Indian horsemen, though fighting with desperate 
courage, could not stand against the well-disciplined cavalry 
of the Greeks, and were driven in upon the supporting 
infantry. Behind the Greek cavalry came the steady 
phalanxes of veteran foot--soldiers, who bore down all before 
them. The rout was soon complete, and the Indians fled 
precipitately, leaving their leader's body among the heaps 
of slain. 

Submission of Porus. When the news was brought 
to Porus that his son was killed and that the force sent with 
him had been dispersed, he drew up his whole army 
in array, determined that the issue between himself and 
Alexander should be decided in one pitched battle. 
In front of his infantry he stationed his two hundred 
elephants, which were to have been goaded forward by 
their drivers to trample down the enemy. He had 
besides an immense body of cavalry and a number of 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 39 

war-chariots. When the two opposing forces met, a sudden 
panic seized the elephants, and turning round they rushed 
back upon his army, crushing men and horses and throwing 
the ranks into confusion. The Greeks following close upon 
the terrified animals, quickly put to flight the whole army. 
Further resistance was vain, and Porus was obliged to tender 
his submission. Alexander was greatly pleased with the 
courage and spirit shown by his fallen enemy, and not only 
treated him with the honour due to his rank, but restored 
to him his kingdom. Porus repaid the kingly generosity of 
his conqueror by becoming henceforth his loyal and devoted 
friend. 

Proposed attack on Magadha. While at Taxila, 
Alexander had heard tidings of a kingdom on the banks of 
the Ganges which far surpassed in wealth and power any 
that he had yet met with. This kingdom was Magadha, 
over which the last of the Nanda dynasty was then reign- 
ing. In the years that had intervened since Buddha's death 
Magadha had been steadily growing till it was now the 
most powerful kingdom in Northern India. It had already 
absorbed Kosala and the neighbouring kingdoms to the 
south, east and west, and now stretched right up to the 
borders of the Punjab. Alexander's informant was Chandra 
Gupta, or Sandrocottus as the Greeks called him, an exiled 
prince from Nand^'s court. With tales of the grandeur 
and magnificence of Nanda's capital the wily Indian fired 
Alexander's mind with lust of conquest, and then coolly 
proposed that they should invade the kingdom together, 
depose the reigning monarch, and place him, Chandra 
Gupta, on the throne. Alexander was impressed with the 
feasibility of the project, but was so greatly displeased 
with the presumption of the adventurer that Chandra 
Gupta was obliged to fly for his life from Taxila. 

After the conquest of Porus, Alexander fought his 
victorious way to the banks of the Chenab, receiving on 
the march the submission of the ruler of Kashmir. The 
Ravi and the Byas were next crossed without serious 
opposition, but in the country of the Kathaians beyond he 
met with a stubborn resistance, which was not overcome 
till Sangala the capital had been captured and rased to the 
ground. Magadha now lay before him, but the conqueror's 



40 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

war-worn veterans had had enough of fighting, and longed 
to return to Greece; and now, too, the south-west monsoon 
had begun to dehige the country with rain. When they 
heard that they would be required to march still further 
from their homes in Europe, they refused, in spite of 
threats, entreaties and promises of plunder to be led 
against Magadha. 

Alexander's departure and death. Alexander was 
therefore forced to relinquish his project and to make his 
way back to Persia. Part of his troops were sent down 
the Jhelum and the Indus in boats to tlie sea, while he and 
the remainder marched along the banks. On the way he 
met with considerable opposition from the natives, and was 
himself severely wounded in the assault and capture of 
Multan. Near the junction of the Five Rivers he halted 
for a while and began the construction of a city which he 
named Alexandria. There he left a Greek governor and 
garrison; then marching on to where the Indus branches 
out into its delta, he founded another city, Patala, which 
as Hyderabad, the capital of Sind, survives to this day. 
After suffering great hardships and losing many of his 
soldiers in the wild and desolate country of Baluchistan, he 
reached Persia in 325 B.C. Two years later at Babylon, 
the capital, while busily maturing fresh schemes of conquest, 
he was seized with a fever and died. 

Effects of his invasion. Though Alexander, added 
no portion of India to his vast dominions, yet by founding 
cities, establishing Greek garrisons and setting up and 
dethroniiioj kinors, he had insured that the eflf'ects of his 
invasion should endure. But the most important result of 
his invasion was that it brought into contact with each 
other the two most highly civilized nations of the ancient 
world a contact that could not be otherwise than to their 
mutual advantage. While the Hindus of Northern India 
felt the influence of Greece in science and art, the Greeks 
must have imbibed from the Hindus something of their 
deep religious and philosophical speculations. 

Chandra Gupta and Seleucus. After Alexander's 
death his vast empire broke up, and in the scramble which 
ensued Seleucus, one of his generals, seized upon the 
Province of Bactria, lying to the north of Afghanistan, and 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 



41 



established there an independent Greek kingdom. As soon 
as he had consolidated his power, he invaded India, think- 
ing to carry out the plans of conquest which had filled the 
mmd of Alexander. But in the years which had passed 
since Alexander's death, Chandra Gupta, the exiled prince 




Head of Alexander (in the British Museum). 

of Magadha, had actually succeeded in carrying out, single- 
handed, the project which he had proposed that he and 
Alexander should jointly effect. Taking advantage of the 
anarchy which followed the withdrawal of the Greeks from 
Northern India, he had by promises of plunder gathered 
together a powerful army of mercenaries and freebooters, 
and with its assistance overthrown and slain the last of the 
Nandas and seized his kingdom. He had since entered 
upon a career of conquest, and at the time of the invasion 
of Seleucus had extended his sway over the whole of 



42 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

Northern India. Seleuciis therefore, unlike Alexander, had 
to face one powerful ruler instead of several petty kings 
who could not for. their mutual jealousies act in concert. 
When he had penetrated as far as the Ganges, he found- 
himself in such difficulties that he was glad to make peace 
with Chandi'a Gupta on terms very different from those of 
a victorious invader. He agreed to relinquish all territory 
south of Kabul to the Hindu king in exchange for 500 
elephants. An alliance was then concluded between the 
two monarchs, in proof of the good faith of which Seleucus 
gave his daughter in marriage to Chandra Gupta, and the 
latter agreed to receive a Greek ambassador at his court. 

Megasthenes's account of Magadha. This am- 
bassador, whose name was Megasthenes, wrote an account 
of his five years' sojourn at Chandra Gupta's capital, but, 
unfortunately, fragments only of it have been preserved to 
us. The capital had been removed from Rajagriha by one 
of the early Nanda kings to Pataliputra, at the junction of 
the Ganges and the Sone. Megasthenes describes it as a 
city ten miles long by two miles broad, protected on one 
side by the Ganges and on the other by a deep ditch, and 
surrounded oa all sides by a wooden wall. The government 
was, so far as the capital was concerned, a paternal des- 
potism. The people were entirely at the mercy of officials 
and had no voice in public affairs. The empire of Magadha 
was a loose confederacy of 118 towns and principalities, 
under the suzerainty of the ruler of Pataliputra, but prac- 
tically independent as far as their internal administration 
was concerned. 

The social state of the Hindus. Except in regard 
to matters which came under his own observation Megas- 
thenes's account must be received with caution. He was 
undoubtedly a close and accurate observer, but statements 
which he makes on the strength of reports made to him 
by others are often obviously false and show a degree of 
credulity which is astonishing. He gravely tells of tribes 
of men without mouths, of others with a single eye, and 
many similar absurdities : but it is only fair to him to add 
that his original work has not been preserved, and we have 
to rely upon quotations from it preserved in later writers, 
and that even when every deduction has been made there 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 43 

is still a considerable residuum of fact in his account which 
is well worthy of attention. Megasthenes remarks with 
approval the exemption of cultivators from military service, 
but he deplores the stringency of the caste rules. He was 
very favourably impressed with the Hindus, and ascribes 
to them many virtues for w^hich they are not now con- 
spicuous. But when he speaks of their simple and frugal 
habits on the one hand, and on the other of their extrava- 
gant love of ornament and show, he is noticing traits which 
prevail to the present day. Strangely enough he makes 
no reference to Buddhism ; though it is thought by some 
that by one of the two classes of philosophers mentioned 
by him may be meant the Buddhist teachei's. The omission 
may be due to the fact that in the time of Chandra Gupta, 
who was not a Buddhist king, the sect, deprived of royal 
favour, had dwindled to insignificance ; or it may be that 
the ambassador relied too implicitly for his accounts of 
Hindu society upon what he gathered from Brahman 
sources. He states that the Hindus had no laws ; but as 
his description of the Government agrees fairly closely 
with the form laid down in the Code of Manu, we may 
suppose that some portions of that sacred unwritten Code 
w^ere generally, if tacitly, observed. The village com- 
munity was answerable through its headman to the king 
for its taxes and good conduct, but otherwise was allowed 
to manage its own internal affairs as it pleased. The king 
was the owner of all the land, and exacted for the royal 
treasury a fourth part of the produce of the soil. 

Life at the Capital. Megasthenes gives a wonderfully 
vivid picture of the life of the court and of the capital. 
The palace which was surrounded by a wide and well-kept 
park, though made chiefly of wood, excelled in beauty and 
costliness of workmanship any to be found even in Persia. 
It was furnished with unexampled lavishness and splendour, 
gold and jewels being profusely employed for ornamentation 
and in the vessels for royal use. The king spent his leisure 
in hunting and in watching combats of animals and men, 
but he seldom showed himself outside the palace, and when 
he went among his people he was surrounded by a band of 
armed women, fierce and strong, and it was death to attempt 
to approach him. In spite of his magnificence and power 



44 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

he lived in constant dread of assassination, never sleeping 
during the day-time or in the same room on two successive 
nights. 

The Administration. A huge standing army was 
maintained continuously on a war footing, which, if Megas- 
thenes is to be credited, comprised 600,000 infantry, 30,000 
horse and 9000 elephants, besides a multitude of chariots. 
The affairs of the army were managed by a commission 
consisting of thirty members, subdivided into boards which 
had charge of the various departments, such as infantry and 
cavaliy. The control of the capital was similarly adminis- 
tered by boards. Trade and manufacture were very strictly 
supervised with a view to insuring the full collection of the 
revemie from taxes thereon. The registration of births 
and deaths was likewise carefully maintained, and wages 
and prices were regulated by the State. The laws relating 
to the payment of taxes were very severe, evasions of pay- 
ment being punishable with death, and crime was repressed 
with almost inhuman cruelty and hanhness 

The administration of provinces was entrusted to viceroys, 
over whom a careful watch was kept by means of an elabo- 
rate system of espionage. The land tax was then as now 
the principal source of revenue and the land was "settled'^ 
for purposes of taxation ; but it is difficult to believe that 
a uniform rate of one-fourth of the gross produce, as 
stated by Megasthenes, could have been levied every- 
where. Irrigation was very carefully attended to and 
irrigation works of great importance were constructed. 
Megasthenes explicitly states that it Avas the duty of one 
set of officers ''to measure the land, as in Egypt, and inspect 
the sluices by which water is distributed into the branch, 
canals, so that every one may enjoy his fair share of the 
benefit." 

We are justified in inferring from Megasthenes's account 
of the Magadha Empire that, despite some barbarously 
cruel laws, relentless exactions, and the inquisitorial nature 
of the government, a high stage of civilization had been 
reached in India, and that the people were fairly prosperous 
and as a whole well cared for by the State. 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 45 



THE RISE OF BUDDHISM. 



Asoka. Chandra Gupta reigned for twenty-four years 
as King of Magadha and overlord of many little kingdoms 
of Northern and North-Western India. He was the founder 
of a line of kings known as the Mauriya dynasty, and was 
succeeded by his son Bindusara. This king, who reigned 
for tAventy-eight years, extended his father's empire by fresh 
conquests. His successor was his son Asoka, one of the 
greatest of Indian rulers. The Buddhist chronicles declare 
that he succeeded in establishing himself upon his father's ' 
throne by the murder of the rightful heir, his elder brother, 
and the wholesale massacre of the members of the roval 
family. This is doubtless an exaggeration, for Asoka, in 
one of his edicts issued at a much later date, makes mention 
of brothers still alive. At the time of his father's death 
Asoka was acting as governor of Ujjain, and, as has so 
often happened in the history of India, a fratricidal struggle 
took place for the possession of the throne. His elder 
brother, who was governor of Taxila, appears to have been 
his most formidable rival, and a fierce encounter took place 
between them, ending in the defeat and death of the 
former. Asoka ascended the throne in B.C. 267, but was 
not crowned at Pataliputra till four years later. The early 
years of his reign were spent in extending still further the 
empire of Magadha by adding to it after a long and devas- 
tating war the territory of the Kalingas, lying between his 
kingdom and the Bay of Bengal. Under him the empire 
of Magadha became the greatest that had up to then been 
known in India. So great did his power become that his 
suzerainty was acknowledged up to the borders of Bactria 
in the north down to the Krishna River in the south. 

His conversion to Buddhism. But it is not so 
much on this account that he has left so great a name in 
history as because of his zeal in the cause of Buddhivsm 
He was not in early life a Buddhist; indeed, if we may 
believe the Buddhist chronicles, he had been notorious for 
violence and cruelty. But the horrors of the conquest of 
Kalinga, and the miseries inflicted thereby upon a prosperous 
and civilized people, so wrought upon his mind that they 
altered the whole tenor of his life. From that time he 



46 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

was troubled with remorse and began to show a kindly 
leaning towards the Buddhist religion ; and as he grew 
older, he came more and more under the influence of the 
Buddhist sages, till, in the eleventh year after his corona- 
tion, he openly avowed himself a convert to that mild and 
gentle creed. His was an ardent nature, and having made 
up his mind that salvation lay in the path that Buddha 
had revealed, he was determined to do all in his power to 
guide mankind along it. From that moment the power 
and the influence of the Brahmans, who had regained 
their ascendancy under his predecessors, rapidly declined. 
Buddhism was established as the state religion of his empire 
and its doctrines proclaimed far and wide. 

Third Buddhist Council. Two years after his 
conversion a great council was called together at his 
capital, to settle the faith, and to "classify and compile 
the Buddhist scriptures. This is known as the Third Great 
Buddhist Council. ^ It is important to notice in passing 
first, that the language employed was that in common 
use at the time, the Magadhi or Pali language, and 
secondly, that in Asoka's time writing was freely in use 
in India. 

Asoka's edicts. In the thirteenth year after his 
coronation he began to issue edicts setting forth the tenets 
of the faith, and had them inscribed on rocks in different 
parts of his kingdom. These rock-cut edicts exist to the 
present day, noble memorials of his earnestness and 
piety, and records of the greatest interest and impor- 
tance to the historian and the scholar. In all of them 
he styles himself King Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, 
and he tells us in them that he has ordered the faithful 
to gather in each district every five years for religious . 
instruction ; that he has appointed Buddhist ministers 
to go into every land to attend to the spiritual needs of 
believers and to teach those who have not yet heard 
the Law ; that he has enjoined universal religious tolera- 

^ There is no good reason for rejecting, as some have done, the 
story of the Third Buddhist Coiincil as a later invention of the 
monks of Ceylon, for the relics of Tissa, son of Moggali, who is 
said to have presided at it, have actually been discovered at Sanchi 
in the Central Provinces. 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 



47 



tioii and exhorted his subjects to be ever extolling 
virtue and imparting true religion to each other; that 
he has prohibited the slaughter of animals for food or 
sacrifice ; that he has provided medicines for man and beast 




Asoka's Pillar. 



in all the realms over which he exercises suzerainty, dug 
wells and built rest-houses along the public roads, and 
planted medicinal herbs, fruit trees, and trees to afford 
shade to travellers, wherever they were needed. The 
edicts also tell us how wide-reaching was the influence of 
Asoka and with what distant countries the Empire of 



48 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

Magadha had intercourse. Antiochiis of Bactria, Ptolemy 
of Egypt, Antigoiius of Macedon, and Alexander of Epirus 
received his missionaries and permitted them to preach in 
their dominions. 

His zeal for the faith. In addition to the rock 
inscriptions, in the 26th and 27th years of his reign he issued 
a fresh set of edicts, containing further religious and moral 
instructions, and had them inscribed on pillars in different 
parts of his kingdom. His zeal in the propagation of the 
faith knew no bounds. Everywhere hospitals and dis- 
pensaries were established, schools opened for the teaching 
of religion and ministers appointed to supervise the morals 
of his people. Buddhist monasteries enjoyed the special 
patronage of the state. Those who took monastic vows and 
wore the yellow robe were so numerous that the eastern 
portion of the empire became known as the land of the 
Yiharas or monasteries. Mahendra, his son, and Sangha- 
mitra, his daughter, entered the order of mendicants, and 
went to Ceylon to spread the faith among its people.^ Their 
mission was from the first crowned with success. The 
king of the island embraced the new faith, and erected a 
stately monastery for those who joined the order, and 
there the brother and sister lived and taught for the 
remainder of their lives. The missionary enterprise 
during Asoka's reign was extraordinary vigorous and far- 
reaching. Buddhist mendicant monks penetrated to Kash- 
mir^ Afghanistan, Bactria, and Greece, Lower Burmah, 
and Indo-China, and to every part of India. Everything 
th^t could be done was done to spread the religion of 
Buddha and insure obedience to its tenets, short of persecu- 
tion or forcible conversion. These the religion itself strictly 
forbade ; for it is the special boast of Buddhism that from 
the first it has relied solely upon peaceful missionary work. 

His greatness. Asoka died in 232 B.C., after having 
reigned for forty-one years. He had been strong enough to 
keep in check the whole extent of his vast empire, and had 
preserved friendly relations with the independent kingdoms 
on its borders. Therefore during his long reign India 
enjoyed one of those periods of general peace which have 

^Mr. Vincent Smith in his Asolca rejects the whole story, but see 
Rhys Davids' Buddhist India, pp. 300-304. 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 



49 



occurred so seldom in her history. Few kings have had so 
good a title to be called Great as this earnest noble-minded 
monarch, and none has exercised a greater influence for 
good upon his fellow-men. 

Decay of the Magadha Empire. After Asoka's 
death six kings of the Mauriya dynasty ruled over 
Magadha. But the Empire quickly dwindled in the hands 
of his successors, and in 184 B.C. the last of the Mauriyas, 
who reigned over little more than the province of Magadha, 
was assassinated by Pushyamitra, his commander in- 
chief. Pushyamitra seized 
the throne and was the 
.founder of a short-lived 
dynasty known as the 
Sungas. He favoured 
Brahmanism and is said 
to, have cruelly oppressed 
the Buddhists. His reign 
is chiefly noteworthy for 
another daring Greek in- 
cursion which occurred 
during it. The decay of 
the Magadha Empire 
seems to have resulted 
in the establishment of a 
number of little Greek 

kingdoms in the country west of the Indus. The ruler of 
one of these, Menander by name, who held sway in the 
Kabul Valley, undertook about the year 155 B.C. an 
adventurous incursion into Northern India. Not only 
did he cross the Beas, the furthest point reached by 
Alexander, but he pushed his way through the country 
now included in the United Provinces and was only 
checked finally at the very gates of Pataliputra itself. 
That a petty prince should have been able to accomplish 
such a striking feat of arms is eloquent of the rapid decline 
of military power in India since the days of Asoka. 

Rise of the Andhras. Northern India during the 
latter half of the second century B.C. was in a very unsettled 
state, and the rise about this time of a new power, the 
Andhras, in Central India must have contributed not a little 

H.I.H.S. D 




Coin of Menander. 



50 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

to increase the confusion and unrest. The Sunga dynasty of 
Magadha came to an end in B.C. 72, much in the same way 
as that of the Mauriyas had done. The last king was 
assassinated by his Brahman prime-minister, who usurped 
the throne. The Kanva dynasty, which the usurper 
founded, had an even shorter duration than the Sunga, for 
in 27 B.C. the reigning Andhra monarch defeated and slew 
the Kanva ruler and annexed his kingdom to his own. 
Thus ingloriously ended the great Magadha Empire. Very 
little is known of the history of the Andhras, but they 
rapidly rose in power and importance and conquered a 
large portion of the Deccan. Their territory, roughly 
speaking, comprised the modern Hyderabad, Berar and the 
Central Provinces. Their kings were Buddhists, and the 
remains of stupas and monasteries erected by them are still 
to be seen scattered over the Deccan. 



TABLE OF APPROXIMATE DATES. 

EARLY HINDU PERIOD. 

B.C. 

Rise of Magadha under the Saisunagas 600 

Birth of Buddha, founder of Buddhism - - - - - 557 

Commencement of the reign of Bimbisara . . . . 520 

Persian invasion of the Indus Valley ..... 500 

Ajatasutru's reign begins 490 

Death of Buddha 487 

First Buddhist Council - 477 

Second Buddhist Council 380 

The first of the Nandas begins to reign 370 

Alexander's invasion 327 

Chandragupta Mauriya - - - - - - - - 321 

Bindusara .......--- 295 

Asoka 267 

Third Buddhist Council 244 

Pushyamitra, founder of the Sunga dynasty 184 

Menander's incursion ........ 150 

The Kanva dynasty founded 72 

The Andhra ruler reduces Magadha - - - - - - 27 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 51 

Scythians and Parthians. About the middle of the 
second century B.C., that is a few years after Menander's 
invasion, the small Greek kingdoms of Bactria were 
attacked and overrun by the Sakas, nomad hordes of wild 
barbarians dwelling to the south-west of the Aral Sea. 
The Sakas, or Scythians as they are often called, had been 
forced south by the pressure of another invading host 
known as the Yueh-Chi, migrating westward in vast 
numbers from Chinese territory. The Sakas, after destroy- 
ing the Greek kingdoms of Bactria, seem to have secured for 
a time an uncertain footing in the northern Punjab ; but a 
branch that made its way down the Indus valley succeeded 
in establishing itself firmly in Kathiawar, then called Saur- 
ashtra. The ill-success of the Sakas in the Punjab was 
perhaps due to inroads of Parthians that occurred about the 
same time, for it seems certain that a succession of Parthian 
kings held sway upon the north-west frontier from about 
120 B.C. till the middle of the first century A.D. The Sakas 
appear to have accepted a position of vassalage under the 
Parthians, for their rulers took the Persian title of Ksha- 
trapa, or Satrap, which signifies subordination to an 
imperial ruler. Amidst the confusion of names and dates 
in the history of the period, the name of one Parthian 
overlord, Gondophares, deserves to be remembered. He is 
known to have ascended the throne in A.D. 21 and to have 
reigned for about thirty years ; but the chief interest 
attaching to his name is that very early Christian tradition 
represents him as having received a Christian mission 
led by the apostle Thomas himself. There seems no 
good reason for doubting the truth of the story, though 
it was not from this direction that Christianity was 
destined to gain a permanent foothold on the Indian 
continent. 

The Yueh-Chi. But while Greeks, ' Parthians and 
Sakas were struggling desparately together, the Yueh-Chi 
were pushing relentlessly south, hard upon the heels of the 
Sakas. Before the Yueh-Chi all three contestants alike 
went down, and by the middle of the first century of the 
Christian Era, Kadphises, the ruler of the leading Yueh- 
Chi clan, the Kushans, had seized upon the whole of the 
territory north of India comprised by the countries now 



52 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 




The Old Tower, Buddh Gaya, as Restored. 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 53 

known as Afghanistan and Bokhara. Kadphises died about 
85 A.D. and was succeeded by his son Kadphises 11. The 
latter, having made an unsuccessful attack upon the Chinese 
Empire, turned his attention to India, which offered an 
easier conquest. Crossing over the border he overthrew 
the Parthian ruler and the Saka Kshatrapas of the Punjab 
together, and speedily made himself the acknowledged 
master of Northern India as far as Benares and Ghazipur. 
Meanwhile the western Scythians, who still occupied Guzerat, 
taking advantage of the state of anarchy resulting from the 
struggles for supremacy in the north, succeeded in establish- 
ing a powerful and independent kingdom. The Saka era, 
78 A.D., an era widely employed in reckoning historical 
dates, marks the date of their declaration of independence. 

Embassy to Rome. It was probably on the con- 
clusion of his Indian campaign that Kadphises II. sent in 
99 A.I), his embassy to Rome to offer his congratulations to 
the Emperor Trajan. Though this is the first mention of 
intercourse between India and the Roman Empire it may 
be mentioned that an extensive trade with Europe in silks, 
spices and precious stones was being carried on during the 
whole of the first century A.D., mainly through the ports 
along the western coast of India. Commerce with foreign 
countries was no innovation, for in much earlier times 
Southern India had supplied the markets of Babylon with 
merchandise, and a coasting trade had existed between it 
and Mesopotamia almost from time immemorial. But 
Trajan's conquests brought India and Rome for the first 
time into actual contact; for Rome became through them a 
great Asiatic power, and direct trade relations were soon 
established between the two. Roman coins began to pass 
current in Northern and Western India, and the influence 
of Roman art is strongly marked in the currency and stone 
carving of the period. 

Political divisions of India. There was at this time 
in India no paramount power, as there had been in the 
time of Asoka. The Andhras, while able to extend their 
dominions over Behar, were unable to push their conquests 
south of the Kistna River, and the Cholas, the Cheras and 
the Pandyas still maintained their ancient sway in Southern 
India. The Kushan branch of the Yueh-Chi did indeed 



54 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

rapidly extend its dominions, but its power lay chiefly in 
the north and west of India and maiiilj^ beyond its borders 
in Central Asia. 

Kanishka. Kadphises II. was succeeded by Kanishka 
about the year A.D. 125, and under him the Kushan 




Kaniska offering Incense, 
(From a coin.) 

Empire reached the zenith of its power. Kashgar, Yar- 
kand and Khotan were added to the territories beyond the 
Indian frontier, and in India the Kushan monarch's 
sway extended as far south as the Yindhyas. Kanishka 
established his capital at Peshawar, upon Indian soil, and 
the city became under him rich and famous and renowned 
particularly for a noble style of stone-carving known as the 
Indo-Roman Buddhist style. Like the Great Asoka, whom 
he delighted to imitate, he was a convert to Buddhism. 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 55 

But the Buddhism of Kanishka's day was very different 
from that of Asoka's. Buddha, despite his express teach- 
ing, had long since been deified, and around him as a central 
deity the whole mythology of a spirit-world had grown up. 
Buddhism had, in fact, passed into a regular religion, and 
in the process the simple teaching of the founder was 
smothered beneath a mass of superstitious ritual. In 
Kanishka's reign, as in that of Asoka, a Great Council was 
summoned to settle disputed points of doctrine. This 
Council, v/hich was the last of the Buddhist Councils, 
settled the creed of the northern Buddhists, as Asoka's 
had settled that of the southern. It is significant of the 
revival of Brahman influence that the language used was 
Sanskrit, and that Brahmanical doctrine is much in evidence 
in these commentaries. There are thus two schools of 
Buddhism, that of the northern Buddhists, known as the 
Mahayana or High Path, and that of the southern Bud- 
dhist, the Hinayana or Low Path school. It was iif 
Kanishka's reign that Buddhist missionaries were sent 
northwards into Thibet and China. 

Decline of the Kushan Empire. Kanishka died 
about the year 150 A.D., and was succeeded by his son, 
Huvtshka. The new king was, like his father, a munificent 
patron of Buddhism and continued to endow monasteries 
and erect stupas on a lavish scale ; but he was lax in his 
beliefs and did honour to the gods of other religions as well 
Greek, Indian, and Persian. Huvishka, like his father, 
enjoyed a long reign and seems to have retained unimpaired 
the vast empire bequeathed to him. His successor was 
named Vasudeva, a significantly Hindu-sounding name. 
The fact, too, that upon his coins are represented the 
mystical signs of the Hindu religion seems to indicate 
that Brahman influence was in the ascendant and a change 
of faith taking place. Vasudeva was the last of the Kushan 
kings to hold imperial sway, and the empire rapidly declined 
during his reign. His death was followed by a period of 
great confusion in Northern India, during which no para- 
mount power arose nor were any stable kingdoms estab- 
lished. 

Saurashtra. The Saka kingdom of Guzerat, known as 
Saurashtra, meanwhile grew and prospered. Its kings, 



56 



HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 



known as the Western Kshatnipas, appear to have been 
Hindus by religion. An inscription of one of them, named 
Nahapana, who ascended the throne in 119 A.D., shows that 
he favoured Hinduism, and paid extravagant honours to 
Brahmans. Nahapana, who was of a warlike disposition, 
was for a time successful in his campaigns against his 
Andhra neighbours, and took from them much territory, 
including Malwa; but in 126 Vilivayakura XL, the Andhra 
king, overran his dominions and in pitched battle defeated 
and slew him. But this check to the fortunes of the king- 
dom of Saurashtra was only temporary, for Chasthana, 
Nahapana's successor, recovered Malwa and removed his 
capital inland to the ancient city of Ujjain. Rudradaman, 
his grandson, who reigned in the middle of the second 
century, made himself by extensive conquests the most 
powerful king in Western India, and twice defeated the 
Andhra king. 

The Guptas. The first half of the third century is 
marked by the decline of the Andhra kingdom. Exhausted 

by its struggles with 
Saurashtra and torn 
by internal dissensions 
it had begun to* lose 
its hold on the out- 
lying portions of its 
dominions. First a 
succession of revolts 
in the south led to 
the establishment of 
several small princi- 
palities, and then the 
northern provinces 
threw off their allegi- 
ancC; forming a new 
kingdom, that of the 
Chedis. The break up 
of the Andhra kingdom 
was followed by a period of general anarchy and strife, 
favourable to the rise ci daring and skilful adventurers. 
A strong hand only was needed to pacify and reunite the 
whole, and in the latter half of the century Magadha 




VlKRAMADlTYA OR ChANDRAGUPTA II. 

(From a coin.) 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 57 

once again supplied rulers capable of performing the task. 
Pataliputra, which had for so many years ceased to play an 
important part in history, was at this time ruled over by a 
petty prince of the name of Chandragupta. By his marriage 
with a Lichchhavi lady of noble birth, named Kumara 
Devi, he had gained both strength and prestige ; for the 
Lichchhavis, after centuries of obscurity, were once more a 
power in the land. It is noteworthy that at this disturbed 
period the tribal form of government revived in various 
parts of Northern India, tribal constitutions being formed 
in the Punjab and Rajputana as well as in Behar. After 
his marriage, Chandragupta, perhaps at first with the aid'' 
of the Lichchhavis, started on a remarkable career of 
conquest. So successful was he that before his death he 
had made himself the master of a kingdom stretching as 
far west as Allahabad and including large portions of Oudh 
and Behar. In consideration of his extensive dominions 
and his unbroken series of victories, he took the title of 
King of Kings and established an era, known as the 
Gupta Era, in honour of himself, dating from the year of 
his coronation in 320. 

Samudra Gupta. His son and successor, Samudra 
Gupta, who ascended the throne in the year 326, was an 
even greater soldier than his father, and his campaigns are 
astounding for their audacity. For the daring and skill 
with which he advanced into wild and distant countries 
Samudra Gupta is deserving of a place among the greatest 
of Indian kings. We are able to judge of his adventurous 
spirit for ourselves, for he has left upon one of Asoka's 
pillars, now standing in the fort at Allahabad, an inscription 
giving a detailed list of his conquests. It tells how he 
carried his victorious arms over the kingdoms of the 
Deccan as far as the Narbadda river, over Assam, Bengal 
and Orissa, and over the Mahratta country in the west, 
and northwards to the Himalayas. Only Sind and the 
Punjab and the south escaped his all-conquering army. He 
did not aiuiex all the kingdoms which he conquered, but, 
even so, his dominions stretched from the Himalayas to the 
Yindhyas and from the Ghambal to the Delta of the Ganges. 
He was not a Buddhist, though tolerant of Buddhism, but 
an orthodox Hindu who payed great honour to Brahmans. 



58 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

At their instigation on the occasion of his victorious return 
from the south he revived with unheard-of splendour the 
famous aswamedlia, the horse sacrifice of Vedic days. 
Besides being a great soldier he was also a great patron of 
learning and the arts. On one of his coins he is represented 
as playing the lyre, and the inscription mentioned above 
speaks of his skill in music and song. After a long and 
prosperous reign he handed on the succession peacefully 
to his successor, Chandragupta 11. 

Chandragupta Vikramaditya. Chandragupta II. 
ascended the throne about 375 a.d. and, like his father, 
spent the earlier part of his reign in warlike enterprise. 
First he put down a rising in Bengal with great vigour, and 
then he turned his attention to the independent kingdoms 
of the west. Malwa and Guzerat were quickly annexed, 
and Saurashtra, after a prolonged struggle, was forced at 
length to submit. The Saka kingdom of the Western Ksha- 
trapas, which had endured for three hundred years amidst 
the surrounding turmoil, was thus at length destroyed. 
Twenty years had been spent in these campaigns ; but 
the prize of victory was worth having, for Chandragupta 
now held the great trading route through Malwa to the 
sea. Saurashtra was at this time the great emporium 
of trade, and through its ports flowed the exports and 
imports of Northern India. The title of Vikramaditya, 
Sun of Victory, which Chandragupta bestowed upon him- 
self after his conquest of Saurashtra, was not altogether 
undeserved, for his empire was scarcely less than that 
of Asoka himself. Though Pataliputra remained officially 
the capital, Chandragupta removed the seat of his 
government, first to the ancient city of Ajodhya, and later 
to Kausambi, a place of great strategic importance, on the 
southern bank of the Jumna, commanding the high road 
through Malwa to the north. Chandragupta Vikramaditya 
inherited his father's literary and artistic tastes as well as 
his skill in war. He must too have possessed considerable 
ability as an administrator, for during his long reign of 
forty years his vast empire enjoyed peace and prosperity. 

Fa Hian^s Account of India. During the reign of 
Chandragupta II., Fa Hian, a pious Chinese Buddhist, 
came on a pilgrimage to India to visit the hallowed spots 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 59 

where Buddha had lived and taught, and to procure for 
his countrymen authentic copies of the Buddhist scrip- 
tures. He has written an account of his journey, and from 
it much valuable information can be gathered regarding 
the state of India at the time. He found Buddhism in a 
flourishing state and the country filled with monasteries. 
Buddhist monks were everywhere supported without stint ; 
but Hindu temples also had their votaries and in every 
large town flourished side by side with Buddhist monasteries. 
The Guptas were Hindus by religion and worshippers of 
Vishnu. It may be on this account that he passes them 
over ; for in his eyes they were heretics, arjd therefore 
unworthy of attention. But symptoms of the decay of 
Buddhism were not wanting, if he had had eyes to see them ; 
for the very places which had been the scenes of Buddha's life 
and teaching were for the most part neglected and their 
buildings in ruins. He found Sravasti, the ancient capital 
of Kosala, which in Buddha's time had been a flourishing city, 
almost deserted. Kapilavastu,the birthplace of Buddha, was 
a scene of desolation. Kusinagara, where he died, was 
inhabited only by a few priests and their families. Gaya 
was deserted, and the holy spots in the neighbourhood were 
overgrown with jungle, though the Bodhi Tree was still 
standing and venerated. At Pataliputra he saw the ruins 
of Asoka's palace, and was much impressed with its magni- 
ficence even in decay. Close at hand there was a handsome 
monastery containing six or seven hundred monks. In 
some of the places which he visited Buddhism was still in 
a flourishing state. In the Deer Park near. Benares, for 
instance, where the first sermon had been preached, the 
monasteries were liberally endowed and generously sup- 
ported by the alms of the faithful. At Mathura, also, the 
monasteries were thriving, and in that part of the country 
and in Malwa Buddhism was prosperous enough. 

Change in the character of Buddhism. But 
Buddhism had undergone a change since the days of Asoka, 
and symptoms of degeneration had begun to manifest them- 
selves. Gorgeous festivals, quite opposed to the spirit of 
the faith, had become recognised institutions, and image 
worship, for which no sanction could be found in the 
Buddhist scriptures, a universal practice. Fa Hian gives 



60 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

an interesting account of a Buddhist procession which he 
saw while staying at Pataliputra. Twenty four-wheeled 
cars surmounted with gaudy imitation pagodas were 
dragged through the streets amid shouting crowds. At the 
four corners of each car were images of Buddha in a sitting 
posture, and round the pagodas under embroidered canopies 
were figures of the Devas adorned with ornaments of gold, 
silver and glass. All the *day of the procession and the 
following night multitudes of gaily-dressed worshippers 
indulged in games and singing and dancing. 

Corruption of the faith. To such idolatrous pomp 
had the pure and simple faith of Buddha degenerated in the 
hands of its priests by the fifth century A.D. Just as the 
bright and cheerful Vedic religion of the early Aryan settlers 
had been smothered by the Brahman hierarchy of Kosala 
under a gorgeous ritual, so the light of Buddha's teaching 
was being in its turn extinguished by the priests under a 
mass of gaudy and idolatrous ceremonial. It may seem 
strange that Buddhism should have undergone so com- 
plete a -transformation ; but Buddhism being essentially 
a religion of the people, as opposed to Brahmanism, 
the religion of a caste, was very liable to be affected 
by current superstitions and to be influenced by the idol 
worship prevalent among non- Aryan peoples. The Buddhist 
priests, being in most cases ignorant men drawn from the 
people, were unable wholly to shake off their old associations 
and beliefs, and permitted, even if they did not encourage, 
practices which were more in accordance with demon- worship 
than with the new faith. It is an indication of the corrup- 
tion of the faith that throughout the whole of Northern 
India there was no complete copy of the Buddhist scriptures 
to be found, but the Bikkhus " trusted to tradition for their 
knowledge of the precepts.'' 

The state of the Country. Fa Hian's account of the 
condition of the places he visited is eloquent testimony to 
the goodness of the governments generally. Being a 
foreigner and a Buddhist he could appraise Hindu rule 
impartially. He found the people following peaceful pur- 
suits undisturbed and he noticed that traders and pilgrims 
passed to and fro freely. In the large towns there were 
abundant evidences of prosperity, and charitable institu- 



THE ^BUDDHIST AGE. 61 

tions were numerous and well supported. At Pataliputra 
there was a noble hospital and dispensary at which the poor 
could receive medicine and attendance free of charge. 
Malwa seemed to him specially prosperous, and he notes 
with approval the gentleness of the people and the compara- 
tive mildness of the criminal law. Altogether from this 
traveller's account it may be gathered that India under the 
Guptas was prosperous and well-governed. 

Kumara Gupta. Chandragupta II. died in 413, and 
was succeeded by Kumara Gupta, who reigned till 455. A 
temple inscription has been discovered bearing reference to 
this king. In it Kumara Gupta is spoken of as " reigning 
over the whole earth " an exaggerated testimony to the 
greatness of his dominions, but proving that his empire must 
have been of vast extent. Kumara Gupta must have 
achieved some notable conquests, for he imitated his grand- 
father Chandragupta in celebrating the horse sacrifice ; but 
the close of his reign was troubled by the invasions of fresh 
hordes of barbarians from the north and by the attacks of 
the Chalukyas, a rising power in the south-west. 

The fall of the Gupta Empire. Kumara Gupta 
was succeeded by his son Skanda Gupta in 455. The new 
king inherited all the martial qualities of his line, but he 
had to contend with almost insurmountable difficulties. The 
White Huns, the name by which the fresh invaders from 
the north are known in history, had been repelled with 
difficulty by his father when they were still comparatively 
few, but they were now gathering again to the attack with 
greatly increased numbers. At the first encounter Skanda 
Gupta by a splendid feat of arms so completely defeated 
them that he gained a respite of several years. But about 
470 they gathered head once more, and in pitched battle 
inflicted a crushing blow upon Skandagupta within the, 
borders of his own dominions. He was soon in great straits 
for want of money to pay his troops, but he struggled 
gamely on, though losing ground steadily, till his death in 
480. By no fault of his own he had left the empire too 
exhausted to recover, and it quickly ' dissolved. By the 
beginning of the sixth century it had suffered so much from 
the ravages of these barbarians that it was reduced to 
insignificance and soon after disappeared from history. Its 



62 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

kings had been zealous Hindus, and it was during the time 
of their ascendency that Buddhism began markedly to 
decline. Sanskrit learning revived under them, and the 
Sanskrit language, which through the influence of Buddhism 
had fallen much out of employment in favour of the ver- 
naculars, once more came into general use among the 
learned. 

The Huns. The original home of the Huns seems to 
have lain somewhere between the Great Wall of China and 
the Caspian Sea. Being driven out thence, they settled in 
the neighbourhood of the Ural river. In the latter half of 
the fourth century A.D. they began a westward movement, 
and in less than a hundred years had overrun most of 
Central and Northern Europe. Under a dreaded leader, 
named Attila, they even laid at length the Roman Empire 
under tribute. But shortly after his death, which occurred 
in 453 A.D., dissensions broke out among their chiefs, and 
the nations of south-eastern Europe whom they had 
reduced to dependence, combining against them, so sig- 
nally defeated them in one pitched battle that they never 
recovered from the effects of it. Their power was com- 
pletely broken, and they rapidly dispersed, the majority 
of them returning to Central Asia. 

Mihiragula. Within a few years of this event, under 
a leader named Toraman, the Central Asian PTuns, no doubt 
joined by the fugitives from Europe, swept down upon 
India, carrying all before them with resistless force. 
Toraman died about 510 A.D., and was succeeded by his son 
Mihiragula, who became even a greater scourge than his 
father. Wherever this ruthless and savage warrior passed 
he left behind him wide scenes of ruin and desolation to 
mark his victorious course. The Huns have won for 
themselves in history a name for unexampled cruelty 
and barbarity, but under Mihiragula they surpassed even 
their own record. His ferocious cruelties at length reached 
such a pitch that the princes of Northern India, sink- 
ing their mutual jealousies for once, combined against 
him. Baladitya, King of Magadha, and Yasodharman, 
King of Ujjain, placed themselves at the head of the 
league. The contending armies met at Kahror in 528 A.D., 
and Mihiragula was utterly defeated and taken prisoner. 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 63 

The power of the Huns in India was completely broken 
by this blow, but with misplaced clemency the victors 
spared their captured foe and unwisely released him. 
Mihiragula took refuge in Kashmir at the invitation of the 
king of the country, who appears to have been himself a 
Hun. His host had soon reason to repent his kindness, 
for Mihiragula secretly collected a band of desperadoes, 
murdered the king and seized the throne. Then by 
treachery he made himself the master of the neighbouring 
kingdom of Gandhara, and exterminated the royal family. 
Kashmir and Gandhara were at this time the principal 
strongholds of Buddhism, while Mihiragula claimed as a 
follower of Siva to be a Hindu. He therefore set fiercely 
about a systematic extermination of the cult by sacking 
temples and monasteries and massacring priests and wor- 
shippers wholesale. Fortunately for his subjects he died 
within the year of his usurpation, but within that short 
time he had wrought such havoc that Buddhism never 
recovered from the shock. 

The legend of Vikramaditya. A good deal of 
mystery surrounds the name of Yasodharman. On inscrip- 
tions which he has left he takes to himself the whole 
credit for the defeat of Mihiragula and claims to be the 
ruler of an empire more extensive than that even of the 
Guptas. But he is known from these inscriptions only. 
There is no mention elsewhere either of him or of his vast 
dominions. It is difficult to believe that the inscriptions 
are the vain and frantic boastings of an insignificant ruler 
anxious to deceive posterity, but it is still more difficult to 
believe that so mighty a monarch, as he claims to be, should 
have been so completely forgotten by history. Efforts 
have been made to identify Yasodharman with the famous 
Vikramaditya of Sanskrit literature, the perfect pattern of a 
Hindu king. Vikramaditya has been to Hindu story-tellers 
what King Arthur was to the bards and romancers of 
Western Europe in the middle ages. They have loved to 
bestow upon him every noble trait, and round his name 
there have gathered countless legends setting forth his 
valour and his piety. Just as Arthur, the British king, is 
fabled to have stemmed the tide of Saxon invasion, so 
Vikramaditya is related to have repelled the barbarians; 



64 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

and just as Arthur's Court was the centre of culture and 
refinement, so Vikramaditya's Court was the resort of 
poets and scholars. He is said to have gathered round him 
nine pre-eminent men of letters, the Navaratna, or nine 
jewels of his court, amongst whom were Kalidas, the 
greatest of Sanskrit poets and dramatists, Varahamihira the 
astronomer, Amara the lexicographer, and Vararuchi 
the grammarian. But whether all these four men were 
living in the time of Yasodharman, or were even con- 
temporaries of one another, is more than doubtful 
indeed such little evidence as there is seems rather to 
warrant a contrary opinion. Hindu writers, unwilling to 
allow their legendary national hero to* be relegated 
altogether to the realms of fiction, have been anxiously in 
search of evidence to connect him with some historical 
personage, and they have fixed upon Yasodharman as the 
most likely, because he claims to have driven back the 
terrible Huns and to have ruled over a wide extent of 
Hindustan. It seems, however, more probable that the 
Legends of Vikramaditya may have gathered round the 
name of Vikramaditya Chandragupta, or at any rate 
round some member of the famous dynasty of the Guptas. 

Confusion in Northern India. After the death of 
Yasodharman his kingdom must have rapidly declined, for 
very little is heard of Malwa subsequently. The period 
which follows is one of struggle for supremacy between the 
many petty kingdoms which had arisen out of the wreck of 
the Gupta Empire. The Huns still appear to have been 
giving trouble in the north ; for, nearly fifty years after the 
battle of Kahror, Prabhakara, King of Thanes war, was 
engaged in conflict with them. Towards the close of his 
reign, his son Rajyavardhan, whom he had sent to com- 
mand his army against the Huns, succeeded in reducing 
them to subjection, and from this time forward they are 
heard of no more in Indian history. -They were in their 
turn entering now upon a desperate struggle in Central 
Asia for existence with a fresh horde of barbarians, the 
Turks, and they had no strength left for Indian enter- 
prises. 

Rise of Thaneswar. Rajyavardhan peacefully as- 
cended the throne ; but he had hardly assumed the reins of 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 65 

government when he was forced to march against the king 
of Malwa to avenge the death of his brother-in-law, the 
king of Kanauj, and to release from chains the queen, his 
sister. Rajyavardhan had no difficulty in disposing of his 
enemy, but in the hour of victory he unwisely accepted an 
invitation to a conference in the camp of Sasanka, the king 
of Western Bengal, an ally of the king of Kanauj, and was 
there treacherously murdered. At his death the succes- 
sion passed by common consent to Siladitya, his younger 
brother, better known to history as Harsha, one of the 
most famous of Indian rulers. 

Harshavardhan. Harsha ascended the throne of 
Thaneswar in 606. His first task was to punish his 
brother's murderer, and he lost no time in marching 
into Bengal to attack Sasanka. This king was doubly 
abhorrent to him, for besides his guilt as the perpetrator 
of a treacherous crime he was a notorious persecutor 
of Buddhists, while Harsha was a staunch supporter 
of the faith. Sasanka had destroyed the Bodhi Tree 
at Gaya, desecrated shrines and holy relics, demolishecj 
convents and driven away the monks. There are no 
records of Harsha's campaign, but Sasanka was doubtless 
thoroughly humbled. Having dealt with Sasanka, Harsha 
embarked forthwith upon an extensive scheme of conquest. 
No Indian king has shown a greater persistency in war 
than he displayed. For thirty-five years he was almost 
constantly in the field and he did not rest till he had 
overcome all opposition from the Punjab to Assam. 

Conflict with Piilikesin. Harsha would have carried 
his victorious arms over the Deccan as well as over all 
Northern India had he not met with an unexpected check 
at the hands of Pulikesin II., king of the Chalukyas. 
Pulikesin's capital was at a place called Vatapi in what 
is now the district of Bijapur, and the Chalukyas 
were immigrants from the north, possibly Scythians, who 
had imposed themselves as a ruling race upon the Dravidians 
of that part of the country. Pulikesin II., whose reign 
commenced in 608, is one of the most renowned of Indian 
warriors, and at the time when Harsha attacked him he was 
at the zenith of his power and prestige. Despite Harsha's 
most strenuous exertions and his enormous and unbeaten 

H.I.H.S. E. 



66 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

army Pulikesin successfully resisted him, and he was at 
length obliged to retire without having achieved anything. 
Thereafter for a time the two sovereigns practically divided 
India between them. Harsha's sovereignty was acknow- 
ledged fi'om the Himalayas to the Narbada, while Pulikesin 
was the recognized suzerain of Southern India. 

Houen Tsang. During Harsha's reign another pious 
Chinese Buddhist, named Houen Tsang, made a pil- 
grimage to India, and he too, like Fa Hian, wrote an 
account of what he saw there. He arrived i_i India in 630, 
^nd remained in the country for fifteen years. Being a 
man of superior intelligence and broader views than Fa 
Hian his account is more reliable. It throws a flood of 
light upon a dark portion of the history of India, and affords 
much valuable information concerning the manners and 
customs of the time. 

His travels. Houen Tsang passed through Kandahar 
and Kabul on his way to India. In the country of 
Afghanistan Buddhism had degenerated into idolatry, and 
the stupas and images of Buddha had been invested with 
supernatural powers by the superstitious inhabitants. 
Many of the monasteries were deserted, and Hindu temples 
were springing up in all directions. In Kashmir, where he 
stayed two years, he found the two religions existing 
side by side, but Hinduism had now quite as strong a 
following as Buddhism. He has much to tell of Kanishka 
and the Great Buddhist Council held in his reign. Time 
had not yet obliterated the traces of the dread Mihirakula's 
devastating invasions, and the memory of them was still 
fresh in men's minds. It is significant of the steady 
decay of Buddhism that it had not recovered from the 
shocks of his invasions despite the lapse of more than a 
century. In Mathura, Buddhism had a strong following, 
hul the great attention paid to outward forms and cere- 
monies was a symptom of decay. Next he visited Thanes- 
war, celebrated in the Mahabharata as the scene of the 
battle between the Kauravas and the Pandavas. Near at 
hand, so he was told, were still to be seen the bones of the 
heroes scattered over the plain. If there were any bones 
visible, they could only have been those of men slain in 
some recent battle ; but the existence of the tradition 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 67 

points to a struggle having actually taken place, and is 
therefore evidence of the fact of the Kuru Panchala War. 
Curiosity led him to Hardwar, 'near the source of the 
Ganges, which had already become a great place of Hindu * 
pilgrimage, and there he saw thousands of pilgrims bathing 
in the sacred stream. Very few in that part of the country 
followed the law of Buddha, and the land was full of Hindu 
temples. 

His stay at Kanauj. Thence he passed on to Kanauj, 
which Harsha had made his capital, and he was much im- 
pressed with the grandeur of the place. The city was 
surrounded by solid walls and deep ditches, and its wealth 
attracted foreign merchants from far and wide. The people 
were noble and gracious in appearance and famed for their 
learning and their piety, and their speech was considered 
the purest in Northern India. As Harsha was a zealous 
Buddhist, the faith was prospering in his kingdom, and 
there were several hundred monasteries maintained and 
thousands of Bikkhus. But even here Hinduism had a 
firm footing, and the people were almost equally divided 
between the two religions. Harsha, after the manner of 
Asoka, held quinquennial religious assemblies, forbade the 
killing of animals and provided hospitals and dispensaries 
throughout his kingdom. Later on, Houen Tsang had an 
opportunity of attending one of these quinquennial assem- 
blies and the festival that followed it. For days continuously 
there were gorgeous processions in honour of Buddha, in 
which his image in gold was carried amid jewelled banners, 
embroidered umbrellas, clouds of incense and showers of 
flowers. The king scattered the wealth of his treasury 
broadcast among the people, and feasted every day Buddhist 
sages and Brahmans indiscriminately. The idolatrous pomp 
exceeded even that witnessed by Fa Hian. After the 
festival, an assembly of learned men was convened, Brah- 
mans and Buddhists alike, and discussions were held on 
the merits of the two faiths. To commemorate the great 
occasion a tower was constructed on the banks of the 
Ganges ; but on the last day of the festival a fire broke out 
in it, and it was destroyed. According to Houen Tsarig, 
this was the work of the Brahmans. Whether this were so 
or not, there was much distrust and ill-feeling existing 



68 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

between the two sects. An attempt made upon the king's 
life during the festival was ascribed to Brahman plots, and 
led to the execution of some and the exile of other pro- 
minent Brahmans. 

He visits Prayag. Harsha was so greatly pleased 
with Houen Tsang and so deeply impressed with his 
learning and piety, that he persuaded him to accompany 
him to Prayag, the modern Allahabad, to witness another 
quinquennial festival held at the junction of the Ganges 
and the Jumna. Prayag was then as now a sacred city of 
the Hindus, and the immense multitude of pilgrims was 
doubtless mainly composed of them, for Buddhism had but 
a slight hold there. Harsha again distributed gifts with 
reckless profusion to religious persons of the different sects, 
though Buddhists naturally received the most ; but it was 
noticeable that the ceremonies of the festival honoured 
Hinduism almost as much as Buddhism. As showing the 
reality and extent of Harsha's power, it may be observed 
that at both festivals he was accompanied by vassal kings 
from kingdoms as far distant as Kamarupa in Assam and 
Valabhi in Western India. 

His pilgrimage through the Buddhist ttoly 
Land. Houen Tsang made an extensive tour during 
his stay in India, and it is clear from his account that 
Hinduism had made great headway since Fa Hian's 
time, even in the country where Buddha lived and taught. 
Sravasti,' the capital of Kosala, was deserted and in ruins, 
and the neighbourhood round about was once more under 
Brahman influence. Kapilavastu and Kusinagara were 
desolate, forsaken even by the monks. Benares was full 
of Hindu temples, and had become, then as now, a centre 
of orthodox Hinduism. But in the Deer-park close at hand, 
where Buddha had preached his first sermon, there was 
still a magnificent monastery, built partly of stone and 
partly of brick, 200 feet high. It possessed a noble image 
of Buddha in copper, and was inhabited by 1500 monks. 
Pataliputra had almost disappeared; nothing but portions 
of the ruined outer wall remained. Close to Gaya, which 
had become a Brahman colony, was the spot made famous 
by the Bodhi Tree. The tree itself, or what remained of 
it after its destruction by Sasanka, was surrounded by 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 69 

high brick walls, and all around were innumerable stupas 
and images of Buddha, many of which were believed 
to exercise miraculous powers. It was a place to which 
pilgrims flocked in thousands after the rainy season every 
year, to present their offerings, burn incense and deposit 
flowers. Near at hand was the stateliest and most 
beautiful of all the Buddhist monasteries. It was a 
monastery and temple combined, and had been built in 
former times by a king of Ceylon. Its exterior was a mass 
of ornamental work, and the utmost skill of the architect 
and the artist had been lavished upon it. Within was an 
image of Buddha in gold and silver adorned with precious 
stones. Close to Gaya was Nalanda, the famous Buddhist 
University, the ruins of which are still to be seen. It was 
the great seat of Buddhist learning, and was the resort of 
scholars and sages, Brahman and Buddhist alike, from all 
parts of India. The monastery was on a gigantic scale, 
and is said to have been capable of holding 10,000 monks, 
besides containing numerous lecture-rooms and halls for 
religious conferences. It was the last stronghold of 
Buddhism, and was still in Houen Tsang's time thronged 
with renowned teachers and multitudes of students. The 
Chinese pilgrim was met on his arrival and escorted to the 
monastery by 200 monks, and welcomed by a great assem- 
bly within its walls. A lodging was allotted to him in 
one of the buildings, and there he stayed five years till he 
had mastered the Buddhist Scriptures and acquired some 
knowledge of the Sanskrit literature of the Brahmans. 

He resumes his travels. He thereafter proceeded 
on his travels again and passed through Bengal, then 
divided into five petty kingdoms, on to Orissa. In the 
latter kingdom Buddhism was the prevailing religion, and 
there were a hundred monasteries, and thousands of monks. 
Puri was a famous place of Buddhist pilgrimage, but not 
then as now so much frequented by Hindu pilgrims. 

The kingdom of Kalinga which had been conquered by 
Asoka had sunk to insignificance, and much of the country 
was overgrown with jungle. Berar, which was then known 
as Kosala, but must be distinguished from the ancient 
kingdom in the north, was ruled over by a Kshattriya 
king, who honoured the laws of Buddha. Houen Tsang 



70 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

speaks of a rock-cut monastery there which was the 
wonder of all India. In his time it was in ruins, and a 
story was told that it had been wrecked by the Brahmans. 
The tale is a further indication of the growing hostility 
between the two religions. 

The country over which the powerful Andhras had 
held sway, which he next visited, had greatly declined in 
prosperity. In this ancient stronghold of Buddhism, the 
Hindu temples now outnumbered the Buddhist monasteries. 
There were many temples of the Hindus, but the Buddhist 
convents for the most part were deserted and the priests 
ignorant and dirty. Next he visited Kanchi, the modern 
Conjeeveram, then one of the finest cities in India and 
the capital of Dravida, a kingdom that may be iden- 
tified with the ancient Chola kingdom. He was much 
impressed with the beauty of its buildings and the en- 
lightenment of its people. Buddhism flourished there, 
and he saw hundreds of monasteries and thousands of 
priests. Turning northwards, he took his way along the 
Western Ghats to Maharashtra. It had long been a 
powerful and important kingdom, and he mentions that 
Pulikesin its ruler had successfully withstood the all- 
conquering armies of Harsha. Houen Tsang gives an 
account of the character of the people which does credit 
to his powers of observation. He speaks of their impetuosity 
in war, their impulsiveness, their pride and their vindic- 
tiveness, traits for which in after days the race became 
conspicuous. 

From thence he journeyed on to Malwa, and there 
he found many monasteries and 2000 Buddhist priests. 
But it is probable that Hinduism was the prevailing 
religion, for he mentions that the Brahmans were very 
numerous. He speaks in glowing terms of the inhabitants, 
and says that they were renowned in Western India for 
their learning and politeness. Gujrat was the last place 
of importance visited by him. A new kingdom had arisen 
there, called the Yalabhi kingdom, on the ruins of the 
kingdom of Saurashtra. The king was closely related to 
Harsha and was a zealous Buddhist; but Hinduism had 
many followers in the kingdom. The people were polite 
and learned, like those of Malwa, and had amassed great 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 71 

wealth in trade. From very ancient days there had been 
famous trading centres in Gujrat, and Indian merchants 
had carried on an export and import trade from the 
ports of Koruka and Bharukachcha (Bharoch) with places 
as far distant as Babylon and Burmah. Valabhi, like 
Saurashtra before it, was at that time the chief emporium 
of foreign trade. 

Decline of Buddhism. In Houen Tsang's account 
we may note the general decline of Buddhism in India 
and the rising tide of Hinduism. He has unconsciously 
indicated for us some of the causes of that decline. The 
faith had grown corrupt in the hands of illiterate priests. 
By the majority of the clergy and laity the ethics of 
Buddha's teaching had been forgotten. The simple story 
of his life had been so surrounded by legends and mir- 
aculous tales that its significance was obscured. The 
divine honours paid to his relics and the mysterious powers 
attributed to them and to his image were idolatrous 
practices utterly at variance with the true doctrine. In 
short, to all but a few the spirit of the faith was dead, and 
Buddhism, like Vedic Hinduism before it, had become a 
mere husk of religion. The monastic system, which in 
its infancy had been its strength, had grown to unwieldy 
proportions. The monasteries had become wealthy cor- 
porations, and those who joined the order of Bikkhus 
were often idle, dissolute and avaricious. The people, 
left without spiritual guidance, were slipping back into 
the old superstitions, the devil worship and the witch- 
craft which Buddhism had never really succeeded in 
expelling. 

The new Hinduism. It may seem at first sight 
surprising that Hinduism should have been able to 
undermine Buddhism and impose again, but with far greater 
severity, the shackles of caste upon the people. But when 
we realize what the new Hinduism was, and how Buddhism 
had ceased to stimulate religious fervour among its followers, 
we shall not wonder that the latter eventually succumbed. 
During the long period in which Buddhism was in the 
ascendant the Brahmans were putting into practice the 
lesson that their deposition had taught them. If they were 
to regain their lost authority, they could only do so by 



72 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HI(m SCHOOLS. 

popularising their faith. They therefore set to work to 
make their religion acceptable to all classes of the people. 
By incorporating into it current superstitions and local 
religious practices they succeeded at length in devising a 
system which, while it made room for religious forms and 
beliefs peculiar to different peoples and districts, preserved 
such of the traits of Hinduism as would enable those of 
widely different creeds to recognize each other as belonging 
essentially to the same religion. In their hands a religious 
system was developed so elastic and so far-reaching that 
every sect, caste, tribe or people might find represented in 
it its own religious views. Buddhism itself was largely 
drawn upon in the process of construction; so that to this 
day, though expelled as a religion from the country, its 
influence is strongly marked upon the character of the 
system which has supplanted it. Even savage aboriginal 
superstitions were not discarded ; so that in its lower forms 
Hinduism is tainted with aboriginal demon-worship, and 
wild rites and gross and fantastic forms of idolatry have 
crept into it bodily or left their mark upon it. 

Failure of Buddhism as a popular religion. To 
people so prone to superstition and so credulous as the bulk 
of the natives of India, an impersonal faith such as Buddhism 
could not carry strong conviction. A system which taught 
that mankind, independently of the gods, could work out 
its own salvation was at variance with immemorial belief in 
the power of spirits capable of influencing the destiny of 
man. While Buddhism was the religion of mighty kings 
and princes, the people outwardly conformed to it, but it 
need not be doubted that they still remained a prey to 
their old superstitions. When Buddhism, in its struggle to 
maintain its waning popularity, began to make concessions 
to idolatry and compromises w^ith spirit- worship, it was 
attempting to fight its more adaptable rival on its own 
ground. Hinduism could incorporate old forms of belief 
without losing in the process its essential characteristics, 
"but Buddhism could not do so without sapping the very 
foundations of its teaching. 

Want of political unity in India. From Houen 
Tsang's description of Indian society we may gather that 
the races of India were on the whole learned and polite 



74 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

and justified the esteem in which they were held by 
foreigners who came in contact with them. But political 
unity was unknown among them. Such union as there was 
at any time did not rest upon a stable and far-reaching form 
of government, but upon the prowess of some great leader 
who compelled his neighbours to recognize his suzerainty. 
Empires therefore, as soon as the reigning monarchy showed 
signs of weakness, fell to pieces as quickly as they had 
arisen. The petty kingdoms of which they were com- 
posed, being mere tributaries, independent of the cen- 
tral authority in matters of internal administration, were 
-always ready to revolt as soon as they thought themselves 
strong enough to do ^o ; while the people, having no poli- 
tical life, were scarcely affected by a change of rule. But 
this very lack of political life served to strengthen the 
bonds of religion and to preserve ancient customs and 
beliefs ; and to it may perhaps be attributed the fact that 
there are no more conservative peoples in the world than 
those of Hindustan. 

The administration of Harsha's empire. The 
civil government in Harsha's day seems to have favourably 
impressed the Chinese pilgrim, just as that of the Guptas 
had impressed Fa Hian ; but the roads were not so safe for 
travellers and the punishment of crime had grown much 
harsher. Mutilation was inflicted for many offences, and 
prisoners were left to die unless cared for by relations or 
friends. The foolish practice of subjecting accused persons 
to trial by ordeal was commonly resorted to, and many inno- 
cent persons after suffering torture must have been unjustly 
condemned. But property rights were carefully respected, 
officials were paid by assignments of land instead of being 
left to live upon the people, and taxation was not burden- 
some. The ordinary land revenue assessment was one sixth 
of the gross produce. The picture painted by Houen Tsang 
of the manners and customs of India in his times never- 
theless shows no general advance of civilization from earlier 
days but rather in some respects a retrogression. Perhaps 
the havoc and confusion wrought by the terrible White 
Huns had resulted in a set-back in Northern India, and 
the people inured to scenes of cruelty had grown less 
humane. 



THE BUDDHIST AGE. 75 

Death of Harsha. Harsha died about 648 A.D. after 
reigning for 50 years. He had been a great king, and 
his authority had been respected far and wide. He was a 
man of learning as well as of piety and encouraged learned 
men to come to Kanauj. Banabhatta, one of the greatest 
of Indian poets, flourished at his court, and he himself 
under the name of Sriharsha is supposed to be the author 
of the famous Sanskrit drama Ratnmali. But his religious 
zeal had led him in his later years into the folly of deliber- 
ately squandering the resources of the state to gain religious 
merit, and when he died he left an empty treasury to his 
successor. Disorder quickly followed, aggravated by a 
severe famine, and in the confusion Arjuna, who had been 
Harsha's minister, usurped the throne. 

Wang Houen Tse. Arjuna was a keen supporter of 
Brahmanism and very hostile to Buddhists. It so happened 
that soon after his accession a Chinese Buddhist mission 
headed by Wang Houen Tse, the friend and companion in 
his wanderings of Houen Tsang arrived in his dominions. 
Arjuna, against all the laws of hospitality and in defiance 
of the comity of nations, seized and put to death every 
member of the mission upon whom he could lay his 
hands ; but Wang Houen Tse escaped to Nepal. The 
rulers of Nepal and Thibet, who were zealous Buddhists, 
incensed at the outrage to their faith, made common 
cause in assisting the Chinese envoy to avenge it. With 
a small force of sturdy mountaineers Wang Houen Tse 
encountered an army many times its size, led by Arjuna 
himself, in Tirhut and utterly defeated him; in a second 
battle he took the king prisoner; in a third he captured the 
whole of his family ; and then a regular reduction of the 
fortifications of the kingdom took place. The fierce hill- 
men, let loose upon the country, took signal vengeance for 
Arjuna's crime, many massacres occurred and great quantities 
of booty and numberless slaves were carried off by them on 
their retirement. Arjuna was led away captive to China 
and never heard of again. Later, when Wang Houen 
Tse returned to India at the head of another mission, 
the lesson was not forgotten, no opposition was offered 
to his passage, and he was allowed to visit the holy places 
without molestation. With these amazing incidents the 



76 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

curtain drops over the scene, and the history of Northern 
India becomes a blank for nearly a couple of hundred 
years. We may now conveniently turn our attention to 
affairs in Southern India. 



TABLE OF DATES OF LATER BUDDHIST PERIOD. 

A.D. 

Gondophares, the Parthian 27 

Kadphises I. 45_ 

Saka Era commences 78 

Kadphises II. 85 

Embassy to Rome - - ... - . - - .99 

Nahapana - - 119 

Kanishka 125 

Third Buddhist Council - - 140 

Rudradaman of Saurashtra 150 

Establishment of Gupta Era - - - - - - - 320 

Samudra Gupta 326 

Chandra Gupta Vikramaditya 375 

Kumara Gupta - 413 

Skanda Gupta - - - - - 455 

Defeat of Skanda Gupta by the White Huns .... 470 

Mihiragula 510 

Battle of Kahror 528 

Harsha ascends the throne of Thanes war - - - . - 606 

Pulikesin 11. , king of the Chalukyas . - - . - 608 

Arrival in India of Houen Tsang - - . - - - - 630 

Arjuna usurps the throne --.--..- 648 

Wang Houen Tse defeats Arjuna - - - - - - 650 



SOUTHERN INDIA. 77 



CHAPTER Y. 

SOUTHERN INDIA. 

Andhras and Pallavas. Very little is known of the 
history of Southern India during the Buddhist Age. A 
bewildering list of names and dates has been compiled 
from coins and inscriptions, but hardly anything worth 
recording regarding the kings and peoples referred to in 
either has survived. The Cholas, Cheras and Pandyas 
continued long after the Christian Era to share with varjang 
fortune the southern extremity between them, but towards 
the middle of the second century a new kingdom, that 
of the Pallavas, with its capital at Kanchi, rose to pro- 
minence and overshadowed them. The Pallavas are 
spoken of as foreigners, and there are good reasons for 
thinking that they found their way into India along with 
the Sakas and wandered or were driven south by them. 
Samudra Gupta claims in his inscription upon the Asoka 
pillar to have conquered the Pallavas when he raided 
Southern India. By far the most powerful of the early 
kingdoms of the south had been that of the Andhras, 
which has already been mentioned more than once. At 
one time it must have covered all Central India, from 
the Indian Ocean to the Bay of Bengal. The capital 
was at a place called Dhanyakataka on the banks of 
the river Krishna. Beyond the fact that the Andhras 
carried on an extensive trade through their seaports with 
most of the important countries of the then known world, 
and that scattered over the whole of their dominions 
are innumerable Buddhist stupas, some of which are 
among the noblest examples of the Indian stone-cutter's 
art, there is nothing to chronicle that has not been 
related in the previous chapter. It is probable that the 
Andhra kingdom gradually fell to pieces in the early 
centuries of the Christian Era under repeated attacks by 
SalJas on the north and Pallavas on the south. The latter 
undoubtedly seized upon much of the southern territory, 
and by the beginning of the fifth century the Andhras had 



78 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

disappeared and the Pallavas had become the most powerful 
state in Southern India*. 

The Chalukyas. The history of the south appears to 
have been from earliest times one of constant internecine 
strife between the many kingdoms among whom the country 
was divided, and, as in Northern India, first one and then 
another gained supremacy over the rest, but no power was 
able long to maintain its superiority. The supremacy of 
the Pallavas was short-lived, for before the close of the sixth 
century a new kingdom, that of the Chalukyas, with its 
capital at Vatapi, the modern Badami, had wrested it from 
them. The Chalukyas were, as has been stated, of foreign, 
probably of Scythian, origin. Their most famous ruler was 
Pulikesin II., who reigned from 609 to 642 and successfully 
withstood, it will be remembered, the victorious Harsha ; 
but his father Kirttivarma, who reigned from 566 to 597, 
also deserves a passing mention, for he conquered no less 
than seventeen kingdoms of the south. During the reign 
of Pulikesin his brother succeeded in establishing a new 
Chalukya kingdom to the eastward with its capital at 
Vengi, and thereafter the two kingdoms are distinguished 
as the Eastern and Western Chalukyas. The Chalukyas 
were followers of Vishnu, and it is noteworthy that about 
this time Buddhism began rapidly to decline in Southern 
India. The greatness of Pulikesin is testified to by the 
fact that the ruler of the mighty Persian Empire, 
Khusru II., not only received with all honour an embassy 
from him but despatched one to him in return. But 
Pulikesin was not destined to end his reign gloriously, 
for a confederacy headed by the Pallavas was formed 
against him, defeated him in a great pitched battle and 
then sacked and burnt his capital. For thirteen years 
Vatapi was deserted, but Vikramaditya, the son of Puli- 
kesin, having gradually restored the kingdom, routed the 
Pallavas and captured Kanchi, their capital, in the year 
655. 

The Rashtrakutas and Cholas. The Pallavas and 
Western Chalukyas continued to war with each other 
during succeeding reigns with varying fortune, but in 
740 Vikramaditya II., the Chalukya ruler, heavily defeated 
the Pallavas and once more captured Kanchi. The Western 



SOUTHERN INDIA. 79 

Chalukyas had, however, hardly emerged from the conflict 
when they were in their turn overwhelmed by a fresh rival, 
the Eashtrakutas of Northern Maharashtra. It is a curious 
fact worth noting in the history of Southern India that 
kingdoms, after being practically extinguished, frequently 
revived again. The Western Chalukyas, for example, two 
hundred years later, once more became the paramount power 
in the south, and the Pallavas, notwithstanding crushing 
defeats, were still strong enough to maintain throughout 
the eighth century the struggle with the Eashtrakutas, the 
temporary successors of their old enemy, the Chaluykas. 
The Eastern Chalukyas seem to have been able to hold 
their own against the new power, for at the end of the 
eighth century they divided with the Eashtrakutas Central 
India from sea to sea. The ancient kingdoms of the south 
continued to drag on, though one or other was constantly 
in danger of extinction. The Cholas, however, at the close 
of the tenth century, under an able ruler, Eajaraja, rose 
again to prominence, overran most of Southern India and 
even conquered Ceylon. The three southern kingdoms, 
it should be noted, unlike their northern neighbours, 
remained purely Dravidian states, and at no time in their 
history were foreigners able to impose themselves upon 
them as a ruling race. 

RAJPUT ASCENDENCY. 

The Rajputs. With the fajl of Harsha's empire the 
history of Northern India, as we have already observed, 
practically ceases for two hundred years. The records of 
what happened during these centuries are scarce and 
meagre, and the literary remains do not guide us in 
reconstructing the history of that time. All that we 
know is that at the end of it BuddLxb.n has almost been 
swept out of the land, and a new power, that of the 
Eajputs, has arisen. Who these Eajputs were is a mystery, 
but there are grounds for believing that they were of 
mixed descent, partly native and partly foreign, and that 
many of them had Scythian blood running in their veins. 
They are spoken of in the legend which gives an account 
of their origin as sprung from four Kshattriyas, re-created 



80 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

in order to drive out the enemies of the Vedas. By the 
enemies of the Yedas it is thought that the Buddhists are 
meant, and as Buddhism expressly denied the efficacy of 
Vedic sacrifices for salvation, it is possible that this is so. 
Like the Aryans before them, the Scythians in time lost 
their identity by becoming merged in the peoples among 
whom they lived. But they infused some of their warlike 
qualities into the mixed race descended from them, and 
thus wherever they settled the people exhibited a prouder 
and more martial spirit. 

The Chalukyas and the Pallavas are examples of the 
way in which in Southern India the union of natives 
and foreigners was being effected, ^nd in Northern 
India the same process was at work. Whether or not 
the Rajputs really had a common origin they came 
at length to look upon themselves as being closely 
allied in blood, and by intermarriage and the adoption 
of common codes of honour and custom they formed 
themselves into a class apart. It was soon the ambition 
of nobles and ruling families to gain recognition as 
Rajputs or "sons of kings," and thus over Northern and 
Western India there arose a multitude of ruling clans 
or families claiming to belong to the same knightly order. 
A kind of Indian chivalry was thus instituted which 
produced a remarkable spirit of adventure and warlike 
enterprise. 

Persecution of the Buddhists. The Rajputs were 
the self-constituted champions of Hinduism, and in their 
zeal for the faith they had adopted they were prepared to 
take any measures that were necessary to stamp out 
Buddhism. There can be little doubt that they resorted to 
violent means to achieve their object, and that where 
they found the Buddhists obdurate, they did not scruple to 
massacre the priescs, raze their monasteries to the ground, 
and destroy their images and stupas. To this work they 
were instigated by the Brahmans, and it is probable that 
for their services in re establishing Hinduism, the Brahmans 
rewarded them by inventing the fiction alluded to above, 
that they were miraculously sprung from the Kshattriya 
race. As early as the 8th century, Kumarila Bhatta, a 
Deccan Brahman and a crreat controversial writer who laid 




H.I.H.S. 



F 



82 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

the foundations of Modern Hinduism, had openly advo- 
cated force if arguments were of no avail in combatting 
Buddhism. 

Sankara Acharya. While the Rajputs were expelling 
Buddhism by force, a champion of Hinduism arose in 
Southern India and started a reh'gious movement which did 
even more than Rajput persecution to sweep Buddhism out 
of India. Sankara Acharya, who was born in Malabar in 
788 A.D. was a profound Sanscrit scholar, a deep philoso- 
phical thinker, and a great preacher. During his short 
life of thirty-two years he wandered from place to 
place preaching against Buddhism, and propounding his 
Vedantic philosophy with its doctrine of the one Supreme 
Being, till he stirred up a revolution second only to that of 
Buddha. His teaching spread throughout the length and 
breadth of India, and in the hands of his disciples the form 
of Hinduism which he preached became one of the most 
widely adopted in the country. But though Sankhara 
Acharya condemned Buddhism, he wisely decided to adopt 
the monastic system which had been so important a feature 
of that religion, and had helped so much to give stability to 
the faith in its early days. The sect of Hinduism which he 
founded therefore has its monks and monasteries and 
observes many of the regulations which Buddha formulated 
for the use of the Bikkhus. The value of the monastic 
system as a means of proi)agating Hinduism was quickly 
perceived by others, and many orders soon arose, represent- 
ing different phases of Hinduism, with branches in various 
parts of the country. 

Puranik Hinduism. The new Hinduism which the 
Rajputs were so zealous in spreading, and which the 
Brahmans had been so patiently constructing through the 
many centuries that Buddhism prevailed, is known as 
Puranic Hinduism, and differs in many points from the old 
Vedic Hinduism. Two points require special notice, one 
being the change in the conception of deity, and the other 
the change in the form of worship. The Yedic deities 
representing the phenomena of nature, as the sun, the 
clouds, the sky and fire, were relegated in Puranic Hindu- 
ism to the position of minor gods, and in their place was 
substituted the Supreme Being in his triple form of Brahma 



SOUTHERN INDIA. 83 

the Creator, Vishnu the Preserver, and Siva the Destroyer. 
The conception of a Supreme Being is as old as the Eig Veda, 
but this three-fold division of his powers arose during the 
Buddhist era. Under one or other of these names the deity 
came at some time to be worshipped. But Brahma was soon 
neglected, and Hindus by the time of the Eajput supremacy 
were mainly divided into Vaisnavas, or followers of 
Vishnu, and Saivas, or followers of Siva. Within these 
two main divisions many sects sprang up, ranging from the 
highest to the most degraded forms of worship. The works 
which glorify the Supreme Spirit under his three manifesta- 
tions are called the Puranas, because they profess to contain 
the old Vedic faith ; though as a matter of fact they have 
little in common with it. As we might expect from their 
origin, they exalt the Brahman at the expense of the lower 
castes ; but they do not make the mistake of ignoring the 
low caste man altogether, for they are an attempt to fit 
religion to all classes of the people. Every phase of 
Hinduism is represented in them, from the highest ethical 
teaching and the purest conceptions of deity to the crudest 
and most degrading superstitions of the non-Aryan. 

As regards the change in the form of worship, it will be 
remembered that in the old Vedic days the Aryan house- 
holder, when performing religious services to the gods, 
offered sacrifices in the fire of his own hearth. Up till 
the time of Buddhism image worship was not recognised 
by the Brahman hierarchy, nor had temples become 
essential for the worship of the gods. But by the time of 
the Eajputs, temples and the adoration of images had 
superseded the older forms of worship by the domestic 
fireside. It is hardly necessary to point out how much 
the building of temples, and the setting up of idols 
strengthened the hold of the priests upon the people. They 
were now, more than ever, the custodians of the national 
religion, and the people venerated them almost as blindly as 
the idols they guarded. To give money or bequeath land for 
the support of priests and temples were looked upon as acts 
of peculiar sanctity, and it was regarded as a duty incumbent 
upon all worshippets to make offerings according to their 
means at the shrine of the god whom they had come to 
venerate. In the course of centuries the temples amassed 



84 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

by such means great riches, and a large proportion of the 
wealth of the country became devoted to religious uses. 

Brahman supremacy re-established. Thus, though 
the history of Northern India is almost a blank from the 
8th till the latter half of the 10th century, it is possible to 
infer from the events which preceded and succeeded this 
period, the condition of the country during it. The old 
powerful kingdoms decayed, and with their decay Buddhism, 
which they had always tolerated if not actually patronised, 
was swept, not without violence, from the land. When the 
curtain rises again, the brave and haughty Rajputs are in 
possession of the ancient capitals of Northern India, and 
Brahman supremacy has been completely re-established. 



^ 



BOOK II. THE MUHAMMEDAN PERIOD, 



CHAPTER I. 

AFGHAN RULE. 

Islam. At the time when the Eajputs were making 
themselves the masters of Northern India and Paranic 
Hinduism was everywhere replacing Buddhism, a new 
religion was steadily spreading from its home in Arabia 
over the neighbouring countries. Islam, as it was called, 
was the very opposite of Buddhism, both in its teaching 
and the methods it adopted to make converts. While 
Buddhism made light of gods, and taught that man 
independently of them could work out his own salvation, 
the formula of Islamic faith was "There is no god but 
God, and Muhammad is His prophet." Buddhists were 
strictly enjoined lo use none but peaceful means to spread 
their gospel, and to be tolerant in their dealings with 
those who held other religious beliefs. Muhammedans 
were restrained by no such injunctions, and even during 
the lifetime of the founder Islam had become a militant 
faith and a strong incentive to conquest. 

Arab triumphs. A religion of such fiery energy was 
well adapted to the natures of the fierce and impulsive 
Arabs. They eagerly embraced it, and thereby were, for 
the first time, united together into one people. Made 
strong by faith, and filled with holy zeal, they poured 
out under the white banners of their religion upon the 
neighbouring countries. They were naturally a brave^ 
hardy, and warlike people, but religious enthusiasm welded 
them into an irresistible conquering force ; and within 
a hundred years of the death of Muhammad, so great 



86 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

was the success of their arms, that they had already 
reached the borders of India. 

Conquest of Sind. Scarcely then had Hinduism 
emerged from its struggle with Buddhism before it was 
called upon to fight for its very existence with a formidable 
and openly aggressive rival. The first warnings of the 
coming storm occurred in Sind. Desultory inroads of 
Arabs had taken place during the seventh century, but 
these had been mere plundering raids, and no attempt had 
been made to effect a permanent settloment. But in 712 
a determined and successful effort was made to gain a footnig 
in the country. A youthful general, Muhammad son of , 
Kasim, led an organised expedition against Dahir, the Rajput 
ruler of lower Sind, to punish him for the destruction of 
a force sent todemand compensation for the seizure of an Arab 
ship. After reducing the surrounding country he forced 
the king to take refuge in Alor, his capital, and there 
besieged him. The Hindus defended the city with obstinate 
valour till Dahir was slain and the provisions began to 
run short. Further resistance being vain, the women 
and children, it is said, preferring death to dishonour 
and slavery, with desperate resolution flung themselves 
upon a huge pyre and perished in its flames; while the 
men, rather than yield, rushed out upon the overwhelming 
numbers of the besiegers and fell fighting sword in hand. 
Muhammad after this soon reduced Silid and Multan, 
and the Hindus had to submit to Moslem rule and to 
pay tribute. Those who would not embrace Islam were 
also forced to pay a poll tax, but were otherwise tolerantly 
treated. Two and a half years after his conquest of Sind 
Muhammad was recalled by the Muhammedan Governor of 
Persia, whose displeasure he had incurred, and was put 
to death. The subsequent history of Sind for many 
years is a succession of Hindu revolts and quarrels and 
intrigues among the Muslim governors ; but the power of 
the Kajputs had been too greatly shattered by Muhammad's 
invasion to revive, and Sind, though insecurely held by 
the conquerors, was never able to shake off their yoke 
completely. 

Continued ascendancy of Rajputs. After this 
India had peace from Muhammedan invasion till the end 



88 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

of the tenth century. During this period the Rajputs con- 
tinued to extend their conquests, and" by the end of it the 
whole of Western and North- Western India was ruled by 
Rajput kings and princes. Puranic Hinduism flourished 
greatly under their patronage. Tales and legends multiplied, 
and the worship of Krishna, the hero of the Mahabharata, 
and Rama, the hero of the Ramayana, as incarnations of the 
supreme being now became widely prevalent among the 
sect of the Vaisnavas. 

The influence of Kanauj. Amidst the general 
anarchy in Northern India caused by the rise of the Rajputs 
the kingdom of Kanauj managed to survive, though its 
boundaries were constantly shifting and its dynasties short- 
lived. The city grew and prospered greatly and it became 
during the period of Rajput ascendency the centre of civili- 
zation and religious life in Northern India. Under Bhoja L, 
who was ruling about the middle of the ninth century, it 
reached the zenith of its fame. Its wealth acquired by trade 
was vast, its temples magnificent, and its priesthood the 
acknowledged arbiter in all social and religious questions in 
the Hindu world. It was here that the new Hinduism 
had its principal seat, and it was here too that the new 
system of caste was evolved. Hitherto caste had been 
a division of the people arising mainly out of the Aryan 
pride of race and the development within the Aryan 
communit}^ itself of an aristocracy of priests and warriors. 
But the old distinction of Aryan and Non -Aryan had been 
long forgotten under the unifying influence of Hinduism, 
and caste had now become a purely social distinction. For 
their own ends the Brahman hierarchy felt it necessary 
to preserve this ancient institution, for upon its continuance 
their predominant authority depended. The Brahmans of 
Kanauj were therefore not content with enjoining purity 
of blood, to strengthen the bonds of caste they imposed 
scrupulous adherence to fixed rules of occupation as well. 
Under their leadership a new principle became henceforth 
a basis of caste distinction, the principle of classification 
by occupation, and those who followed a particular calling 
began to forn^^hemselves into a separate caste with customs 
peculiar to theijiselves. So great at length became the 
prestige of Kanauj in social and religious matters that 



AFGHAN RULE. 89 

Brahmans were invited by kings to migrate from it to king- 
doms so far distant as Guzerat, Bengal and Orissa, to re- 
organize society upon the model of Kanauj. Thus through 
the influence of Kanauj the new Hinduism spread to the 
four corners of India, and caste divisions grew and multiplied 
everywhere exceedingly. 

Pathan invasion of the Punjab. But all the while 
Moslem power was extending and closing in on India. At 
last, in 979, Jaipal, the Rajput Prince of Lahore, precipitated 
the conflict by marching an army up the Khyber Pass into 
Afghanistan, to exact compensation from Sabuktigin, the 
Muhammedan King of Ghazni, for raids on Indian territory 
committed by Afghans dwelling on the frontier. The Hindus 
suffered severely from the intense cold of that mountainous 
region, and after many had perished in a terrible snow- 
storm, they were so dispirited that Jaipal was forced* to 
retrace his steps. The Afghans now pressed close upon his 
army, and also cut ofl'his retreat by seizing the passes ahead. 
Jaipal was forced to surrender, to save his army from annihila- 
tion, and had to agree to pay a large indemnity to Sabuktigin 
before he was allowed to return with the remnant of his 
troops to India. The sum was more than he could pay at 
the time, and he promised to send the remainder when he 
returned to Lahore, But, in the security of his capital, 
he refused to fulfil his promise, and even flung into prison 
the men whom Sabuktigin had sent to fetch the money. 
This rash act drew upon India the second invasion and led 
to all its dire consequences. Sabuktigin promptly descended 
upon him to avenge the insult, and, though the neighbour- 
ing Rajput princes came to Jaipal's assistance, he was 
defeated and the province of Peshawar wrested from him. 
Sabuktigin returned to Ghazni, where he died in 997. 
Though he never returned to India, he maintained a strong 
garrison at Peshawar to hold the further end of the Khyber 
Pass. Thus by the folly of an Indian king was India 
deprived of her natural defence against a northern invader. 

Mahmud of Ghazni. Sabuktigin was succeeded by 
his son Mahmud, who, when little more than a child, had 
already proved himself a daring warrior and a skilful general. 
The first two years of his reign were spent in consolidating 
his power, a task in which he showed great administrative 



90 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

ability. His father's expedition against Jaipal had proved 
that the undisciplined valour of the Hindus could not with- 
stand a well-delivered attack, and the stories of the fabulous 
wealth of Hindu kings had excited his avarice. He there- 
fore turned his attention as soon as he had leisure to this 
rich field of enterprise, and in the year 1001 led the first of 
his many expeditions into India. Jaipal, his father's enemy, 
with a number of petty chiefs marched out to meet him. 
The opposing armies met near Peshawar, and the Hindus 
were signally defeated. Jaipal escaped from the battle, but 
was pursued and overtaken by Mahmud at the Sutlej. On 
payment of a large ransom and the promise of an annual 
tribute, he was released ; and Mahmud, satisfied with the 
amount of plunder he had taken, returned to Ghazni. But 
th proud Rajput would not survive his double defeat, 
and, having made over his kingdom to his son Anangapal, 
mounted the funeral pyre and perished in its flames. 

Signal defeat of the Hindus. During the next few 
years Mahmud paid three brief visits to India two to 
collect arrears of tribute and one to punish a rebellious 
chief in Multan. Anangapal, although a tributary of 
Mahmud, had been concerned in the Multan rising. 
Mahmud's next expedition was therefore directed against 
him, and in 1009 he appeared with a large force of horse and 
foot at Peshawar. Anangapal, who had had timely warn- 
ing of his approach, had meanwhile summoned all the 
powerful princes of Northern India to his aid, pointing out 
to them the necessity of combining against their common 
enemy. The kings of Delhi and Kanauj, of Ujjain and 
Gwalior, besides a host of petty princes, hurried to his 
assistance, realising that a national crisis had arisen, and 
that the coming struggle would be one between Islam and 
Hinduism. Northern India was now fully alive to the 
danger to which it was exposed, and bands of warriors 
flocked from all directions to the Punjab ; while women 
sold their jewels, melted down their golden ornaments, and 
laboured at the loom to assist the holy cause. Mahmud 
was alarmed at the enormous and Avell-equipped host 
gathering before him, and, afraid to assume the offensive, 
entrenched himself at Bhatindah. The armies are said to 
have been encamped facing each other for forty days. 



AFGHAN RULE. 91 

Then the Hindus, growing impatient, attacked, using the 
same formation as Porus had used against Alexander, and 
with the same disastrous result. The elephants took fright, 
and, turning, trampled down the men behind them. 
Mahmud's cavalry followed close upon them, and, dashing 
in upon the broken ranks of the Hindus, inflicted terrible 
slaughter upon them, and scattered them in flight. Hindu- 
stan now lay at Mahmud's mercy, but he contented himself 
for the present with the sack of the wealthy temple of 
Nagarkote in Kangra, and returned to Ghazni. 

Thanesar plundered. His next expedition of im- 
portance, undertaken ostensibly in the cause of religion, 
was against Thanesar in 1014. After a brief defence this 
ancient and wealthy city fell into his hands, and was given 
up to sack. The idols were of course destroyed, and the 
temples plundered of their vast hoards of treasure. Mah- 
mud's army then turned back to Ghazni, loaded with booty 
and encumbered with hundreds of slaves. 

Kanauj plundered. It was not to be expected that 
Mahmud, having penetrated so far into the country, would 
not make Kanauj and the famous cities in its neighbour- 
hood his next objective. In 1018 he crossed the Indus 
once more, took Muttra and Baran the modern Buland- 
shahr cities renowned throughout Hindustan for their 
beauty and their wealth, and then towards the close of the 
year delivered his attack on Kanauj. Eesistance was vain, 
and early in January 1019 its ruler, Jaipal, to save the city 
from the fate of Muttra, which had been ruthlessly sacked, 
made terms with the conqueror. Mahmud's object being 
merely plunder, he Avas ignominiously bought off with all 
the treasure that could be hastily collected. Its value was 
said to have been enormous, and to have well requited him 
for the abandonment of the siege. 

Permanent occupation of Lahore. In 1021 Mah- 
mud had to suppress a formidable rising in the Punjab, led 
by the son of Anangapal. It was the last despairing effort 
of the Hindus, doomed from the first to failure. Mahmud's 
army, confident and strengthened by fresh troops, in one 
pitched battle overwhelmed them. ^ To prevent a recurrence 
of rebellion in his rear Mahmud formally annexed the 
northern Punjab, and stationed a Muhammedan governor 



92 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

and garrison at Lahore. This was an event of great im- 
portance, since it gave a permanent foundation" to Moslem 
power in India. 

Plunder of Somnath. In 1026 he undertook his 
sixteenth and greatest expedition into India. At Somnath, 
in the south of Guzerat, was a temple of Siva which was 
reputed to be one of the wealthiest and holiest in all India, 
and was besides a great place of pilgrimage. Mahmud was 
told that the priests of the temple had defied him to reduce 
Somnath, and he therefore determined to show them how 
vain was their trust in idols. Marching through Rajputana 
and Guzerat, and easily overcoming the opposition he met 
with on the way, he arrived before Somnath in 1025 and 
laid siege to it. He met with the most stubborn resistance 
from the Eajput garrison, and was at one time even in 
danger of defeat. For two days they held him at bay, and 
then he broke into the city, but not before 5000 of the 
defenders had fallen and many of his own soldiers had been 
slain. Somnath was, according to custom, delivered up to 
plunder. Temples were looted, images destroyed, and the 
city ransacked by his soldiery for the wealth which it was 
known to contain. Mahmud then retraced his steps, carry- 
ing with him treasure to a fabulous amount. But on the 
way the Jats of Rajputana hung upon the skirts of his 
army, cutting off stragglers and plundering the baggage 
whenever a chance occurred. At length, to avoid the 
attacks to which his army was continually subjected, he 
was forced to turn aside from the cultivated tracts, and 
lead his demoralised troops through waterless deserts, 
where multitudes died of thirst and exposure. 

His last expedition. Mahmud was furious at the 
disastrous termination of the campaign, and his seventeenth 
and last expedition was undertaken to punish those who 
had molested his return march from Somnath. Rajputana 
was overrun, and terrible vengeance taken upon its unruly 
inhabitants. 

His death. After a reign of 33 years, in which he had 
devastated Northern India and added to his own dominions 
the Punjab, Bokhara, Samarkand, and part of Persia, in 
1030 this remarkable man died. For his services in the 
cause of his religion he gained the name of "The Image 



AFGHAN RULE. 93 

Breaker." But it is doubtful whether avarice and the love 
of conquest rather than religion had not led him to invade 
India. Besides being a great conqueror and a successful 
administrator, he was also a patron of arts and letters. The 
spoils of Hindustan were used to enrich and beautify his 
capital, and Ghazni was converted by him into a magnificent 
and stately city, with a museum, a library, and a univer- 
sity. The scholar Alberuni flourished at his court, and the 
great Persian poet Firdusi wrote his Shah Namah in his 
honour. 

Decline of Ghazni. After the death of Mahmud the 
kingdom of Ghazni began to decline in power. A fresh 
horde of barbarians, the Saljuk Turks, appeared in Central 
Asia, and the kings of Ghazni were too busy repelling their 
invasions to be able to turn their attention to India. The 
Hindus, thus left to themselves, began to recover from the 
shock of Mahmud's invasion, and assuming the ofl"ensive 
wrested the sacred Nagarkote from the Muhammedan 
governor of the Punjab. 

Hinduism still flourishing. Except in those parts 
where the Muhammedans had established their rule, Hin- 
dustan was little affected by Mahmud's invasions. During 
the eleventh century the Rajputs continued to extend their 
conquests, Puranic Hinduism continued to oust Buddhism 
from the land, and much literary activity was displayed 
in diff*erent parts of the country. The kingdom of Magadha 
was finally swept away by Gopala, king of Western Bengal, 
early in the same century, and with its overthrow Buddhism 
in that part of India was practically extinguished. Kanauj 
recovered from the shock of Mahmud's invasion, and under 
Jaichand and his successors, who were Rajputs of the famous 
Rathor clan, became once more the most illustrious city in 
Northern India. King Bhoja of Malwa about the same time 
attained to great renown in Central India. Raja Bhoja, like 
the legendary hero Vikramaditya, is the subject of many a 
Hindu story. He was a famous patron of literature, and 
is himself the reputed author of several well-known works. 
Bhaskara Acharya, the greatest of Indian astronomers, 
composed his works during this period, and in this century 
the modern languages of India, Hindi, Bengali, Mahratti, 
Tamil, and Telugu, came largely into use for literary 



94 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

purposes. Early in the twelfth century Ramanuja, a great 
reformer, popularised the worship of Vishnu as the one 
Supreme Being, and many Yaisnava sects were founded by 
his followers throughout Hindustan. 

Rise of Ghor. While the Ghazni kingdom was declin- 
ing, a rival kingdom was rising at Ghor near Kandahar. 
Early in the twelfth century a quarrel broke out between 
the two kingdoms, which led to reprisals and a bitter feud. 
Hostilities continued with varying fortune for many years ; 
till at length in 1149 Alauddin, King of Ghor, in revenge 
for the treacherous murder of his brother, laid siege to 
Ghazni, and after a vigorous assault succeeded in cap- 
turing it. The vengeance that he wreaked upon it was 
terrible. For seven days his soldiers massacred the inhabi- 
tants indiscriminately, while the city was given up to sack 
and all its noble buildings destroyed. The chiefs who had 
betrayed his brother were led away in chains to Ghor and 
there put to death, and their blood mixed with the mortar 
of the fortifications which Alauddin was building round the 
city. The ruthless butchery of the defenceless inhabitants of 
Ghazni and the wanton destruction of its stately edifices, 
gained for Alauddin the name of Jahansoz, the Incendiary 
of the World. The King of Ghazni, before the city fell into 
the hands of his vengeful enemy, had, luckily for him, made 
his escape towards India with his son Khusru. But he did not 
live to reach it, for on the way he died, worn out with age 
and broken with misfortunes. Khusru, however, reached the 
Punjab in safety, and in this dependency of the shattered 
Ghaznavi kingdom set up his capital at Lahore. He died 
in 1160 after a reign of seven years, and was succeeded by 
his son. ' 

Muhammad Ghori. Alauddin meanwhile had died, 
and one of his nephews had become King of Ghor, and 
another Governor of Ghazni. The latter, named Shaha- 
buddin, but better known to history as Muhammad Ghori, 
determined to reduce the Punjab to its former allegiance to 
Ghazni. After two unsuccessful attempts, in 1186 he cap- 
tured Lahore and took its king prisoner. The last of the 
Ghaznavi dynasty was sent as a captive to Ghor, and the 
Punjab passed into the hands of the conqueror without a 
struggle. 



AFGHAN RULE. 95 

Dissensions among Rajputs of Northern India. 
Muhammad Ghori had long wished to emulate the con- 
quei'or Mahmud . and, now that he was master of the 
Punjab, and thus provided with a base in India itself from 
which to undertake the conquest of Hindustan, he lost no 
time in preparing an expedition for that purpose. There 
were at this time two great rival Kajput kingdoms in 
Northern India, Kanauj ruled over by Jaichand, and 
Delhi and Ajmir united into one kingdom under Prithvi 
Eaj. But a feud had arisen between the two kings, and at 
the time of Muhammad Ghori's coming the Kajput chiefs of 
Northern India were divided into two parties, one siding 
with Jaichand and the other with Prithvi. As in the 
days of Porus, so now the Hindus could not set aside their 
differences to meet a common enemy, and thus when the 
Muhammedans came down upon India they had the luck to 
find a disunited Hindustan. 

Fall of Delhi. Muhammad attacked Prithvi's kingdom 
first, and captured the town of Bhatindah in 1191. Prithvi, 
who had already in many a fight proved himself a redoubt- 
able leader, straightway marched out against him, and 
encountering him not far from Tarain, a hundred miles 
north of Delhi, utterly defeated him. 

Muhammad was badly wounded in the battle and made 
his way back wuth difficulty to Lahore. The project of 
conquering India had for a time to be given up, and as 
soon as he had sufficiently recovered he reluctantly re- 
traced his steps to Ghazni. But he had known defeat 
before, and he was a man not easily to be discouraged 
or turned from his purpose ; and having spent the 
next two years in making fresh preparations, he swept 
down upon India once more. Prithvi was again deserted 
by many who should have helped him, but collect- 
ing round him as many "of the Eaj put chiefs as would 
follow him, he encamped against Muhammad near Thanesar. 
For some time the opposing armies passively watched each 
other. But one morning before dawn the Muhammedans 
suddenly attacked the Indian camp. The Hindus were 
completely taken by surprise and thrown into great con- 
fusion ; and though they rallied and fought stubbornly 
throughout the day, the Muhammedans maintained their 



96 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

first advantage, and by evening the issue was no longer in 
doubt. Then Prithvi was captured, fighting in the fore- 
front of his army, and in despair the- Hindus at once 
broke and fled. Prithvi was put to death by his ungenerous 
conqueror, and his kingdom annexed as far south as Ajmir ; 
but Delhi, strangely enough, did not fall at once into the 
hands of Muhammad. A year later, however, Kutbuddin, 
who had been appointed governor of the conquered territory, 
succeeded in reducing it; Kutbuddin was a Turkish slave 
who by his military genius had raised himself to the rank 
of general in his master's service. Muhammad had mean- 
while returned to Ghazni to recruit for a fresh invasion. 

Annexation of Kanauj. Jaichand had soon good 
cause to regret that he had not- laid aside his enmity 
and helped Prithvi to repel the common enemy, for in 
1194 Muhammad returned and marched against Kanauj. 
Jaichand made one great effort at Etawah to repel him, but 
was defeated and slain. His kingdom passed at once to his 
conqueror, who, after formally annexing it and placing a 
Muhammedan garrison there to keep order, withdrew to 
Afghanistan. But rather than submit to Moslem rule, 
many of the Kajput chiefs of Northern India migrated 
to Rajputana, where they founded kingdoms which endure 
to this day. 

Further Muhammedan conquests. Muhammad 
again returned to Ghazni, and on the death of his brother, 
the King of Ghor, in 1196, was crowned King of Ghor and 
Ghazni. During his absence from India, Kutbuddin the 
Governor of Delhi conquered Guzerat, and Bakhtiyar 
Khilji, the general whom he had left behind in Kanauj, 
annexed first Oudh and Behar, and then Western Bengal, 
the last named without a struggle. 

Death of Muhammad. Muhammad's Indian Empire 
was now of vast extent, and practically comprised the 
whole of Northern India as far as Guzerat on the west and 
the delta of the Ganges on the east. But annexations had 
followed each other so quickly that he had had no time to 
consolidate his empire. He therefore spent the rest of his 
days in subduing rebellions in the north or marching 
expeditions into India to punish refractory Hindu chiefs. 
In the year 1206, while on his way back to Ghor after the 



AFGHAN RULE. 97 

suppression of a revolt of the Khokhars, whose territory 
was in the Punjab, he was assassinated by a Muhammedan 
fanatic at a place called Damyak. Though not comparable 
with Mahmud as a general, Muhammad left by his con- 
quests a more lasting effect upon India. While Mahmud 
had been content with raiding and plundering, Muhammad 
aimed at extension of dominions, and though he showed 
less capacity than Mahmud for administering a vast empire, 
the generals he left behind him were able to hold the con- 
quered countries for him and to establish Moslem rule 
firmly in India. 

The Slave Dynasty 1206- 1290. After Muhammad's 
death, his empire, as might have been expected, fell to 
pieces. Kutbuddin, the Governor of Delhi, set up as an 
independent sovereign, and proclaimed himself Emperor of 
India in 1206. He was the founder of a line of kings 
known as the Slave Dynasty, because, like him, several of 
his successors were originally slaves. Kutbuddin, after reign- 
ing for four years, was killed by a fall from his horse. His 
name is chiefly remembered in connection with the Kutb 
Minar, a tapering and graceful tov/er of red sandstone 
inscribed with verses of the Kuran, which he erected at 
Delhi. He was succeeded by his son, a weak and dissolute 
man, during whose brief reign the Muhammedan governors 
of 8ind and Bengal declared themselves independent. 
Before he had been upon the throne a single year he was. 
deposed by Altamsh, the Governor of Burdwan, who had 
once been his father's slave. 

First appearance of the Moghuls. During Al- 
tamsh's reign the Moghuls made their first irruption into 
India. By the military genius of a great leader, Chengiz 
Khan, the nomad tribes of Tartary had been gathered 
together into one people, and their fighting men converted 
from undisciplined but hardy savages into well-trained 
soldiers. After overrunning the whole of China, they 
poured in vast hordes into Central Asia. One after 
another the Muhammedan kingdoms fell before them, the 
fields were laid waste and the cities sacked and destroyed. 
Wherever the Moghuls met with resistance they signalised 
the defeat of their enemies with appalling massacres. In 
wanton barbarity and destructiveness the early Moghuls 

H.i.H.S. G 



98 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 




were the equals of the White Huns, and though less fiend- 
ishly cruel their great leader was quite as pitiless and in- 
human as Mihiragula. Before he died this "World Stormer," 



AFGHAN RULE. 99 

as he is called, who had started life as the chieftain of 
a petty Mongolian tribe, had created an empire stretch- 
ing from the Dneiper to the China Sea. India narrowly 
escaped the horrors of one of his devastating invasions. 
On one occasion when in pursuit of the ruler of Khwarizm 
the modern Khiva who had fled to India, he appeared on 
the banks of the Indus, and the provinces of Multan, Lahore 
and Peshawar were actually ravaged by his troops. But 
fortunately for India he withdrew to attack Herat, the in- 
habitants of which had risen against the Moghul governor. 
As an instance of his ferocity, it may be mentioned that 
when the town fell into his hands, he put to death man, 
woman, and child. It is said that on this occasion alone 
1,600,000 people were butchered in cold blood. 

Altamsh subdues Northern India. The retire- 
ment of Chengiz Khan left Altamsh free to punish the 
rebellious governors of Sind and Bengal. After success- 
ful campaigns against both, he turned his attention to his 
independent Hindu neighbours, and invaded Eajputana. 
The fortresses of Eanthambhor and Gwalior were captured 
after protracted sieges, and then Ujjain, the ancient capital 
of Malwa, was taken. It is needless, perhaps, to add that 
wherever he went he broke down images and demolished 
temples. At his death, which occurred in 1236, he had 
made himself the master of all Northern India as far south 
as the Vindhya Hills. 

Causes of Muhammedan success. It may seem 
surprising that the Hindus, who so enormously outnumbered 
their conquerors, and who had fought so stoutly for their 
independence, should have been held in check from any 
general rising against their Muhammedan rulers. The 
explanation is to be found in the immense number of hardy, 
well-trained soldiers available at all times for repressing 
them. When Ghazni fell, Khusru was followed into India 
by bands of Turki warriors fleeing from the general 
massacre ; and when the Moghuls swept down upon Cen- 
tral Asia, many of the soldiery of Afghanistan, Samarcand, 
and Bokhara fled to India and took service under 
Moslem rulers. There was thus an almost inexhaustible 
supply of the finest fighting material ready to hand, and a 
Hindu rising could be crushed before it had time to grow 



100 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

formidable. The Muhammedan Emperor of Delhi in par- 
ticular, from the position of his capital, could always 
obtain as many mercenaries as he wanted to wage his 
wars. But while the presence of Afghan and Turki 
soldiers strengthened the hold which the Muhammedan s 
had over India, it was at the same time a fruitful source of 
danger and weakness to the Delhi Empire ; for it enabled 
pretenders to the throne and rebellious governors to 
surround themselves rapidly with large and well-disciplined 
armies. 

Sultan Raziya. Altamsh was succeeded by his son, a 
feeble and cruel debauchee, who was deposed after a reign 
of six months and put to death. His sister Raziya, a woman 
of remarkable vigour and ability, was raised to the throne 
in his stead. She is known by the name of Sultan Raziya, 
a tribute to her masculine energy, and owns the proud 
distinction of having been the only woman who sat upon 
the throne of Delhi. She began her reign well, and acted 
up to her reputation for learning and good sense ; but, 
unfortunately for herself, excited the jealousy of her nobles 
by showing too great a partiality for an Abyssinian slave. 
A rebellion was the result, which ended in her being 
deposed and put to death, after a reign of three and a half 
years. 

Reappearance of the Moghuls. The next two 
kings, who were only distinguished for vice and cruelty, 
were, after brief reigns, both assassinated. Nasiruddin 
Ahmad, a younger brother of Raziya, then seized the throne 
and occupied it for 21 years. During his reign the Moghuls 
again made their appearance in the Punjab, and their 
invasions from this time forward became a constant source 
of anxiety to the Pathan rulers of Delhi. The Rajputs 
of Mewat seized the opportunity to revolt, and the 
Khokhars renewed their raids upon the Punjab. But 
owing to the energy and ability of his minister Balban, 
the tide of Moghul invasion was stemmed, the Rajputs 
were subdued, and the Khokhars driven back to their 
native hills. 

Balban. After Nasiruddin's death, in 1266, Balban 
seized his master's throne. Balban's career had been an 
unusually checkered one even for those w^ild times. Start- 



AFGHAN KUL^. 101 

ing life as Altamsh's slave; "t^ MddC le/igtfr fevM been 
considered worthy to marry his master's daughter. His 
enemies had reason to tremble at his name, for he was 
as vindictive as he was able. His first act on becoming 
king was to massacre the band of confederates who had 
helped him to the throne. Governors suspected of har- 
bouring treasonable designs were flogged, sometimes 
even to death, before his eyes, The Rajputs of Mewat 
and Malwa, who had again risen, were hunted from their 
fastnesses, and nearly exterminated, and lastly a revolt 
in Bengal was put down with merciless severity. His long 
reign was a succession of Hindu revolts, rebellions of 
Muhammedan governors and Moghul invasions, but the old 
warrior was strong enough to hold his kingdom against 
them all. His capital became the asylum of ruined kings 
and princes from Central Asia, who had been driven out of 
their dominions by Moghul invasions, and was filled Avith 
poets and men of letters from northern countries. 

End of the slave dynasty. Balban died in 1287, 
and was succeeded by a grandson, who, like so many of his 
predecessors on the throne, was weak, dissolute, and cruel. 
After three and a half years of misrule he was assassinated, 
and by common consent Jalaluddin Khilji, governor of the 
Punjab, was placed upon the vacant throne. Thus the slave 
dynasty was brought to an end in 1290, after lasting for 84 
years. The cruelty and viciousness of most of its kings had 
alienated the Muhammedans and goaded the Hindus to 
revolt. When it ceased the Moslem Empire in India was 
4M10 firmer than it had been when Kutbuddin, the founder, 
ascended the throne of Delhi. 

The Khilji dynasty 1290-1320. Jalaluddin, the 
founder of the Khilji dynasty, was an old man when he 
usurped the throne. The best part of his life had been 
spent in repelling the Moghul invasions in the Punjab, and 
he was now hardly equal to the task of governing so wild 
and distracted a kingdom. His first year was spent in 
suppressing Hindu revolts. The temples of Malwa were 
plundered and Ujjain, which had regained its independence, 
captured and sacked, but the attempt to reduce Ranthambhor 
failed completely. Jalaluddin thereupon returned to Delhi, 
now anxious only to finish his days in peace. But his nephew, 



102 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

Alaiiddin, gcvernor > of - Xanu, near Allahabad, was of a 
restless and daring spirit, and could not be restrained. His 
first exploit was the capture of Bhilsa, south of the Vindya 
hills, 300 miles away, with a handful of cavalry. The Raja 
was taken unawares by the suddenness of the raid and 
forced to submit, and his city was plundered. Emboldened 
by this success, Alauddin, in 1296, made a dash upon 
Maharashtra with a body of 8000 troops. The Kaja was 
surprised in his capital of Devagiri, and obliged to sue for 
peace to save the city from sack. The price demanded was 
a portion of his territory, an enormous ransom, and the 
promise of a yearly tribute. EUichpur was next attacked, 
captured and sacked. Alauddin then galloped back to 
Karra, laden with booty. The old king, on the news of his 
return, hastened to congratulate his victorious n^ephew, and 
for his pains was treacherously seized and beheaded. 

Alauddin. Alauddin, after this dastardly act, marched 
on Delhi, and having by bribery and intimidation allayed all 
opposition, seized the crown, in 1296. He signalised his 
accession by hunting down and murdering the sons of 
Jelaluddin to make his position secure. The first two years 
of his reign were spent in campaigns against the Moghuls, 
whom he defeated and drove out of the Punjab. In the 
third year he made an expedition into Guzerat. The Raja 
fled before him, and the country was annexed. He next 
turned his attention to the Rajputs of Rajputana, who 
had never ceased, in spite of merciless repression, to raid 
the neighbouring Muhammedan territory. 

Invades Rajputana. As has already been stated^ 
when the Muhammedans conquered Northern India many 
Rajput chiefs with their retainers fled to Rajputana, and 
there established small independent kingdoms. For mutual 
protection they formed themselves into a loose confederacy, 
recognising the Rana of Chittor as their overlord. Alauddin 
was determined to put a stop to their raiding, and he there- 
fore marched the next year into Rajputana to punish them. 
Ranthambhor was captured by assault after a stubborn 
and protracted defence, and its inhabitants massacred : 
then laying waste the country, he marched against Chittor. 
The fortress held out for six months before he could reduce 
it, and the Rajputs fought to the last with desperate valour. 



AFGHAN RULE. 103 

The Ran a was captured when it fell ; but an heroic rem- 
nant of the garrison cut their way through the besiegers 
and fled to the Aravalli Hills. From there, under a nephew 
of the Rana, they made themselves so troublesome by con- 
tinually sallying out and raiding and ravaging the country 
round that Alauddin was glad at last to restore Chittor, on 
condition that his suzerainty was acknowledged. 

Campaign against the Moghuls. After reducing 
Chittor, Alauddin was forced to turn his attention to the 
Punjab, where a fresh invasion of Moghuls was taking 
place. This kept him busy for the next two years. 
Nothing could exceed the ferocity he displayed in the 
conduct of this campaign. The Moghuls had by this time 
been converted to Islam, but they belonged to the sect of 
Shiahs, while Alauddin and his Afghan soldiers were bigoted 
Sunnis. They were therefore detested by him on this 
account. Captives received no mercy at his hands. Men 
were put to death in cold blood, and women and children 
sold as slaves. Thousands of wretched prisoners were sent 
in chains to Delhi, where they were trampled upon by the 
state elephants to piake a public spectacle, and their skulls 
afterwards heaped up in pyramids at the city gates. 

Kafur's campaign in Southern India. While 
Alauddin was engaged in suppressing Rajput revolts and 
repelling Moghul invasions, Malik Kafur, his favourite 
general, was conducting a campaign against the independent 
Hindu kingdoms of Southern India. Kafur was a converted 
Hindu, and had been given as a slave to Alauddin during 
the expedition to G-uzerat. Alauddin had taken a great 
fancy to him, and had marked him at once for high command. 
At that time the chief kingdoms of the Deccan were 
Devagiri, Telingana, and Dwara Samudra in North Mysore. 
All three were ruled over by Rajput kings. Had they 
combined they might have been more than a match for the 
Muhammedans ; but they were no wiser than the Rajputs 
of Delhi and Kanauj had been when Muhammad Ghori 
descended upon Northern India. The excuse for Kafur's 
expedition was that the Raja of Devagiri had failed to pay 
his tribute. His country was quickly overrun, his capital 
pillaged, and he himself was sent a prisoner to Delhi. But 
he succeeded by rich gifts in pleasing Alauddin so well 




Emery Walker sc 



AFGHAN RULE. 105 

during his captivity that he was restored to his dominions.* 
After overrunning the whole of Maharashtra Kafur in 1311 
led his army south. Dwara Samudra was laid waste, 
Warangal, the capital of Telingana, sacked, and the country 
ravaged almost as far as Cape Comorin in the extreme 
south. The campaign was a proof of the wealth of the 
Hindu kingdoms of the Deccan, and also of their defence- 
lessness, and the facts were not forgotten. 

Last years of Alauddin. Kafur then returned to his 
master, and was rewarded by being made Prime Minister. 
Alauddin's constitution was now enfeebled, and his vigour 
greatly impaired, but his ferocity was no whit abated. 
A conspiracy to assassinate him having come to light, he 
massacred indiscriminately the whole of the Moghuls who 
had submitted to him and settled in his dominions ; his 
brother in law was put to death under suspicion of treason ; 
and the queen and her two sons, accused of plotting against 
him, were imprisoned. The news that his health was failing 
was the signal for a general revolt. Chittor regained its inde- 
pendence and the Muhammedan garrisons were driven out 
of the Deccan. Rebellion and sedition spread far and wide ; 
his very palace became a hot-bed of intrigue. In the year 
1316, in the midst of these disorders, he died, his end being 
hastened, it is said, by poison given him by his favourite, 
Kafur. Kafur placed Alauddin's youngest son upon the 
throne, and began to administer the empire as regent. But 
Mubarak, an elder brother of the young king, who had 
narrowly escaped assassination at the hands of Kafur, 
heading a successful rebellion, slew the regent, put out 
the eyes of the puppet ruler and imprisoned him, and had 
himself proclaimed king. 

Decline and fall of the Khilji dynasty. Mubarak 
proved himself a worthless debauchee, and entrusted the 
government of the state to slaves, one of whom, named 
Malik Khusru, a renegade Hindu, was made Prime Minister. 
Khusru took the earliest opportunity to murder his master 
and seize his throne. His first act as ruler was to cut off 
the House of Khilji root and branch by the murder of every 
member of Alauddin's family. But he was as stupid as he 
was brutal and cruel, and while he persecuted Hindus he 
insulted the religion of Muhammedans. Within five months 



106 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

of his accession he was deposed and put to death by Ghazi 
Beg Tughlak, Governor of the Punjab, whom the disgusted 
nobles had called in to rid them of the tyrant. No member 
of the Khilji family remaining, Ghazi Beg was chosen king, 
under the title of Ghiasuddin, Champion of the Faith, 
in 1320. 

The Tughlak Dynasty, 1320- 1414. The new king, 
who had begun life as a Turki slave, was the first of a line 
of kings known as the Tughlak Sultans. Delhi had become 
such a nest of sedition, owing to the number of wild Pathan 
and Turki adventurers from Central Asia that resorted to 
it, that he considered it unsafe to live there. He therefore 
removed his capital to a place about four miles away, which 
he called Tughlakabad. Ghiasuddin ruled wisely and well 
and under him the kingdom flourished greatly. The con- 
quest of the south was continued by him and Warangal 
finally reduced. Bengal also surrendered to him. But he 
had hardly been on the throne four years when he was 
killed in suspicious circumstances by the collapse of a 
wooden pavilion erected for his reception by his son and 
successor. 

Muhammad Tughlak. This son was the celebrated 
Muhammad Tughlak, one of the strangest characters in all 
history. He was a man of deep learning and great abilities, 
simple in his manner of living, and brave and skilful in war. 
But his violence of temper, his waywardness, and his 
inhumanity made his long reign a curse instead of a blessing 
to his subjects. The position to which he had succeeded 
was one of extreme difficulty. His empire stretched from 
Assam on the east to Maharashtra on the west, but, owing 
to the rebellious nature of the Muhammedan governors and 
the un tameable spirit of the Rajputs, it was never under 
complete control. The country was flooded with petty 
trans-frontier chiefs and their retainers landless men 
who had been forced to seek refuge in India under pressure 
of Moghul invasions. They were restless freebooters, without 
any feelings of loyalty to the Delhi Emperor, and, when not 
engaged as mercenaries in plundering expeditions against 
the Hindus, were always ready to take part in any mischief 
that might be afoot. While in the north the Moghuls 
were becoming more continuously troublesome, their troops 



AFGHAN RULE. 107 

were better disciplined, and their raids more systematic and 
more skilfully executed. 

His folly and inhumanity. A cruel and capricious 
tyrant like Muhammad Tughlak, who frequently betrayed 
in his conduct symptoms of insanity, was hardly the man to 
administer such an empire. In order that he might be left 
alone to deal with his rebellious subjects, he emptied his 
treasury in bribing the Moghuls to retire from the Punjab ; 
and then to raise money he increased the land-tax to such 
an extent that the cultivators in despair abandened their 
lands and fled to the jungles. To punish them for this, 
bands of soldiers were sent out to surround the tractJS in 
which they had taken shelter, and hunt them down and 
kill them like wild beasts. On one occasion, in an outburst 
of mad fury, he personally conducted a general massacre of 
the Hindus of Kanauj. The desolated country was soon a 
prey to famine, Delhi itself was stricken and thousands 
within the city died of starvation. In the midst of these 
horrors, being struck with the beauty of Devagiri, the 
name of which he changed into Daulatabad, he determined, 
with characteristic impulsiveness, at once to make it his 
capital. The wretched famished people of Delhi were 
ordered to evacuate the city, on pain of death if they dis- 
obeyed, and march with all their belongings a distance of 
800 miles. In spite of the fearful mortality which occurred, 
and though the project had, to be abandoned as utterly 
impracticable, he had the folly and inhumanity to make a 
second attempt, and thus sacrificed to his whim the lives of 
many thousands more. At his wits' end for money, he sent 
out an expedition of 100,000 men, by way of Assam, to 
plunder China. The few who returned to tell the tale of 
failure were put to death by the furious and disappointed 
monarch. Another expedition was equipped and sent 
against Persia ; but the soldiers, being without pay, deserted 
in such large numbers that the project had to be abandoned. 
As a characteristic example of his imprudence it may be 
mentioned that on one occasion to replenish his empty 
treasury he issued a copper currency stamped with the value 
of the more precious metals. For a time it was successful, 
and his coins were accepted as tokens of fictitious value. 
But foreign merchants refused to accept them, and counter- 



108 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

feiters took to imitating them in amazing abundance. A 
panic was the natural result, trade stopped, and beggary 
and misery spread throughout the land. 

General revolt. Rebellion and anarchy followed closely 
on the heels of ruin and famine. The governor of Malwa, 
his nephew, first raised the signal of revolt, and being cap- 
tured was flayed alive by his ferocious uncle. Eebellions 
in the Punjab and Sind followed, but were quickly sup- 
pressed. Then came a rising in Guzerat, and while 
Muhamm&d was engaged in putting it down, the governors 
of Lower Bengal and the Deccan asserted their indepen- 
dence, and the Hindu kings of Southern India threw oflP 
their allegiance. The whole country was up in arms against 
the oppressor. Having crushed the rising in Guzerat, 
Muhammad hurried towards the Deccan ; but on the way he 
wasseized with a fever and died. His reign of terror had lasted 
27 years, and during it his empire had been subjected to 
every kind of calamity. His administration of justice had 
been so ferocious that in front of his palace there was daily 
heaped up a mound of corpses. He left to his successor a 
much reduced kingdom, an empty treasury, and a plentiful 
crop of troubles. 

Vijayanagar founded. During the reign of Muham- 
mad Tughlak two notable events occurred in the south. 
These were the establishment of the Hindu kingdom of 
Vijayanagar, and the foundation of the Bahmani kingdom, 
the first independent Muhammedan State in the Deccan, 
The ancient kingdoms of the Gheras and the Pandyas had 
long since sunk to insignificance, and the Cholas, who 
had dominated the extreme south for many centuries, had 
finally succumbed after a long struggle to the king of 
Warangal early in the fourteenth century. The result of 
Malik Kafur s expeditions into Southern India in the time 
of Alauddiii Khilji had been to plunge the country into 
a state of anarchy. The ancient Hindu kingdoms were 
overthrown or so weakened that there existed for a time 
no ruler with sufficient power to restore order or to cope 
with Muhammedan raiders. But the misgovernment of 
Muhammad Tughlak so distracted his empire that two 
Kanarese princes, named respectively Harihara and Bukka 
Ray, were able without molestation to build up out of the 



AFGHAN RULE. 109 

ruins of the lately destroyed Hindu kingdoms a new Hindu 
empire. This extensive kingdom, to which the name of 
Vijayanagar was given, after its capital, became for a 
couple of hundred years the last stronghold of independent 
Hinduism. So great did it at last become that in the 
beginning of the sixteenth century, under a ruler named 
Krishnadeo Eai, it comprised the whole of the Peninsula 
south of the Krishna river. 

The Bahmani kingdom established. The Bahmani 
kingdom owed its origin to a combination of the Muham- 
medan noblemen in the Deccan to resist the cruel oppressions 
of Muhammad Tughlak. Their leader was a man named 
Hasan, who, though of good birth, had in early life been 
reduced by poverty to take service under a Brahman called 
Gangu. On the death of Muhammad Tughlak, his successor 
being too weak to put down the rising acknowledged the 
independence of the Deccan, and thus Hasan became the 
founder of an independent Muhammedan kingdom. He 
ascended the throne in 1347 under the title of Sultan 
Alauddin Hasan Gangu Bahmani. The last two names he 
took in honour of his old Brahman master, who had be- 
friended him through life, and whom he now in gratitude 
made his first Prime Minister. His capital was, at a place 
called Kulburga, west of Golconda, and before he died he 
was ruler over a kingdom stretching from Berar in the 
north to the Krishna river in the south. 

Rivalry between them. Between these two rival 
kingdoms war was almost unceasing. Acts of aggression 
followed by bloody reprisals made up most of the history 
of both, the Hindus being not less cruel and vindictive 
than the Muhammedans. 

Feroz Tuglak. Muhammad was succeeded in 1351 
by his cousin, Feroz Tuglak, a very different stamp of 
man. He was a pious Muhammedan, and more anxious to 
spread his religion than to extend his dominions. During 
his reign many Hindus were converted to Islam, especially 
in Bengal, by the efforts of itinerant Muhammedan preachers. 
He did not attempt to recover his lost provinces in the 
Deccan, but acknowledged the Muhammedan governors 
as independent sovereigns. Distant expeditions with his 
empty treasury were out of the question. Though nomi- 



110 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

nally Emperor of Northern India, he was in reality only 
King of the Punjab and the country now comprised by the 
United Provinces. Bengal had become an independent 
kingdom during the last days of his predecessor, and Malwa 
was practically self-governing during his reign. He did, it 
is true, on more than one occasion make a half-hearted 
attempt to recover Bengal, and was nearly lost with the 
whole of his army on another when retiring from an 
unsuccessful expedition into Sind. He deserves however 
to be remembered by his works of public utility and his - 
genuine efforts to ameliorate the condition of his subjects. 
Much of the land which had fallen out of cultivation in 
Muhammad's reign was reclaimed, taxes were lightened, 
canals were cut, tanks dug, roads constructed, caravanserais 
built, and hospitals, schools, and colleges opened. He was 
certainly a more enlightened ruler than any of his prede- 
cessors, but unfortunately, like them, he could not refrain 
from religious intolerance and from persecuting Hindus. 
He died in 1388 after a long and peaceful reign of 38 
years. 

Independent Muhammedan kingdoms. After his 
death anarchy and rebellion broke out afresh. His suc- 
cessors were weak and cruel, and soon completed the ruin 
which Muhammad had begun.* Within six years nothing 
remained to the Emperor of Delhi but the capital itself 
and the country round about it. But though the empire 
had decayed, the Muhammedans were increasing their hold 
upon India. Bengal, Jaunpore, Sind, Guzerat, Malwa, and 
the Deccan, having thrown off their allegiance to the Delhi 
ruler, had become powerful Muhammedan kingdoms, and 
their Hindu subjects had learnt to submit with patience 
to the rule of the foreigner. Rajputana and the south 
were now the last strongholds of independent Hinduism. 

Timur sacks Delhi. In 1398 another world-stormer 
from Central Asia swept down upon India. Timur, or 
Tamerlane, as he is sometimes called, was a descendant of 
the terrible Chengiz Khan. While Chengiz was a mere 
ruthless plunderer, Timur, who was a Muhammedan, pro- 
fessed religious zeal as the ground of conquest. The wild 
Tartar tribes who had invaded Central Asia under Chengiz 
Khan, had during the 13th century become converted to 



AFGHAN RULE. Ill 

Islam, and were full of enthusiasm for their new faith. 
Eeligious fanaticism, added to their lust of plunder, made 
them, if possible, more ferocious and callous of human 
suffering than ever, and certainly more formidable in war. 
Timur had the genius of his ancestor for converting savage 
hordes into well-trained armies, and an equal ambition 
for coiiquest. He was over sixty years of age, and the 
ruler of an empire greater even than that of Chengiz Khan, 
when hearing of the wealth of India and the enfeebled 
state of the Pathan rulers of Delhi he determined to 
invade it. Giving out that his mission was to destroy 
idolatry, he marched with an immense armj^ down the 
Khyber Pass into the Punjab. Timur was destitute of 
humanity, and his soldiers were brutal and cruel to a 
degree unsurpassed in the annals of war. City after city 
fell before him and was plundered, and those of its inhabi- 
tants that were not taken as slaves were put to the sword. 
Wherever he went he spread ruin and desolation. Panic 
preceded his approach, and those who could, abandoning 
everything, fled for their lives ; so that the country was 
filled with hurrying and terrified fugitives. At length he 
reached Delhi, but before commencing the siege, he ordered 
a massacre of his Indian captives, that he might be un- 
encumbered by them in the attack^ and might engage with 
all his forces in the assault. In obedience to this cruel 
order 100,000 helpless prisoners were butchered in cold 
blood in the space of an hour or two. The day before the 
attack Mahmud Tughlak the Emperor slipped away from 
the doomed city, and fled to Guzerat. After a feeble 
resistance the inhabitants capitulated on a promise that 
their lives should be spared. Timur then entered with his 
army, and proclaimed himself the Emperor of Hindustan. 
But notwithstanding his promise, he gave the city up to 
sack. For five days his soldiers raged through it without 
restraint, pillaging and massacring till the houses were 
gutted and the streets impassable for the multitude of 
corpses. Timur then withdrew with his plunder and his 
captives to Central Asia, leaving behind him a wake of 
desolation. Famine :.nd pestilence soon followed, and the 
once populous and wealthy city was for a time actually 
deserted. 



112 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

End of the Tughlak Dynasty. The Delhi Empire 
was destroyed, but Ikbal, Mah mud's Prime Minister, seized 
upon the capital, and managed to maintain a semblance of 
authority for a few years. But in 1405 a rebellion broke 
out against him and he was defeated and killed. Mahmud 
was theui brought back from Guzerat and placed again 
upon the throne. He reigned till 1412, but nothing 
remained to him of the former Empire of Delhi except the 
city itself, and he relinquished the title of emperor. 

The Syed Dynasty, 1414-1450. After his death 
anarchy again prevailed, till in 1414 Khizr Khan, the 
Governor of Sind, marched upon Delhi and captured it. 
Three of his descendants occupied the throne after him, 
but their power was confined to the immediate neighbour- 
hood of Delhi, and they had to struggle with the neighbour- 
ing Muhammedan kings to retain the little territory they 
possessed. Their dynasty is known as the Syed Dynasty, 
because they claimed descent from the Prophet. Alauddin 
the last king of the line, resigned his throne to Bahlul 
Lodi, Governor of the Punjab, and retired from the world 
to pass his days in religious meditation. 

Prosperity of the Bahmani kingdoin. While the 
four rulers of the Syed Dynasty were occupying the throne 
of Delhi, the Bahmani kingdom of Southern India attained 
to the zenith of its prosperity. Under Sultan Feroz and his 
brother Ahmad, the Hindu kingdom of Vijayanagar was 
invaded, and its king forced to sue for peace ; the ancient 
kingdom of Telingana was in great part annexed, and two 
new cities, Ahmadnagar and Bidar, destined to be in later 
times themselves the capitals of kingdoms, sprang up within 
the state. 

The Lodi Dynasty, 1451-1526. Bahlul, who assumed 
the title of Sultan in 1451, was the founder of a hne of 
kings called the Lodi Dynasty. Twenty-six years of his 
reign were spent in a struggle with the neighbouring 
kingdom of Jaunpore, which was at length reduced, and 
annexed to his dominions. His son Sikandar succeeded to 
a kingdom which included the Punjab and the whole of 
the United Provinces. During his reign Behar was added 
to it, and the capital removed to Agra. But Ibrahim 
Lodi, his successor, by his cruelty, arrogance, and bigotry. 



AFGHAN RULE. 113 

estranged his subjects, both Hindu and Muhammedan, and 
brougKt about the ruin of the reviving empire. Eebellions 
broke out against him in all directions, in the midst of 
which Babar, the ruler of Kabul, appeared upon the scene 
with a Moghul army. 

Victory of the Moghuls at Panipat. Babar was 
a descendant of Timur, and on the strength of this he laid 
claim to the throne of Delhi ; but the immediate cause 
of his coming was an invitation from Daulat Khan, the 
governor of the Punjab to assist in dethroning the tyrant, 
Ibrahim Lodi. He had long cherished the desire of con- 
quering Hindustan, and he rightly judged the present to be 
the most propitious moment. He lost no time therefore in 
marching upon Lahore; but before he reached the city, 
the treacherous governor was driven out by the troops of 
Ibrahim Lodi. Babar quickly disposed of the enemy and 
chased them out with great slaughter. The bazaar was 
burnt and the city plundered, and then he moved on 
again. But he had not gone far before he met with a 
serious and unexpected check ; for Daulat Khan, who had 
repented of his treachery, went into rebellion against him 
and took the field with 40,000 men. He was forced, there- 
fore, to turn back and confront this danger threatening him 
in the rear. * The insurrection proved less formidable than it 
looked ; for at the approach of the Moghuls Daulat Khan's 
army vanished. Having restored order and secured the 
country behind him Babar resumed his march on Delhi. 
Ibrahim Lodi, recognising the seriousness of the crisis, 
gathered together all the forces he could muster and 
marched out to meet the invader. On the plain of Panipat, 
in the historic neighbourhood of the two great battlefields 
of Kurukshetra and Thanesar, in 1526, the Moghuls and 
the Afghans met to decide the fate of India. The battle 
was short but bloody. The well-disciplined and hardy 
warriors of Central Asia, though far outnumbered, were 
more than a match for the enervated Afghans of the 
Indian plains. By mid-day Babar had gained a decisive 
victory. 15,000 of the enemy lay dead upon the field, and 
Ibrahim Lodi was himself among the slain. In Delhi, 
which at once submitted to him without a struggle, Babar 
had himself proclaimed Emperor of India. He then 

H.I.H.S. H 



114 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

marched upon Agra, captured it, and seized the family of 
Ibrahim. Northern India now lay at the feet of the 
Moghuls. 

Mahmud Gawan. The year 1526 is also noteworthy 
as the year in which the Bahmani kingdom of the Deccan 
came to an end. Between the years 1435 and 1461, under 
two vicious rulers, the kingdom rapidly declined. Then 
the genius of a statesman, Mahmud Gawan, infused into it 
for a time fresh vitality. During his prime ministership of 
25 years he succeeded not only in maintaining a just and 
firm government, but by annexing the Konkan and the 
Northern Circars, and completing the subjugation of 
Telingana, greatly extended the boundaries of the state. 
He was a man of learning and piety, simple in his habits, 
and incorruptible, employing his great wealth without 
stint in charities and objects of public utilitj'. But all 
his virtues could not save him from an evil fate. In the 
faithful discharge of his duties he aroused the jealousy and 
the hatred of the turbulent Deccani nobility, and they at 
length contrived his ruin. He was executed on a false 
charge by order of the sovereign for whom he had worked 
so ably and so disinterestedly. 

Break-up of the Bahmani kingdom. After his 
death the state was rent by factions and quickly fell to 
pieces. But out of the ruins of the Bahmani kingdom 
there arose five small and vigorous independent states, 
Berar, Bidar, Bijapur, Ahmadnagar, and Golconda. But 
they all continued to display the factiousness of the parent 
kingdom, were always at war with one another, and could 
not even combine for mutual protection against a common 
foe. Thus the extinction of the Bahmani kingdom greatly 
weakened Muhammedan power in the Deccan, and may 
justly be said to have contributed ultimately not a little to 
the downfall of Islamic supremacy in India. 

India under the Pathan kings. The Pathan kings 
of Delhi had held their dominions under a sort of military 
despotism. They had contented themselves with garrison- 
ing important places with their mercenaries, collecting the 
land tax in the country immediately under them, wresting 
tribute from Hindu Rajas, and exacting contributions from 
Muhammedan governors, when they felt themselves strong 



AFGHAN RULE. 115 

enough to enforce obedience ; they had never attempted 
directly to administer their territories. During all this 
period the Muhammedans continued to persecute the con- 
quered Hindus. Their own chroniclers testify with pride 
to the uncompromising way in which their rulers destroyed 
idols and temples, and slew by thousands those who per- 
sisted in idolatry. Even so mild and beneficent a ruler as 
Feroz Tuglak takes credit to himself for the destruction of 
shrines and the massacre of obdurate idolators ; while of the 
ruthless and bloodthirsty Alauddin it is recorded that 
** when he advanced from Karra the Hindus in alarm de- 
scended into the ground like ants. He departed towards 
the garden of Behar to dye the soil as red as a tulip." 

Condition of the Hindus. But the Hindus, while 
. subject at all times to religious persecution, enjoyed under 
their conquerors a large measure of liberty. Their social 
system remained unimpaired, and the Brahmans retained 
over them their power and influence undiminished. Though 
many converts were made to Islam, they were mostly from 
among those who had nothing to lose and everything to 
gain in the social scale by turning Muhammedan. The 
great mass of the people remained as before; and so far 
from the regulations of caste being relaxed, the persecutions 
to which they were subjected only made them hold to them 
more tenaciously than ever. 

Union of Hindus and Muhammedans in the 
Deccan. In Northern India there was very little sympathy 
between the rulers and the ruled, and their religious differ- 
ences made any sort of union impossible. But with the 
growth of independent Muhammedan kingdoms in Bengal, 
Sind, ancf the Deccan, Hindus and Muhammedans had to 
adapt themselves to a different condition of things. These 
kingdoms were essentially Indian, for the foreign element 
was small, and the rulers could not look to the north, as 
the Delhi Emperor looked, for a continuous and inexhaust- 
ible supply of Muhammedan mercenaries. It was therefore 
necessary to treat Hindu subjects with some consideration. 
In course of time, under the influence of climate and sur- 
roundings, racial differences grew less marked and antipathies 
less vehement. Hindus and Muhammedans came to regard 
each other as fellow-countrymen, and Hindu officers were 



116 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

employed in posts of trust side by side with Muham- 
medans. Although divided by the impassable barrier of 
religious difference, and maintaining an uncompromising 
attitude in the matter of their social and domestic regula- 
tions, they learnt in time to regard each other with a less 
intolerant spirit, so that it became possible for them to live 
together in some sort of harmony. 

Babar drives the Afghans out of Northern 
India. Babar and his son Humayun, after the fall of 
Agra, set about tranquillising the country round. The 
Afghans, though decisively beaten at Panipat, did not 
without further struggle relinquish Northern India to the 
Moghuls. They rallied at Jaunpore, and there made a 
desperate effort to set up a rival kingdom. But it was of 
no avail, and they were defeated and driven out. 

Defeats the Rajputs. Hardly had the Afghans been 
subdued before Sanga Singh, the Rana of Chittor, headed 
a combination of Rajputs against Babar. Sanga Singh had 
taken advantage of the stormy times preceding the fall 
of the Pathan empire to extend his dominions and con- 
solidate his power. He was therefore a formidable adver- 
sary, especiauy as Mahmud Lodi, brother of the late king, 
with 10,000 men had joined him, hoping with his assist- 
ance to drive the Moghuls out of India. In the year 1527 
the allies marched upon Agra, and encountered Babar at 
Fatehpur Sikri, close by. The fate of India hung upon the 
issue of the battle. At one time during the fight the 
Moghuls began to give way, and defeat seemed imminent. 
But their better discipline saved them, and, rallying under 
Babar's exhortations, they made one supreme effort, and 
snatched the victory from the already exultant enemy. 
The advancing Hindus and Afghans were checked, then 
driven back, and finally routed with great slaughter. 
Babar gave the Rajputs no chance to recover. Following 
up his success, he assumed the offensive, and completely 
broke their power in Northern India by the capture of all 
their principal strongholds. In 1529 Behar was added to 
his dominions. He was now the ruler of an empire stretch- 
ing from Bokhara to Multan, and from the Arabian Sea to 
the eastern borders of Behar. 

Death of Babar. Babar died in 1530 at the age of 



AFGHAN RULE. 117 

fifty. In many respects he was an ideal Eastern monarch. 
He was brave and generous, frank and impulsive, cheerful 
and patient under misfortunes, fond of letters himself, and 
a patron of learning ; and if in his dealings with his enemies 
he showed himself callous and cruel, he only acted after the 
manner of his times. On his death the empire he had 
created was divided up among his four sons. Humayun, 
the eldest, became Emperor of Delhi, and Kamran, the 
second, ruler of the Punjab and Afghanistan. The other 
two sons were provided with Indian governorships under 
their eldest brother. 

Humayun's critical position. Humayun's position 
was a critical one. The Afghans had not yet abandoned all 
hope of wresting India from the Moghuls,and were again giv- 
ing trouble in the eastern portion of his dominions. Bahadur 
Shah, the King of Guzerat, was absorbing into his kingdom 
the neighbouring territories ; and Sher Shah, a Pathan 
soldier of fortune, had made himself the master of Behar; 
added to which the jealousy existing between Kdmran and 
Humayun made it impossible for the latter to obtain from 
the north the fresh supplies of Moghul soldiers necessary 
for the defence of his kingdom. 

Bahadur Shah driven out of Guzerat. A few 
months before Babar's death, Bahadur Shah had captured 
Chittor and placed there a Muhammedan garrison. Soon 
after Humayun^s accession, the widow of the late Eana 
appealed to him to expel the Afghan governor. Humayun, 
who had a private grudge against Bahadur and was alarmed 
at his growing power, readily responded to her appeal and 
marched an army into Eajputana. Chittor was captured, 
Malwa annexed, and Bahadur chased into Guzerat. Huma- 
yun, following close behind, forced him to fly from place to 
place, and ultimately drove him from his kingdom. The 
campaign concluded with the storming and capture of 
Champanir, the hill fort in which were stored the treasures 
of the kingdom. In this last exploit Humayun displayed 
conspicuous courage, being one of the first to scale its walls. 

Struggle with Sher Shah. But while Humayun was 
thus employed, Sher Shah had conquered Bengal and pro- 
claimed himself its king. He had also seized the strong 
fort of Chunar, on the Ganges. Humayun was thus forced 



118 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

to leave Guzerat and hurry back to the north. As soon as 
he had gone, Bahadur Shah returned and recovered all the 
territory which had been taken from him. After a siege of 
six months, Humayun captured Chunar, and Sher Shah fled 
back to Bengal. Humayun followed in pursuit, and took 
Patna and Gaur, the capital of Bengal, on the way ; but he 
was unable to overtake Sher Shah, who made good his 
escape to the jungle. As the rainy season had commenced, 
Humayun decided to retire ; but sickness broke out in his 
army, and his retreat was cut off by floods. Whereupon 
Sher Shah emerged from his hiding-place, recovered Behar 
and Chunar, and laid siege to Jaunpore. Humayun, as 
soon as the rains were over, began to retreat. Sher Shah 
at once abandoned the siege of Jaunpore, and hurried back 
to cut him ofl". The two armies met at Buxar in 1539, and 
encamped opposite each other. Humayun, fearing to en- 
gage with his weakened forces, entered into negotiations 
with Sher Shah, and agreed to appoint him Governor of 
Behar and Bengal. Scarcely were the terms of peace agreed 
upon when the treacherous Afghans fell upon the rear of 
Humayun's army. The Moghuls, taken unawares, were 
seized with panic, and, flying in disorder, plunged into the 
Ganges, where thousands of them were drowned. Humayun 
himself leapt on horseback into the river, and attempted to 
swim across ; but his horse sank beneath him, and but for 
the assistance of a water-carrier, who lent him his inflated 
mashak, he too would have been drowned. 

Flight of Humayun. Sher Shah continued his 
victorious course as far as Kanauj, while Humayun fled 
before him to Agra. Both occupied the next few months 
in preparation for a final struggle. Sher Shah was now the 
champion of the Pathans against the Moghuls. Afghan 
chiefs flocked to his standard from all directions, and he 
had soon an immense army with him. Humayun, on the 
other hand, was hampered by the intrigues of his brothers, 
and was forced to face the crisis with what Moghuls he 
could collect in Northern India. The armies met at Kanauj 
in 1540, and the Moghtils were again defeated with great 
slaughter. Humayun was obliged to fly for his life and to 
abandon his kingdom to the victor. Kamran refused to 
afl'ord him refuge in his dominions, and he had to turn 



AFGHAN RULE. 119 

aside and make his way with his family to Persia through 
the desert of Sind. On the way to Amarkot, in 1542, his 
famous son Ak'bar was born. The fugitives, after enduring 
great hardships, at last reached Persia and threw them- 
selves on the protection of the king. But shelter was only 
granted them on the humiliating conditions that they would 
become Shiahs instead of Sunnis. 

Sher Shah at Delhi. After the victory of Kanauj 
Sher Shah ascended the throne of Delhi. The lessons of 
the past were not lost upon a man so able. He perceived 
that if he was to be free from Moghul incursions, he must 
get possession of the Punjab. Kamran, anxious to be on 
good terms with so formidable an antagonist, readily ceded 
it to him ; and Sher Shah lost no time in building a strong 
fort at Rhotas on the Jhelum as a protection against in- 
vasion. That he might be able to move an army quickly to 
any point in his wide dominions, he constructed a road 
stretching from Gaur to his new fort in the Punjab, a dis- 
tance of 2000 miles. Along both sides of it he planted 
trees, dug wells and built serais. Three other similar but 
shorter strategic roads, traversing different portions of his 
empire, were also made by him. 

His administration. Sher Shah was not only a great 
general, he was also a great administrator. Though almost 
continually occupied during his short reign with military 
operations, he found time to devise an admirable system of 
revenue collections', and to effect many improvements in 
civil government. It may justly be claimed for him that he 
laid the foundations of the successful system of administra- 
tion adopted by his great successors the Moghul emperors. 
Hindus for the first time under a Pathan emperor of Delhi 
were exempt from state persecution, and were even em- 
ployed in such important posts as those of revenue accoun- 
tants. The land revenue was fixed at one-fourth of the 
produce, and means devised to prevent, as far as possible, 
undue exactions. Sher Shah was the strongest and ablest 
Afghan ruler that ever sat upon the throne of Delhi. None 
of his predecessors had realised as he did the duties and 
responsibilities of a king towards his subjects ; and Northern 
India enjoyed under him a sense of security such as it had 
never known under any previous Muhammedan monarch. 



120 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

His campaign against the Rajputs and death. 
After making himself master of the Punjab he turned his 
attention to the Rajput chiefs in the south of his dominions, 
who now that they had had some time to recover from the 
crushing defeats inflicted upon them by Babar, had recom- 
menced according to their custom to harass their Muham- 
medan neighbours. Malwa was overrun, and the fortresses of 
Gwalior and Ranthambhor reduced, and then siege was laid 
to the stronghold of Raysia. With characteristic treachery 
Sher Shah promised the garrison that if they would submit 
he would spare their lives and property : but when they 
opened the gates on the faith of this promise, he massacred 
them to a man. For while he was just and capable as a 
ruler, he was an unscrupulous, crafty, and cruel enemy. 
The next year he invaded Marwar, and after narrowly 
escaping defeat at the hands of a Marwar chief, succeeded 
in subjugating it. In 1545 while engaged in besieging Kalin- 
jar, an almost impregnable fortress, he was mortally injured 
by an explosion of gunpowder. Although dying and in great 
pain, he continued to direct the operations up to the last, 
and expired just as the news of its capture was received. 

Hemu. His second son, Islam Shah, commonly known 
as Salim, succeeded him, and worthily followed in his foot- 
steps till his death in 1552. Then Muhammad Adil, a 
nephew of Sher Shah, usurped the throne, after foully 
murdering Islam's little son with his own hand, and by his 
vices and his folly did his best to undo all the good work 
of his predecessors. He had, however, the good luck to 
select as his Prime Minister a man of uncommon abilities, 
both as a general and an administrator. This remarkable 
man, whose name was Hemu, was a low caste Hindu, and 
had been a petty shopkeeper till Muhammad took him into 
his service. He was, moreover, deformed and of a weakly 
constitution. While' his master was wasting his treasures, 
and indulging in debauchery with low and dissolute com- 
panions, Hemu, triumphing over his infirmities and natural 
disadvantages, was administering the empire with conspicu- 
ous success. The proud Pathan nobles, however, could not 
endure the humiliation of being governed by a man of 
Hemu's antecedents, and they rose in rebellion. But one 
after another they were attacked and defeated in a series 



AFGHAN RULE. 121 

of brilliant campaigns by the man they had so much 
despised. 

Return of Humayun. But while Hemu was busy 
quelling insurrections in the eastern districts, Humayun 
with the assistance of the King of Persia had made himself 
master of Kabul. He had for some time been watching 
the course of events in India, and he rightly judged that 
the moment was favourable for a descent upon the country. 
In 1555 he gained a decisive victory at 8irhind over 
Sikander, the Governor of the Punjab ; and in the autumn 
of the same year marched upon Delhi, which submitted to 
him without a struggle. He was now again, after an absence 
of twelve years, restored to his kingdom. But he was not 
destined to enjoy for long the throne which he had regained 
after so many years of exile. Six months after his return 
in the month of January, 1556, he was so severely injured 
by a fall from the terrace of his library that he died from 
the effects, after lingering four days. 



CHAPTER n. 



MOGHUL SUPREMACY. 



Akbar the Great, 1556-1605. At the time of Huma- 
yun's death his son Akbar was engaged with Bairam Khan 
his father's faithful companion in exile, in subjugating the 
Punjab. Akbar was then not fourteen years of age, but 
during his short life had experienced so many vicissitudes 
of fortune, and had already gained such a practical 
acquaintance with affairs, that he w^as shrewd and prudent 
beyond his years. He was, moreover, by nature manly 
and self-reliant. His first act on his accession to the throne 
was to appoint Bairam Khan his Prime Minister and to 
entrust him with the regency. His choice could not have 
fallen upon a better man for the task, for Bairam was a 
man of iron w\\\ and a consummate general, capable both 
of dealing with Akbar's unruly subjects and directing his 
forces in the coming struggle. Humayun had had no time 



122 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 



to consolidate his power, and his son's position was there- 
fore a precarious one ; for Delhi and Agra and the country- 
round alone had been properly subjugated. Sikander was 
making a determined effort to regain the Punjab, and 
Hemu was still undefeated and holding the country to the 
east in the name of his master, Muhammad Adil. 

Defeat of Hemu. As soon as he heard of Humayun's 
death, Hemu marched westward with a formidable army, 

captured Agra, and ex- 
pelled the Moghul garrison 
from Delhi. Then without 
loss of time he advanced 
against Akbar and Bairam 
Khan. On the news of 
Hemu's approach with his 
unbeaten troops, the 
majority of Akbar's coun- 
sellors advised him to re- 
tire on Kabul rather than 
undertake the hopeless 
task of attempting to 
recover his father's Indian 
dominions. But Akbar, 
who was supported by 
Bairam Khan, was not 
inclined to yield with- 
out a struggle, and de- 
termined to give battle 
to the victorious Hemu. 
Gathering together all the forces he could muster, he 
advanced to meet him. The two armies encountered each 
other in the autumn of 1556 at Panipat, and once more on 
that historic field the Moghuls and the Afghans contended 
for the sovereignty of India. But jealousy and dissension 
were at work to ruin the Afghan cause. Hemu was sus- 
pected of aspiring to occupy his master's throne, and the 
Afghan chiefs chafed against his leadership. Muhammad 
Adil, who should have led them, was as usual absent. 
In the battle the Afghans would not obey Hemu's orders, 
but fought recklessly and without concerted action, up- 
setting all his plans. The well disciplined Moghuls, there- 







Akbar. 



MOGHUL SUPREMACY. 123 

fore, under the skilful direction of Bairam Khan, though far 
outnumbered, gained a decisive victory. Hemu, though 
wounded, would not leave the battlefield, and, in the 
general rout which followed, was taken captive. He 
was executed the same day, and with his death the empire 
of Northern India passed finally from the Afghans to the 
Moghuls. 

Defeat of Sikandar. By the victory of Panipat and 
the death of Hemu, Akbar was left the master of Northern 
India, for Adil shortly after died, and he proceeded without 
opposition to take possession of Agra and Delhi. But his 
position was still by no means secure ; for early in the follow- 
ing year, 1557, news was brought to him that Sikandar Sur, 
the Afghan governor of the Punjab whom his father had 
defeated at Sirhind, issuing from the strong fort of Mankot, 
had defeated the Moghul troops left in the Punjab to 
watch him. His victory encouraged the disaffected Afghan 
nobles to try conclusions with the Moghuls once again, and 
they flocked to him from all the neighbouring districts. 
The situation was critical, but Akbar wisely lost no time 
in dealing with it. Marching rapidly upon Lahore, he 
forced Sikandar Sur to retire, and drove him. back to 
Mankot. For six months he besieged the place, and then 
Sikandar finding further resistance hopeless, surrendered. 
Akbar magnanimously allowed him to retire to Bengal, 
after exacting a promise from him that he would not again 
take up arms against him. 

Bairam* s regency. During the next two years Bairam 
Khan continued in his double office of regent and tutor to 
the young king. His skill and firmness were much needed, 
for the Moghul power was by no means firmly established. 
Only the Punjab and the country round about Delhi had 
been subdued, and the Afghans were still masters of a large 
part of India. But Bairam's methods though admirably 
fitted for the pacification of a turbulent kingdom were the 
reverse of conciliatory ; and as the country settled down 
his rule came to be regarded as unduly harsh and oppres- 
sive. His iron will and his relentlessness made for him 
many enemies ; and they were not slow to point out to 
their youthful sovereign that the regent was administering 
his dominions without reference to him, and that his cruel 



124 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

and overbearing conduct were estranging many of the 
king's loyal subjects. Akbar, though not unmindful of the 
debt of gratitude that he owed to his faithful servant, had 
observed with displeasure the way in which Bairam had on 
more than one occasion arbitrarily put to death men whose 
only fault appeared to be an enmity to the regent. More- 
over Bairam had in his self-sufficiency omitted to take 
account of the fact that his master was rapidly developing 
from a boy into a man of singularly strong character. The 
relations between Akbar and Bairam could therefore only 
grow more strained as time went on. 

Bairam dismissed. At length in the year 1560 
Akbar, who was now in his eighteenth year, determined to 
take the government into his own hands. Bairam had 
frequently expressed an intention of retiring from the 
regency, as soon as he could do so without damage to the 
interests of the young Emperor, in order that he might be 
able to make the pilgrimage to Mecca before old age should 
incapacitate him from taking so long a journey. Akbar, 
therefore, while issuing a proclamation to the effect that he 
had assumed the administration of affairs and that he alone 
was to be obeyed, sent a message to Bairam informing 
him that he was now free to undertake the pilgrimage he 
had so often expressed a wish to make. It was not to be 
expected that Bairam would tamely submit to so summary 
a dismissal. But Akbar was well aware of the nature of 
the man with whom he had to deal, and prudently made 
preparations to meet rebellious opposition. It was well 
that he did so ; for Bairam, who had quitted Agra, before 
the announcement of the proclamation, was in a few months 
in open revolt against his master. But Bairam soon found 
that he could not as a rebel command the ready obedience 
to which he had been accustomed as a regent, and that the 
influence he had so long and so powerfully exercised was 
no longer his. After a short and ineffectual resistance he 
was forced to throw himself on Akbar's mercy. Akbar was 
of too noble a nature to forget that the old man now suing 
for his life, had been his own and his father's most loyal 
and devoted servant. He readily forgave him, provided 
him with money, and left him, now thoroughly humbled, to 
proceed on his pilgrimage to Mecca. But Bairam was 



MOGHUL SUPREMACY. 125 

never destined to carry out his project; for while at 
Guzerat, completing his preparations for the journey, he 
was assassinated by an Afghan whose father he had put to 
death some years before. 

Akbar quells rebellion. After the defeat of- 
Bairam, Akbar returned to Delhi to assume the full 
responsibility of the empire. His position was still far 
from secure. The Punjab, Ajmir, Gwalior, Delhi, and 
Agra acknowledged his sovereignty, but in the east the 
Afghans were still all powerful. Akbar's army, which was 
officered by Moghul and Turkoman adventurers, was 
attached to him only by the hope of plunder, while his 
foremost generals were more anxious to increase their own 
power than to support his authorit3\ The next seven 
years, indeed, were mainly spent by him in putting down 
rebellions among his own followers. First Khan Zaman, 
who had driven the Afghans from Jaunpore, believing him- 
self strong enough to resist his youthful sovereign, raised 
the standard of revolt ; next Adam Khan, the conqueror of 
Malwa, tried to make himself independent ; and then Asaf 
Khan, the Governor of Karra, having possessed himself of 
much booty by the plunder of a neighbouring Hindu rajah, 
rebelled rather than give it up to his master. But like 
Bairam, they were destined to find that Akbar, though so 
young, was not a man to be trifled with, and that they 
were no match for him, either in generalship or readiness of 
resource. Akbar never gave his enemies time to consoli- 
date their power ; for by forced marches he was upon them 
long before they expected him, and had dealt them a 
crushing blow before they could concentrate their forces. 
Lastly his brother, the Governor of Kabul, treacherously 
invaded the Punjab, while Akbar was engaged in subduing 
his rebellious generals. All were in turn defeated, being 
unable to resist the suddenness and vigour of his att^ick. 

Conciliates the Rajputs. By 1566, Akbar had 
succeeded in establishing peace throughout his empire, and 
was now free to embark on schemes of conquest at the 
expense of his Hindu neighbours. Eajputana, which had 
so long been a thorn in the side of the Delhi Empire, 
naturally claimed his early attention. But Akbar, while 
following the traditional policy of the Kings of Delhi, was 



126 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

wiser than his predecessors ; for though he was just as 
eager to conquer, he desired to conciliate rather than to crush 
those whom he forced to submit to his authority. The 
Raja of Ambar, the modern Jaipur, became his personal 
friend, and even gave his daughter in marriage to the 
Emperor. In return Akbar appointed the Raja's son to a 
high military post. The Raja of Marwar, now Jodhpur, 
and other Rajput princes, after a brief struggle, submitted, 
and became loyal servants of their conqueror. The grand- 
daughter of the Jodhpur Raja was given in marriage to 
Akbar's eldest son, Prince Salim. But the proud Rana 
of Mewar, Uday Singh, rather than yield, retired to the 
rocky fastnesses of the Aravalli hills, leaving behind him a 
garrison of 800 Rajputs to defend his fortress of Chittor. 

Resistance of Udaipur. The defence of this fort by 
the Rajputs, under their brave leader Jay Mai, is one of 
the most stirring events in the history of those times. 
Akbar conducted the siege in person, yet with all his skill 
and determination he could not overcome the defenders. 
But one night Jay Mai, having too rashly exposed himself 
upon the fortifications, was shot by the Emperor's own 
hand. It is said that the garrison were so depressed at 
this incident that they concluded that further resistance was 
impossible, and in despair, rushing out, sword in hand, upon 
the besiegers, perished to a man. Uday Singh, in the depths 
of the Aravalli hills, managed to maintain his independence 
till his death nine years after this event. His son, Pratap 
Singh,, the founder of the modern Udaipur, regained after 
many hardships and reverses much of his father's territory. 
Alone of all the Rajput princes it is the proud boast of the 
Ranas of Udaipur that no ruler of their house ever sub- 
mitted to the indignity of a family alliance with the Moghul 
Emperors of Delhi. In 1570, by the capture of the two 
strong hill forts of Ranthambhor and Kalinjar, Akbar 
completed the conquest of Rajputana. Then the state of 
anarchy into which the Muhammedan kingdom of Guzerat 
had fallen tempted him to invade it. In the course of a 
few months the whole country was subdued and annexed 
to the empire. 

Conquest of Bengal. Bengal was now the only part 
of Northern India that did not owe allegiance to Akbar. 



MOGHUL SUPREMACY. 127 

The Afghan nobles, driven further and further east by the 
expansion of the Moghul Empire, had found an asylum in 
Bengal at the court of the Afghan ruler, Daud Khan. But 
they had not yet learnt the uselessness of struggling with 
the Moghul, and they were of such a turbulent disposition 
that they could neither agree together nor live at peace 
with their powerful neighbour. They had for years been 
raiding Moghul territorj^, and fighting on the borders had 
been continuous. Akbar, now that he had subdued and 
pacified all the rest of Northern India, lost no time in 
dealing with them. An army was accordingly dispatched 
against them, and in the year 1575, at the battle of 
Agmahal, the power of the Afghans was completely broken, 
and the province passed to the Moghuls. But the country 
was soon in a state of rebellion agaiu, for the Moghul land- 
holders, who had been put in possession of the estates of 
the Pathans, threw off their allegiance to the Emperol* of 
Delhi. In their attempt to assert their independence they 
were supported by the Afghan remnant; and in a short 
time Orissa and part of Bengal were again in open re- 
bellion. Akbar had had by this time sufficient experience 
of Afghan turbulence and Moghul treachery. He therefore 
determined to try a new experiment, and, as soon as the 
rising was put down, entrusted the government of it to a 
Hindu, Raja Todar Mai, a man of approved loyalty and 
ability, both as a general and an organiser. So well did 
the plan answer that the governorship continued to be held 
by Hindus down to the time of Akbar's death. 

Annexation of Kashmir. Kashmir had been from 
ancient times a Hindu kingdom, but towards the middle 
of the fourteenth century, a Muhammedan adventurer put 
to death the queen, then reigning alone, and succeeded 
in establishing himself upon the throne. The dynasty 
descended from him held the throne for a hundred years. 
Then the Thibetans invaded the country, destroyed the 
government, and reduced the wretched inhabitants to a 
state of the greatest misery. The fertility and beauty of 
the country, and the healthiness of its climate, have at all 
times made Kashmir the envy of surrounding kingdoms. 
Akbar particularly coveted the possession of it, and under 
the pretext of putting an end to the state of anarchy 



128 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

existing there he sent an expedition into Kashmir and 
annexed it in 1587. 

Conquest of Sind and Kandahar. In 1592 the 
Muhammedan kingdom of Sind, which had for some 
time been showing symptoms of decay, collapsed, and 
Akbar seized upon the occasion to take possession of the 
country. In accordance with his wise and kindly practice 
he treated the deposed ruler with becoming respect, and 
made him a nobleman of his court. In 1594 Kandahar, 
in similar circumstances, was invaded by the Imperial 
troops, and likewise fell into his hands and was incorporated 
in his empire. But though Akbar now claimed sovereignty 
over territory stretching as far northwards as Kabul and 
Kandahar, he was never able thoroughly to subdue the 
wild tribes living among the rocky hills and valleys round 
about the Khyber Pass. In an attempt to subjugate them 
his troops on one occasion suffered a severe defeat, and 
their Hindu general, Raja Birbal, Akbar's intimate friend 
and trusted councillor, was killed. 

Fall of Vijayanagar. During the early part of his 
reign an event occurred in the Deccan which, though un- 
connected with his rule, was of considerable importance in 
the history of Southern India. This was the overthrow of 
the powerful Hindu kingdom of Vijayanagar. Under a 
great ruler, Krishnadeva, Vijayanagar had asserted its 
superiority over its Muhammedan neighbours and had 
made good its claim to be considered the premier state 
of Southern India. Its army is said to have numbered no 
less than 700,000 men, and the wealth of the city and the 
beauty of its buildings were the wonder and admiration 
of early European travellers. But with the death of 
Krishnadeva about 1530 the kingdom began rapidly to 
decline. War with one or other of its Muhammedan 
neighbours was almost constant. At length in 1565 the 
Muhammedan kings of Bidar, Bijapur, Golconda, and 
Ahmadnagar, incensed at the conduct of Rama Raja, the 
ruler of Vijayanagar, who had behaved with great barbarity 
in a war against Ahmadnagar, made common cause against 
him, invaded his country, and utterly defeated him at 
Talikot. Signal vengeance was taken by the conquerors 
upon the vanquished Hindus. Rama Raja, who fell into 



MOGHUL SUPREMACY. 129 

their hands, was put to death with tortures, his city 
sacked, and his people slaughtered. So complete was the 
havoc wrought that Yijayanagar never recovered from 
the blow. The victors spent six months in ransacking 
the city and demolishing its principal buildings, arid, 
when they left, it had been so completely wrecked that 
it had to be abandoned as a hopeless mass of ruins. The 
kingdom sunk at once into insignificance and practically 
disappeared from history. But a descendant of its last 
king, who ruled in the first half of the seventeenth 
century over a petty principality at a place called Chand- 
ragiri, is still remembered as having granted to the 
English the strip of land upon which the city of Madras 
was founded. 

Moghul expedition to the Deccan. After the 
overthrow of Yijayanagar the Muhammedan kingdoms 
resumed the strife among themselves. At length in 1572 
the King of Ahmadnagar conquered and annexed the 
neighbouring kingdom of Berar. Ahmadnagar became at 
once the most important kingdom in the Deccan, and 
seemed to have a great future before it. But in a few 
years, by the factiousness of its nobles and princes, it was 
brought to the verge of ruin. In 1595 a party which had 
temporarily obtained possession of the capital invoked the 
aid of the Moghuls against its rivals. Akbar, having no 
other enterprise on hand at the time, readily responded to 
the invitation, seeing in it a chance of extending his 
dominions to the southward. A large army was despatched 
under his son, Prince Murad ; but before it reached 
Ahmadnagar the faction which had called it in had been 
expelled from the capital. The impending danger had 
united all parties in the state, and the rival factions, laying 
aside their differences, joined in opposing the invaders. 
By common consent Chand Bibi, or Chand Sultana, a royal 
princess, was appointed regent of the state. She was a 
woman of masculine vigour, and had long been famed in 
the Deccan for her spirit and her intellect, and though now 
in her fiftieth year had lost nothing of her energy. Not only . 
did she organise a complete defence, but when the Moghuls 
delivered the attack she directed in person the operations 
to repel them. Thanks mainly to her exertions and her 

H.I.H.S. I 



130 HISTORY OF INDIA FOR HIGH SCHOOLS. 

inspiring personality the expedition was unable to effect 
the capture of the city, and at length withdrew on the con- 
dition that Berar should be ceded to the Moghul emperor. 

Fall of Ahmadnagar and Khandesh. Chand 
Sultana had thus saved the state ; but hardly were the 
Moghuls gone when civil war broke out once more, and 
in a riot which took place within the city the brave Sultana 
was murdered. The Moghuls again interfered on the 
pretext of restoring order, invested the capital and after a 
short siege captured it in 1600. A portion of the kingdom 
was annexed to the Moghul Empire and its king removed 
to the fortress of Gwalior. The little kingdom of Khan- 
desh, which lay to the westward of Berar; and therefore 
now within the borders of the Moghul Empire, was also 
annexed at the same time. It contained the famous fort 
of Asirgarh, which, besides being almost impregnable, 
commanded the highway to Southern India. Had it not 
been for the outbreak of a virulent pestilence among its 
defenders after a siege of nearly a year it is doul^tful 
whether it would not have held out. 

Akbar's system of government. Akbar was now 
the master of an empire stretching from Kandahar and 
Kabul in the west and north to Bengal and Orissa in the 
east and Ahmadnagar in the south. But he did not, as 
former great conquerors had done, rest content with main- 
taining a nominal sovereignty over his vast dominions. 
He made it his endeavour to exercise a real control over 
the whole. For thi purpose he parcelled out his empire 
into fifteen subahs or provinces, over each of which he 
placed a governor, with complete civil and military control, 
but answerable for his conduct of the government to the 
Central Authority. The governor was assisted by a deivan 
or revenue collector, and a foujdar or military commander. 
Justice was administered by a mir-i-adl or chief justice, 
assisted by a kazi or law officer, to conduct the trial and 
explain the law. The city police were placed under a 
hotwal or police superintendent, with magisterial powers ; 
but in the country districts the landholders and villagers 
were left to their own devices. Thus the Hindu village 
system i-emained intact, and the peasantry had still to 
protect themselves as best they could against oppressive 



MOGHUL SUPREMACY. 131 

landholders, extortionate revenue collectors, and the attacks 
of bands of robbers. 

His revenue system. Akbar did not alter Sher 
ShaVs revenue system, but extended its operations to new 
tracts of country. It is worth while, however, to observe 
that while Sher Shah had been content with one-fourth of 
the gross produce as rent, Akbar required one-third. 
Under Raja Todar Mai a fresh revenue settlement was 
carried out, and all cultivated lands were surveyed and clas- 
sified according to their productive power. It was at first 
intended to repeat the survey annually, but as this was 
found too troublesome and expensive, it was afterwards 
made every ten years. So strictly was the Imperial 
revenue exacted that Akbar received yearly from this 
source more than is now taken by the Indian government, 
in spite of the enormo*us extension of cultivation that has 
occurred during the period of British rule. 

Precaution against mutiny. One of the greatest 
dangers to which a ruler or a governor, who is obliged to 
maintain a large army is subjected, is a rising among 
his troops. It was necessary for a despotic ruler, such as 
the Emperor of Delhi, to maintain a large standing army to 
provide against all emergencies; but this army, which was 
intended for his protection, was often also the chief source 
of his anxiety. Mutinies would frequently break out, and 
popular leaders would be joined by large numbers of dis- 
contented soldiers in their attempts to assert their independ- 
ence, or to overthrow the central government itself Akbar 
successfully met this danger by attaching the soldiers to 
himself. In place of the old system, by which the generals 
were provided withjagirs or grants of land out of which to 
pay the troops under their command, he arranged as far as 
possible that the soldiers should receive money paymeni^