





'^'. 



■ ^'■.■^■ 



■:5i;-: vV^^:?>';^-: 



'•;.>,t'rt 1 ,.^ >^. •'■ 






Wet(Vl Sdrf^f>p<-^ 




Dr. O. Johnson. 



BOSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY 



THE HISTORY OF THE 
YORUBAS 

From the Earliest Times to the Beginning of the 
British Protectorate 

BY 

The REV. SAMUEL JOHNSON 

Pastor of Oyo 



EDITED BY 

DR. O. JOHNSON, Lagos 



C.M.S. (NIGERIA) BOOKSHOPS 
LAGOS 



First published 1921 
Reprinted 1937 
Reprinted 1956 
Reprinted 1957 
Reprinted 1960 






PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
LOWE AND BRYDONE (PRINTERS) LIMITED, LONDON, N.W.IO 



AUTHOR'S PREFACE 

What led to this production was not a burning desire of the author 
to appear in print — as all who are well acquainted with him will 
readily admit — but a purely patriotic motive, that the history of 
our fatherland might not be lost in oblivion, especially as our old 
sires are fast dying out. 

Educated natives of Yoruba are well acquainted with the 
history of England and with that of Rome and Greece, but of the 
history of their own country they know nothing whatever ! This 
reproach it is one of the author's objects to remove. 

Whilst the author cotild claim to be a pioneer in an untrodden 
field, he can by no means pretend to have exhausted the subject ; 
but he hopes by this to stimulate among his more favoured brethren 
the spirit of patriotism and enquiry into the histories of the less 
known parts of the country. It may be that oral records are 
preserved in them which are handed down from father to son, 
as in the case of the better known Royal bards in the Metropolis, 
such records though imperfect should surely not be under-rated. 

In the perusal of this feeble attempt, the author craves the 
forbearance of his readers ; he deprecates the spirit of tribal 
feelings and petty jealousies now rife among us. In recording 
events of what transpired, good or bad, failures and successes, 
among the various tribes, he has endeavoured to avoid whatever 
would cause needless offence to anyone, or irritate the feelings of 
those specially interested in the narratives, provided only that the 
cause of truth, and of public benefit be faithfully served. 

With respect to the ancient and mythological period he has 
stated the facts as they are given by the bards, and with respect 
to the History of comparatively recent dates, viz., from the time 
of King Abiodun downwards, from eye-witnesses of the events 
which they narrate, or from those who have actually taken part 
in them. He has thus endeavoured to present a reliable record of 
events. 

He is greatly indebted especially to the honoured David Kukomi, 
the patriarch of the Ibadan Church, (the now sainted father of 
the Rev. R. S. Oyebode). Kukomi was a young man in the days 
of King Abiodun, and it was his fortune (or misfortune) to take 
part in the wars and other national movements of the period as 
a common soldier, and was thus able to give a clear and reliable 
account of the sajdngs, persons, and events of those stirring times, 
being a cool man of judgment, observant, and remarkably 
intelligent. 



Vlll AUTHOR S PREFACE 

Also to Josiah Oni, an intrepid trader in those days, an active 
and intelligent observer who was well acquainted with almost 
every part of the country, and took part in some of the most stirring 
events of a later period. 

And last though not least to his highness the venerable Lagunju, 
the renowned Timi of Ede, so well known all over the country as a 
gifted and trusty historian of the Yoruba Country. 

And to others also who are not here mentioned by name. 

The histories of all nations present many phases and divers 
features, which are brought out by various writers in the lines in 
which each is interested ; the same method we hope will be pursued 
by writers in this country until we become possessed of a fuller 
History ot the Yorubas. 

S. JOHNSON. 
Oyo, 1897. Aiila Ogun. 



EDITOR'S PREFACE 

A SINGULAR . misfortune, which happily is not of everyday 
occurrence, befel the original manuscripts of this history, in 
consequence of which the author never lived to see in print his 
more than 20 years of labour. 

The manuscripts were forwarded to a well-known English 
publisher through one of the great Missionary Societies in 1899 and 
— mirabile dictu — nothing more was heard of them ! 

The editor who was all along in collaboration with the author 
had occasion to visit England in 1900, and called on the 
publisher, but could get nothing more from him than that the 
manuscripts had been misplaced, that they could not be found, 
and that he was prepared to pay for them ! This seemed to the 
editor and all his friends who heard of it so strange that one could 
not help thinking that there was more in it than appeared on the 
surface, especially because of other circumstances connected with 
the so-called loss of the manuscripts. However, we let the subject 
rest there. The author himself died in the following year (1901), 
and it hcis now fallen to the lot of the editor to rewrite the whole 
history anew, from the copious notes and rough copies left behind 
by the author. 

But for many years after his death, partly from discouragements 
by the events, and partly from being appalled by the magnitude 
of the task, the editor shrank from the undertaking, but circum- 
stances now and again cropped up showing the need of the work, 
and the necessity for undertaking it ; besides the almost criminal 
disgrace of allowing the outcome of his brother's many years of 
labour to be altogether lost. No one, who has never made the 
attempt, can have the faintest idea of the great difficulties that 
attend the efforts to elicit facts and accuracy of statements from 
an illiterate people : they are bewildering with repetitions, prolix 
in matters irrelevant, while facts germane to the subject in hand 
are more often than not passed over : they have to be drawn out 
by degrees patiently, and the chaff has to be constantly sifted from 
the wheat. In no sphere of labour is patience and perseverance 
more required than in this. It shows strongly the magnitude of 
the labours of the original author, labours undertaken along with 
the unremitting performance of his substantive duties. 

When all this had to be done with the daily exactions of a busy 
profession, and other demands on his time, friends will judge the 
editor leniently for having taken such a long time to repair the loss 
sustained many years ago. Some chapters had to be rewritten, 



X editor's preface 

some curtailed, others amplified, and new ones added where 
necessary. 

But this history has a history of its own, for apart from the 
mishap that befel the original manuscripts as above detailed, its 
vicissitudes were not yet over. When at last the task of re-writing 
it was completed, jt was forwarded to England by the " Appam," 
which left Lagos on the 2nd of January, 19 16. The Appam was 
at first supposed to be lost, but was afterwards found in America, 
having been captured by the raider Moewe. Nothing was heard 
of the manuscripts again for nearly two years, when they were at 
last delivered to the printers ! By that time, paper haci become 
so dear in England that it was deemed advisable to wait till after 
the War before printing. The manuscripts were next sent back by 
request to the editor, wl^o in order to obviate a future loss, under- 
took to have it typewritten, but in the meantime even j;ypewriting 
paper became difficult to obtain. All these drawbacks were success- 
fully overcome in the end, as well as the difficulties in passing the 
work through the press. 

He now lets the book go forth to the public, in the hope that it 
will fulfil the earnest desire of the original author. 

O. JOHNSON. 

Ajagbe Ogun. 



CONTENTS 

PART I 

THE PEOPLE, COUNTRY. AND THE LANGUAGE. 

§1. Introduction xix 

§2. The Yoruba Language xxiii 

§3. A Sketch of Yoruba Grammar . . . xxxiii 

CHAPTER I 

Origin and Early History i 

CHAPTER II 

The Origin of the Tribes 15 

CHAPTER III 

Religion 26 

CHAPTER IV 

Government 40 

CHAPTER V 

Yoruba Names 79 

CHAPTER VI 

Yoruba Towns and Villages 90 

CHAPTER VII 

The Principles of Land Law 95 

CHAPTER VIII 

Manners and Customs 98 

§(a) Social polity ....... 98 

§(6) Facial marks ....... 104 

§{c) Diet 109 

§{i) Dress no 

§{e) Marriage 113 

§(/) Trades and professions . . . . • "7 

l{g) Learning 125 

§(A) Wealthy Personages ..... 126 

§(») The Iwofa system ...... 126 

§(;■) Distraining for debt 130 

§(*) War 131 

§(/) Funerals 137 



Xll 


CONTENTS 




PART II 




FIRST PERIOD 




MYTHOLOGICAL KINGS AND DEIFIED HEROES 


§1. 

§2. 

§3. 
§4- 
§5. 


CHAPTER I. — The Founders of the Yoruba Nation 
Oduduwa ........ 143 

Oranyan ........ 143 

Ajuan alias Ajaka ....... 148 

Sango alias Olufiran . . . . . .149 

Ajaka's second reign ...... 152 



SECOND PERIOD 

GROWTH, PROSPERITY AND OPPRESSION 

CHAPTER II.— Historical Kings 

§1. Aganju 155 

§2. Kori 155 

§3. Oluaso 158 

§4. Onigbogi 158 

§5. Ofinran 159 



CHAPTER III.- 
§1. Eguguoju 
§2. Orompoto 
§3. Ajiboyede 
§4. Abipa or Oba m'oro 



-The Kings of Oyo Igboho 



161 
161 
162 
164 



CHi^I'TER IV. — A Succession of Despotic Kings 

§1. Oba lokun Agana Erin ...... 168 

§2. Ajagbo ......... 168 

§3. Odarawu ........ 169 

§4. Karan 170 

§5. Jayin . . . 170 

§6. Ayibi 172 

§7. Osinyago 173 

§8. Ojigi 174 

§9. Gberu 175 

§10. Amuniwaiye ........ 175 

§11. Onisile 176 

CHAPTER V. — Basorun GahA and his Atrocities and 
Abiodun's Peaceful Reign 

§1. Labisi 178 

§2. Awonbioju alias Oduboye ..... 178 

§3. Agboluaje ........ 178 

§4. Alaje ogbe ........ 180 

§5. Abigdun alias Adegolu ...... 182 

§6. Abiodun's peaceful reign ...... 186 



CONTENTS Xiii 

THIRD PERIOD 
REVOLUTIONARY WARS AND DISRUPTION 
CHAPTER VI.— The Revolution 



§1. Aole surnamed Arogangan 

§2. The King's enemies . 

§3. The rebellion of the Oyo Chiefs 

§4. The rising of Ojo Agunbambaru 

§5. Maku 



188 
189 

193 
194 
196 



CHAPTER VII —The Rise of the Fulanis to Power 

§1. The spread of anarchy and fall of Afonja . . . 197 

§2. The first attempt to recover Ilorin. Battle of Ogele . 200 

§3. The second attempt : The Mugba mugba War . . 201 

§4. TheBattleof Pamo 202 

CHAPTER VIII.— Consequences of the Revolution 

§r. The Owu War 206 

§2. The Lasinmi War ....... 210 

§3. State of the Capital at this period .... 212 

CHAPTER IX, — Further Development of the Anarchy 

§r. Evil days for the Capital ...... 217 

§2. The third attempt to recover Ilorin. The Kanla war 218 

§3. The vicissitudes of Iko3d . . . . . .219 

§4. The Gbogun War ....... 220 

§5. The Pole War and death of Abudusalami . . . 222 

CHAPTER X. — Spread of the Anarchy 

§1. Devastation of Egba towns and villages . . . 223 

§2. Foundation of Abeokuta ...... 225 

§3. The Egbado Tribes ....... 226 

§4. The founding of Modakeke ..... 230 

CHAPTER XL— The Revolution in the Epo Districts 

§1. The destruction of the Epos, and death of Ojo Amepo . 234 

§2. The occupation of Ijaye and end of Dado . . 236 
§3. How Ibadan became a Yoruba town. The Gbanamu and 

Erumu Wars ....... 238 

§4. The Settlement of Ibadan ..... 244 

CHAPTER XII. — Wars for the Consolidation and Balance 
of Power 

§1. The evacuation of Opomu and Owiwi War . . . 247 
§2. The fall of Ilaro and Ijana 248 



XIV CONTENTS 

CHAPTER XII.— (coniinued) 

§3. The Orayefun War ....... 250 

§4. The Arakanga or Jabara War . . . . .251 

§5. The Onidesg and Oke I§ero Wars .... 252 

§6, The Iperu War ....... 253 

§7. The faU of Ota 255 

CHAPTER XIII.— The Last of Katunga 

§1. Final efforts to throw off Fulani yoke . . . 258 

§2. The Eleduwg War 263 

CHAPTER XIV.— The Interregnum 

§1. Civil war at Abemo ....... 269 

§2. The destruction of Abemo 271 

FOURTH PERIOD 

ARREST OF DISINTEGRATION. INTER-TRIBAL WARS 

BRITISH PROTECTORATE 

CHAPTER XV.— The New City, New Government, Ilorin 

Checked 

§1. Prince Atiba, early life and history .... 274 

§2. Atiba's accession ....... 279 

§3. Conferring of titles ....... 280 

§4. The Osogbo War 285 

§5. The expulsion of ElSpo from Ibadan . . . 289 



CHAPTER XVI.— Fratricidal Wars 

§1. The Osu War, Aaye and Otun . 

§2. The Egbas and Egbados .... 

§3. Ibadan and I jkye. TheBatgdoWar 

§4. Abeokuta and Abiki .... 

§5. The He Bioku expedition and the end of ElSpo 

§6. Sagaun and Igbo Ork .... 



293 
296 
297 
301 
301 

303 



CHAPTER XVII. 



-Subjugation of the IjesAS and Ekiti's 
Social Reforms 



§1. The Opin War .... 

§2. Subjugation of the Ijesas 

§3. The first Dahomian invasion of Abeokuta 

§4. The Aii War and relief of Otun 

§5, Raids by minor chiefs of Ibadan 

§6. Social reforms .... 



308 

309 
313 

317 
321 

324 



CONTENTS 



XV 



CHAPTER XVIII.- 



-A Glorious End and a Gory Dawn of 
Two Reigns 



§1. The death of King Atiba . 

§2. Circumstances that led to the Ijaye War 

§3. When Greek meets Greek 

§4. Famine and the sword 



328 
331 
336 
345 



§1. 
§2. 
§3. 
§4. 
§5. 



CHAPTER XIX.— Sequels to the Ijaye War 

The Awayfe War ..... 
The Iperu War ..... 

The Ikorodu War 

The second Dahomian invasion of Abeokuta 
The atonement ..... 



355 
356 
360 
361 
363 

CHAPTER XX.— The Close and the Opening Careers of 

Two Heroes 



§1. Ogunmola's administration 

§2. The Igbajo campaign 

§3. The late Ogunmola Basorun of Ibadan 

§4. Ogedemgbe and the fall of Ilega 



365 

368 

371 
377 



CHAPTER XXL— Two Administrations of Opposite Policies 

§1. Orowusi's administration ..... 383 

Ibadan under a Kakanf 6 . 
An unprovoked war. Ado 



§2. 
§3. 
§4. 
§5. 



The Are's administration 
The Emure War 



387 
390 
391 
394 



CHAPTER XXII.— A New Reign and Evil Prognostication 

§1. The end of Adelu the AlAfin of Ovo . . . 396 

§2. The Wokuti expedition ...... 403 

§3. The new policy ....... 405 

§4. The civil murder of Aijenku the Fghoko . . . 407 

§5. Plot against the Seriki lyap^ ..... 410 

CHAPTER XXIII. — The Commencement of the 16 Years' War 

§1. The Bokofi expedition ...... 413 

§2. The first act of war ...... 414 

§3. Insurrection against the Ar§ and the death of Seriki lyapo 417 

§4. Further raiding expedition on ggba farms . . . 420 

§5. The revolt of the Ekiti tribes 423 



CHAPTER XXIV.— Conflicts in the North 

§1. The celebrated battle of Ikirun or the Jalumi War 

§2. The results of the Jalumi War .... 

§3. The Ekiti parapos ...... 

§4. The beginning of the actual conflict . 

§5. The Ar§ to the front 



427 

436 

439 
441 

444 



XVI CONTENTS 

CHAPTER XXV. — Ibadan at its Extremity 

§1. Home defences ...... 450 

§2. Closure of roads and the results .... 452 

§3. Distressing episodes ....... 454 

§4. New developments, clouds and sunshine . . . 457 

CHAPTER XXVI.— Failures at Reconciliation 

§1. The Alafin's efforts for peace . . . . . 462 

§2. The Alafin's messenger ...... 464 

§3. The Governor's delegates ..... 467 

§4. The lion at bay 473 

CHAPTER XXVn.— A Rift in the Cloud 

§1. A turning point ....... 479 

§2. Rambling talks of peace ...... 480 

§3. Desperate movements ...... 490 

CHAPTER XXVIII.— The Rev. J. B. Wood and the 
A.O.K. 

§1. The visits of the Rev. J. B. Wood to the camps . . 494 

§2. The death of Latosisa the A.O.K 500 

§3. The vicissitudes of war . . . . . . 503 

CHAPTER XXIX.— The Intervention of the British 

Government 

§1. Measures by Governor Moloney . . . . 508 

§2. The Ilgrins and peace proposals . .... 515 
§3. The messengers and preliminary arrangements . .521 

§4. The treaty of peace 527 

§5. The reception of the treaty by the Kings and Chiefs . 532 

CHAPTER XXX.— Dispersal of the Combatants by Special 

Commissioners 

§1. Special Commissioners sent up .... 53^ 

§2. The Commissioners at Kiriji ..... 543 

§3. The Proclamation of Peace and firing of the camps . 547 

§4. The Commissioners at Modakeke. Failure . . 552 

CHAPTER XXXI.— Disturbance in every part of the 

Country 

§1. Ilorin intrigues and the fall of Of a . . . • 5^1 

§2. Revolutionary movements at Ijebu .... 5^7 

§3. " A mild treaty " 57^ 

§4. The exploits of Esan and the controversy thereupon . 576 



CONTENTS 



xvu 



CHAPTER XXXII. 



-Abortive Measures to Terminate the 
War 



§1. The mission of Alvan Millson 

§2. Subsidiary efforts of the Rev. S. Johnson . 

§3. The AlAfin's diplomacy 

§4. Correspondence and a treaty 

§5. The AlAfin's measures for peace and the issues 

§6. The Ilorins at Ilobu .... 

§7. The conduct of the chiefs at Ikirun . 



CHAPTER XXXIII.— The Dark before the Dawn 

§1. Liberation of the Egbados 

§2. Troubles at Ijebu .... 

§3. Strained relations with the Ibadans . 

§4. Death of Aliku the Emir of Ilorin 

§5. Ijebu excesses and infatuation 

§6. Causes that led to the Ijebu War 

§7. Further causes that led to the Ij ebu War 

§8. The Ijebu campaign 

§9. Effecte of the Campeiign . 

CHAPTER XXXIV.— The End -of the War 

§1. Governor Carter s progress up country 

§2. The return home of the Ibadans 

§3. The return of Governor Carter to Lagos 

§4. Local opinions about the war 

§5. Constitution of the Ibadan Town Council 



CHAPTER XXXV.— The Establishment of the British 
Protectorate. The Sequel 

Abeokuta 643 



§1. 
§2. 
§3. 
§4- 
§5- 
§6. 



Ibadan . 

Ijesa 

The Ekitis 

If e and Modakeke 

Ilorin 



APPENDIX A 

Treaties and Agreements 



§1. Abeokuta 

§2. Oyo 

§3. Ibadan (an agreement) 

§4. Egba (boundaries) . 

§5. Abeokuta (railway) 

§6. Ibadan (railway) 



XViii CONTENTS 

Appendix A — [continued) 

§7. Ijs§a (human sacrifices) ...... 663 

§8. Ekiti „ „ 664 

§9. If§ „ „ ....... 665 

§10. Between England and France for the West Coast . 666 

§11. Porto Novo . . , . . . . . . 667 

§12. Proclamation ........ 668 

APPENDIX B 

§1. Yoruba Kings, Basoruns, etc. ..... 669 

§2. Ibadan chief rulers ....... 670 

§3. Ab§okuta leading chiefs ...... 670 

§4. Emirs of Ilorin ....... 671 

Index 673 

Map of the Yoruba Country ..... at en<i 



§1. INTRODUCTION 

The Yoruba country lies to the immediate West of the River 
Niger (below the confluence) and South of the Quorra {i.e., the 
Western branch of the same River above the confluence), having 
Dahomey on the West, and the Bight of Benin to the South. It 
is roughly speaking between latitude 6° and 9° North, and longi- 
tude 2° 30' and 6° 30' East. 

The country was probably first known to Europe from the 
North, through the explorers of Northern and Central Africa, for 
in old records the Hausa and Fulani names are used for the country 
and its capital ; thus we see in Webster's Gazetteer " Yarriba," 
West Africa, East of Dahomey, area 70,000 sq. miles, population two 
millions, capital Katunga. These are the Hausa terms for 
Yoruba and for Oyo. 

The entire south of the country is a network of lagoons connect- 
ing the deltas of the great River Niger with that of the Volta, and 
into this lagoon which is belted with a more or less dense mangrove 
swamp, most of the rivers which flow through the country North 
to South pour their waters. 

It will thus be seen that the country is for the most part a table- 
land : it has been compared to half of a pie dish turned upside 
down. Rising from the coast in the South gradually to a height 
of some 5-600 ft. in more or less dense forest, into a plain diversified 
by a few mountain ranges, continuing its gentle rise in some parts 
to about 1,000 ft. above sea level, it then slopes down again to the 
banks of the Niger, which encloses it in the North and East. 

In a valuable letter by the Rev. S. A. Crowther (afterwards 
Bishop) to Thomas J. Hutchinson, Esq., Her Britannic Majesty's 
consul for the Bight of Biafra and the Island of Fernando Po, 
published as Appendix A to the book entitled " Impressions of 
Western Africa,"^ we find the following graphic description of 
the country : — 

. . . " This part of the country of which Lagos in the Bight 
of Benin is the seaport, is generally known as the Yoruba country, 
extending from the Bight to within two or three days' journey to 
the banks of the Niger.^ This country comprises many tribes 
governed by their own chiefs and having their own laws. At one 
time they were all tributaries to one Sovereign, the King of Yoruba, 
including Benin on the East, and Dahomey on the West, but are 
now independent. 

' Longmans, Green & Co., 1858. 
"^ i.e. At the time of writing. — Ed. 



XX INTRODUCTION 

The principal tribes into which this kingdom is divided are as 
follows : — 

The Egbados : This division includes Otta and Lagos near the 
sea coast, forming a belt of country on the banks of the lagoon in 
the forest, to Ketu on the border of Dahomey on the West ; then 
the Jebu on the East on the border of Benin ; then the Egbas of the 
forest now known as the Egbas of Abeokuta. 

Then comes Yoruba proper northwards in the plain ; Ife, Ijesha, 
Ijamo, EfoH, Ondo, Idoko, Igbomina, and Ado near the banks of 
the Niger, from which a creek or stream a little below Iddah is 
called Do or Iddo River." 

. . . " The chief produce of this country is the red palm oil, 
oil made from the kernel, shea butter from nuts of the shea trees, 
ground nuts, beniseed, and cotton in abundance, and ivory — all 
these are readily procured for European markets. 

. . . The present seat of the King of Yoruba is Ago other- 
wise called Oyo after the name of the old capital visited by Clap- 
perton and Lander. 

A King is acknowledged and his person is held sacred, his wives 
and children are highly respected. Any attempt of violence 
against a King's person or of the Royal family, or any act of 
wantonness with the wives of the King, is punished with death. 
There are no written laws, but such laws and customs that have 
been handed down from their ancestors, especially those respecting 
relative duties, have become established laws. 

The right to the throne is hereditary, but exclusively in the male 
line or the male issue of the King's daughters. 

The Government is absolute, but it has been much modified 
since the kingdom has been divided into many independent states 
by slave wars, into what may be called a limited monarchy ..." 

Physical features. — ^The country presents generally two distinct 
features, the forest and the plain ; the former comprising the 
southern and eastern portions, the latter the northern, central and 
western. Yoruba Proper lies chiefly in the plain, and has a 
small portion of forest land. The country is fairly well watered, 
but the rivers and streams are dependent upon the annual rains ; 
an impassable river in the rains may become but a dry water-course 
in the dry season. 

There are a few high mountains in the north and west, but in 
the east the prevailing aspect is high ranges of mountains from 
which that part of the country derives its name, Ekiti — a mound 
— being covered as it were with Nature's Mound. 

The soil is particularly rich, and most suitable for agriculture, 
in which every man is more or less engaged. The plain is almost 
entirely pasture land. Minerals apparently do not exist to any 
appreciable extent, expect iron ores which the people work them- 
selves, and from which they formerly manufactured all their 
implements of husbandry and war and articles for domestic use. 



INTRODUCTION XXi 

Flora. — The forests teem with economic and medicinal plants 
of tropical varieties, as well as timber, of which mahogany, cedar, 
brimstone, counter, and iroko are the principal. 

There are also to be found the Abura, useful for carving purposes, 
ebony, Ata 2i hard wood used for facing carpenters' tools, the Iki, 
a hard wood which when dry is very difficult to work, as it speedily 
blunts edged tools. The Ori, another hard wood useful for making 
piers on the coast, and the Ahayan, a very hard wood, unaffected 
by ordinary fires, dry rot, or termites. 

All these are indigenous, but recently " Indian teak " has been 
introduced, and it flourishes widely, as well as the beef wood tree 
on the coast. 

Although a large variety of fruits can be grown, yet the people 
do not take to horticulture ; what there are grow almost wild, 
very little attention being paid to them. Papaw, bananas of 
several varieties, plantcdn, oranges, pineapples, the Oro, plums 
(3'ellow and black), the rough skin plum, the butt lime, are to be 
found everywhere. Some fruit trees have been introduced, which 
have become indigenous, e.g., the sweet and sour sop, the avocado 
(or alligator) pear, guavas of two kinds, pink apples, rose apple, 
mangoes, the bread truit and bread nut trees, the golden plum, 
etc. All these are cultivated, but not widely. 

Vegetables, of which there are several kinds, are largely culti- 
vated. Yam, koko, cassada, sweet potatoes, are the principal 
" roots " used as diet, also beans (white and brown), small and 
large, and the ground nut are largely grown for food. The guinea 
corn grows in the north, and maize in the south. The calabash 
gourd and the Egusi from the seeds of which Egusi oil is pressed, 
grow everywhere. 

Fauna. — ^Big game abound, especially in the north, where the 
lion is not far to seek, also the elephant, buffalo, leopard, wolf, 
foxes, jackals, monkeys of various species, deer, porcupine, etc. 
The hippopotamus is found in large rivers, and alligators in the 
swamps and lagoons in the south. 

The usual domestic animals and poultry are carefully reared. 

Of birds, we have the wild and tame parrots, green pigeons, stork, 
crown birds, and others of the tropical feathered tribe. 

The country was at one time very prosperous, and powerful, 
but there is probably no other country on this earth more torn and 
wasted by internal dissensions, tribal jealousies, and fratricidal 
feuds, a state of things which unhappily continues up to the present 
time. 

When the central authority which was once all-powerful and far 
too despotic grew weak by driving the powerful chiefs into rebellion 
and internecine wars, the entire kingdom became broken up into 
petty states and independent factions as we now know them. 

As far as it is possible for one race to be characteristically like 
another, from which it differs in every physical aspect, the Yorubas 



XXU INTRODUCTION 

— it has been noted — are not unlike the English in many of their 
traits and characteristics. It would appear that what the one is 
among the whites the other is among the blacks. Love of inde- 
pendence, a feeling of superiority over all others, a keen commercial 
spirit, and of indefatigable enterprise, that quality of being never 
able to admit or consent to a defeat as finally settling a question 
upon which their mind is bent, are some of those qualities peculiar 
to them, and no matter under what circumstances they are placed, 
Yorubas will display them. We have even learnt that those of 
them who had the misfortune of being carried away to foreign 
climes so displayed these characteristics there, and assumed such 
airs of superiority and leadership over the men of their race they 
met there, in such a matter of fact way that the attention of their 
masters was perforce drawn to this type of new arrivals ! And 
from them they selected overseers. These traits will be clearly 
discerned in the narratives given in this history. But apart from 
the general, each of the leading tribes has special characteristics 
of its own ; thus dogged perseverance and determination character- 
ise the Ijebus, love of ease and a quickness to adapt new ideas the 
Egbas, the Ijesas and Ekitis are possessed of a marvellous amount 
of physical strength, remarkable docility and simplicity of manners, 
and love of home. 

Among the various families of Yorubas Proper, the Ibarapas 
are laborious farmers, the Ibolos are rather docile and weak in 
comparison with others, but the Epos are hardy, brave, and rather 
turbulent ; whilst the Oyos of the Metropolitan province are 
remarkably shrewd, intelligent, very diplomatic, cautious almost 
to timidity, provokingly conservative, and withal very masterful. 

The whole people are imbued with a deep religious spirit, 
reverential in manners, showing deference to superiors and respect 
to age, where they have not been corrupted by foreign intercourse ; 
ingrained politeness is part and parcel of their nature. 

The early history of the Yoruba country is almost exclusively 
that of the Oyo division, the others being then too small and too 
insignificant to be of any import ; but in later years this state of 
things has been somewhat reversed, the centre of interest and sphere 
of importance having moved southwards, especially since the 
arrival of Europeans on the coast. 

Such is the country, and such are the people whose history, 
religion, social polity, manners and customs, etc., are briefly given 
in the following pages. 



THE YORUBA LANGUAGE 

The Yoruba language has been classed among the unwritten 
African languages. The earliest attempt to reduce this language 
into writing was in the early forties of the last century, when the 
Church Missionary Society, with the immortal Rev. Henry Venn 
as Secretary, organized a mission to the Yoruba country under 
the leadership of one of their agents, the Rev. Henry Townsend,. 
an English Clergyman then at work at Sierra Leone, and the 
Rev. Samuel Ajayi Crowther, the first African Clergyman of the 
C.M.S., also at work in the same place. 

After several fruitless efforts had been made either to invent 
new characters, or adapt the Arabic, which was already known to 
Moslem Yorubas, the Roman character was naturally adopted, not 
only because it is the one best acquainted with, but also because it 
would obviate the difficulties that must necessarily arise if 
missionaries were first to learn strange characters before they could 
undertake scholastic and evangehstic work. With this as basis, 
specizd adaptation had to be made for pronouncing some 
words not to be found in the English or any other European 
language. 

The system, or rather want of system, existing among various 
missionary bodies in Africa and elsewhere emphasized the need of 
a fixed system of orthography. It was evidently essential for the 
various bodies to agree upon certain rules for reducing iUiterate 
languages into writing in Roman characters, not only because this 
would facilitate co-operation, but also because it would render 
books much cheaper than when separate founts of type must needs 
be cast for every separate system (scientific or otherwise) that each 
body may choose to adapt for one and the same purpose. 

In this effort, the Committee of the C.M.S. were ably assisted 
by certain philological doctors, as Professor Lee of Cambridge, 
Mr. Norris of London, and notably by Professor Lepsius of BerUn, 
to whom was entrusted the task of establishing a complete form 
of alphabetic system to which all hitherto unwritten languages 
could be adapted. 

The following remarks are largely derived from the second edition 
of Prof. Lepsius' work. 

The Professor consulted earher efforts that had been made in 
India and elsewhere to transliterate foreign (Eastern) characters 
into the Roman, and out of the chaos then existing he estabUshed 



XXIV THE YORUBA LANGUAGE 

on a firm scientific basis the Standard Alphabet in which the 
Yoruba language is now written. This was adopted by the 
C.M.S. in 1856. By this system therefore former translations had 
to be transliterated under certain fixed rules. 

The number of letters in the Standard Alphabet is necessarily 
very large, as it was designed to meet the requirements of all 
nations ; but with diacritic marks on cognate sounds and accents, 
and the introduction of three characters from the Greek, the 
Roman characters furnish all that is necessary from which every 
unwritten language can draw. 

It is very unfortunate indeed that the system has not been 
faithfully followed by all, for reasons we regard as inadequate and 
inconclusive. This has provoked the caustic remark of the distin- 
guished philologist. Dr. R. N. Cust, that ..." no class of man- 
kind is so narrowminded and opinionated as the missionary except 
the linguist." For even in the Yoruba which professed to have 
adopted Lepsius' Standard, certain particulars (as we shall see) 
have been departed from, by no means for the better. Keen was 
the controversy on these points between the English and German 
missionaries of the Yoruba Mission in its early days. In the 
following' pages the style commonly used in the familiar Yoruba 
translations is departed from in some important particulars, as 
they present some peculiar defects which ought to be rectified. 
We shall endeavour to follow Professor Lepsius' Standard Alphabet 
as closely as possible. 

The Professor himself has conceded that shades of sound can 
be adapted therefrom to meet special requirements without depart- 
ing from the principles laid down. Says he in his second edition: 
" The exposition of the scientific and practical principles 
according to which a suitable alphabet for universal adoption in 
foreign languages might be constructed has (with few exceptions 
above mentioned) remained unaltered. These rules are founded 
in the nature of the subject, and therefore though they may admit 
of certain carefully hmited exceptions, they can undergo no change 
in themselves : they serve as a defence against arbitrary proposals 
which do not depend upon universal laws ; they will explain and 
recommend the application which has been made of them already 
to a series of languages and will serve as a guide in their application 
to new ones. 

"But we have not concealed from the very beginning that it 
is not in every person's power to apprehend with physiological 
and hnguistic accuracy the sounds in a foreign language or even 
those of his own, so as to apply with some degree of certainty the 
principles of our alphabet to a new system of sounds containing 



THE YORUBA LANGUAGE XXV 

its own peculiarities. A few only of our most distinguished 
grammarians are possessed of a penetrating insight into the living 
organisms of sounds in those very languages they have discussed ; 
much less can it be expected of missionaries, who are often obliged 
without previous preparation to address themselves to the reduction 
and representation of a foreign language, that everything which 
belongs to a correct adjudication of particular sounds (frequently 
apprehended only with great difficulty even by the ear) or to 
their connection with one another and with other systems of 
sounds, should present itself spontaneously to their minds." 

Certain rules of transcription are imperative for a correct 
scientific method of procedure. Whatever may have been the 
difficulties encountered in the ancient written languages, so far as 
the Yoruba and other unwritten languages are concerned, the 
field hes clear. 

The Enghsh mode of pronouncing the vowels had to be rejected 
in favour of the Italian or continental mode. 

The following rules or principles have been laid down : — 

1. The power of each letter as representing certain sounds as 
handed down from antiquity should be retained. 

2. The orthography of any language should never use (a) the 
same letter for different sounds, nor (b) different letters for the 
same sound. 

In violation of (a) note the force of the letter g in the Enghsh 
words give, gin ; of a in man, name, what ; of ea in treat, tread ; 
of ei in weight, height ; of the consonants ch in archbishop, arch- 
angel ; of augh in slaughter, laughter ; also the sound of ch in 
chamber, champagne, chameleon where the same letters are used 
for different sounds. 

In violation of (b) note the last syllables in the words atten/fow, 
omission, fsLshion, where different letters are used for the same 
sound. 

3. Every simple sound is to be represented by a single sign. 
This is violated by writing sh to represent the " rushing sound " 
of s. This, as we shall see below, is quite unnecessary in the 
Yoruba language. Here we find an application of the principle 
that where a new sound is not found in the Roman alphabetic 
system a diacritical mark on the nearest graphic sign should be 
used. A diacritical mark therefore over s will more fitly represent 
the English sound of sh. ^ This is also in accordance with the 
sin and shin in the Hebrew and Arabic, where the difference 

1 Publishers' Note. It must be noted, however, that in printing 
this work s has been used throughout to represent the sh sound. 



XXVI THE YORUBA LANGUAGE 

between the soft and the rushing sound is indicated by diacritical 
points, e.g., 

Heb. to tD Arab. - ^ 

Again the letter A is a sign of aspiration (as the spiritus asper 
in the Greek) as in it, hit ; at, hat ; owl, howl, etc. It would 
therefore be unscientific to accord it a new meaning altogether 
by such a use of it in violation of rule i. 

Apart from this is the fact that the letter s with a diacritical 
mark over it has been employed about twenty years previously 
by oriental scholars transcribing Indian letters into the Roman. 

4. Explosive letters are not to be used to express fricative 
sounds and vice versa, e.g., the use oi ph as f where p is clearly 
an explosive letter. 

5. The last rule is that a long vowel should never be represented 
by doubling the short. This method seems to have found favour 
with some transcribers, there being no fixed system of transcription. 

THE ALPHABET 

In a purely scientific alphabetic system, it would seem more 
correct that the alphabets be arranged according to the organ 
most concerned in the pronunciation of the letters, e.g., all sounds 
proceed from the fauces, and are modified either at the throat, 
by the teeth, or by the lips ; hence they may be classified as 
guttural, dental, or labial. But nothing is gained by altering 
the order which came down to us from remote antiquity as the 
Romans received it from the Greek, and these from the 
Phoenicians, etc. 

The Vowels. 

The vowels in Yoruba may 
be built upon the three funda- 
mental vowels, a, i, u, with the 
two subsidiary ones, e formed 
by the coalescence of the first 
two a and i, and o by the coal- 
escence of a and u from which 

we have a, e, i, o and u. These are the recognised principal 
vowels and are pronounced after the Italian method (ah, 
aye, ee, o, 00), but whereas in the Enghsh language the 
short soimd of e is written eh and that of o as aw. these sounds, 
according to the standard system in accordance with rule 3, are 
represented by a dot or dash under the cognate sounds, hence we 




THE YORUBA LANGUAGE XXVll 

have e and o. A complete representation of the vowels in Yoruba 
therefore is as follows : — a, e, e, i, o, g, a (prpnounced ah, aye, 
eh, ee, oh, aw, oo), the original taking precedence of the diacritic. 
Note that u is not to be pronounced as " you " but as oo in food. 

Nasalization. — The clear vowels are capable of a peculiar 
alteration which is produced by uttering the vowel through the 
nasal canal. There is no consonantal element brought into 
play, but it is an alteration entirely within the vowel. Nasalization 
is very largely used in the Yoruba, and consequently its ortho- 
graphy should be free from any ambiguity. In the Standard Alpha- 
bet the circumflex (~) is placed over the nasalized vowel to indicate 
such a sound. Unfortunately the Yoruba as written by mission- 
aries substitute the letter n for this sign, a cause of some ambiguity 
in writing certain words as Akano, Akinola, Morinatu, Obimeko, 
where the letter n stands between two vowels, and is liable to be 
pronounced with the latter, e.g., A-ka-no, A-ld-no-la, MQ-ri-na-tu, 
0-bu-ne-ko ; but following the Standard Alphabet, the words 
should be written Akao, Obueko, just as the Portuguese 
names are written Semao, Adao, JoSo, etc. Indeed certain 
sections of the Yoruba tribes that use nasalization very 
sparingly do pronounce these words as written without any sign 
of nasalization. The n therefore is not only unnecessary but it 
is also misleading. 

In the following pages, the Standard System will be adhered to, 
where such ambiguities are liable to occur : but for the sake of 
simplicity and to avoid the unnecessary use of diacritical marks, 
n as a nasal sign may be used where it cannot cause any ambiguity, 

e.g., 

1. When it precedes a consonant as nje, ndao, nk6. 

2. When it closes a word, as Awon, Basorun, Ibadan, Iseyin. 
As nasahzation is said to be caused by the dropping of a nasal 

consonant, such a Umited use of « as a nasal soimd may be justified. 
No pure, uneducated Yoruba man can pronounce a word ending 
in a consonant, he will instinctively add an i or u to it. There is 
therefore no closed syllable in Yoruba, n at the end of a word is 
purely nasal. 

The System of Consonants 

There are sixteen distinct consonantal sounds in the Yoruba 
language, each having the same force and power as in the English 
alphabet ; they are : b, d, f, g, h, j, k, 1, m, n, p, r, s, t, w, y. 
No consonants are used to represent a vowel by perverting them 
from their legitimate consonantal sounds as h, w, and y are some- 
times used in English. 



XXVlli THE YORUBA LANGUAGE 

Besides the above, there are two other sounds not represented 
in the Roman or in any other European system ; they are ex- 
plosive sounds peculiar to the Yoruba and alhed tribes formed by 
the lip and jaw, viz., gb and kp. They are regarded as guttural 
modifications of b and p, and as they appear to result from a 
combination of two organs concerned in speech, but the com- 
ponent parts of which are so intimately connected they are rightly 
represented by two letters, though not contravening rule 3. 

As to kp, since usage makes it evident that the Yorubas never 
pronounce the letter p but as kp, it is therefore not considered 
necessary to include kp in the Yoruba alphabet as is done in the 
Ibo ; the simple p does perform its duty satisfactorily. 

Here we find a fit application of Professor Lepsius' remarks 
that " The general alphabet, when applied to particular languages, 
must be capable of simplification as well as of enlargement. All 
particular diacritical marks are unnecessary in those languages 
where none of the bases have a double value ; we then write the 
simple base without a diacritical mark. Where two sounds 
belong to the same base, one only of the signs will be wanted. ..." 
This is well exemplified here. We therefore write p and not kp 
in Yoruba. 

The same may be said of the letter s and the sound sh, referred 
to above. The difference is indicated in the Standard Alphabet 
by a diacritical mark, e.g., s, s (for sh). The Yorubas can safely 
dispense with the latter, and for the sake of simplicity this ought 
to have been done, as no difference as to the meaning of a word 
is suggested by the same word being pronounced soft or harsh. 
And more also because in some parts of the country, notably the 
Ekun Osi district (the most northerly), the harsh sound is un- 
pronounceable, whatever may be written ; e.g., shall, shop, will 
be pronounced sail, sop. In the Epo district, on the other hand, 
it is just the reverse ; the harsh sound will be pronounced instead 
of the soft, thus same, son will be pronounced shame, shon. 

But all over the country women and children invariably use 
the softer sound for the same word, which, if thus used by men is 
considered affectations, except in the Ekun Osi district, where the 
purest and most elegant Yoruba is spoken. 

S (for sh) therefore might have been dropped from the Yoruba 
alphabet with no harm resulting ; it is, however, retained because 
over a great part of the country a distinction is made between 
the two sounds ; apart from the fact that it would often be 
required in representing the sounds of some words of foreign origin. 

From the above modifications therefore we have the Yoruba 
alphabet as now used : — 

abdeefggbhijklmnooprsstuwy . 



THE YORUBA LANGUAGE XXIX 



Accents or Tones 



An accent in the accepted sense of the term denotes the stress 
laid upon a particular syllable, be it the ultimate, penultimate 
or antepenultimate syllable of a word. In Yoruba it is used 
differently. What are called accents, and for which the usual 
symbols are used are really tones, of which there are three : the 
elevated, the middle and the depressed ; for the first and the 
last the acute and the grave accents are used respectively, the 
middle tone in its simplest form requires no accent sign. 

In Yoruba, vowels are of greater importance than consonants, 
and tones than vowels ; hence the peculiarity of this language, 
that musical sounds can be employed to convey a correct idea 
of words in speech. 

Another error into which those responsible for the present mode 
of writing Yoruba have fallen, by departing from the Standard 
System, is the introduction of the circumflex (~) and its indiscrimi- 
nate use as a sign of a so-called long vowel. 

There are really no long or short vowels in Yoruba as under- 
stood in the English language ; what appears to be long is the 
coalescence of two or more vowels with an elision of the inter- 
vening consonants, e.g., Bale is a contraction of Baba-ile, i.e. 
father (or master) of the house. Here the second h is dropped, the 
two a's coalesce, and the i is absorbed in them, being represented 
by a prolongation of the tone. The vowels are therefore simple 
and compound. 

The meaning of a word varies as the tone, e.g., we may say : — 
ba ba, bk, the voice being raised, even or depressed respectively. 
The first ba means to meet, the second ba to he in ambush, and 
the third hk to ahght upon. 

So we may have be, be, b^ : b§ means to split open, be to be 
officious, and b^ to beg. 

Also bu, bu, bu : bu means to abuse, bu to be mouldy, and 
bu to cut open. 

In this way each vowel with each tone accent may be combined 
with each of the consonants to form words of different meanings ; 
or in other words, thus may every consonant be used with each 
of the vowels in turn, forming different words by varying the 
tone. 

The Use of the Accents 

To this method of using the accents over the vowels Professor 
Lepsius made the strongest objections, as by such a use the accents 
have been diverted from their proper uses to serve another purpose. 



XXX THE YORUBA LANGUAGE 

He therefore proposed to place the tone accents to the right-hand 
side of the vowel instead of over it, so as to distinguish a word 
accent from a tone accent, as is done in the Chinese and other 
cognate languages: e.g., word accent would be written ba, bk; 
tone accent, ba , ba\ 

In this proposal the professor agrees with the Rev. T. J. Bowen 
an American Baptist Missionary in his Yoruba Grammar and 
Dictionary published in 1858 by the Smithsonian Institution. 
But Crowther — a Yoruba man — did not in his grammar make any 
such distinction. He thinks the existing accents will do well 
enough, and for the best of reasons, there is no word accent in 
Yoruba, the tone governs everything, and Europeans cannot speak 
without a word accent. 

The language moreover abounds in contractions and elisions, 
a whole syllable may be dropped but the tone remains. This is 
the crux of difficulty with foreigners trying to speak the language, 
and to what extent they are able to overcome this, to that extent 
their Yoruba is said to be perfect. 

Combination of the Accents 

As remarked above, there are no closed syllables in the Yoruba 
language, every syllable must end in a vowel and every vowel 
must be one of the three tones represented by the accents. Words 
of three or four syllables are often contracted into two, the 
coalescence of the tones forming the compound vowels. 

The entire scheme of the accents or tones may be thus repre- 
sented: — 

I. Simple vowels with the varied tones. 

a, in which the tone is raised : as ka, to pick ; ba, to meet ; 

la, to lick, 
a, in which the tone is even : as pa, to kill ; ba, to ambush ; 

ta, to kick. 
a, in which the tone is depressed : as rk, to buy ; ki, to count ; 

fa, to draw. 

II. Compound vowels in which a single vowel bears more 

than one tone :— 

A. Compounds of the raised tone, 
a, in which the raised tone is doubled, e.g., A'yan, contracted 

from Arfyan, i.e., cares, worries. 
4-, in which the raised tone is combined with the middle, e.g., 

Ki-nla from Kinila — a form of exclamation. 
& in which the raised tone is combined with the depressed, 

e.g., beni from b^h^ni, so it is. 



THE YORUBA LANGUAGE 



XXXI 



B. Compounds of the middle tone. 

a' in which the middle tone is combined with the raised ; e.g. 

A'yan from a-hayan, a cockroach ; O'ri from Oriri, a tomb, 
a" in which the middle tone is combined with itself, e.g., Ta'ni 

from Ta-ha-ni — who is it ? 
a' in which the middle tone is combined with the depressed, 

e.g., E "ru from eriru, spice ; kere from keh^rg, a screen. 

C Compounds of the depressed tone. 
k' in which the depressed tone is combined with the raised, 

e.g., a'nu from cini-inu, mercy ; 6'to from 6tit6, truth. 
k- in which the depressed tone is combined with the middle, 

e.g., ko"'^^ from kdriko, a wolf. 
i' in which the depressed tone is combined with itself, e.g., 

Ori contracted from Oriri, black plum. 

In this way words of four or five syllables may, by elision and 
absorption, be contracted into two or three ; e.g., «ifin from 
aw6fin, the palace ; hence Alafin from Ani-k-w^-fin, Lord of the 
royal palace. 

0-oni fromOw6ni, which is itself a contraction of Omo oliiw^ni, 
son of a sacrificial victim. 

The consonants may be dropped, the vowels absorbed, but the 
tones are always preserved ; the first and last syllables only are 
essential, the voice can gUde over all the intervening tones for 
the sake of shortness. 

This is at once the chief characteristic and — to foreigners — the 
main difficulty of the Yoruba language. In order to avoid such 
complicated tone accents it would be preferable to write out the 
words in full, although the contracted form may be used in 
speaking or reading, e.g., otito for 6'to ; korik6 for k6"'"'' 

Words similar in form, distinguished only by their tones. 
Words of two syllables : — 



Api 


. the arm 


Ina 


. . fire, louse 


Apa 


. a prodigal 


Ink 


. . flogging 


Apa 


. a scar 


Lia 


. . a tattoo mark 


Aid 


. a riddle 


Idi 


. . the eagle 


A15 


. something ground 


\di 


. . the seat 


Alo 


• going 


Idi 


. . bunch of fruit 


Awo 


. a dish 


llii 


. . a town 


Aw6 


. a crash 


m 


. . a drum 


Aw6 


. . a fishing net 


llu 


. . a gimlet 


Awo 


. a guinea-fowl 






Awo 


. . a secret 







XXXll 



THE YORUBA LANGUAGE 



Agba . . a rope lya 

Agba . . an elder lya 

Agba . . a cannon lya 

A'yan . . anxiety, care Ik6 

A'yan . . a cockroach Ik6 

A'yan . . a hardwood Ikd 

Baba . . father Ori 

Baba (adv.) quite full Ori 

Bkbk . . guinea corn 6ri 

Epo . . palm oil 0p6 

Epo . . bark Op6 

Ep6 . . weeds Opd 

E'ri . . corn chaff Oko 

E 'ri . . dirt Okg 

Eri (for Ori) the head 6k6 

Words of three syllables similarly 

Apata . . a rock korfko 

Apata . . a shield k6rik6 

Apatk . . a butcher 



a mother 
punishment 
a separation 
a cough 

a state messenger 
a hook or hanging 
the head 
shea butter 
black plum 
a post 
a widow 
to be busy 
a husband 
a hoe 
a spear 
distinguished : — 
grass 
wolf 



Words of four syllables. 

Koldkdlo . . stealthily 

Kolgkolo . . circuitously 

K^16kolo . . muddy, miry 

K616k^l6 . . the fox 



A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR 

The efforts we have seen made to produce a Yoruba Grammar on 
the exact lines of an EngHsh or Latin Grammar represent in our 
opinion an honest labour, highly commendable indeed it may be, 
but totally in the wrong direction, and little calculated to elucidate 
the genius of the language. On the contrary, they go a long way 
to obscure it. 

The Yoruba belongs to the agglutinated order of speech, not to 
the inflectional. When therefore particles are used to form cases, 
etc., it is mere pedantry to talk of declensions. 

It is a notorious fact that educated Yorubas find it much easier 
to read an Enghsh book than a Yoruba production — which until 
recently are mostly translations. With an effort they may plod 
through it, but they do not enjoy reading it, and sometimes do 
not even understand it. The main reasons for this are : — 

1. The orthography of the language is still very defective. 

2. The style in which the books are written. This may simply 
be described as English ideas in Yoruba words : the result is often 
obscurity and confusion of thought. 

In the " Church Missionary Intelligencer " for March, 1880, a 
missionary to Japan, who had experienced a similar difificulty, 
wrote thus : — 

" There is great danger, in all use of this language, of thinking 
that when we have rendered various English words into Japanese 
we have of necessity expressed the thoughts which the English 
words convey. Language may correspond to language, but the 
thoughts to which the language is the vehicle may be as distant 
as the poles. Our language must be idiomatic or the natives will 
fail to see the points on which we are endeavouring to lay so much 
stress." 

The writer has on several occasions- read portions of Yoruba 
translations to intelligent but purely uneducated Yoruba men. 
They would show that they comprehended (not without an effort) 
what was read to them by putting pertinent questions, but then 
they would add, " We can understand what you mean to say, but 
what you read there is not Yoruba ; it may be hook language 
(£de I we)." The rock of stumbling is the desire of translators to 
reproduce every word and particle of the English in its exact 
equivalent in Yoruba, regardless of idiom, and thereby obscuring 
the sense of the latter. 



XXxiv A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR 

In taking up a Yoruba book one is forcibly struck by the 
difference in style between quotations of pure Yoruba stories, 
phrases, or proverbs, and the notes and observations of the writer. 
The former runs smooth and clear, the latter appears stiff and 
obscure, because the writer, with his knowledge of the English 
grammar and language, wrote English ideas and idioms in Yoruba 
words, illustrating what is said above. 

When such systems are employed in writing a Yoruba Grammar, 
such a grammar may be usefiil in teaching English to Yoruba 
boys, but that is not a Yoruba grammar. 

We deem these observations necessary because in the following 
pages we shall have occasion to render Yoruba words into English 
and vice versa ; a very literal translation will not be adhered to 
when, by so doing, the sense and force of the language will be 
obscured and weakened. 

The Formation of Words 

The formation of words in Yoruba appears to be a very simple 
process ; any consonant with a vowel attached will form a word 
(or three words, according to the variation of the tone or accent). 
That word will probably be a verb ; it will certainly possess the 
form of one, either current or obsolete. This word will, moreover, 
be the root of a whole class of words. By prefixing a vowel to it 
a noun may be formed ; with other prefixes also some other 
words may be formed from the same root, e.g., da to make, gda, 
a creature ; from which we have eleda, creator. Lk, to spUt ; 
ilk, a cut ; elk, halves of a whole ; kla, a boundary. Rii, to carry ; 
eru, a load ; alarij, a carrier ; elerii, owner of a load. Fe, to 
love ; Ife, love ; Ifeni, brotherly love, charity. 

Thus verbs are mostly monosyllables, formed by one consonant 
and a vowel, and nouns disyllables in which the first syllable is 
a vowel, and the second a verbal root. The penultimate vowel is 
sometimes strengthened by a consonant. 

Adjectives are mostly formed from nouns (or as nouns) by pre- 
fixing the consonant of the verbal root ; e.g., dida, made or created ; 
hlk, fissured ; so also from m6, to know ; im^, knowledge, mim^, 
known. 

Adverbs are generally dupUcation of the adjective, e.g., didun, 
sweet ; didun-didun, very sweet ; dara, good ; dara-dara, very 
good. 

What is here called a verbal root may be an obsolete word or 
one not generally in use, but other words can be formed from it 
all the same. 

There are some primitive words the origin of whose roots has 



A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR XXXV 

been lost, e.g., omi, water ; ina, fire ; igi, wood ; aso, clothes ; 
etc. 

With rare exceptions, nouns not beginning with a vowel are 
either of foreign origin, or onomatopoetic : this latter being very 
common. 

There are, of course, exceptions to the above rules, but these 
will be found to be the fundamental methods of forming Yoruba 
words. 

We cannot within the compass of an introduction, give a 
complete sketch of a Yoruba Grammar, but we may state that 
the Unes laid down in Crowther's Vocabulary of the Yoruba 
language and in Notes on the Formation of Words by the Rt. Rev. 
O. E. Vidal, the first Bishop of Sierra Leone, if properly developed 
and fully worked out, will prove both very useful and instructive. 

The Parts of Speech 

There are eight parts of speech. They are as in the English 
Grammar, the " Article " being excepted. 

The Yoruba language has no article, but when definiteness is 
required the numeral kan (contracted from Okan, one) is used for 
a or an, and the demonstrative na or ni (that, the said one) is 
used for the definite article the. 

The use of the numeral one in place of the article is not unknown 
even in English. " The numeral one is an indefinite demonstrative 
when used as the article an " — Mason, 

The word kan therefore cannot be correctly called an article 
simply because it is made to do duty for it. 

In Yoruba books translated from the Enghsh, where the 
translator endeavours to render every word and particle into its 
Yoruba equivalent, we often find these particles used where a 
pure Yoruba, speaking, would not use an article. Hence the 
Yoruba of translations often sounds rather quaint. 

Literal translations regardless of differences of idiom, often 
result in ambiguity or nonsense. 

In the British colonies of Sierra Leone and Lagos, where the 
Yoruba element predominates, and where the English language is 
often heard spoken with local accents and local idioms, the articles 
are frequently left out where an Englishman would use them, 
e.g., I see snake, for I saw a snake. Water full, for the river is full. 
Here the local English sounds rather quaint, because the speaker 
simply expresses his Yoruba ideas in EngUsh words without the 
article. Again, we may say in Yoruba, O joko lori aga " (He is 
sitting on a chair) " nmu koko taba " (he is smoking a pipe) 
No one would ever think of adding the particle kan after aga or 



XXXVl A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR 

koko taha by way of expressing the article a. So also we may say 
" Mo pade Yesufu ni Odo Osun " (I met Joseph at the River 
Osun), or " Mo iilo sf gja " (I am going to the market). No one 
would use the particle nd after Osun or oja to indicate the article 
the as its English equivalent. But we can say " Okonrin na ti de " 
(the man is come). " Mo pade Okonrin na " (I met the man). 
" Omode kan nduro de g " (a child is waiting for you). " Mo pa 
ejo kan " (I have killed a snake). In which cases definiteness is 
required and consequently the particles representing the articles 
a, an and the are used. 

These examples are sufficient to show that the articles do not 
exist in the Yoruba language, but where definiteness is required, 
equivalents can be found. 

We deem these illustrations necessary as in books on Yoruba 
Grammar the " article " forms one of the Parts of Speech. 

Noun 

Nouns generally in their simplest form are formed by prefixing 
a vowel to a verbal root ; as b§, to shear ; abe, razor ; de, to cover 
(the head) ; ade, crown ; da, to cease ; oda, drought ; s^, to 
offend ; ese, sin. So also the verbals alo, going ; abg, coming from, 
Ig, to go ; and bg, to come. 

But the prefixes have certain peculiarities of their own. Thus : 
a prefixed indicates an agent, one who does a thing, e.g., ke, to cut ; 
ake, an axe — an agent for cutting wood. Da to break ; ida, 
a cutlass ; yun, to file, ayun, a file or a saw. 

o or 0, the same as a but restricted in their use, e.g., lu, to bore ,* 
olu, a gimlet ; 16, to grind ; ol6, a grinder ; we, to swim ; ow^, 
a swimmer ; de, to hunt ; gde, a hunter. 

e prefixed indicates a noun in the concrete, e.g., ru, to carry ; 
eru, a load ; mi; to breathe ; emi, the breath, spirit. 

i prefixed denotes a noun in the abstract, e.g., m6, to know ; 
im5, knowledge ; ri, to see ; iriri, experience. 

The vowels e and u are rarely used. 

Gender. — The Yoruba language being non-inflective, genders 
cannot be distinguished by their terminal syllables, but by pre- 
fixing the words ako, male, and aho, female, to the common term ; 
and sometimes okonrin, a man and obirin, a woman ; e.g., akg- 
esin, a horse, stallion abo-esin, a mare ; akg-malu, a bull ; abo- 
malu, a cow. Omc okonrin, a boy, i.e., a man child ; gmg-birin, 
a girl. 

In one case the masculine seems to be formed from the feminine, 
e.g., lyawo, a bride, gkg-iyawo, a bridegroom. 



A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR 



XXX vu 



Baba 


. . father 


lya 


. mother 


Okonrin 


. man 


Obirin 


. woman 


Oko 


. husband 


Aya 


. wife 


Apgn 


a bachelor 


Wundia 


. a spinster 


Apon 


. a widower 


Opo 


a widow 



)ruba langu 


age in which different 


female of the objects, e.g. : — 


Igbekun 


. . a male captive 


Igbesin 


. a female captive 


Oso" 


. a wizard 


Aje 


. a witch 


Agbo 


a ram 


Agutan 


. a sheep, a ewe 


Obuko 


. a he-goat 


Ewure 


. a goat 


Akuko 


. a cock 


Agbebo 


. a hen 



No other distinction of genders is known. 

The words arakgnrin and arabirin, used in translations for brother 
and sister, are purely coined words, not known to the illiterate 
Yoruba man not in touch with missionaries. To him they are 
" book-language " and must be explained. 

The English words brother and sister show th« relations as to 
sex only without indicating the relative age ; but the Yorubas, 
with whom distinction in age and seniority of birth are of primary 
importance, generally use the words egbgn and aburo, i.e., the elder 
and the younger relative, words which show the relative age only, 
without indicating the sex and are equally applicable to uncles, 
aunts, nephews, nieces and cousins however far removed, as well 
as to brothers and sisters. 

Our translators, in their desire to find a word expressing the 
Enghsh idea of sex rather than of age, coined the above words 
" arakonrin," i.e., the male relative ; " arabirin," the female 
relative ; these words have always to be explained to the pure 
but ilUterate Yoruba man. 

But the words egbon okonrin or obirin and aburo gkonrin or 
obirin would be more intelligible to them and should be preferred, 
especially as it is always easy enough to find out the relative ages 
of the said brother or sister. 

We would recommend this to our translators. 

Proper names rarely show any distinction of sex, the great 
majority of them apply equally well to males as to females. See 
under " Yoruba Names," page 79- 

Number. — The plural of nouns cannot be formed from the 
singular, either by addition or by a change of form ; only from the 
context can it be known whether we are speaking of one or more 
than one : but when specification is desired the demonstrative 
pronoun awQti (they) or won (them) is used with the words, e.g., 
B 



XXXviil A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR 

Aw on okonrin na ti lo (the men have gone away). The bells are 
ringing — Awon agogo na nlu. Awon, however, is rarely used with 
things without life. When the plural nouns are indefinite, that is 
to say, without the definite article, the demonstrative awon is 
omitted, e.g., Walaha okuta meji — two tables of stone. 

Case. — There are three cases, the nominative, objective and 
possessive, as in the English language ; but in none of them is 
there a change of form. The nominative precedes and the objective 
follows after the transitive verb and preposition as usual, but in 
the case of the possessive, the thing possessed stands before the 
possessor with the particle ti expressed or understood between 
them, e.g., Moses' book, Iwe ti Musa, in which the particle ti 
is expressed. Iru esin, the horse's tail, in which the particle ti 
is understood. But although the particle ti is not expressed, yet 
its middle tone is preserved by lengthening the tone of the final 
vowel of the thing possessed. Thus we may say : Iwe (e) Musa, 
the book of Moses, Iru(u) e§in, the tail of the horse. Qro(g) 
Olorun, the word of God. Agbala(a) Oba, the court of the King. 
Oko Ore(e) mi. My friend's farm. 

The sound of the added tone is sometimes so slight as to be 
almost imperceptible, but it is always there, and is one of those 
fine points which are so difficult for the ear of foreigners to catch, 
and the absence of which marks out their defective accents. 

But when the noun in the possessive case stands alone, the 
particle ti must be expressed, e.g., David's, Ti Dauda. Moses's, 
Ti Musa. It is Joseph's, Ti Yesufu ni. 

Adjectives 

Adjectives are generally placed after the nouns they qualify, 
as Esin dudu, a black horse ; omo rere, a good child. They are 
placed before the nouns when some special attribute of that noun 
is to be emphasized, e.g., agidi omo, a stubborn child ; apa omo, 
a slovenly child ; alagbara okonrin, a brave fellow ; akg okuta, 
a very hard stone. 

These are really substantives used attributively. They may 
more correctly be regarded as nouns in the construct state, and 
not pure adjectives, e.g., " a brute of a man " is a more emphatic 
expression than " a brutish man." This view of showing the 
identity of a substantive with an adjective is clearly shown by 
Mason : — 

" The adjective was originally identical with the noun which, in 
the infancy of language, named objects by naming some attributes 
by which they were known. 

" In course of time the adjective was developed into a separate 



A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR XXXlX 

part of speech; the function of which was to attach itself to the 
noun ; even now it is sometimes difficult to draw the line between 
them, as nouns are sometimes used attributively and adjectives 
pass by various stages into nouns." 

Comparison of Adjectives 

Degrees of comparison cannot be formed from Yoruba adjectives. 
The words ju and juld which are generally used in Yoruba books 
and translations, and even stated in some grammars as forming 
the comparative and superlative degrees, are really adverbs 
signifying a greater or less degree than and as such may give 
a comparative sense only to the adjectives to which they are 
attached. The superlative is really non-existing ; it can only be 
gathered from the context. The wordy« is only used in an elhptical 
sense iox julo when a comparison is being made, and it often appears 
in the form of tmesis ; e.g., He re tobi ju ti emi lo — Your house is 
larger than mine ; where lo is separated from ju by the words ti 
emi, and may be omitted without affecting the sense. When used 
otherwise, i.e., without any idea of comparison, ju is purely an 
adverb signifying too, too much or too little, e.g., ga ju, it is 
too high ; O kere ju, it is too small. But a comparative idea 
can be gathered only from the context, and also whether the 
comparison is between two or many, and it is in that way alone 
a comparative and a superlative degree can be made out. " If 
we say, ' John is taller than all the other boys in the class,' we 
express the same relation as to height between John and the rest 
as if we should say, ' John is the tallest boy in the class.' But in 
the former case John is considered apart from the other boys of 
the class, so that the two objects which we have in mind are John 
and the other boys in the class. When the superlative degree is 
used John is considered as one of the group of boys compared 
with each other." — Mason. 

This latter sense is what cannot be expressed in Yoruba and 
therefore the language cannot be said to possess a superlative 
degree. The superlative idea can only be gathered from the context. 

It would be absurd to thus compare the adjective tall : — 
Positive, ga (tall) comparative, ga ju (too tall) ; superlative, 
ga ju lo (more tall than) which are not adjectives in the compara- 
tive and superlative sense at aU. 

To use words like these : Oga ogo julo, for the Most High ; or, 
Owu mi behe pup6 julo for I am most pleased at it, is to speak 
vile Yoruba. No pure Yoruba man uncontaminated with Enghsh 
ideas would speak in that way at all. 

As the genius of the Yoruba language, the working of the 



Xl A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR 

Yoruba mind, its ideas and idiosyncracies do not run in an Anglo- 
Saxon channel, it is not to be expected that the mode of expression 
will agree in every particular. Some teachers of the Yoruba 
language often fall into this error in their endeavours to find the 
exact equivalent in both languages. 

The Forms and Uses of Adjectives 

Every adjective has two forms, the attributive and the predica- 
tive, each depending upon the use thereof, e.g. : — 
A high mountain (attributive), Oke giga. 
The mountain is high (predicative), Oke na ga. 

In Yoruba, the attributive is formed from the predicative by 
reduplicating the initial consonant with the vowel i, e.g., strong 
pred., le, attrih., lile ; sweet, pred., dun, attrib., didun ; hot pred, 
gbona, attrih., gbigbona ; good, pred., dara ; attrib., didara, etc. 
Disyllables with the vowel m as a rule undergo no change, e.g., 
tutu, cold ; dudu, black ; funfun, white, etc. (the n being purely 
nasal). Although not in use, the same rule even here may also 
be applied. 

Pronouns. 

Pronouns are used in the same sense as in EngUsh. They are: 
I Personal, II Relative, and III Adjective ; there is no distinction 
in genders in any of the forms. 

The Personal includes the Reflexive. 

I. Personal Pronouns, 
(a) Nominative Case. 

Singular Plural 

ist Pers. : I Emi, mo (mo, mi) n We Awa, a 

2nd ,, thou Iwo, o, (g) you eyin, e 

3rd „ he, she it On, 6, (6) they Awon, won 

The full forms (sing.) emi, iwg, oii, (plural) awa, eyin, awon, 
are used when emphasis is to be laid on the person, but ordinarily 
the second forms (sing.) mo, o, 6, (plural) a, e, won, are used. 
Those in brackets (mo, mi, o, 6) are mere provincialisms for the 
former. 

5J in the ist person is used only with the incomplete and future 
tenses, e.g., iilQ for emi yio lo, or Mo iilo, I am going, 5Jo lo for 
Emi yio lo, I shall go. 

He, when used in an indefinite sense, is eni, as : Eni ti o ba se e. 
He that doeth it. Eni ti o ba wa si ihin. He who comes here. 



A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR xli 

(b) Possessive Case. 

Singular Plural 

1st Pers. : Mine Ti emi Ours ti awa 

2nd „ Thine Ti iwg or ti ire yours ti ^yin 

3rd ,, his, hers, its Ti on or ti irg theirs ti awon 

It will be observed that the possessive forms, are simply the 
nominatives with the particle ti (meaning of) prefixed ; so that 
hterally they are of me, of you, of him, etc. In ordinary speech, 
however, the vowel of the particle always suffers elision in the 
singular number, but in the plural it is the initial vowel of the 
pronoun that is elided. Thus we have : — 

Sing. : t'emi, t'iwo or fire, t'ofi or fire 
Plural : ti'wa, ti'yin, ti'wgn. 

The apostrophe mark of elision is generally dispensed with in 
writing, e.g., we write temi, tiwa, tiwon, etc. 

Special notice should be taken of the forms tire and tir^ ; in 
the 2nd and 3rd pers. singular the difference lies only in the tone 
(or accent) ; in the 2nd pers. the tone of the first syllable is de- 
pressed, the second is middle, it is vice versa in the 3rd person. 





(c) Objective Case. 






Singular 


Plural 


ist Pers. 


: me mi 


us wa 


2nd „ 


thee 


you yin 


3rd .. 


him, her, it a, e, e, i, 0, g, u 


them wgn 



The objective case as may be seen, consists of fragments of 
the nominative. It is really the terminal syllables of the first 
second and third persons, singular and plural. The third person 
singular calls for special rernarks : — 

It consists of the whole of the vowels, but the particular vowel 
made use of in each case is that of the transitive verb which pre- 
cedes the pronoun and governs the case, e.g., pa a (he killed it), 
Mo pe e (I called him), Wgn te e (they bent it), A bo o (we covered 
it), etc. Where the verb ends in a nasal sound the vowel is also 
nasal, e.g., O kan a (he nailed it), A fun u (we gave him), etc. 

The tone of the pronoun in the objective case is influenced by 
that of the verb which governs it ; when that of the verb is raised 
the objective maintains the middle tone, e.g., O 16 g (he twisted 
it). Mo ka a (I picked it) ; and vice versa when that of the verb is 
middle, that of the objective is raised, e.g., O se ^ (he did it), 
O pa a (he killed it), kan mi (it aches me). Again, when the 
tone of the verb is depressed, that of the pronoun is raised, 



Xlii A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR 

e.g., kkn mi (it touched me), Mo k^ a (I counted it), A pe won 
(we called them). 

The Reflexive 

The word tikara, incorporated wih the personal forms, is used 
to indicate the Reflexive. It is placed between the nominative 
and possessive cases, e.g., 

Singular Plural 

1st Pers. : Emi tikara mi Awa tikara wa 

2nd ,, Iwo tikara re Eyin tikara yin 

3rd ,, Ofi tikara r§ Aw on tikara won 

The harsh r is generally softened into / so that instead of tikara 
we say tikala ; but in a flowing speech the / is dropped off altogether 
and the two a's blended and lengthened ; so we often hear 
Emi tik5 mi, Oil tika r^, Awa tika wa. 

II Relative Pronouns 

The Relative pronoun who, whose, whom, which, what, or that 
in Yoruba, is the simplest in any language. It consists solely 
of the particle ti and is used for every number, gender, person or 
case, e.g., I who called thee, Emi ti o pe o. The man whom I 
saw, Okgnrin ti mo ri. The birds which flew, Awgn eiye ti won fo. 

III. Adjective Pronouns 

These are : — (a) Possessive ; (b) Demonstrative ; (c) Distribu- 
tive ; (d) Indefinite ; and (e) Interrogative. 

(a) Possessive : — Singular Plural 

My mi Our wa 

thy re your jan 

his, her, its rfe their won 

Note. — Like adjectives, they come after the nouns they qualify, 
e.g.. My king, gba mi ; your children, awon omo jdn ; their cattle, 
awon eran-osin won. 

(b) Demonstratives : — Singular Plural 

this yi, eyi, eyiyi these wonyi, iwonyi 
that ni, eyini,na those wonni,iwgnni 

Note. — The simple forms yi, ni, wgnyi, wgnni, are used with the 
nouns tbey quahfy, e.g., This man, gkgnrin yi ; that book, iwe ni ; 
these children, awgn gmgde wgnyi ; those houses, ile wgnni. 
But when the nouns are not expressed, the forms with a vowel 
prefixed are used, e.g., This is not good, eyi ko dara ; this very one, 
eyiyi ; these are not ripe, iwgnyi ko pgn ; those are very good, 
i wgnni dara jgjg. Na refers to something spoken of or understood. 



A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR 



xliii 



[c) Distributive : — 




each 


olukuluku, enikankan 


every 


enikan, or gbogbo 


either 


enikan 


neither 


ko si enikan 



Note. — The Yoruba use of the distributives is rather idiomatic. 
" Each " is olukuluku, but when used in the sense of " one by one " 
it is enikankan. For " every one " the Yoruba is gbogbo, i.e., 
all, e.g., it touches every one of us. (In Yoruba) It touches all of 
us, Gbogbo wa li o kan. "Either of them," is "one of them." 
Either of us may go, Okan ninu wa le lo. 
(d) Indefinite : — 



All 

Any 

Both 


. . Gbogbo 
. . eyikeyi 
. . mejeji 


One 

Other 

Another 


• • 


kan, §nikan 

ekeji 

elomiran 


Certain 


. . (eni) kan 


One another 
Each other 


}' 


ara won 


Few 

Many 
Much 
None 


. . die 

opolgpo, pupQ 
. . pup6, opo 
. . ko si enikain 


Several 
Some 
Such 
Whole 


•• 


pupo 

die (a few) 

bayi 

ototg, gbogbo 



The Yoruba language s very defective in distinctive terms 
expressive of the indefinite pronouns. One word must do service 
for different terms in which there is a shade of difference of 
meaning, e.g., 

Gbogbo is used for all, whole. 

PuPq or bpo for many, much, several. 

Enikan for certain, one. 

None is expressed by " there is no one." 

(e) Interrogative : — 

Who ? Tahani ? contracted to tani ? 
Whose ? Titahani ? contracted to titani ? 
Which ? Ewo ? wo ? 
Whom ? Tani ? eniti ? 
What ? Kini ? ' 

Note. — -The n in kini is often converted or rather softened into 
/ in speech. What shall we do ? Kini awa yio se ? is softened 
into Ki r a o se ? 

Verbs 

Verbs are transitives and intransitives. There are no auxiliary 
verbs as known in the EngHsh and other languages ; certain 
particles are used to mark out the moods, tenses and other forms. 



XllV A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR 

for which auxiliary verbs are used, consequently the verb " to be " 
as an auxiliary is wanting. 

In. the English language there are six auxiliary verbs, viz., 
be, have, shall, will, may, do ; each of them may be used as the 
principal verb, and also as an auxiUary to other verbs when they 
help to form the moods and tenses ; but the particles that are 
used in Yoruba for such purposes are not verbs, and cannot be 
used as such, and therefore cannot be correctly termed auxiUary 
verbs as some compilers of Yoruba grammars have tried to make 
out. For example, the particle ti placed before a verb denotes a 
completed action, e.g., Ajayi ti lo, Ajayi has or had gone. The 
particle jyj'o in the same way points out a future tense, ^.^., Ajayi 
yio lo, Ajayi will go. The nasal n prefixed to any verb shows an 
incomplete action as Ajayi rilo, Aja)^ is going. 

There being no auxiliary verbs as such, the Passive Voice 
cannot be formed in the usual way, the first or third person plural 
of the verb transitive is used for the passive voice, e.g., " A snake is 
killed " will be A pa ejo kan, or Won pa ejo kan. Or if we say 
" The snake was killed by Joseph " the Yoruba will be " A ti owo 
Yesufu pa ejo na, which is literally, " We by the hand of Joseph 
killed the snake," but usually the active transitive is preferred, 
viz., Yesuf u U o pa ejo na, " It is Joseph that killed the snake." 
As was observed above, the majority of Yoruba verbs in their 
simplest form consist of monosyllables — a consonant and a vowel, 
e.g., ka, to pick, kd. to count, rd to buy, lo to go, wa to come, 
sun to sleep, etc. They are non-inflective and do not show any 
distinction in number or person. 

Disyllabic verbs are almost invariably compound words 
resolvable into their component parts ; they may be a verbal 
root compounded with a preposition, a noun or an adverb (some 
roots, however, have become obsolete), e.g., Bawi, to scold, from 
ba, with, and wi, talk. Dahun, to answer, from da, to utter, 
ohun, a voice. Dapo, to mingle, from da, to pour or mix, and 
Pq, together. Sunkun, to weep, from sun, to spring, and ekun, 
tears. 

Some are transitives, others intransitives. 

The noun or pronoun governed by the transitive verb is in- 
variably placed between the component parts, e.g., Bawi, to scold. 
O ba mi wi, He scolded me. 

Pade, to close. O pa ilekun de. He closed the door 

Here the mi is placed between the ha and the wi. It. is not 
O bawi mi for He scolded me, but ha mi wi. 

So also ilekun is placed between pa and de, not O pade ilekun, 
but pa ilekun de for He closed the door. 



A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR xlv 

Verbs compounded with a Preposition : — 

Bawi, to scold. O ba mi wi, He scolded me. 

Pade; to shut. Pa ilekun de, Close the door. 

Dimu, to take hold of. Di mi mu, Take hold of me. 

Dasi, to spare. Da won si, Spare them. 

Verbs compounded with an Adverb : — 

Baje, to spoil. Ba inu je, Grieve, " Spoil the mind." 

Dapo, to mingle. Da won po. Mix them together. 

Tuka, to scatter. Tu won ka, Scatter them. 

Daru, to confound. Da won ru, Confound them. 

Pamo, to keep. Pa mi mo, Keep or preserve me. 

In verbs compounded with a noun, the noun always has the 
preposition ni (softened into li) before it, e.g., 

Daju, evident, from da, clear, and oju, the eyes — clear to the 

eyes. da mi I' oju. It is evident to me 
Tiju, to be ashamed, from ti to cover, oju, the eyes — covering 

the eyes. ti mi I' oju. It shames me. 
Dahun, to answer, from da, to utter, ohun, a voice. Da mi 

I'ohun, Answer me. 
Jiya, to suffer, from je, to eat, iyk, punishment, je mi ni iyd, 

He punished me. 
Gbowg, shake hands, from gba, take, owo, hand. gbd mi 

I'owQ, He shook hands with me. 
Ranse, to send a message, from ran, send, ise, a message. Mo 

ran a ni i§e, I have sent him. 

The Intransitive verbs of this class are usually neuter verbs 
compounded with nouns of similar import and therefore do not 
admit of any nouns or pronouns being inserted into their com- 
ponent parts, e.g., 

Sunkun, to cry, from sun, to spring, shed, ekun, tears. 

Sorg, to talk, from so, to utter, org, a word. 

Kunle, to kneel, from kun, to fill. He, the ground. 

P^de, to meet, from pa, to keep, ade, a coming. 

Duro, to stand, Irom da, to keep, iro, upright. 

Moods and Tenses 

In the formation of Moods and Tenses certain particles are 
made use of. They may have been the roots of obsolete verbs, 
but they cannot now be used as verbs but as particles ; we there- 
fore refrain from applying the terms " defective " or " auxiliary 
verbs " to them. Such are the following : — 

Bi, ha or iha, implying if, should, or would, e.g. Bi o ba lo, 
if he should go. Oia iba lo, should he go 



Xlvi A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR 

Je or ki, or j ski, implying permission, e.g., Je ki o \q or ki o lo, 

let him go. 
Lb, implying permission. O le lo, he may go. 
Md or Mase, implying prohibition (authoritative). 
Maha, impljdng permission (authoritative), e.g., Maha lo, be going 
Yio, often contracted to o, sign of the future, e.g., Yio lo, he 

will go. Emi o \o, I will go. 
Ati or ni ati, softened into lati, implying an intention, e.g., 

Ati lo, to go, Lati jeun, to eat (intending to). 
N or ng, sign of incomplete action, e.g., Emi filo, I am going. 

Ojo fir6, it is raining. 
Ti, a sign of the past tense, e.g., ti lo, he has gone. 
From these particles the Moods and Tenses are formed. 

Moods 

The Indicative, Subjunctive, Potential, Imperative, Infinitive 
and the Participal Moods can be well expressed in Yoruba, and 
all but the first can be formed by the use of one or other of the 
above particles. 

The Indicative is the verb in its simplest form, e.g. lo, to go. 
Emi Ig, I went. Ojo sare, Ojo ran. 

The Subjunctive is formed by prefixing the conjunction hi (if) 
before the subject of the verb, with or without the particle 
ha, e.g., Bi emi lo or Bi emi ba Ig, If I were to go. Bi emi ba 
fe Ig, If I wish to go. 

The Potential is formed by adding the particle le before the 
verb, e.g., Emi \h Ig, I may go (lit. I am able to go). 

The Imperative is formed by the permissive sign J§ ki, e.g., 
Jg ki emi Ig, Let me go. [Besides the direct forms Ig (go thou) ; 
^lg(goye).] 

The Infinitive is formed by adding the particles ati or lati before 
the verb, e.g., Ati lo, to go. Lati mo, to know. 

The Participle is formed by prefixing the particle ii (or ng) to 
the verb, e.g. nlo, going.; nbQ, coming. 

Tenses 

There are only three tenses in Yoruba, properly speaking, the 
preterite, the incomplete, and the future. 

An action just done is a completed action and is therefore past ; 
one doing is incomplete, consequently what may be considered 
present may be merged in the completed action, and is therefore 
taken as preterite, or in the incomplete, as the sense may require. 

The simple verb is always expressed in the past indefinite or 



A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR xlvii 

preterite tense, e.g., Mo lo, I went ; Mo we, I washed. O rerin, 
he laughed or laughs ; joko, he sat or sits. 

The complete tenses, past or present, are expressed by prefixing 
the particle ti before the preterite, e.g., Mo ti we, I have, or had 
washed. O ti lo, he has or had gone. 

The incomplete tense is formed by prefixing the particle ii (orng) to 
the verb, e.g., Emi nwe, I am washing. Emi iirerin, I am laughing. 

The future tense is formed by placing the particle jyj'o (contracted 
to o) before the verb, e.g., Emi yio we, I shall wash. Emi o lo, 
I shall go. Awa o maha yo. We shall be rejoicing. 

The future complete (or second future) tense is formed by 
adding the particles indicating the future and the complete tenses 
to the verb e.g., Emijyw ti we, I shall have washed. Emi o ti lo, 
I shall have gone. 

Adverbs 

Adverbs are used in the same way as in the English, to modify 
or hmit the meaning of a verb, an adjective, or another adverb, 
and are generally placed after the words they qualify, e.g., sorg 
daradara. He spoke well. soro jojg. It is very difficult. After 
an intransitive verb, they come directly after the verb, as sun 
fanfan. He slept soimdly. O sure tete. He ran swiftly. But 
after a transitive verb they come after the noun or pronoun 
in the objective case, e.g.. Mo mo Yesufu daju-daju, I know 
Joseph well. O le won sehin-sehin. He drove them far back. 

Adverbs of manner, quahty and degree are mostly formed by a 
reduplication of the word (especially an adverb or a verb), e.g., 
O sorg daradara. He spoke very well, O duro sinsin. He stood 
firmly. Dajudaju, evidently. Mo feran r^ gidigidi, I love him well. 

Adverbs of time, place and quantity are used in the same way 
as in the EngHsh, and call for no special remarks. We may note, 
however, that in these, words of more than one syllable not 
onomatopoetic in origin are capable of being resolved into their 
elementary parts — usually into a particle (a preposition) and a 
noun, e.g., 

Nigbagbogbo, always, can be resolved into ni (at), igba (time), 
gbogbo (all), i.e., at all times. 

Kigbose, when, can be resolved into ni (at or in), igba (time), 
ti (which), se (it happened), i.e., at the time when it happened, 
i.e., when. 

Nihiyi, here, ni (at), ihin (here), yi (this), at this place. 

Loke, upwards, ni or li (at), oke (the top). 

Nibomiran, elsewhere, ni (at), ihi (place), omiran (another), at 
another place. 



Xlviii A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR 

But there is also a use of adverbs peculiar to the Yoruba lan- 
guage, an onomatopoetic idea is often connected with it, and 
consequently it is always formed to suit the word it qualifies, and 
thus intensify the idea conveyed by the word. A form that is 
applicable to one verb or adjective may not be appHcable to 
another, and therefore adverbs of degree or quality cannot be 
enumerated. For instance : 

The adverb gogoro can only apply to height, as o ga g6g6rd, 
It is very high. A reduplication of the word can further intensify 
the idea, O ga gogoro gogoro. It is very, very high. In the same 
way the word gbagada can only apply to something of a huge 
size, and a redupHcation of it, gbagada gbagada, intensifies the 
idea. Also the word repete or rapcita-rapata implies not only a 
large size, but also a massive one, one in which the space covered 
is much more than the height. 

Apart from intensifying the ideas, other quaUties can also be 
expressed by the character of the adverb made use of ; in other 
words, the adverbs often suggest some other ideas inherent in the 
qualities they describe although they cannot be so expressed in 
Enghsh, e.g., we may say, pon fo 6, It is bright red. Here the 
adverb fo 6, besides being aptly applying to what is red, also 
suggests the warmth of the colouring. So also O pon roro. It is 
deep red ; O p6n rokiroki, i.e., It is bright red, almost yellow. 
In the last two examples roro and rokiroki refer simply to the 
depth of the colouring.^ 

One or two more illustrations will develop the above ideas 
fully. In the matter of length, we may say O gim tunu tunu. 
It is very long. This can only apply to a long road, the idea of 
distance being imphed. O gvm gboro-gbgro. It is very long. This 
conveys an idea of a long pole, or a rope, or a serpent or the like. 
So also with respect to height, we may say, O ga.fio fio, It is very 
high. This can only apply to something on the top of a great 
height, or the top of a high object — as a tree, standing on the 
ground. O ga tian-tian, It is very high. This can only apply to 
an object at a great height, not connected with the ground, as a 
bird flying at a great height. 

In all these examples, the adverb very is used to qualify the 
adjectives in English, no other ideas being conveyed ; in this 
respect the Yoruba is more expressive. 

Prepositions 

Prepositions are particles placed before nouns or pronouns to 

show their relation to other words in the sentence. 

^ See Vidal's Notes to Crowther's Yoruba Grammar. 



A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR xlix 

In Yoruba they are mostly monosyllables, e.g., si, ni, fun, de, 
etc., as : O lo si ile. He goes into the house. O wa ni oko. He is 
in the farm. O ko ile fun Baba, He has built a house for the 
father. Duro d^ mi, Wait for me. 

Words of more than one syllable when used as prepositions are 
capable of being resolved into their component parts, e.g., O nbo 
lehin mi, He is coming behind me. Here, the preposition lehin is 
resolvable into li (at) and ehin (the back). O wa leti ile. He is 
near the house ; leti is resolvable into li (at) and eti, the ear, or 
the edge that is within the hearing or at the edge of the house. 

Under Verbs we have already considered those pecuhar forms 
compounded with prepositions. 

Conjunctions 

Conjunctions are particles which serve to connect words or 
sentences ; they are copulative and disjunctive. 

Copulative. 
Ati, and or both. Ati Baba ati omo, Both father and son. The 

initial a may be omitted, e.g., Tiwo tir^ for ati iwo ati ixh 

(you and he). 
On, and or both. O lo t'ofi ti omo. He left both himself and 

child. It may be noted that on is never used to copulate 

pronouns of the ist and 2nd persons. 
Bi, if. Bi o je se omo. If he would be a child. (This is used 

for an obedient child). 
Nitori, because. Nitori t'emi. Because of me. 
Nje, then. Nje o yio lo ? Then will you go ? 

Disjunctive. 
Sugbgn, but. O de ile sugbon ko ba mi. He called but did not 

meet me at home. 
Tabi, or. Emi tabi iwg, I or you. 
Bikose, unless. Bikose pe o juba re, Unless he pays regard to 

him. 
Adi. although. Adi o ngbo gbogbo rh, Although he hears it all. 
Amgpe, idiomatic for be it known. 

Interjections 

Interjections are any form of exclamation or ejaculation ex- 
pressing some emotions of the mind. Any words may be used 
for the purpose, but very few convey any meaning apart from 
the tone in which they are expressed. 

Exclamations of surprise : Ye ! O ! pa ! emo ! hepk ! 

Exclamations of disgust : S6 ! Siyo ! 



1 



A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR 



It is rather curious that tribal peculiarities are marked in some 
forms of exclamations. 

Favourite expressions of Oyos : Ha ! Kinla ! Em ode ! Gbaga- 
dari ! 

Favourite expressions of Egbas and Ijebus : Here or herek^ 1 
heparipk ! payentiwk ! 

The usual exclamation in law courts for " silence " is : Atoto ! 
lit, enough of your noise ! 

Kagbohun ! lit, let us hear the sound of a (single) voice. 

The tone of voice thrown into the exclamation in particular 
marks the expressions of grief, surprise, admiration or contempt. 

We close this portion with the exclamation usually addressed 
to kings — Kabiyesi ! May long life be added ! 

Numerals 

Numerals in Yoruba, although formed on a definite plan, yet 
are more or less compUcated ; the tone (or accent) plays an im- 
portant part in them. 

All numerals refer to some noun (person or thing) expressed or 
understood. They are Cardinal and Ordinal or Serial. . 

The Cardinal has three forms, viz. : (i) simple enumeration ; 
(2) numeral adjectives ; and (3) numismatics. To these may be 
added adverbs of number and of time. 

1. Simple Enumeration 



I . 


Eni 


22 . 


... Ejilelogun 


2 . 


u 


23 . 


... £talelogun 


3 . 


£ta 


24 . 


... ferinlelogun 


4 • 

5 • 


6rin 

Arun 


25 . 

26 . 


... Edogbgn 
... Jlrindilggbgn 


6 . 


Efa 


27 • 


... Stadilogbgn 


7 ■ 


Eje 


28 . 


... Ejidilggbgn 


8 . 


Ejo 


29 . 


... Okandilggbgn 


9 • 


... Esan 


30 . 


... Ogbgn 


10 . 


£wa 


35 • 


... Arundilogoji 


II . 


... Okanla 


40 . 


Oji 


12 . 


£jila 


45 . 


... Arundiladgta 


13 • 


£tala 


50 . 


... Adgta 


14 . 


... Erinla 


55 . 


... Arundilgggta 


15 • 


£dogun 


60 . 


... Oggta 


16 . 


... £rindilogun 


65 . 


... Arundiladgrin 


17 • 


... fetadilogun 


70 . 


... Adgrin 


18 . 


... ]^jidilogun 


75 . 


... Arundilgggrin 


19 . 


... Okandilogun 


80 . 


... Oggrin 


20 . 


Ogun 


85 . 


... Arundiladgrun 


21 .. 


... Okanlelogun 


90 . 


... Adorun 



A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR 



Simple Enumeration — Continued. 



95 -. 


... Arundilogorun 


4,000 ... 


.. Egbaji 


100 ... 


... Oggrun 


5,000 ... 


.. Edegbata 


200 ... 


... Igba 


6,000 ... 


.. Egbata 


300 ... 


... Odunrun 


7,000 ... 


.. Edegbarin 


400 ... 


... Irinwo 


8,000 ... 


.. Egbarin 


500 ... 


... Edegbeta 


9,000 ... 


.. Edegbarun 


600 . . . 


... Egbeta 


ro,ooo ... 


.. Egbarun 


700 . . . 


... Edegberin 


20,000 ... 


., Egbawa or 


800 ... 


... Egberin 


Oke kan i.e 


'. one bag (of 


900 ... 


... Edegberun 


cowries) . 




1,000 ... 


... Egberun 


Higher num 


bers as 40,000, 


2,000 ... 


... Egb^wa 


60,000, etc. being so many bags. 


3,000 ... 


... Egbedogun 






2. 


Quantitative or 


Numeral Adjectives 


One 


Okan 


Twenty -nine . 


.. Mgkandilggbgn 


Two 


Meji 


Thirty ... 


Ogbgn 


Three ... 


Meta 


Thirty-five 


.. Marun dilogoji 


Four 


Merin 


Forty ... 


Oji 


Five 


Marun 


Forty-five 


.. Marundiladgta 


Six 


Mefa 


Fifty ... 


Adgta 


Seven ... 


Meje 


Fifty-five 


. Marundilogota 


Eight ... 


Mej g 


Sixty 


' Ota 


Nine 


Mesan 


Sixty-five 


, Marundiladgrin 


Ten 


Mewa " 


Seventy... 


... Adgrin 


Eleven ... 


Mgkanla 


Seventy- five 


.. Marundilgggrin 


Twelve ... 


Mejila 


Eighty ... 


... Oggrin 


Thirteen 


Metala 


Eighty-five 


, . Marundiladgrun 


Fourteen 


... Merinla 


Ninety ... 


Adgrun 


Fifteen ... 


Medogun 


Ninety-five 


..Marundilgggrun 


Sixteen ... 


Merindilogun 


One hundred . 


Orun 


Seventeen 


Metadilogun 


One hundred an 


d ten ... Adgla 


Eighteen 


Mejidilogun 


>> i> i> 


twenty Qggfa 


Nineteen 


... Mgkandilogun 


II 1) >> 


thirty Adoje 


Twenty 


Ogun 


II .. II 


forty Ogoje 


Twenty-one 


... Mekanlelogun 


II II .. 


fifty Adgjo 


Twenty-two 


Mejilelogun 


>> II II 


sixty Qggjg 


Twenty-three 


Metalelogun 


II II II 


seventy Adgsan 


Twenty -four 


Meiinlelogun 


II II II 


eighty Oggsan 


Twenty -five 


Medggbgn 


II II II 


ninety 


Twenty-six 


... Merindilggbgn 




Mewadinigba 


Twenty-seven 


... RIetadilggbgn 


Two hundred . 


Igba 


Twenty-eight 


Mejidilggbgn 


etc., etc. 






3. Numis 


matics 




One cowry 


06kani 


Three cowries .. 


Eeta 


Two cowries 


Eejii 


Four 


E erin 



1 Lit., one money, two monies ; cowry shells being used for money. 



Hi 



A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR 



N UMI SM ATics — Continued 

Five cowries ... ... A arun 

Six ,, E eik 

Seven ,, ... ... E eje 

Eight ,, E ejo 

Nine ,, ... ... Eesan 

Ten , Eewa 

Eleven ,, ... ...0-6kanla 

Twelve ,, ... ... E-ejila 

Thirteen ,, ... ... Eetala 

Fourteen ,, ... ... Eerinla 

Fifteen ,, Eedogun 

Sixteen ,, ... Eerindilogun 
Seventeen cowries Egtadilogun 

Eighteen ,, Eejidilogun 

Nineteen ,, Ookandilogun 

Twenty ,, ... Ok6wo 

Twenty-five ,, Eedogbon 

Thirty ,, Ogbonwo 

Forty ,, ... Ogoji 

Fifty ,, ... A-adota 

Sixty ,, ... Qgota 

Seventy ,, A-adorin 

Eighty ,, ... Qgorin 

Ninety ,, A-adgrun 

One hundred ,, ... Ogorun 

no cowries ... ... A-adofa 

120 ,, Qgofa 

130 ,, ... ... A-adoje 

140 ,, ... ... Ogoje 

150 ,, ... ... A-adojo 

160 ,, Qg6jg 

170 ,, ... A-adosan 

180 ,, ... ... Ogosan 

190 ,, ... Ewadinigba 

200 ,, ... ... Igbiwo 

210 ,, ... Ewalerugba 

220 ,, ... Ogunlugba 

230 ,, Ogbonwolerugba 

240 ,, ... - Ojulugba 

250 ,, A-adotalerugba 

260 ,, ... Otalugba 

270 ,, A-adorinlerugba 

280 ,, ... Orinlugba 

290 ,, A-adorunlerugba 

300 ,, ... Odunrun 

400 ,, ... ... Irinwo 



500 cowries . . . E-edegbfeta 


600 


, Egb^ta 


700 


E-edegberin 


800 


Egb^rin 


900 


E-edegberun 


1,000 


Egb^run 


1,200 


'Egb^fa 


1,300 


E-edegbeje 


1,400 


Egbeje 


1,500 


E-edegb^jg 


1,600 


... Egb^jg 


1,700 


E-edegb^san 


1,800 


Egbesan 


1,900 


,, Egbadin-gggrun 


2,000 


,, Egbkwa 


2,200 


Egbokanla 


2,400 


„ Eg'b^jila 


2,500 


,, Egb^taladin-gggrun 


2,600 


Egbetala 


2,800 


Egb^rinla 


3,000 


Egbeedogun 


3.500 


... Egbejidilogun- 




din-gggrun 


3,600 


... Egbejidinlogun 


4,000 


Egbaji 


4.500 


... Egbetalelogun- 




din-gggrun 


5,000 


5gbedggbgn 


5.500 


...Egbetalelggbgn- 




din-gggrun 


6,000 


Egbata 


7,000 


Edegbarin 


8,000 


Egbarin 


9,000 


Edegbarun 


10,000 


Egbarun 


15,000 


Edegbajg 


16,000 


Egbajg 


18,000 


Egbasan 


20,000 


Egbawa (Oke kan) 


30,000 


E-edogun 


32,000 


Erindilogun 


34,000 


Etkdilogun 


36,000 


Ejidilogun 


38,000 


,, ... Ok&ndilogun 


40,000 


,, Egbagun (Oke meji) 



A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR 



liii 



The Ordinal 



The first 

,, second 

„ third 

,, fourth 

„ fifth 

,, sixth 

,, seventh 

,, eighth 

„ ninth 

,, tenth 

,, eleventh 

,, twelfth 

,, thirteenth 

,, fourteenth 

,, fifteenth .., 

,, sixteenth ... 

,, seventeenth 

,, eighteenth 

,, nineteenth 

,, twentieth .. 

,, twenty-first 

,, twenty-fifth 



Ekini 

Ekeji 

Eketa 

Ekerin 

Ekarun 

Ekefa 

Ekeje 

Ekejo 

Ekesan 

Ekewa 

Ikokanla 

Ikejila 

Iketala 

Ikerinla 

Ikedogun 

Ikerindilogun 

Iketadilogun 

Ikejidilogun 

Ikokandilogun 

Ogun 

Ikgkanlelogun 

Ikedogbon 



The thirtieth Qgbon 

,, thirty-fifth Ikarundilogoji 
,, fortieth ... ... Oji 

,, forty-fifth ... Ikarundiladota 

,, fiftieth Adota 

,, fifty-fifth ... Ikarundilogota 
,, sixtieth ... ... Qgota 

,, sixty-fifth Ikarundiladorin 
,, seventieth ... Adorin 

,, seventy-fifth Ikarundilogorin 
,, eightieth ... ... Ogorin 

„ eighty-fifth Ikarundiladorun 
,, ninetieth ... ... Adorun 

,, ninety-fifth Ikarundilggorun 
,, hundredth ... Ogorun 

,, hundred and first... Ikokan- 
lelogorun 
From the first to the ninth — 

Ikokanle to Ikokandin — the 

tenths merge into those of simple 

enumeration. 



Adverbs of Number 



One by one ... 
Two by two ... 
Three by three 
Four by four 
Five by five . . . 
Six by six 
Seven by seven 
Eight by eight 
Nine by nine 
Ten by ten ... 
Continue to 
numerals up 
nineteen then — 
Twenty by twenty 
Thirty by thirty 
Forty by forty 
Fifty by fifty 



Once 

Twice 

Thrice 



Okankan 

... Meji-meji 

Meta-meta 

Merin-merin 

Marun-marun 

... Mefa-mefa 

... Meje-meje 

... Mejo-mejg 

Mesan-mesan 

Mewa-mewa 

reduplicate the 

to nineteen by 



Ogo-gun 
Ogbggbon 
" Ogogoji 

Aradgta 

Adverbs 

Erinkan 
Erin me ji 
Erin-m §ta 



Sixty by sixty ... Oggggta 

Seventy by seventy... Aradgrin 
Eighty by eighty ... Oggggrin 
Ninety by ninety ... Aradgrun 
Hundred by hundred Oggggrun 
Thus from one to nineteen the 
numbers are reduplicated, also 
from 21-29 '< 31-39 ; 41-49 J ^iid 
so on, but for 20, 30, 40, 60, 80, 
100 only the reduplication of the 
first two letters takes place, e.g., 
Ogogun, Ogbggbgn ; for 50, 70, 
90, the same occurs only the 
euphonic " r " takes the place of 
" d " e.g., Aradgta for Adgdgta ; 
Aradorun for Adodorun. 



OF Time 

Four times 

Five 

Six 



. Erin-m erin 
Erin-marun 
. grin-mefa 



liv A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR 

Adverbs of Time — Continued 



Seven times ... 


Erin-meje 


Seventy times 


Igba-adorin 


Eight .. ... 


Erin-mejo 


Eighty „ 


Igba-ogorin 


Nine ,, 


Erin-mesan 


Ninety „ 


Igba-adgrun 


Ten 


Erin-mewa 


Hundred ,, 


Igba-ogorun 


The same to nineteen times. 


Thus " Erin " is 


prefixed to all 


Twenty times 


Igba-ogun 


the numerals, but 


the multiples 


Thirty 


Igba-ogbgn 


of ten take " Igba 


" before them. 


Forty „ 


Igba-ogoji 


Note.—' Erin " 


is usually 


Fifty 


Igba-adota 


softened to ee, e.g., 


^|kan, ^gmeji 


Sixty 


Igba-ggota 


and so forth. 





Analysis of the Numerals 

From one to ten, different terms are used, then for 20, 30, 200 and 
400 ; the rest are multiples and compounds. Thus 11, 12, 13 
and 14 are reckoned as ten plus one, plus two, plus three and 
plus four ; 15 to 20 are reckoned as 20 less five, less four, less 
three, less two, less one, and then 20. 

In the same way we continue 20 and one, to 20 and four, and 
then 30 less five (25), less four, and so on to 30, and so for all 
figures reckoned by tens. 

There is no doubt that the digits form the basis of enumeration 
to a large extent, if not entirely so. Five, ten, twenty, i.e., the 
digits of one hand, of two, and the toes included, and their 
multiples form the different stages of enumeration. 

Beginning from the first multiple of 20 we have ogoji, a contrac- 
tion of ogun meji, i.e. two twenties (40), Ogota, three twenties (60), 
Ogorin, four twenties (80), Ogorun, five twenties (100), and so on 
to ten twenties (200), when the new word Igba is used. 

The intermediate numbers (30 having a distinct terminology), 
50, 70, 90, no, 130 to 190 are reckoned as : 60 less ten (50), 80 
less ten (70), a hundred less ten (90), and so on to 200. 

The figures from 200 to 2,000 are reckoned as multiples of 200 
(400, however, which is 20 X 20, the square of all the digits, has a 
distinct terminology, Irinwo or Erinwo, i.e., the elephant of 
figures — meaning the highest coined word in calculation, the rest 
being multiples). 

Thus we have Egbeta, a contraction of Igba-meta, i.e., three 
two-hundreds (600), Egberin, from Igba-merin, four two-hundreds 
(800), Egberin, five two-hundreds (1,000), and so on to Egbiwa, 
ten two-hundreds (2,000), which in its turn forms the basis of 
still higher calculations. 

The intermediate figmres 6i 300, 500, 700, 900, 1,100 to 1,900 
are reckoned as 100 less the multiple above them, viz., Odunrun, 



A SKETCH OF YORUBA GRAMMAR Iv 

contracted from Orun-din-ni-irinwo, i.e., loo less than 400 (300), 
Orun-din-ni-egbeta, 100 less than 600 (500), Orun-din-ni-egberin, 
100 less than 800 (700) ; and so on to 2,000. 

By a system of contraction, ehsion, and euphonic assimilation, 
for which the Yoruba language is characteristic, the long term 
Oriin-din-ni (Egbeta or Egberin and so on) is contracted to Ed^ 
or Od6, e.g., Edegbeta (500), Edegberin (700), Edegberun (900) 
and so on. 

But the multiples of 200 do not end with ten times, although 
that figure is the basis of the higher calculations, it goes on to 
the perfection (or multiple) of the digits, viz. : twenty times (two 
hundred) ; thus we have Egbgk^nla, that is, Igba mokinla, 
II two-hundreds (2,200) ; Egbejila, twelve two-hundreds (2,400), 
and so on to twenty two-hundreds or Egbaji, that is, twice two 
thousand (4,000). 

With this ends the multiples of 200. The intermediate figures 
of 2,300, 2,500, 2,700, 2,900 are reckoned the same way as before, 
viz. : 100 less than the next higher multiple. 

As already mentioned, Egbawa (or Egba), 2,000, forms the basis 
of still higher calculations ; the multiples of Egba are Egbaji, 
two two-thousands (4,000) ; Egbata, three two-thousands (6,000) ; 
Egbarin, four two-thousands (8,000) on to Egbawa, ten two- 
thousands (20,000), which in its turn forms the basis of the highest 
calculations. 

The intermediate figures of 3,000, 5,000, 7,000, 9,000, 11,000 
onwards are reckoned as 1,000 less than the multiple above them. 
The more familiar terms for 3,000 and 5,000, however, are Egbe 
dogun, or fifteen two-hundreds, and Egbedogbon, 25 two-hundreds. 

For those figures beyond 20,000 the contracted forms which are 
generally used are : Okanla (for Egbamgkanla) 11 two-thousands ; 
£jila, Etkla on to Egbagim, i.e., 20 two-thousands, i.e., forty 
thousand. 

Summary. — Thus we see that with numbers that go by tens 
five is used as the intermediate figure — five less than the next 
higher stage. In those by 20, ten is used as the intermediate. 
In those by 200, 100 is used, and in those of 2,000, 1,000 is used. 

The figure that is made use of for calculating indefinite numbers 
is 20,000 Egbawa, and in money calculation especially it is termed 
Oke kan, i.e., one bag (of cowries). Large numbers to an indefinite 
amount are so many " bags " or rather " bags " in so many places. 



THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

PART I 



Chapter I 
ORIGIN AND EARLY HISTORY 

The origin of the Yoruba nation is involved in obscurity. Like 
the early history of most nations the commonly received accounts 
are for the most part purely legendary. The people being un- 
lettered, and the language unwritten all that is known is from 
traditions carefully handed down. 

The National Historians are certain families retained by the 
King at Oyg whose office is hereditary, they also act as the King's 
bards, drummers, and cymbalists ; it is on them we depend as 
far as possible for any reliable information we now possess ; 
but, as may be expected their accounts often vary in several 
important particulars. We can do no more than relate the 
traditions which have been universally accepted. 

The Yorubas are said to have sprung from Lamurudu one of 
the kings of Mecca whose offspring were : — Oduduwa, the ancestor 
of the Yorubas, the Kings of Gogobiri and of the Kukawa, two 
tribes in the Hausa country. It is worthy of remark that these 
two nations, notwithstanding the lapse of time since their separa- 
tion and in spite of the distance from each other of their respective 
localities, still have the same distinctive tribal marks on their 
faces, and Yoruba travellers are free amongst them and vice versa 
each recognising each other as of one blood. 

At what period of time Lamurudu reigned is unknown but 
from the accounts given of the revolution among his descendants 
and their dispersion, it appears to have been a considerable time 
after Mahomet. 

We give the accounts as they are related : — 

The Crown Prince Oduduwa relapsed into idolatry during his 
father's reign, and as he was possessed of great influence, he drew 
many after him. His purpose was to transform the state religion 
into paganism, and hence he converted the great mosque of the 
city into an idol temple, and this Asara, his priest, who was himself 
an image maker, studded with idols. 

3 



4 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Asara had a son called Braima who was brought up a Moham- 
medan. During his minority he was a seller of his father's idols, 
an occupation which he thoroughly abhorred, but which he was 
obliged to engage in. But in offering for sale his father's handi- 
work, he usually invited buyers by calling out : " Who would 
purchase falsehood ? " A premonition this of what the boy will 
afterwards become. 

By the influence of the Crown Prince a royal mandate was issued 
ordering all the men 'to go out hunting for three days before the 
annual celebration of the festivals held in honour of these gods. 

When Braima was old enough he seized the opportunity of one 
of such absences from the town of those who might have opposed 
him to destroy the gods whose presence had caused the sacred 
mosque to become desecrated. The axe with which the idols 
were hewed in pieces was left hanging on the neck of the chief idol, 
a huge thing in human shape. Enquiry being made, it was soon 
discovered who the iconoclast was, and when accosted, he gave 
replies which were not unUke those which Joash gave to the 
Abiezrites who had accused his son Gideon of having performed 
a similar act {see Judges vi, 28-33). Said Braima, " Ask that huge 
idol who did it." The men replied, " Can he speak? " " Then," 
said Braima " Why do you worship things which cannot speak ? " 
He was immediately ordered to be burnt aUve for this act of gross 
impiety. A thousand loads of wood were collected for a stake, and 
several pots of oil were brought for the purpose of firing the pile. 
This was signal for a civil war. Each of the two parties had 
powerful followers, but the Mohammedan party which was hitherto 
suppressed had the upper hand, and vanquished their opponents. 
Lamurudu the King was slain, and all his children with those who 
sympathized with them were expelled from the town. The Princes 
who became Kings of Gogobiri and of the Kukawa went westwards 
and Oduduwa eastwards. The latter travelled 90 days from 
Mecca, and after wandering about finally settled down at He 
Ifg where he met with Agb^-niregun (or Setilu) the founder of the 
Ifa worship. 

Oduduwa and his children had escaped with two idols to He 
He. Sahibu being sent with an army to destroy or reduce them 
to submission was defeated, and amongst the booty secured by 
the victors was a copy of the Koran. This was afterwards pre- 
served in a temple and was not only venerated by succeeding 
generations as a sacred reUc, but is even worshipped to this day 
under the name of Idi, signifying Something tied up. 

Such is the commonly received account among this intelligent 
although unlettered people. But traces of error are very apparent 



ORIGIN AND EARLY HISTORY 5 

on the face of this tradition. The Yorubas are certainly not of the 
Arabian family, and could not have come from Mecca — that is 
to say the Mecca universally known in history, and no such 
accounts as the above are to be found in the records of Arabian 
writers of any kings of Mecca ; an event of such importance 
could hardly have passed unnoticed by their historians. But 
then it may be taken for granted that all such accounts and 
traditions have in them some basis in actual facts, nor is the subject 
under review exempted from the general rule, and this will become 
apparent on a closer study of the accounts. 

That the Yorubas came originally from the East there cannot 
be the slightest doubt, as their habits, manners and customs, etc., 
all go to prove. With them the East is Mecca and Mecca is the 
East. Having strong affinities with the East, and Mecca in the 
East looming so largely in their imagination, everything that comes 
from the East, with them, comes from Mecca, and hence it is 
natural to represent themselves as having hailed originally from 
that city. 

The only written record we have on this subject is that of the 
Sultan Belo of Sokoto, the founder of that city, the most learned 
if not the most powerful of the Fulani sovereigns that ever bore 
rule in the Soudan. 

Capt. Clapperton {Travels and Discoveries in Northern and Central 
Africa, 1822 — 1824) made the acquaintance of this monarch. 
From a large geographical and historical work by him, Capt. 
Clapperton made a copious extract, from which the following is 
taken : — " Yarba is an extensive province containing rivers, 
forests, sands and mountains, as also a great many wonderful 
and extraordinary things. In it, the talking green bird called 
babaga (parrot) is found." 

" By the side of this province there is an anchorage or harbour 
for the ships of the Christians, who used to go there and purchase 
slaves. These slaves were exported from our country and sold 
to the people of Yarba, who resold them to the Christians." 

" The inhabitants of this province (Yarba) it is supposed 
originated from the remnant of the children of Canaan, who were 
of the tribe of Nimrod. The cause of their establishment in the 
West of Africa was, as it is stated, in consequence of their being 
driven by Yar-rooba, son of Kahtan, out of Arabia to the Western 
Coast between Egypt and Abyssinia. From that spot they 
advanced into the interior of Africa, till they reach Yarba where 
they fixed their residence. On their way they left in every place 
they stopped at, a tribe of their own people. Thus it is supposed 
that all the tribes of the Soudan who inhabit the mountains are 



6 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

originated from them as also are the inhabitants of Ya-ory. Upon 
the whole, the people of Yarba are nearly of the same description 
as those of Noofee (Nupe)^" 

In the name Lamurudu (or Namurudu) we can easily recognize 
a dialectic modification of the name Nimrod. Who this Nimrod 
was, whether Nimrod surnamed " the strong," the son of Hasoiil, 
or Nimrod the " mighty hunter " of the Bible, or whether both 
descriptions belong to one and the same person, we cannot tell, 
but this extract not only confirms the tradition of their origin but 
also casts a side light on the legend. Arabia is probably the 
" Mecca " of our tradition. It is known that the descendants of 
Nimrod (Phoenicians) were led in war to Arabia, that they settled 
there, and from thence they were driven by a rehgious persecution 
to Africa. We have here also the origin of the term Yoruba, 
from Yarba, their first permanent settlement in Africa. Yarba 
is the same as the Hausa term Yarriba for Yoruba. 

It is very curious that in the history of Mahomet we read of 
a similar flight of his first converts from Mecca to the East Coast 
of Africa (the first Hegira), due also to a religious persecution; 
this fact will serve to show that there is nothing improbable in 
the accounts as received by tradition. Again, that they emigrated 
from Upper Egypt to He Ife may also be proved by those sculptures 
commonly known as the " Ife Marbles," several of which may be 
seen at He Ife to this day, said to be the handiwork of the early 
ancestor of the race. They are altogether Egyptian in form. 
The most notable of them is what is known as the " Opa Orafiyan," 
(Orafiyan's staff) an obelisk standing on the site of Oraiiyan's 
supposed grave, having characters cut in it which suggest a Phoeni- 
cian origin. Three or four of these sculptures may now be seen 
in the Egyptian Court of the British Museum, showing at a glance 
that they are among kindred works of art. 

From these statements and traditions, whether authentic or 
mythologic, the only safe deductions we can make as to the mosit 
probable origin of the Yorubas are : — 

1. That they sprang from Upper Egypt, or Nubia. 

2. That they were subjects of the Egyptian conqueror Nimrod, 
who was of Phoenician origin, and that they followed him in his 
wars of conquest as far as Arabia, where they settled for a time. 
How subjects term themselves " children " or offspring of their 

^ Vide Narratives of Travels and Discoveries, by Major Denham 
and Capt. Clapperton, 1826. Appendix XII., Sec. IV. 

A' Tropical Dependency, by Flora L.Shaw (Lady Lugard), 1905, 
pp. 227 — 228. 



ORIGIN AND EARLY HISTORY 7 

sovereigns is too well-known in this country, as we shall see in the 
course of this history. 

3. That from Arabia they were driven, on account of their 
practising there their own form of worship, which was either 
paganism or more likely a corrupt form of Eastern Christianity 
(which allowed of image worship — so distasteful to Moslems). 

Again, the name of the priest " Asara " is also a peculiar one ; 
it is so much like " Anasara " a term which Moslems generally 
applied to Christians (which signifies ' followers of the Nazarene ') 
as to make it probable that the revolution spoken of was in con- 
nection rather with Mohammedanism, and the corrupt form of 
Christianity of those days. 

Lastly, the sacred rehc called Idi from its being bound up and 
preserved, and which is supposed to have been a copy of the 
Koran, is probably another error. Copies of the Koran abound 
in this country, and they are not venerated thus, and why should 
this have become an object of worship ? The sacred book of the 
party opposed to them ! One can hardly resist coming to the 
conclusion that the book was not the Koran at all, but a copy of 
the Holy Scriptures in rolls, the form in which ancient manuscripts 
were preserved. The Koran being the only sacred book known to 
later generations which have lost all contact with Christianity 
for centuries after the great emigration into the heart of Africa, 
it is natural that their historians should at once jump to the 
conclusion that the thing bound up was the Koran. It might 
probably then be shown that the ancestors of the Yorubas, hailing 
from Upper Egypt, were either Coptic Christians, or at any rate 
that they had some knowledge of Christianity. If so, it might offer 
a solution of the problem of how it came about that traditional 
stories of the creation, the deluge, of Elijah, and other scriptural 
characters are current amongst them, and indirect stories of our 
Lord, termed " son of Moremi." 

But let us continue the story as given by tradition. Oduduwa 
and his sons swore a mortal hatred of the Moslems of their country, 
and were determined to avenge themselves of them ; but the former 
died at He Ife before he was powerful enough to march against 
them. His eldest son Okcinbi, commonly called Idekoseroake, 
also died there, leaving behind him seven princes and princesses 
who afterwards became renowned. From them sprang the various 
tribes of the Yoruba nation. His first-born was a princess who 
was married to a priest, and became the mother of the famous 
Olowu, the ancestor of the Owns. The second child was also a 
princess who became the mother of the Alaketu, the progenitor 
of the Ketu people. The third, a prince, became king of the 



8 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Benin people. The fourth, the Orangun, became king of Ila ; the 
fifth, the Onisabe, or king of the Sabes ; the sixth, 01up6po, or king 
of the Popos ; the seventh and last born, Orafiyan, who was the pro- 
genitor of the Yorubas proper, or as they are better distinguished 
Oyos. 

All these princes became kings who wore crowns as distinguished 
from those who were vassals who did not dare to wear crowns, 
but coronets called Akoro, a high-crowned head-gear, embroidered 
with silver. 

But it may be remarked that the Olowu's father was a commoner, 
and not a prince of the blood, and yet he became one of the crowned 
heads. The following anecdote will explain how this came about. 
The Yoruba princesses had (and still have) the Hberty of 
choosing husbands according to their fancy from any rank in life ; 
the King's eldest daughter chose to marry her father's priest, for 
whom she had the Olowu. 

This young prince was one day playing on his grandfather's 
knees, and he pulled at the crown on his head ; the indulgent 
parent thereupon placed it on the child's head, but Hke some spoiled 
children, he refused to give it up when required, and so it was left 
with him, the grandfather putting on another. The child had the 
crown on his head until he fell asleep in his mother's arms, when 
she took it off and returned it to her father, but the latter told her 
to keep it for her son, as he seemed so anxious to have it. Hence the 
right of the Olowu to wear the crown like his uncles. The same 
right was subsequently accorded to the Alaketu, i.e., the progenitor 
of the Ketu people. 

It was stated above that Orafiyan was the youngest of Oduduwa's 
grandchildren, but eventually he became the richest and most 
renowned of them all. How this came about is thus told by 
tradition : — 

On the death of the King, their grandfather, his property was 
unequally divided among his children as follows : — 

The King of Benin inherited his money (consisting of cowry 
shells), the Orangun of Ila his wives, the King of Sabe his cattle, 
the Olupopo the beads the Olowu the garments, and the Alaketu 
the crowns, and nothing was left for Orafiyan but the land. Some 
assert that he was absent on a warlike expedition when the partition 
was made, and so he was shut out of all movable properties. 
Oranyan was, however, satisfied with his portion, which he pro- 
ceeded forthwith to turn to good account with the utmost skill. 
He held his brothers as tenants living on the land which was his ; 
for rents he received money, women, cattle, beads, garments, and 
crowns, which were his brothers' portions, as all these were more 



ORIGIN AND EARLY HISTORY 9 

or less dependent on the soil, and were deriving sustenance from 
it. And he was the one selected to succeed the father as King in 
the direct line of succession. ^ To his brothers were assigned the 
various provinces over which they ruled more or less independently, 
Oranyan himself being placed on the throne as the AlAfin or Lord 
of the Royal Palace at He Ife. 

According to another account, Oranyan had only a bit of rag 
left him, containing earth, 21 pieces of iron, and a cock. The whole 
surface of the earth was then covered with water. Oraiiyan laid 
his portion on the surface of the water, and placed on it the cock, 
which scattered the earth with his feet ; the wide expanse of water 
became filled up, and the dry land appeared everywhere. His 
brothers preferring to live on dry land rather than on the surface 
of the water were permitted to do so on their paying an annual 
tribute for sharing with their younger brother his own portion. 

It will be noticed that both traditions attribute the land to 
Oraiiyan ; hence the common saying " Alafin I'oni ile " (the Alafin 
is the lord of the land) : the pieces of iron representing underground 
treasures, and the cock such as subsist on the land. 

The former account seems more probable, the latter being httle 
else but a travesty of the story of the creation or the flood. But 
it is fair to mention that the more generally received opinion is, 
that Oranyan became more prosperous than his brothers owing to 
the fact of his living virtuously, they bemg given up to a life of 
unrestrained licentiousness ; and being also by far the bravest of 
them all, he was preferred above them and was seated on the 
ancestral throne at Ile Ife which was then the capital of the Yoruba 
country. 

The Alake and the Owa of Ilesa are said to be nearly related to 
the Alafin ; the former was said to be of the same mother with 
one of the earliest Alafins. This woman was called Ejo who after- 
wards took up her abode with her youngest son until her death : 
hence the common saying " Ejo ku Ake " Ejg* died at Ake. 

The Owa of the Ijesas claimed to be one of the younger brothers, 
but his pedigree cannot now be traced; the term "brother" 
being a very elastic one in Yoruba and may be applied to any 
relative far or near, and even to a trusty servant or to one adopted 

1 The reason assigned for this was that he was "born in the 
purple," that is to say born after the father had become King. 
This was at one time the prevailing custom for the " Aremo Ovh," 
i.e., the first born from the throne, to succeed the father. 

2 Ejo means a palaver. The phrase then means a case decided 
at Ake is final. 



10 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

into the family. ^ In olden times when there was universal peace 
throughout the country, before the commencement of the destruc- 
tive intertribal wars which broke up the unity of the kingdom 
and created the tribal independence, this relationship was 
acknowledged by the Owa paying a yearly tribute of a few heads 
of cowries, mats and some products of his forests to the AlAfin, 
while the latter sent him presents of tobes and vests, and other 
superior articles well worthy of him as an elder brother. 

That the AlAfin, the Alake, and the Owa were children or 
grandchildren of Oraiiyan seems probable from the fact that to 
this day none of them is considered properly installed until the 
sword of state brought from He Ife where Oraiiyan was buried is 
placed in his hands. 

Oraiiyan was a nickname of the prince his proper name being 
Odede. He was a man of great physical powers. He first 
obtained renown as a mighty hunter ; and in process of time he 
also became, like Nimrod, a mighty conqueror. 

The expedition against Mecca. — When Oraiiyan was sufficiently 
strong, he set off for an expedition against " Mecca " to which he 
summoned his brothers, to avenge the death of their great-grand- 
father, and the expulsion of his party from that city. He left 
Adimu one of his father's trusty servants in charge of the royal 
treasures and the charms, with a strict injunction to observe the 
customary worship of the national gods Idi and Orisa Osi. 

This is an office of the greatest importance pertaining to the 
King himself • but how slaves or high servants are often entrusted 
with the duties of the master himself is well-known in this country 
as we shall see in the course of this history. 

It is said that the route by which they came from " Mecca " 
and which occupied 90 days, was by this time rendered impassable 
owing to an army of black ants blocking up the path, and hence, 
Oraiiyan was obliged to take another route which led through the 
Nupe or Tapa Country. All his brothers but the eldest joined 
him, but at Igangan they quarrelled over a pot of beer and dispersed 
refusing to follow his lead. The eldest brother calculating the 
distance through the Tapa country lost courage and went eastward 
promising to make his attack from that quarter should his brother 
Oraiiyan be successful in the West.* . Orafiyan pushed on until 
he found himself on the banks of the River Niger. 

The Tapas are said to have opposed his crossing the river, and 
as he could not force his way through, he was obhged to remain 
for a while near the banks, and afterwards resolved to retrace his 

^ A fuller account will be found under "The origin of the Ijesas." 
"^ The geography of our historians may be excused. — Ed, 



ORIGIN AND EARLY HISTORY II 

steps. To return, however, to He Ife was too humiliating to be 
thought of, and hence he consulted the King of Ibariba near whose 
territory he was then encamping as to where he should make his 
residence. Tradition has it, that the King of Ibariba made a 
charm and fixed it on a boa constrictor and advised Orafiyan to 
follow the track of the boa and wherever it remained for 7 days 
and then disappeared, there he was to build a town. Orariyan 
and his army followed his directions and went after the boa up to 
the foot of a hill called Ajaka where the reptile remained 7 days, 
and then disappeared. According to instructions Oranyan halted 
there, and built a town called Oyo Ajaka. This was the 
ancient city of Oyo marked in ancient maps as Eyeo or Katunga 
(the latter being the Hausa term for Oyo) capital of Yarriba (see 
Webster's pronouncing Gazetteer). This was the Eyeo visited 
by the EngHsh explorers Clapperton and the Landers. 

Orafiyan remained and prospered in the new home, his decendants 
spread East, West, and South-west ; they had a free communica- 
tion with He Ife, and the King often sent to Adimu for whatever 
was required by him out of the royal treasures for the new city. 

In process of time Adimu made himself great because he was 
not only the worshipper of the national deities, but also the 
custodian and dispenser of the King's treasures, and he was 
commonly designated " Adimu Ola " i.e. Adimu of the treasures, 
or Adimu 1^ i.e. Adimu is become wealthy. 

But this Adimu who became of so much consequence from his 
performing royal functions was originally the son of a woman 
condemned to death, but being found at the time of execution 
to be in the way of becoming a mother she was temporarily 
reprieved, until the child was born. This child at its birth was 
dedicated to the perpetual service of the gods, especially the 
god Obatala, to which his mother was to have been sacrificed. 
He was said to be honest, faithful and devoted to the King as to 
his own father, and therefore he was loved and trusted. 

When Adimu was announced to the Kings and Princes all 
around as the person appointed by the King to take charge of 
the treasures, and to worship the national deities during his 
absence, it was generally asked " And who is this Adimu ? The 
answer comes " Omo Oluwo ni " the son of a sacrificial victim : 
this is contracted to Ow6ni (Oluwo being the term for a sacrificial 
victim). So in subsequent years when the seat of government 
was removed permanently to Oyo but not the National Deities, 
Adimu became supreme at He Ife and his successors to this day 
have been termed the Olorisas i.e. high priests or fetish worshippers 
to the King, and people of the whole Yoruba nation. The name 



12 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Adimu has since been adopted as the agnomen, and the term Owoni 
as the title of the " Kings " or more properly the high priests of 
Ife to this day, the duties of the office being not local or tribal, 
but national. 

According to another account, after the death of Okknbi, 
Oraiiyan having succeeded and assumed the command emigrated 
to Oko where he reigned and where he died, and the seat of 
government was removed thence in the reign of Sango to Oyokoro, 
i.e., the aforesaid ancient City of Oyo. 

Oraiiyan may have actually died at Oko, but his grave with an 
obelisk over it is certainly shown at He Ife to this day. It is a 
custom among the Yorubas — a custom observed to this day — to 
pare the nails and shave the head of any one who dies at a con- 
siderable distance from the place where they would have him 
buried. These relics are taken to the place of interment, and there 
decently buried, the funeral obsequies being scrupulously observed 
as if the corpse itself were buried there. Hence although (as we have 
on probable grounds assumed) Oraiiyan may have died at Oko, and 
the art of embalming lost or unknown, his relics could thus have 
been taken to He Ife where to this day he is supposed to have been 
buried. A more romantic account of his death, however, will be 
given in Part II of this history. 

As the Yorubas worship the dead, and have the belief that 
prayers offered at the grave of deceased ancestors are potent to 
procure temporal blessings, all succeeding Yoruba Kings on their 
accession and before coronation are expected to send to perform 
acts of worship at the grave of Oduduwa and to receive the benedic- 
tion of the priest. The sword of justice known as Ida Oranyan 
(Oranyan's sword) is to be brought from He Ife and ceremoniously 
placed in their hands ; without this being done, the King has no 
authority whatever to order an execution. Orafi5^an's descendants 
in process of time were divided into four distinct famihes, known 
by their distinctive dialects, and forming the four provinces of 
Yoruba proper viz. the Ekun Otun, Ekun Osi, Ibolo and Epo 
provinces. The Ekun Otun and Ekun Osi or right and left, i.e., 
Eastern and Western provinces are the towns lying to the East 
and West of the City of Oyo. 

I. The Ekun Otun or Western province included all the towns 
along the right bank of the River Ogun down to Ibere kodo, Igana 
being the chief town. The other important towns are : — Skki, 
Oke'ho, Ise5nn, Iwawun, Eruwa, Iberekodo, etc. In this province 
two distinct dialects are spoken ; the people inhabiting the outer- 
most borders are known as Ibai^apas and are distinguished by a 
nasal twang in their speech. 



ORIGIN AND EARLY HISTORY I3 

2. The Ekun Osi or Metropolitan province comprised all the 
towns east of Oyo, including Kihisi and Igboho in the north, 
Ikoyi being the chief town. Other important towns are, Ilorin 
Irawo, Iwere, Ogbomoso etc. including the Igbonas in the utmost 
limit eastwards, and the Igbon-nas as far as Or6. 

The Igbdnas are distinguished by a peculiar dialect of their own. 
The Ekun Osi Oyos are regarded as speaking the purest Yoruba. 
The ancient cit}' of Oyo alsp lies in this province. 

3. The Ibolo province lies to the south-east of the Ekun Osi 
towns as far down as Ede, Iresa being the chief town. The 
other important towns are Ofa (?) Oyan, Okuku, Ikirun, Osogbo, 
Ido, Ilobu, Ejigbo, Ede. 

4. The Epos are the towns lying to the South and South-west of 
Oyo the chief town of which is Idode. Other important towns 
in this division are : Masifa, Ife odan, Ara. Iwo, Ilora, Akinmoirin 
Fiditi, Awe, Ago Oja. 

They are called Epos (i.e. weeds) because they were then in the 
remotest part of the kingdom, rude and uncouth in manners, very 
deceitful, and far from being as loyal as the other tribes. The 
Owns were usually reckoned amongst them, but they are rather 
a distinct tribe of Yoruba although now domiciled amongst the 
Egbas. 

Great changes have been effected in these divisions by means 
of the revolutionary wars that altered the face of the country 
about the early part of the XlXth century. 

In the Ekun Otun district Igana has lost its importance and its 
place taken by Iseyin. 

In 'the Ekun Osi, Ikoyi the chief town has been destroyed by 
Ilorin, and Ilorin itself brought under foreign allegiance by the 
Fulanis. The city of Oyo now lies in ruins, its name and position 
being transferred to Ago Oja in the Epo district. In the Ibglg district 
Iresa has ceased to exist being absorbed by Ilorin and its place taken 
by Ofa, which in its turn was partially destroyed by the Ilorins in 
1887 with several other towns in this district. Modakeke a large 
and growing town, peopled by Oygs of the Ekun Osi, has sprung 
up in the Ife district just beyond the borders of the Ibolgs. 

Owu has been destroyed never more to be rebuilt. 

The Epo district now includes Ibadan, Ijaye and other towns 
formerly belonging to the Gbaguras. Idode has ceased to be the 
dhief town, that position now properly belongs to Iwo, being a 
royal city. But Ibadan which was originally an Egba village 
then the military station of the confederate army which destroyed 
the city of Owu and the Egba villages, and afterwards a settled Oyg 
town, has by means of its mihtary force assumed the lead not only 
C 



14 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

over the Epo district, but also over a large area of the country as 
well. It has a mixed population including every tribe of the 
Yorubas. 

Ijaye formerly an Egba town became peopled by Qyos chiefly 
from the 5kun Osi (Ikoyi) districts. 

All these including hundreds of important towns within the 
area are peopled by Yorubas proper or Oyos as they are generally 
called, and constitute the more important portion of Yoruba proper. 

The Egbas, who were for the most part off-shoots of these, and 
formerly Uving in hamlets and villages independently of one another 
have through the exigencies of these wars collected themselves 
from 153 hamlets or " townships " to form one town, Abeokuta. 
A further account of this will be given in its place. All these 
are reckoned as descendants of Orariyan. 

By the advent also of the white men from the coast, the centre 
of light and civilization has removed to the south, so that the 
Epos may soon cease to be the " weeds " of the country, as they 
may receive the inspiration of civilization from the south instead 
of from the north as hitherto. 



Chapter II 
THE ORIGIN OF THE TRIBES 

All the various tribes of the Yoruba nation trace their origin 
from Oduduwa and the city He If§. In fact He Ife is fabled as 
the spot where God created man, white and black, and from 
whence they dispersed all over the earth. We have seen in the 
previous chapter which are the principal tribes that sprang from 
Oduduwa's seven grandchildren, viz. : The Yorubas proper from 
Orafiyan, the Benins, Has, Owns, Ketus, Sabes, and the Popos. 
Some of the other tribes were offshoots of one or other of these, as 
we shall see further on. Some authentic tradition will be given 
relative to the formation of some of them. 

An important fact which must also be borne in mind is, that the 
country was not altogether unpeopled when Oduduwa and his 
party entered it from the East ; the probabiUty is, that the abori- 
ginal inhabitants were conquered and absorbed, at least at the 
central if not at the remote provinces of the Yoruba kingdom. 

In ancient patriarchal times, the king of a country was 
regarded as the father or progenitor of his people. This view will 
to some extent explain what would otherwise appear to be a 
marvellous (if not impossible) instance of fecundity in any one 
king, e.g., Orafiyan peopling so vast a region as that attributed 
to him, in so short a time — the more warlike the king, the more 
extensive his dominion, and the more numerous, it would seem, his 
progeny. 

In fact we may almost take it as proved that as Orafiyan and 
his army, as well as his brothers', pushed on their conquests in 
every direction, the princes and the war-lords were stationed in 
various parts to hold the country, and from them sprang the many 
provincial kings of various ranks and grades now existing. 

This also accounts for the tradition that the Yoruba sway once 
extended as far as Ashanti and included the Gas of Accra, for the 
Gas say that their ancestors came from He Ife ; and the constitution 
of the Ga language is said to be more like Yoruba than hke Fanti, 
the language of the Gold Coast, and the area in which that language 
is spoken is strictly hmited. And, certainly, until comparatively 
recent times the Popos and Dahomians paid tribute regularly to 
Oyo as their feudal head ; it is certain, therefore, that the generals 
and war-lords of Orafiyan pushed on far beyond the Umits of the 
Yoruba country as now known, and although in places remote from 

»5 



l6 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the centre, as the Benins and Sekiris in the east and the Popos, 
Dahomians and Gas in the west, the Yoruba language is not 
spoken, yet the knowledge of it exists among the ruling chiefs 
and the priestly caste who still maintain their connection with He 
Ife, the place of their common origin. This view will also to some 
extent explain the mutual understanding and bond of sympathy 
existing between the Ifes, Ekitis, and allied families as remnants 
of the largely diluted aboriginal elements still having many things 
in common, and their natural antipathy — more or less — to the 
Oyos or Yorubas Proper. 

It is also worthy of remark that all the principal rulers of the 
country, to show the validity of their claims, must trace their 
relationship by one way or another to the AlAfin of Oyo, who is the 
direct descendant of Orafiyan, son and successor of Oduduwa, the 
founder ; which simply impHes that the children and offspring of 
the conqueror are the chief rulers over the different parts of the 
conquered territories. 

Yoruba Proper 

Oranyan was already distinguished as a brave and war-like 
prince during his father's lifetime, and he probably owed his 
succession to this fact, as was usual in those stormy times. On 
his accession to the throne, when he set out from lie Ife on his 
famous expedition to " Mecca " to avenge the death of his great 
grandfather, he was certainly accompanied by his conquering 
hordes ; and if we trace his route from He Ife northwards to the 
banks of the Niger, whence he turned westward to the borders of 
the Baribas, and then to the ancient Oyo (Eyeo) which he founded, 
and where he settled, and from whence he spread southwards 
towards the coast, we shall see that the people embraced in this 
vast region, viz., with the Ifes in the east, the Niger on the north, 
the Baribas on the west as well as the Dahomians, and the 
Egbados on the south, are those known as the Yorubas Proper, 
or as they are generally termed by the other tribes the Oyqs, 
and are the so-called descendants of Orafiyan, and the cream of 
his conquering army. These then constitute Yorubas Proper. 

We have stated in a previous chapter how they are divided 
into four distinct provinces, but there has always been among them 
a bond of sympathy and union, apart from what they have in 
common with the other tribes. They have always retained 
their loyalty — more or less — to the successors of Orafiyan, their 
common father, even when the revolutionary wars left the country 
no longer united under one head as in the days of Sango down to 
those of Abiodun 



THE ORIGIN OF THE TRIBES I7 



The Egbas 



The Egbas are a small offshoot of the Yorubas Proper, who 
occupy the south-eastern districts of that province. They origin- 
ally occupied the area bounded by certain imaginary lines drawn, 
say, from Ijaye to meet the Ogun River at Olokemeji, and along 
it to its mouth, and another from the same point via Ibadan to 
the west of Jebu Remo down to the coast. They lived in hamlets 
and villages for the most, part independently of one another, and 
never under one rule. All the principal families of the Egbas trace 
their origin from Oyo, hence the common saying " Egbas who have 
not their root in Oyo are slaves," i.e., belong to the conquered 
aboriginal population. Most of the chiefs sprang from the Esos 
of Oyo. It would seem then that during the wars of conquest, a 
number of these warhke Esgs, under the leadership of the King's 
half-brother, was detached from the main army, carrying their 
arms to those regions where they subsequently settled, in the 
immediate neighbourhood of the Owns. Abeokuta, as we now know 
it, of course had no existence then. Each of what is now called 
the " townships " was a separate village or hamlet with its own 
chief ; they were loosely grouped into three divisions, but rather 
independent of one another, but all acknowledging the King's 
brother (the Alake) as their Primus. They were : 

1. Egba Agbeyin. These were the Egbas proper, and nearest 
the I jebu Remos. The principal towns were : Ake, the chief town, 
Ijeun, Kemta, Iporo, Igbore, etc. 

2. Egba Oke Ona, i.e., those situated near the banks of the 
River Odo Ona. Oko the chief town, Ikereku, Ikija, Idomapa, 
Odo, Podo, etc. Their chief is called the Osile. 

3. Egba Agura or Gbagura : these were situated near the Oyo 
districts, and indeed they contain genuine Oyos in large numbers, 
and generall}'^ they partake of their characteristics largely, hence 
they are nick-named " Oyos among Egbas." The principal towns 
were : Agura the chief, Ilugun, Ibadan, Ifaye, Ika, Ojo, Ilawo, 
etc. 

The Egbas were on the whole few in number, and occupied a 
limited territory ; this can very well be proved by the fact, that 
after a period of more than half a century, they have been 
compelled by stress of circumstances to live together within one 
wall, and in spite of large accessions from other tribes, they still 
form but a single large town. Situated, as they were then, far from 
the centre of life and activity, they were little thought of. They 
had no separate king because all the principal chiefs and 
distinguished personages were office bearers of the AlAfin, hence 



l8 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the common saying, " Egba ko I'olu, gbogbo nwon ni nse hi Oba " 
(Egbas have no King, they are all of them like masters) " Olu wa' 
rOyo " (The King is at Oyo). It may be noted, that every child 
born to a reigning Alake must have an Oyo facial mark ; and that 
is so to this day. In early times the Alake ranks among the 
junior members of the Royal Family ; for that reason there has 
never been a distinct royal family arnong the Egbas. The chief 
rulers in each division were usually elected (by divination) from 
any one of the 153 townships ; an Ikija man for instance has been 
" king " of Itesi, an Ijeun man an Alake, etc., as we shall see in the 
Appendix. In this respect also the Gbaguras differ from the 
others. 

In later times, at Abeokuta, one Jibode, a wealthy trader and 
traveller, who vainly endeavoured to obtain the Primacy of Ake, 
left children and grandchildren who eventually attained the 
coveted position, which was a singular instance of more than one 
member of a family becoming an Alake, ^ but then they were 
all born in different townships. 

The Osile is said to be an unfortunate title because, more than 
any of the other divisions, the Oke Ona people were more ptone to 
slaughter human victims ; everytime the Osile entered the Ogboni 
house, he must walk on the blood of a male victim, and when he 
comes out on that of a female ! Also that Osiles never die a natural 
death ; when their excesses became unbearable they were usually 
stoned to death ; hence the appellation of their chief town, " Oko " 
— i.e., a pelting stone. For that reason the Egbas were reluctant 
to resuscitate the title at Abeokuta until Governor McCallum 
of Lagos in 1897 on the occasion of the Queen's Diamond Jubilee 
ordered the Egbas and others to reorganise their government, and 
fill up vacant titles. 

Since the destruction of the City of Owu (as we shall see below) 
and the unification of the Egba villages, the Owus have domiciled 
amongst them. Hence the so-called Four United Kings of the 
Egbas : although Owu is not Egba. 

The Ijebus 

The origin of the Ijebus has been variously given ; one account 
makes them spring from the victims offered in sacrifice by the 
King of Benin to the god of the ocean, hence the term Ijebu 
from Ije-ibu, i.e., the food of the deep. The Ijebus themselves 

'The case of Gbadebo, son of Okukenu, occurred subsequently to 
the estabhshment of the British Protectorate. 



THE ORIGIN OF THE TRIBES I9 

claim to have descended from Oba-nita, as they say of themselves, 
" Ogetiele, eru Obanita," i.e., Ogetiele/ servants of Obanita. 

But who was this Oba-nita ? Tradition says he also was a victim 
of sacrifice by the Olowu or King of Owu. It was said that the 
Olowu offered in sacrifice a human being where two roads cross ; 
this was termed " Ebo-ni-ita," a sacrifice on the highway, the 
victim being mangled and left for dead ; he, however, revived at 
night, and crawled away into the forest, where he subsequently 
recovered and survived. He lived on fruits, on the chase, and 
then did a bit of farming. With an access of population, being 
the oldest man met in those parts, he was regarded as the father, 
and subsequent generations call him their ancestor, and so the 
Ijebu tribe was formed, and the term " Ebonita " (a sacrifice on 
the highway) was converted to " Obanita " (a king on the high- 
way). There was really nobody of that name. A forest is still 
shown near the village of Aha where he is annually worshipped, 
from whence he was supposed to have ascended into heaven. 

It is rather curious that both accounts should have made them 
descended from victims of human sacrifices. This latter account 
is reconcilable with the former, which says they are " the food of 
the deep," for the population of which Ebonita was the head may 
have been largely augmented by the victims of the ocean so as to 
give the name Ije-ibu to the whole of them. 

There are also other important facts and curious coincidences 
connected with the Ijebus which have strong bearings on this 
tradition of their origin. 

1. Of all the Yoruba tribes, with the exception of the Ifes 
they were the most addicted to human sacrifices, which they 
practised up to 1892 when the country was conquered by the 
Enghsh. The \'ictim also usually offered to " Obanita " annually 
was always a human being, but this was never killed ; he was, 
however, always acted upon in some way or other unknown (by 
magic arts) that he always became demented, and left to wander 
about sheepishly in the Aha Forest, until he perished there. This 
is, no doubt, due to the fact that the ancestor " Ebonita " himself, 
when a victim, was not killed outright. 

2. They were, before the conquest, the most exclusive and 
inhospitable of the whole of the tribes. Very few, if any, out- 
siders were ever known to have walked through the country with 
impunity under any circumstance whatever ; not a few of those 
who attempted to do so were never seen nor heard of any more ! 



^An untranslatable word, an onomatopoeic expression for 
whatever is immense and magnificent. 



20 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Commercial transactions with outsiders were carried on in the 
frontier or in the borders of neighbouring towns. 

3. And if the latter account of their origin from the Owu 
victim be the correct one, it is very singular indeed that it was 
mainly due to the Ijebus with their firearms that the Owns owed 
their fall and complete annihilation as an independent state to 
this day. A full account of this will be given in due course. 

The King of the Ijebus is known as the Awujale. His origin 
was thus given by authentic tradition, the event with which it is 
connected having occurred within authentic history : 

There were formerly two important towns called Owu Ipole 
and Iseyin Odo in a district between the Owns and If §s ; they were 
settlements from the city of Owu and Iseyin respectively. A 
quarrel once arose between them on the matter of boundaries, 
and the dispute having been carried on for many years, developed 
into an open fight, and both the Olowu and the Owoni of Ife 
(both being interested parties) were unable to put an end to the 
strife. Messengers were now sent to the King at Oyo who sent out 
a special Ilari and a large number of attendants to put an end to 
the strife. The person of an Ilari being inviolable, he came and 
settled down between the two contending parties, in the midst of 
the disputed plot, and thus compelled them to keep, the peace. 
The Ilari was named " Agbejaile or Alajaile " (an arbiter of landed 
dispute). This term was subsequently sof termed, down to Awujale.^ 
This event occurred during the reign of King Jayin. 

As it was customary to pay royal honours to the King's mes- 
sengers out of courtesy, this Ilari was accorded royal honours 
in due form, and he remained there permanently and became the 
King of that region over the Ijebus who up to that time had 
no tribal " king " of their own and rather held themselves aloof 
from their neighbours. Subsequently he removed to Ode. 
The Awujale ranks after the Oyo provincial kings such as the 
Onikoyi, Olafa, Aresa, Aseyin. 

Origin of the Ijesas and Ekitis 

Two accounts are given of the origin of the Ijesas ; both may 
practically be regarded as in the main correct, so far as they are not 
really contradictory ; for it would appear that the Ijesas of the 
present day are not the same people or, rather, not the descendants 
of the aboriginal inhabitants of that province. 

The first account relates to the earUest period when the Yorubas 
have just entered into, and subdued, the country, and the AlAfins 

^An Ilari title at Oyo to this day. 



THE ORIGIN OF THE TRIBES 21 

then resided at He lie, i.e., prior to the reign of Sango. Human 
sacrifices were common in those days, and in order to have victims 
ready to hand, it is said that a number of slaves were purchased 
and located in the district of Ibokun ; there they were tended as 
cattle, under the care of Owaju, and from them selections were 
made from time to time for sacrificial purposes ; hence the term 
Ijesa from Ije Orisa (the food of the gods). They are described as 
stumpy, muscular, and sheepish-looking, with a marked want 
of intelhgence : they never cJffered any resistance to this system, 
hence the saying "Ijesa Omo Owaju ti ife opo iyk " (Ijesas children 
of Owaju, subject to much sufferings). There is also a legend 
that when the nations began to disperse from He Ife and members of 
the Royal Family were appointed kings and rulers in divers places, 
a young and brave scion of the house was appointed the first 
Owa or king over the Ijesas, but that he returned to the AlAfin 
and complained that his territory was tocv small, and his subjects 
few, the sire thereupon ordered a large bundle of sticks to be 
brought to him, and these sticks he converted into human beings 
for the Owa, in order to increase the number of his subjects. Hence 
to this day the Ijesas are often termed by their neighbours " Qmo 
igi " (offspring of sticks !) 

This, of course, is a pure myth invented by their more wily 
neighbours to account for the notorious characteristics of the Ijesas 
generally, who are as proverbially deficient in wit as they are 
remarkably distinguished for brute strength. 

But one fact holds good down even to our days, viz., that up 
to the recent total abohtion of human sacrifice by the British 
Government (1893) the Ifes, who, far more than any other, were 
addicted to the practice, always preferred for the purpose to have 
an Ijesa victim to any other ; such sacrifices were considered more 
acceptable, the victims being the " food of the gods." 

This preference was the cause of more than one threatened rupture 
between the Ifes and their Ijesa aUies during the recent 16 years' 
war, and would certainly have developed into open fights, but 
for the Ibadan army vis-d-vis threatening them both. 

The other account relates chiefly to the present day Ijesas of 
Ilesa (the home of the gods) the chief town. According to this 
account, they hailed from the Ekitis ; or as some would more 
correctly have it, they were the Ijesas from the neighbourhood of 
Ibokun who first migrated to Ipole near Ondo, and thence back 
to Ilesa. It appears that a custom then prevailed of going out 
hunting for their king three months in the year, and on one such 
occasion they found game so plentiful in the neighbourhood of 
Ilesa, the chmate very agreeable, the country well-watered, and 



22 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the Ijesas there extremely simple, peaceful, and unwarhke (probably 
the remnants and descendants of the old sacrificial victims) whilst 
at home they endured much oppression from their Owa, that 
they there and then conceived and carried out the idea of settling 
on the spot at once, making it their home, and of reducing into 
subjection the aboriginal inhabitants. 

These objects were easily enough accompHshed ; but they spared 
the principal chief, a kindly old gentleman who had an extensive 
garden plantation. He was called " Oba Ila," i.e., Okra king, 
from his Okra plantation, and he was placed next in rank to the 
chief of the marauders. That nickname is continued to the present 
time as a title Oba'la^ and is conferred on the most distinguished 
chief after the Owa of Ilesa. It would appear then that although 
the term Ijesa is retained by the people of that district, and those 
who are ignorant of the origin of the term take some pride in it, 
yet it is evident that the present inhabitants are not all of them 
the descendants of the aboriginal settlers, the " food of the gods," 
but are largely from the Ekitis by admixture ; the pure type 
Ijesas are now and again met with at Ilesa and neighbourhood. 

This fact is fuither shown by the want of homogeneity amongst 
the principal chiefs of Ilesa at the present day, for when the town 
was growing, the settlers did cast about for help ; they sought for 
wiser heads to assist them in the building up and the management 
of their country, e.g., from the Oyos or Yorubas Proper they had 
the Odgle from Irehe, the Esawe from Ora, the Saloro from Oyo 
(the ancient city), and the Sorundi also from the same city — all 
these came with a large number of followers ; from the Ondos, the 
'Loro, and the Salosi from I jama in the Ondo district ; from the 
Ekitis, the Arapate from Ara, the Lejoka from Itaje ; and 
lastly, the Ogboni from the white cap chiefs of Lagos, the 
only one privileged to have on his headgear in the presence of the 
Owa. The Owa himself is as we have seen, a junior member of 
the royal house of Oyo. 

It is also said that when the town of Ilesa was to be laid out a 
special messenger was sent to the AlAfin to ask for the help of 
one of the princes to lay out the town on the same plan as the 
ancient city of Oyo. That prince ruled for some years at Ilesa. 

The Ekitis 

The Ekitis are among the aboriginal elements of the country 
absorbed by the invaders from the East. The term Ekiti denotes 
a Mound, and is derived from the rugged mountainous feature of 

^Often miscalled Obanla by young Ije§as outside Ilesa. 



THE ORIGIN OF THE TRIBES 23 

the country. It is an extensive province and well watered, includ- 
ing several tribes and families right on to the border of the Niger, 
eastward. They hold themselves quite distinct from the Ijesas, 
especially in pohtical affairs. The Ekiti country is divided into 
i6 districts, each with its own Owa or King (Owa being a generic 
term amongst them) of which four are supreme, viz. : — 

1. The 6w6re of Otun 3. The Elewi of Ado 

2. The Ajero of Ijero 4. The Elekole of Ikole 

The following are the minor Ekiti kings : — 

5. Alara of Ara it. Qlgja Oke of Igbo Odo 

6. Alaye of Efon Ahaye 12. Oloye of Oye 

7. Ajanpanda of Akure 13. Olomuwo of Omuwo 

8. Alagotun of Ogotun 14. Onire of Ire 

9. Olojudo of Ido 15. Arinjale of Ise 
10. Ata of Aiyede 16. Onitaji of Itaji 

The Orangun of Ila is sometimes classed among them, but he is 
only Ekiti in sympathy, being of a different family. 

An Ijesa account of the Owa ot Ilesa and some of the principal 
Ekiti kings : 

The Olofin (? Alafin) king of Ife had several children, grand- 
children, and great grandchildren ; amongst them were, the king 
of Ado or Benin, the King of Oyg, the Osomowe of Ondo (from a 
daughter), the Alara of Ara, the Ajero of Ijero, the Alaye of Efon, 
the Owore of Otun, the Orangun of Ila, the Aregbajo of Igbajo, 
the Owa Ajaka of Ilesa. When the Olofin became bhnd from old 
age he was much depressed in mind from this cause ; efforts were 
put forth to effect his cure, all of which proved fruitless, when a 
certain man came forward and prescribed for him a sure remedy 
which among other ingredients contained salt water. He put the 
case before his children, but none made any effort to procure some 
for him save his youngest grandson. This was a very brave and 
warlike prince who bore the title of Esinkin amongst the King's 
household warriors, a title much alHed to that of the Kakanfo, 
He was surnamed Ajaka, i.e., one who fights everywhere, (on 
account of his procHvities) being fond of adventures. He volun- 
teered to go and fetch some wherever procurable. 

Having been away for many years and not heard of, the aged 
sire and every one else despaired of his ever coming back ; so the 
King divided his property amongst the remaining grown-up 
children. Although the Alado (king of Benin) was the eldest yet 
the Oloyg was the most beloved, and to him he gave the land, and 
told him to scour it all over, and settle nowhere till he came to a 



24 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

slippery place, and there make his abode ; hence the term Oyg 
(shppery) and hence Oyos are such shppery customers ! 

After they had all gone and settled in their respective locaHties, 
all unexpectedly, the young adventurer turned up with water from 
the sea ! The monarch made use of it as per prescription and 
regained his sight ! Hence the Ijesas who subsequently became his 
subjects are sometimes termed " Omg Obokun," children of the 
brine procurer. 

Having distributed all his property he had nothing left for Ajaka 
he therefore gave him a sword lying by his side with leave to attack 
any of his brothers, especially the Alara or Alado, and possess 
himself of their wealth, but should he fail, to retire back to him ; 
hence the appellation " Owa Ajaka Onida raharaha " (Owa the 
ubiquitous fighter, a man with a devastating sword). 

The Owa Ajaka settled a Uttle way from his grandfather, and on 
one occasion he paid him a visit, and found him sitting alone 
with his crown on his head and — out of sheer wantonness — he cut 
off some of the fringes with his sword. The old man was enraged 
by this act, and swore that he would never wear a crown with 
fringes on.^ 

The Aregbajo was one of those who had a crown given to him, 
but the Owa Ajaka, paying him a visit on one occasion, saw it, 
and took it away, and never returned it : hence the kings of Igbajo 
never wear a crown to this day. 

The Owa also attacked the Olojudo and defeated him, and took 
possession of his crown ; but he never put it on. On every public 
occasion however, it used to be carried before him. This continued 
to be the case until all the tribes became independent. 

The Owa's mother, when married as a young bride, was placed 
under the care of the mother of the Qloyo, hence the AlAfin of 
Oyo often regarded the Owa as his own son. 

The Orangun of Ila, and the Alara of Ara were his brothers of 
the same mother. 

The Ow6ni of Ife was not a son of the Ololin, but the son of a 
female slave of his whom he offered in sacrifice. The Olefin kept 
the boy always by him, and when he sent away his sons, this httle 
boy took great care of him and managed his household affairs well 
until his death : hence the Oloyo on succeeding the father authorised 
the boy to have charge of the palace and the city, and he sent to 
notify his brothers of this appointment. So whenever it was 
asked who was in charge of the house the answer invariably was 



^Only those with fringes on are really crowns. 



THE ORIGIN OF THE TRIBES 25 

" Omo Oluwo ni " (It is the son of the sacrificial victim). This 
has been contracted to the term Ow6ni. 

The Owa and his brothers used to pay the AlAfin annual visits, 
with presents of firewood, fine locally-made mats, kola nuts and 
bitter kolas ; the Ow6re of Otun with sweet water from a cool 
spring at Otun — this water the AlAfin first spills on the ground 
as a Ubation before performing any ceremonies. The other Ekiti 
Kings used also to take with them suitable presents as each could 
afford, and bring away lavish presents from their elder brother. 

This Ajaka subsequently became the Owa of the Ijesas. 

The Ondos 

The custom of killing twins prevailed all over the country in 
early times ; it has died out all over the greater part ot it so long 
ago, that no one can say precisely when or by whom a stop was put 
to it. But it happened once upon a time when the practice still 
prevailed that one of the wives of the AlAfin (King Ajaka) gave 
birth to twins, and the King was loth to destroy them, he thereupon 
gave orders that they should be removed — with the mother — to a 
remote part of the kingdom and there to remain and be regarded 
as dead. 

So she left with a large number of friends and retinue to the site 
of the present Ode Ondo, then sparsely peopled by a tribe named 
Idoko, and there settled, hence the term " Ondo," signifying the 
" Settlers." The people of the district knowing who the strangers 
were, yielded them ready obedience, and the strangers became rulers 
of the district. 

Probably it was from this time infanticide received its death 
blow — in Yoruba Proper at least. It is said to hnger still at Akure 
and the adjacent regions, but as a rule, in ancient times, whatever 
the custom set or discountenanced at the Metropohs, the effect 
thereof was rapidly felt all over the country. 

The Ondos are sometimes classed among the Ekitis but that is 
hardly correct ; although lying at the border of the Ekitis, they 
are really a mixture of Qyos and Idokos, and their sympathy is 
with all. 



Chapter III 
RELIGION 

The Yorubas originally were entirely pagans. Mohammedanism 
which many now profess was introduced only since the close of 
the eighteenth century. They, however, believe in the existence 
of an Almighty God, him they term Olorun, i.e., Lord of Heaven. 

They acknowledge Him, Maker of heaven and earth, but too 
exalted to concern Himself directly with men and their affairs, 
hence they admit the existence of many gods as intermediaries, 
and these they term Orisas. 

We may note here that the term Olorun is appUed to God alone 
and is never used in the plural to denote Orisas. Kings and the 
great ones on earth may sometimes be termed Orisas (gods) 
by way of eulogy, we are also familiar with the common expression, 
" Oyinbo ekeji Orisa " i.e., white men are next to the -gods (i.e 
in their powers) ; but the term Olorun is reserved for the Great God 
alone. 

They also beheve in a future state, hence the worship of the dead, 
and invocation of spirits as observed in the Egugun festival, a 
festival in which masked individuals personate dead relatives. 

They have a belief also in a future judgment as may be inferred 
from the tollowing adage, " Ohungbogbo ti a se I'aiye, li a o 
de idena Orun ka " (Whatever we do on earth we shall give an 
account thereof at the portals of heaven). 

They also believe in the doctrine of metempsychosis, or trans- 
migration of souls, hence they affirm that after a period of time, 
deceased parents are born again into the family of their surviving 
children. It is from this notion that some children are named 
" Babatunde," i.e., father comes again. " Yetunde," i.e., mother 
comes again. 

Objects of Worship 

I, TheKori. — Originally, the Kori was the only object of worship. 
It consists of the hard shells of the palm nut strung into beads, 
and made to hang from the neck to the knees. In modern times 
it is no longer regarded as an object of worship by adults, but little 
children go about with it to the market places begging for alms. 
The object of worship is then worn by one of their number, who 
goes before, his companions following behind him, shouting the 

26 



RELIGION 27 

praises of the ancient god Kori. In this way they parade the 
market places, and sellers before whom they halt to sing, make 
them presents of money (cowries) or whatever they may happen to 
be seUing, usually articles of food. Thus the httle children 
perpetuate the memory and worship of this deity, hence the ditty : 

Iba ma si ewe, Kori a ku o." 
(But for Httle children Kori had perished). 

In later times heroes are venerated and deified, of these Sango, 
Oya, Orisa Oko, may be mentioned as the chief. The origin of 
their worship will be noted hereafter. 

2. Orisala. — To Orisala are ascribed creative powers. He is 
regarded as a co-worker with Olorun. Man is supposed to have 
been made by God in a lump, and shaped as he is by Orisala. Its 
votaries are distinguished by white beads worn round the neck, 
and by their using only white dresses. They are forbidden the 
use of palm wine. Sacrifices offered by them are not to be salted. 
Albinoes, dwarfs, the lame, hunchbacks, and all deformed persons 
generally are regarded as sacred to this god ; hence they are 
designated " Eni Orisa" (belonging to the god), being regarded as 
specially made so by him. 

Orisala is the common name of the god known and worshipped 
by different townships under different appellations, e.g., it is 
called Orisa Oluofin at Iwofin ; Orisako at Oko ; Orisakire at Ikire ; 
Orisagiyan at Ejigbo ; Orisaeguin at Eguin ; Orisarowu at Owu 
Orisajaye at Ijaye ; and Obatala at Oba. 

3. Ori. — The Ori (head) is the universal household deity 
worshipped by both sexes as the god of fate. It is believed that 
good or ill fortune attends one, according to the will or decree of 
this god ; and hence it is propitiated in order that good luck might 
be the share of its votary. The representing image is 41 cowries 
strung together in the shape of a crown. This is secreted in a 
large coffer, the Hd of which is of the same form and material. 
It is called "He Ori" (Ori's house), and in size is as large as the owner 
can afford to make it. Some usually contain as much as 6 heads 
(12,000) of cowries, and the manufacturer who is generally a worker 
in leather receives as his pay the same amount of cowries as is 
used in the article manufactured. 

As the Kori is the children's god so the Ori is exclusively 
worshipped by the adults. After the death of its owner, the image 
of Ori with the coffer is destroyed, and the cowries spent. 

4. Ogun. — This is the god of war, and all instruments made of 
iron are consecrated to it, hence Ogun is the blacksmiths' god. 
The representing image is the silk cotton tree specially planted, 



28 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

beneath which is placed a piece of granite on which palm oil is 
poured and the blood of slain animals — generally a dog. 

5. Esu or Eleghara. — Satan, the Evil One, the author of all 
evil is often and specially propitiated. Offerings are made to it. 
The representing image is a rough lateritic stone upon which 
libations of palm oil are poured. It is superstitiously believed that 
the vengeance of this god could be successfully invoked upon an 
offender by the name of the person being called before the image 
while nut oil is being poured on it. The image of a man, with a 
horn on its head curving backwards, carved in wood and orna- 
mented with cowries, is often carried by its devotees to beg with 
on pubUc highways. Passers-by who are so disposed may give 
each a cowry or two, or handfuls of corn, beans, or any product 
of the field at hand, as he or she may choose. This curved headed 
figure is called " Ogo Eliggbara "—the devil's club. 

6. Sgpona or the small pox is generally believed to be one of 
the demons by which this lower world is infested, and has its special 
devotees. The representing image is a broom- made from the 
branches of the bamboo palm, stripped of its leaves, and besmeared 
with camwood. To invoke its vengeance parched corn or beniseed 
is usually thrown hot upon the image, and then it is beUeved the 
epidemic will spread,. But they certainly have a more direct 
means of spreading the disease. 

Persons dying of this plague are buried only by the devotees of 
this god, who account it as their special right to bury such corpses, 
being victims of the vengeance of their god. For a propitiation, 
they often demand from the relatives of the victims 5 head {i.e., 
10,000) of cowries, a tortoise, a snail, a fowl, a pigeon, a goat, an 
armadillo, a ground pig, camwood, shea butter, a quantity of 
palm oil, two kinds of beads, green and yellow, called respectively 
Otutu and Opon, together with all the effects of the deceased, 
which are regarded as theirs by legitimate right. The corpse is 
buried either in the bush, or by the side of a river. 

The following anecdote was related by a devotee. He was 
confirmed — said he — in his belief in the existence of the gods and as 
helpers in the government of the world from the following incident. 
Said he, " A young man once fell into a swoon, and having revived, 
he related the vision which he had seen. He said he saw the Great 
God sitting on a throne, covered with a flowing garment, attended 
on His right and left by Orisala and Ifa his counsellors : behind 
him was a pit into which the condemned were cast. Ogun and 
Sopona were ministers of his vengeance to execute justice upon 
offenders. Ogun armed with 4,000 swords (or daggers) went out 
daily to slay victims, his food being the blood of the slain. Sopona 



RELIGION 



29 



also had 4,000 viols hung about his body. His also was the work 
of destruction as he disappeared immediately for another victim 
after presenting one. Sango also appeared, a mighty destroyer 
who, when about to set forth on his journey to earth, used to be 
cautioned by both Orisala and If a to deal gently with their 
respective worshippers." 

It is with such stories as this that the credulity of the simple folk 
is usually wrought upon with a view to strengthen their behef in 
the so-called gods. 

7. Egugnn. The period when the worship of spirits or the 
souls of departed relatives was introduced into the Yoruba country 
will be noted in a future chapter. The representing forms are 
human beings of the exact height and figure of the deceased, covered 
from head to foot with cloths similar to those in which the said 
deceased was known to have been buried, completely masked and 
speaking with an unnatural tone of voice. This feigned voice is 
said to be in imitation of that of a species of monkey called Ijimere. 
That animal is regarded with superstitious reverence, the power 
of walking erect and talking being ascribed to it and is esteemed 
a clever physician. Some professed " medicine men " usually 
tame and keep one of these creatures, and pretend to receive 
instructions and inspirations from it. 

In these later times, the Egiigun worship has become a national 
religious institution, and its anniversaries are celebrated with 
grand festivities. The mysteries connected with it are held 
sacred and inviolable, and although little boys of 5 or 6 years of 
age are often initiated, yet no woman may know these mysteries 
on pain of death. 

The dress of the Egugun consists of cloths of various colours 
or the feathers of- different kinds of birds, or the skins of different 
animals. The whole body from head to foot is concealed from view ; 
the Egugun seeing only from the meshes of a species of network 
covering the face, and speaking in a sepulchral tone ot voice. The 
women believe (or rather feign to believe) that the Eguguns came 
from the spirit world. An Egiigun (the Agan) is the executor of 
women accused of witchcraft, and of those who are proved guilty 
ot such crimes as murder, incendiarism, etc. 

The high priest of the Egiigun is called the Alagb&, and next 
to him is the Alaran, and after this the Esorun, and then the 
Akere whose insignia of office are a bundle of Atori whips. These 
officials are higher in rank than all the Eguguns under the mask, 
and hence the common saying : — " Egugun baba Alagba, Alagba 
baba Egiigun " (The Egiigun is the father of the Alagba, the 
Alagba the father of the Egugun). 



30 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

It is considered a crime to touch an Egugun dress in public, 
and disrespectful to pass him by with the head uncovered. Even 
a boy Egugun is considered worthy of being honoured by his 
(supposed) surviving parents, he salutes them as elderly people 
would do, and promises the bestowal of gifts on the family. 

In every town there are several Alagbas or head priests of Egiigun 
out of them a president is elected, at whose house all the others 
meet on special occasions. 

The individual who fills the highest rank in the Egugun worship 
is the Alapini, one of the seven great noble men of Oyo (the Oyo 
Mesi). He resides always in the royal city of Oyo. There can 
be but one Alapini at a time, and by virtue of his office he must be 
a monorchis. Thus qualified, he shares with the eunuchs in all 
their privileges, and at the same time enjoys the lion's share in the 
Egugun department. 

In a large town, every quarter has its own Alagba in whose 
house a special apartment is dedicated to the Egugun worship, 
where all the Egugun dress in that part of the town are kept until 
required for use on special occasions or at the annual festivals. 

Eguguns are generally worshipped with a kind of cake made 
of beans and palm oil (Olele) in the month of February, after the 
beans harvest in January ; and the Egugun anniversary is usually 
held in the month of May or Jane. These festivals are lucky 
times for the men, for on these occasions, the women are made to 
spend largely to feast " deceased relatives," while the food is 
consumed by the men in the Alagba' s department. The number 
of fowls and goats killed and devoured at such times is simply 
prodigious. Such is the force of habit engendered by blind 
superstition, that although in reality the women are no longer 
deceived, as regards these alleged visits of their dear departed, 
yet they make their offerings with cheerfulness, and with a sure 
expectation of blessings. 

It has already been noted above that the Yorubas believe in a 
future state. It cannot be considered too far fetched to say that 
this periodical re-appearance of the dead as symbohzed in the 
Egugun " mystery " is an embodiment of the idea of the Resur- 
rection, although that doctrine as taught by Christianity cannot 
be said to be identical with what they hold and practise ; but this 
festival is usually observed with all the zeal and fervour with which 
Christians celebrate the Christmas and Paschal festivals. 

This anniversary is the time of reunion among absent friends 
and relatives. The town then puts on its best appearance, the 
streets are everywhere cleaned and put under repairs, and the 
citizens appear abroad in their holiday dress. 



RELIGION 31 

The celebration is usually preceded on the eve of the festival by a 
vigil termed in Yoruba " Ikunle " or the kneeling, because the 
whole night is spent in kneeHng and praying in the grove set apart 
for Egugun worship, invoking the blessings and the aid of the 
departed parent. The blood of fowls and animals offered in 
sacrifice is also poured on the graves of the ancestors. 

On the morning of the festival the whole of the Eguguns, 
including all the principal forms accompanied by the Alagbas 
and minor priests form a procession to the residence of the chief 
ruler of the town ; they there receive the homage of the chief, 
and in turn give him and the other chiefs and the whole town their 
blessings ; they then spend about three hours doing honours 
to the chief, playing and dancing to theii* peculiar music ; and after 
receiving presents they disperse to continue the play all over the 
town, each confining himself more or less to his own quarter of the 
town. 

The festival is continued for seven days, and on the eighth day, 
there is another gathering at the Chief Alagba's and the festivities 
are brought to a close with games, sports, and a display of magic 
tricks. 

For three weeks to a month, lesser Eguguns may still be seen 
making their appearance ; these as a rule, belong to poorer districts 
which weie backward in their preparations for the annual feast. 
Everyone, however, still keeps to the same rule of seven days' 
appearance and disappearing likewise on the eighth day after a 
grand display. 

The Adamuorisa and the Gelede. 

In imitation of the Eguguns, some littoral tribes adopt similar 
forms of representation of their departed dead ; such are the 
Adamuorisa among the Aworis, and the Gelede among the Egbado 
tribes. 

The Adamuorisa is sometimes called Eyg ; the former term 
signifies the god with the nasal twang — on account of the arti- 
ficial voice they affect, and the latter, Eyg, simply means Oyg 
being an imitation or parody of the Oyg system of Egugun worship. 

But whereas the Egiiguns appear annually, at a fixed period of 
the year, viz. at the feast of the first fruits in June, these are used 
as a part of the funeral obsequies of a chieftain, or well-to-do citizen 
who can afford a carnival in connection with his funeral rites. The 
effigy of the departed is set up in state in the house, the immediate 
relatives are dressed in their very best, and all hold horse-tails in 
their hands to dance with. The play lasts for one day only and 
generally ends with a big feast. 



32 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The Geledg is also a human being in a mask the head of which 
is exquisitely carved in wood, and made to represent that of a 
man or woman with all their tribal marks and sometimes any of 
the lower animals such as the alligator. They are more generally 
of a female form, with carvings of plaited haii, and magnificent 
busts ; they are elaborately or fantasticall}^ dressed, bedecked 
with a wealth of female ornaments of native manufacture, such as 
ear-rings, bangles, beads, etc., with jingles on their ankles ; they 
dance and move majestically, treading heavily to the rhythmic 
sound of drums and other musical instruments. 

They are much besmired with chalk and camwood, presenting 
rather a frightful (if harmless) appearance. 

8. Orb. The Oro system is also said by some to have been 
borrowed from the red monkey called tjimerh. It consists of a 
fiat piece of iron or stick, with a long string, attached to a pole. 
This when whirled swiftly in the air produces a shrill sound which 
is called " Aja Oro" (Oro's dog). A larger kind whirled with 
the hand gives a deep bass tone. This is the voice of the Oro 
himself. Amongst the Ijebus and the Egbas, Oro is much more 
sacred and important than the Egiigun, and is the executor of 
criminals. The Egbas pay homage also to another god called 
Ologboijeun, who is personated by a man under a mask with a 
drawn sword in his hand. 

Other gods of the same class are the Igis (trees) also personified 
by human beings, masked and carrying an image on the head. 
Some of these are male figures with branching horns, on which 
are carved figures of monkeys, snakes and other animals. Others 
are female figures which are called Efun-gba-roku. 

Amongst the Oyos (Yorubas Proper) the people of Iseyin 
and Jabata are the principal Oro worshippers. Seven days are 
set apart annually for its worship. Except for a few hours during 
which they are permitted to procure provisions, women are kept 
indoors throughout the day. On the seventh day even this small 
indulgence is not allowed, but they are rigidly shut up the entire 
day. It is certain death for any one of them to be found without 
and this penalty is exacted whatever may be the title, or wealth, 
or position of respectability of any woman who ventures to have 
a peep at the Oro. 

9. tfa. — This is the great consulting oracle in the Yoruba country 
and was introduced at a late period by King Onigbogi, who was 
said to have been dethroned for having done so. 

Another tradition says it was introduced into the Yoruba country 

by one Setilu, native of the Nupe country, who was born blind. 

This was about the period of the Mohammedan invasion. 



RELIGION 33 

Setilu's parents regretting their misfortune in having a Wind son, 
were at first of doubtful mind as to what course they should 
pursue, whether to kill the child, or spare its life to become a burden 
on the family. Parental feehngs decided them to spare the child. 
It grew up a peculiar child, and the parents were astonished at his 
extraordinary powers of divination. At the early age of 5, he 
began to excite their wonder and curiosity by foretelling who 
would pay them a visit in the course of the day and with what 
object. As he advanced in age, he began to practise sorcery and 
medicine. At the commencement of his practice, he used 16 small 
pebbles and imposed successfully upon the credulity of those who 
flocked to him in their distress and anguish for consultation. From 
this source, he earned a comfortable liveUhood. Finding that the 
adherents were fast becoming Setilu's followers, and that even 
respectable priests did not escape the general contagion, the 
Mohammedans resolved to expel Setilu out of the country. This 
being effected, Setilu crossed the river Niger and went to Benin, 
staying for a while at a place called OwQ, thence to Ado. Subse- 
quently he migrated to He Ife, and finding that place more suitable 
for practising his art, he resolved to make it his permanent residence. 
He soon became famous there also, and his performances so 
impressed the people, and the reliance placed in him was so 
absolute, that he had little difficulty in persuading them to abolish 
the tribal marks on their faces, such marks of distinction not being 
practised in Nupe, Setilu's own country. 

In process of time palm nuts, pieces of iron and ivory balls 
were successively used instead of pebbles. At the present day, 
palm nuts only are used as they are considered more easily pro- 
pitiated, the others reqairing costly sacrifices and even human 
blood. 

Setilu initiated several of his followers in the mysteries of 
Ifa worship, and it has gradually become the consulting oracle 
of the whole Yoruba nation. In order to become an Ifa priest, 
a long course of serious study is necessary. To consult Ifa, in the 
more common and ordinary way, 16 palm nuts are to be shaken 
together in the hollow of both hands, whilst certain marks are 
traced with the index linger on a flat bowl dusted with yam flour, 
or powdered camwood. Each mark suggests to the consulting 
priest the heroic deeds of some fabulous heroes, which he duly 
recounts, and so he goes on with the marks in order, until he hits 
upon certain words or phrases which appear to bear upon the matter 
of the applicant before him. Very often answers are given much 
after the rnanner of the ancient oracle at Delphi. 

Ifa was really met in this country by the Yorubas, for Oduduwa 



34 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

met Setilu at He Ife, but the worship of it was officially recog- 
nized by King Ofiran son of Onigbogi. 

10. Sango. — Sango was the fourth King of the Yorubas, and 
was deified by his friends after his death. Sango ruled over all the 
Yorubas including Benin, the Popos and Dahomey, for the worship 
of him has continued in all these countries to this day. 

It is related of him, that being a tyrant he was dethroned by his 
people, and expelled the country. Finding himself deserted not 
only by his friends, but also by his beloved wife Oya, he committed 
suicide at a place called Koso. His tragic end became a proverb 
and a by-word, and his faithless friends were ashamed on account 
of the taunts cast upon the name and fame of the unfortunate 
King. To atone for their base action in deserting him, as well as 
to avenge the insults on his memory they went to the Bariba 
country to study the art of charm-making, and also the process 
of attracting lightning upon their enemies' houses. 

On their return home they put to practice with a vengeance the 
lessons they had learnt. From the too frequent conflagrations 
which were taking place, as well as deaths from lightning strokes, 
suspicions were aroused, and enquiries were set on foot. Then 
Sango's friends said that the catastrophe was attributable to the 
late King taking vengeance on his enemies on account of the 
indignities they had heaped upon his memory. Being appealed 
to, to propitiate the offended King in order that he may stay his 
vengeance upon the land, his friends offered sacrifices to him as 
god, and hence these intercessors became the " Mogba " (advocate) 
and priests of Sango ; and to this day their descendants hold the 
same office. 

The emblems of worship representing Sango are certain smooth 
stones shaped like an axe head commonly taken for thunder bolts. 

They are supposed to be hurled down from the heavens when the 
god would kill any one who has incurred his displeasure. 

The following is the process to be gone through at the initiation 
of any one into the mysteries of Sango worship : — The priests 
demand a ram, a water bird called Osin, a tortoise, a snail, an 
armadillo, a large rat called Okete, a toad, a tadpole, the Otutu 
and Opon beads, the red tail of a parrot, a guinea fowl, shea butter, 
salt, palm oil, the flesh of an elephant, venison, the ihih (greens) 
the leaves of the evergreens called Etiponola, Odudun, and iperegun 
tree ; a small knife called " abe-esu " (the devil's razor) a white 
country cloth of lo breadths, a mat called fafa (mats made of the 
pith of bamboo palm branches) together with 7 heads of cowries 
(14,000 cowry shells) as carriage fee. 
The leaves are bruised in a bowl of water, and with the infusion 



RELIGION 35 

the candidate is to purify himself. He is then seated on a mortar 
and shaved. The birds and tortoise are killed and their hearts 
taken out, and these with slices of the flesh of all the animals 
above-mentioned are pounded together with the evergreens, 
and a ball is made of the compound. The candidate now submits 
to incisions on his shaven head and the ball of pounded articles 
is rubbed into the wounds. The neophyte now becomes a recog- 
nised devotee of Sango. 

Important ceremonies are performed when a house is struck 
by lightning. The inmates are not allowed to sleep in any house,, 
but in booths or blacksmith's shops, until the so-called thunder- 
bolt is dug up and removed from the premises. A garland of palm 
leaves is generally hung up at the entrance of the devoted house to 
forbid any but Sango priests to enter. A watchman is kept on 
the premises at the expense of the sufferers from the divine visita- 
tion, and it is the duty of this man to ward off trespassers from 
what is now regarded as sacred ground, till the ceremonies shall 
have been performed, and the offended god appeased. With the 
sole exception of the great King, the AlAfin of Ovo, all the pro- 
vincial kings and ruling chiefs in whose town the catastrophe 
happens to take place, are bound to repair to the spot to do 
homage to Sango, who is said to pay a visit to earth. 

Such occasions are greatly prized by the worshippers who swarm 
to the place in numbers with their Bayani, a sort of crown made of 
cowries, and they are all to be entertained at the expense of the 
sufferers and also by the neighbours. 

The king or chief coming to pay his respects to Sango is to 
receive ii heads of cowries, a goat, and a slave in three payments. 

In the case of a poor house, a member of the family is seized 
if not quietly given up, and has to be ransomed at a considerable 
sum, which must be paid and the above mentioned articles pro- 
cured, before the ceremony can be performed. Then all being ready 
the priests having now assembled, the tete (greens) etipgnQla, 
together with the evergreens Odudun and peregun are bruised in 
a bowl of water, and with this they purify themselves before 
entering the house. They are preceded by one holding an iron 
instrument (the divining rod) with which a search is made for the 
spot where the bolt is believed to have entered the ground. After 
some pretence they arrive at a spot in which one of their number 
had previously buried one of these sharp stones. Here the ground 
is ordered to be dug, with a show of solemnity, and, of course, the 
thunder-bolt is found and exhumed with well-sustained marks of 
piety and reverence. 

Thus the common people are deceived and imposed upon, and 



36 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

very few besides the priests are aware of the tricks systematically 
played upon their credulity. 

The concluding ceremony stiU bears hardly on the poor sufferers. 
They are required to give over a son to the priests to be initiated 
in the mysteries of the cult, and further they are to pay something 
in order to obtain permission to rebuild their houses. Hence an 
accident of this kind means great calamity to any one, and heavy 
debts are incurred. The unfortunate sufferers already deprived 
of their all (much or little) by this sudden stroke of ill-fortune are 
often obliged to put their children to service in order to raise 
money sufficient to meet the demands of the greedy worshippers 
of this heartless god. The fines obtained are shared between the 
king or head chief, and the town authorities ; but the articles 
purchased for the performance of the ceremonies are perquisites 
which are appropriated by the priests alone. 

This " descent of Sango " on earth is never done but with a view 
to show his displeasure on persons who are guilty of perjury 
and lies. The town for a while is as it were placed under an 
interdict, and during that brief period the worshippers of the god 
are allowed to seize with impunity whatever they can come at in 
the public streets in the vicinity of the catastrophe, such as 
sheep, goats, poultry and things of greater oi less value. 

Sango worshippers are forbidden to touch the large white beans 
called Sese, because it is used for counteracting the evil effects 
of the agencies employed in attracting lightning on people's 
houses. 

II. Qya. This was the name of Sango's faithful and beloved 
wife. She alone of all his wives accompanied him in his flight 
towards the Tapa (Nupe) country his maternal home. But courage 
failed her at a place called Ira, her native town which she was 
never to see any more should love for her husband prevail to 
make her resolve to share with him in his destiny. B ut the prospect 
of making her home among entire strangers in a strange land among 
a people speaking a strange tongue, and of leaving parents and 
home for ever, so overpowered her that she hesitated to proceed. 

As she could not for very shame return to Oyq she remained at 
Ira ; and hearing that her husband had committed suicide, 
she summed up sufficient courage to follow his example. 

She also was deified. The river Niger is sacred to her, and 
hence that river is called all over Yoruba land Odo Oya after 
her name. As thunder and lightning are attributed to Sango 
so tornado and violent thunderstorms, rending trees and levelling 
high towers and houses are attributed to Oya. They signify her 
displeasure. 



RELIGION 37 

Deified heroes and heroines are never spoken of as dead, but as 
having disappeared. Thus the saying : — 

" Oya wole ni ile Ira 
Sango wgle ni Koso." 
(Oya disappeared in the town of Ira 
Sango disappeared at Koso). 

Two naked swords and the horns of a buffalo are the representa- 
tive image of Oya. Her followers are forbidden to touch mutton, 
they are distinguished by a particular kind of red beads which are 
always tied round their necks. 

12. Erinle. Erinle was originally a hunter, native of Ajagbusi. 
He was poor and unmarried. Having no home, he dwelt in a booth 
erected under a large gbinghin tree by the river side, whence he 
made his expeditions to shoot monkeys for sale by which he earned 
his livelihood. He is said to have been accidentally swept down 
the river by a strong current and was drowned. A river flowing 
by the present town of Ilobu, which empties itself into the Osun 
river was named after him. The representing image consists of 
black smooth stones from that river, and an image of iron sm- 
mounted by the figure of a bird. The followers are distinguished 
by wearing a chain of iron or brass round their necks, and bracelets 
of the same material. 

13. Orisa Oko. Orisa Oko was also a hunter, a native of 
Irawo. He used to entrap guinea fowls in nets set in the farm of 
one Ogunjeiisowe, a wealthy farmer, and bj^ this means he gained 
his livelihood. He kept a dog and a fife, and on several occasions 
when lost in the bush his whereabouts were discovered by his dog 
at the sound of the fife. He lived to a good old age, and when 
infirm and unable to pursue his calling as a hunter, he practised 
soothsaying and numbers flocked to him. 

It may be observed that in countries where letters are not known 
and the language not reduced to writing the aged are the reposi- 
tories of wisdom and knowledge, hence the younger generation 
regard their seniors as guides and prophets, and their vast stores 
of experience serve as keys to unlock many a doubtful point in 
the affairs of the young. The latter used to regard the foresight 
displayed by the elders as a marvel ; it is easy, therefore to under- 
stand how it came about that extraordinary powers are attributed 
to them. It is only thus that one can account in a way for the 
success of those who are often styled " medicine men " " sorcerers " 
" soothsayers," etc. 

As witchcraft was punished with death, persons accused of it 
were taken to Orisa Oko for trial. He was accustomed to lead 



38 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the accused to a cave supposed to be inhabited by a demon called 
Polo. In this cave Orisa Oko practised his sorcery. In cases 
where an accused was innocent, he would return with him ; if 
otherwise, then his head is thrown out to those awaiting a decision. 
Polo the demon executed the guilty. The fame of Orisa Oko 
spread and numbers resorted to him in taking oaths. His oracle 
was regarded as infaUible, and appeals to him were final. 

After his death, his followers practised his methods taking 
the precaution to secrete a strong man in the cave to act the part 
of the supposed Polo. 

But a striking exposure soon brought the practice into disrepute, 
and it was aboHshed. It happened thus. A man was accused 
and as usual, was taken to the cave ; but he proved to be a far 
stronger man than the supposed Polo, and the result was that he 
killed the counterfeit demon, and threw his head out of the cave 
to those who were eagerly waiting for the decision of the god. 

The representing image is a fife made of ivory or a flat piece of 
iron 5 or 6ft. in length similar to what is given as a sign of 
acquittal to those in whose favour the god had decided. 

The Erugun mystery is of a kind similar to that of the Orisa Oko 
worship. It also was practised in a cave by the side of a mount 
called the Erugun mount. 

The above are the principal gods worshipped by the Yorubas. 
There are besides many inferior divinities to whom offerings 
are made. In fact the whole number of gods and goddesses 
acknowledged is reckoned at 401. Propitiatory sacrifices are 
also offered to whatever in nature is awe inspiring or magnificent 
such as the Ocean, huge rocks, tall trees, and high mountains. To 
the last named especially offerings are made for the procreation 
of children. 

Mohammedanism as was observed above, was introduced 
towards the close of the eighteenth century ; it numbered very 
few adherents up to the time when the Fulanis by stratagem, 
seized Ilgrin and overran the northern provinces, as we shall 
find related in the second part of this history. The towns in 
the plain were swept with fire and the sword, with the alternative 
of the acceptance of the Koran, and submission to the Fulanis ; 
the southward progress of the conquerors, however, was stopped 
at Osogbo, where the Ibadans met and crushed them, and in the 
direction of the Ijesa and Ekiti provinces, the forests and mountain 
fastnesses offered insurmountable obstacles to these intrepid 
horsemen, who could neither fight on foot nor engage in a bush 
warfare ; hence Mohammedanism prevailed chiefly in the north, 
but latterly it spread southwards by peaceful means, chiefly by 



RELIGION 39 

traders and itinerant mendicant preachers. It is now embraced 
by thousands, as it appears to be a superior form of rehgion to the 
paganism of their ancestors. 

Christianity. Christianity was introduced by the Church 
Missionary Society in 1843, first into Abeokuta via Badagry, 
and from thence to Ibadan in May 1851, and also to Ijaye. On 
January 10, 1852, the C. M.S. removed their base from Badagry 
to Lagos. From Abeokuta, mission stations were planted at the 
Oke Ogun and Egbado districts, from Ibadan missions were planted 
at Iwo, Modakeke, Ife, Osogbo and Ilesa. Missions were established 
also at Oyo and Ogbomoso before the Ijaye war broke out in i860, 
which put a stop to the progress of missions all over the country. 
The intertribal wars which followed and which convulsed the 
greater part of the country, and devastated large areas, prevented 
its growth northwards, but at Abeokuta where it was first planted, 
it grew so rapidly that at the time of the British occupation, 
Christian adherents could be numbered by thousands ; schools 
had been established, and evangelistic work among the surrounding 
kindred tribes systematically undertaken and was being vigorously 
carried on. 

The Bible in the vernacular was the most potent factor in the 
spread of the religion. The sincerity of the converts, and the 
firm hold the religion has attained, have been fully tested by 
several bloody persecutions endured for the faith, through which 
they came out triumphant. 

The forces organized for home defence chiefly against the 
Dahomian attacks contained a compact body of Christians under 
their own captain, the esprit de corps existing among them, and the 
invariable success which always attended their arms, won for them 
the respect and admiration, of their pagan rulers and countrymen. 
This contributed not a little to the cessation of persecutions and the 
increase of their number. 

The establishment of the British protectorate saw the mission, 
established at Ijebu, where it has since been spreading phenomenally 
and also in the Ijesa and Ekiti provinces. It is self propagating 
by means of the people learning to read the Bible in their own 
tongue. To God be the praise. 



Chapter IV 

GOVERNMENT 

The entire Yoruba country has never been thoroughly organized 
into one complete government in a modern sense. The sj^stem that 
prevails is that known as the Feudal, the remoter portions have 
always lived more or less in a state of semi-independence, whilst 
loosely acknowledging an over -lord. The king of Benin was one 
of the first to be indepei dent of the central government, and was 
even better known to foreigners who frequented his ports in early 
times, and who knew nothing of his over-lord in the then unexplored 
and unknown interior. 

Yoruba Proper, however, was completely organized, and the 
descriptions here given refer chiefly to it. With some variations 
most of the smaller governments were generally modelled after it, 
but in a much simpler form, and solely in their domestic affairs ; 
foreign relations so far as then obtained, before the period of the 
revolution were entirely in the hands of the central government 
at Oyo (Eyeo or Katunga). It should be remembered that the 
coast tribes were of much less importance then than now, both 
in population and in intelhgence ; light and civilization with the 
Yorubas came from the north with which they have always 
retained connection through the Arabs and Fulanis. The centre of 
Hfe and activity, of large populations and industry was therefore 
in the interior, whilst the coast tribes were scanty in number, 
ignorant and degraded not only from their distance from the 
centre of light, but also through their demoralizing intercourse 
with Europeans, and the transactions connected with the oversea 
slave trade. 

This state of things has been somewhat reversed since the latter 
half of the XlXth century, by the suppression of the slave-trade, 
and the substitution therefor of legitimate trade and commerce : 
and more especially through the labours of the missionaries who 
entered the country about the same time as the springing up into 
being of the modern towns of Lagos, Abeokuta, and Ibadan, 
through which western light and civiUzation beam into the interior. 

The government of Yoruba Proper is an absolute monarchy ; 
the King is more dreaded than even the gods. The office is 
hereditary in the same family, but not necessarily from father to 
son-. The King is usually elected by a body of noblemen known 
as Qyo Mesi, the seven principal councillors of state. 

40 



GOVERNMENT 4I 

The vassal or provincial kings and ruling princes were 1060 
at the time of the greatest prosperity of the empire which then 
included the Popos, Dahomey, and parts of Ashanti, with portions 
of the Tap^s and Baribas. 

The word " king " as generally used in this country includes 
all more or less distinguished chiefs, who stand at the head of a 
clan, or one who is the ruler of an important district or province, 
especially those who can trace their descent from the founder, 
or from one of the great leaders or heroes who settled with him in 
this country. They are of different grades, corresponding some- 
what to the different orders of the English peerage (dukes, 
marquises, eails, viscounts and barons), and their order of rank is 
well-known among themselves. The Onikoyi as head of the 
Ekicn Osi 01 metropohtan province was the first of these " kings " 
and he it was who used to head them all to Oyo once a j'ear to pay 
homage to the AlAfin or King of the Yorubas. 

The AlAfin 

The AlAfin is the supreme head of all the kings and princes 
of the Yoruba nation, as he is the direct lineal descendant and 
successor of the reputed founder of the nation. The succession as 
above said is by election from amongst the members of the royal 
family, of the one considered as the most worthy, age and nearness 
to the throne being taken into consideration. It might be 
mentioned also in passing that the feelings and acceptance of 
the denizens of the harem towards the king-elect are often 
privately ascertained and assured of previously. 

In the earliest days, the eldest son naturally succeeded the father, 
and in order to be educated in all the duties of the kingship which 
must one day devolve upon him, he was often associated more or 
less with the father in performing important duties and thereby 
he often performedroyal functions, and thus gradually he practically 
reigned with his father under the title of Aremo (the heir appaient) 
having his own official residence near the palace ; but as the age 
grew corrupt, the Aremo often exercised sway quite as much as or 
more than the King himself, especially in the course of a long reign, 
when age has rendered the monarch feeble. They had equal powers 
of life and death over the King's subjects, and there are some 
cases on record of the Aremo being strongly suspected of termin- 
ating the father's Hfe, in order to attain full powers at once. It 
was therefore made a law and part of the constitution that as the 
Aremo reigned with his father, he must also die with him. 
This law had the effect at any rate of checking parricide. It 
continued to take effect up to the last century when (in 1858) 



42 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

it was repealed by Atiba one of the later Kings in favour of his 
Aremq Adelu. The Aremo may now succeed if found worthy, 
but he must be elected in the usual way ; but if passed over or 
rejected by the king-makers he must leave the city and resort 
to a private retirement in the provinces. This however, is not 
really obhgatory, but as he must be superseded in his office, 
such a course is inevitable, unless he chooses of his own accord 
to die with the father. 

The choice may sometimes fall upon one of the poorer princes, 
in the quiet pursuit of his trade, with no aspiration after the 
throne ; such a one is sent for, and unnecessarily ill-used for the 
last time to his own surprise ; this was done probably for the 
purpose of testing his temper and spirit. He may not be aware 
of the intentions of the Oyo Mesi until he is being admonished 
by them as to the duties and responsibilities of the exalted position 
he is soon to fill. 

The nominators are three titled members of the royal family, 
viz., the Ona-Isokun, the Ona-Aka, and the Omo-Ola, uncles 
or cousins of the King, but generally entitled the " King's fathers." 
These have to submit or suggest the names to the noblemen for 
election, but the Basorun's voice is paramount to accept or to 
reject. 

Curious and elaborate ceremonies precede the actual accession 
to the throne. After all arrangements have been made, the 
ceremonies begin by a sacrifice brought from the house of the 
Ona-Isokun by a body of men called Omg-ninari ; these belong 
to a family specially concerned in carrying out all menial duties 
connected with the offering of sacrifices and in waiting upon the 
King and the priests. As soon as they enter the house where 
the King-elect is, he is called out, and he has to stand up with an 
attendant by his side. He is touched on the chest, and on the 
right and left shoulders with the bowl of sacrifice, the attendant 
in the mean time uttering some form of words. This is the signal 
that he has been called to the throne. On the evening of the same 
day, he is conducted quietly into the house of the Ona-Isokun 
where he spends the first night. In order to avoid the crowd, the 
attention of the populace is usually diverted by a procession of the 
Kings' slaves and others with much noise and ado, as if escorting 
him, whilst the king-elect accompanied by the Aregbe'di, a titled 
eunuch, and a few of the Omo-ni-nari come up quietly a long way 
behind. 

At the Ona-Isokun' s house, he is attended solely by the Omo- 
ni-nari. He is admonished and advised by those who stand to 
him in place of a father. Some ceremonies of purification are gone 



GOVERNMENT 43 

through, propitiatory sacrifices are again offered which are carried 
to various quarters of the city by the Onto-ni-nari. 

The next night he passes at the house* of the Otun-Iwefa (the 
next in rank to the chief of the eunuchs). This official being a 
priest of Sango, it is probable that the king-elect spends the night 
with him in order to be initiated into the sacerdotal part of his 
office, the Alafin having as much spiritual as well as secular 
work to perform, being at once King and Priest to his people ; 
and probably' he learns there also the usages and doings of the 
huge population in the inner precincts of the palace with which 
the eunuchs are quite conversant. After this, he is conducted 
into one of the chambers in the Outer Court of the palace (Omo ile) 
where he resides for three months, the period of mourning, until 
his coronation. 

The main gateway to the palace being closed at the demise of 
the King, a private opening is made for him in the outer wall 
through which he goes in and out of his temporary residence. 
During this time he remains strictly in private, learning and 
practising the style and deportment of a King, and the details of 
the important duties and functions of his office. During this period 
he is dressed in black, and is entitled to use a " cap of state" 
called " Ori-k6-gbe-ofo." (The head may not remain uncovered). 

The affairs of state are at this time conducted by the Basorun. 

The Coronation 

The coronation takes place at the end of three months, really 
at the third appearance of the new moon after the late King's 
death. The date is generally so fixed as to have it if possible 
before the next great festival. It is attended with a great public 
demonstration. It is a gala day in which the whole city appears 
in holiday dress. Visitors from the provinces and representatives 
of neighbouring states also flock into the city in numbers. 

This day is generally known as " The King's visit to the BarA." 
It is the first but most important act of the ceremonies. 

The Bara or royal mausoleum is a consecrated building in 
the outskirts of the city, under the care of a high-priestess named 
Iyamode ; there the Kings were formally crowned, and there 
buried. The King enters it but once in his lifetime, and that is 

^ Tradition says that in the early times while the King -elect 
is in the Otun'efa's house among other dishes brought to 
him to partake of is one prepared from the heart of the late King 
which has been extracted and preserved. After partaking of 
this he is told he has " eaten the King." Hence the origin of the 
word Je Oba, to become a King (ht. to eat a King). 



44 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

at the coronation with marked pomp and ceremony. The 
actual crowning does not now take place in the Bar A as it seems 
to have been, but at Koso the shrine of Sango, but the visit to 
the Bara is so important and indispensable a preliminary that it 
has become more closely identified with the coronation than that 
to the other shrines visited on that occasion. 

Leaving the Ipadi — his temporary chambers — there are two 
stations at which the King elect has to halt before reaching the 
sacred building ; the' first is the Ahdtd or area in front of the palace 
where a tent of beautiful cloths has been erected tor him. Here 
he has to change his mourning dress for a princely robe. He then 
proceeds to the second station at the Alapini's midway on his 
route where a large tent and an enclosure have been erected for 
his reception. Here he is awaited by a vast concourse of people 
and welcomed with ringing cheers. Here he receives the congratu- 
lations and homage of the princes, the nobles, the chiefs and the 
people and is hailed as the King. Some ceremonies are here gone 
through also which include distribution of kola nuts, etc., to 
the princes and chiefs without. 

After this he proceeds to the Bara accompanied by the whole 
concourse of people who have to remain outside. He enters the 
sacred precincts attended by the Magaji lyajin (his official elder 
brother) the princesses, the Ona-Onse-awo (an official) , the Otun- 
wefa (the next to the chief of the eunuchs) who is a priest and 
the Omo-ni-nari, a set of servants. These last are to slaughter 
and skin the animals to be offered in sacrifice. 

At the Bara he worships at the tombs of his fathers, a horse, 
a cow, and a ram being offered at each tomb ; portions are sent 
out to each of the noblemen, princes, and chiefs waiting outside, the 
Basorun receiving the first and the lion's share oi the whole. 
He invokes the blessings of his deceased fathers and is hereby said 
to receive authority to wear the crown. The visit to the BarA 
then is for the purpose of receiving authority or permission from 
his deceased ancestors to wear the crown, hence it is spoken of as 
the coronation. It is a fixed rule that the whole of the meat is 
to be totally consumed at the BarA ; under no circumstance should 
any be taken home. 

This over, the King returns hence with great pomp and show 
to his temporary chambers, amid the firing of feu de joie, the 
bleating of the Kakaki trumpet, drumming, etc. 

On the fifth day after this he proceeds to Koso, the shrine of 
Sango, for the actual crowning. Here he is attended by the 
Otun-wefa who has the charge of the shrine, the Bale (mayor) 
of Koso a suburban village, the Omo-ni-naris, and the Isonas. 



GOVERNMENT 45 

[The Isgnas are a body of men whose sole employment is to do 
all needle and embroidered work for royalty. They are also the 
umbrella-makers. The crown, staff, robes, and all ornamental 
beadworks, and workings in cotton, silk, or leather are executed 
by them]. 

Surrounded by the principal eunuchs and princes the great 
crown is placed on his head with much ceremony by the lykkere. 
Who the ly^kere is, for whom is reserved this most important 
function will be seen below. The royal robes are put on him, 
the Ejigba* round his neck, the staff and the Sword of Mercy 
are placed in his hands. 

On the fifth day after this, he proceeds to the shrine of Orafiyan, 
here the Great Sword or Sword of Justice brought from Ile Ife 
is placed in his hands, without which he can huve no authority to 
order an execution. 

After another interval of five days, he proceeds to the shrine 
of Ogun the god of war, and there offers a propitiatory sacrifice 
for a peaceful reign. The offerings consist of a cow, a ram, and 
a dog ; this last being indispensable in any sacrifice to the god of 
war. 

From the shrine of Ogun, the procession goes straight on to the 
palace, entering now for the first time by the main gate opened for 
him, the former opening through the outer wall to the temporary 
chambers being quickly walled up. Thus he enters the palace 
proper as The King. 

But a new opening is made for him at the Kohi Aganju through 
which he enters the inner precincts of the palace. This entrance is 
tor his exclusive use in and out of the Kgbi during his reign : at 
his death it is closed up. At this entrance they offer in sacrifice a 
snail, a tortoise, an armadillo, a field mouse (emo) a large rat (okete) 
a toad, a tadpole, a pigeon, a fowl, a ram, a cow, a horse, a man and 
a woman, the last two being buried at the threshhold of the 
opening ; on the blood of the victims and over the grave of the 
two last, he has to walk to the inner court. 

Human saciifices however (now totally abolished) were not 
commonly practised amongst the Oygs, but such immolation 
was always performed at the coionation and at the burial of the 
sovereign. By these sacrifices he is not only crowned King with 



^ The Ejigba is a string of costly beads reaching down to the 
knees. Beads are used for precious stones. This represents the 
chain of office. Chains — they say — are for captives, hence they use 
beads instead. 
D 



46 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

power over all, man and beast, but he is also consecrated a priest 
to the nation. His person, therefore, becomes sacred. 

All this having been performed, it is now formally announced 
to the assembled pubUc, that King " A " is dead (or rather has 
entered into the vault of the skies — O wo Aja) and King "B " 
now reigns in his stead. 

During the interval of the late King's illness, up to the time of 
his death, the business of state is carried on normally by the palace 
ofl&cers, the Osi-'wefa personating the King, even to the extent of 
putting on his robes and crown, and sitting on the throne when 
such is required ; but as soon as it is known that he is dead the 
Basgrun at once assumes the chief authority, and nothing can 
be done without him. 

The King having been crowned, he is henceforth forbidden to 
appear in public streets by day, except on very special and extra- 
ordinary occasions ; he is, however, allowed evening strolls on 
moonhght nights when he may walk about incognito. 

This seclusion not only enhances the awe and majesty due to 
a sovereign, but also lends power and authority to his commands, 
and is the best safe-guard for public order at their present 
stage of civiUzation. Besides, it would be very inconvenient 
to the citizens it the King were always coming out, for according 
to the universal custom of the country, whenever a chief is out, 
all his subordinates must go out with him. It is an inviolable 
law and custom of the country, and is appHcable to all, whatever 
their rank : thus, if the Basorun is out, all the Oyo Mesi must be 
out also. If the Bale of any town is out, all the chiefs of the town 
must be out also, and if the King is out, the whole city must be 
astir and on the move, all business suspended, until he returns 
into the palace. 

Igba Iwa 

At the commencement of every reign, the Igba Iwa or Calabashes 
of divination are brought from Ile Ife to the new King to divine 
what sort of reign his will be. 

Two covered calabashes, of similar shape and size but with 
quite different contents are brought, one containing money, 
small pieces of cloth and other articles of merchandize, denoting 
peace and prosperity ; the other containing miniature swords and 
spears, arrows, powder, bullet, razor, knives, etc., denoting wars 
and trouble for the country. The King is to choose one of them 
before seeing the contents, and according as he chooses so will be 
the fate of the Yoruba country during his reign. 



GOVERNMENT 47 



The Aremo 



The very first official act of the new King after his coronation 
is to create an Aremg, and a Princess Royal or an eqmvalent. 
The Aremo is the Crown Prince. The term simply denotes an 
heir, but it is used as the title of the Crown Prince of Oyo. 

The title is conferred upon the eldest son of the sovereign in a 
formal manner, the ceremony being termed the "christening" 
as of a newly born child, hence he is often termed " Qmo " (child) 
by way of distinction The title of Princess Royal is at the same 
time and in the same manner conferred upon the eldest daughter 
of the sovereign as well ; this, however, is of much less importance 
than the other. When the King is too young to have a son, or his 
son is a minor, the title is temporarily conferred upon a younger 
brother, or next of kin that stands to him in place of a son, but 
as soon as the son is of age, he must assume his title and begin to 
act under the guardianship of the eunuchs who are his guardians. 

The method is as follows : — Both of them must have a Sponsor, 
or " father " as he is called, chosen by divination from among the 
titled eunuchs ; this done, the Aremo repairs to the house of the 
Ona-Isokun to worship at the graves of the deceased Aremos, who 
were all buried there, and the princess to that of her deceased pre- 
decessor in her mother's house ; the King supplying them with a 
bullock each. The whole day is thus spent in festivities. On their 
return in the evening they both proceed direct to their sponsor's 
house where they must reside four days, each day being marked 
with festi\'ities, the king supplying two bullocks every day, and 
this is further supplemented by the Aremo himself. The feasts 
are open to the general public, whoever Hkes to repair to the house 
is a welcome guest, portions are also sent out to the princes, the 
noblemen, and other distinguished personages. At the end of the 
fourth day the Aremg, invested with the robes of his office and 
with a coronet, is conducted to his official residence where he takes 
up his permanent abode, and the princess suitably clad hkewise 
repairs to her own home. 

Public Appearances of the King 

The King generally appears in public on the three great annual 
festivals of Ifa, Orun, and the Bere. In two at least of these 
festivals (that of the Orun and the Bere), the Basorun is equally 
concerned with him. 

These festivals have certain features in common, although each 
has its own marked characteristics. They are all preceded by the 



48 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

worship of Ogun (the god of war) and on the third day after, the 
firing of a royal salute, and the sound of the ivory trumpet announce 
to the public, that the King may now be seen in state, sitting on 
his throne, and all loyal subjects who wish to have a glimpse of 
his majesty now may repair to the palace. 

The festival of I fa or Mole takes place in the month of July, 
nine days after the festival of Sango. The Ifa is the god of divin- 
ation. One day in the week is generally given to the consultation 
or the service of Ifa, but an annual festival is celebrated in its 
honour at Oyq. 

The Orun festival takes place in September. At this festival 
the King and the Basorun worship together the Ori or god of fate. 
The Orun from which it appears the Basorun derives his name 
and title is a curious if not rather a mystical rite. The word 
" Orun " signifies heaven. The title in lull is Iba Osorun i.e. 
the lord who performs the Orun or heavenly mysteries. 

The King and his Osorun are often spoken of as " Oba aiye " 
and " Qba Orun " i.e.. King terrestrial and King celestial. In 
what way His Supernal Highness performs the Orun, or what 
position he assumes towards the sovereign in this ceremony, is 
not generally known, because it is always done in private. But the 
rite seems to deal with affairs connected ■s\'ith the King's life. It 
is to him a periodic reminder of his coming apotheosis, and the 
emblem of worship is said to be a coffin made of or paved with 
clay in which he is to be buried. It is kept in charge of the " lya 
Oba " (the King's official mother) in a room in her apartments, 
visited by no one, and the ceremonies are performed in private 
once a year by the King himself, his " mother " and his Osorun, 
the latter taking the chief part ; consequently very little is actually 
known of the doings of these three august personages. But this 
much is allowed to be known, that the Basorun is to divine with 
kola nuts, to see whether the King's sacrifices are acceptable to 
the celestials or not, if the omen be favourable the Alafin is 
to give the Basorun presents of a horse and other valuables ; if 
unfavourable, he is to die, he has forfeited his right to further 
existence. But there can be no doubt that under such circum- 
stances, it can always be managed between them that the omens 
be always favourable. 

From this and other circumstances, it would appear that the 
King on this occasion occupies a humiliating position as one whose 
conduct is under review, hence the great privacy observed, for 
it is a cardinal principle with Yorubas that the Alafin, as the 
representative of the founder of the race, is to humble himself 
before no mortal ; if such a contingency were to occur, he is to die. 



GOVERNMENT 



49 



Hence, no doubt, that his natural mother (if then living) is to make 
way for her son ascending the throne, so there will be no occasion 
to violate any filial duty imperative on a son who is at the same 
time the King. His majesty must be supreme. Even in per- 
forming reverential duties before the priests of Sango, when such 
are required, some privacy must be observed. 

The Bere festival takes place in January, towards the end of 
the year, the new year commencing in March. It is the most 
important and the grandest of the three. It is primarily the harvest 
home festival, symboUzed by ceremoniously setting the fields 
on fire to indicate that it has been cleared of the fruits of the earth. 

It is an important one at Oyo, not only because it closes the 
civil year, but also because by it the King numbers the years of 
his reign. 

The Bere itself which seems to be the symbol of so many cere- 
monies, is a common grass which grows only in the plain country 
and is used mainly for thatching houses. It is considered the most 
sumptuous of all other materials used for covering houses : it is 
the coolest, the neatest, the most durable, and lends itself best 
for ornamental purposes ; consequently it is highly thought of. 

The festival proper is always preceded by two important 
ceremonies, the Pakudirin indicating the beginning, and the 
Jelepa the end of the ingatherings. 

The Pakudirin is performed by the Ona-'wefa or chief of the 
eunuchs, by the Basorun or his representative and the Ab'obaku 
or master of the horse. 

The King in semi-state appears in the Kobi Aganju to witness 
the same, with several of the ladies of the palace around him, 
and at the entrance of the Aganju, the musicians making the 
occasion very lively. 

The King is supposed not to have seen the new Bere grass of the 
year, the Ona-'wefa first steps forwards before him with a scythe 
made of brass or copper, performing in the air a mimic act of 
mo\ving the grass, and one of the ladies of the palace deputed for 
the purpose, extending her wrap as it were to receive the same, 
hugging it as something precious. This is done two or three 
times, the Basorun then follows and goes through the same forms, 
and then the master of the horse. Each of these chiefs now makes 
a short speech congratulating the King on the advent of a new 
year, wishing him a long life and prosperous reign. 

After this, about half-a-dozen men with small bundles of the 
Bere grass, neatly done up, enter the palace, with measured steps 
to the sound of music, and come dancing before the King in front 
of the Aganju. His Majesty is supposed to see the grass now for 



50 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the first time that year. This ceremony is brought to a close 
by presents given to the men, and then all spectators disperse. 
From nine to seventeen days are now allowed for harvesting 
before the fields are set on fire. 

The Jelepa is the ceremony of setting the fields on fire. This 
is performed by the Basorun outside the city walls. Booths and 
enclosures of palm leaves having been erected for the purpose, 
the Basorun with a princely train repairs thither on the day 
appointed. He is met there by a number of women from the 
palace bringing a large calabash draped with a white cloth and 
containing 01^1^ (a sort of pudding made of white beans and 
palm oil) and Eko (a kind of blanc -mange made of soaked corn 
flour), corn and beans being taken as the staples of Hfe, the 
principal products of the field. 

His Supernal Highness first offers a morsel of these in sacrifice 
as a harvest thank-offering for the Yoruba nation, after which 
both himself and those with him partake of the rest accompanied 
with palm wine or beer made from guinea corn, thanking God for 
the blessings of the field. This over he orders the fields to be 
set on fire : but if by an accident the fields have already been fired, 
a bundle of dry grass brought from home is used instead, for the 
purpose of the ceremony. 

The firing of a feu de joie now serves to show that the ceremony 
is over and the parties are returning to the city. This is done 
in state. The Basorun robes in one of the enclosures : he is 
attended by hundreds of horsemen and footmen, horsemen gallop- 
ing backwards and forwards before him, the firing and the fifing 
and drumming are quite deafening. With such a right royal pro- 
cession His Supernal Highness re-enters the city. On the evening 
of the same day, the King worships the Ogun which is a prehminary 
to every annual festival. 

The following day is a very busy one at Oyq. It is a day of 
paying tributes of Bere grass. The whole of the Oyo Mesi first 
send theirs to the King, the Basorun alone would send about 
200 bundles, the subordinate chiefs send to the senior chiefs, every 
one to his feudal lord or chief, each man according to his rank 
and position and so on to the lowest grades, the young men to the 
heads of compounds, so that it is usual to see loads of Bere passing 
to and fro all over the town the whole day. From the provinces 
also tributes of Bere come to Oyo later on ; e.g. from the Aseyin 
of Iseyin, the Oluiwo of Iwo, the Bale of Ogbomoso and other 
cities of the plain where the Bere grows. 

This being the recognized principal festival of the AlAfin other 
towns in lieu of Bere send congratulatory messages with presents, 



GOVERNMENT 5I 

or tributes ; the Ibadans in their marauding days used to send 
slaves ; from the Ij§sas and Ekiti countries come kola nuts, alligator 
pepper, firewood and other forest products. Towns nearer the 
coast send articles of European manufacture, and so on during this 
season. 

The day after, being the third day of the ceremony of Jglepa and 
the worship of Ogun, the public festival takes place. 

The King in State 

The King generally appears in state on these three festive 
occasions. 

Facing the large quadrangle of the outer court are the six 
principal Kobis, that in the centre is what is known as the Kqbi 
Aganju or throne room where the AlAfin always appears on 
state occasions. It is always kept closed, and never used for any 
other purpose but this. 

On such occasions, the floor is spread all over with mats, and the 
front . of the throne overspread with scarlet cloths ; the posts 
all around are decorated with velvet cloths, and the walls with 
various hangings. 

The throne or chair of state was made of wood at a time when 
the knowledge of carpentry was not common in this country ; 
it cannot boast of any artistic merit, but it is highly valued for 
its solidity, hoary age, and tr?.dition. It is of a large size and 
covered over with velvet. 

The crown is made of costly beads such as coral, agra, and the 
like, which in this poor country stand to the people instead of 
precious stones. It is artisticsdly done up by experts, with fringes 
of small multi-coloured beads depending from the rim, which serve 
to veil the face. 

The robes are usually silks or velvets, of European manufacture, 
which were of much greater value in earlier days when inter- 
course with the coast was not so common or easy as it now is. 

The Ejigha is the " chaiYi of office." This is made of a string of 
costly beads going round the neck and reaching as far down as 
the knees. 

The Opa Ileke is the staff or sceptre artistically covered all over 
with small multi-coloured beads. 

The Iru here is a specially prepared cow's tail of spotless white 
which the King generally holds in front of his mouth when speaking 
for it is considered bad form to see him open his mouth in public. 
He makes his speech sotto voce, and it is repeated to the assembly in 
a loud voice by the chief of the Eunuchs. The white tail is more- 
over an emblem of peace and grace. 



52 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The State Umbrellas. Umbrellas in this country are part and 
parcel of state paraphernalia. In fact there was a time when 
private individuals dared not use an umbrella ; that was in the 
days before cheap foreign ones were obtainable. The prohibition 
was first done away with at Ibadan, where the war boys were 
allowed to enjoy themselves in any way they liked, and use any 
materials of clothing and ornament they could afford, as it might 
be for only a few days before they laid down their lives on a 
battlefield. 

However, those of a chief are easily distinguished now by their 
size and quality. They are almost always of bright colouring 
usually of damasks. The size and number are in proportion to 
the rank of the chief, usually of European manufacture now, 
though there is a distinct family of royal umbrella makers kept at 
Oyo who make those of the largest size. Most of the umbrellas 
foreign or locally made are decorated with certain emblems indica- 
tive of rank. About two dozen or more are used on these festive 
occasions. 

Music. The Kobi, third or fourth to the Agahju is occupied 
by the musicians. The musical instruments consist of almost 
every description of fifes, trumpets and drums, of which the ivory 
and Kakaki trumpets and Ogidigbo drum are peculiar to the 
sovereign. 

The King enthroned is surrounded by his favourite wives, one 
of whom, the Are-ori-ite, holds a small silk parasol over his head 
from behind as a canopy. 

About 30 or 40 female Ilaris with costly dress and velvet caps 
on, are seated on the scarlet cloth on the right and on the left in 
front of the throne, but in the open air, under two large umbrellas, 
one on either side, a wide space being left between them. 

Then there is a row of about ten large umbrellas each on the 
right and the left, both rows facing each other, leaving a wide 
avenue between from the throne to the main entrance gate ; under 
those on the right are seated the Crown Prince supported by all 
the princes and the principal eunuchs : under those on the left 
are the younger eunuchs, the Ilaris, the Tetus, and other palace 
officials. Behind these on either side are the crowds of 
spectators. 

At a considerable distance in front of the throne, in the avenue 
left between the two groups, stand the Basorun and the rest 
of the Oyo Mesi to do homage. This is done by taking off their 
robes, wrapping their cloths round their waists, leaving the body 
bare ; three times they have to run to the main entrance gate, 
sprinkle earth on their heads and on their naked bodies, and run 



GOVERNMENT 53 

back half way towards the throne, prostrating themselves on the 
bare ground, on the stomach and on the back ! 

Then follows the customary oration from the throne, the King 
speaking in an undertone with the iru kere in front of his mouth, 
and the chief of the eunuchs, who with his lieutenants the Otun and 
the Osi'wefa is standing midway between the throne and the 
noblemen in the avenue between the spectators, acts as his spokes- 
man, repeating his message in a loud voice to the Basorun and his 
colleagues. The Basorun replies first, congratulating His Majesty, 
wishing him long life and prosperity, the other noblemen follow 
in regular order, the Asipa being the last. The chief of the eunuchs 
in like manner repeats the congratulatory address to their lord. 

That over, the sacrificial feast is now brought forward for 
distribution. About 40 dishes of stewed meat, 40 baskets of 
eko, 15 pots of beer, a bowl or two of boiled yam, a large quantity 
of boiled corn (maize) to these is added in later years a demijohn 
of rum. 

The Add-hd or king's taster now steps forward with a rod in 
his right hand, and a shield on his left, accompanied by his drummer. 
He first dances before the King and then retreats taking with him 
his own portion, a basket of eko, a plate of meat, a pot of beer, one 
yam, a head of corn ; he is to have a taste of each of these in the 
presence of the king, and the concourse of spectators present, after 
which his followers make away with the rest of his portion. 

Next comes the Olosa or king's robber, plajang the clown. 
He is dressed in a flowing garment, creeps about on all fours, 
performing mimic acts of robbery for the amusement of the 
spectators. After a few more amusements, the curtain drops. 
The rest of the dishes are cleared away into the dining hall where 
the Asipa by virtue of his office subsequently distributes them 
among the noblemen and their followers according to their 
rank, that of the Basorun being one half of the whole. When 
the curtain rises again, the King appears in a more gorgeous 
robe, with another crown on his head. His Majesty now steps 
out of the Kobi with his staff in hand, and walks towards 
the Ogidigbo drum, stately and majestic, and the Basorun comes 
dancing to meet him ; all at once the drums, fifes, and trumpets 
strike up in concert, the two rows of umbrellas move forward 
meeting in the centre to form a shady avenue for the two august 
personages, the King stepping forward with measured treads 
to the sound of the music, and the Basorun, dancing, and meeting 
him, receives from him one head of stringed cowries. This however 
is expected to be returned the next day, the apparent gift being 
merely a part of the ceremony. 



54 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

This usually ends the show, but on the B§re festival the King 
continues his walk right on to the great entrance gate, then half 
round the quadrangle giving the spectators a full view of himself, 
then by a side door disappears into the inner precincts of the palace. 
The spectators thereupon disperse. 

These three festivals are concluded by a few male Ilaris carrying 
sacrifices to certain quarters in the outskirts of the city in a state of 
perfect nudity, which is rather a trying time for them ; there is 
always a rush of the women clearing out of their way, on the 
approach of them ; the performance being symbolic of some 
religious rite. If it is violated by any show of natural excite- 
ment, it must be atoned for, and there is but one penalty, 
viz., decapitation ! But there is no record of any such case 
occurring within living memory. Their reward for this trying ordeal 
is, that after their return, being properly dressed, they are admitted 
into the King's presence, who, sitting in state, receives them with 
marks of honour. 

This ends the ceremonies of the festivals. 

But at the Bere season, one more ceremony remains, that known 
as the ceremony of " Touching the grass." About 5.30 p.m. on 
a day appointed, the King issuing from the palace is accompanied 
by his slaves who have been engaged in piling into two or three 
heaps the bundles of bere grass scattered about in the area in front 
of the palace, including those brought from the provinces. The 
piles are done up in an artistic manner, 8 or loft. high in an open 
space away from any risk of fire. His Majesty now steps forward, 
and lays both hands upon each of the heaps, making a short speech, 
invoking blessings on the Yoruba nation, congratulating himself 
for being spared to see another year. This brings the Bere festival 
to a close. 

The Funeral of the King 

Although the funeral of the King cannot properly he said to be 
one of his public appearances, yet it is considered more convenient 
to describe it in this place along with other public ceremonies of 
which he is the centre. 

The Kings are buried in the Bard. The funeral usually takes 
place at night. It is notified to the public by the sounding of the 
Okinkin (a musical instrument Uke the bugle), the ivory trumpet, 
and the Koso drum, a drum which is usually beaten every morning 
at 4 a.m. as a signal for him to rise from his bed ; to beat it at night 
therefore, is to indicate that he is retiring to his final resting place. 

The body is removed to the Bard on the back of those whose 
office it is to bury the Kings the chief of whom is a titled personage 



GOVERNMENT 55 

known as the Ona-onse-awo, and his lieutenants. At certain 
stations on the route between the palace and the Bard, eleven in 
all, they halt and immolate a man and a ram, and also at the Bard 
itself, four women each at the head and at the feet, two boys on 
the right and on the left, were usually buried in the same grave 
with the dead monarch to be his attendants in the other world, 
and last of all the lamp-bearer in whose presence all the ceremonies 
are performed. 

All these practices, however, have long been aboUshed, a horse 
and a bullock being used instead of human beings. 

The King is buried in black and white dress ; but the crown 
on his head, the gorgeous robe with which he was laid out in 
state, and with which his corpse was decked to the Bard, and 
the bracelets on his wrists and ankles are never buried with him, 
these become the perquisites of the Ona-ofise-awo and his 
lieutenants. 

The Bard in which the Kings are buried is distinguished by its 
aloof situation from public thoroughfares in the outskirts of the 
city, and having to it as many kohis as there are Kings lying there, 
one being erected over each. The present Bard enshrines the bones 
of King Oluewu the last of ancient Ovg with those of the late 
Kings of the present city. It is not open to the pubHc ; several 
of the late King's wives are secluded here (as in a convent) and 
charged with the sole duty of taking care of the graves of their 
departed husbands. 

Their mother superintendent is the lyamgde generally styled 
" Baba " (father). She is thus styled because being entirely 
devoted to the worship of Sango, one of the earliest deified Kings, 
she is often " inspired " or " possessed " by the god, and thus came 
to be regarded as the embodiment of that famous King. 

Additions are made to their number at every fresh burial, 
usually from among the favourites of the deceased husband. 
These women must all be celibates for life, unfortunately among 
the number are usually found some who are virgins and must 
remain so for life : any misbehaviour is punished with the death of 
both culprits, the man on the day the crime is detected, and the 
woman after her confinement. 

Besides those who are immolated at the death of the sovereign 
there used to be some " honourable suicides " consisting of certain 
members of the royal family, and some of the King's wives, and 
others whose title implies that they are to die with the King when- 
ever that event occurs. With the title they received as a badge a 
cloth known as the " death cloth," a beautiful silk damask wrapper, 
which they usually arrayed themselves with on special occasions 



56 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

during the King's lifetime. Although the significance of this was 
well-understood both by themselves and by their relatives, yet it 
is surprising to see how eager some of them used to be to obtain the 
office with the title and the cloth. They enjoyed great privileges 
during the King's lifetime. They can commit any crime with 
impunity. Criminals condemned to death and escaping to their 
houses become free. These are never immolated, they are to die 
honourably and voluntarily. 

Of the members of the royal family and others to die were : — 

1. The Aremo or Crown Prince who practically reigned with his 
father, enjoyed royal honours, and had equal power of life and death. 

2. Three princes with hereditary titles viz., the Magaji lyajin, 
the Agunpopo, and the Olusami. 

3. Two titled personages not of royal blood viz., the Osi'wefa 
and the Olokun-esin (master of the horse) who is generally styled 
" Ab'obaku," i.e. one who is to die with the King. 

4. The female victims were : — 

lya Oba, the king's official mother ; lya Naso, lyalagbon 
(the Crown Prince's mother) ; lyale Mole (the If a priestess), the 
Olgrun-ku-mefun, the lyamonari, the lya'-le-ori (these are all 
priestesses) and the Are-ori-ite the chief favourite. 

It will be observed that all the above-mentioned are those who 
by virtue of their office are nearest to the King at all times, and 
have the easiest access to his person ; to make their hfe dependent 
on his, therefore, is to ensure safety for him against the risk of 
poisoning, or the dagger of the assassin. 

The custom is that each should go and die in his (or her) own 
home, and among his family. The spectacle is very affecting. 
Dressed in their " death cloth," they issue from the palace to their 
homes surrounded by their friends, and their drummers beating 
funeral dirges, eager crowds of friends and acquaintances flocking 
around them, pressing near to have a last look at them or to say 
the final farewell as they march homewards. The house is full 
of visitors, mourners and others, some in profuse tears ; mournful 
waitings and funeral odes are heard on all sides enough to break 
the stoutest heart. While the grave is digging, the coffin making, 
a parting feast is made for all the friends and acquaintances ; and 
as they must die before sunset, they enjoy themselves as best they 
can for that day by partaking of the choicest and favourite dishes, 
appearing several times in changes of apparel, distributing presents 
with a lavish hand around, and making their last will disposing 
of their effects. When everything is ready, the grave and the 
coffin approved of, they then take poison, and pass off quietly. 
But if it fails or is too slow to take effect, and the sun is about to 



GOVERNMENT 57 

set, thelast office is performed by the nearest relatives (by strangling 
or otherwise) to save themselves and the memory of their kin 
from indelible disgrace. The body is then decently buried by the 
relatives and the funeral obsequies performed. 

In many cases voluntary suicides take place. Some of the 
King's favourite slaves who are not required to die often 
commit suicide in order to attend their master in the other world 
expecting to enjoy equally the emoluments of royalty in the other 
world as in this. 

But these customs are now d5dng out with the age especially 
since King Atiba in 1858 abolished that of the Crown Prince 
dying ; the loss of experienced princes like the lyajin around 
the throne is also felt irreparable. With the exception of the 
women, all the men now refuse to die and they are never forced 
to do so, but are superseded in their office if the next King wills 
it ; they must then retire quietly from the city to reside in any 
town in the country in order to prevent the confusion of two 
individuals bearing the same title. As for the Crown Prince, 
he expects to succeed his father on the throne but if he is rejected 
by the king-makers, he also has to retire from the city. 

Courtiers and Household Officers of the Crown 

The palace officials consist of : — 
I. Titled officers. II. The Eunuchs. III. The Ilaris. 
Some reside in the palace, others attend at regular hours every 
day for duty. 

I. The principal officers having duties in the palace are : — 

1. The Ona-Olokun-esin or Ab'Oba-ku i.e. the master of the 
horse, i.e. one who is to die with the King. This officer resides 
in his own house but repairs to the palace daily on duty. He has 
free access equally with the Eunuchs to all the apartments. The 
title is hereditary. As his name implies he is to die with the 
King to be his attendant in the other world, and consequently 
he is granted unrestricted liberty to live as he likes, and to do what- 
ever he likes, and, like all other officials who must die with the 
King, his house is a sanctuary of safety and reprieve for all 
criminals condemned to death, if they can escape thither. 

2. The Ona-ile-mole is the Ifa priest or chief diviner, a kind of 
domestic chaplain. He has for his assistants the Are-awo and 
others. They are to consult the Ifa oracle for the King every 
fifth day called Ojo-Awo i.e. the day of the mysteries. 

3. The Ona-Onse Awo. The daily duties of this officer are not 
so well-defined, but he has to attend daily at the palace. He has 



58 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

his lieutenants to the sixth grade. But their chief duty is to carry 
the jemains of the deceased monarch from the palace to the 
Bard for interment. 

4. The Qna-modekh. This is the civil counterpart of the mihtary 
title of Seriki. This officer is the head, or leader of all the youths 
in the city and country, capable of bearing arms, whoever may be 
their father or master. He forms a band of them all, and is sup- 
posed to train them in manly sports and civic duties. It is his 
prerogative to shield members of his band from the penalties of 
the law whenever they have become liable to such, by any rash 
act. 

5. The Isugbins. These are members of the palace orchestra. 
They number about 210 per.sons, playing on fifes, the Okinkin 
and the Ivory trumpets, and the special drums Koso and Gbedu, 
etc. 

(«) The Ahikoso or Koso drummer's chief duty is to wake 
up the King every morning at 4 a.m. with his drum. 

(b) The Aludundun or the Dundun drummer. He has to 
attend at the palace every day within certain hours, 
including the \dsiting or business hours. He has one of 
the front Kobis assigned to him, where he sits discoursing 
events with his drum, all during his office hours. With 
it, he pre-announces the presence of any visitor in the 
palace, so that in whatever part of the palace the King 
may be, he can tell by the sound of the drum who has 
entered the court yard before the personage is actually 
announced. This is one of the peculiarities of the Yoruba 
language, and the art of the drummers. The names, 
praises and attributes of every family of note are known 
to all drummers, and musicians, and they are experts 
in eulogizing and enlarging on the praises of any one they 
wish to honour, speaking it with their drums. If for 
instance a white man enters the palace, the drummer 
would strike up : " Oyinbo, Oyinbo, afi okun se gnk " 
(the white man, the white man who makes of the ocean a 
high way). In strains like this he would continue for a 
while enlarging upon his praises. 

6. The Arokins. These are the rhapsodists or national historians, 
an hereditary title ; they have an apartment to themselves where 
they repeat daily in songs the genealogy of the Kings, the principal 
events of their lives and other notable events in the history of the 
Yoruba country. 

7. The lie tndle is the palace surveyor. He has charge of all 



GOVERNMENT 59 

the buildings within that vast compound, especially of the Kgbis. 
He is to see that every part is kept in good repair. He is also 
to attend to the drains and the grounds, especially after a heavy 
fall of rain. He is said to be the principal officer who is to wash 
the corpse of the King and dress it before it is placed in the coffin. 

8. The Tetus. These are the sheriffs or King's executioners. 
They are about 19 in number, each one of them with his 
subordinates has specified duties to perform e.g., it is the duty 
of the 15th with his subordinates to clear the grounds and dishes 
after the King has entertained the Oyq Mesi. They number 
about 150 in all. 

II. The Eunuchs. The Eunuchs are called Iwefa or Iba-afin 
(contracted to Baafin) i.e. lordlings of the palace. The principal 
are : — The Ona'efa or chief of the Eunuchs, the Otun'efa and the 
Osi'efa his principal Ueutenants, and others to the sixth grade. 
Besides these are the untitled ones, and boys. 

The Ona'efa is a high legal personage ; he hears and decides 
suits and appeals brought to the King whenever His Majesty 
cannot sit in person, and his decision is as good as the King's 
whose legal adviser he is. We have seen above the principal part 
he plays in public festivals and state ceremonies. 

The Otun'efa has the charge of the suburban town of Koso, 
built in honour of the national god Sango. It is his duty to worship 
at the shrine at stated periods on behalf of the Yoruba people. 
He sometimes helps to decide cases. He is also one of the chief 
guardians of the King's children. 

The Osi'efa or Olosi although the least of the three yet is the 
most honoured. He represents the King on all occasions and in 
all matters civil as well as military. He sometimes acts as 
commander-in-chief in military expeditions, he is allowed to use 
the crown, the state umbrellas, and the Kakaki trumpet, and to 
have royal honours paid to him . On such occasions he is privileged 
also to dispense the King's prerogatives. His ordinary duties 
are : to be near the King's person at all times, having free access 
to every part of the palace including the harem ; to see that the 
King's bed is properly made, before he retires every night ; to 
visit him at midnight and at cock-crow to see if he has had a 
restful night, and to call him up at 4 a.m. before the Koso drum 
begins to sound. He is to head those of the King's wives who 
are to dance at the Akesan market once a year, after the deity 
presiding over markets has been propitiated. With Eni-gjk one 
of the titled ladies of the palace, he has charge of the King's market 
and enjoys in part the emoluments accruing therefrom. 

Why these exceptional honours are bestowed upon the third 



6o THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

ih rank among the Eunuchs, will be told hereafter in the history 
of one of the early kings. 

The Eunuchs are a grade higher than the Ilaris and must be 
respected by them ; however young a Eunuch may be, he must be 
addressed as " Baba " (father) by any Ilari even the oldest. 

The custom of castrating a man is said to have originated from 
the punishment inflicted for the crime of incest or ot beastiaUty. 

The Eunuchs are distinguished by the manner they wear their 
gowns gathered on the shoulders, leaving their arms bare. They 
are now generally chosen from boys bought with money, and 
employed first as pages to the King, or attendants on one of his 
wives. The custom of choosing boys was introduced by one of 
the later Kings ; his reason for it was, that before the age of 
puberty, boys will hardly be cognizant of their loss, and he would 
thus spare himself the remorse of conscience which would follow 
the mutilation of an adult, and also save his victim from a Ufe-long 
mortification. 

Emasculation of an adult is now only resorted to instead of 
capital punishment in cases of adultery with the wife of a king ; 
but in order that the system may not be abused, provincial kings 
are not allowed to resort to this mode of punishment, nor even to 
keep Eunuchs ; any one really guilty must be sent to the capital 
where a special surgeon is kept for the purpose who is skilful in 
the art. 

The Eunuchs are the guardians of the King's children, the 
princes and princesses as a rule are born in the house of one of the 
principal Eunuchs for as soon as any of the King's wives becomes 
a mother, she is separated from the other women, and placed 
under the guardianship of one of them, and she is not to return 
to the palace until the child is weaned. 

The titled ones among them are masters of large compounds, 
and they also keep their own harems as well ; their wives are called 
" Awewo," i.e. one with hands tied ; because they are doomed to 
be for ever childless. In cases of adultery disclosed by pregnancy 
both the defaulters in early days were to suffer capital punishment ; 
the man on the day the crime was proved against him, and the 
woman with the issue on the day she is delivered. These extreme 
measures, however, have been allowed to die out, in favour of 
fines or other less severe punishments. 

The Eunuchs have the exclusive right of seizing anything in 
the market with impunity. They have also the unenviable 
privilege of mingling with the King's wives either in the harem 
or whenever they appear in public on any festive occasion. 

Ill The Ilaris. The term Ilari denotes parting of the head, 



GOVERNMENT 



6i 



from the peculiar way the hair of the head is done. They are 
of both sexes, they number some hundreds, even as many as the 
King desires to create. 

The individual to be created an Ilari is first shaved completely, 
then small incisions, are made on the occiput (if a male) and on 
the left arm, into both of which a specially prepared ingredient is 
rubbed, supposed to be a charm capable of giving effect to whatever 
the name given to the individual at the same time signifies. Their 
names generally signify some attributes of the King, or are 
significant of his purpose, intention or will, or else the preservation 
of his life, e.g. Oba I'olu, the King is supreme ; Oba-ko-se-tan, 
the King is not ready ; S'aiye ro, the upholder of the world (i.e. 
the kingdom) ; Oba gb'ori, the King the overcomer ; Madarikan, 
do not oppose him. The following are the names of some of the 
principal Ilaris, all of which will be seen to be significant. 



I Kafiaiye f ' Oba 


30 


Ote d'afo 


2 Madarikin 


31 


Aiye-gbemi 


3 Ikudefun 


32 


Magb'orimipete 


4 Ilugbenka 


33 


Kutiya 


5 Obajuwonlo 


34 


Kape laiye 


6 Opaykkata 


35 Agbasa 


7 S'aiyero 


36 Ilugbohun 


8 Mob'oludigbaro 


n 


Oba gb'aiye 


9 Obagbeiile 


38 Agbelegbiji 


10 Obagbori 


39 


Oba diji 


II Ayunbo 


40 


Kosiku 


12 Ote o lowg 


41 


Olu orin-kkn 


13 Kotito 


42 


Kosiji 


14 Obakosetan 


43 


Enu f'oba 


15 Ori§a fetu 


44 


Oba I'agba 


16 Oba d'origi 


45 


Mako'hun 


17 Sunmo-Oba 


46 


Osan 


18 Olukobinu 


47 


Oba gbede 


19 Kafilegbgin 


48 


Oba femi 


20 Obadirere 


49 


Oba gba-iyo 


21 Makobalap§ 


50 


fkufo 


22 Mab'obadu u 


51 


Orikunkun 


23 Temileke 


52 


Mako'hun 


24 Oba-ni yio jilo 


53 


Olufowoti 


25 Ori-ehin 


54 


Img kojo 


26 Oba-tun-wa-se 


55 


Ilusinmi 


27 Agbklk 


56 


Ododun 


28 Agbkro 


57 


Eni-iran 


29 Kutenlo 


58 Agbe defun 



62 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

59 Oba-li-a-isin 64 Madawo t'gba-lori 

60 Emi-mo rOba-mi 65 Ma-ni-Oba lara 

61 Igba-abere 66 Maro-Oba-lohun 

62 Oba I'olu 67 Oridagogo 

63 Akegbe 68 Apeka 

Every male Ilari has a female counterpart who is called his 
companion. The Ilaris themselves by courtesy call them their 
" mother." They are both created at one and the same time and 
they are supposed to seek each other's interest, although there 
must be no intimacy between them ; the female Ilaris being 
denizens of the King's harem ; the only attention they are allowed 
to pay each other is to make exchange of presents at the yearly 
festivals. 

Each Ilari has a representative image made of clay called 
" Sugudu," having incisions on its head and arm similar to his own, 
with the same ingredient rubbed into them. 

The Ilaris are to keep the head shaved, one half being done 
from the middle line downwards alternately every fifth day except 
the circular patch on the occiput where the incisions were made ; 
there the hair is left to grow as long as possible being always plaited 
and sometimes dyed black with indigo. 

The male Ilaris are the King's body guard or " The keepers of 
his head." They are of different grades including high-placed 
servants, messengers, and menials. Some of the favoured ones 
are made masters of large compounds, the King supplying them 
with horses and grooms, and assigning to them certain gates where 
they collect tolls, the proceeds being divided between their master 
and themselves for their maintenance ; they are also feudal lords 
of some masters of large compounds in different parts of the city 
who serve them in various capacities in war or in time of 
peace. 

All the inmates of their houses are for the most part the King's 
slaves, and every newly made Ilari is handed over to the charge 
of one or other of these highly-placed ones. 

These favoured ones ride upon the tallest horses whenever the 
King goes out in public, forming his body guards ; others are 
servants to these ; but their chief work one and all is that of house 
repair year by year. 

On any festive occasion when the King appears in state, as 
many of the male Ilaris as are required to be present must each 
one take his " sugudu " with him to his seat. They are on such 
occasions to be without a headgear or breeches with only a cloth 
over the body, passed under the right aim, and knotted on the left 
shoulder, the arms being left bare. 



GOVERNMENT 63 

It is the especial privilege of the Ilaris, male or female, to carry 
nothing on the head save their hats or caps. 

Ladies of the Palace 

The ladies of the palace consist of eight titled ladies of the 
highest rank, eight priestesses, other ladies of rank, besides Ilaris 
and the Ayabas or King's wives. 

The whole of them are often spoken of loosely as " the King's 
wives," because they reside in the palace, but strictly speaking the 
titled ladies and the priestesses at least should not be included 
in the category. Again, all the ladies of rank are often spoken 
of as Ilaris, but there is a marked difference between them. 

The following are the ladies of the highest rank in their due 
order : — 

1 lya Oba 5 lya-fin-Iku 

2 lya kere 6 lyalagbgn 

3 lya-Naso 7 Orun-kumefun 

4 lya-monari 8 Are-orite 

I. The lya Oba is the King's (official) mother. For reasons 
stated above (vide p. 48) the King is not to have a natural mother. 
If his mother happens to be living when he is called to the throne, 
she is asked to " go to sleep," and is decently buried in the house 
of a relative in the city. All the inmates of that house are accorded 
special piivileges and enjoy marked deference as " members 
of the household of the King's mother." 

The King sends to worship at her grave once a year. One of the 
ladies of the palace is then created lya-Oba, and she is supposed 
to act the part of a mother to him. It is her privilege to be the 
third person in the room where the King and the Basorun worship 
the Orun in the month of September every year. 

She is the feudal head of the Basorun. 

2 The lya kere. Next to the King's mother, the lya kere holds 
the highest rank. Greater deference is paid to the lya Oba indeed, 
but the lya kere wields the greatest power in the palace. She has 
the charge of the King's treasures. The royal insignia are in 
her keeping, and all the paraphernalia used on state occasions, 
she has the power of withholding them, and thus preventing the 
holding of any state reception to mark her displeasure with the 
King when she is offended. We have seen above that she is the 
person entitled to place the crown on the King's head at the 
coronation. 

She is the " mother " of all the Ilaris male and female, for it is 
in her apartment they are usually created ; she keeps in her custody 



64 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

all the " sugudus " bearing the marks of each Ilari in order to 
ensure the safety of the King's life. 

Great and honourable as is the Olosi, she exercises full power 
over even him, and can have him arrested and put in irons if he 
offends. She is the feudal head of the Aseyin, Oluiwo, and the 
Bale of Ogbomgso. With the assumption of this office, she is, of 
course, to be a celibate for life. 

3. The lya-Naso has to do w^th the worship of Sango generally 
and is responsible for everything connected with it. 

The King's private chapel for Sango worship is in her apartment, 
and all the emoluments and perquisites arising therefrom are 
hers. She has also to do with the same at Koso. 

4. The lya-monari is the first lieutenant and assistant to the 
lya-Naso. It is her office to execute by strangling any Sango 
worshipper condemned to capital punishment, as they are not to 
die by the sword, and hence cannot be executed by the T^tus, 

5. The lya-fin-Ikii is the second lieutenant and assistant 
to the lya-Naso. She is the King's " Adosu Sango," i.e. the King's 
devotee to the Sango mysteries. As all Sango worshippers are 
to devote one of their children to the worship of the god, she stands 
in place of that to the King. She has the charge of the sacred 
ram which is allowed to go everywhere and about the market 
unmolested, and may eat with impunity anything from the 
sellers. 

6. The lyalaghon. — The mother of the Crown Prince is always 
promoted to the rank of lyalaghon. In case she is not living 
whoever is promoted to that office acts like a mother to him. She 
enjoys great influence, and controls a portion of the city. 

7. The Orun-kumefun is also connected with the Aremo. 

8. The Are-orite. This official is the King's personal attendant. 
She is to see that his meals are properly prepared, and his bed 
properly made, and also to see him comfortably in bed before 
retiring to her own apartment. She is to hold the silken parasol 
over his head as a canopy when enthroned, and is constantly 
by his side to perform small services for him on state and other 
occasions. 

These eight ladies holding responsible positions are each of 
them the head of a small compound within the palace walls. 

The Priestesses 

1. lya'le Ori 5. lya Olosun 

2. lyale Mole 6. lyafin Osun 
3: lya Orisanla 7. lyafin Eri 

4. lya Yemaja 8. lyafin-Orunfumi 



GOVERNMENT 65 

(i) lya le Ori is the priestess of the god Ori or god of fate. 
In her apartment is the King's Ori and she is the one to propitiate 
it for him. 

(2) lya' le mole has in her keeping the King's If a god, and when 
the If a priests come every fifth day to worship and to consult 
it, she takes an active part in the ceremonies. She is the head of 
all the Babalawos (Ifa priests) in the city. 

(3) — (S) ^s their names denote, are priestesses of the gods indicated 
by the title. 

Other Ladies of High Rank 

1. The Iyamod§ 5. The Eni-Oja 

2. The lya'le Oduduwa 6. The lya'le-Agbo 
;-]. The Ode 7. The lya-Otun 

4. The Obaguntg 

(i) The lyamode. — This high official resides in one of the out- 
houses of the palace, but her duties are not specially in the palace. 
She is the superior of those celibates living in the Bard and is 
styled by them " Baba " i.e. father. 

Her office is to worship the spirits of the departed Kings, calling 
out their Eguguns in a room in her apartments set aside for 
that purpose, being screened off from view with a white cloth. 

The King looks upon her as his father, and addresses her as such, 
being the worshipper of the spirits of his ancestors. He kneels 
in saluting her, and she also returns the salutation kneeling, never 
reclining on her elbow as is the custom of the women in saluting 
their superiors. The King kneels for no one else but her, and 
prostrates before the god Sango, and before those possessed with 
the deity, calling them " father." These are among those set 
apart for life-long service at the Bard. When any one of them 
is thus " possessed " by the spirit of deceased monarchs (it is said 
of them " Oba wa si ara won ") and comes raving from the Bara 
to the palace, she is im.mediately placed under the charge of the 
lyamode ; the possessed on such occasions prognosticates, and 
tells the people what sacrifice they are to offer to avert impending 
evils. The ceremony on such occasions is to pour some water 
into a mortar, covering it with a wide calabash, and this the other 
women in the palace beat vigorously as a drum ; the possessed 
and others infected with the excitement dancing to the sound of 
this drumming. 

The Akunyungbas (the King's bards) are instructed in her 
apartments, their teacher comes there three times daily for three 
months or more until the learners are perfect in their studies. 
Small corporal punishments, twitchings, of the ears, and cracks on 



66 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the head are not spared on these occasions, if they are not quick 
at catching the words or if their memory fails them. 

With the assumption of this office, the tyamgde is, of course, 
to be a celibate for hfe. 

(2) The lya'le-Oduduwa is the priestess, of Oduduwa the supposed 
founder of the Yoruba nation. A special temple is built in the 
palace for him where his image is enshrined and worshipped. She 
is the head of all Oduduwa worshippers in the city. She resides 
in one of the out houses, and does not rank with the eight priestesses 
mentioned above. 

(3) The Ode is the head of all the worshippers of the god Os6si. 
On state occasions she appears dressed as a hunter (hence her name) 
wearing on her shoulder a bow ornamented with strings of cowries 
neatly strung. 

(4) The Obagunte is not regarded as having a very high position, 
although she represents the King in the Ogboni house on ordinary 
occasions, her work being strictly connected with that fraternity. 
She enters the Ogboni chamber on all occasions and acts in the 
King's name, reporting to his majesty the events of each day's 
sitting. Whenever the King wishes to entertain the Ogbonis, 
she has to undertake that duty. 

(5) The Eni-ojd is at the head of all the devil-worshippers in the 
town. She also has charge of the King's market, and enjoys all 
the perquisites accruing therefrom. She wears a gown like a 
man, on her arms the King leans on the day he goes to worship 
at the market, i.e. to propitiate the deity that presides over 
markets. She has under her (i) the Olosi who has joint responsi- 
bility with her for the market, and (2) the Aroja or market keeper, 
an officer whose duty it is to keep order, and arrange the manage- 
ment of the market, and who actually resides there. 

(6) The lya'le-agbo is a private attendant on the King, having 
charge of his private pharmacy. His agunmu (powders) and agho 
(infusions) are all in her care : she is to see that they are in a 
condition fit for use when required. 

All these ladies, except the Qhagunte and lya'le niQle although 
generally styled " Ilaris " are not really so, and that is known from 
the manner their hair is done up. They are really above the 
Ilaris. 

The lya-Oba, and lya mode are always shaven, the others plait 
their hair in small strips from the forehead to the top of the head 
and gather the rest from the back to the top, tying all into one knot 
with a string. This style is termed the Ikokoro. 

The Ode, Eni-ojk, lyafin-Iku, lya-Olosun and the lya'le 
Oduduwa adorn theirs with the red feathers of the parrot's tail. 



GOVERNMENT 



67 



The Ilaris. — The female Ilaris are somewhat differently shaved 
from the male, their incisions being made from the front to the 
back of the head along the middle line ; the hair is allowed to 
grow along the same line, and it is plaited into two horns front and 
back, being twined with a string or thread, and the sides of the 
head shaved alternately every fifth day. 

The following are the names of the principal female Ilaris, 
every one of which is significant : — 



I 


Obaloyin 


2 


Maje-Oba-koye 


3 


Didun-l'Obafe 


4 


Ire-l'Oba-ise 


5 


Igba-ewe 


6 


Ire k'aiye 


7 


Ori-ogbo 


8 


Arosin 


9 


Ajinde 


10 


Oju're 


II 


Alosin 


12 


Akosin 


13 


Omi-su-yarin 


14 


Bam wo wo 


15 


Afeka 


16 Awoda 



17 Irebe 

18 Agbejo ^ 

19 Awujale 

20 Ori're 

21 Oju're 

22 Awigba 

23 Alogbo 

24 Oridijo 

25 Tijotayo 

26 Aiye f'obase 

27 Aji gbohun 

28 Iwadero 

29 Omuye 

30 Ajigbore 

31 Obadaro 



33 Aronu 

34 Apa-6-ka 

35 Ina-Oba-koku 

36 Agbala 

37 Ota-ko-ri-aye 

38 Ma-dun-mi-de-inu 

39 Oledetu 

40 Madajo-l'Oba 

41 Ajijofe 

42 Olu-f'oba 

43 Iwapgle 

44 Ohungbogbo 

45 Aiyedero 

46 Ehin-wa 

47 Maha-ro-t'oba 

48 Onjuwon 



32 Alanu 

These female Ilaris have the exclusive privilege of using the 
female head ties, or men's caps, the ordinary Ayabas or King's 
wives are distinguished by carrying their heads bare, always 
shaved, and their head ties used as a belt round the breasts. 

At the demise of the King the whole of the Ilaris male and female 
go into mourning by dropping their official (Ilari) names, and 
letting their hair grow. At a new accession, the whole of them 
shave their heads. One of the earliest acts of the new sovereign 
after the coronation and the investiture of the Aremo (Crown 
Prince) and just before the next great festival is to create all 
the Ilaris afresh by batches every 5 days, giving a new name 
to each and adding a new set of his own ; only the lances of the 
head are re-done, not those of the arm. Each batch is to remain 
seven days at the He Mol|. This " distribution of honours" is 
eagerly sought after. 

Members of the Royal Family Occupying Responsible 

Positions 

As a rule, distinguished members of the Royal Family except 
those holding responsible positions do not reside in the metropolis, a 



68 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

great number of them may be found scattered all over the provinces 
especially in the Ekicn Osi or Metropolitan province, where each 
one resides as a lord of the town or village. They may take no 
part in the administration of affairs in the town, lest they over- 
shadow the chief of the town who is generally the founder or his 
descendant, but due deference is loyally accorded them, and certain 
privileges are granted them as befitting their rank. One such was 
Atiba the son of King Abiodun who resided in the town of Ago 
with Oja the foundet, after whose death Atiba became practically 
the master of the town before he was subsequently elected King. 

Some of the princes with a large family and a large following 
build their own town and become lord of the town. Such was 
Ayeijin who built the town ot Surii near the ancient Oyo popularly 
known as He Gbager^ from the attributive of the founder. 

There are those however, who hold high positions in the govern- 
ment such as the following : — 

I. The OxNA Isokun. 2, The Ona Aka. 3. The Omo-Ola. 

These are known as thejathers of the King, hence the saying : — 

" Ona-Isokun baba Oba, 
Ona-Aka, baba Isokun." i.e. 

The Ona-Isokun the King's father, the Ona-Aka, father to the 
Isokun. That is to say that they stand in the relation of a father 
to the King, who naturally cannot have a father living. To them 
it appertains to advise, admonish, or instruct the King, especially 
when he comes to the throne at a very early age, and as such lacks 
the experience indispensable for the due performance of his all- 
important duty. The titles are hereditary. 

We have seen above that the nomination to the throne is in 
their hands. The Ona I§okun seems to be the most responsible 
of the three. We have seen that the King-elect is to sleep in his 
house the first night after his election, as the formal call to the 
throne comes from him. Lustrations, divinations, and propitiations 
for the new King are done in his house. Part also of the ceremony 
of creating the Aremg is periormed in his house ; there all the 
princes are entertained in festivities, and there also all crown princes 
are buried if they die in that position. 

Next to the above are those who are termed " brothers " to the 
King, they are : — 

1. The Magaji lyajin 4. The Atingisi 

2. The Olusami 5. The Agunpopo 

3. The Arole Oba 6. The Arole lya Oba. 



GOVERNMENT ^9 

Officially, the Aremg takes his rank among these princes, 
especially in public assemblies and is generally reckoned as the 
last of them in official order. 

As the king must have official " father " and " mother " so also 
must he have official " brothers." Of these the Magaji lyajin is 
the most distinguished. He is known as the King's elder brother, 
whose duty is to perform the part of an elder to a younger brother 
by defending his interests. 

The term " Magaji " is the natural title of every heir to a great 
estate and is usually borne by the eldest son (or anyone in that 
relation) in the family. In this official royal circle the lyajin 
is the eldest son. The term " lyajin " impUes the repelling of insults 
and indignities. The title therefore means the elder brother, 
who wards off insults and indignities. 

This will often be found necessary when the King is young and 
inexperienced, and too conscious of his power, or sometimes rash. 
It is the Magaji's place to let the consequences of his action fall 
on himself rather than on the King who is the embodiment of 
the nation. 

The Ar-ole Ob.\ is the official in whose house all the princes are 
to be buried, and in the month of July every year the whole of 
the princes and princesses, from the Ona-Isokun downwards 
including the Ar§mg repair to his house to worship the spirits 
of their deceased ancestors. A horse is usually offered in sacrifice, 
and all have to feed on the flesh of the same. The lyajiu's portion 
is the head. 

The Aremo as we have seen above is the Crown Prince. The term 
signifies an heir apparent, lit. Chief of the sons. How the title is 
formally conferred has been seen above. 

The Aremo practically reigns with his father, having nearly 
equal power, especially when the monarch is old and feeble. 

From the period of the greatest prosperity of the nation to the 
time of the intertribal wars, the Aremgs v/ere almost invariably 
tyrannical, and given to excess : they contributed largely to the 
disloyal explosion that caused the civil wars and the breaking up 
of the unity of the Yoruba kingdom ; they were.therefore, required 
to die with the father at his demise. Otherwise they expect 
to succeed to the throne as in earliest times, but they had to be 
elected thereto by the constitutional king-makers who would 
never elect one who has been infamous. 

Since King Atiba in 1858 disallowed the practice in favour of 
his Ar§mo Adelu, the custom has died out both for the Aremo 
and the other princes. 



70 the history of the yorubas 

The Nobility 

There are two classes of noblemen at Oyo ; in the first, the 
title is hereditary ; the second which is strictly military is the 
reward of merit alone, and not necessarily hereditary. In both, 
each member is styled " Iba " which means a lord being a dimuni- 
tive of " Oba " a king. 

A. The Oyo Mesi 

The first class of noblemen consists of the most noble and most 
honourable councillors of state, termed the Oyq Mesi. They are 
also the king-makers. They are seven in number and of the 
following order : — 

(i) The Osorun, (2) Agbakin, (3) Samu, (4) Alapini, {5) Laguna, 
(6) Akiniku, (7) A§ipa. 

The title of each (as above said) is hereditary in the same 
family but not necessarily from father to son ; it is within the 
King's prerogative to select which member of the family is to 
succeed to the title or he may alter the succession altogether. 

They represent the voice of the nation ; on them devolves the 
chief duty of protecting the interests of the kingdom. The King 
must take counsel with them whenever any important matter 
affecting the state occurs. Each of them has his state duty 
to perform, and a special deputy at court every morning and 
afternoon and whom they send to the AlAfin at other times when 
their absence is unavoidable ; they are, however, required to 
attend court in person the first day of the (Yoruba) week, for the 
Jakuta (Sango) worship and to partake of the sacrificial feast. 

(i) The OsQrtm or Iba Osorun (contr. to Basorun i.e., the lord 
that performs the " Oran ") may be regarded as the Prime Minister 
and Chancellor of the kingdom and something more. He is not 
only the president of the council but his power and influence are 
immeasurably greater than those of the others put together. His 
is the chief voice in the election of a King, and although the King 
as supreme is vested with absolute power, yet that power must be 
exercised within the limit of the unwritten constitution, but if 
he is ultra-tyrannical and withal unconstitutional and unacceptable 
to the nation it is the Basorun's prerogative as the mouth-piece 
of the people to move his rejection as a King in which case His 
Majesty has no alternative but to take poison and die. 

His Highness being a prince is practically as absolute as a King 
in his own quarter of the town. 

Next to the AlAfin in authority and power, he often performs 
the duties of a King. He takes precedence of all provincial 



GOVERNMENT 71 

kings and princes. There were times in the history of the nation 
when the Basoruns were more powerful than the Alafin himself. 

During the long course of history there have been several alliances 
between the two families so that, in the older line of Basoruns 
at any rate, the blood of the royal family runs also in their veins. 

Several points of similarity may be noted between the AlAfin 
and his Basorun The AlAfin is Oba (a king) he is Iba (a lord). 
The AlAfin' s wives are called Ayaba, the Basorun's Ayinba. 
They are similarly clothed, carrying their heads bare and shaven, 
and their head- bands used as belts ; but the Ayinbas are not equally 
avoided by men as the Ayabas are. 

The Iha Osorun has kgbis to his palace as well, but a limited 
number ; those of the AlAfin being unlimited. He too has a 
number of Ilaris as a king, but they must be created for him by the 
AlAfin. 

The AlAfin has his crown, his throne, his Ejigba round his 
neck. The Osorun has a specially made coronet of his own, a 
specially ornamented skin called the Wabi on which he sits, and a 
string of beads round his neck also like the Ejigba. 

We have seen that at the principal festivals of the AlAfin, the 
Basorun also has minor festivals to observe in conjunction and 
has his part to plaj' at the main observance also. 

When the AlAfin reigns long and peacefully enough to celebrate 
the Bebe, a festival akin to the royal jubilee, the Basorun must 
follow with the Owark. 

But it is a peculiarity of theBasorun's children that the boys are 
never circumcised. 

Although the title is hereditary in the same family yet it is 
within the King's power to change the line of succession when 
necessity demands that course. 

Thus the whole unwritten constitution of the Yorubas seems to 
be a system of checks and counter-checks, and it has on the 
whole worked well for the country. 

There have been five different families of the Basorun line, 
each one with its distinctive cognomen. The first and oldest 
belonged to the family totem of Ogun (the god of war) and have 
for appellatives Moro, Ma§o, Mawd, Maja, Ogun. This was the 
original line contemporary with the earh'est Kings. It covers 
the reign of i8 Kings and ended with Basorun Yamba, in the reign 
of King OjiGi. 

With the long lease of power and influence enjoyed by this 
family, it became as wealthy and great as, or even greater than the 
sovereign himself, especially as some of the Basoruns out-lived 
two or three successive Kings. Therefore King Gberu the successor 



72 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

of Ojigi transferred the succession to his friend Jambu of another 
line, whose appellatives were Maja Maro. This hne embraced 
the reign of seven Kings and ended with Asamu in Abiodun's 
reign. 

The third began with Alobitoki in Aole's reign, having the 
appellatives of Maja Majo of the totem of Agan. 

This line was not allowed to continue, it flourished during the 
reign of one King only, for Ojo Abuiumaku the son of Onisigun 
and grandson of Basorun Ga was of the older line. The fourth 
line began with Akioso in King MaJOTU's reign, and also ended 
with himself in the reign of Oluewu, the last of ancient Oyo. 
This family was rather insignificant. 

Oluyole the first Basorun of the new city was the grandson of 
Basorun Yamba, and therefore of the older Ogun Hne. 

The fifth and last line commenced with Gbenla in the reign of 
King Atiba, the totem is Aye and is the family now in office 
and has already lasted through the reign of three kings. 

The Basoruns of Ibadan after Oluyole are only honorary with 
no national duties attached to the office. 

A Synopsis of the Basorun Family 

Ba§oruns. Appellatives. Family Totems. 

1. Efufukoferi to Yamba Moro, Maso, Maja Ogun 

2. Jambu to Asamu Maja Maro (?) 

3. Alobitoki Maja Majo Agan 

4. Akioso (?) Ese 

5. Gbenla to Layode (?) Aye 

(2) The Aghakin. — The duties of this official are not so well- 
defined, but the present Agbakin has the charge of the worship of 
Oraiiyan. 

(3) Satnu. The duties of the Samu are not clearly known. 

(4) The A lapini. — He is the head of the Egugun mysteries, and 
as such he is at the head of religious affairs in general. He has 
the charge of the famous Jenju, who is the head Egugun of the 
country, and who executes witches ! He is at once a religious 
and a secular personage ; he shares with the priests all rehgious 
offerings, and in secular matters with the noblemen of his class. 
By virtue or his peculiar office he must be a monorr.his. 

(5) The Laguna is the state ambassador in critical times. 

^6) The Akiniku. — The real duties of this officer are not known. 

(7) The Asipa as the last of them performs the duties of the 
junior. He is called the " Ojuwa," i.e. the one who distributes 
whatever presents are given to the Oyo Mesi. The Basorun in 



GOVERNMENT 73 

these cases has always the lion's share viz., one half of the whole, 
the other half being equally divided between the rest of them. 

The Asipa of the present Oyo being the son of Oja the founder 
of the town, has the chief voice in all municipal affairs. He is 
thereby acknowledged to be the master of the town. 

The provincial kings and ruhng princes rank also as the noblemen 
of the first-class. 

B. The E§qs 

Next in importance to the Oyo Mesi and of a rank below them 
are the Esos or guardians of the kingdom. These constitute the 
noblemen of the second class. They also are addressed as " Iba." 
It is a military title, not necessarily hereditary. It is the reward of 
merit alone, and none but tried and proved soldiers are selected 
for that rank. 

First and foremost among them and apart by himself stands the 
Kakanfo, an Esq of the Esos. Then the 70 captains of the guard 
ten of whom are under each of the seven councillors. Each wears 
an Akoro (or coronet) and carries in his hand no weapon, but a baton 
or staff of war known as The Invincible. 
There is a common saying which runs thus : — 
" Ohun meji I'o ye Eso 
Esg ja O le ogan 
Esq ja O ku si ogun." 
One of two things befits an E§g 
The 5so mast fight and conquer (or) 
The E§o must fight and peiish (in war). 
He is never to turn his back, he must be victorious or die in war. 
There is another saying : — 

" Esq ki igba Oik lehin 
Afi bi o ba gbogbe niwaju gangan." 
An Esq must never be shot in the back 
His wounds must always be right in front. 
Also another saying : — 

" Alakoro ki isa ogun." 
One who wears a coronet must never flee in battle. 
They are of two ranks 16 superior and 54 inferior, 70 in all 
and they all must reside in the capital. 

are 



The following 


are the titles 


of the former, 


all of which 


significant : — 








GbQnka 


Esq Qraiiyan 


Sagbedo 


Obago 


Esiel§ 


Kogbonk 


Ole 


Orunt^ 


Owdta 


Sakin 


Odigbon 


Sagbua 


Sadoe 


Erukii 


GbQingboin 


Adaha 



74 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

So much is this title thought of by military men and others 
and so great is the enthusiasm it inspires, that even the children 
and grandchildren of an Esq hold themselves bound to maintain 
the spirit and honour of their sires. The Eso is above everything 
else noble in act and deed. 

" Emi omo Eso " (me born of an Eso) is a proud phrase generally 
used even to this day by any ot their descendants to show their 
scorn for anything mean or low, or their contempt tor any difficulty, 
danger, or even death itself. 

Most of the Egba chiefs sprang from the Esgs of Qyq, Okukemu 
the first " king " of Ab§okuta was a Sagbua, 

A special notice must now be taken of the Kakanfo who stands 
at the head of the Esos. 

The Kakanfo. The title given in full is Are-Ona-Kakanfo. 
It is a title akin to a field-marshal, and is conferred upon the 
greatest soldier and tactician ot the day. 

This title was introduced into the Yoruba country by King 
AjACBO, one of the earliest and most renowned of Yoruba Kings. 

Like the Ilaris, at the time of his taking office, he is first to 
shave his head completely, and 201 incisions are made on his 
occiput, with 201 different lancets and specially prepared ingredi- 
ents from 201 viols are rubbed into the cuts, one lor each. This is 
supposed to render him fearless and courageous. They are always 
shaved, but the hair on the inoculated part is allowed to grow 
long, and when plaited, forms a tuft or a sort of pigtail. 

Kakanfos are generally very stubborn and obstinate. They 
have all been more or less troublesome, due it is supposed to the 
effect of the ingredients they were inoculated with. In war, they 
carry no weapon but a baton known as the " King's invincible 
staff." It is generally understood that they are to give way to 
no one not even to the King, their master. Hence Kakanfos are 
never created in the capital but in any other town in the kingdom. 

There can be but one Kakanfo at a time. By virtue of his office 
he is to go to war once in 3 years to whatever place the King named, 
and, dead or aUve, to return home a Victor, or be brought home a 
corpse within three months. 

The ensigns of office are : — 

1. The Ojijiko. This is a cap made of the red feathers of the 
parrot's tail, with a projection behind reaching as far down as the 
waist. 

2. An apron of leopard's skin, and a leopard's skin to sit on 
always. 

3. The Asis6 or pigtail as above described. 

4. The Staff Invincible. 



GOVERNMENT 75 

The following are the Kakanfos who have ever borne office 
in the Yoruba country : — 

1. Kokoro gangan of Iw6ye 

2. Oyatope ,, 

3. Oyabi ,, Ajase 

4. Adeta ,, Jabata 

5. Oku ,, Jabata 

6. Aignja I'aiya I'ok^ ,, Ilorin 

7. Toyeje ,, Ogbomoso 

8. Edun ,, Gbogun 

9. Amep6 ,, Abem6 

10. Kurumi ,, Ijaye 

11. Ojo Aburumaku „ Ogbomoso (son of Toyej§) 

12. Latosisa ,, Ibadan the last to hold office. 

Nearly the whole of them were connected with stirring times and 
upheavals in the country. Afonja of Ilorin, Toyeje of Ogbomoso 
Kurumi of Ijaye, and Latosisa of Ibadan being specially famous. 
Ojo Aburumaku of Ogbomo.so fought no battles, there being no 
wars daring the period ; the change that has taken place in the 
country left the Ibadans at this time masters of all warlike oper- 
ations. But in order to keep his hand in, he fomented a civil 
war at Ogbomoso wliich he also repressed with vigour. 

Provincial Governments and Titles 

Every town, village or hamlet is under a responsible head, 
either a provincial " king" or a Bale (mayor). In every case 
the title is hereditary (excepting at Ibadan) as such heads are 
invariably the founder or descendants ot the founder of their town. 

The provincial kings are styled the lords of their town or district, 
and from it they take their title, e.g. : — 

The Onikoyi, lord of Ikoyi ; Aseyin, lord of Iseyin ; Alake, 
lord or Ake ; Olowu, lord of Owu ; Oluiwo, lord of Iwo ; Alakija, 
lord of Ikija, etc. There are a few exceptions to this rule, where the 
first ruler had a distinctive name or title before he became the 
head of the town or district, e.g. : — 

Timi of Ede, Atawoja of Osogbo, Awujadg of Ijebu, Okere of 
Saki, Onibode of Igboho, etc., in which case the distinctive name 
becomes the hereditary title of the chief ruler. 

A provincial king is, of course, higher than a Bale as a duke or 
an earl is higher than a mayor. They are privileged to build 
kobis to their palaces, and to create Ilaris which Bales are not 
entitled to do. They are also allowed an Akoro (coronet) which 
Bales are not allowed to have ; but few of them indulge in large 



76 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

state umbrellas. They are invested originally with power from 
Oyo whither they usually repair to obtain their titles, the sword 
of justice being given them by the AlAfin at their installation. 
Every one of them as well as every important Balg has an official 
at Oyo through whom they can communicate with the crown. 

They are also invested with an Qpaga by which they are em- 
powered to make and keep an Ilari. The Qpaga is an iron instru- 
ment of the shape of an Osain, but taller and is surmounted with the 
figure of a bird. This is the Qsain worshipped b}' Ilaris. To be 
deprived of it is equivalent to being deprived oi one's rank. 

To dethrone a kingling, he is publicly divested of his robe 
and sandals and the announcement is made that XYZ having 
forfeited his title, he is deprived of it by AB his suzerain or teudal 
lord. 

The following are the kinglings in the Oyo provinces. 

1. In the Ekun Osi or Metropohtan province : — • 

The Onikoyi of Ikoyi ; Olugbon of Igbon ; Aresa of Iresa ; 
the Ompetu of Ijeru ; Olofa of Ofa. 

2. In the Ekun Otun province : — 

Sabigana of Igana ; Oniwere of Iwere ; ^Alasia of Asia ; Onjo 
of Oke'ho ; Bagijan of Igijan ; Okere of Saki ; Alapata of Ibode ; 
Ona Onibode of Igboho ; Elerinpo of Ipapo ; Ikihisi ol Kihisi ; 
As§yin of Is§yin ; Alado of Ado ; Eleruwa of Eruwa ; Qloje of 
Qje. 

3. In the Ibolg province : — 

The Akirun ot Ikirun ; Olobu of Ilobu; Timi of Ede. the Ata- 
woja of Osogbo ; Adimula of Ife Odan. 

4. In the Epo province : 

The Oluiwo of Iwo ; Ondese of Idese. 

Of these vassal kings the Onikoyi, Olugbon, the Aresa and the 
Timi are the most ancient. 

Since the wave of Fulani invasion swept away the first 
three, those titles exist only in name. The Onikoyi has a 
quarter at Ibadan, the bulk of the Ikoyi people being at Ogbomoso, 
the family is still extant and the title kept up.* The same may be 
said of the Aresa at Ilorin. But wherever the representative head 
of the family may be, he is completely subject to the ruler of the 
town, be he a Bale or a king. Thus the Olugbon at Ogbomoso 
is subject to the Balgof Ogbomoso, the Aresa to the king or Emir 

^ The Alasia is the only man privileged not to prostrate before 
the Alafin in salutation according to the custom ot the country. 
He sits on a stool with his back turned towards him. 

* The town has been rebuilt and the Onikoyi returned home in 
1906. 



GOVERNMENT 77 

of Ilorin, and similarly the Olowu at Abeokuta is nominally subject 
to the Alake, the primus of the Egba chiefs. 

In the Ekun Osi and Ekun Otun provinces, no special remarks 
are called for in the arrangement of the titles in the government ; 
they are for the most part a modified form of the Oyo titles. 

IbglQ titles. — Amongst the Ibglgs the royal family is called 
Omolaisin. The title next to that of the king which answers to the 
Basorun is the Osa, next to the Osa comes the Aro, then the 
Odofin and then the Ejemu. These are the principal councillors. 
The other subordinate titles are chiefly military viz., the Jagun 
and his heutenants the Olukotun and Olukosi. Then the Agbakin, 
Gbonka, Asipa which are Oyo titles that have been borrowed. 
Then the Saguna, Sakgtun, Sakosi, Asape, Oladifi Esinkin, and 
the Ar'oguny6. 

The Elesije is the chief physician. 

Smaller towns are governed by the Bale, and the Jagun (or 
Balogun) is the next to him. In time of war, the Bale appoints 
the Jagun to go with the Kakanfo to any expedition to which the 
AlAfin may send the latter ; but if it is a great expedition to which 
he appoints the Onikoyi, all the other vassal kings, and the Bales 
of every town were bound to go with him. The affairs of the town 
are then left to be administered by the Bale Agbe, i.e. the chief of 
the farmers. The duties of the Bale Agbe on ordinary occasions 
are to superintend the tax collectors, and to assist the Jagun who 
superintends the cleaning ot the roads. 

The Iy.\lode, i.e. the queen of the ladies is a title bestowed 
upon the most distinguished lady in the town. She has also 
her lieutenants Otun, Osi, Ekcrin, etc., as any of the other principal 
chiefs of the town. Some of these lyalodes command a force of 
powerful warriors, and have a voice in the council of the chiefs. 
Through the lyalode, the women of the town can make their 
voices heard in municipal and other affairs. 

The King's civil officers judge all minor cases, but all important 
matters are transferred to the AlAfin of Oyo whose decision and 
laws were as unalterable as those of the ancient Medes and Persians. 

The Egba Province 

" Egba k6 I'Olu, gbogbo won ni nse bi Oba (i.e. Egbas have 
no king all of them act like a king), is a common saying. That 
is to say, they have no king that rules. The king is acknowledged 
as the head of the government, but only as a figure head. More 
marked was this when they lived in separate townships before 
their concentration at Abeokuta. The Ogbonis constitute the 
town council, and they are also the executive, and even the 
E 



78 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

" king" was subject to them. The same rule holds good even 
at Abeokuta for each township. 

Amongst the highest Ogboni titles are : — 

The Aro, Oluwo, Apena, Ntowa, Bala, Basala Baki, Asipa, 
Asalu, Lajila, Apesi, Esinkin Ola, Bayimbo, Odgfin. 

The warriors rank next after the Ogbonis, the Balogun and the 
Seriki being the most important. 

The Ijebu Province 

Among the Ijebus the civil authorities are of three divisions, 
viz., the Osugbos or Ogboni, 2, the Ipampa, and 3 the Lamurin. 
Without these acting in concert, no law can be enacted or repealed. 
Of these bodies, the Osugbos are the highest for even the king him- 
self must be of that fraternity. The Lamurins are the lowest. 

Amongst the Egbas and Ijebus, the Ogbonis are the chief 
executive, they have the power of life and death, and power to 
enact and to repeal laws : but in the Oyo provinces the Ogbonis 
have no such power ; they are rather a consultative and advisory 
body, the king or Bale being supreme, and only matters involving 
bloodshed are handed over to the Ogbonis for judgment or for 
execution as the king sees fit. 

The actual executioners at Oyo are the Tetus, amongst the 
Ibglos, the Jagun, and in the Epo districts the Akgdas or sword 
bearers of the principal chiefs, acting together. 

The Ijesa and Ekiti Provinces 

In the Ijega and Ekiti provinces the form of government is 
more or less alike, with slight modifications. The tendency is to 
adopt the Oyo forms ; but they have some admirable systems of 
their own. The municipal arrangements of the Ijesas are quite 
excellent. 

It has been mentioned above that there are 16 provincial 
kings recognised in the Ekiti province under four principal ones. 
The title of Owa is a generic term for them all, including that of 
Ilesa. The Owa of Ilesa stands by himself, for the Ekitis hold the 
Ijesas separate from themselves. 

The Orangun of Ila is sometimes reckoned amongst the Ekitis ; 
but he is not an Ekiti although his sympathies are with them. 
He aims at being the head of the Igbomina tribes, but Ila seems 
to stand by itself. 

Titles in ancient times may be obtained by competition, and it 
was not always the most worthy but the highest bidder that 
often obtained them. 



Chapter V 
YORUBA NAMES 

The naming of a child is an important affair amongst the 
Yorubas ; it is always attended with some ceremonies. These of 
course differ somewhat, amongst the different tribes. 

The naming usually takes place on the 9th day of birth if a 
male, or on the 7th if a female ; if they happen to be twins of 
both sexes, it will be on the 8th day. Moslem children of either 
sex are invariably named on the 8th day. 

It is on that day the child is for the first time brought out of 
the room, hence the term applied to this event — Ko omg jade 
(bringing out the child). The mother also, is supposed to be 
in the lying-in room up to that day. 

The ceremony is thus performed : — The principal members 
of the family and friends having assembled early in the morning 
of the day, the child and its mother being brought out of the 
chamber, a j ugf ul of water is tossed up to the roof (all Yoruba houses 
being low-roofed), and the baby in the arms of the nurse or an 
elderly female member of the family, is brought under the eaves 
to catch the spray, the baby yells, and the relatives shout for joy. 
The child is now named by the parents and elderly members of 
the family, and festivities follow ; with presents, however trifling, 
for the baby from every one interested in him. 

This is evidently an ancient practice, a form of baptism which 
the ancestors of the Yorubas must have derived from the eastern 
lands, where tradition says they had their origin, and is another 
proof of the assertion that their ancestors had some knowledge 
of Christianity. 

In some cases there is also the offering of sacrifice and 
consultation of the household oracle on the child's behalf. 

For the sake of convenience we call this the Christening of the 
child. There are three sets of names a child can possibly have, 
although not every child need have the three ; one at least will 
be inapplicable. 

1. The Amutorunwa i.e. the name the child is born with. 

2. The AhisQ i.e. the christening name. 

3. The Oriki i.e. the cognomen or attributive name. 

A few remarks on each of these sets of names will serve to 
elucidate their meanings. 

79 



80 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

I. The Amutqrunwa 

r A child is said to be "born with a name" {lit. brought from 
heaven) when the peculiar circumstance of its birth may be 
expressed by a name which is apphcable to all children born under 
like circumstances. The most important of these is twin-births. 
No condition is invested with an air of greater importance, or has 
a halo of deeper mystery about it, than that of twin-births ; 
the influence is felt even upon children that may be born after 
them. Twins in Yoruba are almost credited with extra-human 
powers, although among some barbarous tribes they are regarded 
as monsters to be despatched at once. 

Taixvo or Eho. — The name of the first born of twins, applicable 
to either sex. It is a shortened form of To-aiye-w6 (have the 
first taste of the world). The idea is that the first born was sent 
forward to announce the coming of the latter, and he is considered 
the younger of the two. [Compare the stories of Esau and Jacob, 
and of Pharez and Zarah,in both of which the first born of the twins 
virtually became the younger of the two.] 

Kehinde " He who lags behind," i.e. the second born. 
tdowu. The child born after twins, male or female, Idowus 
are cdways considered heady and stubborn, hence their usual 

appellation " J)su lehiu ibeji " (the d 1 after twins). There is 

also a current superstition that the mother who has had twins 
and fails to get an Idowu in due course, may likely go mad ; the 
wild and stubborn Idowu " flying into her head " will render her 
insane ! Hence all mothers of twins are never at ease until in 
due course the Idowu is born. 

Idogbe. — The child after Idowu if male. 
Alaba, — The child after Idowu if female. 

Thus we see the influence of the twins affecting the second and 
third births after themselves. 

Eia Okd. — The name given to the third of triplets. 
The next to twins in importance is the child named Oni Oni. 
This name is given to a small neurotic child which at its birth 
cries incessantly day and night. The child after Oni is called 
Ola, the next O^^^nla, and so on. 

These names signify to-day, to-morrow, the day after to-morrow, 
etc. With a small tribe termed the Isih people, it is carried on 
as far as Ijgni i.e. the 8th day, if the mother have as many. 

Asa or Oroyh are names applied under conditions similar to 
those of Oni by some clans. The latter is generally preferred 
by worshippers of the god Orisa Oko. 
Igh is a child born with breech or footling presentation. 



YORUBA NAMES 8l 

llgri is a child who was conceived during absence of menstru- 
ation. 

Qtnope signfies " the child is late " that is, a child born later 
than the normal period of utero-gestation. 

Ojo or Aina is a child born with the cord twined round its neck. 
The choice of name is a matter of preference partly clannish or 
by the decision of the family Oracle. Ojo, however, is never 
given to females, Aina may be male or female. 

Ajayi is a child born "with face downwards" it is styled 
Adojude, that is to say, when rotation is absent during the exit 
of the shoulders. 

Oke is a name given to a child which faints away on being fed 
in a horizontal position as is the custom of the country. 

Oke (a bag) is a child born with membranes unruptured. 

Salako (male), Talabi (female), a child born with the head and 
body covered with the caul, or ruptured membranes. 

Dada is a curly-headed child styled " Olowo Ori." 

Olugbodi is a child born With supernumerary digits. 

Abigna means " born by the way side." i.e. a child born when the 
mother is on a journey, or away from home. 

Abiodun born at the new year or any annual festival. 

Abiose born on a holy day. 

Babatunde means " father comes again," a name given to 
a male child born soon after the death of its grandfather. The 
sire is supposed to re-appear in the newly born. 

Abiba is applied to a female under similar circumstances. 

Yetunde means " mother comes again " a name given to a female 
child born soon after the death of its grandmother. The granny 
is supposed to re-appear in the newly born. 

Babarimisa (father fled at my approach) is the name given to a 
posthumous child. 

Jg'hdJQ a child whose mother died at its birth (Ichabodlike) 
or during the puerperium. 

II, — The Abiso or Christening Name 

All children need not be " born with a name " but all must 
be named. Names are not given at random because of their 
euphony or merely because a distinguished member of the family 
or of the community was so named, but of a set purpose from 
circumstances connected with the child itself, or with reference 
to the family fortunes at the time etc. Hence the saying : — " He 
la iw6 kia to so omo I'oruko (the state of the house must first be\ 
considered before naming a child). The names then are always 



B2 



THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 



significant of something, either with reference to the child itself 
or to the family. 

A child may have two or more christening names given it 
one by each parent or grandparents if living or by any elderly 
member of the family. Whichever is most expressive of the present 
circumstances of the family will be the one to stick. 

(a) Names having reference to the child itself directly and indirectly 

to the family : — 
Ayodele Joy enters the house. 

Onipede The consoler is come. 

Morenike I have some one to pet. 

Moseb'olatan Joy hitherto despaired of. 
Omoteji A child big enough for two. 

Akinyele A strong one befits the house. 

Ibiyemi Good birth becomes me. 

Ibiyinka Surrounded by children. 

Ladipo Increase honour (of children born). 

(b) Names having reference to the family directly and indirectly 

to the child itself : — 

Ogundalenu Our home has been devastated by war. 
Otegbeye Warfare deprived us of our honours. 

Ogunmola The river Ogun took away our honour, 

lyapib Many trials. 

Olabisi Increased honours. 

Laniyonu Honour is full of troubles, 

Kurumi Death has impoverished me. 

Oyebisi Increased titles. 

(c) Names compounded of Ade, Ola, Olu, Oye originally belonged 

to one of high or princel}^ birth, but are now used more or 

less indiscriminately : — 

Adebiyi The crown has begotten this. 

Adegbite The crown demands a throne. 

Olaleye Honour comes fittingly, or is full of dignity. 

Olubiyi A chief has begotten this. 

Oyeyemi Title becomes me. 

Oyewole Title enters the house i.e. where the parent 

has a title. 

N.B. — Ade does not always signify a crown, it may be taken 

from the verb de to arrive, it may then mean coming, e.g., 

Adebisi or I ., 

. , . t My commg causes an increase. 

Adesina My coming opens the way. 

Adepeju My coming completes the number (of births) 

Adepoju The coming has become too much. 



YORUBA NAMES 83 

(d) Some names are compounded with fetish names showing the 
deity worshipped in the family : — 

Sangobunmi Sango (the god of thunder and Hghtning) 
gave me this. 

Ogundipe Ogun (the god of war) consoles me with this. 

Ogunseye Ogun has done the becoming thing. 

Omi yale The god of streams visits the house. 

Oba-bunmi The King (i.e. god of small pox) gave me this 

Fabunni Ifa has given me this. 

Fatosin Ifa is worthy to be worshipped. 

Fafumke Ifa gave me this to pet. 

Osuntoki Osun is worthy of praise or honour. 

It msLy be noted that names compounded with Ifa are very 
common amongst the Ijesas which shows that they are devoted 
Ifa worshippers. 

(<;) Compounds of Ode shows that the father is a worshipper of 
Ogun or Erinlc : — 

Odewale Ode comes to the house i.e. visits the family. 

Odemuyiwa Ode has brought me this. 
These names are often confounded with Adewale and 
Ademuyiwa. 

(/) Compounds of Oso or Efun shows that the family is a 
v/orshipper of Orisa Oko i.e. the god of the fields : — 

Osodipe Oso has granted a consolation. 

Osodeke Oso has become a roof i.e. shield and shelter. 

Efunsetan Efun has done it (by granting the child). 

Efunlabi Efun is the one born. 

(g) Compounds of Oje are peculiar to the children of Elewi of Ado. 
Names pecuUar to the royal family of Oyo : — 

Male : Afgnja, Tela, Ajuan. 

Female : — Ogboja, Siye, Akere. 
Yoruba names are with few exceptions common to both genders. 
Ojo and Akerele, however, are never applied to females. Also 
names compounded oi Akin which means strength ; and, of course, 
such names as Babatunde, Babarimisa can only apply to males, 
and Yetunde to females. 

Abiku Names 

There are some peculiar names given to a certain class of children 
called " Abiku " i.e. born to die. These are supposed to belong 
to a fraternity of demons living in the woods, especially about and 
within large Iroko trees ; and each one of them coming into the 



84 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

world would have arranged beforehand the precise time he will 
return to his company. 

Where a woman has lost several children in infancy, especially 
after a short period of illness, the deaths are attributed to this 
cause, and means are adopted to thwart the plans of these infants 
in order that they may stay ; for if they can only tide over the 
pre-arranged date, they may go no more, and thus entirely forget 
their company. 

Besides charms that are usually tied on them and ugly marks 

'they are branded with, in order that their old company may 

refuse the association of disfigured comrades which must oblige 

them to stay, certain significant names are also given to them in 

order to show that their object has been anticipated. 

Such are the following names : — 

Malomo Do not go again. 

Kosokg There is no hoe (to dig a grave with). 

Banjoko Sit down (or stay) with me. 

Durosinmi Wait and bury me. 

Jekiniyin Let me have a bit of respect. 

Akisatan No more rags (to bury you with). 

Apara One who comes and goes. 

Oku The dead. 

Igbek6yi Even the bush wont have this. 

Enu-kun-onipe The consoler is tired. 

Akuji Dead and awake. 

Tiju-iku Be ashamed to die. 

Duro-ori-ike Wait and see how you will be petted. 

Periodical feasts are usually made for these children of which 
beans and a liberal quantity of palm oil must form a principal 
dish. To this children of their age and others are invited, and their 
company of demons, although unseen are supposed to be present 
and partake of these viands. This is supposed to appease them 
and reconcile them to the permanent stay of their comrade, so 
that they may always have such to feed upon. 

This superstition accounts for a rather high rate of infant 
mortality, for parents are thereby led away from the proper treat- 
ment of their ailments, while occupying themselves in making 
charms to defeat the purpose of imaginary demons ! 

It is fair, however to add that thoughtful men have begun to 
perceive the absurdity of this superstition, for many have been 
heard to say " There is really no such thing as Abiku ; disease and 
hereditary taints are the true causes of infantile mortahty." 



YORUBA NAMES 85 

III. — The Oriki or Cognomen or Pet Names 

This is an attributive name, expressing what the child is, or 
what he or she is hoped to become. If a male it is always expressive 
of something heroic, brave, or strong ; if a female, it is a term of 
endearment or of praise. In either case it is intended to have a 
stimulating effect on the individual. 

Yorubas are always particular to distinguish between the 
Oruko (name) and the Oriki (cognomen or attributive). 
Male attributive names :-=— 

Ajamu One who seizes after a fight. 

Ajagbe One who carries off after a contest. 

Akunyun One who buzzes to and fro 
Ajani One who possesses after a struggle. 

Alawo One who divides and smashes up. 

Ak h' I ^"^ conceived after a single touch. 

Alabi or ) Is a male that comes after several female 

Alade ) births. 

Female attributive names : — 

Amoke Whom to know is to pet. 

Aygka One who causes joy all around. 

Abebi One born after a supplication. 

Apinke To be petted from hand to hand. 

Akanke To meet whom is to pet. 

Asabi One of select birth. 

Aw^ro One to be washed and dressed up. 

Alake One to be petted if she survives. 

The use of the attributive name is so common that many children \ 
are better known by it than by their real names. Some do not ^^ 
even know their own real names when the attributive is popular. 
But there is a method in the use of it ; as a rule, only children 
are addressed by their Oriki by their elders, especially when they 
wish to express a feeling of endearment for the child. It is con- 
sidered impertinent for a younger person to call an elder by his 
Oriki or pet name. 

Certain names carry their own attributive with them e.g. 
Adeniji (the crown has a shadow), the attributive to this is Apata 
.(a rock). Hence Adeniji Apata, Apata ni iji i.e. Adeniji is a rock, a 
rock that casts out its shadow. 

IV. — The Orile or Totem 

This is about the best place to take note of this singular system. 
The term Orile denotes the foundation or origin ; and is of an 
immense importance in the tracing of a pedigree. Each one 



86 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

denotes a parent stock. The Orile is not a name, it denotes the 
family origin or Totem. The real meaning of this is lost in obscurity. 
Some say they were descended from the object named, which must 
be a myth; others that the object was the ancient god of the 
family, the giver of the children and other earthly blessings, 
or that the family is in some way connected with it. 

The Totem represents every conceivable object e.g. Erin (the 
elephant), Ogun (the god of war), Opo (post), Agbo (a ram), 
etc. The number of totems of course is large, representing as 
each does a distinct family. Some families, however, have become 
extinct, and some obscure ones there are who have lost their totems. 
A married woman cannot adopt her husband's totem, much 
less his name. Intermarriages within the same totem was 
originally not allowed, as coming within the degree of consanguinity 
but now the rule is not rigidly observed. The children both boys 
and girls take their father's totem, except in rare cases, where the 
father has lost his, or more usually when the mother's indicates 
a higher or nobler rank. Some girls of noble birth will marry 
below their rank, but would have their children brought up in 
their own home, and among their father's children, and adopt 
his totem. An illegitimate child if not acknowledged by the 
supposed father cannot adopt his totem but the mother's, 
especially if a female. 

The following are some distinguished Totems : — 

Erin, the elephant, the totem of the original line of the Kings. 

Ogun, the god of war, the totem of the original line of the 
Basoruns. 

Both were merged in King Abiodun, who chose to adopt 
his mother's totem, the Basoruns being pre-eminent in 
those days. Hence the present line of Alafins' is Ogun. 

Opo (a post). The totem of a noble Oyg family. 

Okin (the love bird) Totem of the Olofa and the Oloro. 

Iko ,, Onigusun. 

Agan ,, Elese. 

Edu ,, Onigbayi. 

Ojo (rain) ,, Ologbin. 

Agbe or Ade ,, Olukoyi. 

Agbo (a ram) ,, Ajagusi father of Erinle. 

Oge ,, Enira and the Onipe. 

Ekan ,, Olufan 

Elo ,, Elerin. 

Eri ,, Oloyan 

Tji ,, Onigbeti. 

Ogo ,, Ijesa families. 



YORUBA NAMES 



87 



WTien the Orukg (name) the Oriki (attributive) and the Orile 
(totem) are given, the individual becomes distinctive, the family 
is known, and he can at any time be traced. 

Two men may be found with the same name, but rarely with 
the same cognomen together, and more rarely still with the same 
totem as well. The man is universally known by his Oruko 
(name) familiarly by his Oriki (attributive). The Oriki is always 
used in conjunction with his Orile (the family stock or totem) 
expressed or understood : always expressed when endearment or 
admiration is intended. The Orile of course is nevef used by itself 
as it would be meaningless. 

A name given in full will appear thus : — 





Male. 






Female. 




Orukg 


Oriki 


Orile 


Orukg 


Oriki 


Orile 


Adewale 


Agana 


Erin 


Ibiyemi , 


Abebi 


Ikg 


Abigdun 


Ajamu 


Ogun 


Olawale 


Asabi 


Opo 


Adejumg 


Ajagbe 


Oguri 


Morenike 


Abeje 


Agan 


Oyebgde 


Akunyun 


Opo 


Mgwumi 


Agbeke 


Agbo 


Adegboye 


Isgla 


0km 


Layemi 


Atgle 


Ogun 


Fagbemi 


Akawo 


QgQ 


Ibisgtg 


Akanke 


Iji 


Moslem 


children although n 


amed trom 


the Arabic 


: calendar 


yet must have their Oriki and ( 


Drile ; thus 


: — 




AUhu 


Isgla 


Opo 


1 Fatumg 


Akanke 


Ojo 



\ 



Irregularities Introduced 

The introduction of Christianity and the spread of British 
influence over the country have been the causes of great irregulari- 
ties in names which one meets with now in the Yoruba country. 

The early missionaries, notably those of Sierra Leone, abolished 
native names wholesale, considering them " heathenish," and 
substituted European names instead : such names are naturally 
transmitted to their children anglice, hence the incongruities 
of names that puzzle a foreigner on his first landing in West Africa. 

But with more enlightenment and better knowledge, a gradual 
change is coming over this ; educated Yorubas cannot see why 
Philip Jones or Geoffrey Williams should be more Christian than 
Adewale or Ibiyemi ; he knows what these mean, the former to 
him are but mere sounds, nor are their meanings — even wh( n 
known — an improvement on his own. 

But nothing sticks so fast as a name, and nothing more difficult 
to eradicate ; for even in spite of the better knowledge Christians 
still give to their children foreign names although in conjunction 
with a Yoruba name. That an English name should be given at 



88 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

all can hardly be contended to be necessary, but the practice is 
defended by many who plead for it a universal custom, e.g. that 
a convert to Mohammedanism adopts a Moslem or Arabic 
name ; analogously therefore only Biblical names ought to be 
given, but in the British West African colonies, Yoruba and other 
tribes with Christian names include English, Scotch, Irish, Welsh, 
German and Dutch names ! 

But there is another consideration that helps to rivet the yoke. 
It invariably appears that most of those who have EngHsh or other 
foreign names, are in some way connected with English education 
and with Christianity, and are certainly in a way more enlightened 
than their pagan brethren, or considered to be so ; hence it comes 
to pass, that many who originally were free from the brand of a 
foreign name, nevertheless still regard it as a mark of enhghten- 
ment, and would voluntarily adopt one or more with their own 
real names in order to be considered " up-to-date ! " Nothing 
but a thoroughly sound education all round (and not limited to 
individuals here and there) can remedy this evil : but in the mean- 
time educated Yorubas are losing the knowledge and the genius 
of the method of Yorubas in naming their children. Thus according 
to the system now prevailing, where one English name is given 
or adopted, it is used as the first name, and the Yoruba name as 
the second or surname, e.g. James Adesina. Where two Enghsh 
names are given the Yoruba is placed either in the middle as James 
Adesina Williams, or at the end, as James Williams Adesina. 
The reason for this want of system is due to the introduction of 
another element unknown to Yorubas and is, therefore, a compli- 
cation, viz., the prefix of Mr. to the names. This is foreign to Yoruba 
genius arid language and makes a hybrid mixture, as it would 
appear if attached to any historic Biblical name ! The essence of 
the incongruity in this matter lies in the conversion of Yoruba 
names into a surname or family name and it is in this particular 
that the most appalling absurdity occurs. Thus some retain 
their own Yoruba name as a family name to the exclusion of their 
father's. Others use their father's name as a surname and suppress 
their own native name or use it as a middle name. Some adopt 
a brother's name as a family name if he is considered more eminent, 
thus excluding the father's name and suppressing their own. 
Some use the father's " Amutorunwa" as Taiwo, Idowu, Ige. 
Some use the father's " Abiso " as Adejumo Layode, etc. Some 
use the father's Oriki as Akawo, Alade, Ajasa, some use the 
father's title as Apena, Dawodu, Mogaji, etc. All this in order — 
as is alleged — to make the individual distinctive but as a matter 
of fact to make the Yoruba conform to the English method, 



YORUBA NAMES 89 

because that is considered more civilized ! Some ridiculous results 
have thereby been obtained e.g. a woman is called Mrs. Taiwo, 
who was not twin-born, and probably her husband was not either, 
but it may be his father or his uncle ! One fails to see how that 
system makes her distinctive among thousands of Taiwos in the 
land whilst it is so inappropriate. 

A man was called Babarimisa because he was a posthumous 
child ; on his becoming " civilized " his children according to the 
English system of transmitting names became so many masters 
and misses " Babarimisas " with himself alive I And yet these 
absurdities are supposed to be necessary to Christianity and 
civilization ! But when we remember that the fathers of western 
civilization, as also the founders of Christianity with the early 
Christians and martyrs have transmitted their names down to 
history in a simple form as Yoruba names, it becomes evident 
that the present method is not essential to Christianity or 
civihzation. 

And even now, we know that the familiar English method 
does not prevail all over Europe, not even all over Britain, for 
in the north of Scotland, it is usual for married women to retain 
their maiden names, and children take their father's Christian names 
for their own surnames, and yet, not only are the Scotch a highly 
civilized people, they are also intensely Christian. From all this 
we may learn that it is not necessary to do violence to an original 
language as the Yoruba in order to be considered civilized or 
Christian. Whatever incongruities may have been perpetrated 
in the past, it behoves those who are responsible for the keeping 
of the language in its purity to cease from inflicting these anomalies 
on those brought under their influence, especially among converts 
to Christianity. 

Neither Christianity nor civilization requires a man's name to be 
given to his wife or children, considering the purpose for which 
children are named amongst the Yorubas. 

On the coast, the corruption of the Yoruba language is pro- 
ceeding at a rapid pace. What began with the names is now extend- 
ing to phrases and expressions which are idiomatic English in 
Yoruba words. The writer thinks it will require a strong effort 
to preserve the Yoruba language in its purity. 



Chapter VI 

YORUBA TOWNS AND VILLAGES 

All Yoruba towns with very few exceptions are built on one 
uniform plan, and the origin of most of them is more or less the 
same, and all have certain identical features. A cluster of huts 
around the farmstead of an enterprising farmer may be the starting 
point : perhaps a halting place for refreshments in a long line 
of march between two towns. In any case it is one individual 
that first attracts others to the spot ; if the site be on the highway 
to a large town, or in a caravan route, so much the better ; the 
wives of the farmers ever ready to cater refreshments for wearied 
travellers render the spot in time a recognised halting place : the 
more distant from a town, the more essential it necessarily 
must be as a resting place ; if a popular resort, a market soon 
springs up in the place, into which neighbouring farmers bring 
their wares for sale, and weekly fairs held : market sheds are built 
all over the place and it becomes a sort of caravanserai or sleeping 
place for travellers. 

As soon as houses begin to spring up and a village or hamlet 
formed, the necessity for order and control becomes apparent. 
The men would thereupon assemble at the gate of the principal 
man who has attracted people to the place and formally recognise 
him as the Bale or Mayor of the village (Ht. father of the land) 
and thenceforth the mayoralty becomes perpetuated in his family, 
with a member of the family either the son or the brother or a 
cousin, succeeding in perpetuity. This however is the only 
hereditary title in the village. The house of the Bale becomes the 
official residence, and is thenceforth kept in good repairs by the 
men of the town, and the frontage of his house becomes the 
principal market of the town. 

The Bale having been elected, he in turn appoints his Otun 
(or right hand man), Osi (the left) and other civil officers of a town. 
Even in this early stage, the necessity for defence is felt ; the 
bravest man among them will be chosen as the Jagun or Balogun 
and he in turn picks out his heutenants, so that in any matter 
that may spring up, either civil or mihtary everybody knows his 
duty and whom to look up to. 

The village must necessarily be answerable to the nearest town 
from which it sprang and thus an embryo town is formed. There 

90 



YORUBA TOWNS AND VILLAGES 9I 

are cases in which an influential personage with a large following 
deliberately built a town, and is from the beginning the recognised 
head of the same. 

In fact if there are but half a dozen huts in the place, that of 
the headman or embryo Bale would be recognised. 

From this we see how it is that the principal market of the town 
is always in the centre of the town and in the front of the house of 
the chief ruler. This rule is without an exception and hence the 
term Oloja (one having a market) is used as a generic term or title/ 
of all chief rulers of a town be he a King or a Bale. 

Minor chiefs also have smaller markets in front of their houses. 
Market squares as a rule mark out the frontage of a chief or a 
distinguished man, and the principal entrance to his compound 
is marked out by its having a street verandah added to it right 
and left, and if a King two or more kobis are added to the street 
verandah. The larger the town, the larger the principal market 
to which everyone resorts for morning and evening marketings 
and is the general rendezvous of the town on every national or 
municipal occasion. It is planted all over with shady trees for 
sellers and loungers of an evening. The central market also 
contains the principal mosque of the town, and the fetish temple 
of the chief ruler, if he be a pagan. 

Every town is walled, deep trenches are dug all round it outside, 
the more exposed to attack the more substantial the wall and 
for the greater security of smaller towns a bush or thicket called 
Igbo He (home forest) is kept, about half to one mile from the 
walls right round the town. This forms a security against a sudden 
cavalry attack, and a safe ambush for defence, as well as hiding 
places in a defeat or sudden hostile irruption. The tall trees in 
them are sometimes used as a watch tower to observe the move- 
ments of the enemy : except in tim.es of profound peace, it is penal 
to cut trees in the home forest. Highways are made through them 
straight to the town gate, and are always kept in excellent repair. 

Towns in the plain that are greatly exposed to sudden attacks, or 
those that have had to stand long sieges have a second or outer wall 
enclosing a large area which is used for farming during a siege. 
This wall is called " Odi Amola " (wall of safety), sometimes it 
is called " Odi Amonu " (wall of ruin) as the wall has been to them 
the means of safety, or has been unavailing for its purpose. 

The town gates are always massive and a gateman lives in a 
house adjoining the town wall, he collects the tolls from passers by. 
Market people have a fixed amount to pay, varying from 40 to 
200 cowries, and farm people contribute a trifle from whatever 
they are bringing home, a head or two of corn, a handful of beans, 



92 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

a yam or two, a few dry sticks and so forth, for his sustenance, 
r' The gates are named after the most important town they lead to. 
^ Each of these gates is in charge of a chief who is responsible to the 
town for whatever may occur there or along the route to which it 
leads right on to the frontier, also for keeping the walls of that 
part in good repairs, as well as the highway leading out of the town. 
This chief it is who is to put his servant there for collecting tolls, 
the amount to be collected from each person being fixed by the Town 
Council. This servant is expected to pay to his master a certain 
sum every 9 or 18 days, being the average of what the gate yields. 
Whatever surplus there may be in a brisk season, he appropriates 
to himself or if there is a deficit, he is expected to make it good. 

In Yoruba Proper (including the Egbas) streets are not properly 
made or named except large thoroughfares leading to town gates, 
and the squares and markets of chiefs. 

It does not appear that any care is ever taken to choose the site 
of a town, as the neighbourhood of large streams : wells are 
sunk by individuals to supply drinking water. The streams that 
may be flowing through the town are fouled beyond degree, and 
are by no means fit for drinking purposes. For keeping the town 
clean every compound looks after its own frontage and surround- 
ings, in the market place every seller sweeps the space around her 
stall. 

The system of sanitary arrangements is the most primitive 
imaginable ; near every large thoroughfare or a market place is 
a spot selected as a dust heap for the disposal of all sorts of refuse 
and sweepings of the neighbourhood, and at intervals, fire is set 
to the pile of rubbish. 

Here and there about the town are found leafy groves, usually 
clumps of fignut trees, the neighbourhood of which is unsavoury 
from the disposal of sewage. These sites are always infested by 
crowds of those keen-scented scavengers of nature, the hungry - 
looking vultures. Important chiefs have a large area of land 
enclosed within their compounds within which spots are selected 
for sanitary purposes. 

Every chief is responsible to the town council for the quarter of 
the town in which he resides. 

When a town has grown up to the town wall, the town council 
has to determine the amount of area to be taken in, and a new wall 
is built enclosing such area. The whole of the town participates 
in the work, even women and children also are engaged in fetching 
water to mix the swish and in providing refreshments for the men- 
folk ; the streets of the area simply follow the old line of the 
foot paths to the farms now enclosed within the town. 



YORUBA TOWNS AND VILLAGES 93 

It must strike the most casual observer who has travelled over 
the Yoruba country that those portions of the country which are 
supposed to be more backward in intelligence viz. the Ijesa, Ekiti, If e 
andother provinceshave betterstreets than themoreintelhgentones. 
Old men attribute this fact to the effect of the intertribal wars. E.g. 
in the case of Abeokuta, however well laid may have been the 
streets of the original farm villas, when the refugees began to flock 
in, attention could scarcely be paid to the ahgnment of the houses 
each one simply tried to find out the whereabouts of the members 
of his township, and thus they grouped themselves by their famihes 
in every available space around the chief of their town. 

The same may be said of all the towns of Yoruba proper which 
have suffered from the vicissitudes of war. In later years the 
.people seem to have lost altogether the art of laying out and naming 
streets as is the case in Ijesa and Ekiti towns. 

Roads. — ^Before the period of the revolutionary and intertribal 
wars, the bulk of the Yoruba people Hved in the towns of the plain, 
the towns in forest lands were small and unimportant, except the 
city of Owu, all below this being regarded as in the outskirts. 
Roads at that time were comparatively good. The country being 
flat was interspersed with hundreds of towns and villages, the 
inhabitants of which enjoyed the blessings of peace, and the 
fruits of their industry. Good roads were then made from one 
town to another, and were annually repaired at the time of the 
drummers' and Egugun festivals. They were wide enough for the 
easy progress of the company of dancers at these festivals and also 
for nuptial processions. 

But they are now neglected not only that they may impede the 
easy advance of invaders, but also to aid the concealment of the 
panic-stricken inhabitants, who at the first alarm disappear at 
once in the bushes surrounding their towns and villages. 

§ 2 Peculiar Yoruba Towns 

There are some important towns which form exceptions to some 
of the rules above given ; in their case the cause is due to intertribal 
and the revolutionary wars as we shall find in detail in the second 
part of this book. 

I. Abeokuta. — This large town is a conglomeration of villages, 
to the number of 153 with Ake as the chief. Each township (as they 
are called) has its own organization. Ake can scarcely be said 
to have any authority over them in their own local affairs, except 
such authority as is granted by the Principal Chiefs or " Ogbonis " 
who form the chief political organization. Hence we see that there 
is not one central market for the town as such, in the frontage of 



94 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the chief ruler. There may be several Baloguns or Serikis, there 
are at least four kinglings, and several Ogboni houses, each section 
being jealous of its liberty and tenacious of its rights. Abeokuta 
in short was never organized as a single town : its pecuhar pohtical 
organization should be the subject of another chapter. 

Ibadan. — This town was originally a small Egba village around 
the site of the central market, but occupied by a portion of the 
army that destroyed the city of Owu and devastated the Egba 
villages. After the withdrawal of the Egbas into Abeokuta, the 
motley crowd forming the army settled at Ibadan. Ibadan has 
since been the mihtary encampment of Yoruba; the titles, order of 
precedence, etc. are chiefly military. For that reason there is 
not one family in which the title of Bale is hereditary and no official 
residence for the Bale. The Bale is always chosen from old 
retired war-chiefs, always by sufferance of the Balogun, who has 
equal authority and more real power. But when the Balogun has 
become old and has already won his laurels, he is expected to be the 
next Bale. A young Balogun with his future to make yields the 
mayoralty to an older chief, usually the Otun Bale. This is the 
only town where such arrangement exists. Ibadan has no hom.e 
forests. Attempts were made from time to time to form one, but 
always without success through the habit of firing the fields year 
by year at the dry season. They are in no fear of invasion. To be 
in Ibadan is to be in a place of safety. Hence the Ibadans style their 
town " Idi Ibon " i.e. the butt end of the gun ; for the same reason 
also the town walls are very indifferently kept. 

Ilorin. — Ilorin is in one respect different from the other Yoruba 
towns, in that the ruhng powers are aliens to the place. How it 
came about that Ilorin a pure Yoruba town, and one time the third 
city in the kingdom fell into the hands of ahens and to this day 
owns allegiance to other than its rightful sovereign, will be told in 
its place ; but to this day the principal market and the chief mosque 
of the town remain still in front of the house of the founder and 
rightful owner of Ilorin. 

These three towns, Abeokuta, Ibadan, and Ilorin are the largest 
towns in the Yoruba country, and probably in West Africa, and the 
three are the outcome of the revolutionary and intertribal wars. 



Chapter VII 

PRINCIPLES OF LAND LAW 

The Land laws of the Yoruba country are simple and effective, 
there being no need of any complicated or elaborate laws, as there 
is enough land for all the members of the various tribes. Whatever 
land is not effectively occupied is for the common benefit of all ; 
no one need own any land which he cannot utihze, except farm land 
left fallow for a short period. 

Theoretically and traditionally we have seen above that 
Yoruba land belongs to the AlAfin of Oyo as the supreme head of 
the race. " The land belongs to the King " has passed into a 
proverb. But it must be understood, that it is not meant that the 
land is the private property of the King, it is only his as representing 
the race, in other words, Yoruba land belongs to the Yoruba people 
and to no other, hence as the Yorubas are split into so many tribes, 
the head of each tribe, as representing the Alafin is the King for 
that tribe, and he holds the land or division of the. country for the 
benefit of the tribe, and even he has no power to alienate it perma- 
nently of his own accord, to an ahen. All lands, therefore, includ- 
ing forests and the plain are owned by some tribe or other, and no 
one belonging to another race or another tribe can make use of 
the land without the permission of the king and chiefs who hold / 
the land for their tribe. Members of the tribe have no difficulty 
at present in obtaining as much land as each requires for agricultural 
purposes in which every one is supposed to be engaged ; with the 
increase of population however, it is felt that some difficulties 
will arise in future, but the chiefs can cope with such cases. 

Lands are never sold, but may be granted to outsiders for life, and ^ 
to their heirs in perpetuity ; but where the land so granted had 
been under cultivation, it is understood in every case that the fruit- 
bearing trees, especially the palm trees, and kola-nut trees, etc., on 
the land are not included in the grant ; hence the common 
expression " The grantee is to look down not up," i.e. he is to 
confine his attention to plants he has cultivated and not on fruit- 
bearing trees he met on the spot. 

Land once given is never taken back except under special 
circumstances as treason to the state which renders the grantee 
an outlaw, and he is driven altogether from that state or tribe, 
and his land confiscated. Even when left unutilized, if there 

95 



96 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

are marks of occupation on it, such as trees planted, or a wall 
built, etc., it cannot be taken back without the consent of the 
owner. 

There is no subject in which the Yoruba man is more sensitive 
than in that of land. This normally quiet and submissive people 
can be roused into violent action of desperation if once they per- 
ceive that it is intended to deprive them of their land. 

We shall see in the course of this history that the non-ahenation 
of their land forms one of the main conditions of their admitting 
a European officer among them by the Ibadans at the beginning 
of the British Protectorate. 

The forests are under the direct guardianship of the hunters 
who form among themselves a fraternity recognized all over the 
land, subject of course to the town authonties. Any laws, rules, 
or regulations relating to forests that are to be made, must recognize 
the rights, privileges and services of the hunters, especially, as 
it is by them effect can be given to those laws. It is their duty to 
apprize the chiefs of any town, of any spies, expeditions, or raids 
that have that town or its farms for their objective. Crimes 
committed in the forests must be traced, and the authors tracked 
and unearthed by them. Any animal bearing traces or marks of 
their bullets or arrow-wounds must be restored to them. All 
information relating to forests must be given by the hunters to the 
chiefs of the town. 

The forests are free to every member of the tribe for procuring 
building materials, medicinal herbs, firewood, etc. 

Inlieritance. — When a man dies, his farms are inherited by his 
children, and so from father to son in perpetuity, and, Hke the house 
are not subject to sale. If his children are females, they will 
pass on to the male relatives, unless the daughters are capable of 
seeing the farm kept up for their own benefit. If minors, they may 
be worked by their male relatives until the boys are of age to take 
up the keep of the farms. 

No portion of such farms can be ahenated from the family without 
the unanimous consent of all the members thereof. 

These are the simple, fundamental and universal laws appUcable 
to all the tribes in general, but subject to modifications and 
development according to the local exigencies of each place. 
These exigencies may be due to the proximity of large populations, 
and consequently higher value of land, the nature of the land, 
whether forests with economic plants in them or pasture land, and 
the locality whether near the coast where foreign intercourse affects 
local habits, or far inland where the tribes remain in their sim- 
plicity. But in every case the ruling of the local chiefs, and their 



PRINCIPLES AND LAND LAWS 97 

councillors must necessarily be the law for that tribe since the 
fundamental laws are not violated. 

None but citizens born or naturalized can own land permanently 
in this country. Land granted to foreigners for a specific purpose 
reverts to the owner or the state on the grantee leaving the country. 

These are the general laws, to be observed rather in the spirit 
than in the letter. 



Chapter VIII 

MANNERS AND CUSTOMS 

§ {a) Social Polity 

The ancient Yorubas were very simple in their manners, their 
tastes, and habits. Their houses all on the ground floor are built 
in compounds called Agbo He (lit. a flock of houses), that is to say 
in the form of a hollow square, horse shoe or a circle, enclosing 
a large central area, with one principal gateway the house being 
divided into compartments to hold several families, all more or less 
related or united by ties of kinship, or friendship. One piazza 
runs right round the whole, and is used for all ordinary purposes 
by day, and for the reception of visitors. The central area is 
used in common by all the inmates for general purposes ; usually 
horses, sheep and goats are found tethered in it. 

The compartment of the head of the house is usually opposite 

the main gateway or a httle to the right. It is larger, the roof 

1 loftier and the piazza more spacious than the rest. Here the master 

\ is expected to be found at all times (during visiting hours) by a 

1 doorway which leads to his harem at the back of the house. This 

J particular doorway is known as where the master " shows his face " 

\ (for the reception of visitors) ; it is an essential adjunct to the 

/ houses of chiefs or important personages, being used for no other 

Vvpurpose, for at all other times it is kept closed. A high wall often 

encloses a garden attached to the back of the building, the space 

enclosed is always in proportion to the size of the house, the rank, 

and the means of the owner. The houses of great men contain 

smaller compounds at the back attached to the main compound, 

these are called Kara or retiring quarters, each devoted to some 

purpose from a harem to stables for horses. 

The houses of chiefs are distinguished by a " street verandah " 
(as it is called) on either side the main gateway on the outside, 
varying in length according to the taste and capacity of the owner ; 
the roof of which is an extension or projection of that of the main 
building. It is used for lounging in the afternoons, at the cool 
of the day. A small market is almost always to be found at the 
frontage of such houses. The walls of the houses rising from 7 to 
8 feet in height are built of mud, the roof consequently is low, and 
is covered with a tall grass called Bere or with Sege or Ekan. In 
forest lands where these are not obtainable, a kind of broad leaf 

98 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS 99 

called Gb6d6gi is used instead. The houses are without any decor- 
ations ; the walls are plastered and polished with black and 
sometimes red earth by the women whose work it generally is. 
The houses of Kings and Princes are embellished with a sort of 
wash which is a decoction made from the skin of the locust 
fruit. 

Now and then attempts are found at artistic decorations, by 
figures traced on the wall ; but more commonly the front posts of 
the verandah consist of carved figures of various kinds, equestrians 
swordsmen, hawkers, etc. The floor is generally rubbed and 
polished once a week. 

The household furniture consists chiefly of cooking utensils, 
waterpots, and a mortar with pestles, all of which are deposited in 
the front and back piazzas of the house. 

The use of bedsteads, tables and chairs being unknown, they 
squat or lie on mats instead. In modern times those who can 
afford it keep a few chairs for the accommodation of visitors in 
European garb, who find it difficult or are unaccustomed to squat 
on the ground. It is not unusual to find skins of buffaloes, leopard,"") 
lion, or a large bullock hung up on the walls of the front piazza t 
which are taken down for distinguished visitors to sit on. ^ 

All their valuables are kept in pots or bags made of bamboo 
fibres, and placed in one corner of the sleeping room, so that in all 
cases of alarm, whether of fire, or night attack by robbers or slave- 
hunters, everything of value is soon taken away to a place of 
safety whenever possible. 

As all the houses are invariably built with mud ceilings which 
are themselves fire-proof, the losses in cases of fire are small, and 
of hardly any account, especially if the doors are kept rigidly 
closed. The property of the women consists chiefly of cloths, 
beads, with goats, sheep and poultry, these usually form a sub- 
stantial part of their " dowry." 

The head of the compound's principal wife is the mistress of 1 
the compound, as himself is the master, and all heads of the / 
several families within the compound are bound to pay their \_ 
respects to them the first thing every morning, the men prostrating 
on the ground, and the women sitting on the ground and reclining 
on their left elbow. 

[This is the ordinary mode of saluting a superior in this country; ") 
but when greater respect is to be shown, or pardon asked for some 
offence committed, the men while prostrating lay the right and 
left cheek alternately on the ground, and the women wrap their 
cloth lower down, loose their head tie, and recline alternately on 
the right as well as on the left elbow. 



J 



\ 



100 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

r~ Before Kings and great rulers, for a show of homage, they run 
y to the porch of the house and back three times, throwing dust on 
/their head or roll on the ground]. 

They are chiefs in their respective domains, where they transact 
all business affecting the welfare or interest of the people in their 
respective households. All important cases are judged and 
decided in the master's piazza, and he is responsible to the town 
authorities for the conduct of the inmates of his compound ; hence 
the saying: — "Bale ni gloran awo " (the master of the house 
must be privy to all secrets). His word is law, and his authority 
indisputable within his compound, hence also another saying, 
" Ob^ ti Bale ile ki ij§ lyale ile ki ise e " (the sauce which the 
master of the house cannot eat or which is unpalatable to him, 
the mistress of the house must not cook), which when applied 
simply means that no one should go contrary to the wishes of the 
master of the house. 

To this high authority belongs a leg of whatever is slaughtered 
in the compound, from a chicken to a bullock ; whether killed for 
sacrifice, or for a festival, or for any other purpose of whatever kind. 

At the death of the master of the house, when the period of 
mourning is over, his successor be it his son, or his brother or 
cousin as the case may be, removes from his own compartment 
into that of the master. He is installed into his place by his feudal 
lord, or in case the deceased be a public man, by the Town Council, 
with a title that attaches him to one of the senior chiefs. But 
before the ceremony can take place, the roof over the late master's 
compartment (be it old or recent) is taken down and rebuilt afresh ; 
hence the term for a successor, Arole i.e. one who roofs the house. 

Personal Appearance. — In early times very little regard was 
paid to personal appearance. Boys and girls up to the age of 8 
years walked about in puris naturalihus ; from that period up to 
the age of puberty they were allowed the use of aprons, the cut and 
shape for either sex being different, the one from the other, that 
for boys being called hante, that for girls tdhi. The whole period 
was regarded as one of unencumbered freedom which ceases with 
the act of marriage. It was not an uncommon thing to find girls 
of the age of 15 when engaged in hard work whether at home or 
in the farm with absolutely nothing on,' and even their mothers 
on such occasions were but scantily clothed. This custom, how- 
ever, excepting among some tribes as Ijgsa and Efon has completely 
died out. The extreme poverty of the people in those early times 
was probably the chief cause of such disregard of personal attire. 
In modem times better attention is paid to their outward appear- 
ance, and although from the standpoint of an enlightened civiliz- 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS lOI 

ation there may be much to be desired still among the ordinary 
class of people, yet on the whole, especially amongst the well-to-do, 
the Yorubas dress very decently and becomingly as compared with 
former generations of the same people. 

Great regard, however, has always been paid to personal 
cleanliness, and for this the tribe is specially remarkable. The 
word Qbitn (filthy) as applied to a person carries with it such a 
feeling of disgust which beggars description. The men are always 
shaved and hence, when one appears unshaven, unwashed, and with 
filthy garments on, you may safely conclude that he is mourning, 
for these are the signs of it. Children and youths are either 
entirely shaved or a strip of hair running from the forehead to the 
occiput along the top of the head is left which is sometimes made 
into circular patches. As it is considered decent and cleanly 
for men to carry their heads bald so on the contrary " the hair is 
the glory of the woman," and much attention is paid to it. Wom.en 
have their hair done up in all sorts of ways dictated by their usual 
vanity; the unmarried ones are distinguished by their hair being 
plaited into small strips (from 8 to 14) from the right to the left 
ear, the smaller and more numerous the plaited strips the more 
admired. Married women on the other hand adopt other forms of 
plaiting ; usually they commence on both sides and finish up in 
the middle in a sort of net-work running from the forehead to the 
occiput ; ornamental forms are adopted by some, such as stuffing 
the hair in the middle of the head after being gathered from all 
sides ; and others again as the Ijebus finish up theirs in the shape 
of a pair of horns. 

Character. — As regards the social virtues, the ancient Oygs or 
Yorubas proper were very virtuous, loving and kind. Theft was 
rare as also fornication in spite of the scantiness or often times 
complete absence of clothing to which they were accustomed. 
Friendship was more sincere. Children were more dutiful to their 
parents, and inferiors respectful to their superiors in age or position. 
Liars were formerly punished by exclusion from society and from 
the clubs ; but as the whole people took dehght in ambiguous 
forms of speech which were not understood by those unaccustomed 
to their habits they were regarded and spoken of as prevaricators. 
Now, as formerly they are remarkably patient of injuries, and 
would never resist or retaliate except in extreme cases when 
provocation became insupportable. They are characteristically 
unassuming in their manners and submissive to their superiors. 
They are very shrewd in driving bargains, and hence foreigners 
speak of them as " African Jews " in reference to their commercial 
instincts. 



102 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

No nation is more remarkable for cautiousness and for putting 
themselves generally on the safe side. When powerless they would 
submit to oppression and wrong to any extent so long as they find 
resistance useless ; but when an opportunity offers for asserting 
their rights and overthrowing their oppressors, they are never 
slow to embrace it. The common proverb embodies this trait 
in their character : — " Bi owo eni ko te ekii ida a ki ibere iku ti o 
pa baba eni," i.e., if one has not grasped the handle of his sword 
he should not attempt to avenge the death of his father. 

Intercourse with other nations has caused various forms of 
vice to creep in among modern Yorubas or Oyos ; their natural 
timidity and submissive spirit have produced a degeneracy of 
manners so as to be considered essentially lacking in straightfor- 
wardness ; they can effect by diplomacy what they cannot 
accompHsh by force, in which proceeding the Oygs differ widely 
from the other tribes, some of whom are characterised by a proud 
and intractable spirit, but they are no less determined in carrying 
out their object although the means used to effect their purpose 
is essentially different. 

Yorubas as a whole are social, polite, and proverbially hospit- 
able. Licentiousness is abhorred. There are well attested cases 
where a member of a family would be condemned to slavery by a 
unanimous vote of all the relatives when he has brought disgrace 
on the family. Sometimes forcible emasculation is resorted to as 
a punishment (as in cases of incest) or total banishment from the 
town and neighbourhood to where the offender is not likely to 
be known. 

A peculiar custom was prevalent amongst the ancient Oyos. 
Young men were permitted to have intimate friends among the 
fair sex, and they were often the guests of each other. At the 
annual festivals the young man and his female friend would meet 
and take an active part in the ceremonies, and render pecuniary 
services or manual assistance to each other. At the time of harvest 
the female friend with the full consent of her parents would go 
for about a week or a fortnight to assist her male friend in bringing 
home his harvest while he himself may be engaged on his father's 
farm. Yet notwithstanding so much mutual intercourse strict 
chastity was the rule not the exception. The practice, however, 
has long been discontinued, owing to the degeneracy of the present 
age. 

Filial Duties. — It was the duty of every male child to serve 
his father although he might be married and have a family of his 
own unless he was exonerated from the obhgation by the father 
himself. As a general thing a small portion of farm work was 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS I03 

allotted to him as his day's work after attending to which he may go 
and see after his own business. So while serving his father, every 
son had his own private farm also to manage ; and it was on his 
own portion of land that the female friend used to render assistance 
in time of harvest. 

All married women were also engaged in their husband's farm 
and the harmony that usually prevailed between them and the 
young people was very remarkable. 

Young men were not allowed to marry until they could give 
their father 10 heads of cowries, equal in those days to ;^io sterling. 
They were seldom married before the age of 30 and the young 
women, not before 20. Promiscuous rnarriages were not allowed, 
freeborn must be married to freeborn, slaves to slaves, and 
foreigners to foreigners. Except amongst the Igbonas consan- 
guineous affinity however remote was not allowed. 

Privileges of the Great. — Kings and nobles who kept harems 
were exempted from this rule of affinity ; they were at liberty to 
multiply wives from any tribe, and these wives might be of any 
condition of life. It was the pride of Kings to fill their harems 
with women of every description, such as foreign women, slaves, 
hostages, daughters of criminals given as the price of redemption, 
or seized in confiscations ; dwarfs, albinoes, hunch-backs, and any 
other in whose persons there should appear any signs of lustis 
naturcB. Such beings, being considered unnatural, were the King's 
peculiar property. Hence the saying " Oba ni ije ^rg" (it is Kings 
who are to feed on the uncommon). 



104 



THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 



OYO MARKS 





/idq/a //? je^ ^//?ree 





/ii?q/<7//7se/j gf/oi/r 





/ar/affb/7j ^fAe/\dq/a 





Ae/re or Gp/rpdg Ae/re orOo/??^ 



Pe/e 





Ture 



OWU MARKS 




Ada/a O/otve/ 




Ae/re O/om/ 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS 



io5 



EGBA MARKS 





JEBU MARKS 





FE MARKS 






IJESHA MARKS EFON MARKS 




) 'I \ 'I 

IGBOMNA MARKS YAGBA MARKS 





ON DO MARKS 




I06 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

§ {b) Facial Marks. 

The facial marks are for the purpose of distinguishing the 

various Yoruba families. Of these, only those of the principal 

ones can be indicated. They are designated : — (a) Abaja, (b) 

Keke or Gombo, (c) Ture, (d) Pele, {e) Mande and (/) Jamgbadi. 

I. The Oyo marks are : — The Abaja, Keke or Gombo, 

Ture. 

{a) The Abaja are sets of three or four parallel and horizontal 

lines on each cheek ; they may be single or double, each line 

being from half-an-inch to one inch long. 

Lines in sets of three : — 

~ ~ or ~ 

The double sets are those of the Royal Family' of Oyo the 
single that of the older line of Basoruns. 
Lines in sets of four : — 

^11 or = 

These marks distinguish some noble families of Oyo. 
Variations of these marks are made by adding three perpendi- 
cular lines to them as a family distinction thus : — 

iU _ or LU 



The latter of these is common amongst the Ibolos and Epos. 
{b) The Kek^ or Gombo consists of four or five perpendicular 
and horizontal lines placed angularly on each cheek ; they 
occupy the whole space between the auricle and the cheek bone ; 
three small perpendiculars are also placed on the horizontal 
lines on both cheeks thus : — 



1 Besides the above, broad ribbon marks termed Eyo drawn 
along the whole length of the arms and legs are distinctive of the 
Royal Family of Oyo. For whereas homeborn slaves and others 
closely related to Royalty may have the facial marks distinctive 
of the house to which they belong, the Eyo marks are reserved 
strictly for those actually of Royal blood. 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS 



107 



A variation of this is sometimes made by adding on the left 
cheek the Ibamu i.e. a line running aslant from the bridge of the 
nose to the horizontal lines. This also is for the purpose of distin- 
guishing a family. 



\ 



When the lines are rather bold, the mark is termed Keke, 
when fine and faint it is termed Gombo. The K^ke or Ggmbg 
is a common mark of all Qyos and of the Egbado tribe. 

(c) The Ture consists of four perpendicular lines somewhat like 
the Gombo, but longer, with the three small perpendiculars 
but without the horizontals. 

,.,l ! 



{d) The Pele are three short perpendicular lines over the cheek 
bones, each about an inch long. They are not distinctive 
of any particular family, but are used generally by some men 
who disapprove of tribal distinctions, usually Moslems, but are 
loth to remain plain-faced, e.g. 



{e) (/) The Mande and Jamgbadi are no longer in use ; the 
latter is said to be distinctive of aliens naturalized amongst 
Yorubas. 

These are the principal facial marks. The other principal 
Yoruba families are distinguished by a slight variation of these 
marks : — 

II. Egba marks: — The Abaja dr6 i.e. the upright Abaja 
is distinctive of the Egbas. They consist of three perpendicular 
lines each about 3 inches long on each cheek. The younger 
generations, however, have their lines rather faint or of shorter 
lengths undistinguishable from the Pele. 



III. The Egbado marks are the same as the Oyo marks 
generally as this family remained in close connection with Oyo 
and in their allegiance to the Alafiin long after the break-up of the 
kingdom, and the establishment of tribal independence. 



io8 



THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 



IV. Owu marks. These are of two kinds, both being 
variations of Oyo marks. They are: — (a) Ahaja Olowu and 

{b) Keke Olowu. 

(a) The Abaja Olowu are three horizontal lines surmounted 

by three perpendiculars each about one and a-half inches long. 



(b) The Keke Olowu is like the Keke or Gombo with the lines 
discrete or interrupted. 



V. Ijgbu marks are also of two kinds (a) the first is much like 
the A baja Olowu (the tribe from which they are partly descended) 
but with the horizontals curved. 



(b) The other is the Abaja Oro of the Egbas. The former is 
more distinctive of Ij§bus. 



VI. If§ marks are three horizontal lines like those of the 
original Basgrun's marks, each being shorter, about half-inch 
long. Otherwise Ifes are usually plain faced. 



VII. The Ondos and Idokos have only one bold line or 
rather a gash about one and a half inches to two inches long over 
each malar bone. 



VIlI. The Ijesas as a rule have no distinctive marks ; they 
are mostly plain-faced ; some families, however, are dis- 
tinguished by having on each cheek 5 or 6 horizontal lines. 
They are closely drawn, and much longer than any Oyo mark, 
e.g. 



Amongst the Efons an Ekiti family, the lines are so many 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS lOQ 

and so closely drawn that the whole together form a dark patch 
on each cheek, e.g. 



IX. The Yagbas are the most north-easterly tribes of 
Yoruba ; they are distinguished by three long lines on each 
cheek, far apart behind, but converging to a point at the angle 
of the mouth, e.g. 



X. The Igbominas are by some classed with Qyos, and by 
others with Ekitis. It will, perhaps, be more correct to say they 
are Oyos with Ekiti sympathies. They occupy a midway 
position between the two ; and so their facial marks are parallel 
like those of Qyos, but long and far apart like those of Yagbas, 
yet not convergent in front e.g. 



On the whole, speaking generally, the finer and more closely 
drawn lines, are more elegant than the same drawn bold, and 
too far apart. 



We may note how each of the principal marks is indicated 
by a different verb signifying "to mark": — 
To be marked with the Pele is O kQ Pele 

„ „ „ Abaja ,, O hu Abaja 

Keke ,, O ja Kekg 

,, ,, ,, Gombo ,, O iva Gombo 

§(c) Diet 

The diet of the common people is plain but substantial. The 
morning meal is a kind of gruel made from corn flour (maize or 
guinea corn) and taken between 7 and 8 a.m. with Akara an oily 
cake made of beans, ground and fried. There are no fixed hours 
for meals. After midday, dinner is served, each family consulting 
its own convenience as to the precise time of eating. Supper is 
taken in the evening generally between 7 and 9 p.m. 

In ancient times pounded yam is served out in a large bowl 
or earthenware vessel, and both the father and his children and 
grandchildren sit around it to partake of the food. Each one dips 
his hand into the dish and takes a morsel in strict order of seniority. 



^ 



no THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the youngest present acts the part of a servant and waits on his 
seniors ; and whether the food be sufficient or not care was usually 
taken to leave some portion for him. 

The staple articles of diet are yam and yam flour, corn and 
corn flour, beans of various kinds, cassava, sweet potatoes, etc. 
Only the well-to-do can afford to indulge in flesh diet daily, the 
poorer people are mostly vegetarians, except when animals are 
slaughtered for sacrifice they seldom partake of meat ; game, 
however, is plentiful. Dwellers on the coast have a plentiful 
supply of fish. 

Of fruits the principal are : — The shea fruit in the plain, the 
Oro {Irvinga Barter i Hook) in forest lands. The Ori or black 
plum {verbenacea cuneata), locust, bananas, plantains, pawpaws, 
oranges, lime (citron), pine-apples, the well-known kola nut, and 
the bitter kola {garcinia kola-Heckel) , ground nuts {Arachis hypogea) , 
etc. Their drink consists of palm wine, bamboo wine, and beer 
made from the guinea corn or from maize. 

§ {d) Dress 

The Yorubas clothe themselves in loose flowing robes like the 
people of the East, whence indeed they trace their origin. The 
men wear gowns, vests, and a very free and ample kind of trousers 
called S6k6t6. In lieu of the gown sometimes a sheet of cloth 
three yards by two is thrown around the body for a covering, 
passing under the right arm-pit, and overlapping over the left 
shoulder. 

In ancient times the gowns were made very plain and were 
, of purely native manufacture. They were without embroidery 
on the breast and around the neck as at present ; only kings and 
chiefs wore gowns made of superior stuffs richly embroidered. 
The covering for the common people is called Eleg6d^. The 
weavers have a standard of breadths for all home-made cloths. 
Men's coverings are made of 14 breadths, and women's of 10, 
of about 5 inches each. Cloths of wide breadths— say about a 
yard — were first imported from Or6 or Ila in the Igbomina 
province, and were known as Akoko cloths being chiefly the pro- 
duction of Akoko women ; hence the practice spread all over the 
country for women to manufacture broad width cloths, and men 
narrow ones. Formerly only men were weavers and tailors, but 
from intercourse with other nations the women now engage in the 
same craft. 

The vest spoken of above is known as kukumg over which the 
gown or loose cloth is thrown. It is sleeveless and without a collar, 
and open in front ; it may be made of any kind of native stuff. 



i 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS HI 

but that which is made of Alari (crimson dye) or of SSmayan 
(rough silk) is the most respectable, as it is at the same time most 
costly. 

Another kind of vest is termed Ewii ; this is much like the former, 
but with sleeves ; it is more commonly used in modern times ; 
in full dress it is often worn under the gown, and is always made of 
white stuff. 

There is another form which seems to be of foreign importation 
used only by big men ; it is- full of pleats below reaching to the 
calves, but the sleeves are very ample and long, about 12 inches 
longer than the arms, very wide at the end. It is called Dandogo, 
and is worn in lieu of the gown. 

Togo is a sleeveless dress like kukumo but smaller and simpler ; 
it is the soldier's dress and is often worn with a turban wrapped 
round for a belt. 

There are three sorts of gowns, the Suliya, Agbada and Girike. 
The Suliya is the smallest, plainest and lightest ; always made 
of white material, it reaches much below the knee, open at the 
sides, with the arm stretched the sleeve would reach as far as the 
wrist, but long and pointed below. The Agbada is a larger form, 
always made of dyed or coloured stuff. It reaches as far as the 
ankles, much embroidered at the neck and breast, open at the 
sides, and quite covers the arms. The Girike is the largest and 
heaviest, it is like the Agbada but more ample ; it is much 
embroidered, reaching also as far as the ankles, and extends 
beyond the arms. 

Trousers (called Sokoto) are made of different shapes and 
lengths, but all are kept round the waist by a strong cord. They 
are worn below the vests. They consist of the following : — 

(a) Ladugbo is the commonest, worn by young and working 
men, it is quite free, but somewhat tight at the knee where it 
terminates. It is now out of fashion. 

(b) Aibopo, also common, worn by all classes. It is free but 
tightened towards the knee where it terminates. 

(c) The Alongo. This is tight throughout, and is not unlike a 
bishop's gaiters. It reaches below the knee, and is used chiefly 
by sportsmen. 

(d) The Kdfo is a tight-legged dress like the Alongo, but reaches 
as far down as the ankles. It is worn by warriors and ruffians 
generally. 

(e) The Ketnbe. This is made like the Aibopo but richly 
embroidered about the legs with threads of crimson dye. This 
is the kind usually worn by nobles and gentlemen. 

(/) The Efa or Abenugbangba. The name (wide-mouthed) well 



112 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

describes the nature of the trousers. It is a kind that is very 
free, longer than the Aibopo, is somewhat shaped like European 
trousers, but stops short a little below the knee. 

(g) The Wondo is made entirely like the European trousers. 
Though once fashionable, yet is now entirely out of use. 

{h) The last is the Agadansi. This is adopted from the Nupes, 
by whom it is commonly used. It extends from the waist to 
the ankles ; it is very free throughout save at the ankles where 
it terminates and is heavily embroidered there. It is often made 
of two or three j^ards wide (sometimes more) so that when the feet 
are thrust in at either end, and the cord drawn above, it gathers 
into a large volume between the legs. 

The men's head-gear is usually a cap (Filk) of which there are 
two kinds ; the ordinary filk which is about lo inches long, rather 
close fitting, and is bent upon itself on the top. The turban is 
generally wound round it by Moslems and full-dressed gentlemen. 
The other kind is used generally by young folks, and is called 
Fild Ab'eti i.e. the ear-covering cap. It is shaped like the sector 
of a circle, the pointed ends being used — as its name denotes — for 
covering the ears in cold weather. But when used otherwise the 
pointed ends are tmned fore and aft, the point on the forehead 
being tilted up in a sporting manner to show the under -surface 
prettily done up wth cloths of bright colouring : it is then termed 
Lahankadd. 

Hats made of straw, and ornamented with coloured leather are 
worn solely for protection from the sun : the crowns are large 
enough to accommodate the turbaned head. 

The women's dress is much simpler, two or three wrappers 
and a head dress or circlet complete their toilet. Unmarried 
women generally use two wrappers, the under wrapper being fixed 
above the breasts. This is made of fine cloth and is heavier. 
The upper is fixed about the middle of the body ; and is made of 
lighter cloth. To these married women add a third, used as a 
shawl, or covering for the head and back. Underneath all these, 
and immediately next the body is worn from the age of puberty 
a short apron or petticoat reaching the knees, and tied round the 
waist with a strong cord or band. This is called T6bi. 

Female headgear consists of a band, of about 6 to lo inches 
wide and 5 feet long (more or less). This is wound twice round 
the head and tucked on one side. It may be of plain cloth 
or costly, as she can afford. Well-to-do ladies use velvet 
cloths. 

Hats are used only as sunshades ; the crown is small for the head 
but the rim is as wide as an open umbrella. 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS II3 

Camwood to the feet and stibium to the eyelids complete the 
female toilet. 

§ {e) Marriage 

In ancient times the Yorubas were mostly monogamic ; not 
from any enlightened views on the subject however, but rather 
from necessity ; for, although polygamy was not actually forbidden, 
yet only rich folk could avail themselves of indulgence in that 
condition of life. 

Besides, in a community mainly pastoral and agricultural, 
where all were peaceful, and no one engaged in any occupation 
perilous to the lives of its male population e.g. warfare, sea- 
faring, deep mining, etc., where wants were few, and those easily 
satisfied, the young men married as soon as they were of an age to 
support a family, and therefore a superfluous female population 
was hardly ever known. 

The marriage laws and customs have undergone changes brought 
about by intercourse with other peoples, but the chief features in 
them are still preserved. 

Where all things are equal and normal, there are three stages 
to be observed, viz. i. An early intimation. 2, A Formal 
Betrothal. 3, The Marriage. 

1. An early intimation. — It is generally the duty of the female 
members of the family to look out for a wife for their male relative ; 
girls are generally marked out from childhood as intended for a 
particular young man, with or without her knowledge ; this is the 
first stage in the process. Mutual relations at this time are of 
an informal nature ; much depends upon subsequent events, 
especially on the girl's liking for the man when she is of age, and 
the consent of the parents. There are other important factors 
in the matter, but for the former, ways and means are found for 
the girl to make the acquaintance of the future husband. This 
period is also employed in making a close acquaintance with each 
other's family, for before a formal betrothal is made the relatives 
on both sides will first satisfy themselves that the family of the 
other side is free from the taint of any hereditary disease such as 
insanity, epilepsy, leprosy, etc. and also whether they be insolvent 
debtors. As mutual understanding becomes established, presents 
are usually given at the New Year, and at other annual festivals. 
This period will last until the girl is of marriageable age. 

2. The Betrothal, — This is called the " Isihun " or formed consent. 
No girl will marry without the consent of her parents ; and it is 
rare for a girl to refuse the choice of her parents. The family oracles 
are invariably consulted before the final decision is arrived at. 



114 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The ceremony of betrothal is a very important one ; it is 
generally performed in the night, when all the most important 
members of the family on both sides will be at leisure to be present, 
as well as their intimate friends. The young man is to present 
40 large kola nuts, some money, and several pots of beer for the 
entertainment of those present. The kola-nuts have to be split, 
and all present as well as important absentees must have a share 
of them, indicating thereby that they are witnesses of the betrothal. 
From this day, the girl is not to meet her fiance or any member of 
his family without veiling or hiding her face. 

Then follows what is known as the AnS or " dowry." The 
bridegroom-elect has to present to the parents of the intended 
bride, choice kola-nuts, some alligator pepper, and bitter kolas.* 
Also a fine wrapper of good quality, a large covering cloth, 
a head tie, and some money according to his ability. . Well-to-do 
families rarely require more than 10 heads of cowries in these 
days, in earlier times one head was considered ample — only as 
a token. 

Whatever variations may be in these presents, the kola-nuts of 
both kinds and the alhgator pepper are invariable and essential. 
If the girl happens to be doing debtors' service at the time, the 
young man will pay the debt and release her, before the marriage 
can take place. 

This event (the betrothal) is also an occasion of rejoicing, 
feasting, and offering of sacrifices. The parties themselves are 
to carry special propitiatory sacrifices offered to the evil one. 
This is termed " Ebg lyawo " i.e. A bride's sacrifice. 

3. Marriage. (Igbeyawo). — Marriages may be solemnized at 
any time of the year, except during the fasts, but the most usual 
time is after the season of harvest, and following the Egugun 
festival. 

The bride is conducted to her new home always in the night, 
attired in her best with a thin white cloth for a veil, and attended 
by her companions all well clothed, with drums, and singing and 
dancing. The bridal party is met at the entrance gate of the 
bridegroom's compound by a female band of the house specially 
selected for the purpose, and by them the ceremony of washing 
the bride's feet is performed, and then the bride is literally lifted 
and borne into the house. Hence the term for marriage " Gbe 
lyawo " i.e. lifting or carrjdng the bride. She is then conducted 
into the bathroom where she is washed, rubbed down, perfumed, 

' This is really not dowry but symbols of future relationship 
between both families. 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS II5 

and dressed up afresh, and then conducted into the apartment of 
the head lady of the house. She now becomes the inmate of that 
house for life. 

The bride is usually brought with her idols, and furnished from 
her home with every thing that appertains to the female depart- 
ment of house-keeping, including cooking utensils, brooms, and 
other articles for house use. 

If she gives satisfaction to her husband, and friends, presents 
are sent on the next day to her parents, she herself is covered 
with trinkets (consisting chiefly of corals and other costly beads, 
gold necklaces where they are obtainable, etc.) and the festivities 
continue for at least three days. 

A bride who is found unchaste is rather hardly used and some 
times severely punished to the extent of having her tied^ and 
severely flogged, thus compelling her to name her violator so as 
to have him severely fined. No ornaments are allowed her 
and she may be ordered to perform errands out of doors unveiled, 
the next day, or may be sent out with a pitcher for water ! Other- 
wise, a bride is never seen out of doors for 12 months at least 
after her marriage, except closely veiled, and with attendants. 

In the case of Moslems, liturgical forms of ceremonies are per- 
formed by the priest in the house or in the mosque. This is 
termed Isoyigi. Such women alone in former times had the 
privilege of covering their head with a light shawl when out 
of doors ; but the practice has now been extended to all married 
women. 

Widowhood and Remarriage. — Three months is the period of 
mourning in Yoruba, during which time widows remain closely 
indoors ; they may spin, dye, or do any home work, but must do 
nothing that will take them out of doors. Among other signs of 
widowhood is an entire absence of personal attention, they neither 
bathe nor do up their hair, nor change the cloth they had on at 
the time of the husband's death. 

This period over, they are open to offer of marriage from mem.bers 
of the deceased husband's family. Where there are several 
women, the heir (usually the eldest son or younger brother) who 
succeeds to the headship of the house, usually inherits the majority 
of the women, except of course his own mother. The custom 
is for each man to send his chewing stick (tooth brush) round to 
the woman of his choice, she is expected modestly to decline 

' This gave rise to the proverb " Tani de o ti o nka oko " i.e. 
who has tied you that you begin to name a violator ? The equiva- 
lent of Qui s'excuse s'accuse. 



Il6 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

it once or twice ; but if she refused it the third time, the refusal 
is taken as final. 

The following peculiarities mark Yoruba wedded life : — 

1. Women are never really married twice ; they may be inherited 
as widows, or taken for a wife outside the late husband's family, 
but the marriage ceremony is never gone over again under any 
circumstances. 

2. Once married they are attached for ever to the house and 
family of their deceased husbands ; hence it is more usual for widows 
to choose another husband from the same family. 

3. No woman is without a husband, except in extreme old age, 
but every woman must in any case have a male protector who is 
responsible for her. 

4. Divorce is very rare ; so rare as to be practically considered 
X as non-existing. It is by no means easily obtained especially 

when there are children of the union. 

The causes that may lead to a divorce are : — Adultery with the 
husband's blood relation, kleptomania, repeated insolvency, 
especially such as may bring trouble to the house. A woman 
may apply for a divorce for extreme cruelty, which can be testified 
to, and ill-usage. 

But these causes notwithstanding a divorce is never granted by 
the rulers of the town until all possible means of reclamation have 
been exhausted. 

5. A woman divorced from her husband can never be married, 
or taken up legally by another man ; hence the saying A ki isu 
opo alkye (no one can inherit the relict oi a living man). 

Under purely Native Government the above rules still hold 
good. 

Other Recognized Forms of Marriage 

There are cases in which all the above forms and ceremonies are 
not gone through, and yet the woman is regarded as the lawful 
wife of the man of her choice. Mutual consent is the only thing 
indispensable. Of such cases, some may be girls who when of 
age, will not accept the man chosen for them from childhood, 
except one of their own choice. Some may be widows who failed 
to be mated at the house of her late husband. Some may be 
slaves who have redeemed themselves, or a captive of war, or 
one bought to be made a wife of. In all such cases, the woman's 
free consent, and the recognition of her by the members of the 
man's family, are all that is required for her to be regarded as the 
man's lawful wife. 

There is a third form of marriage which is more common among 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS II7 

Moslems of modern times. In such cases, it is not usual to 
mark out a husband for the girls from childhood ; but when 
they are of age, the father, seeing a young man he delights in, or 
an elderly man with whom he desires to form a connection, if he 
expresses himself willing to accept the gift, the father after a very 
short notice will order his daughter to be washed and dressed 
up and taken over to the man in the evening, as a " Sarahk" 
i.e. a free gift of God ! The|;irl may not even know the man until 
she is taken to him ! 

In such cases a girl that is wild and unruly who is likely to 
bring disgrace on the family receives but a few hours' notice ; 
but a dutiful and obedient daughter will always have her 
feelings consulted, and her wishes granted as to her choice of the 
man and the time of the marriage. Festivities are performed in 
these cases also. 

These are the three forms of wedlock recognized by the Yorubas 
the first being far more binding than the latter two. 

Moslems hold that the Koranic law limits them to four wives, 
and, therefore, the ceremony of Isoyigi is never performed for the 
same man above that number. 

Other wives taken without the ceremony of Isoyigi are known 
as Wahari (a Hausa word) ; they are legal in every way and their 
children quite as legitimate, but both mother and children are 
regarded as somewhat inferior to those others. Amongst pagans 
the " customs " detailed above take the place of Isoyigi with the 
status it confers upon both the mother and the children. 

Only the products of an illicit intercourse are regarded as 
illegitimate. 

§ (/) Trades and Professions 

The principal occupations of men are: — Agriculture, commerce, 
weaving, iron-smelting, smithing, tanning and leather working, 
carving on wood and on calabashes, music, medicine, barbing, 
and other minor employments. 

Agriculture. — This is the most general occupation of the bulk 
of the people. It is carried on with simple and primitive instru- 
ments, viz. a hoe and a cutlass, and nothing more, both of home 
manufacture. Ploughing is unknown, and it is very doubtful 
indeed whether a plough would be of much service to them 
under present conditions ; experiments with that instrument 
by those who understand the use of it have not proved successful. 

The principal articles of food and of commerce grown are : — 
Corn (guinea corn in the north and maize in the south), beans of 
several varieties, ground nuts [arachis hyPogea), yams of various 



Il8 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

species, sweet potatoes, koko (colocasiaantiquorum), pepper, piper, 
calabashes and other kinds of gourds, coffee, cocoa, kola nuts, 
vegetables of all sorts for home consumption, cotton for weaving, 
etc. 

When a plot has been worked with rotation of crops for a 
few years, it is left to lie fallow for some years whilst contiguous 
plots are put under cultivation, and so on alternately ; manuring 
is unknown. The soil is remarkably fertile under present system. 

Women and children assist in reaping and in bringing harvest 
home. No beasts of burden are employed in agricultural operations. 

All farmers and men of any importance have generally smaller 
farms nearer home " Oko Utile " and a more distant one generally 
in the forest " Oko Egdn." When engaged in the nearer one, 
they work from 6 or 7 a.m. to 5 p.m., with intervals for meals, and 
then return home ; but at the distant farm, they invariably 
remain there for weeks and months before returning home. 
Regular farmers do so only at -the annual festivals. In these 
farms, not only are fruits of the earth cultivated but also poultry 
and smaller cattle are reared for the market. Fairs are held period- 
ically in some central farm markets where these products are dis- 
posed of to market women from surrounding towns and villages. 

Although the soil is well adapted for raising fruits, yet fruit 
trees are rarely cultivated for the supply of markets. 

Commerce. — Commerce comes next in the order of im.portance. 
Yorubas are keen traders, they are to be found in every part of 
neighbouring countries for that purpose. A large trade is carried 
on by barter. Cowry shells, the medium of exchange, being too 
clumsy for large transactions, are used only for small exchanges 
locally ; the very small species are used by travellers. Costly 
beads are used by many on distant journeys for trade, they are 
valued as precious stones. Thus the products of the north are 
given in exchange for those of the south, and those of Yoruba 
land for those of neighbouring states always by barter. Both 
sexes are engaged in trade but each in his own line. 

Currency. — Metallic currency was unknown previously to the 
arrival of European traders, and even as lately as 1897 in places 
far off from the coast coins were regarded more or less as a curiosity. 
Silver was better appreciated than gold or copper, because it can 
be converted to ornaments. Silversmiths abound in the country 
whilst there were no goldsmiths. Shells then stood for money 
and are thus calculated : — 

40 cowries = i string 
50 strings = i head 
10 heads = i bag 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS UQ 

The value of a cowry was never fixed. Countries nearer the 
coast can obtain them with greater faciUty than those inland, 
and therefore they are of higher value in the interior ; but since 
the British occupation of Lagos the principal port of the Yoruba 
country, and English coins began to circulate in the country, 
the rate of exchange became practically fixed at 6d. for a " head " 
(the usual standard of calculation) i.e. 2,000 cowries ; hence 3d. 
= 1,000 cowries. But coppers being considered inferior in value, one 
penny is taken at 300 cowries each ; 3d. in coppers then would be 
900 cowries. Cowries are an absolute necessity at the present 
stage of the country, and should be used pari passu with coins 
for purchases below one penny. Fruits, herbs, and small articles 
of food may be purchased for a few cowries, beggars collect them 
by two's and three's from passers by, and thereby earn enough 
to keep life going ; to what extent they are rcire, to that extent 
the hardships of life are felt in the land. . 

The custom of stringing cowries was for the facility of counting 
large sums ; they were usually strung by 200 in 5 strings of 40 
each, three of 66 or two of 100 each and with a discount of one per 
cent. 

Esusu is a universal custom for the clubbing together of a number 
of persons for monetary aid. A fixed sum agreed upon is given 
by each at a fixed time (usually every week) and place, under a 
president ; the total amount is paid over to each member in rotation. 
This enables a poor man to do something worth while where a 
lump sum is required. There are laws regulating this system. 

Weaving. — This also is carried on by both sexes but in different 
styles of manufacture. Men weave cloths of narrow breadths 
about 5^ inches wide called Alawe. The loom is operated upon 
N^dth both hands and feet ; the threads of the warps are so arranged 
that they open and close by a mechanical contrivance worked 
by both feet moving alternately as the pedals of an harmonium, 
whilst the shuttle about 8 by 2 inches carrying the woof is 
tossed and caught by the right and left hand alternately through 
the opening, the disengaged hand being rapidly used in ramming 
in the thread. The cloth is woven in one long strip and then cut 
to the required lengths and tacked together. 

Tailoring is done mostly by men only as it is only men's dress 
which requires a tailor. It includes embroidery made in the neck 
and breast of men's gowns. Women being wrapped in plain 
cloths hardly require tailoring. The stitches are made the 
contrary way to that of European tailors, the needle being pushed 
away from the seamster, and not toward himself. 

Iron Smelting was carried on more largely in earlier than in 



120 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

modern times. Certain districts are rich in iron ores, its iron 
production gave its name to the city of Ilorin, from Ilo irin, iron 
grinding, also to El eta a district of Ibadan " Eta " being the term 
for iron ore. Certain districts in the Ekiti province are also famous 
for their iron ores from which good steel was made, such as Oke 
Mesi. Charcoal from hard wood, and the shells of palm nuts are 
the materials generally used for generating the great heat required 
for the furnace (called Ileru) which is kept going all the year round. 
Iron rods and bars of European commerce being cheaper are fast 
displacing home-made products, and here and there all over the 
country the furnaces are being closed, and soon will doubts begin 
to be expressed as to whether Yorubas ever knew the art of smelting 
iron from the ores ! 

Other products of the mines e.g. gold, silver, tin, etc., are not 
known among the Yorubas. 

Smithery is carried on largely. Before the period of intercourse 
with Europeans, all articles made of iron and steel, from weapons 
of war to pins and needles were of home manufacture ; but the 
cheaper and more finished articles of European make, especially 
cutlery though less durable are fast displacing home-made wares. 

There are also brass and copper smiths who make ornaments 
from these materials ; for this purpose brass and copper bars are 
imported from foreign parts. 

Workers in leather were formerly their own tanners, each one 
learns to prepare for himself, whatever leather he wants to use ; 
black, white, green, yellow, and brown are the prevailing colours 
given to leather. They are now largely imported from Hausa- 
land, principally from Kano. 

Every worker is expected to know, and to be able to execute 
the various crafts performed with leather, e.g. saddlery, sheaths 
to swords and knives, leather ornaments on hats, waistbands for 
children, leather cushions, bolsters, boots and shoes, sandals, etc. 

It may be remarked that shoes and boots are used only by riders 
on horseback, and therefore they are always made with spurs 
immovably fixed upon them. 

Music is a favourite pastime and gives occupation to many, 
both men and boys. 

Musicians also have first to learn how to manufacture the 
instruments they have to perform upon, hence each one can easily 
repair a damaged instrument. 

Yoruba music has yet to be studied and reduced to a system 
by a competent musician ; how essential this is can easily be 
recognized when we consider how much time and trouble is spent 
in acquiring the art, and how much the practice of it enters into 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS 121 

the varied life and conversation of the people. Having learnt 
how to make their instruments, they then begin to learn how to 
speak with them, an operation to which the Yoruba language 
readily lends itself, as it consists chiefly in modulation of the 
voice ; this the instruments try to imitate. The praises and 
attributes of great men and distinguished names are got up, and 
the various measures in dances are learnt. There is no sound 
more common in Yoruba towns than what Europeans term 
" tomtoms." Musicians are in requisition at weddings, funerals, 
in processions of all kinds religious and otherwise ; they are constant 
attendants on all great men, and many of them parade the streets 
asking alms on their drums. 

Musical Instruments used by the Yorubas are of two classes 
only, viz. wind and percussion. 

{a) The Ivory trumpet and the Kakaki introduced from the 
Hausa and Nupe are used for the AlAfin alone. The Fami fami, 
Okinkin, Igba, Tiyako fife and the Oge. These are the principal 
wind instruments. 

{h) The Koso is the AlAfin 's drum, and the Ogidigbo is used 
only on the occasion of the AlAfin and theBasorun dancing on the 
annual festivals. 

The Calabash drum — ornamented with strings of cowries — 
is called Sek^r^. The Yangede, Dundun, Bata, Aye, Sami, 
Siki and the Apinti are all ancient drums. The Aro (cymbal) 
the Bembe, introduced from Hausa, and the Gangan the noisiest 
but most popular are of recent invention. These are the percussion 
instruments. 

Stringed instruments are rarely used, except by Hausa mendi- 
cants. 

Medicine. — There are certain persons, doctors by profession 
(general practitioners) to whom people resort on an emergency. 
They are called Adahunse. There are no institutions like hospitals, 
but some of these doctors do keep on their premises a number of 
invalids suffering from chronic or constitutional diseases, e.g., 
leprosy, insanity, chronic ulcers, etc. Many of these patients 
being unable to pay the doctor's fees, style themselves " Gba 
mi o ra mi " i.e., help me and appropriate me. Such persons 
on being cured become the property (or perpetual house servant) 
of the doctor. 

Formerly there were certain clans known as medicine people, 
and were licensed as such by the King. For instance, the 
inhabitants of the towns of Ogur6, Ogidi, Abe, Agberi, Apat^, 
Arohungbe. They were remarkable for their skill in using secret 
poisons, and crimes committed by them generally went unpunished, 



122 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

they being under the special protection of the King. They are 
expected to be at the King's service when required, but it meant 
death to any of them if the poison given to the King for his use 
upon his enemies did not take fatal effect. 

There was also a particular family of Efon descent living at 
one time at Oyo said to have belonged to the Ondasa tribe. Their 
great ancestor was said to have been invited to the capital bj' 
one of the early Kings of Oyo for medical advice when all his 
wives were barren. His prescriptions were successful, and so he 
was detained at Oyo and rewarded with a high rank and position 
in the palace amongst the household officers. His descendants 
are now distinguished from the citizens of Oyo by the totem OgQ 
(a club) being affixed to their names. 

The art of medicine is kept a profound secret by those who 
profess it ; an increase of knowledge can only be gained by an 
interchange of thoughts between brother professionals ; many 
die without imparting their secrets to others, and thus much 
valuable knowledge is entirely lost. But some do impart their 
secret to those of their children male or fern. ale who show special 
aptitude for such knowledge and whom they particularly l6ve. 

On the whole we can unhesitatingly assert that those men 
who are specialists in one or two particular branches but who do 
not make the practice of medicine a profession can be more con- 
fidently relied upon. 

Carpentry is in a very backward condition. Of joinery they 
have no idea whatever. Carpenters are called Gbenagbena. 
They are the crudest and most primitive of handicraftsmen ; their 
services are not much in requisition. 

Carving in wood is executed in a rather primitive way but such 
natural genius is displayed by some men, that it is a matter of 
surprise that such artistic achievem.ents can be displayed by an 
illiterate person, and with tools so simple and primitive. 

The Yorubas of the Egbado district are said to be the best artists 
in the country. They certainly have in their forest&^^vood most 
suitable for carving purposes. / 

Calabash dressers are always found in a row in market places 
plying their trade ; all sorts of geometrical figures are traced or 
cut in calabashes ; some designs are exquisitely correct and 
beautiful. Names, mottoes, and phrases are burnt into calabashes 
by educated artists, figures only by the uneducated. These 
designs are recently being imitated by Europeans under the term 
of Poker Work. 

Seamanship. — There are very few large rivers in Yoruba land 
and nearly all of them fordable during the dry season, consequently 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS I23 

only in coast towns and on the Niger are canoemen found who 
make any pretence to seamanship. 

When the inland rivers are swollen by rains, large bowls and 
very large calabashes are used in ferrying passengers across. The 
passengers sit on them with their luggage, with the ferryman in the 
water, pushing the freight across. 

All canoes are dug out from large trees. Our canoemen cannot 
really be called experts, as they rarely sail out of sight of land, 
and canoes can ill endure any storm or tempest ; nevertheless, 
when war canoes are rigged up and manned, they are handled with 
no little skill in their fights, sham or real. In the title of Aromire 
(i.e. one in friendly terms with water) we have preserved a chieftain 
who ranked as an admiral in the olden days of sea fights. 

Fisheries. — Deep sea fishing is but little practised, the rivers 
and lagoons furnish all that they can harvest. Shrimps and oysters 
are plentiful in their season. The fishing industry is of course 
confined to coastal towns, and as there are no means of supplying 
inland towns the consumption of the fresh article is confined to 
the coast. 

Building as a profession is almost unknown ; houses as a rule 
are built by men clubbing together, but there are always a few 
experts among them in particular lines, either in building the mud 
walls or in roofing and they distribute themselves accordingly. 
These are always in requisition whenever they can be spared 
from their farms. Large works are undertaken and arranged for, 
when all hands can conveniently be spared from their farms. 

Pastoral Work as a profession is carried on only in the northern 
provinces more suited for that purpose from the extensive plain 
and pasture land of those regions. But very few Yorubas are 
found engaged in it. Gambaris (i.e. Hausas) are generally engaged 
by the chiefs to tend their cattle. 

The barbers and ropemakers are also mostly Hausas and 
Fulanis, these are crafts rarely practised by Yorubas. 

These Hausas also perform some minor surgical operations 
such as cupping, bone-setting, tapping hydroceles, etc. Some 
are even oculists, and profess to be able to operate for cataract. 
It goes without saying that much mischief is often done by their 
crude performances. They are unskilled and the instruments 
used are rather clumsy. It is a wonder that more mischief 
is not done, or that they occasionally get good results at all. 

Occupations of Women 

It is specially the province of women advanced in age to seed 
cotton and spin thread. The former is done by rolling out the 



124 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

seeds from the wool between a smooth log of hard wood and a 
polished iron rod, the latter by weighting a thin rod of about 
12 inches long with a small ball of clay about i inch distant from one 
end, attaching the cotton to the other end and setting the ball spin- 
ning like a top, the wool being rapidly drawn out to the required 
fineness. Seeded cotton is rendered fluffy for spinning by being 
attached to the string of a bent bow, and the string constantly 
pulled as if shooting an arrow. These operations being an occupa- 
tion of a sedentary nature, and more suitable for old women are 
performed by them leisurely all day. Reels of spun thread are 
sold to dyers. 

Aged women who reside in the farms also employ their time 
in shelling the kernels from the pcdm nuts, and also tending 
poultry, goats and sheep for the market. 

Dyeing is done by women. They buy a quantity of the yarn, 
bleach and dye them in various colours, and sell them to the 
weavers, male or female. The commonest colour is blue or blue 
black from the indigo dye. The preparation of indigo balls for 
the market is also an important industry. Women are equally 
with men engaged in trading and weaving ; but whereas men 
weave in small breadths and carry on their occupation in courtyards 
or secluded squares in the streets where they can stretch their 
warp 20 yards or more, the women on the contrary fix their 
looms in the piazza of the house, close to the door of their apart- 
ments where they may be seen sitting on the ground, with their 
legs in a hole under the loom ; they weave the cloths in broad 
pieces called Kijipa two or three breadths forming a covering. 

The warp is wound round two stout bamboo poles fixed athwart 
two strong upright posts, top and bottom. There is a mechanism 
by which the threads can be made to cross each other. The 
woof in rods of about a yard long is passed slowly right and left 
as the warp is opened and separated one way and the other, being 
rammed down each time by a flat smooth staff. 

Besides indigo dyes of light blue and dark shades, the scarlet 
called ilaharl and roagh silk, Samayan in grey are the prevailing 
colours of Yoruba yarn. 

Palm oil making and nut oil making from the kernels of the palm 
nuts, as well as shea butter from the shea fruit are exclusively 
female industries. 

Beer-brewing from guinea corn or maize is done also by women ; 
for this they have a sheltered place within or near the compound 
to insure protection against fire. 

A large class is engaged in preparing articles of food. They are 
purveyors of cooked food, keepers of refreshment stalls and other 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS 125 

branches of dietary for the market, especially to accommodate 
working men and caravans. 

The manufacture of beads from the hard shells of palm nuts, or 
from the cocoa nut shells, is an important female industry. The 
former quality is more highly valued. 

Pottery is also a female industry. Men may sometimes be seen 
assisting to dig up the clay and to perform some rough initial 
work, but as a rule the whole industry is in the hands of women. 
The drying, pulverising, sifting, mixing and moulding, are all 
done by women and girls. 

Large pots for brewing beer, and for setting indigo dyes, and 
cooking Eko (the morning gruel) for sale are turned out with 
marvellous skill. Cooking utensils, dishes, water pots, etc., are 
also made for the markets. Some parts of the country furnish 
clay of superior quality, notably Ilorin. 

Although ignorant of the use of the wheel, or any such mechanical 
contrivance used in pottery, yet the figures, forms and shapes of 
the articles turned out are wonderfully correct. 

Every woman whatever her trade may be, is expected to keep 
a few chickens and a goat or two from which she derives smeill 
income for house keeping and general " pin money." The rearing 
of poultry then must be reckoned among female occupations. 

Hair dressing may also be mentioned among female occupations, 
for although the race has not much to boast of in that form of 
natural adornment, yet they often contrive to bring out styles 
and fashions which satisfy them ; but a marked distinction must 
always be made between that of married women and the 
unmarried ; this is a social law which on no account should ever 
be infringed. 

On the whole the women seem to be far more industrious than 
the men, for whereas the men always contrive to have leisure 
hours and off days from work, the women seem to have none. 
Boys and young men certainly have more idle hours than the girls. 
The care of the children also devolves almost entirely upon their 
mother, an inevitable result of polygamy. 

§ {g) Learning 

As the Yorubas have no knowledge of letters, their learning 
consists chiefly in oral traditions. The historians are the King's 
cymbaUists and ballad singers, the chief of whom is called the 
Ologbo or Arokin. They may be compared to the rhapsodists 
of the Homeric age, as they perform almost precisely similar 
functions. They chant to the King the story of the nation, and 
history of former reigns, for his information and instruction. They 



126 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

are kept in the royal service and are well supported. The office 
is hereditary. 

Like many other heathen nations the Yorubas have their 
tradition about the creation and the deluge. It is their belief 
that at the creation men fed on wood and water, that they had a 
long projecting mouth ; that the bat was originally a creature in 
human form, and was a black-smith by trade, and that with his 
instrument he reduced men's mouths to their present shape, for 
which cause he was condemned to lose the human form and to 
assume that of a beast, and to use one and the same mouth for 
receiving food as well as for evacuation. The allegation that 
water was the original food of man is supported by the fact that 
it is the first thing taken by a new-born babe, as well as the last 
thing taken at a man's dying moments. 

§ (h) Wealthy Personages 

There were certain historical personages in Yoruba who were 
noted for their great wealth, viz., Amoloku of Oro, Gedegbe of 
Qfa, Lapemo of Ijomu near C>r6, Onibiy6 of Guguru, Minimi 
of Erubu. There is also a sixth spoken of who resided at Gbudu. 
There was also a lady known as the Olowo of Ijebu. 

§ (i) The Iwofa System and the Laws Regulating it 

The term Iwofa has no equivalent in English. It denotes one 
who serves another periodically in lieu of the interest on money 
lent. In short, it is one in service for interest. 

It has been mistranslated a "pawn" by those who fancied 
they saw a resemblance to it in that system, and are trying to 
identify everything native with those that are foreign, and conse- 
quently, as in other similar cases, much mischief has been done 
thereby. 

The Yoruba man is simply shocked to hear of " pawning " 
a man as is done with goods and chattels ; to pawn in Yoruba is 
ft dogd which term is never applied to a human being. 

It has also been compared to slavery by those ignorant of 
the legal conditions ruling the system ; but an Iwofa is a free 
man, his social status remains the same, his civil and political rights 
are intact, and he is only subject to his master in the same universal 
sense that " a borrower is servant to the lender." 

Iwofas are held quite distinct from slaves ; the verbs applied 
to each system mark the distinction e.g. rd to buy is applied to 
a slave, yd to lend or engage (a hand) to an Iwofa ; consequently 
you can buy a slave, but engage an Iwofa or service man. 

The derivation of the term- is probably from Iwo the entering 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS 127 

into, and Efk a period of six days ; hence an Iwgfa is one who 
enters into a recurrent sixth day service. 

The Iwofa system is a contract entered into in the presence 
of witnesses called Onigbgwo i.e. sponsors, the money-lender 
is termed Oluwa i.e. master, and the worker Iwofa, i.e. a service 
man. 

It is a legal transaction recognized and protected by the laws of 
the country. Whatsoever the amount of money lent, it is the 
law that the service rendered goes for the interest, and only the 
principal is paid back whenever payment is made whether after 
a few days or after many years. 

An Iwgfa may be a man or a woman, a boy or a girl, and the 
laws for each differ accordingly. 

A man Iwgfa lives in his own house and plies his own trade, 
but he is required to clean a piece of land equal to lOO yam 
heaps or an equivalent in his master's farm once a week, the 
Yoruba week consisting of five days. 

The people being mainly agricultural, farm-cleaning is the 
work of their daily life, and is the recognized ordinary system of 
labour. 

Cleaning three hundred heaps is the ordinary amount of an 
average man's day's work, consequently a strong man often 
found it possible to work in three different farms on the same 
day, for different masters, or to do three week's work at a time in 
one farm, and have 14 off days at a stretch, in which he is free 
to follow his own trade without interruption. Special arrange- 
ments can also be made if a longer period is desired, but the 
Iwgfa is bound to make up for the number of days lost. 

This is the original law, but it is subject to slight modification 
or variation in various places, according to the local value, or the 
amount of money lent ; e.g. amongst the Egbas, a whole day's 
work is required instead of a morning's work. But whatever 
modification of the original law is made in any particular locality, 
the law for that tribe is always fixed by authority, and never subject 
to the whims and caprice of an individual money-lender. 

The master is to treat the service man as his social rank demands, 
he mingles freely with his equals in the house or in the field as 
a member of the household. A kind master often allows him 
his breakfast before he quits the field although he is not bound to 
do so, and if a master be too exacting or disagreeable, he may be 
changed any day without any previous notice, once the money 
lent is paid back in full. 

Where the master is a great chief or a rich man, the service man 
may live under his protection and own him his feudal lord ; hence 



128 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

some men never troubled themselves to pay back the money, 
but may rather incur further obligations, being safe and free under 
the protection of a great name. Some men there are ,who are 
better able to do another man's work than their own. 

An Iwofa is never subject to punishment physical or otherwise, 
if he fail in his weekly service, the sponsors are called upon to make 
good the deficiencies. 

In fine an Iwofa differs from a slave in that a slave must live 
with his master, an Iwofa in his own house. A slave can be 
compelled to work for his master every day, an Iwofa for a limited 
amount of work for half a day in the week, and that not by com- 
pulsion but from obligations of honour. A slave can be punished, 
an Iwofa cannot be. A slave has lost his independence and 
political rights, an Iwofa retains both. A slave has no one 
responsible for him, an Iwofa has two at least. In fine an Iwofa 
can go and come as he likes, a slave cannot. 

For women the same law holds good generally but with some 
modifications on account of their sex ; they work generally as 
char-women once a week, and have a meal in the house before 
returning home. In some cases they may live among the women 
folk in their master's house, carrying on their own work, and lending 
a helping hand in the housework and in harvest time do their own 
share of the day's work in the field along with the other women. 

Some are engaged in trade, in which they sell for their master at 
the same time, and bring him the proceeds of his own articles 
as the allotted service rendered. When the trade is done in the 
home market, payments are made every nine days which are 
market days ; when out of town, at the return of the caravan. 

If a service woman is tampered with by the master, the money 
is thereby considered absolutely paid, and the debt discharged. 
If forced against her will, not only is the debt cancelled, but he 
is also liable to prosecution and heavy fines besides to be paid 
both to the woman's husband as damages and to the town author- 
ities as court fees. 

If a young unmarried woman is tampered with, not only is 
the debt ipso facto discharged, but the master has to repay the 
fiance all the money he has spent on her and also a betrothal 
" dowry " to the parents besides. 

If the matter is not arranged amicably and the case has to go 
before the town authorities, the master has to pay, and heavy 
fines are inflicted on him besides. Often has a rich man been 
reduced to poverty by this means and consequently they are 
always very careful. 
If a betrothed girl becomes marriageable whilst in service 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS 12^ 

and her fianU wishes to get married at once, he has only to pay 
back the loan and lead his intended bride away. A woman 
cannot be married whilst doing service work. 

A boy or a girl in service has to live entirely with the master or 
mistress as a domestic servant, inasmuch as their services are 
not worth much and they have to be trained besides, and the 
parent or whoever placed him there is supposed to have his whole 
time to ply his trade and withdraw his child as soon as possible ; 
therefore, the boy must give the master his whole time whatever 
that may be worth. The master is bound to feed him but not 
necessarily to clothe him, although many kind masters do that as 
well. They have a fixed time to visit their parents, usually once 
a week. 

The boys generally tend horses and run errands, and the girls 
engage with the house-wives in domestic affairs. They are 
always with the boys and girls of their own age in the family. 

The law protects such children very strongly. If the child 
refuse to stay any longer with the master or mistress for any cause 
whatever, they are never forced against their wish, but the parent 
or guardian must provide a substitute, or perform himself the 
weekly task. 

If a child die during his or her service, the master must prove 
to the satisfaction of the parents and (if need be) of the town 
authorities that it was not due to any act of carelessness or neglect 
on his part, and that he provided ample medical aid for him. 

The troubles accruing from young Iwofas are often a deterrent 
to the acceptance of them for service ; some folks would expect 
and demand more comforts for their children in service than they 
can provide for them at home. Marriages and funerals are the 
two great causes of money borrowing. 

But this system is not limited alone to the business of pro- 
fessional money-lenders, it enters much into other transactions 
of their everyday life. 

The system of engaging domestic servants for service with 
a monthly wage is unknown in this country, the Iwofa system is 
what is resorted to for that purpose. A parent will even put his 
child into service that way when there is no debt to pay in order 
to train him into habits of discipline and industry, and return 
the money when they feel that the child has been safhciently 
trained. 

Some would do so and put the money into trade and when 
satisfied with the profits made, return the principal and bring the 
child home. 

The system is used also for apprenticeship. A man who wants 



130 THE HISTORY OF THE YOROBAS 

his son to learn a particular trade would put him under the crafts- 
man for the purpose, and obtain from him a certain amount of 
money ; the master, wishing to get his interest out of the boy 
willsee that he learns speedily and well, so as to be of some use 
to him. In this way both are benefited. 

A chief or a well-to-do gentleman with a wild and unruly son 
whom he wishes to tame, or who is indulged at home, would also 
resort to this method for training and discipline ; in such a case 
the boy will remaiii with such a handicraftsman until he is able to 
earn his own livelihood by his craft, then the money is paid back 
and the boy returns home. 

This method of lending money is the only one known for invest- 
ment and is therefore resorted to as their banking system. 

So the Iwofa system may be regarded at one and the same 
time as one for banking, apprenticeship, and domestic service. 

Since the establishment of the British Protectorate there 
•has been more than one attempt made to abolish the system as 
a " species of slavery ! " The Yorubas themselves never at any 
time regarded it as such ; to so regard it must be due either 
to an ignorance of the/ laws regulating it, or because an exact 
equivalent cannot be found in any European system. It can, 
however, be imagined what chaos will result in any European 
country if the banking system, apprenticeship, and domestic 
service were abolished at a stroke — if that be possible. Like any 
other system it may be reformed if given to abuse, that is more 
reasonable and statesmanlike. But to abolish it outright because 
it has no foreign analogue would be to disorganize the social life 
of a people with no compensating advantage to borrower or lender. 
If such were done in this case the greatest sufferers will be those 
it was intended to benefit, viz., the service men themselves. But 
with the country now settled, and everyone free to prosecute his 
business, there must be less of money borrowing and service for 
interest, and thus a gradual change or modification is naturally 
effected in this system, with no tendency to abuse. 

§ (j) Distraining for Debt 

The Yorubas have a peculiar method of forcing paj'ment out 
of an incorrigible debtor. When a creditor who has obtained 
judgment for debt finds it impossible to recover any thing out 
of the debtor, he applies to the town authorities for a licensed 
distrainor. This individual is called Og6, he is said to d'dgd ti 
i.e. to sit on the debtor (as it were). For that purpose, he enters 
the premises, seeks out the debtor, or esconces himself in his 
apartment until he makes his appeeirance, and then he makes 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS I3I 

himself an intolerable nuisance to him and to the members of the 
house generally until the money is paid. 

The distrainor is a man of imperturbable temper, but of a foul 
tongue, a veritable Thersites. He adopts any measures he likes, 
sometimes by inflicting his presence and attention on the debtor 
everywhere and anywhere he may go, denying him privacy of 
any kind, and in the meantime using his tongue most foully upon 
him, his own person being inviolable, for touching him implies 
doing violence to the person of the authorities who appoint him 
the task. He demands and obtains whatever diet he may require, 
however sumptuous and may help himself if not quickly served. 
If he thinks fit, he may lay hold on any poultry or cattle he finds 
in the premises, and prepare himself food, and all at the expense 
of the debtor. He must not take anything away but he may enjoy 
the use of anything he finds in the house. 

Loud in his abuses, intolerable in his manners to all in the 
house whilst going in and out with the debtor, he goes on in 
this way all day, and from day to day if needs be, until even the 
inmates of the compound get tired of this, and then means will 
quickly be found of getting rid of the distrainor by paying off the 
debt. 

§ {k) War 

In early times war expeditions were sent out every other year by 
the AlAfin of Oyo to distant countries chiefly amongst the Popos. 
War then was for spoils and to keep their hands in, and not for 
captives ; the victors rarely pursued the vanquished ; those who 
concealed themselves behind heaps of rubbish, or in any hiding 
place in the town or in the fields were quite safe. When a town 
was taken the shade trees about the principal market — which is 
always in front of the official residence of the chief ruler of the 
town — are cut down as a sign of conquest. Slave-raiding and the 
traffic in human beings did not then exist. Long sieges were 
unknown, for whether victorious or defeated, the presence of the 
Kakanfo or his corpse was expected home within 60 days. 

There never was or has been a standing army, nor any trained 
soldiers (except at Ibadan latterly where the idea began to 
germinate, and some of the chiefs had a number of their slaves 
trained solely for war ; some chiefs had also a corps of boys, not 
to bear arms, but to be attendant on them in battle, in order to 
famiharize them with the horrors of war 1) But according to the 
custom of the country, every man capable of bearing arms is 
expected to serve in war ; but the law did not make it compulsory 
except for men of rank and title, and for home defence. 



132 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

At the close of every war, each one goes away to his farm, 
and, except on an occasion of importance, as when the King's 
messengers are to be received, even the Bale and the Balogun 
could not be found at home during the day at the busy seasons. 

Before the introduction of fire-arrtis (a comparatively recent 
affair) their weapons of war consisted of bow and poisoned arrows, 
a short sword called J^m6 and Ogb6 a kind of heavy cutlass 
used chiefly by the common people. 

As sieges then were of short duration and dways carried on 
in the dry season, there was no necessity to provide against severe 
weather ; the chieftains generally used awnings made of Ayin 
mats spread on four poles. Since sieges began to be carried on 
for more than 60 days, booths of palm branches have come into 
use, and in later times even these have given way to huts and 
houses built of swish. 

The preserved food used in earlier expeditions consisted of 
parched beans, and a sort of hard bread made of beans and corn 
(maize) flour called Akara-kuru. 

By the rules of warfare piye or foraging was permitted. The 
Ibadans, who, more than any of the others carried on war operations 
for longer periods, and over wider regions, were accustomed to 
cultivate the lands all around their camps and in the neighbourhood 
whenever a long siege was anticipated. 

War Titles and Methods 

War titles are of two grades, senior and junior, but both 
are modelled on one and the same plan. 

Senior Grade : — The Balogun or Commander-in-Chief comes 
first with his principal lieutenants the Otun and Osi, that is 
Generals commanding the right and the left wings, then the 
(Asipa), Ekerin, Ekarun and Ekefa i.e. the fourth, fifth and sixth. 
These command the veterans. 

Junior Grade : — The Seriki with his principal lieutenants also, 
viz., the Otun, Osi, with the Ekgrin, Ekarun, and Ekefa. These 
command the young warriors, and those not attached to any of the 
greater war-chiefs. 

The AsAj u is the leader of the van, he too has his lieutenants. 

The Sarumi or chief of the cavalry and his men form a class by 
themselves ; he also has his Balogun of the cavalry, with the 
Otun, Osi, etc. 

" These titles constitute what is termed " Oye Ilu" or "Town 
titles," because they are conferred by Bale or chief of the town and 
the town council, and they are all members of the town council 
with a right to speak and vote. 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS 133 

Among the senior war titles may be mentioned the Bale's war 
chiefs. The Bale himself does not go to war ordinarily, but he 
has his war-chiefs, the Otun Bale, Osi Bal§, Ekerin, Ekarun, 
Ekefa as well, who represent him in war ; they are always chosen 
from among the older men who have past their best days. 

Signification of the Titles 

The term Balogun is contracted from Iba-li-Ogun i.e. lord in 
war. In time of war, and generally in the camp, the Ibalogun 
is not only supreme, but he is also above all laws, he commands 
implicit obedience from all, and he can do whatever he likes. 

The Balogun's Otun and Osi (right and left) are also the Otun 
and Osi of the town and of the army ; they command respectively 
the right and left wings, and they rank next after the Ibalogun. 

The Asipa is a title borrowed from Oyo to satisfy any war-chief 
who, being equal by merit to the Otun and Osi, yet just missed 
becoming either. 

The Ekerin, Ekarun, Ekafa are the fourth, fifth and sixth 
respectively of the senior generals. 

Seriki is a Hausa word signifying a " king." He is practically 
like the Balogun, and is as important among the young warriors 
as- the Balogun is among the veterans. A brave Seriki ranks 
himself next to the Balogun, the Otun and Osi Balogun notwith- 
standing ; for it often happens when he is exceptionally brave, 
that he skips over these and succeeds the Balogun, when a vacancy 
occurs. Otherwise the Otun succeeds. 

All booty and perquisites that fall to the army are divided 
into two unequal parts, the larger portion belongs to the Balogun 
and his lieutenants and the lesser to the Seriki and his lieutenants 
also. The Balogun and the Seriki are each entitled to one half 
of the portion that falls to them, the other half being equally 
divided among the subordinate war chiefs of each respectively. 

In every successful expedition each of the subordinate war chiefs 
is expected to give one half of his plunder or captives to his chief, 
the seniors to the Balogun, the juniors to the Seriki, and they 
themselves also receive the like from their subordinates. 

Subordinate Titles : — Every one of the above chiefs. Senior and 
Junior had his own subordinate chiefs modelled on the same 
plan of Balogun, Otun, Osi, etc., in the same way, these also 
form their companies on the same plan, and so on throughout 
the whole army. By this system every man capable of bearing 
arms knows his right place in the army, so that what appears to 
be a motley crowd is really a well-organised body every man being 
in his right place at the front, the right or the left of his immediate 



134 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

chief, although they lack that co-ordination and precision of 
movements which are the outcome and advantages of discipline 
and drill. 

Other subordinate titles Areagoro, Bada, Ajiya. 

Ar§agoro. — This is the first title borne by a young chief of great 
promise, who, as the heir of a great war chief has just succeeded 
to the headship of a great house. It is a stepping-stone to one of 
the senior grade titles. He is always attached to one of the 
senior chiefs, as his alter ego ; he represents his chief in the councils 
and other important assemblies in the absence of the latter, where 
he can speak and vote with equal right and authority ; hence the 
saying : " Ar§agoro ti o ba gboju t'on ti Oluwa re I'egb^ra " 
i.e. an Areagoro who is bold is the equal of his master. An 
Areagoro remains as such only till a vacancy occurs in one of the 
higher titles suitable for him. 

Bada. — The title of Bada answers in many respects to a knight 
of the middle ages. He is one who is expected to keep at least 
one or two war steeds and a few followers at his own charges, 
to be ready to take the field at a moment's notice, to be an accom- 
plished horseman, a skilful swordsman or lancer, and to fight 
always on horse-back. All the principal chiefs have each at least 
a Bada. The Badas stand in the order of seniority of their respec- 
tive masters and form a corps by themselves. 

Ajiya is a non-descript title borne by any junior war chief who 
cannot for the time being find a place among his peers. He is 
rather a free lance. 

Arrangement of the War Chiefs in Battle 

The Asaju or leader of the van comes first. His company 
begins the fight by skirmishing, and provoking the opposite party. 
He is supported by all the Badas. 

The Seriki comes next with his lieutenants in their proper order, 
and then the real pitched battle begins. Last of all comes the 
Balogun with his lieutenants. The Balogun himself, however, 
does not take any active part at once, until later on, except 
to watch the various movements and generally to direct the 
fight. 

The duties of the cavalry are to reconnoitre, to hover about the 
enemy watching for an opportunity they can take advantage of 
such as a weak or an unguarded point through which they can dash 
to break the ranks of the enemy, and throw them into confusion. 
Also to cover retreats on a defeat or to cut off stragglers when 
pursuing an enemy. 

Occasionally at the height of the battle a brave horseman would 



MANNERS AND CUSTOM'S 1 35 

demoralize the enemy by dashing suddenly into their midst, and 
return with a captive on his horse ! 

The usual method of a pitched battle is for all the war chiefs to 
be disposed, each in his right place, according to their rank and title, 
or as the commander-in-chief disposes, and then each in turn to 
march forward, company by company to the middle line of battle 
to discharge their arms, trying each time to gain more ground. 
This method they call Tawusi. But when later on, the Balogun 
himself rises to fight, that denotes a general charge throughout 
the whole host ; every man must be engaged in fight ; and where- 
ever he fixes the war standard, every one is bound to dispose himself 
about it in due order. • His going forward means that the whole 
army must push forward at whatever cost, for no one whose 
right place is in front dares fall to the rear of the Balogun except 
when hors de combat. 

The Bale's war chiefs need not take any prominent part in the 
fight, but they guard the camp and baggage, support weak points, 
and make themselves useful generally as men vvho must keep cool 
heads while the others are engaged in the excitement of a fight. 
Their chief duty otherwise is to act the part of advisers and 
moderators of rash and hot-headed warriors. 

A synopsis of the arrangement in battle : — 

The AsAju 

Supported by all the Badas 

Osi Seriki Seriki Qtun Seriki 

Ekerin to Ekefa disposed as strategy requires 

Osi Balogun Balogun Otun Balogun 

Asipa, Ekerin to Ekefa disposed as strategy requires. 

The Otun and Osi Bale and other older warriors are to guard 
the rear, camp, and baggage and support weak points. 

War as a profession in this country was always said to date from 
the time of the Fulani invasion and seizure of Ilorin when the 
necessity arose for an organized resistance but the Yorubas generally 
are not considered a fighting race, although they have now and 
again thrown up a general who would be considered distinguished 
in any race. In the later period of their history circumstances 
have brought things about that Ibadan became a centre for all 
warlike spirits of whatever tribe, and consequently it is to that 
place we have to turn, to see the development of warlike proceedings. 

How war is declared. — Every expedition is supposed to be sent 
out by the King (Alafin). It is in his name war was generally 
declared, and his permission or at any rate his assent must be 
obtained before an army can march out. 



136 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

When it has become evident that a place is marked out for 
an attack, a system of exclusive dealings is first established 
between that town and its neighbours ; then follow preparations 
for attack and defence, and when plans are matured then, 
at the usual meeting of the town council in the house of the chief 
ruler, the announcement is made. 

The Balogun (commander-in-chief) rising, would address 
the assembled crowd outside and end with " I leave (such and 
such a place) at your mercy." He is greeted with shouts of 
applause, and a day would be fixed when the war-staff will be 
taken outside the town walls. The marching out of the Balogun 
is always so denoted as the war-staff is always kept with him. 

The War Staff or standard of war is a bamboo pole of about 
four feet in length, and 2\ inches in diameter. It is wrapped all 
over with charms and amulets, and finished up with a globular 
head, the size of a large cocoa-nut. The size of course varies with 
the cost. It is encased in leather with the charms hanging all 
over it. It is always an object of worship. To this day, proper 
standards of war are procured from He Ife and are dedicated to 
Oranyan. Human sacrifices were usually offered to such standards 
before they are taken out to any campaign. Whenever war is 
declared, and it is to be worshipped, priests and priestesses are 
always required for the purpose of offering the sacrifice. 

The Propitiation of Oranyan. — The victim is usually subjected 
to much inhuman treatment on these occasions before being 
despatched. With his hands tied behind his back, he is led to 
the market place, and there paraded from one spot to another, 
and made to do homage to the fetishes there, and to invoke blessings 
on the town and on the chiefs thereof. As he could not conveniently 
prostrate himself before the gods in his bound condition, he is 
assisted with a forked stick, with which he is pushed violently 
down from behind ! Bruised and bleeding, he is to receive 
three strokes on the back with a rod before he is helped up 



agam 



In this way, the unfortunate one is soon exhausted ; he would 
then be literally dragged along into the grove sacred to Oranyan, 
and there beheaded. 

The blood is considered sacred and hence the commander-in- 
chief of the army who must be present on such occasions with 
his staff of principal officers must come forward with each of them 
and have a touch of the blood to rub on their swords, and after 
them the common soldiers would all rush in for a drop to rub in 
their hands, for success in the war. 

The corpse is not to putrefy before the Balogun leaves the town : 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS 137 

it is considered an ill omen if it does. Hence Orauyan is never 
worshipped until they are quite ready to march out. 

The corpse is exposed for seven days, and it is the duty of some 
of the priestesses to bathe it daily and smear it with camwood 
preparations, and pray for the speedy return of the victim to this 
world and to be born in their family ! 

We see in these revolting practices, not an act of studied cruelty, 
but one of supposed highest form of religious worship of a poor 
deluded people. 

The blood of certain animals is forbidden to be used in the 
worship of Orariyan e.g. the tortoise, he- goat, hen and pigeon. 

§ (/) Funerals 

The Yorubas do not bury their dead in graveyards or cemetries, 
but in their houses. Infants, however, are not buried in the house, 
but their dead bodies are either thrown away into the nearest 
bush or forest, or are partially buried with a bit of earth sprinkled 
over them, and are thus left a prey to jackals prowling by night. 

Such children are called " Abiku " (born to die) and are 
supposed to belong to a company of young demons roaming about. 
They are beUeved to be capable of being born as young children, 
and (except forcibly detained by charms) of returning to their 
company at will, or at the instance of the members of their 
company. 

The graves of aged people are dug generally in the piazza or in 
one of the sleeping rooms. In case of the wealthy dead, after the 
ground has been dug to a depth of about 6 feet in the piazza it is 
then carried on horizontally towards one of the bedrooms, so that 
the corpse is literally buried in the bedroom. It is then shut up 
in this horizontal hole with a piece of board plastered over with 
mud ; the whole grave is then filled up and the floor of the piazza 
levelled and polished, the rest of the earth being cast into the 
streets. 

Only the well-to-do can afford a coffin, the workmanship of 
which is usually very rough and coarse, the many chinks and 
interstices being filled up with cotton-wool and soap. As a rule, 
coffins are made much larger than we should think necessary, but 
the superabundant space is filled up with some of the dresses be- 
longing to the deceased, and with presents from all the relatives, it 
being a custom amongst them that all the nearest relatives should 
give each a piece of cloth for the burial. In the absence of cloths 
seeded cotton is put in to fill up the coffin tight, as they have a 
superstitious dislike of leaving any empty spaces in a coffin. 

In the practice of filling up the coffin with cloths, one may catch 



138 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

a faint glimpse of the popular ideas in regard to another state of 
existence. 

If the family is wealthy, after a couple of months another 
ceremony is gone through, consisting chiefly of feasting and dancing 
in honour of the dead, and this they term laying the dead upon its 
other side. 

In cases where coffins cannot be had, after wrapping up the 
corpse in a mat like a mummy it is laid in the grave and a few 
sticks of the Akoko tjee are laid across upon which a mat is spread. 
If a piece of board could be procured, it is laid over the corpse 
instead, and then earth is put upon it, and the grave filled up. 

The funeral ceremonies are further continued by the following 
observances : — The wife or wives of the deceased are to lie on the 
bare ground over the grave without even a mat or cloth being 
spread for full three months from the date of the funeral. On 
the 7th day they are led out of their town wall by an Egugun to a 
place where mounds of earth had been raised according to the 
number of the women with a yam placed on each mound. There 
is an extra mound raised, on which no yam is placed ; this represents 
the deceased. The widows are led out clad in rags with both 
hands on the opposite shoulders, their heads being left bare. 
Each takes a yam from the heap, and this is understood to be the 
last subsistence they should expect to receive from their dear 
departed. After this they return home weeping. 

On the 13th or 17th day the final ceremony is thus performed : 
By the advice of the Alagba, they provide some heads of cowries, 
a dog, two dishes of pounded yam or cooked yam flour, two pots 
of native beer, kola nuts, parched corn, a hoe and a cutlass, and 
two coverings of native cloth for an Egugun dress. At dead of 
night a man goes and sits on the roof of the house of the deceased ; 
another who is to personate the dead, is secreted at the back yard, 
but within hearing distance of the former ; a third is the Egugun 
called Agan undressed, coming in the Alagba's company, speaking 
in a hollow, but thrilling tone of voice, crying out, " E gbe mi." 
(Do lift me up). Immediately several voices are heard " Lift here, 
lift there," as if they were carrying the Agan and found him rather 
heavy. As they enter the compound the widows and the other 
women are to rush into the rooms and ex'tinguish all lights. The 
Agan is then conducted to the piazza of the deceased where the 
special ceremony is performed. He sings out distinctly the name 
of the deceased so that the substitute might hear him, at the same 
time warning him not to answer to his call, but to that of the man 
on the roof. The latter then strikes the hoe in his hand with the 
cutlass as a signal to attract the attention of the secreted substitute. 



MANNERS AND CUSTOMS I39 

After this, he calls out in loud tones the name of the deceased 
as did the Agan. He calls out three times, and at the third call, 
which is also the last, a still small voice is heard from the counterfeit, 
simulating that of the dead. At this stage, the widows and all 
the other mourners begin to weep and wail for the dead ; the dog 
is then slaughtered and the flesh is taken to the Alagbas. 

On the following morning, the Egugun of the deceased, appears 
in his usual dress, with an attendant Egugun, both emerging from 
the Alagbi's house. He proceeds to his old home where a mat is 
spread outside to receive him. He embraces all his children, sits 
them by turns on his knees, and blesses them, promising to bestow 
health, strength, long life, and the rest. He accepts presents 
from all the relatives, who are the mourners — of stringed cowries 
from the men, and unstringed from the women. After which 
they repair with all the presents received to the Egugun grove 
or to the Alagba's where the Egugun is undressed and a good 
feast is made of the flesh of the dog slaughtered on the previous 
evening. The stringed cowries contributed by the men are there 
returned to each of them, being participators in the organised 
imposture that was being practised. The unstringed cowries of 
their dupes, the women, are distributed amongst those who took 
part in the ceremony including of course the AlagbS.. 
. This is the last farewell between the deceased and his family 
if we except the supposed annual visits made by the former 
during the Egugun festivals. 

In case of a woman the ceremony is simpler. The same offerings 
are usually required, excepting the hoe and the cutlass. The 
relatives are ordered to procure a miniature hearth, and put it 
into a new calabash to meet the Egugun of the deceased matron 
emerging from the Egugun grove. 

On the day appointed they proceed to the grove with drums, 
the orphans carrying each a horse's tail on his shoulder, as a 
sign of mourning. Then one of the Alagba's men calls out thrice 
the name of the dead matron, just as in the similar ceremony 
detailed above ; an Egugun answers from the grove and the 
voice is drowned with drumming and singing. The Egugun with 
the Paka (an attendant) now issues from the grove, and walks 
towards the orphan children to receive the new calabash containing 
the miniature hearth ; blesses the giver, and returns with it to 
the grove. The hearth is subsequently buried quietly by the river 
side or within the grove. 

This is the last office of a dutiful child to its mother and this is 
understood as their last meeting in this world. The hearth pre- 
sented to her is for her to cook with in the other world. 



140 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The period of mourning for either man or woman is as aforesaid, 
three months, during which time the men are to remain unwashed, 
unshaven and the women with dishevelled hair and dress unchanged. 
At the expiration of this term on a day appointed the whole of them 
shave for the dead, and their hair is thrown outside by the wall 
of the house. They then parade the streets, dressed in their best, 
singing and dancing in honour of the dead, and calling at one house 
after another to return thanks to the sympathizers. The children 
of the deceased, begotten or adopted, now carry the horses' 
tails in their hands by which they are distinguished from those 
who have no immediate connection with the family. 

In the division of the property the widows as aforesaid pass into 
the possession of the children and the nearest relatives, the right 
to each being determined by ballot. Each male relative sends 
round his chewing stick (native tooth brush) with his name to 
the woman of his choice ; they are expected to reject the proposal 
twice as if they were resolved to remain widows all their life ; but 
at the third and last proposal, with tears in their eyes, they 
make their choice and are taken over. This concludes the final 
ceremony. 

In the case of young men or young women, the proceedings 
are essentially different. The companions of him or her that is 
gone proceed in a body to a spot where two roads intersect each 
other, preceded by one of their number who stands at a great 
distance from them. The call as in the case of the Agan is made 
thrice, the usual answer follows, and then he or she is told by 
all the friends and companions " A yk o O ! " (we separate you 
from our companionship). The substitute returns home with the 
rest, and the simple ceremony comes to an end. 



THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

PART II. 

YORUBA KINGS AND CONTEMPORARY EVENTS 
EMBRACING FOUR PERIODS. 

I. The Mythological Period : Oduduwa to Ajaka 

II. The Period of Growth and Prosperity : Aganju to 

Abiqdun 

III. The Decline, Revolutionary Wars and Disruption: 

Aole to Oluewu 

IV. The Arrest of Disintegration, Efforts at Restoration 

OF Unity, Tribal Wars, the British Protectorate : 
Atiba to Adeyemi 



FIRST PERIOD— MYTHOLOGICAL KINGS AND DEIFIED 

HEROES 

Chapter I 

THE FOUNDERS OF THE YORUBA NATION. 

§ I. Oduduwa 

Oduduwa the reputed founder and ancestor of the race is really 
a mythical personage. The Etymology of the term is from Odu 
(ti o) da Iwk. Whatever is unusually large as a large pot or 
container is termed Odii : the term then implies, the great container 
the author of existence. According to Ife mythology Oduduwa 
was the son of Olodu mare, i.e. the father or Lord of Odu ; ma r6 
implies cannot go beyond i.e. the Almighty. Oduduwa was sent 
by Olodumare from heaven to create the earth. Olokun i.e. 
the goddess of the ocean was the wife of Oduduwa, Oranmiyan 
and Isgdale their children, and Ogun a grand-child. 

Such is the desire of most nations to find a mythical origin 
for themselves through their kings and ancestors. 

All that was known of him has been told in Part I of this history, 
which gives an account of the emigration of the ancestors of the 
Yorubas from the east to He Ife where Oduduwa died in peace 
and was deified, being worshipped to this day by the Ifes, and up 
to the time of the British Protectorate, human sacrifices were 
offered to him at regular intervals. The soil of He Ife is said to be 
sacred to him. He was the grandfather and great-grandfather 
of renowned Kings and Princes who ruled and made history 
in the Yoruba country. 

The number of years embraced by this period is unknown, 
but it includes the time during which the Yoruba kingdom was in 
prosperity, and the Kings despotic. The capital of the kingdom 
then was He If§. 

The Basgrun of this reign was Qlorunfun-mi. 

§ 2. Oranyan 

Orafiyan the grandson of Oduduwa succeeded his grandfather 
on the throne. He was a very brave and warlike Prince, and of 
an indomitable courage. He was the founder of the order of the 
Esos vide Pt. I page 73. His body-guard consisted of 150 well- 
tried soldiers. 

143 



144 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

How he headed his brothers on an abortive expedition to the 
east to avenge the death of their great-grandfather, and how they 
quarrelled at Igangan and dispersed from that place, has been 
told in Part I. After founding the city of Oyo where he resided 
for a time he was said to have pushed on to a place called Okd, 
leaving Oyo in charge of one of the princes. This is not unlikely 
when we remember that that was not an age of settled government, 
but that the warlike and restless King was engaged in extending 
his dominions far and wide. Much that was known of him has been 
told in Part I. He resided at 6k6 for many years and according 
to some died there, but others affirmed that he died at He Ife, 
where his grave is shown to this day. But the Yorubas have a 
custom whenever any one died away from home, to cut the hair 
of his head and pare his nails, and these are taken to the place 
where they would have him buried, and there ceremoniously 
and religiously deposited. It may thus have been the case here. 
But an anecdote connected with his later years must here be told : 

It was said that after a long period of reign an urgent necessity 
made him revisit the city of He Ife, which he had left for so long a 
time ; perhaps to arrange some family affairs, or to possess himself 
of some of his father's treasures left in charge of Adimu. He left 
his son Ajaka as Regent and went. Having stayed much longer 
than the time fixed for his return (communication between the 
two places being then dangerous and difficult) the people thought 
he was dead, or that at any rate he would no more return to 6k6 ; 
the OYO MESI who were the authorised rulers of the town conse- 
quently confirmed Ajaka on the throne, investing him with full 
powers, and all the insignia of royalty. 

But his father was returning ; and having come within a short 
distance of the city, his attention was arrested by the sound of the 
Kakaki trumpet — a trumpet blown for the sovereign alone. 
Upon enquiry, he learnt what had taken place. He thereupon 
retraced his steps quietly to He Ifg where he spent the rest of his 
days in peaceful retirement. An obelisk termed Opa Oranyan 
(Orafiyan's staff) erected on the spot he was supposed to have been 
buried is shown at He Ife to this day. This would seem to confirm 
the view that he died and was buried at He If§ and not at 0k6. 



THE FOUNDERS OF THE YORUBA NATION 



145 



Opa Or(7/7c/an 




*WT^ 



146 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

This obelisk is about 10 or 12 feet in height/ and about 4 feet 
square in width at its base ; it tapers to a point, and has upon 
one face of it, several spike nails driven into it, and some carvings 
as of ancient characters. The nails are arranged in such an ordered 
manner as to render them significant. First, there are 61 in a 
straight line from the bottom upwards at intervals of about 
2 inches in midline; and next, at about a distance of 4 inches 
on either side of this, and from the same level on top, two 
parallel lines of 31 nails ea.ch running downwards and curving 
below to meet those of the midline. Then in the space 
between these three rows of parallel lines, and about the level 
where they converge, is found the most conspicuous of the 
carvings, i*^^. 

What is conjectured as most probable in these arrangements 
is that the 61 nails in midline represent the number of years 
Oraiiyan lived, and that the 31 each on either side indicates that 
he was 31 when he began to reign, and that he reigned 31 years, 
the year he began to reign being counted twice as is the manner 
of the Yorubas ; and that the carvings are the ancient characters 
Resh and Yod which stand for Oranyan. 

Besides Opa Orafiyan, there are to be found to this day, in 
groves at He Ife, and at other Ife settlements outside the city, 
carvings in stone of natural objects such as tongs and anvil, 
table, stool, fish, and several other objects of curiosity which 
are generally hidden from strangers, because they are held 
sacred ; they represent the handicrafts of the founders of the 
race. 

The art of carving on stones or drilling holes in them has since 
become lost among Yorubas, and consequently, how nails could 
have been driven into stones and various figures cut out of them 
is usually explained to be, that these objects were once carved out 
of wood, and when the carvers were deified, their work became 
petrified ! As these gods were once men, so these stones were once 
wood ! 

The Ifes are the guardians and custodians of these sacred 
relics from ancient times. 

Nearly all legends and folklore are attributed to the age of 
Orafiyan, among these may be mentioned the following told by an 
ffe :— 

1 About four feet was broken off from the top of this obelisk 
during a storm in the year 1884. The obelisk has since twice 
fallen down and inartistically re-erected. But a stump of it now 
remains. 



the founders of the yoruba nation t47 

The Legend of Moremi and her Son 

" Moremi was the wife of one of the ancient heroes of He Ifg, 
probably Oranmiyan. She was a woman of great beauty and 
virtue, and had an only son named Ela or Olurogbo. 

It happened that the city of Ife was at one time in a state of 
frequent commotion and unrest, owing to the repeated raids of a 
tribe of people called the Igbos. This continued for a series of years. 
The Ifes attributed this affliction and distress to the displeasure 
of their gods, because those that attacked them from the Igbo 
territory appeared not to be human beings, but gods or demi gods, 
and consequently the Ifes felt they could not withstand them, and 
so these raiders used to make away with easy plunder, including 
their valuables, with their women and children. For this they 
propitiated and called upon their gods for help, but received no 
response. 

Now, this Moremi, fired with zeal and patriotism was determined 
to do what she could to free her country from this calamity. 
She was resolved to find out what these Igbos really were, and 
how to fight them. To this end she repaired to a stream called 
Esinmirin, and there made a vow to the deity thereof, that if 
she was enabled to carry out her plans, and they proved 
successful, she would offer to the god the most costly sacrifice 
she could afford. Her plan was to expose herself to the raiders, 
and get caught, and be taken to their country where she could 
best learn their secrets: 'But,' she said, ' if I perish, I perish.' 

At the time of the next raid she undertook to carry out her 
plans, she was caught by the Igbos and taken to their country ; 
and being a woman of great beauty, she was given up amongst 
others, and sundry booty to their king. Her beauty and virtue 
soon won her a place in the country and the confidence of the 
people ; she became familiar with all their customs, and learnt 
all their secrets : then she also learnt that those who were such 
objects of terror to her people were mere men, who covered them- 
selves from head to foot with Ekan grass and bamboo fibres, 
making them appear extra human, and are nicknamed Eluyare. 
She extracted from her husband also the secret of attacking them 
successfully. ' If your people know how to make a torch, and have 
the courage to rush amongst them with lighted torches, they 
cannot stand that.' 

Moremi feeling she was now conversant with everything amongst 
the Igbos, having disarmed any suspicion they may have enter- 
tained of her as a captive, suddenly escaped one day to her native 
land, and by making use of the secrets she had learnt, freed her 



148 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

country for ever from the raids of the men once their terror. It 
remained now for her to fulfil her vows. 

She repaired to the stream with her offerings of lambs, rams, and 
goats for sacrifice, but the god would not accept any of these. 
She then offered a bullock, which the god also refused to accept, 
then she prayed the priests to divine for her what would be accept- 
able ; this was done, and the god demanded of her, her only 
son ! 

She then gave up her only son in sacrifice to the gods in the 
fulfilment of her vcws. The If§ nation bewailed her loss and 
promised to be to her sons ind daughters, for the loss she had 
sustained for the salvation of her country. 

Olurogbo however, when supposed to be killed, was but half 
dead ; he afterwards revived and rose again, and made a rope 
with which he climbed up into heaven ; and all Ifes to this day 
have a full hope that he will come again to this world, and reap 
the full reward of his good deeds." 

We may discern in this legend a confused idea of the story 
of Jephtha, and that of the Blessed Virgin and her Son perverted, 

Orafiyan was the father of al^ Oyos or Yorubas proper, and 
was the universal conqaeror of the land. He left behind him 
two renowned sons, Ajaka and Sango, both of whom succeeded 
him in turns, and both of whom became famous in Yoruba history, 
and were deified after death. 

The Basorun of this reign was Efufu-ko-fe-ori. 

§ 3. AjuAN alias Ajaka 

Ajuan alias Oba Ajaka was at first only a Regent when his 
father left for He Ife, but was subsequently confirmed on the 
throne as was mentioned above. He alone of all the Yoruba 
Kings had the singular fortune (or misfortune) of being called 
to the throne twice, being once deposed, but afterwards recalled 
to the throne. 

Very little was known of his earlier reign, except that, unlike 
his father, he was of a peaceful disposition, loved husbandry and 
encouraged it. 

Being too mild for the warlike spirit of the age, and tamely 
suffering the encroachments of provincial kings, he was dethroned, 
and he went to Igbodo where he remained in retirement seven years 
during which period his brother Sango reigned in his stead. His 
Basorun was nick-named Erin-din-logun-Agbgn k6 se da ni Ha 
(i.e. sixteen cocoa nuts is unsuitable for Ha divination). That is 
to say cocoa nuts are not suitable substitutes for palm nuts. The 
reason for this sobriquet is not known. 



the founders of the yoruba nation i49 

§ 4. Sango or Olufiran 

Sango son of Oranyan, and brother of Ajaka was the fourth 
King of Yoruba. He was of a very wild disposition, fiery temper, 
and skilful in sleight of hand tricks. He had a habit of emitting 
fire and smoke out of his mouth, by which he greatly increased the 
dread his subjects had of him. 

The Olowii at this time appeared to have been more powerful 
than the King of Ovo, for after the death of the uncle Oranyan, 
he compelled his cousin the peaceful Ajaka to pay tribute to him. 
This was probably the reason why Ajaka was deposed. 

On Sango's coming to the throne, being a much younger man, 
the Olowu meant to take advantage of his youth ; he demanded 
the tribute of him, but Sango refused to acknowledge his primacy, 
notwithstanding the Olowu' s threat to deprive him of his wives 
and children ; consequently his capital was besieged and a sharp 
fight ensued. Sango there displayed his wonted bravery as well 
as his tricks ; volumes of smoke issuing from his mouth and nostrils 
so terrified the Olowu and his army that they became panic stricken 
and were completely routed and put to flight. 

Sango pushed on his advantage, and with every fresh victory 
he was the more firmly established on the throne ; he thereby 
became elated and was tyrannical. 

It was his ambition now to remove the seat of government 
from Oko to Oyo then called Oyokoro, he knew he would meet 
with strong opposition from the prince of that city and so he set 
upon devising plans by which he could effect his purpose with 
as little fighting as possible. 

Sango was now possessed with a desire of performing an act 
of filial piety. He wished to worship at the grave of his dead 
mother, but he did not so much as remember her name for she 
died when he was but a babe. She was the daughter of Elempe 
a Nupe king, who formed an alliance with Oranyan by giving him 
his daughter to wife, of which marriage Sango was the issue. 
Sango therefore commissioned a Tetu and a Hausa slave to proceed 
to the Tapa country, to his maternal grandfather Elempe for the 
purpose giving them a horse and a cow for the sacrifice. 

' The King's charge to these messengers was, that they should 
listen carefully to the first name uttered in the invocation which 
evidently will be his mother's name. 

The messengers were heartily welcomed and highly entertained 
by Elempe, their King's grandfather, so much so that the Hausa 
forgot himself and the duty he was charged with. At the time 
of the sacrifice, the priest said at the grave " Tor6si, lya gbodo, 



150 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

listen to us, thy son Sango is come to worship thee." The Tgtu 
noted the name Torosi, but the Hausa, being far from sober paid 
no heed to what was said ; therefore, on their return home, the 
Tgtu who had faithfully carried out his orders was highly rewarded, 
and the Hausa slave severely punished. The punishment meted 
out to him was 122 razor cuts slashed all over his body as a lasting 
warning for all time. 

The scars left by these wounds strangely took the fancy of the 
King's wives who thought that they added comeliness and beauty 
to the man, and therefore they advised that in future such marks 
should not be performed upon a slave, but on actual members 
of the royal family as distinctive of royalty. 

Sango took this advice, and placed himself first in the hands 
of the " Olowolas " (the markers) named Babajegbe Osan and 
Babajegbe Oru ; but he could stand only two cuts on each arm, 
and forbade them to proceed any further. This is what is termed 
£y6. The marks are to this day retained in the royal family, 
as a distinctive badge of royalty, and hence members of the royal 
family are termed Akey6. They are two broad ribbon marks on 
the arms from the shoulder to the wrist. 

When the King had determined upon taking Oyokoro, it 
occurred to him to employ this as a device by which he could 
effect his purpose easily without loss of lives. He thereupon 
sent the Hausa slave to Oloyo-koro for him to see how beautiful 
this slave looks with these marks, and that it has been resolved 
to use the same as a mark of royalty ; he therefore advised the 
Oloyo-koro to submit himself to be thus marked, with his principal 
chiefs for rank and beauty, stating that he himself had done so. To 
this they consented, Babajegbe Osan and Babajegbe Oru were 
sent over there, and admirably did they perform their tasks. 

But on the third day, when the Oloyo-koro and his chiefs were 
very sore, Sango appeared with his forces against them ; no 
resistance could be offered, and the city fell easily into his hands : 
shamefully and brutally he put to death the prince and his chiefs, 
the dupes of his stratagem. 

Thus the seat of government was permanently removed from 
Oko (or as some would have it, from He Ife) to Oyo the ancient 
" Eyeo or Katunga." 

Sango reigned for seven years, the whole of which period was 
marked by his restlessness. He fought many battles and was 
fond of making charms. He was said to have the knowledge 
of some preparation by which he could attract lightning. The 
palace at Oyo was built at the foot of a hill called Ok^ Ajaka 
(Ajaka's hill). One day the King ascended this hill accompanied 



THE FOUNDERS OF THE YORUBA NATION I5I 

by his courtiers and some of his slaves, among whom were two 
favourites, Biri and Omiran ; some of his cousins went with him, 
but none of his children. He was minded to try the preparation 
he had in hand ; thinking it might have been damp and useless, 
he first made the experiment on his own house. But it took effect, 
a storm was immediately raised and the lightning had struck the 
palace before they came down the hill, and the buildings were on 
fire. Many of Sango's wives and his children perished in this 
catastrophe. 

Sango who was the author of his own misfortunes became 
alarmed and dismayed at what had happened and from a broken 
heart he was resolved to abdicate the throne and retire to the court 
of his maternal grandfather, Elempe king of the Nupes. 

All Oyo was now astir, not only to sympathize with the King, 
but also to dissuade him from carrying out his resolution ; but 
he could not bear any opposition, and so mad was he, that he 
even used his sword against some of his loyal subjects who ventured 
to remonstrate with him, and who promised to replace for him 
his dead wives by others, by whom he might beget children, and 
so in time make good his present losses. 

According to other accounts, he did not abdicate of his own 
freewill, but was asked to do so by a strong party in the state. 
Both accounts may be true, there may have been two parties, 
for to this day, Yorubas have an abhorence of a King given to 
making deadly charms ; because for one who already has absolute 
power invested in him by law, this strange power can only be used 
spitefully, so that no one near him would be safe. 

He was said to have caused 160 persons to be slain in a fit of 
anger, of those who were showing much concern and over-anxiety 
on his behalf, and who would prevent him by force from carrying 
out his resolve. 

Thus determined he set out on his fateful journey with a few 
followers. Biri his head slave and favourite was the first to regret 
the step taken, and to urge on his master to yield to the entreaties 
of those citizens of Ovo, who with all loyalty promised to replace 
his losses, as far as man can do it, and to rebuild the palace ; but 
finding the King inexorable, he forsook him and returned to the 
city with all his followers ; Omiran likewise followed his example, 
and the King was thus left alone. He now repented his rashness, 
especially when he found himself deserted by his favourite Biri. 
He could not proceed alone, and for shame he could not return 
home, and so he was resolved to put an end to his own life ; and 
climbing on a shea butter tree, he hanged himself. 

His friends hearing of this tragedy went immediately and 



152 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

performed for him the last act of kindness, by burying his remains 
under the same tree. 

On hearing of the King's death, his personal friends followed 
his example, and died with him. Biri committed suicide at Koso 
(where the King died), Omiran did the same. His cousin Omo 
Sinda committed suicide at Papo, Babayanmi at Sele, Obei at 
Jakuta and Oya his favourite wife at Ira. 

Thus ended the life of this remarkable personage, who once 
ruled over all the Yorubas and Popos. He was afterwards deified, 
and is still worshipped by all of the Yoruba race as the god of 
thunder and lightning. 

In every Yoruba and Popo town to this day, whenever there is 
a flash of lightning followed by a peal of thunder, it is usual to 
hear from the populace shouts of " Ka wo o," " ka biye si " 
(welcome to your majesty, long live the King.) 

Ajaka his brother was now recalled from exile, and he once 
more held the reins of government. 

Salekuodi was the Basorun of this reign. 

§ 5. Ajaka's Second Reign 

King Ajaka who was dethroned for being too peaceful was 
now recalled to the throne. He proved after his re-instatement a 
totally different man to what he had been before, and showed 
himself more warlike than even his brother Sango, 

He led an expedition into the Tapa country. Tradition has 
it, that he employed large and well-trained birds, armed with 
arrows, and after crossing the Niger they showered down these 
deadly weapons upon the maternal relations of his brother Sango. 

What is certain is, that the expedition was successful but by 
what means, it is not really known. But thus it was with the 
Yorubas (as with all superstitious people) that brave deeds and 
extraordinary acts of daring are always attributed to the super- 
natural. 

He spent the latter part of his years in waging intestine wars 
with his subjects. He was said to have been engaged in civil 
wars with 1060 of his chiefs and princes among whom were the 
principal vassal or provincial kings, the Onikoyi, the Olugbon, 
and the Aresa. 

He had in his service certain " medicine men," who made charms 
for him, viz., Atagbgin, Omo-onik6k6, Abitibiti Onisegun, Paku, 
Teteoniru, Y5nk, Oko-adan Egbeji, Alari baba isegun, and 
Elenre. 

The following fable was related of him : — 

After his wars, some of these " medicine men " went up to him, 



THE FOUNDERS OF THE YORUBA NATION I53 

and humbly prayed to be allowed to return home ; but the King 
refused to grant them leave, fearing lest their services might be 
required by some other kings, and in that way, others might be in 
possession of the charms they made for him. As they were 
determined to go home they showed the King by demonstrative 
proofs, that they made the request simply out of courtesy but 
that the King could not detain them. Paku fell down before him, 
and disappeared. Tete oniru, Abitibiti Onisegun, and Alari 
baba I§egun performed the same feat and vanished. Egbeji 
threw up a ball of thread which hung suspended in space, and he 
climbed up it and disappeared. Elenre alone remained standing 
before him. Then said the King to him " Elenre, you had better 
follow the examples of your colleagues and vanish, or I shall 
wreak my vengeance upon you for their disobedience." " Kill 
me if you can " replied Elenre. The King thereupon ordered him 
to be decapitated ; but the sword was broken in two on the 
attempt. He then ordered him to be speared but the spear 
became bent and the spearman's arm withered ! He ordered a 
large stone to be rolled over him to crush him to death but it 
fell on him as light as a ball of cotton-wool. 

The King and the executioners were now at their wits' end, 
and then it occurred to one of them to " plough with his heifer." 
His wife Ijaehin being prevailed upon, told them that no iron or 
steel can affect him: "Pull off a single blade of grass from the 
thatch of the house, and with that you can decapitate him." 
This was done, and the head was struck off, but instead of 
falling to the ground, it fell into the King's hand, and he 
involuntarily grasped it. The King tried all his best to drop it 
off, but to no avail. Any food brought to the King the head 
devoured, and drank all the water likewise. The King soon 
became famished, he was losing flesh, and was really dying from 
hunger. 

All the " medicine-men " of every tribe in the kingdom were 
sent for, to disenchant this alarming phenomenon : as soon as 
anyone entered, the head would call him by name, tell out the 
composition of his charms, and then ask " Do you think that 
can affect me ? " Thus many were baffled, until at last came one 
Agawo ; this man at once pro:-trated at a distance and entreated 
the head to forbear with him, saying : — " Who am I to oppose 
you ? In what am I better than my predecessors whom you have 
already foiled ? I came only in obedience to the King's commands 
as I dare not refuse to come." The head replied " I will respect 
you because you are wise and respect yourself ; I yield to your 
entreaties." Then, falling suddenly from the King's hands. 



154 "^"^ HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Elenre's head became a flowing river known at Oyo to this day as 
Odo Elenre (Elenre's river). 

His wife Ijaehin who disclosed the secret of his strength was 
also converted into a stream, but Elenre's head said to it " Thou 
shalt not flow," therefore Ijaehin became a stagnant pool at Oyo 
unto this day. 

From this incident King Ajaka made it a rule that from hence- 
forth no King should be present in person at an execution. 

He put to death all the vassal kings 1060 in number taken in 
war ; the relics of their skulls were put together and are worshipped 
under the name of Orisa'la to this day. This is the probable 
origin of that worship. 

The reign of the mythological heroes abound in garbled forms 
of scriptural stories, showing as was remarked in the earlier part 
of this history that the ancestors of the Yorubas were acquainted 
with Christianity in the land of their origin. The fable here related 
is evidently the story of Elijah in a perverted form.. His putting 
to death so many priests of Baal has been perverted into Ajaka 
slaying all his vassal kings and their skulls converted to an object 
of worship. His judgment of fire on those sent to arrest him finds 
a counterpart in Elenre's head anticipating those who came to 
exorcise it, both yielded to a wiser delegate who substituted 
entreaties for authority. The name Asawo (i.e. one who deals 
in mysteries) is very significant ; it is evidently a mythological 
rather than a real name. Elijah going up to heaven became 
Egbeji climbing up a cord and disappearing as the saying goes 
" Egbeji ta 'kun O lo si Orun," i.e. Egbeji suspended a cord and 
by it went up to heaven. The river Jordan crossed by Elijah 
suggested Elenre's head becoming a river, etc. 

The Ogidigbo drum was introduced into Oyo during this reign. 
It is of all drums the most inartistic, and is totally devoid of any 
embellishment. It consists of a block of wood about 3ft. in length 
hollowed out from the centre to about 6 inches of both extremities, 
and is beaten with a rod. 

It is used only for the King and theBasorun at the great festivals 
when they dance together at his public appearance. 

Nothing is known of the end of Ajaka, probably he died in 
peace. 

Salekuodi continued as the Basorun of this reign also. 



SECOND PERIOD.— THE PERIOD OF GROWTH AND 
PROSPERITY AND OPPRESSION. 

Chapter II 

HISTORICAL KINGS 

§ r. Aganju 

As Sango left no issue, the crown fell to Ajaka's son Aganju without 
any dispute. His reign was long and very prosperous. He had 
a remarkable faculty of taming wild animals and venomous 
reptiles, several of which may be seen crawling about him. He had 
also in his house a tame leopard. 

He greatly beautified the palace adding piazzas in front and 
back, with rows of brazen posts. He originated the custom of 
decorating the palace with hangings on state occasions, being a 
sovereign of accomplished taste. 

Towards the end of his reign, he waged war with a namesake 
of his, Aganju the Onisambo, for refusing him the hand of his 
daughter lyayun. In this war, four chiefs, viz. the Onisambo and 
his allies the Onitede the Onimeri and the Alagbona were captured, 
their towns destroyed, and the bride forcibly secured. 

The close of his reign was clouded by great domestic troubles. 
His only son Lubeg6 was discovered having illicit intercourse 
with his beloved lyayun, on whose account so many princes and 
people have lost their lives. The stern father was enraged beyond 
words, the sentence pronounced on him was the extreme penalty 
of the law, and it was rigidly carried out. But the King was 
overcome with grief, he died not long after this, even before the 
birth of a successor to the throne. The name of his Basorun was 
Banija, succeeded by Erankogbina. 

§ 2. KoRi 

The late King having no surviving son Erankogbina the Basorun 
was left to manage the affairs of the kingdom. The only hope of 
a direct successor to the throne was the child of lyayun still in 
utero ; hence sacrifices were offered frequently on the grave of 
Aganju praying him to grant lyayun a son if his name is not to be 
forgotten, and the dynasty end with him. When in due course 
therefore lyayun gave birth to a son, the joy of the populace was 
unbounded. He was named Kgri. 

155 



156 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

During Kori's minority, lyayun was declared Regent ; she 
wore the crown, and put on the royal robes, and was invested 
with the Ejigha, the Opa ileke and other royal insignia, and ruled 
the kingdom as a man until her son was of age. 

It was during this reign that Timi was sent to Ede and not in 
Sango's reign as was supposed.^ 

The Ijesas proving very troublesome to their neighbours by 
kidnapping them in their farms, and molesting caravans to and 
from Apomu a frontier town where a large fair is periodically 
held for the exchange of goods with the Ijebus, and also getting 
frequently embroiled with the king of Ido their neighbour, com- 
plaints from time to time reached the AlAfin of Oyo. It was 
now determined that a stop be put to these inroads ; for this 
purpose the King sent a notable hunter to that district who 
succeeded in checking these marauders. He took up a position 
at a place called Ede as his headquarters, and there he subsequently 
established himself as a kinglet with the title of Timi. 

Timi was a famous archer, notable for his deadly arrows, and 
he more than justified his appointment. The Owa of Ilesa 
imitating the same appointment, posted an opposition kinglet 
at Osogbo named Atawoja ; but his chief duty was to worship 
the fish in the river Osun. 

As the Timi's duties required all his time, skill and valour, 
he had no time left to provide for himself and family ; the traders 
and caravans being now well protected, he obtained permission 
from the AlAfin to levy a toll of 5 cowries each on every trader ; 
by this means he soon had more than enough for the support 
of his family, and as a good and loyal subject, he paid the surplus 
into the royal treasury. 

After some years of this act of loyalty, he regretted this self- 
imposed tribute, taking another view of the matter, that whatever 
he could collect this way should be his own by right as a compen- 
sation for the loss of the advantages of a city life, as well as a 
reward for his labours. So he abruptly stopped the tribute. 

When the King missed the usual tribute, he sent to demand 
the same, but Timi refused to pay it, and gave his reasons for not 
doing so. This did not satisfy the King, so a more peremptory order 
was sent to Timi to deliver up what he had withheld. This order 
was also disobeyed, and so the King resorted to force, a body of 
troops was sent to arrest him, and to seize all his belongings. But 
Timi was prepared for this, he resisted with all his might, and 
routed the King's forces. 

^ Vide Yoruba Reading Book. 



HISTORICAL KINGS 157 

But the King was resolved to punish Timi as a warning to others 
who might follow his example. Eliri-onigbajo the Gbonka was 
proposed to him as the only man equal to the task. But the 
Gbonka was already a powerful subject at Oyq, being the only 
man who dared to oppose the King's encroachments upon the 
liberties of the people, therefore, he was at first loth to accede to 
this proposal, lest a success might add an additional lustre to the 
Gbonka's glory, and make him more elated than before ; but on 
second consideration he consented, secretly hoping he might fall by 
the hand of his brave antagonist. So the Gbonka was appointed. 

The fight was limited to a single combat between the two 
chieftains, Timi armed himself with his bow and arrows, but 
the Gbonka carried a shield with which to defend himself against 
the powerful darts of his assailant. His own weapon of offence 
was a viol containing a drug with strong narcotic properties when 
inhaled, and by means of this Timi was soon rendered unconscious, 
and in this state, he was dispossessed of his weapons, and taken 
bound to Qyo. 

The King received the tidings with mixed feelings of joy and 
disappointment that neither of them fell in the combat, especially 
the Gbonka whom he wished to get rid of. When the illustrious 
captive was brought before him, the King pretended to be dis- 
satisfied with the issue of the contest, doubting its fairness, except 
the same could be repeated in his presence, so that he may witness 
it personally, secreth^ hoping that Timi might have a better 
chance this time, and that the Gbonka might fall. This desire 
was apparent to all present, and to the Gbonka himself ; however, 
he addressed himself to the renewed combat. The King ordered 
the Timi's weapons to be restored to him, and the fight resumed. 
To his mortification the Gbonka was again victorious amid shouts 
of applause from the people. Timi was not only subdued but 
was also instantaneously killed by the victor before the King and 
without his orders. 

The Gbonka to show further what he could do, and to strike 
terror into the King, ordered a pile to be made, and pots of palm 
oil, nut oil, and shea butter to be poured on it ; he then went 
coolly and sat on the top of it, and ordered it to be set on fire. 
All present were anxious for the consequence ; but when the pile 
was ablaze, the Gbonka disappeared. 

Courtiers now began to congratulate the King on the fall of 
his enemy by his own hands ; but he was apprehensive of some 
other issues " Not too fast" said he, " we must first wait and see." 
Tidings soon reached the court that the Gbonka followed by 
drummers, was seen dancing about the town. 



158 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The Gbonka knowing the public feeling towards the King, and 
his unpopularity, entered the palace and challenged His Majesty 
to display feats similar to his own and said if he could not, he 
would be rejected. There being no alternative, the King took 
poison and died. 

Esugbiri succeeded Erankogbina as Basorun during this reign. 

§ 3. Oluaso 

The unfortunate King was succeeded by a handsome and 
amiable prince called Oluaso, who was remarkable for his longevity 
and peaceful reign. His agnomen was Osarewa S'akin i.e., 
handsome but strong. He was a wise and affable sovereign 
fabled to have reigned for 320 years, and had 1460 children ! 
Three times did nine of his wives bear him male twins in one day. 
The first set he named Omgla, the second Ona-aka, and the third 
Ona-isokun. Of these three sets of twins the last (Ona-isokun) 
were the most popular and Kings were chosen from amongst them 
and their descendants. These names have become hereditary 
titles unto this day. The King built 54 palaces for these 54 
princes all of whom rose to positions of trust and responsibility 
by their own merits. 

He originated and built 120 kobis to the royal palace. He was 
ably assisted by his Basorun, Esugbiri-elu. He lived to a good 
old age, and died full of days and honour, and his longevity has 
passed into a proverb. " O ni ki o gbo ogbo Oluaso, o le jiya 
Oluaso ? " You pray to live as long as Oluaso, can you endure 
the trials of Oluaso ? Old age has its own trials and sufferings. 
His son Onigbogi succeeded him on the throne. Esugbiri was the 
Basorun of this reign also. 

§ 4. Onigbogi 

Onigbogi was one of the sons of Oluaso by Aruigba-ifa an Ota 
woman. She had left Oyq during the previous reign for her own 
native town, but on hearing that her son ascended the throne, she 
returned to Oyo in order to assist him in his government by her 
advice. She was a very superstitious woman. Wishing her son 
to have a long and prosperous reign, she advised him to introduce 
the worship of Ifa into Oyo as a national deity. The Oyo citizens 
asked the King and his mother what offerings are required with 
which to propitiate Ha. She replied, 16 rats, 16 bags of cowries, 
16 fishes, 16 fowls, 16 arm lengths of cloth and 16 ground pigs. 
The Oyo citizens answered that they were prepared to give the 
offerings, but they could not worship palm nuts. Thus the advice 
of the King's mother was rejected and the worship of Ifa cancelled. 



HISTORICAL KINGS 159 

When Aruigba-ifa was going to Oyq she was accompanied by 
the personification of several common objects used in fetish 
worship e.g. Aje, Opon, Ajere, Osun, Elegbara, and Iroke. When 
the citizens of Oyo rejected her god, she returned on her way to 
Ota with all her followers, weeping as they went. On reaching 
the foot of the Ado hill, the Alado's wife came out to see the cause 
of a company of people weeping and wailing, saying " We are 
driven out of the country." She reported this at home, and the 
Alado came out and invited the party to lodge with him. His 
inquisitiveness led him to ask why such august personages should 
be driven out of the city ; when he had learnt the whole story, he 
sympathized with Arugba, and asked her to stay, promising to 
give some of the things required, as they were too poor to be able 
to afford all. This was done, and Arugba not only initiated him 
into the mysteries, but also conferred upon him the right of initiat- 
ing others. Hence in the subsequent reign when the Oyos decided 
to adopt Ifa worship, it was this Alado who went to the city to 
initiate them into all the mysteries, rites and ceremonies of Ifa 
worship. 

A war broke out after these events, and the King sent out the 
Basgrun at the head of his army to Ita-ibidun with all the war 
chiefs. The king of the Tapas (Nupe) between whom and the 
Yorubas there have been strained relations since the death of 
Sango, seized this opportunity for crossing the river, and pouring 
his army into the Yoruba country, carried everything before 
him, until he stood before the gate of Ovo. There being no avail- 
able force to oppose him, the city was soon taken. The King 
fled to Gbere in the Bariba country, and there he died not being 
used to the hardships incidental to the life of an exile ; leaving his 
son Ofinran a refugee in a strange land. In the land of his exile. 
King Onigbogi made it a law that only 35 of the Esos should be 
absent from home at any time, leaving 35 for the defence of the 
city and country, the Tapa King having entered Ovo practically 
without any opposition. 

Ayangbagi Aro was the Basorun of this period. 

§ 5. Ofinran 

The Oyo refugees were at first received with open arms by the 
King Eleduwe and his Balogun Bokgyo because Ofinran's mother 
was a Bariba woman. The refugees having no regular employment 
here, joined theBaribas, who are a race of marauders, in all their 
expeditions. In one of these expeditions Irawo in the Yoruba 
country was taken, and also Oke Isero where died the famous 
warchief Gbonka Eleri-onigbajo. 



l6o THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

After this, the Baribas began to ill-treat the refugees, but the 
young prince proved himself equal to the occasion ; he collected his 
people together, and set out at their head for Oyo. 

When they arrived at a place called Kusu, they encamped 
there to complete their preparations for the journey to Oyo. 
From Kusu the King sent delegates to Ota for Ifa priests, as he and 
his chiefs superstitiously believed that their misfortunes arose 
from their rejecting the worship of Ifa ; the Alado then came to 
initiate the AlAfin and his people into the mysteries of the Ifa 
worship. Thus Ifa was accepted by Yoruba proper among the 
gods of the land. 

The Egugun mysteries also were hitherto unknown to the 
Yorubas, by this means the Tapas have long imposed upon them, 
they believing in the reality of the so-called apparitions. On the 
hill Sanda at Kusu the secret was made known to Saha the King's 
head slave. 

The first Alapini with the other Egugun priests the Elefi, 
Olohan, Oloba, Aladafa, and the Olgj^, emigrated from the Tapa 
country to Yoruba, joining the remnants returning from the 
Bariba country. These became the first priests, and instructed 
the Yorubas further in the Egiigun worship ; therefore the honours 
and emoluments to be enjoyed in this worship by right belong to 
them and their successors unto this day. 

Before the encampment at Kusu was broken up, the King died, 
and was succeeded by his son Eguguoju. The deceased King's 
body was wrapped in an ass's skin to be taken to Oyo. At a place 
called Okutu-gbogbo the cord broke, and the body had to be bound 
up afresh before they could proceed. On the very spot in which 
this happened, the palace at Saki was built. 

Sokia " ti iwo ewn irin " (clad with a coat of mail) was the 
Basorun of this period. 



Chapter III 

THE KINGS OF OYO IGBOHO 

§ r. Eguguoju 

Eguguoju having succeeded his father, became the leader of his 
people to Oyo ; the camp at Kusu was broken up and they carried 
the remains of the late King with them for state funeral at home. 

They encamped next at Iju Sanya, a desert place. Whilst there 
two large birds an Igbo and an Oyo were seen fighting, and they 
chased each other from the bough of the tree under which the 
King sat until they came down to the ground, and he ordered both 
to be caught and killed. 

This occurrence was regarded by him as a happy omen ; he 
therefore resolved to build a city there and to remove the seat of 
government to that place. From the example of the birds, he 
was resolved to fight to the last drop of blood in his veins any army 
that came against him there, never showing the " white feather." 
The city was accordingly built there, and was named Oyo Igboho, 
after the two birds, Igbo and Oyo, and there he buried the remains 
of his father. 

Nothing remarkable was recorded of this King except that he 
built Igboho, which became the last resting-place of four Yoruba 
Kings before the government was again removed to the ancient 
capital. 

Obalohun was the Basorun of this reign. 

§ 2. Orompotq 

Prince Orompoto, brother of Eguguoju, and son of Ofinran 
succeeded to the throne. Shortly after his accession, troubles 
began to assail him ; he, however, proved himself to be a skilful 
and experienced commander, and as a statesman, he was unrivalled. 
In his reign Oyo regained the military fame it had lost. He was 
swift in action, darting upon his enemies as an eagle upon his 
prey, when they least expected his approach. He used all skill 
to conceal his movements from the enemy. His rearguard con- 
sisted of 1,000 foot and i,ooo horse, for each of whom he provided 
a broad ghaju leaf to sweep and obliterate the foot prints of his 
army on the march, the horsemen tying the leaves to the tails 
of their horses. 

But at the battle of Ilayi the King's army was routed although 

i6i 



l62 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

he fought with unusual bravery. He lost in this battle, three 
Gbonkds, leaders of the van. When the first fell, he there and then 
created another ; he also fell, and he created a third who also fell, 
but whose fall converted the rout to victory under a peculiar 
circumstance 

As he fell under showers of arrows in a kneeling posture his 
mouth remained fixed in a state as if grinning; the Baribas observing 
two white rows of teeth under his helmet thought he was playing 
them a trick, and that he was laughing at their fruitless attempts 
to kill him and put his army to flight, not knowing that he was 
stiff dead and that the Oyos were on the point of retreating. A 
sort of dread overcame them for a man it was impossible to kill 
notwithstanding showers of arrows hanging on him ! so they 
retreated thinking they had lost the day, and the Oyos remaining 
in the field claimed the victory. Hence it was commonly said of 
this man " Gbonka Orogbori ti o ft ehin le ogun." (The Gbonka 
of the ghostly head who routed an army with his teeth). 

How long this King reigned is not known but he was the third 
buried at Igboho. 

Asamu was the Basgrun of this reign. 

§ 3. AjIBOYEDE 

Ajiboyede succeeded to the throne. He was a most successful 
King but he was a tyrant. 

During this reign, the country was invaded by Lajomo, king of 
the Tapas. The King marched against him ; brave deeds were 
done on both sides ; at last, however, the Yorubas were routed, 
and the King would have been slain but for a circumstance which 
not only saved his life, but also turned the tide of victory in his 
favour. 

When it became apparent that the battle was lost, Ajanlapa 
the Osi'wefa hastily exchanged dress with the King, and told him 
to escape for his life. He put on the King's crown and his robes, 
and the Tapas supposing him to be the King turned their attention 
chiefly on him, and showered upon him such a number of darts, 
that in falling his body was propped up by the shafts of the arrows. 
As the crown fell off his head (like Gbonka Orogbori of the preceding 
reign) a coward observed his teeth with the face set as if he were 
grinning ; thinking he was laughing at their futile efforts he con- 
cluded at once that they had supernatural beings opposed to them ! 
He was alarmed, communicated his fears to his comrades, and 
panic immediately spread throughout the Tapa host ; and before 
they could be rallied, the stampede had become general, and 
he pursued now became the pursuers ; the Yorubas returned to 



THE KINGS OF QYQ IGBOHO I63 

the charge, and the Tapas were completely routed, and put to 
the sword. Lajomg their King was taken and the victory was 
complete. 

The King was so grateful for his life being saved by the devoted 
Osi'wefa, that he took counsel of all the Oyo nobles as to what 
honours he should bestow on Ajanlapa's son. He wished him to 
be his constant attendant, to be about him night and day, and that 
he should be free of any part of the palace. But such a post cannot 
be held by any other than a eunuch and to make him so would 
seem cruel and ungrateful ; but the Oyos counselled that unless 
he is so, he cannot enjoy the full liberty desired by the King. A 
painful necessity that seemed to be, but the King yielded to that 
advice, and he was emasculated. 

This circumstance accounts for the great honours attached to 
that office to this day, vide p. 59. The Osi'wefa is always the 
first as well as the last in the King's bed chamber. If the King 
is ill, he takes his place on state occasions, putting on his robes 
and the crown ; in war, he often appears as the King's deputy, 
invested with all the paraphernalia of royalty, including the state 
umbrellas, the kakaki trumpet, etc. Thus Ajanlapa by sacrificing 
his life converted what would have been a crushing defeat into a 
triumphant victory, and so saved his country from humiliation, and 
purchased royal honours for his family and for his official successors 
for ever. To mark this victory as well as his long reigp, Ajiboyede 
celebrated the Bebe festival. 

The Bebe is akin to a jubilee or golden age of a king's reign. 
There have been but few such in the history of the Yorubas. It 
lasts for 3 years, and during this period liberty of speech and 
action is granted to everyone, high and low, rich and poor through- 
out the kingdom, without any fear of being accused of sedition 
or treason. No riot or fighting is to be heard of anywhere, all 
provocations must be suppressed while the Bebe lasts, for no one is 
to be prosecuted during that period. All is peace. The King's 
Ilaris are rarely seen about on duty at this time, and when met, 
ne«d not command that worship and deference usually accorded 
them. No toll or tribute is paid. Everyone appears in his holiday 
dress. Country folks go to Oyo to enjoy themselves without fear. 
Festivities mark the occasion. Provincial and feudatory kings 
and princes, and those of adjacent countries pay visits to Oyo 
to offer congratulations ; presents are given and received in a 
lavish manner. The corridors and courtyards of the palace, and 
all the trees in the King's market used to be decorated with 
hangings of cloth of various hues, native and foreign make, as 
with bunting. One deplorable act, however, is a blot on theBeb§ 



l64 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

celebration ; it is always accompanied with human sacrifices 
offered to the memory of all preceding Kings from Oduduwa 
downwards ; two to each, and their blood mingled with those of 
animals slaughtered without number is poured out, for the King 
and his courtiers are required to have a religious dance upon it ; 
and this part of the ceremony is regarded as the highest act of 
worship, and of thanksgiving. 

The Bebe is sometimes termed the Iht or funeral rites, as if 
intended to mark the close of a long reign, from the fact that the 
few Kings who celebrated it died a short time after. 

The three years festivities of the Bgbe being over, the Ba§orun 
celebrates a minor form of festival termed the Owara, and this 
lasts three months. 

A short time after these festivitives were over, the King lost 
by death his first-born son, Osemolu to his inexpressible grief. 
All the Oyo nobles who came to sympathize with him were by his 
orders put to death, alleging that their feigned condolence was but 
a mock sympathy, for since he was fasting from grief, their hands 
smelt of food recently partaken. An insurrection against him was 
quite ripe when a Moslem priest from the Tapa country called 
" Baba-kewu " sent his son " Baba-Yigi " to remonstrate with 
him for his unjust and cruel acts in avenging his son's death on 
innocent people, when his son had died a natural death. " This," 
said he, " is a sin against God who took away the life of your 
son." 

The King pondered seriously over this message, and became 
convinced of his tyranny. He convened an assembly of the 
Oyo citizens, and publicly asked their pardon for his unjust acts. 

He was making preparations for removing the seat of govern- 
ment back to Oyo when he died. 

This is the fourth and last King buried at Igboho. 

The Ba§grun of this reign was Ibat^. 

§ 4. Abipa or " Oba M'oro " (the ghost catcher) 

Prince Abipa succeeded to the throne, being the fourth and last 
King who reigned at Gboho. 

His first effort was to carry out the last wishes of his father, 
viz., to remove the seat of government back to the ancient capital. 

The Nobles however, and those born at Gboho were strongly 
opposed to the removal, but could not prevent or dissuade the 
King from carrying out his purpose ; they therefore had recourse 
to a stratagem by which they hoped to thwart his purpose. 

When they knew that the King was about to send to inspect 
the old sites, and to propitiate the gods as a preliminary to re- 



THE KINGS OF QYQ IGBOHO 165 

occupation, emissaries were secretly despatched by them to precede 
the King's messengers. The Bagorun sent a hunchback, the 
Alapini an albino, the Asipa a leper, the Samu a prognathi, the 
Laguna a dwarf, the Akiniku a cripple. All these emissaries 
are considered in this country as unnatural beings, suffering the 
vengeance of the gods, hence they are termed " Eni Orisa " (the 
belongings of the gods). They are usually kept as priests and 
priestesses to Obatala and other gods, especially the albinoes, 
dwarfs, and hunchbacks. 

As the King's messengers were about to offer the sacrifices at 
the place appointed, these counterfeit apparitions who, according 
to instructions had posted themselves on the hill Ajaka, at the 
foot of which the palace was built, by a preconcerted plan suddenly 
began to shout " Ko si aye, ko si aye " (no room, no room). 

At night they roamed about the hill, hooting and cooing with 
lighted torches in hand, and they were taken for the spirits of 
the hill refusing them readmission to Oyq. 

This report was very distressing to the King, and he was at 
a loss what to do. The Ologbo or Arokin (chief cymbalist) 
shrewdly suspecting the real facts of the case advised his master 
to send hunters to investigate the truth of the matter. B6ni, 
Igi^ubu, Alegbktk, Lgkd, Gbandan^and Olomo were the six famous 
hunters sent. They armed themselves with weapons and with 
charms to meet any contingency for self-defence. 

When these hunters discovered that they were human beings 
they came upon them, and one of them took his aim and would 
have shot one of the deformed beings, had he not cried out and 
begged for his life. They were all taken alive and brought before 
the King ; and being questioned they were obliged to betray their 
masters who were at this time ignorant of what had taken place. 
The King adopted a most characteristic way of administering to 
his Nobles a silent rebuke which told. 

At the weekly meeting of the King and the noblemen for the 
Jakuta sacrifices (which occur every 5 days) after the usual pro- 
ceedings and religious ceremonies of the day were over, and they 
retired into the banqueting hall for refreshment as was their 
wont, the King on this occasion sent to each of the noblemen a 
calabash full of beer by the hands of his own emissary the 
" apparition " of Oyo ! The Basgrun saw with ineffable surprise 
his hunchback whom he thought was playing the ghost at distant 
Oyo emerging from the King's inner apartment with a calabash 
full of beer for him, the Alapini his albino, and so with all the 
others, each one being waited upon by his own emissary ! Instantly 
a deep silence pervaded the room and the rest of the time was passed 



l66 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

in an ominous stillness. The King and his Nobles parted with- 
out a word being spoken on the subject. The noblemen, however, 
showed their resentment by poisoning the Ologbo the King's 
adviser ; but he, in order to show his love and esteem for the 
deceased, ordered for him a semi-state funeral, and had his body 
wrapped in ass's skin to be taken to Oyo for interment. 

From this incident. King Abipa was nick-named Oba M'gro 
(the King who caught ghosts). 

Another nickname given to the King that had connection 
with this event was derived from his head slave Bisa, a Bariba, 
who was his favourite, and one time had great influence with his 
master. The King found out that Bisa was an accomplice with 
the Nobles in thwarting his designs. His Majesty now adopted a 
characteristic method of administering him a very sharp rebuke 
which he never forgot. 

He one day called Bisa, and told him that the Eleduwe (the 
king of his native country) was dead, and that the Baribas have 
sent to him to pay the ransom of Bisa, who has been elected to 
the vacant throne. "Now Bisa, will you go?" "Yes, your 
Majesty " replied Bisa, " and your majesty may be sure of this, 
that when I ascend the throne, the Bariba country to its utmost 
limits will be free and open to all Yorubas." The King then 
rejoined " Why do you wish to go to your country and yet you 
were trying to prevent me going to my birthplace and ancestral 
home ? Therefore, yoti shall not go." Bisa begged hard, but his 
master remained resolute, hence he was nicknamed " Ogbolu 
Akohun, Akohun Bisa jale " Ogbolu the Refuser who totally 
refused Bisa's entreaties. 

From this time Bisa lost all influence with the King. The design 
of removing the seat of Government to Oyo was now carried out, 
and Oyo from that time was known as Oyo O^Q ie- Qyq of the 
ghosts.* 

Those famous hunters remained three years with the King 
in the capital as his guests, until he was perfectly settled. When 
they were about to return home, the King in order to do them 
honour, sent a special messenger with them as his representative, 
and lest this servant of his should prove a source of expense to 
them, he was allowed the privilege of receiving tolls for his liveli- 
hood. He became really the new Governor of the town with the 
title of Onibode (receiver of customs) . Hence that title is bestowed 
on the chief ruler of Gboho to this day. 

The remaining act of this King was the consolidation of his 

^ Oyo is also sometimes called Oyo Egboro from the name of the 
prince from whom Sango seized it. 



THE KINGS OF OYO IGBOHO 167 

kingdom. He buried charms in several places in the city that it 
might never be destroyed by war. 

When his " medicine men " asked for a new born babe to be 
used as an ingredient in the composition of the charm, it happened 
that one of his wives had just then been confined ; this being 
reported to him, he ordered the new born babe to be brought in its 
blood as it was, and he handed it over to the men to be pulverized 
and used for their purpose. This act is to this day highly com- 
mended by the people, and the King accounted a great public 
benefactor who so loved his country, that he sacrificed his son for 
the welfare of his people. 

O Yo was never destroyed by war after this event, but all the same, 
when the hour of retribution came, the blood of the innocents 
was avenged, for she suffered the fate of all cities destroyed by 
war. She was deserted, and thus she is in ruins unto this day. 

Ibate continued as the Basorun of this reign also. 



Chapter IV 

A SUCCESSION OF DESPOTIC AND SHORT-LIVED KINGS 

§ I. Obalokun Agana Erin 

Obalokun succeeded to the throne of his fathers. His mother 
was the daughter of the Alake, the Primus of the Egba chiefs. 

The most memorable event of this reign was the introduction 
of salt into the Yoruba country. The article hitherto used for 
it was an insipid rock salt known as Obu. Salt now known as 
iyo was at first called dun-mdmd. 

This King was said to be in friendly relations with the King 
of France (probably Portugal) with whom he had direct communi- 
cation. It was said that the King sent 800 messengers with 
presents to that European sovereign, but that they were never 
heard of again. Tradition says that the sounds of bells ringing 
in the skies was plainly heard in the Akesan (King's) market, 
and it was conjectured that it was the voices of the unfortunates 
speaking to them from the other world to tell their fate. 

What natural phenomenon this may have been due to which 
was interpreted thus, we do not know, but so it was believed at 
the time, and similar omens are not unknown to history. 

It was said that a white traveller visited Oyo during this reign. 

This King placed the first Ajele (political resident) at Ijana 
near Ilaro, with the title of Onisare. The appointment of an 
Onisar^ was regularly from Oyo and he must be a Tapk by birth. 
More of this will be noted hereafter. 

He sent an expedition into the Ijesa country which was ambushed 
and defeated by the tribe known as Ijesa Arera, the Ovos being 
then unaccustomed to bush fighting. So great was the loss of 
life in this expedition that the Ologbo was sent out as a town crier 
to inform the bereaved of their losses in this war. 

During this reign Sabigana emigrated from the Sabe to the 
Yoruba country. 

TheBasorun of this reign was Iba Magaji. 

§ 2. Ajagbo 

Ajagbo who succeeded Obalokun was remarkable for a long 
reign. He was said to have reigned 140 years and is an exception 
to the recent rule. 

He was born a twin, and so striking was the resemblance 

168 



A SUCCESSION OF DESPOTIC AND SHORT-LIVED KINGS 169 

between himself and his brother Ajampati that the one was often 
mistaken for the other, and very often royal honours were paid 
to the latter as to his brother. 

Ajagbo was also a warlike prince ; several expeditions were 
sent out by him. 

He had a friend at Iwoye called K6koro-gangan whom he made 
his Kakanfo (vide p. 74). This was the first Kakanfo in the 
Yoruba country. 

It was his custom to send out four expeditions at the same time 
under four commanders. One under the Basorun, the next 
under the Agbakin, the third under the Kakanfo, the fourth under 
the Asipa. Those under this last consisted of the youths of the 
metropolis. 

He destroyed Iweme in the Popo cpuntry. He Olgpa, Onko 
and his maternal town Ikereku-were an Egba town. The rest of 
his reign was peaceful. 

The Basorun of this reign was Akidain. 

§ 3. Odarawu 

Odarawu was the successor. His reign was very short. He 
had a bad temper which was the cause of his being rejected. 
His short reign became a proverb, and often used to point a 
moral, and as a warning to succeeding Kings and also to inculcate 
a lesson of patience and forbearance. 

On his accession he was asked according to custom who was his 
enemy ; he replied Ojo segi, i.e. a town in the kingdom named 
after the Bale thereof. 

The reason he gave for this was that when a private man, he 
was once insulted by the Bale's wife. The alleged insult was 
under the following circumstances : — 

He was accustomed then to trade in the provinces, and on one 
occasion he went to the market to buy eko for his dinner, the seller 
whom he approached happened to be the Bale's wife ; both buyer 
and seller were ignorant of each other's position. Eko then was 
sold for one cowry each ; he bought six and paid five cowries as a 
privilege of his birth. The seller not knowing that he was an Akeyo 
(prince) and considering herself insulted thereby, in the heat of 
passion gave him a slap, and called him a thief for the one cowry 
withheld ! 

The King's order for the destruction of the town was obeyed, 
but the Oyo people surmised that this would be a heartless tyrant, 
who, on account of a single cowry harboured such malice and 
resentment within him as subsequently to order the destruction 
of so many lives of his peaceful and loyal subjects. On this 



170 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

account, having fulfilled his wishes, he was rejected. He, therefore 
committed suicide. 

Akidain survived the late King and was the Basorun of this 
reign also. 

§ 4. Karan 

Karan succeeded Odarawu, but he proved to be an unmitigated 
tyrant. He tortured many of his subjects by ordering them to be 
scourged front and back until they expired ; so great were his 
cruelties that his name ha-^ ^"^c-^^ i^f^ a proverb " as cruel as 
Karan " and this led to a c,^^. ^ . mation of his reign. 

He sent out an expedition against Aga Oibo, and there the 
conspiracy against him was quickly developed. 

When the insurrection was ripe for execution, they sent a 
message home to him craving for his fan, as it has been told them 
by divination that the town cannot be taken except the King's 
fan be offered in sacrifice to the gods. This was complied with, and 
a portion of the sacrificial meat was sent him to partake of. 

As soon as he had tasted thereof, it was said to him " The King 
has eaten his own fan, his word is now of no value, " i.e., his 
commands have returned to his own mouth. This is a characteristic 
round about method the' Yorubas have of conveying intimations 
of what they intend to do. The army is now absolved from a 
charge of disobedience if they withdraw from the siege for the King 
has recalled his words ! All those who would stand by him were 
included in the plot. Iba Biri was elected to be the Basorun in 
place of Woruda who had succeeded Akidain. The Agbakin's 
son was chosen to succeed his father, and so on with the other 
titles. This done, they raised the siege and encamped against the 
city demanding the King's abdication or death. 

The King unwilling to die offered a stout resistance. He was 
personally courageous and brave, but he had the whole of his 
army against him. When they entered the city, he held out 
against them in the palace ; overcome by odds, he shot arrows 
until his hands were swollen. Dislodged from within the courtyard 
he climbed to the top of the roof, and there he sat fighting until 
the palace was set on fire and he perished in the flames. 

Thus ended a short and an inglorious reign. He was succeeded 
by his son, Jayin. 

Woruda was the Basorun of this reign. 

§ 5. Jayin 

Jayin was the son of the late King Karan. He was an effeminate 
and dissolute prince. He had his harem full of all sorts of 
characters. His son Olusi was kind and generous ; he was the idol 



A SUCCESSION OF DESPOTIC AND SHORT-LIVED KINGS I7I 

of the nation, and on him they built their hopes for a better future 
for the country. 

Brought up amidst such demoralizing influences, in an evil 
hour, he fell under the charms of one of his father's numerous 
wives and was caught in her embraces. The father already jealous 
of the son's popularity with the people never forgave this offence. 
According to one account he summoned the prince before him, 
and whilst reprimanding him for his conduct, he was for a moment 
off his guard and thus betrayed himself by letting out the feeling 
rankling in his breast. " Villain " said he, " the citizens of Oyo 
prefer you to myself, and you are at one with them against me." 
Whilst speaking thus to him, he had in hand a club, the top of 
which was spiked and tipped with poison ; this he pressed upon 
his head to the point of bleeding, and the poison proved fatal to 
him. 

According to another account, it was a poisoned cake made 
of beans that his father gave him, and of which he partook that 
caused his death. Anyhow, it was certain that he died of poison 
by the hand of his father. 

He was universally mourned. The Oyo chiefs were detei mined 
to find out the cause of his death. They had a strong suspicion 
of foul play and were determined to avenge it. 

The King gave it out that his death was due to an accident 
from the kick of his horse. The secret however, was divulged 
by one of his wives, and the disappointed citizens became much 
disaffected towards their King. 

The late Olusi had a public funeral, a national mourning was 
proclaimed, and the public undertook to perform his funeral 
obsequies. His Egugun was brought out, i.e. an appearance of 
his apparition clothed with the cloths with which he was known 
to have been buried. 

The Egugun was said to have repaired to the palace, as was 
usual to pay honours to the chief ruler of the town, and as soon 
as the King showed his face, he was grasped by it. He was then 
told to die, having been touched by an Egugun. 

3ut according to another and a more probable account, when the 
King heard that his late son's Egugun in the company of others 
was coming to the palace, knowing what the most probable out- 
come of such a visit must be, he hastily took poison and died. 
And this has passed into proverb " O ku dhde ki a ko iwi wo 
Akesan, Oba,Jayin te ori gba aso. (At the approach to Akesan 
of a company of chanting Eguguns, King Jayin buried his head in 
a shroud.) Used of one who anticipates the inevitable. 

It was during this reign that an Ilari " Agbeja-ilfe " was sent 



172 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

to settle a land dispute between the Aseyin odo, and the Olowu 
Ipole ; he became the first Awujale of the Ijebus. 

Iba Biri was appointed Basorun in place of Woruda deposed. 

§ 6. Ayibx 

An inter-regnum of some years followed the last reign, the 
affairs of the kingdom being left in the hands of the Basorun. 
The heir to the throne was the late King's grandson, the infant 
son of the lamented Olusi, who was too young to administer the 
government. The Oyo Mesi elected him in order to do honour to 
the memory of his deceased father. Ayibi was crowned when he 
came of age. Unfortunately he proved unworthy of the honour 
and respect done him ; he greatly disappointed the hopes of the 
nation. This may have been due to a great defect in his training 
when a minor, over-indulgence taking the place of strict discipline. 
He proved to be a tyrant who took delight in shedding blood. 

When any suit was brought to court for his decision he often 
gave judgment by ordering both com.plainant and defendant 
to be executed. He had no respect for age, or rank, but terribly 
abused his power. 

As an example of his cruelty and arbitrariness, the following 
story was told of him : — 

He was one day in his bath, being attended by one of his 
favourite wives ; and she, in a moment of self-forgetfulness (or 
rather of amorous regard) said jocularly to him, " And this is all 
of the man so much dreaded by all ! " He took offence at this 
remark, but disguised his displeasure by a smile, but inwardly 
he was determined to convince her practically of the power which 
made him an object of dread to all. 

After leaving his bathroom, he gave an order to a Tetu (execu- 
tioner) privately to fetch the heads of the wife's father and mother 
each in a calabash, and decently covered up. This order was 
promptly executed The wife had by this time forgotten her 
remarks in the bathroom, as she had no reason to be apprehensive 
of any evil consequences arising therefrom. The calabashes 
being brought and set before him, he sent for her from her apart- 
ment, and asked her to uncover those , calabashes and tell the 
contents of them ! " Do you know them ? " asked he, " Yes I 
do," she replied trembling. " Then," rejoined he " that is the 
secret why I am so much dreaded by all, although to you I seem 
but commonplace and ordinary." She fully expected her own 
execution to follow, but he was satisfied with the pain and misery 
into which he had thrown her, and he graciously pardoned (sic) 
her. 



A SUCCESSION OF DESPOTIC AND SHORT-LIVED KINGS I73 

For this and similar acts of cruelty, an insurrection was stirred 
up against him by all the people, and being rejected he committed 
suicide. 

Oluaja, and after him Yabi were the Basoruns of this reign. 

The reason why these Kings after rejection invariably committed 
suicide is this. The person of a King is regarded as sacred. 
Kings are venerated as gods, indeed many of them have been 
actually deified ; but the moment a king's enormities provoke an 
open rebuke, or on being told publicly " We reject you," by the 
constitution of the country he must die that day. He cannot 
from the sanctity with which he has been regarded abdicate 
and continue to live as a private individual, or Continue to reign 
by sufferance, by the clemency of aggrieved subjects. Hence he 
must die ; and by his own hands, for it is an unthinkable horror 
among the Yorubas for any man to lay hands upon a being 
regarded as sacred. It is the prerogative of the Basorun to utter 
the sentence of rejection when the people are determined on it. 

Ev^en Noblemen also from their exalted positions are never 
ordered to execution. " The King rejects you. The ancient Kings 
Oduduwa, Orafiyan, Aganju, and others, reject you." He must 
then take poison and die. Such deaths are accounted honourable, 
public and decent funerals are accorded them. 

If any one allows himself to be executed his carcase will be treated 
like that of a common felon, and his house pulled down. Therefore 
a faint-hearted individual would be despatched by his nearest 
relatives to save themselves from indelible disgrace. An honour- 
able burial will then be. accorded to the illustrious dead. 

§ 7. OSINYAGO 

Osinyago who succeeded to the throne was equally worthless. 
He was an avaricious man who by exactions, massacre, and con- 
fiscations amassed wealth which he did not live long to enjoj'. 

His firstborn son, like his father, was of a grasping propensity, 
which led to his early death. The second child Omgsun, although 
a female, was of a masculine character, and she considered the 
rank and privileges of the Aremo (Crown Prince) her own ; but the 
King adopted a cousin Woruale (contracted to Wurale or Irale) 
son of Gbagba, a physician, his maternal uncle, as the Aremo, and 
this Omosun resented. 

It happened that a dispute arose between these two as to 
the right of appointing a new Aseyin at the death of the then king 
of Iseyin, and Omosun from wounded pride that she was opposed 
by a commoner, in the heat of passion slew Irale ! 
H 



174 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Irale's father Gbagba the physician was determined to avenge 
the death of his son, and this he did by poison said to have been 
extracted from one cowry worth of shea butter, 200 grains of 
beniseed, and other ingredients by which he effected the deaths of 
the King, Omosun, Apala the Basorun, and other notabilities of 
Oyo who were concerned with the misgovernment that was going 
on. 

He was said to have escaped to his own country by means 
of charms. One report says, he flew away like a bird, and was 
found at Ede ; another says he died and was buried, but his 
corpse became a red monkey which escaped into the bush. What 
was more probable was, that from the dread he inspired by his 
powers, he had an opportunity of escape, and was not slow to make 
use of it. The country was bereft of King and Basorun simul- 
taneously. 

The Basorun of this reign was Apalk. 

§ 8. OjiGi 

Ojigi who was elected to the vacant throne, was a powerful and 
warlike King. He extended his conquests to the Dahomian 
territory. In three expeditions headed by the Basorun and the 
Gbonka Latoy6, the Dahomians were brought fully under sub- 
jection. 

Yansumi an Idahomian town was taken and destroyed. He sent 
an expedition also against the Igbdnas. 

This King in order to show his undisputed sovereignty over 
the whole of the Yoruba country, including Benin, sent out a 
large expedition which struck the Niger in the north, near the 
Ibaribas, and coasted along the right bank until they arrived at 
the coast and returned to Oyo by the Popo country. Great 
exploits were reported of the leaders. 

Personally, he was a very good man, but a too indulgent father. 
The Aremo by his cruelties and excesses brought about the father's 
rejection and death. He ordered Oluke the Basoran's son to be 
unlawfully beaten. As this wrong could not be avenged without 
serious consequences, and as the King did not punish the wrong doer, 
it was thought more expeditious to effect the King's death ; for 
about this time the custom began to prevail for the Aremios to 
die with the father, as they enjoy unrestrained liberty with the 
father. A pretext was soon found for rejecting the King and 
fond father, and consequently he died, and his eldest son with 
him. 

One of the most famous men in Yoruba history Yamba was the 
Basorun of this reign. 



a succession of despotic and short-lived kings i75 

§ 9. Gberu 

Prince Gberu who now succeeded to the throne was a wicked 
and superstitious King, much given to making charms. Before 
his accession to the throne he had a friend called Jambu whom he 
afterwards raised to the high rank of Basgrun. But it was not 
long before these former friends became disaffected towards 
each other. Both of them were one day sitting under a large 
Ose tree (the Adamsonia digitata) at Oyo. TheBasorun remarked 
on the magnificence of the tree which " bade fair to last for ever." 
The King made no reply, but afterwards poisoned the tree in 
order to cast the suspicion on the Basorun who had made remarks 
on it ; and before the next morning it had withered. 

Oyo we may remark is situated in a vast plain where trees 
are rarely seen. This was one of the few that grew there and it was 
much thought of, and was highly prized for* its magnificence when 
in full bloom. 

This circumstance caused a great sensation in the city among 
all who saw the tree flourishing in all its glory only the day before ! 
Enquiries as to the cause were keen and close ; it was at first thought 
this deed was done by the Basorun in order to frame an accusation 
against the King as both were seeking each other's life ; but the 
author of the deed was soon known. 

The chiefs of the town now grew suspicious and apprehensive 
of their own safety should the King add the use of secret poison 
to his unlimited regal power. They soon found a pretext for 
rejecting him, and he had to put an end to his own life. His 
quondam friend Jambu the Basorun who divulged the secret was 
not spared either, he soon shared the fate of his friend and 
sovereign. 

Gberu's reign was short and inglorious. He was succeeded by 
Amuniwaiye. 

Jambu was the Basgrun of this reign. 

§ 10. Amuniwaiye 

Prince Amuniwaiye who now ascended the throne promised 
well at first, by his clemency and grace; but subsequently his low 
morals rendered him weak and despicable, and, as such, a disgrace 
to his high office. 

He had for mistress the wife of his principal " medicine man " 
Olukoyisi, with whom he became acquainted under the following 
circumstances : — 

The King engaged this " medicine man" to help him against 
the friends of Jambu the powerful Basgrun who effected the death 



176 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

of the former King. Being afraid that if his services to the King 
were known, his own life would be in danger, he worked warily 
by sending his wife Ololo with the pots instead of going himself 
personally. In this way the King had the opportunity of coming 
into contact with her, which he disgracefully abused, and the 
husband got to know it. 

He could not bring an open charge against the King nor had 
he any other means of obtaining redress but by secret revenge, 
and this he effected terribly ! 

Olukoyisi prepared certain ingredients from the root of the 
Opgki tree which he applied to his wife unsuspected ; it was a 
fatal " tell-tale," for when next she was being indulged in the 
royal embraces, the pair of them got so inextricably adhered 
together, that it became necessary to resort to a surgical operation 
in order to separate them ! Thus both of them died in the act. 
Thus ended this inglorious reign. 

The Basgrun of this reign was Kogb6n son of the late Jambu. 

§ II. Onisile 

Onisile who now ascended the throne was quite a different 
man from the former occupant. He was a great warrior, and 
for his exploits was nicknamed " Gbagida ! Wowo I'^won ab'esiri 
fo odi " (Gbagida [an expression of admiration] a man with 
clanging chains [for prisoners] whose horse can leap over a town 
wall.) 

He was remarkable for his indomitable courage and lion- 
hearted spirit. He was moreover very artistic, and was said to 
have made seven silver doors to the seven entrances of his sleeping 
apartment. 

During this reign the Sekere (calabash) drum was ornamented, 
not only with cowries, but also with costly beads e.g. lyiin (corals) 
Okun (stone beads, Benin) Erinla (striped yellow pipe beads) and 
Segi (blue pipe beads), strung with silk thread dyed red ; all of 
native manufacture. 

His rashness and fearlessness was the ultimate cause of his death. 
He was cautioned against experim.enting with the "sun leaf" 
a plant known to possess electrical properties, by which lightning 
can be attracted ; but he was not the man to heed any such remon- 
strance. The consequence was that the Sango worshippers managed 
to attract lightning on the palace, the King was struck, and from 
the shock he became paralysed. Thus he was incapacitated from 
performing the duties of his office. 

The chiefs of Oyo then assembled and waited on him, and told 
him that as he had challenged Sango to a single combat and had 



A SUCCESSION OF DESPOTIC AND SHORT-LIVED KINGS I77 

been worsted, he could no longer continue to live. Thus he was 
rejected, and he had to die. 

The feeling had gained ground by this time that Kings should 
not be allowed to die a natural death. Unchecked despotism, 
unrestrained licence, insatiable greed, and wanton voluptuousness 
should not be allowed to flourish throughout the full term of a 
natural lifetime. The excesses of the Crown Prince also were 
unendurable hence the earliest opportunity was usually sought, 
for putting an end to their reign. 

His Basorun's name was Soyiki alias £)sij6gb6. 



Chapter V 

BASORUN GAHA AND HIS ATROCITIES, HIS FALL, 
AND ABIODUN'S PEACEFUL REIGN 

§ I. Labisi 

This unfortunate Prince was nominated to the vacant throne, 
but was never crowned. Only 17 days after he commenced the 
preliminary ceremonies, the new Basorun Gaha rose to power, and 
commenced those series of atrocities which made him notorious 
in Yoruba history. 

Olubg and Ajibadu the King-elect's friends were sum.marily 
put to death, and he, having no supporters was not even allowed 
to enter the palace, much less to sit on the throne. He had to 
put an end to his own life. 

Gaha had great influence with the people, and a great many 
followers who considered themselves safe under his protection, 
from the dread in which they stood of the Kings, because of their 
cruel and despotic rule. 

Gahk was also famous for his " charms ; " he was credited with 
the power of being able to convert himself into a leopard or an 
elephant, and on this account was much feared. He lived to 
a good old age, and wielded his power miercilessly. He was noted 
for having raised five Kings to the throne, of whom he murdered 
four, and was himself murdered by the fifth. 

§ 2. AwoNBioju alius Ouuboye 

Gaha the Basorun had by this time attained to great power and 
influence. He made himself the King maker and King destroyer. 
He did not aspire to the throne, for that was impossible of attain- 
ment, but he demanded the homage of all the Kings he raised to 
the throne. He raised Awonbioju into the place of Labisi. His 
reign was very short, having wielded the sceptre for only 130 days. 
He was murdered by the all-powerful Basorun for nobly refusing 
to prostrate before him, his own Chancellor. 

§ 3. Agboluaje 

Agboluaje who succeeded the late King on the throne was a 
very handsome and prepossessing Prince, and as he submitted 
to the powerful Basorun, he was allowed to reign for a longer 
period than the two preceding Kings. He was not as ambitious 

178 



BASORUN GAHA AND HIS ATROCITIES I79 

as some of his predecessors, he had no wars, the kingdom had 
extended to its utmost limits, bounded by the river Niger on the 
north and a portion of the Tapa and Bariba countries, on the 
East by the lower Niger, on the South by the seacoast, and on the 
West it includes the Popos and Dahomey. From all the provinces 
included within these boundaries, and by some including the Gas 
and Ashanti, tributes were paid to Oyq. Tranquility prevailed 
all over the land. 

The King thought this a fitting opportunity for celebrating 
the Beb§, not so much for the length of his reign, but for the 
peace and prosperity that prevailed all over the Kingdom. 

During the three years celebration, visitors from all parts 
thronged Ovg as was usual, but the most distinguished guest was 
the Elewi-odo, a Popo king, who visited Oyq in state and had a 
reception befitting his rank. He was a particular friend of the 
Alafik's, and usually supplied him. with cloths and other articles 
of European manufacture, being nearer the coast and having deal- 
ings with European traders of those days. 

As on such occasions everybody visited Oyo in his best holidaj' 
dress, so the Elewi-odo who was accounted proverbially rich 
appeared at this time. On public occasions the Elewi-odo sat 
on a throne opposite the King ; as often as the King changed 
his robes, he changed his covering cloth to one of the same 
material ; when the King puts on a robe of silk or velvet, he covers 
with a cloth of the same material. Both Kings were an object 
of interest and admiration by the 1060 vassal kings and chiefs 
of Yoruba, with the populace who were present on that occasion. 

But the citizens of Oyo grew jealous for the honour and glory 
of their King and wished him to appear superior to the Elewi-odo 
by robing himself with something the like of which even the Elewi 
had not ; but they found that he had nothing the like of which his 
friend had not ; so they had recourse to a device. The manu- 
facturers were summoned and the case put before them, and they 
promised to rise to the occasion. A simple gown was thereupon 
woven, of common stuff indeed, but embossed all over with the 
silken wool of the large cotton tree ; seen at a distance the nature 
of the cloth cculd not be made out by the crowd ; when the sun 
shone upon it, it reflected a silken hue to the admiration of all ; 
when the breeze blew, detached flosses of silk floated all around 
his majesty. Even the Elewi-odo and the provincial kings could 
not help admiring the curious robe which they took for something 
so superior, that none but the great Ai.afin of Oyo alone possessed ! 
The crowd went into ecstatic frenzy about it, and shouted an 
applause. 



l8o THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

But the conduct of the Elewi on this occasion offended the 
Basorun because he vied with his sovereign. Therefore, after his 
return home at the expiration of the Bebe and the Basorun had 
celebrated his Owara as usual, he denounced the Elewi before His 
Majesty in the severest terms : that he came, not to honour the 
King but to disgrace him, to show off his wealth to the King's 
disadvantage, and, therefore, he was determined to punish him 
for his conduct. 

The King pleaded hard for his friend but in vain. " Every 
one " said he, " is allowed by custom to appear at Oyo during 
Bebe in his best, how much more should a king do so ? His action 
in this matter is pardonable, and therefore, should be overlooked." 
But Gaha was inexorable, and war was declared. 

The Elewi having been privately forewarned, attempted no 
resistance, but sent a private message to the King not to be anxious 
on his account, and that his safety was assured. He speedily 
crossed the Esuogbo river and escaped to the Tapa country. 

Unfortunately the private messenger arrived af Oyo too late 
to meet the King alive. Unwilling that the head of his friend the 
Elewi should be brought in triumph to him at Oyo, he took poison 
and died before the return home of the expedition His brother 
Majeogbe was placed on the throne by the all-powerful Basorun 
Gaha. 

§ 4. Majeogbe 

Majeogbe did not fare any better than his immediate pre- 
decessors. His first care was to find means of checking the ambition 
of the Basorun. He could not order his execution, and the 
Basorun was too much on the alert to be taken off by poison ; 
but he set about making charms offensive and defensive in order 
to rid himself of this terror. 

Gaha had by this time attained the zenith of his glory ; his 
sons were scattered all over the length and breadth of the kingdom, 
they resided in the principal towns and all the tributes of those 
towns and their suburbs were paid to them. No tribute was now 
paid to the AlAfin ; Gaha's sons were as ambitious and as cruel 
as their father. 

Several anecdotes illustrating their wanton cruelties were told 
of them, e.g. : 

One of them once engaged a carrier to whom he gave a load too 
heavy for him to carry, but he dared not refuse to do so. He 
walked behind the man amusing himself with the sight of the man's 
sufferings from the weight of the load. He remarked in jest that 
the man's neck had become so thick that he doubted whether a 



BASORUN gAhA AND HIS ATROCITIES l8l 

sword could cut through. He suited his action to his words, 
drew his sword, and actually tried it ! The man was decapitated, 
and his body was left wallowing in his blood, and another man was 
compelled to take up the load. 

Another of his sons was said to have shot a farmer dead, whilst 
engaged in making heaps for planting yam, wantonly charging 
him with disfiguring the King's ground by making horns on it ! 

Another similarly shot a farmer dead whilst hoeing the ground, 
pretending that he mistook him for an ape on all fours ! 

Thus Gaha and his sons usurped all power of the government 
the King himself living in dread of his own fate at the pleasure 
of the notorious regicide. 

The King's own " medicine men " were not idle either. A 
lighted lamp was said to have been placed in one of his inner 
apartments which was kept burning for three years untrimmed, 
and while it was burning there can be no peace to the regicide. 

A horse was said to be in one of the stables and was heard 
neighing every day, and yet was kept there 3 years without 
fodder ! 

The AlafIxN's death was brought about by one of his sons quarrel- 
ling in theBasorun's quarter of the town ; this act Gahk resented 
as a daring affront which the father's life must atone for, the son 
being too insignificant for him to take any notice of. But the 
AlAfin had succeeded by this time in poisoning the Basorun that 
he became paralysed in both his legs. On the other hand the 
nature of the charms in the King's apartment had been made known 
to Gaha, who now bent all his energies to extinguish the ever- 
burning lamp. Its effect was so great that all who approached 
that apartment instantly dropped down dead. All the " medicine- 
men " in the kingdom were summoned by Gahk but none succeeded, 
and it cost many their lives. At last an Agberi man appeared, 
who sacrificed the life of his slave in order to gain the honour, 
nor did he survive it himself. In this service the Agberi tribes 
gained the pre-eminence over others of the same craft, and became 
friends of the Basorun. And thus the King died. 

But from this time the power of Gahk began to decline, old age 
set in, and impaired his strength of body and mind. His wives 
began to desert his harem, but some faithful domestics stood by 
him and they concealed from the general public the fact of his being 
lame. The door opening to the audience chamber was always 
kept shut whilst the King and the other noblemen were in waiting 
every morning to pay their respects to him. The opening and 
closing of the doors of the inner apartments announce the approach 
of his supernal highness. He crawled on all fours, and was usually 



l82 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

seated before the door of the audience chamber was sUd back, 
so that he was never seen on the move ; but in order to inspire 
dread, his drummer used to beat " Iba kanbo, irin ija ni nrin." 
His Highness comes majestic, striding as one spoiling for a fight. 

§ 5. Abiodun alias Adegolu 

Abiodun, whose peaceful reign has passed into a proverb was 
described as a tall and slender prince, of a very dark complexion, 
a comely person, of dignified manners, and altogether fit to wear 
a crown. He also was raised to the throne by the order and 
influence of the Basorun. 

The young King was wise and prudent, and at first made no 
attempt at any opposition to the powerful Basorun. He went 
regularly every morning to pay him his respects, and invariably, 
received his presents of 10 heads of cowiies (which as a matter of 
fact, never exceeded 6 heads, not with the knowledge of the 
Basorun however, but by the action of the attendants). 

This state of things continued for many j^ears so much so that 
even the Basorun himself was becoming tired of this abject 
submission, and wanted but a decent pretext for which he might 
kill him, just for a change ! This man of blood was often heard 
to say " Who taught this King to be so wise ? These daily presents 
are getting to be too heavy a charge on my exchequer now." 
All power was in his hands and so were the responsibilities. His 
lust for power drained his exchequer, for his sons lording it all 
over the country deprived him of the revenues which might have 
come to him. 

That he was in great straits for money seemed evident from the 
fact that he requested his " medicine men " to make him charms 
to get him plenty of cowries. " Of all that constitutes v/ealth 
or power," said he, " I have, save money (cowries) enough to 
support my position." 

One of his " medicine men " assured him that he can make 
him a soap to wash with, and before sunset, his wish will be 
realized. He made the soap, and His Supernal Highness used it 
according to directions, and strange to say, it took effect, but in a 
way no one anticipated. Whatever the cause was due to, nobody 
knew, but fire broke out in the Basorun's house that afternoon, 
and all efforts to extinguish it failed, and so the palace was burnt 
to the ground. Owing to His Highness' influence and power, 
and the dread all had of him, every rank and station, from the 
AlAfin downwaids now vied to be the foremost in contributing to 
repair his losses, 10, 15, 20 bags of cowries came in from all quarters. 



BASQRUN gAhA AND HIS ATROCITIES 183 

The heads of the different wards of the city, the Modade, Molkbi, 
Nsise-og\in, Ntetu, T'onse-Awo, Aremu, Ita-Ologbo, Ajofk, 
and the Ogede quarters, all brought presents in cowries. 

Then the provincial kings and chiefs from the Onikoyi down- 
wards brought building materials, and also their own contributions 
in cowries, which greatly augmented his store. The Basgrun 
then asked the " medicine mam " " Is this the way you promised 
to get me cowries ? " He replied, " Yes, your Highness ; by what 
other means could you have amassed such an abundance in so 
short a time ? " 

But the Basorun was still thirsting for the blood of the AlAfin, 
and he was never so wise in his dealings with him, till at length, 
King Abiodun took a bold step, upon which he had devoted no 
little consideration. Having given orders to his courtiers and his 
wives privately to report to the Basorun that he was suffering from 
indisposition he left Oyo privately in the night for a town called 
Akala to his namesake Adegolu the powerful chief of that place. 
Being in disguise, he was not recognised by the Bale's wife, who 
told him her husband had gone to his farm. The feigned poor 
stranger asked the lady kindly to fetch him home in haste, as 
he had an important message for him. The kind hostess did so, 
and Chief Adegolu came home immediately, wondering what the 
message could be. 

" Who are you ? Where from ? And what is your message ? " 
\\eie the eager questions the Bale put to the sti anger. " I want 
a private interview " was the reply. Both of them retired to a 
convenient place, and the Bale was startled, and was scarcely 
himself when he heard from this humble stranger " I am your 
namesake Adegolu the AlAfin of Qyo." It was with some difficulty 
he could restrain the Bale from doing homage there and then with 
earth on his head, etc. " No, no," said the King, " another time 
will do for that. I am come to confer with you upon the present 
crisis, how to rid the throne of Oyo of the great usurper, the King 
maker and King destroyer. You know very well, that in all the 
6,600 towns and villages of the Yoruba kingdom, Gaha and his 
sons have the dominant rule." 

After conference. Chief Adegolu went with the stranger to rhe 
powerful Kakanfo (Field Marshal) Oyabi at Ajase ; here the plot 
was matared, of a strong and secret combination against the 
Basgrun and his sons. This was communicated by swift posts 
to all the principal kings and chiefs in the country, and it was 
arranged that on a fixed day, they should all rise and destroy all 
Gahci's children. 

The arrangement being complete King Adegolu returned home 



184 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

as he came out ; and next morning paid his respects to the 
Basorun as before. 

At the day appointed, the whole country rose up against Gahk's 
children, and butchered them to pieces ; and in order to exter- 
minate the seed in toto, those of their wives who were enceinte 
were ripped open, and the embryo chopped in pieces ! 

The whole army of the country headed by Oyabi, and Adegolu 
now marched for Oyo according to the secret arrangement, and the 
Oyo chiefs with the AlAfin opened the gates to them. 

Gahk's people single-handed were preparing to resist, but it 
was evident that his time was come and nothing could stop the 
inevitable and fatal end. Gahk summoned his relatives together, 
and handed to them a bundle of here grass, well tied, and asked 
them to break it ; when all had tried and failed, he had it loosed, 
handing round a few blades to each ; that was easily crunched ; 
then said he to them " Combined we shall stand, but if disunited 
we shall be broken to pieces like the blades of ber^ in your hands." 
But his brother Olubii who might have offered the stoutest 
resistance, had been won over by the Oyo chiefs, who promised 
him his brother's title when all shall have been over ; but this 
turned out to be a ruse, devised to weaken theBasorun's resistance, 
for Olubu never escaped the fate of all Gahk's people, but was 
butchered in the general massacre of the great man's adherents 
and relatives. To the last, Olaotan, Gahi's eldest son, stood by his 
father. The troops from the country poured in from all quarters 
and were joined by those of the city, all equally tired of 
the iron rule of Gahk and of the enormities being perpetrated by 
his children. His palace was surrounded, and attempts were 
made to beat down the walls thereof ; but they were heroically 
defended by his trusty domestics, and the few faithful adherents. 

Gahk in vain tried to transform himself into an elephant as 
of yore. He ordered four mortars to be placed in position for the 
fore and hind legs, and two pestles for the tusks ; old and feeble 
and lame, he could not even help himself up the mortars, and when 
helped to them, his trembling limbs could not support his body 
weight : his incantations proved a failure. At the sight of this 
failure Olaotan groaned with disappointment and said, " Father, 
have I not always said it were better you should secure a charm 
for ensuring perpetual youth ? It was because I was strongly 
convinced that these charms will be of Uttle avail to you, when old 
age has set in." 

From the walls and from the roofs of his palace, the Basgrun's 
men kept the army of the Kakanfo at bay. A sharp shooter in 
particular did havoc amongst them ; but a certain young man. 



BAgQRUN gAhA AND HIS ATROCITIES lS$ 

bold and astute, observing this, ran close to the wall at some 
distance from the spot where he was, and walked along so close 
under it right on to the spot, that he was not seen from above or 
within, and as soon as the marksman put his head out again for 
another shot, he grasped and dragged him down, and immediately 
the men rushed forward and beat down the wall. The house was 
immediately fired, and all the domestics found within were put 
to the sword. The Basorun and Gbagi a faithful and favourite 
Ilari were taken aUve and brought before the King. He was 
soon on his chair of state with all insignia of royalty in full display 
about him, and the fallen minister made to prostrate at a distance 
before him, under a hot burning sun. The old man pleaded for 
his life, and even asked to be degraded and made the keeper of 
His Majesty's poultry yard, but it was felt that no quarters could 
be granted to him now. Being bulky in size, the ground under him 
where he lay prostrate under the mid-day sun became saturated 
with the profuse perspiration oozing from him. He neither deserved 
nor- received pity of any one. There were great rejoicings in the 
city and in the King's palace, and especially among the King's 
wives. 

So great were the indignities and contempt this fallen minister 
was subjected to, that even children could approach him now 
and pull at a pedunculated tumour in his forehead, hanging down 
his face, which the fear and dread of him did not allow people to 
notice before, for who could approach so near as to gaze on him ? 
But the fate awaiting him was of greater concern to him now, than 
to take notice of these trifling jests. 

By the order of the AlAfin, the posts of his house and everything 
that could be used as firewood, which had escaped the burning, 
were brought together and piled as a stake ; pots of palm oil, 
nut oil, and shea butter were poured on it, and set ahght ; he was 
then approached by a menial saying in mockery " Master, the fire 
is alight, will you not warm yourself a bit in such a weather as 
this ? " Then he was lifted up to the top of the stake and made 
secure, together with Gbagi, his faithful Ilari. 

His fate has been a lesson to all usurpers and abusers of power. 
It has passed into a proverb " Bi o I'aiya Osika, bi o ri iku Gahk, 
yio so otitg. If you have the heart of a cruel man, take note of 
Gaha's death and be true." 

A one day bebe i.e. a public holiday with the freedom of a 
Bebe (vide p. 163) was proclaimed, after which Qyabi the Kakanfo 
returned home with the thanks and good wishes of the King and 
nation. 

Abiodun now commenced the work of reformation beginning 



l86 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

from the capital. In order to make himself secure on the throne, 
he suppressed or executed all those known or suspected to have 
been Gahk's friends secretly, and who might raise an insurrection 
against him, for Gaha was not without friends even among the 
chiefs, such as the Esiele, the Sakin, and the Sahadow^. 

From this time commenced that period of peace and prosperity 
for which King Abiod UN's reign was famous. Tributes poured into 
Oyo from the remote states and from Dahomey, agriculture and 
commerce flourished, and the people to the remotest part of the 
kingdom were so far happy and contented. 

The Kakanfo Qyabi did not live long to enjoy the peace he was 
so instrumental in effecting ; two years later, the AlAfin invited 
him to Oyo in order to bestow on him special honours, and marks 
of favour in recognition of his services to King and country, but 
unfortunately, his health was in a precarious condition, and in 
obeying the commands of his sovereign, he died on his way to 
Oyo. 

§ 6. Abiodun's Peaceful Reign 

King Abiod UN had a long and prosperous reign. He was 
said to have been the father of 660 children ! The firstborn 
Agunpopo was said to have been the issue of an ilUcit intercourse 
with one of his father's wives, during the father's lifetime : hence 
the Oyo citizens refused to have him as the Argmg (Crown Prince). 
Ige Gbengberu his legitimate firstborn was accepted for that title, 
but he \yas of a delicate constitution, and died prematurely ; the 
office of Aremo now devolved upon the next prince Adesina. 

Wlien Abiod UN was fully established on the throne he found out 
that a Mohammedan had hidden one of Gahk's childien for about 
40 years^ ! The King not only graciously spared the young man, 
but also amply rewarded his preserver for his generous act, and 
confirmed his goodwill by giving one of his daughters to the 
Moslem for wife ; " for surely," said the King, " you would have 
done the same for myself also." 

Towards the latter part of the King's reign, certain of the 
Popo tribes had a quarrel among themselves, and two of their 
kings came to Oyo with a large retinue of about 4,000 people 
for an appeal. They were detained for 3 years without their 
case being heard, and in the end they were informed that they 
were no more to return to their own country, but kept as the 

^ The Yorubas always exaggerate their time period by a bad 
method of calculation. If, for instance, a child is born 5 days 
before the new moon appears, he is then 2 months old, and at the 
next new moon he is 3 months, when in reaUty he is only a month 
and some days. So also is the calculation for years. 



BASORUN gAhA AND HIS ATROCITIES 187 

King's body guard under the command of his son Agunpopo 
whom the Oyo citizens insisted upon reckoning among his 
brotherstheOlusami, Atingisi.andlyajinforthereasonstated above. 

One act of revenge marred this distinguished sovereign's 
reputation. Long before his accession, he was a trader in potash. 
He once had a quarrel at Ijaye with the Bale's son but the Bale, 
out of deference to his high birth interposed and sharply repri- 
manded his son. Upon his accession he avenged the alleged insult by 
ordering the destruction of the town. Ijaye was then an Egba town. 

This fact is noted because this was the first time Ijaye was taken, 
a town which was destined hereafter to play a notable part in 
Yoruba history. His other wars were against the Popos every 
other year. They were completely subdued. 

The Crown Prince Adesina turned out to be a very vain and 
extravagant young man, weak in character, yielding to flattery. 
E.g., it was said that some of his followers used to say to him 
" Prince, you can give me lo heads of cowries now (equivalent 
to ;£io in those days), if only you wish ; why, you have only to 
say the word and it would be done ; come now, why be reluctant 
about it ? It is only to speak, etc." The Prince would yield, and 
order the money to be given. 

King Abiodun attained to a good old age, full of honours, having 
subdued all his enemies. The Aremo had hoped to succeed his 
father. Not satisfied with the high honour and unrestricted 
liberty he was enjoying, he was too eager to occupy the throne, 
and so he hastened his father's death by poison. 

The end of this reign marked an important epoch in Yoruba 
history. With the death of Abiodun ended the universal and 
despotic rule of the Alafins of Oyo in the Yoruba country. He was 
the last of the Kings that held the different parts of the Kingdom 
together in one universal sway and with him ended the tranquility 
and prosperity of the Yoruba country. The revolution ensued, 
and the tribal independence, with the loss to Yoruba of the Tapa 
and Bariba, and Dahomey provinces, and the Popos later on, 
which has continued to our own day. In a word, with Abiodun 
ended the unity of the Yoruba kingdom. 

Kangidi succeeded Gahk as the Basorun of this reign. 

THE THIRD PERIOD. 
In which revolutionary wars devastated the whole of Yoruba- 
land, ending in the Fulani usurpation and tribal independence. 
It embraced a period of the reigns of five Kings, from the 
accession of Aole to the death of Oluewu, the last of the Kings, 
who reigned at the ancient Oyo. 



Chapter VI. 
THE REVOLUTION 

§ I. AOLE SURNAMED AROGANGAN 

None of Abiodun's numerous children succeeded him on the throne. 
Aol^, a tall and handsome . Prince, a cousin of the late King was 
elected in his stead. But unfortunately, his reign was a very 
unhappy one ; it marked the commencement of the decline of 
the nation until it terminated in the tragic, end of the fifth 
King after him. The cup of iniquity of the nation was full ; 
cruelty, usurpation, and treachery were rife, especially in the 
capital ; and the provinces were groaning under the yoke of 
oppression. Confiscation and slavery for the slightest offence 
became matters of daily occurrence, and the tyranny, exactions, 
and lawlessness of the Princes and other members of the royal 
family, were simply insupportable. Oaths were no more taken 
in the name of the gods, who were now considered too lenient 
and indifferent ; but rather in the name of the King who was 
more dreaded. " Idk Oba ni yio je mi " (may the King's sword 
destroy me) was the new form of oath ! Aole was unfoitunately 
saddled with the ill fate of the nation, as the following ditty 
commonly sung would show : — 

" Laiye Abiodun I'afi igba won 'wo 
Laiye Aol^ I'adi adikal^." 

(In Abiodun's reign money we weighed by bushels. [Lit. with 
calabashes.] In Aole's reign, we packed up to flee). 

But there was nothing more in his actions than in those of his 
predecessors to warrant this saying, on the contrary, he was 
probably too weak and mild for the times. The nation was ripe 
for judgment, and the impending wrath of God was about to fall 
upon it ; hence trouble from every quarter, one after another. 

On the King's accession, according to custom when the time 
came for him to send out his first expedition, he was asked who 
was his enemy, that they should fight him. He named the Bale 
of Apomu, and hence Apomu was doomed. 

The alleged cause of offence will clearly show how much of 
corruption there was at the fountain head in those days. 

Apomu was the market town where Oygs, Ifes, Owus, and 
Ijgbus met for trade. It was situated in Ife territory, and m the 

1 88 



THE REVOLUTION 189 

border of the Olowu's dominion. Raiding and man-stealing were 
rife at those times. Oyos particularly were in greater danger, 
as they came from afar. During the last reign several Oyos were 
stolen and sold here, and hence King Abiqdun sent orders to both 
the Olowu and the Owoni of Ife to keep a strict watch and prevent 
the recurrence of these practices. The Owoni and the Olowu in 
turn sent strict orders to the Bale of Apomu to be on the watch, 
and arrest any offender. 

Aole who was then a private man used to trade in these parts 
with a friend who was also his attendant ; and on one occasion, 
he bartered away his friend for merchandise ! So faithless and 
heartless were the princes in those days. The Ijebus were actually 
taking him away when it was reported to the Bale of Apomu that 
an Oyg man was being sold away. Fortunately for the man 
by the prompt action of the Bale he was rescued at a certain spot 
named Apata Odaju (the rock of the heartless), perhaps so named 
from this circumstance, and brought before the Bale. Investig- 
ation soon showed who the slave-dealer was ; but as Aol^ was an 
Akeyo (Prince) and could not more severely be dealt with, in 
order that justice may not miscarry, he was ordered by the 
Bale to be severely flogged. This was the reason why Aole now 
named the Bale of Apomu as his enemy. 

When the Bale of Apomu heard that war was declared against 
his town on his account he took refuge in the court of the Ow5ni 
of Ife his over-lord, and whose orders he had obeyed. But as 
the offence was against the Suzerain, even the Ow6ni could not 
save him ; so this faithful chief, in order to save his town and his 
people from destruction, committed suicide, and his head was cut 
off and sent to Oyo to appease the offended monarch ! 

But an expedition must in any case be sent out, the King was, 
therefore, approached again and asked to name his enemy. But 
he replied, " My enemy is too formidable for me." Being pressed, 
he named the powerful chief Afonja the Kakanfo residing at Ilorin 
with great reluctance, as he foresaw evil ahead. 

§ 2. The King's Enemies 

After the death of the Kakanfo Oyabi, Afonja of Ilorin demanded 
the title ; but as a Prince (through the mother) the title was below 
his rank, for the Kakanfo ranks after the Basorun, but being the 
highest mihtary title, it suited his restless nature best, and so he 
obtained it, almost by force. 

But King Aole was unwilhng to initiate any civil war, and 
refused to take any action against Afonja after he had granted 
him the title. 



igO THE HISTORY OF THE YORUDAS 

Hitherto, Afgnja alone was his enemy, the other chiefs were 
as yet loyal to him, but circumstances occurred, one after the other 
which created a disaffection between him and theBasorun and the 
other chiefs, fanning into a flame the destructive fire already 
smouldering in its embers. 

The cause of quarrel between the King and Asamu theBasorun 
was this : — 

One Alaja-eta a Hausa trader at Oyo was plundered of his 
goods, under the pretext that he was bringing bad charms into 
the city. Among his confiscated goods was his Koran which he 
prized more than all his other stolen property. He appealed to 
the King, and he, from a sense of justice ordered that all his goods 
be restored to him. All but the Koran were accordingly restored. 
The Hausa again appealed to the King for this his most valued 
treasure ; the King insisted that search should be made and the 
lost Koran be restored. 

The Basorun in whose possession it probably was, or who 
at any rate knew where it could be found, refused to restore it 
and told the King it could not be found ! His Majesty felt this 
keenly as an insult to his dignity ; he was heard to say " Is it 
come to this that my commands cannot be obeyed in my own 
capital ? Must it be said that I failed to redress the grievance 
of a stranger in my town ? That he appealed to me in vain ? " 
Turning to the Basorun and pointing upwards he said, " Very 
well then, if you cannot find it my father (meaning the deified 
Sango) will find the Koran for me." 

As the god Sango is reputed to take vengeance on thieves and 
liars by burning their houses, so the next day, when lightning 
struck the Basgrun's house, great was his rage against the King 
for being instrumental in convicting him of theft and lying ! 

The ceremony of appeasing the god by the devotees, entailed 
heavy expenses on the Basgrun who, had it been another man's 
house might have gone shares with the Alafin in the fines imposed 
upon the sufferers. He knew where the trouble came from, for 
he noted the King's words " My father will find it for me." In 
this way be became the King's enemy. 

Another circumstance occurred which added the Ow6ta one of 
the 5sgs to the list of the King's enemies. 

One Jankalawa who had offended the late King and who had 
escaped to the Bariba country when he sought to kill him, now 
returned after the King's death and was flaunting about the streets 
of OYg under the protection of Lafianu the Owota. The late 
King's wives were angry at this and complained to Aole against 
Jankalawa. Said they " You have inherited our late husband's 



THE REVOLUTION I9I 

wives, his treasures, slaves and his throne. Why nut make 
his cause your cause and his enemies yours as well ? Why do you 
allow this Jankalawa to stalk so defiantly about the streets of 
Qyo?" 

By thus appealing to him from day to day, he yielded to their 
entreaties and remonstrances, and ordered the arrest and subse- 
quent execution of Jankalawa. 

The Owota's pride was wounded, because he was not respected 
by the King, in that one known to be under his protection should 
be so summarily dealt with. Thus the Bagorun and the Kakanfo 
found an accomplice in the powerful Owota. A conspiracy was 
formed but not being ripe for execution, they awaited a 
favourable opportunity. 

At length the time arrived when an expedition must be sent 
out, and the King was again asked "Who is your Majest3''s enemy?" 
He replied, " I have told you that my enemy is too formidable 
for me, and besides we are the same kith and kin." However, he 
advised that as the last campaign ended at Gbeji, the war should 
be prosecuted from that place. 

But in order to gain their object in view, viz., the removal 
of the Kakanfo, the King's counsellors advised that the Kakanfo 
and the army should be sent against Iwere, a place fortified by 
nature and by art, and impregnable to the simple weapons of 
those days, and as the Kakanfo by the oaths of his office must 
either conquer within three months or die, and Iwere is impreg- 
nable, he will have no other alternative, but as in honour 
bound to make away with himself. 

It was, however, arranged that he should not be foiewamed, 
but decoyed as it were to that place until he found himself at the 
foot of the hill on which Iwere was built ; hence it was given out 
that war was declared against Gbeji. 

But the royal party leading the army received private instruc- 
tions to lead the army to Iwere and when there to inform the 
Kakanfo that that was the place he was sent against. 

But private intelligence had reached the Kakanfo at Ilorin, 
of all the plots and intrigues going on in the capital. However, 
he with his accomphces in the city deferred the execution of their 
design till after their arrival at the seat of war. 

The army at length stood before Iwere and the Royal party, 
consisting of the King's brother, the Eunuchs, and the principal 
slaves, and their men, pointing to it said " This is the town to be 
taken by the order of the AlAfin." 

The time was now come for the mutiny to break out. The 
Basorun and the Owota at the head of the troops from the city, 



192 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the Onikoyi and the Kakanfo leading those from the provinces 
now alleged as a pretext for the mutiny that " If the King had not 
aimed at our destruction, he would not have ordered us to this 
impregnable town. And besides, is not this the maternal town of 
King AjAGBO ? Are there not Kobis in the Queen Mother's palace 
there ? " 

The watchword was now given " O Ya " (now is the time) and 
so the whole army turned their swords upon the royal party and 
massacred them ! Chief Qpele of Gbogun in particular was famous 
as a swordsman ; he made himself notorious on that occasion, 
and took to himself a name " A ri agada pa aburo Oba " (one who 
has a blade for slaying the King's brother). 

The siege was immediately raised, and the whole army stood 
before the city for forty and two days. The King sent word to 
say if they have returned from the expedition, whether successful 
or unsuccessful, let them come in for an interview. The insurgent 
chiefs sent word back to say that the royal party had offended them 
and that the result had proved unfortunate. " Very well," Sciid 
the King, " in any case, come in for an interview." Several weeks 
passed, and they were still encamped before Oyo irresolute as to 
what they should do next. At last an empty covered calabash 
was sent to the King — for his head ! A plain indication that he 
was rejected. He had suspected this all along and was not unpre- 
pared for it. There being no alternative His Majesty set his house 
in order; but before he committed suicide, he stepped out into the 
palace quadrangle with face stern and resolute, carrying in his hands 
an earthenware dish and three arrows. He shot one to the North, 
one to the South, and one to the West uttering those ever-memor- 
able imprecations, " My curse be on ye for your disloyalty and 
disobedience, so let your children disobey you. If you send them 
on an errand, let them never return to bring you word again. 
To all the points I shot my arrows will ye be carried as slaves. 
My curse will carry you to the sea and beyond the seas, slaVes will 
rule over you, and you their masters will become slaves." 

With this he raised and dashed the earthenware dish on the 
ground smashing it into pieces, saying " Igba la isg a ki isg awo, 
beheni ki org mi o se to ! to ! " (a broken calabash can be mended, 
but not a broken dish ; so let my words be — irrevocable !) 

He then took poison and died, after which the camp was broken 
up, and each of the chiefs repaired to his own place. 

Thus ended an unhappy reign of about seven years, and Prince 
Adebg succeeded him on the throne. 

Asamu Agba-o lekan was the Basgrun of this reign. 



the revolution 193 

§ 3. The Rebellion of the Oyo Chiefs 

The death ot the late King was all that the rebel chiefs demanded, 
after which, the army entered the city, pillaged the palace and then 
dispersed each to his own place. From this time the spirit of 
rebelHon and independence began to spread throughout the king- 
dom. Adebo was placed on the throne with the nominal title of 
King, but without the authority and power of a King. It was his 
misfortune to have come to the throne at such a time, and he held 
the sceptre for only 130 days. 

Afonja the Kakanfo of Ilorin and Opele the Bale of Gbogun 
were the first to proclaim their independence, other chiefs soon 
followed their examples. This was the commencement of the 
break-up of the unity of the Yoruba kingdom, and the beginning 
of the tribal independence. Tribute was no longer paid to the 
King. The King's messengers and Ilaris no longer carried that 
dread as before, nor were they allowed to oppress people or enrich 
themselves with their goods as before. 

As the King's authority waned, so also the respect and deference 
hitherto paid to the citizens of the capital ceased ; they were 
even treated disrespectfully and became the subjects of vulgar 
songs all over the country, a thing unheard of before ! Law and 
order were subverted, might triumphed over right, and the 
powerful chieftains turned their arms towards subverting town 
after town in the kingdom in order to increase their own wealth 
and power. Chief Opele of Gbogun took Dofian and Igbo-Owu; 
he besieged Gboho but fell in that place, being shot with an arrow 
by the brave defenders. 

Opele was the only powerful chief Afonja respected and having 
now no rival he resolved upon a scheme to reduce the provinces 
under his own sway, leaving the capital severely alone in complete 
isolation. He made no attempt on Oyo, had no aspiration after 
the throne knowing that was impossible of attainment ; it was 
sufficient tor him that the King was powerless to check his ambition. 
In order to strengthen his hands in the enterprise he was about to 
undertake, he invited a Fulah Moslem Priest named Alimi to 
Ilorin to act as his priest. Alimi in responding to his call came 
with his Hausa slaves and made Ilorin his home. These Hausa 
slaves Afonja found to be useful as soldiers. He also invited to 
Ilorin a rich and powerful Yoruba friend at Kurwo named 
Solagberu, who quartered himself at the outskirts of the town. 

All the Hausa slaves in the adjacent towns hitherto employed 
as barbers, rope-makers, and cowherds, now deserted their 
masters and flocked to Ilorin under the standard of Afonja the 
Kakanfo, and were protected against their masters. 



194 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Under Solagberu's standard also flocked Mohammedans from 
Gbanda, Kobayi, Agoho, Kuwo, and Kobe. All in his quarter 
being Moslems, he named that part of the town Oke S una, i.e., 
the quarter of the faithful. They held themselves separate not 
only from the pagans, but also from the Fulahs or Fulanis their 
co-religionists. 

From this time beg?in the Jehad or religious war in the Yoruba 
country. Those who were enlisted as soldiers called themselves 
Jama (a Hausa word for the rank and file, as distinguished from 
the leaders). The mark of distinction between themselves and 
others was the Kende, two large iron rings one on the thumb, 
the other on the 3rd or 4th finger of the left hand ; with this they 
welcome each other, striking the rings against each other to produce 
a sound. This io the sign of brotherhood ; hence they often say 
'■ O re kende si mi, okan na ni wa," (he welcomed me with the 
Kende, we both are one). 

The operations of the Jamas were directed against the Igbdna 
tribe. The only towns of Yoruba proper destroyed were amongst 
the Ibolos viz., Iresk, Ejigbo, and Ilobu. The reason why these 
towns were destroyed we shall notice afterwards. 

§ 4. The Rising of Ojo Agunbambaru 

Ojo surnamed Agunbambaru was one of the surviving sons of 
the renowned Basorun Gahk. He had escaped to the Bariba 
country at the general massacre of Gahk's children and relatives 
in the reign of King Abigdun. Hearing of the present state of 
the country, he thought there could never be a more favourable 
opportunity for him both to avenge his father's death, and also 
to obtain his title without opposition. 

He returned from the Bariba country with an immense army, 
entered Qyo, and under the pretext of espousing the King's cause, 
he put to death indiscriminately most of the influential citizens 
who were named as Afonja's friends and allies. The Owota was 
the first victim of his ambition and revenge. On the whole, about 
100 chiefs were despatched, who were either his father's enemies, 
or who might have opposed him -in his main object. 

He now set off for Ilgrin to measure strength with Afgnja the 
powerful Kakanfo, whose father was one of those who swelled 
Oyabi's army for the overthrow of his father the Basorun Gahk, 
and who had succeeded the same Oyabi in his title as Kakanfo, 
These were his grievances against Afgnja ; but besides these, 
Afgnja was the only person in the land after Op§le of Gbogun, 
who might have opposed him in his designs. 

If Ojo had acted with prudence, he might have succeeded without 



THE REVOLUTION 195 

the slightest doubt ; but his indiscriminate slaughter of the Oyo 
chiefs and others in his track, and his threats against the Onikoyi, 
tended to weaken his own strength on the outset. Fire and the 
sword marked his path to Ilorin, and so great was the dread of him, 
that such towns as Ogidi, Ogele and others, were deserted at his 
approach. 

Adegun the Onikoyi being one of Afonja's secret friends, was on 
his hst for destruction but he was reserved till after the war. Both 
were kept informed of all Ojo's movements, policy, and designs 
by the Oyo people who followed him trembhng, not really as 
friends, but rather as traitors, their minds having been prejudiced 
against him, on account of his excesses, and a secret combination 
was formed between them and the Onikoyi, to desert Ojo at the 
most ciitical moment. 

Ojo's army was further swelled by recruits from all the Yoruba 
towns who feared his vengeance should victoiy crown his efforts 
without their help ; and even the Onikoyi who knew himself to 
be a marked man, declared for him and swelled his army. 

Afonja met this large army a great way off but he was defeated 
on three successive engagements. His army being completely 
routed he fled precipitately to Ilorin to fortify the town against 
the approach of the conqueror. Ilorin had not been walled, and 
there was no time to think of doing so now, so he had to extemporise 
fortifications, erecting stockades with the locust and shea-butter 
trees. 

Ilorin was soon besieged and was nearly taken, as Afgnja's 
courage was faiUng from repeated reverses, when private messages 
from the enemy's camp were sent to encoiurage him to hold out 
a Uttle longer. 

At last, the final decisive battle was to be fought, Afonja and 
his army were hard pressed on every side, being shut up within 
their forts, and the town was on the point of being taken when 
Adegun the Onikoyi and his accomplices suddenly gave way, 
in the heat of the battle, and the great conqueror irretrievably 
lost the day ! 

The traitors fled away in confusion, but Ojo and his trusty 
Bariba troops retreated orderly ; the Kakanfo could not follow up 
the victory by pursuing him from the dread he had of the Baribas, 
who were renowned for being good archers, and for their poisoned 
arrows. Ojo made good his escape with the remnant of his army. 
Being thus deserted by those whose cause he professed to espouse, 
Agunbambaru considered himself unsafe among them, and there- 
fore returned to the Bariba country with the wreck of his army 
watching for another favourable opportunity. 



196 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

After the fall of Opele of Gbogun, King Adebo declared war 
against the town of (Gbogun, but he died at home during the 
progress of the siege. His reign was short and specially marked 
by troubles. The people now longed for peace, hence their 
pathetic songs . — 

" A pete, a pero, a fi Adebo joba, 
Abiodun, pada wa joba o ! " 

(With deliberation, and thought we made Adebg King, O 
Abiodun, do thou return to reign !) 
Asamu was also the Basorun of this reign. 

§ 5. Maku 

Afonja by new conquests and especially by his recent victory 
over Ojo became mightier still. The Igb6nas having already been 
subjugated, he now proceeded to punish Iresa for being in league 
with Ojo, because no private message came to him from that place 
during the war. 

Prince Maku ascended the throne without Afonja's being con- 
sulted, and therefore he never sent any congratulations, nor 
repaired to Oyo to do homage as usual. A deputation was therefore 
sent to inform him that " The New Moon has appeared," meaning 
a new King has ascended the throne ; and he sent back this 
arrogant reply " Let that New Moon speedily set." 

Maku's reign was very short, not exceeding two months (or 
three moons as Yorubas reckoned it). 

He declared war against Iworo, and took the field in person. He 
suffered a defeat and retreated to I wo (in the Metropolitan district). 
From shame he did not return to Oyo till the Oyo Mesi sent word 
to him that he should not think of removing the seat of government 
to I wo, or else why did he remain there ? His Majesty thereupon 
returned to the capital, and then he was poUtely told that rio Yoruba 
King must survive a defeat. He thereupon committed suicide. 

The Bagorun of this reign was the same Asamu. 



Chapter VII 

THE RISE OF THE FULANIS TO POWER 

§ I. The Spread of Anarchy and Fall of Afonja 

An interregnum folloNved the last reign but for how long, it is 
not known ; after which Majotu was placed on the throne. The 
whole country was at this time in the greatest disorder, wars and 
rumours of war being the order of the day. The tocsin of war 
resounded from every quarter, and the new King found himself 
incapable of coping with the situation. 

The Epos, imitating the Kakanfo at Ilorin organized a military 
band which they called Ogo Were (i.e. the Jackals) at the head of 
which was the Aresa but with what object in view, it was not 
known. The Kakanfo received the news with mixed feelings 
of jealousy and suspicion ; he sent and enquire.d of Toyeje the 
Bale of Ogbomoso his Otun i.e. commander of his right, what he 
understood by that movement. Toyeje could not say. War was 
in consequence declared against the Epcs, and several towns in 
that province were taken, only Ogbahagbkha and Iwo amongst 
the principal towns escaped. Ilobu and Ejigbo amongst the 
Ibglos were also taken, and the Ogo Were suppressed. 

Afonja was now the sole power in the kingdom ; the King and 
the capital were left to manage their own affairs by themselves. 

The Jamas were increasing in number and in rapacity, to the 
utter distress and ruin of the country. When there was no war 
in hand they usually scattered themselves all over the land plunder- 
ing the people and committing outrages. They would enter any 
house, make it their headquarters, from which they would pillage 
the neighbourhood and surrounding districts. They fed upon the 
cattle of the house and led the rest away at their leisure and 
pleasure. 

Knowing the consequences to themselves and to the town if 
they were to attack these marauders, the country folk became 
rather disinclined to rear up any cattle or poultry to feed these 
thieves ; every one helped himself and family to whatever remained 
of their livestock, so that at one time there was not a single livestock 
to be found in country towns. 

To further illustrate the gross licences of these Jamas, slaves 
who had deserted their masters often returned to the same town, 
and even to the very house as a Jama, making their former 

197 



198 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

master's house their headquarters for their rapine : masters who 
were kind to them formerly were now repaid by protection against 
the rapacities of their comrades ; unkind ones were now treated 
with heartless revenge. These fellows were not regarded now as 
slaves bat as the Kakanfo's servants. 

Thoughtful men were now apprehensive of the evils to the nation 
which the unrestrained licences of these Jamas portended, but no 
one was bold enough to remonstrate with the Kakanfo, or even to 
appeal to him against their rapacities. Fagbohun the chief of 
Jabata alone had the courage to do so by virtue of his office as 
the commander of the left wing of the Kakanfo's arm}-, and he 
incurred his displeasure for his boldness. 

In order to get Fagbohun into his grasp, Afonja summoned 
all the provincial Bales to him at Ilorin, but Fagbohun having 
got wind of his intention escaped back to his town. 

But Afonja perceived his error when it was too late. Haughty 
and passionate, his very egotism was the cause of his fall. Fortune 
had carried him to such a high pitch of glory, he thought his fall 
was impossible ; besides, he had unlimited confidence in his 
Jamas, and was not aware ot their growing disaffection and dis- 
loyalty towards himself. He thought he could put them down 
whenever he liked, and was sometimes very severe with any act of 
insubordination, openly threatening them with suppression and 
annihilation. This threat only served to increase their disaffection. 
Too late, he saw what Fagbohun had warned him against. He 
failed completely to check their ambition, rapine and lawlessness. 
His threats and warnings were not heeded. Long impunity had 
increased their boldness. 

At last, the Kakanfo was resolved to give effect to his threats 
and to disband the Jamas, but he miscalculated his own strength. 
By the death of his brother Agbonrin, and his head slave Lasipa 
he had lost his mainstay for these were men of power. He had 
offended all the powerful chiefs in the kingdom including his 
former friend and ally Solagberu of Oke Suna, and his priest 
AUmi by his high-handedness, lofty airs and haughty spirit. 

Fearing lest these Jamas should attack him suddenly if he were 
to delay their destruction, he sent a private message to the Onikoyi 
and other powerful chiefs in the country inviting them to make 
their appearance in Ilorin suddenly, and to assist him in 
annihilating these Jamas. 

But the secret was divulged to the Jamas, and they, losing 
no time, being headed by Alimi the priest, rose up against him 
before he could obtain help from abroad. Solagberu being a 
Yoruba, professed neutrality. The Kakanfo was closely besieged 



THE RISE OF THE FULANIS TO POWER I99 

in his quarters, but he fought with his characteristic bravery. 
When he found himself overwhelmed by numbers, he despatched 
Bugare his head slave to solicit the aid of Solagberu ; but Solagberu 
treacherously detained him, saying, " Your Master has hitherto 
looked down upon us as his menials, and why does he now require 
our aid ? " This treachery, he lived to regret. The great Kakanfo 
was disappointed on all sides. As neither Bugare nor Solagberu 
made an appearance, he could not hold out till the Onikoyi's 
arrival ; he was compelled to fight within the walls of his house ; 
but when the house was set on fire, he rushed out again into the 
streets surrounded by his faithful few. The insurgents surrounded 
them, charged again and again, but could not break their ranks, 
Afonja himself in the midst of them was fighting most desperately, 
surrounded by the corpses of some of his faithful attendants. 
Seeing the day was lost, some of his followers became disheartened 
and deserted him., but the rest chose to die with him. He fell 
indeed like a hero. So covered was he with darts that his body 
was supported in an erect position upon the shafts of spears and 
arrows showered upon him. 

So much dread had his personality inspired that these treacher- 
ous Jamas whom he had so often led to victory could not believe 
he was really dead ; they continued to shower darts upon him 
long after he had ceased fighting. They were afraid to approach 
his body as if he would suddenly spring up and shake himself for 
the conflict afresh ; not till one of them, bolder than the rest 
cautiously went near and placed an arrow in his hand and they 
saw he could no longer grasp it, that they believed he was really 
dead ! His corpse was taken up and burnt to ashes. 

The crafty AUmi his treacherous friend took his helpless children 
and family under his own protection, a leging that it was a mis- 
understanding that led to the civil fight between himself and his 
old friend, in which the latter unhappily lost his life. His house 
was rebuilt, and the remnant of his people were permitted to occupy 
it, but the government of the town passed over to the conqueror. 
His family, however, are highly respected at Ilgrin to this day. 
Thus passed away one who will always be remembered in the 
annals of the Yoruba country as the leader of the revolution which 
ended in the dismemberment of the Yoruba country. 

The late Afonja was a native of Ilorin. The city was built by 
his great grandfather, Laderin, whose posterity bore rule in her in 
succession to the fourth generation. Laderin the founder, was 
succeeded by Pasin, his son, a valiant chiet who opposed the 
renowned Gaha when he was in the zenith of his glory. Fearing 
his rising power, Gahk drove him out of Ilorin and he escaped to 



200 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Ol^. He sent an army after him there which reduced the town and 
Pasin was taken and slain. Alagbin the son of Pasin succeeded 
his father, and in turn handed the government to his vaUant son 
Afonja with whom the rule ended. 

Ilorin is sometimes spoken of as Afonja's Ilorin. This is because 
he was the most renowned of her rulers, and not only so, but 
also because it was he who made it into the large city it now is. 

There were several towns and villages around at no very great 
distance from Ilorin e.g. Kanla, Oke Suna, Ganma, Elehinjare, 
Idofian, Oke Oyi, Ibare, Igbon, Iresa etc. Most of them this 
restless warrior captured one by one and resettled them around 
Ilorin so as to make it into what it has become. The able-bodied 
men he enrolled among his soldiers, and several women and 
children he sold into slavery, in order to have wherewith to 
maintain and supply arms to his war boys. 

He was not actually of the royal family although often reckoned 
as such, but his mother was said to have been a home born slave 
of the palace, and he was brought up among the children of the 
royal family, hence the Ibamu facial mark across the face seen 
in his descendants to this day. 

Ilorin now passed into the hands of foreigners, the Fulanis 
who had been invited there as friends and allies. These being 
far more astute than the Yorubas, having studied their weak 
points and observed their misrule, planned to grasp the whole 
kingdom into their own hands by playing one chief against another 
and weakening the whole. Their more generous treatment of 
fallen foes and artful method of conciliating a power they could 
not openly crush, marked them out as a superior people in the art 
of government. 

§ 2. The First Attempt to Recover Ilorin from the Fulanis 

The Battle of Ogele 

The tragic end of Afonja the Kakanfo by the hands of his 
Jamas had long been anticipated by thoughtful men who depre- 
cated their formation, and had predicted the worst for the nation 
when slaves became masters. 

The death of the Kakanfo struck the whole nation with such 
awe and bewilderment that it took the people nearly a whole 
year to bring them to their right mind. Seeing that the fate of 
the whole nation was trembling in the balance as it were, all the 
people united to avenge the death of Afonja, while in the meantime, 
the crafty Fulani had been strengthening himself for the conflict. 
He had studied the Yorubas and knew how to circumvent them. 



THE RISE OF THE FULANIS TO POWER 201 

Toyeje the Bale of Ogbomosg and commander of the late 
Kakanfo's right, was promoted to the post of Kakanfo, and the 
whole nation was united under his standard to expel the Fulanis 
from Ilorin. They encamped at a place called Ogele, where they 
were met by the Fulani horse aided by the powerful Yoruba 
Moslem Chief Solagberu of Oke Suna. Another fatal mistake of 
Sglagberu's. 

A sanguinary battle was fought in which the Fulanis were 
victorious. They routed the Yorubas and followed up their 
victory, which resulted in the desertion or destruction of a great 
many towns in the Ibolo province. The only important towns 
left in that part were Ofa, Igbona, Ilemona, Erin, and a few others. 

The refugees could only carry away such of their personal 
effects which could be snatched away in a hasty flight, as the 
Fulani horse kept hovering in their rear. They found temporary 
refuge in any walled town where a powerful chief happened to be, 
there, it may be, to await another siege by the conqueror. 

The distress caused by this calamity cannot be described. 
Aged people who could not be carried away were left to perish. 
The doleful lamentations of parents who had lost their children, 
and of thousands of widows and orphans were heartrending. 
Bereft of every thing, without money, or anything that could 
be converted into money in such hasty and sudden flight, they were 
reduced to abject misery and poverty among strangers, and could 
only support life by doing menial work by procuring firewood or 
leaves for sale and such like. A people who until recently lived 
in what for them was affluence and plenty, are now oppressed 
with want and misery brought about by the want of foresight, and 
the vaulting ambition of their rulers. 

§ 3. The Second Attempt to Expel the Fulanis and Recover 

Ilorin 

The Mugbamugba War 

After a short respite the Yorubas again rallied and resolving 
to rid the country of these hordes of marauders the Jamas, made 
an alliance with Monjia, the King of Rabbah, that he may help 
them to extirpate the pests. The war took place somewhere 
between March and April at the time when the locust fruit was 
ripe for harvest. 

The country was already devastated by the late wars, many 
towns were left desolate, and consequently there were no farms for 
foraging. What food there was in the Ilorin farms were soon 
eaten up, and both the besiegers and the besieged were without 



202 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

provisions and had to live on the locust fruit (igba) . Hence the war 
was termed Mugbamugba. 

The Yorubas were again unsuccessful in this expedition. They 
had not yet learnt how to cope with cavalry and the Fulanis were 
expert horsemen. From successive defeats the Yorubas lost all 
courage, and victories one after another made the Ilorins more 
confident, so that in the open fields they gained easy victories over 
the Yorubas ; and when they were protected within walled towns 
they reduced them by long sieges and famine. 

On this occasion, the Ilorins attacked the alUes to advantage. 
They hid their horses in the rear of the allied armies and while 
a party of horsemen engaged them in front the main body of the 
cavalry suddenly bore down upon them from the rear and routed 
them. Monjia fled precipitately to his own country, leaving the 
Yorubas at the mercy of the victors. The Ilorins followed up their 
victory and swept away all the towns in the direction of ^ia, 
Erin, Igbona etc. The Olofa with Asegbe his favourite and wise 
Ilari escaped to Ikoyi. 

§ 4. The Battle of Pamo 

Alimi the Moslem priest, who was at the head of the foreigners 
at Ilorin died after the last war and was succeeded by his son 
Abudusalami, who became the first King, or Emir, of Ilorin. 
Ilorin now passes definitely into the hands of the Fulanis as rulers, 
and affords a home for the Gambaris (Hausas) from whom the 
Jamas were reciuited. 

The late Alimi was much respected at Ilorin from his arrival 
there as a mere priest. At fiist he had no intention of making 
Ilorin his home much less to embark upon a career of conquest ; 
and indeed when Afonja and his Jamas commenced their excesses 
he was prepared to return to his own country from disgust, but 
the eldeis of the Yorubas prayed him to stay and act as a check on 
Afonja for there was no one else to whom he would defer and there 
was no telling how far he would go without someone to put the 
fear of God into him. The Kakanfo and the people of Ilorin pre- 
vailed upon him to send for his family and make Ilorin his home. 

Alimi was a pure Fulani by birth and his wife also a Fulani 
lady. They lived together for a considerable time without any 
issue. The wife then consulted a Moslem priest as to her state of 
childlessness, and she was told to give out of her abundance to a 
distinguished Moslem priest a slave as an alms to the glory of 
of God, and she was sure to have children. 

Having considered this matter over, she came to the conclusion 
within herself that she knew of no distinguished Moslem priest 



THE RISE OF THE FULANIS TO POWER 203 

greater than her own husband, and therefore she gave to her 
husband one of her maidens as " an alms to the glory of God." 

This maiden as Ahmi's secondary wife became the mother of 
Abudusalami and Shitta his two eldest sons. The Fulani lady 
herself subsequently gave birth to a son named Sumonu, who was 
nick-named Beribepo (one who cuts off head and post). Alimi 
afterwards took to himself a third wife by whom he also had a 
son, and, therefore at his death he left four sons to inherit his 
property. As will be seen below however, no advantage in the 
matter of government accrued to the son of the real wife (who was 
a pure white Fulani) above those of the slave wife who were 
coloured. Hence in the third generation, the chief rulers of Ilorin 
have become black. 

The power of the Fulanis was now very great, and they aimed 
at nothing short of the subversion of the whole Yoruba country, 
and the short sighted Yoruba war-chiefs were playing the game for 
them by their mutual jealousy of one another. One expedition 
followed after another and the result was the devastation and 
depopulation of the country. Far seeing men had predicted all 
this, if the various Yoruba families did not unite and expel the 
foreigners ; but jealousy and rivalry among the chiefs prevented 
unity of purpose. Allegiance was no longer paid to the King, not 
even in the capital. Intestine wars not only weakened the country, 
but offered it an easy prey to the common enemy. 

Thus Toyeje the Kakanfo at Ogbomosg had a difference with 
Adegun the Onikoyi which at length broke out into an open war, 
each of them being now independent, and neither would submit 
to the other. The Kakanfo formed an alliance with the Oluiwo 
of Iwo, the Timi of Ede and Solagberu of Ilorin, and besieged 
the Onikoyi in his city of Ikoyi. 

Solagberu had his own personal grievance to vent because the 
Onikoyi did not do homage to him or pay him tribute ; so he came 
with all the Ilorin forces at his command. Abudusalami the 
Emir alone remained at home. The combined forces encamped 
at a place called Pamo. The conflict was very fierce, and Ikoyi, 
hemmed in on all sides, was nearly taken, when Asegbe the Olofa's 
Ilari, who was then with his master, a refugee at Ikoyi, saved the 
city by wise and judicious measures. He told his master and 
it also came to the Onikoyi's hearing that if he could be allowed 
to use his wisdom without being forbidden or thwarted, he could 
save the city. The besieged who were prepared to agree to any 
terms in order to obtain peace accepted the offer, although 
reluctantly, as Asegbe kept his plans to himself. 

He sent a private messenger to Abudusalami the Emir of Ilgrin 



204 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

in the name of the Onikoja, that he was besieged in his city, 
for the sole reason that he declared himself for the Emir of Ilorin. 
The Emir again questioned the messenger " Is it true the Onikoyi 
declared for me? " " Quite true, your Majesty," was his reply. 
" Then the siege must be raised," said the Emir. 

Orders were now sent to recall Solagberu with all the Ilorin 
forces, but he refused to obey orders. Again and again peremptory 
orders were sent, with the same result. The fifth and last message 
was to the Princes and other chiefs, to the effect that whoever 
would prove himself loyal should return home at once by the order 
of the Emir. The Ilorin army now left the camp, leaving Solagberu 
alone behind together with the aUies. 

The next effort of the Emir of Ilorin was to raise the siege at 
all cost, and hence he sent his army to reinforce Ikoyi. These 
Ilorin troops entered Ikoyi, but for ten days did nothing but help 
themselves to every thing they could lay hands on, eating and 
drinking to excess. On the eleventh day they asked to be 
conducted to the scene of action. Then they joined battle, and 
completely routed the Kakanfo's army. Solagberu fled back to 
his quarters at Ilorin, and the Yorubas were dispersed. Solag- 
beru's feelings towards Abudusalami, can better be imagined 
than described. The men of note who fell in this war were, — 
The Timi of Ede, the king of Erin, the Chief Aina-Abutu-Sogun, 
and Ay ope. 

Although Solagberu was allowed to remain in his quarters, yet 
the disaffection between him and the Emir of Ilorin was very 
great, and every incident served but to heighten it. . It grew 
from jealousy and illwill to opposition and resentment, and at 
length into a civil war. The Emir's party besieged Oke Sun a, 
desperate battles were fought, but the besieged held out for a 
long time until they were reduced by famine. They were hard 
put to it in order to sustain life, living on frogs, lizards, barks 
of trees, etc., till no green thing could be found at Oke Suna, 
Solagberu had cause to remember with regret his tieachery towards 
his friend Afonja, in his hour of need, at the hands of these very 
Jamas. At last, Oke Suna was reduced and Solagberu slain. 

Abudusalami the Fulani Emir having now no rival in any 
Yoruba King or Chief, the Onikoyi having declared for him, the 
Kakanfo's army shattered, and Solagberu slain, resolved upon 
subverting the whole kingdom, and making himself the King of 
the Yoruba country. The remaining Yoruba towns spared were 
placed under tribute. He was aided in his enterprise by the 
Jamas whose tyrannies and oppression greatly exceeded those 
which they practised in the days of Afonja, which were so galling 



THE RISE OF THE FULANIS TO POWER 205 

to the Yorubas : formerly it was only the livestock that were freely 
taken away, but now, they entered houses and led away women 
and young persons at their pleasure. It was Hterally enslaving 
the people ! 

To such a wretched and miserable condition were the people 
reduced, especially in the provinces. 



Chapter VIII 

THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE REVOLUTION IN THE 

SOUTH 

§ I. The Owu War 

The kingdom being now in a disorganized condition each tribal 
unit constituted itself an independent state. The Ifes in the east, 
and the Ijebus in the south formed an alliance against the Owns 
to the south-west of the former and north west of the latter. 

The Owns (although now domiciled with the Egbas) are a family 
quite distinct from. Egbas or Oyos. Hardihood, stubbornness, 
immorality, and haughtiness are marked traits in their character, 
so much so that it has passed into a proverb " A bi omg I'Owu, 
o ni ako tabi abo ni, ewo ni jdo se omg nibe ? " (a child is born at 
Owu, and you ask male or female : which will be a proper child ?) 
Either sex when roused by passion would sooner die than not take 
dire revenge. Their manners were totally different from those of 
the Oyos, but from the days of Sango they have been very loyal 
to the AlAfin of Oyo. 

As warriors, the Owus were hardy, brave, and courageous, 
they had no guns, their weapons consisting of the Agedengbe 
(a long heavy cutlass) with bows and arrows. Coming to close 
quarters with cutlass in hand was the mode of fighting characteristic 
of these brave people. 

The cause of the war between these three families was this : — 
We have already stated above that during the reign of King 
Abiodun, express orders were sent from Oyo to the Ow6ni of If§, 
and the Olowu to prevent Oyos being kidnapped and sold at 
Apomu, the great market town where the interior and the coast 
people met for trade. Now, since the commencement of the 
revolution, and the disorganized state of the kingdom, the practice 
was revived. The rebellion has rendered the Central Authority 
powerless, but there were still some men of considerable power and 
influence in the land, such as Adegun the Onikoyi who was the 
premier provincial king, Toyejg theBal§ of Ogbomoso the Kakanfo, 
and Edun of Gbogun. 

A message similar to that sent by King Abiodun was now sent 
by the Onikoyi and the Kakanfo conjointly to the Olowu, and he 
in carrying out his orders had to chastise several towns ; hence 

206 



THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE REVOLUTION IN THE SOUTH 207 

Ikoyi Igbo, Apomu, Ikire, Irkn, He Olup^mi, Itahakun, Iseyin 
Od6, Iw^ta, Akinboto, Gbkngan, Isope, Iwar6, and Jagun, were 
destroyed by war, all in Ife territory. 

The Ow6m of Ife was highly incensed at this and declared war 
against Owu. The command of the war was entrusted into the 
hands of his commander-in-chief Singunsin. Other war-chiefs 
associated with him were : — Okansk, Gbogbo Olu, Wasin, 
Alodeloko, etc. Their first encampment was at a place called 
Dariagbon a farm village of one 01up6na, next at Sifirin at the 
confluence of the Osun and Ohk rivers. 

The Ifes thought they would make an easy conquest of Owu 
for they themselves are a brave people, and hence this war song 
in their peculiar dialect : — 

E maha ja (a) gba, Let us cut ropes, 

Igbekun la mu a di Our captives to bind. 

If a Olowu The Olowu's If a (god of palm nut) 

£wa la mu a se With our corn we'll cook. 

The Owns received the news that war was declared against them 
with great indignation. They considered themselves the power 
in these southern regions, and what infatuation has led the Ifes 
to this presumption ? With one consent they immediately marched 
out to meet them at this great distance. The engagement was a 
hand to hand fight in which the Ifes were completely routed ; their 
army was all but totally annihilated, only about 200 escaped to 
tell the tale of their dire misfortune ! 

The King of Iwo, in whose territory this disaster took place 
did not admit the survivors into his town for fear of incurring the 
displeasure of his formidable neighbours the Owus, whom he 
dreaded ar;d of whom he was jealous, but he so far sympathized 
with them that he advised that they should not undergo the 
humiUation of returning home, and he allowed them to rendezvous 
in a place called Adunbieiye for the purpose of recruiting their 
army and to try another chance, secretly hoping that fortune may 
favour them next time, and being ill at ease with such a formidable 
neighbour as the Owus. 

This small army remained in this place for about 5 years, 
unable to return home from shame, and yet could not obtain 
re-inforcement adequate for the great enterprise. 

Just at this crisis the Owus and the Ijebu traders had a serious 
complication at the Apomu market. The dispute arose from the 
sale of alligator pepper, and it resulted in the rash expedition 
against Apomu by the haughty Owus ; the town was destroyed, 
and many Ijebu traders and residents lost their lives or their all. 



208 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The king of Iwo thereupon advised the Ifes to form an alliance 
with the Ijebus, who, like them, have now a grievance against 
Owu. When this was done, the lies at home were now wilUng 
to re-inforce their wrecked army for a conjoint attack upon Owu. 

The Ijebus now declared war against Owu, and crossing the 
Osun river, encamped at the farm of one Oso. 

The Ijebus were better armed than either their allies or their 
foes, and indeed, than any of the interior tribes, for, being nearest 
to the coast, they had the advantage of obtaining guns and gun- 
powder from Europeans in exchange for slaves. They were 
remarkable marksmen. The older men with their cloths tied 
round their waists, and the ends left flowing behind, constituted 
the regular fighting column : being too old pr too heavy to run 
away, they were obhged to be courageous. 

The Owns were mad with rage at the receipt of the news that 
anyone, such as the Ijebus, had presumed to declare war 
against them who (as they considered themselves) were the first 
power in these parts (southern Yoruba). They rushed out to 
check the progress of the Ijebus as they did that of the Ifes, and 
attacked them furiously cutlass in hand. But they were compelled 
to fall back from the steady fire of the Ijebus which did great 
havoc amongst them. Summoning courage, the Owns offered 
another obstinate battle, but they were again repulsed with a 
heavy slaughter, having lost in the first and second engagements 
about 40 of their leaders. This was the first check to their pride. 
They ralUed, however, and retreated to a short distance, and then 
again ventured upon another attack, the Ijebus advancing as 
they were retreating : they finally met, and once more fortune 
was against the Owus, and they fled precipitately to fortify their 
city against the expected siege. 

The Ijebus with their allies the Ifes encamped to the west of the 
city of Owu, under a large tree called the Ogilngun, east of the 
town of Oje. We may here remark that although the Egba towns 
of Of a and Oje were about a mile and two miles respectively from 
Owu, yet so bitter was the animosity between them that not only 
did these towns refuse their aid to Owu, but rather rejoiced at 
its misfortunes ! 

The Owus fought with their accustomed bravery, and in one 
furious assault, routed the aUies, and pursued them to Oje, Ofa, 
and Ibadan. The first two places were deserted in the general 
confusion and panic, and all sought refuge at Ibadan. Here the 
allies received reinforcements from the Egbas, and from the Oyo 
refugees from the north whose homes had been devastated by 
the Fulanis and who were now scattered about the provinces 



THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE REVOLUTION IN THE SOUTH 209 

homeless, and without occupation. Glad to find some occupation 
in arms, these refugees flocked to the standard of the allies in 
numbers ; and thus strengthened, the war was renewed. The siege 
lasted about 5 years (usuaJly reckoned as 7). The city was obstin- 
ately defended by the brave inhabitants from the walls, and from 
the forts built on the walls of the city. One Skkulk was an expert 
sharp shooter who was never known to miss his aim ; he contri- 
buted much to the defence of the town. But he was at the same 
time a good-natured man, kind and merciful to his enemies. 
Whenever he saw a young man hazarding his life too close to the 
forts in order to show valour, pitying his youth, he used to hail 
at him from the fort, and warn him as follows : — " I give you your 
life for to-day, but do not venture here to-morrow or you shall 
die." And he was alw^ays as good as his word. Thus Sakulk 
defended the city heroically and killed many a valiant warrior. 

At last, the allies held a council of war, and were determined 
to get rid of S^kulk on the next day. The Ijebus, who had guns 
were the foremost, and the whole army directed their fire and 
showers of darts at the fort where S^kiila was fighting, all kept 
shooting at that one spot, until they saw Skkiilk fall, suspending 
from the fort ! 

Owu was now deprived of her bravest defender, and famine 
also began its fatal work within its walls. 

It was at this time the Owns began for the first time to eat 
those large beans called popondo (or awuje) hitherto considered 
unfit for food ; hence the taunting songs of the alUes : — 

Popondo I'ara Owu nje. The Owns now live on propondo, 

Aje f'ajaga bo 'run. That done, their necks for the yoke. 

Unto this day, whoever would hum this ditty within the hearing 
of an Owu man, must look out for an accident to his own person. 

For all the famine within, the besiegers could neither scale the 
walls, nor force the gates open, until Akinjobi the Olowu opened 
a gate, and escaped to Erunmu, one of the principal towns in his 
territory. The chief of this place was one Oluroko who was 
nearly related to the Ow6ni of Ife. Oluroko protected his over- 
lord. The allies pursued the Olowu to this place, but Oluroko 
when called upon to answer for his conduct, submitted himself, 
and asked for pardon, showing that he could not have acted 
otherwise and be blameless. ^ The allies saw with him, and pardon 
was accordingly granted him. 

Ikija was the only Egba town which befriended the city of 
Owu in her straits hence after the fall of the latter town, the 
combined armies went to punish her for supplying Owu with 
provisions during the siege. Being a much smaller town, they 



210 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

soon made short work of it. After the destruction of Ikija,^ the 
allies returned to their former camp at Idi Ogungun (under the 
Ogiingun tree) . 

"Owu was thenceforth placed under an interdict, never to be 
rebuilt ; and it was resolved that in future, however great might 
be the population of Oje — the nearest town to it — the town walls 
should not extend as far as the Ogungun tree, where the camp was 
pitched. Consequently to this day, although the land may be 
cultivated yet no one is allowed to build a house on it. 

[In the year 1873 Akinyemi one of the sons of one Bolude of 
Ibadan happened to build a substantial farm house at Owu. 
Latosisk then the Kakanfo at Ibadan ordered it to be pulled down 
immediately, and Akinyemi was fined besides]. 

After the fall of Owu and Ikija, the army was not disbanded, 
but the commanders of the Ife and of the Ijebu armies returned 
home to give an account of the war to their respective masters, 
but the remnants still in the camp were continually swelled by 
recruits from Oyo refugees whom the Fulanis had rendered home- 
less. 

After a time the Ijebus in the camp invited the allies home to 
their country as friends ; then they broke up the camp at " Idi 
C)gungun " and withdrew to Ipara in the south. 

It should be noted that the Owu war marked a definite period 
in Yoruba history. It was here for the first time gunpowder was 
used in war in this country, and it was followed by the devastation 
of the Egba townships and the foundation of modern Abeokuta 
and Ibadan, to be related in due course. 

§ 2. Consequences of the Revoution : — The Lasinmi War 

Whilst the Owu war was raging in the south, the northern 
provinces were in no less disturbed condition. The Onikoyi, 
not content with being the first and greatest of the provincial 
kings took advantage of the disturbed state of the country to usurp 
the King's prerogative and aimed at subjugating the other chiefs 
under his own authority. Toyeje the Kakanfo at Ogbomosg was 
alone his rival and in order to oppose him, the Onikoyi created 
Edun of Gbogun an opposition Kakanfo to him. But Toyeje 
continued in office, and so there were two Kakanfos at this period, 
a thing quite unprecedented. 

During this reign, it was said that a European traveller visited 
Oyo to whom the King granted an interview. This was most 
probably Clapperton (vide Clapperton'sL as^ Expedition to Africa, 

^ The site of Ikija is now an Ibadan farmstead known as Karaole. 



THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE REVOLUTION IN THE SOUTH 211 

Vol. I., Chap. IV.). The King was said to have complained bitterly 
of the rebellion of his subjects, and that he was King only in name : 
he craved for military assistance in order to reduce his rebellious 
chiefs ; but as it was impossible for the stranger to afford this, 
he tried persuasive measures. He visited the several powerful 
chiefs in the country, remonstrated with them pointing out forcibly 
how " Unity is strength." His advice was favourably received 
and the result was a congress held at Ikoyi in which all the principal 
chiefs were present, and to which the King sent an Ilari. 

After a prolonged deliberation they came to an agreement to 
return to their former loyalty and allegiance. The Onikoyi 
then asked that the Ilari be called in to bear the good tidings to 
his master ; but when called aloud by his official (Ilari) name 
" Kafilegboin," the chiefs all gave a start and were much surprised 
to hear the name of the Ilari sent to them. " What ! Kafilegboin ! 
(i.e. let's have it on stiff) Is that then the King's intention ? A 
name which implies implacabiUty, resolute determination and 
inexorableness! Very well then, let the rebellion continue. No one 
among us can consider himself safe at the hands of the King should 
we return to our allegiance, since he can send us such an Ilari at a 
time as this when he wants to win us back!" The congress was 
then dissolved. 

Whether the King did this intentionally or not, we cannot say; 
but Yorubas being very diplomatic, and very suspicious of one 
another, he should have sent one whose name implies conciliation 
or harmony if he wished to win back the chiefs. 

But we consider all this from God in order that the sins of 
the nation may be purged by judgment from above. 

Shortly after this, there was a serious compUcation between the 
Kakanfo at Ogbomoso and the Timi of Ede. Ede had been 
tributary to Ogbomoso, but after the Pamo war it threw off 
its allegiance, and the Kakanfo had long been seeking for an 
opportunity to reduce it again to subjection. One cannot 
say what was the real cause of the war, but there can be no doubt 
that the Kakanfo made something or other a pretext for commenc- 
ing hostilities. The Kakanfo, however, did not take the field in 
person as he considered it only a small affair ; he sent Lasinmi 
his Balogun to reduce the town. 

Ede was beseiged, and for 15 days desperate battles were fought, 
but the town was defended heroically. 

Bamgbaiye the Timi of Ede at that time, was one of the richest 
of the provincial kings, and it was due to his largesses that the town 
was able to hold out so long. Every morning he ordered bushels of 
corn (maize) to be well cooked, and placing large earthenware pots 



212 THE HISTORY OF THE YqRUBAS 

at certain intervals right round the walls of the town, he filled 
them alternately with the cooked corn and cool drink (well- 
mashed Eko) or pure water, for the combatants, so that no one 
need compldn of hunger or find an excuse for leaving his post 
by day or by night. 

The strength of the besiegers and the besieged was well-nigh 
spent, when Asegbe the Olofa's wise Ilari appeared again on 
the scene to prevent further bloodshed and to save the town. 
With a small body guard, he approached the walls of the town, 
so as to be heard. With his usual persuasive eloquence he induced 
the people to surrender in order to avoid further bloodshed. " We 
are all the same tribe and one family, and why should we destroy 
one another in the very face of our common enemy, destroying us 
from without ? I give you my word, that if you capitulate the 
siege will be instantly raised. " 

These words were soon conveyed to the Timi, and so glad was 
he that he sent Asegbe a bottle of gin, which he and his attendants 
drank on the spot and the empty bottle was sent back as a token 
of good-will, that the gift was accepted. 

The Timi sent again to enquire how the negotiations might 
best be carried on. Asegbe advised him to send lo bags of cowries 
and 10 goats, and to capitulate and the siege would be raised. 
Asegbe returned to the camp to report his success, and the chiefs 
were all glad and thankful. Towards the evening the Timi paid 
the fines imposed and capitulated and the siege was raised. 

Bamgbaiye was the richest Timi that ever ruled Ede. His large 
garden was full of goats and sheep without number so that all the 
green grass in the garden was eaten up. But the creatures were 
all miserable looking as they were more in number than could be 
properly fed at home ; they should have been driven by herdsmen 
to the pastures to graze, but the war without prevented this. 
It was even said that they were so hungry that any one entering 
the garden would have to defend himself with a stick to prevent 
his clothes being eaten off his body ! When presents had to be 
given, or fines and indemnities paid in token of subjection, or to 
purchase peace as above related, selections were made from the 
well-favoured ones among them and the enemy appeased. He 
could afterwards recoup himself by taxation. 

Ede prospered under the rule of this king. 

§ 3. State of the Capital During this Period 

King Majotu was well advanced in age, before he was called 
to the throne, and consequently the business of state was for the 
most part left in the hands of the Crown Prince Adewusi surnamed 



THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE REVOLUTION IN THE SOUTH 213 

Fuhiiniji : unfortunately, he was neither wise nor prudent but 
rather a dissolute and licentious prince, extravagant and cruel 
to a degree. His weak qualities were, however, eclipsed by his 
largess. He acted more like a monomaniac than like a rational 
being. His father was too old and weak to check him. Not- 
withstanding his exalted position he usually spent days and nights 
out-of-doors, roaming from one quarter of the town to another 
without returning home. 

Whenever he was going to s.pend a night in a house in any quarter 
of the town, he usually gave orders that his suite should start about 
half-an-hour after he had preceded them. He would clothe 
himself in tatters, carrying an axe, a club, or a stick just hke a 
madman ! He would reach the gate of the chief whose guest he 
intends to be, long before the arrival of his suite, and mingle with 
the crowd of spectators who were there waiting to see the sight of 
a royal equipage, listening to their remarks and especially to 
those of his intended host. 

If the host were to complain of the undesired visit of an un- 
principled coxcomb putting him to unnecessary trouble and ex- 
pense, and that he would rather do without the honour of his visit, 
or any other such remarks that he might make, he would hear it 
all with his own ears. As soon as his attendants arrived he would 
instantly get himself into the midst of them, change his rags for 
a magnificent robe, and step forth as becomes a prince. When 
the host now rushed forward to show his respect, and bid him a 
hearty welcome, etc., he would burst out "You hypocrite, did you 
not say so and so, when you heard I was coming to you on a visit ? 
I'll curb your lying tongue." When the host lay prostrate and 
trembling, conscious of guilt and pleading for mercy, he would 
deal him heavy blows with his club, which more often than not 
killed or disabled him for life, and in some cases, if he survived, 
he would order him to be sold into slavery. 

But if the host were really solicitous about giving him a loyal 
welcome, and showed himself desirous of giving him an entertain- 
ment worthy of his rank, he would hear and know for himself, 
so that when he joined his attendants and came forward to greet 
his host, he would accept his welcome and bid him not to care 
about how he should entertain him, but would himself order 
refreshments and entertain the host and all present out of his own 
bounty, and give him presents lavishly besides. If this prince is 
spoken of as cruel, and as having killed or sold into slavery several 
of his father's subjects, it was in this way. 

An instance related of his liberahty was as follows : — 
Upon a festival called Isul^ customarily held in the month of 



214 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

July, all the members of the royal family gorgeously dressed go 
in procession to a certain place to worship the spirits of their 
dead ancestors. The demonstrations on these occasions are 
very imposing, and usually end with gifts from the Crown Prince. 

On one such occasion, this Prince gave the Ologbo who accom- 
panied him a common gown, but the latter refused to accept it, say- 
ing it was not worthy of the dignity of His Royal Highness. The 
Crown Prince thereupon took off his robes in which he went to 
the Isule, and gave them to the Ologbo, and ordered other members 
of the royal family to do the same. 

Adewusi had his own good qualities but his enormities were 
revolting ! He accounted it a privilege to commit indecencies 
under the open sky, surrounded by his attendants and Eunuchs 
holding large cloths in the four corners as a curtain to shield him 
from sight. In his train were always some of his wives and 
mistresses. 

He would commit rape with impunity, and whether to show 
that he was above law, or out of pure spite to the chiefs, in his 
visits to any of them it was his custom on entering their houses, 
to perform the same act in the open court-yard before he took his 
seat in the piazza ! 

This beastly conduct bemeaned him in the estimation of the 
Oyo chiefs, and not only had he lost all respect from them on that 
account, but, on one occasion, he very nearly lost his life at 
the hands of the Basorun, in whose palace he had the temerity 
to venture on the same action ! On his arrival, his supernal 
highness came out to receive him as his guest, but was shocked 
to find that Adewusi made no exception in his lewd practices 
in regard to himself. He returned in a rage to his inner apart- 
ment, to reappear with a drawn sword, and would have despatched 
him and his mistress on the spot had not the Prince and all his 
attendants fled away in confusion. The Basorun's servants 
pursued after them with clubs and dispersed them. 

Adewusi had no one among all the chiefs to appeal to for 
sympathy, as he had offended every one of them in the same 
way, although none but the Basorun was able to resent it; hence 
their sympathy was rather on the side of the Basorun. 

But the ultimate result of this would have been serious for the 
Prince had not his wise and aged father conciliated the chiefs. 

Knowing what the outcome would probably be, His Majesty 
summoned a meeting of the chiefs, noblemen, and other important 
personages in the city and said to them in a parable : — " The 
Crown Prince was my creditor when we were in the other world, 
and when I could not pay the debt, I escaped to this world. He 



THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE REVOLUTION IN THE SOUTH 215 

pursued me hither demanding payment, and being born of royalty, 
I was able to pay off my debt. 

But my difficulty is this — for the purpose of which I have 
summoned you all my chiefs for your advice and help. The 
Crown Prince not content with the payment, demanded that I 
should carry back the amount paid to the other world ; and for 
this I crave your advice and help." 

The Oyo chiefs asked His Majesty for an explanation of the 
parable and his reply was as follows : — 

" The enormities of the Crown Prince in your quarters and in 
your houses, I have heard of, and what would have been the result, 
if the Basorun had killed liim in his house, we all know. Would 
it not have cost me my own life also ? What I crave of you is 
that in future I should be exonerated, and not be charged with 
his conduct." The Oyo chiefs were appeased and promised not to 
implicate the father in the crimes of his son. 

Added to the scourge of the sword, divine judgment fell upon 
the nation in famine also and pestilence. Towards the end of this 
reign there was a famine in the land for two years which obliter- 
ated every trace of the plenty they revelled in when there was peace 
and prosperity. Many died from it. It was a struggle for many 
to be able to support their family, especially those in exile ; but 
the richness of the soil enabled those whose towns were not 
destroyed to render great assistance to their guests the refugees. 
But unfortunately there was a dearth of the latter rains and the 
dry season crops could not be planted. This following closely 
after the Lasinmi war caused the distress to be more severe. 

Gbogi, an Ijesa town was attacked and destroyed only for the 
sake of the provisions it contained, no one caring for slaves or 
booty. The staple of the Ijesas being yam and not corn, the 
famine was less felt amongst them, as the yam crop does not 
depend upon the latter rain. This famine was called lyan 
Yamord. 

It was said that a subscription was made by several famihes to 
the amount of 6 heads of cowries, and a special messenger was 
sent to the Egba territory to buy corn. The return of the messenger 
was eagerly looked forward to, and at length he returned with a 
merry heart whistling as he walked along : but there was no load 
on his head, the 6 heads worth of corn was carried in a bag slung 
on his shoulders ! and he protected it beneath the cloth he wrapped 
himself with, so that no one may know what he had with him. 
It was a treasure ! It was shared by the subscribers by counting 
the grains. 

This calamity was followed by a pestilence called the Pehe, 



2l6 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

a disease of the respiratory organs like the recent {1892) fatal 
epidemic of Influenza ; thousands were swept away by it, and 
King Majotu was among its victims. Of a long succession 
of Kings, it was his good fortune to have died a natural death. 

At the death of the King, the Crown Prince was told to die 
with his father, according to the custom now prevailing. But he 
was unwilling to do so, and was giving out bribes liberally to the 
chiefs that they should give him their support ; and trusting 
to his former largess to the people, he was determined upon a 
civil fight, hoping for a general rising in his favour ; but Akawo, 
his bosom friend quietly undeceived him, and advised him to die 
honourably, or he would have the mortification of seeing himself 
deserted at the most critical moment by those on whom he counted 
most to espouse his cause. Adewusi then committed suicide, 
and Prince Amgdo was placed on the throne. 



Chapter IX 

FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF THE ANARCHY 

§ I. Evil Days for the Capital 

Prince Amod6 was one of the grandchildren of Ajampati the 
twin brother of King Ajagbo. He came to the throne at a time 
when the kingdom was distracted by anarchy and confusion. 
The Fulanis having an eye on the capital of Yoruba-land, but not 
being confident enough to make an attack on the city whilst there 
were so many powerful chiefs in the land, who might suddenly 
return to their allegiance, were using prudence and astuteness to 
spread the disaffection. They were fanning the flames of discord 
by allying themselves with one or other of the chiefs known to be 
rebellious against their lawful sovereign. None of the provincial 
kings now paid tribute to Oyo or acknowledged the authority of 
the King. He was virtually King of the capital only. 

In order to have a powerful friend and ally in whom he could 
confide in time of emergency, King Amodo made an alliance with 
Lanloke the chief of Ogodo, a market town, at the confluence 
of the river Niger, where Yorubas and Tapas met for an exchange 
of merchandise. Ogodo was originally a Tapa town, but subse- 
quently the Yoruba population predominated, nearly all the 
children of influential Oyo chiefs resided there permanently for 
the purpose of trade. King Amod6 cemented and strengthened 
this aUiance by giving his daughter to Lanloke to wife, and 
treating him as an independent sovereign. 

To show how weak and contemptible the AlAfin has become, 
Lanloke most brutally and cowardly beat the princess his wife 
actually to death, and boasting over it, took to himself the nick- 
name, " My name is Amod6, and I put Amod6 to death. My name 
is Ajebaba, and I enslaved Ajebaba." 

Fearing the resentment and vengeance of Oyo for this act, 
he hastily formed an alHance with the Ilgrins, and assumed the 
aggressive, and so besieged Oyo. Oyo at length capitulated and 
the Ilorin troops entered and sacked the city. Oyo was plundered 
of nearly everything, but no captives were made excepting 
some Oyo beauties who were carried away with the spoils, 

Jimba, one of the head slaves of the Ilorin Emir was the chief 
spoiler. He took away all the Egugun dress, and forced the 
citizens to accept the Koran, which necessitated every one to 

217 



2l8 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

change his name for an Arabic name, the only alternative being 
the sword. 

Thus at length Oyo became tributary to Ilorin ! 

§ 2. The Third Attempt to Expel the Fulanis 
The Kanla Expedition 

Amod6 was ill at ease under the yoke of the Fulani Emir of 
Ilorin, and he prevailed upon all the Yoruba chiefs throughout 
the country to unite and rid themselves of their common enemy.' 
Apparently they were united, but between the capital and the 
provinces, the spirit of disaffection and jealousy was strong. 
It was understood full well that the King's policy was to use 
them together to rid himself first of the common enemy, and then 
to subdue the rebel chiefs one after another, by force of arms. 

But the Ilgrins on the other hand were more diplomatic. In 
order to facilitate their plans, they made friendship with some of 
the Yoruba chiefs who were men of power, and who, if united, 
would be able to oppose them successfully ; such were Prince 
Atiba of Ago Oja, Edun chief of Gbogun, the most powerful 
Yoruba general of the day, and Adegun the Onikoyi the premier 
provincial king. 

Whenever there was war with the Ilorins these chiefs usually 
acted against their own real and national interests, either by 
betraying their own nation and people, or by giving their backs 
to the enemy without shooting an arrow, and thus allowing the 
Ilorin horse the advantage of out-flanking their foes. 

King Amod6 having prevailed upon all the chiefs to come 
together, declared war against the Fulanis, and Ilorin was besieged 
by a formidable army raised throughout the country. 

Adegun the Onikoyi was suffering from indisposition and 
was really unfit to take the field ; but Edun of Gbogun his rival, 
forced him to go to the war, secretly planning with the Ilgrins 
that he would give way in the heat of the battle, in order that 
Adegun might be taken alive ! This battle took place at Kanla 
from which the expedition was named. 

Edun having carried out his act of treachery, the Onikoyi 
was surrounded by the Ilorin horse ; but he fought, and fought 
bravely and fell like a hero. Thus the AlAfin's army was routed, 
and the people fled away in confusion. 

It was at the time when the rivers overflowed their banks, 
and a number of people were drowned at the river Ogun. The 
most notable chief drowned on this occasion was Oja the founder 
of Agd (the present Qyo). Prince Atiba, one of the rising power, 



FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF THE ANARCHY 2I9 

rode his powerful horse into the river, and narrowly escaped being 
drowned. 

The Yoruba towns deserted at this defeat were Esiele and 
Pop6. 

§ 3. The Vicissitudes of Ikoyi 

The fall of Adegun at the Kanla war left the kingship of Ikoyi 
vacant. There were two aspirants to the title, viz., Siyenbola, 
the son of the late Adegun, and Ojo, the son of Adegun's prede- 
cessor. The majority of the people was for Siyenbola, and Ojo's 
partisans were but few. Ojo, however, went to Oyo to have 
the title conferred on him by the Suzerain as of yore, and he 
succeeded in obtaining the Alafin's favour in his claim. 

King Amodo was glad for this mark of recognition and hoped 
for the gradual return of the provincial kings to their allegiance. 
He therefore made Ojo take a solemn oath that he would ever be 
loyal to him. His Majesty strictly charged him against making 
any league with Edun the rebel chief of Gbogun through whose 
town he must pass to reach his home at Ikoyi. This charge was 
occasioned by the treacherous conduct of Edun at the Kanla 
war by which the Alafin lost the day. "I am a King," said 
Amodo, " and you are now a king. Kings should form aUiance 
with kings and not with a commoner." 

The King justly anticipated what would happen, for when 
Ojo the new Onikoyi reached Gbogun on his way home, Edun 
sought his friendship and alliance, and pressed him to take an 
oath with him, that they would always be faithful to each other. 
Ojo stoutly refused to take the oath, alleging that it was unbecoming 
for a king to take an oath with one not of royal blood. But 
Edun was a man of power, and the Onikoyi was already in his 
clutches being in his town and he felt he could do whatever he 
hked with him ; ; he therefore insisted that the oath should be 
taken before the Onikoyi could leave his town. Ojo was in a 
dilemma, his oath of allegiance to the Alafin forbade him to dis- 
obey the King's charge, and now he was at the mercy of this 
miscreant. He had now no option, the oath must be taken and 
the only way out of it the Onikoja could find was to delegate one 
of his attendants to perform the business for him, as the fitness 
of things required from the inequality of their respective ranks. 
The Kakanfo considered this an insult to his dignity, and he 
resented it by ordering Atanda one of his own attendants to take 
the oath with the Onikoyi's delegate. 

Whilst this was taking place at Gbogun, tidings reached Ikoyi 
that Ojo had succeeded in obtaining the title from the AlAfin, 



220 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

and Siyenbgla who had usurped it therefore fled from the town 
with all his party to Ilorin. 

The remnant of Ojo's party at home who did not accompany 
him to Ovg met him at Esiele with the news that the town had 
been deserted from disgust that he should reign over them. 
The Onikoyi was too weak to proceed to occupy Ikoyi with his 
small party, he therefore remained at Esiele. 

A week after this, the Ilorin horse came against Esiele to espouse 
the cause of Siyenbgla, and they had seven days of hard fighting, 
but finding it not such an easy business to rush the town, as they 
had supposed, they retreated home to make full preparation for 
a regular siege at the ensuing year. 

The siege was accordingly laid in the following year. Esi§le 
held out for a long time, being heroically defended by its balogun 
Kurumi, and another notable war-chief Dad6 (of both of whom 
we shall hear more afterwards) . When they could hold out no 
longer, the war-chiefs deserted the town, leaving mostly the women 
and children at the mercy of the conquerors. Ojo the Onikoyi 
was slain, and Siyenbgla having now no rival obtained the title of 
Oniko5a from the Emir of Ilgiin, and returned with those of 
his party who went with him to Ilgrin to re-occupy the town. 
Thus Ikoyi was re-peopled but no longer as a vassal state of 
Ovg but of Ilgrin. The city was rapidly refilled by those of Ojo's 
party that escaped the fall of Esiele and they now acknowledged 
Siyenbgla as their king. 

Esiele also was again re-peopled, as it was not actually destroyed 
by war but deserted under stress. The inhabitants were per- 
mitted to remain as they were because the siege was laid against 
the town on account of the late Onikoyi — no longer alive. 

Shortly after this there was a serious complication between 
Edun of Gbogun the Kakanfo and Dada the Bale of Ade)d which 
broke out into a war. Edun marched his army through Esiel§ 
to besiege Adeyi, but Fasgla the Bale of Esiele hearing that the 
Kakanfo's army was to pass through his town having hardly 
recovered from the effects of the late war, and dreading the 
devastation and pillaging of farms consequent on such a march, 
deserted the town. So Esiele was again desolate, the people 
finding refuge at Ogbomgsg and Ikoyi. 

The expedition, however, was unsuccessful. The Kakanfo's 
army suffering many reverses, it had to be given up. 

§ 4. The Gbogun War and Fall of Edun the Kakanfo 

Gbogun was the last of the powerful towns in the country 
and as the aim of the Fulanis was the subversion of the whole 



FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF THE ANARCHY 221 

country, a pretext for war was soon found in order to lay siege 
against her. 

Abudusalami the Emir of Ilorin threatened the Kakanfo with 
war if he refused to pay allegiance to him ; Edun accepted the 
challenge and began at once to make a vast preparation, offensive 
and defensive. 

Ikoyi being already a vassalage of Ilorin and a neighbouring 
town, Edun regarded her as an enemy and insisted that it should 
be deserted at once or he would take her by surprise. Siyenbola 
the Onikoyi sent ambassadors to Gbogun to arrange terms of peace 
but Edun refused to hear ot any such thing and threatened to 
destroy the town the next day, if not deserted at once as he would 
not afford the Ilorins a base of operation against him at such 
close quarters. There being no alternative, Ikoyi was a second 
time deserted and Siyenbola escaped to Ilorin. 

Gbogun was soon besieged by the Ilorins and desperate battles 
were fought, the defenders fighting heroically and could not 
be overwhelmed until at last the city was reduced by famine and 
thus Gbogun fell, the last of the powerful towns of Yoruba. 

Edun the greatest Yoruba general of the day escaped by way 
of Gbodo where he was overtaken, being hotly pursued by the 
Ilorin horse. He had with him a handful of veterans and such 
was the terror his very name inspired that the pursuers did not 
dare to offer him battle. 

The men of Gbodo were torn between two opinions whether they 
should afford protection to their fallen general or allow him to escape 
in peace. But the pursuers insisted on his destruction, saying ' ' If you 
allow him to escape, your lives will go for his life as you will show 
yourselves thereby to be an enemy to the Emir of Ilorin." This 
decided the men of Gbodo; in order to save themselves they took up 
arms against the fallen general and overwhelmed him and his 
faithful few, the brave man himself falling under a shower of darts 
fighting gallantly at the head of his little band. His head was 
taken off, raised upon a pole and carried in triumph to the camp 
and from thence to Ilorin ; OdQewu his eldest son and some of 
the distinguished war-chiefs who were taken being compelled to 
ride behind it in order to grace the triumph of the conquerors. 

On the 3rd day after their arrival at Ilorin Oduewu succeeded 
in purchasing the head of his father and had it decently buried 
to save himself from disgrace. 

After the fall of Gbogun, Siyenbola returned the second time 
to Ikoyi. Fasgla the Bale of Esiele, who had escaped with his 
family and a few followers to Ogbomgso, also returned to his town. 
On his way to E§i§le, he was the guest of Siy§nbola the Onikoyi 



222 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

for three days. He and his sons Sinolu and Abgsede and his 
eldest daughter Omotajo were feasted on the flesh of an elephant 
just killed and brought to the Onikoyi. This was regarded as an 
auspicious omen. 

§ 5. The Pole War and the Death of the Abuousalami 

The Fulanis having subdued all the chiefs in Yoruba proper 
and reduced the large towns by conquest or annexation, his 
ambition led Abudusalami to turn his attention to the Ijesa tribes 
for conquest, and hence he sent an expedition to that province. 

The Fulanis depended more on their cavalry than on their 
infantry, the latter being armed with only a sword and a club. 
In a country with primitive forests like those in the Ijesa province 
horses were of no avail, and hence the Ijesas chased the enemy in 
their mountain tracks and cut in pieces the greater part of their 
horsemen. In pursuing their foot soldiers, they cry after them 
" Pole, Pole," which in their dialect means Down, Down. From 
this circumstance this expedition was termed the Pol^ war. 

After the return of this expedition Abudusalami fell sick and 
died. He was a successful king who raised the Fulani power to 
that pitch of glory which Ilorin has attained. 

The late Abudusalami and Shitta were the children of the slave 
wife of Alimi and being the two eldest they naturally took the lead. 

On their father's death Abudusalami divided his property into 
four equal parts, called all his brothers to take each one his portion 
beginning from the youngest. His half brothers took theirs 
and went away, but as Shitta was about to take his Abudusalami 
stopped him and sent him away with a walking stick. With the 
slaves and riches of himself and his brother, he kept up his royal 
estate and had sufficient means to carry on the war and to effect 
the conquest of Yoruba proper and hence at his death the throne 
and the property devolved upon Shitta, the half brothers having 
no longer any claim. Abudusalami hereby secured the throne of 
Ilorin to his own and his brother's descendants to the total 
exclusion of the half brothers and the succession to this day 
alternates between the family of the two. 

The children of the lawful wives (especially those of the Fulani 
lady) considered the throne theirs by right, but as they could not 
claim anything of the royal estates they were excluded from the 
throne as well. Abudusalami was succeeded by his brother 
Shitta. Olusi the Bale of Ogbomgso also died about this time. 



Chapter X 

THE SPREAD OF ANARCHY AND POLITICAL 
DISPLACEMENTS 

§ I. The Destruction of Egba Towns 

We have seen above (Chap. VII) that after the fall of Owu, and the 
punishment inflicted upon some Egba towns for secretly befriending 
the beleagured city, the camp at Idi Ogugun broke up, and the 
leading Ife and Ijebu generals returned home to their respective 
masters, but the rest of the aUied armies with the Oyo refugees 
were invited by the Ijebus to Ipara, a town of Ijebu Remg. 
Making this place their headquarters, these restless bands of 
marauders found occupation for their arms in conquering and 
subjugating several towns in Ijebu Rem.o under the Awujale of 
Ijebu Ode, viz Ode, Iperu, Ogere and Makun. 

Pretext was soon found for waging war with the Egbas who were 
then living in small villages scattered all over the area between 
Ipara and Ibadan. Several expeditions were made from their 
base at Ipara, and Iporo, Eruwon, Oba, Itoko, Itesi, Imo, Ikereku, 
Itoku, etc., were taken. 

The following are the names of the distinguished war-chiefs in 
this campaign : — Oyo chiefs — Oluyedun, Lakanle, Oluyole, 
Adelakun, Opeagbe, Abitiko, YSmati, Oluoyg, Koseiko, Abidogun, 
Apksa, Osun, Laleitan, Bankole, Fadeyi Ogani-ija, Agbeni, etc. 

All these chiefs oined the allied army as private soldiers, but 
the fortunes of war raised them to positions of great distinction. 
Notwithstanding this, they were looked down upon by the Ife 
and Ijebu leaders under whose auspices they joined the war against 
Owu, and had no voice in their councils. But they were soon to 
show their superiority. 

Ife chiefs — Maye (the generahssimo in the absence of Singusin) 
Ogugu, Derin-Okiin, Labgsinde, Ogini, Aregbe, Olufadi, Degoke, 
Kugbayigbe, Oluygde, Epo, Kudayisi. 

Ijebu chiefs — Kalejaiye, Amoibo, Osunlalu, Oguade, Argwgsanle, 
etc. 

Rich with the booty of these expeditions, and finding no fresh 
fields of operation for their arms they decided to disband the 
army. The Ijebu war chiefs returned home and the Ifes set out 
to return by way of Oorun ; the Oygs who had nowhere to go to 

223 



224 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

accompanied them. There were thousands of Oyos already in 
Ife districts. 

At 06run (a Gbagura town) they found fresh employment 
for their arms when the men of that place refused them a passage. 
Another circumstance also occurred which hastened the siege of 
Oorun and the fall of the remaining Egba townships. 

A dispute arose between the people of Idomapa a neighbouring 
town and the Gbaguras about territorial limits which at length broke 
out into war and Oluwole the king of Idomapa who was the 
weaker of the two combatants asked the aid of Labgsinde one of 
the leading Ife war-chiefs, and through him the rest of the Ife 
and Oyo war-chiefs against Ajiboso the king of the Gbaguras. The 
allies encamped at Idomapa and Oorun was the scene of conflict, 
where the Gbaguras concentrated all their forces to oppose the 
Idomapas and their allies. 

The Gbagura army was swelled by re-inforcement from Ika, 
Owe Ikija, Iwokoto. The contest was furious and one Oga 
Oh5roagallantwar-chiefgreatlydistinguishedhimself in the defence 
of 06run. As long as he could handle his bow and arrows, the 
enemy was kept at bay ; but he fell in an engagement, and at the 
same time famine had commenced its direful work, and so the 
assailants successfully reduced the town. 

As their fighting men had all fallen at Oorun the conquest of 
all the rest of the Gbagura towns was complete. Oorun when 
captured was fired ; being a town situated on a high hill, the 
conquerors were able by the aid of the light to pursue their 
victory to the next town which they found deserted, and so on 
to the next and the next until they reached Ojoh6. 

The towns deserted and overrun that night were Oorun, Ijaiye- 
maja, Kosi-kosi, Ikerekuiwere, Ora, Ibadan. Ofa and Oje were 
also deserted, but the conquerors did not know of this till three 
days after as they lay outside their line of march. 

From Ibadan they followed up the conquest to Ojokodo Iwohaha, 
and Eguoto ; all these places were deserted and plundered in 
one night and by the dawn of day they were before 0]6h6. Ojghb 
offered a stout resistance and being weary from long marches the 
conquerors retired to find a resting place. Of all the towns overrun 
the previous night, Ibadan alone they found not destroyed by 
fire, and so this marauding band hastily occupied it, the 
war-chiefs taking possession of any compound they chose, and their 
men with them and thus Ibadan was again re-peopled but not by 
the owners of the town, but by a composite band of marauders, 
consisting of Oyos, Ifes, Ijebus, and some friendly Egbas, Maye 
a bold and brave Ife chieftain being their leader. Next to him 



THE SPREAD OF ANARCHY AND POLITICAL DISPLACEMENTS 225 

was Labgsinde also an Ife, but, through his mother, of Oyo descent. 
These two leaders were men of different character and opposite 
temperament. Maye was of an irritable temper, in manners 
rough and domineering, and never failed at all times to show his 
contempt for the Oyos, chiefly because they were homeless refugees. 
At the head of the Oyos was Lakanl^ a bold and brave leader who 
alone of all the Oyo war-chiefs could venture to open his mouth when 
Maye spoke. Labosinde on the contrary was most agreeable and 
very fatherly in his manners and therefore much respected by all. 

Ibadan now became the headquarters of these marauders from 
which place Ojoho was besieged and at length taken. At this 
time also Ikeiye Owe and a part of Ika were deserted ; the Ika 
people escaping to Iwokoto. All these were Eeba villages of the 
Gbagura section. 

§ 2. Foundation of the Present Abeqkuta 

As stated in the preceding section there were some friendly 
Egba chiefs who joined the marauders at Idi Ogiigun and at 
Ipara, and now they were all living together at Ibadan. The most 
influential among them were : — Lamgdi, Apati, Ogunbona, Oso, 
Gbewiri, and Inakoju. OgQdipe, who afterwards became a notable 
chief at Abeokuta was then but a blacksmith and a private soldier. 

Rivalry was so rife among these various tribes that altercations 
were frequent, and one led to a civil war. In a public meeting 
held at the Isale Ijebu quarter of the town, Lamodi an Egba 
chief shot Ege an influential Ife chief down dead with a pistol, 
and in the commotion which ensued Lamodi himself was slain. 
For fear of the Ifes avenging the death of Ege the Egbas withdrew 
in a body from Ibadan and encamped on the other side of the 
Ona river, about 3 or 4 miles distant Here also they were ill at 
ease and after divination they sent for one Sodeke to be their 
leader, and they escaped to Abeokuta then a farm village of an 
Itoko man, and a resting place for traders to and from the Oke 
Ogun districts. Sodeke was at the head of this new colony until 
his death. This was about the year 1830 They were continually 
swelled by Egba refugees from all parts of the countr}^ and also 
by Egba slaves who had deserted their masters. At Abeokuta the 
refugees kept together according to their family distinctions, viz. : — 

1. The Egba Agbeyin comprising Ake the chief town, Ijeun, 
Kemta, Imo, Igbore, etc. These were under the Alake as chief. 

2. Egba Agura (or Gbagura) comprising Agura the chief town 
Ilugun, Ibadan, Ojohg, Ika, etc., under the Agura as chief. 

3. Egba Oke Ona with Oko the chief town. Ikija, Ikereku, 
Idomapa, Odo, Podo, etc., under the Osile as chief. 



226 tHE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Here also the Owus joined them, one common calamity throwing 
them together. It was some considerable time after that Ijaiye 
joined them, and so by degrees all the Egba townships about 153 
became concentrated at Abeokuta, the new town comprising Ijemo 
Itoko and a few others who were already on the spot. 

Until the death of Sodeke in A.D. 1844 the Egbas never 
spoke of having a king over them, Sodeke wielding supreme 
power in a very paternal way. Of external relations, very little (if 
any) existed, each of these families managed its own affairs, and 
there was no properly organized central government. 

Even after the foundation ot Abeokuta there were still some 
Egbas residing at Ibadan. Egba women also who were unable 
or unwilling to go with their husbands to the new settlement were 
taken as wives by the new colonists at Ibadan and they became 
the mothers of most of the children of the first generation of the 
new Ibadan. 

From this it will be seen that the current tale of the Egbas 
being driven from Ibadan by the Oygs is lacking in accuracy. 
Such then is the foundation of the present Abeokuta. 

§ 3. The Egbado Tribes 

The Egbados are a Yoruba family bordering on the coast. 
They were very loyal subjects of the AlAfin^ before the revolution 
that altered the pohtical state of the country. The Olu or king of 
Ilaro was the greatest king of the Egbados, having about 443 
ruling chiefs under him, himself a crowned vassal of Oyo. 
The ancient custom was for the Alafin to crown a new Olu 
every three years. After the expiration of his term of office the 
retiring Olu was to take 10 of his young wives, and whatever else 
he chose and proceed to the metropohs, and there to spend the 
rest of-his days in peace. There was a quarter of the city assigned 
to them known as Oke Olu (the quarter of the Olus). 

The parting between these young wives and their mothers 
was most touching. The relatives generally accompanied them 
as far as to Jiga or Jakg, and the wailings and lamentations on such 
occasions were as one mourning for the dead. Hence the sa5nng 

^ In the year 1902 the head chief of Ifo died, an Egbado town 
about 6 hours distant from Ilaro. Sir Wm. MacGregor, then 
Governor of Lagos, asked the chiefs of the town who their overlord 
was, to appoint a successor, they replied the Alafin of Oyo. He 
was much puzzled at this. He told them he was too far, they 
had better apply to the Alake of Abeokuta. Evidently they 
at least were not affected by the revolution. 



THE SPREAD OF ANARCHY AND POLITICAL DISPLACEMENTS 22/ 

" A ri erinkan I'Egba iri Olu " (the Olu is seen by the Egbas but 
once in ahfe time). 

Next to the Olu of Ilaro came the Onisare or king of Ijana, 
but his was not a crowned head. The appointment of the Onisare 
was also from Oyo, and a Tapa was always selected for that office. 
The reason for this is not known. The Olu and the people of Ilaro, 
as well as the Onisare and the people of Ijana were so to speak but 
one people ; they observed the same national customs, and the same 
laws, their national deity was the god Ifa and the annual festivals 
in its honour were observed in both places one after the other in 
the same month, each lasting for a week, the one commencing the 
day after the completion of the other so as to give the people 
of both places an opportunity of taking part in each other's 
festivities. 

The following ceremony usually brought the anniversary to a 
close : — ^Both these kings were to meet in a certain place in the 
open field midway between the two towns : two mounds of earth 
previously raised opposite each other served for each king to 
enthrone himself upon, the one turning his back to the other 
as they were not to see each other's face. The one to reach the 
spot first would sit with his face turned homewards, the other 
on his arrival does the same, and thus they sit back to back, each 
one looking homewards ; communication with each other was by 
messengers. A numerous retinue always attended either to take 
an active part in the proceedings or as mere spectators. 

This custom served as a bond of union and friendship between 
them, a people having identical interests. 

The kings of Ijakoand Jiga are called Abepa : they had a strange 
custom of standing seven days and seven nights in the seventh 
month of the year during the anniversary of their national deity, 
after which they may sit down. 

The Egbados were a commercial people and of a quiet and 
peaceful disposition and. as a result, were considered very wealthy. 
They termed themselves "Egbaluw§" to distinguish them 
from the Egbas in forest lands (now inhabiting Abeokuta) whom 
they designated " Egbalugbo." They traded in kola nuts, palm 
oil, and fish. They had very few slaves, and their wealth consisted 
in beads and native cloths. From Kano and Sokoto they imported 
what they termed Erinla and Esuru beads in quantities, as they 
esteemed them very valuable. 

The Beginning of Disturbance in the Egbado Districts. 
The Ijaka War. A serious complication arose between the 
people of Ijana and Ijaka which ended in the conquest and fall of 



228 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

this peaceful tribe. War was very foolishly declared against Ijaka 
by the Onisare of Ijana which resulted in the defeat ot the aggressor. 

There was a rich and influential chief at Ijana called Dekun, 
in whom the Ijanas trusted when they rashly declared war, not 
knowing that he was a great coward. At the height of the battle 
Dekun dastardly gave way and the IjcLnas were completely routed. 
He escaped to Oniyefun and those who like himself escaped with 
their lives murmured against him, and even insulted him to his 
face, calling him " white-feathered," " a poltroon," " the cause of 
their defeat." Dekuri was offended at this, and more from shame 
than from the insult he resolved never to return to Ijana. He 
remained at Oniyefun for a considerable time, until a war 
(which we shall notice afterwards) met him there. 

On the return home of the remnants of the defeated IjSnas 
Dekun's house was plundered. 

Dekun afterwards spent several years at Ijaka with whose 
king he contracted friendship, and later perhaps in order to avenge 
the insults received, he took refuge with the king of Dahomey whom 
he asked to espouse his cause. The king of Dahomey destroyed 
Inubi where thousands of Oyo refugees made their home ; of these 
about 13,000 were children or grandchildren of Oyo nobles or 
well-to-do people " whose fathers had kept horses " before the 
devastation of the Yoruba country by the Fulanis. They were 
all put to the sword by the Dahomians with the exception of one 
Ekuola to whom Dekun was under some obligation, and he 
evidently interposed and had his life spared. Thus did 
Dekun resent his so-called insdlt. Such was the beginning 
of the fall of this peaceful Egbaluwe tribe, and the inroads of the 
Dahomians into the Yoruba country. 

Two years after the destruction of Inubi, the king of Dahomey 
took Refurefu by capture in war. 

A Short Account of Dekun. Dekun was an Ilari of Oyo, placed 
at Ijana by one of the AlAfins as the King's representative. 
Instead of upholding the King's interests when the great chiefs 
of the kingdom rebelled against their sovereign, he also rebelled 
against his master, and made himself great at Ijclna, by appro- 
priating all taxes and tributes he should have forwarded to Oyo. 
He joined the marauders at Ipara in the devastation ot the Egba 
principalities, but at the occupation and settlement of Ibadan he 
returned to Ijana, and did not reside with the new settlers. In 
one of their expeditions Sodeke was captured by him, and served 
him for years as his horse boy. But providence destined Sodeke 
for a great position in life and hence he eventually became the 
renowned leader of the Egbas to Abeokuta. 



THE SPREAD OF ANARCHY AND POLITICAL DISPLACEMENTS 229 

Dgkun was rich but childless, although he kept a numerous 
harem. There is a story told in connection with him which is 
worth recording : — 

A woman ot an abandoned character called Isokun had left 
her husband and children at Ipokia to become Dekun's mistress. 
This woman on one occasion went on a long journey and required 
some justification for her prolonged absence ; on her way home, 
she saw at the last sleeping place of the caravan, a mother with 
her new born babe 3 days old, she quietly stole this babe from its 
mother's side while she was fast asleep, and immediately went off 
with it. On reaching home she gave it as an excuse for her long 
absence that she was enceinte of this child before she left home, and 
when she might have returned she was unfit for travelling but 
immediately after delivery she was able to hasten home. 

Dekun rejoiced that after all he was now a father and to 
demonstrate his joy he invited all the principal men and chiefs of 
Ijana and of the adjacent towns to a feast held in honour of the 
event. Presents poured in from every rank and station for the 
child and the supposed mother according to the father's dignit}' 
and every care and attention were bestowed on them. 

Meanwhile the real mother was in eager search for her lost 
baby. She at first supposed that it might have been a wolf 
that snatched it away from her side, and consequently she explored 
the surrounding woods if haply she might find the bones. Failing 
in this she was resolved to seek for it in the town ; and taking it 
quarter by quarter she entered every house asking the mothers 
to produce their babies, in order to identify her own. On the 
i8th day of search she reached Dekun's house and discovered her 
baby with Isokun. Then there arose an uproar about the child 
and a regular " to do " about the whole affair with assertions 
and denials on either side. A proper investigation of the case 
having been instituted, and signs of recent delivery not found 
in Isokun she was thus brought to book ; the whole truth was at 
length extorted from her when her arms were bound behind her 
back with a new rope, till both elbows and wrists met. 

From shame she escaped from Ijana to her former home at 
Ipokia where she had left her sons and daughters to become 
D§kun's mistress. Her name was put to vulgar street songs, 
being branded as a man-stealer. 

Dekun lived in Dahomey till the accession of King Atiba of 
the present Oyo who demanded him from the King of Dahomey, 
and he was given up. He was charged as a rebel and a traitor, 
condemned, and pubhcly executed at the market-place. The 
sentence was universally held to be a just one. 



230 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Dekun it seems had a son called Onibudo ; perhaps an adopted 
one as is customary with childless chiefs ; his life was spared, but 
he was degraded by the AlAfin and the mean title of Agbomopa 
was conferred on him and his descendants. 

§ 4. The Founding of Modakeke 

By the Fulani conquest of all the principal towns in Yoruba 
proper, fugitives from all parts escaped southwards and settled 
in all Ife towns except at He Ife the chief town. They were in 
great numbers at Moro, Ipetumodu, Odiiabon, Yakioy6, Ifa-lende, 
Sope, Waro, Ogi as well as in Apomu and Ikire. 

Just about the time of the Lasinmi war a Mohammedan at 
Iwo called Mohomi invited the Folanis of Ilorin to extend theii 
conquest to the towns of these Eastern districts, as the Oyos 
were then engaged in a civil war. The Ilorin army accordingly 
came and overran the above mentioned towns. The latter made 
no attempt at resistance but simply deserted their towns and with 
all the Oyo refugees escaped to He Ife their chief town and were 
well received and protected by Aldnmgyero (aUas Odunle) the 
then reigning Ow6ni of Ife. The most important Oyo chief 
amongst the refugees was the Asirawo, the king of Iraw6. 

Before long, a feeling of disaffection became evident between 
the Ife citizens and the exiles. The Owoni spared the Ife refugees, 
but enslaved all the Oyos making them " hewers of wood and 
drawers of water " after having murdered the Asirawo their chief. 
One ot the Asirawo's sons enslaved was the afterwards renowned 
chieftain of Modakeke, Ojo Akitikori by name. 

The Oyos built their houses, cleaned their farms and performed 
all sorts of menial work for them. This was towards the close 
of Akinmoyer6's reign. Gbanlare who succeeded him was more 
favourably disposed towards the Oyos, and they now received 
better treatment, but this was not for long. Gbegbaaje succeeded 
Gbanlare, and the bad feeling and cruelty against Oyos were 
revived ; many of them were even sold into slavery. This king 
also was soon murdered. 

Winmolaje who succeeded Gbegbaaje utilized the services 
of these Oyos in repelling the inroads of the Ijesas into his territory. 
From appreciation of their services, he was kindly disposed toward 
them ; but the hatred and malice of the Ife citizens generally was 
so strong that not even the well-disposed could curb the virulence 
of the opposite party. 

A pretext was soon found again for murdering the well disposed 
Ow6ni. Adegunle succeeded to the throne: he was partly of 



THE SPREAD OF ANARCHY AND POLITICAL DISPLACEMENTS 23I 

Yoruba descent on the mother's side and hence was the benefactor 
of the Oyos all his days. 

Before he accepted the crown of Ife he made the chiefs take 
an oath that they would not find a pretext for murdering him as 
they did his predecessors, but would allow him to die a natural 
death ; they readily agreed to this request. Soon after his accession 
knowing full well the disposition of his people, he took the pre- 
caution at once of accumulating ammunition of war, in order to 
make himself strong against any attack from the populace. He 
was not of a warlike disposition but was rather given to agricultural 
pursuits ; hence his nickname " Ab'ewe ila gbagkdk gbagada " 
(one whose okra leaves are very broad) from his garden plantations. 

The Oyos were by this time growing to be an important section 
in the community, having for their chief one Wingbolu a smelter 
of iron. 

The Ife nature and spirit of the times soon became evident. 
Notwithstanding the oath, a pretext was soon found for a 
civil war against their king, but he was too strong for them; he 
defeated and suppressed all the refractory chiefs among them. 

After the civil fight the Owoni called Wingbolu and asked him 
why he and the Oyos were neutral at the time of the insurrection. 
He replied boldly " Had I been invited by your opponents, does 
your majesty think yoa would have proved victorious ? Or if 
you had invited us, would not 3''our victory have been more 
complete? " 

Thinking over these significant remarks the Owoni who had 
some strains of Oyo blood in him was resolved not on exter- 
minating these Oyos as some others would have done but rather 
on emancipating them. He appointed them a settlement outside 
the walls of the city deputing one Adewgro to accompany Win- 
gbolu to the site and mark out the settlement. On the Oyo chief 
himself he conferred the title of Ogunsuwa signifying One whom 
Ogun (the god of war) has blessed with a fortune. That has 
become the title of all the chief rulers of Modakeke to this day. 

By a royal proclamation all Oyos were to leave the city of He 
Ife for the new settlement, and accordingly the settlement grew 
rapidly from new arrivals every day. The new settlement was 
named Modakeke, a term said to have been derived from the cry of 
a nest of storks on a large tree near the site. 

Modakeke was first built in a circular form as a single vast 
compound of about 2 miles in circumference ; the enclosed area 
was left covered with trees and high grass, each individual clearing 
out a small space in front of his dwelling. This was done for the 
sake of mutual protection as no one need to go out of the com- 



232 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

pound for sticks or thatch for roofing purposes. Modakeke was 
in 1884 a town of between 50,000 and 60,000 inhabitants. 

By dwelling in a separate settlement it was not meant that they 
should hold themselves independent of the Ifes. They were still 
loyal to the Ow6ni. 

A sedition was again raised for the purpose of murdering the 
Ow6ni for emancipating the Oyos, but he receiving help from the 
new settlement crushed the rising completely, and all the ring- 
leaders were put to death among whom was the son of a rich lady 
called Olugboka. 

As Ab'ewe-ila could not be murdered by force of arms, the 
Ifes finally succeeded in poisoning him and the first intimation 
the settlers had of the death of their benefactor was from the 
street song of the Ifes " They are deprived of their King, woe 
betide the Oyos." 

The late king was denied a royal funeral, and was buried like any 
common man and all his slaves were seized b}- the Ifes, but the 
Oyos amongst them went over in a body to the new settlement. 

Modakeke was soon besieged by the Ifes, but they were repulsed 
with a heavy loss in dead, wounded, and captives. The Modakekes 
captured aboat 12070 of them, but they had not the heart to 
enslave their former masters and benefactors and hence all were 
released. Thirty days after this defeat, one Ogunmakin an Ife 
chief receiving re-inforcement from Oke Igbo, Modakeke was 
again attacked. The Ifes were again badly beaten and 
they were pursued right home, and the city of Ife taken 
by an assault. The victors now ventured to sell their Ife captives 
as slaves, but reserved of their women-folks for wives. The Ifes 
escaped to Isoya, Oke Igbo, and other Ife towns where they 
remained for many years till about the year 1854 when the Ibadans 
were engaged in the Ijebu Ere war. Chief Ogunmola of Ibadan 
sent messengers from the camp to negotiate terms ot peace and 
bring the Ifes home, as it would never do to let the cradle of the 
race remain perpetually in desolation and the ancestral gods not 
worshipped. Kubusi was the then reigning Owoni who could no 
longer remain in exile, but promised that if allowed to return 
home the past would be obliterated ; no restitution of anything 
will be demanded of the Modakekes, not even of their wives who 
might have been appropriated. 

But no sooner did they return home than all the Ife women 
deserted their present husbands with all the children born to them 
and returned to He Ifg. 

Notwithstanding their present relations the Modakekes still 
acknowledged the supremacy of the Ifes and by mutual arrange- 



THE SPREAD OF ANARCHY AND POLITICAL DISPLACEMENTS 233 

ment they had their representatives in the If e assembly. Thus they 
Uved together harmoniously till the year 1878 when the whole of 
the Yoruba country was again embroiled in war, and the latent 
animosity broke out afresh in an open fight, and the If§s were 
again worsted as we shall noti e hereafter. 



Chapter XI 
THE REVOLUTION IN THE EPO DISTRICTS 

§ I. The Destruction of the Epos and the Death of 
Ojo Amepo 

Notwithstanding the Fulani devastations, there were not 
wanting still among the Yorubas powerful generals, who could 
successfully oppose them if only they would act together. One 
such was Ojo Amepo the Kakanfo. 

Ojo Amepo was one of the generals of the late Kakanfo Afonja 
of Ilorin ; he inherited the lion-like spirit of his chief. After the 
fall of Afonja he resided at Akese, where he found employment 
for his enterprising spirit in waging intestine wars with the Epos, 
and became a great man and a terror in that district. Thus Ojo 
Amepo usurped the prerogatives of the AlAfin in that district. 
He took Iware, Okiti, Ajerun, Koto, Ajabe, towns near Ijaye, and 
he assumed the title of Kakanfo in opposition to Edun of Gbogun 
whom, however, he survived (as Edun himself formerly did in 
opposition to Toyeje of Ogbomoso) showing the state of anarchy 
in the kingdom as there can be but one Kakanfo at a time. 

Amepo was a good horseman and an intrepid warrior. Ago 
was one of the towns in the Epo district. Oja the founder perished 
at the Kanla war as we have already noticed, and the only man 
of power then in that town was Prince Atiba formerly of Gudugbu, 
and he was in friendly alliance with the Ilgrins and abetted them, 
when they were resolved upon subjugating the Epds. 

Chiefs Amepo, Salako, and Ojomgbodu were opposed to the 
Ilorins, and the latter soon found a pretext to wage war upon 
them and to destroy their towns. 

The Ilorins encamped at Ago Oja against Ojomgbodu which 
was about 6 or 7 miles distant. The Kakanfo at Akesfe sent Dado 
his commander-in-chief at the head of a detachment to reinforce 
the beleaguered town ; associated with Dado were Adekambi, 
Soso, Dese and Lagbayi, all distinguished men. A portion of the 
Ilorin army was encamped against Wonworo at the same time, and 
the Kakanfo also sent Ayo another distinguished war chief to 
protect the place. Both these places were obstinately defended 
and, but for the tragedy which befell the Kakanfo at home, they 
might have held out longer even if they could not repel the enemy 
eventually. 

234 



THE REVOLUTION IN THE EPO DISTRICTS 235 

Amepo the Kakanfo being anxious about his men when he 
heard no news from the seat of war, rode out one morning dressed 
in his red uniform with only about 20 boys as his attendants. 
He took the path leading to the seat of conflict to listen if per- 
chance he would hear the sound of musketry showing that his people 
were still holding out and the town not yet taken. 

He dismounted under a large tree in the fields, and most un- 
fortunately for him was discovered from afar by a company 
of Ilorin horsemen, who had made excursion into the W6nw6ro 
farms, and were returning to their camp at Ago-Oja by way of 
Akesfe. He found himself in a predicament all too late, his body 
guards were, alas ! too young to defend him, and his corpulency 
prevented him from springing at once upon his horse and making 
good his escape. So he was slain there under the tree, and his head 
and hands were cut off and carried in triumph to the camp before 
Ojomgbodu. But before doing so, the Ilorin horsemen rode back 
to Akese and called upon the town to surrender under threats of 
immediace destruction. The Kakanfo being slain, and the 
war-chiefs absent at Ojomgbodu, the town Akese surrendered at 
discretion ; but as soon as the horsemen were gone the inhabitants 
packed up and deserted the town. 

The Kakanfo s army at Ojomgbodu of course did not know 
of the tragedy that had befallen their master at home until they 
were informed the next morning in the battlefield by the Ilorin 
horsemen taunting them. To confirm the truth of their statement, 
Amepo s speckled hand which was cut of! was thrown to them 
within the town wall for identification. " Know ye whose hand 
that was ? We have slain your master ! What is the use of further 
fighting ? Woe betide you if you do not surrender at once." 
The men were panic stricken and would have fled there and then 
but for the presence of mind and brave speech of Dado the com- 
mander-in-chief. He said to them " The death of our master is 
no reason why we should give way, let us fight like brave men and 
not show the white feather." Turning to the besiegers he said 
" We are here to defend the town not our master whose misfortune 
is only an incident though a lamentable one. You prepare yourself 
for a battle to-morrow, for you shall receive such a severe encounter 
as you have never experienced before ; you will then know how 
brave men can resent treachery." This speech created order 
among the troops and the Ojomgbodu people also were re-assured ; 
but it was only a ruse in order to make good their escape, for by 
daybreak, before the Ojomgbodu people knew that they were 
deserted. Dado had retreated with his army in good order and 
escaped to Ika-Odan. 



236 the history of the yorubas 

§ 2. The Occupation of Ijaye and end of Dado 

Ika-Odan now became the home of the flower of the army 
from the Oyo provinces. The leaders here were the only brave 
generals who would not submit under the yoke of the Ilorins, 
and who held out still until such time that fortune would veer 
round to their side. 

These refugees soon became masters of the town, the wives and 
daughters of their hosts became theirs, and the hosts themselves 
practically their menials. 

Everything at home and in the farms was soon devoured as they 
lived only by foraging. When nothing remained in the Ika-Odan 
farms they extended their operations into the Ijaye farms. When 
the I j ayes could no longer endure it, and their farms were nearly 
all eaten up they attacked these marauders ; a skirmish ensued 
and the foragers finding the men of Ijaye too strong for them, sent 
home for re-inforcements. 

Kurumi's advice was for conciliatory measures, considering 
that these proceedings were rather hard on the people, who 
really could not help attacking the foragers. But Dado their 
leader was for opposition. " Cowards " said he, " what can the 
I j ayes do ? " Saying this, he hastily put on his armour and rushed 
on to the scene of the conflict. He was allowed to go on alone, 
none of the other war-chiefs followed him. 

The foragers seeing their leader coming were inspirited and 
put forth more efforts, and he led them to victory. They drove 
the Ijayes home, and pressed so closely on their heels that the latter 
could not rally to defend the town, but deserted it and fled on, till 
they escaped to Ika-Igbo. Ijaye now fell into the possession of the 
assailants who did not fire it, but simply occupied it as was done 
at Ibadan, each one taking possession of the finest compound he 
could get. 

Dado now sent to invite Kurumi and the rest of the war-chiefs 
at Ika-Odan, and they came and took possession of Ijaye. Thus 
that town passed out of the hands of the Egbas, and became an 
Oyg town to this day. 

At a special meeting convened to consider their future course 
it was resolved that they should make Ijaye their home at least 
for the present until they could see a brighter prospect of dis- 
lodging the Fulanis from Ilorin and then return to their own 
homes. They therefore took possession of the lands and farms 
along with the houses and proceeded to so.v the farms, lest 
famine should follow the present abundance. Thus they became 
proprietors of houses, lands and farms not their own. The fields 



THE REVOLUTION IN THE EPO DISTRICTS 237 

were extensively cultivated, all the war-chiefs with the sole exception 
of Dado their leader, paid great attention to agriculture, going to 
their farms daily. 

Dado was of a more restless spirit and was indifferent to 
agriculture. Nothing delighted him more than the rattle of 
musketry, for he was never in his element unless he was at the 
head of his army directing a battle. He often frightened his 
people home from farm, mistaking the volleys Dado ordered 
to be fired for an attack on the town. The other war-chiets 
petitioned him again and again not to cause such an alarm, but 
he usually replied in a haughty manner: " Cowards, were I such 
as you I could not have brought you here, when yoi" wished to 
negotiate peace with the aborigines." 

Casting this at their teeth day by day, his colleagues felt hurt 
but were afraid of opposing him till one day Kurumi summoned 
up courage to do so and was backed by the other chiefs, a civil 
war ensued and Dado was expelled the town. 

Dado's Later Career. — To trace the subsequent career of Dado 
we have to anticipate some events of history yet to be narrated. 

Dado was bold and brave as a warrior, but in his disposition, he 
was irritable and very proud. On his expulsion from Ijaye he went 
first to Iware, and from thence he crossed the river Ogun going 
to a small town near Isede called Tobalogbo. He encamped 
outside the town walls with his few followers, and sent to apprise 
the Bale of his arrival. His fame as a great warrior having 
travelled far and wide the Tobalogbo treated him with every mark 
of respect, supplying him and his followers with provisions, and on 
the next day he came out with his chiefs to pay his respects to 
the fallen general. 

Whilst the Bale and chiefs prostrated before this monster 
in the act of salutation, he ordered them all to be decapitated ! 
He and his men then rushed into the town and captured it. He 
cared only for the booty and not for making it his residence ; 
he, therefore, passed on to the town of Aborerin near Iberekodo 
and there he built a house and resided with his family and about 
400 men. Subsequently he left Aborerin with his family and 
belongings and wishing to try the fortunes of war once more, 
he joined an Ibadan contingent under Osun the chief of the Ibadan 
cavalry in an expedition in aid of Oniyefun. When Osun fell in 
battle, and Oniyefun was reduced by the Egbas, he narrowly 
escaped with a handful of his men, leaving his wives and children 
at the mercy of the conquerors and escaped to Ijaka. Divine 
retribution now began to overtake him for his cruelties and for his 
heartless treachery and cold-blooded murder of Tobalogbo and 
K 



238 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

his chiefs. He lost everything at Oiiiyefun, and from that time 
he went up and down the country as a " fugitive and vagabond." 
After some time spent at Ijaka he came to Ibadan ; he accompanied 
Lakanle the Ibadan commander-in-chief to the Arakanga war 
(to be related afterwards) ; on their leturn he went to Ilorin and 
returned again to Ibadan. Fortune was altogether against 
him He outlived his fame and glory, suffered from penury 
and want and was reduced to a nonentity. 

After Lakanle's death, having no one to befriend him at Ibadan 
again, he went once more to Ijaye. Kurumi was then at the zenith 
of his glory, with the old animosity against Dado still rankhng 
in his breast. He sent for him one day and as Dado lay prostrate 
before him Kurumi ordered him to be decapitated ! 

Thus the same measure was meted to him, as he once meted 
to his hosts of Tobalogbo. 

The Occupation of Abento, — Kuriimi of Ijaye was an arbitrary 
and domineering chief, and moreover tribal jealousies and clanship 
were rife among the chiefs who now occupy Ijaye as they were 
from different provinces and townships brought together here 
by one common calamity. Kurumi and the Ikoyi chiefs with 
him were from the MetropoHtan province. 

The notable war-chiefs from Akes^ were : — Ay6, Adekambi, 
Ajadi, Sukotg, Bankgle, Lahkn, Aruno-agba-ni-igbe and Oluwol^. 
These chiefs from the Ep6 districts could not endure the hauteur 
of Kurumi who was backed up by the Ikoyi chiefs. They hold 
themselves superior to the Akes^ chiefs. Ikoyi was indeed the 
premier provincial city next to the Metropolis, and the Onikoyi 
the AlAfin's viceregent, but these chiets seem to have forgotten 
that they were no longer worthy of the honour they now claimed 
since they have become disloyal to the Crown. 

However, in order to avoid a civil war from constant 
friction the above-mentioned Akes| chiefs with their men left 
Ijaye in a body and retired to Abem6, a town 12 miles distant 
(midway between Ijaye and the present Oyg) under the leadership 
of chief Ay6. We now have two rival towns, Ijaye occupied 
by the Ikoyi chiefs, and Abemo by the Akes^ chiefs, 

§ 3. How Ibadan Finally Became a Yoruba Town 

The Fall of Maye 

The marauders who settled at Ibadan after the fall of Ooriin 
and all the Gbagura towns (as we have mentioned above) com- 
prised the Ife, Ijebu, Qyo, and Egba chiefs with their men. Chief 
Maye an Ife was the acknowledged head of them all. He was a 



THE REVOLUTION IN THE EPO DISTRICTS 239 

proud, haughty, and irritable man, overbearing to all ; Lakanl§ 
the Oyo leader (as above mentioned) was the only man who could 
speak when May§ was in a rage. The Ifes generally regarded the 
Oyos of the settlement as slaves because they were homeless 
refugees ; they treated them httle better than they would dogs. 
Maye handled them with an iron hand, and denied them every 
security either of their goods or of their lives ; they were oppressed 
and beaten with impunity. 

The Oyos, groaning under this yoke of bondage sought every 
opportunity for lifting up their heads, but the very name of 
Maye inspired such a dread in all, that no plan could be acted 
upon. The bards sang of him as the greatest general of the day, 
a man who commanded an amount of dread and respect, un- 
surpassed by any, etc. But, like Napoleon after Moscow, " From 
the highest to the lowest, there is but one ^tep ;" so it was with 
Maye. His fall was sudden and cornplete. 

Two neighbours were quarrelling over a piece of ground used in 
common as a dunghill, one was an Own man, Amejiogbe by name, 
one of May§'s soldiers, the other an Oyo man ; both of them private 
soldiers. But as Oyos were treated like dogs, when Maye came out, 
he asked no questions about the case, but sided with the Owu 
man and simply drew his sword and cut off the headof the Oyoman. 
Instantly a hue and cry was raised, and an alarm given that Maye 
was putting all Oyos to death ! The Oyos became desperate, and 
all flew to arms. Maye was taken aback with surprise to see them 
making a dead set at him. They refused to hear his plea for self- 
defence, and would not allow him to re-enter his house ; he was 
beset on every side and driven out of the town. He escaped on 
foot by the way of the present Abeokuta gate and crossed the river 
Onk followed by some of the If e chiefs e.g. Aponju-olosun, Aregbe 
Deriokun, etc. 

After this, the Oyo chiefs began to feel ill at ease, and were the 
first to offer him terms of reconciliation. They knew his fame 
and valour and were trembling for the possible consequences. 
In the afternoon an embassy was sent to him with a humble 
apology and petition saying " Our Father should return home, our 
Father should not spend the night in the bush." He answered 
the messengers roughly and swore by the gods that he would surely 
destroy the town and that before long. 

The next day higher grades of ambassadors were sent to sue 
for peace, and with them large baskets of provisions for himself 
and his followers because "Father must be hungry since yesterday." 
These were not even allowed to approach his camp, and some of 
the Oyos who accompanied him as personal friends sent privately 



240 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

to apprise their country-men that it was of no use their waiting 
for an answer, the great chief would neither hsten to them nor even 
grant them an interview and it was in vain to hope that he would 
agree to return to Ibadan. 

The ambassadors had to return home to report their ill success 
but they left behind all the provisions they took with them in 
hopes that his followers would take them away after they had gone. 

The chiefs were much disappointed at this turn of affairs and 
blamed themselves for their rashness and instructed the ambas- 
sadors not to wait for further orders but that by early dawn they 
should proceed once more and offer their humble submission and say 
that they would agree to any fine he would be pleased to impose 
upon them as a condition of his returning home. 

In the meantime a meeting was convened to consider what 
further steps should be taken ; they decided to levy a tax upon all 
the people in order to raise money for the fine. But the messengers 
soon returned with a distressing report : — " The master's camp, 
has been broken up, the food they carried the previous day was 
left untouched, for hawks, crows, and vultures to feed upon, nor 
could anyone tell his route or destination ! " 

It was surmised that he probably went to join the Egbas at 
Abeokuta to raise an army to fight them : but a few days after, a 
farmer reported that he saw a broad path leading to Idomapa 
in the south. Maye then was the guest of Oluwol^ of Idomapa, 
but the people of Erumu invited him to Erumu, offering him their 
support and friendship because his calamity was caused by his 
espousing the cause of an Owu man. We have seen above, that 
Erumu was the chief vassal state of Owu and that to this place the 
Olowu and his people escaped when the city of Owu was taken. 

They were determined to avenge Maye's wrongs, and with such 
a distinguished commander on their side, they hoped to be able to 
annihilate these Oyo marauders, the principal agents in the 
destruction of their capital city. 

Before they were prepared to lay siege to Ibadan, the Erumu 
people and their guests began at once to make predatory incursions 
into the Ibadan farms, kidnapping also the caravans with corn 
and other foodstuffs from Ikir^ so as to cut off theii food supplies 
and distress them by starvation before reducing them by war at 
the ensuing dry season. 

This state of things continued nearly a whole year and during 
that time vast preparations were made to crush Ibadan by an 
overwhelming force. An alliance was formed with the Ife towns 
of Ikir^, Apomu, Ipetumodu and other towns in their neighbour- 
hood, and a large army was raised against Ibadan. The Egbas 



THE REVOLUTION IN THE EPO DISTRICTS 24T 

also were invited as allies, as all have their grievances to avenge 
on the new occupants of Ibadan. Two famous commanders 
Degesin and Ogini led the Egba contingents ; they marched through 
the Ibadan farms in the south to join the main army at Idomapa. 
The Gbanamu War. The Ibadan chiefs met this overwhelming 
force with courage and determination bat the odds were against 
them ; at every battle in spite of all they could do, they lost 
ground and the assailants advanced to within a mile or a mile and 
a half of the town. The Ibadans in their extremity were obhged 
to ask help from Kurumi of Ijaye who readily responded to their 
call. They were all one people whom a common calamity compelled 
to these parts, and they had to make a new home and defend it. 
Kurumi arrived at Ibadan on a Friday, but as Fridays were con- 
sidered inauspicious days the Ibadan chiefs suggested that the 
fight should be postponed till the next day. Kurumi repHed, 
"It is true Fridays are inauspicious, but it is only so to aggressors, 
not to defenders of hearth and home." The last decisive battle 
then was fought on that day. It was a bloody day. Equal 
courage and valour were displayed on both sides, but in the end, 
though outnumbered by far, the superior military skill of Kurumi 
and the Ibadans won the day. For the Ibadans it was a life and 
death struggle, and because it was mostly a hand to hand fight in 
which swordsmen proved themselves a match for those with fire- 
arms the battle was named " Gba'namu " (grasping fire). Rushing 
upon their assailants sword in hand and grasping the barrel of the 
gun, the Ibadans averted the fatal discharge of the weapon while 
using their swords and cutlasses with effect. Thus the Ife, Owu, and 
Egba alUes were completely routed. Several of their leaders were 
made prisoners and put to death. Maye the great commander was 
taken prisoner by a common soldier, and as he was being led to the 
town all the war-chiefs refused to see his face. 

It is a common belief amongst warriors in this country that any 
war-chief, who ordered a brother war-chief, his equal in arms, to 
execution, will surely meet with the same fate at no distant date. 
Therefore, although the whole of the chiefs desired his execution 
yet no one was bold enough to show his face and order it, and take 
upon himself the responsibility for what all desired. Both the 
captor and the captive fully understood the import of the phrase 
" Let him not see my face." It meant his death warrant. Maye 
therefore cried out : " E m.a da a se, E fi oju mi kan alagbk ! E 
ma da a se, E fi oju mi kan Lakanle. (Do not take the responsi- 
biUty, bring me before a chief ; do not take the responsibiUty, 
bring me before Lakanle) . But all in vain, his fate had been sealed 
by the chiefs declining to see him, and so the great Maye was 



242 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

beheaded by a common soldier. Degesin and Ogini the Egba 
commanders also shared his fate. 

Chief Kurumi claimed the honour of the victory and hence his 
bards sang to his praise "Opa Maye, o pa Ogini, O pa Degesin, 
O fi oko ti Ife laiyk " (he slew Maj^e, he slew Ogini and Degesin 
and thrust his spear into the bi easts of the Ifes). 

By this victory the remnant of the Oyo refugees was saved. 

The Erumu War 

The victors followed up their victory and encamped against 
Erumu. Reinforcements came for them from Iwo, Ede, Apomu 
and other places ; the Oyo refugees in those parts joining their 
brethren at the siege of Erumu so that the doomed town was 
hemmed in on every side : indeed they had to fight from within 
their walls. As the besiegers could neither force the gates nor 
scale or beat down the walls, they were content to reduce the 
town by famine. The most disgusting creatures were used for 
food, and even greedily devoured in order to sustain life ! It 
passed into a proverb " When the price of a frog came to 120 
cowries then Erumu was taken." 

The siege of Erumu recalled that of Oke Suna in the fight 
between Solagberu and Abudusalami. 

The following anecdotes illustrative of the horrors of the siege 
of Erumu were told by eye-witnesses : — 

Corn planted within the walls of the town wanted but a few 
weeks for ripening when the famished inhabitants could no longer 
wait for a full corn, everyone helping himself not only to the 
immature corn but also the corn-stalks. It was so much relished 
that one of them was heard to say that he did not know before 
that corn stalks were so delicious and that henceforth he would 
ever be using it as an article of food. 

Another reported the case of a good-looking and well-to-do 
young woman, a snuff seller, at Erumu. Before the war broke 
out, her beauty and style always attracted young men to her side 
in the shed where she was grinding and retailing snuff. Her stall 
was so clean and so well-poUshed that they required no mats to sit 
upon, they would just squat on the ground about her. This 
well-to-do woman was so famished that she died of starvation 
at her stall in the open thoroughfare, and of all her admirers not 
one was found to do her the honour of a burial ! 

Again, another eye-witness among the besiegers related that 
whilst bathing in a stream which flowed through the town to the 
camp, he often saw myriads of maggots which he could not account 
for as if the water bred them, but when Erumu was taken he saw 



THE REVOLUTION IN THE EPO DISTRICTS 243 

hundreds of putrefying bodies in the stream within the town and 
this accounted for the maggots he saw in such abundance lower 
down as the stream flowed by the camp. 

On the town being taken the Oluroko (or king) of Erumu and 
the king of Idomapa were caught and slain. Also the Olowu 
was now caught who (cLs was related above) escaped thither when 
the city of Owu was destroyed. Now, he was a provincial King 
of great importance, a real crowned head, and his case caused the 
victors some embarrassment. No pure Yoruba would venture 
to lay hands on a king even if worthy of death ; in such an event 
the king would simply be told that he was rejected and, noblesse 
oblige, he would commit suicide by poison. 

The Olowu, although now a prisoner of war, was regarded 
with so much reverence that none of the chiefs would dare order 
his execution, and yet they could not keep him nor would they 
let him go. His death was compassed in a diplomatic manner. 

The conquerors pretended to be sending him to the Ow6ni 
ol Ife, who alone may be regarded as his peer in this part of the 
country, and he was to be accompanied by one of his own slaves 
as a personal attendant and by some messengers to the Owgni 
as his escort. But the slave, who was supplied with a loaded gun 
as his master's bodyguard, had been privately instructed that at 
a given signal from the escort he was to shoot his master dead, 
and that he would be granted his freedom and loaded with riches 
as well. Thus they proceeded on their way until they came to 
the bank of the river Osun when the signal was given and the slave 
shot his master dead on the spot ! These "messengers" now set 
up a hue and cry of horror and surprise: " WTiat ! You slave ! How 
dare you kill your royal master ? Death is even too good for you." 
And in order to exonerate themselves of all complicity in the 
matter, they set upon the poor slave attacking him on all sides 
and clubbed him to death saying " The murder of the king must 
be avenged." They then dammed up the river in its course and 
dug the king's grave deep in the bed of it, and there they buried the 
corpse whilst uttering this disclaimer : — 

" O King, we have no hands in your cruel murder. The onus 
of it rests with your slave and we have avenged you by putting 
him to death, and he is to be your attendant in the other world." 

They then allowed the river to flow on in its channel over the 
grave. Burying the king in the bed of the river was regai ded as an 
expiation made for his murder, because they were conscious of guilt 
although they attributed the act to the slave. With such reverence 
and sanctity was the person of a king regarded. The divine 
right of kings is an article of belief among the Yorubas. 



244 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Such was the end of the last king of the famous city of Owu, 
The title is continued by a representative of the family at Abeokuta. 

§ 4. The Settlement of Ibadan 

After the fall of Erumu the war chiefs returned to Ibadan and 
the rest of the people who joined the war as volunteers returned 
to their respective homes. It was not till this time that Ibadan 
was peopled by Oyos chiefly. Everyone of these war-chiefs 
entered the allied army of Ife and Ijebu at Idi Ogugun as a private 
volunteer, but they soon showed their capabilities in the various 
wars. Oppressed and enslaved by the Ifes, scorned by the Ijebus, 
in pure self-defence they banded themselves together under a 
leader for mutual protection and notwithstanding the great dis- 
advantage under which they were placed, they vindicated their 
superiority and at last obtained the ascendancy in the town. 

Under such circumstances did the Oyos become masters of 
Ibadan. Hence the allegation that it was they who expelled the 
Egbas from their original home and took possession of the same is 
wholly inaccurate, and the bad feeling which this impression has 
created and perpetuated between the two peoples unto this day 
is hereby shown to be groundless. 

Ibadan then consisted of the central market and about half, 
a mile of houses around. The town wall was where the principal 
mosque now stands. 

Hitherto Ibadan has been occupied as a miUtary headquarter 
for marauding and other expeditions, but after this war, at a public 
meeting held to consider their future course, it was resolved that 
as they now intend to make this place their home they should 
arrange for a settled government and take titles. Oluyedun came 
first. He was the son of the late Afonja of Ilorin, and as such, 
the scion of a noble house. He was honoured and respected by all. 
He might have been the Bale, but he preferred to adopt his father's 
title of Kakanfo and it was conceded him, not for his valour, but 
for his age and dignity, being a survivor of the men of the preceding 
generation. 

Next came Lakanle " the bravest of the brave." He might 
have taken the title of Balogun or commander-in-chief, as he had 
hitherto been their principal leader in M'ar, but Kakanfo being 
a miUtary title, that of Balogun would be superfluous. He then 
became the Otun Kakanfo and Oluyole the Osi Kakanfo. 

The others were : Adelakun the Ekerin (fourth), Olumaiye the 
Ekarun (fifth) Abitiko Ekefa (sixth) Keiiihe Are Ah ese. To Osun 
was the honour given to confer these titles, and he in turn was 
created the Sarumi (chief of the cavalry). Only a single Ife 



THE REVOLUTION IN THE EPO DISTRICTS 245 

chief remained at Ibadan and that was Labosinde, and even he 
(as was mentioned above) had Oyg blood in his veins through 
his mother. He was very gentle, good-natured and fatherly to 
all. Even during the days of Maye the Oyo chiefs had an 
affection and great respect for liim as a father. At the expulsion 
of Maye when the other Ife chiefs joined him, he took no sides and 
hence he was allowed to remain. After Maye's tall he did not 
aspire to the leadership of the people, preferring private life to 
the responsibilities of government. He was a man who loved 
peace; he would never carry arms nor allow any to be carried before 
him even in those turbulent days, except in the battlefield. A 
bundle of whips was all usually carried before him, as used to be 
done before the Roman Tribunes of old, and with this token of 
authority he was able several times to disband men in arms 
and put an end to civil fights. The combatants as soon as 
they saw the bundle of whips coming would cease firing, 
saying to one another '!Babambo " " baba mb^" (father is 
coming, father is coming). His title now is Baba I sale i.e. chief 
adviser, lit father underneath (for counsel). 

It will be noticed that (except this last) all the principal titles 
were military titles. Ibadan has kept that up unto this day. 

Although they seemed to be now settled, yet they really lived 
by plunder and rapine. A single stalk of corn could scarcely 
be seen in an Ibadan farm in the days of Maye, and although 
Lakanle encouraged husbandry, yet the people were so much 
given to slave hunting that they could not grow corn enough 
for home consumption. The women of those days were as hardy 
as the men, and often went in a body — as caravans — to Ikird and 
Apomu for corn and other foodstuffs although the road was unsafe 
from kidnappers. They supplied the town with food whilst the 
men were engaged in slave himting. One company returning 
would meet another just going out, and often, an unsuccessful 
individual returning would go back with the outgoing company to 
try another chance without first reaching home. Ill-luck of one 
did not prevent another company venturing out. 

At home violence, oppression, robbery, man-stealing were 
the order of the day. A special gag was invented for the mouth 
of human beings to prevent any one stolen from crying out and 
being discovered by his friends. No one dared go out at dusk for the 
men-stealers were out already prowling about for their prey. 
Thus even the great Maye was once stolen on going out 
one night. He offered no resistance but went quietly with 
the man-stealer, who, on reaching home, called for a light to 
inspect his victim. Finding to his dismay that it was the great 



246 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

chief Maye himself, he nearly died of fright. Quaking and trem- 
bling he prostrated at his feet and begged for his life. So bad were 
those days at Ibadan and so callous had the people become that 
if a woman or a child was heard to cry out "Egbkmi, won mu mi 
o " (O help me, I am taken) the usual answer from indoors was 
" Maha ba a lo " (you can go along with him). The moral and 
social atmosphere of such a place as has been described could 
easily be imagined. Yet they were destined by God to play a most 
important part in the history of the Yorubas, to break the Fulani 
yoke and save the rest of the country from foreign domination ; 
in short to be a protector as well as a scourge in the land as we 
shall see hereafter. 

A nation born under such strenuous circumstances cannot but 
leave the impress of its hardihood and warlike spirit on succeeding 
generations, and so we find it at Ibadan to this day. It being 
the Divine prerogative to use whomsoever He will to effect His 
Divine purpose, God uses a certain nation or individual as the 
scourge of another nation and when His purposes are fulfilled He 
casts the scourge away. 



Chapter XII 

WARS FOR THE CONSOLIDATION AND BALANCE OF 
POWER BETWEEN IBADANS, EGBAS AND IJEBUS 

§ I. The Evacuation of Apomu 

We have seen above that the people ot Apomu being Ifes alHed 
themselves with Maye at the Gbanamu war, hence after the 
destruction of Erunmu, they were afraid that the next wave will 
overwhelm themselves. They theiefore sent an Oyo resident at 
Apomu, chief Agbeni by name, to encamp on the further side of 
the river Osun as an outpost, to watch and report upon the move- 
ments of the Ibadan army. 

But the Ibadans were not meditating any revenge on them; 
yet they were so ill at ease that they would not even wait for a 
report from their outpost, but one chiet after another, one master 
of a large compound after another deserted the town for Ipetumodu 
till only the Oyo lefugees remained at Apomu. 

At Ipetumodu they were however restless ; it seemed unreason- 
able that they should be famishing in another town when food 
could be obtained in their own farms ; therefore bands of pillagers 
and kidnappers issued daily from Ipetumodu to the Apomu 
farms destroying whatever they could not carry away. They also 
grew suspicious of Agbeni and sent a strong force to drive him 
away from the post where they had located him. But Agbeni 
was determined to maintain hisground, and he therefore despatched 
messengers to Ibadan to ask foi help. Only one desperate battle 
was fought between them, and the Ipetumodu men apprehending 
danger to themselves if they should wait to offer a second, as by 
that time reinforcements from Ibadan might have come, they 
retreated hastily home. 

The Ibadan army arrived too late and were disappointed to 
find the Apomu army gone ; they were loth to return home 
empty handed as they lived by plunder, they therefore began to 
loot the houses of the residents at Apomu. But these were their 
kinsmen, the Oyo refugees who were left behind by the townsmen, 
and nearly every one of them saw a friend or a relative whom he 
was in duty bound to protect from violence and robbery. These 
relatives went over to them and with them to Ibadan. Lakanl^ 
their leader took away all his, and his friend Agbeni came over also 

347 



24S THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

with him. Lanase went over with all his belongings to Osun the 
chief of the cavalry, and so Apomu became deserted. 

Agbeni was located in Lakanle's farm and the site has since 
been included in the overgrown town and known as Agbeni 's 
quarter to this day with a market in front ot his house. Chief 
Agbeni survived Lakanle and all his contemporaries and died 
at a good old age in May i860. 

Thus the Oyo refugees at Apomu were merged with the Ibadan 
settlers, and helped to swell the population of that important 
town. 

The Ipetumodu and Owiwi Wars about A.D. 1819 

The Apomu and Ipetumodu people having drawn attention 
to themselves, after a short respite the restless Ibadan chiefs 
declared war against Ipetumodu for allying with Apomu to 
kidnap the Ibadan caravans, who went to buy corn at Ikire, Iwo, 
He Igbo before the Erumu wars. Any pretext, however flimsy, 
would do when they were on mischief bent. 

It was just at this time that the Ijebus declared war against 
Abeokuta, and sought the alliance of the Ibadans. But they 
could not send them adequate help and advised the Ijebus rather 
to wait a while and let them get Ipetumodu off their hands. 
But the Ijebus would not wait, the Ibadans, therefore had to 
send them a small contingent under one Olugun^. The last 
decisive battle between the Ijebus and the Egbas was the cele- 
brated battle of Owiwi (a stream so called) where the Ijebus 
were sorely defeated; they lost all their principal fighting men and 
their power was completely crushed ! Olugunk with his small force 
escaped to Oniyefun a town on the right bank of the river Ogun 
where he remained for a long time, apparently seeking for an 
opportunity to return home. 

The Ibadans on the other hand were successful in their own 
expedition, Ipetumodu was taken and those who escaped fled to 
He Ife their chief town. 

§ 2. The Fall of Ilaro and Ijana 

During the siege at Owiwi the Ijebus sought and obtained 
the alhance of the Egbaluwe kings. Abinuwggbo the Onisare 
of Ijana sent his forces under the command of two of his war-chiefs 
Lapala and Ajise ; the only war-chief remaining at home was Akere 
the Areagoro. Lapala fell in battle and the command devolved 
upon Ajige alone. 

The Ilaros sent no re-inforcement because of a great disaffection 
among the people towards their Olu on account of his t5n-annies. 



WARS FOR THE CONSOLIDATION AND BALANCE OF POWER 249 

For a small matter which he might very well pass over, he would 
impose exorbitant fines, hence the affection ot his people was 
alienated from him and they were seeking an opportunity for 
his overthrow. His was a long reign, for this age of anarchy, and 
he did not retire to Oyo after three years, like his predecessors, 
to spend the rest of his days there as was customary. He 
became lame on both his feet, from poison by his people as was 
alleged. 

A private message was sent to the Egbas by the people inviting 
them to come and rid them of their tyrant, thinking they would 
come and simply remove the Olu and leave them in peace. The 
Egbas thereupon sent from Owiwi a detachment of 134 men 
under chief Angba who entered Ilaro without opposition, fired 
it, and began to kill and plunder indiscriminately ! As the Egbas 
cared more for booty than for captives the Olu (their principal 
objective) had an opportunity for making his escape to Ifoin, 
being borne on a litter by his slaves, while most of the Ilaro people 
escaped to Ijana. A bride was said to be so frightened by the hasty 
flight that she fell down dead at the gate of Ijana, and was buried 
behind the house of one Tagi the gate-keeper. 

They had scarcely had breathing time here when news came 
that the Egbas had gained a victory over the Ijebus at Owiwi 
and a rumour gained ground that they were coming to take 
vengeance on the 'Luwes of Ijana for allying themselves with the 
I j ebus. The consternation became general when Ajise the surviving 
war-chief arrived home. Neither the Ilaro refugees, nor the Ijana 
people themselves could stay in the town any longer, all sought 
safety in flight, and so Ij§,na was deserted. The flight took place 
on a dark and stormy night, and hundreds of people were groping 
in darkness trying to find the way to the town gate. Fortunately 
it was only a rumour or the Egbas might have met them within 
the town for at break of day the dawn found them at Dekun's 
quarters late of Ijana. 

Ak^re the Areagoro the only war-chief left at home instead of 
preparing for the defence of the town deluded the people by having 
three lighted lamps burning at the three entrances to his house 
making it appear as if he was still at home whereas he had already 
escaped. 

An incident of interest occurred during this flight. A child 
of about 3 years of age was found the next day at Afehinte weeping, 
its mother having disencumbered herself ot it in her flight. A 
kind-hearted man Ajayi by name took it up from pity and carried 
it in his arms wherever he went. They did not meet the Areagoro 
at Refvu-efu but joined him at Osoro ; there the heartless mother 



250 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

seeing the child with Ajayi, claimed it but Ajayi refused to give it 
up till it was duly ransomed. 

The refugees left Osoro for Ifoin where they met the 01 u and 
here they were resolved to wait and offer some resistance in case 
of an attack, as they were afraid to proceed to Porto Novo. The 
Olu, however, left Ifoin for Itoho his maternal town, where he 
would wish to die ; here Sodeke with an Egba army met him and 
he was taken with his family and slain. One Okete the executioner 
carried the head about at Refurefu for money ; at the gate of 
whomsoever the Olu's head was placed Okete received 3 heads of 
cowries before removing it. It was brought to Abeokuta and was 
buried at the threshold of the main entrance to Sodeke's house. 

vSodeke took Ayawo the Olu's daughter to wife, but she had 
no child by him. After Sodeke's death she was " inherited " 
by Somoye, who subsequently became the Basorun of Abeokuta. 
She went with him to the late Ijaye war and was taken captive 
when Ijaye fell on the 31st March, 1862. The captor gave her 
up to Chief Ogumgla. She was sent back to her husband in the 
year 1865 and was the means of reconciliation between Ibadan 
and Abeokuta, after the return of the latter from the Ikorodu 
war. The accounts of these wars will be given below in due course. 
After Somoye's death Ayawo refused the hand ot Chief Ogundipe 
and went back to her early home at Ilaro where she died. 

After the death of the Olu Asade at Itohg the Ilaro refugees 
at Idggo near Igbeji created another Olu, Ojo Kosiwon by name. 
For 19 years he reigned at Idogo and after his death there was an 
interregnum of many years. 

Ilaro was, however, again repeopled but under Egba suzerainty, 
who created one Tela the Olu in 1857. Ilaro continued under 
the Egbas till the year 1891 when they gave themselves over to 
the British Government on account of the incessant raids and 
molestations of the Dahomians from which their Suzerain failed 
to protect them. They now form a Protectorate in the " Western 
Waters " of Lagos. 

§ 3. The Oniyefun War 

After the return of the Ibadans from the Ipetumodu war, 
hearing of the disaster at Owiwi, and that their contingent under 
Oluguna had escaped to Oniyefun and was there hemmed in by 
the Egbas, some of the war-chiefs headed by Osun the chief of the 
cavalry, and Elepo also a great warrior, decided to go to their 
rescue. But Oluguna was met rather on the offensive, waging 
a desultory warfare in Egba territory. Being now re-inforced 
from home he commenced regular operations against the small and 



WARS FOR THE CONSOLIDATION AND BALANCE OF POWER 251 

weaker Egba towns such as Imosai, Iboro, and Jiga. Jakg was 
deserted and these marauders were infesting the Isaga farms 
and wou)d have taken Isaga had not the Egbas sent a strong 
force to protect the place. 

After a short time, however, Elepo left them and returned 
to Ibadan and with him nearly all the other war-chiefs, as he was 
a man of great power and influence. 

The army at Oniyefun being now considerably reduced in 
number, the Egbas attacked it in full force ; several battles 
were fought and the Egbas gained an advantage at every engage- 
ment. They succeeded in cutting off all supplies and in laying a 
close siege against Oniyefun. All the Ibadan common soldiers 
under colour of going foraging escaped from the doomed town 
one by one never to return, but the war-chiefs themselves, with 
their immediate followers and bodyguards, could not leave without 
attracting attention or creating a panic and a rush, with an 
immediate destruction of the town. Osun fell in an engagement ; 
being shot through the head he tumbled off his horse. Sogunro was 
wounded and Dado — late of Ijaye — who was also there, prevented 
Sogunro being taken to Jako as an invalid, lest they should lose 
the services of his fighting men. Dado remained the only war- 
chief in command, but he was no longer the commander he once 
was before his fall. He held out for only five days longer, and then 
left Oniyefun secretly with the other war-chiefs and escaped to 
Ibadan, leaving Oniyefun at the mercy of the invaders. 

The Ibadan war-chiefs who fell at Oniyefun besides Osun were : 
Sogunro, Keji, Ilupakin, lyanburu, Otopo, and Esan. 

§ 4. The Arakanga or Jabara War 

The Ibadan war-chiefs were indignant at the fall of their 
comrades at Oniyefun, especially Osun who was held in high 
esteem, and were bent on avenging his death. This was really 
the cause of the Arakanga war, and not in order to show that 
they were more powerful than the Ijebus as some have erroneously 
averred. 

In this expedition they secured theallianceof Kurumiof Ijaye and 
Ayo of Abemo, whose contingent met the Ibadan army at Olokemeji. 

This expedition was one of the most stupid ever undei taken 
by the Ibadans. Divided counsels prevailed and therefore no 
adequate preparation was made, one half of the so-called kegs of 
gunpowder carried before the chiefs contained nothing but 
yam flour, thereby deceiving the people who followed them. Some 
asserted that the Egbas were more afraid of poisoned arrows than 
of ballets and therefore never supplied themselves with fire-arms. 



252 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Others went just mechanically because they were obliged to go, but 
without any preparation. We may here notice that this is how 
the junior chiefs behave when the war is unpopular, for they dare 
not remain behind when the head-chiefs march out. 

They marched out through the Ido gate and encamped by the 
Ogun river at Olokemeji for a long time till their stores were 
exhausted, and before the enemy was in sight ! Meantime their 
wives used the empty kegs as water pots. 

After a long time they pushed forward towards Abeokuta, and the 
Egbas met them a great way off. Four hard battles were fought 
and the Egbas retreated to Arakanga, a river behind their town 
wall. Here the Ibadans found themselves with their powder 
exhausted and no time to procure more from Porto Novo or 
Ado ; the arrows some depended upon were found to be of little 
use. Adekambi the war-chief sent from Abemo was the first 
to return home being disgusted at the conduct of the war. With 
him went a good many war-chiefs, and recruits which they met 
on their way back also returned home when they heard the ill 
report of the campaign. 

Five days after Adekambi had left the Egbas appeared in 
full force, determined on death or victory. At a given signal by 
the sound of their god Or6 to which they responded with a shout, 
they made a sudden dash and attacked the enemy vigorously, 
cutlass in hand. 

With their powder exhausted some of the Ibadans resorted 
to the gourd bark planted all over the battlefield, and with this 
they pelted their assailants. From this ciicumstance the 
campaign was termed the " Jabara war." At the height of the 
battle, Bada Akeyan one of the chief swordsmen fell ; and when 
another chief named Adelakun was mortally wounded, the Ibadans 
gave way and the rout was general and complete. 

This desperate method of attack — cutlass in hand — is the peculiar 
method of the Owus, the bravest element in the new settlement, 
and the honour of the victory was theirs. 

The Egbas however had not the courage to pursue their victory 
to any extent seeing amongst the war-chiefs many of those who had 
but recently driven them to Abeokuta : "a lion at bay " may 
prove a dangerous customer to tackle. The Ibadans instead of 
escaping home by the direct route went by way of Ijaye, being 
suspicious of the Ijebus. 

§ 5. The Onidese and Oke Isero Wars 

After a short period of rest Kurfimi the chiei of Ijaye invited 
the Ibadans to an expedition against Onidese. He gave as a 



WARS FOR THE CONSOLIDATION AND BALANCE OF POWER 253 

reason for this war that they were troublesome to him, but as a 
matter of fact, it was from pure jealousy at the growing importance 
of the people of that place and that of their neighbours of He Ode 
famous for their poisoned arrows. 

Seeing the overwhelming force from Ibadan and Ijaye, Owoko 
the chief of Ode was so terrified that he deserted the town with his 
people and escaped to Onidese, but this place was besieged and 
taken. Sejo the chief of Onidese and Owoko of He Ode were 
both taken together. 

Oke I§ero. — The following dry season the Ibadans captured 
Oke Isero for no alleged cause of grievance but simply out of a 
desire for slave raiding. The people of this place were quiet 
agriculturists. Ibadan and other towns were fed with yam flour 
exported from this place. 

§ 6. The Iperu War 

After the defeat of the Ijebus by the Egbas at Owiwi there was 
a series of desultory warfare between them with little or no success. 
Neither of them could encamp or take a town from the other, 
neither would- yield though both were tired. Whereupon the Egbas 
had resort to a cowardly trick, at once disgraceful and perfidious. 
They proposed to the Ijebus of the Remo district who were their 
neighbours, terms of peace which these gladly accepted, being tired 
of the war, and a treaty was made between them. But while 
the Ijebus were rejoicing and congratulating one another in songs 
and dances : — 

" Omode Ijebu, E ku ewu 
Agba Ijebu, E ku ewu 
Ote yi jaja pari o ! " 

(Young folks of Ijebu, we congratulate you 
Old folks of Ijebu, we congratulate you. 
This long-drawn war is at an end at last). 

Suddenly, the Egbas who had lain in ambush sprang upon them 
and began to make captives of them. Makun and other towns 
were taken and destroyed and Iperu was besieged. The Ijebus 
beingharassedandgreatly straitened sent to Ibadan for help. All 
the war-chiefs were sent forward except Lakanle the Commander- 
in-chiet, who remained at home with the aged Oluyedun the 
Kakanfo, and the venerable Labgsinde the Baba Isale. 

The Egbas proved too strong for the allies, and all their efforts 
to raise the siege of Iperu were fruitless. The difficulty of pro- 
visioning a besieged town without stores at the best of times 
and with a large access of auxiliaries proved insurmountable. The 



254 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

allies lost several battles and the Egbas hemmed them in very 
closely. Iperu was nearly taken when the Ibadan allies sent 
home to their commander to come at once to their rescue as all 
hopes of deteating the Egbas were gone. 

Lakanle responded to the call of his people and took the field 
in person. On his arrival at Iperu he assumed no lofty airs nor 
did he allow one word of reproach to fall from his lips. On the 
contrary he praised the war-chiefs and harangued the men as 
follows : — " Fellow countrymen and companions in arms, I am 
not more surprised at your valour and prowess than at your 
chivalry in inviting me to share with you the honours of the field. 
For what can I do singly without your aid ? I know your love and 
esteem for me and that you only wish for me the honour and fruits 
of the victory ; I am come therefore to grant you your hearts' 
desire and lead you on to victory. Be assured also that I. 
reciprocate your feelings of love towards me, for since your 
absence from home I have entered every compound now and 
again to ask after the welfare of your families and I am this day 
able to assure you that they are in good health. 

I have gone the round of all the farms and when I saw any over- 
grown with weeds and learnt that the owner was at the seat of 
war, I ordered the farm to be immediately cleaned. I am now able 
to assure you also that your farms are in good order and your 
families in good health. Be of good cheer my brave men and by 
this time to-morrow let victory crown our efforts." 

The soldiers gave long and loud shouts of "Muso, Muso, Muso." 
They made the heavens reverberate with their shouts and were 
heard at a very great distance. 

When the Egbas heard that Lakanle had reached the camp 
they extemporized a ditty including his name : — 

" Nigbati a ba pade t'awa ti Lakanle 
Igi t'o ba se oju re a wl o ! " 

(When we do meet, ourselves and Lakanle 

The trees that witness the sight shall tell the tale.) 

And so it was. It must here be admitted that since the Egbas 
have been driven to Abeokuta and have had almost constantly 
to engage in wars both offensive and defensive against the Oygs 
in one direction, Ijebus in another, and the Egbaluwe provinces, 
they have developed a wonderful aptitude for fighting, and capable 
generals have been thrown up amongst them. A most sanguinary 
battle was fought the next day, and so great was the courage which 
the presence of their commander-in-chief infused into the Ibadan 
soldiers, and with such skill were they led that the tide of victory 



WARS FOR THE CONSOLIDATION AND BALANCE OF POWER 255 

turned in their favour that day. The Egbas were utterly defeated 
but their skilful commanders encouraged them to keep up the fire 
until sunset so as to be able to retreat in good order. Moreover 
they also tried to prevent a panic among their soldiers by not 
allowing the bodies of the wounded and the slain to be taken to 
the camp or to lie scattered about in the battlefield, and so they 
made a pile of the corpses so as to have the field cleared up. But in 
spite of it all, the Egbas could not hold on till the evening ; they 
were completely routed and Lakanl^'s victory was decisive. 

In the pursuit, Lakanl^'s attention was drawn to the pile of 
corpses, and for the first time his lion-like heart was m.elted by 
the dreadful carnage, and the following exclamation escaped 
from his lips "Are these the bodies of mortals once born of women? " 
" Of course they are " retorted a private soldier " and whose 
work it was but yours? Was there any such butchery seen before 
you came into the camp ? " The great general turned away quietly 
without uttering a word more. 

Thus Iperu was saved to the great disappointment of the Egbas 
and this they afterwards expressed in their street songs : — 
Ki a ko Iperu ki a ko Ode 
Ni Barapa ru imu re de 
(Iperu and Ode we had all but taken, 
When officious Barapas came poking their noses.) 

§ 7. The Fall of Ota 

The Egbas at this time were equally as restless as the Ibadans 
waging a series of wars with the surrounding tribes, A serious 
complication arose between them and the Otas about this time 
which resulted in the latter place being besieged by them. 

Ota is the name given to a small town and clan of the Awori 
tribes situated about 24 miles north of Lagos. They are usually 
reckoned amonst the Egbaluwes. 

Prince Kosoko of Lagos was an ally of the Otas and it was he 
who asked the help of the Ibadans in defence of Ota. 

A force was sent from Ibadan under the command of Oliiygle 
the Osi. He made Ipara his headquarters and sent two war-chiefs 
Elepo his own lieutenant and Inakoju the Seriki with some minor 
war-chiefs to the scene of conflict ; these encamped at Agerige, 
Lagosward, from which place they marched to Ota when there 
was to be a fight. 

The Egbas fought bravely but the besieged defended their town 
most heroically assisted by their ally. The Egbas in order to 
harass the allies began kidnapping the Ibadan caravans, who were 
supplying them with provisions from home, as there was none to 



256 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

be got locally, so that the station at Ipara coiild not supply that 
at Ageiige. Lakanle hearing this at home left the town and 
stationed himself at Ikija, from which place he sent escorts with the 
weekly caravans to Ipara ; by this means Agerige was also relieved 
and communication established with Ibadan. 

The Otas are known to be an obstinate people, and in the defence 
of their homes every man amongst them was a hero ! The Egbas 
had nearly given up the campaign in despair ; a good many of the 
war-chiefs had returned home and others became rather listless, 
but for the shame of being baulked by such a small clan which 
kept them in the field, the whole undertaking would have collapsed. 
But the situation was improved by the diplomacy of one of the 
Egba chiefs ; he advised that unbounded licence be granted to 
the soldier}' in the field to gratify their passions in any manner 
they liked with impunity, himself setting the example : the amount 
of bravery displayed under fire, was to be the measure of indulgence 
in the camp. The device proved successful, the camp was 
refilled with characters of all sorts, and the campaign was prosecuted 
with renewed vigour. The small town was hemmed in on all sides 
and famine effected what the sword failed to accomplish. 

When their Ibadan allies saw that the Otas were not likely 
to hold out much longer, and that it was with difficulty they could 
obtain supplies from home, they left Agerige secretlj' and hastened 
homewards. 

Ota was at length taken by the Egbas and they wreaked their 
vengeance on the inhabitants so mercilessly, especially on the men 
for their obstinate resistance, that the clan was nearly extinguished 
altogether. From that time to this Ota has been subjected to 
the Egbas. 

The Ibadan contingent under Elepo and Inakoju met Oluyole 
at Ipara. Whilst here, a most pernicious plot was hatched with 
consequences so far-reaching and so disastrous resulting in repeated 
civil fights at home, until nearly the whole of the important war- 
chiefs perished one after another. Oluyole aspiring to the position 
of commander-in-chief planned a scheme by which Lakanlfe 
and Bankole his lieutenant should be wiped out, but the plot was 
discovered and it aroused great indignation at Ibadan. There 
was a determination that he should not be allowed to re-enter 
the town and steps were taken to prevent it. All the other chiefs 
returned one by one. 

It was due to his friend Elepo alone that Oluyole re-entered 
Ibadan. He kept him informed of all that was taking place at 
home. Oluyole remained out but kept advancing by small 
stages, with the connivance of Elepo, till one night he entered by 



WARS FOR THE CONSOLIDATION AND BALANCE OF POWER 257 

the town gate from another direction. Once at home E16po 
prevailed on all the senior Chiefs to forbear with him and 
pardon him. 

Then Oluyole's men began firing a feu de joie but with guns 
charged with bullets, directing them towards Lakanle's house, 
and Lakanle's men returning the compHment did the same towards 
Oluyole's, the houses of the principal war-chiefs ranging round the 
central market. This continued for several days, the chiefs of 
both sides taking no part, but leaving the skirmishing to their boys. 
The tension of affairs affected the whole town, all business was at a 
standstill, till Labosinde the Baba-Isale came forward with some 
elderly chiefs and put a stop to these proceedings. 

This pacification however lasted but a short time, for soon 
afterwards there arose a complication between Oluwaiye, one 
of Lakanle's lieutenants and one of Oluyole's men. This developed 
into something approaching a civil fight, the town was soon in an 
uproar. Then Bankole unarmed approached Oluyole's men, and 
with soothing words was urging them to desist, and not to disturb 
the recently made peace, when one of Oluyole's men levelled 
his gun at him for interfering and shot him down dead ! This 
was a signal for a civil fight in the heat of which Oluwaiye fell. 
Thus Lakanle was deprived of both his lieutenants, and Oluyole's 
party gained the upper hand ; Lakanle had to take refuge with his 
old friend Agbeni at his quarters. 

Oluyole now obtained the object of his ambition, and would not 
listen to any adjustment of affairs except the death or expulsion of 
Lakanle. The brave man hearing this put an end to his own 
life by ripping his bowels open with a jack-knife, and passing the 
entrails around his own neck. In a few minutes he expired 
in the arms of one of his men. 

Thus Oluyole became supreme at Ibadan. 



Chapter XIII 

THE LAST OF KATUNGA THE GREAT METROPOLIS 
AND THE END OF A DYNASTY 

§ I. Final Efforts to Throw off the Fulani Yoke 

The Metropolis had long been left to herself whilst great and 
stirring events had been taking place all over the country. The 
outcome of the rebellion of the chiefs and the revolution Was the 
foundation of modern Ibadan, Abeokuta, Modakeke, the occupation 
of Ijaye, Abemg, the destruction of the city of Owu, and the fall 
of many ancient towns in the plain, and above all the ascendancy 
of Ilgrin under the ravaging foreigners. 

That such important events as these should take place, one 
after another, altering the face of the country, and the King 
not be able to promote or retard the accomplishment of any — 
a King only in name, the direct descendant of absolute monarchs 
and deified heroes— could not but be a matter of pain and grief 
to the sovereign. Added to all this was a great calamity which 
befel him at home, one that distressed him sore and accelerated 
his death. A fire broke out in the palace and all efforts to arrest 
its ravages failed, and most of the accumulated treasures of his 
ancestors were consumed in the conflagration ! Great efforts were 
made to remove some to out-houses away from the direction of 
the flames, but unfortunately by a turn of the wind, those out- 
houses also caught fire and everything was lost ! 

Between the distress caused by the Ilorins now masters of the 
country, and the destructive fires the King died of a broken heart. 
Prince Oluewu was elected his successor with the general consent 
of the nobles and the King-makers. 

Oluewu was said to be a prince comely in person, but all too 
conscious of his own dignity and importance ; haughty and irritable 
in temperament. His one aim and determination was to recover 
his dominions from the Fulanis first, and then subdue all his 
refractory chiefs. 

Soon after Oluewu 's accession, Shitta the King of Ilgrin, required 
him to come to Ilgrin in person to pay homage to him as his vassal. 
But Oluewu was unwilling to go ; however, his great chiefs, and 
especially Prince Atiba of AggOja brought pressure and entreaties 

258 



THE LAST OF KATUNGA THE GREAT METROPOLIS 259 

to bear upon him, and he was prevailed upon to accede to the 
wishes of the conqueror in order to save the capital and the remnant 
of the towns that still paid their allegiance to Oyo. 

Shitta received him with every mark of honour and distinction; 
but all the same, the shame and disgrace of it all, with unutterable 
resentment rankled in the breast of King Oluewu. The 
Gbedu drum was beaten before him as he went, and also on his 
returning. Shitta's attention was drawn to that particular drum 
and he asked some questions about it. When he was told it was 
a royal drum beaten before the ICing alone, he ordered it to be 
taken away, saying " There cannot be two Kings in my dominion 
but one only, and that is myself." 

Oluewu felt his humiliation keenly and was resolved to resent 
it at all cost or die in the attempt. But that was not all ; the Emir 
of Ilorin sent Jimba one of his head slaves after Oluewu to ransack 
the palace at Oyo and to bring away anything of value he could 
lay his hands upon so that Oyo may not be said to have anything 
which Ilorin has not. This Jimba did, and among other things 
removed were the 100 brass posts in the long corridor of the palace 
erected by King Aganju. 

Again, a short time after, Shitta required the Alafin of Oyo 
to come over to Ilorin to perform the ceremony known as " tapping 
the Koran," in order to become a true Moslem, but the AlAfin 
was resolved never to go to Ilorin a second time come what may. 
The chiefs urged him to do so in vain. However, Akioso the 
Basorun and Ailumg the Asipa went, against the express order of 
the King forbidding them to go ; and on account of this he was 
resolved to punish them, although they were too powerful for 
him to order their execution at once. 

The AlAfin's refusal to go to Ilorin being considered an offence 
to Shitta, the latter sent an army with Lanloke the chief of Ogodo, 
which ravaged the suburbs of Oyo and the city itself was 
threatened. At this crisis the AlAfin invited the aid of the 
Baribas, to assist him in subduing his enemies " within and 
without." Those within were the Basorun and the Asipa who 
went to Ilorin against his commands. 

On a fatal morning the Basorun and the Asipa went with the 
other noblemen to a council at the palace gate, for consultation 
about the impending Ilorin war, and the defence of the city. 
Whilst there, they heard that the Baribas were entering the city 
by the Modahade gate. Thinking that they were invited by the 
King merely to help to defend the city, the A§ipa rode to meet 
them and was according them a hearty welcome in the usual 
manner of men on horseback shaking the fist, when all of a sudden 



260 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

a shower of darts came pouring down upon him, and the son of 
one Fagbayibi shot him dead on horseback! 

The Baribas then pursued after the Basgrun who fled to the 
palace begging the King to spare his life. " Ah," said the King, 
" why should you beg me now, are you not the master and I the 
subordinate ? Why crave your life from your servant ? " 

In the noise and confusion that ensued with the entrance of 
the Baribas, the Basorun managed to escape to his own house ; 
express messengers were thereupon sent to his relatives that 
he should be kept under strict surveillance whilst the King and his 
allies were engaged in the defence of the city, and that they would 
be held responsible for his escape. But a family council was held 
and in order to save him from a disgraceful death in public, his 
relatives put an end to his life by strangUng. 

The forces of nature came to the defence of Oyo on this occasion. 
There was a great storm, and whether it was due to the great 
number of gUttering Swords and spears brandished, or whatever 
may have been the cause, hghtning was attracted and so Izirge 
a number of men were struck in the Ilorin host that their army 
was discomfited, and the men fled away in terror. Oyo was a 
great city, which could not be rushed by the Ilorins nor could it be 
invested and reduced by along siege, for there was always the fear 
that a prolonged siege of their metropoUs by aliens might rouse the 
great chiefs of the country to its aid. Thus failing to take the 
city, Shitta's next tactics were the subversion of the remaining 
large Yoruba towns that still showed any allegiance to Qyo, and 
hence Gbodo was besieged. He also succeeded in securing the 
alliance of some powerful Yoruba chiefs among whom were the 
Onikoyi, Chief Elebuof Ago Oja, and Prince Atibaof the same place. 
This last named having resided at Ilorin for some time was well 
known to the Fulanis. 

The AlAfin again secured the help of the Baribas. Eleduwg 
the Bariba king promised to help him not only to conquer the 
Ilorins but also to subdue his rebel chiefs. Gbodo which was 
closely besieged by the Ilorins was well nigh taken when timely 
help arrived in the person of the Eleduwe and his Bariba hordes. 
Some of the Yoruba chiefs were serving in the Ilorin army at the 
time, notably those of Ago Oja mentioned above, but be it said to 
the praise of Prince Atiba that he was acting merely out of 
policy, for his soldiers, from private instructions previously 
received, were firing only gunpowdei. This was suspected when in 
spite of the vigorous attacks of Atiba, his fire never killed or 
wounded anyone ; the guns of his men were thereupon examined, 
and the truth had to be confessed. 



THE LAST OF KATUNGA THE GREAT METROPOLIS 261 

The Baribas were good archers, the siege of Gbodo was raised 
and the defeated Ilorins and their alUes were hotly pursued. 

It was about the month of June, when the rivers were swollen 
by rain, and thousands of Ilorin horse and foot were driven into 
the river Ogun and were drowned. Elebu the brother and 
successor of Oja the founder of Ago found here a watery grave. 
He would have escaped death but for the plot against his life. 
It is said that the late Oja was a dear friend to Prince Atiba and 
the friendship continued all through his life until he perished 
at the Kanla expedition ; but Elebu his brother begrudged that 
friendship : he always suspected the influence and good faith of 
the prince, regarding him as a potential usurper of his family 
rights ; and when he succeeded his brother as the Bale of Ago, 
there was always friction between them. Consequently on this 
occasion as Elebu plunged into the river during the flight and 
with great difficulty swam across he caught hold of a Gbingbin 
tree that stretched its branches far out into the river, but one 
Lohosa who had preceded him and got on to the tree, seeing 
Elebu in his exhausted condition, and in order to do good service 
to Prince Atiba, cut off that branch of the tree and Elebu was 
swept away and was drowned. 

Prince Atiba himself nearly lost his life there also, had not 
Yesufu his uncle, carried him across on his back and given him 
his horse on the other side to ride home. 

But the prince and many others owed their life really to Maje 
his balogun. The Baribas would have overtaken them at the banks 
of the river before they could cross had he not kept them at bay 
whilst horses and men were struggling across, and so he gave up 
his life to save theirs, for he fell there. 

The wreck of the Ilorin army gathered at Bala and Iwo from 
which places they returned home. 

But the Eleduwe was not satisfied with raising the seige of 
Gbodo, he was determined to free the country entirely of these 
foreigners, and hence he was resolved to conquer Ilorin. Oluewu 
the AlAfin, whose cause he was espousing was right glad and 
sent round to invite the co-operation of all his subjects includ- 
ing those who were alhes of the Ilorins, knowing that they 
were aUies only out of policy, but not wilhngly, and that they 
would be glad to be free from the foreign yoke. 

But matters were complicated by the fact that most of the Oyo 
chief towns in the eastern and western provinces had been subju- 
gated by the Ilorins and were vassals of that state. Hence at a 
council of war held by the two Kings it was decided that they 
should not march straight from Oyo to Ilorin, but make a detour 



262 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

by the western province, in order to secure the alliance and good 
faith of these vassal states, and thus to collect an overwhelming 
army against Ilgrin. Accordingly the Eleduwe sent Jankgrg 
one of his war-chiefs to garrison Ago Oja, whose chief was an Ilgrin 
ally, and Jegede another war-chief to garrison Otefan whilst he 
himself was following with his invincible army in their wake. 

The Ilgrins hearing of the threatened invasion were not idle 
either, but were making full preparations offensive and defensive. 

Jimba the head slave of the king of Ilgrin headed an expedition 
of horse and foot to the Otefan farms when they heard of the 
garrison there, and brought away several captives. Jimba's 
route in going was through the Esiele farms, but was so far from 
the town that his company was not seen. On his return he came 
through the town and halted at the gate to receive Fasgla the 
Bale, who came to pay him his respects. Jimba did not dismount 
as he was in a hurry to get away with his captives lest he be over- 
taken, for he was sure of a pursuit. On horseback he accepted 
the hospitality of a drink of cold water, and before hurrying away 
gave the following advice to Fasgla " You are between two fires 
and you would be wise to vacate this town at once. I am 
just returning as you see with captives from the Otefan farms. 
Although you were not aware of my passing through your farms 
yet had I been detected, I would have suspected you as a traitor, 
and would have punished you on my return although you may be 
innocent. And now as I return through your town the Otefan 
pursuers will track me to this place and you may likely suffer for 
it and we have no means of protecting you, hence I advise you 
speedily to vacate this place." 

The Esiele people after consultation together decided at 
once to follow his advice. Otefan being the nearest large town 
and wishing to cast in their lot mth the new conqueror, they 
decided to escape thither and accordingly despatched oneBankgle 
to apprise Idowu the Bale of Otefan of their intentions. At 
Bankole's instance they promised not to desert their home before 
his return as they treated him on a previous occasion ; but their 
cowardice got the better of them. On returning Bankgle met the 
fugitives by the way and this was the third and last time Esielg 
was deserted, and is to this day an uninhabited desert. 

It was in the month of March 1830, that the Eleduwe accom- 
pam'ed by Prince Atiba of Agg Oja and Jatq, Eleduwe's general, 
joined the garrison at Otefan the rendezvous of the Oyo army. 
Kurumi of Ijaye, the Aseyin of Iseyin, the Sabigana of Igana, 
the Okere of Saki and others of the western province met them 
there. Here King Oluewu and the Eleduwe pledged the confidence 



THE LAST OF KATUNGA THE GREAT METROPOLIS 263 

of all the Oyo war-chiefs save the Bale of Ogbomoso and the 
Onikoyi, both of whom were in secret alliance with the Ilorins, 
although they outwardly professed loyalty to their lawful 
sovereign. 

Meanwhile, the Emir of Ilorin alarmed by this great host sent 
to the Sultan of Sokoto his suzerain for help. The Sultan sent 
17 kings under Esugoyi of Rabbah to his aid, and they came 
with such an overwhelming force that those of the two kings were 
as a mere handful before them. The two kings were besieged at 
Otefan by the Ilorin and Niger hosts, several battles were fought, 
and they were nearly overwhelmed by numbers. At the last great 
battle, but for the courage, wisdom and experience of Eleduwe 
theBariba King, the fate of the whole expedition would have been 
decided on that day. He fought in the centre, the AlAfin and 
Oyo chiefs in the right and left wings. He sent aid to those 
fighting in both wings, so that thej, forced the enemy into the 
centre, and in one furious charge he bore down upon them and 
dispersed them. Esugoyi's army was routed with great slaughter 
and fled away in confusion. The victory however, was dearly 
bought, for Yenibini, King Eleduwe's first-born son fell in the 
battle. 

The Oyos pursued their victory too far till they met with a 
disaster. They dearly learnt the lesson that in the pursuit of a 
foe footmen are no match for horsemen. The Ilorins having 
recovered from the panic of their defeat, a body of horsemen 
suddenly wheeled round and charged upon their pursuers and 
speared about 400 of them, thereby forcing them to desist from 
the pursuit. They were then able to retreat in good order, and 
made good their escape. 

§ 2. Failure. The Eleduwe War 

About the month of June, 1830, the two Kings left Otefan for 
Adeyi, and thence proceeded to Ogbomoso. Here King Oluewu 
sent round to the whole of the Yoruba chiefs to join him in the last 
effort to throw off the Fulani yoke. There responded to his call 
Oluyole of Ibadan with several Egba war-chiefs, Kurumi of 
Ijaye, Ayo of Abem6, Timi of Ede and others. This mighty host 
remained here for about six months wasting time. They were 
holding councils almost every day as to how best they might 
attack Ilorin with success. But here also the future of the expedi- 
tion was foreshadowed and the doom of the allied Kings was 
sealed. There were two principal causes for this, viz., the rapacity 
of the Bariba soldiers, and the imprudence of the Kings. 

The excesses of the Baribas made the Yoruba chiefs and 



264 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

people fear lest they pass from one master to another and a 
worse. The Fulanis weie after all a superior race, but the Baribas, 
a race of bandits, as masters would be more intolerable. The 
country was literally being ravaged b^ them. They considered 
themselves licensed to all the goats in the country. Even when 
kept in the inner apartment of the houses, they would get at 
them and devour them. Sheep they did not care for, but goats, 
say they are traitors and must be devoured. For this reason the 
Yorubas termed them " Arun-eran " (cattle devourers) while the 
Ilorins termed them Ikoriko (wolves). 

Their excesses consisted not only in devouring cattle, but also 
in stripping and depriving helpless ones of their cloths ; at length 
they spared not even men though they might be armed. Organized 
bands would attack and deprive men of all their valuables. 

The Oyos could offer little or no resistance because the persons 
of the Baribas were held sacred, already being considered the 
deliverers of the country. 

The following instance will show how sacred their persons were 
regarded. One of them attacked an Oyo man, who was not 
wilHng to give way Hghtly and the Bariba was shot dead by him. 
The Oyo man ran away. So much noise and hubbub were raised 
about this, that both Kings rode in person to the spot to see the 
corpse. The converse to this might have happened every day 
without provoking any comment. But the eyewitnesses of the 
affray were so much in sympathy with the murderer that he was 
not betrayed, so disgusted was everybody with the excesses of the 
Baribas. All this might have been avoided if instead of wasting 
time at Ogbomoso they had given the soldiers work to do by 
marching at once on Ilorin, half demoralized by two successive 
defeats. On the contrary they allowed them time to regain 
theii confidence and perfect their defences. Small blame indeed 
to the soldiers as each one had to provide for himself, how- 
ever prolonged the campaign. 

The two Kings were imprudent enough to betray their 
feelings. It leaked out that after the conquest of Ilorin all 
the refractory Yoruba chiefs who had usurped the King's prerog- 
ative would be murdered by the help of theBariba king ; and the 
kingdom would again be one under the Alafin. 

One or two instances might be given of how the Kings betrayed 
themselves. 

L. Timi Bamgbaiye of Ede on his arrival at the camp went 
straight to pay his homage to the King. Being a corpulent man 
the Eleduwe was heard to remark " See this corpulent fellow, 
one of those who have made themselves fat upon the King's 



THE LAST OF KATUNGA THE GREAT METROPOLIS 265 

diverted revenues. Never mind, he also will be dealt with after 
the war as he deserves." 

2. Above all the others the one who appeared the most offensive 
to the Bariba king was Prince Atiba of Ago Oja. He was all 
Fulani in his manners. He had resided at Ilorin for some time 
and adopted the Fulani custom of being lifted up and helped 
off his horse by his attendants, and one of his menials ready 
with his sandals so that he might not have to walk barefoot when 
his riding boots were off. 

The two Kings were one day sitting at a pubUc meeting, and 
Prince Atiba arrived late with an august pageantry to the disgust 
of the kings and chiefs present, who could not afford as much. 
He was preceded by his Junior war-chiefs mounted on strong 
ponies, with their attendant footmen ; then those mounted on 
larger horses came after, then himself followed on a specially 
powerful animal richly caparisoned, with a large retinue. He 
was lifted off his horse his sandals being ready for him to 
put on, contrary to the etiquette of the country to be shod before 
a king. This was disgusting to both Kings and to many of the 
Oyo chiefs present, who, notwithstanding the rebellion and 
revolution still going on, have yet full respect for royalty. 

Olurinde the chief of Sepeteri in the eastern province, could 
not bear to see this act of disrespect pass unreproved, so he 
went near and pulled off the sandals from Atiba's feet, and thus 
reprimanded him : " Know you not before whom you are ? How 
dare you be shod in the presence of our King ? " Atiba could 
not brook a reproof from a commoner and from wounded pride 
fiercely retorted; "And who are you ? And what is that to you ? 
The King is my father and, as a prince, I have privileges which 
the likes of you can never aspire to. I can even pass by him into 
the harem which none of you can dare do ; but who are you ? " 
The contention was so sharp that Kitoyi the Okere of Saki had 
to interpose begging Prince Atiba to have respect for the two 
Kings, to take off the sandals, and not to persist merely for the 
purpose of spiting the Sepeteri chief. 

The Kings noticed all this and marked Prince Atiba out as one 
of those to be dealt with after the war. 

Lastly the disaffection towards Oluewu was increased by the 
unreasoning stubbornness he displayed to whatever advice was 
given him, however good. The Oyo chiefs who were left to guard 
the city were kept informed of everything that transpired. They 
were very anxious as to the fate of the expedition ; their own 
interests were chiefly involved in the fate of the capital. They 
were sure the offended chiefs would take revenge and wreck the army 



266 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

of which they formed a part. Consequently they sent message 
after message to advise the King not to advance on Ilgrin direct 
from Ogbomoso but to come by way of Ikoyi, Iwo, Gbogun, 
and Sah6 making the attack from the north so that having the 
capital and the Niger provinces behind him he might in case of 
defeat have safe places within easy reach to retire- upon. And in 
order to give strength and force to the advice, they represented it 
as the express advice of the god Ifa by divination. Knowing his 
haughtiness they sent their messages through the Bariba king, 
to whom alone he might perhaps listen ; but as they anticipated, 
not even from the Eleduwe would he brook any such advice. 
He was for marching straight on Ilorin from Ogbomoso. 

Before the army marched out of Ogbomoso the disaffected 
Yoruba provincial kings and chiefs entered into a conspiracy to 
desert the King and his ally at a critical moment and therefore in 
order to apprise the Ilorins of their intentions they sent them- a 
parabolic message in soap, camwood, and karinkan (flesh brush) 
implying " We are attending the bride to the bridegroom's house." 
This was fully understood at Ilorin. 

The huge host left Ogboragsg in December 1830 by slow stages 
encamping first at Aduin, where they were for nine days. (Ilorin is 
but one good day's walk from Ogbomoso). On the tenth day they 
advanced to Jayin, thence to Ogele, and from Ogele they encamped 
at the farm of one Ajiya of Ilorin. Never before was Ilorin 
threatened by so large a force, consequently the consternation 
there was great, and vast preparations were made for battle, 
offensive and defensive. The face of every man was marked by 
grim determination to do his best. The Moslem priests were very 
busy making charms and amulets not only for individual self- 
protection but also in order to defeat the enemy completely. A 
crow, a cat, and a crown bird (the Agufan) with charms tied round 
their necks were sent by special messengers to be left in the camp 
of the allied armies. These messengers were caught and when 
threatened they boldly showed that they despised death and said 
to their captors " Take our advice and decamp at once for as for 
the yams you are now cooking in our farms it is a question whether 
you will be able to eat them before you are^ defeated, and even if 
you should, we are quite sure that the survivors will evacuate 
them at the Ogbomoso farms." 

Shortly after this a company of Ilorin horse surprised a body 
of men who went foraging, and the Bariba troops who went out 
against them were repulsed, but Prince Atiba whose men were 
armed with guns came to their timely aid, drove back the horsemen 
and captured a horse. 



THE LAST OF KATUNGA THE GREAT METROPOLIS 267 

To show the wanton excesses of these Baribas, even after this 
skirmish in which they figured so badly, they went unceremoniously 
to Prince Atiba's tent and coolly loosed the horse that was captured 
and were taking it away ! They laid claim to it not because it was 
captured by them, but because they considered themselves now 
the masters as it was they who had the first brush with the enemy. 
But the Prince was not the man to forego his claims easily, he 
pointed out forcibly how, but for his timely succour there could 
not have been any question as to the ownership of the horse, for 
instead of capturing, they themselves would all have been killed, 
or captured. The contention was so fierce between them that 
the Alafin had to send a special message to Atiba to forego 
his claims and give up the horse for the sake of peace. 

The following day being Friday the Kings did not take the field 
until 2 p.m., Fridays being considered unlucky up to that hour. 

The Kings again fought in the centre in the highway called 
the Pakaba road, and located the Yoruba war-chiefs on the right 
and left wings of the army. 

But Prince Atiba of AgQ and the Timi Bamgbaiye of Edg 
did not fire a shot or shoot an arrow before they gave way, affording 
the enemy an advantage to surround the two Kings. It was 
Oluyole of Ibadan alone who seemed not to have been apprised 
of the plot, for he fought for some time on the road leading to Oke 
Suna and pressed the florins hard towards the town wall. The 
camp was taken behind them and fired before the Kings were 
aware of the perfidy of the Yoruba chiefs. There was no alterna- 
tive now for them but to fight desperately and sell their Uves as 
dearly as possible. The Eleduwe fought with his usual bravery 
and exhausted all his skill to retrieve the position if possible, but 
he was overpowered by numbers and fell among the slain. His 
head was taken off and carried in triumph to the town and exposed 
upon the town WcQl. 

King Oluewu's heir seeing that the day was lost rode up to his 
father and bade him farewell, to meet again in the other world. 
Putting spurs into his horse he galloped to meet the enemy and 
fought gallantly until he fell among those he had slain. 

The Ilgrin horse and foot were in pursuit all night and 
unfortunately for the wreck of the Oyo army whilst escaping to 
Ogbomoso they missed the way taking one that led back to Ilorin ; 
they met the pursuers at a short distance and were all either 
captured or slain. 

Thus was fulfilled the prophecy of the charm bearers who were 
caught, that the yams they were then cooking might be eaten at 
the Ilorin farms but would be evacuated in the Ogbomosg farms. 



268 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Lanloke the chief of Ogodo who had always been an inveterate 
enemy of Oyo and an active ally of Ilorin, taking advantage of 
the absence of the King and principal war-chiefs from the city, 
came and attacked Oyo, but he was repulsed by the Ohota nick- 
named Ari-ibon-peji eyin, (one whose gun can create a gap in the 
upper front teeth) , who was left in charge. 

When the news of the disaster reached Oyo and that both Kings 
had perished, Lanloke again attacked the city but was again 
repulsed. The citizen's fearing that he would receive re-inforce- 
ment from Ilorin did not wait to try any further conclusions ; 
the great metropolis was deserted, some fled to Kihisi, some to 
Igboho, and some even to Ilorin. As it was not a flight from an 
enemy in pursuit many who reached Kihisi and Igboho safely 
with their family returned a^ain and again for their household 
goods and chattels till one Agandangban went and told Lanloke 
that Oyo had been deserted, and the latter proceeded immediately 
to plunder, and carry away what was left by the citizens. 

Thus failed the fourth and last campaign against Ilorin, and such 
was the fall of the great Metropohs " Eyeo or Katunga," the 
ancient Oyo, still in rains. 



Chaptep XIV 
THE INTERREGNUM 
§ I. Civil War at Abem6 

Before the Eleduwe war broke out, a marked disaffection and 
rivalry was rife between the two leading chiefs of Abem6, Ayo 
the Bale and Okoyan alias Lahan the next man to him. 

The latter claimed relationship to Oyabi the late Kakanfo 
at Ajase and hence to Kurumi of Ijaye also. This rivalry became 
apparent during the expedition, for Lahan out of spite to his chief 
Ayg, went over to Kurumi, encamped with him and fought under 
his standard as if he was an Ijaye rhan. The disaffection now 
became an open rupture and it was evident to all that Lahan was 
secretly abetted by chief Kurumi of Ijaye. It subsequently 
became known that Lahan and Kurumi were plotting to fall upon 
Ayo suddenly and despatch him after their retreat, before reaching 
home. Ayo apprised of this, suddenly broke up his encampment, 
and by forced marches reached home a considerable time before 
Lahan who followed hard after him. 

But Ayo instead of entering his house remained squatting on 
a mat in the square in front of his compound, close by the spot 
where his women folk were dyeing cloths, his horse standing by 
his side, and his spear stuck in the ground close by him, 

Lahan halted outside the town walls, afraid to enter. When 
Ayo heard of it he sent to invite him to return to his house in 
peace, but Lahan suspicious and afraid to enter by the main gate 
took a circuitous route and entered by the one nearest to his 
quarter of the town where he commanded about 200 compounds. 
Their designs having now failed Kurumi became very anxious 
about the safety of his friend Lahan, and not wishing to leave him 
thus at the mercy of Ayg he attempted to bring about a reconcili- 
ation between them before proceeding home to Ijaye ; but Ayo 
politely declined his interference saying that having just returned 
home from this great war it was too early to talk about such 
matters. Kurumi thus disappointed proceeded homewards but 
first despatched Amodu one of his distinguished captains on 
horseback to bid Ayo good bye and to say he would return in a 
short time to settle their difference. 

Amodu met Ayg on the same spot his horse still unsaddled 
but all his men had dispersed, only about 5 attendants remained 
L 269 



270 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

with him. Amodu having delivered his message returned to his 
master, and suggested to him that a better opportunity than this 
cannot be had of making short work of the whole affair ; Ayo's 
men having dispersed he could easily be surprised and killed. 

Kuruni took the hint and made for Ayo ; the latter surprised 
to see an armed force coming on towards him, hastily jumped 
upon his horse and was ready for action. Kurumi perceiving it 
would not be an easy matter to accomplish his purpose, did not 
venture upon an attack but speedily wheeled round and left the 
town by another gate. 

Ayo and his men thereupon became mad with rage and they 
fell upon Lahan, fired his quarter of the town, took his men with 
their wives and childien as captives of war ! Lahan himself was 
spared with but a few attendants, and allowed to shelter himself 
in a small house in that quarter which had escaped the conflagra- 
tion. Here he spent a most miserable night of grief, remorse 
and disappointment, having lost all his family and all his 
property. 

Chief Oluygle of Ibadan arrived at Abemg only a day too late 
to be of any service to his friends, and was very sorry that this had 
happened, especially at this crisis. He visited Lahan where 
he was to sympathize with him for his misfortunes having a 
reminiscence of his own troubles on his return from the Ota war. 
He went straight from Lahan to Ayo to effect a reconciliation 
between them and the release of those who were seized, contending 
that they cannot be regarded as prisoners of war but fellow towns- 
men and victims of a civil fight. He further showed the impolicy 
of having one part of the town desolate. He succeeded with Ayo 
and with some of his chiefs ; some had even set free their own 
captives. Thus, in order to assure Oluyole, one Oga appealed 
to Kukomi one of his followers in the presence of them all, "Have 
I not released mine ? " In the same way one Eku6debe appealed 
to one Bankole. The reply in both cases was in the affirmative. 
Thereupon one Akilapa and Agidi-ko-ko-iku who had not yet done 
so asked leave to go home and release theirs at once. Everything 
now seemed to make for a peaceful settlement, when one Ogun- 
gbade an Own man then residing at Abem^ raised a strong objection 
to the proceedings ; he declined to set his captives free and 
declared himself unconcerned as to the results even if it be the 
destruction of Abem6 and the loss of his own liberty. Said he 
" I am an Owu man by birth, my parents came from the ancient 
Owu Ipole to the city of Owu where I was born. The same fortune 
that smiled on my parents at Owu Ipole, smiled on them at the 
city of Owu, Here am I, fortune is smiling on me to-day although 



THE INTERREGNUM 27I 

I was taken captive at the fall of the city of Owu. Let Abem6 
be destroyed to-day and let me lose all I have and be taken captive, 
I shall still be a great man wherever I may be. 'Tis enough, Abem^ 
may be destroyed in part or in whole ; it matters nothing. We 
shall not release our prisoners." 

Unfortunately at such a crisis as this, Chief Ayo was in an 
inebriated condition, although he was conscious of what was going 
on and was able to signify his acquiescence to Chief Oluyole ; yet 
throughout all the proceedings and the wicked proposals of the 
Owu man he remained silent, and further, he displayed in the 
presence of Oluyole some of those disgusting habits customary 
with him of soiling himself while in that state. 

Oluyole was indignant with Ayo and his councillors and looked 
upon them all as a number of fools ; he, however, concealed his 
anger, but the whole affair was terminated abruptly and unsatis- 
factorily. 

About the time of Oluyole's departure however, Ayo was 
able to thank him for the interest he kindly took in the affairs 
of the town, and presented him with a young woman among the 
captives. Oluyole was dehghted with this acquisition to his 
harem. She was described as a young woman of great beauty, 
of a fair complexion and a slim figure. But the mother hastened 
forward with a tender appeal to Oluyole, and prostrating (after the 
manner of men) before him, said " She cannot be your wife, 
for she is your relative ; we also are of the Basgrun descent like 
yourself." Oluyole yielded to her entreaties but demanded 15 
heads of cowries for her release; this was paid and the girl was 
handed to her mother. 

Oluyole left Abemo for Ibadan by way of Ijaye where he spent 
5 days with Kurumi, and both of them being offended at Ayo's 
conduct the fate of Abemo was thereupon settled and sealed. 

§ 2. The Destruction of Abem^ 

According to the settled arrangement between Kurumi and 
Oluyole during the stay of the latter at Ijaye, their movements 
were to be kept private as much as possible. Abem6 was to be 
taken by surprise in order to avoid the necessity of a siege. The 
Ibadan forces were to join those of Ijaye and in order to do this 
without their objective being known, Oluyole gave it out that the 
Aseyin was paying a visit to Ibadan and that they should go out 
and escort him to the town. 

As the head chief went outside the town wall, no war-chief 
dared remain behind ; hence, all went out according to custom. 

They went as far as Ijaye but when they saw the Ijaye army 



272 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

also marshalled forth then they knew that they were going against 
Abem6. 

It was quite late before Ayg knew that evil was determined 
against him. He went out that morning to review his troops. 
Two of his generals Aruna and Ajadi being accused of treason 
were before him, and whilst he was enquiiing into the charge they 
were interrupted by the approach of the enemy. The intrepid 
warrior at once jumped upon his horse, and dashed into the ranks 
of the enemy. He performed feats of valour that day, he broke 
through their ranks, had his horse shot under him and himself 
wounded in the leg. But he was not dispirited ; he called for another 
horse and fought bravely at the head of his people. The men of 
Abemg, however were overpowered by numbers, for whilst fighting 
braveh' at one gate of the town, the Ibadans entered by another 
and set fire to the town. All hopes being now lost, Ayo escaped 
with a few horsemen and followers to Ago Oja (the present Oyo) 
being hotly pursued by Ijaye and Ibadan troops. 

In order not to incur the displeasure of KurGmi and Oluyole 
the two leading chiefs of the country whom he hoped hereafter 
would be his back stay. Prince Atiba of Ago Oja told Ayo that he 
could not protect him and consequently he should leave the town 
before his pursuers arrived there. Ayo took the way to Ojomgbodu 
on his way to Ilorin, but after a while on considering the humiliation 
of it all and the grave probabilities that lay before him, he chose 
death rather than dishonour. 

He dismounted at a certain spot and sat. under a tree, his horse 
standing by him. He sent away his little band of devoted followers 
in order to die alone like a soldier. Here he calmly awaited his 
pursuers. 

According to one account, at the sight of them he sprang again 
upon his horse and made for them. He threw one Lakonu off his 
steed and brandishing his spear round and round him, exclaimed 
" But for Atiba you are a dead man," then the men opened fire 
upon him and he dropped down dead. 

But another account says he sat with calm dignity under the 
tree and offered no resistance whilst they showered their deadly 
weapons upon him and he dropped down dead. 

Thus perished one of the best and ablest of the Oyo or Yoruba 
generals. His remains were brought back to Ago Oja and interred 
there. 

Ayg like the late Ojo Amepo was a good horseman and one 
of the best generals of the day, but drink was his greatest vice, 
and to that may be attributed the cause of his ruin as well as that 
of Abem^. His aide-de-camp was nick-named Am u-igba-legb§-giri, 



THE INTERREGNUM 



273 



i.e., one who grasps tight the sides of a drinking bowl ; because 
he himself was hardly inferior to his master in that respect as the 
name implies. 

Although the ruler of the town yet he often spent as much as 
three days and nights out of home attending " wakes " at night 
wherever he was invited, and during daytime dancing to the bMa 
drum in various quarters of the town hke the commonest citizen. 
He offered the right hand of fellowship to anyone who could drink 
like himself. 

He was by nature generous and merciful, in which respect he 
was most unlike his bloodthirsty peers of that age. As an 
instance of this a story was told of his favourite Amu-igba-legbe 
who on leaving the Bale's house quite late one night the worse 
for drink missed his way into his chief's harem, and slept by the 
side of one of his wives thinking he had got home ! When the 
woman awoke in the early hours of the morning, and saw a stranger 
by her side she cried out and roused the whole estabHshment. 

Amugba starting from his sleep being now sober, took in the 
situation at once and resigned himself to the only fate he felt sure 
was awaiting him under the circumstances. 

Overcome with fear he went home in great distress and when 
the matter was known in the house the whole compound was 
deserted for fear of the usual confiscation and punishment in such 
a case. Amugba expected nothing but death and when about noon 
he heard his chief's drum coming towards his house, he thought 
the fatal hour was come. Ayo entered and saw him trembling and 
attempting an apology ; he simply jeered at him and said : " Why 
are you looking so dejected ? Is it because you missed your way 
last night ? Never mind the mistake, let's go out and drink 
away yesterday's occurrence." 

Amugba thought it was only a stratagem to get him out of his 
house to be arrested and executed ; he followed, however, but 
was still dejected. Whilst drinking in a friend's house Ayo 
observed him still in that mood, and said to him with surprise, 
" Are you still downcast on account of yesterday's affair ? Why 
that is past and gone ; it only proved I can beat you in drink, for 
I drank far more than you did on that occasion, but was not in 
the least affected, whilst you, could not find your way home." 
So the matter passed off in jokes. 

Abemo and Ijaye were rival towns and the former had the 
sobriquet of " Abem6 siiru okg ilu bantatk " (Abemo small and 
compact, but the husband of a huge town) meaning Ijaye. 



FOURTH PERIOD. — ARREST OF DISINTEGRATION — 
ILORINS CHECKMATED— ATTEMPTS AT RECONSTRUC- 
TION—INTERTRIBAL WARS— BRITISH PROTECTORATE. 

Chaptek XV 

THE NEW CITY AND NEW GOVERNMENT 

§ I. Prince Atiba : His Early Life and History 

Prince Atiba was the son of King Abiodun by an Akeitan 
woman. According to one account, he was born in the city of 
Oyo, his father died when he was but a child, and when Abiodun's 
children were being ill-treated by King Aole his mother fled with 
him to her own town in the country. 

Bat another account was of a more romantic interest and is 
more probable, as being characteristic of that age. According to 
this account, his mother, a slave at Gudugbu, was given as a hostage 
to the Alafin of Oyo. She had an intimate friend who was much 
distressed by this separation. After 8 or lo weary months, she 
was resolved at all costs to go up to the city to visit her friend with 
whom she had been associated from childhood. 

The Gudugbu hostage was too insignificant to be noticed among 
the crowd of women in the King's harem until- this strange visit 
of her friend drew the King's attention to her. The visitor from 
the country loitering within the precincts of the palace was asking 
all whom she saw coming from the women's quarters to call her 
Eni-Olufan one of the King's wives, but no one knew who that 
was. At length King Abiodun was told that a woman from the 
country was asking for one of his wives, and this unusual incident 
aroused the King's curiosity. The Gudugbu woman was called 
to his presence to state the object of her visit. She replied . — 
" May your majesty live long. The young woman from Gudugbu 
given as a hostage was my bosom friend, and for the past 8 months 
or more I have had no one to talk to, and hence I was resolved to 
visit her." 

The King then said to her, " Are you not afraid to come here 
and to enquire for my wife ? Suppose I add yourself to the harem 
or kill you or sell you ? " Sherephed, " For my friend's sake I am 
prepared to undergo any treatment, and if your majesty make a 
wife of me I shall be happy as my friend and I will see each other 
every day." 

274 



THE NEW CITY AND NEW GOVERNMENT 275 

The King greatly admired their friendship ; he gave permission 
for her to be lodged with her friend, and was by this led to pay some 
attention to the Gudugbu hostage. 

For three months these two friends enjoyed each other's company 
and as the King's wife was now in the way of becoming a mother, 
he was graciously pleased to send them home. He sent for both 
of them one morning, and after a few approbatory remarks 
on their friendship, he loaded them with presents, and said to his 
wife's friend, "I am sending your friend home with you in order 
that you may not fail to have some one to unbosom your mind to 
as hitherto. I make you both my deputy for that part of the 
country. All matters to be referred to Oyo will henceforth be 
brought to you for decision, all the tribute monies will be paid to 
you also, and as my wife will be unable to undertake a journey, 
I expect your visit here as often as you can come." With this 
instruction he dismissed them and sent several Eunuchs and Ilaris 
with them as escort and to commend them formally to the 
care and protection of the Bale of Gudugbu. Both these women 
returned to Gudugbu in quite a different capacity from that in 
which they left it. The little town was all astir on their arrival, 
and many were the private murmurs against Eni-Olufan's friend 
for the heavy responsibilities she had brought upon them. Great 
deference, however, was paid to them both, and they became 
practically the supreme rulers and judges of that district. The 
King's wife in course of time gave birth to a son who was named 
Atibk ; her friend also (who was a married woman) gave birth 
to a son named Onipede. The intimacy existing between the 
two mothers re-appeared also in the boys from childhood up to 
manhood. 

[This account is reconcilable with the first as it is possible that 
as an infant, Atiba may have been taken to Oyo to see his father, 
and may have been there till Aole's reign when the mother had to 
flee with him back to the country as stated above]. 

Atiba grew up a wild and reckless lad. When he was of age, his 
father ordered that the mother should apportion to him the tribute 
money of that district, this continued until the succeeding reign 
when the country was thrown into confusion and anarchy. 

This circumstance probably led his mother to remove with 
him from Gudugbu to Akeitan her own home. Here Atiba was 
under the care of his maternal uncle who was now head of the house 
and the family estate. 

Atiba was brought up as a tailor, but he preferred a wild and 
predatory life, for which the circumstances of the times afforded 
great opportunities. A story was told of him that once being very 



276 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

hungry, he asked his uncle for a yam, and the uncle not only refused 
it him, but took the opportunity of reprimanding him sharply 
for living the idle life of a kidnapper. " If I had lived on man- 
stealing like you," said he, " I could not have got any yam," 
But Yesufu the younger uncle felt sorry for his nephew and said 
to Atiba that whilst he (the uncle) was living, he (Atiba) would 
never suffer the pinch of hunger. This incident had its reward 
hereafter as will be noticed in its place. 

From Akeitan Prince Atiba made several incursions into the 
Gudugbu farms, and was generally a pest to the country round 
about. 

In order not to bring trouble on the Akeitan people, Atiba was 
urged to remove his residence to the town of Ago where he would 
find in Oja- the chief of that place a man of a like spirit to his own, 
of a warlike disposition, and he did so. 

But when Atiba arrived at Ago, Oja was strongly advised not 
to let him settle down there, because a man like him would eventu- 
ally become master of the town. Elebu, Oja's brother was the 
chief opponent. But Oja did not follow this advice. " How can 
I," said he "an ofhcer on the staff of the Kakanfo, and a title- 
bearer in the kingdom, turn away my prince ? " Oja continued 
friendly to him until his fall in the Kanla expedition. 

Their kidnapping expeditions were at that time chiefly directed 
against the Egbas in the Oke Ogun districts near Sagaun. They 
found them so simple and unsophisticated in those days that when 
a kidnapper had captured several of them and was in quest for 
more he had only to leave his cap or his spear or any other personal 
property by the side of them, and bid them wait for him there, and 
should another kidnapper fall in with them he was to be shown the 
sign of prepossession, and thus they would be left untouched until 
their captor returned. These captives never made any effort to 
escape. 

Atiba rose to importance by committing acts of violence and 
extortion with impunity, from the great deference paid to his 
high birth. In that age of anarchy and confusion he collected 
around himself all lawless men, insolvent debtors, slaves who 
had deserted their masters. His wealth was continually aug- 
mented by fresh marauding expeditions, his men behaving like 
the Jamas, himself at the head of them. 

By his address and largess Atiba won to himself the following 
chiefs of Oyo, viz., Aderinko, Ladejobi, Olumole, Oluwajo, Lgsk 
Oluwaiye (the Alagba), Adefumi, Lakonu, Told Maje, Falade, 
and Gbenla. 

His slaves who had horses and a large retinue each were : — 



THE NEW CITY AND NEW GOVERNMENT 277 

Eni-d'Olgrun (who subsequently became the Apeka), Galajimg, 
Otelowo and Ogboinu his mounted trumpeter. 

Elebu succeeded his brother as the Bale of Ago. As might be 
expected he was not on good terms with Atiba ; but the latter 
had already risen to such a height of greatness and popularity 
that Elebu could neither crush him nor turn him out of the town ; 
they remained antagonists till Elebu was drowned in the river 
during the Gbodo war, as related above. 

Before Elebu's death, Ajanaku of Ilorin to whom Ago Oja 
paid tribute summoned them both to Ilorin and asked Shitta his 
sovereign to effect a reconciliation between them. The turban 
was given to both as a sign of brotherhood in the Moslem faith. 
This reconciliation was only on the surface, but by no means real. 
It was at this time that all children born at Ago had Moslem 
names given to them and many adults and aged people 
changed theirs in order to be in good favour with the Jamas of Ilorin, 
who then infested the country 

Atiba had nearly lost his life in the Gbodo expedition; his horse 
was shot dead under him and theBaribas were pressing hard behind 
him in pursuit. His life-long friend Onipede galloped past him 
paying no heed to the despairing cry of his friend and master: 
" Onipede here am I, will you leave me behind to perish ? " Onipede 
notwithstanding this rushed on into the river Ogun and swam 
across safe to the other side. But when Atiba's uncle, Yesufu came 
up and saw him in such straits he dismounted and offered him his 
horse. Atiba declined to take it, but Yesufu forced him to accept 
it, saying " Even if I perish in this war I know that you will take 
care of my children." Yesufu was a powerful swimmer and he 
assisted both the horse and the rider safe to the other side. 
Adekidero the Lemomu also offered his own horse to be used 
alternately with Yesufu's until they reached home. 

Onipede did not wait for him although he was riding on a horse 
bought for him by the very Prince he now deserted. It was even 
reported of him that after he had reached the other side of the 
river, he halted to watch with amusement the distress and danger 
of his friend battling with the swift current until Yesufu came to 
his assistance, and that on the Prince's reaching the other side 
Onipede came up with a smile and an untimely joke saying " The 
intrepid warrior that you are, I did not know that a riveF 
current could conquer you." The Prince said nothing, and showed 
no sign of resentment, but Onipede from that day became a 
marked man, because it was evident to Atiba that his death 
would have excited no feelings of sympathy and regret in 
Onipede. 



278 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Up to this time Onipede enjoyed his entire confidence. What- 
ever he said or did was indisputable ; any criminal pardoned by 
him was free, and latterly he would not even take the trouble of 
acquainting the Prince with all that he did. He was 
known beyond the confines of the kingdom as the confidant of 
the Prince and all foreigners residing at Ago were under his pro- 
tection. He was always attended by a large retinue of foot and 
of horsemen as a Prince, whenever he paid visits in town or in 
going to his farm. He was the greatest favourite at the Prince's 
palace ; no one was allowed to see the Prince or obtain favours 
from him except through Onipede. The love Atiba had for this 
companion of his childhood and youth made him bhnd to all 
his faults until his eyes were opened by the incident narrated 
above. 

Onipede at the zenith of his popularity quite forgot himself and 
regarded the Prince rather as his equal or co-partner, although as 
a matter of fact he was in no way equal to one of his war-chiefs 
or his notable slaves enumerated above. Still all of them used to 
show him due respect and pay him marked deference as one above 
them, so he came to set himself as a rival of his master ; but the 
incident of the Gbodo disaster was the means of his fall. 

On their arrival home from the unsuccessful war, they hastened 
to fortify the town against an expected invasion. Atiba attended 
by all his great warriors was digging a trench right round the 
town, when Onipede rode up attended by a retinue of mounted 
servants. Atiba could no longer suppress his anger but ordered 
him to take up a digger and work like any of the common labourers. 
For one who had always lived an easy life Onipede's hands became 
blistered and sore. There are two accounts given of his death : 
one was that after this Atiba ordered him to be slain and buried 
in an upright posture when they returned home ; and that his 
slaves carried out his orders by showering darts upon Onipede, 
cut off his head and buried him in a house near the present Akesan 
market. 

But a more probable account given of his death was as follows : 
The Prince and his servants began by slighting him, the latter 
losing no opportunity of showing him marks of disrespect. He 
now observed that he was no longer in favour but the exalted 
position he had already attained placed him above fear ; and indeed 
the Prince could not attack him in an open civil fight without 
dire results, for he was the commander of some of the greatest 
war-chiefs in the town. An opportunity at length was offered 
when he was unattended. He met Atiba where he was busy 
with his servants storing up hisBere grass, and there and then he 



THE NEW CITY AND NEW GOVERNMENT 279 

ordered his slaves to club him to death. Such was the end of 
Onipede. 

By the death of Elebu, Oja's children lost their natural protector 
and guardian, and the people their chief. Prince Atiba who was 
aiming at the supreme power placed none of Oja's children who 
were capable as head of the house and chief of the town, but rather 
his younger brother Ailumo, whom he knew to be weak in intellect. 
He placed him over the house with the title of Mggaji till after the 
Eleduwe war, he should be formally installed as Bale of 
Ago. In the meantime Atiba constituted himself the administrator 
of the affairs of the town in the place of Oja's children and over- 
shadowed even the Mogaji himself. Thus the fears of the late 
Elebu were fully realized and the town of Ago practically passed 
out of the hands of the children of Oja the founder. 

§ 2. Atiba's Accession to the Throne 

That Atiba was aspiring to the throne was evident to all when 
they were assembled for the Eleduwe war. He was even then far 
more powerful than the King and all eyes were turned upon him 
as the one who would eventually save the country from the Fulani 
yoke, In order to obtain the object of his ambition he plotted 
with others to bring about the downfall of the King. He bought 
the support of the two most powerful war-chiefs left in the land, 
viz., Oluyoleof Ibadan by promising him the title of Ibasorun, and 
KuriJmi of Ijaye by promising him that of Kakanfo. 

After the fall of the ancient capital and the death of King Oluewu 
the crown was offered to Lagiiade, but he dechned it and advised 
that it should be offered to that powerful aspirant Prince Atiba, 
of Ago Oja; the only one with men and means, who seemed able 
to cope with the Ilorins and save the country from tyranny and 
oppression. This was done, and Atiba accepted it with the general 
consent and approval of all, but it was with the distinct under- 
standing that he would lead the people home from Saki, Gboho, 
Kihisi, Ilorin and other places whither they had taken refuge. 
For this purpose Prince Lajide. son of Onsolu, and Fabiyi with 
32 other messengers were sent by the Oyq Mesi at Kihisi and Igboho 
to invite him home to the ancient capital. They were his guests 
till the coronation, after which he detained them permanently 
at Ago and conferred on Prince Lajide the title of Ona'sokun. 

After he was estabhshed on the throne, he sent Lakonu one of 
his powerful chiefs to Kihisi and Gboho for the remnant of the 
Kings' wives, and the eunuchs and other court officials that could 
be found in those regions. 

Thus Ago passed out of the hands of Oja's family and became 



28o THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the royal city of Yoruba and as such it was no longer called 
Ago-Oja but Oyo as the AlAfin now resides there. And hence 
it is often styled by way of disparagement Ago-d'Oyg (Ago which 
became Qyg). This is the present city of Oyo. 

§ 3. Conferring of Titles 

At the conferring of titles and re-organization of the kingdom 
the AlAfin confirmed on those who came to him from Kihisi and 
Gboho the titles they had formerly borne. Those who did not 
care to leave the more salubrious north for forest lands were 
superseded in their offices. 
The following are those who were confirmed in their titles. 
Name. Title. 

Makaaiye 0h6ta 

Odusola Agbakin 

Ariori SWu 

The following were those newly conferred at the present Oyo. 

Obagbolu Ona-modek^ 

Gbenla Lagunk 

Aiyewun (from Ise5dn) Alapini 

Ailes6 Tetu 

Adefalu Olokuesin 

Ailumg (Qja's brother) Asipa 

Yesufu (Atiba's uncle) Parakoyi* 

The following were titles conferred on members of the loyal 
family, not all of whom however were deserving. 
Olukokun (grandson of King Onisile) Atingisi 

Telaokbki Magaji lyajin 

Abioro (son of King Ajagbo) Arole Oba 

Idowu (son of King Ojigi) Olusami 

The following were commoners, but favourites and formerly 
companions-in-arms of Atiba, on whom were conferred titles 
usually borne by members of the Royal Family exclusively : — 
Falade Agunpopo 

Lakonu Ogigimagi 

Ladejobi Olosun 

Toki La'dilu 

Eniaiyewu the Alapini of the ancient city was still alive when 
Aiyewun was brought from Iseyin for the same office. The 
former remained and died at Saki. 

^ In recognition of his kind services to him at the Gbodo 
Expedition. 



THE NEW CITY AND NEW GOVERNMENT 281 

Ailgs^ had been created chief of the Tetus (they are 150 in 
number) before those from the ancient city arrived to claim their 
rights ; they had to be satisfied wth minor ranks. 

Ancient Oyo was a very large city comprising the following 
wards : — Oke Eso, Modade, Molaba, Nsise-Ogan, Ntetu, Ondasa, 
On§e-awo, Aremu, Ile-Ologbo, Ajofa, Isale-Ogede. 

Now, Ago d'Oyo was very small in comparison, and hence the 
AlAfin adopted forcible means to enlarge it. Several of the 
surrounding towns and villages were depopulated and the inhabit- 
ants transported to the new city e.g. Akeitan, Apara, Idod§, 
Ajagba Seke, Gudugbu, Jabktk, Ojomgbodu, Aguwo, Opapa and 
Ijoga. These places were all within lo or 20 miles from Ago. 
The King's army would surround each of them by night, and at 
break of day, the inhabitants were offered the choice of a peace- 
able migration to the new city or (in case of resistance) the town 
would be destroyed. Thus they were transported with all their 
household effects and as they arrived the King assigned to each a 
quarter of the town for their residence. Thus Igaga was taken 
in the month of May during the Egugun festival. 

Higher Titles 

(a) The Basgrun. — Oluyole of Ibadan received the title of 
Ibasorun as was conditionally promised him at the Eleduwe 
war. He based his claim on his descent from Basorun Yamba 
whose cognomen was Ok61o Ogun. His father's name was 
Olokuoye, his mother was Agbonrin daughter of King Abiodun 
and thus he was the AlAfin 's nephew. 

Oluyole now came to Ovo to have his title conferred upon him 
by the King. 

This was a new departure from the old custom for the Basorun 
to reside in the country. His right place is in the city being the 
next man to the King, and the chief of the seven principal 
councillors of state comprising the Oyo Mesi. He, moreover, 
has distinct official duties to perform at the principal annual 
festivals especially at theBere at which he is the chief actor. 

But this new departure must be allowed in order to meet the 
exigencies of the times. The King could not be secure on his 
throne if he were to cause a disaffection to arise between himself 
and the powerful war-chiefs of Ibadan and Ijaye by denying 
them the titles of their ancestors which they were so ambitious 
to obtain. 

But a provision had already been made in the constitution 
for performing the state ceremonies in the absence of the Basorun : 
his place could be filled by either the Otun'wefa, the Qna Onse« 



282 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Awo, or the Ariwo. Thus what would have proved a serious 
constitutional difficulty had already been obviated by past 
experience, and adequately provided for. 

(b) The Are-ona-Kakanfo or Yoruba Field Marshal. This 
title was now conferred upon Kurumi of Ijaye according to the 
conditional promise made to him also at the Eleduwe war by 
Prince Atiba. He was undoubtedly the greatest Yoruba general 
and tactician of the day in the Yoruba country. He was a great 
friend of the King and during his term of office he shielded the 
sovereign against the encroachment on his prerogatives of his 
nephew of Ibadan for he was by no means loyal to him. He also 
on this occasion went to Oyo to have the title conferred on him. 
Thus it came to pass that the two most distinguished titles next 
to the sovereign were held by the chiefs of the two largest towns in 
the south, viz. that of Basorun the head of all civil affairs, and that 
of Kakanfo the head of the military department. 

State Policy. — In order that a collision may not take place be- 
tween these two warlike towns, so contiguous to each other, a 
compact was now arrived at between the AlAfin a,nd his principal 
chiefs : — 

1. That they should make it their primary aim to defend what 
was left of the Yoruba country, and gradually regain if they could 
their lost provinces under the Fulanis of Ilorin. 

2. As the last King died in war, the sovereign should not be 
allowed to go to war any more, but conffiie himself to all religious, 
civil, and political matters (external relations) on behalf of the 
nation. 

3. That the Ibadans were to protect all Yoruba towns to the 
north and north-east, and meet whatever danger might arise in 
those quarters, to have a free hand over all Ijesas and Ekitis, 
and the eastern provinces generally, to reduce them to subjection. 

4. That the Ijayes should protect all Yoruba towns of the 
western provinces, and meet whatever danger appeared in that 
direction and carry on their operations against the Sabes and dis- 
loyal Popos. 

Thus the disintegration of the country would be arrested. 

But the ancient cities of Iluku, Saki, Gboho and Kihisi with 
their towns, containing the remnant of the citizens of the ancient 
Oyo and members of the royal family preferred not to be placed 
under the protection of either of these powers, but under the King 
direct ; and this was allowed. Thus it was hoped that in time the 
unity of the kingdom would be regained, and those who still longed 
for their old homes would be able to return thither. 

In this way it appeared latterly that the province under the 



THE NEW CITY AND NEW GOVERNMENT 283 

AlAfin is small, and foreigners ignorant of the history of the 
country are apt to consider Ibadan of more importance than 
Oyo especially when by the destruction of Ijaye the former claimed 
the overlordship of the territories formerly under Ijaye. 

Provincial Affairs 

The affairs of the new Metropohs having been settled both the 
Basgrun and the Kakanfo returned home to arrange their own 
local affairs. 

Ibadan. At this time the war-chief next to the Iba himself 
who was head and shoulders above all his compeers at Ibadan 
was chief Elepo, consequently the title of Ibalogun was offered 
him ; but he declined it, for reasons which no one could tell. 
He was urged over and over again in pubhc as well as in private, 
both by the Basorun and his brother chiefs to accept it, but he 
declined, saying his name Elepo alone was enough for him. And 
yet he would submit to no one but the Basorun alone who was his 
old colleague. The title of Balogun was, therefore, conferred 
upon Oderinlg. 

The following were the titles conferred upon distinguished 
war-chiefs : — 

Names. Titles. 

Od§rinlg Balogun or commander-in-chief. 

Lajumgke Otun i.e. general commanding the right 

Opeagbe Osi i.e. general commanding the left wing 

Toki Seriki 

Babalgla Asipa 

Oyesile Abese 

Ogunrenu Sarumi or chief of the cavalry 

Yerombi Agbakin 

Dele Areagoro 

Ijaye. — The Are-ona-Kakanfo of Ijaye was a bloodthirsty 
tyrant. He put to death all the chiefs rising into power who 
might become his rivals. His Balogun's name was Olasilo 
alias Ogun-koroju, a Mohammedan, and the friend of Balogun 
Oderinle of Ibadan. He was the only man at Ijaye for whom 
Kurumi entertained any regard. One Ajayi was his Areagoro, 
and this was about all the titles given at Ijaye. Nevertheless 
there were other powerful men at Ijaye such as Lakusk, AgSlna 
Epo, Fanyaka, Akigla, Asegbe, Amgdu and Labudanu. Lahan 
after the destruction of Abemg came to reside at Ijaye. 

Kurumi usurped all power both civil and religious ; all were 
centred on him or his family, and all the profits accruing from 



284 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

them flowed to his exchequer. His brother Popoola was the AlagbS, 
or Egugun high priest, himself the Mogba or head Sango priest. 
His chief executioner was one J6mgban. The Kakanfo was 
more dreaded at Ijaye than even the gods as the common sajnng 
shows " Are npe o o ndifa ? Bi If a fo rere ti Are fg ibi nko ? (You 
receive the Are's summons and you are divining with your Ifa ? 
What if Ifa is propitious and the Are is not ?) He did not value 
the life of a human being more than that of a dog. For the least 
offence he ordered the offender to execution and plundered his 
house. But he was more of a terror to rank and station, for 
to the poor, he granted liberty and redress. 

The Agbamaja War 

It has become the custom at Ibadan that a newly created 
Balogun should lead the army out on an expedition in order to 
prove his worth to the title and thereby commend himself to the 
respect of the soldiery. But no town at this time gave any cause 
of offence for an attack, all the same the Balogun was sent 
against Ede- —a town under their own protection. But it would 
appear that Elepo vetoed the destruction of Ede and so they 
marched on towards Ilobu. 

The people of Ilobu became alarmed. They had not committed 
any offence, but although they were assured of peaceful measures 
yet they brought a large amount of presents to the Ibadan camp 
to buy off their hostihty, and showed every sign of submission. 
All the same, the soldiery becoming restive from inaction would 
have sacked the town but for Elepo, especially when it happened 
that lightning struck a house in the town and the war boys became 
wild, and rushed to the spot under pretext of doing homage to 
Sango, while others were already scahng the walls when E16po and 
his men undertook to beat them off and save Ilobu. From that 
town and the surrounding villages presents came pouring into the 
Ibadan camp but instead of going to the Balogun all went to 
Elepo, before whose tents all the presents were piled up. He 
neither directed them to the commander-in-chief nor made use 
of them for himself. He ruled the army according to his will, 
and consequently the Balogun was indignant at this usurpation 
of his rights and the other chiefs sympathized with him. After 
frittering away their time doing nothing the men became dis- 
heartened and began to steal away home. Hence this expedition 
was termed " Agbamaja," i.e. fully armed but engaging in no fight. 

The Basorun at home was kept informed of all that was going 
on at the seat of war and when they arrived at home a mass 
meeting was held of all the war-chiefs and men and the whole of 



THE NEW CITY AND NEW GOVERNMENT 285 

them complained bitterly against Elepo ; he was accused to his 
face of usurping the rights of the Balogun when he had himself 
declined the office, but on account of the love and respect they had 
for him they were prepared to let bygones be bygones, only he 
must prostrate before the Balogun and offer an apology and the 
matter would end there He apologised but would never bemean 
himself by prostrating before the Balogun. This last act therefore 
set a seal upon his downfall ; his humiliation was there and then 
decided upon. 

The next step taken was to deprive him of his principal subordi- 
nate war-chiefs by conferring town titles on each of them, making 
them members of the town council with equal votes. Elepo's 
eyes were now open to his own folly, but almost too late. At 
the next public meeting, he apologized again but was too proud to 
prostrate before any one save the Basorun alone. He was told 
all round that his apology was accepted and the pardon granted. 
He went home glad at heart, but was soon to be undeceived, for 
when he went the following day to the houses of all the principal 
chiefs to thank them, not one of them would see him ; at every 
house he called he was told " The master is not at home." He 
understood the full import of this, and moreover none of his subordi- 
nate chiefs called at his house as before, and all matters in his 
quarter of the town were taken straight to the Balogun. Thus 
Elepo saw himself isolated. 

§ 4. The Osogbo War. The Ilorins Checkmated 

After a short pause that followed the Eleduwe war, the aggressive 
spirit of the Ilorins once more impelled them to the accomplish- 
ment of their aim, viz., the subversion of the entire Yoruba 
country, and hence for the third time they laid siege to Osogbo. 
The command this time was entrusted to their brave and experi- 
enced general AH, the Hausa Balogun of Ilorin. 

Osogbo was closely besieged, and terrible battles were fought 
between the assailants and defenders to the advantage of the 
former. When the king of Osogbo found the Ilorins too strong for 
him he sent to Ibadan for help. 

It now devolved upon the Ibadans as defenders of the north 
and north-east to meet the coming danger. They sent them some 
auxiliaries under the leadership of one Ob^le alias Mobitcin, and 
Alade Abinupagiin. As this force proved insufficient for the 
defence of the town, another contingent was sent under a more 
experienced leader. But still the Ilorins were gaining ground 
after every battle until the besieged and their auxiliaries were 
confined to the thickets surrounding the town which in all Yoruba 



286 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

towns were reserved for the purposes of defence. The Ibadan 
contingent thereupon sent an express report home to theBasorun 
that they would soon be overpowered and the town taken if timely 
aid was not forthcoming. 

The Basorun unwilling that the Fulanis and Jamas of Ilorin 
should be masters of the forest lands to which they had been 
driven from their homes in the plain, was resolved to raise the 
siege at all cost. It was with the Ibadans a matter of now or 
never and hence the Balogun was instructed to endeavour to deal 
a decisive blow to the Ilgrins once and for all, for should he fail 
now the Fulanis would be masters of the whole Yoruba country. 

Balogun Oderinlg now marched out with the whole of the Ibadan 
mighty men save Elepo and the Basorun, the former having been 
rejected by the war-chiefs for his actions at the late Agbamaja 
expedition. TheBasorun approved of this resolve and therefore 
Elepo stayed at home, but he felt himself far too exalted to care 
for any of them. 

When the Ibadan army arrived at the seat of war and saw the 
situation they had some misgivings as to the probabihty of success 
without the aid of Elepo their champion. They could not show 
their face in the open field for fear of the Ilorin horse, and for 
about 20 days after their arrival at Osogbo, they also could not 
fight outside the town thickets. 

The Basorun himself having some doubts as to the hopes of 
success of his generals in the absence of Elepo was much depressed 
in mind on hearing the news from the seat of war, and he was 
minded to send Elepo to meet them ; he gave him a cow to worship 
his god On and told him to prepare to join his comrades in the field. 

The Ibadan war-chiefs hearing this were fired with jealousy lest 
the honour of the victory might be his and hence were resolved to 
risk a battle at all cost. Again and again they held councils of 
war, and at length they fixed a day for the venture. Still they 
were afraid to attack the florins during the morning hours, Osogbo 
being practically in a plain, the Ilorin horse might have the advan- 
tage of them with disastrous results : from prudence therefore they 
resolved to make the attack in the afternoon, as they might be 
able to hold on until dusk when the florins would no longer be 
able to use their horses to advantage, or if defeated, the shades 
of night would assist them in their retreat. 

About 2 p.m. the standard of the Ibadan army left the gate of 
Osogbo for the battlefield. Again, another council of war was held 
and it was finally resolved that they should not proceed 
until dark, as it was necessary that their movements be as private 
as possible. About sunset they were again on the move and the 



THE NEW CITY AND NEW GOVERNMENT 287 

vanguards were instructed to keep a strict watch and arrest anyone 
suspected as a spy on their movements. 

About a mile from the Ilorin camp they halted and arranged 
the order of the attack. The Osogbo army and the earlier auxil- 
iaries were to maintain the centre of the battle, Chiefs Abitiko 
and Lajubu to command the right wing, Balogun Oderinlo with 
the rest of the Ibadan war-chiefs to form the left wing of the army. 
About midnight the Ilorin camp was attacked on all sides. The 
watch word was Elo ni owo odo ? (The fare of the ferry ?) [The 
river Osun had to be crossed in entering Osogbo from the south. 
Any one who could not tell was known to be an enemy.] The 
first camp attacked was that of the Elese, and as soon as they 
rushed in, they set it on fire. The Elese himself was shot dead as 
soon as he showed his face at the tent door. A panic seized the 
whole Ilorin army thus startled from their beds ; they could 
not offer the slightest resistance, they simply melted away ! 
Those who fell by the hands of their own friends to make way for 
their hasty flight were probably more than those who fell by the 
hands of their enemies. Several who summed up courage enough 
to saddle their horses had not the presence of mind to loose them 
and were caught in the stables digging spurs into the poor beasts 
and wondering why they would not go, forgetting that they were 
still tethered by the feet. 

But Ali the commander-in-chief was calm and resolute ; he 
ordered his horse to be saddled, and gathering around him a 
goodly portion of his cavalry they dashed through the ranks of 
the Ibadan army ; these quickly making a way for them to gallop 
through without daring to oppose them, especially as numbers 
of the men were scattered about on plundering bent. 

The principal Ilorin war-chiefs captured in this defeat were : — 

1. Jimba the head slave of the Emir of Ilorin. 

2. One of the sons of Ah the commander-in-chief. 

3. Chiet Lateju and 

4. Ajikobi the Yoruba Balogun of Ilorin. 

The first two were released and sent home privately by the 
Ibadan war-chiefs, a form of chivalrous etiquette among the 
war-chiefs. The latter two being Yorubas by .birth were regarded 
rather as traitors to their country, and were sent home to Ibadan 
as distinguished captives of war. 

The Basorun sentenced Lateju to death alleging that it was in 
his house that King Oluewu, the last of the ancient Oyo, was 
fettered when taken at the Eleduwe war, before he was put to 
death. That was the ostensible charge but the chief reason 
really was because Oluyole's wives fell into Lat§ju's hands at 



288 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the collapse of that expedition, and he was not chivalrous enough 
to release them and send them to him as a brother chief. 

Ajikobi being a more distinguished personage was sent to the 
AlAfin of Oyo for capital punishment. 

The messengers with the illustrious captive met the King 
engaged in one of his annual festivals, and he ordered that the 
feti de joie his servants were then firing should be directed on 
Ajikobi. This was- accordingly done, and he was roasted to death 
with gunpowder. 

Besides a large number ot captives the Ibadans captured 
numbers of horses but very few of them were brought home. 
These hardy people cared very little then for the luxury of riding 
on horseback : what they cared for more was the horses' tails 
upon which to tie amulets as preventives against bullets in war. 
These were always a part of their war kits. The only attention 
bestowed on the hundreds of tailless horses now roaming about 
the field was for replenishing their larder as occasion required ! 

This victory at Osogbo was a most important one and forms a 
turning point in Yoruba history. It saved the Yoruba country 
as such from total absorption by the Fulanis as a tributary state. 
From this time forth the power of the Ilorins for an independent 
aggressive warfare in Yoruba land was for ever broken and the 
Ibadans gained the ascendancy. The Ilorins without losing sight 
of their ultimate objective to '' dip the Koran in the sea," i.e. the 
subjugation of the entire Yoruba land, henceforth contented them- 
selves with allying themselves now with one, and then- with the 
other of the contending tribes with the hope of ultimately weaken- 
ing the whole, so that eventually the entire country might fall an 
easy prey into their hands. 

That the AlAfin did not seize this opportunity to gather 
all the forces of the kingdom and strike a final blow at the enemy 
was a matter of surprise to many, but a great dread was still 
entertained of meeting the cavalry in the plain, in which case it 
would not be that of Ilgrin alone, but also those of Sokoto and 
Gando. Hence the return home to the ancient capital was fraught 
with danger, the probabihty of their being continually harassed 
and attacked and taken by surprise being very great. 

Other reasons also have been advanced for remaining in their 
present position, among which was the comparative proximity 
to the coast and greater facilities for trade. As new generations 
sprang up who knew Httle or nothing of the old country they grew 
less and less disposed to abandon the comparative safety and 
advantages of the present position for the old cities with all the 
attendant risks, however fertile and salubrious they might be. 



THE NEW CITY AND NEW GOVERNMENT 289 

After the siege of Osogbo was raised, Ibokun an Ijesa town not 
far from Osogbo was taken by the Ibadans, being one of the tribu- 
tary towns and allies of Ilorin. On the approach of the enemy, 
having heard of the defeat of the Ilorins at Osogbo, Kusi the 
Ilorin Resident of the town escaped to Ilorin leaving Ibokun 
to its fate. 

§ 5. The Expulsion of Elepo from Ibadan 

Chief Elepo not being allowed by his colleagues to go with them 
to the Osogbo expedition, and having heard of their success marched 
out with his own troops against Otefan, a Yoruba town in the 
western province, which he took, and returned home with many 
captives and much booty by which he satisfied the cravings of his 
war boys, whose loyalty to him prevented them from going with 
their comrades to a successful expedition. 

After his return from Otefan, Elepo was told by the Basorun 
that the other war-chiefs in the field had sent home to say that 
he should leave the town, alleging that he was heard to have said 
that they could not achieve any victory without his leadership, 
and now that the Ilorins had received a crushing defeat at their 
hands without his presence, it was evident they could do without 
him. Whether this message was actually sent or whether it was 
an arrangement concocted between the Basorun and the war-chiefs 
is not certain, but as a matter of fact the whole of them stood 
in dread of him and he was also an object of envy and jealousy. 
It is evident that if the Basorun had been as true to him as he was 
loyal to the Basorun such a question could not have arisen at all. 
Elepo was said to have been the greatest general Ibadan ever 
produced ; before him and after him there has yet been none 
to be compared to him whose very name strikes terror and confusion 
in all around. Eyen the Basorun himself was secretly afraid of 
him, as with one breath he could upset him and his government, 
and yet there has never been a chief at Ibadan so humble, so 
loyal and devoted to his chief as Elepo was to the Basorun. But 
for him Oluyole could never have attained to his present position 
nor could have maintained it for a month, before his murder or 
expulsion would have ended his career. 

Oluyole was blind to his own interests when he was arranging 
this plot against Elepo. Elepo on the other hand, unsuspicious 
of the intrigues of his chief, was negotiating through him with 
the other chiefs. He loved and trusted him too well for him to 
entertain the slightest doubt of his good faith. 

As the war-chiefs were on their homeward march, threatening 
messages were said to have been sent to Elepo through the Basorun ; 



290 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the latter, in order that he might be able to accomphsh his design, 
ill-advised Elepo to leave his house a while, assuring him that 
all would be right in the end. He knew quite well that as long as 
Elepo was in his own house their plansmust fail, for no one would 
dare to face the lion in his den. 

Atipo his brother at once suspected the intriguer by such 
advice, and asked, " Why should it be deemed necessary for the 
Mogaji (i.e. Elepo) to leave his house when you the chief were 
employing your good offices for him ? Which of the war-chiefs 
would be bold enough either to go against your declared wish or 
to attack Elepo backed by his chief the Basorun ? " But the 
Basorun evaded the question ; on the contrary he kept pressing 
the point with great urgency knowing that once Elepo left his 
house he would never be allowed to return to it. 

Elepo disheartened by the bad faith of his hitherto trusted 
lord jdelded with pain' and disappointment only out of respect 
to him. He removed all his effects to the Basorun's house as 
well as all the captives and booty from the late Otefan expedition. 
Thus unmindful of the good Elepo had done him when he was 
somewhat similarly situated after the O^a expedition, Oluyole 
requited him with ingratitude out of sheer jealousy ; he desired 
to wield an absolute power and felt he could not safely do so 
with such a man under him, and thus he plotted to gain his end 
at the expense of a faithful and loyal friend and colleague. 

When the war-chiefs were nearer home, Oluyole told Elepo 
that he had failed in his negotiations with them and that they 
threatened a civil war in case he sided with him, and consequently 
should Elepo leave the town he, the Basorun, would arrange 
matters with them so that he might return home in peace. 

By this Elepo saw plainly the intrigues of his friend and master. 
Thrice he asked him pointedly " Do you really mean me to leave 
the town ? " Each time the reply was " Yes for the present but 
all will be right in the end." Then chiet Elepo uttered the following 
parable : — " Once upon a time the leopard was king of the beasts, 
and the god Orisa was the only object of his dread. The Orisa's 
house was built in the open fields, and he was protected with an 
earthenware pot. The beasts of the field had no respect for 
Orisa but used to walk and graze around the pot with which he 
was covered without incurring any harm. But at the yearly 
festival when king Leopard headed all the beasts to worship 
the Orisa, to their surprise, he used to prostrate at a distance, 
and do homage by putting earth on his head, and never allowed 
any of the beasts to approach too near lest they give offence to 
the Orisa. The beasts used to say among themselves ' And why 



THE NEW CITY AND NEW GOVERNMENT 29I 

all this precaution ? We often grazed around that pot without 
experiencing any harm, can Oiisa kill at all as king Leopard would 
have us believe ? ' Now upon one such occasion when the Leopard 
and all the beasts in his train were prostrating at a distance, the 
Orisa said to the Leopard ' Why not allow these my children to 
draw near to me ? ' The Leopard rephed, ' O most adorable Orisa, 
the beasts you would have to approach your sacred presence are 
ignorant creatures that know not your worth ; were they allowed 
to do so they will tread on the mat on which you are seated and 
will soon after end by treading on yourself.' This parable is 
for you, Basorun. The war-chiefs you are making so much of 
do not know your worth, they pay honours to you only on my 
account, and should I leave the town as you say, they will soon 
tread upon the mat on which you are seated and finally upon 
yourself." 

After this Elepo left the town with about 1,000 followers and 
retired first to Ipara a town in Ijebu Remo and resided there for 
a while. 

Civil War at Ibadan 

Not long after the departure of El^po the truth of his parable 
became quite evident, the prophecy had all but obtained a terrible 
fulfilment. 

Enriched by the treasures of the expelled chieftain, and his 
wealth further augmented by the portion allotted to him by his 
war-chiefs from the successful expedition of Osogbo, Oluyole 
became much elated, feeling himself now the sole and absolute 
master of the town of Ibadan without the fear of any possible 
rival. But it was not long before an insurrection was raised 
against him ; Chiefs Olubodun, Akiliyi, Atipo, Lajubu, Akinlabi 
and Ogidi took up arms against him and the whole town was soon 
in an uproar. Nothing but the mere chance of their leader 
Olubodun being killed before the action really commenced 
brought the rising to a sudden close. 

One of OluyQle's men from the roof of his house espied Olubodun 
hastening to the scene of action and as he m.ust pass by the corner 
of his house to gain the main street, the man raised the thatch 
of his roof, levelled his gun at Olubodun at very close quarters 
and shot him dead on the spot ! The suddenness and unexpected- 
ness with which this was accomplished created a panic among his 
followers and it spread instantly among the other chiefs and their 
men, and they fled precipitately pursued by Oluyole's men. 
Akiliyi and Ogidi were taken but the rest escaped to Ijaye. Akihyi 
was executed. Ogidi was pardoned, but was ordered out of his 



292 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

house and district at Isale Ijebu, the former being levelled to the 
ground and left in ruins, and he had to occupy a small house at 
Isale Osun under strict surveillance. 

[The site of the house was subsequently given to the Rev. D. 
Hinderer the first missionary of the Church Missionary Society at 
Ibadan in 1851 and has since become the C.M.S. station at Oke 
Kudeti.] 

IjAYE AND THE IbADAN REFUGEES 

Of the three men who escaped to Ijaye after the tragic end of 
Olubgdun, Lajubu somehow effected a return home and was 
pardoned, but Atipo and Akinlabi did not return but made Ijaye 
their home permanently. 

They occupied the house of one Akiola who was put to death 
by the Are of Ijaye under the following painful circumstances : — 
In one af their expeditions to the Sabe provinces Akiola captured 
a young maiden of whom he became enamoured ; he first shared 
his bed with her, and on the return home of the expedition this 
captive was among others he apportioned to their chief Kurumi 
the Are of Ijaye. But the Are also was captivated by 
the charms of this young woman and he at once included her in 
his harem. And so it happened that on finding afterwards that 
she had already been tampered with, he became enraged with 
Akiola and constituted this a crime for which he murdered him ! 

Atipo and Akinlabi retaining the spirit and energy of Ibadan 
were restless at Ijaye ; they made two expeditions to the banks 
of the Niger on their own account, captured Ogodo in the first 
and Gbajigbo in the second expedition, and brought home many 
captives and much booty. 

After this Atipo went to Ipara to fetch his brother El^po to 
Ijaye by way of Ilugun. Elepo's followers had by this time 
dwindled to about 70 men, the rest having returned home to 
Ibadan weary of the inaction at Ipara. 

Oluyole became very jealous of the success and the popularity 
of these men at Ijaye, and Kurumi ever suspicious of any brave 
and distinguished man, readily listened to the insinuations of the 
former that these men would one day prove a danger to the state, 
that they would sooner or later desert him for Ilorin (their common 
enemy) and that Kurumi should at once dispose of them. 

Kurumi invited them both to a banquet and there, completely 
in his power, he murdered them both and seized all their property. 
Thus ended the career of these brave men of Ibadan and Ijaye. 



Chapter XVI 
A SERIES OF FRATRICIDAL WARS 

After the events narrated above, the history of the Yorubas 
centred largely at Ibadan which, down to the time of the British 
Protectorate continued to attract to itself ardent spirits from 
every tribe and family all over the country, who made it their 
home, so that while the rest of the country was quiet, Ibadan was 
making history. 

An Episode. — The Osu War. — After the return of the Ibadans 
from the Ota war, and the civil war which placed Oluyole at the 
head of the government, Inakoju the Seriki died and was succeeded 
by one Ladanu. After his promotion, Ladanu led out an expedi- 
tion to Osu which turned out disastrous. He was accompanied 
by most of Oluyole's men, e.g , Akinsowon, Abipa, Aijenku and 
Erinle S^nku. 

Osu not being far from Ile§a the capital of the Ijesa country, 
the Ijesas, hearing of their approach, lay in ambush, and cut the 
Seriki's army in pieces. The Seriki himself in an attempt to rally 
his discomfited army was slain. Chiefs Akinsowon and Abipa 
were also slain leaving Aijenku and Erinle Sanku who escaped 
with difficulty alone to tell the tale. 

The Eleduwe war which followed soon after, and the Abemo and 
Osogbo wars subsequently, fully engaged the attention of the 
Ibadans ; now they were at leisure they were resolved to avenge 
the loss of their late Seriki. Balogun Oderinlg led out the whole 
Ibadan army. Their route lay through the Ede farms and there 
they were encamped for many days foraging. The Ije.sas of the 
capital joined by the army of Osu met them at Iloba which was 
4 hours to Osu eastward, and between 6 and 8 hours to Ile§a, 
Osu itself being about 6 hours to Ilesa. Here several battles were 
fought, and when the Ijesas could stand the fire of the Ibadans no 
longer, they evacuated the town, and the place was taken. The 
Ibadans followed up the victory to Osu their objective, but the 
town had been deserted ; they made no captives there but carried 
away booties, and returned home to Ibadan in triumph. After 
this there arose a series of neighbourly strifes all over the 
country. 

m 



294 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

§ I. A A YE AND OtUN 

Whilst the revolutionary wars were raging all over the rest 
of the Yoruba country, the Fulanis devastating the Metropolitan 
province, the Oygs the Egba province, and the Ifes, Ijebus and Oygs 
striving for predominance in the south, the Ijesa and Ekiti 
provinces, save for the late Pole war, were enjoying the blessings 
of peace. Entrenched in their mountain fastnesses, they were 
safe from the Fulani horse and other foes. 

But it seems they were not to be exempt from the ban that hung 
over the rest of the Yoruba nation, and hence they commenced an 
internal strife among themselves, which led to their inviting 
outside help and resulted in their final subjugation. 

A^ye and Otun were two towns in the Efon and Ekiti districts 
contiguous to one another ; the people bear the same relationship 
to each other as the Egba bear towards the Oyos or Ijebus. They 
are all included under the term Ekiti. 

A feud arose between these two towns about their boundaries 
which culminated in a war in which Otun was worsted, but so 
determined on revenge was the Olotun (king of Otun) that he 
sought help from abroad ; he sent to Ibadan for that purpose 
and Balogun Oderinlo was sent out with the whole of the Ibadan 
army, and Akye was besieged. 

Finding that the Ibadans were too strong for them the Alaye 
(king of Aaye) sought help from Ilorin, and the Ilorin horse under 
their general Afunku appeared in the field in aid of Aciye. The 
choice fell on the Fulani Balogun as the Hausa and Yoruba 
Baloguns of the Ilorins had already failed at Osogbo. 

The Ilorins did their best to raise the siege by attacking the 
Ibadans in the rear, but the Ibadans rounded on them and inflicted 
on them a severe defeat. Their leader general Afunku fell in 
the conflict, about lOO Ilorins were made prisoners, and the rest 
escaped home, leaving Aaye to its fate. 

Such a turn of affairs was least expected at Aaye. The town 
was now closely invested, and when they were reduced to feeding 
on roots of trees, reptiles, and other loathsome objects they 
went about the streets bewailing their misfortunes and endeavour- 
ing to move the sympathy of their kinsmen of Otun, and sang 
" Olotun nje otito li o yio fi kini yi se ? " (O king of Otun, will 
you then make of this matter a stern reality ?) 

But there were some men in the town who were encouraging 
them to hold out a Httle longer, saying that great as their distress 
was in the town, greater still was it in the Ibadan camp where they 
were reduced to pounding hay for food ; and if their allies could 
not raise the siege, famine would do it for them. 



A SERIES OF FRATRICIDAL WARS 295 

Thus encouraged, the men of Aaye held out heroically, they 
built forts upon the town walls from which sharp shooters harassed 
the Ibadans continually, and among those killed by that means 
was a notable chief Toki Onibudo^ the Seriki of Ibadan. But 
when they could hold out no longer, when men, women, and children 
were dying in the stieets from starvation, Fagbefiro the Alaye 
with his mother were resolved to risk going in person to the 
Ibadan camp to sue for peace. 

When they entered the camp and were being conducted to the 
Balogun's quarters, the Alaye was overcome with surprise on 
finding yam, corn, flour, and other articles of food exposed in the 
market for sale, " What do I see ? " exclaimed he " What about 
the famine we were told existed in the Ibadan camp so that men 
were reduced to feeding on pounded hay? " He there and then 
ordered some yam to be purchased for him, even before he got to 
the presence of the Balogun. 

The Balogun received the Alaye in a friendly manner, and terms 
of peace were agreed upon, the Alaye promising to serve the 
Ibadans. But he was told that as they could not return home to 
Ibadan empty-handed, he should give them a small force and a 
guide to Isan the next town of importance ; and in order to allay 
the Alaye's apprehensions the Balogun ordered a chief named 
Lajubu to return with the Alaye to the town to protect the same 
against the wild soldiery until the whole army had passed on to 
Iskn. But this seems to have been a ruse, for Lajubu and the 
Alaye had scarcely reached the gate of the town when the whole 
Ibadan army was on the move, Lajubu himself rushed forward not 
to protect the place, but to be amongst the first in plundering and 
slave-catching. Very few however were the captives taken, 
as famine had done its worst with them ; most of the survivors were 
weak and sickly, with oedematous hands and feet, and only about 
100 comparatively able-bodied were found amongst them, and even 
these nearly all soon perished from the indiscretion of their captors, 
who in hopes of restoring them speedily to sound health fed them 
immoderately after a long spell of starvation. 

The Ibadan army pushed on and took Oro, Yapa, Isi and Isan. 
At the last mentioned place all the war-chiefs remained, but the 
war-boys followed up the conquest as far as to Itagi, where they 
suffered a disaster and were checked. 

The people of Itagi left their town and hid themselves in the bush 
hard by. The Ibadan war-boys having rushed in, dispersed 

1 This chief was succeeded by his nephew, Ibikunle, who 
became a famous Balogun. 



296 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

all over the town, intent on plundering ; when the Itagi armed 
men came out and hunted them down everywhere butchering 
them to pieces. Chief Lajubu was amongst those caught in 
the market place and there he ended his career. 

This expedition opened the way for the Ibadan raids into 
the Ekiti country, which continued year by year until the whole 
of that province was brought under subjugation by them as will 
be seen hereafter, and they remained a subject people under the 
Ibadans until, united in one, they struck for freedom, which was 
won by the aid of the British government many years after. 

§ 2. The Egbas and Egbados 

About the same time as the events recorded in the previous 
section, the Egbas were waging war with some of the Egbado 
tribes. Ado was besieged, but held out for many years. All 
the Baloguns of Abeokuta were there present except their chief 
Sodeke ; but they spent their strength and skill to no purpose. 

It was just about this time (A.D. 1843) that the Missionaries 
of the C.M.S. arrived at Abeokuta for inspection with a view 
to carrying on mission work in this country. The pioneer was 
the Rev. Henry Townsend a European missionary, with Mr. 
Andrew Wilhelm Desalu his interpreter, both from Sierra Leone. 
They met Chief Sodeke the Balogun of Itoku and leader of the 
Egbas to Abeokuta who received them with a cordial welcome. 
Mr. Townsend left Abeokuta after a short stay with a promise 
to return soon for a permanent stay amongst them tor missionary 
work. 

Thus light began to dawn on the Yoruba country from the 
south, when there was nothing but darkness, idolatry, superstition, 
blood shedding and slave-hunting all over the rest of the country. 
There was an old tradition in the country of a prophecy that as 
ruin and desolation spread from the interior to the coast, so light 
and restoration will be from the coast interior-wards. This was 
a tradition of ages. Is not this event the beginning of its fulfil- 
ment ? Whilst the Egbas were encamped before Ado, the Daho- 
mians led out an expedition, and were on the march for Ilaro. 
It was privately reported to the Egbas that the Dahomians would 
suddenly fall on them and raise the siege. Hearing this the Egbas 
first sent out spies to ascertain their situation ; they thereupon 
surprised the Dahomians one morning as they spread themselves 
about their camp airing and drying their accoutrements that had 
got wet from a drenching rain after a storm that took place on the 
previous evening. In the confusion of the flight the Egbas captured 
the standard of the Dahomian army, which was an umbrella made 



A SERIES OF FRATRICIDAL WARS 297 

of the skins of different kinds of animals, and burnt it. It was 
said that the King of Dahomey negotiated for it, and would have 
redeemed it at any price, but as it had been destroyed, it could 
not be restored ; and this was the cause of the mortal enmity 
and s>vorn hatred that has existed between successive Kings of 
Dahomey and the Egbas of Abeokuta unto this day. By the 
intervention of the Rev. Hy. Townsend, the siege of Ado was 
raised after a duration of 5 or 6 years, and the Egbas returned 
home. 

§ 3. Ibadan and Ijaye. The Batedo War, a.d. 1844 

Inflated with the success of his intrigues at home and his arms 
abroad, the Basorun of Ibadan was aspiring to the throne of 
Oyo ! That this was so was evident from his style and manner 
at this time, and the insinuations his drummer was permitted to 
make when greeting him : — 

" Iba, kuku joba, (Be the King at once, my lord, 

Mase bi Oba mo." Cease acting like a King). 

He, however, had his own misgivings ; he was the King's nephew 
but by the female line, and no such succession is possible in the 
Yoruba country. He would however make a venture trying might 
where he had no right, and in order to effect his purpose he was 
seeking occasion for a rupture with the AlAfin, and at the same 
time, by entreaty and bribery, endeavouring to secure the 
connivance if not the alliance of the Are of Ijaye, the only obstacle 
in his way. The latter refused to listen to him, and even remon- 
strated with him for his presumption and disloyalty to his lawful 
sovereign whose first minister he was. But as he would not 
be dissuaded from his projects, the Are finally sent word to say 
no one would venture to attack Oyo unless he the Are-ona-Kakanfo 
be first removed out of the way. 

The Are kept the King well informed of all that was passing 
between himself and the Basorun. His Majesty also was well 
aware of the Basorun's intentions and of his power, hence he dealt 
wisely and patiently with him, never evincing any hostile spirit 
towards him, nor taking any notice of his insults. Thrice did 
Oluyole the Basorun send word to the King to say he should now 
fulfil the promise he made before his coronation to lead the people 
back home and remove the seat of government back to the ancient 
capital. The King knowing his intentions, thus replied to the 
messengers on the tliird and last time : " Tell your master that 
if he is ready let him come on, I am ready. As the present 
Oyo is on the high way to the ancient capital, he should start 



298 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

first and meet me here." At the same time the AlAfin was 
fortifjang the town against a sudden attack, and employed a 
fetishman one Latubosun to bury charms at all the gates leading 
to the city as a preventive. As he was evincing much anxiety 
for the safetj' of the town both this fetishman and the Ondasa 
(the official fetishman) assured him that not a single shot would be 
fired against this place. 

Oluyole on the other hand lost no opportunity of seeking an 
occasion for a rupture between himself and the King. He sent 
a body of troops to intercept Abudu Alelo and Kosija the Ilari 
whom the King sent to Porto Novo for a supply of ammunition. 
Abudu's teeth were shattered by the fire of one of Oluygle's men, 
for this the King neither remonstrated with Oluyole nor demanded 
a redress knowing it to be a deliberate casus belli ; he treated the 
matter as an accident. 

With Kurumi the Are also Oluyole was provoking a rupture 
as he was the only obstacle in the way of his carrying out of his 
projects. He demanded that Kurumi as Kakanfo should acknow- 
ledge the seniority of himself as Basorun by coming in person to 
Ibadan to pay his respects to him, as he goes to Oyo to do homage. 
Kuriimi was too wide awake to venture his head into the lion's 
mouth, notwithstanding that Ogun-ko-roju his Balogun urged 
him to comply for the sake of peace. The Basorun constituted 
this refusal a casuf belli. 

A circumstance, however, occurred which accelerated the war. 
One Asu the Areagoro of Ladejo, an Ijaye chief, was expelled the 
town for treason, and he escaped to Fiditi, a town mid-way 
between Ijaye and Oyo; he rebuilt the ruins and had the town 
re-inhabited. The Kakanfo sent a company of 100 men to surprise 
and disperse this Httle band, but they found Asu and his men ready, 
and proving too strong for them, they were defeated and driven 
back. Fearing therefore the resentment of the Are, Asu sent to 
Ibadan for help. TheBasor un who had long been seeking an oppor- 
tunity for war against Ijaye hailed the present offer and sent out 
Balogun Oderinlo and Ibikunle the Seriki with instructions to 
confine their operations to kidnapping expeditions in Ijaye and 
Oyo farms, in order to harass them, and render farming both 
useless and unsafe so that famine might do half the work before a 
direct attack was made. 

This continued for many months and several skirmishes took 
place on the Aregbe hills in the Ijaye farms with varying results. 
At length the Ibadans suffered a great disaster at Odogido in 
the Ijaye farms which put an end to the Fiditi campaign. On 
that eventful day the Balogun arranged to lead an expedition 



A SERIES OF FRATRICIDAL WARS 299 

to the Oyo farms and entrusted that to the Ijaye farms to the 
Seriki. At a place called Odogido the Ijayes lay in ambush 
and suddenly attacked the Seriki's army on all sides and routed it 
completely. About 140 masters of compounds " who went to 
war on horseback " were caught and slain exclusive of private 
soldiers. It was said that Ibikunle the Seriki himself only escaped 
by falling into some friendly hands and was quietly let off. The 
Ijayes pressed hard in pursuit until it was dark and the shadows 
of night saved the remnant ot the defeated. Hence this expedition 
was sometimes named " Oru gba mi 1^." (The night saved me.) 
One Lampejg was wounded in about 60 places all over his body,, 
and was left for dead, but at night he revived and found his way 
home. 

The expedition to the Oyo farms under the Balogun was also 
unsuccessful, though not disastrous ; not a single captive was 
brought back with him for they met nobody in the farms. 

The Are of Ijaye put to death all the captives that fell into his 
hands ; and made a platform on which he piled up the heads of 
the slain. For three months after this, the Ibadans remained 
inactive at Fiditi. 

Oluyole received the news with great indignation. He was 
resolved upon a siege of Ijaye ; and at once declared war and ordered 
his army at Fidih to meet him on the way thither ; they met him 
at Ojoho his first encampment about six miles from Ibadan. 

Thence they removed to Ika about midway between the two 
belligerent towns. From this place they began to clear the bush 
taking a north-easterly direction to the Ijaye farms which they 
reached on the 5th day and there encamped. Here the Ijayes 
met them and for two full years hard battles were fought with 
equal success on both sides ; but the war was very unpopular. 

Also an incident reported from home contributed largely to the 
failure of the expedition on the part of the Ibadans. The war- 
chiefs were told of the Basorun's boast when he heard of the 
disaster of Odogido that if there remained but himself alone and 
Oyainu (his favourite wife) he would take Ijaye. Oyainu herself, 
a lady of a masculine temperament and very popular was heard 
to swear by the Egugun gods (a thine; forbidden to women) that 
if the war was left to herself alone, she would take Ijaye. 

The war-chiefs were naturally hurt by this impHed slur cast 
upon them by the Basorun and his wife. This, added to the un- 
naturalness of the conflict, rendered them perfectly indifferent to 
the issue of the war, they followed their chief and his wife half- 
heartedly, rather as spectators to see how far they could do without 
them ; it was even asserted that some of the chiefs fired only 



300 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

blank ammunition. Whatever maybe the truth of these reports, 
it was qiiite certain that the war was unpopular, and that the 
Basgrun and his wife had to bear the brunt of the battle. 

The war at length became a general one. Both sides sought the 
alliance of the Egbas ; the Egba chiefs were divided, Sodek§ and 
Anoba declared for Ijaye, but Apati being Oluyole's friend and 
relative declared for Ibadan. Sodeke himself never went beyond 
Arakanga, 3 miles from home, but sent his eldest son forward 
to Ijaye. 

The alliance of Ogbomoso was also sought ; there was also a 
division here, the Bale declared for Ijaye but Ogurunbi a notable 
war-chief, for Ibadan. Oluygle further sought the alliance of the 
Emir of Ilorin and the aid of his powerful Balogun Ali. He also 
sent provisions for the Ilorin troops on account of the great 
scarcity of food then at Ilorin, and asked them to beseige Ogbomoso. 
He also sent a contingent force of infantry in aid of the Ilorins. 
The men of Ogbomoso defeated this army but could not pursue 
them far, for fear of the Ilorin horse. 

The Oke Ogun districts also were divided in their allegiance 
Iseyin declared for both Ijaye and Ibadan. [The fact is that that 
town was practically situated between two fires]. But He Bioku 
Berekodo, Igbo Ora and Pako were for Ibadan. 

In the Eastern districts Apomu, Ikire and Osogbo were vassals 
of Ibadan and had no choice, but Iwo and Ede revolted. The 
people of Ede were at first the allies of the Ibadans, and Folarin 
their prince was in the Ibadan camp from the beginning of the 
campaign, but when he received information that his people at 
home had revolted, he one day went over with all his men to Ijaye 
and was there received with open arms. The Are sent him home 
in peace under the escort of Chief Elepo late of Ibadan. 

Lodifi an Iwo chief also went over and was similarly sent home. 
But Kolokg and Adepo two Ibadan war-chiefs were stationed at 
Ejigbo to raid the Ede farms ; when therefore Prince Folarin and 
Chief Elepo arrived at Ede, they went against Ejigbo to drive away 
these raiders. Elepo, confident in the terror his very name 
inspired thought they would not dare await his approach, but alas, 
that time for Elepo was past and gone ; Prince Folarin fell in an 
engagement and Elepo was seriously wounded in the arms. He 
was thus invalided at Ede for about a whole year before he was 
sufficiently recovered to return to Ijaye. 

Thus the war between Ibadan and Ijaye involved nearly the 
whole country ; it lasted for two full years and during this period, 
the deadly conflict was chiefly between the Basorun and the Arg, 
for Odgrinlo the Balogun of Ibadan and Oguoroju the Balogun of 



A SERIES OF FRATRICIDAL WARS 30I 

liaye had free though private communication with each other, 
and so all the minor chiefs and privates on both sides met each his 
kinsman and exchanged greetings and presents with one another. 

The Alafin of Oyo held himself quite neutral and rendered 
no aid to either party and was thus able to come forward as 
an arbitrator between the contending parties. He sent the emblems 
of the god Sango with the high priest from Oyo to Ijaye, and thence 
to the Ibadan camp saying, " What the king on earth may not be 
able to effect, surely the King from the other world can do, and 
this unnatural conflict must now cease." 

Sango's intervention was respected by both parties now tired 
of the war, and peace was immediately concluded. The Ibadans 
in the camp flocked to Ijaye and vice versa, ^dich. one to see his 
friends and relatives and to offer congratulations. 

It was during this war that locusts were first seen in the Yoruba 
country. They swarmed through the land and devoured every 
blade of green grass, but there was no famine in consequence for 
providentially it occurred just before cereals were planted, and 
they did not pass over the same region again ; but there was 
agricultural depression in some parts of the country for the locusts 
did not altogether disappear from the land for about two years. 

§ 4. Abeokut aand Abaka. The AbAka War, a.d. 1846 

About a year after their return from the Ado war, and after 
the death of Sodeke the Egbas found a pretext for waging war 
against Abak^ a suburban village. It was at first considered 
an easy task, but the Abaka men defended theii town so vigorously 
that they compelled the Egbas to beat a hasty retreat. The war 
was, however, renewed and the small town closely invested for 
fully four months and was reduced by famine. The distinguished 
Egba war-chiefs then were ; Apati the Generalissimo, Anoba, 
Olufakun, Somoye, Ogunbgna of Ikija and others. On their 
return from this expedition about 150 captives were allotted 
to Anoba alone. 

The Egbas being now fully settled in their new home, Abeokuta, 
deemed it necessary to organize themselves for complete civil 
duties and have a king over them ; and Okukenu one of their 
war-chiefs who bore the Oyo title of Sagbua (one of the junior 
Esos of Oyo) was unanimously elected the first king of Abeokuta. 

§ 5, The Ile Bioku Expedition and End of Chief Elepo 

At the same time the Abaka war was going on, Kuriimi the 
Are of liaye sent an expedition against Ile Bioku one of the Oke 
Ogun towns to punish them for having sided with the Ibadans 
M 



302 The history of the yorubas 

during the late Batedo war. This expedition was entrusted 
to Chief Elepo late of Ibadan. This chief was for carrying the 
place by a coup de main, but the men of Bioku having heard before- 
hand of the impending danger were on the alert, and were fully 
prepared to offer a determined resistance. Elepo arranged for a 
night attack and headed his men for the assault. The men of 
Bioku fought desperately, but so vigorous was the assault that they 
were compelled to retreat into the town and some captives were 
made among them. 

But Elepo the leader of the expedition had been wounded with 
a poisoned arrow at the first onslaught, and as he stepped aside 
as was his wont, for his troops to rush forward, he expired soon after 
unknown to them. 

But the men of Bioku rallied and repulsed the attack, and when 
at this moment Elepo was expected to re-appear on the scene to 
support his men he was not to be found. The repulsed assembled 
at the foot of the hill on which He Bioku was built waiting for 
their leader ; his drum was kept up beating and calling him if per- 
chance he had missed his way, but alas he had fallen and they 
knew it not. 

The Bioku men had not the courage to descend from their 
heights and attack them, nor could the Ijaye in vadeis venture on 
another assault without their leader. Thus both parties retired. 

At dawn, the men of Bioku in removing their slain observed 
the corpse of Chief Elepo, and they called to the Ijaye men from 
their heights : "Examine among j'ourselves and see who is 
missing ; here is the corpse of a fallen soldier with striped trousers." 
Then the Ijaye men knew that they had lost their leader. Thus 
the expedition against He Bioku failed. 

The Late Chief Elepo. — Chief Elepo was a native of Iwdgbk 
and was acknowledged to be one of the greatest generals Ibadan 
ever produced. In no other man was power ever seen so combined 
with hamiUty, loyalty, and devotion as was characteristic of 
Elepo. He was remarkable for simplicity of manners, and could 
not be distinguished among his common soldiers by dress or any 
futile accessories. At home or in the field he mingled freely with 
them all and carried a gun on his shoulders hke one of them. He 
was almost always victorious. Unhke the other generals of the 
day, he used to march at the head of his troops leading them to the 
fight, and when on the scene ot action he stepped aside with his 
attendants, for his men to rush forward, and if they were 
repulsed he would at once re-appear on the scene and repel the 
enemy. 

The following anecdote told of him will serve to illustrate how 



A SERIES OF FRATRICIDAL WARS 303 

much was the dread which his very name inspired in people's 
breasts. 

It was once rumoured at Iwo that Elepo was coming against 
them at the head of his army. There was a great consternation 
in the town and a Babalawo (Ifa priest) in consulting his god as 
to his safety and that of his family was so distracted with fear 
that he transposed the words of divination, substituting the name 
of Elepo for that of the god, and vice versa ; said he, " Elepo nkan 
kan, Orunmila li o gbe ogun de oke odo yi. Ngo ti se ku ti omo ti 
omg," i.e. O Elepo the ineffable, heie is Orunmila (the god Ifa) 
with his army at the banks of the river. ^ By what means shall I 
perish children and all ! Upon his son calhng his attention to 
the mistake saying " Father, you are saying it wrong, it is just the 
other way," he turned round and dealt him a blow on the head 
saying, "Bi mo ti nfe e ki fito da iya re nu u" (i.e. that is how I used 
to be engaged to it, before ever I divined with your mother), 
intending to say that was how he used to divine with it before he 
was ever engaged to the lad's mother. Such was the dread 
Elepo's name inspired. 

He was generally loved and respected by his colleagues, but 
his oldest friend and chief to whom he was devoted proved false 
to him and contrived to bring about his ruin. Such is man ! 

When the corpse was recognised by the Bioku people his head 
was taken off and sent to the Basorun of Ibadan. What grim 
pleasure or delight that great intriguer took in it, tradition did 
not say, but such was the end of that great man. 

§ 6. Sagaun and Igbo-Ora 
The fires of theBatedo war were still smouldering in the embers. 
The Basorun of Ibadan at the zenith of his glory, but unable to 
attain the height of his ambition became very oppressive at home. 
No one escaped the virulence of his tongue ; he had no regard for 
any, least of all for the Balogun who was the next man to him in 
the town. A general insurrection was therefore raised against 
him which involved nearly the whole town. The Balogun and 
Otun connived at it, but professed neutrality ; the Seriki and the 
Asipa alone were for restoring order in the town, and through their 
intervention, by remonstrating with the two senior chiefs, and 
addressing a strong appeal to the Basorun to check the excesses 
of his men, the insurrection was quelled. The Ibadans however 
soon found a vent for their overflowing energies by events trans- 
piring elsewhere, as an outcome of the late Batedo war. 

^ The River Obk near Iwo. 



304 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

We have seen above how parties were divided in their allegiance 
in the Oke Ogim districts during the late Batedo war, how Sagaun 
declared for Ijaye, andBerekodo, Igbo Ora, and Pako for Ibadan. 
Agidi the chief of Sagaun found a pretext for declaring war against 
Igbo- Ora, and besieged it, but finding the place too strong for 
him, he appHed to Ijaye for help, and the Are sent out theBalogun 
to his aid. The Igbo Ora people on the other hand sent to Ibadan 
for help as their misfortunes were occasioned by their loyalty 
to Ibadan, The Basorun at first sent to their aid a war-chief 
named Akawo but Akawo soon sent home for a larger force ; 
then Ibikunle the Seriki, Opeagbe the Osi and others were sent as 
re-inforcement. The principal war-chiefs remained at Berekodo, 
but they sent all the Badas to Igbo-Ora. But the Ijaye army was 
still too strong for them and when they could hold out no longer 
they retreated with the whole of the Igbo-Ora people to Pako. 
The Balogun of Ijaye besieged them here also and would have 
crushed them had not timely aid come from Ibadan. The 
Basorun hearing of the straits in which his men were, ordered the 
Balogun to the rescue. But Oderinlo the Balogun of Ibadan and 
Lasilo theBalogun of Ijaye were sworn friends, and rather than 
prove false to him, Oderinlo from his first rendezvous at Odo 
Ona sent to tell his friend that he was coming with an overwhelming 
force which the I j ayes could not possibly withstand, and there- 
fore he would advise him to retire from Sagaun as soon as 
possible; nothing could be gained by the enormous loss of lives that 
must ensue, and the pangs of broken friendship ; and Sagaun 
must fall. Lasilo and his men accordingly letired from Sagaun, and 
on that very day the Ibadan hosts entered and Sagaun was taken. 

Chief Agidi who originated the war fell from the heights of Oke 
Tapa and was killed. Within 13 days of their departure the 
Balogun of Ibadan with his armj' returned home but met the 
Basorun seriously ill. During their absence in the field the Basorun 
called at the houses of all the principal chiefs and respectable 
citizens to ask after the welfare of their households ; he was 
everywhere received with marks of honour. In one of these rounds 
he unfortunately met with an accident, by being thrown off his 
horse and he sustained an internal injury from which he was laid 
up and was unable to see or welcome home his army. Five days 
after their arrival, he breathed his last. 

What the populace could not do during his lifetime they were 
determined to do now, viz., to pull down and plunder his house on 
account of the enormities perpetrated by him. But the Balogun 
prevented this, he posted the Agbakin with his men at the entrance 
of the palace to prevent any outrage or disorder. 



A SERIES OF FRATRICIDAL WARS 305 

Thus passed away one of the most distinguished figures in the 
Yoruba countr5\ 

The Late Oluyole Basorun of Ibadan. — Oluygle was the son 
of OlokQoye, grandson of Basorun Yamba, and Agbgnrin the 
daughter of King Abiodun the Alafin of Oyo. He was born 
during the period of the Fulani ascendancy and the ravages of 
the Jamas, and hence his parents were reduced to absolute poverty. 
As a lad, he was apprenticed to a metallurgist for whom he carried 
charcoal. It was during this period that he obtained the friendship 
of Oyainu (his favourite wife) whom he afterwards married ; but 
his first wife was Latofide. When he first asked for her hand she 
refused him on account of the idle life he was then leading as a 
dancer ; but his friends Lanose and others begged her to accept 
him, pledging their honour to see her taken care of and properly 
supported. 

When Oluyole rose to power and eminence he took revenge 
on her for this circumstance which he never forgot. 

Oyainu had no children but Latofide was the mother of his 
first born Akiola whom he loved very much ; so much so that when 
the lad was seriously ill, at the advice of an Ifa priest he offered 
a slave in sacrifice as a ransom for the life of his son. Akiola however 
died. 

Oluyole joined at Ipara the band of marauders which subse- 
quently settled at Ibadan. Fortune favoured him there and he rose 
to a position of some distinction in the army, first as an Areagoro, 
then the Osi of Ibadan, and lastly he became the Basorun of the 
kingdom. 

He was the friend of Ologun I'Eko and of Kosoko of Lagos 
whose ally he was during the Ota war : he survived all his colleagues 
and after the Eleduwe war obtained the title of Basorun from the 
AlAfin Atiba. 

As a ruler he was arbitrary and oppressive and that was the 
cause of several civil wars at Ibadan. As a commander he was 
almost always successful although he had many narrow escapes. 

As an excuse for him, his was an age of anarchy and lawlessness, 
and a ruler who showed himself weak would soon be compelled to 
give place to another. He could endure no rival and was exceed- 
ingly ambitious, hence the two inexcusable flaws in his life history, 
the perfidy to his faithful friend Elepo, and the disloyalty to the 
AlAfin his uncle and sovereign. 

He cannot be properly spoken of as a bloodthirsty tyrant 
because although sometimes inexorable, yet he was frequently 
merciful and forbearing. We may note for instance his treatment 
of those caught in the insurrection against him. In this respect 



306 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

he contrasted most favourably with his contemporary Kurumi 
of Ijaye. 

Ogunmgla who subsequently rose to distinction was but a 
private during his early administration: he had only a single 
drummer as his attendant whom he used to mount on a tree in 
front of his house and himself sitting on an empty keg of powder 
challenging the Basgrun to a civil war ! His drummer used to 
beat : — 

" Ogunmola, ija 'gboro ni yio pa a dan, dan, dan ! 
O nyi agba gbiri, gbiri, gbiri ! 
O mu agbori Igwg, o nwo ona Orun yan, yan, yan ! " 
(Ogunmola, of a civil fight he shall die for sure, sure, sure ! 
He keeps kegs of powder a rolling, rolling, rolling ! 
With a jack knife in hand he is looking heavenwards steadily, 
steadily, steadily !) 

His Highness, amused at this imp, used to send him some presents, 
sa5ang " He is hungry hence he is challenging me to a fight." 

His contemporary of Ijaye would have made short work of 
him for this. 

Oluygle was fond of husbandry ; he had extensive plantations 
of okra, beans, vegetables, corn and yams, a separate farm for 
each, and whenever he had to take any to the market, no farmer 
was allowed to sell that particular article that day as he had sufii- 
cient to supply all the traders in the town, and could undersell 
any farmer. He made an experiment in yam planting so that a 
single root should be large enough for a load. The soil was first 
prepared, and a hole dug about 3 or 4ft. deep, and as many in 
diameter ; this was filled with weeds and pieces of banana stalks, 
earth was raised upon it, and the yam planted therein ; as the 
underlying rubbish decayed room was made for the yam to extend 
in all directions until the hole was filled and the size of the yam 
large enough for a load. 

The Basorun owned nearly all the kola trees in the town as 
well as the kola groves, and often offered human sacrifices in 
them in order to make the trees fruitful One of his wives, the 
mother of his son Owolabi, was for a trifling offence punished by 
being sacrificed in one of these groves. 

Silk velvet was then very rare and of a high value ; he allowed 
no one but himself alone to use a velvet robe ; the chiefs might use 
velvet caps only, but this no common man dared to do. The argu- 
ment for this was that when poor people begin to aspire to what 
they could not easily obtain, they neglect the more necessary 
things of every day life and thereby impoverish those dependent 



A SERIES OF FRATRICIDAL WARS 307 

upon them. Moreover, it fosters the spirit of ambition and 
covetousness which may lead to robbery and other evils. It is 
better, therefore not to encourage such, and thus they were for- 
bidden altogether. 

Oluyole kept a large harem, for when he had become great his 
wives used to seize any good-looking maiden found in the street 
or market place, and bring her to him to become his wife. Hundreds 
of these he did not even know by sight, his palace being an enormous 
compound. On his death, the relatives and betrothed husbands 
of these maidens boldly entered his palace and took them away. 

He had many children, the most distinguished among them were : 
Owolabi who perished in the Ara expedition (to be noticed hereafter) , 
after him Alade who became the head of the house, but he also 
died not long after, and Aborisade the next eldest who stood for 
many years the head of the house. 

The central market at Ibadan known as " Oja Iba " was so 
named after him when he became Ibasorun ; fo merly it was 
Oja Labosinde after theBaba Isale of the early settlers. 

By the death of the Basorun the government of the town 
devolved upon Oderinlg theBalogun, but as some of the important 
chiefs were then absent from home, he was not disposed to assume 
a higher title till their return, and a general re-arrangement of 
titles take place. But he survived his chief only a year, and Laju- 
mgke the Otun and next in rank to him having died, the headship 
devolved upon Opeagbe the Osi, but he survived them only 11 
months, and after his death, by a unanimous vote Olugbode an 
Owu man was elected Bale, but he was not properly installed 
into office until the war-chiefs returned from an expedition now 
to be noticed. 



Chapter XVII 

SUBJUGATION OF THE IJESAS AND EKITIS BY THE 

IBADANS— SOME IMPORTANT EPISODES— SOCIAL 

REFORM AT IBADAN 

§ I. The Opin War 

After the crushing defeat of the Ilorins at Osogbo and the Ibadan 
ascendancy, the Ilorins ventured no more into the Oyo provinces, 
except for the Httle help they endeavoured to give to the Ibadans 
during the Batedo war, by attempting to besiege Ogbomoso, 
which ended disastrously for them. They appeared now to have 
recovered somewhat from their military depression, at least 
sufficiently to essay an aggressive warfare into the Efon districts. 
A man called Esu, a native of lye, a town between Ilemoso 
and Eluku who had been a slave at Ilorin was redeemed by one 
Lai eye for 12 heads of cowries ; the latter also redeemed one Oni for 
25 heads of cowries, and gave her to him to wife. Esu, however, 
turned out to be a ne'er do weel of a roving disposition, unfit for 
any trade. He left Ilorin and settled first at Egbe then at Itagi 
and finally at Isan, leading a predatory life in those regions, kid- 
napping peaceful traders, sparing none, and was particularly 
hard on the Ilorin traders. In that way he became a person of 
some importance in those parts ; hence the Ilorins were now 
resolved upon capturing him alive. 

Finding himself obnoxious to the Ilorins he hastily declared 
his allegiance to the Ibadans their great antagonist. Through 
the assistance of Oluokun a distinguished Ibadan gentleman 
residing at Ila, he received an introduction to the Basorun 
of Ibadan (then living) who received him cordially, and in dis- 
missing him, gave him a war standard and commended him to 
the care of Yemaja his tutelary deity, Oluyole being a very 
religious man in his own way. In his incursions Esu never forgot 
his patron, for during the Basorun's Ufetime, he continually sent 
him slaves and booty taken in his raids. After the death of 
Oluyole the Ilorins were resolved to besiege Esu at Opin where 
he then was. 

Ali the braveBaloganof Ilorin was entrusted with this expedition. 
He sought the alUance of the Ibadan chiefs, as the relation between 
Esu and Ibadan was only a personal one with the late Baoruns; 
and besides, the Ibadans were somewhat under an obligation to 

308 



SUBJUGATION OF THE IJESAS AND EKITIS BY THE IBADANS 309 

Ilgrin for assisting them in the futile siege of Ogbomgso during 
the late Batedo war, but as a matter of fact in order to forestall 
his opponent. Although any pretext however small was quite 
sufficient as an excuse for the Ibadans to mobilize, yet in this 
case only a junior war-chief named Kgloko with a small force 
was sent to represent the Ibadans, 

For three years Opin held out heroically and had nearly baffled 
the prowess of AH when a sudden accident occurred which extin- 
guished their hopes. Aganga Adoja a noble citizen was the hero 
of the town ; one night Aganga was inspecting his magazine 
with a naked lamp in hand, when suddenly a terrific explosion was 
heard and the hopes of Opin with her heroic defender perished 
together in a moment. 

Esu escaped to Isan, thence to Oye, and then to Ikole. These 
places were taken one after another as Esu was being pursued 
to be taken alive. He escaped finally to Omu Ijela, a place 
fortified by nature against primitive weapons of warfare. Situated 
on a high hill, and surrounded for a mile on all sides by a thorny 
hedge and thickets, it was impenetrable to the Ilorin horse. Ali 
died soon after Opin was taken and his body was conveyed to 
Ilorin for interment. The command of the army now devolved 
on Hinna-konu the Fulani Balogun, assisted by Alanamu the 
Yoruba Balogun of Ilorin. 

After the capture of the above named towns the camp was 
broken up, and the Ilgrin army as well as the Ibadan contingent 
returned to their respective homes. Kglgkg of Ibadan, however, 
did not reach home, but fell sick by the way and died at Osogbo. 

§ 2. Subjugation of the Ijesas 

After th-e return home of the war-chiefs from the Opin expedition 
and all were now present at home. Chief Olugbode was regularly 
and formally installed into office as the Bale of Ibadan. It was 
now his turn to confer the principal titles on the war-chiefs. The 
important titles of Balogun, Otun, Osi, i.e., the commander-in- 
chief, commander of the right and of the left, were vacant. As 
titles were sometimes given not to the most worthy but to the 
highest bidder, Ibikunle the Seriki was advised to bid for the 
title of Balogun ; but he refused to do so with words which have 
become memorable, showing the character and qualit}' of the man 
" A ki ifi owo du oye alagbara," i.e. the title of the valiant should 
never be contested with mone}'. As the most worthy of his 
compeers, the title of Balogun was conferred upon him without 
a dissentient voice. The other titles followed in due course. 

The Ibadan army as now constituted being the instrument of 



310 



THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 



raising the reputation of that military state to its highest pitch 
of fame, which was maintained for many years afterwards and 
has never been surpassed, the names of the principal leaders and 
their offices may here be given : — 

Bale — Olugbode 



Titles. 


Names. 


Titles. 


Names. 


Balogun 

Otun 

Osi 


Ibikunle 

Ogunmola 

Osundina 


Seriki 
Asaju 
Otun Bale 


Ajayi Jegede 

Madarik^n 

Sumala 


Asipa 

Ek§rin 

Ekarun 


Akere 

Orowiisi 

Oyasaw§ 


Osi Bale 
Ajiya Bale 
Areagoro Balogun 


Tub6sun 
Abayomi 
Aij^iiku 



Of these the first three and last two were exceptionally brave men. 
There was at this time in the Yoruba country a great increase 
in the population, a marvellous agricultural prosperity, and an 
abundant energy not always directed to useful purposes. 

It was always the custom after conferring of titles especially 
that of Balogun to seize the first opportunity that offered to prove 
one's fitness for the title ; an opportunity was soon afforded for 
the purpose. 

The Ijebu ERg War 

The Ijgsas of Ilase and Ibokun reinforced from Ilesa were 
at this time making incursions into the Osogbo farms. Osogbo 
being under the protection of Ibadan, the Bale of Ibadan therefore 
sent out his Balogun on his first expedition to punish Ilase for the 
raids. 

On reaching Osogbo, the Ibadan army marched direct to the 
Ilas§ farms, clearing the bush, making wide paths and encamped 
by the Yawo stream. 

But the expedition nearly collapsed before ever they came in 
sight of the enemy. A quarrel broke out between Orowilsi the 
Ekgrin and two of the Bale's war-chiefs Ojo Orona and Okunlk, 
which nearly involved the whole camp. There appeared to be an 
old grudge between them and they clashed with each other when 
choosing sites for their tents. The Bale's principal war-chiefs 
the Otun and the Osi took no part in the fight but their men did. 
Neither the Balogun nor Ogunmola the Otun could interfere with- 
out appearing to take sides and then the strife would be general. 

Ogunmola who was distinguished for his tact and diplomacy 
therefore sent to the Balogun that he should give orders for battle as 
if the Ij§sas were coming upon them. This was done. They marched 
out in order of battle, crossed the Yawo stream and opened fire 



SUBJUGATION OF THE IJgSAS AND EKITIS BY THE IBADANS 3II 

upon an imaginary foe. They then sent a company of men to the 
camp to raise an alarm " The Ijesas in sight." When therefore 
those rival chiefs heard the sound of musketry they left off fighting 
among themselves. The matter was amicably adjusted on the 
next day. 

The Bale at home was informed of everything that transpired 
by a special messenger Oni by name (afterwards Josiah Oni) 
and he sent to pacify both parties. 

For a whole year Ilase withstood the attacks of the Ibadans. 
In order to raise the siege, the Ijesas of Ibokun attacked the Ibadan 
camp from the rear, but the Balogun had provided against this 
contingency. Ali the powerful Balogun of Iwo was always left 
in the camp with a reserve force whenever they were engaged 
in battle. The Ibokuns were routed, driven back, and pursued 
right home, and the town was taken. The Ibadans were now able 
to concentrate all their forces on Ilase. When Ilase could no 
longer hold out, their Ilesa auxiliaries withdrew and the town was 
taken. The Ibadans now left the camp at Yawo and pitched in a 
plain having the ruins of Ilase and Ibokun on one side, and on the 
other Esa Egure and Esa Olusopo. Olusopg and Mesin Oloja 
Oke surrendered through Oluokun of Ibadan, a resident in those 
parts, and peace was concluded with them. From thence they 
removed to Ijebu Ere. 

A large number of the people of Ilase escaped to Ijebu Ere. 
This was a large town, and a large force from Ilesa the capital was 
sent to defend it. The Ibadan army was met at a considerable 
distance from the town. • Three severe engagements took place ; at 
the third the Ijesas were defeated and 160 of them made prisoners. 

Ijebu Ere was now closely besieged. Being a large town, the 
Balogun divided the Ibadan army into three parts ; he 
encamped at Iwaye, and placed the Otun at the Erinmo road and 
the Seriki with all the Badas at the Efon Aye road. He intention- 
ally left the Ilesa road free as if to suggest a way of escape for them. 

The Ijesas made a desperate effort to carry the Iwaye camp, but 
found the Balogun too strong for them. Next they concentrated 
their attack on the camp at the Erinmo road ; thrice they attempted 
to carry it by assault, bat they were repulsed. The Balogun 
thereupon left a few of his war-chiefs in the Iwaye road, took the 
Seriki's place in the Efon Aye road, and sent him to reinforce the 
Otun where the fight was now strongest. 

The Ibadans were then in the habit of using coloured or 
variegated umbrellas in the field as banner j, and the Ijesa war-chiefs 
having then no umbrellas raised their broad sun hats upon a pole 
covering them with a red cloth, to serve the double purpose. 



312 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Opejin the chief of Ibokun, was one of the bravest defenders of 
this place. 

Finding that the defenders continued stubborn, the Ibadans 
began to kidnap on the only route left them, viz. the road to Ilesa. 
The Ijesas fearing that this also would be lost to them quietly 
deserted Ijebu Er^ and escaped with the people of the town. 

After they had clean gone the information was conveyed to 
the besiegers by a man left in shackles ; not a soul was found in 
the town when they entered. The principal chiefs remained there, 
but the juniors went in pursuit : they found many of the smaller 
towns had likewise been deserted. 

At Erinmo a feeble resistance was made. About 200 men 
kept up fire from the forts ; this continued for some time, but they 
escaped, leaving two cripples who were good marksmen to keep 
up the show. When the town was attacked on all sides and the 
walls scaled then the Ibadans found to their amazement that the 
town had been wholly deserted, and that the fire was kept up by 
only two cripples. They were brutally dragged down from the 
fort and slain ; the gates were then thrown open for their comrades 
to rush in. The Ibadans continued their pursuit to Omo Erin 
where they found a few aged men and women, the able-bodied 
having fled away ; next to Erinta-dogun where a feeble resistance 
was made until night-fall when the men had an opportunit}' of 
making good their escape. Leaving Erinta-dogun they came to 
a place where three roads met, one leading to Ipindun, another to 
Akata, and the third to Ikeji. Those who took the way to Akata 
met all the women and children of the several towns and villages 
that were deserted, and they were all taken captives. But the 
section that took the way to Ikeji (which was four days distant 
from their base at Ijebu Ere) met with a disaster by an ambuscade 
and were nearly annihilated but for the timely aid of Ali of Iwo and 
Jefiriyin of Ibadan. This disaster was subsequently avenged 
by the Otun whom the Balogun sent to their assistance when the 
news reached him at the Ijebu Ere headquarters. 

This expedition was termed Ijebu Ere because of the amount 
of mud and slush along the way from Ijebu to Ikeji the terminus 
of the present expedition. 

The Ijesas of Ilesa the capital here surrendered to the Ibadans 
bringing them presents of cowries, beads, etc., and also hostages. 
The people of Og6tun put up a white flag at the approach of th 
pursuers and surrendered to Osundina the Osi. Igbara did the same 
and surrendered to Ajayi Jegede the Seriki. Some of the minor 
chiefs who were not satisfied with what they got asked leave to 
make incursions in other directions; they were allowed to do so. 



SUBJUGATION OF THE IJgSAS AND EKITIS BY THE IBADANS 3I3 

Some met with good fortune, others with privations and terrible 
disasters from ambuscades. The wreck of this subsidiary expedi- 
tion reached the camp at Ijebu Ere. Nine days after this the 
standard of the Ibadan army wended its way homeward. 

Before starting on this expedition the Ibadans sent presents to 
the Ilorins, requesting their co-operation. The Ilorin army marched 
out, but on reaching Otun it was reported to them that their old 
enemy Esu was encamped on a rock about a mile from Otun. 
Knowing that he was sure to be attacked there, the principal 
war-chiefs of Otun, against the protest of the Ow6rc their prince, 
admitted Esu into the town, and the Ilorins instead of joining 
their allies thereupon encamped against Otun. But Otun is a 
tributary town of Ibadan, the Balogun and Otun of Ibadan there- 
fore sent to remonstrate with the Ilorins for fighting with their 
friends when they were asked against their enemies. The reply 
was, " Not Otun but Esu ; we find our old enemy here, and we 
must not pass him by." The Ilorins, however could not take Otun 
till the Ijebu Ere campaign was over. Ajayi Jegede the Seriki, 
therefore asked permission to go to the help of his friend Esu 
at Otun, and Lisibade the over-lord of Otun did the same. Not 
only was permission granted, bat the Balogun, Otun, and each of 
the principal war-chiefs also sent a small detachment with hira, 
about 3,000 strong to re-inforce the town. The rest of the Ibadan 
army now returned home. Thus the whole of the Ijesas were 
subdued by the Ibadans. 

§ 3. The First Dahomian Invasion of Abeokuta, a.d. 1851 

The first Dahomian invasion of Abeokuta took place on Monday 
the 3rd of March, 1851, during the absence of the Ibadans at the 
Ijebu Ere expedition. We have seen above Chap. XVI, § 2 what 
was the cause of their sworn hostility to Abeokuta. 

Commander Forbes a British naval officer, and Mr. Beecroft, 
Her Britannic Majesty's consul for the Bights of Benin and Biafra 
were at Abomey (the capital of Dahomey) when preparations were 
being made for the invasion of Abeokuta, and they communicated 
a full account of the same to the English Missionaries there with 
a view to forewarning the Egba chiefs, while they themselves 
were exerting their good offices in dissuading the Dahomians from 
these periodic raids on their neighbours. 

It was alleged by an eye-witness that as the troops were assembled 
in the market square, the leaders pledged themselves to their 
sovereign not to shrink before the foe, and exhibited what prowess 
they would display in the coming struggle. The leader of the 
Amazons demanded for her regiment the honour of leading the 



314 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

attack upon the ground that on previous expeditions they (the 
Amazons) had always carried the positions when the male regi- 
ments failed to do so. The arrangement was accordingly agreed 
upon. 

But the Egba chiefs were rather indifferent to the representations 
of the missionaries urging them to a vigorous preparation, except 
Sagbua the Alake and Ogunbona the Balogun of Ikija, who 
repaired the walls of the town in the direction of the main gate to 
Aro : the rest were left in a dilapidated condition. 

When the Dahomians reached Isaga, a small town about 17 
miles from Abeokuta, the people tendered their submission to 
them and whilst concluding terms of amity and friendship with 
them, they despatched private messengers to Abeokuta to apprise 
the chiefs of the situation. It was now too late for the Egbas 
to begin to repair their walls. The whole town was seized with 
panic and consternation, some fleeing to Osiele, some to Atadi, 
others going where they knew not. The women everywhere 
raised the cry of alarm " Elel6 m'el6 " (every man to his matchet), 
and hurried the men to the walls to watch the approach of the 
enemy. Fortunately for Abeokuta the Isaga people had induced 
the Dahomians to alter their plan of attack from a night to a noon 
day assault, and from the north west where the walls were in a 
dilapidated condition to the western gate where repairs had 
recently been executed ; and to this circumstance alone Abeokuta 
owed her safety ; had they followed their original plan, nothing 
could have saved the town. Even as it was many eye-witnesses 
do aver that what contributed most to their safety was confidence 
in the presence of the missionaries in the town. " The God of the 
white man " said they "is on our side." From this they derived 
moral com age. 

On that memorable Monday the Dahomians were descried 
advancing towards the Ar6 gate. Some of the Egba chiefs went out 
to arrest their progress, but they could not withstand the force of 
those brave warriors. They were said to be advancing in the order 
of battle, marching steadily and solidly onward, ignoring the fire 
of the Egbas and paying no attention to those among themselves 
who fell, but kept marching stolidly onward. They never fired, but 
at the word of command, and when they did, their volleys were 
demoralizing. By this we can see that the Dahomian soldiers 
were discipUned troops such as the Egbas had never faced before. 
Those who went to arrest their progress fled precipitately and 
would not even stay to man the walls ; some of them never halted 
till they reached the Abetu stream within the town. The general 
idea that the Dahomians cared more for skulls than for captives 



SUBJUGATION OF THE IJgSAS AND EKITIS BY THE IBADANS 315 

and that the drinking cup each soldier carried in his knap-sack 
was a human skull added greatly to the dread entertained of them. 
But Ogunbona the Balogun of Ikija, and Sokenu the Seriki of 
Ab§okuta displayed undaunted courage and bravery, opposing, 
the enemy with all their might. 

The courage and noble deeds of the Egba women on this occasion 
were beyond all praise, and demand our special notice. But for 
them some of the men who were cowardly would have fled before 
the enemy. In the thick of the tight, with bullets flying right and 
left the Egba women could be seen in the ranks of the fighting 
men with water, mashed eko (a cooling drink), refreshments and 
encouragements, so that they need not fall to the rear for any- 
thing but continue the fight. Some of the missionaries were 
also there encouraging them by their presence, and doing what 
they could for the wounded. 

Notwithstanding all this the trench around the town wall being 
full of dead bodies, the Dahomians were actually scaling the 
walls. Some of them with one hand cut off would hold on with the 
other or with the stump with grim determination in their faces; 
they kept pressing on, and a few did actually get into the town. 

Up to this time the Egbas did not know that they were fighting 
with women. Following the barbarous custom of the age, it was 
customary to send as a trophy to the chief ruler of the town, the 
head and the private parts of the first enemy caught in warfare ; 
when those who actually entered the town were caught and slain, 
and the trophy was to be sent, then the Egbas knew that these 
terrible fighters were the Amazons ! 

Immediately the news spread among all ranks that they have 
been fighting with women, and lor very shame all the Egba 
men were exasperated beyond measure and rushed upon them with 
one accord and compelled them to retreat. The Dahomians left 
thousands dead behind the walls of Abeokata. 

The Egbas thought they only retreated to prepare for a more 
vigorous attack the next day, and they also went to prepare for a 
more determined resistance; but the Dahomians were already on 
their homeward march, they were not accustomed to lay siege 
or repeat an assault ; if an assault failed they retreated altogether 
to renew it at another time. They were determined to punish 
the Isaga people for their treacherous conduct towards them. 
The Egbas, finding that the attack was not renewed the next day, 
followed in pursuit and met them at Isaga, the chiefs of which were 
just then apologizing and defending their conduct. The battle 
fought here was said to have been more fierce than that before 
the walls of Abgokuta. The Egbas contemned the idea of being 



3l6 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

attacked by women hence the furious onslaught they made at 
them. 

The Dahomians left more dead behind them than the captives 
they succeeded in taking away, including the skulls of the unfor- 
tunate victims caught in the farms. 

Soon after the invasion, on the i6th of May, 1851, the Rev. D. 
Hinderer, a German missionary of the C.M.S., who was then 
labouring at Abeokuta and witnessed the attack, obtained per- 
mission from Sokenu and the other chiefs to carry the gospel to 
Ibadan. At this period, none of the surrounding tribes was at 
peace with Ibadan. The Ijebus especially were kidnapping on the 
roads, and one had to reach the town by a circuitous route of four 
instead of two days from Abeokuta. Caravans to Ijaye and Ibadan 
were under escorts up to a certain point, and the Rev, D. Hinderer 
was obliged to risk the rest of the journey by himself when the 
escorts could proceed no further for fear of Ijebu kidnappers. 

The Rev. D. Hinderer was received kindly by the Balgandthe 
other leading chiefs of Ibadan. When he told them the object 
of his visit, the five leading chiefs, viz., the Bale, Balogun, Otun, 
Osi, and an elderly chief Lanoso by name, in whose house lie was 
lodged, held consultation whether they should receive the white 
man and the message he brought or not. Osundina the Osi a 
staunch Moslem raised great objections, evidently on religious 
grounds ; he stoutly opposed his stay amongst them. Said he 
" Awgn obaiye je ni iwonyi." (These are the world spoilers), 
" There is no country they enter but misfortune will follow for 
that place." Ogunmola the Otun said: "But white men are at 
Lagos, Badagry, and Abeokuta ; why should we refuse him ? We 
are not the first nor shall we be the last to receive them, and what- 
ever be the consequence to others let the same be to us also." 
Ibikunle the Balogun suggested that the national god Ifa should 
be consulted, and if Ifa prognosticated evil let the white man 
be ordered out of the town at once ; but if favourable, let 
him be received. These five chiefs accordingly repaired to the 
Ogboni house at the Ibasorun market and consulted the brazen 
Ifa which is the national god. The omen was favourable and Mr. 
Hinderer was accorded a cordial welcome and well entertained. 
A place of residence was assigned to him, the house of the late 
Chief Ogidi, and he was placed under the special care of chief 
Abayomi the Ajiya Bale the head chief of that part of the town 
through whom he could always approach the chiefs in council ; 
and he in turn entrusted him to Olumiloj^o his Balogun whose house 
was not far from the mission premises. 

Mr. Hinderer remained five months at Ibadan on this his first 



SUBJUGATION OF THE IJESAS AND EKITIS BY THE IBADANS 317 

visit, preaching and teaching and making general observation 
on the place as a field of missionary enterprise. He then returned 
to England to recruit his health and to prepare for a permanent 
stay there. 

§ 4. The Ara War and Relief of Otun 

Ara is a town of considerable importance in the Ekiti country. 
This expedition was named after it, although Ara was not the 
primary objective when the Ibadan standard left home, but it 
was the last important place taken before the Ibadans returned 
home. 

We have seen above that the Ibadans invited the Ilorins to the 
Ijebu Ere expedition and that the Ilorins instead of joining them 
as allies encamped against Otun a tributary state of Ibadan because 
of Esu their inveterate enemy ; and at the close of the campaign, 
certain Ibadan war-chiefs who were interested in Esu or the 
town of Otun obtained leave to go to the assistance of their 
friends. 

Now, although the Ilorins failed to conquer the defenders, 
and they could not drive the Ilorins away, yet by overpowering 
numbers, Otun was closely invested and famine began to do its 
dreadful work within the town ; therefore the Ibadan contingent 
there sent home to ask for a larger relieving force, and " if possible, 
let the Balogun himself come." 

The Ibadan army was once more on the march to the Ekiti country 
for the rehef of Otun, but other complications occurred which 
diverted their attention from Qtun. 

Prior to this expedition the Alara (or king of Ara) had been 
deposed by his people for stealing and selling their children ; the 
poor victims were bound and conveyed out of the town in hampers 
of cotton. The Alara appealed to the Ibadan chiefs at Otun for 
their kind offices and they composed the difference between king 
and people and reinstated the former, the people yielding more 
from fear of the consequences a refusal might entail. 

But about a year after, he was deposed again for his atrocities 
and he escaped again to the Ibadan chiefs at Otun. By this 
time the Balogun of Ibadan and his hosts were on the way to the 
relief of Otun, the chiefs therefore sent their messengers along with 
the Alara to meet the Balogun at Igbajg to tell his own tale Thence 
the Balogun and the principal war-chiefs sent special messengers 
with the Alara once more to compose the difference between him 
and his people and to reinstate him. He was accepted with very 
great reluctance, more from fear of the Ibadans than otherwise. 

This ended the first act in the tragedy which sealed the fate of 



3l8 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Ara. up to this point there was not the slightest intention of 
destroying the town. 

The Ibadan expedition left Igbajo for the Ila farms and every- 
thing having been eaten up far and near except the farms at Koro, 
the war chiefs after consultation sent special messengers to the 
Ajero of Ijero the paramount chief of Koro for permission to forage 
in the Koro farms. The Ajero replied " The Koros are wild boys : 
a yam may cost you a human head." The Ibadans felt insulted 
at this reply and sent back to the Ajero to say " We only applied 
out of courtesy, and if our peaceful overtures are not complied 
with, two ' wild boys ' will meet in the field within three days, 
and, therefore, all Yoruba (Oyo) residents at Ijero should leave the 
town at once." 

The Ajero called together the Oyg residents in his town and had 
the message repeated in their ears, then he said to them " You may 
go now, but you need not go far, you can wait at Ara or Eriwo 
until the Koros have driven away this Ibadan army, then you can 
come back." So confident was he of the strength of the Koros. 
The Oyo residents accordingly left the town. 

The Ibadans now wended their way to Koro and the Koros 
about 2,000 strong came out to meet them on their frontier at a 
place called Ita Oniyan. The Ibadans were marching according 
to their ranks, the Balogun and Agipa being in the rear, and the 
junior war-chiefs in front, but the Koros had lain in ambush 
and the Ibadans walked into it ; suddenly they fell upon theBalo- 
gun's and the A§ipa's ranks, but in both places they were utterly 
defeated with great slaughter. The Ibadans advanced to the river 
Oyi, the scene of the next fight ; the Koros met them here, and 
again they were defeated. The Ibadans advanced to Yawo a 
place not far from the town, and here the Koros made a stand. 
The Ajero their paramount chief now got alarmed and hastened 
to their assistance. He applied to the Ilorins before Otun, for 
help, and the Ilorins whose sole poUcy was to help one set of Pagans 
against another until they had weakened each and both fall a 
prey to them, lost no time in sending two war-chiefs Adedeji 
and Magobon with horse and men to help the Koros. The Ajero 
sent also to all the towns in his territory including Efon and 
Ara to come to their help and save Koro the strongest town 
in their district which now seemed doomed to destruction. 

Ara alone refused to comply; the Alara said he had just been 
re-instated by the Ibadans, and he could not take up arms against 
them. But the men of Ara were angry with their king's decision, 
they were all for going to the help of their kinsmen against the 
" Qyos " 



SUBJUGATION OF THE IJggAS AND EKITIS BY THE IBADANS 3I9 

But there were two rebel chiefs of Ara who had been expelled 
the town and were living at Ohan ; they considered themselves 
free to join the coalition, and they defiantly came outside the walls 
of Ara inviting their townsmen to come along to the aid of their 
kinsmen. The Alara, unwilling that Ara should be represented in 
the coalition against his benefactors summoned his people to come 
out and drive these rebel chiefs back ; but his summons was not 
obeyed, and he went out himself unaided to intercept them ; there 
was a brief but sharp fight between them in which fell a stout and 
well-to-do citizen who exposed himself between them, trying to 
put an end to the fight, thinking that his person would be respected. 
So the rebel chiefs went on to the help of Koro. 

Ara was not officially represented, as the Alara refused to 
go, and Lejofi the most powerful man in the town whom the 
people would rather follow remained sulky and neutral. 

But when these rebel chiefs saw that there was little hope 
for Koro they sent a private message to apprise the Ard people 
that they would leave Koro at such and such a day and that they 
were to hold themselves in readiness that together they might fall 
upon the Alara and murder him before Koro was taken and his friends 
the Ibadans were free to avenge him. 

The Alara having an intimation of this, summoned the Oyo 
residents at Ara, inviting them to be ready at once to leave the 
town with him, reminding them how on the former occasion 
Chief Ogunmola had reprimanded them for not leaving the town 
when he did, thereby casting their lot as it were with rebels. 

The Alara and these Oyg residents quitted the town fortunately 
just a day before the rebel chiefs came, who together with the 
townsmen gave chase, and pursued after the fugitives and overtook 
them. These had to fight their way to Efgn Ah aye ; they lost 
nearly everything. At a place called Oke Ogbe they made a stand 
and offered a determined resistance to enable the women and 
children to escape safely to Ahky^. This action sealed the fate 
of Ara as we shall see. 

In the meantime the Ibadans were drawing a cordon round 
Koro, and the Ilorin contingent true to their characteristics were 
prepared to escape and abandon their friends. Magobon one of 
their leaders conceived the bold idea of marching right through 
the Ibadan lines, trusting that he would escape undetected. The 
Ibadans who never imagined any venture so foolhardy, at first 
mistook them for a company of their own men, as Magobon stood 
by the standard of chief Sumala the Otun Bale while his people 
were marching past. But as a chief on horseback rode past, 
a man eyed him closely and recognized in him an Ilorin man and 



320 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

at once took his gun and shot him down dead on the spot. 
Being now discovered, they took to their heels and were 
pursued and many were caught, but a few swift-footed escaped. 
Another company which took another route hkewise was dis- 
covered and captured. 

But Adedeji the other leader remained at Koro being afraid 
to run the risk : the Ibadans therefore offered him protection if 
he would commit himself unreservedly to their clemency ; he did 
so (there being no alternative) and was allowed to come to the 
Ibadan camp. He remained there a few hours ; he and his men 
were well entertained, and were sent away in peace. Even a 
hatchet one of them left behind at the Ibadan camp in their haste 
to get away the chiefs sent to them in the Otun camp. 

This noble deed of the Ibadans so put the Ilgrin general to 
shame that he negotiated peace with the Ibadans and raised the 
siege of Otun. 

The siege of Otun being raised, the Ibadan contingent there 
together with Esu whom they went to defend were now able 
to join the Ibadan army at Koro ; the " bad boys " were finally 
beaten and the town fell. Ijero the chief town of the district, 
and three other towns also which assisted them were taken, 
Oro surrendered and was placed under tribute but Ara held out 
for two years, being well defended by the powerful chief Lejofi. 

Finding further resistance useless Ara now surrendered and 
brought presents to the camp, and an armistice was concluded. 
On account of their past conduct, and the useless waste of life 
occasioned, the Ibadans while accepting the presents imposed two 
conditions upon them : — 

1. That they should recall their king from Ahaye. 

2. That all the Ara chiefs with Lejofi at their head should come 
and meet him in the camp so that they might have the opportunity 
of hearing both sides, and adjust matters between them. 

The Ara chiefs thought this was a stratagem to get them all 
into their power for capital punishment. They sent for the Alara 
into the camp but the chiefs declined to venture themselves there : 
they offered to pay whatever fines might be imposed on them. 

Then another proposal was made, if they would not come then 
let them send them their fighting men and a guide to Igede in 
the Ado territory. Neither would they comply with this but 
they begged to be subjected to whatever fines they pleased and to 
be placed under tribute, and they would serve them. 

The armistice was now declared at an end, and fighting resumed, 
till the Balogun at length forced his way into the town by an 
assault, and Ara was taken. 



SUBJUGATION OF THE IJESAS AND EKITIS BY THE IBADANS 32I 

The scene that followed showed how courageous and stout- 
hearted the Ara people were. A band of about i,6oo young men 
choosing death rather than slavery put the muzzle of their loaded 
guns in their mouth, pulled the trigger with their great toe and 
shattered their brains to pieces. 

The great and wealthy Lejofi, in order that the Ibadans might not 
profit at all by his wealth, destroyed all his valuables, with his 
store of provisions, cutting the yams into bits and strewing them 
all over the yard (provisions being so scarce for this great host). 
Then two of his wives were killed to be his attendants in the other 
world, and himself with his own jacknife cut his own throat. 
His eldest son met him weltering in his blood, life not extinct, 
being unable to complete the deed ; he, therefore put an end to 
his father's agonies, loaded the gun afresh and shattered his own 
brains ! 

A man from Oke Mesin, Ladojude by name, whose brother had 
been killed by Lejofi came to avenge his brother's death upon the 
corpse. He kindled a fire from wood obtained in Lejofi's own 
house, threw his body into it and burnt it. 

Thus ended the Ara campaign, as it was called, in 1854 and the 
Ibadan army returned home triumphantly. 

Esu who was relieved and was the indirect cause of this campaign, 
did not go home with them, neither stopped in the vicinity any 
longer, but penetrated further into the Yagba country and there 
established himself. 

§ 5. Raids by the Minor Ibadan Chiefs 

The subjugation of the Ekitis, including the Ijesas, Efons and 
others, may now be said to be complete, but the process seems to 
have reacted to the demoralization of the Ibadan war-chiefs and 
others. Slave-raiding now became a trade to many who would 
get rich speedily, and hence those who felt themselves unlucky 
in one expedition, and others who quickly spent their illgotten 
gains in debauchery and all excesses would band together for a 
raiding expedition on those minor places that have hitherto escaped 
the misfortunes of war. A brief notice will be taken of some of 
them. 

Ayorinde. — Chief Ayorinde did not return home with the 
army after the destruction of Ara, but went on first to Isan with 
Esu ; thence they went against the Ades, whom they conquered, 
and then he returned with his hands full. 

Intoxicated with pleasure at his own success, he was lavish 
in his enjoyments and out-stepped the bounds of moderation. 

He offered a thanksgiving sacrifice to his Ori (god of good 



322 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

fortune). About the same time for an alleged offence he flogged one 
of his wives to death. For this he was brought under the power 
of the civil authorities, and was told to die. It must be remembered 
that a private individual would be executed at once for murder, 
but a chief must commit suicide by any method he may prefer, 
for if executed pubhcly his house would be demoHshed and his 
family ruined. 

But Aygrinde begged hard for his life. He surrendered nearly 
all he had to no purpose ; then Chief Ogunmgla his patron advised 
him privately to leave the town speedily and go into voluntary 
exile to those regions he lately came from, for even he could not 
save him from the penalties of the law. 

Ayorinde left Ibadan secretly with only 12 followers out of all 
he brought back with him ! When his escape became known 
he was hotly pursued and narrowly escaped with his hfe. He 
went back to Esu with a tale of woe, and located him in a place 
called Irun, and there he remained and organized a band of 
marauders and ravaged all those regions till he encamped against 
a place of some importance named Ogb^gi. He was here for fully 
tei years with varied fortune. Adoyan Okorigi a great and 
powerful warrior came to the help of Ogbagi and Ayorinde was just 
on the point of being defeated when by a skilful move he took 
Okorigi in the rear and inflicted on him a crushing defeat and slew 
him. 

Next the Ogbagis obtained help from Rabbah and Ilorin. Sinabu 
King Masaba's son and Hinakonu the Fulani Balogun of Ilorin 
came against him ; thrice was Ayorinde routed, and many of his 
fighting men speared, but he ralHed again and maintained his 
ground. Ogbagi was at length taken. Ayorinde became lord of 
the Akokos and Ido Ani. He opened a caravan way to Ow^ 
through which he obtained ammunition from Benin. He was 
kind to all Oyos, who flocked to his standard ; every one could 
enjoy himself to any extent he liked but he absolutely forbade 
the introduction of intoxicating liquor into that country. They 
might buy whatever they hked with their slaves and booty. He 
himself undertook to supply all ammunition required for their 
raids.' But no one must think of deserting him ; in order to ensure 
this, he posted men in all the exits of'his tenitory : any Oyg 
caught escaping lost all he had and returned home as he came ; 
but any Ekitisor Has similarly caught were seized with their slaves 
and sold to 0^^- 

At last after many years as old age approached Ayorinde longed 
for home. But he knew that he would not be allowed by the 
people of Irun, who befriended him all these years, to depart 



SUBJUGATION OF THE IJEIAS AND EKITIS BY THE IBADANS 323 

with all his effects to Ibadan, so he manufactured a quarrel with 
them, and captured Irun the headquarters of all his expeditions 
and destroyed the place. In spite of all this precaution not one 
tenth of his slaves returned with him to Ibadan, 

Ayorinde returned to Ibadan in 1872 after a very long absence. 
Nearly all the chiefs he left and the whole of his compeers had 
died out. He met at the head of the government subordinate 
chiefs, who had risen into power during his absence, and to his 
mortification he had to submit to them. He was, however, 
honoured with the title of Osi, but he did not holdit long; he died 
in the following year. 

Abayomi. — Abayomi the Ajiya Bale with Olumiloyg hisBalogun 
got up an expedition to reheve Is^ a tributary town of his in the 
Ekiti country. He met Ayorinde at the siege of Ogbagi but he 
passed off and encamped against Agbad6. The town was soon 
taken and he had an immense number of captives and booty. 
From hence he was proceeding to the relief of Is^. But the cap- 
tured town Agbado being in the territory of Ado, the Balogun 
of the king of Ado was sent to intercept him ; an ambush was laid 
for him, and he was hemmed in on every side. He had to fight his 
way to Is^, and lost all he had taken, and what was more he left 
behind him some of his best fighting men including two of his power- 
ful slaves and Olumiloyo hisBalogun. He arrived at Ise with the 
wreck of his army and returned to Ibadan in a worse condition 
than he left. This was in the year 1857. It will be remembered 
that Olumiloyo was the chief who had direct supervision of the 
missionaries at Ibadan. Readers of " Seventeen years in the 
Yoruba country " (Life of Anna Hinderer) will find frequent 
mention of the name of this chief and how kind and friendly he 
was to the missionaries. He gave Mr. and Mrs. Hinderer two of his 
children a boy and a girl to train, in which he showed himself 
more enlightened than the sirperior cliiefs. The boy was trained 
first by these good missionaries themselves: subsequently at the 
C.M.S. Training Institution at Abeokuta, then he was employed 
as a schoolmaster, Mr. Hinderer himself continuing his education. 
Later he was employed as a catechist in 1885, and finally as an 
ordained missionary of the C.M.S. at Ogbomoso in 1892, where he 
is still labouring. 

Ajobg and the Badas. — While the sieges of Ogbagi and of 
Agbado were going on, all the Badas of Ibadan headed by Ajobg 
the senior Bada got up an expedition against Pakunde. All the 
Efon, Ijesa, and Akoko territories had now become a field for 
slave hunting for any number of men who could band themselves 
together for an expedition. 



324 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The Badas at first meant to take the place by stratagem, 
encamping outside the walls, professing friendship and asking 
for a guide to Ogbagi to meet Esu. But the men of Pakunde 
were too wideawake, and so when strategy failed, hard fighting 
was resorted to. 

But it was reported at Ibadan that these Badas meant to 
establish themselves there after the capture of Pakunde and not 
to return home. This would eventually mean the loss of all the 
tributary towns t6 Ibadan ; consequently Chief Ogunmola of 
Ibadan sent to all the surrounding kings and chiefs subject to 
Ibadan not to let Pakunde be taken. The town was almost on 
the eve of faUing when tidings reached the camp that all the 
men sent to procure provisions at Ikolo, Ado, Oye, Odo Ijesa, 
Ikoyi had been seized and either slain or sold into slavery ! This 
was a blow to the Badas. In whatever direction they sent to 
procure food, they could not get any and no farms were near them 
for foraging. Being in a strait, the camp was broken up in the night 
and they made for home. Their guide took them by a way 
between Ikgle on the left and Omwo in the right ; the Ikoles 
waylaid them and they had to fight their way through. At 
Omu Ijelu whilst they were satisfying the cravings of hunger 
in the farms, the men of the town fell upon them and killed 
many with poisoned arrows. At Aiyede, a town built by Esu 
they were not allowed to forage in the farms. So by forced 
marches, and in a starved condition the wreck of Ajgbo's army 
arrived at Ibadan. 

§ 6. Social Reforms. 

The Present Condition of Slaves. — Ibadan had by this time been 
greatly augmented, not only by immigrants from the provinces 
and elsewhere who repaired there as affording a safer place of 
abode, but also by the thousands of slaves brought in annually. 
It had now become necessary to crystaUize into law a custom that 
had gradually grown amongst the chiefs and people generally, 
who had thousands of them in hand. 

Except under especially pressing circumstances the chiefs do 
not now sell their slaves or rather captives of war excepting the 
old and infirm and that chiefly to procure arms and ammunition. 
The able-bodied men are kept and trained as soldiers, and it has 
become the law and custom that soldier-slaves are never to be sold 
under any circumstances ; they are to remain permanently as 
members of the house. The fair young women are added to the 
harems by the great, and young men save themselves the expenses 
of a dowry by making wives of any that come into their hands. 



SUBJUGATION OF THE IJESAS AND EKITIS BY THE IBADANS 325 

Any slave-woman taken as a wife becomes ipso facto a free woman. 
All the rest are sent into the farms, each to be employed in his 
or her own line of work. The chiefs had large farms and farm 
houses containing from a hundred to over a thousand souls. The 
men are engaged in clearing the bush, cultivating the soil, cutting 
palm nuts and doing other male work ; the women in making 
palm oil, nut oil, soap, weaving mats, rearing poultry and the 
smaller cattle, cultivating kitchen vegetables of all kinds for the 
weekly markets and the fairs ; older women in preparing and 
spinning cotton, sheUing palm nuts, etc. All are engaged as 
" hands " in time of harvest. 

These extensive plantations not only support their huge 
establishments but also supply the markets, so that a miUtary state 
though Ibadan was, food was actually cheaper there than in many 
other towns. 

The male slaves had wives given them by their masters from 
among the slave women, whomsoever they may choose, or if 
their choice lay elsewhere, the master would redeem any woman 
for them. Their offspring are home-born slaves, belonging to the 
master ; their condition is hardly different from that of the 
freeborn, all grow together as children of the house. Thus by 
slave-raiding and procreation the great houses are enlarged and 
the population of the town increased. 

Well-to-do women in the town also buy slaves of both sexes, 
their offspring belong to them in the same way as the parents 
themselves, but barring exceptional cases of distress occasioning 
the ruin of the house they are never to be sold. 

Of the slaves who are kept as soldiers, some are selected as body- 
guards or personal attendants; these are provided for in every way 
by the master. The rest follow their own avocation and provide 
for themselves ; their services are only required in time of war. 
If the slave is successful in war and catches several slaves, he is to 
surrender them to his master ; a kind master will return him one 
or two fifths for his own purpose and keep the rest. An unkind 
master will keep all, as the service he has rendered him is his 
duty. Some masters would give money as consolation from the 
proceeds of any of the slaves he may sell. Any of these slaves 
is at liberty to procure his own freedom at any time. A wise one, 
who has captured one or two slaves in war, gives them 
back to his master in the presence of witnesses in lieu of 
himself, and thereby his ransom is paid ; he is free now to go 
any where he likes. Those who wish to remain permanently 
with the master nevertheless remove to a friend's house for 
a short time and in that way publicly make known their freedom; 



326 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

and then they may return to the master's house, and serve under 
him in war as freeborn soldiers and in that case give to their 
master as any other freeborn does one or two captives as the case 
may be and appropriate the rest. They are protected by the law 
as any freeborn citizen. 

Others who consider themselves free and safe under the pro- 
tection of a great name, as slaves of a powerful chief, will squander 
whatever they may have in hope of replenishing their stock at the 
next opportunity. 

Freeborn soldiers who are independent give to their captain a 
proportion of i or 2 out of 5 and appropriate the rest ; but if he 
is an idle fellow and dependent on his captain for everything, 
including his war accoutrements and his debts, he has to give up 
more than a half or nearly all of what he captured. 

Highly Placed Servants. — At this period the chiefs were in the 
habit of installing favourite slaves into a position of trust and 
responsibility especially if they were brave and energetic and 
proved themselves worthy of trust. These keep horses of their own, 
farms and farm-houses, have harems, a drummer and lifer, etc. 
Young slaves and recruits are placed under them to be trained 
for war. At the return of every expedition a fourth or a fifth 
of the captives taken are given to the master; they appropriate the 
rest. They are generally more richly dressed and make more 
show than their lord. Whatever the misfortunes of the house 
these of course are never sold : they remain the guardians of the 
house and of their master's sons. Their children may be considered 
as home born slaves, but practically are indistinguishable from 
freeborn children. These servants are "slaves" only in name 
for want of a better term. These customs originating at Ibadan 
have been followed by all the Oyo states throughout. The 
more of these highly placed servants a chief has, the greater he 
is held to be. 

The Law of Inheritance. — Hitherto when a man dies all his 
effects are inherited by his brother or brothers in succession until 
the turn of the eldest son comes, then he gets whatever may 
remain of what was once his father's, but in most cases, he gets 
nothing at all. It has happened within the experience of the chiefs 
that whilst one is toiling and saving, some brothers are idle and 
dissolute, and yet at his death, the idle and dissolute will step 
in and squander all he has saved, leaving his children to welter 
in poverty and want. 

At a deliberative council held in the year 1858 it was proposed 
to alter this custom. For whom is a man toiling and saving? 
The answer comes naturally " For his children." Why then 



SUBJUGATION OF THE IJgSAS AND EKITIS BY THE IBADANS 327 

should a brother displace one's children in the succession ? If 
the children are minors the uncle may act for them until they 
are of age, otherwise the eldest surviving issue of the founder 
of a house must succeed as the head of the house in rotation until 
it comes to the turn of the children of the next generation. This 
is not like the English law of primogeniture in which only the 
eldest sons succeed, but it is the eldest surviving issue of the 
founder of a house that succeeds, until the turn of the eldest 
son of the first successor comes round. 

But the members of the family are not totally overlooked. At 
the time of the succession the personal effects are distributed 
amongst the nearest relatives, every one having a share of the 
clothes, slaves, money, etc., but the house, inalienable slaves, 
principal farms, in a word, the real property, and all that goes to 
make the house what it is, are never to be ahenated. These are 
assigned to the eldest surviving son and successor. 

Every house is under the protection of a chief, a chief's house 
is under the protection of the paramount chief or the town council 
and these will see about the installation of the successor. In a 
great house, the highly placed servants will be in charge to train 
and direct their young master in the ways of his father. 

These resolutions were communicated to the AlAfin of Oyo 
for his approval, and he not only approved but adopted the same 
for all Oyo states, and moreover he adopted the same for the Crown 
also. He ruled thereupon that the custom that has arisen during 
the degenerate times of Old Oyo that the Aremo (Crown Prince) 
die with his father should cease and the earlier custom reverted 
to. He wished his eldest son Adelu to succeed him, and after him 
the eldest surviving issue of the house as seems fit to the King Makers. 

In the year 1858 Ibadan was so thickly populated that it was 
found necessary to extend the town walls. The new wall was 
known as Odi Ibikunle (Ibikunle's town wall) after the Balogun, 
as it was he who suggested, planned and superintended the carry- 
ing out of the work. This is the present town wall. 

Ogunmola also suggested that Ibadan should have what is 
known as " Igbo He," i.e. home forest, the thick bush surrounding 
every town in the Yoruba country, which may be exposed to 
raids and sieges. But the Ibadans did not care for any such 
thing and it could not be carried into effect, for they had no one to 
fear. The annual bush fires were allowed to nullify Ogunmola's 
suggestion. 



Chapter XVIII 

A GLORIOUS END AND THE GORY DAWN OF TWO 
REIGNS— THE IJAYE WAR. 

§ I. Death of King Atiba. 

Atiba the AlAfin of Oyq lived to a good old age. Of few Kings 
do we know so much as we do of him ; he was a link with the past, 
and lived within the days of authentic history. He was the father 
of several princes and princesses whose names are the following : — 





Princes. 


Princesses. 


Adelu {The 


Crown Prince) 


Boje 


Adeweni 


Adelabu 


Adeleye 


Atowurg 


Ogboja III. 


Adesiyen 


Adesetan II. 


Adedgja 


Ade Oy6 


Adeyemi 


Adedgtun 


Durokilu 


Adeyimka 


Adediran 


Afonja 


Ogboja I. 


Ogboja IV. 


Adejumo 


Agbonrin 


Ogboja II. 


Siy6 


Olawoyin 


Tela Okiti papa 


Akere I. 


Ogboja V. 


Tela Agboj 


u Qgo 


Akere II. 


Popogla 


I'ogun 




c f Adeduntan 
f, \ Adewale 


Lapemg 


Aid 


Momgdu 


Ogboja" VI. 


Adewusi 


Adesokan 


Akere III. 


Adetgla 


Adesetan I. 


Adejojo 







Of these the ist and the 4th succeeded to the throne. 

A few remarks on some of the princes : — 

Adelu was much older than his brothers or sisters, for he was 
born when his father was qiiite a young man, long before he entered 
into his career of a war-like prince. He was much beloved by 
his father because he was a very dutiful son and shared with him 
most of the dangers and privations of war in those turbulent days 
of his early career. By virtue of his birthright he became the 
Aremo when his father ascended the throne. 

Ogo was the Aremg Oy^ i.e., the first born after the father's 
accession. 

Adewusi was Adelu's brother, of the same mother, and was 
of a contrary disposition. He was wild, undutiful and cruel. 
Re once quarrelled with his father, and with a cutlass cut off 
all the mattings that enclosed the Aganju (throne room). He 
quarrelled with his half brother Ala by seizing from him a plot 
of land the latter had obtained for farming, containing many 

328 



A GLORIOUS END AND THE GORY DAWN OF TWO REIGNS 329 

palm and kola trees. Adewusi went and secured the same spot 
for himself by affixing thereon a symbol of the Egugun curse on 
any trespasser. When Ala went to remonstrate with him, 
he stabbed him to death with a knife ! The father thereupon 
sentenced him to be executed by strangling ! 

Aid was of the same mother with Adelabu. 

Adeyemi who subsequently succeeded his brother on the throne 
was of the same mother as Olawoyin. He enjoyed the longest 
reign of modern times ; more of him hereafter. 

Agbgnrin, nick-named Allah ni yio bo Asiri (God will hide 
secrets) was also a prince of a most cruel disposition. His 
favourite (?) wife was once preparing his Okra leaf sauce with 
strained ash, which was a milder form of the carbonate of potash 
used in such cases. He thereupon compelled her to drink a 
calabashful of caustic potash, and she died soon after from inflam- 
mation of the stomach and bowels. He once caught a young man 
in his farm cutting palm nuts. Upon his begging him to spare his 
Ufe Agbonrin said he would do so if the young man could climb 
up again and replace the nuts ; this being impossible he clubbed 
him to death ! 

The conduct of many of these princes brought great discredit 
on. royalty. Very few of the crimes they committed ever reached 
the ears of their father for who would undertake to report them. 
Hence the licence they allowed themselves without the father's 
knowledge for he never spared them. 

King Atiba was now old and full of years. Early in the year 
1858 he was resolved on celebrating the Bebe (the Bebe is akin 
to the Royal Jubilee, and only Kings who have had a long and 
peaceful reign celebrate it). Yorubaland is now free from the 
incursions of foreign foes, the Fulanis of Ilorin permanently 
checked. All now was peace ; the people were content and prosper- 
ous, and therefore the King thought a Bebe should be celebrated. 
But inasmuch as the few Kings who celebrated it died soon after 
doing so, that festival came to to be regarded as celebrating one s 
funeral rites, hence Beb§ is sometimes termed the " Iku " (death). 

The Are of Ijaye and others who were attached to him strongly 
advised him not to doit, as it might portend his death. His Majesty 
replied " Well, I am old enough and do not care to live much 
longer." 

Notification of this was sent round everywhere and delegates 
came from every part of the Yoruba country to observe this 
festival with the King. From Saki alone came about 200 Eguguns, 
and so from all other Oke Ogun towns for the ceremonies. 

Booths were erected all over the palace street from the Abata 



330 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

(frontage of the palace) to the Akesan market for the visitors. 
The Oyo noblemen also hved in tents, in front of their houses, until 
the ceremonies were over. 

The ceremonies partook of the character partly of the coronation 
and partly of the funeral rites, the principal part of it being done 
privately, at dead of night. 

On the eve of the Bebe the King paid a visit to the Bkrk to 
perform certain ceremonies there as a thank-offering sacrifice 
to his fathers. We have mentioned in Part I. that only on the 
coronation do the Kings ever enter there, and never afterwards 
till they are taken there for interment. This festival forms an 
exception. 

Tents made of beautifully woven cloths were set up and enclosed 
with mattings at the Abata, the Akesan, the Apini, and near the 
Bkrk for the King as on the coronation. Attended by all the 
noblemen he issued from the palace and entered each of these 
tents in succession, the noblemen waiting outside and only one 
woman (probably a priestess) accompanied him into the tent. 
He remained half an hour or an hour in each performing certain 
ceremonies, and sent presents of kola nuts to those waiting outside 
and so on till he reached the Bkra. On his return, that very evening 
the general festivities began. All the Eguguns observed a vigil, 
the voice of the Agan being heard all night. The next day an 
Egugun confinement was proclaimed in which all women and 
children must remain indoors. The Egiiguns our readers will 
remember are the denizens of the other world, and are supposed 
to be our dead relatives on a visit to us. 

For a limited space of time during the day, licence was granted 
to all the Eguguns' attendants to seize goats, sheep or fowl found 
in the streets : none was to exceed that fixed time, whoever did 
was arrested and made to pay a fine of 25 heads of cowries (equiv. 
to {,1 5s. then) for each animal. In the afternoon of this day the 
King came outside the palace attended again by a woman, the large 
gate being shut ; the whole area between the palace and the Akesan 
was full of Egiiguns. He sat on a hide, and rechned on a bolster, 
the wife sitting by his side was by special permission initiated into 
the Egiigun mysteries. Then appeared the supposed spirit of his 
father dressed in the skin of the red monkey ; the King prostrated 
before his father and the " monkey " rubbed him all over with its 
tail and blessed him. 

It was supposed that Eru-if a one of his slaves was under the mask 
on this occasion. The King's " funeral " expenses on this occasion 
can only be imagined. 

Not long after this celebration, the King's health which had 



A GLORIOUS END AND THE GORY DAWN OF TWO REIGNS 33I 

not been very good lately, markedly declined. He was soon 
reported ill. Whether anything deleterious to health was applied 
on him with the tail of the red monkey or not, we cannot tell, 
but His Majesty succumbed under the ailment and was gathered 
unto his fathers, and the Bara was soon again the scene of a great 
ceremony sombre and sad. 

Before the King's death, anticipating trouble for his eldest 
son Adelu. from sticklers after precedents, he reminded the Ibadans 
of the new law of succession he had sanctioned and begged them 
to stand by the Crown Prince and support his claim for he did not 
wish him to die with his father. And this they promised on oath. 
Thus passed away Atiba the first Alafin of the present Oyo 
and Adelu his son was proclaimed King in his stead. 

§ 2. Circumstances that led to the Ijaye War. 

Adelu the son and successor of Atiba was acknowledged 
King by all, except Kurumi the Are of Ijaye. 

Towards the latter end of Atiba's reign, there was some dis- 
affection between him and the Are ; this breach with the Crown 
widened by the succession of Adelu whom the Are refused to 
acknowledge as a lawful successor to his father. " It is contrary 
to custom " said he, " and the Aremg should die with his father." 
He never repaired to Oyo to do homage according to custom, nor 
even sent a congratulatory message. He was for seeking for another 
prince of the older hne, of the royal family at Igboho or Kihisi 
to succeed Atiba, but Adelu having been duly elected and accepted 
by the denizens of the palace and obtaining the support of the 
Ibadan chiefs, ascended the throne in due form, and the pretext 
for an open rupture which the Are had long been seeking was 
hereby afforded. The common people also catching the spirit of 
the times sang in their dances: 

" Atiba ma ti ilg, (" Atiba don't go yet awhile, 

Duro de Adelu O ! " Wait for your Adelu pray ! " ) 

The AlAfin was conciUatory towards the Are, who was the 
comrade of his father in their old warHke days, but the Are remained 
irreconcilable. Every means of averting war was resorted to, 
but the Are remained obdurate and insolent. Matters came to a 
crisis when a rich lady Abu by name, died intestate at Ijanna; 
she left no heirs, and as such the property reverted to the Crown. 
But Ijanna being directly under Ijaye, owing to the breach between 
the King and Kurumi, the townfolk were divided in their opinions 
as to the disposal of the property. They feared the power of Ijaye 
on the one hand and yet loyalty to the Crown dictated a contrary 



332 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

action ; so one party sent to Oyq to request that the King should 
send to take over the property, the other party sent a similar 
message to Ijaye. The King anticipating danger to those whom he 
sent for the treasure ordered a well equipped force under Akingbe- 
hin Aleyo the Ona-aka, and the Aremg's Balogun to escort them. 
But Kurumi sent a body of troops to waylay them, and the Oyo 
escorts with the messengers bringing the treasures were attacked 
by the Ijaye troops at Apata Miba near Oke 'ho and were dispersed 
some escaping to Oke'ho others to Iseyin. Within four days they 
collected themselves together at Iseyin and met there with the Oyo 
traders who could not return home for fear of the Ijaye kidnappers 
but who now availed themselves of the protection of the escorts 
to return home. 

The Ijaye troops under the command of Amodu intercepted 
them again between Iseyin and Oyo. The I j ayes encamped on 
a rock named afterwards Apata Jabata because there the Jabata 
of Oyo fell. When they met, the Oyo escorts asked, " And 
who are ye? " They repUed, " We are from Oyo sent by the 
AlAfin to escort you home," allowing them to come very near; 
when suddenly the Ijaye troops opened fire upon them and so 
dispersed the Oyo troops with the traders and all. About 240 of 
them were taken captive exclusive of some minor chiefs, e.g. 
Aridede, Algy6, Jigin, etc. The head priest of Sango lost 10 of 
his daughters caught in this raid. 

The AlAfin sent again and again requesting the Are to release 
them but he obstinately refused to do so, saying unless they were 
redeemed for 10 bags of cowries each. [The price of slaves at 
that period being about half that amount.] 

The AlAfin sent back to say " I have a claim on you to demand 
the release of these people, for besides being the King of YoRUBA 
to whom allegiance is due, remember what I did for you in the 
past. When you sent one Dayiro on an expedition and the people 
of Saki defeated him and made about 210 of his men prisoners, 
did I not use my authority and influence and obtain the release 
of them all and send them to you free of charge ? Why should you 
now detain my own people ? " 

[The above incident relates to one of the acts of the King to 
concihate the Are's refractoriness]. Still the Are refused point- 
blank to release them. And further, in order to avert war with 
Ijaye, His Majesty sent the Samu (one of the Oyo Mesi) via Ijaye 
to Ibadan to ask the Ibadan Chiefs to second his remonstrance and 
prevail on the Are to release his people. The Are was inexorable, 
and even chased the Samu on his way to Ibadan ; the Samu 
escaped the pursuers and returned home via Iwo. The AlAfin 



A GLORIOUS END AND THE GORY DAWN OF TWO REIGNS 333 

then gave orders that the Oyo people should go to Ijaye and 
redeem each one his relatives as soon as possible. 

The Alafin was now determined to punish Ijaye by the help 
of the Ibadans ; he therefore sent to them 40 slaves, 8 demijohns of 
beads.with gowns and vests, saying he had declared war against Ijaye. 

The matter was taken up warmly at Ibadan ; many remembered 
that the town was placed under a ban by the late Basorun Oluyole 
who failed to take it himself. The Balogun of Ibadan alone among 
the senior chiefs was for peaceful measures. " Kurumi is an old 
man " said he, " and will soon die, and the Ijayes are our kinsmen." 

The other chiefs imposed a fine on him for thus " betraying 
cowardice." But they knew well enough his matchless valour 
and undaunted courage, and the real cause of his reluctance 
to rush into a war of this kind. Ijaye was a town of equal import- 
ance with Ibadan, equal in valour, courage, and skill, and both 
with vast connections between each other and all over the country ; 
for them to engage in war would mean deluging the whole of Yoruba- 
land with blood. But when he could not prevail over his generals, 
and the common soldiers affixed a crow to his house at night imply- 
ing that he was a coward (as cowardly as a crow is a common 
expression in this country) ; and also threw stones into his 
house, he yielded to public opinion and commenced his own 
preparations for war. 

When the Are of Ijaye heard of the movement against him, 
being self-confident he was loud in his boastings : " On this post 
will I chain that imp of Ogunmola," " Ibikunle will have cause to 
remember the Odogido disaster," and so forth. He gave orders 
that all the youths of Ijaye should be trained to the use of 
bow and arrows, the older men superintending the practice. 
To those who succeeded as good marksmen he awarded prizes. 
This practice was termed " Se e " and was carried out daily 
without intermission. 

Being fond of singing and dancing the Are kept amusing himself 
with parabolic songs and witty sayings e.g. 

" A ta gpolo ni ipa, o sun ikaka, 

Gbogbo wa ni yio ku bere." 
(A frog is kicked and lies on its back. 
We shall all die by myriads.) 

The common people took up the same against the AlAfin 
and the Ibadans. Against the Ibadans they sang : — 
" Ibadan a k6 gba Ajele Ibadan we can accept no Resident, 

Orogun li awa ise." For rivals are we. 

This meant to say "We cannot serve or yield to you." 
N 



334 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Against the AlAfin they sang : — 

" L'aiye Onalu^ \i a ro okan le gkan 

L'aiye Kurumi U a ro'gba ro'gba 

L'aiye Adelu ni ipele di itele idi." 
(In Onalu's time we used changes of dress. 
In Kurumi's time we used cloths of the finest weaving 
In Adelu's time our best becomes our every day's.) 

This last description of Adelu's time is a well-understood irony. 
It is a common saying in this country " Ibere otosi bi omg 
olor6 la iri " (When poverty begins, one appears like a rich man's 
son) which means that when one cannot afford to replace the 
everyday dress, one resorts to his best for every day use 
and thus appears like a rich man ; but the real condition soon 
becomes apparent when this cannot be replaced. This condition 
is what they would now apply to Adelu's regime. 

The tocsin of war was now resounding from one end of the 
country to another. Kuriimi disallowed the exportation 
of foodstuffs to Ibadan, The Ibadans sought the aUiance 
or at least the neutraUty of Abeokuta and Ilorin and pressed 
into service the Oyo towns under her protection. Kurumi 
sent one Oje to conclude an alhance with the Egbas and to 
procure ammunition, but Ogunmola of Ibadan, who was 
entrusted with the negotiations with Abeokuta forestalled 
him, and they took an oath of friendship and neutrahty with 
Ibadan. 

The populace of Ibadan were now singing in their dances : — 

" Akope Ijaye ki o mk ko ti Ika mo, 
Onigbo da 'gbo meji." 
(Palm cutters of Ijaye do not venture to Ika, 
The lord of the forests divides it in two.) 

By a transposition of names the Ijayes were singing the same 
ditty, Ika being just midway between the two towns. Inter- 
communication now ceased. On all hands were heard " Onile ki o 
gbe ile ko kan odi yiyan." (Let every man keep to his own house, 
that need not imply animosity.) The kidnappers soon began to 
infest the farms; thus the Ibadans kidnapped two American 
missionaries who hearing of the rumours of war and incursions 
of the kidnappers went in search of Mr. J. C. Vaughan at his 
farm at Ido. Mr. Vaughan had escaped back to Ijaye by another 
route, and the missionaries were caught and brought to Ibadan 

^ Kurumi s other name. 



A GLORIOUS END AND THE GORY DAWN OF TWO REIGNS 335 

on the 20th of February i860. These war boys, not knowing what 
to do with white men, brought them with their horses mounted 
as they were, to the Rev. D. Hinderer, sa3ang " White man, we 
have brought you your brothers," Mr. Hinderer thanked them and 
gave them some cowries to procure refreshments. The gentlemen 
were sent on to Abeokuta the next day, communication with 
that town being then still free and uninterrupted. 

All hopes of a pacific settlement were now given up, for private 
messages, advices, and remonstrances were without number to 
the Are ; but for all this Kurumi remained unyielding to the King, 
and defiant to Ibadan. War was now formally declared. When at 
the next meeting of the town council, the Balogun arose in his 
place and harangued the assembly ending with " Eyin omo Jama, 
Mo fi Ijaye jin o " (Young men, Ijaye is now given up to you) 
a loud and prolonged huzza of " Muso, Muso," greeted his 
astonished ears. He was painfully impressed with the knowledge 
of how popular the war was. Orafiyan was worshipped and the 
standard of war was borne out once more by the valiant and 
experienced commander-in-chief Ibikunle on the loth of April, 
i860. It was known to all that Balogun Ibikunle went forth to this 
war with great reluctance. He had seen many battles and known 
well the horrors of a siege, and of all sieges one against one's own 
blood relations was particularly horrid and heartrending to him. 
Inter-marriages and national festivals which they had in common 
had made them one ; they were sharers together in times past 
of weal and woe ; supply of foodstuffs for overgrown Ibadan came 
largely from Ijaye where the soil was fertile and the people 
industrious. These considerations therefore made the bravest 
shrink from a war that might possibly be averted. 

When starting for the expedition, as soon as his foot was on the 
stirrup, his Akewi (bard) gave utterance to the following pathetic 
strains. 

" Baba mi fire igbo gdaju o ! o ! o ! 
Nibi ti olgmg meji yio ku okan, 
Nibi ti olomo kan yio p6h6ra, 
' lya mi ni lima wa' — ki o pada lehin Baba mi, 
' Baba mi ni fima wa' — ki o pada lehin Baba mi, 

Kiniun Onibudo. 
' lyawo mi to igbe " — ki o pada lehin Baba mi, i, i, 
Kiriniun Onibudo." 

(My master is going to the field of the heartless ah ! ah 1 ah me 1 
Where the parent of two will be left with but one. 
Where the parent of one will be left all forlorn. 



336 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Let him whose mother forbids him to come return from follow- 
ing my Lord, 
Let him whose father forbids him to come return from follow- 
ing my Lord. 

The Lion of the Master of camps, 
Let him whose betrothed is of age to be wed return from 
following my Lord. 

The Lion of the Master of camps). 

As the expedition started the drummer struck up the war march 
" Kiriniun Onibudo." 

[Toki surnamed Onibudo, master of camps, it will be remem- 
bered was a formidable war-chief, the Seriki of the Ibadan army 
and the uncle of this chief. He succeeded his uncle as Seriki 
from which post he rose to be Balogun. He is eulogized as the 
lion that rendered chief Toki to be so formidable.] 

Ogunmola who had gone to intercept Oj^ did not return home, 
but awaited the Balogun at Orita Elepo a small resting place 
about four miles from Ibadan town, at the junction of the 
two roads leading from the Oyo gate and Inalende gate of 
Ibadan. 

§ 3. When Greek meets Greek 

The Ijayes were not idle either, and did not wait at home 
with folded arms for the Ibadans to come. The fu-st battle 
took place at Apata Ika — the Ika rock just midway between the 
two towns — and the Are soon found, too late, and to his cost the 
truth of the message sent him that he should yield and accept a 
compromise and not haughtily compare the Ibadans of the present 
day to those of yore. But he was truly a born warrior and never 
lost courage, notwithstanding that he had now to contend with a 
younger generation of Ibadans who were quite inured to the hard- 
ships of the field and whose trade was war. 

But the Are's eyes were now open when too late to yet another 
folly of his. In order that he might secure for himself a safe and 
despotic position, he had killed so many brave men of Ijaye and 
had forbidden any chief to accumulate ammunitions of war, that 
only three hard battles were fought before he found his magazines 
exhausted. The Ijayes now resorted to bows and arrows and 
consequently they lost ground rapidly. But for this probably 
the war would have ended in a draw as before. 

The Egbas were now resolved to take part in this war. The 
majority were for assisting Ijaye. Sokenu alone was against 
their taking this course " after the oath of alUance and friendship 



A GLORIOUS END AND THE GORY DAWN OF TWO REIGNS 337 

taken with the Ibadans," said he, " it will be a serious breach 
of faith, and even the gods will be against us." 

This opposition, it was said, was the cause of his early death. 
The altercation was sharp, and the other chiefs in going said to him 
" We must not meet you alive on our return," and he retorted 
" If at all you return alive." Shortly after this Sokenu became 
paralysed (from poison it was said) and died. 

The expedition was commanded by Angba the Balogun of Oba 
as generalissimo — all the other Baloguns including Somoye 
" Basgrun " the Balogun of Iporo had to serve under him. They 
halted for a long while at Atadi, 12 miles from home, undecided 
what course to take : then they proceeded to Olokemeji where, 
still of two opinions, they debated the matter afresh, whether to go 
to the help of the Ibadans with whom they had formed an alhance 
or to the assistance of Ijaye. (Olokemeji is a central and neutral 
ground for the Ijaye, Ibadan, andtheOke Ogun hunters). They 
finally decided to help the Ijayes, " to raise the siege, and drive 
away the Ibadans and dispossess them of those kola groves originally 
planted by our fathers and grandfathers." This last idea swayed 
them. Thus it was subsequently reported at Ibadan. But there is 
an Egba version of the reason why they decided to ally themselves 
with the Ijayes. Some one alleged that Ogunmgla was reported 
to have said that after shaving the crown of the head he would shave 
the occiput ! Meaning after taking Ijaye he would also take 
Abeokuta ! But there is no proof whatever of this assertion, 
especially as there was no occasion for any such thing. And 
again Ogunmgla the author of the treaty of friendship and alliance 
was not the man to utter such a threat, which he certainly was 
not in a position to carry out, being a subordinate officer. And if 
he did say it, there would not have been such a prolonged 
hesitation amongst the Egbas, and such divided counsel as 
to what course they should pursue. The former version there- 
fore, is far more probable. 

Thus they proceeded from Olokemeji to Ijaye. But the vener- 
able Chief Ogunbgna, Balogun of Ikija did not proceed with them; 
he remained encamped at Olokemeji to be a protection and guard 
to caravans going and coming between that place and Ijaye. 

The Ijebus also as kith and kin to a portion of the Egbas seemed 
to have entered into an agreement to be one with them for offensive 
and defensive purposes. Hence when the Egbas went to Ijaye 
against the Ibadans, they also for no other reason entered into a 
state of warfare against Ibadan. 

Mele the Ibadan state messenger to the Ijebus in the days of 
Oluygle the late Ba§grun was again sent with Kobiowu the 



338 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Jagun to conclude a treaty of friendship with the Ijebus before 
their attitude was known. But the Ijebus sent a body of troops 
which attacked them at Odo Ona even before they had left the 
Ibadan farms, on their way to Ijebu ! With shield and spear 
Mele bravely defended himself and retreated with his party home 
with only slight wounds. 

The Emir of Ilgrin also embraced this opportunity for declaring 
war against Ibadan. The " Kafiris " (infidels) said he, " are at 
war with one another, and we should combine against this Ibadan 
which has often baulked us of our prey ; we may yet carry the 
Koran to the sea." He sent some horsemen to Ijaye, who when 
they observed the starvation and distress that ensued, could not 
remain long ; however, they kept kidnapping in the Oyo farms. 

The Owa of Ilesa not only revolted against Ibadan, but also 
took advantage of the coalition to take revenge upon Efon Ahkye 
and other towns which were allies of the Ibadans during the late 
Ijebu Er§ and Ar4 wars. 

Thus practically all the principal states in Yorubaland were 
combined to crush the Ibadans who had rid the country of the 
great bug-bear of the Fulani subjugation, but in turn became so 
restless as to be a source of anxiety to them all. 

But a section of the Ijebus viz. Ijebu Remo with Keher6 the 
Balogun of Ipara at their head was friendly to the Ibadans. They 
held that they were a commercial people, and Ibadan not only 
their best, but also their only customer, and one time their deliverer 
in the time of Lakanle ; and they could not see their way to join 
in a war that did not concern them. The periodic 9 days' market, 
therefore, was continued between them, and as we shall see here- 
after the Ibadans had to fight their way there and back, escorting 
caravans. 

Meanwhile the struggle between the combatants was proceeding. 
The third and last battle fought before the arrival of the Egbas 
had exhausted the Are's store of ammunition. The battle was 
fought in his own farm and was one of the bloodiest ever fought 
in this campaign. Nothing but the intrepid personal bravery of 
the Are saved him from being taken alive that day ; had he given 
ground an inch he would have irretrievably lost the day. 

There were only two fierce battles fought afterwards that may be 
compared to this last ; on the last occasion the Are at the head 
of his choicest troops charged the Ibadan centre with intrepidity 
and desperation, with a determination to break through, but the 
Ibadans remained firm and impregnable. The circumstances will 
be related below. 

The Egbas arrived at Ijaye in the nick of time to replenish 



A GLORIOUS END AND THE GORY DAWN OF TWO REIGNS 339 

the exhausted stores of the Ijayes. The Are who from experience 
knew the strength of the Ibadans, forewarned them to be very 
cautious and not to encamp outside the walls of Ijaye. The Egbas 
fresh from home and buoyant in spirits spurned the idea of 
" sheltering " themselves within the walls of the town ; however, 
they encamped without but close by the walls of Ijaye. 

The camp of the Ibadans was at this time at Olorisa Oko, 
about 3 hours' walk from Ijaye. The Balogun of Ibadan could 
not at first be made to beheve that the Egbas came as alHes to the 
Ijayes after the oaths they had taken with Ibadan. To those who 
brought the report he said " Yes, they may have come but it must 
be to negotiate peace between us." Over and over again he was 
assured that they have come with a mighty army. " Yes," he 
repHed, " it must be to put an end to the war." But at last, the 
Balogun was taken quite aback when a band of skirmishers returned 
and reported that they were driven back by the Egbas who came 
in overwhelming numbers against them. The Ibadans were 
alarmed and dismayed at the report. " In Kuriimi," said they, 
" we have an equal match already, and how to face the combined 
force with the overwhelming host of the Egbas ? " 

But the principal chiefs encouraged one another and were 
determined to die rather than yield. " Death," said they " was 
preferable to the shame of a defeat, or the humiliation of being 
made a prisoner." " Here is his head is better than here is his 
face " said Ogunmola. " If we cannot resist them here, surely we 
shall not be able to do so at home if driven from this place." He 
then took out his jack knife and displaying it before all his colleagues 
he said " It must be victory or Death." 

A council of war was held, and it was resolved that they 
should wait until the Egbas came and attacked them, and if they 
succeeded in repelling the attack then they would have hopes of 
being able to maintain their ground ; but if they went and offered 
battle first and were forced to retreat, it was certain the men would 
be disheartened and really demoralized, and there would be a poor 
chance for them — ^it would end for them in a total defeat. One 
Kujeiiyo a babalawo or If a priest was thereupon commissioned 
to make charms to provoke the Egbas to come forward to fight. 

The Egbas on the other hand fresh from home were eager to offer 
battle, contrary to the advice of the Are of Ijaye. " Let them 
come first and attack you here," said the Are to the Egbas, " but 
never go after them," But the Egbas repHed that when they left 
home they meant business and were not afraid of the Ibadans. 
A period of about a fortnight elapsed in which there was inaction 
on both sides. 



340 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

At length the day arrived and to the field the Egbas led their 
troops with flying colours. The Ibadan outposts reported the 
advance of the Egbas in the order of battle. The Balogun of 
Ibadan issued orders that no one should fire a gun until the word of 
command was given. The Egbas came within a few yards of the 
entrenchments and their fire wounded several persons within the 
Ibadan camp before the command was given. The Balogun's voice 
rang out " Omo Ibadan, e gba e fi ti won " (Ibadan boys, up and at 
them). Then the Ibadans rushed out, and the struggle commenced. 

At the first onslaught of the Ibadans, the Egbas retreated about 
a hundred yards and made a stand, and then ensued a most 
desperate fight on both sides. To the Ibadans it was a matter 
of life and death, and their one thought was whether they would be 
able to maintain their ground against the overwhelming odds of 
the Egbas, the I j ayes being now at a discount ; but it was not 
long before they became confident that they could certainly 
maintain their ground. 

Ogunmola being a man of small stature was wont to be mounted 
on the tallest horse he could possibly obtain, and move from point 
to point in the field observing the men's behaviour, and singling 
out individuals for praise or blame. On this occasion, having 
observed for a while the methods of the Egbas, he rode up joyfully 
to the Commander-in-Chief saying " Ibikunle, a o se won, a o se 
won, Egba ko mo ogun jija " (Ibikunle, we shall win, we shall 
win. The Egbas have no knowledge of the art of war). 

What Ogunmola observed was as follows :— As the combatants 
on both sides came company by company to the firing line (what 
they call Tawusi), Ogunmola noticed in the first place that the 
Egba shooting was too high, and that the men under fire were 
rarely ever hit, whilst the Ibadans had been taught to shoot low, 
and consequently they scored several hits among their foes. Again 
the Egbas discharged all their muskets at once and all turned 
back together before the reheving company came up ; whereas 
the Ibadans kept a reserved fire with which they accompanied 
the retiring foe, so that the retiring was more or less a disorderly 
retreat, and again they kept their place until their own relieving 
company came up, and more often gained a few yards forward 
before those of the Egbas came up, and thus gradually were 
gaining more and more ground. Ogunmola noticing all this 
was sure that, according to their own method of fighting, when 
later on, the Balogun arose to fight, and all men and all arms must 
push forward in a general engagement, this disorderly retreat of 
the Egbas would be converted to a general rout. Hence he was 
confident in assuring the Balogun that they would win. 



A GLORIOUS END AND THE GORY DAWN OF TWO REIGNS 34I 

But long before it was time for that, another officer, viz. 
Abayomi the Ajiya Bale planned out tactics of his own. As all the 
Bale's Jfighting men were disposed as strategy requires he seemed 
to know that the Egbas left their flank unguarded ; he left the 
main body of his men at their post, and chose out a number of 
brave fellows to cut through the bush a great way off and suddenly 
burst upon the Egbas at the rear with a shout, and away fled the 
whole host panic stricken, and the rout was complete. There 
was a morass a little way off called Alabata which many of them 
were driven into, and were either slaughtered or taken alive. Some 
never halted but fled from the battlefield into the camp and from 
the camp into the town of Ijaye, others at full speed homewards 
the Ibadan boys pursuing. 

Ijaye would have been taken that day but for the Are. Watch- 
ing the movements of the Egbas, he noticed their lack of skill in 
their manoeuvring and fighting, and anticipating a disaster he 
held his men in readiness for eventualities. As soon as the Egbas 
gave way and the Ibadans were in pursuit, he made a flank move- 
ment and intercepted the Ibadans ; and these, seeing there were no 
chiefs behind them to back them up, hastily retired from the 
pursuit. The chiefs did not give chase for fear of what the Are 
might do, but they kept an eye on him ; for he might take them in 
the rear and convert their victory into a defeat. 

From that day the Ibadans were confident of ultimate 
success and the Ijaye chiefs despaired of driving back the 
enemy. The Egbas were much enraged and ashamed of this defeat 
which they attributed to the cowardice of their Generalissimo 
Anoba, and for this they ordered him to " go to sleep " (a 
euphemism for suicide). They said that instead of coming up to 
their assistance with the reserved forces, he himself gave 
way also ! 

The Ibadan boys ascribed this victory to Ajiya Abayomi 
in their songs and dances : — 

" Ajiya nikan I'o le'gun, 'Twas Ajiya singly routed the foe, 

Iwi I'a ko gbodg wi." But we must not say 'tis so.) 

A very large number of captives fell into the hands of Ogunmola, 
and as the author of the treaty, which was so perfidiously broken 
he took vengeance on many of them, by ordering their faces to be 
branded with broad Tapa marks, and exultingly took a name on it 
" Emi a so Egba di Tapa " (the transformer of ?gbas into 
Tapas). He, moreover, ordered yam peels to be rubbed 
on the marks in order that the irritant may cause thick scars 
on them. 



342 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

In order to show what contempt the Ibadans now had for the 
5gbas as fighters, they sang while they danced : — 

" Kanakana Ajibade 

Ohan, ghan ni ndun. 

A ri Egba Igkankan a se bi ogun ni, 

Ija suk§ suke ni ija Egba, 

Ija Ule lile n'ija Qyo." 
(The crows of Ajibade 

Ohan ghan they cry. 

Egbas at a distance appear Hke men, 

Nerveless and feeble Egbas are in fight,. 

Strenuous and brave Oygs are in fight.) 

Emboldened by this success, the Ibadans removed their camp 
further to a place called Ajibade (where the Egbas were defeated) 
and the battle ground was now at Alabata (where they were 
driven to) about two hours' walk from Ijaye. 

Several hard battles were fought before they could establish 
themselves here, but at every fight the Ibadans gained ground, 
and so they again removed their camp from Ajibade to Alabata, 
and the battle ground was now at the River Ose not far from the 
walls of Ijaye. 

By this time the ammunition of the Ibadans was exhausted, 
and but for Kehere the Balogun of Ipara the expedition would 
have ended in failure if not disaster to the Ibadans. K§h§re 
was faithful to them to the end. 

The unfriendly Ijebus of Ode and Igbo were daily raiding the 
Ibadan farms. Flying columns had to be organized to protect 
the farmers and chase away the Ijebus. They also kidnapped from 
the caravans to Ijebu Remg (viz. Ipara, Iperu, Ode, Ikorodu) ; the 
Ibadans were obliged to send escorts from the camp from time 
to time to protect these traders to Ipara and back. The Ijebus 
more than once made a regular encampment and erected forts 
to block the way after the caravans had passed on to Ipara, the 
intention being to prevent their return ; but the Ibadans 
always succeeded in routing them, pulhng down the forts, and 
returning home safe with the caravans. In one of these defeats, 
one Kongo a well-known Ijebu, who was formerly a trader and a 
resident at Ibadan was caught with several others ; but Chief 
Ogunmgla lost two of his most vaHant men in this fight, Kukula 
and Erin. He showed his resentment by ordering Kongo to be 
killed on Kukula's grave, and the rest of the Ijebu captives they 
led to the camp at the river Ose, exhibited them to the Egbas 
and Ijayes, and then killed them under their eyes, to show that 
they had been victorious over their allies as well. 



THE GLORIOUS END AND THE GORY DAWN OF TWO REIGNS 343 

But there was a memorable battle of this kind fought at the 
river Omi in the Ijebu Remo road which was terrible. The Ijgbus 
exasperated by the former defeats were determined to deal a 
crushing blow to the Ibadans the next time. For some weeks the 
caravans could not proceed, the road had become more unsafe 
than ever ; all who came from the provinces assembled at Ibadan. 
Then the chiefs sent powerful escorts from the camp under chiefs 
Abayomi, Tubosun, and Madarik^n, The name of Abayomi 
raised the hopes of the caravans, and an extra large number of 
them flocked together to take advantage of this opportunity. 

After the caravans and escorts had passed on to Remo, a large 
Ijebu army was sent to prevent their return. They erected strong 
stockades right across the path in three places, and placed bodies 
of troops behind each, the main army and the encampment 
being behind the strongest stockade towards Ibadan, and there 
awaited the return of the caravan. Madarikan the leader of the 
van first came at them and fighting ensued ; the first stockade 
was won and they came up to the second. Madarikan was 
wounded in half-a-dozen places and driven back towards Remo, 
bleeding all over and was hors de combat. When Ajiya Abayomi 
came up, he dashed upon the Ijebus with great intrepidity and 
won the second stockade ; he then repelled the enemy until they 
came to the third and strongest stockade with the encampment 
behind it of the main Ijebu army. At the sight of the Ibadans, 
the Ij§bus raised a great shout of triumph and tauntingly asked 
" By what way will you get home now ? You had better try 
flying." From behind the stockade they wrought havoc among 
the Ibadans with impunity, being protected from the bullets 
of the latter by the stockade. 

Chief Abayomi thereupon called some of his most trusty 
servants, and posted them with their men on the highway with 
orders not to yield an inch if all had to perish there. He then 
chose a band of trusty veterans, cut a path through the forest 
and attacked the Ijebus in the rear. When the Ijebus driven 
to bay, saw the foe before and behind, they were furious and 
dashed upon the Ibadans with great intrepidity. At the first 
onslaught, Abayomi the Ibadan leader was shot off his horse, and 
when his veterans saw their master fall and their own fire languish- 
ing, they became exasperated, and with drawn swords they rushed 
upon the Ijebus with great fury and madness, broke through 
their ranks and put to the sword those that could not escape. They 
immediately pulled down the stockade and rejoined those of their 
comrades who had been posted in the highway and had come up. 
They pursued the Ijebus a little way and rescued as many as they 
could of the women and others of the caravans whom the Ijebus had 



344 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

captured before the main body of escorts came up. Thus the 
Ibadans eventually won ; the victory though dearly bought was 
complete. Abayomi, however, ralhed, and was able to lead the 
people home. When reports of this victory reached the camp and 
the cost at which it was achieved the Balogun and other senior 
chiefs immediately sent congratulations to Abayomi, Madarikan 
and others, and allowed them to remain at home until their wounds 
were healed before rejoining their comrades in the camp before 
Ijaye. 

From this and previous achievements Abayomi (through his 
bards) added to his other names " Death to traitors," " Terror to 
the Ijebus," " Maker of safe paths through tangled forests," 

There were further skirmishes on this road while the Ijaye war 
lasted, but none to be compared to the above two remarkable 
ones. 

Meantime the war before Ijaye continued with undiminished 
vigour the invaders being now replenished with ammunition. 

The Ijaye watchman was posted on the top of a tall tree near 
the River Ose, from whence he could command the view for 
several miles around, and announce the approach of the enemy. 

For a long time the River Ose was the scene of action : which- 
ever party arrived first at the stream gained the opposite bank 
and held it until repulsed. In course of time the Ibadans gained the 
river permanently, and the action thenceforth was on the Ijaye 
side of it. 

At this time all the farms being in the hands of the Ibadans, 
the distress, starvation and consequent mortahty at Ijaye were 
indescribable. Hundreds, nay thousands died in the streets from 
starvation, whole families perished without anyone to bury them. 
All the livestock had been consumed, the garden, the streets, and 
the yards were all planted with corn, but the cornstalks were 
devoured when they could not wait for the corn to develop. The 
herb Gb6r6 a common creeper in the streets was planted in every 
available place and used for food. 

It was generally said then that the advent of the Egbas replen- 
ished their magazines but exhausted their granaries. Now the 
Egbas procured food for themselves from home, but instead of 
succouring their allies, they took advantage of their distress to 
benefit themselves. A child who wandered longingly to an Egba 
tent and obtained a meal of beans (awuje) thereby became his 
slave ! The Egba man who could procure several loads of Awuje 
beans from home, covered all his expenses by securing so many 
Ijaye children as slaves for feeding them ! All these were sent home 
to Abeokuta. 



A GLORIOUS END AND THE GORY DAWN OF TWO REIGNS 345 

But the good offices of the missionaries of the C.M.S. and 
American Baptists at Ijaye at this time were never to be forgotten. 
Sympathizing friends at home and abroad sent them supplies, and 
they received and maintained as many Ijaye children as they could. 
The parents also received some assistance and were glad and 
thankful to see their children provided for. The names of the 
Rev. Adolphus Mann, C.M.S. and Mr, J. T. Bowen, American 
Baptist, can never be forgotten by any Ijaye born. 

Mr. Mann's skill in surgery also was in requisition ; he was 
of immense service in extracting bullets and binding up wounds. 
Thus in ministering to the wants of famished children, sheltering 
orphans and performing surgical operations he had his hands 
quite full. 

The Ijaye people had also to oppose a war behind them from 
Oyo. a small force under Amodu was sent to Iran, as he alone 
was quite enough to oppose the Oyo army which encamped at 
Ilora whence they issued for the fight. 

The AlAfin whose battle Ibadan was fighting had to supply 
both the Ibadan and Ilgra camps with gunpowder and bullets 
and for the latter purpose the services of all Oyo smiths were in 
requisition. 

The AlAfin also invited the Baribas, but their cavalry on 
which they solely depended were of little use in forest lands ; the 
I j ayes at Iran concealing themselves in the thickets surrounding 
the town had the advantage of them. Although Iran was a small 
village yet the men were able to repulse the attacks of the Oyos 
and Baribas. 

But if they could not capture Iran these Baribas were a source of 
great annoyance to the I j ayes by kidnapping in their farms and 
thereby increasing the amount of distress and starvation in the 
town. This gave rise to the pathetic wail : 

" Ibadan mu, Fiditi mu 
Ojojumo ni ara Ago iimu ni I'oko 
Ojojumo ni ara Ago fiyan mumusin l§hin odi 
Oran yi jo bi ala I'oju mi." 

Ibadan kidnaps, Fiditi kidnaps. 

Daily the men of Ago kidnap in our farms. 

Daily the men of Ago capture for service behind our walls, 

This matter to me is like a dream ! " 

§ 4. Famine and the Sword 

As we have already noticed, most of the Oke Ogun towns were 
under the rule of the Are of Ijaye ; at this crisis they became 



346 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the source of food supply to Ijaye, and both men and women 
frequented these regions for procuring provisions. 

By this time the people of Ijaye had recovered from the first 
shock and horror of a siege, and as the town could not be carried 
by assault, and was now fairly supplied with food from the Oke 
Ogun regions, and with ammunition from Abeokuta, the hopes of 
taking the town soon became very small. 

The Ibadans now tried to cut off their supplies by sending a 
small army to Oke Ogun. Isgyin was friendly to Ijaye and 
Ibadan, and both were admitted within her walls. A man called 
Ojelabi went to Iseyin and began to seize people's things in the 
market for " privilege " as an Ibadan man; Majaro the Aseyin 
ordered him out of the town, but he not only refused to go 
but was also setting houses on fire with a lighted torch. He was 
ultimately driven out under a shower of stones. The Ibadans 
hearing that Ojelabi was driven out and not knowing the cause, 
sent one Rogunto ask whether it wastheirintentiontorebel,or why 
had they expelled Oj elabi . B ut as Rogun and his party were likewise 
pillaging the town they did not fare any better but were driven 
out by force of arms. Before this happened however, the Isgyin 
people showed evident signs of impatience at the language and 
actions of these men, and sounded in their songs a note of an 
impending civil fight : — 

" Ibadan ti o k^ ti ko lo 
Awowo a w6 o " 

(The Ibadan who sticks and won't go. 
A great crash will crush him.) 

The Ibadan boys on their part took up the challenge and retorted 
with 

" A f'adamo da 'mo lekun Awowo." 
(The shot gun will shut up all crashes and crushings.) 

The civil fight soon set in, and Rogun held out till the evening 
before he was finally expelled the town. 

Iwawun, Erin, and Away^ were for Ijaye, but Bergkodo and 
other Ibarapa districts were for Ibadan. One AkSwo was sent 
from the camp to ask the Iwawun people why they were supplying 
food to Ijaye, the answer returned not being satisfactory the result 
was a little war here also. The Are hearing this sent Amodu, 
Arawgle, Adelakiin, Abese and Labudanu to reinforce Iwawun. 
When Akawo found them too strong for him, he sent to the camp 
for re-inforcement, and Latosisa and other petty war-chiefs were 
sent to his help. Still they found the power of the I j ayes too much 



A GLORIOUS END AND THE GORY DAWN OF TWO REIGNS 347 

for them to withstand, so much so that instead of besieging 
Iwawun, they were on the defensive, being practically besieged 
in their camps. 

Iwawun and Erin were advantageously situated for defensive 
purposes, being built on a high hill and surrounded by a mass 
of huge craggy rocks ; the town wall was built at the foot of the 
hill. 

The Ibadan chiefs knowing that as long as Ijaye could draw 
supplies from these places the town could not be taken, Ogunmgla 
was resolved to go himself and deal a decisive blow to their power 
here. The Balogun alone with his men and some minor chiefs 
being left in charge of the camp, Ogunmola his Otun and Osundina 
the Osi headed the rest of the war-chiefs to Oke Ogun. 

Passing by the Ijaye farms to Fiditi, they reached the Oyo 
camp at flora. The AlAfin sent one of the eunuchs to welcome 
them and take them presents of bullocks, sheep, goats, fowls, 
etc. Ogunmola respectfully dechned to accept them now : he 
sent to tell the King that he would receive them after his return 
from taking Iwawun within nine days. 

Ogunmola spoke that day as an oracle. He ordered Ajayi 
Ogboriefon the captain of the Ibadan contingent there to march 
on before him and receive a shot in that well-fed stomach of his. 

" You are leading an easy life here with our King under pretence 
of fighting against this little place," he said to him. 

On reaching Iseyin Ogunmola went to pay his compHments 
to the Aseyin, and prostrated before him in salutation. The Aseyin 
forgetful of himself received him as a subject, but he had to pay 
dearly for it some years afterwards when Ogunmola became a 
Basorun of Ibadan, and consequently his official superior. The 
army passed on to Iwawun ; rumours of a large reinforcement to 
the Ibadan force there reached the ears of the I j ayes at Iwawun, 
and some of those among them suggested that they should 
withdraw entirely before the break of day, but Arawole and 
Amgdu said " Should we not see what is d^i^^ng us before we run 
away ? Or what shall we say to the Ar§ at home ? " Up to this 
time they had no positive knowledge as to who the leader of the 
expedition was. 

Early next morning the Ibadans took a hasty breakfast, and 
soon after they filed out for the attack on Iwawun instead of 
waiting for an attack as usual. Those of the I j ayes who had 
suspected an access of reinforcement were now positive, for other- 
wise the small Ibadan force could not have been so bold this 
morning. In order to keep the expedition as secret as possible, 
apart from his rapid movements, Ogunmola forbade his drummer 



348 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

to beat and those of the other chiefs Hkewise, lest his arrival be 
known to the enemy ; but when the hour for battle was come, he 
ordered all the drummers including those of the other chiefs to 
strike up his own battle cry. Consequently the I j ayes were all 
dismayed and panic stricken when they heard : — 

" A f'oke, afi 'gbo (But the hills, but the woods, 

Ko s'eni ti o le duro." There's no one to withstand me.) 

Now they were forced to credit the report that Ogunmola himself 
was the leader of the expedition. It was thought most improbable 
that in the face of the Ijaye and Egba armies Ogunmola and staff 
with the other war-chiefs would venture to leave the camp. 

But the I j ayes were men in the true sense of the word ; after the 
first shock of this discovery, they steeled their hearts and threw 
themselves on their assailants with great intrepidity but the 
odds were greatly against them. It is reported that the chief 
of Awaye was bribed or terrorized into disclosing a secret path 
by which an enemy might enter Iwawun, but this is very doubtful, 
because Awaye herself had to share the fate of Iwawun afterwards. 
Whatever it may be, Iwawun was taken by assault, and within an 
hour the town was in flames ! The Ijaye heroes had an opportunity 
of escape but did not avail themselves of it. Amodu fought and 
died a hero's death. He had borne a distinguished part all through 
this war, and in him Ijaye sustained an irreparable loss. 

Five of the Are's sons were caught and slain, including Arawole 
his eldest surviving son. The death of Arawole sent a thrill of 
horror and grief throughout the camp and town of Ibadan. Many 
were the ill-suppressed murmurs against Ogunmola for this heartless 
murder, for, although Kurumi was now a foe, he was still a name 
and a venerable figure in the history of Yoruba, a contemporary of 
the fathers of these Ibadan chiefs and the last surviving link 
between their past in the old homes desolated by the Fulanis, 
and these forest lands to which they have escaped. Now he was 
old and on the verge of the grave, to extinguish his light in his 
eldest son was an event no reflecting patriot could calmly con- 
template. Ibikunle the Balogun was said to have shed a tear 
when he heard it, and none but that heartless diplomat Ogunmola 
could have killed Arawole thus. Of the Ijaye chiefs, the Abese, 
Labudanu and Adejumo alone escaped to tell the tale. About ten 
others perished there. 

Erin also was taken very easily the same day, and numbers 
of the Ijaye caravans who went there to buy provisions fell into 
their hands but a great many escaped into the bush. 

On the return march of the Ibadans Ogunmola had 



A GLORIOUS END AND THE GORY DAWN OF TWO REIGNS 349 

recourse to a ruse by which he entrapped hundreds of those 
who had escaped into the bush. Instead of his own battle cry, 
he ordered the drummers to strike up that of the Are of Ijaye, 
and when those who had escaped into the bush heard : — 
" Ija Orogun koro, Orogun." 
(Bitter is the quarrel of rivals, the rivals.) 

they naturally thought their master had come to their help 
against Ogunmola, and as they issued one by one from their 
hiding places to flock to his standard, they fell an easy prey 
into the hands of the Ibadans.^ 

On the 9th day of his leaving the Ilgra camp, he arrived there 
again as he promised to do ; and singularly Ajayi Ogboriefon was 
also wounded in his " well-fed " stomach, even as Ogunmola said. 

But during the absence of Ogunmola and the flower of the 
Ibadan army at Iwawun, brave deeds were done behind the walls 
of Ijaye. It was now or never with the alHes, and the Are was 
determined to take the Ibadan camp before their return. Had 
Ibikunle not been a particularly brave and experienced general, he 
could never have withstood the force of the impact made upon him. 

Appraising the Egbas at their true valuation, notwithstanding 
numbers, the Balogun opposed to them his Areagoro Aijenku 
but himself withstood the more vigorous attack of the I j ayes. 

It was on this occasion that the Are at the head of a choice body 
of veterans made a dash on the Ibadan centre with a determination 
to break through ; but he might as well have hurled himself upon 
an immovable rock ! Again and again he tried and failed, and not 
only so, but the young woman, a devotee, who carried before him 
into battle his covered calabash of charms for safety and success, 
was severely wounded and had to be carried away. An eye-witness 
who stood by him all through and who related the events to the 
writer, said seeing his non-success, all disconsolate and despairing 
he sat under fire in the midst of the battle saying " How can I go 
back, how can I ? I cannot, I cannot." His attendants and body- 
guard had literally to carry him to the rear. The old general 
seemed to have forgotten that he was no longer young, and that 
for deeds of might and strength, age must give place to youth. 
Aijenku acquitted himself against the Egbas so well, that he had 
no need to ask for reinforcement from his chief. There can be 

1 History repeats itself. It will be seen hereafter how by a 
singular act of retributive justice, Ogunmola lost his only son 
and heir in battle by the same trick being practised upon 
his son by the Ekitis. 



350 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

no doubt that the Balogun gained in prestige enormously by this 
action and fully justified the eulogies of his bard 

" Odunbudere Okunrin 
A to ft ise ogun ran." 
(Odunbudere (an untranslatable word) a mighty man, 
Fit to be entrusted with the onus of war!) 

On the return of the Ibadan expedition after the usual welcome 
the Balogun was said to have expressed himself bitterly to 
Ogunmola on the slaughter of the Are's sons especially that of 
Arawole. " Arawole," said he "is our own companion, and the 
Are, a contemporary of our fathers, how long further has he to live, 
and who is to uphold his house ? " Ogunmola was said to have 
justified his acts by saying " If we want the war to be over soon, 
sentiment must give way to something practical, a crushing blow 
was needed at Iwawun, and that is what I have dealt." 

The cutting off of provisions by the destruction of the Oke Ogun 
towns gave a death blow to Ijaye. The Are on hearing the 
sad news was crushed entirely by it. It was as if he had received 
his death warrant; he saw clearly that all hopes for Ijaye were 
now gone, and with a dejected spirit he was often seen in his 
house wandering about abstractedly and muttering to himself 
" Nje emi ni mo jebi oran yi ? " (am I then in the wrong in this 
matter ?) He had hitherto been confident of success from the 
supposed justice of his cause, but now he was sadly 
disillusioned. 

From this time the old general began to languish, and no more 
great deeds were recorded of him. He died of a broken heart 
in the month of June, 1861. 

Thus passed away one of the most venerable and historic 
figures in Yoruba history. 

Prior to his death occurred that of another notable figure, a 
friend, colleague, and brother in arms. The Olu-Ode or chief of 
the hunters of ancient Ikoyi with Kurumi were among the bravest 
defenders of the old country. After the Fulani destruction of their 
homes he retired hither with Kurumi and lived the rest of his life 
at Ijaye. During this war he wrought havoc amongst the Ibadans 
with his cross bow and arrows. He was never known to miss his 
aim. In one of their skirmishes he was caught by the Ibadans. 
When brought into the camp it was said that the Balogun met and 
saluted him, prostrating before him as to his own father, and there 
and then gave him his liberty on parole. This was against the 
wish of Ogunmola who would have him killed at once, but the 
Balogun overruled it. 



A GLORIOUS END AND THE GORY DAWN OF TWO REIGNS 35I 

Another chief, a cavalry officer was also caught, one who had 
successfully crossed spears with the Fulanis in olden days. He, 
too, was set free on parole, and he wisely retired to Ibadan where 
he spent the rest of his days. 

But the Olu-odg broke his parole, he was caught again trying 
to escape back to Ijaye. This time even the Balogun could 
not save him, much as he would like to do so ; the other war-chiefs 
threatened to mutiny if the Olu-ode was again spared, and the 
Balogun was obliged to give way. " Why are you going back to 
a doomed city ? " he asked of the old chief. His reply was direct 
and simple: " My children are there." " Alas sire, you die, 
but for a cause not unworthy, you are laying down your Ufe on 
account of your children." Thus did the Balogun address him 
before he was led away to execution by Ogunmgla's swordbearers. 

After Kurumi's death, Abogunrin his head slave had the honour 
of burying him. This was done in secret, and the two slaves 
who dug the grave were slain also to accompany their master 
so that the spot might not be disclosed ; but the place was found 
out afterwards, and the skull taken over to the AlAfin as the 
custom was, for all who bore the title of Ar§-ona-Kakanfo. 

The government of the town, and the conduct of the war now 
devolved upon Abogunrin the Are's head slave, who had been 
placed in power even before his master's death. His treasures and 
all his ammunition being under the charge of Abogunrin, 
implicit obedience was rendered to him by all, in all matters both 
civil and mihtary. 

The only road left to the I j ayes by which they could obtain 
provisions and ammunition was the Ab§okuta road, and on this 
the Ibadans began now to kidnap regularly. The caravans had 
to be under miUtary escort, and the Egba outpost at Olokemeji 
was an immense service to them at this time. 

The old chief Ogunbgna the Balogun of Ikija who was stationed 
there died of illness, but a small force was still kept there to assist 
the caravans half way ; the danger lay between Ijaye and Oloke- 
meji, beyond this it was safe. One Oje was a notable escort, but 
he was caught in the Ijaye farms, and publicly executed. 

Early in 1862 the Ibadans removed their camp once more from 
Alabata, and crossing the river Ose they pitched their tents in the 
battlefield ; three fierce battles were fought to prevent this but 
as the Ibadans were able to maintain their ground, the fate of 
Ijaye was sealed. 

Leaving the Balogun to face the Ijayes, Ogunmgla now went to 
the Abeokuta road and besieged the Egbas in their camp. The 
Ijayes thereupon left the town and encamped in the field opposite 



352 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the Ibadan camp. The fighting now was both obstinate and fre- 
quent, for besides fighting in the da3', a special band of skirmishers 
was organized to keep it up all night. 

On the 15th of March, 1862, Lieut. Dolbein, of H.M.S. 
Prometheus, accompanied by Mr, Edward Roper, a European 
missionary of the C.M.S, came up to Ijaye to the reUef of Mr, and 
Mrs. Mann. 

A battle was fought on the i6th which he witnessed, and he 
was said to have expressed his opinion that the Ibadans were 
superior warriors judging from the manoeuvrings on both sides, 
and that the town was sure to be taken. But Mr. Mann was 
unwilUng to leave his post, the state of Mrs. Mann's health, however, 
rendered it imperative that he should take her down to the coast 
and he promised to return soon to his post. Mr. Edward Roper 
volunteered to hold the station until his return. 

The Rev. A. and Mrs. Mann with Lieut. Dolbein left Ijaye 
early on the 17th March, 1862, and as soon as it was knowfi that 
the white man had left the town, it was regarded as an evil omen 
for that town. The Egbas said that the white man's God had 
shown them that evil was coming, and would not themselves 
wait for it either. Before night fail, there was a rush, fugitives 
overtook them even in the course of the day, and they had to 
redouble their speed both to avoid the crush of fugitives and also 
to escape the expected pursuers. Fortunately the Ibadans did 
not know in time that the town had been deserted or they might 
have met them by the way ; still some of the stragglers were met 
later on when pursuit was made. 

Thus fell Ijaye, a town of ease and plenty, a town compact, 
and full of brave men, an industrious town, but too despotically 
governed, a town in which the citizens were marked by restlessness 
and daring. 

Ijaye and Ibadan being sister towns and the people one, many 
wise heads in the former place made captives (as it were) of their 
wives and children, putting halters round, the necks of their 
own brothers and led them to Ibadan to the house of their relatives 
without being detected. Once there, they were free. But knowing 
each other so well, some were detected and captured. Some lost 
their bearings and missed their way in the town and were captured, 
some fell into the hands of acquaintances and were rescued. The 
Ijaye warriors in the camp with their chiefs escaped with the 
Egbas to Abeokuta, Abogunrin at their head. 

The Egbas assigned them a portion of land where they pitched 
their tents, and there they subsequently built their houses. The 
spot is known as AgQ Ijaye to this day. 



A GLORIOUS END AND THE GORY DAWN OF TWO REIGNS 353 

When the Rev. D. Hinderer of Ibadan heard of the capture of 
Mr. Edward Roper, he sent to negotiate for his release from 
Ogunmola in whose possession he was, but this hard-hearted 
soldier refused to give him up unless he was released for 200 
bags of cowries (equivalent then to £200) 200 kegs of powder and 
200 guns. Mr. Hinderer then went in person and remonstrated 
with Ogunmola. The latter grew more stern, refusing to abate 
any one of his terms, rather than that he would keep him, and if 
he was incapable of performing any material service for him, still 
he should be able to tend his poultry yard in his farm. " We have 
learnt that white men live on eggs and milk I will feed this one with 
parched corn." And he added " We know that this is not the 
actual white man of Ijaye, whom we often saw in the battlefield : 
this one only entered the town a few days ago, hence you have 
such easy terms, otherwise we should have killed him right out, 
for he fought us, and we had our eyes on him." Mr. Mann we know 
did not fight, but reHeved the wounded men; however, there were 
two " Afro American " sharp-shooters,^ who harassed the Ibadans 
a good deal with their rifles. 

Mr. Hinderer then asked for the interference of the Balogun, of 
Aijenku and of Ajiya Abayomi ; they all interceded but in vain, 
he remained obdiu-ate. Mr. Hinderer then sent two of his agents 
to the Alafin of Oyo to appeal to His Majesty for his interference. 

The King then sent the following message to Ogunmola : — 
" What your Balogun Ibikunle, and your colleagues Aijenku 
and Abayomi failed to obtain from you, I know you have reserved 
the honour for me, and now I ask you to give up the white man 
freely and without any charges." In obedience to the King 
Ogunmola gave Mr. Roper up to his friends, the latter being too 
glad to be once more among his countrymen. 

Besides the Rev. Mr. and Mrs. Hinderer, Mr. Roper met also 
at Ibadan, Mr. George Jeffries a friend and college mate of his, 
and both of them resided together. 

A few months- after Mr. Roper's arrival at Ibadan, his friend 
Jeffries was laid up from diarrhoea. Roper's presence here at this 
time cannot but be regarded otherwise than as providential, 
to comfort and cheer up his friend's dying hours. Jeffries passed 
quietly away and Roper undertook the charge of his station at 
Ogunpa, Ibadan. He remained there till he was able to return to 
England in 1865. 

The good offices of His Majesty the AlAfin to the missionaries 
claim our special notice. This was the second of the kind during 
this war. Mr. Samuel Cole, a native schoolmaster, was once 

» Messrs. Vaughan and Pettiford. 



354 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

kidnapped between Ijaye and Iseyin in the early part of the 
conflict, (i860). Mr. Hinderer hearing this sent Mr. (now Rev.) 
D. Olubi to the AlAfin, who kindly ordered his release and sent 
him to Ibadan. Mr. Cole returned to Abeokuta by the Remo road. 
The Ijaye war was one of the bloodiest fought by the Ibadans, 
as may be expected " When Greek meets Greek." But the only 
chief of note that fell was Osundina the Osi (father of the well- 
known Ibadan chief Apampa). He was shot in the knee, but he 
kept his post till the battle was over that day. He died a few days 
after. How many thousands upon thousands of common soldiers 
died on both sides it is impossible to say, but a faint idea could be 
had from the only authentic account kept. 

At the commencement of the war Ogunmola ordered that a 
correct account of his soldier slaves who fell in battle should be kept. 
For that purpose a huge basket 5 or 6ft. high was kept and the cap 
of every slave of his who fell in battle was thrown into it. When 
Ijaye was taken Ogunmola counted the caps, they amounted to 
1800, representing the soldier slaves of his who fell between April 
10, i860, and March 17, 1862, exclusive of freeborn soldiers ; and 
that was for only one single chief ,* what then of the whole Ibadan 
army and those of the provinces; what of the Ijayes, the Egbas, the 
Oyos, and the Oke Ogun peoples, and Ijebus engaged in this war ! 

It shows the redoubtable courage of the assailants and the 
obstinate resistance of the defenders. It justifies Ibikunle's 
reluctance to declare war upon their kith and kin. But those 
who knew Ijaye best, and were acquainted with the details of 
the enormities being committed there in the years before the war, 
were satisfied that their judgment was from above ; the cup of 
their iniquities was full and not only the besiegers but also their 
very allies helped to bring about their ruin. This was evident from 
the significant song commonly sung in their dances in those days: — 

" Onigbeja li o fo 'gun, 
Iwi I'a ko gbodo wi." 
('Twas our alHes caused our rout, 
But we must not say 'tis so.) 
The Egb^s have always been ashamed of this defeat which 
did not admit of being explained away, but many regarded it as 
a just punishment for their perfidy. And singularly, scarcely any 
of the principal chiefs concerned survived the war, thus recalUng 
Sokenu's retort on them. Henceforth Oygs never have any 
fear in meeting any Egbas in the field, whatever the odds. 

Ijaye was taken, but the war was not over, the bad blood left 
behind rankled for the next three years. 



Chapter XIX. 

SEQUELS OF THE IJAYE WAR 

§ I. The Awaye War 

The Ibadans being determined to punish Away^ for supplying 
Ijaye with provisions during the siege, now sent the Asipa and 
subordinate chiefs at the head of the army against it, leaving 
only the Balogun and the Otun in the Ijaye camp ; and so Away6 
was besieged. 

Away^ was a small but beautiful town situated on a plateau, 
the scenery from which is very picturesque, the Ado mount rising 
in lofty magnificence a few miles off, and the open country for 
miles around interspersed with the locust and the lya trees. The 
inhabitants were a very peaceful and agricultural people, and were 
faithful and loyal to Ijaye to the very last. In fact, Ijaye was the 
only town of importance to which they could sell their agricultural 
produce. 

The men of that town had no guns, but they were very expert 
in the use of their bow and poisoned arrows, and for full seven 
months they obstinately defended the town. It was at last 
reduced by famine, being closely invested on every side, so that 
they could not get to their farms ; but the able-bodied men cut 
their way through the Ibadans and made good their escape. In 
fact the Ibadans hastily made way for these desperate men, when 
they saw them making a furious charge and were singing the well- 
known song of desperadoes escaping life in hand : — 

" Oyin su, Oyin Ig o 
Oyin a sii, Oyin a pgn roro." 
(Bees in a swarm, bees swarming away, 
Bees will swarm, the swarm, o how red.) 

Thus these brave defenders deserted the town when famine and 
the sword rendered it no longer tenable. 

The remnant of the Away6 people are now encamped at the foot 
of the Ado mount. 

The Ibadan army returned from this expedition in the month 
of October, 1862. The latter rains were then incessant and the 
rivers much swollen ; the Ogun river in particular swept many 
away, both horses and men. 

35S 



356 the history of the yorubas 

§ 2. The Iperu War 

During the siege of Awayd, the Egbas and the Ijaye refugees 
at Abeokuta went also to take revenge on the Remo towns that 
were friendly to the Ibadans during the siege of Ijaye. 

On the 19th of June, 1862, the Egbas destroyed Makun, 
and advanced against Ode, Ogere, aiming specially at Ipara whose 
Balogun Rehire was a particularly active ally of Ibadan. The 
Rem OS therefore sent to Ibadan for help and Ogunmola went 
straight from the Ijaye camp to Remo, theBalogun himself although 
in ill health rejoining him soon after, until the army at Awayd 
could join them. Ogunmola in the meantime found his way to 
Ikorodu for a supply of ammunition. 

Iperu easily surrendered to the Egbas and there the triple forces 
of the Egbas, Ijayes and Ijebus were concentrated to repel the 
Ibadans and overrun Remo. 

The Ibadans retook several towns as Ipara, Ogere etc., sweeping 
all before them until they came up with their old antagonists 
again, re-inforced by the Ijebus at Iperu. 

At home, the Ibadans at first made light of the combination, 
hence they sang in their'dances : — 

" Ijebu ko pe okowo, 
Nitori eru I'a se nlo." 
(The Ijebus are not worth a sou [lit. 20 cowries] 
Only for booty are we going). 

But the chiefs knew the difficulties that confronted them, 
especially as the foe blocked the route of their supply of ammuni- 
tion. Moreover Ajiya Abaygmi pointed out that Remo being a 
non-agricultural country, could not supply an army with food : 
they must therefore be provisioned from home and would thus be 
far from their base ; besides Ijebu is proverbially destitute of 
water ; he therefore, suggested that they should attack them from 
Ijebu Igbo, which is not far from the Ibadan farms S.E. as 
opposition from that point would be almost m7, and in that way they 
would withdraw the coaUtion against their friends the Remos, and 
with their own farms as base, they would have a safe and easy task. 

The other chiefs saw with him, but, said they, their aim was 
not to destroy the Ijebus but to protect their friends ; and it would 
be most ungracious to leave the Remos who had been so loyal 
to them in their hour of danger,. 

Thus the encounter was again renewed between the old anta- 
gonists in a different battlefield. The Ibadans were again sweeping 
all before them, and Iperu was just nearly taken and the con- 
federates crushed when Providence decreed the arrest of their 



SEQUELS OF THE IJAYE WAR 357 

progress. The tide turned dead against them ; a combination 
of causes created insurmountable difficulties. 

1. The Egbas now introduced superior weapons. They were 
armed with breach-loading guns and rifles. 

2. One Mr. Pettiford an American sharp-shooter was engaged 
to pick down the chiefs, thus Odunjo the Seriki, Madarikan the 
Asaju, Chief Adepo, and others fell. Ogunmola himself was nearly 
hit, his hat being knocked off his head. 

3. The Ibadans having hemmed them up at Iperu were conse- 
quently near enough to be within the range of the rifles, and so 
from within the town walls and surrounding thickets they were 
constantly harassed in their camps. 

4. The Balogun's illness grew worse, he could not leave his bed 
and several of the leading chiefs were killed. 

5. The distance of their base, the difficulty of food supply and 
the scarcity of water told against them. The whole camp had 
to depend upon one single well which they dug when water could 
not be obtained otherwise ; a very deep well it was and the only 
one. 

6. No scope to deploy their troops for manoeuvring against 
superior numbers and superior weapons ; and worst of all they ran 
short of powder for the old Dane guns they were using, so that 
instead of taking the offensive they were now on the defensive in 
their camps ; the Egbas could come out and cut down the corn 
they had planted and offer battle. 

The direction of the war devolved upon Ogunmola alone in 
the absence of the sickBalogun, the Osi killed at Ijaye, the Seriki, 
Asaju and others shot down at Iperu. Matters came to such a 
pass one day, when Ogunmola was hard pressed that he sent to 
call the Balogun from his sick bed " to die if needs be like a soldier 
in the field." 

Once more the " lion of the master of camps " aroused himself 
and appeared on the scene of action for the last time. He was 
literally helped and held on horse back, one desperate effort 
was made, and the Egbas were pushed a Httle way back. But the 
Balogun could not continue long, he left some of his men with 
Ogunmola, to hold the ground they had regained and he was 
borne back to his tent. His legs had become so cedematous 
when he was hfted off his horse, that his riding boots had to be 
ripped open with a knife in order to release his legs ! Thus the war 
dragged wearily on, Iperu could not be taken by assault or other- 
wise, nor could the Ibadans be dislodged from their entrenchments. 

Towards the latter part of 1864 the Alafin intervened, as his 
father did in the late Bat§do war. His Majesty sent the high 



358 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

priest of Sango with the emblems of the deity, and a eunuch to 
represent himself, to the belligerents. They came first to the 
Ibadan camp, and then passed on to Iperu to the Egbas, Ijayes 
and Ijebus ; in each place, homage was paid to the god and fealty 
to the representative of the monarch. The " God Sango had 
enjoined a cessation of arms and the return of each one to his home." 
Peace was then declared between the belligerents. 

Congratulatory messages were sent home by friends and relatives 
in opposite camps, mutual visitings took place and all went well 
for three or four days. 

But the Ibadan principal chiefs had no great confidence in 
Egba good faith, having the perfidy of i860 before their eyes ; 
they, therefore, took certain precautions. 

First, they ordered all the sick and wounded home (except the 
Balogun), together with the women and children by slow marches. 
Secondly, the bones of the fallen chiefs were exhumed and sent home 
for re-interment. 

They were apprehensive of treachery from the Egbas immediately 
they turned their backs, but to prevent a panic they did not disclose 
their fears or suspicion, but Ogunmgla knowing himself to be the 
most invidious of the lot and a special object of hate hastened away 
in the night and before daybreak had reached Ipara. In his 
hurry his slaves on occasion made way for him with the sword, 
and seeing his only daughter Omosa in the company of women 
who had been sent on the day before, he lifted her on to his saddle 
and never halted until he reached Fawe in the Ibadan farms, 
there to await his comrades. 

But the majority of the women lingered by the way, others 
in the camp, seeing no reason why they should be in a hurry 
as all was peace. The Balogun who was dropsical and could not 
ride was borne on a htter. 

Now when the day arrived for the breaking up of the camp, 
and the Ibadans already on the move, the Egba nature asserted 
itself by justifying the worst apprehensions entertained of it. 
They had crowded the Ibadan camp in friendly intercourse, and 
exchanged greetings, but the prey was now eluding their grasp ; 
they pounced upon the unsuspicious and began to make prisoners 
and pressed forward in pursuit. Some of the chiefs who did not 
suspect treachery were caught. The venerable Sumala the Otun 
Bale who would have been made the Bale of Ibadan on their 
return home was caught and killed. Chief Abayomi was one of 
the unsuspicious, the Egbas had begun to make prisoners before 
he was aware of what was going on. Mounting his horse when it 
was tethered he forgot to unloose it till one of his slaves severed 



SEQUELS OF THE IJAYE VVAR 359 

the cord with his sword. He had to fight his way out and escaped. 

Soderinde, although a native of Iperu but a resident at Ibadan, 
and a distinguished cavalry officer was then at home among his 
relatives enjoying himself ; he was there arrested and had to 
ransom himself by the payment of a heavy fine, and had to remain 
there at home for the time. At the stream Afidiwo the Egba 
pursuers overtook theBalogun and his guards ; these stood fighting 
whilst those who bore him were hastening on. But the Egbas 
were pressing closely endeavouring to take the Balogun alive. 
When they reached the river Omi the Balogun ordered his carriers 
to put him down and that the Egbas be driven back from that place 
Akere the Asipa was the only war-chief who waited to protect the 
Balogun besides his own men and bodyguards. Here, when 
they had rallied and arranged themselves in order of battle, they 
made a furious charge on the Egba pursuers and drove them clean 
away with a heavy loss. These soon finding it unprofitable to 
pursue armed men when hapless women and children were to be 
got, quickly gave up the pursuit. 

All, as many as escaped, assembled at Fawe from which place 
they returned home one by one, mostly at night on account of the 
disastrous ending of the expedition. More women were lost 
than men. Kehere the Balogun of Ipara wisely came to Ibadan 
until peace had been completely restored. 

For weeks and months, people were coming home by degrees, 
as numbers had escaped into the bush and lost their way ; some 
strayed to Ijebu farms and were captured, some found their 
way back to the road or to Ibadans farms and returned home, 
whilst some perished in the forests. 

A small force of armed men was ordered to proceed as far as the 
river Omi with the hopes of rescuing them, following the directions 
in which those who had escaped located large bodies of them. A 
few were rescued by them, for guns fired to attract their notice 
unfortunately had the effect of driving them farther into the 
forests, as reported by the few which escaped. 

The view taken of this disaster by the Ibadans was expressed 
thus in the song and dances of the day : — 

" Sango I'o laja ti o d'obirin nu, 
Ogun ko le wa." 

("Twas Sango's mediation that lost us our wives, 
We've suffered no defeat.)^ 

^It is only fair to mention that the Egbas atoned for this 
action in a very diplomatic way as we shall find in §5 following. 



360 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The experience gained from this circumstance was the reason for 
the caution displayed many years afterwards when peace was 
being arranged between the Ibadans and Ekitis at Kiriji by various 
parties. The Ibadans refused to decamp in the face of their 
foes without a guarantee against a pursuit until the British Govern- 
ment intervened in 1886 and arranged for a simultaneous decamp- 
ment. 

§ 3. The Ikorodu War 

The Egbas instead of returning home after this, led the conjoint 
army against Ikorodu. Ikorodu is a town situated on the Lagoon 
about 3 hours' steam from Lagos. Whether because as a Remo 
town she took no part in the late war, or because she was secretly 
in alHance with Ibadan is not certain. They were here for 
several months and some good fighting was done on both sides. 
But Ikorodu was hopelessly outnumbered. When she was nearly 
taken, the chiefs applied for the protection of the British Govern- 
ment at Lagos. The Lagos traders and merchants also suffering 
from the closing of the markets approved of the interference of 
the Governor. His Excellency John Hawley Glover, then governor 
of Lagos, therefore sent to the Egbas to raise the siege, as Ikorodu 
was a peaceful town on the Lagoon with a regular trade with Lagos, 
which was thus beingindirectly injured. On their refusing to do so, 
he sent them an ultimatum which was also disregarded. On the 
29th March, 1865, the Governor sent about 100 men of the West 
Indian regiment then quartered at Lagos with a few shells and 
rockets. 

Within an hour of the engagement the Egbas had taken to 
their heels, large numbers perished in the flight. It was ascertained 
afterwards that those who fell from bullets were very few indeed 
but the majority died from fright and thirst induced by exhaustion 
in the flight ; for as the rockets flew overhead with hideous noise 
and streaming fiery tails, a thing unseen before, they were panic- 
stricken. 

As soon as the report reached Iperu of the flight of the Egbas 
from Ikorodu, Soderinde in order to retrieve his losses and to 
avenge himself on the Egbas, collected^ his men and as many 
Ibadan boys, as he could collect who had come down for trade, and 
they fell upon those of the Egbas who had escaped from Ikorodu 
and were recovering their breath. He made many captives, and 
returning he stayed no longer at Iperu but passed on straight 
to Ibadan where he domiciled until his death in 1880 full of days 
and honour having attained to the rank of Balogun in the cavalry. 
Thus Ikorodu was saved. 



sequels of the ijaye war 361 

§ 4. The Second Dahomian Invasion of Abeokuta 

During the Iperu war, the Dahomians taking advantage of the 
absence of the Egba war-chiefs made a second attack on Abeokuta 
on the 15th of March, 1864. 

It was alleged by some that this was at the instigation of the 
Ibadans in order that the Egbas might withdraw from Iperu, 
and also that men were sent to teach them how to encamp and 
lay siege. How far this is true is not known, but it is certain 
that the Dahomians required no instigation for raiding Abeokuta 
nor did they at any time lay siege against her. 

The Egbas had profited by the experience of 1851, the town 
wall was well repaired, and the trenches dug deep, two or three 
field guns were mounted on the ramparts and sentinels placed 
to prevent a surprise. 

The Christian community, now a numerous body, formed a 
corps by themselves under John Okenla their Balogun, encamping 
apart during intervening Sundays, and having their religious 
services in the field. 

False alarms of the approach of the enemy and the usual 
cry of the women " Ele le m'ele " were constant. The Christians 
gave the people a sign that when they heard the booming of 
the cannon, then they were to be sure of the approach of the 
enemy. 

Early in the morning of the 15th of March, the booming of 
cannon in rapid succession, and the rattling of musketry told the 
town that the enemy was in sight ; the women resumed their cry, 
and the men hastened to man the walls. 

About 7 a.m. the noise of fire-arms was quite deafening and for 
the space of half-an-hour without intermission, all on the side of 
the Egbas who wer€ well within the walls having learnt by experi- 
ence never to attempt to meet them in the open field to arrest their 
progress. 

The Dahomians without returning the fire, or breaking their 
ranks marched steadily onwards, the Amazons this time bringing 
up the rear. On they marched stolidly till they began to scale 
the walls. Cannon and muskets were now of little use, it was a 
matter of hand-to-hand fighting. The Egbas well within the walls 
kept lopping off the hands of the Amazons as they attempted to 
scale the walls, and in that way hundreds of their advanced 
comrades were left in the trenches. 

When they were repulsed, they fell back and took to their guns. 
The Egbas kept up a steady fire from the holes made in the walls. 
Finding it useless to renew their efforts of taking the town by 
assault, the Dahomian army retreated but in good order. 



362 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The Egbas now came out, hovering in their rear until they saw 
them pass Ibara to Isaga. Many captives were made, of whom 
were Amazons so ferocious, that although chained, many found 
means of killing their captors, and were of course killed in turn. 
A male soldier penetrated as far as Igbein, being caught near 
the C.M.S. station there by the son of an old Ogboni man. He was 
put in stocks, but great care was bestowed upon him to soften his 
ferocity. He refused to eat, and was resolved to die. He was 
heard muttering something in his language, not understood by 
those around, his intention therefore was not known. But he 
managed to obtain and conceal a large bit of stone near him, and 
watching for an opportunity, he dealt a heavy blow with it on the 
face of the old Ogboni man, who, thereupon fell down and fainted 
away. The women-folk in the house set up a yell, and as the 
fellow could not possibly escape he was shot dead on the spot. 

The subsequent Dahomian invasions never came up to the walls 
of Abeokuta, but almost every year their expedition would come 
as far as Ibara, 10 miles from the town, the inhabitants deserting 
the place for Abeokuta, and sometimes they would encamp on 
the Ata hills 5 or 6 miles distant, remaining for a couple of 
months, devastating the farms all around. The Egbas would 
remain day and night keeping watch by the walls till the beginning 
of May when the rainy season had fairly set in, and the rivers began 
to rise. The Ogun river at this time became a wall of protection 
for them, as the Dahomians could not ford it nor bridge it, and they 
had no canoes. The Yewa river also flowing between the Yoruba 
and Idahomian territories had to be forded. The Dahomians 
therefore invariably raised their sieges and returned home before the 
rains had fairly set in. 

During these periods of what is called siege, there were some 
desperadoes among the Egbas who would venture across the river 
to within two miles of the Ata hills to spy out the enemy, and some- 
times to scare them by letting off fire arms. In order to capture 
such men the Dahomians would come down unseen as near as 
possible to the river, dig trenches at intervals on either side of the 
path, and conceal men in them, setting scouts to apprise them of 
the approach of Egba spies. After these -had passed on towards 
the Dahomian camp, they would emerge from their hiding places 
and cut off their retreat, driving them onwards towards their 
camp. In this way several were caught, and some of those who 
escaped capture died of fright, or of exhaustion and thirst. 

The panic and distress caused by these yearly raids became 
very great at Abeokuta, depression of trade and the arrest of all 
agricultural pursuits followed. The Egbas, although better armed, 



SEQUELS OF THE IJAYE WAR 363 

yet lacked the courage to leave the security of their walls and 
meet their enemy in the field. This national disgrace was subse- 
quently wiped off by John Okenla the Christian Balogun, who in 
1873 with a company of his men attacked and defeated a body 
of Dahomian raiders at Oba who went scouring the fields and 
pillaging the farms. 

The Enghsh Government was now memorialized by the 
secretaries of the CM. Society on account of the Christians at 
Abeokuta, and, in response to this appeal, the King of Dahomey 
was warned against meddhng with Abeokuta any more. 

The Dahomians now turned their attention to the Yorubas of 
the western province, and were actually devastating the Egbados 
and the Oke Ogun districts until a higher power decreed " Thus 
far shalt thou go, and no further." 

§ 5. The Atonement 

The Balogun of Ibadan died ten days after their return home, 
and was given a public funeral with full honours. 

The government of Ibadan now devolved upon Ogunmola the 
Otun Balogun, and the first thing he did was to assemble the 
other chiefs in council with a view to arranging terms of peace with 
their neighbours. But the perfidy of the Egbas and the great loss 
sustained especially of the women must in some way be avenged 
at any rate. 

The secret somehow leaked out that the Egba chiefs gave up 
Osiele to be taken by the Ibadans to satisfy their honour if it 
could be done by a coup before the news of it reached Abeokuta. 

Ogunmola himself led out the expedition, but remained with the 
reserved forces in the forests, and entrusted the enterprise into the 
hands of Ajobo the newly made Seriki. He was to surprise Osiele, 
swoop down upon it, make a clean sweep of the place and retire 
ere help could come from Abeokuta. 

Ajobo, however, lacked the courage to take it by an assault and 
hence the expedition failed. Ogunmola keenly regretted having 
stayed behind, but as the attempt could not be repeated without 
provoking a war with the Egbas he led the Ibadan forces home 
again. It was a diplomatic offer and should be done in one stroke. 

A few weeks after this Ogunmola again led the Ibadan troops 
against Atadi another village of Abeokuta, this time entrusting 
it to no one, he went in person, and on the 9th of March, 1865, 
Atadi was taken by assault. The two powers now felt that honour 
has been satisfied on both sides. 

It was said that the news of the Ibadan attempt on Osiele met 
the Abeokuta chiefs at a pubhc meeting, but in spite of the excite- 



364 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

ment shown by the people, and the urgent requests for a pursuit, 
the chiefs gave no heed, but were coolly going on with the business 
in hand, which was quite an unimportant affair. 

To the peoples' importunities they simply returned a derisive 
answer pointing out the impossibility of the thing, and when 
they knew the Ibadans must have gone then they bestirred 
themselves to find Osiele intact. Hence when the report of Atadi 
was given they were able to say " False alarm again, so they did 
in the case of Osiele the Ibadans would not dare to think of it" 
etc. 

This daring attack was not followed by a retaliation or by 
further kidnapping on either side which was a proof that it was a 
diplomatic affair secretly arranged by the authorities on both sides. 

Ayawo the wife of Somoye the Basorun of Abeokuta, who was 
taken at Ijaye was now restored to her husband and on the 15th 
of July, of the same year, the Ibadan messengers arrived at 
Abeokuta for a formal negotiation about the re-opening of the 
roads for intercommunication and trade. A month after this 
peace was proclaimed, and the roads became free and open to all. 
The Egbas, however, forbade the sale of arms and gunpowder to 
the Ibadans, and these forbade the sale of horses to the Egbas. 

The paths through the forests fields and farms having been 
overgrown and blocked by large trees falHng across during the 
period they were disused, had now to be cut and cleared on either 
side right on to the frontier. 

This brings to a close the Ijaye war and its consequences. 



Chapter XX 

THE CLOSING AND THE OPENING CAREERS OF 
TWO HEROES 

§ I. Ogunmola's Administration 

The attention of the Ibadans was now turned to home affairs, 
vacancies among the chiefs had to be filled up, and new titles 
conferred. The first to be conferred was, of course, that of 
the head of the town as he it is who has to arrange for the others. 

It was known that if the Balogun had returned home in good 
health, he would have negotiated for the title of Kakanfo, as 
he was the conqueror of the late Kakanfo, and being a native 
of Ogbomoso, was said to be related to a former Kakanfo of that 
place. But when his fatal illness supervened it is said that hopes 
were fixed on the venerable Sumala the Otun Bale for the title of 
Bale on their return home, but Sumala was caught and killed 
at the retreat from Iperu. Ogunmola now found himself the undis- 
puted head of the town. He declined the title of Bale alleging it 
was an effeminate title, for Bales do not go to war, and so many 
brave men having perished at the war, Ibadan would lose her 
military prestige by his retiring so early from active life. But he 
might have negotiated for the title of Kakanfo now vacant. That 
is a miHtary title par excellence, but his vaulting ambition aimed 
higher than that, he usurped the title of Basorun notwithstanding 
that Gbenla the first Basorun of the present Oyo was still alive, 
and there can be but one Basorun of the kingdom. 

The Basorun is a prince of Oyo and the title hereditary, but 
this impudent upstart who found himself temporarily entrusted 
with the great force of Ibadan was a native of an Iwo village 
a provincial of a rough type. He demanded that His Supernal 
Highness Gbenla should make way for him. 

The Alafin, however, was up to the occasion. He agreed to 
confer on him the title of Basorun ^ro causa honoris in recognition 
of his services at the Ijaye war. He was firmly against the demand 
for the death of his aged Basorun. The times said he, demand 
that such should be the case, Gbenla must remain the Basorun 
of the kingdom with his official duties to perform at Oyo, but 
Ogunmola may be a provincial Basorun as a special reward for 
services done. 

Ogunmola having been installed in office demanded His Highness 
o 365 



366 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Gbenla's " chain of office " (represented by the beads round his 
neck), and his Wabi (a specially ornamented hide on which only 
the Basorun sits). The AlAfin sent him both and consoled his 
chief minister by giving him others and begged him not to mind 
the insult, nor commit suicide out of grief, as he was inclined to do. 
He further sent to tell Ogunmola that he might have all he wanted 
but he was not to demand the death of the Basorun any more, 
as he the King willed that there should be two Basoruns at this 
time, one in the city and the other in the province. 

It may here be mentioned that 7 years before this event, that 
is before the Ijaye war, the town of Ibadan was one day startled 
by the report that Ogunmola (then Otun Balogun) whilst divining 
with his Ifa, was told by the priest that he would attain to the title 
of Basorun before his death ! What seemed then to be an utter 
improbabihty now became a reahzed fact. 

The Basorun 's next duty was to confer titles on his chiefs, the 
more important of them were the following : — 

Akere the Asipa became the Balogun. 

Tubosun the Osi Bale his old colleague and supporter, the Otun- 

Balogun. 
Abayomi the Ajiya Bale, who distinguished himself so much 

before Ijaye and at the Ijebu road, the Osi. 
Or6wusi, who afterwards became better known, the Asipa. 
Ali Laluwoye, brother of the late Osundina, the Ekerin. 
Ajobo, the head of the Badas, the Seriki. 
Latosisk, who afterwards became famous, the Otun Seriki. 
Tahaj6, was made the Sarumi. 
Soderinde, a distinguished horseman, the Balogun Sarumi. 

These names were given and we shall come across every one 
of them again in the course of this history. 

Some Oyo titles were now introduced to satisfy distinguished 
men who were for some reason or other passed over, but who 
could not accept subordinate titles, in the same way as the Asipa 
had been introduced for one who failed to get the Otun or Osi. 
Aijenku negotiated for and obtained the title of F6w6k6. 

Omoteji took the Eso title of Gbonka. 

Ojokofo that of C)w6ta. These purely Oyo titles were for the 
first time introduced into Ibadan. 

According to merit the man who by far was probably the fittest 
person for the title of Balogun was the redoubtable Aijenku 
the Areagoro or alter ego of the late Balogun Ibikunle — the 
man who alone withstood the whole force of the Egbas at Ijaye 
when he was left with the Balogun in charge of the camp at the 



THE CLOSING AND THE OPENING CAREERS OF TWO HEROES 367 

storming of Iwawun by Ogunmola and subordinate chiefs. But 
Aijenku failed in his duty to protect his chief at the retreat from 
Iperu. • Akere on that occasion performed the duty that was his 
and, therefore, obtained his reward. Ibikunle before his death 
was said to have bequeathed the title to him. 

This offence might probably have been pardoned and an 
opportunity given him to retrieve his good name by prowess 
in the field for the public benefit ; but the secret underlying this 
treatment of him was, that after the death of Oluyole the first 
Basorun of Ibadan, who tyrannized over his chiefs so mercilessly, 
subjecting them to his cutting wit, the Ibadans were resolved 
never to give the higher titles to any Oyos of the pure type, i.e. 
one born in the ancient capital or in the Metropohtan province. 
■ They far excel the southerners in astuteness and diplomacy and 
rather look down on them, Ibolos and Epos being preferred. 
Aijenku moreover, was one of Oluyole's household officers and 
was said to be of an irritable disposition and inflammable temper. 
There was every probabiHty of his emulating his old master. 

And besides this, he was one of the original settlers ; he was 
one of those who " entered the town on horseback " showing that 
unhke most of the present chiefs he was never at any time a 
common soldier, and he never ceased to rebuke or educate the men 
of another generation in the Hght of former day experience, which 
goes the wrong way with them. Having been passed over he 
negotiated for and obtained the title of Fow6k6 a lieutenant 
of the Kakanfo. 

After enjoying a short period of rest, attending to home affairs, 
Ogunmola now turned his attention abroad. In communication 
with the Governor (Glover) of Lagos, he effected the opening of the 
road to Lagos via Remo for intercourse with the interior. 

He now thought of avenging all the insults offered to the 
Ibadans, by some of the provincial kings, which could not have 
been done before this without unnecessarily multiplying enemies 
against themselves. Foremost amongst them was the Asejdn who 
was fond of extemporising epigrams and ditties directed against 
Ibadan in parabolic songs and dances, and who received him 
as a subject on his way to Iwawun. Now, as a Basorun takes 
precedence of all provincial kings, Ogunmola summoned the Aseyin 
to Ibadan. He came attended by his principal chiefs and Prince 
Okanlawgn. On their arrival they met all the Ibadan chiefs at 
the Basorun 's in full council. It was now the Basorun's turn 
to lord it over him. He at once ordered him to do homage ; this he 
did by running backwards and forwards to the street three times, 
putting earth on his head, and prostrating each time before the 



368 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Basorun, performing acts of humiliation. His life being also 
threatened, he had to beg hard for it, and some of the chiefs 
who were friendly to him interposed on his behalf and he was 
pardoned. 

Ogunmola having thus satisfied his vanity afterwards treated 
him kindly, and sent him away loaded with presents. Being 
in part friendly to Kurumi of Ijaye, he could not have been sincere 
in his loyalty to the AlAfin his liege lord during the "war, but he 
would sooner entrust himself into the hands of the rough Ibadans, 
who would at any rate have some regard for the person of a king, 
than into the hands of his Suzerain at Oyo ; he, therefore, took a 
bush path to Ibadan and back, and on his return home he 
extemporized a ditty in his dances, congratulating himself on his 
safe return thus : — 

" Kakk ki Aremu ba ti Oyo lo si Ibadan, 
Bi o je odun meta Aremu a sun igbe." 

Rather than to go by Oyo to Ibadan, 

If it takes Aremu three years, he will sleep in the bush. 

§ 2. The Igbajo Campaign 

About this time there was a civil commotion at Ilesa ; the then 
Odole, one of the ministers of the Owa being a man of power and 
influence was in great favour with his master, practically holding 
the reins of government; without his fiat nothing could be done at 
Ilesa. 

The Ijesa chiefs about this time were resolved to declare war 
against Igbajo, a frontier town of a composite nationality (as its 
name implies) not far from Ikirun, because of their sympathies 
with Ibadan ; but the Odole, a wise and far-seeing man, was opposed 
to that measure, fearing the consequences it may entail. The 
other chiefs said they were not going to stoop to him any longer, 
and in spite of him they declared war against Igbajo. 

The Ijesa standard of war left the town with all their mighty 
men under the leadership of the Lokiran, Lejoka, Isihikin with 
the Loro at their head ; thus they laid siege against Igbajo. 

The Ijesas of Ilesa were never on good terms with the Ibadans 
since the late Ijebu Ere and the Ara expeditions and their move- 
ments at this time were being closely watched at Ibadan. But 
several wild Ijesa boys had come of their own accord to reside at 
Ibadan being driven out of the town by chief Odole for their wild 
and lawless habits ; these preferring the unrestrained Hfe at 
Ibadan, distributed themselves under the principal chiefs Ibikunle, 
Ogunmola, Osundina and others, and fought for them in all their 



THE CLOSING AND THE OPENING CAREERS OF TWO HEROES 369 

expeditions. The most notable amongst them were Omole, 
Ayibiowu, Fayise, O^Q Edidi, Jege, Osogbo, and Ogedemgbe.^ 
Omgle was the chief of them all and knew the Ijesa farms and all 
the secret paths quite well. He often led the Ibadan kidnappers 
to kidnap his own people and bring them captive to Ibadan ; 
for this he acquired the nickname " A ni obara ojulum6 I'apd " 
(one who has in his sack a cord for binding an acquaintance). 
It was the services of these Ijesas driven out of the town that were 
successfully utiHzed by the Ibadans in the Ijebu Ere and the 
Ara expeditions. In this way they resented their expulsion from 
Ilesa by betrajdng their countrymen, and their exploits served 
but to increase the disaffection of the Ijesa chiefs against the Odole. 

Just about this time (1866) Mr. Philhp Jose Meffre a well- 
known Ijesa at Lagos with some other Ijesas, taking advantage 
of the opening of the roads went up for a short visit to their 
native land. On their returning to Lagos, they bought as curios 
several native mats, fans, etc., with other articles of merchandise 
for presents. On both journeys they stayed at the C.M.S. 
compound and premises at Kudeti, Ibadan. 

But the Ijesas of Lagos being at variance with one another, 
sent secret intelligence to Ibadan, and a hint was given to the 
Basorun to watch the clandestine movements of Mr. Meffre 
against the interests of Ibadan. 

In the afternoon of the 2nd of March, 1866, the Basorun sent 
for Mr. Meffre and all his countrymen who were with him and 
charged them with working secretly against the interests of Ibadan. 

They, of course, denied it and declared their innocence. Most of 
them had been carried away as slaves to Brazil and other parts and 
having effected their ransom and returned to Lagos they now 
simply took advantage of the opening of the roads to revisit 
their native land ; with poHtical matters they had no concern 
whatever. But the Basorun detained them and cast them all 
into prison, and sent to the mission premises to confiscate all their 
goods. The Rev. J. T. Smith, missionary in charge of the station 
during the absence of Mr. Hinderer, interposed on their behalf, 
because they were all Christians from Lagos. In vain did he 
plead their cause, invoking the aid of some of the friendly chiefs. 
They were all put in chains, and there was no peace or rest at the 
mission compound on their account. Thus matters stood for nearly 
a fortnight. 

On the morning of the 14th of March all at the Mission were glad 
to see Mr. Meffre and his countrymen released and sent back free 

^The youngest and destined to be the most famous. 



370 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

unconditionally ! What had happened ? On the previous night, 
there was a terrible conflagration in which the house of theBasorun 
had a very narrow escape. All the houses around that part of 
the building in which these men were chained were burnt to the 
ground but their prison house was intact ! The Basorun was so 
struck with this miraculous escape that he exclaimed " Surely 
these men are innocent persons, and this is naught else but the 
interposition of their God, and I am not the man to defy the white 
man's God." So he hastily released them and sent them back to 
the mission. 

In the meantime the siege of Igbajo was being vigorously prose- 
cuted by the Ijesas, and Igbajo was nearly hemmed in on every 
side. In their extremity they sent to Ibadan for help. The 
Basorun sent to them Osuntoki the Maye with some minor war 
chiefs, but the Ijesas were too strong for them. The town was well 
nigh taken when the Ibadan contingents there sent home to the 
Basorun for theBalogun to come to their rescue as mere reinforce- 
ments were of no avail. 

On the i6th of December, 1866, the war staff was propitiated, 
and on the 17th the standard was out under the command of the 
new Balogun Akere on its way to Igbajo. They arrived at 
Igbajo about the 14th of January, and they obtained. a victory 
as easy as it was complete. 

On the first day the fight was to take place, while they were 
holding a council of war, the Ijesas marched out to give battle. 
Abayomi the Osi impatient of much talk left them all at the council, 
by a private arrangement he entered the forest, and through a 
secret path was led to the rear of the Ijesa army. All of a 
sudden he burst upon the principal chiefs where they were lounging 
without guards and without protection : the younger men were all 
in the battle field. Escape was impossible, he fell upon them and 
butchered them all to pieces, carr5ang the camp by assault. The 
Ijesas who had marched out to give battle were filled with constern- 
ation when they saw the camp in flames behind them, and the 
Ibadan army before and behind ! Panic stricken they were simply 
pounced upon as does a cat on a mouse. It was a matter of " veni, 
vidi, vici," the battle did not last an hour. The Ijesa camp was 
at the foot of a hill, neither chiefs nor men went on horseback, 
all were on foot and in the chase up the hill not a single chief 
escaped to tell the tale ! Those who escaped the sword died of 
exhaustion and thirst, many of them corpulent men. Here the 
power of the Ijesas was completely broken. Ilesa was partly 
deserted as they expected an immediate siege. Esa was taken 
on the 26th of January. 



THE CLOSING AND THE OPENING CAREERS OF TWO HEROES 371 

The news of this tragedy travelled swiftly to Lagos, and the 
Ijesas of Lagos approached the Governor (J. H. Glover) beseeching 
him to interpose on their behalf, that their capital city be not 
destroyed by war. 

The Governor sent a messenger to the Basorun of Ibadan, 
deprecating the capture of Ilesa, and accordingly repeated messages 
one after another from the Basorun were sent to recall theBalogun 
who had advanced towards Ilesa. 

At the same time also, the Owa had sent demijohns of beads 
and heavy presents to the Basorun at home tendering his 
submission. Thus Ilesa was spared. The Ibadan army returned 
home in triumph on the 17th of February, 1867. 

§ 3. The Late Ogunmola Basorun of Ibadan 

The Ibadan war-chiefs after their arrival at home paid the 
customary tribute in slaves to the AlAfin. The senior war-chiefs 
also contributed their share to the Basorun Ogunmola and the 
minor chiefs received their share from the subordinate chiefs 
according to custom. 

After this the Basorun paid a visit of congratulation to each of 
the principal war-chiefs on their safe return. Each of them 
received him with every mark of honour and offered presents of 
a slave and some heads of cowries. They also paid a return visit 
according to custom. 

A few days afterwards it was rumoured that the Basorun 
was sick: the rumour soon gained ground, and from the abundance 
of the sacrifices being offered the malady was known to be serious. 
It was said to be an attack of small pox, and the Babalawos 
(priests of Ifa) advised that a gun loaded with bullets be fired in 
the direction of the Isale Osun district ; this was done and more 
besides, but all to no purpose. On the morning of the 28th 
February, 1867, repeated rattling of musketry announced to the 
public that the august patient had passed away. 

Not two months after, on the 12th of April, 1867, Abayomi the 
Osi died after a few days' illness. On the 30th of the same month 
died Tubosun the Otun Balogun also suddenly. 

These important deaths in quick succession struck one as 
very remarkable, as if to atone for the wholesale butchery of the 
Ijesa chiefs at Igbajo. Thus of the five principal chiefs who held 
the council of war for the rehef of Igbajo within four months only 
the Balogun and Seriki remained alive. 

The Cause of the Basorun's Death. — From the nature of the 
malady it was generally held that the death was not due to natural 
causes. During the absence of the war-chiefs at Igbajo, the 



372 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Basorun in the height of his glory was so elated that he sent to the 
AlAfin to send him Ahayan posts and here grass for his Kobi, 
As a nobleman he was entitled to a kobi (a bay projecting from the 
house with a conical top higher than the roof of the house). 
Ahayan is a rare tree found in certain parts of the country, and 
used by the great alone. It is neither affected by weather, termites, 
or ordinary fire. The here is a grass used for thatching that grows 
only in the plain. Annual contribution of this grass is made 
by subordinates to their chiefs between December and January 
in the country of the plain, so that a gift of bere has come to be 
regarded in the Hght of paying tribute ; it has thus passed into 
a proverb to illustrate anything most incongruous " Odi ori odi 
ki ara Oyo ki o pa bere fun ara Oko " (the height of incongruity 
for citizens of Oyo to contribute bere to country folks). This time- 
honoured maxim Ogunmola was bent on violating out of sheer 
vanity, not caring for the fact of its being an insult and great offence 
to his sovereign. The King ordered both to be sent to him, but 
it was noticed that the posts were wrapped in mats, and tied 
precisely the same way corpses are wrapped in this country for 
interment. Ogunmola did not enjoy his acquisition for two 
months. This can only be regarded as a paternal imprecation 
on an undutiful and disloyal son. 

The more probable and direct cause of his death alleged by 
those who had access to his presence was the following : — 

It was reported to him by one of his roaming followers that he 
had seen a cloth with one of the Ekiti Kings, the Hke of which 
could be found in the possession of his superiors. The cloth 
was so finely-woven that it could be folded up into so small a 
compass that it could bestowed away by stuffing it into a moderate 
sized conch shell, and yet unfolded was an ample covering for a 
man. [The cloth probably was silk, as the best kind of Samayan 
or rough silk, comes from that part of the country.] 

Ogunmola did not adopt a course which one would have 
expected from so astute a man, viz. to ask the said Ekiti king to 
send him the weaver to weave one like it for him, or even one of a 
superior quality, and also to teach the art to his people. On the 
contrary he sent to take possession of the cloth. Here again we 
see the operation of that vanity that demanded the title of Basorun, 
that required Ahayan and Bere for his kobi, and which displayed 
a show of triumph over the Aseyin. The cloth was sent him. It 
was noticed that from the moment he unfolded the cloth and 
wrapped it around his body, he began to feel some inconvenience, 
this grew to a feverish heat which baffled every effort to cool 
down, nay not even when they resorted to pouring buckets of 



THE CLOSING AND THE OPENING CAREERS OF TWO HEROES 373 

cold water upon him ; it went on increasing in intensity, and in 
this agony of heat he writhed until he passed away. This gave 
colour to the bulletin issued that His Highness died of the fever 
of small pox. 

Ogunmgla as a private man has been brought to our notice 
first during the time of Basorun Oluygle. He was as a soldier 
bold, hardy, fearless, and very astute. He rose rapidly to dis- 
tinction by the aid of some of his colleagues who saw in him qualities 
of a great leader, viz., Awanibaku, who became his Balogun, 
Tub6sun, who became the Otun Balogun, Aruna, who afterwards 
became a distinguished cavalry officer, Kukoni who afterwards 
became a Christian and retired from their company, Odunjo the 
Seriki of Ibadan during the Ijaye war, and others. He led them on 
several slave-hunting expeditions, and, as their captain received 
a lion's share of the booty, so as to be able to fill his position with 
credit and provide them with arms and ammunition for another 
expedition. His fame brought him many more followers, and he 
soon obtained a title and a voice in the government, and thus lose 
from one post of distinction to another until he attained the head 
chieftaincy of Ibadan. 

We may note here that this is the precise way most of the war- 
chiefs of Ibadan rose to distinction. 

As a general he was unsurpassed for boldness and courage, he 
knew not how to give his back to the enemy, and these qualities 
often saved him from many a critical position. Being a man of 
small stature, he always rode on the tallest horses he could find, with 
his eyes on all around, to single out the brave by name for praise 
and encouragement, and the coward for disgrace. His fame 
eclipsed that of Ibikunle his chief, who was his superior in every 
respect, so much so that those who knew little of Ibadan took him 
for the head of the town even when he was only the Otun Balogun. 
But he knew how to obey commands and yield implicit obedience 
to his superior officer. Of the three senior war-chiefs in the early 
sixties, Ibikunle, Ogunmola and Osundina, he was their bull dog, 
hence his name was universally known and his fame grew. 

As an administrator he was very just, and was never influenced by 
bribes. On the contrary if money was brought to him to prejudice 
his mind in a case to be heard, after patiently hearing the case 
if it went against the man who attempted to bribe him, he would 
disgrace him openly for what he had attempted to do, bring out 
the bribe in public and the fine would be more than the bribe. The 
following story will serve to illustrate a case of this kind showing 
also his practical common sense : — A disagreeable man's goat 
broke through the fence of his neighbour and destroyed several stalks 



374 THE HIStORY OF THE YORUBAS 

of his standing corn ; the latter in driving it away inadvertently 
hit the goat on the head with a stone and killed it. The owner of 
the goat demanded redress, and charged an exorbitant price for 
his goat, refusing all entreaties, and when the money was not 
forthcoming, he summoned the poor man the next day before the 
Basorun. 

The Basorun saw at once that the act was merely an accident 
and that the plaintiff was altogether spiteful; he was, therefore 
determined to teach him a lesson. 

The case having been stated in open court, the next day the 
Basorun acted as if he were all in favour of the plaintiff. He rated 
the man, who killed the goat soundly for his clumsiness and want of 
caution etc. ; it served him right, he was to pay the price demanded 
by the owner of the goat, lo heads of cowries ; but as the man 
could not afford the money (on account of which the case came to 
court at all) he offered to lend him the amount, and the amount of 
10 heads was brought out. Both parties now began to get confused 
before this extraordinary judge. As the poor man thanked the 
Basorun and was going away (the plaintiff being afraid to take 
the money) the Basorun called him back saying " Where are you 
going, you duffer? Why don't you bring a counter-charge for the 
destruction of your corn ? I suppose about 30 or 40 stalks were 
destroyed. As he has received 10 heads of cowries for one goat, 
supposing you demand 10 heads for each stalk of your corn 
destroyed ? That would be fair according to his own code, won't 
it ? " And there in open court he told how this disagreeable 
neighbour had come the previous evening with three heads of 
cowries to bribe him on this case. He had kept the money on one 
side and now ordered it to be brought out in open court saying, 
"After carelessly leaving your goat to stray out and destroy 
another man's property you have the heart to come here and 
charge about double the market price for the loss of it, when this 
was due to a pure accident." (The utmost amount for goats then 
was about 6 heads.) It was now the plaintiff's turn to beg trembhng 
where he lay prostrate before the Basorun. Thus His Highness 
dealt with the case, the plaintiff not only losing his bribe, but 
also had to pay about 30 or 40 bags for the corn destroyed. It 
was generally known that it was of no use bribing the Basorun, 
that would not affect the decision of the case. 

Previously to Ogunmgla's regime, no young man or youth could 
be seen out of doors unarmed with some weapon or other ; it was 
considered effeminate to go about without any. Firearms of course 
were absolutely forbidden by the fundamental laws of the town 
but a young man did not consider himself fully dressed without 



THE CLOSING AND THE OPENING CAREERS OF TWO HEROES 375 

a short sword or knife girded to his side, a jack knife buckled 
to his left wrist, and wielding in his right hand a large-headed 
club or cudgel ringed or pegged with iron ; consequently street 
fighting was a common affair. To spend a good day out without 
wounds and bruises to show for it was not considered manly. 
Ogunmola put a stop to all that because thereby the innocent 
often suffered at the hands of brute strength. 

To prevent fire accidents those whose occupation demands 
large fires like brewers and those who cook eko or yam for sale were 
ordered to do so during the dry season in open spaces, preferably 
near wells or streams, and not under a shed, much less under a roof. 
The master of the compound was made answerable for every 
case of fire. In order not to escape justice the rough and ready 
method pursued was to seize some of the members of the house 
and the head of the house would be compelled to effect their 
redemption. When everyone in the compound is liable to suffer, 
every one will be concerned to see that no mischief arises from 
carelessness. 

Warriors are honouied by him far more than farmers or traders. 
If, for instance, a warrior's wife is outraged by a farmer or a trader 
(which was considered one of the most serious offences) he usually 
imposed the heaviest fines, i.e. a dog, a goat, and 10 bags of cowries 
which in those days was equivalent to ;{io. But if the case was 
vice versa the fine is lighter, perhaps only 5 heads of cowries (one- 
twentieth of the above) and a goat ; but he was usually reminded 
that the rest of the fine would have to be paid with interest on the 
battlefield ; i.e. by showing courage and bravery. He was loved 
and trusted as a leader because he knew how to appreciate and 
reward valour. As an instance of this the following story may be 
told : — During the year 1866, one Samuel Peeler, alias Bioran, 
a Sierra Leone emigrant, who had distinguished himself in many 
a battlefield was summoned before him by certain hunters and 
charged with appropriating a deer they had shot, the blood and 
footprints of which they traced to his farm ; he did not give it 
up to them, on the contrary when it was demanded he offered them 
a share ! According to the customary laws of the country that was 
a serious offence (hunters are a privileged class of men, they are the 
national foresters, scouts, and bush detectives) and heavy fines 
were usually imposed on such offenders. 

When Bioran was asked what he had to say, he repHed, 
" Kabiyesi " (may your highness live long) " When the Ibadan 
army was before Ijaye between the years i860 and 1862 on several 
occasions when such and such (naming them) important personages 
fell in the thick of the fight and a deadly struggle ensued with the 



376 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

enemy for the appropriation of the body, when none could do it, 
it was IBioran, who went forward, Hfted the body on my shoulders, 
and brought it to the camp. Again before Iperu when certain 
important chiefs fell it was IBioran with bullets flying about my 
ears who went to the midUne of battle and rescued the body from 
the enemy. Now, in walking over my farm 2 days ago, I saw 
a dead deer in the border of my farm, so I said to myself. If 
Bioran can shoulder a dead man between two fires (lit K\k ijk) 
why should he be unable to shoulder a dead animal between two 
farms (Ut Alk oko) that was why I shouldered it. Kabiyesi." 

The iSasorun who remembered the occasions very well laughed 
outright and exclaimed " Behe na ni wayi Bioran, behe ni tire 
ri " (and exactly so it was old Bioran, and that is just like you). 
The skilful way in which he touched theBasorun's sensitive parts 
and his witty play on the words " Ala ijk alk oko," between two 
fires, between two farms, amused the whole court, and there before 
the assembly theBasorun praised and honoured him for his valour, 
and calling for a head of cowries and a bottle of gin (instead of 
fining him), he said, "Take these Bioran, you can go home and enjoy 
your venison and wash it down with this bottle of gin. I see no 
reason why a valiant man should not enjoy a bit of venison." 
Turning round to the hunteis he said " That is not the sort of 
man to be fined, he is a valiant man." He then satisfied the 
hunters with some presents to console them and dismissed the 
case. 

Ogunmola had only two sons Osun and Ilgri and one daughter 
Omosa. He kept a large harem ; his wives could be numbered 
by hundreds and having but three children by all these, the 
Ijayes during the war often taunted him in their songs : — 

" Ogunmola ko bi'mo (Ogunmola without children 

Omo Ibadan li o warun." Ibadan lads he would destroy.) 

but he left several grandchildren to mourn his loss. 

Ibadan lost in him a wise and just Administrator, and a veteran 
leader and successful soldier. He was a liberal minded man, 
who, instead of crushing delighted in lifting up the hands of a 
weaker comrade. For example, Osundina the Osi, his junior 
colleague was a powerful warrior but a poorer man than either 
himself or theBalogun. Thus in one of their expeditions one of his 
tributary towns gave up more than 200 refugees to him. As these 
were not captives of war, but refugees (termed £yg) they should 
be distributed among the senior chiefs ; but Ogunmola suggested 
to the Balogun that they should let Osundina keep all in order to 
increase his means of keeping up his position with credit ; the 



THE CLOSING AND THE OPENING CAREERS OF TWO HEROES 377 

Balogun accordingly agreed. Ogunmgla would never address 
him by name or title, always " Ekeji mi " my comrade. 

§ 4. Ogedemgbe and the Fall of Ilesa 

Ogedemgbe a young Ijesa warrior as we have noticed under 
§2 was one of those restless spirits of Ilesa who came to domicile 
at Ibadan, where they could find for their energies the scope which 
was denied them at home. He was placed under Bada Aki iko o a 
distinguished warrior, under whom he learnt the art of war. 
When the Ijesas rebelled against Ibadan, he was one of those who 
returned home to rejoin his compatriots to lay siege against 
Igbajo. When they were defeated he was caught and brought 
back to Ibadan and handed over to Ogunmola. 

The fact of his having been at Ibadan before and then 
joined the rebels against the country of his adoption rendered 
his crime to be regarded as treason for which he should suffer 
the extreme penalty. He was ordered by Ogunmola to be executed. 
He was being led to the altar of Ogun (the god of war) for execution 
when his old colleagues Ayibiowu, Omgle, and O^Q ran to the 
Basgrun to plead for his life ; they went through Latosisa then the 
head of Ogunmgla's war boys and a favourite at court. Had 
Lat6sisa delayed a minute he would have been too late: the Basgrun 
granted his release, but to mark the gravity of his crime he dis- 
figured his face with the A Bunu marks which he carried to his 
grave as a lesson for the future, and handed him over to Ayibiowu*. 

After this was done, Ogunmgla as his custom was to divine 
daily with his Ifa, was told by the priest that the young man so 
disfigured was destined to become a great man hereafter, and that 
he would cause the Ibadans any amount of trouble. Immediately 
His Highness ordered a propitiation to be made on the spot where 
the blood from his face was spilt ; and this was done accordingly. 
He was the man destined by Providence to be the deliverer of his 
country from bondage as we shall see hereafter. 

A short time after this, Ogedemgbe escaped back to Ilesa, and 
other young men also who had escaped at the defeat at Igbajg 
to Odo, Iperindo, and other places returned home one by one. 
Ogedemgbe now headed a conspiracy against the Odgle who had 
warned them against the siege of Igbajg, and who by his repressive 

^This act of deliverance Ogedemgbe never forgot until the day 
of his death. Many Ibadan young men in after years that fell 
into his hands he spared and was often heard to say " They did 
not kill me when they might have done so, we must spare 
them! " 



378 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

measures caused many young men to flee from the city of Ilesa. 
A civil war ensued ; for seven days the Odole kept them at bay, 
but at last, overpowered by numbers, he was shut up in his house 
for three days, and when his boys grew weary and disheartened 
and began to disappear, the Odole fell by his own hands. 

Immediately the news of the death of the Basorun of Ibadan 
reached them, Ilesa again rebelled openly against Ibadan and war 
was declared against them. 

Balogun Akere was now the senior chief after the death of the 
Basorun, but he declined to assume the Baleship till after their 
return from the Ilesa war. It was alleged by some that the 
Basorun before his death left a charge that Ilesa should not be 
spared. Whether it was so or not, yet the Ibadan chiefs were not 
all unanimous about this expedition, not from any love for Ile§a 
or fear of its almost impregnable forts, but rather that titles should 
be re-arranged so that they might have promotions. The Balogun 
could obtain the assent and co-operation of Obembe alone, the 
son of the late Balogun Ibikunle ; having secured the confidence 
of this powerful chief he declared war in spite of the others. 

The war-staff was propitiated on the 20th December, 1867 ; 
it had to be done at night on account of the disaffection among the 
chiefs. The Balogun left the town on the 22nd of December and 
as in duty bound, the rest of the chiefs joined him on the 23rd. 
They marched straight via Oshogbo and encamped first at 
Ilase and marched thence to Ibala. Here the Ijesas began to 
oppose their advance, and the first battle fought. 

Hitherto the war chiefs followed the Balogun just mechanically 
but would not fight for him ; but with the help of Obembe he 
felt he could dispense with their services and so he took no notice 
of them. But now a formal measure was adopted to put an end to 
the disaffection, the matter was talked over, the Balogun pacified 
them with large presents, and being satisfied they fought with a 
will, and dislodged the Ijesas from Ibala, forcing them to fall back 
on Afara Jegede. This was a trench about 30 or 40 feet deep with 
drawbridges, carried almost round Ilesa. Here the Ijesas made a 
long stand, but it was taken at last and the camp was removed 
forwards. 

There was another entrenchment \vith forts beyond a stream 
which the Ibadans named Fejeboju (washing the face with blood), 
so named from the bloody battles fought there which caused the 
stream to flow with blood constantly from the wounded and the 
dying. In an attempt to take this second entrenchment an 
ambuscade headed by Ajdbiowu went to the Oke Esa road, but 
they were discovered and waylaid : they were dispersed and 



THE CLOSING AND THE OPENING CAREERS OF TWO HEROES 379 

Ayibiowu their leader was taken alive by his countrymen, and 
butchered to pieces. 

The Ibadans were over a year in this place fighting but could 
not take it, and without that there was no hope of taking Ilesa. 
Notwithstanding this the Ijesas considered it prudent to surrender, 
as sooner or later Ilesa would surely be taken ; hence they began to 
negotiate for peace. There was an armistice ; during the negotiation, 
they brought over 400 bags of cowries into the Ibadan camp as 
submission money, but the chiefs feared to touch the gift, for it 
might have been poisoned ! But Ogboriefon who about this time 
began to make a name being a poor man, was wilhng to take all. 
" Let me die if poisoned," said he, " I do not mind." With this 
he entertained the fighting men, and made fresh preparations for 
the conflict. At this crisis Akere the commander-in-chief died. 
A council of war was held to consider the decision to be made under 
present circumstances. It was resolved to continue the war " lest 
the Ijesas would say we agreed to peace because we had lost our 
leader." So the next day they forestalled the Ijesas by telling 
them that they had killed their Balogun because he was inclined 
to peace, the armistice therefore was now at an end. A terrible 
battle ensued that day, they fought till sunset. This was done 
chiefly to inspire courage into those that might be faint-hearted 
amongst themselves and lose courage on account of the death of 
the Balogun. This battle was fought on February 15th, 1869. 

The command of the army now devolved upon Orowusi the 
Asipa. Orowiisi was a powerful chief but very unpopular. He 
was disliked by all the senior war-chiefs of the day, he had no 
influence even with the men ; however, by virtue of his office as 
senior chief all agreed to submit to him. 

What was denied him, however, was accorded to his eldest son 
Akeredolu. This young man had several friends among his 
companions, several left their masters and made him their captain, 
and at last the honour was his to capture this entrenchment which 
had baffled the whole army for over a year. The trench which 
continued as far as they could extend their lines to the right as 
well as to the left, they thought was carried right round the town 
but it was disclosed to Akeredolu that it terminated at the foot of 
a mighty rock several miles distant and that the terminus was 
concealed by a dense forest. Excepting on the day of battle very 
few men were generally left to guard the entrenchment and the 
fort which was considered impregnable, the majority being left 
at home for rest and enjoyment, 

Akeredolu kept the secret to himself, he told not even his father. 
One afternoon he and his companions put on their arms, and it 



380 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

was reported to his father that he was going to the battlefield. 
Not being the day of battle the father was alarmed that he was 
going single-handed to attempt what had baffled the whole army 
for more than one year ! He sent peremptory messages to call him 
back, faihng in that, he sent a pathetic remonstrance "Come 
'back, oh, come back, tor so was I bereaved of your elder brother 
at the Iperu war, when he was attempting a feat of valour." 
Akeredolu heeded nothing, but went off in another direction. 
When out of sight of camp he dismounted and carried a gun on his 
shoulder like the rest of his companions, and was led to the foot 
of the rock where the trench terminated. They chmbed.it to the 
other side and made for the battlefield, nothing preventing them. 

The Ibadan chief being anxious about his son and not knowing 
his whereabouts, armed himself and went out to the battlefield, 
the whole army, of course, following him. Then all of a sudden 
Akeredolu and his companions appeared on the other side of the 
moat, fell upon the small guard left there and dispersed them ; the 
drawbridges were thrown over to admit his father with the whole 
Ibadan army, the walls of the fort were quickly beaten down.. In a 
few minutes the trench was filled up to a considerable distance, every 
one throwing in something, and with hoe and digger it was soon 
levelled up enough for a passage for the whole army. Thus 
Akeredolu won for his father and for himself a great reputation. 
The Ibadans were now able to remove to a third encampment by 
the walls of Ilesa. 

Before Ilesa was taken two other chiefs signalized themselves, 
viz. Latosisa the Otun Seriki and Ajayi Ogboriefon. The latter 
rose into prominence by heading a band of young men for exploits, 
as most of the Ibadan chiefs did. He was always poor, because 
he spent lavishly, but he was a brave leader and smooth tongued, 
knowing well how to encourage soldiers and inspire courage into 
the faint-hearted. Thus in the thick of the fight with men faihng 
right and left, he used to produce beans from his satchel showing 
them to the men saying, "See, this is what they are filing now, 
they have no bullets, come let us get at them." Then he used to 
remind them of home and all its pleasures, telling them that it is 
the bravest that will be honoured, who can break the laws with 
impunity. " Remember the bazaars, the Iba market, what pleasures 
you often enjoy there, pleasures bordering on crime. Now is the 
time to atone for them if you will enjoy yourself again with im- 
punity." With such words he often spurred them on to the fight. 

The Ibadans now discovered that the Ijesas were well supplied 
with food and ammunition from Odd, and it was evident that unless 
this road was taken there was little hope of taking the town. The 



THE CLOSING AND THE OPENING CAREERS OF TWO HEREOS 381 

arduous task of doing this devolved upon these two war-chiefs 
Latosisa and Ajayi Ogboriefon. This road being the hfe of Ilesa 
was heroically defended by two armies. A more desperate battle 
was never fought in this campaign than what took place here. 
Latosisa opposed the Ijesa army from the country, and Ogboriefon 
that from the city. 

An Ijesa eye-witness reported that in the first day's fight a 
heap of 140 corpses was made, the corpses not being allowed to 
be removed home or lie about for fear of causing a panic ! The 
wounded were more in number, and these on the side of the 
Ijesas from the city alone. For five days the contest continued, 
fighting went on day and night till in the end the road was taken 
and the Ibadans under Latosisa and Ogboriefon made an encamp- 
ment there. Ajgbo the Seriki encamped in the Oke Esa road, 
and the body of the army with the head war-chief at Ita Ogbogi 
in the main road. The walls of Ilesa were very thick, high and 
slippery, the moat very deep, and as long as Ogedemgbe was there 
to defend it. there was no telling how long the town could hold out. 
But the end was inevitable. 

Added to the distress in the city were the ravages of the band of 
ruffians called Ipaiye. These were Ogedemgbe's war boys organized 
like the Jamas of the days of Afonja. They would enter houses 
and help themselves to food and whatever they could lay hands 
upon. 

When the C)d6 road was taken and food supplies cut off, people 
died of starvation in the streets by hundreds ; the ravages of the 
Ipaiyes became more intolerable. Whole famiUes left the town 
and entered the Ibadan camp giving themselves up as slaves in 
order to save their lives. Ajobg the Seriki was largely benefited 
by these, for hearing of his unparalleled liberality, they entered 
the Ibadan camp and named him as the chief they gave them- 
selves up to, and were conducted to his tent. 

Ogedemgbe at length sent word to Ogboriefon to grant him an 
interview. This interview took place on the battlefield, the two 
generals leaving their armies in the rear met at the centre of the 
battlefield. 

At the second interview they made a covenant of friendship 
and Ajayi promised to allow him a safe retreat. The fate of 
Ilesa being now a foregone conclusion, in order to prevent further 
unnecessary loss of lives by the sword and by famine, they arranged 
that the Ibadan army should make a way for Ogedemgbe and his 
followers to go in peace leaving the town a prey to the besiegers. 

On the appointed day Ogedemgbe brought valuable presents 
in beads and cloths to Ajayi, and the covenant was ratified. 



382 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Early in the morning of the 4th of June, 1870, Ogedemgbe with 
his Ipaiyes left Ilesa and threw the gates open. According to 
arrangement the Ibadans opened their ranks for them to pass, 
and closed them against stragglers, and then the town was taken. 

The Owa came into the camp. The Ibadan chief gave him 10 
of his wives and as many of his children as could be found, also 10 
bags of cowries and a basket of kola nuts. They then left him 
in charge of the king of Ibokun (a neighbouring Ijesa tributary 
town) to be reinstated when the fugitives and all who escaped 
capture could have returned to their desolate homes. 

The Ibadans pursuing their conquest as far as Odo and Iperindo, 
both places were taken. The a;rmy now divided into two parts, 
one part went against Igangan, the other to Ipetu ; the former 
made a long resistance but was at length taken. 

The Ibadan army returned home in triumph on the loth of 
July 1870. 

All the war-chiefs in procession escorted home the coffined 
bones of the late Balogun Akere. Before this coffin when fixed 
in state the leading chief prostrated and in a formal way told the 
result of the war as to the living Balogun, and then wept over his 
remains lamenting his loss ! 

The whole of them now accompanied Orowusi home, thereby 
acknowledging him their head, then they dispersed to their homes. 

Ogedemgbe whose opening career we have now related dis- 
appeared from view for a time. We shall hear of him again. 



Chapter XXI. 

TWO ADMINISTRATIONS OF OPPOSITE POLICIES 

§ I. Orowusi's Administration 

Ibadan was the one place that loomed largely in people's eyes at 
this period (1870). To have taken liesa was regarded as a feat of 
extraordinary magnitude it being a town of great strength, both 
in its fortifications and in its able-bodied citizens ; and consequently 
the eyes of all surrounding tribes were fixed on the town situated 
on the hills. 

The first duty of the Ibadans now was to fill up the vacancies 
among the ruling chiefs and to settle home affairs. 

They had only been at home for less than two months when on 
the 1st of September the town had to lament the death of Osun, 
the first-born son of Ogunmola the late Basorun. It was a great 
loss to the community, as the late Basorun had only two sons and 
a daughter. The town went into mourning for a month, and then 
arrangements were made to confer the title of Bale on Orowusi. On 
the 30th September Agbaro the Ilari sent by the AlAfin for the 
purpose conferred the title on him in the presence of all the chiefs 
and a large assemblage of people. 

On the 5th day after, the Bale began to confer the principal 
titles by batches ; the most important of which we need mention 
are : — Ajgbg who became the Balogun, Latosisa the Otun, Ajayi 
Ogboriefon the Osi, Ali Laluwoye the Asipa, Lawoyin the Seriki, 
Ojo Oronna the Otun Seriki, Tajo the Otun Bale. 

All these men' played some important part more or less in the 
history of the country. By the end of October the affairs of the 
town had been settled. 

On the 5th of November the old Chief Mele was again despatched 
to Ijebu to negotiate for an Agurin (consul) in order that peace 
and amity might once more be established between them. The 
last Agurin was recalled when Ijebu declared war against Ibadan 
during the Ijaye war. Now peace and tranquility reigned over all 
the land. 

This Bale encouraged agriculture himself setting the example. 
Under such peaceful rule the Christians of Ibadan numbering about 
400 with their teachers thought it right to do honour to the Bale, 
who was well disposed to Christianity. They went in a body with 
the school children to his house, and he came out to receive them in 

383 



384 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the square in front ot the house and a short service was held 
including the prayers for the King and all rulers. The Bale was 
immensely pleased and the Christian body enjoyed a pleasant day. 

Civil commotion. — The next trouble started where the last 
ended. The Owa of Ilesa being dead, it devolved upon Ibadan 
as the Suzerain power to appoint another Owa. There were, 
however, two claimants, each with his rival party, and both parties 
were seeking for help among the Ibadan chiefs to promote their 
cause. 

Prince Odigbadigba, backed by Ogedemgbe, sent about 50 
slaves and a quantity of beads to Balogun Ajgbo to promote his 
cause. Ajgbo instead of bringing the matter before the council, 
with whatever backing he could bestow on his client, appropriated 
all the presents and gave orders that Odigbadigba be crowned. 

When the Ibadan chiefs came to know about all this they were 
fired with rage and ordered both claimants to Ibadan. In the 
meantime Ogedemgbe's nominee had been crowned at Ilesa, but 
on their arrival he was set aside as being irregularly crowned, and 
the rival was crowned at Ibadan on the 22nd of May, 1871, and 
sent home in state. Prince Odigbadigba was detained at Ibadan, 
and lodged with Ogundepo the Bale's brother. 

This action of Balogun Ajobo hurt not only the Bale whose rights 
he had often usurped, but also his brother chiefs, especially 
his principal lieutenants Latosisa and Ajayi, on whom fell the 
brunt of the task of taking Ilesa at the final stage. 

Ajobo's popularity lay in his largess to the people, which 
gained him fame at home and abroad and secured for him a large 
following among whom were some brave men that could not be 
overlooked; this popularity turned his head, leading him to act 
as he did. As a leader he was much lacking in courage and ability 
as the fiasco at Osiele showed, and therefore he carried no weight 
or respect among the body of the people. He arrived at his post 
more by order of seniority than by merit and by the large number 
of men behind him which must be taken into account. But for such 
a grave political blunder his deposition was resolved upon. 

Chief Ogedemgbe was very anxious about the safety of Prince 
Odigbadigba hence he was sending some slaves and presents to 
the Ibadan chiefs to effect his release. On this being known, the 
Ibadan chiefs sent to intercept the messengers out of spite to the 
Balogun to whom they were sent direct. 

On the 23rd of June, the war-staff was demanded from him, 
— a sign that he was deprived of his title : there was consequently 
a great commotion in the town, the people apprehending a civil 
war, but Ajobo had not the courage to attempt one ; on the 



TWO ADMINISTRATIONS OF OPPOSITE POLICIES 385 

contrary he spent largely to purchase his pardon. This pardon 
was granted on the 29th and all was quiet again, and he attended 
the weekly town council as before. 

But the disaffection against him among some of the chiefs was 
as great as ever, and the desire to encompass his fall very strong, 
especially with Ajayi the Osi, and Lawoyin the Seriki, who were 
under great obligation to him for the means of attaining their 
present position. To them his fall would mean one hft upwards 
in their titles, and an obUteration of their feehng of obhgation 
to him, the shame and remorse of conscience for their ingratitude 
to him in his distress, being intolerable when he was pardoned. 
Consequently there was another explosion engineered by these two 
chiefs ; he was deprived of all his tributary towns, was forbidden 
to attend Council, and was rejected by the chiefs in council. 

Ajobg now resolved to die, and ordered his cofhn to be made 
and the grave to be dug. On the evening of the 5th of July, he 
returned the war-staff to the Bale. But early on the 6th when 
everybody was expecting to hear of Ajobo's death, and his lying 
in state, he escaped from the town ; passing by the C.M.S. 
station at Kudeti he took a by-path by which he regained the 
main road to Ijebu and escaped to the town of Ipara in the Remo 
district. Some of his ill-wishers actually gave chase when the 
news of his escape was heard but failed to overtake him. 

Now his principal opponents Latosisa and Ajayi Ogboriefon 
came to congratulate the Bale on having got rid of the Balogun. 
But the Bale's reception of the news disappointed their expecta- 
tions. The Bale's wish was that his pride be humbled for such a 
gross public offence, but that he be finally pardoned. With 
surprise and alarm he asked " Gone away .-* Who drove him away ? 
What message did you send him which obliged him to leave the 
town? " Latosisa and Ajayi repUed "Who drove him away but 
yourself ? Did you not send a messenger to us to say we should 
accept no terms of reconciUation ? " " What " replied the Bale 
" What is the name of the messenger I sent ? " In great anger the 
Bale retired within and shut the door against them leaving them 
where they prostrated before him. 

He saw at once through the scheming of the war- chiefs who would 
get rid of a chicken-hearted Balogun ; but he the Bale had no 
need of a fire-eater for one, and hence he apprehended trouble 
from these younger war-chiefs. 

That was the last time the Bale was seen in public, he never 
showed his face after this till his corpse was exposed in state before 
interment. The rumour of the Bale's death began on the 15th 
of August, but there was no pubhc announcement. On the 19th 



386 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Prince Odigbadigba, who was the cause of all these troubles was 
sent away to his country, but private orders were given to his 
escorts, that as soon as they were a good way off from the town he 
should be murdered. On the 30th of August, Ijebu ambassadors 
arrived at Ibadan to plead for the restoration of Ajobo, but they 
were sent away with a negative reply. On the evening of the 
19th September it was pubHcly announced that Orowusi the Bale 
was dead. The expulsion ot Ajobo being the cause of his death 
his people went that same evening and set Ajobo's house on fire. 

Ibadan was once more without a head. Tajo the oldest among 
the war-chiefs declined the honour. When the other chiefs were 
going to assemble in his house, as the Otun Bale, he met them at the 
central market and there dechned the offer. No elderly chief 
agreed to accept the title from the unsettled state of the town due 
mainly to Latosisa and Ajayi. For some time their meetings 
were held in the central market till at last Latosisa agreed to under- 
take the responsibility though not as a Bale but as a Kakanfo. 
He alleged that he was a Moslem and none of his cieed had been 
Bale before, but Ojo Amepo who was a Moslem was a Kakanfo 
and he took his precedent from him. 

The Ibadan chiefs did not Like the idea, and the AlAfin ot Oyo 
was reluctant to grant it knowing the national troubles usually 
caused by strong Kakanfos, but in the end Latosisa won all 
parties over and obtained the title. 

The Late Bal§ Orowusi. — The late Bale was a native of 
Ogbdgbd a town about 6 miles from Iwo. He was originally 
an elephant hunter hence his name Orowiisi, super-deadly poison 
(from his poisoned arrows in hunting big game). He rose into 
power by his own merits, but he was unpopular among the other 
war-chiefs who were his seniors in the days of Ibikunle and Ogun- 
mola. Notwithstanding instances of slights and indignities he 
endured in the earlier days, he lived to be the head of the town of 
Ibadan. His rule was short but was marked by a wise adminis 
tration and by peace with the surrounding tribes. 

He was a far-seeing man, of sound judgment and strong 
determination. He once summoned a meeting of the chiefs and 
after addressing them on matters poUtical and inter-tribal, he 
laid down the following advice which he wished them to treasure 
up and act upon for the present and future. 

" I. That on no account should Ibadan wage any aggressive 
warfare with any of their principal neighbours the Egbas, Ijebus 
and Ilorins. 

2. That high and responsible positions should not be given to 
the Mogajis (heirs to large estates) because of the men and means at 



TWO ADMINISTRATIONS OF OPPOSITE POLICIES 387 

their command, on account of their inexperience, but rather to 
older men who were the companions of their fathers for the country 
will be the gainer by their experience. 

3. That they should rely more on the children of the soil than 
on their slaves, as it has now become the fashion to make of their 
slaves high stewards and confidants ; for how can these who 
are slaves after all seek the permanent interests of the country 
that enslaved them and made their own country desolate ? The 
seed of bitterness towards ' Oygs ' must have sunk deep in their 
hearts. Their women also should not be made their principal 
or choice wives. 

4. Never should the slaves be entrusted with messages of 
impoitance to the interior, for having nothing to lose, their conduct 
will not be marked by moderation or discretion." 

These words were well received by the assembly and he set the 
example by refusing to grant the title of Seriki to lyapo the son of 
the late Balogun Ibikunle, although for wealth, power, and the 
highest war-like qualities he was unsurpassed by none at Ibadan, 
but his youth was against him. Hence the title was given to 
Lawoyin an old and experienced veteran who had seen many 
wars. 

How these precepts were reversed by the succeeding adminis- 
tration and with what consequences to the country we shall see 
hereafter. 

§ 2. Ibadan Under a Kakanfo 

Latosisa usurped the title of Kakanfo by might over right, by 
displacing Ojo Aburumaku the Kakanfo at Ogbomosg, as Ogun- 
mola attempted to do in the case of Gbenla the aged Basorun of 
Oyo. He sent to Ojo for all the insignia of the office, which he was 
obliged to resign to him, and on the 3rd of October, 1871, he was 
publicly installed. On the 9th he gave titles to his chiefs the most 
principal of which were to Ajayi Ogboriefon, Balogun the title he 
intrigued so much for, and to Ali Laluwoye the Otun. They were 
barely a year at home when the Ilesa complications cropped up 
again, but this time they appeared as defenders of that city. 

We have seen in the preceding section that Odigbadigba was 
the man Ogedemgbe desired to be crowned as Owa, so when he 
heard that Odigbadigba was murdered at Ibadan he came with 
an army from his place of exile, captured Ilesa and drove away 
the Owa placed there by the Ibadans. Thus Ilesa was destroyed 
a second time within a short period. Ogedemgbe remained at 
Ilesa in defiance of Ibadan. 

The Ogedemgbe Campaign. — The Ibadans accepted the 



;^88 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

challenge by espousing the cause of the expelled Owa. The 
standard of war was propitiated on the 28th of December, 1872, 
and on the 30th Ajayi Ogboriefon as commander-in-chief marched 
out. His orders were simply to capture or drive away Ogedemgbe 
and restore the Owa. 

But Ogedemgbe would not risk another war with the Ibadans 
so shortly within the walls of Ilesa, so he left the town at the 
approach of the Ibadan army. 

These encamped near the walls of Ijeba Ere, and although their 
orders did not include seizures at Ilesa, yet, as individuals among 
them entered the city with the intention of buying provisions 
one and another among them seeing their run-away slaves of the 
previous campaign, seized them, others following their examples 
seized under false pretences, and in order not to go away empty 
handed, seizures became general, and so Ilesa was taken again as 
the people were just settling down. 

The Are of Ibadan on hearing this was much displeased with the 
Balogun, and, although he pleaded his innocence in the matter, 
yet the fact remained a stigma on his character. He was sent to 
reheve Ilesa not to plunder it. 

Passing from Ilesa in pursuit of Ogedemgbe, Odo was again 
taken. The commander-in-chief being somewhat in a state of 
destitution before he left home, did not abide by his orders, but 
was only intent upon slave catching and was always ready with 
excuses. Ogedemgbe was pursued from place to place until he 
lured them to a great forest called Igbo Alawun east of Ikere 
where he made a stand. Ogedemgbe encamped at Ita Ogbolu 
and the Ibadans at Ogotun with the forest between them ; there 
they fought several battles. Ogedemgbe inflicting disasters upon 
them checked the restless ambitions of the Ibadans. 

Ifthe Ijesa and Efon towns in the rear had had the courage to 
rebel, the Ibadans would have been cut off to a man. 

The third battle fought here was simply disastrous to the Ibadans. 
Ogedemgbe and his aUies lay in ambush while a small body of men 
was sent forward to draw the Ibadans ; this was soon defeated and 
in the pursuit the flower of the Ibadan army was hemmed in and 
cut off from the main body at the base. Most of the young Mogajis 
were there such as Akeredolu heir of the late Bale Orowusi, 
Aderibigbe, heir of the late Bale Olugbode, also the A§aju with all 
the Badas, the Seriki with his Otun and Osi Seriki. These last 
sat on the very spot the ambuscade was laid their men all scattered 
in the pursuit for slave catching when all of a sudden the Ijesas 
opened fire upon them ! The Seriki was shot off his horse, seriously 
wounded, his Otun and Osi were killed on the spot and their heads 



TWO ADMINISTRATIONS OF OPPOSITE POLICIES 389 

taken off (the Osi Seriki alone had 2,000 followers in this campaign 
not one of them being with him when this disaster occurred) 
When the pursuers knew that they were hemmed in, they began 
to fight their way back, and the pursued now became the pursuers. 
It was " save himself who can " with the Ibadans, the chiefs had 
only with them their bodyguards who must always be by their 
sides in weal or woe. 

It was now that Balogun Ajayi began to redeem his honour. 
He was a man for any emergency. Unrespected hitherto because 
he was inferior in men and means to any of the Mogajis, but for 
presence of mind, courage and resources, he was unequalled by 
any. He came up at once with the reserve forces, bore down on 
the Ijesas, and in one tremendous charge he dispersed them 
and in that way he saved those who had been cut off. The news 
of this disaster was received with great mourning at Ibadan. 

To mihtary skill, Ogedemgbe now added state craftiness ; 
he sent large presents to the Are at home and tendered his sub- 
mission. The Are sent one messenger after another to recall the 
Balogun, but from shame the Balogun would not return till the 
third messenger reached him. A great deal is attached to a 
Balogim's first expedition, and to go home empty handed with 
nothing but tales of disaster was enough to make him afraid of 
falHng into disrepute, especially as there were murmurings against 
him already among the war boys. 

He turned his steps homeward with a heavy heart. He spent 
a few days at Ikere. It was in his mind to surprise the town 
and capture it, but when it was privately intimated to him that 
they would be hemmed in, he left quite unexpectedly. 

The army arrived home on the ist September, 1873. 

The Are reprimanded the Balogun sharply for disobeying orders, 
and he wept in the pubUc meeting like a Httle child. He would 
have been deposed from his high olftce, but the Are knew his worth 
as a soldier, and that his misfortune lay in not having the where- 
withal to command respect and that for that reason he was bent 
at all hazards on risking everything in order to secure the 
necessary means. 

The war-chiefs now began to disrespect their commander-in-chief 
but conscious of his own capabiUties he took no notice of slights 
and insults knowing that occasions will arise when he was sure to 
command their respect. In order to quiet the restlessness and 
general dissatisfaction the Are promised to lead the next expedition 
in person when they would have an opportunity of retrieving their 
losses. 

The Arg however, deposed the Seriki Lawoyin alleging that he 



390 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

was too unlucky as a general to lose his two principal lieutenants 
in his very first campaign. But the underlying reason was that 
the principal chiefs felt he was a disgrace to them for the glaringly 
base ingratitude he displayed towards the deposed Ajobg who had 
helped him to defray the expenses incidental to his taking office 
by giving him 800 bags of cowries, a horse, a sword, gowns, etc., 
and this HberaHty he requited by pursuing the fallen chief with 
the very horse he had given him ! 

Lawoyin submitted calmly, relinquished public life altogether 
and retired to his farm. 

The title was given to lyapo the Mogaji of the late Balogun 
Ibikunle who commanded all his late father's resources, and for 
men and means was unapproached by any of the other chiefs in 
the town. And Akeredolu son of the late Bale Orowusi the Otun 
Seriki. Thus the Are began to reverse the policy of the late Bale 
Orowusi in the advice not to exalt inexperienced young men over 
elderly men of ripe judgment although comparatively poor. 
His idea was that these young men should be advanced to 
responsible position in order that they might use the means at their 
command for the public benefit which they would otherwise not 
do. Subsequent events will prove which of these two poUcies 
was the right one. 

§ 3. An Unprovoked War.— Ado 

The Ibadans were not long at home before they found another 
pretext for marching oat. for .-ilave raiding. The Ifes, seeking 
an occasion against Modakeke, but mindful of the past were afraid 
to attack them direct, and secretly invited the Are and gave up the 
town to him. So the Ibadan army left home again, under the 
Are, on the 8th December, 1873. 

He rendezvoused between lie Igbo and Kuta, villages of Iwp, 
and was just preparing to cross the Osun river and march against 
Modakeke when the Ifes thought better of their offer and 
regretted theii rashness. They now prayed the Are to leave 
Modakeke alone ; for it occurred to them that there was no 
wall separating the two towns, and what would prevent the wild 
soldiery of Ibadan from rushing from one to the other ? They 
would just be bringing disaster on their own heads. 

So the Are desisted. The Ibadan army then marched to 
the Ekiti country with no express object in view. The Are now 
remembered that he had lost a brother in the Agbado war, when 
they were waylaid by the Balogun ot Ado ! He now made up his 
mind to destroy the Ado country. 

The Ados met them at lyin a frontier town of theirs, and were 



TWO ADMINISTRATIONS OF OPPOSITE POLICIES 39I 

routed in a single pitched battle on or about the i6th of January 
1874. They could not rally, so the Ibadans made an easy 
conquest of the whole district. Men, women, and children 
were captured without the slightest attempt at resistance. So 
many were the captives and so much the booty, that the campaign 
appeared more like a promenade. 

The king of Ado entered the Ibadan camp in full regal attire 
attended by a few followers who had nearly all stolen behind 
him ere he could get to the Are's tent. 

The Are received him with every mark of honour and respect ; 
he now remembered that his second wife was a native of Ado 
and so he would do honour to her king. He obtained for him 
41 of his wives, 21 of his children, 30 of his chiefs, and bought 
him a horse and caparison for 3 slaves, and re-instated him. 
The Ibadan army arrived behind their town wall on the 21st 
February and entered in a triumphant procession on the 22nd. 

The conquest of Ado was so easy that not a chief was missing, 
but Akeredolu, the Otun Seriki, who signaUzed himself in the 
Ilesa and Ogedemgbe wars was taken ill, and remained two 
months at I la but growing worse was brought home to die on the 
5th April, 1874. His brother Ajayi Osungbekun succeeded him 
both as head of their father's house, and in his office of Otun 
Seriki. 

§ 4. The Are's Administration 

Latosisa the Are-ona-kakanfo at the commencement of his 
administration ruled with great clemency, but after this successful 
expedition be began to show himself a Kakanfo with all the 
characteristics of a Kakanfo — obstinacy, recklessness, blood 
thirstiness. 

The Are's first act after his return from Ado was directed 
against Efiisetan the lyalode or Ladies' Queen. The charges 
against her were : — i. That she did not accompany him to the 
war. 2. That she never sent him supplies during the campaign. 
3. That she did not come in person to meet him outside the 
town wall to congratulate him on his safe return. 

He was, therefore, resolved to depose her and this was done on 
the ist of May, 1874, and lya Ola her Otun (first Heutenant) was 
promoted to the office. 

lya Ola was very reluctant to accept the office, but the Are 
sent a peremptory message to her to say, if she refused, she was to 
take a single cloth and a head tie, and leave the town immediately. 
She was obhged to accept the title. We may mention in passing 
that Ef usetan herself took the title from her chief a former lyalode, 



392 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

who, from adverse circumstances lost her wealth, whilst fortane 
smiled on Efusetan. She lived to see Efusetan deprived both of 
the title and of her life. 

When men or women of high rank and great social position are 
deposed, it means that their death is determined upon ; but if 
they have fallen into poverty and insignificance and so have lost 
influence before deposition, their death is not insisted upon. 

In order to save her life, Efusetan with lavish gifts sought 
the aid and interposition of all the influential chiefs, paid the fines 
imposed upon her, but all to no purpose. 

It must be remarked that many of the chiefs were against this 
treatment of the lyalode, but the Are at this time was haughty 
and unapproachable. She was summoned to the meeting of the 
Town Council on the 22nd of June and was pubHcly disgraced, 
after which she was told that she was pardoned ; but when a few 
days after the voice of the Agan was heard in the night (i.e. the 
Egugun that executes women) it was known that her death was 
resolved upon. 

But the lyalode could not be openly attacked. It has been made 
one of the constitutional laws of the town that there was to be no 
civil war, that if any chief ventured on one, whether his case 
be right or wrong the whole town was to rise against him and crush 
him. All that could now be done was to effect her death by some 
means or other, either by poison, or by direct violence when 
unguarded. 

Kumuyilo the lyalode's adopted son and her relatives were 
heavily bribed by the Are and his abettors, to murder her in cold 
blood ! The lyalode spent miserable days and nights suspicious 
of every sound and movement. She changed her sleeping place 
from night to night as she could not trust any of her domestics. 
She prepared her food herself, could not go out of doors, received 
no visitors, as she did not know from what quarter the fatal blow 
would fall. At length on the night of June 30th, 1874 knowing 
where she slept, two slaves instructed by Kumuyilo entered the 
room from the ceiUng and dashed out her brains. The next 
morning, when her death was reported, she was accorded a public 
funeral befitting her rank and having no son of her own the Are 
installed Kumuyilo her adopted son as head of the house. 

The late Madam Efusetan was an Egba by birth but made 
Ibadan her home, where she grew to be very rich. The Egbas 
hearing of her death sent to ask the cause of it. This made the 
Ibadan chiefs, who were against the cruel deed, declare their 
innocence leaving the onus of it upon the Are. To show their 
displeasure in the matter they demanded of the Are at the public 



TWO ADMINISTRATIONS OF OPPOSITE POLICIES 393 

meeting to prove his innocence by producing the murderers. He 
tried by one way or another to evade the question : they rejected 
his excuses, the meeting became stormy and they adjourned in a 
rage. The Are was ill at ease, fearing a general sedition against 
himself; hence he summoned a meeting daily to settle this matter, 
and to have a reply for the Egba messengers. 

On the 8th of July the town was in a feverish excitement, for 
the chiefs demanded that Kumuyilo be summoned to the meeting. 
Kumuyilo although the son of a notable citizen was brought 
to the meeting bound with cords, and compelled to name his 
accomplices. He named the Oluwo, theBalogun, andtheSebaloju. 
This last was the Are's spokesman at public meetings. Of course, 
all present knew that he meant this for the Are himself whom he 
was afraid to name. Consequentlyitbecameclearthat the first two 
chiefs of the town, the Are and the Balogun, were the doers of the 
deed, and if due justice were to be done, it was they who should 
atone for the crime with their lives ; but such a course would mean 
the destruction of the town. The rest of the chiefs, finding that 
Kumuyilo only carried out the orders of the rulers had not the 
conscience to order him to execution or rather to clamour for 
his life, they were content therefore to have him publicly 
disgraced, ordered out of the great lady's house to his own humble 
dwelling, and appointed a distant relative as head of the house. 
In this way the chiefs signified their displeasure at the action 
of their leaders, and these, conscious of guilt, could not oppose the 
verdict. 

But as life must go for Ufe, they further demanded the actual 
perpetrators of the deed to be produced. On the loth of July, 
1874 these two slaves were brought to the public meeting and the 
writer who saw them prostrating there before the chiefs saw them 
a few minutes later impaled at the Basgrun market. Thus ended 
the matter. 

The Late Madam Efusetan as we have said was an Egba by 
birth but made her home at Ibadan. [There were several Egbas 
of note residing at Ibadan at this time. Chief Lisibade being the 
head of them and Lanisa an Egba was theBalogun of Lawgyin 
the Seriki]. She was very rich owning some 2,000 slaves in her 
farms alone exclusive of those at home. She had also her own 
captains of war and warboys. She had an only daughter who died 
in childbirth in i860 and since that sad event took place she 
became strangely cruel to all her female slaves found in an interest- 
ing condition, using all cruel means to cause forcible abortion, most 
of which ended in death. And these things were known to the chiefs. 
Her property at her death was regarded as belonging to the state. 



394 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Omoko a distant relative was placed over the estate as the 
responsible man but her sister was the chief manager. 

§ 5. The EMURg War. 

Chief Ogedemgbe being driven out of Ilesa gathered around 
himself a band of marauders infesting the Efon district. He also 
made himself obnoxious to the Ibadans by attacking their 
tributary towns being bent upon harassing them in every way 
possible. For that 'purpose he encamped against Ise an Ibadan 
tributary town, and it had to apply to Ibadan for help. On 
the 7th of December, 1874, the Are sent two of his powerful generals 
lyapo the Seriki and Ilgri the Osi to reUeve Ise. 

The Are himself knowing the imprudence of such an appoint- 
ment sent an elderly chief called 01up6yi to go with them as 
Baba Isale (chief adviser). The council of war was to be held in 
his tent, and he had to order the battle. He was their senior in age, 
but far inferior to the least of lyapo's or Ilori's captains. 

A wise policy this as these young men refused to submit to each 
other, although they agreed to submit to this old chief. lyapo 
was the heir of the late Balogun Ibikunle, and was possessed of 
all his father's men and his means. Moreover a brave Seriki 
considers himself second to the Balogun alone as he could leap 
from the one title to the other as his late father did," occupying 
as he did the same relative position to the young warriors, as the 
Balogun to the veterans. 

Ilori was the heir of the late Basorun Ogunmola, he also was 
possessed of his father's men and his prestige, and considered 
himself the senior in rank being the general commanding the 
commander-in-chief's left, and generally taken as senior in rank. 
What they would not yield to each other they agreed to concede 
to this old chief out of deference to his age. The wisdom of the 
advice of Bale Orowiisi may be indirectly noticed here also. 

But the fame and prestige of lyapg far eclipsed that of Ilori, 
and he was virtually the leader of the expedition ; where he en- 
camped there all encamped, and when he struck his tent all were 
bound to be on the move. 

Ogedemgbe hearing of their approach < raised the siege of Ise 
and escaped again to his stronghold at Ita Ogbola. The Ibadan 
army not willing to return home empty-handed went against 
Emure which was giving supplies to Ogedemgbe at Is§. The 
town was taken the next day but all the fighting men escaped 
in a body. 

The Seriki became ill after this, and it was with difficulty 
he could reach Ha the sanatorium of the Ibadans in all their 



TWO ADMINISTRATIONS OF OPPOSITE POLICIES 395 

Ekiti and other wars in those parts : there he remained until 
he was well enough to come home. 

As it would not be wise for all the army to remain at Ila until 
his recovery, they returned home on the 15th of February, 1875. 

The Seriki was well enough to leave Ila about six weeks later ; 
he arrived outside the town wall of Ibadan on the 28th of March, 
and there most of the members of the expedition who had returned 
home joined him to grace his triumphal entry the next day. 
The joy, the excitement, and the enthusiasm attending the 
pageantry of this young man so moved the whole town that the 
like of it had scarcely ever been seen. Whilst it stirred the envy 
of some to its very depth, it excited the admiration of others. 
Thus a young man was heard to say " If I enjoy such a glory for 
only one day and I die the next, I shall be content." 

On the 7th of April following died that distinguished veteran 
and commander-in-chief AH a former Balogun of Iwo who was 
expelled by a civil fight from Iwo to Ibadan. 



Chapter XXII 

A NEW REIGN AND EVIL PROGNOSTICATIONS 

§ I. The End of Adelu the AlAfin of Oyo and 
Accession of Adeyemi 

King Adelu did not attain to the age of his father. His accession 
was marked by confusion, wars, and rumours of war all over 
the country for about four years, due chiefly to the Ijaye war and 
its sequels; but after this peace and tranquility prevailed, except 
for the Ibadan raids and the subjugation of the Ijesa and Ekiti 
provinces. 

Towards the end of his reign he met with an accident by being 
thrown off his horse, and as a consequence a prolonged illness 
ensued. After his convalescence he had an attack of paralysis 
which was probably due to internal injury sustained by the 
fall, but it was generally attributed to poison administered 
by the Crown Prince, who was impatient to come to the throne ; 
it was also said that his accomplice and agent was the King's 
favourite wife Alayoayo. Among all the denizens of the ro5'al 
harem she was the only one who could be termed Queen, for she 
had the whole village of Awe and half the city of Oyo serving her, 
and the whole of the King's treasures were at her disposal, so that 
one could scarcely imagine what could have so alienated her 
affections as to make her an accessory to such a crime. It was 
subsequently discovered, however, that the Crown Prince had an 
illicit intercourse with her. and that she was enceinte by him ! It 
was in order to cover her shame and disgrace, therefore, that she 
lent herself to the accompUshment of this double crime, and the 
more readily as the Crown Prince promised her the same position 
and influence when he came to the throne, as he fully expected 
he would. 

As the King grew worse day bj' day ^nd had to keep his bed for 
about a month, the rumour of his death began to gain ground. 
Thereupon the Oyo Mesi repaired to the palace and requested 
to see his majesty even in his sick bed, in order to be assured 
of his condition. Accordingly, he was bolstered up in one of his 
apartments, and the curtain was drawn in order that the noblemen 
might see him and thus he held his reception for the last time. 
A few days after, the beating of the Koso drum and the blowing 

396 



A NEW REIGN AND EVIL PROGNOSTICATIONS 397 

of the ivory trumpet at midnight announced to the pubhc the 
death of their King. 

Such an occasion was a time of dire distress in the palace, 
for apart from those who were bound by their special office to die 
with the King immolation was more or less indiscriminate in 
order to furnish the monarch with a large retinue in the other 
world. Hence every one tried to hide himself or herself in every 
nook and corner imaginable and in the ceilings of their apartments. 

As an instance of the indiscriminate slaughter which occurred 
on this occasion we may mention the following : — 

Kudefu the King's favourite Ilari and head of all his slaves on 
the morning of the death before it was officially announced 
went to know of his master's condition, and learning he was dead 
he was going home sad at heart to die of his own accord. 

Alega the keeper of the gate seeing him coming from the inner 
apartments, being inquisitive, approached him to learn of their 
august master's condition. Kudefu at once unsheathed his sword 
saying " You go before, I ani coming at your heels to be attendants 
on our master in the other world " and in one stroke he cut off 
his head and then coolly went home to die. Several who were 
too inquisitive lost their Lives in this way. In that vast compound 
those in one corner of it may not know what was taking place in 
another. 

It was also a time of mourning for the relatives of those who have 
received the " death cloth " knowing that they must have to bury 
in the evening a relative strong and healthy in the morning and 
up to the time the fatal cup is taken. 

Alayoayo was very reluctant to die, and begged hard that her 
life should be spared, relying probably on the Crown Prince's 
promise to her. But in this she was sadly disappointed ; for this 
reason she stayed much longer in the palace than she was expected 
to do, for according to custom she must die at home among her 
own people. When at last she knew that death was inevitable, 
she issued from the palace well-dressed in her " death cloth " 
with her drummer before and her maidens carrying large calabashes 
full of kola nuts, she trod her way homewards to the measures of 
the drum scattering kola nuts with a lavish hand right and left 
to the crowd of spectators thronging her way from the palace gates 
to hei home, to have a last glance at her. 

In the meantime a great feast had been made at her home 
for all friends and relatives to partake with her for the last, during 
which time the grave was in digging and the coffin made. She 
distributed her property among her relatives and her only son. 
When the hour was come she bade all farewell and repaired to her 
P 



398 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

chamber and the fatal cup was placed in her hands. But owing to 
the preventives she had fortified her system with, the effects 
were neutraUzed ; this was repeated again and again, with the 
same result. So towards sunset the disappointed relatives in 
order to prevent an indelible disgrace to the family had to strangle 
her, and then gave her a decent funeral. The same may be said 
more or less of all those who had received the '* death cloth." 

The Aremo (Crown Prince) also was told to die, but not only 
did he refuse point blank to do so but was also determined to ascend 
the throne. His grandfather had abolished the custom of the 
Aremo dying with the father, his own father the monarch now 
deceased was his father's Aremo and he succeeded him on the 
throne, and why then should he die ? But the Oyg Mesi were 
not in favour of his ascending the throne because of his surpassing 
cruelties. One instance among many to illustrate this : — 

A young man Folarin by name had a mistress of whom he was 
deprived by the Aremo. One day, seeing Folarin pass along 
the street he sent for him and with a heavy blacksmith's hammer 
smashed his knees and ankles rendering him a cripple for life, 
and then nicknamed himself " Alagbede Akesan ti itun Folarin 
I'ese ro " (the Akesan blacksmith who can recast Folarin 's limbs). 
By such deeds he forfeited his rights to the throne, which would have 
been indisputably his had he been as kind and humble as his 
father. 

In the meantime he was bidding high for it, he secured the 
support of the King's slaves by feasting them" on a bullock and 
a donkey slaughtered every day. But the Oyo Mesi who rejected 
him put forward the Asipa (son of the founder of the town) to 
oppose him, and both parties were in arms. Not aware of the 
actual facts of the situation he distributed arms and ammunition 
to all the men of the Apara, Ajagba, and Sek§ wards and was 
determined to expel the Asipa from the city that day and demolish 
his house. The war drum was beating, and the Famif ami trumpet 
calling to arms and he was just ready to mount his horse when the 
Basgrun appeared on the scene with about 400 men behind him 
all unarmed like himself. Said he to him " Your royal highness, 
will you pull down the fabric your fathers have set up ? Will you 
destroy the city your father and grandfather helped to raise ? Be 
quiet, all will be right." 

With such soothing words he dissuaded him from going forward. 
By this time the King's slaves had been won over. The Basorun 
had scarcely finished when the Apeka (the head slave) came 
on horseback with his men all unarmed. He began with " My 
lord, what is it ? Why is this ?' The Aremo in a rage retorted with 



A NEW REIGN AND EVIL PROGNOSTICATIONS 399 

" Away with you. Are you not my club who ought to have been 
striking hard for me by this time ? Is it now to ask such a question 
when you ought to be acting ? " 

The slaves took exception to this language of their master to 
their chief. We have noticed in Part I what influence these 
so-called " slaves," especially the titled ones, wield, as their good- 
will and assent with those of the members of the harem must be 
obtained before any election can be considered valid. They now 
professed to be offended because their chief was metaphorically 
styled "kumo" i.e. a club, and they declared openly that they would 
have nothing more to do with the Aremo. They refused to enter 
his house from that day ; the cow and the ass were slaughtered as 
usual and the feast prepared but no one came to partake of it. 

The Prince again sent for the men in the Apara, Ajagba, Sek§ 
and Akeitan wards, who were loyal to him ; their chiefs came as in 
duty bound but their men had been disbanded, and not a single 
armed man came with them ! 

The Prince was now at his wits' end, and greatly mortified by 
seeing himself deserted by all those who had promised him their 
support. At last Prince lyajin his father's uncle sent for him, 
and undeceived him of his hopes. " The Oyo Mesi have not 
elected you and there is the end of it. I would advise you to leave 
the city quietly or build a house at the outskirts, and live 
there in dignified retirement." 

The Prince returned home much depressed and made preparation 
to leave the city. He entered the palace and denuded it of all 
its treasures. He sent several loads to the Bara to be kept there 
until sent for ; and whatsoever he did not or could not take away 
he smashed and made a bonfire of them in the palace courtyard, 
and the wells he filled with kegs of gunpowder and broken pieces 
of crockery. Some wives of his who had offended him he confined 
in a closed room with ceihngs, and had the entrance walled up. 
He then proceeded to his farm at Agodomgbo and unfettered a 
few hundreds of the slaves put in stocks there, and ordered them 
to carry all those loads with him to Ibadan. The Are of Ibadan 
received him with open arms and assigned him a portion of land 
to build on in the Yem§tu quarter. 

The late King Adelu was the first born son of his father Atiba. 
He was born when his father was but a youth. He became a 
companion to his father in all his turmoils, especially when as a 
private man Atiba chose the career of a soldier of fortune. 

Adelu was much older than his brothers, as they were born a 
very long time afterwards when their father was in better circum- 
stances. As a son, he was very obedient and dutiful, always ready 



400 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

to answei his father's calls whatever he may be doing, and many 
a time whilst at his meals. He was an absolutely just man, 
strict to a fault. He so abhorred stealing that with him robbers 
had no alternative but instantaneous execution. The following 
stories told of him will illustrate his strictness. 

1. A certain young woman sold beads on credit to a buyer, 
but when the money was not forthcoming in time the creditor 
went to demand it. Not finding the debtor at home but seeing 
her beads hanging on a peg in her apartment being determined 
to have either the money or the beads, she went in and took her 
beads away until they should be paid for. 

An imperfect report of this came to the hearing of the King 
representing her as having entered the rooms of another woman 
when she was out, and taken her beads away ! The King without 
further enquiries and proper investigation of the case ordered 
her execution at once ! He keenly regretted this afterwards, when 
the whole facts were brought to his knowledge. 

2. He sent a few of his slaves for tall poles to build his K6bi. 
On their return he saw a yam tied to the load of one of them. He 
questioned the headman how he came by it, but not being satisfied 
with the plea that it was a gift of a farmer, and surmising that they 
had been taking undue advantage of poor farmers out of privilege , 
he was determined to put a stop to that custom. 

The executioner was immediately at his service and he was 
instantly decapitated. This incident had the desired effect. 
All through his reign stealing or taking by violence out of sheer 
privilege, so common with the King's slaves, was utterly unknown, 
everybody's property was safe. 

His public executioner was called K61oh6. A call at his name 
K61oh6 was usually sufficient. He was at his duty at a moment's 
notice. 

He loved his people and would never allow any of the princes 
to distress the poor with impunity. An instance was given of a 
prince who fought with a commoner and cut off one of his fingers. 
This being reported to his father he severely reprimanded the 
prince, and was determined to exact a full retaliation of the deed. 
But the constitution of the country forbade him to disfigure a 
prince so he ordered someone to be brought from the family of 
his mother as a substitute. A young virgin was met in the house 
beating corn and she was summoned to the palace. The King 
ordered K61oh6 to lop off the same finger of the young woman as 
that which the prince cut off from the man's hand. This was done 
instantly. Then said the King to her "It is not my fault it is 
your cousin who deprived you of your finger." 



A NEW REIGN AND EVIL PROGNOSTICATIONS 40I 

That was his rude idea of justice. As that young woman and 
all the relations of the prince's mother enjoy great advantages 
under his auspices, so they should be ready to suffer for his crimes. 
And again, the training of children devolves greatly on the mothers, 
therefore both herself and her relatives would learn to train their 
children to good behaviour. A misguided notion of doing what was 
right. 

With his cliildren he was very strict and scarcely any one of 
them escaped punishment from him, and whoever among them 
he had occasion to lay his hands on, carried sore sides for weeks 
or months and would have to lie on cotton wool or banana leaves. 

He was particular to see them all engaged in some industry, 
either weaving or farming. Even the Crown Prince, who has 
official duties to perform, must employ his spare moments in 
weaving or tailoring. The King was particularly strict with 
him for his many cruel acts ; and although above law many a 
time would the father surprise him in his house, and ere he could 
escape would lay heavily on him with a stick or the fiat of a cutlass. 

His Majesty encouraged agriculture in every possible way. 
As he could not visit his farm by daylight he often did so on moon- 
light nights to examine the crops and advise the head farmer, 
who was often taken by surprise at his visits. His crops were 
usually stocked in huge barns until food was becoming dear, which 
was usually just before the next harvest ; then he would open his 
barns and flood the markets with food at a little below the market 
price, " My children must not starve," he used to say. Notice 
Wcis usually given and farmers warned before the King's stores 
came into the market, so that they might not run the risk of a loss 
by being undersold. 

He was exceptionally kind to the thrifty and to those farmers 
and their wives who showed themselves industrious. 

It is customary in this country to give goats to the womenfolk 
to rear for their own keep, the kids being shared with the owner. 
.But in his case, he would demand none from those who kept theirs 
well except a young billy occasionally. He would rather add 
to their store. But careless owners would get no encouragement 
from him. 

He was a perfect organizer, a man of taste, he appreciated and 
rewarded excellencies wherever found. 

If any man was accused before him and he understood the 
individual was then in his farm, he would never allow him to be 
sent for, and whenever the case was heard the defendant would 
have every consideration from the King : but if actually guilty he 
was let off with a light fine. " If a man is not idle " he used to say. 



402 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

" he must be a good man." He loved and respected the C.M.S. and 
American Baptist Missionaries at Oyo in his days. He was kind 
and Uberal to them during the Ijaye war when they were in 
straitened circumstances. He was universally mourned by his 
people. 

The Accession of Adeyemi, 

Prince Adeyemi the fourth son of Atiba was elected to the 
throne in succession to his eldest brother the late King Adelu. 
He at first declined it in favour of an elder brother Adesiyen who 
had a prior right, the eldest surviving Adelabu being at that time 
an exile at Ibadan, and from his character was on no account 
eligible. Adesiyen, however, urged his younger brother to accept 
it as he was in bad health, and for him to have to go through all 
the ceremonies and wear the crown perhaps for only a few days 
would be inconvenient for all concerned, and for himself also. He 
was on a decUne from phthisis. He promised however to aid 
Adeyemi as much as he could with his advice and counsel, wishing 
him a long and prosperous reign. Then Adeyemi accepted the 
offer. 

Adeyemi' s accession was acclaimed by the populace without a 
dissentient voice, he being very popular with all the people especially 
with foreigners and provincials. All the traders from Ibadan, 
Abeokuta, Ijebu and elsewhere used to lodge in his house, and 
all used to partake of his hospitality. As a prince, his weakness 
was drink ; not that he did it to excess, but he was in the habit of 
visiting the brewers of native malt liquor every day with numerous 
followers and would satisfy them all at his own expense. Hence his 
popularity and universal acceptance. High hopes were, therefore, 
entertained of a happy and prosperous reign for one who was a 
friend to all. 

But no sooner had he ascended the throne than an evil reign was 
prognosticated for him. As usual the divination was sent from 
the sacred city He Ife. The " Igba Iwa " consisting of two covered 
calabashes identical in shape and size, similarly draped but the 
contents of which were different were brought before him. The one 
contained money (cowries), cloth, beads, etc., indicating a happy 
and prosperous reign, the other gunpowder, bullets, razor, knife, 
miniature spears and arrows, indicating wars and turmoils. He was 
to choose one and by his choice determine the fate of the Yoruba 
kingdom. Unfortunately he chose the latter and from that time 
evil days were held to be in store for the country. This was fulfilled 
by the troubles initiated by the Are of Ibadan, which culminated 
in the protracted i6 years' war which involved the whole of the 



A NEW REIGN AND EVIL PROGNOSTICATIONS 403 

Yoruba country and ended by the British protectorate and the loss 
of the Yoruba People of their absolute independence. 

The " sword of state " or rather of justice was also sent from 
He Ife which every sovereign must have before he can order an 
execution. 

The following were the sons born to Adeyemi before he ascended 
the throne : — Adelakun (the Aremo) Ajuan, Akere I, Ak^re II, 
Tela Kunduke, Tela Kankansi, and Origade. Adelakun, however, 
was his natural son and consequently it was Ajuan's mother that 
was created an Ilari and raised to the title of lyalagbon. 

§ 2. Ibadan Raids on the Confines of the Kingdom 
The Wokuti Expedition 

At this time there was peace all over the Yoruba country, trade be- 
tween the coast and interior was brisk, caravans went to Abeokuta 
from the interior every day, and to Ijebu via Ibadan once a month. 
These littoral tribes however, would not allow those from the interior 
to pass on to the coast, but traders from the coast can travel in 
safety right on to the Niger and Bida. The Ibadans were now at 
the zenith of their glory. All the Ijesa and Ekiti tribes and some 
Oke Ogun towns paid their tributes regularly, and from the easy 
victory of the Are's first expedition all the tribes dreaded the power 
of the Ibadans, and gave no cause of offence, and the Are himself 
was very much elated, being almost idolized by the war boys. 

In the midst of this profound peace the Are and his chiefs on 
the 26th of November, 1875, started on his second expedition 
for slave-hunting. They proceeded to the Ekiti country direct 
via Ila and encamped at Yahapa. Seeing such a large hostile 
force menacing, a large number of the Ekitis concentrated their 
forces at Ijesa Ahaye for self protection. The place was taken with- 
out much opposition. But the expedition was intended against 
Aiyede the capital city of Esu the Ata, lord of the Yagba and Akoko 
tribes in the confines of the Yoruba country North-eastwards. 
But ere this large army reached Aiyede that city and its environs 
had been deserted. It is said that the Ata was rather their friend 
and not a foe, and nothing but plunder hunger took them there. 
Some of the Ibadan chiefs, therefore, had privately sent and 
apprized the Ata of the coming danger which he would never 
be able to oppose, and therefore he should at once seek safety in 
fhght. Some escaped to a distance of five days' journey knowing 
the ferocious way the Ibadans have of pursuing their prey. The 
Ata himself escaped to Omu IjMu, a town supposed then to be 
impregnable. Built on a high hill, strongly walled, and surrounded 



404 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

by a thorny thicket, the pathway for entering the town being 
narrow and well guarded. It had successfully repulsed three 
attacks before and therefore was considered safe. Finding 
Aiyede deserted, the Ibadan Seriki who led the way tracked the 
fugitives to this place. He had a preliminary skirmish that evening 
and he encamped at the foot of the hill awaiting his chiefs. In 
course of the night, the Balogun, and afterwards the Are arrived, 
and next morning the Seriki went to pay his respects to them 
awaiting orders. But as he was returning to his tent and his drum 
was rolling " Kiriniun Onibudo " before him, the warboys thought 
he was going to the battlefield. "The Seriki is going, the Seriki 
is going " flew from mouth to mouth and immediately the great 
host not waiting any longer for orders from the leaders rushed 
after this young and intrepid general, himself being borne along with 
them, unable to reach his tent to put on his war-dress; these were 
brought to him in the field. In one assault the thorny thickets 
were crumbled like matchwood under the feet of myriads, ^nxHi 
was taken and Esu the Ata brought a prisoner before the 
Are. 

The illustrious captive was kindly treated by the Ibadan chiefs, 
but the Ilorin arm}/ (which accompanied them) requested the Arg 
to hand him over to them as their mortal foe. This the Ibadans 
positively refused to do. " It is not our custom," said they " to 
put to death a fallen leader or hero." This refusal created a 
disaffection between the Ibadans and Ilorins which the latter were 
determined to avenge whenever an opportunity offered. 

Omu was after all a very small town and the Ibadan host a 
large and insatiable one, the Are and the Balogun therefore 
returned to their base at Yahapa and allowed the Seriki to lead 
the young men further on in search of prey. 

The next place attacked was Ikole. They had a preliminarj' 
skirmish in the evening of their arrival before retiring to prepare 
for a regular pitched battle the next day ; but at moonUght the 
Ikole people deserted the town and sought refuge by flight to 
various places. The Ilorins who were well acquainted with their 
haunts did very well for themselves in the pursuit, but the others 
who did not fare so well scattered themselves throughout the 
length and breadth of the Akoko country like hungry wolves 
seeking for prey. The people hid themselves in caves, ravines, 
and in dens, some escaped as far as to Egbe. The Ibadans pursued 
on and on until they reached the border of the Emir of Bida's 
territory. There they came up with some of the Bida cavalry who 
questioned the leading chiefs as to their authority for trespassing 
in King Imoru's territory. They apologized, and after an exchange 



A NEW REIGN AND EVIL PROGNOSTICATIONS 405 

of presents and kola nuts, they parted as friends. These cavaliers 
were described as seated erect on powerful horses, their spears were 
of burnished brass which glittered in the noon-day sun. 

Having reached the utmost hmits possible theSeriki nowretraced 
his steps to meet the Are at their base. But a great disaster 
befel a part of the Ibadan host on their way back. Some who 
lingered behind were hastening on to join the Seriki and took a 
shorter route to the left with a steep descent. The mass behind 
pressing on those before, hundreds were hurled down and trampled 
underfoot ; the clouds of dust raised by myriads suffocated many 
and left them no power of resistance, and so within the space of 
,half-an-hour hundreds had lost their lives ! 

There the survivors, in order to find the bodies of relatives and 
friends to perform the last offices for them, piled corpses in heaps, 
presenting a gruesome sight ! A man on horseback rode up, and 
seeing he had lost there all his brothers and friends who came with 
him to the expedition groaned out " and what shall I say at home?" 
He drew out his pistol and discharged it in the ear of his horse. 
Reloading, he blew out his own brains ! So that not one out of that 
family returned home to tell the tale. This tragedy gave the name 
to that expedition, " Wgkuti," piling of corpses. 

At Yahapa before the camp was broken up for the homeward 
march, the florins once more made a strenuous effort to get the 
Ata, but Chiefs Aijenku and lyapg the Seriki confronted them 
saying " If you were the leaders of this expedition and we followed 
you, you would have had a claim ; but as we are the leaders and 
you follow us, we have told you it is not our custom to kill a fallen 
king or general and that is the end of the matter." The Ilorin 
troops parted here in no pleasant mood. 

The Ibadans returned home on the 19th of February, 1876. 
This was the last of the Ibadan raiding expeditions in the Ekiti, 
and was, perhaps, the most powerful force that ever marched out 
of their gates. They were now confronted with the task of states- 
manship, of consolidation and organization which turned out to 
be a more difficult affair. 

§ 3. The New Policy 

The power of the Ibadans being dreaded by all the interior tribes, 
their messengers to the provinces under them took undue 
advantage of the subject states and that to such an extent as to 
drive them to rebellion. The very name Ibadan stank in the 
nostrils of all the Ijesa and Ekiti tribes, so that they were only 
seeking for an opportunity for throwing off their yoke. And 
strange to say these messengers who were doing all the mischief were 



406 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

not the Ibadan born, but the Ijesa and Ekiti slaves who were sent 
with messages to their own native towns ! 

As soon as each one gets outside the Ibadan town walls he 
secures to himself the services of a drummer and fifer and a 
bard to sing the praises of his master as if the latter were coming : 
he collects behind him idle fellows who follow no regular 
employment and he moves as a little chief aping the master who 
sent him. When he enters a town he asks for the Ibadan Ajele 
there and introduces himself as the messenger of such and such a 
chief, the Ajele is to introduce him to the authorities of the town 
who will assign him quarters for lodging. The landlord has to 
defray all expenses of the keep of this messenger and his followers 
who will remain there as long as they Hke, time being no object to 
them. The best local dishes with chicken or mutton must be 
provided every day with pots of local beer or palm wine. The 
master of the house has to levy on all the inmates for the contri- 
bution of their share, even to the old women who lived on spinning 
cotton for their keep, none is exempted, all are to contribute their 
quota. Nor is this all : cruelty, vanity, debauchery were more 
common with them than otherwise. A landlord would be compelled 
to wait on them at meals, at times holding the lamp in his hand 
for them and sometimes the lamp is placed on his head making him 
as it were a lamp post whilst they are partaking of his hospitality ! 
Forcing their women, raping their girls, rifling their valuables, 
are common causes of complaints, and they generally return to 
Ibadan with booty as from a raid. Who dares touch the messenger 
of a great Ibadan chief ? Thus all the Ibglos under their pro- 
tection, the Ijesas, Ekitis, Yagbas, and Akokos were groaning under 
the yoke of Ibadan, not from paying tribute which was only 
nominal, but from the excesses of these messengers who wei e their 
own sons. 

Thoughtful men at Ibadan hearing this, recalled the advice of 
the late Bale Orowusi and his policy now reversed by the Are. 

It was found that the messengers of the Are and of the Balogun 
were the greatest offenders in this business leading the country 
into the vortex of a revolution. The other chiefs foreseeing 
the evil, remonstrated with their leading chiefs, but these, from 
what they profited by these messengers would not check them. 
Matters can>e to a crisis in October and November 1876 when the 
minor chiefs made matters too hot for the leading chiefs and 
compelled them to put a stop to these enormities. Three of these 
messengers were caught decoying people from the provinces to 
Ibadan to be sold. Being brought before the council and convicted, 
two were executed at the Basorun market (the usual place of 



A NEW REIGN AND EVIL PROGNOSTICATIONS 407 

execution) and the third outside the north eastern (or Iwo) gate, the 
highway to their hunting grounds as a warning to other messengers. 
The effect however was only shght and transient, the feeUngs in 
the provinces were by no means allayed. 

§ 4. The Civil Murder of Chief Aijenku the F6h6k6. 

The Are now began to evince more and more the characteristics 
of a Kakanfo. Experience has shown us that a Kakanfo always 
caused trouble at home and abroad. Their paths were always 
marked with blood. We have only to recall the history of 
Afonja of Ilorin, Edun of Gbogun and Ojo Amepo who were 
rivals, of Kurumi of Ijaye among others ; and now Latosisa 
of Ibadan was on the same track. His primary object was 
to suppress all the leading chiefs who were his equals or superiors, 
and the first man to feel his power was Chief Aijenku that old and 
experienced war-chief, who had made a name in the field when the 
Are was nowhere. He was the only check on him at the commence- 
ment of his administration. Aijenku was amongst the first 
settlers of Ibadan. He entered the town on horseback being then 
a httle chief. He was a powerful man as we saw that he alone 
opposed the whole forces of the Egbas before Ijaye, when Ogun- 
mola and the other chiefs were absent at Iwawun (vide Chap, 
xviii) and, although fortune did not set him at the head of affairs 
yet he was, as he had always been, one who could not be overlooked. 
He was never a private man at Ibadan. He was the Asaju for 
Oluyole the first Basorun when the Are was only a palm tree 
dresser ! And, although fortune had now raised Latosisa the Are 
above him, yet Aijenku was like a king in his own quarter of the 
town, where he was acknowledged, loved, and venerated by all 
the Oke Asa people, a tribe in the Ekun Osi province now resident 
at Ibadan. Aijenku at the public meetings in course of debate 
often told the chiefs of the administrations of former distinguished 
rulers that made Ibadan what it was to-day. This the Are and 
others of grasping propensities like him never liked to hear, and 
the Are in particular was ever on the look out for an opportunity 
of putting an end to this " historian." 

Aijenku on the other hand whenever he spoke did so boldly 
as one who by age, experience, and past services in many a bloody 
field was competent to give them advice. He had little sympathy 
even amongst the junior chiefs, who were all affected with the 
prevailing avarice ; for he was said to be of an irritable temper, 
too bold and pointed in his remarks, and when he reproved, 
did so without respect of person or rank ; and being so capable a 
warrior there was a latent fear that if this man was backed up and 



408 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

eventually placed at the head of the government he woixld rule 
with rigour and become oppressive. 

At length an opportunity afforded itself for taking revenge on 
this chief, and the Are and the other chiefs were not slow to make 
use of it. Igbajo was one of the tributary towns under him. The 
people of that town being dissatisfied with their ruling chief 
deposed him and appointed another Aregbajo. The deposed 
came to Ibadan to ask the aid of the Ibadan government to 
reinstate him. The Are and the other chiefs were for reinstating 
him, but Aijenku was opposed to that measure and gave his 
reasons. He spoke in his usual authoritative way which offended 
his brother chiefs and hence on the 13th of January, 1877, he was 
rejected by all the chiefs in the public meeting, and that declaration 
was confirmed by his being deprived of all the towns hitherto 
tributary to him, including this very Igbajo. He bore his humili- 
ation patiently and the next day (14th) went to the adjourned 
meeting with a few slaves to offer to the assembly in payment of 
fines, and to ask to be pardoned. The chiefs refused to pardon 
him, they further disgraced him ; he had to return home dis- 
appointed and with a heavy heart. But what roused the old 
Lion to desperation was the attempt to deprive him of the tolls of 
the Abeokuta gate. This was on the 20th of January, when the 
chiefs sent other gatemen there, and drove his men away. He 
was exasperated beyond measure, and was resolved upon civil 
war, come what may. Said he : — " The Abeokuta road was 
opened at the peril of my life. The scars in my body and my dis- 
figured hands were the result of that special conflict when none of 
the present chiefs was in existence, and while I am living no one 
will deprive me of this." He drove away those who had displaced 
his men and resorted to arms, defying anyone who would oppose 
him. He roused the town to action by permitting the women in 
his district to sing : — " O di ori odi, asa ko le wole ko gbe eiye- 
le " (next to an impossibility, the hawk cannot enter into the 
house to take away a pigeon). Meaning that no one would dare 
face their chief in his own house. 

The town was in commotion, the excitement in that part of the 
town was very great, but no one came forward to oppose him. The 
C.M.S. agents waited on the Are to express their regrets for the 
events of the day. The Are made only a cursory remark on the 
subject. He said "It is the public that is against him, not I, 
and we were surprised to hear that he was in arms, against whom, 
we know not." 

Knowing his might, the chiefs moved cautiously to undermine 
his great power. Nothing was done till the following Monday the 



A NEW REIGN AND EVIL PROGNOSTICATIONS 409 

22nd at the general meeting of the town council. There they won 
over all the chiefs who were his personal friends, and to his subordi- 
nate chiefs they offered titles and ranks and tributary towns, 
and then decided to attack him in a body. 

Having thus deprived him of all his mainstays, word was sent 
to him to quit the town, or die, or to prepare for the worst. His 
slaves seeing their master in such a plight, and the impossibility 
of their being able to resist the whole town opposed to him sought 
each one his own safety by flight, some to one chief, some to 
another, 

A private message was sent to him to seek refuge in old Tajo's 
house, who had received permission to shelter him, for if he resisted 
it would mean not only his own life, but also the lives of his wives 
and children. 

As soon as it was known that he had left his house, the whole 
town in arms swooped down upon his quarter of the town, and 
sacked every house, removing everything, even to grinding stones, 
earthenware pots and dishes, doors, firewood, etc., leaving the 
whole place in desolation and ruin as a conquered town. The 
writer could not suppress his emotion when he saw the sight the 
next morning. It was heartrending, especially when on reaching 
Chief Tajo's house he met the chief quite besieged by scores of 
mothers wailing the loss of their children. Several interested 
friends called on him in Chief Tajo's house and even the Are 
himself called in the evening, disclaiming all responsibiUty. It 
was the doing of the town, said he, and not the work of an 
individual. He was said to have offered him the following cold 
comfort : " Take comfort and be thankful your hfe is spared you. 
Remember how many towns subverted by your arms have been 
made desolate, and how many kings have suffered as you now 
do. Be of good courage, be not cast down, all will be right." 

At the pubUc meeting of the town council of the 25th January, 
1877, at the Are's, it was decided that he should return to his house, 
and hence, each of the principal chiefs cent his sword bearer to 
accompany him home from Tajo's. Two days later the chiefs 
having heard that Tajo's people were taking advantage of the 
fallen chief s condition to pillage his farm, sent to warn the old chief 
to check his people ; the main object of the chiefs was to humiliate 
Aijenku and not to ruin him altogether. 

On the 30th of January, 1877, the C.M.S. agents, by the per- 
mission of the Are, paid the fallen chief a visit in grateful recognition 
of his kindness and the protection he extended to the agent and 
the body of Christians in his quarter. After some expressions of 
sympathy and a few words of comfort addressed to him, he said 



410 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

" I did not at first expect that matters would come to this crisis, 
but having come up to such a pass, I restrained my people from 
fighting as I was unwilhng to shed a drop of blood in a town of 
which I was among the foremost of the settlers, and where I built 
houses, and where I was blessed with wives and children. This is 
the third compound I have built at Ibadan. If I had chosen to 
go, I have friends at Abeokuta who might receive me with open 
arms ; and who will dare pursue me if I leave the town ? But I 
prefer to die here, and to have an honourable burial." 

But alas, the chief's troubles were not over. The matter was 
revived again by some of the ill-disposed. At one of the public 
meetings of the council it was insinuated by some that, "if he 
is not finished up with, such a man like that, a turn of the wheel 
of fortune may one day place him at the top, and woe betide any 
one of us or our offspring then living." 

His slaves who had sought the protection of other masters, 
seeing their master now at home, began to return one by one to 
him. So it was resolved by the chiefs in council that he should 
not receive them again but that each should return permanently 
to their temporary masters. The fallen chief submitted to this 
also. Yet still at a meeting of the 12th February, 1877, word was 
sent to him that it was resolved that he should die ! " WTiat else 
have I done ? " asked he of the messengers. They repUed, " We 
do not know, we are only sent to tell you to die." Aijenku went 
again to Tajo's house where he had taken refuge before, to ask 
for his interference again ; but this chief had been forewarned 
not to meddle in this matter again, and therefore he did not 
show his face to his doomed friend. " The Master is not at home " 
is a well understood phrase, and the veteran soldier, overpowered 
with grief went home, gave his last orders to his children and 
retired finally to rest, by blowing out his own brains. This was 
the second cold-blooded murder perpetrated by the Are. 

§ 5, Plot Against the Seriki Iyapo 

Strange as it may seem, yet so it was that the young and 
intrepid Seriki Iyapo was one of the principal agents in hounding 
the late chief to death. One would have supposed that the chief 
being the Areagoro or Alter Ego of his own father in his days, he 
would have looked up to him as a second father. But it seems 
Iyapo felt that his own glory would not be complete while this old 
chief was alive, and that the house of Aijenku should look up to 
him as supreme in that quarter of the town as it did in the days of 
his father which could hardly be the case while the old chief was 
alive. But retributive justice soon overtook him also. The 



A NEW REIGN AND EVIL PROGNOSTICATIONS 4II 

main object of the Are being to suppress all who could successfully 
oppose his designs, the Seriki lyapo was not exempt from his 
ban and he readily raked up charges and accusations against him. 

lyapo was one of those engaged in the plunder of the house 
of the late Aijenku. He was now accused of having in his possession 
a basket of beads which had belonged to the late chief ; and, 
although it was given up on demand, yet the chiefs were resolved 
upon his overthrow, for his independent and defiant attitude. 

It would seem as if the virtue of gratitude was at a discount at 
Ibadan in those days, for the Are himself was much beholden 
to this young and valorous chief, when there was an insurrection 
against him for his overthrow, on account of his atrocities ; but 
for lyapg he certainly would have put an end to his own life. 
Instead of succouring him now, he joined the others and turned 
against him. 

Just a fortnight after the death of Aijenku, lyapo was impeached 
at the meeting of the chiefs, and was told either to quit the town 
or die. The young and brave general was determined not to 
pay any fines, but if needs be to fight it out. Fines only whet their 
appetites for greater demands, and they are never satisfied 
until they have seen the last of their victims. He had the cases of 
Ajobg, the Lady Efusetan, and the late Aijenku before him, 
he therefore " stood by his guns " and defied them all. 
Unfortunately for him, his own brothers joined in the plot 
against him, and on threatening them they fled to the Are for 
protection ! 

But the elders of the Are's house waited on him and reminded 
him of the good and loyal services lyapo had rendered him in the 
past, and they prevailed upon him to relent, and not to proceed 
to the extremity with him, for really he had done nothing un- 
pardonable. He listened favourably to them, and the lyapo 
affair was lulled for a while. 

But the intention was not given up, for within two months it 
was revived again, and again suppressed, each of the chiefs dis- 
claiming any responsibility for the rumour. But still, they were 
only feeUng their way, for lyapo was too influential a man to be 
overpowered suddenly. The Are's chief grievance against him 
was that lyapo had usurped his rights, because he would allow no 
confiscation of houses in his quarter. Whoever offended he 
punished himself, for which purpose he always kept a bundle of 
atori whips in his house. Those great chiefs who enriched themselves 
by plundering and confiscating people's houses as a punishment for 
slight offences found they could not do so in lyapo's quarter. 
" The whole of my quarter consists of but one compound and I 



412 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

am the head of it," he used to say. No outside interference was 
allowed, and any head of a compound convicted of any offence he 
punished himself. The Are had cause to hate him for this. 

The Balogun also eyed him suspiciously as potentially a usurper 
of his title, for the Are more than once threatened to depose him 
and transfer the title to lyapo. The Otun was not even taken to 
account, he was regarded as "white-feathered." The Osi and the 
Seriki were rivals, both equal in age, each the head of their father's 
house, and commanded their means and men ; the Osi's title was 
higher, but lyapo's influence was greater, and so it was that he 
was positively hated by the principal leading chiefs, but none had 
the courage to face him. 



Chapter XXIII 

THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE i6 YEARS' WAR 

§ I. The Bokqfi Expedition 

Since the Ijaye war (1860-62) the Ijebus and the Egbas had strictly 
forbidden ammunition to be sold to any of the interior tribes, 
notably Ibadan. On the restoration of peace in 1865 the trade 
between them consisted of foreign clothes, salt, rum and gin from 
the coast in exchange for produce, chiefly palm oil, kernels, cotton, 
etc., from the interior. In order to obtain ammunition, the late 
Basorun Ogunmola opened the Oke Igbo road via Ifg to Benin 
solely for that purpose. 

The late King Adelu, however, had purchased a large quantity 
of gunpowder at Porto Novo which was sent half way to Bokofi 
but no further for fear of the Egbas kidnapping the whole. On 
hearing this, the Are was resolved to send the youngest Mogajis 
for it, secretly wishing they might encounter the Egbas or 
the Dahomians who might probably help him to get rid of 
one or other of them. Ilori the Osi, arid lyapo the Seriki were 
sent on this expedition under the elderly chief Olupoyi as Baba 
IsMe. 

The name of Ij'apo drew the whole of the young men of Ibadan 
to this expedition leaving only the Are, the Balogun and the Otun 
at home. Their simple instructions were : — " Molest no one, 
steer clear of Egba territory, go straight by Oke'ho, Igana to 
Meko ; but if any one molest or interfere with you, follow the 
party home, and we shall come and meet you outside their gates." 
The Are hurried the Seriki out of home the same day he gave him 
the order, the less prepared the better the chances of his fall in the 
Are's opinion. 

The expedition left Ibadan on the 26th April, 1877, and returned 
safely on the 21st June, without encountering either Egbas or 
Dahomians. They brought with them about 800 kegs of gunpowder, 
a few Dane guns, and casks of rum, etc. On the next day the 
whole of the powder was forwarded to the AlAfin who took a few 
kegs and made a present of the rest to the Ibadan chiefs. 
During this expedition there was a great stir among the Egbas. 
They charged the Ibadans with seeking an occasion of quarrel 
with them by sending an army into their " backyard " as they 
styled it, but as the Ibadan government had sent formally to 

4>3 



414 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

apprise the Egba chiefs of their movement and object before the 
expedition left, the responsible chiefs of Abeokuta hke Ogundipe, 
and others paid no heed to the hue and cry that was being made. 
But the great majority of them at a meeting at Sodeke street 
decided to close the roads against Ibadan and forbid especially 
the exportation of salt and foreign goods. 

Ajagunjeun the Balogun of Itoko took the lead and went to the 
caravan town gate to turn the Ibadan traders back home and 
to see that those already in the town leave empty handed. 

This was really the first hostile act that led up eventually to 
the 16 years' war, which involved practically the whole Yoruba 
country, and caused so much loss of lives, and much distress 
and misery, and destruction of towns, subjugation of the Ijebus 
by the British Government, reduction of the mihtary power of 
Ibadan, the placing of a British Resident in that town, and of 
District Commissioners in the principal towns of the Yoruba 
country. 

§ 2. The First Act of War 

The Are's avarice and ambition at this time were unbounded. 
His ambition was to eclipse the fame of the two greatest chiefs 
of undying memory at Ibadan viz Ibikunle and Ogunmola (his 
late master) who both left a name behind them, and sons who 
upheld the fame and greatness of their father. To this end he 
sought occasion first against Ilori Ogunmgla's son, and then 
against Seriki lyapg, Ibikunle's son. If he could reduce these men 
who eclipsed himself in all that made for feudal greatness and 
glory, his own star would then shine undimmed. 

Further, he now undertook to organize a mihtary band for his 
own house, raising some of the principal slaves to power and 
greatness, some of them commanding from 400 to 1,000 soldiers 
each, horse and foot ; and accumulated also a vast store of ammuni- 
tion in his own house. Also he put up his eldest son as a rival 
to the other Mggajis in the town, and organized a military band 
for him, and a guard consisting of the sons of the well-to-do men 
in the town. 

These doings of the Are did not escape the observation of the 
chiefs. It seemed to them that the Are wanted to perpetuate 
the administration of Ibadan in his own family, and they were 
determined to resist this with all their might. The Are on 
the other hand was much elated with his mihtary organization, 
and he made it clear that he was bent on an enterprise which he 
was determined to prosecute to a successful issue with or without 
the help of his chiefs. 



THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE SIXTEEN YEARS* WAR 415 

On the 25th of June, 1877, the Are declared at the meeting of the 
Town Council that as the Egbas first shut their gates against 
Ibadan since the 3rd of June they must now shut theirs against the 
Egbas, and 17 days hence commence hostilities. 

The chiefs one and all remonstrated with him against this 
enterprise, but he was obdurate. Messengers were despatched 
to their neighbours the Ijebus, Ilorins, the Ijesas, Ekitis and Ifes 
telling them of the impending struggle and requesting their co- 
operation. The casus belli were stated as follows : — 

1. That they only performed an act of loyalty towards the King 
by sending to Porto Novo to bring home ammunition he had bought 
there, when the Egbas refused to sell to them. 

2. They never trespassed on Egba territory, nor gave any cause 
of offence to any, and yet the Egbas resented their action by closing 
their roads against Oyos forbidding all trade and intercourse with 
them. 

3. Hundreds of their people who went to Abegkuta for trade 
had been stolen and sold into slavery which alone gave them the 
right to demand redress. 

But before the return of the messengers the Egba chiefs sent 
their ambassadors headed by one Leasu to negotiate peace and 
on the I2th of July, 1877, a full meeting was convened to hear them. 
But Leasu proved himself most unfit to play the part entrusted 
to him ; he spoke disrespectfully and in an impertinent manner, 
addressing the Are by name, but his own head chief by his title 
Alatise. The chiefs were indignant at this and the Seriki lyapo 
at once confronted him with " You ought rather be gone as you 
are most unfit to discharge the duties of a messenger. Why did 
you not call your own chief Ogudipe by name but by his title Alatise, 
but our own chief you keep calling by name Latosisa ? That is 
his name true, but he has a title and he is the ruler of this town. 
If you cannot do him respect we will show you the gate." 

Leasu had to leave the town the next day without a reply to 
his message. 

Whilst the chiefs were for negotiation, the Are was bent on 
hostiUties. He found in this affair a plausible pretext for a thing he 
had long premeditated to carry out, viz., the subjugation of Abeo- 
kuta as the first step towards bringing the whole country again 
under one head. 

Seeing the storm brewing the native missionaries in a body 
interviewed him and endeavoured to dissuade him from prosecuting 
his mad project. They pointed out to him that the thing could not 
be done, as the Egbas were well supphed with breach-loading guns 
which are terrible weapons of precision, whilst he had none. He 



4l6 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

laughingly replied " And with muzzle-loading ones will I break 
them." They further remonstrated with him saying " Otg 
aladugbo ko dara " (warfare between neighbours is a great evil). 
He received them hitherto with his usual smiles and affabihty, 
extenuating his actions, etc., but now, all of a sudden (probably 
thinking they were moved thereto by the chiefs) he grew stern and 
resolute, not to say fierce (his Kakanfo blood seemingly flying 
into his head) and he said " I am going to perform a task which 
God has allotted to me to do, and those who say they shall see that 
I do not accomplish it will not live to see it done, as done it shall 
be, and when I have finished there shall be no more wars for 
ever in the Yoruba country." How truly prophetic his words 
turned out to be, but how differently from what he intended 
them to be. 

Kidnapping Expedition to the Egba farms. — The Are was as 
determined to commence hostilities as the chiefs were against 
it. Hence at the meeting of the Town Council on the 31st July, 
he said to the chiefs, " There is no subject for discussion to-day 
but you should all go home and prepare for a kidnapping expedition 
to the Egba farms to-morrow morning." The Balogun and the 
other chiefs were against the proposal, they said they were not 
prepared for such a big undertaking. But the Are coolly returned 
this ironical answer, " Very well, as you are not prepared you can 
have as much time at home as you wish, meantime I go, and perhaps 
by the time I return you may then be ready." This sarcastic 
reply was felt, and each one went home for a hasty preparation 
for the morrow. 

The Are led out the Ibadan host to the Egba farms on the 
ist August, and captured Atadi, and Alagbara, and pushed on as 
far as Arakanga behind the gates of Abeokuta, and captured a 
young bride there. The Egbas were not prepared for this. At 
the instance of Chief Ogundipe they were about to send another 
ambassador to undo the mischief done by Leasu, but this attack 
on their farms and villages put an end to their pacific intentions. 

As it was now evident that war was inevitable, the Ijebus to 
show on which side their sympathy lay, recalled their Agurin at 
Ibadan, a sign of declaration of war. 

The Are with reference to Abeokuta said " Too large for a close 
siege but for that reason the more vulnerable to famine." His 
plan was to swoop down on the farms now and again, cut off 
supplies, prevent cultivation, and thus reduce the place by 
famine. Hence in his expeditions, the main object was to destroy 
foodstuffs, fire the barns, cut down standing corn, chop in pieces 
yam and other tuberous foodstuffs. 



THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE SIXTEEN YEARS* WAR 417 

The second expedition was known as " Igbe Igbin " (the Igbin 
expedition), because some of the Ibadan soldiers encountered 
Igbin an Egba war chief. But the Ibadan war-chiefs had made a 
compact among themselves not to fight, but leave the brunt of 
everything to the Are alone ; therefore when they reached the 
farms they located themselves at short distances from one another, 
leaving Aturu the Balogun's head slave to lead the men in search 
of prey. There was no chief with them when Igbin attacked 
them vigorously and pursued them a great distance until they 
reached the vicinity of the Seriki's location when he sent a body 
of men to drive back the pursuers. Aturu also ralHed those within 
his reach, and led them back safe. 

This second expedition was less beneficial to them than the first. 

§ 3. Insurrection Against the Are, and the Death 
OF Seriki Iyapo 

The aversion of the chiefs to this war grew stronger every day, 
and so also did the obstinacy of the Are. 

Being bound by a sense of duty to follow him wherever he went, 
the plot they had made, viz : to take advantage of whatever 
chance may bring within their reach, but to leave all the fighting 
to be done by the Are and his slaves, did not prevent the latter 
from prosecuting his mad resolve. So then the chiefs in order to 
put an end to this undesirable war were determined to rise against 
the Are, and make an end of him and with him of the war. For 
this purpose they met at a given signal in the dead of night on the 
ist October, 1877, in the Ogboni house at the Basorun's market. 
There they took a solemn oath of secrecy and mutual confidence 
and ratified the same by spUtting of kola nuts and the slaughter 
of a ram, each of them taking his portion home. But they were 
not all faithful to one another. Solalu the Osi Seriki a notorious 
tale-bearer went that very night and divulged the whole secret 
to the Are. Ilori the Osi also who but lately had incurred the Are's 
displeasure had not the courage to go the whole length with them, 
fearing the consequences to himself in case of failure ; he also 
went secretly and exposed the plot. The majority of the rest of 
them, knowing this, followed suit, each one to save himself, but the 
Balogun and the Seriki considered it infra dig., so to betray them- 
selves. 

At a general meeting on the 2nd of October, the Are told them 
what he had heard : they all denied it one after another. But 
the Are told them that he trusted none of them not even those 
who professed loyalty to him, he was sure that with a better 
prospect they would all kick against him. 



4l8 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The matter was suppressed for the time being, but in less than a 
month it broke out again. The insurrection was fixed for the ist 
of November but the secret was divulged again by the notorious 
Solalu. 

The Arg was terribly ill at ease. Before the morning of the ist 
November he had left home for his farm with his slaves armed. 
Some surmised that it was his intention to escape from Ibadan, 
but where to go to ? He had offended all their great neighbours. 
Restless in the farm, he returned to town. He made little account 
of all the chiefs except theBalogun and the Seriki each of whom was 
a match for him. In his perplexity he resorted to Chief Mosaderin 
the brother of the Balogun, with two slaves and valuable presents, 
begging him to use his influence with the Balogun for good on 
his behalf. He succeeded. Chief Mosaderin called his brother 
and remonstrated with him, " What have you as compared 
with the Are in slaves or wealth to satisfy the greedy appetite 
of Ibadan chiefs ? If he is overthrown to-day it will devolve 
upon you to-morrow to assume the reins of government, and 
it will not be long before the same measure is meted out to you. 
And the Seriki with whom you are in league, have you forgotten 
that he was the one aspiring to your title when the Are threatened 
lately to depose you ? Will you be able to manage him if you 
become the Bale and he the Balogun ? Remember that his father 
was a native of Ogbomgso and descended from an Esq. He will 
soon aspire to become a Kakanfo as by right, and what is to become 
of you then ? " 

In this way Mosaderin won the Balogun over to the Are and 
on the latter 's return from his farm the Balogun called on him in 
the evening. 

The Are, almost beside himself with joy, greeted him with " Aye 
my brother and companion in arms, you have almost done for me ! " 
Having won over the Balogun he was determined not to spare the 
Seriki. The latter hearing that the Balogun called on the Ar§ 
called also himself the next day, but the Are refused to see him. 
He returned home under a shower of stones from the Are's slaves. 

Seeing that evil was determined against the Seriki the' other 
chiefs tried to interpose on his behalf, 'but the Are was resolute. 
He was determined to rid himself of one whose power and 
influence had always made him uneasy. 

On the 4th of November the Are declared that he pardoned him, 
but this was a ruse to get him into his power, for he instructed 
his slaves to shoot him down, when he least expected danger. 
The Seriki who had friends amongst the Are's slaves heard of it 
and never committed himself into his hands. The Are could not 



THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE SIXTEEN YEARS' WAR 4I9 

treat him, however, as he treated the late Aijenku, and all measures 
adopted to get at him and kill him suddenly, failed. So he had 
recourse to depriving him of his brave men. He deposed him 
from his title conferring the same on Ajayi Osungbekun his Otun. 
The notorious Solalu the Osi Seriki he made the Otun. Amowo 
one of lyapo's brave men he made the Osi Seriki, lyapo's Bada 
he made his own, and so of all his principal fighting men, thereby 
weakening his hands if he meant to fight, and having done this 
he sent to him to die. 

Ajaja, however, was reluctant to supersede his chief, so the 
Are sent to him to take with him One wife, one horse and one 
groom and leave the town. 

On lyapo hearing this he sent at once to Ajayi advising him 
to accept the title. " I know that I afn a doomed man," said he 
" and I must not involve you in my ruin ; as for me, my father 
was an Eso and I was bom an Esg, and like an Eso I will die." 
He summoned his brothers together, and gave them his last 
charge, all being present excepting Akintola the next to him. He 
distributed his property to his sons and daughters, left directions 
about the family property (to which he added something) and how 
to keep up the glory of the house and their father's name, etc. 
In the meantime he ordered his grave and his coffin to be prepared, 
and having inspected and approved of both, and having thus set 
his house in order, on the evening of the 17th November, 1877, 
this young and brave general entered his bedroom, and put an 
end to his life I 

When the news got abroad, the consternation and agitation 
in the town were indescribable. All the young Mogajis lyapo's 
comrades quaked and trembled. They combined and took a solemn 
oath of mortal hatred of the Are for the death ,of lyapo 
and a determination to avenge it. They agreed never to win for 
him a battle, or conquer a hamlet until he was dead and gone. 
Thus the Are by putting an end to the life of such brave men as 
Aijenku and lyapo started the decadence of Ibadan military 
power. His chief motive was a selfish one, to immortalize his own 
name and exalt his family never taking into account what provi- 
dence may have decreed for him. 

The Succession of Akintola 

After the death of lyapo, Akintola his brother succeeded him 
as the head of the house but of course not to his title nor to any 
public title at all, as the Arg was determined to diminish if not 
extinguish the glory of Ibikunle's house. That quarter of the 
town of which that house was the centre was broken up, all the 



420 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

strong chiefs therein being assigned to several petty chiefs so that 
Akintola was left with no following and had none to depend upon 
but his father's slaves. But all the same he felt that none was equal 
to him among all the chiefs in that quarter and that the prestige 
of his father's house was in no way obliterated, he knew that the 
" Lion of the Master of Camps" will one day arise and shake 
up himself in all his former power ; but for the present he had to 
bow to the inevitable. 

§ 4. Further Raiding Expedition on Egba Farms. 

On the 19th November, 1877, the Balogun was sent out to 
raid the Egba farms and he ravaged those that lay near the Ijebus. 
On the 28th December, he went northwards against those that lay 
in the direction of Iberekodo and an attempt was even made to 
capture a village called Ogatedo at the confluence of the Oyan 
and Ofiki rivers. But the rivers were swollen and the Ibadans 
having waded waist deep were compelled to retreat before the 
steady fire of the men of the place, who posted themselves behind 
the large trees growing along the side of the river, and prevented 
their gaining the opposite bank. The Balogun being ill in the 
camp they could not renew their efforts. The expedition returned 
home on the 17th of January, 1878, the Balogun being borne on 
a litter. 

A Nine Days' Raiding Expedition 

On the Balogun 's recovery from his illness the Are proposed 
another expedition and was determined to make a longer stay 
in the Egba farms this time and thus draw them out to a fight. 
Hitherto the raids lasted only three days each time and only the 
Ibadan war-chiefs were concerned, but now he proposed inviting 
outside help as well. For that purpose he sent the Otun to clear 
the road leading to Arawo, that is a place midway between Ibadan 
and Abeokuta on the caravan route. He also invited the war- 
chiefs of Ife, Modakeke and other subject towns. He could not 
count upon the complete loyalty of the Ibadan war-chiefs because 
of their opposition to this enterprise, and because he knew how 
deeply he had offended most of them ; bjit he knew the courage 
and intrepidity of the Ifes and relied more on them. The expedi- 
tion left Ibadan on the 24th of March, 1878 and encamped next 
day at Alakisa a few miles beyond Arawo. Having this for their 
base they ravaged the farms on the right as far as Iber§kodo, and 
on the left as far as they could go. They lived on the spoils of 
the farm and destroyed the rest, setting the barns on fire. The 
Egbas however, did not show their faces, but contented themselves 



THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE SIXTEEN YEARS' WAR 42I 

with bravely manning their walls against any attack. The Ife 
army arrived on the 28th and joined them in the field. 

At the end of nine days the Are summoned a council and 
announced that as the Egbas did not take up the challenge and 
come out for a fight, they should take a roundabout course and 
capture Osiele before they returned home. He was opposed by 
the whole of the Ibadan war-chiefs without exception . They alleged : 

1. That they were already exhausted by this 9 days useless 
exposure. 

2. That Osiele not being taken into account before they left 
home, they had not first consulted the gods nor offered propitia- 
tory sacrifices as they usually did before attacking a town. 

3. That to go to Osiele from where they were was too risky and 
inadvisable, because they would leave rear and base exposed 
to attack by the Egbas should they undertake to attack them 
by way of Atadi. If Osiele is to be taken why not go home first 
and make a direct attack from home by a route shorter and safer ? 
The Are repHed " You had better go and reconsider what you 
intend to do, as for me, my mind is made up. I am decided, 
and if there remain only my slaves and Ayikiti the Ife General and 
the Modak§ke people with me, I shall take Osiele." 

■ The chiefs retired, but to strengthen the plot against him. They 
agreed to follow but only to witness how he and his slaves with the 
Ife and Modakeke people would take Ogiele. In the meantime 
private messages had gone to apprise the Egbas of the impending 
assault on Osiele. The Ibadan war-chiefs also let their men 
know that they were not obliged to stand by their masters, nor 
to stay and fight in case of an attack, but as for themselves they 
were bound by their office not to desert the Are. Before daybreak 
on the 1st of April they had started for Osiele. 

The Osiele army met them at a great distance from their home, 
and without firing a shot those who led the van of the Ibadan 
army melted away, bringing the Are himself and his principal 
war-chiefs face to face with the enemy. Only their bodyguards 
remained with the chiefs, their fighting men had all gone. The 
Are and his slaves threw themselves into the attack vigorously, 
and in the first attack, about 300 of them became hors de combat 
in dead and wounded. Nothing daunted, a second onslaught was 
made and about 200 became hors de combat. The Are's slaves 
now perceived that the brunt of the fighting was left for them alone 
to bear, and suspected it was a plot to annihilate them, therefore 
they also gave way. The Ife and Modakeke people quickly took 
in the situation and they themselves gave way, leaving only the 
Are and his principal war-chiefs with their bodyguards. None 



422 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

of the war-chiefs deserted the Are so that no one could be accused 
of cowardice. The chiefs knew the risks they were running 
by thus exposing themselves to be enveloped and taken but 
they could not have done otherwise; that was the only way to 
accompUsh their plot and bring the Are to reason. 

It is now evident the day was lost, and as the Are began to 
retreat the rush became general and the Egbas pressed hard in 
pursuit. The camp was a long way off, nearly a day's journey, 
and hundreds died of thirst. The Are and the veterans about him 
retreated in good order, or let us rather say were allowed to retreat 
in good order, for if Ogundipe and the Egba war-chiefs had deter- 
mined to press hard in pursuit the Ibadan army would have been 
annihilated, but the war-chiefs on either side knew secretly the 
game they were playing. About 2 p.m. the Are expressed a desire 
to say his afternoon prayers. " By all means," said the Balogun 
" you can do so." The Balogun then dismounted and expanding 
his arms in the direction of the pursuers he said to them " Fire all 
your shots here." But Sanusi the Are's eldest son and Idagana 
one of his principal slaves threw themselves forward and kept' 
the Egba pursuers at bay until the Are had said his prayers ; 
and once on the saddle again they retreated hastily. The 
casualties on the whole were slight. Sanusi was wounded in the 
lip, the Balogun lost a favourite servant in this campaign, and the 
Mogaji of the late Chief Bioku was captured by the Egbas. The 
wreck of the expedition returned home on the 2nd of April, 1878. 

The Are was greatly disappointed, especially in his own slaves. 
He said he had thought that come what might he could always count 
upon a thousand at least to stand by him for weal or woe, but 
alas he was deserted. However, he comforted himself with this 
reflection : " There is no one who may not suffer a defeat, for 
even the prophet of God (Mahomet) suffered a defeat." 

After this all the interior war-chiefs returned to their homes but 
Ayikiti and the Ife war-chiefs. Several offices had to be filled 
among them. Also the office of the Owoni of Ife was vacant by 
the death of Ayikiti's father, and he was desirous of succeeding 
him. The Ifes, however, were for another prince and not Ayikiti, 
but he so pressed his claims that the Are had to give in, and so on 
the 8th April after titles had been arranged for all vacancies in 
the Ife chieftaincies, messengers from the Ibadan chiefs followed 
Ayikiti home to crown him the Owoni of Ife. 

Another Raid. — The Are, however, was not dispirited by the 
defeat and failure to capture Osiele, he sent the Otun out again to 
clear the direct route via the Agangan hill. In the meantime 
he was carrying on a private negotiation with the Ijebus for 



THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE SIXTEEN YEARS' WAR 423 

a treaty of friendship and commerce working chiefly through 
the Ijebus resident at Ibadan and the Ij§bu Remos. But the 
answer of the Awujale of the Ijebus was insolent, bidding the Ar§ 
first to be on friendly terms with the Egbas, the AlAfin, the Ijesas 
and the Ifes, and when he saw the messengers of the heads of these 
states he would reconsider his relations with Ibadan. The Ibadan 
chiefs hearing this reply were so enraged at its insolence that they 
were willing to yield to the Are's determination that the reply to 
the Awujale should take a practical form by sending the Balogun 
to ravage the Egba farms. Although they held a different view 
from their chief in this matter of Abeokuta yet they could not 
brook any insults to him from outside. They marched out on 
the 2oth of May, 1878. 

§ 5. The Revolt of the Ekiti Tribes 

The Ekiti tribes who had long been groaning under the yoke 
of the Ibadans, seized the opportunity of the latter being involved 
in compHcations with the Egbas and Ijebus to rebel against them. 
Adey^a, prince of Ila, Fabunmi and Odeyale both of Mesin- 
Oloja-Oke, allied themselves together to commence hostilities 
against the Ibadans. 

Their first act of rebellion was to seize all Oyos (Yorubas proper) 
residing peacefully amongst them with their famiUes. They killed 
some, and the rest they sold into slavery. Then they collected 
together a large number of hen coups, and skulls of cattle, set them 
up as fetish, and offered to them sacrifices of human beings, the 
victims being (i) The Ibadan messengers that oppressed them so 
much ; (2) and the Ajeles (pohtical residents) of the Ibadan chiefs 
among them ; fowls and cattle being the chief articles of diet these 
messengers generally demanded from them. The massacre at 
Ila alone was estimated at about 1,000 human beings ! 

The Ijesas of Ilesa who had more than once come into colHsion 
with the Ibadans before, were rather wary and felt very reluctant 
to join this coaUtion ; indeed they were frequently seized with 
panic from false rumours of the approach of the Ibadans, so that 
Ilesa itself was more than once deserted from this cause. There 
were good reasons for this however. One was the transport of 
ammunition from Ibadan to Mgsin Ipole, a town which had not 
then thrown off its cdlegiance, but this was in order to settle between 
two brothers a dispute which had risen to undue proportions and 
in which an armed intervention had become necessary. 

The other was that Ayikiti the Owoni lately crowned by the 
Are for the Ifes captured some Ijesa towns, viz., Ipindun, Ife 
v/krk, and Osu in order to possess himself of the wherewith to 



424 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

defray the expenses of his coronation. All these gave rise to the 
panic at Ilesa. 

On the i6th June news reached Ibadan that the Ilgrins had 
joined the coalition against them, and the King of Ilorin was 
said to have sent the following message to the Are of Ibadan. 
" If a man's wife deserted him, and afterwards repented and 
came back to him, is not the husband justified in receiving her 
back " The Are's replj' was " Yes he is, but let the husband 
beware of what he may contract from the whore." The key to the 
parable is this : — When the Fulanis overran the northern Yoruba 
territories, the Ilorins became masters of the Ekiti provinces also ; 
but when the Ibadans rose to power the Ekitis transferred their 
allegiance to them. But now they are disposed to return to their 
" first love " and thus are compared to an erring wife returning to 
her former husband. The meaning of the Ibadan reply is obvious, 
the Ilorins may thereby involve themselves in a war of which they 
may have cause to regret. The Are took no heed of the rebellion, 
but was prosecuting his desultory warfare with the Egbas. 

On the 23rd of June, there was a terrible conflagration at Ibadan; 
the Balogun and Seriki in whose quarters the fire broke out went 
to arrest its progress, but unfortunately, before they reached home, 
sparks from the flames had set their own houses on fire. Every 
preparation having been made for an expedition to the Egba 
farms, it was thought that it would be postponed, but early next 
morning (June 24th) whilst the embers were still smouldering, 
the Balogun 's drum was heard on its way to the Egba farms. 
This expedition returned on the evening of the 26th June bringing 
about 40 captives. 

On the 14th of July another expedition went out under Ali the 
Otun, the Are sending Kupolu with him, but they were not as 
successful as the last. 

The people of Ila afterwards got alarmed at their own acts, and 
began to be afraid of the consequences. They therefore sent on the 
i6th July ambassadors to Ibadan to make amends, and to sue 
for peace ; but these were roughly received and were sent back 
home to prepare for the worst. Upon this the Ekitis sent no 
more to Ibadan but took further steps to strengthen their alliances 
and put their defences in order. 

The confederates now aimed at wresting from the Ibadans 
all their subject towns including Oyo towns under their protection 
from Ikirun to Iwo, and limit the Ibadan territories to the river 
Oba, that is the natural limits of their farms in that direction. 
It soon became evident that the Ifes had joined them, because 
their only safe route to Benin for ammunition via Oke Igbo became 



THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE SIXTEEN YEARS WAR 425 

unsafe from kidnappers ; but the people of Modakeke being Oyos 
and not Ifes refused to join the coalition knowing that the 
destruction of Ibadan would be their own ruin, as the Ifes were 
ever hostile to them, but remained quiet for fear of the 
Ibadans. 

On the 19th August news reached Ibadan that the Ekiti 
allies had marched against Igbajg. Igbajo is a border town and 
as its name implies contains a mixed population of Oygs, Ijesas, 
Ekitis and other clans. In its physical aspect it is like the rest of 
the Ekiti towns but the rulers and principal inhabitants were Oyos 
and cdl were Oyos in sympathy. They maintained their allegiance 
to Ibadan refusing to join the coalition. Hence the resolve to 
remove them out of the way before marching on the nearest genuine 
Oyo town — Ikirun. 

Not even did this news move the Are. He sent the Balogun 
to ravage the Egba farms on the other side of the Ogun river, not 
only because those on this side had been utterly despoiled, but 
also because he meant further to straighten Abeokuta, and more 
especially to be in touch with Porto Novo in order to procure 
ammunition. He took Ogatedo by an assault, and from Meko 
he sent on the caravans that accompanied him to Porto Novo 
for ammunition and salt, and the Seriki to escort them beyond 
the danger zone, and there to await their return. 

On hearing that the army of the Egbas was out to waylay his 
caravans, the Balogun formed links from his base at Mekg right 
on to the Seriki's post for mutual defence ; the Otun and Osi 
being placed within easy reach of the Seriki, and then his own 
division under Aderibigbe the Mogaji of the late Bale Olugbode, 
and a part under his own brother Mosaderin, and his eldest son 
Babalola and his head slave Jato. 

This last division considered themselves practically secure ; hence 
they neglected all precautions, placed no sentinels and were com- 
pletely off their guard. It was this division the Egbas surprised 
and attacked. They were dispersed, and Kurakura the Hausa 
slave of Chief Ogundeyi of Abeokuta hotly pursued after Aderi- 
bigbe and would have caught him, but that the latter was a 
splendid rider and was well mounted on a powerful steed. It was 
late in the afternoon when the Otun and his companions hearing 
the continuous report of musketry at their rear contrary to expect- 
ation came up with their forces, and drove the Egbas away and 
once more cleared the road. 

The Balogun before leaving Meko sent a kidnapping expedition 
to the Ketu farms, a part of which was successful ; but the Ketus, 
being well acquainted with their country, took by-paths, attacked 



426 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the kidnappers and rescued their people. Several Ibadans were 
caught, but most of them escaped to Meko and Ibadan. 

But whilst all this was going on in the South-west the scene in 
the North-east was one of dreadful carnage. The Igbajos defended 
themselves heroically and repelled the enemy more than once ; at 
the second instance the Egugun Chief Priest of Ila was caught and 
slain. But the allies were reinforced and returned to the attack. 

On appeal to Ibadan for help Osuntoki the Maye of Ibadan 
was sent with a small force to assist Igbajo, but it was found that 
the Are underrated the strength of the coalition. Igbajo could 
hold out no longer, Maye was obliged to retreat with the Igbajos 
to Ikirun, with the allies at their heels, laying siege to Ikirun. 

The King of Ilorin now sent out his forces under the command 
of Ajia to join the allies at the siege of Ikirun with instructions 
to sweep all Oyo towns, right on to the river Oba at the confines of 
the Ibadan farms, that is to say, to take Ikirun, Osogbo, Ed§ and 
I wo with their villages. 

The Ilorins commenced operations at Otan a village near Ikirun, 
and at the onset met with an ominous disaster. The people of 
this village hearing of their approach deserted the place and hid 
themselves among the craggy rocks surrounding the village. 
The Ilorins finding no one to oppose them flew to the spoils, 
and thus engaged, the men of Otan came in and set on them sla5dng 
many ; only a few of those who entered the town made good their 
escape, and that with great difl&culty. The Ilorins receiving 
reinforcement from home laid siege also against Ikirun. Thus was 
Ikirun hemmed in nearly on all sides by the Ilorins, the Ekitis 
and Ila, with the Ijesas, and the inhabitants were obliged to defend 
themselves within their walls, and the thickets surrounding the 
town. 

The small Ibadan contingent at Ikirun reported matters at 
home but no help was speedily forthcoming, as theBalogun, with 
the flower of the Ibadan army had not yet returned from Meko. 
On the 14th of October, 1878 the Ibadan expedition returned home. 
The Balogun was ordered to make a hasty preparation and march 
out in five days. 



Chapter XXIV 

CONFLICTS IN THE NORTH 

§ I. The Celebrated Battle of Ikirun Otherwise Called — 
" The Jalumi War " 

The Are of Ibadan at this crisis hastily filled up one or two gaps 
in the ranks of the chiefs. Oranyan was worshipped on the 20th 
October and the standard of war immediately marched northwards 
to the seat of carnage. It was a most unfavourable time for the 
army to march out, as it was the time of the latter rains. The rivers 
were unusually full, and unhappily many of the soldiers found a 
watery grave in the overswollen Oba and Osun rivers before ever 
they came in sight of the enemy. 

The expedition was altogether a trying one for the Balogun, for 
the Are even in this hour of danger recklessly continued to practise 
those short-sighted, suicidal policies of his which tended to weaken 
the power of Ibadan, thus showing a great lack of statesmanship. 
He slyly tried to handicap the Balogxm by making the Osi his 
rival. To this young man already of considerable importance 
he assigned most of his own war-chiefs and his fighting slaves, and 
also all the fighting men of the late Seriki lyapo his old rival. 
Intoxicated with such honours conferred upon him, the Osi looked 
down upon the Balogun ; he not only refused to obey orders, 
but often dictated his wish to the Balogun. Happily the latter 
was a man of great experience, of consummate tact, and marvellous 
resources ; he would readily yield in minor points as of no great 
importance in order to maintain peace and harmony at this 
crisis. Twice before they reached Ikirun he claimed in advance 
from the Balogun a reward for the victory that he would achieve, 
for he was confident that the honour of the victory would be his. 
At each time the Balogun sent him 10 heads of cowries. It must 
be added, however, that he was scarcely ever sober during the 
expedition. The free use of spirituous liquors was considered at 
this time the acme of pleasure and mark of greatness ; spirits being 
at this period beyond the reach of poor men. 

At Osogbo the Osi deeply offended the principal slaves that 
formed his body guard, and on whom he depended at the supreme 
hour of danger, by disfiguring two of them with facial marks for 
an offence of seizing things from people in the market by way of 
privilege. The big slaves interceded in vain. They pleaded for 

427 



428 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

any other punishment but that, but he gave them no heed, the 
culprits were marked with two gashes on either cheek from the 
top of the head to the chin. This action they were determined 
to revenge whenever opportunity offered. 

At Osogbo, he also related to those about him a dream he had 
in which he saw his late father Ogunmola and his brother Osun. 
He felt rather uncomfortable thereat, and was. ad vised to offer 
sacrifices to them. This he did with a horse and a cow. 

Meanwhile at Ikirun matters were growing from bad to worse. 
The last battle fought before the arrival of the Ibadans was on the 
30th October, 1878, in which the Ikiruns were hemmed in on all 
sides, and they had to fight within the town walls. Balogun 
Ogboriefgn with the Ibadan forces at last entered Ikirun on 
Thursday the 31st October. It was said that the Akirun, Oyebode 
the chief ruler of Ikirun, when he saw the Ibadan forces marching 
into the town for his succour was so overcome with joy that he 
could only say to the Balogun " Ajayi, are you come ? I am almost 
done for." The Balogun replied, " Take courage, take courage, 
we are come, your deliverance is at hand." 

The Balogun of Ibadan now learnt from the Ikiruns the situation 
of affairs. The allies were in three different camps. The Ilorins 
under the command of Ajia were encamped by themselves North- 
eastwards, near the Ikirun farms ; the Has and Ekitis together 
not very far off from the Ilorins under Prince Adeyala of Ila, 
and Fabunmi of Oke Mesin respectively, and the Ijesas under 
their generals Ayimoro and Ogunmodede eastwards. These 
last had in the meantime captured the small town of Iba near 
Ikirun and were encamped within its walls. Iba we may mention 
was the paternal town of Osuntoki the Maye of Ibadan (afterwards 
Bale) who headed the contingent for the relief of Igbajo. 

From these three points the foes marched in the day of battle, 
and attacked Ikirun on all sides. 

At a council of war held the very day of their arrival the Balogun 
of Ibadan proposed to give the men one or two days' rest, the 
journey from Ibadan being tedious on account of the incessant 
rains and the privations they endured, and then to march against 
the confederates. The Osi again opposed the Balogun. He was 
to march at once the next day " before the allies are aware of our 
arrival ; " and if the Balogun will not go, he will. " To-morrow," 
said the Balogun " will be Friday, and Fridays being unlucky days 
it is not likely the allies will attack us, and the men may as well 
have some rest." 

The Osi again objected, and the Balogun yielded the point. 
Then again the Balogun in ordering the battle proposed to divide 



CONFLICTS IN THE NORTH 429 

the Ibadan army into two parts, one led by himself against the 
armies of the Ilorins and the Ekitis encamping not very far off 
from each other, especially as he had been told that was the 
strongest part ; and the other under the Osi to go against the Ijesas 
encamping eastwards at Iba. Again the Osi objected. " The Ilorins 
and the Ekitis lie to the left of us," said he, " and I am the com- 
mander of the left, to the left therefore I go." " Very good," 
replied the Balogun " You can have your own way." 

As the Osi commanded nearly the half of the whole Ibadan forces, 
there was no reason why he should not accomplish successfully 
what he proposed to do, provided he acted with reason and 
judgment. 

Those about him reported that he was restless and sleepless 
all night, he ate little but drank much, and it had been so since 
their arrival at Osogbo. He emptied a bottle of gin before 
ordering his horse to be saddled long before daybreak. He 
marched out of the town by the Northern (O^a) gate, long before 
his war-chiefs including Akintgla were ready. He dismounted and 
halted a while before dawn behind the town wall until some of his 
men came and then he proceeded ; the others had to hurry after 
him one after another as each was ready. 

The Balogun at dawn with the Otun marched out by the eastern 
or Oba'gun gate leading past the ancient village of that name, along 
the fine road that leads to the town of Iba where the Ijesas were 
then encamped. 

The Osi's route lay for about three miles along the highway to 
the north, then it verged towards the right nearly at right angles 
along a farm road,a high range of mountains parallel to this separat- 
ing the forces of the Osi from those of the Balogun. About three 
miles along this farm road the Ilorin camp could be descried on 
the left hand side, situated on a hill on the other side of a morass, 
but approachable by a ford which lay about a mile further on, 
which point was more directly near the Ekiti camp. Those of 
Osi's men who had gone before went straight along to this ford, 
but the Osi wishing to take a short cut to the Ilorin camp left the 
road and went by a bush path and through farms with the intention 
of attacking the Ilorins on both sides at once. This after-thought 
he never communicated to those before. Many of his war- 
chiefs coming on after him went straight on along the road not 
knowing that he had left it for a bush path straight for the Ilorin 
camp. 

The Ekitis were surprised to see the Ikiruns out against them 
but the reason soon became evident, they had been reinforced. 
Those who went early to the stream were driven back at the sight 
Q 



430 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

of the Ikiruns, and they reported to the camp the advance of the 
enemy. 

Fabumi and his colleagues attacked them vigorously and over- 
powered them ; they were surprised at not seeing their chief 
and no reinforcement coming up to their aid, so they were driven 
back and dispersed. Fabumi pursued them till he came to the 
spot where Ilori the Osi took to the bush path, and this was pointed 
out to him. By that time Ilori had attacked the Ilorins and 
had repelled those out against him, and was pressing hard to capture 
the camp when he heard the sound of Akintola's drum coming 
up behind him " Kiriniun Onibudo," " Kiriniun Onihudo." He 
sent a mounted messenger to greet Akintola and to say "You are 
rather late in coming, I had almost entered the Ilorin camp, 
however, you are welcome." 

But the messenger never returned, and Ilori 's men noticed that 
the rolling of the drum was not perfect in style, they therefore 
suspected treachery and communicated their fears to their master. 
But he rephed "Who else can it be ? Is not that Akintola's war- 
cry Ki-ri-ni-un Oni-budo ? " When too late, he discovered the 
treachery. Fabumi of Oke Mesin it was who was counterfeiting 
the war-cry of Akintola, who had been left behind. 

It was at such a crisis like this that his guards would have stood 
by him to a man and kept the enemy at bay until relief should 
come from those he left behind ; but he had insulted those trusty 
servants and this was their time of revenge. He was helped to his 
horse, but at best he was not a good rider, and his head had 
become muddled by drink. The horse soon got entangled in a yam 
field and fell down, and the illustrious Ilori was taken alive and 
conducted to the Ilorin camp ! At the camp he was stripped of 
everything he had on, a rag being given him to wrap across himself 
and was kept in a room under close supervision. One Koiditan 
a renegade from Ibadan betrayed his personality to the Ilorins, 
and they in ecstasies of joy at the capture of so illustrious a prisoner 
gave themselves up to feasting and enjoyment for the day, appre- 
hending no further trsuble. The Ikiruns sadly disappointed 
at this turn of events were ready to stone the Ibadans, they insulted 
them to their face saying to them " We could not drive them away 
indeed, but we never suffered so ignominious a defeat as this, 
and what is the good of you ? " 

So the Osi's men were scattered, many of them fleeing back to 
the town met those just coming out, and together they fled 
back to Ikirun. 

But some of them instead of retracing their steps to Ikirun went 
across the mountain range to the other side and told the Balogun 



CONFLICTS IN THE NORTH 431 

what had happened. They met him in the thick of the fight with 
the Ijesas, company after company on both sides marching to the 
fighting Hne, attacking each other furiously. As soon as the 
escaped arrived and reported " The Osi has been captured aUve 
and his army dispersed ! " The Balogun was startled ; but he 
was a man full of resources, and endued with remarkable presence 

of mind " Sh " said he to the men, " say nothing of this to 

any one as you value your lives." He quickly called about half-a- 
dozen of his slaves, and bade them roll themselves in the dust 
—they did so. He then bade one of his servants " bind them hand 
to neck as men captured in battle and take them to the Otun 
tvith my compHments, and say Ilgri has entered the Ilorin camp, 
here are captives that he sent us. What are we doing ? " He then 
sent a message to Babalola his eldest son saying " I can see what 
your younger brother is doing but goodness alone knows what 
you are doing ; be careful, lest I disinherit you in favour of him." 
Just then a company of Ijesas were coming to the attack, but 
instead of another company of Ibadans meeting them in the 
fighting Une, he threw his whole force suddenly upon them and 
overwhelmed them. He ordered that everyone be put to the 
sword, and they were all massacred. They had scarcely done this 
when another company was coming gaily on to relieve these. 
The Balogun ordered a feint retreat so as to allow the company 
to advance further before firing, so his men hastily retreated, and 
this retreat encouraged the Ijesas to advance forward. The Balogun 
meanwhile had his eyes on them to see the effect of the massacre. 
As soon as the Ijesa company came up suddenly on their 
massacred comrades, finding them wallowing in their blood, 
they stood stock still, panic stricken. The Balogun noting this 
at once ordered a general charge " Omo Ibadan, e gba efi ti won." 
(Ibadan boys, up and at them). " E ma je won o Ig — " (let not 
one escape) at once rang throughout the whole army, and the 
panic stricken Ijesas gave way, the panic spread throughout their 
army, and the Balogun followed them up foot to foot into the town 
of Iba where they were encamped, and Iba was retaken. The 
bulk of the Ijesas fell into his hands. He then issued that heart- 
rending, never to be forgotten order " Let no one stay for booty 
or captive, all prisoners must be slain at once, both will hamper us, 
the latter may prove treacherous." And so all the Ij§sas captured 
were put to the sword. It was a heartrending sight, for many of 
them were formerly slaves at Ibadan who ran away to enhst 
under the flag of rebelUon or of Uberty (from whatever point we 
view it). Old comrades, calUng each other by name craved for 
mercy. But the Balogun's orders rang out " Whosoever will not 



432 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

kill his captive, let him be killed with his captive." So all were 
massacred ! And then the Balogun immediately turned his face 
northwards towards the Ilorin camp without delay. As they 
marched along a body of Ekitis about i.ooo strong appeared on 
their right flank to attack them, but the Balogun neither noticed 
nor regarded them, notwithstanding all their efforts at firing ; 
they had to cease firing of their own accord, amazed at such a 
spectacle. There was but one thought uppermost in the Balogun's 
mind, and in that of every Ibadan soldier, viz., how to rescue 
Ilori the Osi. 

It was about 2 p.m., when the Ilorins heard the drum of the 
Balogun coming. " And who is that again ? " they asked, and 
were told " The Balogun." " Any other Balogun besides the one 
we captured this morning ? " they asked. They went out to meet 
the Ibadans, and within a short time, they were repulsed. The 
fine river that flowed by the town of Iba, flowed also along the 
foot of the hill where the Ekiti camp was situated, and from which 
they obtained water. That river loses itself in a morass here below 
the Ilorin camp, and the only spot where a ford was possible was 
along a winding stream breast deep at this season. The Ilorins 
having retreated to the other side held the Ibadans in check for a 
while on the other side of the morass. There they stood face to 
face, the attackers and the defenders. 

Chief Akintola, who we may remember was attached to the Osi's 
army, was left behind as we saw when that unfortunate chief 
rushed on before daybreak to his own fate. By the time he 
came up to his chief, the tragedy had taken place, and he was 
met by the fugitives defeated by Fabumi. He therefore retraced his 
steps back to Ikirun, and took the other route to join the Balogun. 
By the time he reached Iba, the Balogun had finished with the 
Ijesas and had cleared out of the place, and he had to follow in his 
track to where the battle was now raging. The Ibadan boys all 
but exhausted after the morning's fight and the day's march, 
encouraged at the sight of fresh troops were exhilarated by the in- 
spiriting air of Akintola's war cry, which the \yhole army took up 
with a swing " Kiriniun Onibudo Kiriniun Onibudo." Thus 
came up Akintola ; and stretching forth his hand across to the 
enemy, half turned on his saddle to his men he said " Awon ta 
nu ? Awon ta I'emba se ta nta ? " (and who are those ? Who are 
they with whom you are exchanging shots?) Immediately the 
Ibadan boys dashed into the morass, treading on one another 
they struggled across the quagmire and hurled themselves upon 
their foes. The Ilorins taken aback by this unexpected, this mad 
rush became completely demoralized and gave way. The Ibadans 



CONFLICTS IN THE NORTH 



433 




434 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

entered the Ilorin camp, captured a large number, put some to the 
sword and demolished the camp. All those who were captured 
in the morning with the Osi, speedily rejoined their comrades and 
made captives among their captors. The Osi's men were among 
the foremost to seek out their master, but alas, the worst had 
befallen him. When he heard the noise and tramp of the Ibadans 
within the Ilorin camp, he tried to make his escape ; he 
rushed out of his confinement and hid himself in a clump of 
fignut trees not far from the tent. The Ilgrins in their hasty 
flight did not forget the illustrious captive, but he could not be 
found until betrayed by a woman who saw him in his hiding 
place ; then a man with drawn sword rushed upon him and 
put him to death before he made good his own escape. The same 
fate befel several of the minor chiefs, Ilori's fighting men who 
were caught with him that morning. Ijesas and Ekitis who had 
lived at Ibadan and knew all these chiefs at sight easily pointed 
them out to the Ilorins. Koiditan the renegade and betrayer of 
the Osi was caught, and taken to Ikirun where he was subsequently 
tried and publicly executed. 

The Balogun then turned towards the Ekiti and Ila camp. It 
was evident that they had no longer any spirit of resistance left in 
them. By one assault that was taken also, and so the three camps 
were smashed on one and the same day by Balogun Ajayi Ogborie- 
fgn. The victory was decisive and complete, and Ikirun was 
saved. 

The Ofa people who had long been groaning under the yoke of 
Ilorin took this opportunity to throw off their yoke. They cut 
the bridge over the Otin river at the rear of the Ilorins, and when 
these in their flight came to the river now swollen, with the 
Ibadans at their heels, they rushed into it. Here thousands upon 
thousands of men, women and horses perished. The river at one 
point was said to be so choked with human bodies and carcases 
of horses that some fugitives who came later were able to escape 
upon corpses. Ajia the Ilorin commander-in-chief escaped 
with great difficulty with one of his favourite wives, but 
several Ilorin chiefs and well-to-do people were caught. Prince 
Adeyala of Ila fell among the slain but Fabumi of Oke 
Mesin managed to escape. The roads were said to be strewn 
all along with loads which the Ilorins could not carry in their 
hasty flight. The Ibadans pursued their victory right up to 
Erin about 8 miles from Ofa ; the head chiefs however remained 
at Ikirun. 

This event gave the name to this expedition " Ogun Jalumi," 
i.e. the rush-into-the-river war. 



conflicts in the north 435 

Notable Events of the Day 

1. Roti, Ilori's head slave and a very great favourite, with 
whom he was as a most intimate friend, eating out of the same 
dish and drinking out of the same cup, and from whom he was 
never parted, was in another part of the field that fatal morning 
when the disaster overtook his master. When he observed that 
something was wrong, he rode up hastily asking " Ilori da ? Ilori 
da ? " (And where is Ilori ?) The reply was " Ogun mu u lo " 
(taken by the enemy). He uttered one deep groan " O — h " 
He then bade his comrades farewell " Good-bye to you all, no home 
for me again." He drew his sword, put spurs to his horse and 
dashed into the midst of the Ilorins, slashing on the right and on the 
left, kilHng many before he fell among the slain. 

2. Akintola's drum played a most notable part in the day's 
business ; it won and lost for the Ilorins, it lost and won for the 
Ibadans. And here let us note a most remarkable instance of 
retributive justice. The trick now played upon Ilori by Fabiimi 
by which Ilori was captured was the same played by Ilori's father 
the famous Ogunmola upon the Ijayes after the Iwawun war. 
It will be remembered how on his return march he counterfeited 
the war cry of KurQmi of Ijaye, and in that way all Ijayes who 
had escaped into the mountains thinking their master was come to 
their rescue came down from their hiding places and fell a prey 
into his hands (vide Chap, xviii, page 349). The same trick was 
now played by Fabiimi on his son with fatal results. 

3. The Ife and Modakeke people who always joined the Ibadans 
in every expedition of theirs came up late this time after every- 
thing was over. The Ibadan boys taunted them to their face 
and accused them of intentional delay because of the formidable 
appearance of the war ; but said they " we have already shown 
that we can do without you." 

The If es never uttered a word of excuse, nor resented the remarks 
but followed up the chase and took Ilofa. (The fact was that the 
Ifes had secretly wished the issue to be otherwise in order to cast 
off their own yoke also ; and the Modakekes having their eyes on 
them would not leave them behind). They also joined in taking 
Omu, Erinmope, Gogo, etc., and the conquest was pursued up to 
Ekan. This was a small town but the men of that place were 
mostly hunters and sharp-shooters. They manned their walls 
so that the Ibadan boys failed to take it by assault. The Balogun 
hearing this sent Ali Laluwoye the Otun to their help. He was 
nearly a month in this small place and was content to reduce it by 
famine. They negotiated peace, sending valuable presents by 
Aturu who was sent to conclude a treaty with them. The Bale 



436 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

andBalogun of the place were sent by Ali to Ikirun to theBalogun 
of Ibadan to ratify the treaty. The Otun was thereupon recalled 
from the siege, to the great disgust of the Ibadan warboys who 
grumbled much against their unlucky and inefficient chief. 

The victory and its cost were reported at Ibadan simul- 
taneously on the 5th of November, so that the joy was greatly 
tempered with the painful loss they had sustained by the death 
of Ilori and his brave comrades. 

The Balogun received orders not to waste time to retaliate on the 
Ijesas or Ekitis as they would soon tender their submission. He 
was not to go beyond Ila, but rather to turn his face against Ilorin 
towns. 

On the i8th November the Ilorins sent ambassadors to Ibadan 
to sue for peace. The Are took occasion to remind them of the 
parable of the whorish wife returning to her husband and what 
he predicted would Hkely be the result. Knowing that their 
overtures were only for the purpose of redeeming their chiefs who 
were captured in the war, and kept as state prisoners, and still 
smarting under the loss of Ilori the Osi and his brave comrades, 
the Are and chiefs sent them back home without an answer. 

Whilst the Ibadans were rejoicing and mourning at the same 
time over the affairs in the north, the Egbas came to kidnap in 
their farms on the 22nd of December, and some farmers were 
carried off to Abeokuta. 

The Balogun was at length recalled and the Ibadans returned 
home on the 23rd December, 1878, with the Balogun in an in- 
different state of health. 

§ 2. The Results of the Jalumi War. 
The results that followed this crushing defeat of the allies were 
totally different from what the Are of Ibadan had expected. 
In his opinion the disastrous results to the Ilorins were quite 
sufficient to make them hold aloof from the rebel states, and these 
he expected would tender unreserved submission, and that things 
would henceforth move as smoothly as before ; but, as we shall 
see matters took a totally different turn everywhere. The Are 
now saw the necessity of being on friendly terms with at least one 
of the neighbouring states. The Ijesas and Ekitis were subject 
states, he could never treat with them on terms of equality. The 
Ilorins lately defeated were characteristically untrustworthy, 
Ibadan could have nothing to gain from that quarter. The Egbas 
the Are was determined to subjugate so as to open a free route to 
the coast to all Oyos through the river Ogun. There remained only 
theljebus with whom Ibadans could possibly treat, and therefore 



CONFLICTS IN THE NORTH 437 

the Are sent large presents with some slaves to the Awujaleof Ijebu 
and craved for friendly relations, as there had never been any 
cause of quarrel between them. But the Ijebus refused a 
rapprochement and declined the presents. They openly declared 
themselves alHes of the Egbas and Ekitis, surmising that all this 
pretence of friendship was mainly for the purpose of procuring 
war materials from the coast through the Ijebus themselves. 

The Are resented this rebuff by sending another raiding expedi- 
tion to the Egba farms. The Balogun who returned home from 
Ikirun ill, was getting worse and worse every day, so he sent the 
Otun and the Seriki, but they returned on the 4th of January, 
without a single captive. 

Meanwhile the storm was gathering thick in the north and 
north-east. The effect of the late defeat was to exasperate rather 
than dishearten the aUies, and they were determined more than 
ever not only to wipe off the disgrace but also to crush the Ibadan 
power if not destroy that town altogether. 

Although the Ilgrin refugees were well treated at Ofa yet 
they were determined to take vengeance by destroying that town 
for their conduct in destroying the bridge over the river Otin 
which occasioned such tremendous losses to them. 

Karkrk the Hausa Balogun of Ilorin, who, on account of his 
marked disloyalty to his King was denied the honour of conducting 
the battle which ended so disastrously, came out to succour the 
escaped. He came as far as Elehinjare, but when he heard of the 
Ibadans pursuing as far as Erin, he retreated to Ganmo as he 
was not then prepared to fight. Here he remained until he received 
orders to destroy the town of Ofa. This he meant to do by strata- 
gem, and to make quick work of it. He asked leave of the Olgfa 
to allow him to pass through his town to Erin in order to punish 
that small town for intrigue. But the Olof a was wide awake ; he 
knew who the prime intriguer was, therefore, the reply he gave was 
" Not until I am removed out of the way." Karkrk now threw 
off the mask and openly declared war against Ofa ; leaving 
Ganmo he went forward and pitched his first camp. 

This expedition was not popular at Ilorin, because King Alihu 
wished to be on good terms with the Ibadans, at least for the present, 
in order to ransom all the Ilorin chiefs caught in the last war. 
But Kar^ra it was said threatened to convert his camp into a town, 
and set up M6m6 the heir apparent to be king over it, in opposition 
to Ilorin, and so Alihu was obliged to let him have his own 
way. 

The Ofas sent to Ibadan for help on the 20th of February, 1879 ; 
the Are sent Ali the Otun with all his forces, also Kanike one of 



438 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

his own head slaves with some of his men, and the Otun, Osi, 
and Ekerin of the Seriki ; later on he sent Akintola. 

This on the whole was a very weak force, for, although there 
were some very strong men in it, yet the leader of the expedition 
was held to be both unlucky and incompetent. 

But King Alihu did not despair ; in order to conciliate the 
Ibadans he declared all the roads in his territory open for trade 
so that all Oyos immured in Bida and in Hausa towns were able to 
come down in safety. He then sent an embassy again to Ibadan 
to negotiate for peace between them, and to arrange for the 
ransom of the Ilgrins captured in war, but the Are declared he 
could not entertain the idea unless the siege of Ofa was raised. 

The Are now endeavoured to fill up the gaps made in the late 
war by making some indispensable appointments. Akintaro 
the heir of the late Balogun Akere he made the Osi Balogun in 
place of the late Ilori. For the great house of Ogunmola there was 
none but the youthful Kongi son of the late Osun, Ilori's elder 
brother. He was now advanced to be the head of the house with 
the title of Areagoro. These two were the most important. 

Death of the Balogun of Ibadan. — In the midst of this crisis 
the Ibadans suffered an irreparable loss by the death of their 
Balogun. On the 7th of April, 1879, the firing of musketry, volleys 
upon volleys announced to the public that Ajayi nick-named 
Ogboriefon had passed away ! The town went into deep mourning, 
as he was the last of those veteran generals of Ibadan, who had 
seen great fights and made a name, with the sole exception of the 
Are. Those who were now to the fore were not the old and experi- 
enced but the young and untried heirs of great houses according 
to the policy favoured by the Are. He was buried at about 10 
p.m., with full pagan and military rites. An eye-witness thus de- 
scribed the interment. The grave was dug in his bedroom, the large 
coffin was first lowered, and the body wound up as usual was placed 
in it, and then nailed up. Four flint-lock guns, a naked sword, 
and strings of cowries were placed upon the cofifin, and a kid was 
immolated, the blood being poured on the lid of the coffin, and 
prayers offered to the gods for his soul. 

Ajayi was a native of Ejigbo, he came to Ibadan for the love of 
a military career. He was nick-named Ogboriefon from the follow- 
ing circumstance : — At a battle in the Efon country, he noticed a 
man who posted himself behind a large tree doing havoc to the 
Ibadans. The man was using two guns giving an assistant the one 
he had discharged to be reloaded for him while he took his deadly 
aim with the loaded gun. Aja)^ then a common soldier quietly 
crept into the bush behind him, going on all fours till he came near 



CONFLICTS IN THE NORTH 439 

enough to this marksman, and then suddenly shot him down dead. 
The assistant bolted clean away. Ajayi then cut off the Efon's 
head held it by the ear between his teeth being besmeared all over 
with blood, and with the man's guns on his shoulders came again 
to his comrades who raised for him a shout of triumph and 
acclaimed him " Ogboriefon " i.e. a carrier of the Efon's head. 

He was always a poor man, for he spent too lavishly, but he 
was a brave and hardy soldier. This characteristic cleaved to 
him all through Ufe from a private to the post of commander-in- 
chief and was the cause of many errors in his procedure which all 
but marred his career. For a long time his favourite companions 
were his only slave Jato, a man with a fair complexion, and his 
horse ; then some friends associated together and made him their 
leader, and thus by degrees he rose to a responsible position. His 
first military appointment was when he was created an Abese 
and sent to Ilora during the Ijaye war to reinforce the Oyo army 
against Iran. He was marched off with Ogunmola to Iwawun 
where he received a wound which nearly proved fatal to him. 

The next period where he made a name was the Ilesa war, when 
he and Latosisa were stationed at the Odo road where he had to 
oppose Ogedemgbe and the army from the city, and Latosisa 
that from the country ; and Ogedemgbe capitulated to him. 

The blot on his character was serious. He intrigued to get rid 
of Ajobo who had helped him to bear the expenses incidental to 
his taking office on filling the post of Osi Balogun which was 
bestowed upon him after the Ilesa war. Also his withdrawal 
from the coaHtion in the insurrection against the Are and the 
betrayal of lyapo. Added to these was the wholesale massacre 
of the I jesa, captives in the taking of the camp at Iba, for which 
however, he pleaded military necessity. 

But there were pleasing traits in his character. His Uberality 
and humility gained him the respect of the soldiers and made 
his memory lasting. He will always be remembered as the hero of 
the Jalumi war. His eldest son Babalola was his heir, and became 
the head of his house. 

§ 3. The Ekitiparapos 

Instead of tendering their submission as the Are thought they 
would do, the Ijesas, Ekitis, Efons and other tribes hitherto sub- 
jected to the Ibadans formed an alUance which they termed Ekiti 
parapo i.e. the Ekiti confederation. They raised a formidable 
army and were determined not only to liberate themselves but 
also to overrun the Oyo tribes right on to the Ibadan farms at the 
river Oba. 



440 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

They invited Ogedemgbe to come over to lead them ; but this 
hardy warrior, having crossed swords more than once with the 
Ibadans was loth to do so again, but rather tried to see what 
might be done by entreaties and remonstrance in order to ameli- 
orate the condition of his people. The arrogance of the Are 
made him deaf to reason ; he simply snubbed Ogedemgbe for his 
pains ; but this simple hearted soldier regarding his oaths to the 
Ibadans kept to his promise and for a long time never moved 
from his retreat. Meanwhile Fabumi of Oke Mesin headed the 
confederates and was on the march again for Ikirun ; the news of 
the death of the Balogun of Ibadan seemed to put more spirit 
and courage into them. 

When the news of this reached Ibadan the Are ordered the Seriki 
to arrest their progress. The Seriki was very reluctant to go for 
two reasons. Firstly, he wished to be present at the funeral 
obsequies of the late Balogun his chief, but the urgency of the 
affairs in the north-eastern frontier brooked no delay. Secondly, 
he had been dipt of his wings as it were, for his Otun, Osi, 
and Ekerin had been ordered to Ofa and he was left single- 
handed. 

But he must obey orders, and thus he started for Ikirun. 
On reaching Iwo, he was detained by the venerable King of Iwo. 

" What do you intend to do," asked he, " with such a small 
handful of men ? The Are could never have had the slightest idea 
-of the nature and strength of the confederacy." His Highness 
thereupon sent to Ibadan and acquainted the Are with the formid- 
able nature of the task before him. 

The Are with enemies all around him was trying to behave 
cautiously and with prudence : he did not know what the Egbas 
and Ijebus might do if the town were denuded of men ; however, 
he sent a small force to reinforce the Seriki at Iwo. The allies 
at this time were using all their endeavours to isolate Ibadan 
by cutting off all communications from it. At this crisis the Lisa 
of Ode Ondo sent messengers to Ibadan to inform the Are how the 
allies had offered him large presents to induce him to join the 
alliance, and close against the Ibadans the only route by which they 
could now communicate with the coast, viz, that by Oke Igbo, 
but he wished to be neutral. He might send if he Hked to 
verify his statements, and let his messengers see the presents 
for themselves. The Are repUed by sending the Lisa large presents 
and begged him to keep strictly neutral, and to keep that road open. 

The Ijebu Remos in the So«th who are simple traders were 
much annoyed by this closure of the roads, which put a dead 
stop to their occupation. Ibadan is their only customer, but 



CONFLICTS IN THE NORTH 441 

their Suzerain the Awujale of Ode having joined the alliance, 
they were helpless. They however conceived an idea of sending 
to their countryman resident at Ibadan, Chief Soderinde the 
Balogun of the cavalry, to induce the Are to send another embassy 
to the Awujale and that they would act as a go-between. The 
Are was glad to comply with this request, but the Awujale took 
the presents and the slaves sent, but rejected the Remos as inter- 
mediaries. 

The fact of his accepting the presents sent a ray of hope into 
the Are to make one more effort. He therefore summoned to 
him all the natives of Ijebu Ode resident at Ibadan with Abinu- 
sawa, an Ijebu Prince, at their head, one who had some influence 
at home and begged them to act as plenipotentiaries for him in 
arranging terms of friendship with the Ijebus. These were glad 
to be of some service to their hosts, and were confident of success. 
But they were not even allowed to reach the town of Ode, they 
were stopped at Aha by an Agurin and sent back with the following 
message : — 

"Why should the Ibadans now desire our friendship? Let 
them remember the scant courtesy with which they have treated 
us in the past. When they were going to the Ijaye war we 
remonstrated with them but to no purpose. When we entreated 
them to receive back Ajobo expelled, they utterly refused even 
to take home his dead body. When they had differences with 
Efu§etan, Aijenku, lyapo we interfered and offered our good 
offices but were hot listened to. If they are tired of the war and 
want peace, let them first arrange with the Egbas, recall their 
troops from Of a and from Ikirun, and let the Are go to sleep." 

This was the end of all negotiations with the Ijebus, but the 
Ijebu residents still continued to make efforts to negotiate, but 
the Are would not expose himself to another rebuff. 

Once more the Lisa of Ondo sent messengers to Ibadan on 
hearing of the Balogun's death ; they brought the Are some 
presents and performed funeral obsequies for the late Balogun, 
kiUing a ram and pouring its blood on his grave. 

§ 4. The Beginning of the Actual Conflict 

The Seriki's forces met the confederates near Ikirun, and once 
more the clash of arms resounded between Oyos and Ekitis. 
After several battles, the Ekitis began to retreat before the Ibadans 
towards Mesin Ipole via Igbajo ;' this town was deserted at the 
approach of the alUes. The Seriki drove them beyond Igbajo and 
pitched his camp about a mile beyond, and from thence cleared 



442 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the undergrowth in the forest for miles in the direction of Mesin 
Ipole. Another reinforcement from Ibadan met him here in the 
person of Akintaro the newly-made Osi, and chief Aderibigbe. 
Here was enough force now to crush those opposed to them. The 
Are's young Chiefs could fight, but they lacked the wisdom gotten 
by experience. 

The Ibadans were surprised to see the allies advancing to attack 
them in their camp through the openings they had made in 
the forest, and concluded that they must have received 
reinforcement from Ogedemgbe, the rumour of whose approach 
then filled the country. They therefore took the precaution of 
guarding the camp and the rear by the Osi whilst the Seriki 
advanced to the attack. The Seriki had his father's veterans 
about him who instructed him in all his movements, where he was 
to sit, and when he was to charge. There was a dreadful carnage 
that day on both sides. When at the right moment the Seriki 
(through his advisers) ordered a general charge, they found the 
Ekitis immovably firm as a rock ! From repeated conflicts, and 
from their former slaves, the Ekitis had grown accustomed to the 
methods of the Ibadans, and were prepared against them. There 
was then no help for it but to maintain their ground vis a vis whilst 
a desperate struggle ensued. At length, the Ibadans a little 
while after made a sudden dash and secured a prisoner. From the 
obstinate resistance offered, the Ibadans thought they were 
opposing Ogedemgbe, but the prisoner told them it was Fabumi 
of Oke M§sin. " Where is Ogedemgbe then ? " they asked, and 
were told, " Not yet come." And further : " Who lay in ambush 
at our rear? " "No one." " Where is the remnant of your 
army ? " " This is all." With this assurance the Seriki now sent 
to the camp for reinforcements. It was about 4 p.m. that the 
drum of Akintaro the Osi was heard coming, and when the Ekitis 
saw fresh troops coming they gave way and fled. But it was too 
late to pursue them far. The Osi's men claimed the honour of 
the victory as theirs, as the enemy did not dare to await their 
approach. Those who bore the brunt of the fight since morning 
were naturally hurt at this, and trifling as this circumstance 
might appear, it altered the character of the whole campaign, and 
the larger issues that depended upon it. Jealousy and rivalry now 
take the place of judgment and discretion. 

Disaster upon disaster followed on both sides in subsequent 
battles ; the allies again and again sent repeated messages to call 
Ogedemgbe to their help. " We will fight now," said they, " to the 
best advantage, the Ibadan army is divided into three parts, one 
part at home to guard the town against the Egbas and Ijebus, 



CONFLICTS IN THE NORTH 443 

one part at Ofa against the Ilorins, and it is but a third part we 
have to oppose." 

Ogedemgbe was a very straight-forward man, he was always true 
to his word. Although a sworn enemy to the Ibadans, yet he 
wished to be faithful to his covenant with them, for he had sworn 
never to oppose them. On making Ita Ogbolu his headquarters for 
excursion into the Igbo Ani country, he sent to Ibadan, and the 
Are gave him a war standard, and also sent him a contingent 
consisting of his slaves and volunteers among the restless and 
warHke youths of Ibadan. Hence Ogedemgbe was reluctant to 
enter upon this war rashly. But he received invitations from all 
the aUies, as well as from the Egbas and Ijebus, Ibadan being con- 
considered a formidable neighbour whose power they all dreaded 
and were resolved to see it crushed this time. 

Ogedemgbe at last issued from Ita Ogbolu his retreat, and took 
the field at the head of the Ekiti parapos against the Ibadans. 

On hearing this, the Ibadan war chiefs sent home again for more 
reinforcements, and on the 3rd November, 1879, the Are sent the 
following chiefs, viz.. Babalola the son and heir of the late Balogun 
Ogboriefon, Ojo late Bale Opeagbe's son, and Ogundepo the uncle 
of the Seriki. 

It was the belief of the war chiefs that the Are deUberately 
planned to weaken them all one by one, so as to make room for 
his own son to be supreme over them, for instead of sending an 
adequate force which could deal with the whole affair in one blow he 
kept sending them by dribblets, promising each batch that which- 
ever came out victorious would take the lead of the others, thus 
creating a spirit of jealousy among them. Hence every newcomer 
had to fight singlehanded, and never received support from those 
already in the field. 

Babalola had to oppose Ogedemgbe at Kiriji as his father opposed 
him many years ago at Ilesa. The combatants met about three 
miles from Mesin Ipole, and Babalola fresh from home and probably 
in order to make a name, fought three successive battles which 
established his fame as a worthy heir of the hero of the Jalumi 
war. He bore the brunt of the battle with the Ekitis alone, the 
Seriki and all he met before him just sat in the battlefield sur- 
rounded by their men, all looking on, ready to retrieve a disaster 
should any occur. 

A custom initiated by the late Balogun Ibikunle and Ogunmola 
at the time of the Ijaye war was still kept up for the war chiefs to 
have about them pages in training called " Baba ni lima sa " 
(the Master says I must not run away). They were all dressed in 
red uniforms and were to sit around their master whatever may be 



444 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the condition of the fight : they may be beyond gunshot, or equally 
exposed with their master in a close fight. Babalgla had about 
400 of these ; at the first fight he lost 140 in killed and wounded. 
At the second fight he lost more, at the third fight they were 
wiped oat ! 

Thus the Are began by wasting their strength, and those in the 
field, out of jealousy of each other, played his game until experience 
brought about a better judgment when too late. 

§ 5. The Are to the Front 

Such was the state of affairs at the seat of war whilst the Are's 
son and his slaves and household war-boys were enjoying them- 
selves at home, till they became surfeit with pleasure and all 
excesses, the report of which reached the war chiefs from time to 
time at the seat of war. Whenever the Ijebus or Egbas were 
descried kidnapping in Ibadan farms, the war chiefs at home would 
be sent after these, but the Are's sons and slaves .would march out 
leisurely after these in blazing costumes, and instead of pursuing 
after the enemy would contentedly encamp in the Ibadan farms, 
feeding on the crops and cutting down standing corn as fodder 
for their horses ! 

The war chiefs in the field having wasted their strength in the 
manner indicated above, and finding themselves as it were being 
over-ridden by the Are's sons and slaves, were resolved to invite 
himself to the war, to take command of the army in person, and 
when there they were determined to take revenge on him and his 
menials for all their insolent acts at home. By virtue of his title 
as Kakanfo he was bound to respond to his people's call, and 
consequently he sent to the King at Oyo to ask leave to 
take the field, and to return home within 17 days. The King 
granted his consent reluctantly, knowing that he was determined 
to go. 

The Ar§ at this time exhibited some of the worst phases of human 
nature. At such a pitch of glory his word being law to all Ibadan 
and its dependencies, he became the dupe of his flatterers ; he 
considered himself a god and that nothing was impossible for him 
to effect. He certainly thought he would make a short and easy 
work of the task before him, but the chiefs who invited him to the 
war had a different plan in their head. Their resolve was to humble 
his pride, and to avenge the death of Aijenku and that of lyapo, 
the late Seriki in particular, both of whom he ordered to "go to 
sleep." 

Sanusi, the Are's eldest son, further exasperated the war-chiefs 



CONFLICTS IN THE NORTH 445 

by the impudent songs he permitted his bards to indulge in at 

their expense ; thus : 

The expedition that occupied Akere's son^ three years, 
The war over which Awarun's son* has spent six months in 

vain, 
But one day will it take Alabi', son of lyanda Arc*, 
With silver-studded hands he'll extricate and bring them home. 

Again they sang : 

A club is thrown at a lime. 

Both hme and club got entangled. 

And the stick and the lime, 

lyanda's son will disentangle and bring home. 

But there were those even among his followers at home who 
dishked these proceedings. Many were the followers of Sumonu, 
the Are's nephew, who was a more affable and good-natured fellow 
and much preferred to Sanasi. The followers of the latter, 
noticing this, permitted his drummer to beat : 

" Sanusi jgba na a gbg ni Kanu, 

Iro, irg, Aremo ko pe meji." 
(That Sanusi is supreme is known up to Kanu, 
Nay, nay, two heirs there cannot be.) 

The retort to this came from the populace in theii; dances : 

" To prostrate to father, and then to the son, 
I cannot stoop to two at once. 
And where is such a thing ever done ? 
On the hilltop is such a thing done." 

The Ar§'s house at Ibadan is on the top of a hill. All these 
sayings and doings were duly reported in the camp, and the war 
chiefs there were resolved to have these high-flown talkers in the 
camp, where only valour counts. 

The Are, in order to strike a blow with effect, recalled Ali the 
Otun Balogun and Akintola the late lyapg's brother from Ofa 
to join him at the camp. Akintgla preceded Ali to the camp 
and, as a young Mggaji he also was allowed to fight a battle 
singlehanded as each of his predecessors had done. He distin- 
guished himself above them all ; by a flank movement he bore down 
on Ogedemgbe suddenly with a vigorous onslaught, surprised and 
captured him, but he was let off. It was not the intention of these 

iThe Osi. ^ xhe Seriki. » His own attributive. * His 
father's attributive and totem. 



446 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

war-chiefs to defeat their enemy to the Are's advantage, but each 
of them wished to show what he can do. 

Ogedemgbe fell into the hands of one of Akintola's slaves who 
said to him, " Ologun, yara, Oyo nbo " (Captain be quick, Oyos 
are coming.) The hide on which he was sitting, the kegs of gun- 
powder all about him, his charms and amulets were all taken, the 
Ijesas were utterly discomfited, but Akintgla withdrew and 
there was no further fighting that day. 

But the result of this fight was to drive the allies to a vigorous 
preparation for a more desperate resistance, especially as they 
heard that the Are was coming. It was reported that Ogedemgbe, 
on hearing the rumour of the Are's coming, sent a messenger to 
ask him whether the report was true, and if so, in regard to the 
oath he had taken, and for past favours he had received from him, 
he was loth to meet in the field a chief who had given him the 
war standard he was using. He would therefore retire with half 
the Ekiti forces, leaving the rest for an easy conquest ; only he 
prayed for his clemency towards his countrymen. So faithful and 
honest was Ogedemgbe, But the Are, instead of returning 
courtesy for courtesy, proudly dared him to remain if he would 
share the fate of those he would soon crush under his heels ! 

But Ogedemgbe, out of deference to the Are, sent another private 
messenger to meet him at Osogbo on the same errand. The Are's 
answer was, " Is he still there and not gone away yet ? Well, he 
will have himself to thank for the consequences." Ogedemgbe 
and his countrymen were fighting for freedom ; courtesy and 
generosity he was prepared to yield to, but threats and defiance 
he was determined to meet with obstinate resistance. 

The Are, on reaching Irehe went by Otan and intended to take 
the Ekitiparapos in the rear, thus placing them between two fires. 
But the Ibadan chiefs lest their plans should be defeated grew 
excited, sent urgent messages after messages entreating him to 
come to them to the camp and take no other course. Said they : 
" The veterans and the flower of your army are here in the camp, 
who are those about you with whom you would risk your safety 
by taking another course ? They are but slaves who will desert 
you at the sound of the first gun. Not so did Lakanle of old when 
our fathers called him to their help at Iperu in olden days. As 
he went straight to them so do you come to us now and lead us 
to victory." 

In the meantime the Ijesas, hearing the Are was contemplating 
another route, were determined to checkmate him. Ogedemgbe 
left the command with one Olubayode, a great war -chief, and took 
with him his well-trained veterans to waylay the Are and if 



CONFLICTS IN THE NORTH 447 

possible to take him alive. He was rather disappointed at the 
Are's being dissuaded from carrying out his plan. He missed his 
game. 

The war-chiefs' estimate of the value and fighting quahties of 
the Are's slaves and household officers was not from spite but from 
actual fact ; they had learnt to appraise them at their true valua- 
tion in the Ado and Aiyede wars and in the raids on Egba farms 
especially before Osiele. They were no longer the hardy and trusty 
veterans of the Ilesa and other wars when there was keen rivalry 
between them and the late Ajayi Ogboriefon. A hfe of ease and 
debauchery had since brought about degeneracy ; they were more 
distinguished for displaying red and showy uniforms, sitting round 
their master and boasting of past deeds. 

The Ibadan war-chiefs entered into a secret compact before the 
Are's arrival never to achieve a conquest or capture a town while 
he was living, for, said they, "What is the use ? The lion's share of 
our achievements will go to him, and we shall only help to increase 
the number of his slaves who are now lording it over us." 

The Are again on arriving at the camp did not call them all 
together and harangue them or praise them for what they had done. 
On the contrary his son Sanusi marched straight on through the 
camp and pitched his tent in a field of standing corn which the 
Ibadans had planted outside the camp. " Cut all down," said he 
"we do not need it, how long are we going to stay here ? " 
He had cause to regret this afterwards. 

The Are led the host to the field the next day, the 4th of May, 
1880. The war-chiefs fought with their accustomed bravery to 
show him what they could do, but no more. At the first onslaught 
the Ijesa chief Olubayode was caught and slain, the Ijesa army 
became demoralized, and gave way ; the Ibadan warboys pursued 
them right into the gates of Mesin Ipole. The Ibadan war-chiefs 
seeing this passed the word round from mouth to mouth, " Afaro, 
afaro," i.e., " Refrain, refrain " (or " halt, halt.") 

The Ajero saved the situation for the Ekitis that day, for seeing 
all in full retreat he stood by the gate of the town, and the first 
Ibadan boy that entered he shot down dead ; the others, seeing no 
war-chief or leader of any kind behind them, retreated hastily. 
The Ibadan war-chiefs sat in groups, each under a tree here and 
there in the battlefield surrounded by their men as if resting for 
a while, but the Are could not get them to do anything more than 
skirmishing that day. He took in the situation at a glance, and 
was determined to sleep on the battlefield that day, and offer 
battle the next day, although it was pouring with rain, and there 
was no shelter. Cold and wet he was advised to return to the camp. 



448 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

but he at first refused to do so ; then the chiefs and elders of his 
house approached him and remonstrated with him, sajdng, " It 
is folly to remain on the battlefield ; we are all wet, and it is 
still raining. Suppose the Ekitis were to fall upon us in the night, 
it will be all to their advantage, because they will come from 
home quite fresh, with ammunition dry," The Are was sore at 
heart, recalling the achievements of his old rival and comrade the 
hero of the Jalumi war. That he, the Kakanfo, should not be 
able to achieve as much and a great deal more was a mixture of 
shame, pain and grief to him. With great difficulty he was pre- 
vailed upon to return to the camp for the night, and the fight was 
resumed the next day. 

The secret combination against the Are was divulged to him by 
Chief Aderibigbe, probably with the hope of his making amends 
to the war-chiefs, but the Arg, instead of calling these young men 
together and pacifying them, answered with some asperity, " I 
have fought in front of their fathers and it is now their turn to 
fight for me and they will not ; as we are all equally concerned, let 
us agree to remain indifferent." 

The Ekitiparapos, on the other hand, fighting as they were for 
their independence, went on strengthening their forces by drawing 
recruits from the utmost bounds of the country behind them, 
throughout the Ijesa, Ekiti, Efon, Yagba and Akoko countries 
right on to Egbe. They further strengthened their alHance with 
the Ilorins by an exchange of troops. One Ogunmodede with a 
strong force of Ijesas, was sent to the Ilorin camp, and the Ilorins 
sent one Lasebikan with his men to the Ekiti camp. This arrange- 
ment, we should rather say, was an astute measure of the Ilorins 
by which they retained a firm hold on the Ekitis, so that they could 
not withdraw from the alliance even if they wished to do so, and 
this proved to be the case many years afterwards as we shall see 
in due course. 

The allies had also the great advantage over the Ibadans, in 
that they had free access to Benin for ammunition whilst nearly 
all the roads were closed to the Ibadans. Long flintlock guns with 
large muzzles were imported from Benin ; these, when fully loaded 
and fired, gave a report which reverberating from hill to hill all 
around sounded like Ki-ri-ji-i, from which this war was named 
the Kiriji Campaign. 

Famine soon broke out among the Ibadans, the provisions they 
brought from home were exhausted, and the standing corn around 
the camp had been cut down by Sanusi to make room for his 
tents. The common soldiers had now to live on palm nuts, certain 
edible roots, and whatever they could procure from the forests 



CONFLICTS IN THE NORTH 449 

to sustain life, whilst there was plenty in the town for the 
alhes. 

The Are, to emphasize his determination to see that this business 
should at once come to a finish, removed the camp to the spot where 
he sat at his first battle, called Elebolo, from the abundance of 
the herb Ebolo in ^he place. The Ekitis, to show their determin- 
ation to resist him, left the town of Mesin Ipole and encamped on 
the spot where Babalola fought his three celebrated battles ; and 
so both camps stood face to face to each other surrounded on all 
sides by high mountains, deep ravines and craggy rocks. It seemed 
Providence had brought both armies into this defile, to teach them 
a lesson. In the day of battle there was no room for them to 
deploy, the situation being worse for the Ibadans than for the 
Ekiti mountaineers in their native mountains. The battles now 
became more frequent and bloody, and at every fight the Ibadans 
lost one or more distinguished war-cTiiefs. 

At a battle on the i8th May Kupolu, the Commander of the 
infantry of the Are's bodyguard, was killed, and Akintaro the Osi 
Balogun was mortally wounded. 

On the ist of June died Opehinde, one of the chiefs left in 
charge of the town. 

On the nth of June Ajenigbe the Ekerin was mortally 
wounded. He died the next day. 

Chief Oluferegbe, Kongi's stepfather, also fell in battle. 

On the 31st August a sanguinary battle was fought at Kiriji 
with heavy losses on both sides. 

Thus for a long period of time a serious battle or a skirmish 
took place nearly every other day with heavy losses on both sides. 



Chapter XXV 

IBADAN AT ITS EXTREMITY— BLOODY STRIFES. 

§ I. Home Defences 

The preceding section has given us an idea of how matters were 
for the Ibadans at Kiriji. Now, whilst all this was going on at the 
seat of war, the Ijebu and Egba kidnappers were not inactive at 
home, raiding the Ibadan farms, sometimes successfully, but some- 
times repulsed, but making farming risky and unsafe until a 
scheme was evolved of a complete organization for home defence. 
There are three main points from which the attacks may be 
expected (a) the farms contiguous to those of the Egbas ; (b) the 
route leading to Ijebu Igbo ; and (c) that leading to Ijebu Ode. 
Arrangements were perfected by building forts in a central point 
in each of these main routes, for the better protection of the 
farmers. Whilst the hunters were in the forests, hunting for game 
and on the look-out for kidnappers, the farmers could work in their 
farms with composure and confidence. They were instructed to 
hasten to the forts with their women and children at a given 
signal by the hunters. The men went to their farms well armed, 
and were ready for any emergency. 

The fort in the direction of the Egbas was left in charge of some 
hunters, and a few old warriors left at home. But the Egbas 
once surprised the fort at Itosi and carried away much people ; 
some of them, however, were rescued by the hunters who pursued 
after the kidnappers. 

In the direction of Ijebu Igbo, where the forest was thickest, 
the forts were in charge of the principal hunters, the chief of these 
were Ajiya, Obisesan, Odeyale. These kept the fort while the 
younger hunters were dispersed about in the forests. The fort 
was the rendezvous of the women and children. By this arrange- 
ment the defeat of the Ijebus became such a constant and regular 
thing that the vulgar people put it into a song : 

Are de, are de. For the flight, for the flight, 

Igbayi Tare ma de o. Now is the time to flee, 

Oni yoyo-gb. Ye clothed in Yoygg5. 

Yoyggb is a coarse and loosely woven sort of cloth which the 
Ijebus were accustomed to wear at this period. 

The fort in the direction of Ijebu Ode was built at the point of 

450 



IBADAN AT ITS EXTREMITY — BLOODY STRIFES 45 1 

divergence of the roads leading to Ijebu Ode and Ijebu Remo, the 
convergence of the roads being at the middle of the fort, enclosed 
with a wall all round. This was in charge of certain cavalrymen 
left in town, there being no scope for their services among the 
crags of Kiriji, Associated with these were the Sango chief priest 
and one Ogungbesan. 

The only fight which took place in this direction was on Palm 
Sunday, the loth of April, i88r, and was far-reaching in its results. 
When the alarm was given, a mounted messenger was sent post 
haste to the town to call up those in charge of this direction. 
Solaja and Sonik^n, sons of Soderinde theBalogun of the Cavalry, 
performed feats of valour that day, and distinguished themselves. 
In the thick of the fight, Solaja with his horse dashed into the 
Ijebus, knocking down two or three, and returned with a captive 
on his horse. Seeing this, Sonikan the elder brother, not to be 
outdone by his younger brother, performed the like feat, and also 
returned with a captive. This was a signal for a general rout. 
The Ijebus, who scarcely ever saw a horse in their country and 
could not face a cavalry charge, gave way and were pursued as far 
as Odo Ona kekere in the Ijebu Ode route, and about 20 captives 
were taken among them. At Odo Ona kekere, the Ijebus met 
reinforcements and there they made a stand. The struggle here 
was fierce and obstinate, and the brave captain of the Ijebus, 
whilst leading and encouraging his men, was shot down dead : 
a general rout was the consequence, and in the pursuit, among other 
captives made, was Omitogun, the brother of the old Balogun of 
the Ijebus. 

This distinguished captive was well treated at Ibadan. When 
the report of what had taken place reached the camp, the war 
chiefs sent back to say that Omitogun was to be allowed to go 
back home to arrange for his own ransom and on his own terms ; 
but that he was to exert his influence at home with the authorities 
there so that the roads may be opened for trade, remembering 
that they never had any quarrel with the Ijebus, and never attacked 
their farms, and that the Egbas, whose cause they said they were 
espousing, had slyly opened a roundabout road for themselves 
via Eruwa to trade with the interior Yorubas. 

Omitogun himself had another tale to tell. He bought and 
took home with him some corn, beans, etc., to show his people 
at home. Ibadan, which was reported to be on its last leg and 
on the verge of starvation, was actually revelling in plenty 
such as they never enjoyed at home ! The farmers had no outlet 
for their produce whilst the Ijebus, who are nearly all traders 
were sorely in need of foodstuffs. 



452 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

This circumstance made a deep impression on the Ijebus, 
there was no more raiding in this direction. Its further development 
had a far-reaching effect which, bore fruit in the following year, 
as we shall see. 

§ 2. Closure of Roads and the Results 

The greatest needs of the Ibadans now were ammunition and salt, 
and the only route by which they could obtain them even in 
small quantities was- the roundabout way via Oke Igbo to Ondo 
and thus to the coast. Hence they endeavoured to keep on friendly 
terms with Derin Ologbenla, the Bale of Oke Igbo, and humoured 
him every now and then by sending him presents of slaves. 

Derin was an Ife prince, and as to the Ifes themselves, although 
their army was in the Ibadan camp, yet their sympathies were all 
on the other side. 

But it happened in March, 1881, that the Ibadans suspecting 
treachery in a town named Ogu, situated between He Ife and Ilesa, 
sent a small force secretly by Awo, son of the late Labosinde, 
against the place, to capture it by surprise in order to keep their 
rear clear of any trouble But all the towns in the neighbourhood 
were in the secret of the expedition and in sympathy with the 
Ekitis as men striking for freedom, therefore it leaked out. Osu 
was prepared and reinforced against a surprise, and hence the 
expedition failed. 

The town of Osu not being far from the city of Ifg, to suspect 
Osu is to suspect Ife itself, and Derin of Oke Igbo, taking this as 
a cause of offence, openly declared tor the Ekitis and endeavoured 
to close even this road to all Oyos by allowing the Ijesas to kidnap 
caravans on the road. But the Ogunsua or Bale of Modakeke, 
knowing that the safety of his town is linked with that of Ibadan, 
by protecting caravans arid attacking kidnappers did not allow 
the road to be altogether closed. In vain the Ifes tried to win the 
Ogunsua over : the position of Modakeke to Ife is analogous 
to that of Belfast to the south of Ireland ; the. Modakekes are 
Oyos and of the same tribal affinity with Ibadan with which their 
own safety is linked. 

The price of salt rose so high that a pound of salt could not be 
had for less than ten shillings when it could be obtained at all. 
Poor people therefore could not even think of preparing their 
meals with salt ; those who could obtain a few grains of it, ate 
their meals insipid, and then qualified the tastelessness in their 
mouths with the few grains of salt afterwards ! 

But the distress in the country was not all on one side. The 
Egbas also were indirectly affected by this closure of the roads 



IBADAN AT ITS EXTREMITY— BLOODY STRIFES 453 

against the interior tribes. They were free to trade wdth Lagos 
indeed, but they wanted produce from the interior and slaves to 
work their farms. They therefore managed to open a circuitous 
route to Ketu and Ejio, where they and the Porto Novians 
estabhshed a market to trade with all Oyos from different parts of 
the country, but they still rigidly excluded the sale of ammunition, 
only cloth and salt were the articles of merchandise, and even 
this was considered a godsend by the interior folks, for their 
distress from want of salt was by this greatly aJleviated. 

An anecdote from an actual occurrence will forcibly illustrate 
the point of desperation to which these people were driven at 
this time : 

A man with his wife and daughter — a marriageable young 
woman — went to Ejio to trade. At the close of the fair, the 
woman was being taken away by an Egba man ; a hue and cry 
was immediately raised, and the Egba was arrested as a man- 
stealer. He denied the charge and told his tale. The woman had 
been bartered to him for salt and cloth, he only claimed what was 
his by right. Upon investigation it was found that he was quite 
right, the seller was the woman's own daughter ! She had 
bartered away her own mother for salt ! But the man could not 
allow his wife to be taken away, a compromise must be made. So 
after he and the woman had consulted together they agreed that 
this undutiful daughter was to be given to the Egba in ex- 
change : they showed him that the mother was old and would 
be of little service to him, whereas the young woman might be taken 
by him for a wife and that they, the parents, would regard the 
cloths and salt as an adequate dowry given by him. The Egba 
man was highly pleased with the offer and went home delighted 
with having had the best of the bargain, and the parents on the 
other hand were satisfied that to all intents and purposes their 
daughter had been comfortably settled. This was by no means a 
solitary instance of desperate acts such as this. 

The distress at the seat of war at this time was indescribable : 
the Oke Igbo road being closed there was a great dearth of 
ammunition. The Ekitis knowing this from escaped slaves often 
came as near as possible to the gate of the camp and assaulted them. 
The Ibadan army would be drawn up but they could not return 
the fire of the enemy. They could hardly muster 100 kegs of 
powder throughout the whole army, and this they reserved for 
an extreme case of emergency. The writer was present in the 
camp on one such occasion, when Chief Babalola sent a slave wife 
of his round to all the traders present in the camp for even a 
handful of powder if possible. From private soldiers who had not 



454 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

exhausted their allowance, and others who did not use theirs in 
previous fights she collected a small quantity in exchange for 
food ! The writer being a friend of the Seriki's brother, asked him 
confidentially on that occasion, " Supposing the Ijesas and Ekitis 
were to come upon you suddenly one day to rush the camp, what 
will you do ? " He replied, " 'Tis true we have no ammunition, 
but there are not wanting among us about 5,000 accomplished 
swordsmen who will be more than a match for the Ekitis with 
their guns at close quarters, and they know it or they would have 
attempted to do so." 

Further, the Ekitis often taunted them by appearing on tbp of a 
rock where they could well be seen by the Ibadans, and tantalized 
them by emptying kegs of gunpowder on the rock, throwing a 
lighted torch on the pile, and blazing all away. 

The muster for battle at this time took place almost every day. 
The Ekitis came as near as possible to the camp, firing into it. 
The method adopted by the Ibadans to meet the present crisis 
was to assemble near the gate of the camp, and thence make a 
sudden and vigorous dash on the Ekitis driving them back to the 
battlefield : then the swordsmen would spread thernselves in 
the valley and trenches awaiting those who would venture near ; 
the Ekitis being on higher ground could be seen by them much 
sooner. Now and then as opportunity offered they would pounce 
upon them sword in hand, and often come back with captives. 
Thus they would hold out till about five or six in the evening 
before the main Ibadan army marched out, when they could not 
all fire more than one round before nightfall. 

For months and months affairs dragged on in this way, each 
party being afraid of the other. The sentries at the camp gate 
were doubled for fear of a night attack. 

On one occasion a few kegs of powder were obtained at Ejio 
at a very high price ; when these reached the camp such a shout of 
joy was raised as if they had won a victory ; a Feu de joie was 
fired that evening. The shout was heard at the Ekiti camp. 
But this joy was short lived, for a grave danger threatened the 
Yoruba country from another direction. 

§ 3. Distressing Episodes 

A. Dahomian Invasion. — The Dahomians, who had hitherto 
confined their depredations to the Egba and Egbado districts, 
now for the first time advanced into the western districts of 
Yoruba proper. The Ibadans, since the destruction of Ijaye, on 
whom it would have devolved to meet this threatened danger, 
heard this news with chagrin ; they could only chafe but could 



IBADAN AT ITS EXTREMITY — BLOODY STRIFES 455 

render no help in that quarter. In fact it was their pre-occupation 
that rendered such unprovoked invasion possible. It was said 
that the Dahomian guide and counsellor in this enterprise was 
Afin the Chief of Ketu, and in May, 1881, the following towns were 
taken : Ejio, Obaniiisunwa, Ilaji, Atasa, Oke'le, Iwere, Aiyetor6 
and Igana. 

Lawore the Asejdn marched out in defence of the district but 
he narrowly escaped with his life ; at Igana a young man who, 
kneeling before him, was shooting arrows on the enemy was 
suddenly approached by the Dahomians and his head taken off ! 
The Aseyin himself had to escape on horseback. 

This conduct of Afin in introducing the Dahomians into this 
part of the country gave pain to all, but retributive justice soon 
overtook him, for at the next campaign of the Dahomians, his 
own town Ketu was taken and himself slain. The other towns 
taken with Ketu were Idikumo, Iselu, Dain, etc. 

Ketu is an ancient town bordering on the Sabe and Oyo 
countries. It is a place badly watered, their drinking water being 
miles away from the town. They used deep underground tanks 
for storing rain water. The scarcity of water in Ketu has passed 
into a proverb. " Omi d'oyin ni Ketu " (" Water becomes honey 
in Ketu "). The destruction of Ketu was about the 17th of July, 
1886. 

In order to record all the ravages of the Dahomians together we 
shall have to anticipate the dates of events in the history. 

Their third campaign was again in the western districts of 
Yoruba Proper — Ilesan, Ibise, Oke Amu, Ago, Iluku, Gbagba, 
Ago Sabe, Irawo, Owg, and for the second time Ilaji, were all 
destroyed. This was in 1887, 

Their fourth campaign was against the towns bordering on 
Egba districts, and also on the western districts. Berekodo, 
Oke Tapa, Aiyete, Bako, Gangan, Igbo Osa, Idgfin, Idire, Papa, 
Gbunginu were all taken. Eruwa was deserted. This was about 
the year 1890. 

Thus far they went, when a higher Power decreed their fall ; 
they were themselves subjugated by the French. 

Travellers in the western districts will find all the towns enclosed 
in double walls. The city of Oyo was connected with the village 
of Awe by a wall. This outer wall was called " Odi Amol^," or 
by some, " Odi Amonu." The former term indicates " The Wall 
of Safety," used by those to whom it has proved a source of safety 
and the latter term, " The Wall of Loss," used by those to whom 
it has proved unavailing for security. 

B. Destruction of He Bioku. — He Bioku was one of the Yoruba 



456 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

towns in the Oke Ogun district between Eruwa and Is§yin, and 
consequently under the protection of the Ibadans. 

The following is a short history of its foundation and destruction. 

He Bioku was quite a modern town built by two friends, Bioku 
and Lebebi, Bioku being the Chief. It was one of the towns 
beautifully situated on a hill and easily defended against a hostile 
attack, and consequently, for the safety it afforded, it got peopled 
rapidly and soon became a prosperous town. 

There were several men of note in this town besides the founders, 
e.g., Oguntaiye the Areagoro, Odunmbaku the Ikolaba, Ar§mu 
the Jagun, Alawo and his son Ladipo (both being men of note), 
also Oje, Adebawonpe, and Maborisaj§. 

Bioku lived to a good old age, and the town prospered under him. 
At his death he was succeeded by Lebebi the co-founder. Oye- 
dokun, son of Bioku, was the head of his house. But Lebebi 
did not outhve Bioku long, he also died and was succeeded by 
Ajadi as the head of his house. Oyedokun, son of Bioku, now 
became the head chief of the town, and so the succession would 
have continued in the two famihes alternately had all continued 
well. 

Alawo also died about the same time and was succeeded by 
his son Ladipo. Oyedokun, son of Bioku, however, was a bad 
ruler ; he soon disgusted all the chief men in the town. When 
he could no longer be endured Ajadi, the next man to him as ruler, 
left the town with a large following and founded a settlement at 
the foot of the hill, leaving He Bioku to Oyedokun and his party. 

In order to avenge himself for this defection Oyedokun sent to 
Ibadan to invite an army to destroy the new settlement ; but the 
Are Latosisa, then at the head of Ibadan, sent one Aiyeleru to 
reconcile the two parties, but he failed in bis efforts and returned 
to Ibadan. 

Now, with the Ibadans away from home, Oyedokun sent a 
similar message to Chief Ogundipe at Abeokuta to come and 
destroy the new settlement. Ogundipe responded to the call 
with alacrity and came with an Egba army, as he had been seeking 
occasion to go against Itabg, a small suburb town of He Bioku. 

The alleged cause of offence to Ogundipe was that when the 
Egbas fled from Ijaye in March, 1862, one of his wives (then in 
delicate state) fell into the hands of an Itabo man. Chief Ogundipe 
offered to redeem her, but the man refused to part with her. After 
t-ie child was born Ogundipe sent two slaves to the man in exchange 
for mother and child, but the man still declined the offer. For this 
reason Ogundipe now embraced this opportunity of going against 
the settlement of He Bioku hoping to recover his wife and 



IBADAN AT ITS EXTREMITY — BLOODY STRIFES 457 

child at the suburb. His route lay through Eruwa, he invited 
the Bale of this town to join him, but he declined. But Ogundipe 
having gone forward, the Bale went with an army by a shorter 
route to assist the doomed town, their kith and kin. 

The Egbas were actually repulsed by this handful of men of the 
new settlement, and were in full retreat when Omisina, Oyedokun's 
brother sent to tell Ogundipe not to lose such a splendid chance of 
victory by retreating so hastily as the ammunition of his foes was 
all but exhausted and the Egbas had victory close at hand. 
Ogundipe, hearing this, returned to the attack, and ammunition 
failing the men of the new settlement, the town was taken. Of the 
chiefs who escaped were : — Ajadi, Ladipo, Adewggba. Omisina 
the traitor was hunted down by the remnant of the people and 
was discovered in a cave at Itabo, thence he was brought back, 
slain, and his family sold into slavery. 

In order to avenge themselves on Oyedokun the remnant that 
escaped sent to him a message of submission and offer of recon- 
ciliation. Negotiations followed and all the terms of peace 
settled, it only remained for him to come down from the hill to 
perfect the terms which could not be conveniently carried out by 
messengers. He did so, and as the men lay prostrate before him 
and pourparlers were going on, all of a sudden they rushed upon 
him and butchered him to pieces ; and in order to show their 
abhorrence of him they roasted his flesh in the fire and had a taste 
of it all round. 

Thus the remnant that escaped gathered themselves together 
and formed another settlement in the plain opposite IleBioku, and 
they called it Lanlat^ and had Ajadi as their Bale. 

The remnant of the old town of He Bioku soon joined them 
here. Like all other Oke Ogun towns, the people of this place 
are industrious, food is plentiful and they seem quite contented. 

§4. New Developments, Clouds and Sunshine 

After the Dahomian invasion and the destruction of the market 
towns of Ejio and Ketu distress prevailed again in the country. 
At this crisis the AlAfin of Oyo sent a special deputation to Abe- 
okuta to negotiate through Chief Ogundipe foi the opening of the 
roads for salt. It was an open secret that the AlAfin connived at 
the combination against the Ibadans and the consequent closure 
of the roads ; but the want of salt touched even His Majesty himself 
as well as his people ; hence his action. 

At this period the ruling chiefs of Abeokutu were four, viz., 
Ogundipe the Balogun of Ikija, Onlado of Kemta, Ogundeyi of 
Iporo, and the Jaguna of Igbein. Ogimdipe was the leading chief. 



458 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Onlado was at the head of all the Ogbonis, and Ogundeyi of the 
war party, the Alake being a nonentity. It was said that Ogundipe 
and Onlado were more in consort, the public meetings were 
generally convened either at Ogundipe's gate or in the front of 
Sodeke's house. Ogundipe was always the spokesman, queer in 
his ways but shrewd in his methods. He generally spoke in his 
own name. Public acts were said to be done by his order, but he 
was only carrying out the conclusions which himself and his 
colleagues had arrived at. Thus it was given out that the Eruwa 
road to Oyo had been opened under the auspices of Chief Ogundipg. 
Eruwa now became the market town for the exchange of com- 
modities with the further interior. 

It was also shrewdly suspected that Ogundipe, as the friend of 
the Are of Ibadan, was doing his utmost to relieve the Ibadans at 
this time. He had always been against the closure of the roads, 
but he could not get his colleagues to see with him. Cloth, salt 
and spirits were the articles sent to the Eruwa market in exchange 
for slaves and produce from the interior, but all but one of the so- 
called demijohns of rum, and cases of gin sent up by Ogundipe, were 
gunpowder secretly being sent to the Are. , The gatemen at the 
tall gates were supposed to know nothing about them, a glass of 
rum or of gin was poured out of the genuine package for them and 
the whole passed free, especially as it was known to be Ogun-^ 
dipe's, and this particular road was under the charge of the Egba 
Oke Ona, of whom Ogundipe was the head, as the river route was 
under the immediate charge of the Egba Agbeyin. This favour 
of Ogundipe's was highly appreciated by the Ibadans. 

This Eruwa market was called the Erebe market, only guns and 
gunpowder were prohibited as articles of trade. 

But the road to Eruwa was now and again infested by two 
notable highway robbers, Kurakura, a Gambari slave of Chief 
Ogundeyi, and Gata, an Ilorin outcast, a notorious robber. Both 
of them were sharing the spoils with their masters, of whom 
Ogumefun was one. One-fourth of the booties went to them, the 
remaining three-fourths to the robbers themselves. 

In spite of this, the Eruwa market and the secret supply of 
Ogundipe were a great boon to the Ibadans but for the supply of 
a whole army something more was required, hence all their efforts 
were bent on keeping the Oke Igbo route open. 

Derin the Chief of Oke Igbo now the Oni elect of Ife, seemed 
at this time to have the key of the whole situation in his hands, 
and his favour and goodwill were sought by all. The Ibadans 
sent him slaves, and excellent native cloths and other valuables 
as presents that he might keep the road open. The Ilorins sent 



IBADAN AT ITS EXTREMITY — BLOODY STRIFES 459 

him horses, the Ekiti kings sent him baskets of kola nuts and 
other valuable presents, and other costly presents came also from 
Ijebu and from Abeokuta that he might keep the road closed. 

The Ogunsua of Modakeke refused to ally himself with the Ifes, 
and a well-to-do Ofa man resident at Oke Igbo was as a bone in 
Derin's throat, as the safety of their respective towns depended 
upon the safety of the Ibadans. So this road could not be altogether 
closed. 

About this time the rumour spread that Derin of Oke Igbo with 
the confederates sent to tell the Ibadan chiefs that if they wished 
for peace they should send to beg the King for he also had his 
grievance. There was his nephew Lawani harboured at Ibadan, 
who, on leaving Oyo, emptied the palace of all the royal treasures 
so that he, the AlAfin, was practically a poor King. To this the 
Ibadans replied, " He is our prince, what can we do to him ? We 
cannot eject him out of the town, and we cannot touch his property, 
since he was allowed to leave Oyo with all he brought with him 
we cannot question his right to them." However, they sent 
accredited messengers to Oyo to beg the King to arrange matters 
for them, pledging their devotion and loyalty to him. 

His Majesty, as was his wont, returned them a fair answer, and 
sent them a few Oyo fighting men and a Babalawo (Ifa priest) 
ostensibly to make charms for their success : but the Ibadans, 
having reason to believe that the action of the priest was just to 
the contrary, drove him out of the camp. 

About this time Sneider rifles were introduced by the Ijesas. 
The Ijesas at Lagos purchased a large quantity with cartridges 
for their country people " for the defence of the fatherland." At 
first the Ibadans did not know what they were nor their deadly 
character ; they made a mock of them for the Ijesas did not know 
how to use them properly. Being short compared with their long 
Dane guns, and making but little noise when fired, they called 
out to the Ijesas in jest, " Are you reduced to using tobacco pipes 
now ? Do send me one " (O ku temi o). But the scene was soon 
changed when certain Ijesa young men who had learnt the use 
of these weapons at Abeokuta during the Dahomian invasions 
there came over to teach and to help their people in the use of 
them, Labirinjo of Lagos, Gureje and Apara of Abeokuta being 
the principal leaders. Moreover they formed a rifle corps which 
they carefully instructed. 

These new weapons of precision now struck terror into the 
Ibadans. " What is this ? " " What is this ? " they began to 
say when they saw their effects upon the body of the slain. To 
quote an instance: — In the battle fought on the 15th May, 1881, 



460 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Chief Akintola was shot through the leg as he sat on horseback, 
the same bullet killed the horse and a page standing by ! To 
make matters worse for the Ibadans, their precarious supply of 
the coarse gunpowder for their Dane guns was exhausted. They 
were greatly perturbed by this new development, thinking that 
the British Government at Lagos must be supplying the Ekitis 
with new weapons, especially when they saw the rifle corps in 
uniform. From a great distance in the battlefield men, women and 
children were shot dead within the Ibadan camp, some mortallj' 
wounded, others crippled for life ! 

Ogedemgbe accorded these rifles a doubtful welcome. "Sooner 
or later," said he, "the Oyos will get possessed of similar weapons, 
and what is to become of us then, unless we can finish them up 
before they do, which is very doubtful ? " 

It became a matter of great difficulty for the Ibadans to muster 
together and troop into the battlefield on the day of battle. 
When they assembled at the gate of exit the rifles wrought havoc 
amongst them, every man had to try and find his way through 
nooks and corners, crawljng along valleys, picking out shelters till 
they could approach near enough within the range of their Dane guns, 
to return the fire : others, sword or cutlass in hand, would crawl 
still nearer to pounce upon them. In this way some Ijesas were 
caught with rifles and cartridges which were examined with great 
curiosity. They were so perplexed in mind that they sent home 
for a native missionary — one of their sons — and laid this matter 
before him. "Why should the Lagos Government supply the Ekitis 
with such weapons to fight us ? " It was then explained to them that 
the Lagos Government had nothing to do with it ; the Ijesas at 
Lagos formed a committee which purchased these weapons, and 
sent them up via Aiyesan, Itebu, to Ondo, and thence to Ilesa to 
assist their countrymen. 

" Can any of you chiefs be held responsible for whatever a man 
may buy at the Ibadan markets and bazaars for their friends at 
Oyo and Ogbomoso ? — No. — So then this matter stands." 

Still, they were hardly satisfied, feehng that such strange 
weapons and men to teach the use of them could not have left 
Lagos without the Governor's knowledge. 

At this crisis they sent again to the Awujale of Ij§bu on the 
28th June, 1881, craving either for the opening of the roads or for 
his arbitration : but the Ijebus did not even allow the messengers 
to enter the town of Ijebu Ode ; they were refused a hearing. 

Now, about the month of August, 1881, Derin of Oke Igbo as 
the Owoni elect of Ife came forward, professing to arrange terms 
of peace for the belligerents. His messengers met those of the 



IBADAN AT ITS EXTREMITY — BLOODY STRIFES 461 

Ibadans and the Ekitis on the battlefield and everything was 
arranged for the restoration of peace, but the whole thing broke 
down when it came to the last point, who was to decamp first. 
The Ijesas said, " We are in our country and you came from afar, 
how can you say we should leave our country ? " The Ibadans 
rephed, " Nobody said you were to leave your country, you are 
only asked to retire from the camp into the town of Mesin Ipole 
behind you, so as to give us the chance to extricate ourselves 
from the defile through which we must pass. Bitter experience 
has taught us never to decamp in the face of an enemy for thus it 
was in 1865 when decamping from Iperu after peace had been made 
between us and the Egbas and Ijebus, the Egbas pursued after 
us, and we bought our retreat dearly. Should we repeat the 
same thing here under the very eyes of the Ekitis it will mean 
annihilation for us in these ravines and precipices. Retire to the 
town and so put some distance between us, and we will then 
decamp." 

As neither party would agree to decamp first the negotiations 
failed and the war was resumed. 

At this failure of the negotiations the people began to murmur 
against the Are for bringing all these troubles upon them ; matters 
came to such a pass that the Are, on the ist September, was going 
to take poison and put an end to his hfe, but his family and the 
chiefs begged him not to do so. "It is God's will that things 
should be so," said they. " Such a thing has never happened to 
us before, but God wills it so." 

On the i8th September, 1881, they sent again to the Awujale, 
and again he would neither arbitrate nor open the roads, but sent 
them a taunting reply, " If you are tired of the war, come home." 
They returned the reply, " How can we come? We are in a 
defile." 

The Ijesa rifle corps still continued to do havoc amongst the 
Ibadans. On the 26th December the Ibadans received a terrible 
blow by the death of Belo, the brave son of the late Osundina 
(whose younger brother became afterwards so well known as 
Chief Apampa). He was a born soldier, and second to none in the 
whole camp. The death produced such a shock that his body 
could not be taken to the camp for fear of causing a panic ; from the 
battlefield it was conveyed outside the camp walls to Ikirun for 
interment. The mourning for this chief was deep and universal, 
for he was a very good man. On the news reaching home, all 
markets and bazaars were broken up for the whole day and the 
town went into mourning. Thus bloody strife continued on 
both sides for months and years. 
R 



Chapter XXVI 

FAILURES AT RECONCILIATION 

§ I. The AlAfin's Efforts for Peace 

After the failure of Derin's efforts, circumstances compelled the 
AlAfin to make a genuine effort for the restoration of peace. 

(a) The Dahomian ravages of the western district, and the 
threats to " visit Oyo this coming dry season." 

(b) The men of the frontier towns sent to him to say that 
they will all desert their towns if the King could not send an army 
to protect them. 

But the King's most effective army are the Ibadans, and those 
with them and they are pre-occupied. 

On the gth of October, 1881, he sent for the Rev. D. Olubi of 
Ibadan as head of the missionaries in the interior at the time, and 
with him " any two of his sensible colleagues." The order was 
obeyed on the 12th and the interview took place on the 13th. 

There were present at the interview : 

Two Oyg officials, viz., The-Olosi, who is the King's vade mecum 
as it were, and the Apeka, who is the white men's intermediary 
with the court. 

Also Mr. Jonathan Ojelabi, the foremost Christian gentleman at 
Oyo at the time. These are of Oyo. The Rev. D. Olubi, Mr. 
J. Okusehinde, and the writer, both Catechists under Mr. Olubi 
at Ibadan. Also Mr. A. F. Foster, by whom the letter to Mr. Olubi 
was written for the King, being the C.M.S. Scripture Reader at 
Iseyin, and also the Aseyin's messenger. 

He consulted Mr. Olubi in particular as to the best way to 
reach the British Government to crave their assistance (i) to put 
an end to the fruitless war ravaging the country ; and (2) to offer 
a check to the Dahomian inroads into the Yoruba country. 

He said that he was led to take this step as all his efforts to 
stop the war at its commencement failed, and also recently he 
fared no better. Also because the Egbas would intercept any 
messages of his to the coast. 

It had happened more than once that when his messengers 
were at Abeokuta on peaceful errands then the Egbas would start 
an expedition against the Ibadans as if he egged them on to it. 
So it was at the time of the expedition against He Bioku, and also 
at a raiding expedition to the Ibadan farms, and twice in the 

462 



FAILURES AT RECONCILIATION 463 

Oke Ogun districts. The Egbas would seize any letter that he 
wrote to the British Government, and he would be glad if Mr. Olubi 
could reach the British Government for him. 

After some discussion it was finally arranged that a letter be 
written to the Lieut. -Governor W. Brandford Griffiths at Lagos, 
and another to the Rev. J. B. Wood, Secretary of the C.M.S., 
requesting him to second his efforts ; and as he knows the country 
very well, to explain matters to the Governor of Lagos on any point 
His Excellency may require further elucidation. 

The Palace, Oyo. 

October i^th, 1881. 
To His Excellency, 

LIEUT.-GOVERNOR W. B. GRIFFITHS, 

Sir — I hereby approach your Excellency and through 
you to the Imperial Government of England with this humble 
request : (i) My country has long been disturbed by a desultory 
war, which your Excellency well knows and which has put a stop 
to all trade and impoverished the country, and thousands of 
lives have perished by death or hopeless slavery. 

I have several times undertaken to bring about the long- 
desired peace, but my ef^trts have from time to time been 
frustrated. Instead of terminating the war is extending, to 
threaten the utter extinction of the Yoruba race. 

The Dahomians have taken advantage of this to ruin my king- 
dom. A few months ago seven towns have fallen a victim to 
their rapacities and Iseyin is now threatened. The next turn 
might be to my own royal city. 

With all possible speed I beg that the Imperial Government 
— for which I have always a great respect — to come to my help. 
I crave your assistance both to come to settle this unfortunate 
war between the belligerent powers, and to stop the Dahomians 
who have made an inroad into my kingdom. 

To assure your Excellency of my great anxiety I pledge myself 
to undergo any expenses if only peace be effected as the issue. 

All my frontier towns are in great panic now, and if I make 
no stir to protect them they will all scatter and so I will under- 
take this in the coming dry season. 

I mention this lest you may say after asking your help I 
make a movement. 

I beg to remain, 

Adeyemi, King of the Yorubas. 



464 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The second letter, addressed to the Secretary of the C.M.S 

The Palace, Oyo. 

October i$th, 1881. 
The Rev. J. B. Wood- 
Dear Sir, — I beg to approach you with my humble request : 
You might have heard of the desultory war in my kingdom 
which has been wasting its thousands. I have undertaken 
several times to effect peace, but my authority was not respected 
by the belUgerent powers. And seeing that if this is not done 
in time, the extinction of the Yoruba race is inevitable I sent 
specially on the 9th inst. to call your representative here at 
Ibadan to consult with him how the Imperial Government might 
be reached that I might crave assistance to bring about the 
peace speedily. 

Now, I humbly beg you to assist me in urging the Government 
to attend to this my request speedily. The letter addressed 
to the Government will be forwarded by you and please use 
your influence in this important matter for the sake of humanity 
to save my kingdom from extinction. 

I am, etc., etc., 

Adeyemi, King of the Yorubas. 

§ 2. The AlAfin's Messenger 

The writer was the bearer of these letters via Oke Igbo, Ode 
Ondo, and the Mawen country to Lagos. 

Simultaneous with the invitation by the Alafin to Oyg the 
Rev. D. Olubi received also a strange oral message from Derin of 
Oke Igbo by Solomon Olorunfumi the C.M.S. mailman to Lagos 
to the effect that as all the belligerents had appUed to him to 
settle their differences for them, he wished Mr. Olubi to give him 
authority to do so, and if he was backed by him, he would have the 
confidence to act. 

The fact was, that Derin was over-elated with the regard paid 
to him by all the principal states in Yoruba-land. Mr. Olubi, 
being then the head of the missionaries in the interior came to 
be regarded as the representative of the white man, and Derin, in 
his vanity, wished for the recognition also of the white man ; 
hence the message. 

In sending the writer with the AlAfin's letter to Lagos Mr. Olubi 
asked him to say to Derin that he had no power to authorize him, 
but that he was sending down to Lagos and that the messenger 



FAILURES AT RECONCILIATION 465 

would have an interview with the Governor of Lagos on the subject 
and would bring him word on his return. 

The message was delivered to Derin and he said, " Yes, I might 
settle their differences but for the presumptions of the Ibadans, 
who wished the confederates who are in their own country to 
decamp first, which thing is impossible." 

At this time the Mawen a piratical tribe in the eastern waters 
of Lagos, and the people of Epe — an Ijebu town on the Lagoon — 
were fighting with each other, thus rendering the passage to Lagos 
from Ondo most difficult. The Epes had rashly declared war 
against the Mahins on account of their piratical habits; they 
fitted out their large war canoes, and scoured the lagoon to the 
Mahin districts. The Mahins in their small canoes easily escaped 
into the jungles and had no difficulty in shouldering their canoes 
into places of safety. The Epes, not meeting with any Mahin, 
wished also to scour the Ofara River on the other side. They 
dragged their war canoes over the bit of land separating the lagoon 
from the Ofara River about a mile distant ; this gave opportunity 
to the Mahins who lay hid in the jungles and behind large trees 
to shoot down the Epes without being seen, and so the latter were 
utterly defeated, and those who survived escaped to Itebu, and 
burnt some of their war canoes with their own hands while the rest 
fell into the hands of their enemies. Itebu is in the Lagos pro- 
tectorate and consequently Manuwa the head chief, himself a 
Mahin, held himself neutral. But the Mahins besieged them at 
Itebu for three months and they had to ransom theii lives for a 
large sum of money before they were allowed to return home to 
Epe. But the Epes commanded the lagoon and would allow no 
Mahin canoe to proceed to Lagos. 

Several Lagos traders in this district suffered by this war, and 
the Governor of Lagos had to come to these waters to restore order 
and rescue some of the Lagos traders from the Mahins. 

Such was the disturbed state of things when the bearer of the 
AlAfin's letter to Lagos reached Ode Ondo. He was twelve days 
at Ondo before he found it possible to proceed to Aiyesan, where he 
had to embark for Lagos, and eight days at Aiyesan before he could 
get a passage at all to Lagos. 

His Excellency the Governor had several interviews with the 
AlAfin's messenger in order to learn from him particulars about 
the country, and the state of things there at present political and 
otherwise. He also interviewed the representative Oyos and Ijesas 
at Lagos separately, but these being ignorant of the real state of 
things in the interior at the time could do no more than display 
tribal jealousies of each other without conveying any useful 



466 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

information. The Ij§sas thought that the opportunity of their 
countrymen had come, and that they should not be interfered 
with. The Oyos were indignant with the AlAfin's messenger 
and discredited his mission, alleging that the Oygs being the 
leading tribe should never be the first to ask for the 
Governor's interference. They questioned the genuineness 
of the letter, and asked where was the King's Ilari 
(state messenger) and where his staff as the messenger's 
credential. 

Under the circumstances the Governor asked the messenger to 
put down in writing his opinion of the situation, the exact state of 
things, and his reasons for believing that the people wanted peace 
and that the Lagos Government's interference would be acceptable. 
And this he did in a letter addressed to His Excellency on the 28th 
of November, 1881. 

In the letter he showed that all parties would welcome peace 
but could not arrange it between themselves, being jealous and 
distrustful of one another. That the Ibadans and Ekitis wished 
for peace was evident from the fact that the messengers of both 
met those of Derin (the Owoni elect of Ife) in the battlefield for the 
purpose, the only hitch being who was to decamp first. Distrustful 
of each other, either party feared a treacherous pursuit by the 
other of the one to decamp first, hence the negotiations failed. 
With the representatives of a power respected by both between 
them there was no doubt that the war would at once come to 
an end. 

As to the Egbas, he showed that they were never unanimous 
about the closing of the roads, one party being for it, the other 
against, hence they managed to find a circuitous route to Eruwa 
for trade. They also would welcome peace but would not take the 
initiative for fear of losing prestige. The same thing might be said 
of the Ijgbus. In fact, it was well known that the Awujale, their 
King, was the only one for hostilities, the Ijebus themselves would 
rather have peace, hence the strained relations existing between 
the people and their king. That at the time of his leaving Ibadan 
for Lagos, steps were being taken to renew their attempts at 
negotiation, the chances this time being more favourable from 
the fact of the capture by the Ibadans of the brother of the 
Balogun of Ijebu in a raiding expedition which he undertook 
to their farms, and his being sent home to arrange for his 
own ransom. 

From these facts it seemed evident that they would gladly accept 
from a higher and neutral power what all wished for but could 
not effect themselves. 



failures at reconciliation 467 

§ 3. The Governor's Delegates 

The Governor after due deliberation decided to send accredited 
messengers to sound the feehngs of the chiefs of the tribes most 
concerned as to how far they desired peace, and also to ascertain 
whether the Alafin's letter was genuine and if so that he should 
send an Ilari down with his staff. The delegates entrusted with 
this business were : For the Oygs — Messrs. Simeon D. Kester and 
Oderinlo Wilson ; for the Ijesas — Messrs. Phillippe Jose Meffre and 
Joseph Haastrup. These delegates with the Alafin's messenger 
left Lagos on their mission on the 5th January, 1882, bearing letters 
to the Alafin, the Ibadan war chiefs, and to the Ekitiparapos 
from the Governor. A copy of the Alafin's letter was sent back 
for confirmation if genuine or otherwise. The Governor himself, 
visiting the eastern waters of the Colony at the same time, conveyed 
them in his yacht to the landing place at Atijere. 

In order to secure greater importance for the mission, his Ex- 
cellency arranged that those interior chiefs who occupied a neutral 
position, such as the Chiefs of Ondo and Derin of Oke Igbo, should 
send their own messengers also to accompany either party. 
Accordingly the parties from Lagos proceeded first to Ode Ondo 
and then to Oke Igbo before directing their footsteps each to his 
destination with messengers from these two places. At Oke Igbo, 
when all from Lagos were being introduced, Derin flew into a rage 
with the AlAfin's messenger for not telling him the purport of his 
message to Lagos. He was inclined to doubt the genuineness of 
it. He said that the Alafin could not have sent him without first 
consulting him ; that it was his cause they were defending, that 
blockading ammunition from the Ibadans was done by his 
instructions, etc., etc. The messenger in reply reminded him of 
the message he brought him from the Rev. Mr. Olubi, which he 
admitted, and further said it was the same Olubi that sent him. 
He would not hear the messenger defend himself any further. 
Then Mr. Joseph Haastrup one of the delegates who was for fair 
play, and one Akitonde one of Derin's own men, interposed on his 
behalf, the former said the messenger was a man of God who was 
not likely to bear a false message. The latter said — He was but a 
messenger and is not supposed to know the contents of a sealed 
letter, how then was he to communicate the same to you ? 

The fact was that Derin was elated by the honour and respect 
accorded him by all the powers, and also by the recognition of the 
Governor. He thought it was because he was an Ife, a city which 
tradition says was the cradle of mankind, and not because he 
happened to hold the key of the situation to lock against or to open 
for the Ibadans to obtain ammunition from the coast. 



468 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The delegates separated at Oke Igbo, those for Oyo proceeded 
to Isoya, Modakeke and Ibadan, those for the Ekitis returned to 
Ode Ondo, and went by Iperindo and Odo to Ilesa. 

The Oyg delegates were well received at Ibadan, in fact they 
received such welcome as would be accorded to the actual peace 
messengers ; and also at Ijaye they were met at a distance of four 
miles from the town by the Balogun and about 100 followers 
drumming, fifing, and the firing o^ a feu de joie showing with what 
eagerness they were seeking after peace. 

They arrived at the capital on the loth. His Majesty the AlAfin 
had two interviews with the delegates, he confirmed his letter to 
the Governor as genuine, briefly recounted the history of the war, 
adding : " Humanity forbids me to be indifferent to the hundreds 
of lives perishing daily. The whole Yoruba race is a gift from God 
to me, and hence every loss of life even to an untimely birth is a 
loss to the AlAfin of Oyo. 

The antagonists are formidable, and without the intervention 
of a power stronger than both, peace will not be effected, hence 
I applied to the English Government for their intervention. 

If I call upon the whole Yoruba country at large, they might 
respond to my call for enforced peace, but the issue will not be good, 
peace will be too dearly bought. What I desire is an intervention 
without any further loss of life." 

The AlAfin also wrote, thanking the Governor for his letter, 
confirmed his former letter as genuine, and sent an Ilari, Obakosetan 
by name, with his staff, which was a fan. embroidered with red and 
green, as his credential. 

From Oyo the delegates proceeded to the Ibadan camp. By this 
time those to the Ekiti camp having a shorter route to traverse 
had come to those of their own side and gone back. 

The Ibadan war chiefs received the delegates well. According 
to custom they offered them cold water, and afterwards suitable 
presents, and lodged them. 

At the interview Chief Maye was the spokesman. He recounted 
the history of the war and laid great stress on the desirability of 
having a safe route to the coast for trade which should not be subject 
to the whims of their littoral neighbours ; and of the different 
possible routes, they preferred the Ikorodu route to Lagos which 
was freely opened for their use in the time of Governor Glover, and 
said they were ready to subscribe any amount that may be required 
for opening the road on their side, provided the Lagos Government 
would guarantee its security from the molestations of the Egbas 
and Ijebus. 

The delegates were the bearers of a letter also from the Ibadan 



FAILURES AT RECONCILIATION 469 

war chiefs to the Governor of Lagos. In their letter they pointed 
out strongly that they were there not as aggressors, but as defenders 
of their frontier towns. That the commencement of hostilities 
was not on their side but on the side of the Ekitis, who perpetrated 
a most horrible massacre at Ila of all Oyos on peaceful avocation 
in their midst. The reason alleged for this was the cruel and 
oppressive measures of our messengers among them but of which 
they never made any formal complaint. 

And this brutal massacre the Ekitis followed up by the invasion 
of their frontier towns. They have been defeated before but they 
renewed the invasion of Ikirun, and that was what brought them 
where they now are. 

With the Egbas they had their complications : the Egbas 
kidnapped Oyos and they retahated. They expelled all their 
people trading at Abeokuta, and they (the Ibadans) 
remonstrated ; the Egbas sent an impertinent messenger 
to them whose conduct was openly outrageous, and they replied 
by raiding the Egba farms. All this they admitted, but with the 
Ijebus and Ilorins they had no case whatever, nor could they 
understand why these should join any hostile coalition 
against them. They remonstrated with the Ilorin King but 
in vain. The Ibadan war chiefs sent two messengers down, the 
one Ojeniran representing the Are with his staff, and the other 
Oderinde representing the rest of the war chiefs. The writer, who 
was formerly the AlAfin's messenger, had again to accompany 
them with the Ilari Obakosetan to Lagos. 

By the hands of their messengers the Ibadan war chiefs sent 
specimens of the cartridges taken from the Ijesas to the Governor 
of Lagos, and asked whether it was the Lagos Government that 
supplied the Ekitis with such ammunition to fight them. 

By a strange coincidence the messengers of the different kings 
and war chiefs each with his staff met at Ode Ondo, with them Derin 
of Oke Igbo sent his son to represent him, and the Osimowe and 
chiefs of Ondo appointed their own messengers to accompany 
them to Lagos. They were also fortunate enough to meet his 
Excellency the Governor of Lagos in the eastern waters, who, when 
he heard of their arrival at Aiyesan, steamed up and conveyed them 
£ill in his yacht to Lagos on the loth February, 1882. 

The Governor had several interviews with the messengers, and 
at the same time communicated with the Governor-General, Sir 
Samuel Rowe at the Gold Coast. The latter ordered that the 
messengers should wait for him. They were two months at Lagos 
waiting for the Governor-General, who when he arrived in his gun- 
boat, summoned the messengers to an interview the next day. He 



470 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

heard them all round and reserved his decision until further 
deliberation. 

The failure of the mission was evident from what transpired at 
the meeting. At the Governor's instance the messengers related 
their messages in turn : 

Oba-ko-setan the AlAfin's Ilari said, " My Master presents his 
compliments to your Excellency. He has sent me to invite your 
kind interference in the protracted war that has been going on 
these several years in the interior, in which thousands of lives are 
being sacrificed yearly. His own effort for the purpose proving 
abortive he has been constrained to apply to you as representing 
a higher power, to enable us to effect peace throughout the land." 

The messenger of the Are of Ibadan had nothing else to say, 
" The AlAfin," said he, " is our King, and where his representative 
speaks the Ibadans cannot say otherwise. We abide by what he 
says." 

Ape-ni-di-agba the Owa's messenger said, " We have the Ibadans 
in our clutches now, and they should not be plucked off." The 
Governor replied, " Why then did you not eat them up before this 
time ? And why come here to ask this Government for their 
interference ? " 

The Ijesa messenger further stipulated as their condition that 
unless the Ibadans would give a guarantee that they will never 
make war in future with either the Ijebus, Egbas, Ilorins, Ijesas 
and Ekitis, they would not agree to peace. 

The Seriki Ogedemgbe's messenger agreed with what the Owa's 
messenger said. 

The Ondo messengers wished for peace all round. 

The Governor-General a fortnight later dismissed the messengers 
with a copy of an identical letter to each of the different kings and 
chiefs that sent them. The letter reads as follows : 

" I have carefully thought over the message you gave to me a 
fortnight ago, and I have heard from the Lieut. -Governor all 
that passed in this matter before I came to Lagos. 

I appreciate the action of the King of Oyg in sending to the 
Governor of Lagos to ask him to send an officer to make peace 
between the Ibadans and Ijesas. 

I thank the King of Oyo for the compliment he has paid to 
the English Government in doing this, showing that he believes 
in the honour of the English Government, and that he feels 
confident that an officer from the English Government will deal 
justly in this matter. 

The great Queen whom I serve, Her Most Gracious Majesty 
the Queen of England and Empress of India, has no other 



FAILURES AT RECONCILIATION 47I 

wishes than good wishes towards the entire African people. 
Her Majesty's instructions to her officers whom she sends to 
govern this colony are to promote by all proper means friendly 
intercourse between the people under theii rule and the native 
tribes li\ang near them. 

In doing this from time to time her Majesty has approved 
the visits of her officers to many of the tribes neighbouring 
Lagos. 

But Her Majesty has no desire to bring the inland tribes 
neighbouring Lagos under British rule, and though wicked people 
have said that if the white man comes to the interior he will 
take the country, I tell you pubhcly that my Queen has no 
wish to take your country. 

As to sending the messenger asked for by the King of Oyo, 
I am quite aware that in sending to ask the Governor to send a 
messenger to the Ibadan and Ijesa camps to make peace, the 
King of Oyo has done a great thing. He has made a request 
that is not to be lightly answered. 

I have thought over it patiently and very anxiously and what 
I have to say is this : the message given by the Ijesas was not 
a clear message. They said they wanted the Ibadans to go away 
and they would agree to make peace on certain conditions, and 
a part of this condition was — that the Ibadans should sign a 
promise that they would never again make war on any of the 
alHed tribes whether Egba, Ijebu, Ijesa, Ekiti, or Ilorin. 

I cannot send an officer to your camp to dictate to you what 
you shall do there, but I will report all the circumstances to Her 
Majesty's principal officer, and if hereafter the Ibadans and 
Ijesas should wish to cease from fighting, and to agree to such 
a condition as one of the Queen's officers may think right, and 
if Her Majesty should direct that one of her officers should 
visit you to try to find out their conditions, then I will do all in 
my power to carry out your wishes ; and although I have found 
fault with the difficulties in the road, I would even come wilUngly 
myself if I were directed to do so. 

The Queen is very much interested in yovu* welfare and she 
wishes her officers to use every right endeavour to increase your 
prosperity." 

Government House, Lagos. 
April 14th, 1882. 

Each of the messengers was sent back with presents for them- 
selves and for their respective masters. To the Ibadans the 
Governor sent two specimens of the cartridges used for the regulation 



ii^^ THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Martini-Henry rifle which were quite different from those of the 
Sneider, showing that what the Ijesas were using were not Govern- 
ment property. 

In the meantime, news had come to Lagos of the unsafety of 
the road between Oke Igbo and Modakeke. It was given out that 
a body of Ijebu kidnappers were stationed at Isoya to blockade 
the traffic in ammunition only, but what proved to be the fact 
was that at the instance of Derin the Ijebus were concentrating 
their forces at Isoya with the object of attacking Modakeke in the 
rear, whilst the Ifes attacked them in front. The Ogunsua (Bde of 
Modakeke) and a distinguished Modakeke Chief Ajarawa by name, 
died suddenly and rather mysteriously, it was said by poison, and 
further that Derin distributed arms and ammunition to the 
neighbouring towns of Ikire Gbangan, Ipetumodu and Oduabon 
to join in the attack on Modakeke, which being removed out of the 
way Ede would be besieged and thus the Ibadans in the camp 
would be taken in front and in the rear. But these towns not only 
refused to take part in such coalition, but also forwarded all the 
ammunition to the Are in the camp. 

This news meant a great peril for the Ibadan and Oyo messengers. 
The Governor-General, hearing this, sent a special message to 
Derin by his son that he should see to it that no harm came to 
the messengers between his town and Modakeke. But notwith- 
standing this Derin arranged with the Ijebus to meet his own men 
halfway in the forest, and that the AlAfin's first messenger with 
the letter {i.e., the writer) should be killed. It was in the presence 
of the writer that Derin's men were sharpening their matchets ; 
they went out early before dawn to waylay the messengers but it 
happened that for want of carriers they could not go that day: 
and when the kidnappers saw some traders coming with their 
loads wrapped with tarpaulin they mistook them for the messengers 
from Lagos and fell on them. The news of this disaster reached 
the messengers in the afternoon of that day and it caused great 
consternation at Oke Igbo. Derin was approached again, and 
reminded of the Governor's orders and an escort was demanded from 
him. After much trouble he sent one Asaju with five men, three with 
old and useless Dane guns, one with a revolver, and the fifth carried 
a native bell ! That was all. The escort demanded presents from 
them at once before leaving home for the services he was about to 
render. In mid forest he demanded more or he would leave 
them at the mercy of the Ijebus. Much trouble was experienced 
so that they could not reach Isoya that day ; they were soaked 
by a drenching rain, but this rain proved the providential means 
of clearing the road of kidnappers who betook themselves to shelter 



FAILURES AT RECONCILIATION 473 

when we passed. On reaching Isoya there was another detention. 
The Ijebus were loth to let them all go safe, the AlAfin's fiist 
messenger being the principal person they wished to kill ; but 
Asaju the escort interposed with, " If that had been done in the 
forest, it could not have been helped, but you cannot do that here 
now, my master will put the blame on me." So with much 
reluctance they were all let off. At Isoya they heard of the party 
that went to waylay them the previous day, about a hundred 
men armed with muskets ! It was a merciful deliverance. 

At the gate of exit from Isoya, and at the He Ife gate they 
experienced further troubles before reaching Modakeke. 

On the arrival of the messengers at Oyo the AlAfin was much 
disappointed at the failure of the mission. When the Governor's 
letter was read to him he said, " Let us say in a word the whole 
thing has collapsed ! " 

At the camp the war chiefs were very glad to see back their 
men of whom they had heard nothing for over two months. The 
failure of the mission did not seem to move them much, as they 
had expected it. 

On hearing the letter read they said — "We expected as much. 
Such has been the action of the Ijesas on a previous occasion when 
attempts at peace-making were undertaken by the AlAfin and by 
Derin of Oke Igbo." Thus ended the mission in a total failure. 

§ 4. The Lion at Bay 

Resumption of Hostilities. — On the morrow of the return of the 
Ibadan messengers, the Ibadan war chiefs announced to the Ekiti 
confederation the end of the truce which they had observed while 
negotiation was going on, and gave notice of battle. 

The war was resumed and vigorously prosecuted in all its horrors 
and with desperation. During the stay of the AlAfin's messenger 
(the writer) in the camp, fighting went on almost every day with 
varied success on either side. The Ibadans often scored over their 
opponents, but from the lack of ammunition on their side, and 
owing to the arms of precision on the other side, they could not 
dislodge the Ekitis from their strongholds. 

The Ijesas dug trenches in the battlefield in which they sheltered 
themselves from the Ibadan fire ; two of the Ibadan war chiefs 
viz., Fijabi and Sumgnu Apampa, and one of the Are's big slaves, 
Idagana by name, intrepid horsemen all, distinguished themselves 
at this time by plunging into these trenches and dislodging the 
Ijesas and Ekitis from them. This daring act they styled " Tengba," 
or " Ajapa," i.e., a speedily accomphshed job: it was always 
done at a tremendous risk of their hves, for whilst they were exposed 



474 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

to the steady fire of their foes, their own men behind them could 
not return the fire for fear of wounding them and those who 
accompanied them on horseback, until all had jumped into the 
trenches and dispersed the foes. 

The Ibadans were now determined to possess themselves of 
breach-loading guns and cartridges at whatever cost. Letters 
were written to the Oygs of Lagos, individually to distinguished 
men among them and collectively to the whole, stating their own 
case for the war, and calling for help as those on the other side 
had been helped by their own people, but for political reasons 
they received no response, as we shall see hereafter. 

Hostilities by the Egbas. — Not only at Kiriji was the war being 
vigorously prosecuted, but the Egbas also resumed activities in 
kidnapping in the Ibadan farms at home. About the 15th of June, 
1882, the Egbas closed the Berekodo and Eruwa roads ; the Are had 
not ceased carrying on some negotiations with them all this time, 
for it was by his goodwill and connivance markets were opened 
formerly at Ketu and Ejio, and afterwards at Eruwa and Berekodo 
for trade, to the mutual advantage of both sides. Now they pro- 
fessed at this time to be displeased with the message brought by 
Ok6 the Are's principal messenger, hence they recalled all their 
traders who were as far as Berekodo and Iseyin and expelled all 
Oyos from Abeokuta before closing the roads. 

Lawore the Aseyin did his best to pacify the Egbas, and bring 
about a good understanding to keep the roads open, but all in 
vain. At a public meeting held at Iseyin on the 19th he took 
from a certain man an Egba slave who had escaped to Iseyin and 
sent him back to Abeokuta as a mark of goodwill ; but his 
messenger was not even allowed to enter the town. This act was 
repaid on the 31st by another raiding expedition on the Ibadan 
farms, but the Ibadan hunters gave chase, overtook them and 
rescued all the captives. 

The Dahomians again. — On the i8th August, about 200 Meko 
refugees arrived at Iseyin who escaped the second invasion 
by the Dahomians. They were well received, and a portion of 
land allotted to them to build on, with ample room for more of 
their friends who might escape to this place. 

A Bogus Peace Negotiation. — About this time the Ilorins sent 
some messengers to the Ibadan camp to negotiate for peace between 
them. The Ibadans had good reasons for suspecting their sin- 
cerity and therefore they sent them back with the message that if 
they are sincere in their overtures for peace, let them raise the 
siege of Ofa and return home, and if they are loth to return home 
empty they may take the town of Otun. This place was offered 



FAILURES AT RECONCILIATION 475 

to the Ilorins to be taken because of the mortal hatred they knew 
the Ilorins had harboured against it. It had hitherto been secure 
under the protection of Ibadan, but now Otun had joined the con- 
federates against them. She, however, had already subm.itted to 
Ilorin and accepted an Ilorin political Resident. As this overture 
was only a ruse to lead the Ibadans to withdraw their contingent 
at Ofa so that they might capture that city and advance to their 
rear, the negotiation fell through. 

About the 14th September, 1882, a comet appeared in the 
heavens, which to the Yorubas is a very ominous sign. They are 
always on the look out for the demise of a great king or a mighty 
chief or the destruction of a great city ; consequently at such a 
time every important king or chief in the country usually consults 
his Ifa and offers a propitiatory sacrifice for the preservation of his 
life. The last seen before this was in 1859, when King Atiba 
of Oyo died. 

The Revolt of the Ifes. — Although the Ife auxiliary army was 
with the Ibadans in the camp at Kiriji, yet it was known that the 
Ifgs at home sympathized rather with the Ekitis than with their 
overlords and would long ago have attacked the Ibadans from the 
rear but for the presence of the Modakekes near them. There 
might be other reasons for their hostility against the Ibadans but 
the chief one alleged was the forcing on them of Ayikiti, the son of 
a tyrant, as their Owoni (or king) in 1877. 

It will be remembered that the Are engaged the services of the 
Ifes and Modakekes in his raids on the Egba farms in 1877, and 
after the retreat from Osiele Ayikiti the Ife general requested 
as the greatest favour he could show him that he should place him 
on his father's throne in order to preserve his seed from utter 
destruction, which he was sure would happen in revenge for the 
great mischief his father had done during his reign. 

The Are demurred, being unwilling to force upon the Ifes a 
king not in consonance with their desire, but Ayikiti brought great 
pressure to bear, and the Arg felt bound not only to reward his 
services, but to secure at least the loyalty and friendship of one 
leading provincial king. But he very soon after turned against 
the Ibadans. Ayikiti however did not survive long but the 
Ifes all the same harboured a feeling of spite and resentment 
against the Ibadans on that account, and that they were seeking 
an opportunity to give effect to. The Modakekes at their doors 
rendered this impossible, they refused to join in any coalition 
against Ibadan and hence the Ife hostility was directed in the 
first instance to the Modakekes themselves ; they began kidnapping 
in their farms at first. Living in such contiguity to each other 



476 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

intermarriages of course were frequent and social intercourse 
unrestricted, but at this time several Modakekes who went to their 
relatives at lie Ife were heard of no more, some the Modakekes 
had to redeem back. 

A distinguished Ife chief, Akingbade by name, and the Agaju 
of Derin of Oke Igbo went and joined the Ijebu camp at Isgya to 
kidnap Yoruba caravans, and they made no exception of Moda- 
k§kes their neighbours. 

The Are hearing this sent over and again to conciliate them, and 
urged on Derin rather to come over to He Ife and be crowned the 
Owoni and restore peace to at least that part of the country ; but 
Derin refused to comply unless the Ibadans would first cede to him 
the following towns which once may have belonged to Ifg but 
had ceased to be so for at least 50 years, viz., Ipetumodu, Odiiabon, 
Gbangan, Ikire, Apomu, and the villages in their vicinity. Other- 
wise (said he) he would not go until the close of the war which he 
thought could only end in one way, which would indubitably place 
these towns in his hands. 

To concihate the Ifes the Are sent one Told to -mediate between 
the two parties, which done, they were to take a mutual oath of 
amity and to ratify the same with the blood of a sheep he took 
with him. 

But matters in the meantime had come to a crisis. The Ifes 
raided the Modakeke farms, caught and maltreated a woman by 
cutting off her breasts, the Modakekes in turn resented the affront, 
they retaliated by raiding Ife farms, caught four persons and also 
sent to the camp at Kiriji to recall Oyebade their Balogun, for it 
was evident that war has now become inevitable. 

The Are did not hke the look of things. In permitting Oyebade 
to go home he sent also an influential Ife chief, charging each of 
them to go and quell the faction, put the ringleaders to death on 
either side and restore peace at home. 

These chiefs went by forced marches and took the precaution 
that the news of their coming should not precede them. They 
reached home together. Oyebade and Adepoju, his second in 
command, marched straight to the house of one Obalaiye, a 
known intriguer who was carrying on secret correspondence with 
the Ilorins and had obtained a horse from them, and stood before 
his gate. Hearing that the war chiefs were come, he came out to 
welcome them ; whilst these war chiefs lay prostrate to receive 
the greetings of this venerable man, a swordsman who had been 
instructed walked round to his back and, ere he was aware, by one 
sweep of the sword his head fell off from his shoulders ! His house 
was immediately confiscated and levelled with the ground. The 



FAILURES AT RECONCILIATION 477 

war chiefs saw this accompUshed before they went to their own 
homes. 

But the Ifes not only did not punish but condoned the action 
of the ringleaders on their side, and were prepared to give battle 
the following morning. Oyebade nearly lost his life by trusting 
himself too far among the Ifes tr5ang to explain that they were 
not sent home to fight but to punish the ringleaders and respect 
the oaths ; he was luckily pulled back in time. On account of the 
oath the first shot fired by the Ifes was by a man who climbed up 
a tree to do so ; the idea being that to break the oath standing on 
the earth on which the oath was taken would surely result in 
disaster. But notwithstanding this, when they joined battle the 
Ifes were defeated and driven away out of the city and many of 
them were taken captives. 

He Ife and Modakeke being practically one town with only a 
small stream separating the two, they had not to go outside their 
walls to fight, the battle took place at the Akogun market. It was 
practically a civil war. 

The Are and Ibadan chiefs hearing this ordered that the Ife 
captives be released, and Toki was sent again with a sheep and a 
cat to worship at the tomb of Orafiyan, and to bring both parties 
together again into a covenant ratifying the same with an oath 
on the blood of these victims. 

But ere this could be done the Ife young men had collected 
another force and made a determined attack on Modakeke. This 
was on the ist December, 1882. Victory was again on the side of 
Modakeke, but the victory was dearly bought ; Oyebade their 
commander-in-chief was mortally wounded and he died a short 
time afterwards leaving the command of the army to Adepoju. 

While all this was going on at home the Ife war chiefs were in 
the Ibadan camp at Kiriji fighting against the Ekitiparapos but 
one night before daybreak they left the camp in a body with their 
wives and children and went over through the battlefield to 
the Ekitis. They were received with open arms and sent home to 
join their comrades to make efforts to destroy Modakeke. 

Modakeke now became the third seat of war. 

Reinforcements came to the Ifes from the Ijesas and Ij§bus. 
An Ijesa force under their war chief Ayimoro encamped on the 
north-east and the Ijebus under their Seriki Ogunsigun of Igbo 
crossed the Osun river and encamped in the south. The If§s 
themselves were encamped in a village eastward of Modakekg. 
From these three points Modakeke was attacked at one and the 
same time. The fall of Modakeke would mean an attack in the 
rear for the Ibadans at Kiriji and consequently they were obhged 



47^ THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

to send as reinforcement the following chiefs on the 4th December, 
viz., Akintola, Sanusi, Bamgbegbin and Aturu. 

At this new development the Ekitis redoubled their energies to 
overwhelm the Ibadans in the camp the battle raged at Kiriji 
with unabated fury and many valuable lives were lost on both 
sides. Of the men of note on the Ibadan side were : Ali Laluwoye 
the Otun (from illness) Aderibigbe son of the late Bale Olugbode 
(from wounds previously received) Awo the son of the late Labo- 
sinde, the Baba Isale, Ogunrinde son of the late Agbakiu. 

Some of the reinforcement at Modakeke had to be recalled when 
the fighting at Kiriji was becoming too strong leaving Akintola 
alone and subsequently Sumgnu Apamp'a was sent to join him. 

Thus stood the Ibadan lion at bay facing fiive fronts, with 
ammunition spent, yet flinching from none, at Ofa, at Kiriji, at 
Modakgke and against the Egbas as well as the Ijebus at home. 



Chapter XXVII 

A RIFT IN THE CLOUDS 

§ r. A Turning Point 

When everything was thus dark and gloomy for the Ibadans, 
quite unexpectedly, on the 17th December, 1882, Ijebu messengers 
arrived in the town to negotiate for peace between the two 
countries ! 

The messengers were received at the Are's gate at Ibadan. 
They were hooted at in the streets and called all sorts of names, 
being taken for spies. Their message was however conveyed to 
the war chiefs in the camp and the home authorities were instructed 
to send a messenger back along with them to ascertain the truth 
of their statements. 

The hearts of all were made glad on the return of the messengers 
when they heard that the Ijebus were sincere in their overtures 
for peace. Ajako the messenger sent reported that about 800 of 
the Ogbonis met at Oru and without a dissentient voice all agreed 
to make peace. Ten kegs of powder and ten bags of salt were the 
presents sent to the Are and war chiefs as a token of their goodwill. 
These sent as return presents slaves, gowns, and sheep. Thus 
peace was concluded with the Ijebus and trading relations resumed. 
Provisions which were scarce at Ijebu were taken down and bartered 
for salt, and cheap foreign made cloths and cutlery, the Ijgbus 
for the present forbidding the exportation of powder and firearms. 
What led to this negotiation for peace has been told in a previous 
chapter {vide p. 451). And again, the Ijgbus, being essentially a 
commercial people, their only market for interior products and 
for disposing of their wares from the coast was closed to them since 
the commencement of the war, and scarcity of foodstuffs caused 
much distress among them also, and yet the Egbas, whose cause 
they were espousing — having no grievance of their own — had 
managed to open markets for themselves, first at Ketu and Ejio, 
subsequently nearer home at Eruwa by which their own wants 
were reheved. The Ijebus had no such outlet ; they were there- 
fore inclined towards peace with Ibadan, but the Awujale their 
king was for prosecuting the war vigorously for which purpose he 
ordered the Balogun put to encamp at Oru, from whence he might 
send raiding expeditions out to the Ibadan farms. We have seen 
the disaster that befel them on the loth of April, 1881, and the 

479 



480 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

capture of the Balogun of Ijebu's brother, who was sent back by 
the Ibadans to effect a good understanding between them and the 
Ijebus. That episode made a deep impression on the Ijebus, and 
ever since they had been working for peace against the wish of 
the Awujale, and a small clique about him ; but a quiet revolution 
had been going on towards this end. The people were now 
determined to have the road open in spite of the Awujale, and this 
led to something like a civil war as will be seen below. 

Another Ilorin Episode. — Simultaneously with this event was 
the arrival of a peace embassy from the Sultan of Gando to the 
Ilorin and Ibadan camps. The Ibadan chiefs, who would not 
listen to any overtures from the Ilorins, knowing their treachery, 
paid more regard to these messengers, gave them a cordial 
welcome, treated them respectfully, beUeving them to be 
sincere. To show their wilUngness to accept peace with IJorin 
the Are sent home for about 60 of the Ilorin captives at 
Ibadan, who were men of influence, and sent them all home 
on horseback. Moreover they accepted all the terms offered 
by the Ilorins. Peace was so far concluded that the opposing 
armies at Ofa exchanged visits with each other. Several Ibadan 
and Ofa people even passed on to Ilorin and traders on both sides 
who had been shut up in other towns hailed the opportunity of 
returning home, and others did a good trade as far as Bida in 
potash and salt while the opportunity lasted. 

But still the Ilorins refused to raise the siege of Ofa, on the con- 
trary they insisted on the Ibadan contingent going away. The 
Ibadans on the other hand promised that not only would they leave 
Ofa, but also that they would not claim the overlordship of that 
city, they would hand it over to Ilorin, but only on one condition, 
namely, that the town be not destroyed ; but as they were there 
to defend that town they could not retire except the siege was first 
raised. This test of the sincerity of motives of the Ilorins being 
insisted on, the negotiations failed and hostihties were resumed. 

§ 2. Rambling Talks of Peace 

The Rev. David Hinderer, a retired missionary of the C.M.S., 
who for many years had laboured in Yoruba land and who con- 
tinued to take a lively interest in the country and its people, 
addressed a letter to the representatives of the tribes residing at 
Lagos on the difficulties present in the interior, well knowing the 
tribal feelings and jealousies existing at Lagos which were fanning 
the flames of the hostilities in the hinterland. He invoked them 
as patriots and especially as Christians to see that all tribal feelings 
and jealousies be set aside in the interests of peace to their father- 



A RIFT IN THE CLOUDS 481 

land, and that they should act in concert in order to restore good 
understanding among their fellowmen, and prosperity to their 
unhappy country. 

This led to a representative gathering at Lagos of the elders of 
the different tribes, in which it was resolved that a deputation 
should wait upon the Lieut. -Governor Alfred Moloney, on the 
subject of peace between the interior tribes. Those appointed for 
the purpose were : The Rev. Jas. Johnson, Pastor of St. Paul's 
Breadfruit, Messrs. Henry Robbin and L H. Willoughby, native 
merchants. They waited on the Governor on the 8th of December, 
1882, and presented the following resolution : 

" At a meeting of the representative elders of the different 
tribes, Yorubas, Egbas, Ijebus, Ijesas Ifes and Ondos, held at the 
Breadfruit parsonage on the 7th of December, 1882, in reference 
to the long-standing warfare in the interior, from which both the 
interior countries and Lagos have suffered, the following resolution 
was after a full consideration of the subject unanimously 
adopted : 

' That this meeting, convinced of the ex-king Dosumu's 
influence with the kings and chiefs of the interior, though he no 
more exercise regal power in Lagos, and this is known every- 
where in the interior, decides that a deputation composed of 
nominated representatives of the different tribes be appointed 
to wait upon him, and respectfully solicit his interference with 
the King of Jebu and the other kings and chiefs in the interior 
for the peaceable settlement of the interior difficulty. His 
Excellency the Governor of Lagos having been first respectfully 
informed of it, and the countenance and support of his influence 
had.' (Sgd.) Jas. Johnson." 

His Excellency the Governor replied that no one was more 
desirous than Her Majesty to see peace restored among the people 
of the interior, and with such an object so far as counsel, advice 
and moral influence went, he would not hesitate to do all he could 
in Lagos. Giving the deputation distinctly to understand that 
neither Dosumu nor his chiefs were allowed to exercise any rule 
in the settlement ; yet the Governor considered that he would 
best suit the interest of the Government and meet the aim of the 
community by having a meeting of the ex-king and his chiefs, at 
which he would allow to be introduced the members of the depu- 
tation who could then repeat the resolution on which he would then 
for himself hear the views of Dosumu and his chiefs. 

The meeting accordingly took place on the nth, at which, after 
some introductory remarks by the Governor, the Rev. Mr. Johnson 



4^2 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

repeated the resolution, explained the desire of the community 
and advanced his hopes. 

King Dosumu next spoke but said nothing of importance. 

HeS was followed by the Apena, who acted as spokesman for the 
king and the remaining chiefs, conveying that they would like the 
matter reported to the Queen, and if they were then asked to 
exercise their influence with the king and chiefs of I jebu they would 
willingly do so. 

One and all they' expressed their desire for peace. In support 
of the aim of the community Messrs. Robbin and Willoughby also 
spoke forcibly. 

We may remark that the Apena evinced such caution and 
reluctance in the matter of action as desired because of the trouble 
he fell into in 1875 during the administration of Governor Dumaresq 
when he was personally forbidden by the Lieut. -Governor Lees 
to interfere in Ijebu matters. 

The Governor said that if Dosumu and the chiefs would put to 
loyal advantage their influence in the matter of the restoration of 
peace to the country lie was confident that Her Majesty's Govern- 
ment would be appreciative of any such effort ; and that a general 
move for good in the way of an honest endeavour to restore peace 
was very different to direct and meddlesome interference in the 
interior economy of a government such as Ijebu. 

This movement was the first of a series of fruitless meetings held 
at Lagos between the years 1882 and 1892 which had for their object 
the restoration of peace in the hinterland by the exercise of 
" influence." The subsequent meetings however were not under 
the aegis of the Government but among the tribal representatives 
themselves. 

The AlAfin's letter to Lieut. -Governor Griffiths in 1881 made it 
clear that it required a higher power which commanded, the respect 
of the combatants on both sides to make them lay down their arms. 

The AlAfin's messenger emphasised the fact over and over that 
nothing less than an armed intervention could prevail upon the 
belligerents to decamp. 

But then the interior at that time was so little known that 
people living at ease and security at Lagos had no idea of those 
arduous circumstances of hfe that moved men resolute and brave 
to protect their interests by the sinews of their own right arms. 
Probably there were not half a dozen men in all Lagos, certainly 
not among the " influential " personages — so-called — who knew 
the exact state of things prevailing in the interior, or we would 
have heard less of the " influence " which the ex-king of Lagos 
or the Awujale of Ijebu Ode was able to exert with the heroes of 



A RIFT IN THE CLOUDS 483 

a Homeric struggle, incapable as they were to intervene with a 
force or to guarantee safety for an hour ; nor was it apparent by 
what means they could sheath the sword of men who meant 
business. 

What was happening at Ijebu at that very moment furnishes an 
amusing commentary on the resolution read before the Governor, 
and affords incontestible proofs of how little Lagosians knew about 
up country affairs, not even of what was going on, so to speak, at 
their very doors and also of what value the Awujale would be 
in the matter of peace. 

The tribal parties at Lagos evidently missed the point of Mr. 
Hinderer's letter. The idea expressed in their resolution and their 
procedure seemed rather far-fetched, and roundabout, except the 
object had been to show that the Awujale of Ijebu was an 
important personage. 

The remarks of Apelidiagba to the Governor General, Sir Samuel 
Rowe, which served to wreck the peace embassy initiated by the 
AlAfin were dictated at Lagos ; the same expression had been used 
before by the Ijesa representatives to the Lieut. -Governor W. B, 
Griffiths. As the tribal antagonism of compatriots at Lagos 
served to inflame and excite the belligerents, so unanimity amongst 
them might serve to soothe their feehngs and dispose them to yield 
even at a mere message — say — of the Governor, behind whom there 
was known to be a force of incalculable weight. Such was the 
intention of Mr. Hinderer. 

On the 26th of December, 1882, the Apena waited on the Governor 
to intimate to His Excellency that he was the person deputed by the 
ex-king and council to proceed to Ijebu on the above mission. 

The Apena's Report 

The Report makes long and tedious reading, but the following 
extract is the gist of the same. 

The Apena of Lagos who was sent up on a mission to the Awujale 
of Ijebu with the object of adopting measures for putting an end 
to the war in the interior, left Lagos on the 28th December, 1882, 
and landing at the first Ijebu port at Itg Ike, he learnt of the civil 
commotion at Ijebu Ode the chief town, and instead of sleeping 
there for the night he left at midnight, went through bush paths 
with lighted torches and by forced march reached Ijebu Ode by 
daybreak. He lost no time, but was announced by the Apena of 
Ijebu Ode to the Awujale, who granted him an audience at once. 

The Apena told in few words the object of his visit and what 
gave rise to it, viz., a letter written by a retired missionary to the 
representatives of all the interior tribes at Lagos in the interest of 



484 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

peace ; and that his mission was at the instance of the ex-King 
Dosumu and his council, with the approval of the Governor of 
Lagos. 

The Awujale, after hearing the Apena's mission, requested him 
to proceed to the Ijebu camp at Oru to deliver the same to the 
war chiefs there. But the Apena would like to know the King's 
mind, as it was most likely the war chiefs would ask, " What did 
he say to your message ? " The King then said he could not 
give an authoritative reply to a poUtical message without the 
advice of his councillors, and that they were all disaffected now, 
and were deserting the town. The Apena might be able to find out 
why they were leaving the town. But he might mention that the 
object of the Apena's mission, strange to say, bears strongly on 
the present condition of things at Ijebu, viz., the restoration of 
peace in the interior. That it was with the advice of all his 
councillors, the Osugbos, Ipampas, Ilamurins, and the Ogboni 
Odis, that he embarked on hostilities against Ibadan, and that he 
sent messengers to the sixteen kings of the Ekiti confederates, also 
to the king of Ilorin, to the AlAfin of Oyo and others before he 
commenced hostilities, and he promised the Ijesas and Ekitis his 
support in breaking off the Ibadan yoke ; and now after entering 
into an agreement with all these kings his own people turned round 
and said they desired peace with Ibadan, and he was to break his 
word to the other kings ! 

The war chiefs by his commands are at Orii as a base of 
operation against the Ibadan farms, but why were the civil chiefs 
deserting the town for the village of Imowo ? The Apena might 
be able to ascertain the reason when he got there. The Apena of 
Ijebu Ode told him that the civil chiefs were having a meeting that 
day at Imowo and that he was to be quick so that he might 
meet them all together. 

Accordingly, the Apena on his way to the Ij§bu camp at 
Oru passed through the village of Imowo, where he met about 
320 of the Ogbonis and others. He told them his mission 
and three times they asked him, "Is it customary with you 
at Lagos to settle a quarrel or not ? " He rephed in the 
affirmative. " Then," said they, " we are of the same mind." 
They said, moreover, that they had been there seven days since, 
under great personal discomforts, to interpose between the Awujale 
and the war chiefs at Orvl who were bent on a civil fight, as the 
Awujale would not listen to any arrangement to terminate hostilities 
and bring peace and prosperity to the country. He was to hasten 
at once to Oru as the war chiefs were holding a council there " to- 
day " and the result might be some strenuous measures. He did so, 



A RIFT IN THE CLOUDS 485 

and met them just dispersing from the meeting, but they resumed 
their seats when they saw him. He related to them the object 
of his mission and the Balogun asked him, " Is it customary with 
you at Lagos to settle a quarrel or not ? " He rephed in the 
affirmative ; the Balogun then turned to the chiefs and people 
asking them what they thought of the message of the community 
of Lagos by the Apena about the restoration of peace in the 
interior and resumption of friendly relations ? The answer was 
one loud shout of joy. 

The Balogun thereupon told his own story. For the last seven 
years (said he) they had been stationed at Orii to carry on hostili- 
ties against the Ibadans, they had spent their all, their money 
and their goods gone, and they were now impoverished. ' ' You may 
have heard of the fame of Ibadan," said he. " Do you think 
anyone in his senses can go against such a people with a pouchful 
of parched corn ? " — No. — Then as the King has made his state- 
ments, by the leave of the war chiefs the Apena should patiently 
hear their own verison. 

The Balogun then proceeded to say that they had no cause of 
quarrel with the Ibadans but were drawn to one by the Egbas. 
That the same thing was done in 1860-62 during the Ijaye war, the 
Egbas sent to them to say two Oyos were fighting, and they were 
going to flog them both ; but on the contrary it was the Ibadans 
that flogged both the Egbas and I j ayes. The scene of battle was 
changed from Ijaye to Oke kere in the Remo district, and there was 
an appalling amount of bloodshed before they succeeded in driving 
the Ibadans home : but that they, the Ijebus, were then impressed 
with the irony of the whole situation : the Ibadans were there to 
defend Ijebu towns against the Egbas, " and we joined the Egbas 
in fighting them ! After all, we were the losers because the result 
was the destruction of so many towns in the R§mg districts. And 
with all their pretensions the Egbas were no men. Akodudu 
was the only brave man we saw amongst them in those 
days." 

Then the Egbas needlessly went and interfered with the Ibadans 
in their new road to Porto Novo which was the origin of the present 
imbroglio, and sold 1,460 persons of those who went to trade 
amongst them, and they had involved them (the Ijebus) in 
the quarrel. Some distinguished and influential Ijebu chiefs who 
disapproved of the war had been ruined by the Awujale and would 
have been killed but that they escaped from the country. 

" We attacked the Ibadan farms and caught three men, but the 
home garrison chased us and caught 143 of us ! The Ar§ of Ibadan 
not only released them, but sent them back by one Dawodu, with 



486 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

emblematic messages, viz., a ^fan, Osin feather, and a white sash. 
But the Awujale kept listening to the advice of ill-disposed persons 
who were against peace, representing the message from the Are as a 
false message, originating from the Balogun, who, knowing salt 
to be dear at Ibadan, wished to drive a lucrative trade therefrom ! 
After a while Oluguna the Awujale's own slave, who was caught by 
the Ibadans in our raids, was sent back with a present of twelve 
slaves to the Balogun with a message that he should assist him to 
beg the Awujale. The Awujale approved of his receiving the 
presents, but arranged that future messengers should come to 
himself direct by a new road, and not by the old route through 
Oru where the Balogun was stationed. This of course they did not 
mind, thinking he might thereby be amenable to peace. 

" After this, the Are of Ibadan sent messengers to the Awujale 
several times, and each time with presents, 72 slaves in all, valuable 
cloths, a demijohn of segi beads and a crown ! All which he appro- 
priated but still would not declare the roads open for commerce 
so that we here might return home. On the contrary, he sent an 
army to Isoya to aid the Ifes in destroying Modakeke. We are 
suffering, and the Egbas on whose account we embarked on this 
suicidal policy are trading on their own account at Erebu. But 
the Awujale entered into all sorts of intrigues with the men of I wo, 
Ed§, Modakeke, Ife, and the Ijesas, and all Ijebus were scandaHzed 
at this after receiving so much from the Ibadans ! " They 
attributed it to the fact t-hat since his accession he never removed 
to the palace of the kings but remained in his mother's house, 
where he was accessible to everybody, and he followed other 
advices than those of the official councillors. Hence they were 
determined he should reside in the palace if needs be with their 
guns, or he must be deposed. They told the Apena he was free to 
inform the Awujale of their determination, nobody else would 
tell him. He promised them he would. 

He thereupon went back to the king and remonstrated with 
him. The determination of his people was that he should remove 
to the palace, demolish his present residence, send away his sons 
from him, as by custom they were to visit him only once a year, 
and that he was to execute all his bad advisers. 

The King demurred. He said that kings should reside in the 

1 A fan in Yoruba is Abebe the root b6 means to beg. 
Osin is a water bird. Sin in Yoruba means to serve 
A white sash — white is an emblem of peace. 

The message means, we beg you, we will serve you, let there be 
peace between us. 



A RIFT IN THE CLOUDS 487 

palace true, but he declined to receive orders from the people, 
and he could not be compelled to do so. 

After much remonstrance, showing him the evils of life in 
exile, reminding him of Akitoye's case at Lagos, etc., he prevailed 
upon him to yield. He asked him to take a retrospective view of 
his life and try to meet the wants of his people : that there was a 
time when he commanded and his people obeyed ; now they com- 
mand and he must obey. He had been fed by God hitherto with 
honey but now He gave him a taste of bitter herbs : the King 
would not refuse that. 

After much difficulty he obtained for the Awujale five days' 
grace in which to carry out the demands of the people, viz., to 
demolish his present residence, send his sons away, and execute 
Jiis bad advisers. (These marked victims, however, escaped to 
Epe, an Ijebu town in the Lagos protectorate.) 

There was a great deal more of compUcations attending this 
business, but he (the Apena) should not meddle with Ijebu internal 
affairs. 

The King reluctantly took leave of him and wished there were 
many like hirn for the sake of affairs of the country : he gave him 
two bags of cowries, and he left Ijebu Ode on the gth inst. via Epe for 
Lagos. On the loth the King's " ill advisers " who were marked 
for destruction met him at Epe, he advised Agbaje, the chief ruler 
of Epe, not to deliver them up for death but rather refer the case 
to the Governor of Lagos through Dosumu. The mat whereon 
he sat at Epe, valued about 20 heads of cowries, was given him as 
a present, and they expressed high appreciation of his services 
in bringing the affairs in Ijebu to such a peaceful issue. He 
arrived at Lagos early on the 12th of January, 1883. 

The following letters marked A, B and C from Agbaje, the 
Balogun of Epe (an Ijebu port subject to Lagos), to the Governor 
of Lagos, will show us the condition of the Ijebus at that time and 
the sequel to the Apena's visit. 

Letter A. 

Sir, — I have the honour of informing your Excellency that 
I have had the mind of laying before your Excellency's infor- 
mation the other day when here in H.M.S. Gertrude the 
quarrel between the King of Ijebu and His Majesty's subjects 
who compose His Majesty's war camp at a place called Oru in 
the Ijebu territory. 

The King's subjects said that they would not fight against 
the Ibadans any more : they having made three subsequent 
raids on the Ibadan's farms but were not successful, therefore 



488 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

they are tired of fighting ; they are threfore desirous of making 
peace with the Ibadans and then resume trade. 

The King not agreeing to peace-making but determined to 
carry his purpose in fighting with the Ibadans. He does not 
want any thing else but war. His Majesty's subjects said in 
charges against him that since he has been proclaimed the King 
of Ijebu he was never seen to sit on the king's throne, he resides 
in his mother's house. He was requested by his subjects to 
sit on the throne as were his predecessors and to yield to the 
peace-making with the Ibadans. These the King refused to 
accept but determines to fight with the Ibadans and no peace. 
His Majesty's subjects are being prepared to fight a civil war 
with their king and to have him dethroned while the King is 
being prepared also to resist their purpose ! 

The King and the subjects are now ready to fight the civil 
war. I have however, sent three messengers to the King at 
different times towards peace-making, but he would not permit 
me and my chiefs. Notwithstanding my further effort in sending 
the fourth message to the camp at Oru, but I am afraid they 
will not accept my offer. In a plain word, war is imminent. 
Your Excellency may say I have not given you a due notice. 
If I am successful all right otherwise I could not help. 
I have the honour, etc., 

Agbaje, Balogun of Epe. 
December 25/^, 1882. 

[Note that this letter was written three days before the Apena 
left Lagos, but the news it contained was not known before he 
left.] 

Letter B. The Balogun of Epe's second letter to the Governor 
of Lagos. 

January 12th, 1883. 

Sir, — I have the honour to asknowledge the receipt of your 
Excellency's letter of the 27th December and noted its contents. 

As per my promise in my last letter that I have sent message 
to the Ijebus at Oru in the way of mediation — mediation between 
them and their King — and as I also promised to you the result 
of such message, the messenger has returned saying that it is a 
quarrel between a father and his son, we have no hand in it 
and that in a few days after that I heard that the Apena from 
Lagos has arrived in the camp thinking that he would settle the 
rhatter, but sorry he could not do it, it is still continued. 

Since the Apena has left the camp and Ijebu Ode to this 



A RIFT IN THE CLOUDS 489 

place and proceeded to Lagos, the King's sons have been driven 
away together with four of his notable slaves with their men. 
When they left the country (? town) Ode they did not stop in 
any of the Ijebu districts but came right off to Epe. I am hearing 
that the fugitives will be pursued by their opponents, and that 
wherever they are met with the country (? town) will be 
destroyed. And now, acting to the advice of your Excellency's, 
viz., that I should be neutral in the matter, so I do but in con- 
siderating I am determined not to give up the fugitives to their 
pursuers. I will not do it to please anyone. 

Your Excellency's obedient servant, 

Agbaje, Balogun of Epe. 

[Note this letter was written on the very day the Apena reached 
Lagos.] 

Letter C. The Balogun of Epe's third letter to the Governor 
of Lagos. 

January 15th, 1883. 

Sir, — Since mine of four days ago, things here have continued 
in the zigzag manner. To-day the King of Ijebu Awujale has 
left his town Ijebu Ode and has arrived at this place (Epe). 
His Majesty's complaints are that he was requested by his 
subjects to reside in his father's house, he has done so. To 
drive away his sons, and to accept the opening of the roads 
to Ibadan, and these he has yielded to. Not satisfying with 
these, they further requested him to go to sleep — meaning that 
he should die. This he will not do as he is not ready to leave 
the world when it does not please God to take him away yet 
from the world he will not force it. Seeing that Epe is his 
country and he had had a house there before, therefore he 
returned to his home. 

I remain your obedient servant, 

Agbaje, Balogun of J^pe. 

[Note that the above was written only three days after the 
return of the Apena to Lagos, when he was supposed to have settled 
everything.] 

Thus ended the movement at Lagos which had for its object 
the termination of the deadly struggle going on at Kiriji by 
means of the " influence " of Dosumu the ex- King of Lagos, and 
Afidip^te, now the ex-King of the Ij§bus. 



490 the history of the yorubas 

§ 3. Desperate Movements 

The following letter, addressed to some gentlemen at Lagos, 
will show how straitened the Ibadans now were, from the use of 
the rifles against them. 

To I. H. WiLLOUGHBY, Esq., 
D. C. Taiwo, Esq., 
SuMONU Animasawun, Esq., 
Shitta, Esq., 
And all Lagos Oyqs or Yorubas, 

Sirs, — We, the Are and Chiefs of Ibadan, send you our 
greetings. 

We have written and sent a special messenger to you and 
that letter was our first to you, on the subject of the present 
war. We there mentioned that the Ijesas of Lagos have 
supplied their brethren with superior weapons of war, and that 
we beheve the Lagos Government had no hands in it. Our 
grounds for believing so was this. We have sent a specimen of 
the rifle shots that they have been fighting us with to the Lieut. - 
Governor W. B. Griffiths by the hands of his messengers, Messrs. 
Kester and Wilson, asking at the same time whether it was the 
Government who was supplying them with the same. Our 
messengers who accompanied them down returned with two 
different kinds of cartridges, one for the Henry Martini, and 
the other for the Government rifles, and word was sent by our 
messengers that their ammunitions of war were quite different 
from the specimens sent. We beheve them so far and have 
agreed that they should act the part of a peace-maker. 

But soon after our letter was written we were informed from 
good authority that influential people of Lagos, who could not 
have left the colony without the Government's notice, have 
actually left Lagos, and have been fighting with us with superior 
weapons of war, viz., with the GattUng gun, and with plenty 
Sneiders. 

We undertake to mention the names given to us, viz., T. F. 
Cole, Esq., Labirinjo, Esq., F. Astrope, Esq., Messrs. Campbell 
and 0§ifila, and that Mr. Vaughan was hired as the artillery 
man. How is it that such eminent men should leave the colony 
without the Governor's notice ? 

The Ijesas may truly plead that they are fighting for their 
country, but we have written to the Lagos Government telling 
them the cause of this war. It was they who first originated the 
war by encamping against Ikirun and their watchword was 
" Odo Ohk ni Ala." The Qhk river will be the boundary ; 



A RIFT IN THE CLOUDS 49I 

that is to say Iwo at a day's journey from us will be annexed 
to their own territory ! They were once defeated and this is 
a second confederation ; and we have said, and do say now, that 
we are in our frontier protecting the Oyg provinces from their 
inroads. 

Trusting you would give the matter your serious consideration 
for the interest of your country and people. We submit the 
matter to you, our kinsmen, that you bring the matter before the 
Government, that an enquiry be made if the above-mentioned 
persons could be found in the settlement. 

We have the honour, etc., 

Latosisa, A.O.K. 
and the Ibadan Chiefs. 

The above letter was read by the Yorubas of Lagos and was 
published anonymously. Mr. F. Astrope was at that time farming 
at Aiyesan, although all the same he and the other Lagos Ijesas 
were there in the interest of trade, or rather for easy transport to 
their country, but did not actually go to Ilesa, much less to the 
Ekiti camp to fight. He now brought pressure to bear upon the 
editor of the newspaper which published the letter, and L H. 
Willoughby was disclosed as responsible for its publication. 

Mr. Astrope then took legal proceedings against Mr. Willoughby 
for libel and was awarded damages of £50. 

The Ibadan war chiefs did not content themselves with the 
letter to the Oyo descendants at Lagos alone in general but wrote 
also two other letters, one to Mr. D. C. Taiwo, on May 26th, 1884, 
by one Joseph Osunrinde, and the other to Sumonu Animasawun 
on the 6th of June, 1884, by one Otesile. Both letters bearing the 
same contents, viz. : 

" As the Ij§§as are determined to spoil the Yoruba country, 
and their countrymen at Lagos are supplying them with 
European weapons of war, we send (here the messenger's name) 
to you for a supply of Sneider rifles with cartridges, and we 
promise to pay in palm oil and palm kernels which we are 
collecting for the purpose. We wish you to arrange with the 
Balogun of Ijebu in order that our produce might reach you," 
etc., etc. 

" We are, 

" Latosisa, A. O.K.," Etc., etc. 

Warned by what happened to Mr. Willoughby, great caution 
was displayed. The following was the reply sent by one who 
styles himself — A Yoruba. 



492 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Shitta Street, Lagos. 
June i6th, 1884. 
The Are-Qna-Kakanfo, 

Dear Gentlemen, 

I hope this to meet you in a good health as I am at present. 
Your message has been dehvered to us and we note your saying. 
Doubtless whatever thing you are wanting, if you give Ijebu 
goods they will supply it to you. May God let this war settle 
sooner. 

If you want to send here again, you must send to Government 
directly with King's token, either walking-stick, or other 
instrument, but if you want to send to Yorubas, you can send 
it separately. You must beUeve all what your messenger will 
tell, and receive from them advice, for they have seen here and 
yonder. You must not send such person as foohsh as Apara, for 
he is thoughtless person. If you want to send here again, you 
must elect clever and wise person in order that your wishes may 
be attended to ; and you must not send verbal message, all 
that you have to do must be written in letters. 

With kind regards and best wishes. 

Yours very faithfully and affectionately, 

A Yoruba. 

Thus the Ibadans received no help whatever from their com- 
patriots at Lagos. However, with the deposition and expulsion of 
the Awujale from his capital, the strain between Ibadan and the 
Ij§bus became relaxed. Through Chief Kuku of Ijebu Ode, who 
had resided at Ibadan for many years, as well as through the 
Balogun of Ijebu, and from private traders through the Ij§bu 
country, the Ibadans were now able to obtain at very high prices 
some rifles and ammunition, just sufficient to render their position 
more secure at Kiriji. The guns were sold to them at the rate of 
;^io to £1$ a piece, and the cartridges at 6d. each — prices which 
(considering the scarcity of money and the general impoverishment 
induced by this prolonged war) only men in desperate condition 
would care to pay. Sanusi, the Are's eldest son, was the first to 
purchase a few, then Lady Omosa, the daughter of the late 
Basorun Ogunmola, procured a few for her nephew Kongi, who 
was now the head of the house. After this the possession of a rifle 
became a general thing, every war chief trying to get a few for 
himself. For this purpose many had to sell their slaves and slave 
wives, a matter of pain and grief to them, as altogether contrary 
to their custom, but the body politic must be preserved at all costs. 



A RIFT IN THE CLOUDS 493 

Now and then contributions had to be made at home from those 
in easier circumstances. To assist those at the seat of war the 
chiefs in council ordered that those who are well-to-do, and every 
large compound, should give an equivalent of a slave each, and 
smaller compounds should combine and do the same. But the 
messengers often exacted much more than they were authorised 
to receive, and were rather indiscriminate in their exactions : the 
distress in the country in consequence can well be imagined, with 
practically the closure of the roads for trade and the restriction of 
farming through the kidnappers. 

Bad as things were on the Ibadan side latterly it was almost 
worse on the Ekiti side where Ogedemgbe's Ipayes (war-boys) 
helped to impoverish the country by a sort of licensed robbery. 
The town of Ilesa was all but deserted through their rapacities 
before a peremptory stop was put to their excesses. Even the 
more important Ekiti kings, e.g., the Ajero of Ijero, the Owor^ of 
Otiin and the Olojudo of Ido had to be present at the seat of war ; 
not however in the camp, but in the town of Mesin Ipole. The 
Owa of Ilesa did not actually go to the field, but he had to leave 
home to reside at Ijebu Ere halfway to the town of Mesin Ipole. 

Notwithstanding his expulsion, the ex-Awujale of Ijebu was not 
quiet in his place of exile, he kept moving those favourable to him 
to start a revolution in his favour : but as all were tired of the 
war nothing of consequence was done. He however sent his big 
slaves to Isgya to help Ogungigun against the town of Modak§kg. 



Chapter XXVIII 

THE REV. J. B. WOOD AND THE A.O.K. 

§ I. The Visits of the Rev. J. B. Wood to the Camps 

Such was the condition of the country as related above when the 
Rev. J. B. Wood, then the oldest missionary of the C.M.S. in the 
Yoruba country residing at Abgokuta, obtained permission from 
the Egbas to go on his round of visits to the Mission stations in 
the interior, chiefly Isejrin, Oyo and Ibadan. He arrived at Ibadan 
on the 24th August, 1884. The Ibadan war chiefs, hearing of the 
arrival at Ibadan of the white man through whom the AlAfin 
lately communicated with the Lagos Government, sent to him a 
special messenger with a letter written in the Yoruba language, 
once more asking for his kind interference in the interest of peace. 
They thought that, as a white man, and one who knew the country 
well,, he could so represent matters to the British Government 
who alone could interpose with effect. 

The reverend gentleman was highly desirous of doing something 
in that direction, but he felt that nothing could be done without 
fuller knowledge of all the facts obtainable only from the spot. 
He was therefore determined to proceed to the seat of war, taking 
with him the Rev. D. Olubi of Ibadan, Mr. Abraham F. Foster, 
C.M.S. Catechist at Ise5rin who accompanied him from Iseyin to 
Ibadan, and the writer, then C.M.S. Catechist at Ibadan. 

They left Ibadan on the i6th of September and got to the camp 
on the 24th. It was the period of the latter rains when it poured 
incessantly, the roads were in their worst condition, and the rivers 
much swollen. 

That a white man should brave it all and visit them in the 
craggy heights of Mesin, at such a distance and under such con- 
ditions filled the Ibadan chiefs with surprise and gratitude. 

The first interview with the chiefs was held on the following 
morning, when the principal war chiefs met the Rev. Mr. Wood 
and his colleagues in the Are's reception room. He opened by 
telhng them the object of his visit to the camp, that he was moved 
to do so by their letter to him, and that his wish was to visit both 
camps if possible in order to know how to proceed about the 
matter. 

Chief Maye was the Ibadan spokesman. He gave a full history 
of the origin of the relations between themselves and the Ekitis, 

494 



THE REV. J. B. WOOD AND THE A. O.K. 495 

and how they became masters of the Ijesa and Ekiti countries. 
That in most cases they were invited over by the Ekitis themselves, 
who placed themselves under their protection after throwing off 
the yoke of the Ilorins ; and that they never had any war with 
any of the Ekiti towns unless invited by one or other of themselves. 
He ended his statements by telling briefly the cause of quarrel 
between themselves and the Egbas, and how while thus engaged 
there followed the rebellion and aggression of the Ekiti 
confederates into the Oyg territory. He concluded by sajnng, 
" We are here now in the interests of the Oyo tribes fighting 
their battles and safe-guarding our frontiers from aggression, and 
the country from being overrun by the enemy as they seem 
determined to do." 

The Rev. J. B. Wood offered no remarks or comments but asked 
to be allowed to visit the other side, and thus alternately going 
and coming till he could bring both parties to understand each 
other. 

The Ibadans at first demurred to this proposal saying that the 
Ijesas will pubUsh it far and wide that they were so hard pressed 
that they were obhged to sue for help from the white man. But 
after some talk over the matter they agreed only out of deference 
to Mr. Wood, that he should pass from their camp to that of the 
other side. But how to reach the other side ? It was agreed that 
Mr. Foster and the writer should go to the Ekiti side with a flag 
of truce, bearing a message from Mr. Wood to Chief Ogedemgbe, 
asking for an interview. They proceeded therefore unarmed, each 
with his boy, Mr. Foster's boy carrying the flag of truce before 
them. The Ibadan skirmishers in the field were withdrawn in 
order to disarm suspicion, thus they crossed the Eleriko or 
Fejeboju stream. The events which followed were thus described : 

" The Ekiti soldiers seeing us coming towards them advanced to 
meet us, levelhng their guns at us ; the flag of truce was waved 
vigorously and we shouted, ' Do not fire, do not fire, we are peaceful 
messengers sent to your Commander-in-Chief.' With that they 
desisted, but walked on towards us, and we towards them, when 
all of a sudden one of them levelled his gun at Mr. Johnson, saying, 
' Ma si yin eyi na ' (I must first discharge this anyhow). With 
that he let off ! The flag of truce was thrown away and we all 
fled precipitately back : Messrs. Johnson and Foster, who had 
their boots on, fell down at the top of Fejeboju hill and rolled 
down the stream. The Ibadan skirmishers who were watching 
from the Elebolo hill hastened to our rescue and drove back the 
Ijesas, recovering the flag and personal articles dropped in the 
flight. The whole camp was astir at this incident, and 



496 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

sympathizers poured in on all sides, congratulating Mr, Wood on 
our providential escape. We offered our thanksgiving to God 
for this merciful deliverance." 

But the Ekitis reported this incident at home, describing what 
sort of men they fired on, thereupon Messrs. Gureje and Apara, 
Ijesa Christians from Abeokuta who formed and led the rifle corps, 
came to the field the next day and desired the sentinel to ask those 
men fired at yesterday to come again. As they came unarmed, we 
also approached them unarmed, and when we met we recognised 
old faces well known years ago at Abeokuta. They were surprised 
to hear that Mr. Wood was in the camp. 

These men reported the matter to the Ekiti kings and leaders 
and a deputation was sent to meet Mr. Wood on the battlefield 
to hear what he wanted. There Mr. Wood repeated the same words 
as to the Ibadan chiefs. The Ijesas demurred to any proposal of 
peace, they said their determination was " to fight it out to the 
last drop of blood." But Labirinjo of Lagos, who was amongst 
them, spoke most sensibly till he won them over ; he dilated on 
the vicissitudes and uncertainties of war, and the desirability of 
peace. He begged Mr. Wood to do all in his power to bring about 
the desired peace ; but they could not ask him over to their camp 
without first obtaining the consent of their kings and leaders. 

The object was gained at last on the 29th September, 1884, 
when Mr. Wood and his colleagues passed over to the Ekiti camp 
and stated his mission of peace. There was a good deal of high- 
flown talk, and a show of fierce determination not to yield ; at 
the end there was an adjournment till the next day. 

That day, September 30th, happened to be the Moslem festival 
of Beiram, no meeting was held in the morning. The Moslems on 
both sides had to repair to the battlefield for their prayers and 
sacrifice. On such days on previous occasions the most sanguinary 
battle used to be fought the Ekitis being determined that Qyos 
should not worship on their soil : great preparations for the strife 
was usually made, and human blood often mingled with that of 
rams offered in sacrifice ! But on this occasion, out of respect to 
Mr. Wood's presence in the camp, there was no battle. Mr. A. F. 
Foster and the writer were sent with the flag of truce to post them- 
selves between the two parties and . thus their worship was 
performed in peace, each party returning quietly to the camp. 

In the afternoon of the same day there was another meeting 
of the chiefs, after which an elaborately written document was 
placed in Mr. Wood's hands, stating the terms on which they 
would agree to make peace. This was with some difficulty 
deciphered to read thus : 



THE REV. J. B. WOOD AND THE A. O.K. 497 

1. That they claimed their independence and would no longer 
serve the Ibadans. 

2. That the Owa, being the AlAfin's younger brother, would still 
acknowledge him by a yearly gift, which is not to be taken for 
tribute but as a token of respect. 

3. That they would not carry war into Oyg territories provided 
their own territories were respected. 

4. That they would claim Igbajo, Ada, Otan and Iresi for the 
Owa of Ilesa, those places being his originally. 

5. That the Ibadans should withdraw from Of a, handing Of a 
over to the Ilorins. 

6. That the Modakekes, being Oyos, should remove from If§ 
soil. That it had been their purpose after defeating and driving 
away the Ibadans from their territory to fall upon Modakeke and 
destroy it, selling the captives to defray the expenses of the war, 
but out of respect for Mr. Wood they would give up the idea, 
but Modakeke must be removed. 

7. That the exile Awujale be re-instated. 

8. That there be a general and lasting peace throughout the 
country. 

The Rev. Mr. Wood and party returned to the Ibadan camp the 
next day with these conditions of peace, and delivered them 
verbatim to the Ibadan chiefs in council without any comment. 
After a private consultation among themselves they gave the 
following replies to each : 

1. That out of deference to the white man, and in order to peace, 
they agreed to grant the Ekitis their independence. 

2. That the brotherly relationship between the AlAfin and the 
Owa should by all means be revived ; they could have no objection 
whatever to that, as the AlAfin is their own lord and master. 

3. That they agreed to respect Ije§a territories provided the 
Ijesas respected theirs. 

4. As to Otan, Ada, Iresi, Igbajo, the Owa's claim to these 
places belongs to a remote antiquity, and that by tradition only, 
at present they are not subject to the Owa if even they ever were ; 
and note that the inhabitants are not generally Ijesas, but Qyos. 
It should be left to the people themselves to decide under whom 
they would be. 

5. They objected to remove Modakeke now, being the key to 
their own situation, but when the war was over they would require 
at least two years respite for preparation to remove the town to 
another site. 

6. That if the King of Of a choose to return to his former 
allegiance to the Ilgrins, that is his own affair, they were protecting 



498 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

him only as a friend, he had never been nor is he now under their 
allegiance. They are defending Ofa because they v/ould not hke 
to see an Oyo city so historic to be destroyed. 

7. As to the King of Ijebu, they had no hands in his dethrone- 
ment. They only heard the report of it in their camp : they were 
for years begging the Ijebus to open the road for trade and they 
refused : they were only too glad to accept their offer for trade 
now : how it came about they are not supposed to know, but 
they could not hold themselves responsible for the Awujale's re- 
instatement. 

On the next day Mr. Wood and party returned again to the Ekiti 
camp with the Ibadan rephes. This the Ekiti chiefs met to 
consider on that and the following day, and then they formulated 
their resolutions : 

1. That the four above-mentioned towns be removed at once 
and go with the Ibadans, the Owa desiring them no longer as his 
subjects. 

2. That Ofa should be evacuated at once and go with the Ibadans. 

3. The same with Modakeke. 

The Rev. Mr. Wood for once broke through his reserve and put 
in a kind word for Modakeke in consideration of the sick, the 
infirm, women and children. On account of these time ought 
necessarily to be allowed for their removal, Modakeke being a 
large town. 

The Ekiti chiefs then said they would grant them 18 days and 
no longer, after which they should fall a prey. 

With these demands Mr. Wood and party returned to the 
Ibadan camp in the afternoon, and reported to the Ibadan chiefs. 
The chiefs were rather indignant at the Ekitis dictating terms to 
them as to a conquered people, they only submitted to these 
indignities out of deference to Mr. Wood : but they refused point 
blank to remove any of these towns until they had returned home 
to Ibadan, 

Mr. Wood returned the next day to the Ekitis and reported to 
them the resolution of the Ibadans. The Ekitis now agreed to 
extend the 18 days to 120 days, " after which they should fall a 
prey if not removed." 

This ultimatum was conveyed to the Ibadans the next day by 
the Rev. Mr. Wood. It aroused a great deal of indignation among 
the Ibadan chiefs that the Ijesas should be dictating terms of 
peace to them ! Somehard words were used which threw a damper 
on Mr. Wood's spirit. Finally the chiefs met the next day to 
speak out their own minds. They said to Mr. Wood, " Hitherto 
the Ekitis have been dictating to us, and we have practically 



THE REV. J. B. WOOD AND THE A.O.K 499 

accepted all their terms ; but now we have only one request to 
make : as nothing can be done until we reach home, in order to 
expedite matters let the Ekitis retire from their camp into the town 
of Mesin behind them — only a mile distant — on that same evening 
we shall be ready to leave. 

And again, why stipulate about the removal of these towns 
when they said they wanted universal peace ? Is it an essential 
of peace to bring such distress upon thousands ? However, if such 
be necessary to a lasting peace all over the country, we require 
15 months at least in which to remove Modakeke, Igbajo, Otan, 
Iresi, and Ada. 

On the 8th of October Mr. Wood returned again to the Ekiti 
camp with the requests of the Ibadans, which were duly considered. 

Whilst the Ekitis would be prepared to grant the 15 months 
respite they would on no account remove from their camp into the 
town. They assured Mr. Wood they would never pursue after 
the Ibadans. Their Commander-in-Chief Ogedemgbe exclaimed, 
" Aja ki ilepa Ekun, Ekun ni won, Aja I'awa, Oyinbo maha mu 
won lo " (" The dog cannot pursue after a leopard, they are 
leopards, and we but dogs. White man, do take them away.") 

As an assurance of their sincerity the Ekiti chiefs said they 
were ready to build a temporary house for Mr. Wood and his 
party on the battlefield and leave with him all the Ijesa Christians 
to stay there as a witness until the Ibadans were clean gone. 

Mr. Wood returned to the Ibadans on the next day with these 
proposals. 

To these the Ibadan chiefs replied, " We have no objection to 
the temporary house being built, and the Ijesa Christians remaining 
there with the white man (though what effectual guarantee that 
will prove we fail to see), but we do certainly object to entrap 
ourselves in a defile under their very eyes. What the chiefs may 
desire is one thing ; what the uncontrollable war-boys may do is 
another. If they are sincere let them put a mile between us and 
themselves, Mesin Ipole is not far. We have accepted all their 
terms, that is the only stipulation we have to make, and that is 
reasonable enough." 

No argument could prevail upon the Ibadan chiefs to yield this 
one point, and they asked Mr. Wood to try his utmost to get the 
Ekitis to agree to this, then all would be right, and the honour 
of putting an end to this war would be his. With a trembling 
heart Mr. Wood made this last effort, and the result justified his 
fears. The Ekitis would not hear of it. They grew wild at the 
very idea. 

Thus ended in failure Mr. Wood's effort at peace negotiation. 



500 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

On that very night the Ijesas came to the battlefield and fired 
three rockets into the Ibadan camp which, however, did no harm. 
Before Mr. Wood left the Ibadans wrote him a letter of thanks for 
his efforts, and addressed letters also to Chief Ogundipe of Abe- 
okuta, who had shown much interest in their affairs, and also to the 
Governor of Lagos, lauding Mr. Wood's efforts. 

The Rev. Mr. Wood and party left the Ibadan camp on the 
17th October, 1884, and hostiUties were resumed with much vigour 
during the remaining months and during the whole of the following 
year. 

Early in 1885 Mr. Wood, in order to complete his tour of 
inspection, left Lagos to visit the C.M.S. stations at Ondo and 
Ilesa via Leke, Itebu and Aiyesan. On reaching Ondo the Rev. 
C. Phillips, the pastor of those parts, accompanied him to Ilesa, and 
thence to the seat of war again, from the Ijesa side, and he repeated 
his efforts of the preceding year between the two camps, asking 
the same questions whether it was not time for a cessation of 
hostiUties. He had to face the same objections as before : and 
this second effort also, Hke the first, ended in failure. 

§ 2. Death of Latosisa the Are-Ona-Kakanfo 

In the year 1885, not long after the Rev. J. B. Wood left the 
camp the second time, Latosisa, the GeneraHssimo of the Ibadan 
army, died. His death being wholly unexpected, various reasons 
have been assigned as the cause of it : (i) That he had forfeited his 
title as A. O.K., having exceeded the traditional 60 days in the 
campaign. But this could hardly have weighed much with him 
considering that times had greatly changed and many ancient 
customs with them. (2) That he had lost his influence among the 
war chiefs, and therefore he committed suicide. 

There is not the sUghtest doubt about this loss of influence. 
It was he himself who, by reversing the policy of his immediate 
predecessor, and advancing to high position many of the young men 
heirs to great houses in preference to older and more experienced 
men but with less means at their command, brought it about. 
The few older chiefs formerly his companions in arms having 
died out, he now found himself surrounded by much younger 
folks, the companions of his son. There is a certain camaraderie 
amongst these young men, nearly all of the same age, and sons of 
distinguished bygone chiefs, bred in the same atmosphere, and 
naturally of a common sympathy with one another. These young 
men have never ceased to lament those of their number whose 
deaths were due directly or indirectly to the intrigues of the Are, 
especially of lyapo the Seriki, son of the late Balogun Ibikunle, 



THE REV, J. B. WOOD AND THE A.O.K 5^1 

whom he sent " to sleep," of Aderibigbe, son of the late Bale 
Olugbode, Belo, son of the late Osi Osundina, and Awo, son of 
the late Baba Isale Labgsinde, all of whom perished in this war 
which the Are had brought about. And even of Ilori, son of the 
late Basorun Ogunmola, who met his death at the Jdumi war by 
the Are's bad statesmanship ; not to speak of men of lesser note. 
They felt sure that his object in bringing about these deaths was 
to make room for his ow-n son to outshine the rest, so that 
he might perpetuate the headship of Ibadan in his own family. 
But the proximate cause of his death seemed to be due to the 
action of one of his slaves towards Ajayi Osungbekun, the senior 
chief among the young men, and next to himself in command. 

The actions of the Are's slaves at this time beggar description, 
both at the seat of war, especially in the provinces, and at 
home, they carried on their excesses regardless of age, rank or sex. 
Robbery, seizing by violence, rape, etc., were of daily practice. 
The knowledge that these slaves were captives led to the town by 
the very people of whom they had now become masters through 
the indulgence of the Master, made their crime less pardonable. 

The Seriki having sent home for a ram and other things to offer 
sacrifice, the time for which was drawing near, his mother sent 
him also some Eko, home-made, with her love. The messenger 
came all the way quite safely with his charge. Leaving Irehe, he 
was making for Igbajo and was within a few hours from the camp 
when he came up with some of the Are's slaves who had gone out 
looting ! One of them in particular wrested the ram from him, 
and seized the Eko, devouring the latter there in the messenger's 
presence, who kept crying out, " It is the Seriki's ! It is the 
Seriki's ! " " And who is the Seriki ? " retorted the slave. Both 
of them got into the camp together, and the messenger related to 
his master all that happened to him and his charge all within 
sight, as it were, of the camp. The Seriki called together his 
comrades and poured his tale into S3anpathetic ears. They were 
mad with rage. They assured him of their support in whatever 
measure he might adopt, but the slave must never go with impunity 
(for they knew that as usual the Are would never deal condignly 
with him), for the same thing might occur to any one of 
themselves to-morrow. 

Together they accompanied him to the Are to complain of the 
action of his slave and to demand redress. Unfortunately the 
Are took the matter hghtly : instead of dealing out sharp punish- 
ment to the slave he left him to dispute the matter with the Seriki. 
He even attempted to shield him, before the culprit was forcibly 
brought forward. The Seriki then asked him, " Did not the 



502 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

messenger tell you the things were mine ? " He answered, " Yes, 
he did, but how am I to know that he was speaking the truth when 
he said, ' It is the Seriki's ' ? I thought he was deceiving me." 
There was no apology made, his master looked on amused. The 
Seriki thereupon arose, unsheathed his sword, and with one sweep 
severed his head from his shoulders in the very presence of his 
master ! 

All the war chiefs present neither moved nor said a word. The 
Are, imperturbable as usual, but comprehending at once what it 
all meant, said nothing. The meeting was immediately adjourned. 

It was said that the Are afterwards sent the Seriki ii heads of 
cowries. (This being the amount usually paid to the head chief 
for unsheathing his sword.) This the Seriki was said to have 
accepted without any apology. It is a metaphorical way of 
asking, "Are you prepared to take the headship?" His 
acceptance of the money was an answer in the affirmative. 

Not one of the chiefs called on the Are or sympathized with him 
on this direct affront offered him, and this grieved him most, being 
a clear evidence that their sympathy was all on the other side. 
He then knew that this was but the beginning of the end, and it 
became him to die an honourable death. He was not laid up for 
long, the fact of his ailment was not known throughout the camp 
before the rumour of his death followed. Just before the end he 
sent for Sanusi, his eldest son, and gave him his last charge. Sanusi 
left him smoking his pipe, his courtiers sitting all around him. He 
was heard to cough gently as if suffocated by the fumes of his 
pipe, and putting down the pipe he lay quietly on his mat and 
adjusted his cloth over himself and thus passed away gently. Those 
sitting about him and looking on scarcely beheved he was dead ! 

Thus passed away one whose narrie will ever be remembered in 
Yoruba history as the man who raised the fame of Ibadan to its 
highest pitch of glory and by his bad statesmanship brought it 
down to its lowest level, and there left it. 

The late Latosisa was the son of a private man, a native of 
Ilora, a suburb of Oyo. He joined the marauders at Ibadan 
as a private soldier, and in early life he was a very unfortunate 
man ; although he never missed any predatory excursions, he 
never did well for himself in any. He lived to be an old bachelor 
because he could not afford the means of marrying a wife. He was 
a palm dresser and from his own statement he could tell the nature 
of all the palm trees for miles around Ibadan. His turn of fortune 
began when in a civil war at Ibadan he was fortunate enough to 
have caught a woman with some children. It was then he had 
a wife ! And he sold the children to start life with. 



THE REV. J. B. WOOD AND THE A. O.K. 503 

Being inured and accustomed to poverty he continued to the 
end of his days to be thrifty, to feed sparingly and mostly on dry 
food, as in early life when he could afford nothing else. 

He was one of the faithful followers of Ogunmola, the late 
Basorun of Ibadan, the captain of whose guards he was when 
Ogunmola was the Otun Balogun of Ibadan. He was a man of a 
genial disposition and of winning manners. 

His first military command as a captain was when he was sent 
to take over charge of the army under Akawo before Iwawun, but 
both were hard-pressed and even besieged in their camp by the 
Ijayes that came to the succour of Iwawun, before Ogunmola 
and Osundina came to their aid and defeated the Ijayes {vide 
Chap." XVIII, p. 346). 

He was originally a pagan, and thrice was he taken to an Ifa 
grove for purification in order to have children (for he had none 
for many years after the firstborn, who was killed at the Ijaye 
war), but to no purpose. He then embraced the Moslem faith, 
and became confirmed in the faith by the birth of a son whom he 
named Sanusi. This was during the I jebu Ere war. He signaHzed 
himself at the late Ilesa war when, in taking the last road to the 
city, he had to oppose the army from the country whilst Ajayi 
Ogboriefon opposed that from the city. Together with his colleague 
he rose rapidly ; owing to political changes at Ibadan he soon 
found himself at the head of affairs. He wrested from Ojo 
Aburu-maku of Ogbomoso the title of A. O.K. He obtained the 
Ojiko {vide p. 74) from the King with two slaves; he never wore it 
himself but his favourite slave Idagana used to wear it in front of 
him as Abogunrin that of the late Are Kurunmi of Ijaye. 

He was the hero of the Ado and Aiyede wars when he took the 
field in person. The wars were unprovoked, they were simply for 
the love of slave hunting. Elated by the easy victories won, he 
declared war against the Egbas, against the expressed wishes of 
the King and his own war chiefs ; this compUcation with the Egbas 
gave room for the rebellion of the Ijesa and Ekiti provinces which 
culminated in this war. 

He was undoubtedly an ambitious man, and envied the glory 
of the two foremost houses at Ibadan, viz., those of Ibikunle and 
of Ogunmola. He strove to efface the fame and glory of both 
houses and to exalt his own over all, but in this he failed. His 
death was rather inglorious. His bones were preserved and taken 
home to Ibadan for interment. 

§ 3. The Vicissitudes of War 

After the death of the Are, Ajayi Osungbekun, the Seriki, 
became the leading General of the Ibadan army. In fact he was 



504 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the only titled war chief, the older men having all died, and the 
Are did not fill up several important vacancies before this war 
began. 

But the Ibadans were loth to retain a Seriki as their leader, 
they had always been led to victory (said they) by a Balogun and 
not by a Seriki. It was unanimously agreed that he should assume 
the title of Balogun. 

As the leading chief the title that really devolved upon him was 
that of Bale, but that is a non-combatant title, and for him to take 
it would mean that he should retire from the seat of war and go 
home — which was impracticable at this crisis. 

And again, after the death of the late Balogun Ajayi Ogboriefon, 
when the national god Ifa was consulted as to his successor the 
oracle declared for Akintola, son of the late Balogun Ibikunle, 
and brother of Seriki lyapo. Akintola then was an untitled chief, 
only an Are-agor6, and the Are was not prepared to grant so high 
a title to the head of a house he was then determined to 
see degraded, consequently he left the title open, and was not 
going to fill up this and other vacancies till after the war. In 
conferring the title on Osungbekun now, it was understood that he 
was merely to hold it in trust for Akintola, as Akintola could not 
rightly be placed over him, but after the close of the war, when 
he entered upon his rightful title of Bale, Akintola would then come 
to his own. 

But there are many amongst the Ibadans who attributed their 
failure in this war to disobedience to the voice of the oracle in 
not making Akintola the Balogun, and that they were not Ukely 
to win under any other against the voice of the oracle. And again 
it is to be noted that when Akintola first arrived at Kiriji and had 
to fight single-handed, then Ogedemgbe was caught and let off, 
because of the secret combination against the Are, which pointed 
to the fact that the oracle divined correctly. But his advance- 
ment now would be most inexpedient, and the present arrangement 
seemed fair enough. 

The War under the Leadership of Ajayi. — The young war chiefs 
who had resolved to win no victories which would redound to the 
praise and glory of the Are, had been greatly seconded in their 
resolve by circumstances they never dreamt of, and now that they 
would wish to do so, events which had transpired were too much 
for them. Very few battles were fought during the years 1885 
and 1886, as the Ibadans had now been able to secure some rifles, 
and were not slow to learn the use of them (though nothing to be 
compared to those of the Ekitis in point of number). The Ekitis 
could no longer approach the Ibadan camp to shoot into it with 



THE REV. J. B. WOOD AND THE A.O.K. 505 

impunity and to offer battle. But still they had the advantage of 
position. While the Ibadans were filing out of camp in the day of 
battle their rifle corps could always make a target of them, but 
when they had all spread themselves on the battlefield the 
chances were somewhat even, both sides had to seek cover and 
shelter from the sharpshooters. They then did more of skirmishing 
than of real battle. 

The War at 0/a.— But the war at Ofa was raging with unabated 
fury. The men of Ofa and the Ibadan contingent there encamped 
outside the city, and erected double walls connecting the city with 
the camp. Behind the outermost wall they engaged the enemy. 
The Ilorins, trusting more to their cavalry, had but few infantry 
men, besides those supplied them by the Ekitis, and they were' 
armed with swords. The method of the cavalry men was to gallop 
round and round beyond the range of bullets, and then watch 
the opportunity for seizing a weak point or take their enemies 
unawares and endeavour to pull down the walls or spear the foe. 
When they were pressing too hard upon the defenders, the Balogun 
of Ibadan sent over one of his slaves, Babare by name, a sharp- 
shooter, with a rifle and a good supply of cartridges. His presence 
was always in demand at whatever point the battle was hottest, 
and by dropping two or three horsemen he always caused the 
Ilorins to decamp. 

The War at Modakeke. — Here the battle was fiercest, as the Ifes, 
Ekitis and Ijebus who were pressing hard to destroy the town, 
were better supphed with arms of precision. Akintgla, who was 
sent to reinforce the place twice, suffered disasters by ambuscade 
which nearly proved fatal to his life. At the first instance the Ifgs 
came to provoke a fight after having placed ambuscades in several 
places in the ruins of the city. As the Modakeke war chiefs and 
the Ibadan contingent joined battle with them at the Akogun 
market, the Ifes retreated as if defeated, and they were being 
pursued until the pursuers were drawn off to a considerable distance 
from the town, then the ambuscades opened fire behind them. 
They were completely hemmed in on every side, and had to 
fight their way back. In the rush, Akintola's horse slipped and 
fell, and he was fortunate enough to escape being trodden to death 
as many others were, horse and foot ! As soon as they had 
fought their way through one set of ambush men, and were walking 
slowly to take breath, another set would open fire upon them ; 
thus they went from one to the other, the Ifes and Ijesas pressing 
hard in pursuit, determined to take Modakeke that day. But 
Adepoju, the Balogun of Modakgke, at the expense of his life saved 
the situation : with a band of a faithful few he barred the way 



506 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

against the pursuers and fought desperately like a hero, against 
great odds until he fell among the slain. It was instantly reported 
in the town that both Akintola and the Balogun had fallen, and 
many had already begun to pack up to flee when Akintola's drum 
was heard approaching. He himself by this time was completely 
exhausted, panting and thirsty. He owed his safety to his cousin 
Latunji, an intrepid horseman. Latunji it was said, woke up, 
that morning feeling sad and depressed, and on consulting his Tfa 
he was advised not to go out that day, and consequently he kept 
at home ; but when he heard of the disaster he immediately saddled 
his war horse and went to the succour of his cousin. He met him 
at the Akogun market, being hotly pursued and almost taken alive. 
He dashed upon the pursuers, spearing them right and left, then 
cantering round and round his cousin said "Are agoro maha rin 
pele pele " (Are agoro, do walk on gently, gently) and kept the 
pursuers at bay until they reached the town of Modakeke. 

In this disaster Akintola lost his favourite charger, his Dane 
guns were thrown away in the flight, and what he prized most of 
all, his father's war dress, an heirloom in the family. It had 
descended in due order through his elder brothers Ko-ejo, 
Babayemi, Obembe, and lyapo to himself ; being a garment studded 
with charms, it was too heavy for him to carry in the flight so he 
entrusted it to one of his men who in the rush fell down and lost 
the garment. It was picked up by the Ifes and carried away in 
triumph, together with his horse as a trophy of war. 

The second disaster was at an engagement with the Ijebus at 
Isoya. The Ibadans and Modakekes were enticed into a distance 
in the forest in the direction of Isgya, and there the ambush 
attacked them on every side. Akintola had to fight his way back 
and lost several of his guns, his men throwing them away in their 
flight. The brave son of Chief Olubode fell in this disaster. 

Having failed to dislodge the Ibadans from Kiriji, the con- 
federates were determined to take Modakeke at all costs, so that 
Kiriji might be taken at the rear. They now reinforced the Ifes 
strongly from the Ijesas and Ekitis, Prince Fabumi at their head. 
He was determined to take Modakeke at his first fight, but in this 
he failed. In the same way he had determined to defeat the 
Ibadan army at Kiriji before Ogedemgbe came to take over the 
command, but in a fair fight he met with intrepid warriors like 
himself in Akintola and Apampa. He left several of his veterans 
dead on the battlefield, and many more — like himself— wounded 
in several places. Ogunsigun the leader of the Ijebus was also 
reinforced by the ex-Awujale's party from Epe. 

The Modakekes now took great pains to fortify their town. 



THE REV. J. B. WOOD AND THE A. O.K. 507 

They repaired the walls thoroughly and built forts upon them in 
several places, placing in them sharp shooters with rifles. But they 
never shielded themselves behind these walls, they always engaged 
the enemy outside. 

Akintola also replaced his lost Dane guns with rifles, mainly at 
the expense of his tributary town of Ipetumodu ; Apampa also 
acquired some rifles but was far more lenient with his tributary 
town of Eduabon. (Edun-j'abon.) 

The houses of the two most powerful war-chiefs at Modakeke 
in the 'sixties, Ojo Akitikori the Balogun and Ajombadi the Otun, 
were duly upheld by their worthy sons and successors, Oyebade 
and Adepoju respectively, both of whom fell in the defence of their 
town. They were duly succeeded by their brothers, Detomi of the 
the latter and Oke (nicknamed pupa, i.e., yellow, from his hght 
complexion) of the former. Oke also fell in an engagement and 
was succeeded by his half-brother Oke, surnamed Dudu (the dark) 
from his complexion. 

Detomi became lame in both his feet, but still directed the battle 
on horseback. 

With the command of a few rifles by the Ibadans the ardour 
of their foes cooled, and the war here, as at Kiriji, became less 
frequent than formerly and might practically be said to be at a 
standstill. 



Chapter XXIX 

THE INTERVENTION OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT 

§ I. Measures by Governor Moloney 

About the end of January, 1886, the Government of Lagos was 
severed from that of the Gold Coast, and Lagos was constituted 
a separate colony with Capt. A. C. Moloney as its first Governor. 
One of his first public acts was to feel his way towards the settle- 
ment of the interior difficulties. 

In an interview the writer (who happened to be at Lagos at the 
time) had with his Excellency on the 23rd of January the topic of 
conversation turned mainly on the state of things in the interior 
and he asked the writer to put down in writing an account of the 
interview, stating all he knew about the complications from the 
commencement, and what prospect there was of peace ; also to 
give the names of the principal chiefs of Ijebu, Abeokuta, Ibadan, 
Ekiti, and Ilorin concerned in this war, and an account of the visits 
of the Rev. J. B. Wood to both camps in 1884, and also to state 
his opinion as to how they might receive some one like himself 
coming among them to settle their difference for them. This the 
writer did in a long letter to H. E. the Governor. 

The Governor was then resolved to make use of the writer as 
a messenger to the Ibadan camp, and of the Rev. C. Phillips to the 
Ekiti camp. 

Having obtained the consent of the local secretary of the C.M.S. 
for making use of their services (both being C.M.S. agents) the 
Governor issued the following instructions : 

Government House, 

March 1st, 1886. 

Sir, — The Venble. Archdeacon Hamilton has most consider- 
ately placed your services at my disposal in connection with 
satisfying to the latest date on the feehng in the direction of 
peace that obtains between the Ibadans and the Ekiti parapos. 
You have in a most praiseworthy and philanthropic manner 
come forward to carry out on the subject of my wishes. They 
are embodied in the accompanying letter addressed to the 
Baloguns, chiefs, elders and people of Ibadan with whom you 
say you are on the most intimate and friendly terms. 

508 



THE INTERVENTION OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT 509 

You will be good enough accordingly to consider the contents 

of such letter as your instructions, and in view of the interviews 

I have had with you I will hope to find success as far as it can 

will attend your endeavours to act as my instructions dictated. 

I have, etc., 

Alfred Moloney, Governor. 

The instructions to Rev. PhiUips are the same, only substituting 
for " Balogun, chiefs, elders and people of Ibadan, with whom 
you say you are on the most intimate," etc., to " Owa, Balogun, 
elders, chiefs and people of Ijesa whom you at times visited." 

The following is a. copy of the letter addressed to the chiefs by 
Governor Moloney : 

Government House. 

February 2yth, 1886. 

Governor Moloney to the Balogun s. Chiefs, Elders and 
People of Ibadan, 

Gentlemen, — I have the honour to convey that I take this 
opportunity to announce to you my return on the 8th ult., and 
my assumption as Governor of the administration of the Govern- 
ment of the Queen's Colony of Lagos. 

2. It is a pleasure for me to come again amongst people 
whom I know and who know me, and it is almost needless for 
me to assure you that, as it has been in the past so it will be in 
the future, my aim and object to promote in every legitimate 
way I can, the general interest and development of West Africa 
and the peace of the country. 

3. I attach, as I am informed you do, much importance to the 
restoration of peace between you and the countries with which 
you have unfortunate differences. 

4. Entertaining as I have always such a feeling and a due 
appreciation of the value of a general good understanding and 
friendly relationship in our surroundings, I sincerely invite the 
entertainment by our neighbours of like sentiment. 

5. I am pained to learn that the unfortunate differences which 
have fruitlessly, as regards the country's good, struggled on for 
years between you and the Ijesas, and others still continue. 
The country and people are, I gather, tired generally of the 
miserable and obstructive state of things, which has done so 
much mischief, and has been productive of no general benefit ; 
on the contrary, there have followed bloodshed, loss of hfe, 
devastation, desolation, and other miseries. 

6. Good kindly feelings have always existed between you and 



510 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

this colony, may they long continue so ; knowing this, I feel it 
due to inform you of my return. 

7. As regards restoration of tranquility once more to the 
country, and the desire of the contending parties for mediation 
to be undertaken by this Government, it may be convenient I 
should remark that, as a matter of course, distinct and un- 
conditional overtures for peace must be made to this Government 
by all the parties concerned ; then I may feel myself in a position 
of being enabled to send an offtcer into the interior with a view 
to attempt to effect a peace based upon conditions which are 
Ukely to render it a lasting one. Each side should but know 
what conditions as far as he is concerned he has to offer, and 
would be most likely to prove of duration. On this part I should 
like to be clearly informed. 

8. Then it would be well I should be clearly enhghtened by 
each on the nature of the terms of responsibility, as such must 
rest entirely with the parties craving peace, for the fulfilment 
of their engagements, if peace be restored each is prepared to 
offer and accept. 

9. What are the guarantees each will give for his sincerity 
and earnestness in his appeal for peace. 

10. Each side may, for instance, suggest or voluntarily offer 
that he will enter into an agreement binding on him to suspend 
hostilities for, say, six months or any other duration deemed 
advisable, then there should be no need for fresh supplies of 
guns and ammunitions for such a time. Such an agreement as 
to cessation of hostilities, and of armament should be entered 
into not only at the camps but also at all other places concerned 
within the territories of the opposing parties. 

ir. Each side may, for all I know to the contrary, be prepared 
to give as hostages influential persons to any arbitrator, 
appointed by the Government, against treachery during period 
of withdrawal of encampment to home, so that neither side may 
have cause to continue the entertainment of any doubt as to 
security of retreat. Each side may be ready to engage to with- 
draw his army at a given time, to subsequently disembody it, 
and to allow component parts to return to their respective towns, 
homes, and families, and to the resumption once more of peaceful 
avocations. 

12. From past experience there must be prominent in the 
minds of contending parties a desire of the Government to 
befriend them, and to bring about a reconciliation amongst 
them if they will only place themselves to abide by the settle- 
ment the Governor may make. 



THE INTERVENTION OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT 51I 

13. I shall be glad to heai* from you soon, and to receive any 
representative messengers you may be pleased to send to me, 
who can faithfully give me your mind on your interior troubles, 
and satisfy me on the sincerity of your desire for the restoration 
of peace. 

14. It should not any longer be viewed or allowed that the 
present disordered state of things in the interior should be sub- 
servient merely as I fear has been the case to the advantage of 
the few. Peace should be established for the common good of all. 

15. The bearer of this letter, the Rev. Samuel Johnson is well 
known to you all, let me commend him to your kind care and 
consideration. 

16. I have sent a like communication to the other side. 

17. Both of my messengers may, with the desire and 
concurrence of parties concerned, meet on the encamping 
ground. 

Wishing you and your people peace, and to your country 
an early resumption of peaceful occupation on the part of its 
inhabitants. 

I have the honour, etc., 

Alfred Moloney, Governor. 

The Rev. C. PhilHps is the bearer of a similar letter to the Ekiti 
chiefs, with the exception that " the Rev. C. Phillips " is the 
messenger named in paragraph 15, 

The writer left Lagos on the 2nd March, 1886, via Ijebu, with an 
oral message from the Governor to the Balogun of Ijebu to the 
effect that the Governor being his old friend, desired to announce 
to him his return to administer the government of Lagos, and that 
during his administration he wanted peace all over the country. 
That the bearer of this message was a messenger from him to the 
interior kings and chiefs for that purpose and that he wished him 
to convey this to the Awujale. 

This message was delivered to the Balogun in his camp at Orii 
on the 6th, when the messenger got there. He was so pleased to 
hear that the Governor saw his way to interfere in the interior 
difficulties that he at once sent for the other war chiefs to hear 
the joyful news from the mouth of the Governor's own messenger. 

He at once despatched a messenger to the new Awujale asking 
him to send one of his trusty Agurins to come and hear the good 
news delivered to him. 

The Awujale felt rather hurt that he was ignored by not hearing 
the message first before the Balogun. He said that it was for him 
to inform the Balogun, and not the Balogun him. However, he 



512 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

would not let his feelings stand in the way of so important a 
message. He sent an Agurin as desired, who spoke out the King's 
mind on this (what he considered) breach of order ; but he was 
immediately pacified when told that it was just otherwise, but 
that the Governor only wished to approach his highness through 
his old friend the Balogun. The Agurin then said, " The Governor 
and the Awujale are of the same mind, wishing nothing else but 
peace." 

The Ibadan home authorities were much pleased at the prospect 
of peace, and Tahajo, the senior chief, assured the messenger that 
the war chiefs would not hesitate to accept the terms of peace with 
the Governor as arbitrator. 

From Ibadan, the Governor's messenger proceeded to Oyo. The 
Rev. D. Olubi of Ibadan, then the Superintendent of the C.M.S. 
Missions of that district, and who was equally interested in the 
subject of peace, embraced this opportunity of going with the 
Governor's messenger, to pay his usual pastoral visits to Oyo, 
Iseyin and Ogbomoso, and to see what influence he could exert 
with the King to induce him to send one of his Ilaris and His 
Majesty's staff, with the Governor's messenger. 

On the 19th March they had an audience with the King and the 
following letter from the Governor of Lagos to His Majesty was 
read to him : 

Governor Moloney, C.M.G., to His Majesty King Adeyemi 
OF Qyq. 

Government House, Lagos, 

February 2yth, 1886. 
King, — I have the honour to convey that I take this oppor- 
tunity to announce to you my return to Lagos on the 8th ult. 
and my assumption as Governor of the administration of the 
Queen's Colony under that name. 

2. It is a pleasure for me to come among people whom I know, 
and who know me, and it is almost needless for me to assure 
you that as it has been in the past so it will be in the future, 
my aim and object to promote in every legitimate and peaceful 
way I can the general interest and development of West Africans. 

3. I attach as I am confident you do, knowing how long you 
have longed for the restoration of peace to the Yoruba and other 
interior countries, much importance to the promotion of good 
relationship, between this colony and our interesting and friendly 
neighbours, among whom stands prominently yourself. 

4. Entertaining as I have always such a feehng and a due 
appreciation of the value of general good understanding and 



THE INTERVENTION OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT 5I3 

friendly relationship in our surroundings, I sincerely invite the 
entertainment of our neighbours of like sentiment. 

5. I am pained to learn that the unfortunate differences 
which have fruitlessly as regards the country's good struggled 
on for years between the Ibadans and the Ijesas still continue. 
The country and people are generally tired of the miserable and 
obstructive state of things which has done so much mischief 
and been productive of no general good. On the contrary 
there have followed desolation, bloodshed, and other miseries. 

6. I shall be glad to hear from you soon and to receive any 
representative messengers you may be pleased to send to me, 
who can give me your mind on the interior troubles, an end to 
which should be brought about as soon as possible ; such is 
the cry and desire of every right-minded African having at heart 
his country's interest. 

7. I hear both sides are tired of the war. I should be glad 
to be satisfied that such was the case. 

8. Wishing you and your people every good wish. 

I have the honour, etc., 

Alfred Moloney, Governor. 
His Majesty King Adeyemi, 
The AlAfin of Oyo. 

After hearing the letter read he said that he was glad that the 
Governor after all saw his way to interfere and that he was pre- 
pared to bear the expenses of whatever it would cost to restore 
peace to his dominions. He further said that the news was too 
good to be true, however, he would let the Oyo Mesi know 
about it. 

The last sentence cast a damper on the enthusiasm of the 
messengers. The control of foreign relations is vested in the King 
and for him to say he would consult the Qyq Mesi in this matter 
made it evident that he had ceased to take active interest in the 
matter. And so it turned out to be. Having sent twice to Lagos 
(in 1881 and 1882, Mr. A. F. Foster being sent by the Abeokuta 
road) on the same subject, one would have expected his active 
interest and co-operation on this occasion, but it turned out to 
be otherwise ; the failure of the measures initiated by him must 
have pained His Majesty, and he did not care to compromise 
his dignity any more by furthering measures doomed to failure. 
He did not take into consideration the difference in the personaUty 
of the new Governor of Lagos. 

After repeated messages to the palace on the following day, the 
King at last sent two private gentlemen, and without his staff, 



514 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

as his messengers to Lagos ! Taught by the experience of 1881, 
the Governor's messenger dedined to proceed with these men except 
with an Ilari and the King's staff. Three times he was waited upon 
the third day, before he at last granted an Ilari, with his staff, and 
the Ilari was none other but the same Oba-ko-se-tan as before ! 

The Governor's messenger with the King's Dari and his staff 
left Oyo on the 22nd March and reached the Ibadan camp on the 
26thr 

The war chiefs were glad to see the former but the presence of 
the latter — with his significant name — cast a damper on their 
spirits. After hearing the Governor's letter read they were very 
reluctant to accede to the Governor's request of sending down a 
messenger, saying, " It will all end in failure as before," thinking 
that an embassy headed by an Ilari, " The King is not ready," 
can scarcely ever be successful. Consequently they raised one 
objection after another, alleging the absence of the messenger of 
the King and the Balogun of Ijebu, that they could not afford to 
ignore those to whom they were indebted for being able to keep 
their position at Kiriji to that day, etc. However, after further 
deliberation better counsel prevailed, and they agreed to send 
their messengers down with the Governor's messenger. 

By a happy coincidence, the Governor's messenger to the other 
side reached the Ekiti camp on the same day, and almost at the 
same hour, and on the following morning both messengers met on 
the battlefield with their flags of truce and each had good news 
to tell of the pacific tone of the respective chiefs they were sent to. 
On the following day they exchanged visits to the opposite camps 
and both were well received, and were much pleased to know that 
the chiefs of the opposite camp agreed to the Governor's interference. 

A proposal emanating from the Elciti chiefs pleased the Ibadans 
very much as showing the sincerity of their motives, viz., that both 
the messengers of the Governor should visit the Ilorin camp and 
induce the Ilorins to agree to the truce, as the hostihties going on 
at Ofa were part and parcel of those at Kiriji and Modak§ke, only 
that they had no control over the independent Ilorin chiefs. 

The Ibadan chiefs also proposed that both flags of truce should 
be set up, and kept flying at the battlefield until the terms of 
peace were definitely signed. This also was accepted by the 
Ekitis, and it was accordingly done the next day. 

Both messengers read to the chiefs of the opposite camps the 
letters with which they were entrusted, in order to show that 
they were identical, the better to secure their confidence. 

The messengers then took leave of each other to meet again at 
the Ofa and the Ilorin camps, each by his own route. 



the intervention of the british government 5i5 

§ 2. The Ilorins and the Peace Proposals 

The Ijesa chiefs were not wiUing to allow the messenger of their 
side (the Rev. C. Phillips) to pass through the Ibadan and Ofa 
camps to that of Ilorin, although a shorter route of a day and a 
half's journey, lest it prejudice the minds of the Ilorin chiefs 
at the outset ; he had therefore to take a circuitous route of five 
days with the messengers of the Owa and the Ow6re through the 
Ekiti and Igbomina provinces to Karara's camp near Ofa. 

The Governor's Ibadan messenger, who went by the direct route, 
arrived at Ofa on the ist of April and met the belligerents on the 
battlefield fighting, and was not lodged till the battle was over. 
Similarly the Governor's Ekiti messenger who arrived at the 
Ilorin camp on the 3rd met them on the battlefield, but as Kkrara, 
their Generahssimo, did not take the fielH in person that day, he 
had the opportunity of a preliminary talk with him on the subject 
of his mission. The battle lasted till 3 p.m. and he lost no time 
in obtaining permission from the Ilorin chiefs to come over to 
the battlefield to meet his colleague who he was sure would have 
reached Ofa. The messenger at Ofa had instructed the sentinels 
that as soon as they saw a white flag com.ing towards them they 
should send for him, and this they accordingly did, by despatching 
two men on horseback to apprize him of the same. 

Both messengers welcomed each other on the Ofa battlefield as 
they did at Kiriji ; they arranged to rest the next day (being the 
Lord's day) and to commence work on the Monday as they did 
at Kiriji. 

Although Chief Kkikik received the Rev. C. PhilHps well, yet he 
showed plainly by his conduct that he was not agreeable to the 
mission ; he appeared rather indifferent and his repUes were 
evasive. When he heard the Governor's letter read, he said, " The 
Ibadans are so treacherous that we cannot agree to an armistice, 
and again I cannot act without the orders of my King and therefore 
I cannot say anything good or bad." 

At a second interview the Rev. PhiUips had with him he repeated 
the same thing and laid so much stress on " the King's orders " 
that the messenger asked whether he wished him to go to Ilorin 
to obtain the King's consent. The General was glad of the pro- 
posal, which he said he could not have made, but he wished that 
he should be accompanied by his colleague of the other side, and 
that they together visit the King at Ilorin. 

This was perhaps to test the sincerity of the Governor's 
messenger. The latter objected, but the General insisted upon it 
that he should not go to Ilorin alone without his colleague at Ofa, 
adding that as tFie GoveiTior did not send to them direct, and that 



5l6 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

this visit to his camp was an afterthought, it was but giving 
King Ahhu the respect due to him that both messengers should 
go together to deUver the Governor's message to him. 

The Rev. C. PhiUips came over the next day to inform his 
colleague of Karkrk's proposal. Although they were not sent as 
far as to Ilorin yet they were resolved to leave no stone unturned 
in order to bring about the desired peace, even at their own risk. 

Accordingly both of them went, accompanied by Adu the 
General's swordbeafer, and the messengers of the Owa, Ow6r6 and 
Ogedemgbe. It was but a day's journey, Ilorin was reached the 
same evening. The King did not lodge them, but sent them back 
with Kkrkra's messengers to Kkrkrk's house, which augured ill 
for their mission. 

At Kkrark's house the accommodation given them was a room 
in which the smallpox epidemic had destroyed all the inmates 
thereof, the rags and rubbish of the deceased being still left in it 
uncleared away ; they had therefore to sleep in the open air and 
fortunately for them the weather was fair during the few days 
they spent at Ilorin. 

The next thing which augured the failure of the mission was the 
reception the King gave the messengers. He had no private 
interview with them, they were sent for to dehver their message in 
open court amid the assembly of men, women and children, with 
a few of the chiefs. After reading to them the Governor's letter 
to the belligerents, King Alihu asked whether the Ibadan and 
Ekiti kings had heard it read, and whether it was acceptable to 
them. We replied in the affirmative. He then asked, " Why 
then did the Ibadans give battle to the Ekitis after the arrival 
of the Governor's messenger among them ? " He was told that 
the last battle fought took place five days before the arrival of 
the messengers to the camps. After a pause he asked, " When 
are you returning ? " " As soon as Your Majesty sends us back, 
even if it be to-morrow," was the reply. " You shall wait three 
days more," continued he, " and I believe the Governor will not 
take it ill when he knows that it was I who detained you." 

With this reply the messengers were sent back to their lodgings, 
amid the jeers and scorn of these Mohammedan fanatics who were 
calling them names, styUng them " Anasaras " {i.e., Nazarenes) 
etc. There was no doubt but that communications passed between 
Ilorin and the camp in the meantime. 

The King dismissed the messengers the third day with these 
words : 

" I have not much to say. Who should be entreated to give 
up a struggle, the assailant or the assailed ? I want peace myself 



THE INTERVENTION OF THE BRITISH , GOVERNMENT 517 

therefore my words will be few. The stronger should be entreated 
to let go the weaker." Turning to the Governor's Ibadan 
messenger he asked, " How many days it took you from Ibadan 
to the camp ? " " Five days." " And from the Ibadan camp to 
Ofa? " " One day." " And how many from Ofa to Ilorin ? " 
" Only one day." " Well," continued His Majesty, " the fact that 
the distance from Ibadan to our camp being six days and from the 
camp to Ilorin but one day shows that I am not the aggressor ; 
we are the weaker party and are only on the defensive. Our camp 
may be described as a shield raised to defend our country against 
reckless invaders. I am thankful to the Governor for his message 
and I will instruct my Balogun to send you back with a good 
message." 

On asking the King if he would send a messenger to accompany 
"US back to the Governor he replied, " If the Governor had sent to 
me direct I might do so." Being asked further whether he would 
comply with the Governor's wish in suspending hostilities for six 
months and accept him as an Arbitrator, he replied, " That is not 
my business, that is the Balogun's business." Then turning to 
theBalogun'? messenger the King said, " Tell your master to agree 
to whatever the Governor's messengers tell him." With these 
words the Governor's messengers left Ilorin for Kcirkrci's camp, 
where they arrived on the morning of April loth, 1886. 

Kkvkrk congratulated them on their safe return and told the 
Governor's Ibadan messenger to send his boys over to Ofa at once 
in order to allay their apprehensions, but that he should himself 
wait till the afternoon when he would convene a meeting of the 
war chiefs to hear the Governor's message and to reply to the 
same. Soon after the Governor's messenger returned from the 
battlefield whither he had accompanied his boys on their way to 
Ofa, the Balogun Karkrk sent for him and his colleague and told 
them that one of his slaves had just escaped to Ofa, and that if 
he had not suspended hostilities since their arrival the slave 
would not have had the chance of doing so ; and that was one 
reason why he could not agree to the armistice of six months 
according to the Governor's wish. 

The messengers replied that they had nothing to do with the 
escaping of slaves, and objected to his connecting it with the 
suspension of hostiUties, for slaves could always manage to escape 
at any time. 

He then began to brag and boast of his prowess, detailing the 
number of successful battles he had fought with the Ibadans in 
this place. He gave an account of the origin and progress of this 
war from the time of the defeat of the Ilorins before Ikirun at the 



5l8 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Jalumi war. This, he said, was his third camp before Ofa, and 
from here that city would be taken. He stated how he had fought 
with and killed in one day the Balogun and Otun of OgbomgsQ, 
and had tried conclusions with every one of the Ibadan chiefs 
except the Are himself. They the Ilorins had been masters of 
several towns in the Oyo and Ekiti provinces and had their 
Ajeles (political Residents) in them ; but the Ibadans had ousted 
them from every one of them and would like to oust them from 
Ofa also ! That he would agree to the armistice of six months 
only on condition that the Ibadans withdrew their contingents 
from Ofa. He said, moreover, that the Ibadans were remarkable 
for their treachery " but could they equal the Fulanis for wiliness 
and cunning ? The Fulanis have seven different tricks, they 
have only used one as yet against Ofa and Ibadan, before they have 
made use of the remaining six Ofa will be taken." 

" Two years ago the Sultan of Gando sent his envoy here to 
mediate between us. We observed the armistice for five months. 
Not only did we suspend hostilities, but also allowed traders on 
both sides to carry on between Ofa and Ilorin and even beyond. 
Unexpectedly the Ibadans shut their gates upon our traders, they 
refused to release them though we sent back their people to them." 

He went on to say that the Ibadans were the common enemy of 
all, for even the AlAfin their King was on friendly terms with 
Ilorin and had exchanged presents with the King of Ilorin. " If 
the Governor would interfere at all let him bid the Ibadans retire 
from the Ekiti and Ilorin territories." 

He went on further to dilate on his own prowess, and what his 
horses could do, and as a proof thereof he sent for the son of the 
King of Erin, captured a few days before the arrival of the 
messengers, heavily-laden with a couple of chains, for them to 
see him and hear from his own mouth. " Whose son are you ? " 
" The son of the King of Erin." " How came you to be here ? " 
" I was captured by the Ilorin horse." " Go back to your 
prison." 

After all this talk the messengers were dismissed to prepare 
for the afternoon meeting. 

About 3 p.m. a full meeting was convened in Karkra's reception 
room, all the war chiefs being present before he sent for the 
Governor's messengers. The General opened the meeting by 
introducing to them those who were present thus : 

" Sitting on my left are the Balogun of the Fulanis, Ajikobi the 
Balogun of the Yorubas, and the last in order the Balogun of the 
4th Standard of the Ilorin army, I myself being the Balogun of the 
Gambaris. Sitting before me are Agidiako the Balogun of Ofa 



THE INTERVENTION OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT 519 

who deserted to me at the rebeUion of the King of Ofa ; next to 
him is Ogunmodede the head of the Ijesa contingents here. Sitting 
on my right are the Princes, the King's brothers. Now go on to 
deUver your message." 

The Rev. C. Phillips read to them the Governor's letter to the 
beUigerents, after which Karkrci threw the subject open for 
discussion. The Balogun of the Fulanis began and was followed by 
each of the others, giving vent to their feelings in bitter invectives. 
One of them exclaimed, " A new era is come for us and Ahnu's 
Jehad has had a fresh start, we shall carry the koran to the sea." 

Kkrark himself spoke last in the same strain. One and all of 
them evinced bitter feelings against the Governor's Ibadan 
messenger in particular, now and then caUing him " You Ofa man," 
and further, " If you choose to remain at Ofa you shall see what 
we can do." Another said, " In a few days we shall take Ofa, and 
you, if you remain there, will be taken." And another, " If you 
loiter on your way back to Ofa the horsemen will be upon you." 
and so on to that effect. 

The Governor's messenger replied, " I am not an Ofa man, but 
the Governor's messenger." " Yes, we know that," repUed one 
of them. " Did you not go three days ago when at Ilorin to see 
your grandmother's grave ? But you have come to us through 
Ofa and anyone who did we call an Ofa man and is our enemy and 
worthy of death." 

The messengers were thereupon dismissed. Seeing the excited 
feelings of the mob, a kind-hearted man standing by suggested to 
the Governor's Ibadan messenger, " Had you not better ask 
Karark for some one to escort you across, otherwise the mob will 
have torn your dress from your body ere you get to the gate of the 
camp. This friendly advice was followed, and the General told 
off his sword-bearer to escort the Governor's messenger as far as 
the locust tree in the battlefield where he used to take his seat on 
the day of battle. His colleague also was permitted to accompany 
him as far, and they stood there till they saw the messenger safely 
at Ofa. 

The Ofa people were quite prepared for the failure of the 
mission ; they said they expected as much, and would never have 
allowed the effort to be made, but that they thought that probably 
the respect due to messengers from the Governor of Lagos might 
carry some weight with the Ilorins. 

The Ilorins, true to their word and to show to both messengers 
that they were determined to take Ofa, attacked the city furiously 
on the next day. The battle raged from the morning till the 
afternoon when both sides returned to their respective camps. 



520 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The Olgfa's Statements. — ^Before the Governor's messenger left 
Ofa, he had an interview with the Olofa, who made the following 
statements as to the true cause of the war : 

" We are pure Yorubas by descent, and as such the subjects of 
the AlAfin of Oyo. It was after the fall of the ancient capital and 
the ascendancy of the Fulanis at Ilorin that we became subjected 
to the conquerors. We have been loyal to them ever since, we 
paid our tributes regularly, performed every menial work for them 
and submitted to all indignities without any complaints. We 
built their houses, worked their farms, and at every confinement in 
the King's harem we are to give tributes in money called ' soap 
money ' meaning soap to wash the babies with. Such was the 
menial servitude to which we were compelled to submit. Besides 
all these we served in all their wars. To all these we submitted 
in order to avoid such a crisis as this. 

"But nine years ago the King of Ilorin sent to inform my late 
father, the then Olofa, of his intentions to wage war with the 
Ibadans. My father warned him against embarking on such an 
enterprise, so unnecessary and so risky, the Ibadans having given 
no cause of offence ; on the contrary their influence on the whole 
had been for good, for the whole of the Yoruba country in general, 
and the Ilorins also, had derived much benefit from the same. 

" This advice offended the Ilorin king and chiefs and they had 
ever since regarded us as traitors and rebels. My father had to 
pay heavy fines for his advice, so heavy that all Ofa and her 
dependent towns had to subscribe to it, and yet they were not 
appeased. Again and again my father sent to assure the King of 
our loyalty and each time he used to utter smooth words and evasive 
replies. 

" In spite of the warnings the Ilorins joined the Ekiti con- 
federates and besieged Igbajo which they destroyed, and pro- 
ceeded to Ikirun, and there the Ibadans dealt them a crushing blow 
in the Jalumi war. Those of them who escaped here naked and 
destitute we clothed and fed, the well-to-do we sent home on 
horseback. All this we did to please our masters, but all in vain. 
Three days later they intended to resent the shame and disgrace 
of their defeat upon us by taking Ofa by stratagem. A large 
army was collected and war was ostensibly declared against Erin, 
a suburb town of ours, my father being apprized of this so-called 
expedition replied that Erin could not be taken except Ofa be 
removed out of the way. Then war was openly declared against 
Ofa. 

" Such was the cause of the present war. We had done nothing 
really to provoke it 



THE INTERVENTION OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT 521 

" Three years ago the Sultan of Gando sent Potun one of his 
officers to mediate between us and to effect peace ; for four months 
there was an armistice after which the war was resumed. The 
Ilorins accused us of breaking the truce, which was a false charge, 
for while the negotiation was going on, instead of breaking up the 
camp they were removing it nearer and nearer, swelling their 
numbers by fresh recruits from home, and strengthening their 
position. Secret intelligence reached us from the Ilorin camp 
that we should be taken by surprise. The Are of Ibadan hearing 
this sent at once to put a stop to communications. This order 
was given not a minute too soon, for the report came on that very 
day that the Ilorins had seized all the Ibadan and Ofa people 
at Ilorin and in the camp. All the Ilorin people shut up at Ofa 
I collected and sent home, and Karara released also those of ours 
they had seized in their camp. If anything is said to the contrary 
it is absolutely false, we neither broke the truce nor was the 
initiative in releasing captives theirs. We shall be thankful if 
the Governor will interfere and save us and our people from 
undeserved ruin." 

The Governor's messenger left Ofa on the 12th of April and 
arrived next day at the Kiriji camp to await his colleague. 

§ 3. The Messengers and Preliminary Arrangements at 
Kiriji and Modakeke 

On the third day (April 15th) after the arrival of the Governor's 
messenger at the Ibadan camp, an incident worth recording 
occurred which nearly marred the success of this mission entirely. 

A young man in the Ibadan camp who was out of his mind went 
to the Elebolo camp, where an advanced column of the Ibadan 
army was stationed under Chief Enimowu. He had in his hand a 
bow without an arrow and roaming all over the camp at night, 
he kept shouting, " In heaven it was decreed that the war should 
come to an end, but you Elebolo soldiers are obstinate. The 
Balogun, the Maye, Agbakin, Timi of Ede, Atawgja of Osogbo, 
and the Olobu of Ilobu have all agreed that peace should be 
restored, but ye refuse, and yet at the day of battle, you prove 
yourselves cowards and cannot fight. I am just from the rock in 
the battlefield where I found this arrowless bow, a sure sign of 
the decree of heaven that hostilities should cease." 

The man was taken to Enimowu that night, to whom he repeated 
the same words. Early next morning Enimowu went to the 
Balogun to report the incident, and it was surmised that the 
Governor's messenger must have sent one of his boys to proclcdm 
these words ! The Balogun then sent for the messenger to come 



522 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

with his boy, he then questioned them as to the message the 
boy was sent to proclaim at the Elebolo camp last night. 

Of course they denied all knowledge of any such thing. Eni- 
mowii thereupon confronted them, describing how the boy came 
with a bow in his hand, and how clad, and what he said. But 
the messenger's boy said he went nowhere last night, whilst 
Enimowu insisted that he did for he saw him himself. At this 
stage it dawned on 0&9. orie of the Balogun's young m.en, that 
there is a lunatic abroad, answering to the description of Enimowu, 
and who was accustomed to roam about the camp at night. It 
was suggested therefore that he should be sent for. Ogungbenro, 
the master of the lunatic, was reluctant to allow him out by day, 
but as the Balogun insisted that he should be brought, the lunatic 
himself sent a message to the Balogun to say if he wanted to see 
him he should come himself to him, as inferiors must always go 
to their superiors. Then the whole incident became a matter of 
laughter as a huge joke. Ogungbenro was, however, ordered to 
remove him from the camp at once, lest he might one day take it 
into his head to set the camp on fire. 

The Governor's Ekiti messenger arrived on the other side on the 
i6th and hastened early on the 17th to his colleague at the Ibadan 
camp to announce his arrival. 

The Ijesa chieftains were much disappointed at the failure of 
the negotiation with the florins ; but the Ibadans did not expect 
otherwise. Ogedemgbe, the Ekiti Generalissimo, however, said " If 
the florins would not agree to peace there was no reason why he 
should not on his part accept it." The Ibadan chiefs hearing this 
urged on Ogedemgbe to act the part of a plenipotentiary to the 
Ilorins and to do his best to bring them to reason, and this he did 
by sending a special messenger at once, but the Ilorins would not 
yield. The astute Ilorins, as we have mentioned above {vide 
p. 448), had taken the precaution of holding the Ekitis fast to the 
alliance by placing a contingent force among them, whilst retaining 
an Ekiti auxiliary force among themselves which they held more 
or less as a hostage. 

The belligerents at Kiriji now proceeded with preliminary 
arrangements between themselves, through the Governor's 
messengers of both sides. Chief Ogedemgbe sent to the Ibadan 
chiefs to say, that whilst both parties had agreed to an armistice, 
and that hostilities should cease between them for at least six 
months until the Governor or his deputy should arrive among them 
they should not avail themselves of the opportunity for reinforcing 
their contingents at Ofa and at Modakeke. The Ibadans could not 
promise that because the safety of their position here depended upon 



THE INTERVENTION OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT 523 

defensive measures in both places, unless the Ekitis would pledge 
themselves not to reinforce both places against them ; for if they 
heard that the fighting was getting unusually strong, and that 
their men were likely to be overpowered, they could not help sending 
reinforcement. Next, the Ibadan chiefs considering that the in- 
terval of six months' truce being so long, and the possibiUty of some 
misunderstanding arising which in the absence of the Governor's 
messengers, might undo the work now begun proposed that 
a special messenger on either side be appointed to meet in the 
battlefield every morning with the compHments of their respective 
masters, and if any untoward incident should occur, that they 
should have the power of arranging matters amicably. This 
proposal pleased the Ekitis so well that at their suggestion two 
were appointed on either side as a provision against illness or any 
disabihty, and a third from the Ibadan Elebolo camp who 
was to report on the approach of the messengers on either side. The 
principal messenger appointed by the Balogun was Osun and the 
Agbakin appointed another to represent the other war chiefs. The 
principalmessengerappointedbyOgedemgbewasLupon,andanother 
was appointed to represent the rest of the Ekiti war chiefs, and all 
met with the Governor's messengers at the battlefield under the 
flags of truce, first on one side, and then on the other side, a little 
ceremony being performed by this small party. The hands of the 
special messengers of both sides were joined by the Governor's 
messengers in friendship, and by the AlAfin's Ilari and the Owa's 
messenger in the name of their respective masters. They were 
enjoined to have a friendly intercourse with each other to help to 
preserve peace until the arrival of the Governor or his Deputy. 
The ceremony was concluded by a ratification of the promises 
made, by the spHtting of kola nuts. 

The Governor's messengers, and those of the King and the 
Owa thereupon bade each other adieu to meet again at the Ife and 
Modakek§ battlefield each by his own route. 

The war chiefs on either side were grateful to the Governor for 
his disinterested interposition, and this they showed by sending 
some valuable presents to him by the hands of the accredited 
messengers of either side. The Ibadan chiefs sent him a horse 
and an alari cloth, the Balogun an ivory tusk, the Owa and 
Ekiti kings also sent valuable presents. Certain messengers whose 
names will be found below were deputed to accompany the 
Governor's messengers to Lagos according to his wishes expressed 
in Clause 13 of the " Instructions." 

At Modakeke. — The Governor's Ekiti messenger had this time a 
shorter route than his Ibadan colleague, who did not reach Moda- 



524 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

kek§ till the 24th of April. The latter, however, lost no time in 
setting up his flag, and going to the battlefield to meet his colleague 
who he was sure must have arrived at the Ife camp some days 
previously ; but he had to wait till 6 p.m. before the colleague 
made his appearance, and explained the difficulties in their way. 
The Ifes would not listen to any pourparlers whatever until the 
Modakekes should explain the reason for their being in arms and 
prepared for a battle the previous day ; they regarded that 
action as a challenge they must take up. But the explanation was 
soon made, for the Governor's Ibadan messenger had heard the 
story as soon as he arrived. The Modakekes having heard a shout 
in the Ife camp on the night previous, similar to what usually took 
place when the Ifes were worshipping the god of war previously 
to a battle, consequently put themselves in readiness against a 
sudden attack ; it is this precaution of theirs the Ifes construed 
into a challenge. This explanation satisfied the Ifes who came 
with the Governor's Ekiti messenger ; the latter had had great 
difficulty with the Ifes in preventing them from giving battle 
that day under the plea of taking up the " challenge." 

The Ife chiefs being satisfied with the explanation of the so-called 
challenge agreed to confer with the Governor's Ekiti messenger, 
and subsequently allowed him to visit his colleague at Modakeke, 
the same methods being pursued in this place as at Kiriji. The 
meetings took place on the 25th and 26th, after which interchange 
of visits were allowed the Governor's messengers both at Modakekg 
and at the Ife camp. 

During the conference at Modakeke the report of a gun was 
heard which startled them all ; upon enquiry, however, it was found 
to have been fired at the Ijebu camp at Isoya. 

The Modakeke chiefs readily assented to the armistice as their 
overlords at the Kiriji camp had done ; they however stipulated 
that the Ifes should refrain from kidnapping them in their farms. 

Both the Governor's messengers then went over to the Ifes with 
the result of the conference on this side, and the requests of the 
Modakeke chiefs. Before listening to what they had to say, the 
Ifes first wanted to know the meaning of the firing of a gun on the 
previous day. That was explained to j;hem. It was done at 
Isoya. On hearing of the requests of the Modakekes they repUed 
that they themselves had one request to make, viz., that they should 
be allowed to go and rebuild their city. But the Governor's 
messenger pointed out that that was too advanced a step to take, 
which would surely bring about a colHsion. The Ifes moreover 
objected not to the armistice but to the hoisting of the flag of 
truce on their soil, which was " sacred to Oduduwa, who was a 



THE INTERVENTION OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT 525 

King." But they agreed that two " heaps of witness " be raised 
on either side, and that two messengers, on either side be appointed 
to meet each other in the battlefield every morning as was arranged 
at Kiriji. This being done, both the messengers of the Governor 
and the Alafin's Ilari and the Owa's messenger joined the hands 
of the appointed deputies of both sides as was done at Kiriji. 
Both parties now shook hands and parted, each by his own route, 
to meet again at Lagos. 

The Apology of Modakeke. — Before the Governor's messenger 
left Modakeke, the principal chiefs had a meeting to state for the 
benefit of the Governor their own version of the present war 
between themselves and the Ifes. An old man of probably about 
100 years of age was sent for, and he came, leaning upon a staff ; 
he was a boy when Modakeke was settled. The main object in 
giving the history of the foundation of Modakeke was to rebut the 
oft-repeated story that they were slaves to the Ifes. He stated (as 
we have learnt above) that they were originally refugees from the 
Ancient Oyo Provinces, who escaped south when the Fulanis 
became masters of the country. They were well received at first 
at Ife, and treated with much sympathy and cordiality, but the 
turning point of the cordial relations came when Maye the Ife 
general was expelled from Ibadan, and the Oygs gained the 
ascendancy in that town. Then a systematic method of cruelty 
began to be practised on the Oyos of the city of Ife, they were 
treated more as slaves than as freemen till a favourable Owoni 
(or king of Ife) assigned them this settlement of Modakeke. 

Qdunle was the Owoni they met who treated them well, the 
disaffection began towards the close of his reign. 

Ghanlare succeeded him. He was more friendly disposed. 

Ghegbaaje, who succeeded, revived the animosity ; some of them 
were even sold into slavery, no one questioning. 

Winmolaje, who succeeded, was kind to them as he appreciated 
their services in assisting to suppress Ijesa kidnappers who were 
committing depredations in Ife territory. 

Ab'eweila, who succeeded, made the Ifes swear, before he 
accepted office, that they would not find a pretext to murder him 
as they did so many of his predecessors. By this time the Oyos 
had become very important in the state, having one Wingbolu as 
their chief. The Ifes soon broke their faith and wanted to kill 
the Owoni. A civil war ensued but the Owoni was too strong for 
them ; he defeated them. The Oyos were neutral. The Owoni 
then questioned Wingbolu why the Oyos were neutral. He boldly 
repUed that if the Oyos had been invited by his enemies he could 
not have thus gained the upper hand, or if the Owoni himself had 
T 



526 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

invited them, his victory would have been more complete. Tliis 
answer the Owoni pondered over, and as a result assigned them 
this settlement so that all Oyos should remove from the City of Ife 
to this place, and he had a strong guard of Oyos in his palace. 
Soon their numbers rapidly increased in the settlement. This 
favouring of Oyos irritated the Ifes the more against him. 

After his death, which was due to poison by the Ifes, the Moda- 
kekes met and repelled two attacks of the Ifes on their settlement ; 
at the first of which they captured 12,070 of them but subsequently 
released them because they had not the heart to enslave their 
quondam benefactors. 

But thirty days after when one Chief Ogumakin received rein- 
forcement from Oke Igbo the Ifes attacked them again, and were 
defeated again. At this second time they followed up the victory, 
captured the City of Ife and ventured to sell the Ifes caught. 

The city was however rebuilt in 1854 by the advice of Ognumola, 
the Ibadan general. Under the Ibadans they had Hved amicably 
together until the present war, which had largely divided the 
interests of the country, the Ifes sympathizing with the Ekitis, 
and the Modakekes whose safety and interests were intertwined 
with those of Ibadan cast their lots with the Ibadans. He further 
related all that took place between them during the war up to 
the present time. 

Chief Tahajo of Ibadan, who was twice sent to reconcile the 
Ifes and Modakekes together, also made his own statement showing 
the efforts at reconciliation that were put forth and the implaca- 
bihty of the Ifes, who broke faith and fired the first shot from a tree. 

All these statements, as they have been noted in full, above, 
were duly recorded to be placed before the Governor. 

The Governor's messenger left Modakeke on the 28th of April, and 
after a short stay at Ibadan proceeded to Lagos via Ijebu. 

The new Awujale of Ijebu, who was all for peace, was very glad 
to hear of the armistice at the seat of war. He assembled his 
chiefs to hear the report from the mouth of the messenger himself, 
and at their advice he wilhngly sent his messengers down with the 
Governor's messenger to show that he was at one with those who 
wished for peace. 

The following is the hst of messengers who accompanied those 
of the Governor down : — 

In the Oyo and Ibadan district : — 
The Rev. S. Johnson, the Governor's messenger to the Oyos. 
j'Obakosetan, envoy of the AlAfin, Feudal head of the 

Oyo j Yoruba country. 

VBelewu, representing the Oyo nobiUty. 



THE INTERVENTION OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT 



527 



Ibadan 



Ijebu 



'Arinde, messenger of the Balogun of Ibadan. 

Atere, from the Maye, representing the Ibadan war 

chiefs. 
Elegbede, from Tahajo, representing the Ibadan home 

authorities. 
/Awonimesin, messenger of the Awujale of Ijebu. 
JOgundeko, also messenger of the Awujale of Ijebu. 
jOdusajo, confidential messenger of the Balogun of 
^ Ijebu. 

Those of the other side : — 
Rev. C. PhilHps, the Governor's messenger to the Ekiti parapos 
J- f Apelidiagba, messenger of the Owa of Ilesa. 

lOlukoni, also messenger of the Owa of Ilesa. 
Fatiye, messenger of the Owore of Otun. 
Orisalusi, messenger of the Ajero of Ijero. 
Oba§a, messenger of the Olojudo of Ido. 
Dawudu, messenger of Ogedemgbe, Ekiti Commander- 
in-Chief. 
Lomi, messenger of King Manuwa of Itebu. 
jAkinlamu, messenger of the Osimowe of Ondo. 
Is aba, messenger of the Elders of Ondo. 



Ekiti 

Itebu 
Ondo 



§ 4. The Treaty of Peace 

The Governor of Lagos had several interviews with the different 
envoys and messengers from the interior kings and chiefs, from 
which he gathered much information ; His Excellency thereupon 
drew up a treaty which was read and interpreted to them and 
which obtained their assent on the whole. 

Obakosetan, the AlAfin's envoy, however objected to Clause 5 
of the treaty which refers to the removal of Modakek§ from its 
present site, but he was told that as he had already agreed to the 
Governor's arbitration he could not object to any article of the 
treaty. The treaty was accordingly signed by all the envoys and 
messengers on behalf of their masters. 

The following is the text of the treaty : 

Treaty of peace, friendship and commerce between the AlAfin 
of Oyo, the Balogun, the Maye, the Abese, the Agbakin, the 
Otun Bal§ of Ibadan; the Owa of Ilesa, the Owore of Otun, 
the Ajero of Ijero, the Olojudo of Ido, the Seriki of Ilesa, 
the Owoni of Ife, the Obalufe, the Obajiwo, the Obaloran, 
the Ajaruwa, the Arode, the Arisanre, the Balogun of Ife ; 
the Ogunsuwa of Modakeke, the Balogun and Otun of Moda- 
kekc, the Awujale of Ijebu and the Balogun of Ijebu. 



528 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Whereas the Kings, Chiefs, Baloguns and Chiefs above 
enumerated, parties to this Treaty, and to the conditions and 
articles of agreement hereinafter set forth, profess to be earnestly 
desirous to put a stop to the devastating war which has for years 
been waged in their own and adjoining countries, and to secure 
the blessings of lasting peace to themselves and their peoples, 
and have appealed by their envoys and messengers duly 
accredited to His Excellency the Governor of the Colony of 
Lagos as representing Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen 
to mediate between them, and to arbitrate, and determine 
such terms and conditions as shall secure a just and honourable 
peace to the contending parties, and have each and all of them 
agreed to abide by such arbitration and determination, and to 
do his and their utmost endeavour to carry into effect the terms 
and conditions so arranged and determined. And whereas the 
envoys and messengers duly accredited by the aforesaid Kings, 
Bales, Baloguns and Chiefs have been received in audience by 
His Excellency the Governor, and have themselves assented 
both verbally and in writing to the terms and conditions of 
peace hereinafter specified, and have agreed to be bound there- 
by, and faithfully to observe the same. 

Now this is to testify that the Kings, Bales, Baloguns and 
Chiefs aforesaid hereby ratify and confirm the said agreement 
made and entered into by their envoys and messengers for them 
and on their behalf and solemnly pledge themselves faithfully, 
loyally and strictly to observe and carry out the following 
terms and conditions so far as they are individually or collectively 
concerned : — 

1. There shall be peace and friendship between the Kings, 
Bales, Baloguns and Chiefs, the signatories to this Treaty and 
their peoples respectively and the Kings, Bales, Baloguns and 
Chiefs aforesaid hereby engage for themselves and their peoples 
that they will cease from fighting and will remain within or retire 
to their own territories as herein provided, and will in all things 
submit themselves to such directions as may seem necessary or 
expedient to the Governor of Lagos for better and more effect- 
ually securing the object of this Treaty. 

2. The Kings, Chiefs and peoples comprising the Ekitiparapo 
alliance or confederation on the one hand, and the Bale, Balogun, 
Chiefs and people of Ibadan on the other shall respectively 
retain their independence. 

3. The AlAfin and Owa shall stand to each other in the 
relationship of the elder brother to the younger as before when 
the Ekiti countries were independent. 



THE INTERVENTION OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT 529 

4. The towns of Otan, Iresi, Ada, and Igbajg shall form part 
of the territories of Ibadan, and be subject to the Bal§, Balogun 
and Chiefs of Ibadan. Such of the inhabitants of the towns 
aforesaid as desire to leave shall be permitted to do so at such 
time and in such manner as the Governor, his envoy, or messenger 
shall direct after conference with the governments of the parties 
principally concerned, and such people shall not be molested by 
the signatories their peoples or allies. 

5. In order to preserve peace the town of Modakeke shall be 
reconstructed on the land lying between the Osun and the Oba 
rivers to the north of its present situation, and such of the 
people of Modakeke as desire to live under the rule of the Bale 
and Balogun of Ibadan shall withdraw from the present town 
to the land mentioned, at such times and in such manner as 
the Governor his envoy or messenger shall direct after conference 
with the governments of the parties principally concerned, and 
such of the people as desire to live with the Ifes shall be per- 
mitted to do so but shall not remain in the present town of 
Modakeke, which shall remain the territory and under the rule 
of the king and chiefs of Ife, who may deal with the same as 
they may think expedient. 

6. Except as herein provided the boundaries of the territories 
of the respective parties and signatories shall remain as at 
present and shall not be interfered with. 

7. The Kiri ji camp shall be broken up and the contending parties 
agree quietly and peaceably and without any demonstration to 
withdraw their armies and their peoples at such time or times 
in such manner, and by such routes as shall be directed by the 
Governor, his envoy or messenger after conference with the 
governments of the parties principally concerned. 

8. The signatories engage themselves at or immediately 
after the signature of this treaty or at such times as may be 
directed by the Governor, his envoy or messenger after con- 
ference with the parties principally concerned, to withdraw 
their peoples and warriors and allies employed or associated 
with the contending peoples or armies at Modakeke, Isoya, or 
elsewhere, and wherever such allies or people or warriors may be 
employed in war, or likely to foster or promote war, and further 
when their peoples, warriors, and allies have been withdrawn, 
and the camp of Kiriji broken up and dispersed to do their utmost 
by peaceful and friendly means to bring about peace at O^a. 

9. The signatories bind themselves to endeavour in every 
legitimate way to promote trade and commerce, and to abstain 
from dissension and acts likely to promote strife. 



530 



THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 



10. The signatories agree if any cause of strife or dissension 
should still exist after the ratification and carrying out of these 
conditions which is not dealt with herein, to refer such cause 
or matter unreservedly to the arbitration of the Governor of 
the Lagos Colony and peaceably and without resorting to strife 
or provocation to await his determination thereof and abide by 
it, testifying their gratitude to Her Majesty's Government for 
efforts already made and undertaken in their interest and their 
sincerity and earnestness in the cause of general peace and 
goodwill. 

11. The armistice now existing oetween the hostile forces in 
the camps of Kiriji and Isoya shall be promoted, and the 
signatories bind themselves to cease from all warlike operations 
or acts of provocation, and to do their utmost to promote friendly 
relations until the Governor, his envoy or messenger shall be 
able to, and shall communicate with the signatories hereto. 

12. As a guarantee of good faith, and for the further and 
better securing the objects of this treaty and the faithful and 
strict observance of the terms and conditions thereof, the 
signatories agree to place in the hands of the Governor his envoy 
or messenger as and when he may determine, such of their 
leading chiefs as he may require as hostages, who will continue 
and remain with him on the battlefield of Kiriji, whilst the armies 
and peoples of the respective signatories are dispersing therefrom, 
and for and during such time or period as the circumstances or 
necessities of the case may require, or to give such other or 
further guarantees as may seem just or expedient to the 
Governor, his envoy or messenger. 

In witness thereof we have hereunto put our hands and 
seals the days and dates specified. 



Name. 


Title. 


Country. 


Mk. 


Seal. 


Date. 


1. Adeyemi. . 


The Alafin 


of Oyo 




X 


LS 


June 25th, 1886. 


2. Ajayi 


Balogun 


Ibadan . 




X 


LS 


July ist, 1886. 


3. Osuntoki 


Maye 


Ibadan . 




X 


LS 


July ist, 1886. 


4. Fijabi 


Abese 


Ibadan . 




X 


LS 


July ist, 1886. 


5. Fajinmi . . 


Agbakin 


Ibadan . 




X 


LS 


July ist, 1886. 


6. Tahajo . . 


Otun Bale . . 


Ibadan . 




X 


LS 


June I4th,i886 


7. Agunloye 


Owa 


Ilesa 




X 


LS 


July 7th, 1886. 


8. Okinbaloye 


Owore 


Otun 




X 


LS 


July 3rd, 1886. 


9. Oyiyosoye 


Ajero 


Ijero 




X 


LS 


July 3rd, 1886. 


10. Odundun 


Olojudo 


Ido 




X 


LS 


July 3rd, 1886. 


II. Ogedemgbe 


Seriki 


Ilesa 




X 


LS 


July 2nd, i886. 


12. Derin 


Owoni-elect 


Ife 




X 


LS 


July i8th, 1886. 


13. Awotionde 


Obalufe 


Ife 




X 


LS 


July 14th, 1886. 


14. Oramuyiwa 


Obajiwo 


Ife 




X 


LS 


July 14th, 1886. 


15. Akintola . . 


Obaloran 


Ife 




X 


LS 


July 1 6th, 1886. 



THE INTERVENTION OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT 



531 



Name. 


Title. 


Country. 


Mk. 


Seal. 


Date. 


t6. Osundulu 


Ajaniwa 


Ife 


y. 


LS 


July 14th, 1886. 


17- JoJo 


Arode 


Ife 


X 


LS 


July 14th, 1886. 


18. Aworinlo 


Arisaure 


Ite 


X 


LS 


July 14th, 1886. 


ig. 0,?;a 


Balogun 


Ife 


X 


LS 


July 14th, 1886. 


20. Ogunwole 


Ogunsua 


Modakcke 


X 


LS 


July 14th, 1886. 


2 1 . Sowo 


For Balogun 


Modakeke 


X 


LS 


July 14th, 1886. 


22. Ayanleye 


For Otun . . 


Modakeke 


X 


LS 


July 14th, 1886. 


23. Aboki 


Awujale 


Ijebu 


X 


LS 


June 9th, 1886. 


24. Nofowokan 


Balogun 


Ijebu 


X 


LS 


June loth, 1886 



Signed, sealed, and delivered in the presence of the under- 
signed after the terms and condition therein contained had been 
interpreted and explained by us, or one of us to the respective 
signatories. 

(Signed) Samuel Johnson, Cld.rk in Holy Orders, 

Messenger and Interpreter for the Governor. 

(Signed) Charles Phillips, Clerk in Holy Orders, 

Messenger and Interpreter for the Governor. 



Affix to Treaty, dated 4th day of June, 1886, 

The undersigned envoys and messengers duly accredited to 
His Excellency the Governor of Lagos to convey to the Governor 
the terms and conditions which they and the Kings, Bales, 
Baloguns and Chiefs who have despatched them duly accredited 
as aforesaid are willing to observe, abide by, and carry into 
effect in order to secure peace to their respective peoples and 
countries, having heard the foregoing treaty and the terms and 
conditions thereof read over and the same having been inter- 
preted, and fully explained to them, solemnly agree themselves 
to abide thereby and faithfully and loyally to observe the same 
on testimony whereof they have hereunto set their hands 
and seals this 4th day of June, 1886. 



Their marks. 






Obakosetan 


X 


accredited 


by 


the AlAfin of Oyo. 


Belewu 


X 






»> »> >> 


Arinde 


X 






,, Balogun of Ibadan 


Atere 


X 






,, Maye of Ibadan 


Elegbede 


X 






,, Otun Bale of Ibadan 


Apelidiagba 


X 






„ Owa of Ilesa, 


Olukoni 


X 






,, Owa of Ilesa. 


Fatuye 


X 






,, Owore of Otun 


Orisalusi 


X 






,, Ajero of Ijero. 


Obasa 


X 






,, Olojudo of Ido. 



532 



THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Their Marks. 



Dawudu 


X accre 


Apelidiagba 


X 


Olukoni 


X 


Arinde 


X 


Awonimesin 


X 


Ogundeko 


X 


Odusajo 

o • 1 1 _ _ 


X 

■ _■! _1 1 • 



X accredited by the Ogedemgbe, Seriki of Ilesa. 
the Owoni of Ife. 



Ogunsua of Modakeke. 
Awujale of Ijebu Ode. 

a 9 9 99 

Balogun of Ijebu Ode. 



Signed, sealed, and deUvered in the presence of 

Alfred Moloney, the Governor. 

Smalm AN Smith, Judge. 

H. HiGGiNS, Assi. Col. Secy, and Private Secretary. 

Chas. Phillips, \ Governor's messengers to the Interior 
S. Johnson, i and Interpreters on this occasion. 

§ 5. The Reception of the Treaty by the Interior Kings and 

Chiefs 

His Excellency, A. C. Moloney, the Governor took the envoys 
and messengers with him in the colonial steamer on his visit to 
the eastern waters of Lagos on the 7th of June, 1886. Instructions 
were also given to his special messengers to have the Treaty read 
and interpreted to the different kings and chiefs concerned, and 
to obtain their signatures to it, and then to forward it down to 
Lagos ; and then, not till then, would he see his way clear to go 
personally or to send to complete the arbitration. 

The Oyq messengers with the Governor's special messenger were 
landed at Ejirin, and the Ekiti messengers with the Governor's 
special messenger to the Ekitis were landed at Atijere. 

The Treaty in the Qyo Division. — On the 9th of June the Awujale 
signed the Treaty in the presence of his chiefs. Nofgwokan, the 
Balogun, also signed it the next day at Orii in the presence of all 
the war chiefs, not being concerned they had nothing to say against 
it. The messenger passed on to Ibadan, and Tahajo, the head 
chief at home, who was represented at Lagos by his messenger 
Elegbede, also heard the Treaty read and interpreted ; after 
some consideration he subscribed to it in the presence of the Home 
authorities. The Governor's messenger with the rest of the 
messengers passed on to Oyo. 

At Oyo the AlAfin expressed his surprise at the way matters 
were hurrying on to a crisis in the following parable : — 

" The Governor is like an Egugun enchanter who is about 



THE INTERVENTION OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT 533 

to perform a transformation trick. The mortar is ready, the 
drummers already at their posts drumming with all their might 
and the eyes of the whole world are now fixed upon the enchanter 
to see what he would become before they shout hurrah, hurrah ! 
If success attends his efforts the Governor will then know 
that there are humble Africans here who know how to 
appreciate kindness." He also signed the Treaty on the 25th of 
June, 1886. As soon as the Governor's messenger got him to sign the 
Treaty, he lost no time, but with the rest of the messengers left 
the next day for the Ibadan camp which they reached on the 
30th of June. 

The interview with the Ibadan chiefs was on the istof July when 
the Treaty was read to them and fully interpreted. Of course 
they are the ones who were most concerned in this division. They 
brooded a bit over clause 5 of the Treaty ; but the leading chiefs 
whose names were affixed to the Treaty signed it without raising 
any objection. They said that they had qo alternative since the 
Awujale and the Balogun of Ijebu had signed it, as well as the 
AlAfin : and on the whole they considered the Treaty just and fair. 

The Treaty in the Ekiti Division. — The Ekiti kings and chiefs 
did not sign the Treaty so readily, having a strong objection to 
paragraph 4 of the Treaty which left Otan, Iresi, Ada, and 
Igbajo in the hands of the Ibadans. 

The report of the Rev. C. Phillips the Governor's messenger 
relative to it, will show the difficulty he met with in getting them 
to sign the Treaty. 

Extract from the Report of the Rev. C. PhilHps. 

2. The Ijesas and Ekitis. 

" I reached £sa where the Owa was stationed on the 28th 
June. After the Owa had called his chiefs together I read the 
Treaty to them and gave them an oral account of our interviews 
with the Governor of Lagos. The Owa hesitated a little to set 
his hands to his seal on account of some objections he made with 
respect to the fourth article. But after I had made some 
remarks, showing him the impartiality of the Governor's decision, 
he set his hands to the seal. From Esa I proceeded on the 29th 
with all the messengers to the camp. At Oke Mesin I met a 
messenger telling me that it is the Seriki's wish that I should 
not stop to see the kings, but that I should come straight on to 
him in the camp. I did so. The Seriki seemed to have the 
chief authority in these matters, but I cannot say whether it is 
an authority delegated to him by the gratitude of the kings, 



534 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

who regarded him as their deliverer, or whether it is arrogated 
on the principle of 'might over right.' However, as this may be, 
the fact stands that the Seriki is invested with much authority, 
and all state business must be done with him. Therefore I gave 
him a full account of our interviews with the Governor of Lagos 
and read to him the Treaty in the presence of his comrades. 
He said he would not sign the Treaty on account of the 
fourth article which transfers (? retains) Igbajg, Iresi, Ada, 
and Otan to the Ibadans wholesale. I was sorry to find that the 
Seriki was instigated to this obstinacy by the Ijesa emigrants 
from Lagos and Abeokuta who seemed to have gained much 
influence over him. There is a section of them in the camp under 
the leadership of one James Thompson Gureje who came from 
Abeokuta, arid I also found that a special messenger from the 
' Lagos Ekitiparapo Society ' had preceded me to the camp. 
He is a Brazillian Creole, a carpenter by trade, his name is Abek. 
The opposition which I had from these emigrants was greater 
than that of the Seriki himself. They were very clamorous. 
Not only did they set up the Seriki but they also tried to influence 
the Ekiti kings not to sign the Treaty. Their objections to the 
fourth article were principally two. First, that the cession of 
those towns to Ibadan was an infringement upon Ijesa territory ; 
secondly, that the position of those places was too contiguous 
for the Ijesa and Ekiti people to be safe in future from Ibadan 
invasions or surprises. In vain did I advise the Seriki to confer 
with the Balogun of Ibadan on the subject. In vain did I 
represent the impartiality of the Governor's decisions. In 
vain did I remind them of his former promise of unconditional 
submission to the Governor's arbitration. Still the Seriki con- 
tinued refractory until Thursday afternoon, July ist. 

" On that morning Mr. Johnson wrote to me to announce his 
arrival at the Ibadan camp, and I went out immediately to have 
a interview with him on the battlefield. At this interview he 
informed me that the Ibadan chiefs had signed the Treaty 
though the fifth article was galling to them, and that they would 
not yield any further upon the Igbajo question. However, I 
asked him to tell the Balogun of the difficulty I met with. 
When I returned to the Ekiti camp, I told the Seriki that the 
Ibadans had signed the Treaty, and he would be responsible 
for the continuation of the war if he persisted in his refusal. 
I should state that nobody stood by me except Mr. G. A. Vincent^ 
the C.M.S. agent at Ilesa. The Ekiti war chiefs were entirely 

^Latterly known as " Daddy Agbebi." 



THE INTERVENTION OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT 535 

silent. Apelidiagba and his comrades with Mr. G. W. Johnson 
the Lagos book-binder, hid themselves. 

" When I found that remonstrances were of no avail I retired 
to my lodgings, and was on the point of leaving the camp to 
appeal to the Kings Owor^, Ajero, and Olojudo, when the 
Seriki sent for me and signed the treaty. 

" Whether he shrank from the responsibility of the continu- 
ation of the war or whether his former violence and stubbornness 
was only a ruse to disconcert the Ijesa emigrants whom he was 
unwilling to displease (because he had been much indebted to 
them for the supplies of breech-loading guns and cartridges) I 
could not tell. But since he signed the Treaty I was astonished 
to find that his language was changed and he openly avowed his 
indifference about the Igbajo question, even in Mr. Johnson and 
the Ibadan messengers' presence. This could not be a mere 
capriciousness, it seemed to me a deeply contrived artifice. He 
told me afterwards that if he had signed the Treaty at once his 
countrymen would afterwards reproach him and his children 
with having handed a portion of their land to the Yorubas. . . . 

" Lugbosun, the head Ekiti war chief, in the Mesin camp, told 
Mr. Johnson and me afterwards that the Ijesa emigrants who 
made much gain by importing the breech-loading guns and 
cartridges desired the prolongation of the war, but he and his 
colleagues who had nearly spent all their possessions did not 
approve of the opposition to the Treaty. They were anxious to 
decamp, and were impatiently expecting the Governor. 

" The Ajero asked Mr. G. A. Vincent to tell me in confidence 
that they (the Ekitis) do not make much of the Igbajo question. 

" When I returned to £sa the Owa thanked me very much for 
the patience with which I endured the opposition I met with, 
and begged me not to make much of it, for it was only unruly 
people who resort to the camp. He gave me some historical 
account of the defection of Igbajo, in which he acknowledged 
that it was due to the ill-treatment that the Igbajo people 
suffered from some Ijesa head chiefs (who then tried to keep the 
Owa in the dark as to the real state of matters) that they were 
obliged to surrender themselves to the Ibadans. He begged me 
to urge the Governor to come or send at once to put an end to 
the war." 

The Ibadan chiefs commenting upon the objection of the Ekitis 
to paragraph 4 of the Treaty remarked that " their request for 
the removal of Igbajo was unreasonable, not to say dictatorial 
and presumptuous. For if, according to the terms of the Treaty, 
we are to live in peace and amity, why should Igbajo be left a 



536 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

desolate wilderness and a rendezvous for highway robbers and men- 
stealers ? And again, Igbajo is not nearer their town of Oke Mgsin 
than their towns of Ibokun, Ilase, Oke Bode are to our towns of 
Ikirun and Osogbo. Should we then ask that these places be 
removed from our vicinity ? This seems to us to be promoting 
unnecessary complications and difficulties." 

After the signing of the Treaty at both camps at Kiriji the 
messengers left by their respective routes to meet again at Moda- 
k§ke. 

At Modakeke the state of affairs was different from that at 
Kiriji. The latter place is a battlefield, and no personal animosity 
existed between the Balogun of the Ibadans and the Seriki of the 
Ijesas, only that they were unwilling to sacrifice public good for 
their own private interests, hence the efforts made to obtain as 
much as they could. Not so, however, at Modakeke. But for 
Fabumi the Ekiti General who was the mollifier, hostiUties would 
have been resumed. No sooner had the Governor's messengers left 
them on the former occasion when the truce was arranged, than 
the road between Modakeke and the If§ camp was thrown open, and 
not only the messengers of both parties met, but also parents, 
children and friends and relatives long separated rushed into each 
other's arms, the Ifes flocked to Modakeke, some spending three to 
five days there, and the Ife women and children who were captured 
at the fall of He Ife were allowed to go and see their kindred at the 
Ife camp. Some of them never returned again and the Ifes refused 
to give them up, thus abusing the privileges granted them There- 
fore the Modakekes resolved never to allow any of the rest to go 
over to the Ife camp any more till peace was actually restored, but 
they allowed the Ife women to come into the town to buy pots and' 
utensils or whatever necessaries they were in need of. 

As to the signing of the Treaty, the Ifes were of course very 
glad to do so, because their wishes had been gratified in the 
matter of Modakeke ; they would now get rid of them altogether. 
The Modakeke chiefs on their part, pained though they were by 
the terms of Clause 5 which stipulates for their leaving a spot 
sacred to them as containing the graves of their ancestors, yet 
signed without demur, hoping to ask the Governor when the 
time comes, for an amendment providing for the separation of the 
two towns by a wall as there is none existing hitherto. 

The Awujale of Ijebu in complying with the articles of the 
Treaty, sent his Agurins (state messengers) to accompany the 
Governor's messenger to tell Ogunsigun the Seriki of Ijebu Igbo 
at the Isoya camp to return home in peace with the forces under 
him. Scarcely did the messengers expect any opposition from that 



THE INTERVENTION OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT 537 

quarter. When Chief Ogedemgbe, during the negotiations at 
Kiriji, asked the Ijebu messengers whether the Epe refugees and 
the Isoya band were reconciled to their new Awujale, he was told 
that the latter had sent a friendly message to the Epe refugees, 
inviting them to return home, with nothing to fear from him ; 
and to Ogunsigun and the forces under him at Isoya he was 
favourably disposed, and was sending a friendly message to them. 

The Rev. C. Phillips and his party who went by a shorter route, 
had seen the Ijebu Seriki before the arrival of his colleagues on the 
other side, and was good enough to prepare their minds against the 
reception they might likely meet with : it was as much as he could 
do to prevail upon Ogunsigun to receive the messengers at all, and 
he finally agreed to see them not in his camp but in the battlefield. 
The interview was a hot one. But for Fabumi there would at 
least have been a damper cast on the whole affair, if not a collapse 
of the embassy. He and the Governor's messengers had great 
difficulty in restraining the Seriki and his war chiefs from doing 
violence to the person of the Chief Agurin sent by the Awujale : 
they vented their feelings in bitter invectives and curses on their 
countrymen the Ijebu messengers. 

The Seriki said that the Ijebus having been bribed to take up 
arms causelessly against the Ibadans who had done them no wrong, 
the late Awujale was prevailed upon to declare war against them, 
and so was himself forced to engage in it. For full seven months 
he hid himself in his farm to avoid it, and five times was his house 
confiscated till he was obliged to come forward to this war. Their 
king having been led to this, why was he driven away to die at 
Epe? (Turning to the Agurin, he said) "And you, Awonimesin, 
have you the audacity to come on an errand to me ? Were you not 
sent with us to this war ? Were you not encamped with us at the 
river Osun ? Who made you an Agurin ? Was it not the late 
king whom you helped to dethrone ? deserting us here and going 
home for that foul purpose, you put your own master to death 
and raised up another ! You are the wrong man for this peace 
embassy, and this will be your last." 

At last, turning to the messengers the Ijebu Seriki said, " I 
agree to all the terms of the Treaty, but I cannot acknowledge the 
present Awujale as king, because he was installed not by the 
general consent of all the Ijebus : and besides, the funeral 
obsequies of the late king have not yet been performed." 



Chapter XXX 

DISPERSAL OF THE COMBATANTS BY SPECIAL 
COMMISSIONERS 

§ I. Special Commissioners Sent up. 

The Treaty duly signed was forwarded to the Governor of Lagos 
by his special messengers, themselves awaiting further orders at 
their respective posts at Ode Ondo and Ibadan. 

By this time the Governor's furlough was due, but, with the 
sanction of the Secretary of State for the Colonies, he had arranged 
everything for the accomplishment of this work, and matters were 
left in the hands of the Acting-Governor, F. Evans, Esq., the 
Colonial Secretary, to carry out. Mr. Henry Higgins, the 
Asst. Col. Secretary and Mr. Oliver Smith, Queen's Advocate, were 
appointed Special Commissioners for this business. They were to 
be attended by an escort of 50 Hausa soldiers, each provided with 
50 rounds of ball cartridges for their Martini Henry rifles. They 
had also with them a 7-pounder gun, and a rocket trough with 
necessary ammunition. 

Capt. W. Speeding, the Harbour Master, also accompanied the 
expedition, with instructions to make geographical observations 
all along the route from Ejirin on the lagoon — the point of dis- 
embarkation — through Ijebu Ode, Ibadan, to Osogbo and Kiriji, 
to return to Lagos if possible via Ile§a, Ode Ondo, Aiyesan, Itebu, 
and Atijere. He was also to make as far as possible a survey map 
of the route and to fix the positions of the principal towns, the 
number of houses and inhabitants in each village, names of chiefs, 
depth, width, and courses of rivers crossed, heights of hills, nature 
of roads, and all other useful and statistical information to be 
carefully obtained and recorded. The Commissioners were the 
bearers of the following letter : — 

Government House, Lagos, 

August 14/A, 1886. 
To Kings, Bal^s, Baloguns and Chiefs, 

I send you greeting. 

2. Your good friend. Governor Moloney, has beeri obliged to 
go to England for health and rest. But before leaving Lagos 
he put you all in my hands ; he told me how you had all said 
you were tired of war and wanted peace. He told me how you 

538 



DISPERSAL OF THE COMBATANTS 539 

had all sent your most trusted messengers, to beg him to assist 
you, and how you had signed treaties promising to be faithful. 
He told me all he had done for you, and how sorry he was he 
could not be present when you broke up your armies and camps 
according to your promises. 

3. If I could have come to you myself I would have done so. 

4. You would, I am sure, have received me with welcome, 
but my people in Lagos wanted me, and I regret to say I cannot 
arrange to leave them. 

5. I send you, however, two of my officers in whom I have 
much confidence ; they are next in rank to myself. 

6. I ask you to receive them as my envoys and to accord to 
them the same cordial welcome you would have given to me. 

7. They have my full powers to act for me in helping you to 
fulfil the engagements you made in your Treaty, and I ask you 
to treat with them as if they were myself. 

8. You have promised to place hostages in the hands of my 
envoys while your camps are being dispersed and while you are 
settling the difficulties between yourselves. 

9. I rely upon you to fulfil your promises and now call upon 
you to do so. 

10. It is hardly necessary for me to remind you of the 
advantages to be derived from a lasting peace, you who have 
been unfortunately so long at strife must know the troubles a 
war entails ; you must feel when you see your people decreasing 
in numbers, your children fatherless, your women without 
husbands, your trade dechning, and your villages decaying, that 
the time has arrived when you should fight no more. 

11. Let that time be now, as you have promised it shall be ; 
let there be peace and friendship among you all ; go home to 
your villages, and make your women glad, and see your children 
grow around you, and let me have the pleasure of telling my 
Queen, the great and good Queen of England, that 3'our troubles 
are now at an end. 

I am. Kings, Bales, Baloguns and Chiefs, 

Your good friend and well wisher, 

Fred Evans, Acting-Governor. 

[Governor Evans' letter seems very remarkable in its own way. 
To us it reads like an admonition to a number of truant schoolboys 
rather than an address to commanders of about half a million men 
who for over ten years had been engaged in a death struggle with 
one another, pouring out their life blood unflinchingly for honour, 
power and freedom — worthier objects than those which often 



540 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The expedition left Lagos on the i6th August via Itg Ike the 
first Ijebu port. Great difficulties were experienced with regard to 
the transmission of their loads ; the Ijebus are by nature averse 
to carrying loads, they depend more on their slaves for such 
purposes. Besides they also considered it derogatory to the dignity 
of a free people to " ru asingba," i.e., transmitting state loads from 
point to point which in this country is a compulsory duty and 
regarded as a sort of taxpaying. 

The Commissioners arrived at Ijebu Ode on the 19th and were 
well received. The Lisa (prime minister) called on them im- 
mediately after their arrival with a message of welcome and presents 
from the Awujale, and conducted them to the quarters prepared 
for them. On the same day the Governor's Ibadan messenger 
arrived at Oru where he was ordered to meet the Commissioners. 

A public interview took place on the 21st at which about 3,000 
people were present. 

What was uppermost in the Awuj ale's mind was the case of 
Ogunsigun the Seriki of Igbo who had been sent to Isoya and 
his refractory behaviour in refusing to decamp. This the Awujale 
considered a difficulty in the way ; the Commissioners, however, 
treated the matter lightly, saying they did not anticipate any 
difficulty in his case. 

The Awujalg, not satisfied with this reply, sent word to the 
Governor's Ibadan messenger (the writer) at Orii to this effect. 
" When you reach Modakeke, if the Commissioners could not pre- 
vail upon Ogunsigun to decamp at once, tell them to kill him, he 



stained the swords of mightier nations — ambition, jealousy and 
greed ! "Go home to your villages," says the Governor, " and 
make your women glad," etc. Those " villages " are towns with 
50,000 to 250,000 souls ! And is there any reason why their 
" women " should be denied the right and dignity of being termed 
their wives ? 

Men who can control such huge masses of humanity, capacities 
which can guide, control, and direct all the intricacies of municipal 
and political machineries of a government, and can wage honour- 
able wars for years without external aid or a national debt be- 
queathed to posterity might at least be considered as possessing 
some serious qualities beyond those of children, as they appear to 
be regarded, and deserving some honourable consideration due to 
men although they be Negroes. But happily the patronizing 
language of the letter which discloses so much thinly-veiled con- 
tempt, will be lost in the translation, and in other respects 
interpreters may be trusted to make up in tone and expression for 
what is wanting in style and diction. — Ed.] 



DISPERSAL OF THE COMBATANTS 54I 

is my slave, and let his followers return home in peace." Such was 
the autocracy and the rude form of government that prevailed in 
the Ijebu state. The Awujale being ignorant of British methods, 
thought this order would be carried out as a most ordinary and 
insignificant matter ; its non-execution nearly cost the writer 
his life subsequently, the Awujale noting him down as a personal 
enemy in league with Ogunsigun, and gave orders that he should 
be hunted down and murdered should he be seen in any of the 
Ijebu provinces ! 

Carriers were supplied the Commissioners from Ijebu Ode to 
Oru at the border of the forests a few hours distant, beyond which 
the Ijebus refused to go, unless carriers came down from Ibadan ! 
But the Ibadans were very reluctant to adopt this unusual course ; 
the custom was for the Ijebus to transmit to Ibadan, and they to 
the next town on the route, and so on to the terminus, hence a 
considerable delay ensued until the Balogun of Ijebu sent word to 
the Ibadan Home authorities, and the Governor's Ibadan me.ssenger 
also sent to the Rev. D. Olubi to move the chiefs to send down 
the needed carriers. In consequence of this delay the carriers 
never turned up till the 27th of August, and the Commissioners left 
for Ibadan on the 28th, leaving 17 loads behind for want of a 
sufficient number of carriers. 

The Ibadan carriers did not wait, but went forward with great 
speed with the bed and bedding as well as the provisions, so that 
at their sleeping place at Olowa the Commissioners had to pass 
the night in their hammocks suspended on trees ! The carriers 
were overtaken the next morning at Odo Ona nla in the Ibadan 
farms where they halted and there the Commissioners breakfasted 
before proceeding to Ibadan, where they arrived in the afternoon 
and were lodged with the Otun Bale, who received them very kindly. 

From Ibadan, the Commissioners would have proceeded direct 
via Iwo, Ede, Osogbo to the Kiriji camp, but the Governor's Ibadan 
messenger made them to understand that the Ibadan chiefs 
would never act without their King having a voice in the matter, 
as they were not constitutionally competent to treat with a foreign 
power without the King, whose prerogative it was. They were 
only his army. Consequently the expedition started for Oyo on 
the 2nd of September, 1886. 

This affair the Commissioners remarked in a letter to the Acting- 
Governor thus : " We have been induced to visit Oyo on the 
representation of the Rev. S. Johnson that we should be imable 
to carry out our mission without having an interview with the 
Alafin previous to visiting the Kiriji camp." 

Hearing of their approach, the AlAfin sent an escort consisting 



542 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

of a few of his big Ilaris to meet them at the village of Fiditi, a 
distance of about 14 miles from the city. As soon as they appeared 
the escorts ordered their men to fire a feu de joie, which they kept 
up till they reached the city of Oyo. The leader of the expedition 
was rather unsettled by these demonstrations, he immediately 
ordered his Hausas to form around him and to fix bayonets, and 
told the Ilaris to go on before with their men. 

At Oyo they were lodged at the house of the Apeka, one of the 
chief Ilaris, who lodges white men. 

On the 4th September the AlAfin accorded them a formal state 
reception as a special honour due to them. He was enthroned 
full-robed at the Kobi Aganju with all the princes and the Oyo 
nobles about him, and the usual state umbrellas and all the 
paraphernalia of royalty displayed on the right and on the left, 
the trumpeters also sounding lustily the praises of the King and 
the welcome to the white men.^ 

The usual ceremonies over, the King presented them with two 
bullocks, ten sheep, four goats, 20 bags of cowries, and eighty 
baskets of yams. 

On the next day they had a private interview in which the 
AlAfin sat with them and discussed affairs in a friendly and 
famihar manner. His Majesty advised them not to visit Ilorin, 
as Karara the Ilorin Generalissimo at Ofa was both obstinate and 
treacherous. He gave them a horse and two bags of cowries and 
wished them God-speed. 

On the 6th of September the King having supplied the necessary 
number of carriers, the Commissioners left Oyo with the King's 
Ilari, en route for the Ibadan camp via lie Odan. Masifa, Ejigbo, 
Ilobu, Ikirun. They arrived at Kiriji on the loth of September, 1886. 

^ The ceremonies on this occasion were nearly marred by the 
leader of the expedition who, against the remonstrance of the 
writer of the untimehness of such a course insisted on going straight 
to the throne to " shake hands," saying, that as he represented the 
Governor of Lagos who is the representative of the Queen, he con- 
sidered himself superior to any African Monarch — which may or 
may not be true of such a delegated superior rank, but the writer 
fails to see how it confers the right to commit a gross breach of 
etiquette at the moment special honours were being done to him. 
But ere he was half way along the avenue formed by the princes 
on the one side and the courtiers on the other, two or three big 
Ilaris rushed forward, and with expanded arms barred the way 
saying " Oyinbo, mase, mase " (white man please don't, please 
don't). Then he desisted and was shown to the seat prepared for 
him. 



DISPERSAL OF THE COMBATANTS 543 

The Ibadan chiefs wished to detain the Commissioners as their 
guests for a day or two before they passed on to the tents built for 
them on the battlefield by both belligerents, but they rightly 
declined, and marched on straight to the neutral ground. 

Soon after their arrival, Ogedemgbe called on the Commissioners, 
the Balogun of Ibadan did the same later on at dusk : presents 
in cowries and provisions flowed in from both camps day by day, 
and from the Kings Ajero, Owore, and the Olojudo at Mesin town. 

The Commissioners returned the visits to both camps on the 
lith at 10 a.m. to the Ibadan camp and to the Ekiti's at 4 p.m. 

§ 2. The Commissioners at Kiriji 

The interviews to arrange matters began on the 13th, the 
Ibadan chiefs coming to the Commissioners' camp for the purpose 
at 10 a.m. No difficulties lay in their way except in the case of 
Ofa, for whilst the Ibadan chiefs lay no claim to Ofa, yet they were 
loth to see the town destroyed, because it is one of the principal 
Yoruba towns, and the birthplace of some of their chiefs. 

When asked when it will be convenient for them to decamp they 
replied, as soon as they had informed their contingents at Moda- 
keke and at Ofa, lest the news coming upon them suddenly and 
probably in a distorted form, there may be a rush in both places 
with disastrous results. Seven days may be allowed for this, but 
they cannot send as yet until they shall have known the result of 
the Commissioners' interview with the belligerents of the other side. 

The interview with the Ekitis took place at 4 p.m. of the same 
day but the results were not so satisfactory ; the Ekitis insisted 
on the Ibadans decamping first, but the Commissioners were for 
both camps to be broken up together on the same day and hour. 
As they could not arrive at an understanding also in the matter of 
the Ilorins, whom they were supporting at Ofa, the meeting was 
adjourned till the next day. 

At the next interview after much talk the Ekitis agreed to the 
Commissioners' proposals. 

On the r5th the Commissioners proceeded to the town of Mesin 
Ipole to see the Ekiti kings, the Ajero, the Owore and the Olojudo. 
The Owore was prolix and pointless in his remarks but the Ajero 
was more sensible ; his statements were few and to the point. 
The Olojudo said but little; his words were, "We want our inde- 
pendence, and not to be molested any more in future." 

On the i6th the question of the boundaries engaged the attention 
of the Commissioners : the elders of Mesin and Igbajo said it was 
the stream Eleriko that divided them. On the 17th at another 
interview defining the boundaries between Mesin, Otan, Ada, 



544 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Esuvvii and Ipetu, they all agreed that the boundaries of each of 
these towns met at a place called Ata where also was a river called 
Omi Ad^. The last interview was on the i8th September, when 
the elders of these towns were to sign the document defining the 
boundaries. On this day the If§ chiefs arrived at the Ekiti camp 
about their own part of the Treaty. On the 19th the Ibadans 
sent to build the hoiise for their hostage, the Ijesas and Ekitis 
having done their own two days before. 

The interview between the Commissioners and the Ife chiefs 
took place on the 20th. The latter with Ogedemgbe previously 
in council had agreed to allow the Modakek§s ten months' respite 
in which they were to remove to a new spot on the other side of 
the Osun river, but meantime they might be allowed to remain in 
the small towns of Ipetumodu, Odiiabon, Moro, etc. 

The interview between the Commissioners and the Modakeke 
chiefs took place on the 21st. In vain did they plead that peace 
and reconciliation be made between the Ifes and themselves. In 
vain did they plead that there should be a town wall separating 
the two towns from each other. The Commissioners were for carry- 
ing out the letter of the Treaty, which was also the resolution 
arrived at by the Ifes and Ekitis. The Modakekes thought it 
strange indeed that as a result of peace the vanquished should 
dictate terms to the victors, and worse still for those terms to 
include the evacuation of their hearths and homes, and spots 
sacred to them by a thousand ties and considerations. If that 
must be, then they prayed that the time be extended to the follow- 
ing dry season which would allow sui!icient time to build a new 
town, and cultivate new fields so that they might not perish from 
starvation and exposure. Even this was not allowed them, they 
were to evacuate the present town of Modakeke at once, and in 
ten months' time build a new town and destroy the old ! To 
this the messengers were obhged to yield. 

Hitherto the Commissioners interviewed the Chiefs of each of 
the camps by themselves, but on this day September 21st they 
were asked to meet each other in the Commissioners' camp in the 
afternoon. The whole of the fighting men of either side were 
drawn up on the battlefield but they were not allowed to come near 
except the leading chief of both sides. The fifty Hausa soldiers 
accompanying the expedition were drawn up in two rows at 
the two ends of the Commissioners' camp facing those of both 
belligerents, and only the leading chiefs were allowed to pass 
through to the Commissioners' tents, and there the Balogun of 
Ibadan, the Maye, Agbakin, Adejumo and others met and shook 
hands with Ogedemgbe, Lugbgsun and other leading chiefs of the 



DISPERSAL OF THE COMBATANTS 545 

Ekiti army. Chief Maye opened conversation, asking after several 
persons, some still living and some dead, all of them being 
acquainted with one another. Ogedemgbe was silent, and never 
uttered a word, probably overcome with emotion : he was finally 
prevailed upon to speak, but his words were very few. Being 
late in the day the meeting was adjourned again till Thursday, the 
23rd, for the purpose of taking the oaths that there would be peace 
between them. 

The Commissioners also proposed Tuesday the 28th for the 
evacuation of both camps. But both GeneraHssimos proposed 
ten days from date {i.e., October 2nd). This the Commissioners 
refused ; they also refused the proposal of eight days (September 
30th) and the chiefs were obliged finally to agree to the 28th. 

[We may remark that the Commissioners did not believe that 
the Ibadans would really decamp, the assurance of the Governor's 
Ibadan messenger notwithstanding ; because, said they, the 
Ibadan camp consisted of substantially built swish houses, which 
they would be loth to desert, whereas the Ekiti's were only frail 
huts of bamboo and brushwood, but the events proved that the 
messenger was right.] 

At length Thursday the 23rd arrived, a very memorable day. 
The Commissioners in their respective uniforms received the leading 
chiefs of both sides under the canopy of heaven in the space between 
the two houses built for them by the beUigerents. 

The final interview can best be told in the words of the Com- 
missioners : — 

Extract from the Report of the Commissioners published in 
the Blue Book : 

". . . Thursday, 23rd September.— Early in the morning, 
although there was drizzling rain, and a mist, yet people began 
to come from the camps and took up their places at a short 
distance from either end of our camp, the Ibadans remaining on 
their side of the Eleriko stream. By nine o'clock there was a 
crowd of several thousand persons on horseback and foot 
collected on either side, and the variegated dresses, turbans and 
umbrellas of the sable warriors, and the showy horse trappings 
presented a picturesque mass of colouring. We had a hne of 
sentries posted at each end of our camp, to keep off the crowd in 
case the multitude should endeavour to follow the chiefs to the 
meeting, as it was not deemed advisable that a large force from 
either side should be present or come in contact with each other. 

" A marquee was pitched in the centre of the camp under 
which our chair was placed, and a guard of Hausas being placed 



546 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

on either side of it. Chairs, stools, and mats were placed for 
the accommodation of the chiefs and representatives of signa- 
tories of the Treaty in lines from either side of the marquee so 
as -to form a semicircle with it, leaving an open space in 
front. 

" About ten o'clock the Balogun of Ibadan arrived accom- 
panied by the principal chiefs in the Ibadan camp, and the 
Ijebu, Oyo and Modakeke signatories of the Treaty or their 
representatives, in all some 200 people. They took their seats 
on the chairs to the right of the marquee. A few minutes later 
the Seriki of Ijesa (Ogedemgbe) with the principal chiefs of the 
Ekitiparapo army, and the Ijesa, Ife and Ekiti signatories of 
the Treaty or their representatives arrived. The Seriki and his 
party, about the same number as the Ibadans, took their seats 
on the left of the marquee. All being ready we came out of our 
hut and accompanied by Capt. Speeding, the Rev. C. Phillips, 
Rev. S. Johnson and Mr. Willoughby proceeded to our seats 
tmder the marquee. 

" It was then discovered that the Modakeke representatives 
were not present, and ^. mounted messenger was despatched to 
fetch them. They arrived shortly afterwards and were present 
when the Treaty, and the ratification of it, were read and 
translated. 

" We expressed our pleasure at seeing all those present and 
said, ' After the Balogun of Ibadan and Seriki of Ijesa had sworn 
friendship to each other, as we understood they wished to do, 
we would say what we had to say.' 

" The Balogun and the Seriki then swore eternal friendship 
to each other by their respective fetishes. 

" The Governor's proclamation was then read and interpreted. 
The Treaty was next read and interpreted ; and after a few 
remarks from us, the ratification of the Treaty was read and 
interpreted. Each signatory then came to the table as his name 
was called and affixed his mark and seal to the document. 
We then congratulated all in the name of the Queen of England, 
and the Governor of Lagos, upon the peace which they had 
concluded and ratified and said we sincerely trusted that they 
would observe the peace as faithfully as they had observed 
the Armistice. 

" The proclamation of peace was then read and interpreted 
after which the bugles played and a salute of seven guns was 
fired (first gun 12.20 p.m.). The Balogun, Seriki and others 
came and shook hands with us heartily thanking us for what 
we had done for them. Even the Ijebu representatives. 



DISPERSAL OF THE COMBATANTS 547 

generally undemonstrative and even supercilious in manner, 
were effusive in their thanks and congratulations. 

" The rains ceased before the meeting took place and the 
mist clearing away the sun shone brilliantly on the scene. 
Thousands of people were to be seen posted on the huge 
boulders of rock which were scattered through the Kiriji Camp, 
and crowned the summit of the mountain (the Oke Mgsin Camp 
was not visible from the place of meeting there being a slight 
rising in the ground between) and as we learned afterwards the 
sound of the gim which was to announce that peace had been 
concluded, and that people could go to their homes, was most 
anxiously awaited in both camps, and received when heard with 
cheers and hurrahs." 

§ 3. The Proclamation of Peace and Firing of the Camps 

The following is the Proclamation of Peace between the Ibadans 
and the Ekitiparapgs at Kiriji- Mesin battlefield on the 23rd 
September, i886. 

Whereas through the friendly mediation of His Excellency 
the Governor of Lagos an understanding has been brought about, 
and a treaty of peace, friendship, and commerce concluded 
between the AlAfin of Oyq, the Balogun, the Abese, the May§, 
the Agbakin, and the Otun Bale of IJjadan ; the Owa of Ilesa, 
the Ow6re of Otun, the Ajero of Ijero, the Olojudo of Ido, the 
Seriki of Ijesa, the Owoni, the Balogun, the Obaluf§, the 
Obaloran, the Obajio, the Ajaruwa, the Arode, and the Orisanire 
of Ife ; the Ogunsua, the Balogun, and the Otun of Modakeke, 
and the Awujale and Balogun of Ijebu. 

And whereas due provision has been made by us after con- 
ference with the heads of the governments principally concerned, 
or their representatives duly accredited to us, for the complete 
fulfilment of the conditions of the said treaty. 

Now therefore we, Special Commissioners appointed by His 
Excellency the Governor of Lagos for the purpose of executing 
the said treaty in accordance with the provisions thereof, do 
hereby proclaim, in the name of the signatories of the said 
treaty, that peace has this day been established and shall 
henceforth continue for ever between the signatories of the said 
treaty and between their respective peoples. 

Dated at Kiriji-Mesin battlefield this 23rd day of September, 
1886. 

(Signed) Henry Higgins) cx • * ^ 

Oliver Smith ^^'''^^ Comtmsstoners. 



54^ THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Ratification of the Treaty of Peace, Friendship, and Commerce 
between the Ibadans and Ekitiparapos. 

We, the undersigned signatories, and duly authorised represen- 
tatives of signatories of the Treaty of Peace, Friendship, and 
Commerce signed in the months of June and July in the 
current year, by the AlAfin of Oyo; the Balogun, the Abes§, 
the Maye, the Agbakin, and the Otun Bale of Ibadan, the Owa 
of Ilesa, the 0w6re of Otun, the Ajero of Ijero, the Olojudo of 
Ido, the Seriki of Ijesa, the Owgni, the Balogun, the Obalufe, 
the Obaloran, the' Obajio, the Ajaruwa, the Arode, and the 
Orisanire of Ife, the Ogunsua, the Balogun, and the Otun of 
Modakeke, and the Awujale and Balogun of Ijebu, and having 
for its object the termination of the war between the Ibadans 
and their allies, on the one hand, and the Ekitiparapo con- 
federacy on the other hand, hereby ratify and confirm the said 
treaty, and all and singular the conditions and stipulations 
thereof, and do further agree to, and approve of the following 
provisions, for the more perfect fulfilment of the same, made 
after conference with the governments of the parties principally 
concerned or their representatives by the Special Commissioners 
appointed by the Governor of Lagos as representing Her Most 
Gracious Majesty the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland to 
carry the said treaty into effect. 

1. Peace between the signatories of the treaty and their 
peoples shall be proclaimed by the Commissioners immediately 
after the signing hereof. 

2. Immediately after the proclamation of peace the breaking 
up of the camps at Kiriji and Oke Mesin respectively shall begin, 
and upon the signal being given by gunfire in the Commissioners' 
camp the Ibadans encamped in the Kiriji camp and the 
Ekitiparapos encamped in the Oke Mesin camp shall 
simultaneously begin quietly and peacefully and without 
any demonstration to withdraw from their said respective 
camps. 

3. The Ibadans encamped in the Kiriji camp shall return to 
their homes by way of Ikirun, Osogbo, Ede, and Iwo, and by 
Ikirun, Ilobu, Ejigbo, and Oyo, and the Ekitiparapos encamped 
in the Oke Mesin camp shall return to, their homes by way of 
Mesin Ip61e, and Mesin Igbo Odo, and Esa Oke, and Esa 
Egure. 

4. The evacuation of the said Kiriji and Oke Mesin camps 
shall be completed by 12 o'clock noon on Tuesday next the 
28th inst. when a signal gun shall be fired in the Commissioners' 



DISPERSAL OF THE COMBATANTS 549 

camp after which, without further warning, the said Kiriji 
and Oke Mesin camps shall be destroyed by fire, at such time 
and in such manner as the Commissioners shall deem 
expedient. 

5. The camps at Modakeke, Isoya, and' elsewhere shall be 
broken up on such day, and in such manner as the Commissioners 
after their arrival at the quarters prepared for them by the 
Modakekes and the Ifes, on their battlefield shall determine, and 
thereupon the Ifes shall be re-instated in their town of He Ife, 
and the Modakekes shall forthwith withdraw provisionally to 
the towns of Ipetumodu, Moro and Oduabon to the land between 
the Osun and Oba rivers, and north of the present town of 
Modakeke, before the end of the month of March in the year 
1888, and for their faithful compHance with the provisions of 
this article the authorities of Ibadan undertake to be 
responsible. 

6. During the time that the Modakgkes shall inhabit the said 
towns of Ipetumodu, Moro, and Oduabon, they shall be at 
hberty to cultivate and carry away the produce of their present 
farm of Modakeke, without. molestation from the Ifes. They on 
their part shall not in any way molest the Ifes. 

7. Such of the Modakgkes as shall desire to live with the Ifes 
shall give notice of such desire to the Commissioners for the 
brealdng up of the said camps at Modakeke, Isoya, and else- 
where, and any Modakeke who shall not have given such notice 
shall be conclusively deemed to have elected not to Uve with 
the Ifes. 

8. Those of the inhabitants of the towns of Otan, Ires^, Ada, 
and Igbajo, who shall desire to remove from those towns, shall 
be permitted to do so with all their movable property and without 
molestation at any time before the end of the month of January 
1887. 

Any inhabitant of any of the said towns who shall not have 
left such towns before the expiration of the said term shall be 
conclusively deemed to have elected to become a subject of the 
authorities of Ibadan. 

9. The hostages given to the Commissioners by way of 
security for the due observance of the article of the said treaty 
relating to the breaking up of the Kiriji and Oke Mesin camps 
shall remain with the Commissioners so long as the Commissioners 
shall deem expedient. 

In witness whereof we have hereunto affixed our hands and 
seals the 23rd day of September, 1886. 



550 



THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 



Obakosetan 

Belewu 

Ajayi 

Adejumo 

Osuntoki 

Fajinmi 

Elegbede 

Apelidiagba 

Fatuye 

Orisalusi 

Qbasa 

Ogedemgbe 

Osundulu 

To jo 

Akinpe 

Sow5 

Ayanleye 

Awonimesin 

Ogundeke 

Okunlaja 



representing the AlAfin of Oyo 

Balogun of Ibadan . . 

representing the Abese of Ibadan . . 

The Maye of Ibadan 

The Agbakin of Ibadan 

representing the Otun Bale of Ibadan 
„ ,, Owa of Ilesa 

„ ,, Owore of Otun 

,, ,, Ajero of Ijero 

,, ,, Olojudo of Ido 

Seriki of Ijesa 

(the Ajaruwa) for the Ife Signatories 

(the Arode of Ife) 

representing the Ogunsua of Modakeke 

Acting Balogun of Modakeke 

Acting Otun for Modakeke 

representing the Awujale of Ijebu 
,, ,, Balogun of Ijebu 



Their marks 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 



X 
X 

X 
X 
X 
X 



Signed, sealed, and delivered in the presence of 



Seal 
O 
O 

o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 



(Signed) Henry Higgins, \ 

Acting Col, Secretary! „, . , „ . . 
,.,. j^ r\ c- [Special Commissioners. 

(signed) Oliver Smith, ^ 

Queen's Advocate"^ 

(Signed) Charles Phillips, \ 

Clerk in Holy Orders [ Interpreters on this 
(Signed) Samuel Johnson, | occasion. 

Clerk in Holy Orders^ 



As it was evident that the camps must be evacuated, all the 
women with their movable effects and live stock cleared off to 
Ikirun within three days. 

The Ibadan slaves who did not wish to return home with their 
masters took this opportunity to escape to their country. In 
order to effect this with safety, without drawing attention, they 
set fire to some houses, and during the confusion and bustle 
attending the conflagration hundreds of them made good their 
escape to the Ekiti camp which overlooked the Ibadan camp. 
The houses of the Maye of Ibadan, and the Timi of Ede and those 
of several men of lesser note, were consumed in this conflagration. 



DISPERSAL OF THE COMBATANTS 551 

This was on Friday, the 24th September. One chief alone (Sanusi 
the son of the Are) lost about 400 slaves.* 

The Ibadan chiefs, fearing they would lose all their slaves in 
this manner, thought they ought rather to go at once and wait 
no longer for the 28th or they might have to do so with grief and 
gloom. By the 25th the camp was all but deserted. On the 26th 
the Balogun with the rest of the war chiefs left for Ikirun. Oge- 
demgbe hearing that the Ibadan chiefs had gone, left also with 
his men for Mesin Ipole. The Commissioners, however, were 
determined to keep to the letter of the treaty and to fire both camps 
on the 28th. The hostages. Chief Mosaderin and Fakeye of the 
Ibadan?, and Asipa of the Ekitiparapgs, were detained still by 
the Commissioners until the camps were fired. 

The following extract from the Commissioners' report will 
describe the proceedings of the 28th when the camps were fired : — 

'. . . Tuesday, September 28th. — There was heavy rain during 
the night, and the thermometer registered 66 degrees, the lowest 
temperature we had experienced. The morning was fine though 
cloudy, and there was a shght breeze. 

Mr. Johnson left for Ikirun with presents from us to the 
kings and chiefs whose sudden departure from Kiriji had not 
allowed us the opportunity of giving them prior to their leaving 
the camp. 

We sent 50 of our carriers to either camp to be in readiness 
to fire them on the signal gun being fired from our camp. Two 
guns were fired at 12 o'clock, and three minutes later both camps 
were in flames. 

The breeze being slight the smoke did not clear away but 
hung in dense clouds over the camps. 

By half-past one o'clock both camps were almost completely 
burned, but the lire smouldered during the day and night. 
The houses in the Ibadan camps were not so completely 
destroyed, as those in the Oke Mesin camp, the former being 
mud with thatch roofs, while the latter were chiefly constructed 
of bamboo with leaf roofs. 

Immediately the camps were fired. Chief Mosaderin and the 
Oyo hostage came to say good-bye to us. . . . He was a fine old 
man, with very courteous manners, and he was in a desperate 
hurry to get away, always fearing that something had happened 

^ Many of them finding their old homes quite different from 
what they had expected, and conditions of life more arduous, 
returned to their former masters at Ibadan. 



552 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

to his wives and belongings at Ikirun, or that we might take 
him to Lagos. 

The Ijesa and Ekiti hostage also came to say good-bye, 
and to express their gratification at the sight of the burning 
camps. The Asipa was very anxious for us to allow him and 
his party to walk to the gates of the Ibadan camp. For obvious 
reasons we would not grant his request." 

We may remark- that Ogedemgbe, the Seriki of the Ijesas, 
showed much anxiety about the camps at Ofa, wishing this offshoot 
of the war to come to an end also ; but the Ilorin Generalissimo 
would not give in as we shall see later on, nor allow the Ijesa 
contingent with him to come away. 

§ 4. The Commissioners at Modakeke : Failure. 

The Commissioners left their camp on the 29th September, 1886. 
They thus described the ruins of both camps in their report : — 

" The rain which fell heavily during the night turned into a 
drizzle in the early morning, and the mountains and country 
enveloped in a thick cloudy mist for some hours after sunrise, 
when the weather cleared up somewhat. 

About 150 carriers all Ekitis furnished by Chief Ogedemgbe 
had come to our camp the preceding evening, and so facihtated 
our making an early start. However, notwithstanding the fact 
of these carriers being on the spot, it was a quarter past ten 
o'clock before they could all be got off and we ourselves able 
to start. . . . 

As the dense mist cleared under the rays of the sun we could 
discern the still smoking ruins of the Kiriji (Ibadan) camp, the 
downpour of rain during the night not having cornpletely put 
out the conflagration. 

Passing through the Oke Mesin camp (Ekitiparapg) a complete 
ruin, the leaf roofs and bamboo sides of the huts having burned 
more rapidly than the mud walls and thatch roof of the huts 
in the Ibadan camp, we reached the town of Mesin Ipole at ten 
minutes past eleven o'clock." 

The Commissioners halted here awhile to have an interview 
with the kings for the signing of the enactment for the abohtion 
of human sacrifice. The Seriki's speech on the occasion shows 
the amount of power and influence he had over the Ekiti 
kings. His speech to the Owore embodied in the Commissioners' 
report of the occasion is as follows : "I command you to sign it, 



DISPERSAL OF THE COMBATANTS 553 

in the name of the white man, and when I command no king dare 
disobey. I will send word to all the Ekiti kings." 

Leaving Mesin Ipole at one o'clock the Commissioners had to 
travel through a difficult path under a heavy shower of rain which 
drenched them to the skin. The path in some places was steep 
and rugged, and in consequence of the rain quite overflooded. 
Hare was reached at 3.30, and Esa Egure at 6 p.m. where they 
peissed the night. 

Here they had an opportunity of an interview with the Owa of 
Ilesa who also signed the enactment for the abolition of human 
sacrifice. 

At 11.30 the next morning the Commissioners started on their 
onward march, reached Ijebu Ere at 2 p.m. and passing through 
a very bad and shppery road where most of the carriers had 
. numerous falls, and the horses floundered, and had occasional 
falls with the rider, all which rendered the journey an unpleasant 
one, they at length arrived at Ilesa about 6 p.m. 

The accident at Ilesa was that of a fierce bull which attacked 
the chief Commissioner's horse, but was driven away by the sentry. 
The bull went next to the Queen's Advocate's horse when it was 
tied up, and gored it so badly that next morning it had to be 
shot. 

Leaving Ilesa on Saturday, October 2nd, Ibodi was reached at 
11.20, Gunmodi at 2 p.m., and after resting here one hour the Ife- 
Modakeke battlefield was reached quite late on the same day. 
On the next morning the following Ijesa, Ekiti, and Ife chiefs 
came to welcome the Commissioners : Fabumi (Ekiti), Lodifi 
(Ijesa), Oluyo, the Balogun, and Bambe, the Seriki of Ife. Also 
the civil chiefs Obalufe, Obaloran, Obajio, Ajaruwa, Arode, and 
the Orisanire. 

In the afternoon the chiefs of the Ibadan contingent defending 
Modakeke, viz : — Aldntola, Sumonu Apampa, Ojo Wanwanmasi the 
Ekarun paid them also a friendly visit of welcome. Of the Moda- 
k§ke chiefs Sowo the Ogunsua's respresentative, the Agbakin, 
Oyeleye the Otun Agbakin, Detomi and Oke the two powerful 
war chiefs also came to pay their respects. The conference at the 
Ife-Modakeke battlefield lasted about 30 days without any result 
till the Commissioners left them. It was thus summarized in the 
Commissioners' report : — 

We arrived at Ife-Modakeke on the evening of the 2nd of 
October, and on the 5th inst we had an interview with the 
Ibadan chiefs, and impressed upon them the necessity for 
the Modakek§s removing from their town as soon as. possible. 



554 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The Ibadan chiefs promised to see the Modakeke authorities 
and return on the following morning. 

On the 6th the Ibadan chiefs' messengers and one Modakek§ 
chief's messenger came to say their masters could not come as 
it was an unlucky day. We said we should expect to see their 
masters on the following day. 

On the 7th the Ibadan and Modekeke chiefs came together 
and the latter asked lor five months in which to remove to 
Ipetumodu, etc. 

In the afternoon of the same day we saw the Ife chiefs and 
their allies and informed them of the Modakekes' request. 
The Ifes would not hear of five months being granted, saying 
it was only a ruse to get rid of us, and that the Modakekes would 
never leave if they did not remove in our presence from their 
town. 

On the 8th inst. we saw the Ibadan and Modakeke chiefs, 
and told them that we had decided upon careful consideration 
that the Modakekes must remove from their town to Ipetumodu 
within ten days from that day, and that the Ibadans on the one 
side and the allies of the Ifes on their side should decamp also 
within that time. The Agbakin said he would tell the Ogunsua 
what we had decided. 

In the afternoon we informed the Ifes and their allies of our 
decision. On the gth the Ijebu, Ibadan, and Oyo represen- 
tatives came to tell us that the previous afternoon, on our 
decision becoming known, there was an uproar at Modakeke, 
the people saying they would die rather than leave their town. 
The representatives considered matters serious and therefore came 
to ask us if some other arrangement could be made as the 
Modakekes seemed very determined. 

We told the representatives that they had better go and see 
the Ibadan chiefs and Modakeke authorities and try to learn 
from them the true state of affairs and let us know. 

In the afternoon the representatives returned and said the 
Ibadan chiefs told them that the uproar had been directed against 
them the previous day, the Modakekes alleging that the Ibadan 
chiefs had betrayed them and saying they would not leave their 
town. The representatives said the -Ibadan chiefs had sent a 
messenger to the Balogun at Ikirun asking for instructions as 
to how to act and expected an answer in about five days' time. 

On the nth the Agbakin and representatives of the Ogunsua 
and Otun Agbakin and the Ibadan chiefs came to see us : they 
said they wished us to reconcile the Modakekes and Ifes, that 
the former never had intended to leave their present town, and 



DISPERSAL OF THE COMBATANTS 555 

that their proposition of five months' grace being granted meant 
nothing. We told them that the Agbakin was the only chief 
present, and that if the chiefs had any proposals to make they 
must make them in person. 

On the I2th the junior commissioner had an interview with 
the Ibadan and Modakeke chiefs, and impressed upon them 
that if the Modakekes persisted in their refusal to quit their 
present town within the time given, the Ifes and their allies 
would not be bound to break up their camps, while the Ibadans 
would have to retire from Modakeke if we so ordered them, 
they having made peace with the Ifes and their allies. 

The Ibadans appeared to side with the Modakekes at this 
interview, and two of the chiefs were somewhat insolent.* 

No progress with affairs under consideration was made. We 
had subsequent interviews with the Ifes on the 13th and with 
the Modakekes on the 14th, and at the request of both parties 
agreed to the chiefs on either side meeting in a shed by our house 
with a view to their possibly being able to come to an under- 
standing. 

We gave them distinctly to understand, however, that any 
scheme they might agree upon must be submitted to us by 
noon on Monday the i8th of October. 

Several meetings of the Ife and Modakeke chiefs were held, 
and at one time it almost seemed that they might be able to 
come to an understanding ; the Ifes offering to allow all the 
Modakekes to hve with them in He Ife* provided the present 
town of Modakeke was destroyed. 

On Monday the i8th both parties appeared before us and asked 
for an extension of 24 hours which was granted to them. 

^ These were Akintola and Sumonu Apampa the latter being the 
spokesman. The chief commissioner being indisposed on this 
occasion, the Queen's Advocate conducted the negotiations in his 
own way. Foiled and silenced at every turn by his dialectic 
skill, the young war-chief fiercely broke out " You were sent here 
to make peace not to destroy lives. When you ordered a population 
like that of Modakeke to remove at once and go and live in a forest 
what is to become of the women and children, the aged and infirm, 
how and where are they to live ? How to be sheltered and how fed ? 
If anything should happen to them, at your hands will God enquire 
their lives. They and the Ifes had lived in peace between them- 
selves before, and they can do so again if only you would reconcile 
them together." — Ed. 

^ Modakeke contained a far larger population than He Ife 
and more powerful war-chiefs. — Ed. 



556 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The chiefs then resumed their meetings, which shortly after- 
wards became very stormy and ended by both parties leaving 
without having come to any agreement. No proposal was 
submitted to us by the authorities on either side at all. 

On the i8th we had an interview with the Ibadan chiefs 
and pointed out to them that we might have to call upon them 
to retire from Modakeke if- the Modakekes did not abide by the 
treaty. They begged us not to send them away before the 
allies on the Ife side, but gave no hint that they would not 
obey cmr orders. 

On the 20th we saw the Ibadan chiefs and told them that the 
Modakekes having broken the treaty, we called upon the 
Ibadans to retire from the town of Modakeke they being at 
peace with the Ifes and their allies. 

The Ibadan chiefs replied that they had sent all their things 
away, but would not leave Modakeke unless the Ifes' allies 
also decamped, without orders from the Balogun. 

We warned them that in remaining in Modakeke after we 
had ordered them to leave, they were breaking the treaty. They 
said they had not signed the treaty and therefore were not 
responsible. We said we should send direct to the Balogun. 

On the 2 1st October we despatched the Rev. S. Johnson to 
Ikirun with a letter to the Balogun of Ibadan informing him of 
the state of affairs, and requesting him to withdraw the Ibadan 
contingent in Modakeke without delay, and also to let us know 
what measures he intended taking to carry into effect the 
obligations undertaken by him and the other Ibadan authorities 
in clause 5 of the ratification of the treaty. 

On the same day we despatched the Rev. C. Phillips to Mesin 
Ipole with a letter to Chief Ogedemgbe and with orders to 
proceed on and meet Mr. Johnson at Ikirun. Mr. Philhps 
returned to us on the 26th bringing a letter from Chief 
Ogedemgbe asking us not to allow the Modakekes to remain in 
their present town. 

Mr. Phillips reported that the news he took to Mesin Ipole 
about the Modakekes caused much indignation. 

On the 27th Mr. Johnson arrived with a messenger from the 
Balogun of Ibadan who delivered the following message to us : 

Qdejayi [the messenger] : " The Balogun salutes you. He 
had heard of all your trouble with his people who are here. 
He begs you to pass it over. He has sent them word that they 
are all to clear out at once. He salutes you for being hungry 
on his account. He least expected that the Modakeke people 
would be so obstinate. He thought it would be a thread but 



DISPERSAL OF THE COMBATANTS 557 

it has passed a twine. He thought with one word he would 
tell the Modakekes to clear out, and they would obey him ; but 
now they are so obstinate, and disobedient. He would beg the 
Ifes to come home, and the Modakekes as many of them as 
are his friends or relations or belong to him he will tell them 
to clear out to Ipetumodu, and those who remain will have 
their choice whether to clear out or live with the Ifes. 

" He says as to the Of a case, they are negotiating with the 
Ilorins therefore the Modakeke case will take time. Now you 
are settling things here there will be no firing of guns ; he will 
try to settle everything peaceably. He will never break the 
treaty in any way." 

The Commissioners : " Are you charged with any message 
to the Modakekes ? " 

Odejayi : " No," 

The Commissioners : ".Is there any other messenger going 
to them ? " 

Qdejayi : " The only message I have for the Modak§kes is 
that the Balogun is withdrawing his army in compliance with 
the treaty. I am sent with a message to Fabumi." 

The Commissioners : " What is that message ? " 

Odejayi : " That the Balogun has sent to the Seriki as well 
as the Owa to beg the Ifes, and he asks Fabiimi also to beg the 
Ifes, and that he will put matters straight. All their forefathers 
came from Ife and so Ife must not be a desolate place." 

The messenger said he would deUver his message to the 
Ibadan chiefs that afternoon, and let us know their intentions 
as soon as possible. 

The nex.t morning the messenger came to teU us that he had 
delivered the message to the Ibadan chiefs at a meeting the 
previous evening, and they had said they were ready to go when 
the allies on the other side went, but not before. 

The messenger said he had seen one of the Ibadan chiefs that 
morning who had said they were going to have another meeting 
to consider again the Balogun's message. 

On the 29th a messenger arrived from Chief Ogedemgbe with 
a letter in which he said, if the Modakekes did not leave their 
town he would attack the Ibadans at Ikirun. 

It seems Chief Ogdemgbe sent the messenger whom the 
Balogun had sent to him back to Ikirun, with a message that 
he could not agree to the Balogun's proposal to reconcile the 
Ifes and Modakekes and let the latter remain in their town, 
and asking the Balogun to send any answer he might have to 
make direct to us so as to save time. 

u 



558 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

On the 30th we sent for the Balogun's messenger who came 
with Mr. Johnson, and learnt from him that the Ibadan Chiefs 
said they could not leave until matters were settled, or in other 
words, that they had decided to disobey the Balogim's order to 
quit Modakeke at once. 

We now came to the conclusion that it was useless our wasting 
any more time in endeavouring to see the treaty carried out, 
and accordingly addressed a letter to the Modakeke authorities 
which was read to them by Mr. Johnson on the ist of November 
charging them with having broken the treaty and holding them 
primarily responsible for any compUcation which might arise 
through their default. 

We had twice since our arrival at Ife-Modakeke sent word 
to the Ogunsua through Mr. Johnson that we proposed to visit 
him, but each time he had begged to be excused from receiving 
us.^ 

We had a final interview with the Ifes on the ist November 
and impressed upon them that neither they nor their aUies 
should do anything to provoke a renewal of hostilities but 
await the action of the BaJogun of Ibadan to whom and also 
to Chief Ogedemgbe, we were sending particulars of the situation. 
They all said they had no wish to recommence the war, and 
would do what they could to keep the peace. 

Mr. Johnson told us that the Modakekes and Ibadans had 
also expressed themselves as most strongly averse to more 
fighting. 

We addressed letters to Chief Ogedemgbe and the Owa, and 
the Ekiti kings, teUing them of our intention to return to Lagos, 
and pointing out to them that every effort should yet be made 
to have matters settled peaceably, and that they should afford 
the Ibadan authorities every opportunity of carrying out their 
part of the treaty. We also addressed a letter to the Balogun 
of Ibadan impressing upon him that if the Ibadan authorities 
did not at once actually withdraw their contingents from 
Modakeke, and fulfil their obligations under the 5th clause of 
the ratification of the treaty, they would be equally guilty with 
the Modakekes of a breach of faith with the Governor of Lagos, 
and all the signatories of the treaty, and be held responsible 

^ Which is a great pity ; for had the commissioners done so, 
they would possibly have been impressed with the size of Modakeke, 
a town ot over 60,000 inhabitants and the practical difficulties 
in the carrying out of their proposals. Ipetumodu did not contain 
more than 10,000 ; and how can 10,000 accommodate 60,000? — Ed. 



DISPERSAL OF THE COMBATANTS 559 

should war ensue in consequence of their failure to abide by their 
pledges. 

This letter we entrusted to the Rev. S. Johnson to take to 
Ikirun, and he was to leave Modakeke on the 3rd November, 
and should reach the Balogun at latest in four days after. 

We left Ife-Modakeke on the morning of the 2nd November 
for Ode Ondo. 

While we were at IferModakeke, and especially towards the 
end of the time, there were constant communications between 
the opposite camps, and we were asked by Akintola the leading 
Ibadan chief, and by FabQmi to allow them to meet in our 
presence with a view to the withdrawal of the respective alHes 
of the Ifes and Modakekes. 

This we declined to do, as we did not consider it consistent 
with the object of our mission : but we informed Fabumi that 
if he and Akintola choose to meet, we had no objection to their 
doing so, and if they came to an arrangement between them- 
selves, that was their concern. 

H. HiGGINS lex • 7^ 

Oliver SmithP^^*'*^ Commxsswners. 

After the Commissioners had gone, Fabiimi said to the envoys 
from the AlAfin of Oyq, the Awujale of Ijebu, and the Balogun of 
Ibadan, that if the white men could not wait to settle their 
differences, they should wait to accomplish what they had begun, 
and to bring matters to a final issue. He asked them to summon 
the Ibadan chiefs with Akintola at their head for a conference. 
This was done, and all the Ibadan chiefs went out but had not the 
confidence to go unarmed as far as the Commissioners' camp, 
where they used to meet the Ife chiefs when the Commissioners 
were there. They went half-way and sent word to Fabiimi to 
say they had come. Fabumi however could not prevail upon the 
If§ chiefs to meet them for a conference, hence he sent word to 
say that he would meet with the Ife chiefs at a conference and 
would let them know the result. 

On the 3rd November Fabiimi went to Ayimoro's camp and 
brought pressure to bear upon him that under no circumstance 
should they provoke a fight and recommence hostihties with the 
Ibadans and Modakekes. On his return, he told Oba-kosetan that 
he had secured the promise of Ayimoro upon good faith that the 
Modakekes should not be kidnapped or provoked to a fight and 
that the armistice should continue. 

The Ibadan chiefs sent a message to Fabiimi that a sensible 
messenger should be sent from each of the three camps to them. 



560 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

viz., the Ife's, A5dmgro's and Ogunsigun's camps, and they would 
tell them their minds. 

Fabumi alone took the initiative, and he sent back to say that 
unless he visited each of these camps in person and prevailed 
upon the chiefs to send each a messenger, they would never do so. 
He also suggested that the free intercommunication between them 
should continue, for if communication be interrupted there would 
soon be another difficulty. 

The envoys were not allowed to leave Modakeke for about a 
month after the Commissioners had gone, and as the result of their 
negotiations, the Ibadan contingent at Modakeke, as well as 
Fabumi and the Ijesa contingents with the exception of Ayimorg 
(Ijesa) and Ogunsigun (Ijebu) left their respective aUies the same 
day ; the Ibadan contingent leaving for Ikirun to join their 
brethren and Fabumi for Mesin Ipole to join Ogedemgbe, and subse- 
quently for Mesin-Oloja-Oke his home. 

The Ifes however remained in their camp, refusing to go home 
(as yet) and rebuild their city, but there was no resumption of 
hostiUties. 



Chapter XXXI 

DISTURBANCE IN EVERY PART OF THE COUNTRY 

§ I. Ilorin Intrigues and the Fall of Ofa 

We have seen above how anxious Ogedemgbe was about the war 
going on at Ofa, how he wished the Commissioners to include this 
in their efforts, being as it were a part of the same war. He tried 
to induce them to send a messenger with his own, and one from the 
Balogun of Ibadan to prevail. upon KsLrkrk the Ilorin Generahssimo 
to accept terms of peace ; but the Commissioners dechned to do 
so. They however appro ved of their sending their own messengers 
if they so wished. Seriki Ogedemgbe and the Balogun of Ibadan 
agreed to ask Lasebikan the head of the Ilorin contingent with 
the Ekitis to send also with them, but he backed out of this 
obligation. It appeared that Seriki Ogedemgbe had some 
communications with Kkvkrk, urging him to the acceptance of 
peace, and had not succeeded. He was also very anxious about 
the Ijesa contingent in the Ilorin camp. He sent to tell Karkr^ 
that matters had been settled at Kiriji, and that if he would let 
the Ekitis with him leave his camp, he would let the Ilorins with 
him leave Oke Mesin. The following was the reply returned by the 
wily Kkrkrk : " Let my men perish with you, and let your men 
perish with me." Showing that the astute Gambari knew what 
he was about when he made the arrangement. The fact was 
that the Ilorins had no grievance which could be settled like that 
of the Ekitis, they were simply on conquest bent. 

K^ark had good reasons to be so haughty and implacable. 
He was on bad terms with his king at home, and embarked on this 
war against his strong behest, and to return to Ilorin otherwise 
than as a victor might cost him his Hfe. Hence all negotiations 
with him proved abortive ; he was determined to take Ofa either 
by force of arms or by stratagem. 

Shortly after the firing of the camp at Kiriji, the Seriki Ogedemgbe 
sent to assure the Balogun of Ibadan that they wished peace to 
be made at Ofa also, so that they might withdrav/ their contingent 
from the Ilorin camp, and that the Ibadans should do nothing 
to prevent this being done. The Balogun sent back to say he also 
wished for peace there so that he might recall his men, Ofa would 
be restored to the Ilorins provided they might promise not to sack 
the city. They (the Ibadans) would await the result of the efforts 

561 



562 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

of the Ijesa and Ekiti kings' mediation with the Ilorins, and should 
Kkrkrk refuse to let the men quit his camp, the Ibadans would be 
quite ready to let them pass safely through their ranks to Ofa, and 
thence safely to their homes without a calabash or a pot being 
broken. Having sworn friendship to him he would never go 
back on his word. As the result of the messages sent to him 
by Seriki Ogedemgbe Kkrkrk sent to the Ibadan war chiefs to say 
that the Ibadans should withdraw their contingent from Ofa, 
and must not fear any molestation from the Ilorins. 

The messengers arrived at Ikirun on the 9th of November, 1886. 
The Ibadans considered it puerile to demand that the defensive 
should withdraw from a beleaguered city before the offensive, and 
therefore rephed as follows: "Before we remove a single man 
Karara should decamp first, and if he refuse to do so, let him 
await us. And why should he ask us to withdraw our forces when 
he is still encamped against Ofa ? When Ali his father encamped 
against Otun, and we sent Ajayi Jegede to defend that city some 
years ago and peace was made between us, was it not Ali his 
father that decamped first ? So it should be in this case also." 

The messengers however were well treated ; the Balogun 
entertained them with two large calabashes full of lyan (pounded 
yam), a potful of meat, and also gave them ten heads of cowries 
and a goat. 

When this strong message was delivered to Kkrkrk he opened 
a secret communication with one Lagbeja, one of the powerful 
chiefs who re-inforced Ofa. Lagbeja was carrying on this com- 
munication without informing his brother chiefs in the camp, and 
when this was found out they all set against him, and the 
quarrel was so hot that Lagbeja had to escape from the camp over 
the walls and took refuge in the town of Ofa. 

The news of this disunion among the re-inforcement alarmed 
the Balogun and the other war chiefs at Ikirun ; they immediately 
despatched one Oyesunle to reconcile them, and Lagbeja returned 
to his post. 

On the very night of his return, two messengers from the Ilorin 
camp came to ask for an interview with him. He declined the 
interview for obvious reasons, but the other chiefs hearing this, 
advised him to grant the interview, and let them hear what the 
envoys had to say. He was invited to the Ilorin camp for peace 
negotiation. 

Oyesunle the Balogun's messenger was deputed to conduct the 
negotiation. He was the chief envoy, and each of the principal 
war chiefs sent a man with him. Thus he visited the Ilorin camp, 
and proceeded to Ilorin city for an interview with the Emir. 



DISTURBANCE IN EVERY PART OF THE COUNTRY 563 

The Emir of Ilorin received the messengers graciously, and before 
granting an interview he treated them with cold water, bananas, 
honey, and sugar ; saying " As sweet and refreshing as these are, 
so I wish the country to be." 

The following was the message sent by the Emir to the 
Ibadan chiefs : " Of a has always been mine, the royal gift 
of my father to me, and hence I do not wish it to be destroyed. 
My request is that the Ibadans should treat me as a King, and to 
let my words come to pass. They should recall their army first, 
and I shall recall mine." He presented the messengers with 13 
gowns (one to each man), fed them sumptuously, and gave them 
some cowries. 

The Ilorin Emir also sent his own messengers to the Balogun, 
about 17 of them, all on horseback : and he also treated them with 
similar generosity ; they were sent back with a similar message 
as the one they brought, asking the Emir to withdraw his attacking 
force, and they would withdraw the defending one. 

The Ibadans were quite ahve to the Ilorin intrigues. 

Karara in the meantime never ceased to breathe out vengeance 
against Ofa, and to speak disparagingly of the Balogun of Ibadan : 
he was often heard to say, " And who else is called Balogun 
besides myself ? " However, there was an armistice till the 
month of June, 1887, when the AlAfin as a part of his engagement 
in the Treaty, and at the request of his subjects, took the negoti- 
ation in hand. His Majesty sent Obajuwon, one of his chief 
Ilaris, who went to the Ilorin camp in a style befitting his rank. 
A tumult arose in the Ilorin camp when he entered there with his 
drum. He was set upon by the Gambari faction, and his drum 
was ripped with a knife ! The Yoruba element in the camp 
immediately rushed around him to prevent violence being done 
to his person, and effected his safe return to Ofa. Obajuwon 
arrived home on the 30th June, 1887. Thus failed the negotiation 
of peace at Ofa, and hostilities were recommenced afresh. 

All prospects of peace appeared very dark and cloudy once 
more, the war being vigorously prosecuted at Ofa, and it was 
under consideration at Ikirun whether the army at Ofa should be 
re-inforced or not. The Ibadan senior chiefs were reluctant to 
do so, lest the conflict between themselves and Ogedemgbe be 
renewed, and the scene of war be but changed from Kiriji to Ofa 
and Ikirun, for Ogedemgbe had not disbanded his forces. 

The war chiefs had once a stormy meeting at Ikirun on this 
subject, when Chief Enimowu (son-in-law to the famous Basorun 
Ogunmola) in the heat of passion volunteered to go to the relief 
of Ofa if the leaders would not move. Without obtaining any 



564 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

sanction he left the meeting in a rage to prepare for Ofa. Kongi 
his nephew and heir to the house of Ogunmgla being then but a 
youth volunteered to go with him, as all the members of the house 
must go. Enimowu encamped at Erin, a small town a few miles 
from Ofa where he was of great help in provisioning the beleaguered 
city. 

Unfortunately this new re-inforcement suffered a disaster so 
great as to be compared to none but that in which his brother-in- 
law the late Ilori the Osi was taken alive at the Jalumi war. 

The Ilorin horsemen were in the habit of kidnapping the caravans 
between Ofa and Erin bringing in provisions. On this occasion 
Enimowu attacked the kidnappers, and in a short time put them 
to flight, and pursued them rather too far. One notable Ilorin 
horseman, Nasamu by name, but surnamed " Gata-ikoko " 
{i.e., a devouring M'olf, from his great fondness for meat) 
in the chase easily out-distanced his pursuers, and with a few choice 
horsemen he made a wide detour and re-appeared at the rear of 
their pursuers ! The alarm was soon given at the rear. The pursued 
had now become the pursuers. Great was the havoc wrought 
by the Ilgrins with their spears on the panic-stricken pursuers now 
taken in the rear. Enimowu, the leader of the expedition, was 
found sitting on a keg of powder fanning himself after the chase, 
his horse led to be watered, and he congratulating hirriself that he 
had given a good account of the enemy, when suddenly the enemy 
burst upon him from the rear, and there he was taken alive with 
other illustrious war chiefs, viz., Salako, the heir and successor of 
the late Aijgnku, Winkunle, late Tubosun's son, Malade, son of the 
late Seriki Odunjo, and others of lesser note. Salako refused to 
to go with them as a prisoner of war, and was killed on the spot ; 
the rest were taken to Ilorin and were there treated as respectable 
prisoners of war. 

Young Kongi was so terrified at the news of this disaster that 
he waited no longer at Erin but fled precipitately back to Ikirun. 
For this abject cowardice he was cold-shouldered by everyone 
of the chiefs and forbidden to attend their councils. He was fined 
heavily for this before he was allowed to re-occupy his former 
position, but all the same he subsequently lost the title that would 
have been his on their return home. 

No sympathy was expressed for Enimowu because of the 
arrogant manner he volunteered for the war, as if all the rest 
were cowards. 

Whilst all this was going on, reports from time to time reached 
the Ibadans of the disaffection existing at Ofa itself, a portion of 
the people were in league with the Ilorins, and their messengers 



DISTURBANCE IN EVERY PART OF THE COUNTRY 565 

had several times been caught. These belonged to the party who 
would not have Adegboye the present Olofa as their king, for the 
only reason that he was the son of the last king. They held that 
the son should not succeed the father at once, an uncle or elderly 
cousin should come between. Adegboye did not insist on his 
right, but was determined to retire from the scene with all his 
belongings. The case was reported to the Ibadan chiefs and the 
Are — then living — said to the opposing party, " With an enemy 
at your gates can you afford to ignore this young prince ? Wliose 
are the guns, the kegs of powder, and other ammunition you are 
using to fight the foe ? If he should retire with arms and ammuni- 
tion belonging to him what will be your prospects ? " Then they 
reluctantly yielded to Adegboye succeeding his father. They were 
now unremitting in their intrigues against him. 

The Ibadan chiefs being apprehensive of a great act of treachery 
which might overwhelm their men were, for this reason, no longer 
disposed to sacrifice the lives of any more of their men after the 
loss of Enimowu. They were determined therefore to withdraw 
their army from Ofa. 

Apparently going to re-inforce Ofa in strength and avenge 
Enimowu, the whole of the war chiefs except the Balogun marched 
out for Ofa with orders secretly to withdraw the Ibadan contingent, 
the Olgfa, and those in sympathy with the Ibadans. They halted 
near Erin and sent for those to be rescued at dead of night. 

The Olofa on leaving home, in order to ward off suspicion, and 
prevent a panic, ordered his horse to be saddled and left in charge 
of a page outside in front of the palace, some of his wives also 
were left sitting there and there was a bright light burning, while 
he escaped by a back door with the rest of his wives, children, 
and favourite servants. Till he was clean gone none but his body- 
guard knew of it. He joined the Ibadan reHef party and all 
ai'rived safely at Ikirun. 

The Olofa was the head of all the provincial kings of the Ibolo 
district between Ilgrin and Iwo. He was assigned a portion of 
land between Osogbo and Ede, where he founded a new town 
called Ofa-tedo, and there he resided till the end of the war. 

Next morning when it was known all over the city that the 
Ibadans had gone and the Olofa with them, those hitherto in 
favour of the Ilorins put leaves on their heads, and went dancing 
to the Ilorin camp and singing : 

" Awa ko se ti Ibadan mo o, 
T'onirugbon I'a o se." 
(" No more are we for the Ibadans, 

With the long-bearded our lot we've cast,") 



566 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Thus they came and prostrated before Karkrk. It was said 
that he asked them, " Have the Ibadans gone ? " — " Yes, they 
have gone." He then added, " Very well, you can go home, 
I will pay you a visit shortly." 

After breakfast Kkrkrk rode up to Ofa with his army, and took 
his seat at the palace gates. His first act was to despatch a body 
of horsemen to occupy each of the gates of the city so as to allow 
no exit from any. He next summoned him all the remaining 
Ofa chiefs and the influential men of the city to be brought before 
him ; they came with leaves on their heads as a token of sub- 
mission. He then said to them, " You now say you are all on 
my side, if that be so, why is it you held out so long against me, 
and did not open your gates secretly for my troops to enter ? You 
know now that the Ibadans have gone then you say you declare 
yourselves for me." And when they lay prostrate before him 
he coolly gave the order, " E maha dumbu^ won " (" Slaughter 
them away.") Thereupon followed the process; a man appeared 
with a butcher's knife in hand, and another with a basin of water. 
Seizing these prostrate forms one by one, they were forcibly held 
down, with head and neck raised and the throat coolly cut, and 
the blood thoroughly drained and the corpse thrown down. This 
done, the knife was washed in the basin of water — after the manner 
of slaughtering animals, and then they proceeded to the second, 
and third, and so on till they had slaughtered the whole of them ! 
Then he ordered the shade trees of the market place to be cut 
down as a sign of victory, and the city to be sacked, the inhabitants 
(such as were left) to be made prisoners. Thus Ofa was taken. 

The Consequences of the Fall of Ofa. — When all the towns in 
the vicinity heard that the Ibadans were gone, and a part of Ofa 
with them, knowing what the consequences would be, they all 
were deserted, and the people went with the Ibadans to Ikirun, 
viz., Erin, Ijabe, Okuku, Igbayi, Oyan, Iba, Ekusa, Okuwk, 
Agboye, Ori, and Asi. 

Inisa alone was not deserted, not being far from Ikirun but within 
a short time the Ilorin horse was at its gates. 

The Ilgrins, who promised so faithfully that if the Ibadan 
contingent were withdrawn from Ofa they would decamp, now 
sent word to the Ibadans to say, " Qru yin nmu wa ni Ikirun " 
(" We are feeling the inconvenience of your body-heat at Ikirun "). 
Meaning that they should withdraw from Ikirun also. Inisa had 
to be strongly re-inforced, and for a long time a desultory warfare 
between the Ibadans and Ilgrins was carried on there. The 

^Dumbu is the word used for slaughtering animals for sacrifice. 



DISTURBANCE IN EVERY PART OF THE COUNTRY 567 

Ilorins could not leave their camp at Yanayo to encamp against 
Inisa or Ikirun as before, and the Ibadans did not consider it safe 
to go against them at Yanayo, where they would be exposed 
on all sides to the cavalry attack. The strength of the Ilorins 
lay in their horses, and they could come from a day's journey 
to attack Inisa or Ikirun, usually by breaking their journey half- 
way overnight and give battle next morning. If defeated, they 
were able to retreat in good order : taught by former experience, 
the Ibadans did not venture to pursue horsemen far from their 
base. This continued for a good while. 

In course of time the Ilgrin horse kept hovering constantly 
between Ikirun and Inisa as if to cut off communication between 
the two places, about six or eight miles apart ; the war chiefs 
therefore considered it more prudent to concentrate their forces 
at Ikirun in order to prevent a surprise, and therefore they with- 
drew Babalola who was stationed there. Ikirun once more 
became the scene of conflict, the Ilorins with their horses paying 
surprise visits now and then. The Ibadan scouts and outposts 
being ever on the alert to report their approach the so-called 
battles now dwindled into occasional skirmishes for half a day, 
and these few and far between. Taught by Jalumi, the Ilorins 
would not encamp against Ikirun, and from the experience of 
Enimowu the Ibadans would not go after them in the plain at 
Yanayo. 

§ 2. Revolutionary Movements at Ijebu 

The Ijebus at this time were alarmed at the quiet changes going 
on in the country. Traders and others from the interior were 
finding their way down to the coast through their country and 
vice versa. The traditional saying, " Ijebu Ode, Ajeji ko wo " 
(Ijebu Ode, no aHen to enter) was in danger of being abohshed, 
and they were determined to put a stop to it. The blame for 
this was laid upon the Awujale and on Ngfowgkan the Balogun 
for entering into friendship with the white men and befriending 
Oyos (that is for the part they had taken hitherto towards the 
restoration of peace in the interior). They begrudged the Balogun 
his influence with the Oyos, and therefore recalled him home from 
Oru and a civil title was given him. They forced the king to 
pass a law forbidding Oyos to reach Ijebu Ode, much less to pass 
through it to Lagos ; all intercourse for merchandise was to be 
carried on at Orii. 

The younger Ijebus were instigated to take the enforcement 
of the law in hand, and some of them went further and even 
clamoured for the death of the king. 



568 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Their King exonerated himself from their charges by arguing 
with them thus : " Since we have had a closer intercourse with 
the Oyos during the late negotiations for peace — a peace clamoured 
for and desired by yourselves — you Ijebus have had many of 
their daughters to be your wives, and they have had children for 
you. Is it not natural for the parents of these women to visit 
their daughters and grandchildren ? How can you sever the ties 
of relationship by preventing brothers from visiting their sisters, 
and parents their children ? If you will be just and fair, send these 
women back home with the children born to you, then there will 
be no occasion for any outsiders to enter your country." The 
law was made so stringent that Prince Adekoya, the Awuj ale's 
eldest son went to the Remo district which had hitherto been free 
to caravans both ways and took up his station at Ode seizing all 
Lagos traders passing up or going down. The writer, together 
with the Rev. D. Olubi of Ibadan, on their way to Lagos met him 
there on Easter Tuesday, 1887, but just escaped him on their 
return, having visited other villages for the same purpose. 

Previously to their passing down, a son of the reverend gentleman 
on his way from Lagos to Ibadan had no end of trouble with him ; 
he had in his custody a goodly number of traders from the interior 
and from the coast whose goods had been seized and forwarded 
to Ijebu Ode and themselves loaded with chains ! This young 
man was needlessly detained by the prince, and when he grew 
desperate he got into a rage and frightened the prince by firing a 
walking-stick gun into the air, just to show what he could do. 
This novel sight disposed the prince to let him pass on homewards. 

His father when passing down took the opportunity to speak 
to Prince Adekoya, explaining to him the difference between 
missionaries and traders, and thus paved a way for the mission's 
mail-man between Lagos and Ibadan by that route. 

Soon after their return home from Lagos, news reached the 
writer at Oyo by one of Balogun Nof owokan's sons that the writer 
had been declared by the Awuj ale an outlaw in any of the Ijebu 
provinces, whether of Ode, Igbo, or Remo. He could be killed 
by anyone if found in any of these provinces. The crimes alleged 
against him were these : — 

1. That he was no longer on the side of peace, but for the con- 
tinuation of the war. 

2. That he was building a house for the AlAfin, whom he knew 
to be not favourable to peace. 

3. That he was supplying the AlAfin with arms of precision 
and ammunition for the Ilgrins in order to enable them to wage 
a successful war against the Ibadans. 



DISTURBANCE IN EVERY PART OF THE COUNTRY 569 

The apparent foundation of these baseless charges was the 
appointment of the writer by the C.M.S. to take charge of their 
mission at Oyo and of his building a church and a vicarage there. 

The Awujale gave a ready credence to this report because of 
the maUcious feehng existing in him already against the writer 
because the Commissioners of 1886 were not prevailed upon by 
him to kill Ogunsigun the Seriki of Ijebu Igbo, and to disperse his 
troops at Isoya according to his order. 

The writer seized the first opportunity that presented itself of the 
Rev. W. B. George, Wesleyan minister going down to Lagos via 
Ijebu to request him to deny these reports both to the Balogun 
and to the Awujale as utterly false and unfounded. 

Early in March, 1888, having another occasion to visit Lagos 
instead of avoiding the Awujale by finding another route, he 
thought it best to face the difficulty at once and clear himself of 
these false charges. Accordingly on his arrival at Oru, by the 
advice of Tunubi, son of the Balogun and grandson of the Awujale 
by his eldest daughter, the writer sent to apprise the Balogun of 
his arrival at Oru, and of his intention to proceed forward. The 
Balogun sent to say he could come on to Ijebu Ode, but not until- 
dusk. 

Meanwhile the Balogun was pleading his cause with the Awujale, 
after sending to him about six times to no good effect he had to 
go in person and urge the claims of the writer, reminding him of 
all he had undergone as the Governor's messenger on behalf of 
peace since 1886, and begged the King to see him and hear from 
his own mouth a true explanation of the charges alleged against 
him. After two days the Awujale relented and agreed to see him. 
The interview however was not in the day but about 8 p.m. 
" Ajose " {i.e., Johnson) said the Awujale, " Is that you ? I heard 
that you are no more for peace but have joined the Alafin in his 
intrigues." " No, sir," was the reply. " My going to Oyg to 
reside was not of my own choice, but as an obedient servant I 
went where I was sent. I am like a rod in the hands of my 
masters, and wherever I am flung there I must be. Who am I 
to have a voice of my own in these great political matters ? My 
calling is of a different kind and not political." The King replied, 
" Don't you say so ; your words have gained the ears of kings 
and mighty warriors lately, so you cannot think so meanly of 
yourself. I was so angry with you that I never intended to see 
your face any more, but thanks to the Balogun who vigorously 
pleaded your cause." The writer was allowed to proceed to 
Lagos, but he had to be accompanied by two escorts from the 
Balogun. 



570 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

That the King was not quite satisfied with the above explanation 
was evident by his remonstrance with the writer on his returning 
from Lagos on the 26th of May following. " Ajose," said he, " the 
whole Ijebu nation love and respect you, but you will lose that 
love and respect if you do not reconsider your appointment to 
Qyo." 

Prince Adekoya continued his blockade of the Remo district 
for a long time, and many valuable lives perished and much 
property was confiscated in that district ; both persons and effects 
were transferred to Ijebu Ode and nothing more heard of them, 
most of the persons being killed or sold far away. A Brazihan 
freedman who had acquired some substance in his land of exile was 
returning to his native town of I wo. He happened to meet with 
Adekoya here, and was seized by him with all his goods and personal 
belongings, and sent to Ijebu Ode. The goods were said 
to be worth over ;{8oo, including cash : among them was a large 
red silk damask umbrella with tassels all round intended for his 
King, the Oluiwo. The Ijebu King in council in consideration of 
his heavy losses, granted the man his freedom. • They told him he 
could go. But the unfortunate man, overcome with grief and 
despair groaned and said, " What is life worth to me now? I 
have committed no crime, I have been utterly ruined. No prospect 
before me now but utter destitution and beggary ! Death is 
preferable." "All right," said the Awujale, " we will oblige you 
in this." He then gave the order " E lo ipo o " (Go and kill 
him). In a few minutes his head was off his shoulders ! 

Not content with watching his own country the Awujale also 
sent an Agurin to the Ibadans with strict orders to arrest anyone 
in European dress, white or black, and if he is such as cannot be 
dealt with they should at any rate send him back to Lagos. An 
attempt was made thus to turn the writer back to Lagos from the 
very gate of Ibadan, but he left his luggage with them at the town 
gate and galloped into the town to Awonimesin, the Chief Agurin, 
his former colleague in his travelling up and down on the peace 
negotiations in 1886 : he on seeing him' sent orders that he should 
be allowed to enter the town in peace. The Rev. T. Harding, the 
European Superintendent of the C.M.S. Missions, had to pass 
through Ijebu to the interior, and was compelled to pay the sum 
of £4 before he was allowed to pass in 1889, and that was only 
because he at that time had his home in the interior. 

Thus the Ijebus were trying to prevent the opening up of the 
country. 

It should be made clear, however, that the motives actuating 
the Ijebus to these proceedings, mistaken though they be, were 



DISTURBANCE IN EVERY PART OF THE COUNTRY 571 

not only the determination of being the middle men between the 
coast and the interior, but also (as they thought) in order to 
prevent the country from being taken by white men. A report of 
what was called, " The scramble for Africa," then going on reached 
them in one form or another, and they were but safe-guarding the 
national interests. 

§2. "A Mild Treaty" 

About the month of May, 1888, all Lagos was startled by the 
report that the emissaries of the French from Porto Novo had 
reached Abegkuta, and that they concluded a treaty with the 
three leading chiefs, Ogundejd, Onlado, and the Jaguna of Igbein 
(Ogundipe being dead) giving them large presents, and promising 
them a profitable trade, and the construction of a line of railway 
from Porto Novo to Abeokuta. Advantage was taken of the 
constant misunderstandings and frictions between the Lagos 
Government and the Egbas shown by the frequent blockading 
of the river and land route by the Egbas, and the stopping of all 
trade with Lagos. 

The situation was saved for the British Government by the 
Egba educated natives {i.e. Sierra Leoneans whose fathers were 
of Egba origin) of Lagos, who, as soon as they heard the report, 
held a meeting among themselves without delay, and sent a 
deputation to Abeokuta to enquire from the chiefs how far the 
report was true. The deputation returned to Lagos on Whit 
Tuesday, May 22nd, 1888, with a confirmation of the rumour; 
however, the chiefs were said to have denied signing any treaty. 
Their language, which was regarded as not quite satisfactory, 
was to this effect : — 

" We thank you for the solicitations you have manifested for 
your fatherland. You have done well in that, though living out 
of home, you have not forgotten the homeland and its interests. 
You call yourselves our children, but what have we, your parents, 
ever received from you ? But immediately you heard that others 
have made us a few presents, you hastened to show us the danger 
lurking in their gifts. Some of you were born abroad and never 
made our acquaintance until now, very singular way indeed of 
showing love and interest towards one's fatherland. 

' ' Have you not observed the short weights and the short lengths 
in the folded cloths ? Have you not noticed that the English 
cloths contain increasingly more chalk than cotton fibres, the 
liquor diluted, the price of our produce always falling and never 
rising ? What have you done to help us in these things to make 



572 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

our labour more remunerative ? Nothing. It strikes us that you 
only concerned yourselves in competing with the white men to 
make your own profits out of us. We have been trading with the 
English for years, and the result is like an operation on the tread- 
mill, always on the move but remaining where we were with a 
tendency to a backward motion in spite of efforts continually put 
forth. But no sooner we attempt to try for a profitable trade 
with another people than you hasten to warn us of the danger 
that lies therein. We thank you for your anxious care, but 
neither to the French nor to the English are we giving our country." 

Not satisfied with the character of the report of the deputation, 
the leading members of the educated Egbas of Lagos themselves 
went up to interview the chiefs, and warned them of the danger 
they were running of placing themselves between the upper and 
nether millstones of two European powers. What really passed 
between them in this interview was not made known, but the 
chiefs were said to have received them well, and assured them 
that they were not giving the country to anyone. Nothing 
further was heard of the movement, and thus the situation was 
saved. 

When it was known that the Egbas claimed as far as Ebute 
Meta as their territory, surely no British officer at Lagos could 
view this movement with indifference. The very existence of Lagos 
would be at the mercy of the power predominant at Abeokuta. 

Baulked at Abeokuta, rumour had it that the French emissaries 
were proceeding to Oyo to establish friendly relations with the 
AlAfin. 

As it was about this time the overlapping of interests in the 
scrambling had begun, and it was said to be laid down by the French 
that he who possessed the capital had the right to the rest of the 
country, the Governor of Lagos thereupon sent the writer — who 
happened to be at Lagos at the time — ^with a letter and a Treaty 
to the AlAfin of Oyo as the Suzerain of Yoruba-land, which he 
termed " A Mild Treaty." 

Government House, Lagos, 

May 23rd, i<S88. 

No. 115/77- 

King, — I received with much pleasure your letter of the 
20th February last, and beg to thank you for the present of 
two cloths of the country, any manufacture of which interests 
me indeed. 

2. To show my esteem to you and my appreciation of the 
position you occupy I have asked the Rev. S. Johnson, who 



DISTURBANCE IN EVERY PART OF THE COUNTRY 573 

returns to his ministerial duties, to salute you and your people 
with my compliments and respect ; and to wish well to you 
and yours. 

3. As you know, and every Yoruba knows, people to the 
west and to the north are not Yoruba ; they differ in feehngs and 
object from Yorubas. You will have doubtless learnt I always 
aim at making all Yoruba-speaking peoples one in heart as 
they are in tongue. Towards such unity I attach much im- 
portance to a definite and permanent understanding between 
these Yoruba-speaking peoples, and this colony which is mainly 
inhabited by Yorubas. And where should I look first for sym- 
pathy and support but to Adeyemi, the AlAfin of Oyo the titular 
King of all Yoruba ? 

4. Between you and the Governor of the Queen's Colony of 
Lagos there should be ever friendship, goodwill which no 
foreign interference should be allowed to influence or 
disturb. 

5. Yoruba-land was comprised traditionally as regards its 
corners a few years ago of Yoruba proper, Egba, Ketu and 
Ijebu. Where is Ketu now ? And from what direction was it 
destroyed ? 

6. Without the entertainment of the least desire to meddle 
with the government of such kingdoms as Yoruba, Egba, or 
Ijebu, and with the assurance that not one yard of land is 
coveted by me, in feehng and sympathy for Yoruba union I 
desire that Lagos take the place of Ketu as the fourth 
comer. 

7. If the accompanying document be agreeable to you, and 
embodies your wishes, sign it and return it to me. If your 
relations with the country to the north of yours be such as to 
admit of your persuading them what is to their interest, I would 
be glad to find you can get its people to sign a paper similar to 
the one I propose to yourself. 

8. Look what has been done with considerable expense 
already by Her Majesty's Government for the Yoruba-speaking 
countries in connection with the settlement among them in 
i886 of what had been known as the Interior War, in which 
you took such action as should when you look back upon it 
swell your heart with pride, and your country with 
gratitude. 

9. I am anxious to hear of large markets re-established 
between Oyg Ogbomosg, Ilorin, Abeokuta and Ijebu as they 
existed in the past, and safe roads. How this can best be done 
I will be glad to hear from you. 



574 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

ID. You will be at liberty to send your accredited messengers 
to me should you desire to have a longer conversation than can 
well be put within the compass of an ordinary letter, 

II. I venture to send you five pounds as a small present. 
Wishing you and all your people every good wish. 
I am, King, 

Your good friend, 

Alfred C. Moloney, Governor. 

The Treaty. 

Treaty between Adeyemi, AlAfin of Oyo, and Head of 
Yoruba-land, and Her Majesty, Queen of Great Britain and 
Ireland. 

I, Adeyemi, AlAfin of Oyo, and Head of Yoruba-land, the 
four corners of which are and have been from time immemorial 
known as Egba, Ketu, Jebu, and Oyo, embracing within its 
area that inhabited by all Yoruba-speaking peoples, being 
desirous of entering into, and maintaining for ever, friendly 
relations with the subjects of Her Majesty, the Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland, and of developing the resources of Yoruba 
by means of legitimate trade with the subjects of Her Majesty 
and those under her protection or who may hereafter come 
under her protection, and in gratitude for what the Queen has 
at so much expense and risk to life done from time to time for 
my country, have this day at the city of Oyo in the presence of 
those who have hereunto subscribed their names as witnesses 
declared my intention of abiding by the following 
articles : — 

1. From henceforth there should be peace and friendship 
between the subjects of Her Majesty the Queen, and those 
under her protection, and the AlAfin of Oyo and King of Yoruba- 
land and his people, and all other peoples over whom he has 
authority and influence. 

2. The subjects of the Queen may always trade freely with 
the people of Oyo, and the Yoruba-speaking countries in every 
article they may wish to buy and sell, in all towns, rivers, 
creeks, waters, markets and places within territories known 
as Yoruba : and I, Adeyemi, pledge myself to show no favour 
and to give no privilege to the traders or people of other 
countries which I do not give or show to those of the 
Queen. 

3. British subjects and others under the Queen's protection 



DISTURBANCE IN EVERY PART OF THE COUNTRY 575 

are to have the first consideration in all trade transactions with 
my peoples. 

4. No tolls, duties, fees, imposts, or charges shall be charged 
or levied upon the person or property of any British subject 
or other person under Her Majesty's protection other than and 
beyond that or those which are customary and reasonable, or 
may from time to time be agreed upon to be so levied or charged 
by the Governor of Lagos and myself. 

5. I will not allow any disputes that may arise between people 
frequenting or visiting the markets in my territory to interfere 
with or stop the markets ; and all differences or disputes that 
may arise other than trade disputes between my peoples and 
those of other nations and tribes visiting the markets shall be 
adjusted by me or referred for adjustment and settlement to 
the decision of an arbitrator appointed by the Governor of Lagos, 
and the decision and award of such arbitrator shall be finally 
conclusive. 

6. I engage as far as in me lies to bring about new markets 
between the Oyos and the other Yoruba-speaking peoples, to 
promote the enlargement of existing ones, and to keep open 
all the roads through my kingdom to the Niger, and towards 
the coast. 

7. It is hereby further agreed that no cession of territory and 
no other Treaty or Agreement shall be made by me other than 
the one I have now made without the full understanding and 
consent of the Governor for the time being of the said Colony 
of Lagos. 

8. In consideration of the faithful observance of the foregoing 
Articles of the Agreement the Government of Lagos will make 
unto me a yearly dash to the. value of 200 (two hundred) bags 
of cowries, but such dash may upon breach or neglect of all or 
any one or more of the provisions of the Agreement and at the 
discretion of the Governor of the Colony of Lagos be altogether 
withdrawn or suspended. 

9. Provided always that the terms of this Agreement be subject 
to the approval of Her Majesty. 

Signed and sealed at Oyo this 23rd day of July, 1888. 

Adeyemi, AlAfin of Oyo x (his mark). 

In the presence of 

Samuel Johnson, Clerk in Holy Orders. 
William Moseri, Scripture Reader. 



576 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Ratification of the above Treaty. 

Government House, Lagos, 

June i6th, 1890. 
No. 255/142. 

King, — I have the pleasure of informing you that Her Majesty 
the Queen of England has been graciously pleased to ratify and 
confirm the Treaty between yourself and Her Majesty which 
you signed on the 23rd July, 1888, and which subject to Her 
Majesty's approval I subsequently signed on Her Majesty's 
behalf. 

2. I am glad to think that the Treaty will tend to draw 
the people of this Colony and your subjects closer together. 
Both belong to the Yoruba race, and it is but natural that there 
should be peace, friendship and commerce between them. 

3. It will be my duty in future under the Treaty to continue 
to pay to you as opportunities offer an annual present of 200 
bags of cowries, subject always to the performance by you of 
your own obligations under the Treaty. 

4. I forward to you £^1 5s. in cash which represents what 
will become due to you by the 23rd prox. 

5. I write to you in the full hope and expectation that you 
will not only remember, but faithfully and zealously fulfil all 
your engagements under the Treaty, and especially those relating 
to the increasing of the markets and the opening of new roads. 

I am, King, 

Your friend, 

Alfred Moloney, 
Governor and Commander-in-Chief 
of the Colony of Lagos. 

§4. The Exploits of Esan and the Controversy thereupon. 

In the year 1888 negotiation was set on foot through the 
instrumentality of the Oluiwo, one of the oldest and most 
venerable of the provincial kings in the Epo division, who was 
very much anxious for the restoration of peace in the country. 

He prevailed upon the AlAfin to appoint a messenger to head 
those of the principal provincial kings of Yoruba forming a 
deputation to negotiate peace with Ilorin. The AlAfin did not 
object but his appointee was a private man and not an Ilari which 
augured ill for the embassy, and betrayed the actual feelings of 
His Majesty on the subject. 

These messengers went by Ogbomosg. On reaching 
Obanifisunwa, the last tollgate to Ilorin, they were met by the 



DISTURBANCE IN EVERY PART OF THE COUNTRY 577 

Emir of Ilorin's messenger who bade them halt there till further 
orders. 

They were detained there for a week whilst private messages 
passed between Ilorin and the Ilorin camp. 

Counting much upon the floating report of an august embassy 
like this, hundreds of traders went with them, seizing the oppor- 
tunity of trading with Ilorin, owing to the distress which this pro- 
tracted war had caused all over the country. 

A few days after their arrival at Ilorin some mischievous persons 
in K^rcirk's camp went privately and kidnapped on the road be- 
tween the camp and the city of Ilorin, and a report was 
manufactured and circulated, attributing this deed to the Ibadans 
while negotiation of peace was going on ! This so exasperated 
the Emir of Ilorin that when he was returning from the mosque 
on the Friday he rode direct to the Dongari's house where these 
messengers were lodged and ordered them to leave the town before 
sunset ! The truth, however, was soon found out, and the order 
was countermanded. 

The negotiation however proved a failure as was anticipated, 
and when the messengers were returning home they were detained 
at Obaniiisunwa for three daj'S until the Emir sent an escort of 
horsemen to conduct them to the Ogbomoso farms, it having been 
known that a party of kidnappers from Karkrk's camp lay in wait 
for them. 

The Ibadans it need hardly be said, were exceedingly annoyed, 
by these repeated disappointments. It had become evident now 
to all fair-minded persons that the protraction of this war was 
due entirely to the AlAfin and the Ilorins, the Ibadans therefore 
were resolved to renew hostilities with Ilorin in right earnest. 

It may here be remarked that at this time traders from all 
parts of the country were finding their way to Ilorin, and the 
Ogbomoso route was utihzed to a large extent. This the Ibadans 
knew and hitherto connived at, but now they took measures to 
stop it at once. Another trade route was via Iseyin, Papa, Saki, 
Igboho and Igbeti to Ilorin and from Iseyin on the other side to 
Abeokuta. Practically therefore peaceful intercourse was going 
on in one part of the country, whilst war was going on in another, 
and it was known to the Ibadans that the Ilorins were importing 
rifles by this route to fight them at Ofa ; they weie therefore 
resolved to put a stop to this also. For this purpose they utihzed 
the services of one Esan, an expert in organizing kidnapping expe- 
ditions, and sent him to the Oke Ogun districts with a free hand 
against Ilorin traders. Twice did Esan kidnap caravans along 
this route ; several Egba traders were kidnapped, and they 



578 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

suffered an immense loss of their merchandise. This exasperated 
the Egbas and they complained of it both to the AlAfin of Oyo 
and to the Governor of Lagos whilst at the same time they them- 
selves kidnapped in the Ibadan farms, as well as the caravans to 
Ijebu. 

The letter to the AlAfin on the subject : 

Iporo Abeokuta, 

February Sth, 1889. 
His Majesty Adeyemi, King of Oyo. 
Your Majesty, 

We, the undersigned and authorities of Abeokuta, have the 
opportunity of writing to you on a subject we have lately heard 
from your territories. We learnt that the Ibadan people came 
to stop or blockade the peaceable traffic road at the town 
Lanlate, which was freely opened to all free traders, even from 
interior to Lagos, by catching the Ilorin and Egba peaceful 
traders. They even proceeded their attempts to Eruwa close 
to our country simply on account of the war they are still 
fighting. We beg to request and show you that if this bad 
practice is just and right ? for we know certainly that it will 
soon create an uneasiness betwixt us and the neighbouring 
tribes which will cause a great war. Kindly try and put a stop 
to this bad practice at once, for the road to Ilorin was freely 
opened for the Egbas,' Oyos, florins, Baribas, and all these 
peaceable traders, and even the Ibadan people themselves are 
trading all along our surrounding countries, even to our 
countries. We beg you to drive out from your neighbouring 
countries these rascals, and vagabonds riot Ibadan people. 

We await your favourable reply to the succession of our 
request. Wishing you health and prosperity. 
We are your true friends, 

Onlado X (their marks) 

Jaguna X 

Ogundeyi X 

Ali Balogun X 

The following is a copy of the reply to the above letter from the 
AlAfin. 

The Palace, Oyo, 

February igth, i88g. 
To the Onlado, Jaguna, Ogundeyi and Ali Balogun. 
My Good Friends, 

I have the pleasure to convey that I have received your 
kind letter of the 4th inst. and have perused its contents with 



DISTURBANCE IN EVERY PART OF THE COUNTRY 579 

the diligence it requires and I beg to return my sincere thanks 
to you for the honour and good faith conferred on me by referring 
the matter of the raid committed in my territory to me. 

I beg to express my regret for the action done by the Ibadan 
ruffians, and you are worthy of thanks for making this known 
to me, and I shall take a prompt and decisive step in redressing 
this evil. I will lose no time in sending to my subjects about 
the matter. It is well that the peace of the country be preserved 
that trade should flourish and war to cease, and all my efforts 
will be to this end. Will you bear with me until matters are 
rectified ? 

I have the honour to remain, 
Your true friend, 

Adeyemi X (his mark) 

King of Yoruba. 

The following letter from the Acting- Governor of Lagos, G. C. 
Denton, to the Ibadan chiefs on the same subject. 

Government House, Lagos, 

October gth, 1889. 
No. 310/167. 

Gentlemen, — In connection with my letter No. 273/145 
of the 30th August last, to which I have as yet received no 
reply, I have the honour to inform you that in a communication 
which I have received from the Abeokuta authorities, it is 
alleged that some four months ago the Ibadan soldiers attacked 
and plundered by night caravans of traders belonging to Abeo- 
kuta, and amongst the people killed were Egbas, Ilgrins, Hausas 
and Baribas. Horses, cattle, asses, kola nuts and cotton goods 
were carried off by your countrymen, and a number of 
people were captured. Some of the persons seized and a portion 
of the plunder were sent to you, to the AlAfin of Oyo and to the 
Aseyin, the remainder you conveyed to your camp at Ikirun. 

2. On hearing of this raid on your part the Egbas at once 
sent messengers to the AlAfin and the Aseyin to enquire into the 
truth of the report which had reached them. They discovered 
the rumour to be well-founded and they therefore recalled their 
people and the caravans pending the adjustment of the disturb- 
ances. 

3. Again a few weeks after the occurrence to which I refer 
it is stated by the Egbas that yoa suddenly descended on their 
farms and plundered them. 



580 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The Egbas admit that in revenge for what you had done to 
them they after this attacked the Ibadan farms. 

4. It is further alleged that you carried your depredations 
into the Ijebu country and plundered some farms at Ipara. 

5. I am very reluctant to beheve that the acts with which 
you are charged have been committed by you ; but in the face 
of the statement which I now convey to you it is hard for me 
to exonerate you from blame. 

6. When I ren:iember too the part which you took in the 
Treaty of 23rd September, 1886, and the protestation ot the desire 
for peace which have been made by your messengers in my 
presence, I am at a loss to understand your action, unless there 
be some explanation for it, which I am not in possession of and 
it is to give you an opportunity of exculpating yourselves from 
blame in this matter that I now address this letter to you. 

7. In the letter to which I refer in the first part of this com- 
munication, I endeavoured to remind you of the sad and bitter 
disasters which attend on war, and to impress on you that the 
prosperity of your country is best served by your peaceful 
intercourse with your neighbours. 

Let me again put this before you and with the assurance of 
my goodwill, and of the great interest which I take in the 
affairs of Yoruba-land. Allow me to be. 
Your good friend, 

G. C. Denton, Acting-Governor. 

The reply of the Ibadans to the above letter. 

Ikirun, 
November 20th, 1889. 

To His Excellency, Capt. G. C. Denton. 
Your Excellency, 

We hereby acknowledge the receipt of your kind letter 
which is a sort of supplement to that of the 30th August. It 
got to our hands yesterday and it has received our due consider- 
ation. 

2. We thank Your Excellency for requiring a clear statement 
from us after the receipt of the communication from the Egbas. 
We trust that ere this reaches you oar reply to Your Excellency's 
former letter will have got into your hands, wherein you will 
find but a part of the reply to their charges. 

3. It was true we kidnapped the caravans to and from Ilgrin 
but allow us to say that they were no Egba traders but Hausas 



DISTURBANCE IN EVERY PART OF THE COUNTRY 581 

and Ilorin people, and we are glad Your Excellency has given 
us an opportunity of explaining ourselves. 

4. Your Excellency knew very well that the difference between 
us and the Egbas and the Ilorins has not yet been adjusted and 
yet the road has been opened through our territory, and that 
we have long permitted this undisturbed. It was for the 
interest of trade with a view to the final settlement of the war 
that we have permitted this. But when we found that it will 
eventually end in our ruin we put a stop to it. 

5. Since the late Ijaye war of i860 the Egbas would not allow 
any ammunition to pass from their town to us, but those so- 
called traders were returning with Sneiders and cartridges from 
Abeokuta to strengthen the hands of. the Ilorins against us, and 
having a timely intimation of it we took steps to prevent the 
ruin of our country, and could we be blamed for preventing our 
own ruin especially when the ammunitions are to pass through 
our own territory ? 

Egba traders were at Iseyin, Oyq and in all our Oke Ogun 
towns and they are not wanting till to-day. Did we touch any 
of them ? If the traders we kidnapped had not traded in 
ammunition we would not have troubled them. 

6. From our last letter Your Excellency will find that it was 
the Egbas who were the aggressors, having first kidnapped on the 
Ipara and Oru roads and have committed raids in our farms 
before we retaliated. We had ceased escorting caravans to 
Ijebu but we were obhged to do so since they were kidnapping 
on the roads. This was even before the Oke Ogun affair, 

7. Why should the Egbas complain of our raids in the Ijebu 
farms ? They should let the Ijebus complain themselves. The 
fact of the case is this — The Ijebus and the Egbas were not on 
terms and the Egbas have succeeded in stopping the trade 
between Ipara and Ibadan by kidnapping and blockading that 
road. In retahation the Ijebu Remg at Ipara have obtained 
re-inforcement in the idle ones at home to harass them in their 
farms, and why should they saddle this on us here at Ikirun ? 

Your Excellency must take our word. We beg to affirm once 
more that if the Egbas cease kidnappping in our farms and the 
Ijebu roads we will not kidnap in their farms. Your Excellency 
must not doubt our sincerity in whatever we say, and if anything 
happens to the contrary it must have a reason and we are ready 
to explain ourselves. 

8. It is our wish to be sending our messengers down frequently 
to keep the Governor well-informed of all the incidents which 
may be occurring here, but we beg to say we have not the oppor- 



582 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

tunity of a free communication with Lagos. We say this in 
confidence to the Governor as we do not mean to complain of 
the Ijebus who have done so much for us. If this get to their 
hearing they will take it as a complaint against them and we 
shall smart for it. Hence we say this is private and in confidence. 
We had to buy the road as it were before our messenger went 
down also even this we do not mind. 

But they are still never pleased and they must know why we 
send down. We beg to suggest to the Governor that whenever 
the Governor wishes to see our messenger to let the Awujale 
know of it, as we are ready to send at any time. 
Wishing Your Excellency good health. 

Your good friends their marks, 

AjAYi, Balogun of Ibadan X 

OsuNTOKi, Maye of Ibadan X 
FijABi, Abese of Ibadan X 

Fajinmi, Agbakin of Ibadan X 

In consequence of the remonstrance of the Egba chiefs, the 
Iseyin chiefs, with the exception of the Aseyin himself, were 
against further raids being committed at least within their territory, 
but they could not prevent it. 

Towards the end of June, 1889, hearing of caravans going again 
to Ilorin, Esan came and met them at Iseyin. It was generally 
believed that he was invited by Lawore the Aseyin, but the chiefs 
insisted that Esan shall not capture these Hausa and Egba traders 
in their town of Iseyin. Esan with his small body of troops there- 
fore left the town and encamped at a place called Boiboi over 
against Iseyin spoiling their farms. The AlAfin hearing this sent 
kegs of powder and bowls of bullets to Esan, not because he 
favoured Esan's raids, but because he felt that the Asejrin's 
authority should be upheld against his chiefs. 

The Iseyin people dared not attack Esan, because that would 
amount to attacking an Ibadan army, and consequently there 
was nothing to be done but to have a conference on the subject. 
Esan would not agree to any terms but the expulsion of the Hausa 
traders from the town. This was done on the 29th of June, 1889. 

Esan hearing of this expulsion, gave chase and overtook them 
at the brook Odo Onko and plundered them, carrying away much 
booty. 

This was the last of Esan's successful exploits, for early in the 
following year he led an expedition to the Sabe country, and 
besieged Danikan, their chief town. Here he was attacked by 
the Sabes in overwhelming numbers, and hemmed in on every side, 



DISTURBANCE IN EVERY PART OF THE COUNTRY 583 

his little band of troops was dispersed, and he was taken ahve 
and slain. 

The late Esan was a native of Modakeke ; he came suddenly 
into notice in the years 1887 to 1889. He was a first-rate swords- 
man, and specially skilful in the use of the cutlass called Oya. 
He led several kidnapping expeditions to the Egba farms, attacked 
and defeated several Egba kidnapping expeditions to the Ibadan 
farms. We have noticed above his exploits in the Oke Ogun 
districts, three times in succession did he attack and plunder 
Ilorin, Hausa and Egba traders. He now lost his Uf e in attempting 
with a handful of men to take Danikan in the Sabe country on 
the 5th of February, 1890. 



Chapter XXXII 

ABORTIVE MEASURES TO TERMINATE THE WAR 

§ I. The Mission of Alvan Millson 

We have seen that by the terms of the Kiriji Treaty, the AlAfin 
was made responsible for the settlement of the Ibadan-Ilorin war, 
and that Chief Ogedemgbe failed in 1886 to induce the Com- 
missioners to send messengers to the Ilorin camp, because they 
were not commissioned thither. 

The AlAfin however was suspected of duplicity by his people, 
for several of his private messengers to Karark had been caught, 
and instead of making a move, he had to be moved by the Awujale 
of Ijebu, and the Oluiwo of Iwo to undertake measures towards 
the restoration of peace. Whenever he was as it were forced to 
send a peace embassy to Ilorin, he would send a private man for 
that purpose instead of an Ilari ; if pressed for an Ilari, he sent 
Oba-ko-se-tan ! Showing he was not ready. It became evident 
that although he wanted peace in the abstract, yet he wished to 
keep the Ibadans fully engaged at a distance from home. 

The Governor received several communications from the interior 
kings and chiefs, notably the Oluiwo of Iwo, praying His Excel- 
lency to bring to a finish the good work commenced in 1886, by 
sending up again special Commissioners for the purpose, as it has 
proved to be that the seat of war had but changed from Kiriji- 
Mesin to Yanayo-Ikirun. 

Unfortunately His Excellency did not consider the matter of 
so much importance as to send up a strong embassy direct to 
Oyo and Ilorin. He sent a single European officer, Mr. Alvan 
Millson, the Asst. Col. Secretary, and a native officer, Mr. F. 
Colley-Green, a subintendant of police with instructions to 
gather representatives from both the Ilorin and Ibadan camps 
for a " palaver " and to endeavour to mediate between them 
and get them to decamp and return to their homes ! 

The Commissioners left Lagos on the 14th January, 1890, 
arrived at Ijebu Ode on the 15th, left on the 17th and arrived at 
Ibadan on the 19th. Leaving Ibadan on the 24th, they arrived 
at Oyo on the 25th. They had an interview with the AlAfin on 
the 26th when His Majesty was informed of the object of their 
mission. 

Obtaining two messengers from him they left Oyo on the 29th 

584 



ABORTIVE MEASURES TO TERMINATE THE WAR 585 

January and arrived at Ikirun on the 3rd February. It must be 
remarked that the messengers sent by the Alafin for this important 
business were both private men, and no Ilari, which is very 
significant. 

The interview between the Commissioners and the authorities 
of Ibadan took place on the 4th of February, the Commissioners 
dehvered to them the compHments of His Excellency the Governor, 
and their message and instructions were to this effect : — 

That the authorities of Ibadan should assist or second the 
Governor's effort in obtaining a permanent peace in the Yoruba 
country. In order to do this they should facihtate their pro- 
ceeding to Ilorin for an interview with the Emir, and negotiate 
with him terms of peace and the withdrawal of his troops under 
his Commander-in-Chief K^rara, now at Of a. They were also to 
gather representative people from both powers for a " palaver " 
and to disperse both camps. 

This seemed to the war chiefs like trifling with the affair, as if a 
fierce race of warriors like the Ilgrins bent on conquest could be 
induced to leave their camps on such conditions ! 

The Commissioners found it impracticable to proceed either to 
the Ilorin camp or to Ilorin ; the direct route was the scene of 
the conflict. Not only so, but the Commissioners also witnessed 
two attacks on Ikirun by the Ilorin army from Ofa, and were 
convinced of the risk of venturing to the Ilorin camp with an escort 
of only eight Hausa soldiers ! The Ibadan chiefs would not 
even allow it. 

The Commissioners were resolved to try the Ijesa route. The 
way to Mesin Ipole by the old Kiriji route had been closed when 
the Ijesas kidnapped about 150 Oyo traders, who, taking advantage 
of the peace now existing between them after the breaking up of the 
Kiriji-Mesin camps were utihsing that way for trade with the 
Ekiti countries.^ This serious breach of the Treaty by the Ijesas 
excited no comment at Lagos at the time, because it was not 
followed by a retaliation : the Ibadans simply protested against 
such actions, and closed the road. 

The Commissioners were resolved to try the Ilesa route via 
Osogbo and Oke Bode. At the latter place armed men barred 
the way, preventing further progress. For three hours they were 
under the blazing mid-day sun, after which better couns el pre- 

^The Commissioner had occasion afterwards to question 
Ogedemgbe about this action. He confirmed the report but 
justified himself by saying that they were considerate enough to 
sell the parties to Modakeke so that their friends might have the 
chance of ransoming them. But why do it at all ? He replied — 
Because the Ibadans remained still at Ikirun. 



5^6 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

vailed, and they were allowed to go under shelter but not to proceed 
an inch further on their journey ; in the meantime they were 
communicating with the authorities at headquarters. The 
Commissioners had to write to the Owa and the Seriki of their 
detention, and the reply they received was from one G. W. Johnson, 
a bookbinder of Lagos, acting as secretary and writing in the 
name of the Kings of the Ekiti parapos. ..." Who are you ? 
We do not know you ; are you a Missionary ? Why do you 
trespass on Ijesa soil without first notif3ang the i6 kings of the 
Ekitiparapos ? " The Commissioneis wrote back to say who they 
were and requested permission to visit the Owa. The reply came 
that the Oke Bode people should allow them to proceed ; this 
they did, but refused to supply them with a guide ; they had to 
write again to the Owa for a guide which they obtained before they 
could proceed, after full ten days' detention. The Owa and 
Ogedemgbe subsequently apologised to them for this action of the 
Oke Bode people. 

They spent three days at Ilesa before proceeding to Esa Egure 
where they met with the Owa of the Ijesas, and spent four days with 
him, discussing with him the object of their mission. 

At Mesin Ipole they interviewed the Seriki and the three principal 
Ekiti kings : but Ogedemgbe the Seriki objected to their going to 
Ilorin by way of Mesin. " No road," said he, " the path is full 
of ditches." On Mr. Millson persisting and offering to go with 
only his cook if possible he told him plainly he could not be allowed 
to go as it would involve the loss of their lives. He even dechned 
to take a letter from him to Kkrkrk the Ilorin Generahssimo, 
telUng him that it would get him in hot water with the Ilorins as 
was the case when the former Commissioners came in 1886 to 
disperse the camps at Kiriji. 

The Commissioners had to go back to Ikirun by the way they 
came, and told the Ibadan chiefs of the failiue of their mission. 

Thus ended in failure this ill-conceived, unstatesmanlike mission 
which sought to intervene between two fierce armies in a conflict 
that had lasted 14 years by means which could scarcely have 
separated two excited parties in a village riot. 

§ 2. Subsidiary Efforts of the Rev. S. Johnson 
Whilst the above episode was being enacted, the writer who 
was then at Lagos was invited to an interview with the Governor. 
His Excellency wishing him to join the above mission, obtained 
permission from the local C.M.S. Secretary to send him up. He 
was to be the bearer of letters to the Awujale, the AlAfin, the Aseyin 
and to receive accredited messengers from the first two as well as 



ABORTIVE MEASURES TO TERMINATE THE WAR 587 

from the Oluiwo of Iwo and the Bale of Ogbomgso, and with 
these, as representatives of their masters join the Commissioners 
at Ikirun for a conference which was to put an end to the war ! 
The writer was also to render assistance to the Commissioners as 
he did in 1886. 

Whilst the Governor was interesting himself in the affairs of 
the interior, and doing his best to restore peace to the country, 
some ill-informed persons at Lagos, under the plea of patriotism, 
were trying to undermine his efforts. After the Commissioners 
had gone up, private messages were sent to the Awujale of Ijebu 
that they should not let the white man terminate this war for them, 
lest they rob them of their country, deprive them of their wives, 
give freedom to their slaves, and that eventually they would be 
reduced to the condition of having to hoe their own farms for 
themselves, and to perform other menial work. 

This was speedily communicated to all the kings and chiefs 
of the interior. The Ijebu authorities went one step further, 
resolving not to allow any Lagos trader or any foreigner to pass 
through their country to the interior and vice versa. The law 
was so stringently enforced that the writer, although so well known 
at Ijebu during the peace negotiations of 1886, found it hard to 
proceed up country ; he had to leave his luggage at the port Ito 
Ike and to enter Ijebu Ode in the night to obtain permission from 
the king to pass through his country. His being also the bearer of a 
letter from the Governor of Lagos to the Awujale emboldened him 
to proceed to that capital. 

Even the Awujde himself was careful not to infringe the law. 
He refused to see the writer when he was announced to him ; 
he sent word to say that whatever message he brought for him 
from the Governor, should be deHvered to the Balogun Ngf owgkan 
who would dehver the same to him. It was in the dead of night at 
last, that the Awujale arranged for a private interview with the 
writer, and that was owing to the influence of the Balogun. He 
was very careful to have this nocturnal visit in order that he might 
not offend the Ijebus, although personally he did not approve of 
these measures. 

The writer was detained at Ijebu Ode for another day. At the 
suggestion of the Balogun, with the approval of the Awujale, all 
the Ijebu authorities were summoned together to hear the 
Governor's message from the mouth of the messenger himself. 
After hearing the letter read, and after consultation with one 
another, their spokesman came forward and said : " We have 
already sent our messengers to the interior for peace negotiations 
with Ilgrin, the King his Agurin, the Osugbos, the Lamurins, and 



588 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the Ipampas their messengers, they are probably now at 
Ibadan, and we are decided not to send up fresh messengers ; 
those already sent, the Governor's messenger will meet there, 
and they will go with him together with the messengers of the 
Ase5dn and of Oluiwo to the AlAfin who will appoint his 
messenger with them to meet the Commissioner. 

The Awujale, as one interested in the peace of the country, 
moreover told the writer in confidence that he had been in com- 
munication with the Alafin, and that His Majesty complained 
bitterly of the Ibadans, but he had begged him to overlook his 
grievances at present in the interest of peace to the country at 
large, and after this he would exert his influence with the Ibadans, 
and that His Majesty would find in the end that the Ibadans 
would be more loyal to him. 

But, as the sequel will show, it was evident that the insinu- 
ations of the so-called patriots of Lagos had poisoned the minds 
not only of the Awujale, but of all the interior kings and chiefs 
also, and the Governor's messenger was duped throughout where- 
ever he went. 

Arriving at Ibadan on the 21st March, he lost no time in looking 
up the Ijebu messengers, and informed them of the resolution 
arrived at by the Awujale in council, and asked when they would 
be ready to proceed to Oyo. They excused themselves by saying 
that they had a special message for the war chiefs at Ikirun from 
home, and that they were expecting the answer on Monday, the 
24th, after which they would be ready to proceed ; if the 26th 
suited him they might start together on that date. To this he 
readily consented. 

On the 25th the Governor's messenger sent to ascertain from 
these Ijebus whether they would be ready to start on the morrow 
accoiding to arrangement: they told his messenger he should 
wait for them at the town gate early in the morning, and there 
they would join him. But this they never meant to do. The 
Governor's messenger waited for hours at the gate, but thej' never 
turned up. He had to proceed alone. 

These Ijebu messengers subsequently arrived at Oyo after the 
Governor's messenger had proceeded to Iseyin on his errand ; it 
was after his return from Iseyin that he learnt indirectly from them, 
that they had not the intention of going with him to join the 
Commissioner, that was not part of their instructions from home, 
they were instructed to remain at Oyo and from thence conduct 
all negotiations with the messengers from the important chiefs 
of every part of the country, and never to return home until the 
war should end. The Governor's messenger had no alternative 



ABORTIVE MEASURES TO TERMINATE THE WAR 589 

but to leave them, but before going away he suggested to them 
that they should send a special messenger home to ascertain whether 
the information he conveyed to them from the Awujale in council 
was true or not, promising to call again to hear the result. 

The Governor's messenger proceeded to Ogbomoso on his errand 
on the 5th April, 1890. The authorities of Ogbomoso felt flattered 
that they should have been so recognized by the Governor as to 
be required to take part in the peace negotiations ; they readily 
sent two messengers, one from the Bale the other from the Ompetu 
on Easter Tuesday, April 8th, 1890. These repaired to Oyo 
with the Governor's messenger. 

The Ijebu messengers were again interviewed to learn whether 
they had heard from home. The Governor's messenger was 
taken aback to hear them giving vent to their pent-up feelings 
in these words : 

" Why should the Governor of Lagos request the Ijebu king to 
send messengers along with his own ? A year ago did not the 
Awujale send to the Governor to soUcit his aid to bring to a success- 
ful issue the good work the Enghsh Government had so kindly 
begun, and was not the Acting Governor indignant at the Ibadans, 
calling them thieves and robbers., and asking why they remained still 
at Ikirun, and whether that was their home ? And were not the 
Ilorins in their farms ? ' Leave me alone,' said he, " I will only 
interest myself in the affairs of the Colony. Let the Awujale and 
the AlAfin, who are rulers in the interior, settle their interior 
difficulties themselves." 

" Hereupon " — the\' continued — " the Awujale at the instance, 
of the Oluiwo, sent an embassy through Iwo to Oyg to negotiate 
peace. Although the AlAfin was prevailed upon to send his 
messenger, yet he felt the proceedings irregular and his dignity 
affronted, hence everything promised failure at the start. The 
messengers had to wait nine days at Ogbomoso before proceeding 
to Ilgrin, and the result proved a failure. Profiting by past ex- 
perience, we are now instructed to come straight to the AlAfin, 
and to act according to his orders, to go backwards and forwards 
as he should direct. And why should the Governor now require 
our king to send delegates with his own after his locum tenens had 
told us to see after the interior difficulties ourselves ? " 

This ended the efforts of the Governor's messenger with the 
Ijebus. It was plain now that he could not get them to go with 
him. 

His Majesty the AlAfin was waited upon by the Governor's 
messenger on his arrival from Lagos, and he delivered the 
Governor's letter and message to him. 

X 



590 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The Governor's letter to the AlAfin. 

Government House, Lagos, 
No. 3/51, March i^th, 1890. 

To THE AlAfin of Oyo. 

King, — I have the pleasure of announcing to you my return 
in good health to my Government. 

2. Since my departure to my country last year, many things 
have happened.some of which have caused me joy and others regret. 

3. It is a source of gratification to me to reflect that my own 
colony remains prosperous. 

4. Unfortunately the war between the Ilgrins and Ibadans 
continues, and the Ibadans are still at Ikirun. 

5. Happily, however, both sides appear to be tired of 
hostilities^ and I hope that my Commissioner, who is charged 
with mediating between them, will induce them to make a 
lasting peace. 

6. You have seen my Commissioner, and been courteous and 
hospitable towards him. I thank you, and I remember that 
my Commissioners who made a settlement between the Ibadans 
and the Ekitiparapos four years ago retain a pleasant recollection 
of their intercourse with you. 

7. My Commissioner is about to proceed by way of Ikirun to 
Oke Mesin or some more northerly or easterly spot where the 
final negotiations can most conveniently take place. 

8. I think it due to Yoruba-land and desirable that he be 
accompanied thither, or joined there by accredited representatives 
of the parties principally interested in the restoration of peace ; 
and I therefore invite you to send with him or after him 
messengers who will possess your mind and who will have fuU 
authority to enter into engagements on behalf of yourself 
and your people. 

9. My sorrow and astonishment were not small when I 
heard that the Ibadans had stopped the trade route which leads 
through your pro\dnce of Iseyin. 

10. The prosperity of Yoruba-land which I have at heart 
depends largely as it seems to me upon its trade routes being 
kept open ; and I shall be glad to consider any suggestions or 
proposals that you may be prepared to make, with a view to 
the opening and keeping open of the trade routes of all Yoruba, 
or at any rate of as many of them as possible. 

I am. King, Your true friend, 

Alfred Moloney, 
Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of Lagos. 

^ Here the governor was mistaken. The Ilorins were not. — Ed. 



abortive measures to terminate the war 59i 

§ 3. The AlAfin's Diplomacy 

The above letter being read and interpreted to the King, he 
expressed his willingness to second the Governor's proposals. 

On hearing afterwards what the Ijebu messengers said, he was 
not surprised, but simply said, " I fully expected they would act 
thus, but being most concerned in the matter, I shall appoint my 
own delegates. But the Aseyin's messenger should not be left 
out, the Ase5rin being equally interested in the matter." The 
Governor's messenger replied that although his instructions did 
not include the Aseyin, he did not think that the Governor would 
have any objection if the AlAfin saw fit to include a messenger 
from the Aseyin. Who could have doubted His Majesty's sincerity 
in such a reply ? But the sequel shows that he was a past master 
in diplomacy : he resented the Governor's treating with his 
subordinate chiefs as on an equality with himself and was deter- 
mined to show it. 

He actually appointed his Oba-ko-setan to go with the Governor's 
messenger, and sent to the Basorun to appoint another to accom- 
pany his own : but as the Governor's messenger was on the point 
of starting (Friday, nth April) he told him that Friday was an 
inauspicious day when they should never send messages abroad, 
but that the messengers would join him the next day at Iwo. 

The Oluiwo appointed his own man on the Saturday against 
the arrival of the AlAfin's messenger who was to bring with him 
those from Ogbomgso and Ise5an. But they waited in vain ! 
On the evening of Sunday the 13th a private messenger came from 
the AlAfin to the Oluiwo and the Governor's messenger to say 
that since the departure of the latter from Oyo he had been informed 
that the Ibadans had sent an expedition to Hero, and as a goodly 
number of Oyo princes and princesses reside there, and the Ibadans 
were going to enslave them, he must wait to redeem them all, 
before he thought of helping them ! This of course was a made-up 
story purely invented as an excuse for not sending anyone ; 
moreover, the Ogbomgso messengers he sent back home. 

The disappointment of the Governor's messenger can well be 
imagined. He had to return at once at his call, but to tell the 
AlAfin that if he could not carry out that part of his instructions, 
hfe must at all events proceed to meet the Commissioners. He 
returned for this purpose the next day via Iwo again, and met the 
Commissioners at Ede on their return journey after the failure of 
their mission. Together with them he returned to Oyo. 

A few days after the happening of the above events, the writer 
in conversation with a highly respectable Oyo gentleman, com- 
plained bitterly of the disappointments and rebuffs he lately met 



592 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

with, not only from the Ijebus but also by the action of the 
AlAfin, to which also the action of the I j ebus could be traced. The 
AlAfin was always fair, courteous, and pohte, but no reliance 
could be placed upon his words. The writer recalled the incident 
of the messengers, how he would send private gentlemen instead 
of an Ilari on important state business when he knew the matter 
would thereby end in failure, etc. The following dialogue 
which passed between them will show the Oyo official view of 
the matter. To the messenger's complaints the citizen 
replied : — 

at. : Ah yes, but see what treatment the Governor has offered 
our Master ! 

Mess. : What treatment ? 

Cit. : Suppose the Queen of the Geh^si (the English) is at war 
with the King of the Aguda (the Portugese) and the King of 
Franse (the French) offered to mediate between them, and suppose 
he sent his messenger to the Queen, and to the Bales (Mayors) of 
those great Enghsh towns we have heard of such as the ship- 
building town (Liverpool) the cloth-weaving town (Manchester), 
and the town where iron goods come from (Birmingham), asking 
them to send their own messengers with that of the Queen for a 
conference, putting them as it were on an equality with the Queen, 
how would she like it ? Although a woman I believe she would 
resent it. Yet that is precisely what the Governor has done, 
sending to the Bale of Ogbomgso, and the Oluiwo to send their 
messengers along with that of the AlAfin with you to meet the 
Commissioner for a conference ! 

Mess. : Did not the AlAfin himself suggest the Aseyin, how 
could it have displeased him when he himself suggested a 
messenger from the Aseyin ? 

Cit. (laughing he said) : But can't you see that that is ironical ? 
Did you not come with a letter from the Governor to the Aseyin ? 
And yet in the matter of delegates you left him out. The AlAfin 
simply meant to point out to you your inconsistency in leaving 
him out, for he is higher in rank than either the Bale of Ogbomgso 
or the Oluiwo. But don't you see that no messenger from any of 
them joined you after all ? 

Mess. : Well, if we made a mistake we are quite willing to be 
corrected but why did he not tell us so ? Why adopt measures 
which will serve to wreck the whole scheme ? 

Cit. : That is not Oyo etiquette. You know it is never con- 
sidered pohte with Yorubas to tell one to whom respect is due 
that he is wrong in his methods, but when he meets with failure 
then he will reconsider his methods. It is not for the AlAfin 



ABORTIVE MEASURES TO TERMINATE THE WAR 593 

bluntly to correct the Governor, but when he fails in his movements 
then he must know that his measures were wrong. 

Mess. : But the Governor cannot be expected to know these 
tortuous Yoruba methods, the EngUshman prefers straight 
dealing. 

at. : But he ought at any rate to know what is due to a 
Sovereign or he would not have been selected to represent one. 
You are just looking at the matter from the standpoint of the 
Governor's messenger that you are, but the AlAfin must consider 
how your message affects him with his chiefs. 

Before the Commissioners left Ikirun, they got the Ibadans to 
sign a declaration that they would in future be more loyal to the 
AlAfin and that the Governor in consultation with the AlAfin 
should delimit the boundaries of the territories immediately under 
them and that any such dehmitation which has the AlAfin's 
signature they would accept. 

On the Commissioners reaching Oyo they induced the AlAfin to 
agree to this proposal, and further that His Majesty should pledge 
himself and subjects not to disturb the peace of the country ; 
should any disturbance arise, before any hostile action is resorted 
to, that he would communicate at once with the Governor as to 
what measures would be taken and how the offender would be dealt 
with. The Commissioners scarcely saw that in this they were 
asking the AlAfin to surrender his sovereign rights to the Governor. 
This latter declaration was to be signed also by the Oluiwo, the 
Timi of Ede, the Bale of Ogbomoso and the Aseyin of Iseyin. 

On the loth of May the writer accompanied by Oba-ko-se-tan, 
started with a copy of this declaration. The Oluiwo signed it on 
the same day, the Ibadan chiefs at Ikirun signed it on the i6th, the 
Timi of Ede's signature the Ibadan chiefs thought was not 
necessary, being a subordinate chief to Ibadan, and what the 
Balogun of Ibadan signed was enough for him ; but that the 
Bale of Ogbomoso may. For this purpose, and to expedite matters, 
they sent a messenger along with the Governor's messenger to 
assure him of their conclusions. 

But the Bale of Ogbomoso in consultation with his chiefs 
refused to sign the paper although they agreed with everything it 
contained. No argument could shake them from their determin- 
ation. "What His Majesty the AlAfin signed," said they, " as 
well as the Ibadan chiefs, was good enough for us, we are their 
subjects." This was no doubt due to the rebuff they met with 
at Oyo when sending their messenger to go with the Governor's. 

The Aseyin, amidst the excitement of the Dahomian invasion, 
signed the declaration on the 2nd of June, 1890. 



594 the history of the yorubas 

§ 4. Correspondence and a Treaty 

The following letter was sent to the AlAfin with a copy of a 
Treaty by Taniafisara, the AlAfin's messenger, who returned 
to Lagos with Mr, Alvan Millson, M.A. : — 

Government House, Lagos, 

May igth, 1890. 
No. 214/115. 

Sir, — On the 13th March last I had the honour to inform you 
of my return, and I express my sorrow and astonishment to 
find that the Ibadans had stopped the trade route through 
Iseyin. 

2. I now hasten to thank you for sending me your messenger 
Taniafisara. He was accompanied by representatives of the 
Balogun of Ibadan, of the Abese of Ibadan, and the Oluiwo of Iwo. 

3. It pained me much, I must admit, to find closed on my return 
one of the commercial roads to the interior viz., by Eruwa, by 
which this Colony, the Egbas and Yorubas are benefited ; 
and another to Remg, Ipara-Ibadan route rendered insecure 
from raids. Here you have an example of cause and effect ; 
because Eruwa road was plundered, the Ipara route was raided. 

4. The Ibadan action was a breach by them unwillingly, 
perhaps, of the provisions, of the Treaty of peace, friendship 
and commerce existing between this colony and your kingdom ; 
further, it was an unfriendly act towards this Government 
which has done so much for them and the country. 

5. I must disapprove of the Ibadan raids upon the Abeokuta, 
Eruwa, Iseyin road, and as I feel bound to hold the Ibadans 
responsible for the cessation of communication between Abeo- 
kuta and Iseyin I must look to the Ibadans to effect promptly 
by negotiation the opening of the Abeokuta-Iseyin road and 
also the opening up of the Abeokuta-Ibadan road which has 
been closed since 1877. 

6. Draft of a Treaty in furtherance of the object I enclose. 
A copy has been furnished to the Ibadans and to the Egbas. 
The Ijebus will also be supplied. 

7. Such closures and raids cannot be viewed with unconcern, 
and from such hindrances to trade, there can only result a block 
to the general prosperity of the country and universal discontent. 

8. At an interview I have had with your representative and 
those of the Ijebus and Egbas, I have advised mutual forbearance 
and compromise and the substitution instead of the jealous 
suspicion and hatred of the past, of healthy and friendly 
emulation and intercourse. 



ABORTIVE MEASURES TO TERMINATE THE WAR 595 

9. The importance of completing the Treaty now forwarded 
and the necessity for promptitude should be manifest to you, 
and I venture to urge that you open up communication without 
delay with Iseyin, Ogbomgsg, Iwo, Ibadan, and Abeokuta. The 
Egbas have been similarly advised. 

10. To help you to bring about a bettej understanding and 
to secure with all the despatch I can recommend for an end so 
generally desired, I have taken the liberty to send you the draft 
Treaty which practically embodies in a formal shape all the 
Yorubas, Egbas, and Ijebus professed they desire. 

11. In any further way I can help j^'ou pray let me know. 
My advice and assistance in promoting your interests and those 
of the country generally are at your service, 

12. It remains for me to convey to you my sincere thanks 
for your courteous and hospitable treatment of Mr. Millson 
during his stay in your kingdom. 

13. This letter and those addressed to the Balogun and 
authorities of Ibadan to the Oluiwo of Iwo and to the As§yin 
are entrusted to the Egba messengers who have kindly under- 
taken their dehvery. 

14. I wish you and your people every good wish, and an early 
restoration of friendly intercourse between Yorubas and Egbas. 

I am, sir, your good friend, 

Alfred Moloney, 
Governor and Commander-in-Chief . 

Draft copy of the Treaty accompanying the above letter. 
Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Commerce between the Egbas, 
the Ibadans, and the Ijebus. 

Whereas the relations of the Egbas, the Ibadans, and the 
Ijebus have in the past been frequently disturbed by mis- 
understandings which have only too often resulted in raids upon 
one another's territory and other hostile acts. 

And whereas the said peoples are desirous of living for the 
future in peace and amity with each other 

Now therefore we, the undersigned authorities of the said 
peoples, having power to bind our respective peoples solemnly 
and sincerely promise each other and declare as follows : — 

1. The Egbas, the Ibadans, and the Ijebus (hereinafter called 
the signatories) shall henceforth wholly desist from making 
raids each upon the territory of either of the others. 

2. The signatories will respectively within three months from 
these presents coming into force restore to each other or make 



596 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

compensation for or in respect of all captives whom they may 
respectively have made during any such raid as aforesaid, 
within the two years immediately preceding the first day of 
January, 1890. 

3. There shall henceforth be peace, friendship and commerce 
between the signatories. 

4. The signatories shall henceforth keep open their roads 
each to and for the benefit of the others. 

5. In particular the Egbas shall keep open so far as in them 
lies the road from Abeokuta to Iseyin by way of Eruwa, and 
the Ibadans and the Ijebus shall so far as in them respectively 
lies keep open the road from Ibadan to Ikorodu by way of 
Ipara and Sagamu, and the road from Ibadan to Itg Ike by way 
of Oru and Ijebu Ode. 

6. The last preceding article hereof shall in no way be con- 
strued as limiting the provisions of the fourth article hereof. 

7. The Egbas and the Ibadans will forthwith open the direct 
road between Abeokuta and Ibadan which was closed in the 
year 1877. 

8. The signatories will henceforth only levy and allow to be 
levied reasonable duties and tolls upon goods imported into or 
conveyed through their respective territories and will in no 
case levy or allow to be levied upon any such goods any duties 
and tolls amounting in the aggregate to more than double the 
duties and tolls to which similar goods shall be for the time 
being liable in the territory of either of the others of the signa- 
tories or to more than one-tenth of the value of the goods so 
imported or conveyed, provided that none of the signatories 
shall be bound to their tariffs of duties and tolls more than once 
in every year. 

9. These presents shall come into force when executed by the 
Ijebus. 

ID. In case any question shall arise upon the construction of 
any of the provisions hereof or otherwise in relation hereto, or 
in connection herewith, such question may be referred by any 
of the signatories to the arbitrament of the Governor for the 
time being of Her Britannic Majesty's Colony of Lagos whose 
decision thereon shall be binding and conclusive upon all the 
signatories. 

In witness thereof we have hereunto set our hands and seals 
on the days below set opposite to our respective names and 
titles. 



ABORTIVE MEASURES TO TERMINATE THE WAR 597 

The following is from the Governor to the Ibadan authorities : — 

Government House, Lagos. 
No. 217/115. ^^^ '9th. 1890. 

Gentlemen, — My Commissioner to Ijebu, Yoruba, and Ekiti 
Mr. Millson, has returned to Lagos, and has informed me fully 
on the affairs of the interior. During his absence I collected 
important facts. 

2. During his presence among you he conveyed that I have 
returned from England and how pained I was to find closed 
one of the commercial roads via Eruwa which connects this 
Colony with Yoruba-land and another the Remo-Ipara route 
raided, and confidence withdrawn therefrom in consequence. 

3. I have looked carefully into the situation and find myself 
unable to approve of the Ibadan raids upon the Eruwa-Iseyin 
road of communication between Abeokuta and Iseyin. I must 
look to the Ibadans to effect promptly by negotiation the 
opening of that route as also now the opening of the Abeokuta- 
Ibadan road which has been closed since 1877. 

4. In the difficulties that have arisen since I left the Colony 
you have an example of " cause and effect." First the owner 
of a house is responsible for its order. And whether Esan 
acted with or without your authority you are responsible : and 
further I find that the Ibadans, Iseyins, Oyos and Ogbomosos 
shared the unfortunate captives and plunder, and should now 
be ready to make good the losses they inflicted. 

5. The action was a breach of the Treaty of peace, friendship 
and commerce existing between this colony and the Yoruba 
kingdom, and as it interrupted the trade, it was an unfriendly 
act towards this Government which has done so much for you 
and the country. 

6. Such closures and raids cannot be viewed with unconcern, 
and from such hindrances to trade there can only result a block 
to the general prosperity of the country and universal discontent. 

7. Again, Esan's outrageous conduct was openly defiant and 
hostile to Ilorin at the very time when in your interest and in 
those of Yoruba generally and on your representations Her 
Majesty's Government had allowed peace negotiations to be 
opened through Major Macdonald with that city. This is a 
very serious aspect of that affair. 

8. At the interviews I have had v/ith your representatives 
and those of Ijebu and Egba, I have advised mutual forbearance 
and compromise and the substitution instead of the jealous 
suspicion and hatred of the past, of healthy emulation and 
intercourse. 



598 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

9. A copy of a Draft Treaty in furtherance of objects desired 
in paragraph 3 of this letter I append. 

The Draft Treaty has been sent to the AlAfin of Oyo. 

10. I have explained to the AlAfin the importance of com- 
pleting this Treaty and the necessity for promptitude and I 
must look much to the Ibadans for the success of the undertaking. 

11. I now turn to another act in the interior drama. Taking 
up the negotiations for peace between you and the Ilorins where 
they were left by Major Macdonald I have addressed a letter 
to the Emir of Ilorin. I wish you to know this and to exhort 
you to avoid adding to the difficulties of the situation as between 
you and them. 

12. In the restoration of freedom to the roads between the 
Egbas and yourselves you must in no way forget your obligations 
to Jebu in the past. With the Ijebus also, remember I desire 
you to continue to maintain the 'best relations. 

13. It remains for me to convey my appreciative acknowledg- 
ment of the courtesy and hospitality you were good enough to 
extend to Mr. Millson during his stay in your country. 

14. Finally, let me wish you and your people every good wish 
and the early resumption between you and the Egbas of friendly 
and commercial intercourse, and the continuance of like relations 
with the Ijebus. 

I am, gentlemen, your good friend, 

A. C. Moloney. 
To the Balogun and Ibadan Authorities. 

The tone of the Governor's letter did not please the Ibadan 
chiefs ; they complained that it showed a want of sympathy 
with them in their trying position. They were struggUng for 
existence as it were, but he was only concerned about trade with 
Lagos at whatever cost to others. 

What they took exception to were the charges brought against 
them of breaking the Treaty, and of ingratitude to the Government 
" which has done so much for them." Whatever their 
character may be, they were certainly not an ungrateful people, 
and no one had paid more deference to the wishes of the Governor 
of Lagos than they had done. 

A Treaty (said they) was made between them and the Ekitis, 
but none whatever with the Egbas, and when the Ekitis broke the 
Treaty by kidnapping their traders the Governor said nothing. 
They yielded to none in their desire for peace and commerce. 
If proofs of this were required, it might be found in the patience 
with which they were enduring their sufferings and trials at the 



ABORTIVE MEASURES TO TERMINATE THE WAR 599 

hands of the Ijebus at that moment, with the same Egbas kid- 
napping on the route. Again the very fact of the existence of the 
trade by Eruwa the interruption of which was now the subject 
of complaint, was another proof in their favour, for although this 
war commenced with the Egbas, and no formal peace had been 
arranged between them, yet they (the Ibadans) had hitherto 
allowed this trade, but certainly not to make it operate to their 
detriment. 

That for twenty years the Egbas had refused to sell them 
ammunition, but they would sell to the Ilorins and utiHse their 
territory to convey the same ; would it not be folly and suicidal 
on their part to carry the pretence of a desire for trade so far as to 
allow that, at a time the Ilorins were la5dng siege against their 
frontier towns ? 

One of them remarked, " We cannot blame the Governor, the 
Egbas have gained his ears, and it depends upon how they repre- 
sented matters to him. It is all the fault of the Egbas. They 
are hke spoilt children who in a fit of temper will hurl a knife 
at you, but if you in turn flourish a whip at them they will yell 
out before ever they are touched." 

They concluded that as they agreed with the Governor's senti- 
ments in the main they would only protest to the one objectionable 
point, viz., the trade with Ilorin through their territory before the 
establishment of peace. 

The following letter was then addressed to the Governor in reply. 

Ikirun, 
July i6th, 1890. 

To His Excellency, Sir A. C. Moloney, K.C.M.G. 

Your Excellency, 

We were glad to receive Your Excellency's letter on the 
arrival of our messengers from you and have given it deep 
consideration. 

2. We have noticed the expression of Your Excellency's 
feehngs respecting the closed roads. 

Our reason for cutting off communication or trade with the 
Ilorins we have given to the Acting-Governor in your absence 
in a letter under date November 20th, 1889. 

We regret the Governor did not see with us in the reasons we 
have given to the Acting-Governor for kidnapping the Gambaris 
off Iseyin, and not the Egba traders, which the Egbas retaliated 
in closing of the Eruwa- Iseyin road and kidnapping on the Ipara 
road. 



600 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

However, that has passed ; and now that Your Excellency 
is come, we feel assured that there will be nothing to fear in 
what you undertake to do or see carried out. We are ready 
for the opening of the Eruwa road to Abeokuta and of the 
Ibadan road to Abeokuta and will see to it. 

3. The appended copy of draft of a Treaty has been read 
to us, and we have considered it duly. 

4. We are glad to learn that negotiations for peace between 
us and the Ilorins have been resumed by Your Excellency and 
have no inclination to add to the difficulties of it. 

5. Although we agree with the letter of the Treaty in the 
main, yet we wish to give our protest against the Ilgrin traders 
utilizing that road as long as we are at war with each other. 
We are here on the defensive and earnestly wish to return to 
our homes as soon as possible. If the Ilorins are allowed to 
utilize that road is there any possibiHty of their agreeing to any 
terms of peace and cessation of hostihties since they have free 
trade ? Hence we feel ourselves bound to open our minds to the 
Governor in sending our protest until peace is made. 

We have no personal ill-will against their trading with us, 
but there must be cessation of hostihties. " Ota dig, Ore die 
ni ipani " ("A little enmity and a little friendship is always fatal 
to life "), says a Yoruba proverb. 

6. We are thankful for Your Excellency reminding us of our 
obligation to the Ijebus. 

Since Ogunsigun has commenced his troubles the Awujale 
has sent to inform us, and we feel it our duty to help him in 
case he should be distressed, but we trust Your Excellency will 
do your best to avert the impending war there. 

7. We have to thank Your Excellency for the kind reception 
of our messengers, the kind present of money sent, and of the 
valuable seeds sent to us. They will receive our best care and 
attention. 

8. Wishing Your Excellency good health and prosperity, 
and hope before long you shall hear that the Abeokuta roads 
are opened. 

We remain to be. 

Your Excellency's faithful friends, 
their Marks 
AjAYi X Balogun of Ibadan. 

0§UNTOKi X The Maye of Ibadan. 
FijABi X The Abese of Ibadan. 

Fajinmi X The Agbakin of Ibadan. 



ABORTIVE MEASURES TO TERMINATE THE WAR 6oi 



§ 5. The AlAfin's Measures for Peace and the Issues 

We have mentioned above that the Ijebu messengers were at 
Oyq waiting the pleasure of the AlAfin for making a move towards 
the negotiations for peace with the Ilgrins, in which they were 
to take a part. But as His Majesty would not make any move, 
they were obliged to return home from disappointment ; but 
after the invasion of Berekodo by the Dahomians, and both Iseyin 
and Oyo lay exposed to their inroads, the whole country began 
to murmur against their King as the author of all their troubles, 
by keeping the national force tied down at Ikirun. His Majesty 
now saw sufficient cause to make a move. He collected messengers 
again from Ibadan, Iwo, Iseyin and Ogbomoso and sent them on 
peace embassy to Ilorin. This he did in accordance with the 
wishes of the Governor, and to make a demonstration of his desire 
for peace ; otherwise provincial embassies are wholly unnecessary. 
It was an open secret that the AlAfin always had a regular correspon- 
dence with Ilorin all through these wars, but his private messenger 
Alebiosu by name, usually went by the bush paths escorted by 
hunters. The present effort being apparently sincere, everything 
seemed favourable this time, the Emir of Ilorin (perhaps plajdng 
the same game of dupHcity as the AlAfin) received the messengers 
cordially, saying to the AlAfin's messenger that his master was 
rather too long in making this move towards peace, and why so ? 
For his part (said he) he quite agreed to peace-making but 
he would wish the messengers to go back to their master and let 
him ascertain assuredly from the Ibadans whether they were 
really prepared this time to make peace, and when were they 
prepared to go home ? Then if the answer was favourable the 
messengers should come again and encamp between the two armies, 
and let both decamp on the same day, the AlAfin's messengers 
accompanying each home. 

[This stipulation of the Ibadans " going home" throws a doubt 
on his sincerity as the Ibadans were there to defend Ikirun against 
his forces.] 

The messengers returned to Oyo on the 20th July, 1890. There 
was a universal rejoicing at the bright prospects of peace, the eyes 
of all being turned to Oyo for the next move. 

After some delay of over a month the AlAfin sent to tell 
the Ibadan chiefs at Ikirun the result of the embassy, and 
meanwhile addressed the following letter to the Governor of 
Lagos. 



602 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

From the AlAfin of Oyo to the Governor of Lagos. 

The Palace, Oyo, July 2-^rd, 1890. 
To His Excellency, Sir A. C. Moloney, K.C.M.G. 
Governor, 

Your Excellency's letters of the 19th May and i6th June 
have been duly received with the amount of money forwarded 
with the letter for which please receive my sincere thanks. 

2. I hope my last of the i8th June has reached Your 
Excellency. 

3. In that letter I told the Governor that we were about sending 
our messengers to Ilorin to negotiate peace, and promised to 
let him know the result. 

4. I am happy to say that my messenger with messengers 
from Oluiwo of Iwo, Asejan of Iseyin and the messenger of 
the Bale of Ogbomgso left Oyo on the 25th of June, and they 
arrived here again on the 20th inst, I am glad to say with 
favourable results. Both parties have placed themselves in my 
hands, agreeing to decamp when I send my messengers again. 

5. Considering the great interest and kind assistance Your 
Excellency has rendered us in this matter it would be very 
disrespectful and a base ingratitude on my part to send to 
disperse them without Your Excellency's knowledge and ap- 
proval. I therefore earnestly beg that Your Excellency lose no 
time in forwarding me a letter of approval so that my messengers 
should go in time, as both parties are eager to return to their 
respective homes. 

My messenger is also leaving for Ijebu to-morrow, the 24th 
inst., to inform the Awujale of the same as he also has great 
interest in the peace negotiation. 

6. I am expecting Your Excellency's reply within a fortnight 
from date. I feel I ought not to make a final move without 
your knowledge as we have a proverb which says, " He that 
planteth should reap the harvest." 

7. When the Ibadans are returned home then the Treaty, 
a copy of which is affixed to Your Excellency's letter to me 
of the 19th May will be enforced. 

Wishing Your Excellency a good health. 
I have the honour to remain. 

Your Excellency's good friend, 

Adeyemi X (his mark), 
Receipt. The Aldfin of Oyg. 

Received per bearer Taniafisara the sum of ;^3i 5s. by 
order of the Governor of Lagos on the 21st June, 1890. 

Adeyemi x (his mark), The Aldfin of Oyo. 



ABORTIVE MEASURES TO TERMINATE THE WAR 603 

Before the return of these messengers from Ikirun, the Ilorin 
horse raided the Ikirun farms and kidnapped some people. A party 
of horsemen raided the Ilobu farms also and were equally successful 
as no one expected a raid whilst peace negotiation was going on ; 
but a third party which raided the Ogbomoso farms were worsted, 
four horsemen being killed, their horses taken and the raiders 
dispersed. 

After this the Ilorins sent again to the Ibadan camp to negotiate 
peace independent of the AlAfin : the Emir of Ilorin went so far 
as to send presents to the Balogun of Ibadan ; but since their last 
perfidy the Ibadan chiefs would never trust them. Terms of 
peace were being arranged when a fire broke out at Ikirun. The 
people took advantage of the peace negotiation which was going 
on to go out far (to the Ila farms) for sticks and leaves for roofing, 
all unarmed : suddenly a party of Ilorin horsemen appeared but, 
suspecting no mischief, the Ibadans allowed them to pass on 
Ikirun-wards ; but the horsemen later on wheeled round and 
captured every one of them, and among the captured were two 
of the Balogun of Ibadan 's nephews, the sons of his late brother 
Akirimisa. 

This put an end to the negotiation, and although the Ilorins 
sent twice afterwards to renew the negotiation, and repudiated 
the charge of sending a kidnapping expedition while they were 
negotiating peace, yet as they did not send back the captives, 
especially the Balogun's nephews, they did not obtain a hearing : 
the second set of messengers were even forbidden to see the 
Balogun's face lest they lose their heads. 

FaiUng to negotiate with the Ibadans the Ilorins opened com- 
munication with the Oluiwo of Iwo, but when the Ibadans heard 
of i t, knowing it to be an intrigue they sent to put a stop to it at once. 

Thus ended all negotiations with Ilorin. 

§ 6. The Ilorins at Ilobu 

We have related above that after the taking of Ofa and the 
desertion of several towns in the neighbourhood, including Inisa 
near Ikirun, the Ilorins still kept to their camp at Yanayo, a full 
day's journey from Ikirun. Depending on their horses they could 
come all the way to give battle to the Ibadans at Ikirun, but the 
Ibadans, without the skill or means to meet a vigorous cavalry 
charge, were unable to go after them in the plain in which Ofa is 
situated. After one or two stifi battles the Ilorins were convinced 
that they could not dislodge the Ibadans by direct attack except 
by stratagem. They therefore left their women and the infirm 
at the Yanayo camp and came forward to make a new camp at 



604 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

a place called Toribol^ between Erin and Ijabe, from which they 
may carry on surprise attacks on the small towns between Ikirun 
and Ilobu, cut off supplies, threaten the rear of Ikirun and thus 
induce the Ibadans to retreat from their present position. The 
Ibadans therefore appointed Chief Akintgla to Ilobu to guard 
these strategic points. 

A small town behind Ilobu called He Aro was surprised and taken 
by the Ilorins. When the news reached Akintola at Ilobu he quickly 
marched out, gave chase, and intercepted them as they were 
returning with captives and booty. It was on this occasion that 
a single combat was fought between the champion lancers of the 
two armies which recalled similar warfare of ancient times. The 
two famous horsemen of both armies here met for the first time. 
Nasamu, nick-named " Gata-Ikoko " of whom we have heard as 
the captor of Enimowu at Erin, the most famous of the Ilorin 
horsemen on his famous war steed named from its colour " Arasi," 
here met with Latunji, surnamed " Okiti kan," of whom we have 
heard as the rescuer of his cousin Chief Akintola at He Ife when 
entrapped in an ambuscade, on his favourite war steed named 
" Nasankore." Both of them had heard of each other's fame and 
exploits on various battlefields, and had been longing to meet 
each other in a trial of valour. They now accosted each other, 
" Is that you ? " "Is that you ? " and then the single combat 
began according to their accepted rules, with spear on either 
side, and the hosts on both sides stood holding their breath, and 
watching these two chiefs of strength. The combat lasted for 
some time, which shows they were equally matched ; but by a 
skilful turn Nasamu with his spear knocked Latunji's spear off 
his hand, and then went about to throw him off his horse and 
spear him on the ground, when Latunji hastily whipped out his 
revolver from his side and wounded Nasamu in the right hand, 
causing his spear to fall off his hand. With the left Nasamu 
gathered up his reins, put spurs to his hoise and escaped : the 
Ilorins with one accord gave way and were hotly pursued and badly 
beaten, all their captives and booty being recovered. 

Nasamu's spear was picked up and carried as a trophy before 
Akintola ; he returned with great triumph to Ilobu, waiting out- 
side the gate with the spear stuck on the ground before him, the 
war boys drumming and dancing around it till the pursuers had 
all come, and so he entered Ilobu in triumph. 

The victory was so decisive, the Ilorins lost so many in dead, 
wounded and captives, that they waited no longer in their new 
camp at Toribola, but retreated to the former camp at Yanayo. 

The Ilorin plan, if successful at He Aro, was to attack Ofa-tedo 



ABORTIVE MEASURES TO TERMINATE THE WAR 605 

and Ede next, and thereby dislodge the Ibadans from Ikirun. 
For a considerable time after this the Ilorins neither attacked 
the Ibadans at Ikirun, nor at Ilobu, but contented themselves 
with kidnapping expeditions in the Ogbomosg farms. 

§ 7. The Conduct of the Chiefs at Ikirun 

As it had become evident that under present conditions the 
Ibadans and Ilorins were not likely to come into closer contact so 
that the issue might be decided one way or another, and the temper 
of both remained the same, the Ibadan war chiefs were content 
to make a home of Ikirun at least for the present, whilst the 
Ilorins made a home of their camp at Yanayo. 

The Balogun of Ibadan gave himself up to a reckless life of 
wantonness and cruelty, and the other leading chiefs were no 
better. Moreover the Balogun took to drinking to excess, and 
his slaves overran the countr}' to an extent hitherto unknown, 
not even in the days of the late Are with his numerous slaves. 
The people were literally groaning under fines and confiscations 
from trumped-up charges ; the Balogun appropriated whatever 
his slaves brought him, asking no questions as to how they came 
by it. Cases brought before him were never investigated before 
he ordered the confiscation of defendants' houses, seizing the women 
and children to be shared by the three leading chiefs, himself, 
the Maye and the Agbakin; these were sold to the Ijebus if not 
speedily redeemed. Knowing this to be the case, old grievances 
were raked up by some men who wished to take revenge upon 
others, and inflict unjust punishment upon them. Slaves who 
had redeemed themselves with wives and family were seized, their 
family shared by the leading chiefs and sold unless speedily redeemed. 

Freemen invited to Ibadan by their fathers or grandfathers 
were seized as slaves, but cases of this sort the other chiefs would 
have nothing to do with, because nearly all of them came that 
way to live at Ibadan. 

Latterly a house to be confiscated was surrounded very early in 
the morning before the inmates were up from their beds, but the 
master of the house was never caught so that he might arrange 
for the ransom of his household. 

Bad as things were at Ibadan they were worse in the provinces. 

Chief Akintgla practised the same at Ilobu. Sumonu Apampa 
alone, to his praise be it said, was exempt from such practices, 
and he would not allow anyone in his quarter of the town to be 
accused or distressed in this way. 

The Balogun was determined to enrich himself before they 
returned home, whenever that might be. 

Such was life at Ikirun latterly. 



Chapter XXXIII 

THE DARK BEFORE THE DAWN 

§ I. Liberation of the Egbados 

We have related in previous chapters how the Egbados were 
among the most peaceful tribes and most loyal to the AlAfin of 
Oyq, from the earhest times down to the period when the provinces 
became disorganized by the rebellion of the nobles ; and how the 
revolution fomented by the Fulanis spreading south involved the 
Egbas who in their turn conquered the Egbados at the battle of 
Owiwi ; and how up to 1888 they were under a succession of Egba 
rulers to whom they paid tribute. Ilaro the chief town was about 
this time under Chief Ogundeyi of Iporo Abeokuta. They were 
now to change masters. 

The Egbados were groaning under the oppression of the Egbas 
on the one hand, and were much harassed by the Dahomians on 
the other, their masters being unable to free them from the annual 
raids of the latter. They were therefore determined to place 
themselves under the protection of the British Government. 
Chief Falgla of Oke Odan, who at this time appeared to be the 
greatest of the Egbado chiefs, went to Lagos in person and 
represented their case to the British Government, whereby the 
various branches of the Egbado tribes should come under the 
British protectorate. Prince Tela of Ilaro, son-in-law of Falola, 
was deputed by the combined Egbado chiefs to carry out the 
Treaty at Lagos. The British flag, however, was not hoisted at 
once in those places, but subsequently when to the oppression of 
the Egbas was added the encroachment of the French Government 
from Porto Novo, the flag was hoisted at once at Ilaro in 1891 
and at Oke Odan. 

The following towns which had suffered more or less from the 
Dahomians, were included in the Egbado protectorate : — 

Ilaro, Oke Odan, 0w6, Ijako, Isagbo, Ajilete, Isalu, Onfo, 
Ipokia Sahasa Ilagbe, Itakete, Isiyan, lyakoto, Iwoye, Idogo, 
Igbeji, Isoto, Itolu, Pahajn, Pokoto, Ijado, Ibese, Ilobi, Erinja, etc. 

The annexation of Ilaro caused great consternation and indig- 
nation at Abeokuta ; several indignation meetings were held to 
protest against it. They went so far as to threaten Ilaro with 
war if the flag was not hauled down. On an appeal to Lagos a 

606 



THE DARK BEFORE THE DAWN 607 

small force of Hausas was sent to protect the place. But the 
Egbas did not attempt to carry out their threat. 

The Egbas at length wrote to the Governor of Lagos attesting 
their rights and protesting against the taking of Ilaro without 
their consent. 

The Governor of Lagos replied to their letter of protest and sent 
Mr. F. Colley Green a native subintendant of police up, who induced 
the Egba authorities to send with him a deputation down to Lagos, 
The Egbas not satisfied with the explanation of the Governor of 
Lagos, blockaded the land and river route to Lagos. 

With the Ijebus and Egbas hostile, Lagos at this time appeared 
like a deserted village. Canoes were drawn up, markets were 
extremely poor, shop-keepers sat gazing on their goods, there 
being no buyers, and the streets seemed to have put on a mournful 
appearance. Lagos then was but a small town. But it would 
appear that the Egbas suffered equally with Lagos, having nowhere 
else to dispose of their produce. Moreover the Egba authorities 
had not the means of making their blockade effective either by 
land or by the river, the blockade only benefited certain enter- 
prising individuals at the expense of the community ; the object 
of it was not gained, therefore the matter ended in negotiation. 

§ 2. Troubles at Ijebu 

Whilst the interior and the Egbados were in an unsettled con- 
dition fresh troubles broke out at Ijebu. Ogunsigun the Seriki- 
of Ijebu Igbo, who was sent by the exiled King Afidipote to re- 
inforce the Ifes against the Modakekes and who refused to decamp 
when the camps were broken up in 1886, now returned home to 
Igbo. Being declared an outlaw by the present Awujale for 
refusing to acknowledge him as his sovereign he returned at the 
head of an army composed of Ijebus, Ifes and Ijesas to fight and 
dethrone the present Awujale. The Baiogun of Ijebu having 
been recalled home [vide p. 567) Kuku the Seriki of Ijebu Ode 
alone remained at Oru as an outpost and he was attacked by 
Ogunsigun 's army. Kuku received a gashing wound in the 
abdomen, the scar of which he bore to his grave ; but he was well 
repaid for his liberality and largess to the Ibadan boys, many of 
whom were with him at this time. Many came down for the 
markets at Orii where, in the absence of the Baiogun, Kuku dis- 
pensed justice to them and fair treatment against the grasping and 
greedy Ijebus taking undue advantage. He furnished them with 
arms and ammunition, and they promised to repay his kindness, 
and with the rifles he possessed in abundance they were able 
to repulse Ogunsigun and his army from Oru. 



6o8 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The Ijebus were for asking for re-inforcement from Ibadan to 
prosecute the war with Ogunsigun and crush him, but the elderly 
Ijebus counselled otherwise, lest the Oygs {i.e., the Ibadan boys) 
gained an insight into their country. The matter ended in 
negotiation. Ogunsigun was said to be fined 300 bags of cowries 
and II slaves. Of these slaves, the Awujale took five, the Ijebu 
authorities five, and one, if report be true, was executed in lieu 
of Ogunsigun the outlaw, and peace was restored with the Igbo 
division of the Ijebus. 

§ 3. Strained Relations with the Ibadans 

No sooner was the internecine war of the Ijebus over than they 
picked up a quarrel with the Ibadans. The first thing they did 
was to prohibit the sale of arms and ammunition to the Ibadans, 
because (as they alleged) they heard that the Ibadans had 
written to the Governor of Lagos to say that the Ijebus were snags 
by the way, and that the Governor should assist them to remove 
these snags in order that they might be able to supply the Lagos 
markets with produce of every description. 

But the truth of the matter was because they heard that on the 
22nd of August, 1890, the Ibadans rebuilt their toll-gate leading to 
Abeokuta with the intention of opening the Abeokuta road. But 
this was in accordance with the wish of the Governor of Lagos in 
his letter to them of the 19th May on the subject. 

The friendly relations of Kuku the Seriki of Ijebu Ode with the 
Ibadans at this crisis led to his expulsion from Ijebu ; there was 
a great disaffection between the younger Ijebus and their King 
because he and Kuku were not pleased with their attitude towards 
the Ibadans. The charge against Kuku was that he was be- 
friending the Ibadans and the white men. On his expulsion he 
came to reside at Ibadan and built a splendid house in Madam 
Efuduiike's compound near the Are egbe omo market. 

Strict Blockade. — The Ijebus at this time were more resolved 
than ever to keep their position as middlemen between the interior 
and the Lagos traders. The Governor of Lagos on the other hand 
was continually receiving communications both from the AlAfin 
of Oyo and from the Ibadan chiefs relative to a road to the coast 
independent of the Egbas and Ijebus, preferably the Remo route 
opened for them in the 'sixties by the late Sir John Hawley 
Glover, then Governor of Lagos ; especially as the Remos were 
never in a hostile attitude towards the interior tribes even when 
there was war between them and the Ijebus. 

The Governor of Lagos had from time to time communicated 
with the Awujale of Ijebu on the subject, reporting the same to 



THE DARK BEFORE THE DAWN 609 

the authorities in Downing Street. It was decided at last to give 
an open road to the interior tribes at all cost and this was com- 
municated to Her Majesty's Representative at Lagos. 

The Ijebu authorities knowing the mind of the British Govern- 
ment, were equally determined on their part to keep their country 
closed to all " foreigners " to or from the interior. 

The Governor of Lagos, vSir Alfred Moloney, having come to 
the end of his term of service on the coast, was reluctant to close 
his career with a war among those with whom he had been on terms 
of friendship since the time of Governor Glover. He therefore 
sent a warning to the Egbas and the Ijebus through their sons at 
Lagos, advising them to change their attitude towards the interior 
tribes ; that Her Majesty's Government had resolved upon an 
open road from the interior to the coast, that his long residence 
among them on friendly relations made him feel reluctant to close 
his career with war, but that another administration would not be 
bound by such consideration. But this communication was not 
accepted in the spirit in which it was tendered, but rather in a 
hostile way ; a strict blockade was resolved upon both by the 
Ijebus and the Egbas. 

§ 4. Death of Alihu, the Emir of Ilorin 

About the end of November, 1891, the report of the death of 
Alihu, the Emir of Ilorin, gained ground, and spread all over the 
country ; the precise date of his demise was not known, probably 
it was in the earlier part of the month. Prince Momd the rightful 
successor, whom Karirk had regarded as his rightful sovereign, 
was unanimously chosen by all to the throne of Ilorin. It was 
said that about 20,000 horsemen and 20,000 footmen escorted 
him home from the camp to take possession of the throne of his 
fathers. 

As soon as Mom6 ascended the throne the scene was changed 
altogether. Being partly of Yoruba descent, his mother being a 
native of Ipapo a town near Iseyin, he was for peace with the 
Yorubas. Communications between him and the AlAfin of Oyo 
were open and frequent, the latter sending him some heavy presents 
for his coronation : the return presents from the Emir were beauti- 
ful horses richly capansoned. He also sent a horse to the Bale of 
Ipapo, his mother's town. Some of the princes of Oyo also ex- 
changed presents with Ilorin princes. 

Not long after the accession of M6m6 the renowned Karkra, 
the Hausa Balogun of Ilorin, died in the camp and was succeeded 
by his son Adamu who inherited not only his father's property 
but also his warlike spirit and his office. 



6lO THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The road to Ilorin was now partially and informally open to 
enterprising traders. No active measures were taken any longer 
on either side, each remaining in his camp, Adamu only barking 
as a chained dog. 

Madam Omosa of Ibadan, whose husband Enimowu had been 
captured since 1887, and who had been spending largely for his 
release but all in vain, now sent again to the AlAfin praying His 
Majesty to renew his efforts on her behalf at the present favour- 
able turn of affairs. Success attended their efforts this time, and 
not only Enimowu but also Malade and the two nephews of the 
Balogun of Ibadan were released, Winkunle, Tubosun's son, having 
died in captivity at Ilorin. The released arrived at Oyo on the 
2nd of June, 1892, and after paying their respects to the AlAfin 
rejoined the war chiefs at Ikirun. 

§ 5. IjEBU Excesses and Infatuation between the Years 

1884 and 1892 

As middlemen, between Lagos and the interior of Yoruba, the 
Ijebus enjoyed great advantages which were as greatly abused. 
Ibadan especially was at their mercy for supplying them with 
arms and ammunition, in which Ijebus themselves profited 
enormously ; and on this account they held themselves practically 
as their masters, knowing that the Ibadans depended upon them 
in order to be able to defend their frontiers against the Ilorins, 
and must perforce submit to any affront offered them. 

An Ijebu, whatever his social standing — only because he is an 
Ijebu — considers himself superior to any Oyo man. The following 
will suffice for an illustration : — 

The son of the Balogun. of Ijebu once said in conversation with 
the writer : " Afi Oyinbo afi Ijebu, dede aiye dede eru ni won. 
Ko si oja ti a ita Oyinbo, ko si oja ti a ita Ijebu " {i.e., " Except 
the white man and the Ijebus the whole world besides are slaves : 
there is no market in which a white man may be sold and none 
where Ijebus may be sold.") Can conceit go any further ? 

An educated African, an Oyo by birth, resident at Lagos, had 
occasion to reside at Ijebu for some time, where he made some 
friends. On one occasion he was about-to pay a flying visit to 
the interior and one of his young Ijebu friends, trying to dissuade 
him from going, said to him : " Are you going Ibadan way ? 
Mark you there are no Ijebus there for you to associate with, 
they are all Oygs there! " This innocent effort at persuasion 
but provoked a smile, but it showed what the Ijebus thought of 
themselves. 

As the only market for trade at this time, thousands of Oygs 



THE DARK BEFORE THE DAWN 6ll 

came down once a month from the eastern and western provinces, 
assembled at Ibadan, and proceeded under escort to Ijebu, for salt 
especially and other necessaries. The market was held at Orii, an 
Ijebu frontier town. The treatment they generally received at 
the hands of the Ijebus beggars description, and can hardly be 
credited at this distance of time and change of circumstances. 
For a load of produce worth thirty shillings an Ijebu once offered a 
bag of something tied up. " And what is in your bag? " asked 
the Oyo man. The Ijebu replied, " A jo d'ale " (" Something to 
make one dance till eventide "). As he was about to examine the 
contents of the bag offered him in lieu of his produce, the Ijebu 
went away with the produce, and the unhappy man found nothing 
but snail-shells left in lieu of his merchandise, and redress 
could not be obtained ! 

Another offering a bag of something for a load of produce was 
similarly asked what the contents were, andreplied, " Kieiye luwe," 
a newly-coined word — To make birds swim. As their dialects 
differed the seller would look at the contents of the bag offered him 
to know what went by that name, and the Ijebu immediately went 
off with the produce. The contents were wooden emblems of 
Sango ! No redress. The Ijebu insisted that once the man had 
taken the bag, he had accepted his offer ! 

If an Oyo man or woman was seUing his wares for 7s. 6d. and the 
Ijebu offered 5s. the former dared not refuse. If he attempted to 
take back his merchandise from the intending purchaser, there 
was sure to be a scuffle in which the seller would be overpowered by 
other Ijebus coming to the aid of the buyer, some beating him, 
others pricking him with their hairpins and so forth. 

The caravan route at that time was notoriously unsafe from 
brigands and Egba kidnappers ; any Oyo carrier for an Ijebu 
who suffered any losses of his package in part or in whole was 
made to pay double the price or become the slave of the Ijebu. 
Accidents from slippery paths, highway robbers, thorns and 
thickets of the bush paths were of frequent occurrence ; whatever 
the losses an Oyo carrier for an Ijebu might suffer from any of 
these causes, must be made good at double the price by the carrier 
and members of his compound or he was claimed as slave by the Ij ebu. 

The action of Ijebu men towards Oyo maidens need not be 
referred to : rapes and seizures for trumped-up charges were of 
revolting frequency. A shocking instance occurred of an Ijebu 
who alleged he had contracted venereal disease from a woman 
he had ravished, and thereupon claimed heavy damages from her 
husband ! 

Whatever the price the Ijebus are pleased to offer for any article, 



6l2 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the Oyg man is obliged to accept as it may end in a total loss of 
his merchandise and what was offered. 

As to flogging at the toll gates — that was so common and 
indiscriminate that Ijebu youths were frequently found to come 
up to the gates on market days with whips, ready to find exercise 
for their arms with or without any cause. 

The only court to which appeal lay was to the Balogun Nofowo- 
kan when he was stationed at Orii, and latterly to Chief Kukii. 
About a dozen applicants would be found before him at once ; 
hundreds had no chance to approach him before the return of 
the caravan was due. 

The sufferings of these people impressed these chiefs who were 
dealing out justice to them, and hence they were charged with 
befriending Oyos. This is but a poor description of the kind of 
treatment Oyo3 had at the hands of the Ijebus during this period. 

Deference and respect to age and station is a marked charac- 
teristic of Yorubas everywhere ; but at this period an Ijebu man 
even on Oyo soil would pay no respect to any chief or elderly 
person. Their indignities and impertinences had to be borne. 

There were not wanting venturesome and enterprising persons 
who would risk the way down the coast with an Ijebu friend ; 
several of these were discovered between Ijebu Ode and the coast, 
and were sold into hopeless slavery. 

Chief Kukii the Seriki of Ijebu Ode had done much for the Oyo 
war chiefs and for his own pocket, by seUing them rifles and 
cartridges at very high prices. Scores of Oyo beauties of whatever 
town they may be, were seized by him for debts alleged to be owing 
him by an Oyg, it might be by a man of another town unknown 
to her, as long as the niaiden seized was an Oyo by birth as the 
supposed debtor was ! Once in his harem he would never consent 
to their parents coming to redeem them ! This example was 
followed by several other well-to-do traders. 

These are the causes that led the Ibadan chiefs in their letters 
to the Governor of Lagos, as mentioned above, to ask for a road 
to the coast which should not be disturbed and preferably the Remo 
route. 

Added to all this was the unsafety of the road from Egba kid- 
nappers. The caravans had to be protected by armed escorts 
every month as they trooped down and back. The first station 
was Odo-Ona-nla in the Ibadan farms. Here Adio the head 
priest of the Sango worshippers, was stationed with some elderly 
warriors. Next at Onipe. Here was the camp named Budo-Ode 
(hunters' camp). Here were stationed the hunters and reserved 
forces. Next at Olowa. Here lay the main body of the army, 



THE DARK BEFORE THE DAWN 613 

" lya Ogun " as it was called. Here such brave men like Solaja 
and Bada Agidi were posted. Further on at Alabata and at 
Mamu were the advanced forces consisting of men from the Ibadan 
town districts of Oja Igbo, Ofa, and Oje. 

There were frequent brushes with the Egbas at one point or 
another, but the most serious engagement in this route occurred 
in November, 1884, when the Egbas came with a large army and 
attacked the caravans at Alabata, overwhelming the guards and 
sweeping away a large number of traders. The report soon reached 
Olgwa and a strong body of men pursued after and overtook them. 
A sanguinary engagement took place in which the leaders Solaja 
and Bada Agidi signahzed themselves. The Egbas weie defeated 
with heavy losses. They rescued many of those captured, and 
captured also many of the Egbas. Among the captured were 
several Christians who formed the rifle corps of Abeokuta, with 
Moses Sasegbon, the Seriki of the Christians, their captain. 
Luckily for him he fell into friendly hands. He was caught by one of 
the boys of his old friend Solaja, who seeing him bleeding from wounds 
he had received, peremptorily ordered his captor to go for some 
water for the captive lest he lose him altogether. With a v.ink 
he then indicated to Sasegbon a way of escape, and then turned 
his back on him, pretending not to see him as he slipped into the 
bush and escaped. He reached home on the 19th of November, 
1884, a wiser man, never more to engage in any kidnapping expe- 
dition. He was for months on a sick bed from his wounds. 

Moses Sasegbon was well known at Ibadan, especially at the 
Ijebu quarters in the early seventies. He spent a long time 
there ; he had a factory with several hands ginning cotton till 
the war broke out in 1877. He was one of the sufferers when 
Egba properties and slaves were confiscated at the beginning of 
the war. This was the second time he had a brush with the 
Ibadans. In an affray the Egbas had with Ogboriefon the Balogun 
of Ibadan in the Ogun district he took an active part. When the 
Egbas were routed he was three days in the bush ere he could 
find his way home to Abeokuta. 

When the Commissioners went up in 1886 to disperse the camps 
at Kiriji they met the Ibadan warriors as. above described. 

§ 6. Causes That Led to the Ijebu War 

(a) Affront to the Acting Governor 

Governor Moloney was not a man of action. It was said that 

he was too fond of writing letters to and drafting treaties for 

men who hardly appreciated the one or comprehended the other 

or knew the force or value of their marks of signature. 



6l4 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

During his five years of administration he never once visited the 
people and the scene of which he writes so much : a single visit 
from him would have cleared up many difficulties in his way and 
enabled him to understand much, and he would have acted more 
to the purpose. No wonder then that matters remained in statu 
quo. 

After his departure the Colonial Secretary, Capt. George Chardin 
Denton, now Acting Governor, in pursuance of the peaceful policy 
of the Governor proposed to visit the Awujale of Ijebu, talk 
matters over with him in a friendly way, and point out the advan- 
tages that would accrue to the Ij§bu nation by a free intercourse 
throughout the country under the auspices of Her Majesty's 
Government, of Lagos. He received permission from Downing 
Street to carry out his object. 

Having communicated his intentions to the Awujale and ob- 
tained his assent, the Acting Governor started for Ijebu Ode 
accompanied by Oliver Smith, Queen's Advocate, Thomas Welsh, 
Esq., a member of the Legislative Council, and a mercantile 
representative. Dr. J. W. Rowland, the Colonial Surgeon, Capt. 
A. F. Tarbet and Mr. F. Colley-Green of the Hausa force, Mr. 
Jacob Alesinloye, an Ijebu merchant resident at Lagos, and Mr. 
A. L. Hethersett, Government Interpreter, with a guard of honour 
including the Hausa band to give eclat to the occasion. He took 
with him also large presents for the Awujale and his chiefs. 

The Ijebus hearing of the Governor's approach sent to stop him 
at the landing at Ito Ike ; he was wilfully misrepresented as 
coming with hostile intentions. The Governor, however, sent to 
remind the Awujale that the visit had been agreed upon between 
them, and that it had received the sanction of Her Majesty's 
Government, and the travelling expenses granted : what explana- 
ation was he now to give for not being able to reach him ? He was 
quite ready to dispense with his guard of honour and visit Ijebu 
with his attendants only if they conceived any fears and appre- 
hensions. 

It was not without much trouble and annoyance that the 
Governor's messengers with the above errand could reach Ijebu Ode 
being stopped repeatedly by the way. On reaching the town none 
of the Ijebu Authorities would lodge them ; they were sent from 
one chief to another till at length they had to return to the town- 
gate to await the morrow. They managed to get audience of 
the king the next day and they returned with a message approving 
of the Governor's visiting Ijebu Ode bat not with a mihtary escort. 

The Governor, who was all the time in the Colonial steamer, the 
Margaret, now proceeded, to Ijebu Ode with his civil attendants 



THE DARK BEFORE THE I?AWN 615 

only. At Ode they were kept under strict surveillance, none of 
the party being allowed to leave the compound. They had 
audience of the Awujale on the fourth day of their arrival when 
the Governor impressed upon them the determination of the 
British Government that the interior peoples should have free 
access to the coast like themselves. The Governor reasoned with 
the Ijebu authorities, showing them the advantages of opening 
up the country for trade, and that the result would be a general 
increase in trade which would bring more money into the country 
and that the Ijgbus themselves would enjoy a large share of the 
same. 

He also promised them that the Lagos Government would pay 
to them a sum equivalent to what they were receiving in tolls. 

The Ijebu chiefs received the Governor's words with displeasure 
and with every sign of anger against him and against their own king, 
putting the blame of the Governor coming up to " dictate " to 
them (as they call it) upon the Awujale who granted him the 
permission to come. They would listen to nothing else but that 
the interior Yorubas should meet them at Oru for trade, and that 
the white man's people {i.e., Lagos traders) meet the Ijebus at 
Ejirin. 

The Governor proceeded to give the presents he brought for 
them. The king accepted his own, but the chiefs unceremoniously 
refused theirs. This of course the Governor considered an insult, 
and he therefore told them he would return what had been given 
him. As they made no objection to this he returned their presents 
of sheep and cowries he had received, and left Ijebu Ode the next 
morning. Thus the Lagos Government received an unceremonious 
rebuff in the person of its Chief of the Executive. 

The Home Government being informed of the attitude of the 
Ijebus and their action towards the Acting-Governor, the Secretary 
of State for the Colonies, after consulting with the late Governor, 
Sir Alfred Moloney, resolved upon coercive measures, and hence 
gave full power to the new Governor to deal with the Ijebus. 

§ 7. Causes that led to the Ijebu War 
{b) Treaty Made and Broken 

On the arrival of Governor Gilbert Thomas Carter in the 
latter part of 189 1, communication was re-opened with the Ijebus. 
Special messengers were sent down to greet the new Governor. 
He received them in state in the presence of the principal Govern- 
ment officials and heads of departments, members of councils, 
and principal merchants. 



6l6 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

The first thing the Governor required of them was to apologise 
for their conduct to Acting Governor Denton. This they had to 
do. Then they were required to sign a treaty, which among other 
provisions, aboHshed human sacrifices and enjoined the free opening 
of the road through their country between Lagos and the interior 
for all, the Governor of Lagos stipulating to pay the Awujale 
;r5oo annually in lieu of tolls hitherto received from caravans. 
The delegates objected and required authority from home to sign 
a treaty. They were detained at Lagos until they received 
authority to do so or, if needs be, men capable of signing the 
treaty should be sent down. This was duly effected. 

After this, there was a small measure of freedom to and from 
the interior for a few months, to enlightened people who knew of 
the treaty, but caravans were still not allowed a foot beyond Oru. 
But the Ijebus were incensed with their king and were determined 
on a revolution. They showed their resentment in moving the 
Awujale to several intolerant acts. They picked up a quarrel 
with the Ibadans, threatened to stop all arms and ammunition 
if Kuku was not expelled out of Ibadan. Kuku was accordingly 
expelled, and his fine house at Ibadan was demolished by the Ijebus 
there. Kuku returned to Ijebu, but was obUged to take refuge 
at Ijebu Ife which to all Ijebus is a city of refuge, by which he 
escaped death. Kuku remained there till after the taking of 
Ijebu in May, 1892. 

Next the Awujale also raked up a quarrel against Solaja that 
intrepid Ijebu horseman at Ibadan. A beautiful cushion he had 
presented to the king a few years before was sent back : that 
meant heavy fines which had to be paid or he would demand his 
life. Solaja certainly was not expected to keep the returned 
article which had been in the possession of his king. Along with 
this, frivolous charges were brought against the Rev. D. Olubi, 
the C.M.S. agent at Ibadan, by the Awujale. 

(i) That one of his sons took up some corrugated iron sheets 
for the C.M.S. house at Ibadan through Ijebu when they had 
forbidden all intercourse with white men. 

(2) That he was instrumental in bringing Europeans up country. 
He sent to the Ibadans that he should be expelled the town. The 
Ibadan chiefs were reluctant to do so as they had no fault to find 
with him since he had been amongst them over 40 years. Mr. 
Olubi hearing this sent Mr. W. S. Allen a colleague to ascertain 
what the real cause of offence was, and that he was to pass on to 
Lagos and to procure some presents to appease him. This was 
done and the C.M.S. granted ;^5 for the presents in the interest of 
their interior agents, that route being the only one available to 



THE DARK BEFORE THE DAWN 617 

the interior at present. The presents were accepted but un- 
fortunately they seemed but to serve to whet the appetite of the 
Ijebu king for more. 

The Awujale next sent to demand his head, and that of the 
white man (the Rev. T. Harding) at Ibadan. Mr. Olubi then 
opened negotiation for his life with the Awujale. He demanded 
more presents, and the reverend gentleman sent 12 sheep by Mr. 
(now Rev.) F. L. Akiyele, a C.M.S. Catechist under him. These 
were accepted but the ban was not removed, only matters were 
quiet for some time. 

After a while, the Awujale sent to the Ibadan war chiefs 
threatening to stop trade, with all arms and ammunition if his 
orders were not carried out. The Ibadans commissioned one 
Fade, an Ijebu long resident at Ibadan to negotiate with him, 
and point out the unfairness of this order against one who came 
amongst them as a youth, grew to manhood, married and begat 
children and not once offending against their laws. On Fade's 
return he reported that the Awujale was inexorable that he 
demanded not the head of Mr. Olubi alone but also that of the 
European Mr. Harding, and that the houses and property 
of all the Christians should be confiscated and that 200 young 
men and women should be sent to appease his wrath. 

The war chiefs saw no alternative but to yield to this extra- 
ordinary demand. A deputation of Christians was sent to the 
camp to remonstrate with the war chiefs but all in vain. They 
said " rather sacrifice the head of one man than risk the safety 
of the whole country." The home authorities sent back to the 
camp to ask whether the order was really meant to be carried out. 
A peremptory message was sent back to say if the order was 
not carried out the heads of the home authorities themselves 
should be taken off ! 

The messengers with this order arrived at Ibadan on Saturday 
the 2ist May and the home authorities felt extremely reluctant 
to carry it odt. Action was postponed till after the assembhng of 
the town council on Monday and the matter discussed afresh. 
But on the Sunday, the sound of cannon was said to be heard 
at a distance, a conflagration was descried as that of 
the burning of a town. Towards the afternoon the rumour grew 
stronger and stronger that the phenomenon descried was at Ijebu, 
and at last the rumour was confirmed that Ijebu was taken by the 
British forces from Lagos ! The Home authorities withheld their 
hand on the Monday and reported matters to the camp. The 
war chiefs were so alarmed that they sent special messengers 
from Ikirun to ask pardon of Revs. Olubi and Harding and 



6l8 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

expressed their regret that they ever yielded so as to issue such an 
order against the lives of men with whom they had hitherto Hved 
in the closest bond of fellowship from childhood. In this there is 
no doubt that we can see the interposition of divine Providence. 

The treaty signed by the Ijebu plenipotentiaries was accepted 
with bad grace by the young Ijebus at home who kept goading 
the king to such intolerant acts as the one related above. To see 
people passing up and down through their country was galhng to 
them. A treaty so badly received evidently could not last long. 
It was soon broken. Now and then it became known at Lagos 
that individuals going up or coming down were sent back. The 
caravans were not allowed to proceed to the Ejirin markets. The 
Rev. T. E. Williams a Wesleyan minister who had gone to Lagos 
for the annual Synod of that denomination returning to his post 
was driven back to Lagos. That the Ijebus never meant to observe 
the spirit or letter of the treaty was evident from the events 
related above towards Revs. Olubi and Harding, the while un- 
known at Lagos. 

What stirred their hostility most deeply was said to be the 
action of a foreign missionary going up country, who was received 
with hostile demonstrations by the Ijebus. Whilst waiting to pay 
his call on the Awujale, a crowd assembled and he, it was said, 
was going to preach to them against their wish : they would hear 
nothing from him ; on his persisting this inflamed them and both 
he and his party were literally driven back to Lagos. This matter 
was duly reported to the Governor. An ultimatum was sent to 
the Ijebus which they ignoied. The Egbas especially since the 
Ilaro affair were in sympathy with them, and both began to prepare 
for the fight. The Governor of Lagos sent a letter to the Egba 
Government by the Inspector of pohce, Mr. Adolphus Pratt, which 
they refused to receive and ordered the bearer to leave the town 
before sunset that very day with his letter. A council was held 
the same day at Abeokuta and it was known that emissaries of 
the Ijebus were in the town to take part in it. It was reported 
that the Egbas offered their services to the Ijebus, but that the 
Ijebus averred they could hold their own, and that if they could 
not drive back the white man in three njonths, then the Egbas 
may come to their aid. Meanwhile the Egbas strictly enforced 
the blockade of both land and river routes to Lagos. War was now 
declared against the Ijebus. 

§ 8. The Ijebu Campaign 
The officers and men who took part in the Ijebu campaign were : 



THE DARK BEFORE THE DAWN 619 

Colonel Francis C. Scott, C.B. Inspector-General of the Gold 
Coast Forces, the Commander of the Expedition. 

Officers from England, 20. 4. 92 : 
Capt. The Hon. A. S. Hardinge, ist Battalion Scots Fusiliers. 
Capt. E. R. Owen, ist Batt. Lancashire Fusiliers. 
Capt. A. V. Ussher, ist Batt. Scottish Rifles. 
Capt. R. L. Bower, 7th Batt. King's Royal Rifles. 
Capt. J. R. V. Gordon, 15th Hussars. 
Lieut. C. E. Laurie, Royal Artillery. 
Lieut. J. F. Davies, ist Batt. Grenadier Guards. 

From the Gold Coast, 20. 4. 92. 
Capt. F. M. Bayley, Asst. -Inspector, Gold Coast Colony. 
Capt. H. D. Larymore, Asst.-Inspector, Gold Coast Colony. 
Native Officer Ali, Gold Coast Colony. 
Native Officer Akero, Gold Coast Colony. 
Mr. Henry Plange, Quartermaster (Acting), Gold Coast Colony. 
2 Sergt. -Majors, 4 Sergts., 146 N.C.O.'s and men Hausas. 

From Sierra Leone, 9. 5. 92. 

Major G. C. Madden. 

Lieut. C. V. R. Wright. 

Lieut. E. L. Cowrie. 

Surgeon C^pt. R. Croft. 

99 N.C.O.s and men, 2nd Batt., W.I. Regiment. 
Lagos Hausas. 

Capt. A. F. Tarbet, Asst.-Inspector, Lagos Constabulary. 

Capt. G. B. Haddon-Smith, Asst.-Inspector, Lagos Constabu- 
lary. 

Capt. R. E. D. Campbell, Asst.-Inspector, Lagos Constabulary. 

Sergt. -Majors Dangana and Dankafi. 

Asst.-Supdts. F. Colley-Green, A. Claud Willoughby. 

Pay and Quartermaster W. R. Harding. 

158 men, rank and file. 

With 100 Ibadan Irregulars under their own Captain Toyan. 

The expedition left Lagos on the 13th of May, 1892, and arrived 
at Epe early on the 14th. 

The Ij§bus had expected the expedition to come by Ito Ike, the 
shortest route to the capital, and had therefore spread their army 
ready at the Eluju grassfields not far from the town of Ibefun. 
Previously, they had offered in sacrifice a man and a woman, 
goats, fowls and pigeons at Itg Ike, and charms of imprecation for 
which they were famous were uttered over the creek that the vessels 
might founder and the expedition might end in failure. But they 



620 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

heard to their surprise that the transports had proceeded to Epe 
and the troops landed there ! They hastily broke up the camp 
and proceeded to the Epe road. Of the three routes generally 
taken, Itoike, Ejirin, and Epe, the last is the longest but the best. 
It has the best and easiest landing, and a village of some consider- 
able size to be used as the base, one-half of the population of which 
consists of Lagos people. The way to the capital from here was 
mostly through farms. The other routes had no such advantages, 
they were for the greater part through bush paths : that through 
Ejirin especially at that time of the year was worse, the road for 
the most part v-shaped paths. The forward march from Epe after 
every preparation had been made was on the i6th May. Arriving 
at Pobo after a short march, an Ijebu ambuscade opened fire about 
10.30 a.m., and a smart brush took place, the Ijgbus hastily re- 
treating. The village and hamlets surrounding were immediately 
burnt down. In this engagement one of the Ibadan Irregulars 
was wounded and died from the wound at Ijebu Ode a few days 
after. Leaving Pobo on the 17th a larger force was encountered 
at Erebo ; here the Ijebus made a furious attack but were repulsed 
with heavy losses, and here fell A. Claud Willoughby of the Lagos 
force, ventaring too far in pursuit. The engagement lasted from 
8 a.m. till 11 a.m., when the village of Majoda was taken. 

No traces of the Ijebus were found on the i8th except the 
deserted camp. On the morning of the 19th the order of march 
was — the Ibadan Irregulars first under their captain Toyan, then 
the Lagos Hausas led by Capt. Bower, then the W. I. Regiment 
under their Major, the Gold Coast Hausas bringing up the rear 
under Capts. Campbell, and Haddon Smith of the English Militia 
Force. 

The report of the day's event given by an officer who took an 
active part in the fight was as follows : — 

"As we marched along a few men from the hills at the left 
fired at us, but soon ran away ; probably this was intended as 
a signal to the main force. We continued our march and all 
of a sudden, the Ibadan Irregulars halted, and began drumming 
and fixing on their war charms ; Capt. Bower ordered them to 
move on, but their Captain replied, ' The Ijebus are near, we 
have smelt them.' They had not advanced twenty paces when 
at a bend in the road the Ijebus opened fire at us. Here their 
main army was concentrated. They chose their spot well. 
The River Yemoji flowed across the path at this time overflowing 
its banks breast deep for the tallest man. The river flowed 
through marshes except at the ford through which we must 
pass and this the Ijebus rendered dangerous by snags thrown 



THE DARK BEFORE THE DAWN 62I 

into it. As they opened fire the Ibadans were first at them, 
then Capt. Bower rushed forward with the Lagos Hausas, and 
the engagement began. It lasted full three hours. The Ijebus 
retreated to the other bank and raised a shout, as much as to 
say, ' We will see how you will cross,' but the Maxim gun soon 
cleared the opposite bank. The Lagos Hausas were ordered 
forward into the river, but they wavered and hesitated. In a 
moment the Colonel thundered out, ' 2nd West, advance ! ' 
The West Indian Regiment at once rushed into the stream, 
stumbling on the snags but kept going at the enemy, the Colonel 
himself amid stream giving his orders. The Hausas now came 
rushing in whilst Capt. Owen with the 7-pounder fired over 
their heads and quite cleared the landing for our men. Inspector 
F. C. Green shouldered the 7-pounder across the stream, shells 
and shrapnel doing their deadly work. At the right bank of 
the river Capt. Owen was wounded in the head and leg. The 
Ijebus fled in confusion. Their camp was at the village of 
Magbon but they never stayed to defend it. Rockets were 
fired into the forest and thick bush surrounding the place, 
and thousands of Ijebus hidden therein were dislodged and fled 
away in terror. The Ibadan Irregulars seeing the rockets for 
the first time with their horrid noises and streaming fiery tails, 
bursting into the forest, dislodging ambuscades and others 
conceahng themselves, fancied the whole forest on fire, they 
thereupon shouted and acclaimed Colonel Scott, 'Adana sun 
igbo '1 (one who set the forest on fire). The village of Magbon 
was occupied that afternoon and there the expedition passed 
the night." 

He went on to say : — 

" Next morning, thinking the Ijebus would make their last 
stand to defend the capital at all cost, the Colonel arranged his 
troops accordingly with every precaution. The Imperial troops 
being more steady led the way under Capt. Bower to his great 
delight. From Magbon right on to Ijebu Ode the capital was 
one broad path, the bush on either side the road was trodden down, 
and articles strewn about the whole way. The Ijebus after their 
defeat at Magbon thought they were being pursued, so they 
fled precipitately home. The town was entered on the 20th of 
May. 

" On reaching Ijebu Ode we found that the town had been 
deserted, the poor old King was left with only two or three 
men, and a few of the chiefs trembling. He came forward to 

^ That is the origin of the word, now commonly applied at Lagos 
to all raw up-countrymen as the irregulars then were. 
Y 



622 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Col. Scott and said he thanked him for teaching a sharp lesson 
to those disobedient young fellows whom he had warned, and 
warned in vain, not to venture to fight the white man. The 
Colonel replied, ' I see you cannot manage your disobedient 
boys, so I have come to help you to do so.' The King was 
kept as a State prisoner in his own house, and only allowed to 
take a stroll about in the evenings with orderHes behind him. 
He felt himself safer with the conquerors than with his own 
refractory subjects. 

" Less than an hour after we entered the town, we saw an 
old man staggering on towards us, saying, ' I want my skin ; 
he has taken my skin ; I want it.' It was the aged Balogun 
Nofowokan. The Hausas looting, one of them entered the 
Balogun's house and saw him sitting on a large leopard skin ; he 
drove him off from it and took the skin, and this he came to 
the Colonel about. Enquiry was made, his skin was restored to 
him, and a strict order was given that the old man was not to 
be molested." 

The Governor of Lagos went up immediately after. The Queen's 
birthday was celebrated on the 24th with imposing miUtary 
ceremonies. Chief Kuku came from his place of exile and 
welcomed the Governor. 

It appeared that the Governor had written to the Ibadans to 
attack the Ijebus on the north at the same time that the troops 
from Lagos attacked them on the south. Nothing was seen of 
the Ibadans, and the Governor was inclined to doubt their good 
faith ; but when Ijebu was taken, a large batch of letters was 
found in the King's quarters, letters that had been sent some up 
country and some to Lagos, the bearers of which had disappeared ; 
among them was found the Governor's letter to the Ibadans. 
The bearer had been made away with by the Ijebus ! The postal 
work of distributing these letters to their respective owners was 
the first duty of civilization performed at Ijebu. 

The expedition left Ijebu Ode on the 30th May, leaving Capt. 
Campbell as head of the district and Capt. Bower with 100 Hausas 
to keep order. The Ipebi or the king's private residence was 
converted into a fort and there all were quartered, the king 
occupying a separate quarter within the compound. The disused 
royal palace at Iporogun, and the famous Ogboni house wherein 
were several men kept in stocks and tortured, were levelled with 
the ground, the victims being released. The king was allowed 
;f200 a year and Chief Kuku £100 p.a. to assist the king in the 
management of purely native affairs, and the aged Balogun £50 
p.a. out of regard to his age and position. 



the dark before the dawn 623 

§ 9. Effects of the Campaign 

The taking of Ijebu Ode sent a shock of surprise and alarm 
throughout the whole land. The people felt instinctively that a 
new era was about to dawn on them. A new and foreign power had 
entered into the arena of active politics in the country, and every- 
one was exercised in mind as to how the country would be affected 
by it. Combatants suspended hostilities and all of them together 
turned their faces coastwards. 

At the Seat of War. — The belligerents felt that their operations 
must soon come to an end, engagements therefore ceased. 

In the Country at Large. — To the vast majority of the common 
people it was like the opening of a prison door : and no one who 
witnessed the patient, long-suffering, and toiling mass of humanity 
that week by week streamed to and from the coast with their 
produce, their manufactures and other articles of trade and returned 
with their purchases, could refrain from heaving a sigh of 
gratification on the magnitude of the beneficial results of the short 
and sharp conflict. 

The first night in which, after the fall of Ijebu Ode, the troop of 
the first set of caravans slept at the Kanakana toll gate beyond 
Aka, large fires were Hghted, and all the men and women sitting 
round, spent the hours in recounting their sufferings and losses 
for years, in this very place, and the great change that has taken 
place. They continued thus far into the night, and occasionally 
raised loud huzzahs for the merciful deliverance, and the prospect 
of freedom of trade, and the discharge of their debts which the 
long period of 16 years' war had imposed upon every individual 
in the interior countries, giving thanks to God and invoking 
blessings ori the head of the good Queen of England. 

They brought cloths of native manufacture, cotton, indigo, 
palm oil, palm kernels, beads, cattle, poultry, yam flour, pots and 
plates of native manufacture, calabashes in large quantities, turkeys 
and pigeons, rubber, etc., etc., and took back mostly salt, cloths 
and other articles of European manufacture, trade rum, gin, 
matchets, etc., etc. 

On the Ijebus. — Even among the Ijebus themselves, very few 
if any outside the high officials of the capital who had hitherto 
maintained the iron system of inexorable exclusiveness and 
rigour suffered much from the change: the Ijebus were exclusively 
traders and they benefited by the increased trade. But the escape 
of slaves which was inevitable was their greatest cry. Slavery as 
an institution, however, was doomed to disappear. 

The door was open to the preaching of the gospel. There was 



624 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

already a small congregation of Christians, the work of Ijebu 
citizens who had been converted at Lagos and Abeokuta, and who 
had learnt to read the Scriptures in their own tongue. These, who 
hitherto dared not show their faces or profess their religion openly 
were now released from fear, and when a few months later delegates 
from Lagos were sent formally to introduce Christianity amongst 
them — in an assembly of the King and his chiefs — these Christians 
came in a body, and in a humble but fervent address assured the 
King and chiefs of their loyalty and patriotic devotion, that the 
religion they professed enjoined both, and that they would never 
be found wanting in every duty appertaining to loyal citizens. 

Permission was then given for the teaching of Christianity 
publicly, and grants of land were made for churches, schools, and 
mission stations. 

On the Egbas. — It was generally known that a large section of 
the Egbas was disposed to render the Ijebus assistance, but as 
the community of Abeokuta included a large number of intelligent 
citizens mostly Christians, who knew the magnitude of the power 
they had to deal with, their hands were held back by them. But 
there is no doubt that if the Ijebus had succeeded in repeUing the 
invasion even but temporarily, there would not be wanting a 
large force of Egbas which would have volunteered to lend their 
aid and might even attack Ilaro, 

As it was, a few months after this event, when it appeared 
probable that Abeokuta might also come in for a share of attention 
from the Lagos Government, a diplomatic niove was made by the 
chiefs through one of their intelligent citizens, and overtures were 
made to the Lagos Government, accompanied by carefully-worded 
apologies for their late actions, especially towards the messenger 
of the Government whom they drove away without even accepting 
the letter he brought. He apologized for the Egbas in these terms. 
The letter was addressed " To the Chief of Abeokuta." 
Now there was no one to lay claim to that title. The Alake was 
but a figurehead and had no authority. Ogundeyi of Iparo, 
Onlado of Kunta and the Jaguna of Igbein, who together managed 
the affairs of the town, were co-partners, so that not one of the 
three could by himself lay claim to that title, and the Ogbonis 
whose voices are supreme in important political crises could not 
claim the title either. And again, for aught they could tell the 
letter may have contained certain orders they were not in a position 
to carry out. It was better therefore that they did not know the 
contents thereof, than to know and not be able to carry them out. 
Consequently their action in not accepting the letter was 
dictated by the high esteem they had for the British Government. 



THE DARK BEFORE THE DAWN 625 

And that the messenger might not hnger when he was unable to 
fulfil the object of his mission — for the letter might have contained 
urgent matters — they therefore respectfully asked him not to stay 
or loiter, but to proceed to Lagos at once. 

Such was the tenor of the apologies they made, and thus they 
endeavoured to explain away what was a gross insult to be but 
a cautious deference. Their explanation was accepted, and the 
result was a free and uninterrupted opening of the roads by land 
as well as by the river. 

On Lagos. — An abundant supply of produce, a large and steadily 
increasing volume of trade was the result, not unaccompanied by 
some disappointment due entirely to over-exaggerated hopes and 
keen competition, and glutting of the markets. But as the old 
condition of things was for ever gone, men soon adapted 
themselves to the new. 



Chapter XXXIV 

THE END OF THE WAR 

§1. Governor Carter's Progress up Country 

Governor Carter was not the man to leave his work half done. 
The refractory and irreconcilable Ijebus had been subjugated ; 
the Egbas had submitted and their apologies accepted. He now 
proceeded to the further interior to put an end to the protracted 
war, fraught with so much evil to the country. The measure 
adopted for this purpose was the only one capable of dispersing 
such fierce combatants, viz., an armed intervention advocated for 
by the writer all through these wearisome years. Although it 
might not be necessary to pull a trigger, yet a display of force offered 
a far more convincing weight of argument than volumes of treaties, 
faultless though these may be in aim and purpose. The presence 
of the Governor himself gave additional weight and importance 
to the Mission. 

Governor Carter left Lagos on the 3rd January, 1893, for his 
tour. He was accompanied by a posse of Hausa soldiers, with 
Captain Bower, one of the officers who came out for the Ijebu 
war. The Maxim gun was en Evidence throughout the whole way. 
The Governor went via Abeokuta. He there had a long con- 
ference with the Egba chiefs and a treaty was signed on the i8th 
of January, 1893 {vide App. A). Face to face with the conqueror 
of Ijebu, and knowing the unsatisfactory relations that had always 
existed between Abeokuta and Lagos since the time of Governor 
Glover in 1867, and the part they played recently in conjunction 
with the Ijebus, they were certainly apprehensive of subjugation 
or annexation : and when the Governor assured them that he 
would do neither provided they mend their manners in future, 
they respectfully requested that that assurance should be 
specifically stated in the treaty ; hence the clause. 

[Clause 5. ... So long as the provisions of this treaty are 
strictly kept, no annexation of any portion of the Egba country 
shall be made by Her Majesty's Government without the consent 
of the lawful authorities of the country. No aggressive action 
shall be taken against the said country and its independence 
shall be fully recognized.] 

This should be particularly noted because in after years other 

626 



THE END OF THE WAR 627 

parts of the country, whose independence was never even 
threatened {e.g., Oyo and Ibadan) there being no need for any 
such thing, were held by some to occupy less favourable positions 
because a specific guarantee of their independence was not stated 
in the treaties signed with them. They were taken to be open to 
annexation. 

The expedition leaving Abeokuta proceeded to Oyo, the capital 
of YoRUBA via Iseyin. 

The Governor was well received by the Alafin of Ovg and His 
Excellency's tent was pitched in the Asipa's market, hard by the 
King's garden. This was a concession due to the owner of the 
town, the Asipa being the son of the late Oja the founder of Ago 
d'Oyo. His Majesty had several private interviews with His 
Excellency besides the public reception accorded him, and a 
treaty was concluded between the AlAfin and the Governor. 
{Vide, App. A.) From Oyo the Governor was now about to proceed 
to Ikirun via Ilorin. The Alafin was asked for an Ilari to go with 
him to the former place for the dispersal of the Ibadan camp by 
authority. He once more told off the Ilari Oba-k6-se-tan to go 
with His Excellency ; but the Governor would have nothing to do 
with that name of evil omen, " The King is not ready." His 
Majesty was told plainly that it was time the King was ready, for 
this war must now come to an end. Seeing the Governor was 
not a man to be shuffled or trifled with the King at once yielded, 
and ordered Oba I'olu (The King is the Chief) to go instead. 
The short and sharp lesson taught the Ijebus made an impression 
on the whole country not soon to be effaced. 

From Oyo the Governor proceeded to Ilorin via Ogbomgso. He 
was cordially received by the Bale of Ogbomosg, who ever after- 
wards often referred to the pleasant and pleasurable time he. spent 
with the Governor. He was apprehensive about his proposed 
visit to Ilorin, and he did all he could to dissuade him from going 
there as he greatly feared the perfidy of the Ilorins and their 
hostility to Christians generally. 

From all accounts the Governor on the other hand unfortunately 
left with the impression that the Bale's seeming anxiety on his 
account was not due to disinterested motives but to the sight of 
the large amount of presents he saw going forward to Ilorin ! 
The reflective reader of these pages, however, will see that the 
Bale had good and ample reasons for distrusting the good faith 
of the Ilorins. 

At Ilorin the Governor had several interviews with the Emir 
and they parted with an assurance of mutual friendship. But 
it was generally reported that from the moment the Governor's 



628 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

proposed visit to Ilorin was known, the Mullahs and others waited 
upon the Emir and requested him to give them bullocks and 
money to make charms in order that the Anasaras (Christians) 
might not enter their town. The Emir, although not in accord 
with them in this purpose, nevertheless granted them their 
request. 

He had occasion to throw this in their face and reproach them 
for it afterwards. He was reported to have said that he knew 
the futiUty of their attempts, and that they would have been 
more candid if they had averred that they wanted something 
to feast upon. For why should not the Governor visit him ? He 
liked to see the Governor. The Governor is a European, and him- 
self a Foulah by descent, and they know that the European and 
the Foulah were brothers, and why should the Mullahs interpose 
between the meeting of two cousins ? Had he not granted their 
requests, they would have charged him with niggardUness and 
would have made the world believe that their charms would have 
kept the Governor back if the Emir had granted their requests. 
He concluded in this way, " But the Governor has come and is 
gone and what about the charms now ? You may now retire 
and be more honest in future." One thing that struck all the 
visitors to Ilorin forcibly at this period was the almost total absence 
of the fair complexion and straight hair of the original Foulahs. 
By intermarriages and miscegenation the Negro element had 
absorbed the Semitic. The Emir himself was of a purely dark 
complexion, being partly of Yoruba descent, which accounted for 
his disposition to peace with the rest of the Yoruba country. 

From Ilorin the Governor proceeded to a station between the 
two camps near the River Otin ; there he had several meetings 
with the war chiefs on both sides. The case for the Ibadans was 
easy enough, they were there to defend the country against the 
Ilorins, as soon then as they decamp they (the Ibadans) would go 
home. The Ilorins averred that they were in their own farms and 
should not be asked to go home. The Ibadans came from full 
four days' journey, it is they who should be asked to go home. 

But the Governor repUed that he knew all that, he knew how 
the Ilorins came to be there, he even knew how Fulanis and 
Gambaris came at all to be in Ilorin, but he did not come there to 
discuss ancient history. He fixed a day in which both camps 
should be broken up together ; he appointed those who were to 
see the Ilorins home, and those who were to see the Ibadans home. 
The Awere stream near Erin was appointed as a boundary between 
the two States. And so the camps were broken up on the same day. 
The Ibadans had wanted to stop a day or two at Ede to compose 



THE END OF THE WAR 629 

the difference between the people and the Tinii Lagunju, who had 
been deposed by them, but they were hurried homewards so that 
they could not do so. Thus ended the sixteen years' war. 

We might call attention to the fact that all the towns serving the 
Ibadans in the Ibolo district asked the Governor for a flag each 
as a protection against Ibadan oppression. The Governor did not 
accede to their wish but promised to give attention to their request. 
The Ibadan army arrived behind their town wall on the 22nd 
March, 1893. 

§ 2. The Return Home of the Ibadans 

The usual mode of a triumphal entry into the town after every 
successful campaign was followed on this occasion also, because 
whatever it was, they had not suffered a defeat, their army was 
still intact. Hence they slept one night outside the town wall, 
preparatory to a triumphal procession into the town the next 
day. Here friends and relatives visited them, and every preparation 
made for a grand procession. 

Very early, at the dawn of the 23rd, Sanusi, the late Are's eldest 
son, first entered the town with the bones of his late father in a 
coffin borne before him. • He set it up in state at the gate of his 
house awaiting the war chiefs. 

Before entering the town the majority of the senior chiefs 
thought of having a private meeting among themselves to settle 
their own differences, or they might find it difficult to govern the 
town peaceably. Enormous wrongs had been perpetrated upon 
individuals, houses had been wrongfully confiscated, properties 
and people stolen and sold and any amount of mischief had been 
done whilst they were at war, so that most of them thought that 
those at home would be justified if they should close the gates 
against them so that they might not enter, and if they did, there 
was sure to be a civil war. No one committed greater wrongs 
than the Balogun's slaves, and the Agbakin his chief adviser. 
Moreover, the war chiefs had long been ashamed of the Balogun 
as their commander-in-chief, because he was so given up to liquor 
and was scarcely ever found sober all the time they were at Ikirun. 
They once approached him there to remonstrate with him for it, 
and his reply to them was, " Does my drink cost you anything ? 
Am I not buying it with my own money ? " At the seat of war 
the Balogun was supreme and absolute, nothing therefore could be 
done ; but at home it was otherwise. 

Approaching him therefore to talk matters of so great importance 
over before entering the town, they found him as usual in his 
inebriate condition. He answered them roughly ; and he said that 



630 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

he had no time for a council, and that if any one had anything to 
say to him, let him come to him in his father's house. Thus did 
the Balogun stifle all overtures intended for his own benefit. 
The chiefs were all stung by this remark, and there and then 
agreed to reject him as head of the town. They however suppressed 
their feelings and followed the order of proceeding. The Balogun 
led the way and the others in the strict order of their ranks 
followed ; every man as soon as he entered the town gate fired a 
gun, and there was a regular feu de joie the whole time as the 
procession wended its way to the Are's house on the hill, and 
before his gate to give account of the war as they would have done 
if he had been alive. Thousands upon thousands of spectators lined 
the route the whole way, shouting welcome to some of the chiefs 
and hooting others. The Balogun was received with a rigid 
silence by the crowd, whom his slaves had wronged. Thus they 
came to the front of the Are's house. The Balogun in front, the 
other war chiefs behind him prostrated before the coffin and wept ; 
then he began to give his account : — 

" 'Twas ye who sent us to the war. We met the enemy on our 
soil and we repelled them, and carried the war into their own 
country. We fought to the utmost of our powers, and finding the 
battle too strong for us, we invited you to come to our aid. Ye 
will remember how ye led us to the fight and how many hard battles 
we fought in your presence. Then ye took ill. .and. .then, .it 
came to pass., ye were transformed [E paradk]. And after that 
we fought several hard battles, and did all we could to keep up 
the Ibadan prestige : we were not able to conquer the enemy, 
and they were unable to drive us back, till the white men came 
and separated us. 

We have since then been at Ikirun defending our frontier against 
the Ilorins. They were unable to come near to encamp against 
Ikirim, and we were unable to go and meet them at Yanayo, until 
the Governor of Lagos came and ordered both of us to decamp." 

They wept once more, and thereupon Sanusi brought out the 
customary presents his father would have given them had he 
been alive. The ceremonies over, the next thing was for the whole 
of them to accompany the Balogun home, and thus to acknowledge 
him the head, but they had rejected him. Akintola was the first 
to mount his horse and say to the others, " Haven't ye your 
father's house to go to ? I am going to mine." Each of the 
younger war chiefs took it up, " I am going to mine," " I am going 
to mine," and mounting his horse each of them went home 
direct, leaving the Balogun and his own people to go home by 
themselves 1 



THE END OF THE WAR 63I 

It needed no prophetic eye to see that a storm was gathering 
which would burst at no distant date. 

The usual presents and refreshments theBalogun had ordered to 
entertain the chiefs with were all ready, but no one came to partake 
of them. The Balogun at first treated the matter lightly, affecting 
to care nothing for their plots ; but when he received no message 
of congratulation from any of them, and no secret message from 
any to disclose the nature of the plot, then he began to reahze 
the danger of his position. He was severely isolated. 

At dusk the next day he went to the Agbakin to ask him to beg 
for him. But the Agbakin was his chief adviser, aider and 
abettor all the while at Ikirun ; he was by many considered as 
guilty if not more so and should be dealt with along with the 
Balogun ; therefore the Agbakin for the sake of self-preservation, 
speedily dissociated himself entirely from the Balogun, trying his 
utmost to secure himself whilst receiving from the Balogun large 
presents intended to mollify his brother chiefs. But as the 
Balogun 's fate was already sealed what he had thus received he 
kept for himself. 

Governor Carter, following slowly behind, arrived at Ibadan on 
the 26th of March, 1893, and encamped at the Basorun market 
where booths and enclosures had been prepared against the 
arrival of His Excellency and his party. 

The Ibadans in the meantime suppressed their feelings against 
the Balogun, and His Excellency, not knowing what was going on 
underneath, had dealings with none else but the Balogun, taking 
him for the head of the town. 

The Governor unfortunately left Ibadan highly disappointed 
with the conduct of the chiefs because they declined to sign an 
agreement he drew up for them, and the idea of a European 
Resident he broached was repugnant to them. 

They objected that they had been absent from home about 
seventeen years ; they had only just arrived, the town was as yet 
without a head ; they were not yet settled down for civil administra- 
tion and hence there was no one authorized to act in an official 
position. These essentials must first be seen to before they could 
consider any treaty or agreement. The Balogun then said to him, 
" You have said you were sent from home to separate us, then 
you go home again and tell your masters you have carried out 
your mission." The Governor's last words to them were, whether 
they were wiUing or unwilling they would have to do it. 

At a banquet given at Lagos in honour of the Governor's 
successful mission. His Excellency in his after-dinner speech 
referred bitterly to this incident. He said that he met with 



632 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

success all along his tour in his going and coming, till 
he got to the last stage where it was least expected ; there he 
met with a rebuff and he believed they were instigated to it by 
one in his own train but he hoped all would be right in the end. 

To anyone with an open mind the Governor's words sounded 
very strange indeed ; it could only be attributed to an imperfect 
knowledge of the people. His Excellency might have allowed to 
such men as could govern a town like Ibadan and all its dependen- 
cies some credit of knowing their own minds and not be swayed 
by a mere clerk in his office. 

But what people anywhere in Africa, nay, in the whole world, 
would readily and speedily fall in with the view of a foreign 
garrison in their midst if they could help it ? Besides, the argu- 
ment advanced by the chiefs seemed reasonable enough. 

As soon as the Governor left Ibadan the Balogun's troubles 
began afresh. He paid heavily in slaves, cowries and goods to 
beg for his life. After all had been received the chiefs sent for 
Osb, the chief officer of Orowusi's house, to come and represent 
his master's house in the council held at the big market (always 
the place of meeting when there was no head of the town). The 
Balogun was charged with all the enormities perpetrated by his 
slaves, the confiscation of so many houses for little or no cause, 
rapes and robberies all unpunished, etc., etc., they ended by saying 
that they had rejected him, and that he should honourably go 
to sleep. 

We may remark that all these charges are such as would have 
been condoned but for his personal unfitness, which in the eyes of 
the Ibadans were unpardonable, viz., (i) His great indulgence in 
hquor (2) his failure to lead them to victory as a Balogun. 

A Balogun who has won no victory has a small chance with the 
Ibadans. The Balogun received the message with much indig- 
nation ; he was determined not to die but to fight it out. When 
his determination was known, the people were also determined 
to meet him ; already his quarter of the town was being deserted, 
for they had begun to seize people about his quarters. Private 
messages were sent quickly to his brothers. " You know the 
consequences : will you allow your father's house to be wiped off 
at Ibadan ? " They knew very well that when the people assailed 
a house, it is to level it with the ground, and make it a dunghill, 
and the family — such as remain alive — dispersed for ever : no 
member thereof ever to hold a pubHc position in the town, for 
fear of his rising to power hereafter and taking revenge on the 
children of the perpetrators. 

The Balogun's brothers stayed their hands and held a consul- 



THE END OF THE WAR 633 

tation in the family, the elders thus addressing the Balogun's sons : 

" We must all die sooner or later, and the death of a man 
advanced in life, with numerous grown-up children, is no early 
death. Which is better, for such a man who has already made 
his name and has nothing more to achieve to anticipate the 
inevitable by a short period at most, and the house remain, or 
for the said man with his house, family and posterity to be wiped 
off at once and for ever ? Your father was not the first heir to 
our father's house, let him not be the last : and so it will be if 
the citizens lay violent hands on him, and ye yourselves will not 
escape. It is left for you his children to save your own Uves and 
the honour, dignity and fame of your father's house." 

The rest was left with his sons. No one could be accused of 
parricide for no one could say positively who did it, or how it was 
done, The Balogun himself scarcely knew what was going on, 
for he had now a plausible excuse for drowning his grief in liquor ! 
Rumour says his sons persuaded him to take the fatal cup himself. 
Others say they took advantage of a time he was the worse for 
liquor and discharged fire-arms on him, which threw him off his 
seat but otherwise had no effect on him, and in his inebriate 
condition he muttered, " Who is throwing stones at me ? " 

Warriors like him with system fortified against bullets can 
hardly be hurt by a musket. Then, it is said that they had recourse 
to clubs with which he was clubbed to death. 

However it be, he was dead, and report was conveyed to the 
infuriated mob assembled at the market ready for action. Some 
one was sent to verify the fact, and when it was confirmed, 
information was conveyed to the principal war chiefs that the 
Balogun was dead. The mob dispersed. Lamentations were duly 
set up, funeral dirges sung, and he was buried with full miUtary 
honours as befits a Balogun of Ibadan, and his next brother Ola 
was appointed head of the house of Orowiisi. 

§ 3. The Return of Governor Carter to Lagos 

The Governor's mission to the interior was a complete success 
from every point of view, and he deserved all the ovation given 
him with one accord by the Colony. 

He had a right royal progress through the town from one end 
to another. The whole of the streets along which he was to pass 
from Ebute Ero, the northern landing place to Government House, 
were decorated with flags and bunting, with palms and triumphal 
arches ; they were also lined with troops — Hausas and the Con- 
stabulary — the mass of the crowd was hke a moving sea of humanity 
shouting welcome at the top of their voices. 



634 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Mr. Ademuyiwa Haastrup, a prominent citizen, on a markedly 
big and powerful horse and in a gorgeous native robe, kept on 
cantering backwards and forwards round the Governor all the 
way along. The Governor was visibly affected at the sight of 
these signs of joyful appreciation of his efforts, and the success 
attending what he had accompUshed. 

The work was so thoroughly well done that from that time to 
this the roads have been completely opened from one end to the 
other, and never has there been any obstruction to trade, and all 
this without firing a shot ! 

As a matter of course (as things were at Lagos in those days) 
a banquet by the " eUte of Lagos " followed a few days after at 
which His Excellency was the principal guest ; and he recounted 
amidst plaudits the principal incidents of his mission from 
beginning to end. 

If Governor Carter did nothing more for the Colony, his name 
will be entitled to an undying fame in the Yoruba country. But 
we have to place also to his credit the initiation of the system of 
good roads which now stretches all over the country, being much 
developed by Governor Egerton. Carter's first road was from 
Ijebu Ode to Ejirin where the weekly caravan was the thickest, 
next the Epe road, then the Ibadan Ijebu road. These were the 
roads most used for the principal markets. 

He built a proper Government House at Lagos. Then he 
started the railway between Lagos and Ibadan, which, under 
Governor Egerton, was continued to Kano.^ All this with the 
small revenue of Lagos at the time. 

Two traits in Governor Carter impressed the chiefs and people of 
this country. One was the unfailing deference usually paid to native 
rulers, and the non-encroachment upon their rights. The result 
of this was the almost entire absence of bullying and belittling by 
subordinate officers which generally brought about disorganization 
of Native Governments, and other evils consequent thereupon. 
The other was the Governor's intuitive and almost unerring 
judgment of character and his sense of justice. The country was 

^ Carter's successor was Governor M'Callum whose term was only 
12 months spent chiefly over the question of our northern 
boundary with the French. He secured to the Yoruba country the 
ancient Yoruba cities to the N.W. of ancient Oyo. Next to him 
was Governor MacGregor under whom the system of sanitation was 
perfected. Under Egerton his successor the work of his prede- 
cessors was far advanced in roads and bridges, and filling swamps 
by dredgers, and further started on his own initiative the opening 
of the bar by which ocean hners might enter Lagos harbour. 



THE END OF THE WAR 635 

prosperous in those days. Several causes might have contributed 
to this but the mass of the people set it down to the fair rule 
and government of Governor Carter. 

§ 4. Local Opinions About the War 

As was inevitable, opinions were freely exchanged and con- 
jectures made in those days as to what would have happened had 
the British Government not interfered in the interior wars, but 
had left the native states to fight out their own battles. Naturally 
opinion was divided. Some thought the Ibadans would have been 
driven from Kiriji, for the Ekitiparapos were all animated with a 
determination to break their yoke for ever ; they were fighting 
for life, home and liberty. 

Against this the Ibadans maintained that the force which could 
dislodge them from Kiriji would also be able to conquer Ibadan 
itself, for if they were unable to hold their ground where they 
were with all the provincial towns on their side, neither would they 
be able to do so at home with these towns hostile or neutral, and 
all their Ekiti fighting slaves escaped ; therefore in holding their 
own there they were not merely fighting to maintain honour and 
prestige, but also they were doing it with all the desperation of 
men guarding hearth and home. As to determination therefore, 
both sides were even. 

But to the unbiassed observer the prospects of the Ibadans 
seemed much better for the following reasons : — 

(i) If the Eldtis could have driven them, they had the best 
chance of doing so when they were furnished with thousands of 
rifles, and the roads being closed, the Ibadans had not even 
ammunition for their old flint-lock guns. When they used to 
fire into the Ibadan camp with fatal results and these could not 
reply : when the Ibadans had to go against them in the battle- 
field crawhng on the ground, seeking cover till they were near 
enough to spring upon them with swords, cutlasses, and the butt 
end of their Dane guns, capturing men and rifles. But latterly 
when the Ijebus were compelled by circumstances to open their 
roads for traffic and the Ibadans were able to acquire a few scores 
of rifles, their chances became more even, and the Ekitis were no 
longer able to assume the offensive. It was only a matter of time ; 
the Ibadans would eventually have increased their stock of rifles, 
and then the Ekitis would have had no chance against them, 

(2) The Ibadans moreover were inspired with hopes of a future 
success by the following circumstance derived from experience. 
In all their previous wars, whenever in a difficult campaign, 
while holding their foes in check they were able to send out a 



636 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

detachment for a subsidiary punitive expedition which proved 
successful, victory ultimately rested with them. So it was in the 
case of Iwawun during the Ijaye war, of Ibokun during the Ilesa 
war, etc. The victory at He Ife showed it would be the same in 
the Kiriji campaign. 

(3) The next ground of hope was of a more solid nature. 
Ogedemgbe was the only leader in whom the Ekitiparapos relied 
to hold their different sections together ; he had to expose himself 
in every battle as any of the meanest soldiers in order to get his 
countrymen to follow him. His body was covered with scars 
from wounds. It was not unlikely that the Ibadans, having acquired 
rifles, a stray bullet might one day put him out of action, and with 
him the hopes of the Ekitis would be extinguished. 

The Ibadans on the other hand could count upon scores of men 
wilHng and able to take the lead. In fact they attributed their 
non-success to the disobedience to the voice of their national oracle 
which bestowed the office of Balogim on Akintola, but which the 
Are was not inclined to follow, consequently the fall of their own 
leader was not likely to have a bad effect upon them but probably 
just the contrary ; and the Ekitiparapos driven from the field, 
the Ilorins were not likely to remain any longer to continue the 
struggle, as they were unable to take the field against a strong army 
without an infantry support. 

§ 5. Constitution of the Ibadan Town Council 

We consider it important to note how the titles were distributed 
at this time at Ibadan, because these men formed the Town 
Council and were officially responsible for the Agreement which 
practically made not only Ibadan but also all Yoruba country a 
British Protectorate. 

Bale. — There were two aspirants to the title of Bale, and each 
was backed by the two most powerful junior war chiefs, viz. : 

(i) Osuntoki the Maye, backed by Akintola, and (2) Fijabi, the 
Abese, backed by Sumonu Apampa. The latter was determined 
to carry out his wish at all cost : he eventually succeeded, and 
Fijabi was elected Bale. A special messenger was thereupon sent 
to Oyo to place his name before the King. An Ilari was sent 
by His Majesty to confer the title of Bale on him. The act was 
known as placing the leaves of title upon his head because it is 
the plum leaves (Ewe lyey^) that are used on these occasions, 
" lyeye " from the root ye, to live, which rendered the act to mean, 
" May you live long." 

Bale Fijabi now appointed his rival to the post of honour. The 
title of Otun Bale was conferred on Osuntoki the Maye, and that 
of Osi Bale on Fajinmi the Agbakin. 



THE END OF THE WAR 



637 



The titles of the war chiefs are the most important at Ibadan. 
That of Balogun happily was indisputable, the National Oracle 
had declared it for Akintola after the death of Ogboriefgn : the 
late Balogun it was generally understood held it in trust for him 
while the late war continued. Akintola now by common consent 
came to his own as the Balogun of Ibadan. There were two 
aspirants to the next position of Otun Balogun, viz., Kongi the 
grandson of Ogunmgla, and the brave Babalola the son of the 
late Ajayi Ogboriefon. 

Kongi based his claim upon the fact that his grandfather was 
the Otun to Akintola's father when Balogun, and so it was right 
that he be the Otun to Akintola as Balogun. But the bravery of 
Babalola could not be overlooked ; he too was the son of the hero 
of the Jalumi war and was second to none. Babalola therefore 
obtained the title of Otun. 

That of Osi was offered to Kongi, but he sulkily declined to 
have it ; he was told either to accept it or receive none at all 
and was reminded of the cowardice displayed by him at Erin 
when Enimowu was captured by the Ilorins. Moreover, Sumgnu 
Apampa laid claim to the very title of Osi. His father was the Osi 
of Akintola's father as Balogun, and so also he would be the Osi 
to Balogun Akintola. Although in every respect he was deserving 
of it, yet to accede to Apampa's request would mean to degrade 
the house of Ogunmgla further, which they did not think it right 
to do, for the heroes of that house were equal to any albeit the 
head of the house was a cowardly youth. And to Apampa they 
said that they sympathized with him, he was worthy of it, but 
as he had been yielded to and had obtained his wish in the matter 
of the Bal§ Fijabi, he must not press his claim in this instance. 
So Kongi was made the Osi Balogun and to Apampa was given 
the title of Asipa. 

The principal titles were as follows, civil and military : — 



Name. 

Fijabi 


Tiile. 

Bale 


Name. 

Akintola 


Title. 

Balogun 


Osuntoki 


Otun Bale 


Babalgla 


Otun Balogun 


Fajinmi 


Osi Bale 


Kongi 


Osi Balogun 


Mosaderin . . 


Ekerin Bale 


Sumgnu Apampa 


Asipa 


Bamgbegbin 


Areagoro Bale 


Suberu 


Ekerin Balogun 


Salakg 


Are Alasa 


Ogungbesan 


Ekarun Balogun 


Lanlatu 


lyalode 


Akintunde 


Ekefa Balogun 






Olaifa 


Asaj u 


Ogundepo . . 


Seriki 


Obisesan 


Agbakin 


Mgsanya 


Otun Seriki 


Tanpe 


Maye 


Aina Fagbemi 


Osi Seriki 


Enimowu 


Abgse 


Dada Ojo . . 


Ek§rin Seriki 


Eweje 


Sarumi 



Chapter XXXV. 

THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BRITISH 
PROTECTORATE 

After the titles and ofl&ces had been distributed, and the town 
settled down once more to the duties of civil Ufe, the chiefs held 
a consultation about the Agreement Governor Carter had called 
upon them to sign, and which they were not then in a position to 
consider. After the pros and cons had been dul}' weighed it was 
agreed that with proper safeguards they might agree to it, provided 
the Governor gave due consideration to their objections. 

A letter was then addressed to the Governor asking him to send 
up the document for them to reconsider in a regularly constituted 
assembly. 

Governor Carter having in the meantime left for England, on 
his furlough, this request was cabled to Downing Street and the 
Acting-Governor, G. C. Denton, Colonial Secretary, was ordered 
in reply to visit Ibadan in person and present the Agreement. 
Accordingly in August, 1893, the Acting-Governor visited Ibadan 
for that purpose. 

The document was again read and interpreted to them, and 
after due consideration the following letter was addressed to the 
Acting-Governor stating clearly the objections in their way to 
signing the Agreement. 

Ibadan, 
August 14th, 1893. 

Your Excellency, — We are not unmindful of all the kindness 
done to us by Her Majesty the Queen, nor are we unappreciative 
of it : and, in order to be frank we desire to state to you our 
fears in objecting to a Resident European which we trust Your 
Excellency will see to. 

First, we fear the authority and respect of the Bale and 
chiefs will suffer deterioration, as there may be two courts of 
appeal. 

2. We fear our slaves will assert their freedom by running 
to the Resident. 

3. We fear our wives will be taken by the soldiers which 
will be a source of great offence to us. 

638 



THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BRITISH PROTECTORATE 639 

4. We consider our land as our inalienable property inherited 
from our forefathers, and never subject to sale. We consider 
it also our greatest wealth bestowed upon us by the Almighty 
and we do not desire it to go out of our hands. 

If the Governor will see that our rights are not trespassed we 
make no scruple to sign all the terms of the Treaty. 
We are your good friends, 

FijABi THE Bale x (his mark). 
And OTHER Ibadan Authorities. 

G. C. Denton, Acting Governor. 

The following was the reply to the above letter by the Acting- 
Governor : — 

Ibadan, 

August 14th, 1893. 

Gentlemen, — In reply to the letter of this date which was 
handed to me by you this morning, I have the honour to inform 
you that the conditions of the Agreement you tell me you are 
prepared to sign, do not contemplate interference with the 
Native Government of Ibadan in any way. 

2. I may also say that the officer in charge will not as at 
present proposed hold any court or take any action opposed to 
local customs and observances so long as they do not conflict 
with the ordinary principles of humanity. 

3. The officer placed in charge at Ibadan will be instructed 
that it is not the intention of the Lagos Government to inter- 
fere with the domestic slavery so long as it is conducted on 
humane principles, as the country will still remain vested in 
the Ibadan authorities. 

I fail to see that slaves will obtain their freedom by running 
to the Resident. 

4. Any Hausa who takes a woman of the country away 
from her home, against her will, will be severely punished. 

5. With regard to the question of land, the Agreement only 
deals with a place for the erection of quarters for an officer 
and men, and sufficient grounds for a construction of a line of 
railway should it be deemed advisable to undertake such a v/ork. 

6. In neither case can it be said that alienation of the land is 
contemplated. And that there may be no mistake on this 
point, I am quite prepared to guarantee that in recognition of 
your right, rent be paid to you for what land is utilized under 
the Agreement. 



640 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

7. I can with safety promise you that your rights will not 
be infringed by the Lagos Government, the only object aimed 
at being to preserve peace, to secure open roads and reasonable 
freedom of action to the inhabitants generally. 

I am, gentlemen. 

Your good friend, 

G. C. Denton, Acting-Governor. 

After the receipt of this letter and after further consideration 
the Agreement was signed the next day by the Chiefs, {vide App. A). 
But before signing the Agreement, and in consideration of the 
Treaty signed by them at Kiriji in which the removal of Modakeke 
was made binding on them, and in order to speak their minds 
with regard to the same, they submitted the following document 
to His Excellency, the Acting-Governor. 

A brief statement of the Modakek§ affair. 

Ibadan, 
August i^ih, 1893. 

Your Excellency, — We beg to say that the real intent of 
the article respecting the Modak§ke affair in tha former treaty 
was not understood before signature : but when the first Com- 
missioners (headed by Mr. Higgins) came up and were at Moda- 
keke and insisted upon the removal, then the late Agbakin of 
Modakeke who was one of the signatories was surprised and said, 
that he did not understand it so, and our contingents there then, 
viz., the present Balogun and Asipa, sent to us and we expressed 
our concurrence with the then Agbakin of Modakeke as to our 
understanding of the article. It obliged the Rev. S. Johnson 
to come to us at Ikirun and we told him the same thing. 

When the Commissioners still insisted then the late Agbakin 
told them that it was one of the late Ife kings, Degunle by name, 
also known as Abi-ewe-ila, who gave their fathers the land out 
of pity, as the Ifes illtreated them by making sacrifices with 
them : and since then they lived and flourished there, and 
served them as landowners ; and the several times they fell 
out the Ifes were the aggressors, or were the first to fire at them, 
but God usually gave them the victory. They know no other 
home. 

When the Commissioners still insisted on their removal 
then the Agbakin said that the place beyond the river Osun 
mentioned by the Commissioners was a forest without a house 
to accommodate them and no cultivation to supply them with 



THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BRITISH PROTECTORATE 64I 

food, he then asked them to look at the town and think of the 
probable number of old and infirm men and women, with the 
infants and sucklings that may perish by exposure to the 
weather and then asked whether they would be able to stand 
responsible before God for the loss of their lives. This made 
them desist to press further the point, and matters remain as 
they are. 

2. By right of conquest we have had our Ajeles in the Ijesa, 
Ekiti, Yagba and Eton countries right up to Otun and now 
that the Ijesas, etc., have rebelled. Your Excellency, is it right 
for any one of the rebellious towns to dictate to us as the Ijesas 
have done in asking us to remove our Ajele from a town which 
does not rebel as they have done ? It is because we are conscious 
of the Queen's power and goodwill that we have accepted a 
Resident, paying Her Majesty due deference. Ought not the 
Ijesas to pay us some deference ?- In the first article of the 
Treaty the whole of the Ekun Otun and Ekun Osi are put under 
us, the Ife and Modakeke people form a part of the Ekun Osi. 
We think they and the Ijesas need being informed of this. 

We leave the subject to Your Excellency's wise consideration. 

We are, Your Excellency's, 

FijABi, the Bale, x (his mark). 

With the other Authorities of Ibadan. 

After Governor Carter's return from England, Capt. R. L. 
Bower, with a force of about 100 Hausas, was sent up to be the 
first Resident and Travelling Commissioner of the Interior Yoruba 
having his headquarters at Ibadan. The Ibadan authorities 
were prepared to assign him a place in the town for residence, 
but he marched through and took up his quarters outside the 
town walls, in the space between the town and the ancient city 
of Owu. 

With the establishment of the British Protectorate a new era 
dawned upon the country. It marked the close of the fourth 
and the beginning of the fifth period. 

What the distinguishing feature of this new era will be, and 
how long it will last, are questions which only the future can 
answer. 

When we have allowed for all the difficulties of a transition 
stage, the disadvantages that must of necessity arise by the 
appUcation of rules and ideas of a highly civilized people to one 
of another race, degree of civilization, and of different ideas, we 



642 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

should hope the net result will be a distinct gain to the country. 
But that peace should reign universally, with prosperity and 
advancement, and that the disjointed units should all be once 
more welded into one under one head from the Niger to the coast 
as in the happy days of Abiodun, so dear to our fathers, that 
clannish spirit disappear, and above all that Christianity should 
be the principal religion in the land — paganism and Mohammedan- 
ism having had their full trial — ^should be the wish and prayer of 
every true son of Yoruba. 



THE SEQUEL. 

The Protectorate has been established and everything has 
settled down : but this end has not been easily attained as may 
,Yery well be imagined. The country had to be convinced that 
a new regime had dawned upon it, and that the people must con- 
form to it. This was not unaccompanied at first by a method 
high-handed and somewhat violent under successive Residents, 
but that was not unexpected. 

We shsJl here but briefly indicate how the new order of things 
affects each unit, and incidentally we shall discover who were the 
real disturbers of the peace of the country. 

§ I. Abeokuta 

The Egbas rigidly kept to the Treaty, so that the Lagos Govern- 
ment could find no fault with them. The intelligent portion of 
the community was admitted to a share in the Government, and 
they strove to conduct everything after the model of a civihzed 
state. In fact it was the general opinion that in many things 
they ignored the rule, " Make haste slowly." The early career 
of the Alake and the new Government Secretary was highly 
beneficial to the well-being and progress of the Egba community. 

§ 2. Ibadan 

It took the Ibadan rank and file some time to realize the fact 
that intertribal wars are for ever at an end in this country. It 
was customary with them, after the conferring of new titles 
that they should go to a war, for each chief and especially for 
the Balogun to recommend himself thereby to the people as fit 
for the title he holds. The Ilorins remained the only power 
they had not come to any definite terms with, so we were not 
surprised to hear on all hands, " Nje Bower k6ni si ogun Ilorin 
yi fun wa " (" Will not Capt. Bower then open for us an Ilorin 
campaign ? ") To be at home with nothing definite to do was 
rather irksome to those whose trade was war. Happily most of 
the important chiefs had huge farms wherein were engaged many 
of their domestics, and the majority of the men also were farmers, but 
a good many were warriors pure and simple. No wonder then that 
for some time burglaries, arson, etc., were rife in the community. 

643 



644 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Again, there soon followed a series of blunders which startled 
the community not only of Ibadan but also all the Yoruba country, 
e.g., the threat to arrest the Bale of Ibadan upon the ground of 
a supposed intrigue with Ilorin ! But this charge which had no 
foundation in fact, was easily disposed' of : all the same it seemed 
necessary in high quarters to do something which would strike 
terror into the whole country " in order to keep order " ! The 
Osi Bale therefore offered himself to be arrested instead, for the 
Bale's person he said was sacred, and that to arrest him would 
mean the break up of the town. 

This was followed by the arrest of the Balogun of Ibadan 

" until the man was found who had insulted Captain ". But 

there was no such man. The salutation usually accorded to a 
gentleman on horseback by shaking the fist towards him was 
mistaken for a threat ; and how was the Balogun to know who 
thus saluted the Captairi out of doors some days after the event, 
in a huge town like Ibadan some miles away from his residence ? 
But this was speedily atoned for, and the Balogun honourably 
returned to his house. Then came the clash with Oyo over the 
case of Lagunju the ex-Timi of Ede, who appealed to his Suzerain 
to exert his good offices to restore him to his post. And again 
over the case of a man sent from Iseyin to be emasculated for 
the usual offence for which that was the form of punishment. 
This resulted in what was known as " the bombardment of Oyo," 
during which a ricochet shot hit the AlAfin on the knee. This 
was however admitted to be a blunder, and the matter was 
speedily adjusted by the Governor on his return from furlough. 
After a short time the people and the energetic Resident got to 
know each other better, and there was not only harmony, but 
even friendship between them, especially at Oyo : for it was 
subsequently found out that the mistakes and misunderstandings 
were all due to imperfect information in which the part played 
by the interpreter was not only dishonourable but highly repre- 
hensible, and he was condignly dealt with. 

But Ibadan never really settled down till after about eighteen 
months, when the Government of Lagos enlisted two battaHons 
of men for mihtary service in Northern Nigeria. This opening 
afforded relief to all those ardent spirits whose profession was arms, 
and with a wonderful celerity they imbibed and assimilated the 
new method of drill and discipUne, by which they were led to a 
successful campaign. Again, the railway undertaking absorbed 
the energies of many. Since then, Ibadan has had varied 
experience under various Residents. 



THE SEQUEL 645 

§ 3- IJESA 

It was hardly recognised that the Ijesas under Ogedemgbe 
were given to warfare as much as the Ibadans, only that the scene 
of their operations was distant from Lagos but nearer Benin. 
Chief Ogedemgbe's war boys were known as Ipayes, and much 
mischief was done by them to the country people during the 
war. This habit they found hard to give up now that wars were 
over. All warhke spirits, including princes who thought they could 
do anything with impunity were among the number of his war- 
boys. Molestations of their country people, robberies, brigandage, 
and violence of every kind were of frequent occurrence, and he 
of course always shared the booty or plunder with them. 

Matters were from time to time reported to the Resident at 
Ibadan. Capt. Bower wrote twice to warn Ogedemgbe to keep 
his men in check ; the old chief regarded this warning as a huge 
joke. That the soldiery should be given to violence was a matter 
of course to him, he simply laughed over the matter. The offence 
was repeated and that in an aggravated form on the men of 
Ara, and was duly reported. Capt. Bower, after due notice, went 
over to Ilesa,. and according to arrangement, summoned at the 
King's palace a meeting of all the chiefs. Ogedemgbe, after a 
delay of about forty minutes, met him there, and the Captain 
after relating the cases and the warnings he had given their chief, 
there arrested him in the presence of them all. Ogedemgbe had 
the good sense to warn his boys to refrain from any violent 
act in order to rescue him, and thus he prevented bloodshed — 
but by forced marches ere the news became generally known he 
was far distant. He was interned at Iwo instead of being brought 
to Ibadan the headquarters, " lest his old enemies might exalt 
over him." This, however was a mistake, for Ogedemgbe would 
simply have come back to his old home. The actual perpetrators 
of the crime were also seized and cast into prison at Ibadan. 
Capt. Bower also seized those rifles now in Ogedemgbe's possession 
which were used against the Ibadans at Kiriji. They were said 
to be an alarming number of perfect weapons of precision. 

Ogedemgbe remained at Iwo for a httle over a year. When 
in 1896 Mr. Haastrup (generally known as Daddy Kumoku) was 
elected the Owa of Ilesa, he pleaded for him with the Governor 
and Ogedemgbe was released and restored to Ilesa. He was 
given the title of Oba'la, the next in rank to the Owa himself. 
The war-boys have since been suppressed and dispersed. 

§ 4. The Ekitis 
The Ekitis are mostly farmers and traders ; there was only 



646 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

one chief amongst them who was devoted to wars. This was 
Fabumi of Imesi Oloja Oke. He also had war-boys given to 
violence as those of Ogedemgbe. Reports had from time to time 
to be made of him to the officer stationed at the River Otin of 
violence to peaceful traders, capturing and selling them as slaves 
to Benin, and other acts of brigandage. The captain usually 
sent to warn the King of Oke Mesi, till on one occasion even the 
King himself sent his son to complain of Fabumi : then it was 
that the situation dawned upon Captain Tucker. Then he knew 
that Fabumi was the culprit and not the King, who was powerless, 
being a man of about 120 years of age ! Next he found a list 
drawn up by Captain Bower in which the name of Fabumi appeared 
as one of the troublesome spirits of the country, next after 
Ogedemgbe, and one to be arrested. He consequently went up 
with about twenty Hausa soldiers and arrested him, and brought 
him bound to the River Otin camp, and the next day he sent him 
on to the Resident, Captain Hawtayne, at Ibadan. The Captain 
gave him a good warning and set him at liberty. He was hence- 
forth quiet, and subsequently became King of Mesi Ipole. It 
will be remembered that it was he who effected the capture of 
Ilori the Osi, by simulating Akintola's war cry ; it was he who 
decoyed the Ibadan army to the clefts of Mesi Ipole ; but he failed 
to take Modakeke. He was an honourable warrior. 

§ 5. Ife and Modakeke 

According to the Treaty of 1886, Modakeke was to be removed 
from Ife soil, and rebuilt in a place between the Rivers Osun 
and Oba, and the Ibadans were to see that this was carried out. 

That portion of the Treaty was galling to the Ibadans, the 
Modakekes simply would not hear of it, but the Ifes were jubilant, 
and were determined to see it carried out. 

Modakeke was a large town, and the immediate removal was 
simply impracticable. In vain did they ask that a reconciliation be 
made between themselves and the Ifes so that they might remain 
on the spot dear to them, containing as it did the ashes of their 
fathers ; the present generation knew no other home. But the 
Lagos authorities would not stultify themselves by going behind 
the Treaty, as it were, although they took no steps to enforce it, 
nor would the Ifes yield to anything except removal. Thus they 
remained together for years. 

Subsequent Governors, who actually knew the towns, had their 
hands tied by the Treaty, much though they would have Uked 
to see things effected differently. In course of time, however, 
the Ifes were practically indifferent about it, as intermarriages 



THE SEQUEL 647 

between them had all but made them one people, and the hope 
was being entertained that the matter would die away, and that 
Modakeke would remain. But Adelekan, the newly-created 
Owoni of Ife, a man as austere as he was uncompromising, was 
unremitting in his efforts to see Modakeke removed. He went 
so far as to conciUate Governor Carter in 1896 by giving him three 
of those national and ancestral works of art known as the " If§ 
Marbles." But since the general peace was kept, and th6 Moda- 
kekes were as industrious as they were loyal to the Ifes, and both 
populations seemed to Uve together in amity except for the 
Owoni, neither he nor his successors renewed the proposal to 
remove Modakeke. 

Sir WiUiam MacGregor, during his regime as Governor, among 
other places visited He Ife. He granted the Owoni an 
annual subsidy on account of his position. Thinking he had 
secured his man in this Governor, the Owoni with plausible 
excuses, but chiefly for this purpose, undertook the unusual 
course of visiting Lagos in person. He did so but without effect, 
for Sir WiHiam had seen the towns himself. But still, Adelekan 
was unremitting in his hostilities towards the Modakekes, causing 
them repeated annoyance, fomenting disorders, and by false 
reports and unsubstantiated charges, got the two most powerful 
chiefs — the Balogun and the Otun — transported to Ibadan under 
charges of disturbing the peace. Then, later on, during the regime 
of Sir Walter Egerton (himself being on furlough at the time) the 
Owoni, armed with a copy of the old Treaty, got round the officer 
stationed at He Ife, and it would seem secured his connivance. 
The Ifes thereupon took it upon themselves to molest and annoy 
the Modakekes in every possible way, even to the extent of entering 
their houses and seizing anything they took a fancy to, doing 
violence to men and women in a way they dared not do without 
provoking a war, before the Pax Britannica was imposed. The 
Owoni knew what he was about when he got the Balogun and the 
Otun removed to Ibadan. The officer located at He Ife saw all 
this but said and did nothing, which was very significant. The 
Modakekes saw that a higher power was now behind the Ifes 
and that they would have no redress. Thus it came to pass that 
on the 27th day of March, 1909, twenty-three years after the 
imposition of the Treaty, the town was broken up. Those of them 
who were descended from the Owus removed to their ancestral 
homes to Owu Ipole, between Ife and Ijebu, others to Gbangan, 
some to Oduabon, others to Ede ; the bulk of the people, however, 
with the Ogunsua or Bale of Modakeke removed to a place called 
Odekomu somewhere midway between Ede, Ife and the Ijesas, 



648 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

about ten miles from Ife, just beyond the river Sasa which after 
the war was made the boundary of Ife territory. 

Adelekan seems to have been raised up for the purpose of 
breaking up Modakeke, for he commenced his hostihties against 
the town soon after he was raised to the stool of the Owoni, and 
he died the year after the breaking up of the town. " They drove 
us twice from our home," he used to say, " and we must see 
that they are driven permanently from theirs." 

Want of sufficient land for farming prevented the people from 
concentrating in a spot as at Modakeke. Unfortunately Ode- 
komu is not on a caravan route, and that has restricted its popu- 
lation ; but it is a small, compact and flourishing town, the 
people happy, contented and progressive as usual. 

Providence, who ordereth and controlleth all things, saw that 
it was time Modakeke should cease to exist after they had nobly 
done their part in shaping the history of the Yoruba country. 

§ 6. Ilorin 

The Ilorins quickly showed themselves as the real disturbers of 
the peace of the country, and the real cause of the protracted 
war : for whereas the disturbances in the other provinces were 
more or less domestic and local, it was left for them to engage in 
poUtical disturbances which under the old regime would have 
drawn forth the Ibadan army out of home. 

No sooner had the Ibadans gone home from Ikirun, and Governor 
Carter and his party had left them, than they broke the agreement 
arrived at with them and placed Ajeles (poUtical Residents) at 
Ikirun and Osogbo. 

The boundary between the Ibadan and Ilorin territory had 
been fixed at the A were stream, to the south of Erin, leaving 
Erin and Ofa to the Ilorins, but the towns and villages hitherto 
under Ibadan protection were definitely excluded from Ilorin 
interference. 

For this encroachment therefore Captain Bower had to go to 
Ilorin to remonstrate with the Emir for disregarding the compact 
made with the Ilorins by Sir Gilbert Carter. The Ilorin chiefs 
took great exception to the manner Captain Bower was addressing 
their King, but partly from fear, and partly from the intervention 
of the Emir, they were restrained from laying violent hands on 
him. They called Captain Bower "Bawa" (pronounced Bah- 
wah) ; that in Hausa is the name of a slave. All their great men 
have each one a Bawa — their principal slave — and hence Captain 
Bower was taken for Sir Gilbert Carter's slave ! For a slave to 
be talking after that manner to, and threatening their King, was 



THE SEQUEL 649 

intolerable ; as it was, he was said to have been literally hustled 
out of Ilorin. 

Captain Bower, having driven the Ilorin political Residents 
out of Ikirun and Osogbo, encamped with his handful of Hausa 
soldiers at the banks of the River Otin — a river of ill-omen to 
the Ilorins since the Jalumi War — about five miles north of Ikirun. 
He sent to Lagos for re-inforcement, and he was granted a force 
of about 200 men with which he effectually protected the northern 
provinces of Yoruba from Ilorin encroachments. 

All was apparently well after this, the weekly caravans from 
Ilorin and beyond went to and returned from the coast, the 
messengers of the Emir of Ilorin frequently camieto the camp and 
as the Hausa soldiers were all Gambaris, mostly from beyond 
Ilorin, the intercourse between them and Hausas from Ilorin was 
frequent and natural, not knowing they were all spies ! All 
of a sudden at the end of March, 1896, — Captain Bower being 
then at Ibadan — the Ilorins came in force one morning, swooped 
down upon this small garrison and nearly overwhelmed it. With 
shell and shrapnel, and by the use of rockets, the noise of which 
they called Sango, the garrison succeeded in driving them back. 
The force was naturally strengthened, and wisely so, for within 
three months the same thing was repeated ; however, the Ilorins 
then made but a poor show. 

Towards the end of 1896 the Ilorin army came out for a regular 
campaign. It was a very large army, and they carried all before 
them till they came within a few miles of the camp. The reception 
they had twice received on previous occasions ill-disposed them 
to make a third trial of a frontal attack. For the present they 
swept along their old haunts to the Northern Ekiti laying siege 
to Otun and Orimope, both within the Lagos protectorate, with 
the intention of getting round to Ikirun and Osogbo and taking 
the camp at Odo Otin in the rear. 

From private information received of there being spies in the 
camp who would set fire to it immediately the Ilorins came and 
the fight commenced. Captain Shaw, the officer then in command 
drew up the whole of the men on parade and then with a sergeant 
and two privates entered each tent and turned out about twenty- 
three men in all who had no business to be there ! They were 
" on a visit to their countrymen," they said. Strict precautions 
were then enforced about admitting strangers into the camp. 

From messages received from the Owore of Otun, about twenty 
men of the Hausa force were sent under Asani, a sergeant, to 
observe the movements and intentions of the Ilorin hosts ; and these 
reported an overwhelming force, and that Otun was sure to be 



650 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

taken unless they received timely assistance. For this reason 
Sergeant-Major Dangana was sent with about eighty men with 
some rockets. The Sergeant-Major was a skilful and rehable 
leader : he dared not expose his small force to the overwhelming 
hosts of the Ilorins, but he hid some in a bush commanding a by- 
path to their rear, and the rest he posted on a rock in full view 
of the Ilorins. At the sight of them the Ilorins gave a shout and 
made for them, led by their Balogun Adamu, son of the late 
Karara and leader of the expedition. But the horses could not go 
on the craggy rocks, and the Lagos troops were therefore safe from 
their lances. Dangana then ordered volleys to be fired on them, 
the rockets also rent the air about them and frightened many away. 
Adamu was fatally hit on the neck, and in their presence he 
divested himself of his war-dress, and entrusted it to one of his 
men with orders not to stop till he reached home with it, for that 
he himself might not reach home. The dress was an heirloom 
in the family, from his grandfather AH. 

Their leader wounded, the Ilorins gave way and the Lagos 
troops followed them cautiously till they came within striking 
distance of the camp. There they discharged two or three rockets 
which set the camp on fire, and the host gave way ! A large 
portion of them had gone a-pillaging in the morning, and these, 
returning to find their leader dead and the camp fired and broken 
up, made the best of their way home, being pursued only a httle 
way by the Ekitis of Otun and neighbourhood. Here the Ilorins 
lost hundreds of riderless horses. 

Thus the camp at the River Otin was again saved from the 
determined attack of these intrepid horsemen. 

By these repeated attacks on the Lagos troops and the disturb- 
ance of the peace, the hopes of the Ibadans were for a while raised 
for an Ilorin campaign. But in February, 1897, the forces of 
the Royal Niger Company having its headquarters at Lokoja, 
with the two battaUons raised at Ibadan, entered Ilorin from the 
north after a single pitched battle before the gate of that city. 
Thus Ilorin has been subjugated and a Resident placed there to 
this day. 

The disappointment of the Ibadans was shared by those who 
had hopes of seeing the Yoruba country once more united under 
the AlAfin of Oyo by the subjugation of Ilorin by the Ibadan 
forces backed by a force of British troops. But it seemed this 
was not to be. The Ilorin power has thus been thoroughly broken, 
and the garrison was removed from the River Otin. 



APPENDIX A 
TREATIES 

§ I. ABgOKUTA 

Treaty of friendship and commerce made at Abeokuta in the 
Egba country this i8th (eighteenth) day of January in the year 1893. 

Between His Excellency Gilbert Thomas Carter, Esq., Com- 
panion of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and 
Saint George, Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the Colony 
of Lagos, for and on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland, Empress of India, etc., her heirs and 
successors on the one part, and the undersigned king (Alake) and 
Authorities of Abeokuta representing the Egba Kingdom, for and 
on behalf of their heirs and successors on the other part. We 
the undersigned King and Authorities do, in the presence of 
the Elders, Headmen, and people assembled at this place hereby 
promise : — 

ist. That there shall be peace and friendship between the 
subjects of the Queen and Egba subjects, and should any difference 
or dispute accidentally arise between us and the said subjects 
of the Queen, it shall be referred to the Governor of Lagos for 
settlement as may be deemed expedient. 

2nd. That there shall be complete freedom of Trade between 
the Egba country and Lagos, and in view of the injury to Commerce 
arising from the arbitrary closing of roads, we the said King and 
Authorities hereby declare that no roads shall in future be closed 
without the consent and approval of the Governor of Lagos. 

3rd. That we the said King and Authorities pledge ourselves 
to use every means in our power to foster and promote trade with 
the countries adjoining Egba and with Lagos. 

4th. That we the said King and Authorities will, as heretofore, 
afford complete protection and every assistance and encourage- 
ment to all ministers of the Christian rehgion. 

5th. It is further agreed and stipulated by the said Gilbert 
Thomas Carter, on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen of England, 
that so long as the provisions of this Treaty are strictly kept, no 
annexation of any portion of the Egba country shall be made by 
Her Majesty's Government without the consent of the lawful 
Authorities of the country, no aggressive action shall be taken 

651 



652 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

against the said country and its independence shall be fully 
recognised. 

6th. The said King and Authorities having promised that the 
practice of offering human sacrifices shall be abolished in the one 
township where it at present exists^ and having explained that 
British subjects have already freedom to occupy land, build houses, 
and carry on trade and manufacture in any part of the Egba 
country, and likewise that there is no possibility of a cession of 
any portion of the Egba country to a Foreign Power without the 
consent of Her Majesty's Government, it is desired that no special 
provision be made in regard to these subjects in this Treaty. 

Done at Abeokuta this eighteenth day of January, 1893. 

OsoKALU X (his mark) King Alake. 
OsuNDARE Onlado X\ Representatives of King. 
SoRUNKE Jaguna X j Alake and Egba United 
Ogundeyi Magaji X ^ Government. 

G. T. Carter, Governor and Commander in Chief, Colony Lagos. 

Witnessed at Abeokuta this i8th day of January, 1893. 

G. B. Haddon -Smith, Political Officer. 

R. L, Bower, Captain, Asst. Inspector, Lagos Constabulary. 

J. B. Wood, Missionary of the Church Missionary Society, 

A. L. Hethersett, Clerk and Interpreter, Governor's Office. 

E. R. Bickersteth, Trader. 

W. F. Tinney Somoye, Clerk to the Egba Authorities. 

I, the undersigned, do swear that I have truly and honestly 
interpreted the terms of the foregoing Treaty to the contracting 
parties in the Yoruba language. 

A L. Hethersett. 
Witness to signature : 

E. R. Bickersteth, Trader. 

§ 2. Oyo. 

Treaty made at Oyo in the Yoruba country, this 3rd day of 
February, in the year 1893, between His Excellency Gilbert 
Thomas Carter, Esq., Companion of the Most Distinguished Order 
of Saint Michael and Saint George, Governor and Commander- 
in-Chief of Lagos, for and on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen of 
Great Britain and Ireland, Empress of India, etc.. Her Heirs and 
Successors on the one part, and the undersigned King AlAfin of 
Oyo and Head of Yoruba-land, for and on behalf of his Heirs cind 
Successors, on the other part. 

I the undersigned AlAfin of Oyo do hereby promise : — 



APPENDIX A 653 

1st. That there shall be peace between the subjects of the Queen 
of England and Yoruba subjects, and should any difference or 
dispute accidentally arise between us and the said subjects of 
the Queen, it shall be referred to the Governor of Lagos for the 
time being, whose decision shall be final and binding upon us all. 

2nd. That British subjects shall have free access to all parts 
of Yoruba-land, and shall have the right to build houses and 
possess property according to the laws in force in this country. 
They shall further have fall liberty to carry on such trade and 
manufacture as may be approved by the Governor of Lagos. 

3rd. That I, the said AlAfin of Oyo, agree to allow a right of 
way to Lagos to all persons wishing to go there. 

4th. That I, the said AlAfin of Oyo, pledge myself to use every 
means in my power to foster and promote trade with the countries 
adjoining Yoruba-land and with Lagos. 

5th. That I, the said AlAfin of Ovo, will afford complete protec- 
tion and every assistance and encouragement to all ministers 
of the Christian religion. 

6th. That I, the said AlAfin of Ovy, solemnly promise to pro- 
hibit the practice of offering human sacrifices, and to prohibit it 
throughout the country under my control. 

7th. That I, the said AlAfin of Oyo, will not enter into any war, 
or commit any act of aggression, on any of the chiefs bordering 
on Lagos, by which the trade of the country with Lagos shall be 
interrupted, or the safety of the persons and property of the subjects 
of the Queen of England shall be lost, compromised, or endangered. 

8th. That I, the said AlAfin of Oyo, will at no time whatever 
cede any of my territory to any other power, or enter into any 
agreement, treaty, or arrangement with any foreign Government 
except through and with the consent of the Government of Her 
Majesty the Queen of England, etc. 

9th. It is hereby agreed that all disputes that may arise between 
the parties to this Treaty shall be inquired into and adjusted by 
two arbitrators, the one appointed by the Governor of Lagos, the 
other by the AlAfin of Oyo, and in any case, when the arbitrators 
so appointed shall not agree, the matter in dispute shall be referred 
to the Governor of Lagos, whose decision shall be final. 

loth. In consideration of the faithful observance of all the fore- 
going articles of this Treaty, the Governor of Lagos will make 
from ist January next ensuing unto the King of Oyo a yearly 
present of one hundred pounds ; but such present may, upon 
breach of all or any one or more of the provisions of this agreement, 
and at the discretion of the Governor of Lagos for the time being, 
be altogether withdrawn or suspended. 



654 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

iith. I likewise pledge myself to obtain the consent and co- 
operation of all the subordinate kings and authorities of represen- 
tative towns in Yoruba-land to the provisions of this Treaty. 

Adeyemi, Aldfin of Oyo and Head of Yoruba-land x (his mark) . 

G. T. Carter, Governor and Commander-in-Chief, Colony of Lagos. 

Done at Oyq this 3rd day of February, 1893. 

Signed in the presence of, 

G. B. Haddon-Smith, Political Officer. 

I, the undersigned, do swear that I have truly and honestly 
interpreted the terms of the foregoing agreement to the contracting 
party in the Yoruba language. 

A. L, Hethersett. 
Witness to signature, 

G. B. Haddon-Smith, Political Officer. 

§ 3. Ibadan 

Agreement made at Ibadan this 15th day of August, 1893, 
between His Excellency George Chardin Denton, Esq., Companion 
of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint 
George, Acting-Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the Colony 
of Lagos, for and on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland, Empress of India, her heirs and successors 
of the one part, and the undersigned Bale and Authorities of 
Ibadan, for and on behalf of their heirs arid of the people of 
Ibadan of the other part. 

We, the undersigned Bale and Authorities of Ibadan on behalf 
of ourselves and of the people of Ibadan, do hereby agree and 
declare as follows : — 

1. That the general administration of the internal affairs of 
the following Yoruba towns, viz. : Iwo, Ede, Osogbo, Ikirun, 
Ogbomoso, Ejigbo and Iseyin and in all countries in the so-called 
Ekun Otun, Ekun Osi, is vested in the general government of 
Ibadan and the local authorities of the said towns act in harmony 
with and are subject to Ibadan notwithstanding that the Alafin 
is recognised as the King and Head of Yoruba-land. 

2. That we fully recognise all the provisions of the Treaty 
dated the 3rd February, 1893, made at Oyo between His Excellency 
Sir Gilbert Thomas Carter, Knight Commander of the Most Distin- 
guished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, then Com- 
panion of the Most Distiguished Order, on behalf of Her Majesty 
the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland, and the Alafin of Oyo 
as Head of Yoruba-land. 



APPENDIX A 655 

3. That we fully agree to carry out within the territory of Ibadan 
all the provisions of the said Treaty. 

4. That we further agree in ampUfication of the said Treaty 
on our own behalf to the following terms and conditions : — 

First. That we will use every effort to secure the free passage 
of all persons coming through Ibadan either from the interior 
to Lagos, or from Lagos to the interior, and we promise to 
afford protection to persons and property so passing. 

Second. That for the purpose of better securing the performance 
of the said Treaty of the 3rd February, 1893, and of this 
agreement, we do hereby agree to receive at Ibadan such 
European officers and such a force of the Lagos constabulary 
as the Governor shall from time to time deem necessary for 
the said purpose and for securing to us the benefits of the 
said Treaty and Agreement ; and we also agree to provide 
land for the occupation of such officers and force. 

Third. We further agree, upon the request of the Government 
of Lagos, to provide land for the construction and main- 
tenance of a railway through our territory, should the con- 
struction of such a railway be determined upon, and to accept 
for such land such compensation, if any, as shall be agreed 
upon between the parties hereto or between the authorities 
of Ibadan and the persons undertaking the construction of 
such railway. 

5. And we do finally agree that all disputes which may arise 
under or in reference to this Agreement shall be enquired into and 
adjusted by two arbitrators, the one to be appointed by the 
Governor of Lagos for the time being, the other by the Bale and 
authorities of Ibadan, and in any case where the arbitrators so 
appointed shall not agree the matter in dispute shall be referred 
to the Governor of Lagos whose decision shall be final. 

Done at Ibadan this fifteenth day of August, one thousand 
eight hundred and ninety three. 

George Chardin Denton, C.M.G., Acting Governor. 

FijABi, the Bale X 

OsuNTOKi, the Otun Bale X 

Fajinmi, the Osi Bale X 
Akintola, the Balogun, by his 

representative, Oyeniyi x 

Babalola, the Otun Balogun x 

KoNGi, the Osi Balogun x 

Sumonu Apampa, the Asipa x 

Ogundipo, the Seriki X (their marks) 



656 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Signed in the presence of : 

G.B. Haddon-Smith, Acting Inspector General, Lagos Constabulary. 

W. R. Henderson, Acting Travelling Commissioner. 

D. W. Stewart, Capt., Asst. Inspector, Lagos Constabulary. 

We, the undersigned, do swear that we have truly and honestly 
interpreted the terms of the foregoing Agreement to the contracting 
parties in the Yoruba language, 

John A. Williams, Clerk to Travelling Commissioner. 
C. J. P. Boyle, Clerk and Interpreter. 

Participators in and witnesses to the Agreement : 

Lanlatu, the tyalode x 

MoSADERiN, the Ekerin x 

Ogungbesan the Ekarun x 

Obisesan the Agbakin x 

Tanipeyi the Maye X 

Akintunde, the ^kefa x 

Salako, the Are Alasa x 

Bamgbegbin, the Areagoro x 

Enimowu, the Abese x 

Olaifa , the Asaju x 

Omqsanya, the Qtun Seriki x 

Aina Fagbemi, the Osi Seriki x 

EWEJE, the Sarumi, by his 
representative Alawo x 

Dad A Ojo, the Ekerin Seriki x (their marks). 
Signed in our presence, 

John A, Williams, Clerk to Travelling Commissioner. 
C. J. P. Boyle, Clerk and Interpreter. 

§ 4. Egba (Boundaries) 

Agreement entered into at Abeokuta between His Excellency 
Sir Gilbert Thomas Carter, Knight Commander of the Most 
Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Governor 
and Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of Lagos, and the King 
and Authorities of the Egba nation. 

Whereas it is expedient to define the boundaries between the 
Egba country and the territories bordering on, or under the British 
Protectorate of Lagos, we, the undersigned Governor of Lagos 
and the King and Authorities of the Egba Nation residing at 
Abeokuta, agree as follows, viz. : 

I. The Hne of demarcation between the two countries shall 
commence on the eastward at the town of Ori§i on the left bank 



APPENDIX A 657 

of the River Ogun, which shall be considered as falling within 
the Lagos sphere of influence ; the boundary hne shall then cross 
the river at right-angles, and take the most direct established 
road to the town of 6ta, which as at present shall be considered 
as under Egba jurisdiction. From Ota the boundary hne shall 
follow the main road leading through Ilogbo, Ilogboro and Epoto 
to Ilaro. 

2. All towns which may be actually on the said main road 
leading from Ota to the protected town of Ilaro shall be considered 
to be outside the sphere of Egba influence, but any Egbas who 
may have farms on the southern or lagoon side of the said road 
may continue in their occupation without molestation from the 
Lagos government, and similarly all Lagos subjects who may 
have farms on the north of the said boundary shall be accorded 
the same privilege by the Egba Authorities. With this proviso all 
towns to the north of the said road shall be considered as belonging 
to Egba territory, and all towns to the south shaU be liable to 
be included in the British protectorate of Lagos. 

3. The boundaries between the Ilaro kingdom and Egba must 
be determined by the position of the towns and farms held under 
the king of Ilaro, which kingdom was formerly tributary to Egba, 
but all Egbas who may have farms in the territory now known 
as the Ilaro kingdom may continue to work them as heretofore, 
any complaints upon either side being made to the TravelHng 
Commissioner for the District, through the officer in charge of 
Ilaro. 

4. It is understood that this Agreement is subject to the strict 
fulfilment of the provisions of the Treaty signed at Abeokuta on 
the i8th January, 1893, and may be subject to modification in 
the event of the position of any towns enumerated being wrongly 
placed in the Intelhgence Map of 1888 by the aid of which this 
Agreement has been drawn up. 

Signed at Abeokuta this fifth day of January, 1894. 

G. T. Carter, Governor of Lagos. 

OsnoKALU, Alake of Abeokuta x (hi*- mark) 

OsuNDARE, Onlado X 

SoRiNKE, Jaguna X 

Ogundeyi, Magaji X (their marks) 

Witnesses to Agreement : 

Alex. F. Tarbet, Capt., Private Secretary. 

E. R. BicKERSTETH, Trader. 

Wm. R. Tinney Somoye, Sec. to the ^gba Government. 



658 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

We, the undersigned, declare that we have truly and honestly, 
interpreted the terms of this Agreement to the contracting parties 
in the Yoruba language. 

C. J. P. Boyle, Governor's Clerk and Interpreter. 
E. R. BicKERSTETH, Trader. 
Witness to the signature : 
Wm. R. Tinney Somoye, Sec. to the Egba Government. 

§ 5. Abeokuta (Railway) 

Agreement made this 21st day of February, 1899, between His 
Excellency George Chardin Denton, Esq., Companion of the 
Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, 
Acting-Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of Lagos, 
for and on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain and 
Ireland, Empress of India, her heirs and successors, of the one 
part, and the Alake and Authorities of the Egba nation for and 
on behalf of themselves, their heirs and successors, and the Egba 
nation of the other part. 

Whereas the Alake and Authorities of the Egba nation, for 
and on behalf of themselves, their heirs and successors and the 
Egba nation, have granted (as they hereby acknowledge) to Her 
Majesty the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland Ein press of 
India, her heirs and successors, the right to construct, estabUsh 
and maintain a railway with the proper works and conveniences 
for the conveyance of passengers, animals and goods through and 
on the Egba territories. And whereas it is deemed expedient to 
make provision for the protection of the said railway works and 
conveniences and for the purposes hereinafter appearing. 

Now therefore the Alake and Authorities of the Egba nation, 
for and on behalf of themselves, their heirs and successors and 
the Egba nation, hereby grant to Her Majesty the Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland, Empress of India, her heirs and successors, 
for a period of ninety-nine years from the date hereof the following 
rights : — 

1. To enter upon and occupy land to a distance of 100 yards on 
both sides of the railway. 

2. To exercise upon such land all the powers for making, main- 
taining, altering, repairing and using the railway conferred upon 
the Government of Lagos by the law for the time being of the 
Colony of Lagos relating to railways. 

3. To apprehend in any part of the Egba territories and to 
try and, if found guilty, to punish any person, whether a British 
subject or not, accused or suspected of having committed upon 



APPENDIX A 659 

the land aforesaid any offence of whatsoever nature against the 
Law for the time being of the Colony of Lagos relating to railways, 
or against any regulation or bye-law made in accordance with 
such law. 

To apprehend in any part of the Egba territories and to try and, 
if found guilty, to punish : 

(a) Any British subject and any officer or servant, whether 
British subject or not, employed by the Government of Lagos 
on or in connection with the railway, accused, or suspected of 
having committed upon the land aforesaid any offence of what- 
soever nature against the person or property of any British subject 
or other person ; and 

(6) Any person other than a British subject accused or suspected 
of having committed upon the land aforesaid any offence of what- 
soever nature against the person or property of any British subject 
or any ofiicer or servant aforesaid. 

And the Alake and Authorities of the Egba nation for and on 
behalf of themselves, their heirs and successors and the Egba 
nation, hereby undertake — 

To apprehend and to deliver up to the Government of Lagos, 
and to aid and assist in apprehending, any of the persons above 
specified accused or suspected of having committed any offence 
as aforesaid. 

And His Excellency the said George Chardin Denton, for and 
on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland, 
Empress of India, her heirs and successors, in consideration of 
the rights hereinbefore granted, and the undertaking hereinbefore 
given, hereby promise — 

To pay to the Alake and Authorities of the Egba nation, their 
heirs and successors during the continuance of this Agreement, 
the annual sum of two hundred pounds by four quarterly payments, 
payable on the 25th»day of March, the 24th day of June, the 29th 
day of September, and the 25th day of December in every year, 
the first of such payments to be made on the 25th March, 1899. 

Arid it is hereby agreed that if, owing to unforeseen circum- 
stances, it shall be considered by Her Majesty the Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland, Empress of India, her heirs and successors, 
that the provisions of this Agreement or any of them, require 
alteration, amendment or revocation. Her Majesty, her heirs and 
successors shall be entitled by giving three months' previous 
notice in writing to the Alake and Authorities of the Egba nation, 
their heirs and successors, to determine the Agreement at any 
itme, and negotiations shall thereupon be entered into for the 
purpose of making a new Agreement in lieu thereof. 



660 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

In witness whereof the said parties have set their hands and 
seals the day and year first above written. 

(Signed) George C. Denton, (L.S.), Acting Governor, 
Gbadebo, a lake X 

Adepagba, Olowu X 

Olubumi, Agura X 

SuLE, Mohammedan Chief X 
Ali Delokun, Balogun x 

Ali Ijeun, Seriki x 

Idowu, Apena tporo x 

C SoRUNTUN, Head Parakoyi x (their mark). 

Signed and sealed at Abeokuta by the said Alake and Authorities 
of the Sgba nation in the presence of : 

(Sgd.) Frank Rohrweger. 
George Anderson. 
D. O. Williams. 

I do hereby certify that I have truly and honestly interpreted 
and explained in the Yoruba language the terms of the foregoing 
Agreement to the Alake and authorities of the Egba nation. 

(Signed) Wm. Alfred Allen. 
Signed by the said W. A. Allen in the presence of 

Ladapo Ademola. 

§ 6. Ibadan (Railway) 

This Indenture, made the 14th day of December, 1900, between 
His Excellency Sir George Chardin Denton, Knight Commander 
of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, 
Lieutenant-Governor of the Colony of Lagos, for and on behalf 
of Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland, Empress 
of India, her heirs and successors of the one part, and theBasorun 
and Authorities of Ibadan for and on behalf of themselves, their 
heirs and successors, and the people of Ibadan of the other part. 

Whereas by an Agreement made at Ibadan on the 15th day of 
August, 1893, between His Excellency George Chardin Denton, 
Esq., Companion of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael 
and Saint George, Acting-Governor and Commander-in-Chief of 
the Colony of Lagos, for and on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen of 
Great Britain and Ireland, Empress of India, her heirs and 
successors, of the one part, and the Bale and Authorities of Ibadan 
for and on behalf of themselves and the people of Ibadan on the 
other part, the said Bale and Authorities agreed among other 
things to provide land for the construction and maintenance of a 



APPENDIX A 66 1 

railway through Ibadan territory. And whereas the said railway 
is in course of construction through the said territory, and it is 
deemed expedient to make provision for the protection of the 
said railway works and conveniences and for the purposes herein- 
after mentioned. 

And whereas the Basorun and Authorities of Ibadan for and 
on behalf of themselves, their heirs and successors and the people 
of Ibadan, have agreed to grant, subject to the conditions herein- 
after mentioned, to Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain and 
Ireland, Empress of India, her heirs and successors, for a period of 
ninety-nine years, certain lands hereinafter described. 

Now this INDENTURE WITNESSETH that, in consideration 
of the above premises, they, the said Basorun and Authorities of 
Ibadan do hereby grant to Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britciin 
and Ireland, Empress of India, her heirs and successors, all the land 
to a distance of lOO yards on both sides .of the said railway and 
have also agreed to grant for a like period to Her Majesty the 
Queen of Great Britain and Ireland, Empress of India, her heirs 
and successors, all that piece of land near the Iddo Gate at Ibadan 
which, as to its position, dimensions, and boundaries, is particularly 
shown in the plan hereto attached, marked A, and coloured red 
thereon, and have also agreed to grant for a like period to Her 
Majesty the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland, Empress of 
India, her heirs and successors, all that piece of land on the right 
bank of the River Ogun at Olokemeji which, as to its position, 
dimensions, and boimdaries, is particularly shown in the plan 
hereto attached, marked B, and thereon coloured red. To the 
use of the said Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland 
Empress of India, her heirs and successors, for a period of ninety- 
nine years from the date hereof, and the said Basorun and Authori- 
ties of Ibadan do hereby agree that the said Her Majesty the 
Queen of Great Britain and Ireland, Empress of India, her heirs 
and successors, shall have and exercise the following rights : — 

(i) To enter upon and occupy and use the said land in any 
manner and for any purpose that may seem desirable to the said 
Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland, Empress of 
India, her heirs and successors. 

(2) To exercise upon such lands all the power for making, main- 
taining, altering, repairing, and using the railway conferred on 
the Government of Lagos by the law for the time being of the 
Colony of Lagos relating to Railways. 

(3) To apprehend in any part of the Ibadan territories and to 
try and, if found guilty, to punish any person whether a British 
subject or not, accused or suspected of having committed upon 



662 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

the land aforesaid any offence of whatsoever nature against the 
law for the time being of the Colony of Lagos relating to railways, 
or against any regulation or bye-law made in accordance with 
such law. 

(4) To apprehend in any part of the Ibadan territories, and to 
try, and, if found guilty, to punish — 

(a) Any British subject and any officer or servant, whether 
British subject or not, employed by the Government of Lagos, 
accused or suspected of having committed upon the land afore- 
said any offence of whatsoever nature against the law for the 
time being of the Colony of Lagos ; and 

(b) Any person other than a British subject accused or 
suspected of having committed upon the land aforesaid any 
offence of whatsoever nature against the person or property of 
any British subject, or subject of a civiUsed power, or any officer 
or servant aforesaid. 

And the Basorun and Authorities of Ibadan, for and on behalf 
of themselves, their heirs and successors and the Ibadan people 
hereby undertake — 

To apprehend and to deUver up to the Government of Lagos, 
and to aid and assist in apprehending any of the persons above 
specified accused or suspected of having committed ahy offence 
as aforesaid. 

And His Excellency the said George Chardin Denton, for and 
on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland, 
Empress of India, her heirs and successors, in consideration of the 
rights hereinbefore granted and the undertaking hereinbefore 
given, hereby promise — 

To pay to the Basorun and Authorities of Ibadan, their heirs 
and successors, during the continuance of this Agreement, the 
annual sum of twenty pounds by four quarterly payments, payable 
on the 25th day of March, the 24th day of June, the 29th day of 
September, and the 25th day of December in every year, the first 
of such payments to be made on the 25th day of December, 1900. 

And it is hereby agreed that if owing to unforeseen circum- 
stances, it shall be considered by Her Majesty the Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland, Empress of India, her heirs and successors, 
that the provisions of this Agreement or any of them require 
alteration, amendment, or revocation, Her Majesty, her heirs and 
successors shall be entitled, by giving three months' previous notice 
in writing to the Basorun and Authorities of Ibadan, their heirs 
and successors, to determine the Agreement at any time, and 
negotiations shall thereupon be entered into for the purpose of 
making a new Agreement in lieu thereof. 



APPENDIX A 663 

In witness whereof the said parties have hereunto set their 
hands and seals the day and year first above written. 

(Signed) George C. Denton (L.S.), Lieut.-Governor. 

Fajinma, Basgrun of Ibadan X 

Ogundbesan, Osi Ba§orun X 

Dada, Ekerin Basorun X 

Olaifa, Maye Basorun X 

Sumonu, Otun Balogun X 

Bamgbegbin, Osi Balogun X 

Shitu, Asipa X 

Suberu, Ekerin Balogun X (their marks). 

Signed in the presence of 

(Signed) F. C. Fuller, President, Ibadan. 

C. E. Johnstone, Private Secretary. 

I, the undersigned, do swear that I have truly and honestly 
interpreted the terms of the foregoing Agreement to the contracting 
parties in the Yoruba language. 

(Signed) Henry Libert, Clerk and Interpreter. 
C. A. Sodipe, Clerk and Interpreter, Witness to signature. 

§ 7. IjESA 

Enactment for the Abolition of Human Sacrifices in the 
IjESA Countries 

Whereas the practice of immolating human beings is cruel, 
barbarous, futile and unjust in the eyes of all civihsed nations 
and right-minded persons ; and whereas the said practice has fallen 
into disuse amongst the Ijesas, and the present time appears 
opportune for its total abolition in the Ijesa country ; and whereas 
the Ijesas are under a deep and lasting obhgation to His Excellency 
the Governor of Lagos for having established peace between them 
and their late enemies, the Ibadans, and for having thereby secured 
the independence of the Ijesa country ; and whereas His Excellency 
the Governor of Lagos desires no other proof of gratitude of the 
Ijesas for what he has done for them than that they should aboHsh 
the abominable practice ; and whereas the Ijesas have resolved 
to abohsh the said practice accordingly : Now, therefore, we the 
undersigned, as representing the Ijesa nation, do hereby enact, 
ordain, and declare as follows, viz. : — 

I. The practice of immolating human beings, whether at the 
festival of any deity or before, at, or after the funeral of any 
king or subject, or on any other pubUc or private occasion, shall 
be and hereby is aboHshed for ever. 



664 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

2. It shall be and is hereby constituted a criminal offence for 
any one in the kingdom of Ijesa or for any subject of the Ijesa 
king to perform or participate in, or to aid and abet others in 
performing or participating in any human sacrifice. 

3. Every such criminal offence shall be punished by the infliction 
of a heavy fine, imprisonment, or forced labour. 

4. No person condemned to death for a crime punishable with 
death under the laws of the Ijesa country shall be utiHsed for 
the purpose of sacrifice. 

Given under our hands and seals this 29th day of September, 1886. 

Agunloye, Owa of llesa x 

Ogedemgbe, Seriki of Ijesa X (their marks). 

Signed and sealed in our presence after the contents had been 
read and interpreted to the signatories by the Rev. Charles Phillips. 



H. HiGGINS 1 cj. • 7 ^ 

Oliver Smith S Speaal Comtmsstoners. 



§ 8. Ekiti 

Enactment for the Abolition of Human Sacrifices in the 
Ekiti Countries 

Whereas the practice of immolating human beings is cruel, 
barbarous, futile and unjust in the e57es of all civilised nations 
and right-minded persons, and whereas the said practice has 
fallen into disuse in the Ekiti coimtries, and the present time appears 
opportune for its total aboUtion in those countries ; and whereas 
the Ekitis are under a deep and lasting obligation to His Excellency 
the Governor of Lagos for having estabUshed peace between them 
and their late enemies the Ibadans, and for having thereby secured 
the independence of the said Ekiti countries ; and whereas His 
Excellency the Governor of Lagos desires no other proof of the 
gratitude of the Ekitis for what he has done for them than that 
they should abohsh the said abominable practice ; and whereas 
the Ekitis have resolved to abohsh the said practice accordingly : 
Now therefore we, the undersigned, representing all the Eldti 
kings and countries, and being duly authorised to speak in their 
name, and on their behalf, do hereby enact, ordain, and declare 
as follows, viz. : — 

1. The practice of immolating human beings, whether at the 
festival of any deity, or before, at, or after the funeral of any 
king or subject or on any other public or private occasion, shall be 
and hereby is abohshed for ever. 

2. It shall be and hereby is constituted a criminal offence for 






J- special Commissioners. 



APPENDIX A 665 

anyone in any Ekiti country, or for any subject of any Ekiti king 
to perform or participate in or to aid or abet others in performing 
or participating in any human sacrifice. 

3. Every such criminal offence shall be punished by the infliction 
of a heavy fine, imprisonment, or forced labour. 

4. No person condemned to death for a crime shall be utiUsed 
for the purpose of human sacrifice. 

Given under our hands and seals this 29th day of September, 1886. 

Okinbaloye, Owore of Qtun x 

Oyiyosoje, Ajero of Ijero X 

Odundun, Olojudo of Ido X (their marks). 

I guarantee the enactment of the above-written promise. 

Ogedemgbe, Seriki of Ijesa x (his mark). 
Signed and sealed in our presence after the contents had been 
read and interpreted to the signatories by the Rev. Charles Phillips. 

H. HiGGINS 

Oliver Smith 

§9. Ife 
Abolition of the Custom of Human Sacrifice by the Council 

OF Ife 
Whereas the practice of immolating human beings is cruel, 
barbarous, futile and unjust ; and whereas His Excellency the 
Governor of Lagos, to whom the Ife nation is greatly indebted 
for having magnanimously mediated between them and their 
enemies, will be pleased to hear that the Ife nation has abohshed 
the said detestable practice ; and whereas the Council of Ife has 
already undertaken through its representatives at Kiriji to aboUsh 
the said abominable practice : Now therefore we, the undersigned 
members of the Council of Ife, hereby declare and promise that 
the practice of immolating human beings is and henceforth for 
ever shall remain abolished in the Ife country. 

In witness whereof we have hereunto affixed our hands and 
seals on the date hereunder written opposite our names. 

AwoTUNDE, Olalufe of Ife x Nov. 2nd, 1886. 

Oramuiyon, Ohaji of Ife x 

Awonrile, Orisamile of Ife X „ „ 

Tojo, Asoje of Ife x „ „ 

(their marks). 
Signed and sealed in our presence, after the contents had been 
read and interpreted to the signatories by the Rev. Chas. Phillips. 

H. HiGGINS \ o^ ■ 1 n 

Oliver Smith I ^^^"«^ Commissioners. 



666 the history of the yorubas 

§10. France 

Arrangement concerning the delimitation of the English and 
French possessions on the West Coast of Africa. Signed at 
Paris, August loth, 1889. (Annex B.) 

The undersigned, selected by the Government of Her Majesty 
the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland and by the Government 
of the French Republic for the purpose of preparing a general 
understanding with a view to settle all the questions at issue, 
between England and France, with regard to their respective 
possessions on the West Coast of Africa, have agreed on the 
following provisions : — 



Article IV 

Sect. I. On the slave coast the line of demarcation between 
the spheres of influence of the two powers shall be identical with 
the meridian which intersects the territory of Porto Novo at the 
Ajara Creek, leaving Ipokia to the Enghsh Colony of Lagos. 
It shall follow the above-mentioned meridian as far as the ninth 
degree of north latitude, where it shall stop. To the south it 
shall terminate on the seashore after having passed through the 
territory of Appah, the capital of which shall continue to belong 
to England. 

The navigation of the Ajara and of the River Ado shall be free 
and open to the inhabitants and boats of both protectorates. 

Sect. 2. French traders shall be guaranteed full liberty of trade 
with such districts as shall not be included in the French sphere 
of influence, and especially as regards the Egbas. 

English traders shall likewise be guaranteed full liberty of trade 
with such districts as shall not be included in the English sphere 
of influence. 

Sect. 3. Guarantees shall also be given in favour of the in- 
habitants of Ketonu and of the French portion of the territory of 
Appah. These inhabitants shall be free to leave the country 
should they so desire, and those who remain shall be protected 
by the French authorities against any act of aggression on their 
person, their position, or their property, on the part of the king 
of Porto Novo or of his people. 

Similar guarantees shall be given in favour of the inhabitants 
of the territory of Ipokia. 

Sect. 4. It is furthermore agreed that (i) the English Government 
shall have full liberty of political action to the east of the frontier 



APPENDIX A 667 

line ; and that (ii) the French Government shall have full liberty 
of political action to the west of the frontier line. 

Sect. 5. In consequence of the understanding defined as above, 
and with a view to obviate any conflict to which the daily relations 
of the inhabitants of the Porto Novo country with those of Ipokia 
might give rise if a Custom-house were to be established by one 
or other of the contracting parties on the Ajara Creek, the English 
and French Delegates agree in recommending to their respective 
Governments the neutralization, from a Customs point of view, of 
that portion of the territory of Ipokia, which is comprised 
between the Ajara Creek and the Ado until such time as a 
definitive Customs Agreement can be arrived at between the 
French establishments of Porto Novo and the Colony of Lagos 

Article V 

The two Governments reserve to themselves the right of nomin- 
ating Special Commissioners of Delimitation to trace upon the 
spot, wherever they may consider it necessary, the line of demarc- 
ation between the English and French possessions in conformity 
with the general provisions which are set forth above. 

In witness thereof the undersigned delegates have drawn up 
and signed the present Agreement, subject to the approval of 
their respective Governments. 

Done at Paris in duphcate the loth day of August, 1889. 

(Signed) Edwin H. Egerton. 

Augustus W. L. Hemming. 

A. NiSARD. 

Jean Bayol. 



§ II. Porto Novo 

Sect. I. " The meridian which intersects the territory of Porto 
Novo at the Ajara Creek " shall be taken to mean — 

1. (To the north of the Porto Novo lagoon) the middle of the 
stream of the Ajara River to the point where the said riverceases 
to separate the kingdom of Porto Novo from that of Ipokia and 
from thence the meridian thereof as far as the ninth parallel of 
north latitude. 

2. (To the south of the Porto Novo lagoon) the meridian of 
the middle of the Ajara River, where it flows into the Porto Novo 
lagoon. 

3. The frontier Une has been based in this Convention upon the 



668 THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 

Sketch Survey of the Inland Water Communication in the Colony 
of Lagos by Harbour Master Speeding, 1886. 

§ 12. Proclamation of 13TH August, 1891 

By His Excellency George Chardin Denton, Esq., C.M.G., Acting 
Governor of Lagos, etc., etc. 

George C. Denton, (L.S.), Acting Governor. 

Whereas Her Majesty has been advised that it is for the best 
interests of the people of the Colony and protectorate of Lagos, 
and also of the people of the kingdom of Ilaro that the said kingdom 
should be transferred to the Government of Her Majesty and that 
Her Majesty should assume the Protectorate thereof : 

And whereas the King, Chiefs, Elders, and people of the kingdom 
of Ilaro have expressed their desire that the said kingdom should 
be so transferred and that Her Majesty should assume the Protec- 
torate thereof : 

And whereas it is Her Majesty's pleasure that the kingdom of 
Ilaro be attached to the Colony of Lagos and form part of the 
protectorate thereof : 

Now therefore I, George Chardin Denton, Esquire, Companion 
of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint 
George, Acting Governor of the Colony of Lagos, do publish, 
make known and proclaim as follows : — 

1. The kingdom of Ilaro is now under the Sovereignty and 

protection of Her Majesty. 

2. The kingdom of Ilaro is attached to the Colony of Lagos and 

forms part of the Protectorate thereof. 

Given under my hand and the Great Seal of the Colony of 
Lagos this thirteenth day of August in the year of our Lord one 
thousand eight hundred and ninety one. 

A. F. Tarbet, Acting Asst. Colonial Secretary. 



APPENDIX B 



§ I. YoRUBA Kings, Ba§oruns, and Notable Events. 



Kings. 

1. Oduduwa 

2. Oranyan 

3. Ajaka 

4. Sango 

5. Ajaka 

6. Aganju 
Regent lyayun 

7. Kori 

8. Oluaso 

9. Onigbogi 

10. Ofiran 

11. Eguoju 

12. Qrompgto 

13. Ajiboyede 

14. Abipa 

15. Obalokun 

16. Ajagbo 

17. Odarawu 

18. Kanran 

19. Jayin 

Interregnum 

20. Ayibi 

21. Osiyago 

22. Ojigi 

23. Gberu 

24. Amuniwaiye 

25. Onisi'le 

26. Labisi 

27. Awonbioju 

28. Agboluaje 

29. Majeogbe 

30. Abiodun 

31. Aole 
32 Ade"b5 
33. Maku 

Interregnum 



BasQruns. 
Olorun-fun-mi 
Ef iifu ko-fe-ori 
Erindinlogun-Agbou 
Salg ku odi 

» > 

Banija 

Eran-k6-gbina 

E§ugbiri-elu 

Aiyagbaro 

Sokia 

Obalohun 

Asamu 

Ibate 

99 

Iba Magaji 
Akidayin 

Woruda 
Iba-Biri 



Olu aja and Yabi 

Apala 

Yamba 

Jainbu 

Kogbou and Kokiki 

Soyiki alias Esuogbo 

Gahk 



Gahk 

Gdha and Kangidi 
Asamu alias 
Agbakolekcin 



669 



Events. 
Capital — He Ife 
Ancient Oyo built 



Ed§ and 0§ogbo built 



Said built by this King 
Igboho built 

The Bebe celebrated 
Oyo rebuilt 
Salt introduced 



The first Awujale of 
Ijebu appointed 



Circumnavigation of the 
Niger and the Lagoon 



The Bebg celebrated 



670 



THE HISTORY OF THE YORUBAS 





Kings 


Basgruns. 


Events. 


34- 


Majotu 


Ojo and Akioso 


Seizure of Ilorin by the 
Fulanis 


35- 


Amodo 


>> >> 


I' I j aye and Modakeke 


36. 


Oluewu 


M 


\ occupied. Ibadan and 
\ Abeokuta founded. 




Interregnum 




Fall of Ancient Oyg 


■^1- 


Atiba 


Oluyole and Gbenla 


Ago became Oyo of the 
present day. Bebe 
celebrated 


38- 


Adelu 


Gbenla and Ogunsoro 




39- 


Adeyemi 


Ogunsoro,Iye,Layode 





§ 2. Ibadan Chief Rulers and their Baloguns from its 

Occupation to the beginning of the British 

Protectorate. 





I. Ibadan as a MiUtary Camp. 


Maye 


Generalissimo 


Labosinde Baba Isale 


Lakanle 


Leader of the Oyos 




2. Transition Stage. 


Oluyedun Kakanfo (honorary) 


Lakanle 


Otun Kakanfo 


Oluyole 


Osi Kakanfo 




3. As a Settlement. 


Rulers. 


Titles. Baloguns'. 


Oluyole 


Basorun 


Oderinlg 


Opeagbe 


Bale 


vacant 


1855 Olugbode 


,, 


Ibikunle 


1866 Ogunmola 


Basorun 


Akere 


1870 Orowusi 


Bale 


Ajgbo 


1872 Latosisa 


Kakanfo 


Aja5d Ogboriefgu 


vacant 




Osungbekun 


1892 Fijabi 


Bale 


Akintgla 



§ 3. The Leading Chiefs of Abeokuta from its Foundation 
TO the Beginning of the British Protectorate 

Sodeke, Leader of the Egbas to Abeokuta 

ApatiS Balogun of Kemta jHis associates in the Govern- 
Agbunrin, Balogun of Ilugun i ment. 

^ Apati bought the title of Basgrun from Oluygle of Ibadan 
but never lived to enjoy it. It passed on to Somoye. 



APPENDIX B 



671 



Okukenu, alias Sagbua, King 

Ogunbona, Balogun of Ikija ' 
Sokenu, Balogun of Ijeun Associates who 

Anoba, Balogun of Ika helped to rule 

Somoye, Balogun of Iporo, the town, 

afterwards Basorun J 

., . ... -3. /Ogundipe, Balogun of Ikija 

Ademola, Alake or Pnmus ^^^^^^^ ^^ ^^ ^^^^^ 

Oyekan. ^ „ „ jsolanke, Jaguna of Igbein 

01uwa]in „ „ VOgundeyi, Balogun of Iporo 

The Quadrumvirate who actually ruled. 
Osokalu, Alake or Primus Ogundeyi* 

Other distinguished Baloguns more or less independent each in 
his own township. 
Ege of Oko Obirinti of Ijaye Kukudi 

Agbadu of Ijemo Ajagunjeun of Itoko 

Atambala of Ikereku Ogunsgla of Ijeja 

Anoba of Ika Olumloye of Ilugun 

§ 4. The Emirs of Ilorin. 

AUmi the Fulani priest of Afonja who headed the mutiny of 
the Jamas and murdered their lord paved the way for his eldest 
son to become the first king or Emir of Ilorin under the Sultan 
of Sokoto. 

At his death he left four sons, the succession in the Emirate 
being confined to the descendants of the first two. 



Ahmi 


the 
I 


Priest 




1 
I. Abudusalami 

1 






1 

2 Shitta 
1 


1 
3. Suberu 
1 






1 
4. Alihu 
1 


1 
5. Abudusalami II 






1 
6. Sule 



^ Oluwajin was a wealthy Itoku man who bought the title of 
Alake. 

2 Ogundeyi having out-Uved his rivals assumed the title of 
Basorun (being nephew to Somoye) and ruled the town singly, the 
Alake being only a figure head. 



INDEX 



Akye, 294 
Abaja, 106 
Abaka war, 301 
Abata, 44 
Abayomi, 366, 371 
Abebi, 85 
Abem6, 269, 271 
Abeokuta, 643 ; under 

protectorate, 643 ; 

Treaty with, 651 ; 

Railway agreement, 

658 ; Leading 

Chiefs of, 670 
Abese, 527 
Ab'eweila, 521 
Abiba, 81 
Abidogun, 223 
Abiku, 83 
Abinusawa, 441 
Abinuwogbo, 248 
ABIODUN, 81 ; 

KING, 18 
Abiona, 81 
Abiose, 81 
ABIPA, 164 
Abiso, 79, 81 
Abitibiti, 152 
Abitiko, 223, 244 
Abogunrin, 351 
Ab'orisade, 307 
Ab'obaku, 56 
Ab'orerin, 237 
Abgs§de, 222 
Abu, 331 
Abudu, 298 
Abudu Salami, 203 
Accents, xxix 
Adk, 529, 543 
Adkha, 53, 73 
Adahunse, 121 



Adamu, 609 
Adamu Orisa, 31 
Adebawonpe, 456 
Adebisi, 82 
Adebiyi, 82 
ADEBO, 193 
Adedeji, 318 
Adefiimi, 276 
ADEGOLU, 182; 

Bale, 183 
Adegun, 193 ; Onikoyi 

206, 218 
Adegbite, 82 
Adegboye, 565 
Adejumg, 544 
Adekambi, 234, 238 
Adekidero, 277 
Adekoya, 570 
Adekunle, 230 
Adelakun, 223, 244, 

346 
ADELU, 331, 396 
Adepeju, 82 
Adepo, 357 
Adepoju, 82 ; of 

Modakeke, 476, 507 
Aderibigbe, 425 
Aderinko, 276 
Adesina, 187 
Adeta, 75 
Adewusi, 212 
Adeyala, 423, 428 
ADEYEMI, 402 
Adio, 612 
Adjectives, xxxviii 
Ado war, 390 
Adosu Sango, 64 
Adoya Okorigi, 322 
Adu, 516 
Adunbieye, 207 

673 



Aduni, 266 
Afehinti, 249 
Afin of Ketu, 455 
Afonja, 75, 83, 189, 

197, 199 
African Jews, loi 
Aga Oyinbo, 170 
Ag2danrangban, 268 
Agadansi, 112 
Agan, 86, 138 
Agana Erin, 168 
Aganga Adoja, 309 
AGANJU, 155 
Agedemgbe, 206 
Agidi, 304 
Agidiako, 518 
Agidikokgku, 270 
Ago Ijaye, 352 
Agunpopo, 56, 68, 187 
Agbada, iii 
Agba ikolekan, 192 
Agbaje, 488 
Agbakin, 70, 544, 631 
Agbajnaja war, 284 
Agbe, 86 
Agbeni, 223, 247 
Agberi, 181 
Agbo, 86 
Agbo-ile, 98 
AGBOLUAJE. 178 
Agbomopa, 230 
Agbgniregun, 4 
Agbgnrin, 198 
Aijenku, 293, 367, 410 
Aileso, 280 
Ailumg, 259 
Aina, 81 

Aina abutusogun, 204 
Aiyede, 403 
Aiyetoro, 455 



674 



INDEX 



Ajabe, 234 
Ajadi, 272 
Ajagunjeun, 414 
Ajagusi, 86 
Ajagbe. 85 
AJAGBO, 168, 217 
Ajagbusi, 37 
AJAKA, 152 
Ajaka, Oyo 11 
Ajako, 479 
Ajamu, 85 
Ajanaku, 277 
Ajani, 85 
Ajanlapa, 163 
Ajanpada, 23 
Ajapa, 473 
Ajaruwa, 527 
Ajayi, 81 
Ajayi Jegede, 310 
Ajayi Ogboriefon, 349, 
383, 428, death of, 

Ajayi Osungbekun, 
501, Balogun, 504 

Aje, 159 

Ajere, 159 

Ajero, 23, 527 

Ajebaba, 217 

Ajerun, 234 

Ajibade, 342 

Ajiboso, 224 

AjmOYEDE, 162 

Ajikobi, 288, 518 

Ajise, 249 

Ajiya, 134; hunter, 
450 ; of Ilorin, 
434 ; Abayomi, 343 

Ajombadi, 507 

Ajgbo. 323, 366, 383 

Ajofa, 183 

Ajose (Johnson), 569 

Ajuan, 83 ; alias 
Ajaka, 148 

Akala, 183 

Akanbi, 85 

Akande, 85 

Akanke, 85 

Akara kuru, 132 



AkSwo, 304 
Akere, 249 ; Asipa, 

S;^ ; native officer 

619 
Akeredolu, 380, 390, 

391 
Akese, 234 
Akeyg, 150, 189 
Akibgto, 207 
Akidan, 169 
Akilapa, 270 
Akingbade, 476 
Akingbehin, 332 
Akiniku, 70 
Akinjobi, 209 
Akinlabi, 291 
Akinlamu, 527 
Akinliyi, 291 
Akinmoyero, 230 
Akintaro, 438 
Akigla, 292 
Akintgla, 419, 432, 

445." 478. 636 
Akinyele, 82 
Akinyele F.L., 617 
Akinyeni, 210 
Akiosa, 259 
Akirun, 76 
Akisa tan, 84 
Akisgwgn, 293 
Akitonde, 467 
Akodudu, 485 
Akghun, 166 
Akoko, 138 
Akgpe, 334 
Akuji, 84 
Akunyim, 85 
Akunyungba, 65 
Alaba, 80 
Alabi, 85 
Aladafa, 160 
Alade, 85 ; Abinu- 

pagun, 284 
Alado, 159 
ALAFIN. 41 
Alagba, 29, 138 
Alagbin, 200 
Alagbgna, 155 



Alahari, 124 
Alake the first, 17 
Alake, 85 
Alakoro, y^ 
Alanamu, 309 
Alapinni, 70 
Alara, 23 
Alasia, 76 
Alawe, 119 
Alawo, 85, 456 
Alaye, 23 
Alaygayg, 396 
Alebiosu, 601 
Alega. 397 
Alegbata, 165 
Alelg, 298 

Alesinlgye Jacob, 614 
Ali Balogun of Ilgrin, 

285 ; of Iwo, 311 ; 

native officer, 619 ; 

Laluwoye, 366, 383, 

387 
Alihu, 437, 516; 

death of, 609 
Alimi, 193 
Alobitiko, 72 
Alodeloko, 207 
Aludundun, 58 
Alukoso, 58 
Amazon, 313 
Amepo, 75 
AMODO, 217 
Amoibo, 223 
Amgke, 85 
Amgdu, 269, 283 
Amugbalegbe, 273 
AMUNIWAIYE, 175 
Amutgrunwa, 79 
Ana, 114 
Anasara, 516 
Anoba, 337 
AOLE, 188 
Apala, 174 
Apara, 84, 492 
Apata Ika, 336 ; 

Jabata, 332 ; Maba, 

332 ; Odaju, 189 
Apati, 225 



INDEX 



675 



Apelidiagba, 483, 527, 

531 
Apena, 78 ; of Ijebu, 
484 ; of Lagos, 482, 

483 
Apesi, 78 
Apinke, 85 
Apinti, 121 
Apomu, 188 
Ara (war), 317 
Arakanga (war), 251 
Arapate, 22 
Arawole, 346 
Arebajo, 23 
Are (Kurumi), 350 
Are agoro, 134 
Aregbe, 223, 239 
Aremo, 47 
Aremu, 183, 456 
Areorite, 56, 64 
Aresa, 76, 152 
Arinde, 527, 531 
Arinjale, 23 
Arisanre, 527 
Armadillo, 45 
Aro, 77, 78, 121 
Arogangan, 188 
Arole oba, 68 
Arole fya Oba, 68 
Arokin, 58, 125 
Arowosanle, 223 
Arugba ifa, 158 
Aruna, 272 
Asa (or Oroye), 80 
Asalu, 78 
Asara, 3 
Aseyin, 76 ; at Ibadan, 

367 
Asabi, 85 
Asaju. 132 ; of Derin, 

460, 476 
Asamu, 162, 192 
Asawo, 154 
Asegbe, 202, 212 
Asipa, 78, 133, 379, 

551 
Asirawo, 230 
Asiso, 74 



Astrope,49i 
Asu, 298 
Ata, 23, 544 
Atagboin, 152 
Atando, 219 
Atawoja, 76, 156 
Atere, 527, 531 
ATIBA, 57, 218, 274, 

328 
Atingisi, 68, 187 
Atipo, 292 
Atonement, 363 
Aturu, 417, 433, 478 
Awaye, 346, 355 
Awero, 85 
AWONBIOJU, 178 
Awonimesin, 527 
Awujale, 20, 75, 172 
Ayangbagi, 159 
Ayawo, 250 
Aye, 121 
AYIBI, 172 
Ayibiowu, 369 
Ayikiti, 421, 423 
Ayimoro, 428, 477 
Ayo, 238, 269 
Ayo dele, 82 
Ayope, 204 
Ayorinde, 321 



Babajegbe Osan and 

Oru, 150 
Babakewu, 164 
Babalola, 283, 431, 

443. 567. 637 
Babari, 504 
Babarimisa, 81 
Babatunde, 81 
Babayanmi, 152 
Babayigi, 164 
Bada, 134 
Bada Agidi, 613 
Baki, 78 
Bala, 78 
Baleile, 98 
Bale, 90 
Balogun, 132 



Bambe, 553 
Bamgbaiye, 211, 267 
Bamgbegbin, 47 
Banija, 155 
Banjoko, 84 
Banking, 130 
Bankole, 223 
Bante, 100 
Baptism, 79 
Bara, 43 
Barbers, 123 
Baribas, 159 
Basala, 78 
Bata, 121 
Bayinbo, 78 
Bayley, Capt. F. M., 

619 
Beecroft Consul, 313 
Beer brewing, 124 
Beiram, Feast of, 496 
Belewu, 526, 531 
Belo Sultan, 5 ; of 

Osundina, 461 
Betrothal, 113 
Bebe. 71, 163. 179, 

329 
Bere, 49, 98 
Bioku He, 301, 455 
Bioran, 375 
Biri, 151 
Bisa, 166 
Boiboi, 582 
Bolude, 210 
Bone setting, 123 
Bowen, Rev. J. T., 

345 
Bower, Capt. R. L., 

619, 643 
Bokofi, 413 
Bokgyg, 159 
Boni, 165 
Braima, 4 
British Government 

interference, 508 ; 

protectorate, 638 
Budo ode, 612 
Bugare, 199 
Building, 123 



676 



INDEX 



Calabashes, 117 
Campbell, Capt. 

R. E. D., 619 
Carpentry, 122 
Carter, Sir Gilbert, 

615, 626 
Carving, 122 
Character, loi 
Christening, 47, 79 
Christianity, 39 
Clapperton, 210 
Coffin, 137 
Cognomen, 85 
Cole, Samuel, 353 
Comet, 475 
Commerce, 118 
Commissioner, Special 

538 
Comparison of adjec- 
tives, xxxix 
Conjunction, xlix 
Constitutional disease, 

121 
Corn guinea and 

maize, 117 
Coronation, 43 
Cowrie, Lieut. E. L., 

619 
Cowry shells, 118 
Croft, Surgeon Capt., 

619 
Crow for cowardice, 

333 
Cupping, 123 
Currency, 118 
Cust, Dr. R. N.. 

xxiv 
Customs, Manners and 

98 

Dada, 81 ; Bale 

Adeyi, 220 
Dado, 235 
Dahomian ferocity, 

362 ; invasion of 

Abgokuta, 313 361 
Dangana, Serg.-Major, 

619 



Danikan, 582 
Dankafi, 619 
Dariagbon, 207 
Davies, Lieut. J. F., 

619 
Dawodu, 527 
Death cloth, 56, 397 
Degesin, 241 
Degoke, 223 
Dele, 283 
Delegates of Governor, 

467 
Denton, Capt. G. C, 

614 
Derin-Okian, 223 
Derin Olggbenla, 452 
Detomi, 507, 553 
Dekun, 228 
Dialogue, A, 592 
Diet, 109 
Distraining for debt, 

136 
Divbrce, 116 
Dofian, 193 
Dolbein, Lieut., 252 
Dosumu, Ex- king, 481 
Dowry, so-called, 113 
Dress, no 
Dumaresque, 

Governor, 482 
Duro-orike, 84 
Duro-sinmi, 84 
Dyeing, 124 

Ebo, 80 
Egugun, 29 
EGUGUN OJU, 161 
Egbeji, 152 
Ejigba, 45, 51 

Ejio. 453 

Ekitis, 20 ; revolt of, 

423 

Ekitiparapo, 439 ; 
under the protec- 
torate, 645 ; abo- 
lition of human 
sacrifice, 664 

Eku-Ida, 102 



Elebolo, 449 ; Camp 

of, 523 
Eleduwe, 260 
Elegbede, 527, 531 
Elekgle, 23 
Elenre, 152 
Elepo, 256, 284, 287, 

300 
Eleruwa, 76 
Elese, 86, 287 
Elewi, 23 
Elewi-Odo, 179 
Eluyare, 147 
Emure war, 394 
Epilepsy, 113 
Epo, 223, 234 
Erinle, 37 
Erinle-Sanku, 293 
Eruwon, 223 
Esawe, 22 
Esimirin, 147 
Esinkin, 'j'j 
Esu or Elegbara, 28 
Esu the Ata, 403 
Esu of lye, 308 
Esugoyi, 263 
Esugbiri, 158 
Esukogbo, 177 
Esusu, 119 
Etiponola, 34 
Eunuchs, 59 
Evans, Acting 

Governor, 538 
Extremity, Ibadan at 

its, 450 
Eyeo or Katunga, 11, 

150 

Ebo lyawo, 114 
Ede, 156 
Edun, 75 

Edun of Gbogun, 210 
Efa, III 
Efufukoferi, 14 
Efundunke, 608 
Efunlabi. 83 
Efunsetan, 83 ; lya- 
lode, 391 



INDEX 



677 



Eg§, 225 

Egbados, 226 ; libera- 
tion of, 606 

Egbalugbo, 227 

Egbaluwe, 227 

Egbas, 225 ; bound- 
aries of, 656 

Ekan, 86, 98 

Ekunkddebe, 270 

Ekun Otun and Osi, 68 

Ekuola, 228 

¥la, "147 

Elebu, 261 

Elefi, 160 

Elggodo, no 

51egbara, 159 

Elehinjare, 200 

Elerin, 86 

Elerinpo, 76 

Elerionigbajo, 155 

Elo. 86 

Emo, 45 

Eni d'Olorun, 277 

Enimowu, 521, 563, 

637 
Eni-Olufan, 274 
Eni-Oja, 65 
Eni ra, 86 
Enukunonipe, 84 
Erankogbina, 155 
Erebe, 458, 486 
Eri. 86 

Erin, 86, 202, 346 
Eru-ifa, 330 
Eruku, 73 

Erunmu, 209, 240, 242 
Esa Egure, 553 
Esan, 577, 582 
Esiel§, 73, 186, 219, 

220, 262 
Eso, 73 ; Oranyan, 73 
Eta-Oko, 80 
Eyo, 31, 106 150 

Fabumi, 83, 423, 428 

440, 506 
Facial marks, 106 
Fade, 617 



Fadeyi, 223 
Fafunke, 83 
Fagbohun, 198 
Fakeye, hostage 551 
Falade, 276 
Falola, 606 
Famifami, 121 
Fasola, 220, 262 
Fatiye, 527 
Fato^in, 83 
Fauna, xxi 
Fawe, 358 
Fayi§e, 369 
Fejeboju stream, 378 
Fijabi, 636 
Filk, 112 

Filial duties, 102 
Fisheries, 123 
Flags of truce, 515 
Flora, xxi 
Fglarin, 300 ; limbs 

smashed, 398 
Forbes, Commander, 

313 
Foster, A. F., 462 
Fulanis, 197 
Fuhuniji, 213 

Gahi, 178 
Galajumo, 277 
Gambaris, 202 
Gando, Sultan of, 480 
Gaii ma 200 
Gata Ikoko, 564, 604 
Gender, xxxvi> 
Gedegbe, 126 
Gelede, 32 
Girike, ill 
Glover, Sir J. H., 360 
Gogobiri, 4 
Gombo, 106 
Gordon, Capt. J. R. V. 

619 
Government, 40 
Green, F. CoUey, 607, 

614, 619 
Griffiths Brandford, 

Lt. -Governor, 463 



o- 



Gudugbu, 274 
Gureje, 459 

Gbagi, 185 
Gbagba, 173 
Gbajigbo, 292 
Gban^tnu, 241 
Gbandan, 165 
Gbanlare, 225, 525 
Gbe lyawo, 114 
Gbegba-aje, 525 
Gbeji, 191 
Gbeiila, 276 
GBERU, 175 
Gbewiri, 225 
Gbenagbena, 122 
Gbodo, 221 
Gbodogi, 99 
Gbogi, 215 
Gbogim, 220 
Gbogbodu, 207 
Gboingboin, T^ 
Gbonka, 73 ; Qr^ 
gbori, 162 

Haastrup Ademuyiwa, 
634; Joseph, 467 

Hairdressing, 125 

Hamilton, Arch- 
deacon, 508 

Harding, Rev. T., 570 ; 
617 

Harding, W. R., 619 . 

Hardinge, Hon. A. S.; 
619 

Hethersett, A. L., 614 

Higgins, H., 538 

Highness, Supernal, 
48 

Hinderer, Rev. D., 
316, 480 

Hinnakonu, 309 

Hunters' Camp, 450 
privilege, 376 

Hutchinson Consul, 
xix 

Hydrocele tapping, 
123 



678 



INDEX 



Iba Biri, 172 

Ibadan under protec- 
torate, 643 ; Agree- 
ment with, 854 ; 
Railway indenture, 
660 ; Chief rulers 
of, 670 

Ibalogun, 133 

Iba Magaji, 168 

Ibamu, 107 

Ibare, 200 

Ibikunle, 298, 309 

Ibiy§mi, 82 

Ibiyinka, 82 

Ibokun, 310 

Idi, 4 

Idi-ibon, 94 

Idofian, 200 

Idogbe, 80 

Idomapa, 224 

Idowu, 80 

Ifa, 32, 47 

Ife destroyed, 232, 
475 ; abolition of 
human sacrifice, 665 

Ifoin, 249 

Ige, 80 

Ige gbengberu, 186 

Igi, 32 

Igisubu, 165 

Igba, 121 

Igba Iwa, 46, 402 

Igbajo, 368, 425, 441, 

529 
Igbe Igbm, 417 
Igbekoyi, 84 
Igb6, i6r 
Igbodo, 148 
Igboho, i6i 
Igbomina, log- 
Igbo Owu, 193 
Igbo Ori, 304 
Igbos, 147 
Igbon, 200 
Igbofia, 201 
Ijana, 227, 248 
Ijaye, 236 
Ijaye Maja, 224 



Ijero, 318 
Ijebus, 206 
Ijebu Ere, 310 
Ijesas, 20 ; Arera, 168 ; 
under protectorate, 

645 ; abolition of 
human sacrifice, 663 

Iji, 86 

Ijimere, 29 

Iju Sanya, 161 

Ika, 224 

Ika Igbo, 236 ; Odan, 

235 
Ikereku, 223 ; Were, 

224 
Ike eiye, 225 
Ikija, 210, 224 
Ikire, 230 
Ikorodu war, 360 
Ikoyi Igbo, 206, 219 
Iko, 86 
Ikgle, 309 
Ikunle, 31 
Ila, Massacre of, 42 
Hare, 553 
Ilari, 60 
Ilaro, 248, 606 
Ilase, 310 
Ilayi, 161 
He Bioku, 456 
He Male, 58 
He Oluponi, 206 
He Olopa, 169 
Hero, 591 
Ileru, 120 
Ilemona, 201 
Ilgri, 81, 430 
Ilorin, after treaty, 

646 ; Emir of, 671 
Imo, 223 

Imowo, 484 
Inakoju, 225, 256, 293 
Inisa, 566 
Insanity, 113, 121 
Insurrection against 

the Are, 417 
Interjection, xlix 
Interregnum, 269 



nubi, 228 
padi, 44 
pampa, 78 
papo, 609 
para, 210 
peregun, 34 
perindo, 468 
petumodu, 230 
peru, 223, 253, 453 
poro, 223 
ra, 152 
ran, 206 
rawo, 159 
resa, 200 
resi, 529 

ron smelting, 119 
roke, 159 
rukere, 51 
se, 323 
s§de, 237 
seyin, 12, 13 
seyin Odo, 206 
soya, 232 
sovigi, 155 
sule, 213 
saga, 251, 314 
san, 295 
sihun, 113 
sokun, 229 
sona, 44 
sope, 207 
sugbin, 58 
tabo, 456 
tagi, 295 
tahakun, 206 
ta Ibidun, 159 
ta Ogbolu, 443 
ta Ologbo, 186 
ta Oniyan, 318 
tebu, 465 
tesi, 223 
toku, 223 
tori. Fort at, 450 
tgho, 250 
vory trumpet, 121 
wara, 207 
ware, 234 
wata, 207 



Iwawun, 346 
Iweme, 169 
Iwere, 191 
Iwo, 196 
Iwokoto, 224 
Iworo, 196 
Iwofa, 126 
lyajin, 187 
lyakere, 45, 62 
lya lagbon, 63 
lyalode, 'j'j 
lya mode, 43, 56, 65 
lya moneri, 56, 63 
lya naso, 56, 63 
lya Orisa nla, 64 
lya Oba, 48, 56, 63 
lya Ola, 391 
lya Olosun, 64 
lya Yemaja, 64 
lyafin eri, 64 
lyafin Iku, 63 
lyafin Osun, 64 
lyafin Orunfurhi, 64 
lyale Agbo, 65 
lyale- Mole, 56, 64 
lyale Oduduwa, 65 
lyale Ori, 56, 65 
lyapg, 82, 390, 410 
lyayun, 155 ; Regent, 
156 

Jabara war, 251 
Jabata, 198 
Jagun, 207 
Jaguna of Igbein, 457 
Jakg, 227, 251 
Jakuta, 152 
Jalepa, 49 
Jalumi war, 427 
Jama, 194 ; rapacity, 

197 
Jambu, 175 
Janagbadi, 106 
Jankalawa, 190 
Jankoro, 262 
Jayin Town, 266 
Jefferies, George, 353 
Jegede, 262 
Jekinriyin, 84, 312 



INDEX 

Jiga, 227, 251 
Jimba, 217, 287 
Johojo, 81 
Johnson, G. W., 535 

Kafilegboin, 211 
Kafo, III 
Kakaki, 121 
Kakanfo, 74 
Kalejaiye, 223 
Kanakana toll gate, 

623 
Kangidi, 187 
Kanla, 200, 218 
Kar^, 98 
KARAN, 170 
Karaole, 210 
Karara, 437, 515, 609 
Katunga, 150 
Keji, 244 
Kembe, iii 
Kende, 194 
Kester, S. D., 467 
Ketu, 453 
K^here, 338 
Keke, 106 ; Olowu, 

108 
Kehinde, 80 
Kihisi, 76 
Kijipa, 124 
King Celestial, 48 ; 

Terrestrial, 48 
Kiniun Onibudo, 335 

430, 432 
Kiriji, 448 
Kitoyi, 265 
Kobiowu, 337 
Kogbon, 176 
Kogbona, 73 
Kokoro gangan, 75, 

169 
Koloho, 400 
Kongi, 492, 637 
Kongo, 342 
KORI, 26, 155 
Koro, 318 
Kosija, 61 
Kosikosi, 224 
Koseiko, 223 



679 

Koso, 34, 44, 121, 152 
Kosoko, 84 
Koto, 234 
Kobi Aganju, 45, 49 
Kolgko, 300 
Kubusi, 232 
Kudayisi, 223 
Kudefu, 397 
Kugbayigbe, 223 
Kujenyo, 339 
Kukawa, 3 
Kukomi, 270 
Kuku, 492, 607, 622 
Kukula, 342 
Kukumo, 110 
Kumuyilo, 392 
Kupolu, 449 
Kurakura, 425, 458 
Kurumi, 75, 82, 236 
Kusi, 289 
Kusu, 160 
Kuwo, 194 

Labankada, 112 
Labirinjo, 459, 496 
LABISI,' 178 
Labosinde, 225, 245 
Labudanu, 283, 346 
Ladanu, 293 
Laderin, 199 
Ladejo, 298 
Lade j obi, 276 
Ladipo, 82 ; of He 

Bioicu, 456 
Ladojude, 321 
Ladugbo, 11 1 
Laguade, 279 
Laguna, 70, 72 
Lagunju the Timi, viii 
Lagbeja, 562 
Lagboyi, 234 
Lahan, 238, 269 
Lajide, 279 
Lajila, 78 
Lajomo, 162 
Lajubu, 291, 295 
Lajumoke, 283 
Lakanle, 244, 254 
Lakonu, 272, 276 



680 



INDEX 



Laleitan, 223 
Laleye, 308 
Lamodi, 225 
Lampejo, 299 
Lamuriir, y8 
Lamurudu, 3 
Lanase, 248 
Land laws, 95 
Lanisa, 393 
Laniyonu, 82 
Lanlate, 457 
Lanloke, 217, 259, 268 
Lapala, 248 
Lapemo, 126 
Larymore, Capt. H.D., 

619 
Lasinmi, 210 
Lasilo, 283 
Lasipa, 198 
Lateju, 287 
Latonde, 305 
Latosisa, 75, 366, 383, 

385. 500 
Latoyo, 174 
Latubgsun, 298 
Latunji, 506, 604 
Laurie, Lieut. C. E., 

619 
Law of inheritance, 

326 
Lawore, 455, 474 
Lawoyin, 383, 385 
Learning, 125 
Leasu, 415 
Lebebi, 456 
Lees, Gov. Cameron, 

482 
Lejofi, 319 
Lejoka, 22 
Leopard,. King, 290 
Leprosy, 121 
Lepsius, xxiii 
Licentiousness, 102 
Lisa of Ijebu Ode, 

540 ; Ondo, 441 
Lisibade, 393 
Locusts first seen, 301 
Lodifi, 553 
Lome, 527 



Loro, 22 
Ldk^, 165 
Losa, 276 
Lubejo, 155 
Lufianu, 190 
Lugbosun, 535, 544 

Maborisaje, 456 
MacDonald, Major, 

597 
Madarikan, 343, 357 
Madden, Major G. C., 

619 
Magaji lyajin, 44, 68 
MagQbon, 318 
Magbon, 621 
Maje, 261 
MAJEOGBE, 180 
MAJOTU, 197, 212 
MAKU, 196 
Makun, 223 
Malade, 564 
Maygmo, 84 
Mamu, 613 
Mande, 106 
Mann, Rev. Adolphus. 

345 
Manners and Customs, 

98 
Manuwa, 465 
Marriage, 113 
Mawen, 465 
Mayi 223, 494, 527. 

544 
Medicine, 121 
Meffre, Phillip Jos€, 

369. 467 
Mele, 337 
Mesin Ipole, 441 
Metempsychosis, 26 
Millson Alvan, Mission 

of, 584 

Minimi, 126 

Minors, 96 

Missionaries, Ameri- 
can, 334 

Modakeke, 230 ; 

Apology of, 525 ; 
Removal of, 647 



Mohammedanism, 38 
Moloney, Sir Alfred, 

508, 609 
Monarchy, 40 
Monjia of Rabbah, 201 
Moods and Tenses, xlv 
Morenike, 82 
Moro, 230 

Mosaderin, 418, 551 
Mosebolatan, 82 
Modade, 183 
Molaba, 183 
Mole, 48 

M6m6, Emir, 609 
Moremi, 147 
Mugba mugba war, 

201 
Music, 120 
Musical instruments, 

121 
Musicians, 120 

Names, 79 
Nasalization, xxvii 
Nasamu, 564, 604 
Nasankore, 604 
Noun, xxxvi 
Nsise Ogun, 183 
Ntetu, 183 
Ntowa, 78 
Numerals, 1 
Numismatics, li 

Obago, 73 
Obei, 152 
Obembe, 378 
Obisesan, 450 ; Ag- 

bakin, 637 
Obokun, 24 
ODARAWU, 169 
Ode, 223 
Odigbon, 73 
Odigbadigba, 384 
Odi Ibikunle, 327 
Odogido, 298 
Odo Ohk, 17 
Oduboye, tyS 
ODUDUWA, 3 
Odusajo, 527 



INDEX 



6^i 



OFIRAN, 159 
Oge, 121 
Ogedemgbe, 369, 377, 

443. 446, 460, 545 
Ogele, 195, 200, 266 
Oger^, 223 
Ogi, 230 
Ogidi, 195, 291 
Ogidigbo, 52 
Ogodo, 217, 259, 268, 

292 
Ogowere, 197 
Oguade, 223 
Ogugu, 223 
Ogugun, 208 
Ogunbona, 225, 337 
Ogundalenu, 82 
Ogundeyi, 458 
Ogundepo, 637 
Ogundeko, 527 
Ogundipe, 285, 456, 

457 
Ogungbade, 270 
Ogungbenro, 522 
Ogungbesan, 451 
Ogunkoroju, 283 
Ogunlaiye, 456 
Ogunmakin, 232, 526 
Ogunmefun, 458 
Ogunmodede, 428, 

448. 519 
Ogunmola, 82, 310, 

365. 371 
Ogunrunbi, 300 
Ogunseye, 83 
Ogunsigun, 477, 536, 

540, 607 
Ogunsua, 231, 527 
Ogboja, 83 
Ogboni, 22, 'J'] 
Ogboriefon, 428, 439 
Oje, 208 
OJIGI, 174 
Ojijiko, 74 
Ojo, 81 

Ojo Aburumaku, 75 
Ojo Agunbambaru, 

194 
Ojo Akitikori, 230, 507 



Ojo Amepo, 234 
Ojo Kofo. 366 
Ojo Kosiwon, 250 
Ojo Orona, 310 
Ojo Onikoyi, 219 
Ojomgbodu, 234, 272 
Ojo Segi, 169 
Ojo Wanwasi, 553 
Oke, 81 
Oke Bode, 585 
Oke'ho, 76 
Oke Igbo, 232, 452 
Oke Isero, 159, 252 
Okenla John, 363 
Oke Oyi, 200 
Oke Suna, 194, 200 
Okete, 250 
Okiti, 234 
Okitikan, 604 
Oko, 144 
Oko Etile, 118 
Oko Egan, 118 
Okoyan, 269 
Oku, 75, 84 
Okuseinde, 462 
Okutagbogbo, 160 
Ole, 73 

Ologbo, 125, 166 
Olojudo, 23, 527, 543 
Olokemeji, 251, 337 
Olokuesin, 56 
Ololo, 176 
Olomuwo, 23 
Oloro, 86 
Olosi, 59 
Olu, The, 226 
Oluaja, 173 
OLUASO, 158 
Olubayode, 446 
Olubi, Rev. D., 462, 

616 
Olubiyi, 82 
Olubodun, 291 
01ubu,i84 
OLUEWU, 55, 258 
Olufade, 223 
Olufan, 86 
Oluferegbe, 449 
OLUF'IRAN, 149 



Oluguna, 248, 486 
Olugbode, 307 
Olugbodi, 81 
Olugboka, 232 
Olugbon, 76 
Oluiwo, 584 
Oluke, 174 
Olukoyi, 8^ 
Olukomi, 527 
Olukoyisi, 175 
Olumgle, 276 
Oluokun, 308 
Olu Oyo, 223 
Olupona, 206 
Olupoyi, 394, 413 
Olurinde, 265 
Olurogbo, 147 
Oluroko, 209 
Olusami, 56, 187 
Olusi, 171, 222 
Oluwa, 127 
Oluwaiye, 244, 276 
Oluwa jo, 276 
Oluwo, 76 
Qluwode, 350 
Oluwgle, 240 
Oluyedun, 223, 244 
Oluyo, 553 
Oluyode, 223 
Oluyole, 223, 244, 

305" 
Omiran, 151 
Omisina, 457 
Omiyale, 83 
Omu Ijelu, 403 
Omupetu, 76 
Ondasa, 122 
Ondos, 25 
Onibiy6, 126 
Onibode, 76 
Onibudo of Dekun, 

230 
Onigusun, 86 
Onigbayi, 86 
Onigbeti, 86 
ONIGBOGI, 158 
Onigbgwo, 127 
Onikoyi, 41, 76 
Onimeri, 155 



682 



INDEX 



Onipe, 86, 612 
Onipede, 82, 275 
Onire, 23 
Onirungbgn, 565 
Onisambo, 155 
Onisare, 168 
ONISILE, 176 
Onitaji, 23 
Onitede, 155 
Onjo, 76 
Onko, 169 
Onlado, 457 
Onomatopoetic, xxxv 
Oorun, 223 
Opo, 86 
Ori, 27, 48 
Oriki, 79, 85 
Orile, 85 
Orisa, 26 
Orisa egunju, 27 
Orisa giyan, 27 
Orisa Jaye, 27 
Orisa Kire, 27 
Orisa La, 27 
Orisa lusi, 527 
Orisa Oko, 27, 37 
Orisa Oluofin, 27 
Orisa Owu, 27 
Orita Elepo, 336 
Oro, 32 

Orowusi, 310, 379, 382 
Osi Balogun, 135, 438 
Osiwefa, 46, 59 
Osiele, 363 
Oso, 225 
Osodeke, 83 
Osodipe, 83 
Osogbo, 156 
Osoro, 249 
Osu, 452 
Osu war, 293 
Osugbo, 76 
Osun, 159 
Otutu, 28, 34 
Owen, Capt. E, R., 

619 
Owiwi, 248 
Owoko, 253 
Owolabi, 306 



Owore, 23, 527 
Owota, 73 
Owu, 206 
Oyebade, 476, 507 
Oyebisi, 82 
Oyedokun, 456 
Oyeleye, 553 
Oyesile, 283 
Oyesunle, 526 
Oyewgle, 82 
Oyey§mi, 82 
Oyi, 318 
Oyo, 161 

Oba, 223 
Oba, 207 
Obabunmi, 83 
Obagunte, 65 
Obajuwon, 526, 563 
Oba-kosetan, 468, 526, 

' 531 

Oba'la, 22 
Obalaiye, 476 
OBALOKUN, 161, 

168 
Obaloran, 527 
Obalufe, 527 
Oba m'oro, 166 
Obaniilsunwa, 455 
Obasa, 527 
Obatala, 27 
Ode, 65 
Oderinde, 469 
Oderinlo, 283 
Odejayi, 556 
Odemuyiwa, 83 
Odewale, 83 
Odeyale, 423 
Odeyale hunter, 450 
Odg, 369 
Odofin, 77 
Odgle, 22, 368 
Odu abgn, 230, 476 
Odudun, 34 
Oduewu, 221 
Odunjg, 357 
Odunle, 525 
Odunmbaku, 456 
Ofa, 201, 437 



Ofara, 465 
Ofatedo, 565, 604 
Oga, 270 
Oga Ohgrg, 224 
Oganija, 223 
Ogatedo, 420, 425 
Oge, 86 
Ogede, 183 
Ogini, 223, 241 
Ogg, 86, 522, 632 
Oggtun, 312 
Ogbagi, 323 
Ogbahagbaha, 197 
Ogboinu, 277 
Qja, 218 

Qj§. 334; of He 

Bioku, 156 
Ojelabi, 346, 462 
Ojeniran, 469 
Ojghg, 224 
Okansa, 207 
Oke, 81, 553 
Oke dudu and pupa, 

507 
Okere, 75 
Okin," 86 
Okinkin, 121 
Okg-adan, 152 
Ola, 78, 637 
Olabisi, 82 
Olakotan, 184 
Olaleye, 82 
Olgba, 160 
Olofa, 76, 86, 520 
giggbin, 86 
Olghan, 160 
Olgja, 91 
Olgja Oke, 23 
Olgje, 160 
Olgmg, 165 
Olgrun, 26 
Olgrunfumi, 143 
Qlgsa, 53 
Olgwa, 541, 613 
Olgyan, 86 
Olgye, 23 
Omgigi, 21 
Omgkg, 394 
Omgle, 369 



INDEX 



683 



Omg-oba, 42, 68, 158 
Omg-onikoko, 152 
Omgninari, 42 
Omope, 81 
Omg-sanda, 152 
Omg-sun, 173 
Omotajo, 222 
Omoteji, 82 
Omoteji Gbonka, 366 
Ona-Aka, 42, 68, 158 
Ona-ile-Mole, 57 
Ona-Modeke, 58 
Ona-Onibode, 76 
Ona-Onse-Awo, 44, 57 
Ona-sokun, 42, 68, 158 
Ona-wefa, 59 
Opaga, 76 
Opa-ileke, 51 
Opa Oranyan, 146 
Opeagbe, 223, 283 
Opejin, 312 
Opele, 193 
Operinde, 449 
Opin war, 308 
Opoki, 176 
Opgn, 28, 34, 159 
Ora, 224 
Orangun, 23 
ORAHYAN. 8, 45. 

136, 143 
Org, 320 
Orogbori, 162 
ORQMPOTO, 161 
Orun, 47 
Orunkumefun, 63 
Oruntg, 73 
Osain, 76 
Osemolu, 164 
Osile, 17, 225 
QSIIsfYAGO, 173 
Osg, 208 
Osgrun, 70 
Osun, 207, 223 
Osun Ogunmgla, 383 
Osun-Sarumi, 244, 251 
Osundina, 310 
Osungbekun, 419 
Osunlalu, 223 
Osunrinde, 491 



Osuntoki, 83, 370, 426, 
' 636 

Ota, Fall of, 255 
Otan, 529 
Otefan, 262 
Otegbeye, 82 
Otelgwg, 277 
Otesile, 491 
Otun-Balogun, 133 
Otunwefa, 44, 59 
Ovva, 78, 528 
Owaju, 21 
Owara, 164, 180 
Owe, 224 
Oya, 34, 152 
Oyabi, 75, 184, 186 
Oyainu, 299 
Oyatgpe, 75 
Oyg, Bombardment of 

644 ; Treaty with, 

636 
Oyokoro, 150 
OYO MESI, 70 

Paka, 139 
Pakaba Road, 267 
Paku, 152 
Pakunde, 323 
Pakundirin, 49 
Palm oil, 124 
Pamg, 202 
Papo, 152 
Pasim, 200 
Pastoral, 123 
" Pawn," 126 
Peace proclamation, 

547 
Pele, 106 
Pehe, 215 

Phillips, Rev. C, 508 
Pigeon, 45 
Piye, 132 
Plange, H., 619 
Ploughing, 117 
Poker work, 122 
Pole war, 222 
Policy, The New, 405 
Popo, 152 
Popondo, 209 



Porto Novo frontier, 

667 
Pottery, 125 
Pgtun, 521 
Pratt, Adolphus, 618 
Preposition, xlviii 
Proclamation, 668 
Profession, 117 
Pronoun, xl 
Protectorate, British, 

393 

Reform, Social, 324 
Refu refu, 228 
Religion, 26 
Roads, 93 
Robbin, Henry, 481 
Rogun, 346 
Rope makers, 123 
Roper, Edward, 352 
Roti, 435 

Rowe, Sir SamL, 469 
Rowland, Dr. J. W., 
614 

Saba, 527 
Sabigana, 76, 168 
Sadge, 73, 186 
Sagaun, 303 
Sagbedg, 73 
Sagbua, 73 
Sahibu, 4 
Saki, 160 
Sakula, 209 
Salakg, 81, 234, 564 
Salekuodi, 152, 154 
Saloro, 22 
Salosi, 22 

Salt introduced, 168 
Sam ay an, 124 
Samu, 70 
SANGO, 34, 149 
Sangobumi, 83 
Sani, 121 
Sanusi, 444, 478, 492, 

629 
Saraha, 117 
Sarumi, 132 
Sasegbgn, Moses, 613 



684 



INDEX 



Scott, Col. F. C, 619 
Seamanship, 122 
See, 333 
Sege, 98 
Sekere, 121 
Sele, 152 
Sepeteri, 265 
Sequel, 643 
Sequels of Ijaye war, 

355 

Seriki, 133 

Service 'man, 126 ; 
woman, 126 

Setilu, 4, 32 

Shitta, 222 

Sifirin, 207 

Siki, 121 

Singusin, 207 

Siiiolu, 222 

Siye, 83 

Siyenbola, 219 

Smith, Capt. Haddon, 
619 

Smith, Rev. J. T., 369 

Smith, Oliver, 538, 614 

Smithing, 121 

Snail, 45 

Sneider rifles intro- 
duced, 459 

Social polity, 98 

Sogunro, 251 

Sokia, 160 

Sokoto, no 

Sorundi, 22 

Soyiki, 177 

Sodehinde, 366, 441 

Sodeke, 226 

Sokerin, 336 

Solagberu, 193, 201 

Solaja, 451, 613, 616 

Solalu, 418 

Somoye, 337 

Sonikan, 451 

Sope, 230 

Sopona, 28 

Sqwo, 553 

Speeding, Capt. W., 538 

Sugudu, 62 

Suliya, in 



Sumaila, 310, 358 
Sumonu Apampa, 637 
SumonuBeribepo, 203 

Tadpole, 45 
Tahajo, 366, 383, 526 
Taiwo, 80 
Talabi, 81 
Taniafisara, 594 
Tanners, 120 
Tarbet, Capt., 614, 619 
Tawusi, 135 
Tela, 83, 250 
Tela of Ilaro, 606 
Tengba, 476 
Tete konirOi, 152 
Tetu, 59 
Tiju iku, 84 
Timi, 75, 156 
Tiyako, 121 
Toad, 45 
Tobalogbo, 237 
Tobi, 100, 112 
Toki, 276, 283, 295 
Toniseawo, 183 
Toribola, 604 
Torosi, 150 
Tortoise, 45 
Totem, 85 
Townsend, Rev. 

Henry, 296 
Toyan, 619 
Toyeje, 75, 197, 201 
Trades, 117 
Treaty, A mild, 571 
Tubosun, 310, 366 
Ture, 106 

Umbrellas, State, 52 
Ussher, Capt.A.V., 619 

Vaughan, J. C, 334 
Venn, Henry, xxiii 
Verbs, xliii 
Vincent, G. A., 534 

Wahari, 117 
War, 131 
Waro, 230 



Warp; IT9, 124 
Wasin, 207 
Weaving, 119 
Welsh, Thomas, 614 
West India Regiment, 

360 
Wilhelm Andrew 

Dasalu, 296 
Williams, Rev. T. E., 

618 
Willoughby, Claud, 

620 
Willoughby, I. H., 481 
Wilson Oderinlg, 467 
Wingbolu, 231, 525 
Winkunle, 564 
Winmolaje, 230, 525. 
Wokuti expedition, 

403 
Wondo, 112 
Wonworo, 234 
Wood, Rev. J. B., 463, 

494 
Woof, 119, 124 
Words, Formation of, 

xxxiv 
Woruda, 170 
Wright, Lieut. C.V.R., 

619 
Wurale, 173 

Yabi, 173 
Yagba, 109 
Yaki Oyo, 230 
Yamati, 223 
Yamba, 174 
Yana, 152 
Yanayo, 567 
Yangede, 121 
Yansumi, 174 
Yawo, 318 
Yemetu, 399 
Yemoji, 620 
Yenibini, 263 
Yerombi, 283 
Yetunde, 81 
Yoruba Kings and 

Basoruns, 669 
Yoyogg, 450 



MAP OF THE YORUBA COUNTRY 




Q ' A"^' BOSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY 

3 9999 06561 213 5 






^_ 










r: 



«i:^. 

















s.y-'. 




.v^::-,5^ 



