GIFT OF 
Leslie Van Ness Denman 




The Man 

Who Knew Too Much 
% 



, > > » > 

5 , » • 



.5 ' 



,•••* •••> 



».. • 



5 , "••< 




"i SHALL WANT YOUR HELP, THERE'S SOMETHING PRETTY BAD 
OUT ON THE LINKS" 



THE MAN 

WHO KNEW TOO MUCH 

By 

Gilbert K. Chesterton 



With Illustrations by 
W. HATHERELL, R.I. 




Harper & Brothers Publishers 
New York and London 
cMCMXXU 



SIFT OF 

THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO MUCH 

Copyright, 1922 
By Harper & Brothers 



-1 — * * i i ■ — * — 
• • • • * r *-x 



CONTENTS 



THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO MUCH: 

CHAP. PAGE 

I. The Face in the Target i 

II. The Vanishing Prince 34 

III. The Soul of the Schoolboy 66 

IV. The Bottomless Well 89 

V< The Fad of the Fisherman 116 

VI. The Hole in the Wall 147 

VII. The Temple of Silence 185 

VIII. The Vengeance of the Statue. 225 

THE TREES OF PRIDE: 

I. The Tale of the Peacock Trees 261 

II. The Wager of Squire Vane 286 

III. The Mystery of the Well 312 

IV. The Chase After the Truth 340 



M103895 



The Man 

Who Knew Too Much 



THE MAN 

WHO KNEW TOO MUCH 



THE FACE IN THE TARGET 

TTAROLD MARCH, the rising reviewer and 
T ■*• social critic, was walking vigorously across 
a great tableland of moors and commons, the 
horizon of which was fringed with the far-off 
woods of the famous estate of Torwood Park. 
He was a good-looking young man in tweeds, 
with very pale curly hair and pale clear eyes. 
Walking in wind and sun in the very landscape 
of liberty, he was still young enough to remember 
his politics and not merely try to forget them. 
For his errand at Torwood Park was a political 
one ; it was the place of appointment named by 
no less a person than the Chancellor of the Ex- 
chequer, Sir Howard Home, then introducing his 
so-called Socialist Budget, and prepared to ex- 
pound it in an interview with so promising a 
penman. Harold March was the sort of man 
who knows everything about politics, and nothing 
about politicians. He also knew a great deal 
about art, letters, philosophy, and general cul- 



Tin Man Who Knew Too Much 

ture,.abput almost everything, indeed, except the 
iVofli htt was living in. 

Abruptly, in the middle of those sunny and 
windy flats, he came upon a sort of cleft almost 
narrow enough to be called a crack in the land. 
It was just large enough to be the water-course 
^for a small stream which vanished at intervals 
under green tunnels of undergrowth, as if in a 
dwarfish forest, y Indeed, he had an odd feeling 
as if he were a giant looking over the valley of 
the pygmies. When he dropped into the hollow, 
however, the impression was lost; the rocky 
banks, though hardly above the height of a cot- 
tage, hung over and had the profile of a precipice. 
As he began to wander down the course of the 
stream, in idle but romantic curiosity, and saw 
the water shining in short strips between the 
great gray boulders and bushes as soft as great 
green mosses, he fell into quite an opposite vein 
!of fantasy. It was rather as if the earth had 
opened and swallowed him into a sort of under- 
world of dreams. And when he became con- 
scious of a human figure dark against the silver 
stream, sitting on a large boulder and looking 
rather like a large bird, it was perhaps with 
some of the premonitions proper to a man who 
meets the strangest friendship of his life. 

The man was apparently fishing; or at least 
was fixed in a fisherman's attitude with more 
than a fisherman's immobility. March was able 

2 



The Face In the Target 

to examine the man almost as if he had been a 
statue for some minutes before the statue spoke. 
He was a tall, fair man, cadaverous, and a little 
lackadaisical, with heavy eyelids and a high- 
bridged nose. When his face was shaded with 
his wide white hat, his light mustache and lithe 
figure gave him a look of youth. But the 
Panama lay on the moss beside him; and the 
spectator could see that his brow was prematurely 
bald; and this, combined with a certain hollow- 
ness about the eyes, had an air of headwork and 
even headache. But the most curious thing about 
him, realized after a short scrutiny, was that, 
though he looked like a fisherman, he was not 
fishing. 

He was holding, instead of a rod, something 
that might have been a landing-net which some 
fishermen use, but which was much more like 
the ordinary toy net which children carry, and 
which they generally use indifferently for shrimps 
or butterflies. He was dipping this into the 
water at intervals, gravely regarding its harvest 
of weed or mud, and emptying it out again. 

"No, I haven't caught anything," he remarked, 
calmly, as if answering an unspoken query. 
"When I do I have to throw it back again; espe- 
cially the big fish. But some of the little beasts 
interest me when I get 'em." 

"A scientific interest, I suppose?" observed 
March. 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"Of a rather amateurish sort, I fear," 
answered the strange fisherman. "I have a 
sort of hobby about what they call 'phenomena 
of phosphorescence.' But it would be rather 
awkward to go about in society crying stinking 
fish." 

"I suppose it would," said March, with a 
smile. 

"Rather odd to enter a drawing-room carry- 
ing a large luminous cod," continued the stran- 
ger, in his listless way. "How quaint it would 
be if one could carry it about like a lantern, or 
have little sprats for candles. Some of the sea- 
beasts would really be very pretty like lamp- 
shades; the blue sea-snail that glitters all over 
like starlight; and some of the red starfish really 
shine like red stars. But, naturally, I'm not look- 
ing for them here." 

March thought of asking him what he was 
looking for; but, feeling unequal to a technical 
discussion at least as deep as the deep-sea fishes, 
he returned to more ordinary topics. 

. "Delightful sort of hole this is," he said. 
"This little dell and river here. It's like those 
places Stevenson talks about, where something 
ought to happen." 

"I know," answered the other. "I think it's 
because the place itself, so to speak, seems to 
happen and not merely to exist. Perhaps that's 
what old Picasso and some of the Cubists are try- 

4 



The Face In the Target 

ing to express by angles and jagged lines. Look 
at that wall like low cliffs that juts forward just 
at right angles to the slope of turf sweeping up to 
it. That's like a silent collision. It's like a 
breaker and the back-wash of a wave." 

March looked at the low-browed crag over- 
hanging the green slope and nodded. He was 
interested in a man who turned so easily from the 
technicalities of science to those of art; and asked 
him if he admired the new angular artists. 

u As I feel it, the Cubists are not Cubist 
enough," replied the stranger. "I mean they're 
not thick enough. By making things mathema- 
tical they make them thin. Take the living lines 
out of that landscape, simplify it to a right 
angle, and you flatten it out to a mere diagram 
on paper. Diagrams have their own beauty; 
but it is of just the other sort. They stand for 
the unalterable things; the calm, eternal, mathe- 
matical sort of truths ; what somebody calls the 
'white radiance of " 

He stopped, and before the next word came 
something had happened almost too quickly and 
completely to be realized. From behind the 
overhanging rock came a noise and rush like 
that of a railway train; and a great motor car 
appeared. It topped the crest of cliff, black 
against the sun, like a battle-chariot rushing to 
destruction in some wild epic. March auto- 
matically put out his hand in one futile gesture, 

5 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

as if to catch a falling tea-cup in a drawing- 
room. 

For the fraction of a flash it seemed to leave 
the ledge of rock like a flying ship ; then the very 
sky seemed to turn over like a wheel, and it lay 
a ruin amid the tall grasses below, a line of gray 
smoke going up slowly from it into the silent air. 
A little lower the figure of a man with gray hair 
lay tumbled down the steep green slope, his limbs 
lying all at random, and his face turned away. 

The eccentric fisherman dropped his net and 
walked swiftly toward the spot, his new acquaint- 
ance following him. As they drew near there 
seemed a sort of monstrous irony in the fact 
that the dead machine was still throbbing and 
thundering as busily as a factory, while the 
man lay so still. 

He was unquestionably dead. The blood 
flowed in the grass from a hopelessly fatal frac- 
ture at the back of the skull; but the face, which 
was turned to the sun, was uninjured and 
strangely arresting in itself. It was one of those 
cases of a strange face so unmistakable as to 
feel familiar. We feel, somehow, that we 
ought to recognize it, even though we do not. 
It was of the broad, square sort with great jaws, 
almost like that of a highly intellectual ape ; the 
wide mouth shut so tight as to be traced by a 
mere line ; the nose short with the sort of nos- 
trils that seem to gape with an appetite for the 

6 



The Face In the Target 

air. The oddest thing about the face was that 
one of the eyebrows was cocked up at a much 
sharper angle than the other. March thought 
he had never seen a face so naturally alive as 
that dead one. And its ugly energy seemed all 
the stranger for its halo of hoary hair. Some 
papers lay half fallen out of the pocket, and 
from among them March extracted a card-case. 
He read the name on the card aloud. 

"Sir Humphrey Turnbull. I'm sure I've 
heard that name somewhere." 

His companion only gave a sort of a little 
sigh and was silent for a moment, as if rumi- 
nating, then he merely said, "The poor fellow is 
quite gone," and added some scientific terms in 
which his auditor once more found himself out 
of his depth. 

"As things are," continued the same curiously 
well-informed person, "it will be more legal for 
us to leave the body as it is until the police are 
informed. In fact, I think it will be well if 
nobody except the police is informed. Don't 
be surprised if I seem to be keeping it dark from 
some of our neighbors round here." Then, as 
if prompted to regularize his rather abrupt con- 
fidence, he said: "I've come down to see my 
cousin at Torwood; my name is Home Fisher. 
Might be a pun on my pottering about here, 
mightn't it?" 

"Is Sir Howard Home your cousin?" asked 

2 7 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

March. "I'm going to Torwood Park to see 
him myself; only about his public work, of 
course, and the wonderful stand he is making 
for his principles. I think this Budget is the 
greatest thing in English history. If it fails, it 
will be the most heroic failure in English history. 
Are you an admirer of your great kinsman, Mr. 
Fisher?" 

"Rather," said Mr. Fisher. "He's the best 
shot I know." 

Then, as if sincerely repentant of his non- 
chalance, he added, with a sort of enthusiasm: 

"No, but really, he's a beautiful shot." 

As if fired by his own words, he took a sort 
of leap at the ledges of the rock above him, and 
scaled them with a sudden agility in startling 
contrast to his general lassitude. He had stood 
for some seconds on the headland above, with 
his aquiline profile under the Panama hat re- 
lieved against the sky and peering over the 
countryside before his companion had collected 
himself sufficiently to scramble up after him. 

The level above was a stretch of common turf 
on which the tracks of the fated car were 
plowed plainly enough; but the brink of it was 
broken as with rocky teeth; broken boulders of 
all shapes and sizes lay near the edge; it was 
almost incredible that any one could have de- 
liberately driven into such a death trap, espe- 
cially in broad daylight. 

8 



The Face In the Target 

"I can't make head or tail of it," said March. 
"Was he blind ? Or blind drunk ?" 

4 'Neither, by the look of him," replied the 
other. 

"Then it was suicide." 

"It doesn't seem a cozy way of doing it," 
remarked the man called Fisher. "Besides, I 
don't fancy poor old Puggy would commit sui- 
cide, somehow." 

"Poor old who?" inquired the wondering 
journalist. "Did you know this unfortunate 
man?" 

"Nobody knew him exactly," replied Fisher, 
with some vagueness. "But one knew him, of 
course. He'd been a terror in his time, in Par- 
liament and the courts, and so on; especially in 
that row about the aliens who were deported 
as undesirables, when he wanted one of 'em 
hanged for murder. He was so sick about it 
that he retired from the bench. Since then he 
mostly motored about by himself; but he was 
coming to Torwood, too, for the week-end; and 
I don't see why he should deliberately break his 
neck almost at the very door. I believe Hoggs — 
I mean my cousin Howard — was coming down 
specially to meet him." 

"Torwood Park doesn't belong to your 
cousin?" inquired March. 

"No; it used to belong to the Winthrops, you 
know," replied the other. "Now a new man's 

9 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

got it; a man from Montreal named Jenkins. 
Hoggs comes for the shooting; I told you he 
was a lovely shot." 

This repeated eulogy on the great social 
statesman affected Harold March as if some- 
body had defined Napoleon as a distinguished 
player of nap. But he had another half-formed 
impression struggling in this flood of unfamiliar 
things, and he brought it to the surface before 
it could vanish. 

"Jenkins," he repeated. "Surely you don't 
mean Jefferson Jenkins, the social reformer? I 
mean the man who's fighting for the new cot- 
tage-estate scheme. It would be as interesting 
to meet him as any Cabinet Minister in the 
world, if you'll excuse my saying so." 

"Yes; Hoggs told him it would have to be 
cottages," said Fisher. "He said the breed of 
cattle had improved too often, and people were 
beginning to laugh. And, of course, you must 
hang a peerage on to something; though the poor 
chap hasn't got it yet. Hullo, here's somebody 
else." 

They had started walking in the tracks of the 
car, leaving it behind them in the hollow, still 
humming horribly like a huge insect that had 
killed a man. The tracks took them to the cor- 
ner of the road, one arm of which went on in 
the same line toward the distant gates of the 
park. It was clear that the car had been driven 



The Face In the Target 

down the long straight road, and then, instead 
of turning with the road to the left, had gone 
straight on over the turf to its doom. But it 
was not this discovery that had riveted Fisher's 
eye, but something even more solid. At the 
angle of the white road a dark and solitary figure 
was standing almost as still as a finger post. It 
was that of a big man in rough shooting-clothes, 
bareheaded, and with tousled curly hair that 
gave him a rather wild look. On a nearer 
approach this first more fantastic impression 
faded; in a full light the figure took on more 
conventional colors, as of an ordinary gentle- 
man who happened to have come out without a 
hat and without very studiously brushing his 
hair. But the massive stature remained, and 
something deep and even cavernous about the 
setting of the eyes redeemed his animal good 
looks from the commonplace. But March had 
no time to study the man more closely, for, 
much to his astonishment, his guide merely ob- 
served, "Hullo, Jack!" and walked past him as 
if he had indeed been a signpost, and without 
attempting to inform him of the catastrophe 
beyond the rocks. It was relatively a small 
thing, but it was only the first in a string of 
singular antics on which his new and eccentric 
friend was leading him. 

The man they had passed looked after them 
in rather a suspicious fashion, but Fisher con- 

ii 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

tinued serenely on his way along the straight 
road that ran past the gates of the great 
estate. 

"That's John Burke, the traveler," he con- 
descended to explain. "I expect youVe heard 
of him; shoots big game and all that. Sorry I 
couldn't stop to introduce you, but I dare say 
you'll meet him later on." 

"I know his book, of course," said March, 
with renewed interest. "That is certainly a fine 
piece of description, about their being only con- 
scious of the closeness of the elephant when the 
colossal head blocked out the moon." 

"Yes, young Halkett writes jolly well, I think. 
What? Didn't you know Halkett wrote 
Burke's book for him? Burke can't use any- 
thing except a gun; and you can't write with 
that. Oh, he's genuine enough in his way, you 
know, as brave as a lion, or a good deal braver 
by all accounts." 

"You seem to know all about him," observed 
March, with a rather bewildered laugh, "and 
about a good many other people." 

Fisher's bald brow became abruptly corru- 
gated, and a curious expression came into his 
eyes. 

"I know too much," he said. "That's what's 
the matter with me. That's what's the matter 
with all of us, and the whole show; we know too 
much. Too much about one another ; too much 

12 



The Face In the Target 

about ourselves. That's why I'm really inter- 
ested, just now, about one thing that I don't 
know." 

"And that is?" inquired the other. 

"Why that poor fellow is dead." 

They had walked along the straight road for 
nearly a mile, conversing at intervals in this 
fashion; and March had a singular sense of the 
whole world being turned inside out. Mr. 
Home Fisher did not especially abuse his 
friends and relatives in fashionable society; of 
some of them he spoke with affection. But they 
seemed to be an entirely new set of men and 
women, who happened to have the same nerves 
as the men and women mentioned most often in 
the newspapers. Yet no fury of revolt could 
have seemed to him more utterly revolutionary 
than this cold familiarity. It was like daylight 
on the other side of stage scenery. 

They reached the great lodge gates of the 
park, and, to March's surprise, passed them 
and continued along the interminable white, 
straight road. But he was himself too early 
for his appointment with Sir Howard, and was 
not disinclined to see the end of his new friend's 
experiment, whatever it might be. They had 
long left the moorland behind them, and half 
the white road was gray in the great shadow of 
the Torwood pine forests, themselves like gray 
bars shuttered against the sunshine and within, 

13 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

amid that clear noon, manufacturing their own 
midnight. Soon, however, rifts began to appear 
in them like gleams of colored windows; the 
trees thinned and fell away as the road went 
forward, showing the wild, irregular copses in 
which, as Fisher said, the house-party had been 
blazing away all day. And about two hundred 
yards farther on they came to the first turn of 
the road. 

At the corner stood a sort of decayed inn with 
the dingy sign of The Grapes. The signboard 
was dark and indecipherable by now, and hung 
black against the sky and the gray moorland 
beyond, about as inviting as a gallows. March 
remarked that it looked like a tavern for vinegar 
instead of wine. 

"A good phrase," said Fisher, "and so it 
would be if you were silly enough to drink wine 
in it. But the beer is very good, and so is the 
brandy." 

March followed him to the bar parlor with 
some wonder, and his dim sense of repugnance 
was not dismissed by the first sight of the inn- 
keeper, who was widely different from the genial 
innkeepers of romance, a bony man, very silent 
behind a black mustache, but with black, restless 
eyes. Taciturn as he was, the investigator suc- 
ceeded at last in extracting a scrap of informa- 
tion from him, by dint of ordering beer and 
talking to him persistently and minutely on the 

14 



The Face In the Target 

subject of motor cars. He evidently regarded 
the innkeeper as in some singular way an author- 
ity on motor cars; as being deep in the secrets 
of the mechanism, management, and misman- 
agement of motor cars ; holding the man all the 
time with a glittering eye like the Ancient Mar- 
iner. Out of all this rather mysterious conver- 
sation there did emerge at last a sort of admis- 
sion that one particular motor car, of a given 
description, had stopped before the inn about 
an hour before, and that an elderly man had 
alighted, requiring some mechanical assistance. 
Asked if the visitor required any other assist- 
ance, the innkeeper said shortly that the old 
gentleman had filled his flask and taken a packet 
of sandwiches. And with these words the some- 
what inhospitable host had walked hastily out of 
the bar, and they heard him banging doors in the 
dark interior. 

Fisher's weary eye wandered round the dusty 
and dreary inn parlor and rested dreamily on a 
glass case containing a stuffed bird, with a gun 
hung on hooks above it, which seemed to be its 
only ornament. 

"Puggy was a humorist,'* he observed, "at 
least in his own rather grim style. But it seems 
rather too grim a joke for a man to buy a 
packet of sandwiches when he is just going to 
commit suicide." 

"If you come to that," answered March, "it 
i5 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

isn't very usual for a man to buy a packet of 
sandwiches when he's just outside the door of 
a grand house he's going to stop at." 

"No . . . no," repeated Fisher, almost me- 
chanically; and then suddenly cocked his eye at 
his interlocutor with a much livelier expression. 

"By Jove ! that's an idea. You're perfectly 
right. And that suggests a very queer idea, 
doesn't it?" 

There was a silence, and then March started 
with irrational nervousness as the door of the 
inn was flung open and another man walked 
rapidly to the counter. He had struck it with a 
coin and called out for brandy before he saw 
the other two guests, who were sitting at a bare 
wooden table under the window. When he 
turned about with a rather wild stare, March had 
yet another unexpected emotion, for his guide 
hailed the man as Hoggs and introduced him as 
Sir Howard Home. 

He looked rather older than his boyish por- 
traits in the illustrated papers, as is the way of 
politicians; his flat, fair hair was touched with 
gray, but his face was almost comically round, 
with a Roman nose which, when combined with 
his quick, bright eyes, raised a vague reminiscence 
of a parrot. He had a cap rather at the back 
of his head and a gun under his arm. Harold 
March had imagined many things about his 
meeting with the great political reformer, but 

16 



The Face In the Target 

he had never pictured him with a gun under his 
arm, drinking brandy in a public house. 

"So you're stopping at Jink's, too," said 
Fisher. "Everybody seems to be at Jink's." 

"Yes," replied the Chancellor of the Excheq- 
uer. "Jolly good shooting. At least all of it 
that isn't Jink's shooting. I never knew a chap 
with such good shooting that was such a bad 
shot. Mind you, he's a jolly good fellow 
and all that; I don't say a word against him. 
But he never learned to hold a gun when he was 
packing pork or whatever he did. They say he 
shot the cockade off his own servant's hat; just 
like him to have cockades, of course. He shot 
the weathercock off his own ridiculous gilded 
summerhouse. It's the only cock he'll ever 
kill, I should think. Are you coming up there 
now?" 

Fisher said, rather vaguely, that he was fol- 
lowing soon, when he had fixed something up; 
and the Chancellor of the Exchequer left the 
inn. March fancied he had been a little upset 
or impatient when he called for the brandy; but 
he had talked himself back into a satisfactory 
state, if the talk had not been quite what his 
literary visitor had expected. Fisher, a few 
minutes afterward, slowly led the way out of the 
tavern and stood in the middle of the road, look- 
ing down in the direction from which they had 
traveled. Then he walked back about two 

17 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

hundred yards in that direction and stood still 
again. 

"I should think this is about the place," he 
said. 

"What place?" asked his companion. 

"The place where the poor fellow was 
killed," said Fisher, sadly. 

"What do you mean?" demanded March. 
"He was smashed up on the rocks a mile and a 
half from here." 

"No, he wasn't," replied Fisher. "He didn't 
fall on the rocks at all. Didn't you notice that 
he only fell on the slope of soft grass under- 
neath? But I saw that he had a bullet in him 
already." 

Then after a pause he added: 

"He was alive at the inn, but he was dead 
long before he came to the rocks. So he was 
shot as he drove his car down this strip of 
straight road, and I should think somewhere 
about here. After that, of course, the car went 
straight on with nobody to stop or turn it. It's 
really a very cunning dodge in its way; for the 
body would be found far away, and most people 
would say, as you do, that it was an accident to 
a motorist. The murderer must have been a 
clever brute." 

"But wouldn't the shot be heard at the inn or 
somewhere?" asked March. 

"It would be heard. But it would not be 
18 



The Face In the Target 

noticed. That," continued the investigator, 
"is where he was clever again. Shooting was 
going on all over the place all day; very likely 
he timed his shot so as to drown it in a number 
of others. Certainly he was a first-class crim- 
inal. And he was something else as well." 

"What do you mean?" asked his companion, 
with a creepy premonition of something coming, 
he knew not why. 

"He was a first-class shot," said Fisher. 

He had turned his back abruptly and was 
walking down a narrow, grassy lane, little more 
than a cart track, which lay opposite the inn and 
marked the end of the great estate and the 
beginning of the open moors. March plodded 
after him with the same idle perseverance, and 
found him staring through a gap in giant weeds 
and thorns at the flat face of a painted pal- 
ing. From behind the paling rose the great 
gray columns of a row of poplars, which filled 
the heavens above them with dark-green shadow 
and shook faintly in a wind which had sunk 
slowly into a breeze. The afternoon was al- 
ready deepening into evening, and the titanic 
shadows of the poplars lengthened over a third 
of the landscape. 

"Are you a first-class criminal?" asked Fisher, 
in a friendly tone. "I'm afraid I'm not. But 
I think I can manage to be a sort of fourth-rate 
burglar." 

19 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

And before his companion could reply he had 
managed to swing himself up and over the fence ; 
March followed without much bodily effort, but 
with considerable mental disturbance. The 
poplars grew so close against the fence that they 
had some difficulty in slipping past them, and 
beyond the poplars they could see only a high 
hedge of laurel, green and lustrous in the level 
sun. Something in this limitation by a series of 
living walls made him feel as if he were really 
entering a shattered house instead of an open 
field. It was as if he came in by a disused 
door or window and found the way blocked by 
furniture. When they had circumvented the 
laurel hedge, they came out on a sort of terrace 
of turf, which fell by one green step to an ob- 
long lawn like a bowling green. Beyond this 
was the only building in sight, a low conserv- 
atory, which seemed far away from anywhere, 
like a glass cottage standing in its own fields in 
fairyland. Fisher knew that lonely look of the 
outlying parts of a great house well enough. He 
realized that it is more of a satire on aristocracy 
than if it were choked with weeds and littered 
with ruins. For it is not neglected and yet it 
is deserted; at any rate, it is disused. It is 
regularly swept and garnished for a master who 
never comes. 

Looking over the lawn, however, he saw one 
object which he had not apparently expected. 
20 



The Face In the Target 

It was a sort of tripod supporting a large disk 
like the round top of a table tipped sideways, 
and it was not until they had dropped on to the 
lawn and walked across to look at it that March 
realized that it was a target. It was worn and 
weatherstained; the gay colors of its concentric 
rings were faded; possibly it had been set up in 
those far-off Victorian days when there was a 
fashion of archery. March had one of his 
vague visions of ladies in cloudy crinolines and 
gentlemen in outlandish hats and whiskers re- 
visiting that lost garden like ghosts. 

Fisher, who was peering more closely at the 
target, startled him by an exclamation. 

"Hullo!" he said. "Somebody has been 
peppering this thing with shot, after all, and 
quite lately, too. Why, I believe old Jink's 
been trying to improve his bad shooting here." 

"Yes, and it looks as if it still wanted im- 
proving," answered March, laughing. "Not 
one of these shots is anywhere near the bull's- 
eye ; they seem just scattered about in the wildest 
way." 

"In the wildest way," repeated Fisher, still 
peering intently at the target. He seemed 
merely to assent, but March fancied his eye was 
shining under its sleepy lid and that he straight- 
ened his stooping figure with a strange effort. 

"Excuse me a moment," he said, feeling in 
his pockets. "I think I've got some of my chem~ 

21 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

icals; and after that we'll go up to the house." 
And he stooped again over the target, putting 
something with his finger over each of the shot- 
holes, so far as March could see merely a dull- 
gray smear. Then they went through the 
gathering twilight up the long green avenues to 
the great house. 

Here again, however, the eccentric investi- 
gator did not enter by the front door. He 
walked round the house until he found a window 
open, and, leaping into it, introduced his friend 
to what appeared to be the gun-room. Rows of 
the regular instruments for bringing down birds 
stood against the walls ; but across a table in the 
window lay one or two weapons of a heavier and 
more formidable pattern. 

"Hullo! these are Burke's big-game rifles," 
said Fisher. "I never knew he kept them here." 
He lifted one of them,, examined it briefly, and 
put it down again, frowning heavily. Almost 
as he did so a strange young man came hurriedly 
into the room. He was dark and sturdy, with 
a bumpy forehead and a bulldog jaw, and he 
spoke with a curt apology. 

"I left Major Burke's guns here," he said, 
"and he wants them packed up. He's going 
away to-night." 

And he carried off the two rifles without cast- 
ing a glance at the stranger; through the open 
window they could see his short, dark figure 

22 



The Face In the Target 

walking away across the glimmering garden. 
Fisher got out of the window again and stood 
looking after him. 

"That's Halkett, whom I told you about," he 
said. "I knew he was a sort of secretary and 
had to do with Burke's papers; but I never knew 
he had anything to do with his guns. But he's 
just the sort of silent, sensible little devil who 
might be very good at anything; the sort of man 
you know for years before you find he's a chess 
champion." 

He had begun to walk in the direction of the 
disappearing secretary, and they soon came 
within sight of the rest of the house-party talking 
and laughing on the lawn. They could see the 
tall figure and loose mane of the lion-hunter 
dominating the little group. 

u By the way," observed Fisher, "when we 
were talking about Burke and Halkett, I said 
that a man couldn't very well write with a gun. 
Well, I'm not so sure now. Did you ever hear 
of an artist so clever that he could draw with 
a gun? There's a wonderful chap loose about 
here." 

Sir Howard hailed Fisher and his friend the 
journalist with almost boisterous amiability. The 
latter was presented to Major Burke and Mr. 
Halkett and also (by way of a parenthesis) to 
his host, Mr. Jenkins, a commonplace little man 
in loud tweeds, whom everybody else seemed 
3 23 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

to treat with a sort of affection, as if he were a 
baby. 

The irrepressible Chancellor of the Exchequer 
was still talking about the birds he had brought 
down, the birds that Burke and Halkett had 
brought down, and the birds that Jenkins, their 
host, had failed to bring down. It seemed to 
be a sort of sociable monomania. 

"You and your big game," he ejaculated, 
aggressively, to Burke. "Why, anybody could 
shoot big game. You want to be a shot to shoot 
small game." 

"Quite so," interposed Home Fisher. "Now 
if only a hippopotamus could fly up in the air out 
of that bush, or you preserved flying elephants 
on the estate, why, then " 

"Why even Jink might hit that sort of bird," 
cried Sir Howard, hilariously slapping his host 
on the back. "Even he might hit a haystack or 
a hippopotamus." 

"Look here, you fellows," said Fisher. "I 
want you to come along with me for a minute 
and shoot at something else. Not a hippopota- 
mus. Another kind of queer animal I've found 
on the estate. It's an animal with three legs and 
one eye, and it's all the colors of the rainbow." 

"What the deuce are you talking about?" 
asked Burke. 

"You come along and see," replied Fisher, 
cheerfully. 

24 



The Face In the Target 

Such people seldom reject anything nonsen- 
sical, for they are always seeking for something 
new. They gravely rearmed themselves from 
the gun-room and trooped along at the tail of 
their guide, Sir Howard only pausing, in a sort 
of ecstasy, to point out the celebrated gilt sum- 
merhouse on which the gilt weathercock still 
stood crooked. It was dusk turning to dark by 
the time they reached the remote green by the 
poplars and accepted the new and aimless game 
of shooting at the old mark. 

The last light seemed to fade from the lawn, 
and the poplars against the sunset were like 
great plumes upon a purple hearse, when the 
futile procession finally curved round and came 
out in front of the target. 

Sir Howard again slapped his host on the 
shoulder, shoving him playfully forward to take 
the first shot. The shoulder and arm he touched 
seemed unnaturally stiff and angular. Mr. 
Jenkins was holding his gun in an attitude more 
awkward than any that his satiric friends had 
seen or expected. 

At the same instant a horrible scream seemed 
to come from nowhere. It was so unnatural 
and so unsuited to the scene that it might have 
been made by some inhuman thing flying on wings 
above them or eavesdropping in the dark woods 
beyond. But Fisher knew that it had started 
and stopped on the pale lips of Jefferson Jenkins, 
25 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

of Montreal, and no one at that moment catch- 
ing sight of Jefferson Jenkins's face would have 
complained that it was commonplace. 

The next moment a torrent of guttural but 
good-humored oaths came from Major Burke 
as he and the two other men saw what was in 
front of them. The target stood up in the dim 
grass like a dark goblin grinning at them, and 
it was literally grinning. It had two eyes like 
stars, and in similar livid points of light were 
picked out the two upturned and open nostrils 
and the two ends of the wide and tight mouth. 
A few white dots above each eye indicated 
the hoary eyebrows; and one of them ran up- 
ward almost erect. It was a brilliant caricature 
done in bright botted lines and March knew of 
whom. It shone in the shadowy grass, smeared 
with sea fire as if one of the submarine monsters 
had crawled into the twilight garden; but it had 
the head of a dead man. 

"It's only luminous paint," said Burke. "Old 
Fisher's been having a joke with that phosphor- 
escent stuff of his." 

"Seems to be meant for old Puggy," observed 
Sir Howard. "Hits him off very well." 

With that they all laughed, except Jenkins. 
When they had all done, he made a noise like 
the first effort of an animal to laugh, and 
Home Fisher suddenly strode across to him 
and said: 

26 



The Face In the Target 

"Mr. Jenkins, I must speak to you at once in 
private." 

It was by the little watercourse in the moors, 
on the slope under the hanging rock, that March 
met his new friend Fisher, by appointment, 
shortly after the ugly and almost grotesque scene 
that had broken up the group in the garden. 

"It was a monkey-trick of mine," observed 
Fisher, gloomily, "putting phosphorus on the 
target; but the only chance to make him jump 
was to give him the horrors suddenly. And 
when he saw the face he'd shot at shining on the 
target he practiced on, all lit up with an infernal 
light, he did jump. Quite enough for my own 
intellectual satisfaction." 

"I'm afraid I don't quite understand even 
now," said March, "exactly what he did cw* why 
he did it." 

"You ought to," replied Fisher, with his 
rather dreary smile, "for you gave me the first 
suggestion yourself. Oh yes, you did; and it was 
a very shrewd one. You said a man wouldn't 
take sandwiches with him to dine at a great 
house. It was quite true; and the inference was 
that, though he was going there, he didn't mean 
to dine there. Or, at any rate, that he might 
not be dining there. It occurred to me at once 
that he probably expected the visit to be un- 
pleasant, or the reception doubtful, or something 
that would prevent his accepting hospitality. 
27 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

Then it struck me that TurnbulL was a terror to 
certain shady characters in the past, and that 
he had come down to identify and denounce one 
of them. The chances at the start pointed to 
the host — that is, Jenkins. I'm morally certain 
now that Jenkins was the undesirable alien Turn- 
bull wanted to convict in another shooting-affair, 
but you see the shooting gentleman had another 
shot in his locker." 

"But you said he would have to be a very good 
shot," protested March. 

"Jenkins is a very good shot," said Fisher. 
"A very good shot who can pretend to be a very 
bad shot. Shall I tell you the second hint I hit 
on, after yours, to make me think it was 
Jenkins? It was my cousin's account of his 
bad shooting. He'd shot a cockade off a hat 
and a weathercock off a building. Now, in 
fact, a man must shoot very well indeed to shoot 
so badly as that. He must shoot very neatly to 
hit the cockade and not the head, or even the hat. 
If the shots had really gone at random, the 
chances are a thousand to one that they would 
not have hit such prominent and picturesque 
objects. They were chosen because they were 
prominent and picturesque objects. They make 
a story to go the round of society. He keeps the 
crooked weathercock in the summerhouse to 
perpetuate the story of a legend. And then he 
lay in wait with his evil eye and wicked gun, 
28 



The Face In the Target 

safely ambushed behind the legend of his own 
incompetence. 

"But there is more than that. There is the 
summerhouse itself. I mean there is the whole 
thing. There's all that Jenkins gets chaffed 
about, the gilding and the gaudy colors and all 
the vulgarity that's supposed to stamp him as an 
upstart. Now, as a matter of fact, upstarts 
generally don't do this. God knows there's 
enough of 'em in society; and one knows 'em well 
enough. And this is the very last thing they do. 
They're generally only too keen to know the 
right thing and do it; and they instantly put 
themselves body and soul into the hands of art 
decorators and art experts, who do the whole 
thing for them. There's hardly another million- 
aire alive who has the moral courage to have 
a gilt monogram on a chair like that one in 
the gun-room. For that matter, there's the name 
as well as the monogram. Names like Tompkins 
and Jenkins and Jinks are funny without being 
vulgar; I mean they are vulgar without being 
common. If you prefer it, they are common- 
place without being common. They are just the 
names to be chosen to look ordinary, but they're 
really rather extraordinary. Do you know many 
people called Tompkins? It's a good deal rarer 
than Talbot. It's pretty much the same with the 
comic clothes of the parvenu. Jenkins dresses 
like a character in Punch. But that's because he 

29 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

is a character in Punch. I mean he's a fictitious 
character. He's a fabulous animal. He doesn't 
exist. 

"Have you ever considered what it must be 
like to be a man who doesn't exist? I mean to 
be a man with a fictitious character that he has 
to keep up at the expense not merely of personal 
talents: To be a new kind of hypocrite hiding 
a talent in a new kind of napkin. This man has 
chosen his hypocrisy very ingeniously; it was 
really a new one. A subtle villain has dressed 
up as a dashing gentleman and a worthy business 
man and a philanthropist and a saint; but the 
loud checks of a comical little cad were really 
rather a new disguise. But the disguise must be 
very irksome to a man who can really do things. 
This is a dexterous little cosmopolitan gutter- 
snipe who can do scores of things, not only shoot, 
but draw and paint, and probably play the fiddle. 
Now a man like that may find the hiding of his 
talents useful; but he could never help wanting 
to use them where they were useless. If he can 
draw, he will draw absent-mindedly on blotting 
paper. I suspect this rascal has often drawn 
poor old Puggy's face on blotting paper. Prob- 
ably he began doing it in blots as he afterward 
did it in dots, or rather shots. It was the same 
sort of thing; he found a disused target in a de- 
serted yard and couldn't resist indulging in a 
little secret shooting, like secret drinking. You 

30 



The Face In the Target 

thought the shots all scattered and irregular, and 
so they were; but not accidental. No two dis- 
tances were alike; but the different points were 
exactly where he wanted to put them. There's 
nothing needs such mathematical precision as a 
wild caricature. I've dabbled a little in drawing 
myself, and I assure you that to put one dot 
where you want it is a marvel with a pen close 
to a piece of paper. It was a miracle to do it 
across a garden with a gun. But a man who can 
work those miracles will always itch to work 
them, if it's only in the dark." 

After a pause March observed, thoughtfully, 
"But he couldn't' have brought him down like a 
bird with one of those little guns." 

"No; that was why I went into the gun-room," 
replied Fisher. "He did it with one of Burke's 
rifles, and Burke thought he knew the sound of 
it. That's why he rushed out without a hat, 
looking so wild. He saw nothing but a car pass- 
ing quickly, which he followed for a little way, 
and then concluded he'd made a mistake." 

There was another silence, during which Fisher 
sat on a great stone as motionless as on their 
first meeting, and watched the gray and silver 
river eddying past under the bushes. Then 
March said, abruptly, "Of course he knows the 
truth now." 

"Nobody knows the truth but you and I," 
answered Fisher, with a certain softening in his 

3i 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

voice. "And I don't think you and I will ever 
quarrel." 

u What do you mean?" asked March, in an 
altered accent. "What have you done about 
it?" 

Home Fisher continued to gaze steadily at 
the eddying stream. At last he said, "The police 
have proved it was a motor accident." 

"But you know it was not." 

"I told you that I know too much," replied 
Fisher, with his eye on the river. "I know that, 
and I know a great many other things. I know 
the atmosphere and the way the whole thing 
works. I know this fellow has succeeded in 
making himself something incurably common- 
place and comic. I know you can't get up a per- 
secution of old Toole or Little Tich. If I were 
to tell Hoggs or Halkett that old Jink was an 
assassin, they would almost die of laughter be- 
fore my eyes. Oh, I don't say their laughter's 
quite innocent, though it's genuine in its way. 
They want old Jink, and they couldn't do with- 
out him. I don't say I'm quite innocent. I like 
Hoggs; I don't want him to be down and out; 
and he'd be done for if Jink can't pay for his 
coronet. They were devilish near the line at 
the last election. But the only real objection to 
it is that it's impossible. Nobody would believe 
it; it's not in the picture. The crooked weather- 
cock would always turn it into a joke." 

32 



The Face In the Target 

"Don't you think this is infamous?" asked 
March, quietly. 

"I think a good many things," replied the 
other. "If you people ever happen to blow the 
whole tangle of society to hell with dynamite, 
I don't know that the human race will be much 
the worse. But don't be too hard on me merely 
because I know what society is. That's why I 
moon away my time over things like stinking 
fish." 

There was a pause as he settled himself down 
again by the stream; and then he added: 

"I told you before I had to throw back the 
big fish." 



II 

THE VANISHING PRINCE 

* I S HIS tale begins among a tangle of tales 
■*• round a name that is at once recent and 
legendary. The name is that of Michael O'Neill, 
popularly called Prince Michael, partly because 
he claimed descent from ancient Fenian princes, 
and partly because he was credited with a plan 
to make himself prince president of Ireland, as 
the last Napoleon did of France. He was un- 
doubtedly a gentleman of honorable pedigree and 
of many accomplishments, but two of his accom- 
plishments emerged from all the rest. He had 
a talent for appearing when he was not wanted 
and a talent for disappearing when he was 
wanted, especially when he was wanted by the 
police. It may be added that his disappearances 
were more dangerous than his appearances. In 
the latter he seldom went beyond the sensational 
— pasting up seditious placards, tearing down 
official placards, making flamboyant speeches, or 
unfurling forbidden flags. But in order to effect 
the former he would sometimes fight for his free- 
dom with startling energy, from which men were 
sometimes lucky to escape with a broken head 

34 



The Vanishing Prince 

instead of a broken neck. His most famous feats 
of escape, however, were due to dexterity and 
not to violence. On a cloudless summer morn- 
ing he had come down a country road white with 
dust, and, pausing outside a farmhouse, had 
told the farmer's daughter, with elegant indiffer- 
ence, that the local police were in pursuit of him. 
The girl's name was Bridget Royce, a somber 
and even sullen type of beauty, and she looked 
at him darkly, as if in doubt, and said, "Do you 
want me to hide you?" Upon which he only 
laughed, leaped lightly over the stone wall, and 
strode toward the farm, merely throwing over 
his shoulder the remark, "Thank you, I have 
generally been quite capable of hiding myself." 
In which proceeding he acted with a tragic 
ignorance of the nature of women; and there 
fell on his path in that sunshine a shadow of 
doom. 

While he disappeared through the farmhouse 
the girl remained for a few moments looking up 
the road, and two perspiring policemen came 
plowing up to the door where she stood. Though 
still angry, she was still silent, and a quarter of 
an hour later the officers had searched the house 
and were already inspecting the kitchen garden 
and cornfield behind it. In the ugly reaction of 
her mood she might have been tempted even to 
point out the fugitive, but for a small difficulty — 
that she had no more notion than the policemen 
35 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

had of where he could possibly have gone. The 
kitchen garden was inclosed by a very low wall, 
and the cornfield beyond lay aslant like a square 
patch on a great green hill on which he could still 
have been seen even as a dot in the distance. 
Everything stood solid in its familiar place ; the 
apple tree was too small to support or hide a 
climber ; the only shed stood open and obviously 
empty; there was no sound save the droning of 
summer flies and the occasional flutter of a bird 
unfamiliar enough to be surprised by the scare- 
crow in the field; there was scarcely a shadow 
save a few blue lines that fell from the thin tree; 
every detail was picked out by the brilliant day- 
light as if in a microscope. The girl described 
the scene later, with all the passionate realism of 
her race, and, whether or no the policemen had 
a similar eye for the picturesque, they had at 
least an eye for the facts of the case, and were 
compelled to give up the chase and retire from 
the scene. Bridget Royce remained as if in a 
trance, staring at the sunlit garden in which a 
man had just vanished like a fairy. She was still 
in a sinister mood, and the miracle took in her 
mind a character of unfriendliness and fear, as 
if the fairy were decidedly a bad fairy. The sun 
upon the glittering garden depressed her more 
than the darkness, but she continued to stare at 
it. Then the world itself went half-witted and 
she screamed. The scarecrow moved in the sun- 
36 



The Vanishing Prince 

light. It had stood with its back to her in a 
battered old black hat and a tattered garment, 
and with all its tatters flying, it strode away 
across the hill. 

She did not analyze the audacious trick by 
which the man had turned to his advantage the 
subtle effects of the expected and the obvious; 
she was still under the cloud of more individual 
complexities, and she noticed most of all that 
the vanishing scarecrow did not even turn to look 
at the farm. And the fates that were running 
so adverse to his fantastic career of freedom 
ruled that his next adventure, though it had the 
same success in another quarter, should increase 
the danger in this quarter. Among the many 
similar adventures related of him in this manner 
it is also said that some days afterward another 
girl, named Mary Cregan, found him concealed 
on the farm where she worked; and if the story 
is true, she must also have had the shock of an 
uncanny experience, for when she was busy at 
some lonely task in the yard she heard a voice 
speaking out of the well, and found that the ec- 
centric had managed to drop himself into the 
bucket which was some little way below, the well 
only partly full of water. In this case, however, 
he had to appeal to the woman to wind up the 
rope. And men say it was when this news was 
told to the other woman that her soul walked 
over the border line of treason. 
37 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

Such, at least, were the stories told of him in 
the countryside, and there were many more — 
as that he had stood insolently in a splendid green 
dressing gown on the steps of a great hotel, and 
then led the police a chase through a long suite 
of grand apartments, and finally through his own 
bedroom on to a balcony that overhung the river. 
The moment the pursuers stepped on to the bal- 
cony it broke under them, and they dropped pell- 
mell into the eddying waters, while Michael, who 
had thrown off his gown and dived, was able to 
swim away. It was said that he had carefully 
cut away the props so that they would not sup- 
port anything so heavy as a policeman. But 
here again he was immediately fortunate, yet 
ultimately unfortunate, for it is said that one of 
the men was drowned, leaving a family feud 
which made a little rift in his popularity. These 
stories can now be told in some detail, not be- 
cause they are the most marvelous of his many 
adventures, but because these alone were not cov- 
ered with silence by the loyalty of the peasantry. 
These alone found their way into official reports, 
and it is these which three of the chief officials of 
the country were reading and discussing when the 
more remarkable part of this story begins. 

Night was far advanced and the lights shone 

in the cottage that served for a temporary police 

station near the coast. On one side of it were 

the last houses of the straggling village, and on 

38 



The Vanishing Prince 

the other nothing but a waste moorland stretch- 
ing away toward the sea, the line of which was 
broken by no landmark except a solitary tower 
of the prehistoric pattern still found in Ireland, 
standing up as slender as a column, but pointed 
like a pyramid. At a wooden table in front of 
the window, which normally looked out on this 
landscape, sat two men in plain clothes, but with 
something of a military bearing, for indeed they 
were the two chiefs of the detective service of 
that district. The senior of the two, both in age 
and rank, was a sturdy man with a short white 
beard, and frosty eyebrows fixed in a frown 
which suggested rather worry than severity. 

His name was Morton, and he was a Liver- 
pool man long pickled in the Irish quarrels, and 
doing his duty among them in a sour fashion not 
altogether unsympathetic. He had spoken a 
few sentences to his companion, Nolan, a tall, 
dark man with a cadaverous equine Irish face, 
when he seemed to remember something and 
touched a bell which rang in another room The 
subordinate he had summoned immediately ap- 
peared with a sheaf of papers in his hand. 

"Sit down, Wilson," he said. 'Those are the 
dispositions, I suppose." 

"Yes," replied the third officer. "I think I've 
got all there is to be got out of them, so I sent 
the people away." 

"Did Mary Cregan give evidence?" asked 
4 39 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

Morton, with a frown that looked a little heavier 
than usual. 

"No, but her master did," answered tne man 
called Wilson, who had flat, red hair and a plain, 
pale face, not without sharpness. "I think he's 
hanging round the girl himself and is out against 
a rival. There's always some reason of that 
sort when we are told the truth about anything. 
And you bet the other girl told right enough." 

"Well, let's hope they'll be some sort of use," 
remarked Nolan, in a somewhat hopeless man- 
ner, gazing out into the darkness. 

"Anything is to the good," said Morton, "that 
lets us know anything about him." 

"Do we know anything about him?" asked the 
melancholy Irishman. 

"We know one thing about him," said Wilson, 
"and it's the one thing that nobody ever knew 
before. We know where he is." 

"Are you sure?" inquired Morton, looking at 
him sharply. 

"Quite sure," replied his assistant. "At this 
very minute he is in that tower over there by 
the shore. If you go near enough you'll see the 
candle burning in the window." 

As he spoke the noise of a horn sounded on 
the road outside, and a moment after they heard 
the throbbing of a motor car brought to a stand- 
still before the door. Morton instantly sprang 
to his feet. 

40 



The Vanishing Prince 

"Thank the Lord that's the car from Dublin," 
he said. "I can't do anything without special 
authority, not if he were sitting on the top of 
the tower and putting out his tongue at us. But 
the chief can do what he thinks best." 

He hurried out to the entrance and was soon 
exchanging greetings with a big handsome man 
in a fur coat, who brought into the dingy little 
station the indescribable glow of the great cities 
and the luxuries of the great world. 

For this was Sir Walter Carey, an official of 
such eminence in Dublin Castle that nothing 
short of the case of Prince Michael would have 
brought him on such a journey in the middle of 
the night. But the case of Prince Michael, as it 
happened, was complicated by legalism as well 
as lawlessness. On the last occasion he had 
escaped by a forensic quibble and not, as usual, 
by a private escapade; and it was a question 
whether at the moment he was amenable to the 
law or not. It might be necessary to stretch a 
point, but a man like Sir Walter could probably 
stretch it as far as he liked. 

Whether he intended to do so was a question 
to be considered. Despite the almost aggressive 
touch of luxury in the fur coat, it soon became 
apparent that Sir Walter's large leonine head 
was for use as well as ornament, and he con- 
sidered the matter soberly and sanely enough. 
Five chairs were set round the plain deal table, 
4i 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

for who should Sir Walter bring with him but 
his young relative and secretary, Home Fisher. 
Sir Walter listened with grave attention, and his 
secretary with polite boredom, to the string of 
episodes by which the police had traced the fly- 
ing rebel from the steps of the hotel to the soli- 
tary tower beside the sea. There at least he 
was cornered betweeen the moors and the break- 
ers ; and the scout sent by Wilson reported him 
as writing under a solitary candle, perhaps com- 
posing another of his tremendous proclamations. 
Indeed, it would have been typical of him to 
choose it as the place in which finally to turn 
to bay. He had some remote claim on it, as 
on a family castle; and those who knew him 
thought him capable of imitating the primitive 
Irish chieftains who fell fighting against the sea. 

"I saw some queer-looking people leaving as 
I came in," said Sir Walter Carey. "I suppose 
they were your witnesses. But why do they 
turn up here at this time of night?" 

Morton smiled grimly. "They come here by 
night because they would be dead men if they 
came here by day. They are criminals commit- 
ting a crime that is more horrible here than theft 
or murder." 

"What crime do you mean?" asked the other, 
with some curiosity. 

"They are helping the law," said Morton. 

There was a silence, and Sir Walter considered 
42 



The Vanishing Prince 

the papers before him with an abstracted eye. 
At last he spoke. 

"Quite so; but look here, if the local feeling 
is as lively as that there are a good many points 
to consider. I believe the new Act will enable 
me to collar him now if I think it best. But is 
it best? A serious rising would do us no good 
in Parliament, and the government has enemies 
in England as well as Ireland. It won't do if I 
have done what looks a little like sharp practice, 
and then only raised a revolution." 

"It's all the other way," said the man called 
Wilson, rather quickly. "There won't be half 
so much of a revolution if you arrest him as there 
will if you leave him loose for three days longer. 
But, anyhow, there can't be anything nowadays 
that the proper police can't manage." 

"Mr. Wilson is a Londoner," said the Irish 
detective, with a smile. 

"Yes, I'm a cockney, all right," replied Wilson, 
"and I think I'm all the better for that. Espe- 
cially at this job, oddly enough." 

Sir Walter seemed slightly amused at the per- 
tinacity of the third officer, and perhaps even 
more amused at the slight accent with which he 
spoke, which rendered rather needless his boast 
about his origin. 

"Do you mean to say," he asked, "that you 
know more about the business here because you 
have come from London?" 

43 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"Sounds funny, I know, but I do believe it," 
answered Wilson. "I believe these affairs want 
fresh methods. But most of all I believe they 
want a fresh eye." 

The superior officers laughed, and the red- 
haired man went on with a slight touch of 
temper : 

"Well, look at the facts. See how the fellow 
got away every time, and you'll understand what 
I mean. Why was he able to stand in the place 
of the scarecrow, hidden by nothing but an old 
hat? Because it was a village policeman who 
knew the scarecrow was there, was expecting it, 
and therefore took no notice of it. Now I never 
expect a scarecrow. I've never seen one in the 
street, and I stare at one when I see it in the 
field. It's a new thing to me and worth noticing. 
And it was just the same when he hid in the 
well. You are ready to find a well in a place 
like that; you look for a well, and so you don't 
see it. I don't look for it, and therefore I do 
look at it." 

"It is certainly an idea," said Sir Walter, smil- 
ing, "but what about the balcony? Balconies are 
occasionally seen in London." 

"But not rivers right under them, as if it was 
in Venice," replied Wilson. 

"It is certainly a new idea," repeated Sir 
Walter, with something like respect. He had 
all the love of the luxurious classes for new ideas. 
44 



The Vanishing Prince 

But he also had a critical faculty, and was in- 
clined to think, after due reflection, that it was 
a true idea as well. 

Growing dawn had already turned the window 
panes from black to gray when Sir Walter got 
abruptly to his feet. The others rose also, tak- 
ing this for a signal that the arrest was to be 
undertaken. But their leader stood for a mo- 
ment in deep thought, as if conscious that he 
had come to a parting of the ways. 

Suddenly the silence was pierced by a long, 
wailing cry from the dark moors outside. The 
silence that followed it seemed more startling 
than the shriek itself, and it lasted until Nolan 
said, heavily: 

" 'Tis the banshee. Somebody is marked for 
the grave." 

His long, large-featured face was as pale as 
a moon, and it was easy to remember that he 
was the only Irishman in the room. 

"Well, I know that banshee," said Wilson, 
cheerfully, "ignorant as you think I am of these 
things. I talked to that banshee myself an hour 
ago, and I sent that banshee up to the tower 
and told her to sing out like that if she could get 
a glimpse of our friend writing his proclama- 
tion." 

"Do you mean that girl Bridget Royce ?" asked 
Morton, drawing his frosty brows together. 
"Has she turned king's evidence to that extent?" 
45 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"Yes," answered Wilson. "I know very little 
of these local things, you tell me, but I reckon an 
angry woman is much the same in all countries." 

Nolan, however, seemed still moody and un- 
like himself. "It's an ugly noise and an ugly 
business altogether," he said. "If it's really the 
end of Prince Michael it may well be the end of 
other things as well. When the spirit is on him 
he would escape by a ladder of dead men, and 
wade through that sea if it were made of 
blood." 

"Is that the real reason of your pious alarms?" 
asked Wilson, with a slight sneer. 

The Irishman's pale face blackened with a 
new passion. 

"I have faced as many murderers in County 
Clare as you ever fought with in Clapham Junc- 
tion, Mr. Cockney," he said. 

"Hush, please," said Morton, sharply. "Wil- 
son, you have no kind of right to imply doubt of 
your superior's conduct. I hope you will prove 
yourself as courageous and trustworthy as he has 
always been." 

The pale face of the red-haired man seemed 
a shade paler, but he was silent and composed, 
and Sir Walter went up to Nolan with marked 
/courtesy, saying, "Shall we go outside now, and 
get this business done?" 

Dawn had lifted, leaving a wide chasm of 
white between a great gray cloud and the great 

4 6 



The Vanishing Prince 

gray moorland, beyond which the tower was out- 
lined against the daybreak and the sea. 

Something in its plain and primitive shape 
vaguely suggested the dawn in the first days of 
the earth, in some prehistoric time when even 
the colors were hardly created, when there was 
only blank daylight between cloud and clay. 
These dead hues were relieved only by one spot 
of gold — the spark of the candle alight in the 
window of the lonely tower, and burning on into 
the broadening daylight. As the group of de- 
tectives, followed by a cordon of policemen, 
spread out into a crescent to cut off all escape, the 
light in the tower flashed as if it were moved for 
a moment, and then went out. They knew the 
man inside had realized the daylight and blown 
out his candle. 

"There are other windows, aren't there?" 
asked Morton, "and a door, of course, some- 
where round the corner? Only a round tower 
has no corners." 

"Another example of my small suggestion," 
observed Wilson, quietly. "That queer tower 
was the first thing I saw when I came to these 
parts; and I can tell you a little more about it — 
or, at any rate, the outside of it. There are 
four windows altogether, one a little way from 
this one, but just out of sight. Those are both 
on the ground floor, and so is the third on the 
other side, making a sort of triangle. But the 
47 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

fourth is just above the third, and I suppose it 
looks on an upper floor." 

"It's only a sort of loft, reached by a ladder," 
said Nolan. "I've played in the place when I 
was a child. It's no more than an empty shell." 
And his sad face grew sadder, thinking perhaps 
of the tragedy of his country and the part that 
he played in it. 

"The man must have got a table and chair, 
at any rate," said Wilson, "but no doubt he 
could have got those from some cottage. If I 
might make a suggestion, sir, I think we ought 
to approach all the five entrances at once, so to 
speak. One of us should go to the door and 
one to each window; Macbride here has a ladder 
for the upper window." 

Mr. Home Fisher languidly turned to his dis- 
tinguished relative and spoke for the first time. 

"I am rather a convert to the cockney school 
of psychology," he said in an almost inaudible 
voice. 

The others seemed to feel the same influence 
in different ways, for the group began to break 
up in the manner indicated. Morton moved 
toward the window immediately in front of 
them, where the hidden outlaw had just snuffed 
the candle; Nolan, a little farther westward to 
the next window; while Wilson, followed by 
Macbride with the ladder, went round to the two 
windows at the back. Sir Walter Carey himself, 
48 



The Vanishing Prince 

followed by his secretary, began to walk round 
toward the only door, to demand admittance 
in a more regular fashion. 

"He will be armed, of course," remarked Sir 
Walter, casually. 

u By all accounts, " replied Home Fisher, "he 
can do more with a candlestick than most men 
with a pistol. But he is pretty sure to have the 
pistol, too." 

Even as he spoke the question was answered 
with a tongue of thunder. Morton had just 
placed himself in front of the nearest window, 
his broad shoulders blocking the aperture. For 
an instant it was lit from within as with red fire, 
followed by a thundering throng of echoes. The 
square shoulders seemed to alter in shape, and 
the sturdy figure collapsed among the tall, rank 
grasses at the foot of the tower. A puff of 
smoke floated from the window like a little cloud. 
The two men behind rushed to the spot and 
raised him, but he was dead. 

Sir Walter straightened himself and called out 
something that was lost in another noise of fir- 
ing; it was possible that the police were already 
avenging their comrade from the other side, 
Fisher had already raced round to the next 
window, and a new cry of astonishment from him 
brought his patron to the same spot. Nolan, the 
Irish policeman, had also fallen, sprawling all 
his great length in the grass, and it was red with 
49 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

his blood. He was still alive when they reached 
him, but there was death on his face, and he was 
only able to make a final gesture telling them that 
all was over; and, with a broken word and a 
heroic effort, motioning them on to where his 
other comrades were besieging the back of the 
tower. Stunned by these rapid and repeated 
shocks, the two men could only vaguely obey the 
gesture, and, finding their way to the other 
windows at the back, they discovered a scene 
equally startling, if less final and tragic. The 
other two officers were not dead or mortally 
wounded, but Macbride lay with a broken leg 
and his ladder on top of him, evidently thrown 
down from the top window of the tower; while 
Wilson lay on his face, quite still as if stunned, 
with his red head among the gray and silver of 
the sea holly. In him, however, the impotence 
was but momentary, for he began to move and 
rise as the others came round the tower. 

"My God! it's like an explosion!" cried Sir 
Walter; and indeed it was the only word for 
this unearthly energy, by which one man had 
been able to deal death or destruction on three 
sides of the same small triangle at the same 
instant. 

Wilson had already scrambled to his feet and 
with splendid energy flew again at the window, 
revolver in hand. He fired twice into the open- 
ing and then disappeared in his own smoke ; but 

50 



The Vanishing Prince 

the thud of his feet and the shock of a falling 
chair told them that the intrepid Londoner had 
managed at last to leap into the room. Then 
followed a curious silence ; and Sir Walter, walk- 
ing to the window through the thinning smoke, 
looked into the hollow shell of the ancient tower. 
Except for Wilson, staring around him, there 
was nobody there. 

The inside of the tower was a single empty 
room, with nothing but a plain wooden chair and 
a table on which were pens, ink and paper, and 
the candlestick. Halfway up the high wall 
there was a rude timber platform under the 
upper window, a small loft which was more like 
a large shelf. It was reached only by a ladder, 
and it seemed to be as bare as the bare walls. 
Wilson completed his survey of the place and 
then went and stared at the things on the table. 
Then he silently pointed with his lean forefinger 
at the open page of the large notebook. The 
writer had suddenly stopped writing, even in the 
middle of a word. 

"I said it was like an explosion," said Sir 
Walter Carey at last. "And really the man him- 
self seems to have suddenly exploded. But he 
has blown himself up somehow without touching 
the tower. He's burst more like a bubble than 
a bomb." 

"He has touched more valuable things than 
the tower/' said Wilson, gloomily. 
5i 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

There was a long silence, and then Sir Walter 
said, seriously: "Well, Mr. Wilson, I am not 
a detective, and these unhappy happenings have 
left you in charge of that branch of the business. 
We all lament the cause of this, but I should like 
to say that I myself have the strongest confidence 
in your capacity for carrying on the work. What 
do you think we should do next?" 

Wilson seemed to rouse himself from his de- 
pression and acknowledged the speaker's words 
with a warmer civility than he had hitherto 
shown to anybody. He called in a few of the 
police to assist in routing out the interior, leaving 
the rest to spread themselves in a search party 
outside. 

"I think," he said, u the first thing is to make 
quite sure about the inside of this place, as it 
was hardly physically possible for him to have 
got outside. I suppose poor Nolan would have 
brought in his banshee and said it was super- 
naturally possible. But I've got no use for dis- 
embodied spirits when I'm dealing with facts. 
And the facts before me are an empty tower 
with a ladder, a chair, and a table." 

"The spiritualists," said Sir Walter, with a 
smile, "would say that spirits could find a great 
deal of use for a table." 

"I dare say they could if the spirits were on 
the table — in a bottle," replied Wilson, with a 
curl of his pale lip. "The people round here, 

52 



The Vanishing Prince 

when they're all sodden up with Irish whisky, 
may believe in such things. I think they want 
a little education in this country." 

Home Fisher's heavy eyelids fluttered in a 
faint attempt to rise, as if he were tempted to a 
lazy protest against the contemptuous tone of 
the investigator. 

"The Irish believe far too much in spirits to 
believe in spiritualism," he murmured. "They 
know too much about 'em. If you want a simple 
and childlike faith in any spirit that comes along 
you can get it in your favorite London." 

"I don't want to get it anywhere," said Wil- 
son, shortly. "I say I'm dealing with much 
simpler things than your simple faith, with a 
table and a chair and a ladder. Now what I 
want to say about them at the start is this. They 
are all three made roughly enough of plain wood. 
But the table and the chair are fairly new and 
comparatively clean. The ladder is covered with 
dust and there is a cobweb under the top rung 
of it. That means that he borrowed the first 
two quite recently from some cottage, as we 
supposed, but the ladder has been a long time 
in this rotten old dustbin. Probably it was 
part of the original furniture, an heirloom in 
this magnificent palace of the Irish kings." 

Again Fisher looked at him under his eyelids, 
but seemed too sleepy to speak, and Wilson went 
on with his argument. 

53 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"Now it's quite clear that something very odd 
has just happened in this place. The chances 
are ten to one, it seems to me, that it had some- 
thing specially to do with this place. Probably 
he came here because he could do it only here ; 
it doesn't seem very inviting otherwise. But 
the man knew it of old; they say it belonged to 
his family, so that altogether, I think, every- 
thing points to something in the construction of 
the tower itself." 

"Your reasoning seems to me excellent," said 
Sir Walter, who was listening attentively. "But 
what could it be?" 

"You see now what I mean about the ladder," 
went on the detective; "it's the only old piece 
of furniture here and the first thing that caught 
that cockney eye of mine. But there is some- 
thing else. That loft up there is a sort of 
lumber room without any lumber. So far as I 
can see, it's as empty as everything else ; and, as 
things are, I don't see the use of the ladder lead- 
ing to it. It seems to me, as I can't find anything 
unusual down here, that it might pay us to look 
up there." 

He got briskly off the table on which he was 
sitting (for the only chair was allotted to Sir 
Walter) and ran rapidly up the ladder to the 
platform above. He was soon followed by the 
others, Mr. Fisher going last, however, with 
an appearance of considerable nonchalance. 
54 



The Vanishing Prince 

At this stage, however, they were destined to 
disappointment; Wilson nosed in every corner 
like a terrier and examined the roof almost in the 
posture of a fly, but half an hour afterward they 
had to confess that they were still without a clew. 
Sir Walter's private secretary seemed more and 
more threatened with inappropriate slumber, 
and, having been the last to climb up the ladder, 
seemed now to lack the energy even to climb 
down again. 

"Come along, Fisher," called out Sir Walter 
from below, when the others had regained the 
floor. "We must consider whether we'll pull 
the whole place to pieces to see what it's made 
of." 

"I'm coming in a minute," said the voice from 
the ledge above their heads, a voice somewhat 
suggestive of an articulate yawn. 

"What are you waiting for?" asked Sir Wal- 
ter, impatiently. "Can you see anything there?" 

"Well, yes, in a way," replied the voice, 
vaguely. "In fact, I see it quite plain now." 

"What is it?" asked Wilson, sharply, from 
the table on which he sat kicking his heels rest- 
lessly. 

"Well, it's a man," said Home Fisher. 

Wilson bounded off the table as if he had been 
kicked off it. "What do you mean?" he cried. 
"How can you possibly see a man?" 

"I can see him through the window," replied 
5 55 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

the secretary, mildly. "I see him coming across 
the moor. He's making a bee line across the 
open country toward this tower. He evidently 
means to pay us a visit. And, considering who 
it seems to be, perhaps it would be more polite 
if we were all at the door to receive him." And 
in a leisurely manner the secretary came down 
the ladder. 

"Who it seems to be!" repeated Sir Walter 
in astonishment. 

"Well, I think it's the man you call Prince 
Michael," observed Mr. Fisher, airily. "In 
fact, I'm sure it is. I've seen the police portraits 
of him." 

There was a dead silence, and Sir Walter's 
usually steady brain seemed to go round like a 
windmill. 

"But, hang it all !" he said at last, "even sup- 
posing his own explosion could have thrown him 
half a mile away, without passing through any 
of the windows, and left him alive enough for a 
country walk — even then, why the devil should 
he walk in this direction? The murderer does 
not generally revisit the scene of his crime so 
rapidly as all that." 

"He doesn't know yet that it is the scene of 
his crime," answered Home Fisher. 

"What on earth do you mean? You credit 
him with rather singular absence of mind." 

"Well, the truth is, it isn't the scene of his 
56 



The Vanishing Prince 

crime," said Fisher, and went and looked out 
of the window. 

There was another silence, and then Sir Walter 
said, quietly: "What sort of notion have you 
really got in your head, Fisher? Have you de- 
veloped a new theory about how this fellow es- 
caped out of the ring round him?" 

"He never escaped at all," answered the man 
at the window, without turning round. "He 
never escaped out of the ring because he was 
never inside the ring. He was not in this tower 
at all, at least not when we were surrounding it." 

He turned and leaned back against the window, 
but, in spite of his usual listless manner, they 
almost fancied that the face in shadow was a 
little pale. 

"I began to guess something of the sort when 
we were some way from the tower," he said. 
"Did you notice that sort of flash or flicker the 
candle gave before it was extinguished? I was 
almost certain it was only the last leap the flame 
gives when a candle burns itself out. And then 
I came into this room and I saw that." 

He pointed at the table and Sir Walter caught 
his breath with a sort of curse at his own blind- 
ness. For the candle in the candlestick had 
obviously burned itself away to nothing and left 
him, mentally, at least, very completely in the 
dark. 

"Then there is a sort of mathematical ques- 
57 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

tion," went on Fisher, leaning back in his limp 
way and looking up at the bare walls, as if 
tracing imaginary diagrams there. "It's not so 
easy for a man in the third angle to face the 
other two at the same moment, especially if they 
are at the base of an isosceles. I am sorry if it 
sounds like a lecture on geometry, but " 

"I'm afraid we have no time for it," said Wil- 
son, coldly. "If this man is really coming back, 
I must give my orders at once." 

"I think I'll go on with it, though," observed 
Fisher, staring at the roof with insolent serenity. 

"I must ask you, Mr. Fisher, to let me con- 
duct my inquiry on my own lines," said Wilson, 
firmly. "I am the officer in charge now." 

"Yes," remarked Home Fisher, softly, but 
with an accent that somehow chilled the hearer. 
"Yes. But why?" 

Sir Walter was staring, for he had never seen 
his rather lackadaisical young friend look like 
that before. Fisher was looking at Wilson with 
lifted lids, and the eyes under them seemed to 
have shed or shifted a film, as do the eyes of an 
eagle. 

"Why are you the officer in charge now?" he 
asked. "Why can you conduct the inquiry on 
your own lines now? How did it come about, 
I wonder, that the elder officers are not here to 
interfere with anything you do?" 

Nobody spoke, and nobody can say how soon 
58 



The Vanishing Prince 

anyone would have collected his wits to speak 
when a noise came from without. It was the 
heavy and hollow sound of a blow upon the door 
of the tower, and to their shaken spirits it 
sounded strangely like the hammer of doom. 

The wooden door of the tower moved on its 
rusty hinges under the hand that struck it and 
Prince Michael came into the room. Nobody 
had the smallest doubt about his identity. His 
light clothes, though frayed with his adventures, 
were of fine and almost foppish cut, and he wore 
a pointed beard, or imperial, perhaps as a further 
reminiscence of Louis Napoleon; but he was a 
much taller and more graceful man thattiis proto- 
type. Before anyone could speak he had si- 
lenced everyone for an instant with a slight but 
splendid gesture of hospitality. 

u Gentlemen," he said, "this is a poor place 
now, but you are heartily welcome." 

Wilson was the first to recover, and he took a 
stride toward the newcomer. 

"Michael O'Neill, I arrest you in the king's 
name for the murder of Francis Morton and 
James Nolan. It is my duty to warn you " 

"No, no, Mr. Wilson," cried Fisher, sud- 
denly. "You shall not commit a third murder." 

Sir Walter Carey rose from his chair, which 
fell over with a crash behind him. "What does 
all this mean?" he called out in an authoritative 
manner. 

59 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"It means," said Fisher, "that this man, 
Hooker Wilson, as soon as he had put his head 
in at that window, killed his two comrades who 
had put their heads in at the other windows, by 
firing across the empty room. That is what it 
means. And if you want to know, count how 
many times he is supposed to have fired and 
then count the charges left in his revolver." 

Wilson, who was still sitting on the table, 
abruptly put a hand out for the weapon that lay 
beside him. But the next movement was the 
most unexpected of all, for the prince standing 
in the doorway passed suddenly from the dig- 
nity of a statue to the swiftness of an acrobat 
and rent the revolver out of the detective's hand. 

"You dog!" he cried. "So you are the type 
of English truth, as I am of Irish tragedy — 
you who come to kill me, wading through the 
blood of your brethren. If they had fallen in 
a feud on the hillside, it would be called murder, 
and yet your sin might be forgiven you. But I, 
who am innocent, I was to be slain with cere- 
mony. There would be long speeches and patient 
judges listening to my vain plea of innocence, 
noting down my despair and disregarding it. Yes, 
that is what I call assassination. But killing may 
be no murder; there is one shot left in this little 
gun, and I know where it should go." 

Wilson turned quickly on the table, and even 
as he turned he twisted in agony, for Michael 

60 



The Vanishing Prince 

shot him through the body where he sat, so that 
he tumbled off the table like lumber. 

The police rushed to lift him; Sir Walter stood 
speechless; and then, with a strange and weary 
gesture, Home Fisher spoke. 

"You are indeed a type of the Irish tragedy," 
he said. "You were entirely in the right, and 
you have put yourself in the wrong." 

The prince's face was like marble for a space ; 
then there dawned in his eyes a light not unlike 
that of despair. He laughed suddenly and flung 
the smoking pistol on the ground. 

"I am indeed in the wrong," he said. "I have 
committed a crime that may justly bring a curse 
on me ar.d my children." 

Home Fisher did not seem entirely satisfied 
with this very sudden repentance ; he kept his eyes 
on the man and only said, in a low voice, "What 
crime do you mean?" 

"I have helped English justice," replied Prince 
Michael. U I have avenged your king's officers; 
I have done the work of his hangman. For that 
truly I deserve to be hanged." 

And he turned to the police with a gesture 
that did not so much surrender to them, but 
rather command them to arrest him. 

This was the story that Home Fisher told to 
Harold March, the journalist, many years after, 
in a little, but luxurious, restaurant near Picca- 
61 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

dilly. He had invited March to dinner some 
time after the affair he called "The Face in the 
Target," and the conversation had naturally 
turned on that mystery and afterward on earlier 
memories of Fisher's life and the wav in which 
he was led to study such problems as those of 
Prince Michael. Home Fisher was fifteen years 
older; his thin hair had faded to frontal bald- 
ness, and his long, thin hands dropped less with 
affectation and more with fatigue. And he told 
the story of the Irish adventure of his youth, 
because it recorded the first occasion on which 
he had ever come in contact with crime, or dis- 
covered how darkly and how terribly crime can 
be entangled with law. 

"Hooker Wilson was the first criminal I ever 
knew, and he was a policeman," explained 
Fisher, twirling his wine glass. u And all my 
life has been a mixed-up business of the sort. 
He was a man of very real talent, and perhaps 
genius, and well worth studying, both as a de- 
tective and a criminal. His white face and red 
hair were typical of him, for he was one of those 
who are cold and yet on fire for fame; and he 
could control anger, but not ambition. He swal- 
lowed the snubs of his superiors in that first 
quarrel, though he boiled with resentment; but 
when he suddenly saw the two heads dark against 
the dawn and framed in the two windows, he 
could not miss the chance, not only of revenge, 
62 



The Vanishing Prince 

but of the removal of the two obstacles to his 
promotion. He was a dead shot and counted 
on silencing both, though proof against him 
would have been hard in any case. But, as a 
matter of fact, he had a narrow escape, in the 
case of Nolan, who lived just long enough to say, 
Wilson' and point. We thought he was sum- 
moning help for his comrade, but he was really 
denouncing his murderer. After that it was 
easy to throw down the ladder above him (for 
a man up a ladder cannot see clearly what is 
below and behind) and to throw himself on the 
ground as another victim of the catastrophe. 

"But there was mixed up with his murderous 
ambition a real belief, not only in his own talents, 
but in his own theories. He did believe in what 
he called a fresh eye, and he did want scope for 
fresh methods. There was something in his 
view, but it failed where such things commonly 
fail, because the fresh eye cannot see the unseen. 
It is true about the ladder and the scarecrow, 
but not about the life and the soul; and he made 
a bad mistake about what a man like Michael 
would do when he heard a woman scream. All 
Michael's very vanity and vainglory made him 
rush out at once; he would have walked into 
Dublin Castle for a lady's glove. Call it his pose 
or what you will, but he would have done it. 
What happened when he met her is another story, 
and one we may never know, but from tales I've 
63 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

heard since, they must have been reconciled. Wil- 
son was wrong there; but there was something, 
for all that, in his notion that the newcomer 
sees most, and that the man on the spot may 
know too much to know anything. He was right 
about some things. He was right about me." 

"About you?" asked Harold March in some 
wonder. 

"I am the man who knows too much to know 
anything, or, at any rate, to do anything," said 
Home Fisher. "I don't mean especially about 
Ireland. I mean about England. I mean about 
the whole way we are governed, and perhaps 
the only way we can be governed. You asked 
me just now what became of the survivors of 
that tragedy. Well, Wilson recovered and we 
managed to persuade him to retire. But we had 
to pension that damnable murderer more mag- 
nificently than any hero who ever fought for 
England. I managed to save Michael from the 
worst, but we had to send that perfectly innocent 
man to penal servitude for a crime we know he 
never committed, and it was only afterward that 
we could connive in a sneakish way at his escape. 
And Sir Walter Carey is Prime Minister of this 
country, which he would probably never have 
been if the truth had been told of such a hor- 
rible scandal in his department. It might have 
done for us altogether in Ireland; it would cer» 
tainly have done for him. And he is my father's 
64 



The Vanishing Prince 

old friend, and has always smothered me with 
kindness. I am too tangled up with the whole 
thing, you see, and I was certainly never born 
to set it right. You look distressed, not to say 
shocked, and I'm not at all offended at it. Let 
us change the subject by all means, if you like. 
What do you think of this Burgundy? It's 
rather a discovery of mine, like the restaurant 
itself." 

And he proceeded to talk learnedly and luxuri- 
antly on all the wines of the world; on which 
subject, also, some moralists would consider that 
he knew too much. 



Ill 

THE SOUL OF THE SCHOOLBOY 

A LARGE map of London would be needed 
**- ^ to display the wild and zigzag course of 
one day's journey undertaken by an uncle and 
his nephew ; or, to speak more truly, of a nephew 
and his uncle. For the nephew, a schoolboy on 
a holiday, was in theory the god in the car, or in 
the cab, tram, tube, and so on, while his uncle 
was at most a priest dancing before him and 
offering sacrifices. To put it more soberly, the 
schoolboy had something of the stolid air of a 
young duke doing the grand tour, while his 
elderly relative was reduced to the position of a 
courier, who nevertheless had to pay for every- 
thing like a patron. The schoolboy was officially 
known as Summers Minor, and in a more social 
manner as Stinks, the only public tribute to his 
career as an amateur photographer and elec- 
trician. The uncle was the Rev. Thomas Twy- 
ford, a lean and lively old gentleman with a red, 
eager face and white hair. He was in the ordi- 
nary way a country clergyman, but he was one of 
those who achieve the paradox of being famous 
in an obscure way, because they are famous in 
66 



The Soul of the Schoolboy 

an obscure world. In a small circle of ecclesias- 
tical archaeologists, who were the only people 
who could even understand one another's dis- 
coveries, he occupied a recognized and respect- 
able place. And a critic might have found even 
in that day's journey at least as much of the 
uncle's hobby as of the nephew's holiday. 

His original purpose had been wholly pater- 
nal and festive. But, like many other intelligent 
people, he was not above the weakness of play- 
ing with a toy to amuse himself, on the theory 
that it would amuse a child. His toys were 
crowns and miters and croziers and swords of 
state ; and he had lingered over them, telling him- 
self that the boy ought to see all the sights of 
London. And at the end of the day, after a 
tremendous tea, he rather gave the game away 
by winding up with a visit in which hardly any 
human boy could be conceived as taking an 
interest — an underground chamber supposed to 
have been a chapel, recently excavated on the 
north bank of the Thames, and containing liter- 
ally nothing whatever but one old silver coin. 
But the coin, to those who knew, was more soli- 
tary and splendid than the Koh-i-noor. It was 
Roman, and was said to bear the head of St. 
Paul; and round it raged the most vital contro- 
versies about the ancient British Church. Itcould 
hardly be denied, however, that the controver- 
sies left Summers Minor comparatively cold. 
67 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

Indeed, the things that interested Summers 
Minor, and the things that did not interest him, 
had mystified and amused his uncle for several 
hours. He exhibited the English schoolboy's 
startling ignorance and startling knowledge — 
knowledge of some special classification in which 
he can generally correct and confound his elders. 
He considered himself entitled, at Hampton 
Court on a holiday, to forget the very names of 
Cardinal Wolsey or William of Orange; but 
he could hardly be dragged from some details 
about the arrangement of the electric bells in 
the neighboring hotel. He was solidly dazed by 
Westminster Abbey, which is not so unnatural 
since that church became the lumber room of 
the larger and less successful statuary of the 
eighteenth century. But he had a magic and 
minute knowledge of the Westminster omnibuses, 
and indeed of the whole omnibus system of 
London, the colors and numbers of which he 
knew as a herald knows heraldry. He would 
cry out against a momentary confusion between 
a light-green Paddington and a dark-green Bays- 
water vehicle, as his uncle would at the identifi- 
cation of a Greek ikon and a Roman image. 

"Do you collect omnibuses like stamps?" 
asked his uncle. "They must need a rather large 
album. Or do you keep them in your locker?" 

"I keep them in my head," replied the nephew, 
with legitimate firmness. 

68 



The Soul of the Schoolboy 

"It does you credit, I admit," replied the 
clergyman. "I suppose it were vain to ask for 
what purpose you have learned that out of a 
thousand things. There hardly seems to be a 
career in it, unless you could be permanently on 
the pavement to prevent old ladies getting into 
the wrong bus. Well, we must get out of this 
one, for this is our place. I want to show you 
what they call St. Paul's Penny." 

"Is it like St. Paul's Cathedral?" asked the 
youth with resignation, as they alighted. 

At the entrance their eyes were arrested by a 
singular figure evidently hovering there with a 
similar anxiety to enter. It was that of a dark, 
thin man in a long black robe rather like a cas- 
sock; but the black cap on his head was of too 
strange a shape to be a biretta. It suggested, 
rather, some archaic headdress of Persia or 
Babylon. He had a curious black beard appear- 
ing only at the corners of his chin, and his large 
eyes were oddly set in his face like the flat decora- 
tive eyes painted in old Egyptian profiles. Be- 
fore they had gathered more than a general 
impression of him, he had dived into the door- 
way that was their own destination. 

Nothing could be seen above ground of the 
sunken sanctuary except a strong wooden hut, 
of the sort recently run up for many military 
and official purposes, the wooden floor of which 
was indeed a mere platform over the excavated 

69 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

cavity below. A soldier stood as a sentry out- 
side, and a superior soldier, an Anglo-Indian 
officer of distinction, sat writing at the desk in- 
side. Indeed, the sightseers soon found that this 
particular sight was surrounded with the most 
extraordinary precautions. I have compared the 
silver coin to the Koh-i-noor, and in one sense it 
was even conventionally comparable, since by a 
historical accident it was at one time almost 
counted among the Crown jewels, or at least 
the Crown relics, until one of the royal princes 
publicly restored it to the shrine to which it was 
supposed to belong. Other causes combined to 
concentrate official vigilance upon it; there had 
been a scare about spies carrying explosives in 
small objects, and one of those experimental 
orders which pass like waves over bureaucracy 
had decreed first that all visitors should change 
their clothes for a sort of official sackcloth, and 
then (when this method caused some murmurs) 
that they should at least turn out their pockets. 
Colonel Morris, the officer in charge, was a 
short, active man with a grim and leathery face, 
but a lively and humorous eye — a contradiction 
borne out by his conduct, for he at once derided 
the safeguards and yet insisted on them. 

"I don't care a button myself for Paul's Penny, 
or such things," he admitted in answer to some 
antiquarian openings from the clergyman whp 
was slightly acquainted with him, "but I wear 

70 



The Soul of the Schoolboy 

the King's coat, you know, and it's a serious 
thing when the King's uncle leaves a thing here 
with his own hands under my charge. But as 
for saints and relics and things, I fear I'm a bit 
of a Voltairian; what you would call a skeptic." 

"I'm not sure it's even skeptical to believe in 
the royal family and not in the 'Holy' Family," 
replied Mr. Twyford. "But, of course, I can 
easily empty my pockets, to show I don't carry 
a bomb." 

The little heap of the parson's possessions 
which he left on the table consisted chiefly of 
papers, over and above a pipe and a tobacco 
pouch and some Roman and Saxon coins. The 
rest were catalogues of old books, and pam- 
phlets, like one entitled "The Use of Sarum," 
one glance at which was sufficient both for the 
colonel and the schoolboy. They could not see 
the use of Sarum at all. The contents of the 
boy's pockets naturally made a larger heap, and 
included marbles, a ball of string, an electric 
torch, a magnet, a small catapult, and, of course, 
a large pocketknife, almost to be described as 
a small tool box, a complex apparatus on which 
he seemed disposed to linger, pointing out that 
it included a pair of nippers, a tool for punch- 
ing holes in wood, and, above all, an instrument 
for taking stones out of a horse's hoof. The 
comparative absence of any horse he appeared 
to regard as irrelevant, as if it were a mere ap- 

« 1i 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

pendage easily supplied. But when the turn 
came of the gentleman in the black gown, he did 
not turn out his pockets, but merely spread out 
his hands. 

"I have no possessions," he said. 

"I'm afraid I must ask you to empty your 
pockets and make sure," observed the colonel, 
gruffly. 

"I have no pockets," said the stranger. 

Mr. Twyford was looking at the long black 
gown with a learned eye. 

"Are you a monk?" he asked, in a puzzled 
fashion. 

"I am a magus," replied the stranger. "You 
have heard of the magi, perhaps? I am a 
magician." 

"Oh, I say!" exclaimed Summers Minor, with 
prominent eyes. 

"But I was once a monk," went on the other. 
"I am what you would call an escaped monk. 
Yes, I have escaped into eternity. But the monks 
held one truth at least, that the highest life 
should be without possessions. I have no pocket 
money and no pockets, and all the stars are my 
trinkets." 

"They are out of reach, anyhow," observed 
Colonel Morris, in a tone which suggested that 
it was well for them. "I've known a good many 
magicians myself in India — mango plant and all. 
But the Indian ones are all frauds, I'll swear. 

72 



The Soul of the Schoolboy 

In fact, I had a good deal of fun showing them 
up. More fun than I have over this dreary job, 
anyhow. But here comes Mr. Symon, who will 
show you over the old cellar downstairs." 

Mr. Symon, the official guardian and guide, 
was a young man, prematurely gray, with a 
grave mouth which contrasted curiously with a 
very small, dark mustache with waxed points, 
that seemed somehow, separate from it, as if a 
black fly had settled on his face. He spoke with 
the accent of Oxford and the permanent official, 
but in as dead a fashion as the most indifferent 
hired guide. They descended a dark stone stair- 
case, at the floor of which Symon pressed a but- 
ton and a door opened on a dark room, or, rather, 
a room which had an instant before been dark. 
For almost as the heavy iron door swung open 
an almost blinding blaze of electric lights filled 
the whole interior. The fitful enthusiasm of 
Stinks at once caught fire, and he eagerly asked 
if the lights and the door worked together. 

"Yes, it's all one system," replied Symon. "It 
was all fitted up for the day His Royal Highness 
deposited the thing here. You see, it's locked 
up behind a glass case exactly as he left it." 

A glance showed that the arrangements for 
guarding the treasure were indeed as strong as 
they were simple. A single pane of glass cut off 
one corner of the room, in an iron framework 
let into the rock walls and the wooden roof 

73 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

above; there was now no possibility of reopen- 
ing the case without elaborate labor, except by 
breaking the glass, which would probably arouse 
the night watchman who was always within a 
few feet of it, even if he had fallen asleep. A 
close examination would have showed many more 
ingenious safeguards; but the eye of the Rev. 
Thomas Twyford, at least, was already riveted 
on what interested him much more — the dull 
silver disk which shone in the white light against 
a plain background of black velvet. 

"St. Paul's Penny, said to commemorate the 
visit of St. Paul to Britain, was probably pre- 
served in this chapel until the eighth century," 
Symon was saying in his clear but colorless voice. 
"In the ninth century it is supposed to have been 
carried away by the barbarians, and it reappears, 
after the conversion of the northern Goths, in 
the possession of the royal family of Gothland. 
His Royal Highness, the Duke of Gothland, re- 
tained it always in his own private custody, and 
when he decided to exhibit it to the public, placed 
it here with his own hand. It was immediately 
sealed up in such a manner " 

Unluckily at this point Summers Minor, whose 
attention had somewhat strayed from the reli- 
gious wars of the ninth century, caught sight of a 
short length of wire appearing in a broken patch 
in the wall. He precipitated himself at it, call- 
ing out, "I say, does that connect?" 

74 



The Soul of the Schoolboy 

It was evident that it did connect, for no 
sooner had the boy given it a twitch than the 
whole room went black, as if they had all been 
struck blind, and an instant afterward they heard 
the dull crash of the closing door. 

"Well, you've done it now," said Symon, in 
his tranquil fashion. Then after a pause he 
added, "I suppose they'll miss us sooner or later, 
and no doubt they can get it open; but it may 
take some little time." 

There was a silence, and then the unconquer- 
able Stinks observed : 

"Rotten that I had to leave my electric torch." 

"I think," said his uncle, with restraint, "that 
we are sufficiently convinced of your interest in 
electricity." 

Then after a pause he remarked, more ami- 
ably: "I suppose if I regretted any of my own 
impedimenta, it would be the pipe. Though, as 
a matter of fact, it's not much fun smoking in 
the dark. Everything seems different in the 
dark." 

"Everything is different in the dark," said a 
third voice, that of the man who called himself 
a magician. It was a very musical voice, and 
rather in contrast with his sinister and swarthy 
visage, which was now invisible. "Perhaps you 
don't know how terrible a truth that is. All you 
see are pictures made by the sun, faces and fur- 
niture and flowers and trees. The things them- 

75 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

selves may be quite strange to you. Something 
else may be standing now where you saw a 
table or a chair. The face of your friend may 
be quite different in the dark." 

A short, indescribable noise broke the stillness. 
Twyford started for a second, and then said, 
sharply : 

"Really, I don't think it's a suitable occasion 
for trying to frighten a child." 

"Who's a child?" cried the indignant Sum- 
mers, with a voice that had a crow, but also 
something of a crack in it. "And who's a funk, 
either? Not me." 

"I will be silent, then," said the other voice 
out of the darkness. "But silence also makes 
and unmakes." 

The required silence remained unbroken for 
a long time until at last the clergyman said to 
Symon in a low voice : 

"I suppose it's all right about air?" 

"Oh, yes," replied the other aloud; "there's 
a fireplace and a chimney in the office just by the 
door." 

A bound and the noise of a falling chair told 
them that the irrepressible rising generation had 
once more thrown itself across the room. They 
heard the ejaculation: "A chimney! Why, I'll 

be " and the rest was lost in muffled, but 

exultant, cries. 

The uncle called repeatedly and vainly, groped 

7 6 



The Soul of the Schoolboy 

his way at last to the opening, and, peering up 
it, caught a glimpse of a disk of daylight, which 
seemed to suggest that the fugitive had vanished 
in safety. Making his way back to the group 
by the glass case, he fell ever the fallen chair 
and took a moment to collect himself again. He 
had opened his mouth to speak to Symon, when 
he stopped, and suddenly found himself blink- 
ing in the full shock of the white light, and look- 
ing over the other man's shoulder, he saw that 
the door was standing open. 

"So they've got at us at last," he observed 
to Symon. 

The man in the black robe was leaning against 
the wall some yards away, with a smile carved 
on his face. 

"Here comes Colonel Morris," went on Twy- 
ford, still speaking to Symon. "One of us will 
have to tell him how the light went out. Will 
you?" 

But Symon still said nothing. He was stand- 
ing as still as a statue, and looking steadily at 
the black velvet behind the glass screen. He was 
looking at the black velvet because there was 
nothing else to look at. St. Paul's Penny was 
gone. 

Colonel Morris entered the room with two 
new visitors ; presumably two new sightseers de- 
layed by the accident. The foremost was a tall, 
fair, rather languid-looking man with a bald 
77 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

brow and a high-bridged nose; his companion 
was a younger man with light, curly hair and 
frank, and even innocent, eyes. Symon scarcely 
seemed to hear the newcomers; it seemed almost 
as if he had not realized that the return of the 
light revealed his brooding attitude. Then he 
started in a guilty fashion, and when he saw the 
elder of the two strangers, his pale face seemed 
to turn a shade paler. 

"Why it's Home Fisher I" and then after a 
pause he said in a low voice, "I'm in the devil 
of a hole, Fisher." 

"There does seem a bit of a mystery to be 
cleared up," observed the gentleman so ad- 
dressed. 

"It will never be cleared up," said the pale 
Symon. "If anybody could clear it up, you could. 
But nobody could." 

"I rather think I could," said another voice 
from outside the group, and they turned in sur- 
prise to realize that the man in the black robe 
had spoken again. 

"You!" said the colonel, sharply. "And how 
do you propose to play the detective? 11 

"I do not propose to play the detective," an- 
swered the other, in a clear voice like a bell. "I 
propose to play the magician. One of the ma- 
gicians you show up in India, Colonel." 

No one spoke for a moment, and then Home 
Fisher surprised everybody by saying, "Well, 

78 



The Soul of the Schoolboy 

let's go upstairs, and this gentleman can have 
a try." 

He stopped Symon, who had an automatic 
finger on the button, saying: "No, leave all the 
lights on. It's a sort of safeguard." 

"The thing can't be taken away now," said 
Symon, bitterly. 

"It can be put back," replied Fisher. 

Twyford had already run upstairs for news 
of his vanishing nephew, and he received news 
of him in a way that at once puzzled and re- 
assured him. On the floor above lay one of 
those large paper darts which boys throw at 
each other when the schoolmaster is out of the 
room. It had evidently been thrown in at the 
window, and on being unfolded displayed a 
scrawl of bad handwriting which ran: "Dear 
Uncle; I am all right. Meet you at the hotel 
later on," and then the signature. 

Insensibly comforted by this, the clergyman 
found his thoughts reverting voluntarily to his 
favorite relic, which came a good second in his 
sympathies to his favorite nephew, and before 
he knew where he was he found himself encircled 
by the group discussing its loss, and more or less 
carried away on the current of their excitement. 
But an undercurrent of query continued to run 
in his mind, as to what had really happened to 
the boy, and what was the boy's exact definition 
of being all right. 

79 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

Meanwhile Home Fisher had considerably 
puzzled everybody with his new tone and atti- 
tude. He had talked to the colonel about the 
military and mechanical arrangements, and dis- 
played a remarkable knowledge both of the de- 
tails of discipline and the technicalities of elec- 
tricity. He had talked to the clergyman, and 
shown an equally surprising knowledge of the 
religious and historical interests involved in the 
relic. He had talked to the man who called him- 
self a magician, and not only surprised but scan- 
dalized the company by an equally sympathetic 
familiarity with the most fantastic forms of Ori- 
ental occultism and psychic experiment. And 
in this last and least respectable line of inquiry 
he was evidently prepared to go farthest; he 
openly encouraged the magician, and was plainly 
prepared to follow the wildest ways of investiga- 
tion in which that magus might lead him. 

"How would you begin now?" he inquired, 
with an anxious politeness that reduced the 
colonel to a congestion of rage. 

"It is all a question of a force; of establish- 
ing communications for a force," replied that 
adept, affably, ignoring some military mutter- 
ings about the police force. "It is what you in 
the West used to call animal magnetism, but it 
is much more than that. I had better not say 
how much more. As to setting about it, the 
usual method is to throw some susceptible per- 

80 



Trie Soul of the Schoolboy 

son Into a trance, which serves as a sort of bridge 
or cord of communication, by which the force 
beyond can give him, as it were, an electric 
shock, and awaken his higher senses. It opens 
the sleeping eye of the mind." 

"I'm suspectible," said Fisher, either with sim- 
plicity or with a baffling irony. "Why not open 
my mind's eye for me? My friend Harold 
March here will tell you I sometimes see things, 
even in the dark." 

"Nobody sees anything except in the dark," 
said the magician. 

Heavy clouds of sunset were closing round the 
wooden hut, enormous clouds, of which only the 
corners* could be seen in the little window, like 
purple horns and tails, almost as if some huge 
monsters were prowling round the place. But 
the purple was already deepening to dark gray; 
it would soon be night. 

"Do not light the lamp," said the magus with 
quiet authority, arresting a movement in that 
direction. "I told you before that things happen 
only in the dark." 

How such a topsy-turvy scene ever came to be 
tolerated in the colonel's office, of all places, was 
afterward a puzzle in the memory of many, in- 
cluding the colonel. They recalled it like a sort 
of nightmare, like something they could not con- 
trol. Perhaps there was really a magnetism 
about the mesmerist; perhaps there was even 
81 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

more magnetism about the man mesmerized. 
Anyhow, the man was being mesmerized, for 
Home Fisher had collapsed into a chair with 
his long limbs loose and sprawling and his eyes 
staring at vacancy* and the other man was mes- 
merizing him, making sweeping movements with 
his darkly draped arms as if with black wings. 
The colonel had passed the point of explosion, 
and he dimly realized that eccentric aristocrats 
are allowed their fling. He comforted himself 
with the knowledge that he had already sent for 
the police, who would break up any such mas- 
querade, and with lighting a cigar, the red end 
of which, in the gathering darkness, glowed with 
protest. 

"Yes, I see pockets," the man in the trance 
was saying. "I see many pockets, but they are 
all empty. No; I see one pocket that is not 
empty." 

There was a faint stir in the stillness, and the 
magician said, "Can you see what is in the 
pocket?" 

"Yes," answered the other; "there are two 
bright things. I think they are two bits of steel. 
One of the pieces of steel is bent or crooked." 

"Have they been used in the removal of the 
relic from downstairs?" 

"Yes." 

There was another pause and the inquirer 
added, "Do you see anything of the relic itself?" 
82 



The Soul of the Schoolboy 

"I see something shining on the floor, like the 
shadow or the ghost of it. It is over there in 
the corner beyond the desk." 

There was a movement of men turning and 
then a sudden stillness, as of their stiffening, for 
over in the corner on the wooden floor there was 
really a round spot of pale light. It was the 
only spot of light in the room. The cigar had 
gone out. 

"It points the way," came the voice of the 
oracle. "The spirits are pointing the way to 
penitence, and urging the thief to restitution. I 
can see nothing more." His voice trailed off into 
a silence that lasted solidly for many minutes, 
like the long silence below when the theft had 
been committed. Then it was broken by the 
ring of metal on the floor, and the sound of some- 
thing spinning and falling like a tossed half- 
penny. 

"Light the lamp !" cried Fisher in a loud and 
even jovial voice, leaping to his feet with far less 
languor than usual. "I must be going now, but 
I should like to see it before I go. Why, I came 
on purpose to see it." 

The lamp was lit, and he did see it, for St. 
Paul's Penny was lying on the floor at his feet. 

"Oh, as for that," explained Fisher, when he 
was entertaining March and Twyford at lunch 
about a month later, "I merely wanted to play 
with the magician at his own game." 
83 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"I thought you meant to catch him in his own 
trap," said Twyf ord. "I can't make head or tail 
of anything yet, but to my mind he was always 
the suspect. I don't think he was necessarily a 
thief in the vulgar sense. The police always seem 
to think that silver is stolen for the sake of silver, 
but a thing like that might well be stolen out of 
some religious mania. A runaway monk turned 
mystic might well want it for some mystical 
purpose." 

"No," replied Fisher, "the runaway monk is 
not a thief. At any rate he is not the thief. And 
he's not altogether a liar, either. He said one 
true thing at least that night." 

"And what was that?" inquired March. 

"He said it was all magnetism. As a matter 
of fact, it was done by means of a magnet." 
Then, seeing they still looked puzzled, he added, 
"It was that toy magnet belonging to your 
nephew, Mr. Twyford." 

"But I don't understand," objected March. 
"If it was done with the schoolboy's magnet, I 
suppose it was done by the schoolboy." 

"Well," replied Fisher, reflectively, "it rather 
depends which schoolboy." 

"What on earth do you mean?" 

"The soul of a schoolboy is a curious thing," 
Fisher continued, in a meditative manner. "It 
can survive a great many things besides climb- 
ing out of a chimney. A man can grow gray in 
84 



The Soul of the Schoolboy 

great campaigns, and still have the soul of a 
schoolboy. A man can return with a great repu- 
tation from India and be put in charge of a great 
public treasure, and still have the soul of a 
schoolboy, waiting to be awakened by an acci- 
dent. And it is ten times more so when to the 
schoolboy you add the skeptic, who is generally 
a sort of stunted schoolboy. You said just now 
that things might be done by religious mania. 
Have you ever heard of irreligious mania? I 
assure you it exists very violently, especially in 
men who like showing up magicians in India. 
But here the skeptic had the temptation of show- 
ing up a much more tremendous sham nearer 
home." 

A light came into Harold March's eyes as he 
suddenly saw, as if afar off, the wider implica- 
tion of the suggestion. But Twyford was still 
wrestling with one problem at a time. 

"Do you really mean," he said, "that Colonel 
Morris took the relic?" 

"He was the only person who could use the 
magnet," replied Fisher. "In fact, your oblig- 
ing nephew left him a number of things he could 
use. He had a ball of string, and an instrument 
for making a hole in the wooden floor — I made 
a little play with that hole in the floor in my 
trance, by the way; with the lights left on below, 
it shone like a new shilling." 

Twyford suddenly bounded on his chair. "But 
85 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

in that case," he cried, in a new and altered voice, 
"why then of course — You said a piece of 
steel " 

"I said there were two pieces of steel," said 
Fisher. "The bent piece of steel was the boy's 
magnet. The other was the relic in the glass 
case." 

"But that is silver," answered the archaeolo- 
gist, in a voice now almost unrecognizable. 

"Oh," replied Fisher, soothingly, "I dare say 
it was painted with silver a little." 

There was a heavy silence, and at last Harold 
March said, 1{ But where is the real relic?" 

"Where it has been for five years," replied 
Home Fisher, "in the possession of a mad mil- 
lionaire named Vandam, in Nebraska. There 
was a playful little photograph about him in a 
society paper the other day, mentioning his de- 
lusion, and saying he was always being taken in 
about relics." 

Harold March frowned at the tablecloth; 
then, after an interval, he said: "I think I under- 
stand your notion of how the thing was actually 
done; according to that, Morris just made a 
hole and fished it up with a magnet at the end 
of a string. Such a monkey trick looks like 
mere madness, but I suppose he was mad, partly 
with the boredom of watching over what he felt 
was a fraud, though he couldn't prove it. Then 
came a chance to prove it, to himself at least, 

86 



The Soul of the Schoolboy 

and he had what he called 'fun' with it. Yes, I 
think I see a lot of details now. But it's just the 
whole thing that knocks me. How did it all 
come to be like that?" 

Fisher was looking at him with level lids and 
an immovable manner. 

"Every precaution was taken," he said. "The 
Duke carried the relic on his own person, and 
locked it up in the case with his own hands." 

March was silent; but Twyford stammered. 
"I don't understand you. You give me the, 
creeps. Why don't you speak plainer?" 

"If I spoke plainer you would understand me 
less," said Home Fisher. 

"All the same I should try," 6aid March, still 
without lifting his head. 

"Oh, very well," replied Fisher, with a sigh; 
"the plain truth is, of course, that it's a bad busi- 
ness. Everybody knows it's a bad business who 
knows anything about it. But it's always hap- 
pening, and in one way one can hardly blame 
them. They get stuck on to a foreign princess 
that's as stiff as a Dutch doll, and they have their 
fling. In this case it was a pretty big fling." 

The face of the Rev. Thomas Twyford cer- 
tainly suggested that he was a little out of his 
depth in the seas of truth, but as the other went 
on speaking vaguely the old gentleman's features 
sharpened and set. 

"If it were some decent morganatic affair I 

7 87 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

wouldn't say; but he must have been a fool to 
throw away thousands on a woman like that. 
At the end it was sheer blackmail; but it's some- 
thing that the old ass didn't get it out of the 
taxpayers. He could only get it out of the Yank, 
and there you are." 

The Rev. Thomas Twyford had risen to 
his feet. 

"Well, Fm glad my nephew had nothing to do 
with it," he said. "And if that's what the world 
is like, I hope he will never have anything to 
do with it." 

"I hope not," answered Home Fisher. "No 
one knows so well as I do that one can have far 
too much to do with it." 

For Summers Minor had indeed nothing to do 
with it; and it is part of his higher significance 
that he has really nothing to do with the story, 
or with any such stories. The boy went like a 
bullet through the tangle of this tale of crooked 
politics and crazy mockery and came out on the 
other side, pursuing his own unspoiled purposes. 
From the top of the chimney he climbed he had 
caught sight of a new omnibus, whose color and 
name he had never known, as a naturalist might 
see a new bird or a botanist a new flower. And 
he had been sufficiently enraptured in rushing 
after it, and riding away upon that fairy ship. 



88 



IV 

THE BOTTOMLESS WELL 

TN an oasis, or green island, in the red and 
-* yellow seas of sand that stretch beyond 
Europe toward the sunrise, there can be found 
a rather fantastic contrast, which is none the less 
typical of such a place, since international treaties 
have made it an outpost of the British occupa- 
tion. The site is famous among archaeologists 
for something that is hardly a monument, but 
merely a hole in the ground. But it is a round 
shaft, like that of a well, and probably a part of 
some great irrigation works of remote and dis- 
puted date, perhaps more ancient than anything 
in that ancient land. There is a green fringe of 
palm and prickly pear round the black mouth of 
the well; but nothing of the upper masonry re- 
mains except two bulky and battered stones stand- 
ing like the pillars of a gateway of nowhere, in 
which some of the more transcendental archae- 
ologists, in certain moods at moonrise or sunset, 
think they can trace the faint lines of figures or 
features of more than Babylonian monstrosity; 
while the more rationalistic archaeologists, in the 
more rational hours of daylight, see nothing but 

89 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

two shapeless rocks. It may have been noticed, 
however, that all Englishmen are not archaeolo- 
gists. Many of those assembled in such a place 
for official and military purposes have hobbies 
other than archaeology. And it is a solemn fact 
that the English in this Eastern exile have con- 
trived to make a small golf links out of the green 
scrub and sand; with a comfortable clubhouse 
at one end of it and this primeval monument at 
the other. They did not actually use this archaic 
abyss as a bunker, because it was by tradition 
unfathomable, and even for practical purposes 
unfathomed. Any sporting projectile sent into 
it might be counted most literally as a lost ball. 
But they often sauntered round it in their inter- 
ludes of talking and smoking cigarettes, and one 
of them had just come down from the clubhouse 
to find another gazing somewhat moodily into 
the well. 

Both the Englishmen wore light clothes and 
white pith helmets and puggrees, but there, for 
the most part, their resemblance ended. And 
they both almost simultaneously said the same 
word, but they said it on two totally different 
notes of the voice. 

"Have you heard the news?" asked the man 
from the club. "Splendid." 

"Splendid," replied the man by the well. But 
the first man pronounced the word as a young 
man might say it about a woman, and the second 
90 



The Bottomless Well 

as an old man might say it about the weather, 
not without sincerity, but certainly without 
fervor. 

And in this the tone of the two men was suffi* 
ciently typical of them. The first, who was a 
certain Captain Boyle, was of a bold and boyish 
type, dark, and with a sort of native heat in his 
face that did not belong to the atmosphere of 
the East, but rather to the ardors and ambitions 
of the West The other was an older man and 
certainly an older resident, a civilian official — 
Home Fisher; and his drooping eyelids and 
drooping light mustache expressed all the para- 
dox of the Englishman in the East. He was 
much too hot to be anything but cool. 

Neither of them thought it necessary to men- 
tion what it was that was splendid. That would 
indeed have been superfluous conversation about 
something that everybody knew. The striking 
victory over a menacing combination of Turks 
and Arabs in the north, won by troops under the 
command of Lord Hastings, the veteran of so 
many striking victories, was already spread by 
the newspapers all over the Empire, let alone 
to this small garrison so near to the battlefield. 

"Now, no other nation in the world could 
have done a thing like that," cried Captain Boyle, 
emphatically. 

Home Fisher was still looking silently into 
the well; a moment later he answered: "We cer- 
9i 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

tainly have the art of unmaking mistakes. That's 
where the poor old Prussians went wrong. They 
could only make mistakes and stick to them. 
There is really a certain talent in unmaking a 
mistake." 

"What do you mean," asked Boyle, "what, 
mistakes?" 

"Well, everybody knows it looked like biting 
off more than he could chew," replied Home 
Fisher. It was a peculiarity of Mr. Fisher that 
he always said that everybody knew things which 
about one person in two million was ever allowed 
to hear of. "And it was certainly jolly lucky 
that Travers turned up so well in the nick of 
time. Odd how often the right thing's been done 
for us by the second in command, even when a 
great man was first in command. Like Colborne 
at Waterloo." 

"It ought to add a whole province to the 
Empire," observed the other. 

"Well, I suppose the Zimmernes would have 
insisted on it as far as the canal," observed 
Fisher, thoughtfully, "though everybody knows 
adding provinces doesn't always pay much nowa- 
days." 

Captain Boyle frowned in a slightly puzzled 
fashion. Being cloudily conscious of never hav- 
ing heard of the Zimmernes in his life, he could 
only remark, stolidly: 

"Well, one can't be a Little Englander." 
92 



The Bottomless Well 

Home Fisher smiled, and he had a pleasant 
smile. 

"Every man out here is a Little Englander," 
he said. "He wishes he were back in Little 
England." 

"I don't know what you're talking about, I'm 
afraid," said the younger man, rather suspi- 
ciously. "One would think you didn't really ad- 
mire Hastings or-— or — anything." 

"I admire him no end," replied Fisher. "He's 
by far the best man for this post; he understands 
the Moslems and can do anything with them. 
That's why I'm all against pushing Travers 
against him, merely because of this last 
affair." 

"I really don't understand what you're driv- 
ing at," said the other, frankly. 

"Perhaps it isn't worth understanding," an- 
swered Fisher, lightly, "and, anyhow, we needn't 
talk politics. Do you know the Arab legend 
about that well?" 

"I'm afraid I don't know much about Arab 
legends," said Boyle, rather stiffly. 

"That's rather a mistake," replied Fisher, 
"especially from your point of view. Lord 
Hastings himself is an Arab legend. That is 
perhaps the very greatest thing he really is. If 
his reputation went it would weaken us all over 
Asia and Africa. Well, the story about that hole 
in the ground, that goes down nobody knows 

93 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

where, has always fascinated me, rather. It's 
Mohammedan in form now, but I shouldn't 
wonder if the tale is a long way older than 
Mohammed. It's all about somebody they call 
the Sultan Aladdin, not our friend of the lamp, 
of course, but rather like him in having to do with 
genii or giants or something of that sort. They 
say he commanded the giants to build him a sort 
of pagoda, rising higher and higher above all 
the stars. The Utmost for the Highest, as the 
people said when they built the Tower of Babel. 
But the builders of the Tower of Babel were 
quite modest and domestic people, like mice, 
compared with old Aladdin. They only wanted 
a tower that would reach heaven — a mere trifle. 
He wanted a tower that would pass heaven and 
rise above it, and go on rising for ever and ever. 
And Allah cast him down to earth with a thunder- 
bolt, which sank into the earth, boring a hole 
deeper and deeper, till it made a well that was 
without a bottom as the tower was to have been 
without a top. And down that inverted tower 
of darkness the soul of the proud Sultan is fall- 
ing forever and ever." 

"What a queer chap you are," said Boyle. 
"You talk as if a fellow could believe those 
fables." 

"Perhaps I believe the moral and not the 
fable," answered Fisher. "But here comes Lady 
Hastings. You know her, I think." < 

94 



The Bottomless Well 

The clubhouse on the golf links was used, of 
course, for many other purposes besides that of 
golf. It was the only social center of the gar- 
rison beside the strictly military headquarters; 
it had a billiard room and a bar, and even an 
excellent reference library for those officers who 
were so perverse as to take their profession seri- 
ously. Among these was the great general him- 
self, whose head of silver and face of bronze, 
like that of a brazen eagle, were often to be 
found bent over the charts and folios of the 
library. The great Lord Hastings believed in 
science and study, as in other severe ideals of 
life, and had given much paternal advice on the 
point to young Boyle, whose appearances in that 
place of research were rather more intermittent. 
It was from one of these snatches of study that 
the young man had just come out through the 
glass doors of the library on to the golf links. 
But, above all, the club was so appointed as to 
serve the social conveniences of ladies at least 
as much as gentlemen, and Lady Hastings was 
able to play the queen in such a society almost 
as much as in her own ballroom. She was 
eminently calculated and, as some said, eminently 
inclined to play such a part. She was much 
younger than her husband, an attractive and 
sometimes dangerously attractive lady; and Mr. 
Home Fisher looked after her a little sardoni- 
cally as she swept away with the young soldier. 
95 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

Then his rather dreary eye strayed to the green 
and prickly growths round the well, growths of 
that curious cactus formation in which one thick 
leaf grows directly out of the other without stalk 
or twig. It gave his fanciful mind a sinister feel- 
ing of a blind growth without shape or purpose. 
A flower or shrub in the West grows to the blos- 
som which is its crown, and is content. But this 
was as if hands could grow out of hands or legs 
grow out of legs in a nightmare. "Always add- 
ing a province to the Empire," he said, with a 
smile, and then added, more sadly, "but I doubt 
if I was right, after all!" 

A strong but genial voice broke in on his 
meditations and he looked up and smiled, see- 
ing the face of an old friend. The voice was, 
indeed, rather more genial than the face, which 
was at the first glance decidedly grim. It was a 
typically legal face, with angular jaws and heavy, 
grizzled eyebrows; and it belonged to an emi- 
nently legal character, though he was now at- 
tached in a semimilitary capacity to the police 
of that wild district. Cuthbert Grayne was per- 
haps more of a criminologist than either a law- 
yer or a policeman, but in his more barbarous 
surroundings he had proved successful in turn- 
ing himself into a practical combination of all 
three. The discovery of a whole series of 
strange Oriental crimes stood to his credit. But 
as few people were acquainted with, or attracted 
96 



The Bottomless Well 

to, such a hobby or branch of knowledge, his 
intellectual life was somewhat solitary. Among 
the few exceptions was Home Fisher, who had a 
curious capacity for talking to almost anybody 
about almost anything. 

"Studying botany, or is it archaeology?" in- 
quired Grayne. "I shall never come to the end 
of your interests, Fisher. I should say that what 
you don't know isn't worth knowing." 

"You are wrong," replied Fisher, with a very 
unusual abruptness and even bitterness. "It's 
what I do know that isn't worth knowing. All 
the seamy side of things, all the secret reasons 
and rotten motives and bribery and blackmail 
they call politics. I needn't be so proud of hav- 
ing been down all these sewers that I should 
brag about it to the little boys in the street." 

"What do you mean? What's the matter 
with you?" asked his friend. "I never knew 
you taken like this before." 

"I'm ashamed of myself," replied Fisher. 
"I've just been throwing cold water on the en- 
thusiasms of a boy." 

"Even that explanation is hardly exhaustive," 
observed the criminal expert. 

"Damned newspaper nonsense the enthusi- 
asms were, of course," continued Fisher, "but I 
ought to know that at that age illusions can be 
ideals. And they're better than the reality, any- 
how. But there is one very ugly responsibility 
97 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

about jolting a young man out of the rut of the 
most rotten ideal." 

"And what may that be?" inquired his friend. 

"It's very apt to set him off with the same 
energy in a much worse direction," answered 
Fisher; "a pretty endless sort of direction, a 
bottomless pit as deep as the bottomless well." 

Fisher did not see his friend until a fortnight 
later, when he found himself in the garden at 
the back of the clubhouse on the opposite side 
from the links, a garden heavily colored and 
scented with sweet semitropical plants in the 
glow of a desert sunset. Two other men were 
with him, the third being the now celebrated 
second in command, familiar to everybody as 
Tom Travers, a lean, dark man, who looked 
older than his years, with a furrow in his brow 
and something morose about the very shape of 
his black mustache. They had just been served 
with black coffee by the Arab now officiating as 
the temporary servant of the club, though he 
was a figure already familiar, and even famous, 
as the old servant of the general. He went by 
the name of Said, and was notable among other 
Semites for that unnatural length of his yellow 
face and height of his narrow forehead which 
is sometimes seen among them, and gave an ir- 
rational impression of something sinister, in spite 
of his agreeable smile. 

"I never feel as if I could quite trust that 
98 



The Bottomless Well 

fellow," said Grayne, when the man had gone 
away. "It's very unjust, I take it, for he was 
certainly devoted to Hastings, and saved his life, 
they say. But Arabs are often like that, loyal to 
one man. I can't help feeling he might cut any- 
body else's throat, and even do it treacherously." 

"Well," said Travers, with a rather sour smile, 
"so long as he leaves Hastings alone the world 
won't mind much." 

There was a rather embarrassing silence, full 
of memories of the great battle, and then Home 
Fisher said, quietly: 

"The newspapers aren't the world, Tom. 
Don't you worry about them. Everybody in 
your world knows the truth well enough." 

"I think we'd better not talk about the gen- 
eral just now," remarked Grayne, "for he's just 
coming out of the club." 

"He's not coming here," said Fisher. "He's 
only seeing his wife to the car." 

As he spoke, indeed, the lady came out on the 
steps of the club, followed by her husband, who 
then went swiftly in front of her to open the 
garden gate. As he did so she turned back and 
spoke for a moment to a solitary man still sitting 
in a cane chair in the shadow of the doorway, 
the only man left in the deserted club save for 
the three that lingered in the garden. Fisher 
peered for a moment into the shadow, and saw 
that it was Captain Boyle. 
99 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

The next moment, rather to their surprise, the 
general reappeared and, remounting the steps, 
spoke a word or two to Boyle in his turn. Then 
he signaled to Said, who hurried up with two 
cups of coffee, and the two men re-entered the 
club, each carrying his cup in his hand. The 
next moment a gleam of white light in the grow- 
ing darkness showed that the electric lamps had 
been turned on in the library beyond. 

"Coffee and scientific researches," said 
Travers, grimly. "All the luxuries of learning 
and theoretical research. Well, I must be going, 
for I have my work to do as well." And he got 
up rather stiffly, saluted his companions, and 
strode away into the dusk. 

"I only hope Boyle is sticking to scientific 
researches," said Home Fisher. "I'm not very 
comfortable about him myself. But let's talk 
about something else." 

They talked about something else longer 
than they probably imagined, until the tropical 
night had come and a splendid moon painted 
the whole scene with silver; but before it was 
bright enough to see by Fisher had already 
noted that the lights in the library had been 
abruptly extinguished. He waited for the two 
men to come out by the garden entrance, but 
nobody came. 

"They must have gone for a stroll on the 
links," he said- 

ioo 



The Bottomless Well 

"Very possibly," replied Grayne. "It's goings 
to be a beautiful night." 

A moment or two after he had spoken they 
heard a voice hailing them out of the shadow 
of the clubhouse, and were astonished to per- 
ceive Travers hurrying toward them, calling out 
as he came : 

"I shall want your help, you fellows," he cried. 
"There's something pretty bad out on the links." 

They found themselves plunging through the 
club smoking room and the library beyond, in 
complete darkness, mental as well as material. 
But Home Fisher, in spite of his affectation of 
indifference, was a person of a curious and al- 
most transcendental sensibility to atmospheres, 
and he already felt the presence of something 
more than an accident. He collided with a piece 
of furniture in the library, and almost shuddered 
with the shock, for the thing moved as he could 
never have fancied a piece of furniture moving. 
It seemed to move like a living thing, yielding 
and yet striking back. The next moment Grayne 
had turned on the lights, and he saw he had only 
stumbled against one of the revolving bookstands 
that had swung round and struck him; but his in- 
voluntary recoil had revealed to him his own 
subconscious sense of something mysterious and 
monstrous. There were several of these revolv- 
ing bookcases standing here and there about the 
library; on one of them stood the two cups of 

IOI 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

coffee, and on another a large open book. It 
was Budge's book on Egyptian hieroglyphics, 
with colored plates of strange birds and gods, 
and even as he rushed past, he was conscious of 
something odd about the fact that this, and not 
any work of military science, should be open in 
that place at that moment. He was even con- 
scious of the gap in the well-lined bookshelf 
from which it had been taken, and it seemed 
almost to gape at him in an ugly fashion, like a 
gap in the teeth of some sinister face. 

A run brought them in a few minutes to the 
other side of the ground in front of the bottom- 
less we'll, and a few yards from it, in a moon- 
light almost as broad as daylight, they saw what 
they had come to see. 

The great Lord Hastings lay prone on his 
face, in a posture in which there was a touch of 
something strange and stiff, with one elbow erect 
above his body, the arm being doubled, and his 
big, bony hand clutching the rank and ragged 
grass. A few feet away was Boyle, almost as 
motionless, but supported on his hands and knees, 
and staring at the body. It might have been no 
more than shock and accident; but there was 
something ungainly and unnatural about the 
quadrupedal posture and the gaping face. It 
was as if his reason had fled from him. Behind, 
there was nothing but the clear blue southern 
sky, and the beginning of the desert, except for 
1 02 



The Bottomless Well 

the two great broken stones in front of the well. 
And it was in such a light and atmosphere that 
men could fancy they traced in them enormous 
and evil faces, looking down. 

Home Fisher stooped and touched the strong 
hand that was still clutching the grass, and it 
was as cold as a stone. He knelt by the body 
and was busy for a moment applying other tests; 
then he rose again, and said, with a sort of con- 
fident despair: 

"Lord Hastings is dead." 

There was a stony silence, and then Travers 
remarked, gruffly: "This is your department, 
Grayne; I will leave you to question Captain 
Boyle. I can make no sense of what he 
says." 

Bgyle had pulled himself together and risen 
to his feet, but his face still wore an awful ex- 
pression, making it like a new mask or the face 
of another man. 

"I was looking at the well," he said, "and 
when I turned he had fallen down." 

Grayne's face was very dark. "As you say, 
this is my affair," he said. "I must first ask you 
to help me carry him to the library and let me 
examine things thoroughly." 

When they had deposited the body in the 
library, Grayne turned to Fisher and said, in 
a voice that had recovered its fullness and con- 
fidence, "I am going to lock myself in and make 
8 101 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

a thorough examination first. I look to you to 
keep in touch with the others and make a pre- 
liminary examination of Boyle. I will talk to 
him later. And just telephone to headquarters 
for a policeman, and let him come here at once 
and stand by till I want him." 

Without more words the great criminal inves- 
tigator went into the lighted library, shutting the 
door behind him, and Fisher, without replying, 
turned and began to talk quietly to Travers. 
"It is curious," he said, "that the thing should 
happen just in front of that place." 

"It would certainly be very curious," replied 
Travers, "if the place played any part in it." 

"I think," replied Fisher, "that the part it 
didn't play is more curious still." 

And with these apparently meaningless words 
he turned to the shaken Boyle and, taking his 
arm, began to walk him up and down in the moon- 
light, talking in low tones. 

Dawn had begun to break abrupt and white 
when Cuthbert Grayne turned out the lights in 
the library and came out on to the links. Fisher 
was lounging about alone, in his listless fashion; 
but the police messenger for whom he had sent 
was standing at attention in the background. 

"I sent Boyle off with Travers," observed 
Fisher, carelessly; "he'll look after him, and he'd 
better have some sleep, anyhow." 

"Did you get anything out of him?" asked 
104 



The Bottomless Well 

Grayne. "Did he tell you what he and Hastings 
were doing?'* 

"Yes," answered Fisher, "he gave me a pretty 
clear account, after all. He said that after Lady 
Hastings went off in the car the general asked 
him to take coffee with him in the library and 
look up a point about local antiquities. He him- 
self was beginning to look for Budge's book in 
one of the revolving bookstands when the gen- 
eral found it in one of the bookshelves on the 
wall. After looking at some of the plates they 
went out, it would seem, rather abruptly, on to 
the links, and walked toward the old well; and 
while Boyle was looking into it he heard a thud 
behind him, and turned round to find the general 
lying as we found him. He himself dropped on 
his knees to examine the body, and then was 
paralyzed with a sort of terror and could not 
come nearer to it or touch it. But I think very 
little of that; people caught in a real shock of 
surprise are sometimes found in the queerest 
postures." 

Grayne wore a grim smile of attention, and 
said, after a short silence: 

"Well, he hasn't told you many lies. It's 
really a creditably clear and consistent account 
of what happened, with everything of impor- 
tance left out." 

"Have you discovered anything in there?" 
asked Fisher. 

105 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"I have discovered everything," answered 
Grayne. 

Fisher maintained a somewhat gloomy silence, 
as the other resumed his explanation in quiet 
and assured tones. 

"You were quite right, Fisher, when you said 
that young fellow was in danger of going down 
dark ways toward the pit. Whether or no, as 
you fancied, the jolt you gave to his view of the 
general had anything to do with it, he has not 
been treating the general well for some time. 
It's an unpleasant business, and I don't want to 
dwell on it; but it's pretty plain that his wife 
was not treating him well, either. I don't know 
how far it went, but it went as far as conceal- 
ment, anyhow; for when Lady Hastings spoke to 
Boyle it was to tell him she had hidden a note 
in the Budge book in the library. The general 
overheard, or came somehow to know, and he 
went straight to the book and found it. He 
confronted Boyle with it, and they had a scene, 
of course. And Boyle was confronted with some- 
thing else; he was confronted with an awful 
alternative, in which the life of one old man 
meant ruin and his death meant triumph and 
even happiness." 

"Well," observed Fisher, at last, "I don't blame 
him for not telling you the woman's part of the 
story. But how do you know about the letter?" 

"I found it on the general's body," answered 
106 



The Bottomless Well 

Grayne, "but I found worse things than that. 
The body had stiffened in the way rather peculiar 
to poisons of a certain Asiatic sort. Then I 
examined the coffee cups, and I knew enough 
chemistry to find poison in the dregs of one of 
them. Now, the General went straight to the 
bookcase, leaving his cup of coffee on the book- 
stand in the middle of the room. While his 
back was turned, and Boyle was pretending to 
examine the bookstand, he was left alone with 
the coffee cup. The poison takes about ten 
minutes to act, and ten minutes' walk would 
bring them to the bottomless well." 

"Yes," remarked Fisher, "and what about the 
bottomless well?" 

"What has the bottomless well got to do with 
it?" asked his friend. 

"It has nothing to do with it," replied Fisher. 
"That is what I find utterly confounding and 
incredible." 

"And why should that particular hole in the 
ground have anything to do with it?" 

"It is a particular hole in your case," said 
Fisher. "But I won't insist on that just now. 
By the way, there is another thing I ought to 
tell you. I said I sent Boyle away in charge of 
Travers. It would be just as true to say I sent 
Travers in charge of Boyle." 

"You don't mean to say you suspect Tom 
Travers?" cried the other. 
107 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"He was a deal bitterer against the general 
than Boyle ever was," observed Home Fisher, 
with a curious indifference. 

"Man, you're not saying what you mean," 
cried Grayne. "I tell you I found the poison in 
one of the coffee cups." 

"There was always Said, of course," added 
Fisher, "either for hatred or hire. We agreed 
he was capable of almost anything." 

"And we agreed he was incapable of hurting 
his master," retorted Grayne. 

"Well, well," said Fisher, amiably, "I dare 
say you are right; but I should just like to have 
a look at the library and the coffee cups." 

He passed inside, while Grayne turned to the 
policeman in attendance and handed him a scrib- 
bled note, to be telegraphed from headquarters. 
The man saluted and hurried off; and Grayne, 
following his friend into the library, found him 
beside the bookstand in the middle of the room, 
on which were the empty cups. 

"This is where Boyle looked for Budge, or 
pretended to look for him, according to your 
account," he said. 

As Fisher spoke he bent down in a half-crouch- 
ing attitude, to look at the volumes in the low, 
revolving shelf, for the whole bookstand was not 
much higher than an ordinary table. The next 
moment he sprang up as if he had been stung. 

"Oh, my God!" he cried. 
108 



The Bottomless Well 

Very few people, if any, had ever seen Mr. 
Home Fisher behave as he behaved just then. 
He flashed a glance at the door, saw that the 
open window was nearer, went out of it with a 
flying leap, as if over a hurdle, and went racing 
across the turf, in the track of the disappearing 
policeman. Grayne, who stood staring after him, 
soon saw his tall, loose figure, returning, restored 
to all its normal limpness and air of leisure. He 
was fanning himself slowly with a piece of paper, 
the telegram he had so violently intercepted. 

"Lucky I stopped that," he observed. "We 
must keep this affair as quiet as death. Hastings 
must die of apoplexy or heart disease." 

"What on earth is the trouble?" demanded 
the other investigator. 

"The trouble is," said Fisher, "that in a few 
days we should have had a very agreeable alter- 
native — of hanging an innocent man or knocking 
the British Empire to hell." 

"Do you mean to say," asked Grayne, "that 
this infernal crime is not to be punished?" 

Fisher looked at him steadily. 

"It is already punished," he said. 

After a moment's pause he went on. "You 
reconstructed the crime with admirable skill, old 
chap, and nearly all you said was true. Two men 
with two coffee cups did go into the library and 
did put their cups on the bookstand and did go 
together to the well, and one of them was a 
109 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

murderer and had put poison in the other's cup. 
But it was not done while Boyle was looking at 
the revolving bookcase. He did look at it, 
though, searching for the Budge book with the 
note in it, but I fancy that Hastings had already 
moved it to the shelves on the wall. It was part 
of that grim game that he should find it first. 

"Now, how does a man search a revolving 
bookcase? He does not generally hop all round 
it in a squatting attitude, like a frog. He simply 
gives it a touch and makes it revolve. " 

He was frowning at the floor as he spoke, 
and there was a light under his heavy lids that 
was not often seen there. The mysticism that 
was buried deep under all the cynicism of his 
experience was awake and moving in the depths. 
His voice took unexpected turns and inflections, 
almost as if two men were speaking. 

"That was what Boyle did; he barely touched 
the thing, and it went round as easily as the 
world goes round. Yes, very much as the world 
goes round, for the hand that turned it was not 
his. God, who turns the wheel of all the stars, 
touched that wheel and brought it full circle, 
that His dreadful justice might return." 

"I am beginning," said Grayne, slowly, "to 
have some hazy and horrible idea of what you 
mean." 

"It is very simple," said Fisher, "when Boyle 
straightened himself from his stooping posture, 
no 



The Bottomless Well 

something had happened which he had not 
noticed, which his enemy had not noticed, which 
nobody had noticed. The two coffee cups had 
exactly changed places." 

The rocky face of Grayne seemed to have 
sustained a shock in silence; not a line of it 
altered, but his voice when it came was unex- 
pectedly weakened. 

"I see what you mean," he said, u and, as you 
say, the less said about it the better. It was 
not the lover who tried to get rid of the hus- 
band, but — the other thing. And a tale like that 
about a man like that would ruin us here. Had 
you any guess of this at the start?" 

"The bottomless well, as I told you," an- 
swered Fisher, quietly; "that was what stumped 
me from the start. Not because it had anything 
to do with it, because it had nothing to do with 
it." 

He paused a moment, as if choosing an ap- 
proach, and then went on : "When a man knows 
his enemy will be dead in ten minutes, and takes 
him to the edge of an unfathomable pit, he means 
to throw his body into it. What else should he 
do? A born fool would have the sense to do it, 
and Boyle is not a born fool. Well, why did 
not Boyle do it? The more I thought of it the 
more I suspected there was some mistake in the 
murder, so to speak. Somebody had taken some- 
body there to throw him in, and yet he was not 
in 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

thrown in. I had already an ugly, unformed idea 
of some substitution or reversal of parts; then I 
stooped to turn the bookstand myself, by acci- 
dent, and I instantly knew everything, for I saw 
the two cups revolve once more, like moons in 
the sky." 

After a pause, Cuthbert Grayne said, "And 
what are we to say to the newspapers?'* 

"My friend, Harold March, is coming along 
from Cairo to-day," said Fisher. u He is a very 
brilliant and successful journalist. But for all 
that he's a thoroughly honorable man, so you 
must not tell him the truth." 

Half an hour later Fisher was again walking 
to and fro in front of the clubhouse, with Cap- 
tain Boyle, the latter by this time with a very 
buffeted and bewildered air ; perhaps a sadder and 
a wiser man. 

"What about me, then?" he was saying. "Am 
I cleared? Am I not going to be cleared?" 

"I believe and hope," answered Fisher, "that 
you are not going to be suspected. But you are 
certainly not going to be cleared. There must 
be no suspicion against him, and therefore no sus- 
picion against you. Any suspicion against him, 
let alone such a story against him, would knock 
us endways from Malta to Mandalay. He was 
a hero as well as a holy terror among the Mos- 
lems. Indeed, you might almost call him a Mos- 
lem hero in the English service. Of course he 
112 



The Bottomless Well 

got on with them partly because of his own little 
dose of Eastern blood; he got it from his mother, 
the dancer from Damascus; everybody knows 
that." 

''Oh," repeated Boyle, mechanically, staring 
at him with round eyes, "everybody knows that." 

"I dare say there was a touch of it in his jeal- 
ousy and ferocious vengeance," went on Fisher. 
"But, for all that, the crime would ruin us among 
the Arabs, all the more because it was some- 
thing like a crime against hospitality. It's been 
hateful for you and it's pretty horrid for me. 
But there are some things that damned well can't 
be done, and while I'm alive that's one of them." 

"What do you mean?" asked Boyle, glancing 
at him curiously. "Why should you, of all 
people, be so passionate about it?" 

Home Fisher looked at the young man with a 
baffling expression. 

"I suppose," he said, "it's because I'm a Little 
Englander." 

"I can never make out what you mean by 
that sort of thing," answered Boyle, doubtfully. 

"Do you think England is so little as all that?" 
said Fisher, with a warmth in his cold voice, 
"that it can't hold a man across a few thousand 
miles. You lectured me with a lot of ideal pa- 
triotism, my young friend; but it's practical 
patriotism now for you and me, and with no 
lies to help it. You talked as if everything al- 
113 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

ways went right with us all over the world, in a 
triumphant crescendo culminating in Hastings. 
I tell you everything has gone wrong with us 
here, except Hastings. He was the one name 
we had left to conjure with, and that mustn't go 
as well, no, by God! It's bad enough that a 

^ there's no earthly English interest to serve, and 
hell beating up against us, simply because 

to half the 
Cabinet.' It's ba3 enough^that an , JffiJfcP 
tf&ffat from Bagdad should make us fight his 
battles; we can't fight with our right hand cut 
off. Our one score was Hastings and his vic- 
tory, which was really somebody else's victory. 
Tom Travers has to suffer, and so have you." 

Then, after a moment's silence, he pointed 
toward the bottomless well and said, in a quieter 
tone: 

"I told you that I didn't believe in the philos- 
ophy of the Tower of Aladdin. I don't believe 
in the Empire growing until it reaches the sky; 
I don't believe in the Union Jack going up and 
up eternally like the Tower. But if you think 
I am going to let the Union Jack go down and 
down eternally, like the bottomless well, down 
into the blackness of the bottomless pit, down 
in defeat and derision, amid the jeers of the very 
Jews who have sucked us dry — no I won't, and 
that's flat; not if the Chancellor were black- 
114 



The Bottomless Well 

mailed by twenty millionaires with their gutter 
rags, not if the Prime Minister^tfKfejgi^dfcrt^ 
^I^B^^not if Woodville and Carstairs 
had shares in twenty swindling mines. If the 
thing is really tottering, God help it, it mustn't 
be we who tip it over." 

Boyle was regarding him with a bewilderment 
that was almost fear, and had even a touch of 
distaste. 

"Somehow," he said, "there seems to be some- 
thing rather horrid about the things you know." 

"There is," replied Home Fisher. "I am not 
at all pleased with my small stock of knowledge 
and reflection. But as it is partly responsible 
for your not being hanged, I don't know that you 
need complain of it." 

And, as if a little ashamed of his first boast, 
he turned and strolled away toward the bottom- 
less well. 



V 

THE FAD OF THE FISHERMAN 

A THING can sometimes be too extraor- 
dinary to be remembered. If it is clean 
out of the course of things, and has apparently 
no causes and no consequences, subsequent events 
do not recall it, and it remains only a subcon- 
scious thing, to be stirred by some accident long 
after. It drifts apart like a forgotten dream; 
and it was in the hour of many dreams, at day- 
break and very soon after the end of dark, that 
such a strange sight was given to a man sculling 
a boat down a river in the West country. The 
man was awake; indeed, he considered himself 
rather wide awake, being the political journalist, 
Harold March, on his way to interview various 
political celebrities in their country seats. But 
the thing he saw was so inconsequent that it 
might have been imaginary. It simply slipped 
past his mind and was lost in later and utterly 
different events; nor did he even recover the 
memory till he had long afterward discovered 
the meaning. 

Pale mists of morning lay on the fields and 
the rushes along one margin of the river; along 
116 



The Fad of the Fisherman 

the other side ran a wall of tawny brick almost 
overhanging the water. He had shipped his 
oars and was drifting for a moment with the 
stream, when he turned his head and saw that 
the monotony of the long brick wall was broken 
by a bridge ; rather an elegant eighteenth-century 
sort of bridge with little columns of white stone 
turning gray. There had been floods and the 
river still stood very high, with dwarfish trees 
waist deep in it, and rather a narrow arc of 
white dawn gleamed under the curve of the 
bridge. 

As his own boat went under the dark arch- 
way he saw another boat coming toward him, 
rowed by a man as solitary as himself. His 
posture prevented much being seen of him, but as 
he neared the bridge he stood up in the boat and 
turned round. He was already so close tor the 
dark entry, however, that his whole figure was 
black against the morning light, and March could 
see nothing of his face except the end of two 
long whiskers or mustaches that gave something 
sinister to the silhouette, like horns in the wrong 
place. Even these details March would never 
have noticed but for what happened in the same 
instant. As the man came under the low bridge 
he made a leap at it and hung, with his legs 
dangling, letting the boat float away from under 
him. March had a momentary vision of two 
black kicking legs ; then of one black kicking leg ; 
ii7 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

and then of nothing except the eddying stream 
and the long perspective of the wall. But when- 
ever he thought of it again, long afterward^when 
lie understood the story in which it figured, it 
was always fixed in that one fantastic shape — 
as if those wild legs were a grotesque graven 
ornament of the bridge itself, in the manner of a 
gargoyle. At the moment he merely passed, star- 
ing, down the stream. He could see no flying 
figure on the bridge, so it must have already fled; 
but he was half conscious of some faint signifi- 
cance in the fact that among the trees round the 
bridgehead opposite the wall he saw a lamp-post; 
and, beside the lamp-post, the broad blue back of 
an unconscious policeman. 

Even before reaching the shrine of his political 
pilgrimage he had many other things to think of 
besides the odd incident of the bridge; for the 
management of a boat by a solitary man was not 
always easy even on such a solitary stream. And 
indeed it was only by an unforeseen accident that 
he was solitary. The boat had been purchased 
and the whole expedition planned in conjunction 
with a friend, who had at the last moment been 
forced to alter all his arrangements. Harold 
March was to have traveled with his friend 
Home Fisher on that inland voyage to Wil- 
lowood Place, where the Prime Minister was a 
guest at the moment. More and more people 
were hearing of Harold March, for his striking 
118 



The Fad of the Fisherman 

political articles were opening to him the doors 
of larger and larger salons; but he had never 
met the Prime Minister yet. Scarcely anybody 
among the general public had ever heard of 
Home Fisher; but he had known the Prime 
Minister all his life. For these reasons, had 
the two taken the projected journey together, 
March might have been slightly disposed to 
hasten it and Fisher vaguely content to lengthen 
it out. For Fisher was one of those people who 
are born knowing the Prime Minister. The 
knowledge seemed to have no very exhilarant 
effect, and in his case bore some resemblance to 
being born tired. But he was distinctly annoyed 
to receive, just as he was doing a little light pack- 
ing of fishing tackle and cigars for the journey, 
a telegram from Willowood asking him to come 
down at once by train, as the Prime Minister 
had to leave that night. Fisher knew that his 
friend the journalist could not possibly start till 
the next day, and he liked his friend the journal- 
ist, and had looked forward to a few days on 
the river. He did not particularly like or dis- 
like the Prime Minister, but he intensely dis- 
liked the alternative of a few hours in the train. 
Nevertheless, he accepted Prime Ministers as he 
accepted railway trains — as part of a system 
which he, at least, was not the revolutionist sent 
on earth to destroy. So he telephoned to March, 
asking him, with many apologetic curses and 
9 ll 9 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

faint damns, to take the boat down the river as 
arranged, that they might meet at Willowood by 
the time settled; then he went outside and hailed 
a taxicab to take him to the railway station. 
There he paused at the bookstall to add to his 
light luggage a number of cheap murder stories, 
which he read with great pleasure, and without 
any premonition that he was about to walk into 
as strange a story in real life. 

A little before sunset he arrived, with his light 
suitcase in hand, before the gate of the long 
riverside gardens of Willowood Place, one of 
the smaller seats of Sir Isaac Hook, the master 
of much shipping and many newspapers. He 
entered by the gate giving on the road, at the 
opposite side to the river, but there was a mixed 
quality in all that watery landscape which per- 
petually reminded a traveler that the river was 
near. White gleams of water would shine sud- 
denly like swords or spears in the green thickets. 
And even in the garden itself, divided into courts 
and curtained with hedges and high garden trees, 
there hung everywhere in the air the music of 
water. The first of the green courts which he 
entered appeared to be a somewhat neglected 
croquet lawn, in which was a solitary young man 
playing croquet against himself. Yet he was not 
an enthusiast for the game, or even for the 
garden; and his sallow but well-featured face 
looked rather sullen than otherwise. He was 
120 



The Fad of the Fisherman 

only one of those young men who cannot sup- 
port the burden of consciousness unless they are 
doing something, and whose conceptions of doing 
something are limited to a game of some kind. 
He was dark and well dressed in a light holiday 
fashion, and Fisher recognized him at once as a 
young man named James Bullen, called, for some 
unknown reason, Bunker. He was the nephew 
of Sir Isaac; but, what was much more impor- 
tant at the moment, he was also the private sec- 
retary of the Prime Minister. 

"Hullo, Bunker !" observed Home Fisher. 
"You're the sort of man I wanted to see. Has 
your chief come down yet?" 

"He's only staying for dinner," replied Bul- 
len, with his eye on the yellow ball. "He's got a 
great speech to-morrow at Birmingham and he's 
going straight through to-night. He's motoring 
himself there; driving the car, I mean. It's the 
one thing he's really proud of." 

"You mean you're staying here with your 
uncle, like a good boy?" replied Fisher. "But 
what will the Chief do at Birmingham without 
the epigrams whispered to him by his brilliant 
secretary?" 

"Don't you start ragging me," said the young 
man called Bunker. "I'm only too glad not to go 
trailing after him. He doesn't know a thing 
about maps or money or hotels or anything, and 
I have to dance about like a courier. As for my 
121 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

uncle, as I'm supposed to come into the estate, 
it's only decent to be here sometimes." 

"Very proper," replied the other. "Well, I 
shall see you later on," and, crossing the lawn, 
he passed out through a gap in the hedge. 

He was walking across the lawn toward the 
landing stage on the river, and still felt all around 
him, under the dome of golden evening, an Old 
World savor and reverberation in that river- 
haunted garden. The next square of turf which 
he crossed seemed at first sight quite deserted, 
till he saw in the twilight of trees in one corner 
of it a hammock and in the hammock a man, 
reading a newspaper and swinging one leg over 
the edge of the net. 

Him also he hailed by name, and the man 
slipped to the ground and strolled forward. It 
seemed fated that he should feel something of 
the past in the accidents of that place, for the 
figure might well have been an early-Victorian 
ghost revisiting the ghosts of the croquet hoops 
and mallets. It was the figure of an elderly man 
with long whiskers that looked almost fantastic, 
and a quaint and careful cut of collar and cravat. 
Having been a fashionable dandy forty year3 
ago, he had managed to preserve the dandyism 
while ignoring the fashions. A white top-hat 
lay beside the Morning Post in the hammock 
behind him. This was the Duke of Westmore- 
land, the relic of a family really some centuries 
122 



The Fad of the Fisherman 

old ; and the antiquity was not heraldry but his- 
tory. Nobody knew better than Fisher how 
rare such noblemen are in fact, and how numer- 
ous in fiction. But whether the duke owed the 
general respect he enjoyed to the genuineness of 
his pedigree or to the fact that he owned a vast 
amount of very valuable property was a point 
about which Mr. Fisher's opinion might have 
been more interesting to discover. 

"You were looking so comfortable," said 
Fisher, "that I thought you must be one of the 
servants. I'm looking for somebody to take this 
bag of mine ; I haven't brought a man down, as 
I came away in a hurry." 

"Nor have I, for that matter," replied the 
duke, with some pride. "I never do. If there's 
one animal alive I loathe it's a valet. I learned 
to dress myself at an early age and was sup- 
posed to do it decently. I may be in my second 
childhood, but I've not go so far as being dressed 
like a child." 

"The Prime Minister hasn't brought a valet; 
he's brought a secretary instead," observed 
Fisher. "Devilish inferior job. Didn't I hear 
that Harker was down here?" 

"He's over there on the landing stage," re- 
plied the duke, indifferently, and resumed the 
study of the Morning Post. 

Fisher made his way beyond the last green 
wall of the garden on to a sort of towing path 
123 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

looking on the river and a wooden island oppo- 
site. There, indeed, he saw a lean, dark figure 
with a stoop almost like that of a vulture, a 
posture well known in the law courts as that of 
Sir John Harker, the Attorney-General. His 
face was lined with headwork, for alone among 
the three idlers in the garden he was a man 
who had made his own way; and round his bald 
brow and hollow temples clung dull red hair, 
quite flat, like plates of copper. 

"I haven't seen my host yet," said Home 
Fisher, in a slightly more serious tone than he 
had used to the others, "but I suppose I shall 
meet him at dinner." 

"You can see him now; but you can't meet 
him," answered Harker. 

He nodded his head toward one end of the 
island opposite, and, looking steadily in the same 
direction, the other guest could see the dome of 
a bald head and the top of a fishing rod, both 
equally motionless, rising out of the tall under- 
growth against the background of the stream 
beyond. The fisherman seemed to be seated 
against the stump of a tree and facing toward 
the other bank, so that his face could not be 
seen, but the shape of his head was unmistakable. 

"He doesn't like to be disturbed when he's 

fishing," continued Harker. "It's a sort of fad 

of his to eat nothing but fish, and he's very 

proud of catching his own. Of course he's all 

124 



The Fad of the Fisherman 

for simplicity, like so many of these millionaires. 
He likes to come in saying he's worked for his 
daily bread like a laborer." 

"Does he explain how he blows all the glass 
and stuffs all the upholstery," asked Fisher, "and 
makes all the silver forks, and grows all the 
grapes and peaches, and designs all the patterns 
on the carpets ? I've always heard he was a busy 



man." 



"I don't think he mentioned it," answered the 
lawyer. "What is the meaning of this social 
satire?" 

"Well, I am a trifle tired," said Fisher, "of 
the Simple Life and the Strenuous Life as lived 
by our little set. We're all really dependent in 
nearly everything, and we all make a fuss about 
being independent in something. The Prime 
Minister prides himself on doing without a 
chauffeur, but he can't do without a factotum 
and Jack-of-all-trades ; and poor old Bunker has 
to play the part of a universal genius, which God 
knows he was never meant for. The duke prides 
himself on doing without a valet, but, for all that, 
he must give a lot of people an infernal lot of 
trouble to collect such extraordinary old clothes 
as he wears. He must have them looked up in 
the British Museum or excavated out of the 
tombs. That white hat alone must require a 
sort of expedition fitted out to find it, like the 
North Pole. And here we have old Hook pre- 
125 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

tending to produce his own fish when he couldn't 
produce his own fish knives or fish forks to eat 
it with. He may be simple about simple things 
like food, but you bet he's luxurious about luxuri- 
ous things, especially little things. I don't include 
you; you've worked too hard to enjoy playing 
at work." 

"I sometimes think," said Harker, "that you 
conceal a horrid secret of being useful sometimes. 
Haven't you come down here to see Number 
One before he goes on to Birmingham?" 

Home Fisher answered, in a lower voice: 
"Yes; and I hope to be lucky enough to catch 
him before dinner. He's got to see Sir Isaac 
about something just afterward." 

"Hullo!" exclaimed Harker. "Sir Isaac's 
finished his fishing. I know he prides himself 
on getting up at sunrise and going in at sunset." 

The old man on the island had indeed risen 
to his feet, facing round and showing a bush 
of gray beard with rather small, sunken features, 
but fierce eyebrows and keen, choleric eyes. Care- 
fully carrying his fishing tackle, he was already 
making his way back to the mainland across a 
bridge of flat stepping-stones a little way down 
the shallow stream; then he veered round, com- 
ing toward his guests and civilly saluting them. 
There were several fish in his basket and he was 
in a good temper. 

"Yes," he said, acknowledging Fisher's polite 
126 



The Fad of the Fisherman 

expression of surprise, "I get up before anybody 
else in the house, I think. The early bird catches 
the worm." 

"Unfortunately,'* said Harker, "it is the early 
fish that catches the worm." 

"But the early man catches the fish," replied 
the old man, gruffly. 

"But from what I hear, Sir Isaac, you are 
the late man, too," interposed Fisher. "You 
must do with very little sleep." 

"I never had much time for sleeping," an- 
swered Hook, "and I shall have to be the late 
man to-night, anyhow. The Prime Minister 
wants to have a talk, he tells me, and, all things 
considered, I think we'd better be dressing for 
dinner." 

Dinner passed off that evening without a word 
of politics and little enough but ceremonial trifles. 
The Prime Minister, Lord Merivale, who was a 
long, slim man with curly gray hair, was gravely 
complimentary to his host about his success as a 
fisherman and the skill and patience he displayed; 
the conversation flowed like the shallow stream 
through the stepping-stones. 

"It wants patience to wait for them, no doubt," 
said Sir Isaac, "and skill to play them, but I'm 
generally pretty lucky at it." 

"Does a big fish ever break the line and get 
away?" inquired the politician, with respectful 
interest. 

127 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"Not the sort of line I use," answered Hook, 
with satisfaction. "I rather specialize in tackle, 
as a matter of fact. If he were strong enough 
to do that, he'd be strong enough to pull me into 
the river." 

"A great loss to the community," said the 
Prime Minister, bowing. 

Fisher had listened to all these futilities with 
inward impatience, waiting for his. own oppor- 
tunity, and when the host rose he sprang to his 
feet with an alertness he rarely showed. He 
managed to catch Lord Merivale before Sir 
Isaac bore him off for the final interview. He 
had only a few words to say, but he wanted to 
get them said. 

He said, in a low voice as he opened the door 
for the Premier, "I have seen Montmirail ; he 
says that unless we protest immediately on be- 
half of Denmark, Sweden will certainly seize the 
ports." 

Lord Merivale nodded. "I'm just going to 
hear what Hook has to say about it," he 
said. 

"I imagine," said Fisher, with a faint smile, 
"that there is very little doubt what he will say 
about it." 

Merivale did not answer, but lounged grace- 
fully toward the library, whither his host had 
already preceded him. The rest drifted toward 
the billiard room, Fisher merely remarking to 
128 



The Fad of the Fisherman 

the lawyer: "They won't be long. We know 
they're practically in agreement." 

"Hook entirely supports the Prime Minister," 
assented Harker. 

"Or the Prime Minister entirely supports 
Hook," said Home Fisher, and began idly to 
knock the balls about on the billiard table. 

Home Fisher came down next morning in a 
late and leisurely fashion, as was his reprehen- 
sible habit; he had evidently no appetite for 
catching worms. But the other guests seemed to 
have felt a similar indifference, and they helped 
themselves to breakfast from the sideboard at 
intervals during the hours verging upon lunch. 
So that it was not many hours later when the 
first sensation of that strange day came upon 
them. It came in the form of a young man with 
light hair and a candid expression, who came 
sculling down the river and disembarked at the 
landing stage. It was, in fact, no other than 
Mr. Harold March, whose journey had begun 
far away up the river in the earliest hours of 
that day. He arrived late in the afternoon, hav- 
ing stopped for tea in a large riverside town, 
and he had a pink evening paper sticking out of 
his pocket. He fell on the riverside garden like 
a quiet and well-behaved thunderbolt, but he was 
a thunderbolt without knowing it. 

The first exchange of salutations and introduc- 
tions was commonplace enough, and consisted, 
129 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

indeed, of the inevitable repetition of excuses for 
the eccentric seclusion of the host. He had gone 
fishing again, of course, and must not be dis- 
turbed till the appointed hour, though he sat 
within a stone's throw of where they stood. 

"You see it's his only hobby," observed 
Harker, apologetically, "and, after all, it's his 
own house; and he's very hospitable in other 
ways." 

"I'm rather afraid," said Fisher, in a lower 
voice, "that it's becoming more of a mania than 
a hobby. I know how it is when a man of that 
age begins to collect things, if it's only collecting 
those rotten little river fish. You remember 
Talbot's uncle with his toothpicks, and poor old 
Buzzy and the waste of cigar ashes. Hook has 
done a lot of big things in his time — the great 
deal in the Swedish timber trade and the Peace 
Conference at Chicago — but I doubt whether he 
cares now for any of those big things as he cares 
for those little fish." 

"Oh, come, come," protested the Attorney- 
General. "You'll make Mr. March think he has 
come to call on a lunatic. Believe me, Hook 
only does it for fun, like any other sport, only 
he's of the kind that takes his fun sadly. But 
I bet if there were big news about timber or ship- 
ping, he would drop his fun and his fish all right." 

"Well, I wonder," said Home Fisher, look- 
ing sleepily at the island in the river. 
130 



The Fad of the Fisherman 

"By the way, is there any news of anything?" 
asked Harker of Harold March. "I see you've 
got an evening paper; one of those enterprising 
evening papers that come out in the morning." 

"The beginning of Lord Merivale's Birming- 
ham speech," replied March, handing him the 
paper. "It's only a paragraph, but it seems to 
me rather good." 

Harker took the paper, flapped and refolded 
it, and looked at the "Stop Press" news. It was, 
as March had said, only a paragraph. But it 
was a paragraph that had a peculiar effect on 
Sir John Harker. His lowering brows lifted 
with a flicker and his eyes blinked, and for a 
moment his leathery jaw was loosened. He 
looked in some odd fashion like a very old man. 
Then, hardening his voice and handing the paper 
to Fisher without a tremor, he simply said: 

"Well, here's a chance for the bet. You've 
got your big news to disturb the old man's fish- 
ing. 

Home Fisher was looking at the paper, and 
over his more languid and less expressive fea- 
tures a change also seemed to pass. Even that 
little paragraph had two or three large headlines, 
and his eye encountered, "Sensational Warning 
to Sweden," and, "We Shall Protest." 

"What the devil " he said, and his words 

softened first to a whisper and then a whistle. 

"We must tell old Hook at once, or he'll never 
131 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

forgive us," said Harker. "He'll probably want 
to see Number One instantly, though it may be 
too late now. I'm going across to him at once. I 
bet I'll make him forget his fish, anyhow." And, 
turning his back, he made his way hurriedly along 
the riverside to the causeway of flat stones. 

March was staring at Fisher, in amazement 
at the effect his pink paper had produced. 

"What does it all mean?" he cried. "I al- 
ways supposed we should protest in defense 
of the Danish ports, for their sakes and our 
own. What is all this botheration about Sir 
Isaac and the rest of you? Do you think it 
bad news?" 

"Bad news !" repeated Fisher, with a sort of 
soft emphasis beyond expression. 

"Is it as bad as all that?" asked his friend, 
at last. 

"As bad as all that?" repeated Fisher. "Why 
of course it's as good as it can be. It's great 
news. It's glorious news! That's where the 
devil of it comes in, to knock us all silly. It's 
admirable. It's inestimable. It is also quite 
incredible." 

He gazed again at the gray and green colors 
of the island and the river, and his rather dreary 
eye traveled slowly round to the hedges and the 
lawns. 

"I felt this garden was a sort of dream," he 
said, "and I suppose I must be dreaming. But 
132 



The Fad of the Fisherman 

there is grass growing and water moving; and 
something impossible has happened." 

Even as he spoke the dark figure with a stoop 
like a vulture appeared in the gap of the hedge 
just above him. 

"You have won your bet," said Harker, in a 
harsh and almost croaking voice. "The old fool 
cares for nothing but fishing. He cursed me 
and told me he would talk no politics." 

"I thought it might be so," said Fisher, mod- 
estly. "What are you going to do next?" 

"I shall use the old idiot's telephone, any- 
how," replied the lawyer. "I must find out ex- 
actly what has happened. IVe got to speak for 
the Government myself to-morrow." And he 
hurried away toward the house. 

In the silence that followed, a very bewilder- 
ing silence so far as March was concerned, they 
saw the quaint figure of the Duke of Westmore- 
land, with his white hat and whiskers, approach- 
ing them across the garden. Fisher instantly 
stepped toward him with the pink paper in his 
hand, and, with a few words, pointed out the 
apocalyptic paragraph. The duke, who had been 
walking slowly, stood quite still, and for some 
seconds he looked like a tailor's dummy standing 
and staring outside some antiquated shop. Then 
March heard his voice, and it was high and al- 
most hysterical: 

"But he must see it ; he must be made to under- 
133 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

stand. It cannot have been put to him properly." 
Then, with a certain recovery of fullness and 
even pomposity in the voice, "I shall go and tell 
him myself." 

Among the queer incidents of that afternoon, 
March always remembered something almost 
comical about the clear picture of the old gentle- 
man in his wonderful white hat carefully step- 
ping from stone to stone across the river, like 
a figure crossing the traffic in Piccadilly. Then 
he disappeared behind the trees of the island, and 
March and Fisher turned to meet the Attorney- 
General, who was coming out of the house with 
a visage of grim assurance. 

"Everybody is saying," he said, "that the 
Prime Minister has made the greatest speech of 
his life. Peroration and loud and prolonged 
cheers. Corrupt financiers and heroic peasants. 
We will not desert Denmark again." 

Fisher nodded and turned away toward the 
towing path, where he saw the duke returning 
with a rather dazed expression. In answer to 
question, he said, in a husky and confidential 
voice : 

"I really think our poor friend cannot be him- 
self. He refused to listen; he — ah — suggested 
that I might frighten the fish." 

A keen ear might have detected a murmur 
from Mr. Fisher on the subject of a white hat, 
but Sir John Harker struck it more decisively : 
134 



The Fad of the Fisherman 

"Fisher was quite right. I didn't believe it 
myself, but it's quite clear that the old fellow is 
fixed on this fishing notion by now. If the house 
caught fire behind him he would hardly move 
till sunset." 

Fisher had continued his stroll toward the 
higher embanked ground of the towing path, 
and he now swept a long and searching gaze, 
not toward the island, but toward the distant 
wooded heights that were the walls of the valley. 
An evening sky as clear as that of the previous 
day was settling down all over the dim landscape, 
but toward the west it was now red rather than 
gold; there was scarcely any sound but the mo- 
notonous music of the river. Then came the 
sound of a half-stifled exclamation from Home 
Fisher, and Harold March looked up at him in 
wonder. 

"You spoke of bad news," said Fisher. "Well, 
there is really bad news now. I am afraid this is 
a bad business." 

"What bad news do you mean?" asked his 
friend, conscious of something strange and sinis- 
ter in his voice. 

"The sun has set," answered Fisher. 

He went on with the air of one conscious of 
having said something fatal. "We must get some- 
body to go across whom he will really listen to. 
He may be mad, but there's method in his mad- 
ness. There nearly always is method in madness. 
10 135 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

It's what drives men mad, being methodical. 
And he never goes on sitting there after sunset, 
with the whole place getting dark. Where's 
his nephew? I believe he's really fond of his 
nephew." 

"Look!" cried March, abruptly. "Why, he's 
been across already. There he is coming back." 

And, looking up the river once more, they 
saw, dark against the sunset reflections, the fig- 
ure of James Bullen stepping hastily and rather 
clumsily from stone to stone. Once he slipped 
on a stone with a slight splash. When he re- 
joined the group on the bank his olive face was 
unnaturally pale. 

The other four men had already gathered on 
the same spot and almost simultaneously were 
calling out to him, "What does he say now?" 

"Nothing. He says — nothing." 

Fisher looked at the young man steadily for 
a moment; then he started from his immobility 
and, making a motion to March to follow him, 
himself strode down to the river crossing. In 
a few moments they were on the little beaten 
track that ran round the wooded island, to the 
other side of it where the fisherman sat. Then 
they stood and looked at him, without a word. 

Sir Isaac Hook was still sitting propped up 

against the stump of the tree, and that for the 

best of reasons. A length of his own infallible 

fishing line was twisted and tightened twice round 

136 



The Fad of the Fisherman 

his throat and then twice round the wooden prop 
behind him. The leading investigator ran for- 
ward and touched the fisherman's hand, and it 
was as cold as a fish. 

"The sun has set," said Home Fisher, in the 
same terrible tones, "and he will never see it 
rise again." 

Ten minutes afterward the five men, shaken 
by such a shock, were again together in the 
garden, looking at one another with white but 
watchful faces. The lawyer seemed the most 
alert of the group; he was articulate if some- 
what abrupt. 

"We must leave the body as it is and telephone 
for the police," he said. "I think my own au- 
thority will stretch to examining the servants and 
the poor fellow's papers, to see if there is any- 
thing that concerns them. Of course, none of 
you gentlemen must leave this place." 

Perhaps there was something in his rapid and 
rigorous legality that suggested the closing of a 
net or trap. Anyhow, young Bullen suddenly 
broke down, or perhaps blew up, for his voice 
was like an explosion in the silent garden. 

"I never touched him," he cried. "I swear I 
had nothing to do with it!" 

"Who said you had?" demanded Harker, with 
a hard eye. "Why do you cry out before you're 
hurt?" 

"Because you all look at me like that," cried 
137 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

the young man, angrily. "Do you think I don't 
know you're always talking about my damned 
debts and expectations?" 

Rather to March's* surprise, Fisher had drawn 
away from this first collision, leading the duke 
with him to another part of the garden. When 
he was out of earshot of the others he said, with 
a curious simplicity of manner: 

"Westmoreland, I am going straight to the 
point." 

"Well?" said the other, staring at him stolidly. 

"You have a motive for killing him," said 
Fisher. 

The duke continued to stare, but he seemed 
unable to speak. 

"I hope you had a motive for killing him," 
continued Fisher, mildly. "You see, it's rather 
a curious situation. If you have a motive for 
murdering, you probably didn't murder. But 
if you hadn't any motive, why, then perhaps, 
you did." 

"What on earth are you talking about?" de- 
manded the duke, violently. 

"It's quite simple," said Fisher. "When you 
went across he was either alive or dead. If he 
was alive, it might be you who killed him, or 
why should you have held your tongue about his 
death? But if he was dead, and you had a rea- 
son for killing him, you might have held your 
tongue for fear of being accused." Then after 
138 



The Fad of the Fisherman 

a silence he added, abstractedly: "Cyprus is a 
beautiful place, I believe. Romantic scenery and 
romantic people. Very intoxicating for a young 



man." 



The duke suddenly clenched his hands and 
said, thickly, "Well, I had a motive." 

"Then you're all right," said Fisher, holding 
out his hand with an air of huge relief. "I was 
pretty sure you wouldn't really do it; you had a 
fright when you saw it done, as was only natural. 
Like a bad dream come true, wasn't it?" 

While this curious conversation was passing, 
Harker had gone into the house, disregarding the 
demonstrations of the sulky nephew, and came 
back presently with a new air of animation and 
a sheaf of papers in his hand. 

"I've telephoned for the police," he said, stop- 
ping to speak to Fisher, "but I think I've done 
most of their work for them. I believe I've 

found out the truth. There's a paper here " 

He stopped, for Fisher was looking at him with 
a singular expression; and it was Fisher who 
spoke next: 

"Are there any papers that are not there, I 
wonder? I mean that are not there now?" 
After a pause he added: "Let us have the cards 
on the table. When you went through his papers 
in such a hurry, Harker, weren't you looking for 
something to — to make sure it shouldn't be 
found T' 

139 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

Harker did not turn a red hair on his hard 
head, but he looked at the other out of the cor- 
ners of his eyes. 

"And I suppose," went on Fisher, smoothly, 
"that is why you, too, told us lies about having 
found Hook alive. You knew there was some- 
thing to show that you might have killed him, 
and you didn't dare tell us he was killed. But, 
believe me, it's much better to be honest 
now." 

Harker's haggard face suddenly lit up as if 
with infernal flames. 

"Honest," he cried, "it's not so damned fine 
of you fellows to be honest. You're all born 
with silver spoons in your mouths, and then you 
swagger about with everlasting virtue because 
you haven't got other people's spoons in your 
pockets. But I was born in a Pimlico lodging 
house and I had to make my spoon, and there'd 
be plenty to say I only spoiled a horn or an honest 
man. And if a struggling man staggers a bit 
over the line in his youth, in the lower parts of 
the law which are pretty dingy, anyhow, there's 
always some old vampire to hang on to him all 
his life for it." 

"Guatemalan Golcondas, wasn't it?" said 
Fisher, sympathetically. 

Harker suddenly shuddered. Then he said, 
"I believe you must know everything, like God 
Almighty." 

140 



The Fad of the Fisherman 

"I know too much," said Home Fisher, "and 
all the wrong things." 

The other three men were drawing nearer to 
them, but before they came too near, Harker 
said, in a voice that had recovered all its firmness : 

"Yes, I did destroy a paper, but I really did 
find a paper, too; and I believe that it clears us 
all." 

"Very well," said Fisher, in a louder and 
more cheerful tone; "let us all have the benefit 
of it." 

"On the very top of Sir Isaac's papers," ex- 
plained Harker, "there was a threatening letter 
from a man named Hugo. It threatens to kill 
our unfortunate friend very much in the way 
that he was actually killed. It is a wild letter, 
full of taunts; you can see it for yourselves; but 
it makes a particular point of poor Hook's habit 
of fishing from the island. Above all, the man 
professes to be writing from a boat. And, since 
we alone went across to him," and he smiled in 
a rather ugly fashion, "the crime must have been 
committed by a man passing in a boat." 

"Why, dear me I" cried the duke, with some- 
thing almost amounting to animation. "Why, I 
remember the man called Hugo quite well ! He 
was a sort of body servant and bodyguard of Sir 
Isaac. You see, Sir Isaac was in some fear of 
assault. He was — he was not very popular with 
several people. Hugo was discharged after 
141 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

some row or other; but I remember him well. 
He was a great big Hungarian fellow with great 
mustaches that stood out on each side of his 
face." 

A door opened in the darkness of Harold 
March's memory, or, rather, oblivion, and 
showed a shining landscape, like that of a lost 
dream. It was rather a waterscape than a land- 
scape, a thing of flooded meadows and low trees 
and the dark archway of a bridge. And for one 
instant he saw again the man with mustaches 
like dark horns leap up on to the bridge and 
disappear. 

"Good heavens!" he cried. "Why, I met the 
murderer this morning!" 

Home Fisher and Harold March had their 
day on the river, after all, for the little group 
broke up when the police arrived. They de- 
clared that the coincidence of March's evidence 
had cleared the whole company, and clinched the 
case against the flying Hugo. Whether that 
Hungarian fugitive would ever be caught ap- 
peared to Home Fisher to be highly doubtful; 
nor can it be pretended that he displayed any 
very demoniac detective energy in the matter as 
he leaned back in the boat cushions, smoking, 
and watching the swaying reeds slide past. 

"It was a very good notion to hop up on to the 
bridge," he said. "An empty boat means very 
142 



The Fad of the Fisherman 

little ; he hasn't been seen to land on either bank, 
and he's walked off the bridge without walking 
on to it, so to speak. He's got twenty-four 
hours' start; his mustaches will disappear, and 
then he will disappear. I think there is every 
hope of his escape." 

"Hope?" repeated March, and stopped scull- 
ing for an instant. 

"Yes, hope," repeated the other. "To begin 
with, I'm not going to be exactly consumed with 
Corsican revenge because somebody has killed 
Hook. Perhaps you may guess by this time what 
Hook was. A damned blood-sucking blackmailer 
was that simple, strenuous, self-made captain of 
industry. He had secrets against nearly every- 
body; one against poor old Westmoreland about 
an early marriage in Cyprus that might have put 
the duchess in a queer position; and one against 
Harker about some flutter with his client's money 
when he was a young solicitor. That's why they 
went to pieces when they found him murdered, 
of course. They felt as if they'd done it in a 
dream. But I admit I have another reason for 
not wanting our Hungarian friend actually 
hanged for the murder." 

"And what is that?" asked his friend. 

"Only that he didn't commit the murder," 
answered Fisher. 

Harold March laid down the oars and let the 
boat drift for a moment. 
143 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"Do you know, I was half expecting some- 
thing like that," he said. "It was quite irra- 
tional, but it was hanging about in the atmos- 
phere, like thunder in the air." 

"On the contrary, it's finding Hugo guilty 
that's irrational," replied Fisher. "Don't you 
see that they're condemning him for the very 
reason for which they acquit everybody else? 
Harker and Westmoreland were silent because 
they found him murdered, and knew there were 
papers that made them look like the murderers. 
Well, so did Hugo find him murdered, and so 
did Hugo know there was a paper that would 
make him look like the murderer. He had 
written it himself the day before." 

"But in that case," said March, frowning, "at 
what sort of unearthly hour in the morning was 
the murder really committed? It was barely 
daylight when I met him at the bridge, and that's 
some way above the island." 

"The answer is very simple," replied Fisher. 
"The crime was not committed in the morn- 
ing. The crime was not committed on the 
island." 

March stared at the shining water without 
replying, but Fisher resumed like one who had 
been asked a question : 

"Every intelligent murder involves taking ad- 
vantage of some one uncommon feature in a com- 
mon situation. The feature here was the fancy 
144 



The Fad of the Fisherman 

of old Hook for being the first man up every 
morning, his fixed routine as an angler, and his 
annoyance at being disturbed. The murderer 
strangled him in his own house after dinner on 
the night before, carried his corpse, with all his 
fishing tackle, across the stream in the dead of 
night, tied him to the tree, and left him there 
under the stars. It was a dead man who sat 
fishing there all day. Then the murderer went 
back to the house, or, rather, to the garage, and 
went off in his motor car. The murderer drove 
his own motor car." 

Fisher glanced at his friend's face and went 
on. "You look horrified, and the thing is hor- 
rible. But other things are horrible, too. If 
some obscure man had been hag-ridden by a 
blackmailer and had his family life ruined, you 
wouldn't think the murder of his persecutor the 
most inexcusable of murders. Is it any worse 
when a whole great nation is set free as well as 
a family? By this warning to Sweden we shall 
probably prevent war and not precipitate it, and 
save many thousand lives rather more valuable 
than the life of that viper. Oh, I'm not talking 
sophistry or seriously justifying the thing, but 
the slavery that held him and his country was a 
thousand times less justifiable. If I'd really been 
sharp I should have guessed it from his smooth, 
deadly smiling at dinner that night. Do you 
remember that silly talk about how old Isaac 
145 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

could always play his fish? In a pretty hellish 
sense he was a fisher of men." 

Harold March took the oars and began to 
row again. 

"I remember," he said, "and about how a 
big fish might break the line and get away." 



VI 

THE HOLE IN THE WALL 

/ T s WO men, the one an architect and the other 
-*- an archaeologist, met on the steps of the 
great house at Prior's Park; and their host, Lord 
Bulmer, in his breezy way, thought it natural to 
introduce them. It must be confessed that he 
was hazy as well as breezy, and had no very 
clear connection in his mind, beyond the sense 
that an architect and an archaeologist begin with 
the same series of letters. The world must re- 
main in a reverent doubt as to whether he would, 
on the same principles, have presented a diplo- 
matist to a dipsomaniac or a ratiocinator to a 
rat catcher. He was a big, fair, bull-necked 
young man, abounding in outward gestures, un- 
consciously flapping his gloves and flourishing 
his stick. 

"You two ought to have something to talk 
about," he said, cheerfully. "Old buildings and 
all that sort of thing; this is rather an old build- 
ing, by the way, though I say it who shouldn't. 
I must ask you to excuse me a moment; I've got 
to go and see about the cards for this Christ- 
mas romp my sister's arranging. We hope to 
147 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

see you all there, of course. Juliet wants 
it to be a fancy-dress affair — abbots and cru- 
saders and all that. My ancestors, I suppose, 
after all." 

"I trust the abbot was not an ancestor," said 
the archaeological gentleman, with a smile. 

"Only a sort of great-uncle, I imagine," an- 
swered the other, laughing; then his rather 
rambling eye rolled round the ordered landscape 
in front of the house; an artificial sheet of water 
ornamented with an antiquated nymph in the 
center and surrounded by a park of tall trees 
now gray and black and frosty, for it was in 
the depth of a severe winter. 

"It's getting jolly cold," his lordship con- 
tinued. "My sister hopes we shall have some 
skating as well as dancing." 

"If the crusaders come in full armor," said 
the other, "you must be careful not to drown 
your ancestors." 

"Oh, there's no fear of that," answered Bul- 
mer; "this precious lake of ours is not two feet 
deep anywhere." And with one of his flourish- 
ing gestures he stuck his stick into the water to 
demonstrate its shallowness. They could see the 
short end bent in the water, so that he seemed 
for a moment to lean his large weight on a break- 
ing staff. 

"The worst you can expect is to see an abbot 
sit down rather suddenly," he added, turning 
148 



The Hole In the Wall 

away. "Well, au revoir; I'll let you know about 
it later." 

The archaeologist and the architect were left 
on the great stone steps smiling at each other; 
but whatever their common interests, they pre- 
sented a considerable personal contrast, and the 
fanciful might even have found some contradic- 
tion in each considered individually. The for- 
mer, a Mr. James Haddow, came from a drowsy 
den in the Inns of Court, full of leather and 
parchment, for the law was his profession and 
history only his hobby; he was indeed, among 
other things, the solicitor and agent of the 
Prior's Park estate. But he himself was far 
from drowsy and seemed remarkably wide 
awake, with shrewd and prominent blue eyes, 
and red hair brushed as neatly as his very neat 
costume. The latter, whose name was Leonard 
Crane, came straight from a crude and almost 
cockney office of builders and house agents in 
the neighboring suburb, sunning itself at the end 
of a new row of jerry-built houses with plans 
in very bright colors and notices in very large 
letters. But a serious observer, at a second 
glance, might have seen in his eyes something of 
that shining sleep that is called vision; and his 
yellow h lie not affectedly long, was un- 

affectedly untidy. It was a manifest if melan- 
choly truth that the architect was an artist. But 
the artistic temperament was far from explain- 
149 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

ing him; there was something else about him 
that was not definable, but which some even felt 
to be dangerous. Despite his dreaminess, he 
would sometimes surprise his friends with arts 
and even sports apart from his ordinary life, 
like memories of some previous existence, On 
this occasion, nevertheless, he hastened to dis- 
claim any authority on the other man's hobby. 

"I mustn't appear on false pretences," he said, 
with a smile. "I hardly even know what an 
archaeologist is, except that a rather rusty rem- 
nant of Greek suggests that he is a man who 
studies old things." 

"Yes," replied Haddow, grimly. u An archae- 
ologist is a man who studies old things and finds 
they are new." 

Crane looked at him steadily for a moment 
and then smiled again. 

"Dare one suggest," he said, "that some of 
the things we have been talking about are among 
the old things that turn out not to be old?" 

His companion also was silent for a moment, 
and the smile on his rugged face was fainter as 
he replied, quietly: 

"The wall round the park is really old. The 
one gate in it is Gothic, and I cannot find any 
trace of destruction or restoration. But the 
house and the estate generally — well the ro- 
mantic ideas read into these things are often 
rather recent romances, things almost like 
150 



The Hole In the Wall 

fashionable novels. For instance, the very name 
of this place, Prior's Park, makes everybody 
think of it as a moonlit mediaevaLabbey; I dare 
say the spiritualists by this time have discovered 
the ghost of a monk there. But, according to 
the only authoritative study of the matter I can 
find, the place was simply called Prior's as any 
rural place is called Podger's. It was the house 
of a Mr. Prior, a farmhouse, probably, that 
stood here at some time or other and was a local 
landmark. Oh, there are a great many ex- 
amples of the same thing, here and everywhere 
else. This suburb of ours used to be a village, 
and because some of the people slurred the name 
and pronounced it Holliwell, many a minor poet 
indulged in fancies about a Holy Well, with 
spells and fairies and all the rest of it, filling 
the suburban drawing-rooms with the Celtic twi- 
light. Whereas anyone acquainted with the 
facts knows that 'Hollinwall' simply means 'the 
hole in the wall,' and probably referred to some 
quite trivial accident. That's what I mean when 
I say that we don't so much find old things as 
we find new ones." 

Crane seemed to have grown somewhat inat- 
tentive to the little lecture on antiquities and 
novelties, and the cause of his restlessness was 
soon apparent, and indeed approaching. Lord 
Bulmer's sister, Juliet Bray, was coming slowly 
across the lawn, accompanied by one gentleman 
11 151 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

and followed by two others. The young archi- 
tect was in the illogical condition of mind in 
which he preferred three to one. 

The man walking with the lady was no other 
than the eminent Prince Borodino, who was at 
least as famous as a distinguished diplomatist 
ought to be, in the interests of what is called 
secret diplomacy. He had been paying a round 
of visits at various English country houses, and 
exactly what he was doing for diplomacy at 
Prior's Park was as much a secret as any diplo- 
matist could desire. The obvious thing to say 
of his appearance was that he would have been 
extremely handsome if he had not been entirely 
bald. But, indeed, that would itself be a rather 
bald way of putting it. Fantastic as it sounds, 
it would fit the case better to say that people 
would have been surprised to see hair growing 
on him; as surprised as if they had found hair 
growing on the bust of a Roman emperor. His 
tall figure was buttoned up in a tight-waisted 
fashion that rather accentuated his potential 
bulk, and he wore a red flower in his buttonhole. 
Of the two men walking behind one was also 
bald, but in a more partial and also a more pre- 
mature fashion, for his drooping mustache was 
still yellow, and if his eyes were somewhat heavy 
it was with languor and not with age. It was 
Home Fisher, and he was talking as easily and 
idly about everything as he always did. His 
152 



The Hole In the Wall 

companion was a more striking, arid even more 
sinister, figure, and he had the added importance 
of being Lord Buhner's oldest and most intimate 
friend. He was generally known with a severe 
simplicity as Mr. Brain; but it was understood 
that he had been a judge and police official in 
India, and that he had enemies, who had repre- 
sented his measures against crime as themselves 
almost criminal. He was a brown skeleton of a 
man with dark, deep, sunken eyes and a black 
mustache that hid the meaning of his mouth. 
Though he had the look of one wasted by some 
tropical disease, his movements were much more 
alert than those of his lounging companion. 

"It's all settled," announced the lady, with 
great animation, when they came within hailing 
distance. "You've all got to put on masquerade 
things and very likely skates as well, though 
the prince says* they don't go with it; but we 
don't care about that. It's freezing already, and 
we don't often get such a chance in England." 

"Even in India we don't exactly skate all the 
year round," observed Mr. Brain. 

"And even Italy is not primarily associated 
with ice," said the Italian. 

"Italy is primarily associated with ices," re- 
marked Mr. Home Fisher. "I mean with ice 
cream men. Most people in this country imagine 
that Italy is entirely populated with ice cream 
men and organ grinders. There certainly are 
153 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

a lot of them; perhaps they're an invading army 
in disguise." 

"How do you know they are not the secret 
emissaries of our diplomacy?" asked the prince, 
with a slightly scornful smile. "An army of 
organ grinders might pick up hints, and their 
monkeys might pick up all sort of things." 

"The organs are organized in fact," said the 
flippant Mr. Fisher. "Well, I've known it pretty 
cold before now in Italy and even in India, up 
on the Himalayan slopes. The ice on our own 
little round pond will be quite cozy by com- 
parison." 

Juliet Bray was an attractive lady with dark 
hair and eyebrows and dancing eyes, and there 
was a geniality and even generosity in her rather 
imperious ways. In most matters she could 
command her brother, though that nobleman, 
like many other men of vague ideas, was not 
without a touch of the bully when he was at bay. 
She could certainly command her guests, even 
to the extent of decking out the most respectable 
and reluctant of them with her mediaeval mas- 
querade. And it really seemed as if she could 
command the elements also, like a witch. For 
the weather steadily hardened and sharpened; 
that night the ice of the lake, glimmering in 
the moonlight, was like a marble floor, and they 
had begun to dance and skate on it before it 
was dark. 

154 



The Hole In the Wall 

Prior's Park, or, more properly, the surround- 
ing district of Holinwall, was a country seat that 
had become a suburb; having once had only a 
dependent village at its doors, it now found 
outside all its doors the signals of the expansion 
of London. Mr. Haddow, who was engaged in 
historical researches both in the library and the 
locality, could find little assistance in the latter. 
He had already realized, from the documents, 
that Prior's Park had originally been something 
like Prior's Farm, named after some local figure, 
but the new social conditions were all against 
his tracing the story by its traditions. Had any 
of the real rustics remained, he would probably 
have found some lingering legend of Mr. Prior, 
however remote he might be. But the new 
nomadic population of clerks and artisans, con- 
stantly shifting their homes from one suburb to 
another, or their children from one school to 
another, could have no corporate continuity. 
They had all that forgetfulness of history that 
goes everywhere with the extension of education. 

Nevertheless, when he came out of the library 
next morning and saw the wintry trees standing 
round the frozen pond like a black forest, he 
felt he might well have been far in the depths 
of the country. The old wall running round the 
park kept that inclosure itself still entirely rural 
and romantic, and one could easily imagine that 
the depths of that dark forest faded away in- 
i55 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

definitely into distant vales and hills. The gray 
and black and silver of the wintry wood were 
all the more severe or somber as a contrast to 
the colored carnival groups that already stood 
on and around the frozen pool. For the house 
party had already flung themselves impatiently 
into fancy dress, and the lawyer, with his neat 
black suit and red hair, was the only modern 
figure among them. 

"Aren't you going to dress up?" asked Juliet, 
indignantly shaking at him a horned and tower- 
ing blue headdress of the fourteenth century 
which framed her face very becomingly, fan- 
tastic as it was. "Everybody here has to be in 
the Middle Ages. Even Mr. Brain has put on 
a sort of brown dressing gown and says he's a 
monk; and Mr. Fisher got hold of some old 
potato sacks in the kitchen and sewed them to- 
gether; he's supposed to be a monk, too. As 
to the prince, he's perfectly glorious, in great 
crimson robes as a cardinal. He looks as if he 
could poison everybody. You simply must be 
something." 

"I will be something later in the day," he re- 
plied. "At present I am nothing but an anti- 
quary and an attorney. I have to see your 
brother presently, about some legal business and 
also some local investigations he asked me to 
make. I must look a little like a steward when 
I give an account of my stewardship." 
156 



The Hole In the Wall 

"Oh, but my brother has dressed up !" cried 
the girl. "Very much so. No end, if I may say 
so. Why he's bearing down on you now in all 
his glory." 

The noble lord was indeed marching toward 
them in a magnificent sixteenth-century costume 
of purple and gold, with a gold-hilted sword 
and a plumed cap, and manners to match. In- 
deed, there was something more than his usual 
expansiveness of bodily action in his appearance 
at that moment. It almost seemed, so to speak, 
that the plumes on his hat had gone to his head. 
He flapped his great, gold-lined cloak like the 
wings of a fairy king in a pantomime; he even 
drew his sword with a flourish and waved it 
about as he did his walking stick. In the light 
of after events there seemed to be something 
monstrous and ominous about that exuberance, 
something of the spirit that is called fey. At 
the time it merely crossed a few people's minds 
that he might possibly be drunk. 

As he strode toward his sister the first figure 
he passed was that of Leonard Crane, clad in 
Lincoln green, with the horn and baldrick and 
sword appropriate to Robin Hood; for he was 
standing nearest to the lady, where, indeed, he 
might have been found during a disproportionate 
part of the time. He had displayed one of his 
buried talents in the matter of skating, and now 
that the skating was over seemed disposed to 
157 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

prolong the partnership. The boisterous Bul- 
mer playfully made a pass at him with his drawn 
sword, going forward with the lunge in the 
proper fencing fashion, and making a somewhat 
too familiar Shakespearean quotation about a 
rodent and a Venetian coin. 

Probably in Crane also there was a subdued 
excitement just then; anyhow, in one flash he 
had drawn his own sword and parried; and 
then suddenly, to the surprise of everyone, 
Buhner's weapon seemed to spring out of his 
hand into the air and rolled away on the ring- 
ing ice. 

"Well, I never !" said the lady, as if with jus- 
tifiable indignation. "You never told me you 
could fence, too." 

Bulmer put up his sword with an air rather 
bewildered than annoyed, which increased the 
impression of something irresponsible in his mood 
at the moment; then he turned rather abruptly 
to his lawyer, saying: 

"We can settle up about the estate after 
dinner; I've missed nearly all the skating as it 
is, and I doubt if the ice will hold till to-morrow 
night. I think I shall get up early and have a 
spin by myself." 

"You won't be disturbed with my company," 

said Home Fisher, in his weary fashion. "If I 

have to begin the day with ice, in the American 

fashion, I prefer it in smaller quantities. But no 

158 



The Hole In the Wall 

early hours for me in December. The early 
bird catches the cold." 

"Oh, I sha'n't die of catching a cold," an- 
swered Bulmer, and laughed. 

A considerable group of the skating party had 
consisted of the guests staying at the house, and 
the rest had tailed off in twos and threes some 
time before most of the guests began to retire 
for the night. Neighbors, always invited to 
Prior's Park on such occasions, went back to 
their own houses in motors or on foot; the legal 
and archaeological gentleman had returned to the 
Inns of Court by a late train, to get a paper called 
for during his consultation with his client; and 
most of the other guests were drifting and linger- 
ing at various stages on their way up to bed. 
Home Fisher, as if to deprive himself of any 
excuse for his refusal of early rising, had been 
the first to retire to his room; but, sleepy as he 
looked, he could not sleep. He had picked up 
from a table the book of antiquarian topography, 
in which Haddow had found his first hints about 
the origin of the local name, and, being a man 
with a quiet and quaint capacity for being in- 
terested in anything, he began to read it steadily, 
making notes now and then of details on which 
his previous reading left him with a certain doubt 
about his present conclusions. His room was the 
one nearest to the lake in the center of the woods, 
159 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

and was therefore the quietest, and none of the 
last echoes of the evening's festivity could reach 
him He had followed carefully the argument 
which established the derivation from Mr. 
Prior's farm and the hole in the wall, and dis- 
posed of any fashionable fancy about monks 
and magic wells, when he began to be conscious 
of a noise audible in the frozen silence of the 
night. It was not a particularly loud noise, but 
it seemed to consist of a series of thuds or heavy 
blows, such as might be struck on a wooden door 
by a man seeking to enter. They were followed 
by something like a faint creak or crack, as if 
the obstacle had either been opened or had given 
way. He opened his own bedroom door and 
listened, but as he heard talk and laughter all 
over the lower floors, he had no reason to fear 
that a summons would be neglected or the house 
left without protection. He went to his open 
window, looking out over the frozen pond and 
the moonlit statue in the middle of their circle 
of darkling woods, and listened again. But si- 
lence had returned to that silent place, and, after 
straining his ears for a considerable time, he 
could hear nothing but the solitary hoot of a 
distant departing train. Then he reminded him- 
self how many nameless noises can be heard 
by the wakeful during the most ordinary night, 
and shrugging his shoulders, went wearily to 
bed. 

160 



The Hole In the Wall 

He awoke suddenly and sat up in bed with 
his ears filled, as with thunder, with the throb- 
bing echoes of a rending cry. He remained rigid 
for a moment, and then sprang out of bed, throw- 
ing on the loose gown of sacking he had worn 
all day. He went first to the window, which 
was open, but covered with a thick curtain, so 
that his room was still completely dark ; but when 
he tossed the curtain aside and put his head out, 
he saw that a gray and silver daybreak had al- 
ready appeared behind the black woods that sur- 
rounded the little lake, and that was all that he 
did see. Though the sound had certainly come 
in through the open window from this direction, 
the whole scene was still and empty under the 
morning light as under the moonlight. Then the 
long, rather lackadaisical hand he had laid on a 
window sill gripped it tighter, as if to master a 
tremor, and his peering blue eyes grew bleak 
with fear. It may seem that his emotion was 
exaggerated and needless, considering the effort 
of common sense by which he had conquered his 
nervousness about the noise on the previous night. 
But that had been a very different sort of noise. 
It might have been made by half a hundred 
things, from the chopping of wood to the 
breaking of bottles. There was only one 
thing in nature from which could come the 
sound that echoed through the dark house 
at daybreak. It was the awful articulate voice 
161 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

of man; and it was something worse, for he 
knew what man. 

He knew also that it had been a shout for 
help. It seemed to him that he had heard the 
very word; but the word, short as it was, had 
been swallowed up, as if the man had been stifled 
or snatched away even as he spoke. Only the 
mocking reverberations of it remained even in 
his memory, but he had no doubt of the original 
voice. He had no doubt that the great bull's 
voice of Francis Bray, Baron Bulmer, had been 
heard for the last time between the darkness 
and the lifting dawn. 

How long he stood there he never knew, but 
he was startled into life by the first living thing 
that he saw stirring in that half-frozen land- 
scape. Along the path beside the lake, and imme- 
diately under his window, a figure was walking 
slowly and softly, but with great composure — a 
stately figure in robes of a splendid scarlet; it was 
the Italian prince, still in his cardinal's costume. 
Most of the company had indeed lived in their 
costumes for the last day or two, and Fisher him- 
self had assumed his frock of sacking as a con- 
venient dressing gown ; but there seemed, never- 
theless, something unusually finished and formal, 
in the way of an early bird, about this magnificent 
red cockatoo. It was as if the early bird had 
been up all night. 

"What is the matter?" he called, sharply, lean- 
162 



The Hole In the Wall 

ing out of the window, and the Italian turned up 
his great yellow face like a mask of brass. 

"We had better discuss it downstairs," said 
Prince Borodino. 

Fisher ran downstairs, and encountered the 
great, red-robed figure entering the doorway and 
blocking the entrance with his bulk. 

"Did you hear that cry?" demanded Fisher. 

"I heard a noise and I came out," answered 
the diplomatist, and his face was too dark in 
the shadow for its expression to be read. 

"It was Buhner's voice," insisted Fisher. "I'll 
swear it was Bulmer's voice." 

"Did you know him well?" asked the other. 

The question seemed irrelevant, though it was 
not illogical, and Fisher could only answer in a 
random fashion that he knew Lord Bulmer only 
slightly. 

"Nobody seems to have known him well," 
continued the Italian, in level tones. "Nobody 
except that man Brain. Brain is rather older 
than Bulmer, but I fancy they shared a good 
many secrets." 

Fisher moved abruptly, as if waking from a 
momentary trance, and said, in a new and more 
vigorous voice, "But look here, hadn't we better 
get outside and see if anything has happened." 

"The ice seems to be thawing," said the other, 
almost with indifference. 

When they emerged from the house, dark 
163 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

stains and stars in the gray field of ice did indeed 
indicate that the frost was breaking up, as their 
host had prophesied the day before, and the very 
memory of yesterday brought back the mystery 
of to-day. 

"He knew there would be a thaw," observed 
the prince. "He went out skating quite early on 
purpose. Did he call out because he landed in 
the water, do you think?" 

Fisher looked puzzled. "Buhner was the last 
man to bellow like that because he got his boots 
wet. And that's all he could do here ; the water 
would hardly come up to the calf of a man of 
his size. You can see the flat weeds on the floor 
of the lake, as if it were through a thin pane of 
glass. No, if Bulmer had only broken the ice he 
wouldn't have said much at the moment, though 
possibly a good deal afterward. We should have 
found him stamping and damning up and down 
this path, and calling for clean boots." 

"Let us hope we shall find him as happily em- 
ployed," remarked the diplomatist. "In that 
case the voice must have come out of the 
wood." 

"I'll swear it didn't come out of the house," 
said Fisher; and the two disappeared together 
into the twilight of wintry trees. 

The plantation stood dark against the fiery 
colors of sunrise, a black fringe having that 
feathery appearance which makes trees when 
164 



The Hole In the Wall 

they are bare the very reverse of rugged. Hours 
and hours afterward, when the same dense, but 
delicate, margin was dark against the greenish 
colors opposite the sunset, the search thus be- 
gun at sunrise had not come to an end. By suc- 
cessive stages, and to slowly gathering groups 
of the company, it became apparent that the most 
extraordinary of all gaps had appeared in the 
party; the guests could find no trace of their 
host anywhere. The servants reported that his 
bed had been slept in and his skates and his fancy 
costume were gone, as if he had risen early for 
the purpose he had himself avowed. But from 
the top of the house to the bottom, from the 
walls round the park to the pond in the center, 
there was no trace of Lord Bulmer, dead or alive. 
Home Fisher realized that a chilling premo- 
nition had already prevented him from expecting 
to find the man alive. But his bald brow was 
wrinkled over an entirely new and unnatural 
problem, in not finding the man at all. 

He considered the possibility of Bulmer hav- 
ing gone off of his own accord, for some reason; 
but after fully weighing it he finally dismissed it. 
It was inconsistent with the unmistakable voice 
heard at daybreak, and with many other prac- 
tical obstacles. There was only one gateway in 
the ancient and lofty wall round the small park; 
the lodge keeper kept it locked till late in the 
morning, and the lodge keeper had seen no one 
165 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

pass. Fisher was fairly sure that he had before 
him a mathematical problem in an inclosed space. 
His instinct had been from the first so attuned to 
the tragedy that it would have been almost a 
relief to him to find the corpse. He would have 
been grieved, but not horrified, to come on the 
nobleman's body dangling from one of his own 
trees as from a gibbet, or floating in his own pool 
like a pallid weed. What horrified him was to 
find nothing. 

He soon become conscious that he was not 
alone even in his most individual and isolated 
experiments. He often found a figure following 
him like his shadow, in silent and almost secret 
clearings in the plantation or outlying nooks and 
corners of the old wall. The dark-mustached 
mouth was as mute as the deep eyes were mobile, 
darting incessantly hither and thither, but it was 
clear that Brain of the Indian police had taken 
up the trail like an old hunter after a tiger. See- 
ing that he was the only personal friend of the 
vanished man, this seemed natural enough, and 
Fisher resolved to deal frankly with him. 

"This silence is rather a social strain," he 
said. "May I break the ice by talking about the 
weather? — which, by the way, has already 
broken the ice. I know that breaking the ice 
might be a rather melancholy metaphor in this 
case." 

"I don't think so," replied Brain, shortly. "I 
1 66 



The Hole In the Wall 

don't fancy the ice had much to do with it. I 
don't see how it could." 

"What would you propose doing?" asked 
Fisher. 

"Well, weVe sent for the authorities, of 
course, but I hope to find something out before 
they come," replied the Anglo-Indian. U I can't 
say I have much hope from police methods in this 
country. Too much red tape, habeas corpus and 
that sort of thing. What we want is to see that 
nobody bolts; the nearest we could get to it 
would be to collect the company and count them, 
so to speak. Nobody's left lately, except that 
lawyer who was poking about for antiquities." 

"Oh, he's out of it; he left last night," an- 
swered the other. "Eight hours after Bulmer's 
chauffeur saw his lawyer off by the train I heard 
Bulmer's own voice as plain as I hear yours now." 

"I suppose you don't believe in spirits?" said 
the man from India. After a pause he added: 
"There's somebody else I should like to find, 
before we go after a fellow with an alibi in the 
Inner Temple. What's become of that fellow 
in green — the architect dressed up as a forester? 
I haven't seem him about." 

Mr. Brain managed to secure his assembly 
of all the distracted company before the arrival 
of the police. But when he first began to com- 
ment once more on the young architect's delay 
in putting in an appearance, he found himself in 
12 167 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

the presence of a minor mystery, and a psycho- 
logical development of an entirely unexpected 
kind. 

Juliet Bray had confronted the catastrophe of 
her brother's disappearance with a somber 
stoicism in which there was, perhaps, more 
paralysis than pain; but when the other question 
came to the surface she was both agitated and 
angry. 

"We don't want to jump to any conclusions 
about anybody," Brain was saying in his staccato 
style. "But we should like to know a little more 
about Mr. Crane. Nobody seems to know much 
about him, or where he comes from. And it 
seems a sort of coincidence that yesterday he 
actually crossed swords with poor Bulmer, and 
could have stuck him, too, since he showed him- 
self the better swordsman. Of course, that may 
be an accident and couldn't possibly be called a 
case against anybody; but then we haven't the 
means to make a real case against anybody. Till 
the police come we are only a pack of very 
amateur sleuthhounds." 

"And I think you're a pack of snobs," said 
Juliet. "Because Mr. Crane is a genius who's 
made his own way, you try to suggest he's a 
murderer without daring to say so. Because he 
wore a toy sword and happened to know how 
to use it, you want us to believe he used it like 
a bloodthirsty maniac for no reason in the world. 
1 68 



The Hole In the Wall 

And because he could have hit my brother and 
didn't, you deduce that he did. That's the sort 
of way you argue. And as for his having dis- 
appeared, you're wrong in that as you are in 
everything else, for here he comes." 

And, indeed, the green figure of the fictitious 
Robin Hood slowly detached itself from the gray 
background of the trees, and came toward them 
as she spoke. 

He approached the group slowly, but with 
composure; but he was decidedly pale, and the 
eyes of Brain and Fisher had already taken in 
one detail of the green-clad figure more clearly 
than all the rest. The horn still swung from 
his baldrick, but the sword was gone. 

Rather to the surprise of the company, Brain 
did not follow up the question thus suggested; 
but, while retaining an air of leading the 
inquiry, had also an appearance of changing the 
subject. 

"Now we're all assembled," he observed, 
quietly, "there is a question I want to ask to 
begin with. Did anybody here actually see Lord 
Bulmer this morning?" 

Leonard Crane turned his pale face round the 
circle of faces till he came to Juliet's; then he 
compressed his lips a little and said: 

"Yes, I saw him." 

"Was he alive and well?" asked Brain, quickly. 
"How was he dressed?" 
169 



'The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"He appeared exceedingly well," replied 
Crane, with a curious intonation. "He was 
dressed as he was yesterday, in that purple cos- 
tume copied from the portrait of his ancestor in 
the sixteenth century. He had his skates in his 
hand." 

"And his sword at his side, I suppose," added 
the questioner. "Where is your own sword, Mr. 
Crane?" 

"I threw it away." 

In the singular silence that ensued, the train 
of thought in many minds became involuntarily 
a series of colored pictures. 

They had grown used to their fanciful gar- 
ments looking more gay and gorgeous against the 
dark gray and streaky silver of the forest, so 
that the moving figures glowed like stained-glass 
saints walking. The effect had been more fitting 
because so many of them had idly parodied 
pontifical or monastic dress. But the most ar- 
resting attitude that remained in their memories 
had been anything but merely monastic; that of 
the moment when the figure in bright green and 
the other in vivid violet had for a moment made 
a silver cross of their crossing swords. Even 
when it was a jest it had been something of a 
drama ; and it was a strange and sinister thought 
that in the gray daybreak the same figures in the 
same posture might have been repeated as a 
tragedy. 

170 



The Hole In the Wall 

"Did you quarrel with him?" asked Brain, 
suddenly. 

"Yes," replied the immovable man in green. 
"Or he quarreled with me." 

"Why did he quarrel with you?" asked the 
investigator ; and Leonard Crane made no reply. 

Home Fisher, curiously enough, had only 
given half his attention to this crucial cross-ex- 
amination. His heavy-lidded eyes had languidly 
followed the figure of Prince Borodino, who at 
this stage had strolled away toward the fringe 
of the wood; and, after a pause, as of medi- 
tation, had disappeared into the darkness of the 
trees. 

He was recalled from his irrelevance by the 
voice of Juliet Bray, which rang out with an 
altogether new note of decision : 

"If that is the difficulty, it had best be cleared 
up. I am engaged to Mr. Crane, and when we 
told my brother he did not approve of it; that 
is all." 

Neither Brain nor Fisher exhibited any sur- 
prise, but the former added, quietly: 

"Except, I suppose, that He and your brother 
went off into the wood to discuss it, where Mr. 
Crane mislaid his sword, not to mention his com- 
panion." 

"And may I ask," inquired Crane, with a cer- 
tain flicker of mockery passing over his pallid 
features, "what I am supposed to have done with 
171 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

cither of them? Let us adopt the cheerful thesis 
that I am a murderer; it has yet to be shown 
that I am a magician. If I ran your unfortunate 
friend through the body, what did I do with the 
body? Did I have it carried away by seven fly- 
ing dragons, or was it merely a trifling matter 
of turning it into a milk-white hind?" 

"It is no occasion for sneering," said the 
Anglo-Indian judge, with abrupt authority. "It 
doesn't make it look better for you that you can 
joke about the loss." 

Fisher's dreamy, and even dreary, eye was 
still on the edge of the wood behind, and he be- 
came conscious of masses of dark red, like a 
stormy sunset cloud, glowing through the gray 
network of the thin trees, and the prince in his 
cardinal's robes re-emerged on to the pathway. 
Brain had had half a notion that the prince might 
have gone to look for the lost rapier. But when 
he reappeared he was carrying in his hand, not 
a sword, but an ax. 

The incongruity between the masquerade and 
the mystery had created a curious psychological 
atmosphere. At first they had all felt horribly 
ashamed at being caught in the foolish disguises 
of a festival, by an event that had only too much 
the character of a funeral. Many of them would 
have already gone back and dressed in clothes 
that were more funereal or at least more formal. 
But somehow at the moment this seemed like a 
172 



The Hole In the Wall 

second masquerade, more artificial and frivolous 
than the first. And as they reconciled themselves 
to their ridiculous trappings, a curious sensation 
had come over some of them, notably over the 
more sensitive, like Crane and Fisher and Juliet, 
but in some degree over everybody except the 
practical Mr. Brain. It was almost as if they 
were the ghosts of their own ancestors haunting 
that dark wood and dismal lake, and playing 
some old part that they only half remembered. 
The movements of those colored figures seemed 
to mean something that had been settled long 
before, like a silent heraldry. Acts, attitudes, ex- 
ternal objects, were accepted as an allegory even 
without the key; and they knew when a crisis 
had come, when they did not know what it was. 
And somehow they knew subconsciously that the 
whole tale had taken a new and terrible turn, 
when they saw the prince stand in the gap of the 
gaunt trees, in his robes of angry crimson and 
with his lowering face of bronze, bearing in his 
hand a new shape of death. They could not have 
named a reason, but the two swords seemed in- 
deed to have become toy swords and the whole 
tale of them broken and tossed away like a 
toy. Borodino looked like the Old World heads- 
man, clad in terrible red, and carrying the ax 
for the execution of the criminal. And the 
criminal was not Crane. 

Mr. Brain of the Indian police was glaring 
173 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

at the new object, and it was a moment or two 
before he spoke, harshly and almost hoarsely. 

u What are you doing with that?" he asked. 
"Seems to be a woodman's chopper." 

"A natural association of ideas," observed 
Home Fisher. "If you meet a cat in a wood you 
think it's a wildcat, though ft may have just 
strolled from the drawing-room sofa. As a mat- 
ter of fact, I happen to know that is not the 
woodman's chopper. It's the kitchen chopper, 
or meat ax, or something like that, that some- 
body has thrown away in the wood. I saw it in 
the kitchen myself when I was getting the potato 
sacks with which I reconstructed a mediaeval 
hermit." 

"All the same, it is not without interest," re- 
marked the prince, holding out the instrument 
to Fisher, who took it and examined it carefully. 
"A butcher's cleaver that has done butcher's 
work." 

"It was certainly the instrument of the crime," 
assented Fisher, in a low voice. 

Brain was staring at the dull blue gleam of 
the ax head with fierce and fascinated eyes. "I 
don't understand you," he said. "There is no — 
there are no marks on it." 

"It has shed no blood," answered Fisher, "but 
for all that it has committed a crime. This is 
as near as the criminal came to the crime when 
he committed it." 

174 



The Hole In the Wall 

"What do you mean?" 

"He was not there when he did it," explained 
Fisher. "It's a poor sort of murderer who can't 
murder people when he isn't there." 

"You seem to be talking merely for the sake 
of mystification," said Brain. "If you have any 
practical advice to give you might as well make 
it intelligible." 

"The only practical advice I can suggest," said 
Fisher, thoughtfully, "is a little research into 
local topography and nomenclature. They say 
there used to be a Mr. Prior, who had a farm 
in this neighborhood. I think some details about 
the domestic life of the late Mr. Prior would 
throw a light on this terrible business." 

"And you have nothing more immediate than 
your topography to offer," said Brain, with a 
sneer, "to help me avenge my friend?" 

"Well," said Fisher, "I should find out the 
truth about the Hole in the Wall." 

That night, at the close of a stormy twilight 
and under a strong west wind that followed the 
breaking of the frost, Leonard Crane was wend- 
ing his way in a wild rotatory walk round and 
round the high, continuous wall that inclosed 
the little wood. He was driven by a desperate 
idea of solving for himself the riddle that had 
clouded his reputation and already even threat- 
ened his liberty. The police authorities, now in 
175 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

charge of the inquiry, had not arrested him, but 
he knew well enough that if he tried to move far 
afield he would be instantly arrested. Home 
Fisher's fragmentary hints, though he had re- 
fused to expand them as yet, had stirred the 
artistic temperament of the architect to a sort of 
wild analysis, and he was resolved to read the 
hieroglyph upside down and every way until it 
made sense. If it was something connected with 
a hole in the wall he would find the hole in the 
wall ; but, as a matter of fact, he was unable to 
find the faintest crack in the wall. His profes- 
sional knowledge told him that the masonry was 
all of one workmanship and one date, and, ex- 
cept for the regular entrance, which threw no 
light on the mystery, he found nothing suggest- 
ing any sort of hiding place or means of escape. 
Walking a narrow path between the winding 
wall and the wild eastward bend and sweep of 
the gray and feathery trees, seeing shifting 
gleams of a lost sunset winking almost like 
lightning as the clouds of tempest scudded 
across the sky and mingling with the first faint 
blue light from a slowly strengthened moon be- 
hind him, he began to feel his head going round 
as his heels were going round and round the 
blind recurrent barrier. He had thoughts on the 
border of thought; fancies about a fourth di- 
mension which was itself a hole to hide anything, 
of seeing everything from a new angle out of a 
176 



The Hole In the Wall 

new window in the senses; or of some mystical 
light and transparency, like the new rays of 
chemistry, in which he could see Buhner's body, 
horrible and glaring, floating in a lurid halo over 
the woods and the wall. He was haunted also 
with the hint, which somehow seemed to be 
equally horrifying, that it all had something to 
do with Mr. Prior. There seemed even to be 
something creepy in the fact that he was always 
respectfully referred to as Mr. Prior, and that 
it was in the domestic life of the dead farmer 
that he had been bidden to seek the seed of these 
dreadful things. As a matter of fact, he had 
found that no local inquiries had revealed any- 
thing at all about the Prior family. 

The moonlight had broadened and brightened, 
the wind had driven off the clouds and itself died 
fitfully away, when he came round again to the 
artificial lake in front of the house. For some 
reason it looked a very artificial lake; indeed, 
the whole scene was like a classical landscape 
with a touch of Watteau ; the Palladian facade of 
the house pale in the moon, and the same silver 
touching the very pagan and naked marble nymph 
in the middle of the pond. Rather to his sur- 
prise, he found another figure there beside the 
statue, sitting almost equally motionless; and the 
same silver pencil traced the wrinkled brow and 
patient face of Home Fisher, still dressed as a 
hermit and apparently practicing something of 
177 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

the solitude of a hermit. Nevertheless, he 
looked up at Leonard Crane and smiled, almost 
as if he had expected him. 

"Look here," said Crane, planting himself in 
front of him, "can you tell me anything about 
this business?" 

"I shall soon have to tell everybody everything 
about it," replied Fisher, u but I've no objection 
to telling you something first. But, to begin 
with, will you tell me something? What really 
happened when you met Bulmer this morning? 
You did throw away your sword, but you didn't 
kill him." 

"I didn't kill him because I threw away 
my sword," said the other. "I did it on 
purpose — or I'm not sure what might have 
happened." 

After a pause he went on, quietly: "The late 
Lord Bulmer was a very breezy gentleman, ex- 
tremely breezy. He was very genial with his 
inferiors, and would have his lawyer and his 
architect staying in his house for all sorts of 
holidays and amusements. But there was an- 
other side to him, which they found out when 
they tried to be his equals. When I told him 
that his sister and I were engaged, something 
happened which I simply can't and won't de- 
scribe. It seemed to me like some monstrous 
upheaval of madness. But I suppose the truth 
is painfully simple. There is such a thing as the 
178 



The Hole In the Wall 

coarseness of a gentleman. And it is the most 
horrible thing in humanity." 

"I know," said Fisher. "The Renaissance 
nobles of the Tudor time were like that." 

"It is odd that you should say that," Crane 
went on. "For while we were talking there 
came on me a curious feeling that we were re- 
peating some scene of the past, and that I was 
really some outlaw, found in the woods like Robin 
Hood, and that he had really stepped in all his 
plumes and purple out of the picture frame of 
the ancestral portrait. Anyhow, he was the man 
in possession, and he neither feared God nor 
regarded man. I defied him, of course, and 
walked away. I might really have killed him if 
I had not walked away." 

"Yes," said Fisher, nodding, "his ancestor 
was in possession and he was in possession, and 
this is the end of the story. It all fits in." 

"Fits in with what?" cried his companion, with 
sudden impatience. "I can't make head or tail 
of it. You tell me to look for the secret in the 
hole in the wall, but I can't find any hole in the 
wall." 

"There isn't any," said Fisher. "That's the 
secret." After reflecting a moment, he added: 
"Unless you call it a hole in the wall of the world. 
Look here ; I'll tell you if you like, but I'm afraid 
it involves an introduction. You've got to under- 
stand one of the tricks of the modern mind, a 
179 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

tendency that most people obey without noticing 
it. In the village or suburb outside there's an inn 
with the sign of St. George and the Dragon. 
Now suppose I went about telling everybody 
that this was only a corruption of King George 
and the Dragoon. Scores of people would be- 
lieve it, without any inquiry, from a vague feel- 
ing that it's probable because it's prosaic. It 
turns something romantic and legendary into 
something recent and ordinary. And that some- 
how makes it sound rational, though it is unsup- 
ported by reason. Of course some people would 
have the sense to remember having seen St. 
George in old Italian pictures and French ro- 
mances, but a good many wouldn't think about 
it at all. They would just swallow the skepticism 
because it was skepticism. Modern intelligence 
won't accept anything on authority. But it will 
accept anything without authority. That's ex- 
actly what has happened here. 

"When some critic or other chose to say that 
Prior's Park was not a priory, but was named 
after some quite modern man named Prior, no- 
body really tested the theory at all. It never 
occurred to anybody repeating the story to ask 
if there was any Mr. Prior, if anybody had ever 
seen him or heard of him. As a matter of fact, 
it was a priory,' and shared the fate of most 
priories — that is, the Tudor gentleman with the 
plumes simply stole it by brute force and turned 
1 80 



The Hole In the Wall 

it into his own private house ; he did worse things, 
as you shall hear. But the point here is that 
this is how the trick works, and the trick works 
in the same way in the other part of the tale. 
The name of this district is printed Holinwall 
in all the best maps produced by the scholars; 
and they allude lightly, not without a smile, to 
the fact that it was pronounced Holiwell by the 
most ignorant and old-fashioned of the poor. 
But it is spelled wrong and pronounced right." 

"Do you mean to say," asked Crane, quickly, 
"that there really was a well?" 

"There is a well," said Fisher, "and the truth 
lies at the bottom of it." 

As he spoke he stretched out his hand and 
pointed toward the sheet of water in front of 
him. 

"The well is under that water somewhere," 
he said, "and this is not the first tragedy con- 
nected with it. The founder of this house did 
something which his fellow ruffians very seldom 
did; something that had to be hushed up even 
in the anarchy of the pillage of the monasteries. 
The well was connected with the miracles of 
some saint, and the last prior that guarded it 
was something like a saint himself; certainly he 
was something very like a martyr. He defied 
the new owner and dared him to pollute the place, 
till the noble, in a fury, stabbed him and flung 
his body into the well, whither, after four hun- 
181 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

dred years, it has been followed by an heir of the 
usurper, clad in the same purple and walking the 
world with the same pride." 

"But how did it happen," demanded Crane, 
"that for the first time Buhner fell in at that 
particular spot?" 

"Because the ice was only loosened at that 
particular spot, by the only man who knew it," 
answered Home Fisher. "It was cracked de- 
liberately, with the kitchen chopper, at that 
special place ; and I myself heard the hammering 
and did not understand it. The place had been 
covered with an artificial lake, if only because 
the whole truth had to be covered with an arti- 
ficial legend. But don't you see that it is ex- 
actly what those pagan nobles would have done, 
to desecrate it with a sort of heathen goddess, 
as the Roman Emperor built a temple to Venus 
on the Holy Sepulchre. But the truth could still 
be traced out, by any scholarly man determined 
to trace it. And this man was determined to 
trace it." 

"What man?" asked the other, with a shadow 
of the answer in his mind. 

"The only man who has an alibi," replied 
Fisher. "James Haddow, the antiquarian law- 
yer, left the night before the fatality, but he 
left that black star of death on the ice. He left 
abruptly, having previously proposed to stay; 
probably, I think, after an ugly scene with Bul- 
182 



The Hole In the Wall 

mer, at their legal interview. As you know your- 
self, Bulmer could make a man feel pretty mur- 
derous, and I rather fancy the lawyer had him- 
self irregularities to confess, and was in danger 
of exposure by his client. But it's my reading 
of human nature that a man will cheat in his 
trade, but not in his hobby. Haddow may have 
been a dishonest lawyer, but he couldn't help be- 
ing an honest antiquary. When he got on the 
track of the truth about the Holy Well he had 
to follow it up; he was not to be bamboozled 
with newspaper anecdotes about Mr. Prior and 
a hole in the wall ; he found out everything, even 
to the exact location of the well, and he was re- 
warded, if being a successful assassin can be re- 
garded as a reward." 

"And how did you get on the track of all this 
hidden history?" asked the young architect. 

A cloud came across the brow of Home 
Fisher. "I knew only too much about it al- 
ready," he said, "and, after all, it's shameful 
for me to be speaking lightly of poor Bulmer, 
who has paid his penalty; but the rest of us 
haven't. I dare say every cigar I smoke and every 
liqueur I drink comes directly or indirectly from 
the harrying of the holy places and the persecu- 
tion of the poor. After all, it needs very little 
poking about in the past to find that hole in the 
wall, that great breach in the defenses of Eng- 
lish history. It lies just under the surface of a 
13 183 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

thin sheet of sham information and instruction, 
just as the black and blood-stained well lies just 
under that floor of shallow water and flat weeds. 
Oh, the ice is thin, but it bears; it is strong 
enough to support us when we dress up as monks 
and dance on it, in mockery of the dear, quaint 
old Middle Ages. They told me I must put on 
fancy dress; so I did put on fancy dress, accord- 
ing to my own taste and fancy. I put on the 
only costume I think fit for a man who has in- 
herited the position of a gentleman, and yet has 
not entirely lost the feelings of one." 

In answer to a look of inquiry, he rose with a 
sweeping and downward gesture. 

"Sackcloth," he said; "and I would wear the 
ashes as well if they would stay on my bald 
head." 



VII 

THE TEMPLE OF SILENCE 

TTAROLD MARCH and the few who culti- 
* * vated the friendship of Home Fisher, espe- 
cially if they saw something of him in his own 
social setting, were conscious of a certain solitude 
in his very sociability. They seemed to be al- 
ways meeting his relations and never meeting his 
family. Perhaps it would be truer to say that 
they saw much of his family and nothing of his 
home. His cousins and connections ramified like 
a labyrinth all over the governing class of Great 
Britain, and he seemed to be on good, or at least 
on good-humored, terms with most of them. 
For Home Fisher was remarkable for a curious 
impersonal information and interest touching all 
sorts of topics, so that one could sometimes fancy 
that his culture, like his colorless, fair mustache 
and pale, drooping features, had the neutral 
nature of a chameleon. Anyhow, he could al- 
ways get on with viceroys and Cabinet Ministers 
and all the great men responsible for great de- 
partments, and talk to each of them on his own 
subject, on the branch of study with which he was 
most seriously concerned. Thus he could con- 
185 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

verse with the Minister for War about silk- 
worms, with the Minister of Education about 
detective stories, with the Minister of Labor 
about Limoges enamel, and with the Minister of 
Missions and Moral Progress (if that be his 
correct title) about the pantomime boys of the 
last four decades. And as the first was his first 
cousin, the second his second cousin, the third 
his brother-in-law, and the fourth his uncle by 
marriage, this conversational versatility certainly 
served in one sense to create a happy family. But 
March never seemed to get a glimpse of that 
domestic interior to which men of the middle 
classes are accustomed in their friendships, and 
which is indeed the foundation of friendship and 
love and everything else in any sane and stable 
society. He wondered whether Home Fisher 
was both an orphan and an only child. 

It was, therefore, with something like a start 
that he found that Fisher had a brother, much 
more prosperous and powerful than himself, 
though hardly, March thought, so entertaining. 
Sir Henry Harland Fisher, with half the alpha- 
bet after his name, was something at the Foreign 
Office far more tremendous than the Foreign Sec- 
retary. Apparently, it ran in the family, after 
all; for it seemed there was another brother, 
Ashton Fisher, in India, rather more tremendous 
than the Viceroy. Sir Henry Fisher was a 
heavier, but handsomer edition of his brother, 
1 86 



The Temple of Silence 

with a brow equally bald, but much more smooth. 
He was very courteous, but a shade patronizing, 
not only to March, but even, as March fancied, 
to Home Fisher as well. The latter gentleman, 
who had many intuitions about the half-formed 
thoughts of others, glanced at the topic himself 
as they came away from the great house in 
Berkeley Square. 

"Why, don't you know," he observed quietly, 
"that I am the fool of the family?" 

"It must be a clever family," said Harold 
March, with a smile. 

"Very gracefully expressed," replied Fisher; 
"that is the best of having a literary training. 
Well, perhaps it is an exaggeration to say I am 
the fool of the family. It's enough to say I am 
the failure of the family." 

"It seems queer to me that you should fail 
especially," remarked the journalist. "As they 
say in the examinations, what did you fail in?" 

"Politics," replied his friend. "I stood for 
Parliament when I was quite a young man and 
got in by an enormous majority, with loud cheers 
and chairing round the town. Since then, of 
course, I've been rather under a cloud." 

"I'm afraid I don't quite understand the 'of 
course,' " answered March, laughing. 

"That part of it isn't worth understanding," 
said Fisher. "But as a matter of fact, old chap, 
the other part of it was rather odd and interest- 
187 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

ing. Quite a detective story in its way, as well 
as the first lesson I had in what modern politics 
are made of. If you like, I'll tell you all about 
it." And the following, recast in a less allusive 
and conversational manner, is the story that he 
told. 

Nobody privileged of late years to meet Sir 
Henry Harland Fisher would believe that he had 
ever been called Harry. But, indeed, he had 
been boyish enough when a boy, and that serenity 
which shone on him through life, and which now 
took the form of gravity, had once taken the 
form of gayety. His friends would have said 
that he was all the more ripe in his maturity for 
having been young in his youth. His enemies 
would have said that he was still light minded, 
but no longer light hearted. But in any case, 
the whole of the story Home Fisher had to tell 
arose out of flie accident which had made young 
Harry Fisher private secretary to Lord Saltoun. 
Hence his later connection with the Foreign 
Office, which had, indeed, come to him as a sort 
of legacy from his lordship when that great 
man was the power behind the throne. This is 
not the place to say much about Saltoun, little 
as was known of him and much as there was 
worth knowing. England has had at least three 
or four such secret statesmen. An aristocratic 
polity produces every now and then an aristocrat 
1 88 



The Temple of Silence 

who is also an accident, a man of intellectual in- 
dependence and insight, a Napoleon born in the 
purple. His vast work was mostly invisible, 
and very little could be got out of him in 
private life except a crusty and rather cynical 
sense of humor. But it was certainly the accident 
of his presence at a family dinner of the Fishers, 
and the unexpected opinion he expressed, which 
turned what might have been a dinner-table joke 
into a sort of small sensational novel. 

Save for Lord Saltoun, it was a family party 
of Fishers, for the only other distinguished 
stranger had just departed after dinner, leav- 
ing the rest to their coffee and cigars. This had 
been a figure of some interest — a young Cam- 
bridge man named Eric Hughes who was the 
rising hope of the party of Reform, to which the 
Fisher family, along with their friend Saltoun, 
had long been at least formally attached. The 
personality of Hughes was substantially summed 
up in the fact that he talked eloquently and ear- 
nestly through the whole dinner, but left imme- 
diately after to be in time for an appointment. 
All his actions had something at once ambitious 
and conscientious; he drank no wine, but was 
slightly intoxicated with words. And his face and 
phrases were on the front page of all the news- 
papers just then, because he was contesting the 
safe seat of Sir Francis Verner in the great by- 
election in the west. Everybody was talking 
189 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

about the powerful speech against squirarchy 
which he had just delivered; even in the Fisher 
circle everybody talked about it except Home 
Fisher himself who sat in a corner, lowering 
over the fire. 

"We jolly well have to thank him for putting 
some new life into the old party," Ashton Fisher 
was saying. "This campaign against the old 
squires just hits the degree of democracy there 
is in this county. This act for extending county 
council control is practically his bill; so you may 
say he's in the government even before he's in 
the House." 

"One's easier than the other," said Harry, 
carelessly. "I bet the squire's a bigger pot than 
the county council in that county. Verner is 
pretty well rooted; all these rural places are 
what you call reactionary. Damning aristocrats 
won't alter it." 

"He damns them rather well," observed Ash- 
ton. "We never had a better meeting than the 
one in Barkington, which generally goes Con- 
stitutional. And when he said, 'Sir Francis may 
boast of blue blood; let us show we have red 
blood,' and went on to talk about manhood and 
liberty, the room simply rose at him." 

"Speaks very well," said Lord Saltoun, gruffly, 
making his only contribution to the conversation 
so far. 

Then the almost equally silent Home Fisher 
190 



The Temple of Silence 

suddenly spoke, without taking his brooding eyes 
off the fire. 

"What I can't understand," he said, "is why 
nobody is ever slanged for the real reason." 

"Hullo!" remarked Harry, humorously, "you 
beginning to take notice?" 

"Well, take Verner," continued Home Fisher. 
"If we want to attack Verner, why not attack 
him? Why compliment him on being a romantic 
reactionary aristocrat? Who is Verner? Where 
does he come from? His name sounds old, but 
I never heard of it before, as the man said of 
the Crucifixion. Why talk about his blue blood? 
His blood may be gamboge yellow with green 
spots, for all anybody knows. All we know is 
that the old squire, Hawker, somehow ran 
through his money (and his second wife's, I 
suppose, for she was rich enough), and sold the 
estate to a man named Verner. What did he 
make his money in? Oil? Army contracts?" 

"I don't know," said Saltoun, looking at him 
thoughtfully. 

"First thing I ever knew you didn't know," 
cried the exuberant Harry. 

"And there's more, besides," went on Home 
Fisher, who seemed to have suddenly found his 
tongue. "If we want country people to vote for 
us, why don't we get somebody with some notion 
about the country? We don't talk to people in 
Threadneedle Street about nothing but turnips 
191 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

and pigsties. Why do we talk to people in 
Somerset about nothing but slums and socialism? 
Why don't we give the squire's land to the 
squire's tenants, instead of dragging in the 
county council?" 

"Three acres and a cow," cried Harry, emit- 
ting what the Parliamentary reports call an iron- 
ical cheer. 

"Yes," replied his brother, stubbornly. "Don't 
you think agricultural laborers would rather have 
three acres and a cow than three acres of printed 
forms and a committee ? Why doesn't somebody 
start a yeoman party in politics, appealing to the 
old traditions of the small landowner? And 
why don't they attack men like Verner for what 
they are, which is something about as old and 
traditional as an American oil trust?" 

"You'd better lead the yeoman party your- 
self," laughed Harry. "Don't you think it 
would be a joke, Lord Saltoun, to see my 
brother and his merry men, with their bows and 
bills, marching down to Somerset all in Lincoln 
green instead of Lincoln and Bennet hats?" 

"No," answered Old Saltoun, "I don't think 
it would be a joke. I think it would be an exceed- 
ingly serious and sensible idea." 

"Well, I'm jiggered!" cried Harry Fisher, 
staring at him. "I said just now it was the first 
fact you didn't know, and I should say this is 
the first joke you didn't see." 
192 



The Temple of Silence 

"I've seen a good many things in my time," 
said the old man, in his rather sour fashion. 
"I've told a good many lies in my time, too, and 
perhaps I've got rather sick of them. But there 
are lies and lies, for all that. Gentlemen used 
to lie just as schoolboys lie, because they hung 
together and partly to help one another out. 
But I'm damned if I can see why we should lie 
for these cosmopolitan cads who only help them- 
selves. They're not backing us up any more; 
they're simply crowding us out. If a man like 
your brother likes to go into Parliament as a 
yeoman or a gentleman or a Jacobite or an 
Ancient Briton, I should say it would be a jolly 
good thing." 

In the rather startled silence that followed 
Home Fisher sprang to his feet and all his 
dreary manner dropped off him. 

"I'm ready to do it to-morrow," he cried. "I 
suppose none of you fellows would back me up." 

Then Harry Fisher showed the finer side of 
his impetuosity. He made a sudden movement 
as if to shake hands. 

"You're a sport," he said, "and I'll back you 
up, if nobody else will. But we can all back 
you up, can't we? I see what Lord Saltoun 
means, and, of course, he's right. He's always 
right." 

"So I will go down to Somerset," said Home 
Fisher. 

193 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"Yes, it is on the way to Westminster," said 
Lord Saltoun, with a smile. 

And so it happened that Home Fisher arrived 
some days later at the little station of a rather 
remote market town in the west, accompanied 
by a light suitcase and a lively brother. It must 
not be supposed, however, that the brother's 
cheerful tone consisted entirely of chaff. He 
supported the new candidate with hope as well 
as hilarity; and at the back of his boisterous 
partnership there was an increasing sympathy 
and encouragement. Harry Fisher had always 
had an affection for his more quiet and eccentric 
brother, and was now coming more and more to 
have a respect for him. As the campaign pro- 
ceeded the respect increased to ardent admira- 
tion. For Harry was still young, and could feel 
the sort of enthusiasm for his captain in elec- 
tioneering that a schoolboy can feel for his cap- 
tain in cricket. 

Nor was the admiration undeserved. As the 
new three-cornered contest developed it became 
apparent to others besides his devoted kinsman 
that there was more in Home Fisher than had 
ever met the eye. It was clear that his out- 
break by the family fireside had been but the 
culmination of a long course of brooding and 
studying on the question. The talent he re- 
tained through life for studying his subject, and 
even somebody's else's subject, had long been 
194 



The Temple of Silence 

concentrated on this idea of championing a new 
peasantry against a new plutocracy. He spoke 
to a crowd with eloquence and replied to an 
individual with humor, two political arts that 
seemed to come to him naturally. He certainly 
knew much more about rural problems than 
either Hughes, the Reform candidate, or Verner, 
the Constitutional candidate. And he probed 
those problems with a human curiosity, and went 
below the surface in a way that neither of them 
dreamed of doing. He soon became the voice 
of popular feelings that are never found in the 
popular press. New angles of criticism, argu- 
ments that had never before been uttered by an 
educated voice, tests and comparisons that had 
been made only in dialect by men drinking in 
the little local public houses, crafts half for- 
gotten that had come down by sign of hand 
and tongue from remote ages when their fathers 
were free — all this created a curious and double 
excitement. It startled the well informed by 
being a new and fantastic idea they had never 
encountered. It startled the ignorant by being 
an old and familiar idea they never thought to 
have seen revived. Men saw things in a new 
light, and knew not even whether it was the 
sunset or the dawn. 

Practical grievances were there to make the 
movement formidable. As Fisher went to and 
fro among the cottages and country inns, it was 
195 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

borne in on him without difficulty that Sir Fran- 
cis Verner was a very bad landlord. Nor was 
the. story of his acquisition of the land any more 
ancient and dignified than he had supposed; the 
story was well known in the county and in most 
respects was obvious enough. Hawker, the old 
squire, had been a loose, unsatisfactory sort of 
person, had been on bad terms with his first 
wife (who died, as some said, of neglect), and 
had , then married a flashy South American, 
jMWp|M^^^^H^ But he must have 
worked his way through jftK0tfej|if&4% with 
marvelous rapidity, for he had been compelled 
to sell the estate to Verner and had gone to live 
in South America, possibly on his wife's estates. 
But Fisher noticed that the laxity of the old 
squire was far less hated than the efficiency of 
the new squire. Verner's history seemed to be 
full of smart bargains and financial flutters that 
left other people short of money and temper. 
But though he heard a great deal about Verner, 
there was one thing that continually eluded him; 
something that nobody knew, that even Saltoun 
had not known. He could not find out how 
Verner had originally made his money. 

"He must have kept it specially dark," said 
Home Fisher to himself. "It must be some- 
thing he's really ashamed of. Hang it all! what 
is a man ashamed of nowadays?" 

And as he pondered on the possibilities they 
196 



The Temple of Silence 

grew darker and more distorted in his mind; he 
thought vaguely of things remote and repulsive,, 
strange forms of slavery or sorcery, and then of 
ugly things yet more unnatural but nearer home. 
The figure of Verner seemed to be blackened 
and transfigured in his imagination, and to stand 
against varied backgrounds and strange skies. 

As he strode up a village street, brooding 
thus, his eyes encountered a complete contrast 
in the face of his other rival, the Reform candi- 
date. Eric Hughes, with his blown blond hair 
and eager undergraduate face, was just getting 
into his motor car and saying a few final words 
to his agent, a sturdy, grizzled man named 
Gryce. Eric Hughes waved his hand in a 
friendly fashion ; but Gryce eyed him with some 
hostility. Eric Hughes was a young man with 
genuine political enthusiasms, but he knew that 
political opponents are people with whom one 
may have to dine any day. But Mr. Gryce was 
a grim little local Radical, a champion of the 
chapel, and one of those happy people whose 
work is also their hobby. He turned his back 
as the motor car drove away, and walked briskly 
up the sunlit high street of the little town, 
whistling, with political papers sticking out of 
his pocket. 

Fisher looked pensively after the resolute fig- 
ure for a moment, and then, as if by an impulse, 
began to follow it. Through the busy market 
197 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

place, amid the baskets and barrows of market 
day, under the painted wooden sign of the Green 
Dragon, up a dark side entry, under an arch, 
and through a tangle of crooked cobbled streets 
the two threaded their way, the square, strutting 
figure in front and the lean, lounging figure be- 
hind him, like his shadow in the sunshine. At 
length they came to a brown brick house with a 
brass plate, on which was Mr. Gryce's name, and 
that individual turned and beheld his pursuer 
with a stare. 

"Could I have a word with you, sir?" asked 
Home Fisher, politely. The agent stared still 
more, but assented civilly, and led the other into 
an office littered with leaflets and hung all round 
with highly colored posters which linked the 
name of Hughes with all the higher interests of 
humanity. 

"Mr. Home Fisher, I believe," said Mr. 
Gryce. "Much honored by the call, of course. 
Can't pretend to congratulate you on entering 
the contest, I'm afraid; you won't expect that. 
Here we've been keeping the old flag flying for 
freedom and reform, and you come in and break 
the battle line." 

For Mr. Elijah Gryce abounded in military 
metaphors and in denunciations of militarism. 
He was a square-jawed, blunt-featured man with 
a pugnacious cock of the eyebrow. He had been 
pickled in the politics of that countryside from 
198 



The Temple of Silence 

boyhood, he knew everybody's secrets, and elec- 
tioneering was the romance of his life. 

"I suppose you think I'm devoured with am- 
bition," said Home Fisher, in his rather listless 
voice, "aiming at a dictatorship and all that. 
Well, I think I can clear myself of the charge 
of mere selfish ambition. I only want certain 
things done. I don't want to do them. I very 
seldom want to do anything. And I've come 
here to say that I'm quite willing to retire from 
the contest if you can convince me that we really 
want to do the same thing." 

The agent of the Reform party looked at 
him with an odd and slightly puzzled expression, 
and before he could reply, Fisher went on in the 
same level tones: 

"You'd hardly believe it, but I keep a con- 
science concealed about me; and I am in doubt 
about several things. For instance, we both 
want to turn Verner out of Parliament, but what 
weapon are we to use ? I've heard a lot of gossip 
against him, but is it right to act on mere gossip ? 
Just as I want to be fair to you, so I want to be 
fair to him. If some of the things I've heard are 
true he ought to be turned out of Parliament and 
every other club in London. But I don't want to 
turn him out of Parliament if they aren't true." 

At this point the light of battle sprang into 
Mr. Gryce's eyes and he became voluble, not to 
say violent. He, at any rate, had no doubt that 
14 199 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

the stories were true; he could testify, to his own 
knowledge, that they were true. Verner was 
not only a hard landlord, but a mean landlord, 
a robber as well as a rackrenter; any gentleman 
would be justified in hounding him out. He had 
cheated old Wilkins out of his freehold by a 
trick fit for a pickpocket; he had driven old 
Mother Biddle to the workhouse; he had 
stretched the law against Long Adam, the 
poacher, till all the magistrates were ashamed 
of him. 

"So if you'll serve under the old banner," con- 
cluded Mr. Gryce, more genially, u and turn out 
a swindling tyrant like that, I'm sure you'll never 
regret it." 

"And if that is the truth," said Home Fisher, 
"are you going to tell it?" 

"What do you mean? Tell the truth?" de- 
manded Gryce. 

"I mean you are going to tell the truth as you 
have just told it," replied Fisher. "You are 
going to placard this town with the wickedness 
done to old Wilkins. You are going to fill the 
newspapers with the infamous story of Mrs. 
Biddle. You are going to denounce Verner from 
a public platform, naming him for what he did 
and naming the poacher he did it to. And you're 
going to find out by what trade this man made 
the money with which he bought the estate; and 
when you know the truth, as I said before, of 
200 



The Temple of Silence 

course you are going to tell it. Upon those terms 
I come under the old flag, as you call it, and haul 
down my little pennon." 

The agent was eying him with a curious ex- 
pression, surly but not entirely unsympathetic. 
"Well," he said, slowly, "you have to do these 
things in a regular way, you know, or people 
don't understand. I've had a lot of experience,, 
and I'm afraid what you say wouldn't do. 
People understand slanging squires in a general 
way, but those personalities aren't considered 
fair play. Looks like hitting below the belt." 

"Old Wilkins hasn't got a belt, I suppose," 
replied Home Fisher. "Verner can hit him any- 
how, and nobody must say a word. It's evi- 
dently very important to have a belt. But ap- 
parently you have to be rather high up in society 
to have one. Possibly," he added, thoughtfully — 
"possibly the explanation of the phrase 'a belted 
earl,' the meaning of which has always escaped 



me. 



"I mean those personalities won't do," re- 
turned Gryce, frowning at the table. 

"And Mother Biddle and Long Adam, the 
poacher, are not personalities," said Fisher, "and 
I suppose we mustn't ask how Verner made all 
the money that enabled him to become — a per- 
sonality." 

Gryce was still looking at him under lowering 
brows, but the singular light in his eyes had 
20 1 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

brightened. At last he said, in another and 
much quieter voice: 

"Look here, sir. I like you, if you don't mind 
my saying so. I think you are really on the side 
of the people and I'm sure you're a brave man. 
A lot braver than you know, perhaps. We 
daren't touch what you propose with a barge 
pole; and so far from wanting you in the old 
party, we'd rather you ran your own risk by 
yourself. But because I like you and respect 
your pluck, I'll do you a good turn before we 
part. I don't want you to waste time barking 
up the wrong tree. You talk about how the new 
squire got the money to buy, and the ruin of the 
old squire, and all the rest of it. Well, I'll give 
you a hint about that, a hint about something 
precious few people know." 

"I am very grateful," said Fisher, gravely. 
u Whatisit?" 

"It's in two words," said the other. "The 
new squire was quite poor when he bought. The 
old squire was quite rich when he sold." 

Home Fisher looked at him thoughtfully as 
he turned away abruptly and busied himself with 
the papers on his desk. Then Fisher uttered a 
short phrase of thanks and farewell, and went 
out into the street, still very thoughtful. 

His reflection seemed to end in resolution, 
and, falling into a more rapid stride, he passed 
out of the little town along a road leading to- 
202 



The Temple of Silence 

ward the gate of the great park, the country seat 
of Sir Francis Verner. A glitter of sunlight 
made the early winter more like a late autumn, 
and the dark woods were touched here and there 
with red and golden leaves, like the last rays of 
a lost sunset. From a higher part of the road 
he had seen the long, classical f agade of the great 
house with its many windows, almost imme- 
diately beneath him, but when the road ran down 
under the wall of the estate, topped with tower- 
ing trees behind, he realized that it was half a 
mile round to the lodge gates, After walking 
for a few minutes along the lane, however, he 
came to a place where the wall had cracked and 
was in process of repair. As it was, there was a 
great gap in the gray masonry that looked at 
first as black as a cavern and only showed at a 
second glance the twilight of the twinkling trees. 
There was something fascinating about that un- 
expected gate, like the opening of a fairy tale. 

Home Fisher had in him something of the 
aristocrat, which is very near to the anarchist. 
It was characteristic of him that he turned into 
this dark and irregular entry as casually as into 
his own front door, merely thinking that it would 
be a short cut to the house. He made his way 
through the dim wood for some distance and 
with some difficulty, until there began to shine 
through the trees a level light, in lines of silver, 
which he did not at first understand. The next 
203 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

moment he had come out into the daylight at 
the top of a steep bank, at the bottom of which 
a path ran round the rim of a large ornamental 
lake. The sheet of water which he had seen 
shimmering through the trees was of consider- 
able extent, but was walled in on every side with 
'woods which were not only dark, but decidedly 
dismal. At one end of the path was a classical 
statue of some nameless nymph, and at the other 
end it was flanked by two classical urns; but the 
marble was weather-stained and streaked with 
green and gray. A hundred other signs, smaller 
but more significant, told him that he had come 
on some outlying corner of the grounds neglected 
and seldom visited. In the middle of the lake 
was what appeared to be an island, and on the 
island what appeared to be meant for a classical 
temple, not open like a temple of the winds, but 
with a blank wall between its Doric pillars. We 
may say it only seemed like an island, because a 
second glance revealed a low causeway of flat 
stones running up to it from the shore and turn- 
ing it into a peninsula. And certainly it only 
seemed like a temple, for nobody knew better 
than Home Fisher that no god had ever dwelt 
in that shrine. 

"That's what makes all this classical land- 
scape gardening so desolate," he said to himself. 
"More desolate than Stonehenge or the Pyra- 
mids. We don't believe in Egyptian mythology, 
204 



The Temple of Silence 

but the Egyptians did; and I suppose even the 
Druids believed in Druidism. But the eight- 
eenth-century gentleman who built these temples 
didn't believe in Venus or Mercury any more 
than we do; that's why the reflection of those 
pale pillars in the lake is truly only the shadow 
of a shade. They were men of the age of Rea- 
son; they, who filled their gardens with these 
stone nymphs, had less hope than any men in all 
history of really meeting a nymph in the forest." 

His monologue stopped abruptly with a sharp 
noise like a thundercrack that rolled in dreary # 
echoes round the dismal mere. He knew at 
once what it was — somebody had fired off a gun. 
But as to the meaning of it he was momentarily 
staggered, and strange thoughts thronged into 
his mind. The next moment he laughed; for he 
saw lying a little way along the path below him 
the dead bird that the shot had brought down. 

At the same moment, however, he saw some- 
thing else, which interested him more. A ring 
of dense trees ran round the back of the island 
temple, framing the fagade of it in dark foliage, 
and he could have sworn he saw a stir as of 
something moving among the leaves. The next 
moment his suspicion was confirmed, for a rather 
ragged figure came from under the shadow of 
the temple and began to move along the cause- 
way that led to the bank. Even at that distance 
the figure was conspicuous by its great height 
205 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

and Fisher could see that the man carried a gun 
under his arm. There came back into his mem- 
ory at once the name Long Adam, the poacher. 

With a rapid sense of strategy he sometimes 
showed, Fisher sprang from the bank and raced 
round the lake to the head of the little pier of 
stones. If once a man reached the mainland he 
could easily vanish into the woods. But when 
Fisher began to advance along the stones toward 
the island, the man was cornered in a blind alley 
and could only back toward the temple. Putting 
his broad shoulders against it, he stood as if at 
bay; he was a comparatively young man, with 
fine lines in his lean face and figure and a mop 
of ragged red hair. The look in his eyes might 
well have been disquieting to anyone left alone 
with him on an island in the middle of a lake. 

"Good morning," said Home Fisher, pleas- 
antly. "I thought at first you were a murderer. 
But it seems unlikely, somehow, that the par- 
tridge rushed between us and died for love of 
me, like the heroines in the romances; so I sup- 
pose you are a poacher." 

"I suppose you would call me a poacher," an- 
swered the man; and his voice was something of 
a surprise coming from such a scarecrow; it had 
that hard fastidiousness to be found in those 
who have made a fight for their own refinement 
among rough surroundings. "I consider I have 
a perfect right to shoot game in this place. But 
206 



The Temple of Silence 

I am well aware that people of your sort take 
me for a thief, and I suppose you will try to 
land me in jail." 

"There are preliminary difficulties," replied 
Fisher. "To begin with, the mistake is flatter- 
ing, but I am not a gamekeeper.- Still less am 
I three gamekeepers, who would be, I imagine, 
about your fighting weight. But I confess I 
have another reason for not wanting to jail you." 

"And what is that?" asked the other. 

"Only that I quite agree with you," answered 
Fisher. "I don't exactly say you have a right 
to poach, but I never could see that it was as 
wrong as being a thief. It seems to me against 
the whole normal notion of property that a 
man should own something because it flies across 
his garden. He might as well own the wind, or 
think he could write his name on a morning 
cloud. Besides, if we want poor people to re- 
spect property we must give them some property 
to respect. You ought to have land of your 
own; and I'm going to give you some if I can." 

"Going to give me some land !" repeated Long 
Adam. 

"I apologize for addressing you as if you 
were a public meeting," said Fisher, "but I am 
an entirely new kind of public man who says the 
same thing in public and in private. I've said 
this to a hundred huge meetings throughout the 
country, and I say it to you on this queer little 
207 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

island in this dismal pond. I would cut up a big 
estate like this into small estates for everybody, 
even for poachers. I would do in England as 
they did in Ireland — buy the big men out, if 
possible ; get them out, anyhow. A man like you 
ought to have a little place of his own. I don't 
say you could keep pheasants, but you might keep 
chickens." 

The man stiffened suddenly and he seemed at 
once to blanch and flame at the promise as if it 
were a threat. 

"Chickens I" he repeated, with a passion of 
contempt. 

"Why do you object?" asked the placid can- 
didate. "Because keeping hens is rather a mild 
amusement for a poacher? What about poach- 
ing eggs?" 

"Because I am not a poacher," cried Adam, 
in a rending voice that rang round the hollow 
shrines and urns like the echoes of his gun. "Be- 
cause the partridge lying dead over there is my 
partridge. Because the land you are standing 
on is my land. Because my own land was only 
taken from me by a crime, and a worse crime 
than poaching. This has been a single estate 
for hundreds and hundreds of years, and if you 
or any meddlesome mountebank comes here and 
talks of cutting it up like a cake, if I ever hear 
a word more of you and your leveling lies " 

"You seem to be a rather turbulent public 
208 



The Temple of Silence 

meeting," observed Home Fisher, "but do go on. 
What will happen if I try to divide this estate 
decently among decent people?" 

The poacher had recovered a grim composure 
as he replied. "There will be no partridge to 
rush in between." 

With that he turned his back, evidently re- 
solved to say no more, and walked past the 
temple to the extreme end of the islet, where he 
stood staring into the water. Fisher followed 
him, but, when his repeated questions evoked 
no answer, turned back toward the shore. In 
doing so he took a second and closer look at the 
artificial temple, and noted some curious things 
about it. Most of these theatrical things were 
as thin as theatrical scenery, and he expected the 
classic shrine to be a shallow thing, a mere shell 
or mask. But there was some substantial bulk 
of it behind, buried in the trees, which had a 
gray, labyrinthian look, like serpents of stone, 
and lifted a load of leafy towers to the sky. 
But what arrested Fisher's eye was that in this 
bulk of gray-white stone behind there was a 
single door with great, rusty bolts outside; the 
bolts, however, were not shot across so as to 
secure it. Then he walked round the small 
building, and found no other opening except one 
small grating like a ventilator, high up in the 
wall. He retraced his steps thoughtfully along 
the causeway to the banks of the lake, and sat 
209 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

down on the stone steps between the two sculp- 
tured funeral urns. Then he lit a cigarette and 
smoked it in ruminant manner; eventually he 
took out a notebook and wrote down various 
phrases, numbering and renumbering them till 
they stood in the following order: "(i) Squire 
Hawker disliked his first wife. (2) He mar- 
ried his second wife for her money. (3) Long 
Adam says the estate is really his. (4) Long 
Adam hangs round the island temple, which 
looks like a prison. (5) Squire Hawker was 
not poor when he gave up the estate. (6) 
Verner was poor when he got the estate." 

He gazed at these notes with a gravity which 
gradually turned to a hard smile, threw away 
his cigarette, and resumed his search for a short 
cut to the great house. He soon picked up the 
path which, winding among clipped hedges and 
flower beds, brought him in front of its long 
Palladian facade. It had the usual appearance 
of being, not a private house, but a sort of public 
building sent into exile in the provinces. 

He first found himself in the presence of the 
butler, who really looked much older than the 
building, for the architecture was dated as 
Georgian; but the man's face, under a highly 
unnatural brown wig, was wrinkled with what 
might have been centuries. Only his prominent 
eyes were alive and alert, as if with protest. 
Fisher glanced at him, and then stopped and said : 
210 



The Temple of Silence 

"Excuse me. Weren't you with the late 
squire, Mr. Hawker?" 

"Yes, sir," said the man, gravely. "Usher is 
my name. What can I do for you?" 

"Only take me into Sir Francis Verner," re- 
plied the visitor. 

Sir Francis Verner was sitting in an easy chair 
beside a small table in a large room hung with 
tapestries. On the table were a small flask and 
glass, with the green glimmer of a liqueur and a 
cup of black coffee. He was clad in a quiet gray 
suit with a moderately harmonious purple tie; 
but Fisher saw something about the turn of his 
fair mustache and the lie of his flat hair — it 
suddenly revealed that his name was Franz 
Werner. 

"You are Mr. Home Fisher," he said. 
"Won't you sit down ?" 

"No, thank you," replied Fisher. "I fear this 
is not a friendly occasion, and I shall remain 
standing. Possibly you know that I am already 
standing — standing for Parliament, in fact." 

"I am aware we are political opponents," re- 
plied Verner, raising his eyebrows. "But I think 
it would be better if we fought in a sporting 
spirit; in a spirit of English fair play." 

"Much better," assented Fisher. "It would 

be much better if you were English and very 

much better if you had ever played fair. But 

what I've come to say can be said very shortly. 

211 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

I don't quite know how we stand with the law 
about that old Hawker story, but my chief ob- 
ject is to prevent England being entirely ruled 
by people like you. So whatever the law would 
say, I will say no more if you will retire from 
the election at once." 

"You are evidently a lunatic," said Verner. 

"My psychology may be a little abnormal," 
replied Home Fisher, in a rather hazy manner. 
"I am subject to dreams, especially day-dreams. 
Sometimes what is happening to me grows vivid 
in a curious double way, as if it had happened 
before. Have you ever had that mystical feel- 
ing that things have happened before?" 

"I hope you are a harmless lunatic," said 
Verner. 

But Fisher was still staring in an absent 
fashion at the golden gigantic figures and trac- 
eries of brown and red in the tapestries on the 
walls; then he looked again at Verner and re- 
sumed: "I have a feeling that this interview has 
happened before, here in this tapestried room, 
and we are two ghosts revisiting a haunted cham- 
ber. But it was Squire Hawker who sat where 
you sit and it was you who stood where I stand." 
He paused a moment and then added, with sim- 
plicity, "I suppose I am a blackmailer, too." 

"If you are," said Sir Francis, "I promise you 
you shall go to jail." But his face had a shade 
on it that looked like the reflection of the green 
212 



The Temple of Silence 

wine gleaming on the table. Home Fisher re- 
garded him steadily and answered, quietly 
enough : 

"Blackmailers do not always go to jail. Some- 
times they go to Parliament. Rut, though 
Parliament is rotten enough already, you shall 
not go there if I can help it. I am not so criminal 
as you were in bargaining with crime. You made 
a squire give up his country seat. I only ask 
you to give up your Parliamentary seat." 

Sir Francis Verner sprang to his feet and 
looked about for one of the bell ropes of the 
old-fashioned, curtained room. 

"Where is Usher?" he cried, with a livid face. 

"And who is Usher?" said Fisher, softly. "I 
wonder how much Usher knows of the truth." 

Verner's hand fell from the bell rope and, 
after standing for a moment with rolling eyes, 
he strode abruptly from the room. Fisher went 
out by the other door, by which he had entered, 
and, seeing no sign of Usher, let himself out and 
betook himself again toward the town. 

That night he put an electric torch in his 
pocket and set out alone in the darkness to add 
the last links to his argument. There was much 
that he did not know yet; but he thought he 
knew where he could find the knowledge. The 
night closed dark and stormy and the black gap 
in the wall looked blacker than ever; the wood 
seemed to have grown thicker and darker in a 
213 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

day. If the deserted lake with its black woods 
and gray urns and images looked desolate even 
by daylight, under the night and the growing 
storm it seemed still more like the pool of 
Acheron in the land of lost souls. As he stepped 
carefully along the jetty stones he seemed to be 
traveling farther and farther into the abyss of 
night, and to have left behind him the last points 
from which it would be possible to signal to the 
land of the living. The lake seemed to have 
grown larger than a sea, but a sea of black and 
slimy waters that slept with abominable serenity, 
as if they had washed out the world. There was 
so much of this nightmare sense of extension and 
expansion that he was strangely surprised to 
come to his desert island so soon. But he knew 
it for a place of inhuman silence and solitude; 
and he felt as if he had been walking for 
years. 

Nerving himself to a more normal mood, he 
paused under one of the dark dragon trees that 
branched out above him, and, taking out hir- 
torch, turned in the direction of the door at the 
back of the temple. It was unbolted as before, 
and the thought stirred faintly in him that it 
was slightly open, though only by a crack. The 
more he thought of it, however, the more cer- 
tain he grew that this was but one of the common 
illusions of light coming from a different angle. 
He studied in a more scientific spirit the details 
214 



The Temple of Silence 

of the door, with its rusty bolts and hinges, when 
he became conscious of something very near 
him — indeed, nearly above his head. Something 
was dangling from the tree that was not a broken 
branch. For some seconds he stood as still as 
a stone, and as cold. What he saw above him 
were the legs of a man hanging, presumably a 
dead man hanged. But the next moment he 
knew better. The man was literally alive and 
kicking; and an instant after he had dropped to 
the ground and turned on the intruder. Simul- 
taneously three or four other trees seemed to 
come to life in the same fashion. Five or six 
other figures had fallen on their feet from these 
unnatural nests. It was as if the place were an 
island of monkeys. But a moment after they 
had made a stampede toward him, and when 
they laid their hands on him he knew that they 
were men. 

With trie electric torch in his hand he struck 
the foremost of them so furiously in the face 
that the man stumbled and rolled over on the 
slimy grass; but the torch was broken and ex- 
tinguished, leaving everything in a denser ob- 
scurity. He flung another man flat against the 
temple wall, so that he slid to the ground; but 
a third and fourth carried Fisher off his feet 
and began to bear him, struggling, toward the 
doorway. Even in the bewilderment of the 
battle he was conscious that the door was stand- 
15 215 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

ing open. Somebody was summoning the roughs 
from inside. 

The moment they were within they hurled 
him upon a sort of bench or bed with violence, 
but no damage; for the settee, or whatever it 
was, seemed to be comfortably cushioned for 
his reception. Their violence had in it a great 
element of haste, and before he could rise they 
had all rushed for the door to escape. What- 
ever bandits they were that infested this desert 
island, they were obviously uneasy about their 
job and very anxious to be quit of it. He had 
the flying fancy that regular criminals would 
hardly be in such a panic. The next moment the 
great door crashed to and he could hear the 
bolts shriek as they shot into their place, and the 
feet of the retreating men scampering and stum- 
bling along the causeway. But rapidly as it hap- 
pened, it did not happen before Fisher had done 
something that he wanted to do. Unable to 
rise from his sprawling attitude in that flash of 
time, he had shot out one of his long legs and 
hooked it round the ankle of the last man dis- 
appearing through the door. The man swayed 
and toppled over inside the prison chamber, and 
the door closed between him and his fleeing com- 
panions. Clearly they were in too much haste 
to realize that they had left one of their company 
behind. 

The man sprang to his feet again and ham- 
216 



The Temple of Silence 

mered and kicked furiously at the door. Fisher's 
sense of humor began to recover from the strug- 
gle and he sat up on his sofa with something of 
his native nonchalance. But as he listened to 
the captive captor beating on the door of the 
prison, a new and curious reflection came to him. 

The natural course for a man thus wishing 
to attract his friends' attention would be to call 
out, to shout as well as kick. This man was 
making as much noise as he could with his feet 
and hands, but not a sound came from his throat. 
Why couldn't he speak? At first he thought the 
man might be gagged, which was manifestly 
absurd. Then his fancy fell back on the ugly 
idea that the man was dumb. He hardly knew 
why it was so ugly an idea, but it affected his 
imagination in a dark and disproportionate 
fashion. There seemed to be something creepy 
about the idea of being left in a dark room with 
a deaf mute. It was almost as if such a defect 
were a deformity. It was almost as if it went 
with other and worse deformities. It was as if 
the shape he could not trace in the darkness were 
some shape that should not see the sun. 

Then he had a flash of sanity and also of 
insight. The explanation was very simple, but 
rather interesting. Obviously the man did not 
use his voice because he did not wish his voice 
to be recognized. He hoped to escape from 
that dark place before Fisher found out who he 
217 



The Man Who Knew Too Mu.ch 

was. And who was he? One thing at least was 
clear. He was one or other of the four or five 
men with whom Fisher had already talked in 
these parts, and in the development of that 
strange story. 

"Now I wonder who you are," he said, aloud, 
with all his old lazy urbanity. "I suppose it's 
no use trying to throttle you in order to find out; 
it would be displeasing to pass the night with a 
corpse. Besides I might be the corpse. I've 
got no matches and I've smashed my torch, so 
I can only speculate. Who could you be, now? 
Let us think." 

The man thus genially addressed had desisted 
from drumming on the door and retreated sul- 
lenly into a corner as Fisher continued to address 
him in a flowing monologue. 

"Probably you are the poacher who says he 
isn't a poacher. He says he's a landed pro- 
prietor; but he will permit me to inform him 
that, whatever he is, he's a fool. What hope 
can there ever be of a free peasantry in England 
if the peasants themselves are such snobs as to 
want to be gentlemen? How can we make a 
democracy with no democrats? As it is, you 
want to be a landlord and so you consent to be 
a criminal. And in that, you know, you are 
rather like somebody else. And, now I think 
of it, perhaps you are somebody else." 

There was a silence broken by breathing from 
218 



The Temple of Silence 

the corner and the murmur of the rising storm, 
that came in through the small grating above the 
man's head. Home Fisher continued: 

"Are you only a servant, perhaps, that rather 
sinister old servant who was butler to Hawker 
and Verner? If so, you are certainly the only 
link between the two periods. But if so, why do 
you degrade yourself to serve this dirty for- 
eigner, when you at least saw the last of a gen- 
uine national gentry? People like you are gen- 
erally at least patriotic. Doesn't England mean 
anything to you, Mr. Usher? All of which 
eloquence is possibly wasted, as perhaps you are 
not Mr. Usher. 

"More likely you are Verner himself; and it's 
no good wasting eloquence to make you ashamed 
of yourself. Nor is it any good to curse you 
for corrupting England; nor are you the right 
person to curse. It is the English who deserve 
to be cursed, and are cursed, because they al- 
lowed such vermin to crawl into the high places 
of their heroes and their kings. I won't dwell 
on the idea that you're Verner, or the throttling 
might begin, after all. Is there anyone else you 
could be? Surely you're not some servant of 
the other rival organization. I can't believe 
you're Gryce, the agent; and yet Gryce had a 
spark of the fanatic in his eye, too; and men will 
do extraordinary things in these paltry feuds 
of politics. Or if not the servant, is it the . . . 
219 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

No, I can't believe it . . . not the red blood of 
manhood and liberty . . . not the democratic 
ideal . . ." 

He sprang up in excitement, and at the same 
moment a growl of thunder came through the 
grating beyond. The storm had broken, and 
with it a new light broke on his mind. There 
was something else that might happen in a 
moment. 

"Do you know what that means?" he cried. 
"It means that God himself may hold a candle 
to show me your infernal face." 

Then next moment came a crash of thunder; 
but before the thunder a white light had filled 
the whole room for a single split second. 

Fisher had seen two things in. front of him. 
One was the black-and-white pattern of the iron 
grating against the sky; the other was the face 
in the corner. It was the face of his brother. 

Nothing came from Home Fisher's lips ex- 
cept a Christian name, which was followed by a 
silence more dreadful than the dark. At last 
the other figure stirred and sprang up, and the 
voice of Harry Fisher was heard for the first 
time in that horrible room. 

"You've seen me, I suppose," he said, "and 
we may as well have a light now. You could 
have turned it on at any time, if you'd found the 
switch." 

He pressed a button in the wall and all the 
220 



The Temple of Silence 

details of that room sprang into something 
stronger than daylight. Indeed, the details were 
so unexpected that for a moment they turned the 
captive's rocking mind from the last personal 
revelation. The room, so far from being a 
dungeon cell, was more like a drawing-room, 
even a lady's drawing-room, except for some 
boxes of cigars and bottles of wine that were 
stacked with books and magazines on a side 
table. A second glance showed him that the 
more masculine fittings were quite recent, and 
that the more feminine background was quite 
old. His eye caught a strip of faded tapestry, 
which startled him into speech, to the momentary 
oblivion of bigger matters. 

"This place was furnished from the great 
house," he said. 

"Yes," replied the other, "and I think you 
know why." 

"I think I do," said Home Fisher, "and be- 
fore I go on to more extraordinary things I will 
say what I think. Squire Hawker played both 
the bigamist and the bandit. His first wife was 
not dead when he married?JHkA0£f£ she was 
imprisoned on this island. Shebore him a child 
here, who now haunts his birthplace under the 
name of Long Adam. A bankruptcy company 
promoter named Werner discovered the secret 
and blackmailed the squire into surrendering the 
estate. That's all quite clear and very easy. 
221 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

And now let me go on to something more 
difficult. And that is for you to explain 
what the devil you are doing kidnaping your 
born brother. 

After a pause Henry Fisher answered : 

"I suppose you didn't expect to see me," he 
said. "But, after all, what could you expect ?" 

"I'm afraid I don't follow," said Home 
Fisher. 

"I mean what else could you expect, after 
making such a muck of it?" said his brother, 
sulkily. "We all thought you were so clever. 
How could we know you were going to be — well, 
really, such a rotten failure?" 

"This is rather curious," said the candidate, 
frowning. "Without vanity, I was not under 
the impression that my candidature was a fail- 
ure. All the big meetings were successful and 
crowds of people have promised me votes." 

"I should jolly well think they had," said 
Henry, grimly. "You've made a landslide with 
your confounded acres and a cow, and Verner 
can hardly get a vote anywhere. Oh, it's too 
rotten for anything!" 

"What on earth do you mean?" 

"Why, you lunatic," cried Henry, in tones of 
ringing sincerity, "you don't suppose you were 
meant to win the seat, did you? Oh, it's too 
childish! I tell you Verner's got to get in. Of 
course he's got to get in. He's to have the 
222 



The Temple of Silence 

Exchequer next session, and there's the Egyptian 
loan and Lord knows what else. We only- 
wanted you to split the Reform vote because 
accidents might happen after Hughes had made 
a score at Barkington. n 

"I see," said Fisher, "and you, I think, are 
a pillar and ornament of the Reform party. As 
you saty, I am not clever." 

The appeal to party loyalty fell on deaf ears; 
for the pillar of Reform was brooding on other 
things. At last he said, in a more troubled 
voice: 

"I didn't want you to catch me; I knew it 
would be a shock. But I tell you what, you 
never would have caught me if I hadn't come 
here myself, to see they didn't ill treat you and 
to make sure everything was as comfortable as 
it could be." There was even a sort of break 
in his voice as he added, "I got those cigars 
because I knew you liked them." 

Emotions are queer things, and the idiocy of 
this concession suddenly softened Home Fisher 
like an unfathomable pathos. 

"Never mind, old chap," he said; "we'll say 
no more about it. I'll admit that you're really 
as kind-hearted and affectionate a scoundrel and 
hypocrite as ever sold himself to ruin his country. 
There, I can't say handsomer than that. Thank 
you for the cigars, old man. I'll have one if 
you don't mind." 

223 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

By the time that Home Fisher had ended his 
telling of this story to Harold March they had 
come out into one of the public parks and taken 
a seat on a rise of ground overlooking wide green 
spaces under a blue and empty sky; and there 
was something incongruous in the words with 
which the narration ended. 

"I have been in that room ever since," said 
Home Fisher. "I am in it now. I won the 
election, but I never went to the House. My 
life has been a life in that little room on that 
lonely island. Plenty of books and cigars and 
luxuries, plenty of knowledge and interest and 
information, but never a voice out of that tomb 
to reach the world outside. I shall probably die 
there." And he smiled as he looked across the 
vast green park to the gray horizon. 



VIII 

THE VENGEANCE OF THE STATUE 

IT was on the .sunny veranda of a seaside hotel, 
A overlooking a pattern of flower beds and a 
strip of blue sea, that Home Fisher and Harold 
March had their final explanation, which might 
be called an explosion. 

Harold March had come to the little table and 
sat down at it with a subdued excitement smolder- 
ing in his somewhat cloudy and dreamy blue 
eyes. In the newspapers which he tossed from 
him on to the table there was enough to ex- 
plain some if not all of his emotion. Public 
affairs in every department had reached a crisis. 
The government which had stood so long that 
men were used to it, as they are used to a 
hereditary despotism, had begun to be accused 
of blunders and even of financial abuses. Some 
said that the experiment of attempting to estab- 
lish a peasantry in the west of England, on 
the lines of an early fancy of Home Fisher's, 
had resulted in nothing but dangerous quarrels 
with more industrial neighbors. There had been 
particular complaints of the ill treatment of 
harmless foreigners, chiefly Asiatics, who hap- 
225 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

pened to be employed in the new scientific works 
constructed on the coast. Indeed, the new Power 
which had arisen in Siberia, backed by Japan 
and other powerful allies, was inclined to take 
the matter up in the interests of its exiled sub- 
jects; and there had been wild talk about ambas- 
sadors and ultimatums. But something much 
more serious, in its personal interest for March 
himself, seemed to fill his meeting with his friend 
with a mixture of embarrassment and indig- 
nation. 

Perhaps it increased his annoyance that there 
was a certain unusual liveliness about the usually 
languid figure of Fisher. The ordinary image 
of him in March's mind was that of a pallid and 
bald-browed gentleman, who seemed to be pre- 
maturely old as well as prematurely bald. He 
was remembered as a man who expressed the 
opinions of a pessimist in the language of a 
lounger. Even now March could not be certain 
whether the change was merely a sort of mas- 
querade of sunshine, or that effect of clear colors 
and clean-cut outlines that is always visible on the 
parade of a marine resort, relieved against the 
blue dado of the sea. But Fisher had a flower 
in his buttonhole, and his friend could have 
sworn he carried his cane with something almost 
like the swagger of a fighter. With such clouds 
gathering over England, the pessimist seemed 
to be the only man who carried his own sunshine. 
226 



The Vengeance of the Statue 

"Look here," said Harold March, abruptly, 
"you've been no end of a friend to me, and I 
never was so proud of a friendship before ; but 
there's something I must get off my chest. The 
more I found out, the less I understood how you 
could stand it. And I tell you I'm going to 
stand it no longer." 

Home Fisher gazed across at him gravely 
and attentively, but rather as if he were a long 
way off. 

"You know I always liked you," said Fisher, 
quietly, "but I also respect you, which is not 
always the same thing. You may possibly guess 
that I like a good many people I don't respect. 
Perhaps it is my tragedy, perhaps it is my fault. 
But you are very different, and I promise you 
this: that I will never try to keep you as some- 
body to be liked, at the price of your not being 
respected." 

"I know you are magnanimous," said March 
after a silence, "and yet you tolerate and per- 
petuate everything that is mean." Then after 
another silence he added: "Do you remember 
when we first met, when you were fishing in 
that brook in the affair of the target? And do 
you remember you said that, after all, it might 
do no harm if I could blow the whole tangle of 
this society to Jiell with dynamite?" 

"Yes, and what of that?" asked Fisher. 

"Only that I'm going to blow it to hell with 
227 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

dynamite," said Harold March, "and I think it 
right to give you fair warning. For a long time 
I didn't believe things were as bad as you said 
they were. But I never felt as if I could have 
bottled up what you knew, supposing you really 
knew it. Well, the long and the short of it is 
that I've got a conscience; and now, at last, I've 
also got a chance. I've been put in charge of 
a big independent paper, with a free hand, 
and we're going to open a cannonade on 
corruption." 

"That will be — Attwood, I suppose," said 
Fisher, reflectively. "Timber merchant. Knows 
a lot about China." 

"He knows a lot about England," said March, 
doggedly, "and now I know it, too, we're not 
going to hush it up any longer. The people of 
this country have a right to know how they're 
ruled — or, rather, ruined. The Chancellor is 
in the pocket of the money lenders and has to 
do as he is told; otherwise he's bankrupt, and 
a bad sort of bankruptcy, too, with nothing but 
cards and actresses behind it. The Prime Minis- 
ter was in the petrol-contract business; and deep 
in it, too. The Foreign Minister is a wreck of 
drink and drugs. When you say that plainly 
about a man who may send thousands of English- 
men to die for nothing, you're called personal. 
If a poor engine driver gets drunk and sends 
thirty or forty people to death, nobody com- 
228 



The Vengeance of the Statue 

plains of the exposure being personal. The 
engine driver is not a person." 

"I quite agree with you," said Fisher, calmly. 
"You are perfectly right." 

"If you agree with us, why the devil don't 
you act with us?" demanded his friend. "If 
you think it's right, why don't you do what's 
right? It's awful to think of a man of your 
abilities simply blocking the road to reform." 

"We have often talked about that," replied 
Fisher, with the same composure. "The Prime 
Minister is my father's friend. The Foreign 
Minister married my sister. The Chancellor of 
the Exchequer is my first cousin. I mention the 
genealogy in some detail just now for a par- 
ticular reason. The truth is I have a curious 
kind of cheerfulness at the moment. It isn't 
altogether the sun and the sea, sir. I am en- 
joying an emotion that is entirely new to me; 
a happy sensation I never remember having had 
before." 

"What the devil do you mean?" 

"I am feeling proud of my family," said 
Home Fisher. 

Harold March stared at him with round blue 
eyes, and seemed too much mystified even to ask 
a question. Fisher leaned back in his chair in 
his lazy fashion, and smiled as he continued. 

"Look here, my dear fellow. Let me ask a 
question in turn. You imply that I have always 
229 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

known these things about my unfortunate kins- 
men. So I have. Do you suppose that Attwood 
hasn't always known them? Do you suppose he 
hasn't always known you as an honest man who 
would say these things when he got a chance? 
Why does Attwood unmuzzle you like a dog at 
this moment, after all these years? I know why 
he does; I know a good many things, far too 
many things. And therefore, as I have the 
honor to remark, I am proud of my family at 
last." 

"But why?" repeated March, rather feebly. 

"I am proud of the Chancellor because he 
gambled and the Foreign Minister because he 
drank and the Prime Minister because he took 
a commission on a contract," said Fisher, firmly. 
"I am proud of them because they did these 
things, and can be denounced for them, and know 
they can be denounced for them, and are stand- 
ing firm for all that. I take off my hat to them 
because they are defying blackmail, and refusing 
to smash their country to save themselves. I 
salute them as if they were going to die on the 
battlefield." 

After a pause he continued: "And it will be 
a battlefield, too, and not a metaphorical one. 
We have yielded to foreign financiers so long 
that now it is war or ruin. Even the people, 
even the country people, are beginning to sus- 
pect that they are being ruined. That is the 
230 



The Vengeance of the Statue 

meaning of the regrettable incidents in the 
newspapers." 

"The meaning of the outrages on Orientals?" 
asked March. 

"The meaning of the outrages on Orientals," 
replied Fisher, "is that the financiers have in- 
troduced Chinese labor into this country with 
the deliberate intention of reducing workmen 
and peasants to starvation. Our unhappy poli- 
ticians have made concession after concession; 
and now they are asking concessions which 
amount to our ordering a massacre of our own 
poor. If we do not fight now we shall never 
fight again. They will have put England in an 
economic position of starving in a week. But we 
are going to fight now; I shouldn't wonder if 
there were an ultimatum in a week and an in- 
vasion in a fortnight. All the past corruption 
and cowardice is hampering us, of course; the 
West country is pretty stormy and doubtful even 
in a military sense ; and the Irish regiments there, 
that are supposed to support us by the new 
treaty, are pretty well in mutiny; for, of course, 
this infernal coolie capitalism is being pushed 
in Ireland, too. But it's to stop now; and if the 
government message of reassurance gets through 
to them in time, they may turn up after all by 
the time the enemy lands. For my poor old 
gang is going to stand to its guns at last. Of 
course it's only natural that when they have been 
16 231 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

whitewashed for half a century as paragons, 
their sins should come back on them at the very 
moment when they are behaving like men for 
the first time in their lives. Well, I tell you, 
March, I know them inside out; and I know they 
are behaving like heroes. Every man of them 
ought to have a statue, and on the pedestal words 
like those of the noblest ruffian of the Revolu- 
tion: 'Que mon nom soit fletri; que la France 
soit libre! " 

"Good God!" cried March, "shall we never 
get to the bottom of your mines and counter- 
mines ?" 

After a silence Fisher answered in a lower 
voice, looking his friend in the eyes. 

"Did you think there was nothing but evil 
at the bottom of them?" he asked, gently. "Did 
you think I had found nothing but filth in the 
deep seas into which fate has thrown me? Be- 
lieve me, you never know the best about men till 
you know the worst about them. It does not 
dispose of their strange human souls to know 
that they were exhibited to the world as impos- 
sibly impeccable wax works, who never looked 
after a woman or knew the meaning of a bribe. 
Even in a palace, life can be lived well; and 
even in a Parliament, life can be lived with 
occasional efforts to live it well. I tell you it is 
as true of these rich fools and rascals as it is 
true of every poor footpad and pickpocket; that 
232 



The Vengeance of the Statue 

only God knows how good they have tried to be. 
God alone knows what the conscience can sur- 
vive, or how a man who has lost his honor will 
still try to save his soul." 

There was another silence, and March sat 
staring at the table and Fisher at the sea. Then 
Fisher suddenly sprang to his feet and caught 
up his hat and stick with all his new alertness 
and even pugnacity. 

"Look here, old fellow," he cried, "let us 
make a bargain. Before you open your cam- 
paign for Attwood come down and stay with us 
for one week, to hear what we're really doing. 
I mean with the Faithful Few, formerly known 
as the Old Gang, occasionally to be described as 
the Low Lot. There are really only five of us 
that are quite fixed, and organizing the national 
defense; and we're living like a garrison in a 
sort of broken-down hotel in Kent. Come and 
see what we're really doing and what there is to 
be done, and do us justice. And after that, with 
unalterable love and affection for you, publish 
and be damned." 

Thus it came about that in the last week 
before war, when events moved most rapidly, 
Harold March found himself one of a sort of 
small house party of the people he was pro- 
posing to denounce. They were living simply 
enough, for people with their tastes, in an old 
brown-brick inn faced with ivy and surrounded 
233 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

by rather dismal gardens. At the back of the 
building the garden ran up very steeply to a 
road along the ridge above; and a zigzag path 
scaled the slope in sharp angles, turning to and 
fro amid evergreens so somber that they might 
rather be called everblack. Here and there up 
the slope were statues having all the cold mon- 
strosity of such minor ornaments of the eight- 
eenth century; and a whole row of them ran as 
on a terrace along the last bank at the bottom, 
opposite the back door. This detail fixed itself 
first in March's mind merely because it figured 
in the first conversation he had with one of the 
cabinet ministers. 

The cabinet ministers were rather older than 
he had expected to find them. The Prime Minis- 
ter no longer looked like a boy, though he still 
looked a little like a baby. But it was one of 
those old and venerable babies, and the baby 
had soft gray hair. Everything about him was 
soft, to his speech and his way of walking; but 
over and above that his chief function seemed 
to be sleep. People left alone with him got so 
used to his eyes being closed that they were 
almost startled when they realized in the still- 
ness that the eyes were wide open, and even 
watching. One thing at least would always make 
the old gentleman open his eyes. The one thing 
he really cared for in this world was his hobby 
of armored weapons, especially Eastern weapons, 
234 



The Vengeance of the Statue 

and he would talk for hours about Damascus 
blades and Arab swordmanship. Lord James 
Herries, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, was a 
short, dark, sturdy man with a very sallow face 
and a very sullen manner, which contrasted with 
the gorgeous flower in his buttonhole and his 
festive trick of being always slightly overdressed. 
It was something of a euphemism to call him 
a well-known man about town. There was per- 
haps more mystery in the question of how a man 
who lived for pleasure seemed to get so little 
pleasure out of it. Sir David Archer, the 
Foreign Secretary, was the only one of them 
who was a self-made man, and the only one of 
them who looked like an aristocrat. He was 
tall and thin and very handsome, with a grizzled 
beard ; his gray hair was very curly, and even rose 
in front in two rebellious ringlets that seemed 
to the fanciful to tremble like the antennae of 
some giant insect, or to stir sympathetically with 
the restless tufted eyebrows over his rather hag- 
gard eyes. For the Foreign Secretary made no 
secret of his somewhat nervous condition, what- 
ever might be the cause of it. 

"Do you know that mood when one could 
scream because a mat is crooked?'* he said to 
March, as they walked up and down in the back 
garden below the line of dingy statues. "Women 
get into it when they've worked too hard; and 
I've been working pretty hard lately, of course. 
235 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

It drives me mad when Herries will wear his hat 
a little crooked — habit of looking like a gay dog. 
Sometime I swear I'll knock it off. That statue 
of Britannia over there isn't quite straight; it 
sticks forward a bit as if the lady were going to 
topple over. The damned thing is that it doesn't 
topple over and be done with it. See, it's 
clamped with an iron prop. Don't be surprised 
if I get up in the middle of the night to hike it 
down." 

They paced the path for a few moments in 
silence and then he continued. "It's odd those 
little things seem specially big when there are 
bigger things to worry about. We'd better go 
in and do some work." 

Home Fisher evidently allowed for all the 
neurotic possibilities of Archer and the dissipated 
habits of Herries; and whatever his faith in their 
present firmness, did not unduly tax their time 
and attention, even in the case of the Prime 
Minister. He had got the consent of the latter 
finally to the committing of the important docu- 
ments, with the orders to the Western armies, 
to the care of a less conspicuous and more solid 
person — an uncle of his named Home Hewitt, a 
rather colorless country squire who had been a 
good soldier, and was the military adviser of the 
committee. He was charged with expediting 
the government pledge, along with the concerted 
military plans, to the half-mutinous command in 
236 



The Vengeance of the Statue 

the west; and the still more urgent task of see- 
ing that it did not fall into the hands of the 
enemy, who might appear at any moment from 
the east. Over and above this military official, 
the only other person present was a police official, 
a certain Doctor Prince, originally a police 
surgeon and now a distinguished detective, sent 
to be a bodyguard to the group. He was a 
square-faced man with big spectacles and a gri- 
mace that expressed the intention of keeping his 
mouth shut. Nobody else shared their cap- 
tivity except the hotel proprietor, a crusty Kent- 
ish man with a crab-apple face, one or two of his 
servants, and another servant privately attached 
to Lord James Herries. He was a young 
Scotchman named Campbell, who looked much 
more distinguished than his bilious-looking mas- 
ter, having chestnut hair and a long saturnine 
face with large but fine features. He was prob- 
ably the one really efficient person in the house. 
After about four days of the informal coun- 
cil, March had come to feel a sort of grotesque 
sublimity about these dubious figures, defiant in 
the twilight of danger, as if they were hunch- 
backs and cripples left alone to defend a town. 
All were working hard; and he himself looked 
up from writing a page of memoranda in a pri- 
vate room to see Home Fisher standing in the 
doorway, accoutered as if for travel. He fan- 
cied that Fisher looked a little pale; and after 
237 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

a moment that gentleman shut the door behind 
him and said, quietly : 

"Well, the worst has happened. Or nearly 
the worst." 

u The enemy has landed," cried March, and 
sprang erect out of his chair. 

"Oh, I knew the enemy would land," said 
Fisher, with composure. "Yes, he's landed; 
but that's not the worst that could happen. The 
worst is that there's a leak of some sort, even 
from this fortress of ours. It's been a bit of a 
shock to me, I can tell you; though I suppose it's 
illogical. After all, I was full of admiration at 
finding three honest men in politics. I ought not 
to be full of astonishment if I find only two." 

He ruminated a moment and then said, in 
such a fashion that March could hardly tell if 
he were changing the subject or no: 

"It's hard at first to believe that a fellow like 
Herries, who had pickled himself in vice like 
vinegar, can have any scruple left. But about 
that I've noticed a curious thing. Patriotism is 
not the first virtue. Patriotism rots into Prus- 
sianism when you pretend it is the first virtue. 
But patriotism is sometimes the last virtue. A 
man will swindle or seduce who will not sell his 
country. But who knows ?" 

"But what is to be done?" cried March, in- 
dignantly. 

"My uncle has the papers safe enough," re- 
238 



The Vengeance of the Statue 

plied Fisher, "and is sending them west to-night; 
but somebody is trying to get at them from out- 
side, I fear with the assistance of somebody in- 
side. All I can do at present is to try to head 
off the man outside; and I must get away now 
and do it. I shall be back in about twenty-four 
hours. While I'm away I want you to keep an 
eye on these people and find out what you can. 
Au revoir." He vanished down the stairs; and 
from the window March could see him mount 
a motor cycle and trail away toward the neigh- 
boring town. 

On the following morning, March was sitting 
in the window seat of the old inn parlor, which 
was oak-paneled and ordinarily rather dark; but 
on that occasion it was full of the white light 
of a curiously clear morning — the moon had 
shone brilliantly for the last two or three nights. 
He was himself somewhat in shadow in the cor- 
ner of the window seat; and Lord James Herries, 
coming in hastily from the garden behind, did 
not see him. Lord James clutched the back of 
a chair, as if to steady himself, and, sitting down 
abruptly at the table, littered with the last meal, 
poured himself out a tumbler of brandy and 
drank it. He sat with his back to March, but 
his yellow face appeared in a round mirror be- 
yond and the tinge of it was like that of some 
horrible malady. As March moved he started 
violently and faced round. 
239 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"My God!" he cried, "have you seen what's 
outside?" 

"Outside?" repeated the other, glancing over 
his shoulder at the garden. 

"Oh, go and look for yourself," cried Her- 
ries in a sort of fury. "Hewitt's murdered and 
his papers stolen, that's all." 

He turned his back again and sat down with 
a thud; his square shoulders were shaking. 
Harold March darted out of the doorway into 
the back garden with its steep slope of statues. 

The first thing he saw was Doctor Prince, the 
detective, peering through his spectacles at some- 
thing on the ground; the second was the thing 
he was peering at. Even after the sensational 
news he had heard inside, the sight was some- 
thing of a sensation. 

The monstrous stone image of Britannia was 
lying prone and face downward on the garden 
path ; and there stuck out at random from under- 
neath it, like the legs of a smashed fly, an arm 
clad in a white shirt sleeve and a leg clad in a 
khaki trouser, and hair of the unmistakable 
sandy gray that belonged to Home Fisher's un- 
fortunate uncle. There were pools of blood and 
the limbs were quite stiff in death. 

"Couldn't this have been an accident?" said 
March, finding words at last. 

"Look for yourself, I say," repeated the harsh 
voice of Herries, who had followed him with 
240 



The Vengeance of the Statue 

restless movements out of the door. "The 
papers are gone, I tell you. The fellow tore 
the coat off the corpse and cut the papers out of 
the inner pocket. There's the coat over there 
on the bank, with the great slash in it." 

"But wait a minute," said the detective, 
Prince, quietly. "In that case there seems to be 
something of a mystery. A murderer might 
somehow have managed to throw the statue 
down on him, as he seems to have done. But 
I bet he couldn't easily have lifted it up again. 
I've tried; and I'm sure it would want three men 
at least. Yet we must suppose, on that theory, 
that the murderer first knocked him down as he 
walked past, using the statue as a stone club, 
then lifted it up again, took him out and de- 
prived him of his coat, then put him back again 
in the posture of death and neatly replaced the 
statue. I tell you it's physically impossible. 
And how else could he have unclothed a man 
covered with that stone monument? It's worse 
than the conjurer's trick, when a man shuffles a 
coat off with his wrists tied." 

"Could he have thrown down the statue after 
he'd stripped the corpse?" asked March. 

"And why?" asked Prince, sharply. "If he'd 
killed his man and got his papers, he'd be away 
like the wind. He wouldn't potter about in a 
garden excavating the pedestals of statues. Be- 
sides — Hullo, who's that up there?" 
241 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

High on the ridge above them, drawn in dark 
thin lines against the sky, was a figure looking 
so long and lean as to be almost spidery. The 
dark silhouette of the head showed two small 
tufts like horns; and they could almost have 
sworn that the horns moved. 

"Archer I" shouted Herries, with sudden pas- 
sion, and called to him with curses to come down. 
The figure drew back at the first cry, with an 
agitated movement so abrupt as almost to be 
called an antic. The next moment the man 
seemed to reconsider and collect himself, and 
began to come down the zigzag garden path, 
but with obvious reluctance, his feet falling in 
slower and slower rhythm. Through March's 
mind were throbbing the phrases that this man 
himself had used, about going mad in the middle 
of the night and wrecking the stone figure. Just 
so, he could fancy, the maniac who had done 
such a thing might climb the crest of the hill, 
in that feverish dancing fashion, and look down 
on the wreck he had made. But the wreck he 
had made here was not only a wreck of stone. 

When the man emerged at last on to the 
garden path, with the full light on his face and 
figure, he was walking slowly indeed, but easily, 
and with no appearance of fear. 

"This is a terrible thing," he said. "I saw 
it from above; I was taking a stroll along the 
ridge." 

242 



The Vengeance of the Statue 

"Do you mean that you saw the murder?" 
demanded March, "or the accident? I mean 
did you see the statue fall?" 

"No," said Archer, "I mean I saw the statue 
fallen." 

Prince seemed to be paying but little atten- 
tion; his eye was riveted on an object lying on 
the path a yard or two from the corpse. It 
seemed to be a rusty iron bar bent crooked at 
one end. 

"One thing I don't understand," he said, "is 
all this blood. The poor fellow's skull isn't 
smashed; most likely his neck is broken; but 
blood seems to have spouted as if all his arteries 
were severed. I was wondering if some other 
instrument . . . that iron thing, for instance; 
but I don't see that even that is sharp enough. 
I suppose nobody knows what it is." 

rt I know what it is," said Archer in his deep 
but somewhat shaky voice. "I've seen it in my 
nightmares. It was the iron clamp or prop on 
the pedestal, stuck on to keep the wretched 
image upright when it began to wabble, I sup- 
pose. Anyhow, it was always stuck in the stone- 
work there ; and I suppose it came out when the 
thing collapsed." 

Doctor Prince nodded, but he continued to 
look down at the pools of blood and the bar of 
iron. 

"I'm certain there's something more under- 
243 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

neath all this," he said at last. "Perhaps some- 
thing more underneath the statue. I have a 
huge sort of hunch that there is. We are four 
men now and between us we can lift that great 
tombstone there." 

They all bent their strength to the business; 
there was a silence save for heavy breathing; 
and then, after an instant of the tottering and 
staggering of eight legs, the great carven column 
of rock was rolled away, and the body lying in 
its shirt and trousers was fully revealed. The 
spectacles of Doctor Prince seemed almost to en- 
large with a restrained radiance like great eyes ; 
for other things were revealed also. One was 
that the unfortunate Hewitt had a deep gash 
across the jugular, which the triumphant doctor 
instantly identified as having been made with a 
sharp steel edge like a razor. The other was 
that immediately under the bank lay littered 
three shining scraps of steel, each nearly a foot 
long, one pointed and another fitted into a gorge- 
ously jeweled hilt or handle. It was evidently a 
sort of long Oriental knife, long enough to be 
called a sword, but with a curious wavy edge; 
and there was a touch or two of blood on the 
point. 

"I should have expected more blood, hardly 
on the point," observed Doctor Prince, thought- 
fully, "but this is certainly the instrument. The 
slash was certainly made with a weapon shaped 
244 



The Vengeance of the Statue 

like this, and probably the slashing of the pocket 
as well. I suppose the brute threw in the statue, 
by way of giving him a public funeral." 

March did not answer; he was mesmerized by 
the strange stones that glittered on the strange 
sword hilt; and their possible significance was 
broadening upon him like a dreadful dawn. It 
was a curious Asiatic weapon. He knew what 
name was connected in his memory with curious 
Asiatic weapons. Lord James spoke his secret 
thought for him, and yet it startled him like an 
irrelevance. 

"Where is the Prime Minister?" Herries had 
cried, suddenly, and somehow like the bark of a 
dog at some discovery. 

Doctor Prince turned on him his goggles and 
his grim face ; and it was grimmer than ever. 

"I cannot find him anywhere," he said. "I 
looked for him at once, as soon as I found the 
papers were gone. That servant of yours, Camp- 
bell, made a most efficient search, but there are 
no traces." 

There was a long silence, at the end of which 
Herries uttered another cry, but upon an en- 
tirely new note. 

"Well, you needn't look for him any longer," 
he said, "for here he comes, along with your 
friend Fisher. They look as if they'd been for 
a little walking tour." 

The two figures approaching up the path were 
245 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

indeed those of Fisher, splashed with the mire 
of travel and carrying a scratch like that of a 
bramble across one side of his bald forehead, 
and of the great and gray-haired statesman who 
looked like a baby and was interested in Eastern 
swords and swordmanship. But beyond this 
bodily recognition, March could make neither 
head nor tail of their presence or demeanor; 
which seemed to give a final touch of nonsense 
to the whole nightmare. The more closely he 
watched them, as they stood listening to the 
revelations of the detective, the more puzzled 
he was by their attitude — Fisher seemed grieved 
by the death of his uncle, but hardly shocked at 
it; the older man seemed almost openly think- 
ing about something else, and neither had any- 
thing to suggest about a further pursuit of the 
fugitive spy and murderer, in spite of the pro- 
digious importance of the documents he had 
stolen. When the detective had gone off to busy 
himself with that department of the business, 
to telephone and write his report, when Herries 
had gone back, probably to the brandy bottle, 
and the Prime Minister had blandly sauntered 
away toward a comfortable armchair in another 
part of the garden, Home Fisher spoke directly 
to Harold March. 

"My friend," he said, "I want you to come 
with me at once ; there is no one else I can trust 
so much as that. The journey will take us most 
246 



The Vengeance of the Statue 

of the day, and the chief business cannot be done 
till nightfall. So we can talk things over thor- 
oughly on the way. But I want you to be with 
me ; for I rather think it is my hour." 

March and Fisher both had motor bicycles; 
and the first half of their day's journey consisted 
in coasting eastward amid the unconversational 
noise of those uncomfortable engines. But when 
they came out beyond Canterbury into the flats 
of eastern Kent, Fisher stopped at a pleasant 
little public house beside a sleepy stream; and 
they sat down to eat and to drink and to speak 
almost for the first time. It was a brilliant 
afternoon, birds were singing in the wood be- 
hind, and the sun shone full on their ale bench 
and table; but the face of Fisher in the strong 
sunlight had a gravity never seen on it before. 

"Before we go any farther," he said, "there 
is something you ought to know. You and I 
have seen some mysterious things and got to the 
bottom of them before now; and it's only right 
that you should get to the bottom of this one. 
But in dealing with the death of my uncle I must 
begin at the other end from where our old de- 
tective yarns began. I will give you the steps 
of deduction presently, if you want to listen to 
them; but I did not reach the truth of this by 
steps of deduction. I will first of all tell you the 
truth itself, because I knew the truth from the 
first. The other cases I approached from the 
17 247 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

outside, but in this case I was inside. I myself 
was the very core and center of everything.'* 

Something in the speaker's pendent eyelids 
and grave gray eyes suddenly shook March to 
his foundations; and he cried, distractedly, "I 
don't understand!" as men do when they fear 
that they do understand. There was no sound 
for a space but the happy chatter of the birds, 
and then Home Fisher said, calmly : 

"It was I who killed my uncle. If you par- 
ticularly want more, it was I who stole the state 
papers from him." 

"Fisher!" cried his friend in a strangled 
voice. 

"Let me tell you the whole thing before we 
part," continued the other, "and let me put it, 
for the sake of clearness, as we used to put our 
old problems. Now there are two things that 
are puzzling people about that problem, aren't 
there? The first is how the murderer managed 
to slip off the dead man's coat, when he was 
already pinned to the ground with that stone 
incubus. The other, which is much smaller and 
less puzzling, is the fact of the sword that cut 
his throat being slightly stained at the point, 
instead of a good deal more stained at the edge. 
Well, I can dispose of the first question easily. 
Home Hewitt took off his own coat before he 
was killed. I might say he took off his coat to 
be killed." 

248 



The Vengeance of the Statue 

"Do you call that an explanation ?" exclaimed 
March. "The words seem more meaningless 
than the facts." 

"Well, let us go on to the other facts," con- 
tinued Fisher, equably. "The reason that par- 
ticular sword is not stained at the edge with 
Hewitt's blood is that it was not used to kill 
Hewitt." 

"But the doctor," protested March, "declared 
distinctly that the wound was made by that par- 
ticular sword." 

"I beg your pardon," replied Fisher. "He 
did not declare that it was made by that par- 
ticular sword. He declared it was made by a 
sword of that particular pattern." 

"But it was quite a queer and exceptional pat- 
tern," argued March; "surely it is far too fan- 
tastic a coincidence to imagine " 

"It was a fantastic coincidence," reflected 
Home Fisher. "It's extraordinary what co- 
incidences do sometimes occur. By the oddest 
, chance in the world, by one chance in a million, 
it so happened that another sword of exactly 
the same shape was in the same garden at the 
same time. It may be partly explained by the 
fact that I brought them both into the garden 
myself . . . come, my dear fellow; surely you 
can see now what it means. Put jhose two 
things together; there were two duplicate 
swords and he took off his coat for himself. It 
249 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

may assist your speculations to recall the fact 
that I am not exactly an assassin." 

U A duel!" exclaimed March, recovering him- 
self. "Of course I ought to have thought of 
that. But who was the spy who stole the 
papers?" 

"My uncle was the spy who stole the papers," 
replied Fisher, "or who tried to steal the papers 
when I stopped him — in the only way I could. 
The papers, that should have gone west to re- 
assure our friends and give them the plans for 
repelling the invasion, would in a few hours 
have been in the hands of the invader. What 
could I do? To have denounced one of our 
friends at this moment would have been to play 
into the hands of your friend Attwood, and all 
the party of panic and slavery. Besides, it may 
be that a man over forty has a subconscious 
desire to die as he has lived, and that I wanted, 
in a sense, to carry my secrets to the grave. Per- 
haps a hobby hardens with age; and my hobby 
has been silence. Perhaps I feel that I have 
killed my mother's brother, but I have saved my 
mother's name. Anyhow, I chose a time when 
I knew you were all asleep, and he was walking 
alone in the garden. I saw all the stone statues 
standing in the moonlight; and I myself was like 
one of those stone statues walking. In a voice 
that was not my own, I told him of his treason 
and demanded the papers; and when he refused, 
250 



The Vengeance of the Statue 

I forced him to take one of the two swords. 
The swords were among some specimens sent 
down here for the Prime Minister's inspection; 
he is a collector, you know; they were the only 
equal weapons I could find. To cut an ugly tale 
short, we fought there on the path in front of 
the Britannia statue; he was a man of great 
strength, but I had somewhat the advantage in 
skill. His sword grazed my forehead almost 
at the moment when mine sank into the joint in 
his neck. He fell against the statue, like Caesar 
against Pompey's, hanging on to the iron rail; 
his sword was already broken. When I saw the 
blood from that deadly wound, everything else 
went from me; I dropped my sword and ran 
as if to lift him up. As I bent toward him some- 
thing happened too quick for me to follow. I 
do not know whether the iron bar was rotted 
with rust and came away in his hand, or whether 
he rent it out of the rock with his apelike 
strength; but the thing was in his hand, * and 
with his dying energies he swung it over my 
head, as I knelt there unarmed beside him. I 
looked up wildly to avoid the blow, and saw 
above us the great bulk of Britannia leaning out- 
ward like the figurehead of a ship. The next 
instant I saw it was leaning an inch or two more 
than usual, and all the skies with their outstand- 
ing stars seemed to be leaning with it. For the 
third second it was as if the skies fell; and in 
251 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

the fourth I was standing in the quiet garden, 
looking down on that flat ruin of stone and bone 
at which you were looking to-day. He had 
plucked out the last prop that held up the British 
goddess, and she had fallen and crushed the 
traitor in her fall. I turned and darted for the 
coat which I knew to contain the package, ripped 
it up with my sword, and raced away up the 
garden path to where my motor bike was wait- 
ing on the road above. I had every reason 
for haste; but I fled without looking back 
at the statue and the body; and I think the 
thing I fled from was the sight of that appall- 
ing allegory. 

"Then I did the rest of what I had to do. All 
through the night and into the daybreak and the 
daylight I went humming through the villages 
and markets of South England like a traveling 
bullet, till I came to the headquarters in the West 
where the trouble was. I was just in time. I 
was able to placard the place, so to speak, with 
the news that the government had not betrayed 
them, and that they would find supports if they 
would push eastward against the enemy. There's 
no time to tell you all that happened; but I tell 
you it was the day of my life. A triumph like a 
torchlight procession, with torchlights that might 
have been firebrands. The mutinies simmered 
down; the men of Somerset and the western 
counties came pouring into the market places; the 
252 



The Vengeance of the Statue 

men who died with Arthur and stood firm with 
Alfred. The Irish regiments rallied to them, 
after a scene like a riot, and marched eastward 
out of the town singing Fenian songs. There 
was all that is not understood, about the dark 
laughter of that people, in the delight with 
which, even when marching with the English to 
the defense of England, they shouted at the top 
of their voices, 'High upon the gallows tree 
stood the noble-hearted three . . . With Eng- 
land's cruel cord about them cast.' However, 
the chorus was 'God save Ireland,' and we could 
all have sung that just then, in one sense or an- 
other. 

"But there was another side to my mission. 
I carried the plans of the defense; and to a great 
extent, luckily, the plans of the invasion also. 
I won't worry you with strategics ; but we knew 
where the enemy had pushed forward the great 
battery that covered all his movements; and 
though our friends from the West could hardly 
arrive in time to intercept the main movement, 
they might get within long artillery range of the 
battery and shell it, if they only knew exactly 
where it was. They could hardly tell that un- 
less somebody round about here sent up some 
sort of signal. But, somehow, I rather fancy 
that somebody will." 

With that he got up from the table, and they 
remounted their machines and went eastward 
253 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

into the advancing twilight of evening. The 
levels of the landscape were repeated in flat 
strips of floating cloud and the last colors of 
day clung to the circle of the horizon. Reced- 
ing farther and farther behind them was the 
semicircle of the last hills; and it was quite sud- 
denly that they saw afar off the dim line of the 
sea. It was not a strip of bright blue as they 
had seen it from the sunny veranda, but of a 
sinister and smoky violet, a tint that seemed 
ominous and dark. Here Home Fisher dis- 
mounted once more. 

"We must walk the rest of the way," he said, 
"and the last bit of all I must walk alone.'* 

He bent down and began to unstrap some- 
thing from his bicycle. It was something that 
had puzzled his companion all the way in spite 
of what held him to more interesting riddles; 
it appeared to be several lengths of pole strapped 
together and wrapped up in paper. Fisher took 
it under his arm and began to pick his way across 
the turf. The ground was growing more tum- 
bled and irregular and he was walking toward a 
mass of thickets and small woods; night grew 
darker every moment. "We must not talk any 
more," said Fisher. W I shall whisper to you 
when you are to halt. Don't try to follow me 
then, for it will only spoil the show; one man 
can barely crawl safely to the spot, and two 
would certainly be caught." 
254 



The Vengeance of the Statue 

"I would follow you anywhere," replied 
March, "but I would halt, too, if that is better." 

"I know you would," said his friend in a low 
voice. "Perhaps you're the only man I ever 
quite trusted in this world." 

A few paces farther on they came to the end 
of a great ridge or mound looking monstrous 
against the dim sky; and Fisher stopped with a 
gesture. He caught his companion's hand and 
wrung it with a violent tenderness, and then 
darted forward into the darkness. March could 
faintly see his figure crawling along under the 
shadow of the ridge, then he lost sight of it, 
and then he saw it again standing on another 
mound two hundred yards away. Beside him 
stood a singular erection made apparently of 
two rods. He bent over it and there was the 
flare of a light; all March's schoolboy memories 
woke in him, and he knew what it was. It was 
the stand of a rocket. The confused, incongru- 
ous memories still possessed him up to the very 
moment of a fierce but familiar sound; and an 
instant after the rocket left its perch and went 
up into endless space like a starry arrow aimed 
at the stars. March thought suddenly of the 
signs of the last days and knew he was looking 
at the apocalyptic meteor of something like a 
Day of Judgment. 

Far up in the infinite heavens the rocket 
drooped and sprang into scarlet stars. For a 
255 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

moment the whole landscape out to the sea 
and back to the crescent of the wooded hills was 
like a lake of ruby light, of a red strangely rich 
and glorious, as if the world were steeped in 
wine rather than blood, or the earth were an 
earthly paradise, over which paused forever the 
sanguine moment of morning. 

"God save England!" cried Fisher, with a 
tongue like the peal of a trumpet. "And now 
it is for God to save." 

As darkness sank again over land and sea 
there came another sound; far away in the passes 
of the hills behind them the guns spoke like the 
baying of great hounds. Something that was not 
a rocket, that came not hissing but screaming, 
went over Harold March's head and expanded 
beyond the mound into light and deafening din, 
staggering the brain with unbearable brutalities 
of noise. Another came, and then another, and 
the world was full of uproar and volcanic vapor 
and chaotic light. The artillery of the West 
country and the Irish had located the great 
enemy battery, and were pounding it to pieces. 

In the mad excitement of that moment March 
peered through the storm, looking again for 
the long lean figure that stood beside the stand 
of the rocket. Then another flash lit up the 
whole ridge. The figure was not there. 

Before the fires of the rocket had faded from 
the sky, long before the first gun had sounded 
256 



The Vengeance of the Statue 

from the distant hills, a splutter of rifle fire had 
flashed and flickered all around from the hidden 
trenches of the enemy. Something lay in the 
shadow at the foot of the ridge, as stiff as the 
stick of the fallen rocket; and the man who 
knew too much knew what is worth knowing. 



THE TREES OF PRIDE 



THE TREES OF PRIDE 

I 

THE TALE OF THE PEACOCK TREES 

C QUIRE VANE was an elderly schoolboy of 
^ English education and Irish extraction. His 
English education, at one of the great public 
schools, had preserved his intellect perfectly and 
permanently at the stage of boyhood. But his 
Irish extraction subconsciously upset in him the 
proper solemnity of an old boy, and sometimes 
gave him back the brighter outlook of a naughty 
boy. He had a bodily impatience which played 
tricks upon him almost against his will, and had 
already rendered him rather too radiant a failure 
in civil and diplomatic service. Thus it is true 
that compromise is the key of British policy, 
especially as effecting an impartiality among the 
religions of India; but Vane's attempt to meet 
the Moslem halfway by kicking off one boot at 
the gates of the mosque, was felt not so much to 
indicate true impartiality as something that could 
only be called an aggressive indifference. Again, 
it is true that an English aristocrat can hardly 
enter fully into the feelings of either party in a 
261 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

quarrel between a Russian Jew and an Orthodox 
procession carrying relics; but Vane's idea that 
the procession might carry the Jew as well, him- 
self a venerable and historic relic, was misunder- 
stood on both sides. In short, he was a man who 
particularly prided himself on having no non- 
sense about him; with the result that he was 
always doing nonsensical things. He seemed to 
be standing on his head merely to prove that he 
was hard-headed. 

He had just finished a hearty breakfast, in the 
society of his daughter, at a table under a tree 
in his garden by the Cornish coast. For, having 
a glorious circulation, he insisted on as many out- 
door meals as possible, though spring had barely 
touched the woods and warmed the seas round 
that southern extremity of England. His daugh- 
ter Barbara, a good-looking girl with heavy 
red hair and a face as grave as one of the garden 
statues, still sat almost motionless as a statue 
when her father rose. A fine tall figure in light 
clothes, with his white hair and mustache fly- 
ing backwards rather fiercely from a face that 
was good-humored enough, for he carried his 
very wide Panama hat in his hand, he strode 
across the terraced garden, down some stone 
steps flanked with old ornamental urns to a more 
woodland path fringed with little trees, and so 
down a zigzag road which descended the craggy 
cliff to the shore, where he was to meet a guest 
262 



The Tale of the Peacock Trees 

arriving by boat. A yacht was already in the blue 
bay, and he could see a boat pulling toward the 
little paved pier. 

And yet in that short walk between the green 
turf and the yellow sands he was destined to find 
his hard-headedness provoked into a not unfa- 
miliar phase which the world was inclined to call 
hot-headedness. The fact was that the Cornish 
peasantry, who composed his tenantry and do- 
mestic establishment, were far from being people 
with no nonsense about them. There was, alas ! 
a great deal of nonsense about them ; with ghosts, 
witches, and traditions as old as Merlin, they 
seemed to surround him with a fairy ring of non- 
sense. But the magic circle had one center : there 
was one point in which the curving conversation 
of the rustics always returned. It was a point 
that always pricked the Squire to exasperation, 
and even in this short walk he seemed to strike 
it everywhere. He paused before descending the 
steps from the lawn to speak to the gardener 
about potting some foreign shrubs, and the 
gardener seemed to be gloomily gratified, in 
every line of his leathery brown visage, at the 
chance of indicating that he had formed a low 
opinion of foreign shrubs. 

"We wish you'd get rid of what you've got 
here, sir," he observed, digging doggedly. 
"Nothing'll grow right with them here." 

"Shrubs!" said the Squire, laughing. "You 
18 263 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

don't call the peacock trees shrubs, do you? 
Fine tall trees — you ought to be proud of 
them." 

"Ill weeds grow apace," observed the gar- 
dener. "Weeds can grow as houses when some- 
body plants them." Then he added: "Him that 
sowed tares in the Bible, Squire." 

"Oh, blast your " began the Squire, and 

then replaced the more apt and alliterative word 
"Bible" by the general word "superstition." 
He was himself a robust rationalist, but he went 
to church to set his tenants an example. Of 
what, it would have puzzled him to say. 

A little way along the lower path by the trees 
he encountered a woodcutter, one Martin, who 
was more explicit, having more of a grievance. 
His daughter was at that time seriously ill with 
a fever recently common on that coast, and the 
Squire, who was a kind-hearted gentleman, 
would normally have made allowances for low 
spirits and loss of temper. But he came near to 
losing his own again when the peasant persisted 
in connecting his tragedy with the traditional 
monomania about the foreign trees. 

"If she were well enough I'd move her," said 
the woodcutter, "as we can't move them, I sup- 
pose. I'd just like to get my chopper into them 
and feel 'em come crashing down." 

"One would think they were dragons," said 
Vane. 

264 



The Tale of the Peacock Trees 

"And that's about what they look like," re- 
plied Martin. "Look at 'em!" 

The woodman was naturally a rougher and 
even wilder figure than the gardener. His face 
also was brown, and looked like an antique 
parchment, and it was framed in an outlandish 
arrangement of raven beard and whiskers, which 
was really a fashion fifty years ago, but might 
have been five thousand years old or older. 
Phoenicians, one felt, trading on those strange 
shores in the morning of the world, might have 
combed or curled or braided their blue-black hair 
into some such quaint patterns. For this patch 
of population was as much a corner of Cornwall 
as Cornwall is a corner of England; a tragic 
and unique race, small and interrelated like a 
Celtic clan. The clan was older than the Vane 
family, though that was old as county families 
go. For in many such parts of England it is the 
aristocrats who are the latest arrivals. It was 
the sort of racial type that is supposed to be 
passing, and perhaps has already passed. 

The obnoxious objects stood some hundred 
yards away from the speaker, who waved toward 
them with his ax; and there was something sug- 
gestive in the comparison. That coast, to begin 
with, stretching toward the sunset, was itself 
almost as fantastic as a sunset cloud. It was cut 
out against the emerald or indigo of the sea in 
graven horns and crescents that might be the cast 
265 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

or mold of some such crested serpents ; and, be- 
neath, was pierced and fretted by caves and 
crevices, as if by the boring of some such titanic 
worms. Over and above this draconian architec- 
ture of the earth a veil of gray woods hung 
thinner like a vapor; woods which the witch- 
craft of the sea had, as usual, both blighted and 
blown out of shape. To the right the trees trailed 
along the sea front in a single line, each drawn 
out in thin wild lines like a caricature. At the 
other end of their extent they multiplied into a 
huddle of hunchbacked trees, a wood spreading 
toward a projecting part of the high coast. It 
was here that the sight appeared to which so 
many eyes and minds seemed to be almost auto- 
matically turning. 

Out of the middle of this low, and more or less 
level wood, rose three separate stems that shot 
up and soared into the sky like a lighthouse out 
of the waves or a church spire out of the village 
roofs. They formed a clump of three columns 
close together, which might well be the mere 
bifurcation, or rather trifurcation, of one tree, 
the lower part being lost or sunken in the thick 
wood around. Everything about them suggested 
something stranger and more southern than any- 
thing even in that last peninsula of Britain which 
pushes out farthest toward Spain and Africa and 
the southern stars. Their leathery leafage had 
sprouted in advance of the faint mist of yellow- 
266 



The Tale of the Peacock Trees 

green around them, and it was of another and 
less natural green, tinged with blue, like the 
colors of a kingfisher. But one might fancy it 
the scales of some three-headed dragon towering 
over a herd of huddled and fleeing cattle. 

"I am exceedingly sorry your girl is so unwell," 

said Vane shortly. "But really " and he 

strode down the steep road with plunging strides. 

The boat was already secured to the little stone 
jetty, and the boatman, a younger shadow of 
the woodcutter — and, indeed, a nephew of that 
useful malcontent — saluted his territorial lord 
with the sullen formality of the family. The 
Squire acknowledged it casually and had soon 
forgotten all such things in shaking hands with 
the visitor who had just come ashore. The visitor 
was a long, loose man, very lean to be so young, 
whose long, fine features seemed wholly fitted 
together of bone and nerve, and seemed some- 
how to contrast with his hair, that showed in 
vivid yellow patches upon his hollow temples 
under the brim of his white holiday hat. He was 
carefully dressed in exquisite taste, though he had 
come straight from a considerable sea voyage; 
and he carried something in his hand which in 
his long European travels, and even longer Euro- 
pean visits, he had almost forgotten to call a 
gripsack. 

Mr. Cyprian Paynter was an American who 
lived in Italy. There was a good deal more 
267 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

to be said about him, for he was a very acute and 
cultivated gentleman; but those two facts would, 
perhaps, cover most of the others. Storing his 
mind like a museum with the wonder of the Old 
World, but all lit up as by a window with the 
wonder of the New, he had fallen heir to some- 
thing of the unique critical position of Ruskin or 
Pater, and was further famous as a discoverer of 
minor poets. He was a judicious discoverer, and 
he did not turn all his minor poets into major 
prophets. If his geese were swans, they were 
not all Swans of Avon. He had even incurred 
the deadly suspicion of classicism by differing 
from his young friends, the Punctuist Poets, when 
they produced versification consisting exclusively 
of commas and colons. He had a more humane 
sympathy with the modern flame kindled from 
the embers of Celtic mythology, and it was in 
reality the recent appearance of a Cornish poet, 
a sort of parallel to the new Irish poets, which 
had brought him on this occasion to Cornwall. 
He was, indeed, far too well-mannered to allow 
a host to guess that any pleasure was being sought 
outside his own hospitality. He had a long- 
standing invitation from Vane, whom he had met 
in Cyprus in the latter's days of undiplomatic 
diplomacy; and Vane was not aware that rela- 
tions had only been thus renewed after the critic 
had read Merlin and Other Verses, by a new 
writer named John Treherne. Nor did the 
268 



The Tale of the Peacock Trees 

Squire even begin to realize the much more diplo- 
matic diplomacy by which he had been induced 
to invite the local bard to lunch on the very day 
of the American critic's arrival. 

Mr. Paynter was still standing with his grip- 
sack, gazing in a trance of true admiration at the 
hollowed crags, topped by the gray, grotesque 
wood, and crested finally by the three fantastic 
trees. 

"It is like being shipwrecked on the coast of 
fairyland," he said. 

"I hope you haven't been shipwrecked much," 
replied his host, smiling. "I fancy Jake here 
can look after you very well." 

Mr. Paynter looked across at the boatman 
and smiled also. "I am afraid," he said, u our 
friend is not quite so enthusiastic for this land- 
scape as I am." 

"Oh, the trees, I suppose!" said the Squire 
wearily. 

The boatman was by normal trade a fisher- 
man; but as his house, built of black tarred tim- 
ber, stood right on the foreshore a few yards 
from the pier, he was employed in such cases as 
a sort of ferryman. He was a big, black-browed 
youth, generally silent, but something seemed 
now to sting him into speech. 

"Well, sir," he said, "everybody knows it's 
not natural. Everybody knows the sea blights 
trees and beats them under, when they're 
269 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

only just trees. These things thrive like 
some unholy great seaweed that don't belong 
to the land at all. It's like the — the blessed 
sea serpent got on shore, Squire, and eating every- 
thing up." 

"There is some stupid legend," said Squire 
Vane gruffly. u But come up into the garden; I 
want to introduce you to my daughter." 

When, however, they reached the little table 
under the tree, the apparently immovable young 
lady had moved away after all, and it was some 
time before they came upon the track of her. 
She had risen, though languidly, and wandered 
slowly along the upper path of the terraced 
garden looking down on the lower path where it 
ran closer to the main bulk of the little wood by 
the sea. 

Her languor was not a feebleness but rather 
a fullness of life, like that of a child half awake ; 
she seemed to stretch herself and enjoy every- 
thing without noticing anything. She passed the 
wood, into the gray huddle of which a single 
white path vanished through a black hole. Along 
this part of the terrace ran something like a low 
rampart or balustrade, embowered with flowers 
at intervals ; and she leaned over it, looking down 
at another glimpse of the glowing sea behind the 
clump of trees, and on another irregular path 
tumbling down to the pier and the boatman's 
cottage on the beach. 

270 



The Tale of the Peacock Trees 

As she gazed, sleepily enough, she saw that a 
strange figure was very actively climbing the path, 
apparently coming from the fisherman's cottage; 
so actively that a moment afterwards it came out 
between the trees and stood upon the path just 
below her. It was not only a figure strange to 
her, but one somewhat strange in itself. It was 
that of a man still young, and seeming somehow 
younger than his own clothes, which were not 
only shabby but antiquated; clothes common 
enough in texture, yet carried in an uncommon 
fashion. He wore what was presumably a light 
waterproof, perhaps through having come off 
the sea; but it was held at the throat by one 
button, and hung, sleeves and all, more like a 
cloak than a coat. He rested one bony hand on 
a black stick; under the shadow of his broad hat 
his black hair hung down in a tuft or two. His 
face, which was swarthy, but rather handsome in 
itself, wore something that may have been a 
slightly embarrassed smile, but had too much 
the appearance of a sneer. 

Whether this apparition was a tramp or a 
trespasser, or a friend of some of the fishers or 
woodcutters, Barbara Vane was quite unable to 
guess. He removed his hat, still with his un- 
altered and rather sinister smile, and said civilly : 
"Excuse me. The Squire asked me to call." 
Here he caught sight of Martin, the woodman, 
who was shifting along the path, thinning the 
271 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

thin trees; and the stranger made a familiar 
salute with one linger. 

The girl did not know what to say. "Have 
you — have you come about cutting the wood?" 
she asked at last. 

"I would I were so honest a man, 1 ' replied the 
stranger. "Martin is, I fancy, a distant cousin 
of mine; we Cornish folk just round here are 
nearly all related, you know; but I do not cut 
wood. I do not cut anything, except, perhaps, 
capers. I am, so to speak, a jongleur" 

"A what?" asked Barbara. 

"A minstrel, shall we say?" answered the new- 
comer, and looked up at her more steadily. Dur- 
ing a rather odd silence their eyes rested on each 
other. What she saw has been already noted, 
though by her, at any rate, not in the least under- 
stood. What he saw was a decidedly beautiful 
woman with a statuesque face and hair that shone 
in the sun like a helmet of copper. 

"Do you know," he went on, "that in this old 
place, hundreds of years ago, a jongleur may 
really have stood where I stand, and a lady may 
really have looked over that wall and thrown 
him money?" 

"Do y©u want money?" she asked, all at sea. 

"Well," drawled the stranger, "in the sense 
of lacking it, perhaps, but I fear there is no place 
now for a minstrel, except nigger minstrel. I 
must apologize for not blacking my face." 
272 



The Tale of the Peacock Trees 

She laughed a little" in her bewilderment, and 
said: "Well, I hardly think you need do that." 

"You think the natives here are dark enough 
already, perhaps," he observed calmly. "After 
all, we are aborigines, and are treated as such." 

She threw out some desperate remark about 
the weather or the scenery, and wondered what 
would happen next. 

"The prospect is certainly beautiful," he as- 
sented, in the same enigmatic manner. "There 
is only one thing in it I am doubtful about." 

While she stood in silence he slowly lifted his 
black stick like a long black finger and pointed it 
at the peacock trees above the wood. And a queer 
feeling of disquiet fell on the girl, as if he were, 
by that mere gesture, doing a destructive act and 
could send a blight upon the garden. 

The strained and almost painful silence was 
broken by the voice of Squire Vane, loud even 
while it was still distant. 

"We couldn't make out where you'd got to, 
Barbara," he said. "This is my friend, Mr. 
Cyprian Paynter." The next moment he saw 
the stranger and stopped, a little puzzled. 

It was only Mr. Cyprian Paynter himself who 
was equal to the situation. He had seen months 
ago a portrait of the new Cornish poet in some 
American literary magazine, and he found him- 
self, to his surprise, the introducer instead of 
the introduced. 

273 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"Why, Squire," he said in considerable aston- 
ishment, "don't you know Mr. Treherne? I 
supposed, of course, he was a neighbor." 

"Delighted to see you, Mr. Treherne," said 
the Squire, recovering his manners with a certain 
genial confusion. "So pleased you were able to 
come. This 7 is Mr. Paynter — my daughter," 
and, turning with a certain boisterous embarrass- 
ment, he led the way to the table under the tree. 

Cyprian Paynter followed, inwardly revolving 
a puzzle which had taken even his experience by 
surprise. The American, if intellectually an aris- 
tocrat, was still socially and subconsciously a 
democrat. It had never crossed his mind that the 
poet should be counted lucky to know the squire 
and not the squire to know the poet. The honest 
patronage in Vane's hospitality was something 
which made Paynter feel he was, after all, an 
exile in England. 

The Squire, anticipating the trial of luncheon 
with a strange literary man, had dealt with the 
case tactfully from his own standpoint. County 
society might have made the guest feel like a 
fish out of water; and, except for the American 
critic and the local lawyer and doctor, worthy 
middle-class people who fitted into the picture, he 
had kept it as a family party. He was a widower, 
and when the meal had been laid out on the 
garden table, it was Barbara who presided as 
hostess. She had the new poet on her right hand 
274 



The Tale of the Peacock Trees 

and it made her very uncomfortable. She had 
practically offered that fallacious jongleur money, 
and it did not make it easier to offer him lunch. 

"The whole countryside's gone mad," an- 
nounced the Squire, by way of the latest local 
news. "It's about this infernal, legend of ours." 

"I collect legends," said Paynter, smiling. 
"You must remember I haven't yet had a chance 
to collect yours. And this," he added, looking 
round at the romantic coast, "is a fine theater for 
anything dramatic." 

"Oh, it's dramatic in its way," admitted Vane, 
not without a faint satisfaction. "It's all about 
those things over there we call the peacock trees 
— I suppose, because of the queer color of the 
leaf, you know, though I have heard they make 
a shrill noise in a high wind that's supposed to 
be like the shriek of a peacock; something like 
a bamboo in the botanical structure, perhaps. 
Well, those trees are supposed to have been 
brought over from Barbary by my ancestor Sir 
Walter Vane, one of the Elizabethan patriots or 
pirates, or whatever you call them. They say 
that at the end of his last voyage the villagers 
gathered on the beach down there and saw the 
boat standing in from the sea, and the new trees 
stood up in the boat like a mast, all gay with 
leaves out of season, like green bunting. And 
as they watched they thought at first that the 
boat was steering oddly, and then that it wasn't 
275 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

steering at all ; and when it drifted to the shore 
at last every man in that boat was dead, and Sir 
Walter Vane, with his sword drawn, was leaning 
up against the tree trunk, as stiff as the tree." 

"Now this is rather curious," remarked 
Paynter thoughtfully. "I told you I collected 
legends, and I fancy I can tell you the beginning 
of the story of which that is the end, though it 
comes hundreds of miles across the sea." 

He tapped meditatively on the table with his 
thin, taper fingers, like a man trying to recall a 
tune. He had, indeed, made a hobby of such 
fables, and he was not without vanity about his 
artistic touch in telling them. 

"Oh, do tell us your part of it !" cried Barbara 
Vane, whose air of sunny sleepiness seemed in 
some vague degree to have fallen from her. 

The American bowed across the table with 
a serious politeness, and then began playing 
idly with a quaint ring on his long finger as he 
talked. 

"If you go down to the Barbary Coast, where 
the last wedge of the forest narrows down be- 
tween the desert and the great tideless sea, you 
will find the natives still telling a strange story 
about a saint of the Dark Ages. There, on the 
twilight border of the Dark Continent, you feel 
the Dark Ages. I have only visited the place 
once, though it lies, so to speak, opposite to the 
Italian city where I lived for years, and yet you 
276 



The Tale of the Peacock Trees 

would hardly believe how the topsy-turvydom 
and transmigration of this myth somehow seemed 
less mad than they really are, with the wood loud 
with lions at night and that dark red solitude 
beyond. They say that the hermit St. Securis, 
living there among trees, grew to love them like 
companions ; since, though great giants with many 
arms like Briareus, they were the mildest and 
most blameless of the creatures; they did not de- 
vour like the lions, but rather opened their arms 
to all the little birds. And he prayed that they 
might be loosened from time to time to walk like 
other things. And the trees were moved upon 
the prayers of Securis, as they were at the songs 
of Orpheus. The men of the desert were stricken 
from afar with fear, seeing the saint walking 
with a walking grove, like a schoolmaster with 
his boys. For the trees were thus freed under 
strict conditions of discipline. They were to 
return at the sound of the hermit's bell, and, 
above all, to copy the wild beasts in walking only 
— to destroy and devour nothing. Well, it is said 
that one of the trees heard a voice that was not 
the saint's; that in the warm green twilight of 
one summer evening it became conscious of some- 
thing sitting and speaking in its branches in the 
guise of a great bird, and it was that which once 
spoke from a tree in the guise of a great serpent. 
As the voice grew louder among its murmuring 
leaves the tree was torn with a great desire to 
277 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

stretch out and snatch at the birds that flew 
harmlessly about their nests, and pluck them to 
pieces. Finally, the tempter filled the tree-top 
with his own birds of pride, the starry pageant 
of the peacocks. And the spirit of the brute 
overcame the spirit of the tree, and it rent and 
consumed the blue-green birds till not a plume 
was left, and returned to the quiet tribe of trees. 
But they say that when spring came all the other 
trees put forth leaves, but this put forth feathers 
of a strange hue and pattern. And by that mon- 
strous assimilation the saint knew of the sin, and 
he rooted that one tree to the earth with a judg- 
ment, so that evil should fall on any who re- 
moved it again. That, Squire, is the beginning 
in the deserts of the tale that ended here, almost 
in this garden." 

"And the end is about as reliable as the begin- 
ning, I should say," said Vane. "Yours is a nice 
plain tale for a small tea-party; a quiet little bit 
of still-life, that is." 

"What a queer, horrible story," exclaimed 
Barbara. "It makes one feel like a cannibal." 

"Ex Africa," said the lawyer, smiling. "It 
comes from a cannibal country. I think it's the 
touch of the tar-brush, that nightmare feeling 
that you don't know whether the hero is a plant 
or a man or a devil. Don't you feel it sometimes 
in 'Uncle Remus'?" 

"True," said Paynter. "Perfectly true." And 
278 



The Tale of the Peacock Trees 

he looked at the lawyer with a new interest. The 
lawyer, who had been introduced as Mr. Ashe, 
was one of those people who are more worth 
looking at than most people realize when they 
look. If Napoleon had been red-haired, and had 
bent all his powers with a curious contentment 
upon the petty lawsuits of a province, he might 
have looked much the same; the head with the 
red hair was heavy and powerful ; the figure in its 
dark, quiet clothes was comparatively insignifi- 
cant, as was Napoleon's. He seemed more at 
ease in the Squire's society than the doctor, who, 
though a gentleman, was a shy one, and a mere 
shadow of his professional brother. 

"As you truly say," remarked Paynter, "the 
story seems touched with quite barbarous ele- 
ments, probably Negro. Originally, though, I 
think there was really a hagiological story about 
some hermit, though some of the higher critics 
say St. Securis never existed, but was only an 
allegory of arboriculture, since his name is the 
Latin for an ax." 

"Oh, if you come to that," remarked the poet 
Treherne, "you might as well say Squire Vane 
doesn't exist, and that he's only an allegory for 
a weathercock." Something a shade too cool 
about this sally drew the lawyer's red brows to- 
gether. He looked across the table and met the 
poet's somewhat equivocal smile. 

"Do I understand, Mr. Treherne," asked 
19 279 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

Ashe, "that you support the miraculous claims of 
St. Securis in this case. Do you, by any chance, 
believe in the walking trees?" 

"I see men as trees walking," answered the 
poet, "like the man cured of blindness in the 
Gospel. By the way, do I understand that you 
support the miraculous claims of that — thau- 
maturgist?" 

Paynter intervened swiftly and suavely. "Now 
that sounds a fascinating piece of psychology. 
You see men as trees?" 

"As I can't imagine why men should walk, I 
can't imagine why trees shouldn't," answered 
Treherne. 

"Obviously, it is the nature of the organism," 
interposed the medical guest, Dr. Burton Brown ; 
"it is necessary in the very type of vegetable 
structure." 

"In other words, a tree sticks in the mud from 
year's end to year's end," answered Treherne. 
"So do you stop in your consulting room from 
ten to eleven every day. And don't you fancy a 
fairy, looking in at your window for a flash after 
having just jumped over the moon and played 
mulberry bush with the Pleiades, would think you 
were a vegetable structure, and that sitting still 
was the nature of the organism?" 

"I don't happen to believe in fairies," said the 
doctor rather stiffly, for the argumentum ad 
hominem was becoming too common. A sulphur- 
280 



The Tale of the Peacock Trees 

ous subconscious anger seemed to radiate from 
the dark poet. 

"Well, I should hope not, Doctor," began the 
Squire, in his loud and friendly style, and then 
stopped, seeing the other's attention arrested. 
The silent butler waiting on the guests had ap- 
peared behind the doctor's chair, and was saying 
something in the low, level tones of the well- 
trained servant. He was so smooth a specimen 
of the type that others never noticed, at first, 
that he also repeated the dark portrait, however 
varnished, so common in this particular family 
of Cornish Celts. His face was sallow and even 
yellow, and his hair indigo black. He went by 
the name of Miles. Some felt oppressed by the 
tribal type in this tiny corner of England. They 
felt somehow as if all these dark faces were the 
masks of a secret society. 

The doctor rose with a half apology. "I must 
ask pardon for disturbing this pleasant party; I 
am called away on duty. Please don't let any- 
body move. We have to be ready for these 
things, you know. Perhaps Mr. Treherne will 
admit that my habits are not so very vegetable, 
after all." With this Parthian shaft, at which 
there was some laughter, he strode away very 
rapidly across the sunny lawn to where the road 
dipped down toward the village. 

u He is very good among the poor," said the 
girl with an honorable seriousness. 
281 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"A capital fellow," agreed the Squire. "Where 
is Miles ? You will have a cigar, Mr. Treherne ?" 
And he got up from the table ; the rest followed, 
and the group broke up on the lawn. 

"Remarkable man, Treherne," said the Ameri- 
can to the lawyer conversationally. 

"Remarkable is the word," assented Ashe 
rather grimly. "But I don't think I'll make any 
remark about him." 

The Squire, too impatient to wait for the yel- 
low-faced Miles, had betaken himself indoors 
for the cigars, and Barbara found herself once 
more paired off with the poet, as she floated 
along the terrace garden; but this time, sym- 
bolically enough, upon the same level of lawn. 
Mr. Treherne looked less eccentric after having 
shed his curious cloak, and seemed a quieter and 
more casual figure. 

"I didn't mean to be rude to you just now," 
she said abruptly. 

"And that's the worst of it," replied the man 
of letters, "for I'm horribly afraid I did mean 
to be rude to you. When I looked up and saw 
you up there something surged up in me that was 
in all the revolutions of history. Oh, there was 
admiration in it too ! Perhaps there was idolatry 
in all the iconoclasts." 

He seemed to have a power of reaching rather 
intimate conversation in one silent and cat-like 
bound, as he had scaled the steep road, and it 
282 



The Tale of the Peacock Trees 

made her feel him to be dangerous, and perhaps 
unscrupulous. She changed the subject sharply, 
not without a movement toward gratifying her 
own curiosity. 

"What did you mean by all that about walking 
trees ?" she asked. "Don't tell me you really 
believe in a magic tree that eats birds I" fl 

"I should probably surprise you," said Tre- 
herne gravely, "more by what I don't believe 
than by what I do." 

Then, after a pause, he made a general ges- 
ture toward the house and garden. "I'm afraid 
I don't believe in all this; for instance, in Eliza- 
bethan houses and Elizabethan families and the 
way estates have been improved, and the rest of 
it. Look at our friend the woodcutter .now." 
And he pointed to the man with the quaint black 
beard, who was still plying his ax upon the tim- 
ber below. 

"That man's family goes back for ages, and 
it was far richer and freer in what you call the 
Dark Ages than it is now. Wait till the Cornish 
peasant writes a history of Cornwall." 

"But what in the world," she demanded, "has 
this to do with whether you believe in a tree 
eating birds?" 

"Why should I confess what I believe in?" he 

said, a muffled drum of mutiny in his voice. "The 

gentry came here and took our land and took 

our labor and took our customs. And now, after 

283 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

exploitation, a viler thing, education 1 They 
must take our dreams 1" 

"Well, this dream was rather a nightmare, 
wasn't it?" asked Barbara, smiling; and the next 
moment grew quite grave, saying almost anx- 
iously: "But here's Doctor Brown back again. 
Why, he looks quite upset." 

The doctor, a black figure on the green lawn, 
was, indeed, coming toward them at a very vigor- 
ous walk. His body and gait very much younger 
than his face, which seemed prematurely lined 
as with worry; his brow was bald, and projected 
from the straight, dark hair behind it. He was 
visibly paler than when he left the lunch table. 

"I am sorry to say, Miss Vane," he said, "that 
I am the bearer of bad news to poor Martin, the 
woodman here. His daughter died half an hour 
ago." 

"Oh," cried Barbara warmly, "I am so sorry 1" 

"So am I," said the doctor, and passed on 
rather abruptly; he ran down the stone steps 
between the stone urns ; and they saw him in talk 
with the woodcutter. They could not see the 
woodcutter's face. He stood with his back to 
them, but they saw something that seemed more 
moving than any change of countenance. The 
man's hand holding the ax rose high above his 
head, and for a flash it seemed as if he would 
have cut down the doctor. But in fact he was 
not looking at the doctor. His face was set 
284 



The Tale of the Peacock Trees 

toward the cliff, where, sheer out of the dwarf 
forest, rose, gigantic and gilded by the sun, the 
trees of pride. 

The strong brown hand made a movement and 
was empty. The ax went circling swiftly through 
the air, its head showing like a silver crescent 
against the gray twilight of the trees. It did not 
reach its tall objective, but fell among the under- 
growth, shaking up a flying litter of birds. But 
in the poet's memory, full of primal things, some- 
thing seemed to say that he had seen the birds 
of some pagan augury, the ax of some pagan 
sacrifice. 

A moment after the man made a heavy move- 
ment forward, as if to recover his tool; but the 
doctor put a hand on his arm. 

"Never mind that now," they heard him say 
sadly and kindly. "The Squire will excuse you 
any more work, I know." 

Something made the girl look at Treherne. 
He stood gazing, his head a little bent, and one 
of his black elf-locks had fallen forward over 
his forehead. And again she had the sense of 
a shadow over the grass; she almost felt as if 
the grass were a host of fairies, and that the 
fairies were not her friends. 



II 

THE WAGER OF SQUIRE FANE 

¥T was more than a month before the legend 
-■* of the peacock trees was again discussed in 
the Squire's circle. It fell out one evening, when 
his eccentric taste for meals in the garden that 
gathered the company round the same table, now 
lit with a lamp and laid out for dinner in a glow- 
ing spring twilight. It was even the same com- 
pany, for in the few weeks intervening they had 
insensibly grown more and more into each other's 
lives, forming a little group like a club. The 
American aesthete was of course the most active 
agent, his resolution to pluck out the heart of 
the Cornish poet's mystery leading him again 
and again to influence his flighty host for such 
reunions. Even Mr. Ashe, the lawyer, seemed 
to have swallowed his half-humorous prejudices ; 
and the doctor, though a rather sad and silent, 
was a companionable and considerate man. 
Paynter had even read Treherne's poetry aloud, 
and he read admirably; he had also read other 
things, not aloud, grubbing up everything in the 
neighborhood, from guidebooks to epitaphs, that 
could throw a light on local antiquities. And it 
286 



The Wager of Squire Vane 

was that evening when the lamplight and the last 
daylight had kindled the colors of the wine and 
silver on the table under the tree, that he an- 
nounced a new discovery. 

"Say, Squire," he remarked, with one of his 
rare Americanisms, "about those bogey trees of 
yours; I don't believe you know half the tales 
told round here about them. It seems they have 
a way of eating things. Not that I have any 
ethical objection to eating things," he continued, 
helping himself elegantly to green cheese. u But 
I have more or less, broadly speaking, an objec- 
tion to eating people." 

"Eating people !" repeated Barbara Vane. 

"I know a globe-trotter mustn't be fastidious," 
replied Mr. Paynter. "But I repeat firmly, an 
objection to eating people. The peacock trees 
seem to have progressed since the happy days of 
innocence when they only ate peacocks. If you 
ask the people here — the fisherman who lives on 
that beach, or the man that mows this very lawn 
in front of us — they'll tell you tales taller than 
any tropical one I brought you from the Barbary 
Coast. If you ask them what happened to the 
fisherman Peters, who got drunk on All Hallows 
Eve, they'll tell you he lost his way in that 
little wood, tumbled down asleep under the 
wicked trees, and then — evaporated, vanished, 
was licked up like dew by the sun. If you ask 
them where Harry Hawke is, the widow's little 
287 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

son, they'll just tell you he's swallowed ; that he 
was dared to climb the trees and sit there all 
night, and did it. What the trees did God knows ; 
the habits of a vegetable ogre leave one a little 
vague. But they even add the agreeable detail 
that a new branch appears on the tree when some- 
body has petered out in this style." 

"What new nonsense is this ?" cried Vane. "I 
know there's some crazy yarn about the trees 
spreading fever, though every educated man 
knows why these epidemics return occasionally. 
And I know they say you can tell the noise of 
them among other trees in a gale, and I dare say 
you can. But even Cornwall isn't a lunatic 
asylum, and a tree that dines on a passing 
tourist " 

"Well, the two tales are reconcilable enough," 
put in the poet quietly. "If there were a magic 
that killed men when they came close, it's likely 
to strike them with sickness when they stand far 
off. In the old romance the dragon, that devours 
people, often blasts others with a sort of poison- 
ous breath." 

Ashe looked across at the speaker steadily, not 
to say stonily. 

"Do I understand," he inquired, "that you 
swallow the swallowing trees too?" 

Treherne's dark smile was still on the defen- 
sive ; his fencing always annoyed the other, and 
he seemed not without malice in the matter. 
288 



The Wager of Squire Vane 

"Swallowing is a metaphor," he said, "about 
me, if not about the trees. And metaphors take 
us at once into dreamland — no bad place, either. 
This garden, I think, gets more and more like a 
dream at this corner of the day and night, that 
might lead us anywhere." 

The yellow horn of the moon had appeared 
silently and as if suddenly over the black horns 
of the seaweed, seeming to announce as night 
something which till then had been evening. A 
night breeze came in between the trees and raced 
stealthily across the turf, and as they ceased 
speaking they heard, not only the seething grass, 
but the sea itself move and sound in all the cracks 
and caves round them and below them and on 
every side. They all felt the note that had been 
struck — the American as an art critic and the 
poet as a poet; and the Squire, who believed him- 
self boiling with an impatience purely rational, 
did not really understand his own impatience. 
In him, more perhaps than the others — more 
certainly than he knew himself — the sea wind 
went to the head like wine. 

"Credulity is a curious thing," went on Tre- 
herne in a low voice. "It is more negative than 
positive, and yet it is infinite. Hundreds of men 
will avoid walking under a ladder; they don't 
know where the door of the ladder wilt lead. 
They don't really think God would throw a 
thunderbolt at them for such a thing. They don't 
289 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

know what would happen, that is just the point; 
but yet they step aside as from a precipice. So 
the poor people here may or may not believe 
anything; they don't go into those trees at night." 

"I walk under a ladder whenever I can," cried 
Vane, in quite unnecessary excitement. 

"You belong to a Thirteen Club," said the 
poet. "You walk under a ladder on Friday to 
dine thirteen at a table, everybody spilling the 
salt. But even you don't go into those trees 
at night." 

Squire Vane stood up, his silver hair flaming 
in the wind. 

"I'll stop all night in your tomfool wood and 
up your tomfool trees," he said. "I'll do it for 
twopence or two thousand pounds, if anyone will 
take the bet." 

Without waiting for reply, he snatched up his 
wide white hat and settled it on with a fierce 
gesture, and had gone off in great leonine strides 
across the lawn before anyone at the table could 
move. 

The stillness was broken by Miles, the butler, 
who dropped and broke one of the plates he 
carried. He stood looking after his master with 
his long, angular chin thrust out, looking yel- 
lower where it caught the yellow light of the 
lamp below. His face was thus sharply in 
shadow, but Paynter fancied for a moment it 
was convulsed by some passion passing surprise. 
290 



The Wager of Squire Vane 

But the face was quite as usual when it turned, 
and Paynter realized that a night of fancies had 
begun, like the cross purposes of the "Mid- 
summer Night's Dream." 

The wood of the strange trees, toward which 
the Squire was walking, lay so far forward on 
the headland, which ultimately almost overhung 
the sea, that it could be approached by only one 
path, which shone clearly like a silver ribbon 
in the twilight. The ribbon ran along the edge 
of the cliff, where the single row of deformed 
trees ran beside it all the way, and eventually 
plungied into the closer mass of trees by one 
natural gateway, a mere gap in the wood, look- 
ing dark, like a lion's mouth. What became of 
the path inside could not be seen, but it doubt- 
less led round the hidden roots of the great 
central trees. The Squire was already within a 
yard or two of this dark entry when his daughter 
rose from the table and took a step or two after 
him as if to call him back. 

Treherne had also risen, and stood as if dazed 
at the effect of his idle defiance. When Barbara 
moved he seemed to recover himself, and step- 
ping after her, said something which Paynter 
did not hear. He said it casually and even dis- 
tantly enough, but it clearly suggested something 
to her mind; for, after a moment's thought, she 
nodded and walked back, not toward the table, 
but apparently toward the house. Paynter looked 
291 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

after her with a momentary curiosity, and when 
he turned again the Squire had vanished into the 
hole in the wood. 

"He's gone," said Treherne, with a clang of 
finality in his tones, like the slamming of a door. 

"Well, suppose he has?" cried the lawyer, 
roused at the voice. "The Squire can go into his 
own wood, I suppose ! What the devil's all the 
fuss about, Mr. Paynter? Don't tell me you 
think there's any harm in that plantation of 
sticks." 

"No, I don't," said Paynter, throwing one leg 
over another and lighting a cigar. "But I shall 
stop here till he comes out." 

"Very well," said Ashe shortly, "I'll stop with 
you, if only to see the end of this farce." 

The doctor said nothing, but he also kept his 
seat and accepted one of the American's cigars. 
If Treherne had been attending to the matter 
he might have noted, with his sardonic supersti- 
tion, a curious fact — that, while all three men 
were tacitly condemning themselves to stay out 
all night if necessary, all, by one blank omission 
or oblivion, assumed that it was impossible to 
follow their host into the wood just in front of 
them. But Treherne, though still in the garden, 
had wandered away from the garden table, and 
was pacing along the single line of trees against 
the dark sea. They had in their regular inter- 
stices, showing the sea as through a series of 
292 



The Wager of Squire Vane 

windows, something of the look of the ghost or 
skeleton of a cloister, and he, having thrown his 
coat once more over his neck, like a cape, passed 
to and fro like the ghost of some not very sane 
monk. 

All these men, whether skeptics or mystics, 
looked back for the rest of their lives on that 
night as on something unnatural. They sat still 
or started up abruptly, and paced the great 
garden in long detours, so that it seemed that no 
three of them were together at a time, and none 
knew who would be his companion; yet their 
rambling remained within the same dim and mazy 
space. They fell into snatches of uneasy slum- 
ber; these were very brief, and yet they felt as 
if the whole sitting, strolling, or occasional speak- 
ing had been parts of a single dream. 

Paynter woke once, and found Ashe sitting 
opposite him at a table otherwise empty; his face 
dark in shadow and his cigar-end like the red eye 
of a Cyclops. Until the lawyer spoke, in his 
steady voice, Paynter was positively afraid of 
him. He answered at random and nodded again ; 
when he again woke the lawyer was gone, and 
what was opposite him was the bald, pale brow 
of the doctor; there seemed suddenly something 
ominous in the familiar fact that he wore spec- 
tacles. And yet the vanishing Ashe had only 
vanished a few yards away, for he turned at that 
instant and strolled back to the table. With a 
293 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

jerk Paynter realized that his nightmare was but 
a trick of sleep or sleeplessness, and spoke in his 
natural voice, but rather loud. 

"So you've joined us again; where's Tre- 
herne? ,, 

"Oh, still revolving, I suppose, like a polar 
bear under those trees on the cliff," replied Ashe, 
motioning with his cigar, "looking at what an 
older (and you will forgive me for thinking a 
somewhat better) poet called the wine-dark sea. 
It really has a sort of purple shade; look at it." 

Paynter looked; he saw the wine-dark sea and 
the fantastic trees that fringed it, but he did not 
see the poet; the cloister was already empty of 
its restless monk. 

"Gone somewhere else," he said, with futility 
far from characteristic. "He'll be back here 
presently. This is an interesting vigil, but a vigil 
loses some of its intensity when you can't keep 
awake. Ah! Here's Treherne; so we're all 
mustered, as the politician said when Mr. Colman 
came late for dinner. No, the doctor's off again ; 
how restless we all are !" The poet had drawn 
near, his feet were falling soft on the grass, and 
was gazing at them with a singular attentiveness. 

"It will soon be over," he said. 

"What?" snapped Ashe very abruptly. 

"The night, of course," replied Treherne in a 
motionless manner. "The. darkest hour has 
passed." 

294 



The Wager of Squire Vane 

"Didn't some other minor poet remark," in- 
quired Paynter flippantly, "that the darkest hour 

before the dawn ? My God, what was that ? 

It was like a scream." 

"It was a scream," replied the poet. "The 
scream of a peacock." 

Ashe stood up, his strong pale face against 
his red hair, and said furiously: "What the devil 
do you mean?" 

"Oh, perfectly natural causes, as Dr. Brown 
would say/' replied Treherne. "Didn't the Squire 
tell us the trees had a shrill note of their own 
when the wind blew? The wind's beating up 
again from the sea ; I shouldn't wonder if there 
was a storm before dawn." 

Dawn indeed came gradually with a growing 
noise of wind, and the purple sea began to boil 
about the dark volcanic cliffs. The first change 
in the sky showed itself only in Jthe shapes of the 
wood and the single stems growing darker but 
clearer; and above the gray clump, against a 
glimpse of growing light, tRey saw aloft the evil 
trinity of the trees. In their long lines there 
seemed to Paynter something faintly serpentine 
and even spiral. He cpuid almost fancy he saw 
them slowly revolving a« in some cyclic dance, but 
this, again, was but a last delusion of dreamland, 
for a few seconds later he was again asleep. In 
dreams he toiled through a tangle of inconclusive 
tales, each filled with the same stress and noise 
20 295 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

of sea and sea wind; and above and outside all 
other voices, the wailing of the Trees of Pride. 

When he woke it was broad day, and a bloom 
of early light lay on wood and garden and on 
fields and farms for miles away. The compara- 
tive common sense that daylight brings even to 
the sleepless drew him alertly to his feet, and 
showed him all his companions standing about 
the lawn in similar attitudes of expectancy. There 
was no need to ask what they were expecting. 
They were waiting to hear the nocturnal experi- 
ences, comic or commonplace or whatever they 
might prove to be, of that eccentric friend, whose 
experiment (whether from some subconscious 
fear or some fancy of honor) they had not ven- 
tured to interrupt. Hour followed hour, and 
still nothing stirred in the wood save an occa- 
sional bird. The Squire, like most men of his 
type, was an early riser, and it was not likely that 
he would in this case sleep late; it was much 
more likely, in the excitement in which he had 
left them, that he would not sleep at all. Yet 
it was clear that he must be sleeping, perhaps 
by some reaction from a strain. By the time 
the sun was high in heaven Ashe the lawyer, 
turning to the others, spoke abruptly and to the 
point. 

"Shall we go into the wood now?" asked 
Paynter, and almost seemed to hesitate. 

"I will go in," said Treherne simply. Then, 
296 



The Wager of Squire Vane 

drawing up his dark head in answer to their 
glances, he added: 

"No, do not trouble yourselves. It is never 
the believer who is afraid." 

For the second time they saw a man mount the 
white curling path and disappear into the gray 
tangled wood, but this time they did not have to 
wait long to see him again. 

A few minutes later he reappeared in the 
woodland gateway, and came slowly toward them 
across the grass. He stopped before the doctor, 
who stood nearest, and said something. It was 
repeated to the others, and went round the ring 
with low cries of incredulity. The others plunged 
into the wood and returned wildly, and were seen 
speaking to others again who gathered from the 
house; the wild wireless telegraphy which is the 
education of countryside communities spread it 
farther and farther before the fact itself was 
fully realized; and before nightfall a quarter of 
the county knew that Squire Vane had vanished 
like a burst bubble. 

Widely as the wild story was repeated, and 
patiently as it was pondered, it was long before 
there was even the beginning of a sequel to it. 
In the interval Paynter had politely removed 
himself from the house of mourning, or rather 
of questioning, but only so far as the village inn; 
for Barbara Vane was glad of the traveler's 
experience and sympathy, in addition to that 
297 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

afforded her by the lawyer and doctor as old 
friends of the family. Even Treherne was not 
discouraged from his occasional visits with a 
view to helping the hunt for the lost man. The 
five held many counsels round the old garden 
table, at which the unhappy master of the house 
had dined for the last time; and Barbara wore 
her old mask of stone, if it was now a more 
tragic mask. She had shown no passion after the 
first morning of discovery, when she had broken 
forth once, speaking strangely enough in the view 
of some of her hearers. 

She had come slowly out of the house, to which 
her own or some one else's wisdom had relegated 
her during the night of the wager; and it was 
clear from her face that somebody had told her 
the truth; Miles, the butler, stood on the steps 
behind her; and it was probably he. 

"Do not be much distressed, Miss Vane," said 
Doctor Brown, in a low and rather uncertain 
voice. "The search in the wood has hardly be- 
gun. I am convinced we shall find — something 
quite simple." 

"The doctor is right," said Ashe, in his firm 
tones ; "I myself " 

"The doctor is not right," said the girl, turn- 
ing a white face on the speaker, "I know better. 
The poet is right. The poet is always right. 
Oh, he has been here from the beginning of the 
world, and seen wonders and terrors that are all 
298 



The Wager of Squire Vane 

round our path, and only hiding behind a bush 
or a stone. You and your doctoring and your 
science — why, you have only been here for a few 
fumbling generations ; and you can't conquer even 
your own enemies of the flesh. Oh, forgive me, 
Doctor, I know you do splendidly; but the fever 
comes in the village, and the people die and die 
for all that. And now it's my poor father. God 
help us all! The only thing left is to believe in 
God ; for we can't help believing in devils." And 
she left them, still walking quite slowly, but in 
such a fashion that no one could go after her. 

The spring had already begun to ripen into 
summer, and spread a green tent from the tree 
over the garden table, when the American visitor, 
sitting there with his two professional com- 
panions, broke the silence by saying what had 
long been in his mind. 

"Well," he said, "I suppose whatever we may 
think it wise to say, we have all begun to think 
of a possible conclusion. It can't be put very 
delicately anyhow; but, after all, there's a very 
necessary business side to it. What are we going 
to do about poor Vane's affairs, apart from him- 
self? I suppose you know," he added, in a low 
voice to the lawyer, "whether he made a will?" 

"He left everything to his daughter uncon- 
ditionally," replied Ashe. "But nothing can be 
done with it. There's no proof whatever that 
he's dead." 

299 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"No legal proof?" remarked Paynter dryly. 

A wrinkle of irritation had appeared in the 
big bald brow of Doctor Brown; and he made an 
impatient movement. 

"Of course he's dead," he said. "What's the 
sense of all this legal fuss? We were watching 
this side of the wood, weren't we? A man 
couldn't have flown off those high cliffs over the 
sea; he could only have fallen off. What else 
can he be but dead?" 

"I speak as a lawyer," returned Ashe, raising 
his eyebrows. "We can't presume his death, or 
have an inquest or anything till we find the poor 
fellow's body, or some remains that may reason- 
ably be presumed to be his body." 

"I see," observed Paynter quietly. "You speak 
as a lawyer; but I don't think it's very hard to 
guess what you think as a man." 

"I own I'd rather be a man than a lawyer," 
said the doctor, rather roughly. "I'd no notion 
the law was such an ass. What's the good of 
keeping the poor girl out of her property, and 
the estate all going to pieces ? Well, I must be 
off, or my patients will be going to pieces too." 

And with a curt salutation he pursued his path 
down to the village. 

"That man does his duty, if anybody does," 
remarked Paynter. "We must pardon his — shall 
I say manners or manner?" 

"Oh, I bear him no malice," replied Ashe 
300 



The Wager of Squire Vane 

good-humoredly, "But I'm glad he's gone, be- 
cause — well, because I don't want him to know 
how jolly right he is." And he leaned back in his 
chair and stared up at the roof of green leaves. 

"You are sure," said Paynter, looking at the 
table, "that Squire Vane is dead?" 

"More than that," said Ashe, still staring at 
the leaves. "I'm sure of how he died." 

"Ah!" said the American, with an intake of 
breath, and they remained for a moment, one 
gazing at the tree and the other at the table. 

"Sure is perhaps too strong a word," con- 
tinued Ashe. "But my conviction will want 
some shaking. I don't envy the counsel for the 
defense." 

"The counsel for the defense," repeated Payn- 
ter, and looked up quickly at his companion. He 
was struck again by the man's Napoleonic chin 
and jaw, as he had been when they first talked 
of the legend of St. Securis. 

"Then," he began, "you don't think the 
trees " 

"The trees be damned!" snorted the lawyer. 
"The tree had two legs on that evening. What 
our friend the poet," he added, with a sneer, 
"would call a walking tree. Apropos of our 
friend the poet, you seemed surprised that night 
to find he was not walking poetically by the sea 
all the time, and I fear I affected to share your 
ignorance. I was not so sure then as I am now." 
301 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"Sure of what?" demanded the other. 

"To begin with," said Ashe, "I'm sure our 
friend the poet followed Vane into the wood that 
night, for I saw him coming out again." 

Paynter leaned forward, suddenly pale with 
excitement, and struck the wooden table so that 
it rattled. 

"Mr. Ashe, you're wrong," he cried. "You're 
a wonderful man and you're wrong. You've 
probably got tons of true convincing evidence, 
and you're wrong. I know this poet ; I know him 
as a poet; and that's just what you don't. I 
know you think he gave you crooked answers, 
and seemed to be all smiles and black looks at 
once ; but you don't understand the type. I know 
now why you don't understand the Irish. Some- 
times you think it's soft, and sometimes sly, and 
sometimes murderous, and sometimes uncivil- 
ized; and all the time it's only civilized; quiver- 
ing with the sensitive irony of understanding all 
that you don't understand." 

"Well," said Ashe shortly, "we'll see who's 
right." 

"We will," cried Cyprian, and rose suddenly 
from the table. All the drooping of the aesthete 
had dropped from him; his Yankee accent rose 
high, like a horn of defiance, and there was noth- 
ing about him but the New World. 

"I guess I will look into this myself," he said, 
stretching his long limbs like an athlete. "I 
302 



The Wager of Squire Vane 

search that little wood of yours to-morrow. It's 
a bit late, or I'd do it now." 

"The wood has been searched," said the 
lawyer, rising also. 

"Yes," drawled the American. "It's been 
searched by servants, policemen, local policeman, 
and quite a lot of people ; and do you know I have 
a notion that nobody round here is likely to have 
searched it at all." 

"And. what are you going to do with it?" 
asked Ashe. 

"What I bet they haven't done," replied 
Cyprian. "I'm going to climb a tree." 

And with a quaint air of renewed cheerfulness 
he took himself away at a rapid walk to 
his inn. 

He appeared at daybreak next morning out- 
side the Vane Arms with all the air of one setting 
out on his travels in distant lands. He had a 
field glass slung over his shoulder, and a very 
large sheath knife buckled by a belt round his 
waist, and carried with the cool bravado of the 
bowie knife of a cowboy. But in spite of this 
backwoodsman's simplicity, or perhaps rather be- 
cause of it, he eyed with rising relish the pic- 
turesque plan and sky line of the antiquated vil- 
lage, and especially the wooden square of the 
old inn sign that hung over his head; a shield, of 
which the charges seemed to him a mere medley 
of blue dolphins, gold crosses, and scarlet birds. 
303 4 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

The colors and cubic corners of that painted 
board pleased him like a play or a puppet show. 
He stood staring and straddling for some mo- 
ments on the cobbles of the little market place; 
then he gave a short laugh and began to mount 
the steep streets toward the high park and garden 
beyond. From the high lawn, above the tree 
and table, he could see on one side the land 
stretch away past the house into a great rolling 
plain, which under the clear edges of the dawn 
seemed dotted with picturesque details. The 
woods here and there on the plain looked like 
green hedgehogs, as grotesque as the incongru- 
ous beasts found unaccountably walking in the 
blank spaces of mediaeval maps. The land, cut 
up into colored fields, recalled the heraldry of 
the signboard; this also was at once ancient and 
gay. On the other side the ground to seaward 
swept down and then up again to the famous or 
infamous wood; the square of strange trees lay 
silently tilted on the slope, also suggesting, if 
not a map, or least a bird's-eye view. Only the 
triple centerpiece of the peacock trees rose clear 
of the sky line; and these stood up in tranquil 
sunlight as things almost classical, a triangular 
temple of the winds. They seemed pagan in a 
newer and more placid sense; and he felt a newer 
and more boyish curiosity and courage for the 
consulting of the oracle. In all his wanderings 
he had never walked so lightly, for the con- 
304 



The Wager of Squire Vane 

noisseur of sensations had found something to 
do at last; he was fighting for a friend. 

He was brought to a standstill once, however, 
and that at the very gateway of the garden of 
the trees of knowledge. Just outside the black 
entry of the wood, now curtained with greener 
and larger leafage, he came on a solitary figure. 
It was Martin, the woodcutter, wading in the 
bracken and looking about him in rather a lost 
fashion. The man seemed to be talking to himself. 

"I dropped it here," he was saying. "But I'll 
never work with it again I reckon. Doctor 
wouldn't let me pick it up, when I wanted to pick 
it up; and now they've got it, like they've got 
the Squire. Wood and iron, wood and iron, but 
eating it's nothing to them." 

"Come !" said Paynter kindly, remembering 
the man's domestic trouble. "Miss Vane will 
see you have anything you want, I know. And 
look here, don't brood on all those stories 
about the Squire. Is there the slightest trace of 
the trees having anything to do with it? Is 
there even this extra branch the idiots talked 
about?" 

There had been growing on Paynter the sus- 
picion that the man before him was not perfectly 
sane; yet he was much more startled by the 
sudden and cold sanity that looked for an instant 
out of the woodman's eyes, as he answered in 
his ordinary manner. 

305 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"Well, sir, did you count th'e branches 
before ?" 

Then he seemed to relapse; and Paynter left 
him wandering and wavering in the undergrowth ; 
and entered the wood like one across whose 
sunny path a shadow has fallen for an instant. 

Diving under the wood, he was soon threading 
a leafy path which, even under that summer sun, 
shone only with an emerald twilight, as if it 
were on the floor of the sea. It wound about 
more shakily than he had supposed, as if re- 
solved to approach the central trees as if they 
were the heart of the maze at Hampton Court. 
They were the heart of the maze for him, any- 
how; he sought them as straight as a crooked 
road would carry him; and, turning a final cor- 
ner, he beheld, for the first time, the foundations 
of those towers of vegetation he had as yet only 
seen from above, as they stood waist-high in the 
woodland. He found the suspicion correct which 
supposed the tree branched from one great root, 
like a candelabrum ; the fork, though stained and 
slimy with green fungoids, was quite near the 
ground, and offered a first foothold. He put his 
foot in it, and without a flash of hesitation went 
aloft, like Jack climbing the Bean stalk. 

Above him the green roof of leaves and boughs 

seemed sealed like a firmament of foliage; but, 

by bending and breaking the branches to right 

and left he slowly forced a passage upward; 

306 



The Wager of Squire Vane 

and had at last, and suddenly, the sensation of 
coming out on the top of the world. He felt as 
if he had never been in the open air before. 
Sea and land lay in a circle below and about him, 
as he sat astride a branch of the tall tree ; he was 
almost surprised to see the sun still comparatively 
low in the sky ; as if he were looking over a land 
of eternal sunrise. 

"Silent upon a peak in Darien," he remarked, 
in a needlessly loud and cheerful voice; and 
though the claim, thus expressed, was illogical, 
it was not inappropriate. He did feel as if he 
were a primitive adventurer just come to the New 
World, instead of a modern traveler just come 
from it. 

"I wonder," he proceeded, "whether I am 
really the first that ever burst into this silent 
tree. It looks like it. Those " 

He stopped and sat on his branch quite motion- 
less, but his eyes were turned on a branch a little 
below it, and they were brilliant with a vigilance, 
like those of a man watching a snake. 

What he was looking at might, at first sight, 
have been a large white fungus spreading on 
the smooth and monstrous trunk; but it was not. 
Leaning down dangerously from his perch, he 
detached it from the twig on which it had caught, 
and then sat holding it in his hand and gazing 
at it. It was Squire Vane's white Panama hat, 
but there was no Squire Vane under it. Paynter 
307 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

felt a nameless relief in the very fact that there 
was not. 

There in the clear sunlight and sea air, for an 
instant, all the tropical terrors of his own idle 
tale surrounded and suffocated him. It seemed 
indeed some demon tree of the swamps; a vege- 
table serpent that fed on men. Even the hideous 
farce in the fancy of digesting a whole man with 
the exception of his hat, seemed only to simplify 
the nightmare. And he found himself gazing 
dully at one leaf of the tree, which happened 
to be turned toward him, so that the odd mark- 
ings, which had partly made the legend, really 
looked a little like the eye in a peacock's feather. 
It was as if the sleeping tree had opened one eye 
upon him. 

With a sharp effort he steadied himself in 
mind and posture on the bough ; his reason re- 
turned, and he began to descend with the hat in 
his teeth. When he was back in the under- 
world of the wood, he studied the hat again and 
with closer attention. In one place in the crown 
there was a hole or rent, which certainly had 
not been there when it had last lain on the table 
under the garden tree. He sat down, lit a 
cigarette, and reflected for a long time. 

A wood, even a small wood, is not an easy 
thing to search minutely; but he provided him- 
self with some practical tests in the matter. In 
one sense the very density of the thicket was a 
308 



The Wager of Squire Vane 

help; he could at least see where anyone had 
strayed from the path, by broken and trampled 
growths of every kind. After many hours' in- 
dustry, he had made a sort of new map of the 
place; and had decided beyond doubt that some 
person or persons had so strayed, for some pur- 
pose, in several defined directions. There was 
a way burst through the bushes, making a short 
cut across a loop of the wandering path; there 
was another forking out from it as an alterna- 
tive way into the central space. But there was 
one especially which was unique, and which 
seemed to him, the more he studied it, to point 
to some essential of the mystery. 

One of these beaten and broken tracks went 
from the space under the peacock trees out- 
fward into the wood for about twenty yards and 
then stopped. Beyond that point not a twig was 
broken nor a leaf disturbed. It had no exit, 
but he could not believe that it had no goal. After 
some further reflection, he knelt down and began 
to cut away grass and clay with his knife, and 
was surprised at the ease with which they de- 
tached themselves. In a few moments a whole 
section of the soil lifted like a lid; it was a round 
lid and presented a quaint appearance, like a 
flat cap with green feathers. For though the 
disc itself was made of wood, there was a layer 
of earth on it with the live grass still growing 
there. And the removal of the round lid re- 
309 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

vealed a round hole, black as night and seemingly 
bottomless. Paynter understood it instantly. It 
was rather near the sea for a well to be sunk, 
but the traveler had known wells sunk even 
nearer. He rose to his feet with the great knife 
in his hand, a frown on his face, and his doubts 
resolved. He no longer shrank from naming 
what he knew. This was not the first corpse 
that had been thrown down a well; here, without 
stone or epitaph, was the grave of Squire Vane. 
In a flash all the mythological follies about saints 
and peacocks were forgotten ; he was knocked on 
the head, as with a stone club, by the human 
common sense of crime. 

Cyprian Paynter stood long by the well in 
the wood, walked round it in meditation, ex- 
amined its rim and the ring of grass about it, 
searched the surrounding soil thoroughly, came 
back and stood beside the well once more. His 
researches and reflections had been so long that 
he had not realized that the day had passed and 
that the wood and the world round it were 
beginning already to be steeped in the enrich- 
ment of evening. The day had been radiantly 
calm; the sea seemed to be as still as the well, 
and the well was as still as a mirror. And then, 
quite without warning, the mirror moved of itself 
like a living thing. 

In the well, in the wood, the water leapt and 
gurgled, with a grotesque noise like something 
310 



The Wager of Squire Vane 

swallowing, and then settled again with a second 
sound. Cyprian could not see into the well 
clearly, for the opening, from where he stood, 
was an ellipse, a mere slit, and half masked by 
thistles and rank grass like a green beard. For 
where he stood now was three yards away from 
the well, and he had not yet himself realized 
that he had sprung back all that distance from 
the brink when the water spoke. 

'21 



Ill 

THE MYSTERY OF THE WELL 

/^■YPRIAN PAYNTER did not know what he 
^-^ expected to see rise out of the well — the 
corpse of the murdered man or merely the spirit 
of the fountain. Anyhow, neither of them rose 
out of it, and he recognized after an instant 
that this was, after all, perhaps the more natural 
course of things. Once more he pulled himself 
together, walked to the edge of the well and 
looked down. He saw, as before, a dim glimmer 
of water, at that depth no brighter than ink; 
he fancied he still heard a faint convulsion and 
murmur, but it gradually subsided to an utter 
stillness. Short of suicidally diving in, there was 
nothing to be done. He realized that, with all 
his equipment, he had not even brought anything 
like a rope or basket, and at length decided to 
return for them. As he retraced his steps to the 
entrance, he recurred to, and took stock of, his 
more solid discoveries. Somebody had gone into 
the wood, killed the Squire and thrown him down 
the well, but he did not admit for a moment that 
it was his friend the poet; but if the latter had 
actually been seen coming out of the wood the 
312 



The Mystery of the Well 

matter was serious. As he walked the rapidly 
darkening twilight was cloven with red gleams, 
that made him almost fancy for a moment that 
some fantastic criminal had set fire to the tiny 
forest as he fled. A second glance showed him 
nothing but one of those red sunsets in which 
such serene days sometimes close. 

As he came out of the gloomy gate of trees 
into the full glow he saw a dark figure standing 
quite still in the dim bracken, on the spot where 
he had left the woodcutter. It was not the 
woodcutter. 

It was topped by a tall black hat of a funeral 
type, and the whole figure stood so black against 
the field of crimson fire that edged the sky line 
that he could not for an instant understand or 
recall it. When he did, it was with an odd 
change in the whole channel of his thoughts. 

"Doctor Brown!" he cried. "Why, what are 
you doing up here?" 

"I have been talking to poor Martin,'* an- 
swered the doctor, and made a rather awkward 
movement with his hand toward the road down 
to the village. Following the gesture, Paynter 
dimly saw another dark figure walking down in 
the blood-red distance. He also saw that the 
hand motioning was really black, and not merely 
in shadow; and, coming nearer, found the 
doctor's dress was really funereal, down to the 
detail of the dark gloves. It gave the American 
3i3 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

a small but queer shock, as if this were actually 
an undertaker come up to bury the corpse that 
could not be found. 

"Poor Martin's been looking for his chopper," 
observed Doctor Brown, u but I told him I'd 
picked it up and kept it for him. Between our- 
selves, I hardly think he's fit to be trusted with 
it." Then, seeing the glance at his black garb, he 
added: "I've just been to a funeral. Did you 
know there's been another loss? Poor Jake 
the fisherman's wife, down in the cottage on 
the shore, you know. This infernal fever, of 
course." 

As they both turned, facing the red evening 
light, Paynter instinctively made a closer study, 
not merely of the doctor's clothes, but of the 
doctor. Dr. Burton Brown was a tall, alert 
man, neatly dressed, who would otherwise have 
had an almost military air but for his spectacles 
and an almost painful intellectualism in his lean 
brown face and bald brow. The contrast was 
clinched by the fact that, while his face was of 
the ascetic type generally conceived as clean- 
shaven, he had a strip of dark mustache cut too 
short for him to bite, and yet a mouth that 
often moved as if trying to bite it. He might 
have been a very intelligent army surgeon, but 
he had more the look of an engineer or one of 
those services that combine a military silence with 
a more than military science. Paynter had al- 
314 



The Mystery of the Well 

ways respected something ruggedly reliable about 
the man, and after a little hesitation he told him 
all the discoveries. 

The doctor took the hat of the dead Squire 
in his hand, and examined it with frowning care. 
He put one finger through the hole in the crown 
and moved it meditatively. And Paynter realized 
how fanciful his own fatigue must have made 
him ; for so silly a thing as the black finger wag- 
gling through the rent in that frayed white relic 
unreasonably displeased him. The doctor soon 
made the same discovery with professional acute- 
ness, and applied it much further. For when 
Paynter began to tell him of the moving water 
in the well he looked at him a moment through 
his spectacles, and then said: 

"Did you have any lunch?" 

Paynter for the first time realized that he 
had, as a fact, worked and thought furiously all 
day without food. 

"Please don't fancy I mean you had too much 
lunch," said the medical man, with mournful 
humor. "On the contrary, I mean you had too 
little. I think you are a bit knocked out, and 
your nerves exaggerate things. Anyhow, let me 
advise you not to do any more to-night. There's 
nothing to be done without ropes or some sort 
of fishing tackle, if with that; but I think I can 
get you some of the sort of grappling irons the 
fishermen use for dragging. Poor Jake's got 
♦ 3i5 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

some, I know; I'll bring them round to you to- 
morrow morning. The fact is, I'm staying there 
for a bit as he's rather in a state, and I think it's 
better for me to ask for the things and not a 
stranger. I am sure you'll understand." 

Paynter understood sufficiently to assent, and 
hardly knew why he stood vacantly watching the 
doctor make his way down the steep road to the 
shore and the fisher's cottage. Then he threw 
off thoughts he had not examined, or even con- 
sciously entertained, and walked slowly and 
rather heavily back to the Vane Arms. 

The doctor, still funereal in manner, though no 
longer so in costume, appeared punctually under 
the wooden sign next morning, laden with what 
he had promised; an apparatus of hooks and a 
hanging net for hoisting up anything sunk to a 
reasonable depth. He was about to proceed on 
his professional round, and said nothing further 
to deter the American from proceeding on his 
own very unprofessional experiment as a detec- 
tive. That buoyant amateur had indeed re- 
covered most, if not all, of yesterday's buoyancy, 
was now well fitted to pass any medical examina- 
tion, and returned with all his own energy to the 
scene of yesterday's labors. 

It may well have brightened and made breezier 

his second day's toil that he had not only the 

sunlight and the bird's singing in the little wood, 

to say nothing of a more scientific apparatus to 

3i6 



The Mystery of the Well 

work with, but also human companionship, and 
that of the most intelligent type. After leaving 
the doctor and before leaving the village he had 
bethought himself of seeking the little court or 
square where stood the quiet brown house of 
Andrew Ashe, solicitor, and the operations of 
dragging were worked in double harness. Two 
heads were peering over the well in the wood: 
one yellow-haired, lean and eager; the other red- 
haired, heavy and pondering; and if it be true 
that two heads are better than one, it is truer 
that four hands are better than two. In any 
case, their united and repeated efforts bore fruit 
at last, if anything so hard and meager and for- 
lorn can be called a fruit. It weighed loosely in 
the net as it was lifted, and rolled out on the 
grassy edge of the well ; it was a bone. 

Ashe picked it up and stood with it in his hand, 
frowning. 

"We want Doctor Brown here," he said. 
"This may be the bone of some animal. Any 
dog or sheep might fall into a hidden well." 
Then he broke off, for his companion was already 
detaching a second bone from the net. 

After another half hour's effort Paynter had 
occasion to remark, "It must have been rather a 
large dog." There were already a heap of such 
white fragments at his feet. 

"I have seen nothing yet," said Ashe, speaking 
more plainly. "That is certainly a human bone." 
3i7 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"I fancy this must be a human bone," said 
the American. 

And he turned away a little as he handed the 
other a skull. 

There was no doubt of what sort of skull; 
there was the one unique curve that holds the 
mystery of reason, and underneath it the two 
black holes that had held human eyes. But 
just above that on the left was another and 
smaller black hole, which was not an eye. 

Then the lawyer said, with something like an 
effort : "We may admit it is a man without ad- 
mitting it is — any particular man. There may be 
something, after all, in that yarn about the 
drunkard; he may have tumbled into the well. 
Under certain conditions, after certain natural 
processes, I fancy, the bones might be stripped 
in this way, even without the skill of any assassin. 
We want the doctor again." 

Then he added suddenly, and the very sound 
of his voice suggested that he hardly believed his 
own words. 

"Haven't you got poor Vane's hat there ?" 

He took it from the silent American's hand, 
and with a sort of hurry fitted it on the bony 
head. 

"Don't!" said the other involuntarily. 

The lawyer had put his finger, as the doctor 
had done, through the hole in the hat, and it lay 
exactly over the hole in the skull. 
318 



The Mystery of the Well, 

"I have the better right to shrink," he said 
steadily, but in a vibrant voice. "I think I am the 
older friend." 

Paynter nodded without speech, accepting the 
final identification. The last doubt, or hope, had 
departed, and he turned to the dragging appa- 
ratus, and did not speak till he had made his 
last find. 

The singing of the birds seemed to grow louder 
about them, and the dance of the green summer 
leaves was repeated beyond in the dance of the 
green summer sea. Only the great roots of the 
mysterious trees could be seen, the rest being far 
aloft, and all round it was a wood of little, lively 
and happy things. They might have been two 
innocent naturalists, or even two children fish- 
ing for eels or tittlebats on that summer holiday 
when Paynter pulled up something that weighed 
in the net more heavily than any bone. It nearly 
broke the meshes, and fell against a mossy stone 
with a clang. 

"Truth lies at the bottom of a well," cried 
the American, with lift in his voice. "The wood- 
man's ax." 

It lay, indeed, flat and gleaming in the grasses 
by the well in the wood, just as it had lain in the 
thicket where the woodman threw it in the begin- 
ning of all these things. But on one corner of 
the bright blade was a dull brown stain. 

"I see," said Ashe, "the woodman's ax, and 
3i9 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

therefore the woodman. Your deductions are 
rapid." 

"My deductions are reasonable," said Paynter. 
"Look here, Mr. Ashe; I know what you're 
thinking. I know you distrust Treherne; but 
I'm sure you will be just for all that. To begin 
with, surely the first assumption is that the wood- 
man's ax is used by the woodman. What have 
you to say to it?" 

"I say 'No' to it," replied the lawyer. "The 
last weapon a woodman would use would be a 
woodman's ax; that is if he is a sane man." 

"He isn't," said Paynter quietly; "you said 
you wanted the doctor's opinion just now. The 
doctor's opinion on this point is the same as my 
own. We both found him meandering about out- 
side there; it's obvious this business has gone to 
his head, at any rate. If the murderer were a 
man of business like yourself, what you say might 
be sound. But this murderer is a mystic. He 
was driven by some fanatical fad about the trees. 
It's quite likely he thought there was something 
solemn and sacrificial about the ax, and would 
have liked to cut off Vane's head before a crowd, 
like Charles I's. He's looking for the ax still, 
and probably thinks it a holy relic." 

"For which reason," said Ashe, smiling, "he 
instantly chucked it down a well." 

Paynter laughed. 

"You have me there certainly," he said. "But 
320 



The Mystery of the Well 

I think you have something else in your mind. 
You'll say, I suppose, that we were all watching 
the wood ; but were we ? Frankly, I could almost 
fancy the peacock trees did strike me with a sort 
of sickness — a sleeping sickness." 

"Well," admitted Ashe, "you have me there 
too. I'm afraid I couldn't swear I was awake 
all the time; but I don't put it down to magic 
trees — only to a private hobby of going to bed 
at night. But look here, Mr. Paynter; there's 
another and better argument against any out- 
sider from the village or countryside having com- 
mitted the crime. Granted he might have slipped 
past us somehow, and gone for the Squire. But 
why should he go for him in the wood? How 
did he know he was in the wood ? You remember 
how suddenly the poor old boy bolted into it, 
on what a momentary impulse. It's the last 
place where one would normally look for such a 
man in the middle of the night. No, it's an ugly 
thing to say, but we, the group round that garden 
table, were the only people who knew. Which 
brings me back to the one point in your remarks 
which I happen to think perfectly true." 

"What was that?" inquired the other. 

u That the murderer was a mystic," said Ashe. 
"But a cleverer mystic than poor old Martin." 

Paynter made a murmur of protest, and then 
fell silent. 

"Let us talk plainly," resumed the lawyer. 
321 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"Treherne had all those mad motives you your- 
self admit against the woodcutter. He had the 
knowledge of Vane's whereabouts, which nobody 
can possibly attribute to the woodcutter. But 
he had much more. Who taunted and goaded 
the Squire to go into the wood at all? Treherne. 
Who practically prophesied, like an infernal 
quack astrologer, that something would happen 
to him if he did go into the wood? Treherne. 
Who was, for some reason, no matter what, 
obviously burning with rage and restlessness all 
that night, kicking his legs impatiently to and fro 
on the cliff, and breaking out with wild words 
about it being all over soon? Treherne. And 
on top of all this, when I walked closer to the 
wood, whom did I see slip out of it swiftly and 
silently like a shadow, but turning his face once 
to the moon? On my oath and on my honor — 
Treherne." 

"It is awful," said Paynter, like a man stunned. 
"What you say is simply awful." 

"Yes," said Ashe seriously, "very awful, but 
very simple. Treherne knew where the ax was 
originally thrown. I saw him, on that day he 
lunched here first, watching it like a wolf, while 
Miss Vane was talking to him. On that dread- 
ful night he could easily have picked it up as he 
went into the wood. He knew about the well, 
no doubt; who was so likely to know any old 
traditions about the peacock trees? He hid the 
322 



The Mystery of the Well 

hat in the trees, where perhaps he hoped (though 
the point is unimportant) that nobody would 
dare to look. Anyhow, he hid it, simply because 
it was the one thing that would not sink in the 
well. Mr. Paynter, do you think I would say 
this of any man in mere mean dislike? Could 
any man say it of any man unless the case was 
complete, as this is complete?" 

"It is complete," said Paynter, very pale. "I 
have nothing left against it but a faint, irrational 
feeling; a feeling that, somehow or other, if poor 
Vane could stand alive before us at this moment 
he might tell some other and even more incred- 
ible tale." 

Ashe made a mournful gesture. 

"Can these dry bones live?" he said. 

"Lord Thou knowest," answered the other 
mechanically. "Even these dry bones " 

And he stopped suddenly with his mouth open, 
a blinding light of wonder in his pale eyes. 

"See here," he said hoarsely and hastily. "You 
have said the word. What does it mean? What 
can it mean? Dry? Why are these bones dry?" 

The lawyer started and stared down at the 
heap. 

"Your case complete!" cried Paynter, in 
mounting excitement. "Where is the water in 
the well? The water I saw leap like a flame? 
Why did it leap? Where is it gone to? Com- 
plete ! We are buried under riddles." 
323 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

Ashe stooped, picked up a bone and looked 
at it. 

"You are right," he said, in a low and shaken 
voice : "this bone is as dry — as a bone." 

"Yes, I am right," replied Cyprian. "And 
your mystic is still as mysterious — as a mystic." 

There was a long silence. Ashe laid down the 
bone, picked up the ax and studied it more closely. 
Beyond the dull stain at the corner of the steel 
there was nothing unusual about it save a broad 
white rag wrapped round the handle, perhaps to 
give a better grip. The lawyer thought it worth 
noting, however, that the rag was certainly 
newer and cleaner than the chopper. But both 
were quite dry. 

"Mr. Paynter," he said at last, "I admit you 
have scored, in the spirit if not in the letter. In 
strict logic, this greater puzzle is not a reply to 
my case. If this ax has not been dipped in water, 
it has been dipped in blood; and the water jump- 
ing out of the well is not an explanation of the 
poet jumping out of the wood. But I admit that 
morally and practically it does make a vital differ- 
ence. We are not faced with a colossal contra- 
diction, and we don't know how far it extends. 
The body might have been broken up or boiled 
down to its bones by the murderer, though it may 
be hard to connect it with the conditions of the 
murder. It might conceivably have been so re- 
duced by some property in the water and soil, 
324 



The Mystery of the Well 

for decomposition varies vastly with these things. 
I should not dismiss my strong prima facie case 
against the likely person because of these diffi- 
culties. But here we have something entirely 
different. That the bones themselves should re- 
main dry in a well full of water, or a well that 
yesterday was full of water — that brings us to 
the edge of something beyond which we can make 
no guess. There is a new factor, enormous and 
quite unknown. While we can't fit together such 
prodigious facts, we can't fit together a case 
against Treherne or against anybody. No ; there 
is only one thing to be done now. Since we can't 
accuse Treherne, we must appeal to him. We 
must put the case against him frankly before 
him, and trust he has an explanation — and will 
give it. I suggest we go back and do it now." 

Paynter, beginning to follow, hesitated a mo- 
ment, and then said : "Forgive me for a kind of 
liberty; as you say, you are an older friend of 
the family. I entirely agree with your sugges- 
tion, but before you act on your present sus- 
picions, do you know, I think Miss Vane ought to 
be warned a little? I rather fear all this will 
be a new shock to her." 

"Very well," said Ashe, after looking at him 
steadily for an instant. "Let us go across to 
her first." 

From the opening of the wood they could see 
Barbara Vane writing at the garden table, which 
325 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

was littered with correspondence, and the butler 
with his yellow face waiting behind her chair. 
As the lengths of grass lessened between them, 
and the little group at the table grew larger and 
clearer in the sunlight, Paynter had a painful 
sense of being part of an embassy of doom. It 
sharpened when the girl looked up from the 
table and smiled on seeing them. 

"I should like to speak to you rather par- 
ticularly if I may," said the lawyer, with a touch 
of authority in his respect ; and when the butler 
was dismissed he laid open the whole matter 
before her, speaking sympathetically, but leaving 
out nothing, from the strange escape of the poet 
from the wood to the last detail of the dry bones 
out of the well. No fault could be found with 
any one of his tones or phrases, and yet Cyprian, 
tingling in every nerve with the fine delicacy of 
his nation about the other sex, felt as if she were 
faced with an inquisitor. He stood about un- 
easily, watched the few colored clouds in the 
clear sky and the bright birds darting about the 
wood, and he heartily wished himself up the 
tree again. 

Soon, however, the way the girl took it began 
to move him to perplexity rather than pity. It 
was like nothing he had expected, and yet he 
could not name the shade of difference. The 
final identification of her father's skull, by the 
hole in the hat, turned her a little pale, but left 
326 



The Mystery of the Well 

her composed; this was, perhaps, explicable, since 
she had from the first taken the pessimistic view. 
But during the rest of the tale there rested on 
her broad brows under her copper coils of hair, 
a brooding spirit that was itself a mystery. He 
could only tell himself that she was less merely 
receptive, either firmly or weakly, than he would 
have expected. It was as if she revolved, not 
their problem, but her own. She was silent a 
long time, and said at last: 

"Thank you, Mr. Ashe, I am really very grate- 
ful for this. After all, it brings things to the 
point where they must have come sooner or 
later." She looked dreamily at the wood and 
sea, and went on: "I've not only had myself to 
consider, you see; but if you're really thinking 
that, it's time I spoke out, without asking any- 
body. You say, as if it were something very 
dreadful, 'Mr. Treherne was in the wood that 
night.' Well, it's not quite so dreadful to me, 
you see, because I know he was. In fact, we 
were there together." 

"Together !" repeated the lawyer. 

"We were together," she said quietly, "because 
we had a right to be together." 

"Do you mean," stammered Ashe, surprised 
out of himself, "that you were engaged?" 

"No, no," she said. "We were married." 

Then, amid a startled silence, she added, as a 
kind of afterthought: 
22 327 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"In fact, we are still." 

Strong as was his composure, the lawyer sat 
back in his chair with a sort of solid stupefaction 
at which Paynter could not help smiling. 

"You will ask me, of course," went on Barbara 
in the same measured manner, "why we should 
be married secretly, so that even my poor father 
did not know. Well, I answer you quite frankly 
to begin with ; because, if he had known, he would 
certainly have cut me off with a shilling. He did 
not like my husband, and I rather fancy you 
do not like him either. And when I tell you this, 
I know perfectly well what you will say — the 
usual adventurer getting hold of the usual heiress. 
It is quite reasonable, and, as it happens, it is 
quite wrong. If I had deceived my father for 
the sake of the money, or even for the sake of a 
man, I should be a little ashamed to talk to you 
about it. And I think you can see that I am 
not ashamed." 

"Yes," said the American, with a grave inclina- 
tion, "yes, I can see that." 

She looked at him thoughtfully for a moment, 
as if seeking words for an obscure matter, and 
then said: 

"Dp you remember, Mr. Paynter, that day 
you first lunched here and told us about the 
African trees? Well, it was my birthday; I 
mean my first birthday. I was born then, or 
woke up or something. I had walked in this 
328 



The Mystery of the Well 

garden like a somnambulist in the sun. I think 
there are many such somnambulists in our set and 
our society; stunned with health, drugged with 
good manners, fitting their surroundings too well 
to be alive. Well, I came alive somehow; and 
you know how deep in us are the things we first 
realize when we were babies and began to take 
notice. I began to take notice. One of the first 
things I noticed was your own story, Mr. Payn- 
ter. I feel as if I heard of St. Securis as chil- 
dren hear of Santa Claus, and as if that big 
tree were a bogey I still believed in. For I do 
still believe in such things, or rather I believe in 
them more and more; I feel certain my poor 
father drove on the rocks by disbelieving, and 
you are all racing to ruin after him. That is 
why I do honestly want the estate, and that is 
why I am not ashamed of wanting it. I am 
perfectly certain, Mr. Paynter, that nobody can 
save this perishing land and this perishing people 
but those who understand. I mean who under- 
stand a thousand little signs and guides in the 
very soil and lie of the land, and traces that are 
almost trampled out. My husband understands, 
and I have begun to understand ; my father would 
never have understood. There are powers, there 
is the spirit of a place, there are presences that 
are not to be put by. Oh, don't fancy I am senti- 
mental and hanker after the good old days. The 
old days were not all good; that is just the point, 
329 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

and we must understand enough to know the 
good from the evil. We must understand enough 
to save the traces of a saint or a sacred tradition, 
or, where a wicked god has been worshiped, to 
destroy his altar and to cut down his grove." 

"His grove," said Paynter automatically, and 
looked toward the little wood, where the sun- 
bright birds were flying. 

"Mrs. Treherne," said Ashe, with a formid- 
able quietness, "I am not so unsympathetic with 
all this as you may perhaps suppose. I will not 
even say it is all moonshine, for it is something 
better. It is, if I may say so, honeymoonshine. 
I will never deny the saying that it makes the 
world go round, if it makes people's heads go 
round too. But there are other sentiments, 
madam, and other duties. I need not tell you 
your father was a good man, and that what has 
befallen him would be pitiable, even as the fate 
of the wicked. This is a horrible thing, and it is 
chiefly among horrors that we must keep our 
common sense. There are reasons for every- 
thing, and when my old friend lies butchered do 
not come to me with even the most beautiful 
fairy tales about a saint and his enchanted grove." 

"Well, and you !" she cried, and rose radiantly 
and swiftly. "With what kind of fairy tales do 
you come to me? In what enchanted groves are 
you walking? You come and tell me that Mr. 
Paynter found a well where the water danced 
330 



The Mystery of the Well 

and then disappeared; but of course miracles 
are all moonshine! You tell me you yourself 
fished bones from under the same water, and 
every bone was as dry as a biscuit; but for 
Heaven's sake let us say nothing that makes 
anybody's head go round! Really, Mr. Ashe, 
you must try to preserve your common sense!" 

She was smiling, but with blazing eyes; and 
Ashe got to his feet with an involuntary laugh 
of surrender. 

"Well, we must be going," he said. "May I 
say that a tribute is really due to your new trans- 
cendental training? If I may say so, I always 
knew you had brains; and you've been learning 
to use them." 

The two amateur detectives went back to the 
wood for the moment, that Ashe might consider 
the removal of the unhappy Squire's remains. 
As he pointed out, it was now legally possible 
to have an inquest, and, even at that early stage 
of investigations, he was in favor of having it 
at once. 

"I shall be the coroner," he said, "and I think 
it will be a case of 'some person or persons un- 
known.' Don't be surprised; it is often done to 
give the guilty a false security. This is not the 
first time the police have found it convenient to 
have the inquest first and the inquiry afterward." 

But Paynter had paid little attention to the 
point; for his great gift of enthusiasm, long 
33i 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

wasted on arts and affectations, was lifted to 
inspiration by the romance of real life into which 
he had just walked. He was really a great critic ; 
he had a genius for admiration, and his admira- 
tion varied fittingly with everything he admired. 

"A splendid girl and a splendid story," he 
cried. "I feel as if I were in love again myself, 
not so much with her as with Eve or Helen of 
Troy, or some such tower of beauty in the morn- 
ing of the world. Don't you love all heroic 
things, that gravity and great candor, and the 
way she took one step from a sort of throne to 
stand in a wilderness with a vagabond? Oh, 
believe me, it is she who is the poet; she has the 
higher reason, and honor and valor are at rest 
in her soul." 

"In short, she is uncommonly pretty," replied 
Ashe, with some cynicism. "I knew a murderess 
rather well who was very much like her, and had 
just that colored hair." 

"You talk as if a murderer could be caught red- 
haired instead of red-handed," retorted Paynter. 
"Why, at this very minute, you could be caught 
red-haired yourself. Are you a murderer, by 
any chance?" 

Ashe looked up quickly, and then smiled. 

"I'm afraid I'm a connoisseur in murderers, 
as you are in poets," he answered, "and I assure 
you they are of all colors in hair as well as tem- 
perament. I suppose it's inhumane, but mine is 
332 



The Mystery of the Well 

a monstrously interesting trade, even in a little 
place like this. As for that girl, of course I've 
known her all her life, and — But — but that is just 
the question. Have I known her all her life? 
Have I known her at all? Was she even there 
to be known? You admire her for telling the 
truth; and so she did, by God, when she said 
that some people wake up late, who have never 
lived before. Do we know what they might do 
— we, who have only seen them asleep?" 

"Great heavens !" cried Paynter. "You don't 
dare suggest that she " 

"No, I don't," said the lawyer, with compo- 
sure, "but there are other reasons. ... I don't 
suggest anything fully, till we've had our inter- 
view with this poet of yours. I think I know 
where to find him." 

They found him, in fact, before they expected 
him, sitting on the bench outside the Vane Arms, 
drinking a mug of cider and waiting for the 
return of his American friend; so it was not 
difficult to open conversation with him. Nor did 
he in any way avoid the subject of the tragedy; 
and the lawyer, seating himself also on the long 
bench that fronted the little market place, was 
soon putting the last developments as lucidly as 
he had put them to Barbara. 

"Well," said Treherne at last, leaning back 
and frowning at the signboard, with the colored 
birds and dolphins, just about his head; "sup- 
333 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

pose somebody did kill the Squire. He'd killed 
a good many people with his hygiene and his 
enlightened landlordism." 

Paynter was considerably uneasy at this alarm- 
ing opening; but the poet went on quite coolly, 
with his hands in his pockets and his feet thrust 
out into the street. 

"When a man has the power of a Sultan in 
Turkey, and uses it with the ideas of a spinster 
in Tooting, I often wonder that nobody puts a 
knife in him. I wish there were more sympathy 
for murderers, somehow. I'm very sorry the 
poor old fellow's gone myself; but you gentle- 
men always seem to forget there are any other 
people in the world. He's all right; he was a 
good fellow, and his soul, I fancy, has gone to 
the happiest paradise of all." 

The anxious American could read nothing of 
the effect of this in the dark Napoleonic face 
of the lawyer, who merely said: "What do you 
mean?" 

"The fool's paradise," said Treherne, and 
drained his pot of cider. 

The lawyer rose. He did not look at Tre- 
herne, or speak to him; but looked and spoke 
straight across him to the American, who found 
the utterance not a little unexpected. 

"Mr. Paynter," said Ashe, "you thought it 
rather morbid of me to collect murderers; but 
it's fortunate for your own view of the case that 
334 



The Mystery of the Well 

I do. It may surprise you to know that Mr. Tre- 
herne has now, in my eyes, entirely cleared him- 
self of suspicion. I have been intimate with 
several assassins, as I remarked; but there's one 
thing none of them ever did. I never knew a 
murderer to talk about the murder, and then at 
once deny it and defend it. No, if a man is con- 
cealing his crime, why should he go out of his 
way to apologize for it?" 

"Well," said Paynter, with his ready apprecia- 
tion, "I always said you were a remarkable man; 
and that's certainly a remarkable idea." 

"Do I understand," asked the poet, kicking 
his heels on the cobbles, u that both you gentle- 
men have been kindly directing me toward the 
gallows?" 

"No," said Paynter thoughtfully. "I never 
thought you guilty ; and even supposing I had, if 
you understand me, I should never have thought 
it quite so guilty to be guilty. It would not have 
been for money or any mean thing, but for some- 
thing a little wilder and worthier of a man of 
genius. After all, I suppose, the poet has pas- 
sions like great unearthly appetites; and the 
world has always judged more gently of his sins. 
But now that Mr. Ashe admits your innocence, 
I can honestly say I have always affirmed it." 

The poet rose also. "Well, I am innocent, 
oddly enough," he said. "I think I can make a 
guess about your vanishing well, but of the death 
335 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

and dry bones I know no more than the dead — 
if so much. And, by the way, my dear Paynter" 
— and he turned two bright eyes on the art critic 
— "I will excuse you from excusing me for all the 
things I haven't done; and you, I hope, will 
excuse me if I differ from you altogether about 
the morality of poets. As you suggest, it is a 
fashionable view, but I think it is a fallacy. No 
man has less right to be lawless than a man of 
imagination. For he has spiritual adventures, 
and can take his holidays when he likes. I could 
picture the poor Squire carried off to elfland 
whenever I wanted him carried off, and that 
wood needed no crime to make it wicked for me. 
That red sunset the other night was all that a 
murder would have been to many men. No, Mr. 
Ashe; show, when next you sit in judgment, a 
little mercy to some wretched man who drinks 
and robs because he must drink beer to taste it, 
and take it to drink it. Have compassion on the 
next batch of poor thieves, who have to hold 
things in order to have them. But if ever you 
find me stealing one small farthing, when I can 
shut my eyes and see the city of El Dorado, then" 
— and he lifted his head like a falcon — "show me 
no mercy, for I shall deserve none." 

"Well," remarked Ashe, after a pause, "I 

must go and fix things up for the inquest. Mr. 

Treherne, your attitude is singularly interesting; 

I really almost wish I could add you to my collec- 

336 



The Mystery of the Well 

tion of murderers. They are a varied and ex- 
traordinary set." 

"Has it ever occurred to you," asked Paynter, 
"that perhaps the men who have never com- 
mitted murder are a varied and very extraor- 
dinary set ? Perhaps every plain man's life holds 
the real mystery, the secret of sins avoided." 

"Possibly," replied Ashe. "It would be a long 
business to stop the next man in the street and 
ask him what crimes he never committed and 
why not. And I happen to be busy, so you'll 
excuse me." 

"What," asked the American, when he and 
the poet were alone, "is this guess of yours about 
the vanishing water?" 

"Well, I'm not sure I'll tell you yet," an- 
swered Treherne, something of the old mischief 
coming back into his dark eyes. "But I'll tell 
you something else, which may be connected with 
it; something I couldn't tell until my wife had 
told you about our meeting in the wood." His 
face had grown grave again, and he resumed 
after a pause: 

"When my wife started to follow her father 
I advised her to go back first to the house, to 
leave it by another door and to meet me in the 
wood in half an hour. We often made these 
assignations, of course, and generally thought 
them great fun, but this time the question was 
serious, and I didn't want the wrong thing done 
337 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

in a hurry. It was a question whether anything 
could be done to undo an experiment we both 
vaguely felt to be dangerous, and she especially 
thought, after reflection, that interference would 
make things worse. She thought the old sports- 
man, having been dared to do something, would 
certainly not be dissuaded by the very man who 
had dared him or by a woman whom he regarded 
as a child. She left me at last in a sort of 
despair, but I lingered with a last hope of doing 
something, and drew doubtfully near to the heart 
of the wood; and there, instead of the silence I 
expected, I heard a voice. It seemed as if the 
Squire must be talking to himself, and I had the 
unpleasant fancy that he had already lost his 
reason in that wood of witchcraft. But I soon 
found that if he was talking he was talking with 
two voices. Other fancies attacked me, as that 
the other was the voice of the tree or the voices 
of the three trees talking together, and with no 
man near. But it was not the voice of the tree. 
The next moment I knew the voice, for I had 
heard it twenty times across the table. It was 
the voice of that doctor of yours ; I heard it as 
certainly as you hear my voice now." 

After a moment's silence, he resumed: "I left 
the wood, I hardly knew why, and with wild and 
bewildered feelings; and as I came out into the 
faint moonshine I saw that old lawyer standing 
quietly, but staring at me like an owl. At least, 
338 



The Mystery of the Well 

the light touched his red hair with fire, but his 
square old face was in shadow. But I knew, if 
I could have read it, that it was the face of a 
hanging judge." 

He threw himself on the bench again, smiled 
a little, and added: "Only, like a good many 
hanging judges, I fancy, he was waiting patiently 
to hang the wrong man." 

"And the right man " said Paynter me- 
chanically. Treherne shrugged his shoulders, 
sprawling on the ale bench, and played with his 
empty pot 



IV 

THE CHASE AFTER THE TRUTH 

COME time after the inquest, which had ended 
^ in the inconclusive verdict which Mr. An- 
drew Ashe had himself predicted and achieved, 
Paynter was again sitting on the bench outside 
the village inn, having on the little table in front 
of it a tall glass of light ale, which he enjoyed 
much more as local color than as liquor. He 
had but one companion on the bench, and that a 
new one, for the little market place was empty 
at that hour, and he had lately, for the rest, 
been much alone. He was not unhappy, for he 
resembled his great countryman, Walt Whitman, 
in carrying a kind of universe with him like an 
open umbrella; but he was not only alone, but 
lonely. For Ashe had gone abruptly up to Lon- 
don, and since his return had been occupied 
obscurely with legal matters, doubtless bearing 
on the murder. And Treherne had long since 
taken up his position openly, at the great house, 
as the husband of the great lady, and he and 
she were occupied with sweeping reforms on the 
estate. The lady especially, being of the sort 
whose very dreams "drive at practice/' was 

340 



The Chase After the Truth 

landscape gardening as with the gestures of a 
giantess. It was natural, therefore, that so 
sociable a spirit as Paynter should fall into 
speech with the one other stranger who happened 
to be staying at the inn, evidently a bird of pas- 
sage like himself. This man, who was smoking 
a pipe on the bench beside him, with his knap- 
sack before him on the table, was an artist come 
to sketch on that romantic coast; a tall man in a 
velvet jacket, with a shock of tow-colored hair, a 
long fair beard, but eyes of dark brown, the 
effect of which contrast reminded Paynter 
vaguely, he hardly knew why, of a Russian. The 
stranger carried his knapsack into many pic- 
turesque corners; he obtained permission to set 
up his easel in that high garden where the late 
Squire had held his al fresco banquets. But 
Paynter had never had an opportunity of judg- 
ing of the artist's work, nor did he find it easy to 
get the artist even to talk of his art. Cyprian 
himself was always ready to talk of any art, and 
he talked of it excellently, but with little response. 
He gave his own reasons for preferring the 
Cubists to the cult of Picasso, but his new friend 
seemed to have but a faint interest in either. He 
insinuated that perhaps the Neo-Primitives were 
after all only thinning their line, while the true 
Primitives were rather tightening it; but the 
stranger seemed to receive the insinuation with- 
out any marked reaction of feeling. When 
34i 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

Paynter had even gone back as far into the past 
asl the Post-Impressionists to find a common 
ground, and not found it, other memories began 
to creep back into his mind. He was just re- 
flecting, rather darkly, that after all the tale 
of the peacock trees needed a mysterious stranger 
to round it off, and this man had much the air of 
being one, when the mysterious stranger himself 
said suddenly : 

"Well, I think Fd better show you the work 
I'm doing down here." 

He had his knapsack before him on the table, 
and he smiled rather grimly as he began to un- 
strap it. Paynter looked on with polite expres- 
sions of interest, but was considerably surprised 
when the artist unpacked and placed on the table, 
not any recognizable works of art, even of the 
most Cubist description, but (first) a quire of 
foolscap closely written with notes in black and 
red ink, and (second) , to the American's extreme 
amazement, the old woodman's ax with the linen 
wrapper, which he had himself found in the well 
long ago. 

"Sorry to give you a start, sir," said the Rus- 
sian artist, with a marked London accent. "But 
I'd better explain straight off that I'm a police- 
man." 

"You don't look it," said Paynter. 

"I'm not supposed to," replied the other. 
"Mr. Ashe brought me down here from the 
342 



The Chase After the Truth 

Yard to investigate ; but he told me to report to 
you when I'd got anything to go on. Would 
you like to go into the matter now? 

"When I took this matter up," explained the 
detective, "I did it at Mr. Ashe's request, and 
largely, of course, on Mr. Ashe's lines. Mr. 
Ashe is a great criminal lawyer; with a beautiful 
brain, sir, as full as the Newgate Calendar. I 
took, as a working notion, his view that only you 
five gentlemen round the table in the Squire's 
garden were acquainted with the Squire's move- 
ments. But you gentlemen, if I may say so, have 
a way of forgetting certain other things and 
other people which we are rather taught to look 
for first. And as I followed Mr. Ashe's in- 
quiries through the stages you know already, 
through certain suspicions I needn't discuss be- 
cause they've been dropped, I found the thing 
shaping after all toward something, in the end, 
which I think we should have considered at the 
beginning. Now, to begin with, it is not true 
that there were five men round the table. There 



were six." 



The creepy conditions of that garden vigil 
vaguely returned upon Paynter; and he thought 
of a ghost, or something more nameless than a 
ghost. But the deliberate speech of the detec- 
tive soon enlightened him. 

u There were six men and five gentlemen, if 
you like to put it so," he proceeded. "That man 
23 343 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

Miles, the butler, saw the Squire vanish as plainly 
as you did; and I soon found that Miles was a 
man worthy of a good deal of attention." 

A light of understanding dawned on Paynter's 
face. "So that was it, was it?" he muttered. 
"Does all our mythological mystery end with a 
policeman collaring a butler ? Well, I agree with 
you he is far from an ordinary butler, even to 
look at; and the fault in imagination is mine. 
Like many faults in imagination, it was simply 
snobbishness." 

"We don't go quite so fast as that," observed 
the officer, in an impassive manner. "I only said 
I found the inquiry pointing to Miles ; and that 
he was well worthy of attention. He was much 
more in the old Squire's confidence than many 
people supposed; and when I cross-examined him 
he told me a good deal that was worth knowing. 
I've got it all down in these notes here ; but at the 
moment I'll only trouble you with one detail of 
it. One night this butler was just outside the 
Squire's dining-room door, when he heard the 
noise of a violent quarrel. The Squire was a 
violent gentleman, from time to time; but the 
curious thing about this scene was that the other 
gentleman was the more violent of the two. 
Miles heard him say repeatedly that the Squire 
was a public nuisance, and that his death would 
be a good riddance for everybody. I only stop 
now to tell you that the other gentleman was 
344 



The Chase After the Truth 

Dr. Burton Brown, the medical man of this 
village. 

"The next examination I made was that of 
Martin, the woodcutter. Upon one point at least 
his evidence is quite clear, and is, as you will 
see, largely confirmed by other witnesses. He 
says first that the doctor prevented him from 
recovering his ax, and this is corroborated by 
Mr. and Mrs. Treherne. But he says further 
that the doctor admitted having the thing him- 
self; and this again finds support in other evi- 
dence by the gardener, who saw the doctor, some 
time afterward, come by himself and pick up 
the chopper. Martin says that Doctor Brown 
repeatedly refused to give it up, alleging some 
fanciful excuse every time. And, finally, Mr. 
Paynter, we will hear the evidence of the ax 
itself." 

He laid the woodman's tool on the table in 
front of him, and began to rip up and unwrap 
the curious linen covering round the handle. 

"You will admit this is an odd bandage," he 
said. "And that's just the odd thing about it, 
that it really is a bandage. This white stuff is 
the sort of lint they use in hospitals, cut into 
strips like this. But most doctors keep some; 
and I have the evidence of Jake the fisherman, 
with whom Doctor Brown lived for some time, 
that the doctor had this useful habit. And, last," 
he added, flattening out a corner of the rag on 
345 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

the table, "isn't it odd that it should be marked 
T.B.B.?" 

The American gazed at the rudely inked 
initials, but hardly saw them. What he saw, as 
in a mirror in his darkened memory, was the 
black figure with the black gloves against the 
blood-red sunset, as he had seen it when he came 
out of the wood, and which had always haunted 
him, he knew not why. 

"Of course, I see what you mean," he said, 
"and it's very painful for me, for I knew and 
respected the man. But surely, also, it's very 
far from explaining everything. If he is a mur- 
derer, is he a magician? Why did the well water 
all evaporate in a night, and leave the dead man's 
bones dry as dust? That's not a common opera- 
tion in the hospitals, is it?" 

"As to the water, we do know the explana- 
tion," said the detective. "I didn't tumble to it 
at first myself, being a Cockney; but a little talk 
with Jake and the other fisherman about the old 
smuggling days put me straight about that. But 
I admit the dried remains still stump us all. All 
the same " 

A shadow fell across the table, and his talk 
was sharply cut short. Ashe was standing under 
the painted sign, buttoned up grimly in black, 
and with the face of the hanging judge, of which 
the poet had spoken, plain this time in the broad 
sunlight. Behind him stood two big men in 
346 



The Chase After the Truth 

plain clothes, very still; but Paynter knew in- 
stantly who they were. 

u We must move at once," said the lawyer. 
"Dr. Burton Brown is leaving the village." 

The tall detective sprang to his feet, and 
Paynter instinctively imitated him. 

u He has gone up to the Trehernes possibly 
to say good-by," went on Ashe rapidly. "I'm 
sorry, but we must arrest him in the garden there, 
if necessary. I've kept the lady out of the way, 
I think. But you" — addressing the factitious 
landscape painter — "must go up at once and rig 
up that easel of yours near the table and be ready. 
We will follow quietly, and come up behind the 
tree. We must be careful, for it's clear he's got 
wind of us, or he wouldn't be doing a bolt." 

"I don't like this job," remarked Paynter, as 
they mounted toward the park and garden, the 
detective darting on ahead. 

"Do you suppose I do?" asked Ashe; and, 
indeed, his strong, heavy face looked so lined and 
old that the red hair seemed unnatural, like a 
red wig. "I've known him longer than you, 
though perhaps I've suspected him longer as 
well." 

When they topped the slope of the garden 
the detective had already erected his easel, 
though a strong breeze blowing toward the sea 
rattled and flapped his apparatus and blew about 
his fair (and false) beard in the wind. Little 
347 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

clouds curled like feathers, were scudding sea- 
ward across the many-colored landscape, which 
the American art critic had once surveyed on a 
happier morning; but it is doubtful if the land- 
scape painter paid much attention to it. Tre- 
herne was dimly discernible in the doorway of 
what was now his house; he would come no 
nearer, for he hated such a public duty more 
bitterly than the rest. The others posted them- 
selves a little way behind the tree. Between the 
lines of these masked batteries the black figure 
of the doctor could be seen coming across the 
green lawn, traveling straight, as a bullet, as he 
had done when he brought the bad news to the 
woodcutter. To-day he was smiling, under the 
dark mustache that was cut short of the upper 
lip, though they fancied him a little pale, and 
he seemed to pause a moment and peer through 
his spectacles at the artist. 

The artist turned from his easel with a natural 
movement, and then in a flash had captured the 
doctor by the coat collar. 

"I arrest you " he began; but Doctor 

Brown plucked himself free with startling promp- 
titude, took a flying leap at the other, tore off his 
sham beard, tossing it into the air like one of the 
wild wisps of the cloud; then, with one wild kick, 
sent the easel flying topsy-turvy, and fled like a 
hare for the shore. 

Even at that dazzling instant Paynter felt that 
348 



The Chase After the Truth 

this wild reception was a novelty and almost an 
anticlimax; but he had no time for analysis when 
he and the whole pack had to follow in the hunt; 
even Treherne bringing up the rear with a re- 
newed curiosity and energy. 

The fugitive collided with one of the police- 
men who ran to head him off, sending him sprawl- 
ing down the slope; indeed, the fugitive seemed 
inspired with the strength of a wild ape. He 
cleared at a bound the rampart of flowers, over 
which Barbara had once leaned to look at her 
future lover, and tumbled with blinding speed 
down the steep path up which that troubadour had 
climbed. Racing with the rushing wind they all 
streamed across the garden after him, down the 
path, and finally on to the seashore by the fisher's 
cot, and the pierced crags and caverns the Ameri- 
can had admired when he first landed. The 
runaway did not, however, make for the house 
he had long inhabited, but rather for the pier, 
as if with a mind to seize the boat or to swim. 
Only when he reached the other end of the small 
stone jetty did he turn, and show them the pale 
face with the spectacles ; and they saw that it was 
still smiling. 

"I'm rather glad of this," said Treherne, with 
a great sigh. 'The man is mad." 

Nevertheless, the naturalness of the doctor's 
voice, when he spoke, startled them as much as a 
shriek. 

349 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

"Gentleman," he said, "I won't protract your 
painful duties by asking you what you want; but 
I will ask at once for a small favor, which will 
not prejudice those duties in any way. I came 
down here rather in a hurry perhaps; but the 
truth is I thought I was late for an appointment." 
He looked dispassionately at his watch. "I find 
there is still some fifteen minutes. Will you wait 
with me here for that short time ; after which I 
am quite at your service." 

There was a bewildered silence, and then 
Paynter said: "For my part, I feel as if it would 
really be better to humor him." 

"Ashe," said the doctor, with a new note of 
seriousness," for old friendship, grant me this 
last little indulgence. It will make no difference ; 
I have no arms or means of escape; you can 
search me if you like. I know you think you are 
doing right, and I also know you will do it as 
fairly as you can. Well, after all, you get friends 
to help you; look at our friend with the beard, 
or the remains of the beard. Why shouldn't I 
have a friend to help me? A man will be here 
in a few minutes in whom I put some confidence ; 
a great authority on these things. Why not, if 
only out of curiosity, wait and hear his view of 
the case?" 

"This seems all moonshine," said Ashe, "but 
on the chance of any light on things — well, from 
the moon — I don't mind waiting a quarter of an 
35o 



The Chase After the Truth 

hour. Who is this friend, I wonder; some ama- 
teur detective, I suppose." 

"I thank you," said the doctor, with some 
dignity. "I think you will trust him when you 
have talked to him a little. And now," he added 
with an air of amiably relaxing into lighter mat- 
ters, "let us talk about the murder. 

"This case," he said in a detached manner, 
"will be found, I suspect, to be rather unique. 
There is a very clear and conclusive combination 
of evidence against Thomas Burton Brown, 
otherwise myself. But there is one peculiarity 
about that evidence, which you may perhaps have 
noticed. It all comes ultimately from one source, 
and that a rather unusual one. Thus, the wood- 
cutter says I had his ax, but what makes him 
think so? He says / told him I had his ax; that 
I told him so again and again. Once more, Mr. 
Paynter here pulled up the ax out of the well; 
but how? I think Mr. Paynter will testify that 
/ brought him the tackle for fishing it up, tackle 
he might never have got in any other way. Curi- 
ous, is it not? Again, the ax is found to be 
wrapped in lint that was in my possession, accord- 
ing to the fisherman. But who showed the lint 
to the fisherman? I did. Who marked it with 
large letters as mine? I did. Who wrapped it 
round the handle at all? I did. Rather a singu- 
lar thing to do ; has anyone ever explained it?" 

His words, which had been heard at first with 
35i 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

painful coldness were beginning to hold more and 
more of their attention. 

"Then there is the well itself," proceeded the 
doctor, with the same air of insane calm. "I 
suppose some of you by this time know at least 
the secret of that. The secret of the well is 
simply that it is not a well. It is purposely 
shaped at the top so as to look like one, but it 
is really a sort of chimney opening from the roof 
of one of those caves over there; a cave that 
runs inland just under the wood, and indeed is 
connected by tunnels and secret passages with 
other openings miles and miles away. It is a sort 
of labyrinth used by smugglers and such people 
for ages past. This doubtless explains many of 
those disappearances we have heard of. But to 
return to the well that is not a well, in case some 
of you still don't know about it. When the sea 
rises very high at certain seasons it fills the low 
cave, and even rises a little way in the funnel 
above, making it look more like a well than ever. 
The noise Mr. Paynter heard was the natural 
eddy of a breaker from outside, and the whole 
experience depended on something so elementary 
as the tide." 

The American was startled into ordinary 
speech. 

"The tide!" he said. "And I never even 
thought of it! I guess that comes of living by 
the Mediterranean." 

352 



The Chase After the Truth 

"The next step will be obvious enough," con- 
tinued the speaker, "to a logical mind like that 
of Mr. Ashe, for instance. If it be asked why, 
even so, the tide did not wash away the Squire's 
remains that had lain there since his disappear- 
ance, there is only one possible answer. The 
remains had not lain there since his disappear- 
ance. The remains had been deliberately put 
there in the cavern under the wood, and put there 
after Mr. Paynter had made his first investiga- 
tion. They were put there, in short, after the 
sea had retreated and the cave was again dry. 
That is why they were dry; of course, much drier 
than the cave. Who put them there, I wonder?" 

He was gazing gravely through his spectacles 
over their heads into vacancy, and suddenly he 
smiled. 

"Ah," he cried, jumping up from the rock 
with alacrity, "here is the amateur detective at 
last!" 

Ashe turned his head over his shoulder, and 
for a few seconds did not move it again, but 
stood as if with a stiff neck. In the cliff just 
behind him was one of the clefts or cracks into 
which it was everywhere cloven. Advancing 
from this into the sunshine, as if from a narrow 
door, was Squire Vane, with a broad smile on 
his face. 

The wind was tearing from the top of the 
high cliff out to sea, passing over their heads, and 
353 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

they had the sensation that everything was pass- 
ing over their heads and out of their control. 
Paynter felt as if his head had been blown off 
like a hat. But none of this gale of unreason 
seemed to stir a hair on the white head of the 
Squire, whose bearing, though self-important and 
bordering on a swagger, seemed if anything more 
comfortable than in the old days. His red face 
was, however, burnt like a sailor's, and his light 
clothes had a foreign look. 

"Well, gentlemen," he said genially, "so this 
is the end of the legend of the peacock trees. 
Sorry to spoil that delightful traveler's tale, Mr. 
Paynter, but the joke couldn't be kept up forever. 
Sorry to put a stop to your best poem, Mr. Tre- 
herne, but I thought all this poetry had been 
going a little too far. So Doctor Brown and I 
fixed up a little surprise for you. And I must 
say, without vanity, that you look a little 
surprised." 

"What on earth," asked Ashe at last, "is the 
meaning of all this?" 

The Squire laughed pleasantly, and even a 
little apologetically. 

"I'm afraid I'm fond of practical jokes," he 
said, "and this I suppose is my last grand prac- 
tical joke. But I want you to understand that 
the joke is really practical. I flatter myself it 
will be of very practical use to the cause of 
progress and common sense, and the killing of 
354 



The Chase After the Truth 

such superstitions everywhere. The best part 
of it, I admit, was the doctor's idea and not 
mine. All I meant to do was to pass a night in 
the trees, and then turn up as fresh as paint to 
tell you what fools you were. But Doctor 
Brown here followed me into the wood, and we 
had a little talk which rather changed my plans. 
He told me that a disappearance for a few hours 
like that would never knock the nonsense on 
the head; most people would never even hear 
of it, and those who did would say that one night 
proved nothing. He showed me a much better 
way, which had been tried in several cases where 
bogus miracles had been shown up. The thing 
to do was to get the thing really believed every- 
where as a miracle, and then shown up every- 
where as a sham miracle. I can't put all the 
arguments as well as he did, but that was the 
notion, I think." 

The doctor nodded, gazing silently at the 
sand; and the Squire resumed with undiminished 
relish. 

"We agreed that I should drop through the 
hole into the cave, and make my way through the 
tunnels, where I often used to play as a boy, 
to the railway station a few miles from here, and 
there take a train for London. It was necessary 
for the joke, of course, that I should disappear 
without being traced; so I made my way to a 
port, and put in a very pleasant month or two 
355 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

round my old haunts in Cyprus and the Mediter- 
ranean. There's no more to say of that part of 
the business, except that I arranged to be back 
by a particular time; and here I am. But I've 
heard enough of what's gone on round here to 
be satisfied that I've done the trick. Every- 
body in Cornwall and most people in South Eng- 
land have heard of the Vanishing Squire; and 
thousands of noodles have been nodding their 
heads over crystals and tarot cards at this mar- 
velous proof of an unseen world. I reckon the 
Reappearing Squire will scatter their cards and 
smash their crystals, so that such rubbish won't 
appear again in the twentieth century. I'll make 
the peacock trees the laughing stock of all Europe 
and America." 

"Well," said the lawyer, who was the first to 
rearrange his wits, "I'm sure we're all only too 
delighted to see you again, Squire; and I quite 
understand your explanation and your own very 
natural motives in the matter. But I'm afraid 
I haven't got the hang of everything yet. 
Granted that you wanted to vanish, was it neces- 
sary to put bogus bones in the cave, so as nearly 
to put a halter round the neck of Doctor Brown? 
And who put it there? The statement would 
appear perfectly maniacal; but so far as I can 
make head or tail out of anything, Doctor Brown 
seems to have put it there himself." 

The doctor lifted his head for the first time. 
356 



The Chase After the Truth 

"Yes; I put the bones there," he said. "I 
believe I am the first son of Adam who ever 
manufactured all the evidence of a murder charge 
against himself." 

It was the Squire's turn to look astonished. 
The old gentleman looked rather wildly from 
one to the other. 

"Bones! Murder charge!" he ejaculated. 
"What the devil is all this ? Whose bones ?" 

"Your bones, in a manner of speaking," deli- 
cately conceded the doctor. "I had to make sure 
you had really died, and not disappeared by 
magic." 

The Squire in his turn seemed more hopelessly 
puzzled than the whole crowd of his friends had 
been over his own escapade. "Why not?" he 
demanded. "I thought it was the whole point 
to make it look like magic. Why did you want 
me to die so much?" 

Doctor Brown had lifted his head; and he now 
very slowly lifted his hand. He pointed with 
outstretched arm at the headland overhanging 
the foreshore, just above the entrance to the 
cave. It was the exact part of the beach where 
Paynter had first landed, on that spring morning 
when he had looked up in his first fresh wonder 
at the peacock trees. But the trees were gone. 

The fact itself was no surprise to them; the 
clearance had naturally been one of the first of 
the sweeping changes of the Treherne regime. 
357 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

But though they knew it well, they had wholly 
forgotten it; and itsf significance returned on 
them suddenly like a sign in heaven. 

"That is the reason," said the doctor. "I 
have worked for that for fourteen years." 

They no longer looked at the bare promontory 
on which the feathery trees had once been so 
familiar a sight; for they had something else to 
look at. Anyone seeing the Squire now would 
have shifted his opinion about where to find the 
lunatic in that crowd. It was plain in a flash that 
the change had fallen on him like a thunderbolt; 
that he, at least, had never had the wildest notion 
that the tale of the Vanishing Squire had been 
but a prelude to that of the vanishing trees. The 
next half hour was full of his ravings and ex- 
postulations, which gradually died away into de- 
mands for explanation and incoherent questions 
repeated again and again. He had practically 
to be overruled at last, in spite of the respect in 
which he was held, before anything like a space 
and silence were made in which the doctor could 
tell his own story. It was perhaps a singular 
story, of which he alone had ever had the knowl- 
edge ; and though its narration was not uninter- 
rupted, it may be set forth consecutively in his 
own words. 

"First, I wish it clearly understood that I be- 
lieve in nothing. I do not even give the nothing 
I believe a name; or I should be an atheist. I 
358 



The Chase After the Truth 

have never had inside my head so much as a hint 
of heaven and hell. I think it most likely we 
are worms in the mud; but I happen to be sorry 
for the other worms under the wheel. And I 
happen myself to be a sort of worm that turns 
when he can. If I care nothing for piety, I care 
less for poetry. I'm not like Ashe here, who is 
crammed with criminology, but has all sorts of 
other culture as well. I know nothing about cul- 
ture, except bacteria culture. I sometimes fancy 
Mr. Ashe is as much an art critic as Mr. Paynter ; 
only he looks for his heroes, or villains, in real 
life. But I am a very practical man; and my 
stepping stones have been simply scientific facts. 
In this village I found a fact — a fever. I could 
not classify it; it seemed peculiar to this corner 
of the coast; it had singular reactions of delirium 
and mental breakdown. I studied it exactly as 
I should a queer case in the hospital, and corre- 
sponded and compared notes with other men of 
science. But nobody had even a working hy- 
pothesis about it, except of course the ignorant 
peasantry, who said the peacock trees were in 
some wild way poisonous. 

"Well, the peacock trees were poisonous. The 
peacock trees did produce the fever. I verified 
the fact in the plain plodding way required, com- 
paring all the degrees and details of a vast num- 
ber of cases; and there were a shocking number 
to compare. At the end of it T had discovered 
24 359 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

the thing as Harvey discovered the circulation 
of the blood. Everybody was the worse for be- 
ing near the things; those who came off best 
were exactly the exceptions that proved the rule, 
abnormally healthy and energetic people like the 
Squire and his daughter. In other words, the 
peasants were right. But if I put it that way, 
somebody will cry: 'But do you believe it was 
supernatural then?' In fact, that's what you'll 
all say; and that's exactly what I complain of. 
I fancy hundreds of men have been left dead and 
diseases left undiscovered, by this suspicion of 
superstition, this stupid fear of fear. Unless 
you see daylight through the forest of facts from 
the first, you won't venture into the wood at all. 
Unless we can promise you beforehand that there 
shall be what you call a natural explanation, to 
save your precious dignity from miracles, you 
won't even hear the beginning of the plain tale. 
Suppose there isn't a natural explanation 1 Sup- 
pose there is, and we never find it! Suppose I 
haven't a notion whether there is or not! What 
the devil has that to do with you, or with me in 
dealing with the facts I do know? My own in- 
stinct is to think there is; that if my researches 
could be followed far enough it would be found 
that some horrible parody of hay fever, some 
effect analogous to that of pollen, would explain 
all the facts. I have never found the explana- 
tion. What I have found are the facts. And 
360 



The Chase After the Truth 

the fact is that those trees on the top there dealt 
death right and left, as certainly as if they had 
been giants, standing on a hill and knocking men 
down in crowds with a club. It will be said that 
now I had only to produce my proofs and have 
the nuisance removed. Perhaps I might have 
convinced the scientific world finally, when more 
and more processions of dead men had passed 
through the village to the cemetery. But I had 
not got to convince the scientific world, but the 
Lord of the Manor. The Squire will pardon my 
saying that it was a very different thing. I tried 
it once; I lost my temper, and said things I do 
not defend; and I left the Squire's prejudices 
rooted anew, like the trees. I was confronted 
with one colossal coincidence that was an obstacle 
to all my aims. One thing made all my science 
sound like nonsense. It was the popular legend. 
"Squire, if there were a legend of hay fever, 
you would not believe in hay fever. If there 
were a popular story about pollen, you would say 
that pollen was only a popular story. I had 
something against me heavier and more hopeless 
than the hostility of the learned; I had the sup- 
port of the ignorant. My truth was hopelessly 
tangled up with a tale that the educated were 
resolved to regard as entirely a lie. I never tried 
to explain again; on the contrary, I apologized, 
affected a conversion to the common-sense view, 
and watched events. And all the time the lines 
36i 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

of a larger, if more crooked plan, began to get 
clearer in my mind. I knew that Miss Vane, 
whether or no she were married to Mr. Treherne, 
as I afterward found sh? was, was so much under 
his influence that the first day of her inheritance 
would be the last day of the poisonous trees. 
But she could not inherit, or even interfere, till 
the Squire died. It became simply self-evident, 
to a rational mind, that the Squire must die. But 
wishing to be humane as well as rational, I de- 
sired his death to be temporary. 

"Doubtless my scheme was completed by a 
chapter of accidents, but I was watching for such 
accidents. Thus I had a foreshadowing of how 
the ax would figure in the tale when it was first 
flung at the trees; it would have surprised the 
woodman to know how near our minds were, 
and how I was but laying a more elaborate siege 
to the towers of pestilence. But when the Squire 
spontaneously rushed on what half the country- 
side would call certain death, I jumped at my 
chance. I followed him, and told him all that he 
has told you. I don't suppose he'll ever forgive 
me now, but that shan't prevent me saying that 
I admire him hugely for being what people would 
call a lunatic and what is really a sportsman. It 
takes rather a grand old man to make a joke in 
the grand style. He came down so quick from 
the tree he had climbed that he had no time to 
pull his hat off the bough it had caught in. 
362 



The Chase After the Truth 

"At first I found I had made a miscalculation. 
I thought his disappearance would be taken as 
his death, at least after a little time; but Ashe 
told me there could be no formalities without a 
corpse. I fear I was a little annoyed, but I soon 
set myself to the duty of manufacturing a corpse. 
It's not hard for a doctor to get a skeleton; 
indeed, I had one, but Mr. Paynter's energy was 
a day too early for me, and I only got the bones 
into the well when he had already found it. His 
story gave me another chance, however; I noted 
where the hole was in the hat, and made a pre- 
cisely corresponding hole in the skull. The reason 
for creating the other clews may not be so ob- 
vious. It may not yet be altogether apparent to 
you that I am not a fiend in human form. I 
could not substantiate a murder without at least 
suggesting a murderer, and I was resolved that 
if the crime happened to be traced to anybody, 
it should be to me. So I'm not surprised you 
were puzzled about the purpose of the rag round 
the ax, because it had no purpose, except to in- 
criminate the man who put it there. The chase 
had to end with me, and when it was closing in 
at last the joke of it was too much for me, and 
I fear I took liberties with the gentleman's easel 
and beard. I was the only person who could 
risk it, being the only person who could at the 
last moment produce the Squire and prove there 
had been no crime at all. That, gentlemen, is 
363 



The Man Who Knew Too Much 

the true story of the peacock trees; and that bare 
crag up there, where the wind is whistling as it 
would over a wilderness, is a waste place I have 
labored to make, as many men have labored to 
make a cathedral. 

"I don't think there is any more to say, and 
yet something moves in my blood and I will try 
to say it. Could you not have trusted a little 
these peasants whom you already trust so much? 
These men are men, and they meant something; 
even their fathers were not wholly fools. If 
your gardener told you of the trees you called 
him a madman, but he did not plan and plant your 
garden like a madman. You would not trust 
your woodman about these trees, yet you trusted 
him with all the others. Have you ever thought 
what all the work of the world would be like if 
the poor were so senseless as you think them? 
But no, you stuck to your rational principle. And 
your rational principle was that a thing must be 
false because thousands of men had found it true ; 
that because many human eyes had seen some- 
thing it could not be there. " 

He looked across at Ashe with a sort of chal- 
lenge, but though the sea wind ruffled the old 
lawyer's red mane, his Napoleonic mask was un- 
ruffled; it even had a sort of beauty from its 
new benignity; 

"I am too happy just now in thinking how 
wrong I have been," he answered, "to quarrel 
364 



The Chase After the Truth 

with you, doctor, about our theories. And yet, 
in justice to the Squire as well as myself, I should 
demur to your sweeping inference. I respect 
these peasants, I respect your regard for them; 
but their stories are a different matter. I think 
I would do anything for them but believe them. 
Truth and fancy, after all, are mixed in them, 
when in the more instructed they are separate; 
and I doubt if you have considered what would 
be involved in taking their word for anything. 
Half the ghosts of those who died of fever may 
be walking by now; and kind as these people are, 
I believe they might still burn a witch. No, 
doctor, I admit these people have been badly 
used, I admit they are in many ways our betters, 
but I still could not accept anything in their 
evidence. ,, 

The doctor bowed gravely and respectfully 
enough, and then, for the last time that day, they 
saw his rather sinister smile. 

"Quite so," he said. "But you would have 
hanged me on their evidence." 

And, turning his back on them, as if auto- 
matically, he set his face toward the village, 
where for so many years he had gone his round. 



THE END 



365 



14 DAY USE 

RETURN TO DESK FROM WHICH BORROWED 

LOAN DEPT. 

This book is due on the last date stamped below, or 

on the date to which renewed. 

Renewed books are sujskct to immediate recall. 



NOV 2 9 1966 



REC'D 



NO!/ 20 '65 -2 PM 



WAY 2« 1997 



LOAN DEPT. 



JUN9 |979 



^VEU 



MAY 7 1997 



REC. CIR. MAY 3 



RCULATICi^ DEPT 



JUL 26 19BU 



\\& l[2«& 



- 5 '80 



3£^ 



*im 



RECEIVED — 

OCT 1 Q 1984 



CtftCUi ATlON DEPT 



LD 21A-60m-3,'65 
(F2336sl0)476B 



General Library 

University of California 

Berkeley 




Ml(K5Hy5 












The university of California library 




