THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 

EDITED BY 
E.CAPPS, PH.D., LL.I). T. E. PAGE, Lrrr.D. W. IT. I). ROUSE, Lnr.D. 



MARTIAL 

EPIGRAMS 
I 



MARTIAL 

EPIGRAMS 

WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY 
WALTER C. A. KER, M.A. 

SOMETIMB SCHOLAR OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE 
OK THK INNKR TEMPI.K, BARRISTER-AT-LAW 



IN TWO VOLUMES 
I 




LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN 
NEW YORK : G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS 

MCMXIX 



CONTENTS 



I'ACiE 

INTRODUCTION vii 

BIBLIOGRAPHY xix 

ON THE SPECTACLES . . 2 

BOOK I 27 

BOOK II 107 

BOOK III 163 

HOOK IT-- . T 229 

BOOK v 293 

BOOK vi 357 

BOOK VII 421 



INTRODUCTION 

AN epigram, as its etymology denotes, was originally 
merely an inscription, such as is put on a statue or a 
monument, a temple, or a triumphal arch. 1 But in 
process of time it came to mean ;i short poem dealing 
with some .person, thing, or incident which the writer 
thinks worthy of observation and record, and by 
which he seeks to attract attention in the same way 
as a passer-by would be attracted by an inscription 
on a physical object. " It must have," says Professor 
Mackail, " the compression and conciseness of a real 
inscription, and in proportion to the smallness of its 
bulk must be highly finished, evenly balanced, 
simple, lucid." The comment of the writer on the 
subject-matter of the epigram is called the point, 
and this is generally satirical " Dost thou think," 
says Benedick, 2 " I care fora satire or an epigram ?"- 
but it is not necessarily so : it may even be pathetic. 

Martial has several poems 3 which by reason of their 
length are not strictly epigrams within the definition. 

1 Even as a brand on the forehead of a runaway slave 
(FUG) : Petr. ciii. - Shak. Much Ado, v. iv. 103. 

3 t.g. HI. Iviii. ; x. xxx. 



INTRODUCTION 

But these are of the nature of epigrams, being 
written in order to lead up to the point at the end. 

Marcus Valerius Martialis, the greatest of epigram- 
matists, and the father of the epigram as we 
understand it, was born at Bilbilis, or Augusta l 
Bilbilis, in Hispania Tarraconensis. The town stood 
on a rocky height surrounded by the rushing Salo, 
a confluent of the Ebro, and was a municipium 
celebrated for the manufacture of iron, to which 
the cold waters of the Salo gave a peculiar temper. 
It also produced gold. 2 The year of the poet's 
birth cannot be fixed with certainty, but it was one 
of the years A.D. 38 to 41. It has been inferred 
from one of his epigrams 3 that his parents were 
named Pronto and Flaccilla. Though they were 
probably not rich, they gave the future poet a good 
education, a fact he afterwards acknowledges * some- 
what bitterly, having regard to its uselessness in that 
corrupt age as a means of making money. About 
A.D. 63 or 64 he came to Rome in the last days of 
Nero, and attached himself to his countrymen 
Quintilian, Lucan the poet, and the Senecas, who 
introduced him to the Pisos. The ruin and death of 
Seneca the philosopher and of Lucan, for partici- 
pation in the abortive conspiracy of L. Calpurnius 

1 cf. x. ciii. 1. 2 xn. xviii. 9. 

3 v. xxxiv. 1. 4 In ix. Ixxiii. 7. 

viii 



INTRODUCTION 

Piso in A.I). 65 threw Martial on his own resources. 
Quintilian seems to have advised him to take up a 
profession/ perhaps the bar, but Martial preferred, 
as he says, to make the most of life while he could, 
a note which he strikes consistently throughout his 
writings. 

Of his life up to A.D. 84 or 85, the date of the 
publication of Book I. of his epigrams, we know 
nothing. In A.D. 80, however, the collection known 
as the Liber Spectaculorum was published to cele- 
brate the opening of the Colosseum by Titus. On 
the strength of this book, and the Xenia and 
Apophoreta (Books XIII. and XIV.) which were issued 
in A.D. 84 or 85, or of other writings that have 
not come down to us, Martial by A.D. 85 enjoyed an 
assured position as a poet, as he himself says, 2 
"known all over the world," and equally widely 
plagiarised. 

At Rome he remained continuously for thirty-five 
years, and here all his books were published except 
Book III., which was issued from Gallia Cisalpina, 
whither he had gone in a fit of spleen at the poor 
rewards of literature. 3 In Book I. he speaks of him- 
self 4 as living in a garret up three high flights of 



1 cf. n. xc. - cf. i. i. 2. 

3 cf. in. iv. 8. * cf. i. cxvii. 7. 



ix 



INTRODUCTION 

stairs. Later on, by A.D. 94, he had a house of his 
own in the same quarter, the Quirinal, and a country 
villa at Nomentum, 1 which according to his own 
account was a poor place. Whether these houses 
were purchased or given to him is unknown. During 
his thirty-five years' sojourn he led the ordinary life 
of the needy client dependent on rich patrons, and 
he never ceases to complain of the weariness of 
levees to be attended, complimentary duties to be 
discharged at unreasonable hours and in all weathers- 
and of the insolence and stinginess of wealthy men. 
Yet he was not without compensations. Domitian 
rejected his petition for a sum of money, but he 
received from Titus the jus trium liberorum, a right 
confirmed by Domitian, and the tribunatus semestrix, 
a kind of honorary tribuneship carrying with it the 
title of a knight. 2 Moreover, he mixed in the best 
society in the capital, numbering among his friends 
Quintilian, the poets Silius and Valerius Flaccus, the 
younger Pliny, and Juvenal. That Martial was capable 
of a very sincere and lusting friendship is shown by 
many of his epigrams. It is curious that he never 
mentions Statius, nor is he mentioned by him. 
At the end of his thirty-five years' residence in 

1 cf. ix. xviih -2. 

cf. in. xcv. 9, 10 ; ix. xcvii. 5. 



INTRODUCTION 

Rome, either as recognizing the fact that the new 
regime under Nerva or Trajan was not favourable 
to adulation of emperors, or from that general 
weariness of City life of which he complains, and 
a longing to see again the patrii anmes and the 
saturae xordida rura casae of his native Bilbilis on 
the rough hill-side, he returned in A.D. 100 to 
Spain. The means of travel were supplied by 
Pliny, as Pliny tells us, 1 from friendliness towards 
the poet, and in recompense for the complimentary 
verses 2 Martial had written upon him. Three years 
afterwards Book XII. was sent from Spain. In 
the meantime a Spanish lady, Marcella, of whom 
he writes with great affection, 3 and whom some 
have supposed to be his wife, gave him a country 
house, where he lived until his death. "She," he 
says, "alone made a Rome for him." But the 
delights and the freedom of the country, of which 
at first he speaks exultingly, began to pall upon 
him, and this fact and the narrow-minded jealousy 4 
of his neighbours made him look back fondly to- 
wards the fuller life of the Imperial City. But he 
was destined never to see it again. His death 
cannot be dated later than A.D. 104. 



1 Ep. iii. 21. 2 rf. x. xix. 

3 cf. xn. xxi. and xxxi. * cj\ xii. K/iial. 

xi 



INTRODUCTION 

Whether Martial was married is uncertain. In 
several epigrams l he speaks as if he had a wife, 
and in two 2 (and those of the foulest) he assumes 
to address her. Again, a daughter is alluded to 
in one epigram, and perhaps in two, 3 for the read- 
ing is uncertain. A writer, however, does not 
always speak in his own person, and also (as 
Martial did 4 ) sometimes writes on a subject sub- 
mitted to him. In other epigrams 5 the poet speaks 
of a wife as an aspiration of the future, and, as 
Professor Sellar says, " the general tone of his epi- 
grams is that of an easy-living bachelor who knew 
nothing of the cares or consolations of family life." 
The probability is that he was never married, and 
it may be said with some degree of certainty that 
he had no children ; for the poet who touched so 
tenderly on the deaths of Erotion, Urbicus, and 
Canace, and who showed so loving a disposition 
towards the young and the helpless, could not 
have been silent if he had had children of his 
own. 

Pliny says 6 of him, " I hear that Valerius Martialis 
is dead, and I am sorry. He was a man of genius, 

] cf. iv. xxiii. 2 ; vn. xcv. 7 ; xi. Ixxxiv. 15. 
- xi. xliii. and civ. 

3 cf. vii. xcv. 8; x. Ixv. 11. 4 cf. xi. xlii. 1. 

s n. xc. 9 ; ii. xcii. * Ep. iii. 21. 



INTRODUCTION 

of subtle, quick intelligence, and one who in his 
writings showed the greatest amount of wit and 
pungency, and no less of fairness. . . . But it may 
be said his writings will not last. Perhaps they 
will not, but he wrote as if they would." The 
quality of candor which Pliny emphasises agrees 
with what Martial claimed l for himself. " I spare 
the person, I denounce the vice." Much of his 
work is poor, and some of it even stupid, as might 
have been expected in an author with so large an 
output. And indeed he says himself that, to con- 
stitute a book, the good must be mixed with the 
bad and the indifferent 2 : "the equal book," he 
says, 3 " is the bad one." But Martial at his best 
is without a rival. If the highest form of art be 
to conceal art, then he was a consummate artist. 
The point, whether dependent on a pun, or an 
ambiguous phrase, on a new meaning given to a 
word, or an antithesis, or Trapa TrpovSoKtav, is 
sharply brought out. And the words fall into their 
places with a fitness that suggests the solution of a 
puzzle : the reader feels that no other words could 
have been employed. He is never turgid or 
pompous : all he touches with a light hand. A 

1 cf. x. xxxiii. 10 ; vu. xii. 2 cf. I. xvi. ; vri.- Ixxxi. 
3 cf. vu. xc. 4. 



INTRODUCTION 

master of terse and pregnant phrase, he has left us 
lines that linger in the memory, such as perdideril 
indium vita reversa diem ; vivere bis vifrt est posse priorc 
fnti ; non est vivere, scd valerc vita ; cineri gloria sera 
venit ; aestate pueri si valenl, .satis discitnt ; non bene 
servo servitur amico ; sera minis vita esl crastina, vive. 
hodie and many others ; and above them all that 
tender sigh for the shortness of mortality, which has 
framed a thousand dials, and has from the Temple 
walls reminded many a generation of lawyers of 
the fleeting hours, pereunt et imputantnr. 

Life was his subject, not outworn mythologies or 
tragic bombast. 1 And what a medley of detail that life 
presents ! Fops, fortune-hunters and dinner-touters, 
dabblers and busybodies, orators and lawyers, school- 
masters, street hawkers, barbers, cobblers, jockeys, 
architects, auctioneers, debtors, bores, quidnuncs, doc- 
tors, plagiarists, hypocritical philosophers, poisoners, 
jugglers and acrobats, the slave who has become a 
knight, or the knight without a qualification, per- 
sonal peculiarities, the faults and vices of fashionable 
life. He describes a gown or a cup, a picture or a 
statue, a rich debauchee's banquet, the courses of 
a dinner, or the produce of a farm, a greenhouse, 
a triumphal arch, a lion in the amphitheatre, a 
1 cf. iv. xlviii. 7, 8 ; x. iv. 7 -12. 



INTRODUCTION 

suburban or country villa, a private bath, a beauti- 
ful slave, the noises, duties, and distractions of the 
town, its topography, the parties, theatres, public 
games, exercise grounds, the baths and the Satur- 
nalia. He gives us a birthday or a marriage poem, 
the eulogy of a friend or of a Roman matron, the 
praise of conjugal or of fraternal love, or of a life 
well spent, the elements of a happy life, the death 
of a good man, epitaphs, verses on the eruption of 
Vesuvius, on a fragment of the Argo, or on an insect 
embedded in amber. The list might be indefinitely 
prolonged. 

No account of the work of Martial would be com- 
plete without two features being touched upon which 
have darkened his fame, namely his indecency, and 
his adulation of Domitian. With regard to the 
first, however, of the 1171 epigrams in the first 
twelve books, those open to objection do not exceed 
a fourth, and if the 350 epigrams in Books XIII. 
and XIV. be included, the proportion is still smaller. 
On the other hand, of the objectionable epigrams 
the greater part are indescribably foul. But it 
should not be inferred that Martial was a peculiarly 
immoral man. " My page is wanton," he says, 1 " my 
life is good." And borrowing the excuse made by 
1 cf. i, iv. 8. 

XV 

ft 



INTRODUCTION 

his master Catullus, he says l that jocosa carmina 
cannot please without prurience. That was as much 
a feature of sportive epigrams as the nudity of the 
performers at the Festival of Flora, and to \vrite 
licentious verse was, as Pliny tells us, 2 fashionable 
with summi et gramssimi viri. A notable example of 
the outspoken indecency in which even Augustus 
indulged is to be found in xi. xx. 3 As an epigram- 
matist Martial had to adapt himself to the manners 
of his age or starve. 

The poet's adulation of Domitian sounds to modern 
ears shameless and disgusting. But it must be re- 
membered that the title " deus " was an official 
one, and it would have been dangerous in those 
critical times to omit it. Moreover, Martial had to 
live ; the patronage of the Emperor and of his suite 
was essential, and Martial had to pay the price of 
recognition. A modern scholar, Professor Verrall, has 
sought 4 to exculpate him on the ground that " the 
worship of the Emperor was the best and truest form 
which religion took in that ' inter-religious ' period 
. . . When [the provincials] called the Emperor 'deus' 
they took the simplest way of saying that the Empire 

1 cf. I. xxxv. 11 ; following Cat. xvi. 9. 

* Ep. iv. xiv. 4. He gives a long list of such authors in v. iii. 

1 All epigrams possible of translation by the use of dashes 
or paraphrases have been rendered in English, the wholly 
impossible ones only in Italian. 4 Literary Estaya, 8. 



INTRODUCTION 

deserved from them, as human beings, gratitude and 
veneration. And so it did." But Martial, unfor- 
tunately for his future fame, has deprived himself of 
this excuse. His changed tone after the accession 
of Nerva and Trajan l shows that his previous flattery 
of Domitian was insincere. In fact, inferentially he 
admits it. 

The terseness and vividness of Martial's style 
makes the interpretation of particular words in 
readable English at times peculiarly difficult. To 
explain a phrase is easy, to translate it is often hard. 
And the commentators, even the most noted of them, 
often fail to bring out the point. Two instances only 
may be given. In an epigram 2 which Pliny possibly 
had in his mind when he summed up Martial's style 
in a passage already quoted the poet, criticising 
another poet, says that his rival's epigrams were 
cerussata candidiora cute. Here the epithet candidiora 
has to do service, not only in comparison with the 
physical feature of a white-leaded skin, but also in 
comparison with the style of epigram, which should 
contain wit and gall. Again, in another epigram 3 
he speaks of the viva quies ponti. This, conversely put, 
is exactly Tennyson's " such a tide as moving seems 

1 cf. x. Ixxii. ; XI. iv. and v. 

2 vii. xxv. 3 x. xxx. 12. 



INTRODUCTION 

asleep." But Tennyson has used seven words, 
Martial only three. 

Of the poet's personal appearance we know- 
nothing beyond the slight sketch he has himself 
drawn, 1 where, comparing himself with an effeminate 
fop, he alludes to his " stiff Spanish hair/ ' and his 
" hairy legs and cheeks." 

The dust of Martial has mingled this many a 
year with the soil of his native land, and over it 
has passed unregarding the life of the centuries, 
the Visigoth, the Moor, and the Spaniard ; and of 
the stones of Bilbilis none survive save in the 
structure of a Moorish city. 2 The written word, 
as he has told us, 3 is the only memorial that cannot 
die. His writings have lived, as he prophesied, 
when the stones of Messalla have been sundered by 
the wild fig, 4 the towering marble of Licinus has 
fallen in dust, 5 the work of Apelles has perished. 6 
And they will continue to live so long as the 
finest literary art shall be held worthy to be had in 
remembrance, and the classics be read and loved. 

7 FIG TREE COURT, TEMPLE. 
April 22, 1919. 

1 cf. x. Ixv. 7, 9. 

2 Calatayud (Job's Castle) two miles E. 

3 cf. x. ii. 12. * cf. x. ii. 9 ; viu. iii. 5. 
5 cf. viu. iii. 6. 8 cf. vii. Ixxxiv. 8. 

xviii 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

MANUSCRIPTS 

THE acknowledgment of the translator is due to Messrs. 
George Bell & Sons for kind permission to use the text of 
Martial as published in their Corpus Poetarum Latinomm 
(1905). According to the learned editor of this text the 
MSS. of Martial may be divided into three families : 

The first is represented by H in the Vienna Library ; R 
in the Leyden Library, both of the 9th century ; and T (a 
transcript of H, and supplementing it) of the 9th-10th 
century in the Paris Library. 

The agreement of T and R is in the following pages 
denoted by the letter o. 

The second family is represented by L (13th century), 
discovered at Lucca, and now at Berlin ; by P (15th century) 
at the Vatican ; by Q (loth century) in the British Museum ; 
and by f (15th century) in the Laurentian Library at 
Florence. These MSS. contain the text as emended by 
Torquatus Gennadius, A.D. 401. The agreement of these 
codices is denoted by /8. 

The third family is represented by E (10th century) in the 
Advocates' Library at Edinburgh; by X (10th century) in 
the Paris Library ; by A (llth century) at Leyden ; and by 
V (10th century) at the Vatican. These are the four best, 
their agreement being denoted by 7. 

Of the same family are B (12th century) at Leyden ; C 
(14th century) also at Leyden ; and G (12th century) at 
Wolfenblittel. 

Recent codices, not dependent on old recensions, but often 
giving true emendations, are denoted by $-. 

EDITIONS 

Among the editions are the following. A fuller list will 
be found in Brunet's Manuel du Libraire (Paris, 1862) : 

1. The Variorum Edition with the notes of T. Farnabius 
and others, edited by Corn. Schrevelius, Lugd. Bat. 1661. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

2. The Delphin Edition by Vine. Collesso, with a para- 
phrase and variorum notes, Paris, 1680, 1823. Published by 
command of Louis XIV. 

3. An edition, containing old and new notes and occasional 
Greek versions, by five Professors of the French Academy, 
Lemaire, Paris, 1825. 

4. An edition by F. G. Schneidewin, Grimae, 1842 

5. Select Epigrams of Martial, with English notes by F. A. 
Paley and W. H. Stone ("Grammar School Classics"), 
Whittaker & Co. and George Bell, 1868. A useful and handy 
edition. 

6. The Epigrams of Martial, with explanatory notes by 
L. Friedlander, Leips. 1886, 2 vols. A standard edition. 

7. Selected Epigrams of Martial, edited, with introduction, 
notes, and appendices, by Rev. H. M. Stephenson, Mac- 
millan, 1880-1895. 

8. Select Epigrams of Martial, edited according to the 
text of Prof. Lindsay, by R. T Bridge and E. D. C. Lake, 
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1908, 2 vols. 

There is a good introduction by Prof. Sellar in Extracts 
from Martial, Edinburgh, 1884 ; and a valuable discussion 
of the epigrams in Lessing's Prose Works. 



TRANSLATIONS 

An English prose translation (the obscene epigrams being, 
however, in Graglia's Italian) is published in Bonn's "Classical 
Library." The versions are not unsatisfactory as regards 
correctness, but the style in the case of the more serious 
epigrams often falls below the dignity of the subject. A 
selection of 150 epigrams has also been translated, with an 
introduction and notes, by Alfred S. West ( Wit and Wisdom 
from Martial, Hampstead Priory Press, 1912). 

Among verse translations are : a MS. of the age of Eliza- 
beth ; Thomas May, poet and playwright, 1629 ; R. Fletcher, 
J656 ; Anon. 1695 ; J. Hughes, 1737 ; William Hay, M.P. for 
Seaford, 1755 ; Wright, 1763; E. B. Greene, 1774. Specimens 
of the preceding and of many others will be found in the 
Bohn Martial. Other translators are W. F. Shaw (Juvenal, 
Persius, Martial and Catullus, an experiment in translation, 
1882), forty-three epigrams in unrhymed trochaics, a close ren- 
dering, the metre being, however, sometimes rugged ; Goldwin 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Smith (Bay Leaves, Toronto, 1890), anonymously ; W. T. 
Courthope (Selections Translated or Imitated in English Verse, 
Murray, 1914) ; both excellent. The most satisfactory of 
the translations as a whole are Hay's, but his versions are 
often imitations only. 

Of foreign translations in prose we have in French : 
Marolles, 1655; Volland, 1807; Verger, Dubois, and Man- 
geart, 18345 (with a memoir of the author supposed to have 
been written by himself) ; since reissued by the Librairie 
Gamier Freres, Paris ; Nisard, 1842 ; J. B. (order re- 
arranged, with notes and commentaries), Paris, 1842-3 ; 
the obscene epigrams forming the 3rd vol.; and in Italian, 
Giuspanio Graglia (London, 1782 and 1791), whose versions 
of the obscene epigrams have been utilized in the following 
work. In German is the version of K. W. Ramler, Leipzig, 
1787-91. 

Foreign translators in verse areMarolles, Paris, 1655, 1671, 
1675 ; Volland, 1807 ; E. T. Simon and P. R. Auguis, 1819 ; 
Constant Dubois (with an essay on Martial's life and works 
by Jules Janin), Paris, 1841 ; in German, Zimmermann, 
Frankfort, 1783 ; and Willemann, Cologne, 1825 ; the latter 
being expurgated. 

Imitations in French verse are by Ant. P. (Antoine 
Pericaud), L'an de Rome 2569 (A.D. 1816) ; and by C. B. D. L. 
(Claude Breghot du Lut), L'an de Rome 2569 ; and by E. T. 
Simon, supra. 

If a " bad eminence " confer any title to fame, James 
Elphinston (1721-1809) deserves special notice. He was the 
son of an Episcopalian clergyman, and was educated at the 
High School and at the University of Edinburgh. In 1750 
he superintended the issue of a Scotch edition of Johnson's 
Rambler, supplying English translations of the mottoes, for 
which he was thanked by Johnson. From 1752 to 1776 he was 
successively a schoolmaster at Brompton and at Kensington. 
He published in 1778 a Specimen of the Translations of 
Epigrams of Martial, with a preface informing the public 
that he awaited subscriptions to enable him to publish a 
version of Martial's works complete. With regard to this 
work, it is recorded by Boswell under date of April 9, 1778 
that Garrick, being consulted, told Elphinston frankly 
that he was no epigrammatist, and advised him against 
publishing ; that Johnson's advice was not asked, and was 
not forced upon the translator ; and that Elphinston's 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

own brother-in-law, Strahan, the printer, in sending him a 
subscription of fifty pounds, promised him fifty more if he 
would abandon his project. 

The offer was not accepted, and in 1782 the whole work 
appeared in a handsome quarto. It was received with 
derision, the poet Beattie saying, "It is truly an unique 
the specimens formerly published did very well to laugh at, 
but a whole quarto of nonsense and gibberish is too much." 
And Mrs. Piozzi records that "of a modern Martial, when it 
came out, Dr. Johnson said ' there are in these verses too 
much folly for madness, I think, and too much madness for 
folly.'" And the unhappy author was gibbeted in the 
following epigram by Robert Burns : 

" O thou whom Poesy abhors, 
Whom Prose has turned out of doors ! 
Heardst thou that groan ? Proceed no further : 
'Twas laurell'd Martial roaring ' Murther !' " 



XXH 



THE 
EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 



VOL. I. 



M. VALERI MARTIALIS 
DE SPECTACULIS LIBER 



BARBARA pyramidum sileat miracula Memphis, 

Assyrius l iactet nee Babylona labor ; 
nee Triviae templo molles laudentur lones, 2 

dissimulet Delon cornibus ara frequens ; 
acre nee vacuo pendentia Mausolea 

laudibus inmodicis Cares in astra ferant. 
omnis Caesareo cedit labor Amphitheatre ; 

unum pro cunctis fama loquetur opus. 

II 

Hit: ubi sidereus propius videt astra colossus 
et crescunt media pegmata celsa via, 

invidiosa feri radiabant atria regis 

unaque iam tota stabat in urbe domus. 

hie ubi conspicui venerabilis Amphitheatri 
erigitur moles, stagna Neronis erant. 

1 Assy r iiin Alciatus, awiduu* T. 
* lones Scaliger, honor en T. 



1 The Temple of Diana at Ephesus. 

2 Constructed by Apollo of the horns of the beasts slain by 
his sister Diana. 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 
ON THE SPECTACLES 

I 

LET not barbaric Memphis tell of the wonder of 
her Pyramids, nor Assyrian toil vaunt its Babylon ; 
let not the soft lonians be extolled for Trivia's 
fane x ; let the altar wrought of many hoi-ns 2 keep 
hid its Delos ; let not Carians exalt to the skies with 
boundless praise the Mausoleum 3 poised on empty 
air. All labour yields to Caesar's Amphitheatre : 
one work in place of all shall Fame rehearse. 

II 

HERE where, rayed with stars, the Colossus 4 views 
heaven anear, and in the middle way tall scaffolds 6 
rise, hatefully gleamed the palace of a savage king, 
and but a single house now stood in all the City. 
Here, where the far-seen Amphitheatre lifts its mass 
august, was Nero's mere. Here, where we admire 

3 The tomb of Mausolus, king of Caria, constructed by his 
wife Artemisia. 

4 A statue of Nero, afterwards turned by Vespasian into a 
statue of the Sun with rays surrounding the head : cf. i. Ixx. 7. 

6 Either the scaffolding of the new works, or movable 
cranes (pegmata) which could lengthen or contract, open or 
shut, and were used at shows as part of the appointments. 



B 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

hie ubi miramur, velocia munera, thermas, 
abstulerat miseris tecta superbus ager. 

Claudia diffusas ubi porticus explicat umbras, 

ultima pars aulae deficientis erat. 10 

reddita Roma sibi est et sunt te praeside, Caesar, 
deliciae populi, quae fuerant domini. 

Ill 

QUAE tarn seposita est, quae gens tarn barbara, Caesar, 

ex qua spectator non sit in urbe tua ? 
venit ab Orpheo cultor Rhodopeius Haemo, 

venit et epoto Sarmata pastus equo, 
et qui prima bibit deprensi flumina Nili, 5 

et quern supremae Tethyos unda ferit ; 
festinavit Arabs, festinavere Sabaei, 

et Cilices nimbis hie maduere suis. 
crinibus in nodum tortis venere Sugambri, 

atque aliter tortis crinibus Aethiopes. 10 

vox diversa sonat populorum, turn tamen una est, 

cum verus patriae diceris esse pater. 

IV 

TURBA gravis paci placidaeque inimiea qviieti, 
quae semper miseras sollicitabat opes, 

traducta est, ingens l nee cepit harena nocentis : 
et delator habet quod dabat exilium. 

1 ingens Housman, getitH* T. 
1 The Baths of Titus. 2 Nero's Golden House. 



ON THE SPECTACLES, n-iv 

the warm-baths., 1 a gift swiftly wrought, a proud 
domain 2 had robbed their dwellings from the poor. 
Where the Claudian Colonnade extends its outspread 
shade the Palace ended in its furthest part. Rome 
has been restored to herself, and under thy govern- 
ance, Caesar, that is now the delight of a people which 
was once a master's. 

Ill 

WHAT race is set so far, what race so barbarous, 
Caesar, wherefrom a spectator is not in thy city ? 
There has come the farmer of Rhodope from Orphic 
Haemus, there has come too the Sarmatian fed on 
draughts of horses' blood, and he who quaffs at its 
spring the stream of first-found Nile, and he 3 whose 
shore the wave of farthest Tethys beats ; the Arab 
has sped, Sabaeans have sped, and Cilicians have 
here been drenched in their own saffron dew. 4 With 
hair twined in a knot have come Sygambrians, and, 
with locks twined elsewise, Aethiopians. Diverse 
sounds the speech of the peoples, yet then is it one 
when thou art acclaimed thy country's Father true. 



IV 

A CROWD dangerous to peace and a foe to tranquil 
rest, that ever vexed unhappy riches, has been 
paraded, nor could the huge Arena hold the guilty ; 
and the informer has the exile he once bestowed. 5 

3 Probably the Briton. 

4 With which the stage was sprinkled : rf. v. xxv. 7 ; vm. 
xxxiii. 4. 

5 This epigram is sometimes joined to the following. 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

IVu 

EXULAT Ausonia profugus delator ab urbe : [5] 

haec licet inpensis principis adnumeres. 



IUNCTAM Pasiphaen Dictaeo credite tauro : 
vidimus, accepit fabula prisca fidem. 

nee se miretur, Caesar, longaeva vetustas : 
quidquid fama canit, praestat harena tibi. 

VI 

BELLIGER invictis quod Mars tibi servit in armis, 
non satis est, Caesar ; servit et ipsa Venus. 

VlB 

PROSTRATUM vasta Nemees in valle leonem 
uobile et Herculeum fama canebat opus. 

prisca fides taceat : nam post tua munera, Caesar, 
hoc iam femineo l 



VII 

QUALITER in Scythica religatus rupe Prometheus 

adsiduam nimio pectore pavit avem, 
nuda Caledonio sic viscera praebuit urso 

non falsa pendens in cruce Laureolus. 

1 Marte fatemur ayi suppl. Buecheler. 

1 Because, by suppressing the informers, he lost the con- 
fiscated estates. 

2 Women sometimes fought in the Amphitheatre : Juv. i. 22. 

6 



ON THE SPECTACLES, iv B-VII 

IVB 

THE informer is an outcast and an exile from the 
Ausonian City : this may you reckon to our Prince's 
cost. 1 

V 

THAT Pasiphae was mated to the Dictaean bull, 
believe : we have seen it, the old-time myth has 
won its warrant. And let not age-long eld, Caesar, 
marvel at itself : whatever Fame sings of, that the 
Arena makes real for thee. 

VI 

THAT warring Mars served thee in arms uncon- 
quered suffices not, Caesar ; Venus herself too serves. 2 

V!B 

OK the lion laid low in Nemea's vasty vale, a deed 
renowned and worthy of Hercules, Fame used to 
sing. Dumb be ancient witness ! for after thy 
shows, O Caesar, we declare that such things are 
wrought by woman's prowess now. 

VII 

As, fettered on a Scythian crag, Prometheus fed 
the untiring fowl with his too prolific heart, so 
Laureolus, 3 hanging on no unreal cross, gave up his 
vitals defenceless to a Caledonian bear. His mangled 

3 A condemned criminal representing in the Amphitheatre 
Laureolus, a robber who had been crucified and torn to pieces 
by wild beasts, and whose death had been represented in a 
Mime (fabula, 1. 12) under Caligula {Juv. 8, 187 ; Suet. Gal. 
57), but in this case was enacted realistically in the Amphi- 
theatre. 

7 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

vivebant laceri membris stillantibus artus 5 

inque omni nusquam corpora corpus erat. 
denique supplicium 1 

vel domini iugulum foderat ense nocens, 
templa vel arcano demens spoliaverat auro, 

subdiderat saevas vel tibi, Roma, faces. 10 

vicerat antiquae sceleratus crimina famae, 

in quo, quae fuerat fabula, poena fuit. 

VIII 

DAEDALE, Lucano cum sic lacereris ab urso, 
quam cuj)eres pinnas nunc habuisse tuas ! 

IX 

PRAESTITIT exhibitus tota tibi, Caesar, harena 

quae non promisit proelia rhinoceros, 
o quam terribilis exarsit pronus in iras ! 

quantus erat taurus, cui pila taurus erat ! 



LAESEIIAT ingrato leo perfidus ore magistrum, 

ausus tam notas contemerare manus ; 
sed dignas tanto persolvit crimine poenas, 

et qui non tulerat verbera, tela tulit. 
quos decet esse hominum tali sub principe mores, 5 

qui iubet ingenium mitius esse feris ! 

1 dignum tulit ; Me parentis suppl. Schneidewiu. 



ON THE SPECTACLES, vn-x 

limbs lived, though the parts dripped gore, and in all 
his body was nowhere a body's shape. A punish- 
ment deserved at length he won he in his guilt had 
with his sword pierced his parent's or his master's 
throat, or in his madness robbed a temple of its 
close-hidden gold, or had laid by stealth his savage 
torch to thee, O Rome. Accursed, he had outdone 
the crimes told of by ancient lore ; in him that which 
had been a show before was punishment. 

VIII 

DAEDALUS, now thou art being so mangled by a 
Lucanian boar, how wouldst thou wish thou hadst 
now thy wings ! 

IX 

SHOWN along thy Arena's floor, O Caesar, a rhino- 
ceros afforded thee an unpromised fray. Oh, into 
what dreadful rage fired he with lowered head ! 
How great was the bull ] to which a bull was as a 
dummy ! 

X 

A TREACHEROUS lion had with ungrateful fang 
wounded his master, daring to violate hands so 
familiar ; but a penalty fitted to a crime so great he 
paid ; and he that would not brook stripes brooked 
the steel. What manners befit men under such a 
Prince who bids the nature of wild beasts to grow 
more mild ! 

1 Probably the rhinoceros was known as bo$ Aethiophis : 
cf. xiv. liii. As to the dummy (piln), cf. n. xliii. 6 ; 
x. Ixxxvi. 4. 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XI 

PRAECEPS sanguinea dum se rotat ursus harena, 

inplicitam visco perdidit ille fugam. 
splendida iam tecto cessent venabula ferro, 

nee volet excussa lancea torta manu ; 
deprendat vacuo venator in acre praedam, 5 

si captare feras aucupis arte placet. 

XII 

INTER Caesareae discrimina saeva Dianae 
fixisset gravidam cum levis hasta suem, 
exiluit partus miserae de vulnere matris. 

Lucina ferox, hoc peperisse fuit ? 

pluribus ilia mori voluisset saucia telis, 5 

omnibus ut natis triste pateret iter. 
quis negat esse satum materno f'unere Bacchum ? 

sic genitum iiumen credite : nata fera est. 

XIII 

ICTA gravi telo confossaque vulnere mater 
sus pariter vitam perdidit atque dedit. 

o quam certa fuit librato dextera ferro ! 
hanc ego Lucinae credo fuisse manum. 

experta est numen moriens utriusque Dianae, 5 

quaque soluta parens quaque perempta fera est. 

1 i.e. What now remains but that beasts should fly if they 
can be caught like birds ? 

10 



ON THE SPECTACLES, xi-xm 

XI 

WHILE on the bloody sand a bear whirled with 
lowered head, he lost the escape that bird-lime 
clogged. Let now the burnished hunting spears, 
their steel hidden, lie at rest, nor the lance fly 
hurled from projected arm ; let the hunter take his 
prey in the empty air, if by the fowler's art one may 
catch beasts. 1 



XII 

WHEN, amid the cruel hazards of Caesar's hunt, a 
light spear had pierced a pregnant sow, there sprang 
forth one of her offspring from the wound of its 
unhappy dam. O fell Lucina, was this a birth ? Yet 
would she, wounded by more darts than one, have 
welcomed death, that a sad path should open for all 
her brood. Who gainsays the birth of Bacchus 
from his mother's death ? 2 Believe ye, thus sprang 
a deity : thus was born a beast. 



XIII 

SMIT by a fatal spear, and pierced by the wound, 
the mother sow at once lost life and gave it. Oh, 
how sure was the hand with its poised steel ! this, I 
ween, was Lucina's hand. Dying, the beast proved 
the deity of either Dian of her that delivered the 
dam, and of her that slew the brute. 3 

2 cf. v. Ixxii. 

3 Diana, the huntress goddess, was also Lncina, who 
assisted at child-birth. 

II 



XIV 

Sus fera iam gravior maturi pignore ventris 

emisit fetum, vulnere facta parens ; 
nee iacuit partus, sed matre cadente cucurrit. 

quantum est subitis casibus ingenium ! 

XV 

SUMMA tuae, Meleagre, fuit quae gloria famae, 

quantast Carpophori portio, fusus aper ! 
ille et praecipiti venabula condidit urso, 

primus in Arctoi qui fuit arce poli, 
stravit et ignota spectandum mole leonem, 5 

Herculeas potuit qui decuisse manus, 
et volucrem longo porrexit vulnere pardum. 

praemia cum laudum ferret, adhuc poterat. 

XVI 

RAPTUS abit media quod ad aethera taurus harena, 
non fuit hoc artis sed pietatis opus. 

XVlB 

VEXEIIAT Europen fraterna per aequora taurus : 

at nunc Alciden taurus in astra tulit. 
Caesaris atque lovis confer nuno, fama, iuvencos : 

par onus ut tulerint, altius iste tulit. 

1 There is a play here on the two meanings of "fall," to 
descend or to happen. 

2 A celebrated beatiari-us, or hunter of wild beasts, in the 
Amphitheatre : cf. xxiii. and xxvii. of this Book. 

" A passage hopelessly corrupt. MSS. read Pratmia cum 
laudem ferre adhuc poteram. Buecheler suggested Pr. cui 



ON THE SPECTACLES, xiv-xvi B 

XIV 

A WILD sow, now full-heavy with the pledge of 
her quick womb, gave forth her brood, made by her 
wound a mother ; nor lay her offspring still-born, 
but, as its mother fell, it ran. Sudden chances that 
fall, 1 how ingenious are they ! 

XV 

THAT which was the highest glory of thy renown, 
Meleager, how small a part is it of Carpophorus' - 
fame, a stricken boar ! He plunged his hunter's 
spear also in a headlong-rushing bear, the king of 
beasts beneath the cope of Arctic skies ; and he laid 
low a lion, magnificent, of bulk unknown before, one 
worthy of Hercules' might ; and with a far-dealt 
wound stretched in death a rushing pard. He won 
the prize of honour ; yet unbroken still was his 
strength. 3 

XVI 

A BULL, borne aloft from the Arena's midst mounts 
to the skies ; this was no work of art, but one of 
piety. 4 

XVlB 

A BULL carried Europa along fraternal seas 5 ; but 
now a bull has borne Alcides to the stars. 6 Compare 
now, Fame, the steers of Caesar and of Jove : let the 
burden be the same, yet CJaesar's bore his more high. 

laudem ftrre duo poterant. ? Praemia cum laudem (or cur 
laudtin ?) ferrea adhnc poterat. 

4 A fragment, but sometimes combined with the succeeding. 

6 Jupiter, in the guise of a bull, carried off Europa over 
his brother Neptune's seas. 

A bestiarius representing Hercules, or a figure of Her- 
cules, was tossed by a bull. 

13 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XVII 

QUOD pius et supplex elephas te, Caesar, adorat 
hie modo qui tauro tarn metuendus erat, 

non facit hoc iussus, nulloque docente magistro ; 
crede mihi, nostrum sentit et ille deum. 

XVIII 

LAMBERE securi dextram consueta magistri 

tigris, ab Hyrcano gloria rara iugo, 
saeva ferum rabido laceravit dente leonem : 

res nova, non ullis cognita temporibus. 
ausa est tale nihil, silvis dum vixit in altis : 5 

postquam inter nos est, plus feritatis habet. 

XIX 

Qui modo per totam flammis stimulatus h'arenam 

sustulerat raptas taurus in astra pilas, 
occubuit tandem cornuto ardore petitus, 

dum facilem tolli sic elephanta putat. 

XX 

CUM peteret pars haec Myrinum, pars ilia Triumphum, 
promisit pariter Caesar utraque manu. 

non potuit melius litem finire iocosam. 
o dulce invicti principis ingenium ! 

1 cf. n. xliii. 6. 
14 



ON THE SPECTACLES, xvu-xx 

XVII 

IN that, loyal and suppliant, the elephant adores 
thee which here but now was so fearful a foe to a 
bull, this it does unbidden, at the teaching of no 
master ; believe me, it too feels the presence of our 
God! 

XVIII 

WONT to lick the hand of its fearless master, a 
tigress, sprung, their unmatched glory, from Hyr- 
canian hills, savagely tore a fierce lion with mad- 
dened fang : strange was the thing, unknown in any 
age ! She ventured no such deed what time she 
dwelt in her deep woods : she is in our midst, and 
shows more fierceness now. 



XIX 

A BULL that but now, goaded by fire through the 
Arena's length, had seized and flung the dummies l 
skyward, fell at length, countered by a fiery tusk, 2 
while he deemed that with like ease an elephant 
might be tossed. 

XX 

WHEN this faction called for Myrinus, that faction 
for Triumphus, 3 Caesar with either hand uplifted 
promised both. In no wise better could he end the 
friendly debate. O pleasant device of an uncon- 
quered Prince ! 

2 Buecheler explains flammis de cornibus ; Friedlander 
reads cornuto ut ab ore. 

8 Probably names of popular fighters against beasts. 






THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXI 

QUIDQUID in Orpheo Rhodope spectasse theatre 

dicitur, exhibuit, Caesar, harena tibi. 
repserunt scopuli mirandaque silva cucurrit, 

quale fuisse nemus creditur Hesperidum. 
adfuit inmixtum pecori genus omne ferarum, 5 

et supra vatem multa pependit avis, 
ipse sed ingrato iacuit laceratus ab urso. 

haec tantum res est facta irap' la-roptav. 1 

XXlB 

ORPHEA quod subito tellus emisit hiatu 
ursam invasuram, venit ab Eurydice. 2 

XXII 

SOLLICITANT pavidi duni rhinocerota magistri 

seque diu magnae colligit ira ferae, 
desperabantur promissi proelia Martis ; 

sed tandem rediit cognitus ante furor, 
namque gravem cornu gemino sic extulit ursum, 5 

iactat ut inpositas taurus in astra pilas : 3 
Norica tarn certo venabula derigit ictu [XXIII 

fortis adhuc teneri dextera Carpophori. 
ille tulit geminos facili cervice iuvencos, 

illi cessit atrox bubalus atque vison : 1 

hunc leo cum fugeret, praeceps in tela cucurrit. 

i nunc et lentas corripe, turba, moras. 

1 The MSS. read haec tamen res t<it facta ita pictoria. The 
text is as amended by Housman. 

2 So Postgate. The MSS. text versam is amur venit is 
unintelligible. Ursam mersitram (Housman). 

a From this point some editors begin a sep.irate epigram 
on the prowess of Carpophorus. 

16 



ON THE SPECTACLES, xxi-xxm 

XXI 

WHATE'ER Rhodope saw, 'tis said, on the Orphic 
stage, that the Arena, Caesar, has shown l to thee. 
Cliffs crept, and a marvellous wood sped swiftly on, 
one such as was in belief of men the grove of the 
Hesperides. Every kind of wild beast was there 
mingled with the flock, and above the minstrel 
hovered many a bird, but he fell, mangled by an 
ungrateful 2 bear. This thing alone was done untold 
by history. 

XXlB 

WHEREAS the earth yawned suddenly and sent 
forth a she-bear to attack Orpheus, the bear came 
from Eurydice. 3 

XXII 

WHILE in fear the trainers were goading a rhin- 
oceros, and long was the great beast's wrath gather- 
ing strength, all despaired of the conflict of the 
promised war ; yet at length the fury, known ere- 
while, returned. For a heavy bear he tossed with 
his double horn, even as a bull hurls dummies 
heavenward, and with as sure an aim as that where- 
with the stout right hand of Carpophorus, as yet 
young, levels the Noric hunting-spear. That beast, 
agile with pliant neck, stood up against (?) a pair of 
steers, to him yielded the fierce buffalo and bison ; 
a lion in flight from him ran headlong upon the 
spears. Go now, ye rabble, and gird at slow delays ! 

1 A representation of Orpheus' magic power and death. 

2 Giving ill return for the sweetness of O.'s song. 

3 The epigram seems to be connected with XXI., and 
Eurydice sends the bear because she wants Orpheus back. 

17 
VOL. I. C 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXIV 

Si quis ades longis serus spectator ab oris, 

cui lux prima sacri muneris ista fuit, 
ne te decipiat ratibus navalis Enyo 

et par unda fretis, hie modo terra fuit. 
non credis ? specta, dum lassant aequora Martem : 5 

parva mora est, dices " Hie rnodo pontus erat." 

XXV 

QUOD nocturna tibi, Leandre, pepercerit unda 
desine mirari : Caesaris unda fuit. 

XXVe 

CUM peteret dulces audax Leandros amores 
et fessus tumidis iam premeretur aquis, 

sic miser instantes adfatus dicitur undas : 
" Parcite dum propero, mergite cum redeo." 

XXVI 

LUSIT Nereidum docilis chorus aequore toto, 

et vario faciles ordine pinxit aquas, 
fuscina dente minax recto fuit, ancora curvo : 

credidimus remum credidimusque ratem, 

1 Either as sacred to Neptune, or as having been given by 
the Emperor. 

2 While the sea-fight lasts. 

3 Artificially admitted into the Arena. 

18 



ON THE SPECTACLES, XXTV-XXVI 

XXIV 

WHOEVER you are who come from distant shores, 
a late spectator, for whom this day of the sacred 1 
show is your first, that this naval battle with its 
ships, and the waters that represent seas, may not 
mislead, I tell you "here but now was land." Be- 
lieve you not? Look on while the seas weary the 
God of war. 2 Wait one moment you will say 
" Here but now was sea." 

XXV 

THAT the nightly wave spared thee, Leander, cease 
to wonder : it was Caesar's wave. 3 

XX\'B 

WHILE bold Leander was swimming to his sweet 
love, and his weary head was now being engulphed 
by the swelling waters, thus in misery ('tis said) he 
spake to the on-surging waves : " Spare me while I 
hasten, o'erwhelm me when I return." 4 

XXVI 

A TRAINED bevy of Nereids pla} r ed along the 
sea, and with their varied marshalling prankt the 
yielding waters. 5 Threatful with straight tooth, 
was a trident, with curved tooth an anchor : we 
deemed an oar, and we deemed a bark was there, and 

4 This epigram seems out of place, and, like xiv. clxxxi., 
to refer to a statue. 

* In a water spectacle, possibly by artificial light, in which 
groups of Nereids presented somehow the picture of a boat 
and rowers. 

T9 
c 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

et gratum nautis sidus fulgere Laconum, 5 

lataque perspicuo vela tumere sinu. 
quis tantas liquidis artes invenit in undis ? 

aut docuit lusus hos Thetis aut didicit. 

XXVII 

SAECULA Carpophorum, Caesar, si prisca tulissent, 

non Parthaoniam barbara terra feram, 
non Marathon taurum, Nemee frondosa leoneni, 

Areas Maenalium lion timuisset aprum. 
hoc armante manus hydrae mors una fuisset, 5 

huic percussa foret tota Chimaera semel. 
igniferos possit sine Colchide iungere tauros, 

possit utramque feram vincere Pasiphaes. 
si sit, ut aequorei revocetur fabula monstri, 

Hesionem solvet solus et Andromedan. 10 

Herculeae laudis numeretur gloria : plus est 

bis denas pariter perdomuisse feras. 

XXVIII 

AUGUSTI labor hie fuerat committere classes 

et freta navali sollicitare tuba. 
Caesaris haec nostri pars est quota ? vidit in undis 

et Thetis ignotas et Galatea feras ; 
vidit in aequoreo ferventes pulvere currus 5 

et domini Triton isse putavit equos : 
dumque parat saevis ratibus fera proelia Nereus, 

horruit in liquidis ire pedestris aquis. 



1 Castor and Pollux, the Constellation of Gemini. 

2 i.e. of the Emperor. 
8 cf. Lib. Spect. xv. 2. 

4 For every head of the hydra that was cut off two fresh 
ones grew. 



ON THE SPECTACLES, xxvi-xxvm 

that the Laconians' star l glittered in welcome to 
the seamen, and sails bellied broad for all to see. 
Who imagined arts so wondrous in liquid waves ? 
These pastimes either Thetis taught or herself she 
learned. 2 

XXVII 

IF the ages of old, Caesar, had begotten Carpo- 
phorus, 3 a barbarous land had not dreaded Parthaon's 
wild-boar, nor Marathon the bull, leafy Nemea the 
lion, Arcadia the Maenalian boar. When he armed 
his hand the hydra had died a single death, 4 all the 
shapes of Chimaera r> had been stricken by him 
once. The fire-breathing bulls he might have yoked 
without the Colchian's aid, 6 he might have van- 
quished either monster of Pasiphae. Were the story 
of the sea monster renewed, he alone would loose 
Hesione and Andromeda. Let the glories of Her- 
cules' honour be summed : tis more to have quelled 
twice ten beasts at one time. 

XXVIII 

IT was Augustus' work here 7 to embattle fleets, 
and to wake the seas with the trump of naval war. 
How small a part of our Caesar's task ! Thetis and 
Galatea both saw on the wave beasts unknown ; 
Triton saw on that seafloor 8 chariots in hot rivalry, 
and deemed his Master's 9 steeds had sped ; and 
Nereus, what time he set abroach fierce battle for 
the hostile ships, shuddered to tread a-foot amid 

5 A fabulous monster, part lion, part goat, and part 
dragon. Of Medea. 

7 In the gardens of Caesar beyond the Tiber. 

* Some commentators translate pulvis as "spray." 

9 Neptune's. 

21 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

quidquid et in Circo spectatur et Amphitheatre, 
id dives, Caesar, praestitit unda tibi. 10 

Fucinus et diri taceantur stagna Neronis : . 
hanc norint unam saecula naumachiam. 

XXIX 

CUM traheret Priscus, traheret certamina Verus, 

esset et aequalis Mars utriusque diu, 
missio saepe viris magno clamore petita est ; 

sed Caesar legi paruit ipse suae : 
lex erat, ad digitum posita concurrere palma ; 1 5 

quod licuit, lances donaque saepe dedit. 
inventus tamen est finis discriminis aequi : 

pugnavere pares, succubuere pares, 
misit utrique rudes et palmas Caesar utrique : 

hoc pretium virtus ingeniosa tulit. 10 

contigit hoc nullo nisi te sub principe, Caesar : 

cum duo pugnarent, victor uterque fuit. 

XXX 

CONCITA veloces fugeret cum damma Molossos 

et varia lentas necteret arte moras, 
Caesaris ante pedes supplex similisque roganti 

constitit, et praedam non tetigere canes. 

1 p>ilma H, parma Wagner. 

1 He found the water sinking, and he was treading on 
land. 

22 



ON THE SPECTACLES, xxvm-xxx 

the liquid waters. 1 Whatever is viewed in Circus 
and in Amphitheatre, that have Caesar's waters, rich 
in sights, made sure to thee. Let not the Fucine 
lake 2 and the mere of dreadful Nero 3 be told of : 
of this sea-fight alone let the ages know ! 



XXIX 

WHILE Priscus drew out, and Verus drew out the 
contest, and the prowess of both stood long in 
balance, oft was discharge for the men claimed with 
mighty shouts ; but Caesar himself obeyed his own 
law : that law was, when the prize was set up, to 
fight until the finger was raised ; what was lawful he 
did, oft giving dishes and gifts therein. Yet was an 
end found of that balanced strife : they fought well 
matched, matched well they together yielded. To 
each Caesar sent the wooden sword, 4 and rewards to 
each : this prize dexterous valour won. Under no 
prince but thee, Caesar, has this chanced : while 
two fought, each was victor. 



XXX 

WHILE a roused hind was flying from the swift 
Molossian hounds, and tangled the drawn-out chase 
by divers wiles, before Caesar's feet, suppliant and as 
in prayer, she stayed, and the hounds touched not 

2 Where the Emperor Claudius had exhibited a sea-fight : 
Tac. Ann. xn. Ivi.-lvii. 

3 Who had also represented a sea-fight : Suet. Nero xii. 
Rudis, symbolic of discharge from service. 

23 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

5 



haec intellecto principe dona tulit. 
numen habet Caesar : sacra est haec, sacra potestas ; 
credite : mentiri non didicere ferae. 



XXXI (XXXII) 

DA veniam subitis : non displicuisse meretur, 
festinat, Caesar, qui placuisse tibi. 

XXXII (XXXI) 

CEDERE maiori virtutis fama secunda est. 

ilia gravis palma est, quam minor hostis habet. 



XXXIII 

Hoc epigramma post lihrum XI V invenies. 



ON THE SPECTACLES, xxx-xxxin 

their prey .... This boon she won for that she 
avowed her Prince ! Power divine hath Caesar : 
sacred, sacred is this puissance. Believe it ye : 
beasts have not learned to lie. 



XXXI 

PARDON my hurried offering. He desei'ves not to 
displease you, Caesar, who hastes to please you. 

XXXII 

To yield to the stronger is valour's second prize. 
Heavy l is the palm the weaker foeman wins. 

1 i.e. painful to the stronger, though defeated, man. 



BOOK I 



M. VALERI MARTIALIS 
EPIGRAMMATON 

LIBER PRIMUS 

SPERO me secutum in libellis meis tale tempera- 
mentum ut de illis queri non possit quisquis de se 
bene senserit, cum salva infimarum quoque persona- 
rum reverentia ludant ; quae adeo antiquis auctoribus 
defuit ut nominibus non tantum veris abusi sint sed 
et magnis. mihi fama vilius constet et probetur in 
me novissimum ingenium. absit a iocorum nostrorum 
simplicitate malignus interpres nee epigrammata mea 
scribat : inprobe facit qui in alieno libro ingeniosus 
est. lascivam verborum veritatem, id est epigram- 
maton linguam, excusarem, si meum esset exemplum : 
sic scribit Catullus, sic Marsus, sic Pedo, sic Gaetu- 
licus, sic quicumque perlegitur. si quis tamen tarn 
ambitiose tristis est ut apud ilium in nulla pagina 
Latine loqui fas sit, potest epistula vel potius titulo 
contentus esse. epigrammata illis scribuntur qui 

28 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 



BOOK I 

I TRUST that I have followed in my little books 
such a mean that none who forms a right judgment 
of himself can complain of them, inasmuch as their 
sprightliness does not violate that respect for persons 
even of the lowest degree which was so little shown 
by ancient authors that they maltreated the names, 
not merely of real persons, but even of great ones. 
May my fame be bought at lesser cost, and the 
last thing to be approved in me be cleverness. May 
the frankness of my jests find no malicious inter- 
preter, and no such man rewrite my epigrams : it 
is a shameless business when anyone exercises his 
ingenuity on another man's book. For the undis- 
guised freedom of my expressions, that is to say, 
the language of epigram, I would apologise, if 
mine were the example set : in this style writes 
Catullus, in this style Marsus, in this style Pedo, in 
this style Gaetulicus, in this style every one who 
is read through. Yet, if there be any man so pre- 
tentiously prudish that to his mind in no page is it 
permissible to speak plain Latin, he may content 
himself with the introductory epistle, or rather with 
the title. Epigrams are written for those who are 

29 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

solent spectare Florales. non intret Cato theatrum 
ineuni aut, si intraverit, spectet. videor mihi meo 
iure facturus si epistulam versibus clusero : 

Nosses iocosae dulce cum sacrum Florae 
festosque lusus et licentiam volgi, 
cur in theatrum, Cato severe, venisti ? 
an ideo tantum veneras, ut exires ? 

I 

Hie est quern legis ille, quern requiris, 

toto notus in orbe Martialis 

argutis epigrammaton libellis : 

cui, lector studiose, quod dedisti 

viventi decus atque sentienti 5 

rari post cineres habent poetae. 

II 

Qui tecum cupis esse meos ubicumque libellos 

et comites longae quaeris habere viae, 
hos erne, quos artat brevibus membrana tabellis : 

scrinia da magnis, me manus una capit. 
ne tamen ignores ubi sim venalis et erres 5 

urbe vagus tota, me duce certus eris : 
libertum docti Lucensis quaere Secundum 

limina post Pacis Palladiumque forum. 

1 The reference is to a story told in Valer. Max. n, x. 8, 
to the effect that at the Floralia in B.C. 55 Cato left the 
theatre on finding that his presence checked the licence of 
the actors. 

3 



BOOK I. i-n 

accustomed to look on the Games of Flora. Let no 
Cato l enter my theatre, or if he enters, let him 
look on. 

I think I may justifiably close my epistle in verse : 

You knew the rites to jocund Flora dear, 
The festive quips and licence of the rout ; 

Why on our scene, stern Cato, enter here ? 
Did you then enter only to go out ? 

I 

HERE is he whom you read, he whom you ask for, 
Martial, known throughout the whole world for his 
witty little books of Epigrams. To him, studious 
reader, while he lives and feels, you have given 
the glory that poets win but rarely after they are 
dust. 

II 

You, who wish my poems should be everywhere 
with you, and look to have them as companions on a 
long journey, buy these which the parchment confines 
in small pages. Assign your book-boxes to the great; 
this copy of me one hand can grasp. Yet, that 
you may not fail to know where I am for sale, or 
wander aimlessly all over the town, if you accept 
my guidance you will be sure. Seek out Secundus, 
the freedman of learned Lucensis, behind the en- 
trance to the temple of Peace and the Forum of 
Pallas. 2 

1 The Temple of Peace was dedicated by Vespasian in 
A.D. 75 after his triumph for the capture of Jerusalem. The 
Forum of Pallas was the Forum of Nerva, or transitorium, 
begun by Domitian and completed by Nerva. It contained 
a temple to Minerva. 

3' 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

III 

ARGILETANAS mavis habitare tabernas, 

cum tibi, parve liber, scrinia nostra vacent ? 
nescis, heu, nescis dominae fastidia Romae : 

crede mihi, nimium Martia turba sapit. 
maiores nusquam rhonchi : iuvenesque senesque 5 

et pueri nasum rhinocerotis habent. 
audieris cum grand e sophos, dum basia iactas, 

ibis ab excusso missus in astra sago, 
sed tu ne totiens domini patiare lituras 

neve notet lusus tristis harundo tuos, 10 

aetherias, lascive, cupis volitare per auras. 

i, fuge ! sed poteras tutior esse domi. 



IV 

CONTIGERIS nostros, Caesar, si forte libellos, 

terrarum dominum pone supercilium. 
consuevere iocos vestri quoque ferre triumphi, 

materiam dictis nee pudet esse ducem. 
qua Thymelen spectas derisoremque Latinum, 

ilia fronte precor carmina nostra legas. 
innocuos censura potest permittere lusus : 

lasciva est nobis pagina, vita proba. 



Do tibi naumachiam, tu das epigrammata nobis : 
vis, puto, cum libro, Marce, natare tuo. 

1 Varro. Ling. Lat. v. 157, derives the word from argilla, 
"clay"; Virgil, Aen. viii. 346, explains, letum docet hovpitis 
A rqi. 

2 It was customary for Roman soldiers, following a triumph, 

32 



BOOK I. IH-V 

III 

WOULD you rather dwell in the shops of the 
Potters' Field 1 although, small volume, my book- 
case stands empty for you ? You don't know, alas, you 
don't know the superciliousness of Mistress Rome ; 
believe me, the crowd of Mars is too clever for you. 
Nowhere are heard louder sneers ; young men and 
old, even boys, have noses tilted like a rhinoceros. 
When you have heard a deep "Bravo," while you 
are throwing kisses, up you will go, shot heavenward 
from a jerked blanket. But you, to avoid your 
master's constant erasures, and the scoring of your 
playfulness by his critical pen, are eager, wanton 
one, to flit through the airs of heaven. Go ! fly ! 
yet you might have been safer at home. 

IV 

IF perchance, Caesar, you shall come upon my 
books, lay aside the frown that rules the world. 
Your triumphs too have been wont to endure jests, 
and no shame is it to a commander to be matter for 
wit. 2 With the air that views Thymele and the 
mime Latinus, therewith I pray you to read my 
verses. A censor 3 can permit harmless trifling : 
wanton is my page ; my life is good. 

V 

I OFFER you a sea-fight : you offer me epigrams. 
You wish, I think, Marcus, to swim along with your 
book. 4 

to indulge in scurrile jests against their general. This was 
<lone possibly to avert the evil eye. See vn. viii. 7. 

3 Domitian became censor for life A.D. 85. 

4 The Emperor will throw it into the water. For a similar 
idea cf. ix. Iviii. 8. 

33 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

VI 

AETHERIAS aquila puerum portante per auras 
inlaesum timidis unguibus haesit onus : 

mine sua Caesareos exorat praeda leones, 
tutus et ingenti ludit in ore lepus. 

quae maiora put-as miracula ? summus utrisque 5 
auctor adest : haec sunt Caesaris, ilia lovis. 

VII 

STEI.LAE delicium mei columba, 

Verona licet audiente dicam, 

vicit, Maxime, passerem Catulli. 

tanto Stella meus tuo Catullo 

quanto passere maior est columba. 5 

VIII 

QUOD magni Thraseae consummatique Catonis 
dogmata sic sequeris salvos ut esse velis, 

pectore nee nudo strictos incurris in ensis, 
quod fecisse velim te, Deciane, facis. 

nolo virum facili redemit qui sanguine famani ; 5 
hunc volo, laudari qui sine morte potest. 

IX 

BEI.LUS homo et mngnus vis idem, Cotta, videri : 
sed qui bellus homo est, Cotta, pusillus homo est. 

1 Ganymede, the cupbearer of Jove. 

1 Stella (see Index) had written a poem on a dove : the 
word delicium may be a quotation. 

34 



BOOK I. vi-iv 

VI 

WHILE the eagle was bearing the boy 1 through the 
airs of heaven, its burden clung unscathed to those 
timorous talons : now their natural prey bewitches 
Caesar's lions, and safely the hare gambols in their 
monstrous jaws. Which think you the greater 
miracle ? To each belongs a supreme Cause : this is 
Caesar's miracle, that Jove's. 

VII 

MY Stella's "Dove," that "pretty pet," 2 (I must say 
it, though Verona hear me !) has surpassed, Maximus, 
the "Sparrow " of Catullus. 3 So much is my Stella 
greater than your Catullus as a dove is greater than 
a sparrow. 

VIII 

IN that you follow the maxims of great Thrasea 
and of Cato the perfect, and yet are willing to live, 
and rush not with unarmed breast upon drawn 
swords, you do, Decianus, what I would have you 
do. No hero to me is the man who, by easy shed- 
ding of his blood, purchases his fame ; my hero is 
he who, without death, can win praise. 

IX 

A PRETTY 4 fellow you wish to appear, and yet, 
Cotta, a great man. But a pretty fellow, Cotta, is a 
puny fellow. 

3 Cat. ii. and iii. Catullus was born at Verona. 

4 For bcllus cf, n. vii.; in. Ixiii. 

35 
i) 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

X 

PETIT Gemellus nuptias Maronillae 
et cupit et instat et precatur et donat. 
adeone pulchra est ? immo foedius nil est. 
quid ergo in ilia petitur et placet ? tussit. 

XI 

CUM data sint equiti bis quina nomismata, quare 

bis decies solus, Sextiliane, bibis ? 
iam defecisset portantis calda ministros, 

si non potares, Sextiliane, merum. 

XII 

ITUR ad Herculeas gelidi qua Tiburis ai-ces 

canaque sulpureis Albula fumat aquis, 
rura nemusque sacrum dilectaque iugera Musis 

signat vicina quartus ab urbe lapis, 
hie rudis aestivas praestabat porticus umbras, 5 

lieu quam paene novum porticus ausa nefas ! 
nam subito conlapsa ruit, cum mole sub ilia 

gestatus biiugis Regulus esset equis. 
nimirum timuit nostras Fortuna querellas, 

quae par tarn magnae non erat invidiae. 10 

nunc et damna iuvant ; sunt ipsa pericula tanti : 

stantia non poterant tecta probare deos. 



BOOK I. x-xn 

X 

GEMELLUS seeks wedlock with Maronilla ; he de- 
sires it, he urges her, he implores her, and sends 
her gifts. Is she so beautiful? Nay, no creature 
is more disgusting. What then is the bait and charm 
in her? Her cough. 

XI 

WHILE twice five wine-tokens 1 are a knight's 
allowance, why do you, Sextilianus, all to yourself 
take twice ten drinks ? By this time the warm water 
would have failed the attendants who bring it, were 
it not, Sextilianus, that you drank your wine un- 
mixed. 

XII 

WHERE runs the road to the heights of cool Tibur, 
sacred to Hercules, and milky-hued Albula steams 
with its sulphurous waters, the fourth milestone 
from the neighbouring city marks a farm and sacred 
grove, acres dear to the Muses. Here a rustic- 
portico secured a summer shade ; alas, how did that 
portico all but dare a crime unheard of ! For sud- 
denly it fell in ruin when, under that mighty mass, 
Regulus had but now driven in his two-horse 
carriage. Assuredly Fortune was fearful of our 
plaints ; she could not brave odium so great. Now 
even losses please ; dangers themselves bring repay- 
ment : a standing roof could not witness to the 
Gods. 

1 Tesserae vinariae entitling to an allowance of wine at 
a show : ef. i. xxvi. 3. 

37 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XIII 

CASTA suo gladium cum traderet Arria Paeto, 
quem de visceribus strinxerat ipsa suis, 

" Si qua fides, vulnus quod feci non dolet ; " inquit 
" sed tu quod facies, hoc mihi, Paete, dolet." 

XIV 

DELICIAS, Caesar, lususque iocosque leonum 
vidimus (hoc etiam praestat harena tibi) 

cum prensus blando totiens a dente rediret 
et per aperta vagus curreret ora lepus. 

unde potest avidus captae leo parcere praedae ? 5 
sed tamen esse tuus dicitur : ergo potest. 

XV 

O MIHI post nullos, luli, memorande sodales, 

si quid longa fides canaque iura valent, 
bis iam paene tibi consul tricensimus instat, 

et numerat paucos vix tua vita dies, 
non bene distuleris, videas quae posse negari, 5 

et solum hoc ducas, quod fuit, esse tuuni. 
exspectant curaeque catenatique labores ; 

gaudia non remanent, sed fugitiva volant, 
haec utraque manu conplexuque adsei'e toto : 

saepe fluunt imo sic quoque lapsa sinu. 10 

non est, crede mihi, sapientis dicere " Vivam " ; 

sera nimis vita est crastina : vive hodie. 

38 



BOOK I. xii i-xv 

XIII 

WHEN chaste Arria was offering to her Paetus that 
sword which with her own hand she had drawn 
from out her breast : " If thou believest me," she 
said, " the wound I have inflicted has no smart ; but 
the wound thou shalt inflict this for me, Paetus, 
lias the smart." 

XIV 

THE tricks, Caesar, the play and pranks of the 
lions we have seen this tribute, too, the Arena pays 
thee when the hare was seized, and yet so oft was 
let loose from the fondling fangs, and ran here and 
there through the open jaws. Whence inspired can 
a ravaging lion spare his captured prey ? But he 
is called thine ; therefore can he spare. 

XV 

JULIUS, O thou who art to be named second to none 
of my comrades, if long-continued faith and ancient 
claims are worth aught, already thy sixtieth consul's 
year is well-nigh treading on thy heels, yet thy 
life scarce numbers a few days. Not well shalt 
thou put off what thou seest may be denied ; and 
count that only which has been as thine own. 
Cares and linked l toils await us ; joys abide not, 
but fugitive they fly. Grasp these with both thy 
hands, and hold them in thy full embrace ; oft 
they glide away, even so, slipping out of the inmost 
bosom. It sorts not, believe me, with wisdom to 
say "I shall live." Too late is to-morrow's life; 
live thou to-day. 
1 But Friedlamler explains labores quales #unt catenatorum. 

39 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XVI 

SUNT bona, sunt quaedam mediocria, sunt mala plura 
quae legis hie. aliter non fit, Avite, liber. 



XVII 

COGIT me Titus actitare causas 

et dicit mihi saepe " Magna res est." 

res magna est, Tite, quam facit colonus. 



XVIII 

QUID te, Tucca, iuvat vetulo miscere Falerno 

in Vaticanis condita musta cadis ? 
quid tantum fecere boni tibi pessima vina ? 

aut quid fecerunt optima vina mali ? 
de nobis facile est : scelus est iugulare Falernum 5 

et dare Campano toxica saeva mero. 
convivae meruere tui fortasse perire : 

amphora non meruit tarn pretiosa mori. 

XIX 

Si meminij fuerant tibi quattuor, Aelia, denies : 

expulit una duos tussis et una duos, 
iam secura potes totis tussire diebus : 

nil istic quod agat tertia tussis habet. 

1 Possibly the meaning is : it needs a good farmer to make 
a good thing of a farm, and a good advocate which I am 

40 



BOOK I. xvi-xix 

XVI 

THERE are good things, there are some indifferent, 
there are more things bad that you read here. 
Not otherwise, Avitus, is a book produced. 



XVII 

TITUS urges me to plead causes, and often says 
to me: "There is fine profit." But the "fine 
profit" of a farm, Titus, is the work of the 
farmer. 1 

XVIII 

WHY do you choose, Tucca, to mix with old Faler 
nian the must stored in Vatican casks ? 2 What is 
this great benefit the vilest wines have bestowed on 
you, or what harm have the best wines caused you ? 
As to us, 'tis no matter ; it is a crime to murder 
Falernian, to apply to Campanian wine deadly 
poison. Your guests perhaps have deserved ex- 
tinction : a jar so priceless did not deserve to die. 



XIX 

IF I remember right, you had, Aelia, four teeth : 
one fit of coughing shot out two, and another two 
more. Now in peace you can cough all day : a third 
fit has nothing left there to discharge. 

not to make a fortune by advocacy. Friedlauder suggests 
that M. hints that the gift of a farm would suit him Better 
than advice. 

2 Vatican wine was very inferior : cf. vi. xcii. 

41 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XX 

Die mihi, quis furor est ? turba spectante vocata 

solus boletos, Caeciliane, voras. 
quid dignum tanto tibi ventre gulaque precabor ? 

boletum qualem Claudius edit, edas. 



XXI 

CUM peteret regem decepta satellite dextra 

ingessit sacris se peritura focis. 
sed tarn saeva pius miracula 11011 tulit hostis 

et raptum flammis iussit abire virum : 
urere quam potuit contempto Mucius igne, 5 

hanc spectare manum Porsena non potuit. 
maior deceptae fama est et gloria dextrae : 

si non errasset, fecerat ilia minus. 

XXII 

QUID non ' saeva fugis placidi, lepus, ora leonis ~' 
frangere tarn parvas non didicere feras. 

servantur magnis isti cervicibus ungues 
nee gaudet tenui sanguine tanta sitis. 

praeda canum lepus est, vastos non implet hiatus : 5 
non timeat Dacus Caesaris arma puer. 

1 non Dousa, mine codd. 



1 The Emperor Claudius was poisoned by a mushroom : cf. 
Juv. v. 147, where Juvenal probably had this passage in his 
mind. 

42 



BOOK I. xx-xxii 

XX 

TELL me, what madness is this ? While the 
throng of invited guests looks on, you, Caecilianus, 
alone devour the mushrooms ! What prayer shall I 
make suitable to such a belly and gorge ? May you 
eat such a mushroom as Claudius 1 ate ! 



XXI 

THE right hand which, aimed at the king, was 
cheated by an attendant,' 2 laid itself, doomed to 
perish, upon the sacred hearth. But a prodigy so 
cruel the kindly foe could not brook, and he bade 
the warrior go rescued from the flame. The hand 
which, scorning the fire, Mucius, endured to burn, 
Porsena could not endure to behold. Greater, 
because it was cheated, is the fame and glory of that 
right hand ; had it not erred, it had achieved less. 



XXII 

WHY fliest thou, hare, the lion's jaws unstirred 
to rage ? They have not learned to crunch beasts 
so small. Those talons are kept for mighty necks ; 
thirst so great delights not in a draught of blood so 
meagre. The hare is the prey of dogs, it fills not 
vasty mouths ; a Dacian boy would not dread Caesar's 
arms. 

2 Mucius Scaevola mistook an attendant for Porsena, the 
king of Etruria. The story had no doubt been enacted in 
the theatre. . rf. vm. xxx. on the same subject. 

43 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXIII 

INVITAS nullum nisi cum quo, Cotta, lavaris 
et dant convivam balnea sola tibi. 

mirabar quare numquam me, Cotta, vocasses : 
iam scio me nudum displicuisse tibi. 

XXIV 

ASPICIS incomptis ilium, Deciane, capillis, 
cuius et ipse times triste supercilium, 

qui loquitur Curios adsertoresque Camillos ? 
nolito fronti credere : nupsit heri. 

XXV 

EDE tuos tandem populo, Faustine, libellos 

et cultum docto pectore profer opus, 
quod nee Cecropiae damnent Pandionis arces 

nee sileant nostri praetereantque senes. 
ante fores stantem dubitas admittere Famam 

teque piget curae praemia ferre tuae ? 
post te victurae per te quoque vivere chartae 

incipiant : cineri gloria sera venit. 

XXVI 

SEXTILIANE, bibis quantum subsellia quinque 
solus : aqua totiens ebrius esse potes ; 

nee consessorum vicina nomismata tantum, 
aera sed a cuneis ulteriora petis. 



44 



BOOK I. xxin-xxvi 

XXIII 

You invite no man to dinner, Cotta, but your 
bath-companion ; the baths alone provide you with a 
guest. I was wondering why you had never asked 
me ; now I understand that when naked I displeased 
you. 

XXIV 

You see that fellow with unkempt hair, Decianus, 
whose gloomy scowl you too fear, who prates of the 
Curii, and of the Camilli, champions of liberty ? 
Don't credit his appearance ; he was a bride 
yesterday. 

XXV 

GIVE at length to the people, Faustinus, your 
books, and send forth a work, polished by your 
learned skill, which Pandion's Cecropian heights 
would not condemn, 1 nor our sages dismiss in silence 
and pass by. Do you hesitate to admit Fame that 
stands before your doors, and shrink from winning 
the reward of your care ? Let writings that will 
live after you by your aid also begin to live now ; 
to the ashes of the dead glory comes too late. 

XXVI 

SEXTILIANUS, you drink as much as five rows of 
benches to your own share ; drinking water so often 
could make you drunk. It is not only the tokens of 
those who sit near you, but you ask for the bronze 
tickets from those in remoter blocks. This vintage 
1 i.e. which the Athenians would not despise. 

45 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

non haec Paelignis agitur vindemia prelis 5 

uva nee in Tuscis nascitur ista iugis, 
.testa seel antiqui felix siccatur Opimi, 

egerit et nigros Massica cella cados. 
a copone tibi faex Laletana petatur, 

si plus quam decies, Sextiliane, bibis. 10 

XX VII 

HESTERNA tibi nocte dixeramus, 

quincunces puto post decera peractos, 

cenares hodie, Procille, mecum. 

tu f'actam tibi rem statim putasti 

et non sobria verba subnotasti 5 

exemplo nimium periculoso. 

/xicroJ fjLvu.fj.ova crvyujroTav, Procille. 

XXVIII 

HESTERNO fetere mere qui credit Acerram, 
fallitur. in lucem semper Acerra bibit. 

XXIX 

FAMA refert nostros te, Fideutine, libellos 

non aliter populo quam recitare tuos. 
si mea vis dici, gratis tibi carmina mittam : 

si dici tua vis, hoc erne, ne mea shit. 

XXX 

CHIRURGUS fuerat, mine est vispillo Diaulus. 
coepit quo poterat clinicus esse modo. 

1 Consul B.C. 121, a famous year for wine. Massic was 
also a choice vintage ; the others mentioned were poor. 

46 



BOOK I. xxvi-xxx 

is not pressed in Pelignian wine-presses ; nor is that 
grape of yours born on Tuscan hills ; nay, a choice 
jar of ancient Opimius l is drained ; 'tis a Massic 
store-room sends forth its smoked jars. Get from 
the taverner dregs of Laletanian if you take more 
than ten drinks, Sextilianus. 

XXVII 

LAST night I said to you (I think it was after I 
had got through ten half- pints) : " Dine with me to- 
day, Procillus." You at once thought the matter 
settled for you, and took secret note of my unsober 
remark a precedent too dangerous ! " I hate a 
messmate with a memory," Procillus. 

XXVIII 

HE who fancies that Acerra reeks of yesterday's 
wine is wrong. Acerra always drinks till daylight. 

XXIX 

RUMOUR assei-ts, Fidentinus, that you recite my 
works to the crowd, just as if they were your own. 
If you wish they should be called mine, I will send 
you the poems gratis ; if you wish them to be called 
yours, buy my disclaimer 2 of them. 

XXX 

DIAUL.US has been a doctor, he is now an under- 
taker. He begins to put his patients to bed in his 
old effective way. 

2 cf. I. Ixvi. 13. 

47 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXXI 

Hos tibi, Phoebe, vovet totos a vertice crines 

Encolpos, domini centurionis amor, 
grata Pudens meriti tulerit cum praemia pili. 

quam primum longas, Phoebe, recide comas, 
dum nulla teneri sordent lanugine voltus 

dumque decent fusae lactea colla iubae ; 
utque tuis longum dominusque puerque fruantur 

muneribus, tonsum fac cito, sero virum. 

XXXII 

NON amo te, Sabidi, nee possum dicere quare : 
hoc tantum possum dicere, non amo te. 

XXXIII 

AMISSUM non flet cum sola est Gellia patrem, 
si quis adest, iussae prosiliunt lacrimae. 

non luget quisquis laudari, Gellia, quaerit : 
ille dolet vere qui sine teste dolet. 

XXXIV 

INCUSTODITIS et apertis, Lesbia, semper 
liminibus peccas nee tua furta tegis, 

et plus spectator quam te delectat adulter 
nee sunt grata tibi gaudia si qua latent. 

at meretrix abigit testem veloque seraque 
raraque Summoeni l fornice rima patet. 
1 submemmi codd. 

48 



BOOK I. xxxi-xxxiv 

XXXI 

THESE, all the tresses from his head, Encolpos, 
the darling of his master the centurion, vows, 
Phoebus, to thee, when Pudens shall bring home 
the glad guerdon of his merit, a chief centurion's 
rank. 1 Sever, Phoebus, with all speed these long 
locks while his soft cheeks are darkened not with 
any down, and while tumbled curls grace his milk- 
white neck ; and, so that both master and boy may 
long enjoy thy gifts, make him soon shorn, but a 
man late ! 

XXXII 

I DO not love you, Sabidius ; and I can't say why. 
This only I can say : I do not love you. 



XXXIII 

GELI.IA weeps not while she is alone for her lost 
lather ; if any one be present, her tears leap forth 
at her bidding. He does not lament who looks, 
Gellia, for praise ; he truly sorrows who sorrows 
unseen. 

XXXIV 

IT is always with doors unguarded and open, Lesbia, 
you offend, nor do you conceal your intrigues ; and 
it is the spectator more than the adulterer that 
pleases you ; no joys are grateful to you if they are 
hidden. But a harlot repels a witness both by 
curtain and bolt, and rarely a chink gapes in the 

1 cf. v. xlviii. , where the vow was fulfilled. 

49 

VOL. I, E 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

a Chione saltern vel ab lade disce pudorem : 
abscondunt spurcas et monumenta lupas. 

numquid dura tibi nimium censura videtur ? 

deprendi veto te, Lesbia, non futui. 10 

XXXV 

VERSUS scribere me parum severos 

nee quos praelegat in schola magister, 

Corneli, quereris : sed hi libelli, 

tamquam coniugibus suis mariti, 

non possunt sine mentula placere. 5 

quid si me iubeas thalassionem 

verbis dicere non thalassionis ? 

quis Floralia vestit et stolatum 

permittit meretricibus pudorem ? 

lex haec carminibus data est iocosis, 10 

ne possiiit, nisi pruriant, iuvare. 

quare deposita severitate 

parcas lusibus et iocis rogamus, 

nee castrare velis meos libellos. 

Gallo turpius est nihil Priapo. 15 

XXXVI 

Si, Lucane, tibi vel si tibi, Tulle, darentur 

qualia Ledaei fata Lacones habent, 
nobilis haec esset pietatis rixa duobus, 

quod pro fratre mori vellet uterque prior, 
diceret infernas et qui prior isset ad umbras : 5 

" Vive tuo, frater, tempore, vive meo." 



1 Summoenium was the name of a street or quarter in a 
low neighbourhood, and the resort of prostitutes. 

2 A reminiscence of Cat. xvi. 7-8. 

5 



BOOK I. xxxiv-xxxvi 

archway under the walls. 1 From Chione at least, or 
from las learn modesty : for dirty drabs even tombs 
are hiding-places. Does my censure appear to you 
too hard ? I forbid you, Lesbia, to be caught, not 
to be a strumpet. 

XXXV 

THAT I write verses little squeamish, and not such 
as a schoolmaster would dictate in school, is your 
complaint, Cornelius ; but these poems cannot please, 
any more than husbands can please their wives, 
without amorousness. What if you bade me indite 
a marriage song not in the words of a marriage 
song ? Who brings garments into Flora's festival, 
and permits prostitutes the modesty of the stole ? 
This is the rule assigned to jocular poems, to be 
unable to please unless they are prurient. 2 Where- 
fore lay aside your squeamishness, and spare my 
pleasantries and my jokes, I beg you, and do not 
seek to castrate my poems. Than a Priapus as 
Cybele's priest 8 nothing is more disgusting. 

XXXVI 

IF, Lucanus, to thee, or if to thee, Tullus, were 
given the fate of Leda's Spartan sons, 4 now would 
there be proud rivalry of love betwixt you twain, for 
each would wish to be the first to die for his brother ; 
and he who first had passed to the nether shades 
would say : " Live, brother, thy own share of life, 
and live thou mine ! " 

3 The priests of Cybele were eunuchs. 

4 Castor and Pollux, who divided alternately between 
them life in the shades and in heaven. 

5 1 
E 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXXVII 

VENTRIS onus misero, nee te pudet, excipis auro, 
Basse, bibis vitro, carius ergo cacas. 

XXXVIII 

QUEM recitas meus est, o Fidentine, libellus : 
sed male cum recitas, incipit esse tuus. 

XXXIX 

Si quis erit raros inter mnnerandus amicos, 

quales prisca fides famaque novit anus, 
si quis Cecropiae madidus Latiaeque Minervae 

artibus et vera simplicitate bonus, 
si quis erit recti custos, mirator honesti 

et nihil arcano qui roget ore deos, 
si quis erit magnae subnixus robore mentis : 

dispeream si non hie Decianus erit. 

XL 

Qui ducis vultus et non legis ista libenter, 
omnibus invideas, livide, nemo tibi. 

XLI 

URBANUS tibi, Caecili, videris. 
non es, crede mihi. quid ergo ? verna, 
hoc quod Transtiberinus ambulator, 
qui pallentia sulpurata fractis 

5 2 



BOOK I. XXXVII-XLI 

XXXVII 

YOUR bowels' load and you are not ashamed 
you receive in a golden vessel unhappy urn ! 
Bassus, you drink out of crystal ; therefore your 
evacuations are the more costly. 

XXXVIII 

THAT book you recite, O Fidentinus, is mine. But 
your vile recitation begins to make it your OAVH. 

XXXIX 

IF any shall be found to be counted among rare 
friends, such as old-time loyalty and aged fame 
knows; if any shall be found steeped in the accom- 
plishments of Attic and Latin learning, and good 
with a true singleness of heart ; if any shall be 
found the guardian of right, admirer of honour, and 
not such as will sue the Gods for anything under 
his breath ; if any shall be found pillared on the 
strength of a great mind may I perish if Decianus 
will not be he ! 

XL 

You who make faces, and grudgingly read that 
eulogy above, may you envy all men, you jaundiced 
fellow, no man envy you ! 

XLI 

A WIT, Caecilius, you fancy yourself. You are 
none, believe me. What then ? A buffoon. You 
are just like the tramping hawker from beyond the 
Tiber who exchanges pale sulphur matches for 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

permutat vitreis, quod otiosae 5 

vendit qui madid um cicer coronae, 

quod custos dominusque viperarum, 

quod viles pueri salariorum, 

quod fumantia qui tomacla raucus 

circumfert tepidis cocus popinis, 10 

quod non optimus urbicus poeta, 

quod de Gadibus inprobus magister, 

quod bucca est vetuli dicax cinaedi. 

quare desine iam tibi videri, 

quod soli tibi, Caecili, videris, 15 

qui Gabbam salibus tuis et ipsum 

posses vincere Tettium Caballum. 

non cuicumque datum est habere nasuni : 

ludit qui stolida procacitate, 

non est Tettius ille, sed caballus. 20 

XLII 

CONIUGIS audisset fatum cum Porcia Bruti 
et subtracta sibi quaereret arma dolor, 

' Nondum scitis " ait " mortem non posse negari ? 
credideram fatis hoc docuisse patrem." 

dixit et ardentis avido bibit ore favillas. 5 

i mine et ferrum, turba molesta, nega. 

XLI1I 

Bts tibi triceni fuimus, Mancine, vocati 

et positum est nobis nil here praeter aprum, 

non quae de tardis servantur vitibus uvae 
dulcibus aut certant quae melimela favis, 



A street improvisatore : Friedlander. 

A court-fool of Augustus: cf. x. ci.: Juv. xi. 162. So 



54 



BOOK I. XLI-XLIII 

broken glass ; like him, who sells to the idle ring 
warm pease-pudding ; like the keeper and owner of 
vipers ; like the cheap slaves of the saltsellers ; like 
the pieman, who bawls as he carries round in his 
warm pans smoking sausages ; like a second-rate 
street poet l ; like the lewd dance-master from 
Gades ; like the chaps of an old foul-mouthed de- 
bauchee. Wherefore cease to fancy yourself to be 
what you alone, Caecilius, fancy yourself, one who 
could surpass in wit Gabba, 2 and even Tettius Caballus 
himself. Not to everyone is given a critic's nose. 
He who jests with a pointless impudence, is no 
Tettius, but a dull hack. 



XLII 

WHEN Porcia had learned the fate of her husband 
Brutus, 3 and grief looked for the weapons that 
had been stolen from it, "Know ye not yet," she 
said, " that death cannot be denied ? I had be- 
lieved my sire by his fate had taught you this ! " 
She spake, and with greedy throat drank down the 
glowing embers. Go to now ! officious throng : deny 
the steel ! 

XLIIl 

TWICE thirty were we, Mancinus, your invited 
guests, and nothing was served us last night but 
a boar. There were no grapes such as are left to 
hang late upon the vine, nor honey-apples that vie 

too, probably, was Caballus, a word which also means 
" horse," on which M. plays. 
s The assassin of Julius Caesar. 

55 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

noil pira quae longa pendent religata genesta J 

aut imitata brevis Punica grana rosas, 
rustica lactantis nee misit Sassina metas 

nee de Picenis venit oliva cadis, 
nudus aper, sed et hie minimus qualisque necari 

a non armato pumilione potest. 10 

et nihil inde datum est ; tantum spectavinufl omnes : 

ponere aprum nobis sic et harena solet. 
ponatur tibi nullus aper post talia facta, 

sed tu ponaris cui Charidemus apro. 

XLIV 

LASCIVOS leporum cursus lususque leonum 
quod maior nobis charta minorque geiit 

et bis idem facimus, nimium si, Stella, videtur 
hoc tibi, bis leporem tu quoque pone mihi. 

XLV 

EDITA ne brevibus pereat mihi cura libellis, 
dicatur potius Tov 8' a7ra/Aiy3o/xevos. 

XLVI 

CUM dicis " Propero, fac si facis," Hedyle, languet 

protinus et cessat debilitata Venus, 
expectare iube : velocius ibo retentus. 

Hedyle, si properas, die mihi, ne properem. 

1 Some criminal who had been exposed to a wild boar in 
the Arena. 

2 Perhaps the single sheets on which some epigrams wire 

56 



BOOK I. XLIH-XLVI 

with luscious combs ; nor pears that hang tied with 
the pliant broom ; nor pomegranates that copy the 
transient roses. Rural Sassina sent no cones of 
cheese ; there came no olive from Picenian jars. A 
boar, and nothing else ! and this too a tiny one, and 
such as could be slaughtered by an unarmed dwarf. 
And nothing after that was provided : all of us 
merely looked on. Even the Arena serves us up a 
boar in this style ! May no boar be served up to 
you after such behaviour, but may you be served up 
to the same boar as Charidemus ! l 

XLIV 

BECAUSE a larger and a lesser page 2 of mine pre- 
sents the airy gambols of hares, and the lions' play, 
and twice I do the same thing if this seem to you 
excessive, Stella, do you in turn serve up to me 
twice a dish of hare ! 

XLV 

THAT my labour be not lost because published in 
tiny volumes, rather let there be added rw 8' dira- 
fj.tif36p.evos. 3 

XLV1 

WHEN thou sayest " I haste ; now is the time," 
then, Hedylus, my ardour at once flags and weakens. 
Bid me wait : more quickly, stayed, shall I speed on. 
Hedylus, if thou dost haste, tell me not to haste ! 

circulated before publication. Thus i. vi. and xxii. would 
take " a lesser," i. civ. " a larger," page. 

3 i.e. if the public won't buy a small book, I must stuff it 
out with repetitions. The Greek words occur many hundreds 
of times in Homer, 

57 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XLVII 

NUPER erat medieus, nunc est vispillo Diaulus : 
quod vispillo facit, fecerat et medieus. 

XLVIII 

RICTIBUS his tauros non eripuere magistri, 

per quos praeda fugax itque reditque lepus ; 
quodque magis minim, velocior exit ab hoste 

nee nihil a tanta nobilitate refert. 
tutior in sola non est cum currit harena, 5 

nee caveae tanta conditur ille fide, 
si vitare caiium morsus, lepus-inprobe, quaeris, 

ad quae confugias ora leonis habes. 

XLIX 

VIK Celtiberis non tacende gentibus 

nostraeque laus Hispaniae, 
videbis altam, Liciniane, Bilbilin, 

equis et armis nobilem, 
senemque Caium 1 nivibus, et fractis 2 sacrum 5 

Vadaveronem montibus, 
et delicati dulce Boterdi nemus, 

Pomona quod felix amat. 
tepidi natabis lene Congedi vadum 

mollesque Nympharum lacus, 10 

quibus remissum corpus adstringes brevi 

Salone, qui ferrum gelat. 
praestabit illic ipsa figendas prope 

Vobesca prandenti feras. 
aestus serenos aureo franges Tago 15 

obscurus umbris arborum ; 

1 Caium Vossius, calrum ft, catum y. 

2 effractis codd. 



BOOK I. XLVII-XLIX 

XLVII 

LATELY was Diaulus a doctor, now he is an under- 
taker. What the undertaker now does the doctor 
too did before. 

XLVIII 

THE trainers have not torn bulls from these yawn- 
ing mouths wherethrough, a nimble prey, the hare 
comes and goes, and greater marvel yet ! issues 
out of the foe's jaws more agile than before ; some 
spirit from a beast so noble he wins. No safer is he 
while he speeds along the lonely sand, nor is he in 
such ward when shut in a cage. If thou wouldst 
shun, impudent hare, the bite of dogs, thou hast thy 
refuge, the lion's mouth. 

XLIX 

You, a man worthy to be acclaimed by Celtiberian 
tribes, and the glory of our Spain, you, Licinianus, 
will see high-set Bilbilis, renowned for steeds 
and armour, and Caius x with its aged snows, and 
sacred Vadavero on the rugged hills, and the 
pleasant grove of delightful Boterdus which blest 
Pomona loves. You will swim in the smooth shal- 
lows of tepid Congedus, and the mild lake of the 
Nymphs, and brace your limbs, by them relaxed, 
in shallow Salo that chills iron. There shall 
Vobesca's self provide her own wild beasts to be 
speared near by even while you lunch. The cloud- 
less heat you, by boughs o'ershadowed, will assuage 
in golden Tagus' stream ; your eager thirst icy Der- 

1 Some peak in the Pyrenees. 

59 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

avidam rigens Dercenna placabit sitim 

et Nutha, quae vincit nives. 
at cum December canus et bruma impotens 

Aquilone rauco mugiet, 20 

aprica repetes Tarraconis litora 

tuamque Laletaniam. 
ibi inligatas mollibus dammas plagis 

mactabis et vernas apros 
leporemque forti callidum runipes equo, 25 

cervos relinques vilico. 
vicina in ipsum silva descendet focum 

infante cinctum sordido ; 
vocabitur venator et veniet tibi 

con viva clamatus prope ; 30 

lunata nusquam pellis et nusquam toga 

olidaeque vestes murice ; 
procul horridus Liburnus et querulus cliens, 

imperia viduarum procul ; 
non rumpet altum pallidus somnum reus, 35 

sed mane totum dormies. 
mereatur alius grande et insanum sophos : 

miserere tu felicium 
veroque fruere non superbus gaudio, 

duin Sura laudattir tuus. 40 

non inpudenter vita quod relicum est petit, 

cum fama quod satis est habet. 



L 

Si tibi Mistyllos cocus, Aemiliane, vocatur. 
dicatur quare non Taratalla mihi ? 

1 As an advocate : see Index. 
60 



BOOK I. xi.ix-i, 

cenna will allay, and Nutha colder than the snows. 
But when hoar December and wild winter shall 
moan with the hoarse northern blast, you will repair 
to Tarraco's sunny shores and your own Laletania. 
There will you slay does enmeshed in yielding toils, 
and home-bred boars, and with your stout steed 
ride down the cunning hare, to your bailiff resign 
the stags. To your very hearth, ringed with un- 
kempt boy-slaves, shall come down the neighbouring- 
wood ; the hunter will be invited, and he will come 
as your guest when you shout for him hard by; 
nowhere will be seen the crescent shoe, nowhere 
the toga, and clothes smelling strong of purple dye ; 
far off will be the odious Liburnian messenger, and 
querulous client ; the haughty commands of widows 
will be far off; your deep slumber the pale defendant 
will not break, but all through the morning will 
you dream. Let another win the loud and frantic 
" bravo " ; do you pity the " fortunate," and without 
pride enjoy true happiness, while your Sura earns 
applause. 1 Not presumptuously doth life seek what 
remains to it when fame hath its sufficiency. 



IF your cook, Aemilianus, is called Mistyllus, 2 why 
should not Taratalla be the name for mine ? 



1 From recollection of the Homeric line, Mtffrv\\6v r' 
\\a /cot au<' b$t\o'iffiv Hirfiuv. 



61 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LI 

NON facit ad saevos cervix, nisi prima, leones. 

quid fugis hos denies, ambitiose lepus ? 
scilicet a magnis ad te descendere tauris 

et quae non cernuiit frangere colla velis. 
desperanda tibi est ingentis gloria fati : 

non potes hoc tenuis praeda sub hoste mori. 



LII 

COMMENDO tibi, Quintiane, nostros 
nostros dicere si tamen libellos 
possum, quos recitat tuus poeta : 
si de servitio gravi queruntur, 
adsertor venias satisque praestes, 
et, cum se dominum vocabit ille, 
dicas esse meos manuque missos. 
hoc si terque quaterque clamitaris, 
inpones plagiario pudorem. 

LIII 

UN T A est in nostris tua, Fidentine, libellis 
pagina, sed certa domini signata figura, 
quae tua traducit manifesto carmina furto. 
sic interpositus villo contaminat uncto 
urbica Lingonicus Tyrianthina bardocucullus, 
sic Arretinae violant crystallina testae, 
sic niger in ripis errat cum forte Caystri, 
inter Ledaeos ridetur corvus olores, 



1 As asaertor in libertatem, who takes up their claim to 
freedom, not allowing the plagiarist to claim them when 
manumitted by M. 

62 



HOOK I. LI-LIU. . 

LI 

No neck, save the chiefest, sorts 'with savage lions. 
Why fliest thou these fangs, ambitious hare? Thou 
wouldst forsooth have them come down from huge 
bulls to thee, and crunch the neck which they can- 
not see ! Not to be hoped for by thee is the glory of 
a mighty death : thou canst not, slender quarry, die 
under such a foe as this. 

LII 

To your charge I entrust, Quintianus, my works 
if, after all, I can call those mine which that poet of 
yours recites. If they complain of their grievous 
servitude, come forward as their champion l and give 
bail for them ; and when that fellow calls himself 
their owner, say that they are mine, sent forth from 
my hand. 2 If thrice and four times you shout this, 
you will shame the plagiarist. 

LIII 

THERE is one page of yours, Fidentinus, in a book 
of mine a page, too, stamped by the distinct like- 
ness of its master which convicts your poems of 
palpable theft. So, when set among them, a Lin- 
gonian cowled cloak defiles with greasy wool the 
violet-purple robes of town ; so crocks from Arre- 
tium degrade crystal glass ; so a black raven, per- 
chance wandering on Cayster's banks, is laughed at 
among Leda's swans ; so, when a sacred grove is afire 

2 " To send forth from the hand" was to make free a 
slave. So, in another sense, a book on publication is sent 
forth from the hand. 

63 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

sic ubi multisona fervet sacer Atthide lucus, 

in pro ha Cecropias offendit pica querellas. 10 

indice non opus est nostris nee iudice libris ; 

stat contra dicitque tibi tua pagina " Fur es." 

L1V 

Si quid, Fusee, vacas adhuc amari 

(nam sunt hinc tibi, sunt et hinc amici), 

unum, si superest, locum rogamus, 

nee me, quod tibi sim novus, recuses : 

omnes hoc veteres tui fuerunt. 5 

tu tantum inspice qui novus paratur 

an possit fieri vetus sodalis. 

LV 

VOTA tui breviter si vis cognoscere Marci, 

clarum militiae, Fronto, togaeque decus, 
hoc petit, esse sui nee magni ruris arator, 

sordidaque in parvis otia rebus amat. 
quisquam picta colit Spartani frigora saxi 5 

et matutinum portat ineptus Have, 
cui licet exuviis nemoris rurisque beato 

ante focum plenas explicuisse plagas 
et piscem tremula salientem ducere saeta 

flavaque de rubro promere mella cado ? 10 

pinguis inaequales onerat cui vilica mensas 

et sua non emptus praeparat ova cinis ? 
non amet hanc vitam quisquis me non amat, opto, 

vivat et urbanis albus in officiis. 

LVI 

CONTINUIS vexata madet vindemia nimbis : 
non potes, ut cupias, vendere, copo, merum. 

64 



BOOK I. LIII-LVI 

with the varied notes of the Athenian nightingale, 
an impudent jay jars on those Attic notes of woe. 
My books need no title or judge to prove them ; 
your page stares you in the face, and calls you 
"thief." 

LIV 

IF, Fuscus, you have still any room for love for you 
have friends on this side, friends on that a single 
niche, if one remains, I ask. Nor should you reject 
me because I am a "new" friend; all your old friends 
were that once. Look only for this in the new friend 
is he worthy to become an old comrade ? 

LV 

IF you wish briefly to learn your Marcus' wishes, 
Fronto, bright ornament of war and of the gown, 
he seeks this to be tiller of land that is his own, 
though not large ; and rough ease he delights in 
amid small means. Does any man court halls gaudy 
and chill with Spartan stone, and bring with him 
O fool ! the morning salute, who, blest with spoils 
of wood and field, can before his hearth open his 
crowded nets, and draw with trembling line the 
leaping fish, and bring forth from the red jar his 
golden honey ? For whom the bailiff's portly dame 
loads his rickety table, and charcoal unbought cooks 
his home-laid eggs ? May he, I pray, who loves not 
me love not this, and live, pale-faced, amid the 
duties of the town. 

LVI 

THE vineyard drips, lashed by continued rains. 
Mine host, you can't, though you would, sell undiluted 
wine. 

65 

VOL. I. F 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LVII 

QUALEM, Flacce, velim quaeris nolimve puellam ? 

nolo nimis facilem difficilemque nimis. 
illud quod medium est atque inter utrumque pro- 
bamus : 

nee volo quod crucial nee volo quod satiat. 

LVII I 

MILIA pro puero centum me mango poposcit : 
risi ego, sed Phoebus protinus ilia dedit. 

hoc dolet et queritur de me mea mentula secum 
laudaturque meam Phoebus in invidiam. 

sed sestertiolum donavit mentula Phoebo 5 

bis decies : hoc da tu mihi, pluris emam. 

LIX 

DAT Baiana mihi quadrantes sportula centum. 

inter delicias quid facit ista fames ? 
redde Lupi nobis tenebrosaque balnea Grylli : 

tarn male cum cenem, cur bene, Flacce, laver ? 

LX 

INTRES ampla licet torvi lepus ora leonis, 

esse tamen vacuo se leo dente putat. 
quod ruet in tergum vel quos procumbet in armos, 

alta iuvencorum volnera figet ubi ? 
quid frustra nemorum dominum regemque fatigas ? 5 

non nisi delecta pascitur ille fera. 
66 



BOOK I. LVII-I.X 

LVII 

Do you ask, Flaccus, what sort of girl I like or 
dislike ? I dislike one too yielding, and one too 
coy. That middle type between the two I approve : 
I like not that which racks me, nor like I that which 
cloys. 

LVIII 

THE dealer asked me a hundred thousand for the 
lad ; I laughed, but Phoebus straightway paid the 
price. Thereat my grieves and complains about 
me to itself, and Phoebus is applauded to my de- 
spite. But his - presented Phoebus with a nice 
two millions : do you give me as much, and I'll bid 
higher. 

LIX 

MY dole at Baiae gives me a hundred farthings. 
What avails that starvation allowance amid luxury? 
Give me back the gloomy baths of Lupus and of 
Gryllus. Seeing that so badly I dine, why, Flaccus, 
sumptuously should I bathe ? 



LX 

ALBEIT, O hare, you enter the lion's yawning 
mouth, the lion yet regards his fang as unfleshed. 
Upon what back, upon what shoulders shall he throw 
his weight ? The deep wounds that lay low steers 
where shall he plant them ? Why vainly tease the 
woodland's lord and king ? 'Tis not save on the 
beast he has chosen that he feeds. 

6? 
F 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXI 

VERONA docti syllabas amat vatis, 

Marone felix Mantua est, 
censetur Aponi Livio suo tellus 

Stellaque nee Flacco minus, 
Apollodoro plaudit imbrifer Nilus, 5 

Nasone Paeligni sonant, 
duosque Senecas unicumque Lucanum 

facunda loquitur Corduba, 
gaudent iocosae Canio suo Gades, 

Emerita Deciano meo : 10 

te, Liciniane, gloriabitur nostra 

nee me tacebit Bilbilis. 

LXI I 

CASTA nee antiquis cedens Laevina Sabinis 

et quamvis tetrico tristior ipsa viro 
dum modo Lucrino, modo se permittit Averno, 

et dum Baianis saepe fovetur aquis, 
incidit in flammas : iuvenemque secuta relicto 5 

eoniuge Penelope venit, abit Helene. 

LXI1I 

UT recitem tibi nostra rogas epigrammata. nolo. 
non audire, Celer, sed recitare cupis. 

LXIV 

BELLA es, novimus, et puella, verum est, 
et dives, quis enim potest negare ? 
sed cum te nimium, Fabulla, laudas, 
nee dives neque bella nee puella es. 

68 



BOOK I. LXI-LXIV 

LXI 

VERONA loves the syllables of her learned bard, 
Mantua is blest in Maro. The land of Aponus is 
apprised by its Livy, and by Stella, by Flaccus no 
less ; the flooding Nile applauds Apollodorus ; Pe- 
lignians are loud in Naso's praise. The two Senecas 
and matchless Lucan eloquent Corduba proclaims ; 
laughing Gades delights in her Canius, Emerita in 
my Decianus. Of you, Licinianus, shall our Bilbilis 
boast, nor of me shall she be silent. 

LXI I 

CHASTE, and not inferior to the old-world Sabines, 
straiter-laced, too, than her husband in his sternest 
mood, Laevina, while she entrusted herself, now to 
the Lucrine lake and now to Avernus, and was oft 
refreshed by the waters of Baiae, fell into flames. 1 
She went after a youth, leaving a husband : she 
arrived a Penelope and departed a Helen ! 

LXIII 

You ask me to recite to you my epigrams. I 
decline. You don't wish to hear them, Celer, but 
to recite them. 

LXIV 

You are beautiful, we know, and young, that is 
true, and rich for who can deny it ? But while you 
praise yourself overmuch, Fabulla, you are neither 
rich, nor beautiful, nor young. 

1 The looseness of morals at Baiae, Rome's fashionable 
watering-place, was notorious. 

6 9 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXV 

CUM dixi ficus, rides quasi barbara verba 

et dici ficos, Caeciliane, iubes. 
dicemus ficus, quas scimus in arbore nasci, 

dicemus ficos, Caeciliane, tuos. 



LXV 7 1 

EKKAS, meorum fur avare librorun), 

fieri poetam posse qui putas tanti, 

scriptura quanti constet et tomus vilis : 

non sex paratur aut decem sophos nummis. 

secreta quaere carmina et rudes curas 5 

quas novit unus scrinioque signatas 

custodit ipse virginis pater chartae, 

quae trita duro non inhorruit mento. 

inutare dominum non potest liber notus. 

sed pumicata fronte si quis est nondum 10 

nee umbilicis cultus atque membrana, 

mercare : tales habeo ; nee sciet quisquam. 

aliena quisquis recitat et petit famam, 

non emere librum sed silentium debet. 



LXVII 

" LIBER homo es nimium " dicis mihi, Ceryle, semper, 
in te quis dicit, Ceryle, "liber homo es " ? 

1 i.e. piles, or some tumour: cf. iv. li ; vn. Ixxi. ; xiv. 
Ixxxvi. 

2 By being held under the chin while being rolled up 
(Friedlander) ; or by being kissed in compliment in the 
recitation room (Paley) : c/. x. xciii. 6. 

70 



BOOK I. LXV-LXVII 

LXV 

WHEN I called figs "ficus" you laughed at it as 
an outlandish word, and you require them, Caecil- 
ianus, to be called "ficos." We will call those 
" ficus " which we know grow on a tree ; we will 
call your figs, 1 Caecilianus, "ficos." 

LXVI 

You mistake, you greedy thief of my works, who 
think you can become a poet at no more than the 
cost of a transcript and a cheap papyrus roll. Ap- 
plause is not acquired for six or ten sesterces. Look 
out for unpublished poems and unfinished studies, 
which one man only knows of, and which the sire of 
the virgin sheet not yet grown rough by the contact 
of hard chins, 2 keeps sealed up in his book-wallet. 
A well-known book cannot change its author. But 
if there be one with ends not yet smoothed with 
pumice, and not yet smart with its bosses and 
wrapper, buy it : such I possess, and no man shall 
know. Whoever recites another man's work, and so 
woos fame, ought not to buy a book, but silence. 

LXVII 

" YOU'RE too free a man," you are always saying 
to me, Cerylus. In your case, Cerylus, who says 
" you're a free man " ? 3 

y Cerylus was a wealthy freed man of Vespasian who 
changed his name to Laches and pretended to be a free 
man (ingenmis) ; see Suet. Vesp. xxiii. The emendation of 
the text est. (or est ?) is due to Wagner and accepted by 
Friedlander. 

71 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXVIII 

QUIDQUID agit Rufus, nihil est nisi Naevia Rufo. 

si gaudet, si flet, si tacet, hanc loquitur, 
cenat, propinat, poscit, negat, innuit : una est 

Naevia ; si non sit Naevia, mutus erit. 
scriberet hesterna patri cum luce salutem, 

"Naevia lux," inquit "Naevia lumen, have." 
haec legit et ridet demisso Naevia voltu. 

Naevia non una est : quid, vir inepte, furis ? 



LXIX 

COEPIT, Maxime, Pana quae solebat, 
nunc ostendere Canium Tarentos. 



LXX 

VADE salutatum pro me, liber : ire iuberis 

ad Proculi nitidos, officiose, lares, 
quaeris iter, dicam. vicinum Castora canae 

transibis Vestae virgineamque domum. 
inde sacro veneranda petes Palatia clivo, 5 

plurima qua summi fulget imago ducis. 

1 i.e. the preceding part of the epigram, which the husband 
(or lover) thinks must allude to his particular li Naevia " 

1 Since he had gone there the City of Tarentum was as 
proud of his laughing, face (rf. in. xr. 21) as of a famous 
image of the laughing Pan. Tarentos (fern.) is probably a 
literary form of Tarentum. 

72 



BOOK I. LXVUI-LXX 

LXVIII 

WHATEVER Rufus is doing, Naevia is to Rufus his 
all in all. If glad, if tearful, if mute, of her he 
speaks. He dines, drinks healths, asks, denies, or 
nods : Naevia is everything ; be there no Naevia, 
he will be dumb. When yesterday he was writing 
a greeting to his father, " Naevia, light of my eyes," 
he wrote, " Naevia, my sunbeam, I salute thee." 

Naevia reads these lines l with face down-dropt, 
and laughs. There is more than one Naevia ; why, 
you silly husband, do you rage ? 



LXIX 

TARENTOS, that used, Maximus, to display a statue 
of Pan, now begins to display Canius. 2 



LXX 

Go forth, my book, to bear my greeting for me ; 
'tis to the smart house of Proculus you are bidden 
to go, a duteous messenger. You ask the way ? I'll 
tell you. 3 You will pass the temple of Castor near 
time-honoured Vesta, and the house of the Vestals. 
Thence by the Sacred Slope you will make for the 
august Palatine, where gleams many a statue of our 

3 M. is sending his book from his house on the Quirinal to 
Proculus on the Palatine across the Via Sacra and Forum 
Romanum, and he points out the various temples, etc., on 
the way. As to the Colossus (formerly a statue of Nero, 
afterwards of the Sun), cf. Lib. Sped. ii. 1. It stood in 
M.'s time on the Via Sacra, near the arch of Titus, and was 
afterwards set by Hadrian near the Flavian Amphitheatre, 
to which it gave the name of Colosseum. 

73 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

nee te detineat miri radiata colossi 

quae Rhodium moles vincere gaudet opus, 
flecte vias hac qua madidi sunt tecta Lyaei 

et Cybeles picto stat Corybante tholus. 10 

protinus a laeva clari tibi fronte Penates 

atriaque excelsae sunt adeunda domus. 
hanc pete : ne metuas fastus limenque superbum. 

nulla magis toto iaiiua poste patet, 
nee propior quam Phoebus amet doctaeque sorores. 

si dicet "Quare non tamen ipse venit ? " 16 

sic licet excuses " Quia qualiacumque leguntur 

ista, salutator scribere non potuit." 

LXXI 

LAEVIA sex cyathis, septem lustina bibatur, 
quinque Lycas, Lyde quattuor, Ida tribus. 

omnis ab infuso numeretur arnica Falerno, 
et quia nulla venit, tu mihi, Somne, veni. 

LXXII 

NOSTRIS versibus esse te poetam, 

Fidentine, putas cupisque credi ? 

sic dentata sibi videtur Aegle 

emptis ossibus Indicoque cornu ; 

sic quae nigrior est cadente moro, 5 

cerussata sibi placet Lycoris. 

hac et tu ratione qua poeta es, 

calvus cum fueris, eris comatus. 

1 Domitian. 
74 



BOOK I. LXX-LXXII 

illustrious Commander. 1 Let not the mass, girt with 
rays, of the wondrous Colossus that exults to surpass 
the labour of Rhodes, detain you. Bend round here 
where is the roof of wine-drenched Lyaeus, and 
Cybele's dome stands with its painted Corybants. 
Right before you on the left a dwelling with shining 
front and the hall of a lofty house invite approach. 
Make for this ; and, that you may not fear any dis- 
dain and a proud threshold, know that 110 portal 
gapes so wide to show its doorposts, nor is there one 
whereto Phoebus and the learned Sisters draw more 
near in love. If he shall say, " Yet why did he not 
come himself? " thus you may excuse me : " Because 
those poems, whatever their worth, no man could 
have written who attends levees." 

LXXI 

LET Laevia be drunk in six measures, in seven 
Justina, in five Lycas, Lyde in four, Ida in three.' 2 
Let every mistress' name be numbered by outpoured 
Falernian. And, since none of them comes, do you, 
Sleep, come to me ! 

LXXI I 

Is it by borrowing my verses, Fidentinus, that you 
think yourself a poet, and would have it believed ? 
So Aegle imagines she has teeth when she has pur- 
chased bone and ivory ; so she who is blacker than 
a falling mulberry, Lycoris, fancies herself when 
plastered with white lead. On this principle that 
makes you too a poet you will be well thatched 
when you are bald. 

2 One cyathus ( = one-twelfth of a sextarius) is to be poured 
into the cup for each letter of the name : cf. vui. li. 21 ; 
xi. xxxvi. 7. 

75 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXIII 

NULLUS in urbe fuit tota qui tangere vellet 

uxorem gratis, Caeciliane, ttiam, 
dum licuit : sed nunc positis custodibus ingens 

turba fututorum est. ingeniosus homo es. 

LXXIV 

MOECHUS erat : poteras tamen hoc tu, Paula, negare 
ecce vir est : numquid, Paula, negare potes ? 

LXXV 

DIMIDIUM donare Lino quam credere totum 
qui mavolt, mavolt perdere dirnidium. 

LXXVI 

O MIHI curarum pretium non vile mearuni, 

Flacce, Antenorei spes et alumne laris, 
Pierios differ cantus citharamque sororum ; 

aes dabit ex istis nulla puella tibi. 
quid petis a Phoebo ? nummos habet area Minervae ; 

haec sapit, haec omnes fenerat una deos. 6 

quid possunt hederae Bacchi dare ? Pallados arbor 

inclinat varias pondere nigra comas, 
praeter aquas Helicon et serta lyrasque dearum 

nil habet et magnuni sed perinane sophos. 10 

1 Divorced or widowed, she has married her lover, and 
so confesses the charge. 

76 



BOOK I. LXXIII-LXXVI 

LXXIII 

THERE was no one in the whole town willing to 
touch your wife, Caecilianus, gratis, while he was 
allowed ; but, now you have set your guards, there 
is a huge crowd of gallants. You are an ingenious 
person ! 

LXXIV 

HE was your lover; yet this, Paula, you once 
could deny. Behold, he is your husband ; 1 can you 
deny it now ? 

LXXV 

HE who prefers to give Linus half rather than 
trust him with the whole, prefers to lose the half. 

LXXVI 

O YOU, whose friendship is no cheap reward for 
my labours, Flaccus, the hope and nursling of An- 
tenor's settlement, 2 put aside your Pierian lays and 
the lute of the Sisters ; no maid among them will 
give you a penny. What seek you from Phoebus ? 
'Tis Minerva's box holds the coin ; she is shrewd, 
she^ alone is usurer to all the gods. 3 What can ivy 
wreaths of Bacchus give you ? The tree of Pallas bows 
its varied leafage, and is dark with weight of fruit. 
Beyond its streams and the chaplets and lyres of the 
goddesses, Helicon has nought, nought beyond the 
loud but empty " bravo." What have you to do with 

2 Patavium, or Padua: cf. Virg. Aen. i. 246. 

3 Friedlander takes deos as = deonim dona, ' ' lends all that 
the gods can bestow," i.e. wealth, beauty, and the like. 

77 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

quid tibi cum Cirrha ? quid cum Permesside nuda ? 

Romanum propius divitiusque forum est. 
illie aera sonant : at circum pulpita nostra 

et steriles cathedras basia sola crepant. 

LXXVII 

PULCHRE valet Charinus et tamen pallet. 

parce bibit Charinus et tamen pallet. 

bene concoquit Charinus et tamen pallet. 

sole utitur Charinus et tamen pallet. 

tinguit cutem Charinus et tamen pallet. 5 

cunnum Charinus lingit et tamen pallet. 

LXXVIII 

INDIGNAS premeret pestis cum tabida fauces 

inque ipsos vultus serperet atra lues, 
siccis ipse genis flentes hortatus amicos 

decrevit Stygios Festus adire lacus. 
nee tamen obscuro pia polluit ora veneno 5 

aut torsit lenta tristia fata fame, 
sanctam Romana vitam sed morte peregit 

dimisitque animam nobiliore rogo. 1 
hanc mortem fatis magni praeferre Catonis 

fama potest : huius Caesar amicus erat. 10 

LXXIX 

SEMPER agis causas et res agis, Attale, semper : 
est, non est quod agas, Attale, semper agis. 

si res et causae desunt, agis, Attale, mulas. 
Attale, ne quod agas desit, agas animam. 

1 rogo B, vita y, unde via 5-. 



1 The nymph of the river Permessus, which rises on Mount 
Helicon. 



BOOK I. LXXVI LXXIX 

Cirrha ? what with naked Permessis ? * Rome's forum 
is nearer and richer. There is the ring of coin : but 
around the platforms of us poets and our sterile 
chairs there is only the chink of kisses. 

LXXVII 

CHARINUS has good health, and yet he is pale. 
Charinus drinks moderately, and yet he is pale. Cha- 
rinus has good digestion, and yet he is pale. Charinus 
enjoys the sunshine, and yet he is pale. Charinus 
rouges his skin, and yet he is pale. Charinus in- 
dulges in every debauchery and yet he is pale. 2 

LXXVIII 

WHEN wasting disease choked his guiltless throat, 
and o'er his very face crept black contagion, Festus, 
dry-eyed himself, spake to his weeping friends, 
and purposed to pass to the lake of Styx. Howbeit 
he marred not his righteous face with secret poison, 
nor with slow starvation tortured his sad fate ; but 
his sacred life he closed by a Roman's death, and 
set free his soul by a nobler end. This death may 
Fame prize more than great Cato's doom : Caesar 
was this man's friend. 

LXXIX 

You are always doing the pleader and always 
doing the man of business, Attalus ; whether there 
is or is not something to do, Attalus, you are always 
doing something. If business and pleadings fail you, 
you do the mule-driver, Attalus. Attalus, that some- 
thing to do may not fail you, do for yourself. 3 

2 i.e. does not blush. 

3 This epigram cannot satisfactorily be translated : it plays 
on the meanings of agere, which means (inter alia) "conduct," 
"do," or " drive."" 

79 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXX 

SPORTULA, Cane, tibi suprema nocte petita est. 
occidit puto te, Cane, quod una fuit. 

LXXXI 

A SERVO scis te genitum blandeque fateris, 
cum dicis dominum, Sosibiane, patrem. 

LXXXII 

HAEC quae pulvere dissipata multo 

longas porticus explicat ruinas, 

en quanto iacet absoluta casu ! 

tectis nam modo Regulus sub illis 

gestatus fuerat recesseratque, 5 

victa est pondere cum suo repente, 

et postquam domino nihil timebat, 

securo ruit incruenta damno. 

tantae, Regule, post metum querellae 

quis curam neget esse te deorum, 10 

propter quern fuit innocens ruina ? 

LXXXIII 

Os et labra tibi lingit, Manneia, catellus : 
non miror, mei'das si libet esse cani. 

LXXXI V 

UXOREM habendam non putat Quirinalis, 
cum velit habere filios, et invenit 
quo possit istud more : futuit ancillas 
domumque et agros implet equitibus vernis. 
pater familiae verus est Quirinalis. 5 

80 



BOOK I. LXXX-LXXXIV 

LXXX 

ON the night you died, Canus, you looked for a 
dole. What killed you, I think, Canus, was that 
there was but one. 

LXXXI 

You know you were begotten by a slave, and you 
blandly confess it, Sosibianus, when you address 
your father as "master." 

LXXXII 

THIS portico which, scattered in clouds of dust, 
spreads its length of ruin, lo ! of how great a mishap 
does it lie guiltless ! For under that roof Regulus had 
but lately driven and had passed out, when, suddenly 
o'ercome by its own weight, now it felt no misgiving 
for its lord, it crashed harmless in careless downfall. 
Now, Regulus, that fear of such heavy complaining 
is past, who could deny you are the charge of the 
gods, you, for whose sake ruin wrought no harm ? 

LXXXIII 

You ii face and lips, Manneia, your little dog licks ; 
I don't wonder that a dog likes to eat filth. 

LXXXIV 

QUIRINALIS does not think he should take a wife, 
meanwhile he wishes to have sons ; and he has dis- 
covered how to secure that object : he has relations 
with maid-servants, and fills his town-house and 
his country-place with home-born slave-knights. A 
genuine " father of a family " l is Quirinalis. 

1 The meaning of "paterfamilias," i.e. "head of a house- 
hold," is altered to give a new sense. 

81 

VOL. I. G 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXXV 

VENDERET excultos colles cum praeco facetus 

atque suburban! iugera pulchra soli, 
" Errat " ait " si quis Mario putat esse necesse 

vendere : nil debet, fenerat immo magis." 
" Quae ratio est igitur?" " Servos ibi perdidit omnes 5 

et pecus et fructus, non amat inde locum." 
quis faceret pretium nisi qui sua perdere vellet 

omnia ? sic Mario iioxius haeret ager. 

LXXXVI 

V r iciNus meus est manuque tangi 

de nostris Novius potest fenestris. 

quis non invideat mihi putetque 

horis omnibus esse me beatum, 

iuncto cui liceat frui sodale ? 5 

tarn longe est mihi quam Terentianus, 

qui nunc Niliacam regit Syenen. 

non convivere, nee videre saltern, 

non audire licet, nee urbe tota 

quisquam est tarn prope tarn proculque nobis. 10 

migrandum est mihi longius vel illi. 

vicinus Novio vel inquilinus 

sit, si quis Novium videre non volt. 

LXXXVII 

NE gravis hesterno fragres, Fescennia, vino, 

pastillos Cosmi luxuriosa voras. 
ista linunt dentes iantacula, sed nihil opstant, 

extremo ructus cum redit a barathro. 

1 Used in two senses, unhealthy, or unsaleable. 
82 



BOOK I. LXXXV-LXXXVII 

LXXXV 

WHEN a humorous auctioneer was selling a well- 
cultivated hill-estate, and some beautiful acres of 
land near the town, he said : " He is wrong who 
thinks that Marius need sell ; he owes nothing, but 
lends money rather." " What is the reason, then ? " 
" He has lost there all his slaves, and his flocks, and 
his crops; hence he does not like the place." Who 
would make a bid but a man who was willing to lose 
all his possessions ? So his injurious x land sticks to 
Marius. 

LXXXVI 

Novius is my neighbour, and can be touched by 
the hand from my windows. Who would not envy 
me, and think me every hour of the day happy in 
being able to enjoy so close a comrade ? He is as 
far from me as Terentianus who now governs Syene 
on the Nile. I can't dine with him, nor even see 
him or hear him, and in all the city there is no man 
who is so near and yet so far from me. I must 
shift farther, or he must. You should be Novius's 
neighbour, or fellow-lodger, if you don't wish to see 
Novius. 

LXXXVI I 

THAT you may not smell strong of yesterday's 
wine, Fescennia, you devour immoderately Cosmus's 
pastilles. That snack discolours your teeth, but is 
no preventive when an eructation returns from your 
abysmal depths. What if the stench is stronger 

83 
G 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

quid quod olet gravius mixtum diapasmate virus 5 
atque duplex animae longius exit odor ? 

notas ergo nimis fraudes deprensaque furta 
iam tollas et sis ebria simpliciter. 

LXXXVIII 

ALCIME, quern raptum domino crescentibus annis 

Lavicana levi caespite velat humus, 
accipe non Pario nutantia pondera saxo, 

quae cineri vanus dat ruitura labor, 
sed faciles buxos et opacas palmitis umbras 5 

quaeque virent lacrimis roscida prata meis 
accipe, care puer, nostri monimenta doloris : 

hie tibi perpetuo tempore vivet honor, 
cum mihi supremos Lachesis perneverit annos, 

non aliter cineres mando iacere meos. 10 

LXXXIX 

GARRIS in aurem semper omnibus, Cinna, 
garrire et illud teste quod licet turba. 
rides in aurem, quereris, arguis, ploras, 
cantas in aurem, iudicas, taces, clamas, 
adeoque penitus sedit hie tibi morbus, 5 

ut saepe in aurem, Cinna, Caesarem laudes. 

XC 

QUOD numquam maribus iunctam te, Bassa, videbam 
quodque tibi moechum fabula nulla dabat, 

omne sed officium circa te semper obibat 
turba tui sexus, non adeunte viro, 

esse videbaris, fateor, Lucretia nobis : 5 

at tu, pro facinus, Bassa, fututor eras. 

84 



BOOK I. LXXXVII-XC 

when mixed with drugs, and redoubled the reek of 
your breath carries farther ? So away with tricks too 
well known, and detected dodges, and be just simply 
drunk ! 

LXXXVIII 

ALCIMUS, whom, snatched from thy master in thy 
burgeoning years, Lavican earth shrouds with its 
light turf, take from me, not a nodding weight of 
Parian stone, the perishable gift which vain toil 
makes to the dust, but pliant box, and the vine's 
dense shadow, and grass that grows green, dewy with 
my tears. Take them, loved boy, as tokens of my 
sorrow. Here for all time shall thy honour live. 
When Lachesis shall have spun to their end my latest 
years, I charge that in none other sort my ashes lie. 

LXXXIX 

You are always chattering in everybody's ear, 
China, and even what one may chatter with the 
crowd listening. You laugh in the ear, grumble, 
make accusations, complain ; you sing in the ear, 
give opinions, are silent, shout. And so deep-seated 
is this malady of yours that often 'tis in the ear. 
Cinna, you speak Caesar's praise. 

XC 

IN that I never saw you, Bassa, intimate with men, 
and that no scandal assigned you a lover, but every 
office a throng of your own sex round you performed 
without the approach of man you seemed to me, I 
confess, a Lucretia ; yet, Bassa oh, monstrous ! 

85 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

inter se geminos audes committere cunnos 

mentiturque virum prodigiosa Venus, 
commenta es dignum Thebano aenigmate monstrum, 

hie, ubi vir non est, ut sit adulterium. 10 

XCI 

CUM tua non edas, carpis mea carmina, Laeli. 
carpere vel noli nostra vel ede tua. 

XCII 

SAEPE mihi queritur non siccis Cestos ocellis, 

tangi se digito, Mamuriane, tuo. 
non opus est digito : totum tibi Ceston habeto, 

si dest nil aliud, Mamuriane, tibi. 
sed si nee focus est nee nudi sponda grabati 5 

nee curtus Chiones Antiopesve calix, 
cerea si pendet lumbis et scripta lacerna 

dimidiasque nates Gallica paeda tegit, 
pasceris et nigrae solo nidore culinae 

et bibis inmundam cum cane pronus aquam, 10 
non culum, neque enim est culus, qui non cacat olim, 

sed fodiam digito qui superest oculum : 
nee me zelotypum nee dixeris esse malignum. 

denique pedica, Mamuriane, satur. 

XCIII 

FABRICIO iunctus fido requiescit Aquinus, 
qui prior Elysias gaudet adisse domos. 

ara duplex primi testatur munera pili : 

plus tamen est, titulo quod breviore legis : 

" Iunctus uterque sacro laudatae foedere vitae, 5 
famaque quod raro novit, amicus erat." 

1 This epigram closely copies Cat. xxi, xxiii, xxiv. In lines 
11 and 12 there is a pun on culus and oculua. 

86 



BOOK I. XC-XCIH 

you are, it seems, a nondescript. You dare things 
unspeakable, and your portentous lust imitates man. 
You have invented a prodigy worthy of the Theban 
riddle, that here, where no man is, should be adultery ! 

XCI 

ALTHOUGH you don't publish your own, you carp 
at my poems, Laelius. Either do not carp at mine, 
or publish your own. 

XCII 

OFTEN Cestos complains to me with overflowing 
eyes that he is pawed by your finger, Mamurianus. 
No need of a finger : take Cestos altogether to your- 
self if he, Mamurianus, is all that you lack. But if 
you possess no fire, nor frame of a bare truckle-bed, 
nor a broken cup like Chione's and Antiope's ; if a 
cloak, white with age and threadbare, hangs over 
your loins, and a Gaulish cape covers but half your 
buttocks ; and if you batten on the steam only of a 
sooty kitchen, and on all fours like a dog drink from 
dirty puddles, I will not prod that latter-end of 
yours it isn't a latter-end, being unused but I will 
gouge out your remaining eye. And don't say I am 
jealous or malicious. In a word, follow your bent, 
Mamurianus on a full stomach ! l 

XCIII 

By the side of leal Fabricius rests Aquinus, who 
is glad to have passed first to the Elysian abodes. A 
double altar-tomb attests the rank of first cen- 
turion, yet more is what you read in the brief 
inscription : " Both were knit in the sacred bond 
of a life with honour ; and (what fame but seldom 
knows) both were friends." 

87 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XCIV 

CANTASTI male, dum fututa es, Aegle. 
iam cantas bene ; basianda non es. 

XCV 

QUOD clamas semper, quod agentibus obstrepis, Aeli, 
non facis hoc gratis : accipis, ut taceas. 

XCVI 

Si non molestum est teque non piget, scazon, 

nostro rogamus pauca verba Materno 

dicas in aurem sic ut audiat solus. 

amator ille tristium lacernarum 

et baeticatus atque leucophaeatus, 5 

qui coccinatos non putat viros esse 

amethystinasque mulierum vocat vestes, 

nativa laudet, habeat et licet semper 

fuscos colores, galbinos habet mores. 

rogabit unde suspicer virum mollem. 10 

una lavamur : aspicit nihil sursum, 

sed spectat oculis devorantibus draucos 

nee otiosis mentulas videt labris. 

quaeris quis hie sit ? excidit mihi nomen. 

XCVII 

CUM clamant omnes, loqueris tune, Naevole, tantum, 

et te patronum causidicumque putas. 
hac ratione potest nemo non esse disertus. 

ecce, tacent omnes : Naevole, die aliquid. 

1 Lit. "halting verse," or iambics ending with two long 
syllables. 

2 Garments of this colour were worn by women or effemi- 
nate men : Juv. ii. 97. 

88 



BOOK I. xciv-xcvn 

XCIV 

You sang badly while your practices were normal, 
Aegle. Now you sing well but I won't kiss you. 

XCV 

You are always shouting, always interrupting the 
pleaders, Aelius. You don't do this for nothing : 
you take pay to hold your tongue. 

XCVI 

IF it is not a burden nor irksome to you, my 
verse, 1 I beg you speak a few words into Maternus' 
ear, just so, that he alone may hear. Admirer as he 
is of sad-coloured cloaks, and clad in Baetic wool 
and in grey, one who thinks that men in scarlet are 
not men at all, and styles violet mantles the vesture 
of women, although he praises native colours and 
always affects sober hues, grass-green 2 are his morals. 
He will ask you whence springs my suspicion of his 
effeminacy. We bathe together ; he never lifts his 
gaze, but with eyes devouring the catamites he looks 
on and surveys their members with no untwitching 
lips. Do you enquire who this man is ? The name 
has dropped 3 from me. 

XCVIJ 

WHEN everybody is shouting, then only, Naevolus, 
you speak, and think yourself an advocate and pleader. 
On this principle there is none but may be eloquent. 
See, everybody is silent : Naevolus, say something. 



3 Used in an ambiguous sense, either as meaning "I let 
the name out by accident just now," or "I have forgotten 
the name." 

89 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XCVIII 

LITIGAT et podagra Diodorus, Flacce, laborat. 
sed nil patrono porrigit : haec cheragra est. 

XCIX 

NON plenum modo viciens habebas, 

sed tarn prodigus atque liberalis 

et tarn lautus eras, Calene, ut omnes 

optarent tibi centies amici. 

audit vota deus precesque nostras 5 

atque intra, puto, septimas Kalendas 

mortes hoc tibi quattuor dederunt. 

at tu sic quasi non foret relictum 

sed raptum tibi centies, abisti 

in tantam miser esuritionem, 10 

ut convivia sumptuosiora, 

toto quae semel apparas in anno, 

nigrae sordibus explices monetae, 

et septem veteres tui sodales 

constemus tibi plumbea selibra. 15 

quid dignum meritis precemur istis ? 

optamus tibi milies, Calene. 

hoc si contigerit, fame peribis. 



MAMMAS atque tatas habet Afra, sed ipsa tatarum 
dici et mammarum maxima mamma potest. 

CI 

ILLA manus quondam studiorum fida meorum 
et felix domino notaque Caesaribus, 



1 Friedlander explains selibra as a piece of plate of that 
90 



BOOK I. xcvin-ci 

XCVIII 

DIODORUS goes to law, and suffers, Flaccus, from 
gout in the feet. But he offers his advocate no fee : 
this is gout in the hand. 

XCIX 

LATELY you did not possess a full two millions, and 
yet so profuse and open-handed, and so large in en- 
tertainment were you, Calenus, that all your friends 
wished you ten. The god heard our vows and prayers, 
and within, I think, seven months, four deaths gave 
you this sum. But you, just as if nothing had been 
left you, but rather your two millions robbed from 
you, came down wretched man ! to such starvation 
parsimony that those more sumptuous banquets which 
you provide just once in the whole year you now 
set out at the squalid expenditure of dirty coppers ; 
and we, your seven old comrades, cost you only a 
half-pound of bad silver. 1 What reward for merits 
like those should we pray for ? We wish you a 
hundred millions, Calenus. If this sum fall to you, 
you will die of hunger. 



AFKA has "mammas" and "dadas," but she her- 
self may be called the most immemorial mamma 
among these dadas and mammas. 

CI 

ONCE the trusty copyist of my poems, his hand 
a treasure to his master and to the Caesars known, 

weight which he sells to save his money, and plumbea as 
" trumpery." 

9 1 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

destituit primes viridis Demetrius annos : 

quarta tribus lustris addita messis erat. 
ne tamen ad Stygias famulus descenderet umbras, 5 

ureret inplicitum cum scelerata lues, 
cavimus, et domini ius omne remisimus aegro : 

munere dignus erat convaluisse meo. 
sensit deficiens sua praemia meque patronum 

dixit ad infernas liber iturus aquas. 10 



CII 

Qui pinxit V^enerem tuam, Lycori, 
blanditus, puto, pictor est Minervae. 



cm 

" Si dederint superi decies mihi milia centum " 

dicebas, nondum, Scaevola, iustus eques, 
" qualiter o vivam, quam large quamque beate ! " 

riserunt faciles et tribuere dei. 
sordidior multo post hoc toga, paenula peior, 5 

calceus est sarta terque quaterque cute : 
deque decem plures semper servantur olivae, 

explicat et cenas unica mensa duas, 
et Veientani bibitur faex crassa rubelli, 

asse cicer tepidum constat et asse Venus. 10 

in ius, o fallax atque infitiator, eamus : 

aut vive aut decies, Scaevola, redde deis. 



BOOK I. ci-ciii 

Demetrius in his fresh prime has left behind him 
years yet young : a fourth summer had been added 
to three lustres. Yet, that he should not go down 
to the shades of Styx a slave, when a cursed con- 
tagion held him fevered in its toils to this I took 
heed, and to his sickness resigned all a master's 
rights : worthy was he by my gift to have seen 
health once more ! He felt with failing strength 
the boon and called me "patron," now that he 
was passing down, a free man, to the nether wave. 



CII 

HE who painted this Venus of yours, Lycoris, was 
a painter, I think, who paid court to Minerva. 



cm 

" IF the high gods shall give me a million," you 
said, Scaevola, when not yet a knight complete, 1 "oh, 
how I shall live ! how bounteously and how richly! " 
Easy-going, the gods laughed and gave it you. After 
this your toga is much dirtier than before, your 
surtout shabbier, and your shoe has been thrice and 
four times patched. And out of ten olives the larger 
number is always put by, and one catering furnishes 
forth two dinners ; and you drink thick dregs of red 
Veientan wine ; your pea-soup costs you a penny, 
and a penny your amours. Let us go into court, 
you fraudulent trustee ! Either learn to live, or, 
Scaevola, restore the gods that million ! 

1 He had not yet the full qualification of 400,000 sesterces. 

93 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

CIV 

PICTO quod iuga delicata collo 

pardus sustinet inprobaeque tigres 

indulgent patientiam flagello, 

mordent aurea quod lupata cervi, 

quod frenis Libyci domantur ursi 5 

et, quantum Calydoii tulisse fertur, 

paret purpureis aper capistris, 

turpes esseda quod trahunt visontes 

et molles dare iussa quod choreas 

nigro belua non negat magistro : 10 

quis spectacula non putet deorum r 

haec transit tamen, ut minora, quisquis 

venatus humiles videt leonum, 

quos velox leporum timor fatigat. 

dimittunt, repetunt, amantque captos, 15 

et securior est in ore praeda, 

laxos cui dare perviosque rictus 

gaudent et timidos tenere dentes, 

mollem f range re dum pudet rapinam, 

stratis cum modo venerint iuvencis. 20 

haec dementia non paratur arte, 

sed norunt cui serviant leones. 



cv 

IN Nomentanis, Ovidi, quod nascitur agris, 
accepit quotiens tempora longa, merum 

exuit annosa mores nomenque senecta ; 
et quidquid voluit, testa vocatur anus. 



1 Nomentan wine, harsh when new, so improves with age 
94 



BOOK I. civ-cv 

CIV 

THE leopard carries a spangled yoke on its spotted 
neck, and savage tigers give obedience to the whip ; 
stags champ jagged golden bits ; Libyan bears are 
cowed by the i-ein ; a boar, as huge as the Calydo- 
nian of legend, yields to a purple halter; ugly 
bisons draw two-wheeled Gallic cars, and the ele- 
phant, bid lightly to dance, does not say nay to its 
black master. Who would not think here were 
sights fit for the gods ? Yet he passes these by as 
lesser marvels, who sees lions hunting humble quarry 
and wearied by the timorous speed of the hares. 
They let them go, they retrieve them and fondle 
their catch, and the prey is safer in their mouths. 
To receive it the lions delight to offer their jaws 
loose and gaping, and to keep their teeth careful 
not to wound, ashamed as they are to crunch such 
gentle booty when they have just come from laying 
low steers. Such mercy is not won by training, but 
the lions know whom they serve ! 



CV 

THE new wine, Ovidius, that is born in Nomentan 
fields, oft as it has taken upon it length of days, by 
hoary age puts off its nature and its name, and when 
old the jar is called by whatever name it chooses. 1 

that J T OU can consider it as good as any brand : cf. xin. 
cxvii. of Mamertine. 

95 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

CVI 

INTERPONIS aquam subinde, Rufe, 

et si cogeris a sodale, raram 

diluti bibis unciam Falerni. 

numquid pollicita est tibi beatam 

noctem Naevia sobriasque mavis 5 

certae nequitias fututionis ? 

suspiras, retices, gemis : negavit. 

crebros ergo licet bibas trientes 

et durum iugules mero dolorem. 

quid parcis tibi, Rufe ? dormiendum est. 10 

CVI I 

SAEPE mihi dicis, Luci carissime luli, 

" Scribe aliquid magnum : desidiosus homo es." 
otia da nobis, sed qualia fecerat olim 

Maecenas Flacco Vergilioque suo : 
condere victuras temptem per saecula curas 5 

et nomen flammis eripuisse meum. 
in steriles nolunt campos iuga ferre iuVenci : 

pingue solum lassat, sed iuvat ipse labor. 

CVI II 

EST tibi (sitque precor multos crescatque per annos) 
pulchra quidem, verum Transtiberina domus : 

at mea Vipsanas spectant cenacula laurus, 
factus in hac ego sum iam regione senex ; 



= ^ sexlarius = 4 cyathi. In 1. 3 uncia = 1 cyathus. 
2 In the Campus of Vipsanius Agrippa, the sou-in-law of 
Augustus. Here stood the Porticus Agrippae. This was on 
the right bank of the Tiber, and east of the Campus Martius. 

96 



BOOK I. cvi-cvin 

CVI 

You often put water in your wine, Rufus, and, if 
you are pressed by a friend, drink but seldom a 
twelfth-part measure of diluted Falernian. Is it that 
Naevia has promised you a night of joy, and you 
prefer the lecheries by sobriety assured ? You sigh, 
you are dumb, you groan : she has denied "you. So 
you may drink full cup l after full cup, and throttle 
with wine your cruel pain. Why spare yourself, 
Rufus? Remains but to sleep. 



CVII 

OFT you say to me, dearest Lucius Julius : " Write 
something great ! You are a lazy man." Give me 
leisure, and leisure such as once Maecenas provided 
for Flaccus and his own Virgil ; then would I essay to 
build up works that should live throughout ages, and 
to rescue my name from the fire. Into unfruitful 
fields steers care not to bear the yoke ; a fat soil 
wearies, but the very labour delights. 



CVIII 

You have and may it stand, I pray, and flourish 
for many years ! a house, beautiful indeed, but 
beyond the Tiber, whereas my garret looks out on 
the Vipsanian laurels, 2 and in this region I have 
already grown old : I must shift my quarters if I am 

Beyond the Tiber the population was of a low class (cf. 
i. xli. 3), but this epigram shows there were some better- 
class residents. 

97 

VOL. I. H 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

migrandum est, ut mane domi te, Galle, salutem. 5 

est tanti, vel si longius ilia foret. 
sed tibi non multum est, unum si praesto togatum : 

multum est hunc unum si mihi, Galle, nego. 
ipse salutabo decuma te saepius hora : 

mane tibi pro me dicet havere liber. 10 



CIX 

ISSA est passere nequior Catulli, 

Issa est purior osculo columbae, 

Issa est blandior omnibus puellis, 

Issa est carior Indicis lapillis, 

Issa est deliciae catella Publi. 5 

hanc tu, si queritur, loqui putabis ; 

sentit tristitiamque gaudiumque. 

collo nixa cubat capitque somnos, 

ut suspiria nulla sentiantur ; 

et desiderio coacta ventris 10 

gutta pallia non fefellit ulla, 

sed blando pede suscitat toroque 

deponi monet et rogat levari. 

castae tantus inest pudor catellae, 

ignorat Venerem ; nee invenimus 15 

dignum tarn tenera virum puella. 

hanc ne lux rapiat suprema totam, 

picta Publius exprimit tabella, 

in qua tarn similem videbis Issam, 

ut sit tarn similis sibi nee ipsa. 20 

Issam denique pone cum tabella : 

aut utramque putabis esse veram, 

aut utramque putabis esse pictam. 



98 



BOOK I. cvm-cix 

to salute you, Gallus, in the morning at your house. 
Tis worth my while, even if that house of yours 
were farther off. But to you 'tis not much my pro- 
viding one gowned client ; 'tis much if I refuse this 
one man to myself. 1 In person I will full fre- 
quently salute you at the tenth hour 2 ; in the morn- 
ing, on my behalf, my book will bid " good day." 

CIX 

ISSA is naughtier than Catullus' sparrow ; Issa is 
more pure than kiss of dove ; Issa is more coaxing 
than any maid ; Issa is more precious than Indian 
pearls ; Issa is Publius' darling lap-dog. If she 
whines you think she is speaking ; she feels sadness 
and joy. Resting on his neck she lies and takes her 
sleep so softly that her breathings are not heard ; and 
when o'ercome by nature's longing never did she by 
a single drop betray the coverlet, but with wheedling 
paw she rouses you, warns you to put her down from 
the bed, and asks to be lifted. So great is the 
modesty of this chaste lap-dog that she knows not 
of love, nor can we find a mate worthy of a maid so 
tender. That death should not rob him of her alto- 
gether, Publius portrays her in a picture, wherein 
you will see an Issa so like that not even the dog 
herself is so like herself. In fine, set Issa alongside 
her picture ; you will think either that each is 
genuine, or you will think that each is painted. 



1 If I rob myself of my leisure. 

2 The dinner hour. 



99 
H 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

CX 

SCRIBERE me quereris, Velox, epigrammata longa, 
ipse nihil scribis. tu breviora facis. 

CXI 

CUM tibi sit sophiae par fama et cura deorum, 

ingenio pietas nee minor ipsa tuo : 
ignorat meritis dare munera, qui tibi librum 

et qui miratur, Regule, tura dari. 

CXII 

CUM te non nossenr, dominum regemque vocabam 
iiunc bene te novi ; iam mihi Priscus eris. 

CXIII 

QUAECUMQUE lusi iuvenis et puer quondam 

apinasque nostras, quas nee ipse iam novi, 

male conlocare si bonas voles horas 

et invidebis otio tuo, lector, 

a Valeriano Pollio petes Quinto, 

per quern perire non licet meis nugis. 

CXIV 

Hos tibi vicinos, Faustine, Telesphorus hortos 
Faenius et breve rus udaque prata tenet. 



100 



BOOK I. cx-cxiv 

CX 

You complain, Velox, that I write long epigrams, 
you yourself write nothing. Yours are snorter. 

CXI 

SINCE the fame of your scholarship is as great as 
your allegiance to the gods, your piety no less than 
your genius, he knows not how to reward merit who 
wonders that a book, and who wonders, Regulus, 
that incense is given to you. 

CXII 

WHEN I did not know you, I called you my master 
and my king. 1 Now I know you well ; henceforth 
you shall be to me Priscus. 

CXIII 

ALL the light verse I penned once as youth and 
boy, and my worthless efforts which not even I 
myself now recognise these, if you want to spend 
good hours badly, and have a grudge against your 
leisure time, reader, you can get from Pollius Quintus 
Valerianus. It is through him my trifles are not 
allowed to perish. 

CXIV 

THESE gardens near to thee, Faustinas, arid the 
narrow field and water-meadows, Telesphorus Faenius 

1 i.e. patron. M. has now found that his patron will do 
nothing for him : cf. II. Ixviii. 

101 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

condidit hie natae cineres nomenque sacravit 
quod legis Antullae, dignior ipse legi. 

ad Stygias aequum fuerat pater isset ut umbras 
quod quia non licuit, vivat, ut ossa colat. 

cxv 

QUAEDAM me cupit, (invide, Procille !) 

loto candidior puella cycno 

argento nive lilio ligustro : 

sed quandam volo nocte nigriorem 

formica pice graculo cicada. 

iam suspendia saeva cogitabas : 

si novi bene te, Procille, vives. 

CXVI 

Hoc nemus aeterno cinerum sacravit honori 
Faenius et culti iugera pulchra soli. 

hoc tegitur cito rapta suis Antulla sepulchre, 
hoc erit Antullae mixtus uterque parens. 

si cupit hunc aliquis, moneo, ne speret agellum 
perpetuo dominis serviet iste suis. 

CXVII 

OCCURRIS quotiens, Luperce, nobis, 
" Vis mittam puerum " subinde dicis 
"cui tradas epigrammaton libellum, 
lectum quern tibi protinus remittam ? " 
non est quod puerum, Luperce, vexes, 
longum est, si velit ad Pirum venire, 
et scalis habito tribus sed altis. 
quod quaeris propius petas licebit. 

102 



BOOK I. cxiv-cxvn 

owns. Here has he buried the ashes of his daughter 
and made holy the name you read, Antulla, though 
'twere fitter his own name were read there ! More 
justly had the sire passed to the shades of Styx ! 
But as it could not be, let him live to honour her 
bones. 

cxv 

ONE I could name desires me (be jealous, Pro- 
cillus !), a girl whiter than a washed swan, than 
silver, snow, lily, privet. But I woo one I could 
name darker than night, than an ant, pitch, a 
jackdaw, a cicada. Just now you were contem- 
plating a cruel death by the rope. If I know you 
well, Procillus, you will keep alive ! 

CXV I 

THIS grove, and the fair acres of tilled land, 
Faenius has consecrated to the eternal honour of the 
dead. In this sepulchre is shut Antulla, snatched 
too quickly from her own ; in this shall both An- 
tulla's parents blend their dust. If someone covets 
this small field, I warn him not to hope : for all time 
shall it lie subject to its lords. 

CXVII 

As often as you run across me, Lupercus, at once 
you say : " May I send a boy to get from you your 
book of epigrams ? When I have read it I will at 
once return it." There is no call, Lupercus, to 
trouble your boy. It is a long way if he sets out 
for the Pear-tree, and Ilive up three flights of stairs, 
and high ones ; you can look for what you want 

103 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

Argi nempe soles subire Letum : 

contra Caesaris est forum taberna 10 

scriptis postibus hinc et inde totis, 

ornnis ut cito perlegas poetas. 

illinc me pete, nee roges Atrectum 

(hoc nomen dominus gerit tabernae) : 

de primo dabit alterove nido 15 

rasum pumice purpuraque cultum 

denaris tibi quinque Martialem. 

"Tanti non es" ais ? sapis, Luperce. 

CXVIII 

GUI legisse satis non est epigrammata centum, 
nil illi satis est, Caediciane, mali. 



104 



BOOK I. cxvn-cxviii 

nearer. Of course you often go down to the Potter's 
Field. 1 There is a shop opposite Caesar's Forum with 
its door-posts from top to bottom bearing advertise- 
ments, so that you can in a moment read through the 
list of poets. Look for me in that quarter. No need 
to ask Atrectus (that is the name of the shopkeeper) : 
out of the first or second pigeon-hole he will offer 
you Martial smoothed with pumice and smart with 
purple, for three shillings. " You're not worth it," 
you say ? You are wise, Lupercus. 

CXVIII 

HE who is not glutted with the reading of a 
hundred epigrams is not glutted, Caecilianus, with 
any amount of badness. 

1 cf. I. iii. 1. 



BOOK II 



LIBER SECUNDUS 

VAL. MARTIALIS DECIANO Suo SAL. 

" QUID nobis " inquis "cum epistula ? parum enim 
tibi praestamus, si legimus epigrammata ? quid hie 
porro dicturus es quod non possis versib?/* dicere ? 
video quare tragoedia atque comoedia epistulam ac- 
cipiant, quibus pro se loqui non licet : epigrammata 
curione non egent et contenta sunt sua lingua : in 
quacumque pagina visum est, epistulam faciunt. noli 
ergo, si tibi videtur, rem facere ridiculam et in toga 
saltantk 1 inducere personam. denique videris an te 
delectet contra retiarium ferula, ego inter illos sedeo 
qui protinus reclamant." puto me hercules, Deciane, 
verum dicis. quid si scias cum qua et quam longa 
epistula negotium fueris habiturus ? itaque quod 
exigis fiat, debebunt tibi si qui in hunc librum 
inciderint, quod ad primam paginam non lassi per- 
venient. 

I 

TER centena quidem poteras epigrammata ferre, 
sed quis te ferret perlegeretque, liber ? 

1 scdtantis Pontanus, saltanti codd. 
108 



BOOK II 

VALERIUS MARTIALIS TO HIS DECIANUS SENDS GREETING. 

"WHAT have I to do," you say, "with a letter? 
Why, am I not bountiful enough if I read epi- 
grams ? What further are you going to say here 
that you cannot say in verse ? I see why tragedy 
and comedy admit of a prefatory epistle, for they 
cannot speak for themselves. Epigrams need no 
crier, but are content with their own tongue : in 
whatever page they choose they constitute an epistle. 
Do not then, if it please you, do a ridiculous thing 
and introduce the character of one dancing in a 
toga. Lastly, consider whether you are inclined to 
encounter the net-caster with a wand. 1 I sit with 
those who at once protest." I think, so help me 
Hercules ! Decianus, you say truly. But if you knew 
what an epistle, and how long a one, you were about 
to deal with ! So let what you require be done. It 
will be owing to you that any persons who come 
across this book will not be weary before they come 
to the first page ! 

I 

You might certainly have borne with you thrice a 
hundred epigrams, but who would have borne with 
you, my book, and have read you through ? But now 

1 i.e. with such a poor weapon as a prefatory epistle to 
encounter the critic. 

109 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

at nunc succinct! quae sint bona disce libelli. 

hoc primum est, brevior quod rnihi charta perit ; 
deinde, quod haec una peragit librarius hora, 5 

nee tantum nugis serviet ille nieis ; 
tertia res haec est, quod si cui forte legeris, 

sis licet usque malus, non odiosus eris. 
te conviva leget mixto quincunce, sed ante 

incipiat positus quam tepuisse calix. 10 

esse tibi tanta cautus brevitate videris ? 

ei mihi, quam multis sic quoque longus eris ! 

II 

GRETA dedit magnum, maius dedit Africa nomen, 
Scipio quod victor quodque Metellus habet ; 

nobilius domito tribuit Germaiiia Rheno ; 
et puer hoc dignus nomine, Caesar, eras. 

frater Idumaeos meruit cum patre triumphos ; 5 

quae datur ex Chattis laurea, tota tua est. 

Ill 

SEXTE, nihil debes, nil debes, Sexte, fatemur. 
debet enim, si quis solvere, Sexte, potest. 

IV 

O QUAM blandus es, Ammiane, matri ! 

quam blanda est tibi mater, Ammiane ! 

fratrem te vocat et soror vocatur. 

cur vos nomina nequiora tangunt ? 

quare non iuvat hoc quod estis esse ? 5 

1 Presumably he was drinking a hot mixture. 

2 He assumed the name Germanicus in 84, after his triumph 



BOOK II. i-iv 

learn what are the merits of a concise book. This 
first : less of my paper is wasted ; next, my copyist 
gets through it in a single hour, and he will not be 
wholly busied with my trifles ; the third thing is this, 
that, if you are perhaps read to anyone, bad as you 
may be all through, you will not be a bore. The 
guest will read you after his five measures have been 
mixed, and before the cup he has put aside begins to 
grow cool. 1 Do you fancy yourself guarded by such 
brevity ? Alas, to how many even so will you be 
long ! 

II 

CRETE gave a great name, Africa gave a greater, the 
one victorious Scipio, the other Metellus bears; a 
nobler yet Germany bestowed when the Rhine was 
subdued ; and of this name thou, Caesar, wert worthy 
while still a boy ! 2 Along with his sire thy brother 3 
won his Idumaean triumph ; the bay given for the 
Chatti is wholly thine. 

Ill 

SEXTUS, you are no debtor, you are no debtor, 
Sextus, we allow. For he is a debtor, Sextus, who 
can pay. 

IV 

OH, how fondling you are, Ammianus, to your 
mother ! How fondling is your mother to you, 
Ammianus ! Brother is what she calls you, and she 
is called sister. Why do disreputable names attract 
you ? Why are you not content to be what you are ? 

over the Chatti, but he had taken part in an expedition into 
Germany in A.D. 70. 

3 Titus : the reference is to the capture of Jerusalem, 
A.D. 70. 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

lusum creditis hoc iocumque ? non est : 
matrem, quae cupit esse se sororem, 
nee matrem iuvat esse nee sororem. 



NE valeam, si non totis, Deciane, diebus 

et tecum totis noctibus esse velim. 
sed duo sunt quae nos disiungunt milia passum : 

quattuor haec fiunt, cum rediturus earn, 
saepe domi non es; cum sis quoque, saepe negaris; 5 

vel tantum causis vel tibi saepe vacas. 
te tamen ut videam, duo milia non piget ire : 

ut te non videam, quattuor ire piget. 

VI 

1 NUNC, edere me iube libellos. 

lectis vix tibi paginis duabus 

spectas eschatocollion, Severe, 

et longas trahis oscitationes. 

haec sunt, quae relegente me solebas 5 

rapta exscribere, sed Vitellianis ; 

haec sunt, singula quae sinu ferebas 

per convivia cuncta, per theatra ; 

haec sunt, aut meliora, si qua nescis. 

quid prodest mihi tarn macer libellus, 10 

nullo crassior ut sit umbilico, 

si totus tibi triduo legatur? 

numquam deliciae supiniores. 

lassus tarn cito deficis viator 

et, cum currere debeas Bovillas, 15 

interiungere quaeris ad Camenas ? 

i nunc, edere me iube libellos. 

1 Small, delicate tablets, often used for love-messages : cf. 
xiv. viii. and ix. 

112 



BOOK II. iv-vi 

Do you imagine this conduct is play and amusement ? 
It isn't. A mother who desires that she should be 
a "sister," is not content to be a mother or a sister 
either. 

V 

MAY I be shot but I should like, Decianus, to be 
with you all day and all night. But there are two 
miles that part us ; these become four when I go 
and have to return. Often you are not at home ; 
even although you are, often you are denied ; or you 
have spare time only for clients or for yourself. Yet 
to see you I do not mind going the two miles ; not 
to see you and to go four I do mind. 

VI 

So much for your bidding me publish my poems ! 
When you have read scarcely two pages, you glance 
at the last sheet, Severus, and pull interminable 
yawns ! These are the poems which, when I read 
them again to you, you used to snatch from me and 
copy, and on Vitellian tablets a too ! These are they, 
which, every one, you used to carry in your pocket 
at all the parties, at the theatres these are they, 
or others better you don't know of. What advantage 
to me is a volume so thin that it is not thicker 
than a roller-stick, if it takes three days to read it 
all ? Never was dilettante so indolent ! A weary 
traveller, do you give in so soon, and, although you 
have to drive to Bovillae, 2 want to change horses 
at the Camenae ? So much for your bidding me 
publish my poems ! 

2 Twelve miles from Rome on the Appian Way ; the 
fountain and temple of the Camenae weru just outside the 
Porta Capena. 

JI 3 
VOL. I. I 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

VII 

DECLAMAS belle, causas agis, Attice, belle, 

historias bellas, carmina bella facis. 
componis belle mimos, epigrammata belle ; 

bell us grammaticus, bellus es astrologus ; 
et belle caiitas et saltas, Attice, belle ; 5 

bellus es arte lyrae, bellus es arte pilae. 
nil bene cum facias, facias tamen omnia belle, 

vis dicam quid sis ? magnus es ardalio. 

VIII 

Si qua videbuntur chartis tibi, lector, in istis 

sive obscura nimis sive Latina parum, 
non meus est error : nocuit librarius illis 

dum properat versus adnumerare tibi. 
quod si non ilium sed me peccasse putabis, 5 

tune ego te credam cordis habere nihil. 
" Ista tamen mala sunt." quasi nos manifesta ne- 
gemus ! 

haec mala sunt, sed tu non meliora facis. 



IX 

SCRIPSI ; rescripsit nil Naevia ; non dabit ergo, 
sed puto quod scripsi legerat : ergo dabit. 



BASIA dimidio quod das mihi, Postume, labro, 
laudo : licet demas hinc quoque dimidium. 

vis dare maius adhuc et inenarrabile munus ? 
hoc tibi habe totum, Postume, dimidium. 

114 



BOOK II. VH-X 

VII 

You declaim nicely ; you plead causes, Atticus, 
nicely ; you write nice histories, nice poems. You 
compose nicely mimes, epigrams nicely ; you are a 
nice litterateur, a nice astronomer, and you sing 
nicely and dance nicely, Atticus ; you are a nice 
performer on the lyre, you are a nice player at ball. 
Seeing that you do nothing well, yet do everything 
nicely, would you have me describe you ? You are 
a great dabbler. 

VIII 

IF any poems in those sheets, reader, seem to you 
either too obscure or not quite good Latin, not mine 
is the mistake : the copyist spoiled them in his 
haste to complete for you his tale of verses. But 
if you think that not he, but I am at fault, then I 
will believe that you have no intelligence. " Yet, 
see, those are bad." As if I denied what is plain ! 
They are bad, but you don't make better. 

IX 

I WROTE ; Naevia wrote me no reply ; so she will 
not receive me. But, I think, she read what I wrote : 
so she will. 

X 

IN that you give me kisses, Postumus, with only 
half your lips, I thank you ; you may subtract a half 
even from this half. Will you give me a gift still 
greater, and one inexpressible ? Keep to yourself 
the whole of this half, Postumus. 



i 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XI 

QUOD fronte Selium nubila vides, Rufe, 

quod ambulator porticum terit seram, 

lugubre quiddam quod tacet piger voltus, 

quod paene terrain nasus indecens tan git, 

quod dextra pectus pulsat et comam vellit, 5 

non ille amici fata luget aut fratris ; 

uterque natus vivit et precor vivat ; 

salva est et uxor sarcinaeque servique ; 

nihil colonus vilicusque decoxit. 

maeroris igitur causa quae ? domi cenat. 10 

XII 

ESSE quid hoc dicam quod olent tua basia murrain 
quodque tibi est numquam non alienus odor ? 

hoc mihi suspectum est, quod oles bene, Postume, 

semper : 
Postume, non bene olet qui bene semper olet. 

XIII 

ET iudex petit et petit patronus. 
solvas censeo, Sexte, creditori. 

XIV 

NIL intemptatum Selius, nil linquit inausum, 
cenandum quotiens iam videt esse domi. 

currit ad Europen et te, Pauline, tuosque 
laudat Achilleos, sed sine fine, pedes. 



1 In the Campus Martins. It was built by Vipsania Polla, 
the sister of Agrippa, and was adorned with paintings of the 

116 



BOOK II. xi-xiv 

XI 

You see, Rufus, how Selius wears a cloudy brow, 
how he paces up and down the colonnade late ; how 
his heavy countenance silently bespeaks some me- 
lancholy thought ; how his ugly nose almost touches 
the ground ; how with his right hand he beats his 
breast and plucks his hair. Yet he is not lamenting 
the death of a friend or of a brother ; each of his 
sons is living and 1 hope may live ; his wife, too, is 
safe, and his chattels and his slaves ; neither his 
tenant nor his steward has made default. His 
sorrow then what is the cause of it ? He dines at 
home ! 

XII 

How shall I explain this, that your kisses smell 
of myrrh, and that there is about you invariably 
some foreign odour ? This is suspect to me, your 
being well-scented, Postumus, always. Postumus, he 
is not well scented who always is well-scented ! 

XIII 

THE judge wants his fee, and your counsel wants 
his. My advice, Sextus, is : pay your creditor. 

XIV 

NOTHING Selius leaves untried, nothing unventured, 
as often as he perceives at last that he must dine at 
home. He scurries to Europa's Portico 1 and pours 
forth praise and interminable praise of you, Pau- 
linus, and of your feet that vie with Achilles'. If 

rape of Europa. As to its connection with running matches, 
cf. vii. xxxii. 12. 

117 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

si nihil Europe fecit, tune Saepta petuntur, 5 

si quid Phillyrides praestet et Aesonides. 
hie quoque deceptus Memphitica templa frequentat, 

adsidet et cathedris, maesta iuvenca, tuis. 
inde petit centum pendentia tecta columnis, 

illinc Pompei dona nemusque duplex. 10 

nee Fortunati spernit nee balnea Fausti 

nee Grylli tenebras Aeoliamque Lupi : 
nam thermis iterum ternis iterumque lavatur. 

omnia cum fecit, sed renuente deo, 
lotus ad Europes tepidae buxeta recurrit, 15 

si quis ibi serum carpat amicus iter. 
per te perque tuarn, vector lascive, puellam, 

ad cenam Selium tu, rogo, taure, voca. 

XV 

QUOD nulli calicem tuum propinas, 
humane facis, Horme, non superbe. 

XVI 

ZOILUS aegrotat : faciunt hanc stragula febrem. 

si fuerit sanus, coccina quid facient ? 
quid torus a Nilo, quid Sidone tinctus olenti ? 

ostendit stultas quid nisi morbus opes ? 

1 The Saepta Julia, an enclosure in the Campus Martius, 
begun by Julius Caesar, and completed by Agrippa. It con- 
tained shops, and became a fashionable place of resort : cf. 
li. lix.; ix. lix. Pliny (Nat. Hist, xxxvi. 29) mentions it as 
containing a group of Chiron (Philyrides) and Achilles. 
Aesonides ( = Jason) probably refers to the neighbouring 
Porticus Argonautarwm : cf. in. xx. ; XI. i. 12. 

118 



BOOK II. xiv-xvi 

Europa has produced nothing, then he makes for the 
Saepta, 1 to see if the son of Philyras and the son of 
Aeson will guarantee him anything. Baffled in this 
quarter, too, he haunts the temple of Isis, 2 and takes 
his seat beside the chairs, sad heifer, of thy worship- 
pers. Thence he seeks the roof poised on a hundred 
columns ; 3 from there Pompey's gift with its double 
groves. Neither of Fortunatus nor of Faustus does 
he spurn the bath, nor Gryllus' gloom and Lupus' 
cave of the winds ; as to the three hot baths 4 he 
bathes again and again. When he has done every- 
thing the god still refusing his wishes after his 
bath he runs again to the box-groves of sun-warmed 
Europa, in hope that there some friend may be walk- 
ing late. Wanton carrier, I pray thee by thyself and 
by thy virgin freight, 5 do thou, O bull, ask Selius to 
dinner. 6 

XV 

To no one do you pass your cup to pledge you. 
This is human feeling. 7 Hormus, not pride. 

XVI 

ZOILUS is ill : it is his bed-trappings cause this 
fever. Suppose him well ; what will be the use of 
scarlet coverlets ? What of a mattress from Nile, or 
of one dipped in strong-smelling purple of Sidon ? 
What but illness displays such foolish wealth ? 

2 Also in the Campus Martius. 

3 The so-called Hecatostylon, close to the Portico and 
Theatre of Pompey. 

4 i.e. of Agrippa, Nero, and Titus. 6 Europa. 

6 i.e. M. prays that S. should be thrown to a bull in the 
Arena (Friedlander) : cf. I. xliii. 14. Others explain that M. 
hopes Jupiter will remove S. from the world. 

7 Because his lips polluted the cup (Friedlander). 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

quid tibi cum medicis ? dimitte Machaonas omnis. 5 
vis fieri sanus ? stragula sume mea. 

XVII 

TONSTRIX Suburae faucibus sedet primis, 

cruenta pendent qua flagella tortorum 

Argique Letum multus obsidet sutor. 

sed ista tonstrix, Ammiane, non tondet, 

non tondet, inquam. quid igitur facit ? radit. 5 

XVIII 

CAPTO tuam, pudet heu, sed capto, Maxime, cenam, 

tu captas aliam : iam sumus ergo pares, 
mane salutatum venio, tu diceris isse 

ante salutatum : iam sumus ergo pares, 
sum comes ipse tuus tumidique anteambulo regis, 5 

tu comes alterius : iam sumus ergo pares. 
esse sat est servum, iam nolo vicarius esse. 

qui rex est, regem, Maxime, non habeat. 

XIX 

FELICEM fieri credis me, Zoile, cena ? 

felicem cena, Zoile, deinde tua ? 
debet Aricino conviva recumbere clivo, 

quern tua felicem, Zoile, cena facit. 



1 cf. I. iii. 1 ; cxvii. 9. z Sensu obsceno. 3 cf. 11. xxxii. 
I2O 



BOOK II. xvi-xix 

What do you want with doctors? Dismiss all your 
physicians. Do you wish to become well ? Take 
my bed-trappings ! 

XVII 

A FEMALE barber sits just at the entrance of the 
Subura, where the blood-stained scourges of the 
executioners hang, and many a cobbler faces the 
Potter's Field. 1 But that female barber, Ammianus, 
does not crop you ; she does not crop you, I say. 
What, then, does she do ? She skins you. 2 



XVIII 

I FISH for your invitation to dinner ; I am ashamed, 
alas ! yet, Maximus, I fish for it ; you fish for another 
man's ; so now we are a pair. In the morning I 
attend your levee ; you, they tell me, have gone 
before to another levee ; so now we are a pair. I 
in person am your attendant, and the escort of a 
haughty lord ; you are escort of another ; so now we 
are a pair. To be a slave is enough ; I won't any 
longer be a slave's slave. He who is a lord, Maxi- 
mus, should not have his own lord. 3 



XIX 

D'YE think I am made happy, Zoilus, by a dinner ? 
Happy by a dinner, Zoilus, and above all by 
yours ? That guest should lie at his meals on Aricia's 
slope 4 whom your dinner, Zoilus, makes happy. 

4 A favourite resort of begears : cf. xii. xxxii. 10 ; Juv. 
iv. 117. 

121 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XX 

CARMINA Paulus emit, recital sua carmina Paulus. 
nam quod emas possis hire vocare tuum. 

XXI 

BASIA das aliis, aliis das, Postume, dextram. 
dicis " Utrum mavis ? elige." malo manum. 

XXII 

QUID mihi vobiscum est, o Phoebe novemque sorores? 

ecce nocet vati Musa iocosa suo. 
dimidio nobis dare Postumus ante solebat 

basia. nunc labro coepit utroque dare. 

XXIII 

NON dicam, licet usque me rogetis, 

qui sit Postumus in meo libello, 

non dicam : quid enim mihi necesse est 

has offendere basiationes 

quae se tarn bene vindicare possunt ? 5 

XXIV 

" Si det iniqua tibi tristem fortuna reatum, 

squalidus haerebo pallidiorque reo : 
si iubeat patria damnatum excedere terra, 

per freta, per scopulos exulis ibo comes." 
Dat tibi divitias : ecquid sunt ista duorum ? 5 

das partem? " Multum est." Candide, das aliquid? 
mecum eris ergo miser : quod si deus ore sereno 

adnuerit, felix, Candide, solus eris. 

1 cf. n. xv. 



BOOK II. xx-xxiv 

XX 

PAULUS purchases poetry, Paulus recites the poetry 
as his. For what you purchase you may rightly call 
your own. 

XXI 

KISSES you give to some ; to others you give, 
Postumus, your hand. You say, " Which do you 
prefer ? Choose." I prefer the hand. 1 

XXII 

WHAT do I want with you, O Phoebus, and ye 
Sisters Nine ? See how the jesting Muse injures 
her own bard ! Postumus used before to give me 
kisses with half his lips ; now he begins to give them 
with both. 

XXIII 

I WILL not say, however repeatedly you ask me, 
who is the Postumus in my little book ; I will not 
say. For why must I offend those kisses which can 
so well avenge themselves ? 

XXIV 

" SHOULD unkind Fortune give you the sad lot of 
one accused, in squalid guise will I cling to you, 
paler than the accused. Should she bid you, a con- 
demned man, to leave your fatherland, over seas, 
over rocks will I go, companion of the exile." She 
gives you wealth ; does that belong to two ? Do 
you give half? " 'Tis much." Candidus, do you 
give something ? My comrade then you will be in 
trouble ; but let the god smile with sunny face, 
Candidus, your good luck you will enjoy alone. 

123 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXV 

DAS numquam, semper promittis, Galla, roganti. 
si semper fallis, iam rogo, Galla, nega. 

XXVI 

QUOD querulum spirat, quod acerbum Naevia tussit, 
inque tuos mittit sputa subinde sinus, 

iam te rem factam, Bithynice, credis habere ? 
erras : blanditur Naevia, non moritur. 



XXVII 

LAUDANTEM Selium cenae cum retia tendit 

accipe, sive legas sive patronus agas : 
" Effecte ! graviter ! cito ! nequiter ! euge ! beate ! " 

hoc volui : facta est iam tibi cena, tace. 



XXVIII 

RIDETO multum qui te, Sextille, cinaedum 
dixerit et digitum porrigito medium. 

sed nee pedico es nee tu, Sextille, fututor, 
ealda Vetustinae nee tibi bucca placet. 

ex istis nihil es fateor, Sextille : quid ergo es ? 
nescio, sed tu scis res superesse duas. 

XXIX 

RUFE, vides ilium subsellia prima terentem, 
cuius et hinc lucet sardonychata manus, 

1 cf. i. x. 2 The digitus infamis ; cf. Pers. ii. 33. 
124 



BOOK II. xxv-xxix 

XXV 

You never grant my prayer, Galla, but are always 
promising. If you are always false my prayer is 
now, " Galla, refuse." 

XXVI 

BECAUSE Naevia wheezes, because Naevia has a 
racking cough, and oft flings her spittle into your 
bosom, do you imagine, Bithynicus, that you have 
your object already attained ? l You are mistaken. 
Naevia is wheedling you ; she is not dying. 

XXVII 

WHEN Selius is spreading his nets for a dinner, 
take him with you to applaud, whether you are re- 
citing or acting as counsel. " A good point ! Weighty 
that ! How ready ! A hard hit ! Bravo ! That's 
happy ! " That is what I wanted. You have now 
earned your dinner ; hold your tongue. 

XXVIII 

SCOFF much at him who calls you, Sextillus, a , 

and push out your middle finger. 2 Indeed you are 

no , nor are you, Sextillus, an adulterer, nor 

have Vetustina's hot lips delight for you. None of 
those things are you, I confess, Sextillus : what then 
are you ? I don't know ; but you know two things 
remain. 

XXIX 

RUFUS, you see that fellow lolling in the front 
seats, whose hand even at this distance shines with 
sardonyx, and whose mantle has so often absorbed all 

125 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

quaeque Tyron totiens epotavere lacernae 

et toga non tactas vincere iussa nives, 
cuius olet toto pinguis coma Marcelliano 5 

et splendent volso bracchia trita pilo. 
non hesterna sedet lunata lingula planta, 

coccina non laesum pingit aluta pedem, 
et numerosa linunt stellantem splenia frontem. 

ignoras quid sit ? splenia tolle, leges. 10 

XXX 

MUTUA viginti sestertia forte rogabam, 
quae vel donanti non grave munus erat. 

quippe rogabatur felixque vetusque sodalis 
et cuius laxas area flagellat opes. 

is mihi " Dives eris, si causas egeris " inquit. 5 

quod peto da, Gai : non peto consilium. 

XXXI 

SAEPE ego Chrestinam futui. det quam bene quaeris ? 
supra quod fieri nil, Mariane, potest. 

XXXII 

Lis mihi cum Balbo est, tti Balbum ofFendere non vis, 
Pontice : cum Licino est, hie quoque magnus homo 
est. 



1 South of the Circus Flaminius. Begun by Julius Caesar, 
and finished by Augustus, who dedicated it B.C. 11 in the 
name of Marcellus. 

* i.e. brand-new, not twenty-four hours old. 

126 



BOOK II. xxix-xxxn 

the purple of Tyre, and whose toga has been made 
to outshine the untrodden snow ; whose greasy hair 
is smelt all over Marcellus' theatre l ; and whose 
arms gleam smooth with the hair plucked off. His 
shoe-latchet, not of yesterday, 2 rests on a crescent- 
decked 3 shoe ; scarlet leather adorns his ungalled 
foot; and his brow numerous patches 4 star and 
plaster. Don't you know what is the reason ? Lift 
the patches : you will read. 

XXX 

I ASKED, as it chanced, the loan of twenty thousand 
sesterces, which, even to a giver, would have been 
no burden. The fact was I asked them of a well- 
to-do and old friend, and one whose money-chest 
keeps in control 5 o'erflowing wealth. His answer 
was : " You will be rich if you plead causes." Give 
me what I ask, Gaius : I don't ask for advice. 

XXXI 

I HAVE often enjoyed Chrestina's favours. Do you 
ask how generously she grants them ? Beyond them, 
Marianus, nothing is possible. 

XXXII 

I HAVE a lawsuit with Balbus : you don't wish to 
offend Balbus, Ponticus ; I have one with Licinus : 

* The crescent on the shoe was a mark of senatorial or 
patrician rank : Juv. vii. 192. 

4 Often used to set off beauty (cf. vni. xxxiii. 22), here to 
hide the marks of the branding-iron. 

5 Others take flayellat as = " urges into activity." 

127 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

vexat saepe meum Patrobas confinis agellum ; 

contra libertum Caesaris ire times, 
abnegat et retinet nostrum Laronia servum ; 

respondes " Orba est, dives, anus, vidua." 
non bene, crede mihi, servo servitur amico : 

sit liber, dominus qui volet esse meus. 

XXXIII 

CUR non basio te, Philaeni ? calva es. 
cur non basio te, Philaeni ? rufa es. 
cur non basio te, Philaeni ? lusca es. 
haec qui basiat, o Philaeni, fellat. 

XXXIV 

CUM placeat Phileros tota tibi dote redemptus, 
tres pateris natos, Galla, perire fame. 

praestatur cano tanta indulgentia cunno 
quern nee casta potest iam decuisse Venus. 

perpetuam di te faciant Philerotis amicam, 
o mater, qua nee Pontia deterior. 

XXXV 

CUM sint crura tibi simulent quae cornua lunae, 
in rhytio poteras, Phoebe, lavare pedes. 

XXXVI 

FLECTERE te nolim sed nee turbare capillos ; 
splendida sit nolo, sordida nolo cutis ; 

128 



BOOK II. \\.\ii-xxxvi 

he, too, is a great man. My next-door neighbour, 
Patrobas, often trespasses on my small field : you are 
afraid to oppose Caesar's freed-man. Laronia denies 
that I lent her my slave, and keeps him : you will 
answer me, "She is childless, rich, old, a widow." 
It is useless, believe me, to be the slave of a slave, 
though he is a friend : let him be free who shall 
wish to be my lord. 

XXXIII 

WHY do I not kiss you, Philaenis? You are bald. 
Why do I not kiss you, Philaenis ? You are carroty. 
Why do I not kiss you, Philaenis ? You are one-eyed. 
He who kisses these things, Philaenis, is capable of 
anything. 

XXXIV 

WHILE Phileros, whom with your whole dowry you 
have redeemed from slavery, is your favourite, you 
allow your three sons, Galla, to perish of hunger. 
Your hoary carcass is assured such indulgence as 
this, although riot even chaste love can any longer 
become it. For ever may the gods make you the 
mistress of Phileros, O mother, than whom not even 
Pontia l was viler ! 

XXXV 

SEEING that your legs resemble the horns of the 
moon, you could bathe your feet, Phoebus, in a 
drinking-horn. 

XXXVI 

I WOULD not have you curl your hair, nor yet ruffle 
it ; I do not want your skin to be sleek, I do not 
1 She poisoned her two sons (.Tuv. vi. 638). 

129 
VOL. I. K 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

nee tibi mitrarum nee sit tibi barba reorum : 
nolo virum nimium, Pannyche, nolo parum. 

nunc sunt crura pilis et sunt tibi pectora saetis 5 
horrida, sed mens est, Pannyche, volsa tibi. 

XXXVII 

QUIDQUID ponitur hinc et inde verris, 

mammas suminis imbricemque porci 

communemque duobus attagenam, 

mullum dimidium lupumque totum 

muraenaeque latus femurque pulli 5 

stillantemque alica sua palumbum. 

haec cum condita sunt madente mappa, 

traduntur puero domum ferenda : 

nos accumbimus otiosa turba. 

ullus si pudor est, repone cenam : 10 

eras te, Caeciliane, non vocavi. 

XXXVIII 

QUID mihi reddat ager quaeris, Line, Nomentanus ? 
hoc mihi reddit ager : te, Line, non video. 

XXXIX 

COCCINA famosae donas et ianthina moechae : 
vis dare quae meruit munera ? mitte togam. 

1 M. is probably thinking of the eunuch and depilated 
priests of Cybele (Friedlander). 

130 



BOOK II, xxxvi xxxix 

want it to be dirty ; do not let your beard be that 
of Orientals l nor yet that of men on trial ; 2 I dp 
not want one too much a man, Pannychus ; I do not 
want one too little. As it is, your shanks are shaggy 
with hair and your chest is with bristles : but it 
is your mind, Pannychus, that is depilated. 

XXXVII 

WHATEVER is served you sweep off from this or 
that part of the table : the teats of a sow's udder 
and a rib of pork, and a heathcock meant for two, half 
a mullet, and a bass whole, and the side of a lamprey, 
and the leg of a fowl, and a pigeon dripping with 
its white sauce. These dainties, when they have 
been hidden in your sodden napkin, are handed over 
to your boy to carry home : we recline at table, an 
idle crowd. If you have any decency, restore our 
dinner ; I did not invite you, Caecilianus, to a meal 
to-morrow. 

XXXVIII 

Do you ask, Linus, what my Nomentan farm 
returns me ? This my land returns me : 1 don't 
see you, Linus. 

XXXIX 

You present a notorious adulteress with scarlet 
and violet dresses. Do you want to give her the 
present she has deserved? Send her a toga. 3 

2 Who let their beards grow unkempt to excite the jury's 
compassion. 

3 Courtesans, or women in adulterio deprthennae, were 
compelled by law to wear the toga. 

IS' 

K 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XL 

URI Tongilius male dicitur hemitritaeo. 

novi hominis fraudes : esurit atque sitit. 
subdola tenduntur crassis nunc retia turdis, 

hamus et in mullum mittitur atque lupum. 
Caecuba saccentur quaeque annus coxit Opimi, 5 

condantur parco fusca Falerna vitro, 
omnes Tongilium medici iussere lavari : 

o stulti, febrem creditis esse ? gula est. 

XLI 

" RIDE si sapis, o puella, ride " 

Paelignus, puto, dixerat poeta. 

sed non dixerat omnibus puellis. 

verum ut dixerit omnibus puellis, 

non dixit tibi : tu puella non es, 5 

et tres sunt tibi, Maximina, dentes, 

sed plane piceique buxeique. 

quare si speculo mihique credis, 

debes non aliter timere risum, 

quam ventum Spanius manumque Prisons, 10 

quam cretata timet Fabulla nimbum, 

cerussata timet Sabella solem. 

voltus indue tu magis severos 

quam coniunx Priami nurusque maior. 

mimos ridiculi Philistionis 15 

et convivia nequiora vita, 

et quidquid lepida procacitate 

laxat perspicuo labella risu. 

1 Ovid ; but the passage is not found in his extant works. 
He, however, gives a warning against laughing if the teeth 
are bad (Art. Am. iii. 279 seqq.). 

132 



BOOK II. XL-XLI 

XL 

'Tis a false report that Tongilius is being consumed 
by a semi-tertian fever. I know the tricks of the 
man : he is hungry and thirsty. Crafty nets are now 
being stretched for dull-witted thrushes, and the 
hook is being let down for the mullet and the bass. 
Let the Caecuban be strained, and the wines Opimius' 
year ripened ; let the dark Falernian be poured in 
small glasses. All his doctors have ordered Tongilius 
to take baths. O you fools ! Think you this is a 
fever ? 'Tis gluttony. 

XLI 

" LAUGH, if you are wise, O girl, laugh," the Pe- 
lignian bard, 1 I think, said. But he did not say it 
to all girls. However, granted he said it to all girls, 
he did not say it to you : you are not a girl, and 
you have three teeth, Maximina, but they are 
altogether of the hue of pitch or boxwood. So, if 
you trust your mirror and me, you ought to dread 
laughing as much as Spanius dreads a breeze, 2 and 
Priscus the touch of a hand ; as' much as pearl- 
powdered Fabulla dreads a shower, white-leaded 
Sabella dreads the sun. Do you put on an aspect 
more grave than that of Priam's. spouse and of his 
eldest son's wife. Avoid the mimes of laughter- 
moving Philistion, and revelries of looser kind, and 
anything that by witty wantonness unseals the lips 

2 i.e. that might disorder the arrangement of his hair 
that conceals his baldness (cf. x. Ixxxiii.). Priscus is a fop 
who is afraid a touch might disorder or soil his dress (cf. 
in. Ixiii. 10). 

.'33 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

te maestae decet adsiderc matri 

lugentive virum piumve fratrem, 20 

et tantum tragicis vacare Musis. 

at tu iudicium secuta nostrum 

plora, si sapis, o puella, plora. 

XLII 

ZOILE, quid solium subluto podice perdis ? 
spurcius ut fiatj Zoile, merge caput. 

XLIII 

Koti/a <iAa>v haec sunt, haec sunt tua, Candide, Kowd, 

quae tu magnilocus iiocte dieque sonas ? 
te Lacedaemonio velat toga lota Galaeso 

vel quam seposito de grege Parma dedit : 
at me, quae passa est furias et cornua tauri, 5 

noluerit dici quam pila prima suam. 
misit Agenoreas Cadmi tibi terra lacernas : 

non vendes nummis coccina nostra tribus. 
tu Libycos Indis suspendis dentibus orbis : 

fulcitur testa fagina mensa mihi. 10 

inmodici tibi flava tegunt chrysendeta mulli : 

concolor in riostra, cammare, lance rubes. 
grex tuus Iliaco pbterat certare cinaedo : 

at mihi succurrit pro Ganymede manus. 
ex opibus tantis veteri fidoque sodali 15 

das nihil et dicis, Candide, KOIVO. 



1 The pila was a dummy figure thrown into the Arena to 
enrage the bull: cf. Lib. Spect. ix. 4; x. Ixxxvi. The first 
one thrown would be the worst gored. 

134 



BOOK II. XLI-XUH 

in manifest laughter. You should rightly sit by some 
sorrowing mother, or by one who weeps for her hus- 
band or loving brother, and you should be free only 
for the tragic Muse. Nay, follow my advice, and 
weep, if you are wise, O girl, weep. 

XLII 

ZOILUS, why do you defile the bath by immersing 
your latter end ? To make it dirtier, Zoilus, plunge 
in your head. 

XLIII 

"FRIENDS have all in common." Is this, is this, 
Candidus, that "all in common" which you night and 
day mouth pompously ? A toga dipt in Lacedaemo- 
nian Galaesus enwraps you, or one which Parma has 
supplied you out of a choice flock ; as for mine, it is 
one which has suffered the fury and horns of a bull, 
one which the first straw-dummy 1 would refuse to 
have called its own. The land of Cadmus has sent 
you Tyrian mantles ; my scarlet one you could not 
sell for sixpence. You poise round Libyan table-tops 
on legs of Indian ivory ; my beechen table is propped 
on a tile. Mullets of huge size cover your yellow 
gold-inlaid dishes ; thou, O crab, 2 matching its hue, 
dost blush upon my plate. Your train of slaves 
might have vied with the cup-bearer from Ilium ; 
but my own hand is Ganymede to serve me. Out 
of such wealth to your old and trusty comrade do 
you give nothing, and then say, Candidus, " Friends 
have all in common " ? 

a The cammarus was cheap food (cf. Juv. v. 84), and was 
served on common red earthenware. 

135 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XL1V 

EMI seu puerum togamve pexam 

seu tres, ut puta, quattuorve libras, 

Sextus protinus ille fenerator, 

quern nostis veterem meum sodalem, 

ne quid forte petam timet cavetque, 5 

et secum, sed ut audiam, susurrat : 

" Septem milia debeo Secundo, 

Phoebo quattuor, undecim Phil etc, 

et quadrans mihi nullus est in area." 

o grande ingenium mei sodalis ! 10 

durum est, Sexte, negare, cum rogaris, 

quanto durius, antequam rogeris ! 



XLV 

QUAE tibi rion stabat praecisa est mentula, Glypte. 
demens, cum ferro quid tibi ? Gallus eras. 



XLVI 

FLORIDA per varies ut pingitur Hybla colores, 

oum breve Sicaniae ver populantur apes, 
sic tua subpositis conlucent prela lacernis, 

sic micat innumeris arcula synthesibus, 
atque unam vestire tribum tua Candida possunt, "j 

Apula non uno quae grege terra tulit. 
tu spectas hiemem succincti lentus amici 

pro scelus ! et lateris frigora trita tui. 1 
quantum erat, infelix, pannis fraudare duobus 

quid metuis ? non te, Naevole, sed tineas ? 10 

1 tni Friedlander, times codd. 
136 



BOOK II. XLIV-XLVI 

XLIV 

SUPPOSE I have bought a slave or a long-napped 
toga, or three, say, or four pounds of plate ; straight- 
way Sextus, the money-lender yonder whom you 
know to be mine ancient comrade, is timorous and 
careful lest perchance I should ask a loan, and mur- 
murs to himself, but so that I may hear : " Seven 
thousand I owe to Secundus, to Phoebus four, eleven 
to Philetus, and there isn't a farthing in my chest ! " 
O grand device of my comrade ! It is harsh to refuse, 
Sextus, when you are asked ; how much harsher 
before you are asked ! 

XLV 

NERVELESS as you are, you have been operated 
upon, Glyptus. Madman, what use had you for the 
knife ? You were a Gaul l before. 

XLVI 

LIKE the flowers of Hybla painted in varied hues, 
what time Sicilian bees ravage the brief-lived spring, 
so shine your presses with mantles laid between, so 
gleams your chest with countless dinner suits, and 
a whole tribe might be clothed in the white togas 
which Apulia's land has brought you out of more 
flocks than one. You regard without concern your 
shivering, thin-clad friend what an outrage ! and 
your escort, threadbare and cold. What sacrifice 
were it, wretched man, to cheat of a couple of 
rags why be afraid ? not yourself, Naevolus, but 
the moths? 

1 See note to in. xxiv. 13. 

'37 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XLVII 

SUBDOLA famosae moneo fuge retia moechae, 

levior o conchis, Galle, Cytheriacis. 
confidis natibus ? non est pedico maritus : 

quae facial duo sunt : irrumat aut futuit. 

XLVII I 

COPONEM laniumque balneumque, 

tonsorem tabulamque calculosque 

et paucos, sed ut eligam, libellos : 

unum non nimium rudem sodalem 

et grandem puerum diuque levem 5 

et caram puero meo puellam : 

haec praesta mihi, Rufe, vel Butuntis, 

et thermas tibi habe Neronianas. 

XLIX 

UXOREM nolo Telesinam ducere : quare ? 

moecha est. sed pueris dat Telesina. volo. 

L 

QUOD fellas et aquam potas, nil, Lesbia, peccas. 
qua tibi parte opus est, Lesbia, sumis aquam. 

LI 

UNUS saepe tibi tota denarius area 

cum sit et hie culo tritior, Hylle, tuo, 
non tamen hunc pistor, non auferet hunc tibi copo, 

sed si quis nimio pene superbus erit. 
infelix venter spectat convivia culi 5 

et semper miser hie esurit, ille vorat. 

138 



BOOK II. xi.vn-i.1 

XLVI1 

FLY, Gallus, I warn you, from the crafty toils of 
the infamous adulteress, smoother though you are 
than conch-shells of Cytherea. Do you trust in your 
own charms ? The husband is not of that sort : there 
are two things he can do, and neither is what you 
offer. 

XLVIII 

A TAVERNER, and a butcher and a bath, a barber, 
and a draught-board and pieces, and a few books 
but to be chosen by me a single comrade not too 
unlettered, and a tall boy and not early bearded, and 
a girl dear to my boy warrant these to me, Rufus, 
even at Butunti, 1 and keep to yourself Nero's warm 
baths. 

XLIX 

I WILL not take Telesina to wife : why ? she is an 
adulteress. But Telesina is kindly to boys. I will. 

L 

You and drink water : 'tis no error, Lesbia. 
Just where you need it, Lesbia, you take water. 

LI 

QUANTUNQUE tutto il tuo danaro sorvente noil con- 
sista, O Hyllo, che in una sola moneta, e questa piu 
rimenata del tuo culo ; con tutto ci6 il panatiere non 
te la tirer& dalle mani, ne tampoco 1'oste ; ma bensi 
se qualcuno sar baldanzoso per esser bene in mem- 
bro. Lo sfortunato ventre sta a videre i banchetti 
del culo, e mentre miserabile, questo ha sempre 
fame, quello divora. 

1 An insignificant town in Calabria : cj\ iv. Iv. 

139 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LII 

NOVIT loturos Dasius numerare : poposcit 
mammosam Spatalen pro tribus : ilia dedit. 

LIII 

Vis liber fieri ? mentiris, Maxima, noil vis : 

sed fieri si vis, hac ratione potes. 
liber eris, cenare foris si, Maxime, nolis, 

Veientana tuam si domat uva sitim, 
si ridere potes miseri chrysendeta Cinnae, 5 

contentus nostra si potes esse toga, 
si plebeia Venus gemino tibi iungitur asse, 

si tua non rectus tecta subire potes. 
haec tibi si vis est, si mentis tanta potestas, 

liberior Partho vivere rege potes. 10 

LIV 

QUID de te, Line, suspicetur uxor 

et qua parte velit pudiciorem, 

certis indiciis satis probavit. 

custodem tibi quae dedit spadonem. 

nil nasutius hac maligniusque. 5 

LV 

Vis te, Sexte, coli : volebam amare. 
jiarenduni est tibi ; quod iubes, col ere : 
sed si te oolo, Sexte, non araabo. 



140 



BOOK II. Lit-i.v 

LI I 

DASIUS knows how to count his bathers. He 
demanded of Spatale, that full-breasted lady, the 
entrance-moneys of three ; she gave them. 

LIII 

Do you wish to become free ? You lie, Maximus ; 
you don't wish. But if you do wish, in this way 
you can become so. You will be free, Maximus, if 
you refuse to dine abroad, if Veii's grape l quells 
your thirst, if you can laugh at the gold-inlaid dishes 
of the wretched Cinna, if you can content yourself 
with a toga such HS mine, if your plebeian amours 
are handfasted at the price of twopence, if you can 
endure to stoop as you enter your dwelling. If this 
is your strength of mind, if such its power over 
itself, you can live more free than a Parthian king. 

LIV 

WHAT your wife's suspicion of you is, Linus, and 
in what particular she wishes you to be more re- 
spectable, she has sufficiently proved by unmistak- 
able signs, in setting as watcher over you a eunuch. 
Nothing is more sagacious and more spiteful than 
this lady. 

LV 

You wish to be courted, Sextus ; I wished to love 
you. I must obey you ; as you demand, you shall be 
courted. But if I court you, Sextus, I shall not 
love you. 

1 Veientan wine was turbid and inferior : cf. I. eiv. 9 ; 
in. xlix. 

141 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LVI 

GENTIBUS in Libycis uxor tua, Galle, male audit 

inmodicae foedo crimine avaritiae. 
sed mera narrantur mendacia : non solet ilia 

accipere omnino. quid solet ergo ? dare. 

LVI I 

Hie quern videtis gressibus vagis lentum, 
amethystinatus media qui secat Saepta, 
quern non lacernis Publius meus vincit, 
non ipse Cordus alpha paenulatorum, 
quern grex togatus sequitur et capillatus 5 

recensque sella linteisque lorisque, 
oppigneravit modo modo ad Cladi mensam 
vix octo nummis anulum, unde cenaret. 

LVI 1 1 

PEXATUS pulchre rides mea, Zoile, trita. 

sunt haec trita quidem, Zoile, sed mea sunt. 

LIX 

MICA vocor : quid sim cernis, cenatio parva : 
ex me Caesareum prospicis ecce tholum. 

frange toros, pete vina, rosas cape, tinguere nardo : 
ipse iubet mortis te meminisse deus. 

1 Where Gallus was perhaps governor. 
* See note to IL xiv. 5. 

:: ef. v. xxvi., where M. apologises to Cordus. 
4 Generally supposed to refer to a banqueting-hall said to 
have been built by Domitian, and having a view of the 

142 



BOOK II. LVI-LIX 

LVI 

AMONGST Libyan tribes l your wife, Gallus, has a 
bad reputation ; they charge her foully with insatiate 
greed. But these stories are simply lies ; she is not 
at all in the habit of receiving favours. What, then, 
is her habit ? To give them. 

LVI I 

THIS fellow, whom you observe languidly wander- 
ing ; who, in an amethystine gown, parts the crowd 
in the middle of the Saepta ; 2 whom my Publius 
does not outshine with his mantle, not Cordus him- 
self, A 1 in cloaks; 3 whom a throng of clients in 
togas and of long-haired slaves attends, and whose 
sedan has new blinds and straps this fellow has only 
just now with difficulty pawned for eighteenpence, at 
Cladus' counter, a ring to get a dinner ! 

LVIII 

SMART in a long-napped toga, you laugh, Zoilus, at 
my threadbare garb. 'Tis threadbare no doubt, Zoilus, 
but 'tis my own. 

LIX 

" THE Tiny " 4 am I called ; what I am thou seest, 
a small dining-room ; from me thou lookest, see, 
upon Caesar's dome. Crush the couches, call for 
wine, wear roses, anoint thee with nard ; the god 5 
himself bids thee to remember death. 

Mausoleum August!, which stood about 650 yards S. of the 
Porta Flamiuia, the N. gate of Rome. Burn, however (Rome 
and C. p. 223), places the Mica Aurea on the Coelian and 
identifies " Caesar's dome " as the Palace on the Palatine. 
s Augustus, buried in the Mausoleum : cf. v. Ixiv. 5. 

MS 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LX 

UXOREM armati futuis, puer Hylle, tribuni, 
supplicium tantum dum puerile times. 

vae tibi ! dum ludis, castrabere. iam mihi dices 
"Non licet hoc." quid? tu quod facis, Hylle, licet? 

LXI 

CUM tibi vernarent dubia lanugine malae, 

lambebat medios inproba lingua viros. 
postquam triste caput fastidia vispillonum 

et miseri meruit taedia carnificis, 
uteris ore aliter nimiaque aerugine captus 5 

adlatras nomen quod tibi cumque datur. 
haereat inguinibus potius tarn noxia lingua : 

nam cum fellaret, purior ilia fuit. 

LXII 

QUOD pectus, quod crura tibi, quod bracchia vellis, 
quod cincta est brevibus mentula tonsa pilis, 

hoc praestas, Labiene, tuae (quis nescit ?) amicae. 
cui praestas, culum quod, Labiene, pilas? 



LXIII 

SOLA tibi fuerant sestertia, Miliche, centum, 
quae tulit e sacra Leda redempta via. 

Miliche, luxuria est si tanti dives amares. 

" Non amo " iam dices : haec quoque luxuria est. 

1 Domitian forbade castration : cf. vi. 2; Suet. Dom. vii. 
For supp. puerile, cf. n. xlvii. and xlix. 

144 



BOOK II. LX-LXIII 

LX 

You have relations, boy Hyllus, with the wife of 
an armed tribune, and all the time are dreading only 
a boy's punishment. Alas for you ! in the midst of 
your enjoyments you will be gelded. You will reply 
"This is not permitted." J Well ? Is what you are 
doing, Hyllus, permitted ? 

LXI 

ALLORCHE un'apparente laiiugine spontava su '1 tuo 
volte, la sozza tua lingua lambiva i centri virili. 
Dopo che la tua odiata testa si tir6 1'aversione de' 
beccamorti, e lo schiffo del carnefice, fai altr'uso 
della tua lingua, ossesso da un'eccessivo livore, la 
scateni contro chiunque ti viene in mente. Sia la 
tua esecrabil lingua piu tosto appesa alle pudenda, 
imperocche essa mentre fellava, era meno impura. 

LXII 

IL perche ti dissetoli il petto, le gambe, le braccia, 
il perche la rasa tua mentola e cinta di curti peli, chi 
non sa che tutto questo, O Labieno, prepari per la 
tua arnica? Per chi, O Labieno, prepari tu il culo 
che dissetoli ? 

LXIII 

ONLY a hundred thousand sesterces was what you 
possessed, Milichus, and these the purchase of Leda 
in the Sacred Way made off with. Milichus, 'tis ex- 
travagance to love at such a price even if you were 
rich. " I am not in love," you will reply ; that too 2 
is extravagance. 

2 i.e. all the more. 

MS 
VOL. I. L 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXIV 

DUM modo causidicum, dum te modo rhetora fingis 

et non decernis, Laure, quid esse velis, 
Peleos et Priami transit et Nestoris aetas 

et fuerat serum iam tibi desinere. 
incipe, tres uno perierunt rhetores anno, 5 

si quid habes animi, si quid in arte vales, 
si schola damnatur, fora litibus omnia fervent, 

ipse potest fieri Marsua causidicus. 
heia age, rumpe moras : quo te sperabimus usque ? 

dum quid sis dubitas, iam potes esse nihil. 10 



LXV 

CUR tristiorem cerniinus Saleianum ? 
" An causa levis est ? " inquis "extuli uxorem." 
o grande fati crimen ! o gravem casum ! 
ilia, ilia dives mortua est Secundilla, 
centena defies quae tibi dedit dotis ? 
nollem accidisset hoc tibi, Saleiane. 



LXVI 

UNUS de toto peccaverat orbe comarum 

anulus, incerta non bene fixus acu. 
hoc facinus Lalage speculo, quo viderat, ulta est, 

et cecidit saevis icta Plecusa comis. 
desine iam, Lalage, tristes ornare capillos, 5 

tangat et insanum nulla puella caput. 

1 A statue of Marsyas stood near the Rostra in the Forum 
Romanum, and was a rendezvous of lawyers : rf. Hor. I. Sat. 
vi. 120 ; Juv. ix. 2. 

146 



BOOK II. LXIV-LXVI 

LXIV 

WHILE you are shaping yourself, now into a pleader, 
now into a teacher of rhetoric, and don't decide, 
Taurus, what you want to be, the age of Peleus and 
of Priam and of Nestor has passed, and by now 'twere 
late for you even to be retiring. Begin three 
rhetoricians have died in a single year if you have 
any spirit, if any proficiency in your calling. If your 
vote is against the schools, all the courts are alive 
with suits : even Marsyas l himself may turn into a 
pleader. Up, then ! put off delay ; how long shall 
we be waiting for you ? While you cannot resolve 
what you are, at last you may be nothing. 2 

LXV 

WHY see we in Saleianus unwonted melancholy ? 
" Is the reason light? " you answer, " I have buried 
my wife." O grievous crime of Fate ! O heavy 
chance ! Is that Secundilla, that rich Secundilla, 
dead she who brought you as dower a million ? 
I am sorry this has happened to you, 3 Saleianus ! 

LXVI 

ONE curl of the whole round of hair had gone 
astray, badly fixed by an insecure pin. This crime 
Lalage avenged with the mirror in which she had 
observed it, and Plecusa, smitten, fell because of 
those cruel locks. Cease any more, Lalage, to trick 
out your ill-omened tresses ; and let no maid touch 

2 A play on words, i.e. "of no calling," or "dead." 
8 Intentionally ambiguous. 

M7 
L 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

hoc salamandra notet vel saeva novacula nudet, 
ut digna speculo fiat imago tua. 

LXVII 

OCCURRIS quocumque loco mihi, Postume, clamas 
protinus et prima est haec tua vox " Quid agis ? " 

hoc, si me decies una conveneris hora, 

dicis : habes puto tu, Postume, nil quod agas. 

LXVIII 

QUOD te nomine iam tuo saluto, 

quem regem et dominum prius vocabam, 

ne me dixeris esse contumacem : 

totis pillea sarcinis redemi. 

reges et dominos habere debet 5 

qui se non habet atque concupiscit 

quod reges dominique concupiscunt. 

servom si potes, Ole, non habere, 

et regem potes, Ole, non habere. 

LXIX 

INVITUM cenare foris te, Classice, dicis : 

si non mentiris, Classice, dispeream. 
ipse quoque ad cenam gaudebat Apicius ire : 

cum cenaret, erat tristior ille, domi. 
si tamen invitus vadis, cur, Classice, vadis ? 5 

"Cogor" ais : verum est; cogitur et Selius. 
en rogat ad cenam Melior te, Classice, rectam. 

grandia verba ubi sunt ? si vir es, ecce, nega. 

1 It was supposed that contact with a salamander acted as 
a depilatory : Plin. N.H. x. 188. 

148 



BOOK II. LXVI-LXIX 

your distempered head. May salamander l mark it, 
or ruthless razor rasp it bare, that your features 
may befit your mirror. 

LXVII 

IN whatever place you meet me, Postumus, you 
immediately cry out and this is your first remark 
" How d'ye do ? " This if you meet me ten times 
in a single hour you say. You have, 1 think, 
Postumus, nothing "to do." 

LXVIII 

BECAUSE I greet you now by your own name whom 
formerly I used to call "patron" and "master," do 
not proclaim me insolent : I have bought my cap of 
liberty at the cost of all my goods and chattels. 
"Patrons" and "masters" a man should possess 
who is not possessor of himself, and who eagerly 
covets what patrons and masters eagerly covet. If 
you can endure not having a slave, Olus, you can 
also endure, Olus, not having a patron. 

LXIX 

UNWILLINGLY you dine out, you say, Classicus. If 
you don't lie, Classicus, may I be hanged ! Even 
Apicius himself was glad to go out to dinner ; when 
he dined at home he was the more depressed. Yet 
if you go unwillingly, Classicus, why do you go ? 
"I am obliged," you say: 'tis true; Selius 52 is also 
obliged. See, Melior asks you, Classicus, to a grand 
dinner. Where are your fine professions ? If you 
are a man, come, refuse ! 

! Who fishes for invitations : cf. II. xi. 

149 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXX 

NON vis in solio prius lavari 

quemquam, Cotile. causa quae, nisi haec est, 

undis ne fovearis irrumatis ? 

primus te licet abluas : necesse est 

ante hie mentula quam caput lavetur. 5 

LXX I 

CANDIDIUS nihil est te, Caeciliaiie. notavi, 
si quando ex nostris disticha pauca lego, 

protinus aut Marsi recitas aut scripta Catulli. 
hoc mihi das, tamquam deteriora legas, 

ut conlata magis placeant mea ? credimus istud. 5 
malo tamen recites, Caeciliane, tua. 

LXXII 

HESTERNA factum narratur, Postume, cena 

quod nollem (quis enim talia facta probet ?) 
os tibi percisum quanto non ipse Latinus 

vilia Panniculi percutit ora sono : 
quodque magis minim est, auctorem criminis huius 5 

Caecilium tota rumor in urbe sonat. 
esse negas factum : vis hoc me credere ? credo. 

quid quod habet testes, Postume, Caecilius? 

LXXIII 

tQuio faciat volt scire Lyris : quod sobria : fellat.t 

1 i.e. you are as great a source of pollution as the others 
you complain of : cf. n. xlii. 



BOOK II. LXX-LXXIII 

LXX 

You are unwilling that anyone should wash in the 
bath before you, Cotilus. What reason is there but 
this, that you be not touched by polluted waters ? 
Be first then in the bath, but needs must be that 
your - - is washed here before your head. 1 

LXXI 

You are candour itself, Caecilianus. I have noticed 
that if I ever read a few distichs of my poems, at 
once you recite passages either of Marsus or Catullus. 
Is this your compliment to me, as if you were read- 
ing what was inferior, that, compared, my own should 
please me the more ? I believe that. Yet I would 
rather you recited your own, Caecilianus. 

LXXII 

A THING is said to have been done at dinner last 
night, Postumus, which I should deprecate for who 
could approve such doings ? it is said that your 
face was mauled, and by an assault even noisier 
than when Latinus smacks the beggarly cheeks of 
Panniculus ; 2 and what is more wonderful it is 
Caecilius whom as author of this outrage rumour 
proclaims all over the city. You say this was not 
done ; do you wish me to believe this ? I believe it. 
What if Caecilius has witnesses, Postumus ? 

LXXIII 

LVKIS wishes to know what she is doing. What 
she does when she is sober. She is . 

2 Comic actors, like clown and pantaloon : cf. i. iv. 5 ; 
v. Ixi. 11. 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 



LXXIV 

CINCTUM togatis post et ante Saufeium, 

quanta reduci Regulus solet turba, 

ad alta tonsum templa cum reum misit, 

Materne, cernis ? invidere nolito. 

comitatus iste sit precor tuus numquam. 5 

hos illi amicos et greges togatorum 

Fuficulenus praestat et Faventinus. 

LXXV 

VERBERA securi solitus leo ferre magistri 

insertamque pati blandus in ora manum 
dedidicit pacem subito feritate reversa, 

quanta nee in Libycis debuit esse iugis. 
nam duo de tenera puerilia corpora turba, 5 

sanguineam rastris quae renovabat humum, 
saevos et infelix furiali dente peremit. 

Martia non vidit maius harena nefas. 
exclamare libet " Crudelis, perfide, praedo, 

a nostra pueris parcere disce lupa ! " 10 

LXXVI 

ARGENTI libras Marius tibi quinque reliquit. 
cui nihil ipse dabas, hie tibi verba dedit. 

LXXVII 

COSCONI, qui longa putas epigrammata nostra, 
utilis unguendis axibus esse potes. 

1 i.e. to return thanks that his advocacy has secured their 
acquittal. Before trial the accused dressed in dark clothes, 
and let his hair and beard grow, to excite pity by his un- 
kempt appearance : cf. Ovid, Met. xv. 38. 

'52 



BOOK II. LXXEV-LXXV1I 

LXXIV 

SAUFEIUS is surrounded behind and in front with 
gowned clients, a crowd as big as escorts Regulus 
home when he has sent the accused with trimmed 
hair to the temples of the high gods. 1 Do you see 
him, Maternus ? Don't envy him. May such a com- 
pany, I pray, never be yours. These friends and troop 
of gowned clients 'tis Fuficulenus and Faventinus 2 
who provide. 

LXXV 

A LION, wont to stand the blows of its fearless 
master, and with gentleness to suffer a hand thrust 
into its mouth, unlearned its peaceful ways ; a fierce- 
ness suddenly returned greater than he should have 
shown even on Libyan hills. For two boys of the 
youthful band that was smoothing with rakes the 
bloody sand, the savage, ill-starred beast slew with 
furious fang ; the sand of Mars never saw a greater 
crime. One may cry aloud : " Cruel, perfidious, 
robber, from our Roman wolf learn to spare boys ! " 

LXXVI 

MARIUS has left you five pounds of silver plate. 
He, whom you yourself gave nothing, has given you 
words. 3 

LXXVI I 

COSCONIUS, who think my epigrams long, you would 
be useful for greasing axles. 4 On this principle you 

2 Moneylenders, who supply the means of display. 

3 i.e. has cheated you. 

4 He is a lump of stupidity, fit only for axle-grease ; 
cf. the proverb pingui Minerva (of stupid wit). 

'53 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

hac tu credideris longum ratione colosson 

et puerum Bruti dixeris esse brevem. 
disce quod ignoras : Marsi doctique Pedonis 5 

saepe duplex unum pagina tractat opus, 
non sunt longa quibus nihil est quod demere possis, 

sed tu, Cosconi, disticha longa facis. 

LXXVIII 

AESTIVO serves ubi piscem tempore, quaeris ? 
in thermis serva, Caeciliane, tuis. 

LXXIX 

INVITAS tune me cum scis, Nasica, vocasse. 1 
excusatum habeas me rogo : ceno domi. 

LXXX 

HOSTEM cum fugeret, se Fannius ipse peremit. 
hie, rogo, non furor est, ne moriare, mori ? 

LXXXI 

LAXIOR hexaphoris tua sit lectica licebit : 

cum tamen haec tua sit, Zoile, sandapila est. 

LXXXII 

ABSCISA servom quid figis, Pontice, lingua ? 
nescis tu populum, quod tacet ille, loqui ? 
1 vocatum 7. 

1 A statuette admired by Brutus, the assassin of Caesar : 
ef. ix. li. 5. 

2 If vocatum (have an invitation) be read, M. returns an 
excuse known by N. to be false, as a hint that M. knows 
N.'s invitation was unreal. 

154 



BOOK II. i.xxvii-Lxxxn 

would fancy the Colossus to be tall, and would de- 
scribe Brutus' boy 1 as short. Learn what you are 
ignorant of: often two pages of Marsus and of 
learned Pedo treat of a single theme. Things are 
not long from which you can subtract nothing ; but 
you, Cosconius, make your distichs long. 

LXXVIII 

Do you ask where to keep your fish in summer ? 
Keep them, Caecilianus, in your warm bath. 

LXXIX 

You ask me, Nasica, to dinner just when you know 
I have guests. 2 I beg you to hold me excused ; I 
dine at home. 

LXXX 

BECAUSE he was flying from an enemy, Fannius 3 
slew himself. Is not this, I ask, madness to die to 
avoid death? 

LXXXI 

YOUR litter may be roomier than one borne by six ; 
but, seeing that it is yours, Zoilus, it is a pauper's 
bier. 4 

LXXXII 

WHY cut your slave's tongue out and crucify him, 
Ponticus ? Don't you know that the people speak 
of what he cannot ? 

3 Fannius Caepio, condemned for conspiring against Augus- 
tus : Suet. Aitff. xix. and Tib. viii. 

4 Which was ordinarily borne by four: cf. vi. Ixxvii.; 
viii. Ixxv. Z. is such a worthless 'fellow (or, perhaps, so 
foul a man) that he is no better than a rile cadaver. 

*55 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXX1II 

FOEDASTI miserum, marite, moechum, 

et se, qui fuerant prius, requirunt 

trunci naribus auribusque voltus. 

credis te satis esse vindicatum ? 

erras : iste potest et irrumare. 5 

LXXXIV 

MOLLIS erat facilisque viris Poeantius heros : 

volnera sic Paridis dicitur ulta Venus, 
cur lingat cunnum Siculus Sertorius, hoc est : 

fab hocf occisus, Rufe, videtur Eryx. 

LXXXV 

VIMINE clausa levi niveae custodia coctae, 

hoc tibi Saturni tempore munus erit. 
dona quod aestatis misi tibi mense Decembri 

si quereris, rasam tu mihi mitte togam. 

LXXXVI 

QUOD nee carmine glorior supino 

nee retro lego Sotaden cinaedum, 

nusquam Graecula quod recantat echo 

nee dictat mihi luculentus Attis 

mollem debilitate galliambon, 5 

non sum, Classice, tarn malus poeta. 

1 cf. in. Ixxxv. 

2 cf. xiv. cxvi., and Plin. N. H. xxxi. 23, and the famous 
Haec est Neronis decocta (Suet. Ner. xlviii.). 

3 i.e. that read backward as well as forward. 

4 Sotades was an obscene and scurrilous Alexandrian poet. 
Perhaps the reference is to verses which, read one way, are 
complimentary, read the other, the reverse. 

156 



BOOK II. LXXXIII-LXXXVI 

LXXXIII 

You have disfigured, O husband, the wretched 
adulterer, and his face, shorn of nose and ears, 
misses its former self. Do you believe you are suf- 
ficiently avenged ? You mistake ; he has still other 
activities. 1 

LXXXIV 

L'EROE Peanzio era efFeminato e compiacente agli 
uomini : si dice che Venere cosi abbia vendicato le 
ferite di Paride. II perche Sertoria Siculo sia cun- 
nilingo, si e, O Rufo, per quel che pare, dall'aver 
ucciso Erice. 

LXXXV 

A FLASK enclosed in light wicker-work, and pre- 
serving water boiled and iced, 2 this shall be your 
present at Saturn's season. If you complain that I 
have sent you the gift of summer in the month of 
December, do you send me a thin, smooth toga. 



LXXXVI 

BECAUSE I do not pride myself on topsy-turvy 
verses, 3 nor read backwards in obscene Sotadics; 4 
because nowhere does a Greekling echo 5 answer 
you, nor does graceful Attis dictate to me galli- 
ambics, voluptuous and broken, I am not, Classicus, 

5 Versus echoici, where a concluding word echoes a pre- 
ceding one (e.g. rerits and eris) ; or where the first words of 
an hexameter are repeated at the end of the pentameter. 

6 A beautiful youth, beloved by Cybele, the Great Mother 
of the Gods, who gives his name to a poem by Catullus 
(Ixiii.) in the Galliambic metre. 

157 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

quid si per gracilis vias petauri 

invitum iubeas subire Ladan ? 

turpe est difficiles habere nugas 

et stultus labor est ineptiarum. 10 

scribat carinina circulis Palaemon : 

me raris iuvat auribus placere. 

LXXXVII 

DICIS amore tui bellas ardere puellas, 

qui faciem sub aqua, Sexte, natantis habes. 

LXXXVIII 

NIL recitas et vis, Mamerce, poeta videri. 
quidquid vis esto, dummodo nil recites. 

LXXXIX 

QUOD nimio gaudes noctem producere vino, 
ignosco : vitium, Gaure, Catonis habes. 

carmina quod scribis Musis et Apolline nullo, 
laudari debes : hoc Ciceronis habes. 

quod vomis, Antoni : quod luxuriaris, Apici. 5 

quod fellas, vitium die mihi cuius habes ? 

XC 

QUINTILIANE, vagae moderator summe iuventae, 

gloria Romanae, Quintiliane, togae, 
vivere quod propero pauper nee inutilis annis, 

da veniam : properat vivere nemo satis. 

1 A famous Spartan runner, and winner at the Olympic 
games : ef. x. c. 

I5S 



BOOK II. LXXXVI-XC 

a bad poet after all. What if you bade Ladas * 
unwillingly to mount the narrow ways of a spring- 
board ? 'Tis degrading to undertake difficult trifles ; 
and foolish is the labour spent on puerilities. Let 
Palaemon 2 write poems for the general throng; my 
delight is to please listeners few and choice. 

LXXXVII 

You say that beautiful girls burn with love for 
you, Sextus, who have a face like that of a man 
swimming under water ! 3 

LXXXVIII 

You recite nothing, and yet wish, Mamercus, to 
be held a poet. Be what you like provided you 
recite nothing. 

LXXXIX 

YOUR joy in prolonging the night with too much 
wine I pardon ; this vice of yours, Gaurus, was 
Cato's. Your writing poems, aided by no Muse and 
no Apollo, must merit praise ; this gift of yours was 
Cicero's. Your vomiting, 'twas Antony's vice ; your 
luxury, Apicius'. Your beastliness tell me, whose 
vice was that ? 

XC 

QUINTILIAN, illustrious trainer of errant youth ; 
Quintilian, glory of the Roman toga ; because, 
though still poor, yet of an age not worn out, I 
am quick to enjoy life, pardon me ; no man is quick 

2 A grammarian and improvisatore of the day, who com- 
posed in unusual metres : Suet. De Gram. xxii. 

3 i.e. bloated and disfigured : c/. in. Ixxxix. 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

differat hoc patrios optat qui vincere census 5 

atriaque inmodicis artat imaginibus. 
me focus et nigros non indignantia fumos 

tecta iuvant et fons vivus et herba rudis. 
sit mihi verna satur, sit non doctissima coniuux, 

sit nox cum somno, sit sine lite dies. 10 

XCI 

RERUM certa salus, terrarum gloria, Caesar, 

sospite quo magnos credimus esse deos, 
si festinatis totiens tibi lecta libellis 

detinuere oculos carmina nostra tuos, 
quod fortuna vetat fieri permitte videri, 5 

natorum genitor credar ut esse trium. 
haec, si displicui, fuerint solacia nobis ; 

haec fuerint nobis praemia, si placui. 

XCII 

NATORUM mihi ius trium roganti 
Musarum pretium dedit mearum 
solus qui poterat. valebis, uxor. 
non debet domini perire munus. 

XCIII 

" PRIMUS ubi est" inquis "cum sit liber iste secundus?" 
quid faciam si plus ille pudoris habet ? 

tu tamen hunc fieri si mavis, Regule, primum, 
unum de titulo tollere iota potes. 

1 By the Lex Julia et Papia Poppaea in A.D. 9 certain 
privileges were conferred on the fathers of three sons (jus 
trium liberorum). These privileges were afterwards often 

1 60 



BOOK II. xc-xrm 

enough to enjoy life. Let him delay who craves to 
surpass his father's means and crowds beyond measure 
his hall with busts. My hearth and a roof-tree 
that disdains not sooty smoke delight me, and a 
bubbling spring and untrimmed sward. Let me 
have a plump home-born slave, have a wife not too 
lettered, have night with sleep, have day without 
a lawsuit. 

XCI 

SURE saviour of our State, the world's glory, Caesar, 
from whose safety we win belief that the great gods 
exist, if, so oft read by thee in hurried books, my 
poems have held thine eyes captive, vouchsafe me 
in repute what Fortune denies me, that I be deemed 
the sire of three sons. 1 This, if I have displeased, 
shall be my solace ; this shall be my reward if I have 
pleased. 

XCII 

WHEN I begged for the right of a father of three 
sons, 1 he, who alone could, gave me the reward of 
my Muse. Good bye, wife ! The bounty of my 
master should not perish. 

XCIII 

"WHERE is the first book," you say, "if that is 
the second ? " What can I do if my first book is 
too shy ? Yet if you, Regulus, prefer that this 
should become the first, you can take one " I " from 

its title. 



given even to childless or unmarried persons. Both Titus 
and Domitian conferred them on M.: cf. ill. xcv. 5 ; ix. 
xcvii. 5. 

161 
VOL. I. M 



BOOK III 



LIBER TERTIUS 



Hoc tibi quidquid id est longinquis mittit ab oris 
Gallia Romanae nomine dicta togae. 

hunc legis et laudas librum fortasse priorem : 
ilia vel haec mea sunt, quae meliora putas. 

plus sane placeat domina qui natus in urbe est : 
debet enim Gallum vincere verna liber. 



II 

Cuius vis fieri, libelle, munus ? 

festina tibi vindicem parare, 

ne nigram cito raptus in culinam 

cordylas madida tegas papyro 

vel turis piperisve sis cucullus. 5 

Faustini fugis in sinum ? sapisti. 

cedro nunc licet ambules perunctus 

et frontis gemino decens honore 

pictis luxurieris umbilicis, 

et te purpura delicata velet, 10 

et cocco rubeat superbus index. 

illo vindice nee Probum timeto. 

1 Gallia Togata, that part of Cisalpine Gaul where the 
toga was worn, i.e. on the Roman side of the Po. M. was 
here at the time : cf. HI. iv. 4. 

164 



BOOK III 



THIS, whate'er its worth, Gaul, named after Rome's 
toga, 1 sends you from distant snores. You read this 
book, and perhaps praise the former one ; that or 
this I claim as mine, the one you deem the better. 
Let that which was born in the Queen City by all 
means please you more : for the home-born book 
should surpass the Gaul. 

II 

FOR whom, my little book, would you become a 
present? Haste to get to yourself a protector, lest, 
hurried off to a sooty kitchen, you wrap tunny-fry in 
your sodden papyrus, or be a cornet for incense or 
pepper. Fly you to Faustinus' bosom ? You are wise. 
Now may you strut abroad, anointed with cedar-oil, 
and, spruce with the twin deckings of your brow, 
wax insolent with painted bosses, 2 and a delicate 
purple clothe you, and your title proudly blush with 
scarlet. With him for your protector do not fear 
even Probus. 3 

2 The two edges of the papyrus roll (called brows) were 
gaily coloured. The bosses were the ends of the cylinder 
round which the roll was wrapped. The outer membrane or 
envelope of all was coloured purple. 

3 A celebrated critic of the day : Suet. De. Gram. xxiv. 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

III 

[FORMOSAM faciem nigro medicamine celas, 
sed non formoso corpore laedis aquas. 

ipsam crede deam verbis tibi dicere nostris : 
"Aut aperi faciem, aut tunicata lava."] 



ROMAM vade, liber : si, veneris unde, requiret, 

Aemiliae dices de regione viae. 
si, quibus in terris, qua simus in urbe, rogabit, 

Corneli referas me licet esse Foro. 
cur absim, quaeret : breviter tu multa fatere : 

"Non poterat vanae taedia ferre togae." 
" Quando venit ? " dicet : tu respondeto : " Poeta 

exierat : veniet, cum citharoedus erit." 



Vis commendari sine me cursurus in urbem, 

parve liber, multis, an satis unus erit ? 
unus erit, mihi crede, satis, cui non eris hospes, 

lulius, adsiduum nomen in ore meo. 
protinus hunc primae quaeres in limine Tectae : 5 

quos tenuit Daphnis, nunc tenet ille lares, 
est illi coniunx, quae te manibusque sinuque 

excipiet, tu vel pulverulentus eas. 

1 Ran from Ariminum (Rimini) to Placentia (Piacenza) in 
Cisalpine Gaul. Cornelii Forum, a town called after the 
Dictator Sulla ; now Imola. 

166 



BOOK III. m-v 

III 

A BEAUTEOUS face you conceal with black ointment 
but with a body not beauteous you insult the waters. 
Believe that the very goddess of the spring says to 
you in my words : " Either disclose your face or 
bathe in your shift ! " 

IV 

Go, book, to Rome ; if she shall ask whence you 
came, you will say " From the district of the Aemi- 
lian Way." l If she shall ask in what lands, in what 
city, I am, you may report that I am in Cornelii 
Forum. 1 She will ask why I am abroad ; in brief 
do you make full confession : "He could not en- 
dure the weariness of the futile toga." "When 
comes he?" she will say; do you reply: "A poet 
he departed ; he will return when he is a harp- 
player." 2 



Now you purpose hurrying to the city without me, 
little book, do you wish to be recommended to many, 
or will one be enough ? One will be enough, believe 
me, one to whom you will be no stranger, Julius, a 
name perpetually in my mouth. Right before you, 
just at the very threshold of the Covered Way, 3 you 
must look for him ; he now occupies the house 
which Daphnis occupied. He has a wife who with 
hand and heart will welcome you, however dusty 

2 A lucrative calling : cf. \. Ivi. 9. 

3 A colonnade closed at both ends, in the N. of Rome, not 
far from the Mausoleum of Augustus. 

167 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

hos tu seu pariter sive hanc illumve priorem 

videris, hoc dices " Marcus havere iubet," 10 

et satis est ; alios cornmendet epistula : peccat 
qui commendandum se putat esse suis. 

VI 

Lux tibi post Idus numeratur tertia Maias, 

Marcelline, tuis bis celebranda sacris. 
inputat aetherios ortus haec prima parenti ; 

libat florentes haec tibi prima genas. 
magna licet dederit iucundae munera vitae, 5 

plus numquam patri praestitit ille dies. 

VII 

CENTUM miselli iam valete quadrantes, 
anteambulonis congiarium lassi, 
quos dividebat balneator elixus. 
quid cogitatis, o fames amicorum ? 
regis superbi sportulae recesserunt. 5 

" Nihil stropharum est : iam salarium dandum est." 

VIII 
"THAiDAQuintusamat." "Quam Thaida?" "Thaida 

luscam." 
unum oculum Thais non habet, ille duos. 



1 The first shaving of the beard was considered the first 
day of manhood, and was sacred. The hair was often dedi- 
cated to a god : cf. i. xxxi. Nero dedicated his to Jupiter 
Capitolinus in a gold box studded with pearls, and instituted 

168 



BOOK III. v-vm 

you arrive. Whether you see them both at once, or 
her or him first, you will say this : " Marcus sends 
greeting/' and it is enough. A letter may recom- 
mend others : he errs who thinks he should be 
recommended to his friends. 

VI 

THIS is the third morn counted to you after the 
tdes of May, Marcellinus, one twice to be honoured 
by your rites. This first made your father debtor for 
his birth into the light of heaven ; this first takes 
toll of your blooming cheeks. 1 Though that day 
gave him the great gift of a joyous life, yet it has 
not given thy sire more than it gives now. 



VII 

FAREWELL now, ye hundred wretched farthings, the 
largess of the jaded escort, ye whom the parboiled 
bath-man parcelled out. What think ye, my famished 
friends ? The doles of a haughty patron are gone. 
" No wriggling serves ; at once he must give a 
salary." 2 

VIII 

" QUINTUS loves Thais." " Which Thais ? " " Thais 
the one-eyed." Thais lacks one eye, he both. 

the festival of the Juvenalia in honour of the event ; Suet. 
Nzr. xii. ; Tac. Ann. xiv. xv. 

2 Nero substituted for a dinner a dole to clients of a 
hundred farthings. Uomitian restored the dinner. But 
many clients (the "famished friends" of the epigram) de- 
pended on the money dole, for which a dinner was a bad 
substitute : cf. in. xxx. and Ix. 

169 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

IX 

VERSICULOS in me narratur scribere Cinna. 
non scribit, cuius carmina nemo legit. 

X 

CONSTITUIT, Philomuse, pater tibi inilia bina 
menstrua perque omnis praestitit ilia dies, 

luxuriam premeret cum crastina semper egestas 
et vitiis essent danda diurna tuis. 

idem te moriens heredem ex asse reliquit. 5 

exheredavit te, Philomuse, pater. 

XI 

Si tua nee Thais nee lusca est, Quinte, puella, 
cur in te factum distichon esse putas ? 

sed simile est aliquid. pro Laide Thaida dixi ? 
die mihi, quid simile est Thais et Hermione ? 

tu tamen es Quintus : mutemus nomen amantis : 5 
si non vult Quintus, Thaida Sextus amet. 

XII 

UNOUENTUM, fateor, bonum dedisti 

convivis here, sed nihil scidisti. 

res salsa est bene olere et esurire. 

qui non cenat et unguitur, Fabulle, 

hie vere rnihi mortuus videtur. 5 

1 in. viii. 

2 If, instead of Thais, I had said Hermione, you would not 

170 



BOOK III. ix-xn 

IX 

CINNA is said to write verses against me. He doesn't 
write at all whose poems no man reads. 

X 

PHILOMUSUS, your father an-anged to allow you two 
thousand sesterces a month, and every day he handed 
you that allowance, seeing that on the heels of 
luxury trod ever to-morrow's beggary, and your vices 
called for a daily wage. Dying he also left you heir 
to every penny. Your father has disinherited you, 
Philomusus ! 

XI 

IK your mistress is neither Thais nor one-eyed, 
Quintus, why do you think my distich J was aimed 
at you ? But there is some likeness. Did I say " Thais" 
and mean " Lais " ? Tell me, what likeness is there 
between "Thais" and Hermione ? Yet you are 
Quintus ; let us change the lover's name. If Quintus 
is unwilling, let Sextus be Thais' lover. 2 



XII 

GOOD unguent, I allow, you gave your guests yes- 
terday, but you carved nothing. Tis a droll thing 
to be scented and to starve. He who doesn't dine, 
and is anointed, Fabullus, seems to me to be in very 
truth a corpse. 8 

have seen any likeness. Let us call her Hermione, and 
Sextus her lover. 

3 Which was anointed. 

171 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 



XIII 

DUM non vis pisces, dum non vis carpere pullos 
et plus quam putri, 1 Naevia, parcis a pro, 

accusas rumpisque cocum, tamquam omnia cruda 
attulerit. numquam sic ego crudus ero. 

XIV 
ROMAM petebat esuritor Tuccius 

profectus ex Hispania. 
occurrit illi sportularum fabula : 

a ponte rediit Mulvio. 

XV 

PLUS credit nemo tota quam Cordus in urbe. 

"Cum sit tarn pauper, quomodo ? " caecus amat. 

XVI 

DAS gladiatores, sutorum regule cerdo, 
quodque tibi tribuit subula, sica rapit. 

ebrius es : neque enim faceres hoc sobrius umquam, 
ut velles corio ludere, cerdo, tuo. 

lusisti corio : sed te, mihi crede, memento 5 

nunc in pellicula, cerdo, tenere tua. 

1 putri Heins. , patri codd. 

1 Crudus means "raw," and also " suffering from indiges- 
tion." Milton uses the word in the latter sense (Com. 476), 
and this has been adopted in the translation. See also 
"crude or intoxicate" (Par. Reg. iv. 328). 

2 Without even entering Rome. The Mulvian Bridge was 
just outside the Porta Flaminia, the N. Gate of Rome. As 
to the dole, cf. in. vii. 

172 



BOOK III. xm-xvi 

XIII 

WHILE you are unwilling to carve your fish, while 
you are unwilling to carve your fowls, and spare, 
Naevia, your boar although more than high, you 
rate and cut up your cook, saying he sent up every- 
thing crude. Mine will be no " crude surfeit " l on 
these terms. 

XIV 

THE starveling Tuccius made for Rome, setting 
out from Spain. A report of the clients' dole met 
him : home he returned from the Mulvian Bridge. 2 



XV 

No man in all the city gives more credit than 
Cordus. " Seeing he is so poor, how's that ? " He 
is a blind lover. 3 

XVI 

You give a show of gladiators, 4 cobbler, little king 
of stitchers, and what the awl has earned for you 
the poniard hurries off with. You are drunk ; for 
you would never do this sober, to take your pleasure, 
cobbler, at the expense of your own hide. 5 You 
have played with your hide ! but bear this in mind 
trust my word ! to keep yourself, cobbler, now in 
your own little skin. 6 

3 A play on the word "credit," i.e. "gives credit," or 
" trusts," "believes." Cordus believes more than he sees : 
cf. vin. xlix. 4 c,f. in. lix. and xcix. 

5 Proverbial for " at your own expense." 

t; Stick to your last. Perhaps also an allusion to the ass 
in a lion's skin. 

173 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XVII 

CIRCUMLATA diu mensis scribilita secundis 

urebat nimio saeva calore man us ; 
sed magis ardebat Sabidi gula : protinus ergo 

sufflavit buccis terque quaterque suis. 
ilia quidem tepuit digitosque admittere visa est, 5 

sed nemo potuit tangere : merda fuit. 

XVIII 

PERFRIXISSE tuas questa est praefatio fauces, 
cum te excusaris, Maxime, quid recitas ? 

XIX 

PROXIMA centenis ostenditur ursa columnis, 

exornant fictae qua platanona ferae, 
huius duna patulos adludens temptat hiatus 

pulcher Hylas, teneram mersit in ora manuni. 
vipera sed caeco scelerata latebat in acre 5 

vivebatque anima deteriore fera. 
non sensit puer esse dolos, nisi dente recepto 

dum perit. o facinus, falsa quod ursa fuit ! 

XX 

Die, Musa, quid agat Canius meus Rufus : 
utrumne chartis tradit ille victuris 
legenda temporum acta Claudianorum ? 
an quae Neroni falsus adstruit scriptor, 

1 A live bear might have done no harm. 
* There are many references to Nero's poetry. Tacitus 
(Ann. xiv. xvi.) says it was not his own ; but Suetonius 

174 



BOOK III. xvn-xx 

XVII 

A TART, repeatedly handed round at the second 
course, burnt the fingers cruelly with its excessive 
heat. But Sabidius' gluttony was more ardent still ; 
straightway, therefore, three and four times he blew 
upon it with his full cheeks. The tart, indeed, grew 
cooler, and seemed to allow the fingers ; but not a 
man could touch it 'twas filth ! 

XVIII 

YOUR opening address complained that you had a 
cold in your throat. Now you have excused yourself, 
Maximus, why do you recite ? 

XIX 

NEXT to the Hundred Columns, where wild beasts 
in effigy adorn the plane-grove, is shown a bear. 
While fair Hylas was in play challenging its yawning 
mouth he plunged into its throat his youthful hand. 
But an accursed viper lay hid in the dark cavern of 
the bronze, alive with a life more deadly than that 
of the beast itself. The boy perceived not the guile 
but when he felt the fang and died. Oh, what a 
crime was this, that unreal was the bear ! l 

XX 

TELL me, Muse, what my Canius Rufus is doing. 
Is he committing to immortal pages, for men to read, 
the deeds of Claudian times ? or does he emulate the 
works the lying chronicler ascribes to Nero ? 2 or the 

denies this : Ner, lii. Some editions put a ? at scriptor, 
making the sense: "is his theme the deeds the lying 
chronicler etc. ? " 

175 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

an aemulatur inprobi iocos Phaedri ? 5 

lascivus elegis an severus herois ? 

an in coturnis horridus Sophocleis ? 

an otiosus in schola poetarum 

lepore tinctos Attico sales narrat ? 

hinc si recessit, porticum terit templi 10 

an spatia carpit lentus Argonautarum ? 

an delicatae sole rursus Europae 

inter tepentes post meridiem buxos 

sedet ambulatve liber acribus curis ? 

Titine thermis an lavatur Agrippae 15 

an inpudici balneo Tigillini ? 

an rure Tulli fruitur atque Lucani ? 

an Pollionis dulce currit ad quartum ? 

an aestuantis iam profectus ad Baias 

piger Lucrino nauculatur in stagno ? 20 

"Vis scire quid agat Canius tuus ? ridet." 

XXI 

PROSCRIPTUM famulus servavit fronte notata. 
non fuit haec domini vita, sed invidia. 

XXII 

DEDERAS, Apici, bis trecenties ventri, 
et adhuc supererat centies tibi laxum. 
hoc tu gravatus ut famem et sitim ferre 

1 The translator of Aesop ; but the reference must be to 
lost works. 

* Not known, unless it was the Schola Oc'aviat, part of 
the Porttcus Liviae et Octaviae. 

3 Perhaps the Temple of Isis : cf. II. xiv. 7. 

4 The Porticus Argonautarum : cf. ir. xiv. 6. 

5 The Porticus Europae : cf. n. xiv. 5. ' cf. I. Ixix. 

I 7 6 



BOOK III. xx-xxn 

jests of naughty Phaedrus f l is he wanton in elegy 
or severe in heroics ? or terrible in Sophoclean buskin ? 
or does he, idling in the Poets' School, 2 tell witty 
stories touched with Attic grace ? If he has gone 
hence, does he tread the Temple's 3 piazza, or idly 
stroll along the expanse of the Argonauts ? 4 Or 
again, does he sit or walk, free of anxious care, amid 
the box-trees, warm after noon, of Europa 5 luxuriat- 
ing in the sun ? Does he bathe in Titus' or Agrippa's 
warm baths, or in the bath of shameless Tigellinus ? 
Does he enjoy the country seat of Tullus and Lu- 
canus? or is he driving to Pollio's charming house at 
the fourth milestone ? or setting out for steaming 
Baiae does he now sail lazily on the Lucrine mere ? 
" Do you wish to know what your Canius is doing ? 
He is laughing." 6 

XXI 

A SLAVE he had branded saved the life of a pro- 
scribed man. 7 This was to give his master not life, 
but lifelong shame. 8 



XXII 

You had expended, Apicius, twice thirty millions 
on your gorging, and still there remained to you a 
full ten millions. This you scorned to endure, as 

T Antius Restio, proscribed bv the Triumvirs, whose life 
was saved by his slave's pretence to the soldiers in pursuit 
that the corpse of a man he had slain, or had found, and was 
burning, was his master's: Macrob. Sat. ii. 11; Val. Max. 
vi. viii. 7. 

8 For branding such a slave. The assonance in vita and 
inuidia is intentional. 

177 
VOL. I. N 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

sunima venenum potione perduxti. 

nihil est, Apici, tibi gulosius factuni. 5 

XXIII 

OMNIA cum retro pueris opsonia tradas, 
cur non mensa tibi ponitur a pedibus ? 

XXIV 

VITE nocens rosa stabat moriturus ad aras 

hircus, Bacche, tuis victima grata sacris. 
quem Tuscus mactare deo cum vellet aruspex, 

dixerat agresti forte rudique viro 
ut cito testiculos et acuta falce secaret, 5 

taeter ut inmundae carnis abiret odor, 
ipse super virides aras luctantia pronus 

dum resecat cultro colla premitque maim, 
ingens iratis apparuit hirnea sacris. 

occupat hanc ferro rusticus atque secat, 10 

hoc ratus antiques sacrorum poscere ritus 

talibus et fibris numina prisca coli. 
sic, modo qui Tuscus fueras, mine Gall us aruspex, 

dum iugulas hircum, factus es ipse caper. 

XXV 

Si temperari balneum cupis ferveiis, 
Faustine, quod vix lulianus intraret, 
roga lavetur rhetorem Sabineium. 
Neronianas is refrigerat thermas. 

1 i.e. for the benefit of your slaves. They stood behind 
their masters at dinner. The epigram is taken by some as 
addressed to one who (cf. n. xxxvii.) handed viands to his 
slave to be carried home. 

I 7 8 



BOOK III. xxn-xxv 

mere hunger and thirst, and, as the last draught of 
all, quaffed poison. You never did anything, Apicius, 
more gluttonous ! 

XXIII 

SEEING that you hand all your viands to your slaves 
behind you, why is not the table laid out at your 
feet? 1 " 

XXIV 

GUILTY of having gnawed a vine, a he-goat, doomed 
to die, stood at the altar, a victim, Bacchus, welcome 
to thy rites. When the Tuscan soothsayer was minded 
to sacrifice this to the god, he chanced to bid a country 
clown quickly to sever with his sharp sickle the tes- 
ticles of the beast that the foul odour of unclean 
flesh should pass away. While he himself, leaning 
over the turf altar, was cutting with his knife the 
throat of the struggling beast and pressing it down 
with his hand, a huge hernia was revealed to the 
scandal of the rites ; this the clown at once seized 
and severed, thinking that the ritual's ancient mode 
required this offering, and that by such entrails the 
old-world deities were honoured. So you, just lately 
a Tuscan soothsayer, now a Gaul, 2 in slaughtering a 
he-goat have been made a gelding. 3 

XXV 

IF you wish, Faustinus, that a bath, so hot that 
even Julianus could scarcely get into it, should be 
cooled, ask the rhetorician Sabineius to bathe in it. 
He makes icy the warm baths of Nero. 

2 The priests of Cybele were eunuchs, and called Galli. 

3 Caper meant "goat" or " castrated goat": Gell. ix. ix. 

179 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXVI 

PRAEDIA solus habes et solus, Candida, nummos, 
aurea solus habes, murrina solus habes, 

Massica solus habes et Opimi Caecuba solus, 
et cor solus habes, solus et ingenium. 

omnia solus habes hoc me puta l velle negare ! 5 
uxorem sed habes, Candide, cum populo. 

XXVII 

NUMQUAM me revocas, venias cum saepe vocatus : 
ignosco, nullum si modo, Galle, vocas. 

invitas alios : vitium est utriusque. " Quod ? " inquis. 
et mihi cor non est et tibi, Galle, pudor. 

XXVIII 

AURICULAM Mario graviter miraris olere. 
tu facis hoc : garris, Nestor, in auriculam. 

XXIX 

HAS cum gemina compede dedicat catenas, 
Saturne, tibi Zoilus, anulos priores. 

XXX 

SPORTULA mil la datur ; gratis conviva recumbis : 
die mihi, quid Romae, Gargiliane, facis ? 

1 nee me puta Madvig. 

1 cf. ii. xliii. 

2 Probably porcelain : cf. xiv. cxiii. 

1 80 



BOOK III. xxvi-xxx 

XXVI 

LANDS are yours alone, and yours alone, Candidus, 1 
are moneys; gold plate is yours alone; murrine 2 cups 
are yours alone ; Massic wines are yours alone, and 
Caecuban of Opimius' year yours alone, and talent is 
yours alone; yours alone genius. All things are yours 
alone fancy I waijt to deny it ! but you have a wife, 
Candidus, who is also the people's property. 

XXVII 

You never invite me in return, though you come 
often when invited ; I pardon you, Gallus, if only 
you invite no one else. You invite others. This is a 
fault in each of us. " What fault ? " you say. I have 
no sense, and you, Gallus, no decency. 

XXVIII 

You wonder that Marius' ear smells abominably. 
You are the cause : you whisper, Nestor, into his ear. 

XXIX 

THESE chains with their double fetter Zoilus dedi- 
cates to you, Saturnus. 3 They were formerly his 
rings. 4 

XXX 

No dole is given ; you recline an unbought guest 
at dinner 5 : tell me, what do you, Gargilianus, at 

3 Slaves, on gaining freedom, dedicated their fetters to 
Saturn, during whose festival, the Saturnalia, they had some 
degree of freedom. 

4 Z. now wears the ring of a knight : cf, xr. xxxvii. 3. 

5 cf. in. vii. 

181 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

unde tibi togula est et fuscae pensio cellae ? 

unde datur quadrans ? unde vir es Chiones ? 
cum ratione licet dicas te vivere summa, 

quod vivis, nulla cum ratione facis. 

XXXI 

SUNT tibi, confiteor, difFusi iugera campi 
urbanique tenent praedia multa lares, 

et servit dominae numerosus debitor arcae 
sustentatque tuas aurea massa dapes. 

fastidire tamen noli, Rufine, minores : 

plus habuit Didymos, plus Philomelus habet. 

XXXII 

" AN possim vetulam " quaeris, Matronia : possum 
et vetulam, sed tu mortua, lion vetula es. 

possum Hecubam, possum Nioben, Matronia, sed si 
nondum erit ilia cams, nondum erit ilia lapis. 

XXXIII 

INGENUAM malo, sed si tamen ilia uegetur, 
libertina mihi proxuma condicio est : 

extreme est ancilla loco, sed vincet utramque, 
si facie nobis haec erit ingenua. 

XXXIV 

DIGNA tuo cur sis indignaque nomine, dicam. 
frigida es et nigra es : non es et es Chione. 



1 For the l>aths. 

2 D. a wealthy eunuch ; P. a harp-player : -cf. in. iv. 8. 

3 H. was turned into a bitch, N. into stone. H. was also 

182 



BOOK III. xxx-xxxiv 

Rome ? Whence comes your poor toga and the rent 
of your grimy garret ? Whence is provided the far- 
thing ? l whence the support of Chione your mistress ? 
You may say that you live with the most reasonable 
economy : your living at all is unreasonable. 

XXXI 

You have, I allow, acres of land widely spread, 
and houses in town occupy many sites, and many a 
debtor is a slave to your imperious money-chest, and 
gold plate supports your banquets. Yet do not scorn, 
Rufinus, lesser men. More had Didymus ; more 
Philomelus has. 2 

XXXII 

"CAN I love an old woman ?" you ask me, Matronia. 
1 can even an old woman ; but you are a corpse, not 
an old woman. I can love Hecuba, I can Niobe, 
Matronia, but only if the one is not yet a bitch, the 
other not yet a stone. 3 

XXXIII 

I PREFER one free-born, yet if she be denied me, 
a freedwoman's quality is next in worth to me. In 
the last rank is the servant-maid ; yet she shall 
surpass either of the others if her face be to me 
that of a free-born maid. 

XXXIV 

I WILL tell you why you suit, and do not suit, your 
name. You are cold and you are dark ; you are, and 
are not, Chione. 4 

called c.anis from the virulence of her vituperation : Cic. 
Tusc. in xxvi. and Plant. Men. 718, 
4 Derived from x 1 ^ (snow). 

183 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXXV 

ARTIS Phidiacae toreuma clarum 
pisces aspicis : adde aquam, natabunt. 

XXXVI 

QUOD novus et nuper factus tibi praestat amicus, 

hoc praestare iubes me, Fabiane, tibi : 
horridus ut primo te semper mane salutem 

per mediumque trahat me tua sella lutuiii. 
lassus ut in thermas decuma vel serius hora 5 

te sequar Agrippae, cum laver ipse Titi. 
hoc per triginta merui, Fabiane, Decembres, 

ut sim tiro tuae semper amicitiae ? 
hoc merui, Fabiane, toga tritaque meaque, 

ut nondum credas me meruisse rudem ? 10 

XXXVII 

IRASCI tantum felices nostis amici. 

non belle facitis, sed iuvat hoc facere. 

XXXVIII 

QUAE te causa trahit vel quae fiducia Romam, 
Sexte ? quid aut speras aut petis inde ? refer. 

"Causas" inquis "agam Cicerone disertior ipso 
atque erit in triplici par mihi nemo foro." 

egit Atestinus causas et Civis (utrumque 5 

noras) ; sed neutri pensio tota fuit, 



BOOK III. xxxv-xxxvm 

XXXV 

You see these fish carved finely in relief by Phidian 
art. Add water : they will swim. 

XXXVI 

THE duties of a new and recent friend you bid me 
perform towards you, Fabianus ; that shivering at 
early morn I should pay my respects to you con- 
tinually ; that your chair should drag me through 
the midst of the mud ; that when I am fagged out 
I should follow you at the tenth hour, or later, to 
the warm baths of Agrippa, although I myself bathe 
at those of Titus. Is this what I have deserved, 
Fabianus, for my thirty Decembers of service, to be 
always a raw recruit to your friendship? Is this 
what I have deserved, Fabianus, that, when my toga 
(my own purchase) is threadbare, you think that I 
have not yet deserved my discharge ? 

XXXVII 

To be angry is all you know, you rich friends. 
You do not act prettily, but it pays to do this. 1 

XXXVIII 

WHAT reason or what confidence draws you to 
Rome, Sextus ? What do you either hope or look for 
from that quarter? tell me. "I will conduct cases," 
you say, " more eloquently than Cicero himself, and 
there shall be in the three Forums no man my match." 
Atestinus and Civis each conducted cases you knew 

1 It is an excuse for not being liberal in presents : cf. xu. 
xiii. 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

" Si nihil hinc veniet, pangentur carmina nobis : 

audieris, dices esse Maronis opus." 
insanis : omnes, gelidis quicumque lacernis 

sunt ibi, Nasones Vergiliosque vides. 10 

" Atria magna colam." vix tres aut quattuor ista 

res aluit, pallet cetera turba fame. 
" Quid faciam ? suade : nam certum est vivere Romae." 

si bonus es, casu vivere, Sexte, potes. 

XXXIX 

JLIACO similem pueruni, Faustine, ministro 
lusca Lycoris amat. quam bene lusca videt ! 

XL 

MUTUA quod nobis ter quinquagena dedisti 
ex opibus tantis, quas gravis area premit, 

esse tibi magnus, Telesine, videris amicus. 

tu magnus, quod das ? immo ego, quod recipis. 

XLI 

INSERTA phialae Mentoris manu ducta 
lacerta vivit et timetur argentum. 

XLII 

LOMENTO rugas uteri quod condere temptas, 
Polla, tibi ventrem, non mihi labra linis. 

1 Jove's cupbearer Ganymede. 
186 



BOOK III. XXXVIII-XLII 

both but neither made his full rent. " If nothing- 
comes from this source, I will compose poems ; hear 
them, you will call them Maro's work." You are crazy ; 
in all those fellows there with their chill mantles 
you see Nasos and Virgils. " I will court the halls of 
great men." Barely three or four has that procedure 
supported ; all the rest of the crowd are pale with 
hunger. "What shall I do ? Advise me, for I am 
bent on living in Rome." If you are a good man 
you may live, Sextus, by accident. 

XXXIX 

ONE-EYED Lycoris loves a youth like to the cup- 
bearer from Ilium. 1 How well the one-eyed sees ! 

XL 

BECAUSE you made me a loan of one hundred and 
fifty thousand sesterces out of all the wealth on 
which your heavy money-chest shuts tight, you fancy 
yourself, Telesinus, a great friend. You a great friend 
because you give ? I, rather, because you get back. 

XLI 

SET 011 the bowl, portrayed by Mentor's 2 hand the 
lizard lives ; and we fear to touch the silver. 3 

XLII 

You try to conceal your wrinkles by the use of 
bean-meal, but you plaster your skin, Polla, not my 

- A celebrated artist in relief of some centuries before. 
3 cf. in. xxxv. on a similar subject. 

187 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

simpliciter pateat vitium fortasse pusillum : 
quod tegitur, maius creditur esse malum. 



XLIII 

MENTIRIS iuvenem tirictis, Laetine, capillis, 
tarn subito corvus, qui modo cycnus eras. 

non omnes fallis ; scit te Proserpina canum : 
personam capiti detrahet ilia tuo. 



XLIV 

OCCURRIT tibi nemo quod libeiiter, 

quod, quacumque venis, fuga est et ingens 

circa te, Ligurine, solitudo, 

quid sit, scire cupis ? nimis poeta es. 

hoc valde vitium periculosum est. 5 

non tigris catulis citata raptis, 

non dipsas niedio perusta sole^ 

nee sic scorpios inprobus timetur. 

nam tantos, rogo, quis ferat labores ? 

et stanti legis et legis sedenti, 10 

currenti legis et legis cacanti. 

in thermas fugio : sonas ad aureni. 

piscinam peto : non licet natare. 

ad cenam propero : tenes euntem. 

ad cenam venio : fugas edentem. 15 

lassus dormio : suscitas iacentem. 

vis, quantum facias mali, videre ? 

vir iustus probus innocens timeris. 

1 To "plaster the face" (on sublinere} meant to deceive: 
Plaut. Merc. n. iv. 17, et passim. The idea was taken from 

188 



BOOK III. XMI-XMV 

lips. 1 Let a blemish, which perhaps is small, simply 
show. The flaw which is hidden is deemed greater 
than it is. 



You falsely ape youth, Laetinus, with dyed hair, 
so suddenly a raven who were but now a swan. You 
don't deceive all ; Proserpine 2 knows you are hoary : 
she shall pluck the mask from off your head. 



XLIV 

THAT no man willingly meets you, that, wherever 
you arrive, there is flight and vast solitude around 
you, Ligurinus, do you want to know what is the 
matter ? You are too much of a poet. This is a 
fault passing dangerous. No tigress roused by the 
robbery of her cubs, no viper scorched by tropic 
suns, nor deadly scorpion is so dreaded. For who, 
I ask you, would endure such trials ? You read to 
me while I am standing, and read to me when I am 
sitting ; while I am running you read to me, and 
read to me while I am using a jakes. I fly to the 
warm baths : you buzz in my ear ; 1 make for the 
swimming bath : I am not allowed to swim ; I haste 
to dinner : you detain me as I go ; I reach the 
table : you rout me while I am eating. Wearied out, 
I sleep : you rouse me up as I lie. Do you want to 
appreciate the evil you cause ? Though you are a 
man just, upright, and harmless, you are a terror. 

the practical joke of blackening the face of a drunken 
man. 
2 Queen of the shades below. 

189 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XLV 
FUGERIT an Phoebus niensas cenamque Thyestae 

ignore : fugimus nos, Ligurine, tuam. 
ilia quidem lauta est dapibusque instructa superbis, 

sed nihil omiiino te recitante placet, 
nolo mihi ponas rhombos mullumve bilibrem 5 

nee volo boletos, ostrea nolo : tace. 

XLVI 

EXIGIS a nobis operam sine fine togatam : 

non eo, libertum sed tibi mitto meum. 
" Non est" inquis "idem." multo plus esse probabo. 

vix ego lecticam subsequar, ille feret. 
in turbam incideris, cunctos umbone repellet : 5 

invalidum est nobis ingenuumque latus. 
quidlibet in causa narraveris, ipse tacebo : 

at tibi tergeminum mugiet ille sophos. 
lis erit, ingenti faciet convicia voce : 

esse pudor vetuit fortia verba mihi. 10 

" Ergo nihil nobis " inquis "praestabis amicus ? " 

quidquid libertus, Candide, non poterit. 

XLVII 

CAPENA grandi porta qua pluit gutta 
Phrygiumque Matris Almo qua lavat ferrum, 
Horatiorum qua viret sacer campus 
et qua pusilli fervet Herculis fanum, 



1 Atreus, king of Argos, in revenge for an injury, served 
up to his brother Thyestes the bodies of T. 's two sons, which 
T. unknowingly ate. The Sun is said to have veiled his face 
in horror : cf. x. iv. 1. 

190 



BOOK III. XLV-XI.VII 

XLV 

WHETHER Phoebus fled from the table and banquet 
of Thyestes l I don't know : we fly from yours, Li- 
gurinus. It is undoubtedly choice, and laid out with 
rich viands, but nothing at all pleases us while you 
recite. I don't want you to serve me turbots, or a 
two-pound mullet, nor do I want mushrooms, oysters 
I do not want : hold your tongue ! 

XLVI 

You exact from me gowned service without end ; 
I don't attend, but I despatch to you my freedman. 
" It isn't the same thing," you say. I will prove it 
is much more : I could hardly escort a litter, lie will 
carry it. Supposing you get into a crowd, he will 
thrust them all back with his elbow ; my flanks are 
weak, and a gentleman's. Supposing you tell a story 
in your pleading, I myself will hold my peace ; but 
he will bellow for you a thrice-redoubled " Bravo ! " 
If you have a lawsuit he will pour abuse in stentorian 
tones ; shyness has forbidden me strong language. 
" So you, though a friend, will give me no service ? " 
you say. Whatever, Candidus, 2 my freedman cannot. 

XLVII 

WHERE the Capene Gate drips with heavy drops, 
and where Almo washes the Phrygian Mother's 
knife, 3 where the plain, hallowed by the Horatii, is 
green, and where the temple of the little Hercules 

2 Addressed also in n. xliii. and HI. xxvi. 

3 The priests of Cybele annually washed the statue of the 
Goddess, and the sacred implements, in the Almo : Ov. 
Fast. iv. 339. 

T9I 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

Faustine, plena Bassus ibat in raeda, 5 

omnis beati copias trahens runs. 

illic videres frutice nobili caules 

et utrumque porrum sessilesque lactucas 

pigroque ventri non inutiles betas ; 

illic coronam pinguibus gravem turdis 10 

leporemque laesum Gallici canis dente 

nondumque victa lacteum faba poi'cum. 

nee feriatus ibat ante carrucam 

sed tuta faeno cursor ova portabat. 

urbem petebat Bassus? immo rus ibat. 15 

XLVIII 

PAUPERIS extruxit cellam, sed vendidit Olus 
praedia : nunc cellam pauperis Olus habet. 

XLIX 

VEIENTANA mihi misces, ubi Massica potas : 
olfacere haec malo pocula quam bibere. 



HAEC tibi, non alia, est ad cenam causa vocandi, 

versiculos recites ut, Ligurine, tuos. 
deposui soleas, adfertur protinus ingens 

inter lactucas oxygarumque liber : 
alter perlegitur, duru fercula prima morantur : 5 

tertius est, nee adhuc mensa secunda venit : 

1 And so had to carry his supplies with him, for his 
country villa produced nothing : cf. ill. Iviii. 49. 

2 He has become poor in earnest. "A poor man's box " 
was ordinarily a modest apartment in rich men's houses, 

192 



BOOK III. XLVII-I. 

is thronged, Bassus was riding, Faustinas, in a travel 
ling carriage crammed full, dragging with him all the 
abundance of the rich country. There might you 
see cabbages with noble heads, and each kind of 
leek, and squat lettuces, and beets not unserviceable 
to a sluggish stomach ; there a hoop heavy with fat 
fieldfares, and a hare that had been wounded by the 
fang of a Gallic hound, and a sucking-pig too young 
to munch beans. Nor was the runner taking holiday ; 
he went before the vehicle carrying eggs protected 
by straw. Was Bassus making for the city? On 
the contrary : he was going into the country. 1 

XLVIII 

OLUS built "a poor man's box," but sold his lands. 
Now Olus occupies a "poor man's box." '' 

XLIX 

You mix Veientan wine 3 for me, whereas you drink 
Massic. I would rather smell these cups of mine 
than drink them. 



THIS, no other, is your reason for inviting me to 
dine, that you may recite your verses, Ligurinus. I 
have put off my shoes ; at once a huge volume is 
brought along with the lettuce and the fish sauce. 
A second is read through while the first course 
stands waiting ; there is a third, and the dessert 

constructed either for variety, or to be used on unceremonious 
occasions : Sen. Ep. xviii. and c. Sen. associates it with 
"quidquid est per quod luxuria divitiarum taedio ludit." 
3 Poor wine : cf. r. ciii. 9. Massic was one of the finest. 

193 

VOL. I. O 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

et quartum recitas et quintum denique librum. 

puticlus est, totiens si mihi pom's aprum. 
quod si non scombris scelerata poemata donas, 

cenabis solus iam. Ligurine, domi. 10 

LI 

CUM faciem laudo, cum miror crura manusque, 
dicere, Galla, soles " Nuda placebo magis," 

et semper vitas communia balnea nobis. 

numquid, Galla, times ne tibi non placeam ? 

LII 

EMPTA domus fuerat tibi, Tongiliane, ducentis : 
abstulit hanc nimium casus in urbe frequens. 

conlatum est deciens. rogo, non potes ipse videri 
incendisse tuam, Tongiliane, domum? 

LIII 

ET voltu poteram tuo carere 

et collo manibusque cruribusque 

et mammis natibusque clunibusque, 

et, ne singula persequi laborem, 

tota te poteram, Chloe, carere. 5 

LIV 

CUM dare non possim quod poscis, Galla, rogantem, 
multo simplicius, Galla, negare potes. 



194 



BOOK III. L-LIV 

does not yet appear ; and you recite a fourth, and 
finally a fifth book. Sickening is a boar if you serve 
it to me so often. If you don't consign your ac- 
cursed poems to the mackerel, 1 in future, Ligurinus, 
you shall dine at home alone. 

LI 

WHEN I compliment your face, when I admire your 
legs and hands, you are accustomed to say, Galla : 
" Naked I shall please you more," and yet you con- 
tinually avoid taking a bath with me. Surely you 
are not afraid, Galla, that I shall not please you ? 

LII 

You had bought a house, Tongilianus, for two hun- 
dred thousand sesterces : an accident too common in 
the city destroyed it. A million was subscribed. I 
ask you, are you not open to the suspicion, Tongili- 
anus, of having yourself set fire to your house ? 2 

LIII 

1 COULD dispense with your face, and neck, and 
hands, and legs, and bosom, and back, and hips. 
And not to labour details I could dispense with 
the whole of you, Chloe. 

LIV 

As I cannot give the price, Galla, you demand of 
your suitor, you may more simply, Galla, say "No" 
outright. 

1 cf. iv. Ixxxvi. K. 2 cf. Juv. iii. 220. 

'95 

o 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LV 

QUOD quacumque venis Cosmum migrare putamus 

et fluere excusso cinnama fusa vitro, 
nolo peregrinis placeas tibi, Gellia, nugis. 

scis, puto, posse nieum sic bene olere canem. 

LVI 

SIT cisterna mihi quam vinea malo Ravemiae, 
cum possim multo vendere pluris aquam. 

LVII 

CALLIDUS inposuit nuper mihi copo Ravennae : 
cum peterem mixtum, vendidit ille merum. 

LVIII 

BAIANA nostri villa, Basse, Faustini 

non otiosis ordinata myrtetis 

viduaque platano tonsilique buxeto 

ingrata lati spatia detinet campi, 

sed rure veto barbaroque laetatur. 5 

hie farta premitur angulo Ceres omni 

et multa fragrat testa senibus autumnis ; 

hie post Novembres imminente iam bruma 

seras putator horridus refert uvas. 

truces in alta valle mugiunt tauri 10 

vitulusque inermi fronte prurit in pugnam. 

vagatur omnis turba sordidae chortis, 

1 A perfumer of the period. 
8 R. suffered from lack of water. 
3 ef. note to last epigram. 
196 



BOOK III. LV-LVITI 

LV 

WHEREVER you come we fancy Cosmus 1 is on the 
move, and that oil of cinnamon flows streaming from 
a shaken out glass bottle. I would not have you, 
Gellia, pride yourself upon alien trumpery. You know, 
I think, my dog can smell sweet in the same way. 

LVI 

I PREFER a cistern at Ravenna to a vineyard, seeing 
that I can get a much better price for water. 2 

LVII 

A CUNNING taverner imposed on me lately at Ra- 
venna. Whereas I asked for negus, he sold me 
wine neat. 3 

LVIII 

THE Baian villa, Bassus, ot our friend Faustinas 
keeps unfruitful no spaces of wide field laid out in 
idle myrtle-beds, and with widowed planes and 
clipped clumps of box, but rejoices in a farm, honest 
and artless. 4 Here in every corner corn is tightly 
packed, and many a crock is fragrant of ancient 
autumns. Here, when November is past, and winter 
is now at hand, the unkempt primer brings home' 
late grapes. Fiercely in the deep valley roar bulls, 
and the steer with brow unhorned itches for the fray. 
All the crowd of the untidy poultry-yard wanders 
here and there, the shrill-cackling goose, and the 

4 Friedlander takes barbaro as "uncultivated," But this 
is inconsistent with what follows. The whole epigram is a 
comparison between Faustinus' uncivilised farm ana Bassus' 
artificial and unfruitful villa. 

197 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

argutus anser gernmeique pavones 

nomenque debet quae rubentibus pinnis 

et picta perdix Numidicaeque guttatae 15 

et impiorum phasiana Colchorum ; 

Rhodias superbi feminas premunt galli ; 

sonantque turres plausibus columbarum, 

gemit hinc palumbus, inde cereus turtur. 

avidi secuntur vilicae sinum porci 20 

matremque plenam mollis agnus expectat. 

cingunt serenum lactei focum vernae 

et larga festos lucet ad lares silva. 

non segnis albo pallet otio copo, 

nee perdit oleum lubricus palaestrita ; 25 

sed tendit avidis rete subdolum turdis 

tremulave captum linea trahit piscem 

aut inpeditam cassibus refert dammam. 

exercet hilares facilis hortus urbanos, 

et paedagogo non iubente lascivi 30 

parere gaudent vilico capillati, 

et delicatus opere fruitur eunuchus. 

uec venit inanis rusticus salutator : 

fert ille ceris cana cum suis mella 

imtamque lactis Sassinate de silva ; 35 

somniculosos ille porrigit glires, 

hie vagientem niatris hispidae fetum, . 

alius coactos non amare capones. 

et dona matrum vimine offerunt texto 

grandes proborum virgines colonorum. 40 

facto vocatur laetus opere vicinus ; 

nee avara servat crastinas dapes rnensa, 

vescuntur omnes ebrioque non novit 

satur minister invidere convivae. 

at tu sub urbe possides famem mund&m 45 

et turre ab alta prospicis meras laurus, 



198 



BOOK III. i.vin 

spangled peacocks, and the bird that owes its name 
to its flaming plumes, 1 and the painted partridge, 
and speckled guinea-fowls, and the impious 2 Col- 
chians' pheasant. Proud cocks tread their Rhodian 
dames, and cotes are loud with the pigeons' croon ; 
on this side moans the ringdove, on that the glossy 
turtle. Greedily pigs follow the apron of the bailiff's 
wife, and the tender lamb waits for its dam's full 
udder. Infant home-born slaves ring the clear-burning 
hearth, and thickly piled billets gleam before the 
household gods on holidays. The wine seller 3 does 
not idly sicken with pale-faced ease, nor the anointed 
wrestling-master make waste of oil, but he stretches 
a crafty net for greedy fieldfares, or with tremu- 
lous line draws up the captured fish, or brings home 
the doe entangled in his nets. The kindly garden 
keeps the town slaves cheerfully busy, and, without 
the overseer's order, even the wanton long-curled 
pages gladly obey the bailiff; even the delicate 
eunuch delights in work. Nor does the country visitor 
come empty handed : that one brings pale honey 
in its comb, and a pyramid of cheese from Sassina's 
woodland ; that one offers sleepy dormice ; this one 
the bleating offspring of a shaggy mother ; another 
capons debarred from love. And the strapping 
daughters of honest farmers offer in a wicker basket 
their mother's gifts. When work is done a cheerful 
neighbour is asked to dine ; no niggard table reserves 
a feast for the morrow ; all take the meal, and the 
full-fed attendant need not envy the well-drunken 
guest. But you in the suburbs possess what is ele- 
gant starvation, and from your high tower survey 

1 Phoenicopterus, or flamingo. 
3 An allusion to Medea's sorceries. 

3 The slaves mentioned are employed in town for profit or 
hmiry ; in the country they have healthy exercise. 

199 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

furem Priapo non timente securus 

et vinitovem farre pascis urbano 

pictamque portas otiosus ad villain 

holus, ova, pullos, poma, caseum, mustum. 50 

rus hoc vocari debet, an domus longe ? 

LIX 

SUTOR cerdo dedit tibi, culta Bononia, munus, 
fullo dedit Mutinae : nunc ubi copo dabit? 

LX 

CUM vocer ad cenam non iam venalis ut ante, 

cur mihi non eadem quae tibi cena datur ? 
ostrea tu sumis stagno saturata Lucrino, 

sugitur inciso mitulus ore mihi : 
sunt tibi boleti, fungos ego sumo suillos : 5 

res tibi cum rhombo est, at mihi cum sparulo. 
aureus inmodicis turtur te clunibus implet, 

ponitur in cavea mortua pica mihi. 
cur sine te ceno cum tecum, Pontice, cenem ? 

sportula quod non est prosit, edamus idem. 10 

LXI 

ESSE nihil dicis quidquid petis, inprobe Cinna : 
si nil, Cinna, petis, nil tibi, Cinna, nego. 

1 cf. in. xlvii. rf. in. xvi. 



BOOK III. LVIII-LXI 

laurels alone ; you are not nervous, for your Priapus 
fears no thief; and your vine-dresser you feed on 
corn brought from town, and indolently cart to your 
frescoed villa cabbages, eggs, fowls, apples, cheese, 
must. 1 Ought this to be called a farm, or a town- 
house away from town ? 

LIX 

A COBBLER gave you a show, 2 lettered Bononia, a 
bleacher gave one to Mutina. Now where will the 
taverner give one ? 

LX 

SINCE I am asked to dinner, no longer, as before, 
a purchased guest, 3 why is not the same dinner served 
to me as to you ? You take oysters fattened in the 
Lucrine lake, 4 I suck a mussel through a hole in the 
shell ; 5 you get mushrooms, I take hog funguses ; you 
tackle turbot, but I brill. Golden with fat, a turtle- 
dove gorges you with its bloated rump ; there is set 
before me a magpie that has died in its cage. Why 
do I dine without you although, Ponticus, I am 
dining with you ? The dole has gone : let us have 
the benefit of that ; let us eat the same fare. 



LXI 

" 'Tis nothing," you say, whatever you ask, impor- 
tunate Cinna. If you ask "nothing," Cinna, nothing 
I deny you, Cinna. 

3 The money dole having been abolished : cf. III. vii. 

4 Its waters imparted a flavour to oysters : cf. xm. Ixxxii. 
6 Or (perhaps) " with lips cut by the shell." 

2OI 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXII 

CENTENIS quod emis pueros et saepe ducenis, 

quod sub rege Numa condita vina bibis, 
quod constat decies tibi non spatiosa supellex, 

libra quod argenti milia quinque rapit, 
aurea quod fundi pretio carruca paratur, 5 

quod pluris mula est quam domus empta tibi : 
haec animo credis magno te, Quinte, parare ? 

falleris : haec animus, Quinte, pusillus emit. 

LXIII 

COTILE, bellus homo es : dicunt hoc, Cotile, multi. 

audio : sed quid sit, die mihi, bellus homo ? 
" Bellus homo est, flexos qui digerit ordine crines, 

balsama qui semper, cinnama semper olet ; 
cantica qui Nili, qui Gaditana susurrat, 5 

qui movet in varios bracchia volsa modos ; 
inter femineas tota qui luce cathedras 

desidet atque aliqua semper in aure sonat, 
qui legit hinc illinc missas scribitque tabellas ; 

pallia vicini qui refugit cubiti ; 10 

qui scit quam quis amet, qui per convivia currit, 

Hirpini veteres qui bene novit avos." 
quid narras ? hoc est, hoc est homo, Cotile, bellus ? 

res pertricosa est, Cotile, bellus homo. 



BOOK III. LXII-LXIII 

LXII 

You buy slaves for a hundred thousand, and often 
for two hundred thousand sesterces apiece ; you drink 
wines laid down in King Numa's reign ; no vast 
amount of furniture stands you in a million ; a 
pound of silver plate runs off with five thousand ; 
a gilt coach is acquired at the price of a farm ; you 
buy a mule for more than a town mansion. Do you 
think, Quintus, that you acquire these things be- 
cause you have a great mind ? You are deceived. 
These are what a puny mind buys, Quintus. 



LXIII 

COTIUJS, you are "a pretty fellow" : many call you 
so, Cotilus; I hear them. But, tell me, what is a 
pretty fellow ? "A pret'ty fellow is one who arranges 
neatly his curled locks, who continually smells of 
balsam, continually of cinnamon; who hums catches 
from the Nile and Gades ; who waves his depilated 
arms in time to varied measures ; who all the day 
lolls amid the women's chairs, and is ever whispering 
in some ear ; who reads billets sent from one quarter 
or another, and writes them ; who shrinks from con- 
tact with the cloak on his neighbour's elbow ; l who 
knows who is the lover of whom ; who hurries from 
one party to another ; who has at his fingers' ends 
the long pedigree of Hirpinus." 2 What do you 
say? Is this thing, Cotilus, this thing a pretty 
fellow? A very trumpery thing, Cotilus, is your 
pretty fellow. 

1 For fear it should soil or disarrange his dress : cf. n. 
xli. 10. - A racehorse : Juv. viii. 62. 

203 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXIV 

Si REN AS hilarem navigantium poenam 
blandasque mortes gaudiumque crudele, 
quas nemo quondam deserebat auditas, 
fallax Ulixes dicitur reliquisse. 
non miror : illud, Cassiane, mirarer, 
si fabulantem Canium reliquisset. 



LXV 

QUOD spirat tenera malum mordente puella, 

quod de Corycio quae venit aura croco ; 
vinea quod primis cum floret cana racemis, 

gramina quod redolent, quae modo carpsit ovis ; 
quod myrtus, quod messor Arabs, quod sucina trita, 5 

pallidus Eoo ture quod ignis olet ; 
gleba quod aestivo leviter cum spargitur imbre, 

quod madidas nardo passa corona comas : 
hoc tua, saeve puer Diadumene, basia fragrant. 

quid si tota dares ilia sine invidia? 10 



LXVI 

PAR scelus admisit Phariis Antonius armis : 

abscidit voltus ensis uterque sacros. 
illud, laurigeros ageres cum laeta triumphos, 

hoc tibi, Roma, caput, cum loquereris, erat. 
Antoni tamen est peior quam causa Pothini : 5 

hie facinus domino praestitit, ille sibi. 

1 cf. m. xx. 8. 

9 Antony, the Triumvir, was the murderer of Cicero ; 
Pothinus, the eunuch of Ptolemy, king of Egypt, of Pompey. 

204 



BOOK III. I.XIV-LXVI 

LXIV 

THE sirens, who brought on mariners jocund 
punishment, and alluring death, and cruel delight, 
from whom, when their song was heard, no man 
could of old rescue himself, the wily Ulixes is said 
to have escaped. I don't wonder ; that I should 
wonder at, Cassianus, if he had escaped from 
Canius 1 and his anecdotes. 

LXV 

BREATH of a young maid as she bites an apple ; 
effluence that comes from Corycian saffron ; perfume 
such as when the blossoming vine blooms with early 
clusters ; the scent of grass which a sheep has 
just cropped ; the odour of myrtle, of the Arab 
spice-gatherer, of rubbed amber ; of a fire made 
pallid with Eastern frankincense ; of the earth when 
lightly sprinkled with summer rain, of a chaplet 
that has felt locks dewy with nard ; with all these, 
Diadumenus, cruel boy, thy kisses are fragrant. 
What if thou wouldst give those kisses in fulness 
without grudging ? 

LXVI 

A CRIME equal to that of Egypt's armed hand 
Anton ius wrought ; this steel and that destroyed H 
sacred life." That head, O Rome, was thine when 
thou didst with joy lead on thy laurelled triumphs ; 
this was thine when thou wert speaking. 3 Yet could 
Antonius plead worse excuse than Pothinus : he by 
his deed served his master, Antonius himself. 

3 The pun on "head" is not happy. Cicero and Pompey 
were both decapitated. 

205 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXVII 

CESSATIS, pueri, nihilque nostis, 

Vaterno Rasinaque pigriores, 

quorum per vada tarda navigantes 

lentos tinguitis ad celeuma remos. 

iam prono Phaethonte sudat Aethon 5 

exarsitque dies et hora lassos 

interiungit equos meridiana. 

at vos, tarn placidas vagi per undas 

tuta luditjs otium carina, 

non nautas puto vos, sed Argonaiitas. 10 



LXVIII 

Hue est usque tibi scriptus, matrona, libellus. 

cui sint scripta rogas interiora ? mihi. 
gymnasium, thermae, stadium est hac parte : recede. 

exuim-ur : nudos parce videre viros. 
hinc iam deposito post vina rosasque pudore, 5 

quid dicat nescit saucia Terpsichore : 
schemate nee dubio sed aperte nominat illam 

quam recipit sexto mense superba Venus, 
custodem medio statuit quam vilicus horto, 

opposita spectat quam proba virgo manu. 10 

si bene te novi, longum iam lassa libellum 

ponebas, totum nunc studiosa legis. 



1 One of the horses of the Sun. 

2 Aryonautas, which may be interpreted "Argonauts" 
or " lazy sailors " (apyovs vavras). 

3 The muse of dancing. 



206 



BOOK III. LXVll-LXVIII 

LXVII 

SLACK are ye, O youths, and no watermen, more 
sluggish than Vaternus and Hasina, along whose slow 
shallows ye float, and dip lazy oars in time to the 
boatswain's call. Already, while Phaethon slopes 
downwards, Aethon 1 sweats, and the day has burst 
in flame, and the noontide hour unyokes weary 
steeds. But you, straying along waves so placid, 
play in idleness on a safe keel. Not tars do I 
hold you, but tarriers. 2 



LXVIII 

THUS far, O matron, my book has been written for 
you. Do you ask for whom were writ the later parts ? 
For me. A gymnasium, warm baths, a running ground 
are in this part of the book ; depart, we are stripping ; 
forbear to look on naked men. From this point Terp- 
sichore, 3 overcome with liquor, after the wine and the 
roses lays aside shame and knows not what she says, 
and in no ambiguous trope, but in plain speech, men- 
tions that symbol which Venus proudly welcomes in 
the sixth month, 4 which the bailiff sets up as warder 
in the midst of the garden, which a modest virgin 
looks at with hand before her face. If I know you 
well, you were laying down my long book, already 
wearied ; now you are eagerly reading it all. 

* An image of Priapus was carried in procession by Roman 
matrons to the Temple of Venus Eryciua, outside the 
Colline Gate in the N.E. of Rome. This was part of the 
rites of Isis. 



207 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXIX 

OMNIA quod scribis castis epigrammata verbis 

inque tuis nulla est mentula carminibus, 
admiror, laudo ; nihil est te sanctius uno : 

at mea luxuria pagina nulla vacat. 
haec igitur nequam iuvenes facilesque puellae, 

haec senior, sed quern torquet arnica, legat. 
at tua, Cosconi, venerandaque sanctaque verba 

a pueris debent virginibusque legi. 

LXX 

MOECHUS es Aufidiae, qui vir, Scaevine. fuisti ; 

rivalis fuerat qui tuus, ille vir est. 
cur aliena placet tibi, quae tua non placet, uxor ? 

numquid securus non potes arrigere ? 

LXXI 

MENTULA cuin doleat puero, tibi, Naevole, culus, 
non sum divinus, sed scio quid facias. 

LXXII 

Vis futui nee vis niecum, Saufeia, lavari. 

nescio quod magnum suspicor esse nefas. 
aut tibi pannosae dependent pectore mammae 

aut sulcos uteri prodere nuda times 



208 



BOOK III. LXIX-I.XXII 

LXIX 

BECAUSE you write all your epigrams in decent 
language, and in your poems no obscenity is found, 
I admire, I applaud ; nothing is more chaste than 
you of all men ; but no page of mine is without 
wantonness. These then let naughty youths and 
girls of easy virtue read, these any old sire, and 
he too one whom his mistress tortures. But your 
language, Cosconius, woi-thy of respect and chaste 
as it is, should be read by boys and virgins. 1 

LXX 

You are the paramour of Aufidia, and you were, 
Scaevinus, her husband; 2 he who was your rival is 
her husband. Why does another man's wife please 
you when she as your own does not please you ? Is 
it that when secure you lack appetite ? 

LXXI 

SEEING that the boy is sore, and you too, Naevolus. 
though I am no diviner, I know what you are up to. 

LXXII 

You wish to have an amour with me, and yet you 
do not wish, Saufeia, to bathe with me ; I suspect 
that some monstrous blemish is in question. Either 
your dugs hang in wrinkles from your bosom, or you 
fear by nakedness to betray the furrows in your 

1 The epigram is ironical. C.'s milk-and-water stuff is fit 
only for boys and girls. 2 S. had divorced A. 

209 
VOL. I. P 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

aut infinite lacerum patet inguen hiatu 
aut aliquid cunni prominet ore tui. 

sed nihil est horum, credo, pulcherrima nuda es. 
si verum est, vitium peius habes : fatua es. 



LXXIII 

DORMIS cum pueris mutuniatis, 
et non stat tibi, Galle, quod stat illis. 
quid vis me, rogo, Phoebe, suspicari ? 
mollem credere te virum volebam, 
sed rumor negat esse te cinaedum. 

LXXIV 

PSILOTHRO faciem levas et dropace calvam. 

numquid tonsorem, Gargiliane, times ? 
quid facient ungues ? nam certe noil potes illos 

resina Veneto nee resecare luto. 
desine, si pudor est, miseram traducere calvam : 

hoc fieri cunno, Gargiliane, solet. 

LXXV 

STARE, Luperce, tibi iam pridem mentula desit, 

luctaris demens tu tamen arrigere. 
sed nihil erucae faciunt bulbique salaces 

inproba nee prosunt iam satureia tibi. 
coepisti puras opibus corrumpere buccas : 

sic quoque non vivit sollicitata Venus, 
mirari satis hoc quisquam vel credere possit, 

quod non stat, magno stare, Luperce, tibi ? 



BOOK III. LXXII-LXXV 

belly, or your person is lacerated and used up, or 
you have a protuberance somewhere. But there is 
nothing such, I am sure ; naked you are most beauti- 
ful. But if there really is anything, you have a 
worse delect : you are stupid. 

LXXIII 

Tu dormi con giovani membruti, e non ti sta, O 
Gallo, quel che sta a loro. Che vuoi, dimmi, O Febo. 
ch'io ne sospetti ? Volevo crederti un cinedo : ma 
quel che si dice non e che sti un cinedo. 

LXXIV 

WITH salve you smooth your cheeks, and with 
hair-eradicator your bald pate : surely you are not 
afraid, Gargilianus, of a barber ? l How will your 
nails fare ? for those at least you cannot trim with 
resin or Venetian clay. Give over, if you have any 
shame, making a sight of your wretched bald pate : 
this is wont to be done by women elsewhere, Gar- 
gilianus. 

LXXV 

GIA da lungo tempo, O Luperco, il tuo membro 
cessa stare, tuttavia tu arrabiato ti sforzi arrigere. 
Ma nulla fanno le rughe, e gli incitevoli bolbi, ne 
tampoco ti giova la oltre modo lasciva satureia. 
Tentasti corrompere con ricchezze le innocenti 
bocche. Venere sollecitata cosi non ha vigore. Nes- 
suno c'e che possa cid bastantemente ammirare o 
credere, che cio che non ti consta, tanto, O Luperco, 
ti costi. 

1 Like Diouysius, tyrant of Syracuse, who, fearing assas- 
sination, would not allow himself to be shaved, but burned 
his hair off with lighted charcoal : Cic. De Off, II. vii. 25. 

211 
P 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXVI 

ARRIGIS ad vetulas, fastidis, Basse, puellas, 

nee formosa tibi sed moritura placet, 
hie, rogo, non furor est, non haec est mentula demens ? 

cum possis Hecaben, 11011 potes Andromachen ! 



LXXVII 

NEC mullus nee te delectat, Baetice, turdus, 

nee lepus est umquam nee tibi gratus aper ; 
nee te liba iuvant nee sectae quadra placentae, 

nee Libye mittit iiec tibi Phasis aves : 
capparin et putri cepas allece natantis 5 

et pulpani dubio de petasone voras, 
teque iuvant gerres et pelle melandrj^a cana ; 

resinata bibis vina, Falerna fugis. 
nescio quod stomachi vitium secretius esse 

suspicor: ut quid enim, Baetice, oa7rpo</>ayeis? 10 



LXXVIII 

MINXISTI currente semel, Pauline, cariiia. 
meiere vis iterum ? iam Palimmis eris. 



LXXIX 

REM peragit nullam Sertorius, inchoat omnes. 
hunc ego, cum futuit, non puto perficere. 



1 The inferior parts of tunny salted, and called " heart of 
oak" from its appearance : Plin. N.H. ix. 18. 

2 Caused by lascivious practices : cf. in. Ixxxi. 



212 



BOOK III. I.XXVI-LXXIX 

LXXVI 

You are ardent for old women, you show disgust, 
Bassus, for girls ; it is not the beautiful, but the 
moribund attracts you. Is not this, I ask, frenzy, 
is not this amorous madness ? Although you can 
woo Hecuba, Andromache you cannot ! 

LXXVII 

NOR mullet nor fieldfare gratifies you, Baetieus, 
nor is hare or boar ever palatable to you. Nor do 
rolls please you, nor a square of scored cake, nor 
does Libya or Phasis send you her birds. You de- 
vour capers, and onions floating in stale fish-pickle, 
and the lean from a dubious ham ; and sprats salted 
please you, and heart-of-oak tunny 1 with white 
skin; you drink resined wine, avoid Falernian. Your 
stomach has some secret failing I suspect ; 2 for why, 
Baeticus, do you feed on carrion? 

LXXVIII 

You made water on one occasion, Paulinus, while 
the ship was on her course. Do you wish to exude 
a second time ? At once you will be a Palinurus. 3 

LXXIX 

THERE is no undertaking which Sertorius com- 
pletes : he begins all. This fellow, I fancy, does not 
in his amours achieve accomplishment. 

3 Palinurus was the helmsman of Aeneas. The word 
na\ivovpos may also be translated "one who makes water 
again." For a similar pun on Argonauts, cf. m. Ixvii. 

213 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXX 

DE nullo quereris, nulli maledicis, Apici : 
rumor ait linguae te tamen esse malae. 

LXXXI 

QUID cum femineo tibi, Baetice Galle, barathro ? 

haec debet medios lambere lingua viros. 
abscisa est quare Samia tibi mentula testa, 

si tibi tarn gratus, Baetice, cunnus erat ? 
castrandum caput est : nam sis licet inguine Gallus, 5 

sacra tamen Cybeles decipis : ore vir es. 

LXXXII 

CONVIVA quisquis Zoili potest esse, 

Summoenianas cenet inter uxores 

curtaque Ledae sobrius bibat testa : 

hoc esse levius puriusque contendo. 

iacet occupato galbinatus in lecto 5 

cubitisque trudit hinc et inde convivas 

effultus ostro Sericisque pulvillis. 

stat exoletus suggeritque ructanti 

pinnas rubentes cuspidesque lentisci, 

et aestuanti tenue ventilat frigus 10 

supina prasino concubina flabello, 

fugatque muscas myrtea puer virga. 

percurrit agili corpus arte tractatrix 

manumque doctam spargit omnibus membris ; 

digiti crepantis signa novit eunuchus 1 5 

et delicatae sciscitator urinae 



1 Sensu obsceno. 

2 Prostitutes : cf. i. xxiv. 6 ; xii. xxxii. 22. 



214 



BOOK III. LXXX-LXXXII 

LXXX 

You complain of no man, no man you slander, 
Apicius ; yet rumour asserts that you are one of 
evil tongue. 1 

LXXXI 

CHE affari hai tu, O Betico Gallo, col femineo 
baratro ? Questa tua lingua e fatta per lambire a 
mezzo gli uomini. A che motivo la mentola fu a te 
con Samia tegola recisa, se a te, O Betico, si grato 
era il c o ? II tuo capo merita esser castrato : 
imperocche, quantunque sii Gallo nelle pudenda, 
tuttavia inganni i sacrifici di Cibele : sei uomo nella 
bocca. 

LXXXII 

WHOEVER can endure to be the guest of Zoilus 
should dine among the wives by the Walls, 2 and 
drink, though sober, out of Leda's broken jar ; this 
is a lighter and more decent thing, I maintain. 
Garbed in green 3 he lies on a couch he alone fills, 
and with his elbows thrusts off his guests on either 
side, propped up as he is on purple and on silken 
cushions. There stands a catamite by him and offers 
his belching throat red feathers, and slips of mastick, 4 
and a concubine, lying on her back, with a green 
fan stirs a gentle breeze to cool his heat, and a boy 
flaps away the flies with a sprig of myrtle. With her 
nimble art a shampooer runs over his body, and 
spreads her skilled hand over all his limbs. A eunuch 
knows the signal of a snapped finger, and, being the 
inquisitor of that fastidious water, guides his boozy 

1 A mark of effeminacy : cf. I. xcvi. 9. 
J Toothpicks : cf. xiv. xxii. 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

domini bibentis ebrium regit penem. 

at ipse retro flexus ad pedum turbam 

inter catellas anserum exta lambentis 

partitur apri glandulas palaestritis 20 

et concubino turturum natis donat ; 

Ligurumque nobis saxa cum ministrentur 

vel cocta fumis musta Massilitanis, 

Opimianum morionibus nectar 

crystallinisque murrinisque propinat. 25 

et Cosmianis ipse fusus ampullis 

non erubescit murice aureo nobis 

dividere moechae pauperis capillare. 

septunce multo deinde perditus stertit : 

nos accubamus et silentium rhonchis 30 

praestare iussi nutibus propinamus. 

hos Malchionis patimur inprobi fastus, 

nee vindicarij Rufe, possumus : fellat. 



UT faciam breviora mones epigrammata, Corde. 
"fac mihi quod Chione " : non potui brevius. 

LXXXIV 

QUID uarrat tua moecha ? non puellam 
dixi, Gongylion. quid ergo ? linguam. 

LXXXV 

Quis tibi persuasit naris abscidere moecho ? 
non hac peccatum est parte, marite, tibi. 

1 And so bad : cf. \. xxxvj. - cf. in. Iv. 

216 



BOOK III. LXXXII-LXXXV 

master's drunken person. But he himself, bending 
back to the crowd at his feet, in the midst of his 
lapdogs who are gnawing goose's livers portions 
among his wrestlers the kernel of a boar, and gives 
his concubine the rumps of turtledoves. And, while 
to us is supplied wine from Ligurian rocks, or must 
ripened in Massylian smoke, 1 he pledges his naturals 
in Opimian nectar from crystal and murrine cups. 
And, though he himself is drenched with all the 
scent-bottles of Cosmus, 2 he does not blush to parcel 
out to us in a gold shell a starving whore's pomatum. 
Then after many a half-pint he is done up and snores ; 
we lie there, and being ordered to compliment his 
snorts with silence, drink our pledges by nods. This 
is the insolence of unconscionable Malchio 3 which 
we endure, and cannot avenge ourselves, Rufus : he 
is a 

LXXXIII 

You advise me to make my epigrams shorter, 
Cordus. " Do me what Chione does " : 4 I could not 
put it shorter. 

LXXXIV 

WHAT does yon drab say ? I did not mean your 
mistress, Gongylion. What then ? Your tongue. 



LXXXV 

WHO induced you to cut off the adulterer's nose : 
It was not by this part, husband, you were sinned 

:1 From /j.a\ai(6s (effeminate . 
* ?f. m. Ixxxvii. and xcvii. 

21 7 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

stulte, quid egisti ? nihil hie tibi perdidit uxor, 
cum sit salva tui inentula Deiphobi. 

LXXXVI 

NE legeres partem lascivi, casta, libelli, 
praedixi et monui : tu tamen, ecce, legis. 

sed si Panniculum spectas et, casta, Latinum, 
(non sunt haec mimis inprobiora,) lege. 

LXXXVII 

NARRAT te, Chione, rumor numquam esse fututam 

atque nihil cunno purius esse tuo. 
tecta tamen non hac, qua debes, parte lavaris : 

si pudor est, transfer subligar in faciem. 

LXXXVIII 

SUNT gemini fratres, diversa sed inguina lingunt. 
dicite, dissimiles sunt magis an similes ? 

LXXXIX 

UTERE lactucis et mollibus utere malvis : 
nam faciem durum, Phoebe, cacantis habes. 

1 Son of Priam, and husband, after Paris, of Helen. 
Menelaus, her first husband, mutilated him: rf. Virg. Aen. 
vi. 494. 

218 



BOOK III. LXXXV-LXXXIX 

against. You fool, what have you done ? Your wife 
has lost nothing in this quarter, seeing the organ 
of your Deiphobus l is safe and sound. 



LXXXVI 

" DON'T read part of my wanton volume, chaste 
madam," I told you before and warned you; 2 and yet, 
behold ! you read it. However, if you look on Pan- 
iiiculus ; and if, chaste madam, you look on Latinus 
these writings of mine are not worse than mimes 
read on. 

LXXXVII 

RUMOUR reports that you, Chione, have never had 
amours with men, and that nothing is purer than 
your person. Yet you bathe covered, but not in your 
appropriate part ; if you have any modesty, shift 
your drawers to your face ! 



LXXXVIII 

Vi sono due fratelli somigliantissimi, ma lambis- 
cono contrarie pudenda. Dite se sieno piu dissimili 
o simili ? 

LXXXIX 

TAKE lettuces and take aperient mallows, for you 
have the appearance, Phoebus, of one straining at 
stool. 8 

* In in. Ixviii. 

3 The same cast of countenance was ascribed to the Em- 
peror Vespasian : Suet. Vesp. xx. 

219 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XC 

VOLT, non volt dare Galla mihi, nee dicere possum, 
quod volt et non volt, quid sibi Galla velit. 

XCI 

CUM peteret patriae missicius arva Ravennae, 

semiviro Cybeles cum grege iunxit iter. 
huic comes haerebat domini fugitivus Achillas 

insignis forma nequitiaque puer. 
hoc steriles sensere viri : qua parte cubaret ~> 

quaerunt. sed tacitos sensit et ille dolos : 
mentitur, credunt. somni post vina petuntur : 

continuo ferrum noxia turba rapit 
exciduntque senem spondae qui parte iacebat ; 

namque puer pluteo vindice tutus erat. 10 

suppositam fama est quondam pro virgine cervam : 

at nunc pro cervo mentula supposita est. 

XCII 

UT patiar moechum rogat uxor, Galle, sed unum. 
huic ego non oculos eruo, Galle. duos ? 

XCIII 

CUM tibi trecenti consules, Vetustilla, 
et tres capilli quattuorque sint dentes, 

1 Iphigenia's, when the latter was about to be sacrificed by 
her father. Agamemnon, 

22Q 



BOOK III. xc-xcin 

xc 

GALLA is willing and yet unwilling to favour me. 
And 1 cannot say, as she is willing and unwilling, 
what Galla means. 

XCI 

WHILE a discharged soldier was returning to the 
h'elds of his native Ravenna, he joined on the way 
Cybele's sexless company. Close companion was his 
master's fugitive slave, Achillas, a boy renowned for 
beauty and for wanton ways. This those unfruitful 
men perceived : they ask him in what part of the 
bed he lay. But that boy, too, perceived the guile ; 
he lied, they believed him. They seek their slumber 
after their wine; straightway that harmful throng 
snatch the steel and mutilate the old sire who lay 
in his part of the bed ; for the boy was safe in the 
ward of the inner side. Fame hath it that of old a 
hind took a virgin's place ; l but now part of a man 
took the place of a stag. 2 

XCII 

MY wife asks me, Gallus, to put up with a lover of 
hers, but only one. 3 Am 1 not then, Gallus. to gouge 
out this fellow's two "eyes " 4 

XCIII 

As you have seen out three hundred consuls. 
Vetustilla, and have three hairs and four teeth, the 

2 A runaway slave was called "a stag" because of its 
speed. 3 cf. vi. xc. 4 i.e. testicuios. 

221 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

pectus cicadae, crus colorque fonnicae ; 

rugosiorem cum geras stola frontem 

et araneorum cassibus pares mammas ; 5 

cum conparata rictibus tuis ora 

Niliacus habeat corcodilus angusta, 

meliusque ranae garriant Ravennates 

et Atrianus dulcius culix cantet, 

videasque quantum noctuae vident mane, 1 

et illud oleas quod viri capellarum, 

et anatis habeas orthopygium macrae, 

senemque Cynicum vincat osseus cunnus ; 

cum te lucerna balneator extincta 

admittat inter bustuarias moechas ; 1 5 

cum bruma mensem sit tibi per Augustum 

regelare nee te pestilenties possit : 

audes ducentas nupturire post mortes 

virumque demens cineribus tuis quaeris 

prurire. quid sarrire si l velit saxum ? 20 

quis coniugem te, quis vocabit uxorem, 

Philomelus aviam quam vocaverat nuper ? 

quod si cadaver exiges tuum scalpi. 

sternatur Orci 2 de triclinio lectus, 

thalassionem qui tuum decet solus, 25 

ustorque taedas praeferat novae nuptae : 

intrare in istum sola fax potest cunnum. 

XCIV 

ESSE negas coctum leporem poscisque flagella. 
mavis, Rufe, cocum scindere quam leporem. 

1 Or quid ? sarrire quis. si mtias or satira codd. 

2 Orci Roeper, Achori codd. 



BOOK III. xcin-xciv 

breast of a grasshopper, the leg and complexion of 
an ant ; as you carry a forehead more wrinkled than 
a woman's stole, and dugs as limp as spiders' webs ; 
as, compared with those chaps of yours, the crocodile 
of Nile has narrow jaws, and Ravenna's frogs croak 
more agreeably, and the Atrian gnat hums more 
sweetly, and your vision is on a par with an owl's 
in the morning, and your odour is that of the hus- 
bands of she-goats, and you have the latter-end of a 
skinny duck, and your bony person would be too much 
for an old Cynic ; as the bathmaii admits you among 
the tomb-frequenting whores only when he has ex- 
tinguished his lamp ; as winter continues for you all 
through the month of August, and not even a ma- 
larious fever can melt you ; you venture, after having 
buried two hundred husbands, to yearn for marriage, 
and madly look for a man to itch for your burned out 
remnants. What, if he should wish to hoe a rock ? 
Who will call you spouse, who wife, whom Philo- 
melus has lately called his grandmother ? But if 
you require your carcase to be clawed, let the 
marriage-bed from the dining-room of Orcus be laid 
out this alone befits your nuptials and let the 
corpse-cremator carry before the new bride the 
torches : only a funeral link can tickle those ancient 
sides. 

XCIV 

You say the hare is underdone, and call for a whip. 
You prefer, Rufus, cutting up your cook rather than 
your hare. 

223 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MAKTIAI. 

XCV 

NOMQUAM dicis have sed reddis, Naevole, semper. 

quod prior et corvus dicere saepe solet. 
cur hoc expectes a me, rogo, Naevole, dicas : 

nam, puto, nee melior, Naevole, nee prior es. 
praemia laudato tribuit mihi Caesar uterque 5 

natorumque dedit iura paterna trium. 
ore legor multo notumque per oppida nomen 

non expectato dat mihi fama rogo. 
est et in hoc aliquid : vidit me Roma tribunum 

et sedeo qua te suscitat Oceanus. 10 

quot mihi Caesareo facti sunt munere cives, 

nee famulos totidem suspicor esse tibi. 
sed pedicaris, sed pulchre, Naevole, ceves. 

iam iam tu prior es, Naevole, vincis : have. 

XCVI 

LIN GIS, non futuis meam puellam 
et garris quasi moechus et fu tutor. 
si te prendero, Gargili, tacebis. 

XCVII 

NE legat hunc Chione, mando tibi, Ilufe, libellum. 
carmine laesa meo est, laedere et ilia potest. 



1 cf. xiv. Ixxiv. and Macrob. Sat. vn. iv. 29.: "occurrit ei 
(Augusto) inter gratulantes corvum tenens, quern instituerat 
hoc dicere : Ave Caesar Victor Imperator ! " And see 
Pliny's account (N.H. x. 60) of a crow that learned to salute 



BOOK III. xcv-xcvn 

xcv 

You never volunteer, but always return, Naevolus, 
that "good day " which even a crow 1 is often wont 
to say the first. Why expect this of me ? Tell me, 
Naevolus : for I fancy you are neither a better man, 
Naevolus, than I, nor above me. Each Caesar 2 has 
praised me and bestowed on me rewards, and given 
me the privileges of a father of three sons. 3 By 
many a reader am I read, and fame, without waiting 
for my death, gives me a name celebrated throughout 
the towns. There is something in this too : Rome 
has seen in me a tribune, and I sit in seats out of 
which Oceanus 4 rouses you. As many have been 
made citizens through me by Caesar's bounty as ex- 
ceed, I suspect, even your household of slaves. But 
you submit to foul lust ; but you, Naevolus, are a 
fine practitioner. Now, now I see you are my 
superior, Naevolus ; you beat me : good day ! 



Tu liiigi, non immembri la mia ragazza ; et ti 
milanti qual drudo, e qual' immembratore. Se 
t'acchiappo, O Gargilio, tacerai. 

XCVII 

Do not let Chione read this book, Rufus, I charge 
you. She has been hurt by my verse, and she too 
can hurt. 5 

the three Caesars, and was considered sacred, and honoured 
with a funeral procession and a pyre on the Appian Way. 
* Titus and Domitian. 3 cf. n. xci. 6. 

4 The attendant of the theatre : cf. v. xxiii. 4 ; vi. ix. 2. 
6 cf. in. Ixxxiii. and Ixxxvii. 

225 
VOL. i. g 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XCVIII 

SIT culus tibi quam macer, requiris ? 
pedicare potes, Sabelle, culo. 

XCIX 

IRASCI nostro non debes, cerdo, libello. 

ars tua noil vita est carmine laesa meo. 
non nocuos permitte sales, cur ludere nobis 

non liceat, licuit si iugulare tibi ? 



CURSOREM sexta tibi, Rufe, remisimus hora, 
carmina quern madidum nostra tulisse reor 

imbribus inmodicis caelum nam forte ruebat. 
non aliter mitti debuit ille liber. 



226 



BOOK III. xcvni-c 

XCVIII 

Vuoi tu sapere quanto '1 tuo orripigio sia magro ? 
Tu puoi, O Sabello, sodomizar con quello. 



XCIX 

You should not be angry, cobbler, at my book. It 
was your trade, not your character, that was wounded 
by my verse. 1 Allow harmless witticisms. Why may 
not I be permitted to jest, if you have been permitted 
to cut throats ? 



I SENT you my messenger, Rufus, at the sixth hour, 
and I think that he was drenched when he delivered 
my poems ; for it chanced the sky descended with 
a downpour of rain. In no other way should that 
book of mine have been sent. 2 

1 In in. xvi. 

* The poems were fit only to be rubbed out. 



227 
Q 2 



BOOK IV 



LIBER QUARTUS 

I 

CAESARIS alma dies et luce sacratior ilia 

conscia Dictaeum qua tulit Ida lovem, 
longa, precor, Pylioque veni numerosior aevo, 

semper et hoc voltu vel meliore nite. 
hie colat Albano Tritonida multus in auro 5 

perque manus tantas plurima quercus eat ; 
hie colat ingenti redeuntia saecula lustro 
> et quae Romuleus sacra Tarentos habet. 
inagna quidem, superi, petimus sed debita terris : 

pro tanto quae sunt inproba vota deo ? 10 

II 

SPECTABAT modo solus inter omnes 

nigris munus Horatius lacernis, 

cum plebs et minor ordo maximusque 

sancto cum duce candidus sederet. 

toto nix cecidit repente caelo : 5 

albis spectat Horatius lacernis. 

1 Domitian's birthday, October 24, 88 A.D., when he was 37. 

2 Nestor's. 

8 Some explain of D.'s golden palace, some of the golden 
olive- wreath, the poet's prize at the annual contest in honour 
of Minerva at D.'s Alban villa. M. is deliberately vague. 

230 



BOOK IV 



PROPITIOUS day 1 of Caesar, and more hallowed 
than that morn whereon consenting Ida gave bii-th 
to Jove in Dicte's cave, come thou oft, I pray, and 
in fuller number than the Pylian's 2 years, and ever 
shine with countenance such as now, or with one 
fairer still ! May he full oft honour the Tritonian 
maid amid Alba's gold, 3 and through those mighty 
hands may many an oak-wreath pass ! 4 May he 
honour the ages as they come round in their mighty 
lustre, 5 and the holy festival that Romulean Tarentos 
keeps. 6 Great things, ye Lords of Heaven, we ask 
for, howbeit due to earth : for so great a god what 
vows are too profuse ? 

II 

ALONE among all the rest the other day, Horatius 
viewed the show in a black cloak, although the com- 
mon people and the lower and the highest orders, 
together with our hallowed Chief, sat in white. From 
every door of heaven snow suddenly fell : it is in a 
white cloak now that Horatius looks on. 

4 D. founded a quinquennial contest, in honour of Jupiter 
Capitolinus, in music, gymnastics, etc. The prize was a gold 
oak-leaf crown. 

8 Every hundred and ten years nominally, when the 
Secular Games were held : Hor. Carm. Saec. 21. 

9 Sacrifices to Pluto at a spot in the Campus Martius : cf. 
i. Ixix. 

231 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

III 

ASPICE quam densum tacitarum vellus aquarum 

defluat in voltus Caesaris inque sinus, 
indulget tamen ille lovi, nee vertice moto 

concretas pigro frigore ridet aquas, 
sidus Hyperborei solitus lassare Bootae 5 

et madidis Helicen dissimulare comis. 
quis siccis lascivit aquis et ab aethere ludit ? 

suspicor has pueri Caesaris esse nives. 

IV 

QUOD siccae redolet palus lacunae, 

crudarum nebulae quod Albularum, 

piscinae vetus aura quod marinae, 

quod pressa piger hircus in capella, 

lassi vardaicus quod evocati, 5 

quod bis murice vellus inquinatum, 

quod ieiunia sabbatariarum, 

maestorum quod anhelitus reorum, 

quod spurcae moriens lucerna Ledae, 

quod ceromata faece de Sabina, 10 

quod volpis fuga, viperae cubile, 

mallem quam quod oles olere, Bassa. 



Via bonus et pauper linguaque et pectore verus, 
quid tibi vis urbem qui, Fabiane, petis ? 

qui nee leno potes nee comissator haberi 
nee pavidos tristi voce citare reos 

1 An allusion to Domitian's campaigns against the Chatti 
and against the Dacians. 

232 



BOOK IV. IH-V 

III 

MARK how thickly the still fleecy shower flows 
down on Caesar's face and on his bosom ! Yet he 
humours Jove, and with head unmoved smiles at 
the waters congealed by numbing frost, wont as he 
has been l to tire Bootes' Northern Star, and, with 
drenched locks, to disregard the Greater Bear. 
Who wantons with this dry shower and frolics from 
heaven ? I deem these were snows sent by Caesar's 
child. 2 

IV 

THE stench of the bed of a drained marsh ; of 
the raw vapours of sulphur springs ; the putrid reek 
of a sea-water fishpond ; of a stale he-goat in the 
midst of his amours ; of the military boot of a fagged- 
out veteran ; of a fleece twice dyed with purple ; 3 
of the breath of fasting Sabbatarian Jews ; of the 
sighs of depressed defendants ; of filthy Leda's lamp 
as it expires ; of ointment made of dregs of Sabine 
oil ; of a wolf in flight ; of a viper's lair all these 
stenches would I prefer to your stench, Bassa ! 



A GOOD man and poor, true in tongue and heart, 
what is your aim, Fabianus, you who come to Rome ? 
You who cannot endure to be counted a pandar, 
or boon-companion, or with ominous tone to cite 

2 Who died in infancy, and is assumed to have been deified. 
* The purple dye gave garments an unpleasant smell : cf. 
l. xlix. 32 ; ix. Ixiii. 

2 33 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

nee potes uxorem cari corrumpere amici 5 

nee potes algentes arrigere ad vetulas, 

vendere nee vanos circum Palatia fumos, 
plaudere nee Cano plaudere nee Glaphyro : 

unde miser vives ? " Homo certus, fidus amicus " 
hoc nihil est : numquam sic Philomelus eris. 10 



VI 

CREDI virgine castior pudica 
et frontis tenerae cupis videri, 
cum sis inprobior, Malisiane, 
quam qui compositos metro Tibulli 
in Stellae recitat domo libellos. 



VII 

CUR, here quod dederas, hodie, puer Hylle, negasti, 
durus tarn subito qui modo mitis eras ? 

sed iam causaris barbamque annosque pilosque. 
o nox quam longa es quae facis una senem ! 

quid nos derides ? here qui puer, Hylle, fuisti, 5 

die nobis, hodie qua ratioiie vir es ? 



VIII 

PRIMA salutantes atque altera conterit l hora ; 

exercet raucos tertia causidicos ; 
in quintam varios extendit Roma labores ; 

sexta quies lassis ; septima finis erit ; 
1 continet B. 

1 To make baseless promises of favour by the Emperor. 
Proverbial, cf. Erasm. Adag. *.v. 

234 



BOOK IV. v-vm 

trembling defendants, nor endure to seduce the wife 
of a dear friend, or to lecher after bloodless old 
women, or to sell about the palace empty smoke, 1 or 
to applaud Canus, or applaud Glaphyrus, 2 whence, 
wretched man, will you get your living ? "A man 
trustworthy, a loyal friend " That is nothing : 
never in this way will you be a Philomelus. 8 

VI 

You desire to be thought chaster than a pure 
virgin, and to win the semblance of bashful mien. 
Yet you are more dissolute, Malisianus, than the man 
who recites in Stella's house poems composed in the 
metre of Tibullus. 

VII 

WHY, Hyllus boy, have you denied to-day what 
yesterday you gave, hard so suddenly who erewhile 
were gentle ? But now you plead your beard, 
and your years, and hair: O night, how long thou 
art, one night that makest an old man ! Why do 
you laugh at me ? Hyllus, who yesterday were boy, 
tell me how you are man to-day ? 

VIII 

THE first and the second hour wearies clients at 
the levee, the third hour sets hoarse advocates to 
work ; till the end of the fifth Rome extends her 
various tastes ; the sixth gives rest to the tired ; 4 



2 A flute-player and a musician respectively. 

3 A rich freedman of evil repute : cf. in. xxxi. 

4 The siesta. 



2 35 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

sufficit in nonam nitidis octava palaestris ; 5 

imperat extructos frangere nona toros ; 
hora libellorum decuma est, Eupheme, meorum, 

temperat ambrosias cum tua cura dapes 
et bonus aetherio laxatur nectare Caesar 

ingentique tenet pocula parca manu. 10 

tune admitte iocos : gressu timet ire licenti 

ad matutinum nostra Thalia lovem. 

IX 

SOTAE filia clinici, Labulla, 
deserto sequeris Clytum marito 
et donas et amas : eeis durwrtos- 



X 

DUM novus est nee adhuc rasa mihi fronte libellus, 

pagina dum tangi non bene sicca timet, 
i puer et caro perfer leve munus amico 

qui meruit nugas primus habere meas. 
curre, sed instructus : comitetur Punica librum 5 

spongea : muneribus convenit ilia meis. 
non possunt nostros multae, Faustine, liturae 

emendare iocos : una litura potest. 

XI 

DUM nimium vano tumefactus nomine gaudes 
et Saturninum te pudet esse, miser, 

1 This and the following epithets are meant to suggest 
Domitian's divinity. 

2 According to Suetonius (Dom. xx.) Domitian was tem- 
perate in his drinking. 

236 



BOOK IV. VHI-XI 

the seventh will be the end. The eighth to the 
ninth suffices for the oiled wrestlers ; the ninth bids 
us crush the piled couches. The tenth hour is the 
hour for my poems, Euphemus, when your care sets 
out the ambrosial * feast, and kindly Caesar soothes 
his heart with heavenly nectar, and holds in 
mighty hand his frugal 2 cup. Then admit my jests : 
my Thalia fears with unlicensed step to approach 
a morning Jove. 

IX 

DAUGHTER of Doctor Sotas, Labulla, you leave your 
spouse and depart with Clitus ; you give him gifts 
and your love. You don't act like Sotas' daughter. 3 

X 

WHILE my book is new and with its edges not 
yet smoothed, while the page, not well dry, fears 
the touch, go, boy, and bear a trifling present to 
a dear friend who has deserved first to possess my 
trifles. Run, but equipped : let a Punic sponge 
attend the book ; that sorts with the gifts I give. 
Many corrections, Faustinus, cannot emend my 
jokes : one wiping-out can ! 4 

XI 

WHILE, swollen with pride, you rejoiced o'ermuch 
in an empty name, 5 and were ashamed, wretched 
man, to be Saturninus, you awoke such impious 

' The pun is untranslatable. The Greek may mean as in 
the text, or "you act profligately." * III. c. 

5 Antonius, the same as the Triumvir's. His other name 
was Saturninus. 

237 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

impia Parrhasia movisti bella sub ursa, 

qualia qui Phariae coniugis arma tulit. 
excideratne adeo fatum tibi nominis huius, 5 

obruit Actiaci quod gravis ira freti ? 
an tibi promisit Rhenus quod non dedit illi 

Nilus, et Arctois plus licuisset aquis ? 
ille etiam nostris Antonius occidit armis, 

qui tibi conlatus, perfide, Caesar erat. 10 

XII 

NULLI, Thai, negas ; sed si te non pudet istud, 
hoc saltern pudeat, Thai, negare nihil. 

XIII 

CLAUDIA, Rufe, meo nubit Peregrina Pudenti : 

macte esto taedis, O Hymenaee, tuis. 
tarn bene rara suo miscentur cinnama nardo, 

Massica Theseis tarn bene vina favis ; 
nee melius teneris iunguntur vitibus ulmi, 5 

nee plus lotos aquas, litora myrtus amat. 
Candida perpetuo reside, Concordia, lecto, 

tamque pari semper sit Venus aequa iugo : 
diligat ilia senem quondam, sed et ipsa marito 

turn quoque, cum fuerit, non videatur anus. 10 

XIV 

SILI, Castalidum decus sororum, 
qui periuria barbari furoris 

1 He revolted in upper Germany at the end of A.D. 88. 
238 



BOOK IV. xi-xiv 

war under the Northern Bear 1 as he awoke who 
wore his Pharian consort's arms. 2 Had you so 
forgotten the doom of this name, which the heavy 
wrath of Actium's strait o'erwhelmed? Or did 
Rhine promise you what Nile gave not to him, and 
should larger rights have been given to Polar seas ? 
Even that famous Antony fell beneath our arms, and 
he, traitor, compared with you, was a Caesar. 

XII 

No lover, Thais, you deny. But if you are not 
ashamed of that, at least be ashamed of this, 
Thais of denying nothing. 

XIII 

CLAUDIA PEREGRINA weds, Rufus, with my own 
Pudens ; a blessing, O Hymenaeus, be upon thy 
torches ! So well does rare cinnamon blend with 
its own nard ; so well Massic wine with Attic combs. 
Not closer are elms linked to tender vines, nor 
greater love hath the lotos for the waters, the myrtle 
for the shore. Fair Concord, rest thou unbroken on 
that bed, and may Venus be ever kindly to a bond 
so equal knit ! May the wife love her husband when 
anon he is grey, and she herself, even when she 
is old, seem not so to her spouse ! 

XIV 

Siuus, 3 the pride of the Castalian Sisters, who 
with your mighty tones crush the perjuries of bar- 

2 Cleopatra. Antony and Cleopatra were defeated by 
Octavian (Augustus) at the battle of Actium, B.C. 31. 
8 The poet of the Punic Wars. 

239 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

ingenti premis ore perfidosque 

astus Hannibalis levisque Poenos 

magnis cedere cogis Africanis, 5 

paulum seposita severitate, 

dum blanda vagus alea December 

incertis sonat hinc et hinc fritillis 

et ludit tropa l nequiore talo, 

nostris otia commoda Camenis, 10 

nee torva lege fronte sed remissa 

lascivis rnadidos iocis libellos. 

sic forsan tener ausus est Catullus 

magno mittere Passerem Maroni. 



XV 

MILLE tibi nummos hesterna luce roganti 
in sex aut septem, Caeciliane, dies 

" Non habeo " dixi : sed tu, causatus amici 
adventum, lancem paucaque vasa rogas. 

stultus es ? an stultum me credis, amice ? negavi 
mille tibi nummos, milia quinque dabo ? 



XVI 

PRIVIGNUM non esse tuae te, Galle, novercae 
rumor erat, coniunx dum fuit ilia patris. 

non tamen hoc poterat vivo genitore probari. 
iam nusquam pater est, Galle, noverca domi est. 

magnus ab infernis revocetur Tullius umbris 5 

et te defendat Regulus ipse licet, 

1 tropa Buddaeus, popa 0, rota y. 



1 Tropa was the game of pitching knuckle-bones into a 
240 



BOOK IV. xiv-xvi 

baric frenzy, and compel Hannibal's false wiles and 
the faithless Carthaginians to yield to the great 
Africani, awhile lay aside your mien austere, what 
time December, idling amid alluring hazard, rings 
on this side and on that with risky dice-box, and 
tropa 1 sports with the licentious knuckle-bone. 
Lend thy leisure to my Muse, and read with a 
smooth, not frowning brow, poems steeped in wanton 
quips. So belike tender Catullus ventured to send 
his Sparrow 2 to great Maro. 

XV 

WHEN you asked me yesterday to lend you a 
thousand sesterces on six or seven days' credit, 
Caecilianus, " I haven't got them," I said ; yet you, 
on the pretext of a friend's arrival, ask me for a 
dish and a few vases. 3 Are you a fool, or do you 
think me a fool, my friend? I refused you a 
thousand sesterces ; shall I give five thousand ? 

XVI 

STEPSON to your stepmother, Gallus, rumour had 
it you never were while she was your father's wife. 
But this could not be proved while your progenitor 
lived. Now your father lives nowhere, Gallus, your 
stepmother lives with you. Though great Tully were 
recalled from the nether shades, and Regulus himself 

hole, or the mouth of a jar (Pers. iii. 50), probably played 
with a good deal of disorder and cheating. 

4 Cat. ii. and iii. 3 Evidently of silver. 

241 
VOL. I. R 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

non potes absolvi : nam quae non desinit esse 
post patrem, numquam, Galle, noverca fuit. 

XVII 

FACERE in Lyciscam, Paule, me iubes versus, 
quibus ilia lectis rubeat et sit irata. 
o Paule, malus es : irrumare vis solus. 

XVIII 

QUA vicina pluit Vipsanis porta columnis 

et madet adsiduo lubricus imbre lapis, 
in iugulum pueri, qui roscida tecta subibat, 

decidit hiberno praegravis unda gelu ; 
cumque peregisset miseri crudelia fata, 5 

tabuit in calido volnere mucro tener. 
quid non saeva sibi voluit Fortuna licere ? 

aut ubi non mors est, si iugulatis, aquae ? 

XIX 

HANC tibi Sequanicae pinguem textricis alumnam, 
quae Lacedaemonium barbara nomen habet, 

sordida sed gelido non aspernanda Decembri 
dona, peregrinam mittimus endromida, 

seu lentuin ceroma teris tepid um ve trigona 5 

sive harpasta manu pulverulenta rapis, 

1 Some archway in the region of the Campus Agrippae, 
over which passed an aqueduct, perhaps the Aqua Virgo : 
cf. ill. xlvii. 

242 



BOOK IV. xvi-xix 

were to defend you, you cannot be acquitted; for 
she who has not ceased to be such after your father's 
death, never, Gallus, was a stepmother. 



XVII 

You bid me, Paul us, write against Lycisca verses 
at which she would blush and be enraged. O 
Paulus, you are a rogue ! You want to keep her to 
yourself ! 

XVIII 

WHERE the gate 1 drips near the Vipsanian Columns, 
and the slippery stone is wet with the constant 
shower, on a boy's throat, as he passed under that 
dewy roof, fell water weighted with winter frost; 
and when it had wrought the unhappy victim's cruel 
death, the frail dagger melted on the warm gash. 
What stretch of power has not ruthless Fortune 
willed for herself? Or where is not death, if ye, 
O Waters, are cut-throats ? 2 

XIX 

THIS shaggy nursling of a weaver on the Seine, 
a barbarian garb that has a Spartan name, a thing 
uncouth, but not to be despised in cold December 
we send you as a gift, a foreign endromis, whether 
you rub the sticky ointment, 3 or catch oft the warm- 
ing hand-ball, or snatch the scrimmage-ball amid the 
dust, or bandy to and fro the feather weight of the 

2 cf. a Greek epigram on a similar subject : Anth. Pal. 
ix. 56. 

3 Or, perhaps, "whether you tread the lists of the oiled 
wrestler": cf. vn. xxxii. 7. 

243 
R 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

plumea seu laxi partiris pondera follis 
sive levem cursu vincere quaeris Athan : 

ne niadidos intret penetrabile frigus in artus 

neve gravis subita te premat Iris aqua. 10 

ridebis ventos hoc munere tectus et imbris 
nee sic in Tyria sindone tutus l eris. 

XX 

DIGIT se vetulam, cum sit Caerellia pupa : 

pupam se dicit Gellia, cum sit anus, 
ferre nee hanc possis, possis, Colline, nee illam : 

altera ridicula est, altera putidula. 

XXI 

NULLOS esse deos, inane caelum 
adfirmat Segius : probatque, quod se 
factum, dum negat haec, videt beatum. 

XXII 

PitiMos passa toros et adhuc placanda marito 

merserat in nitidos se Cleopatra lacus, 
dum fugit amplexus. sed prodidit unda latentem ; 

lucebat, totis cum tegeretur aquis. 
condita sic puro numerantur lilia vitro, 5 

sic prohibet tenues gemma latere rosas. 
insilui mersusque vadis luctantia carpsi 

basia : perspicuae plus vetuistis aquae. 

1 cidt-ua y. 

1 Whether you wrestle or play at ball. Three balls are 
mentioned. The trigon was a small hand-ball bandied by 
players standing in a triangle ; the harpastum a similar ball 

244 



BOOK IV. xix-xxn 

flaccid bladder- ball, 1 or strive to outrun in the race 
the light-footed Athas ; that searching cold may not 
pass into your moist limbs, or Iris 2 overwhelm you 
with a sudden shower. You will laugh at winds 
and rains, clad in this gift. In Tyrian muslin you 
will not be so secure. 

XX 

CAERELLIA calls herself an old woman, although 
she is a girl ; Gellia calls hei'self a girl, although she 
is a crone. One cannot put up with either this 
woman, Collinus, or that : one is ridiculous, the other 
disgusting. 

XXI 

"THERE are no gods: heaven is empty," Segius 
asserts ; and he proves it, for in the midst of these 
denials he sees himself made rich ! 

XXII 

NEW to the marriage-bed, and yet unreconciled 
to her husband, Cleopatra had plunged into the 
gleaming pool, seeking to escape embrace. But the 
wave betrayed the lurking dame ; brightly she 
showed, though covered by the o'erlapping water. 
So, shut in pellucid glass, lilies may be counted, so 
crystal forbids tender roses to lurk hidden. 3 I leapt 
in, and, plunged in the waters, plucked reluctant 
kisses : ye, O transparent waters, forbad aught 
beyond ! 

scrambled for by two sets of players : it was a dusty game. 
Thefollis was a large ball filled with air and struck with the 
hand. See generally xiv. xlv. to xlviii. 
2 The goddess of the rainbow. 3 cf. vm. xiv. 3. 

245 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXHI 

DUM tu lenta nimis diuque quaeris 

quis primus tibi quisve sit secundus, 

Graium quos : epigramma conparavit, 

palmam Callimachus, Thalia, de se 

facuiido dedit ipse Brutiano. 5 

qui si Cecropio satur lepore 

Romanae sale luserit Minervae, 

illi me facias, precor, secundum. 

XXIV 

OMNES quas habuit, Fabiane, Lycoris arnicas 
extulit. uxori fiat arnica meae. 

XXV 

AEMULA Baianis Altini litora villis 

et Phaethontei conscia silva rogi, 
quaeque Antenoreo Dryadum pulcherrima Fauno 

nupsit ad Euganeos Sola puella lacus, 
et tu Ledaeo felix Aquileia Timavo, 5 

hie ubi septenas Cyllarus hausit aquas : 
vos eritis nostrae requies portusque senectae, 

si iuris fuerint otia nostra sui. 

XXVI 

QUOD te mane domi toto non vidimus anno, 
vis dicam quantum, Postume, perdiderim ? 
1 Graium quos Koestlin, gratumque codd. 

1 i.e Callimachus and Brutianus. 

_ 2 A Greek poet of Alexandria of the third century B.C. 
3 The scene is laid in Venetia. Sola is the nymph (here 

246 



BOOK IV. xxm-xxvi 

XXIII 

WHILE you were considering, Thalia, very carefully 
and long, which in your judgment was first, and 
which second, of the pair whom Greek epigTam has 
matched in rivalry, 1 Callimachus 2 of his own accord 
resigned the palm to eloquent Brutianus. Should 
he, cloyed with Attic wit, trifle with the Roman 
epigram, make me, I pray, second to him. 

XXIV 

ALL the friends she had, Fabianus, Lycoris has 
buried. May she become a friend to my wife ! 

XXV 

ALTINUM'S shores 3 that vie with Baiae's villas, and 
the wood that saw the pyre of Phaethon, and the 
maid Sola, fairest of Dryads, who wed with Paduan 
Faunus by the Euganean meres, and thou, Aquileia, 
blest with Timavus 4 honoured by Leda's sons, where 
Cyllarus quaffed its sevenfold waters ye shall be 
the refuge and harbour of my old age, if I be free 
to choose the place of my repose. 

XXVI 

BECAUSE I have not seen you at home in the 
morning for a whole year, would you have me tell 

put for the lake) of a lake in the Eugauean hills (La 
Solana). 

4 A river with seven, or, according to Virgil (Aen. i. 245), 
nine mouths, probably the river down which (cf. Plin. N. H. 
iii. 22) the Argo floated to the Adriatic. Cyllarus was the 
horse of Castor, one of the Argonauts : cf. viii. xxi. 5. 

247 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

tricenos, puto, bis, vicenos ter, puto, nuramos. 
ignosces : togulam, Postume, pluris emo. 



XXVII 

SAEPE meos laudare soles, Auguste, libellos. 

invidus ecce negat : num minus ergo soles ? 
quid quod honorato non sola voce dedisti, 

non alius poterat quae dare dona mihi ? 
ecce iterum nigros conrodit lividus ungues. 

da, Caesar, tanto tu magis, ut doleat. 

XXVIII 

DONASTI tenero, Chloe, Luperco 
Hispanas Tyriasque coccinasque 
et lotam tepido togam Galaeso, 
Indos sardonychas, Scythas zmaragdos, 
et centum dominos novae monetae, 
et quidquid petit usque et usque donas, 
vae glabraria, vae tibi misella : 
nudam te statuet tuus Lupercus. 

XXIX 

OBSTAT, care Pudens, nostris sua turba libellis 
lectoremque frequens lassat et implet opus. 

rara iuvant : primis sic maior gratia pomis, 
hibernae pretium sic meruere rosae ; 

248 



BOOK IV. xxvi-xxix 

you, Posturuus, how much I have lost ? Twice thirty 
sesterces, perhaps, perhaps thrice twenty. Your 
pardon ! On a poor toga, Postumus, I spend more ! 

XXVII 

OFT are you wont to praise my poems, Augustus. 
See, a jealous fellow denies it ; are you wont to 
praise them the less for that? Have you not besides 
given me, honoured not in words alone, gifts that 
none other could give ? See, the jealous fellow again 
gnaws his filthy nails ! Give me, Caesar, all the 
more, that he may writhe ! 

XXVIII 

You have given, Chloe, to young Lupercus cloaks 
of Spanish wool dyed with Tyrian purple and with 
scarlet, and a toga dipt in the mild Galesus, Indian 
sardonyxes, Scythian emeralds, and a hundred sove- 
reigns of new-minted money, and whatever he asks 
you give over and over again. Woe to you, enamoured 
of smooth-skinned boys, woe to you, wretched woman ! 
Your Lupercus l will leave you naked. 

XXIX 

DEAR Pudens, their very number hampers my 
poems, and volume after volume wearies and sates the 
reader. Rare things please one ; so greater charm 
belongs to early apples, so winter roses win value ; 

1 Perhaps with a reference to the Luperci, priests of Pan, 
who ran naked through Rome on the festival of the Luper- 
calia. " Yon will be bare as Lupercus." 

249 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

sic spoliatricem commendat fastus amicam, 5 

ianua nee iuvenem semper aperta tenet. 

saepius in libro numeratur Persius uno 
quam levis in tota Marsus Amazonide. 

tu quoque, de nostris releges quemcumque libellis, 
esse puta solum : sic tibi pluris erit. 10 

XXX 

BAIANO procul a lacu, monemus, 

piscator, fuge, ne nocens recedas. 

sacris piscibus hae natantur undae, 

qui norunt dominum manumque lambunt 

illam, qua nihil est in orbe maius. 5 

quid quod nomen habent et ad magistri 

vocem quisque sui venit citatus ? 

hoc quondam Libys impius profundo, 

dum praedam calamo tremente ducit, 

raptis luminibus repente caecus 10 

captum non potuit videre plscem, 

et nunc sacrilegos perosus hamos 

Baianos sedet ad lacus rogator. 

at tu, dum potes, innocens recede 

iactis simplicibus cibis in undas, 15 

et pisces venerare delicatos. 

XXXI 

QUOD cupis in nostris dicique legique libellis 

et nonnullus honos creditur iste tibi, 
ne valeam si non res est gratissima nobis 

et volo te chartis inseruisse meis. 

1 An epigrammatic poet : cf. vn. xcix. 7 ; vni. Iv. 24. He 
seems to have also written an epic on the Amazons. 

250 



BOOK IV. xxtx-xxxi 

so her pride commends a mistress who pillages you, 
and a door always open holds fast no lover. Oftener 
Persius wins credit in a single book than trivial 
Marsus x in his whole Amazonid. Do you, too, what- 
ever of my books you read again, think that it is 
the only one : so 'twill be to you of fuller worth. 

XXX 

FROM Baiae's lake, fisherman, I warn thee, fly 
afar, lest with guilt thou depart ! These waters 
swim with hallowed fish, that know their lord, 2 and 
fondle that hand greater than anything on earth. 
Aye, do they not bear his name, and at its master's 
voice does not each when summoned come ? While 
aforetime an impious Libyan was drawing up out 
of this deep his prey with tremulous line, his eyes 
were snatched from him, and in sudden blindness 
he could not see the taken fish, and now, loathing 
his sacrilegious hooks, he sits by Baiae's lake a beggar. 
But do thou, while thou canst, depart yet innocent 
when thou hast cast into the water guileless bait, 
and revere these dainty fish. 

XXXI 

SEEING that you wish to be mentioned and read of 
in my poems, and that honour you deem to be some- 
thing, may I perish, but the idea is one most pleasant 
to me ; and I wish to include you in my writings. 

2 The Emperor. 

251 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

sed tu nomen habes averse fonte sororum 5 

inpositum, mater quod tibi dura dedit ; 

quod nee Melpomene, quod nee Polyhymnia possit 
nee pia cum Phoebo dicere Calliope. 

ergo aliquod gratum Musis tibi nomen adopta : 

non semper belle dicitur "Hippodame." 10 



XXXII 

ET latet et lucet Phaethontide condita gutta, 
ut videatur apis nectare clusa suo. 

dignum tantorum pretium tulit ilia laborum : 
credibile est ipsam sic voluisse mori. 



XXXIII 

PLENA laboratis habeas cum scrinia libris, 

emittis quare, Sosibiane, nihil ? 
"Edent heredes" inquis "mea carmina." quando ? 

tempus erat iam te, Sosibiane, legi. 

XXXIV 

SORDIDA cum tibi sit, verum tamen, Attale, dicit, 
quisquis te niveam dicit habere togam. 

1 A fanciful reproduction of some Latin name incapable of 
being brought into M.'s metre, whether elegiac, lyric, or 
heroic. 

2 Similar epigrams are iv. lix. and vi. xv. See on the 
subject generally, Tac. Germ. xlv. and Plin. N.H.ujmvu. 31. 

252 



BOOK IV. xxxi-xxxiv 

But you have a name, given you by your hard-hearted 
mother, which was laid upon you when the sister 
Muses' fountain was unkind, and which neither 
Melpomene nor Polyhymnia could utter, nor kindly 
Calliope, with Phoebus' aid. So assume for yourself 
some name the Muses like : it is not pretty to be 
always saying " Hippodame." l 



XXXII 

IN an amber-drop the bee lies hid and lightens, 
so that it seems to be shut in its native sweets. 
Worthy reward for all its toils it has won ; methinks 
itself would have wished so to die. 2 



ALTHOUGH you possess bookcases crammed with 
books, arduously compiled, why, Sosibianus, do you 
send forth nothing? " My heirs," you say, "will 
publish my lays." When, oh, when ? 'Tis already 
high time, Sosibianus, you should be read. 3 



XXXIV 

ALTHOUGH your toga is dirty, Attalus, yet he says 
truly who says that you have a snowy 4 toga. 

3 There is an intentional ambiguity here. " You should 
have by now given us a chance of reading you," or " By now 
you should have been dead/' 

4 A threadbare toga seems to have been called nivea, as 
giving no warmth : c/. ix. xlix. 8. 

253 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXXV 

FRONTIBUS adversis molles concurrere dammas 

vidimus et fati sorte iacere pan. 
spectavere canes praedam, stupuitque superbus 

venator cultro nil superesse suo. 
unde leves animi tanto caluere furore ? o 

sic pugnant tauri, sic cecidere viri. 

XXXVI 

CANA est barba tibi, nigra est coma : tinguere barbam 
non potes (haec causa est) et potes, Ole, comam. 

XXXVII 

" CENTUM Coranus et ducenta Mancinus, 

trecenta debet Titius, hoc bis Albinus, 

decies Sabinus alterumque Serranus ; 

ex insulis fundisque triciens soldum, 

ex pecore redeunt ter ducena Parmensi " : 5 

totis diebus, Afer, hoc mihi narras 

et teneo melius ista quam meum nomen. 

numeres oportet aliquid, ut pati possim : 

cotidianam refice nauseam nummis : 

audire gratis, Afer, ista non possum. 10 

XXXVIII 

GALLA, nega : satiatur amor nisi gaudia torquent : 
sed noli nimium, Galla, negare diu. 

1 cf. iv. Ixxiv. 
254 



BOOK IV. xxxv-xxxvm 

XXXV 

WITH opposing brows we have seen gentle does 
meet in fight, and lie stricken by an equal fate of 
death. Dogs have gazed upon the quarry, and the 
proud huntsman has stood amazed that no task re- 
mained for his knife. Whence have gentle spirits 
drawn such furious heat ? So battle bulls, so have 
fallen men. 1 



XXXVI 

WHITE is your beard, black is your hair ; dye your 
beard you cannot this is the reason but you can 
your hair, Olus. 2 



XXXVII 

"A HUNDRED thousand sesterces Coranus owes me, 
and two hundred Mancinus, three hundred Titius, 
twice as much Albinus, a million Sabinus, and another 
million Serranus ; from my flats and farms come in 
a clear three millions, from my flocks at Parma is a 
return of six hundred thousand." Every and all day, 
Afer, you prate of this to me, and I remember it all 
better than my own name. You must count out 
something to make me endure this ; cure by cash 
my daily nausea ; I can't hear that tale, Afer, for 
nothing. 

XXXVIII 

REFUSE me, Galla; love cloys if its pleasures torture 
not : but refuse not, Galla, too long. 

2 Perhaps the meaning is 0. is suffering from some disease 
of the chin (cf. Plin. N.H. xxvi. 2) preventing the use of 
dye : cf. i. Ixxvii. 5. 

255 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXXIX 

ARQENTI genus omne conparasti, 

et solus veteres Myronos artes, 

solus Praxitelus manum Scopaeque, 

solas Phidiaci toreuma caeli, 

solus Mentoreos habes labores. ;"> 

nee desunt tibi vera Grattiana 

nee quae Callaico linuntur auro 

nee mensis anaglypta de paternis. 

argentum tamen inter omne miror 

quare non habeas, Charine, purum. 10 

XL 

ATRIA Pisonum stabant cum stemmate toto 

et docti Senecae ter numeranda domus, 
praetulimus tantis solum te, Postume, regnis ; 

pauper eras et eques sed mihi consul eras, 
tecum ter denas numeravi, Postume, brumas : 5 

communis nobis lectus et unus erat. 
iam donare potes, iam perdere, plenus honorum, 

largus opum : expecto, Postume, quid facias, 
nil facis et serum est alium mihi quaerere regem. 

hoc, Fortuna, placet ? "Postumus inposuit." 10 

XLI 

QUID recitaturus circumdas vellera collo? 
conveniunt nostris auribus ista magis. 

1 i.e. Spanish. The Gallaeci or Callaici inhabited the 
modern Galicia where gold was found : cf. x. xvi. 3 ; xrv. 
xcv. 1. 

2 A play on the double meaning of "unadorned " and 
" undenled by your lips": cf. I. Ixxvii. 6. 



BOOK IV. xxx.x-xu 

XXXIX 

You have collected every kind of silver plate, and 
you alone possess Myron's antique works of art, you 
alone the handiwork of Praxiteles and of Scopas, you 
alone the chased product of Phidias' graving chisel, 
you alone the results of Mentor's toil. Nor do you 
lack genuine works of Grattius, or dishes overlaid 
with Gallician l gold, or pieces in relief from an- 
cestral tables. Nevertheless I wonder why, amid 
all your silver plate, you, Charinus, have nothing 
chaste. 2 

XL 

WHEN the Pisos' hall stood with all its ances- 
try, 3 and learned Seneca's house illustrious for its 
triple names, 4 you alone, Postumus, I chose before 
patronage so great ; poor were you, and a knight, 
but to me you were a consul. With you I summed, 
Postumus, twice ten winters ; common to us both 
was one couch. Now you can make gifts, now 
squander, full as you are of honours, copious in 
wealth ; I await, Postumus, to see what you will do. 
You do nothing, and 'tis too late for me to seek 
another patron. Does this, Fortune, please you ? 
"Postumus is a fraud." 5 

XLI 

WHY, when about to recite, do you put a muffler 
round your neck ? That is more suitable to our ears ! 

3 The house had declined since C. Calpurnius Piso's con- 
spiracy against Nero, A.D. 65. 

4 Probably M. means Seneca, the philosopher and tutor of 
Nero, his brother Gallio, and Annaeus Pomponius Mela, the 
writer on geography. 

6 This is Fortune's reply. P. has deceived her. 

257 
VOL. I. S 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XLII 

Si quis forte mihi possit praestare roganti, 

audi, quern puerum, Flacce, rogare velim. 
Niliacis primum puer hie nascatur in oris : 

nequitias tellus scit dare nulla magis. 
sit nive candidior : namque in Mareotide fusca 5 

pulchrior est quanto rarior iste color, 
lumina sideribus certent mollesque flagellent 

colla comae : tortas non amo, Flacce, comas, 
frons brevis atque modus leviter sit naribus uncis, 

Paestanis rubeant aemula labra rosis. 10 

saepe et nolentem cogat nolitque volentem, 

liberior domino saepe sit ille suo ; 
et timeat pueros, excludat saepe puellas ; 

vir reliquis, uni sit puer ille mihi. 
" lam scio, nee fallis : nam me quoque iudice verum 
est. 15 

talis erat " dices " noster Amazonicus." 

XLIII 

NON dixi, Coracine, te cinaedum : 

non sum tarn temerarius nee audax 

nee mendacia qui loquar libenter. 

si dixi, Coracine, te cinaedum, 

iratam mihi Pontiae lagonam, 5 

iratum calicem mihi Metili : 

iuro per Syrios tibi tumores, 

iuro per Berecyntios furores. 

quid dixi tamen ? hoc leve et pusillum, 

quod notum est, quod et ipse non negabis : 10 

dixi te, Coracine, cunnilingum. 

1 Pontia (cf. n. xxxiv.) and Metilius were poisoners. 
258 



BOOK IV. XLII-XLIII 

XLII 

IF any could by chance guarantee me the boon at 
my asking, hear, Flaccus, what kind of boy I would 
wish to ask for. First of all, let this boy be born 
on the shores of the Nile ; no country knows better 
how to beget roguish ways. Let him be fairer than 
snow ; for in swarthy Mareotis that hue is more 
beautiful by its rarity. Let his eyes vie with stars, 
and his soft locks tumble over his neck ; I like not, 
Flaccus, braided locks. Let his brow be low and 
his nose slightly aquiline, let his lips rival the red of 
Paestan roses. And let him oft compel endearments 
when I am loth, and refuse them when I am fain ; 
may he oft be more free than his lord ! And let him 
shrink from boys, oft exclude girls ; man to all else, 
to me alone let him be a boy. " Now I know him ; 
you do not deceive me ; 'tis in my judgment true. 
Such was," you will say, "my Amazonicus." 

XLIII 

1 DID not call you, Coracinus, an unnatural lecher ; 
I am not so rash or daring, nor one willingly to 
tell lies. If I called you, Coracinus, an unnatural 
lecher, may I feel the wrath of Pontia's flagon, the 
wrath of Metilius' cup ! ] I swear to you by the 
swellings of Syrian votaries, 2 I swear by Berecynthian 
frenzies. Yet what did I say? This light and in- 
significant thing a known fact which you yourself, 
too, will not deny: I said that you, Coracinus, were, 
as regards women, " evil-tongued." 

2 Perhaps a reference to the swellings with which Isis 
punished misdeeds : cf. Deos inflantes corpora, Pers. v. 187. 

2 59 
S 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XLIV 

Hie est pampiiieis viridis modo Vesbius umbris ; 

presserat hie madidos nobilis uva lacus ; 
haec iuga, quam Nysae colles plus Bacchus amavit ; 

hoc nuper Satyri monte dedere chores ; 
haec Veneris sedes, Lacedaemone gratior illi ; 5 

hie locus Herculeo numine clarus erat. 
cuncta iacent flammis et tristi mersa favilla : 

nee superi vellent hoc licuisse sibi. 

XLV 

HAEC tibi pro nato plena dat laetus acerra, 

Phoebe, Palatinus muiiera Parthenius, 
ut qui prima novo signal quinquennia lustro, 

impleat innumeras Burrus Olympiadas. 
fac rata vota patris : sic te tua diligat arbor, 5 

gaudeat et certa virginitate soror, 
perpetuo sic flore mices, sic denique 11011 sint 

tarn longae Bromio quam tibi, Phoebe, comae. 

XLVI 

SATURNALIA divitem Sabellum 

fecerunt : merito tumet Sabellus, 

nee quemquam putat esse praedicatque 

inter causidicos 'beatiorem. 

hos fastus animosque dat Sabello 5 

farris semodius fabaeque fresae, 

1 Mount Vesuvius, which erupted A.U. 79, and destroyed 
Pompeii and Herculaneum. 

2 Herculaneum. 3 Domitian's secretary : rf. xi. i. 

260 



BOOK IV. XLIV-XLVI 

XLIV 

THIS is Vesbius, 1 green yesterday with viny shades ; 
here had the noble grape loaded the dripping vats ; 
these ridges Bacchus loved more than the hills of 
Nysa; on this mount of late the Satyrs set afoot 
their dances ; this was the haunt of Venus, more 
pleasant to her than Lacedaemon ; this spot was 
made glorious by the name of Hercules. 2 All lies 
drowned in fire and melancholy ash ; even the High 
Gods could have wished this had not been permitted 
them. 

XLV 

THESE offerings to thee for his son from flowing 
censer, O Phoebus, Palatine Parthenius 3 gives with 
joy, that Burrus, who crowns his first five years with 
a new lustrum, may complete countless Olympiads. 4 
Make good a father's vows ! So may thy laurel love 
thee, and thy sister 5 rejoice in her assured virginity, 
so mayst thou shine in endless youth, so too may the 
locks of Bromius 6 be not longer, Phoebus, than are 
thine ! 

XLVI 

THE Saturnalia have made Sabellus rich: with 
reason Sabellus is puffed up ; and there is no man, 
he thinks and declares, among the lawyers 7 more 
fortunate. This pride and conceit is inspired in 
Sabellus by half a peck of spelt and crushed beans, 

4 The lustrum was five years, the Olympiad four. M. treats 
them as the same. 5 Diana. 6 Bacchus. 

7 Who received presents from their clients at the Satur- 
nalia : cf. xii. Ixxii. 

261 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

et turis piperisqtie tres selibrae, 

et Lucanica ventre cum Falisco, 

et nigri Syra defruti lagona, 

et ficus Libyca gelata testa 10 

cum bulbis cocleisque caseoque. 

Piceno quoque venit a cliente 

parcae cistula non capax olivae, 

et crasso figuli polita caelo 

septenaria synthesis Sagunti, 15 

Hispanae luteum rotae toreuma, 

et lato variata mappa clavo. 

Saturnalia fructuosiora 

annis non habuit decem Sabellus. 

XLVII 

ENCAUSTUS Phaethon tabula tibi pictus in hac est. 
quid tibi vis, dipyrum qui Phaethonta facis ? 

XLVIII 

PERCIDI gaudes, percisus, Papyle, ploras. 

cur, quae vis fieri, Papyle, facta doles? 
paenitet obscenae pruriginis ? an rnagis illud 

fles, quod percidi, Papyle, desieris ? 

XLIX 

NESCIT, crede inihi, quid sint epigrammata, Flacce, 

qui tantum lusus ista iocosque vocat. 
ille magis ludit qui scribit prandia saevi 

Tereos aut cenam, crude Thyesta, tuam, 

1 Sarcastic, relief work being appropriate to gold or silver, 
not to clay : cf. vm. vi. and xiv. cviii. Saguntine cups were 
of clay : cf. xiv. cviii. 

262 



BOOK IV. XLVI-XLIX 

and three half-pounds of frankincense and pepper, 
and Lucanian sausages together with a Faliscan 
paunch, and a Syrian flagon of black boiled must, and 
fig-jelly in a Libyan jar, together with bulbs, snails, 
and cheese. There arrived also from a Picenian client 
a small box scarcely large enough for a few olives, 
and a set of seven cups smoothed at Saguntum by 
the potter's clumsy chisel (the embossed l work in 
clay of the Spanish wheel), and a napkin diversified 
with a broad 2 stripe. Saturnalia more fruitful these 
ten years Sabellus has not enjoyed. 3 

XLVII 

ON this tablet you have an encaustic painting of 
Phaethon. What is your object in getting Phaethon* 
burnt twice ? 

XLVIII 

Tu godi d'essere immembrato ; e dopo d'esserlo 
stato, tu, O Papilo, piangi. Perche, O Papilo, ti 
lagni tu di ci6 che vuoi che ti si faccia ? Ti penti tu 
dell'osceno prurito, ovvero piangi tu, Papilo, per 
desiderarlo maggiormente ? 

XLIX 

HE does not know, believe me, what epigrams 
are, Flaccus, who styles them only frivolities and 
quips. He is more frivolous who writes of the meal of 
savage Tereus, or of thy banquet, dyspeptic Thyestes, 

2 Which was the distinction only of a senator, which S. 
was not. 

3 Ironical, the gifts being poor ones. * cf. IV. xxv. 

263 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

aut puero liquidas aptantem Daedalon alas, 5 

pascentem Siculas aut Polyphemon ovis. 

a nostris procul est omnis vesica libellis, 
Musa nee insano syrmate iiostra tumet. 

"Ilia tamen laudant omnes, mirantur, adorant." 
confiteor : laudant ilia sed ista legunt. 10 

L 

QUID me, Thai, senem subinde dicis? 
nemo est, Thai, senex ad irrumandum. 

LI 

CUM tibi non essent sex milia, Caeciliane, 

ingenti late vectus es hexaphoro : 
postquam bis decies tribuit dea caeca sinumque 

ruperunt nummi, factus es, ecce, pedes. 
quid tibi pro meritis et tantis laudibus optem ? 5 

di reddant sellam, Caeciliane, tibi. 

LII 

GESTAHI iunctis nisi desinis, Hedyle, capris, 
qui modo ficus eras, iam caprificus eris. 

LIII 

HUNC, quern saepe vides intra penetralia nostrae 
Pallados et templi limina, Cosme, novi 

1 The epigram is possibly an attack on the poet Statius, 
whom M. never mentions. * cf. i. xcix. 

3 Haemorrhoids : cf. I. Ixv. ; vn. Ixxi. The caprificus was 
a wild fig. M.'s pun is a cumbrous one. 

264 



BOOK IV. XLIX-LIII 

or of Daedalus fitting to his son melting wings, or of 
Polyphemus pasturing Sicilian sheep. Far from poems 
of mine is all turgescence, nor does my Muse swell 
with frenzied tragic train. " Yet all men praise 
those tragedies, admire, worship them." I grant it : 
those they praise, but they read the others. 1 

L 

WHY, Thais, do you constantly call me old ? No 
one, Thais, is too old for some things. 

LI 

WHEN you did not possess six thousand, Caecili- 
anus, you were carried all over the town in a huge 
litter and six ; now the blind goddess has bestowed 
on you two millions, and your moneys have burst 
through your purse, see, you go on foot ! What 
should I wish you for merits and excellencies so 
great ? May the gods restore you your litter, 
Caecilianus ! 2 

LII 

UNLESS you leave off, Hedylus, being drawn by a 
yoke of goats, you, who just now were adorned with 
figs, 3 will soon be a goat-fig. 

LIII 

THIS fellow, whom you often see in the inner pre- 
cincts of our patron Pallas 4 and on the threshold, 
Cosmus, of the New Temple, 5 a dotard with staff 

4 The Temple of Minerva, lately founded by Domitian in 
honour of the Flavian family : cf. ix. i. 8. 

8 The Templum divi Augusti on the Palatine facing the 
Capitol, or the Temple of Minerva already mentioned. 

265 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

cum baculo peraque senem, cut cana putrisque 
stat coma et in pectus sordida barba cadit, 

cerea quern nudi tegit uxor abolla grabati, 5 

cui dat latratos obvia turba cibos, 

esse putas Cynicum deceptus imagine ficta. 

non est hie Cynicus, Cosme : quid ergo ? canis. 

LIV 

O cui Tarpeias licuit contingere quercus 

et meritas prima cingere fronde comas, 
si sapis, utaris totis, Colline, diebus 

extremumque tibi semper adesse putes. 
lanificas nulli tres exorare puellas 5 

contigit : observant quern statuere diem, 
divitior Crispo, Thrasea constantior ipso, 

lautior et nitido sis Meliore licet, 
nil adicit penso Lachesis fusosque sororum 

explicat et semper de tribus una secat. 10 

LV 

Luci, gloria temporum tuorum, 

qui Caium veterem Tagumque nostrum 

Arpis cedere non sinis disertis, 

Argivas generatus inter urbes 

Thebas carmine cantet aut Mycenas, 5 

aut claram Rhodon aut libidinosae 

Ledaeas Lacedaemonos palaestras. 



1 " Cynic" was derived from KVUV (dog). 

2 See iv. i. 6. The Fates. 

4 Either Passienus Crispus, consul A.D. 42, Nero's step- 
father, or Vibius Crispus, the delator : Tac. Hist. ii. 10 ; 
Juv. iv. 85. 

266 



BOOK IV. UII-LV 

and wallet, whose hair stands up white and shaggy, 
and whose filthy beard falls over his breast, whom a 
threadbare cloak, the partner of his bare truckle- 
bed, covers, to whom the crowd, as it meets him, 
gives the scraps he barks for you, deceived by his 
get-up, imagine to be a Cynic. This fellow is no 
Cynic, Cosmus. What is he, then ? A dog. 1 

LIV 

O THOU, to whom it has been given to reach the 
Tarpeian crown of oak, 2 and to wreathe worthy locks 
with peerless leafage, if thou art wise use to the full, 
Colliiius, all thy days, and ever deem that each is 
thy last. The three wool-spinning sisters 3 it has 
been no man's lot to move by prayer; they keep 
their appointed day. Though thou wert richer than 
Crispus, 4 more firm of soul than Thrasea's self, 5 more 
refined even than sleek Melior, yet Lachesis addeth 
nought to her tale of wool, and the sisters' spindles 
she unwinds, and ever one of the three cuts the 
thread. 

LV 

Lucius, the glory of your time, who let not hoary 
Gaius 6 and our native Tagus yield to eloquent Arpi, 7 
let him who was born amid Argive cities chant in 
his song Thebes, or Mycenae, or illustrious Rhodes, 
or of the wanton wrestling-grounds of Ledaean Lace- 

8 Thrasea Paetus, a Stoic philosopher, put to death by 
Nero. Called by Tacitus (Ann. xvi. 21) virtiis ipaa '(virtue 
itself). 

8 cf. I. xlix. 5. Probably Lucius is the Licinianus of that 
epigram. 

7 i.e. to the birthplace of Cicero. 

267 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

nos Celtis genitos et ex Hiberis 

nostrae nomina duriora terrae 

grato non pudeat referre versu : 10 

saevo Bilbilin optimam metallo, 

quae vincit Chalybasque Noricosque, 

et ferro Plateam suo sonantem, 

quatn fluctu tenui set inquieto 

armorum Salo temperator ambit, 15 

tutelamque chorosque Rixamarum, 

et convivia festa Carduarum, 

et textis Peterin rosis rubentem, 

atque antiqua patrum theatra Rigas, 

et certos iaculo levi Silaos, 20 

Turgontique lacus Perusiaeque, 

et parvae vada pura Tuetonissae, 

et sanctum Buradonis ilicetum, 

per quod vel piger ambulat viator, 

et quae fortibus excolit iuvencis 25 

curvae Manlius arva Vativescae. 

haec tarn rustica, delicate lector, 

rides nomina ? rideas licebit : 

haec tarn rustica malo, quam Butuntos. 

LVI 

MUNERA quod senibus viduisque ingentia mittis, 

vis te munificum, Gargiliane, vocem ? 
sordidius nihil est, nihil est te spurcius uiio, 

qui potes insidias dona vocare tuas. 
sic avidis fallax indulget piscibus hamus, 5 

callida sic stultas decipit esca feras. 
quid sit largiri, quid sit donare docebo, 

si nescis : dona, Gargiliane, mihi. 

1 cf. i. xlix. 52. 
268 



BOOK IV. LV-LVI 

daemon. Let not us, sprung from Celts and from 
Iberians, be ashamed to recall in grateful verse the 
harsher names of our native land, Bilbilis, excellent 
in steel for war, that surpasses the Chalybes and the 
Noricans, and Platea ringing with her native iron, 
which with its small but troublous stream, Salo, 
armour's temperer, 1 encircles ; and the guardian god 
and choruses of Rixamae, and the festive feasts of 
Carduae, and Peteris blushing with twined roses, and 
Rigae, our fathers' ancient theatre, and the Silai un- 
erring with the light javelin, and the lakes of Tur- 
gontum and'Perusia, and the clear shallows of small 
Tuetonissa, and Buradon's hallowed oak-wood, where- 
through even a lazy wayfarer is fain to walk, and 
the fields of Vativesca on the slope which Manlius 
tills with sturdy steers. Do you laugh, nice reader, 
at these names as so rustic ? You may laugh : these 
names, so rustic, I prefer to Butunti. 2 

LVI 

BECAUSE you send huge presents to old men and 
to widows, do you want me, Gargilianus, to call you 
munificent? There is nothing more sordid, nothing 
more filthy than your unrivalled self who venture to 
call your enticements gifts. So the perfidious hook 
flatters greedy fish, so the crafty bait deceives foolish 
wild beasts. What is generosity, what is giving, I 
will teach you if you don't know ; give, Gargilianus, 
to me. 

* A small town in Apulia, which M. elsewhere laughs at : 
cf, n. xlviii. 

269 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LVII 

DUM nos blanda tenent lascivi stagna Lucrini 

et quae pumiceis fontibus antra calent, 
tu colis Argei regnum, Faustina, coloni, 

quo te bis decimus ducit ab urbe lapis, 
horrida sed fervent Nemeaei pectora monstri, 5 

nee satis est Baias igne calere suo. 
ergo sacri fontes et litora grata valete, 

Nympharum pariter Nereidumque domus. 
Herculeos colles gelida vos vincite bruma, 

nunc Tiburtinis cedite frigoribus. 10 

LVIII 

IN tenebris luges amissum, Galla, maritum. 
nam plorare pudet te, puto, Galla, virum. 

LIX 

FLENTIBUS Heliadum ramis dum vipera repit, 
fluxit in obstantem sucina gutta feram ; 

quae dura miratur pingui se rore teneri, 
concreto riguit vincta repente gelu. 

ne tibi regali placeas, Cleopatra, sepulchro, 5 

vipera si tumulo nobiliore iacet. 

LX 

ARDEA solstitio Castranaque rura petantur 
quique Cleonaeo sidere fervet ager, 



1 Tibur, founded by Catillus the Argive. 
* The Constellation Leo. The "heart" is a star in the 
Constellation particularly bright. 

3 Because she had been unfaithful to him while alive. 

270 



BOOK IV. LVII-LX 

LVII 

WHILE the seductive waters of the wanton Lucrine 
lake keep me here, and the grots warm with their 
volcanic springs, you, Faustinus, sojourn in the realm 1 
of the Argive colonist, whither the twice-tenth mile- 
stone draws you from the city. But terribly glows 
the heart of Nemea's monstrous lion, 5 * and Baiae is 
not content with her own fire. So, ye sacred founts 
and pleasant shores, farewell, the abode alike of 
Nymphs and of Nereids ! Surpass ye the hills of 
Hercules in cold winter; now yield ye to Tibur's 
cool ! 

LVIII 

IN darkness you lament, Galla, your husband lost. 
For, I think, you are ashamed, Galla, to deplore your 
spouse openly. 3 

LIX 

WHILE a viper crept along the weeping poplar- 
boughs there flowed a gummy drop o'er the beast that 
met its path, and while she marvelled to be stayed 
by that clinging dew, suddenly she grew stiff, en- 
fettered by the congealing mass. Pride not thyself, 
Cleopatra, on thy royal sepulchre if a viper lies in a 
nobler tomb ! 4 

LX 

SEEK ye Ardea in summer's heat, and the fields 
of Castrum, and meads scorched by Cleonae's 

* cf. iv. xxxii. ; vi. xv. Notwithstanding his comparison 
of Cleopatra's asp, M. by "viper" must mean some small 
creeping thing. Pliny (N.ff. xxxvii. 11) speaks of ants, 
gnats, and lizards. 

271 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

cum Tiburtinas damnet Curiatius auras 

inter laudatas ad Styga missus aquas, 
nullo fata loco possis excludere ; cum mors 5 

venerit, in medio Tibure Sardinia est. 

LXI 

DONASSE amicum tibi ducenta, Mancine, 

nuper superbo laetus ore iactasti. 

quartus dies est, in schola poetarum 

dum fabulamur, milibus decem dixti 

emptas lacernas munus esse Pompullae ; 5 

sardonycha verum lineisque ter cinctum 

duasque similes fluctibus maris gemmas 

dedisse Bassam Caeliamque iurasti. 

here de theatro, Pollione cantante, 

cum subito abires, dum fugis, loquebaris, 10 

hereditatis tibi trecenta venisse, 

et mane centum, et post meridiem centum. 

quid tibi sodales fecimus mali tantum ? 

miserere iam crudelis et sile tandem. 

aut, si tacere lingua non potest ista, 15 

aliquando narra quod velimus audire. 

LXII 

TIBUR in Herculeum migravit nigra Lycoris, 
omnia dum fieri Candida credit ibi. 

1 Ardea and Castrum Inui in Latium were hot places, 
as was also Baiae (ager) in summer : cf. iv. Ivii. 5. " Cleonae's 
star " is the Constellation of Leo. 

8 Proverbially unhealthy. 

3 Sardonyx is the Sardian onyx (so called from Sardis, the 
capital of Lydia : Skeat's Etym. Diet. 5,35), i.e. agate of a 
deep red colour, which, when cut transversely, has the 

272 



BOOK IV. LX-LXII 

star, 1 seeing that Curiatius condemns Tibur's air ; 
from amid waters so belauded was he sent to Styx. 
In no spot canst thou shut out fate ; when death 
comes even in Tibur's midst is a Sardinia. 2 



LXI 

PROUDLY and joyfully the other day you boasted, 
Maiicinus, that a friend had bestowed on you two 
hundred thousand sesterces. Three days ago, while 
we were chatting in the Poets' Club, you told me 
that a cloak, Pompulla's present, cost ten thousand ; 
you swore that Bassa and Caelia had given you a 
genuine sardonyx, one girt with triple lines, 3 and 
two gems like the sea-waves. 4 Yesterday, though 
your exit from the theatre, while Pollio 5 was singing, 
was sudden, in your very flight you said that three 
hundred thousand sesterces had come to you by 
will, and this morning you added a hundred, and 
afterwards at noon another hundred. What great 
injury have we, your friends, done you ? Cruel fellow, 
at length pity us, and at length hold your peace. Or, 
if that tongue of yours can't be still, prate some- 
times of what we want to hear. 

LXII 

DARK Lycoris shifted her quarters to Herculean 
Tibur, fancying that everything became white 
there. 6 

main body of the stone surrounded by concentric rings of a 
different colour. Such stones were much valued for signet- 
rings : see King, Ant. Gems, i. 224 ; Skeat, supra. 

4 Aquamarines. 

8 A celebrated player on the cithara. 6 c/. vn. xiii. 

273 
VOL. I. T 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXIII 

DUM petit a Baulis mater Caerellia Baias, 
occidit insani crimine mersa freti. 

gloria quanta perit vobis ! haec monstra Neroni 
nee iussae quondam praestiteratis, aquae. 



LXIV 

IULI iugera pauca Martialis 

hortis Hesperidum beatiora 

longo laniculi iugo recumbunt : 

lati collibus imminent 1 recessus 

et planus modico tumore vertex 5 

caelo perfruitur sereniore 

et curvas nebula tegente valles 

solus luce nitet peculiar! : 

puris leniter admoventur astris 

celsae culmina delicata villae. 10 

hinc septem dominos videre montis 

et totam licet aestimare Romam, 

Albanos quoque Tusculosque colles, 

et quodcumque iacet sub urbe frigus, 

Fidenas veteres brevesque Rubras, 15 

et quod virgineo cruore gaudet 

Annae pomiferum nemus Perennae. 

illinc Flaminiae Salariaeque 

gestator patet essedo tacente, 

ne blando rota sit molesta somno, 20 

quern nee rumpere nauticum celeuma 

1 eminent 0. 

1 Who had attempted to drown his mother Agrippina in 
a boat with a collapsible bottom. 

274 



BOOK IV. LXIII-LXIV 

LXIII 

WHILE Caerellia, a mother, was sailing from Bauli 
to Baiae, she perished o'erwhelmed by the guilt of 
a maddened sea. What glory ye lost, ye waters ! 
Such monstrous service, even at his bidding, ye once 
refused to Nero. 1 

LXIV 

THE few fields of Julius Martialis, more favoured 
than the gardens of the Hesperides, rest on the long 
ridge of Janiculum : wide sheltered reaches look 
down 2 on the hills, and the flat summit, gently 
swelling, enjoys to the full a clearer sky, and, when 
mist shrouds the winding vales, alone shines with its 
own brightness ; the dainty roof of the tall villa 
gently rises up to the unclouded stars. On this side 
may you see the seven sovereign hills and take the 
measure of all Rome, the Alban hills and Tusculan 
too, and every cool retreat nestling near the city, old 
Fidenae and tiny Rubrae, and Anna Perenna's fruitful 
grove that joys in maiden blood. 3 On that side the 
traveller shows on the Flaminian or Salarian way, 
though his carriage makes no sound, that wheels 
should not disturb the soothing sleep which neither 

2 Munro explains : deep clefts with their heights tower 
over the fields. 

3 A difficult passage. Anna Perenna was a native Latin 
deity, at whose festival on the Ides of March women sang 
lascivious songs. Munro accordingly suggests riryine nequiore 
yaudet. Nothing is known of viryineus cruor. 

275 
T 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

nee clamor valet helciariorum, 

cum sit tarn prope Mulvius sacrumque 

lapsae per Tiberim volent carinae. 

hoc rus, seu potius domus vocanda est, 25 

commendat dominus : tuam putabis, 

tam non invida tamque liberalis, 

tarn comi patet hospitalitate : 

credas Alcinoi pios Penates 

aut, facti modo divitis, Molorchi. 30 

vos nunc omnia parva qui putatis, 

centeno gelidum ligone Tibur 

vel Praeneste domate pendulamque 

uni dedite Setiam colono, 

dum me iudice praeferantur istis 35 

lull iugera pauca Martialis. 

LXV 

OCULO Philaenis semper altero plorat. 
quo fiat istud quaeritis modo ? lusca est. 

LXVI 

EGISTI vitam semper, Line, municipalem, 

qua nihil omnino vilius esse potest. 
Idibus et raris togula est excussa Kalendis, 

duxit et aestates synthesis una decem. 
saltus aprum, campus leporem tibi misit inemptum, 5 

silva gravis turdos exagitata dedit. 
captus flumineo venit de gurgite piscis, 

vina ruber fudit non peregrina cadus. 

1 King of Phaeacia, who entertained Ulysses on his jour- 
ney to Ithaca homeward : Horn. Od. vii. seqq. 

276 



BOOK IV. LXIV-LXVI 

boatswain's call nor bargemen's shout is loud enough 
to break, though the Mulvian Bridge is so near, 
and the keels that swiftly glide along the sacred 
Tiber. This country seat if it should not be called 
a town mansion its owner commends to you : you 
will fancy it is yours, so ungrudgingly, so freely, and 
with such genial hospitality it lies open to you ; you 
will believe it to be the kindly dwelling of Alcinous, 1 
or of Molorchus 2 just become rich. You who to-day 
deem all this but small, subdue ye cool Tibur's soil, 
or Praeneste, with an hundred hoes, and assign to 
one tenant Setia on the hill, so that ye let me as 
judge prefer to that the few fields of Julius Martialis. 

LXV 

PHILAENIS always weeps with one eye. Do you 
ask how that happens ? She is one-eyed. 

LXVI 

You have lived a provincial life always, Linus, and 
nothing in the world can be more inexpensive than 
that. On the Ides, and now and again on the Kalends, 
your poor toga has been shaken out, and a single 
dinner-suit has gone through ten summers. The 
glade has sent you boar, the field the unbought 
hare ; the wood, when beaten, has given plump field- 
fares. The captured fish has come from the river's 
eddies, a red jar has poured out no foreign wine. 

'* A shepherd who unknowingly entertained Hercules. 

277 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

nee tener Argolica missus de gente minister 

sed stetit inculti rustica turba foci. 10 

vilica vel duri conpressa est nupta coloni, 

incaluit quotiens saucia vena mero. 
nee nocuit tectis ignis nee Sirius agris, 

nee mersa est pelago nee fluit ulla ratis. 
subposita est blando numquam tibi tessera talo, 15 

alea sed parcae sola fuere nuces. 
die ubi sit decies, mater quod avara reliquit. 

nusquam est : fecisti rem, Line, difficilem. 

LXVII 

PRAETOREM pauper centum sestertia Gaurus 

orabat cana notus amicitia, 
dicebatque suis haec tantum desse trecentis, 

ut posset domino plaudere iustus eques. 
praetor ait " Scis me Scorpo Thalloque daturum, 5 

atque utinam centum milia sola darem." 
a pudet ingratae, pudet a male divitis arcae : 

quod non vis equiti, vis dare, praetor, equo ? 

LXVIII 

INVITAS centum quadrantibus et bene cenas. 
ut cenem invitor, Sexte, an ut invideam ? 

1 Greek, and so costly. 

2 i.e. adopted the more expensive methods of gaming. 

3 To make up a knight's qualification : cf. v. xxxviii. 

278 



BOOK IV. LXVI-LXVIII 

No boy-slave has been sent from an Argolic tribe, 1 
but a country troop has stood by a homely hearth. 
You have intrigued with your housekeeper, or with 
a rough tenant-farmer's wife oft as your passions 
pricked have warmed with wine. Fire has not 
harmed your house nor the Dog-star your fields, nor 
has your ship there swims no ship of yours sunk 
in the sea. You have never substituted the die for 
the alluring knuckle-bone, 2 but your sole stake has 
been a few nuts. Tell me, where is the million 
your grasping mother left you ? 'Tis nowhere ; you 
have achieved, Linus, a difficult feat ! 

LXVII 

THE poor Gaurus known to him by a friendship 
of many years besought the Praetor for a hundred 
thousand sesterces, and said his own three hundred 
thousand were short 3 only by this sum, to enable 
him, as a qualified knight, to applaud our Master. 
The Praetor said : " You know I am about to make 
a gift to Scorpus and Thallus, 4 and would that I 
were giving only a hundred thousand!" Ah, shame 
on your ungrateful money-chest, shame on its ignoble 
riches ! That which you will not give to the knight 
will you give, Praetor, to the horse ? 

LXVIII 

You invite me for a hundred farthings to dine with 
you, and you dine well. Am I invited to dine, 
Sextus, or to envy ? 5 

4 Famous charioteers : cf. (for Scorpus) v. xxv. ; x. 1., liii. , 
and Ixxiv. 

6 Being entertained with fare inferior to your own : cf. 
vi. xi. 

379 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXIX 

Tu Setina quidem semper vel Massica ponis, 
Papyle, sed rumor tam bona vina negat : 

diceris hac factus caeleps quater esse lagona. 
nee puto nee credo, Papyle, nee sitio. 

LXX 

NIHIL Ammiano praeter aridam restem 
moriens reliquit ultimis pater ceris. 
fieri putaret posse quis, Marulline, 
ut Ammianus mortuum patrem nollet ? 

LXXI 

QUAERO diu totam, Safroni Rufe, per urbem, 
si qua puella neget : nulla puella negat. 

tamquam fas non sit, tamquam sit turpe negare, 
tamquam non liceat, nulla puella negat. 

casta igitur nulla est? sunt castae mille. quid ergo 5 
casta facit ? non dat, non tamen ilia negat. 

LXXII 

EXIGIS ut donem nostros tibi, Quinte, libellos. 

non habeo, sed habet bybliopola Tryphon. 
" Aes dabo pro nugis et emam tua carmina sanus ? 

non" inquis "faciam tam fatue," nee ego. 



280 



BOOK IV. LXIX-LXXII 

LXIX 

You indeed put on your table always Setine or 
Massic, Papilus, but rumour says your wines are not 
so very good : you are said by means of this brand 
to have been made a widower four times. I don't 
think so, or believe it, Papilus, but I am not 
thirsty. 

LXX 

His father, when he was dying, left by his last 
will nothing to Ammianus but a shrivelled rope. 
Who would have thought, Marullinus, it was possible 
Ammianus should regret his father's death? 



LXXI 

I HAVE long been looking all through the city, 
Safronius Rufus, for a girl who says " No " : no girl 
says " No." As if it were not right, as if it were 
disgraceful to say " No," as if it were not allowable, 
no girl says " No." Is none therefore chaste ? A 
thousand are chaste. What, then, does a chaste 
girl do ? She does not offer, yet she does not say 
"No." 1 

LXXII 

You press me to give you my books, Quintus. I 
haven't any, but bookseller Tryphon has. " Shall 
I pay money for trifles," you say, "and buy your 
poems in my sober mind ? I won't act so foolishly." 
Nor will I. 

1 The subject is continued in iv. Ixxxi. 

281 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXIII 

CUM gravis extremas Vestinus duceret horas, 

et iam per Stygias esset iturus aquas, 
ultima volventis oravit pensa sorores, 

ut traherent parva stamina pulla mora. 
iam sibi defunctus caris dum vivit amicis, 

moverunt tetricas tarn pia vota deas. 
tune largas partitus opes a luce recessit 

seque mori post hoc credidit ille senem. 

LXXIV 

ASPICIS inbelles temptent quam fortia dammae 
proelia ? tarn timidis quanta sit ira feris ? 

in mortem parvis concurrere frontibus ardent, 
vis, Caesar, dammis parcere ? mitte canes. 



LXXV 

O FELIX animo, felix, Nigrina, marito 

atque inter Latias gloria prima nurus ; 
te patrios miscere iuvat cum coniuge census, 

gaudentem socio participique viro. 
arserit Euhadne flammis iniecta mariti, 

nee minor Alcestin fama sub astra ferat. 
tu melius : certo meruisti pignore vitae 

ut tibi non esset morte probandus amor. 

1 The Fates. 2 Hounds would be less savage. 
282 



BOOK IV. LXXIII-LXXV 

LXXIII 

WHEN Vestinus in illness was drawing out his 
latest hours, and now was bound beyond the Stygian 
waters, he prayed the Sisters 1 as they unwound the 
last strands to stay awhile the drawing of those 
black threads. While, dead now to himself, he lived 
for his dear friends, a prayer so kindly moved the 
stern goddesses. Then, parcelling his ample wealth, 
he parted from the sun, and death thereafter he 
deemed a death in age. 



LXXIV 

SEE you what strong battle unwarlike does essay ? 
how great the rage in beasts so timid ? Hot are they 
to clash with puny brows, and die. Wouldst thou, 
Caesar, spare the does ? Set on thy hounds. 2 



LXXV 

O BLEST in soul, Nigrina, in husband blest ! and 
among Latin wives the chiefest glory ! blithe art 
thou to share with thy spouse thy father's wealth, 
glad that thy husband should be partner and sharer 
with thee. Let Evadne burn, cast on her hus- 
band's pyre ; nor any lesser fame lift Alcestis to the 
stars. 3 Thou doest better : this hast thou earned 
by a sure pledge given in life that death was not 
needed to prove thy love ! 

8 Both sacrificed themselves for their husbands. 

283 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXVI 

MILIA misisti mihi sex bis sena petenti. 
ut bis sena feram, bis duodena petam. 

LXXVII 

NUMQUAM divitias deos rogavi 

contentus modicis meoque laetus : 

paupertas, veniam dabis, recede. 

causast quae subiti novique voti ? 

pendentem volo Zoilum videre. 5 

LXXVIII 

CONDITA cum tibi sit iam sexagensima messis 

et facies multo splendeat alba pilo, 
discurris tota vagus urbe, nee ulla cathedra est 

cui non mane feras inrequietus " Have " ; 
et sine te nulli fas est prodire tribune, 5 

nee caret officio consul uterque tuo ; 
et sacro decies repetis Palatia clivo 

Sigerosque meros Partheniosque sonas. 
haec faciant sane iuvenes : deformius, Afer, 

omnino nihil est ardalione sene. 10 

LXXIX 

HOSPES eras nostri semper, Matho, Tiburtini. 
hoc emis. inposui : rus tibi vendo tuum. 

1 With envy of my wealth. As to Z. cf. u. xvi. and xix. 

2 Gentlemen-in-waiting to the Emperor. 

284 



BOOK IV. LXXVI-LXXIX 

LXXVI 

You sent me six thousand when I asked for twice 
six. To get twice six I will ask for twice twelve. 

LXXVII 

I HAVE never asked the gods for riches, content as 
I am with moderate means, and pleased with what is 
mine. Poverty I ask your pardon ! depart. What 
is the reason of this sudden and strange prayer ? I 
wish to see Zoilus hanging by the neck. 1 

LXXVIII 

ALTHOUGH your sixtieth summer is already buried, 
and your face shines white with many a hair, you 
gad with roaming feet all over the city, and there 
is no woman's chair but in your fussiness you bring 
it in the morning your " How d'ye do ? " ; and 
without you no praetor may go abroad, and neither 
consul misses your attendance ; and ten times you 
make for the palace by the Sacred steep, and pomp- 
ously talk only of Sigeruses and Partheniuses. 2 
Young men may no doubt do this : nothing in the 
world, Afer, is more ugly than an old busybody. 3 

LXXIX 

You were my constant guest, Matho, at my villa 
at Tibur. This you buy. I have cheated you ; I 
am selling you your own country place. 4 

3 An ardelio was a fussy, pretentious person : rf. n. vii. 8 ; 
Phaedr. ii. 7 ; and Sen. de Tranq. An. xii. 

4 i.e. you were so often there, it was practically yours. 

285 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXX 

DECLAMAS in febre, Maron : hanc esse phrenesin 

si nescis, non es sanus, amice Maron. 
declamas aeger, declamas hemitritaeos : 

si sudare aliter non potes, est ratio. 
" Magna tamen res est." erras; cum viscera febris 5 

exurit, res est magna tacere, Maron. 



LXXXI 

EPIGRAMMA nostrum cum Fabulla legisset 
negare nullam quo queror puellarum, 
semel rogata bisque terque neglexit 
preces amantis. iam, Fabulla, promitte : 
negare iussi, pernegare non iussi. 



LXXXII 

Hos quoque commenda Venuleio, Rufe, libellos, 

inputet et nobis otia parva roga, 
immemor et paulum curarum operumque suorum 

non tetrica nugas exigat aure meas. 
sed nee post primum legat haec summumve trientem, 

sed sua cum medius proelia Bacchus amat. 6 

si nimis est legisse duos, tibi charta plicetur 

altera : divisum sic breve net opus. 



LXXXIII 

SECURO nihil est te, Naevole, peius ; eodem 
sollicito nihil est, Naevole, te melius. 

286 



BOOK IV. Lxxx-Lxxxm 

LXXX 

You declaim in a fever, Maron ; if you don't know 
that this is frenzy, you are not sane, friend Maron. 
You declaim when you are ill, you declaim in a 
semitertian : if otherwise you can't perspire, there 
is some reason in it. " Yet it is a great thing." 
You are wrong ; when fever burns up your vitals 'tis 
a great thing to hold your tongue, Maron. 

LXXXI 

WHEN Fabulla had read my epigram x in which I 
complain that no girl says " No," she, though solicited 
once, twice, and three times, disregarded her lover's 
prayers. Now promise, Fabulla : I bade you refuse, 
I did not bid you to refuse for ever. 

LXXXII 

THESE little books 2 too commend, Rufus, to Venu- 
leius, and ask him to put to my account a few idle 
hours, and, forgetting awhile his cares and tasks, 
to criticise my trifles with no ungracious ear. But 
let him not read these poems either after his first 
or his last cup, but when Bacchus in mid-revel loves 
his bouts of wine. If it is too much to read two, 
let one book be rolled up : divided the work will 
thus become brief. 

LXXXIII 

WHEN you are easy in mind, Naevolus, nothing is 
more odious than you ; again, when you are worried, 

1 iv. Ixxi. 2 The third and fourth books. 

287 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

securus nullum resalutas, despicis omnes, 
nee quisquam liber nee tibi natus homo est : 

sollicitus donas, dominum regemque salutas, 
invitas. esto, Naevole, sollicitus. 



LXXXIV 

NON est in populo nee urbe tota 
a se Thaida qui probet fututam, 
cum multi cupiant rogentque multi. 
tam casta est, rogo, Thais ? immo fellat. 



LXXXV 

Nos bibimus vitro, tu murra, Pontice. quare 
prodat perspicuus ne duo vina calix. 



LXXXVI 

Si vis auribus Atticis probari, 

exhortor moneoque te, libelle, 

ut docto placeas Apollinari. 

nil exactius eruditiusque est, 

sed nee candidius benigniusque. 5 

si te pectore, si tenebit ore, 

nee rhonchos metues maligniorum, 

nee scombris tunicas dabis molestas. 

si damnaverit, ad salariorum 

curras scrinia protinus licebit, 10 

inversa pueris arande charta. 

1 Sensu obsceno. 

2 Good for yourself, inferior for your guests : cf. iv. Ixviii. ; 
x. xlix. The excellence of a murrine cup was its opacity : 
cf. X. Ixxx. 1 ; and Plin. N.H. xxxvii. 8. 

288 



BOOK IV. LXXXIII-LXXXVI 

nothing is more pleasant. Easy in mind, you return 
no man's greeting, you look down on all men ; none 
to you is a free man, or even a created being : worried, 
you make presents, give the title of " master " and 
" lord," ask one to dinner. Naevolus, be worried. 

LXXXIV 

THERE is no one of the people, or in the whole 
city, who can show that he has been favoured by 
Thais, although many desire her favours, and many 
ask for them. Is Thais so chaste then ? I ask. 
Quite the contrary : she is evil-tongued. 1 

LXXXV 

WE drink from glass, you from murrine, Ponticus. 
Why ? That a transparent cup may not betray your 
two wines. 2 

LXXXVI 

IF you would be approved by Attic ears, I exhort 
and warn you, little book, to please the cultured 
Apollinaris. 3 No man is more precise and scholarly 
than he, at the same time no man more fair and 
kindly. If he shall hold you in his heart, if on his 
lips, you will neither fear the loud sneers of envy 
nor supply dolorous wrappers 4 for mackerel. 5 If he 
shall condemn you, you must fly at once to the 
drawers of the salt-fish sellers, fit only to have your 
back ploughed by boys' pens ! 

3 A critic much relied upon by M. : cf. VH. xxvi. 9. 

4 M. compares the paper of his book to the tunica molesta, 
smeared with pitch, in which criminals were sometimes 
burned, as in the case of Nero's treatment of the Christians : 
cf. x. xxv. 5 ; and Juv. i. 155. 5 cf. ill. 1. 9. 

289 

VOL. I. U 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXXVII 

INFANTEM secum semper tua Bassa, Fabulle, 

conlocat et lusus deliciasque vocat, 
et, quo mireris magis, infantaria non est. 

ergo quid in causa est ? pedere Bassa solet. 

LXXXVIII 

NULLA remisisti parvo pro munere dona, 

et iam Saturni quinque fuere dies, 
ergo nee argenti sex scripula Septiciani 

missa nee a querulo mappa cliente fuit, 
Antipolitani nee quae de sanguine thynni 5 

testa rubet, nee quae cottana parva gerit, 
nee rugosarum vimen breve Picenarum, 

dicere te posses ut meminisse mei ? 
decipies alios verbis voltuque benigno ; 

nam mihi iam notus dissimulator eris. 10 

LXXXIX 

OHE, iam satis est, ohe, libelle. 

iam pervenimus usque ad umbilicos : 

tu procedere adhuc et ire quaeris, 

nee summa potes in schida teneri, 

sic tamquam tibi res peracta non sit, 5 

quae prima quoque pagina peracta est. 

iam lector queriturque deficitque ; 

iam librarius hoc et ipse dicit 

"Ohe, iam satis est, ohe, libelle." 

1 Considered inferior : cf. vin. Ixxi. 6. 
290 



BOOK IV. LXXXVII-I.XXXIX 

LXXXVII 

YOUR Bassa, Fabullus, constantly sets an infant by 
her side and calls it her plaything and her darling, 
and yet that you may wonder the more she is 
not partial to infants. So what is the reason ? Bassa 
is apt to break wind. 

LXXXVIII 

You have sent me no presents in return for my 
small offering, and already Saturn's five days are 
over. So not even six scruples of Septician l silver 
plate have been sent me, nor a napkin given you by 
a peevish client, nor a jar ruddy with the blood of 
Antipolitan tunny, 2 nor one containing small Syrian 
figs, nor a stumpy basket of wrinkled Picenian olives, 
so that you could say that you remembered me ? You 
may deceive others with words and benignant face, 
for to me in future you will be a detected pi'etender. 

LXXXIX 

Ho, there ! Ho, there ! 'tis now enough, my little 
book. We have now come to the very end : you still 
want to go on further and continue, and cannot be 
held in even in your last strip, just as if your task 
was not finished which was finished, too, on the 
first page ! Already my reader is grumbling and 
giving in ; already even my scribe says : " Ho, there ! 
Ho, there ! 'tis now enough, little book." 

- i.e. the inferior pickle called muria, as compared with 
the pickle compounded of mackerel : cf. xm. ciii. Antipolis 
(Antibes) in Gallia Narbonensis was an important seat of the 
tunny fishery. 



291 
u 2 



BOOK V 



LIBER QUINTUS 



HAEC tibi, Palladiae seu collibus uteris Albae, 

Caesar, et hinc Triviam prospicis, inde Thetin, 
seu tua veridicae discunt responsa sorores, 

plana suburban! qua cubat unda freti, 
seu placet Aeneae nutrix seu filia Solis 5 

sive salutiferis eandidus Anxur aquis, 
mittimus, o rerum felix tutela salusque, 

sospite quo gratum credimus esse lovem 
tu tantum accipias : ego te legisse putabo 

et tumidus Galla credulitate fruar. 10 



II 

MATRONAE puerique virginesque, 
vobis pagina nostra dedicatur. 
tu, quern nequitiae procaciores 
delectant nimium salesque nudi, 
lascivos lege quattuor libellos : 
quintus cum domino liber iocatur ; 
quern Germanicus ore non rubenti 
coram Cecropia legat puella. 



1 The temple of Diana of the Crossways at Aricia. 

2 Two goddesses of fortune worshipped at Antium. 



294 



BOOK V 



THIS to thee, Caesar, whether them art enjoying 
the hills of Alba dear to Pallas, and dost look forth, 
here on Trivia's fane, 1 there on the waves of Thetis ; 
or whether the truth-speaking Sisters 2 learn the 
oracles thou dost inspire, where, hard by the town, 
sleeps the ocean's level wave ; whether Aeneas' nurse 
delights thee, or the daughter of the Sun, 3 or gleam- 
ing Anxur with its healthful waters, this book I send, 
O thou blest guardian and saviour of the state, whose 
safety assures us that Jove is grateful. 4 Do thou but 
receive it ; 1 will deem that thou hast read it, and in 
my pride have the joy of my Gallic trustfulness. 5 

II 

MATRONS, and boys, and maids, to you my page is 
dedicated. Do thou, whom bolder wantonness de- 
lights o'errnuch, and wit unashamed, read my four 
wanton little books ; the fifth laughs with its Master ; 
this one Germanicus may, with unblushing face, read 
in the presence of the Attic Maid. 6 

3 Whether you are at Caieta, called after the nurse of 
Aeneas, or at Circeii, called after Circe. 

* For the rebuilding by Domitian of Jupiter's Temple on 
the Capitoline : cf. ix. iii. 7. 

8 For the credulity of the Gauls cf. Caes. B. G. iv. 5. 

6 Pallas, claimed by Domitian (Germanicus) as his 
patroness. 

295 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

III 

ACCOLA iam nostrae Degis, Germanice, ripae, 

a famulis Histri qui tibi venit aquis, 
laetus et attonitus viso modo praeside mundi, 

adfatus comites dicitur esse suos : 
" Sors mea quara fratris melior, cui tarn prope fas est 

cernere, tarn longe quern colit ille deum." 6 



IV 

FETERE multo Myrtale solet vino, 
sed fallat ut nos, folia devorat lauri 
merumque cauta fronde, non aqua, miscet. 
hanc tu rubentem prominentibus venis 
quotiens venire, Paule, videris contra, 
dicas licebit " Myrtale bibit laurum." 



SEXTK, Palatinae cultor facunde Minervae, 

ingenio frueris qui propiore dei 
(nam tibi nascentes domini cognoscere curas 

et secreta ducis pectora nosse licet), 
sit locus et nostris aliqua tibi parte libellis, 5 

qua Pedo, qua Marsus quaque Catullus erit. 
ad Capitolini caelestia carmina belli 

grande coturnati pone Maronis opus. 

1 Brother of Decebalus, king of Dacia, sent to treat for 
peace. 

2 i.e. is inspired. The priestess of Apollo at Delphi 
chewed laurel-leaves to acquire inspiration. 

296 



BOOK V. in-v 

III 

A DWELLER, Germanicus, on the bank that is now 
our own, Degis, 1 who came to thee from Ister's subject 
waves, with joy and wonder saw of late the Governor 
of the world, and addressed so 'tis said his com- 
pany : " Prouder is my lot than my brother's ; I may 
behold so near the god whom he worships from 
so far." 

IV 

MYRTALE is wont to reek with much wine, but, to 
mislead us, she devours laurel leaves and mixes her 
neat liquor with this artful frond, not with water. 
As often as you see her, Paulus, flushed and with 
swollen veins, coming to meet you, you can say : 
" Myrtale has drunk the laurel." 2 



SEXTUS, eloquent votary of Palatine Minerva, 3 you 
who enjoy more near the genius of the god 4 for 
you are permitted to learn our lord's cares as they 
are born, and to know our chief's secret heart let 
there, I pray, be found also for my little books 
somewhere a niche where Pedo, where Marsus, and 
where Catullus shall be set. By the song divine 
of the Capitoline war 5 place the grand work of 
buskined Maro. 6 

8 S. was probably curator of the Palatine library. 

4 cf. note to v. viii. 1. 

8 The civil disturbances of A. D. 69, in which the Capito- 
line Temple was burnt. Perhaps Domitian was the author 
of the poem. 6 The Aeneid of Virgil. 

297 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

VI 

Si non est grave nee nimis molestum, 

Musae, Parthenium rogate vestrum : 

sic te serior et beata quondam 

salvo Caesare finiat senectus 

et sis invidia favente felix, 5 

sic Burrus cito sentiat parentem : 

admittas timidam brevemque chartam 

intra limina sanctions aulae. 

nosti tempora tu lovis sereni, 

cum fulget placido suoque vultu, 10 

quo nil supplicibus solet negare. 

non est quod metuas preces iniquas : 

numquam grandia nee molesta poscit 

quae cedro decorata purpuraque 

nigris pagiiia crevit umbilicis. 15 

nee porrexeris ista, sed teneto 

sic tamquam nihil offeras agasque. 

si novi dominum novem sororum, 

ultro purpureum petet libellum. 

VII 

QUALITER Assyrios renovant incendia nidos, 

una decem quotiens saecula vixit avis, 
taliter exuta est veterem nova Roma senectam 

et sumpsit vultus praesidis ipsa sui. 
iam precor oblitus notae, Vulcane, querellae 5 

parce : sumus Martis turba sed et Veneris : 
parce, pater : sic Lemniacis lasciva catenis 

ignoscat coniunx et patienter amet. 

1 Domitian's secretary, and himself a poet : cf. iv. xlv. ; 
xi. i. 2 cf. iv. xlv. 

298 



BOOK V. vi-vn 

VI 

IF it is not a burden, or unduly irksome, ye 
Muses, make to your own Parthenius l this request : 
"So full late may happy age one day close your 
course while Caesar is still safe, and you by Envy's 
favour be fortunate ; so may Burrus 2 soon learn his 
sire's worth admit this timid and brief volume 
within the threshold of the hallowed hall. You 
know the seasons when Jove's brow is unruffled, 
when he beams with that calm look, all his own, 
that is wont to deny suppliants nought. You need 
not fear extravagant petitions ; never does a book 
which, spruce with cedar oil and purple, has fully 
grown with its black knobs, make a great or trouble- 
some request. 3 Do not protrude that book, but so 
hold it, as if you offered and intended nothing." If 
I know the Master of the Sisters Nine, of his own 
accord he will ask for the little book in its purple. 

VII 

As when the fire renews the Assyrian nest, when- 
ever one bird 4 has lived its ten cycles, so has new Rome 
shed her bygone age and put on herself the visage 
of her Governor. Now, I pray thee, Vulcan, forget 
thy well-known plaint against us, 5 and spare ; we are 
the crowd of Mars, but that of Venus withal. Spare 
us, father; so may thy wanton spouse pardon her 
Lemnian fetters and love thee with submission. 

3 i.e. its very appearance shows it is nob a petition. 

4 The phoenix. 6 As descendants from Mars. 

299 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

VIII 

EDICTUM domini deique nostri, 

quo subsellia certiora fiunt 

et puros eques ordines recepit, 

dum laudat modo Phasis in theatro, 

Phasis purpureis ruber lacernis, 5 

et iactat tumido superbus ore : 

" Tandem commodius licet sedere, 

nunc est reddita dignitas equestris ; 

turba non premimur, nee inquinamur " : 

haec et talia dum refert supinus, 10 

illas purpureas et adrogantes 

iussit surgere Leitus lacernas. 

IX 

LANGUEBAM : sed tu comitatus protinus ad me 
venisti centum, Symmache, discipulis. 

centum me tetigere manus Aquilone gelatae : 
non habui febrem, Symmache, nunc habeo. 

X 

" ESSE quid hoc dicam vivis quod fama negatur 
et sua quod rarus tempora lector amat ? " 

hi sunt invidiae nimirum, Regule. mores, 
praeferat antiquos semper ut ilia novis. 

sic veterem ingrati Pompei quaerimus umbram, 5 
sic laudant Catuli vilia templa senes. 

1 In 89 A.D. Domitian ordered his procurators to speak of 
him as Dominus et Deus noster in official documents : Suet. 
Dom. xiii. 

2 By the Lex Julia of Roscius Otho in B.C. 67, which 
assigned fourteen rows in the theatre to the knights. This 
law Avas revived and strictly enforced by Domitian. 

300 



BOOK V. VIH-X 

VIII 

THE edict of our master and god, 1 whereby the 
seating has been made more definite and knights 
have got back 2 their ranks uncontaminated, Pliasis 
was lately approving in the theatre, Phasis glowing 
in a purple mantle ; and he was proudly boasting 
with swelling words : " At length can we sit more 
conveniently, now the knightly dignity has been 
restored ; we are not elbowed or besmirched by the 
mob." While, lolling back, he made these and 
similar remarks, Leitus 3 commanded that purple 
and arrogant mantle to get up. 



IX 

I WAS sickening ; but you at once attended me, 
Symmachus, with a train of a hundred apprentices. 
A hundred hands frosted by the North wind have 
pawed me : I had no fever before, Symmachus ; now 
I have. 



" How shall I explain this that to living men 
fame is denied, and that few readers love their own 
times ? " 4 Of a truth, Regulus, this is envy's way : 
ever to prefer the men of old to those new-born. 
Thus ungratefully we sigh for Pompey's old shadowy 
colonnade, so old men extol the poor temple 5 re- 

3 The attendant. Phasis was not a knight, and could not 
claim a seat. * Regulus is supposed to ask the question. 

6 Of Jupiter, on the Capitol, consumed by fire B.C. 84, 
and restored B.C. 62 by Q. Lutatius Catulus. The Dictator 
Sulla had undertaken the restoration, but predeceased its 
completion, "the only boon," says Tacitus (Hist. in. Ixxii. ), 
" denied to his good fortune." 

301 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

Ennius est lectus salvo tibi, Roma, Marone, 

et sua riserunt saecula Maeoniden ; 
rara coronato plausere theatra Menandro ; 

norat Nasonem sola Corinna suum. 10 

vos tamen o nostri ne festinate libelli : 

si post fata venit gloria, rion propero. 

XI 

SARDONYCHAS, zmaragdos, adamantas, iaspidas uno 
versat in articulo Stella, Severe, meus. 

multas in digitis, plures in carmine gemmas 
invenies : inde est haec, puto, culta manus. 

XII 

QUOD nutantia fronte perticata 

gestat pondera Masclion superbus, 

aut grandis Ninus omnibus lacertis 

septem quod pueros levat vel octo, 

res non difficilis mihi videtur, 5 

uno cum digito vel hoc vel illo 

portet Stella meus decem puellas. 

XIII 

SUM, fateor, semperque fui, Callistrate, pauper 
sed non obscurus nee male notus eques, 

sed toto legor orbe frequens et dicitur " Hie est," 
quodque cinis paucis hoc mihi vita dedit. 

1 Homer. 2 Ovid. 

3 i.e. it is from that the brilliants derive their real bril- 
liancy a somewhat far-fetched conceit. 

4 Explained (but doubtfully) of a ring with ten stones, to 
symbolise the nine Muses, together with Minerva, or S.'s 
mistress Violentilla. 

302 



BOOK V. x-xin 

stored by Catulus ; you read Ennius, O Rome, though 
Maro is to your hand, and his own times laughed at 
Maeonides ; l seldom did the theatres applaud the 
crowned Menander ; Corinna alone knew her Naso.- 
Yet be not too eager, O ye books of mine ! So after 
death come glory, I hurry not. 



XI 

SARDONVXES, emeralds, diamonds, jaspers, my Stella, 
Severus, twists on a single finger. Many gems will 
you find on his hands, more in his verse ; therefrom, 
methinks, is his hand adorned. 3 



XII 

THAT Masclion on his pole-supporting brow proudly 
bears a nodding weight, or huge Ninus with all the 
strength of his arms lifts seven boys or eight, does 
not seem to me a difficult feat, when on a single 
finger, this one or that, my Stella carries ten 
maids. 4 

XIII 

I AM, I confess, and I have always been poor, Cal- 
listratus, yet no obscure or ill-famed knight 5 am 
I ; yet am I read through all the world by many, and 
they say of me "'Tis he!", 6 and what death has 
given to few this has life given to me. But your 

5 Titus (confirmed by Domitian) conferred on M. an 
honorary knighthood and military tribuneship (tribunatus 
semestris : cf. Suet. Claud, xxv. ; Juv. vii. 88). M. alludes to 
this in in. xcv. 9. 

8 cf. "At pulcrum est digito monstrari et dicier Hie est": 
Pers. i. 28. 

33 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

at tua centenis incumbunt tecta columnis 5 

et libertinas area flagellat opes, 
magnaque Niliacae servit tibi gleba Syenes 

tondet et innumeros Gallica Parma greges. 
hoc ego tuque sumus : sed quod sum noil potes esse ; 

tu quod es e populo quilibet esse potest. 10 

XIV 

SEDERE primo solitus in gradu semper 

tune, cum liceret occupare, Nanneius 

bis excitatus terque transtulit castra, 

et inter ipsas paene tertius sellas 

post Gaiumque Luciumque consedit. 5 

illinc cucullo prospicit caput tectus 

oculoque ludos spectat indecens uno. 

et hinc miser deiectus in viam transit, 

subsellioque semifultus extremo 

et male receptus altero genu iactat 10 

equiti sedere Leitoque se stare. 

XV 

QUINTUS nostrorum liber est, Auguste, iocorum 
et queritur laesus carmine nemo meo, 

gaudet honorato sed multus nomine lector, 
cui victura meo munere fama datur. 

'' Quid tamen haec prosunt quamvis venerantia mul- 
tos ? " 5 

non prosint sane, me tamen ista iuvant. 



34 



BOOK V. xni-xv 

roof rests on a hundred columns, and } r our money- 
chest keeps close a freedman's wealth, and the broad 
tillage of Nile's Syene serves you as lord, and Gallic 
Parma shears for you unnumbered flocks. Such 
are we you and I ; but what I am you cannot be : 
what you are that anyone of the people can be. 

XIV 

ACCUSTOMED always to sit in the front row in days 
when to seize a place was lawful, 1 Nanneius was 
twice and thrice roused up and shifted camp, and 
sat down right between the seats, making almost a 
third behind Gaius and Lucius. Thence with his 
head buried in a cowl he peers out, and views the 
show indecently with one eye. Expelled even from 
here, the wretched fellow passes into the gangway, 
and, half propped up at the end of a bench and 
allowed small room, with one knee pretends to the 
knight by him that he is sitting, with the other to 
Leitus 2 that he is standing. 



XV 

THIS, Augustus, is my fifth 'book of jests, and no 
man complains as being wounded by my verse ; nay, 
many a reader rejoices in an honoured name, to 
whom, by bounty of mine, is given undying fame. 
" Yet what profit is there in these poems, however 
much they pay homage to many?" Let profit, in 
truth, be none, yet those poems are at least my 
delight. 

1 i.e. when the Lex Julia was not enforced : cf. v. viii. 

2 cf. v. viii. 12. 

305 
VOL. I. X 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XVI 

SERIA cum possim, quod delectantia malo 

scribere, tu causa es, lector amice, mihi, 
qui legis et tota cantas mea carmina Roma : 

sed nescis quanti stet mihi talis amor, 
nam si falciferi defendere templa fTonantis 5 

sollicitisve velim vendere verba reis, 
plurimus Hispanas mittet mihi nauta metretas 

et fiet vario sordidus acre sinus, 
at mine conviva est comissatorque libellus 

et tantum gratis pagina nostra placet. 1 

sed non et veteres contenti laude fuerunt, 

cum minimum vati munus Alexis erat. 
" Belle " inquis "dixti : iuvat et laudabimus usque." 

dissimulas ? facies me, puto, causidicum. 



XVII 

DUM proavos atavosque refers et nomina magna, 
dum tibi noster eques sordida condicio est, 

dum te posse negas nisi lato, Gellia, clavo 
nubere, nupsisti, Gellia, cistibero. 

1 i.e. take a brief for the Treasury, which was located in 
the Temple of Saturn. But Saturn is nowhere else called 
Tonans. Baehrens suggests togatus. 

* Is only read at banquets where guests have not to pa}* 
for it. 

3 A slave presented to Virgil by Maecenas : cf. vm. Ivi. 12. 

306 



BOOK V. xvi-xvn 



XVI 

THAT I, who could write what is serious, prefer to 
write what is entertaining, you, friendly reader, are 
the cause, who read and hum my poems all over 
Rome ; but you do not know what such love costs 
me. For, were I willing to appear for the Temple 
of the scythe-bearing Thunderer 1 or to sell my 
speech to anxious men accused, many a sailor will 
send me firkins of oil from Spain, and my purse 
become soiled with odd moneys. But, as it is, my 
book is but a guest and boon-companion, 2 and only 
when 'tis unpaid for does my page charm. But our 
ancestors were not as we, content \vith praise ; then 
an Alexis 3 was the smallest offering to a bard. 
"You have written nicely," you say; "we enjoy, 
and will to the end praise you." Do you pretend 
not to understand ? You will make me, I think, 
a lawyer. 4 



XVII 

WHILE you were recalling your great grandfathers, 
and their grandfathers, and the mighty names of 
your ancestors ; while a knight like me is a poor 
match for you ; while you said, Gellia, that you 
could not marry except a broad stripe, 5 you married, 
Gellia, a box-bearer ! 6 

* One of a more lucrative profession. 

* i.e. & senator. 

' Either a common carrier, or the priest who carried the 
sacra arcana in a religious procession : cf, Hor. Od. i. xviii. 
12. Some take the reference as meant for a Jew ; Juv. 
iii. 14. 

307 
x 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XVIII 

QUOD tibi Decembri mense, quo volant mappae 

gracilesque ligulae cereique chartaeque 

et acuta senibus testa cum Damascenis, 

praeter libellos vernulas nihil misi, 

fortasse avarus videar aut inhumanus. 5 

odi dolosas munerum et malas artes : 

imitantur hamos dona : namque quis nescit 

avidum vorata decipi scarum musca ? 

quotiens amico diviti nihil donat, 

o Quintiane, liberalis est pauper. 10 

XIX 

Si qua fides veris, praeferri, maxime Caesar, 

temporibus possunt saecula nulla tuis. 
quando magis dignos licuit spectare triumphos ? 

quando Palatini plus meruere del ? 
pulchrior et maior quo sub duce Martia Roma ? 5 

sub quo libertas principe tanta fuit ? 
est tamen hoc vitium sed non leve, sit licet unum, 

quod colit ingratas pauper amicitias. 
quis largitur opes veteri fidoque sodali, 

aut quern prosequitur non alienus eques ? 10 

Saturnaliciae ligulam misisse selibrae 

tflammarisvet togae J scripula tota decem 
luxuria est, tumidique vocant haec munera reges : 

qui crepet aureolos forsitan unus erit. 

1 The text is probably corrupt. Damnatiave togae (Hous- 
man), e lamniave Tagi (Munro), and flammantisve auri (Fried- 
lander) have been suggested. 

1 cf. v. lix. 4 for the same idea. 
308 



BOOK V. xvm-xix 

XVIII 

BECAUSE in December's month, when napkins fly 
about, and slender spoons, and wax tapers, and paper, 
and pointed jars of dried damsons, I have sent you 
nothing but my home-bred little books, perhaps I 
may seem stingy or impolite. I abhor the crafty and 
cursed trickery of presents ; gifts are like hooks ; 
for who does not know that the greedy sea-bream is 
deceived by the fly he has gorged ? Every time he 
gives nothing to a rich friend, O Quintianus, a poor 
man is generous. 1 

XIX 

IF one may trust truth, no ages, most mighty 
Caesar, can be set above your times. When could 
we view more noble triumphs ? when have the 
Palatine gods more deserved our thanks? under 
what chief was Rome, city of Mars, fairer and 
greater ? under what prince was liberty so great ? 
Yet is there this blot, no small one, though it be 
but one : that a poor man courts ungrateful friend- 
ships. Who lavishes his wealth on an old and loyal 
comrade, or whom does a knight he himself made 
escort ? 2 To have dispatched at the Saturnalia 3 
a table-spoon weighing half a pound, or a flame- 
hued toga worth ten scruples 4 in all, is to them 
extravagance, and our puffed-up lords call these 
bounties, though perhaps just one of them may 

2 To whom he has given the amount of a knightly 
qualification. 

3 The epithet Salunialiciae may perhaps convey a sug- 
gestion that the silver was poor : cf. iv. Ixxxviii. 3. 

* The scruple was a gold coin worth twenty sesterces, 
about three and sixpence. 

309 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

quatenus hi non sunt, esto tu, Caesar, amicus : 15 

nulla ducis virtus dulcior esse potest. 
iam dudum tacito rides, Germanice, naso ; 

utile quod nobis do tibi consilium. 



XX 

Si tecum mihi, care Martialis, 

securis liceat frui diebus, 

si disponere tempus otiosum 

et verae pariter vacare vitae, 

nee iios atria nee domos potentum 5 

nee litis tetricas forumque triste 

nossemus nee imagines superbas ; 

sed gestatio, fabulae, libelli, 

campus, porticus, umbra, Vii-go, thermae, 

haec essent loca semper, hi labores. 10 

nunc vivit necuter sibi, bonosque 

soles effugere atque abire sentit, 

qui nobis pereunt et inputantur. 

quisquam, vivere cum sciat, moratur ? 



XXI 

QUINTUM pro Decimo, pro Crasso, Regule, Macrum 

ante salutabat rhetor Apollodotus. 
nunc utrumque suo resalutat nomine, quantum 

cura laborque potest ! scripsit et edidicit. 

1 Cold baths from the Aqua Virgo, one of the aqueducts : 
cf. vi. ilii. 18. 

310 



BOOK V. xix-xxi 

make sovereigns chink. So long as these men are 
no friends, be you, Caesar, our friend ; no merit in 
a chief can be more pleasing. All this while you 
are smiling, Caesar, with a quiet sneer because I am 
giving you advice profitable to myself. 



XX 

IF I and you, dear Martial, were permitted to enjoy 
careless days, if permitted to dispose an idle time, 
and both alike to have leisure for genuine life, we 
should not know the halls or mansions of men of 
power, nor worrying lawsuits and the anxious forum, 
nor lordly ancestral busts ; but the promenade, the 
lounges, the bookshops, the plain, the colonnade, 
the garden's shade, the Virgin water, 1 the warm 
baths these should be our haunts always, these 
our tasks. To-day neither lives for himself, and 
lie feels the good days are flitting and passing 
away, our days that perish and are scored to our 
account. Does any man, when he knows how to 
live, delay ? 



XXI 

APOLLODOTUS the rhetorician, Regulus, used to greet 
Quintus for Decimus, Macer for Crassus ; now he 
returns the greeting of each by his proper name. 
What power has care and labour ! He wrote the 
names down and learned them by heart ! 2 

2 cf. v. liv. 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXII 

MANE domi nisi te volui meruique videre, 

sint mihi, Paule, tuae longius Esquiliae. 
sed Tiburtinae sum proximus accola pilae, 

qua videt anticum rustica Flora lovem : 
alta Suburani vincenda est semita clivi 5 

et numquam sicco sordida saxa gradu, 
vixque datur longas mulorum rumpere mandras 

quaeque trahi multo marmora fune vides. 
illud adhuc gravius quod te post mille labores, 

Paule, negat lasso ianitor esse domi. 10 

exitus hie operis vani togulaeque madentis : 

vix tanti Paulum mane videre fuit. 
semper inhumanos habet officiosus amicos : 

rex, nisi dormieris, non potes esse meus. 

XXIII 

HEHBARUM fueras indutus, Basse, colores, 

iura theatralis dum siluere loci, 
quae postquam placidi censoris cura renasci 

iussit et Oceanum certior audit eques, 
non nisi vel cocco madida vel murice tincta 5 

veste nites et te sic dare verba putas. 
quadringentorum nullae sunt, Basse, lacernae 

aut meus ante omnis Cordus haberet equum. 

1 Otherwise unknown. 

2 The Temple of Flora and the Capitolium Vetus, a temple 
dedicated to Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva ; both stood on the 
Quirinal where M. lived. 

3 i.e. BO that I can see you. M. also hints that P.'s absence 

312 



BOOK V. xxii-xxm 

XXII 

IF I did not wish, and deserve, to see you " at 
home " in the morning, Paulus, may your Esquiline 
house be for me still farther off! But I am next- 
door neighbour to the Tiburtine column, 1 where 
rustic Flora looks upon our ancient Jove ; 2 I must 
surmount the track up the hill from the Subura and 
the dirty pavement with its steps never dry, and I 
can scarce break through the long droves of mules 
and the blocks of marble you see hauled by many a 
cable. And more annoying still after a thousand 
exertions, Paulus, when I am fagged out, your door- 
keeper says you are " not at home " ! Such is the 
result of misspent toil, and my poor toga drenched ! 
To see Paulus in the morning was scarcely worth 
the cost. A diligent client always has inhuman 
friends : my patron if you do not stay in bed 3 you 
cannot be. 

XXIII 

You were clad, Bassus, in the colour of grass so 
long as the rules of seating 4 in the theatre were 
unheard. Now that our serene Censor's care has 
bid them revive, and knights more genuine obey 
Oceanus, 'tis never, but in robes steeped in scarlet 
or dyed with purple, that you are resplendent, and 
you fancy that thereby you cheat him ! No mantles, 
Bassus, are reckoned at four hundred thousand 
sesterces, or else my Cordus 5 before all men would 
have his knighthood. 

is caused by his dancing attendance on other patrons : cf. n. 
xxxii. 8. 

4 cf. viii., xiv., xxv., and xxxviii. of this Book. Oceanus 
was one of the attendants of the theatre. 8 cf. n. Ivii. 

313 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

xxrv 

HERMES Martia saeculi voluptas, 

Hermes omnibus eruditus armis, 

Hermes et gladiator et magister, 

Hermes turba sui tremorque ludi, 

Hermes, quern timet Helius sed unum. 5 

Hermes, cui cadit Advolans sed uni, 

Hermes vincere nee ferire doctus, 

Hermes subpositicius sibi ipse, 

Hermes divitiae locariorum, 

Hermes cura laborque ludiarum, 10 

Hermes belligera superbus hasta, 

Hermes aequoreo minax tridente, 

Hermes casside languida timendus, 

Hermes gloria Martis universi, 

Hermes omnia solus et ter unus. 15 



XXV 

" QUADKINGENTA tibi non suiit, Chaerestrate : surge, 

Leitus ecce venit : sta, fuge, curre, late." 
ecquis, io, revocat discedentemque reducit ? 

ecquis, io, largas pandit amicus opes ? 
quern chartis famaeque damus populisque loquendum ? 

quis Stygios non volt tobus adire lacus ? 6 

hoc, rogo, non melius quam rubro pulpita nimbo 

spargere et effuso permaduisse croco ? 



1 Never vanquished, and so no other gliidiator being 
substituted for him. 

* Or "the anxiety of gladiators' wives," fearing the death 
of their husbands at his hands. 



BOOK V. xxiv-xxv 

XXIV 

HERMES, the age's delight to the Sons of Mars ; 
Hermes, schooled in all weapons; Hermes, gladiator 
and trainer both ; Hermes, the confusion and terror 
of his own school ; Hermes, whom, but whom alone, 
Helius fears ; Hermes, whom, but whom alone, Ad- 
volans goes down before ; Hermes, skilled to vanquish 
without slaying ; Hermes, himself his own substi- 
tute ; l Hermes, fount of wealth to seat-contractors ; 
Hermes, the darling and passion of gladiators' 
women ; 2 Hermes, proud with the warrior's spear ; 
Hermes, threatful with the sea-trident ; 3 Hermes, 
terrible in the drooping casque ; 4 Hermes, the pride 
of Mars in every shape ; Hermes is all things in his 
single self, and trebly one. 



XXV 

" You don't possess four hundred thousand, 
Chaerestratus ; get up ; see, Leitus is coming ! 
Stand up, fly, run, hide ! " Ho, there ! does anyone 
call him back, and bring him back as he departs ? 
Ho, there ! does any friend unlock his abounding 
wealth ? Whom am I to give to my pages, and to 
fame and the tongues of nations ? Who is loth to 
pass, all unknown, to the lake of Styx ? Is not this, 
I ask, better than to sprinkle the stage with a ruddy 
shower, and be drenched with streams of saffron ? 

3 As a retiarius, or net-caster, who was also armed with a 
trident. 

4 As an andabata, a gladiator who fought on horseback, 
and more or less blindfolded by his helmet. 

315 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

quam non sensuro dare quadringenta caballo, 

aureus ut Scorpi nasus ubique micet ? 10 

o frustra locuples, o dissimulator amici, 
haec legis et laudas ? quae tibi fama perit ! 

XXVI 

QUOD alpha dixi, Corde, paenulatorum 
te nuper, aliqua cum iocarer in charta, 
si forte bilem movit hie tibi versus, 
dicas licebit beta me togatorum. 

XXVII 

INGENIUM studiumque tibi moresque genusque 
sunt equitis, fateor : cetera plebis habes. 

bis septena tibi non sint subsellia tanti, 
ut sedeas viso pallidus Oceano. 

XXVIII 

UT bene loquatur sentiatque Mamercus, 

efficere nullis, Aule, moribus possis, 

pietate fratres Curvios licet vincas, 

quiete Nervas, comitate Rusones, 

probitate Macros, aequitate Mauricos, 5 

oratione Regulos, iocis Paulos : 

robiginosis cuncta dentibus rodit. 

hominem malignum forsan esse tu credas : 

ego esse miserum credo, cui placet nemo. 



1 Than to set up a gilded statue of Scorpus, the jockey : 
cf. x. 1. and liii. 2 u. Ivii. 

316 



BOOK V. xxv-xxvni 

Than to give four hundred thousand sesterces to an 
unconscious horse, that the nose of Scorpus l may 
twinkle everywhere in gold ? O man uselessly rich, 
O disguiser of your friendship ! Read you these 
words, and praise them ? What renown you are 
losing ! 

XXVI 

I CALLED you lately, 2 Cordus, when I was cracking 
a joke in some page of mine, "A 1 in cloaks." If 
as may be this verse has stirred your bile, you may 
call me B 2 in togas. 

XXVII 

THE wit, and the taste, and the manners, and the 
birth that fit a knight are yours, I grant : the rest is 
plebeian. A place in the fourteen rows should not 
seem to you worth having if you have to turn pale 
in your seat at the sight of Oceanus. 3 



XXVIII 

THERE is no virtue, Aulus, by which you could 
induce Mamercus to speak and think kindly of you. 
You may in affection surpass the brothers Curvii, in 
calm the Nervas, 4 in courtesy the Rusos, in goodness 
the Macri, 5 in justice the Maurici, in oratory the 
Reguli, in wit the Pauli he gnaws all with cankered 
teeth. Malicious you perhaps may deem the fellow : 
I deem him miserable whom no man pleases. 

3 Because you are still "plebeian" as not having the 
money-qualification of a knight. * cf. vm. Ixx. 

5 cf. x. xvii. and Ixxvii. The rest of the names are 
unknown. 

317 




Si quando leporem mittis mihi, GeHia, dicis : 
"Formosus septem, Marce, diebus eris." 

si non derides, si verum, lux mea, narras, 
edisti numquam, Gellia, tu leporem. 

XXX 

VARRO, Sophocleo non infitiande coturno 

nee minus in Calabra suspiciende lyra, 
differ opus nee te facundi scaena Catulli 

detineat cultis aut elegia comis ; 
sed lege fumoso non aspernanda Decembri -5 

carmina, mittuntur quae tibi mense suo, 
commodius nisi forte tibi potiusque videtur 

Saturnalicias perdere, Varro, nuces. 

XXXI 

ASPICE quam placidis insultet turba iuvencis 

et sua quam facilis pondera taurus amet. 
cornibus hie pendet summis, vagus ille per armos 

currit et in toto ventilat arma bove. 
at feritas inmota riget : non esset harena 5 

tutior et poterant fallere plana magis. 
nee trepidant gestus, sed de discrimine palmae 

securus puer est sollicitumque pecus. 



1 It was a vulgar superstition that eating a hare made 
the eater beautiful for that time or longer : Plin. N.H. 
xxviii. 19. 



BOOK V. xxix-xxxi 

XXIX 

IF at any time you send me a hare, } 7 ou say, Gellia : 
" Marcus, you will be comely for seven days." l If 
you are not laughing at me, if you speak truly, my 
love, you, Gellia, have never eaten a hare. 



XXX 

VAKRO, whom the Sophoclean buskin would not 
disclaim, nor less to be looked up to for your Calabriaii 
lyre, 2 put off your studies and let not the stage of the 
clever Catullus 3 keep you busy, or Elegy with her 
trim locks ; rather read poems, not to be despised in 
smoky December, which are sent you in their appro- 
priate month. But perhaps it seems to you, Varro, 
more suitable and better to lose your Saturnalian 
nuts. 4 

XXXI 

SEE how the troupe leaps on the placid steers, and 
how complacently the bull accepts his appointed 
burden ! This boy hangs on the tips of his horns, 
that one runs here and there along his shoulders 
and waves his weapons all over the ox. But the 
fierce beast stands unmoved and stark ; the sand 
would not be safer ; rather might the level ground 
cause a slip. Nor are their movements troubled ; 
but of the award of the prize the boy is sure, the 
beast solicitous. 

2 For lyrics like Horace's. Varro is unknown. 

3 A writer of mimes or comic plays. 

4 To gamble for nuts at the Saturnalia. 

319 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXXII 

QUADRANTEM Crispus tabulis, Faustine, supremis 
non dedit uxori. " Cui dedit ergo ? " sibi. 

XXXIII 

CARPERE causidicus fertur mea carmina. qui sit 
nescio : si sciero, vae tibi, causidice. 

XXXIV 

HANC tibi, Fronto pater, genetrix Flaccilla, puellam 

oscula commendo deliciasque meas, 
parvola ne nigras horrescat Erotion umbras 

oraque Tartarei prodigiosa canis. 
inpletura fuit sextae modo frigora brumae, 5 

vixisset totidem ni minus ilia dies, 
inter tarn veteres ludat lasciva patronos 

et nomen blaeso garriat ore meum. 
mollia non rigidus caespes tegat ossa nee illi, 

terra, gravis fueris : non fuit ilia tibi. 1 

XXXV 

DUM sibi redire de Patrensibus fundis 
ducena clamat coccinatus Euclides 
Corinthioque plura de suburbano 
longumque pulchra stemma repetit a Leda 
et suscitanti Leito reluctatur, 5 

equiti superbo nobili locupleti 
cecidit repente magna de sinu clavis. 
mnnquam, Fabulle, nequior fuit clavis. 

1 i.e. he dissipated it in his lifetime. 

2 Supposed to be M.'a father and mother. 

320 



BOOK V. xxxn-xxxv 

XXXII 

CRISPUS in his last will, Faustinas, did not give 
his wife a farthing. " To whom, then, did he give 
his estate ? " To himself. 1 

XXXIII 

A LAWYER is said to carp at my poems ; who he is 
I don't know : if I do know, woe to you, lawyer ! 

XXXIV 

To thee, father Pronto, to thee, mother Flacilla, 2 I 
commend this maid, my sweetheart and my darling, 
that tiny Erotion may not shudder at the dark shades 
and the Tartarean hound's stupendous jaws. She 
would have completed only her sixth cold winter 
had she not lived as many days too few. Beside 
protectors so aged let her lightly play, and prattle 
my name with lisping tongue. And let not hard 
clods cover her tender bones, nor be thou heavy upon 
her, O earth : she was not so to thee ! 

XXXV 

WHILE Euclides in scarlet was loudly proclaiming 
that two hundred thousand sesterces a year were the 
return of his farms at Patrae, and more that of his 
property in the suburbs of Corinth, and was tracing 
a long pedigree from beauteous Leda, and arguing 
with Leitus who was making him stir out of the 
pocket of this proud, high-born, rich knight there 
suddenly fell a big key. Never, Fabullus, was there 
a key more wicked ! 3 

3 As showing that E. was only a door-keeper, or in some 
other menial position. 

321 
VOL. I. Y 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXXVI 

LAUUATUS nostro quidam, Faustina, libello 
dissimulat, quasi nil debeat : inposuit. 

XXXVII 

PUKLLA senibus dulcior mihi cycnis, 

agna Galaesi mollior Phalantini, 

concha Lucrini delicatior stagni, 

cui nee lapillos praeferas Erythraeos 

nee modo politum pecudis Indicae dentem 5 

nivesque primas liliumque non tactum ; 

quae crine vicit Baetici gregis vellus 

Rhenique nodos aureamque nitellam ; 

fragravit ore quod rosarium Paesti, 

quod Atticarum prima mella cerarum, 10 

quod sucinorum rapta de manu gleba ; 

cui conparatus indecens erat pavo, 

inamabilis sciurus et frequens phoenix, 

adhuc recenti tepet Erotion busto, 

quam pessimorum lex amara fatorum 15 

sexta peregit hieme, nee tarn en tota, 

nostros amores gaudiumque lususque. 

et esse tristem me meus vetat Paetus, 

pectusque pulsans pariter et comam vellens : 

" Deflere non te vernulae pudet mortem ? 20 

ego coniugem " inquit "extuli et tamen vivo, 

notam superbam nobilem locupletem." 

quid esse nostro fortius potest Paeto ? 

ducentiens accepit et tamen vivit. 



1 The water of the Baetis ^Guadalquivir) gave wool a 
golden hue : ef. ix. Ixi. 3. 

322 



BOOK V. xxxvi-xxxvn 

XXXVI 

A CERTAIN individual, Faustinus, whom I praised 
in my book, pretends he owes me nothing. He has 
cheated me. 

XXXVII 

A MAID, sweeter-voiced to me than aged swans, 
more tender than the lamb by Phalanthian Galaesus, 
more dainty than mother of pearl of Lucrine's mere, 
before whom thou wouldst not choose Eastern pearls, 
nor the tusk new polished of India's beast, and snows 
untrodden, and the unfingered lily ; whose locks out- 
shone the Baetic fleece, 1 the knotted hair of Rhine, 2 
and the golden dormouse ; whose breath was fragrant 
as Paestan bed of roses, as the new honey of Attic 
combs, as a lump of amber snatched from the hand; 3 
compared with Avhom the peacock was unsightly, no 
darling the squirrel, and less rare the phoenix ; warm 
on a pyre yet new Erotion lies, whom the bitter decree 
of the most evil Fates carried off ere her sixth winter 
was full, my love, my joy, my playfellow. And my 
friend Paetus forbids me to be sad, while he beats 
his breast with both his hands and plucks his hair. 
" Are you not ashamed to bewail the death of a 
paltry home-bred slave? I," he says, "have buried 
my wife, and yet I live, a wife known to all, 
proud, high-born, wealthy." What can be more 
steadfast than our Paetus ? He has received twenty 
millions and goes on living still ! 

2 Which was yellow and knotted : cf. Lib. Spect. iii. 9 ; 
Juv. xiii. 164. 

3 The warmth of the hand brought out the fragrance of 
amber. 

323 
Y 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXXVIII 

CALLIODORUS habet censum (quis nescit?) equestrem, 

Sexte, sed et fratrem Calliodorus habet. 
" Quadringenta seca " qui dicis, O-VKO. /xe/ai^e : 

uno credis equo posse sedere duos ? 
quid cum fratre tibi, quid cum Polluce molesto ? 5 

non esset Pollux si tibi, Castor eras, 
unus cum sitis, duo, Calliodore, sedebis ? 

surge : o-oAoi*io-ju.6V, Calliodore, facis. 
aut imitai'e genus Ledae : cum fratre sedere 

non potes : alternis, Calliodore, sede. 10 

XXXIX 

SUPREMAS tibi triciens in anno 

signanti tabulas, Charine, misi 

Hyblaeis madidas thymis placentas. 

defeci : miserere iam, Charine : 

signa rarius, aut semel fac illud, 5 

mentitur tua quod subinde tussis. 

excussi loculosque sacculumque : 

Croeso divitior licet fuissem, 

Iro pauperior forem, Charine, 

si conchem totiens meam comesses. 10 

XL 

PINXISTI Venerem, colis, Artemidore, Minervam : 
et miraris opus displicuisse tuum ? 

1 The point of the epigram is that the knight's qualifica- 
tion (400,000 sesterces) possessed by C. cannot serve for his 
brother also. 

8 Who, of the Twins, was the horseman : cf. vu. Ivii. 2. 

3 Your procedure amounts to saying "two sits," i.e. on 
the knight's horse. 

324 



BOOK V. XXXVIII-XL 

XXXVIII 

CALLIODORUS has who does not know it? a 
knight's estate, Sextus, but Calliodorus also has a 
brother. You, who say " Divide four hundred," go, 
halve a fig : on one horse do you think that two 
can sit ? 1 What have you to do with your brother, 
what with troublesome Pollux ? If you had had no 
Pollux, you would have been Castor. 2 Although you 
two are one, will you, Calliodorus, sit as two ? Get 
up ! You are guilty of a solecism, Calliodorus. 3 Or 
else copy the sons of Leda you can't sit with your 
brother sit alternately, 4 Calliodorus. 

XXXIX 

WHILE you were thirty times in the year sealing 
your last will, Charinus, I sent you cakes steeped 
with Hybla's thyme-fed honey. I am used up : pity 
me now, Charinus ; seal more seldom, or do once for 
all what your cough constantly suggests falsely. I 
have shaken out my boxes and my money-bag ; had 
I been richer than Croesus, yet I should now be 
poorer than Irus, 5 Charinus, had you so often eaten 
beans of mine. 6 

XL 

You who have painted Venus, Artemidorus, are a 
votary of Minerva ; 7 do you wonder that your work 
has not found favour ? 

4 Like Castor and Pollux, who lived alternately in Heaven 
and in the vShades : cf. i. xxxvi. 

5 The typical beggar : see Horn. Od. xvii. 

6 Though beans are cheap : cf. Juv. iii. 293. 

7 The tutelary goddess of art. Venus had defeated Minerva 
in the contest of beauty decided by Paris. 

325 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XLI 

SPADONE cum sis eviratior fluxo, 
et concubino mollior Celaenaeo, 
quern sectus ululat matris entheae Gallus, 
theatra loqueris et gradus et edicta 
trabeasque et Idus fibulasque censusque, 
et pumicata pauperes manu monstras. 
sedere in equitum liceat an tibi scamnis 
videbo, Didyme : non licet maritorum. 

XLII 

CALLIDUS efFracta nummos fur auferet area, 

prosternet patrios irapia flamma lares : 
debitor usuram pariter sortemque negabit, 

non reddet sterilis semina iacta seges : 
dispensatorem fallax spoliabit arnica, 

mercibus extructas obruet unda rates, 
extra fortunam est quidquid donatur amicis : 

quas dederis solas semper habebis opes. 

XLIII 

THAIS habet nigros, niveos Laecania dentes. 
quae ratio est ? emptos haec haljet, ilia suos. 

XLIV 

QUID factum est, rogo, quid repente factum, 
ad cenam mihi, Dento, quod vocanti 
(quis credat ?) quater ausus es negare ? 

1 Attis. 2 Cybele. 

3 Of July, when there was a procession of the knights 

326 



BOOK V. XLI-XLIV 

XLI 

ALTHOUGH you are more unmanned than a flaccid 
eunuch, and more effeminate than the Ganymede of 
Celaenae l whose name the emasculated priest of the 
soul-maddening Mother 2 howls, you talk of theatres, 
and rows of seats, and edicts, and gowns of purple 
stripe, and Ides, 3 and clasps, and estates, and with a 
pumice-smoothed hand point at poor men. Whether 
you should sit on the knights' benches I will consider, 
Didymus : you can't sit on those of husbands. 4 

XLII 

A CUNNING thief will break your money-box and 
carry off your coin, cruel fire will lay low your an- 
cestral home ; your debtor will repudiate interest 
alike and principal, your sterile crop will not return 
you the seed you have sown ; a false mistress will 
despoil your treasurer, the wave will overwhelm your 
ships stored with merchandise. Beyond Fortune's 
power is any gift made to your friends ; only wealth 
bestowed will you possess always. 

XLIII 

THAIS has black, Laecania snowy teeth. What is 
the reason ? One has those she purchased, the other 
her own. 

XLIV 

WHAT has happened, I ask, what has happened 
suddenly* that, when I asked you, Dento, to dinner, 
four times (who would believe it ?) you made bold 

(equilum transvectio) crowned with olive, and in their state 
robes (trabeae) : Dion. Hal. vi. 13 ; Val. Max. n. ii. 9. 
* Assigned seats in the theatre by Augustus. 

3 2 7 



sed nee respicis et fugis sequentem, 

quern thermis modo quaerere et theatris 5 

et conclavibus omnibus solebas. 

sic est, captus es unctiore mensa 

et maior rapuit canem culina. 

iam te, sed cito, cognitum et relictum 

cum fastidierit popina dives, 10 

antiquae venies ad ossa cenae. 

XLV 

DICIS formosam, dicis te, Bassa, puellam. 
istud quae non est dicere, Bassa, solet. 

XLVI 

13 ASIA dum nolo nisi quae luctantia carpsi 
et placet ira mihi plus tua quam facies, 

ut te saepe rogem, caedo, Diadumene, saepe : 
consequor hoc, ut me nee timeas nee ames. 

XLVII 

NUMQUAM se cenasse domi Philo iurat, et hoc est : 
non cenat, quotiens nemo vocavit eum. 

XLVIII 

QUID non cogit amor ? secuit nolente capillos 

Encolpos domino, non prohibente tamen. 
328 



BOOK V. XLIV-XI.VIII 

to refuse? Moreover, you don't even look back, 
but fly, when I follow you, from me whom but lately 
in warm baths, and in theatres, and in every dining- 
room you used to look for. So it is : you have 
been captured by a richer dinner, and a bigger 
kitchen has carried off the dog ! Presently and 
that soon when you are known and discarded, 
and the wealthy eating-house is sick of you, to the 
bones of the old dinner you will return. 



XLV 

You say, Bassa, that you are beautiful; you say 
that you are a girl. That is what she who is neither 
is wont to say, Bassa. 

XLVI 

KISSES I reject save those I have ravished from 
reluctance, and your anger pleases me more than 
your face ; so I often beat you, Diadumenus, to 
make myself solicit you often. I achieve this : you 
neither fear nor love me. 



XLVII 

PHILO swears he has never dined at home, and it 
is so. He doesn't dine at all whenever no one has 
invited him. 

XLVIII 

WHAT does not love compel ? Encolpos has shorn 
his locks against his master's will, yet not forbidden. 

329 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

permisit flevitque Pudens : sic cessit habenis 
audaci questus de Phaethonte pater ; 

talis raptus Hylas, talis deprensus Achilles 
deposuit gaudens, matre dolente, comas. 

sed tu ne propera (brevibus ne crede capillis) 
tardaque pro tanto munere, barba, veni. 



XLIX 

VIDISSEM modo forte cum sedentem 

solum te, Labiene, tres putavi. 

calvae me numerus tuae fefellit. 

sunt illinc tibi, sunt et hinc capilli 

quales vel puerum decere possunt : 5 

nudumst in medio caput nee ullus 

in longa pilus area notatur. 

hie error tibi profuit Decembri, 

turn cum prandia misit Imperator : 

cum panariolis tribus redisti. 10 

talem Geryonem fuisse credo. 

vites censeo porticum Philippi : 

si te viderit Hercules, peristi. 



CENO domi quotiens, nisi te, Charopine, vocavi, 
protinus ingentes sunt inimicitiae, 

1 E. had dedicated his long hair to Phoebus if his master 
Pudens became first centurion (primi pili) (see i. xxxi.), and 
now proceeds to fulfil the vow. 

2 Helios, the Sun, allowed Phaethon to drive his chariot. 

3 A beautiful youth drawn under the water by the ena- 
moured Nymphs. 

33 



BOOK V. XLVIII-L 

Pudens allowed it and wept : l in such wise did his 
sire 2 yield the reins, sighing at Phaethon's bold- 
ness ; so fair was ravished Hylas, 3 so fair discovered 
Achilles, 4 when amid his mother's tears with joy he 
laid aside his locks. Yet haste not thou, O beard 
trust not those shortened tresses 5 and spring slow 
in return for sacrifice so great ! 

XLIX 

WHEN, as it chanced, I saw you just now in your 
seat, I fancied your single self, Labienus, was three 
persons : my calculation of your bald pate came out 
wrong. You have on that side hairs, you have hairs 
on this, such as might grace even a boy ; and your 
head in the middle is bare, and no single shoot is 
noticed in its long expanse. This confusion was 
profitable to you in December, just when the Em- 
peror sent round lunches ; you went home with 
three baskets of bread. Geryon 6 was like you, I 
am sure. You should avoid in my opinion the 
Portico of Philippus; 7 if Hercules sees you, you 
are undone ! 



IF, as often as I dine at home, I have not invited 
you, Charopinus, immediately you become my deadly 

4 Who had been hidden by Thetis in woman's clothes to 
prevent him going to the Trojan war. An early instance of 
Pacificism ! 

8 Do not imagine him yet a man. 

8 A three-headed herdsman slain by Hercules. 

7 Where there was a Temple of Hercules and the Muses, 
containing a statue of Hercules. 

331 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

meque velis stricto medium transfigere ferro, 
si nostrum sine te scis caluisse focum. 

nee semel ergo mihi furtum fecisse licebit ? 
inprobius nihil est hac, Charopine, gula. 

desine iam nostram, precor, observare culinam, 
atque aliquando meus det tibi verba cocus. 



LI 

Hie, qui libellis praegravem gerit laevam, 
iiotariorum quern premit chorus levis, 
qui codicillis hinc et inde prolatis 
epistulisque commodat gravem voltum 
similis Catoni Tullioque Brutoque, 
exprimere, Rufe, fidiculae licet cogant, 
have Latinum, x a V non Ptest Graecum. 
si fingere istud me putas, salutemUs. 

LII 

QUAE mihi praestiteris memini semperque tenebo. 

cur igitur taceo, Postume ? tu loqueris. 
incipio quotieus alicui tua dona referre, 

protinus exclamat "Dixerat ipse mihi." 
non belle quaedam faciunt duo : sufficit unus 

huic operi : si vis ut loquar, ipse tace. 
crede mihi, quamvis ingentia, Postume, dona 

auctoris pereunt garrulitate sui. 



1 Perhaps containing notes taken in shorthand of forth- 
coming speeches. 

332 



BOOK V. L-MI 

enemy, and you would wish to run me through 
with a drawn sword if you discover that my kitchen 
fire has been aglow without you as guest. Cannot 
I then, not even once in a way, hoodwink you? 
Nothing is more insatiable, Charopinus, than this 
gluttony of yours. Cease, I pray, by now to watch my 
kitchen, and let my cook occasionally cheat you ! 

LI 

THAT fellow who has his left hand weighted with 
documents, round whom a smooth-cheeked band of 
shorthand-writers crowds, who, when note-books 1 and 
letters are offered to him on this side and on that, 
lends them a severe countenance, looking like a very 
Cato, and Tully, and Brutus ! that fellow cannot 
bring out, even though the fiddle-strings 2 forced 
him, a " How d'ye do ? " in Latin, a x a 'P e m Greek. 
If you think I am inventing that, let us greet him. 3 



LII 

YOUR bounty to me I remember and shall always 
keep in mind. Why, then, am I silent about it, 
Postumus ? You speak of it. As often as I begin 
to report to someone your presents, he at once ex- 
claims : " He himself had told me." These are 
things which two persons do not do nicely : one suf- 
fices for this work ; if you want me to speak, be you 
yourself silent. Trust me ; gifts, however great, Pos- 
tumus, lose their value by the chattering of the giver. 

2 A method of torture : Sen. de Ir. in. 3. 

3 An epigram on a pretentious and surly lawyer, possibly 
the Pontilianus of v. Ixvi. 

333 




COLCHIDA quid scribis, quid scribis, amice, Thyesten ? 

quo tibi vel Nioben, Basse, vel Andromachen ? 
materia est, mihi crede, tuis aptissiina chartis 

Deucalion vel, si non placet hie, Phaethon. 

LIV 

EXTEMPORALIS factus est tneus rhetor : 
Calpurnium non scripsit, et salutavit. 



LV 

Die mihi, quern portas, volucrum regina? "Tonantem." 
nulla manu quare fulmina gestat? " Amat." 

quo calet igne deus ? " Pueri." cur mitis aperto 
respicis ore lovem? "De Ganymede loquor." 



LVI 

GUI tradas, Lupe, filium magistro 
quaeris sollicitus diu rogasque. 
omnes grammaticosque rhetorasque 
devites moneo : nihil sit illi 
cum libris Ciceronis aut Maronis. 
famae Tutilium suae relinquat ; 



1 Medea. 

2 i.e. they should be drowned or burned : cf. a similar 
Greek epigram (Anth. Pal. xi. ccxiv.) which M. copies. 

3 cf. v. xxi. 

334 



BOOK V. LIII-LVI 

LIII 

WHY write of the Colchian dame/ why write, my 
friend, of Thyestes ? What does it avail you, Bassus, 
to write of Niobe or Andromache ? The fittest 
matter, believe me, for those sheets of yours is 
Deucalion, or if he doesn't please you Phaethon. 2 

LIV 

MY friend the rhetorician has become spontaneous. 
He did not write down "Calpurnius," and yet greeted 
him by name. 3 

LV 

TELL me, whom bearest thou, queen of birds ? 
"The Thunderer." Why carries he in his hand no 
thunderbolts? "He loves." With what flame burns 
the god ? " With love for a boy." Why lookest thou 
mildly back with open mouth towards Jove ? " I am 
speaking of Ganymede." 4 

LVI 

To what master should you entrust your son, Lupus ? 
This you have long been anxiously considering and 
asking me. All teachers of grammar and rhetoric 
I warn you to avoid ; let him have nothing to do 
with the works of Cicero or Maro; leave Tutilius 5 

4 A Phrygian youth carried off by the eagle to be Jove's 
cupbearer : cf. I. vi., an epigram referring to the masterpiece 
of Leochares, a Greek sculptor contemporary with Praxi- 
teles : cf. Plin. N.H. xxxiv. 19 (17). M. now probably 
alludes to some similar representation of Jupiter. 

5 An advocate and author of some note in the time of 
Augustus. 

335 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

si versus facit, abdices poetam. 

artes discere vult pecuniosas ? 

fac discat citharoedus aut choraules ; 

si duri puer ingeni videtur, 10 

praeconem facias vel architectuni. 

LVU 

CUM voco te dominum, noli tibi, Cinna, placere : 
saepe etiam servum sic resaluto tuum. 

LVIII 

CHAS te victurum, eras dicis, Postume, semper. 

die mihi, eras istud, Postume, quando venit ? 
quam longe eras istud, ubi est ? aut unde petendum r 

numquid apud Parthos Armeniosque latet ? 
iam eras istud habet Priami vel Nestoris annos. 

eras istud quanti, die mihi, possit emi ? 
eras vives ? hodie iam vivere, Postume, serum est : 

ille sapit quisquis, Postume, vixit heri. 

LIX 

QUOD lion argentum, quod non tibi mittimus aurum, 

hoc facimus causa, Stella diserte, tua. 
quisquis magna dedit, voluit sibi magna remitti ; 

fictilibus nostris exoneratus eris. 

1 r/. in. iv. 
33 6 



BOOK V. LVI-LIX 

to his own fame. If he make verses, disinherit the 
bard. Does he wish to learn money-making arts ? 
make him learn to be harper or flutist for the 
chorus ; 1 if the boy seem to be of dull intellect, 
make him an auctioneer or architect. 



LVII 

WHEN I call you "master" 2 don't pride yourselr, 
China. I often return even your slave's greeting so. 

LVIII 

" TO-MORROW you will live, to-morrow," you are 
always saying, Postumus. Tell me, when does that 
"morrow" of yours arrive, Postumus? How distant 
is that morrow ? where is it ? or in what quarter 
should we look for it ? Surely it does not lie hid 
among the Parthians and Armenians ? Already that 
morrow is as old as Priam or as Nestor. That morrow 
tell me for how much it can be bought ? To-morrow 
will you live ? To live to-day, Postumus, is already 
too late. He is wise, whoever he be, Postumus, 
who " lived " yesterday. 3 

LIX 

IN sending you no silver plate, no gold plate, I act 
in your interest, eloquent Stella. He who has given 
great presents has desired great presents in return : 
your burden will be lightened by my earthenware. 4 

2 Apparently a form of address to a person whose name 
had been forgotten. 

3 cf. i. xv. * cf. v. xviii. 9. 

337 

VOL. I. Z 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LX 

ADLATRES licet usque nos et usque 

et gannitibus inprobis lacessas, 

certum est hanc tibi pernegare famam, 

olim quam petis, in meis libellis 

qualiscumque legaris ut per orbem. 5 

nam te cur aliquis sciat fuisse ? 

ignotus pereas, miser, necesse est. 

non derunt tarn en hac in urbe forsan 

unus vel duo tresve quattuorve, 

pellem rodere qui velint caninam : 10 

nos hac a scabie tenemus ungues. 

LXI 

CRISPULUS iste quis est, uxori semper adhaeret 

qui, Mariane, tuae ? crispulus iste quis est ? 
nescio quid dominae teneram qui garrit in aurem 

et sellam cubito dexteriore premit ? 
per cuius digitos currit levis anulus omnis, 

crura gerit nullo qui violata pilo ? 
nil mihi respondes ? " Uxoris res agit " inquis 

" iste meae." sane certus et asper homo est, 
procuratorem voltu qui praeferat ipso : 

acrior hoc Chius non erit Aufidius. 10 

o quam dignus eras alapis, Mariane, Latini : 

te successurum credo ego Panniculo. 
res uxoris agit ? res ullas crispulus iste ? 

res non uxoris, res agit iste tuas. 

1 Alluding to the proverb "dog does not bite dog." AJ. 
says "I will not retort." See Erasm. Adag. s.v. Caninam 
pellem rodere. 

1 i.e. the aestivum aurum of Juv. i. 28. Roman fops wore 
the heavier hibernum aurum in winter. 

338 



BOOK V. LX-LXI 

LX 

BARK at me as you may for ever and ever, and 
assail me with your ceaseless snarlings, resolved am 
I to refuse you the fame you seek so long to be 
read of in whatever shape in my works throughout 
the world. For why should some one or other know 
you existed ? Unknown, you must perish, you miser- 
able fellow. Yet there may be found in this city 
perhaps one or two, or three or four, who are ready 
to gnaw a dog's hide. 1 I keep my nails from such 
an itch. 

LXI 

WHO is that curled spark who is always clinging 
to your wife's side, Marianus ? Who is that curled 
spark, he who whispers some trifle into the lady's 
tender ear, and leans on her chair with his right 
elbow, round each of whose fingers runs a light 2 
ring, who carries legs unmarred by any hair ? Do 
you make no reply ? "That individual does my wife's 
jobs," you say. To be sure ! he is a trusty and 
rugged fellow who flaunts factor in his very face : 
Chian Aufidius 3 will not be sharper than he. Oh, 
Marianus, how you deserve the buffets of Latinus ! 4 
You will be successor I fancy to Panniculus. He 
does your wife's jobs, does he ? Thnt curled spark 
do any ? That fellow doesn't do your wife's jobs : 
he does yours. 

8 Aufidius was a notorious libertine : Juv. ix. 25. 

4 Latinus and Panniculus were comic actors in mimes, like 
clown and pantaloon, the latter being the stupid character, 
who gets his ears boxed by Latinus : cf. n. Ixxii. 4. M. 
means that Marianus is a fool. 

339 
z 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 



IURE tuo nostris maneas licet, hospes, in hortis, 

si potes in nudo ponere membra solo, 
aut si portatur tecum tibi magna supellex : 

nam mea iam digitum sustulit hospitibus. 
nulla tegit fractos nee inanis culcita lectos, 5 

putris et abrupta fascia reste iacet. 
sit tamen hospitium nobis commune duobus : 

emi hortos ; plus est : instrue tu ; minus est. 

LXIII 

" QUID sentis " inquis " de nostris, Marce, libellis? " 
sic me sollicitus, Pontice, saepe rogas. 

admiror, stupeo : nihil est perfectius illis, 
ipse tuo cedet Regulus ingenio. 

" Hoc sentis ? " inquis " faciat tibi sic bene Caesar, 5 
sic Capitolinus luppiter." immo tibi. 

LXIV 

SEXTANTES, Calliste, duos infunde Falerni, 
tu super aestivas, Alcime, solve nives, 

pinguescat nimio madidus mihi crinis amomo 
lassenturque rosis tempora sutilibus. 

tarn vicina iubent nos vivere Mausolea, 5 

cum doceant ipsos posse perire deos. 

1 i.e. asked for mercy, like a gladiator : cf. Lib. Spect. xxix. 5. 

2 Ponticus' blessing being based on the truth of M.'s 
opinions was an empty one. M. with ironical politeness 
returns the blessing : cf. vm. Ixxvi. 

34 



BOOK V. LXII-LXIV 

LXII 

OF your own right you may remain, my guest, in 
my gardens if you can lay your limbs on the bare 
ground, or if a pile of furniture is brought with you ; 
for mine has already held up its finger J to my guests. 
No cushion not even one without stuffing covers 
my broken couches, and the rotten girth lies, its band 
burst, upon the floor. Nevertheless, let hospitality 
be divided between us two ; I bought the gardens : 
that is the larger share; do you furnish them: that 
is the smaller. 

LXIII 

You say " what is your opinion, Marcus, of my 
little books ? " Such is the question, Ponticus, you 
often ask me anxiously. I admire them ; I am over- 
powered ; nothing is more perfect than they are ; 
Regulus himself will give place to you in genius. 
"Is this your opinion?" you say: "so may Caesar 
bless you, so may Capitoline Jove." Rather be that 
blessing yours. 2 

LXIV 

POUR in, Callistus, two double-measures 3 of 
Falernian ; do thou, Alcimus, dissolve upon them 
the summer's snow ; let my dripping locks be rich 
with over-bounteous balm, and my temples droop 
beneath the knitted roses. Yon tombs, 4 so nigh, 
bid us enjoy life, forasmuch as they teach us that 
the very gods can die. 

3 Four cyathi, the sextans being equal to two cyathi. 

4 The Mausoleum of Augustus (described by Strabo, v. iii.), 
which M. could see from his house on the Quirinal : cf. n. 
lix. M. probably imagines himself drinking in the Mica. 

341 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXV 

ASTRA polumque dedit, quamvis obstante noverca, 

Alcidae Nemees terror et Areas aper 
et castigatum Libycae ceroma palaestrae 

et gravis in Siculo pulvere fusus Eryx, 
silvarumque tremor, tacita qui fraude solebat 5 

ducere non rectas Cacus in antra boves. 
ista tuae, Caesar, quota pars spectatur harenae ! 

dat maiora novus proelia mane dies, 
quot graviora cadunt Nemeaeo pondera monstro ! 

quot tua Maenalios conlocat hasta sues ! 10 

reddatur si pugna triplex pastoris Hiberi, 

est tibi qui possit vincere Geryonem. 
saepe licet Graiae numeretur belua Lernae, 

inproba Niliacis quid facit Hydra feris ? 
pro meritis caelum tantis, Auguste, dederunt 15 

Alcidae cito di sed tibi sero dabunt. 

LXVI 

SAEPE salutatus numquam prior ipse salutas. 
sic erit ; aeternum, Pontiliane, vale. 

LXVII 

HIBERNOS peterent solito cum more recessus 
Atthides, in nidis una remansit avis. 

1 Hercules, son of Jupiter, who, having accomplished his 
labours, was deified. 

1 The Nemean lion, afterwards the Constellation Leo. 
3 i.e. by their tails. * cf. v. xlix. 11. 

342 



BOOK V. LXV-LXVII 

LXV 

THE starry heaven, albeit his stepmother said nay, 
was granted to Alcides l by his slaughter of Nemea's 
dread beast, 2 and by Arcadia's boar, and by the 
chastisement of the oiled wrestler of Libyan lists, 
and by the laying low of huge Eryx in Sicilian 
dust, and of Cacus, the terror of the woods, wont 
with secret guile to drag into his den the back- 
turned 3 oxen. How small a part are such things of 
the sights of thy Arena, Caesar ! Each new day 
gives us at morn conflicts more great. How many 
massive beasts, heavier than Nemea's monster, are 
laid low ! How many Maenalian boars does thy 
spear expose in death ! Were the threefold fight 4 
with Iberia's shepherd fought anew, one 5 thou hast 
that can vanquish Geryon. Though the heads of 
Grecian Lerna's beast were counted oft, 6 what is the 
prodigious hydra to the brutes of Nile ? Heaven 
for worth so great, Augustus, the gods quickly 
granted to Alcides; but to thee they shall grant 
it late. 7 

LXVI 

THOUGH often greeted, you are never the first to 
greet. So it shall be : Pontilianus, " farewell for 
ever." 8 

LXVII 

WHEN the Attic birds 9 in wonted wise sought their 
winter retreats, one bird remained within the nest. 

5 Carpophorus, a famous bestiarius : cf. Lib. Spect. xv. , 
xxiii., and xxvii 

6 When one of the hydra's heads was cut off by Hercules, 
two grew in its place. 

7 i.e. that you may live long to benefit earth. 

8 The last salutation to the dead 9 Swallows. 

343 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

deprendere nefas ad tempera verna reversae 

et profugam volucres diripuere suae. 
sero dedit poenas : discerpi noxia mater J3 

debuerat, sed tune cum laceravit Ityn. 

LXVIII 

ARCTOA de gente comam tibi, Lesbia, misi, 
ut scires quanto sit tua flava magis. 

LXIX 

ANTONI Phario nihil obiecture Pothino 

et levius tabula quam Cicerone nocens, 
quid gladium demens Romana stringis in ora ? 

hoc admisisset nee Catilina nefas. 
impius infando miles corrumpitur auro, 5 

et tantis opibus vox tacet una tibi. 
quid prosunt sacrae pretiosa silentia linguae ? 

incipient omnes pro Cicerone loqui. 

LXX 

INFUSUM sibi nuper a patrono 

plenum, Maxime, centiens Syriscus 

in sellariolis vagus popinis 

circa balnea quattuor peregit. 

o quanta est gula, centiens cornesse ! 5 

quanto maior adhue, nee accubare ! 

1 Progne slew and served up her son Itys to his father 
Tereus. She was turned into a swallow. 

2 The eunuch of Ptolemy, king of Egypt, who slew Pompey. 

344 



BOOK V. LXVII-LXX 

This crime they detected when they returned in the 
spring time, and her own mates tore asunder the 
deserter. Late was the penalty she paid : the guilty 
mother had deserved to be rent in twain, but it was 
when she mangled Itys. 1 

LXVIII 

FROM a Northern race I sent you, Lesbia, a lock of 
hair, that you might know how much more golden is 
your own. 

LXIX 

ANTONY, who canst ne'er reproach Pharian Pothi- 
nus, 2 and less guilty for thy list of doom than for 
Cicero's death, why, madman, drawest thou the 
sword against the lips 3 of Rome? A crime like 
this not even Catiline had wrought. An impious 
soldier is bribed with gold accursed, and a price so 
great bought thee the stillness of that one voice ! 
What avails the dear-bought silence of that hal- 
lowed tongue ? All men shall begin to speak for 
Cicero. 4 

LXX 

THE fortune showered upon him lately by his 
patron a full ten millions, Maximus Syriscus, 
gadding about, got through on tavern stools 6 about 
the four baths. Oh, what stupendous gluttony, to 
gorge ten millions ! And still more stupendous, not 
even to recline at table ! 

3 The mouthpiece of Roman eloquence. 

4 cf. in. Ixvi. 

5 Much like our quick-lunch counters. 

345 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 



LXXI 

UMIDA qua gelidas summittit Trebula valles 
et viridis Cancri mensibus alget ager, 

rura Cleonaeo numquam temerata Leone 
et domus Aeolio semper arnica Noto 

te, Faustine, vocant : longas his exige messes 
collibus ; hibernum iam tibi Tibur erit. 

LXXII 

Qui potuit Bacchi matrem dixisse Tonantem, 
ille potest Semelen dicere, Rufe, patrem. 

LXXIII 

NON donem tibi cur meos libellos 
oranti totiens et exigenti 
miraris, Theodore ? magna causa est : 
dones tu mihi ne tuos libellos. 



LXXIV 

POMPEIOS iuvenes Asia atque Europa, sed ipsum 
terra tegit Libyes, si tamen ulla tegit. 

quid mirum toto si spargitur orbe ? iacere 
uno non poterat tanta ruina loco. 

LXXV 

QUAE legis causa nupsit tibi Laelia, Quinte, 
uxorem potes hanc dicere legitimam. 

1 The Constellation of Leo. 

2 A summer resort. It will seem, in comparison, warm 
enough to be a winter resort. 

3 Bacchus was called bimater because, on the death of his 

346 



BOOK V. LXXI-LXXV 

LXXI 

WHERE moist Trebula stands above the cool 
vales, and the green field is chill in the months of the 
Crab, a farm by Cleonae's lion l never spoilt, and a 
house ever welcoming the Aeolian south-west wind, 
summon you, Faustinus ; on these hills spend your 
long harvest-time : presently Tibur 2 will seem to 
you a winter place. 

LXXII 

HE who could call the Thunderer the mother 01 
Bacchus, 3 can, Rufus, call Semele his father. 

LXXIII 

WHY don't I give you my works, although so often 
you beseech me for them, and press me ? Do you 
wonder, Theodorus ? There is great reason : that 
you may not give me your works. 

LXXIV 

POMPEY'S sons Asia and Europe entomb, to himself 
the land of Libya gives if grave he has a grave. 
What wonder if o'er the whole world 'tis scattered ? 
In one spot so vast a ruin could not lie. 

LXXV 

LAELIA, who married you, Quintus, to satisfy the 
law, 4 you may call your " lawful " spouse. 

mother Semele, Jupiter placed him in his thigh till his birth 
was due : cf. Lib. Sped. xii. 7. 

4 The Lex Julia against adultery, revived by Domitian 
cf. vi. vii. 

347 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXVI 

PKOFECIT poto Mithridates saepe veneno 

toxica ne possent saeva nocere sibi. 
tu quoque cavisti cenando tarn male semper 

ne possis umquam, Cinna, perire fame. 

LXXVII 

NARRATUR belle quidam dixisse, Marulle, 
qui te ferre oleum dixit in auricula. 

LXXVIII 

Si tristi domicenio laboras, 

Torani, potes esurire mecum. 

non derunt tibi, si soles irpottivuv, 

viles Cappadocae gravesque porri, 

divisis cybium latebit ovis. 5 

ponetur digitis tenendus ustis 

nigra coliculus virens patella, 

algentem modo qui reliquit hortum. 

et pultem niveam premens botellus, 

et pallens faba cum rubente lardo. 10 

mensae munera si voles secundae, 

marcentes tibi porrigentur uvae 

et nomen pira quae ferunt Syrorum, 

et quas docta Neapolis creavit, 

lento castaneae vapore tostae : 15 

vinum tu facies bonum bibendo. 

post haec omnia forte si movebit 

Bacchus quam solet esuritionem, 

1 You listen to great men with an ear as inclined as if you 
carried oil in it. Said "of flatterers, who say pleasant 
rather than salutary things": Erasm. Adag. s.v. Oleum in 
auricula ferre. 

348 



BOOK V. LXXVI-LXXVIII 

LXXVI 

MITHRIDATES, by often drinking poison, achieved 
protection against deadly drugs. You too, Cinna, 
have taken care, by dining so badly always, against 
ever perishing of hunger. 

LXXVII 

A CERTAIN person is said to have made this neat 
remark, Marullus : he remarked that you carried oil 
in your ear. 1 

LXXVIII 

IF you are troubled by the prospect of a cheerless 
dinner at home, Toranius, you may fare modestly 
with me. You will not lack, if you are accustomed to 
an appetizer, 2 cheap Cappadocian lettuces and strong- 
smelling leeks ; a piece of tunny will lie hid in sliced 
eggs. There will be served to be handled with 
scorched fingers on a black-ware dish light green 
broccoli, which has just left the cool garden, and a 
sausage lying on white pease-pudding, and pale beans 
with ruddy bacon. If you wish for what a dessert 
can give, grapes past their prime shall be offered you, 
and pears that bear the name of Syrian, and chest- 
nuts which learned Neapolis has grown, roasted in 
a slow heat ; the wine you will make good by drink- 
ing it. 3 After all this spread, if as may be Bac- 
chus rouses a usual appetite, choice olives which 

2 Here begins the promulsis or gustus, consisting of a 
draught of mulsum together with appetizers, such as lettuces, 
etc. : cf. xiii. xiv. The dinner proper begins at 1. 6. 

3 This seems to have been a common formula of politeness : 
Petr. xxxix. and xlviii. " Your drinking will be sufficient 
to recommend the wine." 

349 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

succurrent tibi nobiles olivae, 

Piceni modo quas tulere rami, 20 

et fervens cicer et tepens lupinus. 

parva est cenula (quis potest negare r) 

sed finges nihil audiesve fictum 

et voltu placidus tuo recumbes ; 

nee crassum dominus leget volumen, 25 

nee de Gadibus inprobis puellae 

vibrabunt sine fine prurientes 

lascivos docili tremore lumbos ; 

sed quod nee grave sit nee infacetum, 

parvi tibia Condyli sonabit. 30 

haec est cenula. Claudiam sequeris. 

quam nobis cupis esse tu priorem ? 

LXXIX 

UNDECIES una surrexti, Zoile, cena, 

et mutata tibi est synthesis undecies, 
sudor inhaereret madida ne veste retentus 

et laxam tenuis laederet aura cutem. 
quare ego non sudo, qui tecum, Zoile, ceno ? 5 

frigus enim magnum synthesis una facit. 

LXXX 

NON totam mihi, si vacabis, horam 

dones et licet inputes, Severe, 

dum nostras legis exigisque nugas. 

" Durum est perdere ferias " : rogamus 

iacturam patiaris hanc ferasque. 5 

1 M. keeps a surprise for the end. But the text, and 
meaning, is obscure. 

35 



BOOK V. LXXVIII-I.XXX 

Picenian branches have but lately borne will relieve 
you, and hot chick-peas and warm lupines. My poor 
dinner is a small one who can deny it ? but you 
will say no word insincere nor hear one, and, wearing 
your natural face, will recline at ease ; nor will your 
host read a bulky volume, nor will girls from wanton 
Gades with endless prurience swing lascivious loins 
in practised writhings ; but the pipe of little Con- 
dylus shall play something not too solemn nor 
unlively. Such is your little dinner. You will 
follow Claudia. What girl do you desire to meet 
before me ? l 

LXXIX 

ELEVEN times during one dinner you got up, Zoilus, 
and your evening dress was changed eleven times, 
that sweat, kept in by your moist garb, should 
not cling to you, and a searching draught affect your 
opened pores. How is it that I don't sweat, who 
dine with you, Zoilus ? Why, a single evening suit 
produces great coolness ! 2 



LXXX 

LESS than an hour, if you are at leisure, you may 
give me, and charge to my account, Severus, while 
you read and criticise my trifles. " 'Tis hard to spoil 
one's holiday." Yet I ask you to endure and put up 

2 Having no change, I cannot pretend perspiration as an 
excuse for showing off. 

351 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

quod si legeris ista cum diserto 

(sed numquid sumus inprobi ?) Secundo, 

plus multo tibi debiturus hie est 

quam debet domino suo libellus. 

nam securus erit, nee inquieta 10 

lassi marmora Sisyphi videbit, 

quern censoria cum meo Severe 

docti lima momoi'derit Secundi. 

LXXXI 

SEMPER pauper eris, si pauper es, Aemiliane. 
dantur opes nullis nunc nisi divitibus. 

LXXXII 

QUID promittebas mihi milia, Gaure, ducenta, 
si dare non poteras milia, Gaure, decem ? 

an potes et non vis ? rogo, non est turpius istud ? 
i, tibi dispereas, Gaure : pusillus homo es. 

LXXXIII 

INSEQUERIS, fugio ; fugis, insequor ; haec mihi mens est : 
velle tuum nolo, Dindyme, nolle volo. 

LXXXIV 

IAM tristis nucibus puer relictis 

clamoso revocatur a magistro, 

et blando male proditus fritillo, 

arcana modo raptus e popina, 

aedilem rogat udus aleator. 5 



1 i.e. regard its labour wasted. 

2 cf. vui. xix. 3 Playthings. 



352 



BOOK V. LXXX-LXXXIV 

with this loss. If you read them am I too pre- 
sumptuous ? along with eloquent Secundus, this 
little book is likely to owe you much more than 
it owes its author. For it will be free from anxiety, 
nor will it look upon the restless stone of weary 
Sisyphus, 1 when the censorial file of the learned 
Secundus, aided by my Severus, has scored it. 

LXXXI 

. You will always be poor, if you are poor, Aemili- 
anus. Wealth is given to-day to none save the rich. 2 

LXXXII 

WHY were you promising me, Gaurus, two hundred 
thousand if you, Gaurus, could not give me ten 
thousand ? Can you and won't you ? I ask you is 
not that more disgraceful ? Go to the devil your 
own way, Gaurus : you are a paltry fellow. 

LXXXIII 

You pursue me, I fly ; you fly, I follow. Such is 
my mind ; your willingness I reject, Dindymus, your 
coyness I prize. 

LXXXIV 

Now the boy, sad to desert his nuts, 3 is recalled 
to school by his clamorous master; and, ill-betrayed 
by the sound of his fascinating dice-box, and just 
.dragged out of the secluded cook-shop, the boozy 
gambler is begging for mercy of the Aedile. 4 The 

4 Who punished gambling except during the Saturnalia : 
cf. iv. xiv. 7-9 ; xiv. i. 3. 

353 

VOL. I. A A 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

Saturnalia transiere tota, 

nee munuscula parva nee minora 

misisti mihi, Galla, quam solebas. 

sane sic abeat meus December. 

scis certe, puto, vestra iam venire 10 

Saturnalia, Martias Kalendas ; 

tune reddam tibi, Galla, quod dedisti. 



354 



BOOK V. LXXXIV 

Saturnalia are all over, yet you, Galla, have not 
sent me any small presents, not even any smaller 
than usual. By all means let my December so depart; 
you know at any rate, I fancy, that your Saturnalia 
are coming presently, the Kalends of March ; l then 
I will return you, Galla, what you gave. 

1 Presents were made to women at the Matronalia on 
March 1. 



355 



BOOK VI 



LIBER SEXTUS 



SEXTUS mittitur hie tibi libellus, 

in primis mihi care Martialis : 

quern si terseris aure diligenti, 

audebit minus anxius tremensque 

magnas Caesaris in manus venire. 5 

II 

Lusus erat sacrae conubia fallere taedae, 

lusus et inmeritos exsecuisse mares, 
utraque tu prohibes, Caesar, populisque f'uturis 

succurris, nasci quod sine fraude iubes. 
nee spado iam nee moechus erit te praeside quisquam : 

at prius (o mores !) et spado moechus erat. 6 



III 

NASCERE Dardanio promissum nomen lulo, 
vera deum suboles ; nascere, magne puer, 

cui pater aeternas post saecula tradat habenas, 
quique regas orbem cum seniore senex. 

ipsa tibi niveo trahet aurea pollice fila 5 

et totam Phrixi lulia nebit ovem. 

1 See notes to v. Ixxv. and n. Ix. 
* i.e. to the Romans. 
: Niece of Domitian, deified after her death. She shall 

358 



BOOK VI 



THIS, my sixth book, is sent to you, Martial, dear 
to me above all men. If you, with a critic's careful 
ear, will emend it, it will venture with less anxiety 
and fear to pass into Caesar's mighty hands. 



II 

'TWAS pastime once to betray wedlock with its 
hallowed torch, and pastime to mutilate unoffending 
males. 1 Both thou forbiddest, Caesar, and thou suc- 
courest generations yet to come, in that thou biddest 
births to be without dishonour. No man shall now 
be eunuch or adulterer while thou art governor ; but 
aforetime (shame on our morals !) even a eunuch was 
adulterer. 

Ill 

BE born, thou name promised to Dardan lulus,' 2 
true scion of the gods ; be born, illustrious boy, that 
thy sire, after long years have passed, may yield to 
thee everlasting reins of empire, and thou mayst 
sway the world in old age with one more aged still. 
Julia 3 with her own snow-white finger shall draw 
thy golden threads, and spin for them all the fleece 
of Phryxus' ewe. 

watch over the destiny of Domitian's expected child instead 
of the Fates, and spin his life's threads in gold. 

359 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

IV 

CENSOR maxime principumque princeps, 
cum tot iam tibi debeat triumphos, 
tot nascentia templa, tot renata, 
tot spectacula, tot deos, tot urbes, 
plus debet tibi Roma quod pudica est. 



RUSTICA mercatus multis sum praedia nummis : 
mutua des centum, Caeciliane, rogo. 

nil mihi respondes ? taciturn te dicere credo 
"Non reddes " : ideo, Caeciliane, rogo. 

VI 

COMOEDI tres sunt, sed amat tua Paula, Luperce, 
quattuor : et K<a<f>ov Paula irpocrwirov amat. 

VII 

IULIA lex populis ex quo, Faustine, renata est 
atque intrare domos iussa Pudicitia est, 

aut minus aut certe non plus tricesima lux est, 
et nubit decimo iam Telesilla viro. 

quae nubit totiens, non nubit : adultera lege est. 
offendor moecha simpliciore minus. 



VIII 

PRAETORES duo, quattuor tribuni, 
septem causidici, decem poetae 
cuiusdam modo nuptias petebant 

360 



BOOK VI. iv-vm 



IV 

GREATEST of censors and Prince of Princes, albeit 
she already owes thee so many triumphs, so many 
temples rising, so many renewed, so many spectacles, 
so many gods, so many cities yet more Rome owes 
thee, in that she is chaste. 



I HAVE bought a country property at a tall price ; 
I ask you, Caecilianus, to lend me a hundred 
thousand sesterces. You make me no answer? I 
fancy you say to yourself: "You won't repay them." 
That is why, Caecilianus, I ask. 

VI 

THERE are three actors in Comedy, but your Paula, 
Lupercus, loves four. Paula loves a " walker-on " 
as well. 

VII 

SINCE the Julian law, Faustinus, was re-enacted 
for the peoples, and Chastity was commanded to 
enter our homes, 'tis the thirtieth day perhaps less, 
at least no more and Telesilla is now marrying her 
tenth husband. She who marries so often does not 
marry ; she is adulteress by form of law ; l by a more 
straightforward prostitute I am offended less. 

VIII 

Two pi-aetors, four tribunes, seven lawyers, ten 
poets, lately sued a certain old man for the hand of 
1 cf. V. Ixxv. ; VI. xxii. 

361 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

a quodam sene. non moi'atus ille 

praeconi dedit Eulogo puellam. 5 

die, numquid fatue, Severe, fecit ? 

IX 

IN Pompeiano dormis, Laevine, theatre : 
et quereris si te suscitat Oceanus ? 

X 

PAUCA lovem nuper cum milia forte rogarem, 

"Ille dabit " dixit " qui mihi templa dedit." 
templa quidem dedit ille lovi sed milia nobis 

nulla dedit : pudet, a, pauca rogasse lovem. 
at quam non tetricus, quam nulla nubilus ira, 5 

quam placido nostras legerat ore preces ! 
talis supplicibus tribuit diademata Dacis 

et Capitolinas itque reditque vias. 
die precor, o nostri die conscia virgo Tonantis, 

si negat hoc vultu, quo solet ergo dare ? 10 

sic ego : sic breviter posita mihi Gorgone Pallas : 

"Quae nondum data sunt, stulte, negata putas ? " 

XI 

QUOD non sit Pylades hoc tempore, non sit Orestes 
miraris ? Pylades, Marce, bibebat idem, 



1 Auctioneers were wealthy: cf. v. Ivi. Eulogus ("the 
man of fair speech") is an invented name. 

362 



BOOK VI. vm-xi 

a certain maid. Without hesitation, he gave the 
girl to Eulogus the auctioneer. 1 Tell me, you don't 
thinly he acted foolishly, Severus? 

IX 

Do you go to sleep, Laevinus, in Pompey's theatre, 
and grumble if Oceanus 2 rouse you ? 



X 

WHEN for some poor thousands, as it chanced, I 
was praying Jupiter, " He will give them," he said, 
"who gave me temples." Temples, 'tis true, he 
gave to Jupiter, but to me he gave no thousands ; 
alas ! ashamed am I to have asked so few of Jove ! ' 6 
Yet how little severe was he, how unclouded by 
anger ! With a look how calm had he read my 
petition ! Such his guise when he bestows diadems 
on suppliant Dacians, and goes and returns along 
Capitoline ways. 4 Tell me, I pray, tell me, thou 
Maid, our Thunderer's confidant, if with such a face 
he denies, with what is he wont to give ? Thus I : 
so briefly Pallas, laying aside her shield, answered 
me : " That which has not yet been given, thinkest 
thou, O foolish one, has been refused ? " 



XI 

Do you wonder that to-day there is no Pylades, 
that there is no Orestes ? Pylades, Marcus, drank 

a See note to v. xxiii. "Rouse" is intentionally am- 
biguous. 

3 Domitian. M. regrets having asked so little of one so 
great : cf, xi, Ixviii. 4 In triumph. 

363 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

nee melior panis turdusve dabatur Orestae, 

sed par atque eadem cena duobus erat. 
tu Lucrina voras, me pascit aquosa peloris : 5 

non minus ingenua est et mihi, Marce, gula. 
te Cadmea Tyros, me pinguis Gallia vestit : 

vis te purpureum, Marce, sagatus amem ? 
ut praestem Pyladen, aliquis mihi praestet Oresten. 

hoc non fit verbis, Marce : ut ameris, ama. 10 



XII 

IURAT capillos esse, quos emit, suos 
Fabulla : numquid ergo, Paule, peierat ? 

XIII 

Quis te Phidiaco formatam, lulia, caelo, 

vel quis Palladiae non putet artis opus ? 
Candida non tacita respondet imagine lygdos 

et placido fulget vivus in ore decor. 1 
ludit Acidalio, sed non manus aspera, nodo, 5 

quern rapuit collo, parve Cupido, tuo. 
ut Martis revocetur amor summique Tonantis, 

a te luno petat ceston et ipsa Venus. 

1 liquor (quick blood) y. 

1 The epigram is on a statue of Julia, the deified niece 
of Domitian, along with Venus and Cupid : cf. vi. iii, 

3 6 4 



BOOK VI. XI-XIH 

the same wine as Orestes, and no better bread or 
field-fare was given to Orestes ; but equal and the 
same was the dinner of the two. You gorge Lucrine 
oysters, watery mussels from Pelorus feed me ; yet 
my palate too, Marcus, is that of a gentleman. 
Cadmean Tyre clothes you, Gaul with her greasy 
wool me : would you have me, Marcus, in a coarse 
wrapper love you in purple ? That I may prove 
myself a Pylades, let someone prove himself to me 
an Orestes. That does not come about by talk, 
Marcus : by love win love. 



XII 

FABULLA swears that the hair she buys is hers. 
Does she therefore swear falsely, Paulus? 



XIII 

WHO would not think, Julia, 1 that thou wert shaped 
by the chisel of Phidias ? or who that thou wert not 
the work of Pallas' 2 skill ? The white Lygdian 3 
marble answers me with its speaking likeness, and 
a live beauty glows in the placid face. Her hand 
with no rough touch plays with the Acidalian girdle 4 
which it has snatched, small Cupid, from thy neck. 
To win back the love of Mars and of the imperial 
Thunderer, from thee let Juno ask for thy cestos, 
and Venus herself too. 

1 The goddess. 

:! Parian marble from the Cyclades. 

4 The girdle or ceattis of Venus, which inspired love. 

365 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XIV 

VERSUS scribere posse te disertos 
adfirmas, Laberi : quid ergo non vis ? 
versus scribere qui potest disertos, 
f non scribatf , Laberi : virum putabo. 

XV 

DUM Phaethontea formica vagatur in umbra, 

inplicuit tenuem sucina gutta feram. 
sic modo quae fuerat vita contempta manente, 

funeribus facta est nunc pretiosa suis. 

XVI 

Tu qui pene viros terres et falce cinaedos, 

iugera sepositi pauca tuere soli, 
sic tua non intrent vetuli pomaria fures 

sed puer et longis pulchra puella comis. 

XVII 

CINNAM, Cinname, te iubes vocari. 
non est hie, rogo, Cinna, barbarismus ? 
tu si Furius ante dictus esses, 
Fur ista ratione dicereris. 

XVIII 

SANCTA Salonini terris requiescit Hiberis, 
qua melior Stygias non videt umbra domos. 

1 I render Schneidewin's conjecture c,onscribat, which is 
accepted by Friedlander. 
1 cf. iv. xxxii. and lix. 

366 



BOOK VI. xiv-xvm 

XIV 

You affirm, Laberius, that you can write elegant 
verses : why, then, are you unwilling ? He who can 
write elegant verses should write them down, 1 La- 
berius : then I shall think him a hero. 



XV 

WHILE an ant was roaming in the poplar shade a 
gummy drop enfolded the tiny insect. Thus, despised 
but now while life remained, it has become to-day 
precious by its death. 2 

XVI 

THOU who with thy appurtenance scarest men, 
and, with thy sickle, rascals, guard these few acres 
of secluded ground. So may no hoary thieves enter 
thy orchard ; only a boy or a fair girl with flowing 
locks ! 

XVII 

CiNNAMus, 3 you bid us address you as Cinna. Is 
not this, I ask, Cinna, a barbarism ? If you had been 
called Furius before, you would, on that principle, 
be called Fur. 4 

XVIII 

THE holy shade of Saloninus sleeps in Iberia's 
land, than whom no nobler shade views the abodes 

3 Probably a freedman who wished to adopt a genuine 
Roman name : cf. vii. Ixiv. 
A thief. 

367 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

sed lugere nefas : nam qui te, Prisce, reliquit, 
vivit qua voluit vivere parte magis. 



XIX 

NON de vi neque caede nee veneno, 
sed lis est mihi de tribus capellis : 
vicini queror has abesse furto. 
hoc iudex sibi postulat probari : 
tu Cannas Mithridaticumque bellum 
et periuria Punici furoris 
et Sullas Mariosque Muciosque 
magna voce sonas manuque tota. 
iam die, Postume, de tribus capellis. 



XX 

MUTUA te centum sestertia, Phoebe, rogavi, 
cum mihi dixisses "Exigis ergo nihil ? " 

inquiris, dubitas, cunctaris meque diebus 

teque decem crucias : iam rogo, Phoebe, nega. 



XXI 

PERPETUAM Stellae dum iungit lanthida vati 
laeta Venus dixit " Plus dare non potui." 

haec coram domina ; sed nequius illud in aure : 
" Tu ne quid pecces, exitiose, vide. 

saepe ego lascivom Martem furibunda cecidi, 
legitimos esset cum vagus ante toros. 

1 cf. the Pythagorean saying q>i\wv aia^ara. pfv 5i5o 
fila. 

368 



BOOK VI. xvm-xxt 

of Styx. But grief is guilt ; for he who has left 
thee, Priscus, behind him yet lives in that half 
wherein he wished to live. 1 



XIX 

MY action is not one for assault, or wounding, or 
poisoning : it concerns my three she-goats ; I com- 
plain that they are lost by my neighbour's theft ; 
this is the fact which the judge prescribes to be 
proved to him. You, with a mighty voice and every 
gesture you know, make the court ring with Cannae, 
and the Mithridatic war, and insensate Punic per- 
juries, and Sullas, and Mariuses, and Muciuses. Now 
mention, Postumus, my three she-goats. 2 

XX 

1 ASKED you, Phoebus, for a hundred thousand ses- 
terces on loan, seeing that you had said to me, " Do 
you then beg for nothing? " You enquire, hesitate, 
delay, and for ten days you torture both yourself and 
me. I now ask you, Phoebus, to say "No." 

XXI 

WHILE she was uniting lanthis to Stella the poet 
in lasting bonds, Venus joyfully said, " More I could 
not give." This was in the presence of the bride, 
but her word in his ear was naughtier. " See that 
you make no slip, you rogue ! Oft in my fury have 
I smitten wanton Mars when not then my lawful 
spouse he strayed from me. But, now he is my 

2 Copied from a Greek epigram of the age of Nero : Anth. 
Pal. xi. cxli. 

369 
VOL. I. B B 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

sed postquam meus est, nulla me paelice laesit : 
tarn frugi luno vellet habere virum." 

dixit et arcauo percussit pectora loro. 

plaga iuvat : sed tu iam, dea, caede duos. 

XXII 

QUOD iiubis, Proculina, concubino 

et, moechum modo, nunc facis maritum, 

ne lex lulia te notare possit, 

non nubis, Proculina, sed fateris. 

XXIII 

STARE iubes nostrum semper tibi, Lesbia, penem : 
crede mihi, non est mentula quod digitus. 

tu licet et manibus blandis et vocibus instes, 
te contra facies imperiosa tua est. 

XXIV 

NIL lascivius est Charisiano : 
Saturnalibus ainbulat togatus. 

XXV 



MARCELLINE, boni suboles sincera parentis, 
horrida Parrhasio quern tegit Ursa iugo, 

ille vetus pro te patriusque quid optet amicus, 
accipe et haec memori pectore vota tene, 



1 cf. i. Ixxiv. and vi. vii. 

2 When the wearing of the toga was unusual. Perhaps 

37 



BOOK VI. xxi-xxv 

own, he has wounded me by no paramour ; Juno 
would wish to possess so virtuous a spouse." She 
spake, and struck his breast with her mystic lash. 
The blow aids him ; but do thou, goddess, now 
smite two. 

XXII 

IN that you wed your paramour, Proculina, and 
make him, but now your leman, your husband, to 
avoid the brand of the Julian law, you are not 
wedding, Proculina, but confessing. 1 



XXIII 

You bid me, Lesbia, to be always prepared to 
serve you ; believe me, one's faculties are not all 
equally at hand. You may urge me with toyings 
and wheedling words, but your face is imperious to 
defeat you. 

XXIV 

CHARISIANUS is rakishness itself: he walks about 
in the Saturnalia 2 in a toga ! 

XXV 

MARCELLJNUS, true offspring of a good father, you 
whom the numbing Bear covers with her Parrhasian 3 
car, hear what an old friend, and your father's, wishes 
for you, and keep these prayers in a remembering 

M. means that C. was too poor to buy the usual dress 
(synthesis). 

3 Helice, of Parrhasia, a district of Arcadia, was changed 
into the Constellation. 

371 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

cauta sit ut virtus nee te temerarius ardor 5 

in medios enses saevaque tela ferat. 
bella velint Martemque ferum rationis egentes, 

tu potes et patris miles et esse ducis. 

XXVI 

PEKICLITATUR capite Sotades noster. 
reum putatis esse Sotaden ? non est. 
arrigere desit posse Sotades : lingit. 

XXVII 

Bis vicine Nepos (nam tu quoque proxima Florae 

incolis et veteres tu quoque Ficelias) 
est tibi, quae patria signatur imagine voltus, 

testis maternae nata pudicitiae. 
tu tamen annoso nimium ne parce Falerno, 5 

et potius plenos acre relinque cados. 
sit pia ; sit locuples, sed potet filia mustum : 

amphora cum domina nunc nova fiet anus. 
Caecuba non solos vindeinia nutriat orbos : 

possunt et patres vivere, crede mihi. 10 

XXVIII 

LIBERTUS Melioris ille notus, 
tota qui cecidit dolente Roma, 
cari deliciae breves patroni, 

1 " Your father has claims upon you, as well as the 
Emperor." 

2 " To have the head (civil status) in jeopardy " was said 
of a man under a charge. There is a play on words here. 

372 



BOOK VI. xxv-xxvni 

heart. See that your valour be wary ; let no rash 
ardour bear you into the midmost fray of swords and 
savage spears. Let those who lack sense be eager 
for wars and fierce Mars ; you can be your father's 
soldier and your Captain's l too. 

XXVI 

OUR friend Sotades has his head in jeopardy. 2 Do 
you fancy Sotades an accused man ? He is not. 
Sotades' other powers have become nerveless : he 
uses his tongue. 

XXVII 

NEPOS, doubly my neighbour for you too dwell 
full nigh to Flora, 3 you too in old Ficeliae 4 a 
daughter you have, whose face is stamped with the 
semblance of her sire, a witness to her mother's 
virtue ! Yet spare not overmuch your old Falernian ; 
rather leave your jars filled with coin. Loving let 
her be, let her be rich, but let your daughter drink 
new wine : a flagon, new to-day, will grow aged 
with its mistress. Let not a Caecuban vintage cheer 
only childless men ; fathers, too, can enjoy life : 
believe my word. 



MELIOR'S freedman, known to all men, he who 
perished while all Rome grieved, his dear patron's 

:! The Temple of Flora, on the Quirinal, not far from the 
Capitolinm Vetus : cf. v. xxii. 4. 

4 Near M.'s house at Nomentum, or (perhaps) a street or 
district on the Quirinal: Burn's Rome and the Campagna, 
pp. 251, 393. 

373 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

hoc sub marmore Glaucias humatus 

iuncto Flaminiae iacet sepulchre : 5 

castus moribus, integer pudore, 

velox ingenio, decore felix. 

bis senis modo messibus peractis 

vix unum puer adplicabat annum. 

qui fles talia, nil fleas, viator. 10 



XXIX 

NON de plebe domus nee avarae verna catastae, 

sed dommi sancto dignus amore puer, 
munera cum posset nondum sentire patroni, 

Glaucia libertus iam Melioris erat. 
moribus hoc formaeque datum : quis blandior illo ? 

aut quis Apollineo pulchrior ore fuit ? 
inmodicis brevis est aetas et rara senectus. 

quidquid ames, cupias non placuisse nimis. 



XXX 

SEX sestertia si statim dedisses, 

cum dixti mihi "Sume, tolle, dono," 

deberem tibi, Paete, pro ducentis. 

at nunc cum dederis diu moratus, 

post septem, puto, vel novem Kalendas, 

vis dicam tibi veriora veris ? 

sex sestertia, Paete, perdidisti. 



cf. x. Ixi. 

Excessive excellence or good fortune, and the praise of 



374 



BOOK VI. XXVHI-XXX 

brief-lived darling, beneath this marble Glaucias lies 
in a tomb next the Flaminian way. Pure was he in 
manners, of modesty unstained, nimble of wit, with 
charm richly blest. To but twice six summers sped 
the boy was scarcely adding a single year. Traveller, 
who weepest for such a fate, never mayst thou have 
cause to weep ! l 

XXIX 

HOME-BRED, no slave of the household's crowd nor 
of the grasping auction mart, but a boy worthy of 
his master's pure love, Glaucia, albeit not yet could 
lie apprize his patron's gift, was already Melior's 
freedman. To character and grace was this boon 
given ; who was more witching than he ? or who 
fairer with his Apollo's face ? To unwonted worth 
comes life but short, and rarely old age. Whate'er 
thou lovest, pray that it may not please thee too 
much ! 2 



XXX 

HAD you given at once six thousand sesterces 
when you said to me, "Take them, off with them, 
I give them," I should be your debtor, Paetus, for 
two hundred thousand. But now you have given 
them after long delay, after seven, I think, or nine 
Kalends have gone, would you have me tell you 
what is truer than truth ? You have lost your six 
thousand, Paetus. 

it, was supposed to rouse the jealousy of the gods, and 
amulets were worn as charms. 

375 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXXI 

UXOREM, Charideme, tuam scis ipse sinisque 
a medico futui. vis sine febre mori. 



XXXII 

CUM dubitaret adhuc belli civil is Enyo, 
forsitan et posset v'incere mollis Otho, 

damnavit multo staturum sanguine Martem 
et fodit certa pectora tota manu. 

sit Cato, dum vivit, sane vel Caesare maior : 
dum moritur, numquid rnaior Othone fuit ? 



XXXIII 

NIL miserabilius, Matho, pedicone Sabello 

vidisti, quo nil laetius ante fuit. 
furta, fugae, mortes servorum, incendia, luctus 

adfligunt hominem, iam miser et ftituit. 



XXXIV 

BASIA da nobis, Diadumene, pressa. " Quot " inquis ? 

oceani fluctus me numerare iubes 
et maris Aegaei sparsas per litora conchas 

et quae Cecropio monte vagantur apes, 



1 But by poison. 

2 See his dying speech in Plut. Otho xv. ; Tac. Hint. ii. 
47-48. Suet. (Otho x.) adds: " etiam privation usque adeo 
detestatum civilia bella. " 

376 



BOOK VI. xxxi-xxxiv 

XXXI 

You are quite aware, Charidemus, of your wife's 
misconduct with your doctor, and you wink at it. 
It is not by fever that you want to die. 1 

XXXII 

ALBEIT the goddess of civil strife wavered yet, and 
effeminate Otho belike might win, he cursed war that 
should cost so much blood, 2 and with unflinching 
hand pierced deep his breast. Certes let Cato in 
life be greater even than Caesar ; was he in death 
greater than Otho ? 3 

XXXIII 

You have seen, Matho, nothing more miserable 
than the unnatural Sabellus, and yet once nothing 
was more cheerful than he. Thefts, flight, deaths 
of slaves, fires, griefs, afflict the fellow : now the 
miserable man actually runs after women ! 

XXXIV 

GIVE me, Diadumenus, kisses closely pressed. 
" How many ? " thou sayest. Thou biddest me sum 
Ocean's waves, and the shells strewn o'er Aegean 
shores, and the bees that stray on Cecrops' hill, 4 the 

3 Cato died when his cause was clearly lost ; not so Otho, 
at the time of his defeat by Vitellius at Bedriacum, A.D. 69, 
the " ingen* annua " of vn. Ixiii. 9. 

4 Hymettus in Attica, noted for fragrant thyme, the food 
of bees. 

377 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

quaeque sonant pleno vocesque man usque theatre, 5 
cum populus subiti Caesaris ora videt. 

nolo quot arguto dedit exorata Catullo 
Lesbia : pauca cupit qui numerate potest. 

XXXV 

SEPTEM clepsydras magna tibi voce petenti 

arbiter invitus, Caeciliane, dedit. 
at tu multa diu dicis vitreisque tepentem 

ampullis potas semisupinus aquam. 
ut tandem saties vocemque sitimque, rogamus 5 

iam de clepsydra, Caeciliane, bibas. 

XXXVI 

MENTULA tam magna est, tantus tibi, Papyle, nasus, 
ut possis, quotiens arrigis, olfacere. 

XXXVII 

SECTI podicis usque ad umbilicum 

nullas relliquias habet Charinus, 

et prurit tamen usque ad umbilicum. 

o quanta scabie miser laborat ! 

culum non habet, est tamen cinaedus. 5 

XXXVIII 

ASPICIS ut parvus nee adhuc trieteride plena 
Regulus auditum laudet et ipse patrem ? 

maternosque sinus viso genitore relinquat 
et patrias laudes sentiat esse suas ? 

1 Cat. v. and vii. 

2 Perhaps M. also means it is unlucky to count: see Cat. vii. 

378 



BOOK VI. xxxiv-xxxvm 

voices and hands that resound in the full theatre 
when the people see Caesar's unexpected face. Not 
for me the number that .Lesbia, won by prayer, gave 
to tuneful Catullus. 1 He wishes but few who is 
able to count. 2 

XXXV 

SEVEN water-clocks' allowance 3 you asked for in 
loud tones, and the judge, Caecilianus, unwillingly 
gave them. But you speak much and long, and, 
with back-tilted head, swill tepid water out of glass 
flasks. That you may once for all sate your oratory 
and your thirst, we beg you, Caecilianus, now to 
drink out of the water-clock. 

XXXVI 

Tu, O Papilo, hai una mentula si smisurata, ed 
un si gran naso, che potesti, ogni volta che arrigi, 
fiutarla. 

XXXVII 

CARINO ha nessuna reliqui del suo podice raso 
sino all' umbillico, e tuttavia gli prude sino all' um- 
billico ; oh, da quanta scabie 1' infanie e travagliato ! 
culum habet sectum, e tuttavia e cinedo. 

XXXVIII 

SEE you how little Regulus, not yet full three years 
old, himself too listens, and applauds his father's 
speech, and, when he sees his sire, leaves his mother's 
lap and feels his father's glory also his own ? Already 

3 The length of speeches was regulated by the dropping 
of water from clepsydrae, shaped like modern hour-glasses. 

379 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

iam clamor centumque viri densumque corona 5 

volgus et infant! lulia tecta placent. 
acris equi suboles magno sic pulvere gaudet, 

sic vitulus inolli proelia fronte cupit. 
di, servate, precor, matri sua vota patrique, 

audiat ut natum Regulus, ilia duos. 10 

XXXIX 

PATER ex Manilla, Cinna, factus es septem 
non liberorum : namque nee tuus quisquam 
nee est amici filiusve vicini, 
sed in grabatis tegetibusque concept! 
materna produnt capitibus suis furta. 5 

hie qui retorto crine Maurus incedit 
subolem fatetur esse se coci Santrae. 
at ille sima nare, turgidis labris 
ipsa est imago Pannychi palaestritae. 
pistoris esse tertium quis ignorat, 10 

quicumque lippum novit et videt Damam ? 
quartus cinaeda fronte, candido voltu 
ex concubino natus est tibi Lygdo : 
percide, si vis, filium : nefas non est. 
hunc vero acuto capite et auribus longis, 15 

"quae sic moventur ut solent asellorum, 
quis morionis filium negat Cyrtae ? 
duae sorores, ilia nigra et haec rufa, 
Croti choraulae vilicique sunt Carpi, 
iam Niobidarum 1 grex tibi foret plenus 20 

si spado Coresus Dindymusque non esset. 

1 iamni ubida pniit g. y, iamque hybridarum g. $-. 
380 



BOOK VI. xxxvm-xxxix 

the acclaim, and the Hundred Court, 1 and the crowd 
in a dense ring, and the Julian Basilica, please his 
infant mind. The offspring of a mettled steed so 
rejoices in the thick dust of the course, so the steer 
with unarmed brow longs for battle. Ye gods, fulfil, 
I pray, for mother and father their prayer, that 
Regulus may listen to his son, she to both ! 2 



You have been made, Cinna, by Marulla the father 
of seven not children, for there is no son of yours, 
nor son of a friend or neighbour ; but creatures con- 
ceived on truckle-beds and mats betray by their 
features their mother's adulteries. This one who 
struts with curly hair, a Moor, confesses he is the 
offspring of Santra the cook ; but that other with 
flat nostrils, blubber lips is the very image of Pan- 
nichus the wrestler. Who is not aware, if he has 
known and seen blear-eyed Dama, that the third 
is the baker's son ? The fourth, with his shameless 
brow, pallid face, was born to you from your minion 
Lygdus : use your son as you do him, if you wish ; 
'tis no crime. But this creature with pointed head, 
and long ears which move just as donkeys' ears are 
wont who could deny he is the son of Cyrta the 
cretin? Two sisters one is dark, the other red- 
haired are the children of Crotus, fluter to the 
chorus, and of Carpus the bailiff. By now your 
troupe of slaves would have been made up of as 
many sons as Niobe's if Coresus and Dindymus had 
not been eunuchs. 

1 The Court of the Cenlumviri (strictly 105). 

2 The prayer was not granted ; the boy died young : Plin. 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XL 

FEMINA praef'erri potuit tibi mil la. Lycori : 
praeferri Glycerae femina nulla potest. 

haec erit hoc quod tu : tu non potes esse quod haec est. 
tempera quid faciunt ! hanc volo, te volui. 

XLI 

Qui recitat lana fauces et colla revinctus, 
hie se posse loqui, posse tacere negat. 

XLII 

ETRUSCI nisi thermulis lavaris, 

inlotus morieris, Oppiane. 

nullae sic tibi blandientur undae, 

non fontes Aponi rudes puellis, 

non mollis Sinuessa fervidique 5 

fluctus Passeris aut superbus Anxur, 

non Phoebi vada principesque Baiae. 

nusquam tarn nitidum vacat serenum : 

lux ipsa est ibi longior, diesque 

nullo tardius a loco recedit. 10 

illic Taygeti virent metalla 

et certant vario decore saxa, 

quae Phryx et Libys altius cecidit ; 

siccos pinguis onyx anhelat aestus 

et flamma tenui calent ophitae. 15 

ritus si placeant tibi Laconum, 



1 Said to break into flame if a woman bathed after a mau. 
Perhaps the allusion is only to the known chastity of Pata- 
vian (Paduan) women : cf. xi. xvi. 8, and Plin. Ep. i. 14. 

382 



BOOK VI. XL-XLII 

XL 

No woman could once be preferred to you, Lycoris, 
no woman can be preferred to Glycera now ; she shall 
be the thing you are ; you cannot be what she is. 
Such is the might of Time ! I long for her, for you 
I longed. 

XLI 

HE who recites with throat and neck wrapped up 
in wool declares that he can neither speak nor keep 
silence. 

XLII 

IF you do not bathe in the warm baths of Etruseus, 
you will die unbathed, Oppianus. No other waters 
will so allure you, not even the springs of Aponus 1 
unknown to women ; not mild Sinuessa, and the 
waves of steaming Passer, or towering Anxur ; not 
the waters of Phoebus,- and peerless Baiae. Nowhere 
is the sunlit sheen so cloudless ; the very light is 
longer there, and from no spot does day withdraw 
more lingeringly. There the quarries of Taygetus 3 
are green, and in varied beauty vie the rocks which 
the Phrygian and Libyan 4 has more deeply hewn. 
The rich alabaster pants with dry heat, and snake- 
stone is warm with a subtle fire. If Lacedaemonian 
methods 5 please you, you can content yourself with 

2 The Aquae Passerianae in Etruria, where were also the 
Aquae ApolliiMres, now Bagni di Vicarello. 

3 The green Laconian marble : cf. ix. Ixxv. 9. 

4 Synnadic and Numidian marble, one streaked with 
purple, the other yellow. 

5 A hot-air bath followed by a cold plunge. There was a 
special apartment called Laconicum. 

383 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

contentus potes arido vapore 

cruda Virgine Marciave mergi ; 

quae tarn Candida, tarn serena lucet 

ut nullas ibi suspiceris undas 20 

et credas vacuam nitere lygdoii. 

non adtendis et aure me supina 

lam dudum quasi neglegenter audis. 

inlotus morieris, Oppiane. 



XLIII 

DUM tibi felices indulgent, Castrice, Baiae 

canaque sulpureis unda natatur aquis, 
me Nomentani confirmant otia ruris 

et casa iugeribus non onerosa suis. 
hoc mihi Baiani soles mollisque Lucrinus, 5 

hoc sunt mihi vestrae, Castrice, divitiae. 
quondam laudatas quocumque libebat ad undas 

currere iiec longas pertimuisse vias : 
nunc urbis vicina iuvant facilesque recessus, 

et satis est, pigro si licet esse mihi. 10 



XLIV 

FESTIVE credis te, Calliodore, iocari 
et solum multo permaduisse sale. 

omnibus adrides, dicteria dicis in omnis ; 
sic te convivam posse placere putas. 

at si ego non belle sed vere dixero quiddam, 
nemo propinabit, Calliodore, tibi. 



1 Roman aqueducts. 

2 rf. vi. xiii. 3. 

384 



BOOK VI. XLII-XLIV 

dry warmth, and then plunge in the natural stream 
of the Virgin or of Marcia, 1 which glistens so bright 
and clear that you would not suspect any water 
there, but would fancy the Lygdian marble 2 shines 
empty. You don't attend, but have been listening 
to me all this time with a casual ear, as if you 
didn't care. You will die unbathed, Oppianus ! 



XLIII 

WHILE happy Baiae lavishes on you, Castricus, its 
bounty, and the Nymph's spring, white with sul- 
phurous water, is your swimming-bath, the quiet of 
my Nomentan farm, and a small house not too large 
for its fields, recruit me. This to me is Baian sun- 
shine and mild Lucrine lake ; this to me is the 
riches, Castricus, you enjoy. Erewhile I gladly 
hurried everywhere to famous waters, and did not 
fear long journeys ; now places near the city attract 
me, and quiet retreats easy to reach, and 'tis enough 
for me if I am allowed to be lazy. 



XLIV 

You believe yourself to be a pleasant jester, Cal- 
liodorus, and alone overflowing with streams of wit. 
At all you sneer, you shoot your scoffs against all ; 
so, as a guest, you opine you can please. But if I 
may make a remark, not smart indeed, but true, no 
man, Calliodorus, will pass the cup in pledge to 
you. 3 

3 Because it would be passed back to him defiled : cf. n. 
xv. ; xn. Ixxiv. 9. 

385 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XLV 

LUSISTIS, satis est : lascivi nubite cunni : 
permissa est vobis non nisi casta Venus. 

haec est casta Venus ? nubit Laetoria Lygdo : 
turpior uxor erit quam modo moecha fuit. 

XLVI 

VAPULAT adsidue veneti quadriga flagello 
nee currit : magnam rem, Catiane, facis. 

XLVII 

NYMPHA, mei Stellae quae fonte domestica puro 

laberis et domini gemmea tecta subis, 
sive Numae coniunx Triviae te misit ab antris 

sive Camenarum de grege nona venis, 
exsoluit votis hac se tibi virgine porca 

Marcus, furtivam quod bibit aeger aquam. 
tu contenta meo iam crimine gaudia fontis 

da secura tui : sit mihi sana sitis. 



XLVIII 

QUOD tarn grande sophos clamat tibi turba togata, 
non tu, Pomponi, cena diserta tua est. 

1 cf. vi. iv. and vii. 

2 The charioteers of the circus were divided into four 
factions, red, white, green, and blue, the last being out of 
favour with Domitian. M. means that the Bine driver 
pulled his horses, not wishing to win : cf. xiv. Iv. 

3 The Nymph Egeria. 

386 



BOOK VI. XLV-XLVIII 

XLV 

You have had your fling : enough ! Wed, you 
wantons ; you are allowed only chaste love. 1 Is this 
chaste love? Laetoria weds Lygdus : she will be 
viler as wife than she was just now as adulteress. 

XLVI 

THE four-horse car of the Blue charioteer 2 is re- 
peatedly lashed on, and yet goes slow. You are 
doing a great feat, Catianus. 

XLVII 

NYMPH that, welcomed to my Stella's house, glidest 
with thy pure spring and enterest beneath its master's 
jewelled halls, whether Numa's spouse 3 sent thee 
from Trivia's grots, 4 or thou comest, the ninth of 
the Camenae, 5 Marcus with this vii'gin porker acquits 
him to thee of his vow 6 made because in sickness 
he quaffed thy stream by stealth. Be thou content 
to-day with my fault, and grant me without scathe 
the delights of thy spring: may my thirst be again 
without harm ! 

XLVIII 

THE full-dressed throng shout a loud "Bravo" 
to applaud you. 'Tis not you, Pomponius : it is 
your dinner that is eloquent. 

4 From Aricia, where Diana of the Crossways (Trivia) was 
worshipped. 

6 Native Nymphs of Italy, afterwards identified with the 
Muses, and probably so here. 

6 M., contrary to doctor's orders (see vi. Ixxxvi.), had 
drunk cold water from the spring, and had made a vow to 
the Nymph if the water did him no harm. 

387 
c c 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 



XLIX 

NON sum de fragili dolatus ulmo, 

nee quae stat rigida supina vena 

de ligno mihi quolibet columna est, 

sed viva generata de cupressu, 

quae nee saecula centiens peracta 5 

nee longae cariem timet senectae. 

hanc tu, quisquis es o malus, timeto, 

nam si vel minimos manu rapaci 

hoc de palmite laeseris racemos, 

nascetur, licet hoc velis negare, 10 

inserta tibi ficus a cupressu. 



CUM coleret puros pauper Telesinus amicos, 
errabat gelida sordidus in togula : 

obscenos ex quo coepit curare cinaedos, 
argentum, mensas, praedia solus emit. 

vis fieri dives, Bithynice ? conscius esto. 
nil tibi vel minimum basia pura dabunt. 



LI 

QUOD convivaris sine me tarn saepe, Luperce, 

inveni noceam qua ratione tibi. 
irascor : licet usque voces mittasque rogesque 

" Quid facies ? " inquis. quid faciam ? veniam. 

1 The epigram is on a statue of Priapus : cf. I. xxxv. 15 
vi. Ixxiii. 

388 



BOOK VI. XLIX-LI 



XLIX 

NOT hewn am I of fragile elm, nor is my column, 
which stands upright with rigid shaft, 1 shaped of 
common wood; but it was born of the long-lived 
cypress, that dreads not cycles an hundred times 
accomplished, nor the decay of prolonged age. 
This fear thou, whoever thou art, O evil man! For 
if with robber hand thou shalt wound of yonder 
vine even its smallest shoots, there shall be born 
though thou wouldst deny it grafted on thee by 
this cypress-rod, a bunch of figs. 2 



WHEN Telesinus a poor man then cultivated 
decent friends, he went about, a shabby figm-e, in a 
poor shivering toga ; ever since he began to court 
obscene rakes he buys rivalled by none silver- 
plate, tables, landed properties. Do you wish to 
become rich, Bithynicus ? Be an accomplice ; not 
a stiver will pure kisses give you. 



LI 

BECAUSE you entertain so often without inviting 
me, Lupercus, I have discovered a way to annoy 
you. I am angry : though you go on asking me, 
sending, begging " What will you do ? " you say. 
What will I do ? I'll come. 

2 A tumour : cf. I. Ixv. ; iv. lii. 

389 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LIT 

Hoc iacet in tumulo raptus puerilibus minis 
Pantagathus, domini cura dolorque sui, 

vix tangente vagos ferro resecare capillos 
doctus et hirsutas excoluisse genas. 

sis licet, ut debes, tellus, placata levisque, 
artificis levior non potes esse manu. 



LIII 

LOTUS nobiscum est, hilaris cenavit, et idem 
inventus mane est mortuus Andragoras. 

tarn subitae mortis causam, Faustina, requiris ? 
in somnis medicum viderat Hermocraten. 



LIV 

TANTOS et tantas si dicere Sextilianum, 
Aule, vetes, iunget vix tria verba miser. 

" Quid sibi vult ? " inquis. dicam quid suspicer esse : 
tantos et tantas Sextilianus amat. 



LV 

QUOD semper casiaque cinnamoque 

et nido niger alitis superbae 

fragras plumbea Nicerotiana, 

rides nos, Coracine, nil olentis, 

malo quam bene olere nil olere. I 

1 Copied from a Greek epigram : Anth. Pal. xi. cclvii. 
cf. cxviii., which M, probably had also in his eye. 

2 i.e. praegrandes draucos eorumque caudas. 

39 



BOOK VI. LII-LV 

LII 

WITHIN this tomb lies Pantagathus, snatched away 
in boyhood's years, his master's grief and sorrow, 
skilled to cut with steel that scarcely touched the 
straggling hairs, and to trim the bearded cheeks. 
Gentle and light upon him thou mayst be, O earth, 
as behoves thee ; lighter than the artist's hand thou 
canst not be. 

LIII 

ANDRAOORAS bathed With us, took a cheerful dinner, 
and nevertheless was found in the morning dead. 
Do you ask, Faustinus, the cause of a decease so 
sudden ? He had in a dream seen Doctor Her- 
mocrates ! 1 

LIV 

IF, Aulus, you forbid Sextilianus to say the 
words "so tall" masculine or feminine he can put 
scarcely three words together, the wretched fellow. 
" What is the matter with him ? " you say. I'll 
tell you what I suspect. Sextilianus has " so tall " 
attractions 2 of both genders ! 

LV 

BECAUSE, constantly smeared darkly with cassia and 
cinnamon and the perfumes from the nest of the 
lordly bird, 3 you reek of the leaden jars of Niceros, 4 
you laugh at us, Coracinus, who smell of nothing. 
To smelling of scent I prefer smelling of nothing. 5 

3 Cassia and cinnamon were said to be found in the nest of 
the phoenix : Plin. N.ff. xii. 42. 

4 A celebrated perfumer of the day. 8 cf. u. xii. 

391 




QUOD tibi crura rigent saetis et pectora villis, 
verba putas famae te, Charideme, dare. 

extirpa, mihi crede, pilos de corpora toto 
teque pilare tuas testificare natis. 

" Quae ratio est? " inquis. scis multos dicere multa : 5 
fac pedicari te, Charideme, putent. 

LVII 

MENTIRIS fictos unguento, Phoebe, capillos 

et tegitur pictis sordida calva comis. 
tonsorem capiti non est adhibere necesse : 

radere te melius spongea, Phoebe, potest. 

LVIII 

CERNERE Parrhasios dum te iuvat, Aule, triones 

comminus et Getici sidera pigra poli, 
o quam paene tibi Stygias ego raptus ad uiidas 

Elysiae vidi nubila fusca plagae ! 
quamvis lassa tuos quaerebant lumina vultus 5 

atque erat in gelido plurimus ore Pudens. 
si mihi lanificae ducunt non pulla sorores 

stamina nee surdos vox habet ista deos, 
sospite me sospes Latias reveheris ad urbes 

et referes pili praemia clarus eques. 10 

1 Aulus Pudens was campaigning against the Dacians. 
* i.e. grant me longer life. 

392 



BOOK VI. LVI-LVIII 

LVI 

PERCHE hai le gambe irsute di setole, ed il petto 
d'ispidi peli, tu t'imagini, O Caridemo, imporre alia 
fama. Credimi, strappati i peli da tutto il corpo : e 
commincia darne prova dalle natiche. " Per qual 
motive?" di tu. Tu sai che molti mormorano. Fa, 
O Caridemo, che piutosto pensino, che tu sei un 
cinedo. 

LVII 

You fob us off with fictitious hair by means of 
ointment, Phoebus, and your dirty bald scalp is 
covered with locks represented in paint. You need 
not call in a barber for your head ; to give you a 
better clearance, a sponge, Phoebus, is the thing. 



LVIII 

WHILE it pleased you, Aulus, to survey anear the 
Northern Bears and the slow-wheeling stars of Getic 
heavens, 1 oh, how nearly was I snatched away from 
you to the waves of Styx, and viewed the gloomy 
clouds of the Elysian plain ! Weary as they were, 
my eyes searched for your face, and on my chill lips 
oft was Pudens' name. If the wool-working Sisters 
draw not my threads of sable hue, 2 and this my 
prayer find not the gods deaf, I shall be safe, and you 
shall safe return to Latin cities and bring back a 
chief centurion's honour, 3 an illustrious knight withal. 

3 cf. i. xxxi. 3. 

393 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LIX 

ET dolet et queritur sibi non contingere frigus 

propter sescentas Baccara gausapinas, 
optat et obscuras luces ventosque nivesque, 

edit et hibernos, si tepuere, dies, 
quid fecere mali nostrae tibi, saeve, lacernae 5 

tollere de scapulis quas levis aura potest? 
quanto simplicius, quanto est huinanius illud, 

mense vel Augusto sumere gausapinas ! 

LX 

LAUDAT, amat, cantat nostros mea Roma libellos, 
meque sinus omnes, me manus omnis habet. 

ecce rubet quidam, pallet, stupet, oscitat, odit. 
hoc volo : nunc nobis carmina nostra placent. 

LXI 

REM factam Pompullus habet, Faustine : legetur 

et nomen toto sparget in orbe suum. 
" Sic leve flavorum valeat genus Usiporum 

quisquis et Ausonium non amat imperium." 
ingeniosa tamen Pompulli scripta feruntur. 5 

" Sed famae non est hoc, mihi crede, satis : 
quam mtilti tineas pascunt blattasque diserti 

et redimunt soli carmina docta coci ! 
nescio quid plus est, quod donat saecula chartis : 

victurus genium debet habere liber." 10 



394 



BOOK VI. LIX-LXI 

LIX 

BACCARA is annoyed and grumbles that he meets 
with no cold weather : 'tis on account of his innu- 
merable frieze mantles ; and he wishes for dark 
hours, and winds, and snows ; and hates winter days 
if they are mild. What harm, you cruel fellow, 
has my cloak, which a light breeze can lift from 
my shoulder-blades, done you? How much more 
straightforward, how much more kind it would be, 
even in the month of August, to put on your frieze 
wrappers ! l 

LX 

MY Rome praises, loves, and hums my verses, and 
every pocket, every hand holds me. See, yonder 
fellow turns red, turns pale, is dazed, yawns, curses ! 
That is what I want ; now my verses please me ! 

LXI 

POMPULLUS has his wish achieved, Faustinus ; he will 
be perused and will spread his name through the 
whole world. "So may the fickle race of the yellow- 
haired Usipi flourish, and everyone who does not love 
Ausonia's rule ! " 2 Yet the writings of Pompullus are 
said to be clever. " But this, trust me, is not enough 
to bring fame ; how many fluent writers feed moths 
and bookworms, and cooks alone buy their learned 
lays ! There is something more that gives immor- 
tality to writings ; a book, to live, must have a 
Genius." 

1 i.e. if you must show off. 

2 i.e. may they perish as P.'s works will. 

395 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXII 

AMISIT pater unicum Salanus : 
cessas munera mittere, Oppiane ? 
lieu crudele nefas malaeque Parcae ! 
cuius vulturis hoc erit cadaver ? 

LXIII 

Scis te captari, scis hunc qui captat, avarum, 

et scis qui captat quid, Mariane, velit. 
tu tamen hunc tabulis heredem, stulte, supremis 

scribis et esse tuo vis, furiose, loco. 
" Munera magna tamen misit." sed misit in ha mo ; 5 

et piscatorem piscis amare potest ? 
hicine deflebit vero tua fata dolore ? 

si cupis, ut ploret, des, Mariane, nihil. 

LXIV 

CUM sis nee rigida Fabiorum gente creatus 
nee qualem Curio, dum prandia portat aranti, 
hirsuta peperit deprensa sub ilice coniunx, 
sed patris ad speculum tonsi matrisque togatae 
films, et possit sponsam te sponsa vocare : 5 

emendare meos, quos novit fama, libellos 



1 In depriving S. of his only protection against fortune- 
hunters : cf. the next epigram. 

396 



BOOK VI. LXII-LXIV 

LXII 

SALANUS the father has lost his only son ; do you 
hesitate, Oppianus, to send a present ? Ah, mon- 
strous cruelty and malignant Fates ! 1 To what 
vulture shall this corpse belong? 

LXIII 

You know you are angled for, 2 you know this fellow 
who angles is greedy, and you know, Marianus, what 
your angler wants ; yet you write him down your 
heir, you fool, by your last will, and are willing he 
should step, you madman ! into your shoes. " Yet 
the presents he sent me were magnificent." But he 
sent them on a hook ; and can a fish love the fisher- 
man ? Will this man weep for your death with 
genuine grief? If you want him to lament, leave 
him, Marianus, nothing. 

LXIV 

ALTHOUGH you are not born of the stern Fabian 
race, nor are such a one as Curius' wife, taken in 
labour while she was carrying his midday meal to him 
at the plough, brought forth under a shaggy oak, 3 
but the son of a father shorn in front of a mirror 
and of a harlot mother, and though your own wife 
might well call you wife, you take upon yourself to 
amend my poems that Fame knows well, and to carp 

2 capture (to hunt) was the regular phrase to express 
fortune-hunting. 

3 The rude Fabii and Curii might justly sneer at M.'s 
verses. 

397 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

et tibi permittis felicis carpere nugas, 

has, inquam, nugas, quibus aurem advertere totam 

non aspernantur proceres urbisque forique, 

quas et perpetui dignantur scrinia Sili 10 

et repetit totiens facundo Regulus ore, 

quique videt propius magni certamina Circi 

laudat Aventinae vicinus Sura Dianae, 

ipse etiam tanto dominus sub pondere rerum 

non dedignatur bis terque revolvere Caesar. 15 

sed tibi plus mentis, tibi cor limante Minerva 

acrius et tenues finxerunt pectus Athenae. 

ne valeam, si non multo sapit altius illud, 

quod cum panticibus laxis et cum pede grandi 

et rubro pulmone vetus nasisque timendum 20 

omnia crudelis lanius per compita portat. 

audes praeterea, quos nullus noverit, in me 

scribere versiculos miseras et perdere chartas. 

at si quid nostrae tibi bilis inusserit ardor, 

vivet et haerebit totaque legetur in urbe, 25 

stigmata nee vafra delebit Cinnamus arte. 

sed miserere tui, rabido nee perditus ore 

fumantem nasum vivi temptaveris ursi. 

sit placidus licet et lambat digitosque manusque, 

si dolor et bilis, si iusta coegerit ira, 30 

ursus erit : vacua dentes in pelle fatiges 

et tacitam quaeras, quam possis rodere, carnem. 

1 Silius Italicus, the poet of the Punic wars : cf. vii. Ixiii. 

2 The celebrated advocate. 

3 The Temple of Diana on the Aventine. The Circus was 
in the hollow between the Aventine and Palatine hills. 

398 



BOOK VI. LXIV 

at my happy triflings these triflings, I say, to which 
the chief men of state and courts of law do not 
disdain to turn an attentive ear ; these which the 
bookcases of immortal Silius 1 think worthy of them, 
and Regulus 2 with eloquent tongue repeats so often, 
and Sura commends, he who views hard by the 
struggles of the mighty Circus, Sura, the neighbour 
of Aventine Diana; 3 these which our lord, though 
he bears so vast a weight of empire, does not disdain 
twice and thrice to unroll, Caesar himself. But you 
have more understanding, Minerva sharpened your 
mind to a keener point, and subtle Athens shaped 
your intellect ! May I hang if there is not fuller 
flavour in that heart 4 which, together with protrud- 
ing guts, and huge hoof, and gory lights, decayed 
and a terror to the nose, the unfeeling butcher 
carries from street to street. You dare besides to 
write against me your paltry verses, which no one 
will know of, and to spoil your wretched paper. But 
if the heat of my wrath sets a brand upon you, that 
will remain and cling to you and be read all over 
the town, and Cinnamus, 5 for all his cunning skill, 
will not efface the marks. Nay, take pity on your- 
self, and do not, lost man, tempt with your rabid 
tooth the foaming snout of a live bear. He may 
be gentle and lick your fingers and your hands, yet 
if pain, and wrath, and righteous anger compel him, 
he will be a bear. Weary out your fangs on an 
empty hide, and look out for some flesh to gnaw 
that cannot reply. 

4 A play on two meanings of aapere, " to have flavour," or 
" to have sense." Cor also has the two meanings of " heart," 
in a physical sense, and " intellect." 

6 A barber of the day : cf. vi. xvii.; vn. Ixiv. 

399 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXV 

' HEXAMETRIS epigramma facis" scio dicere Tuccam. 

Tucca, solet fieri, denique, Tucca, licet. 
"Sedtamen hoc longum est." solet hoc quoque,Tucca, 

licetque : 

si breviora probas, disticha sola legas. 
conveniat nobis ut fas epigrammata longa 5 

sit transire tibi, scribere, Tucca, mihi. 



LXVI 

FAMAE non nimium bonae puellam, 
quales in media sedent Subura, 
vendebat modo praeco Gellianus. 
parvo cum pretio diu liceret, 
dum puram cupit adprobare cunctis, 
adtraxit prope se manu negantem 
et bis terque quaterque basiavit. 
quid profecerit osculo requiris ? 
sescentos modo qui dabat negavit. 

LXVII 

CUR tantum eunuchos habeat tua Caelia, quaeris, 
Pannyche ? volt futui Caelia nee parere. 

LXVIII 

FLETE nefas vestrum sed toto flete Lucrino, 
Naides, et luctus sentiat ipsa Thetis. 

inter Baianas raptus puer occidit undas 
Eutychos ille, tuum, Castrice, dulce latus. 



400 



BOOK VI. LXV-LXVIII 

LXV 

"You make your epigram 1 in hexameters," says 
Tucca, as I know. Tucca, that is usual, in fact, Tucca, 
it is allowable. " Yet this one is long." That too is 
usual, Tucca, and allowable ; if you approve of what 
is shorter, read distichs only. Let us make a com- 
pact : you to be permitted to skip long epigrams ; I, 
Tucca, to write them. 

LXVI 

A GIRL of not too good a reputation, one of such 
as sit in the middle of the Subura, the auctioneer 
Gellianus was lately selling. As for some time she 
was going for small biddings, wishing to prove to all 
that she was clean, he drew the unwilling girl to 
him, and twice, thrice, four times kissed her. Do 
you ask what he achieved by the kiss ? A bidder 
of six hundred sesterces withdrew his bid ! 



LXVII 

Do you ask, Pannychus, why your Caelia consorts 
with eunuchs only ? Caelia looks for the license of 
marriage, not the results. 



LXVIII 

WEEP for your crime, aye, weep o'er all the Lucrine 
lake, ye Naiads, and let even Thetis 2 hear the sound 
of your lament ! For the boy is dead, snatched 
away amid the waves of Baiae, that Eutychos, thy 

1 i.e. the preceding one. 2 The goddess of the sea. 

401 

VOL. 1. D D 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

hie tibi curarum socius blandumque levamen, 5 

hie amor, hie nostri vatis Alexis erat. 
numquid te vitreis nudum lasciva sub undis 

vidit et Alcidae nympha remisit Hylan ? 
an dea femineum iam neglegit Hermaphroditum 

amplexu teneri sollicitata viri ? 10 

quidquid id est, subitae quaecumque est causa rapinae, 

sit, precor, et tellus mitis et unda tibi. 



LXIX 

NON miror quod potat aquam tua Bassa, Catulle : 
miror quod Bassae filia potat aquam. 



LXX 

SEXAGESIMA, Marciane, messis 

acta est et, puto, iam secunda Cottae 

nee se taedia lectuli calentis 

expertum meminit die vel uno. 

ostendit digitum, sed inpudicum, 5 

Alconti Dasioque Symmachoque. 

at nostri bene conputentur anni 

et quantum tetricae tulere febres 

aut languor gravis aut mali dolores 

a vita meliore separetur : 10 

infantes sumus et senes videmur. 

aetatem Priamique Nestorisque 

longam qui putat esse, Marciane, 

muitum decipiturque falliturque. 

non est vivere, sed valere vita est. 15 

1 A handsome youth celebrated by Virgil in his second 
Eclogue : cf. v. xvi. 12 ; viu. Ivi. 12. 

402 



BOOK VI. LXVHI-LXX 

sweet companion, Castricus. He to thee was partner 
in thy studies, and thy soothing solace, he was 
the darling, he the Alexis l of our bard. Did some 
wanton nymph see thy nakedness under the glassy 
waves, and give back Hylas 2 to Alcides ? or does the 
goddess, 3 won by the embrace of a soft spouse, now 
slight womanly Hermaphroditus ? Whate'er it be, 
whate'er the cause of a rape so sudden, let earth, 
I pray, and wave, be gentle to thee ! 

LXIX 

1 DON'T wonder, Catullus, your Bassa drinks water; 4 
I wonder that the daughter of Bassa drinks water. 

LXX 

A SIXTIETH summer, Marcianus, has gone, and I 
think already a second one also, over Cotta's head, 
and yet he cannot recall that even for a single day 
he has felt the weariness of a fevered bed. He points 
his finger and the insulting finger 5 at Alcon, and 
Dasius, and Symmachus. 6 As for us, let our years be 
strictly counted, and so much of them as harsh fevers 
have carried off, or sore weakness, or racking pains, 
be parted from happier life : we are children, and 
seem old men. He who thinks the life of Priam 
and of Nestor long, Marcianus, is much deceived and 
mistaken : life is not living, but living in health. 

2 See note to v. xlviii. 5. Alcides = Hercules. 

3 Salmacis, originally the Nymph of a fountain in Caria, 
but here, and in x. xxx. , identified by M. with the Nymph 
of spring near the Lucrine lake. 4 cf. II. 1. 2. 

5 The middle finger was called in/amis, and was used to 
point in scorn. 6 Doctors. 

43 
D D 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXI 

EDERE lascivos ad Baetica crusmata gestus 

et Gaditanis ludere docta modis, 
tendere quae tremulum Pelian Hecubaeque maritum 

posset ad Hectoreos sollicitare rogos, 
urit et excruciat dominum Telethusa priorem. 5 

vendidit ancillam, nunc redimit dominam. 



LXXII 

FUR notae nimium rapacitatis 
conpilare Cilix volebat hortum, 
ingenti sed erat, Fabulle, in horto 
praeter marmoreum nihil Priapum. 
dum non vult vacua manu redire, 
ipsum subripuit Cilix Priapum. 



LXXIII 

NON rudis indocta fecit me falce colonus : 

dispensatoris nobile cernis opus, 
nam Caeretani cultor ditissimus agri 

hos Hilarus colles et iuga laeta tenet, 
aspice quam certo videar non ligneus ore 5 

nee devota focis inguinis arma gerain, 
sed mihi perpetua numquam moritura cupresso 

Phidiaca rigeat mentula digna manu. 
vicini, moneo, sanctum celebrate Priapum 

et bis septenis parcite iugeribus. 10 

1 cf. v. Ixxviii. 26- 

2 The father of Jason and Priam respectively, both typical 
old men. 

404 



BOOK VI. LXXI-LXXIII 

LXXI 

SHE who was cunning to show wanton gestures to 
the sound of Baetic castanets and to frolic to the tunes 
of Gades, 1 she who could have roused passion in 
palsied Pelias, and have stirred Hecuba's spouse 2 
even by Hector's pyre Telethusa burns and racks 
with love her former master. He sold her as his 
maid, now he buys her back as mistress. 

LXXII 

A THIEF of too notorious rapacity, a Cilician, was 
minded to plunder a garden ; but in the immense 
garden was nothing, Fabullus, but a marble Priapus. 
Being loth to return with empty hands, the Cilician 
carried off' Priapus 3 himself ! 



LXXIII 

No rude husbandman shaped me with clumsy 
sickle ; you see the steward's noble work ; for Hi- 
larus, the most wealthy tiller of Caere's fields, pos- 
sesses these hills and smiling slopes. Mark with 
how distinct a likeness, and as though not in wood, 
I appear, and carry a weapon not doomed to the 
fire ; rather how an appendage, immortal, wrought of 
imperishable cypress, and worthy of the handiwork 
of Phidias, stands rigid. Ye neighbours, I charge you, 
pay honour to holy Priapus and spare these twice 
seven acres ! 

3 The guardian god of the garden could not protect 
himself ! 

45 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXIV 

MEDIO recumbit imus ille qui lecto, 
calvam trifilem semitatus unguento, 
foditque tonsis ora laxa lentiscis, 
mentitur, Aefulane : non habet denies. 

LXXV 

CUM mittis turdumve mihi quadramve placentae, 
sive femur leporis sive quid his simile est, 

buccellas misisse tuas te. Pontia, dicis. 

has ego non mittam, Pontia, sed nee edam. 

LXXVI 

ILLE sacri lateris custos Martisque togati, 

credita cui summi castra fuere ducis, 
hie situs est Fuscus. licet hoe, Fortuna, fateri : 

non timet hostilis iam lapis iste minas ; 
grande iugum domita Dacus cervice recepit 5 

et famulum victrix possidet umbra nemus. 

LXXVII 

CUM sis tarn pauper quam nee miserabilis Iros, 
tarn iuvenis quam nee Parthenopaeus erat, 

1 The place of honour at dinner. 

2 The usual toothpick : cf. xiv. xxii. There may perhaps 
be a reference to the name given to those unduly solicitous 
of their personal appearance, who were called " toothpick- 
chewers " : cf. Erasm. Adag. s.v. lentiscum mandere. 

3 A notorious poisoner : cf. n. xxxiv. 

4 i.e. of the Emperor as warrior and statesman. 

406 



BOOK VI. LXXIV-LXXVII 

LXXIV 

HE who lies the lowest on the middle couch, 1 
with his three-haired baldness laid out in paths with 
ointment, and who probes his loosened jaws with 
strips of mastich, 2 is a fraud, Aefulanus : he has no 
teeth. 

LXXV 

WHEN you send me either a fieldfare, or a section 
of cake, or a leg of hare, or something similar, you 
tell me, Pontia, 8 you have sent me your tit-bits. 
These dainties I won't send elsewhere, Pontia but 
neither will I eat them. 

LXXVI 

THAT guardian of a sacred life, of Mars in the 
civil gown, 4 he to whom our great captain's camp 
was given in trust, here Fuscus lies. This, Fortune, 
may we confess : that stone fears no longer a foe- 
man's threat. The Daciaii has taken on his bowed 
neck our mighty yoke, and the victor ghost holds in 
fee the subject grove. 5 

LXXVII 

ALTHOUGH you are poorer than even wretched Irus, 6 
younger even than Parthenopaeus, 7 stronger than 

8 The epigram is supposed to be an inscription on the 
tomb, in Dacia, of Cornelius Fuscus, a former captain of the 
Emperor's Praetorian guard at Rome. He was defeated and 
slain, A.D. 87, in an expedition against the Dacians, who were 
subsequently subdued : cf. Juv. iv. iii. 

6 The typical beggar : Horn. Od. xvii. 

7 A Greek warrior, young and handsome : cf. ix, vi. 7. 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

tarn fortis quam nee cum vinceret Artemidorus, 

quid te Cappadocum sex onus esse iuvat ? 
rideris multoque magis traduceris, Afer, 5 

quam nudus medio si spatiere foro. 
non aliter monstratur Atlans cum compare ginno 

quaeque vehit similem belua nigra Libyn. 
invidiosa tibi quam sit lectica requiris ? 

non debes ferri mortuus hexaphoro. 10 

LXXVIII 

POTOR nobilis, Aule, lumine uno 

luscus Phryx erat alteroque lippus. 

huic Heras medicus " Bibas caveto : 

vinum si biberis, nihil videbis." 

ridens Phryx oculo " Valebis " inquit. 5 

misceri sibi protinus deunces 

sed crebros iubet. exitum requiris ? 

vinum Phryx, oculus bibit venenum. 

LXXIX 

TRISTIS es et felix. sciat hoc Fortuna caveto 
ingratum dicet te, Lupe, si scierit. 

LXXX 

UT nova dona tibi, Caesar, Nilotica tell us 

miserat hibernas ambitiosa rosas. 
navita derisit Pharios Memphiticus hortos, 

urbis ut intravit limina prima tuae : 

1 A Greek athlete who won in the Capitoline contest, 
A.D. 86 ; or (perhaps) a pancratiast of Tralles, of the days of 
Galba and Vitellius. 2 A giant. 

408 



BOOK VI. LXXVII-LXXX 

even Artemidorus l when he won in the contest, why 
do you like to be the load of six Cappadocians ? You 
are laughed at, and are much more a spectacle, Afer, 
than if you were to walk naked in the midst of the 
Forum. Similar would be the sight of an Atlas 2 
with a small mule to match him, or a black elephant 
carrying a Libyan of the same hue. Do you want to 
know how offensive your litter is ? Even when dead 
you ought not to be carried in a litter and six. 3 

LXXVIII 

PHRYX, a notorious tippler, was blind, Aulus, ot 
one eye, and blear-eyed in the other. Heras, his 
doctor, said to him : " Beware of drinking ; if you 
drink wine you will not see at all." Phryx laughed, 
and said to his eye '"'Adieu." Immediately he orders 
eleven measures 4 to be mixed for him, and frequently. 
Do you ask the result ? Phryx drank a vintage, his 
eye venom. 

LXXIX 

You are sad, although fortunate. Take care For- 
tune does not know this ; " Ingrate" will be her name 
for you, Lupus, if she knows. 

LXXX 

As a novel gift to you, Caesar, the land of Nile had 
proudly sent winter roses. The sailor from Mem- 
phis scoffed at the gardens of Egypt when he first 
trod on the threshold of your city, so rich was the 

3 But on a pauper's bier, borne by four at most : cf. vni. 
Ixxv. 9. 

4 Nearly three times the usual quantity, eleven cyathi 
instead of four (triens, cf. vi. Ixxxvi. 1 ; i. cvi. 8). 

409 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

tantus veris honos et odorae gratia Florae 5 

tantaque Paestani gloria ruris erat ; 
sic, quacumque vagus gressumque oculosque ferebat, 

tonsilibus sertis omne rubebat iter. 
at tu Romanae iussus iam cedere brumae 

mitte tuas messes, accipe, Nile, rosas. 10 

LXXXI 

IRATUS tamquam populo, Charideme, lavaris : 

inguina sic toto subluis in solio. 
nee caput hie vellem sic te, Charideme, lavare. 

et caput ecce lavas : inguina malo laves. 

LXXXII 

QUID AM me modo, Rufe, diligenter 

inspectum, velut emptor aut lanista, 

cum vultu digitoque subnotasset, 

" Tune es, tune " ait " ille Martialis, 

cuius nequitias iocosque novit 5 

aurem qui modo non habet Batavam ? " 

subrisi modice, levique nutu 

me quern dixerat esse non negavi. 

" Cur ergo " inquit " habes malas lacernas ? " 

respond i : " quia sum malus poeta." 10 

hoc ne saepius accidat poetae, 

mittas, Rufe, mihi boiias lacernas. 

LXXXIII 

QUANTUM sollicito fortuna parentis Etrusco, 
tantum, summe ducum, debet uterque tibi. 



1 i.e.. thus polluting the water ; cf. n. xlii. and Ixx. For 
Charideraus, cf. vi. lyi, 

410 



BOOK VI. LXXX-LXXXIII 

beauty of spring and the charm of fragrant Flora, 
so rich the glory of Paestan fields ; so ruddy, where'er 
he turned his wandering footsteps or his eyes, was 
every path with twining roses. But do thou, bidden 
now to yield to a Roman winter, send us thy harvests, 
receive, O Nile, our roses. 

LXXXI 

You wash, Charidemus, as if you were in a rage 
with the people ; such a cleaning you give your middle 
all over the bath. 1 Even your head I should not wish 
you to wash here in such a fashion, Charidemus. Lo ! 
you wash your head too : I prefer your washing 
your middle. 

LXXXII 

A CERTAIN person, Rufus, lately looked me up and 
down carefully, just as if he were a purchaser of 
slaves or a trainer of gladiators, and when he had 
furtively observed me and pointed me out : "Are you, 
are you," he said, "that Martial, whose naughty jests 
everyone knows who at least has not a barbarous 
ear?" I smiled quietly, and with a slight bow, did 
not deny I was the person mentioned. "Why, 
then," said he, "do you wear a bad cloak?" I 
replied: "Because I am a bad poet." That this 
may not happen too often to a poet, send me, 
Rufus, a good cloak. 

LXXXIII 

As much as his father's fortunes owe to Etruscus' 
solicitude, 2 so much both father and son, illustrious 

2 He had accompanied his father into exile. As to the 
father's death, see vii. xl. 

411 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

nam tu missa tua revocasti fulmina dextra : 
hos cuperem mores ignibus esse lovis ; 

si tua sit summo, Caesar, natura Tonanti, 
utetur toto fulmine rara manus. 

muneris hoc utrumque tui testatur Etruscus, 
esse quod et comiti contigit et reduci. 

LXXXIV 

OCTAPHORO sanus portatur, Avite, Philippus 
hunc tu si sanum credis, Avite, furis. 



LXXXV 

EDITUR en sextus sine te mihi, Rufe Camoni, 

nee te lectorem sperat, amice, liber : 
impia Cappadocum tell us et numine laevo 

visa tibi cineres reddit et ossa patri. 
funde tuo lacrimas orbata Bononia Rufo, 5 

et resonet tota planctus in Aemilia. 
heu qualis pietas, heu quam brevis occidit aetas ! 

viderat Alphei praemia quinta modo. 
pectore tu memori nostros evolvere lusus, 

tu solitus totos, Rufe, tenere iocos, 10 

accipe cum fletu maesti breve carmen amici 

atque haec apsentis tura fuisse puta. 

1 cf. ix. Ixxiv. and Ixxvi. 

2 The district served by the Via Aemilia running from 
Aritninum to Placentia. 

412 



BOOK VI. LXXXIII-LXXXV 

chief, owe to thee. For thou hast recalled the bolts 
by thy right hand hurled ; I could pray that Jove's 
fire possessed such gentleness ! Were thy nature, 
Caesar, the almighty Thunderer's, rarely shall his 
hand employ his bolts' full force. To thy bounty, 
Etruscus ascribes a two-fold boon : partnership in his 
sire's exile, and his sire's return. 



LXXXIV 

PHILIPPUS, though sound, is carried in a litter and 
six, Avitus. If you think this fellow "sound," Avitus, 
you are crazy yourself. 

LXXXV 

Lo ! my sixth book goes forth without thee, Ca- 
monius Rufus, 1 and does not hope, my friend, that 
thou wilt read it. The Cappadocian land, unholy and 
with baleful omen visited by thee, gives back to thy 
sire thy ashes and thy bones. Pour forth thy tears, 
Bononia, widowed of thy Rufus ! and let lamentation 
be loud o'er all Aemilia ! 2 Alas, what filial love ! 
alas, what brief a life has perished ! it had seen but 
the fifth prize bestowed by Alpheus. 3 Thou, who 
with unforgetful heart wert wont to quote my casual 
lays, thou, Rufus, wont to recall whole epigrams, re- 
ceive, with his tears, thy sorrowing friend's brief 
song, and deem these lines incense shed upon thee 
from afar ! 

3 He had lived only five Olympiads, and thus was only 
twenty : cf. ix. Ixxvi. 3. Usually in M. an Olympiad == 
lustrum = 5 years. 

413 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXXVI 

SETINUM dominaeque nives densique trientes, 
quando ego vos medico non prohibente bibam ? 

stultus et ingratus nee tanto munere dignus 
qui mavult heres divitis esse Midae. 

possideat Libycas messis Hermumque Tagumque, 5 
et potet caldarn, qui mihi livet, aquam. 

LXXXVII 

Di tibi dent et tu, Caesar, quaecumque mereris : 
di mihi dent et tu quae volo, si merui. 

LXXXVIII 

MANE salutavi vero te nomine casu 

nee dixi dominum, Caeciliane, meum. 
quanti libertas constet mihi tanta, requiris ? 

centum quadrantes abstulit ilia mihi. 

LXXXIX 

CUM peteret seram media iam nocte matellam 

arguto madidus pollice Panaretus, 
Spoletina data est sed quam siccaverat ipse, 

nee fuerat soli tota lagona satis, 
ille fide summa testae sua vina remensus 5 

reddidit oenophori pondera plena sui. 
miraris, quantum biberat, cepisse lagonam ? 

desine rnirari, Rufe : merum biberat. 

1 A line wine : cf. iv. Ixix. 

2 Or "my lady's snows," i.e. Violentilla's. Wine was 
strained through snow : -cf. v. Ixiv. 2 ; xiv. ciii. 

414 



BOOK VI. LXXXVI-LXXXIX 

LXXXVI 

THOU, Setine, 1 and ye lordly snows, 2 and ye cups 
filled oft, when shall I drink you, nor my doctor say 
me nay ? Fool and ingrate, and unworthy such a boon 
is he who would sooner be heir of wealthy Midas ! 
May he possess Libyan harvests, and Hermus, and 
Tagus, who envies me and drink warm water ! 3 

LXXXVII 

MAY the gods and thou, Caesar, grant thee all 
thy deserts ; may the gods and thou grant me my 
wish if I have deserved it ! 

LXXXVIII 

THIS morning I addressed you, as it chanced, by 
your own name, nor did I add " My lord," Caecili- 
anus. Do you ask how much such casual conduct has 
cost me ? It has robbed me of a hundred farthings. 4 

LXXXIX 

WHEN Panaretus in his cups was, by snapping his 
fingers, requiring it being now midnight a neces- 
sary vase, a Spoletian jar was handed him, one which 
he had already drained dry by himself, and the whole 
flagon had not been sufficient for his single self. He, 
with scrupulous accuracy, remeasured to the jar the 
wine he had drunk from it, and returned the full 
burden of his wine-holder. Do you wonder the 
flagon took all he had drunk ? Don't wonder any 
longer, Rufus : he had drunk his wine neat ! 

3 M. was ill : cf. vi. xlvii. and Iviii. 

4 The client's usual dole : cf. in. vii. 1. 

415 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XC 

MOECHUM Gellia non habet nisi unum. 
turpe est hoc magis : uxor est duorum. 

XCI 

SANCTA ducis summi prohibet censura vetatque 
moechari. gaude, Zoile : non futuis. 

XCII 

CAELATUS tibi cum sit, Anniane, 
serpens in patera Myronos arte, 
Vaticana bibis : bibis venenum. 

XCIII 

TAM male Thais olet quam non fullonis avari 

testa vetus media sed modo fracta via, 
non ab amore recens hircus, non ora leonis, 

non detracta cani Transtiberina cutis, 
pullus abortivo nee cum putrescit in ovo, 5 

amphora corrupto nee vitiata garo. 
virus ut hoc alio fallax permutet odore, 

deposita quotiens balnea veste petit, 
psilothro viret aut acida latet oblita creta 

aut tegitur pingui terque quaterque faba. 10 

cum bene se tutam per fraudes mille putavit, 

omnia cum fecit, Thaida Thais olet. 

1 cf. Sen. De Btn. xvi. " matrimonium vocari unius adul- 
terium": cf. in. xcii. 2 cf. V. Ixxv. ; vi. vii. 

3 Vatican was very inferior wine : cf. I. xviii. 2 ; X. xlv. 5. 
M. assumes that the serpent poisoned the wine. He means 
that A. drank bad wine in costly cups. 

416 



BOOK VI. xc-xcm 

xc 

GELLIA has a paramour, but only one. That is all 
the more disgraceful : she is the wife of two. 1 

XCI 

THE sacred censor's edict of our illustrious chief 
forbids and debars adultery. 2 Congratulate yourself, 
Zoilus : you are impotent. 

XCII 

ALTHOUGH, Ammianus, you have on your cup a 
viper chased by Myron's art, you drink Vatican : you 
drink venom. 3 

XCIII 

THAIS smells worse even than a grasping fuller's 
long-used crock, 4 and that, too, just smashed in the 
middle of the street ; than a he-goat fresh from his 
amours ; than the breath of a lion ; than a hide 
dragged from a dog beyond Tiber ; 5 than a chicken 
when it rots in an abortive egg ; than a two-eared jar 
poisoned by putrid fish-sauce. In order craftily to 
substitute for such a reek another odour, whenever 
she strips and enters the bath she is green with 
depilatory, or is hidden behind a plaster of chalk 
and vinegar, or is covered with three or four layers 
of sticky bean-flour. When she imagines that by a 
thousand dodges she is quite safe, Thais, do what she 
will, smells of Thais. 

4 Fullers used urine in their trade, and used to collect it at 
street-corners in jars. 

5 Where tanners pursued their trade ; Juv. xiv. 203. 

6 Ordinarily used to remove wrinkles : cf. in. xlii. 1 ; xiv. Ix. 

417 
VOL. I. E E 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XCIV 

PONUNTUR semper chrysendeta Calpetiano 
sive foris seu cum cenat in urbe domi. 

sic etiam in stabulo semper, sic cenat in agro. 
non habet ergo aliud ? non habet immo suum. 



418 



BOOK VI. xciv 

XCIV 

GOLD-ENAMELLED plate is always served to Calpe- 
tianus, whether he dines away from home or when 
he is at home in town. In this way, too, he always 
dines at an inn, in this way in the country. Has he 
no other plate then ? Nay, he possesses none of 
his own ! l 

1 C. is satirised for his ostentatious use of plate which is 
not his own, but borrowed : cf. n. Iviii. 



419 
E E 2 



BOOK VII 



LIBER SEPTIMUS 



ACCIPE belligerae crudum thoraca Minervae, 
ipsa Medusaeae quern timet ira comae. 

dum vacat, haec, Caesar, poterit lorica vocari : 
pectore cum sacro sederit, aegis erit. 

II 

INVIA Sarmaticis domini lorica sagittis 

et Martis Getico tergore fida magis, 
quam vel ad Aetolae securam cuspidis ictus 

texuit innumeri lubricus unguis apri, 
felix sorte tua, sacrum cui tangere pectus 

fas erit et nostri mente calere dei. 
i comes et magnos inlaesa merere triurnphos 

palmataeque ducem, sed cito, redde togae. 



Ill 

CUR non mitto meos tibi, Pontiliane, libellos ? 
ne mihi tu mittas, Pontiliane, tuos. 

1 These lines allude to a cuirass, made of boars' hoofs, 
either taken from a temple of Minerva, or made for Domitian 
in imitation of her aegis with the Gorgon's head upon it, and 
worn by him in his Sarmatian expedition, A.D. 92. It is 
again alluded to in xiv. dkxix. 

422 



BOOK VII 



RECEIVE the savage breast-plate of warrior Minerva, 
thou whom even Medusa's wrathful tresses dread. 1 
While 'tis unworn, this, Caesar, may be called a 
cuirass ; when it shall repose on a sacred breast, 
'twill be an aegis. 

II 

IMPENETRABLE by Sarmatian arrows, thou cuirass of 
our Lord, more trusty than the Getic shield of Mars, 
which, a safeguard even against the stroke of an 
Aetolian spear, 2 the burnished hooves of unnumbered 
boars inwove, blest art thou in thy lot ! whose right 
shall be to touch that sacred breast, and to warm 
with the spirit of our God ! Go with him and win, 
undinted, mighty triumphs, and bring home and 
that soon our chief to the palm-embroidered gown. 3 

Ill 

WHY do I not send you my works, Pontilianus ? 
That you, Pontilianus, may not send yours to me. 

2 Meleager's, who slew the Calydonian boar : cf. Lib. 
Spect. xv. 1. 

* A general in his triumphal procession wore a toga of 
purple and gold (toga picta) over a tunic embroidered with 
palm-leaves (tunica palmata). 

423 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MAHTIAL 

IV 

ESSEX, Castrice, cum mail coloris, 
versus scribere coepit Oppianus. 



Si desiderium, Caesar, populique patrumque 
respicis et Latiae gaudia vera togae, 

redde deum votis poscentibus. invidet hosti 
Roma suo, veniat laurea multa licet : 

terrarum dominum propius videt ille tuoque 
terretur vultu barbarus et fruitur. 



VI 

ECQUID Hyperboreis ad nos conversus ab oris 

Ausonias Caesar iam parat ire vias ? 
certus abest auctor sed vox hoc nuntiat omnis : 

credo tibi, verum dicere, Fama, soles, 
publica victrices testantur gaudia chartae, 5 

Martia laurigera cuspide pila virent. 
rursus, io, magnos clamat tibi Roma triumphos, 

mvicTusque tua, Caesar, in urbe sonas. 
sed iam laetitiae quo sit fiducia maior, 

Sarmaticae laurus nuntius ipse veni. 10 

VII 

HIBERNA quamvis Arctos et rudis Peuce 
et ungularum pulsibus calens Hister 

1 For the "pallor" of poets tf. Hor. Ep. i. xix. 28. 

2 Domitian in A.D. 92 was campaigning against the Sarma- 
tians. He returned in Jan. 93. 

424 



BOOK VII. iv-vn 

IV 

BECAUSE, Castricus, he was of a sickly hue, 1 Oppi- 
anus begins to write verses. 

V 

IF thou regardest, Caesar, the longing of the people 
and of the Fathers, and the Latin gown's true joy, 
bring back our God to our urgent prayers ! 2 Albeit 
there comes many a letter laurel-wreathed, 3 Rome 
envies her own foe ; he views more near the Master 
of the world, and in thy countenance the barbarian 
finds his terror and his joy. 



VI 

TURNED usward from Hyperborean shores, is 
Caesar now bent on treading Ausonian ways ? Sure 
witness is there none, yet every voice so tells us ; 
thee, Report, I trust ; thou art wont to speak the 
truth. Despatches of victory attest the public joy ; 
the pikes of war are green with laurel-crowned 
heads. Again O joy ! Rome shouts thy mighty 
triumphs, and in thy city, Caesar, thou art proclaimed 
Unconquered. But now, that faith in our delight 
be greater still, come, thyself the herald of thy 
Sarmatian bay. 

VII 

ALBEIT the wintry North, and savage Peuce, 4 and 
Hister glowing with the beat of hooves, and Rhine, 

3 Despatches announcing victory were laurel- wreathed. 

4 An island at the mouth of the Danube (Hister), so called 
from its pines : cf. vii. Ixxxiv. 3. 

425 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

fractusque cornu iam ter inprobo Rhenus 

teneat domantem regna perfidae gentis 

te, summe mundi rector et parens orbis, 5 

abesse nostris non tamen potes votis. 

illic et oculis et animis sumus, Caesar, 

adeoque mentes omnium tenes unus 

ut ipsa magni turba nesciat Circi 

utrumne currat Passerinus an Tigris. 10 

VIII 

NUNC hilares, si quando mihi, nunc ludite, Musae : 

victor ab Odrysio redditur orbe deus. 
certa facis populi tu primus vota, December : 

iam licet ingenti dicere voce " Venit ! " 
felix sorte tua ! poteras non cedere lano, 5 

gaudia si nobis quae dabit ille dares, 
festa coronatus ludet convicia miles, 

inter laurigeros cum comes ibit equos. 
fas audire iocos levioraque carmina, Caesar, 

et tibi, si lusus ipse triumphus amat. 10 



IX 

CUM sexaginta numeret Cascellius annos, 
ingeniosus homo est : quando disertus erit ? 



PEDICATUR Eros, fellat Linus : Ole, quid ad te 
de cute quid faciant ille vel ille sua ? 

1 River gods were represented with horns. The shattering 
of the horn meant defeat : cf. x. vii. 6. 

426 



BOOK VII. vn-x 

his presumptuous horn now shattered thrice, 1 detain 
thee, while thou dost subdue a false nation's realm, 
thou ruler supreme of the universe and father of the 
world, yet thou canst not be parted from our prayers. 
There, where thou art, are we in vision and in soul, 
Caesar ; and so alone dost thou possess the thoughts 
of all that the very throng of the mighty Circus 
knows not whether Passarinus runs or Tigris. 2 

VIII 

Now joyfully, if ever in page of mine, frolic, ye 
Muses ! in victory is our God being restored to us 
from the Odrysian world. Thou first, December, 
makest sure fulfilment of a people's prayers : now 
may we shout with a mighty voice, " He comes ! " 
Happy in thy lot ! Thou mightest not have made 
way for Janus, wert thou giving us the joys that 
he shall give ! In festive raillery shall the wreathed 
soldier sport when he shall tread attendant on the 
laurelled steeds. To hear the jest and lighter song 
is lawful even for thee, Caesar, if a triumph of itself 
woos mirthfulness. 3 

IX 

THOUGH Cascellius now numbers sixty years, he is 
only a clever man : when will he be eloquent ? 



EROS has one filthy vice, Linus has another : Olus, 
what is it to you what one or the other does with 

2 Race-horses. 

3 For the licence allowed to soldiers in a triumphal pro- 
cession cf. i. iv. 3. 

427 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

centenis futuit Matho milibus : Ole, quid ad te ? 

non tu propterea sed Matho pauper erit. 
in lucem cenat Sertorius : Ole, quid ad te, 5 

cum liceat tota stertere nocte tibi ? 
septingenta Tito debet Lupus : Ole, quid ad te ? 

assem ne dederis crediderisve Lupo. 
illud dissimulas ad te quod pertinet, Ole, 

quodque magis curae convenit esse tuae. 10 

pro togula debes : hoc ad te pertinet, Ole. 

quadrantem nemo iam tibi credit : et hoc. 
uxor moecha tibi est : hoc ad te pertinet, Ole. 

poscit iam dotem filia grandis : et hoc. 
dicere quindecies poteram quod pertinet ad te : 15 

sed quid agas ad me pertinet, Ole, nihil. 

XI 

COGIS me calamo manuque nostra 
emendare meos, Pudens, libellos. 
o quam me nimium probas amasque 
qui vis archetypas habere nugas ! 



XII 

Sic me fronte legat dominus, Faustine, serena 

excipiatque meos qua solet aure iocos, 
ut mea nee iuste quos odit pagina laesit 

et mihi de nullo fama rubore placet, 
quid prodest, cupiant cum quidam nostra videri, 5 

si qua Lycambeo sanguine tela madent, 
vipereumque vomat nostro sub nomine virus, 

qui Phoebi radios ferre diemque negat ? 

1 i.e. scurrilous. Lycambes was driven to suicide by the 
428 



BOOK VII. x-xn 

his own hide ? Matho pays his whore a hundred 
thousand : Olus, what is it to you ? You will not be 
poor on that account, but Matho. Sertorius dines 
till daylight : Olus, what is it to you, seeing you can 
snore all night? Lupus owes seven hundred thou- 
sand sesterces to Titus : Olus, what is it to you ? 
don't give or lend Lupus a stiver. You ignore what 
is your own affair, Olus, what more concerns your 
careful thought. You owe for your sorry toga : this 
is your affair, Olus. Nobody now lends you a 
penny : this too. Your wife is a wanton ; this is 
your affair, Olus. Your strapping daughter now 
demands a dowry : this too. Fifteen times over I 
could mention what is your affair : but your doings, 
Olus, are no affair of mine. 

XI 

You compel me to correct my poems with my own 
hand and pen, Pudeiis. Oh, how overmuch you 
approve and love my work who wish to have my 
trifles in autograph ! 

XII 

MAY my Master be as certain to read me, Fausti- 
nus, with an unruffled brow, and to welcome my jests 
with his wonted heed, as my page has not wounded 
even those it justly hates, and fame won from 
another's blush is not dear to me ! What does this 
avail me when certain folk would pass off as mine 
darts wet with the blood of Lycambes, 1 and under 
my name a man vomits his viperous venom who 
owns he cannot bear the light of day? My jests 

lampoons of the poet Archilochus, to whom he had refused 
his daughter. 

429 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

ludimus innocui : scis hoc bene : iuro potentis 

per genium Famae Castaliumque gregem 10 

perque tuas aures, magni mihi numinis instar, 
lector inhumana liber ab invidia. 

XIII 

DUM Tiburtinis albescere solibus audit 

antiqui dentis fusca Lycoris ebur, 
venit in Herculeos colles. quid Tiburis alti 

aura valet ! parvo tempore nigra redit. 

XIV 

ACCIDIT infandum nostrae scelus, Aule, puellae ; 

amisit lusus deliciasque suas : 
non quales teneri ploravit arnica Catulli 

Lesbia^ nequitiis passeris orba sui, 
vel Stellae cantata meo quas flevit lanthis, 5 

cuius in Elysio nigra columba volat : 
lux mea non capitur nugis neque moribus istis 

nee dominae pectus talia damna movent : 
bis senos l puerum numerantem perdidit annos, 

mentula cui nondum sesquipedalis erat. 10 

XV 

Quis puer hie nitidis absistit lanthidos undis ? 

effugit dominam Naida numquid Hylas ? 
o bene quod silva colitur Tirynthius ista 

et quod amatrices tarn prope servat aquas ! 

1 senos Heins. , denos codd. 

1 cf. iv. Ixii. The sulphurous exhalations of the springs 
at Tibur (cf. iv. iv. 2) were supposed to have the property of 
whitening things, especially ivory. 

43 



BOOK VII. xn-xv 

are harmless : you know this well : I swear by the 
genius of mighty Fame, and the Castalian choir, and 
by your ears, which are to me as a great deity, O 
reader, who art free from ungentle envy. 

XIII 

HEARING that, under Tibur's suns, the ivory of an 
old tusk grows white, dusky Lycoris came to the 
hills of Hercules. What power high-set Tibur's air 
has ! In a short time she returned black ! l 

XIV 

AN unspeakable calamity has chanced to a girl of 
mine, Aulus : she has lost her plaything and her 
darling, not such a one as Lesbia, the mistress of 
tender Catullus, deplored when she was forlorn of 
her sparrow's roguish tricks, nor such as lanthis, 
sung of by my Stella, 2 wept for, whose black dove 
flits in Elysium. My love is not taken by trifles, nor 
by such passions as that ; nor do such losses move 
my mistress' heart : she has lost a boy just counting 
twice six years, whose parts were not as yet Gar- 
gantuan ! 

XV 

WHAT boy is this who stands apart from lanthis' 
sparkling fount ? Is it Hylas, 3 who shuns the Naiad, 
its mistress ? Oh, well that he of Tiryns 4 is wor- 
shipped in that grove, and that so nigh he watches 

2 L. Arruntius Stella, a poet, and the friend of M. : cf. 
v. xi. 3 ; i. vii. 4, His wife was Violentilla (lanthis), whose 
dove S. sang of : cf. I. vii. 

3 The companion of Hercules. He was drawn under the 
water by an enamoured nymph : cf. v. xlviii. 5 ; ix. Ixv. 14. 

4 Hercules. 

431 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

securus licet hos fontes, Argynne, ministres : 5 

nil facient Nymphae : ne velit ipse cave. 

XVI 

AERA domi non sunt, superest hoc, Regule, solum 
ut tua vendamus muriera : numquid emis ? 

XVII 

RURIS bybliotheca delicati, 

vicinam videt unde lector urbem, 

inter carmina sanctiora si quis 

lascivae fuerit locus Thaliae, 

hos nido licet inseras vel imo, 5 

septem quos tibi misimus libellos 

auctoris calamo sui notatos : 

haec illis pretium facit litura. 

at tu munere, delicata, 1 parvo 

quae cantaberis orbe iiota toto, 10 

pignus pectoris hoc mei tuere, 

luli bybliotheca Martialis. 

XVIII 

CUM tibi sit facies de qua nee femina possit 

dicere, cum corpus nulla litura notet, 
cur te tarn rarus cupiat repetatque fututor 

miraris ? vitium est non leve, Galla, tibi. 

1 ddicata y ; interpunctionem correxit Munro ; dedicala 0. 

1 The epigram is on a statue of a boy running (probably 
one of Stella's slaves), placed beside a fountain, perhaps in 
Stella's garden (cf. vi. xlvii.), and named after Argynnus, 

432 



BOOK VII. XV-XVHI 

the amorous waters ! Secure thou, Argynnus, mayst 
tend this fount : the nymphs will do thee no harm ; 
but ware the god himself! l 

XVI 

I HAVE not a copper at home ; this one thing alone 
remains, Regulus, to sell your presents : are you a 
buyer ? 

XVII 

O LIBRARY of a dainty country house, from which a 
reader surveys the City close at hand, if, amid poems 
more reverend, there shall be a place for wanton 
Thalia, thou mayst put in a niche, though it be the 
lowest one, these seven little books which I have 
sent thee, scored by their author's pen : such correc- 
tion gives them value ! But do thou, 2 dainty one, 
that, because of my small gift, shall be sung and 
known throughout the world, protect this pledge of 
my heart's love, O library of Julius Martialis ! 



XVIII 

ALTHOUGH you have a face which not even a 
woman could criticise, although no blemish marks 
your body, do you wonder why it is so rarely a 
gallant desires you and seeks you a second time ? 
You have a defect, Galla, and no light one. Ogni 

the favourite of Agamemnon. M. means that Hercules will 
protect Argynnus from the nymphs of the fountain, but that 
he will be in danger of being carried off by Hercules himself. 
2 Or, without Munro's punctuation, "thou, who, because 
of my gift, shall be sung of as dainty." 

433 
VOL. I. F F 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

access! quotiens ad opus mixtisque movemur 5 

inguinibus, cunnus non tacet, ipsa taces. 
di facerent ut tu loquereris et ille taceret : 

offender cunni garrulitate tui. 
pedere te mallem : namque hoc nee inutile dicit 

Symmachus et risum res movet ista siniul. 10 

quis rid ere potest fatui poppysmata cunni ? 

cum sonat hie, cui non mentula mensque cadit ? 
die aliquid saltern clamosoque obstrepe cunno 

et, si adeo muta es, disce vel inde loqui. 



XIX 

FRAGMENTUM quod vile putas et inutile lignum, 
haec fuit ignoti prima carina maris. 

quam nee Cyaneae quondam potuere ruinae 
frangere nee Scythici tristior ira freti, 

saecula vicerunt : sed quamvis cesserit annis, 
sanctior est salva parva tabella rate. 



XX 

NIHIL est miserius neque gulosius Santra. 

rectam vocatus cum cucurrit ad cenam, 

quam tot diebus noctibusque captavit, 

ter poscit apri glandulas, quater lumbum, 

et utramque coxam leporis et duos armos, 5 

nee erubescit peierare de turdo 

et ostreorum rapere lividos cirros. 

buccis placentae ] sordidam Unit mappam ; 

1 Buccis placentae Scriver. ; buccis plangentcm & ; dulcis 
placenta y. 

434 



BOOK VII. xvm-xx 

volta che venni teco alle prese, e nei mischiati pia- 
ceri s'aggitiamo coi lumbi, tu taci, e '1 tuo c o 
chiazza. Volessero gli del che tu parlassi ed esso 
tacesse : io sono nauseate dalla chiacchiera del tuo 
c o. Amerei meglio che tu petassi : imperocche 
Simaco dice che ci6 e giovevole, e nel tempo stesso 
muove il riso. Chi pu6 ridere ai poppismi d'un fatuo 
c o ? quando questo romba, a cui non cade la men- 
tola e la mente ? Di almeno qualche cosa, o serra 
il susurroso tuo c o : e se non sei affatto mutola, 
impara indi a parlare. 

XIX 

THE fragment thou regardest as cheap and useless 
wood, this was the first keel to stem the unknown 
sea. That which the clash of the Azure rocks l 
could not shatter of old, nor the wrath, more dread, 
of Scythia's ocean, ages have subdued : yet, however 
much it has submitted to time, more sacred is this 
small plank than the vessel unscathed. 

XX 

No miserliness or gluttony is equal to Santra's. 
When he has been invited and has hurried off to the 
grand dinner which he has for so many nights and 
days fished for, he asks thrice for kernels of boar, 
four times for the loin, and for each leg of a hare, 
and both wings ; nor does he blush to tell lies about 
a fieldfare, and to snatch the discoloured beards of 
oysters. With mouthfuls of cake he stains his soiled 

1 Two rocks at the mouth of the Bosphorus, supposed to 
float and collide. They were, according to legend, discovered 
by the Argonauts. Perhaps the legend represents early 
experiences of icebergs. 

435 
F F 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

illic et uvae conlocantur ollares 

et Punicorum pauca grana malorum 10 

et excavatae pellis indecens volvae 

et lippa ficus debilisque boletus. 

sed mappa cum iam mille rumpitur furtis, 

rosos tepenti spondylos sinu condit 

et devorato capite turturem truncum. 15 

colligere longa turpe nee putat dextra 

analecta quidquid et canes reliquerunt. 

nee esculenta sufficit gulae praeda : 

mixto lagonam replet ad pedes vino. 

haec per ducentas cum domum tulit scalas 20 

seque obserata clusit anxius cella 

gulosus ille, postero die vendit. 



XXI 

HAEC est ilia dies, quae magni conscia partus 
Lucanum populis et tibi, Polla, dedit. 

heu ! Nero crudelis nullaque invisior umbra, 
debuit hoc saltern non licuisse tibi. 



XXII 

VATIS Apollinei magno memorabilis ortu 
lux redit : Aonidum turba, favete sacris. 

haec meruit, cum te erris, Lucane, dedisset, 
mixtus Castaliae Baetis ut esset aquae. 

1 i.e. a sow's matrix, a favourite dish : cf. Hor. Ep. I. xv. 
41. It was stuffed with appetising herbs and condiments : 
cf. Athen. iii. 58, 59 ; which in this instance had already been 
eaten. Excavatae, may be however = ejectitiae, a matrix from 

43 6 



BOOK VII. xx-xxn 

napkin ; there too are packed preserved grapes, and 
a few grains of pomegranate, and the unsightly skin 
of a scooped out haggis, 1 and an oozing fig, and a 
flabby mushroom. And when his napkin is already 
bursting under his thousand thefts, he secretes in 
the reeking folds of his gown gnawed vertebrae, and 
a turtle-dove shorn of its head already gobbled up. 
Nor does he think it disgraceful to pick up with a 
long arm whatever the sweeper and the dogs have 
left. Nor are eatables sufficient loot for him : he 
fills behind his back a flagon with the wine and water. 
When that greedy fellow has carried these things home 
up two hundred stairs, and anxiously shut himself 
in his locked garret, the next day he sells the lot ! 

XXI 

THIS is that day which, conscious of a great birth, 
gave Lucan to the nations and, Polla, 2 to thee. Ah, 
Nero ! cruel, and for no death more hateful ! this 
deed at least should not have been permitted thee ! 

XXII 

MADE glorious by the mighty birth of Apollo's 
bard, the day returns : ye Aonian throng, 3 look 
kindly on these rites ! These it earned, when it had 
given thee, Lucan, to the earth, that Baetis 4 might 
be mingled with the water of Castalia. 

which the fetus has been removed before birth : cf. Plin. 
N.H. xi. 84. 

2 Folia Argentaria, the widow of the poet Lucan. She 
was a patron of M. : cf. X. Ixiv. 1. * The Muses. 

4 Lucan was born at Cordova on the Baetis (Guadalquiver). 

437 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXIII 

PHOEBE, veni, sed quantus eras cum bella tonanti 
ipse dares Latiae plectra secunda lyrae. 

quid tanta pro luce precer ? tu, Polla, maritum 
saepe colas et se sentiat ille coli. 



XXIV 

CUM luvenale meo quae me committere temptas, 

quid non audebis, perfida lingua, loqui ? 
te fingente nefas Pyladen odisset Orestes, 

Thesea Pirithoi destituisset amor, 
tu Siculos fratres et maius nomen Atridas 5 

et Ledae poteras dissociare genus, 
hoc tibi pro mentis et talibus inprecor ausis, 

ut facias illud quod, puto, lingua, facis. 

XXV 

DULCIA cum tantum scribas epigrammata semper 

et cerussata candidiora cute, 
nullaque mica salis nee amari fellis in illis 

gutta sit, o demens, vis tamen ilia legi ! 
nee cibus ipse iuvat morsu fraudatus aceti, 5 

nee grata est facies cui gelasinus abest. 
infanti melimela dato fatuasque mariscas : 

nam mihi, quae novit pungere, Chia sapit. 

1 " Inspire me now as thon didst inspire Lucan, the second 
poet after Virgil, when he sang of the civil war between 
Pompey and Caesar." 

438 



BOOK VII. xxm-xxv 



XXIII 

PHOEBUS, come thou, but in thy might, as thou 
wert when to him who thundered of war thou gavest 
with thy own hand the second quill of the Latin 
lyre. 1 What should be my prayer for a day so great ? 
Mayst thou, Polla, long revere thy spouse, and may 
he himself feel that he is revered ! 

XXIV 

THOU that essayest to embroil me with my Juvenal, 
what wilt not thou, perfidious tongue, dare to say ? 
At thy imagining of wrong Orestes would have hated 
Pylades, Peirithous' love would have left Theseus 
lorn : thou couldst have parted the Sicilian brothers, 2 
and a greater name the sons of Atreus, and Leda's 
generation. 3 This is my curse on thee for thy de- 
serts and for attempts so shameless : that thou mayst 
do that which, O tongue, I wot thou doest ! 

XXV 

ALTHOUGH you continually write epigrams that are 
merely sweet, and more immaculate than a white- 
enamelled skin, and no grain of salt, nor drop of 
bitter gall is in them, yet, O madman ! you wish them 
to be read ! Not food itself is pleasant robbed of 
biting vinegar, nor is a face winning when no dimple 
is there. To an infant give honey-apples and insipid 
figs : for me the Chian fig with a tang has savour. 

2 Amphinomus and Anapius, models of fraternal love and 
filial piety, who carried their parents from an eruption of 
Etna : Strabo, vi. 2. Claudian has a poem (De Piia Fra- 
tribus) on the subject. 3 Castor and Pollux, 

439 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXVI 

APOLLINAREM conveni meum, scazon, 

et si vacabit (ne molestus accedas) 

hoc qualecumque, cuius aliqua pars ipse est 

dabis : hoc facetae * carmen inbuant aures. 

si te receptum fronte videris tota, 5 

noto rogabis ut favore sustentet. 

quanto mearum, scis, amore nugarum 

flagret : nee ipse plus amare te possum. 

contra malignos esse si cupis tutus, 

Apollinarem conveni rneum, scazon. 10 



XXVII 

TUSCAE glandis aper populator et ilice multa 

iam piger, Aetolae fama secunda ferae, 
quern meus intravit splendenti cuspide Dexter, 

praeda iacet nostris invidiosa focis. 
pinguescant madido laeti nidore penates 5 

flagret et exciso festa culina iugo. 
sed cocus ingentem piperis consumet acervum, 

addet et arcano mixta Falerna garo. 
ad dominum redeas, noster te non capit ignis, 

conturbator aper : vilius esurio. 10 



XXVIII 

Sic Tiburtinae crescat tibi silva Dianae 
et properet caesum saepe redire nemus, 

1 hoc 5-, haec codd.; facetae Gronov.,facetum codd. 
440 



BOOK VII. xxvi-xxvm 

XXVI 

SALUTE my Apolliiiaris, halting verse, 1 and if he be 
at leisure do not approach him unseasonably you 
will give him this, whate'er its worth, in which he 
too has some part : may cultivated ears be first to hear 
this verse ! If you see yourself welcomed by an un- 
ruffled brow, you will ask him to support you with 
his well-known favour. With what great love for 
my trifles he burns you know ; not even I myself can 
love you more. If against malice you wish to be 
safe, salute my Apollinaris, halting verse ! 



XXVII 

THE ravager of Tuscan mast, now fat with many 
an acorn, second in renown to the Aetolian beast, 2 
a boar which my Dexter pierced with his gleaming 
spear, lies here, a booty abhorrent to my hearth. 
Let my household gods joyously grow fat the 
steaming reek, and my festal kitchen blaze with 
felling of a hill top. But ah ! the cook will consume 
a huge heap of pepper, and add Falernian mixed 
with his treasured fish-sauce. Go back to your 
owner my fire is too small for you, O boar that 
would bankrupt me ! 'tis less ruinous to starve. 



XXVIII 

So may Diana's wood at Tibur burgeon for you, 
and the grove, oft lopped, be quick to grow anew ; 

1 cf. i. xcvi. 1. 

2 The boar slain by Meleager : cf. Lib. Spect. xv. 1. 

441 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

nee Tartesiacis Pallas tua, Fusee, trapetis 

cedat et inmodici dent bona musta lacus ; 
sic fora mirentur, sic te Palatia laudent, 5 

excolat et geminas plurima palma fores : 
otia dum medius praestat tibi parva December, 

exige, sed certa, quos legis, aure iocos. 
" Scire libet verum ? res est haec ardua." sed tu 

quod tibi vis dici dicere, Fusee, potes. 10 

XXIX 

THESTYLE, Victoris tormentum dulce Voconi, 

quo nemo est toto notior orbe puer, 
sic etiam positis formosus amere capillis 

et placeat vati nulla puella tuo : 
paulisper domini doctos sepone libellos, 5 

carmina Victori dum lego parva tuo. 
et Maecenati, Maro cum cantaret Alexin, 

nota tamen Marsi fusca Melaenis erat. 

XXX 

DAS Parthis, das Germanis, das, Caelia, Dacis, 

nee Cilicum spernis Cappadocumque toros ; 
et tibf de Pharia Memphiticus urbe fututor 

navigat, a rubris et niger Indus aquis ; 
nee recutitorum fugis inguina ludaeorum, 5 

nee te Sarmatico transit Alarms equo. 
qua ratione facis, cum sis Romana puella, 

quod Romana tibi mentula nulla placet ? 

1 Now Tarifa, in Spain. 

2 i.e. the law courts. They were at this time three, the 
F. Romanum, F. Caesaris, and F. Augusti. 

3 Palms were affixed to the doors of advocates after success 
in court : Juv. vii. 117. 

4 i.e. the plain truth. 

442 



BOOK VII. xxvin-xxx 

and your olive, Fuscus, yield not to presses of Tar- 
tessus, 1 and your overflowing vats give you goodly 
must ; so may the forums 2 admire you, so may the 
Palace praise you, and many a palm deck your fold- 
ing doors 8 while mid December secures you some 
small leisure, examine, and with unfailing ear, the 
jests you read, "Do you wish to learn the truth? 
that is a hard matter." But you can say to me, 
Fuscus, what* you wish said to you. 

XXIX 

THESTYLUS, the dear torment of Voconius Victor, 
O boy better known 5 than any in all the world, so 
may you, even now with your shorn locks, be beau- 
tiful and dear, and no maiden be pleasing to your 
bard lay aside awhile your master's learned 
books while I read some small verses to your Victor. 
Even to Maecenas, although Maro was singing of 
Alexis, still was Marsus' dusk Melaenis 6 known. 

XXX 

You grant your favours to Parthians, you grant 
them to Germans, you grant them, Caelia, to Dacians, 
and you do not spurn the couch of Cilicians and 
Cappadocians ; and for you from his Egyptian city 
comes sailing the gallant of Memphis, and the black 
Indian from the Red Sea; nor do you shun the 
lecheries of circumcised Jews, and the Alan on his 
Sarmatian steed does not pass you by. What is your 
reason that, although you are a Roman girl, no 
Roman lewdness has attraction for you ? 

5 Because you are sung of in his poems (docti libelli) ; cf. 
vati in 1. 4. 

6 On whom Marsus had written a poem. He was a younger 
contemporary of Horace, and wrote elegies, and epigrams, and 
an epic poem called Amazonis : cf. I. Epist. 12 ; iv. xxix. 8. 

443 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXXI 

RAUCAE chortis aves et ova matrum 

et flavas medio vapore Chias 

et fetum querulae rudem capellae 

nee iam frigoribus pares olivas 

et canum gelidis hoi us pruinis 5 

de nostro tibi missa rure credis ? 

o quam, Regale, diligenter erras ! 

nil nostri, nisi me, ferunt agelli. 

quidquid vilicus Umber aut colonus 

aut rus marmore tertio notatum 10 

aut Tusci tibi Tusculive mittunt, 

id tota mihi iiascitur Subura. 



XXXII 

ATTICE, facundae renovas qui nomina gentis 

nee sinis ingentem conticuisse domum, 
te pia Cecropiae comitatur turba Minervae, 

te secreta quies, te sophos omnis amat. 
at iuvenes alios fracta colit aure magister 5 

et rapit inmeritas sordidus unctor opes, 
non pila, non follis, non te paganica thermis 

praeparat aut nudi stipitis ictus hebes, 
vara nee in lento ceromate bracchia tendis, 

non harpasta vagus pulverulenta rapis, 10 

1 Frost-bitten. M. depreciates what he sends, lest R. 
should think him a rich man. 

2 i.e. M. has to buy in the market ; cf. x. xciv. 5. 

444 



BOOK VII. xxxi-xxxn 

XXXI 

BIRDS of the cackling farmyard, and eggs of mother 
hens, and Chian figs yellow from insufficient heat, 
and the young offspring of the bleating she-goat, and 
olives unable now to stand the cold, 1 and cabbages 
whitened by chill hoar frosts do you believe these 
were sent you from my country-place ? Oh, how 
carefully wrong, Regulus, you are ! My small fields 
bear nothing but me. Whatever your Umbrian 
bailiff, or tenant sends you, or your country-house 
marked by the third milestone, or your lands in 
Etruria or at Tusculum, this for me is produced all 
over the Subura. 2 



XXXII 

ATTICUS, who make live anew the names of an elo- 
quent race, and suffer a mighty house to continue 
mute, on you the pious votaries of Cecropian Minerva 
attend, you cloistered leisure, you every philosopher 
holds dear. But other young men the boxing-master 
with his battered ear courts, and the dirty anointer 
makes off with wealth undeserved. No hand-ball, 
no bladder-ball, no feather-stuffed ball 3 makes you 
ready for the warm bath, nor the blunted stroke 
upon the unarmed stump ; 4 nor do you stretch forth 
squared arms besmeared with sticky ointment, nor, 
darting to and fro, snatch the dusty scrimmage-ball, 

3 As to these, cj. iv. xix. 5 ; xiv. xlv.-xlviii. 

4 The post (palus) on which sword-strokes with a blunted 
sword were practised : Juv. vi. 247. This was also done as 
exercise before the bath. 

445 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

sed curris niveas tantum prope Virginis undas 

aut ubi Sidonio taurus amore calet. 
per varias artes, omnis quibus area servit, 

ludere, cum liceat currere, pigritia est. 

XXXIII 

SORDIDIOR caeno cum sit toga, calceus autem 

candidior prima sit tibi, Cinna, nive : 
deiecto quid., inepte, pedes perfundis amictu ? 

collige, Cinna, togam ; calceus ecce perit. 

XXXIV 

Quo possit fieri modo, Severe, 

ut vir pessimus omnium Charinus 

unam rem bene fecerit, requiris ? 

dicam, sed cito. quid Nerone peius ? 

quid thermis melius Neronianis ? 5 

non dest protinus, ecce, de malignis 

qui sic rancidulo loquatur ore : 

" Quid tu tot domini deique nostri 

praefers muneribus ? " l Neronianas 

thermas praefero balneis cinaedi. 10 

XXXV 

INGUINA succinctus nigra tibi servos aluta 
stat, quotiens calidis tota foveris aquis. 

sed meus, ut de me taceam, Laecania, servos 
ludaeum nuda sub cute pondus habet, 



tu tot Housman, quid te tot , ut quid tu X V ; 
interpunxit post muneribus Housman, who explains that the 
maiignus wrests 1. 5 into an insnlt to Domitian. " No," 
says M., "I only said I prefer N. 'swarm baths to those of 
a cinaedus," thus keeping the description of the vir pessimus 
to the last word. 

446 



BOOK VII. xxxn-xxxv 

but you run only by the clear Virgin water, 1 or 
where the Bull warms with passion for his Sidonian 
love. 2 To trifle in the various sports to which every 
open space is devoted, when one can run, is sloth. 

XXXIII 

As your toga is dirtier than mud, whereas your 
shoe, Cinna, is whiter than untrodden snow, why do 
you, foolish man, overspread your feet with your 
draggling garb ? Gather up your toga, Cinna ; see, 
your shoe is being spoilt. 3 

XXXIV 

How does it possibly come, Severus, that Charinus, 
the worst rascal in the world, did one thing well ? 
Do you ask ? I will tell you, and briefly. What was 
worse than Nero ? What is better than Nero's warm 
baths ? See, at once some one of the malicious 
crowd is ready to say in sour tones : " What do you 
set above the many structures erected by our Master 
and God?" I set Nero's warm baths above the 
baths of a pathic. 

XXXV 

Un- servo, cinto le pudende con un nero cuojo, 
attende a te ogni volta che tutta t'immergi nelle 
calde acque. Ma il mio servo, senza parlare di me, 
ha il giudaico peso sott'un nudo cuojo ; ma ed i 

1 The Aqua Virgo. Here perhaps was a running ground, 
as there was in the Port. Eur. : cf. n. xiv. 4. 

2 In the Porticua Europae : cf. n. xiv. 3 ; in. xx. 12. 

3 M. means that C. prefers white shoes to a white toga, 
and yet allows the one to soil the other. 

447 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

sed nudi tecum iuvenesque senesque lavantur. I 

an sola est servi mentula vera tui ? 
ecquid femineos sequeris, matrona, recessus, 

secretusque tua, cunne, lavaris aqua ? 

XXXVI 

CUM pluvias madidumque lovem perferre negaret 

et rudis hibernis villa nataret aquis, 
plurima, quae posset subitos effundere nimbos, 

muneribus venit tegula missa tuis. 
horridus, ecce, sonat Boreae stridore December : i 

Stella, tegis villam, non tegis agricolam. 

XXXVII 

NOSTI mortiferum quaestoris, Castrice, signum ? 

est operae pretium discere theta novum : 
exprimeret quotiens rorantem frigore nasum, 

letalem iuguli iusserat esse notam. 
turpis ab inviso pendebat stiria naso, B 

cum flaret media fauce December atrox : 
collegae tenuere manus : quid plura requiris ? 

emungi misero, Castrice, non licuit. 

XXXVIII 

TANTUS es et talis nostri, Polypheme, Severi 

ut te mirari possit et ipse Cyclops, 
sed nee Scylla minor, quod si fera monstra duorum 

iunxeris, alterius fiet uterque timor. 

448 



BOOK VII. xxxv-xxxvm 

giovani, ed i vecchi si lavano nudi teco. La mentola 
del tuo servo e solamente la vera ? O matrona, 
siegui tu i feminei recessi, e ti lavi tu di nascosto 
O c o, nella tua acqua ? 

XXXVI 

WHEN my rough country-house was refusing to en- 
dure any longer the rain and drenching sky, and was 
swimming in a winter deluge, many a tile, to carry 
off sudden storms, reached me by your bounty. 
See, rough December roars with the North wind's 
thunder ! Stella, you cover the farm, you don't 
clothe the farmer ! 

XXXVII 

Do you know, Castricus, the quaestor's signal 
for death ? It is worth while to learn this new 
kind of death-warrant : he had given orders that, 
every time he blew his nose dripping with the 
cold, that should be the fatal sign of execution. 
An unsightly icicle was hanging from his hateful 
nose, when wild December was blowing a blast from 
the depths of its throat : his colleagues held his 
hands : what more do you ask ? The unhappy man, 
Castricus, was not allowed to blow his nose ! 

XXXVIII 

So huge and so ugly are you, Polyphemus, slave 
of my Severus, that even the Cyclops himself 
might wonder at you. And Scylla is no smaller. 
Now, if you marry the two wild monstrosities, each 
will become the other's bogey ! 



o a 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XXXIX 

DISCURSUS varies vagumque mane 

et fastus et have potentiorum 

cum perferre patique iam negaret, 

coepit fingere Caelius podagram. 

quam dum volt nimis adprobare veram 5 

et sanas linit obligatque plantas 

inceditque gradu laborioso, 

(quantum cura potest et ars doloris !) 

desit fingere Caelius podagram. 

XL 

Hie iacet ille senex Augusta notus in aula, 

pectore non humili passus utrumque deum ; 
natorum pietas sanctis quem coniugis umbris 

miscuit : Elysium possidet ambo nemus. 
occidit ilia prior viridi fraudata iuventa : 5 

hie prope ter senas vixit Olympiadas. 
sed festinatis raptum tibi credidit annis, 

aspexit lacrimas quisquis, Etrusce, tuas. 

XLI 

COSMICOS esse tibi, Semproni Tucca, videris. 
cosmica, Semproni, tarn mala quam bona sunt. 

XLII 

MUNERIBUS cupiat si quis contendere tecum, 
audeat hie etiam, Castrice, carminibus. 

1 i.e. pleased or angry. As to Claudius Etruscus, see 
Stat. Sylv. iii. 3. He had been banished and recalled by 
Domitiau : cf. vi. Ixxxiii. 

2 Periods of five years, as generally in M. : cf. iv. xlv. 4. 

45 



BOOK VII. xxxix-xLii 

XXXIX 

WHEN he refused any longer to endure and put 
up with the various gaddings about, and the 
devious morning calls, and the pride and salutations 
of wealthy patrons, Caelius set up the pretence of 
gout. And while he was anxious to prove it was 
quite genuine, and plastered and swathed his sound 
feet, and got along with a labouring gait, Caelius 
what potency has the exercise and cultivation of 
illness ! has ceased to pretend gout ! 

XL 

HERE lies that aged sire, famed in the Augustan 
hall as bearing with no abject soul our God in 
either mood ; l his sons' love has joined him to 
his wife's hallowed shade : Elysium's grove holds 
them both. She died the first, robbed of her fresh 
youth ; he lived well-nigh thrice six Olympiads. 2 
Yet whoever has seen thy tears, Etruscus, accounts 
him snatched away from thee too swiftly. 

XLI 

THE very quintessence of Cosmus' shop you fancy 
yourself, Sempronius Tucca. Of Cosmus' essences, 3 
Sempronius, as many are bad as good. 4 

XLII 

IP any one wish to vie with you in gifts, let 
him venture, Castricus, in poetry too. I am poorly 

3 Another, but less likely, interpretation is to take cos- 
micnx as = man of the world, and cosmica as = worldly 
things. 

4 cf. in. Iv. 1 ; I. Ixxxvii. 2. 

451 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

nos tenues in utroque sumus vincique parati : 

inde sopor nobis et placet alta quies. 
tarn mala cur igitur dederim tibi carmina, quaeris ? 5 

Alcinoo nullum poma dedisse putas ? 

XLin 

PRIMUM est ut praestes, si quid te, Cinna, rogabo ; 

illud deinde sequens ut cito, Cinna, neges. 
diligo praestantem ; non odi, Cinna, negantem : 

sed tu nee praestas nee cito, Cinna, negas. 

XLIV 

MAXIMUS ille tuus, Ovidi, Caesonius hie est, 

cuius adhuc vultum vivida cera tenet, 
hunc Nero damnavit ; sed tu damnare Neronem 

ausus es et profugi, non tua, fata sequi : 
aequora per Scyllae magnus comes exulis isti, 5 

qui modo nolueras consulis ire comes, 
si victura meis mandantur nomina chartis 

et fas est cineri me superesse meo, 
audiet hoc praesens venturaque turba fuisse 

illi te, Senecae quod fuit ille suo. 10 



XLV 

FACUNDI Senecae potens amicus, 
caro proxinius aut prior Sereno, 



1 i.e. carried coals to Newcastle. Alcinous, the mythical 
king of Phaeacia, was celebrated for his orchards : cf. x. 
xciv. 2. 

452 



BOOK VII. XLII-XLV 

furnished in both, and prepared to be surpassed ; 
hence repose and unbroken quiet are my delight. 
Why then, you ask, did I send you such bad poems ? 
Think you no man has given apples to Alcinous P 1 

XLIII 

THE first thing is that you should hand it over 
if I ask anything of you, Cinna ; the next thing 
after that, Cinna, is that you should refuse quickly. 
I like a man who hands over ; I do not hate, Cinna, 
a man who refuses ; but you neither hand over, 
nor do you, Cinna, quickly refuse. 

XLIV 

HERE, Ovidius, 2 is your Maximus Caesonius, 
whose lineaments the living wax still preserves. 
He it was Nero condemned ; but you dared to 
condemn Nero, and to follow the fortunes of a 
banished man, not your own : over Scylla's seas 
you went, that exile's high-souled comrade, you who 
had lately refused to be comrade of a consul. If 
those names shall live which are entrusted to my 
pages, and if it may be that I survive my own ashes, 
this shall the men of to-day and of to-morrow hear, 
that you were to him all that he was to his Seneca. 3 

XLV 

THE powerful friend of the eloquent Seneca, 
counted next to his dear Serenus, or dearer still, 

2 Quintus Ovidius, M.'s friend and neighbour at Nomen- 
tum : cf. vn. xciii. 3 ; x. xliv. 

3 Caesonius had followed Seneca into exile when he had 
been banished by the Emperor Claudius. 

453 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

hie est Maximus ille, quern frequenti 

felix littera pagina salutat. 

hunc tu per Siculas secutus undas, 5 

o nullis Ovidi tacende linguis, 

sprevisti domini furentis iras. 

miretur Pyladen suum vetustas, 

haesit qui comes exuli parentis. 

quis discrimina conparet duorum ? 10 

haesisti comes exuli Neronis. 

XLVI 

COMMENDARE tuum dum vis mihi carmine munus 

Maeonioque cupis doctius ore loqui, 
excrucias multis pariter me teque diebus, 

et tua de nostro, Prisce, Thalia tacet. 
divitibus poteris musas elegosque sonantes 5 

mittere : pauperibus munera ?rea 1 dato. 

XLVII 

DOCTOR UM Licini celeberrime Sura virorum, 

cuius prisca gravis lingua reduxit avos, 
redderis (heu, quanto fatorum munere !) nobis 

gustata Lethes paene remissus aqua, 
perdiderant iam vota metum securaque flebat 5 

ftristitia 2 et lacrimisf iamque peractus eras : 
non tulit invidiam taciti regnator Averni 

et raptas Fatis reddidit ipse colus. 
scis igitur quantas hominum mors falsa querellas 

moverit et frueris posteritate tua. 10 

1 iTf^d Palmer, pexa ft, plena, y. 

2 flebant. tristitia Postgate, tristities Housman. 

1 The S of salutem (greeting). These letters of Seneca are 
unknown. 

454 



BOOK VII. XLV-XLVII 

that Maximus is here, whom in many a page the 
happy letter * greets. This is he whom you no 
tongue, Ovidius, but should speak your name ! 
followed over Sicilian waters, spurning the wrath of 
an infuriate despot. Let hoary time admire its 
Pylades, who as comrade clung to one 2 whom his 
parent banished. Who could compare the perils 
of the two ? You, as comrade, clung to one banished 
by Nero ! 

XLVI 

WHILE you are wishing to recommend your present 
to me by a poem, and are anxious to speak more 
skilfully than Homeric lips, you rack both me and 
yourself alike for many days, and your Thalia, 3 
Priscus, at my expense is dumb. You can send 
to rich men verses and sounding elegies : to poor 
men send prosaic gifts. 

XLVII 

MOST famed of learned men, Licinius Sura, whose 
old world tongue recalled our grave grandsires, 
thou art restored to us ah, by how great a boon of 
Fate ! sent back when thou hadst well-nigh tasted 
Lethe's wave. Already had our prayers lost their 
fear ; and sadness wept in calm despair, and to 
our tears thou wert already sped : the reproach 
the Lord of silent Avernus could not bear, and 
himself gave back their ravished distaff to the 
Fates. Wherefore thou knowest what plaints of 
men thy false death stirred, and dost enjoy 

2 Orestes, banished by Clytemnestra after the murder of 
Agamemnon : Aeseh. Cho. 912. 

3 The Muse of epigram : </. iv. viii. 12. P. was apparently 
a poet. 

455 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

vive velut rapto fugitivaque gaudia carpe : 
perdiderit nullum vita reversa diem. 

XLVIII 

CUM mensas habeat fere trecentas, 
pro mensis habet Annius ministros : 
transcurrunt gabatae volantque lances, 
has vobis epulas habete, lauti : 
nos offendimur ambulante cena. 

XLIX 

PARVA suburbani munuscula mittimus horti : 
faucibus ova tuis, poma, Severe, gulae. 



FONS dominae, regina loci quo gaudet lanthis, 

gloria conspicuae deliciumque domus, 
cum tua tot niveis ornetur ripa ministris 

et Ganymedeo luceat unda choro, 
quid facit Alcides silva sacratus in ista? 5 

tarn vicina tibi cur tenet antra deus ? 
numquid Nympharum notos observat amores, 

tarn multi pariter ne rapiantur Hylae ? 

LI 

MERCARI nostras si te piget, Urbice, nugas 
et lasciva tamen carmina nosse libet, 

1 i.e. thy own after-fame. * Ravished from death. 

3 A custom had arisen of handing the dishes round instead 
of placing them on the table. M. complains that they are 
handed round so quickly that the guest had no time to eat. 

456 



BOOK VII. XLVII-LI 

succession to thyself. 1 Live thy life as it were spoil, 2 
and pluck the joys that fly : life brought back should 
lose no day. 

XL VIII 

ALTHOUGH Annius has almost three hundred 
tables, he has servants instead of tables : the 
platters scud across and the dishes flit. 3 Keep such 
banquets to yourselves, you epicures ! We are 
annoyed by a peripatetic dinner. 

XLIX 

I SEND you these small offerings of my suburban 
garden, eggs for your hunger, Severus, apples for 
your palate. 

L 

FOUNT of thy mistress, in which lanthis, 4 queen 
of the spot, delights, glory and delight of a splendid 
house, when thy marge is decked with so many 
snow-white slaves and thy lucent wave reflects a 
band of Ganymedes, 5 what means Alcides consecrate 
in yonder grove ? Why holds the God a grot so 
near to thee ? Keeps he guard over the Nymphs, 
known wantons, lest so many Hylases be rapt away 
together ? 6 

LI 

IF you shrink from buying my trifles, Urbicus, 
and yet would be acquainted with my wanton verses, 

4 The wife of M.'s friend Stella. As to the fountain, cf. 
vi. xlvii. 

5 The fount appears to have been surrounded by marble 
statues of slaves as cupboarers. 6 cf. VH. xv. 6. 

457 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

Pompeium quaeres, et nosti forsitan, Auctum : 

Ultoris prima Martis in aede sedet 
iure madens varioque togae limatus in usu. 5 

non lector metis hie, Urbice, sed liber est. 
sic tenet absentes nostros cantatque libellos 

ut pereat chartis littera nulla meis : 
denique, si vellet, poterat scripsisse videri ; 

sed famae mavult ille favere meae. 10 

hunc licet a decuma (neque enim satis ante vacabit) 

sollicites, capiet cenula parva duos, 
ille leget, bibe tu ; nolis licet, ille sonabit : 

et cum " lam satis est" dixeris, ille leget. 

LII 

GRATUM est quod Celeri nostros legis, Aucte, libellos, 
si tamen et Celerem quod legis, Aucte, iuvat. 

ille meas gentes et Celtas rexit Hiberos, 
nee fuit in nostro certior orbe fides. 

maior me tanto reverentia turbat, et aures 5 

non auditoris, iudicis esse puto. 

LIII 
OMNIA misisti mihi Saturnalibus, Umber, 

munera, contulerant quae tibi quinque dies : 
bis senos triplices et dentiscalpia septem ; 

his comes accessit spongea mappa calix 
semodiusque fabae cum vimine Picenarum 5 

et Laletanae nigra lagona sapae ; 
458 



BOOK VII. LI-LIU 

you will seek out and perhaps you know him 
Pomponius Auctus : he sits at the entrance of Aveng- 
ing Mars, steeped in law, and versed in the many- 
sided practice of the gown. He is not a reader of 
my books, Urbicus, but himself the book. He so 
remembers my poems, though they are not before 
him, and declaims them, that not a letter is lost 
from my pages ; in fine, he might, if he chose, 
have been counted their author ; but he chooses 
rather to support my fame. After the tenth hour 
for he will not be fully at leisure before you may 
solicit him : a small dinner will do for two ; he will 
read : do you drink ; although you may not wish it, 
he will mouth my verses ; and when you have said 
" Hold ! enough ! " he will go on reading. 

LII 

I AM gratified that you read my poems to Celer, 
Auctus x if, that is, what you read, Auctus, pleases 
Celer too. He was Governor over my native tribes 
and Celtiberians, and in that world of mine was 
no man of honour more sure. Therefore greater 
awe confounds me ; and I deem his ears not those 
of a hearer, but of a judge. 

LIII 

You have sent me at the Saturnalia, Umber, all 
the presents the five days have contributed for you, 
twice six three-leaved tablets, and seven toothpicks ; 
these a sponge, a napkin, and a cup accompanied, 
and a half-peck of beans, together with a wicker 
crate of Picenian olives, and a black flagon of 

1 The Auctus of the preceding epigram. 

459 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

parvaque cum canis venerunt cottana prunis 

et Libycae fici pond ere testa gravis. 
vix puto triginta nummorum tota fuisse 

munera, quae grandes octo tulere Syri. 10 

quanto commodius iiullo mihi ferre labore 

argenti potuit pondera quinque puer ! 

LIV 

SEMPER mane mihi de me mera somnia narras, 

quae moveant animum sollicitentque meum. 
iam prior ad faecem, sed et haec vindemia, venit, 

exorat noctes dum mihi saga tuas ; 
consumpsi salsasque molas et turis acervos ; 5 

decrevere greges, dum cadit agna frequens ; 
non porcus, non chortis aves, non ova supersunt. 

aut vigila aut dormi, Nasidiane, tibi. 

LV 

NULLI munera, Chreste, si remittis, 

nee nobis dederis remiserisque : 

credam te satis esse liberalem. 

sed si reddis Apicio Lupoque 

et Gallo Titioque Caesioque, 5 

linges non mihi (nam proba et pusilla est) 

sed quae de Solymis venit perustis 

damnatam modo mentulam tributis. 

1 Really to sponge on M. : cf. xi. 1. 7. 

2 All these were used in expiations. 
460 



BOOK VII. Liii-Lv 

Laletanian must ; and there came some small 
Syrian figs, together with dried prunes, and a jar 
heavy with the weight of Libyan figs. I hardly 
think these presents in all were worth thirty 
sesterces, and yet eight hulking Syrians carried 
them ! How much more conveniently, with no 
labour, might a boy have brought five pounds of 
silver plate ! 

LIV 

EVERLASTINGLY 011 a morning you relate to me 
dreams nothing but dreams about myself, to fret 
and harass my mind. 1 Already last year's vintage, 
aye, and this one too, has come to the dregs, while 
the wise woman is exorcising for me your nightly 
visions ; I have used up salt cakes, as well as heaps 
of frankincense ; my flocks have decreased by the 
frequent slaughter of a lamb ; no porker, no 
poultry-yard fowls, no eggs remain. 2 Either keep 
awake, Nasidienus, or dream about yourself! 

LV 

IP you give presents in return to no man, 
Chrestus, 3 give and return none to me either : 
I will believe you to be generous enough. But 
if you give them to Apicius, and Lupus, and Gallus 
and Titius and Caesius, you shall assault, not my 
person (for that is chaste and petty), but the one 
that comes from Solyma now consumed by fire, 4 and 
is lately condemned to tribute. 5 

" cf. ix. xxviii. 

4 Jerusalem, captured by Titus, and burned A.D. 70. 

5 The Jews were subject to a tax : Suet. Dom. xii. 

461 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LVI 

ASTRA polumque pie cepisti mente, Rabiri, 
Parrhasiam mira qui struis arte domain. 

Phidiaco si digna lovi dare templa parabit, 
has petet a nostro Pisa Tonante manus. 

LVII 

CASTORA de Polluce Gabinia fecit Achillan : 
TTV dya0ds fuerat, nunc erit iTnr6Sa.fj.os. 

LVIII 

IAM sex aut septem nupsisti, Galla, cinaedis, 

dum coma te nimium pexaque barba iuvat. 
deinde, experta latus madidoque simillima loro 

inguina nee lassa stare coacta manu, 
deseris inbelles thalamos mollemque maritum, 5 

rursus et in similes decidis usque toros. 
quaere aliquem Curios semper Fabiosque loquentem, 

hirsutum et dura rusticitate trucem : 
invenies : sed habet tristis quoque turba cinaedos : 

difficile est vero nubere, Galla, viro. 10 

1 A reference to the domed roof of Domitian's palace, 
built \>y R. , his architect (cf. x. Ixxi.), and completed in 
A.D. 92. 

- In Elis. " Phidian Jove" is the statue at Olympia of 
Zeus by Phidias. 

3 i.e. she has made a pugilist a knight. The reference is 

462 



BOOK VII. LVI-I.VIII 

LVI 

HEAVKN with its stars you, Rabirius, have con- 
ceived in your pious soul, who by wondrous art 
build the mansion of the Palatine. 1 If Pisa - shall 
be set to give Phidian Jove a temple worthy of 
him, she will beg of our Thunderer these hands 
of yours. 

LVII 

GABINIA has made Achillas a Castor out of a 
Pollux. 3 Pyxagathos he has been : now he will be 
Hippodamus. 

LVIII 

ALREADY you have married six or seven paederasts, 
Galla ; long hair and a combed-out beard much 
attract you. Next, when you have tested their 
capacity, and their flaccid and used-up powei's, 
you desert weaponless encounters, and an effeminate 
husband, and yet again you continually fall back 
upon the same amours as before. Look out for 
some fellow who is always prating of the Curii and 
Fabii, 4 shaggy, and with a savage look of stubborn 
rusticity : you will discover him ; but even the 
grim tribe 5 has its paederasts : it is difficult, Galla, 
to marry a genuine man. 6 

to Horn. II. iii. 237, where Pyxagathos (TTI/ ayuffos) is the 
epithet of Pollux, the boxer, and Hippodamus ('nrirdSanos) 
that of Castor, the horseman. There is probably an obscene 
jest here: cf. Shak., Henry V., in. vii. 47-49. 

4 Types of ancient Roman virtues : cf. ix. xxviii. G. 

5 i.e. of so-called philosophers : cf. ix. xxvii. and xlvii. 
' cf. i. xxiv. 

463 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 



LIX 

NON cenat sine apro noster, Tite, Caecilianus. 
bellum convivam Caecilianus habet. 



LX 

TARPEIAE venerande rector aulae, 

quern salvo duce credimus Tonantem, 

cum votis sibi quisque te fatiget 

et poscat dare quae del potestis : 

nil pro me mihi, luppiter, petenti 5 

ne stiscensueris velut superbo. 

te pro Caesare debeo rogare : 

pro me debeo Caesarem rogare. 

LXI 

ABSTULERAT totarn temerarius institor urbem 

inque suo nullum limine limen erat. 
iussisti tenuis, Germanice, crescere vicos, 

et modo quae fuerat semita, facta via est. 
nulla catenatis pila est praecincta lagonis 5 

nee praetor medio cogitur ire Into, 
stringitur in densa nee caeca novacula turba, 

occupat aut totas nigra popina vias. 
tonsor copo cocus lanius sua limina servant. 

nunc Roma est, nuper magna taberna fuit. 10 

LXII 

RECI.USIS foribus grandes percidis, Amille, 
et te depreiidi, cum facis ista, cupis, 

1 On which he dines alone, whereas a boar is meant for a 
party : cf. Juv. i. 140. 

464 



BOOK VII. LIX-LXII 

LIX 

OUR friend Caecilianus does not dine, Titus, 
without boar. 1 A fine guest Caecilianus has ! 

LX 

RULER revered of the Tarpeian hall, 2 whom, 
while our Chief is safe, we believe art Thunderer, 
while each man wearies thee with prayers for 
himself, and claims gifts ye Gods can give, with me, 
who ask naught for myself, be not wroth, as if I 
were proud. Thee on behalf of Caesar ought I to 
sue : for myself it behoves me to sue Caesar. 

LXI 

THE audacious huckster had robbed us of all the 
City, and never a threshold kept within its own 
bounds. You have ordered, 3 Germanicus, our 
narrow streets to expand, and what was but now a 
track has become a road. No pillar 4 is girt with 
chained flagons, nor is the praetor forced to walk in 
the middle of the mud, nor is any razor rashly 
drawn in the midst of a dense crowd, nor does 
the grimy cook-shop monopolise the whole of the 
way. Barber, taverner, cook, butcher keep to their 
own thresholds. Now Rome exists : of late it was 
a huge shop. 

LXII 

O AMILLO, tu precidi colle porte aperte, e brami 
esser sorpreso quando fai queste cose, per tema 

z Jupiter of the Capitol, where was the Tarpeian rock. 
3 Domitian (Germanicus) in A. D. 92 by edict forbade stalls 
protruding into the street. 4 Of a wine-shop. 

465 

VOL. I. H H 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

ne quid liberti narrent servique paterni 
et niger obliqua garrulitate cliens.- 

non pedicari se qui testatur, Amille, 
illud saepe facit quod sine teste facit. 



LXIII 

PERPETUI numquam moritura volumina Sili 

qui legis et Latia carmina digna toga, 
Pierios tantum vati placuisse recessus 

credis et Aoniae Bacchica serta coinae ? 
sacra coturnati non attigit ante Maronis 5 

implevit magni quam Ciceronis opus : 
hunc miratur adhuc centum gravis hasta virorum, 

hunc loquitur grato plurimus ore cliens. 
postquam bis senis ingentem fascibus annum 

rexerat, adserto qui sacer orbe fuit, 10 

emeritos Musis et Phoebo tradidit annos 

proque suo celebrat nunc Helicona foro. 



LXIV 

Qu tonsor tota fueras notissimus urbe 

et post hoc dominae munere factus eques, 

Sicanias urbes Aetnaeaque regna petisti, 
Cinname, cum fugeres tristia iura fori. 

qua nunc arte graves tolerabis inutilis annos ? 5 

quid facit infelix et fugitiva quies ? 

1 Teste ia ambiguous. It also means 6px^. 

2 cf. iv. xiv. ' i.e. advocacy. 

4 A spear set in the ground was the sign of the Centumviral 
Court. 

466 



BOOK VII. LXII-LXIV 

che i liberti ed i servi di casa dicano qualche cosa, 
ed il cliente, periculoso per la sua chiacchiera 
maliziosa. O Amillo, colui che testifica non esser 
pedicato, fa sovente cio che fa senza testimonio. 1 

LXIII 

You who read the undying works of immortal 
Silius, 2 poems worthy of the Latin gown, think you 
the Muses' retreats only have delighted the bard, 
and Bacchic chaplets on poetic locks ? Buskined 
Maro's sacred art he essayed not ere he had wrought 
to the full great Cicero's work 3 ; the stately spear 4 
of the Hundred Court admires him still, of him 
many a client speaks in grateful tone. When, with 
the twice six axes, he had ruled the mighty year 
hallowed by the freedom of the world regained, 5 
his veteran years he gave in their turn to the 
Muses and to Phoebus, and, instead of his own 
forum, courts Helicon now. 

LXIV 

You, who had been in all the City the most noted 
barber, and were afterwards by your lady's bounty 
made a knight, took refuge in Sicilian cities and 
Etna's kingdoms, Cinnamus, avoiding the stern laws 
of the forum." By what art now will you, a useless 
creature, support the heavy years ? What does 
that unhappy and exiled leisure do ? Rhetorician, 

5 He was consul in A.D. 68, the year of Nero's death. 

6 She had given him his qualification of 400,000 sesterces. 

7 Perhaps to avoid an enquiry into his qualification, or 
into his free birth. 

467 
H H 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

non rhetor, non grammaticus ludive magister, 
non Cynicus, non tu Stoicus esse poles, 

vendere nee vocem Siculis plausumque theatris. 
quod superest, iterum, Cinname, tonsor eris. 10 



LXV 

Lis te bis decumae numerantem frigora brumae 
content una tribus, Gargiliane, foris. 

a miser et demens ! viginti litigat annis 
quisquam cui vinci, Gargiliane, licet ? 



LXVI 

HEREDEM Fabius Labienum ex asse reliquit : 
plus meruisse tamen se Labienus ait. 



LXVII 

PEDICAT pueros tribas Philaenis 

et tentigine saevior mariti 

undenas dolat in die puellas. 

harpasto quoque subligata ludit 

et flavescit haphe, gravesque draucis 5 

halteras facili rotat lacerto, 

et putri lutulenta de palaestra 

uncti verbere vapulat magistri : 

nee cenat prius aut recumbit ante 

quam septem vomuit meros deunces ; 10 

ad quos fas sibi tune putat redire, 

cum colophia sedecim comedit. 

post haec omnia cum libidinatur, 

468 



BOOK VII. LXIV-LXVU 

grammarian, or schoolmaster you cannot be, nor 
Cynic, nor yet Stoic, nor can you sell your shouts 
and applause to Sicilian theatres. What remains is 
this, Cinnamus, you will be a barber again. 

LXV 

A LAWSUIT while you are counting its twentieth 
cold winter, still wears you out, Gargilianus, a single 
suit in three Courts. Ah, unhappy man, and mad ! 
Does anyone go to law for twenty years, Gargilianus, 
who can give in ? 

LXVI 

FABIUS left Labienus heir to all his property. 
Yet Labienus asserts he deserved still more. 1 

LXVII 

LA tribade Filene pedica i ragazzi, e piu libidi- 
nosa nella prurigine che un marito, liscia in un 
giorno ondici ragazze. sbracciata giuoca anche 
all' arpasto, ed ingialisce pel tatto della polvere, 
e getta con robusto braccio palle di piombo 2 
pesanti agli irsuti, e strofinata d'unguento della 
putre palestra, e sferzata colla verga del maestro 
che la ugne. Ne prima ella cena, o si mette a 
tavola, che non abbia vomitato sette sestieri, al qual 
numero essa pensa poter far ritorno quando ha 
mangiato sedici colifie. Dopo tutte queste cose, 
quando e presa dalla libidine, non fella : pensa ci6 

1 Because he had given F. in his lifetime more than the 
value of the estate. 

3 Dumb-bells : cf. xiv. xlix. Juv. copies this passage in 
vi. 421 seqq. 

469 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

non fellat (putat hoc parum virile), 

sed plane medias vorat puellas. 15 

di mentem tibi dent tuam, Philaeni, 

cunnum lingere quae putas virile. 

LXVIII 

COMMENDARE meas, Instanti Rufe, Camenas 
parce precor socero ; seria forsan amat. 

quod si lascivos admittit et ille libellos, 
haec ego vel Curio Fabricioque legam. 

LXIX 

HAEC est ilia tibi promissa Theophila, Cani, 

cuius Cecropia pectora voce madent. 
hanc sibi iure petat magni senis Atticus hortus, 

nee minus esse suam Stoica turba velit. 
vivet opus quodcumque per has emiseris aures ; 5 

tarn non f'emineum nee populare sapit. 
non tua Pantaenis nimium se praeferat illi, 

quamvis Pierio sit bene nota choro. 
carmina fingentem Sappho laudabat amatrix : 

castior haec et non doctior ilia fuit. 10 



LXX 

IPSARUM tribadum tribas, Philaeni, 
recte, quam futuis, vocas amicam. 

1 A friend of M. : cf. viu. 1. 21 ; vin. Ixxiii. 1 ; perhaps 
identical with the proconsul of Baetica : cf. xn. xcviii. 3. 

- Typical embodiments of old Roman virtues : cf. VI. 
Ixiv. 2 ; ix. xxviii. 4. 

470 



BOOK VII. LXVII-LXX 

esser poco maschile ; ma tutta strugge al mezzo 
le ragazze. Gli del, O Filene, ti dieno un' in- 
clinazione a te conveniente, tu che pensi esser 
maschile lingere un c o. 

LXVIII 

SPARE, I pray, Instantius Rufus, 1 to recommend 
my Muse to your father-in-law : perhaps he likes 
serious poems. But if he too condescends to wanton 
verse, these I would venture to read even to Curius 
and Fabricius. 2 

LXIX 

THIS is Theophila your affianced bride, Canius, 
she whose mind is steeped in Attic lore. Rightly 
might the Athenian garden of the great sage 3 
claim her ; no less would the Stoic band wish her 
for its own. That work shall live, whate'er it 
be you pass through these ears, so little womanlike 
or common is her judgment. Your Pantaenis 4 
though well known is she to the Pierian choir 
would not o'ermuch rank herself before her. Sappho 
the lover praised a poetess : more pure is Theophila, 
yet Sappho was not more learned. 

LXX 

O FILENE, tribade delle tribadi stesse, tu chiami 
con proprieta arnica colei che tu immembri. 

3 Epicurus or Plato. 

4 An unknown poetess of the time, whom Canius seems to 
have admired. 

471 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXI 

FICOSA est uxor, ficosus et ipse maritus, 

filia ficosa est et gener atque nepos, 
nee dispensator nee vilicus ulcere turpi 

nee rigidus fossor sed nee arator eget. 
cum sint ficosi pariter iuvenesque senesque, 5 

res mira est, ficos non habet unus ager. 

LXXII 

GRATUS sic tibi, Paule, sit December 

nee vani triplices brevesque mappae 

nee turis veniant leves selibrae, 

sed lances ferat et scyphos avorum 

aut grandis reus aut potens amicus : 5 

seu, quod te potius iuvat capitque, 

sic vincas Noviumque Publiumque 

mandris et vitreo latrone clusos ; 

sic palmam tibi de trigone nudo 

unctae det favor arbiter coronae 10 

nee laudet Polybi magis sinistras ; 

si quisquam mea dixerit malignus 

atro carmina quae madent veneno, 

ut vocem mihi commodes patronam 

et quantum poteris, sed usque, clames 15 

"Non scripsit meus ista Martialis." 

LXXIII 

ESQUILIIS domus est, domus est tibi colle Dianae, 
et tua patricius culmina vicus habet ; 

1 cf. i. Ixv. 

2 In the game of latrunculi, like our draughts or chess. 
The latro (robber) was a superior piece to the mandra 
(pawn) : cf. xiv. xvii. 

472 



BOOK VII. LXXI-LXXIII 

LXXI 

TUBEROUS 1 is the wife, tuberous too even the 
husband, the daughter is tuberous, and the son-in- 
law, and the grandson ; nor is the steward, or the 
bailiff free from this unsightly wen, nor the sturdy 
ditcher, and not even the ploughman. Seeing that 
young and old alike are tuberous, the wonderful 
thing is not a single field bears tubers ! 

LXXII 

So may December be pleasant to you, Paulus, and 
no worthless three-leaved tablets and scant)' nap- 
kins come to you, nor light half-pounds of frank- 
incense ; but may either some hulking defendant 
or wealthy friend bring you dishes and antique 
goblets ; or what pleases and attracts you more 
so may you beat Novius and Publius hemmed in by 
your pawns and glass robbers 2 ; so may the oiled 
ring's 3 favourable judgment award you victory over 
the thin-clad hand-ball players, and not praise more 
than yours the left-handers 4 of Polybus if some 
malignant fellow claim as mine poems that are 
steeped in black venom, do you lend me a patron's 
voice, and with all your strength and without stop- 
ping shout : " My Martial did not write that." 5 

LXXIII 

ON the Esquiline you have a house, you have a 
house on Diana's hill, and the Patrician Street 

3 Of athletes looking on. 

4 A left-hand stroke was considered a mark of skill. As 
to the game, cf. vii. xxxii. 7. 5 </ i. lii. 

473 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

hinc viduae Cybeles, illinc sacraria Vestae, 
inde novum, veterem prospicis inde lovem. 

die ubi conveniam, die qua te parte requiram : 5 

quisquis ubique habitat, Maxime, nusquam habitat. 

LXXIV 

CVLLENES caelique decus, facunde minister, 

aurea cui torto virga dracone viret : 
sic tibi lascivi noil desit copia furti, 

sive cupis Paphien seu Ganymede cales ; 
maternaeque sacris ornentur frondibus Idus 5 

et senior parca mole prematur avus : 
hunc semper Norbana diem cum coniuge Carpo 

laeta colat, primis quo coiere toris. 
hie pius antistes sophiae sua dona ministrat, 

hie te ture vocat fidus et ipse lovi. 10 

LXXV 

Vis futui gratis, cum sis deformis anusque. 
res perridicula est : vis dare nee dare vis. 



1 A mountain in Arcadia on which Mercury was born. 

* The caduceus, or herald's wand, borne by Mercury as 
the messenger of the gods. 

3 The Ides of May : cf. xn. Ixvii. 1. Maia was the mother 
of Mercury. 

474 



BOOK VII. LXXIII-I.XXV 

holds a roof of yours ; from this you survey the 
shrine of widowed Cybele, from that the shrine of 
Vesta ; from here the new, from there the ancient 
temple of Jove. Say where I may call upon you, 
say in what quarter I may look for you : he who 
lives everywhere, Maximus, lives nowhere. 



LXXIV 

PRIDE of Cyllene 1 and of Heaven, eloquent 
minister, whose golden rod 2 is alive with twining 
snakes, so mayst thou lack no occasion for wanton 
intrigue, whether 'tis Paphie thou desirest, or art 
warm with love for Ganymede ; and so may thy 
mother's Ides 3 be decked with holy boughs, and 
thy aged grandsire 4 be bowed by little weight 
let Norbana with her husband Carpus ever cele- 
brate with joy this day whereon they first joined 
in wedlock. A duteous high-priest, he devotes his 
gifts to wisdom, he invokes- thee with incense, 
he too 5 a leal votary of Jove. 



LXXV 

You wish to receive services without paying for 
them, although you are ugly and an old woman. It 
is a thing too ridiculous : you wish to give, and yet 
not to give. 6 

4 Atlas, who sustained the weight of the sky. 

8 "He is faithful to our Jupiter, the emperor, as thou art 
to the celestial Jupiter." 

6 A play on two meanings of dare, one sensu obsceno, the 
other in the sense of payment : cf. in. xc. 

475 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXVI 

QUOD te diripiunt potentiores 
per convivia porticus theatra, 
et tecum, quotiens ita incidisti, 
gestari iuvat et iuvat lavari, 
nolito nimium tibi placere. 
delectasj Philomuse, non amaris. 

LXXVII 

EXIGIS ut nostros donem tibi, Tucca, libellos. 
non faciam : nam vis vendere, non legere. 

LXXVIII 

CUM Saxetani ponatur coda lacerti 

et, bene si cenas, conchis inuncta tibi, 

sumen aprum leporem boletos ostrea mullos 
mittis : habes nee cor, Papyle, nee genium. 

LXXIX 

POTAVI modo consulare vinum. 
quaeris quam vetus atque liberale ? 
prisco l consule conditum : sed ipse 
qui ponebat erat, Severe, consul. 

1 prisco Housman, ipso codd. 



1 Possibly Al. is thinking of himself (Friedlander). 

2 From Sex or Saxetanum in Hispania Baetica, where was 
a noted salt-fishery. But the lacerti, according to Pliny 
(N.H. xxxii. 53), were very small. 

476 



BOOK VII. LXXVI-LXXIX 

LXXVI 

BECAUSE men of influence vie in hurrying you off 
to entertainments, colonnades, theatres, and enjoy, 
whenever you happen to meet them, being carried 
in litters with you, and enjoy bathing with you, 
by no means fancy yourself too much. You entertain 
them, Philomusus, 1 you are not loved. 



LXXVII 

You demand that I should present you with my 
works, Tucca. I won't do it ; for you want to sell 
them, not to read. 

LXXVIII 

ALTHOUGH the tail of a Saxetan 2 lizard-fish is 
served, and, if you dine lavishly, beans dressed with 
oil are set before yourself, you send as presents 
sow's paunch, boar, hare, mushrooms, oysters, 
mullets : Papylus, you have neither sense nor 
taste. 3 

LXXIX 

I HAVE just drunk a consular wine. You ask how 
old and generous it was ? Laid down in the year 
of an ancient consul. But my host who served it, 
Severus, was consul. 4 

3 P. dines poorly himself, but sends expensive eatables as 
presents. 

4 A fine vintage was known by the name of the consul of 
the year, and a "consular wine" was generally "old and 
generous": cf. i. xxvi. 7 of Opimian. Housman's emendation 
follows a hint in $ that there isjocus de nomine commits. 

477 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXX 

QUATENUS Odrysios iam pax Romana triones 

temperat et tetricae conticuere tubae, 
hunc Marcellino poteris, Faustina, libellum 

mittere : iam chartis, iam vacat ille iocis. 
sed si parva tui munuscula quaeris amici 5 

commendare, ferat carmina nostra puer ; 
non qualis Geticae satiatus-lacte iuvencae 

Sarmatica rigido ludit in amne rota, 
sed Mitylenaei roseus mangonis ephebus 

vel non caesus adhuc matre iubente Lacon. 10 
at tibi captivo famulus mittetur ab Histro 

qui Tiburtinas pascere possit oves. 



LXXXI 

"TRIOINTA toto mala sunt epigrammata libro." 
si totidem bona sunt, Lause, bonus liber est. 



LXXXII 

MENOPHILI penem tarn grandis fibula vestit 

ut sit comoedis omnibus una satis, 
hunc ego credideram (nam saepe lavamur in unum) 

sollicitum voci pai-cere, Flacce, suae : 
dum ludit media populo spectante palaestra, 5 

delapsa est misero fibula : verpus erat. 



1 Who had been campaigning in Dacia : cf. vi. xxv. 

2 Spartan boys used to be flogged at the altar of Diana to 
teach them endurance. 

3 The Danube. Marcelliuus will give, in return for the 

478 



BOOK VII. I.XXX-LXXXII 

LXXX 

SEEING that now the Roman peace restrains the 
Thracian North,, and threatening clarions are un- 
blown, you can send this little book, Faustinus, 
to Marcellinus ; l he has leisure now for my writings, 
now for my jokes. But, if you wish to commend 
the small offering of your friend, let a boy carry my 
poems, not such a one as, full-fed on the milk of 
Getic cows, plays with Sarmatian hoop on the 
icebound stream, but the rosy stripling of Mitylene's 
slave-dealer, or a Spartan not yet scourged 2 at his 
mother's bidding. But to you will be sent a slave 
from subject Hister, 3 who can feed your sheep at 
Tibur. 

LXXXI 

"TAKE all your book, and there are thirty bad 
epigrams in it." If as many are good, Lausus, the 
book is a good one. 

LXXXII 

MENOPHILUS' person a sheath covers so enormous 
that it alone would be sufficient for the whole tribe 
of comic actors. 4 This fellow I had imagined for 
we often bathe together was solicitous to spare 
his voice, Flaccus ; but while he was exercising 
himself in the view of the people in the middle 
of the exercise ground, the sheath unluckily fell off' : 
lo, he was circumcised ! 6 

boy, one of his Getic captives. For F.'s farm at Tibur, cf. 
iv. Ivii. 3 ; v. Ixxi. 6. 

4 Comic actors and singers wore this, as a preventive 
of sexual indulgence, to save their voice : cf. xi. Ixxv. 3 ; xiv. 
ccxv.; Juv. vi. 73, 380. i.e. a Jew. 

479 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXXIII 

EUTRAPELUS tonsor dum circuit ora Luperci 
expingitque genas, altera barba subit. 



LXXXIV 

DUM mea Caecilio formatur imago Secundo 

spirat et arguta picta tabella manu, 
i, liber, ad Geticam Peucen Histrumque iacentem : 

haec loca perdomitis gentibus ille tenet, 
parva dabis caro sed dulcia dona sodali : 5 

certior in nostro carmine vultus erit : 
casibus hie nullis, nullis delebilis annis 

vivet, Apelleum cum morietur opus. 



LXXXV 

QUOD non insulse scribis tetrasticha quaedam, 
disticha quod belle pauca, Sabelle, facis, 

laudo nee admiror. facile est epigrammata belle 
scribere, sed librum scribere difficile est. 



LXXXVI 

AD natalicias dapes vocabar, 
essem cum tibi, Sexte, non amicus. 
quid factum est, rogo, quid repente factum est, 
post tot pignora nostra, post tot annos 
. quod sum praeteritus vetus sodalis ? 5 

sed causam scio. nulla venit a me 

1 In spite of the barber's name, " nimble " (evTpdire\os). 
480 



BOOK VII. I.XXXIII-LXXXVI 

LXXXIII 

WHILE Eutrapelus the barber goes round Lupercus' 
face, and trims his cheeks, a second beard grows. 1 

LXXXIV 

WHILE my likeness is taking form for Caecilius 
Secundus, 2 and the canvas breathes, painted by a 
cunning hand, go, book, to Getic Peuce 3 and 
prostrate Hister these regions with their conquered 
peoples he rules. Small, but welcome, shall be 
the gift you will make to my dear comrade : more 
truly in my song will my face be seen ; this my song, 
which no chances, no lapse of years, can efface, shall 
live when the work of Apelles shall perish. 

LXXXV 

YOUR writing, not without wit, certain quatrains, 
your composing nicely a few distichs, Sabellus, 
1 applaud, yet am not surprised. 'Tis easy to 
write epigrams nicely, but to write a book is hard. 

LXXXVI 

I USED to be invited to your birthday feast, 
although, Sextus, I was no intimate of yours. What 
has happened, I ask, what has suddenly happened, 
that, after so many pledges of friendship between 
us, after so many years, I, your old comrade, am 
passed over? But I know the reason. There came 

2 Probably the younger Pliny. 
8 cf. vil. vii. 1. 

481 
VOL. I. I I 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

Hispani tibi libra pustulati 

nee levis toga nee rudes lacernae. 

non est sportula quae negotiator : 

pascis munera, Sexte, non amicos. 10 

iam dices mihi " Vapulet vocator." 

LXXXVII 

Si meus aurita gaudet lagalopece Flaccus, 

si fruitur tristi Canius Aethiope ; 
Publius exiguae si flagrat amore catellae, 

si Cronius similem cercopithecoii amat ; 
delectat Marium si perniciosus ichneumon, 5 

pica salutatrix si tibi, Lause, placet : 
si gelidum collo nectit Glaucilla draconem, 

luscinio tumulum si Telesilla dedit : 
blanda Cupidinei cur non amet ora Labycae 

qui videt haec dominis monstra placere suis ? 10 

LXXXVIII 

FERTUR liabere meos, si vera est fama, libellos 

inter delicias pulchra Vienna suas. 
me legit omnis ibi senior iuvenisque puerque 

et coram tetrico casta puella viro. 
hoc ego maluerim quam si mea carmina cantent o 

qui Nilum ex ipso protinus ore bibunt ; 
quam meus Hispano si me Tagus im pleat auro, 

pascat et Hybla meas, pascat Hymettos apes, 
non nihil ergo sumus nee blandae munere linguae 

decipimur : credam iam, puto, Lause, tibi. 1 

1 "Who negligently omitted your name.'' This is. of 
course, an excuse. 

1 What animal the lagalopex was is unknown. 

482 



BOOK VII. i.xxxvi-i. xxxvni 

to you from me no pound of Spanish refined silver, nor 
smooth-napped toga, nor new mantles. Hospitality 
is not a matter of bargain ; you are feeding favours, 
Sextus, not friends. You will now reply: "Let 
my summoner 1 be flogged." 

LXXXVII 

IF my Flaccus delights in a long-eared lynx,- 
if Canius 3 appreciates a grim Ethiopian, if Publius 
is consumed with love for a tiny lapdog, 4 if Cronius 
loves a long-tailed monkey as ugly as himself; 
if a mischievous ichneumon is a joy to Marius, if you, 
Lausus, a talking magpie attracts ; if Glaucilla 
twines a clammy snake round her neck, if Telesilla 
has set up a monument over her nightingale ; why 
should he who sees such monsters as these please 
their masters not love the winning face of Labycas/ 
Cupid's boy? 

LXXXVIII 

FAIR Vienna 5 is said, if report speak true, to. 
hold my little books among her darling posses- 
sions. Every old sire and youth and boy reads me 
there, and the chaste bride in the presence of her 
strait-laced husband. I prize this more than if 
those who drink of Nile straight from its fount were 
to hum my poems, than if my own Tagus were to 
glut me with Spanish gold, and Hybla fed, and 
Hymettus fed my bees. Of some account then am 
I, nor am I deceived by the tribute of a flattering 
tongue : now, I think, I will believe you, Lausus. 

3 A poet of Gades : cf. in. xx. 

4 cf. I. cix. 5 Vienne on the Rhone. 

Who had condemned M.'s book of epigrams: cf. vu. 
Ixxxi. 

483 
i i 2 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

LXXXIX 

I, FELIX rosa, inollibusque sertis 
nostri cinge comas Apollinaris. 
quas tu nectere Candidas, sed olim, 
sic te semper amet Venus, memento. 

XC 

IACTAT inaequalem Matho me fecisse libellum : 
si verum est, laudat carmina nostra Matho. 

aequales scribit libros Calvinus et Umber : 
aequalis liber est, Cretice, qui malus est. 

XCI 

DE nostro, facunde, tibi, luvenalis, agello 

Saturnalicias mittimus, ecce, nuces. 
cetera lascivis donavit poma puellis 

mentula custodis luxuriosa dei. 

XCII 

"Si quid opus fuerit, scis me non esse rogandum " 

uno bis dicis, Baccara, terque die. 
appellat rigida tristis me voce Secundus : 

audis et nescis, Baccara, quid sit opus, 
pensio te coram petitur clareque palamque : 5 

audis et nescis, Baccara, quid sit opus. 
esse queror gelidasque mihi tritasque lacernas : 

audis et nescis, Baccara, quid sit opus, 
hoc opus est, subito fias ut sidere mutus, 

dicere ne possis, Baccara "Si quid opus." 10 

1 cf. IV. Ixxxvi.; vii. xxvi. 
484 



BOOK VII. LXXXIX-XCH 

LXXXIX 

Go, happy rose, and with thy soft chaplet gird 
the locks of my Apollinaris. 1 And see that thou 
wreathe them when but may it be long hereafter 
they are white : so may Venus ever love thee ! 

XC 

MATHO puts it abroad that I have composed an 
unequal book ; if that is true, Matho praises my 
poems. Equal books are what Calvinus and Umber 
write : the equal book, Creticus, is the bad one. 

XCI 

FROM my small ground, eloquent Juvenal, I send 
you, see, Saturnalian nuts. The rest of the fruit the 
rakish Guardian God has bestowed on frolicking 
girls. 

XCII 

" IF there be any need, you know you do not 
require to ask me " : that is what you say, Baccara, 
twice and thrice in a single day. Truculent 
Secundus duns me in stringent tones : you hear 
him, and don't know, Baccara, what my need is. 
My rent is claimed in your presence loudly and 
publicly : you hear, and don't know, Baccara, what 
my need is. I complain that my cloak is thin and 
threadbare : you hear, and don't know, Baccara, 
what my need is. This is my need, that you should 
be struck dumb by a sudden stroke from heaven, 
that you may be unable to say, Baccara, " If there 
be any need." 

485 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

xcm 

NARNIA, sulpureo quam gurgite candidus amnis 

circuit, ancipiti vix adeunda iugo, 
quid tarn saepe meum nobis abducere Quintum 

te iuvat et lenta detinuisse mora ? 
quid Nomentani causam mihi perdis agelli, 5 

propter vicinum qui pretiosus erat ? 
sed iam parce mihi, nee abutere, Narnia, Quinto : 

perpetuo liceat sic tibi ponte frui. 

XCIV 

UNGUENTUM fuerat, quod onyx modo parva gerebat : 
olfecit postquam Papylus, ecce, garumst. 

XCV 

BRUMA est et riget horridus December, 

audes tu tamen osculo nivali 

omnes obvius hinc et hinc tenere 

et totam, Line, basiare Romam. 

quid posses graviusque saeviusque 5 

percussus facere atque verberatus ? 

hoc me frigore basiet nee uxor 

blandis filia nee rudis labellis, 

sed tu dulcior elegantiorque, 

cuius livida naribus caninis 10 

dependet glacies rigetque barba, 

qualem forficibus metit supinis 

tonsor Cinyphio Cilix marito. 



1 Quintus Ovidius, alluded to in vn. xliv. and xlv. : see 
also x. xliv. 

486 



BOOK VII. xcin-xcv 

XCIII 

NARNIA, girdled by a stream, white with its sulphur- 
ous eddies, thou whose twin peaks are scarce to be 
scaled, why so oft art thou glad to draw my Quintus l 
from me, and to keep him so weary a time ? Why 
destroy est thou for me the value of my small 
Nomentan farm, which was precious to me because 
he was my neighbour ? But spare me now, nor 
overdo, Narnia, thy welcome to Quintus : so for all 
time mayst thou enjoy thy bridge/ ! 

XCIV 

IT was perfume that the small casket held just 
now : now Papylus has smelt it, see, it is fish- 
pickle 3 ! 

XCV 

'Tis winter, and rough December is stiff' with 
frost, yet you dare with icy kiss, as you go here and 
there, to stop all you meet, and to kiss all Rome, 
Linus. What more severe and more cruel revenge 
could you take if you had been assaulted and 
beaten ? In this cold not even my wife should kiss 
me, nor my innocent daughter with her wheedling 
lips ; but you are more pleasant and refined, from 
whose dog-like nostrils a livid icicle hangs, whose 
beard is as stiff as that which, with up-turned 
scissors, a Cilician barber reaps off' a Cinyphian 4 

2 A high-level bridge joining the two heights, part of 
which still stands. 

3 Malodorous : cf. in. xvii. 6 : in. xxviii. 

4 Cinyps or Cinyphus was a district on the N. coast of 
Africa, famous for the long hair of its goats : Virg. Geory. 
Hi. 312. 

487 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

centum occurrere malo cunnilingis 

et Gallum timeo minus recentem. 1 5 

quare si tibi sensus est pudorque, 

hibernas, Line, basiationes 

in mensem rogo differas Aprilem. 

XCVI 

CONDITUS hie ego sum Bassi dolor, Urbicus infans, 

cui genus et nomen maxima Roma dedit. 
sex mihi de prima derant trieteride menses, 

ruperunt tetricae cum male l pensa deae. 
quid species, quid lingua mihi, quid profuit aetas ? 5 

da lacrimas tumulo, qui legis ista, meo : 
sic ad Lethaeas, nisi Nestore serior, undas 

non eat, optabis quern superesse tibi. 

XCVII 

NOSTI si bene Caesium, libelle, 

montanae decus Umbriae Sabinum, 

Auli municipem mei Pudentis, 

illi tu dabis haec vel occupato. 

instent mille licet premantque curae, 5 

nostris carminibus tamen vacabit. 

nam me diligit ille proximumque 

Tumi nobilibus legit libellis. 

o quantum tibi nominis paratur ! 

o quae gloria ! quam frequens amator ; 10 

te convivia, te forum sonabit 

aedes compita porticus tabernae. 

uni mitteris, omnibus legeris. 

1 male Heins., mala codd. 
488 



BOOK VII. xcv-xcvn 

he-goat. I would sooner run across a hundred lewd 
rascals, and I fear less a priest of Cybele fresh from 
his vices. 1 So, if you have any feeling and shame, 
I ask you, Linus, to put off your wintry osculations 
till the month of April. 

XCVI 

BURIED am I here, by Bassus mourned, Urbicus, 
an infant, to whom mightiest Rome gave race and 
name. Six months were wanting of my first three 
years when the harsh Goddesses cruelly snapt my 
thread. What availed me my beauty, what my prattle, 
what my age ? Give thou, who readest this, tears 
to my tomb : so may he, 2 whom thou wouldst have 
survive thy years, pass not to the waters of Lethe, 
save when older than Nestor ! 



XCVII 

IF you know well, little book, Caesius Sabinus, 3 
the pride of hilly Umbria, fellow-townsman of my 
Aulus Pudens, you will give him these, though he 
be engaged. Though a thousand duties press on 
and distract him, yet he will be at leisure for my 
poems. For he loves me, and, next to Turnus' 4 
famous satires, reads me. Oh, what a reputation 
is being stored up for you ! Oh, what glory ! How 
many an admirer ! With you banquets, with you the 
forum will echo, houses, by-ways, colonnades, book- 
shops ! You are being sent to one, by all will you be 
read. 



1 cf. ill. Ixxxi. ; Juv. viii. 176. a i.e. thy son. 

3 Alluded to in ix. Iviii. * cf. xi. x. 



489 



THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL 

XCVIII 
OMNIA, Castor, emis. sic fiet ut omnia vendas. 

XCIX 

Sic placidum videas semper, Crispine, Tonantem 

nee te Roma minus quam tua Memphis amet, 
carmina Parrhasia si nostra legentur in aula, 

(namque soleiit sacra Caesaris aure frui) 
dicere de nobis ut lector candidus aude 

" Tempo ribus praestat 11011 nihil iste tuis, 
nee Marso nimium minor est doctoque Catullo." 

hoc satis est : ipsi cetera mando deo. 



49 



BOOK VII. xcviu-xcix 

XCVIII 

You buy everything, Castor ; so the result will be 
that you sell everything ! 

XCIX 

So may you see the Thunderer always placid, 
Crispinus, 1 and Rome, no less than your native 
Memphis, love you if my poems shall be read iiithe 
Palatine hall (for they are wont to reach Caesar's 
sacred ear), venture, as a candid reader, to say this 
of me : " He brings your time some honour, and is 
not far behind Marsus and elegant Catullus." This 
is sufficient : I leave the rest to the God himself. 

1 A rich upstart, and favourite of Domitian, the verna 
Canopi of Juv. i. 26 ; cf. also iv. 



491 



PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BI 
RICHABD CLAT AKD SONS, LIMITED, 
BBUNSWICK STREET, STAMFORD STREET, 8.K. I, 
AND BUNGAT, SUFFOLK. 



THE LOEB CLASSICAL 
LIBRARY. 

VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED. 

Latin Authors. 

APULEIUS. The Golden Ass. (Metamorphoses.) Trans, by W. 

Adlington (1566). Revised by S. Gaselee. (2nd Impression.) 
BOETHIUS: TRACTS AND DE CONSOLATIONE 
PHILOSOPHIAE. Trans, by Rev. H. F. Stewart and 
E. K. Rand. 

CAESAR : CIVIL WARS. Trans, by A. G. Peskett. 
CAESAR: GALLIC WAR. Trans, by H. J. Edwards. 

(2nd Impression. ) 
CATULLUS. Trans, by F. W. Cornish ; TIBULLUS. 

Trans, by J. P. Postgate ; and PERVIGILIUM VENERIS. 

Trans, by J. W. Mackail. (yd Impression.) 
CICERO: DE FINIBUS. Trans, by H. Rackham. 
CICERO : DE OFFICIIS. Trans, by Walter Miller. 
CICERO: LETTERS TO ATTICUS. Trans, by E. O. 

Winstedt. 3 Vols. (Vol. I. 2nd Impression.) 
CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTINE. Trans, by W. Watts 

( 1 63 1 ). 2 Vols. ( 2nd Impression. ) 
HORACE : ODES AND EPODES. Trans, by C. E. Bennett. 

(yd Impression. ) 

JUVENAL AND PERSIUS. Trans, by G. G. Ramsay. 
MARTIAL. Trans, by W. C. Ker. 2 Vols. Vol. I. 
OVID: HEROIDES AND AMORES. Trans, by Grant 

Showerman. 

OVID: METAMORPHOSES. Trans, by F.J. Miller. 2 Vols. 
PETRONIUS. Trans, by M. Heseltine ; SENECA: APOCO- 

LOCYNTOSIS. Trans, by W. H. D. Rouse, (yd Im- 
pression. ) 

PLAUTUS. Trans, by Paul Nixon. 5 Vols. Vols. I and II. 
PLINY : LETTERS. Melmoth's Translation revised by 

W. M. L. Hutchinson. 2 Vols. 

PROPERTIUS. Trans, by H. E. Butler. (2nd Impression.) 
SENECA: EPISTULAE MORALES. Trans, by R. M. 

Gummere. 3 Vols. Vols. I and II. 

SENECA : TRAGEDIES. Trans, by F. J. Miller. 2 Vols. 
SUETONIUS. Trans, by ]. C. Rolfe. 2 Vols. 
TACITUS: DIALOGUS. Trans, by Sir Wm. Peterson; 

and AGRICOLA AND GERMANIA. Trans. \>y Maurice 

Hutton. 

TERENCE. Trans, by John Sargeaunt. 2 Vols. (2nd Im- 
pression. ) 
VIRGIL. Trans, by H. R. Fairclough. 2 Vols. 



Greek Authors. 



ACHILLES TATIUS. Trans, by S. Gaselee. 

AESCHINES. Trans, by C. D. Adams. 

APOLLONIUS RHODIUS. Trans, by R. C. Seaton. (2nd Impression. 

THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS. Trans, by Kirsopp Lake. 2 Vols. 

(Vol. \ yd Impression. Vol. II 2nd Impression.) 
APPIAN'S ROMAN HISTORY. Trans, by Horace White. 4 Vols. 
CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA. Trans, by Rev. G. W. Butterworth. 
DAPHNIS AND CHLOE. Thornley's Translation revised by J. M. 

Edmonds ; and PARTHENIUS. Trans, by S. Gaselee. 
DIO CASSIUS : ROMAN HISTORY. Trans, by E. Cary. 9 Vols. 

Vols. I to VI. 
EURIPIDES. Trans, by A. S. Way. 4 Vols. (Vols. I, III and IV 

znd Impression. Vol. 1 1 yd Impression. ) . 

GALEN: ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES. Trans, by A. J. Brock. 
THE GREEK ANTHOLOGY. Trans, by W. R. Paton. 5 Vols. (Vol. 

II 2nd Impression.) 
THE GREEK BUCOLIC POETS (THEOCRITUS, BION, MOS- 

CHUS). Trans, by J. M. Edmonds, (yd Impression.) 
HESIOD AND THE HOMERIC HYMNS. Trans, by H. G. Evelyn 

White. 

HOMER : ODYSSEY. Trans, by A. T. Murray. 2 Vols. Vol. I. 
JULIAN. Trans, by Wilmer Cave Wright. 3 Vols. Vols. I and II. 
LUCIAN. Trans, by A. M. Harmon. 7 Vols. Vols. I and II. (tad 

Impression.) 

MARCUS AURELIUS. Trans, by C. R. Haines. 
PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE. Trans, by W. H. S. 

Jones. 5 Vols. and Companion Vol. Vol. I. 
PHILOSTRATUS: THE LIFE OF APOLLONIUS OF TYANA. 

Trans, by F. C. Conybeare. 2 Vols. (2nd Impression. ) 
PINDAR. Trans, by Sir J. E. Sandys, (znd Impression.) 
PLATO: EUTHYPHRO, APOLOGY, CRITO, PHAEDO, PHAE- 

DRUS. Trans, by H. N. Fowler, (yd Impression.) 
PLUTARCH: THE PARALLEL LIVES. Trans, by B. Perrin. nVols. 

Vols. 1 to IX. 
PROCOPIUS : HISTORY OF THE WARS. Trans, by H. B. Dewing. 

7 Vols. Vols. I to III. 

QUINTUS SMYRNAEUS. Trans, by A. S. Way. 
SOPHOCLES. Trans, by F. Storr. 2 Vols. (Vol. I yd Impression. 

Vol. 1 1 znd Impression. ) 
ST. JOHN DAMASCENE : BARLAAM AND IOASAPH. Trans, by 

the Kev. G. R. Woodward and Harold Mattingly. 

STRABO : GEOGRAPHY. Trans, by Horace L. Jones. 8 Vols. Vol. I. 
THEOPHRASTUS : ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS. Trans, by Sir Arthur 

Hort, Bart. 2 Vols. 

XENOPHON : CYROPAEDIA. Trans, by Walter Miller. 2 Vols. 
XENOPHON: HELLENICA, ANABASIS, APOLOGY, AND SYM- 
POSIUM. Trans, by C. L. Brownson. 3 Vols. Vol. I. 



IN PREPARATION. 



Autho rs . 



AESCHYLUS, H. W. Smyth. 

ARISTOTLE, NICOMACHEAN ETHICS, Michael Heseltine. 

ARISTOTLE, ORGANON, St. George Stock. 

ARISTOTLE, POLITICS AND ATHENIAN CONSTITUTION, 
Edward Capps. 

ATHENAEUS, C. H. Gulick. 

CALLIMACHUS, A. W. Mair ; ARATUS, G. R. Mnir. 

DEMOSTHENES, DE CORONA, H. Mattingly. 

DIG CHRYSOSTOM, W. E. Waters. 

DIOGENES LAERT1US, W. L. Hicks. 

DIQ PRUSAENSIS, W. E. Waters. 

EUSEBIUS, Kirsopp Lake. 

GREEK IAMBIC AND ELEGIAC POETS, E. I). Perry. 

GREEK LYRIC POETS, J. M. Edmonds. 

GREEK MINOR ORATORS, H. G. Evelyn White 

HERODOTUS, A. Godley. 

HOMER, ILIAD, A. T. Murray. 

1 SOCRATES, G. Norlin. 

LIBANIUS, Wilmer Cave Wright. 

LONGINUS, W. Hamilton Fyfe. 

MANETHO, S. de Ricci. 

MENANDER, F. G. Allinson. 

PHILOSTRATUS, IMAGINES, Arthur Fairbanks. 

PHII.OSTRATUS, LIVES OF THE SOPHISTS, Wilmer Cave Wright. 

PLATO, ALCIBIADES, HIPPARCHUS, EKASTAI, THEAGES, 
CHARM IDES, LACHES, LYSIS, EUTHYDEMUS, W. R. M. 
Lamb. 

PLATO. LAWS, R. G. Bury. 

PLATO, PARMENIDES, PHILEBUS AND CRATYLUS, H. N. 
Fowler. 

PLATO, PROTAGORAS, GORGIAS, MKNO, W. R. M. Lamb. 

PLATO, REPUBLIC, Paul Shorey. 

PLATO, SYMPOSIUM, W. R. M. Lamb. 

PLATO, THEAETETUS, SOPHISTES, POLITICUS, H N. Fowler 

PLUTARCH, MORALIA, F. C. Babbitt. 

POLYBIUS, W. R. Paton. 

ST. BASIL, LETTERS, Prof. Van Den Ven. 

THUCYDIDES, C. F. Smith. 

XENOPHON, ANABASIS, APOLOGY AND SYMPOSIUM, C. L. 
Brownson. 

XENOPHON, MEMORABILIA AND OECONOMICUS, E. C. Mar- 
chant. 

XENOPHON, SCRIPTA MINORA, E. C. Marchant. 



Latin Authors. 

' AMMIANUS, C. U. Clark. 
AULUS GELLIUS, S. B. -Plainer. 
AUSONIUS, H. G. Evelyn White. 

BEDE, ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, Rev. H. F. Stewart 
CICERO, AD FAM1LIARES, E. O. Winstedt. 

CICERO, DE ORATORE, ORATOR, "BRUTUS, Charles Stuttaford. 
FRONTINUS, DE AQUIS, C. Herschel and C. E. Bennett. 
FKONTINUS, STRATEGEMATA AND FRAGMENTS, C. E. Bennett. 
FRONTO, C. R. Haines. 
HISTORIA AUGUSTA, David Magic, Jr. * 

HORACE, EPISTLES AND SATIRES, W. G. Hale and G. L. 
Hcndrickson. 

LIVY, B. O. Foster. 

LUCAN, S. Reinach. 

OVID, TRISTIA AND EX PONTO, A. L. Wheeler. 

PLINY", NATURAL HISTORY, F. G. Moore. 

ST. AUGUSTINE, MINOR WORKS, Rev. P. Wicksteed. 

SALLUST, J. C. Rolfe. 

SENECA, EPISTULAE MORALES. Vol. III. 

SENECA, MORAL ESSAYS, J. W. Basore. 

TACITUS, ANNALS, John Jackson. 

VALERIUS FLACCUS, A. F. Scholfield. 

VELLEIUS PATERCULUS, F. W. Shipley. 

VITRUVIUS, F. W. Kelsey. 

DESCRIPTIVE PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION. 



London - - WILLIAM HEINEMANN. 
New York - - G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS. 



Jrom which it was borrowed 





/A 000675936 9 



