
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



'iy 




oeidGl 



Jolleotion 



^r)(V,| 






MATERIA MEDICA OF INDIA 



AND THEIR 



THERAPEUTICS. 



By 

RUSTOMJEE NASERWANJEE KHORY, 

Honorary Physician^ Sir J, J. Hostital and attached to Bat Motlibai and Sir Dinska Petit 
Hospitals ; Member of the Royal College of PhvsicianSy London; Fellow and Licentiate 
of Medicine of the University of Bombay ; Voctor of Medicine (Brux,); Late Syn- 
dic and Dean of the Faculty of Medicine, University of Bombay ; Late Presi- 
dent. Grant College Medical Society ; Fellow of the Koyai Medical and 
Chirurgical Society of London ; Fellow of the Obstetric Society, Lon- 
don ; Justice ofthe Peace for the City of Bombay ; Author of 
" The Digest of Medicine,'' ''The Principles and Practice of 
Medicine,'' " The Bombay Materia Medica and Their 
Therapeutics "/ Examiner in Materia Medica and 
Therapeutics and in Midwifery and Diseases of 
Women and Children, University, Bombay ; 



AND 

NANABHAI NAVROSJI KATRAK, 

Licentiate of Medicine and Surgery (Bombay), Justice of the Peace for ihe Ctty of Bombay ; 

Late Chairman of the Standing Committee and Member of the Municipal 

Corporation of Bom lay ; Late Secretary and Vice-President of 

the Grant College Medical Society, Bombay. 



BOMBAY : 
PRINTED AT THE CAXTON WORKS. 

1903. 



UJis' 



To 

The Right Honourablk 

LORD REAY, G.C.S.I., G.C.I.E., LL.U., &c., 

Late Governor of Bombay. 

In grateful recognition of eminent services rendered 
to the cause of education in general and medical education 
in particular, and of many and beneficent medical reforms 
introduced in the Bombay Presidency, and the sym- 
pathetic solicitude evinced for raising the status and 
position of the local medical profession, 

This work has been, by permission, respectfully 
dedicated. 



Organic Drugs from the Vegetable Kingdom. 



The drugs belonging to this kingdom are treated in this work 
according to the system of natural orders, as this is the most scientific 
and practical of the various systems made use of in works on botany. 
At any rate the importance of this system so far as medicine is con- 
cerned cannot be questioned. The arrangement and sequence of the 
various natural orders have been determined after consulting various 
authors, under the hope that they will be found convenient. 

Rananoulaceee. 

Bachanaga, buttercup or crowfoot family. 

Ranunculaceae is derived from Ranunculus, a little frog, as many 
species grow in moist places where frogs abound. 

Habitat, — Cold, damp climates. Mountainous places. 

Characters, — Herbs or shrubs with an acrid watery juice ; when 
applied fresh quickly produce a blister. Leaves alternate or opposite, 
generally much divided, sometimes entire with dilated and sheathing 
petioles. Stipules generally absent or united to the base of the petiole. 
Flowers small yellow, most complete ; sepals, petals and stamens all 
distinct hypogynous, Corolla 5 with imbricate aestivation, seeds without 
an aril, embryo minute at the base of homogeneous horny albumen, 
roots tuberous. 

Properties, — The leaves and roots of many species when taken in 
excess produce symptoms of irritant poisoning. The different parts 
of the plant at diflferent seasons abound in a volatile acrid principle 
which possesses local irritant, and in some cases even vesicant pro- 
perties ; the acrid principle being volatile is dissipated by drying or 
by infusing it in boiling or even cold water. Some plants contain in 
addition a narcotic principle. A few plants are simply bitter tonics, 
alteratives and stimulants. Among the natives the poisonous plants 
are known as Bish naga. The word is derived from bish — poison, and 
naga — a root, a plant with poisonous root. The non-poisonous plants 
are known by the name of Nirbishi ; nir — against, and bisha — a poison. 

Aoonitum Ferox. 

Habitat, — Himalaya mountains, Northern India, Nepaul, Cash- 
mere and Sikkim. 

Parts used, — The dried tuberous root. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Bish, khanikeel, namir. Beng. — Batsnib, 
Bish, Mitha, telia Ati-singiabish. Bomb. — Bachnab. Cing. — 



2 ACONITUM FEROX. 

Vachanabhi. Duk. — Bachnig. Guz. — Shingadio-vachnig. Hind. — 
Teliy^-bis, Bishnab. Kalabachnig Singya-bis, Mithi-Zahar, Bish, 
Bikh. Malay.— Vatsa-n^bhi. Mar. — Wuchnzlk. Punj. — Moura-bikh. 
Pers. — Bishnag. Sans. — Vatsanibhaj Visham. Shringi-bish. Tam. — 
Visha-navi, Vasha-nabhi. Tel. — Ati-vassa, Vasanabhi. 

Teliya means greased or oiled, to preserve them from the action 
of the air. Vatsa-nabhi means navel of children, as the root resem- 
bles in appearance the navel of children. Shringebish from shingia 
or shingdan, which means a horn, and bish a poison. The smooth and 
tapering root of aconite resembles in appearance a goat's horn. 

Characters* — ^The tubef is heavy, horny, fusiform or conical, 
generally wrinkled, dark or yellowish brown externally, and shining 
black within ; in shape it resembles a deer's horn. It is from 2 to 4 
inches long and about an inch wide at the crown or base ; it breaks 
with a resinous fracture and could be reduced to a coarse powder ; the 
smell is very disagreeable, resembling that of cat's urine, the taste 
acrid and stimulating ,' a portion of it when chewed causes a tingling 
sensation and numbness on the tongtie, the sensation remaining 
unabated for a long time. £)ose of the root i to 2 grains. 

Constituents. — A crystalline alkaloid called napelline or pseudo 
aconitine, similar to aconitine (one pound yielding one drachm). It 
has a transparent vitreous appearance, soluble in boiling water, less 
soluble in ether, chloroform and alcohol. Is weaker than Aconitine. 
A valuable hypnotic. Dose, i to J gr. A good substitute for opium 
and chloral. 

Preparations. — (i) Liniment. (2) Tincture 1 in 8 of alcohol. Dose, 

2 to s ms. 

Actions and uses. — Aconitum ferox is diaphoretic, diuretic, anti- 
pyretic and anodyne. It is more diuretic and less antipyretic than 
A. napellus. The tincture is antiphlogistic and useful in nasal catarrh ; 
also in tonsillitis, sore throat, coryza, neuralgia and acute gout. The 
liniment is used for chilblains. 

Aoonitum HeterophyUum. 

ffabitat.^lndi^t Himalaya. 

Ihrts used. — The dried tuberous roots. 

r^rw^c«/^r.— Duk.— Ativish, Ataicha, Atvik4, Vajje-Turki. Guz. 
— Atavakha-ni-kali. Atvasek. Hind.— Atis, Patis-Batis. Mar.— 
Ativish. Pers.— Vajje-Turki, Tam.— Ati vadayam. Tel.— Ati-vasa. 

Ativisha — meaning counteracting poison. 

Characters, — Two varieties, grey and white. White tubers are 
young, plump, of a pale ash colour, ovoid and half an inch to an inch 
long. External surface wrinkled and marked with scars of rootlets. 
At the broad end there are 2 or 3 scale-like rings, the remains of fallen 
scaly leaf buds. Grey tubers are longer and shrivelled ; both 
break with a resinous fracture, their interior is white, taste very bitter. 
Dose of the powder as a tonic, 5 to 15 grs. As an anthelmintic, 

3 to 5 grs. As an antiperiodic, 20 to 30 grs. 



ACONITUM LYCOCTONUM, 3 

Cofistiiuents. — An intensely bitter alkaloid— rAtisine, Aconitic 
acid, Tannic acid, Pectous substance, abundant starch, fat, a mixture 
of oleic, palmitic-stearic glycerides, vegetable mucilage, cane-sugar 
and ash, 2 p.c. 

Preparation — Tincture (l in. 8). Dose lo to 60 nis. Bdligolia given 
to infants for restlessness and to keep them quiet. It contains 3 
narcotics namely. Cannabis, Opium, and Dhatura, and the remainder 
28 bitters and aromatics. 

Devdir yidi kvith. — Decoction. 

Ativish, ShiijirOn, Rito Dhamaso Gokharu, each one part, fry 
the mass and add Sunth, Kaephal, Nagarmoth, Kariatun, Kadu, 
Dhini, Himaj, Gajapipli, Dhamiso, Ringani, Galo, Kakdasingi, 
of each one part make a decoction (1 in 20). Dose, 4 to 12 drs. used 
during convalescence from fever, acute diseases, parturition, &c. 

Actions and uses. — Bitter, stomachic, aphrodisiac, tonit, and 
antiperiodic, given during convalescence froth such debilitating diseases 
as fevers, acute inflammatory affections, &c., uSed also in cough, 
dyspepsia and in diarrhoea depending thereupon, in which case ft is 
given in combination with aromatifcs^ bitters, and astringents such as 
Tinospora, Bonduc-nuts, Holarrheha, kt. It has been given as an 
antiperiodic in malarial fevers with sofne sutce^s, but is much inferior 
to quinine. Combined with vivadin^ it is given to expel worms. 

Aconitum iiy6o6tontim. 

Habitat, — Europe, N. Asia, Himalaya. 

Part used.^-The tubers. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Khanik-el-zeb, Hind. — Bika. 

Cotistituents. — It contains two alkaloids : Lycoctonine, soluble in 
ether, but sparingly so in water ; and acolyctine, soluble in water, but 
insoluble in ether. 

Aoonltam MapeUus, B. P. 

Aconite — meaning a rock, as the root grows upon steep rocks. 
Napellus — meaning a little turnip, the shape of the root being 
like that of the turnip. 

Habitat* — Europe, Himalaya, Alps, North America. 

Parts used. — ^The tuberous root, Aconiti Radix, B. P., and 
Aconiti Folia. 

Vernacular. — Eng. — Wolf's-bane, Monk*s-hood, mousebane, 
Indian Aconite, Nepaul Aconite. Arab. — Khanik-el-nemer. Beng. — 
Dudhia bikha. Guz. — Nagapuri Bachanaga, Dudhio Vachanaga, 

Hind. — Dudhia bikha, Kota bikha, Batsnab-bish, Mahoor. Panj. 

Telia Kachang. Bomb. — Bachnab, Tel Vasanabha. Can. — Vasanabhi. 

Khanik-el-zeib and Khanik-el-nemir. Khanik, the slayer, and 
Zeib, a wolf. Nemir, a panther. It means slayer of wolf and 
panther. Aconite was used to destroy wild beasts. 

Visham, visha, a name common to any poison. 



4 ArONITlTM NAPFLl.US. 

C^^r^^/^rj. —rFlowers deep blue, helmet shaped. Leaves in 
segment, wedge-shaped and deeply cut, and when chewed giving a 
sensation of tingling on the tongue and lips. Root of a brown colour, 
tuberous, horny, irregular and roughly wrinkled, conical, 2 to 3 inches 
long and one inch in thickness at the crown, the lower portion taper- 
ing and marked with a few scars and fragments of rootlets; on the 
top are the remains of leaflets. The root bark is thick and enclosing 
a seven-rayed star-shaped pith, which is whitish and starchy. The cut 
surface is yellowish white and resinous and made up of wedges. It is 
without any marked odour, the taste is somewhat sweetish at first, 
then becomes acrid and radish like ; when chewed it leaves a tingling 
sensation on the tongue for a long time. Dose, i to 2 grs. 

Constiiiteuts. — The chief active principle is the alkaloid aconitine 
in the proportion of '03 p.c. Pseudo aconitine or napelline or 
Veratroyl Aconine, Pseudo aconine, and Aconella, which resembles 
narcotine, also Picraconitine, aconitic acid, resin, fat, and 
sugar. 

Pseudo aconitine or Veratroyl Aconine or Napellina or 
Napelline is weaker than aconitine. It is more soluble in hot water 
and less soluble in ether and chloroform. 

Aconitina, B. P., aconitine, aconitia is identical with benzoyl 
aconine. To obtain it mix the alcoholic extract with hot water, re- 
move the oil and resin, cool and filter, then precipitate with ammonia, 
exhaust the precipitate with ether, distil and dry. Met with in 
colourless hexagonal, or rhombic prisms, or white amorphous 
solid of alkaline reaction. With acids it forms salts. It is readily 
soluble in alcohol or chloroform, less so in ether, nearly 
insoluble in cold water (i in 150), in hot water fiinso), and in 
petroleum spirit; melts at a temperature of 375® F. A drop of 
even a very weak solution causes a tingling sensation on the 
tongue. yJo K^« o^ aconitine is equivalent to about i grain of 
aconite root Dose, j\^ to ^q grain. The salts of aconitine, namely 
hydrochloride and hydrobromide are both crystalline. 

Preparation, — Of the leaves, Extractum aconiti. Extract of 
aconite. Dose, i to J grain. Of the root, Extractum aconiti fluidum, 
each drop contains one grain of the powdered root. Dose, J to 2 ms. 

Tinctura aconiti, B. P. (i in 20). Dose, 5 to 15 ms., if frequently 
repeated 2 to 5 ms. 

Linimentum aconiti,' B. P. (2 in 3). 

St. Jacob's Oil. — It probably contains aconite liniment, ether, 
alcohol, turpentine, red colouring matter and water. According to 
another formula it contains turpentine, aconite liniment, carbolic acid, 
alcohol, ether, capsicum and origanum. 

Preparaiion.'—Oi aconitina. Unguentum aconitinae, aconitine 
ointment, B. P., contains aconitine (2 p. c.) 



ACOSITUM NAI»ltLLUS. 



contains i grain in 240 ms. 



Injectio aconiltn:e hypodermica, 
Dose» I to 2 ms. 

Oleatuni aconitinac, oleate of aconitine. Contains 2 p.c. of atoniline 
10 oleic acid rt»r external use. 

Anodyne arayl colloid. It contains aconitine, veratrirje, and 
liydride of amy I dissolved in collodion* A good application in 
neuralgia &c, 

Bacbnag Powder, To prepare it, soak small pieces of the root in 
milk for several hours» dry and powder. Dose. ^ to J gn 

PhyshUigkai achon, — Aconite is sedative, anodyne, mydriatic and 
poisonous. U depresses circulation and respiration. It is a powerful 
depressant of the sensory nerve ends of nervous and of muscular apparatus 
of the heart, respiration and the spinal nervous system. It docs not 
aiTect the cerebrum. At first it stimulates the vagus centre in the 
medulla, and lowers the heart-beat, the respiration, and arterial tension. 
This is soon followed by cardiac depression and paralysis of the 
vasomotor centre. As a sedative upon the nerve ends in small 
quantity it produces a little tingling and then numbness as on the 
tongue and lips. It also produces diaphoresis and diuresis. It 
acts upon the stomach and intestines, producing increased i>ecrelion. 
It causes constriction in the fauces, and produces nausea, vomiting 
and more or less salivation. 

In toxic doses there is loss of sight and hearing, with 
dilated, sometimes contracted pupils, cold clammy sweats, great 
numhness, lowering of the body heat, loss of motion, sensation and 
impairment of reflexes, ending in convulsions, syncope and death ; 
consciousness is generally retained to the last* Locally it is a powerful 
sedative, paralysing the sensory nerves around painful areas and 
producing numbness. 

Therapeutics. — ^As a powerful antiphlogistic, its chief use is in the 
early stages of acute cararrhal or sthenic fevers, acute catarrhal inflam- 
mation and vascular excitement* In inflammation of serous mt^mbrancs 
as acute pleurisy, in pericarditis, in orchitis, in acute peritonitis, 
and in acute rheumatism, if given early, it is very useful. 

It should not be given in asthenic patients, in weak, fatty, or dilated 
hearty in continued fevers, in gastro-intestinal irritation and pulmonary 
inflammation^ As a powerful vascular and cardiac sedative, it is 
given in cardiac hypertrophy without any organic lesion, and in nervous 
palpitation. It is also given in scarlet fever, measles, erysipelas, acute 
catarrh^ acute bronchial affections, in coryza, tonsillitis, exophthalmic 
goitre, and asthma ; also in croup, either spasmodic or inflammatory. 
Given with Dover's powder, it is very useful in breaking up a cold 
ar zn attack of influenza. It is a popular remedy with singers. 
They take it occasionally to clear their voice. It is very beneticial 



given m 
' ETling th 



gestive neuralgia, as 



of the fifth nerve; i 



Igia 



ifi 



or those 

sentery 

ppfcatjcd mLnhtruatiun folluvvlng a chill or exposure to 



local con 
iranc 



facial neura 
arrhoea 



or 



6 ACONITITM PALMATUM. 

cold and in congestive dysmenorrhea. Given in gonorrhoea it 
prevents chordee. In cases requiring the passage of a catheter, 
tincture of aconite in drop doses prevents the chill following 
the cathetrism. Aconitine in ,ijy grain doses is used hypoderniical- 
ly in acute inflammations, accompanied with high fever. As a local 
anodyne the liniment is applied to relieve the pain and itching in 
herpes zoster, pruritis and chilblain ; in neuralgia and chronic 
rheumatism. Aconitine ointment is a powerful local sedative and 
used locally in facial neuralgia, also in orchitis and painful affec- 
tions of the joints. In odontalgia the tincture may be rubbed on the 
gums. It should not be used on an abraded surface. Aconitine oint- 
ment is very efficient in trigeminal neuralgia. 

AoonitaiQ Pa)mMmPr 

Habitat, — Himalaya, Mishmi. 

Parts used, — The tubers. 

Vernacular, — Bomb. — Bikhma, Vakhafiia ; Guz. — Vakhamo ; 
Hind. — Bishama. 

Characters^ — Tuber generally branc}ipd, colour light brown, hard 
and horny and breaking with a short starchy fracture. Externally the 
surface is longitudipally furrowpd. Internally compact, shining and 
yellowish. Taste iqtensely bitter, but not acrid. Smell somewhat 
pungent and aromatic. Qos^, 5 to lo grs. 

Constituents, — Ap alkaloid identical with atisine, starch, &c. 

Preparation, — Infusion (i in 20). Dose, i to 4 drs. 

Actions and //j^.— Stomachic, bitter, antiperiodic and anthel- 
mintic; used in fevers, dyspepsia and diarrhoea. It has been also tried 
in cholera. 

Adonis Yemalia. 

False hellebore or the pheasant's eye. 

Habitat, — Southern Europe and Asia. 

Parts used. — The leaves and stalks. 

Characters, — A perennial l^erb of a wild growth. Dose 3 to 6 grs. 

Constituents, — The active principle is a bitter hygroscopic 
glucoside, called adonidin, aconitjc {icid, — adonido quercitrin, adonidic 
acid and sugar (adonido-dulcite). 

Adonidinum-adonjdin. A canary-yellow powder cf intensely 
bitter taste and neutral reaction. It is soluble in water, ether 
and alcohol. Dose ^^ to ^ gr. 

Preparations, — Extractum adonidis liquidum. Dose, i to 2 ms. 
Tinctura adonidis. Tincture of adonis (i in 8). Dose, 10 to 30 ms. 
Infusum adonidis. Infusion of adonis (1 in 40). Dose, i to 4 drs. 



ANhMOSi 



LLA* 



PJk}* ' aciiotis. — Fresh plant is ncrid, irritant and vesicant; 

firv nlatii _ . .. ..lac aUmuUnt, tonic and diufetic, similar in action to 

It acts more promptly, slowing the heart beats, increasing 

and raising the blood pressure in the aiteries. It is rapidly 

xl in the urine. It is not cumulative and can be given for 

I- ti^ lime without danger. In large or poisonous doses it at first 

Kciics the heart and then causes paralysis of the cardiac motor 

'nerves. Adonidin is more energetic than degitoxtn. It is also a 

cardiac sedative like belladonna. 

Thtfijpfutics, — As 3 diuretic it is used to remove oedema or dropsy 
loe to diseases of the hearti chiefly the dilated heart wiih mitral 
eguxgitation. It slows the respiration, relieves throbbing headache, 
ipsration and dyspncea. In epilepsy it may be given with potassium 
lide. 

Anamona Pulsatilla. 

A, praleiuis (pali^tilla ni^ri-cans.) A. patens (pulsatilla vulgaris.) 
Basque flower. Wind flower. Meadow anemone, 

Ancotonc, from an<Jmos the wind, wind flower, the herb grows 
rtndy places. 

Fulsatilla, from puUerei to beat or strike^ it pulsatet from the 
Willi I or be;iting against the tree. 

I : ; , from pratum, a meadow or belonE^inir to meadow ; its 
pkice iA growth* 

fi'iliUit, — HngUnd, Siberia, Temperate untl Aljniie Himalaya. 

/ arls! us^d. — The Hfiwcring herb, 

iWuacuiaK — Pers.— Shakaykel-naamaa. 

CAanicUrs, — Stems simple and erect, with l.irgc terminal flowcrSt 

Flnwcrabcll-shapcfi* vidlt-l or purple. Fruits nchenes, numerous, Koott 

brown» oiilique. Leaves silky and villmis. All parts covered 

t ioft silky hairs. Without any odour and of an acrid taste* 

Dose, 3 to to grs. 

O^nstiiiieNis, — An nci id yellow oil» aiictnonal, winch is converted 
in the pre«rnce of water into ariemonin or pulsatilla camphor ; the 
■ f)le anemunic acid j and acrid anemone camphor, 
iioninnm or pulsatilla camphor is obtained from 
^ ol anemone. Distil the herb with water, and evaporate 
It resembles camphor and is neutral white, friable, 
Hs or needles without odour, of an exceedingly acrid taste, 
lie in chloroform and hot alcohol and sparingly so in ether 
irater j on the addition of alkalies it is converted into ancmoninic 
jd« a crystalline insoluble powder; dissolves in alkalies with a 
How colour* Oose^ i ^^ t fin** i" pi^^* 

VffniratifiH. — Extract um puUalilUe liquidum. Dose, i to 5 ms* 
Tinciura pulsattila (i in lo\* Dose, 2 to 10 !os. Infusion 
(i fo 40). Dose, I to 4 dr 



8 CIMICIFUGA RACEMOSA. 

Physiological action. — Diuretic, general stimulant, antispasmodic 
sedative, mydriatic, expectorant, galactagogue and emmenagogue ; 
in toxic doses irritant. When chewed it increases the secretion of 
saliva. It lowers the heart, and arterial tension, reduces the respira- 
tion and the body heat. In large doses it causes nausea, vomiting 
and diarrhoea, and in toxic doses paralysis with stupor followed by 
convulsions and death. Locally it causes numbness, tingling, skin 
inflammation and eruptions. 

Therapeutics. — The root is mixed with milk and given 
internally. Pulsatilla is now particularly used in functional uterine 
derangements as leucorrhcea, amenorrhcea, dysmenorrhoea, and 
other painful affections of the pelvic organs ; also in rheumatism, 
gout, nervous headache, orchitis and epididymitis, in both of which 
it relieves inflammation and also the pain. As an antispasmodic 
it is used in coryza, rhinitis, bronchitis, asthma, whooping cough, 
and hysteria ; as a gastric sedative it is given in dyspepsia, gastritis, 
flatulence, &c. Anemonin is used in asthma, bronchitis, whoop- 
ing cough, &c. 

Locally, i of tincture to lo of water is used as an injection for 
leucorrhoea ; mixed with walnut husk, it is used for dyeing the hair 
black. It is applied to scaly skin diseases and to unhealthy ulcers, 
syphilitic sores &c. 

Cimioifuga Racemosa, B. P. 

Syn — Actaea Racemosa, Bugbane, black snake root, black cohosh, 
rattle root. 

Cimicifuga, that which drives away bugs, in allusion to the use 
of one variety to drive away bugs. 

Habitat, — Rich woodlands. Cashmere, Temperate Himalaya, 
United States. 

Parts used. — The dried rhizome with the attached rootlets. 
Cimicifugae — Rhizoma-Cimicifuga syn. Actaeae Racemosae Radix, B. P. 

Characters. — Rhizome 2 to 6 inches long and \ inch to i inch in 
diameter, horizontal, thick, hard and covered with cup-shaped scars ; 
the roots are brittle, especially near the rhizome ; on section they form 
3 to 5 wedge-shaped woody bundles, separated by medullary rays, 
colour brownish-black, odour slight, taste bitter and nauseous like that 
of opium. 

Constituents. — Resins (3^ p. c), fat, starch, gum, tannic and gallic 
acids, sugar, volatile oil (when fresh), and an acrid crystallizabls 
neutral principle known as cimicifugin. Of the two resins, one is 
soluble in alcohol, but not in ether, and the other soluble in ether and 
alcohol as well. 

Cimicifugin. To obtain it act upon the rhizomes with alcohol, 
precipitate the solution with acetate of lead, remove the lead with 
sulphuretted hydrogen and evaporate. 



CLEMATIS TRILOBA. 



9 



CAa racier s*-^ A powder of a yellowish-brow a colour, soluble in 
aliolial and dilorofomii slightly so in ether and water* Dose, ^ 
to z gr5, 

I^ffsaraif^n, — Extractuni cimtctfugde liquidum, B. P. Dose, 5 
to 50 ms. Extractum cimidfugae. Dose, 1 to 4 grs« Tinctura cimicifugie, 
TitKture of Act^ea Racemosa, B. P. (1 iu 10). Dose, 30 to 60 ms. 

/^v / ' I action. — The root is alterative, stomachic, cnimena- 
|0^ie. {i[ ic, diuretic, diaphoretic, arid antispasmodic. Its action 

iLaii, ijiiculation^ and the nervous system is similar to that of 
On the un.Htriped muscular fibres its action resembles that 
In small dnse<> it is a gastric stimulant. It increases the 
'4 the generative organs and the menstrual flow, also stimu* 
ite the bronchial mucous membranes and the kidneys. In brge 
JoAev it ».lows the heart, but increases its force, also raises the arterial 
ctt^lon. In toxic doses it acts as an irritant, dilates the pupils, 
r^r...f.v .^ dimness of sight, headache, nervous tremor, violent delirium, 
, nausea, vomiting, and depression of pulse. 

IJurapentks. — It has been given in chronic muscular rheumatism, 
lumhagn. torticollis, intercostal neuralgia, sciatica, pleurodynia, and 
^ to fatigue. As a stomachic tonic it is given in dyspepsia 

»l iisnn and as a nervine tonic in delirium ireuieiB, hysteria, 

uvafian neuralgic pains, chorea and impotence or seminal discharges ; 
a* :\n irhciljt: it increases the flow of menses. It is also useful in 
T and metrorrhagia, subinvolution of the uterus, and in 

u,..-;^*^ T,,..i,b affections, Ac, As an expectorant it is of benefit in 
acute and chronic bronchitis and phthisis. In puerperal mania 
Of pyerperai pet itonitis^ also in puerperal hypochondriasis, its good 
eflbcu are well marked. Cimicifugin is given to excite the contraction 
of th< \o check or allay after-pains of delivery. 

,icata, or baneberry (Eng.)^ possesses properties similar 
lo cimjciiuga racemosa. 

ClematJA Triloba. 

/b^i/ri A— Mountains of Western India. 

Aitj usiii. — The leaves* 

Vernacular^ — Gux. — Rlojii. Hind. — Rdnj4i. Mar. — Morvel. 
Saiii.-»Lagbu*kardni. 

L^ghia*karani. — Laghu, small or tight, and knrani, ear, in allusion 
to the shape of the leaves. 

CkaractfTs, — A climber, young branches tonieiuose .md silky, 
leaves on longish petioles, simple or alternately divided, elliptical, or 
ovale and lanceolate, flowers large and white. 

Preparation, — Infusion (1 in 20), Dose, i to 2 ozs. 

Achomaptiiusis. — Alterative and sedative, used like sarsaparilla in 
Wood diKasea, such as syphilis, chronic fevers and scrofula. It is also 
given in Icptusy. The juice of the leaver coinbined with that of the 



lO corns TFETA. 

leaves of holarrhena antidysenterica, is dropped into the eye for the 
rcflief of pain in staphyloma. 

Coptis Teeta. 

C. trifoliatt — Coptis or mishmi teeta. 

Habitat. — Assam, China, Thibet, Mishmee Mountains. 

Parts used. — The dried rhizome. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Urfik, M^hamirftn Assam. — Mishmee, 
Teeta ; Chin. — Sou-lene or Chynlen, Honglane ; Cing. — Pita-karo-. 
Sana. Eng. — Goden thread root. Gu4. — Haladio Vachnag. Hind. 
Bomb. — Mishmitita and Maha-miran. 

Urak, a kind of turmeric ; Miami means bitter. 

Characters. — Two varieties — superior rhizome, creeping, golden 
yellow, thick as a cane and marked with spinous projections where the 
rootlets have been broken off. Jointed, nuckle-like at the upper end; 
knotty, perfectly dry and brittle. Inferior rhizome, as thick as a goose- 
quill, rootlets thin and wiry, breaks with a short fracture, centre 
spongy, taste intensely bitter, without any odour. The root, when 
cnewed, tinges the saliva yellow. Dose, 15 to 60 grs. 

Constituents. — Berberine, 8| p.c., a colourless alkaloid coptine and 
resin. 

Berberine, a yellow, hitter crystalline alkaloidi also found in 
Hydrastis, calumba root, berberry and Thalictrum foliolum. 

Preparation, — ^Tinctura coptidis (1 in lo). Dose, 30 to 60 ms. 
Infusum coptidis (i in 20). Dose, | to a fid. ozs. 

Actions and uses, — Bitter, stomachic tonic, antiperiodic and altera- 
tive; also local stimulant. As a tonic its influence in restoring appetite 
and increasing the digestive power is very marked. largely used, in 
native practice, in dyspepsia and in convalescence from acute diseases. 
It has a gentle action on the bowels. In ague and other fevers it may 
be given both during and after the paroxysms. Under its use patients 
recover from acute diseases manifestly improved in strength. As an 
alterative it is used in enlarged liver and spleen. Esp^ially used in 
jaundice. Locally it stimulates the mucous membranes, and is used as 
a gargle in sore throat and ulcers in the niouth, It is also used, 
combined with Berberis asiatica, in conjunctivitis and as a snuff in 
coryza. 

DelphiniQm Denadatum. 

Habitat, — Sirmoor, Lahore, Punjab. 
Parts used.— ^Tubers and seeds. 

Vernacular, — Greek — Saturyno. Arab — Zhadvar, antila. Bom. — 
Jadwar Nirbishi. Pers. — M4h-pftrvin, Mafarfin. Sans. — Jadavar. 

Jadwar. — The great purifier of blood or antidote. Mah-parwin. — 
Moon and Pleiades, the plant blossoms in summer when the Pleiades 
rise. 



DBLPHlNltnf OFNtlOATUM, 



If 



_ Nirbbhi, Nir opposed to and Bisi belonging to Bis or poison, 
lti3il 15, t{ is opposed lo, or an antidote to, poison* 

Ciinmc/rrs. — Tubers small, blackish -brown, irregularly ovoid, 
wrinkled, somewhat conical, seldoni more than an inch long and ^ 
iiKh in diameter, having u few horn-like projections at the top, the 
remains of rootlets. Cut surface^ solttsh, of a dark-brown colour and 
hom^ . unctuous to the touch, taste bitter, odour fruity. 

r rjfx. — Some species contain delphinine and staphisagrine- 

I liohol, staphisagrine is insoluble in ether in which 

>■'■ , .;i-...L ..L . ..ble, 

Pte^rathn. — Decoction (i in lo). Dose, 2 to 4 drs. 

its. — Alterative, stomachic tonic, and anodyne. Asa 
Jfmit I ling convalescence from fevers; as an alterative in 

phihs and rheumatism. The root is chewed to relieve toothache* 
clphinc r«embles aconitine» and is antidotal against muscarine and 
dtgtialinc. Staphisagrine acts like curare and paralyses the motor nerves. 
fiennsrks. — A :, to Persian medical works Jadwar is found 

^mng fogether h (A. ferox), to which and to snake poison 

Jadirir b considered an antidote. 

DelphiniuD) Brunoniajium. 
VffnacnlttT^ — Samp-phali (Hind). 
HaHtaU — Punjab* Himalaya. 
Characi^rs. — The root has a strong scent of musk* 
Actiafit and uses, — The juice is used to destroy ticks in animals. 
Delphinium Cciruleum. 
WiQ^rir/ifr^^Dakhan-ghut a Punjab plant» used to kill maggots. 

lih^ nri«. — The marsh marigold found in marshes in the 

t. The rtx>t is poisonous, 

Delphiniuni Zalil. 

ffiM/fiL — Rhorasan and Badghis* 

Pari$ J»i^i/.— The herb. 

Vernacular^ ^ Arab. — Zireer* Hind — Astruck Trayamuna. 

B<>tiib, — ^Traya-mAn^Oul-Jalil. Gur,— Trayaman. Mah- — 

Pcr*.^ — Zaiel, Asfrak. Punj. — Asbarga-yafiz-Gifiz, Sans — 

Bol4 deva, Bala-bhadraf Arjaka, Mangalyarha. 

I. — Herb light -brown or yellow, placed m water it tinges 

}W ; stents anf^ular and furrowed* a span high and 

■■ Tigthwise ; flowers pubescent, perfect, ribbed, yellow 

i-biirri and surrounded by pointed follicles. Taste 

lat aromatic; odour honey-like. 

C'^ffsfifTtrfTft—A r»nrk*redd»sh acid resin ; two neutral principles 

indtwo bitter alkaloids, somewhat similar 



Western 



\d. 



*njij ^^Jincv.iii 



DgLFHlMlUM STAPHISAGklA. 



Preparation. — Ash and decoction (i in 20), Doze— 2 to 6drs. 

Actions ami uses, — A bitter tonic, alterative, anodyne, din f 

parasiticide. As a tonic it is used in fevers and dyspepsia; as ; 1^ 

Live and diuretic in enlargement of the abdominal viscera, as liver and 
spleen, in jaundice and dropsy. Locally, mixed with lime-juice, the ash i» 
used in parasitic afleclions of the skin, as scabies^ itch, &c. With barley 
meat a poultice of it is used in inflammatory swellings* 

Remarks. — Sometimes the rhizomes of Valeriana hardwickii arc 
sold by native druggists for this drug* 

Delphinium Siaphisagria, B. P. 

Staphisagria means wild dried grape. The fruits are in cluj^tcrs 
and resemble wild grapes. 

Delphinium, a dolphin. — The shape of unopened flowers is like 
that of a dolphin's head. 

Habitat, — Mediterranean Coast| France, Italy, L-evant, Asia Minor. 

Piijrts used, — The seeds. Staphisagri«e Seniina^ B.P, — Semen 
Pedicularis, stavesacre seeds. 

Characters* — An annual or biennial plant. Flowers in racefncs. 
They are bluish or purple, the seeds are irregularly triangular 
or obscurely quadrangular, arched or straight, blackish brown, 
becoming dull, greyish brown by keeping. Test^i brownish gjcy, 
wrinkled and deeply pitted with reticulated ridges. The interior of 
the seeds is soft, whitish, and contains oily albumen, enclosing a small 
embryOi The taste is nauseous, bitttr and acrid, without any odour, _ 
Dose of the powder, i to 2 grs. 

Consfituents^^Set^s contain sevcrai alkaloids — delphinine, ng| 
phinoidin, delphisine, and staphisagrine. It also contains rcsii^ 
fatty matters, a bitter principle, volatile oil| and fixed oil 25 p. c,< malic" 
acid, proteids, mucilage. The fatty oil could be extracted by ether* 

Delphinine, Delphinina, Delphia, 

Characters, — An amorphous, brownij^h while or yellowish crysta 

Manufacture. — Obtained by builing the decoction of the !iee^ 
with magnesia, ireaiing the precipitate with alcohol and evapoiatinjf. 
It IS insoluble in water, soluble in alcohol, ether, iIIImiu it iM . md 
chloroform. Dose i to J gr. 

Staph tsagrine.—.\n amorphous yellow alkaloid ul a bitter auul 
lasle. Insoluble in ether, soluble in chloroform and alcohol. 

Preparation, — Oflhcseed; unguentuni stapliiMgria-, utniment of 
staphisagria, stavesacre ointment, B.P, (4 in. 23). Oleum staphisagria:. 
Tincture (10 p. c.) Dose, 5 to 10 ms. 

Preparation 0/ Deipkimne,^0\n\mcni {20 grs. to 1 ox.) 

Physi^toj^icat action* — The seeds arc parafilicrde (owiitg (lieir m**- 
pctty to the fixed oil), Nioleni emctit, diutelic «ind caihariiL. The 



HRU.FnORUS KIGRR, 



dilkaloid dclpbinine, which is a local irritant, produces tingling, burning, 
aintlrnH.immntion of theskfn. It is a heart poison, and, like aconitine and 
veratrine, it depresses the heart and respiration. In large doses it leads 
UM ^ ►t I he spinal cord and asphyxia* Internally it has to be 

UKi iiiirdedly. 

Therapeutic wi^5.— The powdered seeds are used, as an ointment. 
In destroy scabio, pediculi, vermin, lice, &c.; as a liniment for 
rhctjmatism, neuralgia, kc, 

rviphininc is ^ivcn internally in dropsy, rheumatism, spasmodic 
acsUimi <ind neuralgia ; externally the ointment or an alcoholic solution 
is applied i»vcr the painlul ner\^e areas» in neuralgia, toothache and 
cirache. Dclphinine and staphisagrine are antidotes to muscarine and 
digttalin pcnsoning. 

Helleborua Ni^eft Helleborus Offlcinalia. Black Hellebore. 

Nabiiat. — South Europe, Germany, Nepaul Mountains. 

Part used, — ^Thc dried rootlets and rhi^rome. 

1^ Vrfnacnhr. — Arab — Khartik Kuerbeck Kharbec-ul-aswad* Bomb. 
Cutkf. Duk. — Kutki, Eng. — Hellebore, Guz. — Kuddu. Hind.^ — 
Kitt' Ju. Mar.— Rila-kadu. Pers. — Kh;ltbek-e-hindi. Tam. — 

Ka: srti. Sans. — Kalaka-rohani, Katuruni. Singh, — Calurana. 

Character s,^YiooX^ black, and hence the name. As met with in the 
biiiaar it is tit two different colours, each having a different name, the 
rrd kmiwn as Kadu and black, Kali Kutaki. In both the rhizome ts 
kuDtty, io short broken pieces I to 3 inches long, in sixe resembling a 
goo4c i|uit). Externally smooth and of a brownish white colour, slightly 
lihrivclicd and marked with scars of fallen rootlets. Very fragile, 
light soft, and can be compressed between the fingers. On section 
the cut surface appears as if made up of layers or scales. Has 
a white broken ring between the centre and the external surface ; 
udour heavy, resembling that of majith or tobacco. Taste somewhat 
acrid ;ind very bitter. The c<»lMur is brownish dark. In siiee some- 
wlut thicker/ Externally each piece is covered over with numerous 
(ftom 3 to 4) longitudinally nerved scales, or marks of leaflets, 

Do«c, powdered rhizome as a tonic, 10 to 30 grs,; as a 
piirgative, \ to I dr. 

r'>my///irM/f,— Hellehorine, Helleborein — both crystalline and 
|KitM>ji()u%, re^in, fat, &c. 

Hclleborme. — Insoluble in water, but soluble in alcohol and 
chlornform. 

Helleborein.— It is crystalline, very soluble in water, slighty so in 
itcoltol and insoluble in ether. Dose, |V '^ iV' S^* ^^^ ^ ' P-^* 
\ aulutioR. 

t^fntiatnm.—VXmA extract of black hellebore. Dose, 3 to to m%. 



14 HEPATICA TRILOBA. 

Extract of black hellebore. Dose, i to 4 grs., cautiously. 

Physiological action. — In small dose it is a bitter tonic, stomachic, 
also antiperiodic. In large doses a drastic hydragogue, cathartic and 
an emmenagogue. In toxic doses a violent, gastro-intestinal irritant, 
giving rise to vomiting, purging, vertigo, cramps and convulsions, 
often ending in death. As a purgative it resembles colocynth. 
Helleborin is an active poison ; when applied to the tongue it 
causes, like aconite, tingling sensation. Internally as a narcotic it 
causes paralysis of motion and sensation, congestion of the brain and 
spinal cord, dilated pupib, and death. 

Helleborein is an irritant of the mucous membranes of the eyes, 
nose, stomach, intestines, giving rise to conjunctivitis, sneezing, saliva- 
tion, nausea, vomiting and purging. In small doses, like digitalis, it 
acts as a cardiac tonic, but slows the frequency of the pulse. In largie 
"doses it quickens the pulse, ultimately paralysing the heart. The 
respiration is. at first increased, then slowed, and at last becomes 
laborious, there is increased activity of the kidneys and uterus. 
In toxic doses there is gradual paralysis, followed by convulsions, 
and death. 

Therapeutics, — ^Hellebore is given in acute cerebral affections, 
fevers, dyspepsia and in jaundice; the natives give it in combination 
with holarrhena antidysenterica seeds in amenorrhcea, melancholia, 
mania, insanity , worms, dropsies, skin diseases. Helleborein, as a sub- 
stitute for digitalis, is hypodermically injected or given internally in 
smaller doses in diseases of the heart. As a local ansesthetic it is more 
powerful than cocaine ; 3 to 4 drops of I p. c. solution of helleborein 
causes complete anaesthesia of the cornea; on the addition of a little 
erythrophlcein, the anaesthetic effect lasts for a very long time. • 

Helleborus Fcetidus. — Bear's foot. Decoction or syrup of leaves 
used for asthma, hysteria, hypochondriasis. Dose 5 to 20 grs. 

Helleborus Viridis is the green hellebore. The root is used like 
the root of H. Niger. 

Hepatioa Triloba.— Liver wort. 

Habitat. — North America, Europe. 

Part used. — ^The leaves. 

Characters. — Leaves reniform, 3-lobed, 2 inches long. Dose, \ to 
2 drs. 

Constituents. — ^Tannin, mucilage. 

/^^/^ra//b;/.— Decoction (i in 20). Dose, 1 to 2 02s. Infusion 
(i in 20). Dose, i to 2 ozs. 

Actions and use Ss — Demulcent, tonic deobslruenl ; given in liver 
disorders and in respiratory diseases^ such as phthisis, bronchitis, &c. 



nVDRASTlS CANADENSIS, 



«5 



Hydrastis Canadensis^ B.P. 

Golden seal, eye balm» orange root, yellow paint, ohio curcuma. 

^ IS. — So called because its active properties are found in 

the V. lice, or because it grows in marshy or watery places. 

Golden SGiL— In allusion to the yellow rhizome, once used as a 

paint and dye. 
hatntat, — North America^ Canada, &c, 

/fer/i used, — The dried rhtJEome and rootlets. Hydrastis Rhizoma 
Hydrastis Rhtiome» 6. F. 

Characten. — Rhizome, yellowish brown, tortuous, 2 inches long 

\ o\ an inch thick, longitudinally wrinkled and breaking with 

short resinuus fracture ; bark thick and reddish-yellow, with 

nodulbry fays» pith large, of a grccuish-yellow colt)ur, exhibiting 

ring of 10 bright yellow wood bundles; roots thin and brittle ; taste 

bitter and odour slight. Dose, 5 to 30 grs, 

r -' 'rnts^ — Hydrastinc, berberine, xantbopuccine, canadtue, 
&tat4. . resin, and a fluorescent compound, 

aa, liydraitine* — To obtain it» add hydrochloric acid 
and the powdered root. Filter and remove the precipitate uf 

err ->nia to the filtrate. To puriiy hydrastine 

id 1 charcoal and crystallize. It occurs in the 

rcioC iv the extent ul 15 p.c. 

CA<tr^<r/rrjf.— In white crystals^ resembling strychnine in appear- 
ance* very sparingly soluble in water, soluble in alcohol, ether and 
rm. Taste very bitter; combined with acids it forms salts ; on 
illation, it is converted into trimethylamine and meconin. 
qr. From hydrastine is prepared an oxidation product, 

^astinine, oxidize hydrastine with binoxide of 
man. luric acid. Hydrastinine hydrochloride, the salt 

|cncraiiy uacd, occurs as light yellow crystals deliquescent, of bitter 
aslc, Kilublt! in water (i in i)and alcohol (i in 3). Dose, J to 1 grain j 
in a to p.c. suKiiion it ts used as an injection hypodermically for 
^ytcrinc hjrmurrhagcs. 

Bcrberinc. — Occurs as yellow crystalst soluble in alcohol and water, 
and insoluble in ether. Cajiadine. — In while needles ; Canadine 
iulph^te is soluble in water and alcohol. Xanthopuccine. — In yellow 
% It unites with acids to form salts. It is probably impure 

1-- 

Prc/uiraticm 0/ Hydraslu. — Extractum hydrastis liquidum, B, P. — 
''LiqtT- ^ '-net of hydrastis. Dose, 5 t<^ '5 ™s* 

11. — A dry extractive. It is obtained by evaporating 
it bydrasti> Hquidum. It consists chiefly of hydrochloride of 
lL lj, It should not be confounded with the crystalline 

rtd-*Hydnsline, A a bright yellow colour. Do*e 



16 



KrOETXA SATIVA 



Trnctnra Hydrastis, B.R Tincture of Hydrastis (i in lo), 
to I ;inn. 

Physiohgicat actmn, — Alterative aperient, antiperiodic, dianede 
and antiseptic. In small doses it is a bitter and stomachic tonic. 
It has a stimulating action on the mucous membrane of the stomach and 
intestines. It promotes appetite^ increases gastro-inteslinal secretions, 
and stimulates the flow of bile. It is a good deobstruent to the glandular 
sy:>tem* It causes uterine contractions If long continued, 
it deranges digestion and leads to constipation. It is a poison la 
the protoplasm and arrests the movements of the white corpuscles, 
Hydrastine is simitar in action to quinine. It produces edects on the 
nervous system and causes ringing in the ears, 

Hydrastinine is utero vaso constrictor, antispasmodic and cardiac 
stimulant. 

Therapeutics, — As a stomachic tonic it is used in atonic dyspepsia 
gastrO'intestinal catarrh, jaundice, in catarrh of the bladder^ uterus^ 
vagina. &c.» and in chronic alcoholism. It stimulates the liver in habi- 
tual constipation. In menorrhagia and other uterine hasmorrhages, it 
is given in preference to ergot and iron, also used in lismoptysis and 
night sweats of phthisis. 

Hydrastine^ the alkaloid, and hydrastint the dry extractive, are 
both used as antiperiodics like quinine, in chronic malaria and in 
intermittent fevers- As alteratives they are given internally in all 
forms of catarrh, chiefly of the stomach, duodenum, h ' ' >, 
bladder, uterus, vagina, &c. As cholagogue it is given ir. \* 

tioM and in sluggish liver. Externally as an injection, the soluiioa 
nf the extract (i in 50), or the infusion of hydrastis (1 in 50) is 
used in chronic gonorrhoea, leucorrhoeav gleet, and in chronic nasal 
catarrh. The solution is also applied to syphilitic sores in the 
mouth, throat, &c., to rectal fissures and fistula, to aital prolapse^ 
haemorrhoids, cracks and fissures o( the nipples, abrasions, erosion and 
ulceration of the os and cervix. As an ointment (1 in z^) it b 
used in eczema. It is also used asa local antiseptic dressing for unhealthy 
wc^unds and cancerous ulcers, 

Hydrastinine hydrochloride is used hypodermically in !•• 

al irregularities a lew days before the expected lime. Comb ii 

ergot and cannabis it has been used in uterine haemorrhages, such ^m 
congestive dysmenrrhaa, mtinorrhagia and metrorrhagia, also In mctn- 
lis, endometritis, pyosalpingitis, &c, ; also to induce abortion. Given 
also in epilepsy, hydrophobia, strychnine poisoning, with g«>od 
results. Externally applied in acne and hyperidrosis. 

Ni^ella Sativa-H. Indlea. 

I/ijbitaL — The Mediterranean countries. Cultivated in India, 
J*arts uscii, — The seeds. Mugrela seeds* 

Vernacular. — Arab.— Kamune-asvad, Hubha tussoudi* Benfi..— * 
KAI-Zira, Bomb, — Kelanji, Bur.^Safi . t. Can. — Kare^jiragAH 

Cing.— Kaluduni, Duk. — Kalauji. i mall fennel flow^ 



FiEONIA OrKICIN'ALis 



Bgvi*t — Habes-souda. Guz. — Kalijiri. Hind. — ^Kalajira, mugriia. 

*lalyal.— Karum-chirakam, Mar. — Kalajire, Pers. — Siyah-berang, 
1iuncz« Sans, — Krishna-jiraka^ Karavi, Sushavi. Tarn, — Karin- 
kiragum. TeK — Nalla-jilakara, Singh. — Kaloo-dooroo, 

Characters, — ^It is probably the black curtiin of the Bible The seeds 
resemble coarse gunpowder and are triangular, the umbilical end 
^m&Der than the other. Surface, black, wrinkled and marked by 
irregukir dcpre^iona. Testa rough. Internally the seeds contain a 
white oily kernel of a strong aromatic odour, resembling lemons, 
sassafras or cubebs* The taste is oily at first, after a time it resembles 
that of garlic. Dose, 4 to 8 grs. 

CoNsMucnfs. — The seeds contain a fixed oil 37,5 and volatile oil 1.5, 
albumen 8.25, mucilage 2, albumen r.8, organicacids 0*9, metarabiii 
i«4, melanthtn, resembling helteborin, 1,4^ ash 45, moisture 74, sugar 
glucose 2*S> and arabic acid ^,2^ &c. 

PrtparatioH^ — Medicated oil (oleum mugrel.-e) Tincture (i in 8). 
Doflie, 30 10 boms. Decoction mugrela (1 in 20), Dose, 4 to 8 fluid drs- 

AcHi^Hi a$td uses* — Anthelmintic, diuretic, galactagogue, emmena- 
and carminative. It as an aromatic adjunct to purgative and 
remedies. A decoction of the seeds just after delivery is given 
to stimulate the uterus to contraction and to increase the secretion of 
llie milk ; also tn worms. As a carminative and stomachic with 
p]ilint)ago«root, it b given in dyspepsia^ loss of appetite, diarrhcea 
and intermittent fevers* As an emmenagogue it is used inamenerrhcra 
and in d) smcnorrhnea. In large doses it causes abortion. Locally it 
IS kargety used brayed in water to remove painful swellings of 
Ittiidft and feet* 

Rrmarks.-^Th^ seeds are scattered between woollen shawU and 
clothe as a protection against insects. 

Paeonia Offloinalis. 

/fahiai* — Temperate Himalaya and Europe, 
lutrts uifd, — ^The tubers. 

/ s, and Arab. — Fawania Aod-el-Salib. Bomb. — 

LMS.J :. _ ^y rose, ofBcinal Peony. Hind. — Ud salap. 

Udesalam is a corruption of Aod-el-salib, meaning wood of the 
crots/* The wood on section shows two lines crossing each other like 
acrou. Acd<«l-salib is also the name of Peony corallina or male peony, 
the roots of which is turnip shaped. 

Picoiii the physician of the gods. 

CharacUrs^ — Tubers irregular, flattened^ turtlip shaped, one to two 
iticbes ill length and from \ an inch to t inch in thickness. Hardt 
heavy* and conical ; external surface or epidermis brownish, shrivelled, 
tough, and fibrous or rugous» with numerous fissures radiating from 
the ceiUre« At the top is a hard conical pointi the lem^iiis of a stem* 



1 8 THALICTRUM FOUOLOSUM. 

When cut, the tuber is starchy and presents a bluish surface, 
resembling catechu or chobchini, and consists of 2 or 3 rings. Smell 
peculiar, acrid, and resembles that of ipecacuanha. Taste slightly acrid 
and nauseous. Dose, 3 to 10 grs. 

Constituents. — Tuber contains malates, oxalates and phosphates, a 
little tannin, sugar, starch and a volatile oil. 

Actions and uses, — Acrid, alterative, antispasmodic, and emmena- 
gogue. As an antispasmodic it is used in uterine obstructions, biliary, 
intestinal and renal colic, hysteria, epilepsy, palpitation of the heart, 
asthma and convulsive affections. It is, however, in great repute as an 
emmenagogue in dysmenorrhoea and amenorrhoea, to stimulate the 
secretion of menses. As an alterative, it is used m syphilis, torpor 
of the liver and ascites. In large doses it is poisonous, causing 
giddiness, vomiting, &c. 

Remarks. — The peasantry of Europe, even nowadays, put a garland 
of these seeds round the necks of children during dentition, or a 
bag containing pieces of the root is suspended from the neck, under 
the superstitious belief that it wards off convulsions. 

P»nia Emodl. 

Habitat, — Panjab. 

Part used, — The tuber. 

Vernacular, — Mamekh. 

Actions and uses, — Similar to those of Paeonia officinalis. 

Ranunoalas bulbOBus. Crowfoot. 

Habitat, — Europe, North America. 

Parts used. — The herb and corm. 

Characters. — The plant is hairy, 6 to 18 inches high. The bulb 
at the stem base. Dose — ^ to i drs. 

Constituents, — A volatile oil, anemonine, and anemonic acid. 

Preparation. — Decoction, infusion (i in 20). Dose, i to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses, — Irritant, diuretic and narcotic Locally 
applied to the chest in bronchitis. Also in rheumatism, sciatica, 
neuralgia, &c. 

Thalictram Foliolosum. 

Z^^^//^/.— Temperate Himalaya, Khosia Hills, Sutlej Valleys, 
Kamaon Mountains. 

Paris used. — The root. 

Vernacular, ^Bomh, — Piaranga, Mimeeree. Eng.— Gold thread, 
Meadow rue, Poorman's rhubarb. Hind.— Shuprak Mamiran, 
Pilijari. Punj.— Bur-moti, Gurbiani. Sans.— Pitaka. Pilijari— pili, 
yellow, and jari, jar, a root. The root is yellow. 



MAGNOLIACEiC. 19 

Characters. — The root, often mistaken for Coptis Teeta. It is 
creeping and of yellow colour, as thick as a goose quill; surface slightly 
contorted, knotty, and covered with scales, the remains of rootlets. 
Cut surface is resinous, of a deep yellow colour and hollow in the centre. 
Light yellow rings arranged in wedges, found between the hollow and 
the external portion. Taste bitter, odour resembling that of Fel 
bovinum. Dose — 5 to 10 grs. 

Cbiu/f/E/^/f/lf.— Berberine and a yellow bitter extractive. 

Preparation, — ^Tincture (i in 8). Dose, 20 to 30 ms. Liquid 
extract. Dose, 5 to 20 ms., and snufF. 

Actions and uses, — Aperient, bitter tonic and febrifuge, used in 
atonic dyspepsia, jaundice and flatulence, in the interval of intermittent 
fever and during convalescence from fevers and acute diseases, as 
an aperient, it acts gently on the bowels, a good substitute for rhubarb. 
The snuff is used in coryza. It is a febrifuge of some power. 

HagnoIIaoeA. 

The magnolia or Bidiana family. 

Trees or shrubs, leaves alternate, beautiful leathery and stipulate. 
Flowers sweet and fragrant, white or red, and distinct, handsome with 
large sepals and petals in two or more rows. Fruits cone-like, stellate or 
capsular, with numerous carpels, one-celled, dry or succulent, dehiscent 
or indehiscent and distinct or somewhat coherent ; seeds solitary or 
several, albumen fleshy and homogeneous. 

Habitat. — Temperate climates, Tropics, Hindustan, Japan, China. 

Properties, — Plants in this order are remarkable for their bitter, 
tonic, astringent, and aromatic properties; they contain an essential oil, 
a bitter principle and sometimes tannic acid. 

Drimys Winteri or Wintora Aromatioa:. 

Habitat — South America. 

Part used, — ^The bark. 

Vernacular. — Eng. — Winter's Bark. 

Characters, — Bark in quills or curves, in thickness 2 to 4 lines. 
Colour greyish brown, with granular fracture ; odour similar to that 
of canella or cinnamon, often substituted for cinnamon and sometimes 
called Winter's cinnamon. Canella bark has been termed spurious 
Winter's bark. Dose, 10 to 30 grs. 

Constituents, — Winterene — a volatile oil, Resin 10 p.c. ; tannin 
9p.c. 

/V«r///rtf/irb«.— Tincture (i in 10). Dose, \ to i dr. Infusion 
(i in 20). Dose, 4 to 12 drs. 

Actions and uses, — Tonic, aromatic, and stimulant ; given for colic, 
flatulence, scurvy, &c. 



20 ILLICIUM VERUM. 

Illioiam Yeram, B. P. 

Illiciuniy meanrng allurement, t\e,^ from its odour and attractive 
appearance. Verum, verus, true, genuine, or real type. 

Habitat — Cochin China. 

Parts used, — The fruit and oil, oleum anisi, oil of anise, B. P. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Raziyanaje, Badiani Khatai. Bomb.— 
Badian. Burm. — Nanat-paen. Duk.-^Anas-phala. Eng. — Star-anise, 
Chinese anise, aniseed. Hind. — Anasphil. Pers. — Badia-ni-Khatai. 
Tarn. — Anashdpu. Tel. — Marati-mogga. 

Star anise.— The manner in which they grow is peculiar, the pods 
being in small clusters joined together at one end and diverging in 
8 rays. 

Characters. — A shrub ; Fruit pedunculate, of an iron-brown 
colour, formed of 8 carpels arranged like stafs. Each carpel oval, 
with a broad base, compressed on both walls, and having a boat-4ike 
prominence at the top, woody, wrinkled and hard to the touch. The 
cavity reddish-brown and glossy, opening by a slit at its upper margin ; 
seed, one in each carpel, smooth, shining, ovato oval, ribbed only on one 
side and glossy, of a brown or chestnut colour and oily ; taste of 
the seeds like that of anisum, sweet , aromatic, acrid at first, then 
astringent and, lastly, bitter. Taste of carpel like that of kabab chini. 
Dose £ to 30 grs. It contains integuments or capsules, 78 p. c, and 
seeds 22 p.c. 

Constituents, — Star anise contains volatile oil, 4 to 5 p.c. Saponin, 
proto catechuic acid, shikimic acid, resin, mucilage, cane-sugar and 
ash, 2 p.c. The volatile oil is chemically identical with the oil distilled 
from the fruits of pimpenella anisum and is obtained by distillation 
with water. 

Oleum anisi, B. P., a clear colourless or pale-yellow liquid, of fruity 
odour and mildly aromatic sweet taste, becomes red on exposure to 
air, the colour resembles that of ol. foeniculi, composed of a parts, j^ 
being a liquid anethol or anese camphor isomeric with oil of turpentine 
and ^ solid anethol with small amount of terpene, safrol, anisic acid, 
&c. Dose i to 3 ms. 

Preparatton.^-lvdM^xon (i in. 20). Dose, i to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant carminative, anodyne, and diuretic. 
Internally an infusion of the fruits is of great service in flatulent colic, 
spasmodic affections of the intestinal canal ; also in infantile retention 
of urine. The powdered capsules are stimulant and carminative. For 
oil see Pimpinella anisum. An inferior variety is occasionally sold by 
Mahomadan or Bohree druggists as true Badiana. The fruits are 
abortive, with hardly any odour, narrow, and have 13 carpels instead of 
eight. The colour is darker, reddish-brown and they are much wrinkled 
on the under surface. The ends of the carpels are more turned 
up than in the true variety. The taste is feebly aromatic and slightly 
bitter and astringent. It contains only a bitter principle and tannin. 



ILLICIUM RBLIGIOSUM. 2 1 

lUieiom Reli^osam. 

HaKtaU — Cultivated round Buddhist temples in China and Japan, 

Part used. — The fruit. 

Vernacular, — Shikimi . 

Characters, — Fruit similar to Star-anise, having 8 carpels, thin, 
more woody, shrivelled wrinkled, and end in a curved beak, odour 
clove-like and faint ; taste unpleasant. 

Constttuents. — It contains a liquid volatile oil, Protocatechuic acid, 
Shikiminic acid, Sikimipicrin, shikimin ( poisonous ). The volatile oil 
of the leaves contains saffrol, eugenol, shikimofand liquid anethol. 

Actions and uses. — The fruits have poisonous properties causing 
vomiting, dilated pupils, epileptiform convulsions and even cyanosis. 

lUicium floridanum and L par viflorum have fruits with 13 and 8 
carpels respectively. Bark is substituted for cascarilla. 

Liriodendron. Tolipifera. 

Hahttat, — United States, China. 

Parts used,^'The bark. 

Vernacula r, — Eng. — Tulip- tree. 

Chafactets. — Bark in quills or curved pieces, a line or two in 
thickness, colour purplish-brown, fissured and covered with thin ridges. 
Inner surface smooth and whitish. Taste astringent. Dose, ^ to i 
drachm. 

Qmstituents, — Volatile oil, resins, liriodendrin, tulipiferine, tannin. 

Preparation. — Infusion (i in 20). Dose, 4 to 8 drs. Decoction 
(i in 20). Dose, 4 to 8 drs. ; fluid extract, 20 to 40 ms. 

Action and uses, — Bitter tonic, given in dyspepsia, intermittent 
fever, also in chronic rheumatism. 

Magnolia Olaaoa. 

Swamp sa&safras, beaver tree, sweet bay. 

I/abttat,'^lJnited States. 

Putt used. — The bark. 

Characters.'^The bark in thin quills or curved pieces ; colour 
orange brown, externally fissured and warty. Taste astringent, bitter; 
used as a po.wder. Dose, ^ to i dr. 

Constituents. — Volatile oil, resin, tannin and a crystalline principle 
magnolin which is insoluble in water, but soluble in ether and alcohol. 

/Reparation, — Infusion (i in 20). Decoction (i in 20). Dose, 
I to 2 fl, ozs. 

Actions ^iiiflffww.— Tonic, aromatic, bitter, antiperiodic,diaphoretic, 
alterative. Resembling cinchona, and given in fevers, malaria, gout, 
chronic rheumatism, catarrhs. In fever it arrests the paroxysms. 



22 MICHELIA CHAMPACA. 

Hichelia Champaoa— H. Nllagirioa, HUl Champa. 

///?^//^/.— India, Nilgiris, temperate Himalaya. It is cultivated 
for the sake of its yellow sweet-scented tulip-like flowers, which are 
offered to the Hindu deities. 

Paris used, — The bark, leaves and flowers. 

Vernacular, — Burm. — Sa-ga. Eng. — Golden or yellow champa. 
Beng. — Champaka. Can. — Sumpagahy. Cing. — Sappu (M. Nilagirica). 
Guz. — Rae champa. Hind. — Champa. Duk. — Champa. Mar. — Pivala 
Champa. Malyal. — Bongas jampacca. Sans. — Piti. champaka suvarna, 
champaka-pushpam. Tarn. — Shempang shembugha. Tel. — Champa 
Kamu R. Dipapushpa, (lamp flower), from depa, bright, shining; and 
pushpa, flowers. The flowers are shining and bright. 

Characters. — M. Champaca, leaves fall off during the cold season, 
when the tree is full of flowers. Bark light-brown externally, and can 
easily be removed from the wood by mere scratching ; inner surface 
reddish brown; mottled with longitudinal green stripes and irregular 
pale yellow dots or scars ; taste sortiewhat bitter and very acrid; odour 
faint. M. Nilagirica. Bark light-brown, also brittle and covered with 
lichens and mosses, of bitter taste and odour. Dose of the bark, \ to 
I dr. 

Consittuents, — M. Champaca. The bark contains a volatile oil, fixed 
oil, resin, tannin, mucilage, starch and sugar. M. Nilagirica contains a 
volatile and fixed oil, acrid resin, tannin, sugar, starch, calcium oxalate 
.&c. 

Preparation. — Infusion (i in 20). Dose, J to i ounce. Decoction 
(i in 20). Dose, ^ to i ounce. 

Actions and uses. — Deobstruent alterative, bitter, stomachic^ 
emmenagogue and demulcent. The leaves are applied to indolent 
swellings; the bark is febrifuge and alterative and used as a substitute for 
guaiacum in chronic rheumatism. The root is an emmenagogue ; it is 
used in disordered menstruation to increase the flow, and as an aromatic 
bitter during convalescence from fevers. The infusion of flowers is 
demulcent and diuretic and given in gonorrhcea to relieve scalding. 
Flowers beaten up with sweet-oil are applied to the nose in foetid nasal 
discharges. The oil of the seeds is rubbed over the abdomen to relieve 
flatulence. 

Anonaoea. 

The custard-apple or Sitdphala order. 

Trees or shrubs with powerful aromatic taste and smell. Leaves 
alternate, simple and exstipulate. Flowers usually green or brown ; 
fruit dry, or succulent; carpels distinct or united, so as to form a 
fleshy mass. Seeds one or more, albumen ruminated, anatropal. 

Properties. — Generally aromatic and fragrant, in all their parts. 
The order furnishes some edible fruit». Varieties Anona squamosa, 
Custard-apple, Sweetsop, Sitaphal ; Anona muricata, Soursop ; A. 
reticutala,Ramphal, Bullock-heart. 



Anona Squamosa. 

hj:ital —Western India ; cultivated in India and America. 
I^rls used, — The leaves, root and seeds. 

Vtwfiacular, — Arab. — Shurifa. Beng. — Luna, meba. Burni. — Ame- 
auaca* Ctng. — Atta. Eng. — Custard apple, sweet sop, Duk. — ^Sita- 
\\. Hind* — ^Sitaphal. Malay. — Buwah-nona, shri-kaya, Mar,^ — 
'' ., — Shurifah. Sans. — Ganda gutea. Tain. — Sitapallam. 
'1 alij, Maleal, — Ata-chika. 

ChitracUrs^ — The root is dark-brown^ bark scabrous* Seeds dark 
brown and polished with bi-laieral ridges, one end umbilicaled, or with 
a ring ind a central pit» the interior contains ruminate albumen of a 
brownish colour ; taste acrid and oily; odour nauseous, leaves lanceolate, 
ftoiouth, glaucous* of a dark-green colour and of a pungent and 
ofl*eii ' ' ur. Dose, 5 to 10 grs. 

t uU\ — Oil and resins. The seeds, leaves and immature 

[rutl contam an acrid principle, 
'V 'Mratton. — Ointment. 

ns and uses* — Insecticide. The seeds and leaves arc poisonous 
^ The crushed leaves are applied to the nostrils ill 

!\^ . ; 1. " i mixed with salt and made into a poultice are applied to 
Mjfcs iniolccf with maggots; an ointment of pounded seeds is used 
Tiv ill ouiaea worm, and for removing lice from the hair; also 
cesses to hasten maturation. The natives apply to the 
ied seed^ to procure abortion. The root is used as a 
tive and given in melancholia. The drug rccjuires to be 
a vvitn caution. 

Bocagea Dalzellii and GuaUeria LaurifoUa. 

//"^^lAsr/,— Concin, Travancore* 

*4iH M$ed, — Leaves, 

Wnacnlar. — Mar.— Sageri, Kochrik» Harkinjal* 

CkaracUrs* — Leaves polished, narrow, oblong, acute or obtuse^ 5 to 
9 in* ' ' T I to 2 inches broadp coriaceous, serrated, the base 

acut i, taste pungent and bitter. Flowers white, carpels 

j^c, contain 2 mature seeds* 

... i -fi/j, — Tannin and gallic acid. A crystalline body, related 
to stntgrin of mustard seed. 

and uses. — Leaves are used as fomentation in 
rheu 

Henispermacdffi. 

■ »on-sced, or cocculus family. 
, irom mene, the moon, and sperm, a seed, the 
finiU bang kidney or moon (crescent) shaped. 

Genemf chmncUrs. — Shrub, climbing^ trailing or woody. Leaves 
ilmple, entire, cx*tipulate» alternate* Flowers rarely unisexual. 



24 ANAMIRTA PANICULATA. 

generally dioecious, petals shorter than sepals, stamens distinct, some- 
times monadelphous, imperfectly developed or wanting, seeds solitary, 
moon or kidney -shaped fruits, small carpels, distinct, some species 
contain a narcotic and a bitter principle, mucilage or starch and a 
yellow colouring matter. 

HahitaL — Tropics, 

Properties. — Generally they are bitter tonics, and antiperiodic. 
One species, kakamari, contains an excess of narcotic principle in 
its seeds. 

Anamirta Panioulata, B.P. 

A, cocculus. Menispermum cocculus. Cocculus Indicus. 
CqccuIus is a diminutive of coccum— -a berry. Indian berry. 
Paniculata, having Panicles or flowers. 

HahitaU — East India, Caylon, Malayan Islands, East Indies, 
Malabar, Assam, Concan Islands, Travancore, Bengal. 

Farts used. — A neutral principle obtained from the fruits. 
Picrotoxinum, Picrotoxin, B. P. 

Vernaculaf.^YsXig. — Levant nut, Indian berry, fish berry. 
Burm.— Hong. Arab, — Khanak-ul-kalb. Beng. — Bakain-ka-phal Kaka 
miri. Bomb. — Karvatzad. Can. — K^ka miri. Cing. — Tittaval. Duk, 
— Kaka mari. Guz. — Kok phala, jermai . Maleal. — Gaarla-phalla, 
Polla, Hind. — Kakmari. Malay. — -Tuba bidji, Pallak-kaya. Mar. — 
Karwi, Pers. — Zeheri mahit Punj.— Neti mala. Tam. — Kakka- 
calli-maram. Tel. — Kakichampa. Sans, — Kika-phala. Zeheri mahi, 
from Zeher a poison, and mahi, a fish. The seeds, when given to fishes, 
are intoxicating and poisonous. ^ 

Characters. — A climbing shrub. Berries in a long bunch, when 
dry, larger in size than a pea or a small grape, kidney-shaped wrinkled, 
and of a dark-brown purple colour, surface rough, highly tubercled 
or wrinkled, and marked with a circular scar at the hilum ; seed oily 
and yellow ; kernel brown, resinous and oily ; taste acrid and bitter ; 
smell rancid and oily. Dose, i to 9 grains. 

Constituents ^ — The berries or seed-kernels contain picrotoxin, 
an active, neutral, non-nitrogepous crystalline principle ; anamirtin or 
cocculin, and a fixed oil in large quantities. The pericarp or shell 
contains an alkaloid menispermin united with cocculinic acid; para 
menispermin, a neutral ciystalline principle ; hypopicro-toxic acid ; 
also resin, fat and gum. 

Picrotoxin, picrotoxinum, from picros bitter, and toxikon, poison. 
It has properties of a bitter poison. To obtain it triturate aqueous 
extract of seeds with magnesia, exhaust in hot alcohol, evaporate and 
purify; seeds contain from J to i p. c. of picrotoxin. 

Characters, — Neutral, colourless, shining, prismatic crystals, with- 
out any odour, and of a very bitter taste ; soluble in cold water (i in 
330), in boiling water (i in 35), in cold alcohol (i in 13), in boiling 



ANAMIRTA rANICULATA, 



Icoliol (i in 3), freely soluble in glacial acetic acid, in solution of 
l^ish, in olive oil or lard (1 in 500), and in glycerine (^lin&o). It 
not fortn salts. Dose internallyj ^0*^^ to ^^ grain. 

Prepnraiinn of Pkrotoxitu — TJquor picrotoxini aceticus, about 2 
grains to 1 fluid ounce. Dose, 2 to 8 minims. Pigmentura picrotoxini 
(1 grain in r drachm) contains picrotoxin, acetic acid, castor oil 
and eucalyptus Pilula picrotoxini, ^\ grain of picrotoxin with milki 
sugar and glycerine of iragacanth to make one pill — unguenium 
^krotoxini^ 10 grains to l ounce. Injeclio picrotoxini hypodermica, 
i in 360 of water. Dose, 5 to 6 minims, equal to ^q of a grain, 

Ih-tparattuns of the ^^nr^j.— Ex tract urn cocculi fiuidum; fluid 

extract of cocculus. Dose, i to 3 minims. Unguentum cocculi — ointment 

Fofcocculus (80 grains to 1 ounce). DecocLura cocculi — decoction of 

cculus (1 to 20). Dose, j to 2 fluid drachms, Tinctura cocculi, — 

tioct >cculus(i to 8). Dose^ 2 to 15 minims. 

laical actitn. — Insecticide, nervine sedative, cerebro-spinal 
and intoxicant. Used in Europe to adulterate beer, and 
to increase intoxicating effects of country liquors, also to 
(? or poison fish and to stupefy wild cattle for capture. As 
a vv . . . . u*sptnat excitant its action simulates those of belladonna 
and nux vomica, and gives rise to the symptoms resembling those of 
t^ "lepiiform convulsions. It is a powerful stimulant of the 
is of the skin, saliva^ intestines, of all the motor and inhibitory 
lUCS in the medulla, especially of the respiratory centres and also of 
tie Vlgtis* At first it stimulates the heart and respiration; after a time 
tie heart becomes slower, and there is stoppage of the action of the 
iJAphrRgm. In large doses it causes muscular twitchings, in co-ordina* 
lion of the flexors, of a tonic alternating with clonic, or of 

a tr character, stupor, epileptiform convulsions, trembling, 

c3(tJtc<l reflexes followed by insensibility, coma and death, 

TA^rafittttiCS. — As an insecticide, the tincture is used as a vvabh to 
icitrov Dcdiculi which may infest the body. The ointment is used in 
Bft;* 1 flections of the skin, such as prurigo, itch and ring* 

rofi p, care being taken to avoid the application over an 

tbraccd iiLiu. I he natives use the juice of the leaves with that of the 
[^oot of jjflorioHa sunerba to kill guinea-worm. In India the seeds are 
Ki illyi like belladonna and nux vomica, to stimulate the 

the skin, saliva, intestines, 

Picrotoxin is a nervine tonic; and it Is used in chronic paralysis 
*- mralysis of the sphinctor ani and of the sphincter vesicas ; in 
when the attacks are nocturnal, in other spasmodic diseases, 
iij r iM. It is a valuable remedy in j},7 of a grain in nightsweats 

ph:i : .Also given in flatulent colic, and in dysmenorrhcea (given 
I days before tJie term), in leucorrhoea with mucopurulent discharge 
accompanied with lumbar pain) ; in vomiting, with headache 
It is an antidtJte to morphine, chloral, and 
; iiiing, A dose of one jo grain is equivalent 1030 
gratm oi diloraU 



36 



C» lONrmODENDRO H TOM BNTOSU M ^ 



ChoQdrodendFon TomentoBam, B« P« Pareira Brava* 

Chondrodendron — chondros, a carliJagc or grain, and dcndroiii 
tree, in allusion to the grain-like or cartilaginous warty protuberances 
on the bark. 

Toraentosum, meaning woolly. — The under side of the leaves 
being grey and hairy. 

l/aMaL—BrsLzil, Peru, West Indies, 

Paris C'sci^,— 'The root. Pareirae radiJC, Pareira Root, B.P, 

Characters, — Climbing woody plant ; leaves very large ; fruits 
grape-like, root cylindrical, twisted, from J of an inch to 4 inches in 
diameter and from 4 inches to 4 feet in length, covered with a thin 
blackish-brown bark, with longitudinal furrows and transver.se ridges 
and fissures ; internally 3^ellowish-brovvn or grey, with wclUmarkrd 
concentric or eccentric zones and radiating rays, without odour and of a 
bitter taste. Dose of the powdered root, 30 to 60 grs. 

Constituents, — Pelosiiie or cissampeline, an alkaloid, said to be 
identical with berberine ; Tannin, some resin, bitter vflinw itrirf^T, 
starch and ash 4 p.c- 

Pelosine or cissarnpeline. — Boil the root in water, add 
acid, precipitate with potassium carbonate, purify by il 
in solution of sulphuric acid ; finally treat with chnrcoaL Ch*ir.i 
lers* — Amorphous^ insoluble in water, sparingly si^lublc in ether and 
carbon sulphide, freely soluble in chloroform,acct'one, benzol and alcohol 

/^e/xiratton.^Exirzctum pareineliquidum, B* P. — liquid f 

Pareira. Dose, J to 2 fluid drs* Decoction pareira; — Dc\ i 

Pareira (i in 20). Dose, 1 to 2 ozs. 

Physiohgical aciions — Laxative, diuretic and bitter tonic, similar 
to uva ursi and chimaphila. Its chief action is, however, on the 
mucous merabrane of the urinary organs^ which it stimulates. 

Therapeutics, -^li is given in painful micturition due to catarrh of 
the bladder, ureters or the kidneys or to the presence of gravel. In dropsy, 
and in chronic cystitis it increases the flow of urine* In suppurative 
kidneys* in gonorrhcea, gleet and leucorrha:a, it diminishes the 
unhealthy discharges. As a tonic it is used like any vegetable bitter, 
and like caluraba given during convalescence from fevers,, In poisonous 
biles the leaves are applied externally, 

Cissampdos Pareira. 

Parts used. — The root. 

Habitati — West Indies, common in hedges. Singapore^ Ceylon. 

f Vr«ryrw/f^r.— Bcng.— ' ' * *; r •• ' v " , 

Eng*— Wlvel leaf, Guz.— K 

Mar.— Paharvel. Punj. — iikn, K.iti>ru Sani>.- ! 

Patha, Vcnivcl, Pahadamul.t, V^anaiiktika — :. 

Tam.*-Ponaiootootai« Tel. — Pata. 



cotevtm viLLosus. 



27 



Venivel means a braided creeper, so called in allusion to the 
]argc% foundish bracts of the female flowers, resembling plaited hairs 
of children and women 

Characicrs. — It is a tall» woody creeper^ root-bark of a dark-brown 
colour^ rough, crooked, with prominences, stem tortuous, knotty and 
■ ' bark soft, light and slightly furrowed. On section the 
V and presents a radiating menispermal ring of a 
;oU>ur; the ring is similar to that found m calumba. The 
t i.h, aromatic at first, then becomes intensely bitter; smell 

aromatic. Dusc 30 to 60 grs. 

Comtiluents — Cifisampeline or Pelosine, ^ p*c. in the root* It is 
identical with bebeerine, 

i^epajatimt — Decoction (l in 20)* Dose, I to 2 ozs, 

Actioiu and usis*—^\\X^r tonici diuretic and antilithic* Given 
in chronic cystitis, fever, and in diarrhoea. The powdered root 
is dusted over ulcers with benefit. 

Coooulnt Leaba. 

HahitaL — Punjab, Sindh and Carnatic, Arabia, Persia, Afghani- 



Uan. 



Part used* — The jihrub. 

Vernacular. — Punjab — Ullar-bellar, Parvati, 

C^iffik-/^j*— Scandant shrub. 

AtHant and uses. — Bitter toinc ; similar to those of Tioospora 



cordifoUa* 



CoccnluB VUloaofl* 



liabitaL — ^Tropical India- 

Ihris used, — The roots and leaves. 

f'>nKici#/tfn— Bcng. — Huyer, Haer. Can, — Dagadi. Guz, — Patala 
ri. Hind* — Farid-butii Dier, Jamte-ki-beh Mar.^ — Vasanvel» 
ratuu Satu. — Jil-Jamni» Vasa-dani, Patalagarudi, Vasana-valli* 
iTam,— KaUuk-kodi» Tel.^ — Chipura-tige, Katle-tige. Duk.— Jamti' 

fk.i-L*r4tta. 

inv^illi, from vas, fragrance, giving a fragrant perfume* 
J,., Jamni, — Jala, water and Jam, Jamvoun, to coagulate, in 
illusion to the property of the juice of the leaves of forming a 
^coiKuJum or jelly, 

Farid butii in allusion to the legend of Shaik Farid having 
jstainod his life upon the water rendered thick and mucilaginous by 
. baking the leaver of this plant. According to some^ Pedalum murcx 
(Gokharu) is the plant which they name Farid-butit 

CharacUm. — A widely distributed climbing plant, root \^ry 
twining round on itself and giving oflf few fibrous rootlets ; 
Mv^ -^moolh, colour light-brown, odour peculiar and taste bitter and 
Ibagrecable ; leaver on old branthes» thick, succulent, oblong or ovate, 



28 COSCINIUM FENESTRATUM. 

cordate, orbicular or sagitate, obtuse, and more or less downy. Dose, 
I to 1^ drm. 

Constituents^ — Resin, alkaloid and an acid. Resin is yellowish«^reen 
and soft ; odour fragrant, of that of tolu balsam. Soluble in benzine. 

Preparation, — The mucilage of leaves and decoction of root (i in 
lo). Dose, I to 2 ounces. 

Action and uses* — Alterative and demulcent. The juice of the 
leaves coagulates in water into a green jelly, which is applied exter- 
nally as a cooling application in prurigo eczema, impetigo, &c. Sweeten- 
ed with sugar it is given in gonorrhoea to soothe the smarting and 
scalding. The root is an alterative, and mixed with pepper and milk is 
used by the natives for the same purposes as sarsaparilla. With bon« 
due nut (sagorgota) it is a favourite remedy in dyspepsia and colic in 
children. Experience has shown that the use of the root as an alterative, 
laxative and sudorific is beneficial in chronic rheumatism and syphili- 
tic cachexia. 

CoBoiniam Fenestratiim. 

Hibitat. — Ceylon. Western Peninsula. 

Part used. — ^The stem. 

Vernacular. — Eng. — Tree turmeric, False calumba. Bomb. — ^Jhar- 
ki-haldi. Can. — Doda mara-darasina. Cing. — ^VeniveL Duk. — Huldi- 
ka-jhar. Hind. — Jhar-ki Haldi. Malyal. — Mara Manjjal. Mar.— 
Jhade-halede. Sans. — Daru-haridrakam. Tarn. — Mara-munjil. Tel. — 
Mani-pasupu. 

Characters. — Stem cylindrical and woody, bark pale and corky, 
wood of a greenish-yellow colour ; on section porous, with medullary 
rays and no concentric rings. Taste bitter. Dose, ^ to i drachm. 

Constituents. — Berberine. 

Preparation. — ^Infusion (i in 20). Dose, 4 to 12 drs. Tincture (i in 10). 
Dose, ^ to I dr. 

Actions and usesr^X bitter stomachic and tonic, used in fevers 
during convalescence; like calumba, it is found very usefuL The natives 
apply a paste of it to the head as a codling application. 

Jateorhiza Colomba, B. P.— Cooonliia Pmlmata. 

Jateorhiza, meaning healing root ; palmata, the palm of the hand 
The leaves are palmately lobed. Calumba, from Colombo in 
Ceylon, the oriffinsu habitat of the plant. 

Habitat. — Mozambique Forests, East India Islands, Ohio. 

Arty aM#«f.— The dried root Calumbae Radix, Calumba Root, B. P. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Sakel hamam . Bomb. — Kalamb>kachri 
Cing.— Kalumbu. Duk.— Kalamb-ki-jer. Eng.— Calumba rooti 
Columbo. Guz.— Kalumbo, Hind Kalamb-ki jer. Pers.— Bikle. 
Kalambah. Tarn.— Kalamba-ver. Tel. — Kalamba veru. 

Sak-el-hamam, means dove*s foot, from the resemblance of the 
hairy ovaries and three parted stigmas to the leg and foot of a dove. 



JATZOUHVtA CALUMBA 



19 



CiafOCUn, — The fresh roots are fleshy and fusiform, cut in 
verse slices or circular discs* The dry root is raet with in 
Hat, circular or ovali transverse slices, about i to 2 inches in diameter^ 
^antl from 3 to 6 lines in thickness. Each slice is Very light-brown 
externally and yellow internally. It is corky looking and shrunken 
I lk« centre. The most central portion is formed of tubular corky 
eternal to it is another layer, which is also corky and made up 
rial or tape-like fibres cut transversely. This portion is surrounded by 
nother outermost layer, which is nearly flat, of a yellow colour, and 
hard, and to which the bark is firmly adherent. Each slice breaks very 
eadily and with a short mealy fracture. The taste is very bitter, 
Iromatic and mucilaginous. The odour resembles that of azadarach; 
Ihc root is often more or less worm-eaten. Dose, 5 to 30 grs. 

CnmHluents, — A non-nitrogenous, crystalline, neutral, bitter 
I principle, calumbin; an alkaloid, berberine; calumbic acid, starch 35 p,c„ 
fiucilagcand ash 6 px. 

Calumbin. — Exhaust the root with alcohol or ether; evaporate 
*and crystallize. In white crystals, slightly soluble in water, of a 
bitter taste. 

Calumbic acid is found in combination with berberine. It is 
obtained by adding hydrochloric acid to the extract of calumba, 
and treated with hme water. 

CharacUrs* — White crystalline flakes ; sparingly soluble in cold 
watcr^ akohoi and ether* 

Ptefaratiom of the root.^ — Infusum calumbao, B- P, (i in 20). 
e, I to 1 OJE, Liquor calumba: concent rat us, B.P, (i in 2), Dose^ J to 
X dr. Tinrtura calumbae, B. P. Tincture of calumba (i in 10), 
^ Dose, I to 1 dr. 

Extractum calumbae fluidum. Fluid attract of calumba* Dose 
5 to 30 ms. 

Physmlngicai action, — ^A non-irritant bitter, without astrin^ 
Igency, a good stomachic tonic like quassia, and gentian. It is a 
Itlimulant of the mucous membranes of the mouth, salivary glands, 
lir>opliagus, stomach and intestines, and increases their secretion. It 
[increases appetite and digestion, and thus promotes the constructive 
Ifissue changes. If in large doses and long continued, it produces 
^catarrh of the stomach and intestines and interferes with digestion. 

ThffaM'dcs.^h^ a tonic it is generally given in hectic fever and 

Irom acute and chronic fevers and other diseases. 

i ... ^ with loss ot appetite and deficient secretions of 

the stomach ;ind intestines. In diarrhoea, cholera, in vomiting, and in 

latuk-nce, the infusion is given with benefit* A nice vehicle for 

ering acids, alkalies, aromatics and cathartics. Externally the 

I: ; iise the powder of the root as an antiseptic on ulcers and 

wounds. 

Remarh.^li is one of the few bitter tonics which do not contain 
tannic or gallic awid, hence can be combined with iron salts. 



30 STEPHANIA HERNANDIFOLIA 

Meniflpermnm Canadenve and M. Fenestratam. 

Syn, — Canadian moon-seed, Texas or yellow parilla, vine maple. 

Habitat — Eastern United States. 

Parts used. — ^The rhizome and rootlets. 

Characters.-— A woody climbing pUnt, stems round and striated, 
rhizome thick, yellowish -brown, knotty and wrinkled externally. — 
Roots brittle, break with a tough fracture, yellow within. Bark thick 
and porous, without any odour, and of a bitter taste. Dose lo to 30 
grains. 

Constituents. — Berberine, Menispine— s tarch, resin and tannin. 
Menispine is a white powder, soluble in alcohol and ether. 

Preparation. — Extractum menispermi fiuidum — fluid extract of 
menispermum. Dose, 30 to 60 ms. Menispermino — a dry extractive. 
Dose, I to 5 grs. 

Actions and uses, — Stomachic, bitter tonic, alterative and 
diuretic ; used for the same purposes as calumba. A good substitute 
for sarsaparilla in scrofulous conditions, gout and rheumatism and 
in gravel affections. It stimulates the intestinal glands, but not 
the liver ; and is given in dyspepsia, general debility, &c. 

Stephania Hernandifolia. 

Habitat, — Nepal, Singapore, Ceylon. 

Part used. — Stems. 

Vernacular. — Beng — Agnad-akanadi. Sans. — Vanatiktika. 

Characters. — Striated stems. 

Actions and uses, — Similar to those of Cissampelos pareira. 

Tinospora CopdifoIla« T. Crispa. Coooalns Copdifolins. 

Habitat, — Konkan, forests of Tropical India ; Konkan, Western 
Coast of India. 

Parts used, — The stem and fecula (starchy extract Gulancha). 

Vernacular, — ^Arab. — Gilo. Beng, — Gadancha. Bomb.— Gulavela 
Gilo, Giroli. Burm. Singo-mone. Can. — Amrita-balli. Cing. — Rasa- 
kinda. Duk. — Gulbel, Gulwail. Goa. — Amritvel. Guz.— Gado, gulvel. 
Hind. — Guluncha, Gulbel, Giloe. Maleal. — Amrita, chitramruta. 
Malay. — Citamerdu. Mar.— Gulwail Gharol. Pers. — Gulbel. Panj. — ak- 
Gillo, Gularich. Sans. — Somavalli, Amurta, Guduchi, Pittaghni, Bhish 
ak-pryia, Nirjara,Chinnaruha. Tam.— Shendilkodi. Tel. — ^Tippa-tinge, 

Starchy extract (^Fecula). — Beng.— Palo, Sat-i-giloe. Bomb. — 
Galo satta. Duk. — Gulancha, satva. Sikkim. — Gurjo. Hind. — Giloe-ka- 
sat. Pers.— Sake gilo. Tel. — Tuppa sattu. 

Pittaghni — pit means bile, and agne, fire or destroying ; bile 
destroying. 

Bishak pryia, dear to physicians ; Nirjara, not perishing. 



TINOSPORA CORnrFOUA 



.^t 



Chin irnrhua means growing when cut. The stem, when placed 
upon a bush in the open air, will retain its vitality thioughout the 
hot season and pot forth leaves and roots duruig the rains. 

Ckaracitrs. — Climbing shrub. Those spreading, on trees of 
Mangtfcra Indtca and Azadirachta Indica are used for medicinal pur- 
poses. Fresh bark is papery ; dry bark is externally of a dull -brown 
colour, inner portion green and succulent and easily separable from 
the wood ; woodt of a light white colour and presents wedges separated 
sFicd radiating menispermal medullary rays ; taste very bitter 
laginous* 

CoHstiiu^tits, — ^The root and Stem contains starchy extract, bitter 
jdlKiple and a trace of berherine. 

— Infusion of Guiancha ( I tn lo;. Dose i to 2 oajs. 

Tim : ha (l in 8). Dose, J to 2 th"s. Starchy extract or fecula 

io lu ZQ grs. The extract is prepared by powdering the 

lem and washing out the starch with water and drying the sediment. 

"^ioces of various shapes and sizes, of a pure white colour ; taste 

bitter and mucilaginous^ and it adheres to the tongue like Vansa 

Lochana. 

Actions and uu%. — Fresh stem is more efficacious than the dry and 

iiagood substitute for calumba. It is a stomachic bitter tonic, alterative, 

aphrudiiijic, antiperiodic and demulcent, given in dy±»pepsia and in 

drhilitv cauMsd by repeated attacks of fever. Like Peruvian barks 

"d febrifuge ; used in enlarged spleen. As an alterative given in 

- , i.y *yphilis, rheumatism, leprosy, skin diseases, such as impetigo, 

nd m jaundice. As a diuretic and demulcent it is given in 

^suria, in scanty high-coloured urine due to catarrh of the bladder, 

lie juice of the stcni» combined with pAkhanbhed and honey, is 

[ivra in gooorrhaca. The fecula is nutritious, largely used in native 

pfacticG in cold, feircrs, and seminal weakness, also in urittary 

tions, 

A*#w<i^i*jr.— Herbalists sell the stems of cocculus malabaricus for 
^ilavcla.but the stem of cocculus malabaricus is hard, thick, less fleshy 
ad not so cfHcactous as gulavela. 

A wreath, known as kamla-in-m^la or jaundice wreath, and 
of the fresh stem, each piece about an inch long and tied in 
t middle in loose knots with a piece of thrciid, and being 
an inch apart from one another, is put round the neck of 
lldiccd patients, under a common belief among the credulous 
itivcs that the wreath has the property of lessening the force of 
H that its good effects are manifested by the wreath in 
length in proportion as the force of jaundice dimin- 
^nc^, iin^isa mere delusion. The increase in the length of the 
^ rreath i^ due to the drying up of the stems by lapse of time and to 
"llie narrowing of the knots of the thread over the stems. 



3i BEKBERIS AQUIFOLIUM 

Tiliaoora raoemosa. 

HahtiaU — Tropical India, Ceylon. 

Pari used. — The shrub. 

Characters, ^^ A. climbing shrub» 

F^m<tcw/ar.--^TeL— Mushadi. Beng. — Tiliakora. Hind. — Bagor 
Mushadi. 

Actions and usis. — Bitter and stonlaChic, used like other bitters. 
Among the natives it passes for a remedy for snake-bite. 

Berberidao6». 

The daruhalada or barberry family. 

Shrubs or herbs, leaves alternate, compound| usually ^xstipulate, 
stem generally free from hairs, but otten spiny ; stamens hypogynous ; 
equal to petals in number; anthers two-celled, each opening by a valve 
from the bottom to the top. Fruit baccate or dry and capsular. 
Seeds with minute embryo, albumen, fleshy and horny. 

^a^tito/.— 'Temperate parts of Europe, America and Asia and 
mountains of North India. 

Propertiis. — ^Acid, bitter and astringent ; acid properties are due to 
the presence of oxalic acid. 

Berbeiis Aqoifidiiim. 

NMiat—Vziddc Sk>pe of the United Sutes, Western United 
States. 

fhtrt used. — The root. 

Vernacular. — ^American barberry. HoUy-leaved barberry, moun- 
tain grape, Oregon grape* 

Ckmrmcttrs^ — ^Root, i to 2 feet or more in length and about one* 
fourth in breadth, extremely hard and tough ; colour, bright golden 
yellow, cortical portion thin and pap^Taceous, dull-greenish or 
brownish-yellow. Intense, but pleasant bitter taste. Dose, lo to 30 grs. 

ComstiiMients^ — It contains an alkaloid berberina or berberine, also 
a peculiar lesiuous matter. 

Pref>4mit»ou of the root. — Liquid extract. Dose^ 10 to 30 ms. 
Tincturx (^1 to xo>* Dose, 10 to 40 ms. 

Pfystoio^aJ mctHm. — In small doses, bitter took, stomachic 
astringent aiMi antiperiodic ; in Urge doses catnartk and diuretic, 
producing watary motions accompanied with pain. 

71rr«^^miics.— Used in malarial intermittent, remittent and 
typhoid feven, diarrhosft, and dyspepsia ; as an alterative and tonic 
it is given in scrolukHis and cancerous afiectioiis and 
in secondary or tertiary syphilitic .d i sease s , in syphiatk cachexia 
and in chronic scaly or squamous erupiioov more paiticiilarly 
in psoriasis and pit\Ttasb : also useful alter a kMog merciurial course 
to ehminate mercury trom the system. As a citnarttc and diuretic 
it inareaaes the secretions and this relie\xs heputK vx^ngestioQ and 



afiRDF.RlS AJIISTATA 



33 



free* imestinal secretions ; hence, in habitual constipation, it i$ 
combined with cascara sagrada. In pain, soreness and burning 
sensation along the urinary or biliary tracts, with a tendency 
to gall-stone or urinary' calculi, it is a very useful remedy. As a 
glinduUr stimulant it is given in chronic tonsilitis and in enlargements 
of the prosute. 

Berberia Aristata. 

Berberis Lyciunit raisin barberry, Indian Lycium (ophthalmic 
barberry), B, Asiatica and B. Canadensis or B. vulgaris (European 
variety;, 

HabitaL — Mountainous parts in North India, Nepaul, Nilgiri, 
Piountains of Ceylon, Various species of barberry occur on the Nilgiri 
mountains. 

Batts used, — The stem, wood and root-bark (Berberis cortex), 
fruit or dry berries, and extract. 

Vernacular. — The root bark. Arab. — ^Dar-hald. Bomb. — Dar- 
haJad. Hind^ — Dar-halad, Dar-chob. Daru-haridra (the wood). Pers, 
^^Dar-hald, Dar-chob. Eng, — Indian Barberry, Nepaul barberry, 
vdlow wood, turmeric wood. Sans. — Daru haridra. Tam. — MuUa- 
bubU. Puttar. 

The extract. Arab. — Huzari-Hindi, Bomb. — Rusot, R^wanti. 
H'tnd. — Rusot, Raswat. Sind, — Raswal. Pers.— Fil-rahrah, 

The fruit or berries. Arab. — Ambar-baris. Bomb. — Zarishk^ 
Duk. — Zarish. Hind*^ — Zarishk chitra, Hydrabad — Vilayati aniali, 
Pers, — Zarishk, 

Rtsot^Rasuth — Ras^juice^ and uthna to boil; Raswanti^Rasa* 
a juice, and v^anti, a pulp; Daruhalad — Daru, wood, and halad, 
turmeric. The wood is yellow. This term is also applied to the 
yellow root or wood of curcuma aromatica, curcuma longa and 
cocciaiufii fenestratum. 

Characters, — ^The stem is met with in circular pieces, each from i 
to 2 or 4 inches long, and about r to 2 inches in diameter ; very 
bitter and of an astringent taste. The root-bark is smooth and brittle 
and of a dull crey or yellow colour ; on section the stem presents 
a ccniml ring with numerous radiating wedge^like projections, made 
up of fibrous cells ; between these projections is a spongy substance 
perforated by small holes* The fruits are larger than English 
DaibcnieSw shrivelled, much compressed, often oval and of a bright-red 
colour ; most of them abortive, but a few contain oblong seeds ; 
they resemble raisins ; they are met with in black, moist, sticky masses. 
Taste very acid and astringent, owing to the presence of tartaric, 
oxalic and malic acids ; most of them are abort ive» The extract rusota 
b a dark brown, lumpy mass of a bitter, astringent taste, and of the 
cooslsteoce of opium* Dose of the root-bark, 20 to 30 grs. 

Constihuntx. — The root and wood contain in great abundance 1 
yellow alkaloid berbcrine or berberina, oxyacanthine, fat, resin, tannin, 
also b' and another alkaloid. The fruit contains malic and 



citric 



i tanmn. 



34 CAULOPHYLLUM THALICTROIDES 

Berberine, Berberina. — A bitter, orange-yellow, acicular cryst3s, 
soluble in hot water and alchol, insoluble in ether. With acids forms 
salts ; with chloroform, ether and alcohol forms crystalline compounds. 
Dose, I to 5 grs. Berberine is also contained in the root of 
calumba, coptis teeta, #hydrastis, podophyllum, menispermum, 
xanthoxylum, &c. 

/Vtf/^r^/ib;/.— Decoction of the root (i in 20). Dose, i to 2 ozs. 
Infusion of the stem (i in 20). Dose, i to 2 ozs. Tincture of the 
cortex (i in 4). Dose as a tonic, ^ to 2 drs ; as an antiperiodic, 4 to 6 
drs. Syrup or preserves of fruit ; liquid extract not miscible with 
water. Dose, J to 2 drs. 

Rusot, an impure watery extract prepared from powdered stem or 
wood, by exhaustion with water, filtration and admixture with cow^s 
milk and final evaporation. It is readily soluble in water, partly so in 
rectified spirit, forming a yellow solution. 

Actions and uses. — The bark and stem — Tonic, diaphoretic, 
stomachic, antiperiodic, and a gentle but certain aperient, used in 
malarial fevers, diarrhoea, dyspepsia, dysentery, ague, during con- 
valescence from fevers and acute diseases. As an alterative, it is used in 
bilious complaints, torpid liver, dropsy and jaundice. With gypsum, 
it is given in metrorrhagia. The berries are cooling and acid, and 
used as refrigerant in febrile diseases, diarrhoea, &c. The extract 
(Rusot) is an anodyne, tonic and febrifuge, internally used like the 
bark. Externally, rusot, mixed with alum, rock salt, chebulic 
myrabolams and opium, is applied round the orbit in painful affections 
of the eye, as in black eye, &c. Mixed with honey, it is applied to 
ulcers in the mouth. It is also applied to relieve pain of cancer 
and of neuralgia. Berberine.— The alkaloid is given internally in 
malaria, dyspepsia, diarrhoea, sickness of pregnancy, &c. Berberine 
carbonate, berberine hydrochlorate, berberine phosphate and 
berberine sulphate, are used . in malarial affections, amenorrhoea, 
enlargement of spleen, anorexia, vomiting of pregnancy and intestinal 
catarrh. 

Caulophyllam Thaliotroides. 

Verftacular. — Blue cohosh, papoose or squaw root, blueberry, blue 
or yellow ginsing. 

Habitat, — Rich woodlands, Canada, Northern United States. 
Patts used. — ^The rhizome and rootlets, 

Charactets, — Rhizomes are horizontal, 4 inches long, ^ of an inch 
thick, knotty on the_ upper surface with stem-scars and branches; 
externally greyish-brown, inside whitish and tough. Rootlets many and 
matted, without any odour, and of a sweetish and acrid taste« Dose i S 
to 20 grs. 

Constituents* — A resin-caulophyllin, I2p,c. saponin or leontin, a 
glucoside, tannin, wax and an alkaloid-caulophylline. The alkaloid is 
colourless, tasteless and without any odour. Caulophyllin. — To obtain 



PODOPMVLLUAI KMODI 



.^c 



11^ 6xh^«*t the root with alcohol, jiour theakohoHc exiract into water. 
It vn resinoid powder. Dose, i to 4 grs., in pill with glycerine 

oJ . ^ iih. 

Prcf^arnhon, — ^Tinclura caulophyHin^i Tincture of caulophyllum 
(1 in 4), Dose, J to 4 drs, Extractum caulopliyUin:t! hquidum^ — 
liquid extract of cauJophyllum. Dose, ^ to i dr. Liquor caulo- 
phyUin ct Pulsatillas co. Dose, ^ to dr. Infusion and decoction (1 in 
10) Dose 2 to 4 drs. 

/' ;, — CaulophyUin is stimulant, tonic, demulcent, 

diurc: ;. ;, e and antispasmodic; also tKirturient ; it causes 

intermittent contraction of the gravid utem 

Thetapeutks. — Used in deficient labour pam^, m menstrual derange- 
ments, a* spasmodic dystnenorrlicEa. It checks muscular contrac- 
Itoii m cases of threatened abc»rlion» and also relieves spasmodic after* 
paim. It is given in atony of the uterus^ in prolapsus uteri, and in 
$ij lion. Combined with pubatilla it is found u.'^eful 111 acute 

rii NiJcucorrha:M> vaginitis, urethritis and in hysteria. Saponin 

b a itcroutatory. 

Podophyllum Emodl. 

Hahiiat. — Interior range of Himalaya, Ca^hmcrei Shikim 
llazara, &c. 

I\iris tivrd. — The rhizome, roots, fruits, and the resin* 
fVr«/icju/</r.— Hind.^Papra or papri, Bhavan-bakra nr Bakra, 
Chimyaka. San&. — Parpata, vakra. 

CharacUrsi. — Khi/omes similar to those of podophyllum pcuatuni 
except that tl»e rhizfime of P. Eniodi is cylindrical, more crowded 
above with tuf and .stem scars, the under surface covered 

with many dc] val or circular roots. Dose, 5 to 15 grs. 

Cofsstituenis: — Resin, 10 to 12 p. c, sugar, fat, gum, &c., the resin 
is in much greater quantity than in podophyllum peltatum* 

Pftfktrtition, — Tincture (i in 30), Dose, 5 to 20 ms ; resin-podo- 
phyllin, i to i gr. 

Actions and us^s. — Cholagogue, alterative, bitter tonic, given as a 
sure purge, with s-light griping in torpid liver. Uses similar tu those of 
podophyllum peltatum. 

Podophyllum Pdltattimp B. P. 

/Wo/Ay//iii». — Podos foot^and phyllon, *Meaf.-' The leaf is 5 to 7 
.partite^ which resembles the fout of aquatic ducks or domestic fowls* 

/^/iaium* — Pcita, a light shield. The leaf petioles are attached 

to the middle of lamina like a shield. 

HabiUiL — United States. Rich woods of Canada - 

I^tl uud, — The rhizome and rootlets, Podophylli Rhizoma, 

Podoplnllum Root, B. P., the resin; Podophylli Rcsina,' Podophyllum 

Roin, B* P. 



Xb 



POnOFHVLt17M PFtTATtm 



5 px. ; an alkaloid berber Jnci 
and sugar. PodophyJIum 



Vepnacular^ — Eng. — The American May-apple, wild tnandrake or 
vegetable mercury, so called » as it is a powerful biliary purgative* 

Characters. — A perennial herb, stem pale green, with a white flower 
at its summit. The root is dark reddish-brown, smooth or sligluly 
wrinkled, in nearly cylindrical pieces, which are knotty, each knot tt 
marked on its upper surface by a circular depressed scar ; on tbe 
under surface are numerous brittle, brownish rootlets. It breaks with 
a short starchy fracture; on section it is white or pale^yellow or 
brown. It has a characteristic odour and a bitter acrid taste« Dosms^ 
powdered root, 5 to 20 grs. 

Constituents. — Resin podophyllin 4 to 
Podophyllo quercetin, starch, gum, fat, 

Resine, podophylii Resina, B,P., is obtained from the root when a con- 
centrated tincture is precipitated by acidulated water* It is an amor- 
phous powder of a herby odour, acrid bitter taste; colour varies from pale- 
yellow to deep orangC'-brown* soluble in alcohol, alkaline liquids, and 
partly so in ether. Dose, \ to \ gr. It is an ingredient of various 
cathartic pills. The active portion of the resin consists of podophyllo- 
loxin, which contains 70 to 80 p,c. of the cathartic principle, and 
is made up of picropodophyllin held in solution by picropodophyllic 
acid. There is also another inactive acid — podophyUic acid. Picro- 
podophyllin is obtained by treating podophyllotoxin with an alkali. It 
is a neutral, crystalline, bitter mas.s of a white colour* soluble in chloro- 
form, acetone, sparingly soluble in ether, benzin, hot water and weak 
alcohol. PodophyUic acid — an inactive resin acid, soluble in alcnh^yl, 
Podopliyllo quercetin is the colouring matter— occurs in yellow ne 
soluble in alcohol, sparingly so in chloroform and insoluble in w 
The Indian plant yields 10 to 12 p»c. of podophyltin rtfsin and 56 p.c, i/f 
podophyllotoxin, whereas the American species yield's s p.c. of resin 
and 40 p.c. of podophyllotoxin. 

Preparation, — Tinctura podophylii, B.P. (1 ol ihe re*>in in 30 ms.) 
Dosei 5 to I 5 ms. Pikila podophyllin composita. Podophyllin J i!r., aloes 

1 gn, capsicum J gr,, belladonna extract { gr,, glycerin tr !i 
q.s. tomakc one pill. Pilula podophyllin et quinin;e-^Quininc ^. 1 l- 
^ &^*i podophyllin ^j gn, milk sugar ^^ g^% extract of belladonna 
aloes ^ gr. Make one pilL Extractum podophylii fluidum^^u *.- 
extract of podophyllin. Dose» 5 to 20 ms, Tinctura podophyllin 
ammoniata made with aromatic spirit of ammonia (i in 50), Dose, 

2 to 6 ms. Pjlula podophyllin, J of a grain of resin triturated 
with milk sugar, acacia, in pne pill. Pilula podophylii cum 
belladonnse et strychntnae, otherwise known as Tonic liver pills — 
contains: Podophyllin J grain, extract belladonna J grain, slry/ 'y 

grain in one pill Pilula podophylii et pepsinia — Digestive gr . \ 

of a grain in each; Liquor podophylii cum belladonna et strychuiaa* 
Dose, I dr. Liquor podophylii et pepsins. Dose, i dr. 

Actions and uses-^ — Podophyllin is an active chobgnguc and 
c " In small dosea it is given in sick h* '1 

V ucntbilcin the stools^ in habilualcon d 



WMFH.^CACE.'P 



fBfHl in bilious vomiting. It is generally combined with henbane, 
[ionnri or cannabis to counteract its griping effects. In dropsy, 
|r -yphilis, it is generally given along with other purgatives 

kl.^ ynth^ &c,, or combined with cream of tartar and calomel- 

Is'ki derivative it is given in catarrhal or malarial jaundice. In large 
doses it acts as a gastric irritant. The root may be given as an 
alterative. 

NymphsaaoeflB* 

The water lily family ] aquatic herbs ; leaves cordate and 
fi(xating ; flowers solitary ; Thalamus » large, fleshy, forming a disc-like 
expansion^ more or less sur'rounding the ovary ; carpels numerous^ 
united, forming one compound ovary ; frUit indeniscentf many-celled ; 
seeds numerous ; embryo ntinute- 

Habitat, — Northern temperate regions and tropics* 

Properties, — Bitter tad astringent ; rhizomes and seeds of many 
species contain starch. 

Nymphaaa Alba. 

N. Versicolor, Poini. N. Odorata, sweei-scented water lily (Eng.) 

/://<?/•— Bengal, Ajmir, Pastkur Lak^. 

-' \^fts used, — 7*hc flowers and seeds* 

f VyiwrM^^tr.— Beng,— Buro Sundli. Bomb, — Poini, The ii^^d% 
kumabija. 

Characters. — ^The flowers are smaller than those of kamala, and of 
variegated colours. The seeds are very small ^nd tuberclcd. Dose, 
to to 30 grs. 

P^eparaiiatt,'^SyTnp of flowers. Dose, I to 3 drachms^ 

Achoft.% aw</ f/jtf j.~ Demulcentj astringent and refrigerant, and 
u*ed in dysentery in combination with sugar ; other properties are 
simiUr IQ those of N; speciosum, for which it is often substituted. 

Eoryale Ferox* 

• phaea stellata. 

....J;/^/,-^Calcutta, North India. 

Partj used, — The seeds* 

(Vrnaru/aK — Beng. — Makana, Bomb.— Makhana. Hind.-— 
lakana. Kash.^ — Jawur rinn — Kien-shih, k»*tu- Teh— Nallani 
admam. 

Charactfts, — The iniit, large orange or pear-shaped, inde- 
hUcrntt interior white, hard, starchy, contains 8 to 1 5 round black 
he size of pea* and full of flour. The seeds are farinaceous^ 
.i I Iried, roasted or rather baked, they aje known as Dhani* 

Actions and uses. — Dhani is invigorating and used as an article of 
food ; also as an astringent, nutritive, and tonic, used in seminal dis- 
charges* In Bombay makaoa is imported ffom Mathura and Benares. 



3^ NELUMBIACFiC 

NelumbiaoesB. 

The water bean family. 

Aquatic plants, creeping in the horizontal direction, attached to the 
earth by numerous fibres ; leaves, peltate, floating on the surface of water 
and are mucilaginous ; flowers large and showy, thalamus very large* 
flattened at the top, excavated, presenting numerous cavities, each 
containing a single carpel ; fruit nut-like, half buried in the cavity ; 
Seeds solitary, without albumen, embryo large ; plumule well developed. 

Habitat. — Northern temperate and tropical regions, stagnant waters. 

Properties. — Fruit of all species are edible; rhizomes, starchy, 
astringent and bitter. 

Nymphasa Edulis. N. Escalanta. 

Castalia Edulis. 

Hahitat,^\\\d\'di, 

Parts used, — The roots and flowers. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Nilu-far. Beng.— Choto Sundhi, Kanval- 
Bur. — Kiyan-nu, Can,— Nyadale-huvu. Cing. — Nalun. Duk. — AUi- 
phul, Chhota-kanval. Eng. — Edible lotus, pond lily. Guz. — Kanval. 
Hind.—Chhota-kanval. Malyal. — Allit-tamara, Anpala. Mar. — Kamula. 
Pers. — Nilufar. Sans.— Kamala. Tarn, — Ambal, Allitamarai. Tel. — 
Kotika, Kalharomu. 

Characters. — Aquatic plant, leaves oval, entire, downy underneatht 
margin slightly waved, petioles attached to the margin, flowers white, 
seeds numerous. The root, very bitter and astringent. Dose lo 
to 30 grs. 

Constituents, — The root contains gallic and tannic acids, starch, 
gum, &c. 

Syrup. Dose, i to 2 drs. Decoction (i in 20). Dose, i to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses, — Demulcent, diuretic and nutrient. Other 
characters same as those of Nelumbium speciosum. The roots are 
used as an article of diet. 

Nelambium Speoiosum. 

Nymphaea Lotus. N. Pubescens. 

Habitat, — India, Persia, China, Thibet, Japan, Ceylon. 

Parts used, — The flowers, filaments and anthers. 

Vernacular, — Eng. — Egyptian lotus, Egyptian or Pythagorian 
bean. Arab. — Nilufar. Assam. — Kyrob. Beng. — Burrshaluk, Komol, 
Padma. Bur. — Kyah-phyn. Cing. — Juda-tebolu. Duk. — Kung evelka. 
Hind — Kamala, Koi-podoma, Kanbal-kukri. Malyal. — Tamara. 
Pers. — Nilofer (the seeds). Sind. — Pabban, Kooni. Guz. — Nilofara, 
the seeds, kamar kakali. Goa. — Seveka. Can. — Nyadale-huvu. Tam. — 
Tamaray-Ambal. Tel. — Telia kaluva, Alli-kolung. Mar. — Kanial. 
Sans. — Padma, Kamala, Pundarik, Kakonada, Indwara. 



^AVkVFRACF,M 



3P 



CItariiiUrrs. — An aquatic heiD, leaves floatiiii^, pdtaic and 
foundbh, upper surface green, under surface btutsh ; fl(>weii>, when 
fresh, are large, while and showy. The dry flowers have a brown 
coJoiir, sepals 4 or 5, the petals numerous, and in several whorls, 
fiiamenti petaloid, seeds (Kamala kakari) solitary, without albumen. 
The structure of the seed receptacle has been compared to a wasp's 
nest, or a pomegranate, cut in half; in shape oval Externally smooth 
ind brownish or greyish-black ; surface covered with numerous minute 
whitish dots, testa homy^ cotyledons white and starchy and covered 
with a thin almond-coloured membrane, embryo green. Dose, 
powdered seeds, 10 to 30 grs, 

Omxttiuents. — The rhi/ome and seeds contain resins, glucose^ 
metaribin, tannin, fat and an alkaloid, similar to nupharine, identical 
with that obtained from nuphar luteum. 

PiefiarattoH, — Syrup of flowers. Dried flow^ers 2 ounces, sugar i 
ouace, and water 5 fluid ounces. Dose, 1 to 3 drs. Compound de- 
coction of flowers and filaments with liquorice (l in 10). Dose, 4 to 12 
dr$. 

Achons and uses, — The seeds are demulcent and nutritive ; the 
ilmmcnts and flowers are cooling, astringent, bitter and expectorant. 
Syrun of flowers is used in coughs, to check haemorrhage from 
biecaing piles, in sanguineous fluxes from the bowels, and in 
menorrhagta. TheJoius flowers and fresh leaves with sandalwood or 
embli^ -"'^ ^ulan* are used as a cooling application to the forehead 
in ic ui, to the skin in erysipelas and to other external 

inflamnianans. A cooling bed sheet made of kamala is used for fever 
patienis with high fever. The seeds, with those of Euryale ferox 
rr ' i^), are used as an article of diet. The starch contained in the 
r when collected, constitutes a sort of arrowroot known to 

Chinese as Ghaanfeen, The powder of the seeds, Kamarkakri, is known 
by the name of Bhesabola, These two products come from Shanghai, 
and arc largely used by native women as a demulcent in leucorrht^a. 
'ihcsabola should not be mistaken for Rhosabula, which is a variety 
HIrabol. 

PapaveraoeaB* 
7he Alitna or Poppy family, 

Papaver is derived from papa, pap, or thick milk, in aflttsion to its 
use for children, to nourish and cause sleep. 

Gfnnai Chanicters. — Herbs or shrubs, usually with a milky 
white, yellow or blood coloured, acrid and narcotic juice ; leaves alter* 
iiatc» more or less divided, peduncles long, one-flowered; flowers white, 
pink, yellow, rose or red coloured, also showy, regular and sym- 
metrical ; sepals 2 or 3. Fruit one-celled, either pod-shaped with two 
parietal placentas or capsular, with several placentas, dehiscing by 
valves or pores, seeds numerous, albuminous, with minute embryo 
near the bate of fleshy albumen ; seeds contain a bl;tnd, nutnnve fixed 
oiL Taste bland and wholesome. 



40 



ARGBMOKE MSXICANA 



Pfvpt'ilii'b* — Many plants are narcotiL, some arc aK^rul ^ni 
poisoDous, a few emetic, and others cathartic^ 

Argemone Mexioana. 

Habitat, — West Indies, all over India. 

Parts used> — ^The milky juice of the fresh plant and a fixed oil 
of the fresh seeds. 

Vernaculan — Beng. — BuroShyala-kanta. Burm.-*Matr; i(x* 

Can. — Bolurakkisa, Datturi. Duk. — Bharamdandi, Pi« . ra* 

Eng. — Mexican poppy» yelJow thistle, gamboge thistle. Guz. — Pilit 
Dhatura. Hind. — Bharbhand, Shiyal-kanda, Satyanasa, Faringi^Dho- 
tra, Pivola-Dhotra, MalyaK— Brahma-danti. Mar, — Daruri- Spa- 
nish. — Figo del inferno. Sans. — Himavatel Bramha danda* Tam,— 
Birama-dandUf Kurukkam-chedi. Tel. — Bramha-dandl-chettu, 

Remarks. — Daruri. The word Daru means gunpowder, the 
seeds resemble the grains of gunpowder, 

Pivala Dhotra— Pivala, yellow, and Dhotra, corruption of 
dhatura. The flowers and leaves of dhotra are yellowi and resemble 
flowers and leaves of Dhatura. 

Kante Dhotra— the herb is prickly or full of kantas or prickles. 

Figo del inferno, ** The fig of hell/' on account of its strong 
prickles. 

Faring! Dhotra — The plant having been first introduced into 
India by Firingis (Portuguese)* 

Characters. — The yellow milky juice resembles gamboge; leaves 
thick, glaucous^ of a greenish colour and marked with whitish veins on 
the posterior surface ; the mid rib and the veins are here and there 
studded with prickly thistles, which are also found on the borders of the 
leaves; flowers bright yellow, capsules oblong, oval, about i lo ij inch 
long and five partite ; convex portions covered with prickles ; the 
depressions are free ; seeds many, round and of a dark-brown colour^ 
corrugated and tubcrcfed with a thick while band and resemble Kuma 
hija. On section they are resinous and oily; oil» nale-yellow, clear, and 
of a nauseous odour, but without any disagreeanle taste. Dose of the 
oil, 20 to 60 ms. 

Constituents. — The leaves and capsules contain morphia, the seeds 
contain an oil 3^ pc. carbohydrates and albumen 49 p.c, moisture 9 p.c»| 
and ash 6 p.c, The ash contains alkaline phosphates and sulphates* 

Actions and uses, — The juice is alterative and used in syphilid, 

leprosy and gonorrhcea along with the juice of aristolochia bracteatt. 
The seeds are narcotico-acrid. The oil and extract from the seeds arc 
laxative and sedative* combining the action of m1 and 

cannabis Indica. The oil is used in cholera* dropsy, p lie. As 

substitute for ipecacuanha, the seeds are given in ' her 

intestinal afl"ections. Locally the juice or theoil i jng 

anpHcation to indolent ulcers, herpetic eruptions, leucodemia^ syphilitic 
ulcers and warts. It relieves strangury caubL-d bv bIl^lLMH. Frcrab 
root is apph'ed to scorpion bitefi* 



CHELIDONIUM MAJUS 



41 



Chelidonium Majus. 

Great or garden celandine, Tetter wort. 

Habitat — Europe, North America, waste lands and rocky places. 
Chelrdonium. It is derived from chelidon» a swallow, as it flowers at 
the coming of, and dries up at the departure of, the swallows. 

Pari usid. — The whole plant 

Characters. — Perennial herb; leaves pinnate; flowers yield safTron- 
vdlow milky juice ; root reddish-brown, branching, several headed ; 
fruit a capiiule, iwo-valved ; seeds numerous ;. odour unpleasant; taste 
acrid. Dose, lo to 40 grs,; fresh juice, 5 to 20 ms, 

OmsHtiunts, — Chelerylhrine, sanguinarine ; chelidonine, pro- 
topinci chelidoxanthin (a yellow crystalline substance), chelidonic 
(jervic or malic) acid, chelidoninic add, gum, and chlorophyll. 

Chelcr\*thrfne.^ — ^To obtain it, shake the extract with ether. The 
solution contains chekrythrinei leaving behind chelidonine. 

Chelidontne — Digest the extract in hydrochloric acid and preci- 
pitate with ammonia. 

Chelidoxanthin, a bitter neutral principle, occurs in yellow 
needles. 

Preparatim* — Fluid extract. Dose, 10 lo 30 ms. ; Extract — Dosei 
IOgr%. ; Infusion (i in 40). Dose, r to 2 02s.; Expressed juice, 5 to 
20 m»* 

Aciiont and tises* — Drastic cathartic, expectorant, diuretic and dia- 
phoretic. In over doses poisonous ; given in jaundice, liver diseascs» 
whoopintf cough, dropsy, scrofula, intermittent fever and phthisis. 
E as an irritant it is used for warts, opacity of cornea, cornsi 

ur..^.. ..,, .cching, kc, 

Glftucium luteoni (Horn poppy) and Qlaaciam ooFnioulatum. ^ 
Both contain alkaloids similar lo those in chelidonium majus. 

EBohaoholtzia Californlca.— Chamiaao* 

^«,— California poppy. 

HtfAf%t/.^Caltfornia. 

Ihri emf^loyed — The whole plant. 

CharacUrs. — An herbaceous, glabrous^ glaucoscent plant ; leaves 
lte» petiotated and multiBcd^ with linear lobes and no stipules ; 
s supported on long peduncles, terminal, regular and hermaphro- 
dite* The receptacle is a hollow cone, upper border bears a calyx, coralla. 
pcrigynous golden -yellow, sepals two valvate united throughout 
llicir entire length, but detached at the base in the form of a funnel. 
Fruit dtihiscent, linear, oblong, dry and capsular, traversed longi- 
tudinally by ten projecting ribs extending as far as the base into two 
th :; the seed at the edges ; seeds contain an albumi- 

Oi enveloping the embryo, 

Crjmtit2i€nii*'^ll contains morphine and a glucosidc* 



42 MECONOPSIS WALLICHII. 

/V^/tfn?/ibii.— Fluid extract of the plant 15 to 30 ms. 

Actions and uses. — Soporific, the same as that of morphine. It does 
oot cause any bad taste nor does it cause any dr3mess in the mouth, 
nausea, vomitmg, difficulty during urination, &c. ; given in headache. 

Meoonoptis Walliohii, M. Aoolaata, M. Hepalenais. 

Habitat, — ^Temperate Himalaya. 
Part used. — The plant. 

Vernacular — Hind. Guddikum, Gudia. Eng. — Prickly poppy. 
Panj. — Kanta. 

Characters. — A large herbaceous plant, flowers blue, purple, and 
showy root tapering, 6 inches long and bifurcated i^ inch in breadth. 
Smooth below and scaly at the upper part from the scar remains of 
leaves ; between the scales are stiff yellow bristles. It is brown 
externally, and white, soft and spongy within, containing a large central 
pith ; odour somewhat musky. 

Constituents, — Manganese and ash 12.7 p;c.; a yellow viscid 
extract containing crystalhne matter. 

Actions and uses, — Narcotic. Possess very poisonous properties. 

PapaTer Rhcsas, B. P. 

Habitat, — Europe. 

Parts used, — The fresh petals. Rhceados'Petala, Redpoppy petals, 
B. P. 

Vernacular, — Eng. — Common red poray or com poppy. Bom. — 
Janglidrika. Arab. — Nabatul-khash, khashul-ahmar. Beng. — Lai- 
poshta. Bur. — Hin4>in-ami. Can. — Kempu khasa-khasi-gida. Duk. — 
Lal-khaskhas. Guz. — ^Lal-khas-khas, Lala. Hind — GuUala, jangli 
mudrika, Malyal.—Chovanna. Mar. — Tambada-khasa-khasa. Pers. — 
Kohnare surk-khas-khas-i-mansur. Sans. — ^Rakla-postu Mudrika. 
Tam. — Shivappugacha. Tel. — Erra-posta-kaya-chetta. 

Kaskhas>i-mansur, — because it sheds its petals very quickly. 

Mudrika, Mudra (a seal or mark) stamped with the mudra or seal, 
which resembles the capsule in shape. This is in allusion to the 
stigma of the capsules of lala used by the Hindus, after bathing, as a 
mark or Tilaka impressed upon the middle of their forehead. The 
stigma resembles in shape mudra, a seal or a chaknu 

Characters. — ^Flowers large, of a reddish colour, and resemble those 
of opium, fresh petals of a bright scarlet colour mainly used for their 
colouring matter, odour characteristic and \*ery impleasant; taste bitter; 
capsules smaller than those of poppy, globular, 2 inches broad, smooth 
and baring a lustrous surface and entire margin; odour heavy, like that 
of poppy. 

Comstitmemts. — Milky juice, containing a red crystallixable colouring 
matter, and an alkaloid called rhceadine. 

Rhoeadine is tasteless, noo-poisonous, insduble in water, alcohol, 
eiher, chloroform, benjrol or liquor ammonia : soluble in weak acids. 



PAPAVFR SOMNIPHHUM, 



43 



Pirfiuration. — Syrupus rhaeados, B. P* (i in4»5). Dose, 4 ^^ ^ dr. 
Actiofix and uses, — ^The petals arc sHghty expectorant, other 



properties are similar to those of poppy capsules, but much milder 
&ynjp i$ used as a coloiif ing agent. 



The Opium or Garden Poppy. 

China, Africa, Italy, Greece, 



Papavar Sonmirerajn, B. P* 

HabiiaL — Asia Minor, Persia, 
England, United States and India, 

P^rU used, — The nearly ripe and dried capsules — ^Papaveris capsuUe, 
Poppy capsules BP,, petals, seeds and the inspissated juice, Opium B*P« 

Sommferum. — To bring sleep. This drug causes sleep* 

Vernncuhr* — Arab. — Bazrul-khas-khas. Beng.^ — Poshto* Burm. — 
Bhin*si. Eng. — Ntaw seeds (black), white poppy ^ Malay, — Banga-pion, 
Pcrs, — Tukhme-koonar, Khas-khas. bans. — Chosa, Postu bijani, 
Tiim.-^Gasa-gasalu. Tel. — Kasa kasa. Mar. Guz. Duk, Hind. — 
Koknar, post, Khas-khas, MalayaL — Khas-khas-karu, Can. — Khas* 
khasi. 

The vernacular names for the tree, capsules and seeds of poppy 
arc nude up by affixing the vernacular for tne tree» capsules and seeds 
to the vcrnacuhr for the poppy* 

Sfe^j.— Two varieties, P. Somniferum,or poppy with black seeds ; 
tA P* Album, or poppy with white seeds. 

CAaracters, — P. Somniferum is an annual plant, with thick branch- 
ing yellow root, stem a to 4 inches high, leaves thick, smooth and 
^Uucous^ 6 to 10 inches long; sessile, oval, tapering at the base, toothed 
»iutd ^reen, with pronnnent veins, and white midrib. Flowers 
grey; sepals 2 green, petals 4, yellow or violet; 
liar, I lo 3 inches wide, flat at the top, the bottom 
* 1 he puricarp is pale brown externally and marked with dark 
!: has :\ bitter taste. Unripe capsule is marked in 3 or 4 places 
^»th ji or 4 !inal incisions, from which the juice or opium i» 

obtained, tli* 1^ being limited to the middle third of the capsufes^ 

^avoiding the mner capsular diaphragm, as, otherwise, the juice would 
escape into the centra) cavitic> of the capsules. Kach capsule has a 
very stnall, thick stalk at the bottom, with a large radiating sessile stellate 
ittgma at the top, which distinguishes them from colocynth^or bael fruits. 
Seeds numerous, reniform, very small, reticulated, whitish<grey or 
T — ^ h black, taste sweet and oily. Black seed poppy (maw seed) 
I'ic or red flowers, capsules smaller and rounder, seeds black. 
\vniu- *ecd poppy has white flowers and white seeds. 

Contihients. — Capsules and seeds contain a large percentage of a 
fabuid fixed oil, used as food and for burning in lamps. The 
oil is of a pale golden colour, dries easily, and of an agreeable odour ; 
partially soluble in cold alcohol (i in 25) and in boiling alcohol (i in 6), 
and u^khI hke olive oil. Dose, ^ to i dr. 



44 OPIUM. 

Preparation. — Of the capsules (deprived of the seeds). Syrupus 
papaveris (i in 3). £)ose,| to i fluid dr. Of the capsules, including 
seeds^Decoction papaveris (i in 10). Extractum papaveris. Dose, 
2 to 5 grs. 

Actions and uses. — The unripe capsules are active medicinal agents, 
but their narcotic e£fects are less powerful and less certain than those ojf 
opium. They are given for the relief of cough and to check diarrhoea 
in infants. Locally the capsules are used as anodjrne fomentations^ 
and also as emollients. Their poultice is applied to bruised, inflamed, 
excoriated and swollen parts, to tender and irritable ulcers, and to the 
eyes in ophthalmia. Seeds are demulcent and nutritive, also mild 
astringent ; mixed with sugarcandy and cardamoms they are given 
in diarrhcea and dysentery. Decoction is used externally to sprains, 
contusions, bruises, &c. 

Opium, B. P. 

Opium, the juice, obtained by incision from the capsules, inspis- 
sated by spontaneous evaporation. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Afim, Afyun, Labnul, Ahi-phen. Beng.— 
Aphim, Aphin. Bom. — ^Aphim« appoa Burm. — Bein, Bhain. Can. — 
Aphimu. Chin — Ofii^yung, Opien. Cing. — ^Abim. Eng. — Opium. 
Duk. — ^Afim. Greek. — Opion. Guz.— Chasa, Aphion. Himi. — Afyun. 
Malyal.— Kasha-kasha, Kanippa. Mar. — Afmin. Pers. — Mahanul 
Tiryake. Shir i-khuskhus. Sans. — Aphina, Apay^num, Chasa, Aphim. 
Tam. — CasluHpal, Apini. TeL — Gasha-gashala-palu. 

The Arabs converted opion, from Greek opos, into Afiun, opos 
meaning sap or juice of plants. 

Ahi-phena — ^Ahi, a snake, and Phena, the foam, from the belief 
that afima was not a vegetable product, but a produce obtained from 
the foam of snakes. Tirivake, the juice which Rustam obtained from 
Kaikaos to give to Sohrab. It is »id to have contained opium in its 
composition. 

Ckaraciers. — Fresh opium is homogeneous, milky and of the 
ciMSsistence of gum. On keeping it for some time it becomes dry, of 
a brown colour, and hard, oUy and dark. Opium is found in irr^;iilar 
lumj^ or gli^ular cakes covered with agglutinated mass ofpoppy leaves, 
or with the capsules of a species of rumex ; each cake wdgtu 00 the 
average about 2 lbs. and upwards. A fresh cake is plastic, somewhat 
moist, coarsely granular externally, internally smooth and of a 
reddish-brown colour. The taste is bitter, and it has a strong diarac- 
teristic narcotic odour. Dry cake contains from 13 to 15 p.c. of 
morphine. Fresh cake yidds about 9 p.c Dose, | to 2 grs. 

AAilierutfcms. — Sand, stones, litharge, diarcoal, camel's dung, 
tragacanth, molasses, acacia leaves and stems, poppy capsules, also 
the juice of opuntia dellenta, and calatropis gigantea, the extract of 
tobacco plant, dhatura« honp : gum and resinous matter from figs 
called Ussa : resin from sliorea robusia, pulp of tamariiid and bael 
fruit, gum aiid the »eeds of hygrophiU^ spincsa: starchy substances as 
linseed, poppy-^eed, &c. 



MORPHIN'A. 



4S 



rarifHft^^-TiXTkey^ Asia Minor, and Smyrna opium yields from 

la to 13 p.c of morphine; Constantinople from 10 to 13 px. ; 

I Egyptian from 6 to 7 p.c, ; East Indian (Malwa and Garden Paina) 

from 5 to 7 px. ; Persian 8 to 10 px., and European varieties, such as 

English, French, 14 to 23 px. 

In the British Phai macopccia any variety of opium^ containing not 
Ics* than 7*5 px. of anhydrous morphine when dry is directed to be 
ujed in the preparations of tincture of opium and extract of opium ; 
for other preparations it has been directed that opium when dried and 
powdered should contain not less than 9I px. and not more than lo^ 
px. of anhydrous morphine. In the case of opium of a higher strength 
It is directed to bring it to the required strength by diluting it 
with another specimen of opium containing between 75 px. and 10 
px. of morphine or with milk-sugar. 

(hmtiitttfiis, ^Opium contains a large number of alkaloids, 
" ; acids, and neutral substances. 

most prominent alkaloids are morphine ; narcotine 2 to 8 
px, ; codeine 0*2 to 07 p.c. ; thebaine or paramorphine 015 to i px, ; 
pj»fcuJ(Jtnoiphine 0*2 px. ; papaverine 1 p. c. ; narceine 02 to 7 px. 
i h> acids are mecouic acid 4 px. ; lactic acid 125 p c*, which 

e%i^; .. ii^aibittation with the alkaloids. Bitter neutral principles, as 
meconin 03 px., meconosin and porphyroxine. Opium also contains 
Tcsin^t a trace of volatile oil, glucose, sugar, gum, pectin, caoutchouc, 
wax, fat, colouring matter, odorous principles, and ash 6 p. c, 

Morphlna, B.P. -Morphine— Morphia. 

Occurs as a white amorphous powder, or shining, transparent 
adcular prism*, without any odour, and of a bitter taste, insoluble 
in water and ether, soluble in hot alcohol (i in 36), soluble in oleic 
acid and fixed oils. Dose, ^\, to ^ gr. ; J of a grain of morphine is 
equal ID I grain of opium used in chemical testing* 

/Vr^m/fc/M.— Oleatum Morphinae,a local sedatives in 60 to l in 10, 
M" hydrochloridurn, B, P., morphine hydrochloride. — In 

icicitb. "I'-d silky lustre or a white crystalline amorphous powder 

t>f 4&ie and neutral reaction, soluble in cold water (1 in 24), 

in .1 (1 in 50) boiling water (1 in 1). Dose, i^ to ^ gr. ; one 

grain is equ»I to f^{ grains of crude opium, 8 grains of powdered 
opium, -if train of 'extract of opium, and 117 minims of tincture of 



ii grains, 
;■). nuid 



Of morphine hydrochloride. B, P. — Liquor raor- 
s, B. P. (1 gr. in 1 10 ms.) Dose» 10 to 60 ms. ; Sup- 
B. P. J grain of morphine hydrochloride in each ; 
fiina! cum sapone (J grain each) ; Tinctura 
liina? composita, B, P. (i gr. of morphine hydro- 
Chloroform 1 1 fluid ounces, morphine hydro- 
diluted hydrocyanic acid i fluid ounce, tincture 
ounce tliici uie of InJJaii hemp 2 fluid ounces, oil 



4^ 



MORPHINE 



of peppermint 14 minims, glycerine 5 fluid ounces, alcohol 90 p.c* to 
make one pint. Dose, 5 to 15 ms, Trochisciis morphinje, B. P* 
in 3^ grain in each ; Trochiscus morphinae el ipecacusmh^e, B. P^ 
^j grain in each, with y'^ ofa grain of ipecacuanha, 

Morphinic Acetas, 6* P., Morphine Acetate,^ — To obtain it, neu- 
trali^ce morphine with acetic acid- 

Chamcters, — A white crystalline or amorphous powder of a bitter 
taste, acetous odour, and of a neutral reaction; loses acetic acid on 
exposure to the air, soluble in water (i in 2|), in alcohol (l in loo). 
It spoils by keeping. Dose, | to \ gr. 

Preparatiofis. — Liquor morphintC acetalis, B. P< (1 gr. in no ms.) 
Dose, 10 to 60 ms. Injectio morphina? acetatis hypodermica (1 gr. in h 
ms.) Dose, i to 2 ms, Injectio morphince et atropine? hypodermica 
— Injectio morphinae acetas 3 drachms, atropine sulphate i griin. 
Dose I to 3 minims. ( 3 ms, contain \ grain morphine acetate and 
^V grain of atropine.) Atropine, although antagonistic to morphtik;, 
increases the sedative action and counteracts di5^agreeable effects of 
morphine as headache and constipation. 

Morphine Hydrobromidum, a white amorphous powder, soluble 
in water. Dose, J to A gr. ; Morphinx Lactas, a white crystalline salt* 
soluble in water (i m.%). Dose, ^ to ^ gr, 

Morphinx Meconas. — White needles, soluble in water (i in 34). 
Less disagreeable in its effects than other opium salts. Dose, | to \ gr. 
Used as hypodermic tablets. Liquor morpninx bimeconatis (t.35 p.c*) 
about the same strength as tincture of opium. Dose, 5 to 4a mu 

Nepenthe*— An alcoholic solution of morphine mcconate iq sherry* 
wine= strength of tinctute of opium. 

Morphina* Sulphas, Morphine sulphate.^ In tvhite acicular crystals, 
wttlumt any odour, taste bitter and of a neutral reaction, soluble in 
water (1 in 21), contains 80 p.c. of morphine. Dose, ^ to | gr« 
Liquor morphime sulphatis (i p.c.) Dose, 10 to 60 ms, 

Morphinae tartras» B* P., Morphine tartrate^ — prepared by the 
combination of morphine and tartaric acid in molecular proportiom. 
White crystalline powder or tufts of acicular crystals, soluble in cold 
water (1 in 11), almost insoluble in alcohol. Dose, ^ to \ gr., T ■ 
morphinae hypodermica, B. P. i gr* in 22 ms. Dose, 2 to 5 ms. 
morphinac tartratis, B. P. (i in no). Dose, 10 to 60 ms. Wmaiuv? * 
soothing syrup. — Morphine, essence of anise, and syrup of tolu. Each 
ounce contains morphmc ^ grain. 

Morphin^e Phthalas,— In glassy scales, soluble in water (l in j> 
for hypcxJermic injection. Dose, i ^^ i gf • 

Apomorphinas Hydrochlofidum, B, 
chloride, Apomorphine hydrochlorate. 

Manufacture. — Heat morphine or cx:)dtiin€ nyiiriK.iuunuc niin 
hydrochloric acid without access of air, dissolve in water ; to the 
solution add sodium c,v he precipitate thus fof met! 

with ether and add little J l. 



P, -Apomorphine hvdfo* 



CODEINA 



47 



CharacUn, — SmaH greyish, white shining crystals of a bitter 
la^' vithout any odour. It has a neutral or faintly acid reaction. 

It L' in water (i in 50), more readily so in alcohol, is insoluble 

in riht?T and chloroform. The solution becomes green by exposure 
lo the air. Dose, ^^ to -j^ of a grain hypodermically ; by the mouth, 
^ to i of grain* Mistura aproniorphin*e et terebeni, y^ grain in i 
Oafice« Do&e, J oz. Syrupus apomorphinae hydrochloridi^ \ grain in 
I ounce. Dose, \ to i dr. Inject io apomorphinae hypodermica, B. P. 
I grmtx in tio minims. Dose, 5 to 10 ms. 

Pipinc, an active principle of opium; an anodyne without any 
narcotic or convulsive elements, A safe opiate for children, free 
from its bad after effects, as nausea, vomiting, constipation, Ac. Dose, 
adults I dr.; children, i year or under, 2 ms. 

Codeina, B. P. Codeine, Codea, Hethylmorphine. 

Treat morphine with caustic soda and chloride or iodide of 
methyl (•3 or '5 px\ in opiunj). 

Characttrs. — Frequently contaminated with other alkaloids; 
colourless, or yellowish white^ octohedral crystals or rhombic prisms, 
translucent, witliout odour ; taste bitter, alkaline reaction, soluble in 
water (1 in 80), boiling water (i in 17); readily soluble in alcohol, 
clikiioform, dilute acids and in excess of ammonia water, soluble in 
ether (1 in 30). Dose, J to 2 grs. 

Codcinar phosphas, B.P., Codeine phosphate.— The phosphate of 
the alkaloid obtained from opium or morphine. 

Characters* — White crystals of a slight bitter taste, soluble in 
water (1 in 4)* much less soluble in alcohol ; suitable for hypodermic 
injection (1 grain in 6 minims). Does not cause any local irritation ; 
ctiotains 70 (».c. of the alkaloid. Dose, } to 2 grs. Syrupus codein<e, 
B. Pm one fluid drachm contains ^ grain of codeine phosphate. Dose, 
\ \o 2 drs. 

Hypodermic tablets contain \ gr. of codeine in each j Codeine and 
glyccnne jelly. Dose, 1 dr, ; Lozenzes { gr, each ; Pastils \ gr. each 
for cough ; Ptlula codeinx composita. Codeine ^ gr,; Extract of nux 
ftimica I gr. : Extract of lettuce \ gr. ; make a pill — for diabetes. 
Apocodeinc, prepared from codeine. — An amorphous powder, soluble 
in water ; hydrochloride of codeine acts as an emetic ; used hypodermt* 
cally. Dose» |V to i gi'* 

Narceina. 

Narcane difficult to obtain in a pure state* 

CA*jr<»c/jrri.— Occurs as white silky acicular crystals, neutral, taste 
sltghlly hitler : readily soluble in boiling water, in water (1 in 400), 
veiy soluble tn alcohol, and insoluble in ether. Dose, i to ^ gr. 

/V^/^rif/ioM.^Sodium narceine salicylate, otherwise known as 
antispasmtn. A white powder, soluble in water ; contains 50 px. of 
narceine* Dose, ^ to 1 gr. 



4» 



A1KC0NICUM* 



Aoidum Meconieom. 
Meconic acid 4 p. c* 10 opium. To obtain it, add chlutuii: or 
calcititn to iofusion of opium, the precipitate of calcium mcconate h 
washed with hot water and treated with hydrochloric acid ; n 
acid is deposited. Pearly scales, sparingly soluble in water, re.. 
in alcohol. 

Narootina. Narootiiie. 

Characters. — Brilliant white* inodorous, neutral crystalline prisnie j 
contained in opium (2 to 8 p, c), insoluble in water or potash solutioo, 
soluble in chloroform (i in 3), alcohol (i in 100), and ether (1 in 
125), freely soluble in benzol. Dose i to 3 grains. As an antiperiodic 
it has been used in India for ague, Narcotin^ hydrochloride, Narcotioe 
hydrochloride. Dose, 2 to 10 grs. 

Cotarnine Hydrochloride (stypticin*) — A salt of Cotimine, a base 
obtained from narcotine* Occurs as yellow crystals soluble in water 
and alcohol. Dose, J to ^ gr. 

Papaverina, Papaverine. 

Characters. — Delicate, colourless crystals or prisms, does not form 
salts with acids. Insoluble in water, slightly so in alcohol and ether* 

Dose, Vff ^^ A fi'*^*"- 

Preparations of Opitim. 

Acetum opii. — Black drop — vinegar of opium; opium 10 p. c. 
macerate with nutmeg 3, sugar 20, dilute acetic acid, to make 100* 
Dose, 5 to 20 ms. 

Denarcotized opium, Deodorized opium, Opium deodoratum; tt 
contains morphine t4 p. c. To obtain it, add ether to opium to remore 
the constituents, which are soluble in ether, as narcotine and odoroui 
principles which leave bad after effects. Mix the dry residue ^'ith 
milk-sugar. Dose, \ to % grs. 

Extractum opii, B. P<, extract of opium; standardized to contain 
20 p. c. of morphine. Dose, J to 1 gr. 

Extractum opii liquidum, B. P^., contains } grain of morphine 
in 110 minims. Dose, 5 to 30 ms. 

Emplastrum opii, B. P., opium plaster (i in lo), contains opium and 
resin plaster. 

Emplastnim cephalicumi contains extract of opium 6, Burgundy 
pitch 18, lead plaster 76. 

Linimentum opii, B. P,, contains equal parts of tinctum opii and 
liniment um saponis. 

Pilula saponis composita, B« P. (20 p, c. of opium), contains 
opium !♦ hard soap 3 and sytup of glucose i. Dose, 2 to 4 grs, 

Pilula plumbi cum opio, B. P*, contains 12^ p« c. of optuin — opium 
1> acetate of lead 6, and syrup of glucose 0.7, Dose, 2 to 4 grs- 

Pilula ipecacuanha cum scilla, B. P. ; pill of ipecacuanha with squill« 
contains 5 p. c. of opium and 5 p. c of ipecacuanha — Dover's powder 3. 
squill I, an<^ ni i. Duse, 4 to S grs, 

Pulvis I us, B. P., contains io p, c. of opium— opium 3, 

black pepper 4, gingei to, carrnway fruit la, tragicanth powder 1. 
Dose, 2 to 10 gr*. 



OI'lUM. 



40 



urn opio, B, 1\ {2\ p*c. of opium), coiKaius 
aromatic powder vi chalk 39 and opium I. Dose 10 to 40 grs. 

Pv icuanhae compositus, B. P., Pulvis ipecacuanha et*npii,, 

Dover : (1 in jo) contains ipecacuanha 1, opium powder 1, 

and potas?>Jum sulphate 8. Dose 5 to 15 grs- 

Pulvis kino composilus, B. P. (5 p- c. ofopliim)» contains kino 
7Si opium S» and cinnaniou bark 20, Dose 5 to 20 grs. 

Suppositoria plum hi composita, B. P., contains 1 grain of opium, 
3 graim of acetate of lead in each, made in oil of Theobroma. 

Tinctura opii, B. P,, Tincture of opium (laudanum)i i grain of 
opium in 15 minims. Dose 5 to 15 nvs. 

Tinctura camphora: composita, B. P» — Camphorated tincture of 
opium — compound tincture of camphor. — Paregoric elixir — i grain of 
upiuni in 60 minims; contains tincture of opium 60-9, benzoic acid 
4*6| caniphur 3*4, oil of anise 3*1, diluted alcohol to make 1,000. Dose ^ 
to I dr. ; for children, 5 to 20 ins. 

Tinctura opii ammoniata, B, P., ammoniated tincture of opiura 
(5 ' opium in one fluid ounce) — contains tincture of opium 3 

oi- , iL acid 3 drs., oil of anise i dr., solution of ammonia 4 ozs., 

and aknhol to make 20 ozs. Dose 30 to 60 m$. 

Vinum opii— Wine of opium {22 grs. of ext. op- in i oz,) Dose 
10 to 40 ms. 

Ungucntum gallae cum opio^^ — B. P„ Gall and opium ointment 
contains 7J p, c, of opium* 

Baii* goli — A native prcparauon, extensively used^ contains opium 
and other n.ircotics, aromatics and bitters. 

Tfochisci glyccrrhizas ct opii» Troches of glycyrrhiza and opium — 
contain* ext. glycyrrhiza?, opium powder^ oil of anise and sugar, 
(oj '::r, in each)- 

Vs diarrhcea mixture contains : Tinct, opii 1^ spt. camphonc 
j^iapMCii, chloroform ^^ alcohol to make 5. Dose for children, 1 
to 10 ms. ; for adults, J to 1 dr. 

Liquor opii sedutivus — sedative solution of opium (Battley's 
sedative) resembles Kxt. opii. liq. B. P. 

Pkysiohgical aciion. — It depends upon the combined efTects of 
the various alkaloiiis 3iiu\ other principles obtained from it* 
Opium in medicinal doses at first stimulates the braini heart and 
respiration; this efTect is soon followed by general depression. Generally 
opium is analgesic, hypnotic, antispasmodic, diaphoretic, narcotic and 
eerebml depressant. Its chief action is on the cerebro-spinal system 
and through the nerves it acts upon all the organs of the 
body. It affects the ganglia at the base of the brain, giving rise 
to contiBCted pTipiU. vomiting, and slow respir^ition. Under its use 
the grey m ^rd is first jr -re are increased 

refiexcs ' llosvcdbydci ced by the lower- 

ing of : iisation. 'Ihe cutaneous vessels are dilated at 

6rit,a'r J of heat felt on the external ear, itching and 

rotecoloured skin eruptions. This is followed by pallor and coldness 
of the limbs and fingers. The genet ative organs are stimulated. In 
raedieiual do^es, taken for some lime, it affects all the secretions except 



50 OPIUM. 

milk and sweat, which are increased. It causes dryness of the mouth 
and throat, lessens the secretion of the stomach and thus impairs 
appetite. The secretion of bile is also diminished and constipation 
results. The action of the heart is increased, and there is increased 
arterial tension. The cerebral functions are at first exhilarated, 
the ideas flow rapidly, and there is a sort of mild intoxication. 
This is soon followed by drowsiness and sound sleep, often dis- 
turbed by dreams, and often followed, on waking, by headache, 
constipation, indigestion and depression of spirits. If any pain 
be present it is relieved, but a larger dose will be necessary on 
subsequent occasions. In full doses the cerebral symptoms are 
accentuated, but the stimulation is of short duration. The after- 
effects become more marked. The mouth becomes very dry, digestion is 
impaired, there is nausea, vomiting and profuse sweat. The heart is 
depressed, the circulation lowered, the oxidation is interfered with, and 
there is loss of body heat. The pupils are contracted, there is intense 
itching of the nose with retention of urine. The cerebral depression 
is soon followed by headache, vertigo, slow and laborious respiration. 
In poisonous doses, sterterous breathing and coma supervene, followed 
by feeble pulse, cold clammy perspiration, contracted pupils followed 
by dilation as the end approaches, cyanosis of the face and fingers, 
followed by abolished reflexes, deep coma, paralysis of respiratory 
centres, and death. 

Therapeutic uses. — Opium is given to relieve severe pain from 
any cause, except in cerebritis and to allay any irritation. As an 
antispasmodic it is extensively used. It allays irritation and produces 
sleep in insomnia, sciatica, neuralgia, lumbago, cancer, intestinal, 
renal, or hepatic colic, calculi, &c. ; also in tetanus, in morbid states of 
the abdominal viscera, as gastritis, gastrodynia, in hernia and in diseases 
of the urino-genital system. To check excessive secretion it is largely 
used in diarrhoea, dysentery, nervous and sympathetic vomiting, 
and in excessive expectoration ; also in diabetes, ptyalism and 
lecorrhoea, &c. In diabetes and polyuria, codeine is invariably pre- 
ferred. As a support to the general system it is given in low fevers, in 
low states of the system accompanied by tremors, in low muttering 
delirium, and in surgical cases to promote the healing of wounds and 
ulcers. In high fevers it is combined with mercury, aconite, camphor, 
antimony, &c. As a narcotic it is used in all inflammatory conditions, 
acute and chronic, except in those of the respiratory tract and in 
albuminuria, where its administration has led to deaths by coma or by 
apncea. In peritonitis it is highly beneficial. As a sudorific, combined 
with ipecacuanha and camphor, it is given to promote diaphoresis in 
fevers, harassing cough and in coryza. In India it is largely used by 
chundoolees for its aphrodisiac effects. As a haemostatic it is useful to 
check haemorrhages, chiefly from the uterine fibroids and cancer, 
combined with other haemostatics. As a soporific, in spite of all 
its defects, it is the drug most extensively used as being certain in its 
effects. Opium is given to quiet the nervous system ; hence it checks 
or controls the reactionary fevers. In threatened abortion its use is 
extremely beneficial. Externally it has a sedative action upon the 



CODEINK. ^I 

cutaneous nerves, and as anodyne poultices it is largely used to relieve 
pain. It forms an important ingredient in all anodyne applications 
used in gout, rheumatism, and ophthalmia. It is also used as plaster, 
suppository, and as a paint in painful piles, ulcers, &c. For hypo- 
dermic purposes its alkaloids alone are used. 

Bala goli is given to children in wakefulness, diarrhoea, colic and 
general irritability, but its use as a rule should be deprecated, as disastrous 
consequences sometimes result from its use. Young children arc more 
susceptible to opium than adults, and women more so than men. Some 
have idiosyncrasy for it, and cannot tolerate even the smallest dose. 
In persons taking opium medicinally or for the first time, the exhilarat- 
ing effects are of short duration, and they often pass into a state of 
drowsiness ; but with habitual opium-eaters the exhilarating symptoms 
are of longer duration. Thecoma of opium narcosis can be diagnosed 
from that due to alcohol, and apoplexy. In opium poisoning pupils 
are contracted. In alcohol they are dilated. In apoplexy thry are 
contracted unequally. 

Morphine hydrochloride is an anodyne, hypnotic and narcotic. 
The soporific effect of opium as a whole is mostly due to this 
alkaloid ; it is four times as strong as the crude opium. It produces less 
vascular and arterial excitement, less headache, less vertigo, less 
subsequent depression and less constipation. It allays nervous irrita- 
bility, diminishes pain, induces sleep, arrests secretions, except that of 
the skin, which it promotes. Full effects are speedily induced b}^ its 
hypodermic injection. Jt is given in cardiac dyspnoea, in rheumatism, 
gout and in puerperal convulsions; also in aortic stenosis and in 
paroxysms of angina pectoris. In large doses it is a narcotic poison. 

Morphine Acetas is given in diabetes like codeine, and like it 
controls the formation of sugar. 

Apomofphine Hydrochloride, — In small doses it is a valuable expect- 
orant ; in large doses a safe, certain and quick emetic when given 
hypodermically and also when taken by the mouth ; vomiting 
is generally followed by sleep. It is useful in cases of irritant and 
narcotic poisoning, alcoholic intoxication, impaction of foreign bodies 
in the air passages, &c. Although a derivative of morphine, it can be 
used in cases of poisoning by morphine salts. As an expectorant, 
combined with morphine, it is used in hacking cough, bronchial 
asthma and in phthisis. It relieves hiccough, spasms of chorea, 
epilepsy, &c. In catarrh of the larynx and of bronchi and in 
capillary bronchitis it is given with salicylate of ammonia with good 
result. 

Codeine is a respiratory sedative and hypnotic, It is not a very 
active alkaloid, its soporific effects being feeble, while tetanic effects 
being altogether absent. Its chief value depends upon its power of 
lessening the quantity of sugar in the urine in diabetes. It is given in 
various affections of the heart, as a palliative for cough in phthisis and 
for the relief of abdominal pains, in nervous insomnia, and in cases 
where sleep is prevented by the pain of rheumatism or canr( r or by 
distressing cough. In ovarian neuralgia, codeine in \ grain doses 



52 SANGUINARIA CANADENSIS. 

three times a day is given with good results. As a gastro-intestinal 
sedative, it lessens irritability of the stomach and intestines, hence 
useful in nausea, vomiting (from any cause), diarrhoea, gastrodynia, &c. 
Par amor phine or thebaine is a powerful spinal excitant and 
tetanizer, resembling strychnine in action. 

Narcottne, — Hypnotic, tonic, and an ti periodic, only next to 
quinine. Used in ague, in general debility due to prolonged lactation, 
and during convalescence from acute diseases. Also given in headache, 
constipation, &c. 

Papaverine is narcotic and convulsant. It is free from the ill effects 
of opium, as headache, giddiness, &c. It contracts the pupils. 

Narceine is hypnotic, but is without the bad after-effects of 
morphine. 

Treak Farook. — A native preparation containing opium. It occurs 
as an oily, unctuous semifluid, of a darkish blue or brownish dark 
colour. The taste is sweet. The odour is sweet and resembles that of 
liquorice. Used as a tonic, stimulant and antispasmodic, in myxcedema 
beriberi, anasarca, rheumatism, vomiting, diarrhoea, tetanus, seminal 
debility, &c. It is also given in the collapse stage of cholera and in 
poisoning by venomous animals. 

Sangainaria Canadensis. 

Indian (red) paint, Blood-root, Red Puccoon. 

Sanguinaria, from sanguis, blood. The plant, when incised, emits 
blood -like juice. 

Habitat — United States, North America, Canada. 
Part used, — The rhizome. 

Characters, — A perennial plant ; flower white, single on an erect 
stalk ; petals tinged with rose or purple ; rhizome 2 inches long, I of an 
inch thick, cylindrical, somewhat branched and wrinkled, colour reddish 
brown ; on section whitish internally, with numerous small reddish 
resin cells ; bark thin ; odour faint ; taste bitter and acrid. Dose, i to 3 
grs. ; as an emetic, 10 to 30 grs. 

Constituents, — Sanguinarine, chelerythrine. protopine, homo- 
chclidonine, citric and malic acids, resin, starch, gum, albumen, sugar, 
and ash, 8 p. c* 

Sanguinarine, an alkaloid is the active principle of the prfant. 

To obtain it, infuse the root in hot water and add acetic or dilute 
hydrochloricacid to the hot solution and precipitate the solution with 
ammonia. Boil the residue with charcoal and evaporate. It is a white 
powder, of a coffee-brown colour ; taste acrid ; soluble in alcohol, ether, 
benzene. Dose, -jV ^^ ^ gr. ; as an emetic ^ gr. 

Chelerythrine. — To obtain it, pass hydrochloric acid gas through 
the ethereal tincture, dry the precipitated hydrochlorate, and dissolve 
it into hot water, filter and add liquor ammoniae. 

A lemon- coloured salt. Also found in chelidonium majus. 



VI«1.ACI?^ 



T * gives, with sulphuric acid, iJccp purple cciluur. It 

.also t ! papaver somniJermn and chelidonium inajus. 

Pfv^tntiions, — Extractum sanguinariae fluidum ; fluid extracL of 
*^angtiin.inn. Dose^2 to 5 ms, ; as expectorant and stimubnL 

Tinctuni s;inguinari3e, tincture of sanguinaria, ( i in 8 )• Dtisc^ 
32 an expectorant, 5 to 60 ms. ; as an emetic, 1 to 2 drs, 
Acrtum sanguhiarinae. Dose — 10 to 30 ms. 
ifinac nitras. Dose^ — ^^ gr, 
«rin*T sulphas. Dose — ^^ gr. 

Phystolopctil action — Locally it is a feeble escharotic. Internal- 
ly cmciic, stimulant tonic^ alterative, narcotic» stern uatatory, emnicna* 
gogue and expectorant- In small doses it stimulates the stomach and 
increases the circulation. In large doses it depresses the pulse and causes 
n^ittSiea. In full doses it depresses the heart and respiration and produces 
ition, anceiuig, vomiting, purging and great prostration. In cxcc^- 
ir toxic dtjscs it is a violent irriiani ; at first it stimulates the 
ift and iticitasies the arterial tt;iiSton, then it depresses the heart, 
bwrr^ the arterial tension and fmally paralyses the heart; it also lowers 
c-s ; pupils are dilated, there are active vomiting, diarrhcra, 
^ 10 the stomach, faintness, vertigo, dim vision, cold sweats, great 
1 1 rsi and paralysis of the heart and respiration, followed by collapse 
[id death « 

TherapfufHS. — It is used in pneumonia, rheumatism, chronic 
na^al catarrh, croup, bronchitis, whooping cough and in throat affections; 
also in atony of the stomach and in torpid liver, jaundice and duodenal 
catarrh. Given as an aphrodisiac in sperniatorrha-a, as an em- 
mt-nnp;(^nuc in anienorrhcua due to anaemia, and in syphilis. When 
f c-iuiies violent sneezing- Externally it is applied to intlolent 
J *^al polypi » wartJ^, chancres, and also over fungous qranuhitiiins 
and scaiy eruptions 

Vlol&ceis. The Banaphasha or Violet Family. 

Herbs %n shrubs, leaves simple, .siipuJate, with involute vernation, 
alternate or opposite ; flowers blue, pink or white, handsome, irregu- 
[ilar ; Iniit one-celled, c*apsular, threc-valved, dehiscent, loculidd<il ; 
k?cds numerous ; embryo straight ; albumen fleshy. 

//rf^Vrr/,— Europe. Siberia, America, Africa and Malacca. 

/Vi^rr/iV-j:.— Some species have a delicate fragrance, some contain 
an emetic principle known as emetine or violinc ', a few are 
mucibginou5, others are reputed to he anodyne; some arc purgative. 

Viola Trioolor. 

l'.-ni;>y, 

/ J /-/ /^//tf/ii.— Blue violet. 

iii^^iisL — Noiih /\njeiica, Europe. 

Parts fij/-//,— The flowering herb and rhizome. 

Ckarffcfewx,-^Th^ flowering herb is from 4 to 12 inches high and 
! and cordate; flowers yellow, while, blue or 
I. Dose, 10 to 60 grs. 



54 VIOLA onORATA 

Consiiittents. — An active principle, Violin allied to emetine 
Salicylic acid^ resin, &c. 

Preparation. — Decoction (i in 20). Dose, i to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Mucilaginous, expectorant, emollient and laxa- 
tive. Violine is emeto-cathartic. Poultice of the herb in milk is used 
in impetigo, also in eczema of the face and head. Given internally 
in constitutional syphilis, scrofula and bronchitis. 

Viola Odorata. 

HahHai, — Temperate climates, Europe, North America. 

Parts used. — The flowering herb. 

Vernacular.-- Kr 7^. — Banaphasa, Behusscj. Bcng. — Bonosa. Duk. 
— Banaphashaka. Eng. — March violet, sweet violet. Guz. — Banapha- 
sha. Hind.— Bagabanoshsa. Mar. — Baga-banosa. Pers. — Bag-i- 
Banaphasha. Tam. — Vayilettu. 

Bagh-i-Banaphasha — Big, garden, and Banafsha, violet. 
Kashamiri Banaphasha is the name given to the whole plant, and the 
Pul-i- Banaphasha, to the flowers only. 

Characters — A dry herb, colour brownish, without any stem, con- 
sists of leaves and sometimes flowers, variegated, yellow, white, blue or 
purplish, with long filiform stalks. Roots dry, thready, fibrous, pale yellow, 
knotty, slender, some as thick as a quill, and slightly furrowed. Leaves 
cordate at the base, reniform or heart-shaped and dentate at the upper 
part. Flowers purple, violet, blue or pink and irregular. Carpels three 
nervtd and brown. Corolla, with a long, narrow tapering spur, which 
extends beyond the calyx. Smell sweet, nauseous, and resembling that 
of ipecacuanha. Taste nauseous, bitter and mucilaginous. Dose — 1 5 
to 6ogrs. 

Constituents. — The flowers contain a colouring matter, a volatile 
oil, three acids, viz , violenic and salicylic acids and another 
red acid, and an emetic principle called violin, identical with 
emetine ; viola quercitrin allied to rutin (mandelin), sugar, &c. 

Preparations. — Infusion of the root ( i in 10). Dose, i to 2 
ozs. Decoc'ion (i in 10). Dose, i to 2 ozs. Syrup of flowers (i in 6). 
Dose, 2 to 4 drs. 

Actiuis and uses. — The root is nauseating and diaphoretic, some- 
what similar 10 ipecacuanha, given in fevers. The petals, especially of 
the purple flowers, are diuretic, refrigerant and expectorant, also 
laxative, given along with other aperients as tamarind, myrobalans, &c., 
in coughs, nephritis, with ^calding and scanty urine, fevers, syphilis 
scrofula, skin diseases, chronic diarrhoea and dysentery. 

lonidium Saffruticosum, Viola Sufbraticosa. 

Habitat. — Tropical parts of Asia and Australia. 

Parts used.o^Root and leaves. 

rV;-;/^r///<7r — Beng.— Nunbora. Buim — Ke( ki-bin. Duk. — 
Ruttonpuruss Rutianpuras. Hind.— Ratanpurs. Mar. — Ratanpurs. 



BIXCACE/E. 55 

Mai. — Oorela tamara. Sans. — Padma charini, charati. Tam. — Urela 
tamara. Tel. — Purusha ratnam Nela Kobbari, 

Characters. — Roots yellowish white, tapering downwards, 3 to 4 
inches in length and covered with a corky bark ; leaves small, lanceo- 
late, subsessile and alternate ; taste of the plant mucilaginous. Dose — 
20 to 60 grs. 

Constituents — The root contains an alkaloid, soluble in ether and 
alcohol, forming salts with mineral and vegetable acids ; Quercitrine, 
another colouring matter, soluble in water, but insoluble in alcohol, 
mucilage ; acid resin, and oxalates. 

Preparation. — Infusion or decoction (i in 10). Dose, 2 to 6 
drs. Liniment and electuary. 

Actions and uses, — Tonic, demulcent and diuretic, used in gonor- 
rhoea, general debility aiid in affections of the urinary organs; externally, 
with some mild oil, it is used as a cooling application for the head. 

lonidium Parviflorum. — In South Americ i it is used as a specific 
in elephantiasis. It is there known as ** Cuchunchulli de Cuen^a." 

BixaoeeB. 

Bixineae or Flacourtiaceae. The Kesar or chaulmogara family, 
shrubs or small trees, leaves alternate, exstipulate, leathery and often 
dotted ; fruit dehiscent or indehiscent, with a thin pulp in the centre ; 
pulp differently coloured ; seeds numerous, and often covered with 
withered pulp ; albumen fleshy and oily, 

//aditat.'-Hoittst parts of E. and W. Indies and Africa. 

Properties. — Many species, are feebly bitter, stomachic and astrin- 
gent. The fruits of some are edible and wholesome. The bark of 
one variety is emetic. 

HydnocarpuB Anthelmintica, False Chaulmugra. 

Habitat, — China. 

Part used. — Seeds. 

Vernacular,~Qh\nQSQ Lukrabo or Ta-Fung-Tsze, Dai-Phong-tu. 

Characters. — The seed is about half the length of chaulmugra seed, 
but of equal diameter. The shell thicker and harder and marked with 
raised ridges. The seeds, after extraction of the oil, are used as vermifuge. 

Actions and uses. — Used in leprosy, lepra, itch, pityriasis, psoriasis, 
syphilis, cracks on hands, &c. 

Hydnooarpus Wrightiana. H. Inebrians. 

Habitat, — Western Peninsula, Concan. 

Paris used. — The seeds and oil. 

Vernacular. — Cing, — Rata kekuna, makulu. Duk. — Jangli- 
Badam. Eng. — Jungle almond. Hind. — Jangli-Badam. Mar. — Kowtee. 
Maleal. — Moratti, Tanina. Mar. — Kadu-kavatha, Kowtee. Tam. — Mara- 
vattay. Tel. — Niradi-Vittulu. 



56 GYNOCARDIA ODOR ATA. 

Characters. — Fruit globose and of the size of an apple ; rind rough, 
occasionally tubercled and of a brown colour ; seeds numerous, obtusely 
angular, of a dark-brown colour and embedded in a scanty white pulp, 
which is firmly adherent to the testa ; albumen oily, white when fresh, 
and dark-brown in the dry seeds. On expression the seeds yield an 
oil of a pale sherry colour ; odour resembles that of chaulmogra. 

Constituents, — The seeds contain about 44 p. c. of the fixed oil, 
which also, contains some gynocardic acid. Does not give any crystalline 
or fatty deposit on long keeping. 

Preparations, — Infusion (i in 20). Dose, i to 2 ozs. Oil. Dose — 
10 to 30 ms. Paste containing Hydnocarpus Wrightiana 2, Jatropha 
Curcas-oil 2, Sulphur 4, Camphor I, Lime-juice 20 ; used for rubbing 
on scaly eruptions. 

Actions and uses. — The oil is used as a substitute for chaulmogra 
oil. It is an alterative, stimulant and parasiticide. The seeds, like 
chaulmogra, are used externally in obstinate skin diseases, such as 
scabies, lichen and prurigo. An infusion of seeds is used as a wash or 
injection in gonorrhoea, or into the vagina in foetid discharges after 
delivery. The oil, with lime-water, is used as a liniment for scurf on 
the head, and, like chaulmogra, in the treatment of leprosy 
and for rheumatic joints. With alkaline ashes it is used in certain parts 
of India as a stimulant dressing for phagedenic ulcers, foul sores, and 
to remove maggots. By some authors this species is regarded as 
belonging to the natural order Pangiaceae allied to Papayaceae. 

Oynooardia Odorata. Syn Hydnooarpas Odoratas. 

Habitat, — Rangoon Forests, Malayan Peninsula, Sikkim and 
Khassia Hill. 

Parts used, — The seeds and oil from the seeds. 

Vernacular. — Burm. — Talien-noe. Chin. — Tafung-tsze. Hind. — 
Chaulmogra, Petarkura. Pers. — Chaulmogra. Lepcha. — Tuk-Hung. 

Characters, — The fruits grow upon the stem and main branches, 
and are globular, each contains 3 or 4 seeds ; seeds rough-skinned, hard, 
about I inch in diameter, many, ovoid, irregular, more or less angular 
and round or flattened ; testa thin, smooth and brittle ; albumen 
plenty. When expressed yield 30 to 50 p. c. of the oil. 

Constituents, — Oleum Gynocardiae, Chaulmogra oil. — It is a fixed 
oil, very bulky, of a sherry wine or brownish colour. The odour is 
nauseous and peculiar. Dose, 2 to 15 nis. The oil deposits on keeping 
crystalline fat, and contains palmitic acid 60 p. c, and 
therefore solid in cold climates. It contains Gynocardic acid 1 1 p. c, 
the active ingredient; cocinic acid 2*5 p. c, and hypogoeic acid 4 p. c. 
Both of the latter acids are found either combined with glycerides as 
fats or in a free state. Gynocardic acid is a fatty acid, crystallizes 
in yellowish flakes, and has an an acrid burning taste. Dose, \ to 
2 grs. 

Preparations. — Of the oil, pearls or pills, and unguentum 
gynocardias (i in 4). 



•'WCOVftTIA. 



Actifms and uses. — The seeds and oil are alterative and tonic, 
u*cd lo improve the state of the blood as in leprosy, phthisis, skin 
diite3j(e», &c. By some the oil is regarded as a specific in leprosy, 
and, no doubt, in some cases it has very beneficial effects. It is also 
used hi scrofula, secondary syphilis, phthisis and rheumatism with 
slilf joints, both exiernally as an inunction or ointment, and internal- 
ly with mucilage, or as capsules or pearls. Gyiiocardic acid ointment, 15 
to 55 gT;iins lo an ounce of vaseline is used in herpes, tinea, leprosy 
anil other skin ufFections. It should be given alter meals in milk or 
with cod-livcT oil. 

Flacoartia Cataphracta. 

f/ahitiiL — India, Assam» Nepaul, Behar. 

Paris used. — ^The fruit, leaves and bark. 

/* '.-—-Arab. — Zarnab. Bomb. — Juggam. Can. — ^Talisap.itri. 

Cing*- :iuru. Duk. — 7*jijpat. Barmi. Eng. — Many spined 

FUucortta. Bcn^, and Hind. — Talispatri, Barahmi, Paniala, 
lanijala, Man — lambat. Sans, — Talisha, Prachinamalaka. Tani. — 
PaniiaUf Talishapairi. Tel. — Talisapatri. Port, — Joggam. 

Characters. — Leaves oblong or lanceolate, long, annulate, glabrous, 
crcfiaiO'SerraLe; petiole short. Leaves and shoots resemble rhubarb in 
flavour ; fruit of the size of a pUim, indehiscent, purple, containing 5 to 
6 seeds ; seeds obovoid; endocarp hard ; testa coriaceous, taste acid* 
All oil \^ i^xtmcted from the seeds. Dose of the leaves — 30 to 60 
grains. 

/yefiamtioN. — Infusion of the bark (i in 10), Dose, 4 to 12 drs. 

Acthrts and uses, — The hark is refrigerant and astringent, used in 
fevets to allay thirst, correct foul taste and prevent nausea and 
bittcmsness. Leaves and young shoots are stomachic, and given in 
diairhceat dysentery and even in consumption. Infusion of the bark 
b used in hoarseness of the voice. The fruit is edible, 

Cochlasperintiin Gossyplam, Bombax Qosayplum* 

Habitat. — Belinr, Orissa, Dcccan, Garwal and Bundclkhand. 

l\trts ustd, — The gum (Indian Tragacanth). 

I'r ' .'. — Arab — Kaserae-hindi Kather, Samaghul*qatade- 

hindi. ^Elhutmhul. Eng,— Golden silk-cotton tree, yellow* 

lUiwercJ LiiUuii tree, Duk. and Hind.— Pili Kapas, Katcra-gond (the 
gum)* Mar. — Kalhaho gunda* Maleal. — Sluma-punji, Tachema- 
mingec. Pers, — Katerae-hindi, Kathera. Tam,^ — Tanaku marara. 
Tei- — Konda-gogu chettu. 

Ciarncters. — Large trees, bearing large golden-yellow flowers 
apr " when the tree is destitute of leaves; Fruit capsular, 

o* , containing within them cotton ; seeds kidney- 

shafit-U, iciLi Hard* The gum, known as kateera, is obtained from the 
trunk of thrtree. It is greyish white in colour, translucent, in large 
wn . ish, irregular or twisted veimicular pieces or tears, 

Wii , to s[ilii up readily into Hat scales ; when moistened it 



58 CAPPARlDACEiE 

swells into transparent jelly ; taste mucilaginous ; a good substitute 
for tragacanth. 

Preparation. — Lozenges and mucilage. 

Actions and uses. — The gum is demulcent and astringent, used in 
cough, hoarse throat and scalding in the. urine ; mixed with curd or 
whey it is largely used in diarrhoea and dysentery. Experience has 
verified its good results in the cases of the last-named diseases. 

Remarks, — In Bombay the gum of sterculia urens, known as 
karii gunda, is sold for katira gunda. 

Bixa Orellana, B. Indica. Annatto Bash. 

Habitat. — America ; cultivated in India. 

Parts used, — The pulp and seeds. 

Vernacular. — Eng. — Annatto bush, arnotto. Brazilian — Uracuara. 
Beng. — Nutkaner, Latkan, Burm. — Thidew. Can.— Kuppa Manhala. 
Cini^. — Kaha-gaha. Duk, — Kisti. Hind.— iCapurji, Latkan. Malay, 
— Kasumba-kling. Maleal. — Kurungu-munga. Mar. — Sendri, Kisree, 
Tam. — Kuragu-manjal. Tel. — Jafra chettu. 

Characters. — The plant does not thrive without plenty of sun. The 
pulp covering the seeds is of a deep red colour, from this the colouring 
matter, known as arnotta or annatto, is made The annatto exists in 
cakes of a black colour, becoming red-brown on exposure to air. It has a 
peculiar odour and a disagreeable bitter taste. The seeds are triangular, 
compressed on two sides and chanelled lengthwise. On one side 
the top is obtusely mucronate ; the kernel is white and oily. Dose of 
the seeds, 5 to 20 grs. 

Constituents,y—A colouring matter, called bixin, obtained from 
minute red leaflets, soluble in alcohol, concentrated sulphuric acid and 
ether. Insoluble in water. 

Fhrcparation, — Powder of seeds and pulp. Dose, 5 to 10 grs. 

Actions and uses. — The root and seeds are febrifuge, astringent 
and slightly purgative, used in dysentery and in. diseases of the kid- 
neys ; as a stomachic tonic they are given in convalescence from 
fevers and in general debility. Its principal use is as a dyeing agent 
and used to colour butter, cheese, chocolate, &c. 

CapparidaceeB. 

The Hurahura, or caper family. 

Herbs, shrubs or rarely trees ; leaves simple or lobed, alternate, 
generally exstipulate, rarely spiny with stipulate appendages ; flowers 
yellow, white or purple ; fruit dehiscent and pod-shaped or indehiscent 
and baccate; seeds one or many, usually reniform and without albumen, 
cotyledons leafy. 

Habitat. — Chiefly tropical, may be found in temperate climates. 
Properties, — Similar to those of cruciferae, i.e.^ pungent, stomachic, 
stimulant and antiscorbutic. Some are aperient, diuretic arid anthel- 
mintic, and some are poisonous, owing to the acrid principle being large 
in quantity. 



GYNANDROPSIS PENTAPHYLLA 59 

Gynandropsis Pentaphylla, Cleome Pentaphylla. 

Hahiiai, — India and all tropical countries. 

Patis used. — The plant and seeds. 

Vernacular, — Eng. — The five leaved cleome. Bong. — Kama!, 
Katkoduku, Shada-hurburija. Bomb. — Kanphuti. Cing — WaiJa. 
Duk. — Hulhul. Hind.— Karaila, Hulhul. Maleal. — Kara-vella, Tai- 
vala. Mar. — Tilavana, Mabli. Sans.— Surjavarta, Arkapushpika. 
Sind. — Beghara. Tam. — Nai-kaduga, Nai-vella. Tel. — Vaminta. 

Characters. — A five-leaved cleome, a weed ; flowers whitish or 
purple ; seeds black, small, numerous and kiSney-shaped, resembling 
those of cleome viscosa, and having a faint flavour of mustard ; leaves 
5 foliolate, and leaflets obovale. The whole plant is viscid and covered 
with glandular hairs ; odour peculiar, like that of asafetida. Dose of 
the powdered seeds, 15 to 25 grs. 

Constituents. — The plant contains a fixed oil ; seeds, when crushed, 
develop an acrid volatile oil, similar in properties to mustard oil, also 
a resin. 

Preparation, — Decoction (i in 20). Dose, i to 2 ozs. ; medicated 
oil. 

Actions and uses, — Seeds are antispasmodic, sudorific, and carmi- 
native, used in fevers, bilious affections and infantile convulsions. 
Bruised leaves rubefacient and even vesicant, applied to the boils and 
buboes to promote suppuration. The juice of the leaves, beaten with 
salt, is used as drops in earache. The whole plant, boiled in sweet 
oil, is used in leprosy. As an antispasmodic it is given in hysteria. 
The seeds are used as a substitute for mustard seeds. 

CrateBva Religiosa, Capparis Trifoliata, C. Roxsbarghii. 

Keligiosa — The leaves being used for religious purposes. 
Habitat. — Malabar, Canara, Tropical Africa. 
Parts used, — The leaves and bark. 

Vernacular. — Eng. — Holy garlic pear, three-leaved caper. 
Burm — Ka-dat. Duk.— Burmi-ki-jhar. Beng.— Bai un, Tiktoshak. 
Can. — Nirvala,Bilapatri. Cing. — Bilapatra. Guj. — Vaivaruna. Hind. — 
Bilasi, Varvunna. Malyal. — Vilva-patrani, Mar. — Koomla, Haravarana, 
Kurwan Vayavarana. Sans. — Koom Varuna Ashamarighana (the 
leaves), Belpatra, Tapia. Tam. — Mavilinga-maram. Tel. — Vivapatri, 
Usik manu. Panj. — Barna. 

Ashamarighana — Ashamari, means gravel or stone, and Ghdn, 
to kill or to remove. This is in allusion to the use of the drug as 
lilhontriptic in urinary diseases, renal calculi, &c. 

Bela-patra, which means like the leaves of Bela. The leaves in 
both are three-foliolate. 

Characters, — The tree is planted around tombs and temples in 
India ; root -bark soft, when fresh of a dirty white colour, outer surface 
wrinkled and here and there marked with fissures of a dirty brown 
colour, internally white, soft and fragile ; odour heating, nauseous and 



6o CLEOME YISCOSA. 

disagreeable ; taste bitter and pungent. Leaves three-foliolated, leaflets 
lanceolate, fine-pointed and smooth, upper surface dark green, under 
surface of a light colour. When bruised the leaves have a disagreeable 
smell like that of hellebore ; taste bitter and pungent. Dose, s to 20 
grs. 

Constituents, — The bark contains a principle similar to saponin. 

Preparations, — Varuna ashes ; Decoction'of the root-bark (i in 10). 
Dose, I to 2 ozs. Infusion of the leaves (i in 10). Dose, i to 2 ozs. 
Compound decoction. — C. Religiosa, tribulus terrestris, ginger, car- 
bonate of potash, honey and water. Dose, i oz. A conipound powder, 
known as Varunadya-churna, contains ashes, bark powder of C 
Religiosa and potassium carbonate. Varunadyaguda, a confection con- 
tains bark, treacle and a number of aromatics and diuretic substances. 

Actions and uses. — Stomachic tonic, laxative and lithontriptic 
Given to promote appetite and to increase the secretion of bile. As a 
diuretic the root-bark is used in dropsy and urinary disorders, in 
calculous affections, combined with tribulus terrestris. As an altera- 
tive the compound powder is given in ascites, calculus, in chronic en- 
largements of glands, as liver, spleen, and in affections of the bladder 
and uterus. Fresh leaves and roots, mixed with cocoanut juice and ghee, 
is given in rheumatism, also as food to reduce corpulence. A paste 
of the leaves is applied to soles of the feet to relieve swelling and 
burning sensation. The leaf is smoked in caries of the bones of the 
nose. 

Cleome Yisoosa. G. loosandra, Polanisia Yisoosa. P. loosandra, 
Sticky Cleome (Eng.) 

^/j3j/^/.— Tropical India and other warm countries. 

Parts used. — The seeds and plant. 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Hurhurya. Can. — Hucha-sasavi. Duk. — 
Chowri-ajawana. Eng. — Dog mustard, sticky cleome. Hind. — Hurhura, 
Halhul. Malyal. — Kat Kuddaghoo. Mar.— Hulahul, Kanphuti, Pivala 
Tilavana. Port. — Bredo mamma. Sans. — Adity-a-bhakta, Arka Kanta. 
Tarn. — Naaveli. Tamool. — Nahi Kuddaghoo. Tel. — Kukka-vaminta. 

Nahi-kuddaghoo. — Dog mustard. 

Kan-phuti, from kan, ear, and phuti to tear or burst ; the juice is 
a popular remedy for purulent discharges from the ear. 

Characters, — An annual viscous weed, from one to two feet high? 
stem furrowed and studded with glandular capitate hairs ; leaves digitate 
on long petioles, channelled and of a reddish colour ; leaflets three to 
five, obovate, finely serrated at the margin. The leaves have a pungent 
flavour. Flowers yellow and axillary, capsules long, striated and hairy; 
seeds of the size of mustard seeds, 'small, many, reticulated, black and 
reniform, compressed and netted with a white scar near the hilum ; 
taste, on chewing the seeds, hot, and mucilaginous like Mullabija. The 
fresh plant, when crushed, gives out a volatile oil like that of garlic or 
mustard. Dose, 10 to 30 grs. 

Preparation, — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, i to i oz. 



CAtTARIS SPiNOSA, 



61 



I^A^mr awf wjif^*—Carnif native, pungent, anthelmintic and 

intiseptic ; seciJs are used in round worms^ to expel flatus in 

1 children, also in fever and diarrhoea- The juice of leaves is rubefacient 

^likc muUard ; mixed with salt it is dropped into the ear in otorrhcea. 

An infustoo of the ^ecds is used for unhealthy ulcers and to kill 

maggots. 

Capparis Splnosa. 
HaMtai, — Atgiuinjsiuiii West Asia, Deccan, Gujerat, 
Parts usf4t — The bark of the root. 

Fferw/fcwAii',— Eng. — Caper plant* Syrian — Kabur. Turkish — 
Kabarlet. Arab.— Kiabara. Pcrs.— Kabar-Karak (fruit). Sans.— 
KakJiilini'karira (fruil). Hind, — Karu, Karer (the oil). Duk. — Karya 
(the oil). 

Chili actcrs* — The bark is like half quills, outer surface smooth» 
ired and greyish brown, within hrown and resinous ; 

f,- •*> bitter and pungent. DosCi lo to 30 grs. 

C^nsittutnts . — The bark contains a neutral bitter principle of a 
ir e, resembling senegin. The flower bud'* contain 

iioside which yield, on boiling with sul[)hunc acid, 
.1 volouring matter similar to quercetin ; also ,vome 
. mcc. The fresh plant contains a volatile uil, having 
prcipt:rticd ul garlic oil. 

P^eparatifmn— Infusion (\ in to). Dose, f to I oz. 

Actions and uses* — Similar to that of senega ; alterative, 
antiscorbutic, stimuLmt, expectorant and diuretic. The root- bark i& 
uaed in palsy, gout, rheumatism, cough and dropsy. Locally the 
powder is applied to malignant sores, also to boils and swellrngs. 
The juice of fresh plant, like clcorae juice, is dropptil into the ear !d 
kiU vrorms \ t fair sustitutc for senega* 

Capparis Zeylanlca 0. Acuminata. 

RTiidae«i/<ir.— Ben-^.— Kalukcra. Tel. — Paliki. Mar, — ^Waghauli- 
Hiud.— Go%*indphal. Tarn. — Authinidi-kai. Used as refrigerant and 
cooling, 

C- Aphylta* Eng. — ^Thorny caper bush. Hind. — Ardanda. San». 

— n * u Tam.—Katallikai, Tel,^ — Adonda, arudoiida. Thc^e are 
use intcr-irritanls. The fruits are used as a pickle, 

Cadaba Indica. C. Farinosa^ 
HabitaL — Western India, 
r' rr. r. f. , j .-. — Eng. — Indian Cadaba. 
ni' onadi» Chimurudu. The 

aOu AiJLiic«iiiiJiUC* 

C, Trifollata. 

yZ^Aiikr/.— Camatic, Ceylon. 
Paris used. — Leaves and flower-buds, 
Kmro^j/iAif.— Tarn.— V^iluthcc, Maumhak-kooroonthu. 



Tarn, — Velivi. Tcl. — Ada 
root is reputed as aperient 



62 CRUCIFKRiC OR BRASSICACKiE. 

Characters. — Cadaba Trifoliata — leaves palmate, three-foliate, leaf- 
lets oblong, lanceolate and 2 inches long. 

C. Indica — leaves simple, ovate, oblong, acute and mucroiiate, 
from I to i^ inches long. C. Farinosa — leaves hoar}', ovate or oblong, 
obtuse and about i inch long. Dose of the leaves, 2 to 4 drs 

Constituents. — Leaves contain a bitter alkaloid, soluble in ether 
and alcohol and two organic acids — one resembling cathartic acid. Also 
nitrates and carbonates of lime. The ash contains alkaline chlorides, 
sulphates and carbonates. 

Preparation. — Decoction of leaves (1 in 10) Dose, 2 to 4 ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant, antiscorbutic and aperient. 
Decoction of leaves of C. Indica is used as anthelmintic in round 
worms. The juice of C. Trifoliata is given in dyspepsia in 
children. Leaves are used as purgative, emmenagogue and antiph- 
logistic, combined with myrobalans and ginger, or with senna and 
Epsom salt. In amenorrhaea and dysmenorrhoea a decoction of 
the leaves, combined with castor- oil and turmeric, is found useful. 
It is also given in syphilis, scrofula and rheumatism. Externally the 
leaves are used as varalians with the leaves of odina wodier to 
relieve rheumatic pains, and as a poultice to boils to promote suppu- 
ration. The leaves are used by the natives in preparing medicated oils. 

Cruoiferffi or BrasBioaceffi. 

Mustard (Rai) turnip and cabbage family. 

Cruciferae, from crux, a cross in allusion to the Maltese cross 
like arrangement of the four petals. 

General Characters, — Herbs or, rarely shrubs, leaves alternate and 
exstipXilate. Flowers cruciform, yellow, white or pink, rarely purple; 
and generally a mixture of these colours. Stamens tetradynamous, 
Inflorescence in racemes or corymbose. Racemes opposite the leaves or 
terminal and ebracteated. Fruit a siliqua or silicula. Seeds many, 
each seed superior, generally stalked and pendulous. All plants have 
a pungent bitter and acrid juice. The seeds are acrid and contain a 
fixed and volatile oil. The plants contain starch, sugar, iodine and 
sulphur. 

Habitat. — They are met with in temperate, frigid and tropical 
climates. 

Properties. — Many are nutritive, some pungent acrid, others anti- 
scorbutic ; some used as ordinary vegetables. 

Sisymbrium Irio. 

//aditat. — Korih India, Persia and Europe. 

Part used. — The seeds. 

Fer7iacu^ar.—Eng.— Hedge mustard, London rocket. Bom.— 
Khakshi. Arab.— Khubab. Fars.— Shafterak. Hind.— Khub-kalan, 
Khaksi. Mar.— Rantikhi. Mezenderan. — Shalumbi. Pcrs.— Khakshi. 
Tabriz — Surdan. Turkistan- Shiwaran, 



RAPHANUS SATIVUS. * 63 

Khuba-kalan — Khuba means good and Kalan Kallo or Maror 
(Guz.) means beauty. This drug is used by women to increase their 
beauty and promote fat. 

Characters. — The seeds resemble those of asalio, but are smaller and 
of a yellowish red colour. They are small, oblong or oval, and mark- 
ed with a groove. When placed in water the}' become coaled with a 
transparent mucilage ; taste is mucilaginous and oily, not so pungent as 
asalio and has a hot flavour like that of mustaid. Dose of the powdered 
seed — 15 to 45 grs. 

Actions and uses. — Expectorant, stimulant and antiscorbutic. An 
ingredient in many tonic confections used by the natives; given in 
coughs, asthma, hoarsenesis, and to prcmc te expectoration. Native 
women use it under the belief that they thereby fatten the body. Ex- 
ternally they are used as poultice over boils and inflammatory 
swellings. 

Baphanus Sativus. 

Garden radish. R. Caudatus. Raphanus Raphanistrum — wild 
radish. 

Ilahiiat, — G ujerat , Punjab. 

Parts used. — The plant, root. 

Vcrnacniar. — Eng.— Long-podded radish. Garden radish. Bom. 
— Mulo, Muro. Arab. — Bazr-el-Fujl. Beng, — Mula, Mull. Burni.— 
Moula or Moula. Can. — Mullangi. Duk. — Mulli. Hind. — Mula, Muro. 
Pcrs. — Turb. Sans. — Mulaka. Tarn., Tel. — Mullangi. 

Characters. — Root tapering, seldom branched, of a white colour 
and a pungent taste; leaves long and generally lyrate, petiole broadly 
channelled ; taste somewhat pungent ; seeds resemble those of sarasun, 
but are larger and of a reddish brown colour ; testa very minutely 
reticulated. On trituration the roots and seeds yield, with water, a 
fixed oil. 

Constituents. — Seeds and root contain a fixed oil, a sulphuretted 
volatile oil, lesembling mustard-seed oil. The oil is colourless and has 
the taste of radishes. It contains sulphur and phosphoric acid. 

Preparation — Juice of leaves. Dose, J to i dr. ; infusion of seeds 
(1 in 10). Dose, 1 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses. — The seeds and leaves are diuretic, laxative and 
lithontriplic. The root is used as an edible vegetable. All parts of the 
p'ant are used in urinary diseases and in cases of gravel, 

Lepidiam Sativum. 

Habitat. — North of Asia, Persia, cultivated in all countries. 
Part used. — The seeds. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Hab-el-rashad, Half. Beng — Alivcri, 

Bom. — Ahaliva, Asalia. Burm. — Samah-ni, Samung-ni. Duk. — Halim. 
Guz. — Assalia. Hind. — Tara-lezak, Halim, Chansar, Chandrika. Eng.— 



64 LEPIDIUM IBERIS. 

Common garden cress. Mar. — Ahaliva. Pers. — Turrah-tezak. Sans. — 
Chandrasura, Tam.— Alivirai. Tel,— Adiyali» Adala Vitala. 

Characters^ — The seeds resemble in size those of Khubakalan, 
but are larger. They are of a reddish colour, oblong, somewhat angular 
and curved slightly on one side, surface rugous. Near the point of 
attachment there is a white scar, from which a small channel extends 
to ^ the length of the seeds. They are without odour, but of a pungent 
and mucilaginous taste. Doses — as alterative, 5 to 15 grs. ; as 
aperient, 20 to 40 grs. 

Constituents,-^ A volatile, aromatic oil and a fatty oil. 

Preparation. — Infusion cold (i in 10). Dose, 4 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses, — Aperient, alterative, tonic, aphrodisiac and car- 
minative* A cold infusion is used to relieve hiccough. As an alterative 
the seeds are used in chronic enlargements of the liver and spleen. 
As a restorative tonic they form an mgredient in aphrodisiac confec- 
tion or rabree, and are given in seminal debility and leucorrhcea. As 
a carminative they are given as an adjunct to purgatives. The bruised 
seeds, mixed with lime-juice, are used as application for the relief of 
local inflammatory and rheumatic pains. Taken alone jthey act as 
aperient. 

Lepidiom Iberis. 

Habitat. — Persia. 
Part used.-^The seeds. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Bazr-el-khum-khum, Bazr-el-hawah, Kasisas. 
Eng, — Pepper grass. Pepper wort. Hind. — Towdri, Todari. Ispahan — 
Kaduma . Kirman — Mardarakht. Pers. — Tondripha-Towdri. Tabriz. — 
Darina. 

Characters. — The drug consists of white, yellow or black seeds, with 
some portion of rhomboid-shaped pods. In shape the seeds resemble 
lentils, but are smaller. They are yellowish red, ovate, flat or roundish, 
convex on both surfaces, and have a membranous white ring springing 
from the hilum. The ring spreads on both sides and separates the 
surfaces. A small groove extends from the hilum and disappears about 
the middle of both the surfaces. The taste is mucilaginous, slightly 
pungent, and resembles that of asalio ; that of the cotyledons, burning. 
When soaked in water the seeds become thickly coated with 
mucilage. Dose, 20 to 60 grs. 

Constituents. — An amorphous bitter principle. — Lepidin, a sul- 
phuretted volatile oil and gum. 

Preparations. — Confection and tea. 

Actions and uses. — The seeds are diuretic, carminative* sudorific 
and stimulant. The confection is given in dropsy, bronchitis, fevers 
and with pepper in atonic dyspepsia, accompanied with flatus 
Externally tne seeds are used as a rubefacient in rheumatism. 



COCBLCARU ARMOR AHA. 64 

Belianthenitiin Canadense.— Frost wort. 

I^adi/aL—SoTiU America. 

Part used, — The herb. 

CkaracUrs.—The herb, perennial^ 6 to 15 inches high^ hairy; 
leavesi ioag and woolly beneath ; flowers broaU, yeliow : calyx 
pubescent ; taste bitter and astringent. Dose, 5 to 30 grs. 

Cottstiiuents, — A bitter glucostde and tannin 1 1 p. c. I ^ed as 
Infusion, decoction, extract. 

AfiiotiS and usrs. — Tonic, astringent and alterative : in large doses 
letic ; given in scrofula, syphilis^ diarrhoea ; as a gnrgle in sore ihroaL 

CapMlla Bursa Pastom. — Shepherd's purse* 

Habitat* — Europe and widely naturalized. 

P»ft <mphytd.--Tht herb. Dose. 20 to 60 grs. 

Frr/<irfl/;<;wx.*- Fluid extract* Dose, \ to i fl, dn ; Tincture 
(s in a)« 1 to 4 d. drs. 

Aciiom and uses. — ^Diuretic, haemostatic, stimulant and tonic, 
recommended in iilt forms of kidney affectiotis, in chronic diarrhcea^ 
dropsy of the abdomen, &c. 

Coohlearia Jlrmoraoia, B. P., Armoracia RoBttoana, NastuHiam 

Armoraoia* 



J^a:'t:aL — Europe, cultivated in Britain. 

Parti ustiL — The fresh root, Arraoraciie Radix — Horseradish 
foot, B. i\ 

r A/r, — Fng. — Common horseradish. Hind* — Muli. 

/ fS. — Koot nearly cylindrical and marked with leaf-scars at 

ibc crow»» about half an inch to an mch in breadth and one foot long^ 
ydlowtsh externally and whitish internally ; has a characteristic pun- 
gent odour and pungent taste when scraped, cut or bruised. Dose, 
10 to 30 grs. 

CottsiituaUs, — A volatile oil, identical with oil of tnustard| and 
resiin. The oil is dissipated by drying, 

Pre^atatimi, — Spiritus armoraciae compositus, B. P. — Horseradish 
5 ounces, dried bitter orange peel 5 ounces, bruised nutmeg 55 
gT;&ias, alcohol 25 ounces, and distilled water 25 ounces ; distilled to a 
pints. Dose, i to 2 drs, 

Actimu and uses. — ^Stimulant, masticatory and diuretic ; externally 
rubefacient, irritant and vesicant ; used in atonic dyspepsia, rheu- 
matism, dropsy and hoarseness of voice. Locally used tor the same 
purposes as mustard in the form of liniment or catapJasm. Us 
action is due to the volatile oil, and hence should be used fresh. 

Remarks. — Sometimes aconite or monkshood is sold for fiorse- 
tadisJi, which it resembles; accidents have occurred, 

a 



66 CHIERANTHUS CHEIRI. 

Gheiranthas Cheiri. 

/^^i3/Va/.— Northern India. 

Part used. — The seeds. 

Vernacular. — Eng. — The wallflower. Hind. — Tcdri surkh. Panj.— 
Lahori subu, 

Characteis, — Seeds small, linear, acute and reddish. They con- 
tain myrosine and an oil like that found in Raphanussativus. Dose, 
10 to 30 grs. 

Actions and uses. — Emmenagogue and deobstruent ; used in 
paralysis, uterine disorders and disordered liver, also for enlarged 
glands. 

Brassica (Sinapis). 

Varieties.— B, Alba, B. P., B. Nigra, B. P. Syn. — Sinapb Alba 
and Sinapis Nigra. 

Habitat — Asia, South of Europe, United States. 

Parts used. — The seeds, sinapis albae Seinina B. P., Sinapis Nigrae 
Semina B. P., powder of the mixed seeds. Sinapis. Mustard B. P. and 
a volatile oil, oleum Sinapis volatile B. P. 

Brassica — cabbage ; the fruit resembles cabbage. 

Mustard — mustum ardens, burning must, in allusion to the seeds, 
which were once pounded with must or vinegar ; also in allusion to its 
burning and pungent taste. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Khardal. Beng. — Rai. Burm. — Moung-ngyin 
kung ziyen. Can. — Sasave. Cing. — Rata aba, Ganaba. Duk. — Rayan. 
Eng — Mustard. Guz. — Rayi. Hind. — Rayi. Malay. — Savi Sasavi. 
Mar, — Mohari. Pers. — Sipandan, Sarshaf Sans. — Rajika, Tuverica. 
Sarshapaha, Asuri. Tam. — Kadagu. Tel. — Avalu. 

Characters. — White mustard — flowers yellow and in racemes, 
pods ribbed with a long ensiform beak; fruit a siliqua ij^ inch long, 
sword-shaped and four to six seeded ; seeds A of an inch thick 
and globular, with circular hilum ; testa yellowisn, finely pitted and 
hard; embryo oily; two cotyledons, one folded over the otner.. It is 
without odour when entire or powdered, almost inodorous when triturat- 
ed with water. Taste pungent, but less acrid than that of the black 
variety. Black mustard — flowers small, yellow, on peduncles 
at the end of the branches ; pods smooth, erect, and with a short beak. 
The fruit \ of an inch long, oblong, globular and tapering, 3 to 7 
seeded ; seeds smaller than those of the white variety (y^ inch in 
diameter) ; testa hard, minutely pitted and reddish brown or dark. 
It is without any odour when entire or powdered, but, when triturat- 
ed with water, the odour becomes pungent and penetrating. The 
taste is smarting, pungent and acrid. Dose, 15 to 60 grs. 

Constituents. — Sinapis Alba contains a bland fixed oil, 20 to 25 p.c, 
a crystalline substance Sinalbin ; Sinapine sulpho-cyanide. Lecithin, 
mucilage (only in testa) ; Myrosin, a ferment ; proteids, ash 
4 p. c. The ash consists of potassium phosphate, magnesium 



BRASaiCA JHNrRA, 



fihoffhate ;ind cilcium phosphate. Sinalbin and myrosin, icting on 
trach other in the presence oi water, produce sugar, sinapine sulphate 
arttl sulpbo-c}-anide of acrinyUa rubefacient principle, similar to that 
Ibutiii in the volatile oil of black mustard* Black mustard contains 
myro&jf] and stnigrin (potassium myronate), 0*5 p.Cr Myrosin and 
»tnigrm. when acted upon by water, form sulphocyanide of allyl* 
which is the volatile oil of mustard. It also contains lixed oil 25 p. lv 
ninapine solphocyaxtide, lecithin mucilage, proteids and ash 4 px. 

The fixed oil, obtained by expression is a yellowish green, 
uan*drytng Ouid of a slight odour and bland mild taste. It solidifies on 
cooHng. It cc'nlainsglyceiides of oleic, steaiic and erucic or brassic 
sack. It is used as a diet in certain parts of India* 

Sirnlbin, only found in the while variety, in pearly cr>*stals, or 
colotJT nis, .soluble in water, sparingly so in alcohol, 

^^ il of mustard B, P.— A yellowish limpid liquid, highly 

fL of a pungent and acrid odour and taste. It contains chiefly 

Mj.j -. - . nidc oi allyl, with traces of carbon sulphide. 

i^tfiWatirms, — Charta sinapis B.P. or mubtard paper. Linimentum 
^fiapis, B, P,— volatile oil of mustard, li fluid drachm ; camphor, 2 
drdchms \ castor-oil 5 fluid drachms, and alcohol, 4 fluid ounces. 

I al aciions. — Flour of mustard is nervine, stimulaiit, 

cmcti' otic ; externally rubefacient, counter irritant and vesicant. 

In sni t promotes digestion and removes flatus ; in large dose& it 

i»a b! I g and sure emetic in over-feeding, indigestion and in 

narcotic poisoning, when given with hot %vater. It is an irritaijt to 
the^kin* Itichief use, however, is as an external remedy to relieve 
local pain, to stimulate the viscera and to act as a counter-irritant, 
Tl" 1 'tie oil, in tlte fortti of charta or planter, acts as a stimulant 
»' nt lu whatever part it is applied* Its application causes 

fru3<i^-; heal and severe burning pain. If applied lor a long time 
tl cau>«a \T^cation by setting up local inflammation. It is extensively 
ii»ed as .1 ' Inild remedy to rouse patients from syncope, low 

states oiti 11 and from unconsciousness. Asa counter-irritant 

tl tt Largely u^cU in all internal inflammations. 

Tktra^tk mes. — It is applied to remove muscular^ neu- 
ralj?jc, ana rheumaiic pains, in colic» gastralgia, in inflammation of 
tf. - -'*sages of the lung, pleura, pericardium, &c. The volatile oil 
t rritant* Taken internally it produces gastro-enteritis. The 

liMin-cni i3 applied as a rubefacient and also as a vesicant to swollen 
|4nnt»4 Asa defivative, mustard foot-baths or hip-baths are largely used 
tu fevers, uterine derangements, especially amenorrhoea and dysmenor- 
rh'fA ; in headache, cerebral congestion, in cardiac and in chci>t pains, 
' !• fixed oil is applied to promote the growth of hair* The 

- often mixed with wheat flour to weaken its irritant eflTects 

BrasBica Juncea. 

kincea, Sinapis Kansosa, Brassica Ramosa, 

/. — India, South Russia* 

i\tris ttJ/t/.—Thc seeds. 



6S BRASSICA COMPESTRIS. 

Vernacular. — Burm. — Moung-ngyin. Can. — ^Lasane. Ging^-rrGan^ 
aba, Rataaba. Eng. — Indian mustard, Russian sarepta mustard. Hind. — 
Sursun. Malyal. — Kadiya. Mar. — Mc^are. Pers. — Saurshuf. Saas« 
— ^Rajika Tuvarica. Sind. — Suraibij. 

Characters. — Seeds oblong, light, reddish brown, clean and bright, 
closely resembling those of sinapis nigra, but larger. 

Actions and uses. — similar to those of sinapb nigra, for which k 
is a good substitute. If previously deprived of its fixed oil, its activity 
» increased. If kept for a long time, it loses its pungency. 

RrauBsiea CampestriB. 

Habitat, — Europe and Russian Asia* 
Parts used. — Root and seeds. 

Vernacular.^ Eng. — Swedish turnip Can. — Sasave. Guz.— 

Sarasava. Hind. — Surson» Mar. — Sherus. Pers. — Sarshuf. 

Other varieties also produce edible roots and seeds and resemble 
black mustard in property, and probably in constituents. 

Brassica Napus — Cultivated rape-seed or cole seed. The seeds are 
black, but larger than mustard seeds, finely pitted and lightly 
acrid. A large quantity of bland fixed (^ is expressed from the seeds 
known as turnip seed oil. The cake, left after expression of the ofl, fs 
known as oil-cake. 

Brassica Rutabaga — seeds small and contain a pungent oil. 
Brassica Chmensis yields* Shanghai oil. 

Brassica Rapa — ^Rape or colza. The turnip. 

Vernacular. — Hind. — Sarsun, sursr, surras* Duk. — Rayan* Arab. 
— Luft. Beng. — Shalgam, Gonghi, Sarsho. Burm. — MuBg>!a-do-waing« 
Eog. — Rape or colza. Guz.— ^ursul. Pers. — Gouglu. Sans. — ^Asuri 
shershape. Sind. — Gohheu. 

Asuri. — Means Sorceress. Village witches were detected by 
means of this oil. The oil was dropped intacups filled with water, 
each cup bearing the name of the suspected woman. If the oil takes 
the form of a woman in any of the cups, the person whose name is oo 
the cup is declared to be a witch. 

Characters. — The seeds are blue-black and pitted, larger than 
mustard or turnip seeds. They are slightly acrid. The}' yield a bland oil 
known as rapeseed oil. This oil — Sursun tel, b largely used in India 
as an emollient and rubbed over the whole body in leucoderma, 
paralysis and rheumatism. It keeps the skin soft and clean, and is 
believed to promote the growth of hair and to remove lice and scurl 
The natives use the oil as an article of diet. 

Anastatioa Hieroohuntiiia. 

Habitat. — Deserts of Syria, Palestine, Arabia. 
Pkirt usedn — ^Thc dried herb. 



SIA 



!|3<IAUS 



Vernacuiar. — Arab. — Kaphe-Miryana, Raphe- Aye^ha. Hintl.— 
Garbhaphufa* Eng,^ — Mary*s flower, Rose of Jerichot Pcrs*^ — Panja-i- 
Mariam. Gu2. — Garbhaphul. 

Garbha phula — Garbha, a womb, and phiila a flower- The opening 
ftbc plant when put in water, and its closina; in again when drVi is 
Symbolical of the opening of the womb in childbirth and the closing 
oC it after delivery. In Palestine, it is termed Kaf Maryan, Mary's 
flower, in allusion to the tradition that the piant blossomed on 
the Chriiitmas eve to salute the birth of the Redeemer and paid 
hoi&a|[c to his resurrection by remaining expanded till Easter. Raphe 
Ayesha, so called by the Mohamedans, in allusion to the tradition that 
the plant expanded at the birth of Ayesba, who was the favourite 
wiin of the Prophet and mother of the faithful, 

CkaracUrs, — Dry herb of brownish white colour and of the shape 
of a fig. The stem Is short and woody and branched in a corymbose 
ntanucr. The branches when fresh spread out straight upon the 
ground^ but after withering, the hyprometric stems curve inward sci 
IS to form a round ball ; in this state they arc blown out by the winds 
Irom place to place. Hence they are supposed to be the Gurgal, 
rolling things or wheel of Isaiah. The root is thin and occupies 
the ^me place as the stalk of a fig. Each branch is studded with 
Qiimerous small capsules which are white and hairy. In shape the whole 
herb f eseTubics a water goblet The top of it is formed of two margi- 
nal concave wings, between which a curved prickle-like process projects. 
Il pir»^v«e*i«»es a curious hygrometrical property, lis, when placed in 
unti^r it )kprcads Hat by absorbing it. This property is preserved for 
ytars 

J^eparattQn. — Cold infusion (i in lo). Dose, t to 6 drs. 

Aciif^fis and nse$^—'\\\Q cold infusion is given in difficult labour in 
wbich the effects seem to be more mental than physiologicaK 

Fam&rlaceae. 

The Fumiton' order. 

If' ' lootn, with brittle stems and a watery juice; leaves multi- 
ple, 1 » , often with tendrils, alternate much divided ; tlowers 
irt uiisymmetrical, in pink, red, yellow, or white inflorescence, 
at . ise ; fruits small, pod4ike» dehiscent or intehiscent, one or 
Iwy >cc^oJ and succulent ; seeds shining and crested ; albumen fleshy. 

HahitaL — India, Japan, Persia, and in temperate climates. 
ProptHi^, — All plants possess bitter, acrid, astringent^ emmena- 
gngue and apct tent properties. 

Fumaria Officinalis^ 
HahilaU — Persia, Nepaul, Bombay. 
f^riu%cd, — The plant. 

Ftimaria. — From fumus, fume or smoke. The plant irritates the 
«yei like smoke, 

Vernacular. — A rab. — Shahteraj, Baklat-ul-malik. Bomb. — Pita- 
pipra. Chin.^Tsie-hwa-tiaing. Eng.^Common fumitory. Hind. — 



70 CORYDALIS CAVA. 

Pitapapra. Pers. — Shahturuz. Sans. — Ksheteraparapatiyyavanapaipata 
Beng.— Shatera Pitpapra. 

Characters. — The drug is of a greyish yellow colour and resembles 
in appearance trayamana. It consists of broken leaves, stems, capsules, 
flowers and seeds; leaves green ish,t hick and narrow; stems greyish yellow, 
one to two inches long, furrowed and rather quadrangular ; capsules 
very small, gryish green, tubercled, slightly compressed and with a 
transverse ridge scar to the apex; flowers irregular, uns^-mmetrical and 
either \nolet coloured or white; seeds very small and consist of fleshy 
albumen ; taste bitter, acrid and astringent, odour acrid and disagreeable. 

Constituents. — Fumaric acid, and fumarine, — a cr^'stalline organic 
base. 

Fumaric acid is isomeric with maleic acid. It may be obtained by 
de -hydration of malic acid ; it exists readv formed in several plants, 
namely, Corydalis bulbosa, Glaucium flavum, Lichen Islandicus, 
It is also found among the products of the oxidation of protein 
compounds by niiro-hydrochloric acid. 

Fumarine exists in irregular 6-sided crystals or monoclinic 
prisms. Insoluble in alcohol, chloroform, benzol, bisulphide of 
carbon and amyl alcohol ; sparingly soluble in water and soluble in 
ether. 

Preparation, — Decoction (i in lo). Dose, i to 2 ozs 

Actions and uses. — Diuretic, diaphoretic, tonic, alterative, 
anthelmintic, and aperient ; useful in syphilis, scrofula, constipation 
and dyspepsia, due to torpor of the liver or intestines. It is allied in 
its properties to taraxacum. With black pepper it is given in ague and 
jaundice ; also given to purify the blood in skin diseases. 

Remarks. — What is sold under the name of Ghati-pita-papado is 
an acanthaceous plant often substituted for Pita-papado. The true 
Pita-papado is sold in the bazaar under the Persian name Shahtira. 

Corydalis CaTa. C. Tnberoea. 

Syn. — Hollow-rooted fumitory-. 

Habitat. — United States. 

FUrt used. — The root (tuber). 

Constituents, — Cor\*daline, corAxravine and other bases. 

/Vr/<i/a/wii.— Powdered root (tuber), lo to 40 grains. Fluid 
extract. Dose — 10 f 40 ms. Dry extract Dose 1 to 5 grs. 

Actions and uses. — Alterative, antisyphilitic, aDtiperiodic, tonic, 
diuretic and resolvent. It seldom disagrees with the stomach, and 
may be employed as a tonic in irritable condition of that organ. 
It is especially given in scrofula, syphilis, cutaneous affections, urinar>' 
diseases and debility. 

Corydalis GoTaniana. 

//ii^it.tt. — Wester n H imalav-a. 
P,srt u^ca\ — Veilow i^ixc. 



Acttom and uses, — Alterative ; given in scrofula, skin dbeases &c. 

PolygalacecQ. 

Milk wnrt family* 

I' i;€ frtjni poly, much, and gal;;!, milk; it is believed to 

ilicrc^^^ tnlk in female animals. 

Shrubs, ur Kerbs. Leaves alternate or opposite, simple and ex^tipu- 
late* Flnwei:i IT regular, unsym metrical and apparently papilionaceous 
(wing» btnng fcirmed hv the calyx). Fruit indehiscent, loculicidal 
and occasionally winped ; seeds pendulous, smoolli or hairy, with a 
caruncuh next the hi I urn ; albumen copious and fleshy, 

liiihiiat, — Fou n d every w h ere . 

/^ A,.r/i*^5,— Bitter and acrid; roots milky, and used as tonic, 
ff and siitnuhnt ; some are emetic, purgativ*;, diuretic, 

iL-j.MkntUC and expectorant. Some have edible fruit^^ and others 
contain a saponaceous principle. 

Krameria Triandra B> P.— Peruvian Rhatany* Krarneria Argentea 
B. P. Fara Rhatany. 

HahiiaL — Peru^ South America, New * rranada, Bolivia and Para. 

Part med, — The dried root. Kramcri.e Radix— Krameria root^ 
nthatany root B. P. 

Cilrf?r^i<r/rri*— Shrubs. Root in cylindrical pieces. Para Rhatany — 
hark smooth, thick, of a purplish brown colour, marked with deep 
traitsvcfsc fissures or cracks. Internally rough and scaly. W<Jod pale 
and of a reddish browu colc)ur and firmly adherent to the bark, 
frjcture >hon and splintery. Taste astringent and tinges the saliva 
ydlow. Drise^ lo to 60 grs. Peruvian Rhatany — bark dark, reddish 
liroKirn, t lo from the yellowish wood, thinner, astringent* 

in la$lt!, i saliva red. Dose, 10 to 60 grs, 

Gifu%btHe$tis. — The bark contains krameric acid, Tannin 40 p.c, 
Rhalattic nid, Uarch, sugar, gum, wax and calcium oxalate. 
Rhatanic red or ratanhia red. 

.* nirr. — Hoil kramero tannic acid with diluted sulphuric 

acid . I splits up into glucose and the colouring principle, which 

it similar to that found in horsechestnut and tomcntiila. With 
potash it is converted into protocatcchuic acid and phloroglucin* 

PteparaiioMt. — Liquor Krameria^ Concent rat us B. P. (l in 2.) 
Do*c, f lo I dr. Extractum Krameri^e B, P. — Extract of Krameria. 
Extract of Rhatany- Dose, 5 to 1 5 grs. Infusum Kramcriic (iniin). 
D 1 ox, Trochiscus KrameriavB.P, — Rhatany ln?:cnges (1 grain 

c in eiirH.) Trochiscus Krameti<c ct Cocain*^ B. P, (Extract I 

I /„ grain in each.) Tinctura Krameride B. P. — 

* ny \,i JIB'S)- Do!»e, ^ to I dr. 

AcfiOHJ and uses, — A powerful astringent, alterative and tonic ; 
tncd in chronic diarrhcra and dysentery ; also to check passive 
iismuffhagC4 a> mcnoirhagia, Icucorrhcea and gleet. In incontinence 



72 POLYGALA SENEGA 

of urine it is also beneficial. Externally, as gargle or lozenges^ it is 
given in sore throat ; as an injection or enema, for fissure of the anu», 
leucorrhoea, and as a wash in cracked nipples. It is also used a9 
dentifrice. Locally it is applied to spongy gums. As an alterative it 
IS given in rheumatism, syphilis and scrofula. It is also used as an 
application for the bites of venomous reptiles. 

Polygala Crotalarioides. — In India the root is used as an 
expectorant. 

P. Tenuifolia, a Chinese plant, the root of which in contorted 
quilled pieces, is used in cough; the leaves are given in spermatorrhcea. 

Polygala Chinensis, HahitaL — Pasture lands throughout India. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Lubanat. Hind. — Maradu. Man— Negli. 
Pers. — Furfur. 

Polygala Alba. — White or false senega. — The root contains 
polygalic acid 3 p. c. Used as infusion and tincture. 

P. Polygama. — ?• Rubella. — Bitter polygala^ the root and herb 
contains a bitter principle similar to senegin, and is used as a diaphore- 
tic» laxative and tonic in bronchial catarrh &c. 

Polygala Senega B. P. 

Habitat, — Woods, rocky soil, United States, Honan, Shensi. 

Part used, — The dried root, Senegae Redix — Senega Root B. P. 

Sengh. — Snake root, milk wort^ mountain flax. 

Senega. — The term is derived from Seneca, an American Indian 
tribe who used it for snake-bite. 

Characters, — Indigenous perennial plant, FJowers small and 
white and at the summit of the stem ; root 4 or 5 inches long, slender 
and of a yellowish brown colour, enlarged at the top into a knotty 
crown, contorted and often curved, longitudinally wrinkled^ breaking 
with a short fracture ; cortex horny^ translucent, free from starch 
grains, and enclosing a white or yellowish porous wood ; taste at first 
somewhat sweety and afterwards acrid ; odour distinctive. Dose — 
3 to 20 grs. 

Adulterations. — Ginsing root, cypripedium root, Gentian root, 
and Cynanchum Vincetoxicum root ; but they all di&r in odour and 
taste. 

Constituents, — A neutral glucoside called Senegin^ 2 to ^ p. c, 
probably identical with saponin ; PoVygalic acid, a volatile oil, a fixed 
oil, 8 to 9 p.c. ; tannin, gum^ resin, sugar 7 p.c. ; pectin, malates, and 
yellow colouring matter. 

Senegin. — To obtain it exhaust the root with alcohol, concentrate 
and precipitate with ether. A white amorphous powder, without 
any odour^ freely soluble in alcohol and cold water, forming a soapy 
emulsion with boiling water ; with hydrochloric acid it is decomposed 
into glucose and sapogenin. 



SCHLFJCHERA TRIJUGA. 



73 



PoZygalic acid^ sparingly soluble inakoholj insoluble in ether and 
chloroiorm. 

Fixed oil, — Obtained from the root by ether — contains virginic 
acid« to which the: aroma h due* Volatile oil contains valerianic ether 

and mctliyl salicylate. 

f^e/yarations.—lnfiisum Senega? B, P. (i in 20), Dose, } to i or. 
Liquor Senegar Concentratus B» P. (l in 2). Dose, ( to 1 dn 
Tinciura Senegae B,P. (1 in 5). Dose» \ to I dr. Extractum Senegse 
fluidum — Fluid extract oF senega. Dose, lo to 20 ois* 

Syrupus senegac contains iluid extract of senega 20, ammonia 
water 5, and suga? 10. Dose, i to 2 drs. Syrupus scill«e compositus — 
compound ^yrup of sc^uill — 8 p, c. Dose, 20 1030 ms. 

Pkys$<iltigiiiil aciion. — Stimulating expectorant, emmenagogue, 
diuretic and diaphurettc. Iti large doses gastro-intestinal and throat 
irritant^ producing coughs increased salivation, 5nee2ing and nasal 
catarrh. In small doses it removes the tightness and feeling of oppression 
friMJi the chest. Scnegtn has a stimulating action on the mucous 
membranei^i especially of the pulmonary tract. It is a powerful 
depr^sant of the heart and of the muscular and nervous systems. 
It t^ ctiminated by the kidneys, skin and bronchial mucous membrane^ 
i^hich it stimulates and irritates. 

Tketaptuikst, — As a stimulatmg expectorant it is largely used alone 
Of in combination with ammonium cart>onate in chronic bronchitis, 
poeumouia, asthma, croup and whooping cough ; it relieves the cough 
and prorn^ : ctoration. It is not of much use if the bronchial 

raucii% L ion is tough and scanty; as a diaphoretic and 

dhirclic. It ii sumetimes employed in anas^arca and dropsy dvie to 
albuminuria * as an cmmenagogue it is used v^ith benefit in amenorrhura, 

Bapind&cm.— The Aritha or Soap Wort Family. 

Sapindacas from sapo, soap, and Ind, ** Indian," Indian soap. The 
frtiil is saponaceous and contains a vegetable principle named sapontoc. 

[jirge trees or twining shrubs, and rarely climbing herbs; leaves 
generally compound, rarely simple, alternate cr opposite, often dotted 
and with or without stipules. Flowers unsymmetrical, generally poly- 
gamous ; ovary, getierally two to three-celled. Fruit capsular ur fleshy 
and irjdehi!^cnt, some sweet are with an acid flavour ; seedii exalbu- 
mioouis superior arillate. Most prominent property of this family is the 
presence of a &apt»naceous principle. 

Hnhit4it^ — ^'1 Vop i ls. 

The plants are astringent^ aromatic, diuretic, diaphoretic and 
aperient. Some species are poisonous. 

Schleichera Trijuga. 

//tf^'/ji/,— Burma, Ceylon, S. India, Himalayas, 
l^arh used, — ^Tlie bark and oil. 



74 SAPINDUS TRIFOLIATUS. 

Vernacular, — Eng.— Ceylon oak. Hind. — Kosimb. Tarn. — Pu- 
maram. Tel. — May Rahatangah. Mai. — Puvatn. Can. — Sagade, 
Chakota. 

Characters. — Fruit a drupe of the size of a nutmeg ; the husk is 
grey, fragile, covered with soft, blunt prickles; seeds I to 3, oblong, 
smooth, truncated at the base and surrounded with pulpy arilla \ 
taste acid ; bark thick, with a soft, outer corky layer ; inner bark 
firm, hard and breaks with a short fracture ; colour pale red ; taste 
astringent. 

Constituents. — The bark contains tannin and ash. 

Actions and uses, — The pulpy arilla is sub-acid. The bark is 
astringent, and mixed with oil, it is applied to cure itch and other 
skin eruptions ; the oil under the name of Macassar oil is used as a 
stimulant application to the scalp to promote the growth of the hair. 

SapindoB TrifoliatoB. S. Rnbiginosas. 

Habitat. — South India, Ceylon, Bengal. 

Part used. — The pulp of the fruit. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Finduk-i-hindi, Bandak-e-hindi. Beng. — 
Buro-ritha. Bur. — Miavenen-suc-khe-si. Can. — Kukate-kayi, Thaly 
marathu, artala. Cing. — Penela. Duk. — Rithah. Eng.— Indian filbert, 
Soapnut tree, soap berry. Guz. — Aritha. Hind. — Ringin, Dodan, 
Ritha. Malay. — Punnan-kotta. Mar. — Ritha, Areeta Ringin. Pers, — 
Ratah. Sans. — Phenila, Arishta. Tam. — Pannan-kottai, Puvandi. 
Tel. — Kunkudu-kayalu. 

Characters. — Berries dry, generally three, united together, or 
separate ; skin thin, shrivelled and of the colour of raisins; when ripe 
soft and of a greenish colour. In shape somewhat resembling a 
kidney. When united together, points of attachment are marked by 
a heart-shaped scar ; pulp translucent ; berry one-seeded ; seed round, 
smooth, black and shining ; testa hard and bony ; kernel yellowish 
brown and oily ; smell of the berry like that of burnt sugar, and that 
of the pulp resembling that of Khajura ; taste sweet at first, afterwards 
becoming bitter. Dose of the pulp, 2 to 6 grs. 

Constituents, — Saponin ii'S p.c. Glucose and pectin; The thick 
cotyledons contain white fat 30 p.c. It saponifies readily. 

Actions and uses. — Expectorant, emetic,anthelmintic and purgative. 
Externally stimulant and irritant ; used in asthma, colic, worms, 
and as a purge combined with scammony. Externally applied to the 
mucous membrane of the nose to rouse patients from insensibility 
in hysteria, epilepsy, hemicrania and melancholia ; also applied to 
scrofulous and other glandular swellings and to bites of yenomous 
reptiles ; used also to destroy pediculi and to wash and cleanse the 
hairs of the head. Pessaries made of the kernel of the seeds are 
used in amenorrhcea and after childbirth to stimulate the uterus to a 
healthy contraction. 



RAIJLttlfTA SORBttlS — GUARANA — IIRAZltlAN COCOA. 



Rrm^rks, — It rcbenibles sikakai. The fruit pulp is said to he 
fff^- f;t..,>i, more powerful in cleaning linen than soap. Berries of S. 
■' . S. Rttrak, S. Emarginatus, S, Detergens arc all used Un 

i\xx juirjusesof soap-making owing to the presence of Saponin. S. 
Afukora^M is the soap-nut of Northern India, and is called Dodan in 
the Punjab, 

PauUiiiia Sorbilis—Guarana— Brazilian Cocoa* 

HnhiiiU.—^. and W. BraziK 

/\irt Hs^d. — Guarana, a dried paste ofcrn&hed seeds deprived uf 
arif and iiioulded into cylinders and dried by sun or fire. 

Charnctrrs* — A climbing plant ; fruit of the size of grape or 
I' . nvoid, pyriform, 6*ribbed, seeds resembling hazel nut seeds, 2 

' '^ the fruit. Aniluswiiitc; taste bitter ands astringent Guarana 

n Hi*iiic by slightly roasting and powdering the dried seeds and then 
itudc into a St i0^ paste or dough with water; with this paste broken 
seeds arc also rtnngled and made into cylindrical rolls or elliptical 
ciJces or sticks. The paste is dark -brown or of a fawn-yellow 
colour ; odour slight, resembling chocolate ; taste bitter and astriiigentp 
paiUy soluble in water and alcohol. Dose, lo to 60 grs. 

0>mtit$ifnlji, — Contains a bitter crystalline principle ; guaranine 
J - p. c, identical with cafTeinc or theine. Tannin — ^Paullini 

t tf c6 p, c^, resin, greenish fixed oil, fat, albumen^ starch, 

gum nin, ash 2*5. px* 

ts ijc* — Powder the paste. Boil it with litharge and 

inter. Killer the solution, pass sulphuretted hydrogen through the 
sotuiion to precipttaCe lead ; evaporate and erystolli^e^ Dose, 
I to 5 gr». 

PauUini tannic acid precipitates ferric salts^ gelatin, gold and 
Ulvcr salts* 

/^rfiaratfons,^ — Extractum guaran^e fluidum — fluid extract of 
guanna, not miscible with water. Dose, 10 lo 60 grs. Tinctura 
suiriinse (i in 4). Dose, t to 1 dr. Syrup* Dose, 3 104 dis. Elixir 
Guaran«T^ — a tincture of guarana treated with magnesia to liberate 
t id, and flavoured. Dose, ^ to 2 drs. Elixir Eryihroxyli <--t 

i:^^,^..^ contains coca and Guarana 7^ grains each in ooe fluid 
dnchm. Dose, i to 2 drs* 

/" ira/ at/ihfts. — Nervine stimulant, tonic and astringent* 

ft iff .1 the sensory and motor nerves, but more so the sensory 

'^. k causes hyper^eslhesia and also convulsions. Its action 
*-• heart and respiration is to stimulate them at first and then 
|t ns them. It produces restlessnses, and quick perceptiun, 

§%. pulse^ impairs digestion and causes irritation of the bladder* 

Tt is gtvcn chiefly in relieving neuralgic aft'cctions, such as hemicrania, 
ikk lieadache occurring during menstruation or after a debauch. As 
a tonic it is given in diarrhcea and phthisis ; also in convalescence 
from acate diseases, &c. Guaranine may be employed in the same 
way aa ctfleine. 



Dadonaa Viscosa. D. Augostifolia. 

Bahitai, — Throughout India, Neilgherries, and Punjab. 

Pari used, — ^The leaves. 

Vernacular. — Can. — Bandarika. H ind, — SanattAf Banmen Jm^ 
Eng. — ^Jamaica-switch sorrel. Mar. — Jakhmi^ Bandari. 

Ckartickfs. — Leaves green» more or less viscid, cootaiiiing &hinm^ 
yellowish resin ; taste sour and astringent. 

Consttttttut^, — Guhii acid resins 27'j. Albumen, Tannin. Of the 
two resins one is insoluble in ether ; both are soluble in chlorolomi^ 
alcohol, liquid ammonia and in fixed alkalies; 

Preparation. — Tincture (l in 10). Dose^ 15 to 30 ms. 

Actions and uses, — Alterative, laxative, febrifuge and tonic, given 
in rheumatism, gout and fevers. The leaves make excellent poultice 
and varalians and retain heal for a long time when applied to painful 
swellings and rheumatic joints. 

/^sculus Indica. — Himalayan horse-chestnut^ made into a paste 
and applied to rheumatic joints ; the seeds are used as food, 

Acer pictum and accr aesium. — The knots in the stems arc, like 
Quassia, made into cups and used for drinking water in rheumalibm* 

CardiasimFmum Halioaoabum. 



Ha hita /. — India. 

Part used. — The herb. 

leniacuiar, — Eng, Heart's pea. Arab, — Taftaf^ Habb-el-KulkuK 
Beng. — Nayaphataki, Lotaphatakari, (seeds), Burni, — Mala mai. Can,— 
Kanakaia, Cing- — Jyotish-muttee. Dak.— Shib-Jub. Gnz. — Karodio, 
Hind. — Kanaphata. Mai— Ulinja. Mar. — Kanphuti, Shib-jal. Sans.^ — 
Karnasphota, Paravata-padi, Jyantisha mati. Tarn. — ^Modda coatan* 
Tel. — Budha-kakara, NelJa Gulisi-tenda, Vekkudutige* 

Paravata-padi. Pigeon^s foot, Karansphota-karan, an car, and 
sphota, or phota a crack. It is used for the cure of crack to the ear. 

Characters. — A climbing plant, leaves glabrous, biternate : leaflets 
oblong, coarsely cut and serrated; root white and fibrous, of a disagree- 
able odour and of an acrid ^ nauseous and bitter taste. 

Constituents. — Saponin, 

P^eparation.^DecoQiion of the root (i in io).Dose, 4 toiodrs. 
A compound powder containing leavei of C. Halicacabunt ' laie 
of potash, root of acorus calamus^ root-bark of Terminalia i in 

equal pans ; mix, make powder. Dose, 1 drachm in amcnorrha-a* 

Actions and uses, — Diuretic, laxative, stomachic, alterative and 
rubefacient, given in rheumatism, nervous diseases, piles, chronic 
bronchitis and phthisis ; also in amenorrhie .1. The leaves fried are also 
applied to the pubes to increase the menstrual flow in anicnorfhoea;the 



HVPERICUM PERFORATUM. 



77 



eaves, besmeared with caslor-oil, are applied over rheumatic pains, 
^wcUuigs and tumours of various kinds. The juice of the plant b 
dropped into the ear in earache and discharge from the meatus, 

Hyperioaceee. 

The St. John's wort family. Herbs, shrubs or trees. Leaves 
opposite, rarely alternate, exstipulate. simple dotted and bordered 
with bUck glands ; flowers regular ; sepals 4 or 5, unequal, united at 
the }xi$e, unbricated ; petals hypogynous ; stamens numerous ; fruit 
capsular ; seeds minute, numerous and exalbuminous, 

HahitaL — Both temperate and hot regions. 

/^<^rllrV*,— They contain resinous yellow juice, which is 
pttrpittTe; M>me3re tonic, astringent and diuretic. 

Hypericum Perforatum* 

Habitat — Hilly parts of India. 

Pnri tfj^//.— The juice. 

Ffrtiacu/ar.^AT'db, — Hyufarikun. Pers.^ — Dadi, Jao-i-Jadu, 

Jao-i-Jadu means magic barley. 

Conshtucnts. — A volatile oil, hypericum-red — a blood-red resin, 
having the odour of chamomile. 

Acitomanii uses, — Nennne tonic, and astringent, given in hypo- 
chondriasis ; also used as an anthelmintic emmenagogue and diuretic. 
The juice was used as an application to wounds. 

OuttlferaQ or Clusiacea. 

The Kokama or Mangosteen family. Guttiferae — from gutta, 
a drop, and ftrre to bear. Plants yield gum, or resinous juice in drops. 

General characttrs. ^-Trets or shrubs, sometimes parasitical, %vith 
refinous juice ; leaves entire, simple, coriaceous, opposite and exstipu- 
lite. Flowers perfect, sometimes unisexual ; stamens monadelphous, 
distinct, of a fragrant Oilour, Fruits globular, dehiscent or indehiscent, 
edible, of delicious flavour and astringent taste ; seeds solitary or 
numierous, frequently arillate, oily and without albumen. 

Z/aMnL — Tropical parts, specially S. America and Africa. 

/Voi8rr/y. — Many contain a yellow gum resin, of an acrid and pur- 
»tivc character, and some cmitain edible fruits, 

Ochrocarpus LongifoUus. 

f/ahitai, — Western Peninsula. 

/^iri tis^fit — The dried flower buds* 

I VrwatwAii'.^Bomb. — Tarabra Nagakesara. Eng.^ — Cobra's saffron. 
Guz. — Rati Naga-kesara, Gor iundi (the fruit). Hind. — Nagesura. 
Mar, — r.imbra Naga kesara, Punnag, Suringi, Pets. — Nara*Mushka 
Saas«— Naga kesaia, Punnaga. 



7« MESUA PERREA. 

Naga kesara — Naga, a cobra, and kesara, saffron. Cobras are 
said to be fond of these blossoms on account of their fragrance. The 
true Naga-kesara is Mesua Ferrea. 

Characters, — Flower buds resemble kababchini in size and form ; 
and are of a cinnamon colour ; some are hermaphrodite ; others male 
only. On opening the male bud a group of anthers, adherent to one 
another and forming a small ball, is seen. The colour of the anthers 
is deeper than that of the calyx. In the hermaphrodite variety, on re- 
moving the anthers, is seen" the ovary with a large stigma. The seed, 
is large as an acorn, exudes a viscid, gummy fluid when cut. The 
smell is aromatic and taste acrid. Dose, i to 2 grs. 

Actions and uses, — The flower-buds are used as fragrant adjuncts to 
decoctions and medicated oils. They are stimulant, aromatic, stomachic, 
bitter and astringent ; used, like taja, elachi, tamalapatra, in great 
thirst, irritability of the stomach and excessive perspiration, and also 
given in dysentery with benefit. A pasfe of it is used to fill up 
the cavities of caried teeth to relieve toothache. 

Hesoa Ferrea: H. Boxbargha, H. Coromandalina. 

Habitat, — Bengal, Himalaya and An damans. 

Parts used. — The flower-buds, root, bark and oiL 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Nag-kesar ; Burm. — Ken-gan Gungan. 
Can. — Naga-ampagi .Eng. — Iron wood tree. Hind. — Nagesar, Nagkasar. 
Malyal. — Beluta, Champagum-veila. Mar. — Nag-champa. Sans. — 
Kesaramu, Nagasara, Naga-kesaram, Kangal, Kanna. Tam. — Irul- 
maram, Nagashappu, Shirunagappu. Tel. — Chikati-manu Nag-kesa- 
ram. 

Characters. — Flower buds are large and white ; sepals thick, mem- 
branous and orbicular ; petals spreading ; anthers large and golden- 
yellow ; fruit ovoid, conical shaped and chestnut like in size, the base 
surrounded by the persistent sepals; seeds i to 4, dark-brown; testa 
smooth round the base of the young fruits. Dose, i to 2 grs. 

Constituents — The fruit contains an oleo resin and an essential 
oil. The seeds contain a fixed oil. The hard pericarp contains tannin. 
The resin is in tears ; it sinks in water. It is partially dissolved in 
rectified spirit, amyl alcohol and ether, but wholly in benzol. The 
essential oil is very fragrant, of a pale yellow colour and of the 
odour of flowers, and resembles chian turpentine. 

Preparations. ^Syxuip (i in 10). Dose, \ to i dr. Ointment 
and oil. Decoction of root (i in 10). Dose, 2 to 4 drs. 

Actions and uses.— The dried blossoms, root, and bark are 
bitter, aromatic and sudorific. Unripe fruits are aromatic, acrid and 
purgative. Flower-buds are used in dysentery. The oil is used as 
2ln application for rheumatic joints; an ointment of the powder of 
blossoms, with butter, is applied to bleeding piles and for burning 
sensation of the feet. 



OAKCINfA MANCOSTAKA, 



}ar€iiiia XanthechymuB. Xanthochymus Pictorius. 
//aitila/. — Hastei n liengal^ Eastern Hinialayasi Western Peninsula. 
Parf used, — T h e f r u i t . 

Vermanhif. — Beng — Outh orosht. Assam — Tcpor. Burni, — 
. — Daiiipel. Tii\. — Iswara-nianiaiii. Tani.— Tamalamu, 



HitK! 



Matun. 
diiUka. 

Chamrtir:i*^>\ yujiow truii, very acrid, oi liie size of a small 
apple. 

/V^^r/m/4>>w»— Compound syrup, contains^ in addilion to osht, rock 
salt| pepper, ginger, cumiu-secds and sugar. 

ArhoHS auii uses, — Same ns those of G, Indica* 

Garcina Mangostana. 

//alntaL — Malacca, Malayan Peniiibtjla, Singapore, India, Arclii- 
ilago. 

Part4 used, — Tfje rind of the fruit and pulp., 

Vfru^tcuiiir, — Beng, — Mangusatan, Bomb. — Mungeestun. Burm* 
— ■Mcn-pu-young, Zalai Mango-si. Chin. — Shan-chuhikwo* Eng. — 
Manitosttne. Hind* — Mangustan. Malay. — Manggusta. 

r^itri-T^frrs, — Fruit, a drupe as large as a small apple* When fresh 
l^ i* soft, fibrous, and of a red colour; pulp is snow-white, en- 

V' ^ ^ cds;flavour very grateful and delicate; dry fruit is globular 

aiidol a dark-brown colour, with a radiating flat or compressed six-parted 
'tivmia at I lie lop, with a four-parted hard and thick adherent calyx 

e bottom. When cut the interior is hollow and occasion- 
.Mi> contain* a small quantity of dark coloured dried pulp. The rind 
11 corky-looking and sprinkled with a yellow colouring matter. The 
odntir h somewhat aramaiic. The taste is acidulous and astringent. 
Dosci lo to ,^o grs- 

( its* — The rind contains mangostin^ resin and tanntn. 

K To obtaiti it, boil the rind in water ; to remove tannin, 
t ^ alcohol, and evaporate. The resulting product is 

Tij... p, .^.... «,.^ .V in, To precipitate the lesiu re-dissolve in alcohol and 
w**tcr. 

U occurs m fmall yellow scales, without any taste, neutral reac- 
don, iRSotuble in water, but readily soluble in alcohol and ether; also in 
hot dilmc acids. Concentrated nitric acid converts it into oxalic 
acid. With alkalies il forms yellow solutions. 

Preparaimts.—ExiTALt. Dose. 3 to jo grs. Tincture of the rind 

^1 in 10)'. Dosc^ i to I dr. SyTup of the pulp (i in 5)* Dose, | to 1 dr. 

AcHons and usts, — The rind is a powerful astringent and a good 

iibitt: * 1ianbacl,and is used, in intestinal catarrh, advanced 

cajifeA nd chronic diarrhoea ; also in leucorrho^a. gonorrhura 

ol children. Locally the solution of pulp is 

^Afgle in tunsilitis, and as a local application in 

pf^L|#»u^ 4a^ i^\^ vaguia:. 



Qarcina Indica and 0. t^orpurea^ 

Habitat, — Western Peninsula, Araboyna. 

Parts u$rd, — ^The concrete oil, fruit, seeds and bark, 

Vtmacular. — Eng.— The fruit, ^z6. mango. Bomb.— Ainsul^ 
kokuma, Goa.^Brindao. Man — Ratambi — Bhirand, The concrete 
oiL Eng» — Kokuma butter, Guz. — Brindao is a corruption of Bbn-inJ* 
Kokumbela, kokamanu-ghee. Mar. — Birandela, KokunichaleU. 

Cliaraciers. — The concrete oil is extracted from the poundci r ; 
by boiling, and then moulded into ovaUshaped balls, whenil is knowi. .iv 
kokuma butter. It resembles in appearance country soap (kappai ivmji- 
sabu)* It is hard, of a dirty white colour, dry, easily pulvtnsah! .ir>d 
unctuoiis to the touch. The fruit is globular in size, and res* niltif 
an orange. It is of a yellow colour and contains an acid pjip nn i 
several seeds. The seeds are black, reniform, wrinkled and conr 
laterally, and resemble amali seeds in size, and contain a hv 
Each seed has a 4-parted wing-like calyx, with si short stalk at its b;ue« 
Kokama or amsul is the pulp of the fruit cleared of ihe seeds and dried 
in the sun and slightly salted. It is of a black colour and an oval shape* 
The epidermis is wrinkled. At the base of kokama the calyx and thi: 
remainder of the stalk are often seen* The smell and taste «re add* 

Constttuents, — The concrete oil boiled with soda yields hard loap* 
%vhich is decomposed by sulphuric acid, tearing fatly acids as stearic 
acidj myristic acid and oleic acid. The seeds contain fat 50 p.c. The 
fruit contains cellulose, an extractive and insoluble residue* 

J^e/aration.~^Syr\xp of the juice (1 in 5), Dose» ^ to i teaspoonfut. 
Decoction of the bark (i in 10). Dose, 4 to 6 drs. 

Actions and tises. — Cooling* demulcent, emollient and antiscorbu* 
tic. It is used in the form of syrup in irritation of bowels, leading to 
diarrhoea and dysentery and as a refrigerant in fevers. In scurvy 
it is used in place of lemon -juice. The oil — kokum butter — is an 
excellent emollient application to cracks and fissures of the lips, handii 
and feet, and over the nipples and to excoriations in other places. U&cd 
by the natives as an ointment base combined with lard, and ^ 
suppositories and pessaries, and no doubt is a good substitute for oil oC 
theobroma and for simple ointment. It keeps well in India ' i!c»* 
The bark and leaves are astringent and used a& ad. tti 

dysentery* 

Qarciaia Hanburii, B.P. 

G. Morell var. Pedicellata, Gt Pictoria, Hebradcndron Cam* 

bogioides, 

Habitxit. — Camboja, Bengal, Assam, S. India, Cochin Chinai Siam* 

Part used,-— Gum resin Cambogta, B. P., Gutta Gamba« Gamboge^ 

Vffnacii/ar,^ Eng. — Gamboge. Arab. — Kubbe-Rc\%md, Gotagati- 
ba. Beng. — Tamal* Bur* — Tanoto asi, Sanato-pin. Can*^*Jartgt^« 



aARCIKU HAN6URII, B.P. 



8f 



ulfmara Tamal (juice). Ciiig.^ — Gokatu, Melliyani, Kana-Goraha, 
Duk *— Ussarehe-Rcwand. Guz» — Revinchini Khatai* Hind.—* 
Gota-ganba, Tamal. Mar.— Rewanchini, Tamal Pers. — Gotaganba, 
XJ^^rehe-i-rewand. Sans.— Tapinja, Tapiccha» The, Tamala, the 
jaicc* Tam. — Ireval» Karakapuli. Tel. — Revalchini-pal. 

Tamala. — A pigment for making sectarial mark on the forehead* 
Ussarh-i-rewand* — An extract of rhubarb (Rheum palmatum). Both* 
arc similar in colour and properties. : 

CAamr/^ri.— Si am gamboge is the true gamboge of commerce/ 
A yellow juice ^hich exudes in drops from leaves or ducts of the 
middle bark or branchlets when broken or from wounds in the trunk* 
The gum re^in when hardened is called Rawanchni Khatai« and the 
juice when in a fluid state Ra%^anchinio-siro, The gum resin is brittle 
ahd of a deep orange colour. It is met with In two diflPerent varieties. 
The cake or lump or caarse gamboge. It is the gum resin collected 
on the leaver of the tree or in cocoanut-shclls and then transferred 
into 1.-iTPt flut earthen vessels, in which it is exposed to the air for* 
V , and before it hardens completely, it is moulded into cakes» 

'I ..^ v^.>^> or amorphous masses are of earthy fracture, their external* 
surf.*icc is br«»wnish yellow and marked with blue spots, due to the 
mixture of foreign bodies with the resin In this state it is known as 
Revanchini khatai or Gamathi-rhubarb, so called on account of its 
botng moulded into the shape and size ot true rhubarb^ and of being 
simUar to it in taste and odour. The cylindrical, pipe or roll gamboge 
h superior ; and hence officinal ; its surface is longitudinally striated 
fironi the impressions of the bamboo reeds into which the liquid iuice 
Im poured ; is met with in round, solid or hollow and striated pieces,' 
which break with a smooth glistening conchoidal frai ture ; the fractured 
iurface is dull smooth and of a uniform reddish yellow colour. When 
pcmrdered it is bright and yellow ; rubbed with water it forms a yellow 
emulsion. The lasre is acrid. It has no odour. Dose, ^ to 2 grs^ 

Comiitnents — Gum resin contains gum 25 pc, resin or gambogic 
acid 70 p.c, on which its activity chiefly depends, wax and ash 
li "^ne resin i^ soluble in alcohol and ether. In it resides the 

^ matter and medicinal properties. 

faration. — Pilula cambogiae composita, B.P., contains Gatii- 

Irbados aloes, compound cinnamon powder, each j oz , hard 

soap 2 ois.^ and syrup of glucose 1 oz. (1 in 6). Dose, 4 to 8 grS, 
Compound powder contains gamboge 3 drs*» powdered rock-salt 3 drs., 
galangal and ginger each 2 drs. Dose, 10 to 40 grs Pil. Catharticae Co. 
contains Ext. Colocynth Co. 3 grs., calomel 1 gr., Ext* jalap i gr.,: 
G^^mboge ^ gr» for one pilL Dose, I to 2 pills. 

^^yimhgicai actions. — The gum resin is an efficient and active 

i^oguc and dr^^tic purgative, and anthelmintic In large doses 

^ a% an acrid pfvi^on. causes gasiro-enteritis and even death. In 

es it is a cathartic, accompanied with nausea 

a pain, and watery stools* The powder ij^ 

&tmiiutau>fy. ' 



38 CALOPHYLLUM INOPHYLLUM. 

Therapeutic t^^^.-^Seldom given alone ; generally in combinntion 
with pirikajali, rock-salt and galangal, or with calomel, jalap, and 
c^ream of tartar. Given to relieve torpor of the liver due to malaria, and 
in dysentery in very small doses, (gr. -^ at short intervals. It should 
never be given in irritable condition of the stomach and bowels, nor in 
cases where there is a tendency to abortion or to uterine haemorrhage. 
A paste of it, combined with zedoary, is used as an application to 
sprains, bruises, and swollen parts. The natives use it locally with 
cashew-nut as an application for the removal of piles. 

Calophyllum Wight ianum. 
Habitat — Canara, Travancore. 
Part used, — The gum. 

Vernacular. — ^Tam. — Sirra Punnai. Malay. — Sira Punnai. Can. 
— Babbe. 

Characters. — Large translucent, irregular lumps ; colour yellow, 
of horny texture, and brittle ; without any odour ; the taste is soapy. 
Mixed with water it softens, and disintegrates into granular matter and 
oil globules. The water dissolves a portion of it and becomes viscid. 

Calophyllum Tomentosum. 

Habitat — Western Peninsula, Ceylon. 

Parts used. — The gum. 

Vernacular, — Mar. — Pannai. 

Characters, — Black and opaque ; taste feebly astringent ; soluble 
in cold water. 

CalophyllaiD Inophyllam. Balsamavia iBophyUnm. 

Alexandrian laurel, sweet scented calophyllum. 

Calophyllum, Kalos beautiful and Phullon a leaf. 

Habitat. — Tranvancore, Ceylon, Andamans. 

Parts used. — The bitter oil from the seeds and resin. 

Vernacular. — Bomb. — Undi, undel. Burm. — Phung-o)ret. Can. — 
Wuma mara. Cinjf. — S. Domba-gass. Malyal. — Punna. Mar. — 
Undi. Sans. — Punnaga, Kesova. Tam. — Punnaigam. Tel. — Panne- 
gachettu. Ceylon — Domba oil. Duk, — Surfan. Beng.— Sultana- 
champa. Eng. — Laurel nut oil. 

Characters. — Fruit dry, ovoid or round and greenish yellow ; skin 
brown or black and much wrinkled; nut hard, woody and white; seeds 
oily consisting of two hemispherical cotyledons closely united ; the 
kernel contains 60 p. c of oil. The oil is obtained from the seeds by 
expression, and is known as bitter oil or oil of Weandee. It is yellow- 
green, bitter and aromatic. 

Constituents. — ^A resinous substance and oil. The resin is soft, of 
a parsley odour, and resembles myrrh. It melts easily and dissolves 
readily in alcohol. Does not 3deld umbelliferone by dry distillation. 



CHIMA \V AI III MM. 



85 



/^ IS. — Liniment and paste. The paste is made by mixing 

ttht , led seeds of undi, seeds of cashew-nut, borax andgamboge- 

Aciions and wx^i*,— Only used externa] ly. The oil is rubefacient 
* riiant ; mixed with hydnocarpus oil it is used forrheumaticjoints, 
gbnds, &c. ; also in certain skin diseases as scabies and 
exant1ieni;itou& eruptions, A paste of the seeds is iised to hasten 
maturation of enlarged glands, abscesses, and boils. The pounded 
hark it used as an application for swelled testicles. 

Schfma Wallichii. 

HahitM, — Eastern Himalaya, Nepaul^ Assam» Burmah* 

Part w/i/,— The baric, 

I'Vmrficw/cfr,— Hind, — Makriya Chilauni. 

Chilatmt.^ — Mi^ns that which causes itch, 

Ckattacters — Tbe bark* with its liber cells like glistening needles, 
resanUeft ^ The bark is thick and smooth ; external surface 

incfttbr, I J vith fissures and exfoliations ; colour brown, 

Cottshtitfuts. — The parenchyma contains starch and a red colour- 
ing matter. Dose of the powdered bark^ 1 to 3 grst 

Actions and yses* — A mechanical irritant and vermicide ; given in 
taprworms. To be followed by castor*oil. 

Ttrnatrcamfaceffi or Camelliacea. 

The Tea or Camellia family. 

Trees or shrubs ; leavt'» four, leathery, alternate stjptjlale, some- 
limes dotted* Flowers regular, showy, rarely polgyamous : sepals 5 to 
7, coriaceous ; petals 5 tog, imbricated ; stamens, hypogynous. Fruit 
capsular, dehiscent ; seeds few, aril late ; albumen scanty. 

Hahitat. — South America, North America, Chinai East Indies, 

Jhnptrtus* — Stimulant and astringent. 

Camellia Thaifera. B.P. 

Camelea Thea. The teaplant. 

/Ai^f^A— England, India, China, Upper Assam, Japan, Ceylon. 

Part5 tfs<*r/.— The leaves and the alkaloid, (Theineor caflTcina, B P.) 

Virnacuiar. — Eng, — China rea plant, Ind. — Cha, Chai* Mai. — 
Blach tea. Pers. — Chaba Chai Kosh. 

There are three varieties ol this genus. — ^Thea Bohea and l*hea 
viridis, native of China and Thea Assamica, which furnishes Assam 
tea. ITiese are not distinct species but varieties of one termed Thea 
aioetisis. At one time Thea Bohea was supposed to be the source 
of bbck tea and that green tea was obtained from Thea Viridis, 

Characters. — Leaves i to 3 inches long, petiolate, acute at 
both ends, irregularly serrate, of a peculiar odour and bitter, 
aitringent taaic. They are often scented with orange, rose, jismine 
and sweet scented olive. Green tea consists of the leaves, quickly 



8^. DIPTbRACEie — DIPTEROCARPEiE. 

dried after gathering. Black tea—the leaves are dried some time 
lAer they are gathered, or after they have undergone some kind 
of fermentation by which thev change from green to black. Green 
tea is often artificially coloured black by a mixture of prussian blue 
and gypsum, or of gypsum and indigo and a little turmeric. The aroma 
in tea is due to the volatile oil separated during the process of drying 
by heat. Dose, a teaspoonful. 

Constituents. — Manufactured tea contains a peculiar volatile oil, 
tannic and gallic acids ; quercetin so called boheic acid ; theine 
an alkaloid identical with caffeine ; also the alkaloids xanthine and 
theophylline (dimethylxanthine). The volatile oil is most abundant in 
green tea. Xanthine is also found in muscles along with creatine, 
as products of muscular waste. Theophylline is similar in character 
to theobromine It forms salts with hydrochloric or nitric 
acid, wich platinum and gold chloride and a double salt with 
mercuric chloride. It occurs in acicular crystals soluble in warm 
water. Theine is obtained from coffee, cocoa seeds, guarana, paraguay 
tea, kola nuts. &c. It occurs in the form of beautiful silky prisms. 
Soluble in water. Dose, 3 to 5 grains ; hypodermically, \ to i g^in 
for the relief of neuralgic pains. 

Preparation. — Infusion. Dose, 2 to 6 oz. 

Physiological actions. — Tea is a refreshing and stimulating beve- 
rage, soothing, analgesic and sudorific. When indulged in to excess 
it affects the heart, the vaso-motor centre and motor nerves and also 
the stomach, giving rise to nausea, vomiting, flatulent dyspepsia, 
tremulousness ot the limbs, pallor of the face, feeble pulse, supra-orbital 
headache, hallucinations and nightmare. It diminishes the waste of 
the body, and is therefore indirectly nutritive. It increases the 
assimilation of nitrogenous and hydro-carbon food. 

Therapeutics — Given as a household drink. Among the natives 
an infusion of tea with trikatu is used as a carminative and diaphoretic 
in fevers, dyspepsia, in mental overwork. &c. Its tannin combines 
with the gelatine of the food, and hence its excess leads to dyspepsia and 
also to constipation. Its use should be avoided in hysteria, insomnia, 
in those suffering from cardiac valvular disease. Theine is a nervine 
stimulant and is very beneficial in headache, neuralgia, nervous 
depression. It is often combined with benzoate of sodium, which 
increases its solubility. Like curare, it causes muscular contractility 
when brought in contact with it. Compared with coffee its action 
upon the excretions is to diminish the elimination of carbonic acid, 
and also of urea, uric acid and waters. 

Dipteraoea—Dipterooarpaa. 

The Sumatra camphor or the Garajan family. 

Large trees wuh resinous juice ; leaves feat her- veined, involute 
and alternate ; calyx tubular, ultimately enlarged into wing-like ex- 
pansion ; fruits dehiscent or indehiscent, one-seeded j seed solitary and 
ex-albuminous. 



DIPTEROCARPUS TURBINATUS. 



Hahiiat* — Tropical parts of the East Indies, Ja% a. 

Proferttts. — These plants contain an oleo*resin, to which they 
owe their properties. 

Dipterooarpus TurbinatuB, D. Incanas, D. Alatoa. 

Habitat, — Chittagong, Pegu, Burma, Tenasserim. 

Part used. — The oleo resin (balsam). 

Vernacular* — Eng. — Wood-oil tree. Beng, — Batisal Shweta-j 
aryan. Bomb.— Garajana-tela. Burm. — Kanyin. Cing,— Hora-gaha* 
Eng* — Wood-oil tree, Gurjun balsam. Hind. — Jayan-ka-tel. Garajana- 
ka-teta . Mar. — Duhun-el-garjan. Tarn, — Yennar. 

Characters, ^Th^ trunk exudes or yields on incision the oleo resin 
or balsam, which when fresh, is an opaque grey fluid, which soon 
separates into two layers ; the upper one viscid, transparent liquid 
of a dark-brown colour, and lighter than water j the lower one thick 
and of consistence of dirty white sediment; taste bitter aromatic, 
and the odour resembles that of copaiba. It is soluble in pure benzoli 
chloroform, bisulphide of carbon and essential oils. Partially soluble 
in methy lie, et hylic and amylic alcohols, ether, acetic acid, carbolic 
acid or caustic potash. Dose, \ to 2 drs, 

Constituents. — The balsam contains an essential volatile oil of a 
pale straw colour ; also dry semi-transparent resin : and a crystallizable 
acid — Garjanic acid ; and volatile matters. 

P$eparation. — Emulsion (i to 4 of extract of malt). Dose, \ to 
2 drs. Liniment (i in i of lime water.) 

Physiohgical action, — Alterative and stimulant. It has a stimulant 
action upon the mucous membranes, especially that of the urinary 
tract, and is excreted by the kidneys. Like copaiba, it forms glycu- 
ronic acid in the system which appears in the urine ; with nitric acid 
it forms a pecipitate of gurjanic acid, which is mistaken for albumen. 
The precipitate, however, disappears when heated. The glycuronic 
acid renders the urine antiseptic and prevents the development of 
bacteria. 

Therapeutics^ — ^Given in leprosy, both internally and externally; 
so in gonorrhoea, menorrhagia, gleet and various other afifections of 
the urinary organs and in skin diseases ; also used in cough with puru- 
lent expectoration like copaiba, for which it forms a good substitute* 

Yateria Indica. V. Malabarica. Chloroxyloii dtipada* 

Habitat* — Western Peninsula. 

Parts used, — ^The resin and fat. 

Vernacular. — Eng*— White dammer Indian copal, Piney tallow 
tree. Can,— Dupamara. Cing,^ — Halgass. Hind* — Safed Dammar, 
Maleal — Payani Kunlurukaru» Tarn, — Vellay-Kungilium, Dupada. 
Tel.^ — Dupadamaru, Telia. — Damaru. 



8b SHOR£A ROBUSTA. 

Characters, — The resin, which is light greenish or amber coloured , 
exudes from the tree. It burns with a steady light and gives off plea- 
sant smell. The seeds yield an oil known as Piney tallow of Caoara. 

Cotistituents. — The seeds contain solid fat 49*2 p. c, which 
resembles the solid fatt of Garcinia and Bassia. It is a greenish yellow, 
bleaches rapidly on exposure to light, and has a peculiar balsamic 
odour. It contains oleic and other fatty acids. 

Actions and uses. — The tallow is emollient and stimulant, used 
locally for chronic rheumatic joints ; its chief use is, however, as a 
general ointment base but more especially in the preparation of nitrate 
of mercury and other ointments. The resin is used as an incense. 

Shorea Bobnsta. 

Habitat, — Central India, Western Bengal. 
Part itsed.'^The resin. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Qanqahar. Beng. — Dhuna, Rala* Bomb.— - 
Sala, Rala ( the resin ). Can. — Guggala. Cing. — Dummala. Hind. — 
Dhuna, Dhona, Rala, Damar, Rosina. Eng.— ^he saul tree. Malyal. — 
Kungiliyam. Duk. — Rala. Mar. — Rala, Guggilu, Dhuna. Pers.— 
Loalemonatehari. Sans. — Asva-karana, Sal Guggilam, Konshi-kaha« 
Tam. — Kungiliyam. Tel. — Guggilamu. 

Asva-karana, Asva, a horse, and karana, an ear, in allusion to 
the leaves resembling in shape the horse's ear. 

Characters. — Resin obtained from the tree is a deposit between the 
bark and the wood. It occurs in irregularly cylindrical pieces marked 
with longitudinal striae on its surface. Sometimes the pieces are 
colourless, the colour often varying from dark brown to pale ambej or 
yellow, and red. It is very brittle, and consists of small granules, which 
can easily be reduced to a fine powder. Generally tasteless, but some- 
times the taste resembles nearly that of turpentine. Its powder is easily 
fusible. When thrown into the flame of a candle it soon takes fire and 
gives out thick volumes of fragrant smoke or a big blaze. Dose, 10 to 
30grs. 

Preparations. — Ointment (1 in 3), and plaster (i in 2). 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant and demulcent. The natives use it for 
fumigating sick rooms. Externally, as plaster or ointment, it acts as a 
stimulant. A paste of it mixed with brandy and white of eggs is a very 
useful and soothing application for the relief of lumbago and other 
rheumatic pains. The natives use the powder of Rala as an astringent 
application to the relaxed uvula ; it has also been tried in dysentery 
with some good results. 

Dryobalanops Camphora, D. Aromatioa. Shorea Camphorifenu 

Habitat. — Sumatra, Borneo. 

Part used.'^Q,zra]}\iox having a different odour from that of 
ordinary camphor and being less volatile. 



TtLIACe^. 



»7 



Vernacnlar.'-^¥.ng. — Borneo camphor, Borneol or camphyl 
alcohol. BombM Hind. — Baras Kapurap Bhimsani Kapara, Kafur. 
SftOS. — Pakva and Apukva Kapur. 

Characters. — It occurs in small pieces, resembling those of ordinary 
camphor, but is harder and heavier, and sinks in water. It is also less 
-volatile and has a somewhat diflferent odour, the odour resembling that 
If coromon c<imphor^ with the additional smell of patchouli or amber- 
If. It is converted into ordinary camphor by the addition of nitric 
acid. It may be prepared from ordinary camphor by heating it with 
potash* Besides camphor, the tree yields a liquid known as camphor 
oil or Borneene» which is isomeric with oil of turpentine* It must not 
bi ' inded with the ordinary camphor oil, which drains out of crude 

I,. iphor. The odour resembles that of "cajuput, camphor and 

caidji nibined. The higji price of this camphor prohibits its 

use a> V camphor. 

Pr^paratimt. — A compound powder called by the Jains Vasak- 
thepa (Sam.)t or Kabir (Abir)» which contains sandalwood^ Bornea 
camphor, saffron and musk* Dose, ^ to 2 grs* 

Acitons ami itsts, — Stimulant, antispasmodic, aphrodisiac. As t 
ittmulant application it is used in conjunctivitis. 

TiliaceeB* 

The Itmc tree, Linden or the Bahuphali family. 

Tree*, shrubs, or rarely herbs ; leaves stipulate. $imple> lobed and 
ah^Tt^it.. . lowers generally yellow ; sepals distinct or coherent, valvate 
ti on and deciduous; fruits samaroid and many-celled, dry 

Of i'uiji^ ; seeds solitary or numerous ; albumen fleshy ; embryo erect- 

Habitat — Chiefly found in the tropics, a few being found in the 
northern parti* r*l the world. 

f^*erti€s. — ^Allied to those of Malvaceae ; they are mucilaginous, 
C" and demulcent ; some bear edible fruits ; many yield useful 

fiuicd wn manufacturing purposes, and valuable timber. 

Corchoras OUtorius.— C. TrilocolariB. 

Hahiiat'—h^\^^ Africa, Peninsula, Bengal, Punjab, 

I^ts used, — The seeds and leaves. 

t^ertmcuJar, — Beng. — Banpat Kooshta, Bhaogipat. Bomb. — 
fit{i}itm leeds, Isband. Burm.— Phetwun. Chin. — Dimoa. Eng,— 
Jew*! smllovir, jute. Guz.— Rajajira. Hind— Pat, the plant Baphalli. 
Malay. — Raroit<jaa. Mar. — Kurru Chuniz. Sans.^ — Nadika, Peta» 
Putta. Tarn.— Perinta. Tel.^Parinu Kura. 

Characters, — Seeds similar in shape to those of Bhauphali^ but 
smaller, angular, darker, harder and extremely hitter ; leaves oblong ; 
cip»uleft, triloculare Dose of the seeds, 30 to 90 grs. 

Pteparation^ — Infusion of leaves (1 in 10)- Dose, t to 2 oz. 



^8 GREWIA TILiiEFOLIA. 

Actions and uses, — The leaves and seeds are bitter* mudlaginoiis 
and demulcent. The infusion of the leaves is given in fevers and in 
congested liver. The plant, reduced to ashes, is used as an alterative in 
congestion of the liver and dyspepsia. 

Orevia Tiliafolia, 0. ArborM, 0. Elasttea. 

HahitaL — Western India, Ceylon, Burma. 

Part used.— The bark. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Dhamani. Can. — Butaleas, Thadsal. Hind. — 
Dhaman. Mar. — Dhaman. Sans.— Dharmanau Tanu — Thada. Tel. — 
CharachL 

Characters. — Leaves hoary beneath, cordate, dentate ; flowers 
yellow ; berries of an acid flavour ; bark thick, white internally and 
:grey externally ; tuber papery, peeling off", leaving a rough green 
surfoce beneath ; very mucilaginous and sweetish to the taste. 

Preparation. — Infusion (i in lo). Dose, i to a oz. 

Actions and uses. — Demulcent, given in d3rsentery. 

Ore via ftwliitlo. 

Habitat —Ceylon, Burma. 

Parts used. — Fruit and bark. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Shukri. Cing. — Dowanijra. Hind.— Phalsa. 
Mar.— Phals. Sans.— Parusha-PhalaTraya. TeL— Putiki. 

Characters. — Fruits acid, colour dark brown ; kernel hard. 

Preparation. — Infusion (i in lo). Dose, ^ to i oz. 

Actions ana uses. — Cooling and refrigerant ; the bark is demulcent, 
and given in fever and dysentery. 

Orevia Boabnq^ylla. 

Balntat.— West Indies. 

Parts used, — Leaves, stem and fruit. 

Vernacular. — Mar. — Khat-khate. 

Characters. — Leaves scabrous. 

Actions and uses. — Mucilaginous ; used as a substitute for althaea. 

CorohoraB Hnmilia, C. Faadeolarit, C ABtiehonia. 

llaiita i.^TropicaA India, Bengal, Africa* 
Arts used. — The whole plant* 

Vernacular. — Poona. — Mogarmithi, Beng. — ^Jangli-pat, Bilnalita. 
Bomb. — Bhaphali. Duk.— Magar Mithi. Hind. — ^Hirankhari. 

Herankhari — Haran, deer, and khan\ a hoof, from its resemUance 
to deer's hoof. 



CAHVOPHYLLACEjE. 



89 



^^^CharacUri. — Small prostrate weed; root woody; branches 
lettrtl, sinall, slender and spreading out from the root ; leaves oblong, 
serrated, small, wrinkled, thick, mucilaginous and of a greenish dark 
colour ; flowers small, yellow, in the axils of leaves and in bunches of 
two or three ; capsules about \ to i inch in length and hairy 
tr ; e^ich capsule composed of three carpels, containing many 

:; >;al«r, dark-red coloured seeds ; seeds very bitter. 

Preparation, — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, l to 2 0Z9. 

Actions and uses, — The plant is mucilaginous, somewhat astringent 
sd nervine tonic. It is a common ingredient in aphrodisiac confec- 
tions. It h used in gonorrhoea, seminal debility and urinary diseases, 

Remarks. — BhaphaM. This name should not be mistaken for 
Bhiphali, the M<irathi name for Feucedanum grande, an umbiliferous 
plant. In peucedanum grande, the whole plant, including leaves, 
capsule)^, kc.y arc diminutive ; not so in corchorus fascicularis. 

FrankeniaoeA. — The Frankenia or sea heath order. 

Herbs or shrubs; leaves opposite, exstipulate ; 6owcr5 sessile; 
calyx tubular and persistent ; petals 4 or 5, hypogynous ; stamens 
difttinct ; ovary superior, one- eel led ; fruit capsular, dehiscent ; seeds 
numerous, minute ; embryo straight in the middle of albumen. 

W^^iV^/.^South Europe, North Africa. 

Properties, — Mucilaginous, aromatic. 

Frankeiiia OrandifoUa, Yerba B6imia,^Flax Herb. 

Habitat, — California, South of Europe. 

Parts med.—Th^ herb, 

Chafacfers, — The herb is mucilaginous and slightly aromatic- 

Comniuenlv, — It contains a peculiar astringent principle and a 
large amount of sodium chloridc- 

/* v;«. — Fluid extract. Dose, 10 to 20 ros,, chieOy used aa 

an 11' 7 as a gargle, much diluted. 

Action and uses. — Generally used as an injection in catarrhal 
affections of the nares and the genito-urinary tract. In vaginal leucor^ 
thc^ the injection is said to be peculiarly beneficial. 

CaFyopbyllacaaD. 

T' "V or clove wort, or the zaharasa family. 

1 rct, low or prostrate ; stems smaller at the joints ; leaves 

opposite, eniue, exstipulate and connate at the base; flowers heinia- 
phrodite or rarely unisexual, white or pink coloured; fruits utic- 
Galled, rarely more ; seeds numerous and small ; embryo curved round 
albumen; albumen meaty. 

fiahitai* — Temperate and cold climates, 

Prfifiertiei. — ^Most of them have nn important medicinal properti^ 
fioroe arc galactagogue and others alterative. 



90 DIANTHUS ANATOLICUS. 

DianthilB Anatolioas. 

HahiiaL — Thibet, Armenia. 

Part used, — ^The plant. 

Vernacular. — Hind. — Kanturiyun. Pers. — Kanturiyun. 

Characters, — Plant densely tufted ; stalk short, woody and bran- 
ched ; stems slender, with one or more flowers ; leaves rigid, slender, 
with thick midrib and margin. 

Constituents. — Contains a little saponin. 

/Reparation. — Decoction (i in lo). Dose, i to a fluid ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Similar in property to common centaury 
(Erythrcea centaurium ). Also stomachic and tonic like gentian. 
Polycarpaea Corymbosa. — A small plant. 

Habitat. — India. 

Part used, — The plant. 

Vernacular. — Tam. — Nilaisedachi. 

Actions and uses. — Used internally and externally for the bites 
of venomous insects and reptiles. 

Saponaria Yaooaria— Oypaoptaila Yaooaria. 

Habitat. — ^India, Central Europe. 

Part used. — The root. 

Saponaria, soapy, that is, its mucilaginous juice forms a lather with 
water. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — El-sabuniyeh. Beng. — Sabusie. Eng. — 
Perfoliate soap wort« Hind. — Sabuni. Romans. — Struthium, Radi- 
cula. 

Characters, — The entire plant is bitter and of a saline taste; roots 
long, of the size of a qUill, cylindrical and branching ; bark thick, easily 
separable, reddish externally and white within. 

Comstituents. — Saponin — ^is obtained by exhausting the powdered 
root with boiling alcohol : on cooling saponin is deposited as a white 
amorphous friable substance, without any odour, having an acrid 
taste ; soluble in weak -alcohol ; insoluble in water, forming au emulsion ; 
heated with an acid and boiled, the solution is converted into Sapogenin, 
which, on evaporation, gives needle-shaped crystals. Saponin is also 
found in Gypsophila struthium, saponana officinale, illidum anisatum, 
caulophyllum, senega, quillaja, &c. 

PreparmOon. — Infusion ( i in 20 ). Dose, ^ to i oz. 

Actions and uses, — Alteratix^ stimulant, purgative, diuretic and 
sternutatory-. It stimulates the mucous membranes, and may be used 
in ODugh, chronic bronchitis, pleurisy* asthma, &c It is also used in 
liver d h ca ses , jaundice, syphUis, gout and dirociic skin diseases. 



ABELMOCHUS KSCtrtKNTtTS. 



QT 



HalYaces. 

XheBhinda or Mallow family. Malvaceae, — Derived from Malva, 
nnHthfOr soltf the plants having soft and downy leaves and emollient 
properties. 

CharacUi-s^ — Herbs, shrubs or treesi often with hairs ; leaves 
alternate, stipulate, downy, palmate ; flowers showy, regular and 
uutlar)% surrounded by an mvolucre of variegated colours ; fruits 
indehisccnt or dehiscent, capsular or baccate ; carpels one, two or many* 
Mcided ; seeds rtnifurm or ovate and hairy, generally without albumen ; 
imbryo curved, cotyledoni, twisted like chrysalis 

JfaMat — ^Temperate climate, tropics. 

Prt^p^rtiex — Demulcent and mucibginous ; from the liber of many 
species, tough tibreii arc obtained. The hairs covering the seeds 
constitute cotton. 

AbtlmochQa Eftculentus,— Hebiscus Esoulentus. 
HahtiaU — East Indies. 

i\kfts used, — TTie immature capsules and ripe seeds or unripe 
it. 
Vernacular, — East Indies — Ochro, Gombo, Bandikai. Arab. — 
lya. Beng. — Ramturai, Dhenrus, Bomb. — Bhinda, Burm, — 
*ltt*iV3, yung-ma-da. Can*^Bendekayi. Ciug,^ — Bandaka. Duk. — 
Btiendi. Eng — ^Edible Hibiscus, Okro, Gombo, Guz. — Bhindu, 
Hind.^ — BhcnJi, Hamturai. MaleaK— Ventak Kaya, Venda. Mar. — 
Bhcnda. Fers. — Banm-a. Sans. — Darwikai Teridisha, Bhinda. Tarn. — 
Vcudaik-kay ; Tel. — Benda-kaya, 

Hamaturai (the fruit) resembles in shape Turai, the fruit of 
Lufia acutangula (Palwal), The fruit also resembles in shape the 
Crtslt of Trichoiyanthes dioica. 

Chamciers. — Fresh immature capsules are from a to mches 
long, broad L*t the baie and tapering at the apex, furrowed and some- 
^l Micularly at the ridges, abounding in copious bland and 

VI -, each capsule consisting of from 6 to 9 valves or cells, 

c» a single row of smooth^ white, round seedis, turning black 

%i ^ . and dry. 

I fmtituents^ — Fresh capsules contain pectin, starch, muc*ilage 
and aihcs, rich in saiti* of potash, lime and magnesia. The ripe seeds 
uiotaiu phosphoric acid. 

Pr^j^tfTOAbi**— Decoction (1 in lo). Dose, i to a ozs. 

AcHom and uses. — Emollient, demulcent, diuretic, cooling and 
ipfarodisiaCt given in irritation uf the throat, catarrh of the bladder, 
dysurift and gonorrhcea* 

Abutilon Indioom. 

A. Asiaticumy Sida Indica^ Sida Mauntiana, Sida populifolia, 

JifaMat — Tnmtcal India, Ceylon, waste grounds. 
Aris med. — The bark, leaves and seeds. 




9t 



ALTH.CA OI'KICISAUS. 



Vernacular, — ^Arab. — Masht*el-ghoul. Beng. — Gungi-potari, Ealbij. 
Bomb. — Chakra-bhenda, Madami-pitari (the &€cds). Burm. — Thanta 
Khai-ok. Can. — ^Shri-mudrigida, Cing, — Anoda-gaha. Duk, — 
Kangoij Dabbe Gunjij Eng. — Country mallow. Goa» — Tubocutv, 
Guz. — Kangoyi Kapatai Daboli. Hind.^Kali Kanghi, Anter-vel** 
Maleal. — Petaka-putti, Oram, Pers- — Darakhie-shanab. Mar. — 
Petari, Madmi Chakra-bhenda. ^a^j- — ^Ali, Khiratipala, Pataka^ 
Limbal. Tam,— Payruntuthi. TeL— Tutti, Tutttiru-beoda^ Nagu* 
benda. 

Characters. — Bark thin, long, lough and fibrous, also stripedt 
externally cinnamon-coloured, covered with a silky, hoary tometicum, 
internally white ; taste bitter and astringent ; leaves roundish, cordat€| , 
acuminate^ serrated, velvety on both sides, of a pale green colour ana 
mucilaginous; seeds reniforra; testa dull brown and hairy; in size resem- 
bling Elachi dana. On section yellowish white within ; taste mucila- 
ginous and pea-like; Two varieties of seeds are met with — (i) tomento*© 
and hoary, jSulabija of the shops, and (2) with purple stems called Kalo 
Kanghf. 

Comitliients. — The leaves contain mucilage, tannin* organic acid 
and traces of asparagin and ash containing alkaline sulphates^ 
chlorides, magnesium phosphate and calcium carbonate* 

Preparation — Decoction of the seeds and bark ( I in lo). Do^» I 
to 2 02t, and mucilage of bruised leaves. 

Actions and uses. — Seeds demulcent ; the bark diuretic and 
cooling^ used, like althaea, in gonorrha'a strangury, &c, 

AlthflBa OfBcinalis. 

The mallow. Marsh mallow. 

^a^ito/.— Temperate climates, Europe, Wcsteni and Northern 
Asia; salt marshes, New York. 

Pari used. — The flowers, leaves, roots and carpels. 

Mortification root, sweet weed, Wymote, Marsh mallow, 

Verftacular. — Pers, and Hind, — Gul-Khairu (flowers). PcfMan*— 
Tukhm-i-Khitimi (carpels); Risha-i-Khinni (the root)» 

CAflraf/^rj.— Flowers from 1 to 2 inches long with three difFerent 
colours — yellowish at the base, green in the middle, and pink or \'iQlct 
at the top ; caJyx five partite, thick and covered with whitish hatrs ; 
petals five and bearded at the base and on their inner suriace. In 
the centre of the flower is a conical-five-angled projection, the 
stamenal column and pistil ; root hairy, of a whitisti colour, both 
externally and inlernaliy, cylindrical and somewhat tapering, hreakin^ 
with a short granular fracture ; parenchyma is filled wttli 
contains also scattered cells of calcium oxalate crystals. "I 
a faint, peculiar, aromatic odour and asweet mucilaginous t 
of a dark-brown colour, reniform and hairy, with a gru 
back, having two surfaces jointed together at the hilum by a notch, 
A portion of it near the hilum is convex and reticulated. Beyond 
this the surface is studded with hairs. Near the margin the aurfMO 



OOSSiVPllfM BARBADENSK. 



n 



is marked with fan^like ridges* It encloses one seed. The taste is 
mucilaginous. Dose of the root, J to i dr« 

Censlitttents* — Dry root contains an organic principlct althein 
or a.tparagin 2 px-; mucilage called bassorin or althsea 25 p.c; 
Pectoos matter or pectin 10 p.c. ; fixed oiU sugar 8 p.c. ; fatty oil, 
starch, 35 p,c. ; ash 5 p.c. Tannin only in the outer bark, containing 
phosphates* Mucilage is precipitated by neutral acetate of lead, and 
hence differs from gum arabic* It differs from cellulose, as althaea does 
not turn blue by iodine when moistened with sulphuric acid, and 
if nor soluble in ammoniacal solution of oxide of copper. 

Bassorin can be obtained from asparagus, liquorice, beUadonna 
rooca and sweet aJmonds. 

Asparagin occurs as hard, transparent, colourless crystals; soluble in 
cold water (i in 50); insoluble in alcohol and ether. An aqueous 
solution of it dissolves in yellow oxide of mercury, hence recommended 
as a vehicle for hypodermic injection of yellow oxide of mercury. 
Dose — I 10 t grs. 

Althaea root is a constituent of Massa Hydrargyri (25 d.c). Dose* 
I to ] 5 grs. 

f^eparatium, — Decoction of the root (i in 10,) used as an emollient, 
enema, poultices and ointment. Infusum alth^a contain carpels 
and Howcrs (i in 20). Dose, i to 2 ozs, Syrupus alihsea, syrup of marsh 
nidiUow. Contains althaia, alcohol, glycerine and sugar. Dose ad Hbiium* 

At'tions and uses* — The different parts of the plant are 
mucilaginous, cmollitrni and demulcent. Althaea acts mechanically ; it 
iotm% a soothing covering over the inflamed parts and protects them 
from friction. The root is given internally in inflimimatrou of the lungs, 
irr L litadJer. It forms an useiul ingredient of various cough 

n '>ral syrups, i&c. Mixed with sweet oil, the leaves and 

floacrs arc 4i)f»lictl as poultices an J fomentations to burns and to parts 
bitten by ven >mous animals. As a demulcent the decoction is 
iis«d as an enema in irritable and tnflameJ state of the vagina 
and rectum. Althein is a good diuretic and given in cystitis^ 
in irritabic cough due to congestion of the pharynXi in ascitist in 
anasarca due to Bright ^s disease*, and in gout. 

In pharmacy the powdered root, being very absorbent, is used to 
harden pilU, electuaries, &c. 

Gossypium Barbadenae B.P.— Qossypium Herbaoeum 
0. Arboreum. G. Indicum— G* Stockaii and other Species. 

MaMtiL'^-Hoi countries, Asia, Africa, Egypt^ America. 

J ./. — Rout bark, LOtion seed-oil, and the hairy covering of 

the i<- ypium, Cotton, cotton wool, B* P. 

Vemacuiar^ — Arab.^ — Kuttun^ Nabut-ul-gutu, Shagratulgutu. 






^Urpas, Rui, Shuttr-gucht. Durm. — Wabin, Gim. Can. — 
4, Concani. — Denkapus (sacred cotton). Cing. — Kapu. 



94 GOSSYPIUM BARBADENSE. 

Duk. — Rui-kapas. Eng. — Cotton. Guz. — Ru-vona (hairy covering),- 
kapasia (seeds). Hind. — Rui, Binola. Malyal. — Paintai. Mar.— 
Kapasi, kapas. Pers. — Pambah. Sans. — Karapasaha, Karpasi. Tam.— 
Punji, Van-paruti. Tel. — Patti-chettu, Karpasamu. 

Characters, — ^Herb from 2 to 6 feet high ; leaves long petioled, 
palmate, 3 to 5 lobed, and of a green or darkish green colour ; flowers 
yellow, capsular, 3 to 4 celled, opening by many valves, acute, oblong 
or ovate, and containing numerous seeds ; seeds oblong or ovate, 
pointed at one end and covered with silvery white hairs ; hairs 
or covering of seeds, or purified cotton, is not easily separable ; testa 
hard and ot a blackish colour. On section the seeds are oily ; the bark of 
the washed root (G. radicis cortex,) in thin flexible bands or quills, of a 
brownish yellow colour, externally slightly ridged and marked with 
black dots or transverse lines ; the inner surface is whitish and of a silky 
lustre, tough and fibrous ; fibres, separating into papery layers ; no 
odour ; taste slightly pungent and astringent. Dose of the root 30 to 
6ogrs. •,. 

Gossypium. — Hairs of the seeds freed from other impurities and 
deprived of fatty matter. They are pure white, soft, fine filaments, 
hollow, spirally twisted and slightly thick at edges. They are without 
any odour or taste. 

Oil of the seed — Oleum Gossypii Seminis (cotton-seed oil.) The 
fixed oil is obtained by cracking oft testa, grinding kernels and express- 
ing and purifying. Its amount varies from 10 to 30 p.c. It is 
often substituted for olive oil, brazil or para-nut oil, and for beech oil 
or oil from Fagus sylvetica ; It is sometimes used in the preparation 
of camphor and ammonia liniments. 

Constiiuents. — The root-bark contains starch, chromogene 28 p.c. ; 
fixed oil, resin, glucose, tannin, starch and ash 6 p.c. Chromogene, a 
yellow substance, becoming red and resinous by age ; soluble in alcohol 
(i in 14), chloroform (i in 15), ether (i in 23), and benzol ii in 22). 
The oil, oleum gossypii seminis— cotton-seed oil, as expressed from the 
seeds, is of a yellow colour, highly viscous, without any odour, of bland 
taste and neutral reaction ; soluble in ether, but slightly soluble in 
alcohol. It contains oleine, and a green feeble yellow colouring matter. 

The hairs contain cellulose inorganic matter, fixed oil, album- 
inoids lignin, &c. 

Preparation, — of the bark. Decoctum Gossypii (i in 5). 
Dose, I to 2 ozs. ; used as an emmenagogue. As a parturient, it is 
superior to ergot. Extractum gossypii radicis fiuidum — fluid extract of 
cotton root bark ; macerate the bark with glycerine and alcohol and 
percolate. It is not miscible with water. Dose — 10 to 60 ms. Of the 
nairs, purified cotton, absorbent cotton or cotton wool. To prepare it, 
add alkalies to cotton to remove greasiness, adherent impurities and 
moisture ; then add solution of chlorinald lime and hydrochloric acid. 
Cotton is insoluble in ordinary solvents, but soluble in solutions of 
ammonium sulphate of copper. Under the microscope these hairs 
are found to be hollow and twisted bands spirally striate and slightly 



GOSSVPtUM BARBABtlNSB. 



95 



tbickened it the edges. Absorbent cotton^ which is now the official 
cotton or cotton wooU B. P., is used in the preparation of pyroxylin 
or gun coilon. Cotton gauze or cottcm wool tissue consists of a thin 
>hcci of absorbent cotton wool between two layers of gauze. Medicated 
eotton is cotton wool medicated with the following, viz , alum, arnica, 
benjEoic acidt camphor, chrysophanic acid, cubebs, caibolic acid, 
illicyUc acid, boractc acid^ krameria^ opium, resorcin and tannic acid. 

ArtilJcid) Sponges. — Absorbent cotton formed into balls and 
cOYcrcd with antiseptic gauze. Also made of absorbent cotton 
covering a gkss capsule filled with an antiseptic as eucalyptus, carbolic 
acid, thymol, kc,^ to be broken by pressure, 

Pyroxylinum. — B. P, Pyroxylin ; soluble gun cotton ; coUoxylin — 
collodion cotton. It is prepared by the action of sulphuric and nitric 
adds and water on cotton, by macerating, washing, draining and 
di^iM ; chiefly used in the preparation of coHodium, collodion B. P. 

Collodion — to prepare it dissolve pyroxylin i in a mixture of 
ether 36 and alcohol 12. It is a sympy col(»urless liquid of an ethereal 
odour, is highly inflammable, and dries quickly on eyposuie to air,» 
leaving o thin transparent film, whrch contracts rapidly un drying. 
It is insoluble in water or alcohol. 

Camphoid, 1 substitute for collodion. It is a solution (i in 40) of 
pyioxyUn* It contains pyroxylin !» camphor and absolute alcohol 20 
each. Used as a vehicle for the application to the skin of such drugs 
m iodoform V phenol, salicylic acid, resorcin, chrysophanic acid and 
idithyol. 

Haemostatic collodion, — To obtain it, mix together collodion too, 
Cirbotic zdd >o^ and tannic acid 5, or acid benzoic 5. 

Styptic collodion. — ^To prepare it, take absolute alcohol io» 
benxioiii 1, and dissolve. To the solution add tannic acid lo, ether 40, 
and gun cotton 1 . 

Collodium Flexile, B. P., elastic collodion, flexible collodion. To 
prawire it. mix thori>ughIy collodion 13 with Canada turpentine i, 
anil castor-oil j. Flexible collodion is used in the preparation of collo- 
dium canihaiidatum ur collodium vesicans« 

Collodium Vesicans, B. P* — Blistering collodion, cantharidal collo* 
dion* To prepare it, take blistering Buid 20 and pyroxylin ^, and mix. 

Collodium novum, a new kmd of collodion — To obtain it, mix 
and mukc a solution of mastiche 3, Balsam of Peru i, narcotine t, 
and chloroform 5, 

Anodyne colloid ; syn.^-Amyl colloid. To obtain it, take amyl 
hydride 1 ounce, aconitine 1 grain, veratrine 6 grains, collodion 2 
oaoccs ; very often half the quantity of amyl hydride is replaced 
by alcohol (absolute) or by amy he alcohol. 

Ccllotdin — it is pyroxylin purified by solution in alcohol and ether, 
Photoxylin — Dinitrocellulose — prepared by nitrating wood wool ; 
diasolved in a mixture of alcohol and ether, it resembles collodion j 
|g»ed to form artificial aural tympana. 

Carbolic collodion : 20 grains carbolic acid to i ounce of styptic 
GOlloid; used for toothache. Collodium cum oleo crotonis i in 7, used 



96 . GOSSYPIUM BARBADENSE. 

as a counter-irritant. Collodium callosum. — ^A mixture of flexible 
collodion 60 with extract of Indian hemp i and salicylic acid 8, 
used as an application for corns, warts, and lupus. Collodinm com 
iodoformo (i to 12), for venereal sores. Collodium ichthyol (7 to 1). 
Collodium iodi, iodine i to flexible collodion 15. Collodmm Peruvia- 
num — Balsam of Peru i to collodion 9. Collodium Salicylicum — 
Salicylic acid 1, flexible collodion 5. Collodium Salicylicum cum zind 
chlorido. — Zinc chloride i, salicylic aad 3, collodion 15. Collodium 
Salicylicum et lacticum — salicylic and lactic acids, each 10, collodion 
80. Collodium Salol, Salol collodion. — Ether 4, salol 4, collodion 30 ; 
For acute rheumatism. Crystallin. — A combination of ether and 
methyl alcohol, a good substitute for collodium. 

Actions and uses. — A syrup of cotton flowers is given in hypochon- 
driasis ; their poultice is applied to burns and scalds. The carpels 
are astringent. An unripe Capsule, with opium and nutmeg inserted 
into its interior, incinerated and reduced to powder, is used in dysen- 
tery. Decoction of the root-bark is used as abortifacient, emmenagogue 
and oxytocic, it increases labour pains during delivery, and is given in 
amenorrhoea, dysmenorrhcea, uterine haemorrhages and to procure 
abortion. The seeds, made into tea, are mucilaginous, and used in 
dysentery and diarrhoea. They are demulcent, laxative, aphrodisiac* 
expectorant and K^l^ctagogue. The juice of the leaves is used in 
scanty lactation. Pounded cotton seeds mixed with ginger, is applied to 
orchitic swelling. The leaves, with oil, are applied to gouty joints. The 
fibres are protective, and used to cover up wounds, on which they act 
mechanically by keeping ofl* dirt and germs. Burnt cotton is applied 
round dropsical and paralyzed limbs, swollen legs, rheumatic and 
gouty joints, and in children to the chest in bronchitis and pneumonia 
to preserve heat and moisture and also to act as a sort of fomentation. 

Absorbent cotton is a good absorbent of water, and used for 
excluding air from injured surfaces and to allay pain, as in burns, scalds, 
erysipelas, and articular rheumatism. Soaked in antiseptic solutions, it 
is applied directly to wounds and ulcers,to absorb the discharges. Among 
the natives burnt cotton is used to stop blood as well as to cure ulcers. 
Sometimes spider's web is used as a substitute for cotton. Pyroxylin is 
highly inflammable and explosive. Collodion is inflammable, and when 
applied, there is rapid evaporation of its ether ; and it leaves a thin film 
of pyroxylin on the surface. It is used as a protective application over 
wounds, burns, ulcers, slight cuts, cracks and fissures, over inflamed 
surfaces, as in erysipelas, in skin diseases, chapped nipples, &c. Styptic 
collodion is an haemostatic and protective. It contains tannin, and 
is therefore used to stop bleeding from leech bites ; as an antiseptic it 
is used for cuts and wounds and for arresting haemorrhages. Flexible 
collodion is used in drawing edges of a wound together, bringing 
pressure on buboes, boils, carbuncles, &c. In acute orchitis the chord 
and scrotum are coated with it with benefit. 

Vesicant collodion is a more convenient form of applying liquor 
epispasicus, the advantage being that it does not spread to the sur- 
rounding parts. It is used in neuralgia, lumbago and muscular pains. 



HIBISCUS A6KLMOSCUUS. 



97 



OIevmgDSsypium»eminiSy like olive oil* is demulcent, and used 
as a lubricant in prctparing various liniments. Collodium novum is an 
antiseptic and used to relieve pain in neuralgia, and acute or chronic 
fheumatism. 



HiblscoB AbelmoschuBt A. Hoachatua (Bamia Moachata). 

^#iJV//4i/.— Tropical countries. 

Pari tutd, — The seeds. 

Veruiuular, — Arab.— Hub-ul-Mishk Kabbamisk. Burm.^ — Ba-lu- 
wa*ki. Beng, — Mushak-danah, Kasturi-dana. Bomb.— i\Iishka-dana, 
Cing.-^Kapu-kinais&a. Duk. — Musek, Kalakasturi bhcndi-ke-bing. 
Eng* — Musk-mallow. Guz. — Mushak-dana, Hind, — Mushak-daiiah, 
Pcrs* — Mu&hk-danah, Malyal. — Katta-kasturi. Mar. — Bhenda-che-bij, 
Sans. — TataKasaturika. Tarn. — Kattuk*kasturi. TeL — Kasturi-bend«. 
East and West Indies. — Ochro, Gombo, Bandikai. 

At>*^1ni' "<^hus is a corruption of Hub-ul-mishk, 

K k, a grain of musk. 

'\\k... -,.v.>aturik4»^ — Tata, creeping^ and Kasturika, musk-plant, in 
allusion to this musk-smelling plant rising above the ground at first 
swid then bending upon itseH like a creeper. The seeds of Ramturai 
are ofien passed off for Mishka dana, being similar in shape and size. 

Ouir^jr^rj?.— Seeds aromatic* resembling Bhenda-seeds in size. 
They arc of a brown coluur. irregularly kidney-shaped, their surface 
marked with concentric rings, pointed at one end. Odour musky but 
QiOC perci?ptible unless well bruised, 

Constiimnis. — Gum, albument fixed oil, a solid crystalline inatteri 
odorous principle and resin. The fixed oil is a greenish yellow 
Buid« which solidifies on exposure to the air. The solid crystalline 
matter is whilc» pearly^ of a pleasant tastei and soluble in ether* The 
odonius matter is a light green fluid, of the strong smell of musk. It 
ia not volatik. 

Acihtis andtnci. — Stimulant, carminative, cooling and demulcent, 

fiven in Ronorrhura, catarrh of the bladder and hoarseness of voice. 
** Is are stomachic and used after being niixed with coffee* 

I 1 sc^ds steeped in alcohol are used as an application for 

1 r A serpents, 

/\ r.-irfrib. — Abdmoschusesculentus, hibii;;us esculentus, Eng,— 
. Qui* — Bhmda, Egyp.^Bamia. The capsules are ^hcld in 
^,„,m z& a vegetable. 

Hibiacaa Cannabinus* 

//iidi/4i/w^ Western India> Tropics, 

f^rt$ ttsid, — Flowers and seeds. 

Vewnacniar. — Arab, — Hab-el-zalim. Beng.— Mesta-pat, Nalki. 
Can,— Punday, Pundrika. Ch»n.— Hiang*ma. Duk. — Ambari. Eng, — 
The fibres^ brawn Indian hcmpi Dukhani hemp, hemp cuved hibisleas. 

T _ 



98 HIBISCUS ROSA SINENSIS. 

HiDd. — Patsan, Sunnee. Mar. — ^Ambari. Panj. — Sankokla-patsan. 
Pers.— Hab-el-zalim. Tam.— Palungo, ReUcha. Tel.— Grongiikuni. 
Sind. — Sujjado. 

Characters. — The plant has white flowers with purple stamens; 
pods prickly, seeds like cardamoms, with a black skin and white kemeL 
jThe Qbres are known under the name of stinnie or sunn hemp. True 
sunn is derived from crotolaria juncea, or Dukhani hemp. The 
seeds yield an edible fixed oil. Dose of the seeds, 5 to 15 grs. 

Actions and uses. — The juice of the flowers, with sugar and black 
pepper, is used as a remedy in biliousness and fevers. The seeds are 
fiaittening, tonic, and aphrodisiac, being an ingredient in aphrodisiac 
confections. 

Remarks. — Hab-el-zalim is also an Arabic name for artichoke 
seeds, as well as for the fruit of Habzelia oethiopica (monkey-pepper.) 

fliblsoas Rosa Binenab. 

Habitat. — India, Konkan. 

Parts used. — The roots and flowers. 

Vernacular. — ^Arab. — Anghar-e<hindi. Beng. — Orphul, Joba, 
Uni, Juva. Bomb. — Jasund, Jasus. Burm. — Khounyan. Can. — 
Dasvalada huvn. Chin.-^Chukin. Duk. — ^Jasut Gudhel. Eng. — 
Shoeflower. Guz. — Jasutnu-phul. Hind. — Jasim, Juva. Malyal. — 
Shempariti, Kambangsaptu. Madras. — Shappathupu. Mar. — Jasa- 
vanda. Pers. — Angharac Hindi. Sans. — ^Jaba or Japa-pushpam. 
Tam. — Sapatta-cherri. Tel. — Dasana-japa-pushpam. 

Jasovanda is also a name given to Jonesia-asoka, for which this 
should not be mistaken. 

Shoe-flower. The petals are used by the Chinese to blacken their 
eyebrows and to blacken their shoe leather. 

Characters. — A common garden shrub. Leaves ovate, cordate, 
closely serrate, acuminate and of a green or darkish green colour ; 
flowers large, of a red colour, mucilaginous and fleshy ; roots long, 
tapering, of a whitish colour and mucilaginous in taste. There are 
several varieties, some with single white or yellow flowers, others with 
double red flowers. The root of the white flower variety is mostly 
preferred and used in medicine. 

Preparation. — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, i to 2 ozs., and mucilage« 

Actions and uses. — ^The petals are demulcent, and emollient. As a 
refrigerant drink its infusion is given in fevers, as a demulcent in cough 
and cystitis ; combined with milk, sugar and cumin, it b given in 
gonorrhoea. In menorfhagia, combing with lotus root and the bark 
of eriodendron anfractuosum, it is of benefit. 

HibUous Sabdariffa. 

HahitaL — Tropics. 

Partuud. — The fleshy red calyx. 



MALVA SYLVESTRll. 



OQ 



Towdri 
Pers. — Kitrni'i- 



Vernacular. — Beng, — Lai- m est a. B urm . — Thambau- khy enbou ng . 
Can. — Pundi-soppu. Eng. — Red sorrel, Roselle, Duk, — Lal-ambara, 
Htnd. — Palwa. Mar — Lal-ambari. Tarn. — Pulychay-kire, Shemay- 
kaihli'kire* Tel. — Yaragogu, Panj Patwa, 

Ckaracltrs. — The fleshy red calyx, when dried, is used as a fruit 
andts ao article of diet like tamarind. 

Constilmriis. — Potash, tartaric and malic acids, watery extract, 
cellulose, &c. Dose, 15 to 25 grs. 

Preparation. — Jelly and syrup, i to 1 drs. 

Acthns and f/je^.— Demulcent and coohng, used as a cooling 
drink in biUousncss» fevers and cough. It is sometimes combined with 
common salt, pepper, molasses and asafetida, 

HalTa SylYestris—M. Rotundifolia-M. Vulgaris. 

Habitat. — Temperate cUmates, 

Part used, — The fruit, 

Vernacuiar, — Arab. — Khubazi, Anjil, Bomb. — Khubazi 

itlie secdt).^ Eng. — Common mallow, marsh mallow, 
Cacbak) Nan*i-Kul»gh, The seed Towdri, 

Character i*—Vr MM of a light brown colour; carpels from 10 to 12, 
reniform, very beautifully reticulated, and closdy arranged on the 
lU, givtng the whole fruit the form of an artificially made thread 
ftuitun ; in the centre or at its top there is a conical projection, which 
l^^e remnant of styles, and at the base a leathery calyx with or 
without a !*mall ocditle adherent to the fruit. The taste is mucilagi- 
nooSt and rcsemoles that of Gul-i-khitmi. 

Constituents ^ — Mucilage and a bitter extractive, 

/-yr/tfrn/ibfi.— Decoction and infusion (i in 20), Dose, 1 to z dm. 

Actions and uses — Mucilaginous, demulcent and cooling, used in 
cf»uj;hs and other irritable conditions of the mucous membranes of 
f t and pulmonary tract, in inflammation of the bladder and 

3 irhoids ; other properties are similar to those of althxa* 

Pavonia Odorata. 

^aAi/tf/.— N.-W. Provinces, Sind, W, Peninsula^ Burma and 
Ceylon. 

^^ /. — The root. 

i»r, — Beng. — Bala. Can. — Balarakkasi-gida. Hind.^ — 
h i. Mar, — Kala Vala. Pers, — Bulla Hrivera. Sans. — 

L„ :.^ a. Tarn. — Peramutiepu- Tel, — Erra-kati, Chitli-benda. 

Characters, — Root 7 to 8 inches long, twisted, giving off numerous 
tthitl fibres, having a delicate musky odour ; bark light brown, and 
iliDoath; wood hard and yellowish ; plant covered with sticky hairs; 
flowers pink ; seeds brown, and oily ; odour delightful* 



100 SIDA CORDIFOLIA* 

/V^//7m/Srb»5.— Infusion (i in lo). Dose, i to 2 ozs. Compound 
decoction, known as Shadanga Paniya. It contains the roots of 
Pavonia odorata, andropogon muricatus, cvperus rotundus, or 
CyperusperteQius^and red sandalwoods; herbs of oldenlandia herbacea, 
and dry ginger, each i drachm make decoction ; used in fevers as 
a cooling and stomachic acid drink. Dose, i to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Demulcent, carminative, stimulant, diaphoretic 
and diuretic ; used in flatulent dyspepsia, hysteria, nervous headache 
and in low state of the system ; also in fevers, gout, rheumatism and 
cough. 

Sida Conlifolia. 

S. Acuta, S. Retusa, S. Rhombifolia, S. Carpinifolia, S. Spinosa. 
Habitat. — ^The tropics, Australia, Bengal. 
Parts used. — ^The roots and leaves. 

Vernacular. — ^Arab. — Hulbahe-barri. Australia — Queensland 

hemp, jelly leaf, Beng. — Barjala, Bijband, Chuka, Hamaz, Kowar, 
Sirivadi, Babila. Cing. — Katekan, Babila Sirivadi. Guz. — ^Balu- 
Jangli-methi. Hind. — Bariara, Gulsakari, Kharenti, simak (seeds). 
Malyal. — Cheru, paruva. Mar. — Chikana-pata, Tupa Karia, Tukati. 
Pers. — Shanbalide-barri, Shamlite-dashti. Sans. — Bala, Bala-Baty 
alaka, Pat. Tam.—iMalai-tangi, Pilambasi, Visha-badi. Tel. — Chitia 
Mutti, Subadevi. 

Jelly leaf. The leaves being mucilaginous. Chiknapata— chikna, 
means mucilaginous, and pat, a leaf. Bala is the general name for 
plants of this genus. There are five such balas, viz., Bala, Maha bala, 
Atibala, Naga bala, and Rajabala. 

Characters. — Roots woody, hard and fibrous ; taste sweetish, and 
resembling common liquorice root ; bark light, yellowish brown ; leaves 
cordate, rhomboid or lanceolate, tomentose or more or less dentate, 
highly mucilaginous. 

Constituents. — The root contains asparagin and gelatine. 

Preparation. — Infusion of root (1 in 10). Dose, i to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses, — The roots are cooling, astringent, bitter tonic, 
febrifuge, demulcent and diuretic. Given with ginger in fevers 
and urinary diseases; also in rheumatism. As a demulcent the 
juice is given in gonorrhoea, leucorrhcea and chronic diarrhoea. The 
root of S. carpinifolia is locally used by the Hindoos as a paste, with 
sparrow*s dung, to burst boils. The leaves of S. cordifolia are made 
into varaliams and applied to the eyes in ophthalmia. 

Thespeaia Popnlnea. HibiioiiB PopalnM. 

Habitat, — Bengal and Ceylon. 

Pafts used. — ^The leaves, bark, firuit and seeds. 

Vemaculmr. — Eng. — Portia-tree, Tulip tree. Beng. — Poresh. 
Bomb. — Bhiudi. Can, — ^Kandarola-mara, Pooarasoo. Cing. — Gansuri, 
Suria-gmss. Duk« — Paras-pippaL Guz. — Paraai-pipalo. Hind* — ^Pftras- 



ABROMA AUGUSTA 



lOX 



E'pal, Pahari-pipal. Mar, — Bhendi, Parasa. MalyaL — Puvva-rasha, 
ins. — Parisa, Gargha^ Bhanda^ Supara Shavaka. Tarn, — Puvarasa 
roaram. TeK— Gangaravi. 

Characters. — Leaves thick, cordate, broad, acuminate, with long 
petioles, darkish green above and pale beneath ; flotvers large* yellowr 
and bell-shaped; fruit a capsule of the size of a common lemon, oblong, 
dapressed and coriaceous, when dry of a darkish brown colour ; fresh 
fruits abound in a viscid yellow juice, which is highly glutinoua* and 
resembles gamboge ; the seeds contain a dark red oil, known as huile- 
am^e. 

Constiiurnis.-^The heart wood contains a garnet-red resin in- 
soluble in water, soluble in alcohol, chloroform and alkalies; sparingly 
soluble in benzol and in ether. 

Pinparation, — Juice of leaves; decoction of the bark (i in lo). 
Dose, I to 7 ounces, 

AcHons and uses* — Alterative and stimulant ; the decoction is 
given internally in scabies and Other skin diseases. Externally the 
juice of leaves \% applied in scabies, psoriasis, &c.; varalians of leaves 
arc applied to rheumatic and painful swollen joints, 

Starouliaoea. — The silk-cotton^ or Murada Singa family* 
Sterculiaceae, from stercus, *' excrement/* in allusion to the foetid 
OdOUT of flowers or fruits of some of the species. 

ChararUrs, — Trees or shrubs, Leaves alternate, simple or 
compound ; flowers white, red or yellow, regular or irregular, perfect 
or abortive and unisexual ; petals sometimes absent ; stamens united 
by their filaments into a column, indefinite ; anthers, 2-celled, extrose; 
fruits a number of follicles or capsular, rarely baccate ; seeds with 
fleshy and oily albumen : embryo straight or curved. 

Hahiiat. — Tropics and temperate climates. 

Properties similar to those of malvaceae, generally mucilaginous, 
demulcent and emollient ; some are considered emetic, diuretic and 
purgative. 

Abroma Auguata* 

MahitaL — India. 

Parts used, — The root and sap of the bark* 

Fifnacular. — Beng. — Ulat-Kambal. Bomb. — Olak Tambol. 
Rng. — DeviTs cotton. 

Characters* — Small tree or shrub ; leaves ovate, oblong and 
serrulate^ under*side tomencose or scabrous ; flowers dark-purple and 
drooping ; fruit dry, 5<eUed. capsular, with 5 truncated wings^ 
dehiscent when ripe, each cell containing numerous black seeds ; 
roots with thick, brown, fibrous bark, exuding, when cut, a thick 
gummy substance. Dose of the root^ 30 to 60 grs. The sap, 10 to 30 
grs. 

Constituents. — The root-bark contains gum, wax, a non-crystalUne 
extractive matter and ash 11*64 px.« but no manganese. 



I02 ADANSONIA DIGITATA. 

Actions and uses. — The root and the sap are uterine tonic and 
emmenagogue ; with black pepper {riven in congestive and neuralgic 
dysmenorrhoea and amenorrhoea, either given a week before or during 
menstruation. It is a very valuable substitute for hydrastis, viburnunii 
and Pulsatilla. 

Adansonia Di^tata— The Baobab tree. 

Habitat — Cultivated in India. 

Parts used. — The pulp of the fruit, bark and leaves. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Habhabu, Bahobab. Burm. — ^Bila-magjisi. 
Duk. — Gorikha-amali, khatyan. Eng. — Monkey bread, Ethiopian 
sour gourd. Guz. — Chora Amala, Gorakha Chincha, Sum- 
pura (the fruit). Hind. — Rookha, Hathi-khatiyan, Gorak-amli, 
Mar. — Churi Chintza, Gorakh-chinch. Tarn. — Papara pulia maram. 
Anai-puliya. Senegal — El-omarah, oufa. The fruits El-Kongles. 

Gorukha chinch. — Gorukha, the name of a Hindoo monk of 
old, and chinch, tamarind. In allusion to the old monk, who is said 
to have taught his disciples under this tree. The fruits, when dried 
(shells), are used as water pots by the monks, 

Hathi Khatiyan — Hathi, elephant, and Katiyan, fibre. It 
means elephant's flax, in allusion to the great strength of the fibre 
prepared from its bark. 

Characters. — Tree with trunk of an enormous size ; fruit, bottle 
or cucumber-shaped ; shell hard, woody, light and covered with dull 
green felt-like yellowish down or brown hairs. The interior of the 
fruit consists of a soft, corky substance, tough and fibrous in structure 
and a sub-acid pulp, of a brownish red colour. It consists of mucilage, 
which is firmly adherent to and surrounds the seed. The seeds are 
enclosed in a horny shell ; they are kidney-shaped, rough externally, 
of a rusty red colour, acid flavour and sour taste. The bark 3delds a white 
semi-fluid gum, which is colourless, tasteless and insoluble in water. It 
contains calcium oxalate and resin. 

Constituents. — ^The pulp contains phlobaphenes, mucilage and 
gum, glucose, tartrate and acetate of potash, and other salts, &c. The 
pericarp contains phlobaphene, albuminoids, gum, colouring matter, 
carbonate of potash and soda, &c. The leaves contain wax, glucose, 
salts, gum and albuminoids. The bark contains wax, tannin, gum, 
albuminoids, carbonate and chloride of sodium and potassium and a 
glucoside adansonin antagonistic to strophanthus. 

Preparation. — Decoction of bark (i in lo). Dose, i to a ozs. 

Actions and uses. — ^The pulp of the fruit is astringent and demul- 
cent, given in dyspepsia, diarrhoea, dysentery, cough and other pul- 
monary affections. The bark is demulcent and aperient and given for 
similar purposes. As a refrigerant (acid drink), like tamarind, the 
pulp is used in fevers. The leaves are used as varalians in painfal 
swellings. The dr^ powder of the leaves, called LaUO| is used to t ' 
excessive perspiration. Dose, 5 to 15 grs. 



BOMBAX MALABARICUM. 



103 



Bombar Malabaricum— B. Heptaphyllufn. 

Hahiiai, — India, tropical. 

PafU med. — The gum and root . 

I'erttacular. — Beng, — Rakto-semul, Bomb. — Musta-semul (the 
gum), Supari-ka-phuL Burm. — Lapan-La-i. Can. — Mullu, Biirraul- 
mara, Mach&ras. Cing. — Kattu-Imbat Duk. — Sopari-ka-phul, 
K ' t-Khaiyan* Eng. — Red silk-cotton tree. Guz, — Shemalo 

(i ,1), Mocharas. Hind. — Ragat-semul^ Mocharas, Supari-ka- 

SliuL Max. — Sairi. Malyal. — Mulu-elavu, Panj. — Sum. Sans.^ — 
foclia, Rjuta-kadruma, Shemaloi Solmali- mocharas. Duk, — Semal, 
Kantonka Khatyan. Tarn, — Illavam. Tel, — Buruga-manu, Mocharas 
(gumV 

KanU-kudruma, means a tree with hard conical prickles. Sopari- 
lui'phul^^' ' s a name given to the gum, is fiom sopari— areca 
dtcchu, i n to the fact that children masticate the jlunt 

thorns of B. ^Malab.iricum* 

CkaracUrs. — Tree large, remarkable for its height, and covered 
with hard conical prickles, deciduous when in flowers ; flowers large^ 
rt/i 1,T;ftlHjwilh a green cup-shaped calyx, followed by egg-shaped 
^ 5ules ; seeds numerous, of a black colour, and covered by long 

%ut^\ li^iis, or a quantity of 6ne cotton; this cotton is not used like 
cirdmary cotton on account of smoothness and want of adhesion 
between fibres. 

Mocharas is not a normal juice, but the product of diseased action, 
which cfjtLsists in the proliferation of the cells of the bark ; the gum 
unly exudes from the bark, which has been so injured by decay or by 
insects. On incisions into the diseased barki a number of small cavities 
•re seen, which contain a jelly-like substance, some granular matter and 
lUrch. Thus in appearance Mocharas resembles galls more than gum ; 
when tint exuded it is in whitish fungous pieces, which gradually turn 
led, and finally mahogany-like. In some pieces holes made by msects 
Are dbtinctly seen, the galls thus resembling kakada-singa. It is 
veiy brittle, the fractured surface being resinous-looking and red. 
The taste istringent« and resembles cbikani sopari. The root is as 
larjye us a carrot ; bark dark-brown externally and reddish within, 
fit and studded with a soft spongy substance. The taste is 

kt jit, and cutnmy or mucilaginous. Dose of the gum, 10 

to 40 grs. 

Cc^»4///.'//«n.— i iic bceds yield 25 p.c, of a sweet non-drying oil, of 
a light yellowish brown colour which contains crystalline, insoluble fatty 
adds 9a*S p.c. The cake of the seeds contains nitrogenous compounds, 
fet, extractive matter, woody fibre and ash. 

Pnt^mthn, — Decoction of root (i in 20). Dose, l to 2 ois. 

yf : lid mes* — The root is astringent, alterative, demulcent and 
(tor. jd in diarrhora, dysentery and menorrhagia ; also in high- 
er ' with copious deposit. As an alterative and restorative, 
ll. >t^ a pakh (confection) in tuberculosis of the lungs and 



I04 KRIODENDRON ANPRACTUOSXnif. 

Other wasting diseases. The gum is used as an astringent and 
demulcent for the same purposes, but more especially in dysentery, 
menorrhagia and in diarrhoea of children. Native women use it 
largely after delivery to stop menses during lactation. It is a chief 
ingredient in various restorative, expectorant and aphrodbiac 
confections* Found to be a valuable substitute Ifor gum kino, red 
gum, &c. 

Eriodendron Anfraotaosum. 

Habtiat.— Asxdi and Africa. 

Parts used. — The root and gum. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Sh wet Shimool. Burm. — Tembo-lc-bin . 
Can. — Buramara. Cing. — Imbul, Pulim. Duk. — Khatya'n. Eng. — 
White silk cotton tree. Hind. — Hattian, Safed-semul, Tulaper. 
Guz. — Dholo-shemlo. Maleal. — Paniala, MuUila-pula. Mar.— Shami- 
eula, Pandhra Saur. Sans.; — Sveta-shelmah. Tam. — ^Elavum-maram. 
Tel. — ^Buruga-chettu. 

Characters.'-^TYie tree yields a dark coloured opaque gum, in- 
soluble in water. This plant is sometimes preferred to the red silk 
variety. 

Constituents. — ^Albuminoids, fat, non-nitrogenous extractive. The 
ash contains potash and phosphoric acid. 

Preparation. — Decoction of root (i in lo). Dose, 2 to 4 dn. 
Gum. — Dose, 10 to 90 grs. 

Actions and uses. — ^The young roots and fruits are demulcent and 
astringent, and used in diarrhoea, dysentery and menorrhagia. The 
gum (Hattian ka-gond) is used in bowel complaints. 

Heliotares Isora. 

J/aditat.-^CenUdl and Western India, Western Peninsula, 
Ceylon. 

Parts used. — ^The fruit and root-bark. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Atmorha. Bomb. — Murada Siaga. Duk.^ 
Dhamni Kavuna. Eng. — East Indian screw plant. Cing. — Leeviya gaha. 
Guz. — Mriga Shing. Hind.— Kupaise, Joa-ka-phal, Marorphali. 
Mar. — Varkati, Dhamani, Maedasingi. Sans. — Avurtuni Mrigashinga. 
Tel. — Sayamali. Tam. — Valambirikai. Pers.— Pechak, Burkisht 
Hisht bar. 

Mriga Shinga, mruga,-deer, and shenga, a horn, deer's horn, from 
the twisted form of the carpels. 

Characters. — The tree resembles common hazel tree ; fruit 
covered with a yellowish brown tomentum, thickest at the base. 
The stalk is long and club-shaped; carpels five, slender, angular 
and extending from the stalk. Each carpel is of a greenish 
brown colour, and twined round the other, giving^ Hm wfaote 
fruit the shape of a corkscrew, and opening loomtildilial^ in 
fi-ont; seeds many, in a single row, black rhomboid, hiipAj poHmri.' 



PKMTAPETHS PHCENTCFA 



105 



la^tc mucilaginous and slightly bitter ; root-bark dark brow^ and 
studded with round tubercles. Dose of the powdered fruit, 5 to 15 grs. 

Pn^aratton. — Liniment from powdered fruit. Decoction of root 
(t in 10;- Dose, | to i oz. 

Act$ons and tises, — Demulcent and mildly astringent. Powdered 
fruit is given with other drugs to stop griping in the bowels and 
flttulence in children. The root-bark is given in diabetes. The root 
may be substituted for that of althaea. The Hindus use the powder of 
the root with castor^otl as an application inside the ears in offensive 
sores and discharges. 

Pentapates Phmnioea. 

Habitat, — The hotter parts of India. 

Part used. — The capsules, 

Verttacular, — Hind, — Dopahariya. Beng. — Katcula, Bandhuli . 
Mar.— Timbri-dufari. Tarn.— Naga-pu» Sans. — Bandhuka, Bandhu- 
jiv% Arka V^allubha Pushparakta. 

Bhandhujiva^ living in association or groups. Arka Vallabha* 
bdOTed of the sun, Pushparakta, red flowered. 

^ Ckaracttrs.~-P\2Lni found in wet places during the monsoon, 
nit capsular; capsules mucilaginous, sub-globose, bristly, s-^elled, 
i-valreo; calyx inferior, 5-partite» bristly ; cell containing 8 to 12 
seeds* arranged in vertical rows. 

Ac^m and uses. — Demulcent, given in coughs and scalding in 
the urtne. 

PterosperniQii] Suberifolltun. 

/r^^f/!(i/.— ilndia. Godaveri forests^ Ginji Hills, 

Part used^ — Flowers. 

Vernacular, — Cing. — Welaug gas. Tarn, — Teddi maram* Tel — 
Nolika-diettu. Hind, — Muchkand. Sans,^ — Much-kunda. 

Much Kunda muchu^mungo, means mucus, and kund, a sweet 
smelling flower. 

Characters. — Flowers white, fragrant* They render water 
geUtinous. 

Actions and nses.^The, flowers are used externally, [as a paste 
in hetni'crania. 

Pterospermam Aoerifoliam. 

Hahttat. — India, Assam. 

Parts tij^^.— Flowers, bark and leaf. 

Vernacuiar. — Sans.— Kami kara. Hind, — Kamar-Kath-champa. 
Beng.— ^Kanak<hampa. Sikktm — Hathepaila. Nagee. Burm, — 
Toung-jihet'iroon. 

/V<^if Ab>i.— Bhasm (ash). 



I06 STERCULIA ACUMINATA 

Acttofis and uses.^Tht white tomentum from the under surface 
of the leaf is used as a haemostatic to stop bleeding. The Bhasm, mixed 
with kamala, is used as an application in suppurating small-pox. 

Staroulia Aoaminata--Kola Aouminata. 

Female Kola. — Gongo nuts, kola nuts, guru nuts, 

-^/jW^/.— Tropical forests of West Indies, Africa, SoudaD« 
Senegambia, Angola. 

Parts used, — The seed or nut. 

Characters. — Tree handsome and large ; flowers yellow, with 
5 follicles, each containing one seed. Seeds, one inch long, and 
flattened testa, brownish with blackish spots ; odour nutmeg like ; 
taste aromatic. The green canals are present in the pith and bark. 
Dose, powdered nuts, 1 5 to 20 grains. 

Constituents. — Caffeine, in much larger proportion than in any 
member of the group except guarana. Theobromine and a gluco- 
side — kolanin, which splits up in the presence of a ferment into 
free caffeine and glucose ; also starch, sugar, gum, proteids, fat, 
volatile oil, and tannic acid. Kolanin is decomposed by saliva and 
gastric juice. 

Preparations, — ^Tincture (i in 5). Dose, ^ to 1 drm. Extract. 
Dose, 3 to 10 grains. Fluid extract. Dose, 10 to 30 minims. Kola 
Wine. Dose, i to 2 ounces. Neo Kola is a coloured powder from 
kola nuts, flavoured with vanilla and used as a beverage. Kolatina, 
paste of Kola nuts. Dose, i to 2 drs. 

Physiological Action, — Kola is a nervine stimulant, tonic and 
astringent. The fresh nuts are used as food and as aphrodisiac. This 
latter property is due to their containing essential oil which is absent 
in the dry nuts. It is eaten to ward off fatigue and depression, 
to support the strength, to allay inordinate appetite, to assuage 
thirst, to promote digestion, and render those usmg it cheerful in 
spirits and capable of prolonged fatigue in the same manner as coca 
leaves. 

Therapeutics. ^\A\i<t guarana and coca it is used in gastric catarrh 
dyspepsia of alcoholism, sea sickness and syphilis. It counteracts 
the intoxicating influence of alcohol, and the depressing effects 
of tobacco. It is employed in cardiac and nervous asthma. It 
contains tannin, and hence given in chronic diarrhoea and in gastro- 
intestinal irritation. As an aphrodisiac kola is used to allay the 
fense of exhaustion, and thus stimulate the sexual appetite. In 
dipsomania, wasting diseases, neurasthenia, and cephalalgia where 
caffeine is indicated, it is of benefit. It is a valuable adjunct to the 
administration of mercury and iodides, and a good substitute for tea 
or coffee. Kolanin is a tonic and stimulant given for neurasthenia 
and migraine. 

Remarks. — ^The preparations of Kola should be taken at or 
between meals. 



STBRCULIA URENS. 



107 



Sterculia Foetida. 

Habifaf, — Concan, Malabar, Ceylon. 

Parts «Mrrf.^The leaves, fruit and bark. 

Vernticular. — Eng. — Hell's Incense, Wild alnoond. Hind»— Jaogli 
badnm Mah— Narakha Uda, Narkya Uda. Tarn. — Pinari maram, 
Kudrip dukhu. 

Kudrap*dukku — resenciblance of its large follicle to the testicle of 
a hofiie. 

CAflfwtiJrr^.^Lcaves compound, peltate, leaflets 7 to 9, oblong 
lanceolate, acuminate ; wood of a light brown colour, soft and fibrous ; 
the odour resembles that of human ordure, and hence the name. 
carpels oblong, many seeded; seeds elJiptical, an inch long and covered 
with a hard brown shell which is velvety within, covered by a felt like 
skin, and enclosing an oily white kernel. The^kin softens in water like 
bassorin* Flowers panicled, brownish red at the base, and of a 
sterooraceous odour* 

Q' 'V. — The kernel contains fixed oil, 40 p.c, and 

Uairch. 1 is thick^ pale yellow, bland and non-drying, depositing 

cryttallinc sohd fats, anci fiitty acids, consisting of oleic, and small 
quantity of lauric acids. 

Aeimtts and uses* — The fruit is demulcent and astringent, and 
In gonorrhofa. l^he leaves and bark are aperient, diaphoretic, 
ctiCt and used in dropsy, rheumatism &c. The seeds are used for 
eittag^ 

Stercolia Urens. 

Hahitat — ^Throughout India, Ceylon. 

Pm ustd. — Tile gum. 

Fer$Mcu/an — Beng. — Buli. Can. — Penari. Hind. — BAH, g£iI6, 
k(il6, karai, kalru, kur katila, katira. Gust. — Karai. Mar, — Pandnik. 
Uvali, kiinduL Sans.— Balika. Tel— Kalvi, ThabsO* Tarn.— Valley 
puiali. 

Ckaracteri. — Often confounded with cochlosperraum gossypium. 
The seeds yield an oil containing much stearin. A gum exudes from 
young branches, from panicled inflorescence and from petioles of leaves ; 
also from large canals in the oith and bark, where it is contained in 
the tissues. It is a soft solio mass, soluble in cold water, forming a 
milky solution. 

CTustitHtnis. — Mucic acid, obtained by treating gum with nitric 
ici4, and ash 4 p.c. 

jici^ns and uses* — The gum is used for making native sweet- 
nieau ; the mucilage has no adhesive power. Its uses are similar to 
those of Tragacanth. 



to8 



THBOBROMA CACAO, 



StaiHmlia ScapUgerm. 
Vernacular, — Chinese— Ta-hai-tszc, Boatam-paijang. 

Characters. — The fruit contains large quantity of gura. The fruit _ 
is elongated, ovoid and terminates at the lower extremity by a 
oblique cicatrix ; externally dark brown, deeply wrinkled ; pericar 
like thin epidermis, containing dark resinous looking pulp aod 
cotyledons covered by a thin fragile shell. On maceration, the pericarp^ 
swells, forming a large gelationous mass. 

Constituents. — The pericarp contains a green oil, bas»onn« a brown 
astringent matter and mucilage ; the nucleus contains cellular tistyfl 
fatty matter, bitter extractive and starch. 

Actions and uses. — Similar to those of Tragacanltt* 

ByttnariaoesB* 

The chocolate family. Trees, shrubs, or under shrubs, sometiroet^ 
climbing. Leaves simple, alternate; calyx valvate, corolla absent ' 
stamens hypogynous, definite ; filaments united ; anthers 2-eellc ' 
introse. Confounded with sterculiaceae, malvacea, and Tiliaceac. 

Habitat, — Tropical plants. 

Properties, — Mucilaginous. Some species bear edible firuitiw 

Theobroma Caoaa, B. P. 

Theobroma. Theos, a god j and Broma, food — food for the Gc 
in allusion to its delicious qualities. 

Habitat, — South America, Brazil, Mexico, West Indies, Tropica* 

Parts used. — A concrete oil expressed from the seed$, oleitm 
theobromatis, B. P., cacao butter or oil of Theobroma. 

Characters, — Fruit large, fusiform, with ten shallow furrows and 
With blunt ridges covered with tubercles^ single or 2 or 3 t 
Pericarp or shell thick, tough and 5-celled, Seeds many* c!n<;e! t| 

in tears, size that of an almond; they are angular and p 
another and immersed in the pulp, which is copious, ^ 
From the pulp is prepared a beverage or a distilled spirit, too parts \ 
seeds contain is parts of shells or thin husks which envelope the sec 
and %% parts of kernels. In the seed is found theobromine, rcsenibltn| 
caffeine, Cocoa, otherwise known as rock cocoa, consists of the 
with husks roasted, deprived of the oil, ground in a mill mixed with 
flour of rice, barley and sugar, and put up in a powdered form. CV ' Vi 
contains cocoa mixed with sugar, cloves, sassafras nuts, van i 

amatto as a colouring agent, made into a paste and cast into mcjLiJd^ 
or pressed in cakes. The aroma in chocolate is due to the aromatic 
principle which develops when the leaves are roasted. 

Chocolate is often adulterated with starch, barley, rice ft^mr, 
lard he. Both cocoa and chocolate are used in the p T 

agreeable beverages. The beverages often disagree, as 1 

fatty and oily substances. 



TAMARICACKjR. 



109 



Cofutitumfs, — The seeds contain about 50 p.c. of a concrete fat or a 
fixed oil, which is known as butter of cocao or oleum theobromatis ; 
fttarthib p.c. ; an alkaloid theobromine 2 to 4 p.c, ; caffeine and proteids 
t8 px* : sugar, colouring matter and ash 3 to 4 p.c. Butter of cocao, 
oil df ihcobtoma. To obtain it, warm or drv the seeds or bury them in 
1 heap for a few days in a box, and then dry ; next press them 
through rollers and extract the oiL The oil may also be extracted by 
expression, by decoction or by solution in chloroform or ether. 

Characters, — A yellowish white solid concrete mass, breaking 
with a smooth fracture, and has the faint odour of cocoa ; the taste is 
bland and agreeable ; it has a neutral reaction. It is soluble in alcoholi 
ether and oil of turpentine and insoluble in water. The oil contains 
sicarine^ and a little oicine laurin, arachin, resin, and glycerides of 
formic and butyric acids* Dose, A to i dr. 

Theobromine — Demethylxantnine is an alkaloid forming salt 
(closely allied to caffeiu). To obtain it, exhaust the kernels with 
hot water, add acetate of lead and filter the precipitate ; then 
Temove lead by sulphuretted hydrogen, treat the residue with alcohol 
and evaporate. It may be synthetically obtained from xanthine, a 
substance nearly related to uric acid. A crystalline white pow^der of 
a bitter taste ; sparingly soluble in alcohol, chloroform , water and 
ellii^r. Dose, i to $ grs. 

Preparations of the oiL — Emulsion; suppositories ; Ceratum 
theobromine or red salve ; to prepare which melt together, cocoa butter 
35, white wax 33, oil of almonds 30, carmine, oil of rose and ammonia 
water. 

Prefiaratiom of Theotrommt. — Diuretin — a combination with 
sodium !*alicylate. Uropherine, a combination of theobromine with 
lithium salicylate or with lithium benzoate. lodo theobromine^ a 
combination of sodium salicylate and sodium iodide with iheobro- 
mtnc, 

Ictmtts and uses. — The concrete oil is nutrient, emollient and 
ij t, generally used as an excipient for suppositories, pessaries, 

ij ^ &c. ; used externally for abrasioni* and inflamed surfaces. 

The ,;u sil i! theobromine and its salts are diuretic and nervine 
stimn? ! .rnerally given with nitro-glycerine, menthol, cocaine, 
s; caffein, &c. Cocoa is used as a nutritious beverage like 

iL . but is less stimulant than the latter. As a diuretic and 

stmiuUnt it is used in Bright's disease. 

TamarioaoeaB. 

Tamriricaccjc— The Padvasa or Tamarisk family, 

r herbs. — Leaves alternate, entire scale-like ; flowers 
Jl, ei spiked; fruits dehiscent and one-celled : seeds numerous 

eomosci and without albumen ; embryo straight. 

Habitat, — Northern Hemisphere and Mediterranean basm. 
Pro^rrty. — ^The bark of some of these plants is astringent, bitter 
and tonio. Some species, as Tamarix Manniferai contain a saccharine 



no TAMARIX GALLICA. 

substance known as Mount Sinai Manna, supposed to be an exudation 
produced in conseouence of punctures of species of coccus insects which 
infest this plant. The ashes of some species contain large quantities 
of sulphate of soda. 

Tamarix Oallioa— T. Indloa. T. Orientalls. T. Artioalata. 

Habitat — Sind, Panjab, Asia, Africa, Europe. 

Parts used. — The galls and sugary exudation or manna. The 
galls are called the Tamar fruits in Persian works. 

Vernacular, —^T^. — Asl, Tarfa-Jaz, Mazaj (exudation) gazanjebin. 
Beng. — Jhav. Bomb. — Mayun (galls). Duk.— Jhav, Ferash. Eng. — 
Tamarisk. Guz.— Jhav, Hind. — ^Jhav, Padvas, Ferash. Panj. — Phar- 
wan, Pilchi, Rukh. Pers. — Darakhte zamarisk (manna), Gaz. Sans. — 
Jhavuka, Shor-gaz. Tarn. — Shavukku. Tel. — Shiri-Saru Manu. 

Burree mai. — The galls on T. Gallica are smaller than those of 
Majuphala or true galls. These are of a dirty brown colour, roundish or 
ovate, irregularly shaped or angled and knotty. They are of various sizes. 
Sometimes 2 or 3 are united together; some of them present a slender 
(stalk-like) woody portion at their base ; surface tubercled and also 
wrinkled; the cut surface brownish red ; the cavity sometimes contain- 
ing the insect (coccus manniparus) or a resinous-looking exudation, 
which is nothing more than excrementitious matter. 

C^oA' iwtii*.— The galls on T. articaluta. The galls are of a darkish 
brown colour and knotty, resembling a pea in size. They are smaller 
than those of Burree mai. The shape is globular, not angled. The 
surface is resinous-looking,. round, knotty, of the size of a pea and of 
yellowish brown colour, of a slight balsamic smell. 

The manna occurs in small grains, which are white at £rst, but 
have a tendency to liquefy and form a yellow fluid-like honey. The 
taste is astringent at first, but after a time becomes glutinous. Manna 
is produced upon tamarisk willow, or oak, in consequence of the 
puncture of an insect (coccus manniparus). Dose of manna, i to 8 drs. 
Dose of the galls, S to 15 grs. 

Constituents, — Manna; a thick yellow syrupy liquid containing 
cane-sugar, glucose, levulose, dextrin and water. Galls contain tannin 
SO p. c. 

Preparations, — Decoction of galls (i in 10). Dose, ^ to 4 drs. 
Tincture (i in 8). Dose, ^ to i dr. Ointment ( i in 5 ). Compound 
ointment with opium ( 14 in i of opium). 

Actions and uses, — Galls are astringent, used in chronic discharges 
and watery fluxes, as leucorrhcea, diarrhoea and dysentery; also in 
haemorrhagic diathesis. Locally used as pessaries. The manna is a 
mild aperient and expectorant, and forms an ingredient in aperient and 
cough mixtures. These galls are as effective as, or rather superior to, 
the true galls. 



COCAINA* 



111 



Erythrozylaoeat 

General characters, — Tree or shrubs often climbing ; leaves usutUy 
i qpporitcor whorled, rarely alternate, stipulate and furnished with peltate 
' hatff ; flowcn. perfect or polygamous, arising from imbricated scale-like 
brftcts; calyx persistent without glands; petals with two parallel mem- 
branous plates at their base ; stigma capitate ; fruits drupaceous, woody 
nui or utntroid ; seeds solitary; ovules sessile and anatiopal ; embryo 
!ftr%tght. 

Hahiiai, — Brazilt West Indies. 

Protperties. — Some are tonic, others purgative, and others stU 
mulant and sedative. The wood of some is used for dyes. 

Erythroxylum Coca, B. P. 

flabttaL—V^T\A^ Bolivia, Tea districts of India, Ceylon, Java, 
South America 

Pkirh Mir//— The dried leaves of En^^throxylum coca, and other 
VMictie* <" " 1- Folia, Coca leaves, B, R, and an alkaloid — Cocaina, B. P. 

Ej im — from erythros red and xylon, wood. The wood 

has a fcvi (.f.i'jut . 

Characiers, — A small shrub; leaver small, thin, with short petioles 
1^ to y inches long and I to ij inches broad, obovate, entire, glabrous, 
obtuse or cmarginate, both sides reticulate, midrib prominent and with 
a curved line running on each side from base to apex; colour brownish 
ffreen ; odour tc3-like; taste slightly bitter and aromatic \ on chewing 
tt benumbs the lips and tongue. Should not be confounded wtth cocao, 
th« leaves of Thcobtoma cacao* Dose of the leaves, | to 2 drs. 

CnmviitHrnls — Coco leav^ contain hygrine, truxil cocaine (trmciU 
Itf" me (a crystalline alkaloid). Benzoyl ecgonine 

(a ) I aromatic oil, coca tannic acid, coca wax, 

cinnaaiy kuv *ii nc, 4kc. In the Java leaves is found an alkaloid tropo- 
cocaine, a compound of benzoic acid and a base. 

Hs'grinc, — A volatile liquid alkaloid; colour yellow; taste burnings 
odour that of trimethylamine. 

Ecgonine is obtained by heating cocaine with hydrochloric acid, 
when cocaine will split up into methylic alcohol, benzoic acid and 
ecgonine. 

Cocaina^ B. P*, Benzoyl methyl-ecgonine. 

To obtain Cocaine treat coca leaves with alcohol and acidulate 
with sulphuric acid ; treat the precipitate or the colouring matter 
wi'*' »'"-v The aqueous solution contains cocaine sulphate; to this 
ad ym carbonate, then agitate it with ether and alcohol and 

dccu.i n/c with animal charcoal, evaporate and crystallize. The leaves 
contain more cocaine than other parts, and a small quantity of other 
alkaloids. India and Java leaves contain less cocaine and more of the 
other alkaloids. It <x'curs in colourless monoclinic prisms, of a bitter 
tist£| ! tion of tingling and numbness on the tongue. 

It has .^ ton on uU mucous membranes. It has decided 

basic proper tie»f combining with acids to form salts* It is almost 



na 



COCAINA. 



insoluble in water* insoluble in glycerine^ soluble in alcohol (i in lo), 
ether (i in 4), chloroform (1 in i), castor-oil, olive^oil and other ftxed 
oils (i in 12X oil of turpentine (i in 14), benzol, toluol aod amyUc 
alcohol (1 in 3)» petroleum spirit ( 1 in 80). Hot water decompose* U, 
forming an acid solution which contains benzoylecgonine, ecgoniue and 
cocaine benzoate. Cocaine solution kept for a time becomes mouldy 
and covered with fungi. To avoid this, it is recommended to add 
boric acid* perchloride of mercury, salicylic acid, camphor, chloroform, 
thy molt &c. Dose, ^^q to ^ gr. in pills or tablets. As pure cocaine 
is soluble in fats and oils, it is always used externally as local an«esthetic 
combined with fatty substances, 

PrtparattQUs. — Ceratum cocainae (1 in 30) of petroleum ; used for 
burns, pruritis, scalds, urticaria, &c, Bougies of cocaine contains \ 
grain with cocao butter, used in urethritis. Obstetric cones or supposi- 
tories of cocaine. These contain cocaine with boracic acid and butter of 
cocao. Coilodmm cocaines contains z p.c. of cocaine with flexible 
collodion. It allays itching Emf>iastrum cocainae — 1 in 50, of lead 
plaster used for sciatica, neuralgia, corns, bruises, &c. Coca: — 

Cocaine oleate contains oleic acid with 5 p.c. of the alkaloid. ► -urn 

Cocamec contains cocaine i px. Tabellit cocaitur — Cocaine tiiblct /(^ 
grain in each with chocolate, given in sea sickness and tn sickness of 
pregnancy ; also in chloroform or alcoholic vomiting. 

Sails of cocaine. Cocainm citras. — Hygroscopic crystals, used by 
dentists. Dose, ^q to \ gr. Cocainm kydrobmmidum^ Dose, tV ^^ i gf* 
Cocaitue hydroiodidum — Colourless cr^^stals, slightly soluble m water* 
Dose^ A to I gr. Cocaimt hydrockioridum B. P, cocaine hydrochlonie, 
cocaine muriate, cocaine hydrochloride. To obtain it, acidulate the 
extract of coca leaves with sulphuric acid, neutralize with lime and 
filter. To the 5ltrate add hydrcohloric acid and recrysiallize. Itocctifii 
in colourless ciystals or white crystalline powder, ha:^ a neutral reac- 
tion ; taste bitter, producing a tingling sensaiion on the tongue 
followed by numbness. Applied to the eye, it dilates the pupil. 
Soluble in cold water u in i), alcohol (1 in 4), in glycerine (1 in 
4}. Insoluble in olive oil and ahnost insoluble in ether. Dose. % 
10 \ gr. 

Cocaine and c/f/oroform anotstkesia. It < n the u>^ xA 

chloroform inhalation and at the same time cillv iniccting 

cocaine as in operations on the eye and throat. J- b! 

P., contains 3*0 grain of cocaine hydrochloride* / ^ rJCr, 

tV 8^* t*^ 6 g*"* **^ each. Pi/u/a cocainet hydrochhndt^ ^ gr, in each 
witn milk-sugar. Trochisci cocamtx hydrochioridi^ ^ gr. tti each. 
InjectiQ cacamtt hvpadtrmica^ B. P„ 11 mininw contain I grain tA 
cocaine hydrochloride, known also as Liquor cocaine - • "^ ^ - 7/11, 
contains about lop.c. ol the salt mixed with half a grain id 

to make 6 drachms of the liquor. Dose, 2 to 5 ms. i \>r 

hydrochlfiridi. — Each contaitis ^ grain of the salt, 7>or i 

et cocamar^ B.R, contams extract of krameria i gr, and cocaine hv^lro- 
chloride ^^ of a gr, tn each* Used to allay irritation oE the tliroat, 
CQcaim lactas-^A white thick honey-like mass, easily soluble In 



COCAlKA. 



^3 



water : used locally along with the treatment of tuberculous cystitis 
with lactic acid, Oicains nitras — Cocaine nitrate. Large colour- 
less crystals^ freely soluble ill water. Dose, ^ to ^ gr. for hypodermic 
tfsjecuoD (i in $0). Cocaine salkylas^ cocaine salicylate, minute. 
»no IV -white crystals, deliquescent. Used hypodermical ly in spasmodic 
ajithma. Dose, ^ to \ gr. Cocainee sulphas. Dose, j'^^ to \ gr, CocmmB 
phcmn — Cocaine carbolate, a combination of cocaine and carbolic acid. 
Honey-like fluid, soluble in alcohol; used as solution i p.c. Dose» 

tto \ gr. in pill. Given internally in catarrh of the stomach, 
cally the solution is applied to caried tooth to relieve the pain. 
Preparations of coco leaves* 

£xtrncttim coca hqutdumy B.P.^ — Liquid extract of coca, Syn, — 
Extractum crythroxyli fluidum. It is not raiscible with water unless 
fice from wax. Dose, \ to i dr. Elixir cocm, — i in 6 of simple elixir. 
Dose, J to 4 drs. Elixir crythroxyli et Guar anm — Each fiuid drachm 
contains 7^ grains of coca and guarana each. Dose, i to 2 drs. Exintc- 
ium crtcar (solid). In pills or pastils (4 of leaves to i of spirit). Dose, 
2 CO 1 5 grs< fnfusum cocm (1 in 50). Dose* ^ to 2 02s. Tmctura 
*!0c*» (1 in 5V Dose, i to 2 fluid drs. Fitmm cocm i in 8 of sherry. 
Stimulant, checks vomiting caused by irritable stomach and relieves the 
pain of gastralgia. Dose, i to J oz. Pusiilius cocte cxiractt 2 J grs. of 
the extraa in each* Used in aphonia due to relaxed vocal cords, 

Physiftlogical actions, — Coca leaves and their preparations are 
remirkable for their food-replacing properties. They are stimulant, 
muscular and nervine tonic, diuretic, diaphoretic, and narcotic. Locally 
ansevthetic and nervine sedative. Coca is anoalgous to tea or coffee, 
but is more sustaining. In small doses it is an aromatic bitter tonic. 
It stimulates the stomach, the nervous system, kidneys, respiration 
and the heart and raises the arterial tension ; as a stimulant to the 
brain it increases its blood*supply, produces wakefulness, also appeases 
iattgue, hunger and thirst and increases muscular strength and power 
of endurance. It checks the process of tissue waste and also lessens 
the quantity of urea. As a diuretic it increases the flow of urine, and 
also stimulates the intestinal peristalsis. Locally it acts on a limited 
ar€a« When applied or hypodt;rmically injected its effect on the mucous 
meoibranc and the skin is to cause profound an;3esthesia. On the tongue 
it destroys its taste and its sensibility. On the eye it causes dilatatitju of 
the pupilf paralysis of accommodation and sometimes ptosis. It resem- 
bles in its general action atropine In both the eff*ects on the heart, 
respitation, bl^od, pupils, salivary glands, skin and intestines are alike. 

C ^ •'■ 'Ti, or a cocaine habit^ is marked by loss of appetite, loss of 
sleep, ^'S of mind and body, emaciation, general marasniu:>« 

udtt :h, hallucinations, debasing habits, selfishness, great 

depr.. .inity. 

ThftaptuUcs, — The liquid extract of coca leaves is given in sea 
sickness, vomiting of pregnancy, in pains due to ulcer of the stomach, 
gastric indigestion and in hemorrhage from the bowels* The leaves 
are smoked to relieve asthma, hay fever and sore throat. The extract is 
given internally in melancholia, epilepsy, insanity, diabetes, sperma* 



114 ERYTHROXYLON MONOGYNUM. 

torrhcea, &c. In excessive doses coca is injurious like opium or 
fermented liquors. In moderate doses it counteracts the injurious 
effects of tobacco and alcohol. Coca wine is an agreeable stomachic 
stimulant. It checks gastric irritation and vomiting, and relieves the 
pain of gastralgia. It relieves hoarseness of voice in singers and speakers; 
and is also given in seminal debility. In diabetes it has been tried in 
place of codea. It steadies the nerves of excitable persons. Its leaves 
may be smoked as cigars. Cocaine hydrochloride is used as a paint or 
as an hypodermic injection to benumb the pains of inflamed parts ; 
also applied to deaden the sensibility of healthy parts, as the eye, ear, 
nose, urethra, uterus, &c. In coryza a 4 p. c. solution is applied to 
the nostrils. In gonorrhoea 2 p.c. solution is injected into the urethra. 
It is sometimes used as an injection into the back in hydrophobia, 
tetanus, incontinence of urine, lead colic, sciatica, lumbago, 
in ophthalmic surgery and also in minor operations. Locally the 
solution or the oleate is applied to burns, painful ulcers, fissures of 
anus, haemorrhoids, &c. As vaginal pessaries it is used in 
various forms of retarded parturition where the expulsive pains 
are absent or deficient. Its infusion is likewise used as an application 
to the throat or as an injection into the bladder before lithotrity or 
into the urethra before the passage of sounds or catheters, and to 
the gums for teeth extraction. To have a marked effect it should 
reach the terminal filaments of sensory nerves. In moles and warts 6 
grains to a drachm of glycerine should be used locally before the 
application of nitric acid. The oleate of cocaine is a good application 
in pruritis ani or vaginae and in skin diseases attended with itching. 

Erjrthroxylon Monogynum. E. Indioum. 

Habitat. — Western Peninsula, Ceylon, Cuddapah District. 

Parts used. — The wood bark and leaves. 

Vernacular, — Can. — Adavi, goranti. Eng. — Red cedar, bastard 
sandal or cedar. Tam. — Tevadarum, Devdarune. 

Cedar in allusion to the wood being fragrant like cedar. 

Characters. — Shrub. Bark pale and resinous ; leaves cuneate, 
obovate ; wood fragrant. 

Constituents, — No cocaine, but the leaves contain a bitter and 
tonic alkaloid which may have sustaining property. 

Preparations. — Infusion of leaves ( I in 20). Dose, ^ to i oz. Decoc- 
tion of the bark (i in to). Dose, J to i oz. 

Actions and uses. — Leaves are refrigerant, bitter tonic and 
nutrient, possessing properties similar to those of coca. The bark 
is also a tonic ; the leaves are eaten during famine times in India. 

Cedrelaces. 

The mahogany or Toon tree, or Rohana chhala family. It is 
composed of large trees: leaves alternate, pinnate, exstipulate and 
entire ; flowers generally numerous ; fruits capsular, dehiscent. 



CEDRELA TOONA. II5 

HabtiaL — Tropical parts of America and India. 

The properties of this order are aromatic, tonic, astringent , 
febrifuge and fragrant. Many are valuable timber trees. 

Cedrela Toona. 

Habitat. — Peninsula and Bengal. 

Parts used. — The bark, gum and flowers. 

J^ii<»c«/<»r.— Bombay. — Kooruk. Beng. — Toon. Burm. — Thit- 
ka-du. Can. — Sauolamara Tanda. Eng. — Indian mahogany, or white 
cedar, or toon tree. Hind. — Toona. Malyal. — Arana maram. Mar. — 
Rooruk. Sans. — Tunna-Nandevreksha. Tam . — Wunjooli maram. 
Tel.— Nandi. 

Characters, — Bark smooth and grey ; flowers small, yellow and 
sweet scented like honey ; gum transparent, in stalactiform masses, 
colour yellow, surface polished. It first swells and then dissolves in 
water, forming a thick gelatinous mucilage ; seeds numerous, imbri- 
cated and winged. 

Constituents. — Resin, extractive matter, gum, &c. 

Preparation. — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, i to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Fruit and bark astringent, but not bitter. 
With bonduc nut as a tonic and antiperiodic it is given in fevers, 
rheumatism and dysentery ; flowers are emmenagogue, and given in 
disordered menstruation ; the wood is used in making surgical instru- 
ments ; it must not be mistaken for thuja, which is incorrectly called 
white cedar. 

ChloFOxylon Swietenla. 

Habitat.^ CtyXoii^ Western Peninsula. 
Part used. — The bark.- 

Vernacular. — Eng. — Satin wood. Cing. — Buruta. Hind. — Rakata 
Rohidi, Ragatrora. Mar.— Haladarava, Bhiree. Tam. — Mududa Vum- 
maai, Kodavah. Tel, — Biluda-parasham. 

Characters. — The tuber of the bark is dark-brown and very 
rough from the presence of elliptical corky lentils, which are loosely 
attached. When separated they leave a smooth pale surface within. 
It yields a kind of gum, dark reddish brown or amber coloured, which is 
allied to gum-arabic, is insoluble in water, swells and becomes a whitish 
jelly. The wood is the satin wood of India used in making stetho- 
scopes. 

Constituents, — The bark contains tannin. 

Preparation, — Decoction (i in 20). Dose, J to i oz. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent and anodyne, used for sprains, con- 
tusions and for painful joints. 



Il6 CANBLLA ALBA. 

Soymida Febrifaga, Bwietenla Febrifiija, B. Rubra. 

Habitat. — Indiai Ceyloiu 

Parts used. — ^The bark. 

Vernacular. — Eng. — Bastard cedar, redwood * tree. Beng.— 
Rohana. Hind. — Rohana, Rohitaka. Sans. — Patranga. Can.— 
Swamy. Mur. — Rohine Rheyu. Tam. — Shem. Tel. — Sunu, Sonuda. 

Characters^ — Bark in tubular quills, about an inch in diameter. 
Externally of a brown colour, smooth, with numerous cracks and 
covered with small warty growths, which, when they fall off, leave 
brown rings ; taste bitter and astrrngent. Dose, lo to 20 grs. 

Constituents.'^It contains a bitter principle, colourless resinous 
matter, starch and tannic and gallic acids* 

Preparation. — Decoction (i in 20). Dose, J to i oz. Tinaure 
(i in 8). Dose, ^ to i dr. 

Actions and uses. — Bitter tonic, astringent and antiperiodic, like 
Peruvian bark ; in large doses it leads to vertigo and stupor ; given 
in intermittent fevers, dysentery, general debility and diarrhoea. As 
an injection or a wash, its decoction is used in leucorrhoea, 
gonorrhoea and as a gargle in sore throat. 

Canellaoaa. 

The canella order. Leaves alternate ; anthers longitudinal and 
dehiscent ; absence of disk, presence of a style ; seeds albuminous ; 
flowers unsymmetrical ; albumen horny. 

Habitat. — ^West Indies and America. 

Properties. — Aromatic, stimulant and tonic. 

Canella Alba. 

Laurel-leaved canella, wild cinnamon. 

Habitat.— 'Vf est Indies. 

Part used. — The bark canellae cortex— canella bark. Spurious 
winter's bark. 

Characters. — Flowers white and aromatic; fruit (berries) blackish; 
bark whitish, in quills, 6 to 24 inches long, grey coloured. The corky 
layer is orange-red and marked with scars ; inside striated with rjsin 
cells ; the odour between that of cloves and cinnamon ; taste bitter and 
biting. Dose, 15 to 30 grs. 

Constituents. — Volatile oil, resin, bitter principle, starch, mannite 
sugar ; the oil is sometimes substituted for oil of cloves. 
Preparation. — Powder. 

Actions and uses. — Aromatic, tonic and stimulant ; given in 
gout, rheumatism, secondary syphilis, menorrhagia, amenorrhoea, and 
gastric debility ; generally given with aloes. 



AMOORA ROHITUKA. 



HeUacese. 



The bead tree, nima or margosa family. 
Trees or shrubs ; leaves exslipulate, alternate, pinnate, or simple, 
raierally oblique and serrated ; flowers small and very fragrant ; fruits 
baccate, capsular or drupaceous ; seeds few, arillate, exalbuminous. 

^^if/fl/.— Tropics. 

'. — ^The plants of this order are remarkable for their 
bittci lid astringent properties ; some are powerful purgatives ; 

some bear edible fruits ; some species are poisonous, 

Aglaia Roxbarghiana. 

Habtiat. — Western India, Ceylon. 

Part ns€*i. — The seeds. 

Femacu/ar. — Can. — Totilla-kayi. Hind.— Priangu. Sans. — 
PrtyaogSf Syama, Kantatva, Nandtni, 

Characters — Fruit subglobose or pilose, i to 2 -celled and I to 2- 
seeded ; bu(F-coloured when fresh, brown and wrinkled when dry ; 
shell thin» with an aril, pink and fleshy ; seeds flat, irregular and 
slightly convex, ^ inch in diameter ; odour aromatic and astringent. 

Constituents* — Querci tannic acid and ash. 

Prtparathn. — Infusion (1 in 20). Dose^ i to % OES. 

Actirm.\ mid uses. — Refrigerant and astringent; used in fevers, 
|tirTh(ra and liver aflections ; as an alterative it is given in leprosy. 

Carapa moluccensis, Granatum littoreum. A tree of the muddy 
coasts of India and Ceylon. The Malays use the bark, which is 
letter and astringent, in colic, diarrhoea and other abdominal 
difictscs 

Amoora Bohituka, Andersonia Rohituka, Maleacea Wightiana 

Habitat* — Assam, Oudh, Western Peninsula. 
Part used, — The bark. 

Vernacular. — Assam. — Amora-amari. Beng.— Tiktaraj. Burm.— 
CNyaii-ka yn Can.— Muttala gida. Cing. — HinguUgas. Hind.— 
H ii:a. Maleal. — Chemmara Mar.— Rohituka Sans. 

■^ hi, Rohera, Piihagna, Plihashatru. Tarn, — Shem-raa- 

raai. IW* — Chawa-manu, Rohitaka. 

Ptiha*ghna, spleen destroyer ; Pliha-shatru, enemy to spleen. 

Ckameters^—FTyxxi dull-yellow or reddish, 3-celIed, containing 
5 seeds ; seeds chestnut-coloured, enclosed in thick fleshy arilla ; 
bark blaeki.^h brown, externally covered with very rough elliptical 
1* >ns and minute fissures; substance of the bark deep, 

TL and of a striated short fracture. Fresh bark soft and 

can tutsily be cut. Taste very astringent. 

Comtiiuents, — Two yellow resins, starchy colouring matter, tannin 
and salts ; both resins are soluble in ether, but one is insoluble in alcohol 



Il8 MELIA AZEDARACH. 

and alkaline solutions the other is soluble in both these liquids, and 
is of an acid nature. 

/Reparation.— Vecoction ( i in lo ). Dose, i to i oz. 

Actions and uses, — ^Alterative, astringent and tonic, given in en- 
larged glands, as liver and spleen, in corpulence and in general debility. 

Melia Azedarach, H. Bukayun, M. BemperTires. 

Habitat. — North of India, Bengal, Mysore, Bombay, China, 
United States. 

Paris used. — The root-bark, gum, leaves, flowers, fruit and oil of 
the seeds. 

Vernacular — Arab. — Mab-ul-dan (the seed). Beng. — Maha nimb, 
Ghora nim. Burm. — Simbo Karva. Can. — Bavena Betta-da. Cing. — 
Luna-middella. Duk. — Gora nimb. Eng. — Persian lilac. Pride of 
China, Evergreen bead tree. Guz. — Bakayan. Hind. — Bakayan, Maha 
nimb. Malayal. — Malai vempu. Mar. — Goru-niraa, Dongracha lim. 
Panj. — Drek. Pers. — Darakat-i-azad, Tak. Sans. — Hemadruma 
Parvat nimba, Arishta. Tarn, — Male Vembu. Tel. — Vepa manu, 
Nimbarun. Tabrishtan. — Takhak. Shiraz— Taghak. 

Characters. — T he root-bark, when fresh is curved or quilled, thick 
spongy and warty; externally of a dark-brown colour, with irregular 
ndges ; internally brown or covered with white striae ; taste astring- 
ent, also bitter and nauseous. The bark yields a gum,which is in large 
tears, the surface cracked and fissured, the pieces are vermiform, 
colour pale yellow or amber. It is soluble in water, forming 
a pale-coloured mucilage ; leaves bi-pinnate ; leaflets obliquely 
ovate, lanceolate, acute, serrated and glabrous ; flowers small, 
purple, lilac-coloured, sweet-scented and fragrant ; fruit a drupe 
when dry, oblong or elliptical, colour reddish, dark brown or 
yellow of the size of cherries ; epidermis, shining and wrinkled ; pulp 
poisonous, glutinous to the touch and of a disagreeable smell ; nut hard, 
of a yellowish brown colour, 5-celled, each cell containing a seed 
enclosed in a dark coloured testa ; seed of the shape and size of a 
wheat grain, oblong, compressed at the upper part and slightly 
pointed, generally of a pale brown colour; cotyledon greyish white and 
oily; on crushing the seed the odour is very acid ana disagreeable. 
Dose of the root, 15 to 60 grs. 

Constituents, — Noncrystalline resinous substance — the active 
principle, sugar, tannin, &c. 

Preparation. — Decoction of the fresh bark ( i in 10 ). Dose, ^ to i oz. 

Actions and uses. — In small doses, the bark is a bitter tonic, astrin- 
ent, antiperiodic, anthelmintic, given to children in round worms, and lo 
adults in fever and indigestion ; leaves and flowers are alterative and 
diuretic. The juice of the leaves is used in fevers, dyspepsia, general 
debility, jaundice, worms, scrofula, boils, leprosy, &c. Externally the 
flowers and leaves are discutients ; as a poultice they are made warm 
and applied to the head in nervous headaches. A poultice of the 



AZADIRACHTA INDICA. 



U9 



flowcTfi^Sia to kill lice and to cure eruptions of the scalp ; a paste of the 
leaves is applied hot to unhealthy ulcers, to indolent scrofulous glands 
and to pustular eruptions. The drug is a narcotic poison in large doses, 
producing giddiness, dimness of sights mental confusion^ stupor, dilated 
pupils and sterior. It also acts as a gastro-tntestinal i nritanti producing 
vomiting and purging. 

Azadiraehta Indioa. Halia Azadirachta. 

ffabttat. — Himalaya, Persia* 

jRrjr/5 li^^-r/.— The root-bark, fruit, flowers, leaves, gum and oil of 
ieedK 

Ffrnacu/ar, — ^Ceylon — Kohoraba^ Duk, Beng. — Nim. Burm, — 
Kamakba^ Them-bauma, Can, — Bevinamara, Isa-bevu. Cing. — 
TelkO'homba. Chin. — Lientaze, Ku-lien-taze. Eng. — Ash-leaved 
bead tree, morgosa, Indian lilac. Guz. — Limbado. Hind — Nim. 
Malea! — VVeppa, Aria Bepon. Mar, — Limba. Pers.^ — Azaddarakhti- 
Hindt. Sans — Nimba. Tarn. — Vembu^ Vepa Veypam. Tel — Yeppa 
Nimbarnu. 

Chiirnciers, — Bark coarsely fibrous ; externally roughs fissured and 
oC a ru&ly grey colour ; internally yellow and foliaceous, readily 
st"^"* ! into thin layers ; taste bitter and astringent. The petioles are 
t at the base, slender, round and about a foot in length; surface 

c! * colour and longitudinally furrowed, taste bitter ; flowers 

»• brown when dry and tubular ; leaves pinnate; leaflets 

oblii^uc, detualc, lanceolate and smooth on both surfaces, taste very 
bitter, fruit when ripe is purple, one^celled, one-seeded, fleshy within, 
with a hard, woody shell containing an oily bitter kernel, greenish white 
with a brown tesia ; dried fruit resembling small raisin, dark» oval 
and slightly oblong; surface wrinkled; pulp adherent to the stone; seeds 
of a ^T.iivniih white colour, angular and pointed at the top, surface 
ri i and fibrous ; epicarp very brittle and containing one or twa 

ah.-^i. * coloured kernels, which are oily and nauseously bitter ; the 
expn^sed oil from the seeds contains a large amount of sulphur; 
iht c«)lour is pale yellow, odour garlic-like, taste very bitter. It 
coagulates at a low temperature without losing its transparency* The 
glim :" " ir»h. in vermiform pieces. 

i :ts. — ^The seeds contain a resinous oil known as margosa 

or netm o\L The bark contains a neutral resinous bitter principle, 
Alatgosiue, non-crystalline and without alkaloidal properties, catechiji, 
gum, sugar asd tannin. 

A! - is obtained by exhausting the bark with alcohol, and 

Erecif^ he solution with water. The precipitate is next purified 

y «oluii<^n uf benzene, carbon sulphide, ether and alcohol. 

R..*;», t.c ^ii^ Margosa or neem oil. The recently expressed oil 
from t , when exposed for some time, deposits a white sediment 

(:jr ■ ' I L Ditler extract). It is easily soluble in ether, chloroform* 

ca ilphidc, benzole. &c. WhenVepeatedly agitated with alcohol 




III 



m 



120 MBLIA DUBIA. 

it loses its bitterness and its alliaceous odour. It consists of fixed fatty 
acids, probably oleic, stearic and lauric acids, also butyric and valeric 
acids. Dose, 2 to 5 ms. 

The cake, left after expression of the oil, contains another neutral 
principle; insoluble in ether or alkaline solution but solouble in 
chloroform. 

Preparations, — linctura Azadirachtce (i in 8), — Dose, \ to i dr. 
Decoctum Azadirachtce of the root -bark and fruit (i in 5). Dose, i 
to 2 ozs. as an antiperiodic. 

Punch-nimb-churnu. — A compound powder of five parts of the 
tree. These are — leaves, bark, root, flowers and fruit — all pounded to- 
gether and used. Dose, 5 to 20 grs. 

Actions and uses, — The birk and leaf stalks are astringent bitter 
tonic and antiperiodic, and used in intermittent and paroxysmal fevers 
and for general debility and convalescence after febrile and other 
diseases. The leaves are discutient. and Ipcal stimulant and used 
as varalians or poultices to disperse indolent glands and swellings. 
The young trees yield a kind of sweet i nice* (toddy) which, when 
fermented, is used as stomachic and anthelmintic and is given in 
worms and jaundice. The pulp is applied to boils, pustular eruptions, 
opens sores and bruised joints. The compound powder pancha 
nimba churun is tonic, and given in convalescence after fever. The 
fruit is a purgative, anthelmintic and alterative. The oil of 
the seeds is bitter, anthelmintic and stimulant, given in leprosy, 
intestinal worms, piles and urinary diseases. The gum is used by 
lying-in women as a uterine stimulant. The seeds are used for 
killing pediculi, and the powdered kernel for washing the hair and 
as a remedy for mange in dogs. The oil, mixed with other oils, is 
applied to skin diseases, suppurating scrofulous glands, and leprous 
ulcers. It is rubbed on the skin in rheumatic affections and to the head 
in headache. The oil contains sulphur, add therefore, with alkalies, it 
is used in skin diseases. 

Remarks. — The Nimba is one of the pancha-tikta, or five bitters. 

MeliaDubia, M. Buperba, M. CompoBita, M. SobuBta. 

Habitat. — E. and W. Peninsula, Ceylon. 

Part used, — The pulp of the fruit. 

Vernacular, — Bomb. — Kodu-khajura. Can. — Kad-bevu Ara-bevu. 
Cin^. — Lunu-midella. Guz. — Lembarro, Kadukbajur. Hind. — Din- 
karling. Mar. — Nimbarra. Sans. — Arangaka. Tam. — Mallay 
Vemboo. 

Kadukhajur means bitter khajur (dates). Kalakhajur is black 
dates. The fruits resemble dates. 

Characters, — Tree smaller than Melia-azadirach ; fruit, when dry, 
resembling a date in size, shape and colour ; epidermis, dark-brown and 
deeply wrinkled, also rugous ; apex blunt and studded with small 
tubercles, with a stalk and a five partite calyx at the base* Pulp firmly 



SYCACAHPtJS RUSBYr, 



121 



adherent to a large and very hard stone, it is sticky and of a brownish 
fed colour, swelling when soaked in water ; taste of the pulp bitter 
and nauseous ; seed covered with a dark- brown polished testa ; kernel 
very oily and of sweet taste. Dose of the pulp, 30 to 60 grs. 

CotistitHtttis, — A glucoside, a fatty oil, wax, malic acid, glucose, 
inucilige and pectin. The glucosidef is a crystalline bitter principle^ 
af a slightly acid reaction, soluble in alcohol, ether and water. 

Acticms and uses^ — Bitter carminative and anthelmintic, given in 
colic and other bowel complaints, and also in worms. Locally an 
ohument niade of the juice of fresh fruit, with sulphur and curd heated 
together, is used for scabies and wounds affected with maggots. 

Naregamia Alata 

The Goanese ipecacuanha. 

HahitaU — Western Peninsula, India. 

/hr/j used, — The stem and roots. 

Vernacular, — Can.— Nela-Narigu, Nalakanu-gida. Goa. — Trifolio, 
lvac;tft. Mah, — Kapur Bhendi. Malay — Nela naregam. Mar. — Pittve. 
Plrtpapra. Pittmari, Tinapana. 

Avicari (Goa). a corruption of the wordocari, which means emesis. 
The root is used as an emetic, 

CharacUrs, — Stem dirty green, bark firmly adherent, slender^ 
sparingly branched and rising from the root-stalks ; root-stalks knotty, 
contracted and warty; tubers mealy; powder light-brown; odour like 
that of valerian, pungent and aromatic ; taste slightly bitter and 
nauseous* Dose, 5 to 10 grs. 

Conshiuntts. — It contains an alkaloid — ^Naregamine, an oxidizable 
fixed oil, wax, sugar, resin and alcoholic extract (containing asparagin), 
gctm, ttarch, pectin, albuminous and colouring matters and ash 10 p*c. 

Naregamine. — To obtain it, agitate the extract with dilute 
sulphuric -icid. It is an amorphous, slightly coloured residue. It forms 
lalts w ^ uric, nitric and hydrochloric acids. The solution is 

precipi. aanin, potassio mercuric iodide, and iodine. 

/Vij>ifr#?/»b/*x.— Tincture (i in S)* Dose, \ to 1 dr. Liquid 
extract of a golden brown colour. Dose. 45 to 75 ms. Decoction 
(1 in 10), Dose, J to i to oz. 

AciiQns and uses, — Diaphoretic, emetic, expectorant, and stimulant 
to the mucous membranes ; given in dysentery with success. It is 
alio given in rheumatism and biliousness. It is a fair substitute for 
^ecaoianha. 

Syoaoarpoa Raabyi. 
Salt tat •^SoxMh America. 
Bart usedn — ^The bark. 



122 AURANTIACEiE. 

Characters, — The odour of the bark is slight^but peculiar, and 
the taste unpleasant, not bitter, and slightly nauseous. 

Constituents: — Oxalate of lime in large monoclinic crystals. 
Gutta-percha, a resinous secretion, a yellowish-white, amorphous, 
sometimes slightly granular substance ; caoutchouc ; and an active 
principle. 

Preparation, — Fluid extract. Dose, 5 to 30 ms. Tincture (i 
in 10). Dose, \ to i dr. 

Actions and uses.— At first stimulant, expectorant like apomor- 
phine, carbonate of ammonia, and strychnine and then sedative ; given 
m acute bronchitis and in chronic pulmonary cases accompanied with 
viscid secretion, or when the cough is dry and harsh. 

Walsura Pisoidia, Triohilia Trifoliate, T. Emetioa. 

Habitat, — Travancore, Ceylon, Malabar. 

Parts used. — The bark and nut. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Jauz-el-kai, Rukeh. Burm . — Joe-boe. 
Tam. — Walsura . Tel. — Walurasi. 
Jauzel-Kai means an emetic nut. 

Characters. — Bark J inch thick, brown, irregularly and longitudi- 
nally fissured, separated in flakes. The liber is cinnamon coloured, 
hard and compact ; taste bitter and astringent. 

Constituents. — Saponin, a resin of a light brown colour and 
tannin. 

Preparations. — Ointment of the powdered nut. 

Actions and uses, — The bark is stimulant, expectorant, emmena- 
gogue and violent emetic. The nut is used as a hair- wash to kill lice. 
The ointment is used to cure itch. The bark is used to poison fish. 

Remarks. — The fruit of Randia dumetorum is often used as a 
substitute for emetic nut. 

AurantiaoeaB. — The orange family. 

Aurantiacae — aurum (gold), from the yellow colour of the firuit. 

Characters, — Trees or shrubs. Leaves alternate, exstipylate, 
dotted, and with the blade articulated to the winged petiole ; 
flowers regular, fragrant ; calyx short, urn shaped, 3 to 5 -toothed ; petals 
or sepals equal in number ; stamens equal, or some multiple of tnem ; 
disk hypogynous and annular ; fruit indehiscent; seeds solitary or 
numerous, ex-albuminous ; cotyledons thick and fleshy. 

Habitat, — Chiefly natives of East Indies, cultivated throughout the 
warmer regions of the globe. 

Properties. — ^The plants have receptacles containing an essential oilf 
which renders them fragrant ; used m perfumery and fqr flayuWfilllg 
purposes. The volatile oil is found in leaves, petals and rinds or IntftSi' 
The rind contains also a bitter principle. The pulp is acidaod SMMMfli^;: ''Jik 



CITRUS AURANTJUM. 



193 



CitruB Aurantium. var. Bigaradia, B. P. 

?, Vulgaris, — The bitter orange. 

Aurantium, from aurum, gold. From the colour of the fruit. 
Orange, from Arabic naranj. 

Habitat. — North India, Circars, Aurangabad, West Indies, United 
lies, Spain. 
Parts used, — The fresh outer part of the pericarp— Aurantii 
Cortex Rccena B* P. The dried outer part of the pericarp— Aurantii 
Cortisx Scccatus B. P., orange flower* B. P, And the volatile oil 
distilled from fresh flowers. 

V^rnactiiar* — Arab.— Naranj. Beng. — Kumla-neebu, Narangi. 
Bium. — Liet)g*mau, Sung-zen. Chin. — Kan, Kiuh. Can, — KittaTe* 
Cine. — Ntrang-ka. Duk.^ — Narangi. Eng. — C. aurantium, the sweet 
or Portugal orange and Citrus vulgaris, the bitter orange or Caracoa 
orange. Hind, — Narangi, Kamlaneeboo, Indian Cintra. Malay. — 
Simio, Jeruk-manis, Maleal. — Madra^ Narranji, Mar, — Naringa. 
Pcrs.— Karang. Ponuguese— Porto-gallatto. Sans.— Swadu-naringa, 
N* ira» Karuna-nerabu. Tarn.— Kitchili Kolinjy* 

Ti: iili^ Narangamu. 

CiiiUa ib Uic iuroe of the mountain valley near Lisbon^ 

Characters,— A small tree, with beautiful foliage ; spines axillary, 
solitary, young shoots glabrous ] leaves ovali elongated ^ acute, 
somcttraeji slightly toothed ; petioles more or less dilated and winged ; 
flowers fragrant » large and white ; fruit nourishing, roundish or ovoid, 
usually ' d, reef or yellow, terminated by a small knob ; cells 9 to 

I2t mar \\ rind convex, containing vesicles of oil ; colour deep 

or*r Lxtcrnally, rough and glandular; inner surface covered with 

^nv It of spongy portion \ pulp sweet. Epidermis glandular 

inner layer spongy , of a fragrant pleasant odour and 
: :dc taste. Dried rind in thin strips or bands. Dose of the 
rind, 15 to jogrs. 

Cr--' ' — f^. — The rind of tlie Iruit Lontams a volatile oil, 
iBoniefi tl of turpentine ; gum resin, a fixed oil, hesperidin^ a 

bitt jjine principle, tannin, ash 4-5 px. The flowers and rind 

of fruit contain a volatile oil called oil of neroli ; a fragrant 

veUoU' 1 of a bitter aromatic taste ; soluble in alcohol (i to !)♦ 

It glVT: Liliar odour to eau-de-cologne or to Spirilus odoratus. 

Dose, I lu 3 nis. The leaves and young unripe fruit contain a volatile 
oil called the oil of orange leaf or neroU petit grain^ or essence de petit 
grain. This oil contains Limonene 20 px., Nerolol 30 px*, Nerolyl 
acetate 40 p.c, Geraniul 3 p.c. 

J^ifiarafktfu.'— Of the rind, Infusum aurantii^ B. P. (1 in 10). 
Dose, ^ to I oat. Ex true turn aurantii amtiri fimdum. — Fluid extract 
of bitter '^♦n^t^e pecL Dose, ^ to I dr. Infuutm aurantii composifum^ 
B^ P.— ' peel \ ounce, fresh lemon peel ] ounce, cloves 

55 ?n^' ^it. Duse, I to 1 oz, Syru/^tts atvmaticm^ B* P., 

Tir 2*, aqua cinnamomi 5 ozs.^ syrup 10 ozs. Dose, 

^ ! :itiSftiii fhrix B. P. (i of orange flower water m o). 



124 CITRUS MEDICA. 

Dose, i to I dr. Syrupus aurantii{i of tincture in 8). Dose, ^ to i dr. 
Tinctura aurantii, B. P. — Tincture of orange peel (i in 4). Dose, 30 
to 60 ms. Elixir aromaticum, — Aromatic elixir contains compound 
spirit of orange, precipitated calcium phosphate, syrup, alcohol and 
water. Dose, i to 3 drs. Vtnum aurantii, 6. P. (10 p.c. of alcohol). 
Dose, 60 to 120 ms. Aqua aurantii floris, B. P. Dose, i to 2 ozs. 

Orange peel is also an ingredient in the preparation of tinctura 
gentianae composita. Dose, i to 4 drs. Tinctura cinchonse composita. 
Dose, I to 4 drs. 

Actions and uses, — Aromatic bitter, stomachic, carminative 
and stimulant of the nervous system. These properties are due to the 
volatile oil it contains. Its preparations are valuable additions to bitter 
infusions used in dyspepsia and flatulence, but they are used mostly as 
adjunct to other stomachics as a flavouring agent. It is invaluable in 
scurvy. The oil, in large doses, produces violent colic and even con- 
vulsions. 

Citrus Hedioa, var. Limonum, B. P. 

Habitat, — North India, Mediterranean, foot of Himalaya; cultivated 
in Southern Europe. 

Parts used. — Juice — Succus Limonis, B. P., and the fresh outer part 
of the pericarp, Limonis cortex, B. P., and volatile oil, oleum Limonis, 
B. P. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Lemu Qalambak. Beng. — Karna-nebu. 
Bur. — Kigi-samyasi. Can. — Dodda-nimbe. Cing. — Lokka-dehi. Eng. 
— ^Truc lemons. Guz. — Motu-limbu. Hind.; — Korina-neboo. Malyd. 
— Valya-cheru narauna. Mar. — Thora-limbu. Pers. — Kalanbak. Sans, 
— Limpaka, Maha-Jambira, Nimbuka, Vijapura, Madhukarkatika. 
Tam. — Periya-elumihcham. Tel. — Pedda-ninuna-pandu. 

Characters— A straggling bush or tree, more tender than the 
orange tree, having many angular branches ; colour of the bark 
grey, that of branches green, and that of twigs reddish ; leaves 
spiny, evergreen, ovate, acute and serrate ; flowers sweet scented ; 
colour from white to purplish pink ; fruit ovoid, berry with nipple- 
shaped extremity, the rind — Limonis Cortex is smooth and marked 
with punctations over the oil glands ; pulp acid and yellowish. 
The natives use in medicine two varieties — Godaria Limbu thick- 
rinded ; the Kagaji limbu has a thin rind. In shape both are 
globular, their size varying from walnut to that of a small orange; 
colour also varies from shades of green to yellow ; their interior 
is juicy. The juice succus limonis, lemon juice is acid ; each 
lemon yields from 6 to 8 drs. It is contained in conglomerated 
cells separated in different layers or carpels. On the margin of each 
layer one or two seeds are attached ; seeds smaller than those of orange ; 
rind or the peel is in narrow thin bands, adherent to their spongy 
white inner layer. It has a deep yellow colour and is glandular, odour 
fragrant, taste bitter aromatic. The fragrancy is due to the presence 
of the volatile oil in the rind. 



Citrus iiedica. 



1^5 



Citrus Hedica. Yar* Citron. 

//ahtlat^Foot of the Himalaya, Peninsulat 

f^tiii used, — The rind, juice and oil. 

Vertiacular, — Arab. — Utraj. Beng. — Honsa nebu Begpura- 
Borob.— Mahal uag. Bur. — Sh-Onsakhava. Can. — Mada-lada-hannu. — 
Eog. — Citron. Guz. — ^Turtnj, Bijorun. Hind, — Mahalung Leemoo. 
Maleal — Narauna. Pers. — Duk-Turanj Liraoo. Sans. — Phalapural 
karima MahaJunga, Tarn. — Nartlamlpaihara, TeU— Mahipala, 

Btj^aJpura. 

CkaracUn, — The fruit is pineapple shaped, large and oblong; 
peel pale yellow, rough, from the presence of oiKglands, inner surface 
naving only a small quantity of white spongy portion. The juice 
cootnim 7 to 9 p. c. of citric acid and is a slightly turbid yellowish 
liquid. 

Constiiuent^. — Lemon juice contains citric acid 7 to 10 p,c., 
phosphoric and malic acids ; also citrates of potassium and other bases; 
ftugmr, mucilage and ash. Dose, 4 to 6 drs. Lemon peel contains 
a volatile oil, hesperidin, a bitter crystalline glucoside, chiefly in the 
while of the rind ; and ash 4 p.c. Hesperidin, a bitter principle 
5 10 S p« c. in yellow crystals, sparingly soluble in boiling water and 
^th«r, readily soluble in hot acetic acid, also in alkaline solutions. 
Volatile oil. Oleum limonis, B, P,, is obtained by expression from 
fresh lemon peel, and is isomeric with oil of turpentine. It is a pale- 
ycUow limpid liquid of a fragrant odour and aromatic bitter taste, 
foluble in alcohol (i in 3)* It contains citrene or limonene 76 p.c, 
citrol 7^ p.c.» cymene and citronellaJ- Dose^ 1 to 3 mi, 

Prtparatiom^ — Spiritus limonis, spirit of lemon ; used for flavour- 
iog purposes. Spiritus ammoniae aromaticus, B, P. Spiritus aurantii 
compositus. Acidura Citricum — Citric acid— obtained from the juice 
of the lemon or the Itme, by adding chalk to form calcium citrate and 
by decomposing by sulphuric acid. It occurs in colourless rhombic 
crystals, soluble in water. The solution of 17 grs. in 4 drs. of 
water is equal to 4 drs. of lime juice; or sufficient to neutralize potas- 
sium bicarbonate 25 grs* or sodium bicarbonate 20 grs., or Am- 
monium carbonate 15 grs. Dose, 10 to 30 grs. Tinctura limonis, B.P, 
tf id 4)* Dose, 30L0 60 ms. Syrupus limonis, B.P, Lemon peel j ounce, 
emon juice 25 ounces, sugar 38 ounces, alcohol q.s. to weigh 4 pounds 
and one ounce* Dose, | to i dr. 

Actions a fid uses* — The juice, rind of the fruits and volatile oil 
are used in medicine. The peel is bitter tonic and stomachic, used 
(oc flavouring cinctures and infusions* It is also stimulant and 
cartainative, given in indigestion, flatulence, and as a corrective to 
purgatives. It is also extensively used to disguise the taste of 
nicilicines such as quinitie, &c. The lemon juice is refrigerant, 
couliug and antistorbutic, analogous to orange juice, but it contains 
more citric acid and less syrup, and hence called acid of lemons, 
T- l: taken internally enters the blood as alkaline citrates, 

\ I salts and phosphoric acid. The citrates are partly oxidized 



I2b CITRUS BERGAMIA, C. LIMETTA. 

into carbonic acid and water. The potassium salts and phosphoric 
acid act upon the red corpuscles. They precipitate uric acid and 
thus promote the formation of calculi. If long continued, the 
juice or citric acid impairs digestion and impoverishes the blood. 
It is supposed to dissolve organic matters in the system; hence used in 
the treatment of atheroma. Fresh juice is useful in scurvy. It is an 
ingredient in many refrigerant and diuretic effervescing drinks, 
used in allaying febrile heat and thirst, in subduing restlessness, 
promoting the action, of the skin and kidneys. It is given in inflam- 
matory affections and in dyspepsia with vomiting. Its power of 
conveying alkalies into the blood renders it useful in acute rheumatic 
affections, sciatica, lumbago, &c., also given in obesity in large 
quantities with good results. It is often used with potassium bicar- 
bonate and honey by the natives as a gargle in diphtheria and sore 
throat. Externally it relieves itching if applied in pruritis of the vulva, 
scrotum, is applied in sun-burn, and to check post partem haemorrhage. 
The essential oil is a stimulating liniment for the relief of rheumatic 
pains. The juice of baked lemon is used in bilious affections and to 
stop diarrhoea. 

Seville or Bigardi orange comes from Spain, Madura, China 
and India. Mandarin (citrus levensis) comes from South of Europe ; the 
latter is very small in size, flattened at both ends and has a very thin 
rind. 

Citms Bergamia, C. Limetta. 

//abttaL^ltsLly^ Sicily, France, Jamaica, Indian Peninsula, Bengal. 

Pari used, — The soluble oil from the rind of the fresh fruit. 

Vernacular, — Arab; — Limu, Limu Hamiz. Beng, — Niboo. 
Burm. — Than-ba-ya, Shouk. Chin. — Tan-pu-lo. Can. — Nimbe-hanun. 
Cing. — Dehi. Duk. — Limboo. Eng. — Acid lime, Bergamotto lime, 
AdamVapple, common sour lime. Guz. — Nimbu. Hind. — Neemboo. 
Mar. — Zimbu. Malay. — Eroomitchee-narakam cheru-narama. Pers. — 
Limue-rtush. Sans. — Nimbooka, Jambira-phalam. Tam. — Elumich, 
Elimicham. Tel. — Gaja-nimma, Jambira-nimma. 

Characters.— A. small tree, resembling in characters lemon, orange, 
&c. Flowers small, of a delicious peculiar odour ; fruit paler coloured 
than lemon, pyriform or globose, and smooth; rind with receptacles for 
oil ; pulp greenish, aromatic and of an acid taste. 

Constituents. — The rind of the fresh fruit contains a volatile oil, 
hesperidin and ash. The volatile oil, Oil of Bergamot is obtained from 
unripe greenish but full-grown fruits by expression and distillation 
of the outer rind. It is a greenish thick liquid, faintly acid, of a 
peculiar fragrant odour and aromatic bitter taste ; soluble in alcohol, 
liquor potassae and glacial acetic acid. It contains several hydrocarbons, 
such as Cilrene, Bergaptene or Bergamot camphor ; Linalool and 
linalool acetate (or bergamiol), upon which its value chiefly depends. 
It is an ingredient of spiritus odoratus. 



^GLE MARMCLOS. 



Actions and uses. — Stimulant and aromatic* The natives use the 
juke as refrigerant, antiscorbutic and antiseptic in dyspepsia, fevers, 
and vomitini;. The oil is chiefly used externally as a perfume in the 
manufactuT' ofrnrlct articles. 

Butac68Q. 

The rue family. 

Trc€s» shrubs* or rarely herbs. Leaves alternate or opposite, 
exstipuhte, simple or pinnated and dotted; flowers regular or irregular 
and perfect ; calyx and corolla with a quaternary or quinary dis- 
Iribuiion of their parts ; ovary sessile or elevated on a gynophore ; 
fruits capsular, carpels united or distinct ; seeds solitary* or in pairs» 
radicle superior. 

//uplift?*,— *South of temperate zone; cultivated in the East. 

/¥o/tfr/ilpi.— Antispasmodic, febrifuge, diuretic and tonic, 

^gle Marmelos. 

Cratie\a marmelos, Feronia pellucida. 

Habitat, — Malabar, Coromande!, drj^ forests in India* 

/^r/i ined. — The fruit (pulp), 

Vemacuiar, — Arab — Sapharajale-hindi, ShuL Beng, — Shriphal, 
Beta. Bomb. — Shriphah Burm.^ — Oosheet. Can. — Bila-patri-hannu, 
Cing.— Bellika. Duk — BelphaK Eng. — Bael, Bengal Quince. Gnz. — 
Bilinu-phjil. Hind. — Shriphal» Bda. Malay.^ — Taoghai, Mar, — Bela, 
Pcrs*— Saphnrn-jale-hindi. Maleal — Kuvelam. Sans. — Bilva-phalam, 
Mahura. Tam. — Vilva-maram* TeL — Maradu-pandu, Malu-reniu- 
chcttu. 

Shriphal is derived from Sbri — the goddess of abundance^ and 
phali a fruit. It is an emblem of increase and fertility. The tree is 
sacred to the goddess of riches, :ind is cultivated everywhere in Hindu 
gardetu. "^ is also the nanje given to cocoanut, in allusion to 

IM fruit p< ^ ^n abundance of good properties. 

Ckaractsrs. — Fruit of various shapes and sizes, ovaJ, oblong^ 
elliptical, roundish. Smallonesof thesizeof a hen*s egg, large ones being 
as big as cocoanuts. Rind very hard, woody, nearly smooth, becoming 
%v ■ » dry and of a lightish yellow, cherry-red or brown colour,* 

StAf cTcled and dotted ; pulp of a brownish red colour, firm, and 

haviiig ii or more stony carpels, and in the cavities between the 
carpels and surrounding the seeds is a ten aceous transparent gluten like 
or a gummy resinous substance in angular fragments, of a reddish 
brown colour, which becomes hard on drying, but continues transparent. 
It is insoluble in water. The carpel contains seeds» which are hairy^ one 
or more in each carpel; odour (of the pulp) aromatic and agreeable; taste 
astringent and resembling that of jambu ; leaves pinnate or ternate, 
IcaHets oblong, broad Janccolate and crenulate ; green or dark green 
lit colour, itnntiih» shining and thick, and of an aromatic smell and 
la^' r; thin, of a light pink colour and somewhat astringent, 

D' [I, IS tosogrs. 



128 ATALANTIA MONOPHYLLA 

Constituents. — The pulp contains mucilage, pectin, sugar, tannin, 
a volatile oil, bitter principle, and ash 2 p.c. The wood ash contains 
potassium and sodium compounds, phosphates of lime and iron, 
calcium carbonate, magnesium carbonate, silica, sand, &c. The fresh 
leaves, on distillation, yield an oil of a yellowish green colour and 
neutral reaction, of an aromatic odour and bitter taste ; soluble in 
alcohol and miscible with carbon bisulphide. 

Preparations. -'¥,yitT2LQt}im bela liquidum. Dose, i to 2 drs. 
Decoction (i in 5). Dose, J to i oz. 

Aciiofis and uses.— -The ripe fruit is nutritious, delicious, aromatic, 
alterative, and laxative. It is given with sugarcandy to prevent 
the growth of piles and to remove habitual constipation. A 
decoction of unripe or half ripe fruits, or unripe fruit baked for 6 hours 
is astringent, digestive and stomachic, and is given in diarrhoea and 
dysentery. When taken in excess it often causes flatulence. Syrup 
of ripe fruits is used in dyspepsia. The root-bark is refrigerant, and 
is given in fevers, asthma with palpitation of the heart. In native 
practice a poultice of the leaves is applied to the head in the delirium 
of fever, and to the chest in acute bronchitis. The decoction of the 
leaves is given in asthma. A marmalade of bael fruit is a household 
remedy for diarrhoea and dysentery. 

Remarks. — The root is one of the ingredients of the decoction of 
dasa mula^ or the ten roots. 

Atalantia Monophylla. 

Limonia Monophylla, Trichilia Spinosa. 

Habitat -VJestQxn Peninsula, Ceylon, Malabar Coast, Ghauts, 
Bombay Presidency, Mahableshwar^ Coromandel. 

Part ^^flf.— The oil. 

Vertiacular. — Eng. — Wild lime. Can.— Katunimbe. Maleal. 
— Malvaregam. Mar. — Makhur-limbu. Tam. — Katelle-nucha. Tel. 
— Konda-nimma. 

Characters. — Leaves fragrant like those of orange ; berry globular, 
yellow, divided into 4 cells by membranous septa ; pulp like that of 
lime, but scanty, each cell containing one seed ; rind, of a faint 
odour of orange peel and full of oil cells ; oil is aromatic and of a dark 
green colour. 

Preparation. — Decoction of the leaves. 

Actiofis and uses. — The oil is only used externally as a stimulant 
in rheumatic joints, paralytic limbs, &c. The root is antispasmodic 
and btimulant. Decoction of the leaves is applied in itch. 

Barosma Betolina, B. P. 

B. Crenulata. B. Serratifolia. 

Habitat. — South Africa, Cape Colony. 

Part used. — The dried leaves. Buchu folia, B. P. Buchu leaves. 



PERONIA ELEPHANTCM. 



rs9 



HBTo&ma, from baros, heavy, and osme, smell or odour. The 
*ot ihe leaves is heavy and powerful, Betulina, from Betu»birch» 
the Icaveii resemble those of birch tree* Creaulata, from crena» a 
tioicht the leaves are crenulate or notched. 

CkaracUrx. — Shrub. R Bctulina leaves i to | inch long^ of a 
duK ' colour, rhomboid, ovate, rigid, and cartilaginous 

wli glabrous, somewhat warty, margin denticulate^ 

apcjc bluui fiiiil recurved; oil glands visible near the margin ; odour 
liid Uusie strong and characteristic. Dose of the leaves, 15 to 30 grs. 

Ccmtihunts, — Volatile oil, resin^ ligain, bitter extractive principle, 
(rutin, or baraismin) gum and salts. 

V^latiU oily obtained by the distillation of the leaves is the acuse 
principle and contains a body of a peculiar, penetrating, peppermint- 
like odour ; on cooling it separates barosma camphor or mosphenol, a 
Iteoropten occurring in white needle-like crystals. 

Pfeparati^jfis. — Intusum Buchu B. P, — Infusion of Buchu (1 in 
30). Dosei I to 1 oz. Exiractum buchu tluidumi fluid extract of 
buchu. Dose, 10 to 60 ms, Tinctura Buchu, B, P, — Tincture of 
Buchu (I in 5). Dose, J to i dr. 

PkyxioJogical action, — Diuretic, diaphoretic, and stimulant. In 
Ansalt doses it causes a sense of heat in the stomach, increases 
appetite^ uimuTatcs the heart beat, and increases the action of the 
&kto by can 'U diaphoresis* It is eliminated by the kidneys, the 

urine bcco r;er and of a strong aromatic odouri leaving a 

brownish deposit- In large doses it is a gastro-intestinal and renal 
iirttanti producing vomiting, purging and strangury. 

Thttaptiidci* — Given in gravel* chronic pyelitis^chronic bronchitis, 
ciurrh ul the bladder and in urethritis ; also in diseased prostate^ 
in litbia»T9, and in retention or incontinence of urine. In atonic 
dyspepdia, chronic rheumatism it is generally combined with alkalies. 

Fiitmia Elepbantum, Anisiphalins Rumphli, Crateeva Yallanga* 
HahiiaL — India, Gujerat, Bengal, Travancore. 
Psrts used, — The leaves, ripe and unripe fruit and gum. 

Vernacular, — Arab.— Kabit. Beng, — Kat-bel. Burm. — H^man. 
Can^— Hi V tUrf.i^ Kavita V'nksea. Cnig,— Dewul. Duk.— Kavit, 
Eog,— c apple or wood apple, London — Ararad (gum). Guz. — 

Kavit K n *- gund (gum). Hind, — Bhuin-koit, Katbel, Kawit. 

Maly*L— \ i^m. Mar* — Kavitha. Pers.— Kabit. Portuguese, — 

Balong, b^ns- Bhu-kabid-thazi, Kupitha, Kapiprya, Dadhiphala. 
Tarn.— Vela Villa Vila, Vellanga. Tel.— Kapihamu Nola, Puli. 

Elephant ;ipplc or wood apple. The pericarp of the fruit is hard 
like wa(>d nr elephant skin, 

Rapitha^ the apple on which tnonkeys dwell, Kapipriya, that 
which \s dear to monkeys. Dadhiphaia, Dadhi or Dahi means^ 
coagulated milk» and Phal, the fruit. The taste of the fruit resembles 
thai «if LtKH'uliiteLi nvilk. 



130 LIMONIA ACIDtSSIMA. 

Characters. — Leaves with from S to 7 leaflets, pinnate, cuneate or 
obovate, crenate at the top, pellucid and dotted. When crushed they 
smell like fennel, varialee ; fruit light grey or dirty white in colour, 
globose and covered with a scurfy epidermis; rind dull green, woody, 
granular and very fragile ; pulp of a pale greyish pink colour ; seeds 
numerous, oblong, compressed, thick and fleshy; smell aromatic ; taste 
somewhat acid and astringent. The gum, ghati gund^ is semitrans- 
parent, and in roundish tears or irregular masses, colourless, or 
of a yellow or brownish red colour. With water it is readily 
soluble without residue, and forms a thick, tasteless, viscid mucilage 
like that of Bavala gund (gum acacia), the major portion is different 
from gum-arabic, and contains abundant crystals of mucic acid. 
Dose of the pulp, 15 to 25 grs. 

Constituents. — The pulp contains a large quantity of citric acid 
with potash, lime and iron. The leaves yield an essential oil similar 
to that obtained from bael leaves. 

Preparation. — Fluid extract. Dose, ^ to i dr. medicated oil. 
Puncha Kapittha. Composed of the five allied products, viz. flowers, 
bark, fruit, leaves and root, made into a medicated oil and applied to 
the whole body in fevers. Compound powder. Kapith Ashtaka — 
Kapith — Elephant apple. Ashtaka, eight. A compound preparation 
of eight drugs, which are highly astringent. These contain 
Kapith or Koth (the pulp) 8, Sakar 6. Dalimba-chhal 4, Amali- 
chhal 3, Bela-phal 3, Dhauri-phul 4, Naga-kesar i, Taj 4. Mix 
and make a powder. To this add Ajamod 3, Pipali 3, Miri 4. Jirun 
4, Dhana 4, Pipali-mula 3, Valo 2, Sanchal 2, Elachi 4, Tamala- 
patra 2, Chitrk i, Sunth 2. Mix and make a powder. Astringent 
carminative and stomachic. ' Dose, i to 2 drs. Used in chronic 
dysentery and diarrhoea. 

Actions and uses. — The young leaves are stomachic, lithontriptic, 
and carminative, used in d)rspepsia and diarrhoea ; also used in lessen- 
ing red sand from the urine. The unripe fruit is astringent, and, like bael, 
is used in diarrhoea and dysentery. The ripe fruit is refreshing, anti- 
scorbutic, digestive and tonic, the syrup is used in salivation, sore 
throat and in strengthening the gums. The gum is a good substitute 
for gum-arabic, the mucilage is more viscid than that of gum-arabic, and 
is used with honey in diarrhoea, dysentery, and to relieve tenesmus of 
the bowels. The pulp or the powdered rind is used as a local application 
for bites of venomous insects. 

Limonia Aoidtosima, L. Crenolata. 

Habitat. — Himalaya, Coromandel, Malabar, Assam, W. Peninsula 
Hurdwar. 

Parts used. — The fruit, leaves and root. 

Vernacular. — Hind. — Beli. Mar. — Naibel. Malyal. — Jerukat 
narigam. Tel. — Torelaga, 

Naibel. — Nai, Navi, barber. Barber's bael fruit, used by barbers in 
Java instead of soap. 



MURIiAVA KXOnCA. 



nt 



CharacUrs, —Shrub, with pinnate leaves^ with a or 3 pairs of 
lets ; leaflets oblong, crenatea ; with solitary spines, and winged 
Kioles ; flowers corymbose, corymb unibelliform, small, white and 
Bgrant ; root yellow, bitter and aromatic, fruit small, globular, 
of the size of a nutmeg or pea or grape, yellowish, but red when 
pctfectly ripe ; structure bimilar to that of the lime j pulp 
flesh 'Coloured, highly acid and somewhat bitter and aromatic ; 
cells four ; seeds three. 

Prcfara tiofs.^— iniyxuon of leaves and decoction of root (1 in lo). 
Dose. J to a ozs. 

nt^ uses. — The leaves are antispasmodic, given in epilepsy. 
The ; ifgative and antispasmodic, giv^en in colicy pains ; the dried 

fmil is <i tonic and is given in fever and dyspepsia associated with flatus. 

Remarks, — The fruit is considered by the Arabs as a prophylactic 
agminst small-pox, malignant fever and pfague. 

Murraya Exotica. CheUia paniculata. 
//i/A//i»/,— Himalaya, Ceylon, Bengal, China, 
Purls useti. — Flowers and leaves. 

Ventacu Ian— B&ng, — Kamini. Burm* — Thanat-kha, May-kay. 
Cing»— Attaireya-ga^s. Eng. — Honey-bush, Cosmelic-box, China-box. 
Hind, — Bibzar, Koonti, Konkan, — Kanioun, Murchgle. Mar. — 
Kciuiiti. TcL— Noga-golunga* 

HoQcy-bush,— The fragrance of its white flowers is like that of honey. 

CharacUrs, — An ornamental shrub with beautiful dark^green 

leaves. Leaflets coriaceous, flowers white and sweet-smelling, 
■ \g in taste and odour Murraya ka-nigii. 

Omsiituents. — Flowers contain a glucoside named Murrayin, 

rwparatiun, — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, \ to I ozs. 

Actimis and uses. — Tonic and stomachic, like Murraya kcenigii 
«t)d u^d similarly. 

Marraya (Bergera) Koaoigil. 

//"tfi^i/a/.*— Himalaya, Bengal, Ceylon, W. Peninsula. 
Parts med* — The leaves, root and bark* 

Ftniacular^ — Beng. — Barsunga Karia-phalee. Burm,^ — Pindo-sin. 
Can- — Karibevu. Cing. — Kara-pinchee-gass. Duk, — Karya-pak. Eng. 
— Curry*leaf tree* Guz. — Gora-nimb. Hind. — Katnim, Karripak, 
Kwdia-fitrn. Malayal. — ^Karu-veppa, Panj.— Ganda-nimb. Mar, — 
I rub, Jhlrang, Jirani. Maleal. — Barsanga. Sans*— Knshna- 

I; lurabhi-niniba. Tarn, — Karu-vembu. Tel. — Nalyal Karivepa. 

Suurabhi nimb. — Sorab, soram, fragrant smell. The ncem is 
fragraiit Joran, Jirana, to digest. The plant is digestive. 

CA«7/ric/tfrj.— Leaves pinnate with numerous leaflets, alternate^ 
[icqually oblique and serrated, upper surface dark green and dotted, 
ader surface of a light colour; odour powerful; taste pungent, 



132 PEGANUM HARM ALA. 

bitter and acidulous ; root spreading, with numerous suckers ; bark 
soft and thick, odour agreeable; taste like that of fresh ginger. 

Constttuents.^TYkt leaves contain a volatile oil resembling the oil 
of iGgle Marmelos ; a resin; and a crystalline principle named koenigin 
(glucoside). 

Preparation, — ^Infusion (i in lo). Dose, i to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Tonic, stomachic, and febrifuge, given with 
bitters in dyspepsia, loss of appetite, and in general debility ; also in 
dysentery and to stop vomiting. The bark and root are local stimu- 
lants and used as application to wounds by venomous animals. 

Peganum Harmala. 

Habitat. — N. W. India, Western Deccan. 

Part used. — The seeds. 

Vernacular. — Eng. — Syrian Rue. Arab. — Harmal. Beng. — Isband. 
Bomb. — Haramaro, Ispanda. Diik. — Ispand, Harmaro. Hind. — 
Islamlahori, Ispand. Pers. — Isband, Sipand. Tam. — Vanai-virai. 
Tel— Shima, Garante, Vittulu. 

Characters. — The drug consists of seeds mixed with a few pedicles 
and portions of capsules ; seeds are of a dull greyish brown colour, 
several, irregularly angular, curved on one side. Each covered with a 
rough tomentum, easily separable from the testa by scratch- 
ing ; odour strong, heavy and disagreeable, resembling that of 
cannabis or govarni-sing ; taste resinous, persistent and bitter. 

Constituents, — A resin of a narcotic odour and two alkaloids 
viz., Harmaline and Harmine ; Harmaline when treated with 
hydrochloric acid, yields Hermatol, in orange-red cr3^tals sparingly 
soluble in water ; Harmine may be obtained by oxidizing 
harmaline with nitric acid ; It occurs as colourless crystals, insoluble 
in water ; very little soluble in alcohol and ether. Fuming 
hydrochloric acid converts it into harmal. When oxidized by means 
of chromic acid, it yields herminic acid — silky tufts. 

Preparations, — Decoction (i in 20). Dose, ^ to i oz. Tincture 
(i in 8). Dose, 30 to 60 ms. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant of the sexual organs, alterative, 
also emmenagogue like ergot, savine and sitap used internally in 
amenorrhcea and as a fumigatory in palsy, and lumbago ; it increases 
the flow of milk and menses* 

Remarks. — Native midwives use it for procuring abortion. 
Mendi seeds are often substituted for Ispanda ; both are alike in form 
and colour. 



PARAMYGKYA MONOPHYLLA. 



m 



Paramygnya Honophylla. 
SahtM. — ^Sikkira, Himalaya, Bhutan, Ceylon* 
A/is ustd. — Frutts and root. 
Vernacular. — Mar, — Karru-wagete. 

Characters.-^ The root-bark is brown and scabrous ; taste bitter ; 
fruits resemble those of capparis zeylanica. The bark contains large 
CTj'Stah of oxalate of lime. 

Actions and mcs. — Diuretic and alterative, 

LuYimga Boandana. 

HabitaU — Himalaya, Bengal. 

Part used.^The fruit or berry. 

FemacuIar.^^SMi^, — Kakkola. Beng. — (the oil) Kakala. 

Characters, — Berries glandular, papillose, of a terebenthinata 
oAo^t and taste. Contain i to 4 dark*green oily seeds f testa 
membranous. 

Prt^aratkm* — Perfumed medicinal oil (kakkolaka). Hair oiK 

Rata Graveolena— var. AngustifoUa. 

JJaintat,^ Cultivated in the East, South Europe, 

l*afts tfj^^.— The plant, fresh leaves and oil. 

Vtfnacular^ — Arab* — Sudaba. Bomb, — Satapa« Can, — Nagadali- 
'Mppu* Cing.^ — Aruda. Duk. — Saaf. Eng. — Peganon of Scripture. 
Garden rue, Herb of grace. Guz. — Scradab, Sitapa. Hind. — batari 
Amda. Mar. — Sudab. Malay, — Sadab* Pers, — Sudap. Sans.^ — Somala- 
ta» Brahmu Sadapata. Tarn, — Arvada. Tel. — Arudu. 

0^r^<r/*rrj,— Herb, perennial, about 3 or 3 feet high, glaucous- 
men, smooth or tubcrcled ; leaves long, petioled ; leaflets small, 
dotted, linear, oblong or obovate and very minutely crenate ; under 
surface pale, upper surface glaucous green or dark-green; flowers yellow; 
fruit capsule obtuse, shortly pedicelled ^ or 5lobed ; corymbs spreading, 
bracts lanceolate; sepals triangular, acute ; petals ciliatt; ; seeds black, 
many; odour peculiar and resembling somewhat that of Tulasi ; 
tifte pungent, nauseous and slightly bitter. Dose, powdered leaves, 
5 to 10 gri. 

Cfmstittitnts. — An essential volatile oil (Oleum Rutae), and Rutin— 
a Wttcr, yellow glucosidc. The oil is a viscid fluid of a greenish yellow 
colour and neutral reaction, solidifies in crystalline laminae resembling 
tlioec of anl&e oil. The chief volatile constituents are methyl-non}^ 
ketone The ketone was formerly regarded as capric or rutic aldehyde. 
It alio contains lauric aldehyde and a hydrocarbon, analogous to oil of 
lurpentine and bomeol. Dose, 1 to 5 ms. 

-/^<5iMrrt/^iw.^Decoction(i in 10). Dose, i to 2 ois», and essential oiU 

Physif^hgicaJ actions, — Locally an active irritant. In small doses 
tonic, digestive, and aphrodisiac, causes heat in the throat, nausea. 



134 LEBA MACROPHVLLA. 

eructations, and flatulence. It irritates the skin, kidneys and bronchi, 
and increases their secretions. It stmulates the heart, increases the 
frequency of its action and diminishes its tension. It also leads to 
h3rperaemia of the uterus and ovaries, and increases the menstrual flow. 
It IS promptly diffused, and may be found in the urine, sweat and 
breath. In large doses it sets up gastro-enteritis, with violent vomiting, 
purging, bloody urine and dysuria. In poisonous doses it is a narcotic 
and irritant poison, causing great prostration, convulsions, suppression 
of urine, often giving rise to abortion. 

Therapeutics. — ^It is a most powerful aphrodisiac. The juice or 
the decoction of fresh leaves is used as an anthelmintic in children, and 
as an injection (rectal) against thread-worms. The oil is stimulant, 
carminative and antispasmodic, given with aromatics in colic, hysteria, 
epilepsy, and flatulence; as an emmenagogue in amenorrhoea. Extern- 
ally the oil is applied to the chest in chronic bronchitis, to glandular 
enlargements, to rheumatic painful parts and to scaly eruptions. 
jUocally it produces inflammation and vesication. The natives give it 
extensively to increase the flow of urine and menses. The varalians 
of the leaves and oil are used in tympanitis. 

AmpelldaoeaB or Yitaoea. 

The vine family. Climbing shrubs — juice watery; joints swollen and 
separate from each other ; leaves simple or compound, alternate above 
and opposite below ; flowers regular, green, small and stalked ; fruit 
succulent, 2-celled ; seeds erect, few — 2 in each cell ; testa hoviy ; 
ialbumen hard. 

Habitat, — Warm regions, Caspian ; cultivated in the South of 
Europe. 

Properties, — Leaves, stems and unripe fruits are juicy, the juice 
being acid, owing to the presence of tartaric acid and acid potassium 
bitartrate. Ripe fruits are also juicy, but sweet owing to the forma- 
tion of glucose or grape-sugar, 

Leea Maofophylla. 

Habitat. — Hotter parts of India. 

Part /Ay^flT.— Tuberous root. 

Verna cular, — Beng. — Tolsu mudriya. Burm. — Kya-bet-gyec|i 
Mar. — Dinda. Sans. — Dholsa Mudra, Dholusa-mudrika. 

Characters, — Herbaceous plant ; leaves large; flowers small, and 
white, stems straight and pointed ; root woody, porous and tough, 
of a deep red colour and very bulky ; bark dark-brown, scabrous and 
striated. Internally the bark is deep-red. The odour is astringent 
and agreeable. The tubers are mucilaginous. 

Preparations, — Poultice of the root and paste. 

Actions and uses, — Local stimulant. The root is applied over 
guineaworm and to obstinate chronic sores to promote their 
healing. A paste of it is applied in ringworm. 



LEEA SAMBUCINA. 



»3S 



Bea Sambucina. L. Staphylea, Staphylea Indtoa* 

Habitat. — Hotter parts of India, Burmah. 

Finria used. — The roots and leaves. 

Vtrnacuiar. — Beng. — Kurkur-Jihwa- Burm. — Ka-let, Goa. — 
r OtORO. Htnd . — Kurkurgihwa. Mar* — Karkani, Portuguese. — 
latanhia, Tel. — An kadoo. 

ri-.*^Stems shrubby with straight branches ; leaves pin- 
ottc stalked ; flowers greenish white ; fruit the size of a small 

cherry ; root porous, woody and tough ; bark scabrous, of a dark-brown 
colouTi taste astringent and odour agreeable. 

I^tparaHons, — Decoction (i in lo). Dose, ^ to i oz. 

Actions and uses, — Stomachic, tonic and astringent, used in 
diarrhoea, dysentery, colic ; also used to relieve thirst during fever. 
Externally it is used for ringworm. Roasted leaves are applied to the 
head in vertigo. The juice of fresh leaves is digestive, and given in 
diarrhoea and chronic dysentery. 

Titil* — Different species of vitis are remarkable for their contain- 
ing tannin ; hence useful as astringents. Some of them are acrid, owing 
to their containing needle-shaped crystals of oxalate of lime, which 
cause mechanical irritation ; nence used to promote suppuration of 
boiis. The dried tubers and stems are not acrid. In them the oxalate 
cr)-stals mat together and thus become blunt* They contain large 
quantities of potash and lime salts^ and are therefore used as diuretic 
ind antacid in urinary diseases. 

VitlB Aranaosos. 

Vimaculmr. — Hind.^ — Kamraj, Chamar-Musli. Mar, — Bendri, 
Bender vel| Ghorvel. 

Ghoravela^ from ghora, a horse, and vel, vine. The young shoois 
and leaves arc given to horses as a cooling medicine. The root i% used 
as astringent in diarrhoea. 

YItis Caraosa.^ — V\ Cordata, Cissus Carnosa; found in the hedges 
and forests in Bengal. 

Vtrnacuiar, — Beng. — AmaUata. Eng. — ^Fleshy wild wine. Gur, — 
Khatumbro. Hiud.^ — Kassar Amal-beK Mah, — Odi, Ambat-veL 
Tel«*-Mandula-mari-tigae, Kani-apa-tige. 

Actions aftd $(scs, — The root is remarkably acrid ; used as an 
application to boils. 

YtUsIndlca. Yltis Hugosa. 
Habitat. — Western Peninsula India, Deccan, Tennaserim, 
Parts used, — The leaves and tubers. 

Vernacular. ^Kng. — Indian wild vine. Hind. — Amdhuka*Beng.— 
.'Vmdhiaka^ Amoluka. Duk. — Jangali Draksha. Maleal. — Shem* 
bravuUi. Mar- — Randraksh, Kolejan. 



136 VmS PEDATA. 

Characters. — Climbing plant, slightly hairy ; stem striated, rather 
contorted especially at the joints, and smooth; leaves trifoliate, smooth 
and succulent; leaflets lateral, obliquely cordate, acuminate, oblong and 
serrated on the top ; tubers i to 2 feet long, tapering at both ends, 
brown externally, having wart-likeprotuberances arranged in circular 
rings, internally red and juicy. The leaves are rich in salts of potash 
and lime ; fresh leaves are acrid owing to the irritation caused by the 
presence of needles of oxalate of lime ; berries black when ripe, full 
of purple juice, taste acrid, somewhat sweet and mucilaginous. 

Preparation. — Decoction of tubers (i in 10). Dose, } to i oz. 
Actions and uses. — Antiscorbutic, alterative and stimulant; used in 
syphilis, scrofula, scurvy, general weakness, chronic skin diseases, &c. 

Vitis Padata. 

Vernacular. — Beng, — Goali-lata. Mar. — Gorpadvel. Sans. — 
Godhapadi or Iguano*s foot. 

Godhapadi, Godha, — the reptile, lizard, and padi-pedis foot, from 
the fancied resemblance of the leaves to the foot of the reptile Galoli. 

Actions and uses* — The leaves are astringent. The decoction is 
used to check uterine and other fluxes. 

YituB Quadrangnlaris— CiBsas Quadran^laris. 

Habitat. — India, Arabia. 

Parts used. — The dried stalk, leaves and juice. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Harajora, Hasjora. Burm. — Shazavu-lese. 
Can. — Mangaruli. Duk. — Mailer. Guz. — Hadashankar, Chodhari. 
Hind. — Nallar, Harsankar. Malay. — ^Jungilam-parinda. Mar. — Hera 
Shankar, Hada Jodi, Chodhari-kandavel. oans. — Ashti-sandhna, 
Vagra-valli. Tam. — Piranda-kodi. Tel. — Nalla-ratiga. 

Hara Shankar. — Hara or Hada, a bone, and Sankar, a chain, in 
allusion to the jointed stems like a chain of bones. 

Asthi Sandhana — Asthi, bone, and Sandhana, to join or to heal, 
in allusion to the stem having a resemblance to the articulations of 
bones, from this it is supposed to be useful in healing or reducing 
fractures and dislocations. 

Characters, — Stem obtusely quadrangular, smooth, greenish, 
generally dichotomously branched, nodes jointed ; leaves thick, entire 
or three-lobed ; juice acrid. Dose of the powder, 20 to 40 grs. 

Preparation. — Decoction (i in 5). Dose, ^ to i oz. 

Actions and uses, — Alterative and stimulant, given in dyspepsia, loss 
of appetite and scurvy; also in irregular menstruation. The juice is 

Sven mixed with gopi chandan, ghee and sugar. Paste of the 
esh stem is astringent, and locally applied to dislocations, sores and 
fractured limbs ; juice of the stem is dropped into the ear in otorrhoea 
and into the nose to check epistaxis. 



VmS VINIFBRA. 



137 



Vitis Setosa— CiBSQa Setosa— C Cardata 

^/iiViti/.— Peninsula. 

P'ematular, — Hind.^ — Harmml, Haljar. Mah.^ — Khaj-goHcha-vel- 
Tam.— Puli naravi. Tel.— Bara-butsali. 

Actions and uses* — The leaves are very acrid; roasted and 
Oiled they are applied to indolent tumours to promote suppuration, 
ad to painful swelling to assist in the extraction of guinea-worms, 

Shamraj and Bhojraj are short pieces of stems of the two species 
of Viti6, and used as an astringent in gonorrhoea* 

YitlB Ylnifera. 

HabitaL — Himalayas ; cultivated in Europe, ic. 

PSarts used, — Grapes and raisins, or dried grapes without stones. 

Vernacular.-^hrzh, — Kerm. Beng. — Angur, Drakhya. Burm* — 
Sabisii Sabya-si, Bomb, — Drakhsha, Kishamisha, Can.—Drakshi- 
tunnti. Cing. — Mudra-palam. Duk — Angura Daka. Eng. — Grapes, 
Grape vinc^ the vine- Guz. — Draksha, Hind. — Angura, Dakha, 
Ktshamisha, Monakha (raisins) Malyal. — Munteri. Mar, — Draksha. 
Pcrs. — Angura, Gureb (the juice). Sans. — Draksha phalama, Mridoica. 
Tarn. — Diraksha-pazham, Dirippa Zham, Tel. — Gostini-pondu, 

CharacUrs.—Bernes succulent^ of an ovoid form, often globose ; 
ovarv, 2 cellrd, ovules two in each. There are two varieties — Kali draksh 
and K '). The former is black in colour and large* Kishamisha 

IS sm. .\ nish red or pale yellowish brown. The fruity not being 

articulated with the rachis or the rachis with the branch, remains at- 
tadied to the plant and withers on it. The dry fruits are called raisins* 
In lar^e and old raisins the pulp is found crystallized in nodular masses. 
Varieties of raisins, — Sultanas, muscatels and currants. Muscatels are 
raisins dried in the sun. Sultanas are remarkable for the absence of 
ic«ds« Currants, corruption of Corinth, where they were originally 
grown, arc a very small variety of raisins. 

( ^:ts. — The pulp contains grape sugar, cream of tartar, 

gum .1 EC acid. The seeds contain a bland fixed oil and tannic 

add ; skin oi the fruit contains tannic acid. 

PreparaHons, — ^Juice, ashes of the wood, and Asava or wine 
** Draksha arrshta/* Used in the preparation of fermented liquors, 
▼ini^r, &c. 

Drak!iha ari^hca-*a spirituous preparation (Medicinal Wine), 
Make a •! of Raisins 20, and water 60. To the filtrate 

add treaci imon, cardamom, Folia malabarica, flowers of mesua 

ferrea — Fruit ot AgJaia Roxburgh i ana — Black pepper, long pepper, 
and seeds of embelia ribes each 2 parts. The whole is then set 
aside for a fortnight and allowed to ferment. Dose i to 4 drachms. 
As a stimulant given in congh, consumption and enlarged glands. 

Actions and usrs, — Skin and stones from the grapes should be 
r before use. Raisins are refrigerant, demulcent, cooling, and 

a: ^nt, generally used to sweeten medicinal preparations and 



138 PITTOSPORUM FLORIBUNDUM. 

given to relieve thirst in fever, and inflammatory affections and in consti- 
pation. The leaves are astringent, and used in diarrhoea. The ashes 
of the wood are used as prophylactic against stone and in uric acid 
diathesis. The natives apply the paste of the ashes to swellings of 
testicles and to piles. Black raisin is generally used as an ingredient in 
purgative mixtures. Kishamish is used also as an ingredient of several 
confections. 

PittoBporaoesB.— The PittoBporam family. 

Characters, — Trees or shrub. Leaves simple, alternate and exsti- 
pulate ; flowers regular ; sepals and petals hypogynous ; stamens 5 ; 
ovary superior ; fruit baccate or loculicidal capsule ; seeds numerous ; 
embryo minute ; albumen fleshy. 

Habitat, — Australia, Africa. 

Properties. — Resinous properties. Some bear edible fruits. 

PittoBpomm Floribandam, P. Ceylonioiim. CelastraB 
YertioillataB, Senaoia lepalensiB. 

Habitat. — Himalayas, Western Ghauts, Peninsula. 

Part used, — The bark. 

Vernacular. — Mar. — Vekhali Vishari. Hind. — Vel-kali, Vchyentc* 
Cing. — Katteya-goss. 

Vikhari means specific for poison. 

Characters. — Bark in quills ; external surface grey and marked by 
warty prominences forming circular rings ; inner surface smooth of 
ight-brown colour ; odour aromatic, resembling carraways ; taste very 
bitter. Dose, as a febrifuge, S to 10 grs. 

Constituents. — A bitter glucoside — Pittosporin, and an aromatic 
oleo resin. 

Pn?/«w/!rb«.— Decoction (i in 10). Dose, ^ to i oz. 

Actions and uses. — Bitter, aromatic, febrifuge and expectorant* 
In large doses narcotic; used in fevers and in chronic bronchitis with 
good results. It is used by the natives as an antidote against snake 
poison. 

Xanthoxylaoett. 

The prickly ash family. Trees or shrubs; resembling in their charac- 
ters Rutaceae. Differing from it in having polygamous flowers. 
Fruits sometimes baccate and indehiscent. In rutaceae universally 
capsular. Seeds always albuminous in xanthoxylaceae. In rutacese some 
are albuminous while others are exalbuminous. 

Habitat. — Temperate climates and tropics, especially America. 

Properties. — Pungent, aromatic and bitter, stimulant, febrifugCt 
tonic, sudorific, sialogogue and emmenagogue. 



TODDALIA ACULEATA. 

Toddalia ioaleata, T. RnbrioaaliA. Scopalia AGuleata, T. Asiatioa, 
T, Nitlda, Paulinia Aaiatioa. 

Hnhitat — Himalaya, Ceylon, W. PeniQsula, Coromandel Coast* 

P^rts HSfd. — The root-bark and fruit (berries). 

Vemacitiar, — Cing. — Kudu-miris, Duk. — Jangli kali mirachi. 
Eog* — Lopcx root. Hind. — Jangli kali mirch, Dahao- Mai. — Kaka 
ToddaJi, MuUkatajii. Mar. — Limri, Sans, — Kanchan, Dahan. 
Tarn-— Kaka-ioddali, Mirla-karan-maram. Tel. — ^Konda-kashinda, 
Varra-kasimii 

Kanchana (Sanskrit word) means golden — the orange colour of 
the fruit. Dahan means burning^ in allusion to the burning taste or 
pungency of berries* 

Charatiers, — Stem and branches prickly ; fruit of the size of a pea, 
orange coloured, highly pungent. When ripe, dried berries are dark- 
brovrn or black and of the odour of citron; root small, white, woody and 
c^'lindrical ; hark soft, yellow, with a corky external layer, wrinkled 
tongitudinallyt and containing cells filled with oleo-resin j taste hot 
and peppery. 

Comtiiuftits* — The bark contains a resin^ essential oil, and a bitter 
principle* The oil is limpid, oft green colour : oJour that of citron 
and of a bitter aromatic taste. 

Preparations, — Infusion (l in loj. Dose, ^ to i oz. Tincture 
(i in 10). Dose, I to i dr. Liniment of the root* 

Aciions and use:i, — Berries pungent, like black pepper. The bark 
bitter hlomachic, carminative, tonic atid ant i periodic. The bark is 
I^Ken in hill and jungle fever. The whole plant is febrifuge, carmina- 
Itve, ionic and stimulant. Internally the root is given in general debility 
ifKl during con\"ale^cence from fever and other chronic diseases. Under 
ihc name of Lopez root, it had once some reputation for diarrhoea in 
Europe. The liniment is used in rheumatism. 

Zfiiifaoxylon Rhetoa^ X. Alatum. X. Budranga. X. JLcanthopodium. 
X. Hamiltonianam. X. Oxyphyllum. 

UabUaL — \V. Peninsula^ Tropical Himalaya, Assam, Colombo. 

/Vr/i used, — The carpels and bark. 

Vernacular. — Burm. — ^Toung-than. Arab,— Faghireh. Beng. — 
TambuU Can.^Jimmi*mara» Cing*^ — Kattoo-kcenagaso, Chinese^ 
Hwatseaui Tsm-tsian. Eng. — ^Japanese pepper or Indian prickly-ash, 
Mpperwort. Hind.^ — Nepali-dhanyia, Tejphala, Durmur, Bud rang. 
Mafyai.— Mulila, Mar.— Tisal Trephal, ChirphaK Pers.— Kababeh, 
Ruaoadeh. Sans.— Tumburu (carpels). Tam.— Rhetsa-roaram. Tel. — 
Rfa«tia-marami Tisal chira phola kokali. 

Tumburu^ means coriander. It has the peculiar flavour of coriander 
and IS similar in size and shape* Hwa-tseau — pepper flower. Faghireh — 
opsD-mouthed, the dried carpels adhering atone end and open at the 



140 XANTHOXYLON PRAXINBUM. 

Other. Kababeh Kushadeh— open-mouthed cubebs. Rhetsa-inaram 
(Tel.) means a council tree. The hill people held their council or 
panchayet under this tree to settle their disputes. Prickly ash. 
The bark is prickly. The aromatic, pungent property is confined to 
the pericarp. 

Characters, — The tree is armed with prickles ; fruits dehiscenti 
small and oval {\ of an inch in diameter), resembling malkagani: 
surface wrinkled and pitted ; colour brownish, dark externally and 
brown within. It has a small woody stalk at its base and is bifid 
from the top down to more than half its length. Seeds black, very hard 
and shining, resembling pepper ; odour lemon-like. and oily ; taste 
acidulous ; bark in irregular flat pieces of various sizes, externally 
brownish^ consisting of several layers of a brownish red colour, corky 
and spongy. Dose of the seeds, lo to 20 grs. 

Constituents, — ^The bark contains a bitter crystalline principle, 
identical with berberine ; a volatile oil, and resin. The carpels 
contain a volatile oil, resin, a yellow acid principle and a crystalline 
solid body, xanthoxylin, consisting of carbon, oxygen and hydrogen, 
but devoid of nitrogen. Xanthoxylin is isomeric with oil of turpentine. 
It is a stearopten, a pale, viscid non-<irying oil ; a pure hydrocarbon, 
to which its aroma is due. 

Preparations, — Infusion of bark and decoction (i in 10). Dose, 
z to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant, aromatic, carminative, and altera- 
tive. The seeds are used like pepper as condiment. As a stimulant 
they are given in dyspepsia, diarrhoea. The bark is tonic and aromatic; 
the seeds are used as an ingredient in guraku (tobacco for the hukka), 
and given in atonic dyspepsia, fevers, rheumatism. Sometimes the 
essential oil is used as stimulant, especially in cholera. 

Xanthoxylon Frazlneom. 

X. Americanum, X. Carolinianum, X. Clava Herculis, Toothache 
shrub (Eng.) ; Prickly-ash. 

JIabitat'-li. America, United States, Canada. 

Parts used.^The bark and berries. 

Clava Herculis — Clava, club ; in allusion to the resemblance of 
the strong cone-like warts on the bark to the club of Herculis. 

Characters, — X. Americanum — prickly shrub, bark in curved 
or quilled fragments, outer surface brownish grey, with whitish 
patches and minute black dots, faintly furrowed, with some 
brown, glossy, straight two-edged spines, linear at the base, inner 
surface whitish, smooth, without any odour ; taste aromatic, but soon 
becoming bitterish and pungent. Dose, powdered bark, 5 to 30 grs. 
Powdered berries, 10 to 40 grs. 

X. Fraxineum — Shrub covered with sharp scattered prickles ; leaves 
imparipinnate ; leaflets ovate, downy. Bark with prickles protruding 
through the corky cones ; branches covered with large pnckles, X. 



AILANTHUS EXCfeLSA 



14! 



Clava Herculis, or souihern bark, very thick, with conical projections 
and stout brown spines* 

Cofisttiuents^ — Two resins. — A bitter principle, probably identical 
with berberine ; a volatile oil, tanniot a fixed oil, colouring matter, gum, 
sugar and ash, 1 2 p. c. 

Prt^paratinns. — Extract um Xanthoxyli Fluid um. Dose, \ to I dr. 
Decocium Xanthoxyli (i in 20)* Dose, i to 2 ozs, 

FHiyshhgical action. — Alterative, diffusible stimulant, aromatic* 
bitter, carminative, sialogogue, emmenagogue, sudorific and masticatory. 
In the mouth it causes tingling sensation. It increases the secretions 
of the salivary glands, hver, stomach, intestines and pancreas. It 
stimulates the heart, increases the arterial tension. As an alterative 
its action is similar to that of mezerion, guaiacum, stiJltngia, &c. 

7//rra/*<*//^aj*— Indicated in rheumatism, scrofula, syphilis, jaundice 
due to catarrh of the bile ducts, indigestion, intestinal colic, general 
debility and dropsy ; also in low forms of fevers, diphtheria, 
haemorrhage from the stomach, bowels or urinary organs. Locally it is 
applied to old and indolent ulcers, and used as masticatory in 
toothache, and hence the name toothache shrub. In pharyngitis 
gargle of the decoction is useful. 

Xanthoxylon piperitum, Fagara pipenta, Chin-iva-chu-ya grows in 
India and China; a powerful aromatic, used in placeofginger and pepper. 
The active principle resides in the bark, leaves and pericarp. A 
poultice made of its bruised leaves and rice*flour is used io sore throat ; 
mixed with camphor the powdered leaves are applied to porrigo 
decalvans. 

Bimartibace®. 

The Maharukha or Quassia family. 

Shrubs Lir large trees, leaves without glands or dots, alternate, 
compound or simple, sometimes exstipuiate ; flowers regular, axillary 
or terminal ;disk conspicuous ; ovary stalked, 4 or 5lobed, 4 or 5-celled 
fruit indchiscent one seeded and drupaceous ; carpels 4 or 5. 

Habitut, — Tropical parts of India, America and Africa. 

f^Qpfrtifs, — A bitter principle, characteristic of this orderj many 
are tonic and febrifuge, 

Allan thus ExcelBa. 

Habitat. — Baroda, Broach, Coimbatore, Ceylon* Ghauts, Behar, 

Parts used, — ^The bark and leaves. 

Vernacular. — Bomb. — Maharukh. Can. — Dodda-mari. Guz. — 
Mahtn Araduso ; Hind,— Mahanib, Arna. Maleal,^ — Peru-mara. Mar. 
— Maruk, Pers. — Samaga. Sans, — Arala* Tarn, — Peru-maram. TeL 
— Pedda*manu Peyyapa. 

Characters. — This tree resembles the prickly ash. The bark is of 
an ash colour. Externally very thick and rough and marked by 
numerous ridges; internally yellow or white and fibrous, taste 
aromatic, pleasant, but bitter ; leaves tomentose when young, old 



142 AILANTHUS GLANDULOSA. 

leaves glabrous, long and abruptly pinnated ; taste bitter ; leaflets 
from 10 to 14, in pairs and coarsely toothed at the base. Dose, 15 to 
60 grs. 

Constituents. — The bark contains an acid principle, ailantic acid. 
It is wax-like, reddish brown and very bitter ; very easily soluble in 
water, less so in alcohol and ether, and insoluble in chloroform and 
benzol. 

/Reparations, — Infusion of the bark (i in 20). Dose, 1 to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Bitter, stomachic, tonic, febrifuge and astrin- 
gent. An infusion of the bark is given with curd in atonic d^yspepsia, 
diarrhoea and fever. As a tonic it is given in general debility and 
anorexia; generally combined with other vegetable bitters. The juice 
of the fresh bark is given with cocoanul milk and aromatics in general 
debility in women^hiefly after child-birth — to stop after-pains. 
The infusion of the bark is used as rectal enema to destroy ascarides. 

Remarks. — It is a good substitute for Kuda Chhala. 

AilanthuB Olandnlosa. 
Habitat.^Chim.^ South Europe, France, United States. 
Part used. — The bark. 
Vernacular. — Chin. — Chau-chu, Chua-chu. 

Characters. — The tree, called the tree of heaven — forms the food 
of the silk-producing insect, Bombyx Cynthia. The bark is thick 
externally and rough internally ; the colour is pale-yellow and of a 
fibrous texture. Dose, 5 to 30 grs. 

Constituents. — Volatile oil and an oleo resin. 

Preparations. — ^Tinctura ailanthus, tincture of ailanthus (i in lo). 
Dose, 10 to 60 ms. Inhalation of the oil. Dose, 5 to 10 ms. Extractum 
ailanthus fluidum. — Fluid extract of ailanthus. Dose, 15 to 30 ms. 
Decoctum ailanthus (i in 25). Dose, 4 to 8 drs. 

Physiological actions. — The properties are similar to those of to- 
bacco. They depend on the presence of oleo resin. It is a decided nauseant, 
drastic cathartic and vermifuge. The volatile oil is antispasmodic 
and nauseant. It causes vertigo, dull headache, pain in the back, 
weakness, numbness in the lim^, cold and clammy skin, impairment of 
mobility, depression of the heart, cerebrum and of the spinal cord, 
leading to small and weak pulse, slow and laborious respiration, &c. 

Therapeutics. — Used as an inhalation in palpitation of the heart, 
spasmodic asthma and hiccough. As an anthelmintic the decoction 
of the fresh bark (i to 20) or the oleo resin in drachm doses is given 
against tape worms. It is also given in scarlatina with dark eruptions 
and delirium. 



BALANITES ROXDURGHIt. 



H3 



AilanthtiB Malabarioas. 

HMiat, — Western Ghauts of the Indian Peninsula, Cevlon 
Petrts used. — The bark and resinous juice. 

Fdprrwff//it7r.— Sans.— Sarala. Can, — Doop, Baga dhup, Hera-mara 
(resiD). Malval. — Peru-maratoli Mattip^paK Mar. — Ood, Cing. — 
WaJbeltngas^ Kumbalu. Tam.^ — Peru-roaram. Tel. — MuttipaL Travan- 
core — Mutti-paL 

Sarala is regarded as a substitute for pine resin (pinus longifolta). 

Characters^ — Bark roughs very thick and studded with bright 
gmrnel-looliing resinous grains ; taste pleasant and slightly bitter ; 
the bark yields a fragrant resinous juice, dark-brown or grey, of 
the consistence of thick treacle, known as Mutti-pal. 

C^iTisHiuents* — Commercial resin contains 77 p. c* of pure resin, 
and the rest impurities. Resin is soluble in alcohol, and, on evaporationi 
leaves a very viscous, transparent, light-brown liquid. 

Preparalion. — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, \ to 1 oz, 

Acfi'jm and uses , — Bark bitter, tonic and febrifuge, given in 
dyspepsia and fever. The resin is demulcent, and mixed with milk it is 
given in dysentery and bronchitis. The resin is also used for incense, 
as, when burnt, it gives out fragrance, 

BaUnitea Hoxburghi!» B. Indioa, B. Egyptica, 

HMtat*—\^Tn:i parts of India and Egypt. 

flart fisfd. — The fruit pulp, 

yernacuiar^ — Africa — Saum, Arab. — Haleluz, Beng. — Hingana- 
bita, Hinggo. G\xt. — Hingoria. Hind, — Hinggo Hingan, bet. Mar. — 
Hingana. Malyal. — Nanchunta. Sans — Ingudi Vrikshaha, Ingua, 
T*"^'- *'i munipadapa, Gauri-tvac. Egypt — desert date (ripe), Egyptian 
III 1, (unripe). Tarn. — Nanjundan. Tel. — Gan-chettu, Ringri. 

r i,K iivac is derived from Gauri, goddess of abundance, and twac, 
' Nv I h'p *' Gurus (Hindu priests) prepare an oil from the seeds and 
use It m the ceremony of initiating a Hindu. 

Characters* — A small thorny tree, leaves bifoliate ; flowers, 
greenish white ; fniit wrinkled and tuberculated on the surface, of a 
pale yellow or brownish yellow colour » of the shape of bijorun or egg 
or Itroc, oblong and slightly compressed at the base, where a short 
woody stalk is attached. The surface is marked with ^v^ longitudinal 
grooves; rind very thin and highly brittle, containing within it a soapy 
pulp or me5Dcairp» which is unctuous and oily when touched, and 
adherent to the woody shell ; the nut is fibrous, of a pale white colour, 
ai * "ns one large seed ; seed homogeneous, oily, resinous and of a 

di . colour, and having a disagreeable odour ; pulp exceedingly 

billet and of an offensive greasy smell. Dose of the pulp, 2 to 20 grs. 

The shell is 61Ied with gunpowder and is used in Itidia for 
fireworks. 

Constituents, — The bark yields a principle allied to saponin* 
Fiom the seeds is extracted the oil known as Zachun oil or Zaitun 



ri^HBtf 



144 PICRiCKA EXCELSA. 

oil of Africa. The oil resembles that of Arachis hypogoea ; it congeab 
at zero. It contains fatty acids. It is a slow drying oil, and becomes 
white when exposed to the sunlight. The pulp contains an organic 
acid, saponin, mucilage and sugar. 

Actions and uses. — Leaves acrid, purgative, anthelmintic and 
expectorant, used in worms in children, cough and irritation of the 
throat. It is a good emulsifier. In action it resembles senega. The 
oil expressed from the seeds is applied to burns and excoriations, and 
also to freckles. 

Casoara Amarga, Pioramnia Anttdesma. 

Honduras Bark, Picramnia Bark. 

Habitat. — Mexico, West Indies. 

Part used. — ^The bark. 

Characters. — Bark from five to six inches in length, firm and heavy, 
of a brownish grey colour, outer layer striated and longitudinally 
fissured ; inner bart of the trunk is from one quarter to three-eightKs 
of an inch in thickness. In taste the bark, when chewed, imparts a 
moderate degree of bitterness with a slightly yellow saliva. 

Preparations. — Extractum cascara amarga liquidum. Dose, 30 to 
60 ms. The dry extract. Dose, 3 to 5 grs. 

Actions and uses. — A powerful tonic, alterative, diuretic and 
antisyphilitic, used in syphilis, rheumatism and chronic skin diseases, 
as eczema, psoriasis &c., also in chronic hepatic disorders and chronic 
nasal catarrh. The use of tobacco and alcohol seems to counteract its 
usefulness. 

PiorsBna ExoelBa, B. P. 

Picrana, from Pikros, bitter. The plant is extremely bitter. 
Excelsa, from ex out, and celsus, beyond meaning surpassing in 
bitterness. 

Quassia or Quassy, the name of a negro who first used this bark as 
a remedy against malignant fever. 

Habitat. — ^Jamaica, Guiana. West Indian Islands. Surinam. 

Part used. — The bark. The wood of the trunk and branches, 
Quassise Lignum — Quassia wood, B. P. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Bharangi (the bark). Hind.-^Kashshing. 
Jamaica. — Bitter ash or bitter wood. 

Characters. — Bark brownish grey, smooth and wrinkled ; wood 
yellowish white, thick, dense, tough, hard, and porous, used as chips 
or raspings; the taste is intensely and purely bitter. It is without 
any odour ; on longitudinal section the wood exhibiting elongated cells 
containing crystals of calcium oxalate. Dose, 20 to 60 grs. Wood 
is made into cups and sold as bitter cups or quassia cups. 

Constituents. — A bitter principle, picrasminor quassin ; an alkaloid, 
resin, mucilage and pectin. 

Picrasmin or quassin is obtained by adding soda to the Quassia 
infusion, precipitating with tannin, decomposing the precipitate with 



PICRASMA QITASSIOIDES. 



MS 



03tide of lead or lime and dissolving with alcohoL Occurs in crystals, 
very bitter, soluble in hot alcohol, chloroform ; sparingly so in cold 
water, soluble in alkaline or acid solutions* 

Ptefiarafiof/s, — ^Liquor quassiae concentratus, B. P. (i in lo). 
Doie, i to J dr, ; Infusum quassiae, infusion of quassia, B P* (i in joo). 
Dose, I to I 02. ; Tinctura quassiae, tincture of quassia, B. P, (1 in lO), 
Dose, \ to I dr. ; Exti actum uuassi;e, extract of quassia. Dose, t to 

Actjotix aijri uses. — A pure outer, febrituge and anthelminuc, 
chiefly med in ;»tonic dyspepsia, with pain after eating, in vomiting, in 
Ttv "H of food I in atonic diarrhoea, and in loss of appetite ; as an 

mi)' c, an enema made of its infusion is used against threadworms. 

In e from intermittent fever with bilious vomiting, in 

at* J in dropsy from debility, it has been much employed 

combined with sodium bicarbonate. It contains no tannin ; hence it 
can be combined with persalts of iron without producing black culour. 

Picratma Qaassioides— Brucea QnasaioideB. 
HaMaUSuh tropical Himalaya, South China, 
/^^s used, — The wood and bark. 
P'emacuian — Hind. — ^Kashshing. Beng. — Bharangi, 

Characters. — Wood, in pieces, centered with a dark-brown bark, 
having a netted surface and marked with transverse scars of a light 
yelloiv colour with a central pith* 

Oimttiuents,^Vh& bark contains resinous deposits and crystals of 
oxalate of lime. The wood contains a crystalliz^ble principle, probably 
qtMssiti< a bUter resin- like principle, a nun-crystalliicable resinous 
body and an alkaloid. 

Pf //r— Infusion (i in 40). Dose, ^ to i oz. Tincture 

(1 In 1' h to 1 dr, 

ActvAisatui Hse$. — The bark is bitter tonic, less bitter than true 
quassia, and used for the same purposes As a parasiticide the wood 
'\h used 10 kill insects. As a febrifuge it is given m fevers. 

/^€Mi/ir^**— Bharangi is also the name of the roots and stems of 
Clerodendron serratum « 



Samadera Indica— 8 Pen tape tala. 

Habitat — Western Peninsula, Ceylon. 

Pigri usaL—th^ bark, 

^Vrt<jir«/,/r.— Satis.— Lokhandi. Cing.— Somadasa-gass» Eng. — 
NJepa bark, liixh — Karinghota. Tarn. — Niepa. 

Characters, — A tree, very high ; leaves Urge, alternate, and oblong ; 
■I a drupe-oval and compressed, one seeded, colour brown, surface 
ath or rt:ticulaied and coriaceous. Tlie wood is yellow and 
19 



146 SIMABA CEDRON. 

bitter like quassia wood. The bark is in quills, externally minutely 
fissured; colour dark-brown, with light-coloured patches here and 
there ; suber exfoliated. It has a short fibrous fracture. 

Constituents. — A bitter oil from the seeds. The oil contains olein 
palmitin, stearin ; and a bitter principle, saraaderin. yellowish, -soluble 
in water and alcohol. 

Preparation — Decoction (i in 10). Jto i oz. 

Actions and uses* — The decoction of the bark and wood is given 
with myrobolans in fever. The oil is a good application in 
rheumatism. The bark is a good substitute for quassia. 

Simaba Cedron. 

Habitat. — Central and South America. 

Part used, — The seeds. 

Characters. — Flowers hermaphrodite ; fruit pear-shaped, of the 
size of hen's egg; other characters similar to those of simaruba. 

Constituents, — An active principle — Cedrine. 

Preparation. — Fluid extract. Dose, 1 to 10 ms. Powdered seeds. 
Dose, I to 10 grs. 

Actions and uses. — Tonic, stomachic and antiperiodic, much 
valued as a remedy for the bites of serpents and insects. It is taken in- 
ternally and also applied to the wound. As an antiperiodic it is given 
in intermittent fevers and in neuralgia. It is also given in dyspepsia 
and colic of the intestines. 

ZygophyllaceflB. 

The Dhamaso, Guaicum or Bean caper family. Zygophillaceae, 
3roke-leaf. The leaves are bifoliate, yoked and in pairs. 

Herbs, shrubs, or rarely trees. Leaves stipulate, opposite, 
usually imparipinnate or rarely simple, dotless ; flowers perfect, 
regular and symmetrical, bearing a fleshy disk, white, red or yellow ; 
sepals 5, glandless; filaments 8 or 10, having small scales : ovary 
looed, 4 or 5-celled, surrounded by glands ; ovules 2, filiform ; 
albumen little or none ; fruit capsular^ dehiscent or separating into 
cocci, with winged expansions ; seeds albuminous ; cotyledons 
foliaceous. 

Habitat. — Beyond the tropics. 

Properties. — Some of the plants are resinous and possess stimulant 
and alterative properties ; others are diaphoretics and anthelmintics. 
Some have hard and durable wood. 

Fagonia Arabica. F. Bragnieri. F. Oretioa. 

Habitat.^^N. W. India, Sind, Panjab, W. Peninsula, Egypt. 
Part used. — ^The plant. 



GUAEACUM OFFICINALE. 



14T 



Vernacular, — Bomb, — Dhamasa, Gu2. — Dhaniasa, Dhamaso. Him* 
— Spabghzai. Hind. — Usiar-khar, Damahan, Damahar. Mah.— 
Dhrnnasa. Pers. — Bad-aurd, Sans. — Dusparsha. Sind. — Dramahui. 

Dusparsha. — The term is derived from Du or Duha, which signifies 
painful or frightful, and Sparsha^ to touch. The plant is prickly or 
thorny, and hence painful to the touch. Bad-aurd means carried 
by the wind, 

Ckaractcra. — Plant prickly and of a greyish brown colour. 
The drug consists of stems, leaves and thorns, all in broken pieces. 
The stem is slender and of a greyish colour, surface marked with 
longitudinal furrows ; bark tough. On section the wood is soft^ 
light, and brittle ; stem is hollow in the centre and containing 
a white pith ; leaves linear^ oblong and narrowed, specially at 
ba*c, thick and succulent when fresh ; their margin is curved 
ruyish, dark ; surface wrinkled ; thorns conical^ 
\ved and a little below the apex, jointed, and of a 
la^te bitterish and astringent ; odour somewhat 



the 

b:»* ^^ 

Ion. 

rcdiluii toluur; 

aromatic. 



A'tf^am/rorts.^'Infusion and decoction (i in lo). Dose, I to 2 ozs* 

/f (uses. — Local sedative . Stimulant, febrifuge, bitter 

and ai Its poultice is used to promote suppuration of 

ibsces»c7 ; an nifusionof it is used as a gargle in sore mouth. Steam 
inhalation i^ useful in fevers. As a bath it is used in irritability of the 
skin, wtth intense scratching. 

Gnaiacom Offlcinale, B. P. — 0. Sanctum, B. P. 

Sanctum, sanctus, consecrated, used as incense in worship, 

HahitaL — West Indies, South America. 

i\irt$ used — Tlie heart wood^Guaiaci Lignum* B.P„ Lignum vitae 
sod this resin of the wood Guaiaci Resina, or Guaiac, B« P. 

Lignum Vitx means the wood of life, because of its durability 
like Rock*irood« 

C' *'" I hard, of a brown or greenish brown colour, 

hetvk: lioui, with irregular concentric rings surrounded 

by yellow aJbuiiien; when heated or boiled in salt water, or burning it 
in a fire, it emits a balsamic resin, whose odour is feebly aromatic and 
ta^e slightly acrid and disagreeable. The resin is in irregular masses 
or globular tears, very brittle, of a greenish brown colour j when 
broken it has a glassy lustre within. Almost insoluble in water, soluble 
in alcohol and ether, chloroform and alkaline 6uids. Dose of the 
r^ifi, 5 to ifgrs. It should not be given with mineral acids and 
iwoet spirit of nitre. 

C*yristffrfftsf$. — The wood contains resin 20 to 2S p. c, yellow 
colour er, water}' extract 3 to 4 p. c, and ash 1 p. c* 

Tbe * .sists of guaiacic acid, resembling benzoic acid, 

^1 cid I op. c*, gun laconic *icid 70 p. c,, beta resin 10 p. c, gum 

an - ^ vrllnw Tlie guaiac yields by dry or destructive distillation 



148 TRIBULUS TKRRBSTRIS. 

<}uaiacene, of the odour of bitter almonds ; and Guaiacol, a colour- 
less aromatic oil ; Pyroguaiacin (in green scales) ; creosol, which re- 
sembles guaiacol. It also contains yellow colouring matter, gum &c. 

Preparations of guaiacium resin. Mistura guaiaci, B. P. (i in 40). 
Dose, ^ to I oz. Tinctura guaiaci ammoniata, B. P. (20 p. c) contains 
Guaiacum resin 4 ozs., oil of nutmeg 30 ms., oil of lemon 20 ms., strong 
solution of ammonia \\ ozs.; alcohol to make a pint. Dose, ^ to i dr. 
in mucilage or syrup. Trochischus Guaiaci Resins, B. P. (3 grs. in 
each). Extractum Guaiaci Fluidur. — Fluid extract of guaiacunu 
Dose, 10 to 20 ros. Of the wood. Liquor sarsae compositus concentratus, 
B. P. (i in 10). Dose, 2 to 8 drs. 

Physiological action. — Diaphoretic, alterative, stimulant, expecto- 
rant, antirheumatic and antisyphilitic in large doses laxative. Taken 
internally it acts as a local stimulant, producing acrid sensation in the 
throat, salivation, warmth in the epigastrim, increase of the gastric 
juice, bile and intestinal secretions. If long continued it acts as a gastro- 
intestinal irritant, leading to nausea, vomiting, purging and severe 
headache. It enters the blood and is excreted by the liver, bronchi, 
^in and kidneys. 

Therapeutics. — It is used in the treatment of chronic gout, chronic 
rheumatism, sciatica, lumbago, scrofula, syphilis, amenorrhoea and 
neuralgic dysmenorrhcea. A special remedy in tonsilitis, given in \ dr. 
4oses of the tincture, as an emulsion with yolk of egg to abort the 
disease, or to cure inflammation. 

TribuluB terrestriB, T. Zeylanious, T, Lanaginosus. 

Habitat — India and other warm countries. 

Paris used. — The fruit and root. 

Vcmactdar. — Chin. — Peh-tsih li. Eng. — Woolly caltrops. Arab. — 
Khasak-us-saghir. Beng. — Ghokhuri. Burm. — Sule-anen. Can. — 
Negalu-gida. Cin. — Niranche, Sembu, Niringhi. Duk. — Ghokni. 
Guz. — Mitha Gokharu. Hind.— Chhota Gokhru. Maleal. — Neringil. 
Mar. — I-X)han Ghokaru. Panj, — ^Bhukhri. Bakhra-kokullak. Pers. — 
Gokhru-k urd, Khare-khasaka, Hasak Shagkir. Sans. — ^Trikantaka, 
Ikshugandha, Vanasrangata, Gokshura, Gokshuraka. Tam. — Kokullah- 
neringi. Tel.— Chiri Palleru. 

Gokshura, derived from Go-gao, a cow and Ksura, a divided hoo^ 
in allusion to the cloven shaped appearance of the carpels or cocci of 
the fruit, which, like a cloven hoof, adhere together in pairs. 
Ikshugandha means aroma of the plant. 

Characters. — Fruits roundish, somewhat compressed, five-cornered, 
and covered with prickles or thorns, of a lightish yellow colour, and of 
the size of a marble. At the base is a furrowed club-shaped stalk ; car- 
pels, five. Each carpel has four strong prickles, two on each side ; seeds 
several, oily, enclosed in hard stony cells, taste astringent and 
agreeable, odour aromatic ; the root when fresh is slender, fibrous, 
about 4 or 5 inches long, cylindrical and of a light brown colour. 
Dose, 5 to 20 grs. 



LINACS^. 



Comiitu^ntf, — The extract of the powdered fruits contains an 
alkaloid* a resin, probably the source of the ;iroina, fat and mineral 
tnttter, 14 p.c. 

Ptt^ratiorn — CuiiJeciiun, Dose, i to 2 ari. Infusion and decoc* 
lion (i in lo). Dose, i to 2 ozs, 

Actiomafiduscs, — Alterative, diuretic, demulcent^ and aphrodisiaoi 
An infusion is used to relieve painful micturition, to increase the flow 
of urine, and as a vehicle for diuretic medicines in dysuria, gonorrhoea, 
yrinary disorders^ and for the relief of nocturnal emissions, incontinence 
of urine and impotence \ its action closely resembles that of buchu 
ami uva ursi. It is generally given with hyoscyamus and opium. 

/^rmarJis, — The root is one of the ten drugs which go to form 
a compound decoction known as Dasamula dakvatha. 

Vun€ti4fs, — Mitha (sweet), and Kadava (bitter) Gokharu. Mitha 
Ciikbaru, or true Gokharu of old writers, is also known as 
Chh^^^ ^^ Bethha Gokharu. The Kadava Gokharu, otherwise known 
a» Miitha or Ubha Gukharu, is the fruit of Pedalium Murex. Like 
111 1 iru, its fruits are provided with thorns or prickles, but its 

Cii e no resemblance to cow's hoof* Kadva Gokharu is bitter 

and mucilaginous, while the true Gokharu is astringent and alterative 

Tribulas Alatns, 

iiabttaU — Grown in Sindh, Punjab, Beloochistan. 
VtrnAcnlar* — ^Eng. — WingeJ Laltrops* Punjab. — Hasak. Sind — 
Niodo trtkund, Latak* 

CharticUrsi. — Fruit pyramidal, Dr<j;idly winged, cocci and 2-seeded| 
spines conUuent* The fruit has some aperient properties, 

LinaoeaB. 

T or Flax family. 

Li trom Linum, flax or linen thread. 

Hcrb^, or rarely shrubs. Leaves alternate, opposite or rarely verti- 
ctlbtL iiitirc and cxstipulaic ; flowers hypogynous, regular, very showy; 
t icatcd ; ovary 3 to 5 celled ; fruit capsular, many celled ; 

Ui^... ... ^ in each cell, with little or no albumen, embryo straight. 

Habitat — Temperate climates- 

f^vfitrtifi, — Mucilaginous, demulcent and sedative* A few of 
them are stimulant, bitter tonic and purgative. The seeds contain 
mucibge and an oil, and hence they are demulcent and emollient. The 
plants are rem:irkable for the tenacity nf their liber-tibres. 

Limtm UBitatiBsimam, B.P. 



Linumf a thread. Eng. — linen, that is, its fabric 
Uiitatus, most useful, common or familiar. 

JfahitaL — Common in 
Egypt, South of Europe, 



Usitatissimum, 

most temperate countries, Central Asia, 



150 LINUM USITATISSIMUM. 

Parts used. — ^The dried ripe seeds. Linum. Linseed B. P. ; Linum 
<:ontusum— crushed linseed B. P., and the oil, oleum lini B. P. 
expressed from them. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Bazen, Dhonul-kattau. Bang. — Tesi- 
Mosina. Bomb.— Alashi. Burm. — Humatoze. Can. — Aloshi-yaune. 
rhin. — Hu-ma-tsze. Eng. — Flax-seed, Linseed or Lintseed. Hind. — 
Suf Ulsi, Tisi. Mar. — Alshi javas. Maleal. — Bidgierammi. Malyal. — 
Cheru-chana Vittiute-eima. Pers.— Tukhm-i-Katau, Tukhame-zaghira. 
Sans. — Atasi. Tam. — ^Alishi-verai-yenney. Tel. — AUivi-tuUu. 

Characters, — A cultivated annual plant ; seeds small, flat, ovoid, 
with an acute edge, and an oblique blunt point at one end, of a brownish 
red colour, shining on the surface and white within;the seed coat contains 
mucilage, the surface is studded with fine pits or depressions, with a 
ridge just below the apex, having thehilum in the hollow. Seed nuclei 
or cotyledons are two, large and oily, and contained within the external 
covering, within which is a thin mucous envelope. The flax seed 
or linseed oil cake is the cake left after the expression of the 
oil. It contains nitrogen and a little oil and ash 6 p.c. The whole 
linseed, when powdered or ground, is known as linseed meal. It 
yields about 25 p.c. of the fixed oil. 

Constituents, — The seed-nucleus contains a fixed oil 30 to 35 p.c; 
the epithelium contains mucilage'is p.c, proteid 25 p.c, amygdalin, 
resin, wax, sugar and ash 3 to 5 p.c. The ash contains phosphates, 
sulphates and chlorides of potassium, calcium, and magnesium. 

Oleum Lini B.P. — Oil of flax seed, linseed oil. To obtain it, the 
seeds, when fresh, are expressed, without the use of heat or dried with 
heat, and then crushed and pressed. It is a yellowish, oily, limpid liquid 
without any colour. It has a neutral reaction, a peculiar odour and bland 
taste. It becomes thick or solidifies when at a very low temperature. 
It is soluble in ether (i in 3), chloroform and oil of turpentine and 
absolute alcohol (i in 10), Consists chiefly of the glyceride of linoleic 
acid ; heated with oxide of lead it dries up into a transparent varnish, 
known as Linoxyn. By saponification it yields glycerin and fatty acids, 
namely linoleic, oleic, palmitic and myristic acids. On exposure to the 
air the linoleic acid has agreat affinity for oxygen, becomes resinoid and 
converted into oxylinoleic acid, making it a drying oil. Linoleic acid 
is also found on drying poppy seed oil, wnich is also a drying 
oil. Dose. ^ to 2 ozs. 

Mucilage.— It contains in the dry state mineral substances 10 p. c, 
which, when removed, the linseed mucilage is allied to althaea 
mucilage. On mixing with boiling nitric acid the mucilage yields 
mucic acid . 

Preparations of the oil. — Emulsion ; Linimentum calcis B.P (50 p.c), 
known as lime liniment, carron oil liniment. For external use for bums ; 
Sapo mollis — soft soap — Potassium oleate. To obtain it, mix linseed oil 
400, potassa 90, alcohol 40 and water, apply heat till the mixture becomes 
soluble. It is a soft unctuous mass ; colour brownish yellow, soluble in 
hot water (i in 5), alcohol (i in 2). The officinal soft soap is made with 
olive oil. 



OXAUX>ACEM, 



151 



Pre/>arau'-nA hj tiic wed. — Decocium linl (i in 50), infusum lini, 
Itoseetl tea (r in 30) ad libitum. 

PAyno/o^cal action. — Demulcent, expectorant, diuretic and 
emolHent, In large doses it is laxative. In small doses it stimulates the 
kidneys. It is oxidised in the system and excreted as a resinoid body in 
the urine. Its infusion is given in inflammation of the mucous mem- 
branes of the respiratory, digestive and urinary organs ; also in vesical 
and renal irritation * 

Theraj^euttcs. — As it contains a mucilaginous principle and a little 
ail il is given with honey in coughs and catarrh. As a demulcent and 
diuretic il is given in renal colic, cystitis, vesical irritation, strangury, 
vesical catarrh and calculi. Fumigation with the smoke of linseed-oil is 
u>cd for colds in the head and hysteria. The decoction, owing to the 
oil it contains, is useful for enema. Ground meal is chiefly used for 
pouktcts appHed to enlarged glands, boils, gouty and rheumatic swell- 
ings^ to the chest in pneumonia, &c. The oil is laxative and given in 
piles. Locally made into an emulsion with lime water it is a valuable 
tiorHoil irritant application in burns and scalds* Linimentum calcis or 
carron liniment, is so called from having been first very extensively 
used in the Carron iron foundry. The oil is often added to purgative 
enenuta instead of the castor.oiL Liber fibres are cooling to the body 
and lessen perspiration^ and hence used as an article of dress. Lint or 
ghanu kaparun and tow are prepared from fibres and used in surgery. 
Linum catharticum or purging flax possesses purgative properties. 
Bird lime, a brown turpentine-like substance, is the residue left 00 
btiniing the linseed oiU 

OxaJidaoesB* 

The amboti or wood sorrel liamily. Herbs rarely shrubs or trees, 
generally with an acid juice. Leaves non-glandular, punctate, rarely 
opposite, alternate^ usually compound or occasionally simple and witri 
or without stipules ; flowers yellow or pink colouredi regular and 
symmctricat ; fruits capsular, three to five-celled, generally angular, 
occasionally drupaceous ; carpels distinct and indehiscent ; seeds 
few, with fleshy albumen* 

ifr/^/^/.— Tropics and temperate regions ; most abundant at the 
Cape of Good Hope and tropical America. 

p9v/sfr{us*— 'The plants generally possess refrigerant properties 
and are remarkable for their juice. 

Averrhoa Bilimbl. 

Hahi^it, — Cultivated in hotter parts of India on account of their 
acid fruits ; and Burmah. 

J^ifi u$£^, — Fruit. 

Vcfuacular. — Ben^-— Blimbi. Bomb. — Anvuila. Bur.— Kala- 
20un*y3H«i, Cing. — Bilin, Eng.^ — Bitimbi cucumber. Guz. — 
BUambdt. Duk. — Bilambu. Sans., Hind, — Kamaranga. Malay,— 



152 AVERRHOA CARAMBOLA. 

Blimbing.tasi, Maleal. — Wilumpi, Kari-chakka. Tarn, — Pulich- 
chakkay. Tel. — Pulusu-kayalu. Portuguese — Bilimbinos. 

Averrhoa Garambola. 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Kamaranga, kamarak. Burm. — Zoungyah. 
Chin. — Wu-lien-taze. Can. — Kamarak. Duk. — Khamrag. Eng. — 
Chinese gooseberry. Guz. — Kamarak. Hind. — Kamaranga, Kamrak. 
Malay. — Blim-bing-manis karmal. — Maleal. — Tamaratonga; Por- 
tuguese— Carambola, Tam. — Tamarttam-maram. Tel. — Tamarta-kaya. 

Characters. — A. Bilimbi, fruits yellowish, smooth, fleshy, green, 
five-lobed, rounded, of the size of a small mango, hence the English 
name cucumber tree ; unripe fruit is intensely acid ; ripe fruit acid- 
sweet. A. Carambola. — Fruits sweet and sour, yellow, with five 
acute angles and a yellowish, thin, smooth rind, the size of a hen's 
egg. 

Constituents. — They contain a watery pulp, which contains much 
acid potassium oxalate. 

Preparations, — Syrup (i in lo). Dose, i to 2 drs. ; and conserve 
of the fruits. Dose, ^ to i dr. 

Actions and uses. — Antiscorbutic. Fruits are used as an acid 
vegetable and for preserve. The syrup is used as a cooling medicine in 
fevers. The juice is used to remove iron moulds or stains. The 
leaves are a good substitute for sorrel. 

Biophytam SensitiYam— Oxalis Bensitiva. 

Habitat, — Tropical India, Java, Asia, Africa, Moluccas. 

Part used. — The plant. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Bunmaranga. Guz. — Zarer. Hind, — Lajalu, 
Lak-chana, Maleal.— Toda-wadi. Mar. — Lagri. 

Characters, — Plant 6 to 10 inches long; leaves resembling those 
of Bhui amala ; flowers small, greenish brown and in umbels, coming 
out of the axils of leaves, smell resembling that of bhanga or of 
decaying grass ; taste at first acidous, mucilaginous and astringent, 
becoming, after a time, bitter ; seeds red and shining. 

Preparations, — Infusion and decoction of the root ( i in 20). Dose, 
4 to 12 drs. 

Actions and uses, — Acid, refrigerant and cholagogue ; used in 
fever and torpid liver ; mixed with gingelly oil it is given in gonorrhoea 
and in lithic acid diathesis. It is a constant ingredient in various altera- 
tive decoctions. Mixed with butter, the powdered seeds are applied to 
wounds and abscesses. 

Oxalis Comicnlata, 0. Honadelpha, 0. Pasilla. 

Habitat. — Asia, Europe, India, Malay Islands. 
- , Parts used.'T'The plant and fresh juice. 



aEHANIACSiC. 



153 



r 'rr. — Arab. — Hemenbab, Hemba» Homad-mad. Beng, — 

Cbuk . . Amrulsak, Omlote. Bomb, — Amboti* Bhin-surpati, 

Amrulsak. Can, — Pullam-purachi sappu. Duk, — Ambuti, Eng, — 
Indian surrel, horned-vrood-sorreL Hirid.—Amboti, AmruUchuka^ 
Khatta-metha, Set-paiti. Malyal. — Puliyarai. Sans. — Shuk-lika, 
Chuk-rika, Chaugeri Shata-ambusta, Amlika, Shata, Danta. Tam.— 
Puli-yari kiray. Tel, — ^Pulla-chinta. Siam. — Amla-lonika. 

Amla-lonika i$ derived from am ^ acid, and tonika, like loni 
or punlaoe. 

( ' v.^Leaves sknder, prostrate and harry, on long petioles, 

dividt liree segments, each obcordate and finely fringed with 

white hAirs or ciliated at the margins ; upper surface glabrous, lower 
hiir>' ; flowers yellow ; capsule very hairy, conical and furrowed; seeds 
manyi transversely ribbed ; taste very acid and astringent. 

C^MtHiuents.^^ll contains acid potassium oxalate. 

I^gparaHom, — Fresh juice. Dose, J to i dr. Decoction of leaves 
(i in lo}. Oofi«» I to 3 ozs. 

A ^ ifiusts^ — Cooling, refrigerant, appetizing and astringent; 

given ase* of dysentery, prolapse of the rectum and vagina, 

md a ■ , in fever and biliousness. The fresh juice is given 

It an , jisoning by dhatura. 

The crane's bill family, 

Geranosy a crane, from the resemblance of the elongated beak of 
the seed or capsule to a crane's bill. 

Herbs or shrubs, with articulate swollen joints ; leaves simple, 
opposite or alternate, with membranous stipules ; flowers symmetrical 
ancl showy ; sepals 5 imbricate ; petals 5^ twisted, in aestivation ; fruit, 5 
caipdft attached by means of their styles to an elongated axis or 
carpo{)hore. from which they separate (ufhen ripe) from below upwards 
by the curling up of the styles ; seed one in each carpel, ex-albumin* 
Dus; embryo convoluted. 

Hnbitat. — The Cape of Good Hope* 

^ /V<j^r/i>j.— Astringent, resinous and aromatic. 

Geranium Hacalatum. 

Habitat, — North America. 

Part utf(t. — Rhizome. 

Syn. — Crane's bill, Alum root, American kino. Astringent root, 
Ajtierican Torment ilia, crow foot, dove foot* 

Alacuiatum— macula, spotted. Leaves acquire white spots by 
aige. Alum root, because it contains tannic and gallic acids or 
bein^ =» "'^ '* substitute for kino and catechu, 

G Nepalense— G. Oscillatum. Found in Himalaya, 

NilgiiM. wuvinn. The rhizome is used in medicine, and is known as 
fihanda Hewil (Hind ); and used in diseases of the kidneys. 



154 GERANIUM WALLICHIANUM. 

Geranium Robertianum. — Robert herb. — grows in Europe, 
Himalaya. Ther rhizome is used as astringent and diuretic in haemor* 
rhages and gravel. 

Geranium Moscatum, Erodium Moschatum, stoik's bill. A good 
diaphoretic. 

Erodium cicutariura. — A good diuretic given in dropsy. 

Oeraniam VaUiohianiim. 

Habitat. — Temperate Himalayas, Afghanistan, Kuram Valley. 

Part used. — Rhizome. 

Vernacular. — Afghan . — Mamir an. Arab.— Ibrat- ur-raai ; 
Ibrat ur-raai means shepherd's needle. 

Characters. — Indigenous perennial plant. The rhizome is hori- 
zontal, cylindrical, two to three inches long, half an inch or less thick, 
tuberculated longitudinally, wrinkled and dark brown ; the bark is 
thin ; wood wedges yellowish, forming a circle near the cambium line ; 
medullary rays broad, central pith large ; rootlets thin and fragile ; 
taste pleasant and astringent ; no odour. Dose, powdered rhizome, 20 
to 40 grs. 

Constituents, — Tannin 12 to 27 p. c. Gallic acid, red colouring 
matter, starch, pectin, sugar. 

Preparations. — Extractum Geranii Fluidum. — Fluid extract of 

feranium. Dose, 10 to 40 ms. Dried extract, otherwise called Geranin. 
)ose, I to s grs. Tincture (1 in 10). Dose, 20 to 40 ms. Decoction 
(i in 20). Dose, \ to i oz. 

Actions and uses. — Powerful and efficient astringent like tannic 
acid. As a tonic it is given with hydrastine in chronic diarrhoea and 
dysentery, passive haemorrhages, in relaxed condition of the mucous 
membranes, as gonorrhoea, gleet, leucorrhoea, diabetes, cholera, &c. 
Locally used as a gargle in sore throat and in ulceration of the mouth ; 
as an injection to relaxed vagina, uvula, rectum, &c. 

Celastraceea. 

The Malakangani or spindle tree family. 

General characters. — Shrubs or small trees; leaves simple, generally 
alternate, and rarely opposite ; stipules small and deciduous ; flowers 
small, regular, perfect and rarely unisexual ; stamens opposite the sepals; 
fruits 2, 3 to 5 -celled, drupaceous and indehiscent or capsular ; seeds 
ascending, arillate ; disk large, flat, surrounding the ovary and 
albuminous. 

Habitat. — Warmer parts of Asia. India. 

Properties. — Seeds contain an acrid principle ; the seeds of some 
contain an oil of a stimulating nature. 

Celastras Paniculatiui, C. Montana, G. Bothlana, G. Sene^ensls, 
C. Nutans, Soutla puiicnlata. 

Habitat. — Hilly districts, Himalaya and Ceylon. 



CELASTRUS PANICULATUS- 



»55 



nsed, — Tlie seeds and the oil. 

Vemaatiar, — Bomb. — Malakanguni. Eng— (the oil) oleum 
nigrum, Stjff tree. Guz. — Malakaguni. Hind.— Malakangani* Mar.^ — 
Kanguni. Sans. — Vanhiruchi, Katumbhi, Jyotish-mati, Tarn. — 
Ati'parich-chami Malkang-unt, Tel.^ — Mala-erikata, Bavungi, Gundu 
Mida, \^aluluvai Danti-chettu* 

Jyotiih-mati, meaning light possessing. In allusion to their sup- 
posed property of stimulating intellectual powers and sharpening 
memory, 

CkaracUm* — Fruit resembling tirphal in size^ three-celled 
and globose. In form resembling the open-mouthed fruits ot kapus* 
Fruit with a small stalk at the base, surface rugous and of a faint 
yellow colour ; seeds hard, angular, and somewhat pointed at one end. 
In form and size similar to draksha bija colour brownish red, 
S'ltrficc wrinkled and covered with a kind of brownish powdery 
iwb^t^iTtcc ; kernel oily and almond-like ; taste biting and hot ; embryo 
gr itcd in the middle of the kernel ; oil of a deep reddish-yellow 

cr' aning, when kept for a time, thick like honey. Dosc% 3 to 

10 gr^* 

Consniuftifs, — ^The seeds contain an oil, a bitter resinous principle, 
taiuiiu and a-sh 5 p. c The oil is obtained from the seeds by 
exhiiudtion with ether. It is a thick, reddish, bitter oil, of an aromatic 
odour. Oleum nigrum — an empyreumatic black oil^ — is obtained by 
the destructive distillation of the seeds of C, paniculatus» to which 
Loban, lavang, jaiphal, and javantri are often addedt Dose, 5 to 15 ms- 

The bitter resinous principle resembles glucosidal resin. It is 
extracted from the seeds with proof spirit or ether, or by shaking 
the oil with alcohol. It is insoluble in cold and boiling water. 

l^t^mtinm, — ^Decoction of seeds (i to 10). Dose, i to i 02s. 

/^*" '" "• =-1 in 8 of butter known as Magz sudhi or brain polisherg 
•o na;i r the belief that it promotes the intelligence of pundits 

and Ic Ti who use it as an application for the head, 

.? ind tises. — The ^^Qd% are alterative, stimulant and 

lie* combined with aromatics and given in rheumatism, gout» 
iid leprosy. The oil is used as pomade and also as rube- 
cnt tor relieving rheumatic pains of a malarious character 
and in paralysis. Oleum nigrum has been tried in berberi with some 
benefit* 

Elttodendron Qlaacam, £. Paniculatum, E. Roxburghiii Neerij 

Dichotoma. 

ffabitat, — India. Ceylon, Darjeeling* 

flw/F iirw^/.— The bark and leaves. 

Kirnidcw/irn— Can, — Tamrooj. Hind. — Bakra, Chauri. Jamrasi 
Mar* — Bhut-pal, Tamrooj. Punj. — Marandu, Jamoa, Tam. — Karkava, 
Irkoii* Tel, — Nerija-Ncradi, 



mow 



IS6 BLiEODENDRON GLAUCUM. 

Bhut-pal — Bhut, a demon, and pal, palo the plant. The leaves 
are used to remove the Bhut or demon of which women are supposed 
to become possessed in hysteria. 

Characters. — Leaves opposite, short petioled, acutely oblong or 
obtusely serrate, both surfaces polished, upper surface shining ; root- 
bark compact and brittle, in small fragments of a dull reddish colour, 
and covered by a scabrous suber, which is yellowish externally and 
brick-red internally ; bark and leaves bitter and astringent to taste. 

Constituents. — The bark contains an alkaloid, 2 resins, tannin 8 p.c, 
glucose 5 p.c. and ash 18 p.c. The ash contains calcium carbonate and 
calcium oxalate. The alkaloid is separated by lime and chloroform. It 
gives a purplish colour with sulphuric acid, and yellow with nitric 
acid. With acids, it forms salts, which are soluble m water. 

Resins, — One is soluble in ether and amylic alcohol ; the other in 
rectified spirit. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent, stimulant and deobstruent. The 
dried leaves are used as a fumigatory in hysteria ; also as a sternuta- 
tory to relieve headache. The bark rubbed with water is used to 
remove any sort of swelling, and used as a deobstruent in enlargement 
of glands. The natives use it as a remedy for snake-bites. Both the 
leaves and bark are astringent like matico. 

Enonymus Atroparpnrens B.P., Eaonymos Crenalatas, E. 
Pendulus, E. Tingens, E. Eoropoaas, E. Amerioanus. 

Bitter ash, Peg wood, Indian arrow wood, prick wood, burning 
bushy strawberry tree. 

Habitat — Western Peninsula, Himalaya, Nilgiri, shady places. 

Part used. — ^The bark of the root — wahoo bark. 

Vernacular, Hind. — Barphali, Sikhi, Rangchul, Guli, Papar, 
()hopra, Kunku Kesari. 

Characters. — Ornamental shrub ; branches slightly quadrangular ; 
flowers dark-purple, in cymes ; fruit capsular, smooth, 4-lobed. 

The dried bark in quill or curved pieces, outer surface covered 
with a thin scaly suber, which is soft, corky and friable, colour ash- 
grey, with dark ridges or patches ; inner surface smooth, pale, tawny 
and white. It breaks with a short fracture ; odour is faint and 
characteristic ; taste mucilaginous bitter and acrid. Dose, ^ to i dr. 

E. Crenulata bark is almost white. The inner portion of the bark 
of E. Tingens is also white and the arillus yellow. 

Constituents. — The bark contains tannin, sugar, but no alkaloid. 
An amorphous bitter principle, euonymin ; atropurpurin identical 
with dulcite ; resins, asparagin ; euonic acid, fixed oil, albumen, wax, 
starch and ash 14 p.c. 

Euonymin.— To obtain it add chloroform to the dried extract 
or the tincture, shake the solution and evaporate ; then add to the 
residue ether or alcohol and acetate of lead. Dissolve the precipitate 



RHAMNACBvE. 



,toy ^ "1 hydrogen and evaporate. It is soluble io water, 
'ifc- Lf. Dose, i to 2 grs. 

Rci-in. — Amorphoas* of a greenish colour, without any taste, 
insoluble in water, and soluble in ether, Atropurpurin. — A glucoside, 
identical with dulcite. 

/Reparations. — Extractum euonymi. Dose, i to 5 grs. Extractum 
euonymi siccum, B. P. Euonymin. Dose, 1 to 2 grs* Extractum 
euonymi liquidum, riot miscible with water. Dose, to i dr. Tinctura 
euotiymi. — ^Tinctute of enonymi (i in 5). Dose, 10 to 40 ms. 

Compound Pills.^Enonymin, gr. i ; Extract of Henbane, gr. 1 ; 
Extract of Rhubarb, gr. i ; Extract of Nux vomica, gr. ^ ; Aloin, ^r. J ; 
Make one pill — as a cholagogue, Liquid preparations containing 
enonymin with pepsine, cascara sagrada and bismuth are used in pro^ 
prictary medicines. 

Actions and HSfs* — Euonymus is cholagogue, hepatic stimulant, 
diuretic, anlipcrindic, antiparasitic, and tonic. The action is similar 
Io that of pndophvlHn. As a cathartic it is similar to rhubarb, 
but only weaker, ft is generally associated with aloes, jalap, rhubarb, 
Of eolocjmth. It increases the flow of bile and promotes other secre- 
tions. In over-dosciit is a gastro-intesttnal irritant, TherapeuticK, — A 
good remedy for torpid liver, bilious diarrhoea, habitual constipation, 
dropsy, pulmuuary aiTtclion and pcdiculi. With pepsin it is a valuable 
hepatic and digestive agent ; hence given in indigestion, ilatulence. 
The fruit af E. Europcus is used to destroy lice. 

Remarks. — The inner bark of E, tingensis used to make sectarial 
marks on the forehead by the Hindus. The vernacular name, Kunkun, 
Itis reference to the colour of the arillus, Kunku being the red powder 
used to make a mark on the foreliead of the Hindus. E. Europeus 
bthe common spindle tree ; the wood is used to make spindles. 

Rhamnaoea. 

The Boedi, buckthorn, Christ's thorn familyt 

General Characters, — Shrubs or small trees. Leaves spiny, 
3in ■ ernate or rarely opposite ; flowers small, perfect; stamens 

p^ J3 ; petalb involute, sepals valvate ; fruits dfy, capsular 

ficdliy and indehiscent ; seed erect, one io each cell ; albumen fleshy. 

Ha Sitat. — U n i vc rsal- 

Properiies. — ^Some plants have acrid and purgative properties, A 
few are used in the preparation of dyeing materials. The bark in some 
ol the species is highly astringent. In others it is bitter, Ionic and 
febrifuge. 

Rhamnua Frangula. 

\\A..^ buckthorn, black alder, dog wood, Persian berries. 

UtL — Europe, Holland. 
/^ariused, — ^The bark. 



158 RHAMNUS FRANGULA. 

Characters, — Bark from the trunk and branches ; in small quilk, 
smooth, of a purplish or of a greyish brown or black colour, with white 
lenticles ; outer layer corky, with many whitish elongated transverse 
markings; inner layer brownish yellow and fibrous. When chewed it 
colours the saliva yellow; taste pleasant, sweetish bitter, no odour. 
Gives red colour to lime water, yellow colour to cold water, and 
brown to hot water. 

Constttuents, — A glucoside — frangulin or rhamnoxanthin,emodin, 
isoemodin, resin, tannin, ash 5 p. c. Frangulin, a glucoside. To obtain 
it, macerate the bark in solution of carbon bisulphide, evaporate, add 
alcohol and again evaporate. Occurs in crystals, of a lemon yellow 
colour, without any odour or taste; insoluble in water, sparingly soluble 
in alcohol or ether; identical with cathartin. With hydrochloric 
acid it splits up into glucose and frangulic acid. Emodin. — Trioxy- 
methyl anthraquinone, a reddish crystalline principle, a decomposi- 
tion product of frangulin. Isoemodin or frangulic acid, is a bitter 
laxative. 

Preparations, — Extractum Rhamni Frangulae. Dose, 1 5 to 60 grs. 
Extractum Rhamni Frangulae liquidum — Fluid extract of frangulae. 
Dose, I to 4 drs. Trochisci Rhamni Frangulae, otherwise known as 
aperient fruit lozenges. Syrupus Rhamni Frangulae. Dose, i to 4 drs. 
Decoction (i in 40). Dose, i to 2 ozs. Ointment (i to 8 of lard). 

Physiological action, — ^The bark is purgative ; when fresh it is a 
violent gastro-intestinal irritant, producing vomiting, purging and 
much pain. Dried bark is not irritant; a safe purgative, alterative, 
tonic and diuretic. 

Therapeutics. — Given in dropsy, in constipation of pregnancy, also 
in chronic cutaneous affections, in rheumatism and in secondary 
syphilis. Ointment is used for itch and parasitic affections. Frangulin 
is identical with cathartin (the active principle of senna). 

Remarks, — Emodin is also found in rhubarb root. 

Rhajnnus Parshianus, B. P. 

Habitat. — Pacific Coast of the United States, California. 

. Part used, — The dried bark. Cascara sagrada or Rhamni 
Purshiani cortex or sacred bark, B. P. chittem bark, Bearberry 
Persiana or Purchiana bark. 

Characters. — A small tree. The bark in curved quills or nearly 
flat pieces, thick, brownish or greyish white externally, and whitish 
within, easily separable, marked with spots of adherent lichen, without 
any odour and of bitter taste. Dose of the powdered bark, 3 to 15 grs. 

Constituents, — Neutral, bitter, crystalline, yellowi principle, resem» 
bling frangulin; three resins : — Emodin, tannin, oxalic and malic acids, 
and a white crystalline sublimate. 

Preparations, — Extractum Cascarae Sagradae liquidum, Extractum 
Rhamni Purshiani liquidum, B. P. — Liquid extract of cascara sagrada. 
Dose, i to I dr. Extractum cascarae sagradae, B. P, Dose, 2 to 
8 grs. Syrupus cascarae aromaticus, B. P. Dose, ^ to 2 drs. Elixir 



RHAMNrs vvffVMTn. 



159 



sagnuja contains liquid extract of cascara 8, tincture of 
^ 2, ulcohol I, cinnamon water 3^ syrup 6. Dose, ^ to 2 drs, 
Ctsc^ra cordial contains cascara sagrada, Berber is aquifolmm root, 
coriander seeds gr. 15, Angelica root gr. 2, oil of anise gtt. 10, oil of 
01 10, oil of cassia gtt, 2j extract liquorice gr». 12, sugar 5 

dr in constipalioD^ dyspepsia* haemorrhoids, and as an excipient 

for Da ^ugs. Dose, i to. i dr. Cascara capsules J dr. of liquid 

extract - , __.a or 3 grs* of solid extract. Some contain, in addition, 
Euonymin. 1 gr, in each. Dose, i to 2. Cascara lozenges contain 
^jv-.-x.r^ ^Jt>, 2 grs of solid extract in each. Pilula Cascarae 
C' I. — Extract of cascara ij, Extract of nux vomica ^, alcoholic 

cxtf-n.1 I'f belladonna I, milk-sugar 1, in one pill; a nice aperient ; 
Syrupus Cascara Sagrada — Liquid extract of cascara 4 oZ!>., liquid 
extract of Hquoricc 3 ozs., carminati%'e tincture 2 drs., syrup 20 ozs. 
Dose, I to 4 drs. Tinctura laxativa contains liquid extract of cascara 
sagrada 2^ aromatic spirit of ammonia 2, spirit of chloroform 2, 
Itnaure of belladonna j, tincture of nux vomica i,mi5ciblc with water. 
Dos>e, 20 I060 ins.» used as a laxative. Liquor cascara aromalicus 
oontaiDS aromaticSf alcohol and saccharine. Dose, i lo 3 drs , used 
la id adjuvant to constipating drugs. 

Actions and nscs^^ The dried bark is purgative, tonic, and 
fcbnfuge. In Inrgc doses cathartic. It improves the appetite and 
di^ettioD* It promotes the gastric, hepatic and pancreatic secretions, 
produces large, softg and painless evacuations. Useful in chronic 
constipation due to torpor of the liver in catarrhal jaundice, and 
aiooy of the stomach and intestines; after its disuse the bowels act 
oaitirally. It acts best on an empty stomach and in a concentrated 
form« Purgative action is due to the resins, and the tonic effects to 
th< bitttr principle. Given as a tonic and laxative in habitual consti- 
piatton, associated with haemorrhoids, dyspepsia, &c. It sometimes 
cures goot or iheumalism where salicylate of soda has failed, 

Rhamxiiis Wightil, R. Catharticus 

haUtat, — Western Peninsala, Ceylon, Nilgiris 
J^rts iii5/r/-— The bark and berries* 

Fernacular, — Eng. — Buckthorn. Bomb. — ^Rukta Rohida. Guz. 
<— Rakta Rohido. MaL — Rakla Rohida. Mar. — Ragatrora. 

Characttrs.^V^^jk in thick hard pieces ; colour brownish red. 
The texture tough and fibrous, bark from the young wood fragile 
and soft; taste highly astringent ; berries black, siie of a p^a, 3 to 4 
seeded; taste bitter and acrid. Dose, ^ to 2 drs. 

C^nshtiients, — h crysiallioe principle ; resim, tannin, a bitter 
p^ malic and cathartic acids, su^ar, starch, albuminous 

fj aUs and ash The ash contains silica, alumina, lime, iron, 

luagnesia, &c. 

I^paraihns. — Fluid extract. Dose> J to 2 drs. Decoction (j in 
I^)^ Dose, J to I 01, S>Tup. Dose, 2 to 4 drs. 



y^i^i^ 



l60 ZIZYPHUS JUJUBA. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent, tonic and deobstruent, given in 
relaxed condition of the system like cinchona bark. Combined with 
@oedi chhala, it is given in bloody fluxes ; locally it is applied to 
swollen glands and tumours. 

Remarks. — The name Raktarohida properly belongs to Ampora 
Rohituka, order Meliaceae. This name is popularly applied to several 
astringent drugs. 

Zizyphus J^juba. Z. Trinervla. Bhamnus Jujnba, 

Habitat, — South of Asia. 

Parts used. — The bark, leaves and lac. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Zruf, Ussli Suddir, Sidra Nabig, Unabe 
Hindi. Beng. — Kul, Budri. Burm. — Hyi-bin, Hzee zugi. Can. — Elonji- 
mara, Gub-mara. Cing. — Maha-debara, Duk. — Ber-chuni. Eng. — 
Jujube tree. Guz. — Boedi, Bora, Goud. Hind. — Ber, Boer. Maleal. — 
Elantha Perintpdali. Malay. — Bidara. Mar. — Bora. Pers. — Kumara. 
Sans. — Wadari or Badari, Dir, Parni, Vanokoli. Tarn. — Ellendi. Tel. — 
Regu-pandu. 

Characters, — Bark scabrous, externally (like Babul chhal) darkish 
brown and deeply and longitudinally fissured. Internally pinkish or 
reddish, very tough and fibrous, taste highly astringent, odour rather 
disagreeable ; leaves one to two inches long, short petioled, alternate, 
three-toothed, oblong, obtuse, glabrous above and tomentose beneath, 
margins serrated, thick, coriacious and very mucilaginous when bruised. 
Dose, i to I dr. 

Constituents* — The bark and leaves contain tannin and a crystalliz- 
able principle, ziziphic acid and sugar. 

Preparations, — Paste of leaves ; infusion of leaves (i in lo). Dose, 
^ to I oz., and decoction of the bark (i in lo). Dose, i to i oz. 

Actions and uses, — The bark is astringent, used in leucorrhoea, 
diarrhoea and haemorrhagic fluxes, generally combined with Talabija. 
The paste of the leaves, with those of Ficus glomerata, is used locally 
for scorpion bites ; and as a poultice to promote suppuration of boils. 
With catechu the leaves are given as cooling and refrigerant. The 
root is used in fevers. 

Remarks. — A kind of lac known as Bhuri lak or Bora lak, is found 
as excrescence upon the branches. It is an ingredient in the prepara- 
tion known as Lakha shadi tela. 

Zizyphus Yalgaris. 

Habitat.- ^India, Persia, China. 
Part used. — The dried fruit. 

Vernacular.— ATdh.—lJnmb. Bomb.— Unnab-khorasani. Eng. — 
Jujube. Hind.— Fetni, Pitui. Pers.—Unnab, Sinjid-i-jilani, Sutlg. — 
Amlai. 



VENTILAGO MADRASPATANA. l6l 

Characters^ — Fruit dry, oblong and of a red colour, in size resem- 
bling small nutmeg or dried date ; surface smooth, shining and 
wrinkled and presenting a small cup-shaped depression at its base, in 
the centre of which a small stalk is attached ; pulp greyish yellow, 
spongy, unctuous and lumpy to the touch. In the centre of the 
fruit is a small stone, which is pointed on both sides and adherent to 
the pulp; taste sweet, sub-acid and moderately astringent like that of 
fresh apple. A fine gum lac is obtained from this tree. 

Constituents, — ^The fruit contains mucilage and sugar ; the bark 
and leaves contain tannin ; the wood contains a crystallizable acid 
(ziziphic acid), tannin and sugar. 

Preparation, — Decoction of the bark (i in 20;, Dose, J to i oz. 

Acttovs and uses. — Similar to those of dried raisins or prunes. 
The fruit is aperient, demulcent, expectorant and tonic ; used in 
habitual constipation, rheumatism and chronic skin diseases. It is a 
chief and constant ingredient in pectoral syrups and confections. The 
leaves, when chewed, are said to destroy the sense of taste of disagree- 
able medicines. The decoction of the bark is used externally as an 
astringent wash to wounds and ulcers. 

Yentilago Madraspatana. Funis Yiminalis. 

Habitat. — Ceylon, Burma, and Southern India. 

Part used. — The root-bark. 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Ruktupita. Can. — Popli-chukai. Mar. — 
Khandvel, Lokhandi. Sans. — Rakta^valli. Tam. — Vambadam. Tel. — 
Surugundu, Erra-chiratali. 

Raktavalli. — Red creeper. 

Characters. — A climbing shrub ; root J to i inch in diameter, 
rough and scaly ; colour reddish, of a metallic lustre. 

Preparation. ^M^dLXQZttd oil. The powdered bark, with gingelly 
oil. 

Actions and uses, — Parasiticide. The oil is used locally for itch 
and other skin eruptions. 

Anaoardiaoe». 

The Bhilamo or Cashew (Kaju) family. 

Anacardiaceae, from ana, alike or according to, and cardia, the 
heart, in allusion to the fruit, which is heart-shaped. 

General characters. — Trees or shrubs abounding in resinous 
gummy, acrid milky and sometines poisonous juice, which becomes 
black on drying ; leaves alternate, exstipulate, simple or compound and 
dotless ; flowers regular, often small and unisexual ; fruit indehiscent 
drupe or nut-like ; seeds edible, without albumen. 

Prrtperties. — Many plants contain a milky juice of a resinous, 
gummy and acrid character. In some the juice is poisonous. In 
pistachio nut the seeds are solitary, without albumen. Seeds of some 

U 



Ib2 ANACARDIUM OCCIDENTALE. 

species are used as food. Theiuice of Kaju and Bhilama is acrid, cbrro- 
sive and of a black colour. The mango (Amba) of India is a luscious 
fruit. Some plants yield turpentine. Many furnish varnishes and dyes. 

Anaoardiam Ocoidentale. Aoaiuba Ocoidentalis. CassnTiom 

Pomiierom. 

Habitat — An American plant, cultivated on sea-coasts of India, 
Tropics. Imported from Goa. 

Parts used. — Seeds or kernels (almond fruits). Bajk, tar, and 
spirit distilled from the fermented juice of the torus. 

Vernacular, — Amboyna. — Boafrangi. Beng. — Kaju Hidjii badam. 
Bur. — ^The-ho-thayat. Can. — Gerapoppu. Cing. — Kaju-atta. Duk. — 
Kajuki-Jutli. Eng. — Cashew-nut. Guz. — Kaju. Hind. — Kaju, Hijli- 
badam. Mar. — Kaju. Maleal. — Parunki-mavah, Keppal Cherum. 
Malay. — Jambu-monat. Pers. — Badam-i-Pharangi. Sans. — Bijara-sala. 
Tam. — Kala-mavah, Kothai-mundiri. Tel. — Jedi-mamedi, Mamedi- 
vittu. 

Boa frangi — Portuguese fruit. 

Characters, — Flowers sweet smelling, pea-shaped, yellow or red ; 
peduncle or torus, enlarged and fleshy, containing a sweet and 
astringent juice and used as edible fruit each peduncle having 
at its end a small kidney-shaped nut (kaju). The nut is an inch 
long, flattened on both sides, smooth and shining ; the pericarp 
contains quantities of acrid, caustic and vesicating oily liquid. The 
acridity is destroyed by roasting the nut, when it becomes edible, as 
an article of food and as an ingredient in chocolate; hence, when ground 
up with cocoa, the nuts make a good chocolate. The tarry, acrid, oily 
fluid is obtained by heating the pericarp. From the fermented juice 
expressed from the torus or thalamus, a kind of spirit is distilled. 
The spirit has a peculiar flavour due to the volatile, aromatic principle 
contained in the rind of the torus. It is similar to the fermented cedar, 
but is superior to rum or arrack. A kind of astringent gum is exuded 
from the trunk, which is a fair substitute' for gum-arabic. The gum 
occurs in reddish, yellow or brown stalactiform masses ; with water it 
forms glairy, turbid mucilage. The tar lis obtained from the pericarp 
by roasting the fruit. 

Cotistituents. — The tar contains anacardic acid 90 p.c. and cardol 
10 p.c, to the latter the blistering property is due. The kernel 
contains a sweet, bland, pale yellow oil, similar to olive oil, that from 
the mesocarp is thick, brown and viscid. It becomes darker when 
exposed to the air, and is soluble in alcohol and ether. The wood 
contains catechin. 

Anacardic Acid. — The pericarps are exhausted with ether and 
distilled. The solution contains anacardic acid and cardol ; the residue 
is next washed with water to free it from tannin. It is then dissolved in 
alcohol. To the solution is next added oxide of lead, which precipitates 
insoluble lead salts of anacardic acid. The acid thus obtained occurs 
as white crystalline mass without any odour. On heating it is 



BUCHANANIA LATIFOUA, 



J 03 



decomposed, producing colourless Buid oil of the odour of rancid fat 
when Durned. Cardol. — To obtain it, the alcoholic solution of the 
pem-4f p, after removing anacardic acid^ is next distilled ; to the distillate 
;idd acetate of lead and sulphuric acid. The precipitate contains cardol 
A5 a yellow oily liquid, insoluble in water» soluble in alcohol and ether. 

Pre/farattons* — Infusion of bark (1 in 20), Dose, i to 1 oz, 
Tinclura anacurdii (i in 10) of the pericarp. Dose, 2 to Jo minims ; 
used as a vermifuge. Unguentum anacardii, — ^Blistering ointment 
(i of the tar in 10 of ^-aseline). 

Aciiom and uses. — ^The tar is a powerful irritants a good, rapid 
and safe vesicant and a blistering agent* It gives rise to a dark- 
coloured stain and an eczematous inflammation of the skin, 
producing copious flow of serum* It is used in tuberculous 
leprnfv* ringworra» corns, obstinate ulcers, piles, &c. The oil being 
it! n} Uie fluid of the alimentary canal, 3 or 4 drops of it can be 

s\\ 1 Hith iinpunity. It is also used to preserve wood from the 

attack ot insects. The tincture is used as a vermifuge. The bark is given 
in diabcteis insipidus. The spirit is a powerful diuretic and soporific, 
given 10 promote secretion of urine. It is also used as an application 
for rheumatism. Cardol is eliminated with the urine and fieces, 

Bachanania Latifolia, Chirongia Sapida, Spondias Elliptica. 

//aifttitt. — Hotter parts of India, Jumna, Ajmir, Panjab. 
fitri used, — The seeds. 

J' ir, — Burm. — Thitsai, Lambo. Beng. — Chironji^ Piyala. 

Can*— Li, Noas Kool. Guz.— Charoli, Pia-Tal, Hind.— Piyal, 

Charoh. Mar. — Charoli^ Panj. Mai. — Mura, munga, peru, Panj.^ — 
Chirauli. Sans.*-Poyala, Chara, Tapasa-priya. Tarn. — Mowda, Aima. 
Tel. — C h a r a - m a m i d L 

Tapasa-pnya — dear to hermits. 

C/tijrfirf^rs^^FTuit sub-globose, drupe, slightly compressed^ ^ 
if ' *r, colour deep purple; stone hard, 2 valved ; kernels 

lit icssed, brovvn^ or mottled dark brown, 1 inch in length 

and ^ 111 breadth ; cotyledons oily ; flavour agreeable and nutty. 

C'iustitucfits. — Albuminoids 28 p.c., mucilage Ts p.c., oil 58 p.c, 
and fibre and a:>h 3*; p.c. The expressed oil is straw coloured, of a 
sweet Ustc and limpid. It congeals into a white semi-solid mass at a 
low temperature. 

/' ilsion, which contains almonds, dales without 

stotit\ lt and scssamum, made into a paste, in tjiitk or 

water. Dooet a lo 4 drs. 

Atiiiits and n^scs, — Demulcent , nutritive and expectorant, givtn 
in oough and in general debility. The oil is used as an application 
for bilffnes^. 

Mangifera, Indica, M. Montana, H. Domestica* 
Uabitai% — E»iSt Indies and other tropical countries. 



164 ODINA WODIBR. 

Parts used. — The kernel, gum, resin, fruit, leaves, flowers, 
bark, &c. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Maghzak Ambaj. Beng. — Ama, Amgachh. 
Bomb. — Amba. Burm. — Siyapin, That-yat. Can. — Mavena. Chin. — 
Mang-wo. Cing. — Amba-attamba. Duk. — Am. Eng. — Mango tree, 
Guz. — Amba, Keri, Ambosi (dried raw decorticated fruit). Hind. — 
Am, Amba-kaper, Ambosi Amchur Am khusk (dried fruit). 
Mar.— Amachura, Amba. Maly. — Mushchi. Pers. — Darakhte Ambah. 
San. — Ammara-chutu, Sahakara, Prajapati, Makau-lamu. Tarn. — 
Manga-maram. Tel, — Mamidi-chettu. 

Characters, — Fruit juicy, drupe of various shapes and sizes of several 
varieties, differing very much in flavour ; stone compressed and fibrous. 
The kernel is large and covered with a papery testa ; cotyledons two, plano- 
convex, lobed and often unequal, bitter and astringent ; gum resin found 
in pieces exuding from the fruit at the time of flowering and just before 
ripening ; generally found deposited upon tender portions of the plant ; 
leaves long, lanceolate, stiff and of a darkish green colour ; young leaves 
very delicate and of a pale or pale reddish colour, of an astringent taste 
and an acidulous aromatic smell ; bark dark-brown and longitudinally 
fissured, inner part of a light, white, pale yellowish or reddish colour, 
of an agreeable aroma and an astringent taste. A kind of spirit is pre- 
pared from the mango. It is used for the same purpose as whisky. 
It gives about 60 p. c. of alcohol. Dose of the kernel, 10 to 30 grs. 

Constituents. — The dried unripe peeled fruit contains water 21 
p.c„ watery extract 6i'S p.c, cellulose 5 p. c, insoluble ash 15, soluble 
ash 1*9 The soluble ash contains alkalies as potash i, tartaric and citric 
acids 7, and malic acid I2'6. The ripe fruit contains yellow colouring 
matter, chlorophyll product, soluble in ether, bisulphide of carbon and 
benzol, less readily soluble in alcohol. The bark contains tannin. 
The kernel contains gallic acid and tannin, fat, sugar, gum and ash. 

Preparation. — Fluid extract of the bark. Dose, S to 1 5 ms. 

Physiological action. — The bark is astringent and tonic. The ripe 
fruit is invigorating, refreshing and nutrient, also somewhat laxative. 
The unripe fruit is acid, astringent and antiscorbutic. Ambosi is a 
valuable antiscorbutic owing to its containing citric acid. The ashes 
oi the leaves are applied to burns and scalds. Tender leaves, dried 
and made into a powder, are used in diabetes. The kernel is astringent 
and anthelmintic. Amba-no-chick, or the gum resin, mixed with lime 
juice, is used locally in scabies. The bark is astringent,; anthelmintic 
and used in nasal catarrh and for lumbrici. As an astringent it is 
given in diarrhoea, also to check haemorrhages from the nose, stomach, 
intestines, uterus, and lungs. It also checks profuse muco-pui ulent 
discharges as leucorrhoea, gonorrhoea, &c, 

Odina Wodier. 

Habitat, — Hotter parts of India. 
Parts useci. — The bark and gum. 



PISTACIA INTEGERRIMA. 



J65 



Fern/icuhr, — ^Beng. — Jival. Bomb. — Sbimpti* Burm.^Hnaubai 
Nabhay. Can. — Sbimtee Poonu. Cing, — Hick-gass. Diik, — Besba- 
TAm Kashmal. Guz. — Shembat, Jingna-gund (gum). Hind. — Sbimpti. 
Kiniul^ — Moye-chhala. Mai. — Utbi. Malyal, — Udi maram. Mar.— 
Magcer, moye. Sans, — Aja Shringi, Jiyal, Jingini Nelra-usbadhi. 
Tarn.— Oaday maram, anicarra. Tcl. — Oddi-manu Garapina* 

Aja Shringi. — Goat*shorn; Nctra-ushadhi, Netra eyes, and aoshad 
mcdiane. It is a collyriuin for the eyes- 

Characters. — Gum in large tears or stalactiform masses of a 
yellowish tttigeor amber colour, very brittle and friable or in angubr 
IMeces, each piece marked with fissures ; taste disgreeable and mucila- 
ginous, one half of it soluble in water^ the remaining forming a slimy 
or glairy and turbid mucilage on account of the oil it contains ; the 
bark externally is ash -coloured, scabrous, fissured, fibrous and soft ; in* 
li " he fibres are covered with a reddish powdery substance; 
u itly astringent. 

Constituents* — ^Thebark contains tannin and ash, the ash contains 
considerable quantity of potassium, carbonate, and hence deliquescent. 

I^efiaration. — Decoction of bark (i in lo). Dose, i to i oz, 

Actmns and usrs, — Astringent, used as a gargle for the mouth; also 
ms a lotion l^jr skin eruptions. The bark mixed with Morgosa oil 
(Neem oil) is said to be a very useful application for chronic ulcers* 
Til*' f^im beaten up with brandy is used as an application to sprains 
;i i. The gum is given internally in asthma and as a cordial 

to *>viuvif during lactation, 

Plstaola Integerrima, Rhus Kakraslngl, Rhus Suoaedanea. 

Habitats — Sub- Alpine Himalaya, Punjab, 
Part used, — The galls. 

Fifrii<ici»/ijr,*^Beng. — Kakara Sringi. Can. — Dushtapu-chattu. 
Duk*^ — Kakada-singi. Eng. — Zebra wood tree. Guz. — Kakara-singi, 
Sumak (the fruit). Hind. — Kakar-singi, Mah* — Kakada-shingi, 
Sam.*— Kara«kata-sringi. Teh — Kakara -shingi* Tarn. — Kakkata* 
shingi, 

Characters.-^OdXls large» hollow, horn-like andcurved^ rough, pale 
grceniih grey externally, single or sometimes lobed. They vary in size 
aod shape, 5ome of them resembling bivalve shells, others obovate or 
obco?' ncrally purse-like, cylindrical and tapering at either tnd, 

Ncaf 1 or at the attached end is the midrib of the leaf, upon which 

Ihe ^ led ; it appears to have split into two. Between 

the li. lie, which is the passage for the insect ; surface 

ATOOOth and here and there wrinkled, furrowed and marked with 
toboxles. It is brittle, and breaks with a crackling noise. Internal 
surface of the sac has bright yellow colour like that of dried blood ; 
odour slightly aciduous ; taste strongly astringent, bitter and similar to 
that of mmaja. Dose of the powder, lo to 30 grs. 



Ifli 



166 PISTACIA LENnscus. 

Co;}^/r'/i/^f7/j.~-Tannin. 

Preparations. — Decoction (i in lo). Dose, J to i oz. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent, tonic and stimulant, generally 
given with demulcents and aromatics in cough, bronchitis, phthisis, 
asthma, difficulty of breathing, and as a tonic in fevers and want of 
appetite. It allays thirst, difficulty of breathing and to check vomiting. 
As an astringent it is largely used in diarrhoea, dysentery, piles, &c. 
A paste of them is applied in psoriasis. 

Pistacia Lentisons. 

HahitaL — South of Europe, Asia Minor, Calcutta, Levant, Island 
of Scio. 

Parts used. — The bud, bark, leaves, fruit and a concrete resin- 
ous exudation (mastiche). 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Uluk-bagh-dame, Kinnak, Rumi-mastaka 
(resin). Guz., Beng. — Rumi-mastaki. Eng. — Gum Mastiche. Hind.^ 
Rumimostike, Kundar-rumi« Mar. — Rumi-mastaki. Pers. — Kinnah, 
Kinnoli. Tam.— Irumi-malait-taki. Tel, — Rumaroha Ramu. 

Characters. — ^True mastiche obtained from the stem by incision 
is rarely met with in the Indian market. It occurs as small, oval, 
smooth, yellowish white tears, brittle, being usually covered with its 
own dust, resembling gum resin, friable, of a vitreous fracture, soft- 
ening in the mouth and becoming ductile when chewed, shining and 
transparent ; larger tears of an inferior variety are found mixed with 
bark and earthy matter; taste slightly terebinthinous; odour agreeable, 
flavour weak and balsamic ; it melts at moderate heat and exhales a 
sweet odour. Insoluble in water, soluble about 80 p.c. in alcohol, 
leaving a substance resembling caoutchouc, which isdissolvedby ether. 
It gives its name to the process of mastication, being largely chewed in 
the East. Isasa or sveta kundola, is sometimes passed off as true 
mastiche. Dose of the powder, 20 to 60 grs. 

Constituents. — A trace of volatile oil, two resins, Alpha resin 
or mastichic acid 90 p. c, and Beta resin or mastichine 10 p.c, also 
an ethereal oil. Mastichic acid is soluble in alcohol. Mastichine 
resembles copal, is insoluble in cold but soluble in hot alcohol and 
soluble in ether. 

Actions and uses. — It is a mild stimulant and diuretic, used in 
catarrhs of the respiratory and urinary passages ; as an aphrodisiac 
combined with salep it is given in genital debility ; also used as a 
masticatory. It is used by dentists for filling cavities in caried teeth. 
When kept in the mouth it perfumes the breath. The paste is applied 
to the chest in catarrh, bronchitis or to relieve local pain. 

Pistaida Yera, Pistaoia Khlnjok, Pistaoia Cabolioa, P. Poshtn. 

* Habitat. — N.-W. India, Beloochistan, Sind, Syria, Persia, 
Afghanistan. 

Parts used. — ^The fruit, galls, husks and oleo-resin. 



KSTACIA TE8EBINTHUS. 



167 



Vernacular. — Pers. — Darakht-i-Pistah ; the oleo resin, Saker, 
(kundrune Taikh). Baluchi, — Kabul i mastaki. Bombay — Mastic, 
Beng. — Pistan, Bomb, the nuts — Pistan. Eng.^ — Pistachio nuts. Arab. — 
Fusiuk, Guz.— Pistam. Hind — Pistan. Ind.— Pisteh. Pers.— The 
outer husk, Posti-pi^ta ; (the galls), Gul-i-Pisteh Buzgunj. 

GuUi-pisteh means flowers of pista. The term is applied to the 
gmlU of P. Khinjak and P. Cabulica. natives of Scinde, from their sup- 
posed resemblance to the flov^ers. 

Characters, — The fruit is of the size of an olive ; husk 
reddish j taste astringent, and odour terebinthinate ; within the fruit 
is a woody shell or nut of a brownish white colour, with hard, horny 
and polished texture and ovoid shape ; the kernel or almond is of a pale 
greenish colour and covered with a thin brownish red and brittle skin» 
which can easily be removed by scratching* It contains much oil, 
the taste is sweet and balsamic, flavour agreeable and resinous. 
Gall \% a small, ovoid, fig shaped, spherical excrescence, of a 
brownish red colour, about half an inch long and half an inch in 
diameter at the apex, having a hole at the base communicating with 
a hollow cavity within, thus resembling a small fig bud. At one end 
of the gall is a scar, the remains of a fallen leaf. The walls are thin, 
brittle and translucent ; taste acidulous and astringent ; odour lerebin- 
thinous ; oleo resin is similar in appearance, characters and properties 
to true mastiche, but more opaque and less clean. Dose of the fruit, 
I to a drs. ; of the gatlSi to to 30 grs. 

C^mHtuents,^GMs and husks contain tannic acid ^5 p.c, gallic 
^e^in or oleo resin 7 p.c,| to which the odour is due. Kerne! 
08 an aromatic oil, which soon becomes rancid. Galls are 
toI^Ue in water 65 p.c, in spirit 75 p.c, and in ether 31 p.c, 

Pteparatvm, — Confection. Dose, I to 2 drs, 

Acttunx and uses. — The kernel is nutrient, demulcent and res- 
torative. The galls are astringent and demutcenti used in diarrhcDai 
dysentery and in excessive expectoration. 

Platacla Tereblnthus, Terebinthua VuIgaHSt P. Atlantica, 
P, Palestina. 

Mji^^iM/. —Europe, South of France, Algeria* Asia, Mediterranean 
Basin. Africa, Inland of Scto or Chio, and Cyprus. 

Parts i/.K'f/.— The concrete oil ; liquid oleo-resinous exudation; 
(terebinth ina chia) and galls* 

Vernacular, — Arab. — (The oil) Butum, Ilak-el Ambat, 
Kalingc-rumi (Galls^, Hab-ul Khizra. Afjghan. — Khinjak. Hind. — 
(Oleo resin) Cabuli Mistaki. Eng. — Chian turpentine, Cj'press 
tuqjcntinc, East Indian mastich. Pers,— Zunghari, Sukhur. Baluch — 
G^ran. 

Characters^ — The oleo-resin is a thick tenacious, greenish yellow 
liquid, becomes hard by keeping, loses its volatile oil, and becomes a 
concrete, soft, translucent mass or tears, with a fennel, citron or jasinine- 





'nm'^rrt 



l£m 



Iktt^L 



l68 RHUS AROMATICA, 

like terebinthinate odour and faintly bitter, mastiche-like. agreeable 
taste. It is free from the bitterness and acridity of turpentine. Galls 
are small sacs found on the margin of the leaves, smgle, or three 
or four combined, of a pink colour, terebinthinate odour and astringent 
taste; used as an emulsion. Dose of the oleo-resin, 5 to 15 grs., and 
of the galls. Dose, 3 to 10 grs. 

Constituents — Volatile oil, resin, mastichic acid, and masticin. 

Preparation. — Mistura Terebinthinae chise, contains 30 grains in 
I ounce, emulsified with tragacanth and acacia. 

Pilula Terebinth inae chiae contains chian turpentine 3, and 
sublimed sulphur 2 in each. Dose, i to 2 pills. 

Pilula Terebinthinae et zinci contains chian turpentine 4, zinc 
sulphatis J. Dose, i to 3 pills. 

Actions and uses.SxmWzx to those of Rumi mastachi. Its chief 
use is, however, as a remedy for cancer of the female pelvic organs. It 
is said to cause disappearance of the cancerous infiltration. Galb are 
astringent. 

Bhas Aromatioa, R. Aouminata. 

Fragrant sumach, sweet sumach. 

//ij^'/fl/.— United States, Cashmere Valley. 

Part used, — ^The root bark. 

Characters. — Shrub, 2 to 6 feet high, stems straight, branching 
at the top ; flowers yellow, in spikes ; fruit irt clusters, red and 
acid ; when broken the odour is very strong and fragrant ; root-bark 
contains a volatile oil. Dose, 10 to 30 grs. 

Constituents. — The root-bark contains several resins, calcium and 
potassium salts, malates, tannin, a volatile oil, fat, mucilage, &c. 

Preparations. — ^Tincture (1 in 5). Dose, 5 to 30 ms. ; fluid extract, not 
miscible with water. Dose, 5 to 30 minims; solid extract, i to S grs. 

Actions and uses. — Pungent, aromatic, astringent, tonic, diuretic 
and stimulant, exerting its influence principally on the urinary organs. 
Used in diabetes, cystitis, hsematuria, albuminuria; in nocturnal 
incontinence of urine in children ; in hysterical eneuresis in adults ; in 
involuntary painful micturition, where the urine is loaded with mucus 
and pus or as is found in old persons due to loss of tone in the bladder 
to retain the urine ; also given in night sweats, in haemorrhage from 
the kidneys, bladder or uterus and in other passive discharges, as 
leucorrhoea, atonic diarrhoea, dysentery, &c. 

Rhos Goriaria. 

Habitat. — Persia, Syria, Asia Minor, Mediterranean Basin. 

Parts used. — The fruit, leaves and bark. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Sumaka, Tumtum. Eng. — Blue-leaved 
Sumach, Star-leaved Sumach. Hind.— Tratraka. Panj. — Talri. 
Pers. — Sumaka Mahi. 



CORL^RIA, 



169 



Characters, — Fruit a drupe, small, flat, of the size of Guvara-bija or 
lentil, hairy and of a reddish colour, surface smooth, shining and 

fiitled here and there ; calyx small and of a brown colour ; epidermis 
riigilc, so that thc^ seed escapes readily; seed greyish brown, very hard, 
Aat^ rcnifnrm, and resembling a pea, having a white scar at the centre; 
leaves about a foot long and pinnate, with 5 to 7 hairy leaflets; 
dUpticalt woolly and serrate, Dose» 20 to 30 grs* 

' fits* — The leaves contain a colouring matter, and tannm. 

The \' latns bimalate of lime* 

/^efarattom. — Decoction (1 in 10). Dose, ^ to i oz. Paste of 
leaves; gargle; liquid extract, dose ^ to 1 dr. Infusion (i in lo), 
Do^i ^ to I 02. 

Actt^ms and uses. — A good substitute for Rhus aromatica, 
fe^riccrant and astringent, used in scurvy, diarrhoea, dysentery, and to 
check bilious vomitinc ; in catarrh of the stomach and bowels, 
indigestion, cholera, in nsematemesis and in haemoptysis ; also used in 
leucorrhoca. k strengthens the gums. Locally the paste is applied 
over the pubes to check diuresis ; mixed with charcoal powder it is 
applied to unhealthy sores and in piles A gargle is used in catarrhal 
ancctions of the pharyuix and in ulcers of the mouth. The bark is a 
powerful astringent. The liquid extract prepared by boiling the leaves, 
isirk and fruit is given to check diarrhoea. Poultices of the leaves are 
used as apphc;iUons to the abdomen in the diarrhcea of children. 

/^r marks* — The leavus are used as a substitute for gall nuts in the 
production of grey colours for dyeing and tanning leathers. 

Rhus Glabra. -rStnooth sumach* 

//til/ttaL — America, California. 

I^dris used, — The fruit, leaves and bark. 

Characters, — Bark smooth, greyish red, covered with scattered 

Truit a drupe in clusters, of small crimson berries, sub* 
t ly hairy ; seeds roundish or oblong and smooth. With* 
«tlt St and of an acidulous taste Dose, \ to i dr. 

L . ... ..;;/*. — The fruit contains acid calcium and potassium mal- 

atc*, tannin 6 p. c* and colouring matter. The seeds contain a fixed 
oil ; galU contain lannin 60 to 70 p.c 

f^^aratj'ofts, — Infusion and decoction (1 in 20). Dose, i to a ozs. 
Fluid extract, not miscible with water. Dose, 1 to 2 drs. ; gargle. 

Actions and r/ses, — Astringent, refrigerant, diuretic, and antiseptic, 

fiven tn catarrh of the stomach and bowels, in dysentery, gonorrhoea, 
X.; also as a diuretic and refrigerant in fe%*er and diabetes. In catarrh 
of the throat, in pharyngitis and other mouth affections it is used as 
a gargle. The infusion is used as a wash for ulcers, wounds, &c. 

Rhus Toxicodendron. 

Trailmg sumach, poison ivy, 
/&^fi!o/,— Canada, United Sutea« 



I70 SEMICARPUS ANACARDIUM. 

Part used. — The fresh leaves. 

Characters, — Shrub, erect, leaves long, petiolate, trifoliate; lateral 
leaflets sessile, long, obliquely ovate, pointed, terminal at the base, 
wedge shaped or rounded ; leaflets entire, downy, glabrous and notched ; 
dried leaves papery, brittle, without any odour ; taste astringent and 
acrid ; applied to the skin they set up erysipelatous inflammation. On 
incision the plant yields an acrid poisonous juice, which turns black by 
exposure to the air. Dose of the powdered leaves, i to 4 grs. 

Constituents. — A poisonous principle — Toxicodendric acid, tannin » 
fixed oil, mucilage, and wax. 

Toxicodendric acid. — To obtain it bruise the leaves with slaked 
lime, macerate with water, add sulphuric acid and distil. The distillate 
is an acid, which is a colourless solution, highly volatile ; almost absent 
in dried leaves. The poisonous principle is also found in Rhuspumila 
and Rhus diversiloba and Rhus venenata (swamp sumach). The last 
is most poisonous. 

Preparation. — Tinctura Rhois Toxicodendri. — Tincture of Rhus 
toxicodendron (i in 2). Dose, 2 to 5 ms. Emplastrum Rhois Toxi- 
opdendri. 

Physiological action. — A cutaneous irritant ; locally applied, it 
causes redness and swelling of the afiected part, with itching and vesi- 
cular eruptions. It is also an irritant of the mucous membranes, causing 
conjunctivitis, redness and tumefaction of the mouth and throat, great 
thirst, nausea, vomiting often choking pain, worse at night, diarrhoea, 
with bloody stools and diureris. In favourable cases desquamation 
of the epidermis follows, lasting some time. It is given internally 
in chronic eczema, in vesicular erysipelas, in typhoid fever, and even in 
rheumatism. In affections of the fibrous tissue, in erythema, herpes 
and pemphigus and in nocturnal rheumatic pains, the adminis- 
tration of Kb us is attended with benefit. In paralysis, due to rheu- 
matic diathesis or to exposure to cold and wet, it is useful. As a 
local application it is used as a lotion in sprains, superficial burns, 
bites and stings of in|ects. 

femioarpaB Anaoardium. 

Anacardium Latifolium, A. Officinarum — Marking-nut tree 
(Eng.) 

Habitat — Hotter parts of India, Ceylon, Burmah. 

Parts used. — ^The fruit or nut and oil. 

F^nwc«Ajr.— Arab,— Baladar (nut), Hab-al-kalb, Hatul-phahama, 
Inkar-diya. Beng. — Bhela, Bhelava. Burm. — Khi-si chailem khyd. 
Can. — Ghera-mara Giru Duk . — Bhilawan. Eng. — Marking-nut. 
Guz.— Arushu Bhilamu. Hind. — Bhela, Bhilava. Mar.— Bhilamai 
Bilba, Bibnava. Malyal. — Kanpura Cherun-kuru. Mai. — Sambiri, 
Thembari. Pers. — Biladuro. Sans. — Bhallataka, Arshoghani, Bhella- 
tike Bijama, Arush-kara. Sing.— Kiri Badulla. Tam. — Shayug cottay, 
Sheran-kottai. Tel. — Bhallatamu-jodi, Chettu Tumnaoda Mamedi. 

Arush-kara means causing sores. 



SEMICAKPUS AKACA^DIUM. 



I7t 



Arshagani — Arsha or Harasha (Guz). piles and gni, to destroy. 
Bhtlamo is a destroyer of piles, and hence the name. Marking-nut 
ii so called as the nuts are used extensively for marking linen. It is 
tliO tised in the preparation of a black varnish. 

ChnracUrs, — Fruit, a nut resting upon a receptacle, the whole 
in shape the heart of an animal. Nut obliquely cordate, 
it u both sides, smooth, shining and wrinkled ; colour blacky 

epidermis mmutely pitted with a small broad stalk at its base where 
Ine receptacle is attached ; pericarp in two layers, the inner one hard 
and ihe outer one leathery ; between these layers are cells which con- 
tain a black resinous, viscid, acrid juice or vesicating oil, which 
is known as marking ink. The oil can be obtained by boiling the 
Yrhole nut without depriving it of its pericarp. The nut is prepared 
for internal use by first boiling it and then washing with cold water. 
Dose of the oil, \ to 2 ms. 

0>nsHiuents, — The almonds contain a smallquantity of sweet oil; 
the pericarp contains a vesicating oil 32 p.c., soluble in etheri which 
blackens on exposure to the air. It resembles the oil obtained from 
Atiicardium occidentale. 

Preparation, — Paste, containing juice of marking*nut 1, plumbago 



2)eylanica 1, baliospermum montanum 



nertifolia 
Used 



Euphorbia 
Asdcpias gigantea 1, sulphate of iron i, molasses i, mix. 
an application to scrofulous glands of the neck. 

Aeiifms and us^s. — The black thick juice of Bhilamo, is chiefly 
used as a stimulant ; locally caustic and vesicant. As a local stimulant 
It U applied for the relief of rheumatic pains, leprous affections, 
ififlainmation of bones and joints, bruises and sprains- When applied 
over the skin it causes intense pain and stvelling, its thin epidermis 
causes deep bluish coloured vesicles and intractable sore. The mark 
does not disappear for many months or even for life. The pain of the 
application is best relieved by salines interna 11 v and lead lotion ex- 
ternally J the whole fruit or the seed is edible, like that of the cashew. 
It is boiled and then washed with cold water before use. The oil obtain- 
ed from it, mixed with butter or oil » is used by the natives as stimulant, 
narcotic, digestive, alterative and nervine tonic, and given in dyspepsia, 
worms, nervous debility, asthma and epilepsy* As an alterative it is 
given in scrofula, venereal diseases and leprosy, and to relieve asthmatic 
attacks. Sometimes the fruit is heated in the flame of a lamp and the 
oil allowed to drop in milk. This is given in cough due to relaxed 
uvula and palate. Its internal use requires great caution. It is used 
locally to procure abortion. The vapour of the burning pericarp is 
applied to cold swelling and to cure piles* The mature receptacle 
U fleshy and sweetish-sour ; boiled and eaten with cocoanut and 
charonji as an aphrodisiac. 

Remarks, — The natives mix Bilama in the preparation of mercurial 
compounds under the belief that it counteracts the dangerous eSect 
of mercury, namely, salivation. 



asQis 



172 SPONDIAS MANGIFBRA. 

Spondias Hangifera. 

Habitat — Throughout India, 

Parts used. — The fruit, bark and gum. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Amrai. Burtn. — Gue-bin. Can. — ^Amate- 
mara, Fundi. Duk, — Jangh'tam. Eng. — Wild manffo, Hog plum-tree. 
Hind. — Ambra, Amra, Maryam Kaiphar. Malyal. — Ampazham. 
Mar. — Ambada. Pers. — Darakhte Maryam. Sans. — ^Amrataka, Amrat, 
Adhvaga-bhog3ra, Pitta- Vriksha. Tam. — Mare-man-chedi. Tel.— 
Pita-vruk shamu, Toura-manudi. 

Adhvaga-bhogya means travellers* delight. 

Pittavriksha. — ^Bile tree. The bark is used to lessen biliousness. 

Characters. — Fruit a drupe of the size of a pullet's egg, oval, fleshy, 
yellow when ripe ; gum smooth, shining, reddish brown or yellowish, 
m stalactiform pieces, resembling tragacanth ; with water it forms 
transparent jelly, or incompletely soluble mucilage. Dose of the bark, 
lo to 30 grs. 

Preparation. — Decoction (1 in 10), Dose, J to i oz. Extract, 
5 to 15 grs. 

Actions and uses, — ^The pulp is astringent, stomachic and acid, and 
used in dyspepsia. The bark and gum astringent and demulcent, and 
used in dysentery. 

BorseraoaB or Amyridaoa. 

Myrrh (Hirabola) and frankincense family. 

General characters. — Trees or shrubs, leaves compound, frequent^ 
ly dotted ; flowers small, perfect and rarely unisexual ; disk and 
stamens perigynous ; ovary sessile, superior, from i to s-celled ; ovules 
in pairs ; fruit dry, 1 to 5-celled ; seeds ex-albuminous, superior. The 
plants secrete a fragrant gum resin or a resinous juice and turpentine. 

Habitat. — ^Tropical regions of America, Africa and India. 

Properties, — Some plants are bitter purgative and anthelmintic ; 
others are tonic, stimulants and antispasmodic. 

Balsamodendrons. 

Trees of this family yield a gum resin similar in characters 
and properties to that obtained from the trees of the Boswellian 
family. The same remarks apply to the arrangement and classification 
of the plants of this order as in the case of Boswellia. 

Commiphora (Balsamodendron) Opobalsamiim, Balnaimim 
Oileadense. 

Habitat. — ^Arabia. 

Parts used. — The balsam or oleo-resin, known as Balm of Gilead 
or Balm of Mecca, fruit and wood. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — ^Akulla Balasin, Habel-Balasana, Dhonul- 
balsan. Bomb. — Roghan-i-Balsan, the wood Ud-i-Balasana. Duk. — 



BALSAMODENDKON PLAYFAIRII. 



1/3 



ftlasan kmteb. Eog. — Balm of Gelead. Mecca — gum balsam tree, 
Indian bdellium. Egypt* — Belasan. Hind. — Roghaii-i-Baisan, Ind. — 
Dohnula BaI*Uhhana ; uleo resin, Roghaiie-bulsan. 

Chiitacter$, — The balsam is collected by making deep incision 
Ihrough the bark down lo the wood. Another method is to extract it 
by boiling the leaves and wood in water. A greenish turbid balsam, 
re^mblet copaiba in colour and consistence- The genuine oleo-resin is 
greentsh lurbtd fluid, sinks in water. It burns like naphtha without 
injuring the wood. Cotton dipped in it can be washed quite clean in 
water. lis odfiur is similar to that of chini-kababa or oil of rosemary. 
The ta^tc is acrid, aromatic and bitter. When rubbed on the palm of 
the hand it Inscs its essential oil and becomes sticky. Hence, if kept 
for some time, ft becomes 3*ellow and sticky. The fruit is ovate, 
oblong or obovate, elevated on a very small stalk and with a ring-like 
calyx at the base ; surface wrinkled and of a reddish brown colour. 
There is a small projecting style at the top» from which four longi- 
tudinal rtdgcs spread downwards and extend to the calyx ; pericarp is 
brittle ; seed one* resinous looking ; oily and of a brown colour, taste 
balsamic, odour resembling that of turpentine ; wood of a pinkish 
colour and heavy, met with in pieces ; covered with layers of papery 
bark ; bark yellow, tubercled ; odour fragrant ; taste oily. Dose of the 
balsam, 3 to 15 ms, 

C^^nstihtents* — The balsam contains a volatile oil 30 px,, hard 
restn 64 p.c , soft resin 4 p.c, and bitter principles 0*4 px. 

The volatile oil is mobile, without any colour and of a fragrant 
^door, >c>|ublc in alcohol and ether ; sulphuric or nitric acid gives it a 
deep red colotir and i>n the addition of water it is precipitated as a resin. 

Resin is honey yellow, transparent and brittle, dissolves with 
difficuky in alcohol and ether, dissolves readily by heat; also soluble in 
oiK Soft resin is brown, very glutinous and without any odour or 
laue. 

Ptcfaratmt. — Decoction of wood and fruits (1 in 30). Dose, 4 to 
8 drs. balsam and oiL 

Athons and tats. — The fruit is carminative, stomachic, expecto- 
rant, and stimulant, given in combination with gum acacia, in chrom'c 
coughiii, diarrhuM and dysentery, A paste of it is locally applied to 
" ' * ,ind on recent cuts or bleeding wounds. The balsam is 

demulcent, given in profuse mucous discharges from 
43 as goiiorrlura, glt.ct, Icucjrrhfxu aid chjc.ijic 
ins. The wood has properties similar to those of 



Balsamodendron Playfairiit 

tfabitau — Arabia, N. Africa. 

f^trt useii. — Gum rtain, 

Vfrnncuhr. — Somalis — Hattai. Muscat — Dukh. Arab,— Dijj. 



J 74 BALSAMODKNDRON MYRRHA| B. P. 

Ckaracters.'^The gum resin resembles myrrh. It occurs in 
irregular pieces of wax-like appearance, cracked in all directions^ 
externally yellowish brown or liver-coloured and incrusted on one 
side with reddish sand ; inodorous and of a bitter acrid taste. Agitated 
with water it forms an emulsion, frothy and milky. Dose, 5 to 15 grs. 

Preparation. — Plaster. 

Actions and uses. — Similar to those of other balsams, used as 
plaster for the chest and limbs in rheumatic pain« Also as a stimulating 
application to wounds, in coughs and as a suppository for piles. 
Internally it is used as demulcent and expectorant. 

Balsamodendron Hyrrha, B. P., Commiphora HyrrluL 

Habitat — ^Arabia, Somali Country, Africa, Socotra, Yamen. 

Part used. — The gum resin from the stem. Myrrha — myrrh, B.P. 

Vernacular. — ^Arab. — Mukala, Murr, Habak, Hadee (Bdellium, 
perfumed). Beng. — Bola, Bomb. — Bysabole, Bhensabole,Mhaisagaggul 
(Indian Bdellium). Can. — Bola. Cing. — Gauda-rasa, Bolam. Duk. 
— Bol. Eng.— Myrrh, Bole. Guz.— Bol. Hind.— Bal. Mar.— 
Hirabola, Balata, Bola. Mahomedans — ^Batareh. Pers. — Bola. Sans. 
— Vola Minaharma, Gandha Rosaha, Rasaghandhaha, Saindhava, 
Samudra gugul. Tarn. — Vellaip-paam. Tel. — Balimtra-polam. 

Bhensa means a buffalo, and Bola myrrh. It is called buffalo 
myrrh, because it is given to buffaloes to increase the flow of milk. 

Sindhava Gugula or Samudra Gugula means resin coming from 
beyond the sea. 

Characters. — Low bush or small tree. Trunk very large, branches 
many, knotty, irregular and at right angles, terminating in sharp 
spines ; leaves trifoliate and long, leaflets sessile, obovate ; fruit long 
and pyriform. Gum resin is found in the bark and pith and may exude 
spontaneously as a juice. It is soft, oily, yellowish at first, then 
becomes roundish, irregular tears or hard masses of a brownish or 
reddish brown colour, waxy looking ; odour balsamic ; taste bitter, acrid 
and aromatic. With water it gives a brownish yellow emulsion. 
With nitric acid a purple colour. Dose, 5 to 30 grs. 

Varieties. — Turkish is the best. The Arabian, is called by the 
Arabs " Mur " and by Somalis Hirabul or Mul-mul. The Indian 
myrrh is called Bissaool or Bhesabol. It is very impure. Meena- 
hurnia, another variety. It is of a yellowish white colour, very 
opaque, like aramoniacum and of a bitter taste. It is used tib extract 
guineaworms. It acts by poisoning the animal and making it 
loosen its hold upon the tissues. 

Constituents. — ^A volatile oil, also called myrrhenol or myrrhol, an 
oxygenated etherial volatile oil 2 p.c, resin myrrhin, 25 to 40 p. c, 
which by fusion becomes converted into myrrhic acid, gum 40 
to 60 p.c, bitter principle — a glucoside, salts as calcium phos- 
phate, and carbonate, &c. 



BOSWfiLLIA. 



»7S 



The volatile oil^ obtained on distillation from m>Trh, is neutral in 
reaction, and of the odour of myrrh. It is a pale yellow coloured thick 
viscid liquid, identical in formula with thymol and carvoK 

The resin, called myrrhin, which by fusion becomes r on verted into 
myrrhic acid, is soluble in alcohol, chloroform and ether. Fused with 
potash it gives protocatechuic acid and pyrocatechin. The bitter 
principle, obtained by exhausting the resin with warm water, is an 
amorphous, brittle, brown substance, sparingly soluble in water, of an 
intensely bitter taste. It is a glucoside. 

The gum ii soluble in water. It is adhesive, making a stable paste. 
It is partially precipitated by acetate of lead, and hence differs from 
gum-arabic. 

f^reparatiotK — Pilula aloes et myrrhae, B.P. {2 in 9). Dose, 4 
to ^ grs, Tinctura myrrhae, B.P. Tincture of myrrh (1 in 5), Dose, 
1 to I dr. Decoctum aloes compositum, B.P. Dose^ ^ to 2 ozs, 
Ptlula rhei composita, B.P. Dose, 4 to 8 grs. Mislura ferri composlta, 
B.P, Do^je, i to X oZt 

Physio logical action, — D i s i n fee t a n t , ant ispas mod ic , era m e n ag ogu e , 
expectorant and tonic. Externally astringent and stimulant. In small 
do6es as a gastric stimulant it promotes appetite and digestion* In 
large doses it is a gastro-intestinal irritant and causes nausea^ vomiting 
and dtarr bora. It quickens the cardiac action, diminishes bronchial 
secretions^ stimulates the uterus^ and is a good emraenagogue, 

//ti-.— Given in fevers^ epilepsy, generally combined 
with I . bitters; mixed with molasses it is given for anxmia, 

amcnurrhu;a and bronchial catarrh, and to native women, for ii days 
after confinement, for involution of the uterus. As stimulant to 
mucous membranes it diminishes excessive secretion from mucous 
surfaces of the pharynx, bronchi, vagina, uterus, and bladder, hence it 
is largely used as expectorant in chronic bronchitis and phthisis ; also 
in Icucorrhcca ; as an antispasmodic, combined with tonics, it is given 
in hystcriai asthma, epilepsy. As a tonic it is given in fiatulencc, 
L >n, and atonic dyspepsia. In diphtheria the tincture ofmyrrh, 

L with glycerine, is given internally every one or two hours 

uuh bcuctit. It prevents the hair failing oft* Lucally as a stimulant 
to the mucous membrane of the mouth, it is used as a gargle for 
^: urns, relaxed throat, aphthae and sore mouth; also as a 

tj in loolh-powder ; as a stimulant and disinfectant its fumes 

arc applied on sores and foul ulcers. Dissolved in asses* or women's 
milk it i^ <1t in[>.jd into the eye in purulent ophthalmia. 

Eoswellia. 

The gum rcain — olibanum or fiankincense, is derived from species 
nf thr? ^enus. These are found in Eastern Africa, Socotra, Arabia, and 
ciesofthis family yield olibanum more or less similar in 
; and properties. From the similarity of the vernacular name^ 
oft the gum resin Irom boswellia trees to the names of that obtained 
from Balsamodendrons, some confusion has arisen, but it is of no practical 
importance, because all have similar, if not identical, properties, and 



176 BOSNVELLIA CARTERU. 

are used for nearly the same purposes. Attempts will be made here 
to keep the matter, as far as possible, clear of ambiguity. They will all 
be described under three heads 

BoBwellia Glabra. 

A gum resin from Somali Country in Africa, Arabia. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Luban, Kundar. Burm. — Bringi-lobao. 
Duk. — Farangi aud. Eng. — Indian frankincense. Malyal. — Koonthre- 
Kuni. Pers. — Kundur. Tarn. — Kungli, Parangi Shambirani. Tel.— 
Gugulu, Parangi Shambrani. • 

BoBwellia Tharifera, B. Serrata, Ganaram Hirsatam. 

Deccan, Konkan jungles, Belgaum, Ajmir, East India. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Zuchir, Guj Kundur, Yakar. Bombay 
Market. — Laban Meyeti, Pandhri Esesh, Pandhri Loban, Dhup. 
Beng. — Kundro, Salai-gund. Cing. — Kundrikam. Duk. — Luban 
Kundur. Eng. — Olibanum. Guz. — Gujar-gugar. Hind. — Gugal, 
Awul, Kundur, Dupsalai Sukha, Bizoza, Chandel-ghar, Ganda Biroza. 
Indian. — Guggul. Mahometan. — Mukul. Malyal. — Kundurukkan. 
Sans. — Kundurya-salaki-neryasan. Tel. — Kunduruk Kam-pishin, 
Anduga pisunni. 

BoBwellia Carterii, B. Floribunda, Boswellia Papyrifera. 

The gum resin from Abyssinia. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Bastaja, Kishar, Kundur, Koshfa. Bomb. — 
Esesh- Visech. Eng. — Frankincense, African or Arabian oHbi^num, 
frankincense tree. Guz. — Isasa. Hind.^Seta Kundura, Selagonda. 
Mah. — Visesha. Sans. — Kundari or Sveta Kunduru. 

Characters, — Olibanum. According to the native classification 
there are several kinds. Kundura zakara, male frankincense, is 
in reddish white or deep yellow and circular tears. Kundura 
Unsa^ female frankincense, is yellowish white, translucent or in pale 
tears. Madahraja Kundur^ artificial spherical tears made by shaking 
the moist exudation in a basket. Kishar Kundur or Dhupa 
(India Bazaar) or Kashfa-resin, in flat and scaly pieces, obtained 
from the bark of the tree, which is coated with the exudation or scurf, 
known as Dhupa. The exudation in powder is known as Dukok Kundura 
or dust of olibanum. Dhupa (Guz.) is used in the Indian temples as an 
incense. Visesha^ olibanum, the gum resin obtained by making 
incisions in the bark when the gum is exuded resembles Babula 
gunda or Kera gunda; has the colour and consistence of Canada- 
balsam. It occurs in large, clean, detached, yellowish tears or flat pieces, 
globular or pear-shaped, and often translucent. Papery bark is 
sometimes found adherent to flat pieces, colour whitish, pale yellow or 
brown, and unctuous to the touch ; before the flame of a lamp it burns 
very readily and is reduced to a black mass; does not emit much 
smoke ; odour rather disagreeable, balsamic and terebinthinate ; it 
softens in the mouth ; soluble in ether and spirit of wine ; taste 
slightly pungent and bitter and terebinthinate ; kept for a time in 



CANAmUM COMMUNE. 



J77 



, Vftt^T} It turns into a milk-white opaque and sticky mass^ a soft 
%faitt$h pulp, and then rubbed Into a mortar, it forms an emulsion, 
Gaindha Biro2;i, which is frigrant and transparent, is prepared from the 
gum resin as soft ductile pieces of a greenish or white colour, similar in 
appeirsince to Venice turpentine. Dose, lo to 30 grs, 

Constiiuents. — Olibanum contains volatile oil 4 to 7 p. c, mostly 
(otibene) resin, s6 to 71 p. c, guro 30 p. c, a bitter principle and 
ash 3 p, c, 

Prtpar&tmt. — Olibanum ointmeDt<^olibanum, sesamum oil and 
white wax, equal parts, melted together* Lepa or paste, EniuJsion, 
ptasier or fumigation. 

A€ih$is and uses* — Properties similar to those of the products of 
pinci and firs as Burgundy pitch, &c.; stimulant, expectorant, demul- 
cent, cmmenagogue and discutient. As a discutient Visesha, or 
Gunda^biroza is applied to indolent swellings, buboes, &c,; as stimu- 
Ian! expectorant, chiefly used in chronic pulmonary affections, in 
bt , bronchorrhcea and chronic laryngitis, pharyngitis, &c. As 

SI nt it is used in bloody fluxes; an oil distilled from Gunda- 

btfoza u given in gonorrhoea. Native women take it to increase 
menstruation. As fumigation it is much used in bronchitis and fevers, 
Itf lepa or ointment is a useful stimulant application for sprains, 
bruiites, dislocations, carbuncles, boils and ulcers. 

Ciuiarium Commune, Bursera Paniculata. 

Balfttmodendron Zeylanicum. 

Haffi'tai^^Pemngn Moluccas, Mauritius, Ceylon, Southern India, 
MaDitla. 

Part ti$cd, — The concrete oleo resin, which exudes by excision— 
Elemi. 

Feraacuiar. — Eng. — Java Almond. Elerai tree, East Indian 
Ekmi. Hind. — Jangii badam. Malay. — Kanart. 

Characters. — Bark yields a concrete resin in conical tears or large 
piece* hanging from the trunk and branches. At first it is a limpid, 
oily liquid, while and sticky or soft and yellowish, but 
soon becomes thick, wax-like and yellow. It readily softens when 
hi id has the odour of fennel and lemon or terebinthinate ; 

t: T. and pungent. Kernels or almonds are three-angled ; seeds 

limU -c o* Pistacia tcrebinihus. They yield a bland oil and 

tome of an agreeable sweet taste, and smell of turpentine, 

C^miUuenis, — Volatile oil 10 p. c. and resin (brein) 60 p.c, resin 
(amyrin) 25 p. c„ bryoidin, breidin, and clemic acid. 

/V^/<trtf/K^*r,— Unguentum elemi (1 in 5) ; emulsion of nuts or 
seeds, and oiL Dose of the emulsion, 4 to 8 drs. 

Aci$ons a$td usts.^ Demulcent, stimulant and expectorant, given in 
gonorthcra, gleet, and leucorrhcea. The emulsion of the kernels i$ 
used as n substitute for Mistura amygdala. The ointment is used as a 
sitmiulant application to ulcers and chronic skin diseases. 



178 CANARIUM STRICTUM. 

Canarium Bengalense^ Darjeeling Gokal Dhup, a native of 
Sylhet. Resin exudes from fissures or wounds in the bark. It is 
dear amber-coloured and soft; after a time becomes hard and brittle ; 
resembles copal. 

Gardenia cancamum is a gum resin obtained from a Gardenia. 
It is fragrant like myrrh, and used for fumigation. Medicinally it is 

g'ven in corpulence and to reduce spleen ; also used as an emmenagogue. 
is locally applied to cure toothache. 

Canarium Striotom. 

/?tf3//a/.— Western Peninsula, Tinavelly, Malabar, Philippine 
Islands. 

Part used. — Resin. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — K^la-damar, Manda dup, Gugal, Dup. 
Duk.-*Kala dammar. Eng. — Black dammer. Guz. — Kalo-domar. 
Hind. — Kala dammar. Maleal.— Canari, Thelli-mara. Tam. — Karrapu* 
damar, Kongalam-maram. Tel. — Nalla-rajan. 

Characters. — Dammar, an oleo resin, exudes from incisions or is 
obtained by lighting fire at the base of the tree till the bark has 
become charred, when the resin begins to exude in large stalactitic 
mass, of a shining colour when viewed en masse ; it is deep red-brown 
when held between the eye and the light ; odour strong, terebinth! n ate 
and resembling fennel and lemons, taste bitter and pungent. Insoluble 
in cold, partially soluble in boiling alcohol on the addition of camphor. 
Its powder is readily soluble in oil of turpentine. When burnt it 
emits a more resinous smell and burns with more smoke than white 
dammar. It is chiefly used in the manufacture of bottling wax^ 
varnishes, &c. ; a good substitute for Burgundy pitch. 

Constituents. — It contains volatile oil and resin. Used as plaster 
and ointment. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant to the skin ; used as an ointment in 
chronic skin diseases, as psoriasis, ptyriasis, dec. 

Remarks. — Vateria Indica is the white dammer tree. 

Commiphora HakaJ, C. Atricana. 

Balsamodendron Mukul, B. Agallocha, B. Pubscence, B. Rox* 
burghii. 

Habitat. — Indigenous in Sind ; W. Himalaya, Central India. 
Part used. — The gum resin. 

Vernacular, — Resin : Arab. — Moql, Aflatunum Kundur. Beng.^ 
Goobdee, Gugala. Bomb. — Athaisa gugula. Can. — Guggala. Cing. — 
Gugula, Rata Dummula. Duk. — Gugula. Eng. — East Indian myrrh, 
Indian and African Bdellium. Salaitree. Guz.— Gugala. Hind. — 
Gugal, Gubdee, Mukul Athaisa Gugala, Salai-gogil. Mar — Guggula. 
Pers. — Bae-ja hudan, Muql. Sans. — Guggalaha-sallake, Drava-Sihla-i- 
Guggula. Tam. — Gukkul, Kukkulu. Tel. — Maisakshi^ Gobgula. 



GARUGA PINNATA. 

Characters. — Gugal occurs as yellowish, viscid, brown tears, 
or in fragrant pieces, mixed with hairs, stems, pieces of bark, &c,; colour 
brownish dark or golden yellow. Each piece is translucent. It 
hardens very slowly, and resembles Gulakanda. It is more oily than 
Himbola and burns very readily. With water it forms a milky emul- 
sion. The odour is that of olibanum, or terebinthinate, but fainter. 
The ta^te is bitter. Mhaisa Gugal is in vermiform pieces and thrck^ 
colour lighter and greenish pieces with papery bark attached to tbeni. 

Cons ft tu aits, — Volatile oil, gum resin, bitter principle, 

Prepnratim. — Unguentum gugalae (i in 8), tinctura gugalse 
(i in 5), Dose, \ to r dr. Compound pill, known as Yogaraja Gugala^ 
contains Gugala 25, Triphala 15, Suntha, Pipali. Chavaka, Pipali-mula^ 
Chitraka. Htnga, Ajamoda, Sirasa, Jirun, Shahjirun Ranuka-bija, 
Indra-java, Pahada mula, Baberang, Kutaki, Atisha, Bharingi, 
Vckhanda, of each i, Moravela 2, mix and make a pill mass. Dose^ 

3 to 5 grs. To be given in decoction of Gorakhamundi (Sphoeranthus 
Indicus). Used as an alterative in syphilis, chronic gonorrhoea, piles^ 
fistglaet scrofulous skin diseases, chronic rheumatism, consumption and 
lcpro*y^ Kanchanara Gugala contains Gugala 12, Kanchana-chhala 
I <>• Triphala 2, Trikatu 1, Vayavarana i, Elachi, Taja, Tamala-paira, 
oich |, Madha q. s. Mix and make a paste or a pill mass. Dose, 

4 to 6 grs. To be given in -decoction of Triph^l, or infusion of 
Khcra-chhala. Used as an alterative in enlarged glands in the neck, 
chronic rheumatism, dropsy, gleet, &c. 

Actifjtts and uica* — Alterative, demulcent, stimulant, tonic, anti- 
ipasmctdic and emraenagogue, often combined with aromatics and given 
in rheumatism, scrofulous affections, and nervous diseases ; locally the 
ointment is used as a stimulant to indolent ulcers, to painful joints, com* 
bined with sulphur, catechu and borax, 

Rfmtfrks. — It is confounded with salaigond obtained from Bos- 
weJlia Glabra and B. Serrata. 




Oaro^a Pinnata. 

HahiiaL — India, Madras and Bengal. 

Ar/f HSid. — The fruit and juice. 

Vernacular, — Beng.— Toom. Burm. — Khyong-youk, Hind. — 
Gbog-'O', Kharpat. Mar, — Kaoghur, Kuruk, Kusar, Panj. — Kharpal, 
Tmn* — Kjivi-vcmbu maram. TeU— Garuga-chettu, Kalu*gudu, 

rkAtti^rJers. — Fruit greenish yellow, of the size of gooseberry^ 
rom the leaves gummy and resinous, greenish yellow and 
L, generally in small mamiliform masses. 

0>mhhirnts, — Gum resin contains 76-5 p.c- of gum, 13*9 of rcsin^ 

e, including volatile oil. The gum is ptecipitaied by 
i IS similar to that of myrrh ; resin is neutral, soluble in 



A 



I So 



AfiRUS FRECATDRIUS. 



Pteparation* — ^Elixir containing the juice of Garuga Pinnatai 
Adhaloda vesica, Vitex trifolia, mixed with honey. 

Actions and uses* — The fruii is eaten and is cooling and stomacbic* 
The juice is expectorant* given in asthma and coughs* Dose of the 
juice, I to a drs. 

Leguminoan or Fabaoese. 

The Aghathia, pulse, and Babula family. 

Legumen, from legere, to gather. That which may be easily 
gathered by the hand and not cut. 

Trees, herbs or shrubs ; leaves pdioled, altematet usually stipu- 
late, simple or variously compound ; flowers of various colours, ofieo 
papilionaceous or globose ; fruit sometimes a tomentum and rarely a 
drupe, usually a legume ; hence the name of the order ; seeds arillate, 
one or more sometimes attached to the upper or ventral suture. Tbe 
albumen is absent or present. The cotyledons arc leafy or fleshy^ 

Properties. — Numerous species are greyish coloured and most 
graceful plants. Generally this order is poisonous ; a few are used as 
nutritious food by men or animals. In tnem the poisonous properties 
are replaced by sugar or starch. The gum exuded by most plants is 
generally demulcent. The leaves are aperient, and some are used as 
dyes ; the wood is used as timber, 

AbruB Precatoriae. A. Minor. A. Pauolflorai. 

Habitat — Indigenous in India, wild in tropical countries^ West 
Indies, 

Parts tised. — The seeds, root and leaves. 

Vernacuiar, — Arab. — Ain-eddik. Beng. — Kunchgula, Guiijucin. 
Burm.— Khyen^rwce, Yove-si. Can. — Gul-ganji. Cing.— Olinda. 
Duk. — Gumchi, Eng. — Bead seed tree, Abrus, Jamaica wild 
liquorice, Indian or country liquorice, Jumble beads, American seeds, 
Jequirity, prayer-bcadi, Guz. — Lal-chanothi. Hind. — Gunch-rutli* 
Malay. — Dan-sot-ga. Malyal. — Kunnl-kuru. Mar. — Guu^ha. Pcrs,— 
Khak-shi, Chasma-khuros. Sans. — Gunja, Kaka*chinchi*bajama. Tanu 
Gundumani. Tel. — Guruvenda, Yashti Madbu. 

Ain-ed-dik, cock's eye. The seeds resemble cock's eye. 
Characters. — Leaves 2 or 3 inches long; leaflets many. Saudis 

linear and oval ; taste sweet ; root woody, hard, much bnmchea and c- 
an acrid odour and taste; seeds albuminous, small, globose, of abrUIiant 
scarlet colour, with a black (scar) patch on the hilum Three varieties: 
red, white and black ; red seeds bright scarlet, polished, as large as pets 
and egg-shaped, having black spot containing a white scar at one end, 
which indicates the place where they were attached to the pods; white 
seeds (which are used medicinally) larger than those of ^' - ' " -ly^ 
ivory-white, very hard and highly polished, having a v ch- 

meat at the hilum. The black seeds are never used meaicmaily ; odour 
of the seeds disagreeable. 



ACACIA SENEGAL 



l8S 



Constituents, — The seeds contain some fixed oil, arabic add, two 
protctd poisons, called a-phyt-aJbuminose and paraglobulin, closely 
allied to principles found in snake venom, like ncin and to proteids 
COQUtned in papaw juice. The root, leaves and branches contain 
iugar» and glycyrrhizic acid. 

Prff^arations.—Utd'xQZi^d oil, ** Gunjtel/'— Boil together Til-tel 4, 
and the juice ofBhangro 14. and addGunj 2 (i in 10). Infusura Abri.— 
lofusion of Jcquirity (i of the seeds in 12^), for external application. 

Actions and uses, — The seeds are harmless when eaten^ hut 
poisonous when a paste of them is applied to open wounds. Applied to 
the eyes they set up inflammation^ cedenia of tne lids and ulceration of 
the cornea. The face and neck become swollen and the maxillary 
glands enlarged. 

Internally the seeds are demulcent, expectorant like liquorice ; 
nsed in cough, and gonorrhoea. The fresh leaves are chewed with cubebs 
and ^ugar 10 relieve hoarseness of voice as in sore throat and aphthae 
in the mouth. In spermaiorrhcea with bloody discharges, the white 
abru» leaves and henna leaves triturated with the powder of the root of 
holoslemma rhecdit with cumin seeds and sugar are given internally. 
With chitraka mula the paste of the leaves is applied in skin diseases as 
Icucoderma, and also recommended as a cure for baldness over the scalj). 
The infusion of the seeds should be used fresh, as in a short time it 
decomposes and swarms with bacteria. Boric acid may be added to 
prevent decomposition. It is used as application for the eyes for the 
cure of pan n us and old granular lids. Its use should be followed by 
weak solution of alum or borax. When applied to the inner surface it 
produces artificial purulent ophthalmia, varying in intensity with the 
h of the applications. It is also used for the cure of lupus and 

11 ulcers. The paste of the seed (1 in 4) is used as a rubefacient 

i: 1^ Stiff shoulders and paralysis ; the oil is used in remoxing 

^. he scalp* in prurigo, in exuberant granulations and proliferat- 

ing 1 1 I js. The dried roots are made use of in the same manner 

as tht ; e root. Being sweet like liquorice root, it is called 

liquorice by the Indians. 

The Lai Gunza is used by jewellers and goldsmiths as Ratti 
weiglitStto weigh gold, diamonds and pearls* In some parts of India 
the natives use the paste of the seeds to kill bullocks to obtain a supply 
of hides- Thev prepare small spikes of the paste of powdered seeds bv 
drying tli v the sun and use them after the manner of a drivers 

^oad. Ti are called sui (needles) or suitari (awls). 

Aeauia Senegal, B. P. Acacia Arabica. Mimosa Arabica. 

//^3/A!i/«— India, Arabia, Abyssinia, Africa, 
/ •/. — The bark extract and leaves, gummy exudation 

from J and branches. Acaciae Gummi, gum acacia, B. P. 

Verttacular, — ^Arab. — Amghantan Akakia (extract), Mughilan, 

ighi arabi (gum)» Beng. — Babular. Bomb. — Kalo-bavala, Maswai- 

ind, Makiai gond (gum). Burm.— Nan-lung-kyen. Cing. — Andere, 



Can, — Kare golbale mara. Duk. — Kali-kikar. Eng. — Indian gum 
tree, Babul bark. Guz. — Kaio, Bavala-kikar, Oomravare-gund (g^um). 
Hind. — Kikar, Babul. Mar. — Babli^ Tamra-gond, Malyal, — Karu- 
vebkam. Pars. — Kharo, Mughilan. Sans, — Kala-babal. Senegal. — 
Red gum. Tarn,— Karu-veL Tel. — Nalla umona. 

Bark fissured, scabrous, tough and woody ; colour dark^rcd 
externally and pale*red within. Whole bark can be easily sepamtcd 
into layers ; taste astringent, Gtim^ an exudation from stem and 
branches, a result of the transformation of tell contents under the 
bark where the gum remains in pouches, obtained by making 
incisions into the bark ; occurs in irregular or broken tear&i of pale 
yellow or deep reddish brown colour, of various sizes, agglutinated or 
stalactiform masses and angular fragments or pieces. Thick picccjs 
opaque, thin ones transparent; each tear about \ an inch to an inch in 
'diameler ; gum brittle, breaks with a glassy iridescent fracture ; 
tasle bland and mucilaginous, without odour, entirely soluTile In water 
and insoluble in alcohol. 

Makai or Maklai gund is brought from Aden, is of the best 
quality, colourless, in large round tears ot twisted, or in vermicular 
pieces, of a white-yellow or reddish colour, allied to gum Senegal. 
Ataswai gund is of inferior quality, heavy, hard, fissured and in 
angular pieces, shining, )eilowish rea or straw-coloured or brownish 
yeUow or black with a tinge of white, of agreeable odour and 
mucilaginous and astringent taste, soluble in water, forming a 
sticky solution. It is free from fungus, Seeds in a single row 
along the whole length of the pod ; on both the margins of the 
pod and between each seed there is a constriction. Pod about 4 
to 5 or 6 inches long, compressed and of a grey, glaucous colour, 
containing the pulp (Akakia), in which are embedded several seeds, 
Akakia (extract) is yellowish white mass, resembling Sardaceous pus. 
AVhcn dry, of a bottle-green or daromer colour, heavy, hard and eauly 
pulverizable, having the smell of Rajama, It sticks between the fioger»» 
Generally prepared from the juice of ^^ra^, the fruit of A. Ni lot tea 
and A. Vera. The juice is left to thicken in the pods, which are 
steeped in water for the purpose, and then pressed and dried in the sua. 
Dose of the gum ad libitum of the extract^ 2 to 5 grs. 

Comtitumts, — Gum contains arabic acid, combined with caJctuni 
magnesium and potassium ; also small quantity of malic acnd, sugar, 

moisture 14 px., ash 3-4 px* 

Preparation* — Mucilago acaciae B. P. Mucilage of gum acacti 
(a in 3), Decoction of bark (i in jo). Dose, i to 2 ozs. Poultice of 
leaves* Mistura glycerrhiz^ coniposita. Dose, i to 4 drs Ptilvis 
cretse composiius ; Trothisci cubeb<e ; Trochisci glyccrrhirac ct opii* 

Actions and uses ^ — The bark is astringent and tonic, a su1»^«'^*'«» for 
oak bark. The decoction is used as a gargle in sore throat, in < 1 i- 

vatioD, and as a wash for ulcers; externally applied it all'iV^ nii;*uun 
of excoriations of sores and ulcers by formmg a coaimg. The gum ii 
used as food for diabetic patients, as it is not convertible 
into sugar. In pharmacy it is used to suspend heavy insoluble* 



ACACIA CATKCUV. 



183 



powders ia mixtures and in making pills. Akakia is astringent, styptic 
mnd tonic. A paste of it, with the white of an egg, is applied to burns 
and scalds and to relaxed condition of the mucous membrane, and as 
a collyrium for the eyes in conjunctivitis. It is also used to 
arrest haemorrhages. Powdered bark with gingelly oil is used externally 
in cancerous affections. Pods are given in cough* Leaves are local 
stimultnti poultices of bruised tender leaves are applied to ulcers with 
saniotis discharges. The gum is also demulcent emollient and nutritive 
and ttsed for irritated condition of the mucous membranes^ as ia 
cough, sore throat, catarrh of the stomach and intestines, as diarrhoea, 
dysentery* leucorrhaea, cyfititis, urethritis^ &c.; also in irritant poisons. 

Acacia Cateoho. A. Walliohiana. A. Polyaoantha. 
Uimosa Cataohu. 

Habitat — India, Cutch, Ceylon, Malabar, Bengal and Pegu* 

Parti used. — The bark, extract prepared from the wood, catechu 
ni^mm, gum, and khairsala. 

Acacia. — From Akakta, a thorn, i.e. a tree studded with thorns. 
Catechu^ from cuth, "Kaitha, *^an Indian name for extract or the juice. 

Vernacular* — Beng. — Khair (wood). Bomb. — Khera-sara. Burm. — 
Shta-dza, Sha-shi, Shazibin (wood). Can. — Cuth-k3nli(wood). Cing, — 
Kiheri, Khadir (wood). Duk.^ — Kath. Eng. — Red catechu, black China 
oitcchu. Guz,— Katho, Kheriogund, Hind, — Khera-sara, Kath. 
Mar* — Khadir, Khair. Malay. — Kachu, Gambia, Kadaram* Panj.— 
Kwarech. Sans, — Khadira-sara, Mekashaha, Khadi-ramu (wood). 
Tam*— Wodalai, Kashketti. Tel. — Khadi-ramu. 

Characters. — Bark rough, of a dark -brown colour externally, 
imooth and reddish within. It resembles Bavala chhala* In some 
specimens the bark is smooth, of a yellowish colour, rather thin, 
extrrnal surface here and there denuded of its epidermis; taste highly 
asT Catechu — an extract prepared by removing sap, wood and 

bai .e a decoction of these, strain and finally evaporate to the 

coni3stejice of jaggary and pour into clay moulds. Divide into 
squares by string and dry in the sun. Similar product is obtained by 
boiling Wiiler Irom the unripe pods or twigs. 

Ktimir-sala or Khairsar is a natural catechu, obtained from cavities 
in the wood of acacia catechu. It is of a pale brownish colour, and 
an astringent taste. It occurs in small irregular fragments mixed with 
chips of reddish wood* It is found by persons who split the wood. It 
has a sweetish but feeble astringent taste. It is also found in the WiX>d 
<rf callophyilum tomentosum. Gum Kerio-gunda is of a light yellow 
or ■ lour, and resembles the commtrcial inferior gum. It is 

mc I spheroidal teats or agglutinated masses. The tears are 

hriltk ajid porous* It occurs in minute needle-shaped crystals, and 
does not dissolve in cold water, and forms thick pale-coloured mucilage, 

Commercial catechu is often adulterated with fragments of leaves, 
matSy clothe, ferrous carbonate ; or artificially prepared by roasting 
powdered mahogany ^ walnut and other coloimed woods and then boiC 
tog and evaporating the decoction. Dose^ 5 to 15 grs. of catechu. 



l84 



ACACIA 



Comtitttents. — Catechu tannic acid 35 p, c., catechuic acid of 
catechinf catechu red, gum, quercetin and ash* 

Catechu Tanmc Add, — Mix catechu with cold water and evaporate 
the solution* It is a dark, reddish brown powder oxidising in the air 
and insoluble in ether. 

Catcchin or catechuic acid — make a hot solution of catechu ^ 
strain and allow to settle. Another method: — Dissolve caterfm in 
dilute alcoboU shake the solution with ether, evaporate and ci , 
Occurs as white needles or crystals ; taste sweetish ; soluble 1 
On heating it isconveited into catechu tannic acid. On dr) di^ > 

it >nelds pyrocatechin or catechol, phenol and acetic acid. Fused i>itci 
potash it gives phloroglucin and proto-catechuic acid. 

/>r^^m/?'o«.— Infusion (i in 30). Dose, i to 3 fl, ozs. Kaihhai, — 
A combination of catechu and myrrh. Kathhn, — A confection con- 
taining khairsal, rose buds and sugar. Tmctura catechu ci t 

nigrum (i in 5). Dose, ^ to i fl. dr. Pulvis catechu camft:. ,4 

in to), Dose» 10 to 40 grs. Catechu ointment (i in 8). Trockisct 
€al€ckt*^ I gr. in each* 

Actions and uses. — Powerful astringent stronger than kino, 
antiperiodic and digestive. Its action is due to the tannic add it 
contains. It is a powerful astringent to the mucous membranes, gtvcii. 
in dyspepsia attended with pyrosis, and also in diarrhoea in children, if 
dysentery, intermittent fever and scurvy; as a gargic in hoarienesff^ 
of voice and sore throat. Locally as a dusting powder to hypertrophicd 
relaxed tonsils, ulcerated and spongy gums ; as a gargle in fiaJivatio 
and as an injection in leucorrhaa and to control passive hacmorrhat 
The ointment is used in chancres, sore or cracked nipples and 
eczematous eruptions on the skin ; also leprous indurated ulcers* Its 
powder is used as a snuff in epistaxis, Kher-sal is a stimulant^ J 
expectorant and astringent, given to promote expectoration and taf 
check internal haemorrhages as haemoptysis ; also in diarrhoea aiid" 
dysentery. Kathbal ts a tonic and galactogogue, and given as si 
tonic to women after confinement. KathaUn is used by parturient 
women after delivery. 

Varieties. — The black catechu, Khadira, is in circular flat 
cakes or round balls, of a dark. brown or reddish colour, with a 
shining fracture and of a granular appearance. When in inesular 
masses or square cakes it is known as Box catechu. It 1% liard 
and brittle. The granules resemble those of Htra*dakhnna. Tlie 
taste is highly astringent. It sticks to the tongue. It is u»edj 
for industrial purposes. The pale or pinkish brown catechut Papr 
khar, prepareci from nuts of areca catechu, used as a masticate 
for chewing with beteMeaf* In preparing this, instead of evaporating 
the decoction till it solid iBeSt the inspissation is stopped at a 
certain point and the liquor allowed to cool. It is next all< 
coagulate and crystallize over twigs and leaves thrown into 1 
for the purpose* It occurs in irregular 
porotis earthy appearancei with a lamioai . 



ACACIA COXCINNA* 



i8s 



of alight pinkish brown colour. It is less astringent and less sticky 
than the black catechu* C/nnai Kath or pale caiechu. The extract from 
the leaves and young shoots of uncaria gambier, prepared at Malacca, 
Singapore and Penang. There are two varieties, known as true and 
false. The true Chinai Katha or Gambier catechu is imported from 
China, and is an earthy-looking substance, of a h'ght brown colour, 
consisting of cubes, more or less agglutinatedr They are dark, reddish 
brown externally and of a paJe cinnamon hue within and porous, 
friable, and marked with ridge. The taste is bitter and earthy, also 
aiighlly astringent, becoming subsequently sweetish. It has no odour. 
The false variety is not imported from China. It is disc-like or resem- 
bling lozenges of a pale white colour, and chiefly composed of Mulatani 
Mati flavoured with catechu water. Vadino Katho. — Like Chinai Kath, 
if met with in two forms, true and false. Both occur in irregular 
lampis of about an inch in diameter. The true form is dark-brown 
aba\'e and pale within* The false is pale or pinkish above and earthy 
within, Cnaki-no-katho. — It oceurs in quadrangular squares, of a 
reddish or pale brown colour above and pale white within ; the taste 
rei«inbles that of clay. 

Aoaoia Conoinna. 

A. Rugata, Mimosa Saponaria, M. Concinna* 

fjabitat. — India, Burmah, Nepaul, Assam, 

Pari used,— The pods. 

Vemacuiar, — Seng. — Banritha. Bom. — Sikekat. Burm. — Ken 
Chou-se. Can. — Shige-Kayi, Duk. — Sikekai. Eng. — Soap acacia. 
Hind.«-Ai[a« Rassaul. Malyal. — Chinik-kaya. Mar. — Shika, Tela- 
ibenga. Sans* — Saptala, Charmakasa. Tarn. — Shika. Tel. — ^Shikaya, 
Gogu. 

Charmakasa. — The word is derived from charnia, the skin, and 
kasato injure* It means, skin-injurer. The pods have numerous thorn- 
like projections, which injure the skin when handled roughly. 

Chiiracien, — Pods or legumes, long and flat, colour darkish or 
brownish red, surface rugous and highly wrinkled, from 4 to 5 inches 
in length, and about i to t^ inches in breadth* each pod is bi-valved ; 
valves much wrinkled, marked by a transverse depression on both 
surfaces and much contracted between the seeds ; odour aciduous ; 
tasfe astringent, sourish and nauseous, and resembling that of kokama 
or soap-nut **Aritha;" seeds numerous, separate^ shining, dark 
coloured, small and ovaL 

< its. — Pods, freed from seeds, contain saponin 1 1-2, malic 

icid 3 in J, glucose 13*0, gum and colouring matter ii'S^ 

crude bbre a 2, and ash 375. 

Pteparathm. — Mucilage; infusion (i in 20), Dose, i to fj or, 

Achons .^nd uses. — Pods are used by native women as a detergent 
and a wash for the head* M an expectorant and cholagogue the 




-^ I - U .IJ 



|86 ACACIA PKNNATA. 

infusion is given in torpid liver, jaundice and other biliary complaints. 
It is used by the natives as an adjunct to other purgative medicines. 
It does not cause griping in the bowels as senna. 

A. Faniesiaiia. 

A. Indica, Mimosa Indica, M. Farnesiana. 

Habitat. — Panjab, Sind, Assam. Bengal. 

Parts used. — The bark, gum and extract. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Guh-babul. Burm. — Nauloon-mien, Can.— 
Jalli. Duk.— Ghu-kikar. Guz. — Gu-baval. Hind. — Ghu-babul, Iri- 
babul. Malay. — Pyvelam, Mar. — Iri-babul. Panj. — Vialayeti Kikar. 
Sind. — Baver. Tam. — ^Vaday-vulli maram, Kampa-tumma. Tel. — 
Naga-tumma. 

Ghu-baval, Ghu-kikar.— Ghu, means human ordure. The fresh 
bark, wood and gum having the smell of ordure. 

Characters, — The plant contains yellow sweet-scented flowers. 
The baik exudes a large quantity of gum. The gum is met with in 
spheroidal tears or in stalactiform masses, of a pale-yellow or dark- 
reddish brown colour. With water it partially dissolves, forming a 
gelatinous mucilage. 

Preparations. — Decoction of bark (i in 20). Dose, 4 to 8 drs., 
and mucilage. 

Actions and uses, — Gum is demulcent and emollient ; other pro- 
perties similar to those of A. Arabica. The bark is astringent. Dose, 
of the powdered gum, 10 to 30 grs. 

Acacia Modesta, Amritsar or Binhori gund, similar to Acacia 
Arabica or Acacia Farnesiana— occurs in small tears, angular fragments 
Or vermiform pieces, marked with transverse lines. The colour is 
yellow or it is translucent. With water it forms a soluble mucilage of a 
pale colour. 

Aoaoia Pennata. 

Habitat, — India. 

Parts used, — Bark and leaf juice. 

Vernacular. — Can. — Arar. Hind. — Biswul. Mar . — Shemb. 

Characters, — Scandant shrub, numerous prickles ; leaflets 30 
in pairs, narrow, linear, glabrous ; bark in strips, 3 feet long. 

Cofistituents, — Tannin 8-8 p.c. 

Preparation. — Decoction of bark (i in lo). Dose, 2 to 4 drs. Juice 
of leaves. Dose, a teaspoonful. 

Actions and uses. — Leaf juice and bark are astringent and alterative. 
The juice is civen with milk in diarrhoea with green stools in 
children. In bleeding from spongy gums, the leaves, with cumin and 
sugar, are chewed. In dysuria the pulp of leaves, with cow^s milk, 
cumin and sugar, is given wiUi benefit. 



.ALBIZZfA LEBBEK. 



187 



Agati Orandiflora. 

iEschymomene Coccinca, Sesbania Grandiflora. 

//ahtiat^W eslcrn India. 
- Jhi/is used, — ^The bark, flowers, leaves and gum, 

Vernacular, — Beng. — ^Bak. Can, — Agashi. Duk, — Agasthu 
Gtfi. — ^Agosthia. Hind, — Basna* Mar.— Agashta. Sans, — Sthula- 
pushpa, Vranari Vaka^ Agasti. Tarn. — Agatli. Tel — Avisi. 

C^<fr/jr//'rjf.— Leaves pinnate, oblong ; taste slightly acrid a.nd 
astringent ; flowers large and fieshy» of a white pale-pink or purplish 
coloury and acidulous bitterish taste ; bark fissured longitudinally and of 
a jEfeyish brown colour externally; gum in tears, adhering to the bark, 
of 1 Clark-brown colour and resembling Damula Akhavcna, for which it 
i&a good substitute. It merely softens in cold water ; is insoluble in 
boUtog water and also in alcohol, but soluble in dilute alkalies* 

Conshiucfits, — The bark contains tannin and gum. 
Preparation, — Decoction (1 in 20). Dose, 4 to 8 grs. 
ActiQfts and uses. — The bark is tonic and astringent, given in 
dcbUtty« dyspepsia, diairhoea, &c. The juice of the leaves is poured 
iatu iKe nose in nasal catarrh with headache ; poultice of leaves is a 
popular remedy for bruises and sores. The root is given with honey 
in catarrh of the respiratory passages. 

iUbizzia Lebbek. A. Odoratigsima. A. LatifoLia. A. Serissa. Aoacla 
Speciosa. Mimosa Sarissa. 

HabitaL — Throughout India, Travancore, Coimbatore, 

Parts iisfdn — The seeds, bark, leaves and flowers. 

Verttaculars. — Beng* — Sirish. Burm. — Seet, Tseek-the. Can. — 
Sirasala, Bengha. Duk. — ^Sirish. E"g* — Sirisas tree. Gut. — 
Siris. Hind. — Siriss Bussa Kapitana, Bisniar. Jabelpore — Sarin. 
Mar. — Sinsha, Chichva. Malay, — Chichva, Viln vakc. Sans — 
Seri^ha, aihuka-priya, Muridu-pushpa. Tarn. — Kattuvagai. TeK — 
Poddadu cherram. 

Shuka-priya — dear 
flowerY. 



to parrots. Mridupushpa — having soft 



O^irrtc-//-/!.— Seeds oblong, flat, smooth, of a reddish brown colour, 
Tcry hard, like those of Cassia Fistula, but smaller in size, resembling 
Turanj-bin, Botli surfaces marked by a depression in the middle, the 
depression is limited by a distinct, narrow, obloitg, broken ring; testa very 
hard; cotyledons yellow; smell of the cotyledon disagreeable; taste bitter- 
iih sweet ; flowers large, globular yellowish white on short pedicles* 
The bilk is yellowish brown ; suber in large flakes, much pitted and 
fis^ttredy on separating the suber a red surface is exposed. The bark is 
hard and gritty, externally red and ivhiie within, taste acidulous and 
astringent; leaves bipinnate, in 4 pairs, obtuse, oval^ glabrous and 
uneqtol. From the trunk a kind of gum, Kuruna&*seras-gond, is 



188 ALHAGI NAURORUM« 

Eroduced. It occurs in stalactiform masses; colour light to deep reddish 
rown, translucent and with a smooth and polished surface ; very little 
soluble in water ; the mucilage swells into a gelatinous mass. Dose 
of the seed, 5 to lo grs.; of the bark, 10 to 20 grs. 

Albizzia Porcera. — The gum, is in granular or warty masses or in 
tears or vermiform pieces, colour reddish brown, transparent and 
polished ; water completely dissolves it, and the mucilage is thick and 
gelatinous. 

Albizzia Stipulata produces gum, which is tough and dark-colour- 
ed ; water dissolves very little of it. It swells into a cartilage-like mass. 

Albizzia Odoratissimus. — The gum is in large transparent tears 
and superficially fissured. The colour is like that of amber, very 
little soluble in water ; it swells into a tough colourless mass. 

Constituents. — Bark contains tannin, resin 7.5 p.c., and ash 9 p.c. 

Preparation, — Decoction of bark (i to 10). Dose, 2 to 8 drs. 
anjana. 

Actions and uses. — ^The seeds are astringent, tonic, and used in 
diarrhoea and in seminal debility. Leaves are used as poultices over 
boils, skin eruptions and swelling. The powdered bark is used as 
anjana in eye diseases. A decoction of the bark is used as a gargle in 
sore mouth. Internally it is a tonic and alterative. 

Alha^ Manroram, HedyBaram Alha^. A. Cameloram. 

Habitat. — Khorasan, Concan, N. W. Provinces. 
Parts used.^-The plant, juice and manna. 

Vernacular. — Eng. — Camelthorn. Arab.— Unani Farakeyun or 
Athariyun, Shonkul-Jamal, Algoul. Beng. — Javasha. Guz. — Algaul, 
Javaso, Turaujlein (manna). Hind. — Juvansa. Pers. — Khare Shutar, 
Ushtar-khar. Sans. — Dura-labha, Yavosa (manna). Tel. — Giri-karmika. 

Khare Shutar, camel's thorn. Duralabha — Dur, distant, and 
alabha, diflScult to lay hold of. The plant is found in the wide desert 
of Persia, Syria, Egypt. 

Characters. — The plant with hard spines, leaves oblong, obtuse, 
coriacious and of a reddish brown colour ; an oil is obtained from 
the leaves ; the pod is constricted ; flowers reddish, flower-stalks thorny. 
Manna or sugary exudation in lump or in small whitish and saccharine 
granular powder mixed with thorns, pods and leaves ; colour dirty- 
white, smell sugary ; taste sweet, afterwards slightly acrid and bitter. 

Constituents. — Manna contains mannite and cane-sugar. 

Preparations. — Decoction (i in 10), Dose, ^ to i oz., fresh juice. 
Manna. Dose, 1 5 to 40 grs. Extract obtained by evaporating the 
decoction. It is called ya\^sakara, and is of a bitter sweet taste. 

Actiofts and uses. — The plant is laxative, diuretic and expectorant. 
The manna and the extract is laxative, cholagogue, aphrodisiac and 
demulcent ; given in coughs. The fresh juice is diuretic, and given, in 
combination with aroma tics, in the suppression of urine ; also used 



ARACHIS HYPAG^AS. 



189 



m " ' s of the cornea, and snuflfed up the nose in migraine, 

A , c of the plant or its fumigation is used in the cure of piles. 

The pUiu is smoked with black dhaturay tobacco and bishops-weed 
seeds in asthma. 

Andira jUraroba, B« P. 
Habitat, — Br az il , 

Part used, — A powdery deposit in cavities in the trunk, Araroba 
Goa powder, crude chrysarobin B. P. is obtained by cutting down the 
tree ind scraping the powder from the clefts. The powder is rough, 
tawny*coloured and bitter. 

Constituents, — Goa powder contains chrysarobin about 80 p.c, 
gum 7 p.c, resin 2 px., bitter extractive 7 p.c, woody fibre 5 p.c, 
Hah 05 px. 

Chrysamhinum^ B, P. commonly, but erroneously, called chry- 
sophanic acid, obtained from crude araroba by extracting it with hot 
chloroform or hot benzene, evaporating to dryness and powdering. 
It h a crystalline, yellow or pale orange or ochre coloured powder, 
hcconiing brown or dark on exposure to the air» It is without any odour 
or tastCf entirely soluble in hot benzol, hot alcohol, hot chloroform, ether, 
lolution of alkalies, sulphuric acid, hot oil of turpentine ; partially so in 
petroleum spirit, amylic alcohol, collodion, and various hydrocarbons* 
aoltible in water 7 px*, benzene 80 p. c. 

Pteparations. — Unguentum chrysarobini, B. P, (i in 25), chry- 
$2irobtn ointment. Pigmentum Crysaro&im(i in 10 of liquor Gutta 
Ptrcha or collodion). 

Oxidized Crysarobine. — Obtained by the action ©f sodium 
peroxide on chrysarobin suspended in boiling water ; used in eczema 
of tin: face, genitals, &c., where chrysarobin is contra-indicated. 

Piaster Mulls ^V ^^ \ ^' in every square inch. The Goa powder 
should be mixed with lime juice or vinegar. 

Physiological actiom. — ^Parasiiicide. It is a gastro*intestina] irritant, 
pfoducmg large watery bilious stools and vomiting. It irritates the 
skin and sets up dermiiiiis and follicular inflammation. Ihetapeniics. — 
As a parasiiicidc the ointment is used in superficial skin diseases of 
vegetable origin, as ringworm, herpes, circinatus, cloasma and inter- 
trigo ; also in dhobie*s itch, psoriasis and in haemorrhoids ; 

Remarks* — Chrysarobin is incorrectly termed crysophanicacid. It 
discolours the skin and nails dark yellow ; but the stain can be removed 
by benzene md by chlorinated lime or by potash solution. 

Araohla Hypagsea* 

HahitaU-^lti&\^^ Africa. 

Parts used* — The seeds and oil (oleum arachis), 

Verfmcniar, — Eng.— Ground-nut, pta-nut, monkey-nut, Beng. — 
Chioi-badam. Burm. — Nubi. Can. — Nilagale, Nelakadali, Cing, — 
Baia Khaju. Duk. — Bhui Sing. Guz* — Chmia badam, Bhui chana, 



I90 ASTRAGALUS SARCOCOLLA. 

^he oil) Mithun tela. Hind. — Bhui Sing, Mung-phali, Gror teL 
Malay. — Nelak Katala. Mar. — Bhoi-chane. Bhui Sing. Sindh.*- 
•Bhui Mung. Tarn. — Verk Kadalai. Tel. — Varu Shanaga Kaya. 

Chinai Badam. — Being first introduced from China. Gortd^ 
Mithun-tel — Gor, mithun, sweet ; tel, oil. 

Characters.— The fruit when mature is a pale yellow, wrinkled 
and oblong pod often contracted in the middle and containing 2 or 3 
seeds of the size of hazelnut ; seeds brownish red ; testa papery ; kernel 
white and sweet ; cotyledons plano-convex and more pointed at one 
end than at the other. The seeds when pressed yield an oil known 
as Arachis oil, which is used as a substitute for olive oil. The oil is 
limpid, clear, of a pale yellow colour, of an agreeable odour and olive- 
oil like taste. It is a non-drying oil. The nuts yielding from 40 to 
50 p.c. of the oil. 

Constituents. — The oil contains glycerides of palmitin and olein^ 
hypogseic and arachidic acids. The seeds contain, besides the oil, 
nitrogenous substances, starch, phosphoric acid, potash, magnesia, &c. 

Actions and uses, — The seeds are eaten like nuts ; the oil is a 
good substitute for olive oil ; used as demulcent and emollient in 
burns, scalds, cracks and fissures ; also used for soap making. 

Astragalus Sarcooolla. 

Habitat, — Persia, Western Asia. 

Part used.^—A gummy exudation* 

SarcocoUa, from sarkos, flesh, and kolla, a glue, from the colour of 
the gum being like that of the flesh. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Gujara, Anzeruta Kohl-ktrmani. Jahu- 
daneh. Ispahan — Kunjad, Agardhak. Bomb. — Gugara. Eng. — 
SarcocoUa. Hind. — Gujara. Ind. — Lai. Lat. — SarcocoUa. Pers.— 
Runjudeb, Guzhad. Kohl-Farsi, Persian coUyrium. Shiraj. — Kunderu. 

Characters. — The gum is highly adhesive, like powdered 
frankincense, of a colour varying from deep red to yellowish white^ 
becoming grey when powdered ; met with in agglomerated friable 
grains, which are opaque or semi-transparent, without any odour and of 
a bitter-sweet taste. When heated it swells and emits a heavy smell of 
burnt sugar. Dose, 5 to 20 grs. 

Constituents, — SarcocoUinc 65, gum 4*5, gelatinous matter 3*5, 
woody matter 27. Sarcocolline is soluble in 40 of cold and 20 of 
boiling water. 

Preparation, — Compound dusting powder, contains Gujar, white- 
lead, each one part and starch 6 parts. 

Plaster or Z^.— Lepa (a native plaster) contains various stimulant 
gum resins, anodyne and adhesive ingredients, namely : Gfijar 9, jadwar 
I, aloes 16, alum 8, isas 8, medalakdi 4, Singa-puri dammar 4, frank- 
incense 7, ambahalad 7, gamboge 1 2. To be mixed intimately in 
Mohvra spirit; used by the bone-setters as plaster for fracture, dis* 
location, subluxation, contusions, sprains, &c. 



ASTRAGALUS QUMMIFER. 



in 



Actions and uses. — Styptic, anthelmintic and alterative, used as 
dusting powder in wounds and ulcers. It is non-irritant. The com* 
pMnd powder is used to check purulent discharges from the eyes- 
Roasted with onions, its juice is dropped into the ear in otorrnoBa 
and earache. It is internally given to children as an anthelmintic 
and aperient, and also as an alterative to adults in rheumatism* It acts 
besi when combined with trikatu and nishota. 

Afltragalua Gummifer, B. P. 

Habitat^ — Asia Minor and Persia. 

Part used, — A gummy exudation obtained by incision from the 
stem. Tragacantha B, P. 

Asiragaius, from osteon ^ bone ; and gala, milk. The milky 
exudation S(X)n becoming horny or bony, or from the seeds being 
squeezed into the shape of vtrttbrte, Tragacanth, from Tragos, a goat; 
and acantha, a thorn— pl;inu thorny, like goat's head* Hedges made 
of chb plant resist the onslaughts of the goat. 

C^iir<3cf^f5.— Semi-transparent flakes, or contorted bands, dif5cult 
to powder, without any odour or taste, insoluble in alcohol or ether, 
sparingly soluble in cold water, swelling into a thick gelatinous 
mucilage. It also contains a little starch. Dose, 5 to 30 grs. 

Constituents. — Tragacanthin 30 p. c„ calcium compound of 
giimmic acid 50 p. c, starch, cell fragments, moisture 14 p, c,^ ash 
3 p.c* containing calcium carbonate. 

/^ttarati'on. — Glycerinum tragacanthie B, P. (t in 5), a trans- 
, homogeneous jelly. Mucilago Tragacanihas, B. R, mucilage 
icanth (6 grains to i ounce). Dose, i to 2 02S. Pulvis Traga- 

cmnthx Compo^itus. B> P., tra^acanth, gum acacia and starch, each 

Oae part, i^ugar tliree parts. Dose, 20 to 60 grs< 

Attt^ns and uses, — Tragacanth is demulcent and nutritious, like 
o:' T*, but mostly used to suspend resin, heavy powders, 

ai. emulsions and mixtures. In large doses it is a vehicle for 

a^ i in gargles. It is given in diarrhoea and dysentery; 

ab . . cj-ngles in pharyngitis. 

Aatrajalas Heratensis. A. Strobilifero. 

Mi^//;^/.— Persia, 

Ihiris f/i^//.— Gummy exudation ; country tragacanth or gum 
Katira. 

KmM<rw/<yr.— Arab — Miswak-elabbas, Samagul-kasad, Kathira. 
Hind. — Katera.gond. Per*, — Katcra, Zalzada, Gabina. Tam.^ 
Bodam-piihm* Tel — Bodjm Bunka, 

CAiitactcrs, — It is similar to English tragacanth* Katera-gund 
is nut s.mply the dried juice uf the plant, but is produced by 
metatnorphosLs of the cell membranes. The stems, when cut trans- 



J9S .BAUHINIA VARtEGATA. 

versely, exhibit tough, concentric annual layers»i which tear length* 
wise into filaments. These enclose a central column containing hard 
translucent gum-like mass. The gum consists of different layers, 
spirally twisted, or of tear-like masses or of broad bands, made up 
of several strata* When in the shape of leaf it is known as flake 
tragacanth or leaf gum. The superior quality is white and more 
translucent. It is chiefly imported from Persia. The vermiform 
tragacanth, also called vermicelli gum, is in string-like pieces. It is 
very hard, tough, difficult to powder. Inodorous and tasteless. 
With water it forms a jelly-like mucilage. Dose, 20 to 60 grs. 

CotisHtuents, — Contains an insoluble gum or bassorine, a soluble 
gum, a little starch and ash. 

Bassorin is an isomer of starch. It forms sugar when bolied 
with dilute acids and mucic acid when heated with nitric acid. 

Soluble gum. The gum is different to arabin, being rendered 
turbid by acetate of lead and jelly-like with alcohol. 

Preparation.— 'lAucWzge and a compound powder. 

Actions and uses. — Demulcent and emollient, used in diarrhoea 
and dysentery, in which it is generally given in curd (Dahi) ; other 
properties similar to those of official tragacanth. 

BaptiBia Tinotoria. 

Wild or false indigo. 

Habitat, — North America. 

Part used, — The root, bark or the whole plant. 

Characters, — Plant 2 to 3 feet high, smooth, succulent, glaucous ; 
flowers yellow, branches knotty, odour disagreeable. When bruised, 
taste bitter, acrid and nauseous. Dose, 3 to 10 grs. 

Constituents, — Baptisine, acrid and poisonous. Baptisin, a bitter 
glucoside. Baptin a purgative glucoside, a brownish powder, soluble 
in alcohol. 

Preparation, — Infusion and decoction ; Extract um Baptisiae liqui- 
dum. Dose, 3 to 10 ms. Baptisin. Dose, i to 5 grs. Tinciura 
Baptisiae (i in 10). Dose, 5 to 30 ms. 

Actions and uses, — In small doses alterative, stimulant, em- 
menagogue, tonic, antiseptic and mild laxative. In large doses 
a powerful emetic and cathartic, leading to gastro-intestinal 
irritation and inflammation. Given in amenorrhcea, hepatic disorders, 
scrofula, diphtheria, scarlatina, and dysentery ; in continued fever or in 
the early stage of typhoid fever ; cataplasm, or the decoction is used 
locally in obstinate ulcers and gangrenous sores. Baptisin in small 
doses is tonic and astringent. In large doses purgative. Given in 
dysentery. 

Baohinia Yariegata. B. Porporeaoenflu B. Candida. 

Habitat. — India. 

Parts used. — The bark, buds and gum. 



BAUHINrA RACCMOSA. 



J93 



Vemacuiar, — Can. — Sheinpag, Kauchivala. Hind. — Kuchnar* 
Kuvidarat Sona-kauraj. Mar. — Kanchana (the gum Sem or 
Semla). Malay, — Chovana-numdari. Saos, — Kuvidara. Tarn .^-Segapu- 
McnOuri, Bcng. — Kanchan, Bedat. Burm.— Mahahloegce-ni. 

GBr<rri?<:/«T^*— Bark of the trunk scabrous and tuberded, darkish 
brown externally and tough, fibrous and reddish iniemalJy, On the 
branches the bark is smooth, of an ash colour externally, and very tough 
and green or white within ; taste feebly astringent, resembling that 
of babula bark. The gum (semla gum) is in irregular broken pieces, 
of amber colour. It sparingly dissolves in water, but soon swells 
forming a mucilage, which is turbid, milky or jellyUike, containing 
starch or other insoluble substances. 

C^nsUtuents, — The bark contains tannin, 

/Vd^/ora/ibif,— Decoction (i in lo). Dose, 4 to 8 drs, 

Actions and m€s — The bark and buds are alterative and astringent* 
The decoction of the bark is given in leprosy, scrofula, skin diseases and 
ulcers. In scrofulous enlargements of the cervical glands, the bark, 
with suntha and rice-water, is given as an emulsion, or in combination 
with Boswellia scrrata, myrobalans, and a number of aromatics. A 
gargle of the bark with pomegranate flowers and akakia is used in 
aofe throat and salivation. A decoction of the buds is given in 
menorrhagia, hemorrhoids and bleeding from the mucous surfaces. 
A decoction of the buds is giv^en in cough, bleeding piles, hxraaturia 
and mcnorrhagia. 

Bauhinla Racemosa. B. Panriflora. Piliostigma Racemosa. 

Habitat. — Konkan, Mysore, Bengal, Assam. 

B^is iwi*^.— The bark, leaves and dry extract. 

Femnculan — Bcng. — Bauraj, Burm, — Bivai-gin, Hpa-lan. Cing. 
— ^Alyla^ Hind. — Mawil-Ghila, Matu. Mar, — Apta, Patwa, Pan],— 
Murta. Sans.— Vannaraj, Apta. Tarn.— Atcha maram. Tel. — 
Patwa, Adavt Avi&a. 

CharacUrs^^A climber; leaves cordate at the base, glabrous above 
and pubescent below. Leaflets roundish or broadly ovate ; flowers in 
degant fe&toons ; bark reddish brown ; gum in purplish red fragments 
roscmbtiDg kino in appearance and properties ; soluble in water and 
partially so in spirit. 

ConstiUnrnts, — The gum contains tannin and glucose. Dose, 5 to 

iCgTS. 

PnefarattQtt^ — Decoction of bark (i in 10). Dose, a to 8 drs. 

Actions and mes^ — Astringent, given in chronic dysentery and 
diarrlioHi^ 

13 



194 BUTBA FRONDOSA. 

Banhinia Tomentosa.— Yellow bauhinia. 

Habitat — Ceylon, Malabar. 

Parts used. — The leaves, bark, seeds and flowers. 

Vernacular. — Burm. — Ma-ha-hloe- ga-wa. Can. — Shempage. 

Cing. — Petan. Eng. — Wild ebony. Malyal. — Kahchana. Sans.^> 
Usa*maduga. Tarn. — Kat-ati. Tnviat-putrara, 

Kat-ati. — Kat, dark«coloured, and ati, wood. The wood is strong 
and black, like ebony. 

Characters, — Flowers large and sulphur-coloured ; leaves ovate or 
roundish at the base, under surface villous ; leaflets oval and obtuse ; 
peduncles 2 flowered ; calyx spathaceous, 5 toothed ; petals oval ; 
legumes flat and lanceolote ; seeds 5 or more. 

Constituents. — ^Tannin . 

/Reparation. — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, 2 to 8 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent ; given in chronic diarrhoea and 
dysentery ; the decoction of the bark and seeds is given as a tonic in 
hepatic congestion. Bruised bark is applied to tumours and wounds. 

Botea Frondosa. B. Soperba. Erythriiia Monospemuu 

Habitat. — Plains of India. 

Parts used. — The leaves, flowers, seeds and gum. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Palasha-kinaka, Kamarkas. Burm. — Ponk- 
uway. Can. — Muttaga-mara, Chhiul-mootr. Cing. — Kaliya. Duk. 
^Palasaka, Chinai-gond, Kinya-gond (gum), Palas-papado (seeds). 
Eng. — Bastard teak, Bengal kino (gum). Guz. — Palas-papdo (seeds), 
Khakro, Chinia-gond. Hind. — Dhak, Palas, Kamarka (gum). Malyal. 
— ^Murukha monum. Mar. — Palasha-kakra. Panj. — Chuchra. Pers. 
— Palah. Sans. — Palasha, Lakshataru Kin^nka. Tam. — Murukkam, 
Palas muram. Tel,— Maduga, Kimshuka. The flowers. — Guz. — Palas 
phul. Hind. — Kesurina phul (flowers). 

Lakshataru. — The lac tree. The branches contain lac in large 
quantities. 

Characters. — Leaves ternate, from 9 to 12 inches long, leathery, 
shining above, and hairy below ; floweis large and irregular, fresh 
ones of a btrautiful, deep yellowish -red colour, and shaded with silver- 
coloured down, when dry becoming paler in colour ; seeds flat, each 
about 2 inches long and about i^ inches in breadth, in shape resembling 
shell lac ; surface shining, colour of dried blood or reddish ; testa 
very thin and containing a yellowish brow i. -coloured leafy cotyledon ; 
taste somewhat acrid. The inspissated juice obtained from the stem by 
incision constitutes Bengal kino. Gum when pure, is either translucent 
and in tears, or in small, flat or irregular fragments ot a brilliant •ruby- 
red colour, softening between the teeth, and highly astringent. 
Generally mixed with numerous small pieces of corky bark, of a light 
grey colour; not freely soluble in water and alcohol. 



CASSIA ABSUS. 



m 



ConstHuettts. — ^Tlie gum contains kino, tannic and gallic acids 
50 p. c, mucilage and ash 2 p, c; on dry distillation it yields pyrocate- 
chifi. The seeds contain a tasteless oil of a yellow colour ; wax, or fat 
1$ p. c, albuminoid, gum, glucose, organic acids, metarabic acid and 
phlobapheue, cellulose, ash 5 p. c. 

Preparation — Of the giimp compound powder containing 5 p. c, 
of opium. Dose, 5 10 20 grs* Tincture (i in 10). Dose, ^ to 2 drs. 
Of the leaves and flowers, decoction (i in 10). Dose, i to 2 fld* ozs. 
Infusion ut Howers (i in 10). Dose, i to 2 fid. ozs. Decoction of the 
seeds (1 in 10). Dose» I to 2 ozs. Paste^ — Take the roots of butea 
aitperba, nyctanthes and woodfordia floribunda, the seeds of cassia 
tum and vernonia anthelmintica, the stem and juice of trichosanthes 
palmtta. Make a paste in water and apply in bites and slings of 
animals. 

Actions and uses, — Leaves astringent and alterative, used m 
dtarrha^a, pyrosiss, sweating of phthisis, diabetes, menorrhagia, worms 
and colic. A hot poultice made of leaves is used to disperse boils and 
pimples. The decoction is used as an injection into the rectum in 
diarrhoea, dysentery, and into the vagina in leucorrhaa ; also used as 
A gargle in sore throat and ulcers of the mouth. The seeds are aperient 
ind anthelmintic, used with success in tape-worms and round-worms. 
A decoction of teeds and infusion of flowers is used with nitre as a 
diuretic in dysuria and in retention of urine. Externally the seeds 
are irritant^ and used with lime juice in dhobie's itch, ringworm, 
indolent ulcers, and fistula* Gum. — A powerful astringent and a good 
substitute for kino^ and may be used for all the purposes for which 
kino \* lifted. The natives use this gunii combined with rotk^^alt and 
ti nls» in pterygium and opacities of the cornea. Flowers 

ill igent and diuretic. Varalians of flowers are applied to 

the pub» in dysuria and retention of unne and to promote menses, 

Casala Absus. Senna AbsUB. 
Nah'tat.^^W, Himalaya, Ceylon^ 
Part used, — The seeds. 

Vernacuiar, — Arab. — Tash Mezaj, Kushnu Zunk, Habek Sudan. 
Cing.-"K»lu-Kallu, Bu-tora. Duk.*— Cha-kuta. Guz. — Chinol. 
Hind. — Chakasu (seeds). Egypt. — Allakalis. Malyal.— Karin-killa. 
Mar — Chamada, Kankuti, Chime. Pers. — Che^mak* Chast-migah. 
Tam,^KaTunkanum-kalLukkoK Avarai-pattai. Tel.— Chukuddi-pal. 
Sam^^-Chaksu. 

Chaka&u is a corruption of the Sanskrit word chakihu, which 
means an eve. 

Kalu-KaUu means black horse-gram. The seeds are black and 
bear resemblance to horse-gram. 

Characters, — Seeds black, fl-^t and highly polished, in size resem- 
bling big-!»ued bugs, shape obliquclv ovate and flat on both surf**ccs ; 
test a horny, lough and ti)ick ; cotyfedona yellow ; taste bitter. Dose, 
10 to xo grs. 



19^ 



CASSIA ALATA. 



ConsHiuents. — The seeds contain a trace of manganese, extractive 
matter, resin and ash* 

Prtparatirm. — Powder. Confection, Dose, ^ to I dr. 

Actions and HSts.^Seeds very bitter, aromatic and mudUigiiioas, 
As an aphrodisiac they form one of the ingredients of methtno*bdu 
and vakerio-ladUi The seeds, wheJi baked and reduced to powder, are 

applied under the eyelids in purulent ophthalmia. 

Cassia Alata« C, Bracteata. C. Herpitica. Senna Alata. 

/T^^iVtf/.— Travancore ; cultivated in India, 

Pari lised. — The leaves* 

Vernacular. — ^Beng.— Dadmurdan* Dadmari. Burm, — ^Sim-Do- 
maiza-li. Can, — Shime-agase. Cing. — Attora. Duk, — V^elaiti-agali. 
Eng. — Ringworm shrub, winged cassia. Hind» — Daomurdan. Malay,— 
Shima-akatti. Sans.--Divipagustia-Dadrughua. Tarn. — Simai-agattL 
Teh — Sima-avisi. 

Characters. — Handsome shrub ; flowers in racemes and yellow ; 
leaves 2 feet long, petiole triangular ; leaflets 8 to 14 pairs, obovale, 
oblong, obtuse, mucronate and glabrous ; legumes long and enlarged 
sideways ; taste like senna, but less nauseous. 

Preparation, — Extract of leaves. Dose, i to 4 grs. Tincture (i 
in 5). Dose, J to 2 drs. 

Actions and uses, — Aperient, general tonic and parasiticidei used 
like senna ; extract of leaves is a good substitute for extract of 
colocynth- Externally the juice of the leaves^ with or without lime 
juice, is applied to ringworm and to poisoned bites. Internally given 
in venereal diseases. 

Cassia Acutifolia, B. P. Alexandrian Senna. 
C. Angustifolia, B. P. 

Indian or Tinnevelly senna, C* Officinalis, C, Lanceolau, C, 
Oborata, Jungle senna, C. Elot^ate, Mecca or Bombay senna. 
Habitat. — Africa, India, 
Part used. — ^The leaves. 

Vernacular, — Arab — Pero-sana-e*Hindi. Beng. — Shon-pat. Dok. — 
Nat-ki-sanapat. Eng. — S<fnna. Hind., Guz, — Sona-njukhi. Tam.— 
Nela-ponna. Tel. — Nela Tanged u. 

Leaves of Solenostemma argel, Tephroaia appoUinea, and coriarit 
myrtifolia, are often substituted for senna leaves, 

Acutifolia — Acutus, sharp; and folium, leaf. Leaves sharp- pointed. 

AngusiifoUa — Angustus, narrow; and fulium, leaf. Leaves narrow. 

Characters. — Alexandrian senna. Leaflets pale ^ n 

and brittle, size f to i\ inch in length, mostly r, 

entire, unequal at the base, surface finely pubescent, veins distinct ; 
epidermis hairy, odour characteristic, nauseous and faint ; taste 
mucilaginous and somewhat unpleasant, nauseous. Senna Indies 
or Tinnc%'elly senna, one to two inches in length, lanceoljitfl 



CASSIA. ACUTIFOtlA. 



197 



aqd acute, unequal at the base, thin, entire, yellowish green, 
and smooth above^ somewhat duller beneath, glabrous or pubescent; 
taste and odour nauseous. Senna pods or legumes 7 to S 
lines broad at the base, style prominent on its upper edge ; seeds 
obovate, cuneate ajid compressed. Dose of the powdered leaves 
I to 2 drs. 

Conw/i/^i^fi/i*— The fruit contains cathartic acid^ but no resin or 
oil. The leaflets contain an active principle cathartin — a combina- 
tion of cathartic acid with one or two earthy bases* Also 
s^maptcrin ; a peculiar unfermentable sugar — cathartomannit or 
senna sugar or sennit, a trace of volatile oil ; setmacroi ; colour « 
ing matter allied to chrysarobin — chrysophani ph^oretin ; mucilage^ 
vegetable salts and ash 10 p* c. 

Cathartic acid. — An amorphous glucoside. To obtain it, precipitate 
concentrated infusion with alcohol. Dissolve the precipitate in water, 
add hydrochloric acid to separate the albumen, purify and filter and 
precipitate the 6ltrate with ethen It is formea of carbon, hydrogen, 
oxygen, nitrogen and sulphur ; a brown powder, soluble in water and 
quite insoluble in spirit. Decomposed mto glucose and cathartogenic 
acid by mineral acids* Does not possess nauseous or griping properties- 
Do6e, 4 to 8 grs. 

Senna ^icrith — Bitter principle (glucoside), insoluble in ether. 

Sennacro/. — Acrid resinous principle (glucoside), soluble in ether^ 
causes griping. The nauseating and griping properties of senna 
leav^ arc due to the presence of this resin and of an oil which have 
no purgative properties, 

Cathartomannit. — To the concentrated infusion of leaves, add 
alcohol and precipitate. Dilute the residue with water, add 
OTiide of lead and evaporate and crystallize. Colourless, rhombic 
CTy$tab, mosily spheroidal, with curved sides, of a sweet taste, soluble 
in water (i in 2), alcohol (j in 450), ether (1 in 10). 

Preparation*^Oi the leaves. Liquor senna: conceniratus^ B» P, 
(1 in I), concentrated solution of senna. Dose, \ to i dr. Confectio 
SeuNor, B. P., Electuarium Lenitivum, contains senna eaves 7 ozs. 
coriander fruit 3,025., figs 1 2 ozs., tamarind 9 ozs., cassia pulplg ozs., prunes 
6 CZA., extract of liquorice t oz,, sugar 30 ozs., water sufficient to 
make 75 ors. in weight. Dose, i to 2 drs. { i in 11) Infusum Sennce 
B. P. (I in 10). Dose, ^ to i oz. Mtstura sennet compositus^ B. P.— 
Black draught — magnesium sulphate 5 ozs, liquid extract of liquorice 
f oz., cx^mpound tincture of cardamoms 2 fid, ozs., aromatic spirit of 
ammonia i dd. oz.^ infusion of senna to make i pint« Dose, t lb 2 
oil. (i in 10). Syrnpm senna: B. P. (i in 2), contains senna 40 oz, oil» 
of coriander 10 ms., alcohol 40 ms,, sugar 50 oz., alcohol (20 p.c.) 

g\OZ, Dose, \ to 2 drs. Tine tura senna: comfiosita^h^F. (f in 5). 
ose, i to I df , Piiivis Glycerrhisce compositus^B, P. compound 
liquorice powtler, contains senna (1 in 6). Dose, 60 to lao grs. 
Elixir sennas, — Dose, i to 3 drs. In this the cathartic acid is preserved 
in its full activity, and the nauseating and griping properties are 



'19^ CASSIA AURICOLATA. 

•obviated. Extractum senna fluidum^ fluid extract of senna. Prepared 
by maceration and pressure and flavoured with aromatics. In it the 
^^athartic acid is unoxidised and resin left behind. Dose, 2 drs. 
Extractum Senna Fluidum Deodoratum. Exhaust senna with alcohol 
to remove the resin and oil, dry the solution and exhaust the dried mass 
with water to dissolve cathartic acid. Dose, i to 2 drs. Preparation.'^^ 
-Of the legumes. Extractum senna: leguminum liqutdum. — Contains 
cathartic acid, but no resin or oil. Dose, ^ to i dr. for children. 
The Arabians prefer the pods as a sure and safe purgative as they 
do not gripe. They contain more cathartic acid than the leaflets* 
.and no resin and no volatile oil. 

Physiological action. — Eflicient and safe cathartic, acting on the 
•small intestines, and producing copious yellow stools with griping and 
.flatulence, generally given combined with carminatives to lessen grip- 
ing. In small doses it is non-irritant, acts on the intestines, increasing 
peristalsis and secretions. It does not cause constipation as its after- 
efiects. Given in large doses it is a gastro-intestinal irritant, sets up nausea, 
vomiting and purging with great flatulence and severe tenesmus. In 
women it increases the menstrual flow. It often causes purging in 
•children when' suckling mothers take it. Some people have an 
idiosyncrasy for senna, and even the smell of the drug causes nausea, 
vomiting or purging. It is a very safe cathartic when prompt evacuation 
of the bowels is required. 

Therapeutics, — It is given in constipation, determination of blood 
to the head, biliousness, gout, haemorrhoids, fissures in the rectum, 
fevers and rheumatism. It produces soft and easy motions. It 
should not be given alone, as it causes nausea, griping, flatulence and 
depression of the pulse. It is a stimulant of the abdominal and 
pelvic viscera, and as such acts on the small intestines and increases 
peristalsis and their secretion. It is less powerful than scammony and 
gamboge, more irritating and stronger in its purgative efiects than 
salines and rhubarb. Unlike rhubarb, it is devoid of tonic properties. 
It should not be given in inflammatory conditions of the alimentary canal, 
if there is tendency to intestinal haemorrhage, in haemorrhoids, men- 
orrhagia, threatening abortion and prolapse of the uterusor of therectum. 
The natives take the leaves with betel leaves, coriander, tamarind 
manna, fetmel, Epsom or Rochelle salts as a corrective and aromatic. 

Cassia Aorionlata, Senna Anricnlata. 

Auriculata. — In allusion to the shape of the seeds resembling the 
auricles of the heart. 

Habitat. — Ceylon, Madras, Dekkan, Western Peninsula. 

Parts used, — ^The bark, leaves and seeds. 

Vernacular, — Can. — Tangayree, Avara Taravada. Cing. — Rana« 
wora. Duk. — Tarvar, Aval. Eng. — Mature tea tree. Guz. — Avala. 
Hind. — Tarwar-aval Dantvan (sticks). Malyal. — Ponna-viram, Avar. 
Mar. — Taravada. Sans. — Mayhari, Talopodo. Tam. — Avarai. Tel. — 
Tangadu Avar-gidda. 



CASSIA FISTULA. 



199 



Datavaii, from dant, tooth» and van, stick — native tooth sticks, are 
msde of the stems or wood of this plant, which are as thick as the little 
finger* 

Characttrs. — Bark in pieces or quills, folded like pancakes, in size, 
colour and form resembling cinnamon. Each piece 2 to 3 or 4 inches 
long* External surface dark-brown and slightly tubercled. Internally 
cf a reddish colour, surface rugous, very bittle ; taste astringent and 
sweetish ; leaves pinnate ; leaflets oblong, about an inch long and from 
3 to 4 lines in breadth^ short petioled, upper suface of the leaves 
smooth, under surface hairy ; colour dark-brown when dry ; flowers 
>'etlow; legumes compressed and straight, thus diflfering from those of 
mendhi aN^ala, which are curved like sheep's horn ; seeds heart-shaped, 
smalLf flat, obtusely pointed at one extremity, and of a dark-brown 
colour, without taste or odour. 

ConsHiuents.^'The bark contains tannin 25 p.c. and ash 5 px. 

Preparation. — Infusion of leaves (1 in 20). Dose, 4 drs. to 2 ozs, 

^Compound syrup contains the flowers mixed with mocharas and 
BUiaparilta. Dose, 2 to 4 drs* Decoction of root (i in 20). Dose, a 
to % drs. 

Actions and uses. — The bark is tonic and astringent ; the powder of 
the seeds is blown into the eyes in ophthalmia. The infusion is used 
as a cooling drink in fevers. A powder made with all parts of the 

Elant is given in diabetes and chyloserous urine, and also used 
y Gujanti women to check excessive menstrual flow. A compound 
syrup is given for nocturnal emissions. 

Cassia Fistula B. P* Cathartioarpus Fistala* 
' iiaL — Asia, America, Egypt, W. Indies, Africa, 
nts used* — The fruit, the pulp surrounding the seeds — ^Cassise 
pulpa. B. P. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Katha-el-hinde, Asl-e-Kheyarsambar. 
Bcng. — Sondhali, Honalu. Burm — Gnoogyee Nusi* Cing, — Ahilla. 
Can.— Kakke-kaye, Kunare. Duk, — Girmalah-amaltas, Eng, — Purging 
cassia, Indian laburnum (pulp), drumstick, pudding pipe. Guz. — 
Garmatu, Hind. — Amaltas, Bhawa« Kathel Mai, — Konnan. Malay. — 
Mcntus. Mar, — Bhava Baya. Pers. — Khiya-chambar. Sans. — Arag* 
budha, Suvarnuka. Tam. — Rajataru or Nripadruma Mambala-konnai. 
Tel. — Suvamamu Kayalu. 

Khiyar Chambare — chambara, a necklace, in allusion to the 
structure of the pods, which resembles ** a necklace/' Katha-el* 
Hind means Indian cucumber, the pods having some resemblance, in 
shape, to fresh and young cucumber, 

Asal-i-Khiyara Chambara. — Asal means honey. The pulp of 

^Khijrara Chambara tastes like honey. Suvarnaka, from suvern-gold 10 

Ilu340u to the golden-yellow flowers, Rajataru — Raj means royal; and 

J, a tree, the tree being uncommonly beautiful when in flowers, 

CharacUrs^ — Pod cylindrical, of a dark^brown colour, about 2 feet 

in Length and i to i| inch in diameter ; stalk short, but woody, 

blunt end or the apex is contracted into a point ; within the pod are 



200 C. OBOVATA. 

numerous cells, arranged one upon the other transversely ; each cell is 
thin, membranous, flat on both surfaces, and contains a seed, which is 
oval, flat, and of a reddish brown colour and surrounded by pulp which 
is soft, glutinous and of a dark colour, in smell and taste resembling 
Khajura. It becomes mouldy and sour by keeping. 

Constituents. — ^The pulp consists of sugar 60 p. c, mucilage, astrin- 
gent matter, gluten, colounng matter pectin, calcium oxalate and ash. 

Preparations, — Confectio sennae, B. P. Dose, i to 2 drs. Decoc- 
tion (i m lo). Dose, i to 2 ozs. Compound decoction — ^known as 
Aragbadhadi— <:ontains cassia pulp, picorrhiza kurroa, chebulic 
myrobalans, long pepper-root, and cyperus rotundus. Used as a 
cathartic. Dose, 4 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Laxative — pulp seldom used alone, as it causes 
colic, griping and flatulence. Used as an adjunct to other purgatives. 
When given for a long time it tinges the urine dark-brown. The 
pulp is employed to adulterate essence of coffee. The seeds are emetic 

Therapeutics. — The bark and leaves, mixed with oil, are applied 
to pustules. The root is a strong purgative. The pulp recommended 
to persons of dyspeptic habits. Dose of the pulp as a laxative, 30 to 
80 grs. 

Cassia Obovata. C. iBthiopioa. C. Obtasa. 

Habitat. — Punjab, Sindh, W. Peninsula. Mysore, Egypt, Arabia 
Senegal, Jamaica 

Part used. — The herb. 

Vernacular. — ^Arab. — Senna-baladi. Burm. — Puve-kam-yoe. 

Can. — Nela-varike. Cing.^-Sena-kela, Nilavari. Eng. — Italian senna, 
jungle senna, Jamaica senna, Tripoli senna. Guz. — Mendhi- 
avala, Surtisunamukhi, Bhui Taravara. Hind* — Bhui Taravara. 
Mar. — Mulkacha Shona-makhi. Malayal. — Nila-vaka. Tam. — Nila- 
vagai. 

Senna baladi. — Wild senna. The plant is said to grow in wild 
places. Mendhi-avala. — Mendhi, a sheep ; and avala (C. Auriculata), 
a name of the plant, in allusion to the [shape of the pods 
resembling the horns of a sheep. 

Characters. — The drug consists of pieces of stems, flowers, pods, 
and leaves; stems slender, hairy, and of a greenish brown colour ; 
pods curved, resembling the horn of sheep (Mendhi) ; leaves 
pinnate ; leaflets from 4 to 6 pairs, obovate, glabrous above and dark 
beneath ; colour darkish green ; taste and odour of the leaves 
resembling those of sonamukhi. 

Preparation. — Infusion (i in 20). Dose, 2 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Leaves purgative ; other actions and uses 
similar to those of senna. The whole plant is used locally as an 
application in pityriasis, psoriasis, &c. 



CASSIA OCCIDENTALIS. 



Caatifli Occidentalis. S«niia Occidentalism C« SopherE. 

/fo^i7<?/.— India. 

PifrU used,— The leaves and seeds. 

Venmcuiar, — Eng, — Negro coffee, round-podded cassia. Beng,-^ 
KaU'kasunda. Bomb. — Kasonda, Hikala. Burnt, — Mezalt, Can.— 
Dodda*(agase. Cing, — Peni-tara, Uru tora. Duk. — ^Kasundi, Gajarsag, 
Gufc^— Kasundi. Hind* — Kasa-niurda, Bribat-chitra-kasundi, Gajar 
sag. Mar. — RonU-koIa, Hikalabija, Malyal. — Peya-vera, Ponnam 
Takiira. Sans. — Kasa marda, Sourna May harie. Tarn. — Ponna verai, 
Naltam Gokarai. Tel. — NutiKosinda, Kush-mardha. 

Kasa Marda, Kasa, Khaus, meaning cough, and marda, destroyer. 
Destroyer of Cough, 

Ciaraciers, — An herbaceous plant or a small shrub, 3 to 5 feet 
high, leaves pinnate; leaflets in 3 to 5 pairs, obliquely oblong or 
lanceolate, finely pointed, green, glabrous abo%'e and pale beneath. On 
bruising the leaves the smell is very foetid ; taste pungent and very 
acrid ; root tapering^ fibrous^ of a brownish white colour and very 
bitter ; smell aromatic, musk-like ; legumes linear, turgid or glabrous 
and many-seeded ; seeds horizontal with cellular partitions. Dose of 
the seeds, 4 to 10 grs. in children f of the leaves, I to 2 drs. 

CmntittutiU. — The root contains a resinous substance ; a bitter, 
DOO*alkaloid principle. Leaves contain cathartin, colouring matter 
and salts* The seeds contain tannin, sugar, gum, starch, cellulose, 
chrysophanic acid, calcium sulphate and phosphate and fatty matter 
(olein and margarin )| malic acid, sodium chloride, magnesium 
sulphate, iron, silica, &c. 

Pttf^araUffU. — Infusion of root (i in 20). Dose, 4 to 8 drs* 
Deeoction of whole plant (i in io)« Dose, 2 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses. — The whole plant is purgative, alterative and 
escpectorant, given in liy>teria, anct whooping cough. The seeds are 
pur^tive and given to children with cow's or human milk in con- 
iruJsions. The root is ant i periodic, and given in fevers and neuralgia. 
The whok plant is used in cutaneous maladies, as ringworm, scabies, 
pityriasis and psoriasis ; also as an application over boils and carbuncles* 



C. FcBtida, C. Obtasi folia, Senna Tora. 



Cante Tora, C* Tajara, 

//ioAiV^/.— India. 

Partt used. — The leaves and seeds. 

Vermtiutar. — Sans. ^ — Prabh unai ha, Chakramarda, Dradr ugna , 
Arab*— Kul-kul, Sanji, Saboyah, Aines-saratin, Beng. — Takola» Cha- 
kondia. Burm.— Dan-ky-wai* Can.^ — Takkarike. Cing* —Tora, Duk. — 
Tarotah. Guz, — Kowaria. Hind. — Chakaund, Pan war, Dadmardan. 
Malyal.— Takara. Mar. — Tankli, Tarota. Sans, — Chakra marda, Pra- 

Kunata, Pranunada, Uranakeha. Mahometan — Sanjasoboyah, Pers — 
[ulkul-sanji. Tam» — Takaruni, Ushit Tagaria. TcL — Tantepu chettu* 
Chakra-marda — Chakra, a ring or wheel, Murda to destroy. Des- 
troying ringworm, and Aines-saratin, crab's eyes* 



:S02 CiESALPINIA BONBUCSLLA. 

Characters. — The leaves generally close at night time. They are 
in three pairs, the uppermost pair heing largest and longest ; leaflets 
obovate and obtuse ; taste mucilaginous and nauseous ; seeds greyish 
brown or darkish. They are of various shapes, some cylindrical and 
pointed at one end, others roundish or ovate, others again rhomboid, 
m size resembling methi, but somewhat larger ; surface tubercled and 
marked with yellowish or greenish yellow narrow stripes, the stripes 
occupying the upper and lower surfaces of the seed. 

Constituents. — The seeds contain a glucosidal substance similar to 
emodin which agrees with crysophanic acid in most of its properties. 
The leaves contain a principle similar to cathartin and a red oelouring 
matter as in senna leaves ; also mineral matters. 

Preparation, — Decoction (i in lo). Dose, 4 to 12 fld. dfi. Paste 
contains Cassia tora 6 parts, psoralia corylifolia 4 parts, and carrot 
seeds 2 parts. To be soaked for 8 days and then locally applied in itch. 

Actions and uses, — It has a great reputation as an alterative in all 
kinds of skin diseases accompanied with induration, as leprosy, cheloid, 
psoriasis, &c. The juice of the leaves is applied to relieve cutaneous 
mflammation caused by bhilamo. The seeds, mixed with karanja- 
tela (pongamia glabra), are used locally as an application for ring- 
worm. With sour milk it is used externally in eczema. A paste 
of the root with lime juice is used for ringworm, also for buboes in 
plague. The decoction of the leaves is aperient and given to children 
during teething. Locally they are used as a poultice over boils to 
hasten suppuration. 

Remarks. — Lately the seeds have been used as a substitute for 
coffee. 

CsBsalpinia Bonduoella. 

Syn.^ Bonducella Guilandina. 

Habitat. — India, tropical parts of Asia and Africa. 

Parts used. — ^The kernel of the seeds, oil and leaves. 

Vernacular. — ^Arab. — Akit-makit, Bonduk-i-Hindi. Beng. — ^Nata, 
Koranja, Jhagra-gula. Bomb. — Sagura-ghota. Gajaga-kakachia. 
Can.— Gajaga-kayi. Cing. — Kumburu-atta. Duk. — Gajga. Bng. — 
Bonduc-nut, Nicker tree. Guz. — Sagara-gota, Gajga-atchka, Kaka- 
chia. Hind. — Kat-karanj, Kat-kaleja, Karaijo Sagargota. Malay.— 
Kalan-chick-kuru. Mar. — Gajra, Sagaragota. Pers. — Khaya-i-Iblis. 
Sans. — Kubarakshi-phalami Keti-aranja. Tam. — Kazhar-shikkay. 
Tel. — Gach-chakaya. 

Khaya-i-Iblis — Khaya means testicle, and Iblis the devil. It 
means the devil's testicle, from the resemblance of the seeds in shape 
and appearance to human testicles. Bonduc. — The Arabic word 
Bondaka, or the Persian Funduk, means a ball of earth or a filbert. 

Characters. — Seeds globular, very smooth, shining and of a dull 
grey colour ; shell thick and bony; surface traversed by minute 
brownish coloured stripes, cotyledon, or the kernel dull white, wrinkkd 



C/KSALPmiA CORURtA. 



2as 



1 hard" taste bitter and rather mucilaginous ; leaves large, pinnate 
prickly ; leaflets small, glabrous and of a dark-green colour. The 
ot] i^ obtained by expression of seeds. 

Consittu€nts> — The kernels contain a non-alkaloidal bitter principle^ 
guibndina* The cotyledons of the seeds contain a fixed oil z^y bitter 

^principle or resin 2, sugar 6, salts 3, albuminoid matter 20, starch 35, 
ind tannin. Bitter principle, — A white bitter powder without acridity, 
entirely soluble in essential and fatty acids, in alcohol, acetone, chloro- 

^forro and glacial acetic acid ; very little soluble in ether, bisulphide of 

carbon ; almost insoluble in petroleum and water. 

ffion, — Pulvis Bonducellse compositus. Compound powder 
cam, undue 2 parts, black pepper 1 part, and pipli i part. Dose, 

5 to io gr5. 

f^//. fTv and ma\ — ^The kernels are bitter tonic, antiperiodic 
istic. The juice of fresh leaves is febrifuge and used in 
cbruri. JtNcis. The seeds, powdered and mixed with black pepper 
\ arc febrifuge and alterative tonic and are given in general debility to 
cV ' irhagcs, and in quotidian, tertian, quartan fevers. As 

:itic the kernels, mixed with leaves and flowers of butea 
31^4 and with flowering lops of Artemisia maritima are given 
intestinal worms. The fixed oil is emollient and used as an 
lion and to remove freckles from the face and to stop the 
_C6 ffom thcear ; sagaragota, with powdered cloves, is given 
to relieve the pain of colic and vomiting* 

Jiemarks, — The seeds are worn as necklaces by pregnant women 
lEider the belief that it prevents abortion. 

The soap-nut ^Sapindus triphatus) is also known by the name of 
.Bunduk-i-liindi, with which bonducella should not be confounded. 

CttsaJplnia Coriaria, Poinciana Coriaria* 

Syn, — American sumach — Divi-divi or Libi-dibi (Eng,) 

Habitat^ — H imalaya. 

Par^ tistd. — The legumes* 

Vtmacular ,^~T\\x\i. — Amriqka Sumaq. Pers, — Shumage-amriqah 
.Tani.--Shumak. 

Characters. — Dried pods oblong, compressed, somewhat obtuse, 
3r\*cd laterally; externally of a dark-brown colour, Undetneath the 
loutcr skin of the pods and between it and the inner layer is an astrio- 
iX matter, an impure tannin of a light yellow colour. Dose, 30 to 6d 

Comtitutntt. — Pods contain 60 p. c* of -tannin, starch, gum and 
wocxiy Ebre. 

/^ijrir/ibff*— Decoction (i in 40) as injection* 

Actions a9id uses, — The powder is antiperiodic, and given in inter* 
inittent fevers. Tlic decoction of the legumes is astringent* and used 
as an Injection in bleeding piles and for prolapsus ani in children. 



:J04 CiESALPNIA SAPPAN. 

toftalpinia Di jyna. 

Habitat, — Himalaya, Ceylon. 

Paris used, — The root. 

Vernacular. — Vakeri-mula. 

Characters.— The, root is tuberous. 

Preparation, — Infusion (i in lo). Dose, 2 to 8 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Alterative and astringent, given with milk, 
cumin, sugar and ghee, in diarrhoea and other chronic fluxes ; also in 
phthisis and scrofulous afiections. 

CcBsalpinia Sappan. 

Habitat. — E. and W. Peninsula. 

Part used, — The wood. 

Vernacular, — ^Arab. — Bukam. Beng^Bokom. Duk., Guz. 
Hind., Mar., Bomb. — Patanga. Burm.— Tainniy. Cing.— Patangi. 
Eng. — Sappan wood. Bookum or Bukhum wood, Brazil wood. 
Malyal. — Chappannam. Pers. — Bakam. Sans. — Patong. Tam.— 
Vartangi, Vpttekku. Tel.— Okanu katta, PaUng, Bakaup chekka. 
Can • — ratanga-chekke. 

Characters, — ^The wood hard, heavy, of a light reddish colour, 
here and there sprinkled with a reddish resinous substance ; taste oily 
and acrid ; odour acrid ; often used as logwood. 

Constituents. — Red colouring matter — sappan red or brazillin, gallic 
and tannic acids. Sappan red occurs in colourless rhombohedron 
or monoclinic prisms. It resembles hsematoxylin, and, like it, i» 
soluble in ether, alcohol and water ; contains carbon 67*11 p.c, hydro- 
gen 5*43 p.c„ and oxygen 27*46 p.c. 

Guiala or red powder contains patanga and phataki, mixed with 
tavakhir (arrowroot), cheap aniline dyes are now used instead. The 
dry powder of Gulal is used by the Hindus during the Holi festival 
and in other religious ceremonies. It is also used by a sect of Hindus 
for teka mark on their forehead. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent, given in intestinal and pulmonary 
haemorrhages and in menorrhagia ; also in diarrhoea and dysentery. A 
decoction of it is a good substitute for logwood, and used for the same 
purposes as Rakta-chandana. Guiala is used as a dusting powder in 
otorrhoea. 

Cioer Arietinum. 

Habitat, — Warm climates, India. 

Parts used, — Seeds, acidulous water or acid exudation. 

F(ff7iiicttZ!7f.— Arab.— Humuq. Beng. — Chana, But-kale, Batoola. 
Bomb. — Harabara-chana. Burm. — Ku-lo-pan. Can. — Kadali. Duk. — 
Harbarah. Eng. — ^The Bengal gram, common chick-pea, parched gram 
(the pulse). Guz. — Chaya, Channa, Chuna-no-Khato (acidulated 
water). Hind.^Chana, fiuroarmani. Italian — Cece. Mar. — Herbera^ 



CLITORIA TERNATKA. 



aos 



Ch^na. Pan]. — Nakbud. Pers. — Chola. Sans, — Chana-kamal, 

Chennaka. Tam. — Kadalai, Tel. — Sana-galoo-chanaka. 

Spurious chanano khato is merely sulphuric acid diluted and 
tinged with kimiaja* 

Characters. — An annual small plant ; leaves pinnate; stems covered 

lith glandular hairs, containing oxalic acid and acid oxalates. With 

_liedew these exude and hang in drops, ultimately forming crystals ; 

leaflets amall and hairy, of a greenish grey colour and of an acidulous 

taste ; seeds or pulse gibbous, mucronate, of a yellowish or reddish 

brawn colour ; testa brittle^ containing yellow cotyledons. Chana-no* 

Khato or the vinegar is an acid liquid of a dull, dirty colour — an 

nidation from the hairs» stem, leaves and other parts of the plant. 

lie vinegar is collected by spreading white cloth upon the plant 

luring the season of dew, when the exudation becomes mixed with the 

fc! •* t *1 is taken up by the cloth and finally wrung out in a vessel* 

iulaied water, when evaporated, is known as Chana-no>Khara, 

lUrnKH lA a white powder, which exists in fine needle-shaped crystals 

[id has an acidulous taste* 

Consti/ueft/s^ — The fluid contains water holding in solution oxalic, 
Icelic and perhaps malic acids. The husked seeds or the pulse con- 
iins water 1 1*5, albuminoids 21, starch 5g, phosphoric acid i, oil 4, 
2t fibre 1, &c* Nitrogen per ounce is 14 grains. 

Actions and uses* — The vinegar is an acid liquid similar to thai 
found in Kamarakha, bilambi, &c. Jt is used as stomachic, refrigerant 
and laxative in dyspepsia and to promote digestion and to remove 
flatulctice and costiveness. The juice of leaves possesses' similar pro- 
perty:; ; medicated vapour baths, prepared by adding the plant to 
.vaicr» are used to relieve dysmenorrhoea, A poultice of the 
1. . apptitd to sprained and dislocated limbs. The seeds are as- 
tnngcnt» and given in dysentery. Ghana is the most favourite pulse 
with the natives. It is taken raw or parched, in green or ripe state. 

CUtoria Ternatea. 

HabifaL—lndx^^ Ceylon. 

Paris used, — The root and seeds. 

Ventacuhr. — Arab. — Buzrula, Mazariynne-hindi. Beng, — Kalizer, 
Shavct-upurajita, Vish-mi-karanti. Burm.— Oung-maiphyoo, Can.— 
Karnike. Cing. — Nil^katarodu. Duk* — Gokarna, Phiki kijar Ghutti, 
i^Eng.— Wingcd-l^ved Clitona- Guz.^Garaoi, Hind, — Gokaranai 
ijtta. Mar. — Kajali, Gokarana* Maleal. — Kaka-valli, Pers, — 
Itebikhe'hayat. Mazeriyun-i-Hindi (Indian rnezereon). Sans. — 
{hcria, Aparjita, Ashphota« Vishnu Karanta Gokarna. Tam* — 
4nan-kodi. Tel. — Tella-Dintana. 

Ckaracters.^^ooi white, tapering, branched and fleshy; taate acrid 
bitter; root-bark soft and thick; seeds generally black or greyish 
irn, minutely mottled green and black, oblong, round or nearly 
jTraiilbrm, with a white scar at one margin, sHghtly compressed near the 
^e4gOit The &!i^^ of some seeds are smooth as if cut off by a knife; testa 



206 . COPAIFERA LANSDORFII. 

brittle, containing two cotyledons, which are full of granular starch, 
thus resembling sena-bij ; taste oily, acrid, bitter and disagreeable. 

Constituents, — The root-bark contains starch, tannin and resins^ 
The seeds contain a fixed oil, a bitter resin, which is the active princi- 
ple, tannic acid, glucose a light-brown resin, and ash 6 p. c. 

Preparation, — Infusion (i in 8). Dose, i to 2 ozs. Alcoholic 
extract. Dose, 5 to 10 grs. A compound powder containing clitorea 
seed I, acid tartrate of potassium 2, ginger i. Dose, ^ to i dr. 

Actions and uses . — The root is demulcent, diuretic and laxative, 
apd is given in fever, croup, chronic bronchitis, ascites, dropsy, and 
enlargements of the abdominal viscera. As a demulcent the infusion 
is used to relieve irritation of the bladder and urethra, and also given 
in bronchitis. The juice of fresh root is blown up the nostrils in 
hemicrania. The extract is a brisk purgative — a good substituter for 
kala-danah, gulbas bija and jalap. 

Copatfera LansdorfU, B. P. C. OflScInalis. 

Habitat, — Brazil, Amazon Valley. 

Part used. — The oleo-resin obtained from the trunk — Copaiba, 
Copaiva, B.P. 

Characters. — The exudation is thick, brown and viscid, generally 
translucent, of a characteristic aromatic odour and bitter acrid 
taste. Entirely soluble in absolute alcohol, ether, chloroform, benzene, 
fixed and volatile oils, in petroleum spirit (i in 4) ; insoluble in water. 
Dose, 30 to 60 ms. It is erroneously named balsam ; it does not 
contain cinnamic or benzoic acid. 

Constituents, — Volatile oil, bitter principle and resin. The resin 
contains capaivic acid. The volatile oil — Oleum copaibae, B. P., 
oil of copaiba. To obtain it, distil the exudation with water or 
steam. A colourless or pale-yellow oily liquid, with the aromatic, 
bitter, nauseous taste and odour of copaiba; soluble in absolute alcohol 
(I in i). Dose, 5 to 20 ms. Resin copaiba. — A residue left after 
distilling off the volatile oil from copaiba, A yellowish body, brittle, 
of acid reaction. Soluble in amylic alcohol, and benzol. It contains 
copaivic acid, which is crystailizable, and a trace of viscid resin. 
Dose, 1 5 to 20 grs. 

Preparations, — Mistura copaibas composita — compound copaiba 
mixture. Copaibas i, spiritus aetheris nistrosi i, Liq. potassae ^ ; 
mix and stir. Then add Tinct. lavandulae Co. i, syrup 2, water 8. 
Dose, I dr. Emulsion, pills, capsules, electuary. 

Physiological action, — Laxative, expectorant, diuretic, and stimu* 
lant of the genito-urinary organs. Taken into the stomach it causes 
heat, acid eructations, loss of appetite, heaviness and diarrhoea. 
The urine is increased in quantity and loaded with solid constituents* 
In large doses it irritates the skin, stomach, intestines and kidneys. 
It causes gastric catarrh and nephritis. The urine becomes scanty. 



CROTALARIA JUNECA. 



■ior 



Mastan-pat. 
Can. — Pundi- 
Eng, — Sun 
Mar, — Taga, 
Pulivanji. Tarn. — Wakkoo- 

a fibre obtained from 



stainiDg albumen casts and even blood, with pain in the loins ; 

m the skin it produces itching and even eruptions, as psoriasis, 

inicaria* &c. The oil and resin are soon absorbed into the blood. 

rhe>* are eliminated by the excretions and may be found in the 

urine, breath* milk and perspiration, 

Th^raptuiics^ — As a diuretic it is given in ascites, not depending 
upon :^Jhumrnuri^, Chiefly used in gonorrhoea after the acute symptoms 
\ itcd, in acute and chronic bronchitis with excessive expec- 

t and in heemorrhoids, Jn cystitis in the female it may be 

injected into the bladder* In chronic skin diseases, as psoriasis and 
urticaria, it is used with great benefit. The volatile oil is good for 
throat affections, while the oleo-resin is used for diuretic purposes. 

Crotalaria Jtmcea, C. Bengalensis, C. Fenestrata, 
C. Tenul folia, 
^fe^ito/.— Throughout the plains of India. 
Parts ustii. — The seeds, leaves and fibres. 
Vernacular, — Beng,— Shonpat, Ghoresun. 

Bomb.^-^Maesta-pat, Taag-ambharee. Burm.^ — Paisan, 
nartt. Shana-bina. Cmg,— Keshia. Duk. — Janab, 
or Bengal hemp. Gur. — Sun, Hind, — Sann» shunum. 
^Sooalla, Sam. Malay — Jenapa-vcra, 
^gana-pam, Shanambo, 

Sun is often confounded with sunnee. 
Hibiscus canuabinus. 

Characters. —Seeds compressed, markedly reniform, of a light or 
^fTMvJ^h brown colour ; surface shining, glabrous and slightly lubercled ; 
!!!> hard, bony and yellowish red ; taste and smell like that of 
|n**»>c i^uii mungo. 

Cmistituentt, — ^The leaves contain abundance of mucilage, a little 
solid fitf and a resin soluble in ether. 

Pr€pitr&tiun.^^\w\yx%\K>xi (i in lo). Dose, I to 2 ounces. 

Actions and uses. — Refrigerant, demulcent and cmmenagogue, 
" in fevers and in skin diseases, such as impetigo, and psoriasis. As 
fiemmcnagogue it is used to increase the flow of menses ; sometimes 
tbcy cause abortion. Dose of the seeds, lo to 30 grs. 

Remarls.—Ttih plant furnishes a coarse fibre called Sana, Taaga, 
or Bengal hemp. It ts used for making oakum and surgical tow. 

Cylifita Scarioaa. 

Habitat* — Concan, Ori^s^» Deccan, 

I\srt used. — The roots. 

Vemacu/an — Con can — Rangheuad. 

Ran-gevad Ran, wild ; and Ghevadas a kind of Dolichos* 
tabbb. u resembles Dohchos. 

Characters, — Root tapering, woody^ upper portion 2 inches in 
diameter^ dark brown and covered here and there with circular 



206 DERRIS ULIGINOSA. 

light-browD scars; on section, the central portion is pithy, surrounded 
by medullary rays of a light colour ; the woody tissue is porous and 
red; taste astringent and bitterish. 

C(mstituents. — Tannin, starch, and soft yellow resin but no 
alkaloid. 

Preparation. — Decoction of the root (i in lo). Dose, 4 to 8 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent, given in dysentery and leucorrhcea. 
Applied externally to reduce swellings. 

Dalbergia Sympathetioa. D. Yolubilis. 

Habitat^^Vf . Peninsula. 

Part used. — The plant. 

Vernacular. — Goa. — Titabli. Mar. — Pentgul, D. Volubilis, Alei. 

Characters. — A scandent shrub, stems covered with thick, large, 
blunt thorns ; leaves pinnate ; leaflets obtuse, silky beneath ; flowers 
axillary, in cymes ; calyx, silky ; corolla yellowish white, pod one-seeded 
and obtuse. * 

Preparation. — Infusion of leaves (i in 20). Dose, 2 to 8 drs. 
Decoction of root (i in 20). Dose, 2 to 8 drs. 

Actions and uses. — The leaves are alterative, and used in syphilis and 
rheumatism. The bark is stimulant and used locally to remove pimples. 
The juice of the leaves is used in aphthae as a gargle in sore throat. 
The root is demulcent. Internally the juice or decoction bf the root 
is given with cumin seeds in gonorrhoea. 

Derpis Uliginosa. 

Habitat. — E. Himalaya, Ceylon, W, Peninsula. 

Part used. — The Bark. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Panlata. Mar. — Kajarvel, Kirtana. 

Kirtana. — Worm creeper. It is a poison to worms and their 
larvae creeping in the fields. 

Characters. — The bark dark-brown and scabrous, thickly studded 
with corky warts. Taste astringent and acrid. 

Constituents. — The bark contains a neutral crystalline principle, 
wax, two resins, two colouring matters, an alkaloid, an acrid glucoside, 
allied to saponin, gum, and mineral matter 8 p.c. 

Preparation. — Decoction (i in 20), Dose, 2 to 8 drs.; a medicated oil. 

Actiom and uses. — Alterative and insecticide; the bark is used as a 
fish poison and also as a poison to kill worms and insects which infest 
leaves and flowers; as an alterative, it is given in rheumatism, 
chronic paralysis and dysmenorrhoea combined with asafetida, garlic, 
plumbago root and used externally in rheumatism. 



DESMODIUM GANGETICUM. 



f09 



Deemodiam Oangetioum, 

Habitat — India. Burma, Ceylon. 

I^rts used. — ^Tbe root and bark. 

Fernacu/ar, — Beng.— Salaparni. Guz. — Salavan, Hind,— Sari van. 
Mar^^^^alparni^ Diiye, Sans. — Daye, Shalparni, 

Shalparni. — Having leaves Hke the Shal (Shorea robusta.) 

Characters.^ Plant sub-erect ; stems angular, from 5 to 4 feet high^ 
mad largely covered at the top with short grey hairs ; leaves oblong, 
from 3 to 6 iDGht^?», long, rounded at the base and narrowed towards the 
point; flowers pale and purple; legumes 6 to 8, jointed and compressed-^ 
joints small, rather roundish or kidney-shaped, and covered with minute 
hooked hairs ; fresh root of a light white colour ; taste of the root-bark 
astringent ; odour slightly aromatic. 

Constituents — The root contains extractives, resin, oil, an alkaloid, 
ash 6 p.c, containing a trace of manganese* 

Preparation, — Decoction (i in 16). Dose, 2 to 6 drs. Compound 
dccociion. Dasamula de Kvatha. — Dasa, ten ; mula, the root j and 
quath. a decoction A decoction often plants. Containing: Salavan k 
Pithvan 1, Bhui*ringani i, Dorali-mula i, Chotta Gaklioru i, Bcia j, 
Tctu mula I, Shevana I, Patola 1, Takla 1. The first five plants are 
known as minor plants, called Hrasva pancha-mula or Laghu pancha- 
mula. The la« five are called Vrihat pancha-mula or the five major 
planti». Doi^e, I to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses^ — Febrifugep alterative and tonic. Given in fever, 
derangements of thc'bile, during convalescence from chtonic fevers; 
also in remittent and puerperal fevers, inflammatory diseases of the 
lungs, and in diseases of the brain; also in catarrhal aflfections, vomiting,. 
cou^h» asthma and dysentery. 

Ormocarpum Sennoides, 

ifalfiiMit, — Western Peninsula, Ceylon, 

Vernacular. — Can,— Kadunugge. Tarn.— Katmorunga. TeL— 
Adai-imunaga. 

Characters, — A low shrub, young shoots and flowering parts are 
hairy and of a pale yellow colour, and covered with glutinous secretion. 
Leaves pinnate, alternate* oblong and obtuse ; flowers 3 to 6, yellow ; 
racemes short and axillary ; pods jointed, pendulous, muricaced and 
glminous. 

PrtparaiiQu, — Decoction of the root (i in 10), Dose, 4 to 6 drs. 
Linimeot. 

Actitmi and mes* — ^Tonic and stimulant. The liniment is used in 
paralysis and lumbago. 

D^amodlom Trifloram. D. Heterophyllum* Hedysarum 
Triflorum. 

Mahiiat, — Bengal and Peninsula India* 

flfW med, — The plant. 

14 



no DOLICHOS BIFLOftUS. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Kulalaia. Hind. — Kadalaya. Mar«— Ran- 
methi. Tarn.— Senipullady. Tel. — Moonoodoo-moordoa 

Characters. — Stems procumbent ; leaves trifoliate ; leaflets obovate 
or obcordate, pubescent or hairy ; peduncles axillary, solitary, i to 3 
flowered ; legumes hispidly pubescent, 3 to 6-jointed ; joints truncated ; 
flowers, small and blue. 

Preparation. — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, 2 to 8 drs. 

Actions and uses. — ^The leaves with milk are used as galacta^ogue. 
iand as carminative they are used in diarrhcea and convulsions in 
children. The fresh plant bruised is applied to indolent ulcers. 

DoliohoB BifloPOB. 

Habitat. — India. 

Part used. — The seeds. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Kulthi, Kultho-kuUe. Can. — Hurali. 
Eng. — Madras horse-gram Guz., Hind.— Kulthi. Mai. — Muthenif 
Mxdiri. Sans. — Rahitha, Culutu ; Mar. — Kulitha, Kultha. Tarn. — 
Kollu. Tel.— Walawalli, Ulava. 

Characters.^Tvro varieties — red and white. The seeds are of 
different colours, varying from light red to dark red and black. Those 
which are light red are mottled green or dark. In size they resemble 
chaksu, are highly polished and shining, having a white scar about the 
middle of the margin ; testa very thin and brittle ; cotyledons whitish. 

Cofistituents. — Albuminoids, starch, oil, ash and phosphoric acid. 

Preparation, — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, 4 to 8 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent, diuretic and tonic The decoction 
is used in urmary diseases and menstrual derangements. Parturient 
women luse it to promote lochia ; also given to check profuse 
leucorrhoea and menstrual fluxes. Like Ankola powder, a powder 
of these seeds is applied to the skin to check cold sweats. 

Entada SoandenB, Aoaoia Soandens, Mimosa Entada. 

IfoAitat.'^TTopics, 

Part used. — The seeds. 

Vernacular. — ^Bomb. — Gardul , Beng. — Gila-gach. Cing.— Pus 
wael. Duk. — Gradul. Guz. — Suvali-amli. Hind.— Garabi. Mar. — 
-Garambi, Gartdul. Maleal. — Parin-kaka-vuUi. Panj. — Kastori-kaman. 
TeL — Gila-tiga. Sikkim Pangra. Lepcha, Takdokhyen. 

Characters. — Legunies several feet long and 4 to 5 inches broad, 
surrounded with thick, firm, polished, entire rim ; joints 10 to 30, one- 
seeded, ligneous, swelled in the centre and transversely furrowed ; seeds 
very large, each ab6ut 2 inches in diameter, flat or compressed* and 
roundish or heart-shaped ; surface very shining, smooth and of adark« 
red colour, having a blackish scar at thehilum; testa of a reddish colour 
and thick ; cotyledons two, like that of Bhui-singa ; taste slightly 



KRYTHRINA INDICA, 



biltertsh ; a drop of water placed on it becomes milky owing to the 
escape of oil globules and granular matter. 

Camiituents^ — Contains a viscid^ turbid oil 7 px., and a little 
saponin. 

Actions and uses* — ^Irritant and emetic. A paste of them is applied 
to relieve inflammatory glandular swellings in the axilla, known to the 
natives as Kakha Bilari. It is applied to swollen hands and feet in 
cases of general debility with marked relief. The seeds are used as 
soap to wash the hair. 

Erythrophlcaam Guinense, E. Jadloiaie. 

/Af^iY/f/. — Central and Western Africa. 

J^rt used* — The bark. 

Vtrrniaiiar- Eng.^ — Casca bark, doom bark, sassy bark, ordeal 
bark. 

Characters, — The bark has an astringent, acrid, bitter taste, and 
when powdered excites violent and persistent sneesing, 

CoHsdiiitnts — ^An active glucosidal principle.called Erythrophlc3eine. 

Erythtophlcsina; Hydrochloridum — yellowish white granular, 
crystals, soluble in water. The solution has an acrid, bitier taste« 
Dose, ify 10 ij gr, 

/V^<jrtf/Sib«,— TincturaErythrophloei, (i in 10)* Dose, 5 to 10 ma 

Pkysmhgical achmts. — Cardiac tonic, sedative, hydragogue 
and diuretic. In large doses emetic and narcotic, producing nausea, 
vomitrnj^, intense htadache, narcosis ami death* Erythrophlceinae 
hydrochloridum combines ihe actions of Diuitalin and ^icrotoxin* It 
strengthens and slows tl»e heart's action, contracts the arterioles and 
incrtM[*e*^ the secretion of urine. It is not cumulative. It is given in 
mi' tse and cardiac dropsy ; also ftiven in diarrhcea, dysenteryj 

int \i fever, colic, &c. Some believe it to be a local anseuhetici 

cveii superior to cticaine. 

Remarks. — The bark is used by the negroes as an ordeal in trials 
for witchcraft. 

Erythrina Indjoa. E* Corallodendron. 

HabiiaL — Throughout India, 

Parts used. — The leaves and bark. 

Moochy wood tree. Indian coral tree (Eng.) 

Vertmrular, — Eng. — Moochy wood tree. India coral tree. 
Beng>- oandar* Burm. — Katheet, Kasi. Can. — Paravalada- 

mara, i a« Warjippe* Cing.— Erabadu. Duk. — Pangra, Hind. 

& Sian — Pangrai Furrud. Sans. — Parnata, Parijalaka, Mandara, 
Tarn* — Kaltyana, Murukku, Teh — aad-chippa-chettu. Malay. — 
lCalyaiia*murukku. 

C4</rtfc/rf J.— Fresh bark covered with smooth, grey suber and 
having »mall| corky and Assured lenticels ; outer portion of the bark 
granular and brittle ; odour very disagreeable ; leaves pinnatdy 
Uifoliatc ; leaflets entire. 



212 PLEMINGIA TUBKROSA. 

'Constituents. — ^The bark contains two resins and a bitter alkaloid 
erjrtherine. 

Preparation. — Infusion of leaves (i in lo). Dose, 2 to 8 drs. 
Decoction of bark (i in 20). Dose, 2 to 4 drs. 

Actions and uses. — The leaves are alterative, laxative, diuretic, 
galactagogue and emmenagogue ; used in syphilis, fevers, in amenor- 
rhoea, &c. With cocoanut milk they are used as galactagogue. The 
bark is astringent and tonic, and given in dysentery, fevers, &c. The 
leaves made hot (varalians) are applied to disperse buboes. Erytherine 
has actions antagonistic to those of strychnine, and may be used as an 
antidote. 

Flamin^a Tuberosa. 

Habitat.— Tht Concan. 

Part used. — The tubers. 

Vernacular.^ Mar.— Birmova. 

Characters. — Small herb in grassy places; leaves trifoliate, studded 
with minute golden elands ; flowers small and pea-like ; pods rounded, 
containing a single black seed ; roots tuberous, ovoid, oblong and 
tapering at the lower-end ; skin dark-brown and smooth externally, 
white within ; the tubers yield a sticky juice when injured ; taste 
sweet and astringent. 

^ When boiled the taste of the tubers resembles that of chestnuL 

Constituents. — Yellow resin 1-5 p. c, sugar and ^m 25 p. c^ 
asparagin 4-3 p.c, tannin a trace, starch 40 p. c, albuminoids 13 p.c., 
and ash 3-5 p.c. 

/Reparation. — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, 2 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent. The tubers are used in dysentery 
and leucorrhcea. 

Flamin^a Grahamiana. 

Habitat. — Nilgiris, Concan, Canara. 

Part used, — The glands from the pods, (wars) 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Wars. Hind . — ^W ars. 

Characters. — Fruits are covered with peculiar garnet-coloured 
glands. Wars is obtained by drymg the pods and rubbing them 
together over leaves.' It is a granular mobile powder ,* colour 
deep purple-red, without any odour or taste. It ignites like lycopo- 
dium. It is insoluble in water, soluble in ether, > warm alcohol and 
caustic alkalies. 

Constituettts. — A trace of volatile oil, of the odour between that of 
carraway and lemons ; resinous colouring matter 72 p.c, the resinous 
matter is of a brittle consistence, soluble in ether, alcohol, benzol, 
chloroform, carbon sulphide, acetic acid, alkaline solution and 
alkaline carbonates ; also soluble in lime, magnesia. Diluted alcohol 
separates resinous matter into 2 resins. It also contains ash 6 p.c., 
albuminous matter 8 p.c.y cellulose 9*5 p.c. 



CLYCYRRHJZA GLABRA* 



213 



Yeparatton, — Dusting powder. 
Actions and m€s, — The same as those of lycopodium, used to 
cure scaly eruptions of the skin. 

Glyoyrrhiza Glabra, B. P., 0. Olandulifera. 

Sweet wood, Italian juice root, Spanish juice root, 

Glvcyrrhixai from Glykys, sweet, and rhiza, root, from the sweet 
taste of the root. Glabra, from Glaber, smooth, without hair or dowii« 
leaves ire smooth on both surfaces. Glandulifera — Glandula, a gland j 
^Jid ferro, 10 bear. The pods are covered with thick glandular spines. 

Mahitair^ Northern Asia, Arabia^ Persia, Punjab, Sindh, Southern 
EuropCi Candia, China. 

Faris used, — The peeled root and peeled subterranean stem— 
Glycyrrhizae Radtx^ Liquorice root, B.P. 

Vemaculur. — Arab. — Asl-us-sus, Kobesus. Beng. — Jaishtomodhu. 
Burm — N*wy-K'hye, Shinbo-noegiyu. Can. — ^Ate-madhura, Duk. — 
Milhi-Iakri. Eng, — Liquorice root, the juice, Spanish juice, Italian 
juice. Guz.— Jethi-Madh. Hind. — Jathi raadha. Mar, — Jeshti- 
madha, Irkisus. Pers* — Bekh-Mekeh. Sans — Yashti-matJhu-kam, 
Madhu ytshttkam. Tarn,— Ati-madhramu. Tel- — Yashti-madukam, 
Malay, UriLhmadhuram, Cing. — Atimaduram, Velmi, 

Characters. — The roots abound in saccharine and mucilaginous 
matter, which is slightly bitter and readily soluble in water. It 
is brown on the surface and yellow within j occurs in cylindrical 
branched pieces of various sizes, of the thickness of a finger. It is tough 
md friable ; the taste is sweet at first, after a time it becomes somewhat 
mucilaginous, acrid and bitter ; the odour is earthy and rather sickly ; 
when peeled and sliced, the pieces are yellow and smooth, the fracture 
b coarsely fibrous. Dose, of liquorice root, 15 to 60 grs. 

Constituents. — The glucoside — glycyrrhizin 6 p. c», glycyramarin, 
su^r, starchy resin, gum, mucilage and asparagin. 

Glycyrrhizin. — The sweet principle of liquorice. To obtain it heat 
cold infusion of the root^ add sulphuric acid, when albumen will 
copulate; to dissolve the precipitate add alcohol and ether, filter and 
evmporate. An amorphous yellow powder, of a strong bitter taste and 
acici reaction, soluble m water and sparingly so in spirit and ether. In 
hot water it fotms a jelly* It is precipitated on the addition of acid or 
solution of cream tartar or of neutral acetate of lead. By boiling with 
dilute hydrochloric acid it resolves into glyc)Tretin and an uncrys- 
Uliixable sugar of the characters of glucose. 

Glycyrrhizin combined with ammonia forms ammoniated glycyr* 
rhizin nr glycyrrhizic acid. A glucoside prepared by treating liquorice 
root '' "T and ammonia and precipitating with sulphuric acid and 

^edi^^ ^ dilute ammonia and allowing it to dry. Dark brown or 

red gai ucL coloured scaltrs^ taste sweet, soluble in water and alcohoU 
One ^rain flavours six ounces of water; the sweet taste of the root is due 
to this glucoside. Dose, ^ to 5 grs. 




A^ 



^^id 



114 HARDWICItIA PIKNATA. 

Preparation. — ^Pulvis Glycyrrhizae Compositus, B.P. Compound 
diquorice powder. 

Senna 2« Liquorice root 2, Fennel i, sublimed sulphur I, and 
sugar 6. Dose, 60 to 120 grs. For constipation and hepatic disease. 
Extractum Glycyrrhiza B. P. extract of Liquorice. Dose ad libitum. 
Extractum Glycyrrhiza liquidum. B. P. Fluid extract of glycerrhiza. 
Dose, i to I fld, dr. Decoction (i in \o\ Dose, 4 to 12 fld. dr. 
Mistura glycyrrhizaeComposita— Compound mixture of Glycynrhiza. 
'Brown mixture — Liquorice extract 3, Syrup S, acaciae 10, Tinctura 
opii camphorata 12, Vinum antimoniales 6, spirit etheris nitrost 3, 
water 100. Dose i to 4 dr. 

Action and uses. — Demulcent, expectorant, and a mild laxative, 
also local stimulant. When chewed or sucked it increases the flow of 
saliva and mucus, hence acts as a throat emollient. It stimulates the 
mucous membrane, especially of the air passages where its action is 
more local than general. It; is given in inflammatory affections, 
catarrhs, cough, hoarseness of voice, asthma, and in irritation of the 
.larynx, bronchi and of the urinary passages. The compound powder is 
used as a laxative in constipation. Glycyrrhizic acid is used for flavouring 
decoctions, also covering the taste of nauseous drugs in a liquid form 
as quinine, chloride of ammonium, sulphate of magnesia, senna, senega, 
hyoscyamus, ipecacuanha, aloes &c. The powder is used as an exci- 
pient in pills. 

Remarks, — ^The Indian liquorice is the root of Abrus Precatorius, 
Sab-us-sus ; kubas-susa (Arab.) ; the inspissated juice of Glycyrrhiza 
Triphylla is sold in the bazaar in the shape of black pencils. It is 
an ingredient in various laxative powders, confections and lozenges. 

Hardwiokia Pinnata. 

Habitat — Ghats of Canara, Travancore and Carnatic. 

Part used. — A dark red balsam. 

Vernacular. — Can. — Yenne. Mai. — Kalla, shurale. Tam. — 
Madeyan, Sampirani. Tinnevelly — Kolavu. 

Characters, — The tree yields an oleo-resin — a black or yellowish 
transparent viscid fluid of the smell and taste of copaiba. A deep notch 
is made into the heart of the tree, and after a time the balsam begins to 
flow. Dose, 20 to 60 ms. 

Constituents^ — An essential oil 25 p. c. similar in composition to 
that obtained from copaiba, and 2 resins, of which one has acrid pro- 
perties — does not contain any copaivic acid. 

Actions and uses. — Demulcent, stimulant and expectorant ; like 
copaiba, used in gonorrhoea, gleet, leucorrhcea, bronchorrhoea, etc* 

Ebunatozylon Campeohianum, B. P. 

The Logwood tree. — 

Syn. — Black wood, campeachy wood. 



INDIGO FERA TINCTORIA. 



315 



Haematoxylon from Hsenia, ** blood,** froin blood like colour of 
the heart wood ; Logwood — wood being imported in logs. 

^abiiaL^^W. Indies, Jamaica, India. 

Parts used. — The Heartwood-^H^matoxyli Lignum, B. P. 

Ckamcters, — Wood in chips or coarse powder, thick, heavy and 
hard, externally of a purplish red colour^ iniernally reddish brownish, 
marked with irregular concentric rings, odour faint and agreeable, taste 
■ttringent and sweet. Dose of the powder, lo to 30 grs. 

Constitnent^. — Hiematoxylin, 12 p. c. volatile oil, tannin, fat, 
resin* Hicmatoxylin.^ — To obtain it mix powdered extract with sand 
And exhaust with ether, add water and crystallize. A crystalline 
principle^ pale yellow, sweet like liquorice, soluble in alcohol and ether, 

Pteparations. — Decoctum Hsematoxyli B, P. (i in 20), Dose, ^ to 
a fld« oZ!». Logwood chips 50, cinnamon bark 8, and water tooo^ 
boiK Givtfn in diarrhoea and hiematuri.-!* Extraclum Haematoxyli 
Uauio e, I to 2 drs. It contains Hematoxylin, hiematein and 

ollici nt properties of the wood unchanged. 

Actions and uses, — Astringent and tODic ; under its use faeces 
becomes dark and urine blood red and sweet. Given in chronic 
diarrhoea, dysentery and hemorrhages ; also in atonic dyspepsia, 

Indigofera Tlnctoria, Indigo fera Sumatrana, Indigofera Indioa. 

HabttaL — \V. India, Bengal, Madagascar, 

f^tri used, — The plant and the expressed juice. 

F'tmacular^'^Asab, — Nilaj. Beng. — Nil Guli. Burm.— Mai 
may. Shan — May. Can.— Nili. Cing. — Nila. Chin.— Lan-tian 
Duk.^NiL Eng. — Dogbite shrub. Guz. — Gali, Nil. Hind, — Nil. 
Mah.— Nili, Guli. MalyaL— Nilam, Ameri, Tarun. Pers — NilaJu- 
Ausiralienil, Sans. — Nilam Banig Bandhu. Tam. — Nilam Avari-ckli 
Tayura. Tel. — Nili-mandu. Aviri. Panj. — Wasma, Basma. 

Shrub 2 to 5 feet high. Leaves pinnate j leaflets in pairs, cuneate at 
the ba»e, rather pointed towards the apex, of dark green colour. On 
Squec^ring a dark green juice oozes out ; flowers many, of a pink or pur- 
ple rose colour ; legumes nearly cylindrical deflexed and curved up* 
wards ; seeds truncated at both ends. Dried juice or extract met with 
in hard pieces of an indigo colour. When mixed with water it 
forms a mixture of blue and purple. To obtain Indigo. — The plant is 
cut, steeped in water, and kept or allowed to ferment till the liquid 
becomes charged with the colouring matter. The liquid on evapora- 
tion i.s mixed with air with the result that oxidation takes place and 
the indigo is set free^ which is next collected in shallow wooden boxes 
and moulded into small pieces one inch square. Dose, 1 to 3 grains* 

f fits. — Indican (a glucoside). 

^m. — Decoction of the plant (i in 10). Dose, 2 to 8 drs, 

id uses. — Plant stimulant, alterative and purgative ; used 

in eiil ^ Ml of the liver and spleen, dropsy, affections of the lungs 

aad kidneys, whooping cough and palpiutions of the heart. 



'«l6 INDIGOFERA TRIFOLIATA. 

Indigo is given in epilepsy and erysipelas and also in amenorrhcea. The 
natives apply indigo to the navel with castor oil in constipation also to 
the pubes and hypogastrium in relieving retention of urine. A poul- 
tice of the plant is used to relieve haemorrhoids. Indigo is a soothing 
application to burns and scalds, and the juice of the leaves is used as a 
ploultice externally and given internally as a prophylactic against bites 
of venomous animals and hydrophobia. 
Indigofara Aflpalatboides. Aapalathus Indions. Lespedeza Jonoaa. 

Habitat. — Ceylon, Carnatlc. 

Parts used, — The plant. 

Vernacular — Maleal. — Manili, manneli. Mar. — Shiva nimb« 
Sans. — Shiva nimba. Tam. — Shevenar vaymbu. 

Characters. — A low shrub ; branches slender, one flowered ; leaflets 
pale green, oblong and lanceolate. Pods straight, glabrous, turgid, 6 
to 8 seeded. Flowers, rose coloured. 

Preparation, — Decoction of the plant (i in 20). Dose, i to 2 fld. ois. 
Oil extracted from the root. Paste and ashes. 

Actions and uses. — Cooling, demulcent and alterative. The paste 
of the plant is used to reduce oedematous swellmgs. The ashes of the 
burnt plant are used to remove dandruff" from the hair. The decoction 
is used in cancerous affections and leprosy. The root is chewed to 
relieve toothache and aphthae. The oil is used in erysipelas. 

Indigofera Trifoliata. 

Habitat, — Ceylon. 

Part used, — The seeds. 

Vernacular. — Guz. — ^Vekari. 

Characters. — Seeds oblong, very smooth, shining and beautifully 
mottled with dull red or black points; colour varying from yellow to 
dark red or pink. In size they resemble mustard seeds ; cotyledons of a 
yellow colour ; taste that of Maga-ni-dala (Phaseolus mungo). 

Preparations. — Confection i to 2 drs. and decoction (i in 10). 
Dose, 4 to 12 fld. drs. 

Actions and uses. — Tonic and restorative. A confection of these 
seeds with other mucilaginous drugs is used in rheumatism, lumbago, 
general debility after delivery, in seminal weakness and leucorrhcea. 
The decoction is used for relieving pain in the back and waist 

Indigofera Pauoifolia. 

Habitat, — Bengal, Madagascar. 

Part used, — The plant. 

Vernacular. — Tam. — Kuthekar, summattee. 

Characters. — Leaves covered with a hoary pubescence ; root small 
and twisted. 

Preparation, — Decoction, (i in 10). Dose, i to 2 os« 



LUPINUS ALfiUS* 



217 



Acthns and uses. — Alterative, antiphlogistic, antisyphilitic and 
deobstrucnt. The decoction is used locally to foraent the joints and 
Intcmaily in rheumatism. 

Jonesia Asoka. 

J, Pinnata. Saracalndica. S. Arborescens* 

HahiiaL^\{\mii\^y^t Ceylon, East Indies. 

I^iris used, — The bark. 

P'tfftacuMir, — Beng. — Jasundi, Asoka, Burm, — A-thau-ka-pho, 
Can. — Asoka, ashunkar. Cing. — Diya-rat mayL Chin, — Wu-yu-wha, 
Eng. — The Asoka tree, Guz, — Asupila. Hind. — ^Jasundi, Asok. 
Mar — Jasundii Asoka. Sans. — Asoka, Gundapushpa, Kankelif 
Anganapriy^ Tarn. — Ashogam. 

A&hok;i — a ** without/* and **5hoka/* sorrow or pain, meaning free 
Irom pain, Gundapushpa — Gundh smell or odour, and pushpa flowers. 
It mcjins odor»3us flowers. Angana-priya — dear to women. It is an 
embkm of love, 

CAaracltrs.^B;kTk externally smooth, of a dark brown or ash 
colour. Internalty fibrous and of a pale reddish colour. Tastet 
astringent. 

Constituents. — Tannin and catechin. 

fyiparatton. — Decoction (] in 10} made in milk. Dose, 2 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent ; the decoction with a number of 
aromatics h mvcn m uterine affections. Chiefly in menurrhagia. 

Remarks* — Jasundi is the name for Hibiscus Rosa sinensis» for 
which it should not be mistaken. 

Lupinus AlbiiB, 
Habitat — Egypt, Italy, Sicily, and Mediterranean countries. 
Parts used. — The seeds. 

V<rnacutar, — Arab, Hind. — Turmus, B^ila^t-misri, Zurmish, 
Eng, — WhMc lupine, Horse beans. Pers, — Tira niisha. 

Characters. — Seeds white outside and yellow inter najly, globiUar 
and bard, with a depression at the centre of both surfaces. They have 
a hole on the top, taste bitter. Dose, to to 15 grs. 

Constituents, — Mah'c, oxalic and citric acids ; a golden yellow oil 5 
px, and wax containing a liltle phosphorus, no starch, no inulin, but a 
peculiar jnubstance related to dextrine (a white hygroscopic powder 
soluble in w.«ter and insoluble in ether). Gal act ane, a hydrocarbon, a 
principle similar to galactifie obtained from Lucerne ; also a hydrocarbon 
Parai^alaUine — which is soluble in water; atid when boiled with acid 
it is convertrd into galactose. The albuminous portion of the seeds 
consists of cunji^1utin« legumin and vegetable albumen, also three 
alkaloids, uamuly, lu^ininc, luzanine and lupulidinol. Germinated seeds 
contain asparagin, phenyl ami do- propionic acid, amido -valerianic acid, 
Jeudne, tyrosin, xanthine, hypoxanthine, lecithine, peptone, argininei 
aiKi choline, also vanillin. 




91 8 MIMOSA PlTbiCA. 

Preparation. — Decoction (i in lo). Dose, 2 to 8 drs. 

Acttons and uses. — Carminative and emmenagogue. The decoction 
with rue and pepper is given in fever, loss of appetite and nausea« 
also in leprosy. As an emmenagogue it is given in disordered mens- 
truation ; boiled in vinegar the seeds are applied to disperse swollen^ 
scrofulous or parotid glands. 

Vida Faba. 

Habitat — Persia. 

Part used. — The beans. 

Vernacular, — Eng. — Field bean. Pers. — ^Bakila. 

Constituents, — The beans contain proteids, phosphoric acid, also 
amylaceous and saccharine matter. 

Actions and uses. — The beans are nutritive, tonic and expectorant. 
The root is diuretic. 

Mimosa Pudioa. 

Habitat. — Hotter parts of India. 

Parts used. — The leaves and root. 

Vernacular. — Eng. — Sensitive plant. Beng. — Lajak, Lajiwant. 
Burm. — Hte-ka-yung. Can. — ^Mudugudavre. Hind. — Lajftia, Lajuk, 
Lajwanti. Mar. — Lajri. Sans. — Khaderi, Anjali-Karika. Tam. — 
Totavadi. Tel. — Attapatti, Pedda-Nidra-kante. 

Anjali-karika — ^Joining hands as in prayer or worship ; the leaves 
join together on the slightest touch. 

Characters. — Flowers purple or pale pink ; root fibrous ; leaves 
pinnate, falling off on the slightest touch. Taste pungent. 

Constituents. — The root contains tannin 10 p.c. and ash 5.5 p.c. 

Preparations, — Infusion of leaves (i in 20). Dose, 4 to 8 drs. 
Decoction of root (i in 10). Dose, 2 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Alterative given in torpor of the liver, fever, 
piles, aud jaundice. The decoction of the root is given in urinary 
diseases. 

Maoona PrarienB, M. Frarita, Doliohos Pniriaiui. 

Habitat. — India, Ceylon and Burmah. 

Part used. — The seeds and hairs covering the pods. 

Vernacular. — Eng. — Cowage or Cowitch. Beng. — Bichhoti, 
Alkusi, Kam^ch. Bomb. — Kuhiii, Kavacha. Burm. — Khwae-lae, Khu-e- 
le. Can.— Nasa-guni-Turichi. Cing. — Achiryi. Duk — Ktoch-kiiri. 
Guz. — KAv^nch. Hind. — KAwicha. Mar. — Kuhiii, Kavacha. Pers. 
— Hub-el-Kulai, Sans — Atma^upta, Kopikach-chhu, Vanary. Mai. — 
Nayi, Karona. Tam. — Puna-Kali. Tel. — Pelliadugu Kaia, Dulagondi. 

At ma Gupta — Having hidden properties, Kapikachchhu— 
monkey's itch. Vanari — monkey plant. 



ItTTCUKA MOKOSPERMA. 



21^ 



i?cf/rr.— Pods curved like the letter / 3; or 4 inches long, 

rith rigid »brown hairs and filled with brown matter which 

soon penetrate the skin and irritate it if handled. Skin of the pod hard 

id of a dark colour ; seeds 3 to 5, dark brown or dark coloured, kidney- 

baped« compressed, shining anci smooth ;5ome mottled on the surface 

ich having large white oblong ring, wrinkled at the margin and 

ccupying the hilum ; testa thin and brittle ; cotyledons greyish- whit e> 

rd ; of a disagreeable smelt and taste. 

ConstiiuenU, — Resin, tannin and fat, and a trace of manganese. 

Preparatiom. — Hairs of the pods or powder. Confection (i in 2), 
[ucuna seeds boiled in milk, then decorticated pounded and fried in 
^arified butter, and made into a confection with twice the weight of 
ijgar and aromatics. Dose, 60 to 180 grs. A compound powder, 
Cavacha Pushtika — contains' M ucuna seeds, Tribulus Terrestris, root of 
^hite silk tree. Asparagus adscendens^ Emblic myrobalans^ Tinospora, 
irch, sugar candy in equal proportion. Dose, 10 grs. in milk 
3r spermatcirrhcea, 

Actmm and wj^^.— The seeds are nervine tonic, emmenagogue and 
phrodisiac, used in leucorrhcea, menstrual derangemc^nts, and 
iralysi^. The confection is given in paralysis and seminal 
ability. The hairs of the pods are vermifuge and given in round 

fi». They work mechanically by injuring the worms and promot- 
^^ bcir expulsion. When applied to the skin or to the mucous 
ciembrane, the hairs produce a painful irritation and eruption, and 
Bocc arc very dangerous if left in the intestines. In such cases their 
Imintstration should always be followed by a purge of calomel and 
Dose uf the hairs, I to 3 grs. 

Httouna Monosperma. 

ffabiiaL — Eastern Himalaya, tropics, Western Peninsula, Ceylon, 
f\irt used. — Tlie seeds. 

Vernacular. — Mar. — Songaivi, Mothtkuhilt« Tam.— Thelukodi^ 

Characters, — The seeds are large, flat and circular; testa rough and 

*L colour. The whole convex margin is occupied by the hilum ; 

f-seeded, semtovat, and armed with bristly hairs of a brown 

Used as paste* 

Actians and uses, — Expectorant and sedative, given in cough 

asthma ; externally as a sedative it is applied to painful jointa. 

lljFOxyloQ Pereirs B« P. Tolnifera Pereirai* 

jffahiiat^CGuirdl America (Salvador.) 

Part used. ^h balsam exuded from the trunk after the bark has 
ecn beaten and scorched. Balsamum Peruvianum, Balsam of 
^eru, B. P., Black balsatnp Balsamum Indicum. 

Characters, — It occurs as a thick^ viscid, brownish liquid of a 
benzoin and vanilla odour, and persistent bitter taste. It is black when 
in bulk, but in thin layers it is deep orange-brown or reddish brown 




«20 MYROXYLON TOLUIPBRA. 

and transparent. Insoluble in water, soluble in chloroform and alcohol 
and in spirit (i in 5). Dose, 5 to 15 ms. in emulsion. 

Constituents, — Cinnamein, Metacinnamein, a crystaliizable solid* 
Resins, cinnamic acid, styracin (which is cinnamate of cinnyl), &c. 

Cinnamein or benzyl cinnamate obtained by treating the bakam 
with potash, is a colourless aromatic oil, known as Peru balsam oil ; on 
dry or fractional distillation the oil yields benzyl alcohol, benzylic 
benzoate, benzylic cinnamate, all colourless aromatic oils. With potash 
it saponifies and yields benzalcohol 20 p.c. and cinnamic acid 40 p.c. 

Preparation. — Syrup, emulsion, solution, ointment. 

Actions and uses.^ln small doses antiseptic, disinfectant, vascular 
and nervine sedative, tonic, expectorant, diaphoretic, and diuretic. It 
stimulates the mucous membranes. Its action closely resembles that 
of styrax and benzoin. In large doses it causes nausea, vomiting, 
stomach pain, intestinal colic and diarrhoea. 

Therapeutics. — As a disinfectant stimulant and expectorant it is 
used in catarrh of the mucous membranes, as in chronic bronchitis, 
asthma, phthisis, gonorrhoea, gleet and leucorrhoea ; used externally as a 
stimulant in chronic skin diseases, to relieve jtching in indolent ulcers, 
eczema, sore nipples, freshly-made wounds, also in otorrhoea and 
alopecia. 

/Remarks. — The balsam partially covers the odour of iodoform. 

Myroxylon Tolnifera, B. P. 

Habitat. — Central America, Carthagena, Mountains of Tolu. 

Part used. — The balsam, obtained by making incisions in the 
trunk. Balsamum Tolutanum, Balsam of Tolu, B. P. 

Characters. — It occurs as a soft, tenacious solid, in thin film of a 
•yellowish brown colour and transparent. Becoming harder and 
brittle on keeping ; odour highly fragrant ; taste acid and aromatic ; 
soluble in alcohol and ether, insoluble in water. Dose, 5 to 15 grs. 

Constituents- — Styracin, cinnamic acid, resin, and a volatile oil* 
Resin — amorphous, black, brittle, soluble in alcohol. 

Preparation. — Syrupus tolutanus, B. P., syrup of balsam of Tolu 
(i in 38). Dose, J to i dr. Tinctura tolutana, B. P. ^i in 10), Tincture 
of balsam of Tolu. Dose, J to i dr. An ingredient m the preparation 
of Tinctura benzoini composita. Dose, ^ to i dr. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant, and expectorant, used, like balsam of 
Peru, in bronchial affections, catarrh, coughs, &c. The syrup is used 
in cough mixtures. 

Remarks. — ^The syrup is used to cover the taste of chloral 
hydrate. 



OKMOCARPinvf SENNOIDES, 



Ui 



Tel 



Ormooarpmn Sennoidea. 

HahitaL — Western Peninsul.i, Ceylon. 

P^rtuifd, — YouDg shoots and flowering parts. 

Vernacular. — Tamil. — Katmorungi, Can, — Kadunugge* 
Adavimunga. 

Ckaracten. — Young shoots are covered with soft glutinous haifi 
und a glutinous secretion of a go)d yellow colour ; leaves pinnate; 
leaflets alternate, oblong, obtuse and membranous. Racemes short 
axillary. Flowers yellow. 

/Vr^^r^/ionf.— Decoction of the root (i in jo). Dose, a to 6 drs. 
Lioiinciit — made by boiling the flower tops and young shoots to 
fiwect oil. 

Aciwns and uses. — Tonic and stimulant; the decoction is given in 
fivers. The liniment is used in paralysis and lumbago* 

PhyaoBtigma Venanosnm B, P. 

Calabar bean» ordeal bean^ chop nut. 

Physostigma from physa an ** air bubble '* or •* bladder ** and 
stigroa a ** mark by a pointed instrument/' The stigmatic appendage 
is hollow and inflated like a bladder. Venenosum from Venum a 
poison^ — the plant is poisonous. 

Habitat. — W. Africa, India, Brazil, Calabar. 

J^ris used—Tht ripe seeds or bean — physostigmatis seraina, 
Calabar bean, BR 

Characters* — A woody creeper ; seeds thick, oblong and reniform : 
twta hard, granular and of chocolate brown colour; hilum broad ana 
black with a groove along the whole length of the convex edge ; 
cotykdon!> two, firm, white, starchy and convex ; without any odour 
and of a bean- like taste. Dose, dry powder i to 4grs. The ripe seeds 
conisin in the integument physostigmine to which alkaloid its poisonous 
properties are due. 

Constituents* — Calabar bean contains physostigmine or eserine ; 
Hid calabarinc or cseridmc ; Phytostcrin, starch 48 p» c, proteids 23 
p^C, mucilage, fat and ash 3 p.c. 

Physostigmine or eserinc, 

U is obtained from the alcoholic extract of the seeds 
by treating it with an alkali and dissolving the alkaloid in ether. 
Colourless or pinkish rectangular crystals slightly soluble in water, freely 
soluble in alcohol, ether, chloroform and dilute acids. The solutioa 
rapidly becomes red by exposure to air and light* Dose, j^j^ to ^ of 
a gr, Physusti^mmx H^drobromidum. Physostiminc Hydrobromide, 
Eserine Hydrobromaie — an hygroscopic white amorphous po%vder, 
ver>* soluble in water. Dose, ^^ to i*d gr. 

Physo^tigminte Salicylas Physostigmine Salicylate. Colourless 
shining ntedie shaped crystals without odour, of a bitter taste and 
neutral reaclion, soluble in water (i in 150) in alcohol (1 in it) be- 
coming red on exposure to air* Dosei ^ to ^ gr. Solution 5 p.c. is 



2^Z PHYSOSTIGMA VBNENOSUM. 

used as Injectio Physostigminae Salicylas Hypodermica (i in loo). 
Dose 1 to 6 minims. Physostigminae Sulphas B. P. Physostiffmine 
sulphate or Eserine sulphate, a deliquescent amorphous powder or 
yellow-whitish minute crystals, becoming red by exposure to air and 
Mght, of bitter taste, very soluble in water, soluble in alcohol. Dose, 
bV ^o «V o^* S**- Used as Gutter Physostigmina (2 grs. to i ounce). 
Guttce Physostigmtnas cum Cocaina — i gr. of sulphate of physostig- 
inine, S grs. cocaine Hydrochloras to water one ounce. Lamelhat 
Physostigminae B. P. Discs of Physostigmine, physostigmine sulphate 
tcAjit &' ^° ^^^^* injectio physostigminoR sulphatis Hypodermica — 4 grs. 
to I ounce. Dose, i to 4 discs. 

Calabarine or Eseridine — Eseridina — An alkaloid antagonistic to 
physostigmine and allied to strychnine in its action. Exists ready for- 
med in Calabar bean ; also obtained from the mother liquor by pre- 
cipitation with subacetate of lead and ammonia. It is a white crystalline 
powder, sparingly soluble in water and ether, soluble in dilute 
acids. Dose, 3,^ to ^ of a gr. 

Phyiosterin, — Obtained by exhausting beans with petroleum ether. 
Resembles cholesterine. Has \ the toxic action of physostigmine, has 
a tetanic action on the spinal cord and produces abundant mucous 
discharges from the intestines 

Preparations. — Of Calabar bean. Extractum physostigmatis, B.P, 
Extract of Calabar bean, an alcoholic extract, containing milk sugar 75 

gc. Dose, i to 1 gr. given in tetanus. Tinctura physostigmatis 5 p.c. 
ose, 5 to 15 ms. 

Physiological action, — Physostigma is a powerful nervine sedative, 
myotic, paralyzant of the spmal cord, antiseptic, emetic, purgative 
and diaphoretic. In large doses poisonous. It produces complete 
paralysis with abolition of reflex sensibilities, but does not affect the 
brain. In medicinal doses it stimulates the secretions of the skin, the 
lachrymal and salivary glands, the stomach and intestines, setting 
tip nausea, vomiting, purging, increased intestinal peristalsis, saliva- 
tion and diaphoresis. It is eliminated in the urine. It raises the arterial 
tension and increases the heart beats. Its action on the muscles of 
respiration is at first to cause spasm settmg up dyspnoea followed by 
paralysis of respiration. It also causes carbonic acid narcosis, and death. 
The alkaloids physostigmine and calabarine have different actions. 
They produce contradictory results. Physostigmine paralyses the 
nerve centres and stimulates the muscular fibres, calabarine causes 
convulsions and is allied in action to strychnine. Physostigmine acts 
on the cord like gelsimium, but is antagonistic to strychnine and 
picrotoxine ; Calabar acts on the cord like strychnine and picrotoxin. 

Therapeutics. — The preparations of physostigma and its alkaloid 
physostigmine, applied locally to the eyes, contract the pupils and are 
antagonistic to atropine. The extract of physostigma may be given 
by the mouth, anus or subcutaneouslv in tetanus, and the dose should be 
repeated and increased every hour till paralysis short of arrest of breath- 
ing is produced. In chorea it may be ^iven in small doses. In para- 
lysis it arrests muscular wasting, and improves muscular power. In 



PlSCinU ER\THRINA. 



113 



obstinate constipation it is sometimes given combined with uux 

vomica and belladonna. Locally it is applied to neuralgic and rheumatic 

painful part<». Physostigmine should be used with great care and should 

be at once stopped if paralysis sets in. It contracts the pupils and is 

am^gonistic to atropine, and hence used in eye diseases to diminish 

reflex excitability. Physostigmine is given in large doses gr. ^ to J 

I ijouth, rectum or subcutaueously in tetanus, chorea and tonic 

t US. In small doses it is of benefit in locomotor ataxia, 

V riicrs' cfjrnpand progressive paralysis of the insane and paraplegia 

! ; to myelitis^ ; often given in profuse sweating in phthisis. 

In. mute or salicylate of eserine is preferable to the sulphate 

;i,;iodcrmic purposes. It is also locally applied in affections of the 

eye as glaucoma, in scrofulous ulcers of the cornea, in presbyopia and 

in iritis, Eserine drops (^ to 2 grs. of physostigmine sulphate 

to an ounce of water) cause contraction of the pupils and are 

antagonistic to atropine. Eserine salicylate is a spinal depressant, 

antlteunicand myotic, used hypodermically in tetanus, chorea, atonic 

convulsions. In South Africa calabar bean is used as an ordeal for 

witches. Taken internally, if vomiting occurs it establishes Innocence 

[fit the accused. 
^ Piacldla Erythrina. The fish catching coral tree, 
Pi%cidia. — Ptscis a fish — its effect on fish being intoxicating, 
HabttaL — West Indies, chiefly growing in arid districts on the 
mountains of the Antilles. Most common in Jamaica, 
Part tnrd, — The root bark, 
CA/imc/icr.— The bark is tough and fibrous, in pieces of two to four 
inches in length. Irom one to two inches wide and about one-eighth of 
[»n inch in thickness. The outer surface is dark grey or brown 
frequently studded with flattened protuberances of a lighter colour 
than the surrounding bark ; central portion much lighter coloured^ 
and when wet or freshly broken of a peculiar blue green colour ; its 
inner surlacc is dark brown and very fibrous ; odour narcotic, strong, 
iblc and opium like. When chewed it produces a burning 
II in the mouth and pharynx. Dose oi the powder, 20 to 

CQmiihienh,—Th^ active principle Piscidin, a yellowish resisoid 
amorphous powder. 

ihon, — Extractum Piscidrae liquid um, fluid extract of 
Pii- I miscibie with water. Dose, 20 to 120 ms. Extractum 

Pisciui^, ««n alcoholic extract. Dose, 2 to 5 grs. 

Physiologtcal actions. — ^Narcotic, general sedative, anodyne and 
hypnotic, similar in many properties to opium, but free from its 
objectionable after-effects, viz., constipation, disturbance of the secretory 
organs, headache and other nervous symptoms ; also free from the 
liability to the formaiion of a habit. It differs from opium in that it 
dilates the pupils ; as an analgesic and anodyne it is inferior to opium, 
yet iu hypnotic action is more decisive ; as a narcotic it relaxes the 




224 POINCIANA PULCHBRRIMA. 

muscles, produces inco-ordination of movements, lowers the sensibility, 
stimulates the vasomotor centre and thus increases the arterial tension 
and also the action of the heart. Its action on the spinal cord is to 
stimulate the cord with lowering of its reflexes. It increases the 
secretion of the skin and salivary glands. 

Therapeutics. — It is given as nervine sedative in delirium tremens, 
sleeplessness, also in painful and neuralgic affections, whooping cough, 
facial neuralgia, headache, and sciatica. In uterine diseases such 
as dysmenorrhoea and uterine displacements it is given to relieve 
pain. It is a good soporific for those who are addicted to alcoholic 
drinks. It is also given in bronchitis, phithisis and asthma to allay 
irritative cough. Locally it allays toothache. 

Poindana Paloherrima, Oasalpinia Puloharrima. 

Habitat. — India, Ceylon. 

Paris used.^^The bark, leaves, and flowers. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Gula-mohara. Beng.*— Gul-i-turaha. Can. — 
Konjige. Eng. — Small gold mohar. Hind.— Gul-i-turah, Krishna 
Chura. Mar. — Shankeshwar Shankeshwar. Tam. — Mail, Kannai, Komri. 
Guz. — Gulmohor, 

Characters, — A beautiful tree; leaves doubly pinnate ; leaflets oblong 
oval and emarginate, surface smooth; flowers of an agreeable odour in 
loose spikes at the extremity of the branches, of a beautiful orange or 
deep red colour, or yellow with some spots of green. Bark ash* coloured, 
smooth, and studded with elliptical corky wart-like growths. 
Internally pinkish; taste nauseous and very astringent. 

Preparations. — Infusion of bark (i in lo). Dose, 2 to 8 drs. and 
paste of leaves. 

Actions and uses. — Antispasmodic, uterine sedative and laxative, 
given in amenorrhoea, dysmenorrhea, colic, tympanitis, &c. 

Remarks. — Allied species — Poinciana Regia or Royal Poinciana, 
yields a kind of gum in irregular granular warty tears ; the colour is 
yellowish or reddish brown. With water it forms a thick opaque 
mucilage. It contains a large quantity of oxalate of lime. 

Pon^amla Glabra. 

Habitat. — Near the coast of India. 

Parts used. — The leaves, root bark and leaves pod, seeds and oil 
(Pongamia oil). 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Dahara-karanj. Burm. — Tha-wen, Pimizu. 
Can. — Hougekanuga. Cing. — ^MoguS-karanda. Duk. — Karanj. £ng.^ 
Karunj oil, Houge oil. Guz. — Karanj. Hind. — Kira-m&la, sukh chen, 
Karanj. Mar. — Karanj. Malay. — Punnam, Unna. Panj.— Shook-chain* 
Sans. — Naktamalaka. Tam. — Pungam. Tel.- Kaggera, Kr&nusa, 
Nakta m&la. — Garland of the night» The pods are worn round the 
neck in whooping cough. 



{•SOltALIA CORYUFOtJA. 



tts 



Sukh-cttcu— sukh, happiness, and chen, rest to thesenseSi meaning 
■fi)rdiDg perfect satisfaction to the senses. The beautiful drooping 
branches, shining green leaves and rose-coloured fiowcrs give happiness 
to the scn^e of sight. 

Ckar/tcUrs, — Leaves large and pintiatc ; leaflets opposite 2 to 3 
pairs, o\^lf pointed, smooth and shining. The taste is acrid and bitterish. 
Bark externally i^mooth, of an ash or yellowish green colour, and here 
and there marked with tubercles or scars» Internally green or greyish 
white, very lough and fibrous. Odour very disagreeable and 
heating. Taste bitter and pungent. SeeJs larger than the kernels of the 
alraond, of a brownish red colour, raihtjr kidney shaped and compressed. 
Testa wrinkled, very thin and papery ; cotyledons oily and yellow, 
ciduur and lasle resembling those of the bark. 

Conshtiufifs. — The see<ls contain a bitter and pale sherry coloured 
oil 27 p, c, known as Pongamia oil or Honge oil The bark 
coDtains a bitter alkaloid, resin, mucilage, sugar but no tannin. 

Ptfparatfon.—lnhisinn of leaves (i in 10). Doscp 2 to 6 dra. 
coction of the root (i in 20). Dose, 2 to 8 drs. 

Actions anti uses. — Theoil is stimulant, parasiticide and non-irritant; 
it does not stain the skin ; used in scabies, herpes, porrigo capitis* 
piyriasts versicolor, psoriasis and other skin affections ; generally used 
combined tvith an equal ^^uantity of lemon juice ; also used as an 
cmbriication in rheumatism. The leaves ar^; stimulant^ carminative 
and alterative and are used in dyspepsia, diarrhoea, flatulency, also in 
leprosy, epilepsy and abdominal enlargements. The juice of the root is 
demulcent and cooling, and used in gonorrhoea and to clean foul ulcers 
and fistulous openings. 

Psoralla Corylifolia. Trtfolium Uniflorum, 
Habitat, — Himalaya, Ceylon. 
f\irt used. — The seeds. 

Fernacuhr. — ^ Beng.— Uakucha, Lat-a-Kastury, Guz.^-Btivachi. 
Duk* — Bukchi, Bavanchiyan. Hmd.— Bavanchiyan. MalcaL — KarkaL 
Mar, — Bavachva. Sans. — V^akuchi Somaraja Kushta^Nasini, Lala 
Kasturtka. Tarn. — Kurpokarbhi. Tel. — Bapunga, Bavaachi, Kak 
ginja. 

Vhararttrs, — Seeds, kidney-shaped, flat, oblong, rough, ;\nd of a 
dark brown colour; hilnm situated at thu Umvlt endot its concave margin, 
somewhat bitid. At its upper end there is a small pointed projection, 
which i» the remainder of the style. In some seeds the five partite 
caJyx is found adherent ; surface highly reticulated, unctuous to the 
lotich ; dermis oily and sticky, easily separable from the testa ; odour 
faintly aromatic and agreeable, resembling that <if Bael fruit and elemi; 
taste aromatic, peadike, pungent and bitter ; testa of a brown colour 
and rather horny ; cotyledon of a yellow colour and dry, 

Constttuatts^^A colouiless oil^ extractive matter, 13-5 p.c' 
albumen. ?5ue.*f : ash 7' pc. containing a trace of manganese. 



226 



PlIS 



Prc/>aratirms. — Tincture (i in 20), Dose, ^ to 2 dr** Exlr;tcJ — 
oleo resinous ethereal extract. Medicated oil — Oleatc ofBavancKi — 
obtained from the seeds by soaking them for z few hours iit linseed 
oil or karanj teK 

Actions and uses. — Seeds are alterative, nervine tonic^ hHative^ 
aphrodisiac and stimulant ; given in leprosy and chronic skin 
A paste of them is applied externally to leucodcrmal patches 
eruptions of the skin. The powder is given internally with small 
doses of arsenic in leucoderma and leprosy with good results* The 
medicated oil is rubbed over the patches. The oTeo-resinous exinKt 
is more efficacious as an application than any other preparations, In 
hopeful cases» after a few days the affected patch becomes studded with 
red points, which gradually spread and coalesce ; sometimes pimples 
and small vesicles appear, which dry up and leave dark spots behicii. 
The discoloration gradually disappears and a normal colour of the skia 
lakes its place. 

Pterocarpus Hapsupiuni B.P., P* Indicus. 

///7AiV<?/.— East Indies, Ceylon^ Bengal, W. Peninsula. 

Pari Hstd, — The juice obtained from iacistons in Uie trunk 
and evaporated to dryness — Kino, B. P. 

Pterocarpus — Pteron, a wing, and carpos* a fruit* The fruits or 
legumes are winged. Marsupium— a pouch, bag, or purse. The fnitl 
is of the shape of a purse or a bag. 

I'trmuular, — Arab* — Dammul, Akhvayen-e-hindi. Bcng, — Pita 
sala. Can. — Bibla Honne. Cing, — Gammalu. Duk. — Bijesara, Ene. ^ 
Indian kino, Malabar kino. Hind. — Hira-dokhi, Ranga barota 
Malyai* — Vennap-pasha. Mar. — Asan. Pers.— Khuneseyi /. 
c^hindi. Tarn. — Knnda Miragu, Tel. — Gandim ruyam. 

Characters, — A tall tree — the juice is met with in bniLlc^ 
small, dark coloured or dried-blood-like augular fracments. or piecci^i orl 
thin transparent ruby red coloured slices, laste swcer i" 

astringent, and no odour ; when chewed it tinges the *aliva hi i 

and adheres to the teeth. It is collected in little cups made witl|J 
leaves, and is thus in the form of concavo-convex cakes. It is slightlyi 
soluble in %vater, soluble in alcohol and in boiling ipv^ater (80 p* c.)» In 
fluid state it resembles black currant jelly. Dose, 5 to 20 grt. 

Constituents. — Kino-tannic acid, 75 px,, pyrocatechiD (catechol), 
a crystalline neutral substance kinoin, kino red gunip pectm 
ash 1-5 px. 

KincMannic acid is similar to catechuic acid, found always mtxt 
with colouring matter and pcLtin. h gives a greenish prccipilaie irilJl*^ 
persalts of iron. 

Py roc at echin— Treat kino or Uie aqueous soluL* '"' i| 

ether. It is soluble in water, ether. Kiooin, Boil,. z 

hydrochloric acid, and agitate the i>olution with ether* Wlat^ o^y^i^ib 
sligluly ^ulublc in ctbcij and cold water. 



fTKROCARPUS SANTALrXUS. 227 

Preparations, — Tinclura kino, B* P, Tincture of kino (l Ixi lo}. 
ase, \ to I fld. dr» Pulvis kino corapositus B. P. compound powder 
of kino (opium 5, kino 75, cinnamon bark 20), contains 'opium 5 p.c. 
Dose, 5 to 20grs Infusion kino (i to 40). Dose, J to 1 oz» 

Actions and uses. — Astringenti tonic and haemoaatic, less power- 
ful than lanntn ; used in chronic diarrhcea, dysentery, menorrhagia^ 
pyrosis also in leucorrhcea and sore throat. Chiefly used for astringent 
gargles .tnd as an ingredient in diarrhoea mixtures. Catechin acts only 
oti the lower boweli. 



Ptorooarpus Santalinus, B. P. 

//if^i/<r/,— Madras, Western Peninsula, Ceylon, 

I^tris used. — The heart-wood— Plerocarpi lignum, D. P, Red 
sjinders wood, Ked sandai wood, 

I'cnuictdtir. — Arab, — Sundui» Atamar. Beng. — Kakto chona- 
don. Duk. — Lil^handan, Tambara chandana* Eng — Ked dye wood, 
Red vandal, Ruby or red sanders wood. Gur. — Rataujali, Lai chandan. 
Hind*— -Ragata chandana. Bunn, — Nasaphia. Can. — Kempu gaudha- 
ehekke« MaleaeL — Uruttah-Chandanam. Mar.— Timbara chandana, 
Rmanjali. Pers, — ^Sandulsurkh, Bukura, Sans. — Agaru-gandhaka- 
Ashtaica, Tam. — Shen-shandanam. TeL — Rakta. Gatidham, 

Rakta chandan, Rakla^ blood-tike colour. Chandan, sandal-wood. 
The colour of the wood is like that of blood. 

Ckaracterx. — Wood dark red with black streaks, heavy, sinking in 
water, taUe slightly astringent, smell somewhat aromatic. The cells of 
ihc parenchyma contain large crystals of oxolate of lime. The colour- 
mg matter is soluble in alcohol, ether and alkaline solutions, and gives 
a red colour. Docs not give any red colour to water. 

OjHStituents. — Santalin, Santal, Pterocarpin, Homopterocarpin, 
SantjJinc or Santalic acid. To obtain it precipitate the alcoholic 
»otiilkH) with acetate of lead, wash the precipitate, decompose it 
with sulphuretted hydrogen and evaporate. Red crystalline needles 
Of rc&inoid cuhjurtng matter without any odour or taste. Insoluble in 
water and soluble in alcohol. Pterocarpine and Homopterocarptne 
are alliai to cuumarin* 

/ /«.— Infusion (i in ro)* Dose, i 02. to 2 oafs. Tinctura 

Lavaih iiiposita, B. P. 

Actions find uses. — Refrigerant and astringent, A paste of the 
powder is used as a cooling application to the head, in headache and to 
liifitoied and swollen limbs. As an astringent it is used in combination 
with other astringent medicines in dysentery, diarrhcea &c. Its chief 
ii^e, However, is as a colouring agent in Pharmacy. 

Retnarks. — There are 3 kindsof sandal wood— white (shri khanda), 
ydJow (pita chandana) and red (rakta chandana). The white and 
yellow varieties arc one and the same wood of sautalium albumi only 
dtBcf iug iti colour. 



22^ 



i VTISUS SCOIMWILS. 




Pueraria Tuberosa* 
HahitaL — Western Himalaya^ Weilerii Penimula, Oi 
Part used. — Tubers. 

Vernacnian — Hind. — Sural, Siali, Pabarea, — Dcbrelara. Saiu.-^ 
Shurava, Tel, — D^ri, Gumodi, 

Characters. — Tubers pyriform or spindle shaped; sUc varying from 
a small pear to a turnip. They arc composed of woody layers mlh a 
large quantity of cellular tissue* Externally brown and scurfy. In* 
teruaily white and spongy. Taste acrid, bitter and inuciUginou&. 

Coftshtneuts. — A principle allied to luulio, ash l8 p*c., a saccharine 
matter^ a bitter principlCi an easily oxidizable resiu and a resin add. 

Actions and uses, — The root is acrid, used as a cataplasm to reduce 
swellings of joints. 

Cytisas Scoparius, B* P. 

Habitat. — Europe, W, Asia. 

Part used. — The fresh and dried tops — Scoparii Cacumina. Bn 
tups, B. P. 

Scoparius from scopse, twigs or *• diooqi. i nt^ tup:>are com! 
of twigs like a broom. 

Characters.— Common garden shrub ; leaves, small and d< 
Flowers, golden yellow. Tops in thin flexible branched twigs 
dark green colon r^ usually free from leaves, of a pecuhar odour and 
disagreeable bitter taste. Dose of the tops, lo to 30 grs, 

Constitueuts. — Sparteine ; a neutral cryslallizable principle, i»e^pa- 
rin, a volatile oil^ tannin, fat, wax, sugar and ash 5 to 10 p,c. " ne 

— sparteina, a volatile liquid alkaloid. To obtain it dUltl u \*i 

branches or exhaust the platit with vinegar, add liquid soda and ilimL 
It is a colourless, viscid oily liquid, heavier than and insoluble in water, 
becoming brown on exposure to the air, aniline odour, taste bitter, 
soluble in alcohol, ether, chloroform. It contains no oxygen, possesses 
basic qualities, and is very poisonous, Oxysparteina* Ojiyspancinc, — 
an oxidation product of sparteine, occurs in white granular crystals, 
easily soluble in water, alcohol, ether, chloroform and strong alkaline 
solutions* Dose, J to i^ gr. Oxyspartcin^ hydrochloridum, oxy- 
sparteine hydrochloride — occurs in transparent crystal', freely soluble 
in water ; may be given hypodermically. Dose, J to 1 J gr, S ' .^ 
Sulphas, sparteine sulphate. To obtain it neutralize i»purieint i) 

with sulphuric acid and crystalli/c. Colourless or prisnuiic rhombic 
crystals or powder of saline bitter ta?te ; it absorbs moisture on exposure 
lo the air. It is soluble in water, 3 m 2, and in used as a 

solution 5 p. c, also hypodermically or as lame Is ^ uls. Dose, 

tto t gr. Injectio Sparteines Hypodermica contains 1 gr. in 6 ma. 
ose, 2 to 6 ms. 

Scoparin — a glucoside. To prepare it concentrate into jelly ibe 
decoction of the plant, express and purify. It occurs in pale yellow 
and amorphous masses without any taste or odour. 



ffAHTirinx>irA. 



22q 



Prefnraik'n. — Of broom tops. Iiifusum Scoparii, B, P. (i in lo). 
!i I to 2 fld. OKs. Decoctum Scoparii (r in 20). Dose, 2 to 4 oz. 



I 



\ 



drs. Extractum Scopari 
J 10 I dr. Hypodermic 



Succus Scopirii. B. P. Dose, 1 to 2 fld 
fluidum^ fluid extract of scoparius. Dose, 
Tablets \ g''- ^f sparteine in each. 

Pkysiufngicdl tictinn, — Broom tops. In small doses, diuretic and 
narcotic. In large doses emetic and cathartic, paralyzing motor and 
rcspiiatorv centres. Sparteine sulphate, the salt, mostly used 
medicinally. Is similar in action to conine and digitalis. It paralyzes 
the end or((ans of motor nerves, and vagi, and the respiratory centre in 
ihe oiedulla* In small doses, it is a cardiac toaic, strengthening the 
heart beats and pulse. It increases the secretion of the skin and 
kidneys, giving rise to diaphoresis and diuresis. The respiration is 
quickened at 6rst, but soon becomes slo^v and laborious, and there is 
a feeling of general warmth over the body. Under its use the feeling 
of distress and dyspn<ea is relieved. Given in Urge doses, it causes 
palpitation of the heart, a sense of tightness about the chest, with 
mu^uUr trembling and death by asphyxia, or from depression of the 
respiratory centres, 

T%9rap€uUcs.—\vi small doses as a mild narcotic, given in asthma, 
nalpitatioHp &c. Its use is contraindtcated in acute renal affections. 
Sparteine and its salts are given in angina pectoris, weak heart, 
dropsy, for the relief of 'dyspnoea, priccordral pain, palpitation and 
It4 action is not cumulative like that of digitalis. It is equal 
of digiialib or convatlarta, but its e(Tects are more lasting. In 
mitral regurgitation and in mitral stenosis with small irregular pulse, 
and in aortic regurgitation it quiets the heart. In exophthalmic 
Itre and in asthma it gives marked relief. Externally applied it 
urcrs the temperature, and hence used in erysipelas. 

Satbania Grandiflora, A^ti Grandiflorar 
Hahititi,--\W, Peninsula, India. 
Pant tisfii^ — The bark and flowers. 

fVrMrtcf^/rr/.— Reng.— Bak, Can. — Agashi. Guz, — Agaslhia. 
Hind. — Basna. Mar. — Agasta. — ^Sans* — Agasti, VranAri, Koka 
Sthuta pushpa, Tel — Avisi. Tani. — Agnth. 

Sthulapushpa— Large flowered. Vranari— Enemy of sores. 

Characters, — Leaves pinnate, oblortg, ovate, of acrid and astring- 
cot tas te. Flowers papilionaceous, white or x^^^ large and fleshy, calyx, 
>cd, racemes axillary. Taste mucilaginous and bitter, Legumes 
us, very long and contracted htlween the seeds. Bark 
iftd lor lly — externally greyi>h brown. In the fissures 

tiamerous ^ ' r^ of a red colour and becoming black on exposure 

to the air are seen. The outer portion of the bark contains the same 
kmd of gunt« but softer. 

C^mstiiuenh — Tannin and gum, 

/V^/iv/ra/wwjF.— Thcjuiceof theroci I to 2 drs.; paste of the root 
locally. 




230 TAMARINDUS IXDICA. 

Actions aud uses. — The root is expectorant. The bark astringent 
bitter tonic. The juice of leaves and flowers is blown up the nostrils 
in nasal catarrh and headache with relief. The juice of the root is 
given with honey in catarrh. A paste of the root with the stramonium 
root is applied to painful swellings. 

Sesbania Agypiiaoa, Aschynomene Sesban, Doliohos Satseban. 

Habitat — India. 

Parts used, — ^The bark and seeds. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Hab-el-fakd. Beng. — Jayante. Can. — Kariji- 
nange. Hind. — Jet, Rasin. Mar. — Shevari. Pers. — Sishiban. Sans.--- 
Jaya, Jayanti, Nadeyi, Vaija Yanta. Tam. — Champai. Tel. — Somanri. 
Jaya — Victorious ; Jayanti— daughter of Indra. ^fadeyi — River-bom. 

Characters, — Leaves abruptly pinnate, 3 times longer than broad. 
Leaflets 10 to 15 pairs. Legume tomentose, linear, slender, and much 
contracted between the seeds. Seeds oblong, kidney-shaped and smooth, 
taste bland, odour peculiar. It is difficult to powder. Dose of the 
seeds, 10 to 2ogrs. 

Constituents. — The seeds contain a fixed oil, an odorous body, 
resin, sugar, an organic acid, gum, proteids and ash 5 p.c. 

Actions and uses, — ^The seeds and the juice of the bark are 
astringent and given in diarrhoea. The leaves are used as a poultice 
to promote suppuration. The powdered seeds are applied to relieve 
the pain of scorpion bites. 

Tamarindas Indica B.P. T. oflSoinalis. 

Habitat. — India, cultivated throughout the tropics. East and West 
Indies. 

Parts used. — The leaves, seeds, and the fruit freed from the brittle 
outer part of the pericarp and preserved with sugar — Tamarindus, 
Tamarinds, B. P. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Tamar-hindi, Humara Sahara. Beng. — 
Tentula, Tetai, Tintri Amali. Burm. — Magye. Can. — Hunase. Cing. — 
Mahasi, Ambala. Eng. — ^Tamarind, Indian dates. Guz. — Amali, 
Kachika. Duk., Hind. — Ambli, Imli. Mah.— Chinchoka. Malay. — 
Neghka, Pers. — Ambala. Sans. — Amalika, Tintidi. Tam. — Pulic, 
Puliyam. Tel. — Chinta pundoo. 

Tamar-hindi — Indian date. Tamarind is derived from Tamar, a 
date, and Ind, Indian. It was supposed to be a product of an Indian 
palm-tree. 

Characters. — A large tree, leaves pinnate, linear oblong, 
obtuse, and of a dark green colour, leaflets linear, very short, petioled 
and oblique at both ends. Fruit a pendulous legume, from 5 or 
6 inches long, linear-oblong, slightly compressed, curved or nearly 
straight, as thick as the middle finger, and supported by a woody stalk. 
Outer shell, or epicarp thin and hard, brittle and of a cinnamon 



TEPHROSIA PURPURKA, 



231 



Dlour, containing withiit the shell the acid and juicy pulp of a 
irk, red or brownish dark colour. It is traversed by stroriR woody 
L'ing fibreSi which^ starting from the stalk, extend along the edges 
jdes. One of them extends along the concave edge; and two 
Rcfs on either side of the convex edge ; between these are 2, 3 
4 slender fibres all running towards the apex and throwing out fila- 
Is. Diffused in water^ the pulp forms a glutinous turbid liquid, 
ring m the presence of pectin. Seeds 10 or 12, enclosed in a tough 
Bcrnbranous cell, flattened, of an irregular outline, obtusely furrow- 
I, roundish or obovale and exalbuminous. Surface glabrous, shining, 
adofftd»rk brown colour, having on both faces scars conforming 
the outline of the cells, bears of a dark colour and marked 
ith tfansversc parallel ribs. Cotyledon ivory white and hard, 
l>mctimts a peculiar exudation of oxalate of lime flows from 
be Irec in a liquid form and on drying forms white crystalhne masses. 
Varieties, (i) These are ; West Indian, brown or red j (2) E, Indian, 
llack ; (j) Egyptian — flat round cakes. 

The Indian variety forms a firm black sticky mass. The pulp is 
Itxcd with seeds, fibres and pieces of shell. It is usually salted. Dose 
' the palp, 2 to 4 drams j of the seeds, to to 30 grs, 

Comtilurnti^ — The pulp contains tartaric 5 p.c, citric^ 4 p. c, 
Salic and acetic acids, bitartrate of potassium, sugar, gum and pectin, 
he seeds' testa contains tannin, a fixed oil, and insoluble matter* 

I\rMratiofis, — Syrup. Dose, i to 2 drs- Confectio sennas. Dose, 
1 to 2 ars. 

Aciiotn and uxes, — Pulp — antiscorbutic, refrigerant and laxative ; 
used in fever to quench thirst, in sunstroke and in bilious vomiting. As an 
aperient, it is given in habitual constipation. The pulp and leaves 
made hot are applied locally to inflammatory swellings. A gargle of it 
is given in aphthous sores, and for the relief of sore throat. The 
se^s are given in dysentery. The ash obtained from the suber is 
used as an alkaline medicine in acidity of urine and in gonorrhcBa, 

Tephfosia Purpurea, T. Lancifolia, Galena Purpurea. 

liabitnt — Tropical countries. 

fhirU useti—The plant. 

VrruncHhf — Beng, — Ban nlla. Duk. — Jangli Kulthi, Hunnai* 

tng. — Purple Goat's Hue, Guic. — Surpankho, Gada ka knn. IHnd. — 

arphunkd. Mar.^Unhali Sirpakhii. Malyal* — Koliml. Sans. — 
|[hafapunkkha, Punkhi. Tarn. — Kalluk-kay velai* Tel— Bonta 
/enipali* Surpunkh. 

SuTpunkha Sur, an arrow, and pankha-^the pinion or wing — ^the 
iciton of an arrow* The pinnate leaf of the plant is like the wing of 
arrow. 

Characters. — Root, hard, woody and as thick as a finger, colour 

Jirty white« smell aromatic, taste slightly bitter, stem slender, angular, 

I trowed and hairy ;ci»l»>ur greyish brown, leaves pinnate, in 5 to 7 pairs, 



232 TRACHYLOBUIM HORNEMANNIAXUM. 

leaflets oblong, obovate, shortly pe*ioled and hairy, especially on their 
under surface ; veins running parallel to one another on each side of 
the midrib. Each fresh leaf when torn asunder breaking off with a 
lower portion pointing at two ends, leaving the g«p in the form of 
letter V. This portion resembles horse's ears when pricked, and hence 
called Gada ka-kan. Flowers, small and purple ; pods compressed 
and curved. Each pod 5 or 6 seeded, smell like that of senna, taste 
bitterish. 

Constituents, — The extract contains chlorophylf, brown resin, a 
trace of wax, a crystalline principle, allied to quercitrin, gum, a trace 
of albumen and colouring matter, ash 6 p. c. containing a trace of 
manganese. 

Preparations. — Decoction and infusion (i in 10). Dose, i to 4 drs. 

Actions and uses, — Alterative, tonic, and diuretic ; used in cough 
derangements of the liver, spleen and kidneys As a diuretic it is given 
with black pepper in gonorrhoea ; in bleeding piles it is administered 
with cannabis Indica leaves. An infusion of it is given in fevers. The 
juice of the leaves is used over swollen hands and feet and also over 
swelling or puffiness of the face. Decoction is given in dyspepsia and 
tympanitis. 

Traohylobiam Hornemannianam. 

Habitat, — Africa. 

Parts used. — The gum resin. 

Vernacular. — Sandarus. 

Characters. — ^The resin is met with in yellowish brown masses, 
surface wrinkled, of a chonchoidal fracture and glossy, and without 
odour or taste, soluble in alcohol and oil of turpentine. Dose, 20 to 
40 grs. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent, anthelmintic, diuretic, demulcent 
and emmenagogue. With honey it is applied by the natives to opacities 
of cornea ; and with olive oil dropped into the ear, in earache ; an 
ointment is applied to promote the healingof wounds and to ringworm. 
It is also given to stop haemoptysis. Other uses are similar to those of 
copaiba but milder. 

Trigonella FcBnum Grsecam. 

Habitat, — Cashmere, Punjab, widely cultivated. 

Part used. — The seeds and herb. 

Vernacular. — Eng. Fenugreek. Arab« — Halbah Shimlet. 
Beng., Hind , Guz., Duk. — Methi. Burm. — Penan-ta-zi. Can.- Ment- 
hya, Mente. Cing. — Ulawa. Malyal. — Ulava. Pers.— Shembalita. 
Sans. — M^thi. Tam. — Vendayam. Tel. — Mentula. 

Characters.— Fo6^ sickle shaped, 2 or 3 inches long, flattened and 
ending in a point ; seeds rhomboid, semi-transparent, somewhat 
compressed and of a greenish yellow or 3'ellowish brown colour, hilunr. 



TRrGOKBT.I A rvCATA. 



^y^ 



l\v. Slur per edge, channel extending along the middle of the 
Skced and dividiDg it into two irregular biddies surface of the testa 
tubercular ; lasie bitter, odour aromatic. 

Omshtucnts^ — The cells of the testa contain tannin. The cotyle- 
dons contain a yellow colouring matter, but no sugjar ; seeds contain a 
fcetid bitter, fatty oil 6 p.c.^ also resin and mucilage 28 p*c , albumin 22 
p,c., two alkaloids — choline (a base found in animal secretions), and 
trigonelline. Trigonelline occurs in colourless prisms^ possessing a 
weak valine taste. It is hygroscopic, easily soluble in water and 
insolubl<5 in ether, chloroform and l>en2ol It is isomeric with 
pyridine^betain. By heating trigonelline with caustic potash pyridine 
distils over. The seeds on incineration leave ash 7 p.c, containing 
phosiphijric acid 25 p.c. 

Pte^ar&tmns, — Compound confection, known diS mclhi modak 
or svalpa methi modak. Dose, 2 to 4 drs. 

Aciions and uses* — Demulcent, tonic and carminative ; given in 
dyspepsia with loss of appetite, rheumatism and to puerperal women 
during confinement. In leucorrhoea the pessaries of methi powder 
are u»ed* 

Trigonella Uncata, Melllotus Officinalis, M. Alba, M. Parviflorus, 

T. Cornlcalata. 

Hnhiiat. — Persia and India. 

Parts used, — Tlie seeds and pods. 

Vernaculars, — Arab. — ^Aklil-ul-Malika, Giah-i-Kaisara. Bomb. — 
IkUl^ul Mulk, Aklula mulka. Beng. — Tairapa Sano Mtklya. Eng. — 
Sweet clo%'es« 

Charactfrs, — Pods, small crescent or sickle-shaped /greyiih yellow 
with a beak slightly curved outwards, an inch in length, grooved on 
both sides, with a central partition divided into two cells, each cell 
containing a single row of seeds — seeds hard, rhomboidal or roundish 
and small, like those of fenugreek, of a yellowish colour. Deeply 
notched on one side and marked with numerous black spots. Odour 
hkc that of fenugreek and taste pea-like. 

Cfmstitiinsis — Coumarin, (anhydride of coumaric acid) the odorous 
principle of mtlilot, 

Coumarin is obtained from T. Unctata» also from Tanka or Tonquin 
beans,— the fruit of Coumaruna odorata. In the wood of asperula 
odorata, anthoxanthum odoratum, &c. It is first digested in strong 
alcohol, evaporated and purified with charcoal. Also prepared synthe- 
ttcalty from salicylol or salicylic aldehyde. It occurs as colourless 
triclinic crystals of an agreeable aromatic odour and a bitter burning 
taste. Insoluble in cold water, soluble in boiling water. 

/V^/7rrf7//>>w,— Infusion. Decoction (1 in 10). Dose, 2 to 4 drs. 

Acttotn and uses. — Alterative and stimulant A poultice of 
the bud^ is applied to disperse swellings and lo alluy local pains- 



234 



URARU LACIOrOIPBS, 



Internally they are givea iu colic, diarrlicea, tlysniennrrh<Ea aind rheu* 
mat ism ; also used in scrofula, syphilis^ &c, 

Coumarin is a narcotic. It stimulates the heail at firsi» ihcn 
causes great depression i a dose of 30 to 60 grains causes great depression, 
vomiting and giddiness. Used to disguise the odour of iodoform* 

Uncafta (Nauclea) Gambler. B. P. 

Habitat, — Singapore, Eastern Archipelago. 

Paris used, — An extract prepared from the leaves and vounc 
shoots. Catechu^ B.P. Syn. — Catechu Pallidium. 

Vtnmcular. — Eng.— The extract. Pale catechu > Terra Japonn-a, 
Indian — Chini Kath. Commerce, — Gambler^ Druggist's Catechu in 
square cakes. 

All the vernacular names of A. Catechu are applied to this*catechu« 

Characters.^y^^t with in cubes, reddish broirn externally. 
Internally pale or cinnamon brown — porous and friable. Cubet 
composed of minute acicular crystals. Taste bitter and astringent at 
first and sweetish after a time. Without any odour. Almost entirely 
soluble in boiling water, 70 p.c. in alcohol. Dose, 5 to i 5 grs. 

Co^i^/iVm^i//^.— Catechu, Tannic or Mimo-Tannic acid ; Catechin 
or Catechuic acid ; Catechuicacid by the action of alkalies splits up into 
japonic and rubinic acids. 

Prepatathm* — Pulvis Catechu compositus^ B. P, Catechu 4, 
Kino 2, Krameria root 2, Cinnamon bark 1, and nutmeg u Dose, 10 
to 40 grs. Trochischus Catechu, B. P*, I gr. in each. Ti net ura Catechu, 
B, P,» (I in 5). Dose» ^ to i fluid dr, 

Artions and uses. — Astringent : similar to those of Acacia Catechu. 
Given in diarrhoeat passive hasmorrhage, &c. 

Remarks* — The plant properly bdong?^ tc* Nat. O. Cinchonaccae. 

Uraria LagopoideSr U. Picta. 

Hahittit. — Nepal, Bengal. 

Pnrts used. — The root bark* 

rernncular, — U. Lagopoides* Beng. — Chakuliii, Hind* — Pithvan* 
Mar. — Duvala, (U, Ptcta) Sankarjata. Guz — Pilavan *. n.ihra, Prism* 
parni, Rana Giinju. Sans. — Pris-niparanl* Atiguha- 

Prisnia parni — Spotted leaf. Atiguha — great myblcry. Rjinti 
ganjA. Wild cannabis* — The spikes and tweeds resemble cannahU. 

Ch€iracten\ — Plant from 3 to 4 feet high, voung parts clothed 
generally witli minute hooked hairs. Leaves simple^ oblong and o\ite; 
upper ones or the leaflets compound linear and lanceolate ; flowers in 
racemes, terminal^ very long and spike-like, legumes small, often pale, 
and of a purple or reddish colour ; t^eed^ shining, and of a dull grey 
colour, thus resembling Cannal>i& seeds. 



MORIXGA PTERYGOSPFRMA. 



»35 



Prcparatiun. — Compound decoction (i in lo). Do5e, i to 2 
Id, oz, 

Actmtis and uses. — Alterative, tonic and astringent ; given in 
fevers, catarrh of the air passages and in general debih'ty. Rttn»4gAnjA is 
ufed as an antidote to the poison ot Phursa Snake (Echis Carinata). 

Morlngacaie — The Shengata or Bennut family. 

Gtticmi characters. — Trees large, leaves, bi-pinnate or tri-pinnaie, 
Flo\ver& white, irregular ; capsules* pod-shaped, three- valved. Seeds 
winged, numerous, without albumen. 

Htihitat — Arabia, East Indies. 

/¥o/<»r/i«^SIightly aromatic and stimulant. 

Morlnga Ptarygoaperma. Guilandina Moringa* Hyperaiithera 

Moringa. 
Habitat.— Xvi^vk^ 

Parts tis^d^ — The bark, root, fruit*, seeds and gum, 
I'tmaat/ar, — Arab. — Habulhau. Bcng.— Sohanjana. Bomb.^ 
Sekta, Segat. Rurm* — Da-tha Jwon. Can. — Nugge-gida. Cing. — 
Sanmurungay. Duk. — Mungey. Eng,— The Horse-radish tree. Guz — 
Saragavo. Sekato. Hind*^ — Shajanah, Senpva. Mar. — Soigut, Bododi, 
Malav. — Murinna. Pers. — Bun, Sajna. Sans. — ^Shobhana-jana, sigru 
Muringi, Dansha-mula-sveta, Maricha (the seeds). Tarn — Murungai 
Tcl.^ — Munaga, Sveta Maricha— white pepper, Doonsha, Mula. 
Pungent root. 

CAaracttrs. — Root bark light brown, external surface reticulated ; 
internally white, sofi and thick, smell and taste pungent owing to its 
containing an essential oil ; leaves large and bi-pinn:ac or tri -pinnate, 
leaflets, small, oblong, obtuse or rounded and smooth, green above and 
pale beneath ; smell acrid, taste very hot and burning. Fruit a foot or 
several feel long, greenish or light brown when ripe,triangularand ribbed, 
consisting of 3 valves, each containing a soft white pulp and from 12 to 
15 seeds. Seeds roundish and winged, taste of fresh kernel bitter and 
oily. Dried seeds, dark brown externally, white within, and resembling 
Amali. They yield a fixed oiK Fresh gum pink or brick red in 
colour. Dried specimens of a yellowish or reddish colour; met wnth in 
pieces or masses formed of agglutinated tears, pieces translucent, of 
variable sizes, generally vermicular in form and easily broken. Taste 
mucilaginous and astringent ; on section the interior is white. A good 
substitute for horse radish. Dose, 5 to to grs. 

CfinUitfients — The root yields an essential oil which is very 
ptingent and has a very offensive odour. The husked seeds yield oil 
56 p. c. The bark contains a white crystalline alkaloid, two resins, aii 
organic acid, mucilage, and ash 8 p.c* 

Prfparatinrts, — Paste. Moringa bark 4 ojes., Moringa nuts 4 nzs, 
lohacco 2 ojs., gunpowder 2 drs. Mix with water, make paste to 
rub over scorpion stings or bites. Decoction of the root (f in 20). 



idHas: 



idCto 



236 AGRIMOXIA EUPATORIUM. 

Dose, 2 to 6 drs. Compound spirit (i in 8). Moringa root, orange 
peel 20 ozs., nutmeg 5 drachms, spirit 160 ozs., water 4 ozs. Distil to 
8 pints. Dose, 2 to 4 drs. 

Actiom and uses* — Antispasmodic, stimulant, expectorant, and 
diuretic. The root is very irritating to the skin. The decoction is a 
stimulant, given with asafetida and rock salt in internal deep-seated 
inflammation, in calculous affection, in hysteria, epilepsy, paralysis, 
rheumatism, dropsy, in cough and in flatulence in children, also in 
ascites due to enlargement of the liver. Asa diuretic it is given in 
uric acid diathesis. The pods are taken as preventive against worms. 
Externally the oil from the seeds is used as a stimulant application to 
rheumatic joints and to gouty and other painful parts. The bark is 
acrid. With cumin seeds it is applied locally to gum-boils and 
toothache with relief. It is applied to the temples in headache, and on 
venereal nodes and syphilitic buboes. The decoction of the root is used 
as a gargle in sore throat. The bark is abortifacient, and is used to 
procure abortion, and is a good substitute for laminaria to dilate the 
OS. The gum with milk or sweet oil is poured into the ear in earache. 
Poultice of the leaves is used in reducing glandular swellings. It always 
produces a blister. 

RosaoecB. 

The GuUba or Rose family. Trees, shrubs or herbs with 
-prickles and warts on woody surfaces. Leaves simple or compound, 
alternate, and usually stipulate ; flowers, regular, rarely uni- 
sexual, of different lovely colours and highly odoriferous; fruit entire, a 
drupe, an achaenium, a follicle or a pome ; seeds exalbuminous. 

Habitat — ^Temperate climates. 

Properties. — Some are astringent with succulent and edible fruits. 
Others are poisonous, as they yield hydrocyanic acid. 

Ammonia Eapatoriom. 

Habitat, — Temperate Himalayas, Persia, Europe. 

Parts used. — The herb and fruit. 

Vernacular, — Arab.-^Shajrat-el-Bardghit, Ghafith, or Shaukat-el- 
Muntineh. Eng. — Agrimony. Pers.— Gulkalli. 

Gulkalli — used to cure kalli or ringworm of the scalp. 

Characters. — Fruit rough and bristly, generally inverted when 
ripe, adhering to the clothes, stem ligneous, hairy and swarthy. Leaves 
indented at their edges, downy and swarthy. 

Constituents. — Tannin, 475, yellow fragrant volatile oil, a bitter 
principle and a colouring matter. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, 4 to 12 fld. drs. 

Actions and uses. — Aromatic, astringent, diuretic and taeni- 
acide. Agrimony tea is used in dyspepsia and taken hot to induce 
perspiration in fever, also as an antiscorbutic. The seeds with wine are 
used in dysentery. 



UKAYIiKA VNTIIELMINriCA. ZlJ 

Brayera Anthelmlntlca, B. P* Hagenia Abyasinica. 

Hahitat. — Abvi*iiinia, mountainous districts. 

Putts nsrtL — The dried panicles of pistillate flowers. Cu^so 
KoussOf B, P, 

Ftft/ifiLti/tir. — Boti^ — Kousjo. Guj. — Kussu. 

Characters, — The drug is gathered before the seeds are quite ripe, 
of a Itfihl m reddish brown colour, usually in cylindrical rolls of cora' 
prcwea and broken branches of long panicles of flowers, mixed with s^ome 

"Bniirc flowers. The bunch is sometimes a foot or more in length. 

"The panicle consists of a hairy stalk which is twisted and more or less 
branched. There are large bracts at the base of each branch. At the 
base of each flower there are 2 or 3 smaller ones between which is the 

Icalyx which is 5 partite and arranged in double rows. Each segment 
of the calyx is ovate and reticulated. The drug has a fragrant balsamic 
or ica-like odour, and an acrid, nauseous and disagreeable taste, difHcult 
of letention by the stomach. Dose, } to ^ ounce. 

Comiituents. — A volatile oil, a bitter acrid resin 6*25, called kous- 
sin ; tannin 24 p.c. ; ash 15*7 p.c, a tasteless resin, chlorophyll, wax, 
sugar and gum. 

Koussin, Kosin, Brayerin, Heat Cousso with alcohol^ add calcium 
hydrate, boil the residue with water, filter and distil. Treat the residue 
with acetic acid. It is a crystalline principle, resin like floccutant 

frecipitate, or yellow rhombic crystals ; tt is probably an ether of 
sobutyric acid. Taste, bitter, acrid ; odour leathery ; insoluble in 
water, soluble in chloroform, ether» benzol, bisulphide of carbon, less* 
iioluble in glacial acetic acid« sparingly soluble m cold alcohol. 

Volatile oil is obtained by distillation of flowers with water. The 
distillate also contains traces of valcreanic and acetic acids, 

Prtparatvms* — Extractum Cusso fluidum. Dose, 1 to 6 drs. Com- 
I pound emulsion ; a 6 p. c. infusion with castor oil, yolk of egg, a few 
* drops of ether, oil of anise and oleo-resin of male fern. Infusion (i in 4) 
of flowers. 

Acttom and uses, — Anthelmintic; especially useful for tape worms 
but it rarely expels the head. It has no purgative action. In large 
doses it produces nausea, vomiting, colic and diarrhoea ; olco-resiu of 
male fern is more reliable than cusso. 



Catoneastar Mummularia. 

Mi^i/rt/.— Persia, 

Parts used. — The manna. 

Vermtctilat, — Eng.— Blackwood tree. Guz. — Stra Khista Maiyu 
(Manna). Pers.— Shirkhisht, Shirkhushk, Bhaklu (Manna), Siah 
Chob, Kashiru. 

Shirkhushk— Shir, milk, and Khushk, dried milk. Diitd 
stems contain milk and when dry they are used for walking sticks, 

Four v.uicliei* of manna are met with in India. 



23« 



llEiUCHtiKA AMlLJIICAS'A. 



Turanjhin, — The product of Alhagr maurorum (Leguniino&.cj. 
GazaHJbm, — The product of Tamarix Gallica (TamaricAOcar). 

Shakr-ul-Ashar or shakar lagar, the product of calotropis Froocra, 

Asclepiadaccse, 

Shifkhisht, — The product of Cotoneaster Nutnmularia (Rosacese). 

Chiiraciers. — The mauna exudes or oozes out of the leaves, the 
bark of the trunk and targe branches ; sometimes it bursts through 
large pores spontaneously. It occurs in flat viscid pieces or yellowish 
while granules of the size of millet seeds. Each piece from 2 to 4 
inches in lengthy and 1 to i^ inches in breadth* and resembling ordmary 
camphor, odour sugary. It easily melts in the mouth leaving a sweet 
cool taste. Dose, 1 to 2 drs. in children ; 1 oz. for adults. 

CoHStituents. — Glucose 8-3 p.c, cane sugar 4*1 p,c. or an analogous 
sucrose and a new sugar 50 px. called chirkhestite which beluriL!.-. to 
mannite group and is nearly related to sorbite. 

Actiom and uses. — A mild aperient, demulcent and exptxL«iratu ; 
given to new-born infants if the meconium has not come away freely ; 
alM» to delicate persons, females and children, in torpid liver, deranged 
stomach, a4id intestines ; also given as demulcent and expectoiant in 
cough and sure throat. 

Heuchera Amerioana. 

Alum Root (Eng.). 

IJabitiH. — United Stales. 

Parts used. — ^The Rhizome. 

Characters, — Plant viscid, pubescent ; leaves wide, crenate, 
flowers purple white. Root long, moderately thicki several headed, 
radicles thin^ and m;iny, and brownish purple. Bark thin, without 
any odour and astringent bitter taste. Dose, 10 to 40 grs, 

Co/wAVwrw^^.— Contains tannin 20 p.c, starch 12 p.c. Decoction 
(1 in 20) Dose, 4 to 12 drs. 

Physiological action, — The root is astringent, tonic and 
antiseptic. In small doses it is styptic to the taste and causes 
constriction in the throat and checks the mucous secretions and 
passive haemorrhages and mucous fluxes. 

ThefapcHiics. — Given in diarrhoea menoniiagiaj .um ;is a lotion or 
injection in leucorrhcea and gleet. The ointment is applied to 
haemorrhoids. As a dusting powder it is applied to aphtha*, ulcers, 
ic. 

PotentUla Canaden&is, P. Sarmentosa, P. TormentUta* 
P. Nepalenais, 

Binta falun (Hind^); Cinque foil (Fi%c fingers.) 
HahitaL — United States, N, India, Himalaya, 
Paris used, — The plant, rootlets and rhiicomc. 



l»RfSUS AMYCIMII s, 



Character^.— Herbaceous pl,int, haiuboine when in fliwer, under 
•urfaic (if I Ik- leaves covered with a fine dust which, ivhun the 
plant h shaken, causes sneezing ; rhizome 2 feet long and \ foot thick, 
tubcrculate and brownish red. Dose, lo to jo grs. 

Constiltitftis . — Tannin and red colouring matter. 

Preptirah'oHS^ — Fid, Extract 10 to 30 ms* Infusion of the vine 
Icai^es and root (1 in 20). Dose, 1 to 2 ozs. 

Actittni ami uses. — Astringent and tontc ; useful in nlghl-sweats 
of phthisis and succeeds when atropine and other remedies have 
(ailed. It is also useful in diarrhoea, dysentery and acidity of the 
i Stomach. Locally as a gargle for spongy and bleeding gums* 

Praniia Amygdalas, Var. Amara, B. P., P. Amygdalus, Var. 
Diilois, B* P*, Greek nuts. 

///7^j//i^,— Persia, Syria, Barbar)% Asia ; cultivated in Europe 
c&pccially Spain* 

Paris usee/. — The almonds shell. The ripe seed* Amygdala 
amara, bitter almond, B. P. Amygdala dulcis, sweet almond, B. P., 
and oil, expressed from bitter or sweet almond, oleum amygdalae, 
almond oil, B. P, 

Vernacular. — Eng- — The common almond. Arab — Louza 
|Loa2*el Murr-Louz ul hala (Bitter almond). Beng. — Belati bad^m. 
'Can.— Badami ^Ticktu badam^ Bitter almond)* Duk., Guz., Hind.| 

Mar. — Uadam* Pets. — Kadam. Sans. — Bada mitte* Tam. — Vadam 

Kottai, TeL— Badam V^ittulu. 

To the common Vernacular names, the word sweet or bitter is 
affixed according as the Vernacular is for sweet or bitter almond. 

Characters. — Fruit drupe, ovate, sarcocarp green and Icatheryi 
splitting and falling from the stone when ripe. Stone or nut is other- 
wise known ns commercial almond. Its outer shell pale brown, porous 
and hard ; within the nut are one or sometimes two kernels or 
secdsi which when in pairs are in juxtaposition to one another. Seed 
tbout an inch in length, flattened, lanceolate, ovate, compressed and 
with 16 lines radiating from blunt end, rounded at one end and pointed 
at the other, testa or cndocarp of a cinnamon brown colour and 
astringent as it contains tannin* The endocarp, or outer brown skin 
can easily be removed by keeping the seeds in hot water ; kernel is rose 
coloured or while, blanched and fleshy. 

Amygdala Dulcis, Jordan almond, sweet almond. The seed is 
one inch long, oblong, compressed, pointed at one end and rounded 
at the other* Testa cinnamon brown, thin and rough, seed e:i* 
albuminous composed of two large plano-convex, oily cotyledons ; 
taste bland, without any marked odour even tf triturated into 
cmubion with water. 



240 



PKUNUS AMVUriALUS, 



Amygdala Amara, B. P* Bitter Almond, — The seed ret^mblet 
sweet almond in general appe^irancc, but is shorter and proportionatdv 
broader. The embryo has a bitter taste ; when triturated vritn 
water it forms an emulsion of the chartcteri:»tic odour of hydroc>;aiiic 

acid. 

CoHsliluenis. — Sweet almonds contain a fixed oU, oleum amy^dailae 
B, P. 56 px» ; an albuminous principle or ferment emulsin, (wbidi b 
st>[uble in water) ; mucilage. 3 p c, ; sugar 6 p.c ; proteids (myrositiir 
vilellin and conglutin) 25 px,, and ash 3 to S p.c.| comiining 
potassium, calcium^ and magnesium, phosphates* 

Bitter almonds contain a fixed oil 45 p. c. ; amygdalin ! to 5 px. ; 
proteids 25 p.c. ; emulsin, sugar 3 p c. ; mucilage 3 p.c, .1 -5 px. 

The ash contains potassium^ calcium, and magnesium ph - >. 

Amygdalin, a crystalline substance, a glucoside not foojid in 
sweet almonds, soluble in water and alcohol. To obtain it, boil m alcohol 
almond cake of bitter almond to the consistence of syrup, add 
yeast to set up fermentation, then filter and evaporate to syrupy 
consistence and add alcohol to precipitate amygdalin. Amygdalin 
is found in many plants belonging to Drupacese, Pomaceae and 
amygdalace;e orders, in kernels of peach 2*35 p.c. ; cherry ^96 p.c, ; 
plum -82 p.c, and apple pips^ '6 px. in the leaves o{ cerasus lauf ocer* 
asus, in the bark, flowers and leaves of Prunus Paclus. in the seed* 
and baik of Sorbus Aucuparia, hawthorn, &c. 

Oleum amygdala, B. P. Almond oil — oleum amyguma: expresbuni. 

The oil is expressed from sweet or bitter almonds, 

Characiers, — The oil is a pale yellow clear liquid, more thickly 
fluid than poppy seed oil, and more thinly fluid than olive oil, without 
any odc»ur and of a nutty, very agreeable and mild taste ; it socn be- 
comes rancid if exposed to the air. It becomes thick and solidifies 
to a while butter at a very low temperature. It is soluble in ether 
and chloroform. It is composed chiefly of oleiite and tracts of 
palmitin, also contains traces of cholesterine, thus distinguished from 
sesamum, rape, poppy or olive oil. Do&e, I to 4 fluid drachms— ^used 
as an application in skin affections. 

Oleum amygdahc amara. — The volatile or essential oil of bitter 
almonds. Obtained by trituration or maceration of bitter almonds 
with water and subsequent distillation. It is one of the products uf 
reaction between amygdalin and emulsin acting upon one another. It 
contains hydrocyanic acid and volatile oil. The hydrocyanic acnd is 
removed by distillation with caustic potash. 

It ii a clear pale, cherrj'-coloured thin liquid, of an aromatic bitter 
odour and bitter burning taste, neutral reaction, soluble in water < 1 in 

300), but freely so in alcohol and ether. It contains hydrite '" ' ,1, 

bcnraldehydej and hvdfoc>'anic acid* Benzaldehyde on e ' 10 

air is converted into Benzoic acid* Dose, 4 to I m. Hydroc d 

is also found in cherry laurel, prunus Mahalib, prunus \\r ud 
Uhcr specie^ of prunes — in the juice of bitter cassava &c. 



PKLNUS LNSITITIA. 



Ml 



Emulshi or Synaptase, an albuminous principle or ferment found in 
both the varieties It i^ extracted by water It i^ coagulated by heat, and 
precipitated by alcnhol, but not by acetic acid. In the case of bitter 
almonds, in the presence of water, it acts upon amygdalin forming 
glucd^e, hydrocyanic acid and benzoic aldehyde (oil of bitter 
almonds)* 

Preparations. — Of the seeds. Almond bread made from the almond 
\JBkkt, The sweet almond is first triturated and the fixed oil expressed, 
iving almond cake. This is ground into a meal or flour and made 
tnio bread. This c<)n tains no starch and hence very useful in diabetes. 

nrparaltons.^Oi the seeds. Bitter almonds— Syrupus Amygdalae 
4 p. c. Dose, 2 to 4 drs. Swett almonds — Pulvis Amygdalae compositus 
B. P- Dose, I to 2 drs. Emulsum Amygdalae contains sweet almonds 
6 p. c* Mistura Amygdalae B. P. (i in 8) a vehicle for cough 
mtxtures, Do^e, J to I oz. Of the shells, when calcined, tooth powder, 

Ac(thm ami ttsti, — Both the varieties differ iu their physiological 
actions. Sweet almond is demulcent, nutritive and emollient. The oil 
is used like olive oil for applicaiioti and internally given for pulmonary 
troubles and als(» used as a laxative. Externally the oil or the emulsion 
is used as an application fur acne on the face, for excoriations, chapped 
hands and nipples^ and for earache. Almond cakes made from almond 
meal arc given as substitute for bread in diabetes. 

The bitter almond oil is used for flavouring choice dishes and for 
scenting soap and other delicacies. It may be used as a sedative in 
coughs &c. 

Prunus Insiiitla, Prunus Bokariensis. 

NabitaL — Bokhara, Persia. 

Paris used, — The dried plum deprived of seeds. 

Vemacti/ar, — Arab. — Alu Bokhara, Ijasa. Bcng , Duk. — Alu 
Bokhara. Eng. — Bokhara plum. Hind. — Alu Bokhara. Pers. — Alu. 

CharacitrSn — Fruit globular, sweetish, acidulous and succulent ; 
mrfiice rather compressed and wrinkled, colour reddish yeilow or 
brown, smell like that of dates. Inside ihe fruit is an almond-like nut» 
which is obliquely ovate, convex on both surfaces and marked with 
three prominent ridges at one of its margins. The nut when broken 
contains a kernel which resembles sweet almond in all its characters. 

Constituents, — Malic acid, citric aid, sugar, albuminoids, pectin 
and ash. 

Preparation, — Confection. 

Actinns and us€s, — Demulcent and nutrient ; uses similar to those 
o( the official varrety. 

PruQoii Armeniaca, Armeniaoa Vulgaris. 

^#&f*/a/.— Himalaya, Dekhan, Mysore. 

J^rts used* — ^l^he fruit and seed. 



242 PRUNUS DOMESTICA. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Binkook Tuffa armina. Bokhara. — Baboor- 
Kohani. Eng. — Apricot. Himalayas. — Chulu, chinaru. Hind. — 
Zardalu-Khubani. Pers. — Mish mish. Sutlej. — ^Jaldaru. 

Characters. — Fruit sweetish, acidulous and succulent ; form almost 
globular, surface reddish yellow. Inside is a nut which contains a 
kernel. 

Preparation.'^Conieciioru Dose, i to 2 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Nutrient and tonic ; used in fevers to allay 
thirst ; the seeds form an ingredient in some of the nutritive confec- 
tions. 

PnmiiB Sp. 

Habitat. — Western Asia. 

Parts used.^ The stones. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — ^Jerasaya, Kerasya. Hind. — Alubalu. Pers. — 
Alubalu. Japan. — Sakura. 

Characters. — A small tree — fruits of a light brown colour ; seeds 
embedded in them and resembling those of common cherry ; odour 
of bitter almond seeds, taste bitter and aromatic. 

Constituents. — The kernels contain a volatile oil and hydrocyanic 
acid. 

Preparation. — Confection. 

Actiofis and uses. — Nutritive and tonic. The natives give the 
kernels with other tonic and aphrodisiac medicines in nervous debility 
and nervous exhaustion. 

PraniiB Domestioa, Var. Juliana, B. P. 

Habitat. — Persia. 

Parts used.~The dried ripe fruit; Prunum — Prunes, B. P. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Barkook, Bargoog. Eng. — Common plum, 
Prunes. Hind. — Aru, alu, Aluchah, Shan alu. 

Characters. — Ovoid or oblong, about i^^ inch lon^, black and 
shrivelled. Pulp brownish, without any odour and of a sweet, bland, 
acidulous taste. The finest and sweetest variety is used as dessert? 
The smaller kind, which is more acid and less pleasant, is used in 
medicine. Dose, 2 ozs. 

Constituents. — The pulp or sarcocarp contains a little malic acid, 
sugar 25 p. c, pectin, albumen and salts. The seeds contain a fixed 
oil, amygdalin and emulsin. 

Preparations. — Confectio sennae, B. P. Dose, i to 2 drs. 

Actions and uses. — The sarcocarp is laxative, demulcent and nutri- 
ent ; taken in excess it causes griping and flatulence. It is given with 
purgatives as senna &c. It quenches thirst in fevers. 



PR13NUS PUDUM, 



243 



Prunus LaurooerasuB, B* P. 

ffabttat.—Asi^ Minor. 

fltris us^d, — The fresh leaves — Laurocerasi folia, cherry laurel 
leaves, B. P. 

Charactrrs^ — Leaves thick, coriaceous ; petioles short and strong, 
oblong, obovate, 5 to 7 inches long, tapering towards each end, serrated 
at the apex and re volute at margins. Dark green, smooth and 
shining above^ much paler beneath. Midrib prominent with one or 
two glandular depressions on each side ; odourless, but emitting smell 
of bitter almond seeds, when bruised. 

C<inshtu$nts, — On distillation with water the leaves yield 
Lauroccrasin^ identical with amygdalin ; a bitter principle, tannin, sugar 
and a fenncnt, by the action of which on laurocerasin is produced a 
volatile oil consisting of benzaldehyde and prussic acid. 

f^€/araiions.^Aqu2L Laurocerasi, B. P. — it shall be made of the 
•trength ot ^0 p. c. of hydrocyanic acid. Dose, ^ to 2 fld. 

Acttous and uses* — Sedative, anodyne, antispasmodic and narcotic ; 
same as those of Hydrocyanic acid. 

PrunuB Maballb. 

HabitaL — Central Asia and Europe. 

fhris used, — The kernels and oil. 

Ffrnacuiar. — Arab.— Hab-ul-mahaliba. Eng. — Perfumed cherry 
tfCC* Mar. — Gahula. Pers. — Paiwand-e-maryam. 

Characters, — ^Shell of a dark brown or light bulTcolour, of an oval 
or ovate shape and very fragile. Seeds of a pale buff colour, testa thin 
and striated, kernel of a light brown colour. It has a bitter almond- 
like taste, Tlie oil is rancid ; in flavour like that of hydrocyanic acid. 

PiteparaUQn — Confection. Dose 1 to 2 drs. 

Actions and uses* — Stomachic ; used in dyspepsia, anorexia, and 
general debility. 

Prunua Pudum, P, Sylvetica, Cerasus Pudum. 

Habitat, — Central Asia. 

Parts tned, — The wood bark. 

Vernacular, — Guz. — Padmakastai Padma-nulakarun. Hind, — 

P^dmakasta. Mar. — Padma Kashtha, Chamari Jhelum, 

Characters, — The wood of a light reddish brown colour, some- 
times covered with a biownish thin bark which peels off in flakes* It 
has a faintly almond-oil like taste, and odour* Dose — Powdered bark, 
15 to i 5 grs, 

Constitfienis, — A my gd al i n , 

F^ ns. — Of the bark, decoction (i in 10). Dose, J to 2 fld. 

drs. i 111 known as Muhajam-e-til containing Padma Kui*ht4 



244 PRUNUS SBROTINA. 

4, Lavanga 4, Darunaj-e-abrabi 4, Behaman-e-Sapheda 3, 
]Dehaman-e-Surkha 3, Taja 2, Jaephala 2, J&vantri 2, Jatamanansi 
2, Zara Kachura 2, Jaramabilda 2, Pipali 2, Pipali mula 2, 
Kesara i^, Ispanda 3, Kab&ba chini 3, £lachi i, Kulpha 3, Sugar 2, 
mix and make a confection. Dose i to 4 drs. Used in dyspepsia, 
congested liver, anorexia, &c. 

Actions and uses. — The bark is used as a bitter tonic and sedative. 
It is given during convalescence from acute diseases and in palpitations 
of the heart. 

PrnnaB Serotina, B.P. Wild Cherry. 

Habitat. — N. America, Canada. 

Parts used, — The bark — pruni virginianae cortex. Virginian 
Prune Bark, B. P. 

Characters. — Curved pieces or irregular fragments ; young bark 
covered with reddish brown papery cork, thin and smooth, presenting 
a greenish brown inner layer, and breaking with a short granular 
fracture. Taste astringent, aromatic and bitter ; odour in the presence 
of water that of bitter almonds. 

Constituents. — The bark contains amygdalin, emulsin, a bitter 
principle, a volatile oil, hydrocyanic acid, tannin, gallic acid, resin, and 
starch. In the presence of water it yields hydrocyanic acid and 
volatile oil resembling that of bitter almonds. The root bark con- 
tains a glucoside phloridzin which is also found in the root bark of 
apple, pear and plum trees. 

Amygdalin,*a bitter uncrystalline glucoside obtained by the action 
of alcohol. It is not precipitated by ether. 

Bitter principle — To obtain it, mix aqueous extract with alcohol, 
and milk ot lime, evaporate, filter, boil the residue with alcohol and 
again evaporate. It is a brown gelatinous mass, taste bitter. 

Preparations, — Syrupus pruni Virginians, B. P. (i in about 7). 
Dose, ^ to 1 fid. dr. 

Prunin or Cerasin — obtained by evaporating the tincture and 
powdering the extract. Dose, i to 5 grs. 

Tinctura Pruni Virginianae, B. P. (i in 5). Dose, \ to i fluid dr. 

Physiological actions. — Sedative, pectoral, tonic, and astringent. In 
moderate doses it is an aromatic bitter tonic, stimulates the stomach, 
increases appetite, aids digestion, and thus promotes constructive 
metabolism. The volatile oil is a stimulant of the alimentary canal. 
Hydrocyanic acid acts as a sedative, lessens irritation and impairs 
nervous excitability. Large doses depress the heart's action. Phloridzin 
produces glycosuria in man and animals. 

Therapeutics. — Given in cough, hectic fever, scrofula, in bron- 
chial catarrh, phthisis, and irritation of the throat. As a stomachic 
tonic it is given in dyspepsia, palpitation and f^eneral debility ; also 
during convalescence from acute diseases. The volatile oil is an 
intestinal stimulant and acts like cascarilla, serpentaria, &c. 



QUILLAJA SAPONARIA. J45 

Pyroa Cydonia* Cydonia YQigaris. 

Habii^i, — Central Asia, lemperaie climates, 

Paris used, — The seeds* 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Muzz, Hubbul, Sapharjala. Can. — Shimc 
^diltiuba bija- Duk.— Bihi danah. Eng,— Quince seed. Hind.— 
logloi behedana, Pers. — Beha-danah, Tukhm-e-abi, Karabadia. 
Pam. — Shimai*ma-delaivirai, Teh — Shima-dalima-Vittulu. 

Characters, — 10 or 15 seeds are contained in one cell of the fruit f 

^seeds irregularly ovoid, flattened and angular or three sided, adherent 

[to one another by mucilage and covered by a membrane ; coloui of the 

|tc^ta, dark brown, that of the kernel^ yellowish white. The seeds 

nave the odour and taste of bitter almonds. 

Cottsliiuetiis, — The seeds contain a mucilage named cydonin, 
albuminous matter, Bxed oil, an oily liquid which contains senanthic 
ether, and ash 3-5 p. c, containing alkalies, alkaline earths, iron, &c. 

V ;t coniained in the epithelial cells is in very large quantity, 

and lS 40 times its weight of water. It has little adhesive 

power and is not thickened by borax. It is a compound of gum and 
celluJosc. The fragrance is due to the presence of aenanthic ether. 

Ptiparaiiom. — Mucilago cydonii (1 in 50), 

Acthm aud uses. — Cydonium or quince seeds are nutritive, asmn- 

gent, demulcent, and emollient, and given with sugar \n cough, 

.dysentery, catarrhal aflTections of the throat and pulmonary mucous 

' membrane ; also used as a vehicle for injection in gonorrhoea and 

urinary disorders. Externally the mucilage is applied to burns and scalds. 

Bandoline, a preparation used as a hair dressing, is identical with 

mucilage of cydonin. 

QulUaJa Saponaria, B. P. 

HabitaL — Chih*, Peru, N* Hindustan. 

Parts used, — The inner bark — Quillaioj cortex. Quillaia bark, 
B. P. Syn. — China bark or murillo bark, Panama bark^ soap bark. 
Quillaya means a wash, as this bark is good for washing* 
Saponaria, sapo, soap. Its mucilaginous juice forms lather with 
water. 

Characters* — Bark in flat thick pieces ^ of an inch thick, 2 feet 
km^ and 4 inches wide, brownish white externally, smooth, white or 
fi while within. Fracture splintery, fractured surface laminated* 
fe ng under a lens, glistening prismatic crystals; without any 

odnuFi of an acrid persistent taste » Wood very hard. 

Constituents. — A glycoside saponin, starch, gum, calcium oxalate, 
and calcium sulphate crystals. Saponin— obtained by exhausting the 
bark with hot alcohol. A white amorphous powder without any odour 
tnd of a sweetish taste ; soluble in water and dilute alcohol ; it acts as a 
jMernulatory. It consists of 2 glucosides — Ouillaic acid, soluble in 
[ikohol and precipitated by lead acetate ; and Quillaia-^^apotoxini 
neutral tni^oluble in alcohol and not precipitated by acetate of lead. 



246 ROSA DAMASCRNA. 

Preparations. — Tinctura Quillaiae B. P, (1 in 20). Dose, ^ to i fl. 
dr. Decoctum Quillaise (5 to 200). Dose, i to 2 dr. Fluid extract. 
Dose, 15 to 30 ms. Syrupus Quillaise. Dose, i to 3 drs. 

Physiological Action, — Detergent, stimulant, diuretic, expectorant 
and irritant of the respiratory organs. The powder is sternutatory ; 
macerated in water, the water froths like soap ; it forms emulsions 
with oils owing to the presence of saponin. In laYge doses it is a local 
anaesthetic and antipyretic, paralyzant of the heart and respiration 
^nd a poison to the voluntary muscles. It does not produce vomiting 
or purging, 

Therapeutics,'-^'^£he decoction of the bark is given like senega in 
chronic bronchitis, cough, coryza and in dropsy. The powder of the 
bark is used as a dusting powder or snuff in rhinitis ; locally an 
infusion is used to dispel fcetor of feet or armpits ; also in alopecia as a 
hair tonic or detergent to remove scurf and renew the growth of hair. 
It is contra-indicated in irritation and inflammation of the mucous 
membranes. A dry extract causes the water in which it is macerated 
to froth, and hence used for making emulsions of fixed oil. The tincture 
is an ingredient in Liquor Picis carbonis, B.P. It is also used for 
washing purposes. 

Rosa Dama4Boena, B. P. R. Hosohata. R. SemperrireiiB. 

Habitat. — Syria, Africa, Balkan Mountains, Roumelia. 

Parts used. — The flowers, flower buds, petals, stamens and a 
volatile oil, oleum rosae, attar or otto of rose, B. P. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Wardel, chamak Julanja-bin (conserve). 
Beng.— Gulap. Can. — Gulab. Duk., Guz., Hind.— Gulab-ka!i, Gul- 
kand (conserve). Mar. — Gulaph^. Pers. — Gule-gulaba, Gule-shakar 
(conserve). Sans, — Sata pattri. Tam.— Gulappu, Irojappu. Tel. — 
Rosa-puvou. Eng. — Damask Rose. 

Characters. — It is the source of the official oil of rose. Flower 
buds oblong of a brownish light red colour when fresh, but if old per- 
fectly deep brown ; sepals five partite, of a greenish brown colour, 
viscid, and ciliated. Below the sepals is an ovary resembling a thick 
stalk of a flower, very viscid, greenish brown ; petals over-lapping one 
another to form a cone, of an aromatic agreeable smell and a bitterish 
taste. 

Gulaba-ke-bija. These are not seeds but the compressed, two- 
lobed, oblong, reniform or roundish, small, dark coloured anthers. 

Constituents. — Volatile oil, fat, resin, malic, tartaric, and tannic 
acids. Volatile oil — oil of rose distilled from the fresh flowers with calyx. 
It is colourless at first, but becomes after short time a pale yellowish, 
transparent liquid, with a strong, fragrant odour of roses. Taste mild 
and sweetish ; slightly soluble in acetic acid and alcohol. 

Preparations. — Aqua Rosae Fortior. Strong or triple rose water 
Water saturated with the volatile oil of rose petals ; obtained as a by- 
product in the distillation of oil of rose ; used as excipient and flavouring 
agent. Dose, \ to i dr. Unguentum Aquae Rosae, B. P, cold cream, 



ROSA fjALLiCA. 



147 



Itment of rose water. Stronger rose water 7 ozs., oil of almond 9 ozs» 
fiaceti ijozs, white wax i^ozs,, oil of rose 8 ms., for externa 
kppHcatton. Aqua rosae B. P., Gulab, (Hind») prepared by diluting 
Aqua Kosac Fortior with twice its volume of distilled water. Oleum 
Kosse B, P. oil of rose — attar or otto of rose^ — volatile oil distilled 
from the fresh flowers. A pale yellow crystalline semi-solid ; odour 
strong and fragrant, taste sweet» slightly acid in reaction, sparingly 
soluble in alcohol. It is adulterated with a volatile oil derived from a 
species of Andropogon and known as oil of geranium^ Idris oil, or ginger 
oil* It consists of an aromatic oxygenated elacopten, and an odourless 
solid stearopten or rose camphor. Gulkhand, a conserve of rose petals 
with sugar, to which cannabis Indtca is sometimes added. Gulanjabin, 
a conserve of rose petals with honey. Medicated oil of roses^ Duhn- 
i*ward-i-kham^ — sweet oil added to rose petals and exposed to the 
suti. Duhu-i-ward-i-matbukh — rose petals added to sweet oil and 
heated over the fire* The natives use the above as liniments io 
sprains^ bruises, &c. 

Actions ami uses. — Mildly astringent, carminative, and refrigerant ; 
used as basis for bitter medicfnes and as pill bases. Rose water is used 
as a cooling and aMnngem excipient for lotions, collyria and urethal in- 
jections and in irritability of the mucous membiaues. The ointment 
is a soothing emftllicni and protective for the skin, in chapped hands, 
cracked nipples* Rose buds are used along with other purgative 
decoctions by the natives in constipation during fevers and hepatic 
derangements. 

Kosa Gallica. B, P, 

Habitat, — South of Europe, Western Asia, 

P^rts used. — The fresh and dried unexpauded petals, Rosae Gallics 
petala. 

Characters^ — Cone-like masses, sometimes separate and more or 
less crumpled ; petalSi velvety, of a deep, purplish red colour ; odour 
fragnml. Taste somewhat bitter. Feebly acid and astringent. 

Constituents. — Red colouring matter, tannic and gallic acids, and 
ai volatile aromatic oil (a trace), mucilage, sugar, quercitrin, salts kc. 

Preparation s.'^lnfusum Rosas Acid urn, B, P. (Red rose petals 
i ounce, diluted sulphuric acid 2 fluid drachms, boiling distilled 
water i pint). Dose | to i fld. ot, Extractum Rosa; Fluidum, Dose, 
5 to 50 ms. Confectio Rosa: Gallicae, B, P. (i in 4)* Dose, 60 grs. or 
more. Mel Ros;e — honey of rose, fluid extract 12, and honey 100. 
Dose, I to 2 drs. Syrupus Rosae, B, P. (1 in 23)* Dose, ^ to i fid, dr. 
Red rose is an ingredient of Pilulae aloes et mastiches, 

Actions and uses, — Tonic, mild astringent and carminative ; used 
frequently as a colouring and flavouring agent. Flowers when full 
blown are laxative. The infusion containing dilute sulphuric acid 
IS a good gargle and used in sore throat, aphthae, ulcers of the 
mouth &c. 



248 RUBUS IDiEUS. 

RnbiiB Chamsemoras. 

Norwegian blackberry. Marsh raspberry. Yellow raspberry, 
cloudberry, dwarf mulberry. 

Habitat. — Europe. 

Parts employed, — The fruit and leaves. 

Preparations, — Fluid Extract. Dose, J to i dr. Infusion of 
leaves (1 in 12). Dose, 2 to 6 drs. 

Physiological action. — Leaves diuretic. They act on the kidneys 
without influencing the beat of the heart. Given in nephritis, cirrhosis 
of the liver, cardiac affections, chloro-anaemia wiih cedema, hysterical 
epilepsy, palpitations of the heart, and cancer of the stomach. The 
fruit is antiscorbutic, and is used in haemoptysis. 

RubuB Canadensis. Dewberry. 

R. Villous, the common blackberiy. R. trivialis, the bush black- 
berry. 

Habitat, — Southern States. 

Part used, — The bark of the root. 

Characters, — Bark thin tough, flexible bands, colour blackish 
grey externally and pale brown within. Without any odour, taste 
astringent, bitter. Dose ^ to 2 drs. 

Constituents, — Tannin, 10 p. c, gallic acid \ p. c, villosin 0.8 p. c, 
ash 3 p. c. Villosin is a bitter crystalline glucoside, soluble in 
alcohol, ether, chloroform. 

Preparation, — Extractum Rubi fluidum. — Dose, 10 to 60 minims, 
Syrupus Rubi aromaticus, contains rubus, cinnamon, cloves, and mace. 
30 gr. each in one ounce. Dose, i to 8 drs. Syrupus Rubi (i of the 
fluid extract to 3). Dose, 1 to 6 drs. Decoction. Dose i to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses, — Astringent and tonic ; given in bowel com- 
plaints, such 'as summer and infantile diarrhoeas. 

Rnbns IdsBns, Raspberry, hindberry; Rabas strigosas, 

wild red raspberry; Rnbns oocidentalis, Thimble berry. 

Habitat, — Europe, Asia. 

Part used. — The fruit. 

Characters, — Fruit, a receptable, conical, hollow at the base, hemi- 
spherical, red, hairy, composed of 20 to 30 drupes, small and coalesced ; 
each drupe crowned with withered style. Juice red coloured, odour 
agreeable, taste sweet and pleasant. 

Constituents. — Volatile oil, citric acid, malic acid, sugar 5 p. c. 
pectin, proteids, colouring matter &c. 

Preparation. — Syrupus Rubi Idaei. Colour bright red, odour 
fruity, agreeable taste pleasant, acidulous. Reaction acid. Dose, 2 to 
6 drs. or more. Infusion of the leaves of red raspberry (i to 20). Dose, 
6 to 12 drs. 



PORTUtACA OI-ER.^ 



?49 



Actions and uses. — Refrigerant, laxative and dietetic; given in 
fevers. Tnfu?iion of the leaves of red raspberry is used for drarrhcea. 

SpirsBa TomentoBa, Hard hack. 

Habi'taL — North America. 

Part useti, — The root. 

Characters, — The root consists of brown bark which is bitf er and 
astringent. The wood is hard and without any taste. Flowers 
fragrant. The fragrancy is due to the presence of coumarln. 

Cow^/Z/wrw/i.— Contains tannin, coumarin. a bitter principle and a 
volatile oil. Used as infusion. Decoction (i in 2c). Dose, 4 to 6 drs. 
Extract. Dose, 2 to 5 grs. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent and tonic ; given in diarrhoea 
cholera infantum, also in haemorrhages^ gonorrhea, ulcers &c. 

Portulaoaceae. 

The Purslane or the Kulpha family. 

Succulent herbs or shrubs. Leaves cxstipulate, entire. Flowers 
unsyrametrical. Fruits capsular, usually dehiscing transversely or by 
valves or by a lid. Seeds solitary or numerous. Albumen farinaceous. 
Root fleshy. 

Habitats — Cape of Good Hope and S, America, 

Prr,pertm.^Somt possess cooling and antiscorbutic propcrticS| 

some be*ir edible roots. 

Partutaca Oleracea, Portulaca Quadrlfida, P* Maridlana, 
lUicebrum Yerticalatam. 

Habitat. — All warm climates. 

Part used, — The seeds and herb, 

Portulaca —Porto, to carry, and lac, milk. The herb abounds in 
milky juice, 

P*crHacn/ar, — Arab,^ — Baklat-al Humaka. Kurfah, Beng. — ^Buro 
Luccia* Burm. — Mya-by eet. Can, — Dooda Gorat. Cing, — Genda* 
kola. Duk. — Chorote, Eng. — Purslane* Guz. — Loni. Hind.— 
Kulpha, Linria, Moucha. Malyal.^ — Karichira* Mar. — Bhnigholi« 
Panj. — Limak^ Kakeba. Pers. — Turuk, Kurfah. Sans. — Lonika, 
Lunia, Oopadyki. Tarn.— Karil Kiraj. TeU — Bodda-aveli-kura. 

Characters, — An annual succulent creeper ; fresh leaves, fleshy, 
entire, cunifomi, succulent, oblong and fiat ; flowers sessile, small and 
yellow; capsules globose or o%-ate; one-celled ; seeds numerous resembling 
those of Hura hura but smaller and of a fainter colour, black reinform 
and minutely lubercled. The pLint ha^^ a disagreeable smell and an 
•cid mucilagrnous taste. 

Ctinstiiuents, — The leaves contain acid potassium oxalatet and 
mucilage. 



2SO DICHROA FEBRIFUGA. 

Preparation. — Infusion of the leaves and seeds. Dose, 2 to 8 drs. 
Juice of leaves. Dose, 2 to 8 drs. Compound Tincture (i in 10), 
containing bitter purslane 100, rum 150, Bordeaux wine 850, citrate 
of iron ^. Dose. 60 to 100 ms. 

Actions and uses, — Both the varieties are bitter, diuretic and 
demulcent ; also refrigerant and alterative ; used in scanty and 
high coloured urine, albuminuria, cystitis, and chronic bronchitis. 
The compound tincture with citrate of iron is used as a bitter tonic 
during convalescence from acute fevers and other diseases. The bruised 
leaves are used as a cooling application in erysipelas, burns, scalds and 
other inflamed and swollen parts. The seeds are vermifuge, diuretic 
and demulcent, and given in haemorrhages. The natives give the 
powder of the seeds in haemoptysis. 

Sazifragaoen. 

Herbs ; leaves alternate, entire or lobed, stipulate or exstipulate. 
Flowers unsymmetrical; calyx inferior 4 or 5 partite, stamens perigynous 
or hypogynous. Fruit capsular, i to 2 celled. Seeds numerous, small, 
albumen, fleshy. 

Habitat, — Mountainous districts of northern countries. 

Properties. — Astr i ngen t . 

Diohroa Febrifaga. 

Habitat. — Himalaya, Java, China, Khasia mountains. 

Part used. — The root bark. 

Vernacular. — Bhutan, — Sing-namook. Cochin-China — Cay- 
thuong-son. Cham-chau. Hind. — Basak. Lepcha. — Gebokanak. 

Characters. — Root bark in chips, light yellow coloured, soft and 
corky ; externally fissured longitudinally, internally smooth and waxy ; 
almost tasteless, odour faintly aromatic. 

Constituents, — A crystalline glucoside termed Dichroin, It is allied 
to aesculin ; another crystalline principle of the nature of wax, insoluble 
in water and soluble in alkaline fluids ; also starch, but no tannin. 

/V^/flrr<i/ib;/.— Decoction with liquorice (i in 20). Dose, \ to i 
fluid oz. 

Actions and uses. — Febrifuge and aperient; given in ague and other 
malarial fevers ; in large doses it acts as an emetic and causes depression 
of the circulation. 

Hydrangea ArboreBoens. 

Wild Hydrangea, Leven bark. 

Habitat. — United States. 

Part used. — The root. 

Characters.— A plant with white, tough root. 

Constituents. — Gum, albumen, starch, resin, ferrous salts and 
other salts. 



SAXtFRAGA LIGULATA. 



2^1 



Prfparatifyn. — A compound powder containing Hydrangea, 
benjsoic acid and salicylate of lithia. Dose, 20 to 60 grs. Fluid extract^ 
20 to 60 ms. DecociioD of the root (i in 20). Dose^ 1 to 2 ozs* 

Actions and uses, — ^Tonic, sialagogue, diuretic, stomachic and lithon- 
triptic ; given in calcutous affections and other abnormal conditions of 
the kidneys, chronic gleet, prostatitis and bladder irritation. It 
increases the flow of urine and hence is useful either in retention 
or suppression of urine. The powder has been regarded as a soothing 
alterative and antilithic in urinary* calculus, diabetes, gout, cystitis, rheu- 
matism, haematuria, Bright*s disease, and vesical irritations generally. 
It promotes the removal of gravel from the bladder and relieves the 
pain during the passage of concretions through the ureters. 

Saxifraga Llgulata. 

ifabiiah — Temperat e H i ni alay a . 

Parts used, — The rhizome. 

Vemacntar, — Beas. — Mokhan, Chenab. — Bat pi a. Hind.— Daka- 
chru, Batpia. Ind. Bazaar — Pashanbhed, Pakhanbheda, Jhelum-Popal 
Ban, Patraki Khasia. — Atia, Torongsingh. Nepal,— Sohanpe-soah., 
Pan). Shaproki. Ravi. — Saprotri. Pashanbhed means stone breaker. 
It dissolves stone in the bladder. 

Chtiractns, — Rhizome in small pieces I or 2 inches long and about 
I inch in diameter, externally brown, wrinkled and scaly, bearing scan 
of rootlets ; substance dense, hard and of a reddish colour. Taste as- 
tringent and odour sh'ghtly aromatic. 

Constituents, — Tannic and gallic acids, starch, mineral salts, 
iDetarabin, albumen, glucose, mucilage, wax and an odorous principle. 
Ash 12*87 p. c, containing calcium oxalate. 

Actions and uses, — Diuretic, demulcent and astringent ; given in 
diarrhcea and cough and in uric acid diathesis ; with honey it is applied 
to the gums in teething in children to allay irriution. Dose, 5 to 20 
grs. 

CrasaulacQaB* 

The house leek, stone crop or the zakhme hayata family ; plants 
generally succulent ; herbs or shrubs, with fcxstipulate, entire or pinnaii* 
fid leaves. Flowers cymose, perfectly symmetrical ; fruits dehiscent, 
consisting either of a whorl of follicles or a capsule ; seeds very smallf 
albumen fleshy ; embryo in the axis of albumen. 

Habitat*-— Qtv\tiA\y in dry situation, Cape of Good Hope. 

Ptnperties, — Astringent, refrigerant and acrid. 

Sedam Acre, 
Syn* — Wall pepper. Mossy stone crop, small house leek. 

Habitat, — Europe. Runs wild in some places in North America* 

Ptitt used. — The entire planU 

Characters. — Moss-tike spreading plant, growing in Avy fields and 
on old walls. Leaves one-eighth to a quarter inch long, alternate^ 



tS2 KALANCHOE LANCINIATA. 

nearly imbricate, in about six spirally turned rows, ovate, thick, convex 
on the back, punctate and smooth. Flowers in scorpoid cymes, 
petals yellow, pistils 4 to 5, stamens 8 to 10. The plant is inodorous 
and has a mucilaginous and acrid taste. Dose, 10 to 15 grs. 

Constituents. — Much mucilage and malates. Its active principle 
rutin has not been isolated. 

Preparations. — Fl. extract of the whole plant. Dose, 15 to 30 grs. 

Actions and uses. — The bruised plant or its juice is emetic, the 
emesis being copious and causing little pain, and is employed for 
removing the false membranes in diphtheria. It is used as an 
application to scrofulous, cancerous, and scorbutic ulcers, as a 
resolvent to enlarged lymphatic glands and a dressing to chronic 
diseases of the skin ; also used to remove warts and corns. 

Kalanchoe Lanoiniata. K. Pinnata. K. Spathnlata. Bryophyllnm* 

Calyoiniim. 

Habitat. — Deccan Peninsula, Bengal. 
Parts used. — The leaves. 

Vernacular. — Bens. — Hamsigar. Bomb. — Pervur sala, Airavana 
Nairavana. Burm. — Ywet-kyst-pen-ponk. Can. — Kalnaru, Haradha* 
chchaka. Duk.— Gha-e-mari. Hind. — Ghai-mari, Parnabija, Zakhm- 
hyata, Ghai-oat, Aran-maran, Hemsagar. Mar. — Varnaby, Ghaimari, 
Ghaipat. Sans. — Aimasa-gara, Ashti-bhaksha. Panj. — Talara, Haiza- 
ka-patt, Parna-veja. Tam. — Malla-kulli. 

Parnabija — Parna means leaf, and bija, a seed ; this is in allusion to 
the character of the plant, the crenulations of whose leaves in contact 
with the damp soil give rise to fresh buds which take roots and 
develop new plants. 

Zakhm-e-ha3rata — Zakhm, a wound, and Hayat to heal, A healer 
of the wound. Wound heals at once and no trace of any morbid 
condition is left behind. 

Characters. — B. Calycinum. Plant erect, tall, fleshy, and suffru- 
ticose ; leaves thick, ovate, crenated ; leaflets one large and two smaller 
ones ; petiole and margin of leaf purple ; flowers yellowish red ; taste 
acid and astringent. Dose 6f the juice, 30 to 40 ms. K. Lanciniata — 
Leaves decompound and pinnatifid ; segments, oblong, acute toothed ; 
flowers yellow. 

Constituents. — Chlorophyll, fat, a yellow organic acid, cream of 
tartar, sulphate of calcium and free tartaric acid ; calcium oxalate 
is found in the leaves. 

Actions and uses. — ^The leaves are styptic and applied hot to 
contused wounds, bruises and boils. By their application the edges of 
incised wounds heal generally by first intention ; when applied to unheal- 
thy wounds and foul ulcers they allay irritation and inflammation, and 
facilitate cicatrization. It is used as an application to bites of venomous 
insects, as gnats, house leek, &c. The juice of the leaves with butter 
is astringent and given in diarrhoea, dysentery, cholera and phthisis. 



DROSKRA PtLTATA. 



253 



Droseraoeae^ 

Sundew family. Herbs growing in marshy places, frequently 
glandular. Leaves alternate, exstipulate, with a circinate vernation ; 
flowers regular, symmetrical and hypogynous ; fruitt capsular, one- 
celled with loculicidal dehiscence ; seeds numerous, albumen fleshy, 
embryo small. 

//ahiaL-^Found everywhere except the arctic regions, 

/^T3^if*r/ilfi.— Slightly acid and acrid. This family is charac- 
tertzed by having glands on their leaves or hairs with peculiar irrita* 
bility which enables them to entrap insects. Example, Sundew or 
Venus's flytrap. 

Drosera Peltata* D. Lunata, D. Rotundifolia. 

Round Leaved Sundew. 

HaMai. — Himalayas, Neilgherry. N. Europe. 

Part used.— The whole plant. 

Characters^— W^^h of a dark oliv^e green colour, growing in 
marshy places ; stem erect, and glabrous ; leaves scattered with glan- 
dular hairs which close when flies and insects alight upon them ; long 
petiolcd, peltate with two long horns pointing upwards ; style pencil- 
shaped* Capsule globose ; seeds, oblong, numerous and small. Flowers 
yellow. Paper, cloth, or even wood is stained of a deep red colour by 
the plant il allowed to dry upon them ; it has the odour of sour milk. 

Cofistiinenis, — A crystalline colouring matter ; a resin (having 
blistering property) and ash containing persalts of iron. 

Preparations. ^'PXrnd extract 5 to 20 ms. Tincture (i in 10). 
Dose, 5 to 10 tns. 

Actions and uses. — The expressed juice is acrid and caustic and 
j)pUed to warts and corns ; applied to the skin it sets up inflammatioo 
ajid causes a blister. Intenialiy the fluid extract of the leaves has been 
used in asthma, chronic bronchitis, phthisis and whooping cough ; 
also in gastric disorders and in flatulence. In whooping cough it 
lessens the violence of the paroxysms and relieves harsh and loud cough* 
It also prevents bleeding from the nose and vomiting. 

Remarks. — It is said that animal substances if used as manure arc 
digested by the sundews and they thrive upon such food and produce 
more capsules and seeds. It is used by the natives to reduce gold 
10 powder. A paste of the plant is used to cover a sovereign >vhich is 
then enclosed in an earthen pot, cemented wiih clay and put in fire 
and thoroughly burnt* Gold is then reduced to powder and used 
as antisyphilitic, alterative and tonic in various chronic diseases* 

Llquidambaraoese or Altingiaoese. 

Trees balsamifcrous. — Leaves i^^imple, lobed and alternate ; stipulaa 
deciduous. Flowers unisexual, involucraie and amentaceous. KruiL 
cone-shaped ; capsules two-celled enclosed in hard scales; seeds winged, 
peltate and albuminous, Embrj^o inverted. Radicle superior. 



254 LIQUIDAMBER ALTINGIA, 

Habitat. — Natives of warm part of India, America and South of 
Europe. 

Properties, — ^Remarkable for fragrant balsamic properties ; they 
have warm bitter barks. 

In the United States it is called sweet gum, and the fragrant 
balsam juice which exudes from stems by incision is called liquidamber, 
oil of amber, or copalm balsam. 

Liquidamber Altingia, Altingia Exoelsa. 

Habitat, — Java, Tenasserim 

Parts tised. — Resin, liquid storax. 

Vernacular, — ^Arab — Meaohe-sayelah. Burm. — Nan-tayok. Eng. 
—Rosa malloes, liquid storax. Java. — Rasa mala. Malay. — Rasa 
mala. 

Characters. — Bark when wounded yields a resin which is employed 
to mix with balsam of Peru. 

Actiofts and uses. — The bark is bitter, aromatic and stimulant 
of mucous membranes, chiefly of the air passages. 

Liquidamber Orientalis, B. P. 

Habitat. — Forests in Asia minor. 

Part used. — The Balsam obtained from the trunk, purified by 
solution in Ethylic alcohol, filtration and evaporation of the solvent. 
Sty rax praeparatum, prepared storax, B. P. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Meahsayelah, Lubni, Dukhan-el-daru. Bom. 
Burm. — Inyok. Eng.-— oriental sweet gum, gum storax, Tar-wood. 
Guz. — Silarasa. Hind. — Silarasa Asht-loban. Ind. — Silaras, Malay. — 
Rosa Malay. Pers. — Asli, Lubni. Sans. — S*lhaka. Tam. — Nare- 
arishippal. Tel. — Shila rasam. Ast loban. — Western frankincense. 

Characters. — A soft or semi-liquid viscid balsam resembling 
honey. When in thin layers, transparent, of a greyish brown 
colour and heavier than water. On heating, it becomes dark brown. 
The smell is pleasant and balsamic. Taste pungent, burning and 
aromatic ; insoluble in warm water, soluble in hot alcohol, in ether, 
or chloroform, glacial acetic acid, bisulphide of carbon and in most of 
the essential oils. The bark occurs in half quills, several inches long, 
ofa light brown colour ; externally soft and corky ; internally resinous 
and aromatic. Dose, 5 to 20 grs. 

Constituents. — A volatile oil styrol(cinnamene); a crystalline solid 
styracin or Cinnamate of Cinnamic ether, two resins, one hard and the 
other soft : and Cinnamic acid. 

Styrol. — A hydrocarbon obtained by distilling storax with water 
It is a colourless thin liquid of a fragrant odour and burning taste; also 
synthetically obtained by heating acetylene gas, or from ethylbenzol 
bromide by heating it with baryta. When heated to a very high 
temperature it is converted into metacinnamene which is a colourless 
amorphous solid, insoluble in alcohol and ether. When distilled it is 
reconverted into styrol. 



HAMAMKXIS VlRGlNtAXA 



555 



Cinnamic acid. — Closely allied to benzoic acid* obtained by heating 
<itorax with solution of sodium carbonate and precipitating by hydro- 
chloric acid. It is colourless crystalline body, without any odour* 
It is excreted in the urine as hippuric acid. It is a constituent of 
balsam of Peru and Tolu. 

Preparaiinn^ — Tinctura Benzoini composita, B. P, Dose, J to i 
dr. Mostly used externally. 

Actions atid uses, — Stimulant, expectorant^ diuretic, antiseptic, 
disinfectant and astringent. As an expectorant it is gi%'en in pulmo- 
nary affections^ chronic bronchitis, chronic catarrh of the geni to-urinary 
organs, as cystitis, pyelitis, gonorrhoea, amenorroea, leucorrhoea, 
and gleet ; to affections of the throat, and in copious perspiration* 
An ointment is used as a parasiticide for scabies, phthiriasis 8lc. It acts 
like Benzoin, balsams of Tolu and Peru, and copaiba. The Hindus 
use it for perfuming medicinal oils. Dose, 5 to 30 grs. 

Liquid Ambar Styraciflua. 

HahiiaL — North America^ United States. 

Dfirt used. — ^The Balsam exuding spontaneously or from incisions 
made in the trunk. 

Characten. — Thick, transparent yellowish brown liquid ; of a 
strong odour of liquid storax ; taste aromatic and acrid. It solidifies 
on exposure to the air ; soluble in alcohol, ether and chloroform. 
Dose, 5 to 30 grains. 

Comtituents. — Styracin, storestn, a hydrocarbon 3.5 p.c*t almost 
identical with styrol and cinnamic acid 5^ p*c, 

/V;if/rfirfl/ibw.— Emulsion, ointment, cerate, 

Actirms and tnes* — Same as those of Liquidamber altingia ; 
stimulant* expectorant and diuretic. 

Hamamelidaeea, 

Witch hazel family; small trees; leaves alternate; stipules deciduous; 
flowers perfect or unisexual; calyx superior, 4 or 5 lobed ; petals 4 or 
5 ; fruits capsular, 2 valved with a loculicidal dehiscence. Seeds 
pendulous and albuminous* 

HabitaL — Temperate climates and tropics, Japan, China, Mada- 
gascar, Assam* 

Ptfjfierties, — Astringent, acrid, bitter and balsamic. 

Hamamelia Yirginiana, B. P. 
Syn- — Winter bloom ; Witch hazel, so called from the twigs being 
ased in the days of witchcraft as divining rods to indicate hidden 
[>nng5, ores, &c. 

fJabiiat, — United States. 

Part used. — The fresh and dried leaves, Hamamciidis folia — 
Hamamelis leaves, witch hazel leaves* B, P., and the dried bark — 
Hamamelidis cortex, Hamamelis bark, witch hazel bark, B. P, 



2S6 COMBRETACEiE. 

Characters. — Leaves ovate, pinnately veined with stellate hair, 3 to 
6 inches long, upper surface dark green or brownish green, under 
surface paler ; apex obtuse, margins sinuate, petiole short; without any 
odour and of an astringent taste. Cortex in curved pieces -^ inch 
thick, 2 to 8 inches long, sometimes coveted with silvery grey or dark 
grey cork or warty scars ; inner surface pale reddish pink or cinnamon 
colour and finely striated longitudinally. Fracture laminated and 
coarsely fibrous. Taste astringent and bitter and without any odour. 
Dose, 20 to 60 grains. 

Constituents. — Hamamelis Folia contains tannin, a volatile oil 
and a bitter principle. The bark contains tannin 8 p.c, bitter principle, 
resin, wax, sugar and ash 6 p.c. 

Preparation, — From the bark — Tinctura Hamamelidis B.P. (i in 
10). Dose, i to I fl. dr. Decoction (1 to 20) for external use. From the 
leaves— Extractum Hamamelidis Liquidum, B.P. — liquid extract of 
Hamamelis. Dose, 5 to 15 ms. Hamamelidin or Hamamelin, an 
uncertain powdered extract of a purple brown colour. Dose, ^ to 2 
grs. Suppositories of 3 grs. each of the extract with cocoa butter, 
useful for piles. Liquor Hamamelidis B.P. (leaves 5, water 10, alcohol 
I, distil to one half) for external use. Unguentum Hamamelidis, B.P., 
liquid extract i, Hydrous wool fat 9. Hazeline, an American speciality. 
A pleasant clear liquid, slightly sweetish, of a fragrant odour. Obtain- 
ed by distillation of the twigs. Dose, ^ to 2 fluid drs. 

Physiological Action. — Anodyne, sedative, cooling, antiseptic, 
astringent and styptic ; used both internally and externally. All these 
properties are mostly due to tannin, but it appears to have some special 
influence over the venous circulation, somewhat like that of aconite 
on the arterial system. In full doses it causes throbbing in the head. 
As a sedative it is used locally in cutaneous inflammations. It is a 
good application as an injection for haemorrhoids of a bleeding variety, 
for varicose veins (varicocele) erysipelas, ulcers, sprains and abrasions, 
also pruritus and eczema. In 1 to 3 ozs. of water it is used as an enema. 
Internally it is given to check passive haemorrhages as haemorrhage 
from the lungs, nose, stomach, kidneys, uterus, rectum, &c. 
In threatened abortion it is beneficial. It is given in excessive 
mucous discharges as gonorrhoea and leucorrhoea ; or as a gargle or 
steam inhalation used in stomatitis, aphthae, sore throat, toothache, &c 

Combretaoe«. 

The Himaja or myrobalan family. 

Trees or shrubs, leaves exstipulate entire without dots. Flowers 
perfect or unisexual, beautiful and red, white or greenish yellow. 
Fruits indehiscent and generally winged or obtuse angled, one seeded ; 
seed, exalbuminous. 

Habitat* — Asia, Africa, America. 

The plants are remarkable for their astringent properties. 



CALYCOr-TKRtS KLORtBONriA. 257 

JUiojeissns L&tifolia. Conocarpus Latifolius, A. Villosa. A. 

ParvifoUa. 

Htibiiut. — Himalaya, Ceylon. 

Part used. — ^The gum. 

Vemaculat . — Can. — Dimluga. Ciag.^Madhura-twacha. Eng. 

— Crane tree. Gu2. — Dhaval. Hind, — Dhaya, Dhaura, Bakh 

Sans, — V'akavriksea, DhavaL Tam. — ^Vellanaga, Vakalee< Tel.^ — 
Sheriinam, yclla-muddi. 

Vaka vrikahat Crane tree, the fruit resembles the head of a crane 
(vaka) ; Dhava from dhva to flow : a large ainount of gum flows 

from it like milk from the breast. 

Characters. — Leaves short pctioledi ovatc» smooth generally, and 
jnarginatc, i to 4 inches long^ and ^ to i inches broad. Taste very 
"^ stringent, the leaves of A. villosa are rusty and villous on both 
lurfaces. Those of A parvifolia are small and silk}** The gum from 
the bark resembles ghatti gund and is in vermicular or elongated tears, 
colourless or of a pale yellow colour, rough and of a glassy fracture^ 
free Irom cracks. and transparent* It darkens by keeping ; with water 
it forms a highly viscid mucilage. 

Constituents, — The leaves contain tannic acid 15*5 p* c. The ash 
contoins carbonate of potash. 

Prefarations, — Decoction of the leaves (i in lo). Dose, J to i 
fid. oz. 

Acftons and uses, — Demulcent and astringent ; the gum is used 
as a substitute for gum arabic. The decoction is astringent, and is givea 
in diarrhcea and gonorrhcra. 

Calyoopteris Floribunda. 

Hiibttat* — W. India, Assam- 

Paris used. — The leaves, root and fruit- 

Vefttacular* — Can.— Marsada, Baguli. Hiod. — Kokoranj. Mar — 
ill, Ukshi. TeL— Bandi-Murudu. 

CZ/ar^c/iT^.-— Leaves opposite, having on the upper surface thinly 
scattered long hairs ; under surface rusty, tomcntose. Taste astriogent 
and bitter* Fruit ovoid, 5 ribbed and villous* 

Constituents. — Tannin 6*86 p. c. 

Preparation. — Juice of leaves ; infusion (1 in 20). Do$e» 3 to & 
dr** Paste of the root. 

AcHoni and uses. — Stimulant and astritigent. The juice of leaves 
or infusion is used in colic and dyspepsia* 'Fhe root paste, mixed with 
that of croton oblongifolium is used for bites of Phoorsa snake (Echis 
caruuta). The fruit is used along with other carminatives in jaun- 
dice. The fruit is rubbed with the root of Grtwia Pilosa and the paste 
mixed with honey is applied to ulcers. 

17 



258 TERMINAL! A ARJUNA, 

QoiBqualis Indioa. Q. Yillosa. 

Habitat — Malaya and India. 

Paris used. — The seeds. 

Vernacular. — Duk. — Kangun-ki-bel. Eng.— Rangoon Creeper, 
Chinese honeysuckle. Hind.— Rang^n-ki-bel. Malay. — Sun-sung, 
aroos. Mar. — Vilayati Chumeli. Tam. — Irangfin-Malli. Tel. — 
Rangunu-malle-chettu. 

Characters. — Dry seeds black, yellowish and oily internally. 
Fruits oval or oblong, pointed at either end and sharply pentagonal. 
They dehisce from the apex. Pericarp woody, thin, fragile and of a 
mahogany colour and enclosing a seed. 

Constituents. — Fruits consist of shells 41 parts, and kernels 
59 parts in 100 parts ; they contain a fixed oil 15 p. c. of a yellow colour, 
a sugary substance, similar to levulose, and an organic acid similar 
to cathartic acid. The seeds afford an alkaline ash. 

Actions and uses, — The bruised seeds are anthelmintic and given 
in expelling lumbrici. Dose, 4 or 5 seeds. 

Terminalia Arjana, Pentaptera Arjnna, P. Glabra, 
P. AnguBtifoUa. 

Habitat*^ Deccan, Ceylon, Bengal, Punjab, N.-W. Provinces. 

Parts used. — The bark« 

Vernacular, — Beng*— Anun. Bom. — Arjun Ladara. Burm. — 
Tonk-kyan. Can. — Toru Biflimatti. Duk. — Arjuna. Hind. — Arjan, 
Kahu, Jamla. Malyal. — Vella-maruta. Mar. — Kowa, Shardul. 
Pinjal, Arjun. Panj. — ^Jumla, Kukhsoba. Sans, — Aijuna, Kakubha. 
Tam.— Veellai-Maruda-maram. Tel. — Tella-maddi-chettu. 

Characters. — Bark, in quills, brown, soft, scabrous and corky, easily 
separable from the wood, and breaking with a short fracture, taste 
astringent and odour aromatic 

Constituents. — ^The ash of the bark contains 34 p. c. of almost 
pure calcium carbonate. The bark also contains tannin. 

Preparation. — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, i to i fld. oz. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent, and tonic ; given in heart disease. 
Locally used as a wash for wounds, ulcers, contusions, and specially 
used in promoting union of fractures and dispersion of ecchymosis ; 
internally largely used by the natives in haemorrhagic and other 
fluxes and as a lithontriptic 

Terminalia Bellerioa. 

Habitat. — India, Ceylon, Coimbatore, Peshawar. 

Parts used. — The dried pulp of the fruit without stones. 

Vernacular^ — Arab.— Balilaj. Beng. — Bohor&, Bahera. Bom. — 
Behedan. Burm. — Phankha-si-tit-sein. Bankha. Can. — ^Tari-kuyi. 
Cing. — Bulu. Duk. — B&larA, Balda. Eng.— Beleric myrobalan, 



^^^^ TfiRMIKAtlA CHEBL^LA. 259 

Bastard myroBaians, Bedda-nuts. Guz«<^Behd^n. Hind.^— Bharla, 
Bahera, Baira. Mar, — ^Behada. Karsba-phal, Bhulvaso. Malyal. — TaoL 
Pcrs^^Balileh. Sans, — V^ibhiuka, Anilaghnakaf Bahira. Tain,— 
Tanrik-kay, Tel-— Tandra-kayi» Bahadraha. 

Anilaghnaka means Windkilling. 

Characters, — ^Two varieties, one with nearly globular fruity tlie other 
ovate and much larger. The dried fruit, larger in size than a jaephala 
and obtusely angled ; external surface brown, velvety or silky» shghlly 
wrinkled, having a small stalk at the bottom and a depression on the 
top ; interior containing a dried pulp, yellow and brittle, and easily 
removable from the stone ; stone hard, woody, oval in shape, of a pale 
yellow colour and containing an almond-like seed, very much wrink- 
seed when fresh oily and haviBg the taste like that of filberts, 
id intoxicating when eaten in quantities. Bark when wounded 
iving out insipid gum in tears and vermiform pieces ; colour dark 
brown, surface smooth, free from cracks, very little soluble in water, 
and forming a tough mass. It contains crystals of oxalate of lime. 

Ojmtttueut^. — Gallo-tannic acid, colouring matter, resins and a 
greenish yellow oil. 

Preparatifms. — Powder of the pericarp. Dose, 10 to 40 grs, and 
decoction of fruit (i in 10). Dose, } to i fid. 02, Linctus or 
lozenges* 

Actions and uses, — Astringent, tonic and laxative ; with salt and 
long pepper it is given as an expectorant in the form of electuaries in 
cough» hoarseness of voice, sere throat and dyspepsia. The dried 
nulp roasted is kept in the mouth as lozenges in sore throat. The 
Iruil is given in diarrhcea, dropsy, piles, leprosy, &c., also in 
enlargement of the spleen. 



Terminalia Chebula, T. Reticulata* MyrobaJaiit 

Habitat, — Tablelands of India, Ceylon, Punjab, 

Parts used, — ^The dried fruits — myrobalans and galls. 

There are four varieties of chebulic myrobalans used medicinally 
in India, but they are the same fruit at different stages of maturity. 
V^cry large fruits fetch a fancy price. 

IWnacuJar* — Ouite mature or ripe fruits. — Arab. — Halitat-i- 
Cabuli. Bcng, — Hara, Haritaki. Can, — Alale-kayi« Cing. — ^Aralu. 
Duk, — Harda, Harll. Guz. — Sardari harade, iMohoti Harade. Pile 
harade. Kabuli Harade. Hind, — Harpile, Harja umbedhur» Harda. 
Le|)cha — Silimking. Malval. — ^Kulukka. Mar. — H^rapa, Pahari- 
Hatia« Pers. — Halilohei^ /arda. Sans.^ — Haritaka, Abhaya, pranada 
pathtya« sudha, Bishak priya vigia, Aniruta chetaki. Tam. — Kaduk- 
kay. Teh— Karakkaya, 

Fruit when arrived at or near maturity and yellow. Arab. — 
Habilch-i-Asfar, Hatileh-i-chino. Bomb., Hind.— Haradan, Rangari 
hirailc^ Pers. — Rohini, Halileh-e-asfar, 



260 TERMINALIA CHBBULA. 

Young fruit when dried becoming black and brown and of the 
size of a raisin, — Arab. — Halileh-i-Zangi, Halibche siyah, Halilaji 
asvad. Bomb. — Bola harade. Can. — Alsle-pinda. Duk. — Balhalre, 
Zangi-harle. Eng. — Black myrobalans. Guz — Himaja, himaji harade. 
Hind. — Bilh4r, Langi-hir, kilihar. Pers. — Halilahe sibajih. Sans. — 
Bala-haritaka, Himavali Patana Abhayia. Sind. — Imachi. Tam. — 
Kadak-kay. Tel.— Pinda Karak-kaya. 

Fruit very young about the size of a grain of barley. Arab. — 
Halileh-i-Jawi. Guz. — Java harade. Mar. — Javasa, fruit about the 
size of a cinnamon seed. Arab. — Halileh*i-zira. 

Gall-like excrescenses. Incorrectly considered as flowers. Beng.— 
Haritaki-phul. Can. — Alale-havon. Duk. — Halre-k^-phai. Guz. — 
Harle-phul, pilo harle phul. Malyal. — Katukka-pu. Mar. — Hirada- 
phule. Sans. — Haritaki pushpam. Tam. — Kadu-kai-pu. Tel. — 
Karak-kayu-puwulu Aldicai, 

Pranada life-giver. Sudha, Nectar. Bhishakpriya, Physician's 
favourite. Shakra — Shrista, created by Indra. Pathya, a corruption 
of paraiya or Paharija or paharej — abstinence from unwholesome or 
luxurious living. This drug can be given with benefit to persons 
who may be sufiering from the ill effects of reckless eating and 
drinking. 

C^tfrtfc/^r^,— Halileh-i-kabuli, sarwar-i-Hindi, survari harade — a 
very large sized fruit of an ovoid form, smooth, dense, readily sinking 
into water and heavy ; about 2 inches long, and tapering, especially at 
the lower end ; 5 or 6 sided, furrowed longitudinally and highly wrink- 
led ; epidermis yellowish brown. When cut into, it shows a yellowish 
or darkish brown pulp and stone; pulp astringent and somewhat sticky 
to the taste. The best quality of harade contains a large, rough, bony 
one-celled endocarp and largest quantity of pulp. The epidermis 
when chewed is smarting to the tongue, the stone is insipid, the pulp 
is bitter and somewhat sour. Dose, 2 to 10 grs. Haradan. Rangari 
hirade. These are smaller in size, wrinkled and less furrowed than 
survari harade. In length each is about an inch or more. The 
epidermis is yellow. When cut into, it presents a yellow dried pulp 
and a stone. Bila harade. These are unripe fruits, smaller in size 
than the above two varieties, and ovoid ; colour deep brown or black, 
wrinkled, tapering, epidermis dark or brown. On section, in the 
interior is found a pulp which is dark and homogeneous There 
is no stone. It has a shining fracture and an astringent taste. Dose, 
30 to 60 grs. Java harade. It is the most diminutive of all. The word 
Java means barley, and it is so called as in size it resembles Java ; 
other characters are similar to those of himaja. Galls. These are 
produced by the tender leaves being punctured by an insect, and 
its eggs deposited therein which by extravasation of the sap 
became enlarged into hollow glands of various^ shapes and sizes. 
Dose, I to 3 grs. 

Constituents. — Myrobalans contain astringent principles — tannic 
acid (45 p, c.) and gallic acid, mucilage, a brownish yellow 



TERMING 



2bi 



COlountTg matter. Chebulic myrobalans also contain an "organic acid 
named chebuUnic acid, which, when heated in water, spHts up into 
tannic and gslhc acids. 

Chebuhnic acid»— To the extract of chebulic myrobalans, add 
sodium chloride solution. Dissolve the matter that separates 
in water, shake the solution with acetic ether. Evaporate the ether, 
^dissolve the residue tn water — chebulinic acid crystallizes out in 
'rhombic prisms. It is an acid without any odour. Taste sweety freely 
^lublc in alcohol and hot water, sparingly so in ether and in cold water. 
The myrobalans also contain an oleo resin of a green colour, soluble 
in alcohol, petroleum spirit, and oil of turpentine. Tt is called 
myrobalanin. 

Preparatiun, — Survari harade— a confection, paste and electuary of 
the fruit deprived of stone. Infusion or decoction ( 1 in lo ). Dose, 4 
drachms to i ounce 

Himaja powder fried in ghcc or in casLor oil* Dose, J to 2 drs, 
Java harade, the same as those of himaja ; a compound powder— 
Amrita baritaki and a decoction pathyadi kuatha. 

AcUfius and uses, — Purgative, astringent and alterative. The ripe 
fruits are generally purgative ajid the unripe ones astringent and aper* 
tent. Survari harde freed from the stone (the pulp and the cortex being 
only used) is used as a laxative generally combined with aromatics as 
fennel seeds and carraway and given in chronic bronchitis, asthma and 
in gastric intestinal disorders* Combined with cmbclic and beleric 
myrobalans, it forms the well known Indian preparation called 
Triphala, meaning the three fruits, which is used as an alterative, tonic 
and stomachic, 

Rangart hiradc — alterative, stomachic, laxative and astringent ; 
given in fevers, piles and intestinal disorders ; chiefly used by tanners. 

Btitaharade^a mild and safe aperient, and astringent. Like rhubarb, 
it causes one free motion, and then regulates the boweh. Fried in 
ghee over a fire it is largely used in chronic diarrhoea, choleraic 
diarrhoBa and dysentery ; also in flatulence, vomiting, hiccough and 
colicky pains. Java harade. — Its actions and uses are similar to 
r those of himaja. Galls on the leaves are poweifuUy astringent and 
iven in dysentery and diarrhoea in children. 

Many imitations of survari haradearc sold by Jogis and M4ravaries 
who sell them at very high or fanciful prices ; spurious preparations 
often weighing as much as 6 to 12 ozs., are prepared by over-lapping 
diminutive survari harade (taken as a nucleus) with several slices 
of other survari harade, the whole being cleverly glued together and 
made to resemble a natural big-sized fruit. The high price fetched 
for survari harade is said to be due to its rarity and also to the fanciful 
medicinal properties attributed lo it. It is said that Rajas and others 
who have a repugnance to take medicine internally, are made to 
keep survari harade in their hands for a few minutes, when it acts ^ a 
purgative. In order that the public may give ready credence to such 



262 TERMINALIA CATAPPA. 

fanciful virtues, the Jogis who prepare fictitious harade generally 
paint them with some highly irritant cathartics under the belief that 
when held in the hand the irritants become absorbed and produce pur- 
gative effects. 

Tenninalla Catappa, T. Myrobalans. 

Habitat. — All over India. 

Parts used, — The fruit or nut, bark and oil. 

Vernacular. — Eng. — Indian almond tree, leaf-nut. Beng. — Benglu- 
badam. Cing. — Kotamba. Can. — Nat-badami. Guz. — Nat-ni- 
bidam. Hind. and Duk. — ^Jangli-l^dam. Mar. — Nit-budam. 
Malyal. — Katta-kurn. Catappa. Pers. — Badame-hinde. Sans. — 
Jugudi-phallaani Desha-badamitte. Tam. — Nattu Vadam-kottai . 
Tel.— Nattu-Badam-Vettichi. 

Characters. — Fruit, a drupe, oval, smooth, compressed or flattened» 
of a dull purple colour when ripe. Nut rough, hard and thick ; kernel 
cylindrical, edible and resembling almonds, and hence called country 
almonds or ' leaf nut ' amongst the Europeans. 

Constituents. — The seeds contains 50 p. c. of the oil resembling 
almond oil, in flavour and mildness. It is of a pale yellowish colour 
and without any odour, and composed of stearine and oleine. The 
bark yields a black pigment used by the natives to colour their teeth. 

Prefarations.—'DecocXXon of the bark (i in 10). Dose, \ 
li fid. oz. 

Actions and uses. — The bark is astringent and "given in atonic 
dyspepsia, diarrhoea, gonorrhcea and leucorrhcea. The fruit has the 
same properties as those of almond. 

Terminalla Panioolata, Pentaptera Panioulata. 

Z^/^^/Va/.— Malabar, Nilgherries and Coorg. 

Parts used. — The flowers and bark. 

Vernacular. — Can. — Honal Huluwa. Mar. — Kinjal, Kindal. 
Tam.— Maruthu, Matti, Maida. TeL— Nei-muri. 

/V^/ar/i/rb«.— Powder. 

Actions and w^^^.— Stimulant. The flowers are used by the 
natives with the root of cissampelos pareira in cholera. The juice of 
the flowers or bark with that of gu&va bark is used as an antidote in 
opium poisoning. The same juice melted with butter and rock-salt 
is applied externally in parotitis. 

Terminalla Tomentosa, Terminalla Glabra, T. Alata, T. Crenulata* 

Habitat. — India. 

Parts /w^.— The bark. 

Vernacular.— Beng.^Ashkn, Piasal. Can.— Mutti karai. Cing.— 
Koombuk. Duk. — Jangli-karanj. Hindi.— Asan. Mai.— Tambavu, 
karu-maruta. Mar. — Ain. Tam.— Kurrupu-maruta, Kara-marada. 
Tel. — Nalla-maddi-chettu. 



CARKYA ARBOREA- 



a(i3 



Characters, — The bark is thin, yellowish brown. 

Constituents, — ^The ash of the bark contains much potash and 
tannin. 

PteparatiosiSn — Decoction (i in lo)* Dose, i to 2 ozs, 

Actions and uses, — ^ A stringent ; used in diarrhcea, dyspepsia, and 
leucorrbceaf like the bark of T. catappa. 

MyrtaoeaB. 

The Jimbu or Myrtle family. Trees or shrubs, with opposite, 
alternate, entire, cxstipulatc and usually dotted leaves. Flowers white 
or scarlet, generally brown. Fruits dry or succulent, dehiscent or 
indehiscenti seeds numerous^exalbutninous. 

Habitat, — ^Tcmperate climates and tropics. 

/^o/ertus, — The trees are remarkable for pungent and aromatic 
properties due to their containing volatile oils. Many of these oils 
are used as stimulants, antispasmodics^ diaphoretics, aromatics and 
carminatives. Some species are astringent and others secrete a 
saccharine matter; some bear edible fruits, some are used as spices, and 
others are used in preparing perfumery. Some are used as timber. 

Careya Ajboraa. 

Habitat, — Throughout India, 

I^MTis HS$d, — The dried calices of flowers and the bark. 

Vcrnactdar, — Beng. — ^{The dried calices) Bakumbha, Burm.*^ 
Bambhooai, banubwait ban. Bomb. — Bakumbha. Cing. — Kahaatta. 
Eng.— Wild guava, Guz. — Vakumbha. — Kumbha. Hind. — Ramba, 
kumbhce* Malyal. — Peloa. Mar. — Vakurabha, kumbha. Sans. — 
Kurnbhi. Tam. — Ave-mavo» Ayama. putatanni. Tel. — Kumbhi^ 
Diiilippi. Can. — Kumbhia, gouju, Mai. — Peru. Guz. — Vakumbha. 
Beug. — Bakumbha. 

Kumbhi means a jari a pitcher, or a water pot ; this is in 
allusion to the hollow on the top of the fruit resembling in appearance 
a water pot. 

Characters, — ^The calices about an inch or i^ inches long* of a 
brownish dark colour, and of the shape of cloves ; epidermis deeply 
furrowed and much wrinkled. It has a very small stalk at the bottom. 
On the top of the fruit there are diverging four scaly calyx-lobes. In 
the middle of these there is a cup-shaped depression, from the centre 
of which a long, slender, and wire-like curved style projects. Oo 
tran^vversc section the ovary presents cavities in the interior of which 
abortive seods are attached, taste faintly aromatic, aciduous, and astring- 
ent; odour aromatic. Bark rough, red and fibrous within. On moistening 
it much mucilage is given out. An astringent gum exudes from tlte 
fruit and stems. 

Constituents, — The thick red bark contains tannin, 8 p*c- The 
liber contains calcium o.xalate in large simple crystals. 

Preparations.^Decoction (i in 10). Dose^ 4 to la drs. 



:264 EUGENIA CARYOPHYLLATA. 

Actions and uses. — The bark and calices of the flowers are astring- 
ent, demulcent, and aromatic. The decoction is used in indigestion, 
and also as a demulcent in coughs and colds. The bark is used in 
preparing emollient embrocations. 

Remarks. — Vakumbha is erroneously called by the druggists 
vavani phula. 

Eugenia Caryophyllata, B. P., CaryophyllnB AromatiouB, 
HyrtuB CaFyophylluB. 

/Ttf^i/^/.— Malacca, East and West Indian Islands, Sumatra, 
Penang, India, Ceylon, Travancore. 

Parts used.— The fruit ; the dried flower-buds — Caryophyllum, 
<:loves B, P., and oil — oleum Caryophylli, B. P. 

Caryophyllus from caryon, a nut, and phyllon, a leaf, in allusion 
to the nut-like appearance of flower buds which are like leaves. Clove, 
from clavus, a nail. The dried flowers resemble nails. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Karanaphal. Beng. — Lovanga, long. Bom. 
— (the fruit) nara lavanga. Burm. — La-nyen-pwen. Can. — Lavanga. 
Chin. — Tkeng-hia, Ting-hisug. Cing. — Karambu krabugaha, Warrala. 
Duk. — Ranjambool lavanga, Eng. — Cloves. Guz.— Lavanga. Hind. 
— Laung, (the fruit) nara lavanga, (the clove stalks) vikunia. Malay. — 
Karampu bunga chanke. Mai. — ^Bunga lavanga, Ran-jambul. Pers. — 
Mykek. Sans. — Lavanga. Can.— Lavanga. Tel. — Davanga-pu. 
Tam. — Kirambu Karuvap-pu. Ind. — (bazar, the fruit), na'elnaug. 

The dried unripe fruits are known as mother cloves. 

Karanphul is derived from karan, an ear, and phul, a flower. It 
means a flower ornament for the ear, gold or silver ornaments used for 
the ear resemble cloves in shape and size, hence the ornament is often 
call lavong or karanphul. 

Early writers call Lavang by the name of karanphul. This is 
due to the practice of keeping lavang in the hole in the lobe of the 
^ar to prevent it from closing. 

Narlavang — Nar, a male, and lavang, a clove — mother-clove, 
because of the erroneous;notion among the native that the seed-bearing 
organ is always the male. 

Characters. — A handsome evergreen. The dried unexpanded 
flowers (cloves) consist of calices, ovary and flower buds f of an inch 
long, of a rich or darkish brown colour, and very oily. In form resem- 
bling vakumbhd; calyx tube tapering below, terminated by four thick 
rigid teeth which diverge at the top of the ovary. Within them are 
four imbricated petals forming small globular balls, enclosing numerous 
stamens and a single style. Below the teeth of the calyx is a club-like 
stalk which is the unripe ovary, surface much wrinkled, smell strong, 
fragrant and spicy, taste aromatic and very agreeably pungent. All 
parts of the clove abound in oil cells ; when scratched the oil exudes. 
Dose, 5 to 20 grs. 



EDCALVPTUS GLOBULUS. 



J65 



Mother cloves are ovatet oblong, about an inch long, containing 
two'dark brown oblong, starchy, cotyledons, in size resembling pipUf 
they abound in starch but contain less essential oil ; it has the odour 
cf doves. 

Constituents, — A heavy volatile oil 18 p* c, Caryophyllin — 
a camphor, resin 6 p. c. Caryophyllic acid or eugenic acid; eugenin, 
a cry^stalline body, tannin, woody fibre» gum, &c. 

Oleum Caryophilli, B, R The oil distilled from cloves with water 
or steam, A colourless or pale yellow oily liquid when fresh, becom- 
ing thicker and reddish brown by keeping. Odour strong, pungent 
.and aromatic^ taste, pungent and spicy — soluble in alcohol and glacial 
acetic acid. It consists of a light and a heavy portion. The light 
jrtion contains sesquiterpene caryophyllene. The heavy portion 
contains cugenol, a phenol-like compound and caryophilli ne. Dose, ^ 
to 3 ms, 

Caryophyllin — obtained by treating ethereal extract of cloves with 
water, the precipitate is next filtered and treated with ammonia* It 
occurs in silky stellate needles. 

The oil of cloves of the Indian bazaars is prepared by steeping 
cloves in sweet oil and keeping them for some days. 

Prebaratmn* — Of the clove buds — ^Infusum caryophilli, B. P. 
(i in 40). Dose» \ to 1 oz. Infusum auruntii composita* Dose, \ to i oz. 

PhyWihjgical action, — ^ Antiseptic, local anassthetic, general 
stomachic, carminative, aromatic^ antiemetic and antispasmodic ; 
ejtteriially rubefacient, anaesthetic and antiseptic; internally, it in- 
cTcaies the circulation and raises blood-heal, promotes digestion 
and nutrition, and relieves gastric and intestinal pain and spasm* It 
stimulates the skin, salivary glands, kidneys, liver and bronchial 
«iucous membrane* It is excreted in the breath, perspiration, bile, 
milk and urine. 

Therapeutics^ — Given as a flavouring agent to correct griping 
caused by purgatives^ to relieve flatulence and to increase the now of 
saliva. In combination with other spices and rock salt it is given 
to relieve colic, indigestion, vomiting and thirst. Rxtcrnally it is 
used as an application in rheumatic pains, sciatica, lumbago, to the 
head in headache, and to the tooth in toothache ; roasted in the flame 
of a candle and kept in the mouth it improves the breath, relieves 
sore throat and strengthens the gums. The powdered clove is a chief 
ingredient of a native preparation — lavanga*di-churana, which is given 
in cough, asthma, &c* A paste of them applied in the forehead 
and to the nose is a popular remedy among the natives in headache, 
coryza &c. 

Eucalyptus Globulus, B. P., and other Species. 

Gum wood, Australian fever tree, Australian blue gum tree, 
iron bark, woolly butt, 

^a^f/n/.— Australiflp Italyt Algeria, Europe, United States^ 

■C^alifornia. 



266 EUCALYPTUS GLOBULUS 

Paris used, — ^The dried leaves, Eucalypti folia; and oil, oleum 
eucalypti, B. P. 

Characters. — Leaves smooth, entire, ensiform, 6 to 12 inches 
in length and i inch in breadth ; glaucous when fresh ; yel- 
lowish green and coriaceous when dry. Held up to the light they 
ara found to be studded with oil glands ; odour strongly balsamic and 
camphoraceous, taste astringent, pungent, bitter and aromatic. Dose, 
5 grs. in powder. 

Constituents, — The leaves contain a volatile oil 6 p. c , tannin, 
cerylic alcohol, a crystallizable fatty acid, and a resin composed of 
three resinous bodies. No alkaloidal principle. 

Volatile oil — oleum eucalypti, B. P. The oil is distilled from the 
fresh leaves of E. globulus, E. gracilis, E. incrassata, E. amygdalina 
(wanting in eucalyptol), E. dumosa, E. oleosa, E. cneorifolia, E. 
uncinata and E. odorata. It is a colourless or pale yellow liquid, of an 
aromatic camphoraceous odour and pungent spicy taste, leaving 
an after-sensation of coldness in the mouth. Sp. gr. 0*900 to 0*920. 

It is not caustic and does not cause much coughing when inhaled ; 
nor does it irritate the skin or the mucous membrane when applied. It 
is destructive to low organisms. It is insoluble in water and freely 
soluble in alcohol, oils, fats, paraffins, glacial acetic acid and carbon 
bisulphide. Dose, ^ to 3 ms. in capsules or emulsion. 

The oil dissolves camphor, pine resins, elemi, sandarac, dammar, 
asphalt, copal, benzol, dragons blood, amber, shellac, caoutchouc, 
wax, &c. 

The volatile oil consists of different bodies which distil over at 
varying temperatures, viz. cymene, eucalyptene, terpene and eucalyptol ; 
also small amount of valeric, butyric and capronic aldehydes. 

Eucalyptol. — A neutral body obtained from the volatile oil, principal- 
ly obtained from eucalyptus cneorifolia, E. dumosa and E. oleosa ; other 
plants also yield it, viz. — santonica, rosemary, curcuma, men tha,cajuput 
salvia, laurus, and canella. It is identical with cineol or cajuputol. By 
the action of phosphoric acid it is converted into eucalyptene a sub- 
stance allied to cymene and eucalyptolene. It is a colourless liquid of 
aromatic, camphoraceous odour, and pungent, cooling taste ; soluble in 
alcohol, carbon bisulphide, and glacial acetic acid. Dose, 3 to 10 ms. 

Eucalyptene or eucalyptia. A purified oil distilled from the leaves 
for internal use. Eucalyptene hydrochloride— eucalypteol. In white 
crystalline scales of a bitter taste ; soluble in alcohol, ether and chloro- 
form, nearly insoluble in glycerin and water, decomposed by alcohol and 
alkalies. Dose, 2 to 6 grs., used as an enema — eucalypteol 30 grs., olive 
oil 2 ounces, and yolk of egg, one; mix ; also given in diarrhoea, typhoid 
fever, and in cough in phthisis. 

Eucalyptus honey, an Australian product, produced by a small bee 
Apis Nigra Mellifica, which feeds on the flowers of eucalyptus tree. It 
is used as a bactericide in phthisis, and in diseases of the kidneys and 
bladder, and in scrofulous affections, as a substitute for cod liver oil. 



EUCALVPTUS GLOBULUS. 



267 



Preparations. — Inhalation, eucalvptus oil 5, acid carbolic 10, liquor 
' ammoniae 12, alcohol 25, used in dipntheria, broachitis, ozsena, &c. 

Unguentum iodoformi et eucalypti r iodoform i, eucalyptus 
oil 9, paraffin 20» vaseline 20. Unguentum eucalypti, B. P, (i in 10) ; 
hard paraffin 4, soft paraffin 5, oil of eucalyptus i, used as an 
antiseptic dressing* Tinctura eucalypti foliorum (1 in 5), Dose« 
15 to lao ms, Infusum eucalypti (i in lo). Dose, 2 to 6 ft, 
dxs. Emulsio eucalypti, contains eucalyptus oil, powdered gum 
Arabic, equal parts and water 40* used as an urethral injection or a« a 
lotion in gonorrhoea and may be taken internally. Dose, l to 4 drs. 
Extractum eucalypti fluidum, fluid extract of eucalyptus. Dose, 10 to 
60 mst Vapour eucalypti 40 nis. to 1 oz. with carbonate of magnesia. 
Dose, X drachm in I pint of water. 

Eucalyptus gauze contains eucalyptus oil, 6 p, c. It is also known 
as carbasus eucalypti. The cotton gauze impregnated with oil of 
eucalyptus i, dammar resin 3, paraffin wax 3. Cremor eucalypti 
compositus, an emulsion containing 50 p. c, of cod liver oil and 
5 minims of eucalyptus for each drachm — valuable for phthisis. 
Dose, I to a drs, Euc-alembroth i gauze, contains sal alembroth* 
castor oil, and eucalyptus oil. Eucalyptus sawdust (i in 9) used la 
deodorize the air of rooms, Eucalyptus wool, 5 p. c. of oil, 

Physifdugkal action. — The dried leaves are febrifuge, stimulant, ex- 
pectorant^ diaphoretic and antiseptic. The anti-malarial properties' of 
the trees are chiefly due to the volatile oil, and partially to the great 
avidity they have for water when growing. Eucalyptus increases the 
flow ofsaliva, gastric and intestinal juices and hence wnen taken into the 
stomach it increases the appetite and digestion. It increases the heart 
beats and lowers the arterial tension. It is eliminated by the skin, kidneys, 
bronchi and may be found in the perspiration, urine, breath, milk, &c. 
In large doses it is an irritant of the alimentary canal, producing 
eructation, indigestion, nausea, vomiting and purging. It lowers the body 
heat, causes great weakness of the muscles, and often leads to conges- 
tion of the brain and kidneys. In toxic doses it is a narcotic poison. 
It paralviies the respiratory centre in the medulla. 

ThetapenticSt^^^ll stimulates the mucous membrane and henoe 

.given in chronic bronchitis, chronic catarrh of the genito-urinary 

:>rgans, in broncho-pulmonary catarrh, and during convalescence 

from acute diseases. In influenza the oil is very useful. At 

antimalarial the leaves or the oil are given to reduce the size of the 

spleen by absorbing the noxious germs; by draining the soil of its 

water and by its antiseptic emanations, the tree purifies the malaria 

stricken atmosphere in its vicinity. It is given as a stomachic 

an chronic dyspepsia and in wormi. In ague and other malarial 

■ fevers, an infusion of the leaves is largely used in place of quinine. It 

Ms also tried in septic fevers, remittent fevers* and in later stages of 

t);phoid. The leaves with belladonna or stramonium leaves, or the 

oil are smoked to relieve asthma and whooping cough. The oil is a 

Jpowerfu! antiseptic and has an ozonising influence on the atmosphere 

while it oxidises. It is inhaled or used as a spray in influenza. Given 



l68 HUCALYPTUS ROSTRATA. 

both internally and applied externally it does not irritate the skin 
or the mucous membranes. The oil mixed with olive oil is used as a 
rubefacient in rheumatism. The leaves, coarsely powdered, are 
smoked in cardiac asthma, ozaena, bronchitis, phthisis, and diphtheria. 
Externally the oil is used as a substitute for carbolic acid, as a spray, as 
an inhalation or as an antiseptic solution, or as a stimulant disinfect- 
ant in stomatitis, pharyngitis, tonsillitis, &c, ; as a wash to ulcers and 
wounds and as an injection in gonorrhoea, leucorrhoea, &c. It prevents 
putrefaction and hence used as a vehicle for alkaloids to prevent the 
development of penicillium. It is used as ,a spray deodorizer to 
remove foetid odours. It is added to cod liver oil to remove its fishy 
flavour. It prevents moths entering woollen clothes. Eucalyptol is 
given in bronchitis, phthisis, typhoid fever and diarrhoea. The E. 
amygdalin and E. globulus oils differ. The oil obtained from E. 
globulus contains eucalyptol but no phellandrene. That obtained from 
£, amygdalinae contains phellandrene as its principal constituent and 
no eucalyptol. 

EuoalyptQB Rostreta, B. P., and other Bpeoies. 

Habitat — Australia, Malay Peninsula, Nilgherry Hills. 

Parts used. — The bark. The gummy exudation from the bark* 
Eucalypti gummi B. P., eucalyptus gum, red gum. 

, A ruby coloured exudation, in grains or small pieces of various 
sizes and of a deep red or garnet colour and shining ; thin fragments, 
which are tough and difficult to powder are transparent and of 
a ruby red colour. Taste highly astringent. If chewed the gum 
adheres to the teeth and tinges the saliva red. It is soluble in cold 
water 80 to 90 p. c, entirely so in alcohol. Used as pills. Dose, 2 to 5 grs. 

Preparations. — Tinctura eucalypti gummi (i in 4). Dose, 20 to 40 
ms. 1 oJ tincture to 7 of water forms a very astringent gargle. 

Trochisci eucal3'pti compositi. Eucalyptus gum i gr., chlorate of 
potash 2 grs., and cubeb powder, J gr. in each. Trochiscus eucalypti 
gummi, B. P. One grain in each. Dose, i to 2. 

Extractum eucalypti gummi liquidum. Dose, 20 to 60 ms. 

Syrupus eucalypti gummi (5 of the liquid extract to 3 of sugar). 
Dose, J to I dr. 

Decoctum eucalypti gummi (i in 40). Dose, 2 to 4 drs. used 
as a gargle. Internally given for diarrhoea. Insufflatio eucalypti 
gummi, eucalyptus gum, in powder and starch equal parts, a powerful 
astringent applied through an insufflator to the relaxed larynx. 

Actions and uses, — A powerful astringent both internally and 
externally ; given in diarrhoea and dysentery. The extract, if injected 
into the nostrils at once, stays bleeding from the nose. It is injected 
into the vagina or the rectum in cases of excessive mucous and san- 
guineous discharges. If applied on lint it arrests haemorrhage from 
wounds. Suppositories are used for relaxed condition of the 
rectum and vagina. Red gum lozenges or the diluted extract of it 
are used in relaxed sore throat. It checks the diarrhoea due to mer- 
cury, when given in syphilis. 



EUOES-iA /AMBOLANA. 



S69 



Remarks, — This gum should not be confounded with commoQ 
Australian gum or Botany Bay kino gum, which is ihe producl of 
eucalyptus resinifera. The latter is resinous, and is hardly soluble in 
water. 

E» Rofousta. The leaves yield an essential oil. It is like 
cajuputi oil and very fragrant. 

Eugenia Jambolana, £. Fruticosa, Syzy^inm Caryophylllfolltuii, 
Syzygium Jambolanum. 

NabitaL — India, Coimbaiore, Bengal, Camaon, East Indies. 

Parts used. — The fruit, leaves and dried seeds (jambolan<c semina) 
and bark. 

Vernacular^ — Beng. — Kula Jam, Bomb, — JambuL Can.*— 
Nerala. Cing — Madang. Duk. — Sittala-chini, Eng. — Java-pluuit 
Jatnun» JambuK Guz. — Pnras, JambuL Hind. — Janiuna. Mar.^ — 
Jiimbu, Sans.^ — Jambup Megha-varna, Rajaphala, Nilaphala, Jam* 
b\'a (spirituous liquorj. Tarn. — Nawal. Tel. — Naregar. 

Meghavarna means Cloud coloured, Nilaphala means black fruit, 
Meghaba — Cloud-like, Rajaphala means royal fruit. 

Characters. — The fresh bark is grey, or of a pale brown colour ; sur- 
face fissured and scabrous ; internally red and 6Drousor pale white, soft, 
brittle, and full uf starch-like granules ; wood lough and fibrous, juice 
rather sticky. Taste acidtilnus and astringent. Leaves — oblong, acu- 
minate, smooth, bhining, and glabrous, or of a green or darkish greeo 
colour, of an aromatic odour and taste ; fruit of a purple colour, subacid, 
sweetish and astringent. When eaten unripe it imparts a dark 
colour to the lips, teeth and tongue. When very large and of 
the size of a pigeon's egg it is called paras jambudo Epidermiii smooth, 
shining, and very thin, and can be easily removed by scratching; pulp, 
of a dark reddish colour* A vinegar is prepared from it. The seed when 
fresh of a pinkish colour which becomes brown on drying; t^ta 
thin and brittle, enclosing thick, hard, and wrinkled cotyledons; 
taste of the set-d is aromatic. Dose of the powdered fruit stone, 5 to 
30 grains, in cachets, powder or pills. 

Constituents, — The seed contains jambulin, a glucoside; also a trace 
of essential oil, chlorophyll, fat, resin, gallic acid, albumen &c. The 
bark contains tannin 12 p.c. and a kino*like gum. 

Preparathns, — Extractum Jambul liquidum. (Take fresh seeds, 
^dilCdrd the pericarps and exhaust in alcohol^ without heat.) Dose, 
^tO X dr. Syrup from the ripe fiuit, Dose, 3 to 4 dis. Jambul 
and gluten biscuits, 30 grs. in each* Dose, 4 to 6 biscuits. Decoction 
oftheb^Tkri in 10). Dose, 2 to 4 drs. Pancha Rasa. The five 
- Obtained by macerating in water the bark of K&li 

J.I ul, Lai barjala, Jujube and Jayanti, 

Actions afid uses — The juice of the ripe fruit or syrup is stcmachic, 
astriBgcnt, and diuretic and given in scanty urine. The decoct ion of bark 
18 astringtut, and used in diarrhoea of children, in chronic dysentery, as a 



Z^O MELALEUCA LEUCADENDRON. 

gargle mixed with Dhumaso for the relief of spongy gums, and sore, 
cracked or irritable tongue. A paste of leaves is used to promote 
healthy discharges from indolent sores or from unhealthy ulcers. The 
extract of powdered seeds and dried fruits is used in diabetes. 
It checks diastatic conversion of starch into sugar in cases depending on 
increased production of glucose. 

HyrtuB Chekan, Eugenia Chekan. 

Syn. — Cheken, Chequen, Aroyan. 

Habitat,— ChWi. 

Parts used. — The leaves and shoots. 

Constituents. — A volatile oil resembling that of eucalyptus, a 
volatile alkaloid, clieckanine, and tannin. 

Preparations^ — Extractum Chekan Liquidum. Dose, ^ to 3 fl. dr. 
Infusum Chekan (i in 10). Dose^ to 2 oz. 

Actions and uses. — Aromatic, antiseptic, expectorant, diuretic and 
tonic ; given in chronic bronchitis and catarrh of the bladder. As an 
inhalation, it is given in diphtheria, laryngismus stridulus, and as an 
injection in leucorrhoea and gonorrhoea ; also employed in phthisis and 
pulmonary haemorrhages. Dose of the leaves, i to 2 drs. 

Melaleuca Leucadendron, B. P., M. Cajuputi, M. Minor. 

Mela-leuca from melan, black, and leukos, white. The trunk of 
this tree is black and the branches white. Leucadendron from leukos, 
white, and dendron, a tree. 

Habitat. — Molucca Islands, Indian Archipelago, and the Philip- 
pines. 

Parts used, — A volatile oil distilled from the leaves— oleum 
cajuputi, B. P. 

Vernacular. — Burm. — Thit-tha-hputshi (the tree). Eng. — 
Cajuput oil. Guz. — Kajuputitela. Hind., Beng., Mar. — Kayakuti-tel 
Malay.— Kay u-puteh (the tree). Tam.— Kayapudai-tailam (the oil). 

Characters. — Oleum cajuputi— a light thin liquid of a bluish 
green colour. Rectified oil is yellow. It is transparent and mobile, 
of an agreeable but penetratmg, warm camphoraceous odour, and 
a bitter, cooling and aromatic camphoraceous taste and of a neutral 
reaction ; its green tint is often due to the presence of copper ; freely 
soluble in alcohol. 

Cofistituents. — The oil contains bihydrate of cajuputine or caju- 
putol about f , and several terpenes ; also acetic, butyric and valerianic 
ethers of turpineol. Soluble in alcohol (i in i). Dose of the oil, ^ m. 
to 3 ms. The green colour has been attributed to chlorophyll or to 
copper which is present in it. 

Preparations. — Spiritus cajuputi B. P. (i in 10). Dose 5 to 20 ms. 
Emulsion, pills and linimentum. 



MVltCfA ACRH 



271 



Actions and uses. — The oil is like other volatile oils, a powerful 
stimulant sudorific, carminative, diuretic, and antiseptic ; externally 
parasiticide and anthelmintic, rubefacient and counter-irritant to the 
skin. Taken internally it produces a sense of warmth in the stomach 
and increases the pulse beat* Used externally over rheumatic and pain- 
ful joints, in paralysis, muscular rheumatism, chilblains and neuralgias, 
or given internally, in spasmodic affections of the stomach and 
bowels, as colic, flatulency, and in dysmcnoriha-a, dropsy, syphilis and 
cholera. As a stimulant and diaphoretic it is given in low states of 
the system and in hysteria, nervous vomiting, hiccough and dyspnoea. 
In elephantiasis and other jkin aflTcctions it is given with benefit. 
With olive oil it is dropped into the ear in deafness and eajache. It 
forms an ingredient of croton oil liniment, 

Myrcia Acris. 

Myrcia — surname of Venus — the plant is beautiful. Acris, from 
acer, sharp, pungent — odour of the leaves is pungent, 

Syn. — Wild clove or wild cinnamon, Jamaica bay berry. 

Habitat. — West Indian islands, Jamaica, Trinidad, Venezuela. 

Parts used. — A volatile oil distilled from leaves, oil of Myrcia, oil of 
Bay. 

Characters. — Leaves entire, long, ovate obtuse, coriaceous, 
strongly veined, pellucid, punctate and shining. Odour aromatic 
when bruised, 

Cofi.r/iVifi<'fi7jr.— Volatile oil and tannin. The volatile oil — Myrciae 
Oleum, oil of Myrcia, obtained by distillation from the leaves with water 

■or steam* A yellowish liquid ; odour clove-likc, taste pungent and spicy; 

Mlightly acid in reaction, becoming turbid with alcohol, glacial acetic 
acid and carbon bisulphide. It contains eugenol, myrcene, chavicol, 
methyl eugcnol. mcihyl chavicol, a turpene (phillandrene) and citraU 

Preparatifms. — ^Spiritus Myrciae, spirit of myrcia. Bay rum 
contains oil of myrcia 16, oil of orange peel i, oil of pimenta i, alcohol 
i,a20, water to 2,000. 

Aciians and uses. — Astringent, tonic and stimulant; used exter- 
natty to the fuitrhead in nervous headache, faintiiess and on cracks and 
fissures, also as hair washes. It is principally used as perfume. 

Myrtua Communis* 

HiiHtat. — Europe, cultivated in India, 
i arts //.r*-*/.— The berries, leaves, bark and oil (myrtol). 
Vernacular, — Arab. — The berries, Hab*eUaas, Asbiri, murad, Isbar 
Ismar, Isfaren. Bomb. — Vetayati Mhendi. Eng. — Myrtle. Guz. — 

_ latli, Makli. Hind. — ^Sata sova, Baragasha, the leases, Vilayati- 

"tnehndi. Pers. — Barg-i-murad (leaves). 

Characters^l^tn\^% black, peai -shaped, and slightly sweet ; seeds 
yellowish white, hard, kidney-shaped, and 6, 8 or 12 in number ; ta;ste 



272 PIMENTA OFFICINALIS. 

bland; leaves small, lanceolate, and dotted, margins revolute, very 
agreeably aromatic when bruised. Dose, lo to 60 grs. 

Constituents, — The ripe berries contain a volatile oil, myrti 
oleum — oil of myrtle, resin, tannin, citric acid, malic acid, sugar, &c. 
The oil is distilled from the leaves. It consists of a mixture of pinene, 
another hydrocarbon and cineol — ^the active principle, identical with 
eucalyptol. Dose, i to 3 ms. in capsules. 

Preparations, — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, 4 to 12 drs. Powder 
of leaves and berries. 

Physiological action. — The plant is stimulant and astringent. The 
volatile oil is antiseptic, parasiticide and rubefacient ; applied to a raw 
surface it sets up irritation and inflammation but it does not affect the 
unbroken skin. Internally it is a stimulant of the alimentary canal, 
produces warmth in the mouth and increases the flow of saliva and 
gastric juice. In full doses it is a nervine sedative, and in very large 
doses an irritant. It is an antiseptic and stimulant to the mucous 
membrane of the excretory organs, as the lungs and kidneys, and is 
eliminated in the expectoration and urine. 

Therapeutics. — In small doses it aids digestion and is given 
internally like copaiba, to check profuse expectoration in chronic foetid 
bronchitis, bronchorrhoea, gangrene of the lungs, whooping cough, 
asthma and in chronic inflammation of the bladder and urethra; also in 
passive haemorrhages. An infusion of the berries is used as rectal 
injection against round and thread worms, as an injection in leucorrhcea 
and prolapsus of the uterus and vagina. The powder of the leaves is 
used as an application in eczema, intertrigo and for wounds and 
ulcers. As an antiseptic it is used as a wash for foetid ulcers and as 
an injection for deep sinuses. Locally it is used in favus, pityriasis, 
herpes and parasitic skin diseases, also in otorrhoea, ozaena and other 
foul discharges from foetid ulcers. 

PImenta OfflcinaliB, B. P., Eugenia PImenta. 

All-spice, Pimento, Jamaica pepper. 

All-spice — as it was supposed that it combined at one time the 
odour of all the important spices, such as cinnamon, clove, and nutmeg. 

Habitat, — S. America, W. Indies, Jamaica. 

Parts used, — The dried full-grown unripe fruit. 

Characters, — Fruit thick, brownish, nearly globular, J to ^ of an 
inch in diameter crowned with a short calyx and short style. Two-celled, 
one-seeded. Seed brown and reniform ; odour clove-like, taste pungent 
and aromatic. Dose, 5 to 15 grs. 

Constituents, — The berries contain a volatile oil 3-4 p.c, probably 
identical with oil of cloves, also a fixed oil, 6-8 p. c, resin, gum, sugar, 
fat, tannin, ash, 4 p. c. 

Oleum Pimentae, B. P., oil of all-spice — oil of pimenta. This oil 
is distilled from Pimento with water or steam. It is a yellow or 



yeltuwish red liquid vvhea fresh, gradually becoming darker ; odour 
;Aromattc and taste pungent. Reaction faintly acid, heavier than water. 
Dose, ^ to 3 ms. 

/Vv/<im//b/ij.— The oil h a constituent of Bay Rum ; Aqua 
yPiinencae, B. P. from the fruit (i in 40). Dose, 1 to 2 fl. 02.. It is also 
epared from the oil ( i in 500), 

Achotis and uses* — All*spice is a stomachic, carminative, aromatic 
and stimulant ; also used as a condiment. It increases the vascularity 
of the gastric mucous membrane, and stimulates the s-ilivary secretion ; 
hence it improves digestion and increases saliva. The oil is used in 
dyspepsia, flatulence, intestinal colic and as a corrective to griping 
rnedicines. It is also used as a flavouring agent to cover the taste of 
nauseous drugs* 

Psidium Pyriferum and P. Pomiferum. P. Guava. 

HabitaL — America, naturalized in India. 
F\irts Mjrf^.— The bark, fruit and leaves. 

Fnmcnlar, — P. Pyriferum — ihc white guava. P, Pomiferuni*— the 
red guava. 

TAe fruit, — Arab. — Amarude. Beng, — Goachhi-phiU, peyara. 
Burni. — Malaka. Can. — ^Shibe hannu. Cing. — Suda-pera. Duk. — 
Jilma. Eng.^ — Guava. Guz, — Piyara, peru^ Jamaruda. Hind. — Am- 
rud, saphri dma» safrijam. Mar,— Tupa-pela, peru, Malyal, — Pela- 
Jambu. Pers. — Amrude. Sans. — Amaruta bahu bija phallama, Tani. 
— Koia-maram, goyya-pazham. TeL — ^Jama-chettu* ^ 

Characters. — Bark smooth, brown, and externally marked with 
superficial scars showing the separation of squamous plates of the dead 
" ark. On removing the epidermis, the bark is green. Internally 
rkcd with striae of alight brown colour ; taste astringent and some- 
; acid. Fruit edible; when unripe, it is of agrcen coUmr and highly 
llgent. Pulp, hard and containing numeraus seeds ; rind very 
Ifn. Ripe fruit has a faintly yellow colour, pulp soft and delicious 
10 the taste, of a strong aromatic flavour. Leaves arcmiatic, egg-shaped 
pr oblongi short stalked and covered with soft down. 

Comtituents. — The bark contains tannin 27-4 p.c. Resin and 
crystals of calcium oxatc- 

Pitiparatiuns. -Decoction (f in 10). Dose» 2 to 8 fluid drachms. 

Actions and uses, — Astringent ; the unripe fruit is indigestible, 
and often causes bilious vomiting and feverishncss* The ripe fruit is 
edible but produces costiveness. The liar k of white guava is astnngent, 
and the decoction is used along with other astringents, for 
chronic diarrhcea of children. It is ;ilso used as a wash in prolapsus, 
The leaves .ire astringent and stomachic, and are used to arresc 
liting in diarrh»ea. The bark and leaves of the red variety are 

I to allay votniting and diarrhora ul cholera. 

U 



ttft 



274 BAKKINGTONIA ACUTAKCl I A. "♦ 

Barringtoniaoea. 

The Samudara-phala family — trees or large shrubs, very much 
allied to myrtaceae. Leaves alternate and serrated, flowers scarlet, 
finely long or racemose, fruits drupaceous. 

Habitat. — Tropical regions in all parts of the world. 

Properties, — Rather intoxicating and dangerous. Some have 
faintly aromatic, bitter, aperient and acrid bark. 

Barringtonia Acutangala, Engenea Racemosa. Stravadiam 

RabFom* 

Habitat. — Throughout India. 

Paris used, — The seeds. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — HijjuL Bomb. — Samudar-phala, Tiwvur. 
Burm. — Kyaitha. Cing. — ElIa-Midella-gass. Hind., Guz. — Samudar- 
phala. Hind. — Hijjula. Malay. — Sjeria, Samstravad. Mar. — Pivar 
Sath-phal, Dhatri-phah Sans. — Hijja or Hijjala. Tarn. — Kadapum. 
Tel. — Kanapa, Kanagi, 

Characters.— SeeAs hard and resembling nutmeg or haradan in 
shape and size, dark brown compressed and marked with longitudinal 
striae. Internally hard, horny and brittle. Put into water it becomes 
soft. It consists principally of a homogeneous, pale white substance 
(starch) ; odour very agreeable or faintly aromatic, taste sweet at first 
but Soon becoming acrid and nauseating. Dose, 2 to 6 grs. 

Constituents. — A body allied to saponin, which is the active prin- 
ciple,* starch, proteid, cellulose, fat, caoutchouc and alkaline salts. 

Actions and uses. — Emetic and carminative ; used with the juice of 
fresh ginger in catarrhs of the nose and respiratory passages, and to 
relieve flatus from the bowels. Externally rubbed with water it is 
applied to the chest to relieve pain and to the abdomen to relieve colic 
and flatulence. 

Barringtonia BacemoBa. 

Habitat. — Ceylon. 

Part used. — The root. 

P^ernacuIar.'^Cing. — Deya-midella. Malay!. — Samudrapu. Tarn. 
— Samudra-pallam. 

Characters — The root is slightly bitter but not unpleasant. 

Preparations. — Infusion of the root (i inio). Dose, 2 to 6 drs. ; 
and snun. 

Actiotis and ttses. — A cooling refrigerent and aperient ; given in 
fevers. The powdered seed is used as a local sedative snuff in cold and 
catarrhs of the nose ; also as a dusting powder, in sore throat and 
cutaneous eruptions. • 

Helastomaoett. 

Mela from melan, black, and stoma, mouth ; from property of the 
species, dyeing the mouth black. Trees, shrubs or herbs ; leaves 
opposite, ribbed and dolless ; calyx 4, 5 or 6 lobed, adherent to the 



ovary and imbricated, petals twisted in oestivation ; ovaries adherent, 
nvjiny celled. Fruit either dry or distinct from the calyx and dehiscent 
or succulent, or united and indihescent ; seeds numerous, smaJl and 
exalbuminous. Flowers beautiful. 

Habitat, — ^Tropical regions and all parts of the world. 

Ptfjperttes, — Slightly astringent ; many produce edible fruit5» and 
some arc used for dyeing black and other colours. 

Memecylon Edule. M* Tinctorium. 

Habitat. — Eastern and Western parts of India, Ceylon. 

Part^ usfii. — The plant. 

Vf macular — Can, — Surpa, Cingh.— Dodi-gaha, Serookaya. 
En^. — Iron wood tree. MaL — Kasha wa^ Kana-v^avu. Mar. — Anjan, 
yalki, kurpa^ Lokhando. Sans. — ^Anjani. Tarn. — Kayampoo-voo. 
Tel. — AUi-cheddu. 

Charactifs, — The plant has bright green foliage with purplisli 
blue flowers. Berries globose, deep purple and crowned with four 
toothed limbs of the calyx; leaves entire, firm and leathery ; taste acridi 
bitter and astringent. 

Cofistitumts.—'Xhe leaves contain chlorophyll, resins, malic acid 
6*48 p.c., glucose 625 p,c*, gt»m, colouring matter, starch, crude fibre' 
and inorganic matter containing silica* 

Pteparatiutn, — Infusion of the leaves (i in 20). Decoction of the 
root (i in 10), Dose, ^ to i fid. oz. 

Aciifitts and uses, — Demulcent and astringent. The infusion ot 
tho leaves is used as collyrium for the eyes in conjunctivitis. The 
fccoction is ussed in menorrhagia. Pounded bark with aromatics like 
bjwan, pepper and zcdoary, is used as fomentation or Icp toconlubions, 
bmisc&i &c. The leaves are also used in gonorrhcea. 

Lythraoese. 

The Loosestrife, Mendi or Hernia family. 

Herbs, shrubs or trees ; leaves opposite, rarely alternate, and 
lexsttputate; Howers regular or irregular and of a white, red or yellowish 
'colour; fruit capsular, dehiscent and membranous; seeds numerous 
with or without wings, and exalbuminous. 

Habitat. — ^Tcmperate climate. 

Properties, — Generally astringent and used in dyeing. 

A. Baocifera. Ammannia Vesioatoria, 
Habitat. — Tropical India, 
flirts used, — The herb and leaves. 

Vfnmcuiar. — Beng,— Ban marach. Bomb, — Agiya. Duk, — Agin 
bull. Hind. — Dad mari. Mar.— Agaya, Guien, Bhar-jambul. MaL 



276 LAWSONIA ALBA. 

— Kallarvanchi. Sans.— Agnigurbha. Tarn. — Kallurivi, nirumel-nir- 
appu. Tel. — Agni-vendapaku. Agni gurbha. Agni, fire, and gurbha, 
a womb The plant is pregnant with fire. 

Characters- — Herb erect, and much branched ; stems four-sided ; 
leaves sessile, opposite, and lanceolate, about i inch long and i inch 
broad ; calyx four cleft to the middle ; lobe acute. Flowers minute, 
sessile and red. Smell muriatic, agreeable and aromatic. 

Constituents, — Resin, glucoside, and perhaps an active principle, 
allied to plumbagin. 

Preparations. — Ethereal tincture of the leaves ( i in 2 ). Decoc- 
tion of the dried plant ( i in 20 ). Dose, 4 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses, — Leaves irritant, acrid and vesicant. The leaf 
or the tincture when applied to the skin raises a vesicle within half an 
hour or an hour, and is applied to the joints in rheumatism and to the 
neck in fevers with cerebral symptoms. In action it is similar to can- 
tharides and may be used as a substitute for it. In obstinate spleen 
diseases the juice of the leaves is administered internally. Its 
decoction with ginger and cyperus root is given in intermittent fevers. 
The ash is applied with oil in herpetic eruptions. 

LawBonia Alba, L. Spinosa, L. Inermes. 

Habitat, — Western India, cultivated throughout India. 

Parts used, — Dried leaves, flowers and seeds. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Hinna. Beng. — Mehedi. Chin. — Hai-nah 
Shudu. Bur. — Dan. Can. — Garante. Cing. — Maritondi. Eng. — 
Eygptian privet, Henna. Hind, and Guz. — Henna, Mendi. Mar. — 
Mendi, Mai. — Pontaletshi, Mail-linshi. Pers. — Hina. Sans. — 
Kura vaka, Mendika Sakachara,Raktagarbha. Southern India — Iswan. 
Tam.— Marudam. Tel. — Goranta, Iveni. 

Iswan, a corruption of Isband, the seeds of peganum harmala. 
Raktagurbha, from rakta, red, and garbha,a womb, meaning the plant 
pregnant with red colouring matter. 

Characters. — Leaves opposite, smooth, lanceolate, oblong and 
pointed at both ends; about one inch long and \ inch broad; flowers 
terminal, globular, panicles of a greenish white colour and very fragrant; 
fruit rounded, four grooved, apex, depressed and 4 celled; seeds irregular 
angular and marked with prominent ridges with intervening depres- 
sions, of a reddish brown colour and somewhat rugous; taste bitter. 
The plant contains a colouring matter of a deep orange red colour 
which stains the skin and does not disappear until the epidermis is 
removed. 

Constituents, — Henno-tannic acid — a kind of tannin, resin and a 
colouring matter. 

Preparations,— Paste or powder of dried leaves. Decoction of leaves 
and of bark (i in 10). Dose, { to i fld. oz. 



PUNICA riKANATOM, 



Actt\>ns and uses, — The hnrk is allerative, sedative and astringent; 
given in jaundice, enlargement of ihe spleen, and calculus afretlion; 
as an ukerative in leprosy and skin diseases; also in spermatorrhcea, 
leucorrhtEu, &c. Externally the fresh leaves are applied with vinegar 
and catechu to burning of the soles of the feet. A powder of the leaves 
is used as suppository in prolapse of the rectum and vagina. A paste of 
the leaves with oil and resin i* applied to the head m headache ; they 
also increase the growth of the hair. Decoction of the bark is applied 
to burns and scald:>. Infusion of flowers is used as an application to 
bruises. 

Poaica Granattiin, B*P. 

/^^li^/A//.— Subtropical countries, throughout India, Persia, China, 
Japan, E* and VV, Indies, Arabia, and Socotra, 

Pifirta usf.d.—'VhQ flowers, rind of the fruit, and juice;and the dried 
hark of the stem and root,^ — Granati cortex — pomegranate bark, B.P. 
Punica from puniceus, scarlet, the colour of its flowers. Granatum, 
having many grain* or seeds. The fruit is many seeded. Pome- 
granate — Pomum, a fruit ; and granatus, grained, 

Vtrnacuiar, — Arab — Ruman, Kilkul, Rana, the flowers, Julnar, 
Gulnar. Beng.— Dalim. Bur. — Tha-lai* Can.— Dalimbe* The 
flowers Hasiu-dalimbe. Cing» — Delumghedi, Duk. — Anar. Eng. 
^Pomegranate, Carthaginian apple. Gux, — Dadam. Hind,^ — 
Anar. The flower*, Gulnar. Mai. — Daiima, MaleaU — Madala, Rumon- 
nai». Mar. — Dalimba. Pers. — Rumoni Anar. Sans. — Dadima 
Shukadaua, Kuchaphala. Tarn. — Mad a lam, mogilam. The flowers 
Rimadalai. Tel — Danirauca. The flowers— Pevadanimma. 

Shukadana means Parrot's food ; Kuchaphala means Breast fruit. 

Characters, — A small tree; flowers of a reddish colour and very 
. showy. Fruit gkibular, resembling orange or tomato, somewhat 
pilaltened and obscurely six-sided, short necked at the top and crowned 
with from 5 to 9 toothed thick and tubular calyx, fruit divided into 5 
or 6 compartments, each containing numerous grains. Each grain 
consisting of a thin transparent vesicle which contains a sweet, red, 
pjuicy pulp, surrounding a small angular seed. The juice is acid, sweet 
and &our ; dried seeds* sticky, lumpy, and black* Rind or the skin of 
the fruit in thick fragment s^, hard and brownish, yellow, or reddish 
in colour. External surface or the epidermis shining and tubcrded. 
under surface of a yellow colour, rugous, concave, and marked with 
depressions conforming to the marks of seeds. It can easily be 
powdered. The taste is astringent. The root is heavy, knotted and of 
a yellow colour. Bark in thin quills, in strips or fragments. Externally 
greyish yellow, warty and longitudinaJly ridged. Inner surface smooth 
and yellow; taste, slightly bitter and astringent, without any odour. 
When chewed it colours the saliva yellow, 

Constitufuis* — The bark contains tannin and punico-tannic acid 
22 p.CM mannit, sugar, gum, pectin, ash 15 p c.,an active liquid alkaloid 
Pellet ierine and i^opclleltcrine^ and two inactive alkaloids. 



27^ WOODFORDIA FLORIBUNDA. 

Pelletierina — Pelletierine — to obtain it mix the root bark with milk 
of lime, add water, and percolate with chloroform. It has strong basic 
properties, and occurs as colourless, minute crystals, soluble in 
water, alcohol, ether, chloroform, &c.. Dose, 3 to 6 grs as an anthel- 
mintic. 

Pellet ierinae sulphas. — In minute white acicular crj-stals which on 
keeping become brown and moist or viscid and syrupy; soluble in water 
and alcohol. Dose, 5 to 8 grains to be followed by a purge. As 
subcutaneous injection. Dose, 5 grs. 

Pelletierinae Tannas, Pelletierine Tannate — a greyish white 
amorphous powder, soluble in alcohol (i in 800), water (i in 900). 
Dose, 5 to 8 grains as an anthelmintic. Pelletierinae hydrobromidum — 
a brownish viscid liquid. Dose, 5 to 8 grains ; used in cases of paralysis 
of the muscles of the eye. 

Preparations, — Decoctum granati corticis B.P. (i in 5). Dose, 
^ to 2 fl. ozs. Juice of grains. Dose, i to 4 drachms. Extractum 
granati liquidum made from the root bark. Dose, \ to i| drachms. 
Rind. Dose, 20 to 30 grain.s. 

Physiological Actions. — Granatum and its alkaloids are astringent, 
anthelmintic and laenifuge. The flowers and rind of the fruit are 
astringent and stomachic. The decoction in full doses causes diuresis. 
It produces nausea and vomiting, often purging, flatulence and cramps 
in the legs with giddiness, dimness of sight and numbness of the limbs. 
The juice of the Iruit is cooling and refrigerant. 

Therapeutics, — The juice is given in dyspepsia and fevers ; 
flowers and rind of the fruit mixed with aromatics and astringents, 
such as cloves, cinnamon, coriander, pepper, &c., are given in chronic 
diarrhoea of children and in chronic dysentery unaccompanied with 
tenesmus. The juice of the flowers with durva root juice (cynodon 
dactylon) is used to stop bleeding from the nose. The decoction of root 
bark is vermifuge and is used for expelling tape worms. The alkaloid 
Pelletierine is used in leucorrhaea, and passive haemorrhages and as a 
gargle in relaxed sore throat. Pelletierine sulphate is used as a vermi- 
fuge against tape worms and is also used subcutaneously in 5 grains 
doses for paralysis, vertigo, menier*s disease, tetanus and hydrophobia. 

Remarks, — The native use dalimba juice in the preparation of 
Loha bhashma to facilitate its powdering. 

Woodfordia Floribanda, Lythram frutioosum, Orislea 
Tomentosa. 

Habitat, — Throughout India. 

Parts used, — The flowers. 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Dhai, Dhonga. Bomb. — Daite, Dhanen. 
Can. — Dhatake. Eng. — Downy Grislea. Hind. — Dhaiti, Chota- 
dhaon. Dhava, Devti, Gul-bakar, Gul-dhaur. Mar.— Dhaite, Dhaoshi, 
Phulsatti. Sans. — Dhataki, Dhayatia-pushpika, Tamra-pushpi, 
Guchcha pushpi, Parvati, Aganijvala. Tel. — Dhataki Kusumaum. 
Gaji, (fodari Serinji. 



UMnKU,rFFR.f:. 



279 



Tamra puslipi means red flowers. Guchchha pushpi, Trom Guch- 
cha, a duster of hair, having clusters of blossoms or of numerous 
^mill flowers arranged like Guchcha — clusters of hairs on the temple. 
Parvali from parvata, a hill. It means hill born, in allusion to the plant 
J3cing common in mountainous tracts. Agni Jvala — agni, a fire^ and 
jvaJa, a flame, the colour o! flowers bdng like that of a fire flame. 

Characters — Flowers brownish red, long and covered with calices ; 

Ijoesred, containing maturecapsules, slightly channelled on both sides, 

ftembranouSf and containing many seeds — seeds very minute, numerous, 

"of a brown colour^ shining and angular. Taste, highly astringent^ smell 

somewhat aromatic. Dose, 10 to 20 grs. 

Com/i/w^w/A.— Tannin 20 p. c. 

Preparations — Confection — Dhauriphula, bela, lodhra, valo» g^jl* 
pipali, honey, each 2 drs. mix. Dose, I to 1 drs, 

j'tciifms and uses, — Stimulant and astringent: given in dysenter)' 
beaten up with honey ; also in checking haemorrhages, and chronic 
di:»charges^ such us menorrhagia and leucorrhoea. The powder of flowers 
is sprinkled over vesicular eruptions and foul ulcers to diminish the dis- 
charges and promote granulations* 



Umbellifera or Apiacea. 

The ajamoda or Parsley family. 

Umbelliferit^—umbella, a little shade or umbel, or from umbra, a 
shade, and tero, to bear. The flower stalks are in umbels or heads. 

Gentfal Characters — Herbs, shrubs or rarely arborescent plants, 
With hallow or scilid furrowed stems ; leaves aUernatCt 
divided, generally sheathing at the base and compound, exsttpulate; 
Flowers ^mall umbels of yellow, white, pink or blue colour with or 
without an involucre. Fruits diacha^nium or cremocarp, consisting 
of two carpels (mcricarp) adhering by their face to a common axis 
(carpophore) from which they ultimately separate. Each mericarp is 
indchi scent, one seeded and on its dorsal surface marked with live 
primary longitudinal ridges or nerves and four alternate secondary 
ridges, separated by inters! ices or channels in which are longitudinal, 

^ily rcceplacles or canals called vittic» containing a gummy, resinous, 
iromatic juice; seed solitary-, pendulous and firmly adherent to the 

'^cricarp^ — embryo minute, albumen, horny. 

liahtat, — Tem|>eratc cli m.ite. 

I^ffaiies. — iMany areediblc^ such as celery, parsnip, carrot, parsley, 
fennel. &c. ; some are aromatic, carminative* tonic and stimulant; 
they abound in lesins and contain an essential aromatic volatile oil, as 
unethinum. daucus, coriander &c., others are poisonous owing to their 
C(mtaining an acrid narcotic juice as conium; the rest are antispasmodic 
and cnntain a fttiid gum resin. The firiid gum resin is composed of 
a volatile oil, gum and resin. These include galbanum, ammoniacum, 
oppoponax, scgapenum, and a&safelitla, and are used as stimulant in 
nervous disordcfs. 



28o ANTHRISrrS CEREKOI.rnM. 

Arehan^lica Offldnalis, and A. AtFopnrpiirea, Garden An^fca, 
European An^lica. 

Habitat. — Northern parts of Europe, Asia and America. 

Parts used, — Root, herb and seeds. 

Characters. — Leaves double pinnate, flowers greenish- white stem, 
purplish smooth, hollow-pointed. Root long and fleshy, thick, annulate, 
fusiform, juicy, resinous and pungently aromatic. Dose, lo to 30 grs. 

Constttuents.'-yoXztWt oil, resin, valerianic acid. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, ^ to i oz. — Tincture 
(i in 10). Dose, \ to i drs. Juice (succus). Dose, J to i dr. Fluid 
extract of root 30 to 60 ms. Fluid extract of seed, 5 to 30 ma. 

Actions and uses. — The root is pungent, aromatic, stomachic tonic, 
stimulant, carminative, diaphoretic and diuretic, giving tone to the 
stomach and increasing appetite ; combined with tonis, it is given in 
typhoid condition, bronchitis, intermittents, flatulent colic and pain 
in the stomach. The fruit has similar properties, and syrup or candied 
angelica is taken as dessert as a very agreeable stomachic in rheu- 
matism, gout, painful and swollen parts. 

Remarks. — Large quantities of Angelica are used in the prepara- 
tion of London gin, and the liqueur known as bitters. 

Anthriscns Cerefolinm. 

Habitat. — Europe, cultivated elsewhere. 
Parts used. — The fruit. 

Vernacular, — Eng.— Chervil. Ind. Bazar — Atrilal. There are two 
kinds : True atrilal, KhalaM-Khalil, and Egy-ptian kind, Rijl-el-Ghurab, 
Rijlel-tair, Harjes Shayatin. Atrilal means devil's bane. 

Characters. — Fruit lanceolate, laterally compressed, almost cylin- 
drical, black, terminating in a short 5 angled beak. The seeds in the 
Egyptian variety are dark coloured, resembling in size the celery seeds, 
and in shape the cumin seeds, and are very bitter ; in the true atrilal 
the seed is light coloured, the fruit is aromatic, and free from bitterness. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 20). Dose, 2 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Diuretic, stomachic, and deobslruent: used as 
a stimulant to reinvigorate the body when exhausted by venereal 
excesses or by old age. In white leprosy the seeds are rubbed down 
©ver the patches, and also administered internally with pyrethrum 
and honey. The patient is then made to sit in the hot sun wiih the 
parts exposed and uncovered when the patches show blisters, and the 
new skin appears in its natural colour. 

Remarks. — The fruit of vernonia anthelmintica is often sol J f. r 
atrilal. The leaves are used for flavouring soup, salads. &c. The 
genuine article is diflficult to obtain. 



rARr^vf caritt. 



281 



Apium Graveolens. 
Hahihit, — S. Europe. 
Pitrts usei^^—Tb^ fruit, 

I'emacuhr. — Arab. — Buzz-ul-Karaphs, Bcng — Chanoo Rhadocini, 
Can.--Ajmoda» Voma, Duk.— Ajmudah, Ajviin. Rng.— Celery. Giiz. 
— Bori Ajmud. Hind. — Ajarno, Ajinud, Bhut*jata, Mar.— Ajamoda* 
Nova* Pcrs. — Tukh»n*e-Karaphas. Sans.^ — Ajamod.-!. Tun.— AsIkuiw 
cagtni . Tel, — Ash u-Madaga-vurnam . 

CharacUrs.^Vrmi long, small and ovate or ijlobui^r. i>utiagti 
hairy, slightly tubercled, wrinkled, and marked with prominent 
ridjscs* Colour greenish yellow or brown ; 2 mericarps, 5 ribs 
and 12 oil tubes. Taste aromatic, somewhat pungent and slightly 
mint-like at first, then bitterish ; odour coriander-like, faintly terebin- 
ihaceous. Seeds like those of parsley. Dose, 5 to 30 grs. 

C^ttshtt4ents, — The seeds contain apiin — a glucoside, a jelly-like 
subsUince which when boiled with dilute sulphuric acid splits up into, 
apigenin, and glucose. Apiin is slightly soluble in cold water, easily 
soluble in hot water, more easily in hot alcohol and insoluble in 
ether. Also volatile oil, apiol or apiolum, &c* 

Preparations. — Infusion (1 in 10), Dose, J lo 2 fluid ozs, 

Artifms ituti uses. — The fruit is carminative, aromatic^ slinmlant, 
tonic and emmenagogue. Its infusion is given in bronchitis and inter- 
miticnt fevers ; as an adjunct to purgatives, it is given in constipatiun ; 
as a dcohstruent and resolvent, with linseed or barley nical it is 
used as a poultice on swollen glands. 

Carum Carui, B. P. 
Carum Nignim, C. Gracile. 

//t//;/A//.^ Europe, CashmeTe, Western Thibet, Persia, S. and W. 
Asia. 

Parts used, — The dried fruit. Carui fiuctus, B P,, Caraway seeds, 
caraway fruits, 

V^macuhr.'—AT^h. — Curwiya, Kamune rumi. Reng. — Shia-jira. 
Bomb. — Kurwajira. Can. — ^Shime jirige. Cashmere. — Guinyun^ 
Cin,— RataDam. Duk — Karoyat, Eng- Black cumin^ Indian 
carraway, Gu/, — Kftlun-jira, Hind.— Siyah xirah. Panj.— Umbliu. 
Malcal— Shima-jirakam. Afar. — Sa-jiri, Kalijiri, Pers.— Zirahe rumi, 
P^nj.— -Umbo. Sans. — Susliava, Krishna jiraka. Tarn. — Delappu. Tel. 
-— SinajiU^kara. European caraways. Hind., Man, Guz. — Vilayite- 
jira. Tarn.— KckkuVirar, Shiwai-Shonabu, Tel -Kekku-Vittulu 
Shuna Sapu. Can — Shunc-sapu. Beng.— Bilati-jira. 

Characters.— Vvmi brown, 2-scedcd, ovoid ; cremocarp* slightly 
arched, laterally compressed ; mericarp, too commonly called caraway 
seeds, separate curved and narrowed at both ends with five yellowish 
foliform ridges and oil tubes, having an agreeable aromatic odour an«l 
a suect sptc V taste, n*»^c, 5 to 30 grs. 



282 CORFANDRUM SATFVUM. 

Constituents. — A volatile oil 6 p. c. ; fixed oil, wax, resin, sugar, 
mucilage, tannin and ash 5 p. c. 

Oleum Carui, B. P. — Oil of caraway, the volatile oil, is the active 
principle to which its medicinal properties are due, and obtained by 
distillation of the seeds. It is a limpid, thin liquid, colourless or of a 
pale yellow colour, odour aromatic, taste spicy and pungent, soluble 
in alcohol (i in i). It becomes brown by keeping. Dose, ^ to 3 ms. 
It contains carvene, 35 to 50 p. c, isomeric with turpentine, an unoxi- 
dized product chemically identical with citrene, hesperidene and 
dextrogyrate limonine ; carvol, isomeric with thymol, an oxidized 
product closely related to menthol, myristicol and cumin alcohol ; 
and is identical with carvicrol. Carvicrol — to obtain it distil a mixture 
of car ra way oil with potash or soda, when carvene is separated. To 
the residue add sulphuric acid. It is a viscid yellowish oil, odour 
and taste like that of creasote. 

Preparations, — Aqua carui, B. P., from the oil (i in 500). From the 
fruit (i in 20). Dose, i to 2 ozs. Spiritus Juniperi compositus, ^ p. c. 
Dose, i to I oz. Tinctura Cardamomi composita, B.P. Dose, ^ to i 
dr. Infusum carui (i in 40). Dose, i to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Diuretic, stomachic, stimulant and carminative; 
given to expel wind, allay hiccough and pain of flatulent colic in 
infants. As a carminative and stomachic it is added as an adjunct to 
purgative mixtures to prevent griping and nausea. Locally the oil 
acts as an anaesthetic, and its poultice is apf>lied over painful piles ; 
other actions are similar to those of dill and anise. Carvacrol is useful 
in toothache and is inserted into the cavity of the teeth. 

Remarks. — The name Krishna Jiraka is also applied to the seeds of 
Nigella Sativa. Karwajirah is also the name for Kali jiri (vernonia 
anthelmintica). Both are similar in colour, being darkish brown or 
black. Karvii jirah differs, however, from Kali jiri, in the former being 
larger and rounder than carum nigrum. Shajira, carum nigrum, 
differs from vilayati jirun (carraway) in that the former has more 
slender and darker coloured fruits than carraway. 

Goriandrum SatiTum, B. P. 

Coriander, from koris, a bug. The leaves have the odour of a bug, 
Sativum, from sativus, sown or cultivated. It is a cultivated plant. 

Habitat. — Cultivated in India, Europe, China, Southern Asia. 

Parts used. — The fruit— Coriandri Fructus, B. P., coriander fruit. 

Vci nacular. — Arab. — Kezirah. Beng. — Dhanyai. Burm. — Nan- 
nan. Chin. — Sheh-lo Can. — Kottumbari. Cing. — Kattumbaru, 
Dhanalu. Duk. — Dhanyan. Eng. —Coriander seeds. Guz. — Dhanu 
Kothamiri, the plant. Hind. — Dhanya. Mah.— Dhane. Malyal. — 
Meti, KottampAlare. Pers.— Kitnu, Kushuiz. Sans. — Kushthumbari, 
Dhanya. Kam. Tarn. — Katta-malli. Tel. — Danyalu, Kotimiri. 



CONIUM MACt'LATUM* 



kf9rnctfrs. — Fruit, of a pale, yellow colour, plumps and oval or 
ovoid in form, resembling inflated balloons* in size resernbing gahula 
&eeds ; surface marked with lo ridges ; between every two ridges aie 
tubercles, with undulated or longitudinal lines. Apex crowned with 
two prominences» base presenting a hole from which the stalk is 
removed ; mericarp adherent at the base by two joining ridges. Each 
TOcricarp has two oil tubes, odour like that of limbu, and the taste 
aromatic and oily, 

Cnnstiinrnts, — The fruits yield a volatile oil i p. c; fixed oil 13 
px.; fatty matter 13 p. c. ; mucilage, tannin, malic acid, and ash 5 p. c* 

Oleum Coriandri B* P. — Oil of coriander, distilled from the 
fruit with water or steam. The essential oil is isomeric with borneol, 
and is a ycllotvibh liquid, odour characteristic and aromatic, taste 
spicy and warm ; soluble in alcohol^ and glacial acetic acid. It consists 
of linaloulor coriandroL Dose, J to 3 ms. 

Fr^^r?rrj//'Qii5.— Of the fruit. Infusum coriandri {r in 40), Dose, 
I to 2 oxs- Of the oil.— Confectio scnnse, B.P. Dose, 1 to 2 drs.; syrupus 
%enna% B.P. Dose» \ to 2 dra, Cc»mpound Powder — DhaniVni-d&L — The 
fruits are fried lightly and pounded (busks being rcmovedj. To this 
is added jinih, k^lii miri, lavaiiga, and nimakha. The whole is 
stirred together, lime juice being subsequently added, and the mass 
dried in the sun. 

Dh^nil Aj^va — A cooling drink, containing coriander, fennel fruits, 
poppy seeds, kanchan flowers, rose buds, cardamoms, cubebs, almonds* 
and black pepper, sweetened with sugar. Dost;, i to 2 drs., given in 
colic, dyspepsia &c, 

Acthtn ami //5/rj.^Aromatic» stimulant, carminative and sto- 
machic ; used in sore throat, dyspepsia and common catarrh, but 
chidiy as a flavouring agent and as a corrective to griping medicines as 
jalap, rhubarb and senna. With barley meal, the leaves (kothamiri. 
Hind.) form a useful application for mdolent swellings, Dh4na dis- 
gtiiscs the odour and tasle of stnna and nf other purgatives. The oil 
is a carminative and arom.iiic, and is used in flatulent colic ; also in 
rheumaliMn* neuralgia, &c. The tre*h herb is called kothamiri ami 
is used 10 llav<mr vegetables and curty. 

Conium Maculattim, B. P , Spotted Hemlock. 

Habitat. — Wasic places antl along streams, Europe, N. Asia. 

PattK used, — The dried full grown unripe fruils, conii fructus, 
B. P., and fresh leaves and young branches, conii folia, B. P. 

Vrrtiaeular^ — Arab. — Banj-e-rumi, shokran. Bomb,— Kirdwrnan. 
Kng, — Ath<*nian slate poison, common or spotted hemlock, poison- 
hemlock* cow bane, htraver poison. Hind. — Kurdumana* Ind. 
Bazaar. — Khorasain Ajwan. Pers. — The root, Bikhi-i-Tafii, the 
fruitt Duras'i-Tafahati, tlie >t_e«is, Tnkntni-Tokhj ^ Karvaya-i- 
dashti, Yej!d*Duras. 

CAaracftrs. — A full grown iruit, guthcrea while green. Fruit, 
a cfemncarp of a dark, grey colour, laterally ctknipresscd, small 



a84 



rONIlTM MArUI.ATUM. 



and elongated with vertical ridges on its outer surface. The ridges 
are of a pale or grey colour, 2 mericarps with 5 crenate ribs, but no oil 
tube. In form it resembles anisum, but is rather larger- When 
crushed the odour b offensive and acrid ; on section the interior is 
resinous* yellowish black, and oily. Taste^ slightly bitterish, 
somewhat acrid and oily. Green^ unripe fruits are the most active 
part of the plant. Fresh leaves decompound» smooth, arising from 
stems which are smooth and with dark purple spots* Leaves deep j 
green, shining, tripinnate with leaflets pinatifid. Petioles furrowed and 
sheathiDg at the base* those of the lower leaves hollow, finiour strong 
and disagreeable. Dose of the leaves, 1 to 5 grs, 

Cotistituents, — The leaves contain a volatile oil ^ \.[iich the smell 
is due. The leaves and fruit contain 3 alkaloids ktiou n as coniine (j^ 
to \ p. c) liquid and volatile; methylconiine, and conhydrine, both solid 
and volatilizable, and pseudo conhydrine ; a volatile oil, fixed oil, 
conic acid or malic acid, and ash 6 p.c. Conine or coniine, cicutiue 
conicine. Dextro-a-prophl piperidine — is obtained synthetically from 
alpha picoline, also obtained by distilling the fruit with an alkali 
or adding ammonia to the extract, passing sulphuretted hydrogen 
over the mass, thus converting ammonia into sulphate, then 
exhausting it with alcohol and ether, leaving ammonia sulphate 
undissolved, finally distilling with alkali when conine is liberated. It 
is a colourless, inflammable, yellow, oily fluid of a penetrating odour, 
compared to that of urine of mice, and acrid taste. Like ammonia it 
forms dense fumes with volatile acids. It is soluble in ether, alcohol, 
chloroform, benzol, benzine and fixed oils. Freely soluble in 
carbon bisulphide, slightly so in water (i in loo). It is quickly decom- 
posed by heat. By long keeping it becomes inert. Dose, ^q to ^^ K*'- 
or y*^ to 2 ms.; too irritant for hypodermic use, Coninye Hydro* 
bromidum — colourless and odourless crystals, resembling magnesium 
sulphate in appearance. Insoluble in ether, and freely soluble in 
water. Dose, ^\ to I gr. Pilula coninic Hydrobronndi, J gr in each 
pill. Injectio coninse hydrobromidi hypodeimica, i gr, in 20 ms. Dose, 
I to 3 ms, Coniuni Hydrochlorate. Dose, ^*, to J gr. Paraconiine 
is artificially prepared by the reaction between butyric aldehyde 
and alcoholic solution of ammonia. It is isomeric with coniine, but 
not identical with it. 

Prefiara/tons.^Of the fruit, Tinctura conii, B,P. (i in 5)- Dose. | to ] 

I fld. dr. Of the leaves and young branches, succusconii, B* P., contaiiii 
one volume of alcohol for every three of the juice. Dose, J to 2 ild- dis, 
Extractum conii, i gr, is equal to t gr, of the drug, Do»e, 1 to 5 
gr. Extractum conii fluidum. Dose, 3 to 5 ms. Vapor coninie — !&uceus 
conii, ^ oz,, solution of potash 1 dr,, water i oz, Uose, 20 ms. for in^ 
halation to be put on a sponge and vapour of hot water passed over it. 
Ungueiitum conii, B, P., prepared from the juice, 88 parts • r d tti 

I I parts, to this add hydrous wool fat ^2i P^^^s ; used in , am, 
piles, &c. 

f^)iiioifigHai ^ic /rb;/j.-*Sedjilive antispasmodic, anodyne^ sopariiic 
and antaphrodisiac. Like curare it paraly^CN the end urgans of motor 



CUMINUM CrWJXUM, 



nerves, without affecting sensation or consciousness. If given for 
some titne it afterwards paralyses the motor centres in the brain and 
spinal cofd. The muscular irritability remains intact. It is a direct 
sedative lo the respiratory centres, and death is due to paralysis of the 
respiratory muscles. 

Methyl conune is a stimulant of the spinal cord and produces 
convulsions as seen in cases of coniine poisoning. The sensibility is 
impaired^ and there is a feeling of numbness in the limbs and paralvsis 
of reflex action. In full doses conium gives rise to gastric irritation, 
increased vomitings followed by numbness in the legs, sense of fatigue, 
staggering gait, dilated pupils, impaired speech, and laboured breathing* 
In poisonous doses it acts as a direct sedative to the muscles of 
respiration, leading to paralysis of the voluntary muscles; there is para- 
plegia, loss of speech and sight* Death may be due to asphyxia. The 
cerebral functions are not affected by it, and the mind remains clear 
to the last* It has no action on the heart. 

Therapeutics. — Coniine is indicated in diseases characterized by 
excessive motor activity as in neurosis, tremors, chorea, paralysis 
agitans, hysteria and muscular twitching; also to relieve spasmodic cough 
in bronchitis, pertnsis, asthma and phthisis; sometimes it is given 
with morphinsc in convulsive affections, such as tetanus, hydrophobia, 
epilepsy, acute mania and delirium tremens. Locally it is a resolvent 
and discutient. In enlargement of the breasts with profuse lacteal 
secretion, its application produces atrophy and the secretion oi milk 
becomes scanty and even suspended. As an anodyne application it is 
useful in tender glandular enlargements^ and scrofulous and painful 
growths; also in cancer, and rheumatic joints. The ointment is used for 
painful affections of the rectum and anus such as piles, pruritis ani, 
&c, ; conine vapour is a palliative in the tickling cough of phthisis, 
or of acute bronchitis. In pneumonia and pleurisy, an hypodermic 
injection of coniine by inducing paresis of the respiratory muscles^ 
reduces the temperature and thus gives relief. 

Remarks. — Kirda mana is often mistaken for kira mani ov*t, the 
flower heads of a composite plant, which is not poisonous. 

Caminum Cyminum. 

^<»5iVi»/.— Africa, cultivated in India. 
Pitrii tiset/,^Tht fruit. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Kamun, Kemun. Beng. — Jinl, ZirA. 
Burm.— 7,ec-yii-» Dte-ya. Can,— Jirga. Cing, — Duru* Puk.— 
Sh&hjira. Eng* — Cumin seed. Gu2.— Sapheda jirun. Hind. — Safed 
jirA* Malay. — Jintan. Mar.^ — Jirc, JirQ. Pers. — Jtra-i-safcd, Sans* — 
Jirana^ jtra, kunchicka, jirakaha, Ajaji, Ajmoda, Tarn. — ^Shiraganu 
Tel. — ^Jila kara, jirana. 

Ajaji, from, Aj, a goat, meaning that which overcomes goat^u 
Ajrooda — goat*s delight. Jcriin isderived from jri, lo digest, in allusion 
to th« digestive properties of the seeds. 



286 DAUCUS CAROTA, 

Characters. — Fruit of a light brown colour, elongated, cylindrical, 
and ovoid in shape, smaller in size than variali, surface rugous, hairy 
and marked with longitudinal ridges ; at the apex, the fruit is 
surrounded by two small acute projections which are the remains of 
the styles attached to each mericarp. On bruising, the odour is dis- 
agreeable. Dose I to 2 drs. 

Constituents. — The seeds yield 77 p.c. fat oil,i3'Sp.c. resin, 8 pc, 
mucilage and gum, 1 5-5, protein compounds, malates and an essential oil 
on which the peculiar aromatic odour and taste depends. This essential 
oil contains cuminol or cuminaldehyde 56 p.c. a mixture of hydrocarbons, 
cymene or cymol, terpene, &c. 

Actions and uses. — Carminative, aromatic, stomachic and stimu- 
lant ; used in hoarseness of voice, dyspepsia, flatulence aud diarrhcea. 

Daacas Carota, Daucus Yalgaris. 

Habitat. — Cashmere, W. Himalaya, N. Asia. 

Parts used. — The root and fruit. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Ista Aim Jazr, jazr-ul bostani. Beng. — Gajara 
Can. — Gajjari, Chin. — Hu-lo-peh. Duk. — Gajara, jugur. Eng. — 
Common or wild carrot. Guz. — Gajar. Hind. — Gajra, jugur, gajur. 
Mar, — Gclzara. Pers. — Zir duk. Punj. — Marmuj, Bal-kach. Sans. — 
Grinjana, Gaijara, Garjarama, Shikha-mulama. Tam. — Gijjar. Tel. 
— Gajjara-gadda, Shekka-mulamu. 

Characters. — Fruit pale, dull brown, oval, and compressed from the 
back, longer than suvk bij ; mericarps adherent. At the apex of the fruit 
are two prominences, the remains of styles ; surface rugous, marked with 
ridges, three on the convex back, two on the plane of the commissure, 
ridges distinctly winged. Wings fringed with white teeth or bristles. 
When crushed, the fruit emit an acrid or balsamic odour, taste balsamic, 
acrid, bitter, and oily. On expression they yield an essential oil. Root 
fusiform 6 to 12 inches long, and of a reddish yellow colour ; parenchy- 
ma fleshy and edible. It has a sugary and mucilaginous taste, and a 
feebly aromatic smell. 

Constituents^ — The root contains carotin, hydrocarotin, oil, sugar, 
pectin, nitrogen compound and volatile oil. The fruit contains volatile 
oil and a fixed oil. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, ^ to i fl.oz. Fluid extract. 
Dose, 5 to 30 ms. 

Actionsjind uses, — Fruit stimulant, laxative, emollient, antiseptic 
diuretic and emmenagogue. As a diuretic it is given in nephritic 
affections, dropsy, strangury and amenorrhoea. This property is due to 
its containing the volatile oil which acts locally upon the nervous struc- 
tures of the kidney during the excretion ; as an antiseptic, a poultice 
of the root is used to correct foetid discharges from eczema, unhealthy 
sores, carcinoma, &c., the root is saccharine and edible. The seeds 
are said to cause abortion. 



UORKMA AMMONIACUM, 



2H7 



Dorema Ammoniacum, 6, P., D. Gtabrum, Ferula Orientalla, 
F. Tingitana and probably other Bpecies. 

Habitat, — Persia, Afghanistan (on silicious soil, deserts and barren 
regions). 

Purt^i used. — The gum resin exuded from flowering and truiting 
stem ; Atnntoniacuni, B. P, 

FcmacNlar. — Afghan — Randal. Arab-— Fashuk, Ushti &haka* 
Bomb.^ — Ushaka. Eng. — Ammoniac, Gnz. — Ushaka, Astrak, Gunda. 
layaka. Hind. — Samagh Hamania. Pers,^ — Ushna ooshak. Tarn. — 
Randal. Afghan — Gama Nayakan. Tel. — ^Gama Nayakam« 

Charnckrs. — Gum resin in roundish tears, agglutinated masses, or 

cakes ; tears of a pale cinnamon or brown colour, breaking into ail 

opaque shining or yellow conchoidal w^hite fracture, and having a faint 

[odour and a bitter nauseous taste. The cakes resemble in appearance 

and smell hinga cakes, giving with water a milky emulsion ; an inferior 

variety is obtained from the base of the stem, often mixed with vegetable 

jJragmtnts and earthy matter. It softens by handling. The root called 

^Boi is fibrousp of a loose, spongy texture, and of a faint aromatic odour, 

often mistaken for sumbal. Dose, 5 to 15 grs« 

Constituents. — Gum, 18 to 26 p, c. ; resin, 70 p. c. ; volatile 
oil, 14 p, c; moisture, 5 p. c»; Ash, 3 p, c. The volatile oil differs from 
that of asafetida in that it docs not contain sulphur or phosphorus. The 
resin does not yield umbelliferon. It consists of an acid and two 
resins, one soluble and the other insoluble in etherp the latter is soluble 
Jn volatile and fixed oih 

Preparations. — Emplastrum ammoniaci cum hydrargyro, B. P. 
ammoniac plaster with mercury, ammoniac 12 02., mercuiy 3 oz., olive 
oil 56 grs., sublimed sulphur 8 grs. Mistura ammoniaci, B, P. (i in 33) 
with syrup of Tolu. Dose, \ to 1 Hd, oz. 

Actions a fid uses. — The root, Boi, is used as a fumigation. The 
gum is a stimulating expectorant and laxative ; also rubefacient and 
resolvent. A piaster of it promotes nitrition in the part to which it 
may be applied. As an irritant it produces papular eruptions. 
Internally its action is like that of asafetida but less powerful j given in 
chronic pulmonary catarrh of the aged with profuse secretion, and 
attended with difficult expectoration and without fever; generally 
combined with ammonium chloride. It gives lone to the feeble pulmon- 
ary circular muscular fibres and hence in asthma it is very useful. 
It removes the exciting cause of the nervous paroxysm. Its use should 
T ng continued as it leads to a dry and irritable state of the 

i In hynsterical asthma it is used when combined with 

aaatctida* It is sometimes given in chronic catarrh of the urinary 
paisages. Externally as a resolvent, it is used as a plaster in asthma, 
in indolent tumours and glandular swellings, in enlargement of the 
liver and spleen and as an irritant in chronic muscular rheumatism, 
in chronic bioutbial cataiih and chronic pleurisy. 



288 KERUl-A KKTIDA. 

Ferula Alliaoea. 

Habitat. — Balkh, Persia. 

Parts used. — ^The gum resin from the root. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Hiltit, Tyih. Eng. — Indian Asafetida. Guz. 
— Hing. Vagarni. Ispahan, — Angusht, — Gandah, — Pers. — Angozah 
Kema. Sind. — Hinga, Vaghaunni. Sans. — Bhut nasan, Sula-nasan, 
Nasana Hinguhu. 

Bhutnasan, from Bhut, demon, and nisana, nasvun, to fly 
away or run away or to destroy. It dispels demons. Sula nasana 
from sula, pain in the stomach, to destroy, or drive away pain from 
the stomacn. 

Characters, — It is semifluid at first, of an opaque white colour, 
but gradually becomes dull yellow or darker; met with in irregular 
masses of opaque tears moist or dry and imbedded in a yellowish or 
brownish grey sticky mass. It has a strong feet id garlic-like alliaceous 
persistent odour and an acrid bitter taste. With water it forms a white 
milky emulsion. The odour is due to the volatile oil it contains. It 
dissolves entirely in rectified spirit. Dose, 3 to S grs. 

Ferula FcBtida, B. P., Narthex Asafetida, Fermla Narthex, 
Femla Soorodosma. 

Habitat, — Persia, Afghanistan, Panjab. 

Parts used. — The gum-resin obtained by incision from the root. 
Asafetida, B. P. 

Vernacular, — Arab. Hiltit Sujadan, Shamagh-ul-Mahrus, Juwifeh. 
Beng. — Hing. Burm. — Singu or Shinkhu. Can, — Ingu. Cing. — 
Pirunka yam. Duk. — Hing. Eng.— Devil's dung, asafetida. Guz. — 
Hingra, Vagirnihing. Hind. — Hingu, Hingiseh Anguza. Maleal. — 
Parungayam. Pers. — Angoyah, angustagooda anjadana. Sans. — 
Romatham, Bhuta nasana, sula nasana, hinguhu. Tel. — Juguva, 
Hingu-patri. 

Characters. — A perennial herb ; the gum resin is met with in 
moist, flaky, pieces or tears of a dull yellow colour, becoming darker 
on keeping, tough when fresh, internally yellowish and translucent, 
or milky white and opaque, odour, strong, persistent and alliaceous, 
taste bitter and acrid, soluble in alcohol 65 p. c. ; with water it forms 
a milk-white emulsion. Dose, 5 to 15 grs. 

Constituents, — A sulphuretted volatile oil, 3 to 9 p. c, consisting 
chiefly of allyl sulphide, resin 50 to 70 p.c, soluble in ether ; gum, 
30 p. c, saline matters and ash ; 3 to 4 p.c., also ferulaic, malic, acetic, 
formic and valerianic acids. 

Volatile oil. — The odour and stimulant property of asafetida are 
due to this oil which may be obtained by distilling asafetida with water 
or alcohol. It contains several sulphides of ferulyl, two tcrpenes 
which yield sesquiterpene and a blue coloured oil. 



KUvi.\ Mirriiu. 



The iTsm on dr>* distillation VJelds umbelliferon, wliicli is not 
fnund in the Indian variety. When fused wiLh potash, it viclds 
reK>rcin and pyrocaicchuic aciil. 

Pfeparattrms. — Pill of asafetida — containing King i, Camphor i. 
Opium I, and binck pepper j, made into one pill. Hinga ashtaka 
churana, a compound povv^dcr, Hinga 4, Shajira 5, Pipali 4, Ajavana 
4» Bodi Ajanioda 5, Sonachola 4, Miri y, and Suntha 3, mix and 
make a powder, to this, sometimes Afima 2 is added. Dose, 10 to 20 
grains — used as a carminative and dicestive in dyspepsia, vomiting, 
colic, flatulence, &c. Hinga-Vadi-V^urati Suppositories— Hinga 5, 
Madha 6, Sindhava 4 — mix and make a suppository in kokumtel, 
used in constipation, piles, &ev 

Enema asafetida?, 30 grains in 4 ouncea, Pilula Aloes et 
Aiiafetidie, B.P> ( i in 4). Dose, 4 to8 grs* Pilula Galbani composita, 
B,P. (2 in 7). Dose, 410 8 grs* Spiriius ammonia; Fetidus, B. P, (r in 
13). Dosct 20 to 40 ms- Tinctura Asafetidae, tincture of asafetida^ B. P. 
(t in 5)» Dose, ^ tt» 1 fld. dr* Emulsum asafetidae, milk of a^^afetida, 
4 p.c. Dose, 4 tri 12. Mistnra magnesix* tt asafctiii:c» Dewee's 
cirminativc^ — magnesium carbonate 5, tincture of asafetida 7, tincture 
of opium I, sugar to» water loo. Dosei i to 4 drs, 

Phv^vjhi^kitl ^litihfis, — Among the natives, Hing is usually fried 

hc(OTv being used as medicine* as they believe that law hing causes 

% h is a mo>l powerful foetid gum resin, a valuable stimulant 

:\ the organs of circulation and secretion : aho a nervine and 

, ly slnnulanl, and a powerful anti '\c. It is also 

Mvc, tonic, laxative, diuretic and enui :ue, also anthel* 

minnc and aphrodisiac. In ^rnall doses and il lung continued, it 

produces a scnsie c»f warmth without any rise of temperature. It impairs 

ii-^^tion, gives rise to atliacious erucialions, acnd irritation in the 

liijuat, (latulencc, diarrhita and burning in the urfnc< In large doses it 

stimulates the secretion and excretion and increa^^cs the sexual appe* 

lite. The volatile oil is rapidly excreted and may be found in the 

urine, milk and sweat. It also increases the menstrual t!ow. 

Therapeutics, — Il is given in nervous and neurotic diseases, as 
hysteria, and hypochondriaiiis ; as an expectorant, in habitual cough, 
tdifonic catarrh, bfonchitis and asthma ; as a carminative in dyspepsia, 
colic and other gasTric affections, and to expel worms. It is said to 
ward off malaria if taken with food in malarious districts. It relieves 
y iistension of the bowels* An enema ofhingii is the best form 

I it is exhibited in convulsions. It is a useful remedy in 
\ 'tiin. With m5'rrh and Riven in 

f loid fever. An enema v\ 'roil and 

I c id very beneficial in intesitiial colic ;iud worms» hi habttu^t 

It is a very reliable remedy. 

VnrifHe.K. — Khandari asafetida — this is superior t« hine^, Kwt 
inferior to the Indian hing, " 1 

with sjnd, clay, &c. It i^ the m 



2QO FERIII^ PFRSICA. 

Ferula Oalbanifliia, B. P., and probably other 8peoiet. 

Habitat — Persia, Smyrna, India, coasts of the Mediterranean. 
Pari used, — The gum resin Galbanum, B. P. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Barahada Kinneh. Bomb. — Javashira. 
Duk. — Barija-gonda. Eng. — Galbanum. Hind. — Bireja, Ganda-biroa. 
Pers. — Biriz, Jhav-shira, Berazadd, Gaoshira, Barazahd-i-gaoahir. 
Javashira, a corruption of the Persian Gaoshira. Jao or gao means a 
cow, and shira^milk ; in allusion to the milky nature of the juice. 

Characters. — Yellowish brown externally, and milk-white within, 
often mixed with stems fruits and flowers. Found in minute tears 
or agglutinated hard masses or granules of the size of a pea. The 
odour resembles that of ushaka or celery, taste balsamic and rather 
acrid. With water it gives milky emulsions. Dose, 5 to 15 grains. 

Constituents. — Volatile oil, 6 to 9 p. c, isomeric with turpentine, 
resin 60 to 66 p.c. ; gum 15 to 20 p. c. ; it yields on dry distillation, 
a blue oil and umbelliferon, a tasteless substance in satiny crystals. 
The oil conuins no sulphur. 

Preparations. — Pilula galbani composita — compound pill of asafe- 
tida (2 in 7), asafetida 2. Galbanum 2, m3rrrh 2, syrup of glucose i. Dose 
4 to 8 grs. Emulsion, Tincture (i in 10). Dose, \ to i dr., and PUster- 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant, expectorant, and antispasmodic ; 
similar to those of ammoniac, but is less powerful than asafetida. 
Locally it is used as a stimulant application to indolent glands, boils 
and tumours, combined with other gum resins ; an ointment is used tev 
acne Internally it is given in hysteria, chlorosis, asthma, rheumatism, 
chronic bronchitis and catarrh of the mucous membranes generally. 
It has a stimulant action upon the uterus and is given in vaginal 
and uterine catarrh, and in amenorrhoea and chronic rheumatism. 

Ferola Persica, F. Sa^pennm. 

/^/?^ito/.— Persia. 
Pari used. — The gum resin. 

Vernacular.^ Arzh. — Sakabinaja, Sugabinaja. Bomb. — ^Easus* 

Eng.— Sagapenum. Hind. — Kundel. Pers. — Suga fium, Iskabinah. 

Characters. — Gum resin in masses forming brown cakes, princi* 
pally in tears of a greenish hue, closely resembling javashira ; odour 
like that of garlic, taste acrid, and terebinthaceous. 

Constituents.^-Vohitile oil, resin and gum. Same as those of 
galbanum, but it also contains sulphur. 

Preparations. — Plaster ; Segapenum pills— containing Aloes I, 
Segapenum i, Bdellium x, and Agaric i, given in flatulence and 
dyspepsia. Dose, i| to 8 grs. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant, emmenagogue and anthelmintic ; 
given in flatulent dyspepsia, and in chronic bronchitis, with profuse 
secretion ; externally it is used as a stimulating plaster. 



Ferula Bombal» B. P. 

Sumbul from arabic sumbul which means a spike. The appearance 
of the flowering stem is like that of a spike* 

HahUat. — Northern Asia, 

P^rts fiseii. — The dried transverse slices of the root, Sumbul 
Radix, B. P. 

Vernacular* — Arab. — Sumbul. Eng, — musk root. 

CharacUrs. — A large plant ; root large, thick, fusiform, light and 
spong)*, but longitudinully wrinkled, bark thin, brown and fibrous^ 
interior whitish with yellow dots and irregular fibres— odour strong 
and musk-like, taste bitter and aromatic. Dose, 5 to 30 grs. 

Consttttants — A volatile oil, of a bluish colour, balsamic resin 9 px, 
obtained by distillation and containing umbeltiferon, suinbulic or angelic 
acid, valerianic acid, methyl crotonic acid, a bitter extractive ; sugar and 
suich« 

flrfarattnns* — Ixifusum Sumbul of Decoctum Sumbul (1 in 20). 
Dose, 2 to 6 drs. Tinctura Sumbul^B. P* (1 in to). Dose, 4 to i dr* fl. 
Extract. Dose, 3 to 5 grs* 

AcHcfis and uses. — Stimulant* nervine tonic and antispasmodic 
like musk and valerian ; given in hysteria, nervous disorders, chlorosis, 
also in leucorrhoea, gleei, hypochondriasis, delirium tremens, and 
epilepsy. In chlorosis it is often combined with iron, arsenic, &c. 
Also given as a substitute for musk in cholera, typhoid and other 
adynamic conditions, asthma, &c. 

Fcanioulam CaptUaceum, B. R, F. Vulgare, 
Fcaniculum PanmoharL 

HahitaL — W. Asia, cultivated in India and Europe, 

Parts used, — The dried ripe fruit, FcenicuH fructus, B* P* Fennel 
fruit ; and root- 

Vemacular.—AiiAh, — Razceanej and'dist il led water Arak<i-badiana. 
Bomb: — Sonpha. Cing* — Devaduiu, Rataenduru. Beng. — Panmohuri, 
Moortc, Guowamooree. Can. — Somp. Eng— Sweet or wild fennel. 
Gilt. — Variari. Hind— Bari> Sonpha, Panmohuri, Mayuri, Mar.-^Bari 
Sonpha. Pcrs^ — Badian. Karalah. Tarn. — Perun. Sheragom* TcK — 
Shohi Kire. Pedda-giUa kara. Sans. — Mudorika. 

Characters* — Fruit, cremocarp of a bright yellow colour changing 
to dark brown by keeping, from ^ to | of an inch long, and /{, inch 
tn diameiet, oblongs more or less curved, having a long slender thread-* 
like stalk at the bottom, apex slightly pointed, surface smooth, 
deeply channelled, and marked with ten prominent ridi;es, separable 
into two prominent mcricarps. It exhibits on transverse section 
4 oil tubes on the back, and 2 or 4 on the fl4t surface ; odour 
agreeable and aromatic, taste sweet and aromiiic Indian sweet fennel 
is smaller and straighter than the European article* Du^e, 5 to JOgis. 



^Smm^^^ 



292 HYDKOCOTYLK ASIATICA. 

Constituents. — A volatile oil 2 to 6 p.c, united with a terpene, and 
almost identical with oil of aniseed ; fixed oil 12 p. c, mucilage, 
sugar and ash 7 p. c. 

Oleum Foeniculi. — Volatile oil of fennel. To obtain it distil the fruit 
or entire plant with water or steam. A pale yellow liquid, almost 
identical with anise oil, odour and taste peculiar and characteristic, 
neutral in reaction, soluble in alcohol (i in 1) and glacial acetic acid 
(i in 1). Dose, 2 to 4 ms. The oil contains pinene, phellandrene (isomeric 
with oil of turpentine), dipentene, fenchone and anelhol, or anise 
camphor. Anethol consists of a liquid portion eleopten and a solid 
stearopten. 

Preparations. — Aqua Foeniculi, B. P. (1 in 10), of the fruit, or i in 
500 of the oil. Dose, i to 2 fld. ozs. — pulvis glycyrrhizae compositus, 
B. P. Dose, 60 to 1 20 grs. 

Actions and uses* — A mild stimulant, carminative, aromatic, 
stomachic, emmenagogue and galactagogue ; employed like other 
carminative and aromatic medicines. It acts as a diuretic and diapho- 
retic in children and infants, promoting the secretion of urine and 
perspiration. It is also given for the relief of nausea, flatulency and 
colic. As an emmenagogue its hot infusion is given in amenorrhoea. 
As a galactagogue it is used in re-establishing lacteal secretion when 
wanting or suppressed. As a corrective, the oil is useful in flatulence 
and in arresting griping of purgatives. It is a common ingredient 
in confections. The root is used in native practice in the form of 
infusion for similar purposes, and as an enema to expel flatus in 
infants. 

Remarks. — Fennel is often confounded with anise. 

Hydroootyle Asiatioa. 

Habitat. — India, Ceylon, Southern Africa. 

Parts used. — The leaves and root. 

Vernacular, — Arab, — Brahami Artaniya-a-hindi. Beng. — Thol- 
kuri. Bomb. — Brahami* Burm. — Minkhuti-bin. Can.— Unde-laga. 
Cing. — Hingotu-kola. Duk.— Vallari-k&-patta. Eng. — Asiatic or 
Indian Pennywort, Indian Hydrocotyle. Guz. — Khara brahami. 
Hind. — Brahami, Khula Khudi. Maleal. — Kodagam. Mar. — Karivana. 
Sans. — Brahami, Man^ukaparni. Tam. — Vallarai-kire. Tel. — 
Manduka-brummi, Bokkudu, Babassaielaka. 

Characters.^Cret^mg herb, sending out large runners which 
produce leaves, roots and fruits at the joints; leaves with long stalks, 
reniform, crenate, glabrous or hairy on the under surface, and cordate 
at the base. Stem slender and longitudinally furrowed. Fruits, 
clustered at the joints, small, laterally compressed and furrowed or 
ribbed longitudinally ; when bruised, the odour is aromatic, taste 
pungent, nauseous and bitter. 

Constituents. — An oleaginous substance vellarine, having the 
odour and bitter persistent taste of the fresh plant, resin, and some 



PFUCRDAMUM ORAVKOLFNS. 



203 



?Su\^aromaljc body, j^um, sugar, albuminous matter, salts, mostly 

;tlkaline ^ulpliates, and tannin. 

f'tepamfihtis^^Powdcr. Dose^ 5 to lo grains* Cataplasma, 
lluid extract. Dose, 2 to 5 ms* 

Actions anti mrs. — Alterative, tonic, diuretic and local stimulant. 
It lia* a special influence on tbe urino-genital tract. It sets up urinary^ 
and ovarian irrit.it ion and itching over the whole btKly, 
The root is given with milk and liquorice, in fever and dysentery. As 
a stimulant and alterative the powder is given in chronic skin 
jistases, such as eczema, lupus, psoriasis secondary syphilitic sores or 
^ikin crupUous ; also in antCslhetic leprosy, elephant iasis and scrofula. 
As a snuff, it is used in ozajua. The poultice or cataplasm is applied in 
syphilitic and other forms of ulcerations. The powder is dusted over 
ulcers « 

Peucedanum Grande and Pastinaca Grande. 

l!ahiiat,—\\\\h of Western India. 

Parts tiscii* — The hurt. 

Vernacular,— ^mx\h. — Baphalli. Eng* — Wild carrot. Hind. — 
Dukku ; Daku, Pcrs, — Duku. 

Charactrrsn — Fruit resembling gajara, large, broadly eUipticat, 
oimpie^sed, convex in the middle, with a dilated border and marked 
with ridges, and reddish yellow all over. The seed is of a pale 
yellnw or brown colour adhering to the margin j odour lemon like, 
and taste pungent bitterish. 

Ctifntttucnts, — An essential oil, of a light yellow colour. 

Prep4iratims, — ^Infusion (i in 10). Dose, \ lo i fid. ot. 

Actions tniH tisejt. — Similar to those of fennel, and used as carmi- 
naiive, diuretic and siimulant in flatulency, gastric and intestinal 
fJisurders &c. 

Peuoedanum Graveolene, B. P. 

Anethum sova, A. gravcolens— Pastinaca gravcolens. 

fJiihitat, — S. Europe, Asia, cultivated In India. 

Parh wsr^/,— The dried ripe fruit» aiicthi fructus, dill fruit, R, P* 

/ Vr/irtc«Air,— Arab. — Shabbit. Reng.^Sovalakindai shova sulpha. 
Burm. — Tsa-mont Sanun> Tsa-Morihpyn, Can, — Sabba-sagi. Cing, 
^Hiiien dura, sata, kuppi. Duk- — Soyi. Eng. — Common dill fruit. 
*lind — Sawa, soyah, sulchuka. Gur — Soova. Mar, — Suva, shepu. 
falayaU — Jemuju adas-manis, anisi. Pers. — V'alane khurda, sitada. 
Sans, — Sita, siva, nusreya, sh at a push pa. Tarn. — Sadakuppi, Tel.— 
R.^vikura, vittulu. Unani— anitun. 

Characters. — Fruit broadly oval, oblong, rather flat and smaller 

I fj ill variiili. composed of two mcricarps which are usually separate and 
Irecil from pedicel ; each broadly oval ,\f of an inch long and | inch 
broad, with jimooth svir faces and containing oil lubes and having a 
slender, lofig stalk at the base. Al the apex are two small projections, 



214 



PETEOSltLfXlJM ^ATIVrM. 



the remains oi the styles. Surface rugous darkish, or greyish yellow, 
or brown > with two thick ridges, united tngether from the apex to the 
base, forming a thick margin on both sides, three thin intervening 
ridges occupying their surfaces. On bruisinjCi the odour is like that 
of peppermint » taste warm somewhat pungent, and spicy like that of 
caraway* Dose of the seed, 5 to 30 grs. 

Constituents. — V^olatile oil 3 or 4 p.c, and fixed oil. The volatite 
oil is composed of anethene, carvol and another hydrocarbon. 

Oleum anethi. B. P. The volatile oil to which its medicinal pro* 
perti^ are due is obtained by distillation of the seeds* It is a limpid, 
thin» yellowish or colourless liquid, odour aromatic, taste spicy, 
soluble in alcohol. Dose, J to 3 ms. 

Prttaraiions. — Aqua anethi, B. P., from the fruii \i m 10) \ of 
the oil (1 in 500). Dose, i to 2 fld. ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Carminative, stomachic, aromatic, stimulant, 
and galactagague. Women use it as a cordial drink after confinement to 
stop a tendency to vomiting and hiccough, and in indigestion and 
flatulent colic ; it is also given in amenorrhcea. With methi the seeds 
are fried in butter and used to check diarrhoea. 

Remarks. — The natives use this drug very freely as a carminative 
in various prescriptions* 

Petroselinom SatiTiim. 

Syn.^ — Apium Petroselinum, Carum Petroseltnum. 

i/<y^//ff/.— Southern Europe. 

Ihni^ used, — ^The root, fruit or leaves, and Apiol — ^an olco-rcsiti 
obtained from the fruit» 

Vfmacular. — Beog* — Bilali Pitursilli. Eng. — Common Parsley, 
Hind. — Pitar Saleri. 

Characters* — ^A biennial plantt leaves radical 3 pinnate, flower* 
yellow, fruit long, ovate, greenish brown, mericarp with 5 ribs and 
6 oil tubes ; root conical, yellowish, 6 inches long and J inch thick. 

Constitnents^^Tht root contains a volatile oil, a gelatinous 
suhstante apiin and starch. The fruit also contains Apiol (an oleo* 
resin) which is the true active principle. 

It is a greenish brown oily liquid of a peculiar odour and a 
disai^reeable pungent parsley-like taste, readily soluble in alcohoU 
ether, chloroform and glacial acetic acid. Insoluble in water. Oose, 2 
to 6 ms, 

The name apiol is also given to a kind of camphor. It occurs In 
white need1es» odnur feeble and parsley like, insoluble in water, freely 
soluble in alcohol or ether. Dose, 15 grs. as an a fit {periodic, la cri. 
as aiiemmenagogue against dysmenorrhoea. 

Preparatinns. — Extractum Apii Radicis Uquidum. Dose, 1510 
60 ms. Extractum Apii Fructus Liquidum. Dose, 15 to to ms. 
Infiisum Apii of the root (t in 20). Dose, 1 to : fld« 021^. 



mMPtVKLLA AXISl'M. 



295 



Pkysio/o^ical action. — Parsley is aperient, diuretic, diaphoretic, 
expectorant and carminative ; also emmenagogue and febrifuge ; used 
in dropsy, gravely strangury, gonorrhcea, uric acid diathesis and in 
•guc. Apiol in small doses is carminative, diaphoretic, diuretic, also 
expectorant and vascular stimulant. In large doses it is emmenajfogue 
and febrifuge. Its action is similar to that of quinine. Like quinine 
it produces headache, giddiness^ ringing in the ears, &c. In over 
doies it is decidedly narcotic. 

Therapeutics. — Apiol is given in intermittent fevers, and in 
roilarial neuralgias, but chiefly given in amcnorrhoea if due to anicmiai 
in dysmcrtorrhasa when the discharge is fcetid, and in accidental sup- 
pression of menses ; as an aborttfacient, it is quite useless. Locally 
parsley leaves applied to the breasts suppress secretion of milk, 

Pimpinella Jlnlsam, B P. 

Anisum officinalis. 

Habitat, — Persia, Egypt, S. E. Europe* 

Parts used. — The fruit, Anlsi fructus, B. P., and oil, Oleum 
Anisi, B. P, 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Anisum, Shamtin Beng, — Mahoori, Mitha 
jjra. Bom* — Ervados. Burm. — Tsa moon-lsa-bah. team sompu. Can. — 
Sompu. Cing»— Sinhala-asamodayan. Duk, — Souf. Eng. — Common 
Anise. Gu2. — Ervadosa, Hind — Sonf. Malay. — Jira-manis, Adis- 
manis, Perinchirakam. Mar. — ^Somp. Portuguese Hcrba-doce. Pers. — 
Raxiyan i-rumi, Valine Buray, Sans.— Awak-pushpi Karavasata- 
pu»pha« Tam.-*Shombu, TeK— Kuppi-chattn Pella Jillakara, 
Krvadosa is a corruption of Herba-doce, The native names are 
involved in great confusion, many of them being wrongly applied to 
"^ftvcral other fruits and seeds. 

Characters, — Fruit ith of an inch long, a cremocarp, ovoid^ rough, 
compressed at sides, of a greyish brown colour and hairy, mericarp 
usually remains united or attached to the pedicel ; primary ridges, pale, 
slender and entire containing 15 to 20 oil tubes ; on crushing the seeds 
they give out an agreeable aromatic odour, and a sweet spicy taste^ 
The volatile oil resembles oil of fennel. It becomes dark by keeping* 
Dose of the fruit, 10 to Jo gra. 

Cofistttnents — Volatile oil, 1 to 3 p* c„ fixed oil 3 to 4 p* c, sugar, 
mucilage, and ash 7 p. c* 

Oleum Anisi, B.P., Oil of anise— a volatile oil obtained by distilling 
the fruit with water or steam, used medicinally. It is a colourless. 
>*«nowi&h, thin liquid, of a sweet, mild* aromatic taste, soluble in alcohol 
(l to i). Solidifies into white crystals if kept for some time. It con- 
tains a terpene— phellandrene 10 to 30 p. c, a stearopten— anethol 
or anise camphor 80-90 p. c. Dose, i to 3 ms. Anethol by oxidation 
is converted into anisic acid which resembles salicylic acid. 

Preparations, — Spiritus Anisi, B. P. (1 in 10). Dose, 5 to 20 ms. 
Tinctura Camphoraf composita, B- P, Dose, i to r dr. Aqua ani^i, 



296 PRANGOS PABCTLARIA. 

B. P., anise water, from the fruit (i in 10). and of the oil (i in 500). 
Dose, one to two fluid ounces. 

Preparations, — Of the fruit, infusum anisi (i in 40). Dose, 2 to 
8 drs. 

Actiotis and uses. — The volatile oil which is the active medicinal 
agent, is aromatic, slightly stimulant of the heart and digestive 
organs. It liquefies the bronchial secretion, hence it is used as expecto- 
rant ; it is also carminative and stomachic, and is used as a corrective 
to allay griping of purgative medicines. It is given in flatulence, 
intestinal colic and in bowel complaints. It has a special influence on . 
the bronchial tubes, and is given in infantile bronchial catarrh, after 
the acute stage has passed away. In large doses it is slightly narcotic. 
Locally the oil is applied to the head to relieve headache and to the 
abdomen to expel flatus, to the joints in rheumatism, and round the 
ear in earache. 

Prangos Pabnlaria. 

Habitat. — North of India, Thibet and Cashmere. 

Parts used. — The fruit and root. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Phatara-e-Saleyuna. Afghan. — Badian-e- 
Kohi. Bomb. — Phatarasaliuna, Fiturasaliyun. Hind. — Komal. 
Eng. — Silphium Parsley. Ind. Bazaar. — Fiturasaliyun. Mar. — 
Phatura Salyuna. Sans. — Komal, Avipriya. Thibet. — Prangos. 

Characters, — Root conical, thick and yellow, becoming darkish 
brown when long kept. Fruit, a pair of mericarps, oblong, rather 
compressed and larger than varialee ; surface rugous, marked with 5 
convoluted ridges, on the top of each mericarp are two curved 
prominences, the remains of the styles ; mericarps with 5 ribs and 
6 oil tubes separate from below where the stalk is jointed. Odour 
resembling that of caraway. When kept for a long time the smell 
resembles cats' urine, taste pungent and resembles that of an inferior 
variety of Hinga. 

Constituents, — The dried fruit contains an essential oil, a trace of 
fixed oil, resins, traces of an alkaloid, quercitrin in large amount, and 
an ethereal salt of valeric acid. 

Preparations, — Of the fruit. Infusion (i in 20). Dose, i to 2 fld. ozs. 
Decoction of the root (i in 20). Dose, i to 2 fld. ozs. 

Actions and uses, — The root is diuretic, and the fruit is car mina- 
ive and stimulant ; given in urinary diseases, gravel, strangury and 
lyspepsia, also in dropsy and gonorrhoea. 

Remarks, — The fruit phatare saliyun, is sold as a substitute for 
petroselinon or rock parsley of the Greeks, and Karafs-el-jibali of the 
Arabs. 

PtychotiB Ajowan LeYiBticum, Ajowan, Carum Ajowan, 
Carum Copticum, B.P., Ajwain Omum. 

Habitat. — India, Southern Asia, Africa. 

l^arts used, — The fruit. 



PTVrHOTIS AJnWAS 

Frrnactifar^ — A rah. — Kimun-elniuliiki, Annis. Bcnp.— Ajwain, 
Juviln, Baro-joau, Bomb,— 0\^* Burm, — Sanihuine. Can. — Ouiu, 
Voma. Cing, — Assumoda. Duk. — Ajvaii. Eng.— Lnva>;e, Bishttp*s 
weetl, King's cumin. Guz, — Ajamo. Hind. — Ajvayan, Ajamoda, Mar. — 
Ova, Ajma vovasieda. Malay* — Hornama Azamoda Kani. Pers, — 
Zhinyarii Nan k huh. Sans, — Ya van I AjmrRl.un, \ a van Ik a. Tarn. — 
Omam. TeL — Vaman Chettu. 

CAam£:/im\— Mericarps adherent by a bright yellow stalk or 
sq)aratcdj colour pale brown, resembling that of anisum, in size 
smaiter than anise- Adherent mcricarps, broadly ovale, pointetU 
stalked and conical, streaked with yellow stripes ; separate mericarps, 
compressed or arched on one side, and convex on the other. Surface 
highly tubercled, marked with five or ten prominent ridges, the 
intervening spaces being dark brown ; on bruising the odour is strong, 
resembling that of Thymol or origanum. Tsiste peculiarly heating, 
pungent and also aromatic. Dost of the iruiis, lo to 40 grs. 

Cnftstt'tucHls. — ^An aromatic volatile oil and a crystalline substance 
which collects on the surface of the distilled water. This stcaropten» 
known under the Hindustanee name of Ajawankaphul, flowers of 
ajowan or ajwon camphor, is identical with English thyniol contained 
in Thymus vulgaris. Doge, (stearopten) J to 2 grs, 

Prtparatmts — Oleum Ptychotis— oil of ajwan^oil of oaium. 
Dose, I to 3 ma. in emuUiun, Mtdicaltd oil for application in 
ihcumalism, bruises, lumbago, ^c. Kxtractutu Ptychotii* liquidum, 
not miscible with water. Dose, 10 to 30 tns. Araka — Aqua Plychoti*, 
ajivan or omum water. Dose, i to 2 ozs. 



Actiom aufi uses. — Di (fusible stimulantp stomachic, carminative* 
antispasmodic and antiseptic. The fruit combines the powerful 
stimulant qualities of mustard or capsicum, the bitter property of 
chiretta and the antispasmodic virtues of asafelrda. and is of great 
iervice in cholera. As an antiseptic, it removes oflfensivc smcH from 
foul ulcers. As a stomachic, it increases the flow of saliva^ augments 
the gastric secretion, and hence is given in diarrhoea, dyspepsia, acid 
enniations, heartburn, &c. As an antispasmodic it is given in 
I , colicky pains, hysteria, stoppage of urine and tympanitis. 

Ii iiilis, with profuse expectoration, it lessens the sputum, A 

poultice of crushed fruits is applied to painful rheumatic joints, and 
fomentation of hot seeds to the chest in bronchitis, asthma, and to 
the cold hands and feel in cholera, fainting and syncope, Ajama-na- 
phula, is antiseptic and germicide. With camphor and other 
antispasmodics it is given in cholera, diarrha?a, tntcstinal colic, 
spasm of stomach, asthma and dysmtnorrhcEa, The oil h applied as 
a stimulant embrocation for the relief of pains in the hmb&or rheuma- 
tbm, and also given internally tor colic, tympanitis, &c Aqua piychotis 
i% u^di to disguise (he taste i>f nauseous drugs. 



29^ TRlANTHiittA MOKOGVNA. 

ffaUtat-^Petua^ Kashmir) Egypt. 

Parts usid. — ^The root. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Shina. En^. — Egyptian Misree. Ind. 
Baz« — Secacul mbree. Pers.— Sakaknl, Kirsygeyah. Shirac.^-Badran. 

CharacUrs. — Root resembling small carrots in shape and size. 
Externally, longitudinally furrowed, highly wrinkled and of a li^ht 
brown colour ; surface marked with scars of fallen rootlets. On section 
it is resinous, or sugary looking, and of a dark amber colour. The 
taste is sweetish and starchy. 

C(mstiiueMts.-^Tht root contains saccharine matter, starchi Ac. 

Preparattons,-^ Confection. Dose, t to 2 drs. 

^c/fbiMan^ttj^.— Tonic and aphrodisiac. It resembles in its 
actions sapheda musali and is given in seminal debility and leucorrhoea. 

Tiu^ila Omrgaaioa 

/Ai3f*AfiL— N6rthem Africa, Southern Europe, Arabia. 

Parts OHploytd. — ^The root and resin. 

Preparations. — ^Fluid ext. lo to 30 minims. Plaster from its resin. 

Actions and uses. — G>unter-irritant. It relieves the localized 
pains of rheumatism, gout, bruises and bronchitis. Like croton oil. 
Its action is limited to the spot of its application. Internally it acts as 
tonic in small doses, but in large doses it is an irritant cathartic. 

Triaathenm IIimo0Ba, T. Oboofdata, T. Pwkandra. 

Habitat. — ^Throughout India* 

Part la^i/.— The root* 

Vernacular. — ^Beng. — SAbuni, Lai and Lovet sabuni, Gado-Cunya. 
Guz— Satudo. Hind.— NAsur Janghi, BUh Khapnu Mar.— Vish 
Khlpra. Sans. — Punamava. Tam.— Sharvalay-Kiray. Tel. — Ambati- 
maddu, Bodo-pail4Lura, Ghalijeroo, 

Characters. — Plant, diffused, glabrous and fleshy ; root of a dirty 
brown or brownish white colour, 3 to 4 inches long and as thick as a 
crow's quill ; smell aromatic; taste astringenti bitter, pungent, and acrid ; 
leaves succulent, thick, smooth, obovate or obcordate, margin 
red. The flowers of a light pink colour. Dose, 30 to 120 grs. 

Constituents. — A glucoside, similar in properties to saponin. 

/Reparations. — Infusion (i in 20). Dose^ i to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Cathartic and irritant ; given in constipa- 
tion, jaundice, strangury and dropsy ; it is abo i^ed in torpid liver, 
asthma and amenorrhoea. Among the natives the plant is boiled and 
eaten as a vegetable. 



JUSSf.«A SltFKRUTieOS^ 



199 



Evening primrose, or Singoda family. 

Herbsor shrubs, with simple exstipulate, alternate, dotless leaves ; 
fruit capsular, succulent and dehiscent or indehiscent ; seeds numerous 
without aJbumen. 

Habitat, — India, temperate parts of North America and Europe. 

Profiertus, — The plants of this order are harmless. They possess 
mucilaginous properties. The fruits are acid and edible. The roots 
are also edible ; some are astringent* 

(Enothera Biennis. 

Habitat, — Europe, North America, 4c, 
Part used. — The flowering topt. 

Characters, — A shrub with simple, alternate or opposite, exstipuN 
ate leaves without dots ; flowers ajtillary, almost sessile ; calyx, superior 
j*4 lobed, in sestivation vatvate ; petals, large, showy^ regular and 
twisted in aestivation. Dose, )oto 30 grs. 

Preparations, — Decoction as a wa«h« Fluid extract, 20 to 60 ms« 
ointment. 

Actions and Njri,— Sedative and antispasmodic ; indicated \n 
pulmonary and gastric affections, depending on a morbid 
sensitiveness in the larvngeal, pulmonary or gastric branches of the 
pneumogastric nerve* It is beneficial in whooping cough, and spasmodic 
asthma — externally, a decoction is used as a wash in infantile eruptions 
and as an application to ulcers ; the roots are edible. 

Jatftlsa SnfhnlioaBaf 1* Yillota, Epllobriam Fratiooanm, 
J. Exaltatiu 

Habitat, — India, Ceylon. 

Part used* — The plant. 

^VrfMcrw/ar.— Beng.^Lil-ban-Lavanga. Ceylon — Haemorago. Can. 
— Kava cula. Cing, — Hotmaraga Hind. — Ban Laung, Kanchana* 
Maleal — Carambu, Mar.— Pana Lavanga. Sans. — BbMlavi-anga, 
Tel. — Nirbatsala* Tarn* — Nirkirambu, Niruaghendra-paku, 

P&na Lavanga means water-clove — indicating, the habitat of the 
plant* 

Characters. '^a^xh erect pubescent or villous, leaves broad, lan- 
ceolate, sometimes linear, acuminate, shortly petioled; flowers sessile, 
capsule, linear, ] or 2 inches* cyUndrical, more or les& villous, 8 
ribbed fruit large, yellow, resembhng a clove. 

Preparations, — Decoction (j in 20). Dose, ^ to 1 fl. dr- 

Actions and uses. — Astringent, carminative, diuretic and 
vermifuge ; given in flatulence ; powder steeped in butter milk, 
is given in diarrhcea and dysentery. As an astringent it is given in 
h»*rmoptysis, and in teucorrhopa. 



300 TRAPA BISPINOSA. 

Haloragaoeae, Mare's Tail, or Water Chestnut family. 

Herbs or shurbs, generally aquatic ; upper leaves and petioles 
tomentose, lower leaves opposite ; calyx minute, villous ; seeds solitary 
and pendulous; albumen fleshy or exalbuminous, nearly allied to 
onagraceae, merely an imperfect form of onagraceae. Edible seeds ; 
found in all parts of the world. 

Trapa Bispinosa, T. Natans, T. Bioornis, Tribolas 
Aquaticas. 

/^/73/Ai/.— Peninsulas of India, Bengal, Cashmere, Peshawar 
Nepal. 

Parts used. — The fruit, or nut, or seeds. 

Vcniacular, — Eng. — Water chestnut, 2 spined water caltrop, Jesuit 
nut Chin. — Ling. Beng. — P&ni phala. Bomb. — Singora. Guz. — 
Singoda. Duk, — Pani-phal. Hind. — Singh&rah, Pini phal. Maleal. — 
Karim polam. Mar. — Singoda. Panj. — Gaunri. Sans — Seringata, 
Tel. — Parike-gadda. Tam. — Pauri-mattai. 

Characters, — Fruit or nut is dark green, externally marked with 
horns, very conical in shape and barbed backwards as projecting spines, 
Seeds large, amygdaloid with unequal cotyledons ; nuts abpunding in 
starchy fecula of a white colour, and of a sweetish taste ; seeds edible ; 
those of Trapa Natans are known as Jesuit's nuts at Venice. 

The dried fruit deprived of husk is dull brown externally and 
white within. In shape, it is compressed, and like an obtuse angled 
triangle. On section it is hard and brittle. Dose, i to 2 drs. 

Constituents. — Contains manganese and starch. 

Preparations, — Confection. Dose, 2 to 4 drs. 

Actions and uses% — Nutritive, tonic, and cooling ; given in diarrhoea 
and dyspepsia, and with milk, in nervous and general debility, 
seminal weakness and leucorrhoea. Fresh fruits are edible — dried ones 
are baked, and then eaten. Powder of the dry fruits is used to 
prepare bread. 

SamydaoeA, Samyda Family. 

Trees or shrubs; leaves alternate, simple, evergreen stipulate, 
and marked with round or linear transparent dots. Flowers perfect. 
Fruit capsular and leathery, one-celled. Seeds numerous and arillate, 
albumen fleshy or oily. 

Habitat, — Tropical — principally America. 
Properties. — Bitter and astringent. 

Casearia Esoulenta. 
Habitat, — Southern India and Ceylon. 
Parts used, — The bark of the root. 

Vernacular, — Goa. — Sataganda. Hind. — Chilla, Chilara, Baire. 
Mar. — Mora-igeru, Bithori, Pingri, Mormassi. Tam.— Kaddla Shingi. 
Tel. — Gundu gungura. 



Morl-ageru — morn, a pile, nnd ageru, the rectum. Tliis mediehie 
ii. used for the treatment of piles. Sfitagunda— sntia, ivhich means seven, 
and gonda, a ring, the transverse section of the root bark shows 
seven concentric rings. Moramassi, mora pile and mashi, flesh, or a 
soft tumour. It is a cure for piles or soft tumour. 

Characters. — A small shrub; root crooked, forming angular bends ; 
bark very hard, of a dull red colour, and covered with thin papery 
subef of a yellow colour ; taste astringent. 

Ojnsiiitunis. — The bark contains lannini similar to Ratanhio- 
mnnic acid, and a principle allied to cathartic acid. 

/V/^jm//>;/w.^ Decoct ion (i in 20). Dose, 1 to 2 fld* ozs. Extract, 
Dose, 10 to 20 grs,, and syrup (1 of extract in 6)< Dose, 1 to 2 
drs. 

Actions and nse^, — Laxative and alterative ; u!*ed iot hepatic 
enlargement, and for piles, both internally and tfxternally. Its action 
un the liver is very marked. It i^ also given in (l*;tbetcs. 

PapayaceaB. 

The Papaw family. Trees or shrubs, vviih acrid milky juice ; 
leaves on*hmg petioles, Jubtd, and alternate ; flowers, unisexual or 
hermaphrodite. I'mtt succulent mn! iltluMfnr : s.-iuU many and 
albuminous, 

llabiiaL — India, bouth America. 

PrvpirUes. — The plants of thii> order contain an acrid, milky juice 
Some plants are deadly poisonous ; the unripe fruit and juice of M>nie 
areantlielmintic. Ripe fruit* are edible. 

Carioa Papaya, C. Valeria. 

hahiiat. — Native of America, cultivated throughout India. 
f^rts i#jr^(/-^The milky juice^ seeds, and pulp. 
lr*€rnacul*Mr — The fruit. Arab. — Anabahc liindi, Beng, — Popo- 
yiiiH. Bom., Hiud. — Arand-Kharbu/a, papaya. Burm.— Trenbaw, 
ticn, ihin-baw. Chin. — Muhkwa. Can.— Parangi. Cing,— PapaJ. 
>uk* — Popaiyah, PopiU. Eng. — Papaw, ivuz, — Papuyi. Mar, — 
*opayii. Malay, — r^apiiy;i-papa, Rate. Maleal. — Papeta, umbbaJay. 
?«i:5. — Anobahc-hindi. bind. — Katha Chibhadu. Tarn, — Peppali- 
iti« Tel— Midhumakani, Bapaia pandu. 

Characters. — Kipe fruit» succulent, oblong, furrowed, yellowish 

l^eei!, and containing numerous slimy, round, coloured albuminous 

fcgrcy seed*. The seeds smell like Assilio ; the unripe fruit, wood ^nA 

tjeaves contains a large quantity of thick, milky jutce, of a gelatinous 

tjn^istencc — and which contains a digestive ferment, which is the 

DCttve principle calkd Papain* 

Cunstiiiittits* — ^The juice contains an albuminoid, digestive, or 
dilkcurdling ferment — Papain or Papayotin. The fresh fruit contains a 
Uoutchouc^hkc lubbtaucc \ a soft, yellow rcsiii, fai| albuminoidsi sugar, 



CARICA PAPATA. 



pectin I citric, tartaric and malic acids, dextrine, &c. The dried fruit 
contains a large atnount of ash, 8'4 p. c„ which contains sodai potash 
and phosphoric acid. The seeds contain an oil. Papaya oil, or carictn^ 
an oiMike substance of a disagreeable taste and smell, soluble in ether 
and alcohol ; and several acids; similar to palmitic acid, carica fat acid, 
and a crystalline acid called papayic acid* These are insoluble in cold 
water, but soluble in hot water and alcohol, also a resin acid, having an 
irritant and bitter taste, insoluble in water and ether, aiid soluble in 
alcohol and alkalies ; and a soft resin. The leaves contain an alkaloid 
called carpaine, which with hydrochloric acid forms carpal ne 
hydrochloride, soluble in water ; used hypodermically as an injection. 
Dose, ^a to ^^ of a grain. As a cardiac tonic, it may replace digi- 
talis. Papayotin— a concentrated, active principle, obtained from 
the juice by precipitation with alcohol, A whitish* amorphous, 
hygroscopic powder, soluble in 75 p,c.p of absolute alcohol, water and 
glycerine. Dose, 2 to 10 grs. It is capable of digesting 200 times 
Its weight of fresh pressed blood fibrin. Its action is quicker than 
that of pepsin at a higher temperature, and does not require an 
addition of free acid. Seven grains of papayotin can digest one pint of 
milk* It acts as a solvent in alkaline solutions, and like pepsin if 
curdles milk. Dose, i to 8 grains, 

J^eparaiions. — Of the unripe fruit — succus, or papaw juice. Dddc 
1 to 4 drs. Papaw Spray (2 drs. in 4 025.) contains in addition 
three grains of Hydro-naphthol, and 15 minims of dilute hydrochloric 
acids. Pigment. — Contains papain, la gr, ; borax, 5 gr. ; water, jdrs. 
Lozenges. — ^ to | gr* of papain with -j'^ of cocaine in each. Elixir 
Papain. ^ Dose, 1 dr. 

Physhkgtcal Actiofis, — The action of the milky ^uice of the unripe 
fruit upon raw meat is well known among Indian cooks. It is 
an enzyme, similar to pepsin, acting as a solvent in alkaline, acid or 
nentral solutions* It is a powerful digestive of meat albumen, forming 
true peptones. As a solvent of fibrin and other nitrogenous substancet, 
the juice makes the meat tender, and is used as an anthelminiict 
and for dyspepsia. Externally it is applied for ringwoim and psofiajis, 
sometimes it is given as an emnir % It is not precipitated 

like pepsin on boilings but is pre 1 by mineral acids, iodine, 

mercuric chloride. 

Therapeutics^ — Acidglycerolcof papain is largely used in dyspepsia 
as it dUsolves mucus in the stomach which prevents the absorption of 
food in ca^es of indigestion, colic, flatulence, gastric ulcers, and 
as an aid to the nutrition of patients suffering from phthisis. As a 
solvent of albuminous bodies, papaine solution is used to di&solve 
fibrinous membrane, or to remove exudation in diphtheria, croup, 
iiwellcd mammary and axillary glands &c» A 5 p. c. solution with 2) 
p, c of bicarbonate of sodium, is used as drops into the ear 
in chronic otorrhcca. A pigment, well rubbed is used to remove corns, 
wafts, or any hardnei^s of the skin and in cb^ ^ema. If n 

in glycerine is applied (o ulcere and fi%:sure±» o^ t;uc. The ^^-^ 



TIJRNFRA ArHROOISrACJl* 



}0} 



are recommended for syphilitic ulcers of the tongue and throat* 
The milky juice and the seeds with honey are anthelmintic^ and are 
given to expel lumbrici ; also useful in dyspepsia^ in hepatic and 
splenic enlargements. The seeds are used as emmenagogue ; made into 
pessaries they are used in India to procure abortion — locally with 
glycerine a paste of seeds^ or the juice is used as a cure for ringworm 
and psoriasis. 

Tnnier&cea. 

Tl)e Turnera family. Herb» or shrubs. Leaves alternate, exstipu- 
late and hairy. Flowers axillary ; calyx inferior. 5-lobed, petals 5, equals 
twisted and perigynous. Stamens 5, alternate with the petals^ 
filaments distinct- Ovary, one-celled, superior. Fruit capsular one- 
celled^ 3-valved, dehiscing in a loculicidai manner. Seeds slightly 
curved, embryo, in the midst of fleshy albumen. 

Habitat — South America and West Indies, 

PmperU'es. — Astringent, tonic, expectorant and aromatic. 

Turnera AphrodlBiaoL, T. Hiorophylla. 

Habitat. — California and Mexico, 

Parts used.— The, leaves and tops- 

Characters. — Damiana is a small mint*like plant, bearing yellow- 
iih white fragrant flowers, and growing near the western coast of 
Mexico* The leaves are small, serrated, about one-fourth to one-third 
of an inch long, light green in colour, with a faint aromatic odour, 
and slightly bitter taste. 

Omstituents, — A volatile oil and a resin. 

Preparations. — Extractum Damians Liquidum. Dose, \ lo t 
drs, Extractum Damianae. Dose. 2 to 10 grs. Aphrodisiac pill : — 
Damiana Extract 2 grs», Nux Vomica Extract | gr*, Phosphorus 
xiir K't Coca Extract \ gr., Reduced iron i gr, — for one pill. 

Actions and uses* — Tonic, aphrodisiac, nervine, laxative^ chola- 
gogue and diuretic. It has specific action in seminal emissions, loss 
of seminal power prostatitis, prostatorrhoeai and enlargement of the 
prostate gland. It has been largely eniployed as an aphrodisiac as it 
has a special tonic and stimulant effect over the genito-urinary 
organs. It is useful in exhaustion from excesses* As a general nervine 
tonic it is given in cerebral exhaustion, general atony of the nervous 
system, sick headache, hemiplegia and paraplegia. 

Cuoorbttaoe®. 

The gourd, dodhi, or kikady family. Herbs, generally succulent 
profttrate or climbintf with tendrils. Leaves alternate, more or less 
lobed, and scabrous. Flowers unisexual, monoecious or dioecious, and 
of a yellow or white colour. Fruit a pej»o. or a succulent berry. 
Seeds numerouS| more or less flattened and exalbuminous ; testa, horny 
or leathery. 



304 



BKMNCASA CEKlhEKA. 



Habitat. — Common in ihe tropics. 

The pulp surrounding the seeds is edible. It sometimes possesses 
acrid, bitter, and purgative properties. Some species are poisonous. 
The seeds are generally harmless. By cultivation, the fruits lose their 
acridity, and t^ome edible. 

Benincasa Ceiifen, Cocnrbita Cerifera. 

Cucurbita Hispida, C. alba (white pumpkin), C. Pcpo (common 
pumpkin). 

Habitat. — Tropical Asia, India. 

Parts used. — The seeds and juice of the fruil. 

The word red or white or black is affixed to the vernacular name 
for Pepo. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — M aida bab (C. Pepo). Bomb. — Pandri chiki 
Kohala. Ben^. — Komra, chal-kumra. Burm. — Shwapha young. 
Chin. — Tung Kwa. Can. — Kumbalakaya. Duk. — Kaddu, Pethah. 
Eng. — Chinese pumpkin, Pepo, White tallow gourd. Gur. — Bhopala 
Dangara, Bhurun-Kohalun. Hind. — Kashi-phal, Hulwa, Mitha Kaddoo. 
Mar. — Koholum. Sind. — Prata-Kalu. Maleal. — Kumbulum, Kuvaly 
Punj. — Pitha. Pers. — Kodu. Sans. — Kush manda. Tam. — Pushi- 
nikkaya kumbuli. Tel. — Budide-gum madi. 

CharacUts. — Fruit large, yellowish, red or white, longitudinal or 
cylindrical, externally smooth, covered with obtuse ribs ; pulp, yellowish 
rtd or white, marrow-like, and juicy ; seeds pale yellow or white, flat, 
thick, broad, ovate and acuminate, taste sweet, refreshing, cooling or 
bland and oily. No odour. Dose of the seeds, i to 2 ozs. Given 
as an emulsion with sugar. Dose of the resin, lo to 15 grs. 

Constituents. — Fixed oil, 44 p. c. ; starch 32 p. c. an alkaloid cucur- 
bitine, an acrid resin, proteids, myosin, vitellin, sugar, ash, 4 p.c. 

Preparations. — Emulsion and Confection. Pushtik conserve. Take 
Bhurun Kohalu, cut in small pieces, dry them in shade and powder, fry 
the powder in butter and add almonds, quince seed, cloves, cardamoms, 
nutmegs, asparagus sarmentosus, satawari seeds, seeds of mucuna 
pruriens ; musk, curculigo archioidis, akalkaro, assan, Tejbal, Behman, 
(safed and surkh), Tamal patra, agar, nag kesor equal parts; add sugar to 
make a confection. For spermatorrhoea, with cumin seeds; and as a 
galactagogue with coriander and fenugreek seeds. Dose, ^ to i dr. 

Actions and uses. — Fruit is nutritive, tonic and diuretic. The 
seeds deprived of the outer covering are vermifuge, and are given in 
tape-worms and lumbrici ; as a diuretic it as given in gonorrhoea and 
urinary diseases. The oil has been used for the same purposes. 

The confection is alterative, tonic, diuretic and restorative, and 
given in impotence, phthisis, dyspepsia, anorexia, and to check internal 
haemorrhages such as haemoptysis, &c. Given to children in marasmus 
and for the relief cf cough and asthma. The fresh juice with sugar 
and saffron is given in insanity, epilcp>y, nervous diseases, and in 
diabetes. 



BRYONIA ALBA. 



Bryoida Alba, B. Dioica. 



305 



B* Alba— White bryony. Vitis alba— Wild hops— Tetter berry, 
nrood vine. B. Dioica — Red bryony, devifs turnips. 

Habitat, — S. Europe in thickets and hedges, East Indies. 

Pstr^ used. — The root. 

OmracUrs* — Perennial planL Root spindle-shaped, long, 2 inches 
u) diameter. Bark — thin, yellowish grey^ or brown. The interior is 
made up of numerous small wood bundles in radiating lines* The 
centre is white, flcshyi and lactescent ; taste bitter and acrid ; odour 
nauseous. Dose, powdered root, ro to 60 grs. 

Constituents >^\i contains an active principle, Bryonin — a 
glucoside, starchy sugar, gum, fatty matter, malates and other salts. 

Bryonin — To obtain it exhaust the lOot with alcohol, add tanninp 
and evaporate the precipitate. It is soluble in alcohol, and in water, 
insoluble in ether. Boiled with diluted sulphuric acid we get glucose, 
bryoretin and hydrobryoretin. Dose, J to | gr. 

Preparations, — TincturaBryoniae, from fresh-bruised roots (i in lo). 
Dose, J to 10 ms.or more» Infusum Bryoni^e (i in 20). DosCp 4 to 12 drs. 

Pkysioioiical action* — Emmenagogue, hydragogue, cathartic, 
vesicant, emetic and styptic. It is a cardiac depressant, lowering 
the heart's beats. As an irritant, the fresh plant sets up cut.ineou$ 
inflammation with fever, and also produces vesication. It is a violent 
irritant of the mucous membranes. In small doses it irritates the 
stomachy intestines, and the bronchit causing gastritis, and dry 
hack 1 1 '1, with pain and soreness in front of the chest, and behind 

the As an irritant of the serous membranes it sets up 

pteurius with fibronous effusion. It leads to congestion of the brain, 
liver, kidneys and bladder, producing frontal headache, vertigo and 
sometimes epistaxis ; also pain and tenderness in the liver, bilious 
vomiting and even jaundice, and pain and tenderness in the bladder 
with profuse secretion of urine. As a haemostatic its infusion (i in 10) 
causes progressive contraction of the capillaries. In large doses it is 
a drastic purgative, and acts like jaUp. It is also emmenagogue and 
emetic* 

Therapeutics. — In small doses Bryonia is given in the advanced 
stage of serous inHamraattons after the fever has subsided, as in pleurisy, 
pleuropneumonia and pericarditis. It promotes absorption of the effused 
products- It is given in hysteria^ epilepsy, enlarged spleen, and 
J swelled glands. An infusion of Bryony is styptic, and is used to arrest 
metrorrhagia. In rheumatic fever, it relieves the pain and stiffness. 
Ft should be given after the swelling has been reduced. It relieves 
the pain, soreness and dry hacking cough in persons suffering from 
cold in the chest. In bilious fevers, in bilious headaches, in gastralgia 
with pyrosis, in congestion of the liver, and in croup its use is very 
beneficial Bryonin is given in dropsies : it acts as a diuretic and as 
a draitic purgaii.x. 



^06 BRYONIA LACmOSA. 



HmbiiaL — Punjab. Sind, Guzerat, Deccan. 
Pmrts used. — The root. 

Vernacular. — Arab^ Pers. — Luf — or Lufa. Bomb. — Kavale-che- 
dole. Can. — Akashu ganida-gadde. Duk. — Akasa gaddah, Garaja 
phala. Guz. — Karvi-^iai. Hind. — Akasa gaddah, chhilihinda. Mar. — 
Siva Linga. Sans. — Chhili-hinda, P^ala-ganida^ Mahamnla. 
Tarn. — Gollan-kovaiks-kizh-angu. TeL — ^Akasa-gamda-gaddala, Niga- 
donda. Maha mula, the great root. Akas, the skjr ; Gadda, the 
tuberous root. Linga Shiva~-the linga of Siva, in allnsioo to the sha^ 
ol the fmit. 

Characters. — Root turnip shaped, very large and heavy, met with 
in pieces, or slices resembling kalamba. £ach piecefrom i to 4 inches 
in length, and from i to i| inches in thickness, in colour resembling 
that of Bhui kohofci, outer sur£aK» brownish, and marked with four 
circular rings ; on section it jrields a viscid juice, which hardens into 
gum ; taste very bitter, mucilaginous and subacid ; odour somewhat 
acrid. Dose, of the powder, 10 to 30 grs. 

Constihtenis. — A bitter glucoside- Bryonin» starch, resin and 
mineral matters. 

Pr^ratims. — ^Tincture (i in 10). Dose, 10 to xo ms. 

Actkmi mmd uses. — ^Alterative and laxative ; given in rheumatism- 
syphilis and other venereal comf^aints; also in the later stages of 
dysentery. It has a reputatioo in India as a remedy in snakebites, andb 
given internally and applied to the bitten part. It is also used as an 
anthelmintic. Locally a liniment of the root« combined with oaioos» 
cumin and castor oil, is used as an embrocatioo for chrooic rheu- 
matism and pain&l joints. It is also used as a substitute for Bryony. 

Bryonia umbdlata. Gowala-kakri (Hind). Mohakri (Hind). 
On the Sotlej the root is given for spennatorrhoea. 



Habtiat.-^lndi^ Ceylon, Pegu. 

figrts used,— The plants 

Vernacular. — Bcng. — Mala. Can. — ^LingatoodL Dutch. — SKtten. 
Hind. — Bajgureya^ Ghniga-Nftru. MaL — Kehoe maka. Mar. — Kava> 
dori. Sans. — Baja. Td.— Linga-dooda. Portugoese-^Nohla. Gharu- 
Nam, string of ankle bdb, used by dancing girls, these bdls haw 
vertical sKts, resembling the vertical lines on tlK firuit. 

Characiers. — Qimbing shrub, common in hedges: leaves polmatdy, 
5-lobed, and deeply divided : under surface studded with white, jointed, 
calcareous hair&. Flowers smaO, and pale yeflow. Fruit round, 
smooth and marked with white vertical stripes. The whoSe plant 
is very bitter. 

CoBStUments — ^.A bitter prindpie similar 10 bryonin. fit asi colour- 
ing marifr. 



^iTKULLirS CULOCYNTBIS, 



307 



Prefiatafifjrti. — Jnfuvion (j in 10). Dose, ^ tu 1 M. ozs. 
Actions and uses. — Laxative; given in vomiting and in fevers, 
accomp;iniecl with flatulence and constipation. 

Cephalandra Indica. 

Habitat ' — Throughout India, 

Parts used, — The leaves, root and fruit, 

Vernacuiar. — Bene.— Tela kucha. Can* — Tondekonde. Gut* — 
Ghoii. Hind. — Kanduri. Mar, — Tondali, Rnn-tondla. Sans. — 
Vimbaja» Vinba, Tundkeri^ Vimboshta, Tundika. Tarn. — KavaL 
Vimboshta, means red, or cherry lipped. 

Characters* — Plant, a creeper cull ivated for iu edible fruits. Fruits 
ablong, 2 inches long, green or yellowish green, with white stripes 
intervening ; leaves 5-Iobed, somewhat thick, green, or darkish green ; 
flowers white ; root spindle-shaped, yellowish grey on the outside, 
interior white and fleshy ; odour nauseous, taste bitter, acid and 
astringent. 

Constituents* — The dried powder contains resin and an alkaloid, 
starchf sugar, gum, fatty matter, anorganic acid, and ash 16 p.c, 
wluch contains no manganese* 

Preparatmis, — Tincture (l in lo). Dose, \ to I dr. Dccocliun 
(1 in 10). Dose, \ to I fld. i.iz, \ and juice of the rooti 60 to 180 grs. 

Actions and ttses, — Alterative ; given in diabetes, enlarged glands, 
and in skin deseases such as pityriasis. 

Cltrnllus Calocjnthia, B. P., Ououmis Colooynthis. 

Citrullus, from Citrus, orange or citron, in allusion to orange red 
colour of the fruit when cut. 

Habitat. — India, Japan, Asia, Africa, Spain, uud Asiatic Turkey, 

Partik used. — The fruit, deprived of its rind, the root and the dried 
pulp uf the fruit, freed from seeds^ colocynthidis pulpa, B. P. 

Vernacnlar. — ^Arab. — Manual, Aulqam, Duk„Ben;». — Irtdr^iyai}, 
NUkka. Baluchistan.— Khar Khusta. Bumb^Guz.— Indrayana, 
Burm. — Kaya-si, Can* — Hav;u mckke-kayi, Cing, — Yekka-madu. 
Eng. — Bitter apple, bitter cucumber, Indian or wild gourd ; colocynth 
apple. Hind. — Indarayan, Han^il^ MaqaL Mar. — IndrAyana, Kuru- 
vranduwan, IndnVvana. Per*. — Kabiste taikh, Kharbuiahe-rubah» 
Sans^^ — Indravaruni, VishiUa. Malcal,,Tam- — Peykomatti. Tel. — 
Eti-puchcha, Patsa kaia, Papara budama. 

Characters^ — Fruit of the size of a small orange, thick and globular, 
greetiish, mottled, containing whitish, light and spongy pulp, 
embedded in which are numerous small, ovate, oblong, compressed, 
imootb, brown seeds which should be rejected before the pulp is used. 
When dry, the external surface of the fruit is smooth, yellowish brown 
and tubercled. The rind is brittle, and breaks into three wedge-shaped 
pieces. The timer surface of the rind is covered witli a soft spongy , 



308 CITRULLUS COLOCYNTHK. 

white substance ; taste intensely bitter ; root woody, brownish white 
and tapering ; wood fibrous, and containing a bitter starchy substance ; 
top of the root is semi-globular, tubercled and giving off several diverg- 
ing slender stems. All parts of the plant are inodorous, but very 
bitter, the pulp more so than the seeds. Dose, of the pulp : 2 to 
10 grs. 

Constituents. — The pulp contains colocynthin, also colocynthein 
(a resin), colocynthitin, pectin, gum, no starch, ash 11 p.c The seeds 
contain a fixed oil 17 p.c, albuminoids 6 p.c., and ash 3 p.c. 

Colocy thin. — ^A crystallizable glucoside, is the chief cathartic bitter 
principle. To obtain it, exhaust with water an alcoholic extract, precipi- 
tate with acetate and subacetate of lead, filter. Treat the yellow filtrate 
with sulphuretted hydrogen and precipitate with tannin — dissolve 
tannate of colocynthin in alcohol, add lead subacetate to precipitate 
tannin. Digest with animal charcoal and evaporate. A yellow mass, 
readily soluble in water. Boiled with diluted acids, it spUts up into 
sugar and resinous colocynthein. Dose, i to 6 grains. Hypoder- 
mically, ^ to ^ gr. 

Colocynthitin. — A tasteless crystalline powder, soluble in ether, 
insoluble in water. It has a purgative action. 

f^eparatiofis. — Extractum Colocynthidis. Dose, } to 2 grs. Ex- 
tractum Colocynthidis compositum, compound extract of a>locynth 
B. P. — Colocynth pulp 6 ozs. Extract of Barbados aloes la ozs., Sc»n- 
mony resin 4 ozs.» curd soap 4 ozs., Cardamom seeds i oz., alcohol 
one gallon. Dose, 2 to 8 grs. Pilola Colocynatbidis composita, B. P. — 
Colocynth pulp i ounce, Barbados aloes 2 ozs., Scammooy resin 2 ozs., 
potassium sulphate ^ oz., oil of cloves 2 drs^ Distilled water q. s. 
Dose, 4 to S grs. Pilola Colocynthidis et Hyoscyami BJ^., — Compound 
pill of colocvnth 2, and extract of hyoscyamus i. Dose, 4 to 8 grs. 
A coa^omml ^mr^in^ /iO^^contzins pdxikajali i, Colocynth pulp 4, 
Stt^ur 4, Cardamoms 4, Long pepper 4, Chebulic myrobalans 4. 
Ptmtory root 4. Mix, make a mass. Dose, 3 to 5 grs. 

PfysioiogKal m:iim. — Drastic hydragogue, cathartic and diuretic, 
in larce doses em^ic and irritant ; in moderate doses it increases 
peristusis and the intestinal glandular secretions, producing r^Md 
watery evacuations with griping pains. As a purgative its action is 
very powerful and it acts even if applied to the abdomen. In large 
doses it is a gastro-intestioal irritant and leads to gastro^enteritis, 
irriutionof pelvic organs and even death from prostratioo. It b an 
indirect diuretic 

ThenipaUi:s.^^i is giv^eo in coostipatioo with other purgatives in 
febrik aSectioQs^ in amenorrhoea* jaundice, ascites or dropsy, and in 
dephantiasisw Itbalsoaveraufufge. It is a valuable evacuant, prodoc- 
iog rapid derivatioa in Goma* apoplexy and recent parahrsis d^e to 
coQflestioDof the brain. Its irritant actMO on the bowcb extends to the 
inr^ra and bbckfer and leads to straagnrj. A wamM of the powdered 
rooe tsiniutingtotheeyesindcrastrils. In Indjathsmot its gmn in 




CITRULLUS YULQilRIS* 



3«9 



rheumatism and enlargements of the abdominal viscera in children; 
a paste of the fruit or root with that of nux vomica is applied to boils 
and pimples to hasten maturation. In minute doses, it is very 
beneficial in colic, sciatica, ovarian and other neuralgias ; and also to 
relieve pain of glaucoma. 

CitruUus Vulgaria, C. Cucarblta, Caourbita Citrallus, Cucamia 

CitruUuB. 

HabiiaL — Cultivated throughout the East Indies. 

Parts Mi-^</.— The seeds (deprived of testa) and pulp of the fruit. 

Vftnacutar* — Arab* — Belikh-Zichi. Beng. — Tarmuj, Titoolaoo* 
Bomb, aiid Mar. — Kalingada. Burm. — Pha-rai. Cing.— Pilcha ghadi^ 
Komordu. Eng. — Water melon. Guz. — Karigu. Hind, — Samoka, 
Jamauka, Tarbuz, India — Dilpasand, Malay* — Mandeki Patak, 
somangka, Pers,— Hinduaneh Tarbuz. Sans. — Chaya-puUi Kuttoo 
urombi. Tarn. — Pitchakai. Tel.^ — Darbuje. 

Oilpasand — Dit, heart, and Pasand, to have a liking for. Water 
mdon ts taken with great fondness. 

Characters, — Fruit sweet. The bitter fruit is C« Amara, Seeds flat, 
and of a reddish or blackish colour, ovate or oblong, and marked with 
two small channels running from both sides of the apex downwards 
about the middle of the seeds.* Suiface smooth, testa brittle» 
cotyledons white and oily, and of an almond-like taste. Dose, ^ to 
t dr* 

Consttttients, — The seeds yield a fixed oil and proteids. 

Preparations. — Cold infusion (lo in lo) Dose, 2 to 4 drs. 

Actions and fisesn — The seeds are nutritive, cooling, diuretic and 
demulcent^ and used in strangury and alTections of urinary organs and 
form an ingredient of tonic confections, given in general debility. The 
pulp, like vegetable marrow, is cooling and diuretic, and is given in 
gonorrhoea, hepatic congestion and intestinal catarrh. 

There are 5 cucurbitaceous seeds, used as cooling, diuretic and 
nutritive. These are Citrullus Vulgaris, Tarbuz ; cucumis, sativus, 
cucumber, kakadi ; cucumis citrullusp tnelon or khurbuz ; Lagenaria 
vulgaris clavata, bottle gourdi or Dudhi ; and Benincasa cerifera 
Kohotun. 

Gaoumis Melo. 

Habitat, — Throughout India. 

Parts used, — The seeds. 

Venmcuiar, — Arab. — Betika. Bomb. — Kharabuza* Burm^^Tha- 
khwamwce. Chin.^ — Then kwa, Hiang*kwa. Cing. — Rata-komadu. 
Eng.— Musk melon. Hind. — Kharabuza. Malay, — ^Labo-frangi. 
Maleal.*— Baka-kaia. Panj. — Gilas, Girasa. Pers- — Kharbuzeh. Tarn., 
TeL— Mulam, 

C^r<jcl^ri.— Seeds greyish brown, oblong, or rather ovate, 
smaller in size than Kukari bija^ acute at the apex vrith a small circular 



3JO CUCUMIS TRIGONUS. 

Tidge. At the base testa is tough, cotyledons white ; taste sweet and 
resembling that of almonds. 

Constituents. — Fixed oil, starch, resin and sugar. 

Preparations. — Cold infusion (i in lo). Dose, 2 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Nutrient, demulcent and cooling ; like the 
other four cucurbitaceous seeds they are used by native Hakims in 
gonorrhoea and as a cooling diuretic in fevers and general debility. 

GaoamiB SattTus, G. Utilissimas. 

Habitat. — India. 

Parts used. — ^The seeds. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Kusud. Beng.— Kankur Karkti. Burm. — 
Thkhwassi. Can. — Muliu Kusud. Cing.- Pipingya-Rata Kikari. Duk. 
— Kankari. Eng. — Cucumber. Guz. — Kakri. Hind. — Kira, Susa. Mar. 
— Kikadi. Malyal. — Mullen-velleri. Mai. — Antimun, Timmun. Pers. — 
Khiy&r. Panj. — Khira, Sans. — Mutrulla Sookasa. Tel. — Dosakaia. 
Tam.— Mullu Veleri. Velleri Kai. Tel.— Dosa Kala. 

Characters. — The seeds are brownish white, linear, oblong, and 
pointed at both ends, slightly notched at the apex ; testa rough, 
cotyledons oily and sweet. 

Constituents. — Fixed oil, starch, resin and sugar. 

Preparations. — Cold infusion (1 in 10). Dose, 2 to 4 drs. 

Actiofis and uses. — Nutritive and demulcent. The seeds resemble 
in action and uses the five cucurbitaceous seeds. 

Gaoamis Trigonas, G. Pseado Colooynthis, G. PubescenB. 

Habitat. — India. 

Parts used. — The fruit. 

Vernaculars. — Arab. — Kiza-ut-taul. Beng. — Kankur, Karkti. 
Burm. — Tha-khwa. Can. — Hal-mekki. Eng. — Sitter gourd, Squirting 
cucumber. Hind., Mar. — Pee Ransha, Bislambhi, Katvel, Karit Tak- 
makis. Pers. — Khyar-i-badrang. Sans. — Vishali. Tam. — Bislambi. 
Tel. — Kodinella. 

O^r^c/^rJ.— Cucumis Trigonus, the wild form. Fruit smooth, 
velvety, of the size and shape of a small egg and marked with green 
or yellow streaks ; ripe fruit sweet. Dose, 2 to 15 grs. 

Preparatiotts. — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, ^ to i oz. 

Constituents. ^^oth contain resin similar to that found in 
colocynth and a bitter crystalline principle. 

Actions and uses. — Purgative and diuretic. The fruit pounded and 
boiled with milk is used in medicine ; other properties are similar 
to those of colocynth but milder and less irritating. 



lit 



I 



Eoballiam BlateFiam, B, P. 
Habitat. — S. Europe, N. Asia. 

Part used* — A sediment from the juice of the fruit, known as 
Elaierium B. P. 

Vernacuiar. — Arab. — Khiyar-i-Khar, Katha-el-himar. Eng, — 
Squirting or wild cucumber, balsam apple, Ind* Bazaars — Katr. 
Indrayani. Ind.— Kitrana, Pers.— Khiyar-i-Khar, Katha-eKhimar 
Katha^el-himar, ass's cucumber j Khiyar-L-khar, khiarzeh, little 
cucumber. 

Characters, — Fruit an elliptical pepo, pale green, covered with 
fleshy prickles, 3-ceIled and containing mucilaginous^ watery, bitter juice 
saeds many, and light brown. Ripe fruit falls from its attachment to 
the ground when the contents are vi<nlently expelled, hence called 
squirting cucumber, Elateiium, — A substance deposited by the juice ; 
of the fruit, is iu light, friable, flat cakes /4^th of an inch thick, pale 

Seen or yellowish green, and cA a granular fracture. The odour is 
inty and tea-like ; taste bitter and acrid ; it should yield from 20 to 
as p- c. of elaterin. Dose, ,^ to \ gr. 

Comtituntts. — A neutral^ active, principle* Elaterin B, P. i^ to 33 
p. c. J chlorophyll id p. c, ; prophetin, ecballin, hydro-claterin, and 
elaterid ; Elatermum, elaterin B. P. — Elaterin, Momordicin — to obtain 
it exhaust elaterium with chlorofnrm, add ether» when the crystals of 
elaterin are deposited ; met with in small hexagonal prisms or scales, 
without odour and of bitter acrid taste and neutral reaction; almost 
entirely insoluble in wattr, sparingly soluble in hot alcohol (1 in 337), 
readily so in alkaline solution and in chloroform. Dosci ^0 to ^^^ of a gr, 

Prepa rations* — Pulvis Elaterini compositus, B. P* (1 of elaterin 
with 39 of milk-sugar. Dose, i to 4 grs, Tinctura Elaterii coroposita. 
Dose, 10 to 30 m$, 

Plmiohgical action. — Elaterium is a most powerful hydragogue 
cathartic, but is very depressant, and should be used with caution. It 
has some reputation in malarial fevers. It wards off paroxysms. In 
large doses it causes prostration, gastro-intestinal irritation with nausea, 
vomttmg, and also acts as an irritant poison. 

Therapeutic uses^ — Given to produce free watery motions in 
ascites, anasarca, especially depending upon renal and cardiac disorders, 
uraemia and congestion of the lungs and brain. 

Lagenaria Vulgaris. 

Habitat* — Cultivated throughout India. 

Rirts used, — The seeds and the pulp. 

rernacniar, — The bitter variety. Beng.— Kadu. Ian* Bomb, — 
Karava bhopaU. Eug. — White pumpkin, the bitter-bottle gourd. 
Gua,— Karavi tumbadi. Hind. — Tamra Kaddu, Jangali Kadu,Belas- 
choTa«tumbL Mai. — Gara-dudi, Labo ambon. Maleal, — Bella Shora, 



312 LUFFA AMARA. 

Mar. — Kadu bhopalil. .Sans.— Tikta tumbi. Tarn. — Shoriaikai. Tdw— 
Shora kaia. The sweet variety. — Arab. — Charrah. Bomb. — Dudfai. 
Eng. — Calabash — white pumpkin; Hind. — Mitha Kadu, Dudhi. 
Mah. — Dudhi. Sans. — Tumbi, Alabu. 

Characters. — ^There are two varieties, sweet and bitter. The 
bitter fruit varies much in shape and size, and is generally bottle- 
shaped ; rind, hard and lignous ; fresh pulp, white, spongy and very 
bitter ; dry pulp, a soft powdery substance; seeds grey, about | to } of an 
inch long, and about 3 lines broad at the base ; kernels white and oily 
on expression ; oil bland and of an olive colour, soon getting rancid. 
The sweet variety. Fruit bottle-shaped or oblong, rind soft, pulp 
white spongy, and sweet. 

Preparations. — Infusion of seeds (i in 10). Dose, |to i fid. oz. 
The dried pulp of the bitter variety. Dose, 4 to 10 grs. 

Actions and uses,^^H\\^ pulp of karavi tumbadi is emetic and 
purgative. The oil is used as a coolins and emollient application for 
the head. The pulp of sweet dudhi is an ingredient in various 
confections. The seeds are nutritive and diuretic and constitute one 
of the five cucurbitaceous seeds. 

Lufb Amara, L. FoBtida, L. Aoutan^ola. 

Habitat. — ^Throughout India. 

Parts used. — The fruit, seeds and root. 

Vernacular^ — Beng. — Jhingo (L. fcetida) Ghoshil lata Tito-dhun- 
dhul. Bomb. — Rana turai. Burm. — Tha-bwat-nha-wai. Can. — 
Hare-balli. Duk. — Karvi-turai. Guz. —Kadavi-Hind. — Karvi turai 
Kurella, Chaul turai (L. fcetida) Maleall Pechingab (L. fcetida). Mar. 
— Kadavi ghisodi, Kadudorki, Kadu-siro-a. Sans. — Kosha taki, Dalika 
Ghoshaka. Tel. — Adavi-bira, Sendu-bira-kai. 

Kosha — the cocoon of a silkworm ; the seeds are enclosed in a 
fibrous network. 

Characters. — Fruit smooth, ovoid and marked with ten prominent 
ridges, about 4 or 5 inches long with white and spongy pulp ; odour 
resembling that of kakadi seeds, dark brown in shape and size and 
resembling Tarabuza bija ; epidermis or testa, highly tubercled and 
wrinkled. 

Preparations^ — Infusion of the ripe fruit (i in 80). Dose, i to 2 
ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Every part of the plant is bitter, tonic and 
diuretic, and combined with nitro-hydrochloric acid, is given in dropsy 
and in enlargement of the liver and spleen due to malarial poison. 
The juice of the leaves is applied to sores and to the bites of venomous 
animals. The root combined with that of Hibiscus Rosa sinensis root 
and that of hemidismus indicus, cumin seeds, sugar and milk is given 
in gonorrhoea. The pulp is emetic and cathartic. The infusion of ripe 
seeds is used as a purgative and emetic. The dried fruit powdered is 
used as a snuff in jaundice. 



TUntA KCHINATA. 



313 



Luffk EohinaU, L. Pentandra, L. Patola. 

Habitat — Guzerat, Sind^ BengaJ. 

Parts used. — The fruit and seeds. 

V^ernacular, — Bomb-Guz. — Deodal Kukadavela^ Bindil, Vapla, 
Bunn. — Tha-bwat. Beng. — Dhundhul ghoosal by (L. Pentandra). 
Can* — ^DeodaL Dukh. — Gusali turat (U Pentandra), Hind.^ — 
Deodailt Ghia Turai (L, Pentandra) parol. Pers. — Khyar. TeL — 
Neli bira* Mar* — Kukadavelai Deodangri. Sans. — VApo vrata kosha, 
Dcvadale, Gara-jimuta^ Jalani. 

Vipo — weaving, cocoon-like network in which the seeds are 
imbedded or interwoven. 

Characttrs, — The fruit, oval, of ihe size of a large nutmeg, covered 
with several long, broad based, stiff bristles; colour brownish yellow^ 
three*celled» each being separated from the other by tough, fibrous 
walls, cell triangular ; cell wall consisting of tough fibres, within it, is 
a soft spongy pulp containing seeds which fall off when the cell dries 
up ; seeds ovate and oblong, compressed of a pale, yellowish colour 
and marked with tubercles. 

Comtittttnts, — The dried fruit, deprived of seeds, contains a princi* 
pie allied to colocynthitin and a gelatinous principle named luffein* 
The seeds contain a bland fluid oil, 

Preparatmn. — Infusion and decoction (i in 20). Dose, \ to I oz. 

Actions and uses, — Emetic and purgative ; also abortifacient ; given 
in bilious fevers, colic and jaundice ; also for snake bites and in 
cholera. In putrid fever, the infustion is applied to the whole body, 
and 10 jaundice to the hepatic region* 

Moroordloa Charantla, H* Huricata, M. BaJsamina. 

Habitat — Throughout India. 

Farts used, — The fruit, seedsi and leaves. 

I>r«/i^tt/ar.— Arab. — Karavalla, Kess^ul-barri. Beng. — UchchhelK 
Duk., Bomb. — Karela. Burm,— Kyet-hen-kha. Chin,— Kukwa Lai- 
pu-tan. Can. — Kayi gida, Cing. — Karawila, Eng. — Balsam apple, 
Guz.— Karelin* Hind.— Kareli. MaleaK— Pandi pavel, Kaippa-valli. 
Mar-— Pavakka cheti Mar. — Karli. Pers*^ — Simahang. Sans.— Sushavi, 
Karavai-lkandira. Tarn. — Poda langkai, Pavakkap Chedi. Tel.— 
Kakara. 

C^arac/«T.— Leaves palmatelv five-lobed, sinuate, toothed and 
villous on the under surface. Wnen young, peduncles are slender. 
Fruit oblong, 10 to 14 inches long, and 2 to 4 inches in diameter; 
edges curiously notched or ridged, tubercled and of the size of 
kakadi, taste extremely bitter. In young fruits the pulp over the 
seeds is whitish, becoming red after a time* 

Constituents — A bitter glucoside, soluble in water* insoluble in 
ether, a yellow acid, resin, ash 6 p. c. 



3X4 MOIfORDICA DIOICA. 

Preparations. — Juice of leaves. Dose, ^ to 2 drs« Compound 
ointment, contains powdered fruit, Taja, long pepper and oil of 
hydnocarpus wightiana. 

Action and uses, — Stimul&nt and alterative ; the ointment b 
applied in psoriasis, scabies and other skin diseases. The fruit pulp 
and juice of leaves and also seeds are anthelmintic and given in 
lumbrici. The fruit is also tonic and alterative and given in rheu- 
matism, gout and diseases of the liver and spleen. ^ The whole plant 
powdered is used for dusting over leprous and other intractable ulcers. 

Homordioa Coohin Chinensifl, Morioia Coohin Chinensis. 

Habitat. — Deccan Peninsula, Canara, Bengal. 

Ihrts used* — The seeds. 

Vemacuhtf. — Beng. — Gol-kakra. Hind. — Kakrol . Sans. — Kar- 
kataka. 

Karkataka. — The shell of a crab. The seeds resemble the shell. 

Characters, — Flowers cream coloured ; fruit large, red and 
thorny. Pulp yellow, insipid ; seeds ^ inch in diameter and \ of an 
inch thick, ovate compressed and black ; margins, corrugated ; shell 
fragile, kernel oily. Dose, 5 to 30 grs. 

Constituents. — The seeds deprived of the husk contain a greenish 
oil 43*7 p. c, and a bitter glucoside. The oil possesses very powerful 
siccative properties. 

Preparations. — Confection. Dose, i to 2 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Demulcent, stimulant and aperient ; given in 
cough and to women immediately after parturition. As an aperient, 
the seeds are given in hepatic diseases, lumbago, &c., externally applied 
in procidentia uteri, prolapsus ani, fractures, &c. 

Remarks. — It is an ingredient of a hot stuff, known in Bengal 
as Jhal, and given to women after delivery. 

Momordifia Dioica. 

Habitat — ^Throughout India. 

Parts used, — ^The fruit and tuberous root. 

VemacuUn, — Bomb. — Karatoli. Burm. — Sa-bvet . Can. — Mada- 
hagala. Ciug. — ^Tumba-karawilla. Mah., Guz. — Kantolan. Hind. — 
Dh&r-karela. Mar. — Karantali. Mai. — Erima-avel. Sans.— >Vihassa 
Tarn. — Paloo paghel. Tel. — Potu kakara. 

Characters^ — Fruit ovate, muricated, and somewhat tapering at 
the base. When ripe, it bursts irregularly showing red or yellow arillus 
of the seeds; seeds black, shining and almost spherical; tubers of the 
fresh female plant yellowish, smooth, of the size qI a turnip, or even 
large, and irr«rular in[shape ; dry and sliced pieces, resembling those 
of kolamha. When reduced to powder it becomes yellow ; the taste 
of the fruit as well as of the tuber astringent and bitter. Dose, 
f to I dr. 



MtmiA SCABRBLLA. 



SJ? 



Oimtituents. — An alkaloid, a frajarrant extractive malter, and ash 
3*4 p*c. The ash contains a trace of manganese, 

/y^^<?rtf/rbw^.-^Electuary of txjberous root. Dose> i to 2 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant and astringent ; locally the powdered 
root with cocoanut, pepper* and red sandal wood is applied to the head 
in headache and to the skin to render it soft and supple and to lessen 
sweat ; the electuary is given in bleeding piles, 

Homordioa Umbellata, Zehneria Umbellata. 

Hahitat, — Throughout India. 

Parts used. — ^The leaves, fruit and root. 

Vernacular . — Beng. — Kudari* Goa. — Popinho do Patare, 
Hind, — Tarali, Mar. — Gometta* Malabar, — Gomth Karwi-vatli. Sans. 
— Gumihi. Tel,— Tid-dauda, 

Characters* — Common on hedges; leaves short, pet ioled, cordate, 
or sagittate, palmately* lobed, lobes 3 to 5, longer than petiole, 5 
partite, sinuate and toothed ; root or tubers brown externally and white 
within, of a faint nauseous odour. Berries oval oblong, of the size of 
pigeons* eggs, smooth and red when ripe, 

Prepatations. — Confection of powdered root. Dose, 1 to 2 drs. 
Powder, Dose, 3 to 10 grs. 

.Actions and use. — ^Stimulant and demulcent. The juice of the 
leaves is used as a soothing application to the skin, inflamed by the 
application of bhilamo. The root is stimulant and invigorating. 
In confections it is generally combined with onions, cumin, sugar and 
butter* It is also given in gonorrhtra and dysuria. 

Mukia Scabrella 

Hahitat. — Throughout India. 

Parts used. — The plant in fruit, 

Veniacuiar. — Hind, — Agamaki, Mai. — Mucca-piri, Mar, — ^Chirati, 
Sam.<— Ahilaykum, Ghantali. Tam.-^Mosum-daki, Mosumuski. Tel,— 
Puten*budinga, Nudhosa. 

Ahilaykum^ a corruption of ahilakhf^na, meaning marked like 
snake. The fruit being marked with vertical white stripes. 
Ghantali— Chant, a bell. It means a row or string of bells as worn 
by dancing girls having vertical slits like vertical stripes on the fruit. 

Characters, — Fruit marked with vertical white stripes. Plant 
scabrous ; leaves cordate ; berries globular, of the size of a pea, when 
ripe of a scarlet colour and sprinkled with few bristly hairs. Plant and 
liruit are bitter. 

Preparations. — Infusion {1 in 10). Dose, i to 2 02s, 

Actimn and uses, — Aperient and stomachic, given in dyspepsia, 
especially to children. 



3l6 TRICHOSANTHES CUCUVRRINA. 

TriohMWithas Caoiimeriiia» T. Dioioa, T. Covdala. 

Habitat. — Northern India, Guzerat to Assanii Bengal, Ceylon. 

Parts used. — The plant in fruit. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — PateL Bomb. — Kadu padavala. Burm — 
Tha-b'hot-kha, T6pelen-moye. Chin. — Ko-lau, Kwa-lau. Can. — 
Bettada-padaval. Cmgh. — Dumma-ala. Eng. — Bitter Cvourd. Guz. — 
Jangali parula, parwar. Maleal. — Podavalam. Hind. — Jangli Chicbondft, 
Chuchinga. Mai.— Kaippam-patolam. Mar. — Karupv^. Piinj. — 
Gwal-kakri. Sans.— Patolaka. Tarn.— Pudal, Kattup-pepudal. TeL — 
Patola, Adavi Potta. 

Characters. — Plant foetid, leaves harsh, broad, sinuate, or cordate ; 
five lobed and serrated ; upper surface downy, tendrils bifid ; flowers 
white and fringed ; fruit oblong, acute, or pointed at both ends, 3 to 6 
inches long, glaucous, of la greenish white colour and markeid with 
irregular, longitudinal stripes; stem rather quadrangular, twining and 
striated, sometimes woolly and scabrous. Fruit, 2 to 3 inches l(»ig, 
oblong, acute and red ; seeds, minute, compressed and corrugate on 
the margin. 

Preparations. — A compound decoction (i in 20)— contains Patda 
5, Ratanjali 4, Kadu 5, Galo 4, Jethi madha 5, Vinevela 5, Pashana 
bheda 5, and Water 100. Make decoction. Dose, i to 2 ounces, or 
Patola, cyperus, chiretta, neem bark, catechu, oldenlandia, root bark 
of adhatoda equal parts, water i oz. Dose, i to 2 ozs. Extract — 
Dose, 3 to 5 grs. 

Actions and uses. — ^The unripe fruit is laxative, hydragogne, 
alterative and antiperiodic ; the tender shoots and capsules are bitter, 
stomachic and laxative. The seeds are stomachic and anthelmintic 
and given in disorders of the stomach. As an alterative, the decoction 
is given in syphilis, rheumatism, fever and general weakness. The 
extract is a powerful and safe cathartic, and recommended as a 
substitute for elaterium. The natives use it in leprosy, and as a 
febrifuge and general tonic. In chronic fevers it is given in com- 
bination with aromatics and bitters. 

Triohosanthes Pftlmata. 

Hahiiat. — ^India. 

I^rts used. — The firuit and stem. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — ^Anbaghol. Beng. — Makal. Bomb. — ^KaundaL 
Can.— A vagude-hannu. Cing. — ^Titta-hondala. Duk. — G udi-pandik. 
Hind. — Kaundala. Lai Indra>*an. MaL — Kekapelam. Afar. — 
Kaundal. Ptfs,— Hanzal-e-surkh. Sans.— Mahikila. Tam.— Shavari 
paoham. Td. — Awagiida*pandu. 

Kondala means a circle, pendant or an ear-ring, and the plant b 
so named in allusion to the shape of the fruit, which is like Lulaka or 
kttDdal and used by Dukhnee Hindus as a pendant for their God 
Gmotsh or Ganpaty. 



ffOSANTHES PALMATA. 



317 



Characters. — Fresh fruit round, oval or pyriform and resembling 
a small apple or orange ; pulp like cow-dung and of a dull orange 
colour ; fruit dry, shell thin, brittle, and very bitter ; seeds and pulp lie 
loose, so that the contents when shaken produce a rattling sound ; 
seeds blackish, flat, irregular and generally triangular ; kernel sweet 
and oily, 

ComtUuents* — The rind and pulp contain an amorphous, bitter 
principle, trichosanthin, resembling colocynthin. It is soluble in 
water, alcohol and slightly so in ether. The green pulp in the interior 
of the fruit contains a colouring matter. 

Preparatmis — Medicated oil contains fruit mixed with warm 
cocoanut oil* Decoction or infusion of root (i in 20). Dose \ to i 
nd. Ql* 

AcHons and uses, — Tonic and stimulant. The oil is dropped into the 
ear in otorrhcea, into the nose in ozocna and for other fcetid discharges- 
The natives sometimes smoke the rind of the pounded fruit in asthma 
and use as a fumigatory in ozcena and other discharges from the nose ; 
a paste of the root with colocynth root is applied to carbuncles* 
In gonorrhcea it is given with triphla and turmeric. The root is 
reputed to be a tonic similar tocalumba. 

Zaaoala Indioa. 

Habitat, — Assam, Bengal, Ceylon, Malabar Coast. 

Parts used, — The leaves, 

r^rrrmcrw/^r.—Eng,— Bandolier fruit. Hind, Mar.— Chripota 
laL — Penar-valli, Sans. — Chirpota, Dirgh patra, Kuntali, Tiktaka, 
Pindavalii. 

Characters. — Leaves 6 inches long, 3 inches broad, and acute ; 
petiole I inch ; fruit threenrelled, each cell containing two seeds— seeds 
compressed and minute. 

Actions and uses*— Anodyne ; leaves beaten with milk and butter 
are used as an application to quiet nervous irritation of boils, sciatica, 
and to the chest in cough and asthma. 

DatiftcaceeB. Datiftoa or Akalbar family. 

Herbs or trees; leaves alternate, ex-stipulate ; flowers declinous ; 
fruit dry, opening at the apex ; seeds numerous, minute, without 
albumen. 

Mabiiat.^-Widcly distributed over the globe. 

Properties, — Some are bitter and purgative, and others arc used 
for their fibres. 

Datisoa Cannablna. 

^<i5iA?/.— Himalaya, Nepal, Sind* 

Paris used. — ^The herb and root. 

Verttacular. — Hind* — ^Akalbar. Punj. — Bayr-but^a, Bhang^*aU, 



31 8 ANHALONIUM WILLI AMSII. 

Characters, — Steins stout 'and branching ; leaves pinnate, flowers 
simple, pedicles with linear bracts ; anthers oblong, filaments short ; 
capsule one-celled, open at the apex ; seeds numerous and striated. 
Dose, S to IS grs. 

Constituents. — A glucoside datiscin ; a resin and a bitter principle. 
To obtain datiscin, exhaust the herb with alcohol, and evaporate. Add 
water to the residue, to precipitate the resin, decant the fluid and evapor- 
ate. Occurs as colourless, silky needles or scales ; taste bitter, of neutral 
reaction ; soluble in cold water, sparingly soluble in warm water and 
ether. 

Prepatations. — Infusion (i in lo). Dose, ^ to i oz. 

Actions and uses. — ^Bitter, stomachic, alterative, expectorant 
and laxative ; given in scrofula, intermittent fever with vomiting and in 
catarrh of the throat and bronchi. As a local sedative the bruised 
leaves are applied to the head in headache. 

CaotaceflB— The Indian Fig ftunily. 

Succulent plants, usually spiny and leafless ; stems globular, 
columnar, flattened or 3 or more angled ; flowers sometimes showy, 
sessile. Fruits succulent ; seeds numerous, parietal or embedded in the 
pulp without albumen. 

Habitat.— Th& Tropics. 

Fruits of some species are acid, and agreeable, and others 
are used as food for cattle* 

Anhaloniam A. WilliftmBii. 

Habitat.— West Indies. 

Parts used.'-^The flowers and stems. 

Characters. — Stems stout and branching, flowers simple, with 
short filaments, anthers oblong. 

Cotistituents. — An alkaloid pellotine, yielding salts with acids. 
Pellotine Hydrochloride. Dose, ^ to i gr. ; and Mezcaliiie, another 
alkaloid. 

Action and uses. — Pellotine is hypnotic and analgesic, and used as 
hypodermic injection to procure sleep and to relieve pain of locomotor 
ataxia, neuritis, &c. 

Gaotos Indioos, Opnntia Dillenii. 

Habitat.— lviA\2i^ South of Europe, America, Punjab. 

Parts used. — The fruit, flowers and steins. 

Vernacular.— Hmd.^ Duk.— Chappal send. Beng.— N&gphunee- 
Can.— Kattali-papas. Cing.— Kodu-gaha. Eng— Prickly pear. 
Maleal. — Naga MuUa. Mar. — Vilayati Nevarung. Panj.— Kabuli-tsui, 
Kangi-chii. Portuguese. — Palmatoria d*inferno. Sans. — Vidara-Vuhra- 
sireka. Tarn. — Niga*kali. Tel. — Nagadali. Palmatoria d'infemo means 



&ISEXJA PliARNACEOtDBS. 



3»^ 



punishment on the palm of the hand, the flat branches resembling flat 
pieces of wood used tt school to beat children upon the palm of ihcir 
hand. 

Characters,— h plant on which cactus insects thrive and multiply 
abundantly. 

Constituents* — Soluble malate of manganese, a fluid falty acid, 
a trace of citric acid and wax, resinous matter, sugar &c. 

Preparations — Syrup (i in lo). Dose, i to 4 fld. drs. 

Actihtis and uses. — Antispasmodic, expectorant and alterative ; 
given in whooping cough, asthma and bronchial catarrh ; also in 
hepatic congestion* 

Ficoido. 
Ice plant* Fig-marigold, or the Satodo family. 

Plants generally succulent. Herbs or shrubs with opposite 
or alternate and stipulate leaves. Flowers small. Fruits, capsular or 
indfthiscenti many-celled. Seeds, few or numerous with a curved or 
spiral embryo. Albumen meaty. 

Habitat, — The Tropics, 

/Wr/Yw.— Some plants .ire edible, others yield au%bundance of 
KMr when burnti roots of some are cathartic. 

Oisekia Pharnaoeoides* 

HabitnL — The Punjab, Sind, Ceylon. 

Parts used. — The plant, 

Vernacnlar^ — Cing. — ^Et-eilla-pala. Beng. Hind* Duk. — Biluki. 
Mar.— Valuchi. Sans, — BiUu, VoolukA, Elav^luka. Tarn. — Manalikire. 
Tel. — Esuka dantikura, 

Valuka, Batuka means sand or sandy, in allusion to the number of 
large raphides contained in the leaves and which give them the 
appearance of being full of sand. 

Characters, — Leav«*s opposite, fleshy, oblong or elliptical, narrowed 
at the base ; carpels 5; seeds blackish, smooth, minutely glandular and 
punctate ; embryo curved. Dose of the plant, i oz. 

Constituents *^*T\\^ seeds contain tannin-like principles, provision- 
ally named Alpha Gisekia^ and Beta Gisekia, both having probably 
anthelmintic properties. 

Preparatpiu, — Draught made by grinding the plant in a mortar 
with water* 

AciAm and f^^^j.— Aperient and anthelmintic, given in taenia. 

Hollogo Stricta, M. Spergula. 
//ahitat. — India, 
Part^ used^^The plants 



330 ARAUA GUILPOYUA. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Ghimshak. Burm. — Gyea-fBi. Can. — 
Parpaehtaka. Duk. — ^Hazandanah. Hind. — ^Jim, Jani Mar. — ^Jharasi. 
Maleal. — Kaipa Jira. Sans. — Grishma-Sundaraka, Phanija. Tarn. — 
Parpadagum. Tel. — Parpataka. 

Characters. — Stem glabrous, branching and leafy ; leaves whorled 
opposite, lanceolate, elliptical, acute, much narrowed at the inse ; 
cymes compound ; capsules globose ; seeds many, covered with 
tubercles and short bnstles, dark chestnut coloured ; embryo curled. 
The dried herb during the process of combustion . deflagrates owing to 
the presence of alkaline nitrates. 

Constiittettts, — A bitter principle, a bitter resin, gum, ash 68 p.c. 
containing alkaline nitrates 

Preparation. — Tinctura (i in lo). Dose, J to i dr. 

Actions and uses. — Stomachic, uterine stimulant, and aperient ; 
given to promote menses and lochia ; the juice nude warm is dropped 
into the ear in earache ; also applied to itch and other skin diseases 
with relief. 

Araliaoeae, the Ivy Family. 

Trees, shrubs or herbs ; leaves alternate without stipules. Flowers 
perfect, rarely unisexual. Inflorescence in umbels or capitate. Fruit 
3 or more celled, dry and succulent. Seeds pendulous, albumen fleshy, 

Habitat. — Found universally. 

Properties. — Stimulant, aromatic, diaphoretic and tonic. They 
are not poisonous. 

Aralia Goilfoylia. 

Habitat, — India. 

Parts used. — ^The leaves. 

Vernacular. — Tapmari. TiLp, fever, and mari to kill. The drug 
is supposed to be a fever killer. 

Characters. — Leaves alternate, exstipulate, when crushed they 
have a strong odour of ivy or fenugreek. Root fusiform with a rounded 
head externally, closely annulate and wrinkled ; on section brownish 
yellow, or whtte, and breaking with a mealy fracture ; odour faintly 
bweet ; taste slightly aromatic. 

Constituents. — The leaves contain an alkaloid, two odorous 
principles, one of which is of the odour of fenugreek, resin and sugar, 
and ash 15*2 p. c. containing alkaline salts. 

Preparations. — Svrup of the leaves (i in 10). Dose, J to 2 fluid 
drs. Decoction or infusion (i in 20). Dose, 2 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant, stomachic tonic and febrifuge. The 
syrup is given in cough, seminal debility, and to reduce heat of skin 
in fevers. Also given in dyspepsia and vomiting. 



CORNUS FLORIDA. 321 

Panax Pseudo Ginseng, P. Qainquifolinm. 

Habitat. — Nepaul. 

Parts taed. — The root. 

Characters. — The stalks glabrous, straight, single, and terminating 
in 3 leaves, each composed of 6 uneven leaflets, and toothed at the 
edges. Flowers in an umbel ; berries kidney-shaped, compressed ; seeds, 
semi-circular. The root is of the thickness of a finger like that of parsley. 
Externally brownish yellow and white within, 2 or 3 inches long, 
wrinkled and often divided into two branches, rarely into 3 
or ^, presenting a slight resemblance to a human form, hence the 
Chinese name. The parenchyma is horny and compact, with some 
resinous points. Odour sweet, somewhat aromatic, Taste saccharine 
like that of liquorice, subsequently becoming bitter. 

Constituents. — Starch, gum, albumen, resin, and a sweet princi- 
ple— Panaquelon. 

Preparations.^Tmciuxt (i in 10). Dose, ^ to i dr. Infusion, i in 
20. Dose, \ to I oz. 

Actiofts and uses, — It is regarded as a powerful restorative, stimu- 
lant and aphrodisiac, given in cough, seminal debility and fevers. 

CornaoesB— The Dogwood order. 

Shrubs, trees, or rarely herbs. Leaves simple, opposite, rarely 
alternate, exstipulate. Flowers perfect, arranged in heads, corym- 
bose or umbellate ; calyx superior, 4-lobed ; stamens 4 ; ovary inferior, 2 
celled ; ovule, pendulous, solitary ; style and stigma simple. Fruit a 
drupe crowned with the remains of the calyx. Seed solitary, pendulous. 
Embryo, fleshy, albuminous ; cotyledons large and leafy. 

Native of temperate parts of Europe, Asia and America. 

I^operties. — Tonic, febrifuge and astringent. 

Comae Florida. 

P^lowcring Cornet, Boxwood, Dogwood. — C. Sericea, Swamp 
Dogwood. -C. Circinata, Round-leaved Dogwood. 

Habitat. — Sutlej Valley, Punjab, N. America. 

Parts used. — The inner bark of the root. 

Vernacular. — Hind.— Kandar, Kaksh. Panj. — Kasir, Kagshi 
Haleo, Harin, Hadu, Mang. 

Characters. — Bark deprived of the corky layer, in curved pieces 
of various sizes, about one-eighth of an inch thick, of a pale reddish 
colour, striated, transverse and with a short longitudinal fracture ; 
taste astringent and bitter. Dose, in powder, 15 to 60 grains. 

Constituents, -^Coxmn^ or cornic acid, tannin, 3 p. c, and resin, 
Cornin, a bitter, cry stall isable active principle, soluble in water and 
alcohol. Heat destroys the active principle and hence the decoction 
is useless. 

SI 



322 ALANOllfM LAIIARCKII. 

Preparations. — Solid extract. Dose. 2 to 8 grs. Fluid extract, lo 
to 6o ms. 

Actions and uses. — Bitter tonic, antiperiodic ; given in fevers as a 
substitute for calumba or Peruvian bark. Asa stomachic bitter given 
in debility, neuralgia, dyspepsia and during convalescence from many 
acute diseases. As an astringent, used in leucorrhcea, chronic diarrhoea 
and dysentery. The twigs are dentifrice and used to rub the teeth. 

Alan^aoesd.— The Alangium or the Ankola Family. 

Trees or shrubs, leaves alternate, entire and exstipulate, without 
dots ; calyx, superior, 5-10 ; petals, 5-10 linear retiexed ; stamens twice 
or four times the number of petals, and toothed ; ovary inferior, 1-2- 
celled ; ovules solitary pendulous ; fruit drupaceous and i-celled ; seeds 
solitary ; albumen fleshy ; cotyledons, large, flat and leafy. 

Habitat. — Native of East Indies and United States. 

Properties. — Some species are purgative and aromatic. Fruit 
succulent and edible. The fruit of Nyssa Capitata is succulent and 
used as a substitute for lime fruit and hence it is called ogechee 
lime. 

Alangium Lamarokii. A. Hezapetalom. A. Tomentoaom. 

Habitat, — Throughout India, Khassya Hills, Ceylon and Gujerat. 

Parts used. — ^The roots, bark, seeds and leaves. 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Bagh-ankra, Dhala-kura. Burm. — To-sh- 
on-bin. Can. — Anisaruli-mara, Bcpaata. Cing.— Ecpaatta. Guz. — 
Duk.— Dhera, Akola. Eng. — Sage leaved alangium. Hind. — ^Akola, 
Akarkanta. Mar. — Ankulo. Malyal. — Kara angolam. Sans. — 
Ankolamu, Ankotha, Gupta Sneha, Niko-chaka, Ankota. Tam. — 
AUangi. Tel.— Uduga. 

Characters, — Wood heavy, close grained, of an oily appearance. 
Bark of a yellow or whitish brown colour, corky, and covered with 
circular warts ; taste nauseous and bitter, odour nauseous ; leaves 
alternate, narrow, oblong or ovate, lanceolate, of a green or darkish green 
colour, 3-nerved, persistent at the base. Fruit, a berry ; seeds, 
oblong, albumen ruminate ; cotyledons leafy and crumpled. Dose, 3 
10 10 grs.; as an emetic 30 to 60 grs. 

Constituents, — Non>crystaIlizablc, bitter alkaloid, alangine. 

VteStrations — Decoction of the looi bark (i in 10). Dose, \ to 1 
Hd. 01, ' Medicated oil .uid paste of the root. 

Actions and uses. — The leaves are used as a poultice to relieve 
rheumatic pains, and the medicated oil is applied to indolent ulcers. 
The decoction is given internally in pyrexia, as an alterative in chronic 
skin diseases, syphilis and leprosy ; the powdered root bark is a safe 
emetic and a good substitute for ipecacuanha. 

Ciq^foliaoea. 

The Honey-suckle family. Caper, a goat, and folium a leaf. The 
plant has a climbing or capering habit (tendency) like a ggat. Shnaba 



SAMBUCUS NIGRA. 323 

or rarely herbs, leaves opposite and exstipulate. Flowers corymbose, 
showy, sweet scented. Calyx 4-5 superior ; ovary, usually 3.celled, 
inferior. Fruit indehiscent, succulent or dry, berry or a drupe ; seeds 
solitary, or numerous ; albumen fleshy. 

Hahttate. — Native of temperate climate. 

Properties. — Some species are emetic, purgative ; others astringent, 
diuretic, sudorific or acrid, and a few again are poisonous. 

SambuouB Ni^ra, B. P., S. Canadensis. 

Habitat — Europe and Western Asia. N. America. 

Parts used. — The flowers, elder flowers, Sambuci flores, B.P., 
berries and bark. 

Characters.-'YXo^tx^ small ; calyx, 5-toothed, superior ; corolla flat 
rotate, of a cream white colour, also 5-lobed with five stamens inserted 
in the tube ; anthers yellow ; odour peculiar, sweet, faint and agreeable ; 
taste bitter and aromatic. Fruit indehiscent ; seeds solitary. Dose, 30 
grs. 

Constituents » — Flowers contain volatile oil, \ p.c. Resin, fat, 
mucilage, valerianic acid, wax, sugar and tannin. The volatile oil is a 
yellowish, limpid liquiJ of butyraceous consistence, of a strong odour 
and warm bitter taste. The bark contains valerianic (viburnic) acid, 
potassium and calcium malates, &c. 

Preparations. — Aqua Sumbuci, B.P. (flowers i in water 5 to distil 
down to one-fifth). Dose, i to 2 fld. ozs. 

Decoction of bark (i in 5). Dose, 2 to 4 fld. ozs. Poultices, 
ointment of flowers. Wine (Elder wine). 

Actions and kj^j.— Stimulant, carminative, diaphoretic diuretic 
and laxative ; used locally in rheumatism to relieve local pains, in burns 
and scalds, for blisters, haemorrhoids, abscesses, &c. The bark is a 
hydragogue cathartic, emetic and given in dropsy, rheumatism, 
syphilis, &c. The berries are diaphoretic and laxative. The juice of 
the berries is given in rheumatism and syphilis. 

Yibamnm Faatidiim. 

Habitat, — Western India, Burmah. 

Parts used, — The leaves and the plant. 

Vernacular. — Bomb. — Narvcia. Can. — Naruval. Sans.— *Shir- 
parna, Jaya. 

Characters, — Leaves usually ovate, lanceolate and serrated, 
colour darkish green. Flowers greenish white. Berries small, ovoid 
and of a red colour. All parts of the plant emit a peculiarly fcetid 
odour. 

Constituents. — A foetid volatile oil and an alkaloid, gum resin and 
ash, 12 p.c. The oil is the odorous principle, in white, greasy flakes. 
The foetor can be removed by distillation. The alkaloid is a whitish 



524 Vmt'RUUlI PSUKIfOUTM. 

powder of a peculiar sharp taste, soluble in alcohol and diloroform, 
slightly so in ether and water. 

Prfparatons.^The juice of the leaves. Dose, 4 to 8 fid. drs. 
Decoction of the plant (i in iS). Dose 4 to 8 drs. 

Actiofis and uses. — Uterine astringent and sedative, given in 
menorrhagia, post partum haemorrhage and in threatened abortion ; 
also in dysmenorrhoea and after pains. 

Hindu women during confinement hang a branch of the plant 
over their door, to prevent demons from causing illness- 

Yibvmiim Opoloft— Cramp BaA. 

High cranberry-, guelder rose, squaw bush, whitten tree. 
Cramp bark, socalled as the bark relieves cramps. 

Ynmraiuii Praufaliam. 

Sweet viburnum, stag bush, blackhaw. 

^.i5i/a/.— United States. 

Parts used, — The bark of the stem and root. 

Characttrs. — The baik in flat thin curved bands, with transverse 
brownish warts and longitudinal black lines or thin ridges. Internally 
brownish red, and of a tough fracture — without any odour and bitter 
astringent taste. Dose, ro to ^o drs. 

Constttucnis. — Vibumin, vibumic acid, identical with valerianic 
acid, sugar, tannin, oxalic, citiic and maiic acids, earth}- chlorides, 
sulphates, phosphates and ash, > to g p.c, Vibumin. — Bitter principle 
is a greenish yellow or whitish powder, resinous, soluble in alcohol, 
sparingly so in water. 

J^rt^araii^ns, — Fluid extract. Dose, 15 to to ms. Extract. Dose, 
^ to 16 grs. Decoction \^bumi and Ir.fusum \lbami (i in 10). 
Dose, i to 1 fld. CO, 

Cderina is a speciality said to contain Viburnum, celery, cocoa and 
kola. Used as a nervine tcnic, given to promote oorpuknoe. Malto 
Vibumin, a c»mbinaiion of \-ibumum and extract erf malt. Dose, i 
to 4 drs. 

AczT.'KS .:v*j usrs, — Bitter, nervine tonic, antispasmodic and 
.*>:Tingen:. A> a powerful uterine sedatiN-e it is used to check uterine 
Kx^morrhagc*, and to pTe\'en: threaiened aK^rtion. In spasmodic 
d\^roenorrhvTa. in uterine or ovarian irritations, in ssbinvcdntion and 
ex'en in vomiting of pregnancy i: i> given with cannabis, morphine 
and oihcr nervine scdarives or aromatics, with benefit. As a sedative 
it is g^ven in reuroric cjodirion, as h\^e:ia and in ^oKtita. la Urge 
doses it excites nausea and \»Tn::i:ig. 



Herbs, slaiubs or trees : leaves oroosite, enrine, whoried. having 
inter petivver si .pules Fic^wers white, hiae. p:nk. wd or yellow. Fruit 
beJTV, capsular, drai\aoeous dr\- or saocujerj:. in?ecioT, edible, 5 to 10 
relied : seed en? ."^ m.-^Te :r» each cc'^h ilbairen hcrny ."^i fieshy 



ANTHOCBPHALUS CADAMBA. 325 

Habitat, — Native of temperate climate and tropics. 

Properties, — Many species are tonic, febrifuge, astringent, emetic 
and purgative ; also diuretic and emmenagogue; some are dyeing and 
tanning agents, others are intoxicating and in rare cases even 
poisonous. 

Adina CordifoUa. 

Z^/?3//n/.— Throughout the hilly parts of India. 
Parts ttsed^^The bark. 

r^rrr//?c«//?r,— Beng.— Keli-Kadam. Can.— Hedde, Yet-tega. 
Hind.— Haldu. Mar.— Hedu. Sans.— Dhira-Kadftmba. Tarn.— 
Manja-Kaambe. Tel. — Dudagu. 

rZ/r/r^r/^/j.— Bark in thick curved pieces, dirty while externally. 
Inner surface reddish-brown and fibrous. Taste bitter and astringent. 

Constituents, — Cincho-tannic acid, a red oxidized product, a bitter 
principle, starch, and calcium oxalate. 

Preparations. — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, i to 2 fld. 02s. 

Actions and uses. — Bitter tonic and febrifuge. Like cinchona it is 
used in fevers, dyspepsia, anorexia. 

AnthooephaluB Cadamba— Wild Cinohona. 

Habitat. — Himalaya, Ceylon, Darjeeling, Terai. 
Parts used, — The fruit and bark. 

Vernacular. — Beng., Hind.— Kadamb. Can. — Cadavala mara. 
Sans. — Kadamba, Halipriya, Sisupfila. Tam. — Vella Kadamba. Tel. — 
Kadambe. 

Sisupula, protecting children. Hali-priya, dear to agriculturists. 

Characters. — Flowers, night scented ; flower heads large, globular 
and lemon coloured ; fruit about the size of an orange, edible ; bark in 
thick flat pieces, externally grey and studded with small corky 
lenticels, inner surface red and fibrous ; taste bitter and astringent. 
Dose of the bark 10 to 20 grs. 

Preparations. — Decoction of the bark (i in 10). Dose, i to 2 fld« 
ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Tonic. The juice is given to children 
with cumin and sugar in gastric irritability. The fruit is cooling, 
refrigerant and febrifuge, and given in fever with great thirst. 

Canthium Panrifloram, C. Umbellatum, C. Didymnm, C. Cymosum. 

Habitat, — W. Peninsula, Ceylon. 

Parts used, — The shrub. 

Vernacular. — Cing. — Poruwa. Hind. — Ursool. Malyal. — Kanden, 
Khara. Mar. — Varsangi, Ursool. Tam. — Karai cheddi, Nella Balsu. 
Tcl. — Ballusoo Rura, Naum papal. 



32b COFFEA ARABICA. 

Characters. — A small thorny shrub. Leaves opposite, ovate and 
attached to young shoots ; flowers small and yellow ; fruit with 2 seeds, 
obovate,com pressed, a drupe,colour reddish-brown, of the size of a horse 
bean ; nut 2-celled. TJie leaves and seeds smell like coriander. The 
fruit has a sweet taste. 

Preparation. — Decoction of leaves and root (i in 20). Dose, \ to 
I fld. oz. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent, given in dysentery, diarrhcea, and 
leucorrhoea. The root is anthelmintic ; and given to expel worms. 

Coffea Arabioa, B. P. 

Habitat, — Tropical Africa, Abyssinia, S. K. Asia, South Arabia, E. 
and W. Indies, Assam, Nepaul, Khassya hills. 

Parts used. — The seeds. 

Vernacular. ---Axzb. — Bun, Kahwa. Bom. — Boon. Eng.— Coffee 
caffea. Hind.— Cofl*ee, Kawa. Ind, Bazaar. — Kahvah. Maleal. — Kawa. 
Tam.—Capie cottay. 

Seeds large, solitary, rounded on the back, and flat on 
the ventral surface, where there is a deep narrow Assure, oval, 
longitudinally grooved upon the flat side, albumen is horny, the colour 
yellowish or greenish. Raw cofiee has a faint odour and a sweetish 
astringent bitter taste. When roasted part of the cafleic acid is 
converted into methylamin, the sugar is changed into caramel, 
and several volatile substances are formed known as Caffeone to 
which the aroma is due. Dose, 30 to 60 grs. 

Constituents. — Seeds contain an alkaloid, caffeine, I to 3 p.c. ; 
proteid 6 to 13 p.c. ; sugar, legumin, glucose, dextrine 15 p.c. ; 
caffeo-tannic acid i to 2 p.c. ; volatile oil and ash, 3 to 5 p.c. 
Caffeine B. P. is identical with Theine guaranine, Methyl-Theobo- 
mine, or Trimethylxanthine. To obtain caffeine, add acetate of 
lead to the infusion, filter, add sulphuretted hydrogen to decompose 
excess of acetate of lead and neutralize with ammonia. 

Caffeine is found in various substances besides coffee. These 
are dried leaves of camelia thea, pulp or seeds of paullinia sorbilis 
(guarana), the leaves and twigs of Ilex paraguayensis, kola nuts, 
• the seeds of sterculia acuminata, and cocoa. 

Caffeine is in colourless, silky acicular crystals without odour 
and bitter taste, neutral reaction ; soluble in cold water (i in 80) easily 
soluble in boring water, alcohnl or chloroform, sparingly soluble in 
ether : given in solution or pill. Dose, i to 5 prs. 

Picparations of Gz/^m^.— Caffeinoe citr?s, B P.a white powder, 
w th ut any od« ur and of faintly bnter taste and acid reaction, 
s luHle in water (i in 32) and also in a mixture of chloroform alcohol 
(2 to I). Dose. 2 to 10 grs. Caffeinae cilras efleivescens, B. P. 4 p.c. 
Dose, 60 to 120 gis. 

Caffeine Hydrobromide and C. Hydrochloride — Occur in glass- 
like crystals, betommg greenish or reddish on exposure to air ; soluble 
in water (i in 50). Decompose by keeping. Dose, J to 5 grs. 



COFPEA ARABICA, 



S«7 



I 



Bromo Caffeine. — A proprietary preparation often confounded 
with ealTeinehydrobromate. 

Caflfcine Chloral — A compound of cafleine and chloral. Occurs 
in small white granules or colourless shioinj^ scales of the acdd taste of 
chloral, soluble in water* Dose, 3 to '*igrs, A nice analgesic and laxative 
used hypodermically in sciatica and rheumatism. 

lodo Caffeine or Sodium Caffeine lorJide. Contains 65 p,c» of 
caflfeinc. A white powder without any odour or taste sparingly soluble 
in water. Dose, 2 to 10 grs. A good diuretic given in dropsy and pleu- 
risy wirh cflTusion. Does not affect or disordei respiration or digestion, 

CafTeine iodio benzoate, caffeine sodio cinnamate and caffeine 
sodio SiiHcylate — Prepared by dissolv^insj caffeine in solution of sodiutn 
bcn/oate or sodium cinnamate, or sodium salicylate rcspectively> these 
act like digitalis but more rapidly. Dose, i to 4 grs, ' 

Chforo Caffeine — One atom of chlorine introduced into the 
caffeine molecule ; diuretic and cerebral stimulant, given in nervous 
affections. 

Caffeine Sulphas— A crystalline powder slightly soluble in water* 
Dosc» 4 t*^ 5 &^^' ^^^^-'i^e Valerianas. Dose, f to 3 grs. Hypodermic 
tablets given in hysterical vomiting, 

Fhysihhj^tcai acihn. — Ccrebro spinal, gastric and renal stimulant 
laxative, highly anti^ieptic, efficient diuretic and anlilithic. Roasted 
coffee if mcidcrately taken as a food or beverage acts as a stimulant, it 
assists asMmilation and digestion, promotes intestinal paristalsis, lessens 
tissue waste and decreases the excretion of urea. It allays the sense of 
prolonged bodily and mental fatigue and keeps off sleep for some time 
vrtthout exhaustion. It increases the rellex action and mental activity* 
Given in exce!»s it disorders digestion and leads to headache, vertigo 
and palpitation of the heart, great restlessness, convulsions and para- 
lysis toffee is mt»re stimulating, but less sustaining than cocoa. 

Tkftaf^eutic uses, — Coffee is given in prtilntiged boilily fatigue, and 
in mental and cardiac depression ; as an analgesic it is given with 
guarana in neuralgic and nervous headache, in insomnia of chronic 
alcoholismi to stop vomiting, to check diarrhoea and to allay spasms 
in asthma ; also given in cases of narcotic poisoning. In heart disease 
caffeiu is given with paraldehyde, with benefit. 

Cinohona Suooirabra B. P. 

Hahitat^ — Slopes of Chi mborazo, S. America, S. IndlaiSikkimand 
eylon. 

Part usfd. — The dried branch of the stem and branches. 
Cinchona; Rubrse cortex, Red Cinchona Bark, B.P. 

Cinchona was first introduced into Europe from Peru, America^ 
by the Jesuit missionaries, hence known as Jesuit's bark, Peru\*ian 
bark; also called Countess's powder from a countess of Cinchon, the 
wife of a viceroy of the colony of Pdru, having been cured of i^vtx by 
this bark. 



328 CINCHONA SUCCIRUBRA. 

Succi Rubra, succus, juice, and ruber, red. The sap is 
colourless at first, on exposure it becomes white and finally red. 

Characters. — Occurs in quills or in curved pieces coated with 
periderm. It- varies in length from 2 inches to afoot or more, in 
thickness from 2 lines to \ of an inch, coluor reddish-brown or brownish ; 
epidermis rough with longitudinal ridges and warty. Inner surface brick 
red or deep reddish brown and striated, of a fibrous fracture, without 
odour, and of a bitter astringent taste. Dose, 10 to 60 grs. Contains 
largest percentage of total alkaloids. It should yield from 5 to 6 p.c. 
of total alkaloids, of which half should be quinine and cinchonidine. 
Other varieties are also in use, which are given below. 

C. Officinalis. — The pale crown loxa bark, var. condaminea, Bon- 
plandia and Crispa. The original Peruvian bark occurs in quills. 
It contains J to i^ p.c. of the alkaloid, and a little quantity of quinine. 

C. Peruviana, C. Nutida, C. Micrantha— grey or Huanuco bark. It 
contains from i\ p.c. to 2 p.c. of the alkaloids, chiefly cinchonine and 
quinidine. 

C. Calisaya, C Ledgeriana. Calisaya bark, quinine bark. Native of 
Sikkim, exclusively of the Himalayas, Southern India, Bolivia, Peru and 
Java. The most valuable of all the cultivated varieties of cinchona bark. 
It occurs in quills and contains 5 p.c. of alkaloids and from 2\ to 4 p.c. 
of quinine. 

C. Lancifolia, and C. Cordifolia, Columbian or Carthagena bark, — 
A soft bark, occurs in quills or broken pieces with whitish epidermis. 
It contains mostly cinchonidine and a small quantity of quinidine. 

C. Pitayensis — Pitayo bark ; occurs in short, curly pieces of a 
brownish colour, rich in alkaloids, especially quinine and quinidine. 

Remjia Pedunculata. Cuprea bark or copper coloured bark. It is 
not a true cinchona bark. It contains cupreine, cinchonamine, an 
alkaloid hydro-quinine, 3 p.c, quinine 2 p.c, but no cinchonidine. 

Remijia Purdieana. Remija bark contains quinine, quinidine, 
cinchonine, but no cmchonidine, also an alkaloid cupreine which in 
combination with quinine is known as homo quinine or ultra quinine. 

Consiiinenis. — Alkaloids quinine, quinidine, cinchonine and 
cinchonidine ; quinamine, a crystallizable alkaloid ; aricine, also kinic 
and kinovic acids, kinotannic, and kinovotannic acids, a red colouring 
principle ; starch, volatile oil, gum, sugar, wax, ash 2 to 3 p.c. 

Cinchonina — cinchonine— ran amorphous feeble alkaloid, isomeric 
with cinchonidine, having half the activity of quinine. Ii occurs in 
white shining prisms or needles, taste bitter, not fluorescent. 
Insoluble in water. Dose, 1 to 10 grs. 

Preparations of cinchonine. — Pulvis cinchoninae compositus (1 ins). 
Cinchona with bicarbonate of sodium and sugar of milk. Dose, 3 to 
10 grs. Cinchoninae Hydrochloridum, soluble in water and spirit. 
Dose, 2 to 10 grs. Cinchoninx Sulphas, Cinchonine sulphate. Hard, 
colourless, prismatic crystals, of vitreous lustre, soluble in water (i 
in 66). Absolute alcohol (i in 10), and in dilute acids, sparingly 



eiNCHOKA SUCriRUBRA. 



3^9 



soluble in ether and solution of ammonia. Dose, 2 to 10 grs, 
Cinchonine iodomercurate, yellow ftowder, used externally as an 
antiseptic, 

Cinthonidinae Sulphas, Sulphate cinchonidine^ Colourless, acicu- 
lar, silky, crystals. Taste bitter» soluble in water (i in 100), sparingly 
soluble in chloroform and ether and in rectified spirit (i in 60). Dose, 
1 to ID grs. used like quinine. Cinchonidine Salicylate — tonic and 
antiperiodic; given in neuralgia* rheumatism, intermittent fever, &c. 
Dose, 5 grs. in piih or cachets. 

Quinidina — Quinidinc^ — White prisms, without any odour, taste 
nauseous and bitter, aln^ost insoluble in water» soluble in dilute acids, 
partially soluble in ether and in benzol. Dose, i to 20 grs. 

Quinidina Sulphas — Quinidinc Sulphate. Conquinine or conchinin 
sulphate. An alkaloid obtluncd from cinchona pit<iyen&is or cinchona 
caprea. In white acicular crystals like those of quinine sulphate. 
Soluble in water (i in ioo)» in absolute alcohol (i in 32) freely in dilute 

acids, Dose, i to 20 grs. 

Quinquinina — Quinetum— Cinchona febrifuge, contains 50 to 70 
p.c, of chichanidine extracted from red cinchona bark by acidulated 
water, precipitated by soda and dried, A greyish^ white amorphous 
powder, slightly soluble in water^ easily dissolved in dilute acid, and in 
alcohol (i in 10). Dose» i to 5 grs, Ouineti Sulphas — Quinetum 
sulphate. Closely resembles quinine sulphate. In crystals, soluble in 
water Dose, i to 5 grs, 

Quinina— Quinine — obtained from the bark of various species 
of cinchona and Remijia, It occurs as a white amorphous or minutely 
crystalline powder, very sparingly soluble in water (1 in 1670), freely 
soluble in alcohol (i in 6), in ether, chlorofornj, benzene, aqueous 
ammonia and dilute acids. Heated with glycerine it is converted into 
an isomeric base quinicine. Dose, i to 10 grs. 

Pr^barahons of Quimnf. — Quininse ArMjnas^ — quinine arstnatet 
small while crystals, sparingly soluble in water — ^toniains quinine 67 
c> and arsenic acid 29 p.c. Dosc^ i to \ gr. Oninin^e Bisulphas — 
uininse sulphas acida^neutral quinine or soluble sulphate of 
quinine. In large, colourless crystals, or small needles, efflorescing 
and becoming opaque on exposure to the air, without any odour. 
Has a strong acid reaction, soluble in watcr(i in 10). Dose, i to 
5 grs. As an hypodermic injection I gr, in 12 ms. Dose, 4 to 15 ms. 
Quinina! Carbolas— In crystals — containing quinine 77 p.c, and 
carbolic acid 23 p.c. Given in diarrhcea. Dose, 2 grs. Quininae 
Carbonas — in fine needles, soluble in water. Dose, i to 3 grs. Quininse 
Chloras — Quinine Chlorate, in acicular crystals, ^f ' >oluble in 

water, explodes when heated. Dose, 1 to 5 grs. ' Citras — 

Quinine Citrate, in acicular crystals of very httte ta^^le, sparingly 
soluble in water (i in qoo), used in pill or powder. Dose, i to 5 grains, 
Quinina! Fluortdum, sparingly soluble in cold water, more freely in 
hot water. Dose, ^ to \ gr. In combination with fluoride of 
ammonium it is used in enlarged spleen due to malaria. Quininae 
Hvdrobromidum — Quinine Hydrobroniule — In colourless lustrous 



330 CINCHONA SUCCIRUBRA. 

needles, without any odour, of bitter taste and alkaline reaction, soluble 
in water ( I in 54), produces less cinchonism than quinine. Dose, i to 6 
grs. Syrupus Ferri et Quininae Hydrobromatum — Syrupus Ferri 
Bromidi cum Quinina. Dose, ^ to i dr. Syrupus Ferri Quininae et 
Strychninse Hydrobromatum, each dr. contains i gr. of quinine 
hydrobromide. Dose, ^ to 1 dr. Quininae Hydrobromidum acidum. — 
Yellowish crystals, freely soluble in water (i in 6), richer in alkaloids 
than the quininae sulphate. Dose, ^ to 2 grs. in tablets } gr. each. 
As hypodermic injection i gr. in 6 ms. 

Quininae Hydrochloridum B. P. — Quinine Hydrochlorate, Quinine 
Muriate — In filiform, silky, white crystals, contains 83 p c. of quinine 
against 75 in the quinine sulphate, soluble in water (i in 35), in cold 
alcohol (i in 3), very soluble in Jjoiling water and in boiling alcohol. 
Dose, I to 10 grs. used as solution i in 800 as a germicide ; hypodermic 
injection containing quinine hydrochloride 3, antipyrin 2 and water 
10. Dose, 2 to 5 ms. Quinine Hydrochloridum Aceticum — A 
white crystalline pv'>wder, soluble in less than its own weight of 
water. Dose, i to 10 grs. Vinum Quininae, B. P. — i gr. quinine 
hydrochloride to i oz. of wine Dose, ^ to i oz. Tinctura Quininae B. 
P. — I gr. in 50 of tincture of fresh orange. Dose, J to 1 dr. Quininae 
Glycero Phosphas — A white powder, soluble in alcohol, slightly 
soluble in hot water. Containing 68 p,c. of quinine. Dose, 2 to 8 grs. 

Quininae Hydrochloridum Acidum, B. P. — Acid quinine hydro- 
chloride, quinine dihydrochloride. White yellowish crystals soluble in 
water (i in 1), Dose, i to 10 grs.; used hypodermically J to 2 grs. 
Quininae Hydrochloro Sulphas — In small needles or reduced to powder ; 
soluble in water (i in i). Contains 74 p c. of alkaloid. Dose, i to 
10 grs Injectio Quininae Hydrochloro Sulphatis Hypodermica, 1 gr. 
in 4 ms. More suited than the sulphate or the hydrochloride. Dose, 
2 to 12 ms. Quininae Hydrochloro Carbamidum — Urea Quinine — anew 
compound of quinine and urea, in small prisms, non-irritant. Soluble 
in water (i in i). The solution (50 p.c.) is used as hypodermic 
injection. Dose, S to 15 grs. Quininae lodas — Quinine lodate. White 
silver needles, soluble in water (i to 250) Dose, i to 5 grs. Quininae 
Hydriodum — Quinine Hydr Iodide — Quininae lodidum — Quinine 
Iodide. A neutral salt in pale yellow crystals, sparingly soluble in 
water. Dose i to 5 grs. Quininae Hydridum Acidum — Quininae 
lodidum Acidum — Acid Quinine Iodide. — An acid salt in large yellow 
crystals freely soluble in water. Dose, i to 4 grs. Syrupus Ferri et 
Quininae lodidi — A saturated solution of quinine 2 grs. in an ounce 
of syrup of ferrous iodide. Dose, i dr. Quininae Lactas — Quinine 
Lactate. — A white amorphous powder soluble in water (i in 10). Dose, 
I to 5 grs. Easy of digestion — used as solution i p.c. for hypodermic 
injection. Quininae Oleatum (i to 3). Locally used as inunction in 
fevers. Quininae Phosphos — Quinine Phosphate In acicular crystals. 
Dose, I to 6 grs. Quininae Salicylas — Quinine Salicylate. — An 
anhydrous salt, crystallizes in white silky needles, of a bitter taste, 
sparingly soluble in water (i in 1225), Ether (i in 120), Chloroform 
and rectified spirit (i in 24), contains 70 p.c. of quinine. Dose 2 to 6 



r:mcHONA succirubra. 



gTs. given in pills or in cachets or suspended in water. Quininae 
Sulphas B,P. Disulphate Quinine— Quinine Sulphate, In light 
filiform, silky, white crystals ; taste intensely bitter, soluble in 
water (i in 800), alcohol (i in 65), glycerine (r in 40I, entirely soluble 
in ammonia and acidulated water— given in solution, pills» powder, or 
cachetjv Dose, as a tonic, 2 to 5 grs., as an antiperiodic 5, to 20 era, 
^Fcbricide Pills— containing quinine sulphate, antcfebrin. each 2 grs 
and cocaine hydrnchloratc I grs* Dose, i to 2 pitb in malaria. 

Tinctura Quininae Arnmoniata B. P. ^Quinine Sulphate 2, 
solutii n of ammonia 10, and alcohol 90, soluble in aerated water — noi 
miscible with plain water. Dose, ^ to i dn 

CoUunarium Quininx— Quinine nasal douche^ — ^Ouinine Sulphate 
in water (1 in 875). 

Mistura Chlori cum Quininoi. Mix potassium chlorate 30grs. and 
.hydrochloric acid 60 ms,. add water 11 ounces. Then add Quinine 
'Sulphate 24 grs and syrup of orange 1 oa. Dose^ i oz. 

Warburg^s Fever Tincture— Tinctura Pyrexialis — contains nuinine 
sulphate (i in 50). Socoirinc Aloes (i in 40). opium (i in 4000), rnubarb 
■ root (i m I25)» camphor (r in 500), and saffron and othtir aromaucs* 
^Dosc, I to 4 drs. 

Quininar Sulphas Acidus — Acid quinine sulphate, neutral or 
soluble quinine sulphate. In large rectangular prisms or crystalline 
masses, soluble in cold water (i in 12). Dose, I to 10 grs. Hypodermic 
injection, i gr. in 12 ms. Duse, 4 to 15 nis. 

Qutnin;e Sulpho carbolas— An amorphous white powder, sparing- 
ly soluble in water sometimes known ascarbolaie of quinine. To obtain 
it make a combination of quinine sulphate with phenol. In the case of 
true carbolate of quinine thr combination is of quinine alkaloid and 
phenoK It combines the action of quinine with that of sulpho- 
carbolate— given in diarrhoea and fever. Dose, 1 to 6 grs, 

Quininx Tannas.— A white amorphous powder, sparingly soluble 
in water, quite tasteless, Dtise, 1 to 4 gr», 

Quininae Valerianae. — White pearly lustrous crystals, sparingly 
soluble in water (1 in 100); b<iiling water (1 in 40); alcohol (1 in 5)and 
slightly soluble in ether — odour nf valerian. Dose, 1 to 4 grs. 

Preparnhons. — Of the bark. Infu&umCmchonic Acidum, B,P., red 
cinchona bark i ounce, aromatic sulphuric acid 2 fld drs. ; distilled 
water 20 fid. ounce?. Dose, \ to i Hd. oz. Ext r actum cinchona; 
liquidum, B. P {5 grs of the total alkaloids in 1 10 ms*). Dose, 5 to tf 
ms Tinctura Cnichon;]^. B P; (i in 5) containing i p.c, of alkaloids. 
Dose, I to I fid. dr. Tinctura Cinchon«T C(*mposrt;c, B. P,, contains 
^tincture of re i cinchona bark 10 ; dried biltt-r orange peel 1 ; 

epcntary root | ; with cochineal and saffron for 1 pint Dose, i to i dr. 

)ecoctum Cinchonse (i in 16). Dose, i to z tld. o«s. Elixir Cinchonse. 

)ose, j to I dr. 

PkystQloirical actron. — Cinchona is a general tonic, bitter stoma- 

' chtCf astringent, febrifuge and antiperiodic^ In small dones it 
increases appetite, assists digestion, increases the flow of saliva and the 



332 CINCHONA SUCCIRUBRA. 

gastric juice. It augments the force of heart's action. If continued for 
a long time, it acts as a gastric irritant, impairs digestion, produces 
gastric, catarrh and even constipation. In large doses it causes 
flatulence, eructation, rise of body heat with chill, and fever. Quinine 
is a bitter tonic, antiseptic, most powerful antiperiodic and antipyretic ; 
also analgesic. In small doses it stimulates the heart and increases the 
arterial tension. In large doses, it has direct action on the cardiac 
ganglia, and thus slows the pulse beat, and lowers the arterial tension. 
It is a protoplasmic poison. It prevents the development of the 
Plasmodium and hence the most important agent in malaria. It is 
rapidly diffused. In the blood it increases the number of white 
corpuscles, but prevents or arrests their movements, it lessens oxidation, 
and in fever it lessens the body heat- It lessens the size of the spleen 
when enlarged from fever. As an antiseptic it is an active destroyer of 
low organisms (i in 500), it destroys fungi, checks fermentation and 
putrefactive decomposition; it sometimes produces sexual excitement. In 
the urine it lessens the excretion of uric acid but not of urea. It often 
acts as an uterine stimulant if long continued and in large doses. It 
causes quinism or cinchonism, a set of symptoms characterised by 
fulness and constriction in the head, buzzing in the ears, vertigo, 
reeling gait, deafness, amblyopia, &c. In excessive doses, it leads to 
dilated pupils, delirium and even convulsions. 

Therapeutics. — Quinine is given in 10 grain doses to bring down 
fever. It is also given in whooping cough, hay fever, enlargement of 
liver and spleen, hemicrania, and other localized neurotic pains. In 
small doses it is given as a tonic in dyspepsia, gastric catarrh, adynamia 
and convalescence from fevers and in weak and flabby subjects. In 
remittent fever, large doses of 15 or 25 grs. of quinine may be given 
once or twice a day. In chronic cases, large doses of chinchonine are 
safer than quinine. Quinine is also used as antipyretic in typhoid 
fever, variola, septic fevers pneumonia, acute rheumatism, in acute 
tonsillitis, acute nasal catarrh, pyaemia and in surgical operations. 
The indiscriminate use of quinine, if taken regularly and in large doses, 
for a long time weakens the heart and produces restlessness and 
cachexia. In obstinate cases of ague with persistent vomiting, in 
malarial fevers, in irritability of the rectum or where the patient is 
insensible or cannot swallow and in all cases where it cannot be given 
by the mouth, hypodermic injection of quinine may be used, generally 
combined with guaiacol, with benefit. It should be injected deeply 
into the glifleal or scapular muscles or in the arm. Locally as an 
antiseptic injection, it is used in cystitis and abscess cavities, as a wash 
for wounds and ulcers, and as a gargle in sore throat. It is an ingre- 
dient in dentifrice. The ill-effects could best be avoided by giving it 
with diluted hydrobromic acid Warburg's Tincture is given in 
remittent and continued fevers, even during the pyrexial period. 
In severe attacks of influenza, in chronic bronchitis of old age, in 
asthma, and in phthisis, \ fld. oz. may be given after any convenient 
purgative, to be repeated in 3 hours No food or drink to be given from 
the first dose to an hour after the second ; for ordinary cases 2 fld. 
drs. may be given for a dose. 



GARDENIA GUMMIFERA. 333 

Dlplospora SphsBrooarpa— Wild Coffee. 

Hadttat.— Western Ghats. 

Paris used, — The seeds. 

C/iaracfers. ^Seeds round, flattened and glossy, of a light brown 
colour. Albumen horny. The roasted powder resembles coffee 
in aroma. 

Constituents, — An alkaloid, an astringent acid, an aromatic body, 
fat, sugar and mineral matter. 

Preparations. — Decoction ( i in lo). Dose 2 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Nervine tonic and stimulant like coffee ; given 
in low states of the system, in acute fevers, in hemicrania and neuralgias. 

Galiom Aparine. 

Syn. — The plant Cleavers, goose grass (Eng.) 

Habitat. — Europe and United States. 

Parts used. — The herb and inspissated juice. 

I^eparations. — Succus Galii — dose i to 2 drs. Extractum Galii — 
dose, 5 to 20 grs. 

Actions and uses, — Acid, astringent, alterative and diuretic ; given 
in dropsy, jaundice, suppression of urine, gravel complaints and skin 
diseases ; also in scrofula, epilepsy, and obesity. A poultice of the herb 
is used in obstinate psoriasis. The inspissated juice is locally applied in 
lepra, eczema, and acne, and to promote healthy granulations in wounds 
and cancerous ulcers ; also used as a styptic for bleeding wounds. 

Gardenia Gommifera. G. Resinlfera. G. Arborea and G. Lnoida. G. 
Campannlata, G. Florida. 

Habitat. — Western Peninsula, Ceylon, Burma, Chittagong, India. 

Parts used. — The resinous exudation from the fruits. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Kala-loxada, Kimk-kham. Burm. — Tsay- 
tham-by-ah. Can. — Tella-manga, Chinaka-ringuva. Cine., Duk., Guz., 
Hind., Mar. — Dika-male. Sans. — Hingu-nadika, Pindanva. Tam, — 
Kumbi. Tel. — Chiribikki, Tella-manga. 

Characters, — Thcexudation occurs in masses or irregular flat cake?, 
opaque, of a dull olive green colour, often mixed with soft bark leaf buds 
and pieces of stem, &c. The smell is very foetid like that of cat's urine. 
Dose, I to 2 grs. 

Preparations,^ Emulsion with water (i in 50). Dose, i to 2 drs., 
and paste. 

Constituents. — Gardenin — a' crystalline resin of a gold yellow 
colour, another resin soft and of a greenish colour. 

Actions and uses, — Antiperiodic, cathartic, anthelmintic, altera- 
tive, and antispasmodic ; given in intermittent fevers, dyspepsia, flatu- 
lence, and chronic skin diseases. A paste of it is applied for cleaning 



334 IXORA COCCINKA. 

foul ulcers and for the relief of itching in piles. It keeps away flies or 
maggots from sloughing sores. As an antispasmodic the root of G. 
Florida is given alone or combined with bharangi in hysteria. As a 
cathartic and anthelmintic it is given to expel worms. 

Hymenodlctyon Ezoelsom. Cinchona Eoelsa. 

Habitat — W. Himalaya, Chittagong, Deccan, C. India, Tenasserim. 

Paris used. — The bark. 

Vertiacuiar. — Duk., Hind. — ^Bhaulan, Kalabachnak. Mar. — Kila- 
kadva, Bhoursal. Panj. — Barthoa, Thab. Tam. — Sagapu-maram. 
Tel. — Burija, Bandiru. 

Characters. — Inner coat of the bark resembles, cinchona and is 
bitter and astringent ; outer coat spongy, light and tasteless ; wood fine 
close-grained, colour pale, mahogany-like. Dose, 5 to 20 grs. 

Constituents. — A bitter neutral principle and an alkaloid hymeno- 
dictyonine, allied to quinoidine, berberine paricine,and a glucoside. 

Preparation, — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, J to i fld. oz. 

Actions and uses, — A bitter tonic and febrifuge ; used during 
convalescence from acute diseases and fevers. 

Izora Panriflora, 1. Alba. 

Habitat, — South of India. 

Parts used. — The bark and flowers. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Rangan. Can. — Gorabi. Eng. — Torch tree. 
Hind.— Kotha-gandhul, Runghun. Mar. — Kura-Kurat, Raikura, 
Makadi. Sans. — Ishwara. Tam. — Shulundu. Tel.— Karivipola. 

Ixora or Ishwora means a Hindu god. The plant is sacred to 
Iswar (Shiva). It is used as a torch in the forest. 

Characters.^¥\ovfQrs sweet scented ; root pale brown. The wood 
burns very readily and clearly, and hence post-runners make torches 
of it. 

Constituents. — Fatty matter, tannin, red coloring matter, and ash 
containing a trace of ferric oxide. 

Preparations,— Decoction of the bark(i in 20). Dose, ^ to 1 fld.oz. 

Actions and uses — Tonic. The flowers pounded in milk are given 
in whooping cough ; the bark is a bitter tonic like cinchona and given 
in anaemia and general debility. 

Izora Coccinea, I. Grandlflora 

Habitat.'-Vf. India. 
Parts used. — The root. 

F^r«tfi:«/ar.— Hind-Beng.— Rajana. Burm.— Pan-sa^eik. Eng.— 
Flame of the forest, jungle or country geranium. Mar.— Bakura, Pent- 
guL Maleal.— Shetti. Tam.— Vitchie. Tel.— Theti. 



MORINDA CITRIFOLIA. 335 

Characters. ^Root branched. Bark thick, smooth, and brown, 
marked with warty prominences ; on cutting it a yellow juice exudes, 
odour disagreeable, due to the presence of volatile fatty acids. Dose, 
5 to 20 grs. 

Constituents, — Tannin, saccharine matter, a little fat and coloring 
matter. 

Preparations, — Decoction (i in 20). Dose, i to i fld. oz. 

Actions and usej, — Astringent, stomachic, and tonic ; given in 
fevers and gonorrhoea. In dysentery it is generally combined with Nag- 
kesar and cumin. As a stomachic tonic it is given in flatulence and 
atony of the stomach. 

Pavetta Indica, Izora Pavetta, P. Alba. 

Habitat. — Ceylon. 

Parts used. — The root. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Kukura, Chura. Can. — Pappadi. Cing. — 
Pavetta. Mar., Hind. — Kakra. Maleal. — Malia-Mothi. Sans. — Pappana, 
Papata. Tam. — Pavetti-maram. Tel. — Telia-papata. 

Characters,— An ornamental shrub. Root crooked ^ to i inch in 
diameter. Taste bitter. Bark gray, light brown, epidermis, papery. 
Taste sweetish and aromatic. Dose, powdered root J to i dr. 

Constituents. — A green resin starch, no tannin, an organic acid and 
a bitter giucoside resembling salicin. 

Preparations. — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, ^ to i fld. oz. 
Actions and //j^5.— Bitter tonic and aperient ; given in torpor of 
the liver and with ginger in dropsy. 

Morinda CitrifoHa, M. Tin 

Habitat, — Throughout India, Malwa, Malabar. 

Parts used, — The leaves and fruit. 

Vernacular, "^QWg* — Atchhu. Bur. — Yoi-yoe, Nayhgyle. Can. — 
Maddi. Cing. — Ahugaha. Eng. — Indian Mulberry. Hmd. — Al, atchi, 
ak. Maleal. — Kada pilva. Mar. — Baratundi, A*sa Nagakuda. Tam. — 
Manja-pavattay. Tel. — Moolugu, maddi. Sans. — Achchhuka, Uchyuta 
B^r^tondi is derived from Bara, twelve, and Tond a month. The fruit 
is marked with as many as twelve scars which represent so many 
months. 

Characters. — Leaves oval, oblong, shining, smooth, alternate and 
of a yellowish green or dark green colour ; taste bitter. Ripe fruit shin- 
ing, fleshy, oblong, and marked with scars ; emitting a foetid odour. 
By keeping the seeds and pulp become black or brown and sticky, 
resembling seeds and pulp of dried pomegranate. 

Constituents. — The root bark contains morindin, a dyeing 
principle. 

Preparations. — Decoction of leaves (i in 20). Dose, 1 to 2 fld, oz. 



2^6 OLDENUUdMA UIOKLLATA. 

ActUjfu and uses. — AstringeDt, tonic and febrifnge; genendly given 
mixed with aromatics. Decoction is given in diarrhoea, dysenteiy and 
iinf::Th : the ripe frait is an emmenagogoe, and given in disordered 
metier uation. The juice of the leaves is used as an apptication for the 
relief of pain in gout and healing of wounds and ulcers. 

Mnasmda Frondosa. M. FlaTMOfiiift. 

Habitat. — Nepal, Ce^'lon and Himalayas. 

Parts used. — The root, leaves and fruit. 

Vernacular. — Bomb. — ^Sarwad, Bhooteasse. Sanchount. Hind. — 
Bebina, Sribar. Maleal. — Belila. Nfar. — Srivardoii, Bhut-kes. 
Nepaul. — Asari. Tam. — Vella allay. Sans. — Shrivati, Nagavalli. 

Characters. — Leaves white. Flowers deep yellow or golden coloured. 
Taste bitter. Root slender, long and fibrous. Dose, 20 to 6ogrs. 

Constituents. — Bitter principle — a glucoside, resin, sugar, mucilage 
and colouring matter ; the bitter principle is soluble in water and 
rectified spirit. 

Preparations. — Juice of root or leaves. Syrup of flowers, dose, 
I to 2 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Alterative, and demulcent. The root is 
given with milk in jaundice. The juice of fruit and leaves is used as 
colly rium for the eyes. Syrup of flowers is a gentle expectorant and 
given in coughs, asthma, flatulence, and ague. Extemall}* the paste of 
the root is used as a cooling application in skin eruptions. 

Oldenlandia Umbellata, Hedyotis Umbellata, H. ffiq^ 
H. Indica. 

Habitat. — Peninsula of India, Coromandel coast. 
Parts used. — The root and leaves. 

Vernacular. — Cing. — Choya, Sayan- mul. Eng. — Chayroot, Indian 
madder. Tam. — Emburel chedditel, Cheri velu. 

Characters. — Leaves opposite, verticillate, linear, pale on the under 
surface ; margins recurved, covered with bristles ; flowers white and in 
racemes, root slender, long with few lateral fibres of an orange colour* 

Constituents. — The bark contains a colouring matter. 

Preparations. — Decoction (i in 20). Dose | to i fld. oz. 

Actiotis and uses.^ The leaves are expectorant, and given in cough, 
asthma and consumption. The root is alterative and used in cutaneous 
diseases and applied over poisonous bites of venomous animals. 

Oldenlandia Corymbosa, 0. Biflora, 0. Herbacea. 

Habitat. — Throughout India. 
Parts used, — The herb. 



rOLICl^RIA DENSIFLOHA. 



357 



I \rutHufar, — G uz. , Mar., Keng, — Kl»t;t papra, Pilpapara. Can.^ — 
KuUa Sabatra-sige. Eng. — TwoHowered Indian madder. Hiiid, — 
Dnman-papra, Bakra, Parputt, Pitpapara* Sans. — Kshetra parpala. 
Tarn. — Parpa dagam. Tel. — V'erineila vemu< 

Charactefs, — Annual slender herb, leaves linear, with margins 
recurved, nerveless; peduncle solitary; flower i to 4 ; capsule, broadt 

hemispherical. Dose, I to 2 drs. 

Comhiueut^, — An alkaloid^ and a large proportion of alkaline salts. 

Preparatfofis, — A compound decoction called Pancha Bhadra, 
meaning five bitters^ containing, parpata^ mustaka, gulanchai chiretta^ 
and ginger equal parts, given in remittent fever. Dose, i to 2 fld, ozs. 

AciioNnand uses. — Tonic and antiperiudic, given in fevers with 
gastric irritation and nervous depression. 

Ophiorrhiza Mungoe. 

HnhitaL — Mountains of As^am, Java, Sumatra, W. Peninsula and 
Ceylon, 

Parts used. — The root and plant. 

P'erHficniar. — Can. — Kanjure, Rashme. Cing. — ^Mendi. Guz# — 
Mungusvel, Nakuli. Hind,, Mar. — Rnsna. Java.— Kajomar. Sans* — 
kNagasuganda* Tam.^ — Keri purandan. Tel. — Nakuli Sarpashe- 
lieitu* 

Characters — Root about 6 to 9 inches in length, and as thick as 
the finger, contorted »tnd brown externally ; bark closely adherent and 
corky ; ta^le hitter, like thai of gentian. Leaves opposite, lanceolate, 
acuminate and glabrous. 

Constttttcnts. — Starch, amorphous alkaloid, resin and fat &c* 

Ptfparatiom, — Decoction (f in to). Dose, \ to l fid. oz. 

yktthns ami uses* — Bitter tonic like gentian, and used a^ a tonic 
in dyspepsia and diarrhoea. Among the Cingalese it has a high 
reputation as a remedy against bites of snakes and mad dogs. 

Pdliourla Densiflora, or probably from a Species of Nectandra. 

Habitats — Bolivia, South America, 

Parti used. — The bark — coto-bark, also para coto-bark from 
another plant* 

Characters, -^¥12^1 curved pieces, \ inch thick ; cork fissuredt 
cinnamon coloured ; odour nutmeg like, pungent and agreeable ; 
taste pungent and bitter, when chewed it increases the flow of saliva. 
Dose, 1 to H grs. 

Constituents. — An acrid bitter principle — cotoin, Piperonylic acid, 
volatile oil and resin^ but no tannin. Paracotoin is found in parocoto 
bark along with hydrocotoin; it occurs in small laminar crystals^ weaker 
and paler than coloin ; soluble in ether, boiling alcohol, boiling water 
and chloroform ; slightly soluble in water. Dose, ^ to 3 grs. 

2t 



33^ PILOCARPUS JABORANDJU 

Cotoin occurs as pale yellow, amorphous powder or minute curved 
crystalline prisms, non-volatile, oif a bitter taste and irritating to the 
nostrils ; slightly soluble in water, freely soluble in alcohol, ether, 
chloroform and alkalies. Dose, ^ to 2 grs. ; it checks salivation and 
night sweats. 

Preparations. — Extractum Goto liquidum — liquid extract ; not 
miscible with water. Dose, 2 to 6 ms. TincturaCoto (i in 10). Dose, 
10 to 20 ms. 

Actions. — A powerful astringent ; given in chronic intestinal 
catarrh, dysentery and diarrhoea of rickets, typhoid fever, and phthisis; 
also in diarrhoea due to teething in children — cotoin is given in the 
night sweats of phthisis and in phthisical diarrhoea; it is also used 
hypodermically in cholera, 15 ms. of a i in 4 solution in acetic ether 
as an injection. 

PfiBderia FoBtida, Psyohotria yolubilis, Apooynum Foetidam, 
ConTolYolas Foetidus. 

Habitat. — Himalaya, Bengal, West Peninsula of India. 

Parts used. — The whole plant. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Gandha-bhadhuli. Guz.^Gandhana. Hind. 
— Gandhali. Mar. — Hiranvel. Sans. — Prasarani, Gundha bhadalya. 
Tel. — Savirela chettu. 

Characters. — The plant has a very offensive odour of bisulphide 
of carbon, when bruised. 

Constituents. — A volatile oil of an offensive odour, 2 alkaloids, 
namely, Alpha Paederine and Beta Psederine. 

Preparations. — A liquid extract and a compound syrup or electuary 
containing liquid extract of gandhali i part, ginger and pepper 2 parts, 

E lumbago root \ part, and sugar 5 parts. Dose, i to 2 fld. drs. 
riniment, contains liquid extract of gandhali i part, oil 8 parts and 
camphor \ part. 

Actions and uses. — The whole plant is alterative, antispasmodic, 
and emetic. The root is an emetic. The compound s}rrup is given in 
colic, rheumatism, gout and spasmodic diseases. The liminent is 
used externally in rheumatism and over painful joints. 

FilooarpoB Jaborandi, B. P., P. PinnatlfoliiiB, P. Selloanas. 

HabitaL — Brazil, in forests, and on hill slopes. 

Parts used. — The dried leaflets, Jaborandi Folia, B.P. 

Characters. — Leaflets, long, short stalked, oval, marked with 
numerous pellucid dots, punctate, entire, emarginate, oblong, lanceo- 
late, of a dull, green colour, coriaceous and tomentose ; odour aromatic, 
taste pungent and bitter ; when chewed it increases the flow of saliva. 
Dose, powdered leaves 5 to 40 grs. 



PILOCARPUS JABORAKHK 



339 



Ojtisitnirfifs. — Contain 4 alkaloids^ \ t^ — i pilocarpine, z pilocar- 
pidinc, 3 jaborine antagonistic in action to pilocarpine and 4 
jaboridine ; volatile oil^ malic acid, and salts. 

Pilocarpina — Pilocarpine — a syrupy liquid alkaloid. To obtain it 
add to the alcoholic extract of Jaborandi at first hydrochloric acid and 
then any alkali, shake the whole with chloroform and finally with acidu- 
lated water. Jaborine — also present in leaves, does not form crys- 
tallizabte salts ; it is colourless and more liquid^ without any odour, 



Pilocarpine and 
pyridine. Pile- 



I 



Ptlocarpidinc is supposed to be dihydroxyhiicotine, 
pilocarpidine have been synthetically prepared from 
carpidine on oxidation yields jaboridine* 

Volatile oil is obtained by distillation. It contains chiefly 
turpene and a trace of paraffin-like substance, 

PiliJcarpinseNitras B. P, Pilocarpine Nitrate. — A white crystalline 
powder, soluble in water (i in 9), slightly soluble in cold and fieely 
so ill hot alcohol. Dose» 5*^ to J gr, by the mouth* 

Iniectio Pilocarpinae Nitratis Hypodermica — used hypoderraically 
(I gr. m 20 ms.) Dose, 2 to 6 ms. Hvpodermiclamels or tablets co i- 
tain \ gr. each. Guuae Pilocarpinae, 2 grs to i 02. Ophthalmic disc> »^o 
gr. in each. Lotio Pilocarpinae — Pilocarpine nitrate 2 grs., quinine 
hydrochloride 8 grs., glycerine 2 drs., rose water 6 drs., used in altipe- 
cia. Pilula Pilocarpinae Nitratis — Pilocarpine nitrate ,'0 gr. with milk- 
sugar and gtycenn of tragacanih — ^10 make one pilh Pilocarpin» 
Hydrochloridum. Pilocarpine Hydrochloride — White crystals, deli- 
quesLcnr, bitter, wiihoui any odour, freely soluble in alcohol and 
water, insoluble in ether and chloroform. Dose» y*^ to ^ gr., used hypo- 
dermtcatly» f*g to ^ gr. by the mouth. Pilocarpinae Pfienas — Pdocarpine 
carbolaic, ascptolmc. A colourless oily hquid, soluble in alcohol 
and water* used as hypodermic injection in phthisic (l in 5^000), 
Pilocarpinae salicylas^Pilocarpinc salicylate — colourless crystals of a 
bitter taste, soluble in water. Dose, ^*^ to \ gr, 

Pt0patahons*—Oi Jaborandi Folia — Extractum Jaborandi liqui- 
dum B. P. Liquor Jaborandi— Fluid extract of pilocarpine, not 
miscible with water. Dose^ 5 to 15 ms. Extractum Jaborandi (solid). 
Dose, 2 to 10 grs. Tinctura Jaborandi, B. P. (1 in 5)- Dose, | to i 
achm. To check night sweat. Infusion (1 in 20). Dose, i to a 02s. 

Physmhgical action, — Powerful sudorific and sialagogue, cardiac 
depressant, myotic, emetic, galactagogue, and abortifacient ; taken 
internally it paralyses the vaso motor system and is a stimulant of the 
peripheral nerve ends» supplying glands and involuntary muscles. 
It increases the general secretions, promotes sweating, causes 
flushed face, increased salivation, catarrh of the nose, bronchi and of 
the lachrymal duct. It is rapidly elinunatcd by the skin and sahvary 
glands In large doses it causes drowsintss, contracted pupils, and 
impaired or want of co -ordination oi reflexes, laboured respiration, 
conn act ion of the bladder, uterus and spleen. 

Therapeuttcs, — The leaves arc given in uremic convulsims, and 
renal dropsy; it should not be given if the heart is weak. In aloumi- 
nurU* anasarca, pulmonary oedema, diabetes insipidus, it relieves the 



340 PSYCHOTRIA IPECACUANHA. 

kidneys. It stimulates the skin, and hence used in fever. As ahairwash 
it promotes the growth of hair in alopecia. As a galactagogue it 
increases the flow of milk. In ptyalism it acts specifically in minute 
doses on the salivary glands. In erysipelas and in diphtheria it is of 
great benefit in detaching ihe false membrane and to prevent its 
reformation. Its use should be supported by food and stimulants. As 
an absorbent it is given with, iodides and mercurials, in pleuritis, 
meningitis, retinitis, amblyopia due to alcoholism or tobacco, iritis and 
in glaucoma. 

Pilocarpine in small doses 3V to ^ gr., checks night sweats ; but 
in hrge doses it is a most powerful sialagogue and diaphoretic, and 
used in kidney diseases, dropsy, diabetes insipidus, intermittent 
fever, severe hiccough and syphilis. In hiccough | gr. can be hypoder- 
mically used ; also in deafness due to affection of the lab3Tinth and 
to arrest paroxysm of spasmodic asthma. 

Psyohotria Ipeoaouanha, B.P. 

Cephaclis Ipecacuanha, Carthagena Ipecacuanha, Two varieties — 
long styled and short styled. 
Habitat, — Brazil, India. 

Parts used. — The dried root— Ipecacuanhae Radix, B.P., Ipeca- 
cuanha root. 

Characters. — In Carthagena Ipecacuanha, the root is thicker and 
the annulations less marked. Ipecacuanha root occurs in tortuous pieces, 
6 inches long, and J inch thick, colour dark brick red or dark brown, 
and closely annulaied, breaking with a short fracture, cortex greyish: 
odour slight, but disagreeable, taste bitter. Dose, as an expectorant, 
J to 2 grs., as an emetic, 1 5 to 30 grs. 

Coftstitttents. — An active principle — an alkaloid, emetine, 1*3 p.c. 
cephaeline '6 p.c, Ipecacuanhic acid allied to catechin, saccharose, 
starch, fatty or oily matter, cholin, resin, pectin &c. 

Emetina — Emetine — Emetia — the commercial article is a mixture 
of alkaloids — pure emetine, cephaeline (both emetic) and another 
alkaloid. Pure emetine occurs in white amorphous powder, taste 
slightly bitter, sparingly soluble in water, soluble in alcohol, ether, 
benzin, chloroform and dilute acids, scarcely so in caustic alkalies. 
I^o*^» tU ^^ iV S^' **^" emetic ; ^ to j^ gr. of Ipecacuanha yields 2 p.c 
of crude emetine, Vinum Emetinae (1 gr. of hydrochloride 01 emetine in 
8 ozs. of sherry). Dose, ^ to 40 ms. Emetine has direct nauseant and 
emetic properties— used in pulmonary diseases, and biliousness. It 
rapidly darkens on exposure to light and air, and forms crystalline 
salts as the hydrochloride and hydiobromide. The salts of cephaeline 
are uncrystalluable. It occurs in crystals, white at first, becoming 
dark \-ellow by exposure, sparingly soluble in ether, soluble in caustic 
alkalies whicK distinguishes it from emetine. 

Cephalic or Ipecacuanhic acid — An amorphous, bitter glucoside, 
allied to cafiBeotannic acid* Occurs as brown powder, soluble in 
alcohol* 



PSYCHOTRIA IFECACUANHA, 



34 » 



Prf/>arations* — Of the root — Pulvis IpecacuanhaeCompositus, B.P. 
— Dover s powder — Tpecacuanhii i, opium i, and potassium sulphate 8, 
dose, 5 to 15 grs, Extractuiii Ipecacuanhae liquidum B.P. — Ipecacuanha 
percolated with alcohul» (hen mixed with calcium hydroxide and again 
percolated ; strength from 2 to 2*5 p.c. of the alkaloid. Dose as an 
expectorant, 4 to 2 ms. ; as an emetic, 1 5 to 20 ms. Trochiscus Ipeca- 
cuanh:^, B P., J gr, in each with fruit bases. Trochiscus morphinae et 
I; -ihx, B.P,, j\ gr, of Ipecacuanha and ^*^ gr, of morphine 

h\ -ride in each with tola basis. Pilula Ipecacuanhas cum scilla, 

B,P. (opium 5 p c ). Contains Dov^er's powder 3, squill i» ammoniacum 
I , syrup of glucose q,s. Dose, 4 to 8 grs. Syrup Ipecacuanhae aceticus, 
Vinegar of Ipecac, l pint, sugar 2| lbs. Dose, } to 2 drs. Acetum 
IpecacuanhcG B.P. (i in 20). Dose, 10 to 30 ms, Vinum Ipecacuanhae, 
B.P. (i in ao). Extract of Ipecacuanha i,to sherry 19. Dose, as an expec- 
toranti 10 to 30 ms. ; as an emetic* 4 to 6 fid. drs. Pulvis Ipecacuanhae 
sine Emetina, Ipecacuanha from which emetine has been extracted. 
Dose, 10 to 30 grs. Emetin, an extractive substance, soluble in water, 
has properties like the root ; must tjot be confounded with the alkaloid 
emetine* Dose, as an expectorant, y^ to ^ gn; as an emetic, ^ to 1 gr, 

Actions and wy^^,— ^Emetic, nauseant, diaphoretic, expectorant, 
sternutatory, laxative, cholagoguc, hemostatic, and vascular depressant; 
as an emetic it is not so depressant as tartar emetic, but more depressant 
than sulphate of rinc, mustard, 6t common salt ; it often acts as 
cathartic* In moderate doses it depresses the circulation and hence 
allied \o aconite and tartar eniettc. In small doiies, it is a diaphoictic 
and expectorant* As an emetic it is largely used, especially in sthenic 
cases to unload the stomach in the bet^innina of fever, and in indiges* 
lions and in croup and diphtheria ; in bronchitis, especially nf children, 
it promotes expulsion of fnucusfroni the bronchi. As a cardiac sedative 
it is largely used in fevers to reduce the pulse rate, and to produce 
gentle diaphoresis. In catarrh of the bronchi and lungs, pneumonia 
and phthisis, its stimulating effects on the mucous membrane arc well 
marked. Its principal value consists in its being almo» t a speciiic in 
dysentery. Large doses of Ipecacuanha, as much as 20 to 30 grs., or 
Ipecacuanha sine emetina, arc given. In order to prevent its being 
vomited, no liquid is allowed before or after the dose, and the dose is 
preceded by a morphia draught or morphia hypodermically injected* 
Oftentimes in such cases mustard plaster is applied to the pit of the 
stomach, a few minutes before Ipecacuanha is given* The dose may 
often be repeated 3 or 4 limes* 

Remarks.— The Goanese Ipecacuanha, the root of Naregamia 
alata, Nat. O. Mc1iace:e, bears similar properties to Ipecacuanha. 

Randia Dometorum, R Longispina Canthlam, Coronatam, 

Gardenia Dumetorum. 0, Spinosa. Poaoquerta Dumetornm, 

Ceriscna Malabarious. 

//"^diV/i/.— Throughout India, Gujerat, DchraDoon, Ceylon, Coim- 
baiorc. 

Parii Hsed.^-Xht fruit. 



342 RANDIA DUMETORUM. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Jouzel kowsul, Jouz-ul-kai. Beng., Bomb. 
— Gelaphala, Pieralu, Menphal. Can. — Mangire. Cing. — ^Wali, 
kukuru man. Duk. — Medaphala. Eng, — The emetic nut. Guz. — 
Mindhal. Hind. — Mainphal, Mayina, Pinda, Mindhla. Mar.— Gehela, 
Piralu. Punj. — Mindhal. Sans.— Madana. Tam. — Madu-karray, 
maruk arang. Tel. — Mangha, manda. 

Characters. — Fruit small, like J^ephala, globular or ovate, of a 
deep grey or reddish brown colour. At its base is a small disc-like 
stalk or rim of the calyx. Surface minutely and roughly wrinkled, and 
obtusely ribbed ; ribs varying from five to seven cells or cavities, two 
with thick woody walls, and covered with a yellowish grey, rather soft, 
and unctuous pulp. Within the cells are the seeds, small, hard, numerous, 
translucent, shining, and oblong, or rather kidney-shaped. Pulp is 
nauseous in taste, and the smell is similar to that of valerian. Dose of 
the pulp, IS to 20 grs. 

Constituents, — An active principle, saponin, valerianic acid, wax, 
resin and colouring matter. 

Preparations, — Infusion of seeds (i in ip). Dose, ^ to i fld. oz 
ethereal tincture (1 in 5). Dose, 15 to 60 ms. 

Actions and uses.— A good substitute for Ipecacuanha. The dry 
pulp is emetic, the thick shell and hard seeds are not emetic at all. 
The Native Hakims give the pulp in combination with aromatics 
in dysentery, fever (ague), headache, &c. It contains valerianic 
acid, hence the tincture is used as a nervine calmative and antispas- 
modic, in whooping cough and mania. The shell and seeds are cathartic 
and anthelmintic, and used to remove biliousness and worms in children. 
The fruit is used to procure abortion and as a fish poison like coculus. 
A paste of it is locally applied as a discutient to disperse swellings 
and abscesses. 

Remarks. — The Arabic name Jouzul-akai is also applied to nux 
vomica. 

Randia Uli^OBa, Posoqueria Uli^osa, Gardenia Uli^osa. 

Habitat. — Ceylon, India, in moist places. 

Parts used. — The unripe fruit. 

Vernacular. — Beng.— Chuvadi alu. Can. — Kare-pindalu. Guz. — 
Pinglu. Mar.— Pendhuri. — Hind. — Pedalu. Sans. — Pindhaluka- Tam. — 
Vagaia. Tel.— Guahu — Pedda-mranga ; Devota-malle ; Nalla-ika. 

Characters. — Flowers large, white, and fragrant, in 2 or 3, on the 
top of branchlets. Berry of tne size of an egg. ash coloured, or olive 
grey, 2-celled. Seeds flattish, adherent to the pulp fibres. Dose of the 
powdered fruit, 10 to 30 grs. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent, roasted in hot ashes they are used 
in diarrhoea and d}'seutery. 




RUBTA CORDrFO!JA, 



343 



Rabla CopdifoHa. R. Munjishtba, Heart leaved Madder, R* 
Tinctoria« R. Secunda. 

Habitat, — Hilly districts, S. Europe, Asia, Assam^ NepaK Sind, 
Siberia, and China, 

Parts wjr//.— The roots. 

Vfntaciilnr, — Arab. — Runas» Sabba-ghni. Beng. — Aruna, Manjith. 
Chin, — Si*tsau-ken.Can,^ — Manjushta, Guz. — Majith. Mar., Hind., Duk, 
— Manjtta. Eng.— Indian madder, Malyal. — Pooat, Pers,^ — Runis. 
Sans.— Kala Mashika* Tarn.— Manjithi, Shevelli. Teh— Manjishta, 
Mandastic, Tamravalli. 

Charucters. — The stem is square, rough, and covered with short 
prickles^ root creeping, short, with numerous cylindrical rootlets of the 
siie of quills, suber, brownish, and thin. Bark red brown, odour some- 
what aromatic, taste sweetish at first, then corky and acrid* Dose of 
the root, lo to 6ogrs. 

Cbw^/i/z/^w/j.— Resinous and extractive matter; gum, sugar, colour 
ing matter, and sahs of lime. The medicinal properties are due to 
resinous and extractive matters. The colouring matter consists of 
purpuriu, manjtstin, garancin, alizarin (orange red) and xanthine 
(yellow). 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in lo). Dose, f to i fld. oz. 

Actions and mes* — Alterative^ diuretic, emmenagoguc, and astrin- 
gent. In pharmacy it is used to colour liniments and ointment. The 
root is given in paralysis, dropsy, jaundice, amenorrhoea, and scanty 
lochia; extern.iily as an astringent it is locally applied to inflamed parts, 
swellings, ulcers, fractures, &c. Wrth honey it is applied to various 
disculorations nl the skin, as bruises, contusi^ons, pityriasis versicolor, 
leucodcrma and freckles. 

Spermaooce Hiapida, 8. Saabra. 

/^<;?3//fl/,'— Throughout India, 

Parts Ki^d^.— The plant. 

Vemacuiar* — Beng, — Madana-Banta-kadu. Eng. — Shaggy button- 
weed. Malyal, — ThartaveL Mar.— Ghanti*chi-b^ji, Dhoti, gondi. 
Sans.— Madanghanta. Tam.— Nutti choorie. TeL — Madana. 

Characters. — Herb scabrous, procumbent ; root fibrous ; leaves 
obovate, oblong, or elliptical with cartilaginous edges, and coriaceous; 
flowers small, blue or white, and in a whorl ; capsules, pubescent ; 
seeds oblong granulate and opaque. 

Preparations. — Decoction of the root (l in lo). Dose, i to l 8d» 
ozs. Confections of seeds. Do^e, ^ to I drs. 

Actions and USUI. — Alterative and tonic. The seeds arc cooling, 
iemulccnt and given in diarrhoea and dysentery. The root is alterative 

ind used like sarsaparUJa. 



344 NARDOSTACHYS JATABiANSI. 



Taagiitfia BfinouL, Meynia S^son. 

HahitaL — India . 

Farts used. — ^Thc fruit. 

Vtmacular. — ^Bombay — AIu. Beng. — ^Majoia. Can. — Maggare-gida. 
Hin<L — Pundrika, Pinditak, Bangaxiki-Iakri. Mar. — ChirchoH. 
Madandriksh. Sains. — Pinda, Pindilul^ Tarn. — Pedda-munga. TeL — 
Vadanike, Chega-gadda. 

Ckaractgrs. — Cymes of greenish flowers. Fruit a drupe, subglobose 
fleshy, and of the size of a cherry. Colour yellow when ripe. Odour 
terebinthinate. 

/Vi^Ai/wjw.— Decoction (i in 20). Dose, 2 to 6 drs. 

Actkns ami ms€S. — The fruit is rehigerant and cholagogue and used 
in biliary complaint with hepatic congestion. 



The jataminsi family. From valeo to be strong. In allusioo to 
the well marked medicinal properties and p^^werful smelL 

Herbs, leaves exsdoulate. opposite ; flowers, cymose. hermaphrodite 
or rarely unisexual. Fruit dry and indehiscent, frequently pappose. 
Seed pendulous, solitary, and ex-albuminous. 

Habitat — Native of temperate climates. 

l^rtip^ties. — Remarkable for the presence of a strong scented 
volatile oil. They are stimulant, tonic and antbpasmodic. 



Cdtiea (Sftidn qpica Gdtiea'. 

HaHUL — Alpine Himalaya* Asia. 
l\irts au^^ — ^The rhizome and oil. 

FmrftjLikltr. — Arab. — Ara-ttl-::be. >uTxb*il-aI-asp£re-hiade. Can. — 
Jata m;in»hi. Cing. — Jara mansi. Mar. Becig., Duk. — ^Jhata m-ina^i, 
bniilocan. Eng. — Musk rooc» Indian srikenari. Hizsd. — Jara masi. 
Kalsch.ftdj« sumbuL Rila chari. MalyaL — ^.feia zraixhi. Pers.. — Sombul- 
^-hindi. Bekh>i-sambal, Sins — Ta:a rr.ar.a-?i Bhoiake^C Pisitx. 
Tara^vini. Tam. — ^Jara mashi. TeL — JtCi Tr.nTshi 

Billi ls>tan \Duk^ \a sasre also i?cL*i :^ Acayrha Irkixa) means 
cat"* strugjc^* car » sure* -sec r.^ be voi :t :b^ pCxnc- Bh^rakesi Bhut. 
aJerooQ. aad kea. hair — iev-:> hi.r — fr-zi :be ^SiT'-isa 5Crjc§ 
m3kQ ot the rocckts whtch are I:ke hx:-. 

Cixr-A"jen* — Rhir^cein >hcr: rc^^"*^ arcci :>-e i?r.?ck!^5ss c? fcose 
q::tlA. oc a cark f^y ccJccr arc ?*^m Jwz:ec bv j. r,LZsiIe cf reciish 
livwa ibnes : ooccr heavy ard recvilia.r '.k;e i!ri: re rli^icul . rfece 
Ntter aod an^outSc l^rse. 1 5 : : 4.5 £•>«. 

Cimsi£ssbimSf^ — A vcitifjc cC oC*;:i=r -arirsar^jc^ -«£r. scuxr. starch 
better eisaAititic oskdcf, sad gss. 



V'^ALRRIANA OFKICTNALIS. 



345 



f^t/tarattons. — ^The oil. Dose, 2 to 6 ms. Tincture (i in 8). 
Dose, J to 2 fld. drs. Medicated oil. 

Actions (ind uses. — Same as those of valerian • In nervous 
disorders it is combined with asafetida ; in chlorosis with iron and 
strychnine ; taken habitually in small doses, it improves the appetite 
and digestion without confining the bowels, As an cmmenagogue 
it is very useful in amenorrho^a and dysmenorrhoea ; also used in 
cerebral ansemia, vertigo, or fainting, &c. 

Valeriana Officlnalla, B. P. 

Hahttat, — Europe, N. Asia, Sind, Burmah, Ceylon, New 
England, Vermont. 

Pttrts used, — The dried erect rhizome and roots. 

Vfrnmuiar. — Arab, — Sumbul-ul-asfar. Duk, — V^ilayeti jhata 
manasi, Eng. — True valerian. Hind. — Sugandha biU chhara* Pers, 
Sumbul-ul-tib. Sans. — Bdia Hrivera. 

( ^:f.— A large herbaceous plant, with small while rose- 

C0I0U1 ' 1% rhiiomc^hort, erect, dark or yellowish brown external- 

ly and whitish or yellowish internaJly. Roots numerous, slender and 
brittle ; colour same as that of the ihizome, odour aromatic and musk- 
like ; taste camphoraceous or somewhat pungent* Dose, 5 to 30 grs. 

ConsHtuettts. — A volatile oil 2 p-c^ valerianic acid, formic, acetic 
and malic acids, chatininc, tannin, starch, sugar, resin, gum and 
extractive. 

Oleum Valerianae — A volatile oil obtained by distilling the root 
with water. A pale green liquid, of a pungent, valerian-ltkc odour, and 
of an aromatic tasu and aciii reaction^ suluhle in alcohoK On exposure, it 
becomes vij^cid and yellow. By oxidation is developed valcrene, vaJeroi 
or baldrian camphor and valerianic acid. Dose, 2 to 5 ms. 

Valerianic acid,^ — An oxidation product. The volatile oil on expo- 
sure to the air becomes oxidized and converted into valerianic acid. 
It is also obtained as a product of oxid^ttion of amylic alcohol with 
sulphuric acid. It is an oily liquid, of a characteristic and sweet t;iste ; 
used in preparing various valerianate."!, as v-ilerianates of iron, zinc, 
ammonium and quinine. It also occurs in many other plants, and in 
cod liver oil. 

Preparutinns. — Of valerianic acid — Validol— a combination of 
valerianic acid and menthol, a clear viscid liquid. Dose, 10 to 15 ms, 

Iheparattons^ — Of valerian — Extractum Valerianae fluidum. Dose, 
10 to 30 ms. Infusion. Dose, 1 to 2 ounces, Tinctura Valerianae 
(l in 8). Dose, ^to i drs. Tinctura Valerianae ammoniata, 0, P*(l in 5). 
Dose, \ to I fld. dr. Zinci valcrianas. Dose, i to 3 grs. 

Actmns arid ust^, — General stimulant, anudytJe, hypnotic, anti- 
spasmodic, vermifuge and diaphoretic. It often stimulates sexual 
powers. As a sedative to reHcx excitability, its action is opposed to 
that of btucine, thebainc, and strychnine. In full doses it stimulates 
the heart, raises the temperature, and produces exhilaration of spirits 



34^ VALERIANA WALLICHII. 

If long continued it leads to melancholia. In very large doses it is a 
powerful irritant of the brain and of the gastro-intestinal tract, leading 
to nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, frequent passage of urine containing 
lithates. The oil paralyses the brain and the spinal cord, lowers the 
blood pressure and slows the pulse. Valerian is used in epilepsy, 
hysteria, hemicrania, nervous cough and hiccough. As a tonic it is 
given in fevers and low states of the system ; also given in whooping 
cough, diabetes, dysmenorrhoea, convulsions, worms and flatulence in 
children. In the coma of typhus fever the oil is very efficient. As 
an antispasmodic it is inferior to asafetida. 

Validol is used in asthma, hysteria, and as a preventive against sea- 
sickness. As a stimulant, antispasmodic, anodyne it surpasses valerian 
in energy and rapidity of action, and besides it has anaesthetic properties. 
As an hypnotic it produces sleep like morphia, and chloral hydrate 5 
minims are sufficient to produce tranquil sleep without any depressing 
action on the heart. It has been found very serviciable in biliary 
colic. 

Valeriana Walliohii, V. Hardwiokii, V. Brononiana. 

Habitat. — Temperate Himalaya. 

Parts used. — The rhizome. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Sumbul-jibali, Asaruma. Beng. — Taggera 
ganthoda. Bhutan. — Pimpe. Can. — Naudibattal. Hind. — Bila 
Taggar, Chhar ganthona, mushkwali. Ind. — Asarun. Panj. — Mushk- 
i-wali, vala, Bala. Pers. — Rishaiwala. Sans. — Pindi-tagara, Nandy& 
varta, Nandini, Varhini. Nahushakhya. 

Characters. — A fragrant herb, rhizomes short, knotty and about I 
to i^ inches long, diameter varying from that of a quill to that of a 
little finger, colour dark brown, surface highly wrinkled, and here and 
there marked with transverse ridges and prominent tubercles, or scars 
of fallen leaf-sheaths; lower end blunt, very hard and tough; upper end 
broad with traces of long stripe-like leaves ; odour, aromatic and 
pungent, resembling that of officinal valerian, but much more 
powerful; taste camphoraceous. 

Constituents, — The root contains volatile oil, tannin, glucose 
resin, albuminoids, starch, &c. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 20). Dose, J to i fl. oz. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant, nervine tonic, antispasmodic and 
sedative ; used in hysteria, headache, epilepsy, chorea ; also in suppres- 
sion of urine. As a stimulant it is given in advanced stages of fever, &c. 

Composite or Asteracese. The Thistle or the Sevati family. 

Shrubs or herbs, rarely trees, forming almost the tenth part of the 
described vegetable kingdom ; leaves opposite, alternate, and exstipulate, 
simple or lobed; flowers variegated, hermaphrodite, unisexual or neuter, 
and arranged in capitula ; fruits achene, dry and indehiscent, one- 
celled ; seeds solitary, erect, and ex-albuminous. 



ACHILLEA MILLEFOLIUM. 347 

Habitat. — Universally distributed, abundant in hot climates. 

Properties. — Many are bitter and tonic; some purgative and 
anthelmintic; others stimulant and narcotic; some contain volatile oil 
and are diaphoretic, aromatic and carminative. 

Achillea Millefoliam, A. Mo8ohata» A. SantoUna. 

Habitat. — W. Himalaj^a^ N. America, 

Parts useti.'^The flowering tops and leaves. 

Vernaculars. — Bomb. — Roja mari, Eng.— Nose-bleed, yarrow. 
Egypt. — Barbara. Indian. Bazars. — Riranjasif. Panj. — Rui-Madaran, 
Momadra, Capendiga. Pers. — Bui-e-Madar;\n. 

Characters, — Perennial herb, stems hairy and furrowed ; leaves alter- 
nate. soft, hairy, linear, dentate, lanceolate; globular beneath; and nine 
to twelve inches long, segments toothed and of a dark green colour. 
Flowers white and corymbose Fruit achene, odour feeble, aromatic, 
like that of chamomile. Taste bitterish, saline and aromatic. 

Cottstituents. — Yarrow yields on distillation, a dark green coloured, 
butyraceous volatile oil, a bitter extractive — achillein, hIso resin, 
tannin, gum, and various salts as malatcs, nitratcn. phosphates and 
chlorides of potassium and calcium, and ash, 15 to 18 p.c. 

Achillea Moschata contains a volatile oil known as Jvaol. of a 
refreshing odour and mint-like taste ; it also contains ivain, achillcine, 
achilletine and moschatine. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, i to 2 fld. ozs. Volatile 
oil. Dose, 10 to 20. Decoction (i in 20), Dose. 1 to 2 fld. o/s. 

Actions and uses. — Medicated vapour bath containing yarrow, 
lavender flowers, wheat bran, and milk is used in nasal catarrh and fever. 
It has a specific action on the pelvic organs and used in amenorrhfca, 
menorrhagia, and Icucorrha-a. As a bitter tonic it is given during 
convalescence from fevers, and in atonic dyspepsia to promote appetite. 
Its chief use is in relaxation of the sphinctor ani with discharge of 
mucns or blood during defecation. The infusion is applied to relaxed 
throat and sore nipples with benefit. 

ABthemift HobOit, B.P^ llatrieaiia Chanumillku 

Habitat. — Europe, N. India, Persia, W. Asia, and Australia. 

Part^ used, — The dried expanded flower heads, Anthem idis florcs, 
chamomile flowers, B. P., and oil, oleum anthemidis, B. P. 

Vernacular.^ Xx'kh — TufFah -ul-arz, Shajrat-el-kafur, BahiinAj 
(flower). Chin, — Kau-kiuh-hwa. Can. — Shime-Shy^-Mantijje 

Eng. — True Chamomile. German Chamomile (matricaria). Guz., 
\far.. Hind. — Babund. Maiyal. — Shima-Jevcnti. Pers. — Babi^nah. 
Tam. — Chiiman duppu, Tel. — Sima — chamanri push pamu. 

Shajrat-ei-kat'ur. Shajrat, plant, and Kafur, camphor. The ''cam- 
phor plant,'* the odour of its flowers being like that of camphor. 



3#^ jtarcsBxs^ iudsoijs^ 

QmrmOesn^ — Aa jannoLl jussl Tht tna^ irmmuia yiecgi rfatqo 

fitnwrt &aimgxbtenau. bdcsII, Trinii:, or iKarhr vini* in cciioxxr^ broad and 
iaterjw - ixxvuttxcrt vii r cir 5 ri^wt zf imkzmg araca and obmse scalar 
^1-21^ a xntTistraDCiw Toazg^ sue i: LrvmcaQ and fioHd TcoepgJcV, 
iiu]Q:>w is xcxmsaraL Fjoreii^ hgp'taK- anc atinLCs of stroi^ jcrcniiatic 

CiMEst^!aE€«^. — ^A Tolank: c£: 3 jui^ axcfbtanexic, arnt^fgnk arid, a 

OxasBGomk; cal. ct^nm *Tv»^*«*wT \rK«> £. P. Tlit xiilaxile cil is a 
d&cnk Hof:, u£ii« irsmspicrf-ixu ibkikifjih li^idd. In* tt«ygrg Iracaniit g 
jE7t«SD and brcnro, c<f 21 fiiTciiig ascazx and varm. arcimatic taste. 
PoDSJom aslhtaiKjiL Dqul } to 5 ics. JLdiIkudc^ — lo ohtaxn it 
ci'fiaim fihaTciQiPDak: fio^verf arxni iion arBtir arad... iaiimrm laif, and 
j/mapaSMie iht prK^dzxcn wjah a]cc«bcu ssiZ crapome — occm as 



cnittaK ix&cilBlxfe is alcchdL tshw, d^drctionzu scihaii^ is aoBtic mad, 
TI)« ime dxasioimle ooQ caoudiKs Taraoa^ erhcy% as ii>e az^«^es and 
raVerianaus of bmrl- Doie, r ms. cm sxtgar. 

PrefmrmtKon. — I nfu t aunB arnhfTTridis <^i in 3c). Dcse^ i to 4 fid. 
oziu Ejmacnan autbcnddis. B-P. Dcse, r 10 !^ grs. Ti3ictiiTa amlie- 
xoiis (] is 2^ Dose, 3 to lo ms. 

PIntifjhipcal acti^m^ — S:onnafhir ionic, carnnsaiiTe, emmesiagogiie 
and aDtipmodic. As a siimnlasi of tbe g^uic ssscons locmbnne, 
2t increases tbe appelate and aids digestico. 

Therapeutics. — It is given is fiatokzii colSc, drsf^epsia, dilorosis, 
amenoniMca asd during convakscesce frc^na acute febrile and dhcr 
dihcasc^ The varm infosjOG causes Txmiting. hence it is given in colic, 
biliary derangements, periodic headache and to ocnfermed dnmiiards 
and hearj ginttc^is. ThecoM infasion is a stomachic tooic and given in 
indigestioo, flatolenoe, and summer diarrhonu As an antiperiodic it is 
given in malarious fe%*crs. Fomentation of chamomile iiowers is a very 
soothing application to rdeve local co-icky pains. The oil is a stimu- 
lant and antispasmodic and is given internally to rdiere reflex 
coagfa, pulmonary caurrh. diarrhoea of children, spasmodic asthma, 
and whooping cough ; also in d\^meix>rTho» and in hysteria. W*ith 
other stimulating liniments it is applied over sprains and rheumatic 
afiections. 

Anaejdvs Pjrntinm, B. P. 

Pyrethrum from p}TOs, fire. The roots having fiery spicy taste. 

Habitat. — N. Africa, .Algeria, and Europe. 

Parts mud. — The dried root, Pyrethri Radix^ B.P. Pyrethrum root 
or Peilitory. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — .Akara-Karhi, ud-el Karih-Jibbali- Hind. 
Guz., Mar., Duk., Beng. — Akalkara. Bcm. — Mitho Akalararo. Burm. 
— Kukaiji or Kulayi. Can. — Akkalakare. Eng. — Spanish peilitory, 



ANACYCLUS PYRETHRUM. 



349 



Indian fever root. Spanish Chammonile* MalyaL — Akke Karuka, 
Pers.— Akar-Karah. Sans.— Akara-Karabha. Tarn .—Akkira-Karam, 
TeK — Akala-Karra. 

Characters* — The root resembles the narrow end of sambarasinga. 
It is long, compact, tapering at both extremities. The crown of the 
root is covered with a tuft of hairs ; also shrivelled and marked with a 
few scars of fallen rootlets ; surface smooth and marked with longi- 
tudinal, or irregular furrows ; colour light brown ; on section homo- 
geneous and pithy in the centre where the colour is whitish. The taste 
is rather sweet at first and then becomes hot. acrid or pungent, acridity 
depending on a fixed acrid oleo resin, deposited in vesicles in the bark. 
It produces a glowing heat in the mouth» followed by a tingling and 
pncking sensation on the tongue and lips. Dose, 30 to 60 grs. as a 
masticatory. 

Constituents, — Pyrethrin— -an acrid brown resin, Pyrethrinc 5 px, 
«^am alkaloid, 2 fixed oils, inultn 50 p,c., gum, salts, a trace of tatinin, 

Prrpara(mns*—V^eQOQim\\ Pyrethri (1 in lo). Dose, 2 to 4 fid, 
drs. Tinctura Pyrethri B. P, (tins). Dose, ^ to 1 dr, Confectio 
Pyrelhri, ** Akara Kara-bhadi churana " — contains akalkaro^ kesara, 
jaeplial, lavang, rakta chandan, each 2 drs., afim, i dr„ dhaturii- 
na bij i dr., mix, add siikar 6 drs. Dose, 6 grs. As ati aphrodisiac. 

f^ysiologicai action, — Stimulant, rubefacienti irritant and siala- 
gogue ; locally rubefacient. When chewed it at first irritates or 
stimulates the nerves and vessels of the mouth, salivary and buccal 

5 lands and then deadens and blunts their sensibility. In small 
o&es it is stimulant and cordial. As a maslicatary sialagogue it 
produces pricking sensation in the tongue, with heat, pungency and 
copious flow of saliva, cuubtriclion in the fauces and increased buccal 
mucus. In large du^es it is an irritant of the mucous membrane of 
the intestines, causing bloody stools, tetanoid spasms and profound 
stupor. The pulse becomes accelerated* 

Therapeutics, — The infusion is given with lesser galangal and 
ginger in low states of the system with drowsiness and lethargy. The 
tincture is given in neuralgic head ache, toothache due to caries, in 
paralysis of the tongue and in neuralgia of the face ; as a local 
aojcsthetic gargle or lotion or a mouth wash it is used in sore throat, 
relaxed uvula, aphonia, &c. Aa a sternutatory, the powder is inhaled in 
chronic catarrh u\ the frontal sinuses. The confection is given in im* 
potence and in chronic seminal weakness. As a sialagogue it is an 
etTicient remedy in chronic iodine poisoning where it secures a prompt 
and rapid elimination. 

Pyrelhrum Roseum — P. Carneum* Persian Pellitory — Persian 
sweet powder. The plant resembles chamomile and is found in 
Western Asia and Persia, The powder of flower heads is used 
for kilimg insecu, 4 grs. is sufficient to kill one fly. 



350 ARNICA MONTANA. 

Arotinm Lappa, L. Major, L. Minor, L. Tomentosa, 
Lappa offloinalis. 

Grass Burdock, Lappa clotbur. 

Habitat, — Europe, N. Asia, and United States, Temperate Zone. 

Parts used, — The fruit, root and seeds. 

Characters, — It is a biennial weed common on road-sides and 
waste places. The root is about twelve inches or more long and about 
one inch thick, nearly simple, fusiform, fleshy, longitudinally wrinkled 
and crowned with a tuft of whitish soft, hairy leaf stalks, of a grey brown 
colour, bark rather thick ; inner part and soft wood radically striated, 
parenchyma studded with cavities, and lined with snow-white remains 
of fibrous tissues ; odour feeble, and unpleasant, taste mucilaginous, 
sweetish and somewhat bitter ; seeds angular, obovate, slightly curved, 
flattened and brown grey mottled with black. Dose of the root, 20 to 
60 grs. 

Constituents, — The root contains inunlin, a trace of volatile oil, 
bitter extractive, sugar, resin, fat 9 p.c. tannin, glucoside and ash 4 p.c. 
The seeds contain oil, resins and lappin. 

Preparations, — Of the root. Extractum Lappae Fluidum. Dose, 
J to I fld. dr. Decoctum Lappa (1 in 20). Dose, i to 2 fld. ozs. 
of the seed. Tinctura Lappa (10 p.c.) Dose, i to 2 fld. drs. before 
meals. 

Actions and uses, — Alterative, aperient, diuretic and diaphoretic; 
used in scrofula, constitutional syphilis, skin diseases as psoriasis, 
scurvy and in copious urinary deposits ; also pulmonary catarrh, 
gout and rheumatism ; externally the decoction is uselul for baldness, 
haemorrhoids and chronic sores. 

Amioa Montana, B. P. 

Mountain arnica, mountain tobacco, leopard's bane, accident 
plant. Accident plant from its use in cases of sprains, contusions, con- 
cussions due to accidents. 

/^tf^i/tf/.— Indigenous to European Mountains, Germany, Siberia, 
Switzerland, Alps, Missouri, Columbia. 

Parts used, — Flower heads — Arnicae Flores; and the dried Rhizome 
and roots, Arnicae Rhizoma, B. P. 

Characters, — Perennial plant, flowers large, orange yellow and 
broad, involucre in two rows, receptacle, flat and hairy, odour 
aromatic. Taste pungent and bitter. Rhizome with several rootlets 
thick, brown, curved and wrinkled, rough from the scars of leaflets ; 
dark brown, externally and whitish internally ; bark thick containing 
a circle of resin-cells, and a large spongy pith. Rootlets thin, not 
numerous ; odour aromatic, taste acrid and bitter, distinguished from 
valerian by its smell ; from serpentaria from the latter having many 
contorted rootlets ; from Veratrum, from thick rootlets. Dose — 
Flowers, 5 to 20 grs. Rhizome, 2 to 20 grs. 



ARKKA MONTANA 



351 



O-.r: ■ — The flowers contain Arnicin — a glucoside, 

Irimeth, an ammoniacal alkaloid and the active principle, 

volatile oil, rtsins, and salt?.. The rhizome contains in addition 
capronic and caprylic acids* Inulin lo p.c, tannin, an essential oil, 
and mucilage. Arnicin. To obtain it — pass the tincture through anitnal 
charcoal and evaporate. Add clher to the residue which dissolves, 
arnicin and fat ; shake with alcohol to dissolve arnicin. It occurs as 
ycflow amorphous miss ; of an acrid taste, soluble in alcohol, ether 
and alkalies, very sparingly so in water. 

/V^/^m/ib«5.^Tinctura arnicse florura ii in 5). Dose^ 5 to 30 ms. 
Infasum arnicx florum (i in 5). Dose, \ to 1 tid. 02. 
Best for local use as it does not excite dermatites. It is free from 
the volatile oil and from arnicin. Tinctura Arnica; Radicis B. P. (1 in 
20), DoAc, i 10 ] fld, drs. Extractum Arnicse. Dose, \ to 3 grs. Emplas- 
trum Arnicas Radicis, 33 p.c. of the root to 67 p*c. of lead plaster. 

Phystohgical action, — Gastric and intestinal irritant, cardiac 
stimula'nti antipyretic, and sternutatory ; also diuretic and 
emmenagogue. In small doses taken internally it stimulates the 
heart beat and raises the arterial tension* In large doses it at first 
stimulates but soon depresses the circulation, respiration and the 
nerve centres ; it gives rise to headache, convulsions and even 
unconsciousne^, paralysis of motion, with dilataiion of the pupils, It 
often leads to collapse and death. 

77ufa/>ftJitcs, — As an antipyictic u is used in typliu% and typhoid 
fevers, also given in concussion nf the brain, in chronic catarrh, and in 
internal haemorrhages as epistaxiiSj liactnoptysis, &c., as a diuretic it is 
given in gout» rheumatism and dropsy. As an ernmenagogue it is 
given in amcnorrha^a and chlorisis ; also tor internal bi uisc«^, in chronic 
diarrhciea, dysentery and in paralysis of the bladder* Locally its 
infusion is applied to sprains, contusions, cchymosis, kc. The solu- 
tion is used to promote union of cut surfaces. 

JlrtemUla Jlbstnihium, &. Vulgaris, A. Indioa, A. Grata. 

Uabtttit. — Waste places on chalky soiU, Nepal, China, Japan. 
Indigenous in Europe, Asia and mountainous districts of India, 
cultivated in the United States. 

Parts usttL — The dried herb, leaves and flowering tops. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Afsantin-e-hindi, Kashus-Rumi. Duk.,Guz., 
eng — Mastaru, Nagdoni. Can,— Utuvalu, Urigatlige j Machi patri, 
ig. — Walko-gundo. Eng* — Wormwood, Mugwort (A. Vulgaris). 
Hind. — Machiparna Guud-mar mastaru, Duna murwa* Mal^ — Tiru- 
oitri-pachcha^ Mar» — Surpana. Pers. — Barunji^sif-i-kohi, Artemas^saya, 
Sans.— (ndhana. Tarn. — ^Machi pattiri. leh — Tartiha, Moshe*patre* 

ChtiracUrs, — Bundles of the dried herbs of a brownish white or 
ash colour, of a s-ilky touch, leaves tnfitl, or simple, pinnatifid, and 
tomentose on the under surface ; flower heads small yellow in racemef*, 
hoary and ashy on their under surface, pannicled» and ovate; smell 



352 ARTEMISIA MARITIMA. 

agreeable and aromatic, due to the volatile oil it contains, taste bitter. 
Dose of the herb, 15 to 30 grs. 

Constituents, — Volatile oil, a bitter extractive matter — absinthin ; 
tannin, resin, succinic acid, matates and nitrates of potassium &c., 
and ash 7 p.c. The volatile oil is obtained by distillation. 
It is a dark green liquid of a strong carophoraceous odour and 
aromatic taste. It contains Thujone or absinthol, terpenes 2 p.c, and 
a deep blue oil. Absinthin — to obtain it precipitate the infusion with 
tannin. It is an intensely bitter white or yellowish brown amorphous 
glucoside, soluble in alcohol, chloroform, slightly so in ether, insoluble 
in water. The odour is camphoraceous. 

Preparaitotts. — Extract. Dose, i to 4 grs. Oil. Dose, i to 3 ms. ; 
Tincture (i in 8). Dose, ^ to 2 fid. drs. Infusion (i in 10). Dose, 
^to 1 fid. oz. Vinum Aromaticum absintheum (i p.c.) or absinthe, a 
French liquor — It is an alcoholic solution of the oil containing marjoram, 
angelica, anise, etc. 

Actions and uses. — The oil is a narcotic poison if long used. It 
stimulates the heart and the brain, gives use to tremors, stupor, 
epileptic-form convulsions, stertor, involuntary passage of urine 
and fiaeces, &c. It irritates the stomach and gives rise to morning 
nausea and vomiting. As a local sedative the herb steeped in hot 
vinegar is used as fomentation to the head in cephalalgia, to the 
joints in gout or rheumatism, and over painful sprains and bruises. 
Absinthium is a bitter, stomachic tonic ; it increases appetite 
and promotes digestion ; given in dyspepsia ; as a febrifuge, it is 
inferior to clerodendron inerme. It is also given in hysteria, in 
spasmodic affections as epilepsy, in nervous irritability and in nervous 
depression; also in mental exhaustion. As an enema its infusion is 
used as an anthelmintic. 

Remarks, — A, Sieversiana differs from Artemisia Indica in its 
odour, which is more aromatic and camphoraceous, and its flowers 
more ashy and tomentose. 

Artemisia Maritima Tar. Steohmanniana, B.P., A. Santonioa, 

A. Pauoiflora. 

Habitat. — N. Turkestan, Khurdistan, Plains of Kirghiz, Asia 
Minor. 

Parts used, — The dried unexpanded flowering heads and young 
branches (Santonica). 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Shih, sariphima, afsant-el-bahara. Eng.— 
Levant worm seed. Mar., Guz, — Kira-mani-ova, Kir-mani-ajmo. 
Hind. — Kirmali. Pers. — Darmanah. Sans. — Juviiniya, Gadadhara. 

Characters. — A small perennial plant, flowers oblong, ovoid, obtuse, 
smooth, glossy, greyish green, on exposure becoming light brown, yel- 
low or brown, consisting of closely imbricated involucre 12 or 18 glan- 
dular scales with broad midrib, very small, elliptical, numerous florets 



ARTEMISIA 



(TA. 



353 



buds, flowering axils and pieces of very slender stems covered with a 
white down ; smell ;igreeable and aromatic, taste bitterish and mint- 
Uke. Dose, i; to 60 grs. 

Cntistitufftts. — ^V^olatile oil 2 p.c, (of a peculiar smell and tastei ; a 
crystalline substance santoninum, or santonin 2 p.c* ; resin, sugar, fat, 
and salts of lime. 

Santoninum, santonin, B.P., a neutral principle ; to obtain it 
|i|{est flower heads in alcohol and sUked lime^ evaporate, then atld 
^acetic acid when santouine will be separated. Met with in white shining 
crystals or prisms, odourless, of bitter after-taste, neutral reaction, 
becoming yellow on exposure to the air and light. Scarcely soluble in 
cold water, sparingly so in boiling water (i in 250), soluble in 
chloroform (i in 4), in cold alcohol (i in 40), ether (i in 140) and in 
bolting alcohol (1 in 3) freely so in solution of caustic alkalies, DosCi 
a to 5 grst 

Preparaiiom, — Infusion (1 in 20) of flowering heads. Dose, I to 
2 fld* ozs, Trochlscus santonin, B.P, (1 gr. in each), 

PhYsioh^kitl rtr//>;m.— ''I'aken internally it passes into the blood 
as sodium santonruate, and alTects the ^i^ht, objects appearing bluet 
green, red, and lastly yellow. It renders the urine Jf acid, ofagrcen 
yellow colour, and if alkaline, reddish purple. It aho produces cneurests. 
If long continued it may lead to blindnt'ss. In large and poisonous 
doses it acts upon the brain, heart and rcHpiratiun, disturbs consci- 
ousness* produces intoxication, tremors, cold surface, cold sweats, feeble 
pulse, slow respiration, vomiting, convulsions and death by asphyxia* 

Therapeutics, — The itrlusion is given in flatulence, amenorrhrra and 
dyspepsia ; locally a poultice of the flower buds is used to relieve pain 
from the bites of scorpions and other venomous reptiles, Santonine^ — the 
active principle does not kill worms, but its presence being distasteful to 
them, u causes ihem tolly away from their resting place and lodge 
in the large inieslines from which they are dislodged by a purgative 
such as calomel or castor oil the next morning. It may be used 
as suppository against round worms, but it has no enect against 
tape worms ; often given for nodurnaJ incontinence of urine 
with bene^t. It should not be given to children during fever, Dor 
in constipation* 

AFtemisia Sieversiana. 

The fresh herb is used in Persia, and is cultivated in Bandora, 
near Bombay. The PorttJguese know it by the name of Ajtarona. 
Stem erect, suffrulicose. Leaves ashy, tomentose beneath, lower ones 
pinnatifid, upper trifid. Heads of flowers racemose, pannicled* Dose^ 15 
to 60 grs. It contains absenihatc of pota:»h, a bitter substance, and a 
green volatile oil ; used as an infusion (1 m 20), Dose, 2 to 6 drs. The 
herb is a tonic, stimulant, febrifuge, and anthelmiirtic — locally it is 
an antiseptic and discutient. It is given in jaundice, dropsy, gout and 
hysteria. 

Artemisia Frigida. 

Mountain sage, found in Western United States. Used as the 
powdered herb, dose, i to 2 drs, ; and fluid extract, dose, I tea drs. 



354 BLUMEA BALSAMIFERAa 

Actiom afid tises. — A new substitute for quinine. It produces no 
head symptoms, such as ringing in the ears, deafness and temporary 
delirium. Given in rheumatism, sciatica, neuralgia and general 
malaise. In rheumatism, scarlet fever, diphtheria, &c., it is given hot 
until perspiration and urination are established. 

Artemisia Steraatatoria, A. Pkannioa, Gentipeda orbaoolavis. 

HahitaL — Plains of India, Ceylon. 

Parts used. — ^The plant. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Afkar. Beng. — Naka chhikani. Enjj,— 
Sneeze-wort. Guz. — Chhikani. Hind. — Naka chhikani. Ind. — 
Hachitte. Mah. — Naka chinkani. 

Characters. — The drug consists of broken pieces of stems or 
stalks of a light ash or brown colour, furr-owed and woody ; of pieces of 
numerous wedge-shaped leaves which are sessile, dentate and villous, 
and of flower heads which are hermaphrodite, small, roundish, of a 
yellow colour, and surrounded by oval bracts. The odour is pungent, 
taste acrid, and bitterish. 

/V^um/ibiw.— Compound powder, known as Nak-chhikni, contain- 
ingN&k chhikni 2, Arithi-Chhala 2, Navsagar, Tambakhu, saphed miri, 
kadavi turai, and kali chuno, each one part — mix and make a powder. 

Actions and uses. — Its powder is used as a sternutatory in headache, 
cold in the head, giddiness, hemicrania &c. 

Blomea Balsamifara, B. Densiflora, Conyza BalsamifiNrat, Conyia 
Odorata, Baooharis Salma. 

Z^tf^tto/.— Tropical Himala3ray Burma, Eastern Peninsula, Fiji 
Islands, Ceylon, and Moluccas. 

Parts used. — The plant. 

FirriuicKAir.— Beng. — Kuksungh. Burm. — Pungmatheing. Chin. 
Ngai. Cochin China. — Kaidaibi. Hind. — Kukronda. Java. — Sum- 
bun. Malay. — Bonga chappa. Sans. — Kukundara Kukkura-dni. 
Kukkuradru — meaning dog's bush. 

Characters. — Shrubby plant, branches erect, covered with coloured 
bark ; leaves alternate, short petioled, lanceolate, serrate and pinnati- 
fid, downy beneath ; flowers, small and yellow, odour like that of worm- 
wood and camphor, taste pungent. Dose, of the powdered leaves, 
I tea drs. 

CoHstitutnts. — A volatile oil having the odour of wormwood, and 
a camphor, called Ngai camphor, similar to Borneo camphor. 

P^parations. — Infusion of the plant (1 in 10). Dose, i to i fld. 
oa« A compound decoction ^i in 10} containing Blumea Bdisamifera, 
Vitex Negundo^ Careya aiborca, citrus acida, ot each one part. Dose 
I to a oxs. 



BLUMRA RRfANTHA. 



3SS 



Ac/ions and //jii-f.-- Diaphoretic, expectorant, anthelmintic and 
astringent, A compound decoction h given in fevers and catarrhal aflTec* 
tions ; also in dysentery, diarrhoea, chronic uterine^ and other dischargesi 
leucorrhcBa, menorrhagia, 8tc. It is used in thread worms and tinea 
tarsi* As a deobsiruent and resolvent it is used in Bengal in disease 
of the nose known as ahwah. The oil is highly esteemed as a remedy 
for renal dropsy. In coryza the powder of the leaves is used as snuff, 
and also given internally as a stomachic and antispasmodic in colic, 
hysteria, &c. The camphor is used for the same purposes as ol^cinil 
camphor. 

Blatnea Eriantha, B. Laoera, Lag|6ra Aurita, B. Aurila* 

Habitat, — Western and Southern India, Ceylon* 

I\irts used* — The plant. 

Vernacular — Arab. — Kami phitus. Burm. — Mai-ya-giu* Duk, 
— Devari Muli, Jangli kasni. Guz. — Chancharman, Kalar. Hind. — 
Kakrunda. Mar. — Nimurdo, Bhamburdi. Tarn. — K4ttu Mullangi, 
Niirak Karan-doi. TeL — Kiru-pdgaku» Adavl Mullangi, 

Chanchermari — Chmichar^ a flea, and mari, to kilL in allusion 
to its property of killing fleas. Bhiimbhurdtt and Chancharmuri are 
names indiscriminately applied to all Blumcas. Divarimuli, from 
Divar or Dival, a w all, and muli, the root, in allusion to the root 
or the plant being generally found near the walls of ruinous buildings 
or in graveyards. Adavi Niallangi — Adavi, small, and Mullan, a radish 
— a small radish, in allusion to the resemblance of its leaves and root 
to a small radish, Jungli muli — Jungli, wild, and muli, radish. 

Characters, — ^The plant is remarkable for the clusters of globose 
and woolly buds near the crown of the root. Flowers yellow, odour 
thai of carraways. 

Cfinstiiuenis, — Rei-in, volatile oil, tannin, malic acid, and a crystal- 
line principle allied to quercitrin. and ash H 3 p.c, of brown colour^ and 
containing a trace of manganese and iron. 

Pte^aratifjHs, — Infusion (i in. 10). Dose, ^ to 1 lid. ou The herb 
is used to drive away fleas. 

Actiofis and uses. — The juice is carminative, diaphoretic, diuretic 
and emmenagogue ; given in catarrhal affections, fevers, amenorrhcea. 
[ leucorrhcea, &c. The herb with the leaves of Vitex Nugunds and Careya 
Irborea is used for fomentations. 

Calendula OflSoinalis* 

Syn* — Garden Marigold, Marybud Calendula. 

Habitat. — S. Europe, cultivated everywhere. 

Parts used. — The floreU and fresh leaves* 

Characters. — The florets are wide, linear, strap-shaped, j-toothed, 
E>f an orange yellow colour, and of a slight heavy odour and a bitter 
liBe taste. Dose, 15 to 60 grs. 



356 CARTHAMUS TICTORnTS. 

Comhtunts. — A volatile oil, bitter amoiphons pruKiple 
calendulin, sugar, gam. Calendulin is a gnrnmy principle allied to 
Bassorin. It is yellow and tasteless, soluble in alcohol and swells into 
a jelly with water. 

Pnparatifins. — ^Tincture (i in 5). Dose, | to i fid. dr. Fluid 
extract. Dose, 5 to 30 ms. Decoction (i in io\ Dose, i to a 
ozs. Ointment, i to o. Insufflation amtains Tincture i niin« and 
boric acid 4 grs. 

Actmns mmd uses. — Stimulant* tonic aud febrifuge ; given in scro- 
fula, low fevers, amenorrhoea and jaundice ; externally the lotion is used 
in otitis As an embrocation the tincture is used in sprains and bruises. 
The ointment is used for incised wounds, bums and ulcers. It pro* 
motes cicatrization with but little suppuration. 

CmHiiamiis netorins; C. (teyeantha; Cvoeas ladkas. 

HmhitaL — ^Throughout India. 

Ikaris msea. — ^The plant, seeds and flowers. 

remacM/mr, — Eng. — Safflower, Parrot seed. Arab. — Zurtum, 
Usfiar, Bair-el-ahris. Beng. — Kajirefa. Burm. — Hsoo. Can. — Kusumbe. 
Guz. — Kasumboc Hind. — Kasumba Rar. Mar. — KardL Pers.— > 
Khasaka danih, Razirah. Sans. — Kamalottara. Tarn. — Seodur Kum. 
Tel. — ^Agni sikha. 

CiiMFmeiers. — ^Annual herb : leaves bnuadied, lanceolate, and 
spinose ; flowers, orange red, coroUa tubular. Flower heads of a saffroo 
coloor and surrounded by numerous !ea^ bracts : seeds white, angular, 
smooth, and shining like little cooch sbetts, broad at the base and 
pointed towards the apex, apex marked with ooocentric rings^ Near 
the base is a small brownish scar : cot3riedofis. greyish and ochr : odoor 
slight, taste better. 

Cpmst^memtt. — ^The flowef s mntain a red colouring principle 
carthamin, a yellow cokxiring matter, ceHnlose. extractive matters* 
albumeSt silica, manganese, inxi. &c^ the seeds contain a £xed oil. 

/VrjMfwikiBW. — Inluskiu and dccoctsoo { i ia 2o\. Dose. ^ to 2 
oas^ Medicated ctl — the p£act boued ia sesamom oti. 

ArCtizMS ^md msts. — The seeds are pargativ«. The medkated oil is 
localhr ^if^lkd to rheumatk and patnrcL iocnpi^ paraSvtx hmbs and 
iDtractabie ukciv The hoc infusico cc tir^ec llcwen b gives as a 
diaphocelic ia jaundxe, nasal catarrii aai mnssouar rbeoBu^sssn. A 
oc^ iotusf-od b used as a Uxarive aai tocic in aaeasjes asi icirLadna to 
f xTocr efiorescence off c m y cie c k . 

KtmMrts^ — The Vcit^cs hai« the profcrtr tc c-rcLe milk like 
resnet. hence it can he wsed in m a k^ j: cbeese.' It i:^ a:sc extessivelj 
Qsed If >:« d}nein£ red tape. 






CHRYSAKTHEMIJM CORONARIUM. 



357 



Vcrnacttiar. — Arab,— Bahaman Abiad. BottibM Hind. — Saphcd 
bahamen. Eng.— White Rhapootic, White Behen. Pers,— -Bahaman- 
i-suphcd. BAhman or Brahtnan means supreme intelligence. Baman 
is also the name of the eleventh Persian month and of the second day 
of each month. 

Characters, — The roots are of a light brown colour, and i or 2 

inches in length. They are rather twisted, shrivelled and having two 

■ ^t three branches at their lower portion. The upper end of the root 

blunt where it is marked with blackish rings, which are the remnants 

&f sheath-leaves. In some the remains of leaf buds are seen 

ffesembling in shape a bunch of grapes ; on section^ it is whttc» 

homogeneous, and starchy* The odour ts rather aromatic ; taste 

^mucilaginous and sweetish. 

Constituents, — Fat, sugar, gum, and ash. 

Preparations.-'DtQOQiion (i in ao). Dose, ^ to i fid. ox. 
Confection (i in 5). Dose, i to 2 drs. 

Actions and uses, — As a diuretic, it is given in calculous afTec- 
tions and jaundice. As a mild aperient, it is used like rhubarb. It is 
a good substitute for sapheda inusali, and used in seminal debility, &c. 

Cintaurea Benedicta^ Carduus Benediotus^ CnicuB Benediotns. 
An annual plant cultivated in Europe. It contains cnicin, an 
imorphous bitter principle. It is used as tincture (1 in fo). Dose, | 
lo I ^T, Cnicus is bitter tonic» antiperiodic, and irritant of the 
ah*mentary tract* causing burning sensation and constriction in the 
throat, nausea, vomiting, colicky pain and diarrhoea. The seeds are 
used as a bitter tonic, like calumba, gentian^ taraxacum, &c. 

ChrysanthemDm Coron&ritim, C RoxborghlL 

Habitat, — Mediterranean regions and India* 
^^»r^s used, — The flower heads. 

Vernacniar, — Beng., Hind*, Guz. — Sevati, Guldiudi. Can,— 
ShyAvantigc-huvu. Duk. — Guledaudi» Eng.— Christmas flower* 
.Mah.— Shcvanti. Maly. — j6vanti-pCiva. Sans.— Shevantika, Tarn. — 
^Shimantippu. Tel. — Ch^manti. 

Characters* — Dried flowering heads of a pale brown colour ; coroUas 
in some detached, in others overlapping the whole flower heads. 
Within the corollas are silky bracts, large or small, and of a white or 
yellow colour. When fresh, the odour is very sweet and agreeable, 
taste bittcri*h and rather mucilaginous. When chewed for a long time, 
tingling sensation is produced on the tongue like that produced by 
Lpyrethrum. 

Preparations, — Infusion (f in 10). Dose, ^ to 1^ fld. oz. 

Actions and wsfj.— As a diuretic, it is given in uric acid diathesis j 
nbiacd with kilkld miri it is used as a demulcent for gonorrhoea; 
■^Olher uses similar to those of chamomile flowers for which it is a 
substitute. 



358 CICHORIUM INTYBUS. 

Ciohorlum IntybuB, Wild Suooory or Chicory (Eng.). CSohMrliim 

EndiYia. 

Habitat. — Persia and Europe, cultivated in India. 

Parts used. — The seeds and root. 

Vernacular — Kasani. Arab.— Shikoriah. Hind., Bomb., Beng.^ 
Hinduba, kftsni. Chin. — Ku-tsai, kuku. Eng. — Endive, chicory. 
Mar. — Kachani. Pers. — Kasni, Ambuboia. Tel. — K^sini-viltulu. 
Tarn. — Kashini-virai. 

Hinduba is a corruption of Intuba, or Intybus. 

Characters. — Seeds small, colour light or dark brown, angular, 
furrowed, and rather cuneate or narrow at the base, apex crowned 
with numerous torn calyces or teeth. Sides of the seeds rather curved, 
taste slightly bitter ; root of a brown colour with radiating lactiferous 
vessels ; bark thinner than that of taraxacum, light, soft, pithy and 
corky ; taste bitterish. 

Constituents, — ^The seeds contain a bland oil. Burnt chicory 
contains sugar, free extractive, cellulose, ash, nitrogenous matter, fat, 
&c. The roots contain nitrate and sulphate of potash, mucilage, some 
bitter extractive principle, and inulin, 36 p.c. The flowers contain a 
colourless crystalline glucoside insoluble in ether, soluble in hot 
water and alcohol. In alkalies it dissolves and becomes yellow. 

Preparations, — Decoction of seeds (i in 20). Dose, x to 2 fld. ozs- 
Fluid extract of the root. Dose, i to 2 fld. drs., and powder. 

Actions and uses. — The seeds are carminative and cooling, used 
in bilious complaints. Like taraxacum, chicory increases the secre- 
tion of bile and promotes digestion ; it also promotes the secretion of 
the bowels and kidneys. The decoction of the seeds is largely used in 
torpor of the liver, enlargement of the spleen and general dropsy. 
The root is bitter, tonic and demulcent, and given with other vegetable 
bitters in dyspepsia and fever. The dried root, roasted and powdered, 
is used as a substitute for coffee and for adulterating it. 

Oynara Soolymus, Gynara hortentis. 

Habitat. — Southern Europe, India, Dekhan. 
Parts used. — Succulent receptacles, fleshy leaflets of the calyx, 
and leaves. 

Vemacular.^Axzh. — Kirshuf, Kharsjuf. Eng. — Artichoke. Hind., 
Pers. — Kanjir. 

Characters, — ^The plant is perennial and so named from all its 
parts being sharp like dog's teeth. It has large flowers of a violet blue 
colour. The leaves are very bitter. 

Preparations. — Tincture (i in 10). Dose, J to i fld. dr. The 
juice, extract and infusion of leaves. 

Actions and uses, — The juice is tonic, diuretic and astringent; 
used in dropsy and ascites. The leaves contain tannin, and are used in 
place of galls. 



ECHINACEA ANOUSTIFOLIA. 



Doronicam PardaliancheSt Doronicam Scorpioides. 



359 



Scorpioides — The rhizome has the form of a scorpion. 

Habitat. — Europe, Syria. 

f^irt med, — The rhizome. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Darunaj-i-Akrabi, Eng. — Leopard's bane. 
Hind* — Dafunaj-i-Akrabi, AkrabL 

CharacUn. — Rhizome brittle, horny and knotted. In scorpioid 
forn% flat and jomted, greyish externally, dirty white within, upper sur- 
face scaly, under surface marked with scars of rootlets, smell aromatic, 
resembling that of shapeda musali, taste insipid at first, then 
mucilaginous and somewhat acrid or faintly bitter, and lastly giving a 
warm pricking sensation to the tongue. 

Constituents. — A large quantity of glucose and fat. 

Preparations, — Decoction (i in 20). Doscp i to 2 fid. 02s. 

Actions ana uses, — Stomachic and tonic ; used in dyspepsia ^ 
flatulence, nervous depression and impaired digestion. Given with 
milk iu powder is used in seminal debility. 



Eohlnacea JLnguBtifolia, Nigger-head. 

Habitat. — Western States, Kansas. 

Part used, — The root. 

In Kansas it is known as nigger head from the shape and sombre 
colour of its fruit. 

Characters,^ An herb ; root thick, of the sire of a little finger» 
deep brown or black, wrinkled longitudinally. Woody portion consisting 
of medullary ra3rsand a greenish pulpy substance^ taste pungent ; stems 
numerous, 2 or 3 feet Iong» stout and bristling with hairs. Leaves 3 
veined, lanceolate or linear, very slender at the base, with short petioles ; 
involucre consists of z f ows of bracts. Flower disc concave at first, after 
a time becomes ovoid, and the receptacle assumes a conical form. 
The receptacle is surrounded by bracts which are boat-shaped and 
concave, becoming narrowed into a stiff spine-like projection. The 
fruit is acutely four-angled, one seeded, dry, indchisccnt ; pericarp 
firm, tough and corklike in texture. 

Constitnents. — The root contains an acid organic resin, nearly 
colourless, and of a persistent and acrid taste. 

/Vr//fm//o;i^.—Ecthol— prepared by mixing the active principle 
of echinacea angustifolia and thuja occidentalis in equal proportions, 
A fiiinl yellowish liquid. Dose, 10 to 40 ms, 

detions and w^^jr,— Ecthol is antispasmodic, antisuppurattve 
iHd antidote to blood poisonini' : crtviti in .nal.rlfi (*'\cr^ cholera, 
cry'^pclas. In pyicmia it is ^ cd externally 

also. Locally applied incarbuniiw.>, t^^'ii^ *iMu Wu mh.:^. It is used as a 



360 ECLIPTA ALBA. 

remedy for bites of snakes, stings of insects, and for pimples. In 
suppurative disorders of the mucous membranes it is used as a wash 
or gargle. Under its use suppuration is sometimes avoided. 
Eohinops Eohinatus. 

Habitat. — Himalaya, Mysore, Rajwara. 

Parts used, — The plant. 

Feniacu/ar.—Guz.^XJtkBtkrOf utakanto. Hind.— Oontakatira. 
Sans. — Unthkantaka, Utati. 

Oontakantaka is derived from oont or oonth, a camel, and 
kantik, kanti, a thistle. It means camel's thistle because camels 
consume it readily. 

Characters. — Plant thistle-like, one to two feet high, erect and 
much branched ; leaves pinnatifid, tomentose, cottony and spinous ; 
upper surface viscid, hoary, and tomentose, and cottonj' beneath ; flowers 
spiny and toothed ; flower heads terminal, solitary, and globose ; root 
tapering and of a whitish brown colour. 

Preparations. — Decoction (i in lo). Dose, ^ to 2 fld. ozs- 
Expressed juice of leaves. Dose, 30 to 60 ms. 

Actions and uses. — As an alterative it is given in dyspepsiai 
scrofula, syphilis and fever; a chief ingredient in various alterative and 
tonic decoctions. As a tonic it is used in seminal weakness. 

Remarks. — Often mistaken for Bhuiringni, it having similar spiny 
leaves. In utakatira the leaves are tomentose and cottony. 

Eolipta Alba, E. Prostata, E. Ereota. 

Habitat. — Common weed, in irrigated fields and gardens through- 
out India. 

Parts used. — The herb. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Kadun-el-bint. Beng. — Kesuryia. Can. — 
Garagada-sappu, Kadige-garaga. Duk., Guz., Mar. — Bhangra, 
Markava. Hind. — Bharangraj, Bharngraj. Malyal. — Karish^nganni, 
Cajenneam. Sans. — Kesaraja, Brinjraj, Markava. Tam. — Karesha- 
langanni, Kaikeshi. Tel. — Gunta-Kalagara. 

Characters. — Herb small, prostrate, or erect; colour darkish brown. 
The whole plant is pleasant and aromatic to the taste, covered all over 
with white stiff* hairs ; leaves opposite, entire, lanceolate or rather 
waved. Flower heads axillary, or terminal in pairs, pedicelled or stalked 
and of a white colour. Seeds rugous of a dark brown colour, wedge 
shaped, or compressed and marked by a ridge in the middle of both 
surfaces ; taste acrid, odour disagreeable ; root white, fibrous and much 
branched. 

Constituents, — A large amount of resin and an alkaloidal principle, 
ecliptine. 

Preparations. — Expressed juice. Dose, i to 2 fluid drs. Decoc- 
tion (i in 10). Dose, J to 2 fld. ozs. Oil. Dose, i to 3 ms. 
A kind of khir or porridge made up of bangra juice i part, juice of 



ELEPHANTOPUS SCABER. 



361 



iSS^ 2e>']anica i, ginger 2, vhcx trifolra (juice) i, sesbania grandiflora 
5, boil in cocoanut juice antl adJ rice and treacle. Dose, 2 to 4 fluid 
ozs. Giveu in tetanus. 

Actions and uses* — Cholagogue similar in action to taraxacum. 
The expressed juice of leaves is tonic and alterative, and given with 
ajowan seeds in catarrh, cough, and enlargement ot the liver and spleen* 
A paste ofthe plant is locally applied to chronic glandular swellings and 
to elephantiasis and in skin diseases. The expressed juice is dropped 
into the ears in earache. Mixed with castor oil^ it h given to expel 
worms ; also used to dye hairs black. 

Remarks,— In tattooing, the natives after puncturing the skin, 
rub the juice of white Bhtlngrtk over the part which thus becomes 
indelibly blue. Bluhii^d is of \ kinds : yellow, white, and black. The 
yellow or Piiahi Bhdnj^rd is Wedella Calendulacea. This herb has 
yellow flowers on long peduncles. White Bhdngrd (Eclipta prostrata) 
has white flowers and darkish green leaves. Black Bhdngrd has dark 
coloured stems. It is a variety of white B/nUigrd^ It is the same plant 
which when in flower is called white Bhdngrd^ and when in fruit, 
KdU Bhdngrd, In the latter the white corollas having withered away, 
ihev are followed by the development of a dark green or black achenes 
or fruits which are mistaken for flowers by the natives. 

Elephantopus Scaber. 

llahiiat, — Throughout India in shady places. 

Parts usfd^ — The root and leaves. 

rVr;//i<:i//f/r.— Beng,— Shamdulum, Can. — Hakkarike. Eng» — 
.Frickly leaved Elephants' foot. Hind,— Gnbhi* Mar.— Go-jibha. 
**Matcal. — Ana-sltovadi. Sans. — Go-jihva. Tarn. — Anashavadi. Tel. — 
Husti-Kasaka. 

Go-jibha-*ox tongue ; Gcijibha— Go, a cow, and jihba, a 
tongue. 

Charact€rs,^KocA fibrous ; leaves radical, and spreading flat upon 
the ground, wrinkled, crenulate, and very hairy. The plant is mucila- 
ginous and astringent. 

PrtparntifiHs- Decoction of the root and leaves (1 in 10), Dose, 
4 to 2 fluid 02s. 

Actiofu and uses. — Alterative, astringent, and mucilaginous. The 
decoction with cumin and butter milk is used in dysuria ; also in 
diarrhoea and dysentery* 

B^igeron Canadense, E. Vfscosam— Canada Fleabane (Eng.) 

Squaw Weed. 

Habitat, — W, Himalaya, Punjab, RohJIkhand, Europe^ and N, 
America. 

Piirts fa<*(/.— Volatile oil distilled from iresh liowering herb (oil of 
Fleabane. 



362 EUPATORIUM AYAPANA. 

Erigeron. — From eri, early, and geron, hoary, aged, or an old 
man, in allusion to the early aged appearance of the plant before 
spring. Fleabane, in allusion to a supposed property of the plant to 
destroy fleas. Large bundles of this plant soaked in milk are suspended 
in the rooms to allure flies to their destruction. Squaw weed, from 
the weed having a special action upon the uterus. 

Characters. — A flowering plant ; stem erect, striate, slender with 
scattered hairs ; branches numerous, ascending ; leaves radical, obovate, 
dentate. Flowers yellow in disks. Achenes flat, glabrous, odour mint- 
like ; taste astringent, bitter. 

Constituents. — A volatile oil, bitter extractive principle and tannin. 
Oleum Erigerontis is obtained by distillation. The oil is a pale yellow 
liquid becoming darker and thicker by age, of a peculiar aroma and 
persistent odour, taste not very pungent, terebinthinate, and aromatic ; 
of neutral reaction, readily soluble in alcohol. Dose, 5 to 10 ms. 

Actions and uses. — The drug owes its virtues to the volatile oil. 
It acts like turpentine, but is less irritating and less efficient. It has 
a special action as a haemostatic on the uterus and intestines, and is of 
special value in uterine haemorrhages, menorrhagia, intestinal haemor- 
rhage of passive form, and in typhoid fever. It relieves irritability of 
the bladder, and is given in cystitis, calculus, &c. It is also given in 
bronchial catarrh, in haemoptysis without fever, and in diarrhoea, 
dysentery and dropsy. 

Eupatorium Ayapana, E. Triplinerve, E. Aromatious. 

Habitat, — America, cultivated in India, damp and swampy 
places, meadows and banks. 

Parts used. — The dried leaves, flowering tops and twigs. 

Vernacular, — Hind. — Ayapana. Guz. — Allepa. Tam. — Ayap- 
panni. 

Characters. — Shrub of a pleasant aromatic odour; branches reddish, 
and straight, with scattered hairs ; leaves triple nerved, opposite, 
smooth and lanceolate. Flowers yellow, taste bitter. 

Constituents, — A volatile oil and a neutral crystalline principle 
Ayapanin. In long needles, soluble in ether and alcohol, but insoluble 
in water. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, J to i fld. oz. Fluid 
extract. Dose, 10 to 30 ms. 

Actions and uses, — Bitter tonic, expectorant, antiperiodic and 
diaphoretic ; in full doses, aperient ; given in derangement of the 
stomach and bowels, dyspepsia and cough. It is also given in 
ague. It is very efficacious in cough. The leaves when fresh are 
applied to foul ulcers, and to bites of venomous animals. Its action 
resembles that of chamomile. 



EUPATORIUM PERFOLIATUM, 



363 



EapatoriQm Cannabinum, Rusticomm Panacea, Hemp Agrimony, 

//ii^fV/jA— Temperate Himalaya and Europe. 

Parts used. — The root anc^ leaves. 

Characters.— boxing shoots have a mealy appearance owing to 
the presence of white balsamic exudation. Leaves opposite, in pairs, 
fleshy, lanceolate and smooth ; midrib thick ; flowers purple ; odour 
aromatic ; taste bitter, 

CfinstitHents.—T\\^ flowers and leaves contain a bitter alkaloid. 

Preparaiitim, — Infusion (l in 10). Dose, \ to 1 fld. ox. 

Actions and ru^^.-- Diaphoretic, diuretic and emetic, used in fever, 
jaundice, scurvy, and locally for foul ulcers. 

Eupatorium Perfoliatum. 

Syn. — Bone-set, wood bone set, ague weed, fever wort, vegetable 
antimony, sweating plant, Indian sage, thorough wort, 

Eupatorium from Eu^ well, easy, and pater, father, born of a noble 
father* Or from Mithridates Eupator, King of Pontus, who used 
it medicinally, 

Bone^set. — It relieves the pain in bones and hmbs in influenza and 
bone fever (Dengue), 

^tf^iV^ A— America, 

Parts used. — The leaves and flowering tops. 

Characters. — ^Stems hairy, erect, much branched at summit ; leaves 
opposite and united at base, lanceolate, wide tapering, crenately serrate, 
fugosely veined, rough above, downy, resinous and dotted below. 
Flower heads corymbed and nurnerous* ; florets, tubular, white with 
bristly pappus in ;i single row* The plant has a bitter astringent taste 
and weak, and aromatic odour. Dose, 30 to 60 grs. 

Consttfticnts, — ^A neutral bitter principle, Eupatorin (gJucoside) 
a volatile oil, tannin, wax, gum, resin, sugar, ash 7*5 p.c, Eupatorin-* 
a crystalline glucoside, soluble in water, akohol» chloroform and ether, 

f^teparaiions, — Extractum Eupatorii Fluidum, Dose, lo to 6oms« 
Infusion ( I in 10), Dose, i to 2 fld* oxs. 

Actions and i/j^'jr,^ Bitter, tonic and an efllicient diaphoretic. In 
large doses purgative, emetic, and antiperiodic, similar to chamomile ; 
given during the shivering stage of fevers, acute caCarih, or general 
cold ; also in muscular rheumatism, bronchitis, influenza, and sore 
throat* As a bitter tonic it is given in dyspepsia and general debility. 

Eupatorium Purpureum — Queen of the Meadow, Gravel root, 

^<iAf/<7/,-^United States. 
Paris used, — The root. 



364 GLOSSOCARDIA LINBARIFOUA. 

Characters. — Perennial herb,*with green or purplish band at the 
joints. Leaves petiolate, in whorl, long, white and downy beneath ; • 
flowers purple, corymbs, wood dry. Dose, i to 3 drs. 

Preparations. — Fluid extract, 30 to 60 ms. ; solid extract, 3 to 10 
grs. Eupurpurin (abstract) i to 4 grs. ' 

Actions and uses. — Lithontriptic. It has a decided power over 
the uric acid diathesis. Given in rheumatism, gout, and acidity of the 
urine. 

OloBsooardia LinearifoUa, 0. Bosyallea. 

Habitat. — Central India, Deccan. 

Parts used. — The plant. 

Vernacular. — Deccan. — Pitta-Papdd&. Mar., Hind. — Phatara-suvi. 

Phatara suva. Phatar a stone, or rock, and suva, anethum. 
It means rock anethum ; Pitta papada, a name also given to Fumria 
as well as to some acanthaceous plants. 

Characters.-- Small annual plant ; stems many ; leaves alternate, 
linear at the base, and much divided; flower heads solitary and yellow, 
each with a short naked peduncle, taste bitter and odour fennel-like. 

Constituents.— The root contains an essential oil. The leaves, 
stems and flowers contain a bitter alkaloid. 

Preparation. — Confection (i in 20), i to 4 drs. 

Actions and uses. — It is used as an emmenagogue to promote the 
flow of menses. 

Orangea Haderaspatana, 0. Adansonia, Artemsia Maderaspatan. 

Habitat. — Throughout India, Bengal. 
Parts used. — The plant. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Namuti. Eng. — Madras wormwood. 
Mar. — Mashi patri. Maleal.— Nelampata. Tam.— Mashiputri. Tel. — 
Mustaru. 

Characters. — Stems procumbent, difl'use and villous, growing flat 
on the ground ; leaves solitary, sub-globose, pinnate, sinuous and 
obtusely lobed with terminal peduncles. Flower-heads solitary, yellow 
and sub-globose; odour like that of wormwood. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, J to i fld. oz. 

Actions atui uses. — Stomachic and uterine stimulant, combined 
with ginger, pepper and sugar used in obstructed menses, and in 
dyspepsia and hysteria. Externally it is used as fomentations to 
inflamed and painful parts ; as an antiseptic application the powdered 
leaves are applied to wounds and ulcers. 

Orindelia Robusta, 0. Sqarroaa, Onm plant. 

Habitat. — California, Mexico, N. America. 
Parts used. — The leaves and flowering tops. 



OUrrOTIA OLEIFERA. 



36s 



Characters, — Herbaceous, perennial plant. Lea%^es about 2 inches 
or less long, oblong, or l»nccolate» sessile or clasping, obtuse and sharply 
serrated, pale green, smoolh, finely dotted and brittle. Flowering tops 
many involucre, hemispherical, about half an inch broad, composed of 
numerous imbricated scales ; the involucres and often the leaves are 
coated with glutinous oleo-resin ; floretSt yellow, ligulate ; odour bal- 
samic, taste pungently aromatic, and bitter. Dose, 10 to 40 grs* 

Cofutituents^ — Resin, bitter principle, a fixed and a volatile oil, an 
alkaline principle grindeline, fat, wax, sugar, robustic acid, gum, 
tannin and ash 7 px. 

PreparaitQtss\ — Kxtractum Grindelise fluidum. Fluid extract of 
grindelia. It is alcoholic and contains much resin Dose, 10 10 50 ms* 
Tinctura Grindelia5(i in 10). Dose, ^ to i fid, dr. Infusum Grindelia 
(I in 20). Dose, i to 2 fld, oz. Extractum Grindeliai. Dose, 2 to 5 grs. 
Mistura GrindcHx, — liquid extract of Grindelia 30 ms., liquid extract 
of liquorice J dr,, mucilage mixture i oz. 

Physiahgical Acitom, — Grindelia is acrid hitter, when chewed. It 
incrtsii^cs the flow of saliva. It is antispasmodic, and a motor 
deprosanl, a powerful diuretic and mild expectorant* In large doses 
it IS an irritant, producing scalding and high coloured urine. In small 
doses, it relieves prostration and quieti^ the nervous system- It is 
regarded as a palliative and sjMtcific for asthma^ it gives instantaneous 
relief, especially when the asthmatic paroxysms recur at night. In 
whooping cough it modifies the intensity, and lessens the frequency 
ol the paroxysms. In dyspnrea accompanying inveterate chronic 
bronchial catarrh, and in chronic bronchitis of the aged and in 
emphysema, given in combination with bromide of ammonium, it 
allays irritability. It is aha used with considerable relief in dyspncea 
of the heart and pulmonary disi^ses, and in coughs due to cardiac 
hypertrophy. 

TherapeuHct. — A« a sedative it is used in chronic cystitis, in 
N^Minful coudilions of the sexual organs, as priapism and in vaginitis and 
^'Wo in cancer of the stom;ich. The addition of calomel in minute 
dosc^ increases the expectorant effects of grindelia ; it is generally 
given with iodide of potassium or with bromide of ammonium. 
Grindelia has been regarded as a specific in the bites of venomous 
serpents and in the stings of insects. As a sedative lotion (i to 9) it is 
used for burns and scalds when these are supcificial ; if applied in 
the form of wet cloths, it soothes the agonijting pain in skin 
diseases with itching and burning sensations in vagmitis, uterine 
calafTh and herpes zoster. Chronic ulcerations, e%^en when deep and 
foetid and exquisitely tender, are often speedily cured by the topical use 
of this drug. 

Oulzotia oleifera, Ramtilla oleifera, 6. AbyBsinlca. 

Habiiai. — Africa, cultivated in India. 
P^rU usid. — The seeds and oil. 



366 



INULA HELENIUM. 



Bomb., Guz, — Rumalil, 
seed. Tarn, — OiHjhcllu. 



kalaliK 
Tel— 



Ventacular* — Beng., Hind,, 
Caa. — Hutchu-ellu, Eng.^ — Niger 
Ulisif valesalu. 

Charactefs^ — ^Seeds greyish black, somewhat angular, compre^^^-^^' 
laterally and tapering at the base; surface smooth, taste oily and v\s 
The expressed oil frora the seeds is sweet in taste and of a pale yellow i!jii 
colour, 

Comtituents. — The seeds contain oil 43,2 p.c, albuminous 
substances 19,3 p.c, sugar, gum, 13 px., cellulose 14 ^nd ash 3 p.c. 
The oil is light yellow or brown, solidifies at a low temperature. It 
contains 94 px. of fatty acids. 

Actions and uses, — Emollient. The oil is rubbed over the 
painful parts in rheumatism as a substitute for linseed oil. 

Inula Helenium. I. Qnadriflda or Policaria Crispa. 

Habitat. — C. Asia, S. Europe, N, America. 
Pari used, — ^The root. 

FefTtacuiar, — Arab* — Ussul-ur-rasun. Eng. — Elacampane, Syrian 
costus or Syrian ginger. Hind, — Phatmer or PhatmeL Pers* — 
ganjabil-i-shami, piUgush. Rasan, kust-i-shami. 

Pil gush means elephant^s car. Phatmel : — phata^ rent, and me). 
union. 

Characters. — Root 6 to J2 inches long, one inch thick, very ticsiiy, 
divided below into several branches ; sliced longitudinally and 
transversely ; bark overlapping, transverse slices concave and 
somewhat striated, wrinkled and brownish externally and white 
internally, odour slightly foetid, peculiar and aromatic, taste bitteft 
Dose> 20 10 60 grs. 

Consiiluents-^A volatile oil, an acrid resin, bitter principle, wax< 
helenin and inuline. Volatile oil contains Alantol or inulol and alant 
camphor or inula camphor, Alantol is an aromatic liquid of peppermint- 
like odour and taste. Inula camphor is in white crystals of 
camphor-Hke odour, very slightly soluble in water, soluble in alcohol. 
Inulin — a peculiar body allied to starch. It has no concentric 
formation and does not gelatinize, Ii occurs as a fine while powder and 
is only coloured yellow by iodine, tasteless and without odour. It is 
contained from 19 to 45 px. ; also found in arnica, taraxacum, &c- 
Dose, 1 to 3 grs. Helenin — Alanto Lactone or Elecampane camphor, 
an active principle* a crystalline camphor or a stearoptene is obtained 
from the root, in light white acicular crystals or needles, like 
quinine sulphate in appearance, of a faint odour and aromatic taste- 
insoluble in water and soluble in alcohol. Dose, J to 2 grs* 

Preparatmis, — Decoction and Infusion (1 in 10). Dose, J to 
I fid. o2. Ointment (i in 8). 

Physifyhgical AciiOH.--The root is diuretic, tonic, expectorant 
and emmenagogue. In Urge doses it is iiritant and produces nau:K^a 
and vomiting. 



LACTUCA SATn"A. 



3^7 



Tkfrapmtics. — Given in cough, asthmai, vesica! catarrh, amenorrhcca 
and dropsy ; also in dyspepsia^ acidity of the stomach and rheumatis^m ; 
an ointment is used in skin eruptions and in bites of animals* [t is also 
used to flavour absinthe. The active principle hek-nin or helenina is an 
antiseptic and (i in looo) arrests putrefaction and prevents the growth of 
bacilli, and used as a wash inozicna. Internally it is given in diarrhura, 
malarial fevers, and tuberculosis, in tubercular infantile and catarrhal 
diarrhoea ; also in bronchitis and spasmodic asthma to arrest profuse 
ftecrelions ; its chief value is in phthisis. A solution dissolved in oil is 
used as a patnt in diphtheria. It keeps ofT mosquitoes and other insects, 
Inulin is aromatic, tonic, stimulant and expectorant ; used in dyspepsia 
and pulmonary affections, Alantol is similar in actions to Helenin, 
mixed with alantic acid it is more efficacious in tuberculosis than 
helenin, 

Lactuoa Sativa, L. Scariola, L. Capitata, L. VtroBa. 

HahitaL — E. and S. Europe, cultivated throughout India and 
Persia. 

Pafts me(f,^Tht seeds and concrete milky juice (lactucarium.) 
Vtrnaculiif, — Arab. — Barrul-khasa, Guz., Duk. — Kahu. Eng. — 
Acrid garden lettuce, strong scented lettuce, prickly lettuce. 
Hind— Kahu-khaskabija, Fers. — Tukhrnc-kahu* Tam. — ^Shallatulvirai* 
Tel. — Kavu vittulu. 

Ckarackrs. — A biennial plant ; seeds very smalt, whitish brown, 
ribbed longitudinally^ and little curved vertically, elliptical, lanceolate 
and compressed ; apt^x pointed ; smell slightly aromatic, taste bittensh* 
Lettuce opium or laciucarium — a concrete milky vi&cidjuiceof abrown 
colour ; to obtain it wound the stems of wild lettuce and evaporate the 
juice. It occurs in circular plano-convex cakes, or irregular, angular 
pieces of a dull greyish brown colour. When cut into, it has a waxy 
yellowish white lustre, odour narcotic and opium like, taste bitter* It 
is partly soluble in alcohol and in ether ; with water it forms a turbid 
mixture* 

Ojustitnenh, — ^ Laciucarium is a mixture of lactocin, and three 
bitter principles — lactucin, lactopicrin, and lactucic acid. It also contains 
lactucerin, an inert waxy substance abuut 50 p.c. and a trace of 
hyoscyamine \ also a non-volatilc acid and a volatile acid smelling like 
valerianic acid ; albumen 7 p c* ; mannite 3 p.c; and ash 3 to 6 p.c. ^ 
which contains potash, soJa, manganic oxide, ferric oxide, and lime. 

Lactucin occurs as a yellowish fusible bitter waxy body, in white 
crystals or scales, soluble in Ho parts of cold water, moderately soluble in 
alcohol and acetic acid and less soluble in ether — used as a sedative and 
I hypnotic. Dose, i to 5 grs. The leaves contain albuminous matter, 
Starchy sugar, gum> cellulose, chlorophyll, fat and ash, rich in nitrates. 
Prfparnthm. — Tinctura Lactucarti (50 p.c). Dose, 10 to 30 ms. 
^ Lactucarii, contain* to p c. of the tmcture. Dose, l to 4 drs, 

i urn Lactucarii. Dose, 5 to 15 grs. The Ku-chin-kan — a Chinese 



368 SAUSSUREA LAPPA. 

preparation. It is obtained by cutting off tips of the full grown lettuce, 
collecting the milky juice which exudes and inspissating it by a 
moderate heat. 

Actions and uses. — Anodyne sedative, hypnotic, diuretic, and 
expectorant ; in action similar to opium, but it leaves no bad after- 
effects. It is given in palpitation of the heart and in nervousness. 
The seeds are cooling, demulcent and refrigerant, used in fevers, 
acute inflammation, and in coughs. The leaves are slightly hypnotic 
and sedative, and are used in wakefulness due to mental over- 
work. Ku-chin-kan is said to produce sleep without producing any 
narcotism, to prove sedative without any previous stimulation, and to 
afford an excellent substitute for opium where opium is inadmissible. 
Dose of the seeds, 2 grains to an infant. 

Remarks — Kihu is also the name of Arajuna sddrd — Terminalia 
Arjuna, with which it should not be mistaken. 

Hikania Gnaoo. 

Habitat — South America and West Indies. 

Parts used. — The leaves. 

Preparations.— ^ovfdQxtd leaves. Dose, 30 to 60 grs. Fluid 
extract, 30 to 60 ms. 

Actions and uses, — Stimulant, alterative, bitter tonic and febrifuge ; 
also used as a preventive and cure for the bites of serpents and insects; 
given in chronic rheumatism, both internally and externally, and in 
intermittent fever and atonic dyspepsia. It is recommended as a local 
application in gouty paroxysms. 

Saassarea Lappa, Anoklandia CostuB, Aplotazis Aurioalata, 
Arabian Costas. 

Habitat. — Cashmere. 

Paris used. — The root. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Kust. Beng.— Koshta, Kust Patchaka. 
Can.-— Koshta. Guz,— Upalet. Mar., Hind. — Kutha, Kushta Patchuk, 
Uplete. Malyal. — Sepudday. Sans. — Kushta-Pushkaramula. Tarn.— 
Koshtam. Tel. — Goshtamu, Kashm Koot. — Pers, Koosht-i-shirin. 

Characters. — Root very light, in crooked twisted pieces, brown 
externally and marked with longitudinal ridges, texture very firm. 
Internally lightish brown, and here and there sprinkled with resinous 
shining granules ; odour somewhat aromatic, resembling that of 
Jatamasi. Taste bitterish at first, but soon becoming hot, pungent 
and biting on account of the resin it contains. Dose, S to 25 grs. 

Constituents. — An odourous principle, composed of two liquid 
resins, an alkaloid, a solid resin, salt of valeric acid, an astringent prin- 
ciple, and ash which contains manganese. 

Preparations. — Infusion : — containing cardamoms i, kusht 3, water 
32. Dose, I to 2 ozs. Medicated oil known as Dhupel Tela, lotion and 
paste. Dhupela tela contains Upaleta i^ Kapura kdchari 2^ Agmra z. 



SIHaESBCCXlA 



3«»9 



ChaitdaHa i, Gddha kali \^ Vdio i, Ptitcha pdmiri \^ Nakkaid i, 
Gakmld l, Motka l, Lohana kodinn ^^ Si!iama*na-chhQdan l. Mix 
and reduce to a coarse powder and then intimately mix with Kopareh 
tela 40, Add to this Vd^h^ and the whole wrap up in a piece of 
cloth and put in an earthen pot, invert this vessel over another earthen 
vessel and the two cemented together with cUy% the whole is put into 
a fire made of fire wood for several hours, when the contents are 
intimately mixed together. 

Actkns and line, — Asa stimulant it is given in spasmodic diseases, 
as cough, at^th ma, cholera, and deranged digestion. As an alterative 
it is used in chronic skin diseases and rheumatism. Locally a paste of 
it made in rose uiiter is applied to swollen hands and feet and to swelled 
abdomen in obe>iiy, aiidas a cooling lotion tosprains, contusion, and to 
the head in head4che. It is also smoked like opium. Externally it is 
used as an astringent ointment on ulcers. Dhupel tela is used for itch, 
baldness, &c. Indies use it as a hair oil to relieve headaclie» to remove 
pedicuH and scurf from the head or hair. 

Remarks, — It is used as an incense aud a pci tumt-i and to protect 
clothes or bales of cotton, or Cash n\ ere shawls from the ravages of 
insects as moths. Other drugs similar in action to upalcta and used 
to protect clothes are kapura, mirt, patcholi, kapura kachari, &c. 

SiegesbeGkia OrientaUs. 

//ddrVa^— Persia, throughout India and tropical climatc4». 

Parts used. — The herb. 

Vernacular, — Chin. — He-ki-en^ Kau*kau. Tam*— Katampam 
Kaiampu. 

Cimracttrs, — Herb erect» and much branched $ leaves opposite, 
triangular or ovate, toothed and scabrous ; flowers yellow ; fruit acheneSf 

without pappus* 

Consittueitts, — A bitter |»rinciple, named darutyne, similar in 
properties to salicin, a derivative of salicylic acid. Darutyne- to obtain 
It treat strong decoction of leaves with acetate of lead to precipitate 
the colouring matter, remove the lead by diluted sulphuric acid and 
evaporate, freat the extract with alcohol and water and Bnally 
crystallize. Occurs as crystals, soluble in alcohol and ether, but insoluble 
in culd water, dilute acids, alkalies and chloroform. 

Prefiara tiorts, ^Fluid extract. Dose, lo to 30 nw. Tincture 
(l in 8)« Dose, 10 to 50 ms. Syrup, Dose, I to 2 drs. 

Actiom and uses. — As an alterative combined with potassium 
iodide, it is given tn scrofula, syphilis, gout, rheumatism and skin 
diseases Locally the juice or tmcture is used in tinea, thrush, 
gangrenous sores and other skin diseases ; also for healing gangrenous 
and sloughing sore^ ; it forms a coating like varnish on wounds and 
ulcers. As a stomachic tonic its properties are similar to chamomile. 

SI 



370 SPILANTHES OLRRACEA. 

SphsBFanthuB Indions. 

Habitat, — India. 

Parts used. — The herb. 

Vertiacular, — Arab. — Dookkon, KamazariyCis. Beng. — ChagUl- 
medi. Can. — Mundi Kasa. Duk. — Moondi. Guz. — Gorukh-mundi- 
Hind. — Khamadrus, Zakhim-i-hyat, Gurak moondi Moondibuti 
Malyal. — Adak-majyen, Atakka-mani. Pers. — Kamadariyus. Sans. — 
Munditika, Bhikshu, Parivraji. Tkm. — Kottak Karandai. Tel. — ^Boda 
Saram. 

Characters, — A small plant. Leaves thick, sessile, obovate, covered 
with long white hairs. Roots fibrous ; stem slightly furrowed, oblong or 
perfectly rounded. Flower heads solitary, mostly terminal, and 
sub-globular ; flowers many, minute, in close contact with one another ; 
bracts hairy and ciliated ; seeds very minute and of a grey colour ; odour 
of the whole plant peculiarly aromatic, taste rather acrid and bitter. 
Dose, 10 to 30 grs. 

Constituents, — The herb yields a deep cherry-coloured essential oil- 
The stems, leaves and flowers contain a bitter alkaloid — sphaeranthine. 

Preparations. — Distilled water, a paste. 

Actions and uses, — As an alterative it is given in S3rphilis, 
rheumatism and boils ; as a demulcent in urethritis, frequent micturi- 
tion, &c., externally a paste is applied to piles and swollen glands. 

Spilanthes Oleraoea, S. Aomella, S. Calva and S. Panioulata. 

Habitat. — Throughout India. 
Paris used. — The flower heads. 

Vernacular, — Can. — Vana Mugali. Eng. — Para cress. Hind.— 
Pokarmul. Mar. — Acharabondi, Pipulka. 

Acharhondi — achar, a breast, and Bondi, Botdi, a nipple. The 
flower buds resemble a well developed nipple to a breast. 

Characters, — A pot herb ; stem small, smooth, succulent and highly 
coloured. Flower heads with long stalks, solitary, of a brown colour and 
conical in form. In size they resemble un^b ; smell aromatic, taste acid, 
pungent and warm, resembling that of the true pellitory root. 
Dose, 10 to 30 grs. 

Constituents. — A resin similar to pyrethrin, fixed oil, yellow 
colouring matter, astringent organic acid, glucose, extractive matter 
and mineral matter. 

Preparations, — Tincture (i in 10). Dose, 10 to 30 ms. 

Actions and uses, — Powerful stimulant, and sialogogue. Flower 
heads are chewed to relieve toothache, which they do by producing 
irritation of the gums and salivation ; also chewed m headache^ 
paralysis of the tongue, cough, &c. The natives regard it as a local 
specific in inflammation of the periosteum of the jaw, and the appli- 
cation has a speedy eflect in relieving pain and swelling. It is also 
used as a fish poison. 



TANACBTUM VULGARE. 



37J 



Tanaoetum Umbelliferum, Pyrethrum Umbellferum* 

HabitaU — Eastern Persia. 

Paris ttsed.—Th^ root. 

fVr«<icw/ar.— Hind., Bomb.^ — Mitha Akalakaia. Eng. — Swcel 
Pellitory. Pers.— Bozidan. 

Characters. — The root is devoid o! the acridity of the true 
pclliloiy root, which in appearance it closely resembles. It is larger 
and of a lighter colour than the true pelHtory* It is rough and 
furrowed externally, and hard and whitish within ; on section it is 
starchy and fibrous. The taste is sweet. Dose, if to 60 grs, 

Cotisitinents. — Ver>' little Pyrethrin, inuline, a trace, and sugar* 

/Yf/farahoffs, — Decoction (1 in 10). Dosc^ J to 1 fld. ox. 

Actions and uses, — As an aJteralivc given io rheumatismi gout, 

and enlargement of the liver and spleen. 

Tanaoetum Yalgare, var. Crispum— Common Tansy. 
Habitat. — Europe, Asia» N. America. 
Paris used^~Thc leaves and tops. 

Charac/ers. — ^An herbaceous perennial plant. Leaves long, bi- 
piiinatifid and seiratcdy of a dark green colour^ surface smooth and 
glandular. Flowers yellow. Dose, 10 to 60 grs. 

Constiimnis, — A volatile oil, a bitter principle, catted tanacemi, 
fat, resini tannin, mucilage^ sugar, tartrates^ citrates and tnalatcs. 
Volatile oil— obtained by distillation of the leaves and Ifower ton^ by 
water or steam. It contains a tcrpcnc, ketone, tanacetone, alcohol and 
tanacetyle 10 p.c. It is a greenish ycHuw liquid, having camphoraceous 
odour, pungent taste, soluble in alcohol. 

I^eparatiom. — Fluid extract. Dose, 10 to 60 ms. Infusion 

&{n 10). Dose, i to 2 ftd* ozs. Oleum Tanacetl, oil of tansy. 
ose, J to 5 ms. 

Actions ami uses. — Stimulant, tonic, and eumietiagogue. In 
large doses an irritant narcotic poison ; it causes clonic spasms, 
disturbed respiration and cessation of the heart's aciiun. Generally 
given in hysteria, for worms in children, intestinal colic and 
amenorrha:ia. Locally the oil is rubefacient and used in rheumatism, 
bruises. In large doses as a narcotic it is given in wakefulness. 

Taraxacum Officinale, B. P., T. Denalaonis, 
Leontodon Tarajtacom* 

Habitat, — Europe, Himalaya, NUgiris» N.-W. Provinces- N\ 
Ameriai. 

Parts HStd.-^lhv frr^li and the dried roots* Taraxaci Radix B. P. 

Taraxacuni,— i > from dcr»s, tooth; and lea, lion. The 

ieavt^ are of tbe slu^^c vi umO^s teeth. 



372 TRICHOLBPIS GLABERRIMA. 

Vernacular. — Eng. — Swine Snout, PuflF ball, Dandelion, Lion's 
tooth, White wild endive. Hind. — Dudhal, Baran, Kanphtd« Pers. — 
Tarkhash Kun. 

Characters. — Leaves direct from the root crown, 6 to 8 inches long 
and 2 to 3 inches broad, edges toothed, teeth bent backward 5 or 6 on 
a side, sessile, glabrous, colour bright green ; root nearly cylindrical, 
very long and thick, crowned with several short thick heads, 
longitudinally wrinkled, colour dark-brown ; fracture short, fractured 
surface exhibiting concentric rings. All parts of the plant exude 
from any break or wound, a bitter milky juice. When dry the 
root is wrinkled and shrivelled longitudinally ; axis, porous and 
yellow ; bark thick and white, with it are many milk vessels in 
concentric circles ; without any odour, taste bitter, closely resembling 
the Intybus root. 

Constiiuents. — The milky juice contains a bitter amorphous 
principle — Taraxacin, a crystalline principle, taraxacerin, also 
potassium or calcium salts, resinoid and glutinous bodies. The root 
j^ontains inulin 25 p.c. ; pectin, sugar, levulin, ash 5 to 7 p. c. 

Preparations. — Of the fresh root : Extractum Taraxaci, B. P. Dose, 
5 to 15 ms. Succus Taraxaci, B, P. Dose, i to 2 drs. Decoctum 
Taraxaci, (i in 20). Dose, i to 2 ozs. Extractum Taraxaci Liquidum, 
liquid extract of taraxacum, B. P. Dose, ^ to i dr. 

Actions and «j^^.— Diuretic, bitter tonic, and aperient ; hepatic 
stimulant in large doses ; given in cases of chronic hepatic and 
splenic congestion, hepatic inflammation, especially among residents 
in the tropics ; also in dyspepsia, constipation and dropsy. Used as 
an excipient for pills. 

Trioholepis Glaberrima. 

Habitat. — Central India, Marwar, the Concan and the Deccan. 

Parts usecl,-~The plant. 

Vernacular, — Bomb. — Brdhama dandi. Mah. — Brahmo dandi. 
Sans. — Aj&dandi. 

Characters. — Drug of a p^le brown colour consisting of pieces of 
stems and flower heads ; stems slender, round, furrowed, slightly hairy, 
soft, and containing a white pith ; flower heads, conical and surround^ 
by numerous bristly bracts. Within these or in the middle of the 
flower heads are numerous down-like serrated pappus, white in 
colour and surmounted on seeds which are erect, wrinkled, furrowed 
and of a darkish brown colour ; taste bitterish. The flowers smell like 
chamomile. 

Prepaiatvjus. — Infusion (1 in 10). Dose, 4 drs. to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Aromatic bitter, nervine tonic, and aphro- 
disiac ; recommended in seminal debility, impotence, hysteria, 
&c. 



TlJSSILAao FARFARA. 



Trlcholepifi Pracumbens— Volatarella Divaricata. 

Habitat. — India. 

I\iris used, — The herb. 

Vtrnncuhn, — Arab, — Shanukat-cl-baida* Hind., Bomb. — W\6k- 
varda. Mah. — Sukayi , Pers. — Asphar-i-bari, kangar-i-supheda . 
Badaward. 

Characters. — Plant thorny, slender, whitish, smooth, ajid 
triangular ; stems tough, thick as the thumb ; flower heads white, 
surrounded by three needle-like spines and covered with a white 
down resembling that of Brahama dindi ; bracts not ciliated and broad, 
apex terminating \i\ a long white needle shaped and channelled 
bristle ; slightly mucilaginous and of bitter taste. 

Constituents , — A green volatile oiK an acid resin, fatty matter, an 
alkaloid, and gum. 

Peparatiom^ — ^Decoction (i in 20). Dose, J to 2 fld. ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Stomachic, and tonic, given in dyspepsia, 
itulence» nervous depression, and impaired digestion. It is also given 
rith milk in seminal debility. 

Tiiitilaga Farfara. 

ffaditat.^W, Himalaya, Persia, Europe, Paojab* 

Parts t4sed.^The herb. 

f Vft//?cf////r— Arab. — Fanjiun, Eng.-^Cotts* foot. Hind* — WatpAn 
Afan^iun. Ind* Ba2a»ir» — Fanjiun. 

Characttrs.-^Fhnt mucilaginous and bitterish ; a creeper with 
tnaijy fibren ; flowers bright yellow ; leaves erect, furrowed, and heart 
•shaped, and sharnjy tm>ilied, very smooth and glaucous, green above- 
white, and densely cottony beneath, 

Constituents, — The leaves contain caoutchouc, gallic and tannic 
acids, resin, glucoside, wax, gum and saponin. 

Prfparations. — Infusion (l in to). Dose, \ to i fld. oz. 

Actions and nse$\ — ^Astringent aud demulcent, given in cough. 
The cotton like down of the leaf is used as a sty pic dressing to 

wounds. 

Vernonia Anthelmintica, Serratula Anthelmintica, Conyza 
Anthelmintioa, Asoaridia Indioa. 

Nahitat, — Throughout India. 

/^Jrts used — I'hc fruit. 

I'ern*7cu7fif\ — Arab. — Atarital. Beng, — Somaraj, Bukachi, Kalijiri. 
Can. — K4du-Jirugc. Cing, — Sauni-nAya. Guz., Duk. — Kadvi*Ziri* 
Eng* — Purple flt-abane. Hind.--Bakachi. Mar, — Karalve, Riimi-chA- 
jrre. Malyal.— Kattai Jirakam. Pers. — Itrital. Sans — Vakuchi Alavi 
JiriUcah, kanana-jiraka Avalguja, Somaraj in. Tam* — Katiu shiragam. 
Tel. — Adivi-jifakara. Kadvi J ire — Bitter jrCin. 



374 VERNONIA CINBREA. 

Characters. — Fruit black or dark brown, about 3 or 4 lines in 
length, and i or 2 lines in breadth, cuneate at the base, and seated on 
a glabrous, sessile ring, becoming broader as it approaches the apex. 
Apex Clowned with brownish white coloured scales the remains of the 
toothed calyx ; surface covered with whitish scattered hairs and marked 
\vith 10 or 12 longitudinal ribs. Seed one, small, oily of a brown or dark 
colour and conforming with the fruit ; taste bitter and nauseous ; odour 
faintly aromatic. Dose, 20 to 60 grs. 

Constituents. — The seed contains resins, an alkaloid known as 
veKionine, an oil and ash 7 p.c, free from manganese. 

Preparations, — Compound powder — Tiktajir^kadi Churana — con- 
tains vernonia seeds 2, chiretta 4, Picrorhiza root 3, dika malee i, rock 
salt 2, ginger 5. Dose, ^ to i dr. Infusion (i in 10). Dose, ^ to i 
fld. oz. 

Actions and uses. — Anthelmintic, stomachic, antiperiodic and 
alterative ; given in leucoderma, lepra, psoriasis and other skin 
diseases. As an anthelmintic, the powdered seeds are given for 
the removal of ascarides. As a stomachic, in loss of appetite, 
dyspepsia, &c. ; as an antiperiodic the compound powder is given in 
fevers. Native women use a paste of the seeds for destroying pediculi. 

Yernonla Cinerea, Ck>nyza Oineria, C Parparea. 

Habitat. — Throughout India and Bengal. 

Parts used. — The leaves, seeds, and flower heads. 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Kukseem, chota koksun. Guz.— S^deori. 
Hindi. — Sahadevi. Kak-jangi. Mar. — Sahadevi, Sadidi. Malyal. — 
Puvanku runal. Sans. — Sahadevi. Tam. — Sira-shenga-lanir, Nedsitu. 
Tel. — Gheritte-kamina. 

Characters. — Leaves oblong, oval, roundish, or ovate, slightly 
toothed and of a darkish green colour ; flower heads of a pale blue 
colour. Dose, 10 to 30 grs. 

Preparations. — Infusion of the whole plant (i in 10). Dose, ^ to i 
fld. oz. 

Actions and uses, — The seeds are alterative, and used in leprosy 
and chronic skin diseases. A poultice of the leaves is used as an 
application to guinea worms. As a diaphoretic the whole plant is 
given in fevers to bring on perspiration. The seeds are used to 
destroy vermin in the hair. 

Xanthiam Stramariam. 

Habitat, — Hotter parts of India, Ceylon, Europe. 

Parts used, — The herb. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Hasak, Hamazel, Amir. Beng. — Banokra. 
Can. — Kadvala mara. Chin. — Ts'angurh, Si-rh. Eng.— Broad-leaved 
Burweed. Hind.— Lane-tonru, Shankhahuli. Pers. — Ispahan-Harada 



LOBELIA INFLATE 



Kh^r-i>khn&ak* Mar,- Shanktshivar, Gokhru Kalian. Panj\ and Sind, 
— Goghiu Kalian. Sans, — Sankhini. Shankhapushpi. Tarn.— Marlu' 
niatta. Tel. — Veritel-ncp. Ciokhru Kollan means Great Gogharu. 

Characters, — The herb contains a yellow colouring matter ; stenif 
erect, scabrous, mottled with dark coloured spots ; leaves alternatet 
kidney shaped, or cordate, notched and scabrous ; flowers terminal ; 
fruit prickly. Dose, 3 to 15 grs. 

ComftUfetiis.'^Thc fruit contains fat 38*6 p. c, ash 5 'a p.c, 
albuminoids 56*6 p.c, sugar, resin» organic acids, anu a glucosidc named 
xanthostrumarin related to datiscin. Xanthostruniarin is yellow, 
amorphous mass, soluble in water, alcohol, ether, benzol and 

chloroform. 

Pre/>arations,'^Decoction (l in 20). Dose, | to i fld, oz. 

Actions and uses, — Diaphoretic, diuretic and sialogoguc ; given in 
urinary and renal complaints and long standing cases of malarial fevers ; 
other actions resemble those of Jaborandi. 

Lobeliaoeae— The Dhavala of Lobelia family. 

Herbs or shrubs abounding in acrid milky juice ; leaves alternate 
and exstipulate ; calyx, superior; corolla, monopetalous, valvate; 
stamens 5 ; ovary, inferior 1*3 celled ; ^tyle i ; stigma surrounded by a 
fringe of hairs ; tube adherent lo many seeded pod ; fruit capsular, 
a-valvcd, dehiscing at summit ; seeds numerous, and albuminous. 

//ii&ifaL — Natives of temperate climates and tropics. 

Properties, — Some species contain the milky juice, which is very 
acrid ; some are narcotico-acrid, others emetic, purgative and vesicant. 

Lobelia Inflata, B.P. 

Loobelia BJ*. — Bladder podded lobelia, wild or Indian tobacco, 
emetic herb or weed, asthtna weed, vomit wort, gag-root. Inflata 
from inflatus, inflated or swollen. The pod is egg-shaped and inflated. 

Habitat, — N, America. 

Parts used. — The dried flowering herb collected after the portion 
of the capsules has become inflated. 

Characters. — An annual weed growing on the roadsides ; stems 
anguiar, and channelled ; leaves long, upper ones scssilei lower ones 
petiolate, ovate, dentate and hairy, of a pale green colour ; flowers small, 
m long racemes, of a pale blue coUtur ; calyx superior, 5 toothed, ; corolla, 
bilabiate ; cnpsules inflated, two-celled, stcds minute, oblong, brown 
and reticulated ; odour heavy, unpleasant, slightly irritating, and acrid ; 
taste nauseous, mild acrid and tobacco^like. Dose, as an expectorant, 
I to 5 grs. As an emetic, 15 to 20 grs. 

Comtituents* — Lobeline, a narcotic principle ; Lobelacrin, an acrid 
principle ; Inflatin ; also Lobelic acid, resin, wax, gum, fixed oil, lignin, 
salts of calcium, potassium and iron, Lobeline — Lubelinium : to obtain it 
triturate acetic or alcoholic tincture,or the extract with magnesia, agitate, 



37^ LOBELIA XICOTLKXiEFOLIA. 

add ether, filter and evaporate. It is a 3'ellowy aromatic liquid, soluble 
in water. Dose, -^^^ to ^ gr. Lobelacrin : to obtain it, to the tincture 
add charcoal ash, with water and exhaust the residue with boiling 
alcohol. Lobelic acid — ^precipitate the 3ecoction with sulphate of 
copper and decompose with sulphuretted hydrogen 

Preparations. — Tinctura Lobeliae ^therea, B. P. (i in 5). Dose, 5 
to 15ms. Extractum Lobelia Fluidum. Dose, i to 10 ms. Decoction 
or Infusion (1 in 20). Dose, ^ to i oz. Acetum 10 p.c Dose, 5 to 
40 ms. Oil of the seed 2 to 5 drops. 

Actions and uses. — In small doses, diaphoretic, expectorant, anti- 
spasmodic and sialogogue. In large dose emetic and purgative ; like 
tobacco, the leaves, when chewed, excite nausea, vomiting, giddiness 
headache, general relaxation, increased flow of saliva, and of gastric 
mucus, of urine and of perspiration: as an antispasmodic it is given in 
paroxysmal asthma, dr>- cough with tickling in the throat : also in whoop- 
ing cough, angina, influenza, chronic bronchial catarrh and pneumonia. 
An enema is given in twisting, or intussuscepti(Hi of the bowels and 
in strangulated hernia, in impaction of the foeces. Drop doses of 
the tincture every hour gives relief in habitual constipation or 
10 drop doses at bed>time act favourably. As an emetic it is too 
depressing for children. 

Lobelia RiootiaiiAfidia. 

Habitat. — Ceylon, Travancore, Bombay. 
Parts used. — ^The plant. 

rernacular, — Can. — Kadahoge Sappu. Eng. — ^Indian wild tobacco. 
Mah — Bokenul, Deonul, Dha\*al. Tam. — Kottu popillay. Tel.— Adavi 
pogaku. 

Charactrrs. — An annual plant, studded with grannies of resinous 
exudation. Leaves large, resembling th"«e of tDbacco. finely serrated, 
and covered with simple hairs : dried stalks hollow in the centre; flowers 
white, in spikes, and supponed on a tubular sem ; fruit globular ; cap- 
sules about the sixe of a pea, two-celled ; seeds many, \-ery small, oval, 
flattened and marked wiih delicate lines : c V.o^ar light brown : taste hot 
and acrid. Dose, as an emetic 10 to *c grs. As an expectorant 1 to 
5 gr^- 

C:MsUtxrr:ts. — ^Two alkaloids. Lobeline and Inflatine. 

Frrt^'^» xs. — Iniusi.^n ti in 20K IX>«, | to i fli oz. Tincture 
'1 in icV Dose, 10 to 30 ms^ 

Ars^r.KS asa stsrs, — Seeds are ejttT>Mnely aaid : infusion of leaves 
is expectccant, diaphonftic and anti5]pasmodic ; :n Jarge doses emetic 
and rurgaiiv*, iv»ch>nng much depnessavVi, ccJd sw>eats ic. ; used in 
sfttsnK^K asihma, lan-ncial ard brx>nchial catarrh, whooping coagh^ 
and in dyspncra. 



ARrrOSTAPHYLOS. 



377 



Ericaoett-^Heaih family. 

Trees or shrubs ; leax'cs ever green, opposite or whorled and 
exstipuiate ; calyx inferior ; corolU regular, hypogynous ; ovary 
5 to lo celled, surrounded by a disk or scales ; fruit a capsule* baccate 
or berry, generally edible ; seeds numerous, small ; albumen, fleshy. 

Habitat. — Found universally. 

Proper tm.^^^^ny species are astringent, tonic» and diuretic ; 
some narcotic, others poisonous ; fruits of manv are edible* 

Arotostaphylos, Uva Urai, B. P. 

Bear berry ; wild cranberry ; bear's grape. 

Arctostaphylos-arctos a bear ; and staphyUi a bunch nl grapes. 
The fruit is rough like a bear, and the berries occur in clusters like 
grapes. Uva ursi — uva, a grape ; ursus or ursip bear ; the berries are 
tough or bearish. 

Habitat, — Europe, Asia, mountain?, dry and rocky soil, N, 
America. 

Partt f/jr</.— The dried leaves — Uvae ursi folia, B, P, Bearberry 
leaves* 

Characten.^Low^ evergreen shrub. Dried leaves, yellowishi 
green, obovnte, lonjj, broad and short -stalked ; corinceous and obtuse ; 
margin rcvolute ; upper surface shining, glabrous wiihdeprcssed veins j 
lower surface reticulate; odour faint, hay-like ; taste very astringent 
and bitter. Dose, lo to 30 grs. 

Cnmtiiuents. — Arbutin, EricoHn, bitter and amorphous ursone, 
'also tnnnin 6 to 7 p.c, gallic acid, volatile oil a trace, and ash 5 p.c, 

Arbutin is a bitter neutral crystalline glucoside ; to obtain it 

Erccipitale the decoction with lead acetate, add sulphuretted hydrogen. 
Iter, evaporate and crystallize* It occurs in needles, insoluble m ether, 
soluble in warm water ; freely soluble in hot water and alcohol. 
Dose» 5 to 5 grs. Ursone — a resinous crystalline principle; to obtain it 
exhaust the decoction by ether and evaporate^ Fine needles of a 
neutral reaction, without any taste ; insoluble in water, sparingly so 
in ether and alcohol. 

Pr^^/im/rbw^.^Infusum Uvae Ursi, B. P. (i in 20). Dose, \ to i 
fid* ot. Extract of leaves. Dose, 2 to 10 grs. 

AcHans and tne^. — In small doses diuretic, sialogogue and 
antilithic. In large doses it produces vomiting and purging. It has a 
specific action on the urinary organs, Arbutin splits up in the system 
into glucose and hydro-quinone. Uva Ursi is given in cystitis^ 
urethritis, urinary gravel, nephritis, incontinenceof urine and dysuria ; 
also in obstinate gonorrhoea, gleet and leucorrhciea. Arbutin is given in 
cardiac dropsy and in urethritis with success. 



37^ GAULTHfeHIA PRAGRAXnSSnfA. 

Chimajihfla Umbellata, Pipcinewa ChimaphiUu 

Prince's pine, rheumatism weed, king's cure, bitter winter green, 
noble pine, pine tulip. Chimaphila means winter loving. The 
leaves remain green all the winter as though loving that season. 

HahiiaL — N. America, certain parts of Europe, Asia. 

Parts us$d. — The leaves. 

Characters. — An evergreen plant. Leaves long, sharply serrated 
above ; wedge shaped, nearly entire towards the base ; coreacioos, 
smooth, and of a dark green colour, of no odour, and of a bitter astring- 
ent taste. Dose, lo to 60 grs. 

Constituents. — Chimaphilin, a neutral yellow and oystalline 
principle. Arbutin, a crystalline but colourless substance ; ericolin ; 
urson, tannin 4 p.c. : resin, sugar, gum and ash 5 p.c. 

Preparations. — Liquid extract. Dose, J to 2 drs. Decoction (i to 17). 
Dose. I to 3 ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Similar to those of buchu, uva ursi, pareira, 
scoparius. As an agreeable gastric tonic, it increases the appetite 
and aids digestion. As a stimulant of the kidneys, it is given in 
dropsy, lithic acid gravel ; also in hematuria and chronic cystitis 
attended with albuminuria. It lessens uric acid secretions and hence 
useful in gout and rheumatism. It has a peculiar influence upon 
the lymphatics. If used for a long time it causes atrophy of the testes 
and mammas. Fresh leaves bruised and applied are rubefacient. 

Ganitheria FFaggantiaiima, G. Prooombens, Andromeda 
LeachiiaiiltiL G. LaaehnaiiltiL 

Habitat. — Hills of India, Nilgheries, Burmah, Ceylon, Himalaya. 

Parts used, — The volatile oil distilled from the leaves— oleum 
gaultherise. 

Vernacular. — ^Bomb., Hind. — Jav, Gandapuro. Eng. — ^Winter 
green. 

Characters. — An aromatic evergreen shrub ; branches glabrous ; 
leaves 3 cornered, ovate, thick and coriaceous ; contain an essential oil 
of a yellowish or reddish colour ; flowers in white racemes, axillary; 
berries of a blue colour. 

Constituents. — Volatile oil, arbutin, ericolin, ursone, resin, tannin 
6 p.c. ; ash 5 p.c. 

Volatile oil. Oleum Gaultherix — oil of winter green, is a liquid 
of a peculiar brick-red colour, owing to the presence of iron ; of an 
aromatic odour, sweet, warm taste and acid reaction ; readily soluble 
in alcohol. The oil furnishes carbolic acid identical with that 
obtained 'from coal tar. It contains methyl salicylate 90 p.c,, 
gaultherilene — a hydrocarbon, 10 p.c- Dose, 3 to 10 ms. 

Salic^'lic acid.— To obtain it add to Gaultheria oil, diluted caustic 
alkali, saponify by heat and dissolve. Decompose the solution with 
mineral add, separate the met hylic alcohol, evaporate and qrystailii^. 




ANAGAtUS ARVRKSIS. 



379 



Spfritus Gaultheris, Spiiii *«f naiiltl»crta(i in 20) of the ail. Dose, 
^ to I dr. used for flavouring. 

Acdotis and uses, — Like other aromatic essential oils it is antisep- 
tic, carminative, stimulant, diuretic ; in large doses it is a gastric 
irritant. The oil is used as a flavouring agent in dentifrice prepara- 
tions. As a caustic, it is locally applied to warts, corns, &c. Like salicylic 
acid it is given in gout, rheumatic fever, migraine, sciatica^ diabetes, 
cystitis and diphtheria. Locally an ointment is used in eczema and 
other cutaneous eruptions. 

PrimulaceaB— The Priraroae Family. 

Herbs ; leaves, simple and exstipulate ; tiowers regular, perfect ; 
calyx 4-5-cleft and persistent ; ovary superior ; fruit capsular, dehis- 
cent, transverse or valvular ; seeds numerous ; albumen fleshy. 

Habitat, — Native of cold and temperate regions^ rare in the 
tropics. 

Properties* — The flowers of the cowslip are sedative and 
diaphoretic, the roots of some are purgative and emmcnagogue. 

AQa^alliB ArYensia, A. Caerulea 

//abttal.'-lndh, Europe, W. Asia, Nepal, Kamaon, Khassya. 

fhrts used.— 'Th^ herb. 

Verna c u /a r,-^ At iih. — Marijaneh, Eng — Scarlet PimperneU Hind. 
— Jonkmari, Jam gh.ini. Kashmir — KdlA-Changra. Pers.— Geah Surkh 
gul. Jonk mari— Jnnk, a leech, and mari, to kill. The herb is given 
to kill leeches. 

Characters, — Herb, male with red flowers and female with blue 
flowers ; root small ; stem more or less procumbent ; leaves sessile, 
many nbbed, dotted with purple at the back ; fruit pale, of the size of 
a pea ; taste bitter and acrid, 

Constituenis*—i\ substance identical with saponin to which its 
fjoi^onous properties are due ; and a strong smelling, volatile oil of a 
pungent and acrid taste. 

Preparations, — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, 2 to 4 drs. ; a medicated 
oil. 

Actions and t4ses, — ^As an alterative given in melancholia, epilepsy, 
hydrophobia ai>d gout ; as a local sedative it is jpplicd to relieve the 
pain in the Ilvcr and kidneys ; also used in bites of rabid animals. 

Cyclamen Persioum. 

//.^r<5/^i/.— Persia, LeN-ant. 

Parts used, — The tubers^ 

Vernacular. — Pers. — AzarbU| Chabok-Punjeh-Marium, Ushnan* 
Eng.— Sow bread. Hind.^Hathajoree. Ind Bazaar— Bakhtir-i- 
Miryam, 



3^0 DIONYSIA DIAPENSIiCPOUA. 

Characters. — ^Root roundish and tuberous ; leaves roundish, 
ovate, marfi^ins sometimes angular ; capsule 5 valved, coiling up spirally 
with the seed vessel in the centre. 

Constituents, — Cyclamin — an active principle similar to saponin. 
Taste bitter and acrid. Forms a soapy mixture with water. Boiled with 
acid it is converted into glucose and a resinous substance named 
cyclamireten. 

Preparations. — Ointment (i to 40). 

Actions and uses, — Locally used as a resolvent of tumours. As an 
irritant applied to the abdomen to cause vomiting and purging and 
to the pubes to induce diuresis. 

Dionysia Diapensiafolia. 

Habitat. — Persia . 

Parts used. — The plant and the seeds. 

Vernacular. — Ind.-Bazaars, Hamima. Pers. — Mahilu. 

Characters. — A small shrub like a bunch of intertwining woody 
stems. Flowers small, like wall flowers ; leaves like those of moss ; 
seeds 2 lines in length, elliptical, concave on one side and keeled on the 
other, of a brown colour. Dose, 15 to 30 grs. 

Constituents. — A light brown resin ; a crystalline body ; and free 
fatty acid. The resin on exposure to the air becomes covered with a 
glaucous film. It is soluble in sulphuric acid and in alkaline solution, 
The taste is pungent or acrid. It increases the secretion of saliva. 

Preparations. — Poultices ; Infusion (i in 10). Dose, ^ to i fid. oz. 

Actions and uses, — Local sedative applied to boils and scorpion 
bites. Internally the infusion is given as an alterative in gouts 
torpor of the liver and in enlarged spleen. 

Plombagiiiaoea— Lead wort or thrift, or Chitraka family* 

Herbs or under shrubs : leaves entire, exstipulate, and generally 
covered with white or brownish powdery bloom. Flowers regular, rose 
white or blue coloured ; calyx tubular, 5 partite; corolla membranous ; 
fruits utricular, or dehiscing by valves at the apex ; seeds solitary, 
embryo straight, albumen mealy. 

Habitat. — Found in seashore salt marshes and in temperate 
regions. 

Properties. — Most species are acrid and astringent. In some 
species the roots, applied to the skin when fresh, cause blister. 

Plumbago Zeylanioa and P. Rooea. 

Habitat. — Sikkim, throughout India. 

Parts used. — The root. 

r>rfi<ic#i/#fr.— Arab. — Shitaraj. Mar.,Bom., Guz., Duk., Beng. — 
Chitra-niul Burm. — Ken-ky-ok-Phyoo. Can.— Chitra mola. Cing. — 
Sudu nitual. Eng.— White lead wort Hind*«-CiiitrOb chitiika. 




hPOCTHAlCMM, 



^ 



Malyai. — Tumba-Kodivali. Pers. — Shitarah. S 
Tarn-— Codiveli, chitra oiiilaiii* TcL — Agm 
MooHd. 

P. Rosea bears the same vernacular nam 
addition of adjective red, insteadof wlttie. 

Characttrs. — The fresh root esodo a jwi 
toot is in pieces from 2 to 4 tncJiet lao^ 
little finger ; bark thick, brittle, fSKXidi cf 
marked with small scars of Ukn roodc£»: 
irregular fissures ; wood hard^ tou^ and oc a 
acrid and disagreeable. Red diitr^a— cbe 
and the flowers of a red colour, aod beoce tfe 1 

Co;u//A/i'»/i.— Plunibagio, an acri^ 
the ethereal extract of the root with vatcfvi 
tallize. Ill delicate needies or priiiBS» tiiCe 
acrid and biting, melts readily and voJafiiilgi^ 
neutral reaction. Insoluble in cold, mor caoioMc to 
suiubic in alcohol and ether, with sCroog oitrie aad k ckl^pBia iittp 
yellow, with alkalies to cherry red. 

Dose, 10 tu 30 ms. CocDpamid pomiet 
emblic myrobolanst himaj, long pepp e r , 
each equal part. Dose, 20 to 140 gri* S.^ 

powder, it contains chitr^kt mimytC9. .— ^ w 

kutaki, ativisi, and Himaj eqiol paru. Doie, I 4c. 
flatulence. 

Actions and uir^. — A' lodgaiUic 

Die diarrhceia, dyspepsia a: ^ ^al anasarca. IjaaUf^ % 
the root causes more pain than the ordmary Uatoi aatfcfe 
docB not heal readily. A paste oC the root ii mmA m a 
application to rheumatic joinu, Kqiroqr prafjrticJtahl aai i» 
to promote suppuration. Thccnm[ 
in flatulence, rneumatism* The root i» acri4 a«| if i 
the OS uteri causes abortion. Lai cfcierafca m J 
vesicant than chitro or safed chitraJo* wmA a^ giMi «i 
of caustic application. Taken iolcrfiaOf ftkaiyM 
whether dead or alive. In large do«e»iil m a 

Apocyn&ceie.*-I>og kmm bmSkf* 

Trees tir shrubs, usually with acrid Mftf iakr ; km 
exstipulatc» Di^mmonly opposite, •^^fii\%i% mCHt fj$ 
generally iraooth and with pajaltri f«m ; Ar/fr«n of rc^ wmui m 
yellow colour ; calyx 5 partite ; corolla 5 lobed; mmy % ^sM^ ; mM% 
fiti^ma t reiicmbting tn shape an hour ^am or das^ kdl * im^ktiu 



orbmy;iMi» 



us^. Fruit, I or 2 follicles, a caf 

JUS. 

//a^/M/.— Found iu tropical refioan, Aiu, AfJtM« OMcml 
Pcmnsula of India, Malacca, Beogali Java, ' ^^T7«^ 



382 ALSTONIA SOHOLARIS. 

Properties, — They abound in milky juice with which some acrid 
principle is frequently combined, hence many of them are intensely 
poisonous. The fruits of a few species are edible, of others are drastic 
purgative. The bark and seeds in some are tonic, febrifuge and 
astringent. India-rubber is obtained from the juice of many species. 

Allamanda Cathartioa, A. Aubletii, A. OrandiJSora, A. 
Yertioellata, A. Angustifolia. 

Habitat, — America, cultivated in India, growing wild on the 
Western coast and in Goa. 

Parts used. — The leaves and bark. 

Vernacular, — Burm. — Pha yung Chan. Mar. and Bomb. — Jheri 
Sontaka. Can. — Arasina. Malyal. — Arali. 

Characters. — Climbing shrub; leaves elliptical, lanceolate, and 
on short petioles, arranged in fours round each stem ; flowers large 
and funnel or chimney-shaped. 

Constituents, — An alkaloid and a glucosidal acid, similar in action 
to cathartic acid. 

Preparations. — Infusion of the leaves (i in 20). Dose, ^ to i fld* 
oz. Extract of the bark. Dose, 1 to 2 grs. 

Actions and uses. — Hydragogue cathartic, in large doses, emetic. 
Used in lead or painter*s colic, biliousness, and constipation. 

Alstonia Constricta, AoBtralian or Queen's land fever bark. 

Habitat. — East Indies, Australia. 

Parts used. — The bark. 

Bark in flat pieces about quarter foot in length, one to two inches 
broad and about \ of an inch in thickness, highly fragile, very light 
and of a soft spongy texture ; colour deep brown externally, yellowish 
brown internally, with deep longitudinal Assures on its outer surface ; 
smell rather disagreeable ; taste acrid and bitter. Dose, 3 to 5 grs. 

Constituents. — Alkaloid — Alstonine or chlorogenine. 

Preparations, — Tincture (1 in 10). Dose, J to 2 fld. dr. Fluid 
extract. Dose, 2 to 5 ms. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent bitter tonic and antiperiodic ; it 
possesses the combined properties of quinine and nux vomica, and is 
an excellent substitute for cinchona bark ; especially indicated in 
remittent fevers which do not yield to the salts of quinine. It is also 
useful in chronic diarrhcea and as an anthelmintic in worms. It is 
however inferior to dita bark, 

AlBtonla Soholaris, A. Oleandrifolia, Eohites Soholarls. 

Scholaris — school board ; in allusion to the planks prepared from 
the bark of this species and covered with sand being used as a school 
board. In old days children used to trace letters upon these planks. 

Habitat. — Drier forests of India, Travancore, Assam, Coromandel, 
Bengal, South Konkan, Western Africa, Moluccas, Philiipine Islands. 



APOCVKUM CAKNAfilNUM. 



383 



Parts used. — The leaves and bark, " Dita bark." 
Vernacular.— ^nxm, — Lik-htuk. Can. — Jan thalla. Ciiig. — ^Rook- 
tanna-gass. Eng. — Dita bark. Beng., Hind.— Datyiini, Chhatiin. 
MalyaK— Pala, niukaii-p&la* Bomb., Mar. — Satavin, Hori kowan. 
SaD$. — Sapta-chhada, sapta parna, visliala tvdka, vrihat^ tvaka, 

rguchha pushpa, Tam.^ — Ezhilaip palai. Tel, — Edikulapilla, P4la-* 

> garuda, 

Satvin from Sat, seven, and vin» leaves. Satvin is a corruption of 
the Sapta pdrnd, septa, seven, and paina, leaver, in allusion to the 
plant having verlicels, each bearing from 5 or 7 kaves, Vishaia ttak 
or vrihat tvak. Vishala or vrihai means ** broad or large ^* ; and tvak, 
dark, the satavina bark being large or broad, and of a daik colour. 

CharacUrs, — Leaves, 5 to 7 in a whorl, obovate, oblong, 
obtuse. Dita — bark, in flat pieces or irregular fragments of from 
2 to 4 inches long, one to two inches broad, and about I of an 
inch in thickness, very light, and of a spongy texture ; external surface 
darkish brown, and deeply longitudinally fissured ; imernal surface, pale 
or yellowish brown, spongy and resinous looking ; smell disagreeably 
acrid ; taste bitter like gentian. The milky juice furnishes gutta 
percha. 

Conshtutnts. — An alkaloid diiamine ; two bases echitamine 
and echitencne ; also echicaoutchin, an amorphous yellow mass ; 
cchicerin, in acicular crystals ; echitin, in crystallized scales ; 
echitein, in rhombic prisms ; and echiretin, an amorphous subslance- 

Ditamine. — To obtain it exhaust the powdered bark with 
peitroleum ether, and add boiling alcohol. An amorphous, or crystalline 
powder, having alkaline reaction and bitter taste, similar to quinine. 
Dose, S ^o '5 g>^' 

PrtparaWofts* — Tmclurt; (i in 10.) Dose, 1 to 3 fld. drs. Infusion 
(1 in ao). Dose, 1 to 2 fld, ozs. Liquid extract* Dose, 3 to 8 ms. A 
compound decoction (i in lo). It contains alstonia scholaris (bark). 
Tynospora cordifoUa (stem) ; Azadirachta Indica :,bark) and Betula 
Bhojpatra (bark) equal parts. Dose, 4 to 13 drs. in dyspepsia. 

Actions and uses. — As an alterative, the bark is given in gout, 
I heumatism, skin diseases, &c. As an astringent in chronic diarrha-a, 
and in advanced stage of dysentery. As a bitter tonic, in convalescence 
from exhausting diseases and fevers. The compound decoction is given 
in dyspesia and in cachexia due to enlarged spleen. The alkaloid is 
regarded as febrifuge equal to quinine in elTicacy, and is given in all 
forms of mali^rial fevers. It is also a decided Ralacl^jgogue* 

Apooyntun Cannabinum. k Andro8ffinufolium 

Canadian hemp, Indian Physic. 

/Ai^iifa/.— Canada, United States. 

Parts used. — The root, 

CkaracUrs. — ^An indigcntnis perennial plant. Root cyHndricaJ, 
somewhat hr;inclied, thick, brown ur brownish grey, loi Ny 

wrinkled and transversely fissured ; the bark is tJrick, abound n _ iky 



384 ASHDOSPERMA QUBBttACUO. 

juice ; without any odour and of a bitter agreeable aromatic taste* 
Dose, as a diuretic i to 5 grs., as an emetic 10 to 30 grs. 

Constituents. — Apocynin : Apocynein ; gallic acid, tannin, resin, 
bitter extractive, wax, caoutchouc, starch and ash, i p.c. Apocynin 
— a peculiar active principle, not a glucoside, but a resin amorphous 
mass, insoluble in water, soluble in alcohol and ether. Dose, ^ to | gr. 
Apocynein — A glucoside of a yellowish colour, soluble in alcohol 
and water, acts like Digitalin. 

Preparations. — Liquid extract, 5 to 20 ms. Tincture (i in 10). 
Dose, 20 to 60 ms. Decoction (1 in 40). Dose, |^ to ^ fid. oz. 

Actions and uses. — The root is a powerful emetic and hydra^ogue 
cathartic ; in small doses antiperiodic, diuretic and diaphoretic, similar 
in action to strophanthus, adonidin and digitalis ; given in dropsy, 
ascites and anasarca of Bright*s disease. Apocynin is a nauseating 
expectorant and soporific ; it induces drowsiness and diminishes the 
frequency of the pulse. As a hydragogue carthartic and diuretic, it 
is given in uraemia. Under its use albumen and casts are decreased. 
It is given as a resolvent in pleuritic effusions, in hydrothorax and as 
an anthelmintic for destroying worms. 

Aspidosperma Qoebracho-Blanoo, White Quebracho. 

Habitat, — South America, chiefly in Chili and the Argentine 
Republic. 

Parts used* — The bark. 

Characters. — A large evergreen tree. The wood is white ; bark 
in flat, or curved pieces, \ to i inch thick, yellowish grey, deeply 
fissured externally reddish, yellow and striated withm, fracture, 

franular ; without any odour and with bitter aromatic taste. 
)ose, 15 to 6t)grs. 

Coftstituents.^ it contains 6 different alkaloids, aspidospermine^ 
aspidospermatiue, aspidosamine, quebrachine, quebrachamine, hydro- 
quebrachine : a peculiar sugar called quebrachit ; and tannin, 3 — ^4 p.c. 

Aspidospermine and quebrachine represent the activity of the 
drug. 

Aspidospermine — a crystalline body only soluble in oils and fats as 
cod liver oil, from 6 to 8 p.c. With acids it forms salts as sulphate or 
muriate which are freely soluble in water. 

Preparatiotis. — Tincture (i in 5). Dose, \ to 1 fld. dr. Liquid 
extract, not miscible with water. Dose, 10 to 60 ms. Solid extract ; 
Dose, 2 to 8 grs. Vinum quebracho. (6 p.c.) Dose, i dr. to i oz. 

Actions and uses,-^ In small doses, a bitter toniCf antispasmodic 
and antiperiodic, assists the oxygenation of blood, stimulates the 
respiratory centres and promotes digestion. It is known as digitalis of 
the lungs. It is given in dyspnaea due to phthisis, bronchitis, 
emphysema uraemic and spasmodic asthma and spasmodic cough. 
It should "be avoided in dyspnaea, due to heart disease or in old persons. 
It enables one to endure fatigue, to climb elevations; it decreases 
the sensation of need of air during faitguing exercise ; it is also given 



CARtSSJi CARANDAS. 



38s 



in typhoid and other fevers. The solution is used as a protective lo 
wounds. Aspidospermine sulphas has been used hypadcrmically in 
cardiac neurosis and in asthma. Dose, Vt ^^ sV g^* 

Carissa Corundas, Capparis Corundas, Eohites Spinosa. 

Habitat. — Throughout India, dry, sandy or rocky grounds, 
Kangra and Katah jungles. 

Parts used^ — The fruit, bark, and leaves, 

Vertmcuiar. — Beng. — Karamoha. C ing, — Maha-karomba. Eng . — 
Bengal currants. Malyal. — Keelay, Hind., Gu/.,, Mar. — ^Karwando, 
Karonda Timukhia, Sans.^ — Karamardaka, Krishna pal. Tarn. — Pcrin- 
kalak'phalbm. Til. — Pedda kalivi pandu. 

Charactets. — A large, thorny bush. Fruits oval, resembling large 
olives; unripe fruits milky and of a greenish colour, surface shining and 
smoDth, taste a*»tringent and acid; ripe fruits, purple, dark purple, or 
bUck, and contain a delicious sweet pulp ; leaves subscssile, coria- 
ceous, base rounded or relume, ton rarely mucronate ; root bark with 
large stofiy cells forming a network round the wood, 

Comtiiutnis. — The root contains a fixed oil, a volatile oil, a dark 
yellowish re^iu and an alkaloid. 

Pfeparaiiuns* — ^Syrup of fruits. Dose, I to z fid* drs. Juice of 
fruits. Dose, 50 to 90 ms. Decoction of leaves (i in 5).— Dose, 1 to a 
fid. ozs. 

Actiofis and uses* — ^Thc fruits arc stomachic, antiscorbutic, and 
digestive. The unripe fruits arc astringent, used for preserves 
and pickles, and as an antiscorbutic. The ripe fruit is cooling, 
digestive and lefrigerani. The juice of ripe fruits mixed with 
sdkara and elachi is a cooling drink, during hot weather and in 
biliousness. The decoction of the leaves as a refrigerant is used io 
fevers- A paste of the root is applied with lime juice atid camphor 
in hch. 

Oarisaa Schimferi Acocanthera Ouabaio* 
//<?iiV/7A— Somali Coast, 
I^ris used* — The root and wood. 

Constiturnts, —A glucuside ouabain ; u\ vvliiic, transparent, 
rectangular crystals, bitter to the taste, sparingly soluble in cold water, 
much more readily snluhlc in hot waler, insuluble in ether and chloru" 
form, soluble in stong alcohol, homologous to digitahn and strophan- 
thine being more powerful cardiac tonic but less cumulative. Dose, ||^*|y^ 
to jto of a gr. 

PreparaiidtiS. — Watery extract of the root. Dose, ^^5 to ^ gr. 

Acihns and uses, — Ouabain, a direct heart sedative, paralysing the 
cardiac mTisrlc. H>'podennic4lly it is used as a powerful emetic. As 
a ' tic it is even superior to cocaine. In medicinal doses 

it secretion of urine, stimulates the intestinal peristalsis 

and promotes defecation. It chicBy acts on the respiratory cenlresi 

25 



386 HOLARRHKNA ANTIDYSENTERICA. 

hence given in whooping cough to cut short the attack, to reduce the 
violence and to hasten convalescence. In diabetes it lessens the quan- 
tity of sugar in the urine. It promotes the action of the skin and 
produces perspiration. Generally given with potassium bromide or 
chloral hydrate. The juice is used as an arrow poison by the Somalis 
in East Africa. 

Cerbera OdoUam, C. Manias, C. Quaternifdlia. 

Habitat. — Salt swamps in Malabar and creeks on the sea coast 
of India, Ceylon, Laccadives. 

Parts used, — The seeds. • 

Vernacular, — Can. — Honde. Eng. — Odailam tree. Beng. — Dabur, 
Dhakur. Burm. — Kullua. Hind. — Pili Kirbir. Mai. — Odailam. Man — 
Sukanu. Pers. — Kaner zard. Tam. — Kat arali. 

Characters, — Carpels ripe, ovoid, fibrous and woody within ; seed 
one, broad, white and compressed ; cotyledons two and oily. The seeds 
yields 55 p.c. of a bland fixed oil of a pale yellow colour. Dose, of the 
kernel,' i to 4 grs. 

Constituents, — A poisonous glucoside identical with thevetine. 

Actions and uses, — The bark, leaves and milky juice are emetic 
and purgative. Like thevetia neriifolia, the kernel is emetic and 
purgative, in large doses irritant and used for criminal purposes to 
procure abortion. The natives use the fruit combined with dhatura 
seeds in hydrophobia. 

Holarrhena Antidysenterica, H. Pabeaoens, Echites Antidysen- 
terica, Chensmorpha Antidysenterica. 

Habitat. — Throughout the drier forests of India. 
Parts used.-'The bark and seeds. 

remaas/ar. — Arab. — Lisan ul asfir-al-mur. Zaban-i-gungishk-i- 
talk. Beng.— Kurchi. Can.— Kodasiga. Bomb., Guz .Duk. — Pandhra- 
koora, Karva indaijaw, Kudabija, Dholakuda. Eng. — Conessi or 
TcIIicherry bark. Goa. — Khao, Kurro. Hind. — Kueya, Kaureya. 
Portuguese. — Codagapala. corte de pela. Malyal. — Kotakap-pala. Mar. 
— Pandhra Kuda. Panj. — Kuro. Pers. — Zabane kunjashke. Sans. — 
Kutaja— Kalinga, Vatsaka Giri-walika, Sakra sakhin and sakra sina, 
Bhadrayava Vatsa, Kav>'a-sakravija, Tam. — Veppa brishi. Tel. — 
Amkudu. 

Vatsaka— cow tree, Sakra sakhin — Indra*s tree, Sakra sana 
— Indra's food. Sakri vija — Indra's seed. Indrajav or Indraj-ana, 
the name of a small hand instrument used by the Hindu god 
Indra, The instrument resembles in shape a barley seed or 
Java. Zabin-i-jjangish-i-talkha — Jabdn a tongue, gangish a 
sparrow, and talkha, which means bitter. In allusion to the 
bitter taste of the seeds resembling in shape the sparrow's 
tongue. 



tCHNO CARPUS FRUTKSCKNS, 



3*^7 



Characters. — Stem bark, brittle, thick, often twisted or quilled, 
colour dirty white or snuflTlilte. Surface rugous, soft internally; taste 
slightly, bitter at first which soon becomes intensely increased, and 
resembles that of RnnajAi. Root bark, reddish brown, less thick than 
that from the stem, and studded with prominent small warty growths; 
taste very bitter; seeds whitish, resembling oats, or of cinnamon brown 
colour, narrow, elongated » about ^ to | of an inch long, compressed and 
chanelled on one side, with tuft of hairs on the end most remote from 
the root stock ; convex on one side^ concave and marked by a pale Hne 
on the other, easily broken between fingers; taste bitter; odour 
unpleasant, resembling that of Wrightia Tinctoria, 

CoristilNtJiis, — A non-oxygenated alkaloid. Wrightine. 

Wrightinc — To obtain it treat powdered seeds with carbon 
disulphide ; remove the fat oil, then dry, and exhaust with alcohol ; 
add hydrochloric acid and mix with ammonia, when a copious 
flocculem precipitate is thrown down. It is an amorphous powder 
insoluble in ether and in carbon disulphidc, soluble in water and 
alcohol ; aUo in dilute acids, 

Preparatimis. — Decoction (J in lo), Dose, i to 2 fld. drs. Tincture 
(l in 8), Dose, J to 2 fld, drs. Vine Kutej arishta. Dose, \ to i dr* 
Compound Powder, PalhA dya Churana : — Contains Indrajav 5, 
Lodhra 4, vcnivcl 4, hela 5, Jul chitrak 2, Irikatu 4, jAmbul chhal 5. 
dalimb chhrtl 5, dhivuriphul 4» kutaki 5, ativish 5. Jirfm 5, N»'igar 
moth 5, dAtu hnlad 4, Kari^itu 5, kuda chhiit equal in weight to alt 
the above ingredients Dose, i to 2 drs» Confection ** Kutajaleha'*; — 
To decoction of kud/ichhal 20» add jaggary 5, Rasavanti 2. mocharus 
2, trikntu 2, iriphla 2, chitrak I, vcniveJ 2, bcla phal 3, Indrajav 5, 
vekh;lnd 2, blnlamo 1, ativi!»h 5, vavadtng 4, v^lo 4* madli 12 parts. 
Dose, i to 1 to be given in milk or chhds* 

Actions and uses. — The bark and seeds are antiperiodic, similar 
to cinchona alkaloidsi but do not produce nausea, vomiting or 
headache. They arc given in fever, chronicdiarrho^a, dysentery, worms, 
internal haemorrhages; also in chronic chest diseases, as asthma, in 
renal colic, and lo allay the vomiting in cholera. They arc used after 
delivery to give lone to the genital so*t parts (vagina). It is seldom 
given alone, generally in combination with a number of aromalics and 
a«tiingcnt>. Palhadya churana is given in dysentery and itncstinai 
worms* The confection in piles, chronic dysentery and the vine in 
dysentery and diarrh ra, 

lohno Carpus Frutescens, Apocynum FratesoaiiB, Echiles 
Frutescens. 

//i^i'/fl/.— W. Himalaya, Bengal, the Deccanand Concan. 

l\irts used. — The root. 

Vtruactt/ar.-^B^ng.f Hind,, Bomb.— Sy am lata. Can.— Kireumbu. 
Duk— Krishna Sariva* Malyal^Palvulii, Teh^Nallatiga, Moonla- 
gajja namu. 



388 NERJUM ODORUM. 

Syamlata — black creeper. 

Characters. — The plant a creeper, roots similar in appearance to 
those of hemidesmus indicus ; bark dark-brown, closely adhering to 
the wood, harder than that of H. Indicus and having a central pith; 
taste almost absent. 

Constituents^ — Acid, allied to cincho tannic acid — a red colouring 
matter: resin, a small quantity of coumarine and a caoutchouc Hke 
substance. 

Preparations, — Decoction (i in lo). Dose, i to 4 drs. 

Actions and uses, — Alterative, tonic, diuretic and diaphoretic, 
similar to Indian sarsaparilla, given in syphilis, scrofula, skin diseases, 
convalescence from fevers and other dyspeptic affections, and in uric 
acid diathesis. 

Nerium Odorum, N. Oleander (Bose-berry Sparge.) 

Neriura from Neros, humid, the habit of the species. 

Habitat. -'CQnUdX India, Baluchistan, Afghanistan W. Himala}ra, 
Levant, moist places. 

Parts used, — The root and root bark. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Sumul-himar. Beng. — Karabi. Can. — 
Kanagila. Chin. — Kiah Chuh-au. Duk. — Ganer. Eng. — Sweet 
scented oleander, solander laurel. Mar., Bomb. Guz., Hind. — 
Kaner, Khasuba, Khar Zahra. Malyal. — Aralu. Pers. — Khar Zahrah. 
Sans. — Svela Pushpa, Rakta Pushpa Prati Lasa, Ashva Maraka, 
Karavira. Tarn. — Arali. Tel. — Kasturi Patte. 

Sveta Pushpa, white flowered ; Rakta Pushpa, red flowered ; Prati 
Lasa, laughing. Ashva Maraka — Ashva a horse and Maraka, a killer. 
The root if given to a horse will kill the animal. Sumul-Himar or 
Khar-zaharah means asses' bane. 

Characters. — Root crooked ; bark of a pale whi e colour, exter- 
nally thick and corky and marked with very -mall longitudinal 
fissures ; internally very white; wood pale yellow nd porous; odour 
acrid, taste bitter. Oose, 1 10 3 grs. 

Constituents. — The tuber contains two bitter non-crystallizable 
principles. Neriodorin and Neriodorein (both powenul heart poisons) ; 
a glucoside. Rosaginine; an essential oil; and a crvstaiine body, neriene 
identical with digituleine ; tannic acid — wax. The oaves contain an 
alkaloid oleandrnie ; a glucoside pseudocurarine : ilso Neriene and 
Neriantine. 

JWf^rattons. — Medicated oil II 6. To prepa it boil oleander 

root kura\cradva-taila in tila oil 8 and add chitrak.* nt and vax-adinga 

seeds each I . DcctKtion or infusion (i in 10). Dose, r. to 2 drs. Paste, 

Actions afui uses. — Olcanderin, if hypodermic • Jijected, causes 

the heart*s beats to tall from 75 or $0 to 10 or 12, i = inued for some 

time the heart ctMKs to beat and with it the rer :i- 1. Both the 

root and the roi^i Kuk are poweiful diuretic an ulrac tonic, like 



PLIIMERIA ArrMINATA. 



389 



Strophanthine and digttalin^ — an infusion is given in cardiac systole as 
well as in dropsy. The root h often used to procure abortion and for 
the purposes of self-destruction. Villagers use the powder of the 
dried leaves as a remedy for colic, and as an errhine. The wood is 
employed as rat^s-bane, the oil is used as a local apfjlication in skin 
diseases such as itch, herpes, eczema, impetigo, &c* The paste is applied 
to chancres and ulcers on the genitals and on ringworm. 

Plnmeria Aoanilnta, P. AcoUfolia, P, Alba. 

Habitat, — Throughout India, 

Parts usciL — The bark, flowers, leaves and juice. 

Vf macular. — Beng. — Gabar Champa. Duk. — Gulachin. Eng, — 
Jasmine tree, Pagoda tree. Bomb , Hind,, Ouz,, Man— -Dholo Champo 
Khair Champa, Pers, — Aachin, Sans. — Kshira Champa. TeL — Vaaa- 
ganneru. 

Characters. — Plant with milky juice and several blunt truncated 
branches, the leaves long, lanceolate, acuminate, smocth and with 

Earallel veins; floivers. delicate and of an orange colour; root with 
lunt-ended branches. Dose of the juice, 5 to 10 ms. 

Constituents. — The juice contains calcium sail ; a kind of caout- 
chouc, resins, and plumcric acid. 

Preparatiom* — Decoction of the bark (1 in 80). Dose, ) to 1 
fld« D2. 

Aciihm and tuts. — The leaves are used as a poultice to reduce 
indolent swellings The juice, like gamboge* is counter-irritant, and in 
combination with sandal -wood oil and camphor it is applied to relieve 
rheumatic pains, to dispel swellings^ and to cure itch. The root bark 
is a violent cathartic. Asa demulcent it is largely used in gonorrhoea 
and gleet. The flowers are used as antiperiodic. Its branches are used 
like those of chitraka to procure abortion* 

Banwolfla Serpentiita, Opbloxylon Serpentinuxii* 

/f^WflA— Throughout India. Ceylon. 

/^rts used, — The root. 

Veftmculitr, — Beng. — Chandra, Bomb. — Harkai. Can, — Sutruna- 
bhi. Cing. — Avulpori Jovana. Hind. — ChhotaChand. Malyal. — Chivan 
Avelpori. Sans — Sarpagandha, Chandraka. Tam. — Chivan Melapodi. 
TeL — Patalagandhi, 

Characters* — Root in pieces, each from 3 to 5 lines in diameter 
crookcdi and somewhat tapering ; bark soft, corky, of a light brown 
colour, and marked with longitudinal fissures, cut portion presenting 
the appearance of a honeycomb \ wood brittle; odour acrid, taste very 
bitter. 

Constituents, — Alkaloid ophioxylin, an orange coloured crystalline 
principle, resin, starch and wax. The ash contains iron and 
manganese. 



390 STROPHANTHUS KOMBE. 

/^^jr^/fon^.— Decoction (i in lo). Dose, i to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses,--The root is a bitter tonic and is an antidote to 
snake bites and scorpion stings. It is given in colic, dysmenorrhcea, 
dysentery, diarrhoea and cholera. In cholera it is given combined with 
aristolochia indica. It promotes the expulsion of the foetus. 

Strophanthns Kombe, B. P. 

S. Hispidus, known in Africa as onage or orage. Strophanthus — 
strop— turning, to turn, to twist; and anthos a flower. The corolla is 
twisted and tailed lobed. Hispidus — Hairy, bristly; seeds covered with 
long, coarse hairs. 

Habitat, — Tropical and sub-tropical regions, Africa, Java, Sumatra, 
Asia, Zambesi, Guinea, Senegambia* 

Part used. — The mature ripe seed, freed of its long awn. 
Strophanthi semina, B. P. 

Characters, — A climbing plant, pods scimitar shaped ; seeds J 
inch long, | inch broad; each seed has a compressed comose appendage 
attached to the apex resembling that of Taraxacum but longer. It is 
oval, flattened, obtusely edged, of a greenish fawn colour, covered with 
silky hairs and with longitudinal ridge on one side ; kernel white, oily ; 
cotyledons straight ; odour characteristic; taste bitter. All parts of the 
fruit are poisonous. 

Coftstituents. — Strophanthin, Inein, combic acid, oil, &c., but no 
alkaloid. Strophanthin strophanthinum — a neutral active principle, a 
glucoside. The seeds contain it S to 10 p.c. To obtain it add acidulaied 
hydrochloric acid and alcohol to powdered seeds, and ex-aporate and treat 
the extract with water. White shining colourless or yellowish crystalline 
powder. Taste bitter, slightly acid ; freely soluble in water and alcohol. 

1 nsoluble in ether, chloroform and benzin. With hot diluted 
sulphuric acid it splits up into strophanthidin and glucose. Dose, j^^ to 
jV of a grain used hj-podermically. Strophanthin Tannas — an amor- 
phous yellowish white powder, soluble in alcohol, contains 5S p.c. 
of strophanthin, used in a toxic preparation known as the kombe 
arrow poison. 

Preparations, — Extractum strophanthi, B. P. Percolaie the 
seeds with ether and the residue with alcohol, mix with milk sugar 

2 to I and concentrate. Tinctura strophanthi, B. P. (i in 40J. 
Treat the seeds with ether to remove the oil, add spirit (i in 10). 
Dose, ^ to I dr. Decoction (i in 150). Dose» \ to i dr. Tabelbe. 
Mix the tincture with chocolate. Each contains ^ ms. of the tincture. 
Dose, I to 3. 

Acthns and uses. — Strophanthus is like digitalis — a powerfu' 
diuretic and cardiac stimulant. In small doscs it increases the 
force and lessens the rate of the heart's action, it is not 
cumulative, does not cause any gastric or intestinal irrita- 
tion. It has a powerful effect over rigors: it cuts them short 
and prevents their recurrence. In large viosts it paralyses the 



THEVETIA NERIIKOLIA. 3QI 

heart in systole, and leaves the cardiac muscle in a state of 
powerful contraction, thus relieving cardiac dyspnoea. In chronic 
Bright's disease with dropsy, in uraemia, in valvular diseases of the 
heart with anasarca, in palpitation, in pulmonary oedema, in 
exophthalmos with tumultuous heart, in asthma &c., it well replaces 
digitalis. Is is useful in endocarditis, atheroma of the arteries, hysteria, 
chlorosis and in rigors following operations on the urethra. In tetanus 
2 minims of the tincture is found useful. 

Remarks, — In America arrow poison is prepared from S. 
Hispidus. The extract is used to coat hunting arrows. It kills the 
game but the flesh is not injured by the poison. 

Taberna Montana Caronaria, Nerium Diyarioatam and 
T. Heyneana. 

Habitat. — Cultivated in India, Australia, Tropical Asia. 

Paris used, — The milky juice and root. 

Veniacu/ar. — Can. — Nandi-battal. Eng. — Ceylon Jasmine. 
Hind., Guz. — Tagar. Malyal. — Karata pala. Sans. — Nandi Vriksha. 
Tam, — Ghandi Taggarapu. Tel. — Nandi Vardhana Chettu. 

Characters. — Shrub 6 to 8 feet, much dichotomously branched ; 
bark pale ; leaves glossy, cariacious ; flowers, pure white, often double 
and sweet-scented or fragrant; all parts of the plant abound in a bitter 
cream-like sap or milky juice which is free from acridity. 

Constituents. — The root contains resin, extractive matter, and an 
alkaloid. The milky juice contains caoutchouc and resin. 

Actions and uses, — Local anodyne, the root when chewed relieves 
toothache. The juice is very cooling, and is used as an application with 
lime juice in opacity of the cornea, in ophthalmia and wounds. The 
flowers are also used in inflammation of the eyes. 

Thevetia Neriifolia, Cerbera Thevetia. 

Habitat. — West Indies, India, Calcutta. 
Parts used.-r-The bark and oil of seeds. 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Kolkaphul. Burm. — Molamiyai-pan. Eng.— 
Exile or yellow oleander. Guz., Hind., Duk., Mah. — Pivala Kaner. 
Malyal. — Pachcha- Arali. Tam. — Pach-ch-ai -alari. Tel. — Pach-cha-gau 
neru. 

Pivala Kaner — Pivla, yellow, and kaner, the plant ; the colour 
of its flowers which is yellow and safiron like. The colour of the 
foliage resembles that of oleander. 

Characters. — All parts of the plant abound in a milky venomous 
juice, of an acrid smell. Flowers large, saffron coloured, bell-shaped. 
Foliage like that of the oleander. Fruits fleshy and contain 
a hard stone ; kernels of the seeds are extremely bitter when 
chewed, and produce numbness on the tongue. The oil expressed 
from the kernel is of a yellow colour, taste agreeable, and mild like 



392 WRIGHTIA TINCTORIA. 

that of almond oil. Bark in quills, of the thickness of cinnamon, 
externally of an ash colour, soft, corky and brittle. Internally white, 
also soft and full of milky juice, taste bitter. Odour disagreeable. 
Two grains of this bark is equal to lo grains of cinchona bark. 

Constiinents. — The seeds contain 41 p.c. of a bland oil. Thevetin; 
theveresin the active principles, and pseudo Indican. The bark 
contains thevetin. The oil is limpid, almost colourless. Taste 
mild and agreeable like that of fresh almond. Exposed to cold it 
becomes pasty, and even entirely solid at a very low temperature. It 
consists of triolein 63 p.c, tripalmatin 23 p.c, and tristearin 27 p.c. 
Thevetine, a glucoside, is obtained from the cake after expression of 
the oil. 

Preparations, — Tincture (1 in 5). Dose, 5 to 15 ms. as an 
antiperiodic ; 20 to 60 ms. as a cathartic and emetic. 

Actions and uses, — The bark is bitter, antiperiodic ; it is given 
with benefit in remittent and intermittent fevers. In large doses, it 
acts as an emetic and purgative, and in poisonous doses as an acrid 
poison. The oil is emetic and purgative. Like olive oil, it is used 
externally. 

Wrightia Tinotoria, Nerium Tinotoriiim, W. Rothii. 

Habitat. — Central India, W. Peninsula, Burma, Coromandel, 
Coimbatore, Godavery. 

f\trts used, — ^The seeds, bark and leaves. 

Vernacular, — Arab, — Las4nul-aasd-fer. Beng. — Indeijou. Bomb. — 
Kali kura, Bhurkury. Cing. — Vep&l-arsi. Eng. — Sweet Indrajao. 
Hind«, Mar., Guz. — Mitha Indrajav, Kali kudu. Code Indrajava. 
Malyal. — Kota kappala. Pers — Tukhme-ahare-shirin, Zabane kun- 
jashke shirin. Sans. — Hya-maraka. Tam. — ^X'etpala-Verai. Tel.— 
Ankudu Kodisha. 

Characters. — Leaves pale green, soft, elliptical, lanceolate, ovate or 
oblong, acuminate or glabrous ; panicles terminal ; flowers white, 
follicles in pairs, jasmine-like, and fragrant. Tube o( corolla twice as 
long as the calyx : bark over the stem free from red colouring matter 
and smooth : root bark, dark brown or black, and here and there marked 
with warty growths. It is not distinctly sweet, but is free from bitter- 
ness and tinge the sali\-a red : seeds greyish brown, more pointed at the 
ends than those oi karava indrajava, and marked with irregularly 
longitudinal fissures, some having a tendency to become channelled : 
interior is homogeneous, and of a darkish red or brick>red colour. 

/V^parati ns. — Decoction of leaves and bark ^i in 10). Dose, ^ 
to 2 (id,' oxs. 

Actr'ji^s ar:d uses. — Stomachic tonic and febrifuge in combination 
with other vegetable bitter&« given in bowel complaints and during 
convalescence from fe\*er, and other acute diseases. The seeds are 
tonic and are given in seminal weakness^ Leaves when chewed relieve 



ASCLEPIAS CURASSAVICA. 



393 



toothache. The bark is confounded with that of Holarrhena, 
anrfdysenterica, 

Aaelepiadaceee— The Dpalasari^ Asclepias. or milk-weed family* 

Asclepiadacere — i^vsculapius, Asclepias, tutelary god of medicine* 
Shrubs or herbs, generally milky, succulent, and frequently of a twining 
habit; leaves opposite, entire and exstipulate ; flowers regular, pink, 
greenish yellow, white or purple; calyx and corolla 5 partite ; stamens 
5, alternate with the lobes of the corolla t fruit with two follicles, running 
when ripe at an acute an^le, and thus resembling the two horns of a 
calf; seeds woody and frequently comosc with thin albumin. Other 
characters and properties are allied very nearly to those of Apocynacere. 
It is a Dative of Tropici, Southern India, Arabia, Ceylon/Assam, 
China* Japan, 

The roots of this whole order contain chiefly a hitter acrid juice 
which renders thern stimulant, emetic, acrrd, purgative, and diaphore- 
tic ; sonte .npecies are used as antidotes to poisoning by snake bites. The 
roots of some are aromatic and alterative. The root bark of Mudar is 
a good substitute for ipecacuanha, and that of upalasari for sarsa- 
parilla. The milky juice of sev^eral species yield caoutchouc* while 
others afford indigo. 

AsclepiaB Curassavioa. 

Blood-flowcr ; wild or bastard Ipecacuanha ; Indian root or 
yellow milk weed ; silk weed or wild cotton. Blood-flower because 
the herb or the Ica%es have the property of checking capillary 
haemorrhages when applied on a fresh wound. Bastard Ipecacuanha, 
the root i* employed m some of the West Indian islands as an emetic 
like ipecacuanha. 

Habitat. — Central America and West Indies, introduced into 
India and has run wild over all the Peninsula. 

Parts usfd* — The root and juice. 
Vernacular , — Bomb. — Kurki, Kakatundt. 

Characters, — Herb with oleander I ike leaves; flowers red, saffron 
' orange coloured ; seeds and hairs glossy, hence called vegetable silk ; 
root stock short* abruptly divided into yellowish brown rootlets; bark 
thin, 9ini^ when fresh exuding a milky juice; taste bitter and somewhat 
acrid. Dose, 1 5 to 6a grs. 

O '?. — An active principle, Asclepiadin, a glucoside, closely 

resemb tin. 

Pteparaimns, — Fluid extract Dose, 20 to 6oms. Decoction (i In 20). 
Oose* \ to I (Id. 02. Syriip of the juice — Dose, 2 to 6 fld drs. 

Actiotts and uses* — In large doses it gives rise to vomiting, 
diarrhoea; in small doses powdered dried root is an emetic like ipeca- 
cuanha. Syrup of the expressed juice of the leaves given on an empty 
stomach acts as a very prompt ta?niacide (anthelmintic). Decoction 
is used with benefit as an injection in vaginal leucorrhc^a. 



394 ASCLEPIAS TUBEROSA. 

. Asolepias Cornuti, A. Syriaca, Common milk-weed, silk-weed. 

Habitat. — United States. 

Parts used, — The rhizome. 

Characters. — Root wrinkled, knotty, brownish ; bark, thick with 
lactiferous vessels; wood with wedges, yellow ; taste bitter and nause- 
ous. Dose, 15 to 40 grs. 

Constituents. — Asclepion, a tasteless crystalline bitter principle ; 
caoutchouc 6 p.c, milk juice, resin, tannin and starch. 

Preparation. — Tincture (i in lo). Dose, 5 to 40 ms. ; and dusting 
powder. 

Actions and uses, — Alterative, expectorant and emetic, given in 
asthma, cough, fever, &c. The powder is used locally to promote 
cicatrization of wounds, ulcers, &c. 

Afldepias Incarnata, JSesh-coloored asdepias, swamp silk-weed. 

Habitat. — United States. 

Parts used. — The root. 

Characters, — Root knotty, oblong, brownish ; bark thin with central 
pith, emitting milky juice when wounded; taste sweet and bitter. Dose, 
powdered root, 10 to 40 grs. 

Constituents, — Volatile oil, two acrid resins, and asclepiadin. 

Preparations. — Fluid extract. Dose, 15I to 40 ms. Tincture 
(i in 10). Dose 5 to 40 ms. Infusion and Decoction (i in 10). 
Dose, 2 to drs. 

Actions and uses, — As an alterative, given in scrofula, rheumatism 
as an emetic in asthma, etc., as an anthelmintic to kill worms. 

Asclepias Tuberosa. 

Pleurisy root or butterfly weed, silk weed, colic root, orange 
swallow wort, white root, wind root. 

Habitat. — United States. 

Parts used. — The root. 

Characters. — Root large, fusiform, from 1 to 6 inches long, and 
about three-quarters of an inch or more in thickness, head knotty and 
slightly but distinctly annulate, and longitudinally wrinkled, externally 
orange brown, internally whitish, tough, and having uneven fracture. 
Bark thin, in two distinct layers, the inner one whitish with lar^e 
white medullar)' rays, inodorous and of a bitterish somewhat acrid 
taste. Dose of the powdered root, 20 to 00 grs. 

Constituents. — Wood contains two resins, a crystalline glucoside 
Asclepedin, gum, salts, a volatile odorous fatty matter, starch, tannin, 
gallic acid, albumin, pectin. Asclepedin is freely soluble in alcohol 
and ether, sparingly so in water. 



CATOTROPIS GIGANTEA. 395 

PreparaUoti.^Tincture (i in lo). Dose, 5 to 30 ms. Infusion or 
Decoction (i in 20). Dose, ^ to i fld. dr. Liquid extract. Dose, 20 
to 60 ms. Infusion (i in 15). Dose, i to 2 drs. 

Actions and wj^^.— Diaphoretic, expectorant, emetic, cathartic, 
and heart sedative. It is used as a speci6c in pleurisy. It should be given 
in frequent doses till it produces free perspiration and expectoration. 
Asclepidin is very useful in pneumonia, asthma, hepatic derangements, 
diarrhoea, dysentery, rheumatism, amenorrhoea. It promotes the 
eruption in exanthematous fevers. Generally given with gelsimin, 
veratrin, hyoscyamin, podophyllin, sanguinarin, &c. Its power is 
increased by administering it in warm water. 

CatotropiB Oigantea, C. Procera, Asolepias Oigantea 
(White variety). 

liahitat. — Throughout India, Malay Islands, Persia, Africa, S. 
China. 

Parts used, — The dried root bark (catotropis cortex), milky juice, 
leaves and flowers. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Ushar. Beng. — Shwet-akund. Burm. — 
Mayo-bin. Can. — Yakke-gida. Cing. — Varagaha. Eng. — Gigantic 
swallow wort. Bomb., Mar., Guz., Hind. — Akadu Mundar Akund, 
Rui. Malyal. — Erika. Panj. — Pachkand. Pers.— Khark, Drakhte- 
zahrnak, Shakar-di-Tighal. Sans. — Arka, Rudra Aditya, Surya patra, 
Mondara shri-ai, Taur-kam. Tam. — Erukku, Arka Vella yercam. 
TeL—Tella Jelledu. 

Drakhte Zahrnak — poison tree. Alarka, or white, and arka, or 
red, the colour of their flowers. 

Characters, — Most acrid of all the asclepeas ; every part of the 
plant abounds in an acrid milky juice. Shrub 6 to 10 feet, of an ash 
colour and of a peculiarly foetid odour. Root tapering and thick ; bark 
small, flat or arched and in pieces, brownish or pale white externally, 
yellowish grey internally. It is corky, soft and fissured longitudinally; 
taste mucilaginous, bitter, acrid; odour peculiar. Wood porous, yellow- 
ish and light; leaves thick, oblong, ovate, wedge-shaped, rather acu- 
minate ; stem-clasping at the base, upper surface smooth, under 
surface pale and clothed with woolly down ; flowers star-shaped, of 
a pink or dark purple colour, rather large and showy ; leaflets, keel- 
tormed, circinately recurved at the base. Dose, as an emetic ^ to I dr., 
as a diaphoretic and alterative, 5 to 10 grs. 

Constituents, — Mudarine, caoutchouc, yellow bitter acrid resin. 
Mudarine an active principle, soluble in alcohol and ether, insoluble 
in cold water, and olive oil, possesses the singular property of con- 
gealing by heat and becoming again fluid on exposure to cold. 

Preparations, — Powder. Dose, as an alterative 3 grs., as an emetic 
30 to 60 grs. Infusion (i in 10). Dose, \ to i fld. oz. Aquae (1 in 50), 
Dose, I to z ozs. Bougies. Medicated oil (arka taila). Boil together 
the juice 16, sweet oil 8, and turmeric. Used in eczema. 



396 CATOTROPIS GIGANTBA. 

Actions and uses, — As an alterative the root with calomel and 
antimonial powder is given internally, and the bark made into paste 
applied to the legs and scrotum, in elephantiasis, to leprous 
ulcers, leucoderma and other skin diseases. The root bark, powder- 
ed, soaked in the milky juice, dried, and made into cigars, is 
smoked as an inhalation in coughs and asthma. Dried bark is an emetic 
a very good substitute for ipecacuanha, and with opium it is used like 
Dover's powder in dysentery. The leaves are deobstruent, with rock 
salt are roasted in a close vessel and the ashes given with whey by 
the natives in enlargement of the liver and spleen, in intestinal worms, 
ascites, anasarca, and in dysenter^% As rubefacient the leaves 
are smeared with oil, and used as varalians, to relieve colicky 
pain and tympanitis. As a poultice, they give relief to inflammatory 
swellings. The flowers are tonic, stomachic and digestive, and used 
in cough, asthma, &c. The juice is drastic purgative and caustic, 
in combination with the juice of Euphorbia neriifolia applied to caried 
teeth to relieve pain and dropped into the ear in earache Also applied to 
the cerWx to procure abortion. Given in rheumatism, malarial and low 
hectic fevers ; and largely used in syphilis, hence known as vegetable 
mercury. The juice mixed with powdered wood of Berberis asiatica 
and the juice of Euphorbia Neriifolia made into tents, and intro- 
duced into the rectum to relieve tenesmus. In scorpion and insect 
bites, it relieves the pain and burning. As a depilatory it is used by 
tanners, and also by women for removing hair from the pubes and 
other parts. It is a useful local application for the relief of painful 
joints and swellings, and for ringworm of the scalp. In combination 
with the juice of Natdo Thuhar and with the wood of Berberis Asia* 
tica it is used as a caustic for closing sinuses and fistula in ano. 

Cerope^ Aouminata et Bulbosa, C Tuberosa. 

HahitaL — W. India, Punjab, Upper Gangetic plain, Malabar Hill. 

Parts used. — The bulbous root. 

Vernacular. — Mah. — P£tila tumbadi. Mar. — Khappar kadu. 
Punj. — Gal6t. Tarn. — ^Bach-chalimanda. Tel. — Manchi ^landa. 

Characters. — ^A creeper. Roots bulbous, as large as a small apple ; 
tubers fleshy, when fresh taste like turnip, of a dark colour and smooth 
externally, apex slightly depressed with a constriction at the other 
end. On section white, pith-like and starchy. When chewed they 
are mucilaginous like salep, and somewhat bitter. Dose, i to 2 grs. 

Constituents. — ^A bitter alkaloid cerop^n, fat, sugar, gum» 
albuminoids, starch. The ash contains manganese. 

Actions and uses, — All parts of the plant are edible. The tubers are 
nutritive tonic, gi\*en in leucorrhcea, seminal debility, bowel com- 
plaint of children &c. It forms an ingredient of aphrodisiac and tonic 
confections. 

Ootmoeti^ma RaMmosum. 

Habitat. — W. India, Ceylon, Chittagong. 
Parts used. — ^The root. 



WEMIA EXTFNSA, 



397 



Vernacular. — Can, — GhiVra huvvu. Goa* — Gharphul* Mai. — Vattu 
valli, Mar.^ — Shendvd, Shendari, Marvel. 

Charutiers. — Climber running over high trees. Leaves large^ 
coriaceous, snioolh, sometimes rounded with a group of dusty brown 
prominent glands at ilje iunction of the petiole with the leaf ; root 
light brown, externally ana scabrous, of a starchy and friable fracture* 
Without any taste» but a fLunt odour like ipecacuanha. Dose, of the 
root bark, 5 to 10 grs. 

Cofistitueftts. — Crystalline fatty acids, soluble in cold rectified 
spirit and aqueous alkaUes ; an acid resin which is glucocidal related 
to jalapin, gum, sugar, and carbo-hydrates, etc., having the properties 
of dextrin ; on incineration the roots leave inorganic matter. 

Prrparatmis. — Decoction (i in lo), Dose^ 4 to 6 drs, 

Aciiofis and u^e$. — The rout bark is an efficient cholagogue and 
given in dyspepsia with fever and clay-coloured stools. It restores the 
natural colour to stools even in cases where euonymin or mineral 
acids, &c., have failed. 

DcBmia EEtensa, Afiolepias Echinata^ Cynanohum Extensa m, G« 
Cordifolium, C, Bicolor. 

Habitat, — ^Throughout India. 

Piarts Med, — ^The root and leaves. 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Chhiigul. Can, — Kutinga^Jultuve, Talavar- 
naballi. Duk — Utran, Jutuk. Guz, — r^as^ala-dudheli. Mar., -Hind. — 
Utran» SAgav^ni. Malyal. — Velip-parutti. Sans* — Phala-Kantak. 
Tam- — UtlAniani> Vclipparulti, TcL^ — Jittu*paku. 

Utran, or Uttara, means ejecting or vomiting, or antagonist* 

Characters* — Twining plant ; flowers dull white and drooping; 
follicles with curved beak and covered with soft bristles ; leaves 
roundish, cordate, acuminate, and pubescent, auricled ai the base; 
odour mousy and peculiar; taste faintly bitter and nauseous, when igni- 
ted evolve alkaline fumes like I hat of tobacco or adhaloda. The root 
is long, slender, and of a dirty while colour ; root bark wrinkled and 
longitudinally fissured, marked with scars of fallen rootlets j wood 
whitish, porous, and arranged in wedges. Dose, 5 to to grs. 

Constituents. — Alkaloid DcEraine — soluble in ether, alcohol and 
/inter ; ash, 15-5 p*c. 

Preparations^ — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, \ to i fid. 01. The 
juice of the leaves. Dosc» | to 1 dr. 

Actions and uses. — Emetic and expectorant, given lu cnddreii m 
pulmonary bronchial catarrh and in asthma. The juice of the leaves 
is used as an anthelmintic. Locally the juice mixed with lime 
(chunam) is applied to ihcumatic swellings, boils and abscesses with 
relief. In large doses it acts as a purgative. 

Like Dcrmea Extensa, the leaves of hoya viridiflora are employed 
by the natives as an application to boils and abscesses and as an emetic 
and expectorant. 



398 GOXOLCBUS COXDURANGO. 

Dre^ Yolubilis Tar. Lacuna. 

Habitat. — ^Bengaly Assam, Peninsula. 

Parts used. — The root, herb and fruit. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — ^Tita kanja. Hind. — Xak chikni. Mar. — 
Hirandadi, ambri. Tain. — Kodi-palaL Tel. — Ehidhi palla. 

Characters. — Large climber with green flowers in drooping umbels; 
bark smooth and ash coloured ; leaves coriaceous, at the base rounded 
or cordate: follicles obtuse, and covered with brown mealy substance 
which consists of moniliform hairs. Dose of the root, lo to 40 grs. 

Constituents. — ^The fruit contains a glucoside Dregein, in light 
coloured transparent scales, of peculiar bitterish sweet taste, neutral 
or slightly acid reaction, soluble in water. 

/Reparations. — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, ^ to 2 02s. 

Actions and uses. — Emetic, diaphoretic, expectorant, diuretic and 
sternutatory. The root and tender stalks are intensely bitter and 
nauseant. As a diuretic thev* are given in dropsy. The leai-es are 
employed as poultices to bc>ils and abscesses. The root is applied to 
snake bites. 

Gmiolobiis Condaran^ 

Habitat. — Equador, Peru and Central America. 

Parts used. — The bark. 

Characters. — Bark in quills, or curved pieces ; reriderm. ash grey 
colour, wrinkled, warty and with greenish black lichens attached ; 
liber pale, brown and striated ; occur siigh:. taste biiter and acrid. 
Do6e, 1 5 to 00 grs. 

Constituents. — A glucoside, condurargin resia. alkalcid, starch, 
tannin, gum, &c. 

Pretaratr^ns. — Liquid extract. I>ose, 3 to co ms. Vine 
(i in io>. Dose, i to 4 fld. dr^. Infusion \i in zo). Dcse. ^ to • fli. 
czs. Tincture (i to 5). Dc^se, 1 to 4 fld. drs. 

Ac:sr:ns and uses. — Alterative, tcnic and diuretic : emttic in large 
do6es. given in chronic syphilis, rheumarism. almc<: as a specific in 
canorr o: the stcmavh, i: mitigares caret r rair, improve* the appetite 
and increases strength considerably. Cor o-^ ran gin :s a nene pc-^oa. 

GjmaeBia Lactiferam. 

Cow plant, Ceylcn cow :ree. Berg.— Kiri Harguca. 

Cow tree derives its name rVcm prccucirg a 'uice sim: ,ir :c- milk 
in colour and ccnsxsteuce. The leaves are aCE:in:scercd :c niirses to 
increase the secretioii ot milk. 

Gymnema Gymno*, raked; and rxn^a a thread — ir. allcsicn to 
peculiar 




GYM^fEMA SVXVBSTRE, 



309 



Qymnema Sylvestre, Asclepias Geminatai Periplacsi SylYestria. 

Habitat, — ^Deccan Peninsular* Bengal, Nepaul, Assam, Eist 
Africa, East Indies. 

Parts used, — The root and leaves and the acid principle. 

Vernacular. — Ben — Merasingi. Hind, and Bomb. — Meshasingi, 
Can.— Sennagerse* Cin. — Binnug. Duk< — Parpatrah, Mar. — Kavli 
Wakandi, Sans.— Mesharingi, Tarn, — Shiru-kurut^ja. Tel. — Poda 
patra. 

Meshashringi : — Mesha, a sheep (ram), and shringi horns^ in 
allusion to the follicles resembling the horns of a sheep* 

Characters, — Milky shrub of a twining habit; leaves from 4 to 5 
inches long, ovate, lanceolate, and of a dark green colour, shininj^ above 
and pale beneath ; flowers small, yellow, with globular apex oi" white 
stigma ; root about the size of the little linger and resembling Hemides- 
mus root ; wood tough ; bark spongy and of a reddish brown colour j 
file acrid and saltish. 

Coffstiti4fnfs, — The sun dried leaves contain resin ; a bitter neutral 

Erinciple ; albuminous and colouring matters ;pararabin, glucose, carbo* 
ydrates, tartaric acid, gymnemic acid 6 px. and ash. The bark contains 
starch and a large amount of calcium salts and other crystalline 
concretions. 

Gymnemic acid: — Triturate the leaves in water, add sulphuric ncid 
and precipitate the extract. In appearance it resembles chrysophanic 
acid. Ft fornjH insoluble salts with alkaloids, a fact which accounts for its 
property of masking the taste of quinine and of sweets. 

Preparatiftiis^ — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, ^ to i fid, oit. 

/iciiofts and uses. — Astringent, stomachic tonic» and refrigerant, 
given in fever, cough. The root powder mixed with castor oil is applied 
externally like Ipecacuanha to snake and insect biles. The leaves are 
applied Uke varaliatis to enlarged li%*cr or spleen; the leaves when 
cnewed benumb for a time the taste tor sweets and bitters 5uch as 
sugar and quinine, 

Hemiddsmus Tndicus. B. R. Periploca Indica, Smilax Aspera 
Asclepias Pseudosara ¥ar. Latifolia. 

Habitat.—^, W. and S. India^ Bengal and Bombay, 

Parts used.^Tho roots, Hcmidesmi Radix, B, P, 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Anslabatunnar. Cing. — Irimusu. Can* — 
Djda-sali, Sngadc Karibanta. Bcng. — Anantauiool, Duk — Sttgr^ndhi- 
p;Vli, NatkiVaushbah. Eng, — Indian scented and country Sar 
Hind. — Anantamula, Magrale — Jangali Chambcli, KuraL Hind 
Malyal. — Narst>nmh, Nannari-Kizhanna- Gu2., Mar, — ^Gopa-Kaiiga 
Uperas;lra» Dudhsali. Goa,^ — Upcrcao. Per*. — Aushbahe-hindi^ Va?a 
minc'barri, Mugraboo, Sans, — Anantamula, Gopi mulama, sugandhi- 
utapala, sariva, Naga Jihva (snake tongue) Shadipa, Tun.— N'aitnun. 
Tel, — Gadi-Sughandi. 



400 HEMIDESMUS INDICUS. 

Characters, — Plant twining ; root cylindrical and tortuous ; stem 
glabrous, long and rigid ; root-bark fissured, longitudinally and cracked 
or broken transversely ; wood hard and of a yellow colour ; bark wood 
reddish, brown or dark brown coloured ; odour aromatic and cam- 
phoraceous like that of sassafras, tonka bean, or mellilot. Taste sweet 
but somewhat acrid. 

Constttuenis. — Coumarin. The aroma and taste of the drug are due 
to this constituent ; a volatile oil a crystallizable principle hemidesmine ; 
and a crystalline stearopten called smilasperic acid. 

Pre/Natations. — Infusion (i in lo). Dose, I to 2 fld. ozs- 
Syrupus Hemidesmi, B. P. (i in loj). Dose, J to i fld. dr. 

Actions and uses. — Valuable alterative, diaphoretic, diuretic, tonic; 
the powder fried in butter is given to children in thrush. With hon^ 
it is given in rheumatic pains and boils. As a diuretic, its infusion with 
cows milk is given in scanty and high coloured urine, strangury and 
gravel. As a diaphoretic and tonic, it is given in fevers with loss of 
appetite and disinclination for food. As an alterative it is given in chro- 
nic rheumatism, skin diseases, scrofula, syphilis, cachexia, constitu- 
tional debility &c. Infusion with onion and cocoanut oil is given in 
piles. It is a good substitute for sarsaparilla. Often mistaken for 
Ichnocarpus Frutescens (apocynaceae). Both are called in Sanscrit 
Sariva. Barleria preonitis. — Karanta (Hind), is frequently sold by 
druggist, for upalasari. 

Pentatropis Microphylla, Asdepias Tenniflora, Asolepias 
Miorophylla, P. Spiralis. 

Habitat. — Tropical plant. 

Parts used. — The root. 

Vernacular. — Guz. — Shingroti. Ind. — Amber vel. Malyal. — 
Perpada gum. Punj.— Pushpi. Tam. — Ambar-vel. Tel.— Pula- 
pala. 

Characters — A creeper. Leaves thick, smooth and fleshy, from 
I to 2 inches long and from i to i J inches broad, cordate, ovate, 
and with a very small sharp point at the apex ; stem very slender ; 
root thick as the little finger, of a pale brown colour externally, and 
white within ; smell of the root camphoraceous, and taste acrid. 

Preparation. — Decoction of root (i in lo). Dose, i to 2 fld. ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Alterative, a constant ingredient in native 
alterative decoctions, used in gonorrhoea, syphilis, rheumatism and 
general debility. 

Tylophora Asthmatioa, Aaolepias, astlunatioa, cynandiam, 
Ipeoaonanha, C. Yonutoriam. Tylophora PobMoena. 

Habitat — Bengal, Madras, Ceylon, Southern India. 
Parts uied. — ^The dried leaves and the root. 



isOOAHiAcnm, 



401 



Vernacular. — Beng*. Hind. — Jangali-pikw^ua^ antamul. Cing. — 
Bin-Nuga. Duk. — Pitkari. Malyal. — Valli-P^la. Sans. — Gandhana 
kuli, Anierpachak. Tarn — Codegan, Nanga Murich cham, Nay-palau 
TcK — Kukka-pala. Bomb., Mar. — ^Pittkari, Kharaki, kharaki rasna« 
Can. — Ad u mutioda 

Khadaki Rasna^ Khadaki or khadak, a rock, and rasaria» a brow- 
nish coloured fictitious root, in size resembling the little finger ; the 
root grows in the crevices of rocks, Antamul, antaor anterdun means 
entrails, and muU the root ; the root is the remedy to clear or to 
free or empty, the intestines from dysenteric motions. Anter 
patchak — antcr, intestines, and pachak, to digest. The root is 
intended to digest or assimilate what may be in the intestines. 

Characters, — ^The leaves 2 to 3 inches long, opposite, entire, ovate, 
roundish, acuminate, cordate at the base, glabrous above and downy 
below; dried leaves yellow^ brittle, thick and harsh; odour disaj^reeable 
when bruised and taste nauseous. Root twining, fleshy, whitish; each 
being 6 to 7 inches long, of a pale white or brown colour, slender, 
brittle and wiry : thickest root about two to three lines in width ; root 
bark wrinkled, longitudinally fissured, and here and there marked with 
scars of fallen rootlets ; wood light and porous with a somewhat 
aromatic and acrid smell ; taste slightly bitter. In general appearance, 
it resembles valerian root. 

Cr,nsttiiirntii, — An alkaloid tylophorine and an emetic principiet 

Preparatifm. — Decoction of leaves (i in 10). DD$e» \ to i oz. 
Infusion of root bark (1 in 10). Dose, \ to i fid. oz. 

Actions and uses. — Emetic, diaphoretic, expectorant, stimulant 
and nltcraiive, A good substitute for ipecacuanha, given in dysentery, 
catarrh and fever. As an alterative in sy[)hililic rheumatism and as 
a bitter aromatic and stimulant to increase lochia in parturient 
women. Locally it is soothing and applied to relieve gouty pain. 
As an emetic the powdered leaves 25 to 40 grains is combined with \ or 
i grain of tartar emetic, and as an expectorant powdered leaves, 5 to 5 
grains is generally combined with opium. The root bark may be given 
in similar doses and for similar purposes. 

Lo^aniaoesa, Spigella Sirychnos, Niramali or Kuohala 

family. 

Shrubs, herbs, or trees ; leaves opposite, entire, and stipulate, 
siipulcssometimfs in the form of raised line or rid^e ; ovary 2. to 3 or 4 
celled ; style sitnplc below and as many divisions above as there are cells 
in the uvary. Fruit capsule, or a drupe ; seeds generally peltate, some- 
times winged, fleshy, or cartilaginous and albuminous* Natives of 
tropical regions, 

Properties. — Almost all the plants are poisonous. They act on 

be nervous bystem and produce frightful convulsions. Some arc used 

torptrl or paralytic conditions of the muscular system j others are 

! anthelmintic, but their use requires much caution. They 

^Luerally to be given in very small doses, 

at ^ 



402 GELSBMIUM MTIDUM. 

OelBemium Nitidum, B. P., Oelsemiam SemperYirenB, 

Yellow Jasmine, Wild Jasmine. 

Habitat. — Southern States of N. America. 

Parts used. — The dried rhizome and roots — Gelseraii Radix, B. P- 

Characters.—AcWmhmg^AznX. ; flowers showy, yellow, and forming 
festoons from one tree to another ; rhizome, cylindrical, long and thick, 
fracture splintery. Root thin, of a yellowish brown colour and tough ; 
bark thin and silky, closely adherent to the pale yellow porous wood ; 
odour aromatic, taste bitter. Dose, 2 to 20 grs. 

Constituents, — Two alkaloids, Gelsemine and gelseminine ; also 
Gelseminic or gelsemic acid ; a volatile oil, resin and starch. Gelsimiua 
Gelsimine — an active principle. To obtain it add acetic acid to 
the tincture; the resin is precipitated; concentrate the filtrate, and add 
ether or chloroform, when gelsemic acid will be precipitated ; 
next add potassium carbonate to precipitate Gelsemine, which is 
extracted by adding chloroform, ether or benzene. It is an amorphous 
alkaline very bitter mass, or a pale yellow amorphous solid of intensely 
bitter taste ; possessing strong basic properties, neutralizing the 
strongest acids and forming soluble salts. It is sparingly soluble in 
water. Dose, -^^ to ^V ^^ ^ g"*- Gelsiminae Hydrochloridum. It is 
freely soluble in water. Dose, ^V to ^^ of a gr. Liquor Gelsiminae 
Hydrochloride, 1 gr. in i dr. 

Prefarattons, — Alcoholic extract. Dose, J to 2 grs. Tinctura 
Gelseminii, B. P. (i in 10). Dose, 5 to 15 ms. Fluid extract (not 
miscible with water). Dose, 1 to 10 ms. 

Actions and uses. — Similar to those of conium, digitalis, aconite 
veratrium and antimony. As a motor depressant it acts on the spinal 
cord. In medicinal doses it lowers the temperature, impairs sensibility, 
leads to diaphoresis, gives rise to languor, feeble muscular action, 
slowing of the pulse, drooping of the lids and dilated pupils. In large 
doses it paral\-ses motion and sensation, produces complete anaesthesia 
vertigo, staggering gait, extreme prostration, loss of speech, cold 
sweats and death by asphyxia or by paralysis of respiration. Asa 
nerve sedative it acts primarily on the nerve centres, affecting both 
motion and sensation, but not on the nerve ends as is the case with 
conium. Gelsimine is singularly efficient in antagonizing the mental 
condition, in removing the slate of abnormal fear of any approaching 
ordeal or any ordinary- trial of life, li entirely relieves a woman 
of her fear of impending: confinement c^r a student from his fear 
for examinations. Gelsimine Hydrochlorate dilate> the pupils like 
atropine, over which it has the ad\-ar.tage of quicker action and of a 
mere rapid passing otl'ot" the d:ldUtion, It is crtraiiidicated when- 
ever there is a ucjkk heart. As an anlispasrr.odic, it is given in 
intercostal neuralgia; in neuralgia of the nith nerve, sci.itica, 
rheumatism, muscuUr spasms, in toothache, spasmodic asthma, 
dx-smenorrhofa, sick headache, chorea, hysteria, sunstroke, pruritis, 
icrema, epilepsy, tetanus., also in insomnia, ielirium tremens, and 



SPIGELIA MARILANDICA. 4O3 

irritable bladder. As an antiperiodic and also on account of its 
property of lowering the pulse, it is used in remittent and typho- 
malarial fevers. It should not be given in a weak heart. 

Spigelia Marilandloa. 

Spigelia anthelmia or Demarara pink root ; Carolina pink ; Worm 
grass. 

Habitat, — United States, Maryland, Guiana. 

Parts used, — The rhizome and roots. 

Characters. — A perennial worm grass. Flowers large, showy, scarlet 
or crimson externally, and yellow within. Rhizome is horizontal, 
long, thick, of a purplish brown colour; upper surface cup-shaped, 
and marked with scars ; lower surface having many thin brittle 
rootlets ; odour aromatic. Taste, sweetish bitter. Dose, 1 to 2 drs. 

Constituents. — A bitter principle Spigiline, a volatile oil, resin, 
tannin Jignin, wax, salts and gum. Spigeline, an alkaloid. To obtain it 
distil the tincture with milk of lime and add hydrochloric acid, 
evaporate to dryness. It is soluble in water, alcohol, insoluble in ether. 

Preparations, — Liquid extract. Dose, 10 ms. to i fld. dr. 
Compound infusion of spigelia — worm tea— contains senna, lo ; 
fennel, 10 ; manna, 30 ; spigelia, 15 ; water, 500, Dose, i to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses, — Anthelmintic or vermifuge. In large doses, irri- 
tant cathartic ; in poisonous doses, narcotic. In small doses it is given 
with cathartics, as senna, calomel, &c., to expel round worms. In 
large doses it is an uncertain cathartic and may produce vertigo, dilated 
pupils, spasms and convulsions. It is usually given with an active 
purgative in mitral, or aortic disease, in palpitation of the heart and 
dyspnoea. 

Strychnos Calubrina, S. Rheedii, Lignam Colabrinnm. 

Habitat. — Malabar Coast, drier parts of Ceylon, W. Deccan, 
Peninsula, Cochin. 

Parts used. — The wood and root. 

Vernacular. — Hind., Beng.— Koochilalata. Eng.— Snake wood, 
serpents' wood. Guz. — Goagari-lakri. Malyal. — Modira Kaniram. 
Mar — Deva kadu. Tel. — Naga-musadi, Tansoopaum, Rumphius. 
Arbor ligni colubrini. Tansoopaum — tan-soor, dancing, and paum, a 
serpent. In allusion to the serpent cobra de capello, which is known 
f(;r dancing. It erects its head and moves it from side to side at the 
sound of music. 

Characters., — Wood of a light brown colour, knotty and crooked, 
sometimes covered with a scabrous soft bark which is poious and hard ; 
smell acrid ; taste very bitter. 

Constituents. — Alkaloids — Strychnine and Brucire. 

Preparations. — Tincture (i in 10). Dose, 2 to 10 ms. 



404 CURARE. 

Acttons and uses. — As a febrifuge it is given in obstinate inter- 
mittent fever and quartan agues. As a tonic, it is given in dyspepsia 
and malarial cachexia. Largely used by the natives as a remedy in the 
bites of Nag (snake) both internally and externally. In skin alffeciions 
it alleviates pain and removes swellings. 

StryohnoB CastelnflBana and other spades. Best knovn as 
Curare, Urari, Woorara, or Wonrala. 

HabitaU — Brazil, Guiana. 

Parts used — A resinoid extract from the bark ; also obtained 
from paullinia curare and other plants of the strychnos family. 

Constituents. — Curarina or curarine, resin and fat — Curarina, an 
alkaloid, an active principle, a yellowish brown powder, or in crystals, 
soluble in water and alcohol. It contains no oxvzen. Dose, -^^ to j'g gr. 
Resin : — a blackish brown extract, bitter and friable ; soluble in water 
(; in 4). Dose, of curare hypodermically ^^ to ^ gr. ; of curarine y^*^ 
to Y^^ gr. hypodermically, and yj^ to -^^ gr. by the mouth. 

Actions and uses, — Sedative and antbpasmodic and a powerful 
motor depressant. Like coniine and gelsimine, it paralyses the end 
organs ot the motor nerves and throus^h them the voluntary muscles. 
The brain, cord, and sensory nerves are subsequently affected. The 
heart is stimulated at first, then depressed; eyelids droop, the eyeballs 
protrude, the vision is disordered, and curara diabetes sets in. The 
absorption is very slow, hence it is eliminated by the kidneys without 
any change. Hypodermically injected it is promptly absorbed. 
Hence tried with S4>me success in tetanus, hydrophobia, chorea, 
epilepsy and other convulsive and spasmodic nervous affections, sis 
much as 4 grains .of curare having been injected subcutaneously in 
24 hours. 

Stryohiios Oantheriana, Stfjehiios ■alaceenses. 

/^i5iAf/. — ^Tropical districts of Laos^ Anan, and Tooquin 
mountains. 

P.trts used. — The bark. 

lWttac»J*tr, — Eng. — Tropical Bindweed. Chin. — Hoang>nan or 
Hw-ang nao. A creeping vine, 

C %*^«ti»^J9rs. — Allied to nux vomica and ignatia. It contains alka- 
loids str\vhnine and brucine^ the latier predomzna:icg in very large 
^;uan:::y* In nux vomica anc in ignat ia. strychnine predominates. 

Pi^r/^nui'xs, — Powdered bark. EKxse, i to 5 grs. Tincture 
v^i :.^ 5 p«t. s*r^^ Dsxse, 5 to 50 ms,, trcely diluted with water, and best 
given t^efxe meals. 

.-I.'^f-^f jx.i atSJ-s. — Like nux \x>?nica :t is a general tosic, active 
tctir.irer. It stia'iu Jites the nervous sy^teta, with.-ut cau>£=:g any depres- 
sior. <trengthe:v^ the muscular and ctjutiuljir aprarituses and the hsart. 
G.v<n in chronic a^^hoi»m.to retttovethe treoKV and pcctscration which 
follow a debauch. In arue::s:a it c:ay bie given with xtoq : as an altera- 




STRYCHNOS NUX VOMICA. 



405 



live it is given in leprosy, syphilitic and scrofulous sores and tumified 
glands, in bites from dogs, venomous serpents and other reptiles, in 
seborrhcea of the scalp; also in alopecia, its use benefiting the growth of 
the hair In hyperoidrosis it checks morbid excess of perspiration. 
Good results have been obtained in pustular eczema, acne, sycosis* fur- 
uncles, and carbuncles. In malarial fever it is given instead of quinine, 

Stryohnoa Ignatil— Ignatia Jlm&Fa> 

Hahitat, — The Philippine Islands, 

FarU used. — The seed, St. Ignatius* bean, 

Ventactilar. — Arab, — Papita. Bomb. — Papetan. Eng. — St. Igna- 
tius* bean. Hind.— Papeeta. Tam. — Kayappan Kottai, 

Chnracters. — A small tree j fruit of the shape and size of a pear ; 
pericarp brittle ; seeds 24, embedded in bitter pulp; each seed about an 
inch in length, in form ovoid, or trians^utar, or bluntly angular, 
and covered with silvery hairs ; epidermis brown, or of a dull grey 
colour ; albumen, horny ; intensely bitter and of an earthy smell. 

Comiituetits* — Strychnine, i ptC. ; Brucine, 1 p c# and Proteids. 

Preparaiiutn.--¥o\vdtT J 10 3 grs. Tincture of Ignatia (1 in 10). 
Dosei 1 to 20 ms. 

Actions and uses. — Simitar to nnx vomica, but more active, as it 
contains larger quantity of strychnine. It is, hoxvever, not used in 
European medicine, though in native practice it is still used in cholera, 
In plague and other infectious diseases, in intercostal neuralgia, 
convulsions in children, hysteria, hypencsthcsia, insomniai aphuuia, 
and in hypochondriasis it is used with good results, 

Strychnos Nux Yomioa, B.P. 

Nux Vomica, Nux, a rent; and Vomere, to vomit. Excessive dose 
may vomit or require vomiting to save life, small doses allay it. 

Habitat. — Throughout Tropical India, E, I. Cochin China Island, 
Tanjore^ Malabar, Ceylon, Java. 

Parts ns^tin — The stem bark, the dried ripe seeds called nux 
vomica, B.P* 

Vernacular. — Arab, — Falus Mahi, Khane-kul-kalb. Beng.-* 
Kuthila. Burin, — Khaboung. Can.— Hemmushti-caniram. Cing*— 
Kudaka-dornatta. Eng. — Dog. Quaker or Bachelor's button, vomil 
nut, dog poison, rats' bane, deal root, poison nut, false aiif^us- 
lura bark, snake wood tree* Duk. — Coochla, Hind. — Kuchila, Karerua* 
Malyah— Kannirak. Mar. — Kiyra-Jher-katchura. Pers,— Fuloose niahi. 
Sans. — V^isha mushti, Kulaka Kura chilla» Vishatin duka, Kupilu, kunch* 
Tam. — Yettik Kottai. TeL — Mussedi, Mushte-vettulu. 

Kulaka — a kind of ebony. Kuruchilla, crab seeds, bear resemblance 
in shape to a crab. Kunch— to make crooked. 

Characters*— AW parts of the tree are bitter and poisonous. Fruit 
of the shape, size and colour of an orange; round, smooth, polished, 



406 STRYCHNOS NUX VOMlCi*. 

pulpy and indehiscent; on section large quantities of bitter sticky, 
jjummy fluid escape. Within the pulp are from i to 5 seeds — seeds arc 
flattened, disc-like or roundish, of the size of a quarter to half a rupee 
piece, about an inch in diameter, and about 3 or 4 lines in thickness, 
slightly concave on the dorsal, and convex on the ventral surface, with 
a depression in the centre. Outside the edge is bevelled with a small 
protuberance from which a raphe projects to the hilum. Structure hard 
and horn like. Colour light grey, or greenish; surface shining, covered 
with satiny hairs. Internally translucent, tough and horny with a large 
cavil v ; cotyledons, small and leafy, homogeneous and of a pale white 
colour. Even with direct heat, the seeds are very diflScult to powder ; 
without any odour; taste persistent, and very bitter ; wood in slices 
about an inch in length, and covered with a light brown bark which is 
rough and warty in some parts, taste exceedingly bitter. 

OyTistihtettts. — Seeds contain Strychnine; ipc; Brucine, \ to 
I p.c; Igasurine or impure brucine in combination with igasuric or 
stiychnic acid. Loganin, a glucoside : proteids if pc. ; yellow 
colouring matter, a concrete oil or fat; gum, starch, sugar 6 p c. ; 
wax, earthy phosphates and ash 2 p.c. The wood bark and leaves 
contain brucine, but no strychnine. 

Strychnine B.P.— Strychnina — strychnia :~an alkaloid, to obtain 
it roil powdered seeds with hydrochloric or sulphuric acid, to liberate, 
iijasuric. acid, mucilage, colouring matter, &c. To the chlorides and 
^iulphatcs of the alkaloids thus formed, add milk of lime which will pre- 
cipitate strychnine and brucine. To separate strychnine b^iil the residue 
with alcohol, purify with animal charcx>al and reprecipitate with ammo- 
nia. Colourless, 4 sided, rhombic prisms without any odour and of an 
intensely bitter taste even in i in 700,000 solution of alkaline 
reaction, soluble in water (i in o,700^, soluble in cold alcohol (i in 150), 
in biMiing alcohol, more freely in chl^rot'orm n in o), slightly soluble 
in co\i absolute alcohol (1 in 400\ and in boiling al^olute alcohol (i 
in 40 , nearly insoluble in ether. E>ose, y\t to ^ gr. ; fatal d«>se, \ gr. 

Strychninae Hydrochloridum, B. P.— Strychnine Hydrochlorate. 
Saiail colourless prisms, readily efflorescing in the air, soluble in water 
(i in 35^ in alcohol ^1 in 6o>, used as liquor str^chninx hydrcchlo- 
ratis (I p.c. solution). Dose, 5 to 10 ms* 

Strychnina? acetas: — colourless crysiais— soluble in water \\ in So). 
Dose, ^^ to ^V of a gr. 

Srrychninje arsenas. Strychnine arsenrte :^K:r>-stais — soluble in 
cv^id water (i in J5 i. IX>se. ^^ to y'j of a gr. Solution | p.c. in liquid 
vaseline is injected hypodermicaliv in phthisis. IXxse, 4 to 15 ms. 
St'vchntne H\^irv*br^>midum. s>!ubte in water (i in to). Dose ^'j to 
y> o! a jjr. StrAvhntnx Xitras, Str\-chnii:e Nitrate :— cr3rstai$ or colour- 
less ne«viles of silky lustre and bitter taste, soluble in water (i in 70), 
alochv*; ^ I in 70"^, glycerine (i in 2^>. Insotuble in ether, coctains ?4 
p c. of strychnioe, used jis solution i p.c. Dvxse, ^V ^'^ iV S^- Being less 
••'?taat than the sulphate it is f>reterred foe hy|KNieniuc injectioo: solu- 
tion I rvc giv^n in uxontinence c^ urine** IX^tsc^ i 10 4 bbs. Sciycfai^ii^^ 
Phvtsphxk so4uble in water \i ia ^i)« Dose^ <^ ^ tVP* Stiyrhningr 




STRYCHNOS MUX W^fTCA. 



407 



sulphas. Strychnine sulphate, — Large prismatic crystals, efflorescent, 
without any odour, intense bitter taste, neutral reaction, slightly 
soluble in water ii in 50), in alcohol (i in 100), insoluble in ether ; 
contains 75 p,c, of strychnine. Dose, ^*(^ to g^ gr* Strychnin;c sulphas 
acida — soluble in water (r in 36), used as solution (i in 40), Dose^ ^j 
to y^y gr. of the solution for hypodermic injection i to 3 ms. 

Brucina — ^Brucine — with alkaloid strychnine, it is found in the seed 
of strychnos nux vomica and alone in the bark of strychnos Ligustrina, 
h occurs in prisms, pearly flakes or masses, less bitter and weaker than 
strychnine, slightly soluble in water (1 in 850), freely soluble in alcohol 
(2 in i), chloroform, ammonia, creasote and essential oils, insoluble in 
ether and fatly oils ; seldom used. Dose, ^'5 to | gr. Liquor Brucince 
I p.c. Dose, 10 tns* 

[gnasurin or Ignasuria occurs in the liquors from which strychnine 
and brucine have been precipitated by lime, in white crystals; Loganine 
a bitter glucosidc in white prisms, soluble in water, alcohol, 

Ptepara(mis*^Oi the seeds (nux vomica) : Powder. Dose, I to 
4 grs, Extrnctum nucis vomica, B.P., contains 5 p.c. of strychnine and 
1; p.c. of total alkaloids. Dose, i to | gr, Exiractum nucis voniicx* 
fluidum, B.F, contains ij p.c, ot total alkaloids. D^>sc. I to 5 ms. 
Tinctura nucis vomic:e, H, P. 0*3 p*c. of total alkaloids or 1 gr, of 
iCrychnine in 1 10 ms. Dose, 5 to 15 mu 

Strychnine. Hypodermic tablets, j^r to 5*^ gr, each. Syrupus 
Fcrri Phosphates cum Quinina el Strychninae, B F., S>rup of 
phosphate of iron with quinine and strychnine, •* Easton's syrup," 
Compound syrup of hypophosphites hydrohromatis. Phosphorus pills. 

Acttons itnd «jav,— The seeds are nervine stomachic, tonic and 
aphrodisiac. Externally the paste is antiseptic ; the solution is highly 
irritant to the tissues. If injected subcutaneously it is poisonous. The 
action of nux vomica is that of strychnine. In small doses it stimulates 
the stomach and intestines, increases the gastric, the pancreatic, the 
mtcisiinal and the biliary secretions. Strychnine promotes digestion, 
sharpens appetite, increases peristalsis and acts as a purgative. It 
stimulates the uterus and the gcnito-urmary organs, promotes men- 
struation and increases virile powers. it increases the flow of urine 
and is often found in the urine, saliva and sweats. It is a cumulative 
poison, it contracts the renal arteries and thus hinders its own 
excretion by the kidntys. In large doses it produces tetanic spasms 
with rtrlaxation between the paroxysms. During the paroxysm il 
causes contraction of the arterioles and thereby raises the blood 
pressure. The pupils are dilated, there are jerking movements of the 
limbs, the fcspiration becomes spasmodic, the lower jaw becomes 
stifle, and there is risus sardonicus, or an unmeaning smile depicted 
on the face. 

In poisonous doses there is in addition a sense of sufTocation, great 
dyspnoea and rigidity of the limbs (which are stuck out), the hands are 
clenched, the feet arched, and the belly tense. There is oposthotenoa, 
and the breathing becomes arrested. In the height of the paroxysm the 



408 STRYCHNOS POTATORUM. 

face becomes c3ranosed and the eye-balls protrude. The pulse is frequent, 
there is increased blood heat, but the intellect remains clear to the last. 
There is a feeling of a sense of approaching death. In the interval of the 
paroxysms there is great prostration with profuse sweating. Any slight 
cause, as a breath of wind, some noise, or even bright light, brings on 
the recurrence of the paroxysm. Death may be due to exhaustion 
or asphyxia, due to prolonged rigidity of the respiratory muscles. 

As a general stimulant it is given in acute or chronic feverst 
anaemia, chlorosis, wasting and other exhausting diseases ; also in 
hysteria, chorea, epilepsy, infra-orbital neuralgia or in neuralgia of the 
viscera, &c. In local paralytic affections it should be given only 
after the acute stage has passed away. In prolapsus ani, in 
incontinence of urine, due to atony of the bladder, and sometimes 
in impotence and spermatorrhoea it may be given with benefit. It is 
administered internally or injected subcutaneouslv in impending 
cardiac failure from any cause. With an imperceptible pulse, clammv 
breath and cold extremities, liquor strychninae has been given with 
advantage. It is a nice bitter tonic, in atonic dyspepsia. Given as an 
adjunct to purgatives in constipation, it increases their peristaltic 
effects. In vomiting of pregnancy and of phthisis it is the best agent. 
In torpid liver with foul breath, coated and furred tongue, pale coloured 
and offensive stools, if given with blue pill it is very useful. In sick 
headache or in headache occurring in women at the climateric period 
it is a very valuable agent. As a neurotic it influences the 
pneumogastric nerve and is useful in cough of phthisis, in bronchitis, 
pneumonia, emphysema ; also in bronchial asthma, in cardiac or pul- 
monary dyspnoea, cardiac palpitation with irregular heart and 
in hypochondriasis ; strjxhnine is of great service in acute and chronic 
alcoholism, under its use the morning vomiting, dyspepsia of drunkards 
and delirium tremens disappear. Ii removes the craving for stimulants. 

Strychnine is an antagonist to poisoning by chloral, morphine, 
ph}*sostigmine and by cobra (serpent) venom. Brucine is a powerful 
local anaesthetic. A lo p.c. solution is useful for chronic pruritus, and 
5 p.c* solution for inflammation about the external ear. The natives use 
nux vomica seeds as a vermifuge. Its efficacy is much increased by 
giving it with Dariai narel. Paste of the wood with Dariai narel is used 
as a domestic remedy for application to the head in headache, to the 
body in intermittent fevers, and to the bites of venomous snakes. 

StryohiiM Potatorom. 

Habitat — Deccan, Peninsula, India, Ceylon. 
Parts used. — The seeds. 

Vemacmlar. — Beng. — Induga. Burm. — Kamouye-kyie. Can.— 
Chillibij. Cing. — Inginiatta. Duk— Chil-binj. Eng.— Clearing nut. 
Maleal. — Teiram-kotta. Hind., Mar, — Katak, chilbij, nirmali. Sans. — 
Ambu prasada. Tam.^Tetran-koItai. Tel. — Indugu, kata kamu. 

Niramali is derived from Nira, not, and Mai or Mel, dirt or 
mud. The seeds are used for purifying muddy water. This property is 
due to their containing albumen andcaseine. Ambu prasftda. from amb, 




CANSC'ORA DHCUSSATA 



409 



water» and prasada, clearness. An ignorant man is compared to 
muddy water. He is refined by the society of the learned as dirty 
water is cleared by the presence of the nut* 

Ckaracfers,^F Tuh shining and black; seeds orbicular, button 
shaped and smaller in size than those of kuchala. Each ha%'ing at its 
border a projecting ridge. Integument yellowish and covered with 
hairs. Albumen copious and horny, but not so hard as that of nux 
vomica. No taste. Dose of the powder as an emetic, | dr,; as a demul- 
cent, ro to 15 grs. Contains no strychnine but brucin is present. 

Preparations. — Infusion (1 in 10)* Dose, I to I fld- oz. 

Actions and uses. — Alterative, tonic, stomachic and demulcent, 
rubbed down with honey and camphor it is applied to the eye to 
prevent lachrymation. and to remove opacities ; also applied to the 
abdomen to relieve colic. Its infusion is recommended in irritation of 
the urinary organs, as gonorrhoea^ diabetes and as an emetic in cough- 

Oentianacese. 

The kariatu or Gentian family. Herbs, rarely shrubs ; leaves 
usually smooth, generally exstipulate, glabrous, opposite, simple, 
entire^ sessile and strongly ribbed ; flowers regular, showy, of a yellow 
rose, blue or white colour, axillary or terminal ; fruits capsular or berry, 
I to 2 celled* 2 valved ; seeds many and small; erabrvo, minute; 
albumen, fleshy. Found universally, the properties of this order arc 
bitter, tonic, febrifuge, and stomachic. Bitter principles pervade Id 
ihem universally. 

Canscora Decussata, Pladera Decussata. 

Habitat, — Throughout India. 

I^rts used. — The plant and the fiesh juice. 

^Vrfm£rw//Tr.— 'Beng.— Dankuni. Mar., Hind.— Saukahuli, Dttpi- 
pola, DinkuTii. Malyal. — Causjun-cora. Sans. — Sankha-pushpi, kambu 
maleni, Dandut pa I a. 

Characters. — Stem erect, 4 sided, angles very sharp and smooth, 
branches opposite, cross armed; leaves opposite, sessile, sharp pointed, 
smooth, entire ; flowers white terminal and peduncled ; capsule I 
celled^ many steeded. 

i^paraiiofis.—Th^ juice, \ to i fld. oz. Infusion (l in 80). Dose, 
I to a ozs. 

Actings aftd uses, — Laxative, alterative and nervine tonic. Fresh 
fuice is given in insanity, general debility, scrofula, dyspepsia, &c. 

Enlcoatama Littorale, Exacum Hyssopifolium, Cicendia 

Hyssopifoliat Stevoglia Orientalis, Hlppion Orientale. 

Habitat. — Throughout Southern India. 

Parts used. — The plant. 

Vernacular. — Beng.— Kirota. Bomb, — ^Chhota kirayata* Gu«. — 
Mamijwa. Tam.— Vellurugu. Tel.— Chevu kurti. 



4IO ERYTHILEA ROXRURGHII. 

CharacUrs, — A small plant growing in damp places, about a foot 
or more in height, leafy from the base ; leaves opposite, lanceolate or 
oblong ; flowers small white and sessile. A substitute for andrographis 
paniculata, known in Mangalore as country creat. 

Constituents. — A bilter principle of a glucosidal nature. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 20). Dose, 4 to i fld. oz. 

Actions and uses. — Bitter, laxative and stomachic; a good substitute 
for kadavi-nai — used like other vegetable bitters, in dyspepsia, gastric, 
vomiting. &c. 

Exacum bicolor — grows in the Deccan and Mangalore, possesses 
same bitter, stomachic properties as exacum littorale. 

Exacum tetragonum, Seboe^ carinata — purple chiretta (Eng.), 
koochuri (Beng.), Ooda chiretta (Hind.), found in the Concan and 
above the Ghauts ; possess same properties as above. 

Erythroea Roxbarghii, E. Centanria, Chironia Centauroides. 

ILibitJt, — Mysore. Deccan and Bengal. 

P^irts used.^The plant. Veru Lantak, Kauturiyun. 

A delicate plant 4 to 10 inches high ; root small and fibrous ; stem 
quadrangular and winged ; leaves ovate, oblong and obtuse, those on 
the stem linear acuminate. Flowers pink, star-like ; capsules oblong, 
mucronate. A most powerful bitter ; an excellent substitute when 
chiretta is not obtainable. 

Gentiana Dahnrica, G. Olinieri. 

//l/r/.M/.— Persia. 

Par:s used. — The flowering tops. 

nTK^/.u/.ir.— Hind. — Gul-i-Ghafis. Pers — Ghapitha ; Gul kalli. 

Ck^racttrs. — The quadrangular flower stalks, terminating in five 
flowers : corolla, funnel-shaped, erect. fi\-e partite ; calyx, five partite ; 
stamens, five ; style, single ; stigmas two. Fruit onenxlled, containin-: 
numerous seeds. 

Co'istitumSs. — A bitter crystalline principle, gum, wax and 
colouring matter. 

/^eTjr.jtkKS. — Infusion ^^ i in 40). IX»e, \ to i fld. oz. 

Ac:2 ns 4iaJ uses. — Bitter tc»nic, diaphcretic and alterative, used in 
dyspepsia, fever and general debility. 

Gentiaiia Karoo. 

//,2h':.tLS.AV. Himalaya, Cashmere. 

Parts used. — ^The Tvwt stock. 

J>rK,7*-3s(,'.ir— Kng. — Himalaya Gentian. Hind. — Kani, Nilkant. 

Char.icTfrs- — Root creeping, tenninating ir. knvXty crowns from 
which spring numencms vertTCJil rhiiomes, each bluntly quadrangular, 
as thick as a gocse quill, and marked with prG^ectioosJ the remauns of 



GENTIANA LUTEA. 4II 

rootlets. On section, there is a central woody portion surrounded 
by a thick cortex ; colour yellow, odour and taste similar to that of 
gentian root. 

Constttnetits, — A bitter principle ; a yellow transparent resin, 
resembling mastic, which softens in the mouth ; it is without any odour 
or taste. 

Prcparaltons. — Infusion (i "in 80). Dose, \ to i fid. oz. 

mictions and uses. — Bitter stomachic, tonic, and appetizer ; 
Like European gentian it forms an efficient substitute for chiretta. 

Oentiana Lutea, B. P., 0. Catesboei— an American species — 
(Blue Oentian). 

Lutea, Lutens, golden yellow. The golden yellow flowers. 

Hahiiat, — Central and Southern Europe mountains. 

Parts used. — The dried rhizome and root. Gentiana radix, B, P. 

Vernacular,— Ar^b, — Jintiyani^. Duk. — Juntyana. Eng. — 
Blue Cjentian, Common, pale or yellow gentian, bitter root. Hind. — 
Pakhanbhcd. Pcrs. — Gintiyana, Koushiid. 

Characters. — Large perennial herb, with a thick hollow and 
yellowish green stem ; leaves entire, 5 — 7 nerved, long ovate, 
glabrous and yellowish green. Flowers numerous, in cymes ; rhizome 
in cylindrical pieces, entire or longitudinally split, yellowish brown, 
wrinkled longitudinally, and covered over by leaf scars; tough 
when moist, and brittle when dry ; surface reddish yellow, odour 
peculiar faint, taste sweet at first and bitter afterwards. 

Constituents. — Gentopicrin ; Gentianic or Gentesic acid (an inert 
amorphous body) ; gentianose (uncrystallizable sugar) 14 p.c, pectin, 
gum, sugar, a trace of volatile oil 6 p c, ash 8 p.c. No tannin. 

Gentopicrin or gentianin, a bitter glucoside — to obtain it add 
charcoal to the concentrated alcoholic extract, boil with alcohol, treat 
with oxide of lead to remove colouring matter, precipitate the lead with 
sulphuretted hydrogen, agitate with ether and cr3'stallize. It is soluble 
in water and dilute alcohol. With dilute acid it splits up into 
glucose and gentiogenin. Gentianic acid — to obtain it wash the 
alcoholic extract with cold water to remove bitter principle, then 
wash with ether to remove fat, and crystallize ; yellow tasteless 
amorphous body, sparingly soluble in alcohol and ether. 

Preparations. — Of the root. Infusum Gentianae compositum,B. P. 
Gentian root, \ oz.. Dried bitter orange peel, J oz., Fresh lemon peel, \ 
oz., Distilled water, i pint. Dose, ^ to i oz. Extract u m Gentianse, B. P. 
— Dose, 2 to 8 grs. Tinctura Gentianae composita, B. P., Gentian root, 
2 oz.. Dried bitter orange peel, | oz.. Cardamom seeds, ^ oz. Alcohol 
45 p.c. I pint. Dose, ^ to i dr. 

Actions and uses. — Like calumba, it is a simple bitter without 
astringency or aroma. As a valuable stomachic tonic, it is given in 
dyspepsia, gout, hysteria, jaundice &c. It increases the appetite and 



412 



SWERTIA DKCUSSATA. 



Strengthens digestion, but does not constipate. As a febrifuge it i« 
used in low malarial fevers. It is a good vehicle for administeringj 
chalybeates, mineral acids, neutral salts, and also cod liver oil. 
discoloration of iron salts by gentian is due to gentesic acid, and 
to any tannin, as it contains none. 

Remarks. — The term Pakhanbhed is also applied to a mifieml 
clay. 

Swertia DecuBsata, Ophelia Elegans, 0. Hultiflora* 

Habitat, — N. Circars, West Deccaii, Peninsula, Mahableshwar* 

Farts used. — The plant-stems and root. 

Vt macular. —l^y^k, — Salaras or Silajit^ Tel. — Shilajatu. Hind, — 
Kadu. 

Characters, — Plant 6 to 20 inches long ; leaves sessile, narroir, 
lanceolate or ovate, tapering to a point, opposite and five nerved J^ 
stem quadrangular, clasping, smooth and rather thick. From thcii*' 
axils several small while or pale blue, sessile flowers are given off. The 
whole plant is very bitter and is an excellent substitute for gentian. 

Preparatiom. — Infusion (i in 80)- Dose, \lo 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses, — Like chiretta, a bitter stomachic tonic, febrtfugeij 
and laxative ; as an antiperiodic with neem bark and black pepper, it 
given in fevers. Hakims use it with aromatics as an aperient in interital! 
piles before operation. The term salaras (Dukani) is also applied la' 
storax. and silajit to mineral clay, Armenian bole, or to bitumen. 

Swertia Chirata, B P., Ophelia Chlrata, Agathotes Chirata 
Habitat. — India, Temperate Himalaya, Nepaul, Kumaon. 
Parts used, — The entire dried plant, Chirata, B,P- 

Vernacular. — Arab — Kasab-ud-daura. Beng,, Hind., Mar , Gu2.% 
Bomb. — Chirata ; Kalapnath, kalamegh. Burm. — Tou kha-kyL Can. 
— Nila bevu, Cing.^Bin-cohamba, atadi, Duk, — Kreat* Eng« — 
Chirayit, Bitter stick. Malyal. — Nila Veppa. Pers,— Dowa-i-pecbi$b, 
Sans. — Kirata-tikta ; Aniirya tikta ; Bhu-niraba, Kuch-chi, Tani*— 
Shirat- Tel* — Nila V'embu, 

Kirata tikta is derived from kiratta, kiratas, an out-caste race 
mountaineers in India, and tikta, bitter. The plant is very bitter an 
common over the mountains. Anarya tikta, the bUter plant of the 
Non-Aryans. 

Charactefs, — SeveraJ plants closely allied in medicinal propertii 
to gentian are known by the name of kiriat. The drug is generally sol 
in bundles. It consists of the whole plant except the coarser wood 
stems. Root is woody and knotty irregularly, giving off several smal 
rootlets ; bark pale brown ; wood, pale yellow ; stem, single, varytU] 
in thickness from 2 to 5 lines, orange brown or dark purple, about 
3 feet long, cylindrical in the lower and quadrangular \w the middle 
and upper part, jointed and pithy ; branches decussated, auigular 
the extremities. Surface smooth ; flowering portion yellow (somctimi 



riA CHrRATA. 

present in the drug); flowers in cymes of a dark^brown colour. No 
odour. Taste intensely bitter* The intensity being most marked in the 
flowers and root. Dose, 15 to 3ogr5. 

OmsUiaents. — Ophelic acid, an amorphous bitter principle; 
chiratin, a yellow bitter glucoside ; resin, gum^ carbonates and phns- 
tthates of potash, lime and magnesia ; ash 4 — 6 p,c. ; no tannin* 
Ophelic acid, a syrupy liquid, bitter, soluble in water, alcohol, and 
etner Not precipitated by tannin. Chiratin— Hydroscopic, crystalline^ 
yellow powder ; soluble in alcohol, ether, warm water, precipitated by 
tannin. By hydrochloric acid it is decomposed into chtretogenin 
oaphelic a ad. 

fycfidtaftons, — Liquor chtratx concentratus B.P* (1 in 2). Dose. 
} to I dr. Extractum chiratar fluidum. Doset loto ;o ms, Infusunt 
chirat^e, B.P, (l in 20). Dose, J to 1 oz. Tiuctura chiratse, B.P» 
(I in 10). Dose, i to 1 dr. Drogue amt!re— a tincture — contains 
inaMich, frankincense, resin, myrrh, aloes at)d chirata root, equal 
pnrts, steeped in brandy for a month and strained ; used in apthse. 
Chirattme tablets or Saccharo chirettine ; it is nrepared without 
heat. It is soluble in water, and can be given with allcaline carbonates* 
tanntn« and iron. Three grains is equal to i grain of quinine — used 
«s a tonic and Febrifuge. Compound powder, — Sudarashana churana — 
Sudarash^na is the name of the principal implement of war used 
by the Hindu god V'ishnu, The shape of the weapon is like that of a 
carriace wheel (chakra) and is mythologically supposed to bo the only 
powerful instrument to cut off or to remove devil's heads. Churana 
a powder. Sudarashana churana is a powder, which is supposed to be 
so efficacious as to suppress, dispose of or to cure any or cvcfry bad or 
virulent fever. It contains Kuriutun 5, Trrphalab, Trikatu 5^ Kasni 4, 
Chud^, Aftimun 3, Kujfah 3, Kahu bij j,Sathra 2, La van g 5, Harade4, 
Diruhalad 3, Kuchala 3, Pinali mula 4, Moravcl 4, Gulvel 3, Dbamaso 

4. Kutaki 6, Motha 4, Limado 3, KuLha 3, Jet hi madha 5, Kudii 
chhnla4, Ajanifwia 4^ Indr.ijava (bitter) 6, Bharingani mula 3, Vekhanda 

5, Padma kashatii 3, V^alo 4, Aiivisha 6. Dose, zo to 60 grs. Used in 
chronic fevers* 

Actifms and uses. — Like cinchona and other bitter tonics, it is bitter 
stomachic, laxative, anthelmintic and febrifuge. It excites the appetite 
strengthc^ns digestion, but does not constipate ; it diminishes flatulence 
and hyperacidity; remove* biliousness ; given in .itonic dyspepsia, liver 
troubles, acidity of the stomach and flatulence, gout in intermittent and 
other fevers* In combination with acids, alkalies and aromatics, it 
is given in bilious affections, and in burning heat of the body, A com- 
pound powder sadurashana-churana is a popular native remedy for 
chronic fevers ; as a laxative and alterative it is given in scrofula and 
general malaise. 

CanvolvolaGeaB— The Niahotara« Bindweed or ConYolvalas family. 

Convolvulacesc — Convolvere, roll together, entwine— stems 
ha"vin:; a twining habit. Twining, trailing or milky herbs, or shrubs ; 
root^ generally containing milky acrid juice; leaver exstipulate, alternate, 



tt 



414 ARGYRFIA SPECIOSa. 

simple, or lobed, sometimes parasitic; flowers generally large, bell-shaped, 
and of a beautiful pink purple, blue, red, veilow, or white colour. Fruit 
often globular, capsule, 2 to 4 celled ; seeds generally hairy; cotyledons, 
foliaceous and crumpy. Albumen small and mucilaginous — found 
in the plains and valleys of tropics and temperate climates. This order 
is remarkable for the presence of an acrid, milky, purgative juice, which 
is contained in the roots of many of its species. Seeds of some are 
purgative. This property is due to a resin and a glucoside in their 
juice. In some roots the resin is entirely absent, or in very small 
quantity. In them starch and sugar predominate, and thus render 
them edible. They are allied to solanaceae and scrofuleriaceae. 

Argyreia Speciosa, IpomcBa Speciosa, ConvolYolas Speciosas, C. 
Nervosas, Lettsomia Nenrosa. 

Habitat — ^Throughout India. 

Parts used. — The leaves and root. 

Vernacular, ^l^tng. — Bechotarok. Guz., Mar., Hind., Bomb. — 
Samudra shokha. Can. — Chandrapoda. Duk. — Samander-ka-patt4. 
Eng. — Elephant creeper. Malyal. — Samudra-yogam. Sans. — Vriddha- 
daraka. Tam. — Shamuddirap-pachchai. Tel. — Chandra-poda. 

Characters, — Leaves large, heart-shaped, and ovate; under surface 
covered by a thick layer of silky hairs ; upper surface dark green and 
smooth ; roots long, woody and tough ; bark dark brown ; stems marked 
with furrows ; root in the middle portion porous, and resinous at the 
margin. 

Constituents. — Tannin, amber coloured acid resin which is 
soluble in ether, benzole and partly soluble in alkalies. 

Preparations, — Decoction (i in 20). Dose, ^ to i fld oz. 

Actions and uses, — Alterative tonic, given in rheumatism, and 
syphilis. The under surface of the leaf is irritant, and is used to hasten 
maturation and suppuration, it sometimes acts as a vesicant — the 
upper surface is cooling and supposed to possess healing properties. 

ConvolYolas Scammonia, B.P. 

Habitat. — Western Asia, Syria, Levant, Kaira in Gujerat. 

Parts used, — The root scammoniae radix, B.P. A resinous, gummy 
exudation from the root, scammonium ; and a resin, scammoniae 
rjsina, B.P. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Sakamunia, mahamooda, sogmoOnia. — Eng. 
—Virgin scammony, Aleppo scammony. Guz., Bomb., Hind.— Saka 
muniya. Pers. — Mahmudah. Tam. — Mamuda. Tel. — Shakumuniya. 

Characters. — Roots contorted or cylindrical and tapering, brown 
without and white within, surface longitudinally furrowed. 

Constituents, — Resin 75 to 90 p.c, gum 3-8 p.c, sugar, starch. 
The root contains an active principle, Jalapin — identical with con 
volvulin of Jalap. 



CONVOLVULUS SCAMMOXIA. 



Scammontum» B.P., Scammony — a gum resin obtained by incising 
the fresh root — occurs in flattened cakes, or irregular pieces of a brown, 
dark grey, or nearly black colour, and often covered with a greyish 
black powder, brittle and glossy ; vi^hen broken, the surface is resinous, 
porous and dark brown. Ash grey when reduced to powder, triturated 
with water yields greenish emulsion ; odour characteristic, and taste 
acrid ; soluble in ether (3 in 4). Dose* 5 to 10 grs. 

Scammoni^e B.P* Resina, — Scammony resin, a resin obtained from 
the gum resin scammonium by means of rectified spirit ; brown, 
translucent pieces, brittle, resinous in fracture and of a sweet fragrant 
odour, almost entirely soluble in alcohol, ether and benzene ; it is 
identical with orizabin of ipomoea orizabin. Dose, 3 to H grs 

/^*if/i^m//b//5.— Piiula scammonii cooiposila, B.P. Scammony resin 
I or., jalap resin i oz , curd soap i oz., tincture of ginger 3 fid. 
oZf mix and evaporate* Dose, 4 to 8 grs. Pulvis scammonii "com- 
positus, B P. Scammony resin 4 ozs,. jalap powder 3 ozs., ginger i oz. 
Dose, 10 to 20 grs. Extractum colocynthidis corapositum (1 in 63). 
Dose, 2 to 8 grs, Pilula colocynthidis composita, B P, (2 in 5,^). Dose, 
4108 grs. Pilula colocynthidis et Hyoscyami B.P. Dose. 4'to H gr*. 

Actions a nf/ nsi^s.-- An active hydragoguc or cholagogue cathartic, 
and anthelmintic ; when baked scammony loses its aperient properties 
aticJ acts as a powerful diuretic. It is more active than jalap; it acts 
%*ery promptly, causes much griping, colic and watery stools ; it 
stimulates the liver and the intestinal glands ; it combines with soda 
in the bile with which it forms a solution. As an anthelmintic it is 
given against tape worms. The taste being insipid it can be given to 
children in constipation and as a Vfirmifuge in lumbrici ; it is seldom 
given alone, but is generally associated with potasisium sulphate, jalap, 
colocynih, calomeK aromatics and demulcents. It is given as a 
derivative in dropsy, cerebral affections, torpid liver and in intestinal 
catarrh with shiny inte^^tinal mucus, hs use should be avoided if there 
is any irritability uf the stomach or bowels. 

Ariiticial scammony is made frota the juice of calotroprs gigantea, 
mixed with flour of a kind of puUe called u\ Persian karasanalu Baked 
Scammony :— The powdered drug is enclosed in a bag, the bag is then 
placed inside an apple or quince, hollowed out for the purpose. The 
apple is covered over with dough like a dumphng and baked in an 
oven. 

Creasa Cretioa* 

liabiUit — Throughout India. 

Piirti used, — The plant. 

Vernacular. — Hind., Bcng. — Rudravanti. Guz. — Una. Mar, 

Khardi, chavei. Sans — Rudantika, Anirit srava. Sindi. — Una. 

Amrit Srava, Amrit, Amrut, sweet; Srava, moist. Believed to 
cause moisture which is sweet, because ants are found near it. 

Characters, — Plant very small, shrubby and diffuse ; leaves 
ovate, sessile, very sm.in, and acute : of an ash colour ; flowers 
numerous, small, subsessilc, and of a while or pink colour. 



41 6 IPOMiEA DIGITATA. 

Preparattotis. — Decoction (i in 20). Dose, J to i fld. oz. 

Actions and uses. — Alterative, tonic and expectorant, given in 
bilious affections, cough and in general debility. 

EYolTolas Alainoides, E. Hiranstai. 

Habitat — Throughout India, Ceylon. 
Parts used, — The herb. 

Vernacular. — Can. — Vishnu Krandi. Hind. — Sankha-pushpi. Mar. 
Shankavalli. Sans. — Vishnu Gaudhi. Tam. — Vishnu KarandL 

Characters. — Herb procumbent, covered with hairs ; leaves ovate, 
oblong, baccous plant ; flowers small, \ inch long, beautiful, of a deep blue. 

Constituents, — A yellow neutral fat, an alkaloid, an organic acid 
and saline substance. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 40). Dose, J to I fld. oz. 

Actions and uses. — Tonic, alterative and febrifuge, used in fever, 
nervous debility and loss of memory, sometimes used in syphilis, 

scrofula, &c. 

IpomsBa Digitata, Batatas Panicnlata. 

Ipomsea — a worm, a bind weed. From its twisting habits. 

Habitat. — Tropical India. 

Parts used.-- The tuberous root. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Bhui Kumri. Can. — Buja. — Gumbala. 
Hind.— BidariKand.Malyal. — Palmodekka. Guz., Mar. — Bhui-Kohala, 
Pattana. Sans. — Kshira-VidSLri, Bhumi Kushamanda, Payas vini. 
Tam.— Nelli Kumbalu TeL— MatU-paltiga. 

Characters. — Fresh root milky, a simple or forked tuber and 
rather wrinkled. Dry roots, warty, scabrous, of a greyish white or dark 
brown colour externally ; and white within ; cut surface presenting 
concentric, rings formed of lacticiferous vessels from which a viscid 
milky fluid exudes ; taste astringent and somewhat acrid, not unlike 
that of raw potatoes. The whole tuber consisting of starchy paren- 
' chy ma about 10 or 12 lbs. in weight. 

Constituents* — A resin, sugar, and starch. 

Preparations, — Powder, decoction (i in 10). Dose, J to i fld. oz. 
Confection. — Vidari, wheat flour and barley, and milk, butter and honey. 

Actions and uses. — Tonic, alterative, largely used in several restora- 
tive aphrodisiac and demulcent preparations. It checks excessive 
menstrual discharges. As a lactagogue, given with wine, it promotes 
the secretion of milk in women after delivery. The confection is le- 
commended for emaciated children suffering from debility, diarrhoea 
and want of digestion. 

Remarks, — In Singapore the foreigners who pose as lion-hunters 
deceive rich and credulous people by passing off" pieces of Bhui Kohala 
for lioness milk. The price paid for these tubers is the same as 
that paid for an equivalent weight of opium. 



IPOMCBA HKDERACEA, 



Ipomcsa Hederaoea. Pharbltis Nil. 



417 



Habitat. — Througliout India. 

Parts us^d, — The seeds, 

Vertmcuiiir. — Arab. — Habbun-nil. Beng. — ^Nila Kalomu Duk. — 
Zirki-kc-binj* Hind., Guz.— Kaladana. Man — Nilipushi. Pers*— 
Tukhm*i-niU Tain. — Jiriki-viiai, Kodi Kakkatati virai. TcL — Koili 
vtUulu* 

Characters. — Fiuit globular, made up of four distinct seeds arrang- 
ed in a spherical form. Each seed of the form of a quarter segment 
of a sphere* Its iwo sides flat and compressed, so as to adapt 
ihemselvcs to the flat surfaces ot the adjacent seed. Their j unci ion 
is marked by a scar which is near the hilum and by a thin edge 
resembling the border of a wedge. The convert surface is marked by a 
Hal or broad groove ; kernel yellowish brown and oily ; taste oily and 
somewhat acrid ; odour tarthy. Dose, 5 to 8 grs. 

Cons tttuf fits. — A thick oil, 14*4 px. ; mucilage, albuminous matter 
in tannin and Pharbitis, an active resinous principle, identictil with 
convolvulin, a light yellowish friable massj of a nauseous acrid taste, 
and an unpleasant odour, soluble in alcohol and insoluble in ether, 
benzol, chloroform, and sulphide of carbon. 

Preparations, — Cunipound powder contains kaladana, sindhalona 
equal fjurts, and suntha or kabnjan | part Dose, 30 to 50 grs. Tincture 
(1 in ^). Dose, 2 drs,, and the resin 4 to 8 grs. 

Acttorts and t4se$. — Drastic purgative and anthelmcntic used in 
constipation. 

The name, kaladana is often applied to the seeds of clitorea 
ternata, a good substitute for jalap ; Garambija or Gokaranibija being 
aimilar in colour and proficrtics ; Kalonji seeds, which are dark 
brown and similar in shape ; in ipomxa muri«.ata, the seeds are reddish 
brown» glabrous, spiny, smooth and larger than those of kaladana, 
but not grooved like kalad^ni on their convex surface. Ipomaea 
muricata is a native of Persia (a garden weed in many parts of Concan) 
and is known as Blrik Bhauri or the lesser Bhauri or Tukm-i-nil. 

Ipomoea Pescaprse, I. BUoba, Convolvulus Pesoapras, Ipomofta 

Braailiensls, 

Habitat,^QodL%t of India, Ceylou, 

Parts «i^^.— The root and leaves* 

Vernacular. — Beng, — Chhugulkhuri. Can* — Adambu*balli. 
Eng*^ — Goat^s foot creeper. Guz. — Ravara patri. Hind. — Dopilte- 
luta. Mar. — Maryad vela. Sans. — Marajid vela, V'riddha-dAraka, Tara, — 
I Adapu-kadi. Tel— BaJa bandi tige. 

Characters.— Sl^ms creeping ; root twisted upon the broken ends 
tod containing a black concrete juice; leaves thicki smooth, long 

Klioled and ducply bifid at the apex ; flowers large and fose'coloured. 
nt of the dried luice, c to 15 grs. 
IT 



41^ lt-OM'K-\ tUr'xA 

0,nsUttunts. — A resin and an alkaloid. 

Preparations. — Decoction (i in 20'.- Dose, i to 2 fid. ozs. 

Actkns and uses. — Alterative, tonic and purgative ; used in rheu- 
matism, pout, gonorrhcea. &c. The juice is purgative and given in 
droprsv. The leaves boiled in water are locally applied as varalians 
to painful joints in rheumatism and to the aodomen in colic The 
pa^te of the leaves is applied to boils and carbuncles. 

Iponuea Purgm B.P., Ex<^oiiiam Par^ IpomjM Jabq^ 
YeracnuL 

Habitat. — E. Mexico, shady woods in Mussoorie and in the 

Nilgiris. 

Parts usfd. — The dried tubercles. Jalapa, Jalap. B.P. 

Jalapx from Xalapa, a city in Mexico, from which it is imported. 

Characters. — Perennial herb ; stems numerous, twisted, slender, 
furrowed, smooth and twining round other objects. Root pyriform, 
oblong, thick ; dried roots or tubercles, ovoid, fusiform or oblong, of the 
size ot a nut or orange, also wrinkled, dark brown, hard and compact ; 
internally yeliowish grey or ding}' brown with numerous concentric 
circles composed of small resin cells. The fracture is resinoos, not 
fibrous ; odour sweetish and smoky ; taste sweetish but acrid. Dose, 
5 to zo grs. 

Constituents. — Resin 17 to 20 p.c. starch, gum, sugar and colouring 
matter. Resin composed of convolvulin 90 p.c. andjalapin 10 p.c. The 
latter is the principal constituent of spurious Jalap (Ipomcea oriza- 
bensis), identical with scammonin. 

Jalapin or orizabin consists of mixed decolorized, soft resins. It b 
a whitish amorphous powder, brittle, breaking with a resinous 
fracture, easily pulverizable, of a sweetish fragrant odour and of an acrid 
taste ; soluble in alcohol or potassa insoluble in turpentine, acids, and 
warm water, soluble in ether (i in 30). Dose, 1 to 5 grs. 

Jalapae resina B. P. — Macerate the root with alcohol and percolate, 
throw the residue into water, precipitate the resin and dr}-. A yel- 
lowish brown mass or powder ot a peculiar odour and acrid taste — 
soluble in alcohol. Dose, 2 to 5 grs. 

Convolvulin or Jalapurgin. a glucoside, hard, insoluble in ether, 
soluble in alkalies — more active than jalapin. 

Preparations. — Pulvis Jalapx compositus, B.P. Jalap 5 ozs., acid 
potassium tartrate 9 oz?., ginger i oz. Dose, 20 to bo grs. Extractum 
Jalapae, B.P. (Hydro alcoholic). Dose, 2 to 8 grs. Resina Jalapae. 
Dose, 2 to 5 grs. Jalap is an ingredient in the preparation of pilule 
caiharticacompositaandof pil-cathartitse vegetabilis. Tinctura Jalapae, 
B.P. (1 in 5). Standaruized to contain 1^ gr. of resin in 1 ro ms. 
or 1*5 p.c. of resm. Dose, \ to i fld. dr. Sapo Jalapinus — jalap 
resin 4, soft soap 4, alcohol 3, dissolve and evaporate. Dose, 2 to 6 grs. 
Abstractum Jalapae. Dose, i to 5 grs. 



IFOMtt^. 



419 



Actions iiHff uses, — Jalap is an aclive hydragogue cathartic, ver- 
mifuge and diuretic. It is niore drastic than senna, and less irritating 
than gamboge, podnphyJlin, or scammony and produces copious 
watery stools with nausea, griping and great tenesmus. It increases 
the intestinal and biliary secretions, but it does not cause congestion of 
harmorrhoidal vessels. In over doses it is a dangerous hypercathartic. 
C^nvolvulin isan irritant poison, producing gastro^enteritis. It does 
not irritaie the skin, conjunctivae or the nasal mucous membrane. 
It is not eliminated by the urine or fccces. It is given in dropsy and in 
inflammatory affections ; also in fevers with constipation and in head 
troubles. As a vermifuge it is given with calomel and santonin 
against iumbrici. In ascites and anasarca it is much employed. 

Iponicea Qaamadit. 

rr/7/^/r//A7r,~Stta-che-kes (Mar.) Sita's locks, Kamalata (Sans.) or 
Cupid's flowers — a small twining plant found in Nilciri. Leaves 
filiform, punctate. Flowers small, bright crimson or white ; pounded 
Iciivcs arc used as refrigerant and cooling application to bleeding piles 
nnd as a Icp to carbuncles. 

Ipomo&a Reniformis. 

ffithiittt. — Nilgiris. 

Paris usrtf.— The plant. 

r^rmjoV/A//'^— Bomb.— Undirkani, mushkani. Sansi.—Mushakarani; 
Tarn. — Pcrrctaykecray* 

Undirkani, from lindar^ a rat, and kani, like an car. The leaves 
of this plant resemble in form rat*& ears. 

Charackrs. — ;\ creeper with many roots frtim tiie jonu.s ; stem 
creepin^f ; petioles hairy, slender, wiry, and furrowed longitudinally; 
Icavts kidney sliaped, dentate towards their margins and obtuse; flowers 
small, taste mucilaginous. 

Preparations. — Decoction (1 in io\ Dcise^ J to 1 fld. ox. 

Avtmtts ttnthtsts, — Furj:.itivc and alterative, given in rheumitism, 
neuralgia, headache, &c. ; the joicc is given in rat-bites. It is also 
used for ulcers in the ear. In large doses it acts as a purgative. This 
plant is often mistaken for Bhrahami — Hydrocotyle Asiatica, The leaves 
of both are of the same shape and generally used for the same 
purposes- 

IpomcBa Sp. 

V^aiadharo (Gu2.) the root is in pieces of from 4 to 5, or 6 inches 
long; the root b irk longitudinally furrowed, and slightly twisted; 
colour brownish. On section the w<x>d is porous and whitish, and 
between it and the bark a rrsinuus matter exudes; the smell is dts- 
agrtieable, taste somewhat acrid. Used as decoction (l in 10), Dose, 
\ to I fld. 01, It is an alterative and tunic and given n\ chronic nervous 
diseases and rheumatic affections, scrofula, syphilis, &c. Sanscrit 



420 IPOMOSA TURPETHUM. 

writers attribute high medicinal virtues to this drug. In Bombay, 
the root of samudra sokha is substituted for varadharo. In Bengal, 
the root of argeria spiciosa is sold as vardharo. 

Ipomoea Tarpetham— ConTolTuIas Tarpethom. 

Habitat. — Throughout India, Ceylon. 

Parts used. — The bark of the root and stem. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Hud-ul-zangi. Beng. — Dood-kalmee. Teori. 
Can. — Dike-puti-gadi. Cing. — Trista-valu-mul. Duk. — Tikra. Eng. — 
Turpeth root. Guz. — Nishotara, Turbad. Hind. — Pitdhri, Nik-patar, 
Nishot-Tarwai. Malyal.— Chivika-v6ra. Mar.— Nishottar, Shetvara, 
Phutkari. Sans. — Trivrit, Triputa, Kutaruna Kaloparni, Kalameshi 
(black variety). Tam. — Shivadai-v^r. Tel. — ^Tegada-veru. 

Nasotara, from Nasa, a nerve, and tara or trana, three, in allusion to 
the stem of the plant being three nerved, or three winged. Triputa — 
tri, three, and puta, angle. The stem is three angled. Trivrit, tri, 
three, and Vrit, folds which are spiral or circular, the stem being 
provided with three spiral folds or wings. Turbad is a corruption 
of the Sanscrit word Trivrit. 

Characters. — The root and stem about 2 to 4 inches or more in 
length, and ^ to 2 inches in diameter, twisted like a price of rattan 
cane, or columnar ; bark, dark brown, or pale, rough, longitudinally 
fissured, and here and there deeply furrowed. Transverse section 
shows a porous surface of a dirty white colour, and here and there 
loaded with a pale yellowish white resin ; smell slightly agreeable, taste 
nauseous, or feebly acrid. The acridity is only perceptible after it has 
been kept for some time in the mouth. Dose, 20 to 40 grs. 

Constituents. — Turbeth resin consists of a soft resin soluble in ether, 
and of a substance insoluble in ether, benzine, sulphide of carbon, 
and essential oils. This substance is called Turpeth or Turpethine ; 
a volatile oil, and yellow colouring matter. Turpethin, a resin, a 
grey substance, analogous to jalapine and convolvuline. It is named 
as having some resemblance in colour to turpeth mineral. Alkaline 
bases convert it into turpethic acid and mineral acid into glucose and 
turpetholic acid. The root contains it to the extent of 4 p.c. 

Preparations.^ A compound powder. Nishut 3, Pancha-laN^ana 2, 
Java-khira 2, Himajas, Hinga i, Ajavan3, vavading seeds 2, Tejabal 3, 
Kapilo 2, Palas-bij 2. Dose, 40 to 60 grs. Used in habitual costive- 
ness, flatulence, tape worms, colic and sluggish liver. Confection — 
Contains Nishotar 4 ozs., Scammony i oz., Surijan 3 ozs.^ Saflron 2 
ozs., Costus \ ozs., Sugar 12 ozs., Cinnamon 1 oz., Honey 60 ozs. Dose, 
I to 2 drs. Used as a purgative, for children in sluggish liver, deranged 
digestion, flatulence, &c. 

Actions and uses. — Turbeth is cathartic — given either alone, or in 
combination with other purgatives. With Harade, it is particularly 
beneficial in rheumatic and paralytic affections, melancholia, goat, 
dropsy and leprosy ; it is more powerful and drastic than jalap. 



CORDIA MYXA. 



411 



Boraglnaees— The Borage or Gaozabana order* 

Herbs, slirubs or trees, with ntore or less roundeil steau ; leaves 
alternate, entire, or loathed, ubually thick and rough, and generally 
covered on both sides with white glmids; flowers regular, arid of a red, 
blue or whitish colour — ^fruits 2 to 4 seeded. Native of N. temperate 
regions. The plants are mucilaginous. 

Cordia Myxa, C. Domestica, C. Obliqua, C. Latifolia. 

Habitat, — Throughout India, Egypt, Cochin China, Australia, 
Punjab, Ceylon. 

Pariii used, — The fruit and bark. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Dibka, Mokhitah. Bcng, — Bahubara* 
Burni. — ^Tanasi^thanat. Can. — ^Doduchallu. Cing — Lolu* Duk. — 
Gundni. Eng.— Sebestan plum, Guz.— Sapistan, Gondni, Burf^und. 
Bomb, Hind —Bhokur Lasora. MalyaL — V^iri kolti. Mar. — 
Shelvant* Pcrs.— Slcsha niataka. Sans. — Selu, Bahu Vara. Tarn, — 
Naru Villi. Tani,— Nakkeruchettu* 

Sebesten or sapistan is an abbreviation of sagpistan, derived from 
sag, a dog. and pisatan, dugs. The fruit resembles bitches* dugi 
in shape. Dibk and Mukhitah means niucilaginous» in allusion to the 
glutinous character of thu pulp. 

Characters, — Dry fruit a drupe, irregular, oblong, colour darkish 
brown, surface rugous, and highly wrinkled. In size, resembling 
jaephal; rind tough and sticky, pulp not easily separable from the seed; 
odour like that of cassia pulp, or decayed date^ -taste mucilaginous 
rather aciduous and disagreeable, 

Constitunits. — The pulp of the fruit contains sugar, gum, extractive 
matter, ash ; the bark contains a principle allied tocathartin. 

Preparaiions, — Decoction of the fruit or bark (1 in 10). Dose, 
I to 2 oz. 

Actions and uses* — Demulcent and mucilaginous, used in c-ugiis' 
chest affections and in irritation of the urinary passages, and as a 
laxative in biliuus affeclions. The bark is a mild astringent and tonic, 
and used in general debility and convalescence. The decoction also 
is used as a gargle in sore mouth, 

Hdiotropium Indioum, H. Cordifolium, Tiaridium Indicam. 

Habitat, — Throughout India. 

Parts ustd^ — The herb. 

Virnacular, — Hind,, Beng — Hathisura. Eng,— Indian turn-sole. 
Gut. — Hathi-sundhlkna. Mar.— Burundi. Malayal. ^ — letkatukka. 
Sans.— Hoste sunda» shri-hastine. Tara,— Tcl-kodukki. TeL— 
Kagadonti. 

Haihi sundhana is derived from hathi, an elephant, and sundha, 
a trunk, in allusion to the spikes of the flowers being curved like the 
trunk of an elephant* 



422 COCCINIA GLALXA. 

Characters, — Herb erect, or rather procumbent, generally hairy 
all over ; leavescordate, ovate, oblong ; surface, much wrinkled and 
rugous, taste bitter ; colour green, or darkish green ; flowering spikes, 
scorpioid and longer than the leaves, densely flowered at one side ; 
flowers very small and tubular; tubes 4-sided and hairy, colour pink or 
pale blue; fruit mitre-shaped, odour foetid, like that of stramonium ; 
taste biiter. 

Constituents. — Tannin, an organic acid and an alkaloid. 

Preparations, — The juice. 

Actions and uses* — Local anodyne. The juice boiled with castor 
oil is used to allay the pain of the sting of a scorpion and to cure 
the bite of a mad dog. The leaves are applied to painful gum boils 
and pimples on the face with benefit. 

Coccinia glaaca, Onosma Braoteatum. 

Habitat. — Persia. 

Vernacular, — Hind., Bomb., Beng., Tam. — Gaozaban. Arab.— 
Lisan-uth thour. 

Parts used, — The herb known in Persia as gaozabana ; and flowers. 

Gaozaban — Gao, a cow and Zabana, tongue, in allusion to the 
leaves being covered with tubercles and tapering points which resem- 
ble the enlarged papillae on the tongue of a cow. 

Various plants are sold in the Indian bazaar under the name of 
Gaozaban. These are onosma bracteata, cacalia kleinia ; Anisomeles 
Malabarlica, and Trichodesma Indicum. 

Characters, — The drug consists of broken pieces of the stems and 
leaves; the colour is greyish brown ; stem in pieces, pale brown, chan- 
nelled or compressed, longitudinally furrowed, fissured, and marked 
with broad based white hairs. Hairs generally get broken off, leaving 
white scale-like tubercles ; leaves thick, procumbent, brittle, rough and 
greyish green, or black like bullock's tongue, covered on both sides 
with similar white calcareous glands, from which calcareous hairs ^ inch 
long arise ; surface much wrinkled ; odour disagreeable, sometimes 
resembling that of tea; taste mucilaginous ; flowers of a brownish pink or 
Hue colour, wide mouthed, about i to i^ inches long, hairy and 
tubular, taste sweetish and mucilaginous, odour tea-like; calyx 5 partite 
and set with calcareous hairs. Stamens 5. If long kept the flowers 
turn reddish. 

Constituents, — A nitrogenous substance, forming a jelly on cooling 
from a boiling solution ; the ash contains silica, alumina, traces of iron, 
lime, &c. 

Preparations^ — Decoction (i in 20). Dose, 2 to 4 ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Alterative, tonic, diuretic and demulcent, given 
in chronic fevers, rheumatism, syphilis, leprosy, hypochondriasis, dise- 
ases of the kidneys, gonorrhoea, and dysuria. It might be substituted 
for sarsaparilla. 



ERIODICTYON GLUTINOSUM. 423 

Triohodesma Indioam, T. Zeylanioam, Borago Indioa, B. 

Zeylanioa. 

Habitat, — Throughout India, Ceylon. 

Parts used, — The herb. 

Vernacular. — Mar., Hind. — Jhingi, Chhota Kulpha. Punj. — Rat ■ 
mundu. Sans. — Jhingi, dubala, ambu sirishika. Sind. — Pabarpam' 
Tarn. — Nilakai. Tel.— Gu\ a gutli. 

Jhingi Jhinga, means shrimps or prawns, with rough tubercles 
or bristles. The covering of the herb is bristly and covered with hairs 
and tubercles. 

Characters, — Leaves opposite, sessile, cordate, lanceolate; stem 
clasping, tuberculate on the upper surface. Flowers pale blue ; calyx 
villous, cordate ; corolla tube-like. 

Preparations and actions, — Similar to those of gaozaban. 

HydrophyllaoesB— Water-leaf family. 

Hydrophyllaceic, so called from each leaf having a cavity for 
holding water. 

Herbs, bushes, or small trees being hairy and juicy; leaves hairy, 
toothed, lobed and alternate. Flowers either solitary stalked, axillary, 
and regular, or scorpoidal, and arranged in circinate racemes or spikes; 
calyx persistent; corolla regular, ovary simple, i — 2 celled; styles and 
stigmas 2 ; ovules 2 or many. Fruit capsular, 2 valved, i to 2 celled ; 
seeds netted, albumen hard and abundant. Grows in a temperate 
climate and is used as stimulant and astringent. 

Eriodiotyon Glatinosum. 

Yerba Santa, holy herb, sacred herb, bearVweed, consumptive or 
tar weed, mountain balm. 

Habitat, — California and Mexico. 

Parts used, — The leaves. 

Eriodictyon — means wool and a net, the leaves are woolly and net 
veined. Glutinosum from glutiosus, meaning gluey or viscous, the 
leaves and stems are resinous and sticky. 

Characters, — A perennial evergreen shrub 3 — 5 feet high ; bark 
smooth, green and herbaceous along the stem and branches; leaves 
lanceolate, pointed at the apex, elliptical, petiolate, finely or serrately 
dentate, i — 3 inches in length, alternate with i to 3 or more, growing 
from axil ; upper surface green, smooth, perfectly varnished with the 
resinous principle as to present a most gorgeous spectacle ; under 
aspect minutely reticulated, presents a silvery appearance which is due 
to its pubescency ; flowers pinkish, purple, blue, densely clustered, 
in raceme ; odour aromatic, taste balsamic and sweetish, like that of 
tolu. 



4^4 CUSCUTA REPLEXA. 

Constituents. — An acrid gum resin 30 to 40 p.c. eriodictyontc acid, 
a bitter principle, gum, tannin, a fixed and an aromatic volatile oil, 
ericolin, a peculiar saccharine and crystalline principle. 

Preparations, — Fluid Extract. Dose, 1560 ms. Syrup (i in 10). 
Dose, \ dr. Velatine — a combination of glycyrrhizin and yerbasanta. 

Actions and uses. — Demulcent, diuretic, bitter tonict sedative and 
expectorant. It does not cause nausea. It covers the taste of quinine. 
The resin is sedative and balsamic, and exerts decidedly soothing and 
stimulating effect upon the bronchial tubes ; given with grindelia 
for cough and cold; also given in chronic bronchitis, pneumoniat 
phthisis, aphonia, hay asthma, pertussis, chronic gastric catarrhi 
haemorrhoids and in catarrh of the geni to-urinary tract &c. 

It has the power of completely covering the bitter taste of 
quinine and its salts. The taste is also obviated by giving it in the pill 
form with glycerin, or liquorice, chocolate and velatine. 

Cusoutaoea— The Amapavela, Kasusa or Dodder family. 

Allied to or a sub-division of convolvulaceae. The plants are 
distinguished by their parasitic habit, by the absence of leaves ; stems 
generally yellow, wiry and succulent ; flowers have scales alternating 
with the coroUine lobes; seeds small, resembling those of convolvulus 
plants. Natives of temperate climates ; having purgative properties. 

CuBoata Refleza. 

Habitat. — Persia. 

Part used. — The fruit. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Tukhm-i-kasusa; kushooth. Eng. — Dodders. 
Hind., Guz. — Amaravela, Akasaveli. Pers. — Tukhm-i-kasusa. 

Kushooth— Having neither root, fruits, leaves, nor any fragrance. 
Akdsavela, Ak^sa, sky, and Vela, a twiner. The plant is parasitic and 
grows on other plants, viz. the Amaranthus, Euphorbia, Erythema, 
Acacia, &c. It has no root under the ground, but only grows as 
a dodder, and hence the natives call it sky-twiner or Akfeavela. 

Amaravela, Amara, immortal, and Vela, a twiner. It is an immor- 
tal twiner. It grows during the rains and every year the growth is 
afresh on the same plant, hence it is called Amaravela. 

Characters. — The drug is generally mixed with spines, pieces of 
stems, small oblong leaves, broken up flowers, seeds &c., of the plant on 
which it has grown. It is of a brownish yellow colour, of an aromatic 
odour, and a bitterish taste, the stems are slender, wiry, and longitudi- 
nally furrowed ; flowers pedicelled and cupped. Each cup has several 
teeth. Within the cup there is a corolla— the seeds are four, 
small, light brown, convex on one side and concave on the other, and 
enclosed in a round capsule ; they resemble kala danah. In size, they 
resemble mustard or radish seeds, taste bitter. 

Constituents, — Quercetrin, a bitter glucosidal resin, a trace of 
alkaloidal principle, astringent matter, wax and oil. The resin is 
insoluble in ether, soluble in amylic alcohol and in water. 



BMBEUA RIBSS. 



4^5 



Preparations. — Decoction (i in 20). Dose» } to 2 ozs. 

Actions //;/^/i/jr^i,— Alterative, purgative, and anthelmintic, used 
in constipation, liver diseases, and bilious affections* Variiiins of the 
dodder are used in piles. 

Remarks. — Akdsavela is also the name of Cassytha filiformis of 
the natural order Lauraccae. Both are parasitic plants of a yellow 
colour. 

Casoata Sp« 

Habitat, — Europe and Western and Central Asia. 

Paris used, ^Tht stem* 

Verfuicular, — Arab, — Aftimun. Eng. — Lesser Dodder* Hind.— 
Aphatimuna. 

Characters. — A parasitic plant grovvinj^ on thyme or a shrub grow- 
ing upon bushes and thorns. Flowers small, whitish ; seeds round, and 
reddish yellow ; steins in pieces, of a light brown colour. Each piece is 
wiry, compressed and striated. The plant has a somewhat aromatic 
odour, and an astringent bitter taste. 

Constituents, — Preparation and properties are the &ame as those 
of cuscuta rcflexa, 

Hyr&inaoeao— The HyrBine or Yavading family. 

Trees or shrubs — leaves coriaceouSi smooth, exstipulate. Flowers 
tmall, unisexual or perfect ; calyx and corolla, 4 to 5 partite, 
tnthtrs longitudinal and dehiscent — ovary, superior, one-celled. Fruit 
fleshy, pungent J albumen abundant and horny. Natives of India. The 
fruits «ind seeds of some are anthelmintic, aromatic and astringent. 

Embella Ribes, £. Olandulifera* Embelia Ribesioides. 

Habitat — Throughout India, Bombay, 

Parts used. — The berries. 

Vernacular. — Pcrs., Arab. — Biranj-i-kabuli. Duk., Beng. — Ba- 
barang. Can.— Vuyubliaga. Eng. — Embelia fruit. Bomb., Gu/., 
Hind. — Vayvarang. Mar. — ViWadinga. Malyal. — V'isha-al Sans, — 
Vidanga, Vrisha naiana, Chitra tandula. Tarn — Vaju Vilangam. 
Tel. — Vayu V^'elangam. 

Vrisha nusana — destroyer of the enemy (worms) ; chitra-tandula 
having variegated seeds. 

Characters. — The berries angular, globular and in large bunches j 
l^resh ones, of a reddish dark colour, and of the size of 
peppercorn or chini kabab, and contain a whitish and 0cshy 
3ulp, At the base is a fine toothed calyx, with a small adlierent 
stalk. Where the calyx is absent a hole is apparent. At tJie apex 
is a short beak from which five prominent ridges run downwards 
and outwards, and converge towards the base* Between the ridges are 



426 ACHRAS SAPOTA. 

several longitudinal ribs or nerves. The pericarp is brittle ; the seeds 
are embedded in the pulp. The seeds are hard, oily, of a pale brown 
colour, and covered with a thin membranous reddish testa ; taste is 
aromatic. Dose, of the powdered seeds, i to 4 drs. 

Constituents. — Embelic acid, a volatile and fixed oil, colouring 
matter, tannin, a resinoid body and an alkaloid called christembine. 
Embelic acid — small orange red crystals, insoluble in water and soluble 
in alcohol, used for tape-worms. 

Preparations. — Ammonii embelas, ammonium embelate or ammo- 
nium salt of embelic acid — found in needle-shaped crystals of a 
red colour, tasteless. Dose, 3 to 6 grs. Liquid extract. Dose, i to 
4 drs. Decoction (i in 10). Dose, ^ to i fid. oz. Fruit preserved 
in syrup. Confection of preserved fruit, freed from nuts. Dose, 1 dr. 
Compound pill — sajivani gotika — Sajivan, to restore, and gotika, 
pills. Medicine to restore digestion — contains vai-vairung, suntha, 
pipali, balaharade, amala, bahedana, vehkanda, galo, bhilamo, 
each 5 parts, bachan&g impart. Triturate and add madha. Dose, 5 grs. 
To be given in the juice ofadraka. 

Actions and uses, — The pulp is purgative, the fresh juice cooling 
diuretic and laxative. The fruit is carminative, anthelmintic, alterative 
and stimulant ; mixed with ervados and pipli, the pulp is given to 
children in habitual constipation and in acute capillary bronchitis; as a 
carminative the fruit is given in dyspepsia and flatulence ; as an altera- 
tive in skin diseases and rheumatism. When taken for a long time it 
is found to turn the urine acid and red. As an vermicide, embolic acid 
or the ammonii embellas is used in tapeworms — the worms are killed, 
and to remove the dead mass, castor oil is given the next 
morning. A paste of it is used locally in ringworm and other skin 
diseases. The compound pill is given in dyspepsia and to check 
diarrhoea. 

SapotaoesB,— The Sapota or Sapodilla or Hohawa family. 

Trees or shrubs often with a milky juice; leaves simple, entire, 
ahernatc, coriaceous and exstipulate ; flowers hermaphrodite, white, 
pale yellow or pinkish; calyx £, persistent; ovary, 4 to 12 celled. Fruit 
fleshy, containing large seeds with a shining bony testa ; embryo large, 
albuminous; the bark is bitter, astringent and febrifugal; the milky juice 
of some yield caoutchouc or India rubber. Native of tropical parts 
of Asia, Africa, America — many species yield edible fruits. The seeds 
of several contain a fatty oil. 

Aohras Sapota. 

Habitat, — West Indies, India, China. 

Parts used.^The bark, fruit and seeds. 

Vernacular. — Bomb. — Keweet. Burm.— Thwool-ta-bat. Cing. — 
Ratami. Eng. — Sapodilla plum. Bully tree (the wood). Mar. — Chiku. 
Tam.— Simielupei. Tel. — Simaippa— Chettu. 



BASSIA LATIFOtiA, 



4^7 



Characters, — ^Bark red, outer coat grey and tuberous, of a strong 
bitter and astringent taste. Fruit dcliciousi ovoid, rusty brown and rough 
exteriinlly» yellowish white, soft and pulpy within ; seeds black, elongat- 
ed, shining and ovoid. Taste every bitter. Dose of the seeds, i to 5 grs. 

Comtiluents. — The bark contains 2 resins, tannin, and an alkaloid 
sapotine^ soluble in alcohol, ether and chloroformt and precipitated 
from its salts by atnnu»nia. 

Preparations. — Decoction of the bark (i in 10). Dose, \ to 1 fld, 
oz. 

Actions and uses. — ^The bark is tonic and febrifuge, and used as a 
substitute for cinchona bark. The seeds are aperient and powerfully 
diuretic* The fruit is refrigerant and given in fevers. Achras or sapota 
niulleri, a native of Guiana yields a kind of gutta percha known as 
Balatas. 



Bassia Latifolia ( Mohwa tree), B. Longifolia (Wild sapota or 
Eliopa tree), B. Butyracea iButter tree). 

^fi^i//!/.— Central India, Malabar Coast, Kumaoni Bengal, Ccvlon, 
Terai, Oudh, Gwaliur, Nagporc^ Gujerat, Almora and Ncpau!. 

flirts used, — The flowers and oil of the seeds» 

Veniacular, — B. Longifolia : Burm.^Kan-zam Can. — Ippagtda* 
Cin. — Migass-tchni. Eng. — Mohwah, Guz.— Mahovudun ( B. 
Latifolia). Hind. — Mohwa. Bomb.^ — Mohra. Beng. — Mauh Sans. — 
Madhuka, Mar* — ^Maha pushpa. Pers. — Drakhte-gul chakan, ( B. 
Butyracea)Hind., Duk., Beng. — Falwa, Falawara. Malyah— Poounam ; 
Madhu sravas, Mudhu-madhavr. Madhu-vasavd, Madhu druma, Guda 
pushpi. Tarn.— Ennai, karrai maram. TeU— Ippa Chettu, 

Madhu druma, from madh, honey, and druma, a tree* Parts of this 
tree are sugary. Madhu-sravas. means sugar flower; Madhuka sara, 
means concrete oil of the seeds or the milky juice of the bark, 
Madliuva sava, spirituous liquor prepared from the flowers. Madhu 
Madhavi, fermented juice of the sugary flowers. Guda pushpi. Guda, 
gadc means treacle, and pushpi, flowers. The flowers have a sweet 
taste, Darakht-i-gulchakan— in allusion to its deciduous flowers. 

Characters, — Small white flowers, generally deciduous ; the ripe 
flowers are fleshy and smell like that of jarudalu and have a sickly acid 
and sweet taste. The dry ones resemble dried raisins in appearance and 
colour ; fleshy, sticky, and compressed or hollow, with an aperture at both 
ends; upper end much larger and many toothed. Within the hollow 
arc several light brownish or pink coloured hairy anthers, which soon 
wither, and are found in large quantities under the tree every morning. 
The taste is like that of figs. Fruit large, containing two white kernels 
or cotyledons, which yield above 50 p.c. of greenish yellow fatty oils 
which becomes buttery in cold weather. The oil is known as mawah 
oil or yellah oil. That obtained from B» Butyracea is called Fulwa 
Butter. 



428 PALAQUIITM OBLONGIKOUUM. 

Constituents. — Flowers contain cane sugar, cellulose* albuminous 
substances, and ash. . The seeds contain oil, fat, tannin, extractive 
matter, bitter principle, probably saponin, albumen, gum, starch and 
ash. The ash contains silicic acid, phosphoric acid, sulphuric acid, lime 
and iron, potash and traces of soda. The juice contains caoutchouc 
from whicii gutta percha can be manufactured, tannin, starch, calcium 
oxalate, gum, resins, formic and acetic acids and ash. The oil is 
yellowish, but becomes colourless after exposure to the light. It has a 
faint agreeable odour. Sparingly soluble in alcohol, readily so in ether. 
By saponification it yields oleic acid, glycerin, and two fatty acids ; 
the oil is used in the preparation of country soap. 

Preparations. — Concrete oil from the seeds ; spirituous liquor from 
flowers ; milky juice of the bark ; decoction of the bark(i in 20), Dose, 
^ to I fld. oz. Infusion of flowers (i in 20). Dose, i to 2 fld. ozs. 

Actions and uses* — The fresh juice is alterative and given in scrofula, 
and rheumatic affections. The fermented juice of the sugary flowers is 
stimulant and appetizing and may be substituted for rum. The fruit 
serves as food to man and is cooling and refrigerant. The flowers are 
nutritive, tonic and demulcent; and also intoxicating, and form a 
vehicle in many cooling and demulcent mixtures. By distillation they 
yield an alcoholic spirit. They are largely used in India, in diarrhoea and 
dysentery, and as food. An infusion of the flowers is given with sugar, 
for the relief of thirst, burning of the body, and giddiness. They are 
also used in coughs. The concrete oil is used as an application to the 
head in headache, to wounds, and as a lubricant in rheumatism and 
contraction of the limbs, in cutaneous affiections, and also as an ointment 
base like kokam butter. The fatty oils are used in the manufacture 
of coarse soap and iu India for lamps and for culinary purposes. 

Palaqoiom Oblongifolium, Isonandra Gutta. 

Habitat. — Malay Peninsula and Sumatra. 

Parts used. — A concrete exudation, Gutta Percha. 

Vernacular. — Eng. — Gutta percha or Taban tree. 

Characters. — Obtained by incision in or felling trees, removing 
the bark, the juice being collected in cocoanut shells, in which it 
coagulates. The inspissated juice is in tough pieces, very flexible, of 
a yellow or grey colour, plastic, heavier than water, without any odour 
or taste — insoluble in alcohol or water, soluble in chloroform, oil of 
turpentine, carbon bisulphide, benzin and benzol. 

Constituents.^-GMtXz 80 p,c.— a hydrocarbon, a fine white powder ; 
two resins (fluavil, a yellow resin, and alban, a white resin) ; volatile 
oil, salt, fat and colouring matter. 

Preparation. — Liquor gutta perchae contains gutta percha 9, car- 
bonate of lead 10, and chloroform 91. As a protective to the skin it 
soon evaporates, leaving thin adhesive pellicles. Gutta percha splints. 
Traumaticin, a solution of gutta percha in chloroform (i in lo). 



MIMUSOPS BLBNGI. 



429 



Acitnns and uses, — Gutta percha solution is used as a protective 
application to wounds and eruptions ; also used for the preparation of 
p)iDt&» pessaries, &c. Trauma tic in is used as a coating in skin diseases 
and slight wounds. The application does not contract the skin. It is 
an excellent basis for chrysarobin application in psoriasis, and as an 
adhesive film in wounds, abrasions, sore nipple, &c. 

Himnsops Elen^, 
/;/aiiiaL^Decczn Peninsula, Nagpore, Khandalla, 
Parts used, — ^The bark, flowers, fruit. 

Vernacular, — Benjj.— Bakul, Woula, Burm. — Kya-ya. Can. — 
Mugalimara. Cing* — Moone-mal-gass. Duk. — Taindu. Eng. — Bakula 
tree. Bomb,, Guz,, Hind. — Maulsari, Bakuloli^ Bolsaree, Mar. — 
Voula, ovali* Central Provinces — Taindu. Mai, — Elengee. Portu- 
guese. — Pomme de Adami, Sans,— Vakula» Kesara, Sinha Kesara, 
Tarn. — ^Moga-dam. Tel. — Pogada Manu. 

Sinha Kesara. from Sinha, Sihen, a lion and Kesara, the mane — the 
lion^s mane. Burmese ladies use small delicate scented blossoms, made 
in strings in chaplets like lion's name for the head. 

Characters, — Bark hke quills, darkish brown, tough^ fibrous, 
rather scabrous and marked with short irregular fissures, Internally 
reddish brown, brittle and breaking transversely ; smell rather 
disagreeable ; taste slightly bitter and astringent ; flowers small, pale, 
brown or white, powerfully aromatic, sweetish smelling ; an oil is 
distilled from them* Berry oval and smooth, unripe fruit astringent 
and full of milky juice. The ripe fruit contains no milk, but a yellow 
pulp, which is sweet and astringent ; the leaves produce an extra- 
ordinary noise when burnt. 

Constiiuents. — Tannin, some caoutchouc, wax, colouring matter 
starch and ash. 

Prtparations, — A fragrant water from flowers. Decoction of the 
bvk (I in 10), Dose, 4 to 12 drs. 

Actions and uses* — The bark is astrhigent and given in catarrh of 
the bladder and urethra ; also used as a gargle in salivation, sore 
mouih, loose teeth, and in sponj^y gums. The unripe fruit when 
chewed is said to strengthen loose teeth, A snuff made of the 

Cowdered flowers produces copious discharge from the nose and relieves 
eadache and fever. 

Mlmnsops Hexandra. 

Habitat, — Deccan Peninsula, Ceylon, N. India. 
J^rts used* — The bark and seeds* 

Vernacular. — Bcng, — Khira. Bomb* — AhmedAb^di mevo (fruit). 
Hind, — Rana Kakodio, Kshiri, Mar. and Guz* — Ranjana, Sans. — 
Rajadani, Kheri. Tarn. — Pall. TeU — Palla. 

Khsheri or Kheri — means milky or deliciously juicy; Rilja-dftni, 
R4jah, king, and Adani, an edible substance, or fruit — an edible fruit 
highly priied by the rajas. 



430 DIOSPYROS EMDRYOPTKRIS. 

Characters, — Pretty trees ; leaves broad and wedge shaped ; bark 
in several layers, most external layer smooth and of an ash colour; next 
to it green, and within it the innermost red layer which contains milky 
juice. Wood very tough, seeds darkish brown, smooth and shining; testa 
brittle and breaking with a crackling noise; kernel reddish brown and 
oily; taste of the bark, bitterish and pungent ; that of the seeds oily and 
acrid. The oil is obtained by expressing the seeds. 

Constituents, — The bark contains tannin, resin, wax, a colouring 
matter, starch and ipineral matters. The seeds contain a fixed oil. The 
fruits contain sugar, caoutchouc, pectin, coloring matter and tannin. 

/V^/drrfl/zb/w.— Decoction of the bark (i in lo). Dose, i to i fl.oz 

Actions and uses, — The bark is astringent and used for the same 
purposes as mohvara and bakuli. A paste of the seeds is used to 
procure abortion. The oil from the seeds is demulcent and emollient. 
The ripe fruit is deliciously sweet and restorative. 

EbenaceaB— The Ebony family. 

Large trees or shrubs, without milky juice. Leaves leathery, 
alternate, entire, thick, coriaceous, and exstipulate. Flowers polygamous, 
calyx 3-7 partite, inferior, persistent. Fruits fleshy and edible in some ; 
seeds large and albuminous. Wood hard and black as ebony and 
iron woods. 

Habitat, — Native of Tropical India, 

Properties, — Some have astringent bark, many have edible fruits, 
others are remarkable for the hardness of their wood, known as ivory 
and iron wood. 

Diospyros Embryopteris, D. Yirginiana, D. Olutinosa, D. 
Ebenom (Abnus), Embryopteris Glutinosa— Indian Persimmon. 

Habitat, — Throughout India, United States. 

Parts used. — The unripe fruit and dried seeds. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Abnes-e-hindi, Beng. — Gab. Burm. — 
Yendaik. Cing. — Tumbiri. Hind,, Guz. — Temru, Gib. Duk., Mar. — 
Tiniburni. Malyal. — Vanan chikka maram. Sans. — Tumbiri Tinduka 
Kinkini-Kankr. Tam. — Tumbilikkay. Tel. — Tumiki, Tinduki. 

Characters, — Fruit, plum like, i inch thick, sub-globose, glandular, 
rusty, and yellow ; when ripe 4-lobed ; calyx at the base, covered, 
6-celled, with rust coloured clubbed hair ; seeds reniform and arranged 
round the central core, pulp glutinous. Dose, 15 to 60 grs. 

Constituents, — Tannin, pectin and glucose. 

Preparations.— T\nQi\xrQ{i in 10). Dose, 10 to 30 ms. Extract 
Dose, I to 5 grs. Infusion (i to 10). Dose, J to i oz. 

Actiofis and uses, — Astringent ; given internally in gonorrhoea, 
leucorrhoea, uterine haemorrhage, sore throat, diarrhoea, and dysentery. 
A lotion (2 drs. to i pint of water) is a valuable injection in leucorrhoea. 
Abnus is astringent and Hthontriptic. 



STYRAX BKN'ZOTV. 



4.V 



Siyracacese— The Labana or Storax family. 

Trees or shrubs* Leaves simple, alternate and exstipulate ; flowers 
axillary, calyx 4 or 5 partite* almost entire, and per^^isient. Fruit 
clrupact*ou!(, more or less fleshy, seed one in each cell, albumen abundant 
and fleshy. 

///rA/Vrf/,— Found in tropics^and temperate climate, 

Prfiperties^ — This order is remarkable for yielding stimulant 
balsams and resins. The bark of some plants is astringent. 

StyraK Benzoin, B. P. 

HahtiaL — Sumatra, Java, Siam, Borneo and Islands of Eastern 
Archipelago. 

Pari us^c/. — Balsamic resin flowing from the incision of the bark, 
Benzoinum B. P. Benzoin, 

Vernacular, — Arab,— Hasi4uban-el-Javi, Bakkur, Kunnuk. GuZm 
Beng. — ^L6biin, Sambarani. Burm. — Ldbrin, Mar, -Can -Cing. — 
Sambroan. Hind,-Duk. — [.uban, nod. Eng,— Gum Benjamin, storax, 
Benzuin laurel. Malay. — Konim Jan. Malyal. — Kt»nimjan, Pers. — 
Dur-i-haskhak. Sau<i» — Dgva-Dhupaha. Tam, — Dupani, Tel. — 
Tarn brani. 

There are two varieties — Siam Benzoin which is highly fragrant, 
and occurs in masses of a dark brown colour mottled with white ■ and 
Sumatra Benzoin, in teais of a greyish colour but inferior. The 
superior variety \% called Karis loban from the fact of its containing 
tears which arc similar in size and somewhat in shape and colour to 
kawri, a small shell. 

Chnractfrs. — Benzoin, a Balsamic resinous exudation indurated in 
the air, obtamcd by longitudinal or somewhat oblique, incisions 
in the bark of the stem, n met with in separate flattened aggluti- 
nated tears or drops, yellowish or reddish brown externally and 
milky white within, or in masses pitch dark or amber brown, exudation 
adulterated with wood bark and other impurities, very brittle, with a 
slightly waxy and transparent glossy fracture, readily softening in the 
mouth like maslick, odour bals;iniic, vanilla like, and fragrant, taste 
slightly balsamic ; soluble in 5 parts of warm alcohol or fixed alkaline 
solution ; on heating it evolves fumes of bcnaioic acid. Dose, 5 to 30 grs. 

Comhnitnts.—TYwtQ resins, Benzoic acid, cinnamic acid, vanillin 
and volatile oil. 

Acidum Benzoicum, B.P. — Benzoic acid, Benzoyl Hydrate. Flowers 
of Benzoin— an organic acid obtained from Benzom by sublimation ; 
also artificially prepared from tuluol, hjppuric, or phthalic acid or 
'from other organic compounds. It occurs in yellowish or white lustrous 
cale?^ or friable needics ; when pure it has no odour generally ; when 
obtained from benzoin it has the odour of benzoins, and a warm acid 
taste, soluble in cold water (i in 400), in boiling water (i in 1 7), absolute 
alcohol (i in 1)1 alcohol (rin3), ^^hcr (i in 2*5), chloroform (i in 



432 SYMPLOCOS RACEMOSA. 

7), soluble in fats and fixed and volatile oils and in alkaline solutions. 
With alkaline solution forming benzoates,such as benzate of ammonium, 
lithium and sodium. Dose, S to 1 5 grs. in wafers. Resins — these are 
extracted from benzoin by sublimation or by adding boiling solution of 
caustic potash. Vanillin — treat benzoin with caustic lime, precipitate 
benzonic acid with hydrochloric acid, shake the liquid with ether. 

Preparations. — Of the gum resin — Tinctura Benzoin i composita 
B. P. — contains Benzoin 2 oz., prepared storax ij oz., balsam of tolu \ 
oz., socotrine aloes 160 grs alcohol to produce i pint. Dose, ^ to i fld. 
dr. Adeps Benzoatus B. P. (3 gr. in 100.) Trochiscus acidi Benzoici, 
B. P. \ gr. in each with fruit basis. Tinctura camphorae composita, 
B.P. Dose, ^ to I dr. Tinctura opii ammoniata. Dose, J to i dr. 

Actions and uses. — Benzoin like balsams is an antiseptic, 
disinfectant, stimulant and expectorant. It stimulates the skin, 
kidneys, salivary glands and the bronchial mucous membrane. It ren- 
ders the urine acid and increases its quantity. It is excreted by the 
kidneys as hippuric acid in combination with glycocoll. If inhaled, it 
irritates the nose and fauces, and causes sneezing and cough; taken into 
the stomach it causes epigastric pain. It is used extensively as an 
incense. Its tincture i dr. to i oz. is added to a pint of hot water, 
and the fumes inhaled in laryngeal affections and in sore throat and 
bronchitis, Lobana- is often used as a stimulant expectorant in phthisis, 
asthma, pulmonary catarrh, chronic laryngitis, chronic diarrhoea, and 
dysentery. It should never be used in acute inflammatory diseases 
or in cases of gastric irritability. A healing and protective paste 
of lobana made in Movarano daru or the compound tincture is applied 
to foul and indolent ulcers, over cut surfaces, sore nipples, chaps of hand 
and feet, and over contused wounds. Benzoic acid as antiseptic and is 
given in genito-urinary diseases, to neutralize morbid alkaline foetid 
urine, in chronic cystitis, phosphatic gravel, in copious uric acid de- 
posit, in gonorrhoea and Bright's disease ; also in albuminuria and 
incontinence of urine. A solution (i in 20) relieves urticaria and may 
be used as an antiseptic application on freckles and other skin 
diseases. 

SympIoiBOB Ba4semoBa, 8. Theofolia. 

^fl^ito/.— Burma and N. India. 

Parts used, — The bark, lotur bark. 

Vernacular. — Can.— Jalariya med. Beng., Hind., Guz., Mar. — 
Lodhra, Hoora. Sans. — Lodhra, Tilaka, Shrimata, Savura Lodhra. 
Tam. — Erra lodduga. Tel, — Lodduga. 

Characters. — Bark in pieces or in quills; colour light or brick brownt 
external surface rugous, very soft, friable and easily pulverizable ; on 
section, marginal portion reddish and very soft, that about the middle 
yellowish and fibrous looking ; fibres very soft, taste sweetish, balsamic, 
and astringent ; odour agreeable and aromatic. Dose, 5 to 15 grs. 

Constituents, — Three alkaloids. Loturine, colloturine and 
loturidine; and ash, which contains carbonate of soda. 



CHIONANTHUS VIRGINICA. 



433 



Preparations. — Decoction (i in lo). Dose, \ to i fid. oz. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent and tonic ; with bael and nux 
vomica, given in diarrhcea, dysentery, nienorrhagia and other chronic 
discharges. The decoction is used as a gargle in relaxed uvula and 
bleeding gums ; as a piaster it is used to promote maturation of boils. 
It is one of the constituents of hp, 

Oleaceee— The Ollire family. 

^ Trees or shrubs ; leaves alternate, sim[)le, entire, exstipulalc; 
lowers small, axillary, perfect, rarely unisexual ; calyx persistent, 
monosepalous. generally enbrging so as to cover the fruit, inferior and 
4-cleft — corolla regular, 4-cleft, or in foui distinct petals ; ovary free, 
often embedded in the disk, supertofi 2-celled, with two suspended 
ovules in each cell. Fruit drupaceous, fleshy 1 or dry, often one-seeded; 
seed with integument, solitary and pendulous ; albumen fleshy, embry*o 
straight* 

//adiiat.^NHivt of tropical and temperate regions* 

Propertus, — The barks of some are tonic and febrifuge; some yield 
manna. The common olive yields the well-known olive oil. 

Chianantbiis Virglnloa. 

Fringe tree, old man's bread. 

ffabttat, — ^United States* 

Parts used. — The bark of the root. 

Preparations* — Fluid extract. Dose, 15 to 60 ras. Solid extract. 
Dose, 3 to 12 grs. Tincture (i to 8 of proof spirit) ^ to 2 fld. drs. 

Actions and use^. — Alterative, and cholagogue ; a stimulant of the 
lymphatic system and slightly diaphoretic and diuretic* It is highly 
spoken of as a remedy in cases ot jaundice, h\ bilious and remittent 
fevers and as a tonic, after convalescence from debilitating diseases. 
Locally it is used as a poultice over ulcers and inflammatory swellings* 

Fraxintia Orntii, Ornas floriferaf F. RotandifoliuB, Flowering Ash. 

Habitat, — Mediterraneaiii Sicily, Asia Minor» South of Europe, 

Paris used. — The concrete saccharine exudation. 

Vernacular, — Eng.- Manna — Flowering ash. Guz* — MlCkQ, 

Malyal.— Manna* Pcrs.— Shirkhisht, Tarn.— M6nA. Tel.— McnL 

Characters^' -The juice or sap oozes out of the leaves, bark of the 
trunk and large branches* It also bursts through large pores spontan- 
eously. It occurs in flat friable pieces, concretes on exfjosure to the sun; 
each piece varies in size, occasionally 8 inches long and z inches* broiid, 
usually smaller; externally yellowish while, or white, porous and 
cr)*st3lline ; within, bruwnish white and glutinous ; taste swcel, bitter 
and slightly acrid; odour honey-like* In appearance it resemoles 
country kapura. Dose, 4 to 12 drs* 

S8 



434 ^IJSA EUROPiEA. 

Constituents, — Man nit 60 — 90 p.c, mucilage which does not 
undergo vinous fermentation, glucose 15 p.c,; fraxin, and an acrid 
resin. Mannit or manna sugar — boil the exudation with alcohol 
and crystallize. 

Preparations, — An ingredient in infusum sennae compositum. 

Actions and uses, — A mild laxative, demulcent, expectorant and 
cholagogue. In large doses it causes flatulence and colic. Com- 
bined with senna, rhubarb and magnesia, it is given to disguise the 
taste and to promote the purgative action ; as a demulcent it is given 
in piles, irritation of the genitourinary tracts, and cough, and as a 
mild laxative to delicate persons and children, and to new-born infants, 
if the meconium do not come away freely. 

Olea Earopsea, B.P. 

Habitat, — S. Europe, California, Algeria, Australia, Asia. 

Parts used, — A fixed oil expressed from the ripe fruit, oleum 
olivse, olive oil, B. P. 

C^/zrac/^;j.~The ripe fruit is a drupe, long, ovoid and pointed, 
and of a deep purple colour. Sarcocarp, firm, fleshy and full of oil. 
The stone is thick, and one-seeded, the oil is expressed from the fruit. 
Olive oil— a pale yellow, or greenish yellow oily liquid, of a faint nutty 
odour and an nutty oleaginous bland taste, and of a neutral reaction; 
sparingly soluble in chloroform and alcohol, readily so in ether ; 
becomes acrid by keeping. Dose, 4 to 8 drs. 

Constituents, — A fluid oil as olein, 72 p.c. and palmitin 28 p.c. (a 
solid oil or stearopten). Both are compounds of the base glyceryl with 
oleic and palmitic acid respectively. It also contains arachin, stearin, 
and cholesterin; olive oil is often adulterated with sesamum, oil ground 
nut oil and cotton-seed oil. 

Peparations. — Sapo durus, B.P., hard soap, sodium oleate, white 
castile soap, made by mixing olive oil and sodium hydroxide until 
saponified, a solid mass, colour whitish, odour faint and peculiar, 
taste disagreeable, alkaline reaction, soluble in water, alcohol, &c. 

Sapo mollis, B.P., soft soap, made of olive oil with potassium hy- 
droxide. Ceratum cetacei contains 55 p.c. of olive oil. Emplastrum 
Ferri 5 p.c, Emplastrum Picis Burgundicae 5 p.c, Emplastrum 
Plumbi 60 p.c, Unguentum Diachylon 50 p.c, Emplastrum Saponis, 
B.P., soap plaster, contains hard soap 6 ounces, lead plaster 2\ ounces 
and resin i ounce. Pilula Saponis composita, B. P.^ compound pill of 
soap contains 20 p.c opium- Dose, 2104 grs. Linimentum Saponis 
B.P. soap liniment — tinctura Saponis Camphora — liquid opodeldoc — 
camphorated tincture of soap, contains soft soap 2 ounces, camphor i 
ounce, oil of rosemary 3 fluid drachms, alcohol 16 fluid ounces, distilled 
water 4 fluid ounces. Linimentum Potassii lodidi cum Sapone B.P*, 
contains curd soap 2 ounces, potassium iodide i^ oz., glycerin I 
fid. oz., oil of lemon i fid. dr. distilled water 10 fid. ozs. 



JASMtNUM GHANDIKLORUM. 



43S 



Actions and ikus. — Laxative ; rubbed into the skin it is absorbed 

by the lymphatics, and hence directly nutritious ; locally demukctif. 
and etnnllieiit ; a nice protector of I he mucous membrane again^^t any 
acrid or poisonous substances Ii renders the skin soft and supple. 
In the intestines, it is partly emulsified, and partly saponified ; its 
glycerin is set free, its fatty acids combine with the U^q alkalies 
to form soap* The tniulsitm enters the bl«»od through the lacteals 
and is finally oxidized into carbonic acid and water, the excess of it 
is excreted by the urine. It thus increases the fat of the body 
and lessens the waste of nitrogenous (issues and supplies heat* 
As a laxative it is given in enema, or internally during constipation 
and as a specific in biliary and renal colic, gall stones, and acrid 
poisons. Locally applied it protects the wounds and sores from 
the action of the air, and hence applied to burnsi acute inflam- 
matory affections* of the skin, to bites, stings, bruises, sprains and 
wounds ; as a diluent and a lubricating agent it facilitates friction over 
stiff joints. It is of benefit in removing desquamation of the skin in 
scarlet fever. In corrosive poisonmg it is a good protective of the 
gastric mucous membrane and prevents absorption. 

Jaaminaoese —The Jasmine, or Chambeli order. 

Shrubs, often twining* Leaves opposite* flowers very fragrant, 
calyx persistent, 5 to 8 divisions; corolla regular, 5 to 8 partite; fruits 
capsules, or berries ; seeds with little or no albumen, 

HabiiaL—NsiiivG of warm regions. 

Properties' — The leaves of some species arc astringent, bitter and 
tonic« The flowers are fragrant and abound in a volatile oil; those of J, 
Sambac arc reputed have the power of arresting the secretion of milk* 

Jasrolnum Grandiflorum— Spanish Jasmine. 

Habitat — Cultivated all throughout India, 

Parts used* — The leaves and flowers. 

PVrnacu/ar. — Bur.— Myat-Ice. Bcng., Bomb., Hind* — Chambeli, 
Jati. Sans. — Jati. 

Character s,^ A Iwming shrub ; leaves opposite and pinnatifid ; 
leaflets, pointed and entire ; flowers large, white and very fragrant. 
From the flowers a perfumed oil is prepared. The drug has a bitter 
and astringent taste. 

Constituents, — ^Resin, salicylic acid^ an alkaloid*— named Jasminine 
and an astringent principle. 

Preparations. — The juice of the leaves. — Dose, 3 to 12 ms. and oil, 

Actiom and i/5<'^.--A stringent. The juice of the leaves, or the oil 
is dropped into the ear in otorrhoea. The leaves are chewed, or locally 
applied to aphthous sores or ulcers in the mouth. As uterine sedative 
ai poultice of the leaves and flowers is applied over the genitals, pubis 
mnd loins, in paintul menstruation, and in loss of venereal desire. 
The ftesb juice of the leaves is applied to soft corns with relief. 



436 NYCTANTHES ARBORTRISTIS. 

Jasminum Bambao, J. Undalatum, Nyctanthea Sambao, 
Hogoriam Bambao. 

HahitaL — Cultivated everywhere. 

Parts used. — The flowers. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Varde-abyaz. Burm.— Sabay malee. Can. — 
Mallige huvvu. Cing. — Pich-chi-mal. Bomb., Beng., Hind., Guz., 
Duk., Mar. — But Mogri, Hazarea mugra. Malyal.— Tejerijam mulla. 
Pers. — Zambak. Sans. — Vara shiki, nava malika. Tam. — Mallegaip- 
pu. Tel. — Boondoo. 

Characters, — Flowers white and large, of a delicious fragrance ; 
corolla double ; calyx, greenish yellow with many slender teeth. 

Actions and uses. — Lactifuge. Flowers, bruised and applied to 
the breasts, arrest the secretion of milk in the puerperal state, and 
prevents formation of mammary abscesses. The oil is cooling and used 
for hairs. 

Nyotanthes Arbortristis. 

J/aditat,—Cenir3\ India, Mussoorie, cultivated throughout India. 

Parts used. — The fruit and leaves. 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Singahar. Burm. — Hseik-ba-lu. Can. — 
Harsinghar. Cing. — Sepala. Duk. — Keysur. Eng. — Night Jasmine, 
weeping or sorrowful Nyctanthes. Guz. — Parbuttee. Hind.— Hara- 
singhara, Kersu Dundee. Mai. — Munja-pumerum. Mar. — Pahar- 
butle. Panj. — Pakiira. Sans. — Sephalica, Parijatak, Rajani hano, 
Atyuha. Tel., Tam — Pagala-mully. 

Characters. — Flowers, numerous, of a dull whitish yellow or red 
colour ; calyx companulated, 5-notched and downy ; corolla tubular, 
cylindrical and orange red, very fragrant and opening at sunset and 
withering before morning ; leaves opposite, short, petioled, oblong, 
scabrous, pointed and coarsely serrated ; fruit when dry flat, oblong 
and divided into two cells, each containing a seed ; seeds dark-brown, 
bitter and very astringent. The leaves when chewed, stain the saliva 
yellow. 

Constituents — Resin, colouring matter, an alkaloid. (Nyctanthine) 
and an oily principle, similar to the oil of peppermint. 

Preparations. — Decoction of seeds (1 in 10). Dose, ^ to i fl. oz. 
Infusion of leaves (i in 10), Dose, i to 1 fld, oz. 

Actions and uses. — As anteperiodic, the fresh leaves bruised are 
given with sugar or fresh ginger, in obstinate intermittent fevers. The 
powdered seeds are used locally to remove scurf from the head. The 
decoction or the infusion is used as an alterative in obstinate cases of 
sciatica and rheumatism. 



AZrMA TKTRACANTHA. 



437 



Sal?adoFacese--The Kh&khana family. 

Shnibs or small trees ; leaves opposite, entire, aod leathery. 
Flowers small, pannicled^ greenish, yellow, or white ; fruit» fleshy, of 
white, black or red colour, one-celled ; seeds solitary, erect andexalbu- 
minous. 

Habitat, — Native of India, Syria and N. Africa. 

Properties* — Some species are acrid and stimulant, 

Azima Tetracantba, Honetea Barberioides. 
Habitat, — The Deccan and Ceylon. 

f^rts ni^t/,— The leaves^ root and the juice obtained from the 
root birk. 

Vernacular. — Beng.^ — Trikanta-juti. Hind* — Kauta-gur*kamat. 
Mar, — Sukkapjit. Tarn. — Sunghamcheddi. TcL — Telia upi. 

Charackts. — Herb i horny ; branches innumerable* forming an 
impenetrable bu^h. Thorns, axillary^ fourfold spreading and very shaip. 
Leaver opposite, reflexed» oval or acute- Flowers axillary, fruit a berry, 
globular, of the sire of a pea, white and succulent, seeds two; root 
dark brown and juicy. 

Preparatiom. — Decoction (i in Jo). Dose, 1 to 2 fld. ois. Com- 
pound decoction^Sukka pit lo ozs. Tribulus Terrestris^ the root of 
trianthema, monogyrya, ccphalandra indica, each one oz. Beleric and 
chebulic myrobolans each \ oz., water 6 pints* Dose, 4 to 12 drs. 

Actions and uses. — A powerful diuretic ; given in rheumatism, 
_rop5y, dyspepsia, and chronic diarrliuea, and as stimulant tonic alter 
confinement. 

Salvadora Persica, S. Indica, S. WIghtiana and 8« Oleoidea. 

Habiiat.—'SW, India, A] mere, dry parts of India, Arabia, 
Persian Gulf, 

Parts used, — The bark, leaves, oil, and fruit. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Khardak, Beng,, Guz., Bomb. — Khakhana, 
Pilu. Hind* — Mithijar, Kaurijal. Mar. — Kaugani. Pers. — Darakhle 
misw.'lka. Sans.^ — Pilu, karambha priya. Sind. — Kebbar, Tam* — 
Karkol. TeL — Chuma-varu gogu* 

Drakhte miswak, Toothbrush tree — pieces of the stem are used 
as tooth brush. 

Characters.^SiQm dark brown, cracked and covered with numer- 
ous whitish brown scars; root bark smooth, of a light brown colour and 
studded with scabrous, corky warts ; odour pungent and heating ; taste 
acrid and warm ; leaves petioled and shining on both surfaces, oval or 
oblong and fleshy. In length i to 2 inches ; in breadth about one inch ; 
smeU acrid like that of cress ; fruit small, red or pink-coloured, globular 
ind juicy ; taste sweet; seeds erect, resembling grape (currants), when 
chewed acrid and pungent \ taste like garden cress, and having 
aromatic smelL 



438 SOLANACEiB. 

Constituents^ — The seeds contain an oil, a greenish yellow fat of the 
consistence of butter and of an acrid pungent smell and taste. The root 
bark contains resin, colouring matter and an alkaloid called salvadorine; 
also trimethylamine, and ash containing a large amount of chlorine. 
The fruit contains a large amount of sugar, fat, a colouring matter and 
an alkaloid. 

Preparations. — Decoction of the leaves and root bark (i in lo). 
Dose, 4 to 12 drs. 

Actions and uses, — The shrub is given to buffaloes as fodder to 
render their milk rich and thick. The fruit is edible, digestive, 
carminative and diuretic, and is used in enlarged spleen, lithiasis and 
rheumatism; a decoction of the leaves is used in asthma, cough, &c., and 
poultice of the leaves is applied to painful tumours, rheumatic joints, 
piles, &c. The bark is used as a tooth brush to strengthen the gums. 
A decoction of the bark is given as atonic and stimulant in low fevers, 
and in amenorrhoea. The freshly pounded bark of the root acts as a 
rubefacient and vesicant due to the presence of trimelhylamine. The 
oil — Khakhantel is used as a stimulant application to painful rheumatic 
affections, and as an inunction to the body after child-birth. 

Solanacese—The Bhuirin^, Potato or night-shade family. 

Solanum from sol, the sun, plants dislike the sun and best grow in 
the shade, hence night-shade, or from solor to comfort, from some of 
the plants having a soothing and narcotic effect. 

Herbs or shrubs, leaves alternate, often geminate ; inflorescence, 
axillary or extra axillary ; flowers isomerous, ovary, usually two- 
celled ; style simple ; stigma, two-lobed. Fruit capsular or baccate, 
2-celled ; seeds numerous and albuminous ; embryo, straight or curved 
in an annular or spiral form. 

Habitat, — Universal in the Tropics. 

Properties, — The plants possess haijnless as well as poisonous and 
narcotic properties, but less powerful than those of the atropaceae, 
some are pungent and stimulant, owing to the presence of an acrid 
resin ; others contain a bitter tonic principle ; a few bear edible fruits 
and tubers. The roots of some are febrifuge, astringent and 
alterative. 

Capsioum Nipalensis. 

Most acrid and pungent. Found universally. The fruit is chiefly 
used medicinally. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Filfil ahmer. Beng. — Lanka morich. Duk — 
Lalmorich. Burm. — Ngayonkthi. Can. — Menashina kaya. Cing. — Rata 
mirich Eng — Rt-d pepper chillies. Guz., Hind. — Lai mirch. Malyal. — 
Chabe sabrong. Mar. — Tambari mirchi, mirsingha. Pers. — Fiffel-i- 
Surkh. Sans. — Brahu maricha. Tam. — Golakonda. Tel. — Mirapa-kaya. 

C. Fratesoens.— Cultivated throughout India, America. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — L41 l^mba mircha. Eng — Nepal chilli, 
Golconda chilli, goat pepper, bird pepper. Hind. — Lanka mirch. 



CAPSICUM KIPALENSIS 



m 



C. Minitntim B. P.— Cultivated in India, Birds-eye pepper. 

lltiul. — ^(iach-niircli, Kafri-mirch, Tam, — Oosi mulaghai. Tel. — Sudi 
niirapa-kai, 

C. Annuum, — Cultivated in Soutb America, Mexico, India, Eng. — 

Common capsicum, common pepper, pod pepper, Malyal. — Kappal 
melaka. Tarn. — Mallagu. Teh — Mirapa Raia. 

C Fastigatum.— Imported from Zanzibar and Tropical Africa 
Cing,— Kaffru marich. Negro-pepper. Eng. — Nepaul, Guinea pepper, 
red pepper, Cayenne, Negro or African pepper. Tarn* — Usari 
maUaghai. 

Characters. — C. Minimum. The shell of the fruit is fleshy and 
coloured and contains a pungent principle. Fruits oblong, pendulous, 
or erect, and conical, and sealed on a slightly curved stalk; \ to 
I inch long and \ inch in diameter, colour orange red. VVhtn 
fresh the colour is generally green which changes to red on 
ripening. The surface is smooth and glabrous, skin thin, about 2 or 3 
lines in thickness, tears very readily and shrivels on drying. The fruit, 
2-ccllcd, containing numerous seeds, flattened, somewhat roundish, or 
rcniform> and of a yellowish white colour with a central placenta; smell 
peculiar and acrid, taste highly pungent and burning. The powder 
of the seeds of capsicum fastigiatnm is dark^ orange red and called 
cayenne pepper. 

C> Annuum.— Fruit 2-4 inches long, and i — \\ inch thick, 
small, conical, oblong, sometimes curved or sub-globular, yellow or 
orange coloured, becoming brown» when dr)% shining externaily, with 
spongy pulp within; seeds 2-celled, white, fiat and rcniform» Dose, \ 
to J gr. 

Cow/fy«m/j.^Cap5icin a volatile alkaloid ; capsaicin — a crystalline 
substance ; a volatile oiJ, fixed oil, fatty acid, resin, red colouring matter, 
and ash, 4—5 px. 

Capsaicin mostly found in the pericarp and placenta. To obtain 
it. to the petroleum extract add diluted alkaline solution, pass carbonic 
acid and crystallize ; occurs as colourless, prismatic crystals, insolu* 
ble in water, soluble in alcohol » ether, benzene, and fixed oils* 
The red colouring matter is sparingly soluble in alcohol :iad readily 
so in chloroform. 

Volatile oil — obtained by distillation gives to tJie Iruit lis odour* 

Capsicin — It is a volatile alkaloid — occurs as a thick red oily 
liquid, insoluble in water^ soluble in alcohol, ether and oil of turptn- 
linc, having the odour of coninc and is devoid of pungency. 

Preparaiiom,^Oi the fruil. Fluid extract (alcoholic). Dose, 
1 to 5 ms. Infusion (i in 40). Dose, 2 to 4 dr, Tinctura Capsici, B.P. 
(i in 20). Dose, 5 tn 15 ms, Tinctura Capsici Fortior, (i in 3) Dosc, 1 
to 3 ms,, chiefly used externally, Linimentum Capsici (i in 10). For 
chest affections, rheumatism, &c, Tinctura Capsici Eiherea— made 
with pure ether instead of spirit of wine, used externally as a rubefa* 



440 DATURA STRAMONIUM* 

cient and a liniment (i in 4) with ammonia, turpentine and linseed oil. 
Collodium capsici,i5 grs. to i oz. Unguentum capsici B.P. (i in about 
S). Snuff, consisting of cayenne pepper, borax and carbonate of 
ammonium. Emplastrum capsici, ^ oi z gr. of oleo resin on each 
square inch of muslin. 

Actions and uses. — A powerful local irritant ; applied for a long 
time to the skin, it produces visication. In medicinal doses it 
stimulates the alimentary canal, gives rise to a burning sensation in 
the mouth, increases the flow of saliva and gives sensation of warmth 
in the stomach, promotes the gastric juice, aids appetite and digestion, 
and increases the peristalsis of the intestines. It stimulates the heart, 
skin and kidneys; as an aphrodisiac, it stimulates the nervous and 
genital system. Like ergot, it acts as a styptic upon the unstriped 
muscular fibres of the blood vessels. As an aphrodisiac tonic, it is 
given in functional impotence, spermatorrhoea, in chronic cystitis and 
catarrh of the prostate. In parenchymatous nephritis it checks 
the waste of albumen. As a stomachic tonic with nux vomica, it is 
used in atonic dyspepsia, chronic diarrhoea, colic, tympanitis, ague, 
and extreme prostration ; in dipsomania it allays the craving usual 
in ch ronic alcoholism. It is given in delirium tremens in large doses 
with good results, also in opium habit. In sea-sickness, in malarial 
and other low fevers, gout, in habitual constipation, haemorrhoids, in 
cholera it acts as a stimulant. It also checks uterine haemorrhages such 
as menorrhagia, or those due to endometritis ; also in tuberculous 
dysentery, internal bleeding from piles, &c. As a local stimulant, a 
gargle of the tincture (i in 50) is used in tonsillitis, pharyngitis, 
malignant sore throat, diphtheria, &c. Externally, as a counter-irritant 
capsicum is too irritating. The snuff is used for hay fever. Exter- 
nally the chillies diluted with soap liniment or til tel, is painted on the 
skin or applied to painful areas, as in sciatica, lumbago, rheumatic joints 
and chest affections. The etherial tincture is applied locally to the joints 
in gout, chronic rheumatism and to the chest in bronchitis and bron- 
chial catarrh. 

Datura Btramoniam B.P.— Thorn apple. 

HahitaU — Europe, South Russia, Himalaya, Afghanistan, and 
Persia, United States. 

Paris used. — The dried leaves. Stramonii Folia, B.P. The dried 
ripe seeds. Stramonii Semina, B.P. 

Datura Alba. — White flowered, Datura. The capsules are small, 
sub-globular, seeds triangular, rough and yellowish brown. In India, 
the seeds are used for criminal purposes. 

Datura Fastuosa. — Purple flowered, black variety, native 
throughout India. 

Dhatura Tatula. — Purple stem, purple flowers, and anthers, and 
dark green leaves. 

Dhatura Hetel. — Native of Western Himalaya, Deccan Peninsula * 
The root, leaves and seeds are used in medicine. 



BATURA STRAMOKTUM. 



441 



Vernacular, — ^The adjective white, Safed, i$>fHxed for D, Alba, 
and black, Kala, for D. Fastuosa. Arab. — Jous ul-mathel. Beng. — 
Dhutura, Burm. — Padayin Khatta. Can.^ — Vumraattee* Ciog. — 
Aahcmastidu atiana. iEng. — Downy thorn apple. Hind.-Guz. — 
Kanak bij-Dhatura. Malyal. — Rotiku bung. Mar. — Kanto Dhatura, 
Pisotu Dhatora. Pers. — Kovz-masale. Sans. — Henuka, kanaka, 
unmeta, sveta. Tarn. — Vumattai, Tel. — Umraetta, 

Pisotu or Pisna means to pound, hurt or injure; the seeds, like those 
of rice, or wheat grains, are pounded or hurt between two stones. The 
effect of Dhatura is to pound his enemy. 

Characters. — Annual plant; fruit prickly.about thesizeof a walnut, 
nearly globular, ovate, or obtusely quadrangular^ covered with sharp 
tubercles or short unequal rigid spines ; capsule, 4*celled dehiscing 
half-way down and splitting in an irregular manner into numerous 
fragments ; pulp white and soft ; seeds ear-shaped, or reniform, of a 
light yellowish brown, or black colour, and hard pitted or compressed 
on both surfaces, with a groove on its wall and edges ; embryo 
curved and embedded in a whitish oily albumen. The seedi^ have no 
marked odour, but a slightly bitter taste Near the hilum the 
pulp is adherent, but it can easily be removed by scratching ; 
leaves dark green above, lighter underneath, smooth, very brittle, 
ovate, acuminate, unequal at the base and very coarsely dentate ; taste 
bitter and nauseous. The root is light brown^ tapering and giving off 
root fibrils ; stem green and succulent. The flowers arc large and white, 
the whole plant has a very disagreeable noxious fortcd or rank odour ; 
ta&te nauseous and bitter. Dose, of the leaves, 2 to 5 grs.; of the seeds. 
I to 3 grs, 

Cofistituents. — The leasees contain an alkaloid — daturine, mucilage, 
albumen and ash, 17 p.c. which contains potassium nitrate 25 px, 
The seeds contain daturine, resin, mucilage, pioteids, malic acid, 
scopolamine,and ash, 3 p,c» Daturina — Dalurin^ an alkaloid identical 
with atropine, combined with malic or daturic acid and consisting 
of hyoscyamine and atropine. It is a tropate of tropin and occurs in 
li^ht feathery crystals. Dose, ^\^ to ^0 gr. in solution generally given 
with dilute sulphuric acid. 

DatUlinsB Salphaa* — Daturine sulphate in minute white granular 
crystals, readily soluble in water. Dose, j}^ to fy gr. 

OuttflB DaturinSB — 2 grs. to i ounce. Ophthalmic discs ^^^j^ gr. in 
each combined with gelatine. 

^ f^eparaiions, — Of the leaves, Tinctura stramonii BP, (i in 5), 
Do^, 5 to 15 ms. Extractum Stramonii, B.P. Dose. | to I gr 
Medicated oil— obtained by boiling the seeds with petroleum. 
IS of a greenish yellow colour and a slight odour of valerianic 
acid ; on exposure to the air it becomes thickened. Compound, 
powder. Pulvis stramonii compositus— contains stramonium, lobelia, 
potassium nitrate, anise, &c.i similar to Himrod's cure* For asthma 
It is burnt on a plate and fumes inhaled. Compound pill : Svalpajvaraa 



442 DUBOISIA BfYOPOROIDBS, 

kusa, contains Dhatura bija ; Para kajali, ; Trickatu ; Bachanaga ; 
mix, rub the whole together with lime juice, and make a pill mass. 
Dose, 2 to 4 grs. 

Actions and uses. — Narcotic and anodyne; other and properties are 
similar to those of belladona, but stronger. It affects the sympathe- 
tic nervous system, but not the motor or the sensory nerves. In full 
doses, the heart's action becomes irregular, and there is furious delirium. 
Like atropine, hyoscyamine, and duboisine it acts as a mydriatic. As 
an antispasmodic, it is given in hepatic colic, laryngeal cough, chorea, 
stammering, &c. In dysmenorrhoea, neuralgia, ticdouloureux and 
sciatica it is very useful. In nymphomania and in puerperal mania with 
a tendency to suicide it is given with benefit. Pulvis stramonii compositus 
is burned on a plate and the fumes inhaled. Cigarettes of dhatura tatula 
are used in nervous attacks of asthma. Externally a paste of the seeds is 
used in urticaria and other skin diseases, due to the presence of lice, or 
other animal parasites. It is also applied to decayed teeth and to relieve 
toothache. Dhatura seeds are frequently used in India for criminal pur- 
poses. Toddy, a country drink for natives of India, is made more intoxi- 
cating by placing some of the seeds upon red-hot charcoal and inverting 
an earthern vessel (Gharian) over them. The vessel full of dhatura 
smoke, is next filled with toddy which imbibes some of the qualities 
of dhatura. The natives apply a medicated oil to the head in headache, 
to enlarged testicles and boils, and to the skin in skin diseases as 
pediculi, lice, and psoriasis. Dhatura juice with the root of boerhavia 
diffusa (satodi) and opium is used as an application for the relief of 
rheumatic pains, and swelling over the hands and feet. In haemor- 
rhoids, fissures, and other painful diseases of the rectum, leading to 
tenesmus, its application as a local anodyne ointment gives relief. 
Sval paj varan kusa is used in fever and cough. 

Daboisia Hyoporoides. 

HabitaL — N. S. Wales and Queensland. 

Parts used, — The leaves. 

Characters, — Leaves entire, 3 or 4 inches long, broad, petiolate 
with prominent midrib ; taste bitter. Dose, i to 3 grains. 

Constituents, — Duboisine — a volatile poisonous alkaloid, identical 
with Hyoscyamine and isomeric with atropine. 

Duboisinae sulphas, Duboisine sulphate, Amorphous Hygros- 
copic powder, very soluble in water. Dose, j-Ji^ to ^ gr. 

Preparations. — Fluid Extract. Dose, i lo 5 ms. solid extracts 
Dose, i to ^ gr. Tincture (i in^io). Dose, 5 to 20 ms.Guttae, i gr. to 
I oz. of water ; Ophthalmic discs, -^'^^^ gr. combined with gelatin. 

Actions and uses. — A mild mydriatic ; its action is rapid and of 
short duration. It does not produce conjunctival inflammation. It is 
more calmative and hypnotic and less cerebral excitant than belladonna. 
It is superior to atropine in relieving the excitement of the insane. 
It is given to check morphine habit, paralysis agitans, puerperal 



HVOSCYAMUS HIGBR. 



443 



mania^ hysteria, headache, delirium of typhoid fever, night sweats 
of phthisis, and in vesical tenesmus. It is a very good antagonistic to 
morphine or muscarine. 

Fablana Imbrloata. 

Syn.-^Pichi. Pichu. 

Habitat, — Chili, South America. 

Parts emphy^d, — The stems and leafy branchlcts. 

Characters, — A shrub ; leaves thick, broad, ovate, barely pointed, 
a h'ne long, and closely imbricated upon minute branchleis, densely 
crowded ; their bases and margins and all the tender parts to some 
i«extent, the wood and the bark are covered with ash grey, minute 
Jiand-like protuberances which exhibit under the lens a peculiar 
'resinous lustre j the resin is quite dry and brittle, and forms a 
greyish powder. 

Constituents. — An active principle, a fluorescent glucoside, volatile 
oil and a crystalline neutral oleo-resin, 

/V^//irfl/icf«A-.— Fluid extract from the leaves not miscible with 
water, but miscible by the addition of an alkali. Dose, lo to 60 ms. 

Actions and use, — Pichy is diuretic and sedative. Its virtues reside 
in the oleo-resin. In urinary calculi i^ disintegrates the calculi by 
dissolving the mucin that keeps the particles together. It thus facili- 
tates their expulsion in the sh^pe of a harmless pulp. It is especially 

Inefficacious in ha^maturia, gonorrhcL-a, cystitis, vesical catarrh (acute or 
"Tronic). In uric acid diathesis, it should be given with a potassium 

^sah to dissolve the urates. It should not be given in organic disease 
of the kidney and in albuminuria. Asa diuretic and cholagogue it has 
some action on the liver ; also used in rheumatism, lumbago and 
sciatica in the course of which urates are precipitated from the urine 
in large quantities. 

HyoBcyamus Niger, B.P. 

Habitat. — Beluchistan» West Punjab, Sind, Khorasan, VV. Hima- 
laya, Europe, Northern United States. 

Parts used. — The leaves with flowering tops or the fresh leaves, and 
flowers with the branches — Hyoscyami Folia, B.P, Henbane leaves and 
seeds. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Baisrul-banj. Can, — Khurasdnin Vadakki. 
Cing.^ — Dungazha. Eng. — Common Henbane, Hagbeani poison 
tobacco, fcetid night shade- Duk., Guz , Hind. — Khurasani-ajvayan 
kohi'bang. Mai. — Puka-yila- Mar. — Khorasani-vova, Pers. — Sickran, 
Banga. Sans, — Parasica^ Khorasani Yamani, Syrians Azra4blus. 
Tarn. — Pugai Ilai, huyamani. Tel. — Pogaku Dhunira pattramu. 

Characters* — A biennial plant* leaves ovate, sessile, long and broad, 
lower ones largest, sinuately toothed, triangular, of a greenish grey 
colour with prominent midrib on the under surface, glandular, hairy. 



444 HYOSCYAMUS NIQER. 

or woolly ; odour heavyi and narcotic ; taste bitter, and somewhat acrid; 
flowering tops numerous, nearly sessile, erect, arranged on simple 
terminal spikes of a straw colour ; fruit globular, capsule, 2-ceIled and 
many secaed ; seeds black, small, reniform, laterally compressed, of a 
dirty brown or grey colour; in shape and appearance resembling 
those of k&kanaj ; albumen, oily ; surface beautifully pitted ; taste 
acrid ; odour resembling that of dammar. Dose, i to lo grs. 

Constituents* — The leaves contain Hyoscyamine, Hyoscine 
scopolamine, hyoscipicrin, choline, fatty oil, mucilage, albumen, and 

f»otassium nitrate 2 p.c. The seeds contain hyoscyamine, a fixed or 
atty oil 25 p.c, an empyreumatic oil (obtained by destructive 
distillation) and ash 4-5 p.c. 

Hyoscyamine — an alkaloid isomeric with or readily convertible 
into atropine, and identical with daturine and duboisine. It is the 
chief constituent of the leaves, juice and seeds of hyoscyamus, 
and is also found in datura stramonium, Duboisia myoporoides, in 
Atropa Belladona, Scopola Carniolica and in S. Japonica. To obtain it, 
treat the seeds with etner to remove the oil, then add hydrochloric or 
sulphuric acid, exhaust with alcohol and benzene. To decolorize 
saturate with ammonia, shake out the alkaloid with chloroform, and 
evaporate. An oily liquid or deliquescent, minute white silky needles 
or prisms, colour yellow, becoming brown by exposure to air ; more 
soluble in hot water, ether fhd dilute alcohol than atropine. It is 
converted into atropine by heating it to a high temperature. By 
boiling it with dilute hydrochloric acid, or baryta water, it splits up 
like atropine into tropine and tropic acid. Dose, ^i^ ^^ iH> S^- ^ 
acute mania, ^ to j- gr. 

Amorphous Hyoscyamine^ an uncrvstallized dark brown extract- 
like substance of a strong and disagreeable odour; it contains Hyoscine, 
to which its activity is chiefly due. Dose» *y to \ gr. 

Hyoscyaminae Sulphas, B. P. — Hyoscyamine sulphate. — A delique- 
scent granular crx'stalline powder without any odour and of a bitter 
acrid taste; freely soluble in water (2 in i), alcohol (1 in 2-5), slightly so 
in ether and chloroform. Dose, f\^ to i)^ gr. ; used as Injectio 
H\H>scvamin9e H\*podermica (i in 120). Dose, i to 2 ms. Pills and 
Granules. Dose,',)^ gr., used for sea-sickness. Hypodermic IjmeK 
^ gr. combined with ^atin. Ophthalmic doses, j^^v MJ* 

H\x>scyaminx Hydrobromidum, Hyoscyamine Hydrobromide — it 
is similar to H\*oscyaminx sulphas. A* deliquescent yellowish white 
amorphous mo^ or cr%*stal$ : odour like that of tobacco, taste acrid, 
nauseous and bitter ; sparingly soluble in water (3 in i^ and akohol 
;^i in i\ Dvxse, ,|^ to yj, gr. 

Hyoscina — Hyv^scine. An alkaloid isomeric with atropine — x 
syrupy brown or colourless sem;4iquid substance found in hvoscramos 
iii$er« di£R:rxrnt species of 50f^>lju and other solanaceous plints. It is 
believed bv some to be the chief constituent of amorphous Hroscya- 
mine. Boiled with water it splits up into tropic acid and psesdo- 
tropine. Hyosciiue Hydrobromidum, BJ^., or scopahminr Hydrofaro- 



445 



mide* II is in colourless, tratisparent^ rhombic crystals without any 
odour, and of an acrid bitter ti^ste, soluble in cold water (i in i)* in 
alcohol (i in 15). slightly so in ether and chloroform. Dose, ^J^ to 
iJa gt. Injectio Hyoscinic Hypodermica, i gr, in 200 ms. Dose, i to 
2 ms- Hypodermic tablets ^^^ gr each, combined with gelatin, 
Hyoscine Hydrochloride and Hyoscine Hydro-iodide are in large 
crystals. Dose, ^J,) to yj^^ gr. Piluhi Hyoscianie Hydrobronudum» 

Hyoscipicrin is a bitter glycoside, precipttaied by tannin ; with 
Hydrochloric acid, it is converted into fermentable sugar and a 
yellowish acrid bitter resin, 

Prff^arations, — Ol Hyoscyamus, Extractum Hyoscyami Viride, 
B. P, Dose, 2 to 8 grs- Succus Hyoscyami. B.P. Dose, ^to I fld. dr. 
Tinctura Hyoscyami, B.P. (i in loj. Dose^ ^ to 1 fid. drs, Abstractuin 
Hyoscyami, Dose, 3 to 5 grs. Infusion (i in 20}. Dose, 2 to 4 dri>. 

Actions and uses. — The leaves are anodyne, hypnotic, mydriatic 

and antispasmodic, like duboisia, belladonna and stramonium j but 
most calmative and least irritant of the group. The delirium is never 
furious and is generally accompanied by insomnia, Asa vasomotor and 
cardiac stimulant it is superior to stramonium. As a laxative its action 
is chiefly confined to the intestines. It is a marked sedative of the 
urinary passages. Hyoscyamus being a non-irritant and hypnotic, it 
could be used hypodermically like bclbdurma. As a narcotic, it is 
given to children or in cases where opium is contra-indicated, 
Hyoscyamus is given in acute mania, insanity, delirium tremens, 
dry tickling night cough, asthma, chorea, &c. Like atropine;, 
hyoscyaminc is injected hypodermically in epilepsy, obstinate insom- 
nia, hallucinations, in tremors of paralysis agitans^ or in mercurial 
liemors, to relieve pain and disordered co-ordination as in locomotor 
ataxia. In constipation, Hyoscyamus is given with other purgatives 
to prevent griping and to render them less drastic. In irritation 
of ine bladder Irom any cause it is a sale remedy and is given with 
carmin.tlivcs and aromatics in colic and dyspepsia. Hyoscine is used 
in the morphine habit to control restlessness and insomnia, resulting 
from the wiihdr.mal of morphine .ind in paralysis agitans. It is 
chiefly used in violent and abusive restlessness in mania. Locally the 
seeds mixed with barley and hot brandy arc applied to inflammatory 
swellings. As a local anodyne mixed with tobacco, belladonna, 
stramonium and nightshade, it relieves swollen testicles, inflamed 
breasts and enlarged and painful gouty joints. Pessaries made of 
Hyoscyamus with poppy seeds are used in painful uterine complaints. 

Niootiana Tabaoam, H. HaTanensis. 

Hahitat. — Throughout India^ Tropical Americaj Cubay Vir- 
ginia, &c. 

Parts used. — The dried leaves and stalk*, and herb. 

Vernacuiar^ — Arab. — TaubAk nujjtr bhang. Mar., Bom., Guz^ 
Duk., Hind,, Beng. — Tamaku. Burm,— Se. Tsha Can* — Hage sappu, 
Clng*^ — Dimgazha, Eng.— Virginia Tobacco. Malyal. — Puka-yila» 



446 NICOTIANA TABACUM. 

Pers. — Tanbibkii. Sans. — Dhuma pataram, Timara kiita. Tain. — 
Pugai-Ilai. Tel.— Dhumra.* 

Characters. — Annual plant; herb pubescent and glutinous ; stems 
erect, tapering, branched above ; leaves very large, oblong, lanceolate, 
acuminate, narrowing at the base and sessile; leaves when fresh darkish 
green, viscous to the touch, and of a foetid odour, and containing a very 
poisonous oily fluid, irregularly angled, brittle, light, and of a 
brown colour ; taste heating and acrid ; dry leaves and stalks of a 
yellowish light or dark brown colour. 

Co;w/»///^«/!s.— Nicotine — a liquid alkaloid, Nicotianin a volatili- 
sable camphoraceous principle, resin, albumen, gum, extractive 
matter and ash, containing a large amount ofsalts as sulphates, nitrates, 
chlorides, phosphates, malates and citrates of potassium, ammonium, 
calcium &c. 

Nicotina, Nicotine or Nicotia is the poisonous principle. Its quantity 
varies greatly in different specimens. To obtain it add potassa to con- 
centrated acidulated infusion of the leaves, shake with ether to dissolve 
thealkaloid, add oxalic acid to form nicotine oxalate ; this is precipita- 
ted by ether. It is a colourless volatile oily liquid ; taste acrid, odour 
strong and disagreeable ; exposed to the air it rapidly becomes brown. 
It forms soluble salts with acids ; soluble in water, also in alcohol and 
ether. Dose, i\ to ^ gr., given in tetanus and strychnine poisoning. 

The quantity of nicotine in different specimens varies. It is 6 
to 8 in 100 in French tobacco ; and is 2 p.c. in Havana tobacco ; 
Turkish tobacco contains little or none. According to some, tobacco 
smoke contains no nicotine, but in its stead it contains a series of 
empyreumatic decomposition products as pyridine, picoline, collidine, 
parvoline, &c. In the smoke of tobacco used for pipe, pyridine is 
found in the largest quantity ; whereas in cigars, where there is free 
access of air, collidine predominates. Tobacco smoke also contains 
about 9 p.c. of carbon dioxide ; and such substances as hydrocyanic 
acid, creosote, hydrogen sulphide gas and acetic, carbolic and vale- 
rianic acids. 

Ncotinse tartras. In fine white crystals, freely soluble in water. 
A suitable form for administration in tetanus or strychnine poisoning. 
Preparations. — Enema, 20 grs. infused in 8 ozs. oil— a most viru- 
lent poison obtained by distilling leaves with water or collected from 
Hooka pipe. It is a black tarry substance of an empyreumatic odour. 
Poultices of leaves, used for orchitis. Gurako— a mixture containing 
coarse sugar or molasses with apple, sumbul, the root of Jatamansi 
and tobacco. Tapkhir (or snun), a very fine powder of the leaves. 

Actions and uses. — The juice of the leaves is sedative and antispas- 
modic. Dry leaves are irritant, nauseating, emetic, and sometimes 
purgative. In small doses, tobacco stimulates the secreting glands 
as the saliva, the intestinal secretions and the urine. It lessens the 
sense of excessive exertion and fatigue. It keeps the bowels free. In 
some persons it usually causes vomiting. In large doses and if taken 
for a long time it produces tremors, clonic spasms, contracted pupils, 
depression of the heart, cold skin and profuse sweats. In toxic doses, it 
leads to coma and death by paralysis of the heart and respiration. 



FHYSALTS ALKRKENGl. 



447 



Smokinj; or chewing tobacco leaves to excess, causes irritation of the 
fauces, pharynx and stomach, leading lo dyspepsia, to great nervous 
depression, impaired sexual appetite, and even to angina. It inter- 
feres with nutrition, digestion and assimilation, and hence smoking is 
very injurious in the young. In a few cases^ it leads to cardiac 
hyperrrophv, cardiac dilatation, and even cardiac valvular lesion- 
Nicotine ii a violent gastric irritant. It often leads to vomiting 
and collapse* Its action is very rapid, and fatal results follow in a few 
minutes. Gi\x*n in minim doses internally, or 2 minims by the 
rectum, it relieves spasms in tetanus, and in strychnine poisoning. 
iV B"'* hypodermically injected is also very effective. Tobacco may 
be given as a diuretic in renal dropsy and as an antispasmodic in 
emphysema, asthma, whooping cough, obstinate hiccough, nympho- 
mania, chordee, and to relieve colic. It may also be used as inhalation, in 
nasal polypi, nasal catarrh, headache, chronic giddiness, and fainting. 
The leaves are made hot and applied to the abdomen in colic and 
gripes, and to the spine in tetanus. The upper surface of the leaf 
painted with silarasa is used as an application to the painful swelling 
of the testes in orchitis. Fresh leaves when bruised are locally 
applied as a palliative in urticaria, gouty and rheumatic painful joints^ 
and to the abdomen in lead colic. The natives use a coarse powder or 
thin slices of the leaves to smoke in hukka, or to chew it in ine mouth. 
Moderate tokicco stnoking is considered to be calmative and cardiac, 
snedutive, disinfectant, and good for fumigating rooms A very fine 
powder of the leaves known as tapkhir (snuff) is often usea as si 
tooth powder. 

Physalis iikekengi, 

Habiiai. — Europe, United States, Persia. 

Paris HSid, — ^^fhc berries and juice. 

Characters.— "Bt^u'w^ or fruits, baccate, 2 or more celled, spherical, 
smoolht and marked with stripes of greenish yellow coluur ; seeds 
renitorm. many, and albinninnus ; taste bitterish, and somewhat 
acidulous, 

Omshtucnts. — The ben 11^ tuniain sugar and citnc acad* The 
leaves contain a bitter principle called physalin. 

/V^/fim/r'>//j,— Extract — Dosei 5 10 15 grs. Tincture (i in 4), 
Dos€i i to i dr* 

Actions ami uses, — Hepatic stimulant, alterative and diuretic ; the 
juice and iieeds are given in strangury- due to cantharidcs, in dropsy, 
rheumatism, and gout and in skin diseases. 

Phyialis Minima. 

Ilabitnt. — Throughout India, 
Parts ftstt/, — The fruit. 

r^tfiacuiiir. — Beng. — Bantepariga. Can. — Bandula. Hind, — 

Tulati-pati. Mar, — Thdnmori, chirboti, Sans. — Tankiri. Tel. — 
Kupante, 

Characters. — Plant pubescent, or glabrous ; fruit globular. 



44^ SOLANUM DULCAMARA. 

about the size of a pea, or about i inch in diameter ; seeds numerous, 
reticulated. 

Preparations. — Medicinal oil — it contains Tankari, Pokharmul, 
Hing, Hird^n, long pepper, black salt, sindhava, rock salt, Java khara, 
ginger, and butter or ghee. 

Actions and uses. — Alterative, diuretic, and aperient ; used in 
dropsy, urinary diseases and gout. The medicated oil is used as an 
application in the enlargement of the spleen. 

Boopola Camiolioa, B. Atropoides, B. Japonioa. 

Habitat, — Bavaria, Hungary, Central Europe, Nepaul, Sikkim, 
Central Himalaya. 

Parts used, — The rhizome and leaves. 

Characters, — Plant downy ; leaves resembling those of Datura, 
of a pale green colour, with tobacco-like odour. Flowers solitary, 
drooping, of a greenish purple or lurid yellow colour ; fruit globose ; 
seeds numerous and reniform. 

Constituents. — Hyoscyamine 5 p.c, a trace of Hyoscine ; vegetable 
cholesterin and a fluorescent alkaloidal substance, scopolamine or 
scopoleine. Scopalamine is found in the rhizome of scopala ; also 
found in belladonna root, in stramonium seeds and in duboisia. It is 
allied to atropine and hyoscyamine. 

Preparations, — Liquid extract standardized to contain 0*25 p.c. 
of the alkaloid. Dose, i to 5 ms. Liniment (4 of liquid extract 
in 25). Extract contains 2 p.c. of this alkaloid. Dose, |^ to ^ gr. 
Onintment contains alcoholic extract i in 10. Emplastrum — liquid 
extract i in S of lead plaster. 

Actions and uses. — Sedative, diuretic and mydriatic ; used for the 
same purposes as belladonna. It does not produce dryness of the 
moutn and throat. Scopolamine is preferred to atropine in the treat- 
ment of keratitis, corneal ulcers and iritis. The liniment is used in 
reducing pain and swelling in rheumatism. 

Solanam Duloamara. 

Habitat, — Europe, Asia, N. America. 
Parts used. — The young branches. 

Vernacular. — Eng. — Violet bloom, scarlet berry. Fever twig, 
nightshade vine. Hind.— Ruba barik. Indian Bazaar. — Inabes-th&lib, 

Characttfs, — Twigs or branches of the size of a goose quill, thick, 
striate, angular and warty ; on section hollow ; bark thin, pale brown 
or greenish, marked with alternate leaf scars ; odour slight, taste 
bitter at first, then sweet ; Dose, i to 2 drs. 

Constituents — Dulcamarin— aglucoside, picroglycion — a peculiar 
principle, solanin — an alkaloid, resin, gum, starch, wax and calcium 
lactale. Dulcamarin — to obtain it, digest the infusion with animal 
charcoal, exhaust with boiling alcohol, evaporate, dissolve the resi- 
due in water, precipitate with subacetate of lead, digest the precipitate 
with alcohol and decompose it with sulphuretted hydrogen. A yellowish 



SOLAKUM IKDICtJM. 



449 



pinvder, soluble in alcohol^ or water ; taste bitter, then sweet. By acitl^, 
it splits up into sugar and dulcaiuaretin. Solanin also axists in S* 
Tuberosum^ S. Nigrum, S* Lycopersecum, etc. It occurs in minute 
crystals, or prisms ; taste bitter, reaction alkaline ; soluble in boiling 
alcohol (i in 125), insoluble in water. It exists in very small quaiility. 
Dose, I to 2 grs. 

Preparations, — Fluid extract. Do5.e, 4 to 1 dr. 'Uecoctiou (i in 
10). Dose, 1 to 2 o^s. Infusion (i in 10). Dose, i to 2 ozs, 

Achftfts and uses. — In small doses alterative, anaphrodisiac, 
and deobstruent ; in toxic doses narcotic. Under its us:; the res- 
piration is lowered, the circulation becomes lai^guid and there is a 
dusky colour of the fingers and lips. As an irritant of ih'j mucous 
membranes, it produces nausea, vomiting, vertigo, erythematous 
eruptions, convulsions in children, gastro-enteritis, a teeling of 
lieat in the throat and chest, and extreme prostrattuTi. As an 
iherattve it is given in herpes, pityriasis, psoriasis, acne and ectema ; 
also in diarrhoea, jaundice, gout, rheumatism, chronic bronchitis, and 
in whooping cough. As a diaphoretic, it is used in catarrh of the 
nose, bladder or of the lungs. As an anaphrodistac it is given in 
mania with excessive venereal desire. 

BolanQm Indicum. 

Hahiteii* — Throughout India, 

Parts i#5<f</,— The fruit and root, 

f'Vrymt'w///r,— Beng.— By«lkura. Cing.— Tibbatu. Caw. — Gulla, 
Duk — KtMse-kajhjir, Eng — Indian night-shade. Mar,, Gux.— Ubht 
ringni, molhi riuKtii. Hind, — Harhanta, MalyaL — Chern Chunta. 
Sans. — Bhantaki, Vuliati, Mahali. Tanj, — Pappara nviiIlL Tel. — 
Tclla-mulaka, 

Characirrs. — Kuul, o( a iightish yellow colour ; stem witii uuiikt- 
ous branches -young parts downy and armed with very acute, somewhat 
curved spines ; leaves solitary, or in pairs, petioled, and ovate, on both 
sides downy, sinuately bbca and 3nTit?d with a few straight spine** on 
both surfaces: berries round, smooth, of the size of a mokai, of a yellow 
colour when fresh ; taste pungent , almost acrid j tasteless when dry. 

Comtihtents. — ^Wax, fatly acids, and an alkaloid, solanin* 
/Vr/if/rrtrto«5,— Decoction (1 in 10). Dose, \ tn 1 fld, oz. A 
compttund decoction (i in ro;, containing the root of Solanum Indicum, 
SoUnum Xanthocarpum, sida cordtfolia, justicia adhatoda and raisins 
equal parts« Dose, ^ to ! fld. oz, 

Acthns and uses. — Diaphoretic, stimulant, diuretic and expector- 
ant; used in fevers, coughs and dysuria. Solanum Indicum is an ingre- 
dient in Dasa mula*di-kvath. 

Solanum Jaoquini, 8* difPusum, S* Xanthocarpum* 

ilahit(tt. — Throughout India, Coromandei, Travancore, 
Parts wjr^.— The plant. 



450 SOLANUM NIGRUM. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Hadak-i-barri. Benjsj. — Kant a kari — Jangli 
began. Burm. — Khayan Kazo. Can. — Nelagulla. Cing. — Katu 
valbatu. — Eng. — Wild egg plant, bitter sweet, woody night-shade. 
Ind. — Cundun ghatrievayr. Hind. — Laghu Khatai. Guz., Duk., 
Mar. — Bhuiringni, Kante ringni, Dorali. Pers. — Badingan-i-barri. 
Sans. — Nidig-dhika, Kanta kini, Tarn. — Kandan Kattiri. Tel. — 
Vakudu, 

Characters. — Root biennial, long, and of a light brown colour ; 
stem prostrate or diffuse, branched and covered with long broad- 
based, tapering spines ; leaves frequently oblong, sinuately pinnatifid, 
lanceolate, smooth, and armed on both surfaces with long strong 
spines ; flowers in racemes, prickly, pedicelled, large, and of a 
beautiful light yellow or bright blue colour ; berries spherical, very 
smooth, drooping and marked witfi variegated stripes, generally 
greenish yellow ; taste acrid and pungent ; fruit small with spines ; 
seeds reniform, compressed and of a light brown colour. 

Constituents, — The fruit contains fatty acids, wax and an alkaloid- 
The dried leaves contain an alkaloid and an organic acid. 

Preparations, — Decoction (i in 40). Dose, ^ to i fld. oz. Medi- 
cated oil. To prepare it, boil pounded seeds or juice of leaves in sweet 
oil — Kanta kary aveleha or electuary. To prepare it, take Tinospora 
cordifolia, piper chaba, plumbago zeylanica, chavak, cyperus rotundus, 
rhus kakrasinghi, black pepper, ginger, alhagi maurorum, clerodendron 
siphonanthes, vanda Roxburghii and zedoary, sugar ; mix, and make a 
fine powder. To this add kanta kari, boiled in water and made into 
an extract. Next add ghee and water, and boil the whole over a fire 
till reduced to the consistence of an extract ; when ready add honey 
and vanslochan, long pepper, to make an electuary. Dose, 4 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses, — Aperient, carminative, expectorant, and 
diuretic. The confection is given in asthma, cough, catarrhal 
affections of the lungs, fever, flatulence and pain in the chest ; as a 
diuretic, the decoction is given in dysuria, cystic calculi and dropsy ; 
also given in costiveness. It is seldom given alone and is generally 
combined with other expectorant, demulcent and aromatic medicines. 
A paste of the seeds is locally applied to promote the suppuration 
of boils, buboes and other indolent chronic abscesses. The oil is applied 
to the chest to relieve the pain of bronchitis, and to the skin in 
chronic skin diseases. Fumigation of the fruits is largely used by the 
natives as sialogogue, and applied for the relief of pain in caried 
teeth. Bhuiringani is one of the ingredients of Laghu panch mula 
of Dasa mula-di-kvatha. 

Solanum Nigrum. 

Habitat. — Throughout India and Ceylon. 

Parts used, —The herb. 

Vernacular, — Arab — Inabes-lhaliba. Beng. — Kakamachi Kovida- 
raha. Burm.— Simani-gaha. Can. — Kanchi-Ganike. Cing. — Semani- 
gaha. Duk. — Udi-Kamane. Guz. — Makoy, Kalopilludo. Hind. — 



SOr.ANUM TUBKROSUM. 45 1 

Mako, Gurkamai, uda-maki. Malyal. — Manatta Kali. Mar. — Kamuni 
Ghali, Kala kanguna. Pers. — Rubah turbak ; angure rubah, Sagan- 
gura. Sans. — Kovidaraha, Krishna-ko Vidaraha, Dhvanksba macbi, 
Jaghana Kbal or Kinkini-Kakamachi, Kakamata. Tam. — Karuppu. 
Tel. — Kamanchi chettu. 

Characters, — Small shrub ; stems erect, branches many, irregular, 
spreading, glabrous or pubescent ; wood on section greenish yellow, 
with one or two concentric rings, angles of the branches somewhat 
swollen ; leaves ovate, oblong, attenuated at both ends, entire or 
slightly toothed, and of a dark green colour. Flowers dirty white, 
small, and generally attached to the swollen parts of the branches ; 
berries small, globular, and of a greenish yellow, brown or black colour; 
seeds numerous, compressed and reniform ; smell acrid, taste biting and 
pungent. 

Constituents. — The berries contain solanin, whicli is a compound 
of sugar and solanidine— an alkaloid having the property of dilating 
the pupils. 

Preparations. — Expressed juice. Dose, i to 4 oz. Fluid extract. 
Dose, \ to 1 fld. dr. Decoction (i in 10). Dose, \ to i fid. oz. Infusion 
(i in 10). Dose, i to i fld. oz. Syrup. Dose, i to 2 fld. drs. 

Actions and uses. — The herb is alterative, sedative, diaphoretic, 
diuretic, hydragogue and expectorant ; locally anodyne. Solanine 
is a powerful, protoplasmic poison, acting upon amoeboid organisms 
and ciliated epithelial cells. Its solution i p.c, prevents the growth 
of bacteria. It coagulates albumen. If kept for some time in 
contact with blood, it dissolves the red corpuscles. As an alterative 
the herb is given in skin diseases such as psoriasis, eczema and in 
syphilis ; as a diuretic in gout, rheumatism, dropsy, gonorrhoea, renal 
and vesical catarrh, coughs, splenic and hepatic enlargements, &c. The 
syrup is used as a cooling drink and as a diaphoretic in fevers. The 
leaves made hot are applied to painful and swollen testicles and on 
swelled legs and hands. 

Solanum Taberosum. 

Habitat. —Temperate climates. 

Parts used, — The tubers, stem and leaves. 

Vernacular. — Cing. — Ruta-innala. Hind. — Puttata, alu. Malyal. — 
Ubi kantang. Pers. — Seb-zamini. Tam. — Kelangu. Tel. — Ooralay 

gadda. 

Constituents, — Solanin a starch, which can be removed by process 

of boiling. 

Preparations. — Decoction of the stem and leaves (i in 20). Dose, 

2 to 8 drs. 

Actions a tid uses." A\x.Gr^i\vQ\ gxwQu in skin diseases. Solalina 
starch is nutrient and used like arrowoot. 



452 WITHANIA SOMNIFERA. 

Withania Somnifera, Physalis Floxaosa. 

Habitat. — Dry sub-tropical India, Coromandel, Concans, West 
Coast, Travancore. 

Parts used, — The root and Leaves. 

Fetfiacular. — Bomb ^ Beng. — Asvagandha. Can. — Herimaddina. 
Goa. — Fatar Foda. Duk., Hind., Guz. — Asagandha, Asana. Malyal. 
— Pevetti. Mar. — Tula, Kanchuki Dorgunj, Sans. — Ashvagandha, 
Varaha Kami Vrisha, Turagi gandha. Tarn. — Amkoolang. Tel. — 
Penerr. 

Turagi gandha. smelling like a horse or mare. Varaha-karni, 
Boar-eared. Ashvagandha is derived from Ashva, a horse, and 
gandha, smell. It is said that the root smells like the skin of a horse. 

Characters, — Plant 2 to 4 feet high ; branches very slender; leaves 
alternate, petioled, obtuse, ovate, oblong, and sometimes oblique at the 
base ; young parts and nerves of the leaves covered with whitish starry 
tomentum ; root, hard, tapering and branched, below whitish brown, 
woody, and thick as the little finger ; root bark round, thick, smooth, 
giving off irregularly branched fibrils ; wood hard, of a white colour and 
not easily broken; on section it presents an outer thin ring within which 
is a homogeneous, starchy, crystalline, white substance; taste intensely 
bitter, odour resembling that of bhuikohola, 

Constttuejits, — An alkaloid Somniferin having hypnotic property, 
resin, fat and colouring matter. 

Preparations. — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, ^ to 1 fld. oz. 
Medicated oil. *' Narayen tel " contains Ashagandh, Chikana-pat-mul, 
Bela, Venivel Bhui-ringani, UbhA gokharu, Limado, Tetu niul, 
Puneranava, Arani, each 2 parts. Make a decoction. To this add 
Til tel 40 parts, and a paste of Dudh 10 parts, K^tho Elachi, 
Jatdmanasi, Vekhand, Moravel, Rakta-chandan, Sindhav, Asan, 
Kasana, Varidli, Devadar, Sdlavan, Pitavan, Tagar, each 2 parts. 
Boil the whole for one hour. 

Actions and uses. — Tonic, alterative and sedative ; a paste of the 
root taken with milk and clarified butter helps the nutrition of weakly 
children. As an alterative, a confection is given in consumption, 
debility from old age and rheumatism. Native women combine it with 
various restoratives in nervous debility and leucorrhoea ; as a sedative 
and hypnotic, the leaves moistened with castor oil are applied to 
carbuncles. Narayan tel is dropped into the nose in deafness, and is 
used as an inunction over the bodv in hemiplegia, tetanus, rheumatism 
and lumbago and as an enema in dysentery, and anal fistula. It is given 
internally in 15 tobonih. doses in consumption, emaciation of children, 
debility from old age, leprosy, nervous diseases and rheumatism. 

Withania Coagulans. 

Habitat., — Persia, Punjab, Scinde, Baluchistan. 
Parts used. — The fruit. 



DIGITALIS PURPUKEA. 453 

Vernacular. — Afghan. — Spin bajja. Arab. — Kak-naje-hindi. 
Beng. — Ashva ganda. Ens:. — Vegetable rennet. Duk.— Nal-ke-as- 
gand. Bomb., Hind. — Kaknaj, i^anir-phota, panir-bandd, Akri. 
Panj. — Khamjari. Pers. — Arusaka-pas-i-oaradah. Sans. — Rajanutrika. 
Sinde. — Panirjafota. Tani. — Amuk-kura-verai. Tel. — Penneru 

jodda vittulu. 

Panira Banda. Panira, means cheese, and Banda to bind, or 
coagulate ; this fruit coagulates milk into cheese ; one ounce of the 
decoction of the fruit will, like rennet, coagulate a gallon of warm milk 
in about half an hour. 

Characters, — Shrub stellately tomatose, resembling harmal 
(Paganum Hamald) ; fruit rather larger in size than, but similar in 
shape to Makoya, brownish yellow or reddish brown, and much 
shrivelled; epidermis, rugous and rather shining;seeds many, flattened, 
reniform, pitted, light reddish brown, compressed, sticky, and 
resembling Bhuiringani bija ; odour fruity, taste aciduous and acrid. 
The berries contain a ferment similar in action to animal rennet 
in its coagulating power. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, ^ to I fld. oz. ; and 
confection (i in 5). Dose, i to 2 fld. drs. 

Actions and uses, — The ripe fruit is emetic. The dried fruit is 
diuretic, alterative, carminative and stomachic, and is given in chronic 
congestion of the liver, in skin diseases, jaundice, rheumatism, urinary 
diseases, dyspepsia and flatulent colic. In large doses it is narcotic. 

Sorophulariaoea— The Fig-wort family. 

Herbs or rarely shrubs ; leaves opposite, entire, or toothed, some 
times parasitical on roots. Flowers irregular, beautiful, and of a blue 
yellow, or pink colour; calyx 5-lobed, corolla, irregular, 2-lipped; stamens 
4, didynamous; ovary, sessile, 2-celled; fruits capsular, baccate, 2-celled; 
seeds numerous, albumen fleshy. 

Habitat, — Found everywhere. 

Properties, — The plants are bitter, astringent, emetic, purgative 
and diuretic; some are narcotic poisons. 

Digitalis Purpurea, B. P. 

Habitat, — South and Central Europe. 

Parts used, — The dried leaves, Digitalis Folia, B, P. 

Fairy gloves, folks or ladies' glove, dog's finger, dead men's 
bells. Digitalis, from digitus, a finger — coralla is finger shaped 
or thimble shaped. Purpurea — Purpureus, purple coloured, its 
flowers are purple. Foxglove — corruption of folk's glove. Folk 
synonym of fairies. 

Characters.— ^\exix\\'2\ plant. The drug consists of dry leaves 
from the wild indigenous plant when § of flowers are expanded. The 
dried leaves are dull green, long, ovate, contracted at the base into a 



454 DIGITALIS PURPUREA. 

winged petiole, downy, wrinkled above, and reticulate beneath ; odour 
slight and tea-like ; taste, bitter and nauseous ; flowers purple, in 
spikes ; seeds are known to contain the active principle in larger 
proportion than the leaves but are never used. Leaves if imperfectly 
dried are subject to decomposition, so also the tincture of the leaves 
if mixed with water, or syrup, the active principle being destroyed. 
Dose, of the leaves, ^ to 2 grs. 

Constituents, — 5 principles, Digitalinum or Digital in (at one time 
thought to be the active principle), Digitonin, Digitin, Digitalein, 
and Digitoxin; Digitalosmin (a stearoptin) ; Digitoleic acid, extrac- 
tive, mucilage, gum, pictin, &c. Digitalin — a granular glucoside, 
soluble in alcohol, almost insoluble in water, sparingly soluble 
in ether, or chloroform. Dose, -^^ to /^ gr. Digitoxin, a crys- 
talline glucoside. Light crystals, insoluble in water, soluble in 
alcohol, sparingly so in chloroform, most toxic and cumulative in action 
Dose, j^Q to -^Q gr. Digitalein — an amorphous powder, soluble in 
water, alcohol and insoluble in ether or chloroform. Non-cumulative 
and non-irritant, hence used hypodermically. Dose, -^^ to -^q gr. Digi- 
tonin — a crystalline glucoside, soluble in water, insoluble in cold 
alcohol, ether, or chloroform — similar in action to saponin — a good 
diuretic. Digitin— a crystalline body, insoluble in ether and chloroform, 
sparingly soluble in water, readily soluble in alcohol ; generally 
inert. 

Preparations, — Extractum Digitalis. Dose, \^o\ grs. Extractum 
Digitalis fluidium ; macerate the leaves, percolate in alcohol and water 
and evaporate. It contains mostly Digitalin and Digitalein with trace 
of Digitoxin. Dose, ^ to 3 ms. Infusum Digitalis, B.P. 60 grs. to i pint. 
Dose, 2 to 4 fld. drs. It contains mostly Digitonin, little Digitalein, 
but no Digitalin or Digitoxin, hence used best as a diuretic. Tinctura 
Digitalis, B.P. (i in 8). Dose, 5 to 15 ms. It contains Digitalin, 
Digitoxin and Digitalein; used best as a cardiac stimulant. Abstractum 
Digitalis. Dose, J to 2 grs. 

Actions and uses. — Digitalin contracts the blood vessels generally; 
Digitoxin, Digitalein and Digitonin dilate the renal arteries, thereby' 
increasing the arterial tension and blood pressure in the glomeruli. In 
medicinal doses Digitalis is a diuretic, haemostatic, cardiac and vascular 
stimulant ; in large doses an irritant, causing sneezing, nausea, 
vomiting, and dark green bilious stools ; it gives rise to headache, 
giddiness and irregular pulse. Under its use the heart contracts more 
powerfully but slowly. It is largely used in cardiac afleciions, func- 
tional or organic, as in cardiac hypertrophy with dilatation, in 
mitral regurgitation, accompanied with venous congestion, in irregu- 
lar, intermittent, and feeble pulse and in oedema of the lungs. 
Digitalis prolongs the cardiac diastole ; it thus gives time for the 
dilated auricle to empty itself through the incompetent orifice, 
strengthens the contraction of the left ventricle and brings about 
better approximation of the mitral valve flaps. There is, therefore, 
less regurgitation and less venous congestion and more blood is forced 
into the arterial system. In mitral constriction, in tricuspid regurgita- 



FRANCrSTKA rXIPLORA, 

tion and constnetion, in dilatation of the right side of the heart 
with rapid and fticble pulse, cough, dyspnoea, pulsating jugulars, dutjky 
face, scanty, high coloured urine and dropsy, it is given with great 
benefit. It should not be given in aortic disease as it prolongs tlie diastole, 
gives more time for the blood to regurgitate and thus increase the 
danger of fatal syncope. It is equally dangerous in atheroma, fatty degen- 
eration of the heart, and chronic Bright *s desease. If given for a long 
tinte it causes extreme contraction of the renal vessels, stops the renal 
circulation and secretion of urine, and thus instead of the elimination 
of digitalis by excretion, it is accumulated in the blood and acts as a 
cumulative poison. The excretion of urea is increased al first, but is 
subsequently diminished ; respiration, which may be slow at first, 
soon becomes rapid and feeble. There is paralysis, cyanosis, coma, and 
convulsions followed by death. Digitalis being an uncertain 
diuretic, it is safe to 6;ivc it with sodium nitrite, which dilates 
IJie renal vessels. As an antipyretic in fevers, in the first stage of 
pneumonia and in other acute ititlammatory afTections, as rheumatism, 
in acute broncliitis, pleurisy and in specific fevers, its use is of great 
benefit. As a ha'.mostaiic, large doses of digitalis are given with ergot 
and strychnine in menorrhagia, haemoptysis, &c. In dyspntua and 
orthopncea^ due to loss of tone in the vascular system, digitalis has 
proved very beneficial and give^ quitt sleep. As an anaphfodisiac 
combined with potassium bromide, it is given in spermatorrhtea 
with feeble erections, frequent emissioiiH, and cold hands and 
feet. 



FranGtscea Uniflora. 



ffaMtaL'-TiTimL 



Parts used — The root — Manaca, al^jo called raercurio vegetal or 
vegetable mercury. 

Charactf.rs,^S\\r\ih\ leaves, alternate, oblong, acuminate; petiole, 
short ; stem, tough and woody ; iniernally yellowish ; bark thin and 
dark, 

Constitmnts* — An active principle, Francisceine. 

Preparations ^-^V\u\6. extract* Dose, lo to 60 ms. 

Attions ami tnrs. — Alterative, antisyphililic, emmcnagogue, chola- 
Ogue and diuretic. The root stimulates the lymphatic system, and thus 
eliminates morbid matters from the blo*»d by the skin and kidneys. In 
acute and chronic rheumatism, in rheumatic arthritis it eliminates the 
urates and prevents their being deposited in the jnints, It alsu stimulates 
the lymphatics and acts as an absorbent to remove exudation products. 
It stimulates the liver and lessens jaundice associated with constipa- 
tion* As a tonic and alterative like nux vomica, it is used in scrofula, 
in Bright's disease, with scanty urine and in syphilis^ even after such 
remedies as iodides, stillingea and berberis have failed. On this account, 
it has been termed mercurio-vcgclaL 



45^ PICRORRHIZA KU&ROA. 

HerpestiB Honniera, Bramia Indioa, Oratiola Honniera. 

Habitat, — Throughout India, in marshy ground near streams and 
borders of tanks. 

Parts used. — The herb. 

Vernacular* — Beng. — Shwete chamini. Cing. — Sunn-vda. Bomb., 
Hind. — Bima, Nir-brami, Jala-brahmi. Malyal. — Beami. Mar.— Nir- 
brami, Bimba. Sans. — Jalla-brahmi , Jali-nim. Tarn. — Neerpirimi. 
Tel.— Sambrini-iku. 

Characters,— ^XznX, annual and creeping. Stems several, round 
jointed, smooth and succulent ; leaves hnear, or obovate, also entire, 
wedge shaped, or oblong, smooth, succulent; opposite, sessile and dotted 
with minute spots ; peduncles, axillary, solitary ; flowers blue ; capsules, 
ovate, 2-celled, 2-valved ; seeds numerous ; taste saline. 

Constituents, — A trace of oily matter — which is soluble in alcohol 
and of an acid reaction ; tannin, an alkaloid, soluble in ether and 
chloroform ; an organic acid, 2 resins, both soluble in alkaline solutions 
and one readily soluble in ether* 

Preparations^ — Infusion (i in 20). Dose, ^ to i fld. oz. 

Actions and uses, — Diuretic, aperient and tonic; given in stoppage 
of urine with costiveness ; also in nervous debility, seminal weak- 
ness, epilepsy, &c. With petroleum, the juice is rubbed on rheumatic 
painful parts. The plant is applied hot to the chest in bronchitis and 
cough in children. 

Limnophila Gratioloides and L. GratiBsima. 

Habitat, — India, swampy places. 

Parts used, — The plant. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Karpur. Hind. — Kuttra. Mai. — Minga 
nari. Mar.— Ambuli. Sans. — Ambuja. Amragandhaka. 

Ambuja, water-born. Amra-gandhaka, having odour of mangoes. 

Characters. — The plant has a grateful odour and aromatic taste. 
Leaves whorled, pinnatifid, i to | inch long, opposite, entire at the top 
of the stem and numerous and multifid at its base. Stems simple, hairy. 

Preparations, — Medicated oil of the plant with cocoanut oil — used 
as liniment. 

Actions and uses, — Local stimulant and antiseptic ; the juice is 
rubbed over the body in infectious diseases, as fevers, measles, small- 
pox, &c. The liniment is used as an application to the legs or scrotum 
in elephantiasis. 

Plororrhiza Knrfoa, Yeronioa Lindleyana. 

Habitat, —Sh^dy woods of mountains in Europe and Nepaul. 

Parts used. — The rhizome. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Asava, Khar«baka. Beng. — Kutki Tita. 
Cing. — Kalu-rana. Guz., Bomb., Duk. — Kali-kutaki, karu. Eng. — White 



SCRWElNFURTHrA SPH^ROCARPA, 



Picrofhizctin^ 
glucosiclc and 
It is soluble in 



Christmas rose. Hind. — Kutki, Pathanhed, Mar. — B41akadu. Pers. — 
Karatika. Panj. — Karrooa. Sans. — Kalu-rohani, Kutaki-Dhauvan 
tail grasta Krishna bhedi, Ashaka-rohini chakranga. Tain., Tel.— 
Kaiuka rogani. 

WiiittJ Christmas rose is so called from the flowers appearing m 
winter during Christmas time. Bal kadu — from Ral, a child, and Kaddu, 
hitter ; it means a child's bitter* being used as a laxative for children. 

CharacUrs. — Two varieties — ka(JH ciccurs in >horl broken pieces, 
from I to 3 inches long, resembling goose ([uills» externally smooth, 
and of a brownish white colour ; slightly shrivelled, knotty, and 
marked here ;nul there with scars of fallen rootlets ; very fragile, light 
and soft, and can be compressed between the fingers ; cut surface black 
and presenting ihc appearance as if made up uf layers or scales. It has 
n white broken ring between the centre and llie external surface. In 
Kdii kntah, the pieces are knotty, and resemble m size iho^e of kadu, 
but Siimewhat thicker ; colour, brownish d«irk ; externally each piece is 
covered over wilh 3 or 4 scales, which are the marks of leaflets ; on sec- 
lion, the cut surface resembles kadu ; in colour, appearance. &c., both 
have a smell somewhat like that of Majitha, or tobacco, and a very 
bitter ttstc. Dose of the root* as ,a tonic, 10 to 30 grs, ; as aperient 
2 dfs*, as an aniipcriodic, 20 to 40 grs. 

ConshtHents.— A bitter principle FicrorhiziPt 
cathartic acid, glucose^ wax, ike* Picrorhizin is a 
obtained by exhausting the powdered drug with ether. 
water and alcohol, and insoluble in ether* 

Preparahfms.^-X>^coQi\ox\ (I in 20). Dose^ 1 to 2 fid. ozs. Tinc- 
ture (I in 10). Dose, ^ to i dr. 

Actions ^Wwiyi",— Alterative, hitler, stomachic and cholagogue; 
given in dyspepsia, chronic dysentery, asthma, hepatic derange- 
ments, jaundice, &c. Its action on the liver is similar to, but 
milder than that of colocynth* It is a valuable antipcriodic in low 
continued fevers ; it is given to children in worms. 

f^e marks, — The root is confounded with black Hellebore* 
Schweinfurthia Sphserooarpa. 

Ualntat. — Sind, Beluchibtan, Afghanistan. 

Parts usci/, — The herb, with broken -up fruit ». 

Indian Ba^cars— Sanniput, Sannipat nud* Hind* — ^Nepal nimb, 

Eng»— Nepal bitter. 

Characters, — Fruit globular, capsule papery, mucronate ; seeds 5 
angled, mumerous, wedge-shaped, with longitudinal ridges ; testa tuber- 
cular ; calyx 5 partite, upper segment large, extending over the fruit 
like a hood. Leaves ovate, leathery, with short blunt hairs ; margin 
lighter in colour than the rest of the leaf ; whole plant bitter with a tea- 
like taste. 

Constituents^-' An alkaloid ; fatty saccharine matter, mineral 
matter &c. 



45^ VERBASCUM THAPSUS. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 30). Dose, 2 to 4 fld. drs. 

Actions and uses, — Powerful stimulant and diaphoretic ; given in 
typhoid condition during fevers and other acute diseases —largely used 
by the natives. 

Yerbasoam Thapsus, Y. Indioum. 

Habitat. — Europe, Siberia, Caucasus, Himalaya. 

Parts used. — The root, leaves and flowers. 

Vernacular. — Arab, — Mahizahraj Labidah-el-baida, Adaned dubb 
Eng. — Great mullein weed, cow's lung wort. Hind. — Phulla Ban 
Tamb^ku. Pers. — Busir. 

Characters. — Leaves large, woolly, oblong, upper ones acuminate 
and sessile, those on the stems more or less crenate and covered with 
soft whitish stellate hairs ; taste, bitter, mucilaginous ; odour disagree- 
able ; flowers in a spike, bright yellow, 5 lobed, smooth above and 
tomentose beneath; seeds cone-shaped, finely pitted, very tough and 
horny, of an acrid taste and without odour. Dose, 15 to 20 grs. 

Constituents. — The flowers contain a volatile oil, a fatty acid, free 
malic acid, malate and phosphate of lime, acetate of potash ; also phos- 
phoric acid, sugar, gum, chlorophj^ll and a yellow resinous colouring 
matter. The leaves contain a crystalline wax, volatile oil, resin, 
tannin, a bitter principle, sugar, mucilage and ash, 12*6 p.c. 

Preparations. — Tincture (i in 8). Dose, \ to i fld. dr. Infusion 
(i in 5) of milk. Dose, 4 to 6 ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Expectorant, nutritive, emollient, demulcent and 
anodyne; given in phthisis and in wasting diseases. Under its use the 
expectoration becomes easy, cough is lessened, and like cod-liver oil it 
improves the weight and general condition. It is also given in diarrhoea, 
in gout and rheumatism, generally in combination with aperients. 
Dried leaves are smoked in nasal catarrh ; the seeds are antispasmodic 
and used in asthma and infantile convulsions ; in Northern India, the 
roots are used as febrifuge. 

Yeronioa Yirginioa. 

Habitat. — N. America, Canada. 

Parts used. — The rhizome and rootlets — Leptandra. 

Syn. — Culver's physic, Culver's root, black root, purple Leptandra. 

Characters. — Perennial plant ; rhizome horizontal, thick and 
flattened, of a blackish brown colour, marked with cup-shaped 
scars on the upper surface ; the bark is thin, wood yellowish, pith pur- 
plish brown. Roots thin, wrinkled and fragile, without any odour 
and a bitter acrid taste. Dose, powdered rhizome 20 to 60 grs. 

Constituents. — Leptandrin, an active principle— a glucoside, resin, 
6 p.c, saponin, tannin, mannit, gum, citric acid, and a volatile alka- 
loid. Leptandrin — Precipitate the infusion of the root with acetaic of 
lead, add sodium carbonate to remove the precipitate, add alcohol, 



OROXYLUM INDICUM. 459 

then wash with water, add alcohol, filter and evaporate. Needle- 
shaped crystals, bitter, soluble in ether, alcohol, water. 

Preparations. — Fluid extract. Dose, 20 to 60 ms. Solid extract. 
Dose, I to 3 grs. Tincture (1 in 8). Dose, i to i dr. 

Actions and uses. — Like other resin-bearing purgatives, it is emetic, 
cathartic and efficient cholagogue, alterative and tonic. It excites the 
liver and promotes the flow of bile without any irritation of the 
bowel. It is given in duodenal indigestion, chronic constipation with 
deficiency of bile and intestinal secretions ; in action, it resembles 
podophyllin. 

BignoniaoesB, the Bignonia, Trampet flowers or Teta family. 

Trees, or twining, or climbing shrubs; leaves exstipulate, usually 
opposite, simple, conjugate, compound, very large as in Tetu. Flowers 
ii regular and often beautifully yellow, brown, red, pink, or purple ; 
capsules compressed, seeds many and winged. 

Habitat. — Native of tropical countries. 

/^opertics. — These plants are very little used in medicine ; the 
barks of some are anthelmintic and astringent. 

Cresoentia Cajete, Calabash tree (Eng), 

Habitat. — Native of S. America, cultivated in India. 

Parts used, — The fruit. 

Characters. — Fruit large, gourd-like, and green ; shell, woody ; 
pulp, slightly acid, and white and containing flattened cordiform seeds. 

Constituents. — The pulp contains crescentic acid ; also tartaric, 
citric and tannic acids, 2 resins, a bitter aromatic extractive, and 
colouring matters, resembling indigo. 

/Reparations. — Syrup (i in 10). Dose, i to 2 drs. 

mictions and uses. — Demulcent and expectorant ; given in dyseiv 
tcry and cough. In the form of poultice the pulp is applied to the chest. 

Oroxylum Indioum, Calosanthes Indica. 

Habitat. — Throughout India. 
Parts used,— The root bark. 

Vernacular. — Beng— Nasona. Guz., Bomb. — Tetu. Hind. — 
Arlu, Sona, Plialphal. Mar. — Kharasinga, Bahman-tetu. Malyal. — 
Peiani. Panj. — Talpalanga. Sans. — Syonaka, Prathu Simbrh, sukd 
nasa, Arall, Bhalluka-priya. Tarn. — Vanga-adanthay. Tel. — Dundil- 
1am. 

Prathu Simbih, having broad pods ; suka nasa, having nose like a 
parrot's beak. Bhalluka priya, dear to bears. 

Characters. — The tree is remarkable for terminal spikes of large 
lurid fleshy flowers, and large, transversely compressed, somewhat 
curved pods. The root bark is of a light yellow colour, of an offensive 



460 STERCOSPBRMUM SUAVBOLENS. 

smell and an acrid taste ; bark of the stem, rough and marked with 
large scars of fallen leaves, thickly studded with wart-like protuber- 
ances ; internal surface, very yellow. Dose, 5 to 15 grs. 

Constituents, — Oroxylin, an acrid principle, pectin, extractive 
matter, fat, wax, &c. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, i to i fld. oz. Decoc- 
tion (i in 10). Dose 4 to 8 drs. Medicated oil — boil Teel oil in the 
decoction of Tetu bark over a fire till the watery portion is evaporated. 

Actions and uses, — As an anodyne the oil is dropped into the ear in 
otorrhcea. The powder and infusion of the bark combined with opium 
are sudorific, better than Dover's powders. As an anodyne, a bath 
prepared with the bark is frequently employed in acute rheumatism. 
It is also used in dropsy. The root bark is an ingredient of the Dasa 
muU dekvatha. 

Steroospermam Suaveolens, S. Chelonioides, Heierophragma 
Saaveolens. H. Chelonioides. 

Habitat, — India, throughout the moist parts. 

Parts used, — The root bark and flowers. 

Vernacuiar. — Can. — Hudai. Guz. — Pandan. Beng., Hind. — 
Parul, Kashta-pAtali. Mar. — Kalgori, Padri. Sans. — The tree, Pat^la 
Patali, Kama duti, Madhu duti, Patala. South India. — The flowers 
Madan — Kamapu. Tam. — Padri. Tel. — Kalgoru Padari. 

Kama duti, Cupids messenger ; Madhu duti, messenger of spring 
Patala, light, red or rose coloured. 

Characters, — Flowers large, of dark dull crimson colour, highly 
fragrant, corolla light purple above, brownish purple below, hairy at 
its convexity ; bark ash-coloured, and somewhat scabrous. 

Constituents. — The flowers contain albuminous, saccharine and 
mucilaginous matters and wax. 

Preparations. — Infusion of the bark (i in 10). Dose, i to I fld. oz. 

Actions and uses, — Refrigerant and diuretic; used in dyspepsia, 
fever, cough, dropsy &c. The flowers with honey stop troublesome 
hiccough. 

Remarks, — ^The bark is one of the ingredients of Dasa mula 
dekvath. 

Steroospermam Xylooarpam, Bignonia Xylooarpum. 

Habitat.— T>tcc2LV\ Peninsula. 

Parts used, — The tar. 

Vernacular, — Can. — Ghansing: Mar. — Kharsing. 

Characters ,—^ ood hard, internally presenting a yellow, resinous 
surface. The tar obtained from the wood is a thick fluid of the colour 
and consistence of ordinary Stockholm or pine tar. Dose, 3 to 10 grs. 



PEDALIUM MUREX. 46I 

Actions and uses, — Stimulant, expectorant and parasiticide. The 
tar is useful in the treatment of skin eruptions. Other properties are 
similar to those of pine tar, for which it may be used as a fair substitute. 

PedaliaoesB— the.Pedalium or Tila family. 

General Characters, — Glandular and often glutinous herbs; leaves 
entire, dentate or lobed, and exstipkilate. Flowers axillary, large, 
tubular, irregular, and of a pink, white or other variegated and 
beautiful colours ; ovary on a glandular or fleshy disk, i-celled, 
sometimes 4-celled. Fruits bony, or capsular ; seeds wingless, without 
albumen, cotyledons large. 

Habitat — Natives of tropical countries. 

Properties, — The plants are remarkable for their oily seeds ; 
leaves are demulcent and mucilaginous ; the capsules of some species 
are diuretic and demulcent. 

Hartynia Diandra. 

Habitat — Concan, India. 

Parts used. — The nuts. 

Vernacular, — Eng.— Tiger's claw, devil's claw. Guz. — Vichhida. 
Mar.— Vinchhu, Vecchhu. Vinchhu, scorpion, so named because of 
the resemblance of the fruit to a scorpioti. 

Characters. — The fruit is a green, fleshy capsule, and contains a 
hard, black, woody, wrinkled nut with two fiooks which are sharp and 
curved, thus resembling a beetle. 

Actions and uses, — A paste is used as a local sedative ; the nut, 
rubbed down with water and applied, is said to have a curative effect 
upon the bites of venomous reptiles such as scorpions, &c. 

Pedalium Mnrez. 

Habitat. — Deccan Peninsula, Madras Peninsula, Ceylon, Coroman- 
del. Cape Comorin. 

Parts used. — The fruit and leaves. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Khussuke Kabir. Cing, — Cet-neringi. 

Can. — Annegalugida. Bomb., Hind., Guz. — Kadava gokharu, ghati 
gokharu, Bara gokhru. Malyal.— Kattu nerumil. Mar. — Ubha 
gokhru, karonta. Sans. — Ghilja-sudu-moostra. Tam. — Kaka-mulu. 
Tel. — Yea nuga palleros. 

Characters, — Plant low, spreading and succulent ; leaves smooth, 
truncate, oval, dentate and obtusely pointed. Fruit a drupe, pendulous, 
and four-angled, or winged with a sharp spine at the base of each 
angular ridge ; fresh fruit, green and succulent, dry fruit, corky. Nut 
2-cellcd, 2 seeded ; seeds arillate, 4 in number, elongated and narrow. 
Under surface of the leaves and of immature capsules present 
a frosted appearance, due to the presence of numerous small, brilliant 



462 SESAMUM IXmClJM. 

crystalline glands. Agitated with water they produce white viscid 
mucilage, like white of eggs. The glandular bodies are the source of 
mucilage. The plant has a peculiar, disagreeable, musk-like odour. 

Constituents. — An alkaloid, fat, resin, gum and ash 5 p.c. 

Preparations. — Infusion (1 in 10). Dose, i to 4 fld. ozs. Decoction, 
(i in 10). Dose, i to 2 fld. ozs. 

Actions and uses. — The infusion is a favourite and excellent 
demulcent and diuretic in dysuria and gonorrhoea, and for gonorrheal 
rheumatism. It is also used as a diuretic, and lithontriptic. The 
fresh leaves and young shoots, dipped in boiling milk and 
kept for a few minutes give the milk a bitter and mucilaginous 
taste and are used in gonorrhoea. The decoction is given in 
seminal debility, nocturnal emission, impotence and incontinence 
of urine, and as a diuretic in dropsy. Choia Gokhru is the fruit of 
Tribulus terrestris. 

Sesamum Indicam, S. Orientale, S. Trifoliatum, S. Luteum. 

Habitat. — Throughout India, cultivated in the South of United 
States. 

Parts used, — The seeds, and the fixed^oil expressed from the seeds. 

Fernacu/ar, — Arab. — Sunsin Burm. — Huan, Huonma goshya- 
Bomb. — Goda-tela. Can. — Valley-enne. Cing. — Teel-tel. Eng. — 
Gingili oil, Teel oil, Benn6 oil, Sesame oil. Beng., Guz., Hind. 
— Mitha tel, Teel-katal, Berik-tel, Krishna, tel. Mai. — Eloo, Chiretta- 
Malyal. — Nallena. Mar, — Chakkatel. Pers. — Raghane-Kunjad. Sans, — 
Teela-telam, Telaka telam. Tam. — Nal-yennai. Tel. — Manchi-noovay 

Characters. — Sesamum or Benne plant. Tila seeds as met with 
are black, while and red. The red seeds are minute and flat; taste oily 
and sweet. The black and white only are used in medicine. They 
yield the largest quantity of the oil. The black seed or kala tila must 
not be confounded with * * Ramtila." Dose, 30 to 90 grs. 

Constituents — Fixed oil, 50 to 60 p.c. ; proteid, 22 p.c, mucilage 
4 p.c, and ash, 4*8 p.c. 

Oleum Sesami — Obtained by expression of seeds, or extracted 
by carbon bisulphide. A clear bland fixed oil, similar to olive oil. It is 
a yellowish, non-drying oil without any odour and of a bland, nut-like 
taste, neutral reaction ; and less liable to become rancid or thick. It 
contains olein 76 p.c; myrisiin, palmitin, stearin, resinoid compounds, 
higher alcohol, sesamin, and an uncrystallizable thick oil. Dose, 2 
to 6 drs. 

Preparations. — Confection of seeds. Dose, J to i dr. 

Actions and uses. — The seeds are used as food. A laxative they 
are used in removing constipation and in piles. As demulcent 
they are given in dysentery, and as diuretic in urinary diseases. 
The oil is Ubcd as hair oil in place of olive oil, for which it is a very 
good substitute. It is useful in preparing plasters, ointments and 
other medicated fragrant or scented oils. 



ArAVTHUs ri.trtrouL>. 



Acanthacese— The Acanthus or Adusa family. 

Generai ChattHtcr^ — Herbs or shrubs ; leavers oppusiiei 
^imple» rarely lobcd, exstipulate. Flowers irregular, bracleated. 
white, purpll*. red or yellow ; calyx 4 to ; partite ; sepals 
4 or 5, much imbricated ; inflorescence, terininul ; corolla^ 2<Uppedt 
stamens* 1 or 4, didynamous, axillary or in spikes ; ovary in a disk, 
2-celled ; fruit capsular, and t or 2-celled ; seed one» or more, 
suspended by hard, cup*shaped, or hooked projections ; no albumen ; 
cotyledons, large and fleshy, radicle, inferior. 

fiahitat — Natives of tropical countries. 

Prupi'titt's, — Some are tonic and mucilaginous ; others bitter and 
stomachic ; the leaves of B,irlcria arc highly astiingeut ; those of the 
Rhi»(»canthus are used in ringworm. 

AoanthuB Iliolfolius, Dilivoria Ilicifolia. 

Habitiit* — Malabar, Ceylon (bca coasts, marsh and salt lakes)* 
Parts ns(d, — The plant and root. 

Fenuicultir— Hind ^ Beng. — Hurkuch Kanta. Goa. — Moranna. 
Mai. — Paina Schulli. iVlar. — Marandi. Sans.— Harikasa. Eng. — 
Hully-lcavcd Acanthus, 

C/iarmUrs,-'Sicnn erect and numerous ; bark smooth, very 
sharp! four-fold and covered with prickles i leaves opposite, 
^hoTi |)ctiolcd. oblong, waved, spmous and dctilaie ; spikes terminal, 
somelmicb axillary. Flowers solitary, opposite and Urge ; capsule, z* 
Celled ; seeds 2 in each tell, obliquely cordate and compressed. 

Cotisittuc/tts. — A bitter alkaloitl, an organic .tt ii!, laiv rnaltcr, 
chlorophyll, and soft renins* 

Preparntium, — Decoction (i in 20), Dose, | io i tid. vi, 

Aittuiis nnti uses. — The lundtr sht>ot5s and leaves arc used locally 
Cor snakebite. The root is expectorant and used in cough and asthma. 
As a stimulant, the detn; tiuti is qivcn wijh cumin seeds in dvspcpsia 
with acid eructations 

Aeocanthera Ouabaio— Arrow poison. 

//rt^f ///A— Native of Somali coast. 

Part i/s^i^.— Ouabain, a glycoside ; also obtained from the seeds of 
Strophanthus Glabrus and Carossa Schimpert* 

Characters* — In white and odourless crystals, of a bitter taste 
slightly soluble in ctdd water, more so in hot water, insoluble in 
alcohol, chloroform and ether. Dose, ^^^ gr. 

Actions and uses* — Used by the Africans as an active poison 1 
, paralyzing the heart muscle, llypudcrmically injected it acts as a 
i powerful emetic. It also acts as a local anieithelic for the eve, and 
IS superior to cocaine. As a stimulant lo the kidneys and intestines it 
atls as a diuretic and promotc^i dcfcecaiinn. It does not affect the body 
temperature. In small doses it stimulates the heart like Digitalis. lu 
pertussis it may be used with benefit. 



464 ANDROGRAPHIS PANICULATA. 

Adhatoda Yasioa, Justioia Adhatoda. 

Habitat, — India, Punjab, Assam, Bengal, Nepaul, Ceylon. 

Parts used. — Tlie leaves, root and flowers, 

F<?r;/«t:w//?r.— Burm. — Mesan-bin. Bang. — Bakas. Cing. — Ada- 
toda Pavatta. Can. — Adasoge-sappu. Bomb., Mar., Duk. — Adalsi, 
Arusi. Eng.— Malabar nut. Guz., Hind — Arusa, Bansa, Asganda. 
Malyal. — Atal6takam. Panj. — Bhekkar. Sans. — Vasaka, Sinha mukhi, 
Sinha parni, Utarosha Vaidyamatru, Vrikshaha. Tam. — Adatodai. 
Tel. — Addasaram. Sinha-makki, lion mouthed. Senha-parni, lion- 
leaved. 

Characters, — Shrub bushy ; leaves opposite, short, petioled, broad, 
lanceolate, long, tapering or pointed, smooth on both surfaces, and of a 
yellowish, green or dark green colour. Flowers whitish, spotted, 
sulphur coloured; taste bitter and aromatic ; odour strong and peculiar. 

Constituents — An odorous principle, fat, resin, a bitter alkaloid 
vasicine, an organic acid, adhatodic acid, sugar, gum, colouring matter, 
salts. 

Preparations* — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, ^ to 2 fid. ozs. Aqueous 
extract. Dose, 4 to 10 grs. Juice of the leaves. Dose, 2 to 4 drs. 
Tincture (1 in 10). Dose, i to i fid. dr. 

Actions and uses — Expectorant, antispasmodic, and alterative; the 
flowers and roots with ginger and sitab are given in ague, rheumatism, 
consumption, asthma, chronic bronchitis and other chest affections ; 
the root is a fair substitute for senega. The leaves are often smoked 
in asthma. 

Andrographis Panioulata, Justioia Panioulata. 

Habitat. — East Indies, China, shady places throughout India. 
Parts used. — The herb, dried stalks and root. 

Vernacular. — Arab.— Vizra-ufar, Vasab-buvi. Hind., Beng. — 
Kalo megha ; Cherota, Mahatela. Can. — Nela bevinagida. Cing. — 
Hamba Kalpa. Duk. — Kalafnath. Eng. — Kreat. Guz. — Kiryita. Mar. 
— Glen Kirayata. Malyal. — Nila Veppa, Kiryattu. Pers.— Nain 
chanvandi. Sans. — Bhunimbaha. Tam. — Nella Vemboo. Tel. — 
Kari-vemu. 

Characters. — Plant annual, stem, with the root attached, occurs 
in pieces of about a foot in length, quadrangular, pointed, smooth, 
of a light brown colour ; taste persistent, and bitter ; leaves opposite, 
smooth and on short petioles ; calyx s-cleft ; corolla, bilabiate, 
lanceolate ; upper surface dark green and shining ; under surface 
pale ; flowers, remote, alternate on long petioles, downy, panicled 
and rose coloured, streaked with purple ; capsules, erect, cylindrical ; 
seeds 3 to 4 in each root, fusiform, simple and woody ; taste intensely 
bitter. It yields its properties readily to water and spirit. 

Constituents.'^A bitter principle, and a considerable quantity of 
sodium chloride. 



ASTKRACANTHA l.oNOU.dlJ A, 



46; 



/^ri/xn^/noris^ — Succus — conegnii uu-lI cxjircssedjuice of fresh leaves 
and .stalks (i part represents 4 of the drug). Dose, 10 to 60 ms. 
Compound infusion (i in 20). Contains olcn kanat, 4 drs ; orange 
peel, I dr. ; coriander, i dr» ; boiling water, io fld. ozs. Dose, 
I to 2 fld. ozs. Compound Tincture (3 in 20). contains olen kariyat. 
6 ozs. ; myrrh and aloes, each l o£, ; brandy 40 fld. ozs. Dose* I to 
4 fid. drs, Piluldc Alui composilus Unown ;is Halviva (Beng.) It 
contains cumin, aniseed, cloves and grtaler cardamoms equal pat ts ; mix 
in the juice of kalmeg. Dose, 2 to 5 grs. in milk. 

Actions and uses. — Bitter tonic and stomachic, like quassia and 
chireita. The expressed juice of the fresh leaves or the compound 
infusion is given with cardamom, cloves and cinnamon to infants, in 
general debility, in convalescence after fever, and for the relief of 
griping pain with irregularity of the bowels and loss uf appetite, and in 
advanced stage of dysentery. It is used as a substitute for quinine. 



Asteracantha Longi folia, Barleria Longifolia, 
Ruelia Longifoiia, Uygrophila Spinosa. 



Western coast, watery 



Habitat — Throughout India, Ceylon, 
places and ditches, paddy fields of Bombay. 

Parts used, — The plant, root and seeds* 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Kullakhara. Burm, — Supadan. Can,^ — 
Bahcl shulli. Cing, — Katu-lkkiri. Gu£. — Ekharo (seeds), Talamkhiinii, 
Hind. — Goksura, Phulmakhanu, Ik-chura. Duk,, Bomb., Mar,— 
Talinikliana, Kolisia, Kulsunda. MalyaL — Vayal schulli. Sans. — Kokli- 
luksha, Ika^hugandha, Ikshura-Gokantaka. Tarn. — Nir muii. TeU — 
V' ayroo Gobbi. 

Characters, — Plant annual, erect, 3 to 4 feet high ; roots biennial, 
tapering, with numerous rootlets ; stem erect, bluntly quadrangular, 
branches opposite, jointed, flattened, hairy and oUcn coloured ; leaves 
sessile, opposite, long, rather wavy and inserted in pairs at the 
joints of the stems ; flowers awhsliaped and sprcadmg, calyx 4-cleft, 
corulla, lunnel*shaped, 5-clefi, flowers on whorls, axiilary, numerous, 
sessile, and of a bright, blue or ro^^e colour ; seeds small and compressed^ 
pointed at the apex and bruad at the ba^e where they are oblique; colour, 
brownish red. When placed in the mouth they immediately become 
coated with a large quantity of extremely tenacious mucilage which 
adheres tu the tongue and palate. Dose of the seeds, 10 to 20 grs. 

Coftstituents. — The seeds contain mucilage, albuminoids, traces of 
an alkaloid and a yellow fixed oil. The root and stem exhausted with 
alcohol deposit red shaped crystab* 

Pre/faratiofts. — Decoction of the root (i in 20), Dose, ^ to 1 oz. 
Infusion (i ID 10). Dose. ^ to I tld. oz. ; acetum oi the leaves (1 m d) 
of Vinegar. Duse, I to 4 fld. drs. The natives use ashes of the burnt 
dried plant. Dose, \ to I dr* 

30 



466 BARLERIA PRIONITIS. 

Actions and uses, — The root is demulcent and diuretic, and given 
in dropsy, gonorrhcea, hepatic obstruction, rheumatism, and in urinary 
affections. The seeds are used as aphrodisiac ; a paste of the seeds is 
applied to rheumatic joints. 

Barleria Prionitis. 

Habitat — Tropical India. 

PlAYts used.— The plant. 

Vernaoular — Hind., Beng. — Kanta-Jati, Jhinte. Can. — Goratige. 
Malyal. — Kaletta vitla. Guz., Mar. — Kanta-shelio, kar^nti, pivala- 
karanta, vajradanti, kulsunda. Sans.— Kurantaka, .Mahasaha, Pitaj 
linta; Awlana. Tam. — ^Vara mulli. Tel. — Pachcha. 

Characters. — Root brownish, smooth and rather knotty ; stem 
short and erect with numerous, opposite, round and smooth branches ; 
leaves of a yellowish green or dark green colour, decussate, opposite, 
short petioled, oblong, rather waved, glabrous, and smooth. From the 
axils of the leaves spring up 2 or 3 sharp spines ; flowers axillary, 
generally solitary, sessile, large and yellow. 

Constituents. — Neutral and acid resins, soluble in petroleum and 
ether. 

Preparations. — Juice of leaves. Dose, 2 to 4 fld. drs. Decoction 
of the root (i in 10). Dose, \ to i fld. oz. Medicated oil. 

Actions and uses. — The plant is slightly bitter and astringent, and 
given in catarrhal affections of children accompanied with fever ; also 
in anasarca. Locally the juice of the leaves is applied to the feet to 
prevent the crackmg of the soles and with common salt to strengthen 
the gums when spongy. The paste of the root is applied to boils and 
glandular swellings to cause their dispersion. The medicated oil is 
used as an application to unhealthy wounds. 

BlephariB Edulis— Aoanthodiam Hirtniih 

Habitat. — Egypt, Persia, Sind and Punjab. 
Parts used. — The seeds. 

Vernacular. — Arab.— Kariza. Hind., Bomb. — Utingana. Pers. — 
Anjurah. 

Characters. — Capsules hard, glabrous, shining, and in colour 
mahogany-like ; in oroken pieces, mixed with few entire fruits and 
seeds; compressed, smooth, shining, longer than those of sesamum, 
obtusely pointed at the apex and broad at the base, where they are 
oblique. The surface is covered with bristles or long coarse hairs ; 
colour pale brown ; cotyledons black and homogeneous ; seeds mucila- 
ginous. This is due to the desintegration of the bristles, when soaked 
in water. 

Constituents. — A bitter crystalline principle, soluble in water, 
amylic and ethylic alcohol, but insoluble in ether ; mucilage, albumen 
and ash. 



RHINACANTHUS COMMUNIS. 



4*7 



P^fparattons, — Decoction (i in \o\ Dose, ^ to i fid, oz. 

Actions and U5es, — Demulcent* diuretic, nervine tonic add expec- 
torant ; given in seminal debility, coughsi gonorrh(]ea, high coloured 
urine, &c. The seeds are an ingredient in numerous aphrodisiac 

confections. 

Aoanthos Roboub. 
Hahitah^Vf. India. 
Parts fised. — The root. 

Characters*— l^QQl tuberous, spindle shaped, thick as a quillp 
bark dark brown* Dose, 20 to 60 grs. 

Preparations, — Decoction (1 in 20), i to 2 fld. ozs. 

s4cttons and uses — Astringent and nervine tonic ; the root boiled 
in milk is largely used in Icucorrhoea and general debility. 

Justiola ProoumbenB, RoateUuIaria ProomnbenB. 

Habitat.S, India, Deccan, Ceylon. 

Parts used, — The herb. 

Vernacuiar* — ^Mar. — Ghati pitpapra. Tarn. — Nerei poottie. 

Characters — A small plant of a bitter, disagreeable taste ; stem 
procumbent, diffuse ; leaves loundeJ, glabrous and somewhat hairy j 
spikes compressed, slender ; flowers sfnall^ pale, purple ; root slender, 
woody ; taste bitter. 

Cor/stiti4ents> — A bitter alkaloid* 

/Reparations, — Infusion (i in 20). DosCi 4 to 6 drs* 

Actions and uses, — Alterative and expectorant ; given in asthma, 
eoughi rheumatism, &c. The herb is used as substitute for fumaria, 

Rhinaoanthos CommunlB, Justioia NaButa. 

ffabitat. — Deccan, Ceylon^ cultivated throughout Western India. 

Parts used. — The leaves^ root and seeds. 

Vernacular. — Can. — Nttga-malltge. Chin. — Tong-pong-chong, 
Cing*— Anitta. Duk — Kabfttar. Hmd. — PWakjdhi. Guz , Mar. — 
Gajakarni . Alalyal.— Pushpa-kedol, San^.— Uthika parni. Tam., 
Tel— Niga mulli. 

Niga-mulli. — Naga, a snake, and mulli^ a root ; the root is used by 
the natives against the bites of poisonous snakes. 

Characters, — Shrub thin ; stem erect, green and shrubby ; bark 
smooth and ash coloured ; young shoots jointed ; leaves opposite, short 
pet ioled, broad, lanceolate, obtusely pointed, smooth above and a little 
downy below : panicles corymbose* axillary and terminal ; pedicels short 
and downy ; flowers white ; leaves when chewed having a pungent 
taste, somewhat resembling that of cinnamon ; odour disagreeable. 



4^8 CLEKODEXDKON IXERME. 

Constituents. — Rhinacanthin, apparently related to crysophanic 
acid. It is a dull cherry red resinous substance obtained by exhaostiog 
powdered root fibres with dilute alcohol. 

Preparations. — Expressed juice. 

Actions and uses. — Parasiticide and stimulant; a paste of the leaves, 
seeds and fresh root is applied with pepper and lime juice or sulphur 
for several successive days in parasitic diseases, as ring-worm, dhobie*s 
itch, Malabar itch, eczema and other skin diseases. Leaves and roots 
are regarded as antidotes to snake poisons. 

Yerbenacea—The Yerrain, or Hira^nndi family. 

Trees, shrubs or herbs; leaves generally opposite, rarely alternate, 
exstipulate; calyx persistent, tubular ; ovary, 2 or 4-celled ; flowers, red 
white or blue, generally irregular ; fruits dry or drupaceous ; carpels 
2 to 4 when ripe, separating into as many one-seeded achxnia ; seed 
erect, with little or no albumen, radicle inferior. 

Habitat. — Native of temperate and trop ical regions. 

Properties. — The plants are slightly bitter, aromatic, febrifuge and 
alterative ; some have edible fleshy fruits ; some are fragrant and have 
beautiful flowers ; the leaves of a few are used as substitutes for 
China tea. 

CallioaFpa lanata, C Cana, C. Tomentosa, C Americana. 

Habitat. — Deccan, Ceylon. 
Parts used. — The root, bark and leaves. 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Masandari, Muttura. Hind.— Bastra. Malyal. 
— Tondi, Teregam. Mar. — Pondi Karavati, Iswar. Tam.— Kat komul. 

Characters. — Young branches, cinnamon like, shaggy and woolly ; 
leaves ovate, lanceolate and tomentose beneath ; on the removal of 
tomentum, numerous oil glands are visible ; taste bitterish, odour 
faintly aromatic. It affords considerable mucilage when boiled. 

Preparation. — Decoction of the root and bark (i in 20). Dose, 
I to 2 fld. oz. 

Actions and uses. — Refrigerant, hepatic stimulant, demulcent 
and emollient. The decoction of the root is used to lessen fever and 
high temperature, and to remove hepatic obstruction ; also given in 
skin diseases. It is also used as a wash for aphthae in the mouth. 

Clerodendron Inerme, Yalkameria Inermis. 

Habitat. — Ceylon, India, near the sea-coast. 

Parts used. — The leaves and juice. 

Vernacular, ^^ng. — Garden Quinine. Ceylon — Wolbu-ronda. 
Benff.— Banjuen. Bomb. — Dariai jai, vanjai. Can.— Naituk-kille. 
Hina., Duk. — Sangan-kuppi, chhoti-arni, Isamdhari. Mar.^Vanajai, 



CtCRODEKDRON SERRATUM* 



khari narvel. Java.— Gamber laut. Malyal.— Nirnolajtl. Sans. — 
Kundati. Tarn, — Pina Shengam kooppi, Tel — Tak*kaUpu, Eru- 
Pichha, 

It is called garden quinine, on account of its intense bitter taste. 

Characters, — Shrub slender, zig-zag, with white fragrant irregular 
flowers, bearing beautiful long purple stamens, growing near the sea- 
shore and common in large gardens ; leaves opposite, rarely ternate, 
small, one or two inches long, smooth, shining, oval, and often fleshv ; 
margins reflex^ with numerous dark green dots studding both the 
surfaces; odour agreeable and apple-like, taste intensely bitter. 

Cnnslttutttts. — A bitter principle similar to that found in Chiretta, 
a fragrant stcaropten to which its apple-like odour is due, resin, gum 
and a brown colouring matter and ash containing a large amount of 
sodium chloride. 

Prtparatiom, — Infusion and decoction (t in lo). Dose, \ to i fld. 
0«. Tincture (i in 8). Dose, \ to i fld, dr. 

Actions aud usea, — Tonic, febrifuge and alterative ; given in 
intermittent and remittent fevers ; also as an alterative in scrofulous 
and venereal diseases. A poultice of the leaves is used to resolve 
buboes ; a bath of the leaves is recommended in itch* 

Clerodendron Phlomoides, Valkameria Multiflora* 

Habitat, — Tropical countries. 

farts used.— The root, 

Fernactf/ar. — Bomb,, Guz,, Hind.— Arani. Mar,— Tikali, Sans, 
— Aguimantha, Gani kilrikft. Tarn. — Telutala. Tel. — Tekkar, Tilaka. 

Characters. — The root is thick and of a lightish brown colour. It 
is slightly aromatic. The taste is astringent and somewhat bittcr- 

Preparations.— iyfiQOQUon (i in lO.) Dose, 4 to 12 fld, drs, 

Actions aitd uses, — Alterative, bitter tonic and demulcent ; given 

to children during convalescence; as a demulcent it is useful in gonor- 

rhcea. 

Remarks. — It is one of the five roots, Vrihata Panchmuli of 

Dasa miila dikvaih. 

Clerodendron Serratum, C. Macrophyllum, Yalkameria 
Serrata, C. Siphonanthua. 

Habitat, — Salsctte, Nepaul. 

Parts used, — The root. 

Vernacular. — Duk., Mar., Hind.— Gant Baharangi. MalyaU-^ 
Jarutika. San?^.^ — Bhargi, Tam.^ — Chirudekku. Tel. — Brah*mari. 

Characters, — ^Root light colored, often contorted about an inch in 
thickness; bark thitn of a brown colour, within which the vfond is 
tough and marked with medullary rays and concentric rings. Taste 
faintly bitter, no peculiar odour, Uose of the powdered root, 10 
to 20 grs. 



470 GMELINA ARBOREA. 

Constituents. — Starch, a peculiar bitter principle, acrid resin and 
fatty matter. 

/Reparations. — Decoction (i in 20). Dose, i to 2 fid. ozs. 

Actions and uses* — Stimulant, tonic, and alterative ; given in 
dyspepsia, catarrhal affection of the lungs, scrofula and rheumatism. 
It is often confounded with Premna Herbacia — Knotted Bharangi. 

Clerodendron Infortnnatnm, C Yisoosum, Yalkameria 
Infortunata. 

Habitat. — Throughout Tndia, Belgaum, Bengal. 

Parts used. — The leaves. 

Vernacular. — Hind., Beng. — Bhant, Ghantu. Burm. — Bughyee. 
Can. — Kare. Malyal. — Peragu. Bomb., Mar. — Bhandira, Kari, Nepaul. 
— Chitu. Sans. — Bhandira. Tel. — Manduka bramhi. Bokada, 
Sorasvati aku, gurrapu. 

Characters. — Shrub 3 to 4 feet high, dark green and spreading 
by underground suckers ; leaves 8 to 10 inches long, and 6 to 8 inches 
broad at their base, round or ovate, and with long petioles, edges 
dentate, covered on both surfaces with white and jointed hairs ; 
branches quadrangular, panicle large, terminal and naked ; odour very 
disagreeable, taste bitter ; flowers white, tinged with pink. It is a 
cheap substitute for chiretta. 

Coif^/fV^if/s.— Resinous matter, bitter principle, and tannin. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 10.) Dose, i to 2 ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Bitter, tonic, antiperiodic and vermifuge ; also 
a good laxative ; a decoction is sometimes given as a rectal enema for 
worms ; also given as a bitter tonic during convalescence from acute 
diseases. As an antiperiodic it is given in malarial fever. 

Gmelina Arborea. 

Habitat, — N. W. Himalaya, Deccan Peninsula, Coromandel, 
Neilgherries, Ceylon. 

Parts used. — The root, bark and fruit. 

Vernacular. — Burm. — Yemaneh. Can.— Shivan. Cing. — At- 
demmata. Beng., Guz., Mar.. Hind. — Shevana, Kambhari, Gumhar, 
Joogani, Chookur. Malyal. — Cumbulu. Sans. — Shriparani, Kasa man, 
Gamabhari. Tam. — Tagvomooda. Tel.— Pedda Gumudu. 

Characters. — Bark, covered with powdery tomentum, thick, rather 
brittle and mucilaginous, colour lightish brown, taste astringent ; fruit 
a drupe, ovoid, 2-seeded, sweetish bitter, cooling and mucilaginous. 

Constituents. --TYi^ root contains a yellow viscid oil, resin, an 
alkaloid, a trace of benzoic acid, and ash free from manganese ; 
the fruit contains butyric and tartaric acids, an alkaloid, saccharine 
matter, resin, and a trace of tannin. 



LIPPIA PJODIFLORA, 



47 » 



Preparatinns. — Decoction of the bark (i in 3o). Dose, i to 2 fld. 
02s. A compound decoction of the fruit contains shivan. pariishakai 
liquorice root» red sandal wood and ushera, equal parts and water 16 
parts, the whole quantity reduced ro one half. Dose, J to 2 fld ozs. 

Actions and uses* — Demulcent* stomachic, tonic, refrigerant, and 
laxative. The root bark is given in fevers, indigestion and anasarca. 
With Jiquorice. it is given to increase the secretion of milk in women. 
The juice of the leaves is demulcent and given in gonorrhoea; other 
properties are similar to those of arant. The fruits are bitter and 
cooling, and given in fever and burning heat of the body. The bark is 
used to regulate fermentation of toddy. The wood \s used for making 
artificial limbs, stethoscopes^ etc. The root is also one of the ingredi- 
ents of the Vrahata pancha mula of Dasa mula di kvatha. 

Qmelina Aaiatlca, G. Parviflora* 
Habitat. — Travancore, CoromandeL 
Parts used, — The root, leaves and young shoots. 

Vernacular, — Can. — Kumatha. Cing.— Gatta-demata. Hind.- 

Shiri-^umudu. Malyal— Nilak-kumagh* Sans. — Biddarie. Tarn, — 
Nilak-kimnizh* Tel,— Challa-gumudu. 

Characters, — Leaves opposite, petioled, ovate and tomentous ; 
underneath a sharp hhori lobe on each side ; spines horizontal^ opposite, 
axillary; fluwers huge, on peduncles from the end of tender twigs j 
fruit a berry or drupe. 

Preparations. -^'\i\{\Xh\ox\ (i in 10), Dose, i to 2 fld, ozs. 

Actions and uses -^The root is demulcent and mucilaginouSi and 
given in dysuria and gonorrhoea. 

LIppia Nodiflora. 

Habitat. — Throughout India, Ceylon» 

Parts used, — The herb. 

P^ernacuiar. — Guz., Bomb. — ^Ratalyo, Ratavalio. Beng., Hind* — 
Bukkan. Bhui okra. Mar. — Vakkan, Ratolia. Sans. — Vishira, Yasuka. 
Tarn* — ^Podutalai, TeU — Bokc-naku. 

Characters^ — Small herb ; stem creeping and somewhat coloured ; 
leaves opposite, small, cuneate at the base, and dentate towards the 
apex, somewhat hairy; flowers axillary, very small, whitish or rose 
coloured, and arranged on cylindrical spikes, from j or 3 inches long. 
When the flowers have withered away the spikes with fruits look 
like long Pipali, The plant is slightly bitter. 

Preparations, — Decoction and infusion (l io to). Dose. ^ to I fld. 
ozs* 

Actions and wi<?x.— Demulcent and antiperiodic; given to children 
in indigestion, dysuria and malarial levers. It is commonly given 
in combination \\*ii\i Jirun or Suv4 in gonorrhoea with scalding in the 



472 P&EMXA HERBACEA. 

urine ; mlso used in intermittent fevers. A poultice of it is nsed in 
swollen cervical glands. Chronic indolent ulcers heal readily under 
its use. A paste of it is applied to promote suppuration in boils. 

Premna Herbaeea. 

Habitat. — Himala)ras, Deccan. 

Parts used, — ^The root and leaves. 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Bhooi-janu Can. — Nayit-yaga. Cing. — 
Siribekku. Mar., Hind., Guz. — Bharangi. MalyaL — ^Tajeru-tdca. 
Noar. Circars — Gunta Bharinjie. Sans. — Bhoomi Jambuka, Bhooi- 
jam, Hangika, Bririgaja, Kardhaka« Tam. — Shiru-tek. TeU — Gunta 
Baringa, Gunta BharingL 

Characters. — Root in pieces, from | to i inch in thickness, with 
numerous woody knots of a whitish brown colour ; root bark scabrous 
and brittle ; taste peculiarly bitter and pungent ; wood hard, tough, 
arranged in concentric rings, and of a whitish colour, leaves cuneate, 
ovate and dentate at their margins ; when fresh of a darkish colour. 

Constituents. — The root contains an orange brown, acid resin, 
soluble in ether, alcohol, and alkaline solutions, traces of an alkaloid, 
also a quantity of starch, but no tannin. 

Preparations. — Decoction (i in 20). Dose, i to 2 fid. ozs. 

Actions and uses. — ^The root is stimulant, alterative, and bitter 
tonic, and used in catarrhal affections of the lungs, asthma, cough, fever 
and scrofulous diseases. The leaves are alterative and used in fever, 
cough, rheumatism, &c. As a poultice, the leaves are used in promot- 
ing the suppuration of boils. 

Premna Inte^rifolia. 

Habitat. — Coast of India, Ceylon. 
Parts used. — ^The root and leaves. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Bhut-bhiravi. Guz., Bomb. — Airana-mula, 
Arani. Can. — Takkile. Hind. — Ganiari, Agetha, Arani. Malyal. — 
Appel. Mar. — Takali, Chamaree. Sans. — Arani, Agani, Mantha, 
Hari-mantha, Vahni-mantha, Gani-karika. Tam. — Munnay. TeL — 
Ghebu-nelli. 

Characters — Root thick, of a lightish brown colour; bark smooth, 
and light brown; leaves opposite, petioled, serrated at the margins and 
smooth. 

Constituents. — A resin, a bitter alkaloid, and tannin. 

Preparations. — Infusion of leaves, and decoction of the root 
(i in 10). Dose, i to 2 fid. ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Stomachic, alterative and tonic. The infusion 
of the leaves is used in eruptive fevers, colic and flatulence ; the decoc- 
tion of the root is given in gonorrhoea during convalescence from fevers; 
also in rheumatism and neuralgia. 



VITEX AGNUS CASTUS, 



473 



Premna TattenBis. 

fnhftnt — Fiji Islands. 
tart^ used, — The root bark and leaves. 

Comdtuents, — The leaves contain starch, potassium chloride and 
a volatile alkaloid— longine. The bark contains sugar, pectin, volatile 
oil, &c* 

Pref^aratiotn, — A compound fluid extract known as Tonga — a 
proprietary nostrum — prepared from this root as well as from the 
roots of Kaphidaphhora vitensis and Kipipremium mirabile, Dose^ 
i to 2 fld. drs. 

Actions and uses. — Antineuralgic and analgesic; given in hemi- 
crania, tic-douloureux, occipital and trifacial neuralgias, painful 
aflfections of the eyes, &c It is superior to quinine» gelsemium and 
croton chloral. But recently it has been superseded by the new 
analgesic remedies, such as anttpyrine, phenacetin, exalgene &c. 

Teotona Orandis. 

//ij^iV/i/.— Concans^ W, Deccan Peninsula, Central India, 
Burmahi banks of Taptee and Godavery, 

Paris usrd. — The fruit, wood and tar. 

Ptrfiacisiar. — Arab. — SAj. Beng. — Segun. Burm. — Ky-won. 
Can.— Jadtii, Tegu. Cing. — Ttkka. Rng— Teak tree, Indian oak. 
Gui., Mar., Duk . Hnid, — ^Sfigun, Sagwan* SakhCi, Malyal. — Tekka- 
nianim, Jati. Pers. — SXL Sans,^ — Saka, Tam. — Teku-manna. Tel. — 
Tekkoo ihclu. 

Ckamcdrs, — Wood hard ; colour light, or yellowish ; odour some- 
what aromatic ; wood tar, black and opaque; bark scaly, scabrous, of an 
ash or light brown colour ; flowers small :M\d white, panicles large and 
tcrmiu.itc ; fruits drupaceous and covered with enlarged membranous 
calices ; seeds very oily, of the size and shape of sesamum seeds. 

Omstitumts, — The wood corttains in its cavities, white crystalline 
deposits of calcium phosphate, silica and ammonium and magnesium 
phosphate. It also contain a resin; the seed contains a bland fatty oil. 

Preparations, — ^ Paste of wood. 

Actmns and uses* — Local refrigerant and sedativ*e. The wood 
brayed in water is used as a local application for the relief of headache, 
toothache, and to subdue the inflammation and irritation of the skin set 
up by the use of marking nuts and cashewnuts; it is also used for 
dispersing inflammatory swellings. The oil of the nuts is used 
to proriioic the growth of hair and also to cure itchiness of the 
skin. The bruised seeds with palasa papada are used as varalians over 
the pubes, in partial suppression or retention of urine. 

Yitex Agnus CastUB^ 
/TiiAiVtf/.— India, Syria and Persia, 
Parts used, — The berries. 



474 VITBX NEOUNDO. 

Vernacular, — Pers. — Panjangusht, Arab. — Athlak. Mar. — 
Ranuka bija, Sambhalu, Ka-lija. 

Characters. — The drug consists of very grey small and extremely 
hard fruits, resembling fresh figs, obovate or globular, lower half 
covered with a tomentose calyx ; apex of the calyx dentate, base 
presenting a small stalk ; berry wrinkled, smooth, of a brownish colour, 
consisting of small 4-celled cavities, each containing one yellowish • 
brown small seed ; taste of the seed oily and pungent. 

Consttiuenis. — Bitter principle, called castine, a volatile acrid 
substance, a free acid and fat oil. 

Preparations. — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, ^ to i fid. oz. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant, diuretic and alterative ; given in 
enlargement of the liver and spleen and in dropsy. They are given 
with pipali in hiccough. 

Yitez Negondo, Y. Panioolata. 

Habitat, — Ceylon, throughout India. 

Parts used. — The root, fruit and leaves. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Athalaka, Fanjangasht, Zukham-satil . 
Bomb. — Katari. Burm.-^Kiyou-bhin-bin. Can. — Lakki-gida. Cing. — 
Sudu-nikka. Duk — Shumbali. Eng. — Fine-leaved chaste tree. Guz. — 
Nagoda, Shamalu. Beng., Hind.— Sanbhalu, Nishinda, Nirgundi. 
Malyal — Ban-nuichi. Mar. — Nigudi Lingura. Panj. — Banna. Pers — 
Panjangusht, Sishan. Sans. — Niragfindi shveta-surasa-vrikshaha 
Sindhuvara, Sendhuka-Sephalika-Sveta pushpi Pushpanilika. Tam. — 
VellaiNoch-chi. Tel. — Tella-v6vili. 

Characters. — Shrub generally of an ash colour ; leaves digitate, 
opposite, from 3 to 5 foliolate, on longish slender petioles ; leaflets, 
lanceolate, entire, 3 larger, petioled, 2 smaller, sessile ; under surface 
white and tomentose, upper surface greenish, smooth and shining ; 
flowers minute, and of a light blue colour ; taste bitter and nauseous, 
odour feebly nauseous. 

Constituents. — The leaves contain an essential oil and resin ; the 
fruits contain an acid resin, an astringent organic acid, malic acid, an 
alkaloid and a colouring matter. 

Preparations. — Medicated baths, decoction of the leaves (i in 10). 
Dose, ) to I fld. oz. 

Actions and uses. — Alterative, aromatic bitter and anodyne. The 
decoction is used in colic, dyspepsia, rheumatism and worms; locally the 
leaves, bruised, are applied to the temples in headache, and as varalians, 
over contusions, sprained limbs, rheumatic painful joints, leech 
bites, and also over the swollen testicles due to suppressed gonorrhoea. 
It is largely used as a vapour bath in febrile conditions. The fruit is 
resolvent and emmenagogue, and used in enlargement of spleen and in 
dropsy. The leaves are used to preserve rice and clothes from the 
ravages of insects. It is placed between the leaves of books to preserve 
them from insects. 



ATROPA BELLADONNA. 



475 



Titex TrifoUa. 

Habitat. — Coromandel, Concani Deccan. 

Parts used, — The leaves. 

P'cniacular. — Arab — Aslage-Abi» Burm. — Kiyubhan-bin. Can. — 
Nira-lakki-gidda. Cing, — Valuru. Bens?., Duk.— Pani-ki. Shumbala. 
Eng, — Indian wild pepper. Hind.— Nichmda Siduari, SambhMu, 
Malyal. — NiT-Tioschi, La^ondi. Pers* — Panj-angushte*^bi, Sans* — 
Jela*nirgundi, Sindhuka, Surasa. Vrikshaha, Talnirgundi. Tarn. — 
Shirunoch-chi. TeL — Niru-vivilli. 

C///imc/^r^*— Leaves ternatei leaflets ovate^ acutei entire, hoary 
beneath ; flowers terminal, violet, and racemose. 

f^eparatiQfis.'-lniuiion of leaves. Dose, J to i fld. o«. 

Actions i3w^/w5^y.— Alterative, diuretic, anodyne ajid demulcent ; 
used as dry hot fomentation in sprains, contusions and rheumatism* 
The infusion is given in intermittent fevers with scanty urine, rheu- 
matism, enlargement of the spleen, &c. 

Atropaoeae or the Deadly Night shade family. 

Characters, — This order Agrees with solanaceae in most respects, but 
differs from it in ihc .TStivation of their corolla, being imbricated 
instead t*f valvatc In one or more of the stamens being steiile, anthers 
being dehiscent lotigitudinally. 

Habitats — Native of tropical regions. 

/Vo^^r/f^j.— Many species arc powerful narcotics* Some produce 
dilatation of the pupil. 

Atropa Belladonna, B. P* 

Atropa from Atropos, otieof the three Fates which cuts the thread 
of life, in allusion to its poisonous property. Belladonna from bella, 
beautifutt donna, a lady. The berries were used by Italian ladies as a 
cosmetic and to dilate iheir pupils to give a handsome appearance* 

Habitat. — W, Himalaya, Persia, hedges in mountainous districts 
of Central and S. Europe, United States. 

Parts used. — The root. — Belladonna radix. B. P., and the fresh 
leaves and branches. Belladonnse Folia, B. P., fresh juice of the leaves 
and young branches, 

/Vr«/7cw/«r.— Beng. — Belladonna. Eng. — Deadly nightshade* 
black cherry. Hind. — Suchi. Pers. — Inab-eih-thaltb. 

Characters, — ^A perennial herb, stems thick and smooth \ leaves 
smooth, alternate^ 3 lo 6 inches in lenj^th« stalked, ovate, tapering or 
acuminate, entire and unequal ; pubescent when young, of a greyish 
green colour, of a feebly bitterish and subacid taste and disagreeable 
odour. Flowers solitary, pcnduluiis, dark purple, bell-shaped and 
glossy; berries black, large and shining* of the size of cherries^ of a 
foetid odour and nauseous, bitter taste. The root is large, fleshyi 



476 



ATROPA BELLADOKKA, 



cylindrical and tapering ; about an inch thick, covered over with a 
thick light brown bark which is wrinkled longitudinally. Fracture 
transverse and short ; internally whitish and starchy ; taste bitter and 
acrid, without any odour. Dose, powdered leaves I gr., powdered 
root 1 gr. 

Constihitnis, — The root contains hyoscy amine, atropine, belladon- 
ine, atropamine, atrosin, a colouring principle, malic acid and starch. 
The leaves contain, in addition, choline, albumen, gum, asparagin 
or altheint crysatropic and succinic acids, nitrates and ash, 14 p. c* 

Atropina, Atropine, B. P., an alkaloid obtained from leaves or 
root of Atropa Belladonna. To obtain it, agitate the alcoholic tincture 
of the root with slaked lime, remove resiii and fat, add sulphuric acid 
to precipitate the dissolved lime and filter. The filtrate contains 
atropine sulphate. To this add potassium carbonate in excess to 
precipate atropine. It occurs as colourless acicular crvstals or powder 
without any odour and bitter acrid taste. It has an alkaline reaction, 
becoming yellow on exposure to air ; soluble in water (i in 300), in 
alcohol (I in 3)* chloroform (i in i), oleic acid and ether (l in 36), and 
olive oil (i in 40) ; very soluble in glycerin. It decomposes with caustic 
alkalies into tropin and tropic acid. Dose, jj^ to ^Jo gr. 

Atropina* sulphas, B, P, — atropine sulphate — occurs as colourless^ 
or white crystals without any odour, and of bitter nauseous taste, and 
of a neutral reaction ; soluble in water (r in 1), alcohol (i in 10), inso- 
luble in ether and chloroform Dose ^\^ to ylj^ gr. Oleatum .Atropina; 
(i in 40) used as local anodyne. Linimentum Atropinae (i in 100) also 
used as local anodyne. Unguent um atropinse, B. P. (i m 50). Injectio 
atropinae Hypodermica, 4 grains of sulphate to i ounce, Dos^e, i to 
2 ms, ; for morphine poisoning and to check haemoptysis, Injectio Mor- 
phinae et atropina.- Hypodermica. 3 minims contains \ grain of acetate 
of morphia and ,*^ grain of sulphates of atropine. Lamella; Atropinae, 
B,P., containing j^^q^ gr. of atropine sulphate. Hypodermic t.iblcts 
containing ^^j, grain alone, or with morphine sulphate. Liquor Atropinic 
Sulphatis, B. P, ; gr, i in no ms. Dose, \ to i ms. Pilulie Atropinie 
i'o g''' ^f atropine given to check night sweats, Pilulas Atropinae Ar- 
senici et Quininae — contains quinine sulphate 18 grs., solution of arsenic 
J2 ms,, solution of Atropine sulphate i m, Extract Gentian 20 grs. 
made into 12 pills, used for catarrh. Vaselinum Atropinse (i in 120 of 
vaseline); Atropinse salicylas, soluble in water (! in 20); Liquor 
atropine salicylas, Atropine ^ gr, ; Salicylic acid | gr. ; water 1 oz. 

Homatropine — ^a derivative alkaloid obtained by the action of 
baryta water, or dilute hydrochloric acid upon amygdalate of tropin. 
It occurs as white crystals or powder, soluble in oih, sparingly 
soluble in water. Dose yi,^ to^^ gr. Oleum Homatropine 2 p»c. in 
castor oil, and with 2 p. c, cocaine for the eyes. Honiatropinae 
Hydrobromidura B.P. — Colourless crystals, freely soluble in water 
(1 in 6), and absolute alcohol (l in 133), Dose f^ to jV g^- LamclliB 
Homatropinae, B.P. — contain ^^j gr. in each. Homatropinac Hydro- 
chloridum, similar to above. Homatropine Salicylas, similar to 
Hydrobromido. Guttae Homatropinac 4 grs. of the Hydrobromide to 



ATROrA ilELLA.rx)NNA* 



477 



1 oz. Injectio Homatropinae Hypodermica (i in 120.) Dose* i to 
6 ms. Mydrine— a mixture of Ephedrine fan active principle of a 
Japanese Genttau) and Homatropine (i in loo). 

Prrparafions,—0{ the fresh leaves and young branches, Extractum 
Belladonna? Viride, B.P., green extract of Belladonna* Dose, ^ to i gr. 
Chloroform Bclladnnnae, 1 of root in i^ of chloroform ; mixed with 
olive oil (i to 3) used as an application to painful rheumatic affections* 
Collodium BclladoruKeor Emplastrum Belladonna P^luidum, — contains 
collodion, belladonna and camphor, used as application to painful 
affections of the breast. Empiastrum Belladonna, B,R — contains 4 or, 
of the liquid extract with resin plaster 5 ozs. Porous plaster and Plaster 
Mulls — contain 30 p.c* of Belladonna. Extractum Belladonnze 
Alcoholicum B*P* — ^Prepared from the liquid extract, containing l p.c, 
of the alkaloids of the root. Dose, ^ to 1 gr. Extractum Belladonnae 
Liquidum, B, P.— liquid extract of Belladonna root, standardized to 
contain j of a grain of the alkaloids in 1 10 ms. Glycerinum Belladonnae 
(1 in 2), applied to boils to reduce pain and mflammation, and to the 
breasts to suppress milk. Linimentum Belladonna! B. P. 1 of liquid 
extract of the root in 2. Liniment urn Belladcnjnae Compositum — i 
Chloroform Bclladonmc lo 7 Linimentum Belladonnie, Linimentum 
Belladonnx ^thereum- crthcreal tincture of belladonna i| of the 
root in i^, more readily absorbed than the empiastrum. 

Pilulse Aloin Belladonna et Strychiniae^ Tonic Laxative granules, 
containing aloin, J gr. ; extract of Belladonna^ ^ gr. ; strychnine, y^^''* 
For habitual constipation, Pilulae Ipecacuanlue Belladonnae et nucis 
vomici; belladonna cough granules— ipecacuanha, J gr. ; extract of nux 
vomica, i gr. ; extract of belladonna, -j'g gr. For cough. Pilulae 
Podophyili Belladonna ct Strychnm^e ** Tonic Liver granules,^' 
podophyllin, i gr», extract of belladonna J gr., strychnine ^^j gr. ; 
given in hepatic disorders, Succus Belladonnae, B. P, Dose, 5 to 15 
ms. Suppositoria Bclladonnie, each containing ^V ST- ^^ the alkaloids* 
Tinctura Belladonna*, B« P. (1 of liquid extract in i^)* Dose, 5 to 15 
ni&. Unguentum Belladonnae, B. P. — contains liquid extract of bella- 
donna 2 oz, to 2^ ozs. of benzoated lard. 

Actions ami mes. — Bellademna is mydriatic, antispasmodic, 
anodyne, diuretic and lactifuge. In small doses, it is a cardiac, respira- 
tory and spinal stimulant. In large doses it depresses the respiratory 
centre in ihe medulla and causes contraction of the systemic arterioles 
through the sympathetic. The gastric and intestinal secretions arc 
diminished at first, but are soon reproduced in larger quantities. There 
is disturbed vision (even by a very small dose of atropine). Dilatation 
of the pupils occurs if the drug is locally applied or taken internally. 
It paralyses motor ocuU, increases the power of radiating fibres of the 
iris and lessens that of the circular fibre. An erythematous rash 
resembling the eruption of scarlatina appears on the skin and fauces, 
with desquamation of the epidermis and sometimes sore throat. In 
poisonous doses the heart becomes depressed, and the congestion of the 
brain leads to headache. The spinal cord being aflfected, there is 
complete motor paralysis, the sensation being unimpaired, ending 



47^ ATROPA MANDRAGORA. 

in delirium, coma, convulsions and death. Internally atropine 
is used largely in poisoning by opium, physostigmine, hyoscyamine 
and in mercurial and idiopathic salivation. Belladonna is given in 
congestion of the brain and spinal cord, in congestion and inflamma- 
tion of the lungs, bladder, kidneys, breast, pharynx and tonsils, and 
of the nasal and other respiratory passages. It is a good remedy in 
superficial erysipelas. It is given in excessive expectoration, profuse 
sweating of phthisis or that due to other causes and in spermatorrhoea 
and seminal weakness ; also to check incontinence of urine in children 
and in constipation due to atony of the bowels and in paralytic affec- 
tions. It is also used as an adjunct to other purgatives. It is used as 
an antispasmodic in epilepsy, chorea, spasmodic asthma, whooping 
cough, puerperal convulsions, colic, spasms of the sphincter ani and 
urethra and bladder. As a sedative and anodyne it is given to relieve 
pain of rheumatism, gout, neuralgia, sciatica, tetanus, hydrophobia, 
dysmenorrhoea, cancerous and pelvic affections, &c. Locally it 
is applied to deaden pain in neuralgia, inflammatory condition 
of the tissues beneath the skin and of palpitation of the heart. 
It is applied over the breasts in women to dry up milk, and 
on boils and carbuncles to prevent suppuration. Atropine is hypo- 
dermically used in sweats of phthisis and in sudden failure of the 
heart from ether or chloroform inhalation. In lead poisoning, it 
is given in combination with potassium iodide with great success. 
Its chief use is, however, in ophthalmic practice, where atropine or 
homatropine, and its salts are largely used to produce mydriasis for 
ophthalmoscopic examination. It is used to lessen pain, to paralyze 
accommodation, and to diminish intra-ocular tension and in iritis, ulcers 
of the cornea and glaucoma, it is also used with success as an 
antidote to pilocarpine. It is given as an haemostatic in profuse 
uterine haemorrhage, and in haemoptysis with marked relief. There is 
perfect physiological antagonism within certain limits between 
atropine on the one hand and opium, physostimine, ergotine, 
muscarine, aconite, bromal and prussic acid on the other. Atropine 
and its salts have the property of checking night sweats, uterine 
discharges, milk, saliva &c. 

Atropa Handragora, A. Aonminata, Handragora OflSoinallB, H. 
Antnmnalls, H. Yemalis. 

Habitat. — Levant, South of Europe, Central Asia, North of India. 

Parts used. — The root. 

Vernacular, — Arab.— Ast rang- Dastam harysh. Eng. — Mandrake. 
Hind. — Lakmuni, Lakhshmana, Putrada, Rakta Vindu, Bhagner, 
Luffat. Indian Bazaar. — Lebruj, Malay. — Lufsihat. Pers. — 
Mardami, Giatya bruz. Tam. — Katav jati. 

Dastam Harysh, perfuming the hand ; Lukshamana, possessed of 
lucky signs or marks ; Putrada, child-giver ; Raktavinda, a drop of 
blood ; Bhagner, co-heiress. 



ANISOCHtLUS CAKNOSUS. 



479 



Cliarnrfers.^Pcfennh] plant ; root thick, fusiform, of a light 
brown colour, often bifarcating ; leaves radical^ petioled» broad, acuiei 
with undulating edges ; flowers numerous, on pedicles* shorter than 
the leaves. Fruit, a berry, yellow, round, of the size of a crabapple. 
Taste nauseous, odour acrid. 

Constituents. — A basic substance, isomeric with hyoscyamioCi 
known as mandragorine. 

Actions and nses. — Sedative, narcotic and cholagogue. The 
root b^rk and leaves are local anxsthetic and applied to painful 
swellings. In actions it resembles belladonna, but weaker. Like 
daiur.i, it is said to increase the sexual excitement in both sexes. 
Mandragorin is very drastic. The chief interest lies in the various 
myths connected with the fancied resemblance of the root to the 
human form. 

Lablatsd— The Labiata or Tulasi family* 

Generai Characters* — Herbs or shrubs, usually with square stems ; 
Ives strong, scented, opposite, cxsiipulate and generally serrated; odour 
^ong and aromatic ; tastf! bitter and pungent ; flowers, axillary cymes 
in vertical clusters^ generally irregular ; !ruits contain from i to 4 
achcncs ; seeds erect, oblong and generally angular, with httJe or no 
albumen, each seed has a small scar at its attachment- 

Habitat,—^n'i\c% of temperate climates. 

Pmpfrtu!S,—T\\2y arc free from any delcterinus properties. They 
^WOund in aromatic volatile oil and bitter extractive matter, ajid are 
therefore carminative, aromatic and stimulant. Many contain bitter 
and astringent principles, and possess tonic and stomachic properties. 
Several species have an agreeable odour and are used as perfumery, 
some are used lor flavouring dishes as lemon, garden thymei and 
marjoram ; some are edible. 

AnisochiluB Camosus, Lavandala Caraosa, ColeuB Bpioatua 

Habitat. — W. Himalaya, Central and S, India, Mysore, Malabar, 

f^ifts used. — The leaves and essential oiL 

Vemacnlar.^Qzn, — Dodda*patri. Hind., Duk.— Sitaki Pangeri. 
Eug. — Thick-leaved lavender. Guz,— Ajmun» Malyal.— Kattu-kurkka 
ch6mara* Mar.— K^purh. Tarn.— Karpura-walli. Teh — R6j4chettu, 
Omanneiaku, 

Characters^ — ^Small plant; stem, erect and tetragonal; leaves petiol* 
ed, ovate, obtuse, crenate, thick^ fleshy, hoary and tomentosely villous 
on both surfaces* 

Constituents, — A volatile oil. 

Preparations, — The juice of leaves. Dose, \ to zfld* drs, 

Actions and uses> — Stimulant, diaphoretic and expectorant ; given 
to children in coughs and colds, and in tympanitis. Locally the 
juice tnixed with sugar and gingelly oil is applied to the head in 

headache. 



480 COLKUS CARNOSUS. 

AniBomeleB Halabarioa, A. Ovata, Nepeta Halabarioa. 
JJaga Fratloosa. 

Habitat, — Travancore, Southern India, Ceylon. 

Parts used, — The herb, leaves and essential oil. 

Vernacular, — Bomb. — Gaozaban. Duk. — Mogbira-kispatta. Eng. 
— Malabar cat mint. Malyal.— Peyi-Meratti. Sans. — Bootan Koosham. 
Tarn. — Iratta-i-pey maruttee. Tel. — Moga-bira. 

Characters. — Shrub with branches, tomentose ; leaves ovate, lan- 
ceolate, crenately serrated above, entire below ; calyx covered with 
viscid pubescence ; corolla white, anthers purple, whorls in racemes. 

Preparations,— \vi{\x^\QXi of leaves (i in 10). Dose, \ to i fld. 
oz. Decoction of the whole plant (1 in 10). Dose, | to i fid. oz. The 
essential oil. Dose, 2 to 5 ms. 

Actions and uses. — Stomachic, carminative, diaphoretic and 
astringent ; used in colic, dyspepsia, catarrhal affections and fevers 
due to teething in children; also in dysentery. As vapour bath 
it is used in fevers and rheumatism. The essential oil is used as 
an external application in rheumatism and as an emmenagogue in 
uterine affections. 

ColenB CarnoBUB, Colens AromatioaB, C. Ambolnions. 

Habitat.— yLo\\iQC2iS^ cultivated throughout India, Ceylon. 

Parts used. — The leaves. 

Vernacular. — Beng — Patherchur. Eng. — Country Borage. Hind. 
— Pathar chur. Mai. — Ovii pina. Sans, — Pashanabhedi. Tam.— Karpura 
valli. 

Characters, — Leaves broadly ovate, very thick, and crenate at 
their margins, from 2 to 3 inches in length ; both surfaces sprinkled 
with minute glandular bodies which resemble dew drops as if clothed 
with white villi and hairs ; under surface highly reticulated, glandular 
hairs numerous, giving it a frosted appearance ; odour and taste 
aromatic and pungent and resembling those of ova. 

Preparations. — ^Juice of leaves. Dose, i to 1 fld. dr. 

Actions and uses. — Antispasmodic, stimulant and stomachic ; used 
in colic in children, asthma and dyspepsia ; also as a local application to 
the head in headache and to relieve the pain and irritation caused by 
the stings of centipedes. It is also given in chronic cough, fever, asthma, 
epilepsy and other convulsive affections. The true ova is ptychotis 
ajowan ; this is called ovd pana from the taste and odour of its leaves 
resembling those of ova. 



HEDEOMA PITLEGIOIDKS. 



481 



Collingonia Canadensis. 

*9vfi.— Stone root, ox baltn, knot root, rich weed, horse weed* 

healalL 

HahitaL — North America. 

Pit r in used, — The rhizome. 

Characters. — Rhizome 4 inches lonjf, with short knotty branches^ 
white within, without odour, and with a bitter nauseous taste. Dose, 
powdered root 5 to 30 grs. 

Constituents* — Kcsin. 

/>^/i'irrf//oj;j.— Tincture (l in to). Dose, ^ to 2 fld. drs. Liquid 
extract, misciblc with water. Dose, 15 to 60 ms. Solid Extract* 
Dose, 2 to 5 grs. Infusion (i to 20). Dose, i to 2 fld. ozs. 

Actions and uses, — Alteraiivi% antispasmodic and diuretic; given in 
genito-urinary affections, such as gravel. It relaxes spasms of the ureter 
and urethra and facilitafes ihc expuhion of smaH calculi. In acute 
cystitis, it is combined with morphia and aconite. It is also used in 
proslatorrlicea, Icucorrhcea, chronic gonorrhcea or ^Icet, when copaiba, 
cubebs and sandal oil have failed ; in Hat ulent colic, in gastro-iniesiinal 
catarrh and catarrhal gastritis due to beer and alcohol drinking, it is 
used with benefit. In biliary calculi it is usually given in warm infusion* 
It is also given as an alterative in relaxed conditions of tissues as in re- 
laxation of the throat, uvula, in chronic pharyngitis and affections of 
the vocal organs. As a general tonic it is given in dyspepsia, anaemia, 
and chlorosis. Ascarides are destroyed by rectal injection of fluid ex- 
tract I to 4 of water. Suppositories are used in tenesmus and piles, 

Hedeoma Pule^ioides (Pennyroyal ) 

Habitat, — North America, New England. 

Ar/ used. — The leaves and tops. 

Characters, — Leaves opposite, short petioled, \ inch long, oblong, 
serrated, glandular beneath ; branches quadrangular and hairy ; odour 
strong and mint-like but repulsive to ins* cts, Heas and mosquitoes; taste 
warm and pungent. Dose, 15 to 60 grs, 

CQUstitnents — Volatile oil, bitter principle and tannin. Oleum 
Hedeomae (oil of pennyroyal). It is a yellowish, limpid liquid, 
odour and taste characteristic, soluble in alcohol and glacial acetic acid. 
It contains hedeomol 33 px\ ; pulegone, formic, acetic and isohcptoic 
acids. Dose, 2 to to ms. 

Preparatmns* — Infusion (i in 10)* Dose, I to 2 ounces, Spiritus 
Hedeomac (1 of oil to 9 alcohol), used externally or as a spray. 

Actions and uses, — Stimulant, carminative, emmcnagogue and 
aromatic. The infusion is given in flatulent colic, indigestion, and sick- 
ness. The hot infusion is useful to check diarrhtea. In amenorrhcea the 
leaves are taken with hip and foot baths, The spirit is applied to hands 
and face to keep away mosquitoes. As an abi>rtifacient it is sometimes 
given in poisonous doses^ often causing death by narcosis, 

31 



4^2 LALLEMANTIA ROYLEANA. 

HyssopoB Offloinalis, H. Panriflora. 

Habitat. — Persia, S. Europe, Sind. 

Parts used. — The flowering plant and husks of the seeds. 

Vernacular. — Zupho. Arab. — Zupha-e-yibis. Hind., Bomb. — 
Jupha. Pers. — Ush-naz-daoud. 

Characters. — A small plant from 6 to lo inches in height, of a 
reddish or brownish purple colour, odour aromatic, like that of sweet 
hay, taste bitter and somewhat acrid ;stem square, very slender and 
thin, obtusely 4-angled, smooth and mottled with a purplish tint; young 
parts covered with small whitish hairs ; root woody, brownish exter- 
nally and white within; flowers numerous and disposed in oblong spikes 
of a brownish or bluish purple colour ; seeds oblong, three-angled and 
of a dark brown or grey colour, mottled with a red tint; leaves opposite, 
linear, punctate on both sides, half folded and hairy. Dose, 15 to 30 grs. 

Constituents. — Volatile oil, bitter principle, tannin, resin, fat, 
sugar, and mucilage. The oil is a pale yellow greenish liquid, freely 
soluble in alcohol. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, ^ to i fld. oz. Essen- 
tial oil. Dose, I to 3 ms. compound syrup containing Zupho 
drs. 2, Tukhm-i-khitmi 4 drs., Khub&zi 4 drs., Jethi madha i^ 
drs., Anjir No. 5, Khaskas 6 drs., Anisun 6 drs., Gule banafsha 3 
drs., Raj Hansa, 2 drs. Kakd&sin 2 drs., Kile drakh 2 ozs., Sopisatan 
No. 40, Unab No. 40, Boiling water 80 ozs. Macerate the whole for 
1 2 hours, then boil down to half the quantity of water and strain. Add 
2 lbs. of sakara and prepare a syrup. Dose, drs. | to i fld. ozs. 

Actions and uses, — Stimulant, carminative, diaphoretic and 
emmenagogue; given in dyspepsia, flatulence, asthma, chronic bron- 
chitis in old people and fever complicated with cough ; also in 
amenorrhoea, rheumatism and sore throat ; the syrup is given in 
influenza, chronic cough, and catarrh of the lungs. 

Lallemantia Royleana, Draoooephalom Boyleanuin. 

Habitat, — Persia, Trans-Indus. 
Parts used, — The seeds. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Bazarula-balank. Duk. — Balanka. Hind. — 
Balangu . Pers. — Tukhm-e-balangu. 

Characters, — Nutlets, black in colour and resembling shajira, shape 
oblong, smooth, or rugous, and 3-angled ; angles, rather sharp ; each 
seed arched on one side and tapering towards the umbilicus, where it 
is marked with a white scar ; surface slightly pitted, marked with 
three nerves on its back ; taste rather acrid and mucilaginous; when 
moistened they become coated with tenacious opaque grey mucilage. 

Preparations.'-'lTiiu^ion (i in 10). Dose, i to 2 fld. ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Expectorant and demulcent ; used in cough, 
irritation of the throat and in gonorrhoea. 

Remarks. — The seeds are sold for those of Mishk-i-taramashi. 



483 



Lanium Album, Urtica Hortua. 

fahitaU — Europe, 

Part^ «aW.— The flowers — Flores uriicas mortuae. 

Preparations^ — Infusion (i in lo). Dose, 2 to 6 drs. Extract. 
Dose, I 10 5 grs. Tincture (i in 8). Dose, \ to i dr, Succus. Dose, 
I to r dr, " 

Arttotis and uses. — Astringent, mucilaginous and hsemostatic ; 
given in metrnrrhagia, diarrhoea, dyseni cry and haemoptysis. Locallyt 
cotton dipped in an alcoholic solution arrests local hxmorrhages, 
like pcrchloride of iron. 

Lavandula Stsohas. 

^r#Ai/if/»— Mediteiranean Coast, Asia Minor, Arabia. 
Pafisf$S€d, — The flower spikes, and a volatile oit distilled from 
flowers. 

Ifrnacular, — Arab. — Ustukhudus. Bomb — ^Ustikhudus, Eng; — 
Arabian Lavender, the m\ — false oil of spike, Guz, — Lavandara 
naphub. Hind*^Alaphaj;ina, Dhatu. 

Characters* — ^Thc drug consists of flowering spikes, elongated and 
hairvi and of stalks slender and covered all over. The bracts are <»f a 
bluish colour and rcticulatud with distinct nerves, broad towards the 
apex and cuncate towards the ba?e ; flowers irregular, and longer than 
the calyx; calyx tubular, dentate and inserted with the bracts. The 
whole drug has a bluish brown colour, agreeable odour, resembling 
that of lavender, taste bitterish and aromatic. The oil is of a pale 
yellow colour, fragrant odour and bitter taste ; soluble in alcohol. 

Constttuenis. — Volatile oil, resin and tannin. 

Preparations. — Tincture ( I in 8), Dose^ \ lo i fld. drs. Spirit 
(i in to). Dose, 5 to 20 ms. Essential oil. Dose» i to 3 ma. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant, nervine tonic, carminative and 
antispasmodic ; given in nausea, flatulence, gastralgia, colic and chest 
afleciions, and lo relieve nervous headache, hysteria, hypochondriasis 
and bilious vomiting ; also given to disguise tne taste and smell of 
nauseating medicines. A fomentation of its floivers relieves local 
rheumatic or neuralgic pains. The oil is used locally to relieve 
nen^ous headache. 

Lavandula Vera, B. P., Common Lavender. 

Habitat. — South Europe, England* 

Paris used, — A volatile oil distilled from flowers — Oleum 
Lavandula, B. P. 

Characters, — A small shrub, spikes elongated and hairy ; stalks, 
slender, and covered with white hairs ; flowers irregular^ calyx tubular 
and inserted with the bracts ; of a fragrant odour and aromatic, cam- 
phoraceous taste. * 

Comtitmnts, — A camphor, volatile oil 3 p.c, resin and tannin* 



484 LEUCAS CEPHALOTES. 

Pfei)araHons, — Oleum Lavandulae, B. P., distilled from flowers 
and stalks. A pale yellowish liquid ; odour fragrant and pungent ; 
taste bitter ; soluble in alcohol and in glacial acetic acid. Dose, \ to 
3 ms. The oil is sometimes adulterated with oil of spike. French 
oij of lavender is of a less agreeable odour than English oil of laven- 
der. Lavender water — prepared from lavender flowers with oil of 
Bergamot and ambergis. Spiritus Lavandulae, B. P. (i in 10). Dose, 
5 to 20 ms., used as a perfume and as a flavouring agent. Tinctura 
Lavandulae Composita, B. P. — oil of lavender 45 ms., oil of rosemary 
5 ms., cinnamon bark, nutmeg, a a 75 grs., red sanders wood 150 grs., 
alcohol (90 p.c.) to make i pint. Dose, \ to i fld. dr. — a constituent 
of liquor arsenicalis. 

Actions and uses. — Similar to Lavandula staechas. The tincture 
is carminative, and given in flatulence, colic^ gastralgia. i^ervous 
headache, and in bilious vomiting to arrest nausea. Flowers are 
employed as sternutatory. 

Leonotis Nepetcefolia. 

ZT^Af/fl/.— Throughout hotter parts of India. 

Parts used. — The plant. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Hejur-chei. Guz. — Matisul, Matijer. Mar. 
— Dipmal. 

Characters. — Flowers, orange coloured ; flower head, globular and 
spinous ; stem straight, four-sided ; leaves opposite, spreading and 
long, cordate, serrate and downy. 

/^^/tfrtf/«b/w.— Decoction of leaves (i in 10). Dose, ^ to i fld. 
dr. and ash. 

Actions and uses. — The ashes of the flower heads with curd is 
applied to ring-worm and to allay itching in skin affections. 
The decoction is a tonic and febrifuge, and given in intermittent fevers 
and during convalescence from acute diseases. 

Lenoas Cephalotes, Lenoas Aspera, L. Linifolia. 

ZTtfiiVtf/.— Himalaya, Bengal, N. India, Deccan, 

Parts used. — The herb. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Halkasa chato. Can. — Tigadi. Guz. — 
Kulmanu phul, Kubo. Hind.— Kubo, Goma, Madh apati, chatra. 
Malyal. — Tumba. Mar.— Tumba, Kumbha, Bahuphul. Punj. — Guldora. 
Sans. — Drona pushpi, Kurumba chitra pattrika, chitrak shupa. Sind. — 
Kubo Tel— Tumini. Tarn. — Thumbay keera. 

Characters. — Herbaceous, hairy plant ; leaves erect, slightly pube- 
scent or lomentose, ovate, oblong serrated, linear, and entire ; bracts 
linear, hoary. The plant contains large globose verticels of numerous 
• white fl »wers. 

Constituents.^ Pi. small quantity of essential oil and an alkaloid. 




48s 



/Vr/tfrn/rows*— The juice. Dose, 5 to 15 tiis. 

AcUoHs and uses, — Stinmbnt, expectorant and apeiient ; given in 
jaundice, cough, nasal and intestinal catarrlL It is also externally 
ipplied iJi skin eruptions. 

Melissa Officinalis Melissa Umbrosa. 

Habitat, — ^S* Europe, Central Asia, Persia, 

Parts used* — The whole plant, the leaves and lops. 

Vernacular . — Arab. — Baklut-ul-Faristum. Bomb.^Badaranj. 

Duk. — Mekka-Sabzah. Eng. — Melissa, common balm, mountam balm, 
lemon balm, citionelle, dropsy plant, balm mint. Hind.— Ram-Tulsi. 
PerSi — Badrunj buyt;h. 

Charactcts^.—lih^ drug is much broken and consists of stems 
and fruit ; stem hairy, quadrangular and of a purplish tint ; leaves two 
inches lon^, peliolaie, ovate, liearl-shaped, and crenate at the base, 
margins serrated, upper surface marked with scattered hairs, under 
surface with glands uir the axiU dI the nerves ; calyx striated, hair^\6ve- 
toothed, each having a strong nerve; corolla not so hairy as the calices, 
rose coloured or brownish purple aud rugous ; seeds four, naked, brown, 
3-angled, with a white patch on each side of the hilum and attached 
to the bottom of the calice**, tirect, angular and of a darkish brown 
* colour, in si/e trstmbling Moluuga ; flowers axillarVt in clusters of six 
and short peduncle. The wholt* drug has a light bruwn colour, and a 

Eculiar aromatic odour or fragrance. rcsembUng that of Banaphash& or 
non ; taste, astringent and bitter, similar to that of Nimbiidd, 

Preparation.^ Aqw^ of leavtrs (l in jo). Infusion (l in 10). Dose, 1 
10 1 fid. ozs. ; cum[>outul spirit to obtain it take citroncllc 10. lemon 

?eel u, nutmeg 6, cinoatnon 3, cloves 3, and spirit 150, and distih 
)ose, \ to I dr. 

Actions ami uses* — Carniinative, stimulant, diaphoretic and 
emmenagogue ; chiefly given along with other diaphoretics and as a 
reflex hing drink in febrile a fleet ions. It is also given in defective 
menstruation. 

Mentha Arvensis, B. P>, Vara. Kperaaoens et 

Qlabrata, M. Piperita, B. P. 

Habitat, — China and Jafjan, 

Parts used.^Th^ essential oil distilled from the leaves, flower tog 
tops and sterns^ and astcaropicn known as menthol or peppermint 

camphor. 

Vfmacuhn,^\T7kh — Nannjul-Habagul Hindi, Chin.— The oil, 
Lintsas J^ipanesc — TIkt nil, Hakans. Aburo, Hatsca. Mar., Beng., 
Duk, — Pudnah. Malay — Putiyiana, Jiamanis. Tani« — Iech*chak. 
Karat, Widda. Tel.— Iga engili kura. 

Characters, — Plant shrubby, with square stems ; leaves opposite, 
eXstipulate and strong scented. Flowers in cymes, ajctUary, arranged 



4^6 MRNTHOT.. 

in a whorled manner. Calyx tubular, s to lo toothed and regular; co- 
rolla bilateral ; ovary, seated on a fleshy disk, fruit achenia ; seed erect 
with or without albumen. The plant abounds in a volatile oil. 

Constituents, — The leaves, stems and flowering tops contain a 
volatile oil, also bitter extractive matter and an astringent principle ; 
the oil is high coloured, very pungent and of a bitter after taste, and 
contains the stearopten, menthol, to which it owes its peculiar odour. 

Preparation. — Infusion of leaves (i in lo). Dose, 4 to 12 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Stems and leaves are carminative, antispas- 
modic and stomachic. The infusion is given as a cooling drinK in 
fever and dyspepsia. 

Menthol, B. P., Henthylio Aloohol, Henthyl Propylphenol 
Hexahydride, Peppermint Camphor. 

Verfiacular. — Baisar. — Phudina-kd-phul. Chin,— Pohoyo. Eng. — 
Menthol. Guz. — Ajmani-phul. Jap,— Halsea. 

A crystalline stearopten obtained by cooling the oil distilled from 
Mentha arvensis, M. piperascens, M. glabrata and M. piperita and freez- 
ing the distillate by means of ice and salt. 

Characters. — It occurs in permanent prismatic or colourless acicu- 
lar crystals resembling sulphate of magnesium, very slightly soluble 
in water, giving it the odour and taste of peppermint, soluble in 
alcohol (5 in i), freely soluble in glycerin, ether, chloroform, glacial 
acetic acid and volatile oils. Entirely volatilized by the heat of 
boiling water. Met with also in pencils or cones. The odour is 
strong like that of peppermint. It has a warm aromatic taste 
and produces a sensation of cold when the air is drawn into the mouth. 
An American variety is known as pipmenthol. Among the natives 
it is known as peppermmt-na-phula, or flowers of peppermint. Dose, \ 
to 2 grs. 

/V^r^/irtf//bi«.— Emplastrum menthol, B.P., (3 in 20) of yellow wax 
and resin. Menthol cones or pencils; menthol lotion 2op.c., Gossypium 
menthol or menthol wool 10 p.c ; used to stuff nostrils in catarrh. 
Menth-Iodol, a combination of menthol and iodol, used for neuralgia. 
Linimentum menthol consists of menthol 3, chloroform 4, and olive oil 
to 16, used in neuralgia, lumbago, sciatica, &c. Menthol cum 
aconitina (i in 500), made in cones, 60 grs. each. Menthol Valerianas 
— " Validolum *' contains 30 p.c. of free menthol. Dose, 10 to 15 ms. 
Menth-oleate — solution of menthol in oleic acid. Menthol Ointment 
containing menthol i dr., zinc oxide i dr., carbolic acid \ dr., almond 
oil 10 dr., cerate 10 dr., applied to the mucous membrane of the 
nose in nasal catarrh. A liquid combination of menthol 2 drs., 
chloral hydrate 3 drs,. camphor 2 oz., oil of cinnamon 40 ms., ol-caryo- 
philli 40 ms. alcohol i oz. is applied with a brush on forehead and teniple, 
m cephalagia and migraine. Menthol snuff containing menthol i, boric 
acid 2, ammonium chloride 3, used as a local stimulant in nasal 
catarrh. A compound liquid preparation triturated with equal 



MENTHA PIPERITA. 



487 



weights of menihoK thymo!, phenol, camphor, chloral and croton 
chloral, is applied on cotton wuol and usea for allaying toothache 
in decayed lecth. Tinctura Menthol Etherea (i in 8), Pigmeiuum 
Mtnihul I tt» 4 of olive oiL Menthen^ a hydrocarbon obtained from 
menthol — a clear fluid which dissolves in alcohol, ether and beuzin. 

mictions atui.u^ea, — Analgesic, anodyne, antiseptic, general and 
cardiac stimulant and antispasmodic; given internally in ten drops of 20 
p. c, solution in vomiting of pregnancy, in low states of the system, in 
colic, gastralgia, fl^tulenc e and other stomach and bowel complaints. 
Rxternally as an antiseptic and local anaesthetic it is applied to the 
surface and menthol cones are rubbed to relieve pain, heat, itching and 
[smarting. A saturated alcoholic solution is pamted over the affected 
nerve in neuralgic affections, such as sciatica, toothache, headache, tic 
douloureux^ rheumatic pains, pleurodynea, &c. Its application is also 
used in parasitic skin diseases. A spray or vapour containing 20 p.c* 
of menthol, is u^ed in nasal catarrh and in violent sneezing, influenza 
and tn tubercular laryngitis* 

Mentha Piperita, B^R, H. Hirsuta, M, Crispa, M. Canadentei 
Mentha Inoana, Mioromeria Capitallata. 

HabitaL — Asia, Europe, North America, Northern India, Thibeti 
Himalaya. 

Parts iiser^. — The leaves, tr«ps and mi essential oil, 

t'eniticuiar, — Bomb. — Peparaminta. Eng. — Persian Peppermint, 
Hind. — Piparaminta. 

Charactci s, — A jierenntal herb with the root stalks creeping with 
long suckers, by which it multiplies; stem squareand purplish ; flowers 
5-toothed, purplish, in terminal conical spikes ; leaves oval, lanceolate, 
sharply serrated, and glandular ; odour of the plant very powerful and 
atromaUc, but refreshing ; when put upon the tongue ti produces a 
pungent and cooling sensation, followed by numbness; when swallowed 
it gives diffusible warmth in the abdomen. 

Constituents. — A volatile oil» 1 to I J p c, menthol^ resin, tannin 
and gum. Volatile oil — oleum menthic piperitit-e, B. P. Prepared 
from the leaves by distillation with water or steam— a colourless or 
yellowish green, thick and viscid liquid, on exposure becoming brown ; 
odaur peculiar and pungent, ta!*te hot, camphoraceous and bitterish 
followed by a stusution uf coldness when air is drawn into the 
mouth ; it is soluble in alcohol (r in 4). It contains chiefly a crystallinis 
stearopten known as menthol, or mint camphor, and a liquid turpene ; 
also glacial acetic acid, and carbon bisulphide. Dose, ( to 3 ms,; the 
stearopten is obtained by cooling the oil. 

Ptcparations.—Sxihnm Menth^e Piperita: B.P. (i in lo). 
Dose, 5 to 20 ms. Aqua Mentha Piperitir, B. P,^ — peppermint water, 
77 ms. of the oil in one and a half gallons of water and distilled to |« 
Dose, i to 2 oz. Pilula Rhei Composita. B. P. Dose, 4 to 8 grs. 
Infusum mentha: (i in 10). Dose, ^io i M. oa». 




488 MENTHA SYLVESTRIS. 

Actions and uses. — ^The leaves are aromatic, stimulant, carminative 
and antispasmodic, and given in vomiting, gastric colic, cholera^ 
dysentery and diarrhoea. In flatulence, it removes the flatus at first by- 
its stimulant action and then exerts a sedative action on the bowels ; it 
is also given in dysmcnorrhcea with tea, in weak digestion, palpitation 
of the heart and in hiccough ; as a corrigent, it is given with purgative 
medicine to prevent griping. Oleum menthae piperitae possesses the 
action of peppermint in a very high degree. As a powerful local 
anodyne, anaesthetic, antiseptic and germicide, it is superior to carbolic 
acid, iodoform and iodine, and is used as an antiseptic inhalation 
in phthisis and diphtheria ; as an anodyne, it relieves the pain of 
su()erficial neuralgia, and is also used used locally as a counter-irritant 
in rheumatism. A lotion of the oil 5 ms. with borax 60 grs. and water 
16 ozs. is used in pruritis caused by irritating discharges ; it also allays 
the pain of herpes zoster. The solution (i in 2,000) is given as germi- 
cide in cholera* 

Mentha Sylvestris. 

HahitaL — Cashmere, Temperate Himalaya, Pesria. 

Parts used, — The herb, leaves, flower tops and oil. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Tudanaj. Bomb. — Pudina. Can. — Chetin 
vmaragu. Eng. — Wild mint, wild spearmint, crisped or curled mint. 
Guz. — Phudino. Mar. — Vaialau. Pers. — Pudang. 

Characters, — Leaves oblong, obovate, lanceolate, subacute, serrate 
and hoary beneath ; whorls in terminal spikes; calyx toothed, triangular 
or lanceolate ; corolla hair\% glabrous within ; nutlets pale, smooth and 
brown ; odour fragrant ; taste mild, hot and somewhat pungent. Dose, 
30 to 00 grs. 

Constituents, — A volatile oil similar in composition to peppermint, 
but differing from it in odour and flavour ; resin, gum, and tannin. 

Preparations, — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, | to 2 fld. ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant, carminative and stomachic ; given 
in hiccough, vomiting, etc. A vapour of the leaves is largely inhaled 
with olen chaha in catarrh and fevers. 

Remarks. — Fudina is a generic name, used for the plants of the 
mentha species. 

Mentha Yiridis, B.P. 

Habitat, — Europe, the Canaries, the Cape of Good Hope, N. 
America. Cashmere, United States. 

Parts used, — The leave> and flower tops ; also an essential oil. 
Oleum Menthae Viridis, B. P. 

Vernacular. — Eng. — Spear mint« Hind. — Pahadi phudina. Pers. 
— Phudina kohi. 

Characters, — Leaves 2 to 3 inches long, sessile, serrate, glandular, 
nearly smooth ; branches square ; herb is mostly green, of an aromatic 
odour and pungent taste. On drying it loses about 75 p. c. of its aroma. 
Dose, 30 to 60 grs. 



BfARHUBIUM YULOARK. 



489 



\^^nslitue9Us* — Volatile oil \ p.c, resin, gum, tannin. 

Oleum Mentha* Vrridrs, B. P., oil of spear mint. It is a volatile 
oil obtained by distillation. 

Colourless^ pale yellow, or greenish yellow oil, becoming darker 
by age. The odour is characteristic of the plant ; taste hot and 
aromatic* It is soluble in alcohol (1 in 1) but becoming turbid 
when diluted ; soluble in glacial acetic acid and carbon bisulphide. It 
contains terpene, limonene and carvol. Dose, i to 3 ms. 

Pteparations, — Of the leaves and flower tops. Spiritus Mentha: 
Viridis — essence of spear mint, an alcoholic solution containing rhe 
oil 10 pc. and the herb i px. Dose, 10 to 40 ms. Aqua Menthas 
Viridis 77 ms. in l^ gallons of water distilled to two-thirds. Dose, \ 
to I oz. Infusion of the leaves and tops. Dose, l to z ozs. 

Actions and uses^ — Carminative and stimulant, similar to 
mcntha piperita;, but less powerful \ given in cholera, bilious 
vomiting, colicky pain and for the relief of flatulence. 

Marrubium Yulgare, M. Hamatnm, H. Germanioam. 

Habitat, — Europe (waste places), Western Temperate Himalaya, 
Cashmere. 

Parts Hsed^ — ^Thc herb. 

Vernacular, — Eng. — Common or white horehound» East Indian 
Peppermint, Ind. Bazar — Farisiyun, Hashishat-el-kalb (dog*s herb). 

Characters* — Stem branching, quadrangular and covered with a 
white felt; leaves opposite, petiolate, somewhat heart-shaped, pale green 
and downy above, and hoar)' beneath ; flowers axillary, with woolly 
whorls ; achenes four, dark brown ; odour somewhat aromatic and 
muskyp taste pungent and bitter. 

Con j/f/«f« /J,— Volatile oil, a bitter glucoside called marrubiin 
resin, tannin and fat; marrubiin occurs in tibular crystals, of a bitter 
acrid taste. To obtain it treat aqueous extract with alcohol, distil, and 
treat the residue with ether. 

PftparattQUi. — Infusion (1 in 20), Dose, 1 to 2 fld, 023, Juice or 
9UCCUS. Dose, 1 to 2 fld. drs. 

Actions rjf/f/wirs'.^Stimulant, expectorant, deobstrucmt, resolvent, 
and anthelmintic ; in large doses, diaphoretic and diuretic ■ given 
as a domestic remedy in coughs, in chronic bronchitis wiih copious 
expectoration and in dyspepsia. As an alterative, it is given in chronic 
rheumatism jaundice, chronic hepatitis, phthisis, amcnorrho&a 
cachectic conditions, &c. 



Monarda Punctata— Horsemlnt, 



Habitat.— 'Vmit^ States. 
Part^ uied. — Leaves and tops. 










Tdbsaie m. — Okamc Mnmc^&K^ Itm^-askim 




^pvgm an ins^sa^ x^iiifis&. ^rtiir.. 







OCtMUM GRATISSlMbM. 



491 



Ooimtim BmsUioam, 0. AiiiBatQm« Basilioum Cltpatum. 

Habitat. — Persia, Punjab^ Bengal, Oude, and Travancore. 
Paris used. — The herb and seeds. 

Vernaculat^—Ki^h. — Raihan, Shatbasfaram. Burm, — Kala- 
pinzain. Can.— Kam-kasture. Eng,— Common Basil, sweet Basil. 
Beng*. Duk., Guz., Mar, Hind.— Subza, nazbo, Babi lulsi, MalyaL— 
Tirunitru rach-chi* Pers.^Habak-i-kermani, Dab^n-shab. Sans, — 
Vi$hva*tulasi. Tirunitru-pach-pach-ch-ai, Tel. — Vibudi-patri. 

Characters, — Herb erect and glabrous ; leaves petiolate, ovatei 
oblong, narrowed at the base, slightly toothed ; pedicle ciliated ; 
flowers small and while, in simple racemes ; seeds of a brown colour or 
black ; no odour ; taste oily and slightly pungent. When moistened 
with water they become coated with semi-opaque mucilage. 

Constituents. — ^The leaves contain a yellowish green oil, which, if 
kept for a time, crystallizes* and \h then known as Basil camphor. 

/Reparations ^ Cold infusion (1 in 10). Dose, J to i fld. oz< 

Actions and uses, — Diaphoretic, mucilaginous, carminative and 
stimulant ; given in intestinal fluxes, gonorrhcea, catarrh and to relieve 
after-pains in parturition ; also given during the cold stage of 
intermittent fever and to allay vomiting. It is dropped into the ear 
in earache. 

Oeimum Gratlssimam, C. Zeylanloura. 

^ijA/V/i/.— Bengal, Nepaul, Chittagong, Deccan Peninsula (col- 
li vated near temples.) 

finris used. — The leaves and seeds* 

Vernacular, — Arab. — ^Faraujmishk, Can. — Kida Tulasi* Beng.i 
Duk. and Hind.^^Riimatulasi, Banjari. Malyal — Kattiv-tuituva. 
Pcrs. — Raihane-Oaranfuli ; Palang -mishk* B41ankt-khurd (the seed). 
Sails.— Ramatulsi. Tarn.— Elumich-cham. Tel, — Nimma-Tulast. 

Characters, — Plant from 4 to 6 feet high ; leaves drooping, opposite, 
oblong» serrated and smooth on both surfaces with a long petiole ; 
flowers terminal, in racemes with the verticels of six pretty closely 
arranged flowers ; seeds dark brown, larger than those of Tukhameriai 
somewhat pitted and three^ngled ; taste mucilaginous. 



Preparations, — Cold infusion (i in 10). 
and fumigations. 



Do»e, 2 to 8 drs.; baths 



Actt'ons and uses. — Demulcent and carminative ; generally combin- 
ed with other expectorants, in cough mixtures ; also used in urinary 
disorders, such as gonorrhora, scanty and scalding urine, &c* Locally, 
the juice mixed with Gut*i-armani is used as an application to 
swollen hands or feet. Baths and fumigations of tulasi are used in 
rheumatism* 



4<^2 ocmuM pnx>suM. 

<M«iiiwi Sasotam, 0. Hirtotom, O. Tomentoram. 

Habitat, — Throughout India. 
Parts used. — The leaves and seeds. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Badruj. Beng. — Krishna tulsi. Guz., 
Duk., Mar., Hind., Bom. — K&lil Tulasil, Baranda. Burm. — Lun- 
Punzang-zee. Can. — Tulashi-gida. Cing. — Maduru-talla. Eng. — 
Holy Basil, purple stalked Basil. Malyal. — NallatuUuva tulasi. Sans. — 
Tulasi. Paranasa, Vrandi Sarasa, sitah vaya. Tam. — Kuli mitan. 
Tel. — Tulasi. 

Characters, — Leaves opposite, petiolate, oblong or oval, serrated, 
pubescent, entire at the base, minutely dotted and hairy near the 
nerves ; flowers verticelled, small, irregular and of a pink or purple 
colour ; corolla inserted into a hairy toothed calyx ; calyx shorter than 
pedicels, five partite, upper segment curiously revoluted and reniform 
in shape; ovary, four-seeded ; seeds when fresh white, but becoming 
black or ripening, oblong, blunt pointed and somewhat arched ; the 
smell of the leaves peculiarly aromatic, the aroma being chiefly due to 
the presence of oil cells on their surface ; the smell of the flowers and 
seeds very fragrant, sweet and aromatic ; taste pungent. 

Preparations, — Medicated oil ; decoction of seeds (i in lo). 
Dose, ^ to I fld. oz. The medicated oil contains tulasi pana, 
bhuiringani, danti mula vaja, segata chhala, trikatu ; equal parts make 
a paste ; add gora tela and boil ; used as drops into the nose in ozaena 
and into the ears in purulent discharges. 

Actions and uses. — Demulcent, expectorant and antiperiodic ; 
with kalamiri it is given in catarrhal affections of the lungs and 
cough. The powder of dry leaves is used by the natives as snufl"in 
ozaena and for destroying maggots. The paste of the leaves with 
suntha and sapheda miri is given in intermittent and remittent fevers. 
The medicated oil is used as drops into the ears in earache and in 
purulent discharges and into the nose in ozsna. With lime juice the 
leaves are rubbed over ringworm. The seeds are mucilaginous and 
used as a diuretic in scanty urine and in cough. 

Ooimom Pilosom, 0. Hispidnm, BasUicom Indicum. 

Habitat. — Persia, India. 
Parts used. — The seeds. 

Vernacular. — Arab — Habak.Bomb. — Tukamerian. Hind. — Babui- 
tul. Pers. — Tukhm-i-rihana. Eng. — Nimb loke. Garden Basil. 

The word Tuka-merian is a corruption of the Persian Tukhm-i- 
rihina which means the seeds of Rihana or ocimum. The specific 
name is derived from the condition of their inflorescence which is ver}- 
pilose. 

Characters. — Seeds small, black, slightly arched on one side and 
flattened on the other, obloog, and somewhat angular; each seed is 



ORIGANUM MAHJUKA.VA. 



493 



marked ivith a small white scar at one end ; surface very minutely 
pitted ; odour pleasant and Iemnn*!ike ; taste mucilaginous, oily and 
slightly pungent. 

Preparations. — M ucilage . 

Actions and uses. — Demulcent and nutrient \ given in gonorrhcE«, 
strangury and kidney dijvcases ; also in dysentery and cough. The 
jelly is given in spermatorrhaea. 

Origanum Marjorana, Marjorana Hortenais. 

Habitat* — Partu^al to Western Asia, Panjab, Himalaya* 

Ptirts used* — The plant. 

Vernacuhr. — Pers, — Mir^can gush. Bomb, — Kame phatusa^ Eng. 
— Sn-ect Marjoram. Tarn. — Marru. Td— Maruvamu* Ind. Bazar. — 
Maivva, Marzangush is derived from marzan, a mouse, and gush, ear. 
It means mouse car ; in allusion to the greyish downy character of 
the learcs rcsemblini^ a mouse's car. 

Characters^— 'Si\:w\h slender, slightly quadrangular and covered 
with stellate, whitish hairs ; leaves small, thick, ubovate, or cuneatc at 
the baseband covered all over with starry hairs; odour very af^reeable ; 
taste bitter at first, becoming after a timccamphoraceous. Dose, 15 to 
60 grs. 

Consiitnrnts, — A volatile oil, soluble in alcohol, consisting mainly 
of terpene* Dose, 2 to 6 ms. 

/Reparations.— hifusum (i in 10). Dose, J to I fld< oz. 

Actions and uses. — Carminative, stimulant, diaphoretic, emmena- 
gogue and tonic ; given in colic, dyspepsia and dysmtnorrhoea. The oil 
like oleum mentha is used as an application to the abdomen in colic, 
to ihe jnmts m rheumatism, and to the temples in hcmicrania. The 
oil is given internally in flatulence. 

Orlgiuiam Valgare, Qommon or wild marjoram. 

Habitat, — Europe, N. Africa, N. America. 

It is a perennial herb, containing a volatile oil, tannin, resin and a 

bitter principle* 

Properties. — The dried leaves are employed as a substitute for 
China Tea ; the red volatile oil, known as oleum origani, is now 
superseded by oil of thyme or that obtained from Thymus V^ulgaris. 
It is used as a tonic, carminative, emmenagogue and stimulant, 

Orthoaiphon Staminens* 

^aAiV/?/.— India, Java and E. Indian Islands and Australia. 

Parts used, — The leaves* 

P^ernacuiar, — Eng.^ — Javatea. MalyaU — Koemis koctjing, 

t^ Koemis koctjing, meaning cat's moustache. In allusion to the 
lirngtby statoens of flowers like a cat's moustache. 



494 



rOGOSTEMON PATCHOULI. 



Characters, — Leaves in distant pairs, cuneately nirrowed Into the 
petiole, pel io]ate, ovate or ovato-1anceolate« often acuminate, one to two 
inches long, irregularly and coarsely toothed. 

Consiittients. — A glycoside — ^orthosiphonin, in fine crystals, very 
soluble in water, sparingly so in alcohol, very slightly in chloroform 
and insoluble in ether. 

Preparations —¥\md, extract, lo to 30 ms* Infusion (1 in lO). 
Dose, 2 to 6 drs. 

Actions ami uses. — Diuretic and uric acid solvent; under its use 
the urine, which for a long time has remained turbid and thick, becomes 
clear ; given as a remedy in graveli chronic cystitis and pyonephrosis* 

Pogosiemon*ParYifloni8 P. Purpuraaoens, P. Plectranthoidea, 
P* Pnrpurioaalii. 

Habitat, — Deccan Peninsula, Ratnagtri. 

Paris nsed, — The root, and leaves. 

Vernacular. — Mar. — Phangla, Pangra. 

Characters — Plant about 6 feet high, stem smooth and of a purple 
colour; leaves 6 inches long, broad, ovate, and acuminate ; seeds very 
small, black, and shining, of a strong black currant odour, and a slightly 
pungent ta^te. Root woody ; knotted and bark, light brown an«d 
scabrous. The whole plant has a strung black currant odour, 

Cotntituents. — An alkaloid — Pogostemonine, a yellow varnish of a 
slightly hitler taste and mouse-like odour, more soluble in chloroform 
than in ether ; trimethylamine, a volatile principle of the odour like 
that of cedar wood, resin, and an astringent matter. 

Acttons and uses . — Stimulant ; the fresh leaves are used as a poultice 
to clean wounds and to stimulate granulations* The root is used in 
India as a remedy for the bite of Phursa snake (Echis Carinata); the 
fresh root, about the size of an almond, is given internally three times 
a day and the paste of the root or poultice of the leaves is applied on 
the bites. 

Pogostemon Patohoali* 

Habitat* — Sub-tropical Himalaya, Deccan Peninsula, Penang. 

Parts used* — The leaves, flowering spikes, or dried tops and root. 

Vernacular, — Bomb. — Phangla. Beng. — Patcha, Patchauli. Gu2, — 
Picha, NadadA. Malyal— Kottam. Tarn,— Kattam. 

Characters* — The drug consists of broken stem and leaves ; stem 
ascetiding, quadrangular, hairy and of a dark brown or reddish colour, 
slender and pithy ; leaves thick, hairy, obtuse, ovate, cordate, crenite, 
serrated, and of a dark brown colour ; spikes terminal and axillary and 
densely crowded with flowers ; yroma fragrant and agreeable, more 
powerful than that derived from many other plants ; when pure the 
odour is musty like that of Lycopodium, or of old clothes ; taste cam* 
phoraceous. 



SALVIA H^MATOOKS* 



495 



Omsttiuettts, — The dried tops yield by distillation a strong scented 
voUule oil called oil of Patchouli. 

Preparations, — Infusion (i in lo). Dose, \ to i fid. oz. 

Actions and uses, — Diuretic and carminative ; generally given 
along with tulasi hija in scanty urine and in biliousness. As an insec- 
lifugc the herb is kept in the wardrobe todrrveaway flees, ants, moths, 
gnatSf and mo&quitoes ; aJ^o used as a perfume to prevent ravages of 
moths and insects in shawls and woollen clothes^ 

Rosmarinus Offloinalis, B.P, 

Habitats — Mediterranean Basin, Abia Minor, 

Part\ used, — A volatile oil distilled from the flowering tops*— 
Oleum Rosmarini, B. P. 

Vernacular. — ^Arab. — Aklil-ul-Jabbi. Eng. — Common Rosemaryi 
Garden Rosemary. 

Ckaractets. — A shrub ; leaves, ever green, very long^ linear, blunt 
at both ends, margins resolute, dark green, shining above and woolly, 
with white stellate hairs beneath ; odour pungently aromatic and 
camphor-like; taste bitter ; flowers large, bilabiate and bright blue. 

Constituents. — The flowering lops contain a volatile oil, resin, 
tannin and a biiler principle. Oleum Rosmarini rs a colourless, pale 
yellow liquid with odour of the plant and warm camphoraceous 
lastc, readily soluble in alcohol (i in 2). It consists of a terpene 
iiiomeric wiin turpentine and a body allied to camphor. It is an 
ingredient of Linimentum Saponis. Dose, 4 to 3 nis. 

/Vi?/<f rd/iQiM, — Spiritus Rosmarini, B,P. {i in ro). Dose> 10 to 
30 ms, 

Actitms aufi mes, — Carminative, stimulant and diuretic ; also 
emmenugoguc and diaphoretic ; given in hysttria, headache, neuralgias 
and other nervous disorders ; also in flatulence, menstrual disorders ; 
chiefly used as a stimulant liniment for sprains, bruises and rheumatism 
and as a lotion combined with cantharides in alopecia; it stimulates 
the growth of hair. 

Salvia Hamatodss. 

Hahitat. — Throughout India. 

Piarts used. — ^The root. 

fmmtw/ar^-Arab.— Behcn. Beng,^ Lai Behaman. Bomb. — 
IJila Bahaniana. Eng.^ — Blood veined sage. Hind. — Lai a Bahamana. 
Pers.— Bahamani-surkha, 

Characters. — The root which closely resembles that of Paeony is 
shrivelled* and of the shape of quills ; each piece from 2 to 3 inches 
long, about the si^e of a little finger, and of a reddish brown colour ; 
bark soft and can easily be scratched ; surface marked with scars of 
fallen rootlets ; substance very compact and of a brownish red colour ; 
fmelt like that of salama ; taste slightly bitter and resembling musali. 



49^ SAL^TA PLEBSIA. 

CoastittunU. — Fat, tannic ^dd, and a bitter crystalliiie alfainid, 

Bahmanine. 

Ac inns and uses. — ^Took:, astrii^ent, and aphrodisiac. It is one 
of the ingredients of Tarions compound a^ringent decoctioBS and 
aphrodisiac confections. Largely used among the natires for \ 
d^ility, chlorosis, anawnia, amenorrhea, &c. 

SttMa Ofleinlia-Gmfda 

Habitat, — S. Europe. 
Parts used, — ^The leaves. 

Vernacular, — £ng« — Common or garden sage. Hind. — Salbta. 
TanL — Sefa-kas. 

Characters, — Perennial plant ; leaves pedoUte, orate, ohkxig, 
obtuse at apex, ronnded and heart-shaped at base ; finely crenolate, 
thick and wrinkJed, of a gre3rish green cc4oar, hairy, soft and glandular 
beneath, of a strong fr^rant or aromatic odoor and bitter astringent 
taste- Dose, 20 to 30 grs. 

Constituents. — Volatile oil, bitter principle, tannin, rescn, 
extractive and albumen. The volatile oil is greenish or y^owish 
fluid, soluble in alcohol^ and it b composed of terpene, pinene. cineol 
and salvial (thujooe). 

Pteparatums. — Infusion (i in ro). Dose, i to 2 fid. 02s. 

Actkfus and uses. — Stimulant, tonic, anti-emetic, carminative 
and astringent; used in Cevers, dy^)epsiay to check sweatings and coUo- 
quative sweats of phthisis^ in flatulence, as a gargle in sore throat, 
ulcers in the mouth and relaxed uvula. 



Salvia PlaMa* & BnoUala aad & Min/OoL 

HabUaL — Many parts of In<!ia, Bengal, Onde, KhandaOa, Sind, 
Bdnchbtan. 

Parts used, — ^Tbe seeds. 

Vernacular, — Chin. — Chin-khing-kai. Guz. — Kammor kasa, 
Bijaboda. Panj« — Sammudar saka, sathL 

Kamarkasa, from kummar, which means waist or loins, and 
Kasa, to bind. It gives tone to the weak loins. 

Charactets, — Seeds very smalL ellipscid, smooth and of a brown 
colour, smaller than tukhmaria, oblong and angular at their attach- 
ment to the umbilicus with a very small white scar ; sur^ce rugous ; 
those of S. Egyptica are larger : taste oily and mucilaginous. 

Constituents. — Albuminoid 12 p.c: oil i^^ px.: gum, fibre 44 p c: 
and ash 15 p. c. No alkaloid. 

ActKMS and usesm — Demulcent and nutritive : used in gonorrhoea* 
and mcDorrtiagia. They are abo given to promote sexual powers like 
many other demulcent and nutritive drugs, acd also used in leuctMrhoem 
utdt scommI weakness. 



Scutellaria Lateriflora. 

Hnhitnt. — Mui^t places and along ditches, N* America. 

Parts useti,' — The herb. 

Sytt. — Blue skull cap, helmet flowers, hooded willow herb, mad 
^wecd. 

Charm irts — Perennial herb; stems erect and smooth; leaves 
cA-ate, acuminate* Ofipin*ite. serrate and petinlate ; flowers in racemc»» 
fine*stded and leafy ; corolla pale blue, bilabiate ; calyx closed, upper 
lip Jielmct-bhaped ; odour slij^ht and tasie bitter, 

Consffitir/ifs —A bitter principle, volatile oil, fat, tannin, sugar 
and ash. The bitter principle is a crystalline glucnside, soluble in 
ciher* 

Prtf^tutttvma, — Fluid extract. Dose, \ to I fid. *ir. Decoction 
( I m 20). Dose. I to 2 fld. ozs. 

Ak'Uohs and uses, — Nervine tonic and antispasmodic ; gicen to 
calm the nervous system as in restlessness, tremors, spasnij', twitching 
of muscles, hypcracsihesia, and in nerv^ous exhaustion, due to r^fis^ueor 
over excitement ; also in epilepsy, hysteria, chorea, insomnia, delirium 
tremens, neuralgias, hydrophobia, convulsions, tetanus and hiccough* 

ThymQs SerpyUum, T. Vulgaris. 

Habitat, — W. Temperate Himalaya, France, Per^iia, S,-W. 
Europe* 

fhiris nsfi* — A volatile oil, oleum thymi, distilled from the leaves 
nnd flowering tops. 

Vernacular. — Eng,— Wild thyme, common garden thvme— mother 
of thyme. Hind. — Ipar. Indian Ba2aar — H4shi. Panj.— Masho. 
Pers.— Hisha. 

Characters, — Small common shrub j stems and branches quadran- 
gular ; bark pale brown ; leaves \ inch long, «»val, blunt, entire, margin 
revoluic, thick and smooth ; llowers in cymes, pale purple ; odour 
aromatic. 

Constituents, — A volatile oil, tannin and gum. The oil of thyme, 

also known as oleum origani, or oleum thymi, is a yellowish liquid, odour 
strong, of thyme ; taste, aromatic, cooling and punj^ent ; of a neutral 
reaction ; on exposure, it darkens and thickens with age; soluble in 
alcohol (i in 2), carbon sulphide, and in glacial acetic acid. It contains 
thymol, carvacrol. cymene and ihymenc* 

Thymol, B-P., Thymylic alcohol, Thymic acid» It is a stearopten 
obtained from the oil ok garden thyme, horse mint. Bishop's weed, 
&c- To obtain it saponify the oil with caustic soda ; add hot water to 
the solution to separate the sodium thymol from thy men c, and the oil 
will float on the top. Treat the oil with hydrochloric acid, or expose 
the oil to spontaneous evaporation when thymol will be sec free. 
Thymol so prepared is next subjected to freezing to purify it and 
then recrystallised. When prepared from ptychoti^ ajowan, it is 

:t2 




msusmn Sft ^ej^aaaoMt ihui Zxuaaa lassoBr*- Jc iczars n imigwr 
u^^MinrjCf^ irwras xf -tie ^Kwnfo^ itfnar tf smr TiffT* innyar 

:n «ic:usm. 'Slusr. ::niartmm« llh:^e nL ^raciai jczsrc acnt smi nfcair^ 
> hmc 2 ioDUt samhingiAtt v:ni ;:ninr:ii. smniiiir ir im - mxm sl -am, 
!!*n^e.^ >% i ;|r=r, Canacmi — C^TnennL s i iinixiL :■?»»« i i iiraL » Titt 

Uutxiie- ir ^vioer^ii— ^ mtfiius: ^omofuiiuc if arsacni x i» » ^ 

»if rij ysm^u^r irriuuic sm -uitinr^ 3ise. am.* ^rsL. : 

atir .(»e3iu^. ;pt«»a ct ^eumt C^muim: matt riroTngie ars: jir.:: 

/mr9iirjciniC5L — T^f TT^niml uncnear '31 oi pi ^rs. "n ar 
Tjc^ww V :itrtdusdia -if ThwTiiu % ^r^ ai an ix. -»xii i^rrc larminacBr 

^i^ fliuuieft -sf aiuiiim& acut tan^mu* Ljduit TxrrTmii . n Tim** 

Acsmmt smi ^net^ — Tiie -^ » fiimmaor. Tum:. •f^^^Ilt^?Ta^y3plt^ 
ami aciCJ«c^«n'vSc 2iid: ;p3«L jx. 3in*£C£rx:e cr,nirr> unmmtfir ir.c:t 

X :ft 2:>><a jx egxueoB^^ &fficatC7 uf SRac^mu;. ant zarmm. nr 

-^^1^341^ ""^ dbe rJoazx. fa. fj^noa ant ^rxacs. Tie *£ss^ ir± iseif i±^ 
-^'trsxif xife. Fri(s4 T&nims: 21 aaeif as 2 frjacrnnnic r:: aof .rTg?^sn:ii if ia: 
v^c. it8*v V-' ffarrsar^ rsMpof 'fEsfcca^ A* aa anTTW^rir x ^sicKr-i:r rr^ 

;aa^i '^uetvtttt: car^iorac adit aoac '.d : 

^^WA '^ sarames dbe raA OFgMat cc lesiMCT Terx«s jed^ r» Tierr^ 

^vcsce» a %es:aat30» oi htx m die e^cfstsr-sK, :'3|g':^ ir ihe ears^. 

4C£^et^^ ^yf aviae •sadi aitiiwct dark grcaea ccioez. asic or ibe nsccrir* 
tivrr Wdc-^c^ tfr,2ra.r,<. ^t^,:r% :o cx:;c3k pnui£Cr2:i:c, CGica >,:>£ 

'i)f^3:ier^ «iy>xcfiif a»sliy pft fftats^ . r- . Tftfiml aSfCTirri^. i^fsacil 
c^eUifh, is* tbSexc^^ffift, a ihyrhxTSs^ wonas, xa gascnc famwrarkc ^-^ 
lA n>e«»ac:itCEL lyxaSj ad aoa iachiepcic ii k ssed like carb:^>:; ac^d 
;» Mff iffkal ds€rmn^%. sad aii as ontztnenz- 1: keepis c^ m::!sqr^':«E::< : aisc- 
tMh»i m p»vfui%k« Tingwunn^ eczt^aut kci a& a spray cc irha'iTJzc :: is 
aied m whfxj^eog c^^ogii, diphtheria, CQr3rza, h^na^inurkc c< ibe 
^k^rrm aod iarvnx, aod %c<iictimcs trrcn in broochiris aixi phihisis ; 2s 
^ jgarfk in i^>re throat* and broochieaasis ; ^ a m^oiL v^ash i: reoiores 
the odcMr of UXXKCO from the breath. As an inkctsz-n :: is used in 



ZlZll'KORA TBXNIOK. 



4^9 



cuuensi otorrhoea« gonorrhcjsa ; also in uterine leucorrhora ; as a wash 
for wounds, ulcers, skin diseases. Thymacetin is a derivative to 
thymol, as phenacetin is to phenol It is a white crystalline powder, 
slightly soluble in water ; u^ed in neuralgia, headache* like phenacetin. 
Dose, 5 to 15 jfrst 

Zataria Maltiflora. 

Habitat, — Europe, N, America, Arabia, Persia. 

Parts used, — The herb in flower, stems and leaves. 

P*truacular. — Hind. Bomb. — Sat harm. Ind. Ba/ars. — Satar* 
Arab.^ — Baklat-ul JazaL Pers. — Onsh nch* Tarn. — Mridu-marur 
vamu. 

Charactera* — ^Stenis very slender ; bark whitish and covered 
with hairs; leaves thick, oblong. ovate» rounded and studded with 
numerous pits on both their surfaces, each pit ct»ntainrng granules of 
red essential oil; Howcrs very small, ol a light brown coloui and 
studded with hairs ; calyx marked with numerous pits, colour lightish 
brown ; odour agreeable and aromatic ; taste lemon-like, pungent at 
first, hut after a lime giving a kind of burning sensation to the tongue, 
resembling the taste of Ajmo or lenion Thyme. 

Constittiirnts* — The leaves contain resin, tannin, an aromatic 
essential oiU of a minty odour and an alkaloid bitter principle, 

/i'ffiaratiQNs. — Infusion (1 in 10). Dose, i to i fld. oz. 

Attifms and uses. — Stimulant, aromatic and diaphoretic* Like 
7*hyme, it is given in biliaubncss, gastric irritation, levers, ^c. 



Ziziphora Tennior. 

ffabitat, — Persia, Baluchistan. 

Parts used. — ^Thc flowering plant* 

t^cmaruiar, — Rng, — Wild thyme. Ind. Bazaar.— Mi&hk-i-tarama* 
shia. Pers. — Han^a Shirax. 

Characters, — Stents quadrangular, slightly furrowed, of a greenish 
brown colour and covered with small hairs, about i to 3 or 4 inches long; 
leaves thick, of a brown colour, thickly studded with hairs and marked 
with numerous pits ; smell rather aromatic, taste like that of dried 
phiulmo, but sweeter ; ovaries 4, distinct, lobes erect, attached to one 
another at their base and separated a little below the middle, the 
lDbc?i appearing as if they were 4 distmct fruits, placed around one 
anrithcr. Kiich lobe of a lightish brown colour, tapering below and 
marked with ^ to 12 strong nerves. Between the nerves arc pale 
^hite hairs. At the margin of the apex of each lobe there are from 8 
lo 12 teeth lying horizontally and within which there is a circle of 
long hairs. In the middle of the hairs there Is a hole from which the 
seeds escape ; seeds angular and of a darkish brown colour. 

/V4f/^/-(//r'/M5.— Infusion (i in 20). Do*e, | to I lid, oz. 



^^':njtK jfMp-f^sBi. — ^:mulanr,. laminaitr/ji irftronr-mtc. tmTfn*nie- 
4i\(pu» iini -*3?n«!criirint: .: vinniia'n.i rPiiuiina, init. 2iaisiTaiiiin;'» axpt 
ii'^*'*^ :v*iu«: iiaKnaiurn r;|:'«n in iniiqS ant irher ihufr afitcminsa. «nd: 



Hfrjr^w \r miter -ainina;. 'ea-'ytft ufctnatc*- rcc&nnmiuct.. jni ip-i inw/irrT 

^-vsaX^A. i^^3tn.. itta*!r:iu%.«iV8r3L^lttet:: ix-gitiar mann uiinut n i-mx,- 
■sicii- liumuuj: Ji -vssrrx :: -r-jxc .irx- ir -wu..i:uenr .. -atsni^aaLisnuinir rniu-'^i, 

SiritjuKt — 3t. Aaacrxa;, W ihiiii»» ix. E.ir lae. 
/iKrfc jfc'«!f^.. — Tiu: iriic audi rrutiL. 

^iC*: :: livw*r* ii«r\ixz^ riCismi^er :: rruc i iitrTi„ Turjiiai naiiik. x^iimuiir.. 
Cis94f«%4«c., xatnyamtf;.. JitirT]x- .L-unxxitatfsc ;£ ai i3ri[i£UK. -r?H:n' ^ nurr il 
<laflatt!^^ wxaj aiuj: jrtiriraiar mauk Atett.. Tienxucar ir 7111:7 liitj -ii:,. 

Tisiraauj: ^r^igiKt ^J^ msdiH;. TBke - t#u: a ^lir^i.. iiinica. ami ir-iniiiiifX : 

xiacr.-t?^ jCjrii*, i^i^per^ $«t- I'ie xotc imniiiH. nsm. x;iii::siiifc^ 

i/jiu'.^':s2.'^f TuuvGJr ^airihrrr arcHarfc. 

/^^poTMtKm^ — Of lie imc^ Iioxttduc o ft zol Dos*, x i: i o-k-, 

Atly/tii aua ccata — Fmrtir 2&d xslhzrrki lis aciicir. i^ ikii'v bm 

ix^jj^ V^ l£3i£Xat c/joi^-SLitacaii and dcalh. It » AiitJircciisnc ::• mcccr tid- 
Uttliw tvudi Jt» aikiGbcd. esiitz. ogxuxD, difiiSLlis. kL A^ &:: ^j^trsciTe ii is 
^tSi in bcjoiuhk^ vypkx^jii, mabgnaut tnnicis-*, t^vdid?*: r/ioers tTTtrmy. 

«;;ttttijajcr« JiJa-ccitic aoad rc*oiiT«it, and gircai id cci^nW.. rr..iacir:> * *Dd 
isp^cynm^^ Locauiy a pciarbcied eciad «rnh rriTaci o: bci.anrt'iriA i^ 
meC at io^ ;siiDCt><>o c^er padnfu] tesics axkd mamirjE:. Ir. :M&:'.li:is. 
diphliicrrxift aoxl chrosiJc jdsaiijngiiu, si u £? * en imrrcjiliy and pidiiied 
iouilJy* lu j^landnaiT cnlargemems, batmorzhc/tyd^ £^:^rc^ zt the 



PLANTAGO LANCE0LA1A. fOl 

rectum and prolapsus ani, its application is similar in action to those 
of dulcamara and veratrum. The berries are sudorific and given in 
chronic rheumatism and syphih's. 

Plantaginaoese— The Rib wort or Ispaghala family. 

Herbs generally without aerial stems ; leaves radical and ribbed ; 
fl "wers usually small, perfect ; spikes rarely solitary, sometimes 
unisexual; calyx 4 partite; corolla 4 partite, membranous; ovary simple, 
2 Xo 4 celled ; fruit capsular, dehiscent ; seeds one or many, mucil- 
iiginous ; embryo, fleshy and albuminous. 

Habitat, — Native of cold and temperate climates. 

Properties, — The seeds of some species are demulcent and used like 
those of linseed. The roots of some are bitter and astringent. 

Plantago Ispaghala, P. Ovata, P. Amplexicaolis. 

Habitat — Punjab, Sind, Persia, cultivated in India. 

Parts :tsed, — The seeds. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Bazre-katuna. Beng. — Eshopghol. Can. — 
Isabakolu. Eng. — Spage seeds. Bom., Guz., Mar., Duk., Hind. — 
I'thamu Jirun, Ispaghol. Pers. — Ispazah, Shikam-daridah. 
Tarn. — Iskol-virai. Tel. — Isapagala. 

Charade fs, — Seeds ovate, elliptical, concave, half an inch long, 
boat-shaped, translucent, and of a pale brown colour with a pinkish 
tinge. On their convex side is a ridge which commences at one end 
of the seed and disappears about its middle in an oblong scar. On 
their concave surface is a deep channel which is widest in the middle 
and becomes narrower as it approaches the end. In the centre-is a 
scar of a brown colour, and somewhat bifid. It resembles in appear- 
ancc the foot mark of a calf s hoof on a soft clay. They are mucilagi- 
nous to taste and free from odour, 

Preparaitoiis,—Dtcocuox\ (i in 10). Dose, 2 to 4 ozs. 

Actions ami uses. — Demulcent, emollient and diuretic ; used in 
inflammatory and other derangements of the stomach and intestines, 
as in gastric catarrh, dysentery, gonorrhoea and affections of the 
kidneys. Made into a poultice with vinegar and gora tela they are 
applied to rheumatic and gouty swellings; they are also useful in coughs 
and colds. When roasted, they are used with sakara in protracted 
irritation of the bowels in children. Dose, of the seeds, i to 2 drs. 

P. amplexicaulis is found in Punjab and Sind. It furnishes brown 
Ispaghul known as ejaj-pipli (Hind). 

Plantago Lanceolata. 

Habitat. — Europe and United States. 

Parts //j^f/.— The leaves. 

Preparations. — Fluid extract. Dose, 5 to 15 ms. The juice pre- 
served in alcohol or glycerin. Dose, 20 to 50 ms. The paste of 
pounded leaves with glycerin. The dried leaves powdered. 



502 BOERHAVIA DIFFUSA. 

Actions and uses. — ^The juice in large doses is used to check inter- 
nal haemorrhages or haemorrhagical fluxes, menorrhagia, leucorrhoea, &c. 
The leaves are astringent and styptic. Its styptic properties are partly 
mechanical and partly physiological ; it causes stasis in the capillaries. 
The leaves when chewed relieve toothache. A poultice of the leaves 
is used in painful affections as mastitis, erysipelas, burns, scalds, 
bruises and wounds. 

Plantago Major, Plantago Psyllium. 

Habitat, — Persia, Temperate India, Panjab. 

Parts used, — The seeds. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Lasana-el-hamala. Hind., Bomb. — Bara- 
tunga. Eng. — Greater plantain, cart track plant, way bread. Indian 
Bazaars — Bartang. Pers.— Tukhm-i-baratunga, Tukhm-e-b^rhanga. 

Characters, — Seeds small, oblong, or irregularly angled, of a 
darkish brown colour, and marked with longitudinal convolute lines, in 
size resembling asali, but somewhat smaller ; taste insipid and 
mucilaginous, like ispaghula ; smell oily when crushed. Soaked in 
water they become coated with mucilage. Dose, 30 to 90 grs. 

Constituents^ — Chlorophyll, resin, wax, albumen, pectin, sugar and 
a large quantity of mucilage. 

Preparations. — Cold infusion (i in 5). Dose, 2 to 4 fld. ozs. 

Actions and uses, — Demulcent ; used like ispaghula. With 
cardamoms and sugar candy it is given in urinary disorders and dysen- 
tery ; also used in arresting fluxes and griping pain in the bowels. 

Nyotaginaoese— The MarYel of Peru or Gulabasa family. 

Herbs, shrubs, or trees ; stems tumid at the joints ; leaves opposite; 
flowers showy and with an involucre ; calyx tubular, funnel-shaped ; 
stamens one or many, hypogynous ; ovary, superior ; ovule solitary, 
stigma 1 ; fruit a utricle, enclosed by a hard calyx ; seed solitary, 
containing mealy albumen. 

Habitat. — Native of warm regions. 

Properties. — The roots of some species are purgative, some are 
expectorant, alterative and astringent. 

Boerhavia Diffusa, B. Ereota, B. Prooambens, B. Repens. 

Habitat, — Throughout India, Coromandel, Travancore. 

Parts used. — The herb and root. 

Vernacular, — Beng.— Swhet-poorna, Puneranabha. Cing. — Jan- 
tops. Can. — Bileganjali. Eng. — Spreading hog-weed. Guz — Vakha- 
kbapara ; Sadodi. Duk., Hind.— Besha-khapara, Thikri, Sant. Mar. — 
Punanava, Kalivasu, Ghetuli. Malyal. — ^Taludama. San .— Visha 
Khara-para, Sothaghni, Puna-ranava. Tarn. — Mukku-rattai-kiray. 
Tel. — Atika-inamidi. 



IILIS JaLAPA* 



503 



Sothaghni sotha, or soja, a general swelling, and ghni, to kilU U 
means a killer or curer of swellings or dropsy. Punaranava Punaha, 
againi and Nava, new or fresh* The plant has a perennial habit ; it 
develops afresh or becomes neiv again every year. It grows during 
the rains from the old and the same root. 

CAaracier^, — Two varieties; the red and the white. Creeping plant 
with diffuse stalks. Flowers, pale rose coloured and scattered in long 
branches ; root of a light brow^n colour, as thick as a man's finger, and 
from 6 to 18 inches long ; root bark lonuitudinally furrowed and marked 
with knotty scars of fallen rootlets ; seeds brown, oblong, striated and 
rough ; root tough, white and starchy when cut, smell somewhat 
aromatic ; taste corky and somewhat acrid, also bitter and nauseous. 

Prtftaratiouii. — ^Decoction (1 in 20)* Dose, i to 2 fid. ozs. 

^Actifius and «.9rv,— Stomachic, laxative, diuretic, expectorant^ 
Imetic ; given in asthma, gonorrhcea, dropsy, jaundice, enlargement 
le liver and spleen, ascites, anasarca, scanty urine, and internal 
inflammations. As a remedy for scorpion bites, it is applied externally 
and given internally. Pounded leaves are applied over oedematous 
swellings. 

MirablliB Jalapa. 

HahiLat. — West Indies. 

i\irt$ used. — The leaves and root* 

Vernaculaf, — Arab,^ — Shab-el'btli, Beng.^Krishna-keli. Burm. — 
Mizu-bin, Can.— Chandra-mallige. Cing — Sindrika-gahi. Mar,, 
Guz,* Hind.. Duk. — Guh*i-bash. Malyal. — Anti-mantiiram, Eng^^ — 
iMarvel of Peru, four-u'clock plant, Pers. — Gule-a-abbasa, Sans. — 
Sandhyakcli, Krishna-keli, Tarn. — Anthinarlu, Tel. — Chandra-kanta. 

Mirabilis means wonderful. It is in allusion to the flowers being 
of variegated or wonderful colours. The root was formerly supposed 
to be the true jalap plant, and hence the specific name M. Jalapa, 

Characters. — Plant perennial, herbaceous, dichotomous ; leaves 
thick, ovate, acuminate, smooth and of a dark green colour ; flowers red, 
white or yellow, opening at sunset, and hence called four-o clock plant; 
seeds black, muricated and of the si^e of pepper ; tuber cylindrical 
above and tapering below and starchy ; externally dark brown with 
circular rings, intertjally dirty white or greyish ; transverse section, 
presenting concentric rings. The seeds are used to adulterate black 
I>epper, 

Consiitutnts. — The root contains an alkaloid, and ash 6 p.c* free 
from manganese. 

Preparation. — Infusion of the root (i in 10). Dose, i to i fid. 02s. 

Actsona and uses, — The juice, of the leaves is applied to wounds and 
bruises. The leaves boiled are applied as stimulating poultice to boils 
and buboes to hasten suppuration. The tuber is used as a poultice on 
carbuncles. The root has mildly purgative properties similar to those 
of Jalap. 



504 ACHYRANTHES ASPERA. 

Amaranthace8e-*The Amaranth, Cfaolai bhajl or Aghada family. 

Characters, — Herbs or shrubs ; stems striated, green or red colour- 
ed ; leaves entire, wrinkled, simple, exstipulate, opposite, or alternate, 
generally oval, oblong, rhomboid shaped, and green or variously 
coloured ; flowers small spiked, panicled, crowded or capitated, 
bracteated, occasionally unisexual, often having distinct sexes; clayx 3-5 ; 
stamens 5, hypogynous ; ovary free, i -celled ; fruit an Utricle, caryopsis, 
or berry ; seed one or more, black, pendulous, and affixed to a central 
receptacle ; albumen, mealy. 

Habitat, — Tropical regions. 

Properties. — Several species are mucilaginous, diuretic and astrin- 
gent ; some of them contain a large quantity of khara or ashes. 

Achyranthes Aspera, A. Obtasifolia, A Indlca, A. Spicatas. 

Habitat — India. 

Parts used, — The herb. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Atkumah. Beng. — Apang. Duk., Bomb. 
— Aghada. Burm. — Apang. Can. — Utriini. Cing. — Gaskaral-Lebbo. 
Eng. — Prickly cbaif flower. Guz. — Jhinjarwat Hind. — Chirchira, 
Latchirae, Agareh. Mar. — Pandhra-Aghada utrani. Malyal. — 
Katalati. Pers. — Khare-Vtizhgunah. Sans. — Apilaniragaha, Khara- 
manjare, Ash-Agada-kh&ra, Tam. — Na-yurivi. Tel — Antisa-Apa- 
margamu. 

The word Apamarga is from Apd or Ab, water, and Marga, a 
washerman. This is in allusion to a large quantity of alkaline ashes 
the fruits contain, and which is used by washermen, along with water 
for cleaning clothes. 

Characters. — Plant herbaceous, erect ; root angular and longitudi- 
nally furrowed, colour greenish or reddish; leaves opposite andobovate; 
margins wavy ; surface covered with whitish hairs, spikes terminal, 
long, and generally curved about the middle ; flowers small and of a 
reddish colour ; bracts green, old bracts tough, rigid, prickly, and 
adhering to the clothes ; fruits conical, covered with sharp pointed 
bracts, and containing numerous seeds ; seeds oblong and of a shin- 
ing pale brown colour ; taste like that of BAjari grams. The drug sold 
in the bazaar under the name of Aghada bija is the whole fruit. 

Constituents, — The fruit contains a large percentage of alkaline ash 
containing potash. 

Preparations, — Decoction and infusion of leaves (i in 10). Dose, 
I to 2 fld, 02s. Khar prepared by incineration of the plant. It is used 
in preparing alkaline preparations. Juice from the fresh herb. Paste 
and medicated oil. 

Actions and uses, — Astringent, diuretic and alterative ; given in 
menorrhagia, diarrhoea and dysentery Khar is largely used in anasarca, 
ascites and dropsy. It is also given in cutaneous affections and 
enlargements of glands, and to loosen expectoration in cough. It has 



AMARANTUS SPIXOSUS. 505 

a great reputation in dog-bites, and bites of snakes and other venom- 
ous reptiles, for which purpose it is given imernally and also applied 
externally. The juice is sometimes applied in toothache and the 
paste as eye-salve (anjan) in opacity of the cornea. A medicated oil 
is dropped into the ear in deafness and noises in the ears. 

Arva Javanica, JE. Lanata, Achyranthes Lanata, A. Yillosa, 
lUecebrum Lanatam. 

Habitat. — Plains of India. 
Parts used, — The herb. 

Vernacular, — Duk. — Khul. Beng., Hind. — Chaya. Malyal. — 
Sherupala. Mar. — Kumra pendi, kapur-madhura. Ind. Bazar., Panj. — 
Bhui, kalian. Tam. — Sirru pulai. Tel. — Pendi conda. 

Characters, — Leaves woolly, silvery-looking ; flowers minute, 
white, in dense terminal spikes ; calyx 5, hairy ; sepals 5 ; stamens 
united into a cup at their base. Fruit roundish and an utricle. 

/Reparation, — Decoction (i in lo). Dose, i to 2 fld. ozs. 

Actions and uses, — Demulcent and diuretic; used in the treat- 
ment of lithiasis, strangury, gonorrhoea, &c. Also used by the natives 
as an antidote against poisoning by arsenic. 

Amarantus Spino8a8. 

Habitat, — Southern India, Burma. 
Parts used. — The leaves and roots. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Kunt^-nutia. Burm. — Hinkanoe-sfibli Can. — 
Mulla-dantu. Bomb., Duk. — KAnterimat. Eng. — Thorny amaranth. 
Guz — Kantalo-dambho. Hind.— Cholai. Malyal — Mallan-chira. 
Sans — Tan-dulbija. Tam. — MuUuk-kirc. Tel. — Erra-mulu, goranta. 

Characters. — Plant erect, from i to 3 feet in height ; root taper- 
ing and of a pinkish colour, here and there giving off a few fibres ; 
taste somewhat sweetish and astringent ; stem striated and of a green or 
reddish colour, surface rugous ; leaves long, petioled, rhombo-ovate or 
lanceolate, oblong, and with sharp spines on the axes of the leaves, 
which are channelled. Flowers axillary and termuial, males above and 
females beneath. 

/Reparations, — Infusion and decoction (i in 10). Dose, i to 2 
fld. ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Demulcent, astringent and diuretic. A poul- 
tice of the leaves is used as an application over unhealthy sores. The 
root is given in combination with other astringents in menorrhagia and 
in gonorrhoea. Its ashes are used for the same purposes as the ashes of 
Aghada, a paste of which is applied in eczema. 



506 CHENOPODIUM AMBROSIOIDES. 

Celosia Argentea, C. Crestata, Amaranthus Polygamns, A. 
Hypochondriaous. 

HahitaL — Throughout India, Tropical Asia. 

Parts used, — The seeds, leaves and rool. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Svet-murga. Can. — Goraji. Eng. — 
Prince's feathers, cock's comb. Guz. — Lapadi, safed murgha, Sarwari. 
Hind. — Sarwari, Deokoti. Mur. — Koordoo. Tel. — Gurugu. 

Characters. — Seeds lenticular, brown, roundish, smooth, shining» 
convex, on both surfaces, in form resembling a curry dish ; colour 
black, testa hard ; taste slightly bitter and pea-like ; root of a pinkish 
red colour ; leaves roundish or variously shaped, margin red. 

Constituents. — The seeds contain an oil, resin, starch, extractive^ 
an alkaloid and ash. 

Preparations. — Decoction or infusion (i in lo). Dose, i to 2 fld- 
o^s., poultice of leaves. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent and nervine tonic ; given in diar- 
rhoea, seminal debility, leucorrhoea, and menorrhagia ; a poultice of the 
leaves with rarwanti and besmeared with honey is used as a cooling 
anodyne application to inflamed and painful parts. 

ChenopodiaoeflB.— The Palaka, Goo8e-foot or Splnaoh family. 

General Characters. — Herbs or under shrubs ; leaves alternate, 
rarely opposite, exstipulate, and polygamous ; calyx persistent, stamens 
hypogynous, ovary superior, 1 -celled ; fruit an utricle, achoenium or 
sometimes baccate ; seed solitary. 

Habitat. — Universal, saline places. 

Properties. — Many plants of this order are succulent, as the beet- 
root ; some of them are used as pot herbs ; seeds of some are nutritious. 
Several contain a volatile oil which renders them anthelmintic, 
antispasmodic, aromatic, carminative and stimulant. Several of them 
inhabit salt marshes and yield on combustion an ash called Barilla, 
known to the Greeks as salt-wort. The Arabs called it elkali, arkali, 
or ushnar, sujikh&ra (Hind.) — a mixture of potash and soda. 

Chenopodium Ambroaioldes, C Anthehnintloam— 
Amerioan worm-seed. 

Wild worm-seed, stinking weed, Jesuit tea, goose-foot. 

Habitat. — West Indies (waste places). United States, Europe, 
Africa. 

Part used. — The fruit. 

Characters. — Fruit of the size of a pin's head, depressed, globular, 
and greenish yellow, containing an obtusely edged lenticular black 
seed ; seed glossy, odour terebinthinate, taste bitter and pungent. 
Dose, ID to 30 grs. 



SPIKACEA OLERACEA, 



507 



Comiiiuents. — Oleum chenopodii, a volatile oil, 3 p,c., obtained by 
distilling the fruit with water or steam. It i& a thin yellowish liquid, 
of a highly camphoraceous odour and pungent bitter taste. It consists 
of a hydrocarbon and a liquid oxygenated oil. Dose, 4 to 10 ms, 

Preparatvms. — Expressed juice. Dose* 2 to 4 fid. drs. Decoction 
(i in 10). Dose, i to 2 fld. ozs. Fluid extract. Dose, 10 to 40 ms, 

Actiom and uses* — Anthelmintic : used chiefly for round worms. 
As an antispasmodic and stimulant, the oil is given in hysteria, chorea, 
flatulent dyspepsia, and malarial and intermittent fevers. It increajses 
the action of the heart and promotes the secretion of the skin, kidneys 
and bronchi. 

Beta Vulgaris— Common Beet, Garden Beet. Sugar Beet 

Habitat. — Europe, Africa, Asia. 

Parts meti. — The root. 

Characters,— 'Th^ roots are tapering, colour dark red, very tender, 
and of a sweet taste ; cultivated as a source of sugar. 

Constituents. — An active principle bettn. Dose, X to 8 grs. 

Preparations, — Infusion ; decoction {l in 10) Dose, 2 to 6 drs. 

Actions rtwr///jrrjr.— Aperient, resolvent, and emmenagoguc ; given 
in disordered secretions of the stomach and intestines, in atonic 
dyspepsia, constipation, and in h;emorrhoid». 



Splnacea Oleraoea-S. Setrandra 

M/^/^iA-- Persia, India, 

Parts nstii. — The herb and fruit. 

Vernacular. — Arab, — Fspanaj. Eng. — Spinach. Beng., Bomb., 
Hind, — Sag, Paluk, Chulari Ispanak. Pers. — Burh^n-palak* Tarn. — 

Vusuylcy-keeniy. 

Characters. — Leaves* thick, succulent, deep green, of a triangular 
form ; stem erect, large, round and hollow ; fruit prickly, of a brown 
colour, containing one seed, triangular, each angle terminating in two 
or more channelled tapering points or spines, darkish red, ovate, flat, 
and slightly pointed at the apex ; surface rugous and wrinkled ; taste 
acidulous. 



Constituents . — ^ A 1 a r ^ e 
fat and sugar. 



uuantitv of mucilage, alkaline nitr.itr*^ 



Preparation ^,~\n\umQ\\ atiu decoction (i in io)» Dose, 1 to 2 
fld. ozs. 

Actions ami uses. — Demulcent, diuretic, and astringent ; tt^cd in 
fever, inflammation of the lungs and boweb, hurri^ breathing, 
biliary derangements, and as a lithontriptic in urinary catcult. The 
juice of the leaves is used as a gargle in M>re thtoat. 



508 EMEX SP. ? 

Walsura Plscidia, Trichilia Emetica, Trichilia Trifoliata. 

Habitat — Malabar, W. Peninsula, Ceylon, Travancore. 

Parts used. — The bark, and fruit. 

Vernacnlar. — Arab. — ^Jauz-el-kai. Eng. — Emetic nut. Tarn., 
Tel. — Walurosi. 

Characters, — Bark \ inch thick, suber thick, brown, fissured 
longitudinally, generally in flakes ; liber hard, compact, and of a 
cinnamon colour ; taste bitter and astringent. 

Constituents, — The bark contains resin, saponin and tannin. 

Perparations, — Decoction (i in lo). Dose, 2 to 4 drs. 

Actions and uses. — The bark is stimulant and expectorant. It 
acts as a fish poison ; the fish so caught is not unwholesome to eat. 
The fruit is used in hair washes to kill lice, remove freckles, and to 
cure itch. 

Polygonaoea— The GaM-hamaza or Buokwheat family. 

Genera/ Characters, — Herbs or rarely shrubs ; leaves alternate, 
with a long petiole, attached to the stem by a sheath ; stem consisting 
of many swollen joints ; flowers sometimes unisexual ; calyx, persistent ; 
stamens, hypogynous ; ovary, superior, ovule, solitary ; fruit a nut, 
usually triangular ; seeds solitary and erect, embryo with starchy 
albumen. 

Habitat. — Universal, temperate regions. 

Properties — Most plants are acidulous, astringent and purgative. 
The fruits and roots of some are more or less nutritious. The 
acidulous character is due to its containing oxalic and malic acids. 
The root of Rheum contains an abundance of oxalate of lime crystals. 

Emex Sp. ? 
Habitat. — Persia. 

Parts used, — The herb. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Afsharniki. Shankat-el-baida. Bomb. — 
Shukai. Guz., Hind. — Shukai. Pers. — Kangara khiira. 

Characters, — Drug of a light brown or yellowish colour, consisting 
of pieces of stems, branchlets, portions of the roots, leaves and 
fruits. Stems round or triangular, furrowed and channelled, rugous 
externally ; epidermis thin ; interior full of soft pith. Branchlets and 
spines are channelled. Spines broad at the base and needle-pointed 
at the apex. Root knotty, and here and there marked with scars of 
leaf sheaths. Leaves toothed, lobed, thick, downy and leathery, each 
lobe ending in a spine. Fruits small, erect, and supported on a short 
stalk. From base of the fruit project 6 to 7 very small segments of 
the calyx, within which is the ovary surrounded by 7 or 8 erect, tooth- 
like processes. Seeds oblong, or triangular, of a brownish colour, and 
tough ; odour rather pungent and oily. The whole drug is aromatic 
and of a gummy or corky taste. 



POLYGONUM HYDROPIPEROIDRS. COO 

Constituents. — Resin and an alkaloid. 

Preparations. — Decoction (i in lo). Dose, i to 2 fid. ozs. 

Actions and uses, — The whole plant is astringent, demulcent, and 
deobstruent. It is used in coughs and ague. The hakims generally 
use it for the same purposes as Badi4varda (Fagonia Arabica). Shukayi 
is also a Marathi name for Tricholepis procumbens of the N. O. 
Compositae, the spiny fruits of which resemble those of Shukayi. 

Polygonum AYioulare, P. Bistorta. 

Habitat. — Universal. 

Parts used. — The root and seeds. 

Vernacular.'^ \t^o, — Asiir-rii, Anjubar. Eng.— Knot grass. 
Hind. — Kuwar, Machoti, Nisomali, Bijband. Pers. — Hozsir bandak* 
Sans. — M iromati. Sind . — Endrini. 

Characters. — P. Aviculare. Root fibrous, very tough and somewhat 
woody. Stems several and spreading, leafy at the numerous knots or 
joints ; seeds acutely triangular and black, and of a shining lustre. 

P. Bistorta : Rhizome, Sshaped, bistorted, 2 inches long, and 
flattened, upper side striate, under surface marked with root scars. 

Constituents. — Polygonic acid, tannic and gallic acids, starch and 
calcium oxalate. 

Preparations. — Succus or juice. Decoction (i in 10). Dose, i to 2 
fld. oz<. 

Actions and uses. — Expectorant, diuretic, tonic, astringent, md 
antiperiodic ; given in malarial fevers, chronic diarrhoea and lithiasis; 
also used in capillary bronchitis, whooping cough, and other lung 
affections. 

Polygonum HydropiperoideA— Smart Weed, Water Pepper. 

Habitat.— \5mle^ States. 

Parts used. — The weed. 

Characters. — Leaves, narrow, lanceolate. Flowers white, with 
slender spikes. The weed has a pungent, and acrid taste. 

Constituents. — Tannin, a pungent volatile principle, polygonic 
acid, havmg acrid properties. Polygonic acid is crystallizable, soluble 
in alcohol, ether and chloroform, but insoluble in water. 

Preparations. — Liquid extract. Dose, 10 to 40 ms. Solid extract- 
Dose, 1 to 5 grs. 

Actions and uses. — Diuretic, emmenagogue, and aphrodisiac. The 
weed is acrid and produces a sensation of heat and tingling in the 
stomach. It stimulates the heart, increases the arterial tension, and 
the body temperature, promotes the secretions of the bronchi, skin and 
uterus. The juice excites inflammation and even vesication of 
the skin. It is highly extolled as an emmenagogue in amenorrhoea. 



rio KHBClf O^FICXatAUE. 

Half dradMM dose of the extract a week bdbre the expected period » 
ziveti with beneit. lo fnnctiooal impcccxice. in dardMea, dyxnterr, 
and grrx^tA^ it |;Hes ntaiked retief. As a gargie it is giiren in sore ' 
mouzb asd in mercsrial sa&ratioci. 

B. P^ L FdiMinL Be P^ 1. 



HaUiaL — SootlHEastem Thibet, Turkey. Shanghai, Canton^ 
China, Himalajra, cvkivated in Eorope. their leaf stalks beii^ osed as 
a fruit* 

Patti used, — ^The erect rhizome or so-callcd roof, Rhei Radix, 
B.P.. Rhubarb root. 

VernacuUtf^ — Rivande-hindi. Beog. — Rcran-chinL Burm. — 
Ta-rak'tsha* Can. — Nal-revi-chini. Chines — Hnang-han£. Duk. — 
Nat-ki-rcvan-chini. Eng — Rhubarb root. Hind^ Guz., Imi. 
Bazaar«— Rewand-iiifni Lakri. Mar. — Re\-al-chinL Panj. — Riwas. 
PcTS.— Chukri, Rewash. Tani- — Nauu-manjat-chinak. Tel. — Nattu, 
revaJ-chinni. 

Character %. — An herbaceous perennial plant : stem slender, one 
or ttro : bark pubescent, externally the upper portion is purplish and 
the lower one green ; internally it is white, soft and juicy : taste sour 
and somewhat astringent. The root, deprived of the corky layer, is 
the rhubarb. Good rhubarb should be moderately hea\y, compact, 
and brittle, cylindrical or in conical or flattish segments, generally 
smooth or wrinkled, covered with yellowish or reddish brown powder 
and marked with whitish meshes, in which are found white spongy 
tissue. Internally it is white, with many red medulbn.* rays ; the 
odour is aromatic and peculiar. Taste bitter and astnngent : the 
root is gritty when chewed between the teeth and colours the 
saliva yellow. It imparts its virtues to water and alcohol. Chinese 
rhubarb is the best. It is of a saffron colour, has a fractured 
surface, and is friable. Dose, as a stomachic, 3 to lo grs. ; as a pur- 
gative, 15 10 30 grs. 

Conslituenls, — Resins as phoeoretin, aporetin and erythroretin ; 
chrysophan 014 p.c, chrysophanic acid 5 p c ; emodin 2 p.c; rheumic 
acid ; rheotannic acid, mucilage ; malic acid, fat, sugar, starch, 
albuminoids, calcium oxalate and ash 12 p.c. Chr)*sophan — to obtain 
it exhaust rhubarb with water and treat the residue with benzene. 
It is in golden yellow needles, or powder, soluble in water, alcohol and 
ether ; on the addition of ferments or dilute acids it splits up into 
sugar and chrysophanic acid. It is without any odour or taste. It 
becomes deep red with alkalies. Emodin is obtained by treating 
chrysophanic acid with benzene as a decomposition product. It is of 
an orange yellow colour insoluble in water ; emodin is also found iu 
frangula. 

Phoeoretin : To obtain it wash the extract with water, dissolve the 
residue in alcohol, and add ether. The precipitate contains 
phceoretin, and the concentrated liquid contains chrysophanic acid ; a 



RUMEX CRISPDS, 



:n 



BfcTwn resin without any lasie, soluble in alcohol. Rheo-tannic 
Bcid — on the addition of dilute acids* it is decomposed into sugar and 
rbeuniic acid. Calcium oxalate is the cause of griltiness. 

Preparathm, — Liquor Rhei Concentratus, B. P. (j in 2). Dose, 
\ to 1 fld* dr., Exiractum Rhei, B.P, Dose, 2 to 8 grs, Infusum Rhei^ 
6. P. (I in 20). Dose. ^ to 1 fid, oi, Pilula Rhei Composita, B. P, 
contains rhubarb root in powder 3 ozs., socotrine aloes 2J ozs.» myrrh 
in pnwder ij 02s., hard soap i^^ ok., oil of peppermint 1^ fld. drs., 
syrup of glucose, 2} oz. Dose, 4 to 8 prs. Pulvis, Rhei Compositus, 
B. P. contains rhubarb root 2 ozs., light magnesia 6 ozs.^ ginger in 
powder I oz. Dose» 20 to 60 grs. Syrupus Rhei^ B. P. — Rhubarb root 
2 ozs,» coriander fruit 2 ozs., refined sugar 24 ozs , alcohol 8 fid. ozs., 
distilled water 24 fid- ozs., to produce 2i lbs. Dose ^ to 2 fid. drs* 
Tinctura Rhei Aromatica — contains Rhubarb 20 p.c, cinnamon 4, 
cloves 4, nutmeg 2, percolate with glycerin 10, alcohol to make 100. 
Dose, I to 2 drs. Tinctura Rhei Dukis — contains rhubarb jo p.c, 
glycyrrhiza 4, anise 4* cardamom 1, percolate with glycerin 10, alcohol 
50 and water 40. Dose, 4 10 6 drs, Tinctura Rhei Gomposita, B. P.— 
rhubarb root 2 ozs,, cardamom seeds J ox., coriander fruit. \ oz.^ 
glycerin 2 fid, ozs., alcohol to 20 ozs. (i in 10). Dose, 4 to i fid. dr. j 
2 to 4 fid. drs, for a single dose. 

Actions and usfs. — Aperient, stomachic tonic and slightly astring- 
ent. The cathartic effect is due to phtroretina, a resin, and the sub- 
sequent astringcticy to Rhco tatmic acid and bitter principle. Both 
act on the duodenum. Rhubarb stimulates the muscular layer of the 
bowels and the intestinal glands. In small doses it is a gastric tonic and 
intestinal astringent. In large doses it is a cathartic, producing several 
copious vellow stools with some amount of griping as an after-effect. 
It gtiuerally leads to constipation as a cholagogue. It stimulates the 
liver. The yellow colour uf the ?itc»ols is due to the exce5s of bile, to 
the rhubarb pigment and probably to the resin phacc«rclin. It is 
eliminated by the skin, kidneys and breasts, and its pigment stains the 
urine, sweat .nid the milk. The milk becomes bitter and purges the 
child. Rhubarb, if applied as poultice to abraded skin or if used as a 
dusting powder for ulcers causes purgation. As an astringent following 
its cathartic effect, it is given in diarrhcra due to the presence of 
irritants in the bowel, in dyspepsia, chronic dysentery, ha;morrh(iids 
and even thread worms. In bili«ms fevers it is combined with calomel, 
and with magnesia in stomach and bowel disorders. The tincture is a 
stomachic, ionic and digestive. It promotes the action of the liver 
without any caiharbis. 



Rumex Crifipu8» Yellow Dock--B. Vesicarius, Sour Dock — 
Rumex Acetosa, Common Sorrel. 

HahilaU — Europe, Ajniere^ Madras, grassy places, road -sides, 
Paris nsrd, — The root. 

Ferfhtcnlar — Arab. — Hummaz, Hind-, Duk., Beng, — Chukkah. 
Burm. — KahV khen-boun. Cing. — Suri. Pers. — Turshah, Sans. — 



^12 ARISTOLOCHIA BRACTEATA. 

Shiita-vedhi-chukra. Sind. — Bijband, Endranee. Tarn. — Sukh-gu- 
kire. Tel.— Shukku, Kuraku. 

Characters, — Common weed, growing along road-sides ; root 
embedded deep into the ground, fusiform, yellow, fleshy and highly 
wrinkled ; externally of a rusty brown colour ; internally whitish ; 
bark thick with a short fracture ; odour peculiar ; taste bitter, and 
astringent. Leaves lanceolate, smooth, margins wavy, curled, acute, 
sub-cordate at the base. Fruit reddish brown, having 3 fringed leaf- 
like e.xpansions each with a glandular body ; seed dark brown, triangu- 
lar and polished, often confounded with Bijband. Dose, 15 to 45 grs. 

Constituents, — The root contains 2 principles — Rumicin and 
Lapathin, identical with chrysophanic acid ; tannin, calcium oxalate, 
mucilage, and starch. 

Preparations, — Fluid extract. Dose, ^ to i fld. dr. Decoction 
(i in 10) of the herb. Dose J to i fld. or. Tincture (i in 10) of the 
root. Dose, i to 10 ms. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent and sedative, like rhubarb and 
sarsaparilla ; given in disorders of the lymphatic and glandular 
system ; in scurvy it is of great benefit as it contains large quantities 
of oxalic acid ; also given in chronic skin eruptions, dyspepsia, 
syphilis, scrofula hepatic disorders, in laryngeal irritation and catarrh. 
The root is used as a dentifrice for spongy f^ums. The juice is 
astringent and is given to allay pain of toothache. The seeds are 
astringent and used in chronic dysentery, in checking nausea and in 
promoting appetite. 

Aristoloohiaoea, the Birth- wort, Sapasana or Kida Mara family. 

Characters, — Herbs or shrubby climbers. Wood of the stem 
arranged in separate wedges ; leaves alternate, cordate or entire, and 
of a brown or greenish colour ; flowers axillary, perfect, dull coloured ; 
calyx tubular, superior ; Iruit 3 to 6 celled, capsular or succulent ; 
seeds numerous and albuminous. 

Habitat, — Tropical climate. South America. 

Prtiterties. — The plants abound in a bitter principle and a volatile 
oil. They are generally tonic, stimulant and acrid ; some species are 
regarded as useful in snake bites. 

Ariatolochia Braeteata. 

Habitat — Deccan, Travancore, Coromandel, Sind, Ceylon. 

Parts used. — The herb. 

Vernacular* — Bimb.. Duk., Guz . Hind.— Gadhatee, Kiri Maia. 
Can. — Sanajali pullu. Eng. — Woim killer. Birth wort. Malyai. — 
Atu-tin-t.ip. Mar. — Gandhani, gaval. Sans. — Pattia Bangha, Dhumra 
pattra, Gridhrani. Tam. — Adu-tinna pilai. Tel — Gadide. 

Characters, — Plant trailing. Roots perennial and tbro us ; stems 
striated, wavy, slender and of a pale broun co'our ; leaves very co:use, 
kidney-shaped, curled at the margins and of a pale glaucous, green 



ARISTOLOCHIA INDICA. 5I3 

or darkish brown colour below ; surface wrinkled or tubercled ; 
flowers solitary, axillary, peduncled, and drooping ; fruit oblong, about 
an inch long, depressed at the top, and with a rather curved stalk at the 
base. From the apex 12 prominent ridges spread out longitudinally 
and run down into the stalk, where they gradually disappear ; surface 
of the fruit smooth and of a brownish colour ,• seeds small, deltoid or 
triangular, of a dark colour on one side, and brown on the other ; 
upper surface dark coloured, 'minutely tubercled and rough. The 
other side has two brown smooth lobular projections. Dose, 30 to 90 

Constituents, — A nauseous, volatile substance, an alkaloid and 
salt>, especially potassium chloride. 

Preparations, — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, ^ to i fid. 02. 

Actions and uses. — Purgative, enimenagogue, alterative, antiperio- 
dic, and anthelmintic ; given with castor oil in colic and tormina, 
ameiiorrhcea. dysmenorrhoea, tedious labour, intermittent fever and 
worms ; also given in syphilis, gonorrhoea, and skin diseases. The 
juice of fresh leaves or the powder of dried leaves is applied to sores, 
obstinate itch, psora, and to destroy maggots ; hence the vernacular 
name. 

Aristoloohia Indioa. 

Habitat, — Travancore, Coromandel, Bengal, throughout low 
country of India. 

Parts used. — The root and rhizome. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Zarivande-hindi. Bomb., Beng., Hind., 
Mar. — Soposan Ishora-mula. Rudrajata. Can. — Ishwai-buru. 
Cing. — Satasanda. Duk., — Sapsum, Isrivel. Eng. — Indian Birth 
wort. Goa. — Sapusa. Guz. — Iswari, Sapsand. Malay — Karalekam. 
Pers. — Izaravande hindi. Sans. — Irka mula, Sunanda, Sudhi upasaya. 
Tarn . — Ich-churamuli. Tel. — Ishvararveru. 

Sipasana or sapasuna is derived from sapa, a serpent, and sana or 
siina. senseless ; in allusion to the belief that the root makes the part 
where the snake has bitten insensible to the ill effects of its poison. 

Characters — A twining shrub. The drug consists of roots and 
stems, often obtained in separate pieces ; root bark brownish dark, 
brittle, fibrous, tough, marked with loncjitudinal furrows, and break- 
ing with a transverse fracture ; epidermis, smooth, and here and 
there marked with scars of rootlets and numerous small warty 
projections : within the epidermis is another layer of a greyish brown 
colour ; wood of a white colour porous and composed of longitudinal 
bundles; taste nauseous bitter and camphoraceous ; odour aromatic 
and agreeable, resembling fresh ginger. 

Preparations, — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, \ to i fid. oz. Tincture 
(i in 8). Dose, \ to i fid. dr. 

Actions and uses, — Tonic, stimulant, and emmenagogue ; given in 
intermittent fever, bowel affections of children due to teething, also in 



514 ARISTOLOCHIA SERPENTARIA. 

cholera ; as an emetic the juice of the leaves is given to children in 
croup. It has a great reputation as an antidote to snake poison. 
With agara it is applied externally to the abdomen in colic and to 
the chest in bronchitis in children. 

Aristoloohia Longa. 

Habitat, — Kashmere. 

Parts used, — The root. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Zerawand Taweel ; Zerawand daraz. 

Characters, — Root in whitish, twisted, cylindrical pieces of the 
size of a finger and nearly tasteless : leaves petioled ; flowers yellowish 
brown. 

Preparations, — Powdered root. Dose, lo to 30 grs. Infusion 
Dose, I to 2 fld. ozs. 

Actions and uses, — Nervine tonic and emmenagogue ; given in 
headache and diseases of the brain. The natives give it in dysmen- 
orrhoea. Locally it is applied to ulcers and affections of the gums. 

Aristoloohia Rotunda. 

Habitat, — South of Europe, Cashmere. 

Parts used. — The plant. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Nukhund-i-alavandi. Bomb., Ind. Bazaars 
— Zaravand-i-gird. Pers. — Zaravand-i-gird. 

Characters. — Roots tuberous, externally brownish or grey 
coloured, slightly conical or roundish in shape ; base compressed and 
broad ; top, narrow ; surface rugous, also slightly wrinkled, and here and 
there marked with pit-like scars, the remains of fallen stems ; on 
section they are hard, horny, starchy, and heavy, and have a ring- 
like brim in the middle of which a scaly mass is seen ; colour pale white, 
taste somewhat acrid, odour slightly acrid. 

Preparation. — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, J to i fid. oz. 

Actions and uses, — Tonic, diuretic, emmenagogue and vermifuge ; 
given in gout, jaundice, and intestinal worms, and for promoting the 
renal and menstrual secretion ; also given in itch, leprosy, and for 
drying up sores. 

Aristoloohia Serpentaria, B.P., A. Retioalata, B.P. 

Habitat. — Virginia, United States. 

Parts used, — Rhizome and roots — Serpentaria rhizoma, B.P. 

Characters, — Herbaceous plants. Rhizomes tortuous and slender, 
upper surface marked with remains of aerial stems, under surface 
with numerous wiry interlacing roots ; colour yellowish brown, odour 
camphoraceous, taste strong, bitter and aromatic ; the root de teriorate 
by keeping and hence should be used fresh. The Rhizome of A. 
Reticulata is longer and thicker and the roots straighter. 



CHAVfCK BETEI. 



515 



Constituents. — V'olatile oil, i px. : resin, and a bitter principle, 
aristolochiue, tannin, starch, sugar, gum, albuminoids and ash 11 p.c- ; 
VDlatile oil — obtained by distilling the infusion — contains terpene 
(pinene) and borneol ester. Aristolochine— to obtain it precipitate the 
decoction with acetate of lead, exhaust the precipitate with alcohol 
and evaporate. It occurs as yellow amorphous ma^ or noedle&« soluble 
in water and alcohol. 

I^paratiom. — Infusum serpentariar B. K, (i in 20), Dose* 4 to 1 
fid, 03?, Liquor serpentari;e concent ratus, B. P. (1 in 2). Dose, { to 2 
fld. drs. Tinctura serpen tar las^ B. P, (I in 5). Dose, J to i fid, dr. 

Actions and uses. — Gastric, cardiac, and nervine stimulant. In 
small doses it improves digestion and stimulates appetite, increases the 
secretions of the bronchi and intestines ; it also stimulates the heart and 
excites the brain ; in large doses it is a gastric and intestiual irritant, 
causing nausea, vomiting, colicky pain, rectal tenesmus, distended 
Jibdomen, diarrhcea, and even headache, vertigo, &c. It often gives 
rise to haemorrhoids and even to pruritis. As an alterative and 
emmcnagogue it is u.'^ed in gout^ chronic rheumatism, anienorrhita, 
chlorosis and bilious vomiting ; also in atonic dyspepsia and low states 
of the system. As a vehicle for cinchona in fevers (intermittent) and in 
exanthemata. As a stimulant combined with 'immonium carbonate 
it is given in typhoid fever, pneumonia, capillary broucliitis. cough, 
&c. In functional impotence it is given to restore the lobt virile power. 

Piperace«— The Pepper, Pana^ or Pi pall family. 
Habitat, — Tropi cs, 

Chanuten. — Herbs or shrubs, jointed, creeping or trailing and 
giving off small rootlets ; woody matter in the stern arranged in 
wedges ; leaves entire usually opposite or verlicelled, and marked with 
sitrong nerves ; flowers in spikes* perfect and bractiolcd ; stamens 2 or 
more ; ovary, simple, one-celled ; fruit fleshy, small, globular ; berries, 
l^cclled, I -seeded ; embryo erect ; albumen, fleshy and abundant. 

f*topcitfes* — ^Acrid, pungent, aromatic and stimulant. These 
qualities are principally found in their fruits, and are es^^entially due 
to the presence of an acrid volatile oil and resin ; sume are narcotic* 
others astringent and febrifuge. 

Chavtoa Betel— Piper betel. 

Habitat. — Hotter parts of India, Ceylon* Malay Islands, 
Parts ns*d,—'t\^c leaves* 

Vernacuhr.-'Mdh, — Tanbol. Duk., Hind., DomK, Beng. 

P4n Burm. — KinoyoL Can. — Viledde. Cing*— Bahtt, Eng. 

tBetcl leaf. jMalyaL — Vetrila. Mar.— Xagarvela, Pers, — Barge tanboL 
Sans. — Tamula, nagavaMi, Tam, — Vcltilai. Tel. — Tamala pakoo. 
Characffrs.—^T^%h leaves membrannus, adult ones coriaceous, 
^ng above, glabrims nn huth su\t-^i - xr^ z inches in length, and 



>Ib CHAVICA OFFICINARUM. 

2 to 4 inches in breadth, cordate, petioled, acuminate ; nerves from 5 
to 7, prominent on their under-surface ; both surfaces smooth, green, 
darkish, or of a faint yellow colour ; taste burning, aromatic and 
bitter. 

Constituents, — The leaves yield on distillation, a light aromatic and 
volatile oil known as betel oil and chavicol a very volatile pale 
essential oil. Betel oil contains terpene, betel phenol and sesquiterpene. 

Chavicol or para-allyl-phenol. — It is obtained by treating betel 
oil with caustic alkali, separating phenol from alkaline solution, and 
precipitating it with dilute acid. It is a colourless liquid, soluble in 
alcohol, fixed oils, either and chloroform, very sparingly soluble in 
water. Dose, ^ to 2 ms. 

Preparations. — Succus. Dose, ^ to i fld. dr. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant, carminative and antiseptic ; given in 
flatulence, foetor of the mouth, dyspepsia, colic, &c., mostly used as a 
masticatory by the natives of India. Chavicol is a powerful antiseptic, 
5 times stronger than carbolic acid, and twice as strong as eugenol ; 
the juice is also antiseptic and used in catarrhal affections and 
inflammation of the throat and bronchi in diphtheria, &c. 

Piper Angiistifoliam, Artanthe Elongata. 

Habitat. — Peru, Cuba, Brazil, Tropical America. 

Parts used. — The leaves. 

Characters. — A shrub ; leaves long, petiolate, apex pointed, base 
unequally heart-shaped, crenulate, tesstfllate above and reticulate 
beneath, of an aromatic spicy odour, and spicy and bitterish taste. 

Constituents. — A volatile oil, artanthic acid, (crystalline! : resin, a 
bitter principle, tannin and mucilage. 

Preparations. — Fluid extract. Dose, ^ to 2 drs. Tincture 
10 p.c. Dose, I to 2 drs. Infusion (i in 20\. Dose, i to 4 fid. ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Alterative, stimulant of the mucous membrane, 
and diuretic ; like cubebs, it acts on the uninary passages It constringes 
the capillaries, hence controls mucous fluxes or catarrhs and 
haemorrhages from the lungs, stomach, bowels, kidneys and rectum. 
It is given in bronchitis, gonorrhcea, leucorrhcea, hemorrhoids, 
menorrhagia, haematuria, vesical catarrh, and in inconiineiice 
of urine. Locally the powder is used as haemostatic in al! kinds 
of cuts and wounds. The under surface of the leaf, it aprlied to a 
bleeding surface, promotes coagulation of biocAl. 

ChaTica OlBcinaram, Piper Chaba. 

Hjbitat. — India, Java, Ceylon, Malay Islands. Bei.ga!. Phi-ippine 
Islands. 

Parts used. — The immature iru.t and sten^. 

Veruiicuiars. — Beng. — Chai. Bomb., HiriJ. — Ch^. kl. Ch.ib. 
Gajphai. 



PlfKR CUBHUA. 



5^7 



Characters. — The aments consist of minute baccate fruits, closely 
packed round a common axis, Fruiu ovoid* with a nipple-like point, 
and peltate, bract beneath ; stem or spikes jointdd. as thick as the ring 
finger, bark covering them briule, smooth, slightly rugous and of a 
'dirty brown colour and ca^sily removable ; wood arranged in numerous 
wedges ; colour the same as that of the bark ; taste slightly pungent and 
acrid and smell somewhat aromatic. 

Preparations. — Decoction (i in 20). Dose, 2 to 6 drs. 

Actions trnti uses, — Carminativ*e and stimulant ; given in colic^ 
tympanitis and in renal disease. 

Piper Cubeba, B P., Cabeba Officinalis 



Habitat* — ^Java, Sumatra, Borneo, Ceylon. 
Parts used* — The dried full grown unripe 



Fructua, B 



fruits — Cubeba; 



Verttacular. — Arab. — Kababah chini. Can. — Bala-Menasa. Cfng.— 
Vilmologu. Duk — Dumki-mirchi. Eng. — Tailed pepper or cuhebs* 
CtMt, — Toda-miri, Kabab-chini, Bomb,, Bcng., Hind. — Kabab-chini, 
Kankola. Malyal. — Lada-barekor. Mar. — ^Kombonkoos and kabab- 
chini, Himsi niirie. Pers^ — Hab-el-ams Sans* — Sugandha Marichi, 
Tarn, — ValmalakUi Tel. — Salava Mirialia, Tailed Cubeb, The dried 
fruit is »o called from having a short stalk attached to it. 

Characters.— Vtu'M m form and colour resembling kald miri 
but smaller in sis^c ; pericarp highly wrinkled and bruwnish red 
colourrd^ enclosing a nut ; within the nut is a pale brown coloured 
oily homogeneous and highly aromatic albumen ; the smell is 
aromatic and resembling that of Jacphala ; taste spicy, aromatic 
and camphoraceous* Duse, ^u to 60 grs. 

Constttnents, — An active principle 3 p.c.p a volatile oil, 5 to 15 px. 
oleo resin ^^ p>c.; cubebin 2 p.c; cubebic acid, fatty matter, tv ax 
starch, oil-gum and ash 5 p.c. 

Dtcum Cubebse, H.P.> a volatile oil, obtained by distilling cubebs 
with water or steam. A greenish, yellowish t)r often colourless thick 
fluid, of a faint odour and aromatic, camphoraceous taste and 
neutral reaction ; soluble in equal volume of alcohol. It contains 
cubeben (a liquid), depentene, sesqueterpenc and cardinene. If 
long kept it deposits a stearopten or cubeb camphor. Dose, 5 to 20 
ms- Olco resin is extracted from cubebs by ether. It is an amorphous 
mass, soluble in alkalies and alcohoh It contains a volatile oil and 
cubebic acid ; on evaporation it deposits cubebin and wax. Dose, 5 
to 20 ms. 

Preparattnm. — Fluid extract. Dose, 5 to 30 ms, Tinctura Cubebic 
B. I*. (I in 5). Dose, J to i dr. Infusion, 1 to 2 ozs. Trochisci — 
containing oleo resin 4, oil of sassafras 1, extract glyc>Trhizac 25, acacia 
12, syrup of loin to make loo. Dose, i to 2. 



5l8 CHAVICA ROXBURGHII. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant and diuretic. In large doses it 
irritates the stomach, intestines, uterus and urino-genital passages. 
It disinfects the urine, perspiration and bronchial mucus. Applied to the 
skin it gives rise to urticaria and vesicular eruptions. The seeds kept in 
the mouth and chewed relieve troublesome cough ; as a stimulant and 
diuretic it is given in gonorrhoea, urethritis, cystitis, chronic bronchial 
catarrh, in affections of the genito-urinary organs, and in inflamma- 
tion of the urinary passages. The powder is dusted or blown by an 
insufflator into the nose and pharynx in chronic nasal catarrh, 
follicular pharyngitis, &c., with benefit. It is smoked in cigarettes in 
acute nasal catarrh. Trochisci are kept in the mouth in chronic 
irritability of the air passages, by singers and public speakers, to 
prevent hoarseness. As a local irritant, the oil with rose water is applied 
to the head in headache and to syphilitic sores on the penis. The oil 
increases the quantity of urine, imparting to it a peculiar odour. 

Piper Hethysticum 

Habitat. — South Sea Islands, Samoa, Sandwich Islands, Poly- 
nesian Islands. 

Parts used. — The rhizome and root, Kava Kava. 

Characters. — A shrub, rhizomes fleshy, and pale yellow. Dose of 
the powdered root, 30 to 60 grs. 

Constituents. — An essential oil, 2 resins (which are believed to be 
the active principles), a neutral crystalline principle i p.c, named 
kavalin or lewinin or methysticin, analogous to piperin, kawin or 
kavaine, an alkaloid, and an oleo resin of a semi-solid consistence ; 
taste aromatic, pungent, and hot, like that of pepper at first, later on it 
causes local numbness. 

Preparations. — Liquid extract. Dose, 1 5 to 60 ms. Solid extracts 
Dose, 3 to 8 grs. Tincture (i in 8). Dose, ^ to i fld. dr. 

Actions and uses. — In small doses it is a mild intoxicant, produc- 
ing pleasant dreams of an erotic character ; as a tonic and stimulant it 
lessens the sense of fatigue and sharpens the mental faculties and pro- 
duces a sensation of peace and comfort ; in large doses it produces 
drowsiness followed by headache, and in still larger doses sweet and 
frequent sleep. Under its use there is great and frequent desire to 
pass urine. Used in chronic, rheumatism, Menorrhagia, urethritis, 
gonorrhoea, gout, leucorrhoea, cystitis, catarrh of the bladder .and 
dysuria. 

ChaYioa Roxbupghii, Piper Longum, P. Offlcinarum. 

Habitat. — Java, India, Ceylon, Bengal, banks of water courses, 
Circar mountains and South Concans, 

Parts used. — The immature berries, dried in the sun, and stems. 

r<?r;/flrc///tfr.— Arab.— Dar-phil, Bur.— Peik Khyen. Cing. — 
Tippli. Duk.— Pipaliana. Eng. — Long pepper. Beng., Guz., 
Hind.— Pipal, Pipali, Can.— Yippali, Mar.— Bengali pipali, 



PIPER NIGRUM. 



SI9 



pimple. Malyal.— Cutta, Terpali» chaba-jawa. Pers. — Magz pipal, 
fil6la*daraz. Sans. — Pippali, chapalA* Tarn, — Pippili, Tel. — Pipallu. 

Characti*rs. — Pipali mula — stem cylindrical^ joints swollen and 
irrigularly knotty. Each piece from .} to i or 2 inches long ; irre- 
gularly thicki hard, and of a brownish colour ; intenor starchy, smell 
heating ; taste pungent and biting. 

Pipal — these are immaiure fruits, dncu in liie sun» or^ the dry 
catkins made up of a number of small berries spirally crowded together 
round a common axil ; each is crowned with a style remnant ; spikes 
varying in length, generally thick, cylindrical, uneven^ dusty, and 
tapering slightly towards the apex ; colour brownish dark ; smell like 
that of miri ; taste more pungent than that of pipali mula. 

Cottsttitifnis, — Resin, volatile oiU starch, gum. fatty oil, inorganic 
matter and an alkaloid. 

Prcparaiifms^ — Compound Tincture (1 in 5) : containing black 
pepper» ginger, each i, long pepper 4, spirit 20» Dose, ^ to 1 fid. dr. 
Infusion (i in lo). Dose* ^ to 1 fid. oz. Decoction (i in 10). Dose, \ 
I. \ fld, oz. Compound powders, vjz, Chaturushana : the four heat- 
ing or biting agents — a compound preparation containing equal parts 
of pipali, miri, suntha, and pipali mula ; used in colic and flatulence ; 
also for cough and coryza. PanchaKola: the five pungcnis, a com- 
pound powder containing equal parts of pipal» pipali mula, suntha, 
chavaka and chitraka. It is a good appcti/er and is used in dyspepsia* 
cough, flatulence and enlarged spleen. Shadushana ; the six acrlds. 
These are pancha kola and miri, used as an appetizing agent iu 
flatulence. 

Actions and wj^f.— Stimulant, carminative, laxative, and altera* 
live ; given in chest affections, dyspepsia, chronic cough, enlargement 
of the spleen and other abdominal viscera, gout, lumbago, &c. ; as a 
resolvent ihey are useful in relieving the symptoms due to obstructions 
of the liver and spleen. With pakhanabhcda a paste of them is 
afiplied to the breasts as a lactagogue. 

Piper Nigram, B,P, 

Hahitai. — S. India, Malabar forests, Sumatra, Java, Sitigaport:, 
Bornea, Siam, Travancore, N. Circars, Tellicherry, Penang, Ratavia. 

Putts used^ — ^The dried uuripe fruit — Piper nigrum, black pepper, 

Syn. — Pepper corn, pepper vine, African black pepper. 

Vernacular — Arab.—Phil-phile-asvvad. Beng.— Kala^morich. 

Bur.— Nagayok-konng. Can.— Menasu. Cing. — Kalu-miris. Duk.— 
Choca. Mar,, Guz., Bomb , Hind. — Kali-mirich, choca-mirich. Eng, 
— Blak:k pepper. Malyal.^Kuru-mulaka. Pers. — Philphil-i-siyah. 
Sans.— Mareecha. Tam,— Milaguvally. Teh— Kodi Miriyalu. 

Characters. — Perennial plant. Fruits black, sessile, shape 
globular* pericarp thick, reticulated and wrinkled ; the epidermis i^* 
thin and capable of being easily scratched; the interior is hard, contain- 



520 PIPER NIGRUM. 

ing a whitish yellow oily albumen, the innermost portion is soft and 
starchy or hollow ; smell very acrid, aromatic and heating ; taste 
pungent and spicy. 

Piper Album — White pepper. These are dried ripened fruits of 
Piper nigrum ; black fruits are immersed in water and the epicarp and 
sarcocarp removed by rubbing them with hand ; they resemble in size 
vavading ; t>hey swell in water and hence are somewhat larger than kala 
miri ; they are smooth, yellowish, hard, or horny, and mealy within ; 
the taste, owing to the process of ripening, is less acrid and less pun- 
gent than that of black pepper. Dose, 5 to 20grs. 

Constituents. — A volatile alkaloid Piperina 2 to 8 pc, piperidin 
5 p c, a balsamic volatile oil i to 2 p.c, fat 7 p.c, Mesocarp contains 
chavicin, a green acrid concrete oil, a balsamic volatile oil, starch, 
lignin, gum, fati p.c, proteids 7 p.c, and ash containing inorganic 
matter 5 p.c. 

Chavicin is an acrid or pungent concrete resin, of a dark green 
colour, soluble in alkalies, water, ether and alcohol ; it contains very 
little piperine and no volatile oil. The medicinal virtues and pun- 
gency of pepper are due to this constituent. Pepperina, Piperin, 
Piperinum, a proximate or neutral principle, a feeble alkaloid in a 
state of powder. To obtain it treat the alcoholic extract of the pepper 
with solution of potash, which dissolves resin and forms soap or fat; 
wash the residue with cold water and treat with alcohol, piperine 
crystallizes in rhombic prisms, colourless or pale yellow or white at 
first, but become yellow on keeping ; almost tasteless without any 
odour and a neutral reaction : insoluble in water, slightly soluble in ether 
(i in 60), soluble in alcohol (l in 30), soluble in volatile oils, in acetic 
acid, chloroform, benzole and benzin. It melts like wax into a 
yellowish oily liquid and congeals into a mass of resinous substance. 
Heated with an alkali it forms piperidine. Dose, 2 to 8 grs. as 
antiperiodic ; J to 2 grs. as stomachic 

Piperidine, Peperidinum. — To obtain it mix piperin with soda or 
lime and distil or boil with alcoholic solution of piperine when it will 
resolve into picric acid and piperidine. It may be snythetically 
obtained by reducing piperin with nascent hydrogen, A colourless, 
limpid liquid, of an ammoniacal or pepper-like odour. Taste bitter, 
combined with tartaric acid it forms piperidine tartrate — crystal- 
line powder of a pleasant taste, readily soluble in water. Dose, ^ to 
15 grs. 

Volatile oil : Distil pepper powder with water or steam. It is 
colourless and without any pungency. The commercial oil of black 
pepper contains a volatile oil, a fixed oil, and resin, a by-product in 
the preparation of piperin. 

Preparations. — Fuid extract of black pepper, obtained by percolat- 
ing pepper with ether. It is a mixture of volatile and fixed oils, 
holding in solution pungent resin and peperin. Dose, ^ to 2 ms. 
Confection (i in 10). Dose, 60 to 120 grs. Infusion (i in 10). Dose, 2 
to 4 fid. ozs. 



PIPER TRIOICTM. 



;2t 



Trikalu or katutrika (three acrids.) is a compound preparation of 
tfqual parts of pipali, niiri and suntha. Dose, 5 to 12 ers. Given in 
indigestion, cold in the head, cough» hurried breathing and hoarseness 
cjI voice. Pipali Asava — contains pipali^ njiri» chavaka, halada, 
chilraka, motha» vivadinga, soptiri, lodhrai venivela-nu-mula, 
amahi patoia, viilo, Ratn^jali, kutha^ lavanga, tagara, jaisimanasif 
taja, eiachi, tamiiUpatra, nilga kesara, each 1. Make a paste with 
water ; then add jaggary 10, dhAuri phula 10, Dnikhsha 6o, and 
subject I he whole to fermentation. Dose, i to 2 drs. Used in chronic, 
dyspepsia, enlarged liver and splecn» general debility, anorexia, &c. 

Pranada Gudica. — A compaund confection containing black 
pepper 32, ginger 24, long pepper 16, piper chaba 8, leaves of 
taxus baccata H, tiowrrs of mesua ferrea 4, long pepper root J 6, 
cinnamon i, c^irdamoms 2, root of andrupogcm muricaius 2, treacle 
420, mix together. Dose, 2 drs. for piles, 

Marichadi Tel — a medicated otl^ containing, kiila mtri 10, bacha* 
nii^a 6, haratela 5, manasila 41 akada*nu-duda 5, vancra-nu-mula 5, 
nishota-nu-niula 4, itiduyani nu mula b, upateta 6, haloda H« daru 
halada 6, dcvadaranu-lakadun 5, rakta chandana 4, ruilela 100, water 
400, boil and prepare in oil. Used in chronic skin diseases, and over 
paralytic limbs. 

AlUoh and uses* — \i is a local irritant, causing intense burning on 
the skiut In medicinal doses it slimulates the heart, the kidneys, and 
the mucous mumbranc of the urinary and intestinal tracts. It is 
eliminated in the urine and fceces. In large doses it causes abdominal 
pain, vomiting, irritation of the bladder and urethra and urticaria on the 
skin. As a gastric stimulant it is chiefly used in flatulence, dyspepsia 
and atony of the stomach; like cubebs, it is given in gonorrhopa, 
gleet, and h;emorrhoids and other rectal disorders* Peperin acts as an 
antiperiodic and antipyretic. It relieves intermittent fever*, by 
causing perspiration ; in neurosis and in congestion of the >pleei3| 
it is of benefit. Pipcridinc Tartrate has a high solvent power, like 
pcperazine, ly^idni or urotropin and is a fine solvent for gouty depr»^its, 
uric acid gravel, anu calculi, and used as an application in paralvtic 
aflfections. In toothache a paste ol it is applied with benefit. The 
infusion is used as a gargle ni relaxed uvula, sore lhrf>at, &c. ; with 
vinegar, the powder is applied over the bites of venomous reptiles. 
^^^ Mixed with onions and salt, it is rubbed over bald head in alopecia, 
^^H The oil is applied to muscular rheumatic pains, headache and to pain 
^^H of haemorrhoids, 

^^^^ Piper Trioicum. 

^^^H J^it&jtat^S. India. 

^^^^f Parts used. — The dried fruit. 

^H IWnacti/ar. — Eng. — Canaresc Pepper, abortive pcpper-corns. 

^^ Hind., Mar.^ — Pokala mari. TcL — Murial tiga, 

I Characters, — Fruit succulent when fresh, dried ones round and 

I red, and excessively pungent. 

^^L Preparaimns. — Paste ; powder. Do$e, 5 to 20 gis. 



522 MYRISTICACEyE. 

Actions and uses. — Pungent, stomachic, carminative, and 
stimulant ; used like kala miri. They are locally used to relieve 
toothache and as an internal remedy for cholera. 

MonimiacesB— The Honimia Order. 

Trees or shrubs; leaves opposite, exstipulate ; flowers axillary, 
declinous, unisexual; anthers longitudinally dehiscent; seeds pen- 
dulous. 

Habitat. — Native of South America, Australia, Java, New 
Zealand. 

Properties, — Aromatic, and fragrant. 

Boldoa Fragrans, Peumus Boldas. 

Habitat, — Chili and Bolivia. 

Parts used, — The leaves. 

Characters. — An evergreen shrub. Leaves large, oval shaped » 
broader at the base than at the apex, i to i\ inches long ; when dry, 
the colour is ashy and greyish ; odour aromatic and agreeable ; taste 
slightly bitter and spearmint-like. 

Constituents. — Boldine or boldoin — a glucoside obtained from the 
leaves i to 5 p.c. and a volatile oil 2 p.c. 

Preparations, — Liquid extract. Dose, i to 4 ms. Tincture 
(i to 5). Dose, I to 20 ms. Boldoin. Dose, i to 4 grs. in 
capsules. 

Actions and uses. — In small doses, mild tonic and stimulant of the 
stomach, intestines, bladder and urethra. In large doses irritant and 
emetic ; also somewhat narcotic ; indicated in atonic dyspepsia, 
chronic cystitis, anaemia, rheumatism, general debility and catarrh of the 
genitals; also as a tonic in chronic hepatic diseases. It is a good substitute 
for quinine; also used as an alterative in syphilis and gonorrhoea. Boldoin 
is a safe hypnotic, superior to chloral hydrate, opium, cannabis and 
other preparations. It is also a local anaesthetic like cocaine. 

Hyristioaoea— The Nutmeg or Jaephala family. 

General Characters, — Trees with alternate, entire, exstipulate, 
thick, dotted leathery leaves ; flowers declinate ; calyx leathery, 3 to 4 
cleft ; male flower with 3 to 12 stamens, filaments distinct ; female 
flowers of i or many carpels ; fruits succulent ; seed arillate, with 
copious oily fleshy ruminated albumen ; embryo small. 

Habitat, — Tropics, Cochin China, Ceylon, Java, Moluccas, 
Peninsula of India, America. 

Properties. — The aromatic properties are contained generally in 
their seeds and arillus. The bark and pericarp are frequently acrid. 



MVRISTICA PRAGRANS. 



5^5 



Myristica Matabarica, H. Tomentosa^ 

Hahttat. — Forests of Travancorc, Concao, N. Malabar, S. India, 
S, Canara. 

Paris uaed, — ^The seed and arillus. 

Vernacular. — Can, — Kanagi. Eng. — Malabar nulmcg. Guz, — 
The mace, Rampatri (arillus). Mai. — Panani-palka, Mar. — Runiphal, 
RiknjaphaL Bomb — Raiphal, Jangli jaephal. 

Characters. — Seed larger and softer than, but inferior to nutmeg in 
oiliness and fragrance and other properties ; fruit hairy, oblong and 
tawny ; aril lucumose* lobes twisted and folded into a cone at the top^ 
longer and thinner than the true mace ; colour dark brown or red ; 
shell hard and brittle ; kernel elongated And o\ reticulated structure ; 
odour fruity ♦ on bruising and boiling it yields a yeliriwisli cmuretu- oil. 

Preparutmns, — The oil. Dose, I to t nis. 

Actiotis and uses^ — Local stimulant; used as an embrocation in 
rheumatism and for headache. The niacc is used as a spice« The oil 
is a good application to indolent ulcers to allay pain and to give a 
healthy action. Internally it is used hkctrue nutmeg. 



Myristioa Fragrans, B. P , H. Moschatai H. Offloinalis. 

HainiaL — linWA^ Ceylon, Sumatra, Java» Phihppine Ulands, 
Malabar, Mauritius, Penang, Molucca Islands. 

Parts used, — The dried seed (deprived of testa), Myristica- 
Nutmegi B.P», the arillus-mace, and wood. 

Vernacular. — (The nut). — Arab. — Jour-ut*tib, Jauz*buva. — Guz 
Mar,, Duk., Beng., Hind. — ^JaephaU Burm. — Za-tc-pho. Can. — 
J;\ji-Kuye. Cing. — Jadiku. Eng. — Nutmeg. Malay. ^Buwahpala, 
Pcrs. — Jowz boy ah. Sans.— Jat bowua Jajiphulam, Jati-kosha, Jali- 
sAra, Shuluka. Tarn. & Tel.^ — Jaji-kuya, Jaii phallmu (the mace). 
Arab. — Bu^bas. Beng — Jotri. Burm. — Zadiphu-apocn. Can. — Jnpatri. 
Cing, — V'adu'Vtishu. Mar., Duk., Hind., Guz» — Jiivantari, Juptari- 
Malyal. — Bana pala. Pers.— Bazbaz, Sans*— Jajipatri. Tarn,, 
fcl. — JApatri. Jouz-i-buya — Fragrant nut* 

Characters* — Fruit, a pendulous drupe, smooth, yellow, 
pear-shaped, of the size of a small walnut or peach. The fruit when 
mature splits along the furrow into two separate pieces. It consists 
of four layers : (l) the pericarp ; (2) the arillus mace, which is 
folliaceous, fleshy, thick, here and there lobcd, and very aromatic. 
When fresh the mace is brilliant, scarlet and remains adherent to the 
nut. When dry becoming brittle, in narrow bands of yellow colour, 
which peel otT. Generally the bands are lobcd above and united into 
bioader bands below, and contain many oil cells. They are fatty when 
pressed, and have a fragrant odour and warm aromatic taste. Dose, 
3 to 20 grs. ; (3) Hard shell or testa, surface marked with impressions 
corresponding to the lobes of the tleshy and irregularly cut arillus, 
one side is of a paler colour than the other ; paler side flattened and 



524 LAURACEiE. 

marked with a line or raphe. It is bony, hard, thick and woody, and 
reticulated with a circular scar at the broad end ; (4) a thin 
membranous coat. The seed known as official nutmeg, is of oblong 
shape, end obliquely compressed at both ends ; surface wrinkled 
and marked with impressions ; the cut surface is reticulated 
and consists of abundant endosperm which is soft but firm, and marble 
like in appearance, due to a white albumen and numerous reddish 
brown vein-like partitions or lobes, which can readily be scratched 
with the nail ; on pricking it with a pin, the oil floats on its surface. 
Heavy specimens are superior. The odour is agreeably aromatic, taste 
acrid and spicy ; wood in thin slices of a brownish red colour, extreme- 
ly light and soft ; substance porous and here and there sprinkled with 
a granular matter which on scratching emits an aroma similar to that 
of the seed. Dose, 10 to 20 grs. 

Constituents, — The kernel contains a volatile oil, 2 to 8 p.c, a 
fixed oil, proteids, fat, starch, mucilage and ash ; concrete oil, called 
oil of mace, 20 p.c. The mace contains a volatile oil (by distillation ) 
identical with the volatile oil from the kernel, a fixed oil (by pressure), 
resin, fat, sugar, dextrine and mucilage. 

The concrete oil exists in two layers. The volatile portion is 
known as myristicine, and the oxygenated portion— myristicol or myr- 
isticin or nutmeg camphor. 

Volatile oil — Oleum Myristicae. B.P., is a colourless or pale yellow 
oil, soluble in alcohol (i in i). Dose, ^ to 3 ms. The fixed oil known 
as oil of nutmeg, or nutmeg butter, contains volatile oil 6 p.c, fat 
24 p.c, and a brown yellowish resinous matter. Nutmeg butter is 
erroneously called oil of mace (Jawantri-katela) and occurs in oblong 
cakes like bricks. When discolored and hardened it is called Banda 
sOap. 

Preparations, — Spiritus Myristicae, B.P., spirit ofnutmeg(i in 10). 
Dose, 5 to 20 ms. Decoction of wood (i in 10). Dose, 4 to 8 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Aromatic, stomachic and stumulant. In small 
doses it stimulates digestion, increases appetite, relieves flatulence, 
dyspepsia and colic. In large doses it causes stupor and delirium. 
As a carminative, anodyne and astringent, it is given in diarrhoea and 
dysentery, to allay nausea and vomiting. Small doses frequently given 
relieves strangury. A paste of it is used as an external application 
to the head in headache, palsy, cramps, &c. The wood is used as an 
astringent to check diarrhoea. The oil is stimulant and carminative, 
and in large doses, narcotic and is g^iven in atonic dyspepsia, diarrhoea, 
and as an adjunct to other stimulant medicines. Locally, diluted 
with bland oil, it is applied in rheumatism, paralysis, sprains, &c. 
Butter of nutmeg is externally applied in rheumatism, contusions, 
sprains, &c. Mace is used for the same purposes as the kernel. 

Lauraoesd, The Laurel, Taja or Dalaohini family. 

General Characters. — Trees or shrubs. Leaves exstipulate, usually 
alternate, sometimes dotted, generally smooth above and glaucous 
beneath; flowers perfect or imperfectly unisexual; calyx inferior, 4 to 6 



CINNAMOMUM CAMPHORA. 525 

clett, in two whorls ; ovary, superior, i -celled ; fruit a berry, or drupe ; 
seeds exalbuminous, embryo with large cotyledons. 

Habitat, — Native of Tropics and Europe. 

Properties. — The plants are almost universally remarkable for their 
stimulant and aromatic properties, due to the presence of volatile oils. 
Many of the species are narcotic, sudorific, astringent, tonic and 
febrifuge. 

Cassytha Filiformis. 

Habitat. — Peninsula, Bengal and Cochin. 

Parts used. — The herb. 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Akashbullee. Duk. — Kotan-ka-patt. Hind. 
— .Amarbelli. Malyal. — Acatajn-bulli. Mar. — Akasvela. Sans. — Akasa- 
valli. Tam. — Cottan. Tel. — Nillootiga. 

Characters, — Leafless, thread-like parasite ; spikes ascending on 
bushes or twisting round the branches of trees ; calyx 3-leaved, 
petals 3 ; flowers small and white ; stems tough and dark green ; 
the largest of the size of a crow-quill; branches provided with small 
round suckers like those of the common dodder ; fruit a drupe, one- 
seeded, nut round of the size of a pea. 

Constituents. — An alkaloid. 

Actions and uses — Alterative ; given in bilious affections, for piles,, 
urethritis, &c. Locally it is used as a wash for the head to destroy 
vermin. Mixed with gingelly oil it is applied to strengthen the roots 
of the hair ; with ginger and butter it is used for healing; ulcers. 

Cinnamomum Camphora, B. P., Camphora Offloinaram. 

Habitat, — China, Japan, Formosa. 

Parts used. — A stearopten (concrete volatile oil) purified by 
sublimation. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Kafiir. Burm. — Payo, Paronk. Can. — 
Karpura. Cing. — Kapuru. Duk., Beng , Guz.. Hind., Mar. — Kapur, 
Kaphur Eng. — Camphor. Malyal. — Karppuram. Pers. — Kafur. Sans. 
— Karpuroh, Piikva and Apakva. Tam. — Shudan Karuppuram. Tel. 
— Karpuram. 

Characters, — Camphor, a stearopten, having the nature of a 
ketone, chiefly distilled from the root trunk and branches of cinnamo- 
mum camphora ; also obtained by heating comminuted plant or chips 
of brnnches, &c., in water, when camphor volatilizes, and it is purified 
bv sublimation and condensed into balls, tablets, or sublimed powder, 
km.wn ai> flowers of camphor. It is imported from Japan in a crude 
fcrm and is mixed with lime and resublimed into the caniphor 
cakes. Crude camphor possesses considerrable hygroscopic properties. 
Met with in solid colourless transparent crystalline pieces. The 
odour is powerful, taste pungent and bitter, followed by a sensation 
of cold ; it burns with a smoky flame ; soluble in water (1 in 
700), alcohol (I in i). chloioform (4 in i), and olive oil (1 in 4) ; 



526 CINNAMOMUM CAMPHORA. 

very soluble in ether, benzin and oil. It forms a liquid when triturated 
with chloral hydrate, menthol, phenol and thymol. Dose, 2 to 5 grs. 
Borneo camphor bears the same chemical relation to Japanese camphor 
as alcohol bears to aldehyde. It is also heavier than water. 

Constituents. — Camphor, when heated with chloride of zinc and 
distilled, yields cymol or cymene ; with nitric acid it is more or less 
oxidised, thus forming camphoric and camphoretic acids. Cam- 
phoric acid, a dibasic acid, occurs in acicular crystals, without any 
odour, and of an acid taste ; soluble in alcohol, ether and fatty oils, in 
boiling water (i in 10), and in cold water (i in 100); insoluble in 
carbon sulphide. Dose, 5 to 15 grs. 

Preparations. — Aqua Camphorae, B. P., (70 grs. in i gallon) Dose» 
i to I fid. oz. Linimentum Camphorae, B.P., of camphor in 4 of olive oil. 
Linimentum Camphorae Ammoniatum, B. P., compound liniment of 
camphor (i in 8). Spiritus Camphorae, B.P., (i in 10). Dose, 5 to 20 ms- 
Camphora Salicylata contains camphor 14 and Salicylic acid 11. Dose, 

1 to 5 grs. Tinctura camphorae composita, B. P.. (paregoric elixir), con- 
tains one grain of opium in 4 fid. drs. of tincture. Dose, \ to i fid, dr. 
Eau sedative contains ammonia water 2 ozs.. sodii chloridum 

2 ozs.. camphorated spirit of wine 3 drs., water 40 ozs. For local 
application. Camphor chloral — camphor and chloral equal parts ; useful 
as a paint in neuralgia and over the larynx in spasmodic cough. 
Camphorated chalk and camphorated myrrh, used as dentifrices. 
Essential oil of camphor — a bye-product in the manufacture of 
camphor — contains camphor in solution with a yellow-brown volatile 
oil ; used as a rubefacient. Elixir camphor (1 in 15), miscible in 
water. Dose, \ to i dr. Camphoid — pyroxylin 1, camphor and alcohol, 
20 each. A good substitute for collodion. Camphora Monobromata 
— monobromide of camphor, bromo-camphor, prepared by heating 
together bromine and camphor. It occurs in prismatic, quite 
colourless needles or scales. It has a mild camphoraceous odour 
and taste, neutral reaction; soluble in spirit, ether and chloro- 
form and fixed oils ; sparingly soluble in water and glycerin. 
Dose, 2 to 10 grs. Camphor Naphthol — a mixture of melted 
beta naphtol i part, with camphor 2 parts. An oily fiuid, soluble 
in alcohol, ether, and oils, insoluble in water. It dissolves iodine, 
cocaine, and cinchona alkaloids, &c , used as a local antiseptic 
and antiparasitic. Camphora Phenolata, a solution of camphor in 
carbolic acid. A clear oily liquid ; taste and odour camphoraceous ; 
insoluble in water, soluble in vegetable oils and in petroleum jelly. 
It dissolves salicylic acid, cocaine and iodoform. Dose, 5 to 10 ms. 
An oily solution 50 p.c. is used as an antiseptic, local anaesthetic, 
carminative and antipruritic. Camphor salol — contains melted 
camphor 2, and salol 3. It is light yellow oily fluid, freely soluble in 
ether, alcohol and oils, insoluble in water. Freely dissolves iodine 
and alkaloids. As an antiseptic it is locally used in epithelioma, lupus 
phagedenic and syphilitic sores. 

Actions and uses. — Camphor is locally rubefacient and resolvent. 
In medicinal doses it stimulates the heart, respiration, and the 



aNNAMO^fl>M Zm"t.ANICUM. 



vasomator ganglia ; and stimulates and increases the sexual appetite ; 
after a lime it depresses the generative function. It stimulates the 
uterus and increases the menstrual flow* On the skin it produces 
increased diaphoresis. As an anodyne it allays pain, relieves sexual 
excitt-ment as chordee and other neurotic affections. It is eliminated 
by the skin, kidney's and bronchi ; often causes dysuria. In large doses 
it produces gastro* enteritis and symptoms of irritant poison. It 
depresses the heart, gives rise to cold sweats* cold hands and feet, coma, 
convulsions, and death. In comparatively large dose^ it is given in 
puerperal mania. An enema of camphoris given to expel worms (asca- 
rides). Externally it is used as a wash for ulcers. In toothache, 
camphor dissolved in alcohol and applied to thecavilti* of carious teeth 
gives relief ; used as snuff it checks coryza. The liniment is useful for 
sprains, bruises, for rheumatic pains of joints, also in spasmodic pains 
in muscles. 

iMonobromaled camphor resembles bromides in action and is a 
ncrvoub j^edative, gastric irritant and hypnotic. U is used in insomnia, 
delirium tremens, convulsions and spermatorrhofU. Camphoric acid 
solution 5 p.c. is used in abrasions and ulcerations of the mucous 
membranes. As a spray i p.c. solution is used in severe catarrhal 
aflcctions as trachitis» laryngitis and bronchitis. As a plug soaked 
in solution 2^ p.c. or the solution itself applied to the nxsal sur- 
face» stops severe catarrh. In eczema and erysipelas, an ointment of 
the acid or 4 p.c. solution is used. In catarrhal cystitis with ammoni- 
cal fermentation, a 2 p.c. aqueous solution with alcohol, injected 
into the bladder and given internally, relieves strangury and readers 
the urine a clear normal liquid. 

Cinnamomum Zeylanioum, B.P (Oeylon cinnamon). 
C Saigonicum (Saigon cinnamon), C Cassia (Cassia 
oinnamon) C. Aromaticum, Laurus cinnamomum, 
Cassia Laurus* 

HtthitaL — China, Assam, Cochin China, Ceylon, Southern Intlia. 

Parts used. — The dried inner bark of the shoots from truncated 
stocks, cinnamomi cortex, B.P., and essential oil, oleum cinnamomi, 

Fetnacuiar, — Arab. — Darasini. Bomb., Beng, — Dalachini, 
Taja, Burm, — Theet Kyabah, Chin. — Yuh or Juh — kwei Can. — 
.Lavanga paitce, Cin. — Kurundu. Duk. — Oualami, Malyal.— Katu 
iK^rua. Hind. — Moti durchini, Tvak» Guda tvach, Tvaksura» Tvak- 
svadvi. Matyal. — ^Kulitmants. Kana Manis Pers. — ^Saila Myah* 
Sans. — Darashita, Kalphah. Kira phah, Gudut v^aka. Tarn. — Karuvap- 
pattai, Lawunga, Tel. — Sanna — Lavanga-putla. 

Tvacha — Bark; Guda tvtch, a sweet bark or sugar bark* 

Tvaksara, having excellent bark ; Tvaksvadvi, having sweet b^rk. 

ChamcUn, — The bark occurs in light yellowish brown quills 
consisting of several pieces rolled together, each very thin, Chinese 
variety — each piece in a single quill, rarely double, of irregular 



5^^ CIXNAMOMi'H INERS. 

from and of a rough texture. Each quill is of the size of a lady's 
finger. When deprived of corky layer it has a light yellowish-brown 
cvMour. It is generally mixed with broad pieces of an ash colour, the 
remains of the external bark ; ver\* brittle^ breaking with a crackling 
noise. Odour agreeable, h-agranr and aromatic ; taste sweetish. 
aromatic and pungent. The aroma is due to its containing Large 
quantities of an essential oil. Do^e of the powder, lo to 30 grs. 

C'.nsittiients. — Volatile oil, 2 p.c cinnamic acid, resin, tannin 
sugar, niannit, starch, mucilage, ash, Jtc. 

The volatile oil. oleum cinnamomi. B.P.. is distilled from the 
cortex and consists chiefly of cinnamic aldehyde, oxidizing into resin 
and cinnamic acid : also cinnamyl acetate and hydrocarbons. It is a 
brownish liquid, becomes thicker and darker by age : has a character- 
istic occur, sweet spicy taste soluble in alcohol and glacial acetic acid. 
Fresh oil contains no cinnamic acid, but after keeping cirtnamrc acid 
is formed, which by further oxidation becomes converted into benzoic 
acid. 

Cinnamic acid — cinnamyLic acti — occurs in transrarec: crvstais, 
sparingly soluble in water, used as an injection in phihisis. A 5 p.c- 
oi.v emulsica with ycLk oi egg injected in lupus. 

/V^^arjr.V:rw. — Of the bark- — Aqua Cinnamoasi B.P. : :n io'k or 
ci! •. precipitated calcium phosphate 4. dis:iCed water :> r.coc. Dose. 

1 : ? 2 id- oxs. Tiocrura Cirdamom: Cr-mootsita B.P. 2 p.c. jyc^tt, 1 to 

2 i-s Tincrura Catechu- Do$e. i tv^ i ad dr. Tiixtiira Lavandulae 
Corarcsita- Docse, \ to ! dr. Pulvis aromatfcus cccrarns Ceylon 
cinnan:;:! 35. ^tnjcr j?, cariamocns tf. nutmeg 15 : mixan-i rr:::iratc- 
D-rse^. :o :o 5: grs. Tlnctura jinnarnocnr. B.P. • r in 5 . I>:se, i to 
dvi. dr. Pulris Cinnamogii Comp^'sirus^ B.P-. ccctaiiLii:^ ihe bark, 
c>Lrdi3!Ocis and ginger in equal parts. I>:<5e^ re to ^c grs- Spiritus 
Crncanrrcn:* B-Pl. «^i in tc>. D:se, 5 to ro msw 

Asr^if^' XTJ ssfs^ — ^Tbe bark :s in a^reeabte. carz^'-a'ive^ ant:- 
^^i^nl:d:c. arjcnariv:, sciculant, ascrin^en: ani germicrde. mz ^ '-i>ec 
a- ad-urtct to ccber mecicirre?. The c-d has r.o asm-^tncr. It !< a 
vasvzulir dud ner%ine sgfmalart. In lar^e dic^aes in-e Jtl is ir. im'an: iz d 
a rur^'jcic ros*?c- Intt&edicinal d-rses :i is a ^>-«^ r-tziedj ::r lii:i- 
Icr.cr. r^JTi y>:-s :c the : r^^^, enter^Jrij. one :rirrp?^ n tr-e s" :c:-i--:r: 
a-Sv :j chcci na-jsea 1:1 1 vccniiir^. As an ini-secC':: 'Z > j^^d as a~ 

raci. : and :s cscc ii::ema.ly in tTrcjcd fcvrr- Tne rari ii 
r j!;^»:scif\:, and r-is a scecifc jctujc cc the nterr^ md i:> c'=^:=^ wizh 
:c"*±r nter—e^ icirr:ilin:> t: rrvccce r-»ir::r^.*::n xTd tr cn^cci. 'j.terin^ 
*jfcn:«-r-'-*a^TS : ij>: ^- in n ±it-enA:c- nj.j:jea. vrcn-ri-x- i~d :: :neck 
d:x— r -^a and ti**; jr*r«:s ja-sei rr :ch*^ — ^rd.-r-n':fs- Cm-umc iiid 1- 
xn:::. cTJu^r ir i "^ u.>c*d i-s in :--x*v::: - n T*t>->LS^ Trt rm^^.m 



^£r3 ij«*-i. — Td«i jEta-=its lad bark^ 



LAtTRUS NOBIUS, 



FmiiftM/ar.— Arab.— Tariialy. Bur.— Sikeyabo. Bomb,— T^nui- 
patra. Can. — Adavi LavariKa paiti. Duk., Hind, — Jangli D^rachinii 
Talispatra (leaves). Mah. — ^Ran^^cha dai, Tejpat, MaL — Karunaioli, 
Tarn — KatiUi Kurrnap. 

Characters, — Flat or slightly quilled pieces* thicker than the 
Chinese bark, and of a deeper colour of a strong odour and laste, but 
less sweet ; an oil is distilled from these barks — lejpaira; the leaves 
of a brownish colour, from 4 to 6 inches long, and i| to 2 inches broad ; 
upper surface shining and smooth* under surface glaucous, oblong, 
ovate, coriaceous and obtusely pointed ; three to hve longitudinal 
nerves extend ingfrom the base to the apex, most marked on their 
under surface. They have a pleasant odour, like that of cloves and 
cinnamon, and an aromatic taste. 

CoNsttttiftits, — The leaves contain an essential oil, cugenol, terpcne, 
and cinnamic aldehyde. The bark contains an oil similar to cinnamon oil. 
The root coutainian oil containing eugenol, saffrol, ben^aidehyde and 
terpene. 

Preparations*^-^ compound powder — Trijataka, containing uj 
and three other aromatics-eUchI, lamala patra, and kdla miga kesara 
Compound pill — Trijatakadi Goli, containing trijataka i, pipali 4. 
sakara, drakhsha, jethi madha, each 8 parts. Dose, 3 to 5 grs. 
Used in cough, flatulence and dyspepsia. The pill is to be kept in. 
the mouth tilt it is completely dissolved. 

AitioNs and nsrs. — Carminative, stimulant, diuretic, diaphoretic 
and lactagogue. The powder is used in many aromatic and carminati%e 
compound preparations and given in fevers, flatulence, dyspepsia, and 
urinary diseases. The bark is used like cassia bark, 

Laarns Nobilla. 

Habitat* — Southern Europe* 

Parts used, — The berries and leaves* 

ri-rwrfcfz/^n— Eng.— The sweet bay laurels; Victor's laurels, 
Pers, — Hab-elghara. 

Characters, — Leaves 2 to 4 inches long, pellucid, punctate and 
smooth J berries oval or subglobular. about i inch long, greenisii black 
or blackish brown ; when dry, slightly wrinkled and fragile ; seed oval, 
lying loose in the integument ; cotyledons two, plano-convex f taste 
aromatic, oily and bitter. 

Constitnenis — The fruit and leaves contain a volatile oil, a fixed 
oil (oil of bay berries), and a resin, 

Actmns andusis* — Astringent, stomachic and stimulant* The leaves 
arc used for flavouring medicines. The decoction is used in leucorrhoea, 
diseases of the urinary organs, and dropsy* The oil is used locally in 
relieving rheumatic paim and as a nervine atimulant in hysteria, 
epilepsy, &c* 

a 



530 XFCTAXDRA RODLEI. 

Utmm 8ebitea,Tfttnuitlittni BozbufUi, T. 

Habitat. — ^Throughout the hotter parts of India. 

Parts used, — The bark. 

JWnacmlar. — Arab. — Maghath-i-Hindi. Beng. — ^Knkur Chita. 
Cing. — Boommeegass. Guz^ Mar^ Hiod. — Maeda lakarL Pcrs. — 
Kilia. Tarn. — Mushaippeyetty. Tel. — Naramamide. 

CJkarmviers- — Bark hard, thick, and of a brown coloor, sometioies 
soft and smooth : external surfice rugous and easily scratched^ fragile 
and readily powdered : section corky and composed of several layers of 
a soft granular matter : when placed in water it afibrds a large (pun- 
tity of mucilage ; taste feebly balsamic, bitter and mucilaginous. 

O^mstUments. — The bark contains mucilage, tanrotetanine, an 
alkaloid producing tetanic spasms in animals. 

Prrfanttmms. — Decoction and infusion (i in lot. Dose. | to i fid. oz 

ActKMS mmd uses. — Demukeni, and emollient : giren in dianiiGea 
and G3rsenteTy. Externally a paste of i: is usee as an cmoLlicnt ap|^> 
cation to sprains, bruises and rheumatic and goaty joints. The 
bark is gtenoally given in ccmbination with ccher alterative dregs. 






Ss^iut, — Coocan, Canarx Maiherac, Mahable5hw:3r. 

ArtF »sn£.--Tbe leaves and ocL 

nrrxjcaclirf. — Bombi. — Ksi. Goa. — Gincw 

Cik^A~«in7. — Leives ovate, lanceobite. aocg. pc^stec, cc-riaoec^i^ 
smvxxh, shirmg^ and greenbh aScve wiifa ispcessed cenrcs izc ^iaacoc^s 
ceccath, saeiy recx^ilaccc on bcch scirtaoss^ aixi alsc nimeiv peijjcid 
aai dcctei : saDeil slighiiy arccnarx : tasce bttrerei, rcziccr azc =:ac:I- 
agiactss ; rerncs sdrjec cc the >iac o« a ssall Aivrrr. pi!^ ycHcw, seed 
browts and >X2shec : kemei, ct y asd w^me. :c exrosn :: ibe arr 
becccaic^ ncd : rxsce arcr-jci: lie thai c-c cabec^ 

C./pr.TMwrf. — Tbe frsic cx:cra==* rekz: arc fic. arsi or alkal-iad 
allied to Lasrvcecanize : dbe Jeaves crccir: ssdla^ 

A:^:sa *m *wjl — rVr*~Vecr : =aed :r ^jo-crbsa, Jeac::rTbia, 
vd is =:5^ as i= extir=al arcocuSrc i.* smirs rm^set irrd - ^r" 



J^srs JUMsffl — Tie rort, 

Ca*-A-afrTfL — ^Tr«e Ijt^ ; Jersey jcci- cn-^azcics^ aoi: 



8A98AMAS OrrUCtNALE. 



S3« 



Striated with granular fracture ; internally the colour i^ cinnninon 
brown. Do»e» 20 to 60 grs. 

Coftstituents* — The bark contains bebeerine (identical with buxinc 
and pelosine) and siprrine ; Bebeerine is a yellowish brown amorphous 
powder without any odour and of a bitter taste; soluble in alcohol and 
ether, insoluble in water. Dose, I to 10 grs, 

Bebeerine sulphas — probably a mixture of sulphate of bebeerine, 
nectandrin and other alkaloids met with in dark brown scales^ of a bitter 
taste, freely soluble in water, sparingly so in alcohol* Dose, r to 10 grs, 

Preparaiions. — ^Decoctlon and infusion (1 in lo). Dose, \ to i 
fld. oz. 

Actmnsandfises, — The bark is febrifuge, tonic and anlipcriodic,and 
given like quinine, though inferior to it in .every way* It is given 111 
intermittents, dyspepsia and neuralgias; also as astringent in leucorrhtra 
and tnenorrhagia. Bebeerine is antipyretic and tonic. 

Saasafras Officinale, B.P., 8. YaFiifoUam. 

ffahiiat^^%. America. 

Paris fiir*^.— The dried root, sassafras radix, B.P*| oil, and pith 
of the branches — sassafras meduna. 

Vertwcular, — Eng, — Sassafras, ague tree, cinnamon wood. 

C/tftrncUrs. — Root, deprived of grey corky layer, in irregular 
fragments, colour rust brown: internally corky and smooth; odour 
fragrant and taste sweet, aromatic and asti ingent — the pith of branches, 
otherwise called sassafras medulla, in slender cylindrical pieces, curved 
or coiled, and of a white colour, light and spongy, without any odour* 
With water it forms a mucilaginous liquid, which does not precipitate 
with alcohol* 

Comtiiutnts. — The bark contains* a volatile oil, oleum sassafras 
5 px-, sassafrid 9 p.c, tannin 6 p.c*, starch gum, resin, wax — the 
pith contains mucilage* 

Oleum sassafras — to obtain it, distil the bark with water or steam. 
It is a yellowish red liquid, of a characteristic odour, warm and aromatic 
taste, and nt:utral reaction ; becoming dark and thick by age ; soluble in 
alcohol, glacial acetic acid and bisulphide of carbon. With nitric acid it 
becomes dark red and is finally converted into a red resin. It contains 
cugenol, safrene (pinenc), also safrol, sassafras camphor. Dose, ^ to 
3 ms. Sassafrid is the oxidation product of tannin. Safro! is the liquid 
stearopten of oil of sassafras, used in headacJie and sciatica and to 
disguise the odour of fatty bases. Dose, 20 to 30 nis. 

Freparatious — Of the bark* — Infusum sassafras. Dose, I to 4 
02s. Concentrated compound solution of sarsaparllla, B. P. Dose, 
2 to 8 fld. drs. 

Actions and uses, — ^The hot infusion of the bark is alterative, dia* 

[ihoretic, stimulant and emmenagogue, and is given to purify the blood, 
t is given to combination with guaiacum and sarsapartUa in cutaneous 



526 CINNAMOMUM CAMPHORA. 

very soluble in ether, benzin and oil. It forms a liquid when triturated 
with chloral hydrate, menthol, phenol and thymol. Dose, 2 to 5 grs. 
Borneo camphor bears the same chemical relation to Japanese camphor 
as alcohol bears to aldehyde. It is also heavier than water. 

Constituents, — Camphor, when heated with chloride of zinc and 
distilled, yields cyraol or cymene ; with nitric acid it is more or less 
oxidised, thus forming camphoric and camphoretic acids. Cam- 
phoric acid, a dibasic acid, occurs in acicular crystals, without any 
odour, and of an acid taste ; soluble in alcohol, ether and fatty oils, in 
boiling water (i in 10), and in cold water (i in 100) ; insoluble in 
carbon sulphide. Dose, 5 to 15 grs. 

Preparations. — Aqua Camphorae, B. P., (70 grs. in i gallon) Dose, 
i to I fid. oz. Liniment um Camphorae, B.P., of camphor in 4 of olive oil. 
Linimentum Camphorae Ammoniatum, B. P., compound liniment of 
camphor (i in 8). Spiritus Camphorae, B.P., (i in 10). Dose, 5 to 20 ms. 
Camphora Salicylata contains camphor 14 and Salicylic acid 11. Dose, 

1 to 5 grs. Tinctura camphorae composita, B.P.. (paregoric elixir), con- 
tains one grain of opium in 4 fid. drs. of tincture. Dose, ^ to i fid. dr. 
Eau sedative contains ammonia water 2 ozs., sodii chloridum 

2 ozs.. camphorated spirit of wine 3 drs., water 40 ozs. For local 
application. Camphor chloral — camphor and chloral equal parts ; useful 
as a paint in neuralgia and over the larynx in spasmodic cough. 
Camphorated chalk and camphorated myrrh, used as dentifrices. 
Essential oil of camphor — a bye-product in the manufacture of 
camphor — contains camphor in solution with a yellow-brown volatile 
oil ; used as a rubefacient. Elixir camphor (1 in 15), miscible in 
water. Dose, \ to i dr. Camphoid — pyroxylin 1, camphor and alcohol, 
20 each. A good substitute for collodion. Camphora Monobromata 
— monobromide of camphor, bromo-camphor, prepared by heating 
together bromine and camphor. It occurs in prismatic, quite 
colourless needles or scales. It has a mild camphoraceous odour 
and taste, neutral reaction; soluble in spirit, ether and chloro- 
form and fixed oils ; sparingly soluble in water and glycerin. 
Dose, 2 to 10 grs. Camphor Naphthol — a mixture of melted 
beta naphtol i part, with camphor 2 parts. An oily fluid, soluble 
in alcohol, ether, and oils, insoluble in water. It dissolves iodine, 
cocaine, and cinchona alkaloids, &c , used as a local antiseptic 
and antiparasitic. Camphora Phenolata, a solution of camphor in 
carbolic acid. A clear oily liquid ; taste and odour camphoraceous ; 
insoluble in water, soluble in vegetable oils and in petroleum jelly. 
It dissolves salicylic acid, cocaine and iodoform. Dose, 5 to 10 ms. 
An oily solution 50 p.c. is used as an antiseptic, local anaesthetic, 
carminative and antipruritic. Camphor salol — contains melted 
camphor 2, and salol 3. It is light yellow oily fluid, freely soluble in 
ether, alcohol and oils, insoluble in water. Freely dissolves iodine 
and alkaloids. As an antiseptic it is locally used in epithelioma, lupus 
phagedenic and syphilitic sores. 

Actions and uses. — Camphor is locally rubefacient and resolvent. 
In medicinal doses it stimulates the heart, respiration, and the 



CINNAMOMUM zmXAKlCUIkl. 



«?2« 



vasomator ganglia ; and stimulates and increases the sexual appetite ; 
after a time it depresses the generative function. It stimulates the 
uterus and increases the menstrual flow. On the skin it produces 
increased diaphoresis. As an anodyne it allays pain, relieves sexual 
excitement as chordee and other neurotic affections. It is eliminated 
by the skin» kidneys and bronchi ; often causes dysuria. In large doses 
it produces gastro- enteritis and synvptoms of irritant poison. It 
depresses the heart, gives rise to cold sweats, cold hands and feet, coma, 
convulsions, and death. In comparatively large doses it is given in 
puerperal mania. An enema of camphoris given to expel worms (asca- 
rides). Externally it is used as a wash for ulcers. In toothache, 
camphor dissolved in alcohol and applied to the cavites of carious teeth 
gives relief ; used as snuflf it checks coryza. The lininjcnt is useful for 
sprains, bruises^ for rheumatic pains of joints, also in spasmodic pains 
in muscles. 

Monobromated camphor resembles bromides in action and is a 
nervo\Ks sedative, gastric irritant and hypnotic. It is used in insomnia, 
dehrium tremens, convulsions and spermatorrhoea. Camphoric acid 
solution 5 p.c* is used in abrasions and ulcerations of the mucous 
membranes. As a spray i p.c. solution is used in severe catarrhal 
affections as trachitis, laryngitis and brotichitis. As a plug soaked 
in solution 2J p.c. or the sokition itself applied to the nasal sur- 
face, stops severe catarrh. In eczema and erysipelas, an ointment of 
the acid or 4 p.c, solution is used. In catarrhal cystitis with ammoni- 
cal fermentation, a 2 p.c. aqueous solution with alcohol, injected 
into the bladder and given internally, relieves strangury and rt^nders 
the urine a clear normal liquid. 

Cinnamomnm Zeylanicum, B.P. (Ceylon cinnamon), 
C. Saigonicum (Saigon cinnamon), C. Cassia (Cassia 
cinnamon) C Aromaticum, Laurus cinnamomiun, 
Cassia Laurus. 

HabttaL^^Chxnz^ Assam, Cochin China, Ceylon, Southern India, 

JRarts used. — The dried inner bark of the shoots from truncated 
stocks^ cinnamomi cortex, B.P., and essential oil, oleum ctnnamomi, 
B.P. 

Vernacuhr. — Arab. — Darasini. Bomb., Beng. — Dalachini, 
Taja, Burm, — Theet Kvabah, Chin. — Yuh or Juh — kwei Can. — 
Lavanga pattee. Cin. — Kurundu. Duk. — Oualami. MalyaL — Katu 
Karua* Hind» — ^Moti darchini, Tvak, Guda tvach, Tvaksara, Tvak- 
svadvi* Malyal. — Kulitmanis. Kana .Vlanis Pers. — ^Saila Myah. 
Sans. — Darashita^ Kalphah, Kira pbah, Gudat vaka. Tam. — Karuvap- 
pattai, Lawunga. Tel. — Banna — Lavanga-patta. 

Tvacba — Bark; Guda tvach, a sweet bark or sugar bark 1 
Tvaksara, having excellent bark ; Tvaksvadvi, having sweet bark. 

Characters. — The bark occurs in light^ yellowish brown quills 
consisting of se%*cral pieces rolled together, each very thin. Chinese 
variety — each piece in a single quill, rarely double, of irregular 



528 CINNAMOMUM INERS. 

from and of a rough texture. Each quill is of the size of a lady's 
finger. When deprived of corky layer it has a light yellowish-brown 
colour. It is generally mixed with broad pieces of an ash colour, the 
remains of the external bark ; very brittle, breaking with a crackling 
noise. Odour agreeable, fragrant and aromatic ; taste sweetish, 
aromatic and pungent. The aroma is due to its containing large 
quantities of an essential oil. Dose of the powder, lo to 30 grs. 

Cousitiueiits. — Volatile oil, 2 p.c, cinnamic acid, resin, tannin 
sugar, mannir, starch, mucilage, ash, &c. 

The volatile oil, oleum cinnamomi, B.P., is distilled from the 
cortex and consists chiefly of cinnamic aldehyde, oxidizing into resin 
and cinnamic acid ; also cinnamyl acetate and hydrocarbons. It is a 
brownish liquid, becomes thicker and darker by age ; has a character- 
istic odour, sweet spicy taste, soluble in alcohol and glacial acetic acid. 
Fresh oil contains no cinnamic acid, but after keeping cinnamic acid 
is formed, which by further oxidation becomes converted into benzoic 
acid. 

Cinnamic acid — cinnamylic acid — occurs in transparent crystals, 
sparingly soluble in water, used as an injection in phthisis. A 5 p.c. 
oily emulsion with yolk of Qgg injected in lupus. 

Preparations, — Of the bark. — Aqua Cinnamomi B.P. (i in 10); or 
oil 2, precipitated calcium phosphate 4, distilled water to 1,000. Dose, 

1 to 2 fid. ozs. Tinctura Cardamomi Composita B.P. 2 p.c. Dose, i to 

2 drs Tinctura Catechu. Dose, \ to i fld dr. Tinctura Lavandula? 
Composita. Dose, \ to i dr. Pulvis aromaticus contains Ceylon 
cinnamon 35, ginger 35, cardamoms 15, nutmeg 15 ; mix and triturate. 
Doses, 10 to 30 grs. Tinctura cinnamomi, B.P. (i in 5). Dose, \ to 
fld. dr. Pulvis Cinnamomi Compositus, B.P., containing the bark, 
cardamoms and ginger in equal parts. Dose, 10 to 40 grs. Spiritus 
Cinnamomi, B.P., (i in 10). Dose, 5 to 20 ms. 

Actions and uses. — The bark is an agreeable, carminative, anti- 
spasmodic, aromatic, stimulant, astringent and germicide, and is used 
as adjunct to other medicines. The oil has no astringency. It is a 
vascular and nervine stimulant. In large doses the oil is an irritant and 
a narcotic poison. In medicinal doses it is a good remedy for flatu- 
lence, paralysis of the tongue, enteralgia and cramps in the stomach ; 
also to chtck nausea and vomiting. As an antiseptic it is used as an 
injection in gonorrhoea. As a germicide, it destroys the pathogenic 
bacilli and is used internally in typhoid fever. The bark is 
hemostatic, and has a specific action on the uterus and is given with 
other uterine stimulants to promote parturition and to check uterine 
ha^morrhawes ; also given in flatulence, nausea, vomiting, and to check 
diarrhoea and the gripes caused by other medicines. Cinnamic acid i^ 
antitubtrcular and is used as an injection in phthisis. The emulsion 
is injected in lupus. 

Cinnamomum Iners, C. Nitidum, C. Eucalyptoides. 

Habitat. — Peninsula, Malabar, Konkans. 
Part% used, — The leaves and bark. 



LAURUS NOBILIS. 



;2Q 



FrrH^cw/i^r.^Arab.— Tarnaly. Bur. — Sikcyubo. Bornb, — Tainal- 
' ' ., Hind 

Tejpat^ 



patra. Can. — Adavi Lavanga patli, Duk*, Hind. — ^Jiingli niirachiiii, 
Talispalra (leaves)* Mah.— RanAchii dal, Tejpat* Mai, — Karunitloli« 



Mah.— Ran^cha dal, 
Taui.— Kattu, Kurrnap. 

Characten, — Flat or slightly qtiiUed pieces, thicker than ihc 
Chinese bark, and of a deeper colour, of a strong odour and Tajttc, but 
less sweet ; an oil is distilled from these barks^ — lejpatra; ihe leaves 
of a brownish colour, from 4 to 6 inches long, and i\ io 2 inches broad ; 
upper surface shining and smooth » under surface glaucous, oblung, 
ovate, coriaceous and obtusely pointed ; three tu tive longitudinal 
nerves extending from the base to the apex, most marked on their 
under surface. They have a pleasant odour» like that of cloves and 
cinnamon, and an aromatic taste. 

Coustttueftis, — The leaves contain an essential oil, eugenol, terpcnc, 
and cinnamic aldehyde. The bark contains an oil similar to cinnamon oil* 
The root contains an oil containing eugenol, saffrol, benzaldehydc and 
lerpene. 

Prff>tirattQm^ — A compound powder — Trijataka, containing laj 
and three other aromatics^elachi, tamaJa patra, and kila niiga kesara 
Compound piU — Trijatakadi Goli, containing trijataka i, pipali 4. 
sakara, drakhsha, jethi madha, each 8 parts. Dose, 3 to 5 grs. 
Used in cough, flatulence and dyspepsia. The pilJ is to be kept in, 
the mouth till it is completely dissolved. 

Acthns and uses, — Carminative, slimulanti diuretic, diaphoretic 
and lactagogue. The powder is used in matiy aromatic and carminative 
compound preparations and given in fevers, flatulence, dyspepsia, and 
urinary diseases. The bark is used like cassia bark. 

Lauras NabiliB. 

HabiiaL — Southern Europe. 

Pari^ used, — The berries and leaves, 

Verttattilar. — Eng. — The sweet bay laurels ; Victor's laurels. 
Pers. — Hab-el-ghara. 

Characters. — Leaves 2 to 4 inches long, pellucid, punctate and 
smooth ; berries oval or subglobular* about { mch long, greenish black 
or blackish brown ; when dry^ slightly wrinkled and fragile ; seed oval, 
lying loose in the integument ; cotyledons two, planoconvex ; taste 
aromatic, oily and bitter 

Comtituenis ^The fruit and leaves contain a volatile oil, a fixed 
oil (oil of bay berries), and a resin. 

Actions and uses* — Astringent, stomachic and stimulant. The leaves 
are used for flavouring medicines. The decoction is used in Icucorrhcea 
diseases of the urinary organs, and dropsy. The oil is used locaJIy iri 
relieving rheumatic pains and as a nervine stimulant in hysteria, 
epilepsy, &c. 

34 



530 NKCTANDRA RODIiCI. 

LitsoBa Sebifera, Tetranthera Roxburghii, T. Laarifolia. 

Habitat, — Throughout the hotter parts of India. 

Parts used, — The bark. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Maghath-i-Hindi. Beng. — Kukur Chita. 
Cing. — Boommeegass. Guz., Mar., Hind. — Maeda lakari. Pers. — 
Kilza. Tam. — Mushaippeyetty. Tel. — Naramamide. 

Characters. — Bark hard, thick, and of a brown colour, sometimes 
soft and smooth ; external surface rugous and easily scratched, fragile 
and readily powdered ; section corky and composed of several layers of 
a soft granular matter ; when placed in water it affords a large quan- 
tity of mucilage ; taste feebly balsamic, bitter and mucilaginous. 

Constituents, — The bark contains mucilage, taurotetanine, an 
alkaloid producing tetanic spasms in animals. 

Preparations* — Decoction and infusion (i in lo). Dose, \ to i fld, 02 

Actions and uses, — Demulcent, and emollient ; given in diarrhoea 
and dysentery. Externally a paste of it is used as an emollient appli- 
cation to sprains, bruises, and rheumatic and gouty joints. The 
bark is generally given in combination with other alterative drugs. 

LitBoea Stooksii, Tetranthera Lanoifolia, Aotinodaphne 
Lanoeolata. 

Habitat. — Concan, Canara, Matheran, Mahableshwar. 

Parts used.^The leaves and oil. 

Vernaculars. — Bomb. — Pisd. Goa. — Gino. 

Characters. — Leaves ovate, lanceolate, long, pointed, coriaceous 
smooth, shining, and greenish above with impressed nerves and glaucous 
beneath, finely reticulated on both surfaces, and also minutely pellucid 
and dotted ; smell slightly aromatic ; taste bitterish, pungent and mucil- 
aginous ; berries scarlet, of the size of a small acorn, pulp yellow, seed 
brown and polished ; kernel, oily and white, on exposure to the air 
becoming red ; taste aromatic like that of cubeb. 

Constituents. — The fruit contains resin and fat, and an alkaloid 
allied to Laurotetanine ; the leaves contain mucilage. 

Preparations. — Infusion (cold), (1 in 10). Dose, i to 2 ozs.; and oil. 

Actions and uses, — Demulcent ; used in gonorrhoea, leucorrhcea, 
irritation of the bladder, other urinary disorders, and diabetes. The 
oil is used as an external application to sprains bruises and itch. 

Neotandra Rodisi, Bebeeru or Oreen-Heart Tree (Eng.) 

Habitat. — South America. 

Parts used. — The bark. 

Characters, — Tree large ; leaves long, coriacious, and shining ; 
flowers yellow, of jasmine odour ; fruit pyriform and long ; taste 
bitter ; bark in flat pieces with many longitudinal depressions, coarsely 



SASSAITKAS OKFIICINAI^* 



531 



ftnated with granular fracture ; internally the colour h cinnamon 
brown. Dose, 20 to 60 grs. 

CoustUuents. — The bark contains bebeerine (identical with buxine 
and pelosine) and sipirinc ; Bebeerine is a yellowish brown amorphous 
powder without any odour and of a bitter taste; soluble in alcohol and 
ether, insoluble in water. Dose, i to 10 grs. 

Bebeerine sulphas — probably a mixture of sulphate of bebeerine, 
nectandrin and other alkaloids met with in dark brown scales, of a bitter 
taste, freely soluble in water, sparingly so in alcohol. Dose, 1 to 10 grs. 

Preparations. — Decoction and infusion (i in la). DosC| 4 to 1 
fid, 02. 

Actions and uses, — The bark is febrifuge, tonic and antiperiQdic,and 
given like quinine, though inferior to it in .every way. It is given in 
intermiltents^ dyspepsia and neuralgias; also as astringent in leucorrho-a 
and menorrhagia. Bebeerine is antipyretic and tonic. 

Sassafras Offioinale, B P., S. VarufoUom. 

Habitat. — S- America. 

Parts used. — The dried root, sassafras radix, BP*, oil, and pith 
of the branches — sassafras medulla. 

Vernacular, — Eng. — Sassifras, ague tree, cinnamon wood. 

Characters, — Root, deprived of grey corky layer, in irregular 
fragmeuis» colour rust brown: internally corky and smooth; c>dour 
fragrant and taste sweet, aromatic and astringent— the pith of branches, 
otherwise called sassafras medulla, in slender cylindrical pieces, curved 
or coiled, and of a white colour, light and spongy, without any odour. 
With water it forms a mucilaginous hqutd, which does not precipitate 
with alcohol. 

Constituents, — The bark contains a volatile oil, oleum sassafras 
5 px,, sassafrid 9 p.c, tannin 6 p.c, starch gum, resin, wax — the 
pith contains mucilage. 

Oleum sassafras — ^to obtain it, distil the bark with water or steam* 
It is a yellowish red liquid, of a characteristic odour, warm and aromatic 
taste, and neutral reaction ; becoming dark and thick by age ; soluble in 
alcohol, glacial acetic acid and bisulphide of carbon. VVith nitric acid it 
becomes dark red and is finally converted into a red resin. It contains 
eugenol, safrene (pinene), also safrol, sassafras camphor. Dose, ^ to 
5 ms. Sassafrid is the oxidation product of tannin. Safrol is the liquid 
stearopten of oil of sassafras, used in headaclie and sciatica and to 
disguise the odour of fatty bases. Dose* 20 to 30 ms. 

Preparations — Of the bark. — Infusum sassafras. Dose, i lo 4 
02S. Concentrated compound solution of sarsaparilla, B. P. Dose, 
1 to 8 fld. drs. 

Actions and uses. — The hot infusion of the bark is alterative, dja- 

frhoretic, stimulant and emmenagoguc, and is given to purify the blood. 
t is given in combination with guaiacum and sarsaparilla in cutaneous 



55- 



IMPKNE L AUREOLA. 



diseases, syphilis and rheumatism. The pilh is demulcent and emollient 
and used in gastritis, enteritis and also throat troubles; as collyrium for 
conjunctivitis^ and as an antidote in irritant, or corrosive poisons. ThCj 
oil is anodyne, stimulant, alterative, diuretic, and tonic. It possesses 
violent toxic properties, and produces abortion ; often given in 
neuralgia and applied locally to dispel insects. Safrol is, like mentholi 
an anodyne, and also stimufant, and is given in neuralgia, headache, 
sciatica^ &c. 

Thymelaoeae— The Mezereon famUy. 

General Characters, — Treesi shrubs or rarely herbs; leaves entire 
and exstipulaie ; flowers perfect, tubular or top-shaped; ov 
superior ; calyx petaloid^ 4-5 imbricated ; stamens perig^'nous; o^ 
onenrelled ; fruits dry, nut-like drupes, capsular^ blvalved, soraetinies 
succulent and indehiscent ; seeds abortive and exalbumtnous. 

Habitat. — Australia, Cape of Good Hope. 

Pfopcrties. — The plants are chiefly remarkable for the toughness 
and acridity of their bark. The fruits of some are dangerously 
narcotic and poisonous. The bark of some is used as a vesicatoryt 
also as an alterative, diaphoretic, and stimulant. It contains an acrid 
resin and an acrid volatile oil— some yield a fragrant stimulant 
resin. 

Daphne Laareola, B.P<, 0. Gmdium, B.R, D. Mezeream, B.P. 

Habitat* — Europe, mountainous regions. 

Parts used. — The dried bark, 

VernactUar, — Arab.— Mazeriun, Adoda. Eng. — Spurge, wild pep- 
per. Hind. — Mazeriyuna. Pers. — Iskhes mazerun. 

Characters, — Each piece is in thin bands of various lengths, and of 
the thickness of a black-lead pencil, often folded or rolled into di<iks ; 
surface smooth or scabrous, colour darkish or yellowish brown, cover- 
ed with transverse scars or minute dots, very tough and thin : interna 
surface light, of a white colour, or soft and silky ; taste acrid ; smell 
somewhat aromatic, like that of taggara ganthoda. There are two 
varieties, the white and the brown. Dose, 1 to 6 grs. 

Constituents — ^Daphnin — a bitter glucoside and an acrid resin 
mezerein (an anhydride of a resinous acid) named mezercinic acidJ 
Umbelliferin is obtained by dry distillation of the acrid volatile oil] 
To obtain daphnin add to the decoction of alcoholic extract, acetate 1 
lead, filter the deposit, decompose the filtrate with sulphuretted hyj^ 
rogen, refilter, evaporate, treat the residue with alcohol and crystalliz 
In fine crystals, soluble in alkalies, the solution giving it a ycllof 
colour, and insoluble in ether. Mezerein, an acrid resin — to obtatfl 
h distil the solution of alcoholic extract and treat the residue witl 
water. Hard brittle mass, colour blackish green, taste acrid. 

PrfJ>aratiotis.—¥\\i\d extract, i to 5 ms. ; also used in the prepara- 
tion of Liquor Sarsx Com posit us conceutratus* 



Actions and uses. — The white variety is to be preferred, as it is the 
least acrid. In small doses it is alterative, stimulant, diuretic, laxative 
and diaphoretic; in large doses siaiogogue and intensely acrid and 
irritant, producing salivation, vomiting and purging. Locally the bark 
is highly irritant and produces vesication. As an alterative it is g»ven 
combined with sarsaparilla in syphilis, scrofula, chronic rheumatism, 
and chronic skin diseases. It is seldom used alone. Externally as a 
local irritant its ointment is used like cantharides to excite vesication 
and to promote suppuration, or maintain discharges of indolent ulcers, 
and those caused by setons or flying blisters; also used in toothache 
and as a masticactory in paralysis of the tongue* 

Laaioaiphon SpeciOBUs. 

HahttaU — Deccan Peninsula, Ceylon. 

Parts used. — The bark, 

fWrtaculftr, — Bomb., Hind,, Mar.^ — R a met ha. 

Characteni^A shrub > to 6 feet high ; bark of a brownish 
colour, very tough, and very acrid ; leaves like willow, linear» oblong, 
and of a whitish colour; flower heads horny and terminal. 

Comtitueuts. — ^A green resinous matter— the vesicating principle of 
the bark. 

Preparations. — Powdered bark. 

Actions and uses. — It is used as a powerful vesicant* The natives 
use the stem to procure abortion^ 

Laranthaisase— The Mistletoe family. 

Parasitic shrubby plants ; leaves opposite, exslipulate, greenish ; 
flowers perfect, diuecious ; calyx superior 3-8; ovary, inferior, i -celled; 
ovules 1-3, erect, or suspended ; fruit succulent, I -celled; seed solitary, 
embryo in fleshy albumen. 

Habitat. — Natives of hotter parts of America and Asia. 

Pt^ftcrties. — Some are astringent. 

Vfeoom 8p. 

Habitat, — Temperate Himalaya, Persia. 

Parts used. — The berries. 

Vernacular. — Arab, — Kishmish-i-kawaliyan. Eng. — Mistletoe. 
Hind. — Banda, Bhangra. Ind* Bazaar. — Kismish-kawali. Kawati, 
or kawH is the name of gipsy tribe in Persia, 

Characters.^ \ plant, parasitic on many trees as willows, thorns, 
Hme, elms, firs and apple-tree; fruit like a chickpea when fresh, 
succulent, containing a viscid pulp, rounded, smooth, soft and of a 
green colour externally ; when dry shrivelled and of a brown colour. 
The berries when crushed are highly sticky and contain a small »ecd 
of the size of poppy seed- Dose, 10 to 60 grs. 



534 AQUILARIA AGALLOCHA. 

Constituents. — Viscin, resembling vegetable, wax, very elastic, of 
the consistence of honey and, like caoutchouc, capable of being drawn 
into long threads. 

Preparations. — Tincture (i in lo). Dose, ^ to 2 fid. drs. Decoction, 
(i in 10). Dose, ^ to 2 fid. ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Tonic, antispasmodic, narcotic and oxytoccic; 
also emetic and purgative ; given to reduce splenic and hepatic enlarge- 
ments, to disperse swellings and in menorrhagia and haemorrhages. 
Like digitalis, it may be given in palpitation or tumultuous action of 
the heart. As an antispasmodic it is given in hysteria and epilepsy. 
Locally it is used to mature abscesses. 

Aquilariacea— The Igar family. 

Trees; leaves entire, exstipulate ; calyx tubular or top-shaped, 4-5 
lobed, persistent; ovary superior, 2-celled ; fruit capsular, 2-valved, 
sometimes succulent and indehiscent ; seeds, i or 2, exalbuminous. 

Habitat, — Native of Tropical Asia. 

Properties, — Some species yield stimulant, fragrant resin. 

Aqailaria Agallooha, A. Ovata. 

Habitat, — Malay Islands, Assam, E. Himalaya. 

Parts used* — The wood. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Ud-el-juj, Ayalodgi. Burm. — Akyan. 
Beng., Hind. — Agara. Eng. — Aloes wood, Eaglewood. Malyal. — 
Kaya-gahru. Pers. — Belanjirj. Sans. — Agaru, Rajarah kalijya, Jishva- 
rupa. Tel. — Krishna Agaru. Chinese— Chin heang. 

Characters. — Wood in irregular pieces, of a grey or dark brown or 
black colour and marked with longitudinal dark veins, hard, heavy, 
and not fibrous when powdered ; taste astringent, bitter, and odour 
fragrant ; when burnt they diffuse an agreeable (Sour, Only the diseased 
part is found infiltrated with odoriferous resinous secretion ; secretion 
obtained by tapping the trunk is known as lign-aloes, or wood aloes. 
The decayed wood is generally heavy, oily and black. 

Constituents,-— h volatile oil. 

Preparations. — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, 4 to 12 drs. Incense, 
known as vadana rokshognair dhupalli : — It contains agaru, gugala 
(shorea robusta), acorus calamus, rai, nim leaves, and salt equal 
parts. As an anodyne fumigation, used to relieve pain in gout, and 
jn surgical wounds and ulcers. 

Confection known as java-rasa-uda, contains agar 5, elachi 8, 
post-e-turanj 6, lavang 8, tabashir 12, mastaki 6, kesar 4, goWb kali 8, 
salem misri 6, sumak 6, sakar 10, sumbul tib 4, zirishk 3, rupa leaves i, 
sona leaves I, taj, sunt h, peppermint leaves each i, mix, add sakara 
sufficient to make a confection to be given with arak-e-kevara. Dose, 
20 to 60 grs.; given as a nervine tonic in seminal debility, giddiness, 
faintness, and leucorrhcea. 



SANTLACH^, 



Aetmix and uses. — Vf^ed as perfume and as stimulant choUgogue, 
also deobstruent. It is an ingredient in various nervine tonic, carmi- 
native, and stimulant.'preparations. It is used in gout and rheumatism* 
also to check vomiting. A paste of agara and supasand*i, with brandy, 
is applied to the chest in bronchitis of children and to the head in 
headache. 

/Remarks, — II is a chief ingredient in incense sticks known as 
agara batti. The slicks arc ignited, like candles, and hence ihe 
name. There are two kinds of agara batti, black and white. Taggar 
wood is heavy ^^d dark coloured, oily and resinous. It comei* from 
Zanzibar. To' water it gives a greenish yellow colour* It yields uu oil 
of a yellow colour. The odour resembles that of sandalwood oil and 
b used in the preparation of attar by the natives. 

AquifoliacaA— The Holly order* 

Evergreen trees or shrubs ; leaves coriaceous, simple* ex&tipulate ; 
flowers small, axillary, unisexual; sepals distinct, 4*6; corolla 
imbricated ; fruit flesy, indehiscent ; seeds suspended ; embryo small, 
albumen, fleshy. 

//a Mat. — Native of Europe- 

Ptvpffsifs. — They are bitter, tonic,and astringent: some are emetic 
and purgative. Some are used as substitutes for China tea. 

Ilex Paragaayensis— The Brazilian, or Paragnay Holly. 

Ilnbitat. — Brazil and Argentine Republic. 
Parts used* — The dried leaves and young twigs— called mate or 
Paraguay lea ; bat k and berries. 

Chatacttn* — A small evergreen tree, exstipulate, coriaceous. 

Consiitnents. — ^Contains theine or caffeine, i to 3 p.c. like China 
tea* ;ilso theobromine, but a larger proportion of mineral salts than either 
tea or coffee. It also contains a volatile oil, tanuin and a glucosidc. 

/Reparations. — Decoction of leaves. Fluid extract* Dosie, 30 to 
60 ms. 

Actions and uses. — The berries are diuretic and exhilarant, and in 
large doses emetic and cathartic The decoction when taken to excess 
produces a kind of intoxication. In moderate do^cs it promotes diges- 
tion and augments appetite ; but its continued and immoderate use 
produces dyspeptic symptom^!. It sustains the system when undergoing 
hunger or great fatigue. The leaves and bark are very bcnc6cia) in 
intermittent fever. Used in South America is tea, and known as 
Mate or Paraguay tea. 

Santalaoeao— The Sandalwood or Chandana family. 

Herbs, shrubs or trees; leaves entire, alieiuate ; flowers perfect, 
calyx small, superior, 4 or 5 cleft ; stamens perigynous; ovary one-celled, 
inferior ; ovules 1-4; fruits indehiscent, one*seeded ; seed with fleshy 
albumen. 



h^ 



SAXTAU7M ALBtm. 



Habitat. — Natii'e of tempemte climate and tropics, 

Prry/rr/frj— some of the species are astringent » others are wdl 
known for their wood, which is highly fragrant and contiins an essen- 
tial oil. The seeds are oily. Fruit «iible. 



Santalum JUbum, B.P. Sirinm Myrtifolium. 

Uabttat. — South of India* £. Indian Islands, Malabar. 

Parts used. — The wood and a volatile oil (Oleum SantaJi) RP, 

J'trnacuiar, — Arab. — Sandale-abyaz< Beng.^ — Sadichondan* Bur. 
— Sandaku. Can — Gandhadi-chekke. Cing.^ — Handun. Duk. — 
Sandal. Eng. — White sandal wood, white-saunders, Guz.— Sukl»ada. 
Hind. — ^Safed-chondana. Mal^'al. — Chanduna-niutti, Mar. — Gandha- 
chakoda. Pers.— Sandale-suped. Sans* — Pi tachandana— yellow sandaJ 
(or darker heart wood). Shrikhanda — white sandal (the lighter heart 
wood). Tarn. — Shandanak. TeL — Gandhapu-chekka. 

Ckamctfrs, — Wood yellow inside and white outside; trunk in long 
pieces of various shapes and sizes and covered over with a brownish 
scabrous bark, firmly adherent lo the wood. Central portion or heart 
wtK>d, when rasped or rubbed» highly fragrant; colour varying from 
pale white externally (sapwood) to pale yellow or dark red withm (heart 
wood); central portion of a deep dark brown colour ; the fragrance 
depends on the presence of an esivemial oil, chiefly found in the dark 
central wood. Fruits known as chandana bija are of the size of kaka 
mari, of a dark brown colour and spherical in form with a small stalk at 
the bottom ; apex crowned by a circular brimmed rim, in the centre of 
which JS a conical protuberance. The interior of the fruit contains one 
single seed. The seed is globular, and of a brownish red or cinnamon 
colour ; surface tubercled ; at the centre of the apex are four pro- 
jecting ridges which run divergently and disappear about the middle ; 
testa, brittle and easily separable ; kernel semi-opaque, oily, Tcsinous, 
and of a brownish colour ; odour balsamic ; taste acrid and oily* 

Constituents, — The wood contains a volatile oil 2 tol 5 p.c«, a dark 
resiui and tannic acid. Oleum Santali, B,P,, obtained from the wood by 
distillation. A pale yellowish and thlckish liquid, of a strong, pecuhar. 
balsamic and aromatic odour ; taste pungent and spicy* acid reaction, 
soluble in alcohol (i in 6). Dose. 5 to 30 ms., given in emulsioui ptils 
or capsules. 

Aciirm.% and uses, — The wood is bitter, cooling, sedative and astrin> 
gent. The oil is an astringent to the mucous membrane. It causes 
dryness in the fauces, great thirst* colicky pains and fulness in the loins • 
a pjiste of it is applied to the body in pains in the limbs during high 
fever; with rose war er and camphor or with sarcocollat to the head 
in headache, to inflammatory swellings, or to the skin in skin 
aflTcctinns. The oil is astringent, diuretic, expcctntant and ^ :il ; 

given internally with cardamoms and bamboo manna in y, ca^ 

bronchitis, in inflimimationof the mucous membranes as cystitis. pyeliUs 
and chronic diarrha-a. The seeds are used as pessaries by natiire 



tyPHA TNBIOI. 



?37 



women to procure abortion. A preparation known as khamire 
chandana (confection) is of common use among the natives; it consists 
of safed chandana a parts, gulegohb 4, klisani 4, elachi i^ tabiishira 3, 
^nilA (without seeds) ?, sakara 45 ; given in headache. 

Euphorbiaoese, The Spurge wort, Erandi or Thuvara Family. 

Characters, — Shrubs or herbs, generally with an acrid, milky, 
poisonous juice ; leaves alternate, mostly opposite, simple or compound, 
and stipulate or exstipulate. Flowers unisexual, iixillary, and terminal 
with bracts; calyx wanting; corolla none; sometimts males and 
females are on the same plant and sometimes on separate plants; ovary, 
superior, 3-ceiled; ovules 2 from each cell; fruit tricoccous ; 3 to 6 
seeded capsule, dry» and opening with elasticity ; or succulent and 
indehiscent ; seed one or more in each cell, embryo in fleshy albunjen, 
radicJe superior. 

Hahttat. — Natjve^ ot temperate climate, tropics. 

I\fiperttes. — They generally contain an acrid milky juice^ Poison- 
ous properties are common in most of the plants* In proper doses it is 
emetic, nauseous, purgative, diuretic and rubefacient. Pure starchy food 
is obtained from some edible roots, other contain caoutchouc. The 
wood of some of the species is very fragrant ; embryo of the seeds is 
mostlyviolently emetic or purgative. 

Acalypha Indica, A. Paniculata. 

Habitat — Hotter parts of India, Bengal, Deccan Peninsula. 

Parts nseit — The herb, 

Vernactdar. — Benfj. — Shvct busanta. Can,— Chalmari. Duk — 
Roop*pie Khokali. Eng.^Malabar cupa mani, Indian acalypha. 
Gui.— Dfidaro. Bomb,, Hind., Duk.— Koop-pie, Khokali. Mai* 
Tarn*— Cheti Kuppanvani. TeL — Hariia Manjari. 

Khokali means cough. The plant has a reputation of being a 
good expectorant. 

Characters, — The plant is i to 2 feet high, with many branched 
sterns^ rounded, erect, and smooth ; leaves, on long petioles, ovale, 
serrated, of a green or dark gicen colour above, and pale beneath; 
minutely dotted ; spikfs axillary and hairy, long as the leaves ; 
flowers small, greenish; male uppermost, enclosed in a cup shaped 
involucre, opening oil the inner side ; stamens 8 to j6, styles 3, capsules 
tricoccous, vcelled, one- seeded; fruits small, three-lohed^ covered with 
bristly hairs, and seated on a finely dentate calyx ; smell of the plant 
disagreeable. Dose of the powdered herb, 10 to 30 grs. 

Oimtituentsn — An adkaloid, tcaJyphine. 

Prfparatmns. — Succus, expressed juice. Dose, .^ to ; teaspoon ful 
Infusion of root, (1 in lo). Dose, i to a fld. ozs ; Cataplasm of the leaves* 
Decoction of leaves (i in 20), Dose, J to i fld. oz. Tincture 
(1 in 8). Dose, \ to i fld. dr. Liquid Extract. Dose, 10 to 60 ms. 



BALIOSPERMUM MONTANTTM, 



Actions and uses, — Cathartic, emetic^ expectorant and vermifuge. 
The infusion with a little garlic is used to expel worms in children. 
The decoction is a safe, speedy and sure laxative and emetic like senega or 
ipecacuanha. It increases the pulmonary secretions but does not cause 
any depression of the vital powers ; given in pulmonary tuberculosis, 
croup» asthma and bronchitis of children. Externally the decoction is 
used in earache. The juice made into liniment with oil is used 10 
rheumatism, and venereal pains ; with lime (chunam) it is used as an 
application in skin diseases. Cataplasm of leaves relieves pain atten- 
dant on biles of venomous insects ; also recommended for syphilitic 
ulcers; suppository of bruised leaves relieves con.stipation in children. 

Aleurites Holacoanap A. Triloba. 

Habitat — Pacific Islands, India. 

Parts nsffi. — ^The nuts and oil called kakui or kekune. 

Veniacniar* — Arab. — Jouze-barri. Ben^. — Bangla-akrdt. Burm. — 
Tosikiya-si. Can. — Nat-akrodu. Cing. — Kakkuna, Eng.— Filberts, 
candle nut, berry or Belgaum walnut. Guz., Hind* — Hindi-akhrot- 
hijjle-badam. Malyal. — Kamarr, Kamira. Mar — RAnakhrot, JaphaL 
Pers. — Girda-giine-hindi. Tam.^ — Woodooga^ TeL — ^Akrotu-vittu. 

Characters. — The oil expressed from the nuts is used as a drying 
oil for paint and resembles castor oil. Nuts vary in size from a small 
sopjlri to a big sopari; very hard, ovate, and slightly acuminate. At 
the base is a large brownish scar, like that found in arithd; apex 
pointed; except at the scar, the surface is smooth, somewhat 
shiningi and of a darkish red or brownish r^d colour. The shell is thick 
and contains a thin reddish testa within, which is oily and resinous 
looking ; whitish seeds, very rancid. Kernel on being lighted burns 
like a wax candle. Dose of the oil, i to 2 02s. 

Omstitttents .''^The almond contains cellulose, fat^ organic matter, 
mineral matter, and ash containing lime, magnesta, phosphoric 
anhydride^ &c. 

The oil contains oleine, myristin, palmitini stearin and an acrid 
resin in which resides the purgative principle. 

Actions ami uses. — The nuts are used for their aphrodisiac pro» 
perties; the oil is used as an aperient like castor oil. 

Baliospermam Montanum, B. AxillarOt Croton Poly and rtim, 
Croton Roxburghii, Jetropha Montana. 

flahitat* — Tropical Himalaya, Deccan Peninsula, Bengal, Circar^. 

Parts used, — The root and seeds, 

P'ernacular. — Burro. — Tha-du-wa. Gust*— Dantc-mul. Hind, — 
Hakni. Sans. — Danti-nani, dante upachitra, d4nte vija, maku laka. 

Tel.— Konda-amadum. Tarn.— Niga-dante* 

C///Tr/7c/^r^.— Root nearly straight, seldom branched ; pieces 
about 3 f»r 3 inches in length, and m thick as the little finger; bark 

smooth, of a light yellow or brown colour and tuberclcd or i^cabrous: 



eiCCA DISTICH A. 



taste bitter and pungent with a little aroma; wood very lights of a 
yellowish white colour, soft, less fibrous than the bark, somewhat 
coarsely tough, and loaded with starch; smell disagreeable; seeds like 
those of eranda, but smaller ; sometimes sold as croton seeds. 

Constituents, — The root contain resin and starch. 

Actions ami uses. — The root is purgative, often used with 
aromatics in constipation with flatulence, and in anasacra and jaundice. 
The seeds are drastic purgative^ and given with trikatu and tankana 
khdra, &c. Dose, i seed of i to 3 grs. 

Bridelia Retasa, B. Spinosa^ B. Crenulata, B. Montana* 

Habitat, — Throughout the hotter parts of India. 

Parts used. — The bark. 

Vernacular, — Cing. — Kattakaala-gas. Can. — Asilnd, Hind. — 
Khaja-kharaka. MalyaT— Mullic-vangay. Mar. — Phattar-phoda-kanic* 
hasan. Tarn, — Adamaruthu. Tel. — Korainaddi. 

Characters* — Trees with or wilhuut thorns ; branches nmucrous, 
spreading ; thorns large but few ; bark scabrous yielding a blood-red 
juice, very astringent ; dry bark light brown externally with fungous 
protuberances, internally smooth and fibrous and of a cinnamon 
colour. It is one of the mou astringent barks in India. 

Cnnstituetits.^T^Txmc acid, in very large quantities. 

Preparations. — Decoction fi in 20). Dose, 2 to 6 fld* drs. 

Actions and uses* — The bark is astringent. In general use for 

tanning leather* It \s also used as lithontriptic. 

Breynia Rhamnoides. 

Habitat. — Tropical India. 

Parts used, — ^The leaves and bark. 

Characters^ — Shrub with young angular shoots; leaves alternate, 
short petioled and spreading, broad or oval. 

/Reparations, — Decoction (1 in 20), Dose» 2 to 6 fld. drs. 

Actions and uses,^The bark is astringent. The leaves are 
smoked hke tobacco in cases of etilarged uvula and tons>iIs. 

Cioca Diaiicha^ Phyllanthus DisticbuB, PhyllanthuB 
LongifoliuSi Jlverrhoa Acida. 

Habitat, — India. 

Paris used, — ^The fruit » seeds and leaves, 

Vertmcuiar. — Beng.— Nuburee, Hurriphal. Burm. — Them-ban- 

h*soke-ffyee* Cing.— Ratanelli. Eng.— Country gooseberry. Mar,, 
Guz* — Kaniha avala* Bomb.^ Hind, — Chelmeri^ Haraphiilevadi. 
Malyal.— Chirirai. Port.— Chirambola, Sind,^ — Kakadana. Tam. — 
Arunelli. Tel. — Racha-usherihe. 



S40 CROTON OBLONGIPOLTUM. 

Kantha avala, from kantha, trunk or stem, and avala, the tree of 
emblic myrabolams. The fruits of Cicca Disticha are apparently seen 
to grow on the kantha or stem of avala, and hence the name. 

Characters. — Leaves long, pinnate ; leaflets many, small, alternate 
stalked orbicular, 3 inches long, and with short small petioles ; petioles 
round or oblong, or rather acute, smooth, ending in a raceme of male 
flowers. Racemes numerous, terminal or axillary ; flowers numerous 
small, reddish in globular heads ; fresh fruits yellow, fleshy, and 
marked with from 6 to 8 deep grooves ; in size they resemble small 
fanduka, or gooseberry ; dried fruits of a greyish or dark brown colour; 
surface highly wrinkled. Pulp thick, brittle and rather fibrous ; nut 
very hard, of a pale brown colour, containing 6 seeds, 3-celled and 
marked with 6 striae; seeds reddish brown and resembling Kdlid^na 
in shape. 

Preparation. — Decoction of leaves (i in 20). Dose, ^ to 1 fld. oz. 

Actions and uses, — The decoction of the leaves is a good diapho- 
retic. The leaves are mucilaginous and demulcent, and given in 
gonorrhoea. The ripe fruits are used as adjuncts to cough mixtures. 
They are also pickled and preserved as Amald. Seeds are cathartic. 

Croton Eluteria, B. P., 

Habitat* — Bahamas, Cuba. 

Parts used. — The dried bark, cascarilla, B. P. 

Characters, — Bark in quills or curved pieces, long, thick of a 
greyish colour, and fissured : surface, covered with whitish lichen. 
Inside it is smooth and resinous ; odour agreeable and aromatic ; taste 
warm, bitter and aromatic. Dose, 10 to 30 grs. 

Constituents —Aromsitic volatile oil, 1 p.c; cascarillin a bitter 
crystalline principle, resin 15 p.c, tannin, pectin, gum, starch. 

Cascarillin — Precipitate the infusion with acetate of lead, 
remove lead by sulphuretted hydrogen, evaporate the filtrate and 
crystallize ; soluble in alcohol, ether and hot water. 

Reparations, — Tinctura cascarillse, B. P. (i in 5). Dose, \ to 1 
fld. dr. Infusum cascarillae, B.P. (i in 20). Dose, \ to i fld. oz. 

Actions and uses. — Aromatic bitter, stimulant, expectorant, 
stomachic, tonic and febrifuge; in large doses it causes nausea, vomiting 
and even diarrhoea. It stimulates the secretion of the stomach, salivary 
glands and intestines. It acts as an astringent owing to its containing 
tannin ; chiefly used in flatulence , dyspepsia, chronic diarrhcea, 
dysentery, colic, general debility and intermittent fever ; also in 
chronic bronchitis with excessive expectoration. 

Croton Oblon^folinm. 

/^/?3/V/7/.— Bengal Behar, S India. Deccan, Burma, Ceylon. 

Parts used. — The root bark, leaves and fruit. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Barigach. Goa. — Gonsurong. Hind. — 
Arjuna. Malyal. — Kote, Putol. Mar. — Ganasura. Sans. — Bhutam, 
Kusam, Bhutala-bhairi. 



CROTDN TIGLIUM, 



541 



Characters, — ^Root twisted, often flattened ; bark thick, scaly, 
pretty smooth, and ash coloured externally ; internally yellowish 
and mottled with brovvn^ substance compact and resinous; odour, highly 
aromatic, taste like that of miri; leaves, petroled, alternate, oblong, 
obtuse, pointed, smooth on both sides; capsulse globular, fleshy, six- 
furrowed and tricoccoas. 

Consh'tutnis.^ An alkaloid and various acid principles. 

Prcparatkns^ — Infusion of the bark (i in 20), and decoction of 
the leaves (i in 20). Dose, \ to i fld, qi. 

Aciwm atki t$s€s, — The bark and root are alterative and chola- 
gogue. The seeds are purgative. The bark is used in reducing chronic 
enlargement of the liver and in remittent feven It is applied 
externally to the hepatic region and in chronic hepatitis and also to 
sprains, bruises and rheumatic swellings. 

Croton Tigliumi B.R, 
Habitat* — India, China, Japan, Eastern Bengal. 

Pini.\ med.'^Tht seeds and fixed oil from the seed — oleum 
crotonis B,P, 

Vernncuiar^ — Arab. — Habbel-salatin. Beng. — Rechuk. Burm« — 
Kanakoh, Can, — Japalada, Cing,— Nepalam. Eng. — Cathay castor 
seeds, croton seeds, purging croton, the oil, croton oii,nepula oil, Duk,, 
Hind . Mar,, Gu/. — JamAlagota, nip&lo, jaypala. MalyaK— ICadei* 
avanaku, Fanj.^uphlota. Pers» — Bedanjire. Sans* — Dunti, Napal, 
JayapaU Titliriphal, Kanaka-phala. Tarn. — Nervalam. Tel.-— 
Nepatam. 

Characters,— A small tree. Fruit a capsule, of the size of a hazel 
nut, externally smooth and brownish yellow, tricoccous^ dehiscent, 
each cell containing one seed ; seeds oblong or ovoid, heavy, 
mucilaginous and about half an inch in length : upper surface conveXf 
the dorsal and ventral surfaces arched ; testa thin, brittle, brownish, 
red and shining or mottled. On scratching the scurf is easily removed 
and the surface then presents a black appearance ; old seeds generally 
deprived of the scurf arc black. The surface is marked with four 
ridi^es^ The kernel consists of an abundant oily albumen, of a lightish 
yellow colour, enclosed in a delicate while membrane adherent to the 
testa. Dose, i to 2 seeds, 

ConstitHcitts. — ^The entire seed contains expressed or fixed oil — 
oleum crotonis» 30 to 40 pc, and the kernel alone contains the oil 
50 to 70 p.c; proieids albumin, &c. 

The oil obtained by expression is transparent, colour brownish 
yellow to dark, reddish brown, viscid, slightly fluorescent of a slightly 
fatty rancid smell, and of an acrid burning taste, of a slightly acid 
reaction ; applied to the skin it produces pustular eruptions ; entirely 
soluble in absolute alcohol, freely soluble in ether, chloroform, carbon 
disulphidc, and fixed and volatile oils. It contains glyceridcs of acetic, 
butyric, iormic, lauric, myristic, palmitic, stearic, aod oth^f fatty 



54- 



PUI'IIORBIA ANTlyUOKUM. 



acids, als»o Uglinit acid, which is isonicnc with armelic acid; the 
purgative principle crotonoi \ the vesicating principle crotonoleic 
acid, insoluble in alcohoL 

Preparations, ^lAmm^ninm crotonis B. P. (t in 8) with oil of 
cajuput ; a compound pill largely used by the natives called Maha 
narakha rasa, which means drastic purgative. It contains:^ 
chebulic myrobalans, pulp of cassia fistula, emblic myrobalans, balio- 
sperniura axillare, picorrhiza kurrooa, milky juice of euphorbia nerii 
folia, root of ipomea turpethum, tubers of cyperus rotundus each one 
part ; mix together and make decoction. Then add husked croton seeds 
I part and boil till reduced to the consistence of an extract. To this next 
add croton seeds 8 parts, ginger, black pepper 2 ; parakajali and sulphur 
I, rub together and make a pill mass. Dose, 2 grs. given in tympanitis, 
colic, ascites &c. 

Actions and uses* — The seeds are never used until the testa and 
embryo are removed, and the kernel boiled in milk. It is a powerful 
drastic cathartic and rubefacient. The oil is highly irritant. Applied 
to the skin, it pustulates, leaving an unsightly scab. In small doses as 
a powerful cathartic it acts promplly, producing copious watery stools. 
In large doses it causes vomiting and produce gastritis; it also irritates 
the intestinal glands as well assetting up inflammation of the intestinal 
mucous membrane and giving rise to increased peristalsis. The addition 
of an alkali increases hypercatharsis where prompt derivative action 
is desired, with speedy discharge of aivine evacuations and lowering of 
the blood pressure. It is given in apoplexy, mania, coma, intestinal 
obstruction, paralysis, dropsy, and constipation. It should not be 
given in inflammation of the stomach or intestines or if any organic 
obstruction exists. It may be used where bulky doses cannot be taken. 
In persons who refuse to take purgatives, the oil may be dropped upon 
the tongue with benefit. The seeds and the oil are especially used in 
fever, constipation, intestinal worms, anasarca, ascites, dropsy, enlarge* 
raent of the abdominal viscera, tympanitis,colic,calculoiis affections and 
gout. Externally as a vesicant it is applied to the scalp in acute cerebral 
diseases, to the cord in spinal meningitis, to the chest in chronic 
bronchitis, and to the throat in laryngitis, its liniment is used as a 
powerful counter-irritant in neuralgia, sciatica, ovaritis, gout, glandular 
swellings, chronic articular rheumatism, pulmonary diseases, as bron* 
chitis, pleurisy and tinea tor^surans of the scalp. 

Euphorbia Aiitiquorum, 

Habitat. — The hotter parts of India^ Ceylon. 

Paris iised, — The juice* 

Fernacuiar, — Arab, — Lakkume-hindi. Beng,— Narasij, Burm. — 
Shiiziivangi. Can* — Mudu-mula-kalli. Cing. — Dal6k. Duk, — 
Tindhari-send. Eng.— Triangular spurge. Hind., Guz* — Tandhuri 
Thobar Narsij. Malyal .— Shadi-dakalli, Mar. — Tridhari-nevadunga, 
narnseja. Pers. — Lakuniyul-hindi. Sans. — Sunhi sehunda mahatarui 
Vajra tundi, gandera. Tarn.— Shadre^kalii* Tel.— Boutachc-mudu. 



tUPHOKBIA M(Uni^OLlA* 



543 



Charncters. — Sterns* erect, ramous, 3 or 4 poiu ted, angles furnished 
with stipulary spines; joints straight ; peduncles, solitary or in pairSf 
usually 3 flowered; flowers greenish yellow. 

Const I tut fits, — The dried juice contains euphorbon 35 p.c. two 
resins one 25 p.c. soluble in ether; another 137 px. insoluble in ether ; 
caoutchouc 1*5 px, and gum. 

PprparaUom. — Succus. Dose, 2 to 5 ms. 

Acitons ami uses. — Purgative, alterative, rubefacient and vesicant. 
The juice is corrosive, used externally in rheumatism and in toothache. 
Internally the bark or the juice is used as a purgative in obstinate 
constipation. 

Euphorbia Corollata— Large Flowering Spurge^ 

//rt^/^//.—United States. 
Piirts used, — The rout. 

Characters. — Root many headed, H inches long and 1 inch thick; 
externally brown and fissured; bark» thick and white internally ; taste 
sweet and bitter acrid* It yields milky juice when punctured. 
Dose, 2 to 10 grs* 

C'itntitnenis* — A glucoside, resin and euphorbon. 

Prefyaradons.^lnhmcux and decoction ( i in 20). Dose, | to 1 01, 

Actions and uses. — Diaphoretic, cathartic^ emetic, expectorant 
and vesicant. Given in obstinate constipation and in cough^ intermit- 
tent fever, jaundice and rheumatism. As a vesicant it is applied to 
wart^ cornel &c. 

Euphorbia NeriifoUa, E. Nivulla. 

HahitaL — Deccan Peninsula, Beluchistan, Ajmir. 
Parts used, — The juice and root, 

VirnaCHlar,—AxBb, — Dchu, Bcng. — ^Hydaona piuiisij. Burm.-^ 
Sha^avu-mtna. Caiu— Yale kalli. Duk,— Kutlt*ki-Kibh. Eng, — 
The common milk hedge. Gui. — Thuhara kantiiro. Hind, — Sehund, 
ihohar, pattonki send. Malyal. — ^Elak-kalli. Mar. — Nivadnnga, mingut. 
Sans. — Sunahi, pattakari. Tarn. — Elle kalli, Tel. — Akujc-tnudu. 

Characters. — Prickly milky tree or shrub ; stem ash coloured ; 

branches round and jointed stipular, covered with short and sharp 

_thorns ; leaves tongue-shaped, entire, smooth and thick* flowers 

^feenish yellow ; root thick and woody; root bark pale white. Evciy 

part of the shrub when cut exudes a pure white milky juice which is 

drying. Dose of the 

caoutchouc, raalate of 



acrid, very sticky and becomes thick on 
powdered root, 2 to 4 grs. 

Comtituents* — Euphorbon, resin, 
calcium &c. 

Prefiaraftons. — Succus. Dose, 2 to 5 ms. 



gum, 



Compound powder . To 



obtain it steep mudur flowers, aghadil root, gokarua root equal parts in 



?44 



EtFHORBIA PILULIPgRA. 



ihe milky juke of Llioar and add harade ^ of the weight of the whole 
and dry. Dose, 2 to 4 grs. ; mixed with honey it h given in asthma. 

Actions a fid usey, — The juice is a purgative and expectorant" 
locally rubefacient and a popular application to warts, when it 
acts as a blister. Heated with common salt it is used as a remedy 
for whooping cough, asthma, dropsy, enlarged liver and spleen, 
dyspepsia, jaundice, colic, flatulence, &c. In small doses it promotes the 
expectoration and is often given with the juice of adulasii. By mixing 
with other purgatives its purgative properties become increased, ft is 
given in visceral obstructions, in dropsical affections consequent on long 
continued intermittent fever, in jaundice and in rheumatism. 
Externally it is mixed with margosa oil and applied to stiff limbs . 
in rheumatism ; and also used in killing maggots in wounds. The root 
is used for snake-bites. 



Euphorbia Pilulifera, E. Hirta, E, Parviflora* 

Syn, — Australian asthma weed, snake weed and cats hair. 

HahUat. — Bombay, on gravel rocks and waste grounds, seen after 

the rains. 

Parts used.^-Tht herb. 

Vernacttlnr. — Beng. — Barakeru. Guz,, Hind.» Bomb.^ — Motlii 
dudhi, Dudheli. Can. — Barasu. Mar. — Goverdhan, mothi dudhi 
Nayeti. Sans. — ^Rakta vinduchada. Tarn, — Amum patchai aressi. 
Tel,— Bidari. Nayati — signifies ringworm, 

Ckaractcrs. — A hairy weed, obliquely erect and with apices 
recurved; branches, coloured, hairy and pressing flat on the cArth ; 
flowers small, numerous In clusters; seeds papillose or ovoid* Easily 
recognised by acyte leaves, globular, hispid hairiness and small fruits. 

ConsUtucitts. — Active principle, wax, caoutchouc, chlorophyll, 
resin, tannin, sugar, mucilage, calcium oxalate, carbohydrates and 
albuminoids. The active principle is a gum resin, soluble in water and 
weak spirit, insoluble in ether, alcohol, chloroform, bisulphide of carbon 
and turpentine. 

I\eparatvms, — Solid extract. Dose, ^ to l grs. Fluid extract. 
Dose, 10 to 30 ms. Decoction (j in ^o). Dose, 1 to i fld* ozs. Tincture 
(i in 5). Dose, jo to 50 ms. 

Actions and uses, — Demulcent, anthelmintic, antispasmodic and 
local parasiticide. It is a popular remedy for cough, bronchial affections 
and diseases of the respiratory passages generally ; also given for worms^ 
bowel complaints, gonorrhoea, &c. In dyspnui^a due to asthma,emphy- 
scma and pulmonary cardiac disease it is very beneficial. In spasmooic 
asthma the fluid extract is very usefulc. It is a very useful remedy 
in acute and chronic dysentery, in coryza where arsenic and iodide of 
potassium have failed. In should be given after meals* Its action is 
chiefly exerted through the paeumogastric, paralysing the heart and 
respiration* 



I'Ul'IlOUIllA TIRt7CAI.l.I. 



Eupharbia Resintfera. 
Habitat — Morocco* 

Paris mtd. — The dried juice or concrete gum (Euphorbium) and 
resin. 

Vernacular, ^\\2,h. — Farfiyun. Burm, — Shia*dzaon, Cing, — 
Daluk-gahek-kiry, Hind.— Saynd^kududh. Bomb,, Ind. Bazaar. — 
Afarbiyun, farfiyun. Malyal.— Sudu*s;idu, Vajrak-shira. Sans* — 
Vautaita. 

CharacUrs. — The gum resembles rich Hinga ; colour yellow 
brown ; met with in piecesof irregular shape as if excavated or scooped 
out ; ta^lc bitterish acrid and rather burning ; odour pucuh'ar, acrid, and 
resembling th;it of wax. The gum is also found in Euphorbia canari- 
cnsds of Arabia and Africa^ Euphorbia antiquoruni of Arabia and India, 
and in E, Tetragon ia. 

ComHiurnts, — The juice contains resin, euphorbon, mucilage, 
malates of calcium and sodium and other mineral compounds. 

Actions ami uses, — Euphorbium is a powerful irritant ; a paste 
of it is applied in sciatiea and lumbagu* Made mto pessaries it is applied 
to the OS to procure abortion ; diluted with ^me inert powder, it is 
blown into the ear in deafness. 

Euphorbia Thymifolia. 

Habitat, — Throughout India, Ceylon, Central Asia, 

Paris used. — The plant. 

Vernacular. — (Bcng). — Raktakeru, Hind. — Ntgachuni, Man — 
Lahan nayeii» Punj, — Haxardana, Sans,*-Rakta*viada-chhada. 
Tanj.— Sitlra-paladi. Tel.— Reddi-vari. 

Characters, — Small milkv prostrate plant ; «tcms slender, reddish 
•caves opposite, obliquely oval, serrate, slightly nromatic and astringent 
dowers axillary, on short pet! uncles, small and greenish ; capsule erect, 
or obtusely keeled, pubescent ; seeds with 5 or 6 shalJow transverse 
furrows. 

ComtUuetils* — A crystalline alkaloid principle allied to quercttrin. 

Preparations, — Decoction (i in 40), Dose, i to 2 oxs. milky 
juice. Dose, I to 2 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Wrmifuge, demulcent, stimulant and laxative ; 
chiefly used in bowel compl.unts in children, worms, gonorrhcea and 
amenorrhcea. Locally the juice is applied in ringworm* 

Euphorbia Tiruoalli 

Habitat.— Afncu, India, Asia- 
Parts iij^;/.— The milky juice. 

Vernacular, — Arab* — Azfur, sukkum. Beng. — Lankil shij. 
Bomb. — Netario Thoar. Cing. — Nava hanadi. Can. — Bonta Kalli, 
Hind., Duk, — K4rkt send. Barkiscud. Eng,— Milk hedge, Indian tree 

36 



546 HEVEA BRASILIENSIS. 

purge, milk bush. Guz. — Ranashira, Netruo-thora, Khurassani-thoray 
Thora dana dalio. Javanese — Kayoo-oorb. Mar. — Vajra duhu. Malyal. 
— Kolkalli. Pers. — Taqunai-yal-hindi. Tam — Tiru Kalli. Tel- — 
Kada chemudu. 

Characters. — Smooth green milky bush ; branchlets slender jointed, 
long and blunt : colour green or greenish dark; leaves very small ; juice 
acrid. 

Constituents. — Euphorbon, resin gum, caoutchouc, malate of 
calcium, &c. 

Preparations, — Succus. Dose, i to 3 ms. 

Actions and uses. — In small doses the juice is used as a purgative. 
It is applied as a vesicant to painful joints in rheumatism and 
neuralgia. The milky juice mixed with flour is considered very useful 
as a blister in syphilitic nodes. 

Exeoaria Agallooha, Arbor Exeoans, Exeoaria Camettia. 

Habitat. — Forests of India, Rangoon, Ceylon, salt swamps near 
the sea, Cochin, Travancore. 

Parts used. — The juice and cork. 

Vernacular. — Beng — Ugaru, Burm. — Ka yau. Cing. — Telia 
keeriya gass. Eng. — Tiger's milk iree, blinding tree. Hind.— Gengiva, 
Tejbala. Mai.— Kametti. Can. — Karo. Mar. — Phungali Hura. 
Tam.— Tillae cheddi. Tel.— Telia Chetu. 

Characters. — Wood knotty, grey or blackish, soft, spong>^ and 
smooth. All parts abound in acrid resinous milky juice which when 
dried hardens into a kind of caoutchouc. From the lower part of the 
trunk and roots is obtained a soft light suber. It occurs in irregular 
shaped pieces from which the epidermis has been removed by scraping 
and resembles in structure a coarse cork. 

Actiotts and uses. — The juice is highly irritating, the caoutchouc 
in I to 2 gr. doses is used as a purgative and alterative in epilepsy. 
It is locally applied to inveterate ulcers, leprous sores, &c. Tejbala is 
reputed among the natives as an aphrodisiac. 

HeYea Brasiliensis, B.P., H. Ouyanensls, Siphonia 
Elastioa. HeYea Elastica. 

^a^//rt/. —India, Tropics, S. America. 

Parts used. — The prepared milky juice. 

Vernacular. — India rubber, caoutchouc, para rubber. 

Characters. — Large trees ; leaves trifoliate ; leaflets, obovate, long, 
dark green above and lighter below, flowers in racemes — Caoutchouc 
is a prepared milky juice met with in clusters. It is elastic, in masses 
of varying thickness, brownish black externally and mottled and pale 
internally; odour peculiar and empyreumatic, without any taste; soluble 
in chloroform, oil of turpentine, carbon bisulphide, benzol, and benzin, 



JATROPHA CURCAS, 



547 



insoluble in water, cthylic alcohol, diluted acids and diluted alkaline 
solutions. Combined with sulphur and heated, it is converted into hard 
rubber. Caoutchouc is also obtained from ficus elastita, jatropha 
elastica, artocarpus integrifolia and urceola elastica. 

CortsiitHenia^ — Resin 32 px. volaiileoil, fat, albumen, and colouring 
matter. The resin, a solid hydrocarbon — is the elastic principle known 
a$ caoutchouc. 

Preparaiitm5,-^lAq\xox caoutchouc, B.P»p solution of India-rubber; 
contains India-rubber I oz., benzol lofld. ozs., carbon bisulphide 10 
fld, u/s., Charta Sinapis, B.P, 

Actions and uses. — Woven into fabrics to reduce varicose veins, 
hydrocele and hernia ; also used for the preparation of bougies, pessaries, 
&c. 

Jatropha CurcaSt Cnrcas Purgans, J. MuttifldaB, 

CuFoas Hultifidos. 

HahttaL — Throughout India, Ceylon, Coromandel and Travancore. 

Parts used, — Seeds, juice, leaves and oil. 

Vernact$iar, —Ax^h. — Dunde-biiri. Beng. — Bagbha-randa, Rata- 
>jota. Bomb.^ — MogUi erandi. Burm. — Thcm-ban-kyst-hso**. 

Can, — Mara narulle. Chin. — Tung-shu. Cing — Ratendaru. Eng. — 
Angular leaved physic nut, paraguya nut, purging nuls. Goa. — ^Gala- 
mark. Guz,, Dukt» Mar,, Hind. — BAghbheranda, Mogalai eranda. 
Malyal. — Kat-avanakoo. Sans. — Kanona eranda, nepala, Parvata 
yeranda. Tarn. — Kala-manak> Tel. — Adivi amida. 

C/taracUti, — Large wooded evergreen shrub, abounding in milky 
juice with young slenn> wliich arc rounded ; leaves quite smooth and 
green on long and round petioles, 3 to 5 angled or lobcd, middle lobe 
rather large and more acute. The fruits resembling I'lmala in appear- 
ance and walnuts in si^e. They are greenish, glaucous, obtusely 5 
angled and marked with 6 stri%, 3 seeded and 3 celled ; seeds oblong, 
ovate, compressed, dark coloured, rcsembUiig in shape but are larger than 
erandi ; testa dark. The whole plant abounds in a viscid pus-like juice. 
The oil, pulza oil or seed oil or purging oil, expressed Irom the seeds is 
a fixed oil, slightly yellow or of a paler colour than the linseed oil, with- 
out disagrccble odour of castor oil and of a pleasaJit almond like taste, 
and differing from castor oil tn being slightly soluble in alcohoL Dose 
of the oil, 4 to 15 drops. 

Constiiurnts, — The seeds contain a fixed oil 30 p.c, sugar, starch 
albumen, caseine and inorganic matter. The oil contains an active 
principle, jatrophic acid. 

Preparations. — Decoction of leaves (i in 10). Dose, \ to I fld. oz.; 
succus, embrocation, cataplasm of the lea\'es« 

Actions a$td uses. — The seeds are acrid and emetic and even 
poisonous ; the oil is purgative, parasiticide, and insecticide ; the milky 
juice is bidemostatic, rubefacient and galactagogue ; the oil is applied in 

r 



54^ JATROPHA GLANDULIFERA. 

used as a stimulant embrocation in chronic rheumatism. Internally like 
croton oil it is used as a purgative and given in paralysis and constipation 
and as a vermifuge, and is useful in constipation, dropsy, worms 
&c. The decoction of the leaves is said to excite the secretion 
of milk in women. As a discutient, the juice or the oil, rubbed with 
castor oil, is applied to buboes and abscesses to promote suppuration. 
As haemostatic and styptic, the viscid milky juice when applied 
has the propertj' of healing cuts and wounds like collodion ; it forms a 
thin film and thus checks haemorrhages from bleeding surfaces and 
wounds and from haemorrhoids ; as a styptic it is superior to turpentine, 
alum or the perchloride of iron. If injected into a varicose vein or 
aneurism (about a drachm) it coagulates the blood with good result. 

Jatropha Olandulifera. 

Habitat. — Northern Circars, Deccan Peninsula, Bengal, Pander- 
pore, Bunds of Tanks. 

Parts used, — The juice, fruits, leaves and oil. 

Vernacular, — Bomb. — Velaty-erand, Hind., Beng. — Lai Bhcranda 
Mar. — Underbibi, Tadki Erandi. Sans. — Nikumba. Tam. — Udalai 
Tel, — Dundigapu. 

Characters. — Shrub small, erect, and pubescent ; young branches 
and leaves red and studded with green, succulent, glandular or capitate, 
hairs; leaves 3 lobed, serrated, smooth, glaucous, almost veinless and. 
on long villose petioles ; upper surface covered with glands ; lower 
surface smooth and shimng; margins finely ciliated with small 
glandular hairs; fruits six, striated, smooth, shining, of a greenish colour 
and here and there sprinkled with simple white hairs ; in form they 
resemble erandi or hazel nut, 3 seeds in each fruit ; seeds of a brown 
colour, of the size of a pea ; surface marked with 4 ridges; back rather 
flat and marked with two broad, black, longitudinal stripes. Between 
these a brown coloured ridge passes lengthwise. At the hiluni there 
is a caruncule of a brownish yellow colour, on both sides of the 
caruncule two black lines extend downwards and outwards forming 
side ridges ; from the bottom of the hilum another central ridge 
extends and occupies the middle of the front surface ; cotyledon 
albuminous, white and oily, thus resembling kapura. The whole plant 
abounds in an acrid, greenish and viscid juice ; the oil is yellow. Dose, 
of the root, 2 to 5 grs. 

Constituents, — Similar to those of jatropha curcas. 

Actions and uses. — Purgative, counter-irritant and stimulant. The 
root brayed in water is given to children suffering from enlargement 
of the abdomen due to diseases of the liver and spleen ; it purges and 
reduces glandular swellings. The juice is escharotic, acrid, counter 
irritant, and is used by the natives to remove opacity of the cornea 
or thickening of the conjunctivae ; the oil is applied to joints in 
chronic rheumatism, chronic ulcerations, sinuses, ringworm and 
paralysis. 



MALLOTUS PHILIPPINBNSIS. 



540 



Jatropha Macrorhiza* 
HahiiaL — Northern Mexico and Southern States adjoining^ 
Parts used, — The root. 
Characters.— Kooi very thick, short, tuberous, with an erect 

herbaceous stem. 

I^eparatians. — Fluid extract. Dose, ^ to 2 fld, drs, 

Acthns atid i^jrj.— Alterative, cholagogue, hydragogue, and 

cathartic; resembling in action calomel and vegetable purgatives 

such as leptandra podophyllum, and cuonymin. 

Jatropha Manihot, Manihot Dtilisaima. 

Habitat, — Brazil, Wefit Indies, 

f^rts used.- Th^ fccula of root or rhizome. 

I'trnacular, — Eng.«— Tapioca plant, cassava meal. 

Characters. — A shrub ; stems jointed : leaves glaucous and petiolate; 

root fleshy white, tuberous and very heavy, containing poisonous 
milky juice. To remove the acridity or the poison from the cassava 
meal, the juice is expressctl by pressure, the meal is next washed, and 
the starch finally heated and dried, and the fecula or the starch is then 
known as cas^^ava starchy tapioca meal, or Brazilian arrow rout* There 
arc two varieties^ sweet and hitter. The bitter variety contains prussic 
acid. 

Constituents, — Starch and glutin. 

Actions and uses. — Nutrient and demulcent ; given during 
convalescence, debility, and low state of the system. Dose, ^ to i 02. 

Mallotus Philipplnensis. Croton Philippinensis, 
Rottlera Tinctoria* 

Habitat, — Throughout tropical India, Philippine Islands, Arabia, 
China, Abyssinia, 

Parts used, — The glands and hairs from the capsules. 

Fernacniar. — Arab. — OuinbiL Beng,— Kamela tung. Burm, — 
Memasho. Can. — Chandrahitlu. Cing. — HarnparandcUa. Kng. — 
Monkey faced tree, Dyers Kotlera, Gu/., Hind. — Kamela, Kapilo, 
Kamud, Kembal. Mar. — Shendri, Kapita» Kam»la. MalyaL — PcKmagam* 
Pers, — Kampila, Konbcla. Sans.— Kampilla Rocha nika, kambha, 
lohrta rakla, mchanarakta, keshoor, punnaga. kambha. Tam* — ^Kopilla 
podi. Tel — Bendu rupu. 

Chararters — Knrna! — a ^mnnfar Trjnhtlt- brick red powder, chiefly 
consisting of ^n nle or truit. When 

collected lh\ i i ccs of cap^J-ules, >t.ilk 

and h. II quantities and 

of a ^1 ..id shining, nearly 

ta^ ^^nd in ether. It is 



550 PHYLLAJfTHTS EMBLICA. 

Constituents. — Resins 80 puc. tannic add, gnm ; volatile oil« 
rottlerin, altmminoas matter 7 px. ; colouring matter, ceHolose 7 px. 
and ash 4 px. 

Resins — These contain the colouring matter : to obtain them digest 
the root with ether, alcohol, glacial acetic acid or carbon sulphide ; one 
of them is soluble in cold alcohol and the other hot alcohol Rottlerin, 
is an extract obtained b\' digesting the root with ether or carbon sul- 
phide ; occurs as yellowish needles, soluble in hot alcohol, ether, ben- 
zene and carbon bisulphide. 

Preparatifjnss — Tincture (3 in 10). Dose, i to 3 drs. 

ActMU and uses. — Cathartic and anthelmintic ; given with treacle 
it kills and expels round and thread worms ; as a purgative it causes 
nausea but does not cause vomiting ; it relieves colicky* pain and re- 
moves bile. It is a local remedy for ringworm, pitjTiasis, freckles and 
scabies. 

PhjUaniliiis EmbHea, Erablka OflleiiialU. 

Habitats — Throughout tropical India. 

Parts used, — The dried fruit without nut — Emblicx Fructus, bark 
and flowersw 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Amlaj. Beng. — ^Amritphala, amlaki. Bomb. 
— Aavalakithi. Burm. — Ziphi^^-si. Can. — Xelli-kayi. Cing. — Nellika* 
Eng. — Emblic m>Tobolans. Guz. — Ambala. Hind. — Aoli amU. 
Amvursh. Malyal. — Amalakam. Pers — Amelah. Sans. — Sriphaia 
Amritphala. Tam. — Toppu nelli. Tel. — Amalakam. 

Characteis. — Fresh fruit globular with fleshy pulp, six striated, 
rather compressed, succulent, smooth and of a greenish yellow colour, 
as large as a walnut with a thick acidulous pulp enclosing a nut, which 
is triangular, obovate, 3 celled ; each cell has 2 trian^*ar seeds ; taste 
sweetish, astringent, acid and somewhat acrid. .Amahi are of two kinds: 
true and false. True ones, phyllanthus emblica, are subhexagonal, and 
break upon pressure into 6 fragments and are of darkish colour. Each 
fragment consists of a section of a pulp and nut and contains one 
triangular or brown seed which is wrinkled and generally curved in at 
both ends. The false imala are the fruits of cicca distich a, and are 
smaller than true amala and of a pale brown colour. 

C^msti'tuents. — Gallic acid tannic acid, gum, sugar, albumen, 
cellulose and mineral matter. 

Preparations, — Decoction of the root (i in 10). Dose. ^ to i fld. 
oz. Confection. Dose, i to 2 teaspoonfuls. Crystallized fruit. Dose, 
I to 2, and paste 

Actifms and uses. — The fresh fruit is refrigerant, diuretic, and 
laxative* and is used in chronic constipation. The dried fruit is cooling, 
stomachic and astringent; a powder of the fruit, nilotphar, kesara and 
rose water is used as a paste to the forehead in cephalalgia. It is 
also applied to the pubes in irritabilit}- of the bladder and in retention 
of urine. With grapes and honey it is a favourite cooling drink for 



PHTLLANTftUS NIRtTRT. 



SSI 



fever and diarrhoea. An extract, prepared from the wood, is astringent 
like kalho. lis branches put into muddy water render the latter clear. 
It is one of the ingredients in the preparation known as triphala. 

Phyllanthus MadpaspatensiB* 

Habitat, — Tropical India. 

Parts nsfd. — The seeds, 

Venmculdr. — ^Kanocha Kanochhi (Hind* and Bom.).— The word 
kanochi'V is similar to the English word concha^ which means the larger 
cavity of the external ear. Kanochhd seeds resemble in appearance 
concha, and hence the name* 

Chaructrrs* — Seeds smaller than those of bhdnga, trtangulart 
highly polished, and of a grey colour ; surface reticulated or marked 
with fan-like, delicate dark lines, like basket work. One side of the 
seed is arched and the other presents two sloping surfaces united so as 
10 form a huigiludinal riJgc. At the pointed end is a small scar ; the 
kernel is oily, with a sweet nutty taste, 

Prrfiarations. — Mucilage and decoction (i in zo). Dose, J to 2 o«s. 

Acthns ami us^s. — The seeds are demulcent. With other demul- 
cent decoctions, they are used in urinary affections such as gonorrhcea 
and internal in Aam mat ions on account of the mucilage they contain, 

Phyllanthus Retioulatua. 
HahitaL — Throughout tropical India. 
Parti usfd^ — The leaves and bark. 

P'erttacuiar. — Beng. — Fankushi. Guz — Dot wan. Hind. — Pan- 
joli. MalyaJ. — Katunirure. Mar.— Havana* Sans — Krishna-kamboji. 
Sind.— Kumohi. Tarn — Pulavayr, Tel, — Pulaguda. 

Characters. — Bark in pieces, about a foot long, thick as the wrist 
and dark browrr externally ; taste somewhat sweet ; leaves oval, obtuse, 
and bifarious. 

Oiftstitt/efsts, — Tannic acid, gum and a crystalline principle. 

/V<*/^/r/^//V/fa,— Decoction of bark (i in 20), Dose, i to 2 fld, ozs. 
Infusion of leaveai^i in 10). Dose, r to 2 fid. 02s. 

Actmtxamitisrs. — Astringent, diuretic and alterative ; a pill made 
of its juice mixed with camphor and cubehs is dissolved in the mouth 
as a remedy for spungy and bleeding gums. 

Phylianthos Nlrarl, P. Urinaria. 
Hahiiat, — Deecan Peninsula, Bengal, Travancore. 
Parts used, — The plant (herb). 

/>r;/atw/tir,— Bcng,— Sadahajur-muni. Mar., Hind., Bomb.— ^ 
Bur.— Mi-ziphiyu. Can. — Kiranelligida. Duk. — 
Malyah— Ktzkhaylnelli, Sans.— Bhumy amalaki^ 



Bhui dnmala. 
Dhcen ounlah. 



Tamra velli, bahu patra. Tarn— KiUnelly. TcL — Neela o'oshirika 
Bahu patra means having many leaves. 



Characttn. — Pbnt fraai6 to lo in. long, annual, erect and noKMis; 
stem angnSar, smooth and wiry: leaves 3ike those of iimali, dliptacal, 
mncrooate, entire* giabroits, 3 in. long and one inch bread, divided into 
6 or 7 leaflets, oblong and very short petiokd and arranged alternately- 
fi.<jwfsr%^ axillary, sessile ; fnriu very small : capsules gio'tKise, 3-ceIled ; 
seeds in each cell two, smooth and triangular; smell rather disLgreeable; 
taste astringent and acidulatts. Dose of the powdered plant, 30 to 
6ogrs. 

Omsiiiueuts* — A tntter princi]^ fKeudo chiraiin, an alkaloid, fat 
and colouring matter. 

Preparatintu. — Infostoo, (i in 10). IXose, \ to i f d. oz. tinanre 
(1 in 8). Dose^ ^ to i fld. dr. 

Actir/ns ani uses. — Antiperiodic, diuretic, stomachic and demul- 
cent« It is used in intermittent fevers, to prevent paroxysms; also 
given in diseases of the spleen and liver, in dropsy, gonorrhora, 
acid urine and in jaundice. A poultice of the leaves mixed with salt 
is used for itch and scaly aflfections of the skin. The infusion, mixed 
with methi, is used as a stomachic, bitter and astringent, and a'^so given 
as a reiiiedy in chronic d^'senter)*. 

ffidmis Commanis. B. P. 

HahitaU — ^Throughout India, United Stat»« Italy. 

Purls used. — ^Thc oil, expressed from the seeds. Oleum Ricini — 
Castor oil, B. P. ; leaves and seed. 

Vernacular. ^^ A. — Dhun-ul-kerwa. Beng. — Bharanda. Burm. 
Kyethsu. Chin. — Psuna. Can. — Haralu. Cing — Endaru. Duk. — 
Yarandi-ki-jhar. Guz. — Erando. Hind. — Arandi-ka-per. Mal^-al. 
— ^Sit avanakka. Pers. — Bedi-anjir. Sans. — Eranda. vatari, ruvuka, 
uruvuka. Tam. — Amanak-kan-chedi. Tel. — Amudupu-chettu. chit- 
tamin drak. 

Characters. — Roots long and tapering, light, soft and of an 
acrid taste ; stem hollow, smooth and glaucous, and generally 
marked with transverse rings ; leaves large, smooth, green, or 
glaucous and from 7 to 10 lobed. lanceolate, ac^te, {x>inted and 
dentate. There are two jointed small glands, one at the attachment 
of the petiole to the blade; the other gland is seen a little above the 
insertion of the petiole to the stem. Fruits tricocous, obtuseh* triangular, 
six striated and. marked with bristles ; when fresh of a glaucous green 
colour ; drj' ones dark brown. On section each fruit is ^-celled ; each 
cell containing i seed ; seeds large of the size of coffee grains, oblong 
or ovate and compressed ; dorsal surface more arched than the ventral ; 
apex carunculated, caruncule, of a brownish colour ; whole 
surface mottled with white, brown or dark patches. On the convex 
side, the blotches spread in a fan-like manner from the base of the car- 
uncule; kernel, white and oily ; seeds of two kinds, large and red seeded, 
and small, and grey seeded ; the small ones containing superior oil. 
The oil separates if water be brought in intimate contact with the 



RICINUS COMMtjNTS, 



SS3 



poirdered kernel ; taste of the kernel oily and nauseous. The oil is 
drawn in two ways : by heat (decoction) and without heat (expression). 
This lailer is the official variety and is known as cold drawn oil. 
Dose of ihe seeds, lo seeds; of the oil, i to 8 drs. 

Co fisn'fuents.— Fixed oil, 45 p.c. an inert alkaloid, ricinin, proteids, 
20 ptC; starch, mucilage, sugar* asli rop.c; also a poisonous alurninoid 
principle called ricin. The oil — oleum ricini — castor oil, contains re- 
cinoleiin ricinotcic acid, palmitin» stearin and myiistin and an acrid 
principle. The oil is a yellowish or pale coloured slightly viscid or 
oily, transparent liquid, of an acrid offensive and mawkish taste, mild 
nauseating odour, and neutral reaction ; soluble in absolute alcohol (1 
in f ) in alcohol (1 in 5). 

Preparatimn, — Decoction of roots (1 in 10), Dose, \ to i fld. oz,, 
niistura olei ricini BJ\ (3 in 8). Dose, I to 2 fld. oz. Medicated oil : 
to erandi tela 10, add a waterv paste of majitha 5, triphhi 5, halad 
4^ sunth 4, daruhalad 3, boil, strain and evaporate. 

Acttons ami t4scs. — All the constituents of the seeds except the oil 
are drastic, generally given with ginger tea or with decoction of deshmula 
dikvAth. The t»il IS non-irrttani; when it reach en the duodenum it is 
decomposed by (he pancreatic juice into rticinoleic acid which irritates 
the bowels, stimulates the intestinal j^lands and the muscular coat and 
cause purgation j it does not stimulate the liver. It acts in 4 or 5 hours, 
causing liquid stools without pain or griping and has a sedative effect on 
the intestines. With glycerine the effects of the oil arc increased. 
Recinolcic acid is absotbcd into the blood and tissuc^and is excreted with 
the hutnan milk which when sucked imparts to the child its purgative 
action. Ricin, a toxic ferment, is a violent irritant of the intestines, 
kidneys and bladder. It gives rise to inllammation of the bile 
duct and very often to jaundice and to dysuria. The oil is best given 
in flatulence* costiveness, fever, rheumatism and in inflammation 
of the gcnito-utinary organs as nephritis, cystitis, gonorrhoea, calculi, 
stricture of rectum or urethra. In diafrhtra due to the presence of 
irritating substances in the intestines leading lo congestion or lo 
excessive secretions it acts without exhausting the strength. It is 
used after operations on the abdominal or pelvic viscera. It overcomes 
constipation of typhoid fever, during pregnancy and before labour and 
in post-partem conditions. In intestinal or renal colic it is given 
with the juice of fresh ginger with prompt relief. It expels lurabrict. 
In enteritis, peritonitis and dysentery it is given with laudanum. If 
depression exists, oil of turpentine 5 to 10 ms» may be added. A poultice 
of the crushed seeds is used lo promote suppuration, to mature boils and 
Lto reduce gouty and rheumatic swellings ; as a galactagogue, varalians or 
poultices of the leaves are .ipplicd to inflamed breasts in women during 
lactation. Hot leaves are applied to the hypogastrium to increase the 
flow of menses. The root bark is an alterative and given in chronic 
visceral enlargements and in chronic skiti diseases* 

The medicated oil is used as an embrocation to the abdomen in 
colic, to the back in lumbago, to the ihigh in sciatica, &c., and as an 
inunction to the whole body in fevers* A small seeded variety 



554 TARGIA INVOLUCRATA. 

erandi, with red seeds and big leaves, is known as erando or eddo. 
Its long tubular petiole is used as a tube to inhale medicated vapours 
in cough and chest diseases. Castor oil as obtained in capsules is 
sometimes an admixture of castor oil with croton oil. 

StUlingia Sylvatioa. 

Syn. — Queen's delight, silver leaf, Queen's root, cock-up-hat, 
yaw root. 

Habitat — United States (sandy soil). 

Parts used. — The fresh root. 

Characters. — A perennial plant; root long, thick, subcylindrica 
and branched ; also compact, wrinkled and tough ; wood 
porous ; bark thick ; inner bark studded with many brown resin cells ; 
odour peculiar and unpleasant ; taste pungent, bitter and acrid. Dose, 
powdered root. 15 to 30 grs. 

Constituents. — Sylvacrol, a volatile oil, a glucoside, resin, fixed oil, 
tannin, gum, starch, ash 6 p.c. Sylvacrol is an acrid resin to which the 
pungency of the root is due ; soluble in alcohol, chloroform, benzene. 

Preparations. — Fluid extract miscible with water. Dose, 15 to 
60 ms. Decoction (i in 20). Dose, i to 2 ozs. Tincture (i in 8), 
\ to I fid. dr. 

McDade's ** succus alterans " also known as ** compound antisy- 
philitic mixture " or ** mistura smilacis composita'* contains fluid 
extract of stillingia 4, sarsaparilla 4, lappa minor 4, phytolacca 
decandra 4, and xanthoxylum carolinianum 4. Dose, i to 4 fld. drs. 

Stillingin — The dried extractive, a brown powder. Dose, i to 2 
grs. 

Actions and uses. — In small doses expectorant, alterative, antisy- 
philitic, diaphoretic, diuretic, sialagogue and cholagogue ; in large 
doses, emetic and purgative. As an alterative it is given in secondary 
and tertiary syphilis where mercurials and iodides may have been given 
in excess and without relief. It is given in scrofulous and cutaneous 
affections, in bronchitis, pneumonia and rheumatism ; also in incon- 
tinence of urine, impotence and sterility; in ascites and in cirrhosis due 
to hepatic diseases or torpid liver, in portal congestion and in jaundice 
following malarial intermittents it is given with quinine and arsenic. 
A decoction of it is given to ward off an attack of ague; it is of benefit if 
given in haemorrhoids due to hepatic congestion, or in habitual 
constipation. 

Tragia Involuorata, T. Oannabina. 

Habitat, — Throughout India. 

Parts used. — The root. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Bichhuti. Burm. — Bet-ya. Duk., Bomb. — 
Kancha-kuri. Can. — Haligilu. Hind.— Canchorre, Bichhute. Mar. — 
Kh&jkotti-kanchkuri. Malyal. — Shariganam. Sans. — Kasdghinnie, 
Dustparisha. Tam.^Kanchuri. Tel. — Dula-gondi, revati. 



ANTIARIS SACCLDORA. 



CharactfTS, — A twining shrub, growing in hedges, perennial, from 
3 to 4 feet high, and common in dry barren grounds ; leaves hairy, 
three-lobed, ailernate, pctioled and serrated ; stem erect ; branches 
numerous, smooth and woody ; small ones hairy and twining ; root 
succulent and of a pleasant odour. The hair stings like common 
nettle. 

Freparatirms. — Decoction (i in io)» Dose, J to t fld. oi. Infu- 
sion \i in 20). Dose, i to 2 fid. ozs. 

Ac(mns and uses* — Diaphoretic, diuretic and alterative; given in 
biliousness and liver diseases^ fever » cachexia^ and secondary syphilis ; a 
paste is applied for the extraction of guinea-worms, 

Trewia Nodiflora, Rottlera lodioa, Rottlera Hoaperiana, 

Trewia Macrophylla. 

Habitat. — India. 

Parts //^I'rA— The root. 

Vernacular. — Bomb. — Piitori, Can,^ — KiVt-kamba. Hind. — Pin* 
dara Mar, — Pitari^ sivani. MalyaL — Kanchi* Sans. — Pindara, 
karah^ta, kurangaka. 

Characters. — Root thick, of a tight brown colour, internally stud 
dcd with a few cuticular corky warts. The bark is tough and hbrou5, 
subaromatic and of a bitter astringent taste. 

Coiu/iVr/fw/^.— Resinous matter, and fat. 

Preftaratirjm, — Decoction of root (l in 10), Dose, \ to 1 lid. 02, 

Actions and uses, — ^Stomachici and alterative ; used in rheumatism, 
gout and to relieve flatulence ; a paste of the root is applied locally to 
reduce swellingSp 

Urtioaoiae— The Yada, Pipal or Nettle family 

Herbs, shrubs or trees with watery juice ; leaves stipulate, lobed 
and alternate, with stinging glands containing an acrid juice ; flowers 
unisexual, in small flower heads or catkins; Iruit indehiscent, one-seeded, 
surrounded by persistent calyx ; embryo^ straight and albuminous. 
Radicle superior* 

Habitat^ — Found universally. 

Properties, — The plants of this order possess acrid stinging juice 
which is contained in the glands. 

Antiaris Sacoidora. 
Habitat, — Deccan Peninsula, Java, Ceylon. 
Pirt used, — The nuts. 

Vernacuiar. — Can. — Jajhugri. MalyaK — ^Arayaangeli* Mar. — 
Chkndul, sapsundi. Tam,— Ncttavil, maram. Borneo— Bina. Java — 
AMtif^r, anchar. 



556 FICUS BENGALENSIS. 

Characters. — Nuts subglobular, of a light brown colour, of the size 
of a marble and enclosed in a sweet yellow pulp, forming a small, one- 
seeded fig ; shell thin and fragile ; kernel loose inside the shell. Dose 
of the powdered seed, ^ to ^ gr. 

Constituents, — The seeds contain a nitrogenous principle, very 
bitter and poisonous. 

Actions and uses, — The seeds are used as febrifuge and as a 
remedy in dysentery, colic and diarrhoea. 

Ficus Aspeprima. 

Habitat,^ Central India, Ceylon, Deccan, Peninsula. 

Parts used. — The leaves and bark. 

Vernacular, — Bomb., Mar.— Kharoti, Kharvat. Can. — Khargas. 
Guz. — Sariro. Hind. — Sheoda, Kalumar. Portuguese. —Folasda raopa. 
Sans. — Shakhataka. Tel. — Pindi chettu. 

Characters, — The bark is wrinkled and of a lightish brown 
colour externally ; internally fibrous, rather tough and greenish brown 
or pale in colour ; leaves from 2 to 4 inches long, oblong or oval, 
slightly dentate, scabrous and hard ; colour greenish dark ; surface 
very rough, and hence used as sand papers. The roughness is due to 
the presence of calcareous hairs. 

Constituents, — A crystalline principle, soluble in alcohol an in- 
organic acid, white calcareous matter and ash 18 p.c. 

Preparations, — Infusion of leaves (1 in 10). Dose, 2 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses , — Alterative ; used in glandular enlargement of 
the liver and spleen. The juice is applied to cracks and fissures on 
the palms of hands and soles of feet. The leaves are used to polish 
ivory. The bark, which is mildly acrid, is used as a tooth brush to 
remove the tartar or to cleanse the teeth. 

Fious Bengalensis, F. Indioa, Urostigma Bengalensis. 

Habitat, — East Indies. 

Parts used, — Milky juice and bark. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Tine barry. Burm. — Nan-kidiv. Can. — 
Ahlada mara. Cing. — Kiripelle. Uuk. — Jangli guller, Kakudu- 
mara. Eng.— Indian fig tree, common Banyan tree. Beng., Guz., Mar , 
Hind. — Bargat, vad, Kadugh. Malyal. — Per^lin p^la. Pers. — Anjire 
dasht. Sans. — Vata, sriksha, Nya grodha, Skandaja Veta-kshiram, 
Bahu pada, Sikhandun. Tam. — Alamaram. Tel. — Marri-pillu. 

Characters, — Fruits large, resembling cherries; bark milky, lightish 
brown or ash coloured, and scabrous ; external surface generally smooth, 
epidermis often broken and here and there fissured ; internally the 
bark is very fibrous and tough, the fibres are white and cottony. 



Between the fibres and the epidermis arc numerous^ soft, greyish, 
granules which give the bark a reddish colour ; t.iste astringent and 
nauseous ; odour nauseous* 

Consitluents. — The bark contains tannin, wax ana caoutchouc. 

Prcpatations, — Infusion (i in lo). Dose, \ to i fld, oz. 

Actions and uses* — Tonic and astringent ; given in diabetes, 

dysentery and hieniorrhagic fluxes, and in gonorrhata and seminal 
weakness. Locally the juice is applied as a remedy for toothache and to 
the soles of the feet and palms of the hands when cracked. 



Fious Carioa, B. P. 

Habilfit. — W. Asia, Subtropics, Persia, India, Asia Minor, Shores 
of Levant. 

ParL used, — The dried fleshy receptacles — ^Ficus — 6gs, B* P. 

Vemacuiar. — Arab. — Tin- teen. Eeng* — Doomoor. Hind., Mar.i 
Duk», Bomb. — Anjira. Burm. — ^Saphansi. Chin. — Wu-hwa-kwo, 
Cing. — Kata-atlika. Eng. — Fig- Can., Malyal, Tarn, — Shima-atli, 
Pcrs, — Anjira, Ravi, Jamir* Sans — Udeunbara* Tel. — Tenc-atth 

CharavUrs, — Male and female flowers are in hollow recep- 
tacles, walls covering thern is thick and fleshy. The fleshy recep* 
laclc or the fig bears fruit upon its inner surface. The fig is funnel- 
shaped generally compressed, irregular, and slightly gibbous at the 
top and tapering at the bottom to which a small stalk is attached. 
Immature fig* are green or greenish yellow, tough and leathery ; when 
cut or when j>ricked a milky juice escapes. Mature figs are soft, juicy, 
fleshy, yellowish or brownish red externally and deep red within, 
covered with sugar instead of the rnilky juicr. The pulp is very 
mucibginous, sweet, with a fruity odour and palatable. Figs may 
dry on trees or are dried by ovens or sun and are known as natural figs. 
They contain numerous seeds which are hard and of a whitish yellow 
colour. 

Comiitutnts. — The receptacle contains grape ?iugar 62 p.c*: gum, 
fat and salts. The milky juice (latex) contains a peptonizing ferment, 
thecffectsof which on fibrin and milk are similar to tfiose of papaine ; it 
converts starch into sugar. Fig is a constituent of confectio sennce, B. P. 

PrepiiratioHS. — Syrup, Dose, i to 2 drs. 

A*:thm and i#jr jr. —Laxative, demulcent and imtritious< Fre&h 
fruits are sweet, wholesome and delicious ; taken in moderation 
they are digestive ; in excess they lead to flatulence, enteralgia 
and diarrhiE'a. Both these and the dried figs are laxative and pectoral 
and are used in catarrh of the respiratory passages. The s;«ccha- 
rine and mucilaginous conslituentb render them nutritious and laxative, 
hence used to remove habitual cosiivenesb. The seed and tough skin 
if taken internally cause indigestion and flatulence. A poultice made 
of fig;> is used over gum boih and absces&es on the anus and vulva to 
hasten suppuration. 



558 FICUS HISPIDA. 

Fiona Olomerata. 

Habitat. — India. 

Parts used. — The root bark, fruit, milky juice and galls. 

Veniaculat. — Arab. — Jammaiz. Burm. — Saphanti. Can. — Kith- 
mara. Cing. — Atteekka-gass. Eng. — Glomerous fig tree. Beng., — 
Jagnodumar. Hind.,Duk., Bomb.,Guz. — Gullar-umbro. Mar. — Chaphal. 
Malyal. — Atti-yalura. Pers. — Samare-pash-shah. Panj. — Rumbal, 
palah. Sans. — Udumbara zajmiya, (sacrificial) Parvitraka (purifier). 
Tam . — At t i-pay h am . Tel . — boda-mam id i . 

Characters. — Root bark externally ash coloured and smooth to 
the touch, here and there studded with brownish scars ; internally 
tough, fibrous, and of a lightish brown or red colour, containing a milky 
juice which is sticky; smell somewhat aromatic, taste sweet and 
astringent ; fruit a pedicel, as large as common fig, covered with soft 
down ; when ripe, purple ; leaves alternate, oblong, tapering at each 
end and entire and studded with glands ; they issue from the trunk or 
large branches ; the galls are like blister. 

Constituents. — Tannin, wax and caoutchouc. 

Preparations. — A medicated oil ; decoction of the bark (i in 8). 
Dose, ^ to I fld. oz. and milky juice. Dose, i to 4 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent, carminative and stomachic ; 
given in haematuria, monorrhagia and haemoptysis. The juice 
is used as a vehicle by the natives (anupana) for metallic preparations. 
With cumin and sugar, the juice from the root is given in gonorrhoea; a 
decoction of the root bark with nimado is used as a gargle in saliva- 
tion, as a wash for ulcers and as an injection in leucorrhcea. The 
milky juice is given internally as an alterative, tonic and also applied 
as a lepa to the chest, abdomen, and to rheumatic joints, mumps and 
other glandular enlargements. The application is covered with a pad 
of cotton. 

Fiona Hispida, F. Oppositifolia, F. Dsdmona. 

Habitat. — Bengal, Coromandel, India. 

Patts used. — The fruit and bark. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Tine-barri. Beng. — Kako-dumur. Bomb. 
— Bokhera, Dhed-umbro. Can. — Adavi atti. Duk., Guz. — Jangli 
oombro. Hind. — Katgular. Madras. — Pe-attis. Mayal. — Parakh- 
pazam. Mar. — Veda umde. Pers. — Anjire-dashti. Sans. — Ummetto- 
dumbara. Tam. — Pd-attip-pazam. Tel. — Versi-atti-pandlu and 
Kako dumbara, crow's fig. 

Characters, — Fruit like a small fig and very downy, growing from 
the stem near or beneath the ground. 

Constituents. — Tannin, wax, a caoutchouc-like substance and a 
glucosidal principle having the properties of saponin. 

Preparations^ — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, J to i fld. oz. ; and 
poultice. 



GERONNIRRA RETICULATA. ^^Q 

Actions and mes. — Emetic and laxative ; giveii in hepauc 
obstruction. A poultice is applied to buboes to disperse it or bring it 
to maturity, 

Ficos Reli^iosa, Uroatignia Religiosa. 

^f/^//tfA— India. 

Paris used. — The root bark, 

Pemacuiar, — Arab. — Medah. Beng* — Ashwulh. Can. — Rangi- 

basri. Cing.— Bo-gas5. Duk. — Ani-pipah Eng. — Poplar leaved fig tree, 
Pipal-tree, Guz. — Pipalo. Hind*^ — Pipal. Mali. — Pipal» pipar, munga, 
Malyal. — Ari-alu. Sans. — Ashwatha» *»ikhandin. Budhidru, yajnika, 
shriman;*, seuya, vipra. Tarn.— Arosa-maram, Tcl. — Raya maiiu. 

Characters, — Bark tough and lightish brown ; outer surface 
smooth or slightly scabrous, brittle and soft; internal bark fibrousi very 
tough and studded here and there with soft granules ; odour slightly 
nauseous; taste astringent, but disagreeable. 

OmstttueiitSn — The bark contains tannin, caoutchouc and wax. 

Preparations n — Decoction ( I in lo ). Dose, ^ to i fid. oz, 
a medicated oil containing twigs boiled in gora tela. Pancha Valakal 
Kasheya, — Compound decoction of five barks, containing besides 
Ficus rcligiosa, Ficuiy Itidica, F* Glomerata, Mangifera Indica, 
MimusopSt Elengi and Mulsari, equal parts. Dose, 4 to H drs. 

Actions and uses, — With honey it is locally applied to aphtha and 
sore mouth. The powder is given internally in asthma. The medi- 
cated oil is used as an astringent injection in Ieucorrha*a, into the 
rectum iu dysentery, as a wash for unhealthy ulcers and as a gargle 
in salivation. 



Geponniera Reticulata. 

Habitat. — Sikkim^ Himalaya, Assam, Burma, Ceyloni Deccan, 

PentnsuJa, 

Parts used. — The wood. 

Vertiacnlar, —Cmg* — Urenne. Eng. Hellish incen^* Ind* Bazar — 
Narakiyaood* Nilgiri — Kho-miang. Portuguese — Pao sugo. Tam.— 
Kodituni. 

Characters, — Stems thick, branches many, odour disgusting and 
resembling human ordure ; wood, light brawn in irregularly shaped 
pieces. 

Constituents, — A sulid cr^'stalline pj crate ; skatole, a crystalline 
substance of a foecal odour, similar to naphthylaraine. Obtained from 
the putrefaction products of animal nroteids (human faces). Synihe- 
ticaJly prepared by fusing potash with albumen, also from propyl idine 
phenyl hydritzine. 

Preparations. — Decoction of the wood (i in lo). Dose, « to 4 fid, 

drs. 



560 MORUS NIGRA. 

Actions and uses. — Alterative ; mixed with lime juice, the decoction 
is used in itch and chronic skin diseases ; also given internally. It is 
burnt under the superstition that it drives away evil spirts. 

Ulmns FalYa (Slippery elm), U. Campestris. 

Syn. — Indian elm, sweet or American elm, British tea (the leaves). 

HabitaL — N. America, New England, S. Carolina. 

Parts used, — The inner bark, Ulmi cortex. 

Characters. — The bark in thick flat pieces of a pale brownish 
white colour ; inner surface finely ridged, having a mealy fibrous 
fracture ; odour peculiar, slight and fenugreek-like ; taste mucila- 
ginous. 

Constituents. — Mucilage starch, tannin and a bitter principle. 
Alcohol separates from its solution a gelatinous liquid. 

Preparations. — Mucilage. Dose, 4 to 8 drs. poultices and 
suppositories. 

Actions and uses. — Demulcent, and emollient ; used in diseases of 
the urinary passages, dysentery, diarrhcea and in bronchitis ; locally a 
poultice is applied over the abdomen and chest in bronchitis, and also 
used as vaginal and urethral suppositories, and as tents to dilate the 
uterus and other strictures and fistula. 

Moraoese— The Shetur or Mulberry family. 

Trees or shrubs with milky juice ; leaves with large stipules ; 
flowers very minute, unisexual, in heads, spikes or catkins ; fruits 
sorosis or syconus; seeds solitary and pendulous ; albumen, fleshy ; 
embryo hooked. 

Habitat, — Natives of temperate and tropical climates, 

Properties. — The milky juice of some species possesses acrid and 
poisonous properties ; others are bland and contain beverage ; some 
species are stimulant, sudorific, tonic and astringent ; fruits of some 
are refrigerant, fleshy and agreeable in taste. 

Moras Nigra, M. Rubra, M. Indioa. 

Habitat. — India, N. America. 

Parts used, — The fruit. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Tut. Beng. — Tut. Burm. — Posa. Can. - - 
Hippal. Cing. — Rata-ombilla. Eng. — Indian Mulberry. Bomb., 
Duk., Hind., Mar., Guz. — Shetura. Kashmir. — Tukhlu. Malyal. — 
Babi-saram. Pers. — Tut. Sans. — Shalmah-vrikshaha. Tam.— Musbi- 
kattai, cheddi. Tel. — Kambeli-buchi. ^ 

Characters, — Fruit in dense spikes, perianths coalesced, sorosis, 
fleshy cylindrical and of a dark purple colour ; smell disagreeable ; taste 
sweet ; shining in appearance and moist when touched. 



JIJGLANS REOIA^ 



in, citrates, nutates, &c., 

Preparaliom^ ^fl^^^thk 3)- Dose, i to 2 drs. and drink (or juice). 
Dose, 2 to 6 drs* 

Actions and uses^ — ^The fruits are cooling, refreshing, flavour- 
ing and slightly laxative. The juice and jelly are used in fever, sore 
throat and catarrhal inflammation of the air passages. 

Ju^andaces— The Walnut FamUy, 

Trees ; leaves pinnate, alternate and exstipuJate ; flowers unisexual 
muncHcious, sterile in catkins and fertile in spikes. Calyx 3 to 5 lobcd 
irregular, ovary, 2-4 celled, inferior; ovule, solitary, and erect; fruit dry 
drupe with crustaceous or bony nut shell, containing 4 lobed seed, 
without albumen; embryo with sinuous oily cotyledons. 

Habitat — Temperate Climate, Persia, Caucasus. 

Properties* — Generally cathartic. The seeds of some are oily and 
edible. 

Juglans nigra, Jaglans alba or Cinerea* 

//]f?/^//ri/.— N. America, Canada, United States. 

Parts used, — The inner bark of the root, and volatile oil. 

Characters. — Bark dark grey^ in flat or curved pieces ; internally 
striated and smooth ; fracture short, of a feeble odour and bitter acrid 
taste. Dose, 20 to 60 grs. 

Constituents.— ^Mcm or juglandic acid, resembling chrysophanic 
acid. Fixed oil, 14 p.c, volatile oil, resin, no tannin* Nucin is an acrid 
volatile substance, occurs in orange yellow needles or crystals, becomes 
purple with alkaline solutions, and decomposes by long keeping. Dose, 
to 3 grs. 

Preparations, — ^Extract. Dose, 5 to 15 grs. Decoction, i in 10. 
Dose, 4 to 8 drs. Spirit made by distilling fresh walnuts with alcohol. 
Dofte, i to I dr. 

Actions ami tts€S. — Rubefacient, cholagogue, like rhubarb a mild 
cathartic, diuretic and tonic ; it is not an irritant, and does not 
gripe; given in chronic constipation, also in dysentery. In intermittent 
fever it is mixed with calomel and administered with benefit. Locally 
the bark is a rubefacient and may cause a blister. Country, wild Indian 
or Belgaum walnut is the fruit of aleuritis triloba. 

Juglana Regia. 

Habitat. — Persia, Himalaya, Cashmere, China, and cultivated 
in Europe. 

Parts used. — The oil leaves and bark. 

i Vernactilan'- Ar^h. — Jouz. Burm, — Siskhya-si* Chin.— Hu- 

t*au, King-t'au. Can* — Akrodu. Duk. — Aldiarot. Eng,— Candle 
berry tree, Indian or English walnut. The oil — nut oil, or Artists' oil. 
Bengo iMar., Hind., Guz— Akharota. Pers.^Churmaghz. Tam.— 
Akjottu. Tel, — Akrotu. 
36 



56f 



CASTANEA DENTATA. 



Characters, — ^A handsome tree; leaves long, iniparipinnate; leaflets 
in pairs^ sessile and oblong, round at the base, acuminate^ and serrate ; 
bark flat or in curved pieces, dark grey^ inside smooth ; fruit fleshy. 
a drupe, oblong in form and when immature of an olive green colour : 
in size tt resembles a small applenut, ovoid and somewhat flattened; 
shell hard and thick ; kernel thick, white and oily. 

Constituents, — Nucin or Jugiandic acid, Hesin, fixed oil of a drying 
nature like linseed oil. The oil is palatable. Dose« i to 2 drs. 

Preparations, — Spirit. Dose, i to 2 drs. Decoction of leaves and 
bark (i in 10). Dose, 4 to 12 drs. and oil. 

Actions and uses, — The leaves are alterative and given in scrofula, 
rickets, and leucorrhoea. The oil is a 5ure and mild laxative, and 
cholagogue, and given in torpid liver. It does not cause nausea nor any 
other distressing symptoms. The decoction of the bark is galactafugc and 
used to stop mammary secretions. As an astringent it is given to check 
diarrha-a, and menorrhagia ; and as a gargle in sore throat. The spirit is 
used as an antispasmodic for checking vomiting of pregnancy. The 
kernel is supposed to possess aphrodisiac and vermifuge properties, and 
given in general debility and in children for worms. It is also used as an 
article of food when dried. When stuck on a reed, it is a good substitute 
for candles like fanduka. The oil is used as a drying agent for paints. 

Remarks* — The nut has no resemblance to fanduka. 

Corylaoeae of Cupulifers, the Majuphala or the Oak family. 

1>ees or shrubs ; leaves alternate, usually feat her- veined, simple 
with deciduous stipules ; flowers unisexual, moncecious ; male flowers 
clustered ; stamens 5— 20 inserted into the base of membranous calyx ; 
female flowers solitary or clustered, surrounded by an involucre of 
bracts which form a cupule round the ovary or fruit ; ovary inferiur ; 
fruit a gland or a nut ; seed one or two without albumen. 

Habitat. — Native of forests of temperate regions, 

Properti€is,^^The bark and capsules are highly astringent ; some 
species are tonic and febrifuge ; the gall of some is astringent* 

Caatanea Dentata. 

Habitat. — N. America, S. Europe, W. Asia. 
Piiiris used. — The leaves. 

Vernacular, — Burro. — Theel-kliya Hind, — Ni-keri* Eng. — 
European chestnut, sardian nut. 

Characters,— Th^ leaves are long, wide, lanceolate, acuminate and 
mucronate. sinuate, or serrate at the margin, feather veined iuid 
smooth, with a slight odour and astringent taste. Dose, 30 to 60 grs. 

CWi7/Vw^///i,— Gallic acid, tannic acid 9 p c„ resin, fat, ^um, 
albumen, ash 6 p.c. ; mainly salts of magnesium, potassium, lioiCt trotii 
tlieir carbonates, chlorides and phosphates. The fruit contains starcll 35 
p.Ci lit i t».c,, pruleids 4 p. c. and sugar 2 ji. c. 



^UBRCtJS INFECTORIA* 

Ptefiaraiions^—F\nld extract Do*e, 30 to 90 ms. InfiisaoD (i in 
40). Dose, i to 1 fld. oz. 

Actions and uses, — Tonic, sedative and astringent; used in 
whooping cough to control paroxysms and in dysentery. The nuts are 
edible. 

QuerotiB Alba— White Oak* 

HabiUiL — America, Misuissipi, Texas, Florida. 
ParU nsdii. — The bark* 

C/Mr^Jt/^Tiv— Tree stately ; branches many and spreading ; leaves 
long, oval, tapering at the base ; lobes pinnatifid, smooth, rounded, and 
entire; colour green, glaucous, with prominent veins ; flowers monocci- 
ous ; nut one-seeded, capsular at the base, the cup formed by scaly 
involucre ; fruit ovoid and long ; bark in nearly flat pieces of a pale 
brown colour without any corky layer ; internally tough, covered with 
sharp, short, longitudinal ridges, and breaking with a tough fibrous 
fracture ; odour faint, taste astringent* Dose, 15 to 60 grs. 

Coi«Y////^«/s.— Quercitannic acid, 10 pc. ; oak red, quercin, resin, 
and pectin. Quercuannic acid is a yellowish or reddish brown, amor- 
phous mass. To obtain it wash the bark with ether, precipitate witli 
lead acetate. Quercin is a bitter principle ; to obtain it boil the bark in 
acidulated water, add milk of lime to neutralize, then add solution of 
potassium carbonate, dissolve the precipitate in alcohol and evaporate ; 
occurs in yellow needles. 

I^cparatians, — Pessaries. Decoction (i in 20)* Dose, ^ to i oz. 
Fluid extract. Dose, 15 to 60 ms. 

Actions ami uses. — Astringent and tonic, similar to tannin; 
given in scrofula, chronic diarrhcea, intermittent fevers, dysentery, 
haemoptysis, uterine hicmonhages and bronchial fiuxes ; the decoction 
is used in gonorrhu-a and leucorrhcea ; as a wash in prolapsus ani, 
ulcers and haemorrhoids ; as a gargle for relaxed uvula ; as a lotion for 
flabby ulcers and suppurating wounds. The bark powder is used as a 
dentifrice in tooth powder^. A pouUice of the bark is used as an 
application in gangrt-ue, 

AV/«aMi.— Persons working in tan vats seldom suflTcr from inter- 
mittent fevers or phthisis. 

Qnerons Infeotoria, B* P. 

HabitaL — Asia Minor, F^ersia, Greece, Syria, Turkey, Mediter- 
ranean Basin. 

Parts used. — The excrescences — Galla, galls, B. P, 

Vernacular, — Arab, — Ajees-aafs. Burm* — Pajeen-le-garneethu. 
Beng., Duk., Bomb., Ind., Guz.— Maephala, majuph-d. Can,— Mashi, 
kuyi, Cing. — Masaka. Eng.— Galls, the dyer's oak, gall oak, mad 
apple, Dead Sea apple. Mar.— Maiphala, mashika. Malyal — Maia* 
kanee. Pers. — Mazoo, Sans. — Mayin mayeka, Mj^uhu, Tam., TeU 
— Maj»hik-kay. 



564 QUERCUS IXFECTORIA. 

Characters. — Galls are of two kinds, hard and soft. The soft is 
blind. The hard white gall is used in commerce. The insect cynipsgalbe 
tinctoriae produces hard galls of commerce. The soft variety is produced 
by diplolepis gallae tinctoriae. They puncture, or sting, the buds 
and tender bark and deposit ova (eggs) in the puncture. This 
deposit sets up irritation and the surcharged sap oozes out, 
which on evaporation leaves solid constituents forming the 
excrescence. Those galls which contain the insect are heavy and 
of a blackish colour and highly astringent; those without the 
insect are angular with a round central cavity and less astringent. 
Both varieties are globular or pyriform and have their surface studded 
with numerous tubercles. In some, the tubercles are scattered. In 
others the lower half is smooth and without turbercles. At the base 
each gall has a scar of a grey brown colour projecting and correspond- 
ing to the attachment of the gall on the tree; the cut portion is whitish 
brown except in the centre, where it is deep brown, resinous looking 
and sprinkled all over with sparkling white granules. In the interior 
there are 2 or 3 cavities ; taste astringent. 

Constituents. — Tannin 50 p.c, Gallic acid 2 to 3 PC., Ellagic acid, 
mucilage, sugar, resin and starch in the nucleus. Tannic acid often 
splits up into digallic acid and glucose by fermentation. 

Acidum Gallium, B. P., Tri-hydroxy-benzoic acid, dioxy-salicylic 
acid. To prepare it make a paste of powdered galls, boil it repeatedly 
with water, add diluted sulphuric acid and ferment, and finally purify 
with charcoal, filter and crystallise. 

Characters. — Acicular crystals, triclinic prisms or silky needles, 
nearly white, generally of a slight brownish tinge without any odour 
and of a faintly acid astringent taste ; soluble in cold water (i in 100), 
in boiling water (i in 3), in alcohol (i in 5), in ether (i in 40), glycerin 
(i in 12). Dose, 5 to 15 grs. 

Acidum Tannicum, B.P. Tannic acid, tannin, gallotannic acid or 
digallic acid. To prepare it expose gall powder to a damp atmos- 
phere for a few days, then add sufficient ether and water to dissolve the 
acid, press and dry. A light brownish powder or thin glistening scales 
of a characteristic odour and strong astringent taste ; becoming dark 
by age and acid in reaction ; soluble in water (i in i), alcohol (i in i). 
hot glycerin (i in i), insoluble in absolute ether, chloroform, benzene 
or benzol. Dose, 2 to 5 grs. In wafer, pill or capsule. 

Ellagic acid, a white crystalline powder, almost insoluble in water, 
alcohol and ether ; it also exists in many vegetables and forms the sole 
constituents of the intestinal concretions known as bezoar. It exists 
in herbivarous animals eating those vegetables. 

Prcparations. — G^X^ — unguentum gallae, B. P. (i in 5) ; unguentum 
gallx* cum opio B. P. (7^ p. c. of opium). Tinctura gallae, tincture 
of nut gall, 20 p. c. Dose, i to 2 drs. 

Of Tannic acid— trochiscus acidi tannici B. P. \ gr. in each, 
coUodium stypticum, styptic collodion contains tannin 20, alcohol 5, 
ether 25, and collodion 50. Glycerinum acidi tannici, B. P., gl^xerin 
of tannic acid (i in s). 



UlA LKNTA. 



Glycerinum aluminis et acid! taiinici» contains potassium alum i, 
glycerine 6, and tannic acid j, Suppositoria acidi tannici, B. P., with 
cocao butter, each contains 3 grs. 

Actions and uses^ — The galls are astringent and tonic. They con- 
stringe the muscular tissue in the walls of the minute vessels, check 
hemorrhage and cut short local inflammations. The natives use galls 
combined with pomegranate bark and bariis kapur to- check hsemor* 
rhageand use it locally as a gargle for relaxed throat and as an injection 
for relaxed vagina and rectum. 

Tannic acid is a powerful astringent. When taken into the 
stomach it precipitates albumen and coagulates the intestinal mucous 
secretions ; also coagulates albumen and gelatine of tissues^ lessens 
peristalsis and leads to constipation. From the stomach it is excreted 
mixed with albumen and pepsin. It is thus a valuable antidote in 
poisoning by alkaloids and by tartar cmclic. If given for a long lime it 
disorders digestion, sets up irritation of the mucous membranes and 
leads to emaciation. It is preferred to gallic acid as a local and 
intestinal astringent. In the intestines, it is con%'erted into gallic 
acid, hence largely used in epistaxis, anal fissures* hemorrhoids, 
and hsemorrhage from the lower bowels* It is of benefit in chronic dis- 
charges, asdiarrhfpa, leucorrhoea, gleet and vesical catarrh. Externally it 
is applied to the fauces in sore throat, to aphthtCi to chapped nipples, 
to ulcers and piles; also in otorrhoea, ceitain skin diseases as 
eczema, intertrigo and impetigo; as a styptic crjlloid it is used lo check 
bleeding and to unite wounds. Gallic acid docs nai coagulate albumen 
and gelatin, hence lU topical astringent elTectN are less marked* li is 
useful for internal h;einorrltages as from the lungs, kidneys, Stc; also in 
profuse excretions as in diitbetes. bronchorrhrta, night sweats, chronic 
diarrha^a, &c. Internally, however, it is more powerful and less prone 
to disturb digestion or cause stomach irritation than tannic acid. 

Betulaceae— The Birch family. 

Trees or shrubs ; leaves simple, alternale with deciduous stipules ; 
bark astringent and resinous ; flowers unisexual or amentaceous, no 
calyx, but having small scaly bracts arranged in a whorlcd manner; 
flowers male, opposite the bracts, with 2 or 5 stamens and with 2*ccllcd 
ovaries ; fniit dr>% indehiscent, i celled, i " seeded ; seed pendulous, 
cxalbuminous, 

fiahitat. — Temperate climate and colder regions, 

rro;*<T/iVjF»— Astringent, tonic, and febrifugal. 

Betula lenta. 

Cherry birch, spice birch, mountain mahogany* 

. liabttaL — ^N. America, Indiana. 

I\irt used. — Volatile oil from the bark. 

Ch^iracttrs, — Bark dark brown, separable into layers ; taste sweet 
andtromattc, when wounded cambium exudes sweet, acid, edible juice. 



566 SALICACBiE. 

Constituents. — Volatile oil, tannin 3*5 p.c., Betulin, a canqriioraceoits 
principle. 

Oleum Betulae volatile, a volatile oil. Prepared from the bark by 
distillation. It is identical with methyl salicylate and nearly identical with 
oil of gaultheria procumbens, the latter having an additional terpene. 
It does not pre-exist in dried bark but is formed by reaction between 
water and gaultherin. Dose, i to 5 ms. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant, diuretic and emmenagogue ; used in 
rheumatism, gout, scrofula, in irritable bladder and skin diseases ; also 
in amenorrhoea and intermittent fevers. 

Remarks. '^OSx^txi sold as oil of Teaberr}* or winter green oil. 

<hietao6«— The Jointed Dr family. 

Small trees or shrubs ; stems and branches pointed ; leaves opposite, 
entire, net veined ; flowers in catkins or heads, unisexual ; calyx i leaved ; 
anthers i celled : ovules 1-2, naked ; seeds succulent, embryo 
dicotyledonous, in the axis of fleshy albumen. 

Habitat. — Native of tropical and temperate regions. 

Properties. — Some are astringent and alterative. The seeds of 
several species are eaten as food. 

Bphedra Ynl^aris, B. P&ohyolada. 

Habitat. — Western Himalaya, Afghanistan, Central Asia. 

Parts used. — Dried branches and root. 

Vernacular, — Bom., Pers. — Huma. Japan. — Ma-oh. Punj. — 
Butshur. Sutlq.— Phok. 

Characters. — Shrub rigid and tufted ; branches striate, nearly 
smooth and green ; bracts connate, spikelets ^ to ^ inch, often whorled ; 
fruit fleshy, succulent 1-2 seeded ; seeds biconvex ; odour terebinthinate 
and taste astringent. 

Constituents. — Ephiderine, an alkaloid. By oxidation it splits up 
into benzoic acid, monomethylamine and oxalic acid. 

Preparations. — Decoction of the root (i in 40). Dose, ^ to i fld, oz. 

Actions and uses. — Alterative, diuretic, stomachic, and tonic. Ephe- 
derine, like atropine, has the property of dilating the pupil of the eye. 
The decoction is alterative and used for rheumatism and syphilis, 
especially for acute muscular and articular rheumatism. It is s^iven in 
cases where antipyrine, salol, antifebrine, and salicylate of soda have 
failed to give reliedf. As a stomachic it improves digestion and gives 
tone to intestines. 

Balioac68B— The Willow family. 

Trees or shrubs ; leaves simple, alternate, and stipulate ; flowers 
unisexual, amentaceous, naked or with a cup-like or membranous calyx; 
both kinds are found in catkins one in each bract ; fruit one-celled 
2 to 4 valved ; pod many seeded, each seed having long silky hairs 
at one end ; ovary i celled, superior ; embryo erect and exalbuminous. 



f^AT.rX HIGRA. 



567 



ffiuMn L^K2itive nf lemperatc climates. 

PiDpfrties,— The bark of some species is tonic, astringent^ and 
febrifuge. The hairs which invest the seeds are used for cushions. The 
timber is used for basket making and for the manufacture of charcoal* 
The buds of some secrete an oleo-resin of a stimulant character. 

SalU and Popalaa, B. P., varloos Species. 

Flabiiat. — N. America, Europe, 

Parts used, — A neutral principle (glucoside), « alicinum, salicin, B.P. 

Salicin: To obtain it treat the decoction of the bark with litharge 
and filter ; the residue contains tannin, gum, extractive and colouring 
matter. The filtrate contains salicin and lead ; separate the lead by 
sulphuretted hydrogen and sulphide of barium, filter, evaporate and 
crystallize. Ano'ther method— boil the bark with milk of lime to remove 
tannin, evaporate and filter and digest with alcohol. Occurs in colourless 
shining crystals with very bitter taste, soluble in cold water (l in 2S), 
alcohol (i in 60), insoluble in uiheror chloroform* Dose» 5 to 20 grs, 

Salicin, by boiling it with dilute sulphuric acid, is converted into 
saligenin and sugar (glucose) and by further boiling into saliretin, a 
resinous body. 

Aciions ami uses. — Bitter, tonic, antiperiodic, antipyretici and 
antiseptic; used in rheumatism, fevers, coryza, influenza and neuralgia ; 
externally in solution with borax it is used in eczema, burns and 
f(Etid perspiration. Ft is, however, not so depressing in its action 
as salicylic acid. 

Salix Caprea. Sallx Tetraaperma. 

HtiKtaL — Persia, Europe, N. W. India* 

Paris used, — The bark, leaves, seeds, flowers and a watery essence 

distilled from the plant, 

Veniacttlnr — Arab. — Khilaph-uUbalakhi. Beng, — Pani-jurna. 
Burm.— Moma-kha. Duk. — Bede-mushk* Kng, — Goat^s sallow, round 
leaved sallow. Hind. — Bed, Laila safeda Bhainsa. Pers. — Beda^mushk, 

Characters — Flowers unisexual, naked or with a membranous 
Wyx ; bark purplish brown, externally while^ internally tough and 
fibrous ; catkins long, thick, cylindrical, bright yellow and fragrant ; 
bracts oblong, in stnall scales, obovate, blackish and hairy ; leaves 
long, pointed, entire. 

Con$tttMnts.—^z\\Q\n^ wax, fat, gum and tannin. 

Preparations* — Infusion (i in 10), Dose, ( to i fld. oz., and distilled 
watery essence. 

Actions and uses. — Tonic and febrifuge, used in ague and during 
ivalcscence from malarial fever and cachexia. 

Salix Nigra— Black Willow or Pussy WiUaw. 
ffahitat. — Southern States of America. 
Paris used, — The bark and buds or catkins. 



568 CANNABIS INDICA. 

Characters. — Leaves narrow, pointed and tapering at each end, 
serrate, smooth and green ; stipules small and deciduous, covered 
with short rounded and woolly glands ; catkins pedunculated, loag 
and loose ; filaments hairy below ; ovary stalked and glabrous ; bark 
of a brown colour, light, soft and close grained. 

Preparations. — Of the buds, fluid extract. Dose, i to i dr., as a 
sexual sedative. Of the bark, solid extract. Dose, 3 to 8 grs., as a tonic 
and antiperiodic. 

Actions and uses. — Antiperiodic and febrifuge ; sexual and general 
sedative and anaphrodisiac; used in sexual and urinary disorders, 
in ovarian hyperaesthesia and spermatorrhoea, gonorrhoea, hysteria, 
epilepsy and neurosis. Its action is similar to that of hydrastis, conium 
and potassium bromide, but not so depressant. 

Cannabinaoett, the Hemp or Oanja Family. 

Herbs rough, with a watery juice ; leaves alternate, stipulate and 
lobed ; flowers small, unisexual, dioecious ; male flowers in racemes 
or panicles ; calyx scaly ; stamens 5 ; female flowers in spikes or 
strobiles ; ovary, superior, i -celled ; ovule i, solitary, pendulous ; fruit 
indehiscent ; seed solitary, exalbuminous ; embryo hooked. 

Habitat. — ^Temperate parts of northern hemisphere, Europe or 
Asia. 

Properties. — Some species possess narcotic, stomachic and tonic 
properties ; some yield fibres. 

Cannabis Indioa, B. P., Indian Hemp. 

Habitat. — Cultivated in India, Asia, Persia, N. India. Found 
within N.-W. Himalaya and Kashmir. 

Parts used. — The dried flowering or fruiting tops. The leaves, 
seeds and resinous exudation. 

Vernacular. — Large leaves, capsules or fruits with stalks. Arab. — 
•Nabatul, Ben. — Bhang. Burm. — Bin-segav. Can.— Bangi. Cing. — 
Mat Kansa. Hind., Duk. — Bhang, siddhi, sabji. Eng. — Indian hemp. 
Guz. — Bhang. Malyal. — Lacki. Mar. — Bhanga-cha pana. Pers. — 
Bang. Sans. — Vaj^ya, vriga patta, Ananda, Harasini Bhanga Chapola. 
Indr^ana, Dnayana Vardhani, uijiya, vajradin, matulam, Mahini, sidhu. 
Tam. — Bangi-elai. The dried flowering tops of the female plants con- 
taining the resin of the cannabis sativa. Arab. — Kunnab Haschisch. 
Beng.— G4nj4. Burm. — Segiyav. Can. — Bangi. Cing. — Kansi. Guz. 
— Ganja. Malyal. — Kanch^. Hind., Mar., Duk., Pers. — Kinnah 
shadanah. Tam.— Kalpami. The resinous concrete exudation 
from flowers, stems and leaves. Bomb. — Guz., Beng., Hind., Duk. — 
Charas. Burm. — Segiyav-asi. Can. — Banji-gondu. Cing. — Kansa- 
kiri. Malyal — Chetip-pasha. Sans, — Charma. Tam. — Ganjapal. Tel. 
— Ganji palu. 

Siddhi, Siddhu means perfect. Hindu mythology applies the term 
Siddhu to Jogis or monks in allusion to their having gained a perfect 
knowledge of the way to one true God ; they then spend the rest of 



CANNABIS INWCA. 



?«9 



their days in this one belief. The Jogis generally use Bhinga to 
concentrate their idea upon one God. This drug is^ therefore, known 
as Siddhi, /\ r. used by Siddha (Saddhu), 

Dnyfma Vardhani : Dayanai knowledge, and V'ardhani, promoter, 
Bhiinga taken is exlnlaratiug and promotes knowledge ot things It 
is said of jewellers that tliey lake Bhanga when testing the true value 
of jewels to sharpen their intellect- Vajaya, victorious or unbeaten. 
The drink of bhang drives from the fighting Hindu the haunting 
spirits of fear and weariness. It means giver of success. The drink 
gives success in all undertakings. Wijapata means a strong nerved ; 
Chupola, the cause of reeling gait ; Ananda, causing laughter or 
involuntary movements* ; and Harasini the excitor of virile passions ; 
Indrasana, a favourite drink of Indra, the king of gods. 

Charas is derived from Sanscrit* Charma, Chamra. a skin. It 
jnifics a leather bag, charas being stored in leather bags by cultivators. 
femp seeds are termed Shu dan^th (Pers.), meaning Royal seeds. 

Characters, — An annual herb; stems angular and tomentose ; leaves 
palmate with compound leaflets, lanceolate, SL-rrate and linear ; Rowers 
dioecious, yellow ; flowering tops generally compressed and brittle, 
often mixed with leaves, leaflets, bracts and sometimes with 
nearly ripe fruits ; seeds achenes, of a roundish shape, shining, 
reticulated, also angular and hard ; taste acrid, narcotic and oily. 
Different parts of the plant bear diflTerent names. Bhang, subjee 
or sidhi is of a deep green colour. It consists usually of broken 
leaves in coarse powder, fruit and seeds without stalks. Ganja 
is the flowering and fruiting tops of female plants from which the 
resin has not been removed. It consists of compressed brittle 
spikes with leaves, leaflets, bracts, and small pistillate flowers and 
sometimes nearly ripe fruits, the whole is more or less agglutinated 
with resinous exudation, colour brownish green, odour powerful and 
peculiarly narcotic. Charas, or churrus, is a resinous exudation 
sjiontaneously oozing from the entire plant or from the leaves 
and flowering tops* It is mixed with the hairs and fragments of the 
leaf, and is of a darkish green or brown c(>Iour and has a peculiar 
odour. In consistence and appearance it resembles Afima. 

Constiiuents, — A volatile oil and resin, which is the most active 

principle, .md contains an alkaloid cannabine ; tetano cannabine and 

^annabinon ; gum, sugar and potassium nitrate, Cannabine is a dark 

•rown syrupy resin in a semiliquid state. It is a powerful sedative, 

'and is given in mania and sleeplessness. It is more soporific than 

cannabin tannas. Dose,! to4grs, 

Caunabinon. — A dark brown resin, semi liquid. Dose, ^ to I gr. as 
a sedative, given in mania, insomnia &e. 

Cannabinol. — A toxic red oil a constituent of cannabinon, charas 
ganjah and haschisch. 

Tetano Cannabine is a crystalline alkaloid ; its action is similar 
to that of strychnine. 

Garado or hemp paste contains bhang* miri, and ganja made 
into a paste in water. Majum, majoon (Calcutta), Mapanchari (Cairo), 



?7o 



TANNARIS INBICA. 



Dawames (Arab) a confection or electuary. It contains bhang, ganja, 
churus, opium, poppy seeds, dhatura leaves, and seeds, cloves, niastic, 
aniseeds, cinnamoot cumin, cardamoms, tabashir, milk, ghee, sugar 
and flour. Dose, i dr. 

Subject otherwise known assidhu or gutado* It is a liquid paste 
containing bhanga, miri, goldba kali, khasa-khasa, the five 
cucurbitaceae seeds, badima and elachi equal parts, to which sugar 
and water is added. If milk is added the intoxicating effects become 
more marked. Dose, 2 drs. 

Cannabin Tannas— cannabin tannate. a brown powder, insoluble in 
water or ether, slightly soluble in alcohol, freely soluble in water. It 
is fiee from the irritating volatile oils present in the drug. Dose, 2 
to lo grs. 

Prefiarations. — Extractum cannabis Indicse, B. P. Dose, \ to l gr. 
Tinctura cannabis Indicae, B. P. (i of extract in 20). Dose, 5 to 1 5 ms. 
It is not miscible with plain water. 

Actions and uses, — Anodyne, hypnotic, antispasmodic, sudorific. 
aphrodisiac, and appetizing; in large doses narcotic. In medicinal doses 
and taken for the hrst time it acts as an agreeable intoxicant, as a result of 
whichi time, distance and sound are magnified. It exhilarates the 
spirit, excites the imagination and increases the appetite ; medicinally 
it acts as an anodyne and antispasmodic, but is inferior to opium, ft 
has, however, the advantage of not producing const ipation, loss of 
appetite, nor the unpleasant after effects peculiar to opium. It is 
largely used in headache of a continuous or chronic character, asthma» 
whooping cough, chronic bronchitis, tetanus^ hydrophobia and other 
spasmodic affections as hysteria, chorea, &c. It is also used in nervous 
vomiting, mental depression, delirium tremens &c. It is sometimes used 
in place of opium as a hypnotic where opium cannot be borne ; and 
largely used in menorrhagia and dysmcoorrhoea ; also used in chronic 
rheumatism. 

Among the natives it is largely used as an aphrodisiac and as an 
intoxicant like opium and alcohol In large doses, or if habitually 
taken, or its use persevered in, it produces a bloated face, congest^ 
eyes> tremulous and weak hmbs, imbecility, weakness or loss of 
memory. They use bhang in gonorrhcea and dyspepsia. Locally 
a decoction of the leaves is applied to erysipelas and neuralgic painful 
parts. Its application to the anus is used to relieve the pain of 
haemorrhoids. A paste applied to the head relieves dandruff and 
vermin. 

Ganja is smoked through chillum, an improvised hooka, in 
arsenical poisoning ; also the smoke is passed into the rectum to relieve 
tenesmus and tormina of dysentery. Locally as an anaesthetic It 
relieves the itching of eczema, pruritus &c. 

Charas.— It is a powerful stimulant and narcotic, and used for the 
same purposes as ganja. Majam is used as an excitant and aphrodisiac* 
Subjee is used as intoxicating and cooling. Cannabin Tannas is 
hypnotic, especially in nervous sleeplessness and acute mania* 
Cannabinon is given in acute mania and sleeplessness, more certain 
than cannabin tannas, 



MYRtCA SAPTDA. 



S7I 



Dhun. 



Rmnulas Lupulus, B. P. 
America, Europe^ Central Asia, Australia, Dcra 



Parts tisfid. — The dried strobiles, Lupuliis. the hops or Humulus, 

Characters. — Strobiles ovate, long, and consisting of thin 
hairy undilated axis and many greenish ovate and obliquely mem* 
branous scales ; upper portion reticulately veined toward the base, 
glanduUr and surrounding sub-globular achene, which is covered with 
yellowish numerous aromatic glands ; these are the nio^t active parts of 
the hops. The odour is aromatic and taste bitter and astringent. 

Constituents. — A volatile oil, resin, asparagin, choline, tannin and 
ash, an aromatic and a bitter principle reside in the glands. The bracts 
contain lupuline ; the volatile oil contains a hydrocarbon and valeroL 

Lupulinium — Lupulin» B. P, Glanduln; Lupuli. A granular 
brownish yellow powder composed of glands obtained from the strobiles 
of the hop. Each gland consists of a single hemispherical layer of cells 
of strong bceMikc odour and bitter aromatic tantc. Dose, 2 to 5 grs, 

/^eparatiofiS.^OltO'TQsm extracted by means of ether. Dose. 2 to 
^ grs. Tinctura Lupuli, B. P. (i in 5). Dose { to I dr. Infusum 
Lupuli (i in 20). Dose, \ to 2 fld. ozs. Extract obtained by ether. 
Dose, 2 to 5 grs, 

Actions aud uses. — Tonic, stomachic, hypnotic, narcotic, somewhat 
diaphoretic, diuretic, astringent and aphrodisiac. It increases the 
action of the heart, skin and circulation. It is used in in&omniav 
alcoholism, delirium tremens, seminal debility, priapism, incontinence 
of urine and irritable bladder. Locally hops arc used as poultice to 
sprains, bruises, abscesses and over the abdomen in colic. Pillows filled 
with hops are, on account of the narcotic odorous vapour from them, 
employed to induce sleep. 

Myrioaoeaa.— The Gale Bog Myrtle or Kataphala family. 

Shrubs with alternate, simple resinous and doited leaves ; flowers 
unisexual, amentaceous ; fruits drupaceous, I -seeded ; embryo without 
albumen. 

flahitat — ^Native of temperate parts of Europe, India and Cape of 
Good Hope. 

Pto/ieftus. — The plants of this order are remarkable for their 
aromatic and astringent properties; the berries of mvTica cerifera 
contain a beautiful green wax which burns like spermaceti or candles. 

Myrica Sapida, M. Nagl H, Cerifera. 

Si «. — Wax .Myrtle, Wax berry, Candle bcrr}'. 

Habitat. — Himalaya, Nepaul. 

Parl^ used, — The bark of the root and seeds. 



Vcttiaculitr. — Eng— Bay berry. Arab.— Aznri, Audul-barg. Beng,, 
Ma*^., Duk. — K^ipbala. Hind. — KataphaLi. MalyaL — Maru tarn lolL 
Pcrs. — ^Kandula, Darshishaan. Can, — Kirishivani. Sans. — Kalaphala 
Kumuda, kumblii puki. Tarn. — Marudam-pattai. Tel. — Kaidaryamu* 

Characters. — The bark in quills or thick pieces, about I to 2 inches 
long, and from \ to ^ inch in thickness ; epidermis of a brownish 
colour and scaly, soft, and easily separable from the true bark by 
scratchinf; ; true bark soft, is of a reddish colour and brittle ; cut 
surface here and there studded with a red or dark red gummy or resin- 
like substance ; smell like that of camphor ; taste astringent and some- 
what pungent ; seeds larger, softer and longer than jaephala. of a laja 
colour; interior of a deeper colour and resembling jaephala; in structure^ 
lighter, softer, and much inferior in oiliness to jaephala ; odour 
fruity and somewhat less acrid and aromatic ; cut portion sticking to the 
fingers when touched ; arillus thick, of a darkish brown colour, twisted, 
as if folded into a cone, and adherent to the seed; aroma very faint. 

Consitttienls. — The bark contains tannin, saccharine matter and 
sahs. • 

Preparahtius. — Decoction (i in lo). Dose, i to i fld. 02. Medicated 
oil. Compound powder, katphaladt churana, containing katphalchhal, 
mustaka, curcuma, zedoaria, karkatshringi, kushta, equal parts giveo 
with ginger and honey. Dose, \ to i dr, 

Actions and uses, — Stimulant, alterative, aromatic, diaphoretic and 
astringent; given in fevers, catarrh of the intestinal mucous membrane, 
diarrhcea, dysentery, scrofula, chronic gonorrhoea, catarrh of the 
lungs, asthma &c. The powdered bark is used as a sternutatory. 
The seeds — a paste of them with stimulant balsams is mixed 
with ginger and externally used as a rubefacient and as a stimulant 
application to the fore-arms, calves and extremities during the 
collapse stage of cholera. Its powder is locally applied to 
strengthen the gums ; also as a lep for bruises, sprains and fractures. 
With catechu, asafetida and camphor, a paste of it is applied over piles 
with benefit. The arillus is used as an ingredient in numerous carmi- 
native mixtures. The powder or the lotion of the bark is applied to 
putrid sores. Pessaries made of it are given to promote secretion of 
menses. The bark when chewed acts as a sialogogue and relieves 
toothache. An oil prepared from it is dropped into the ear in earache 
to allay pain. Fruits when boiled yield a kind of wax, called WW 
mvrtle< which is used as a healing application to ulcers. 

Remarks, — Kataphala is the bark, and not the fruiti as the name 
implies. It should not be mistaken for kakaphala which is the 
name of tlic fruit of kakamuri. 

Coniferse or Pinacea-The Oandhabiroja of Devadara 
OF Pine family. 

Trees very large, resinous ; shrubs evergreen ; stems branched and 
continuous ; leaves linear, needle-shaped or lanceolate, parallel veined, 
imbricate, fascicled; flowers unisexual, ii:il<« 'L timna'cious ; no perianth; 



ids 




573 



male flowers in catkms ; stamens I or m5in>% monadelphou^ ; anlhers 2 
or many celled ; female flowers in cones ; ovules, naked, two or more ; 
fruits woody 'and cone-like ; seeds naked with hard custaceous testa, 
albuminous ; cot3'ledons 2 or many. 

HabiiaL — Native of temperate climates, 

Prober ties. — Several species abound in an oleo-resinous juice or 
turpentine ; some contain a volatile oil and resin ; ihey are generally 
stimulant, diuretic, emmenagogue ; also anthelmintic and expectorant- 
Many produce good timber. 

AbioB Balsamea, B.P. 

Habit4tt,—C^nvkAiXi N. United States. 

Parts used. — ^An oleo-resin» Terebinthina canadenMs, Canada 
turpentine, Canada Balsam, B.P» 

Syn. — Fir balsam, the silver fir or balm of gilead fir, balsam 
spruce, hemlock fir, balsam poplar. 

Characters* — Transparent, viscid liquid; colour yellowish or faintly 
greenish ; odour agreeable and tercbinthinate ; taste slightly acrid 
and bitter. On exposure to the air, it dries up slowly into a hard 
transparent mass ; soluble in ether, chloroform or benzol. Dose, 20 to 

Comtitncnts. — Volatile oil, 20 to 30 p.c. resin or rostn, abitter 
principle. 

Prcparatitms.—CoWodxon Flexile, B.P., Flexible collodion, contains 
collodion 48, Canada balsam 2, and cantor oil. 1 Does not contract on 
drying. It is better than contractile collodion. 

Actions and tises, — Local stimulant and protective, similar to oil 
of turpentine. It dries up into a varnish, thus acting as a protective. 
As a stimulant it acts chiefly on the mucous surfaces. Seldom used 
internally, 

Abies CanadenBis— Pioui CanadenBiSi Tsnga CanadetiBls, 

Syn, — Hemlock spruce fir. Canadian tir tree, hemlock pitch* 
Habitat* — N. America. 

Parts wirf/,— The bark and the prepared olco-rcsinous exudation 
known as Canada pilch, 

Charact£n^-A tree of damp, mountainous swamps ; branches 
numerous, giving the tree a pyramidal shape, smooth, reddish grey, full 
of reservoirs containing the balsam ; leaves long, linear and silvery 
beneath ; flowers in catkins or cones ; pollen bright yellow ; seccfs 
with large wings ; oleo-resin is obtained by exudation* or by incision in 
vesicles of the batk, or by evaporation of the wood tar* It is a faintly 
greenish, rcddihh brown or translucent* yellow or opaque liquid. On 
exposure it gradually dries up into a hard, brittle mass; fracture 
shining and conchoidal ; odour mild and balsamic ; taste bitter, 
terebinthinate ; soluble in ether, chloroform, benzene. Dose, 20 to 
60 grs. 



S74 JUNIPERUS COMMUNIS. 

Constituents. — Volatile oil 20 or 30 p. c, oleo-resin. 

Preparations, — Of the bark. Liquid extract. Dose, 15 to 60 ms, 
Glycerinum abietis i in 4, readily miscible in water. Dose, i to 2 drs.; 
of the oleo-resin. Plaster. 

Actions and uses. — The oleresin, like Burgundy pitch, is non- 
irritant, astringent, and stimulant, of the mucous membranes of the 
stomach, intestines, uterus, vagina, bronchi, lungs &c. The oil is used 
as abortifacient ; the liquid extract well diluted is non-irritant and 
astringent ; used as injection in leucorrhcea, catarrh &c.; as a gargle in 
mouth affections and as lotion in sores and haemorrhoids. Internally 
it is given in dysentery, haemoptysis, night sweats, diarrhoea &c. 

Pioea Exoelsa, B. P., Abies Exoelsa, Pinas Pioea. 

Habitat. — Europe, North and South Asia, Burgundy Province. 

Parts used. — The resinous exudation from the stems. Pix Bur- 
gundica. Burgundy Pitch, B P. 

Characters. — Exudation yellowish brown, opaque, hard and 
brittle, of a conchoidal fracture ; odour aromatic ; taste sweet and 
aromatic, without bitterness; entirely soluble in glacial acetic acid, very 
fusible and becomes soft and adhesive at the ordinary temperature or 
by body heat. 

Cofistituents. — Volatile oil, resin (to which the odour is due), and 
pimaric acid. 

Preparations, — Emplastrum Picis, pitch plaster, B.P., contains 
Burgundy pitch 26, frankincense 13, resin 4^, yellow bees-wax 4^, olive 
oil 2, distilled water 2. 

Actions and uses, — Stimulant and rubefacient ; mainly used as a 
plaster in rheumatism, joint affections, chest troubles, liver affections, 
to the chest in chronic coughs and other pulmonary affections and 
to the loins in lumbago &c. 

Janiperaa Ck>mmimi8, B.P. 

Habitat. — Europe and North America. 

Parts used. — The berries (Juniperi Fructus) and the volatile oil, 
oleum juniperi, B. P. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Habul hurer, Shamrat-ul-arar. Bomb. — 
Hanbera. Duk. — Abbal. Eng. — Juniper. Hind. — Aaraar-ki-phal. 
Ind. Bazaar — Padma, kanawar, Bilhar. Pers. — Abhala. Port. — 
Zembro. Sans. — Hapusha. 

Characters. — Evergreen shrub ; fruit roundish, berries of a darkish 
brown colour, size of black currants, or somewhat bigger than kila miri; 
surface gibbous and wrinkled. At the base of each fruit are small 
pointed bracts arranged in whorls of three. The top of the fruit is 
marked with three fines which diverge from a central point. They 
are broad at their point of attachment and become narrow as they 



JUNIPKRUS OXVCEDRUS. 

extend outwards; the pulp is reddish brown, with oil glands and sticky; 
the seedi are three, angular and of a reddish colour; odour of the 
berries aromatic and balsamic ; taste slightly bitter, sweetish, terebin* 
thinate and acrid. 

Cr/wj/»/wrM/^.— A volatile oil 1*2 p c.^ grape sugar 30 p.c, resin 
10 p.c, ; a noncrystallizable principle (Junipcrin)i {at> wax, proteids 
4 p.c, malatesi formic and acetic acids. 

Oleum juniperi, oil of juniper, B.P., obtained from the full-grown 
unripe green fruit by distillation, is a colourless, or pale greenish yellow 
liquid^ rapidly becoming thick and paste-like, having the characteristic 
odour of juniper and a warm aromatic terebinthinate and sweetish 
taste; soluble in alcohol (i in 4), in carbon sulphide (1 to i). It 
contains pinene and cadinene and an ester to which the odour and 
taste are due ; it fulminates with iodine. Dose, ^ to 3 ms. It is 
contained in spirituous drinks as Hollands and gin* 

i^eparattani. — Spiritus Juniperi, B, P., spirit of juniper (r in 20). 
Dose, 2u to 60 ms* Infusion, (t in 20). Dose, \ to 1 fld. oz. Spiritus 
Juniperi Compositus : — compound spirit of juniper, contains oil of 
juniper K, oil of carraway I, oil of fennel I, alcohol 1,400* It is allied 
to gin. Dose, 1 to 4 drs. 

.'kltons tind uses, — The oil is a stimulant of the skin and kidneys. 
In large doses it irritates the kidneys and sets up strangury, 
priapism, ha^maturia^ suppression of urine and even ur^^mtc 
convulsion ; taken for some time it gives violet colour and terebinthinate 
odour to the urine ; when inhaled it produces diuresis ; used also as 
a vehicle for less irritant diuretics. Like oil of turpentine it is 
eiven in renal dropsy, chronic catarrh of the urinary passages, seminal 
|3ebility, in pyelitis, gleet, flatulent colic ; also in chronic gonorrhcra 
'and leucorrhtra ; locally the powder is rubbed on rheumatic and {lainful 
swelling!). It should not be given in acute nephritis. 

Juniperus Oxycedrus, B. P., and other Species— Prickly Cedar. 

Hahitat. — South of Europe and Spain. 

Parts used, — The oil, known as 01eun> Cadinum B. P„ oil of 
Cade, juniper tar oil, oleum juniperi pyroligneum or oleum juniperi 
empyreumaticunu Obtained by the destructive distillation of the 
wood* 

Orf/wc^rj.— Shrub ; branches spreading and drooping ; leaves 
pointed, awl-shaped ; fruit reddish, shining, thick, with two white lines 
on the apex. The oil is an empyreumatic, dark, reddish brown or black 
viscid hquid of a pleasant tarry odour and aromatic bitter and acrid 
taste; soluble in oils, fats, carbon bisulphide and also in ether and 
chloroform ; partially soluble in cold and almost wholly in hot alcohol, 
very slightly K>luble in water. Dose, \ to 5 ms, 

CtywA//V«^///j.— Phenols and sesquiterpene-cadiaeue< 



ibdfe 



576 ^^^F JUNIPERUS SABIMA* 

Pnparatimu^ — Unguentum olei cadini (i in i) of yellow wax. 

Acimns and uses, — ^Oil of cade is anthelmintic and exteraally 
stimulant and parasiticide ; used like the oil of tar, in psoriasis, chrontc 
eczema, pityriasis rubra, prurigo, psora, and favus. 

Remarks, — Often substituted for coal tar» ordinary tar, or oleum 
picis liquidum. 

JuniperuB Sabina— The Comman Savixie. 

HahiiaL — Siberia, Northern Europe, Asia, Canada. 
Parts tned. — The tops and the oil. 

Characters* — Small evergreen shrub, compact, spreading ; top» shart« 
thin, yellowish green, sub-quadrangular ; branchlets or twigs covered 
with minute leaves. The leaves are dark green, opposite, lanceolate, 
scaly, pale reddish brown ; flowers in catkins or small cones ; fruit berry 
like, size of a pea, bluish purple, soft and enclosing seeds t to 5 ; odour 
peculiar and terebinthinale; taste nauseous, acrid^ bitter and resinous. 
Savin grows at very high elevation and closely resembles red cedar (J, 
Virginianalf but the latter has large size and small fruits. Dose, 5 to 10 
grs. 

Constituents, — V'olatile oil, 2 p.c. acrid resin» tannin, extractive 
matter, chlorophyll. The volatile oil, distilled from savine, is a limpid 
colourless liquid, of a pale yellow colour, isomeric with oil of 
turpentine; taste bitter, acrid and camphoraceous ; odour peculiar and 
terebinthinate, reaction neutral ; soluble in alcohol (1 to i). It cou* 
tains pinene and cadinene. Used as emulsion, pill or alcoholic solution. 
Dose, 1 to 4 ms. 

Pteparations, — A paste containing powdered tops with burnt alum 
and acetate of lead is used as a caustic. Tincture {i in M). Dose, ) to t 
dr. Fluid extract 2 to 5 ms, unguentum sabinx (1 in j^) : cerate 
contains fluid extract 1 in 4 of cerate. 

Actions and uses — Locally irritant; internally it is a diuretic, 
emmenagogue and vermifuge. In medicinal doses it causes a sensation 
of heat in the body, gives rise to nausea, eructations and flatulence. 
It increases the action of the heart, kidneys, skin, bronchi, uterus ami 
ovaries. It also increases the flow of menses. The oil is excreted 
in the breath, perspiration and urine. In large doses, it is a gastro-in- 
testinal irritant and causes violent vomiting and purging, severe paio 
and rupture of gall bladder. In poisonous doses the symptoms are those 
of narcotic poison* It produces uterine contraction, and leads to abortion. 
As an emmenagogue it is given in amenorrhcca, haemorrhage after 
abortion, leucorrh*£a, dysmenorrhoea, when not due to mechanical 
causes or to other menstrual derarjgements. The paste is used as a local 
caustic to syphilitic warts, coridylomatas, polypi and to other excre- 
scences ; also to dental caries, tinea capitis, ^c. The ointment is used 10 
prolong discharges from blistered surfaces, setons, or issues ;and a) » 
stimulant application for healing indolent ulcers. 




577 



//fi^///?/,— Shores of the Baltic and Adrialtc Sea, Prussia, Coal 
miues Bohemia, Sicily. 

finHs iisedw — A fossil olco-resin. 

Verfuicnlar. — Arab. — Inkiimm, Kuru-ul-bahr, Misha hareruma. 
Burm, — Anibeng. Chin — Hu-peh. Eng, — Amber, ekctrum. Gu2. — 
Kcrabo, Duk. — Kehruba- Pers. — Kahruba. 

Some conifera^ species which arc submerged under sca^water 
from time to time yield by natural exudation this oleo^resin, which 
when fiubmilied to the destructive di^tilJation and purified yield the 
oil of amber- 

C/inrac/ers,'^Ab gum of this or other coniferous plants, it is 
met with in irregular shed pieces of a yellowish colour, hard and brittle; 
polished exicrnalht semi-tnmsparcnt, yellowish or opaque and resem^ 
bling cnpal gum ; usually associated with lignite j sometimes insects or 
parts of vegetable arc found imbedded in its interior. It is lighter than 
j^ea water and friable in cold weather, having a waxy or resinous 
appearance ; electrical, as when forcibly rubbed with linen it acquires 
the power of attracting pieces of paper from a short distance^ and the 
pieces remain stuck to it for a few seconds. When ground or heated 
it emits a pleasant odour. 

Co«jr/i/wrw/^,— Empyrcuniatic oil, a bituminous principle^ a yellow 
resin, succinic acid, several resins. Oleum Succini, an empyreumalic 
oil, is a volatile, colourles* or pale yellow and thin liquid, becoming 
darker by exposure tu the air. It has a balsamic odour and warm, acrid 
taste, neutral or faintly acid reaction, and is soluble in alcohoL Do&e 
of the oil, 5 to 15 ms. Succinic acid. It is met with in the form of 
scales or prisms* having a slightly acid taste and without smell. 

Actions and uses, — Antispasmodic, stimulant, and diuretic, also 
rubefacient : given in whooping cough, amenorrhcta, epilepsy, hysteria, 
&c. It has a specific action on the generative organs and is given in 
arnenorrha*a, d^smenorrlia*a. It is also given in low fevers. Ii \% locally 
apf)licd as linmicnts over painful swellings, paralyzed limbs and 
rheumatic joints. It is rubbed over the sf)ine to relieve convulsions 
and mixed with olive oil i. h rubbed to the chest in whooping cough. 

There are two rarieties : Kerabo ^f anakans is in the form of court 
^bcads and ornaments and df a suptritJr *juah'ty, Kerabo chhodaus is in 
rregular flat pieces resembling slices of wood (chhodan). 

PinuB Deodara, Abies Devadara, Cedrus Libani* 

HabitaU — N*- VV • H 1 malaya. 

Paris used, — The wood and turpentine^ 

Vernacular* — Arab.^ — Shajftit«ul devadar. Guz,, Duk., Beng. 

Pebad^ru. Can. — Devadari, Hind. — KiUn devdar. iMar. — Dcvadaru- 
ghft-jhad, Dcvatarm. Pers.— Sanobar-i- Hind, Sans. — Suiadaru Sura- 

rtima.— Devadaru, vrikashapa, sneha— viddha, Tam.— Devadri. TeL 

DtH'iidari. 



a^M 



«a 



578 PINUS GKRARDIANA. 

Characters, — Wood somewhat heavy ; colour lightish yellow or 
brown, consisting of layers of coarse fluid resin arranged longitudinally, 
resin thick towards the middle, and becoming less so as it approaches 
the bark; odour balsamic and slightly aromatic; taste oily and resinous. 
Near the heart wood the oleo- resin when touched feels sticky to the 
lingers. It is one of the ingredients of Rasna-di-kvath and Chandra 
Prabha Gotika. 

Constiineuts, — An acid resin. 

Preparations, — Tar and compound decoction — Devdari K vat ha : 
contains devadara, vaja, motha, kariatun, dhamaso, gokharu, kali jiri, 
kutha, kutaki, ativisha, dhana^gula vela, suntha, harade, pipali, ringani, 
gaja pipli, kakari singi, all in equal parts. Dose, \ to i oz. A 
powerful alterative, given in general debility especially after delivery, 
rheumatism, syphilis, fever, vomiting, constipation, dry cough, and 
headache. The tar is prepared by the destructive distillation of wood. 
Dose, lo to 40 ms. 

Actions and uses. — The wood is carminative, diaphoretic, and 
diuretic ; given in fever, flatulence, dropsy and urinary diseases as gravel. 
In ascites it is given in combination with shegata chhula and aghado. 
In gonorrhoea, syphilis, pout and rheumatism, the decoction is given as 
a powerful alterative. With halada and gugala its paste is applied to 
indolent swellings. The tar is used as a favourite alterative, and given in 
chronic skin diseases and in large doses, given in leprosy and also 
applied externally to ulcers. 

PinuB Oerardiana. 

Habitat, — N. W. Himalaya, Afghanistan, Persia. 

Parts used. — The pine nuts. 

Vernacular. — Afghan. — Chilgoza. Arab. — Sanobara el-ki bar. 
Eng. — Neozapine — Edible pine. Guz., Mah. — Chilgozah. Hind. — 
Gunobar, rhee, neoza. Panj — Miiri, gogojal. Pers. — Tukhm-i-Sanobara, 
(seeds). 

Characters. — Seeds about an inch long, roundish at the base, and 
tapering towards the apex, somewhat arched towards the upper part 
where the apex is drawn to one side like the beak of a bird ; testa 
brittle, rugous, brownish red, or yellow externally, and greyish white 
within ; kernel covered over with a thin, lightish brown, membranous 
layer. Within the layer the kernel is albuminous and oily, and 
resembles the kernel of badam ; smell somewhat acrid, oleaginous and 
terebinthinate ; taste heating, oily and slightly acrid ; embryo, of a 
yellowish colour, occupying the whole length of the seed ; radicle seen 
towards the apex of the seed. 

Constituents, — Albuminoids, starch, oil and ash. 

Preparations. — Confection. Dose, i to 2 drs. 

Actions and //i^s.— Stimulant, nutritive, tonic, and aphrodisiac ; 
similar to those of badam, pisatan, charole, &c., and used in chronic 
rheumatism, seminal debility, leucorrhusa, and gleet. 



PINUS STLVESTKIS. 



S79 



Pjnus Longifolia. 

f/ahiiaL — Himalaya ranges. 

Parts used. — The wood and turpentine (oleo resin), ^iid oiL 
Vernacular, — Arab*— Aulakus. Gmi., Duk. — Chirka-jhilr., samghu^ 
gandah birozah (resin). Hind.— ChirkiVptT, sural (wood). Birji 

foond (gum) sanubar. Nepal, — Dhupsalsei dup, Panj.— Nashtar. 
'crs.^Sanobar-e-hindi. Tam.— Shurul Dovaduri. Teh— Devadari- 
chettu. 

Characiera.^-Tht olco resin is a white, opaque, sticky mas$, of a 
paste*like consistence, often found mixed with pieces of broken leaves ; 
odour strong and agreeablci more aromatic than that of commercial 
turpentine* The oil, a limpid sherry coloured fluid, is obtained by 
distilling the oleo resin. The residual resin is dark brown and a iair 
substitute for Burgundy Pitch. Dose of the oil, I to 3 ms, 

Preparathns* — ^Plaster. 

AciioNs and u\fs, — Stimulant and antiseptic ; the oleo*resui is used 
as fumigation. It is highly rtcom mended as a plaster for painful chest 
and enlarged liver. The oil is in much repute, internally, in gleet 
and long'blanding gonorrhtea. Ganda Biroza is the name also applied 
to olibanum, the produce of boswellia floribunda* 

Pinus Ptimilio, BR— The Mugho or Mountain Pine. 

Hahtiat. — Hungary. 

Parts used. — Volatile oil distilled from fresh leaves— Oleum Piui 
6.P.» oil of pine, pinol, pumiline. 

Characters. — A pure, essential, colourless oily litjuid, of a pleasant, 
permanent, exquisite* refreshing aromatic odour and pungent taste, 
more agreeable than other fir oils. Dose, i to 3 ms. 

Pieparations^—'ExlT^KiX, A thick semi-liquid m.ass, very soluble in 
water ; Pumilio Pine soap ; wood wool wadding, sanitary wood wool, 
also used as inhalation, gargle or lotion (10 minims, in 10 ounces of 
water), as embrocation, poultices, baths and plasters, 

PinuB Sylvestris, B. P , Wild pine, Scotch pine, Scotch flr, 
and other Species of Pinus* 

Habitat, — America and Europe. 

/fer/j wjr<^^,— rhe wood, concrete oleo-resin and oil distilled 
from fresh leaves Oleum I'ini Sylvcstris and the oil distilled from the 
olco-resin, oleum tcrebinthin:c, oil of turpentine B. P, 

Characters, — The wood is hard and resinous and contains 
the concrete oleo-resin known as terebinthina ; the olco-resin occurs 
in yellowish opaque tough ma^^s, highly brittle when cold, interiorly 
crystalline ; ta^jte and odour terebinthinate. Dose, 5 to 30 grs. By 
the distillation of the fresh leaves an oil is obtained known as Oleum Pint 
Sylvcstris, Ftrwood oil, or Scotch tir oil. It is a colourless, thin 



580 PIN us PALUSTKIS. 

liquid of an agreeable thyme-like or terebinthinate odour and aroma- 
tic, terebinthinate taste i slightl)' soluble in water, and soluble in alcohol 
and glacial acetic acid (i to 7) ; used as liniment to the chest or as an 
inhalation in chronic laryngitis or as vapour containing Oleo Pini 
Sylvestris 40 ms., in a pint of hot water, the air passed through 
the mixture and inhaled. 

Preparations. — Fir wood extract, readily soluble in water ; bath — 
2 or 3 ozs. of the oil in 30 gallons of hot water as a bath for rheumatism. 
Fir Wool wadding. Fir wool, made of the fibres and hairs of pinus 
sylvestris or of cotton wool, impregnated with the oil used for 
rheumatism. Pine Wool Felt, made like fir wood and used as chest 
protectors (belts) &c. 

Pinas Palustris. B. P., T»da, B. P. 

Habitat. — N. America. 

Parts used. — The concrete oleo-resin, Thus Americanum, frankin- 
cense, B. P., and turpentine. 

Characters. — A large tree, growing in dry sandy soil ; bark thin, 
scaled and furrowed ; wood hard and resinous ; leaves many, very 
narrow and sharp pointed in clusters, surrounded by a sheath ; flower 
sterile, of a violet colour ; fruit oblong, large, scales armed with 
short spines ; young trees resembling brooms. 

Constituents. — Volatile oil, 20 to 30 p.c, ; also resin 50 to 60 p.c, 
bitter principle and formic, succinic, pinic and sylvic acids. 

The oleo resin is obtained by scraping the trunk. Ii is a soft pale 
yellow, opaque, tough, solid resin ; odour terebinthinate, an alcoholic 
solution having acid reaction. On keeping it becomes dry, translucent 
and of a fainter odour. Dose, 15 to 30 grs. Resina, B, P. rosin 
is the residue left after distilling ofT the turpentine from the 
oleo-resin. It is clear, amber coloured, solid, hard, brittle and of a 
glassy conchoidal fracture. It can easily be reduced to powder ; the 
odour and taste are terebinthinate. It is soluble in alcohol, ether, fixed 
and volatile oil and alkaline solution. It contains anhydride of abietic 
acid, pinic and sylvic acids. The volatile oil, oleum terebinthinae, oil of 
turpentine, B. P., obtained by the distillation of the oleo-resin by 
the aid of steam and then rectified, is a thin, clear and colourless neutral 
liquid, very inflammable, of a strong peculiar odour, and hot, pungent 
taste ; sparingly soluble in water, moderately so in alcohol (i in 3) and 
glacial acetic acid (i in 1) readily mixing with ether and other volatileand 
fixed oils. It dissolves resin, wax, sulphur, phosphorus, fats and caout- 
chouc. On exposure to the air it absorbs oxygen and becomes yellow or 
somewhat denser; with hydrochloric acid it forms crystalline 
camphor. It is a mixture of several hydrocarbons. Dose, as a stimulant, 
2 to JO ms. ; as an anthelmintic and purgative, 3 to 4 drs. 

Pre pa rations. ^ Oi ^t^\nx Ceratum Resinse, Resin cerate, Basilicon 
ointment — resin, yellow wax, lard. Emplasirum Resina, B. P. 
resin plaster, adhesive plaster ; resin, lead plaster and yellow wax. 
Of turpentine : Liniment um Terebinth inae, B.P. (13 in 20). 



PINUS r'ALUSTKIb, 



Jnimcntnm TerebinthinG? aceticum B.» R, liniment of turpentine 
and acetic acid» contains oil of turpentine 4, glacial acetic acid i,: 
linimentuni caniphora 4 ; Emulsio tcrebinthinii?. Inhalation or 
vapour 40 ms. to r ounce with light curbcmate of magnesia. Dose, 
T dr. in a pint of hot water. 

Derivatives of turpentine. — These are tciebene, turpin hydrate 
and turpinol* Terebenum B.P., Terebena Pura or pure. Terebene, a 
liquid consisting of pinene and small proportions of dipenlene, and 
rurpinene. It is obtarned by the oxidation of the oil of turpentine or by 
agitating it successively with sulphuric acid and then disiillii>g it in a 
current of steam. It is . a clcar» colourless liquid, odour thymelikc ; 
taste tercbinthinate ; soluble in alcohol (t in j), glacial acetic acid 
(I in 1), slightly soluble in water* Dose, 5 to 15 ms* ; used as vapour 
terebinx 40 ms. to i oz. with light magnesia, i dr. in a pint of hot 
water ; also is used as inhalation. 

Tcrpinum hydratum — Terpin hydrate, terpini hydras, hydrate 
of oil of turpentine, also known as turpentine caniphor* To 
obtain it mix together rectified oil of turpentine, nitric acid and 
alcohnl. Distil and crystallize : in rhombic prismatic crystals resem- 
bling those of chloral hydrate, of the odour of terebene and of aromatic 
bitter taste; soluble in water (i in 200), alcohol (i in 10), boiling water 
(1 in 2), ether (1 in 100) and oil (i in 6), sometimes deposited from oil 
of turpentine wlieu the latter contains water. Dose, 2 to 6 gr., useful in 
neuralgia; in bronchitis and chest affections, it loosens the expectora* 
tion. 

Tcrpinol — an oily body obtained by the action of sulphuric acid 
on terpini hydras, A colourless oily aromatic Hquid. Dosc^ 2 grs., 
used as a sedative and antiseptic, given in chest affect tons, 

Aciiotts and tisrs. — Oleum Terebinthin:c— the volatile oil, is a 
cardiac stimulant, antispasmodic, expectorant, anthelmintic* diuretic 
and hicmoslatic ; also laxative and intestinal and vesical irritant ; 
locally rubefacient or 1 iiiniii"r.irriT;iMi ifihrdation of its vapours, 
antiseptic and sedativt 

In small doses it cau.-Lij suhvatiun, burn nig in the mouth and 
at the pit of the stomach ; in large doses, it sctsupgastro-enteritis with 
vomiting, diarrhoea, suppression of urine, severe scalding, burning in the 
urethra and bloody urine. Inhalation of the vapour gives rise to 
nasal and renal irritation with frontal headache, bioody urine, &c. 
It long continued and in toxic duses it is a narcotic poison, causing 
muscular and sensory paralysis, profound insensibility, abolished 
reflexes, cyanosis, dilated pupils, laboured respiration and death. 
It is supposed to dissolve gall stone. Its power of absorbing 
oxygen from the air renders it a powerful antidote to phosphorus 
poisoning. It converts phosphorus into an insoluble substance. 

As a cardiac stimulant, it is given in typhoid and typhus fevcrs» 
puerperal fever, in erysipelas, pneumonia^ and capillary bronchitis ; 
also m chronic bronchitis, chronic cystitis, &c. ; as an astringent 
U h ^ivcn in passive haemorrhages from the tungSi stomach, 



^82 



VIX I.IQUMiA 



iinestirieii, kidneys and uterine and intestmai ulcerarJon^Hna hacroor- 
rboidal fluxes. It should not be given in h:ematuri.i. A^ an 
antispastnodic, combined with ether, it is given in h3'sieriai eptlep^y, 
lead and biliary colic, biliary concretions, ileus, convulsions and teuiia* j 
as a vermifuge, given with castor oil to expel lumbrici and taenia. 

The vapour is antiseptic like eucalyptus oil and is inhaled 
in cough^ chronic bronchitis, winter cough, emphysema, phthisis and 
bronchorrhcea ; or used as an atomizer either alone or in 
combination with eucalyptus oil or oil of sandalwood and cubeb^« 
&c. Locally, as a rubefacient and counter-irritant* it is used av 
turpentine stupes ; it relieves the pain of chronic rheumatism, 
neuralgia, sciatica, lumbago, peritonitis, pleurisy^ tympanitis and 
renal colic. As a hajraostatic its application to the bleeding tooth 
or to the nose in epistaxis is of benefit. Terpine hydrate is antiseptic, 
expectorant and diuretic, and used in bronchitis, whooping cough, night 
cough of phthisis ; also in chronic nephritis, cystitis and gonorrhocJi. 
Terebene is a stimulant disinfectant. Its vapour is inhaled in phthisis^ 
winter cough, emphysema of the lungs. Its emulsion is given in 
dysentery, flatulence, dyspepsia, cystitis and gleet, A^ a spray tt is 
used in nasal catarrh^ coryza» and in bronchorrhcea. Terpiiiol — Its 
actions and uses are similar to those of terpin. 

Fix Liqaida, B P., Tar. 

A bminimous liquid, obtained from the destructive dislilliuitii cir 
the wood of Pin us paluslris, P. T.eda, P, Sylvesirisi &c* 

Vfrntuuldr. — Arab. — Ouir. Burm. — Kattra-asi. 
Duk. — K»l Kng.— Tar. Storkholm ttr. Mind. — Kil 
Tarn. — Kil-tar. Tel. — Tarukiln 

Chaniciers\ — Tar, an cmpyrcmnauc oleo-rcsirj, ib a tl»ak viirCid 
liquid, granular in appearance owing to the crystals of pyrocatechin, of 
a brown-black colour ; odour peculiar and aromatic; taste sharp, and, 
empyreumatic ; slightly soluble in water, soluble in alcohol (t in lo).; 
fixed and volatile oils, and in alkaline solutions. By keeping it 
separates into crystalline pyrocatechin. 

C>7ij///;/i?M/s.— Methyiic alcohol, acetic acid, acetone* trace of formic, 

propionic and capronic acids, niesit, pyroHginous acid, oily bodies, 
toluene, zylinc, cumine, methyl^n- ^nd other hydructrboni> naph- 
thalin pyrene, chrysene, paraffin, phenols, creasotc 25 p.c, pyroca- 
lechin, and cmpyreumatic resin. 

Preparation* — Of Pix Liquida, Unguentum Picis Liquidae, B. P., 
tar ointment (5 in 7), used in psoriasis and ringworm, Pixol— ^ 
disinfectant made Irom tar, made soluble by the aid of caustic potiish 
and potash soap. Aqua Picis — Tar water, Eau-de-Goudron (1 in 200). 
Dose, 2 to 5 ozs. Capsules dc Goudron — Tar capsules %\ grs, in each. 
Dose, I to 2. Liquor Picis Ligni, prepared with tincture of quilbia. 
Pilula Picis Liquidie. Dow.% 2 to 5 grs* Syrupus Picis Liquid^r 6 px, 
syrup of tar. Dose, i to 4 drs. Oleum Picis Rdctificatum — ligl 
tar, a %*olaiile oil distilled from lur — dark reddish brow^n or cu 



Cing. — Kd. 

p,.r.,._OuiL 



TAXUS BACCATA, 



;??; 



liquid, o^attrr^aoiir and taste* acid renction ; soluble in alcohoL \l 
contains ;i variety nf hydrocarbonsi phenols^ creosote, carbolic acid. 
paraflSn, &L\ 

Fix Carbonis IJijiutla Prxparata or commercial coal lar. Prepared 
from coal Ur, a mixture of resins and hyilrocnrbons, obt;iined by 
heating coal tar lor one hour ; used as piil^. Liquor Picis Carbonis, 
tS. P.— A mixture of prepared coal t.ir wah tincture of quillaiai 
and alcobol digested for two days. Ltquor carbonic detergens— 
An alcoholic 5oluli»^n of coal tar. A dark colouted i\u\6, used as 
lotion (i in 20) ; emuUion and ointment (1 in 8). 

Ai'tmts atui w.^/-^.— Initatit like creosote or carbolic acid i if 
applied to the ^kin it is a gentle tubelacieut. It sometimes produce* 
vehicles or puslults ; it htimulatts the lymphatic;* arul prtmioles 
absorption. Internally as a stimulant it is very bentticial in chronic 
bronchitis, typh<fid fever, vesical catarrh, phthisis and h;emorrhoids ; 
it disturbs digestion. In large dojHs it is a gastro^intestinal irritant, 
leading to vomitinf5, colicky pain, headache, dark urinci giddiness, iS:c. 
As an antiseptic it acts like turpentine. The ointment is used in 
chronic skin eruptions^ as eczema, scabies, prurigo, psoriasis, ringworm, 
fissured nipples and ha;?morrhoids. It& fumes destroy foul odour and 
it is inhaled in phthisis, pharyngitis, laryngitis, winter c<njgh and other 
chronic puhnonary tiiseascji. As a surgical drc-ssing it is used in the 
form of oakum or as marine lint ; oakum is an old tarry rope carded ; 
marine Hnt is a tow impregnated with fresh tar. 

TaxuB Bacoata. 

IfahiM^ — Temperate Himalaya, 

PtirH nufi, — The leaves, 

Vernatu/ar — Arab.— Zaranab. Bomb,— Barami. Kng. — 

Himalayan Yew* Ind. Bazars. Beng, Hind. — Thuneer. Zurnub. 
Talisapatra, Barambhi. Sapani. Jeldum.— ISurin. Sans, — Talisa- 
paira, Manduparami, Barahmi. 

CAaractets. — Drug of a brown colour, and of an aromatic 
and somewhat acrid odour ; taste acrid and somewhat bitter ; pieces 
of stems from one to three inches long, and about 2 to x lines in 
thickness; bark brittle, and marked here and theie with craclu ; surface 
shining as if varnished ; wood of a lightish white colour ; leaves t to 2 
inches long, and about 2 to 3 lines in breadth, linear, flat, mucronaic, 
and rigid ; upper surface shining as if varnished, and slightly rugous ; 
under surface marked with a pronnntnl n»idrib ; margins curved 
towards the under surface, thus giving the upper surface a lonvex 
appearance towards the edges; a concave channel-like depression is seen 
on their upper surface, situated between the margins and the midrib 
on each side. Dose, of the powder, 2 to 5 grs, 

C^ns(ih*rnts,'^A crystaUine alkaloid known as taxine* 



5^4 CYCAS CIRCINALIS. 

Preparations.^TmctwxQ (i in 8). Dose, \ to i dr. Infusion 
(i in 20). Dose, 4 to 12 drs. 

Actions and uses- — Antispasmodic, given in asthma, haemoptysis, 
epilepsy and other spasmodic affections. 

Thuja Oooidentalis— Arbor Yitse. 

Habitat, — Canada, United States. 

Parts used. — The fresh tops. 

Characters, — Tree, very high ; trunk, crooked ; bark pale and 
shreddy ; wood soft and light ; leaves ovate, pointed with glands on 
the back, in four rows ; odour balsamic and terebinthinate, taste 
camphoraceous, pungent and bitter ; twigs flat. Dose, 15 to 6ogrs. 

Constituents. — Volatile oil i p c, resin, tanin pinipicrin, thujin and 
thujigenin. 

Preparations. — Infusion. Decoction i in 10. Dose, 2 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant, diuretic and irritant ; given in 
fevers, coughs, rheumatism, dropsy, pulmonary catarrh and scurvy. 

Cyoadaoeso— The Cyoas Family. 

Small, palm-like unbranched trees or shrubs ; leaves clustered 
at the summit, pinnate, parallel veineJ, hard and woody ; flowers 
quite naked, unisexual ; male flowers in cones, consisting of scales with 
one-celled anther ; female flowers naked ovules, seeds hard or 
succulent, embryo one or several ; albumen, fleshy or mealy. 

Habitat. — Temperate and tropical countries. 

Properties. — Stems and seeds contain mucilage and starch. 

Cyoas Ciroinalis, C. Inermes. 

Habitat. — Malabar Coast, Madras. 

Parts used. — Male bracts and flour of the nuts. 

Vernacular. — Bomb.— Buzoorbutu. Burm. — Mudang. Cing. 
— Madoo guss. Duk. — Pahari madan mastaka. Mar. — Malabari 
supari, Malyal. — Rin badam. Tam. — Madana Kamapu. Tel. — Rana- 
guvva, Karaakshi. 

Characters. — Bracts or scales, spear-head shaped and covered at 
the back with much down. Dose of the powder 10 to 30 grs. 

Constituents. — The bracts or scales contain albuminous and 
mucilaginous matter, but no alkaloid that would account for its narcotic 
action. It yields a gum resembling tragacanth ; also a kind of sago, 
or flour made from the nuts and stems called Indapadi. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant, aphrodisiac, and narcotic ; given in 
hiccough and seminal weakness. Flour is used as food like sago. 
The fruit-bearing cones reduced to poultice are applied to the loins for 
the removal of nephritic pain. 



SMrLAX rWINFXSfS. 



585 



Smilaceae— The Choba Cbtni, or SarsaparUla family. 

Herbs or shrubs, more or less Limbing ; leaves petiolate, net-veined 
and articulated ; flowers small, regular » hermaphrodite or unisexual 
and dioecious; perianth inferior, 6 parted; stamens 6, pcrigynous ; 
ovary superior, 3-celled ; stigma 3 ; fruit baccate ; seeds few or many 
embryo minute, albuminous ; root tuberous, abounding in fecula* 

Habitat, — ^Tropics, temperate climates. 

Proptrtirs, — The plants of this order generally possess alteraiive 
properties. The roots of some are nutritive, tonic, diaphoretic and 
invigorating* 



Smilax ChinensiS) S. Glabrai S. Aapera, S. Pseudo China. 

Habitat. — China, Syihct, Southern United States, 

Parts used, — The root and rhizome. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Khashabus sini, Beng, — Shook China* 
Burm, — Tsein apho ta-roup. Chin. — Tu-fu-ling. Kng — China root 
bamboo, briar root. Hind*, Guz. Mar.,^ — Chopa Chinni, Malyal — 
China-pagu. Pers — Chuba-chini. Sans. — Dvipilta, vacha, rasna, 
suganda mula. Tarn. — Poringay. TeL^ — Pirangi chakka* 

Choba chini — choba means a stick or wood, and, chini Cliinese* 
The rhizomes are in sticks or pieces imported from China. 

C//eimr/fiA— Rhizomes J^ of an inch thick, very long, cylindrical, 
longitudinally wjinkled* rosy and heavy, free from large knots ; tubers 
irregular, found upon the fibrouiv roots of the plant, somewhat flallencd 
and covered with a dark brown or rusty cf^Ioureti bark J interior 
homogeneous, rose-coloured, white and starchy and sprinkled with 
while, silvery and shining granules; tubers in slices or in masses, heavy 
and often hard from 2 to 4 or more inches in length and from 1 to 2 
inches in breadth ; irregularly flat and resembling an elongated potato. 
The taste h mucilagiium^, bitterish and acrid, without any udour. The 
splices are sold under the name of choba khaiai. What is sold is usually 
peeled and trimmed and hence it presents a very irregular form. 

Constiturnts. — Fat, sugar,^a glucoside, colouring matter^ gum and 
starch- 

Prrparatious, — Decoction (I in 10). Dose, 4 to 12 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Diaphoretic, stimulant, alterative and 
resolvent ; given with ananta mula in long-standing headache. 
Chobchtni, with masataki. elachi and taja boiled with milk, is given in 
rheumatism, gout, and epilipsy ; also in general cachexia, scrofula, semi- 
nal weakness and constitutional tertiary syphilis. The rhizome is made 
into a paste and applied to swelled hands and feet in general obesity. 



586 SMILAX ORNATA. 

Smilax Ovalifolia. 

IlaMat.—Conc^ins, 

Parts used, — The root. 

Vcrnacnlat , — Beng. — Kumarika. Bomb.— Gutavela. Burin. — 
Kiiku. Encr. — Wild sarsaparilla. Guz., Hind. — Gnti, Jangali-ushabah. 
Malyal. — Kuri vilandi. Tarn.— Krin koddj-nar. Tel. — Konda-tarnara 

Characters. — A climbing shrub ; roots numerous, resembling 
sarsaparilla ; bark dry, tuberous and of a brown colour ; in the centie 
soft ahd starchy. 

Preparations. — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, 4 to 12 drs. 

Actions and uses. — It isthecountry sarsaparilla of the Portuguese, 
and used as a good alterative in sj-philis, scrofula, &c. 

Smilax Ornata, B. P., S. OflScinalis, S. Medica, S. Papyracea. 

Habitat,— Mexico to Brazil. 

Parts used. — The dried root, sarcse radix, sarsaparilla B. P. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Ushbah. Beng. — Chabal chaba, salasii. Cing. 
— Retai, rissu. Guz., Duk., Hind. — Ushbah, salsa, magrabi. Malyal. — 
Narotensi. Pers. — Maghrabi. — Tarn. — Sharasha-vera. Tel. — Sima, 
sugundhl pal^. 

Characters, — Dried root, long, cylindrical, tough, flexible, greyish 
brown or dark reddish brown, folded together and bound with a 
root stalk ; roots deeply wrinkled longitudinally. On section the 
cortex is reddish brown ; wood yellowish white, without odour ; 
taste slightly bitter. 

There are several varieties of smilax, classified according to the phy- 
sical properties and the amount of starch contained in the roots. Hence 
the roots are known as non-mealy and mealy. In the non-mealy variety 
the starch is pasty, rarely in granules, and more horny ; root stalks with 
longitudinal and irregular folds ; found in Jamaica Sarsaparilla, smilax 
ornata(red) ; Lima sarsaparilla, S. officinalis ; true Vera Cruz sarsa- 
parilla, in the similax medica. In the mealy variety starch is in granules, 
root stalks with outer surface uniform or in shallow wrinkles ; found in 
Honduras. Sarsaparilla (Smilax officinalis), Lisbon sarsaparilla or Brazi- 
lian Sarsaparilla (Smilax papyracea and similax officinalis), Caraccas or 
gouty Vera Cruz (Smilax syphilitica). 

Constituents. — Parillin, saponin, sarsa saponin, volatile oil, resin, 
starch, colouring matter, calcium oxalate and other salts; also smilacin, 
parillic acid, pariglin, salseparin, parillinic acid, 

Parillin, to obtain it exhaust the root with warm alcohol, and 
distil ; occurs as a white glucoside resembling saponin, of a bitter taste; 
soluble in water and alcohol. 

/Reparations, — Liquor sarsae . compositus concent ratus. B. P. 
(i in i). Dose. 2 to 8 dr. ; extractum sarsae liquidum, B, P. (i in i). 
Dose, 2 to 4 drs. Decoctum sarsaparilla compositum. Dose, i to 2 ozs. 



CVPRIPEDTUM PUBRSCENS. 



587 



Arimfu ffti^ us£s. — Alterative, diaphoretic, tonic, diuretic and 
resolvent ; mostly given with iodide of pota&aium, in scrofula, skin 
diseases, tertiary syphilis, gout, rheumatism, &c, 

Orchidace»— The Orchis or Salama Misari family 

Herbs or shrubs, terrestri;il or epiphytical ; roots fibrous or 
tuberculated ; notruestems but a pseudo bulb ; leaves entire, generally 
thick and sheathing ; flowers irregular, reptile shaped, solitary or numer- 
ous, with a single bract, hermaphrodite, showy, and of various colours; 
perianth superior^ petaloid, arranged in two whorls ; pollen powdery, 
more or less collected into grains or in waxy or mealy masses; fruit 

^capsular, ; valved, rarely fleshy and indehiscent ; seeds many, minute ; 

Ite^ta loose netted, exalbuminous ; embryo fleshy* 

//ffM/tf, — Found in every region of the globe* 

Prftfirrfifs^ — Some of the plants are aromntic, antispasmodic and 
fragtanr : others nutrient and aphrodisiac. 



Cypripedium Pube&cens, C> Parviflorum. 

*SVw. — Yellow ladies* slipper, Indian or V'enus shoe, nerve root, 
Venus cup, monkey flower, bleeding heart, yellow umbel, Noah's ark, 
American vattTian. 

Cypripcdium, from Cypris, V*enus, and pes, pcdi^i, the fool— 
Venus' loot, or slipper. The flower's lid is of the form of a slipper. 

ilahiiat. — N, America, Canada. 

Jhiris usciL — The rhizome and roots. 

Characitrs. — Rhizome, horizontal^ long, thick, and studded with 
cup-shaped scars, closely co\*ered with wiry rootlets ; roots fr(tm 4 to 
10 inches long, brittle, of a dark brown colour, and of short fracture ; 
odour peculiar. Taste sweet and bitter* Dose, 5 to 15 grs, 

Constihieuts, — Volatile oil, resin, fixed oil, volatile acid, tannin, 
starch, sugar, ash 6 p. c« 

PnfiafaivjfiS, — Fluid extract. Dose, 10 to 50 ms. Tincture 
(1 in 10), Dose, \ to \ dr. Alcoholic Extract— Cyprepedin, i to 2 grs. 

Actions and uses. — Tonic, antispasmodic, stimulant and diaphore- 
tic ; used as a substitute for valerian but inferior ; given in hysteria, 
chorea, epilepsy, nervousness, hypochondriasis, insomnia, neuralgia, 
nervous headache, tic douloureux, and low fevers- It quiets the system 
without producing the stupefying e fleet of opium or of other narcotics. 
Under its influence the patient wakes up after a pleasant dream. It 
d<.»c^ not produce constipation* 



58>$ ORCHIS LATIFOLIA. 

Dendrobium Hacraei. 

Habitat, — Sikkim, Tenasserim Coast, Concan, Nilgiri Hill, Khasia 
mountains. 

Parts used, — The plant, roots and stems. 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Jibanti. Chin. — Shih hup. Hwang-taau. 
Mar., Hind., Guz. — Jiba sag. Sans. — Jeva jevaniya, saka shreshtha, 
yasasvini, jiva bhadra. 

Characters. — An air plant, growing on jimbultree, much branch- 
ing, stems long, pendulous, and knotty, with many oblong pseudo bulbs, 
leaf one, red, sessile and long ; flowers white, with a yellow lip 3 or 4 
inches in diameter and exquisitely fragrant. 

Constituents, — ^Two resinous principles termed alpha and beta 
jibantic acids and an alkaloid called jebantine. 

Preparation, — Decoction (i in 20). Dose, ^ to i fld. oz. 

Actions and uses. — As a tonic, given in debility, due to seminal 
discharges. 

Eulophia Vera, E. Campestris, E. Nuda. 

Habitat, — Bengal, Deccan Peninsula, Plains of India, Punjab, 
Oudh. 

Parts used, — The tubers. 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Budbara. Eng. — Whitton root. Hind — 
Goruma. Malyal. — Kanta katon. Mar — Ambarkand mankand. Tel. 
— Goru chettu, unani turphylla, Saturyun orkis. Mankand from man, 
the neck, and kand, the tubers. The tubers resemble in 
appearance scrofulous glands in the neck ; m&n in Marathi means 
scrofulous disease in the neck. 

Characters. — The tubers, conical or pyriform, externally surround- 
ed with circular marks, the remains of leaflets, yellowish white or of a 
green colour. Dose, 10 to 20 grs. 

Constituents. — Large quantities of white mucilage and ash 3*6 p.c. 

Actions and uses. — Anthelmintic and tonic. It is a fair substitute 
for salap. The natives use it in scrofulous disease in the neck both 
externally and internally. 

Orchis Latifolia, 0. Laxiflora, 0. Hascnla. 

Habitat. — Persia and Afghanistan, Nepal, Cashmere, O. Mascula, 
S. Europe. 

Parts used, — The tubers and the fecula of the root. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Salab-misri. Beng. — Chhale michhari. 
Bur. — Sala-misri. Cing.— Salama-misiri. Eng. — Oriental salep. 
Duk., Mar., Hind., Guz. — Salob-raisri. Malyal. — Sala-mishri. Pers. — 
Saalab-misri. Tarn., Tel. — Shala-mishiri. 



SACCOfJIUIlTM rAPrtLOSlTM. 



C/iiirac(ers,— Orchis m;\scu\si. Root (tubers) consists of 2 fleshy 
tubers, one inch long, deprived of epidermis by scalding in water, 
yellowish brown, hard, horny and insipid, tuberous hard and horny, 

_ainbcr coloured, often whitish, opaque and somewhat translucent ; 

haste mucilaginous or gum-like. When boiled with milk it ennts au 
odour resembling that of semen horn in is. 

Cuustiincnts. — ^Starch, 27 p.c, mucilage 48 p.c, sugar, albumen^ 
a trace of a volatile oil, and a&h coui^ibting chietly uf pho:»phales and 
chlorides of pota.-vsium and lime. The starch is obtainpd by grinding the 
root under water and straining. 

Prtfxiniiton, — Confection — Kattana Batrisana, contains Salama 51 
Dholi mulsali 5, Knli musali 4, Ekhani-nd-bija i* Gokharu a, 
Balabija 2, Kavacha 1, SatAvari 2, Kaniarakasa 2, Trikatu r» fvulaphu* 
n/i-bija I, Niragundi 1, Vansalochana i ; Asana 2, Sakakuia misari 2, 
Behamani sapheda I, Behaman-i surkha i, Ajamo 2, Suvil 2, Taja 3, 
Elachi 2, Jucphala i, Jiivantri i, VtWdinga 2, Akalakaro I, Asalio i, 
2 Pipalia mula 2, Ispaghula 4, Khasakha>ai 4, B.ivaliogonda 4, 
Lendi pipali 2, Singodan 2, Kesara i, Pobadi 2, SAkara 15. Dose, 2 
to 5 drs. 

Unani hakeems omit from the confection Ispaghula, Niragundi. 
Sakilkula misart, and Bchaman-i-surkha, and add Xiiga kesara, 
Tamnlapatra, Madanamasta, iMocharasa, Miephala* Met hi, KhAraka, 
Lavanga» Safed Kapur, Panini-jar. Used in seminal dcbilitVi chronic 
diarrhcca^ and general weakness in debilitated women after delivery. 

Actions and uus. — Nervine tonic» demulcent, and nutritive ; 
given in sennnal debility, paralytic affection^ &c. It is also nutritive 
and astringent ; hence useful in chronic diarrhtt-a, cholera, and 
tubercular diarrhcEa. Dose ol the pow*der, 5 to 20 gr* 

Remarks, — Three kinds of salama are generally met with. 
Panjab-i-salaba. The word Punjab, means a palm. The lubir is 
pahnatc or handshaped ; this name is converted into Punjabi, The 
ordinary Abushahcri, also called lasanio (garlic-like). It is either 
branched or v^'ith one Lirge bulb. Badashai or Basarai*salem. All 
Ihese fools are decorticated before being dried. An imitation of these 
Htibersmade of pounded potatoes^ gum> and wheat flour is:»uld under the 
name of Banavati (artificial) saletna* 

Vanda Roxbtirghii, 

HabiUji.^^^w^AX, Ciujerat» Behar, Coacum, 

Parh /ijrr/,— The root— Rasna, 

Vernacular. --\\\\\A., Beng., Bomb.— Rasana, 

Saccolabium Papillosum. 

Habitat — Bengal, Lower Himalaya Assam, Circars, and Burmali. 
Parts used, — The root. 
Vernacuhn,— Kanbhcr* 



590 



VAMTtLA PLAMPOLIA. 



C//rtmc^«rri,— Leaves coriaceous, in two rows, oblique at the 
apex ; flowers axillary, racemose or solitary ; stem climbing ; roots 
m thin quills^ long branching, same as sarsaparilia ; colour dark 
greyish brown ; bark thin, marked by longitudinal furrows; without 
odour, and of a starchy^ bitterish, astringent taste. 

Gjnsiiiticnts.—2 resinous acids, a neutral resin, an alkaloid, 
white neutral principle, and a neutral fluorescing principle^ 

/V'^/^m/ibwj.— Confection, Dose, loto 40 grs. Rasna Panchaka — 
Decoction of five roots— containing Rasna, Tino&pora Cordifolta, Cedru^ 
devdar, ginger and ricinus communis, equal parts. Dose, 4 to 6 drs. 
in rheumatism, 

Acttons and tises. — Bitter tonic und alterative ; given in rheu- 
matism, sciatica and neuralgia. Another kind of rasna called Khadakt 
Rasna is the root of tylophora asihmatica. 

Vanilla Planifolia. 

habitat* — Tropics, Mexico, West Indiest cultiv;jted in Java. 

fiaris ttseiL — The fruit. 

Charat/rr^, — A perennial climbing plant, which can be planted 
in a mixture of leaf mould and sand and trained to climb stone 
pillars to form n lattice work; fruit long, thick, linear and narrow ; bent 
at the base; and oblique at apex ; wrinkled, warty, of a dark brown 
colour and leathery* i-celled, containing blackish brown pulp with many 
minute seeds and acicular crystals ; odour fragrant and taste peculiar. 

Constituents, — Vanillin or vanillic acid 2 p c, fixed oil U p»c.; 
resin, sugar, mucilage, and ash 5 p.c, V^anillin — a crystalline odouroys 
principle, an aldehyde of methyl-proto-catechuic acid, is obtained by 
exhausting vanilla with alcohol. It is artificially prepared from 
conifcrin, carbolic acid, eugenol, and guaiacol — occurs as colourless 
needles, oxidises slowly in damp air, soluble in alcohol, ether aild 
volatile oils, and insoluble in water. 

FreparatifjHS. — ^Tincture(i in 10). Dose, \ to i dr. 

ActutHS and nu^s. — Carminative, stimulant, aphrodisiac and anti- 
spasmodic : used in hysteria, low fevers, atonic dyspepsia ; chiefly used 
as a flavouring agent. Those working in it get pruriginous eruptions. 

Soitaminaceae Zingiberacese- Ginger, suntha or halad family* 

Herbs aromatic, rhizomes creeping ; leaves broad, simple, stalked 
and sheathing, with parallel curved veins springing from the midribs 
arising from membranous bracts ; perianth superior, arranged in 
whorls ; stamens 5, anthers 2-celled, ovary inferior, 3-ceiled; flowers 
fragrant, in racemes and in spikes; fruits from I to j celled, capsular or 
baccate ; seeds many, arillate, albuminous and enclithctl in ^ \nr'!lua. 

Habitat* — Native of the tropics. 

Proper tic!^. — The rhizomes i>f some are stimulant, aromatic and 
stomachic. These properties arc due to the pfLbciKc uf le-^In and 



ALPINIA OFFICINAKUM. 



vol&lile oil* Some species are used us food« as iht'y contain starch m 
large quanliliea. 

Alpinia Oalanga. Maranta Galanga, Amomum Galanga. 

Habitat* — ^Java, Sumatra, S. [ndia, Bengal* 

/^aris med.^The rhizotne and fruit. 

fVrw^/;///rtr.^Arab. — Khulanjlne-kabira. Duk,, Beng*, Bomb., 
HiiuL — Sapheda*pana*ki jara ; Bara kalanjana^ Kochthe-kalatijan. 
Burm. — Podagoji. Chin, — Hung-iau-kau. Can. — Dumpa-rasmi* 
Cing. — Kaluwala. Eng, — Java galangal, grand or greater gakingal, 
Galanga cordamoms. MalyaL— ChiUa*ratta, Pcrs — Khusarava- 
daru-c-kal4ih San:». — Dhanmlu tikshra mula, Sugandha vacha, Maha- 
bhara vac ha Kulanjana. Tarn, — Perre*arcte, Tel. — Pedda-dutnpa* 

Chantctcn, — Rhizome resembling in many rebpccts the l^scr 
galangal, but larger in size and irregularly knotty ; externally brownish 
black, like [esser galangal ; hoinugeneous and fibrous; colour dirly 
white; odour and taste Jcebler than ihat of small galangal and rescnibl* 
ing those of kusht.and hence it is abo known as kushta kalinjana; 
fruit when fresh of the size of small cherries, obovate, soft, of a deep 
urange red colour ; dried fruit \ incli in length, oblong, sotnewhuC 
constricted about the middle; some of them are three-sided. 

/V^-Zfj/v/Z/Vy/w.^ Powder. Dose, 5 to lo grs. Tincture (i m 10), 
4 to 1 dr. 

^'h'tions ami tnei. — Aromatic, stimulant and bitter; used in feversi 
catarrhal aflTections, rheumatism, incontinence of urine &c. 

Alpinia Offlcinarum. 

//atalat, — China. 

Part^ tmt/, — The rhuome. 

Vkrnacntur. — Arab. — Khulaujana. Hind., Boujb., Beng.— Chini 
Kalanjana, kulijanj, chhota or k.ila pana-ki-jara. Can. — Sauna rasmi. 
Cmg.— Siua Katai. Chinese. — Kuon-cang-keang. Eng. — The lesser 
or the Chinese Galangal, Sans, — Rastama. Sind. — Kunjara kathi. 
Tam.^ — Shilta Ratio. 

Characters,— l}v\f^^ rhiijonie^, cylindiical, ah ihiek as the liltlc 
finger, about two inches long; colour rust-brown like that ol laja ; 
in shape Jong and irregularly bent, thus resembling ginger ; surface 
marked with circular rings which are the remnants of radical leaves, 
and here and there presenting traces ot rootlets on br.mches ; fracture, 
short, fibrous ; interior homogeneous, ot a reddish brown or yellow 
colour and containing fibres, many brownish re^in cells and lecula ; 
odour peculiar and aromatic ; taste hot and spicy, resembling that of 
Pi|iiili mula. Dose of the root, 2u to 30 grs. 

Comtitncnts, — Voiatile oil, ^ p.c. resin, fat, glucose, a neutral taste- 
less, odourless, yellowish, crystalline body, koempferide, galangal u 
gaiangiQ, and alpinin ; the essential oil is the odorous principle. 
Kcempfcride i% :>hghtly soluble in water, ether and benzene, freely 



592 CAXNA KDULIS. 

soluble in alcohol and soluble in alkalies. Galangalu occurs in 
yellowish white needles; alpinin in yellowish needles. 

Preparations, — Powder; infusion, (i in 20). Dose, 4 to 12 drs. 

Actions and uses* — Aromatic, stomachic, stimulant and carminative ; 
given internally to relieve flatulence, promote digestion, allay 
vomiting of indigestible food and lo check fever. It is givep to young 
children under the idea that it makes them speak early. A paste of 
the drug made by rubbing it with oil or water and applied to the face 
removes freckles. It is useful in reducing the quantity of urine in 
diabetes. It corrects foul breath when chewed. 

Canna Edulis 

Habitat. '^Vqxu^ Brazil. 

Parts used, — The fecula of rhizome— Canna starch. 

Characters. — Rhizome creeping, fleshy, with thick joints. Starch, a 
white satiny powder, granules, large, long, flat, ovate, hilum at narrow 
end. The fecula is dbtained by grinding the rhizome under water, 
kneading, straining and allowing to subside. Dose, 10 to 30 grs. 

Actions and uses. — Demulcent, nutritive and dietetic. Given 
in urinary and bowel complants and during convalescence from acute 
or chronic diseases. 

Canna 'Indioa, Canna Orientales. 

Habitat. — Throughout India. 

Parts used. — The rhizome and fruit. 

Verfiacular,^—Beng Swebajaya. Can. — Sugundaraju. Duk. — 
Akalbarki, Manker. Hind. — Sabbajaya, Akalbar. Malyal.— *Kattu- 
Bula. Mar. — Deokele, Kimakshi. Sans. — Sarvajaya, K&makshi, Eng. — 
Indian bread or Indian shot. Tarn. — Kanda-mani. Tel. — Krishna 
Tamara. 

Characters.— Fruiit capsule, bristly, 3-celled, many seeded ; seeds 
round, black, hard and shining, of the size of a pea or buck-shot ; 
rhizome, thick, fleshy. 

Constituents. — Fat, traces of an alkaloid, gum and starch. 

/Reparations. — Decoction (i in 20). Dose, 1 to 2 fld. ozs. 

Actions and «j^j.— Diaphoretic, diuretic and stimulant ; used in 
fevers, dropsy and dyspepsia. 

Cnronma Amada. 

Habitat. — Bengal. 

Parts used. — The rhizome. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Amada. Duk. — Am-ki-bo-ki-adrak. Eng. — 
Mango ginger. Mar., Hind. — Am-hal-di. Malyal. — Toman munga. 
Taro.^-Arukam laka. Tel. — Shadgrandika. 



VIU IMA ASGll5iTlhOLU» 



:ui 



Characli'fs. — I uoers latcraU colour pale yellow and peculiar ; 
smell rifSembUng that ot ihe rind of green mango; lastc acrid aiid 
asiringent. 

Prepitratinns.'—VsLSle — coDtaiomg amba lialad, rcvanchiiiu airo, and 
white of egg. 

Actions and uses, — Carminative, stomachic and cooling ; other pro- 
perties similar to those of zinger and it is used as such. The paste is 
applied^ like turmeric, externally to bruises^ sprains, contusions, rheu- 
matic pains and black eye, 

Ourouma Aromatioft* 

//if^i/*?/.— TliTOughout India- 

fhris used. '^Thc tuber or rhizome. 

Vernacuhr, — Bcng,, Gux., Bomb,, Reng. — ^Ban-halodi. Burm.— 
Kiyasanoin. Can.— Caituri-arishina. Eng. — Wild turmeric. Cochin- 
turmeric, round zedoary, yellow zcdoary. Hind. — Jangali-haladi. Mar. 
— V^edi-halud, MalyaL^ — Anakuva. Sans. — Vana huridra* shati. 
Tarn. — Kasturi-arishina* TcL— Kailu inanal. 

Characters, — Rhizome, very hard* oblongs rather uvaic, z lo 3 
inches long, and 1^ in 2 inches in diameter; surface wrinkled and 
hairyi and marked with circular disks or rings which are marks of 
fallen leaflets, and scars ol fallen rootlets, with other slender rootlets 
attached. It exhales a camphoractous and jambula-Iike fragrant odour; 
taste oily and balsamic. 

Coustiiuents. — A volatile oil, resin, starch, mucilage, sugari gump 
albuminoids and curcumtn, a yellow colouring matter. 

Prefaratiom, — Powder, 3 to 6 grs. 

Actions and uses. — Stomachic, stimulant, carminative and 
tonic; given to promote eruptions in exanthcfnatous fevers and in 
skin diseases ; its chief use is as a dyeing agent. 

Curouma Aoguati folia, Indian Arrowroot 

Arrowroot, is so called from its brtiised rhizomes or roots being 
employed by the Indians as an application to poisoned wounds in- 
flicted by arroivs. 

Hahitai. — Tropical Himalayai Oudh, 

Putts med* — The tubers. 

Fernacular* — Ben. — Tikhura. Chin. — Bholumio. Duk., Hind. 

Tavakhir, tikor, Malyal. — Kughai, kusy, kaking* Eng. — Indian 
or Curcuma Arrowroot, Curcuma Starch. Sans.--l'avak sphtryeka 
pattrika. Tam. — Kiivti mar 6. 

Indian arrowroot is obtained from the following plants. Curcuma 
Angustifolia C. Leucorhiza, C. Montana, C. Aromatica^ C* Longa, 
C- Rubescens, Hitcht-nra caultna. 

38 



594 CITKCUMA LONGA. 

Characters. — Bulb oblong, pendulous, of a pale colour and contain- 
ing starch ; when dried and powdered it is the chief source of arrowroot 
in India. Milkmen add this powder to milk in order to make it appear 
less watery. 

Constituents. — Starch, sugar, gum, and fat. 

Actions and uses, — Nutritive, demulcent and restorative ; 
used as food for infants in diarrhoea and dyspepsia ; locally it is mixed 
with katha and applied over cracked or sore tongue and in sore 
throat. 

Cnroama Casta. 

Habitat. — Bengal. 

Parts used. — The tubers. 

Vernacular. — Hind., Bomb., Mar., Beng. — Nila kantha, kali halad, 
Nara kachura. Tel. — Manapasupu. 

Characters, — Tubers of the size of halada ; colour lightish brown 
externally and greyish black within ; surface wrinkled, hard and mark- 
ed with irregular longitidinal furrows and with traces of scars of rootlets 
and of fallen leaves ; section homogeneously greyish black, and marked 
with a circular ring ; odour camphoraceous ; taste peculiar, like that of 

amba halada. 

• 

Constituents, — An essential oil, resin, sugar, gum, starch, albumi- 
noide and ash 7 p.c. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulants and carminative ; uses similar to 
those of karchura ; chiefly used as a cosmetic. 

Cnroama Longa B. P., Amomam Copouma. 

Habitat. — Behar, India S. Asia, Indian Ocean Islands. 

Parts used. — The tubers. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Zirsud, urukus safe. Beng. — Holodi. Burm. 
— Tanin. — Can. — Arisina. Cing. — Kaha, Haradul. Eng. — Turmeric 
Hind. — Haldar, Haldi. Guz., Mar., Malay. — Kunhet. Malyal. — Monjella 
kua. Pers. — Zard Chobah, karkum. Sans. — Haridra petta, rajani, nisha, 
gauri, varnavat, kamal. Tam. — Manjal. Tel. — Pasupu. 

Characters, — Rhizome, hard and thick, i to 2 or 2\ inches long, 
and 4 to 6 or 8 lines in breadth; more or less arched; in shape ovoid and 
elongated and narrowed at both ends ; from the body project laterally 
small, knotty tubercles of a roundish form ; surface wrinkled, hard, 
rough, dark, brownish or yellow grey and marked with scars of rootlets 
and rings of fallen leaves ; cut portion resinous, with a distinct ring 
separating the outer from the central portion ; interior of a deep 
orange red colour; smell peculiar and aromatic ; taste ginger-like, acrid 
and rather oily. The powder is deep yellow. Dose, i to i dr. of the 
powder. 



CfKCUMA ZKl>OAKIr\. 



<0i 



OfHstidicnis. — An essential oil i p.c. ; resin, curcumin, the yellow 
colouring matter ; turmeric oil or lurmerol. Turmeric oil is a thick 
yellow viscid oil. The curry powder owes its aromatic taste and smell 
to this oiK 

Curcumin — to obtain it, grind turmeric root with light petro- 
leum when the turmeric oil is removed. To the paste add ether, which 
dissolves curcumin and large quantity of resin — purify and crystallize ; 
met with as needle-shaped crystals, arranged in radiate groups ; colour 
orange or yellow ; without any odour ; insoluble in water, soluble in 
hot alcoliol, more in glacial acetic acid, less in ether* slightly in 
benzene and carbon bisulphide, 

Pnparatiuns* — Tincture (J in 6) B. P., used for the preparation of 
turmeric paper ; a medicated oilp and kunkun used for colouring oint- 
tnent, solutions &c. 

Aciions and uses, — Stimulant, tonic, and aromatic ; gi%^en in 
jaundice, and in chronic bronchitis. When mixed with tila tela, it is 
applied to the whole body to prevent skin eruptions. With kali chuno, 
the powder uf it is applied to bruises, sprains, contused wounds, black 
eye, with relief. A paste of it stops bleeding from leech bites* A 
decoction of it is used as a cooling lotion in conjunctivitis. Boiled in milk 
and sweetened with sakara, turmeric is a popular remedy for cold. 
The fumes of burning turmeric pal^sed into the nostrils relieve coryza, 
internally halada is given in affections of the liver and jaundice. 
On account of its yellow colour, cloth dipped in its paste is employed 
as an eye-shade. It is used in urinary diseases, and with siiji-khttra 
as an external upplicalion lu reduce indolent swellings* The powder 
mixed with Ghcc and Kumar-no-rasa, or with milk, is given to relieve 
cough and cold. 

Curcuma Zedoaria, C Zerumbet, Amomum Zerumbet. 

Hahttai, — Kasteru Himalaya, throughout India. 

Pari^ med, — The tubers. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Zarambad, Maha firfeen. Beng. — Suihi, 
Kar-chur-amu. Banhaldi. Burm. — Tha-nu-wen. Can. — Kachf)ni, 
Nirbisbi. Cing. — Hinhurh, wal-kaha, Kng, — Long Xedoary. Hind., 
Mar , Guz. — Kiichura, Malyal. — Katon-inshikua kezhanna, Malay, — 
Toman, Pers.-^-J advar khata, Kazhux. Sans. — Sate Ganda masli, 
Krachura^ kasturi manjal. Tarn,— Pulfin kizhanga* Teh — Kushthuri 
pasupu. 

Chttraciet^. — Rhizome oblong, pearl coloured, and solid; met with 
in circular slices of a greyish brown colour ; margin presenting traces of 
rootlets and of the epidermis ; surface concave and marked with a ring 
which is nearer the margin than towards the centre ; fracture, short 
and mealy ; taste camphoraccous bitter and tingling ; odour highly 
camphoraceous. Dose, lo to 30 grs. 

ConsUtucnts, — A volatile oil i p.c, a bitter soft resin, bitter ex- 
tractive matter, gum» starch, curcumin and albuminoids. The oil is 
turbid, yellowish white and viscid, of a camphoraceous taste and smell. 




59^ ELKTTAKIA CARDAMOMUM. 

Actions and uses. — Carminative, rubefacient, diuretic and stimulant 
like ginger ; given in gonorrhoea, menorrhagia and nephritic com- 
plaints. It is an ingredient of various alterative decoctions. 

Elettaria Cardamomum, B. P., E. Repens, Amomum Cardamomam 

Habitat, — Malabar, W. and S. India mountains. 

Parts used.^The dried ripe seeds — Cardamomi semina, cardamom 
seeds, B. P. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Kakula ebil, Hel-bava. Bomb., Guz., Beng. 
— Ilachi. Burm. — Palah, Bala. Can. — Yalakki. Cing. — Ensal, enasal. 
Hind., Duk. — Chhoti eelachie. Eng. — Nepaul cardamoms. Lesser 
cardamoms. Malay. — Kapulaga pinvar. Mar. — Veldoda. Pers. — 
Kakelah-seghar. Malyal, — Yalum. Sans.— Truti, Kapeta, Varni, Kar- 
angi, Dravidi, Upa-kunchika, Ela. Tam. — Ella-cheddie. Tel. — Elaki- 
chettu. 

Varieties: Ammomum amarum — bitter seeded cardamom; car- 
damomum repens ; A. grana paradisi — grains of paradise or Mala 
guetta pepper; A. aromaticum, Bengal cardamom ; A. Maximum — 
Java winged cardamom, 9 to 12 winged from base to apex. A. 
Globosum, — Elachi ddnA ; the seeds of a species of Amomum xanth- 
ioides, bastard wild or Nepal cardamom. A, Subulatum — Bada ilachi, 
(Hind.) Kakulah, (Mar.) nara elachi. The fruit is very large and of a 
dark colour ; capsules coarsely striated ; seeds more numerous, less 
aromatic and less camphoraceous than that of kagadi, kaghazi or 
Malabari elachi. 

Kardruna, nutmeg cardamom or cardamomum magnus ; (Pers.) 
Hilbawa — conical fruit, in size and shape like a small fig reversed. The 
seeds are roundish and angular ; odour agreeable, and aromatic, devoid 
of pungency of elachi ; used by Arabs as rosaries. Each fruit has a hole 
in it due to the habit of hangmg each fruit on a cord to dry. 

CT^ri7C/^r^.— Capsules ovate or bluntly triangular, with tufts of fibres 
at its smaller end, i inch in length, i^ inches in circumference, ribbed, 
coriacious and reddish brown ; three-sided, oblong or somewhat 
roundish, of a yellowish brown or dirty white colour, with a small 
curved stalk at the base ; stalk curved on the same side with the 
capsule ; surface rugous, slightly wrinkled, and marked with longitudi- 
nal striae ; seeds small, round or bluntly angular and brown ; closely 
packed and surrounded with membranous arillus in three rows, each row 
being separated by a thin membrane of a rich brown colour ; membrane 
about two lines in length and transversely rugous ; each row with 
generally five seeds ; seeds with a depressed hilum; surface deeply chan- 
nelled, resembling in shape, those of convolvulaceae ; odour pungent, 
camphoraceous and agreeable; taste pungent and leaving a sensation of 
cold upon the tongue when chewed. 

Constituents, — Fixed oil 10 p.c, volatile oil — the active principle, 
5 p.c, potassium salts 3 p.c, starch 3 p.c, nitrogenous mucilage 



IfB^YCtintM SPICATI^M. 



507 



2 p.c, ydluw colouring matter, ligneous fibre 77 p.c,, and ash 6 to 10 p.c, 
coittiining rnanganea^. 

The css<?nliaIoil is isomeric with oil of turpentine and is obtained by 
disiillation or extraclion with tfthcr ; found mo<»tly in the testa ; oduur 
and taste caniphoraccous ; it contains terpinene^ acetic and formic 
acids. 

Preparations^ — ^Tinctura cardamomt coniposita, B, P. (1 in -So). 
Do&Ci^ to I dr. Extractum Colocynthidis compositiim* B, P, Dose^ 2 tu 
8 grs. Pulvis uromalicus, B. P. Dose, 10 to 40 grs. Ttnctura Gen- 
tianae coniptjsila, B. P, Dose, ^ ^^ ^ ^ir. Tiuctura Rhtri composita, B* P. 
Duscp 4 to I dr, 

Actifitis and nsfs — ^Carminative, stomachic, stimulant, aromatic 
and rnaslicatorj' ; used for the same purposes as other carminatives. 
A* a corrective it is given in flatulence, griping of purgative and 
other medicines. 

Hedychium Bpioatum. 

ihihitat. —China, Hiur^Iaya. 

Paris used, — The tubers. 

Vernncuhr, — Duk,— Vilayati-kachur, Guz., Mar* — Kupur-kachri, 
kachur, seer, rutti. Hind, — Sidhoul. Sans. — Kapur kachli, shedwu. 
Tarn* — Ki^hangu. TeK^Sima-kich-chiUk. 

Characters. — Circular slices from J to ^ inch in diameter ; margin 
rugous, wrinkled, of a brownish red colouf and marked with wliite 
rings and traces of rootlets* some of the rootlets being also present ; 
sligntly convex on both surfaces ; wliiie inlernally, homogeneous 
and full of starch ; starch powdery, granular and containing sp;4rkling 
globules ; smell peculiar, agreeable afid aromatic ; taste (ragranl, 
mucilaginous, warm and aromatic, but not peppery or pungent, leaving 
a tingling sensation behind. It is called V^layeti kachur, as its smell, 
lasle and colour resemble those of zedoary. 

O/fii/i/w^w/s.— Starch* cellulose, mucilage, albumen, oils, saccharine 
matter, acid resin, fixed oil, and an odorous body* 

Ar/f/nz/io/w,— Paste, powder and decoction (t in 20). Dose, i to 

2 fld. 02S. 

Actions and uses, — Stomachic and carminative ; given in dyspepsia. 
It is also used in the preparation of cosmetic powders to promote the 
growth of hair. The sliced root is an ingredient iti scented powder 
known as abira* 

Kiempferia Oalanga. 

//i?^i/h<?/.— Throughout India, 

/^trts used, — The tubers. 

I'ernacn/ar, — Burm — khaniinig. Beng., Hind* — Chandra mula, 
Humula, Mar.— Chandra mula, utnetu Malyal. — Kats julum. Sans. — 
Chandra mulika. Tarn. — Katsjulam. TeK — Kachoram. 



59^ MUSA PARADISIACA. 

Characters. — Leaves radicle, petioled, ovate, and cordate ; margins 
membranous and waved ; upper surface smooth and green ; under surface 
pale and woolly ; roots branched ; tubers resembling ginger, giving off 
fleshy fibre ; odour agreeable and camphoraceous ; taste acrid and 
peppery. 

Consttluenis,— An alkaloid, starch, gum, fatty matters containing a 
fragrant liquid oil and a solid white crystalline substance. 

Actions and nscs. — Stimulant and expectorant; the aromatic leaves 
and roots are used as perfume. With honey the root is given in cough 
and pectoral affections ; used also as a masticatory with betel leaves 
and areca nut. Boiled in oil it is used to promote nasal secretions. 

Ksempferia Rotunda, K. Longa. 

Habitat. — Throughout India. 

Parts used, — The tubers and the whole plant. 

Vernacular, — Burm. Myoban touk. Beng., Guz., Hind., Mar. — 
Bhui champa. Cing. — Kahasan-kanda. Malyal. — Milankua. Sans. — 
Bhume champaka. Tel. — Konda-ka-lava. 

Characters. — Leaves oblong and coloured ; spikes radicle ; flowers 
fragrant, purplish white ; root consisting of several globular rhizomes 
from which spring numerous fleshy rootlets ; taste bitter and 
camphoraceous like that of zedoary. 

Actions and uses. — The small globular tubers are used as loca^ 
application to tumours and glandular swellings of all kinds, as mumps, 
&c., the natives use the whole plant bruised as an application to 
anasarcous swellings ; an ointment of the whole plant is applied to 
fresh wounds. It is given internally in cases of pyiemia with the idea 
of removing blood or pus from the body. 

Masa Paradisiaoa, M. Sapientam. 

^/?^///7/.— Throughout India, tropical regions. 

Parts used. — The fruit, leaves and stems. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Maoz. BeAg. — Kachkula. Burm. — 
Huget-pyan. Can. — Bale. Cing. — Anawallu-Kesul. Duk. — Mouz. 
Eng. — Plantain, banana. Guz., Hind.— Kela, kel. Java. — Godang. 
Malay. — Pessang. Malyal. — Vella. Pers. — Mongj. Sans. — Arama- 
kadale, rambha, bhatnpso-Iabha, Rajishta, Van Luksham, autikadali. 
Tam. — Vallipalavu. Tel. — Kommu ariti. 

Characters. — Stem simple, thickly closed with the sheathing 
petioles of the leaves ; leaves forming a tuft on the apex of the stem ; 
flowers compound, yellowish white in a spalhe ; fruit oblong and fleshy ; 
seeds numerous, buried in the pulp. 

Constituents. — The ash contains potash and soda salts, phosphoric 
acid and magnesia. The ripe fruit contains starch, sugar, gum, 
fat, albuminoids and non-nitrogenous extractives. 



SAMADKRA PRNATHKTALA. 



Actions and uses* — Demulcent, nutritive and astringent ; the fruit 
iii used in soreness of the throat, dry cough and in irrilability of 
the bladder. The root is used as an anthelmintic. The meal prepared 
from the fruits is nutritive ; the starch prepared from the unripe fruits 
ift astringent and used in bowel complaints, A syrup of banana is 
given in chronic bronchitis with benefit. In hemoptysis and hsemor- 
rhagic fluxes, the juice of the stem obtained by incisions is very bene 
ficial. The young leaves arc a good substitute for gutla percha tissue 
in dressing wounds and as cooling dressing for blistered surfaces, 

Ret$mrks, — The natives use the leaves as a shade protector in 
eye diseases, 

Maranta Arandinaoea, 

Hahitai. — West [ndies, Bermuda, Brazil. 

Paris usfd, — The fecula of the rhizome, — Arrowroot. 

Frntaru/ar* — Burm , — Penh wa. 

C/ffjtfU/rrs.— Thv rhizome, tuberous and fleshy. To prepare arrnw- 
rool, the rhizome is dug» washed, deprived of scales, ground under 
water, kneaded and strained and the solution allowed to subside ; met 
with in powder or lumps, thick, white and opaque. It produces the 
West India arrowroot or maranta starch. 

Com// ////•«/*.— The root contains starch 27 p.c. and fat, 

Acrihns and uses* — Demulcent and nutritive ; the most palatable 
and digestive of the starches known and used as food for infants an^ 
dufing convalescence from bowel and urinary troubles. The jelly 
IS more tenacious than that from any other starch except canna starch. 

Samad«)ra Penatpetala, Niota Tetrapetala, 8. Indioa, 

ll(thi(at. — Cochin, Konkan» Travancore* South of Ceylon. 

Pkirts used, — The bark root» fruit and oil. 

rernacnhr. — Cing, — Samadara-gass. Eng,"*Neepa bark. Mal- 
yal. — Karin gota. Tarn. — Neepa. 

Characters. — Bark in quills, i to I inch in diameter, fissured 
externally; colour dark brown^ dotted here and there with white patches; 
inner surface yellowish white ; fracture short and fibrous ; taste bitter ; 
the wood has properties resembling those of quassia. Dose, 30 to 6ogrs^ 

Coustiiuents^ — ^A fixed oil of a light yellow colour and bitter 
taste, a bitter principle samadeno, also called quassin. 

/Reparation. — Infusion of bark (i in 80). Dose, 1 to i o«s, 

Actions and uses. — Intensely bitter and febrifuge like quassia ; 
given with myrobolans in fevers and dyspepsia. The oil is used as an 
external application in rheumatism. The seeds are superstitiously 
strung together in a wreath and tied round children's necks as a 
preventive against asthma and other affections of the chest. 

Remarks, — The plant belongs to n. o. simarubacese. 



600 ZINGIBER OFFICINALE. 

Zingiber Cassamanar, Z. ParpoFeam, Z. Cliifordii. 

Habitat — India. 

Paris used, — The rhizomes. 

Vernacular, — Bang. — Ban-ada. Mar. — Nisa Malabari halad' 
Sans — Vana adrakam, Tel. — Kurapashupu, Karu-allamu, Van Adrak' 
Van, wild, and adrak, ginger — wild ginger. 

Characters. — Fresh rhizomes jointed, i to 2 inches in diameter 
and compressed ; surface wrinkled and marked with numerous fleshy 
radicles, to some of which white tubers are attached externally ; 
epidermis scaly and dark brown; interior of a golden yellow colour ; 
odour fragrant and nutmeg or kapura like ; taste hot, burning, and 
kapura like. It resembles amba halada in other peculiarities. 

Coustituents.— Resln, essential oil, fat, sugar, gum, starch, albumin- 
oids and ash. 

Actions and uses. — Stomachic, carminative and stimulant ; used 
in diarrhoea and colic. Other uses are similar to those of turmeric. 

Zin^ber Offloinale, B. P. 

Habitat, — Throughout India, W. Indies, Africa. Cultivated 
in Jamaica, Sierra Leone. 

Zingiber from gingas gringa, or Shringa, means a horn, and her or 
ver, a body. The body of the root is horn-shaped. 

Parts used, — The scraped and dried rhizome Zingeberis^ 
ginger, B. P. 

Vernacular, — The fresh rhizome. Arab. — Zengabil. Bomb. — Alen» 
adu. Burm.— Gin-sin, Khen-seing. Can. — Hasisunthe. Chin — Kan- 
Kiang. Cing. — Ammuingurn. Eng. — Green ginger. Guz. — Adu. Beng., 
Duk., Hind. — Adraka, ada. Malayal. — Alia.Maleal. — Ischia.Mar. — Alen. 
Ala. Pers. — Zinjabile. Sans. — Katubadra. Tam. — Inji. Tel — Allam- 
The dry rhizome. Arab. — Zanjabile yabis. Beng, — Duk., Guz., 
Mar.— Sont, Sunth. Burni. — Ghinsi — khiab. Eng — Dry ginger. 
Hind. — Sontha Sindhi. Pers. —Zanjabile khushak. Sans. — Suniheka, 
Mahaushadha, Vishva-cheshajam. Malyal — Chukka. Tam. — 

Shukku. Tel. — Sonte. 

Characters, — A plant with dingy yellow flowers on a leafless flower 
stalk and long lanceolate leaves on a separate stem ; rhizomes, 2 to 4 
inches long ; tubers branched, knotty, and somewhat compressed, on 
one side lobed and clavately branched without a wrinkled and corky 
epidermis, buff coloured, and striate ; on section, fracture mealy and 
fibrous, showing many scattered resin cells and fibro vascular bundles ; 
odour agreeable, aromatic and penetrating ; taste acrid and pungent. 
The pungency is due to their containing an essential oil and resin; soluble 
in alcohol or ether, partially in boiling water. Dose, 5 to 30 grs. 

Varieties are named after their nativity. Jamaica ginger deprived 
of epidermis sometimes steeped in milk of lime and covered with calcium 
carbonate yields 5 p.c. of oleo resin. African dried ginger covered with 



light brown suberous lis&ue. Other varieties are East Indian and 
Chinese or Cochin. 

Comtituenis, — A volatile oil 2 p.c, fat, a crude liquid oleo resin> 
ginK^i^ol or gingerin, mucilage, resin, starch 20 p.c.; ash 4 px. 
The volatile oil contains camphcne and phellandrenc. Gingerol, an 
active principle exlraclcd from ginger, is a viscid^ inodourous 
pungent liquid, of the colour atidconbistence of treacle, and aromatic hot 
lasle; soluble in alcohol, ether, volatile oil and fat, slightly soluble in 
benzene ; it contains all the virtues of the root. The resin yields 
protocatechuic acid* 

Pfeparaii'tms, — Fluid extract. Dose, 10 to 20 ms. Tinctura 
Zinghicris, B.P. (1 in 10% Dose, i to I dr. Syrup Ztngiberis, B.P.(l in 
40). Dose, \ to I dr. Trochisci each contains 3 ms, of the tincture, 
Tinctura Carminativa — contains cardamoms ro drs, essence of ginger 
10 drs», oil of cinnamon l^ dr*, oil of carraway i} dr., oil of cloves 
ijdfs., macerate and dissolve, add rectified spirit to make 20 ozs. 
Dose, 2 to 10 ms. 

Aiftous and uses, — Dried ginger is aromatic, stimulant and 
carminativei produces a sensation of warmth at the epigastrium 
and expels flatus ; as a carminative it is given in colic ; as a masti- 
catory in relaxed throat and to increase the saliva. Locally it is 
rubefacient, anodyne and sinlo|»eigne. When chewed, fresh ii^inger is 
stomachic and digestive. The clry rhizome powdered and made into a 
paste with warm water is used as cataplasm or fcunentalions to the 
forehead in headaches, neuralgia, colic, and toothache ; also Riven in 
atonic dyspepsia, loss of appetite, to correct flatulence in colic, diarrhoea, 
chronic bronchial cougfi, palpitation of the heart* dropsy, cholera 
and tyn»panilis, and as a corrective to nauseous medicines and to che?ck 
uriptng of purgatives. It is also used as a flavouring adjuvant to bitters. 

The juice is given as an adjuvant to hixalives, as castor oil ; with 
ijarlic and honey il is used \ot cough and a>lhma, 

IiidaceaB— the Kesar* Carnflag or Iris family. 

Herbaceous plants, usually with bulbs, corms or rhizotnes ; leaves 
with parnllel and straight veins ; flowers regular or irregular, 
spathaceous ; perianth superior in 2 whorls ; stamens }, ; ovary inferior, 
three-celled ; style 1 ; stigmas 3. petaloid ; fruit capsular. dehi!>ceni, 
three-celled, thrce-valved ; seeds numerous ; albumen hard and horny. 

Hnhit'it — Tr<>pic;^ and temperate climates, Cape of Good Hope. 

Pnjpertks. — The rhi/omes of *>everal species are acrid, and hence 
used ;is a purgative, emetic, &c,; some tubers are in addition carminative 
and antispasmodic ; othcrfi are used as colouring agents, and many 
contain starch. 

Crocus SattvuB B. P. 

Hahitai. — \V. Asia, France, Greece, Asia Minor, Persia. Culli- 
vatcd in Kurope. 

/^r/j lij^r.'/.^The dried Stigmas with tops of the styles— Crocus 
safTron, B. P. 



002 IRIS GBRMANICA. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Zafran. Burm. — Than-wen. Can. — Kum- 
kuma, Kesari-kumkamada, Huvu, Kesari. Chin. — Fan-hung-hwa. 
Cing.— Kohoon, Kunga mamal. Cash. — Konga. Eng. — Crow saffron, 
Hay saffron. Guz., Duk., Beng., Hind. — Kangan-mundi, Kesara, 
Zaffran. Malyal — Piwva Konger, Mar. — Kesare. Pers. — Karkum, abir. 
Sans. — Kuna kdma, Saurapha kesara. Tarn. — Kaon goomapu. Tel. 
— Kum-kuma puvoo. 

Characters. — Stigmas of a brilliant yellow or orange-red colour, like 
that of the rising sun ; style ^ to i inch long, and of a yellowish colour. 
Upon the style three long and rather twisted stigmas rest ; stigmas 
thread-like, narrow towards the base, and broad and partite or crenate 
at the apex ; colour deep orange red ; odour highly aromatic, strong 
and peculiar ; taste, mucilaginous, slightly bitterish and pungent ; one 
pound of saffron contains 60,000 stigmas. Dose, 5 to 30 grs. 

Constituents. — A volatile oil, crocin — a glucoside, also called poly 
chroit (many colours), which is the colouring matter, picrocrocin— bitter 
principle, wax, proteids, fixed oil, mucilage, sugar, ash 5 p.c, moisture 
12 p.c. The volatile oil is obtained by distillation and by heat. Crocin 
— To obtain it exhaust saffron with ether, then with water ; add alcohol 
to aqueous tincture when gum will be precipitated, filter and add 
ether. Met with in amorphous, yellowish brown mass ; taste sweetish ; 
soluble in alcohol and water. It splits up into sugar (crocose) and red 
crocetin. Picrocrocin, or saffron bitter, the bitter principle, occurs as 
colourless needles, soluble in water. With alkalies it yield crocose and 
volatile oil. 

Preparation, — Tinctura Croci, tincture of saffron, B. P. (i in 20). 
Dose, 5 to 15 ms. Infusion (saffron tea) (1 in 80). Dose, 1 to 4 ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant, aromatic, and antispasmodic* 
also used as a colouring agent ; given in amenorrhoea, chlorosis, seminal 
weakness, leucorrhoea, dysmenorrhoea, in flatulent colic, spasmodic 
asthma and cough. Owing to its containing the volatile oil, it is used 
in rheumatism and neuralgic pains. It is given to children with ghee 
in looseness of the bowels. It is reputed to promote exanthematous 
eruptions in specific fevers, as measles. Externally a paste of it is used 
in removing bruises and superficial sores and in headache. Pessaries 
of saffron are used in painful affections of the uterus. It gives the urine 
a yellow colour. 

Remarks. — American saffron — ^safHower, is from cart ham us 
tinctorius. 

IriB Germaiiioa, 1. Pallida, I. Florentina. 

Habitat. — N. Italy, Germany, France, N. India, S. Europe, 
Persia. 

Parts used. — The rhizome and roots. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Sosan, Kusht-el-hali, Aersa Arastan. 
Bomb. — Balva-ekhanda. Chin. — Pehchj. Eng.— Orris root, violet root. 
Ind. Bazaar, Guz. — Kevara-nu-mula, Bikh-i-banafsa. Pers. — 



mis vEnsicoLOR. 



603 



Padmi pushkara^ Sus-an-i-asman guni. Sans, — Bikh-i-sostann, 
Pushkara mula. 

Characters, — Root in pieces, of a greyish brown, or violet coIouFi 
hard and compressed ; baik wrinkled externallyi where it is marked 
with scars of fallen rootlets ; cut surface, resembling in appearance 
and colour darunaj-i-akrabi ; smell violet-iike or resembling that of 
Tagara ganthoda ; taste acrid and slightly bitter, also starchy. 

Constittutds. — Volatile oil (orris camphor), starch, resin, and 
tannin. 

Pr<r^^r<^i/ib«i,— Decoction (i in to). Dosei 1 to 2 fld^ ozs. 

Actions and usrs, — Cathartic^ stimulant, alterative and diuretic ; 
used in bronchitis, dropsy and liver complaints ; also externally as an 
application to sores and pimples. As a masticatory for perfuming 
breath and in teething of infants. 



Iris Versicolor. 

liahitaL — N. America, moist meadows and swamps. 

Pnrh tnfd — The rhimme and roots, 

Syn^ — Poison or water* flag, snake-lily, blue-flag, liver-lily. 

Ckaracterx.—A ptreiinialherb ; flowers large blue ; rhizome incir- 
cutar pieces about half an inch man inch in Icngtli and of a dark brown 
colour ; bark easily separable, scaly, wrinkled, and here and there marked 
With scars of fallen rootlets. Wood, hard, granular and resinous, look- 
ing ; in colour and appearance resembling chnba chini ; taste some- 
what acrid and astringent ; odour slightly aromatic. Dose, 5 to 20 grs. 

Oatitftr/rfit.w-^Au acrid resin 15 p.c, a cainphoraceous bcxly, an 
alkaloid, tat, sugar, gum and tannin. 

/^r/r/rrt//o;/A.— Decoction ( I in 10). Dose, ^ to 1 fid. 07. Extract, 
Dose, I to 5 griv Fluid extract. Dose, 5 tn 60 ins. Iridin or Irisin, a 
powdered extractive. Dose, i to 5 grs. 

Actions andusrs. — The fresh root is cathartic, but it produces nausea 
and great prostration* As a cholagogucit is given in hepatic disorders as 
jaundice, due to duodenal catarrh and obi*truction of the bile ducts. 
In malarial jaundice and in malarial and bilious remittents, also in 
scrofula and syphilis, it is given with benefit. As a diuretic it is given 
in dropsy, glandular swellings and skin affections. It is also given in drop 
dosesjn vomiting o\ pregnancy and in supra-orbital headache, chiefly of 
hepatic origin ; also in round and lapc worms. Iridin is freely used 
combined with henbane and cuonymin as a mild aperient, cholagoguc, 
alterative and diuretic* It is a special stimulant of the secret iun 
of bile and is used in enlarged liver combined with oxgall and other 
cathartics. It is gentler than pod(^phyUin and more reliable and more 
purgative than cuonymin. It is also given in intestinal troubles and 
in vomiting of pregnancy and in malarial jaundice. Generally given 
with euonymin (4 to r), when it docs not irritate the recium, and 
produces bilious stools. It has no subsequent aslringency. 




604 CRINUM ASIATICUM. 

AmaryllidaoeflB. The AmaryUis or SokadaPBan family. 

Plant, bulbous or fibrous rooted without any aerial stem *• 
leaves with parallel and straight venation, linear ensiforra ; flowers 
on scapes and spathaceous ; Iruit capsular, 3-celled, 3-valved, dehiscent 
or berry ; seeds numerous ; albumen fleshy or horny ; embryo with a 
radicle next to hilum. 

Habitat, — Native of warm parts of the globe, Cape of Good 
Hope. 

Properties. — Several are emetic, purgative or poisonous ; the 
juice of a few species is saccharine, from which fermented liquors 
are obtained ; others contain starch. 

Grinam ABiatioum, C Toxioariam, G. Braoteatam. 

Habitat, — Throughout India, Concan. 

Parts used. — The leaves and the fresh bulb. 

Vernaculars. — Beng., Guz., Mar., Hind. — Bara kanwar, Nagdowna» 
Gaer-honxir-pata, Sukhdursan. Burm. — Koyanji. Cing. — Mahab- 
tobalis. Duk. — N^gina. Eng. — Poison bulb. Malyal. — Visha-mula, 
Beluta-patalah. Sans. — Visha-mandala. Tarn.— Visha-munge-elle. 
Tel. — Kesara-chetu, 

Characters, — The fresh root is bulbous, brownish uhitc, 
terminal and of varying size ; odour narcotic, acrid and disagreeable. 
It can readily be powdered after desiccation ; leaves long, thick, fleshy, 
linear, lanceolate, smooth and striated, green, or greenish yellow. 

Preparations. — Of the juice of fresh bulb. Succus. — Dose, 2 to 4 
drs. Syrup (1 in 3). Dose, 2 drs. as an emetic for children. 

Actions and uses, — Emetic, nauseant and diaphoretic. It acts 
without causing griping, purging or any other distressing symptoms 
and is a good substitute for ipecacuanha and squill. It is given in 
croup, whooping cough, asthma, and chronic bronchitis. The leaves 
bruised, made warm and besmeared with a little castor oil are 
applied over inflamed whitlows and as fomentations to inflamed joints 
and sprains. The juice of leaves is dropped into the ear in earache. 
The dried roots are emetic, but require double the dose, 

Crinum Zeylanicum, which is plentiful in most parts of India, 
has the properties of squills. The root is bulbous, of varying size and 
somewhat acrid. The toasted bulb is applied to tumours, buboes, 
and to piles to promote suppuration. The bulb roasted is used as a 
rubefacient in rheumatism. 

Hypoxidaoe»,^Th6 Hypoxia or Kali masali family. 

Herbaceous plant; leaves dry, harsh, with parallel, straight, general- 
ly linear and ensiform venation ; seeds carunculate; radicle of the 
embryo, remote from the hilum. 

Habitat. — Native of warm parts of the globe. 



rki& vAUi> 



fJO- 



Ptrjfiertu's.— Some are bitter and aromatic ; roots of some are fleshy 
and nnicilaginous. 

Carouli^o OrchJoides. 

flabiiaL — Hotter regions of India, Ceylon* 

Piirta mtd. — The tuberous root* 

rrrnm:ti/iif\ — Beng. — Sada mushli, tumuli. Bouib, — Mu^;ili-kanda 
Cing* — Hinbintal. Can. — Nela-tati-gadde. Guz., Hind., Duk, — 
Kali musli, Shea-musli. Malyal. — Nilapana-kizanna. Sans, — TiVla- 
miilikji, Hema-pushpi, Tarn, — Nila punay kalangu, Tel. — Nalla tade. 

Characters^ — Dried root, translucent, in pieces about ^ to j inch 
in length and from 4 to 5 \m^^ in thickness, cyh^ndrical and of a 
brownish dark colour, surface wrinkled and here and there marked 
with scars of fallen root lets ; cut portion studded with soft fibrous 
bundles and granular matter ; ta&te mucilaginous and slightly bitter ; 
smell rather disagieeablc. Dose of the powdered root, 1 to 2 drs. 

Constituents. — I\e^i^, laiinin, mncilatn". >tait:fi and ash cuntainiog 
oxalate of calcium, &c, 

Prepara tious — C o u i i;c 1 1 un , 

Actimts ami usrs, — Hitler, aromatici tonic and dt;mulcent ; used in 
general debility, in affections of the urino-gcnital system as impotence ; 
also in asthma, piles, jaundice, dysuria, diarrhcra, nitnorrfiagia, 
and gonorrhaa. As a tonic it is generally mixed with aromatic bitters 
and aphrodisiac medicines. 

HdamodoraoesB— The Blood-root family* 

Herbs, rarely shrubs; roots tibrous ; leaves ensiform. usually 
equitant ; perianth superior, tubular, six parted ; stamens 5 ; ovary, 
interior, threecelled; fruit dehiscent or indehisccnt; seeds (ew or 
many; albumen cartilaginous. 

finhiiat* — Native of Arrjerica, Cape of Good Hope, Australia. 

t^r^>prrties. — \ioo\ii are bitter, astringent, tonic and stomachic 

AletriB Farinosa, True Unicorn Colic root or Star wort. 

///fW/i/— United States. 

Parti iiSfd. — Rhi/onie or rootlets. 

Charactcrs.^F'ibTtnis, i,f a d.irk hrown colour externally, tas»tc 
aytaeeous and bitter. 

Constituents, — Starch, and an active bitter principle. 

Pref^aratinns, — Powder. I>ose, 510 logrs, Aletriu. Dose, .^ 10 2 grs. 
Decoction (1 m 20)* Dose, 2 t<i 4 drs. Dried extract. Dose, 2 to 5 grs 
Fluid extract. Dose, 10 to j^o ms. Tincture (j in 8). Dose, k to 
I dr. 

Actttms and uses. — Tonic, diuretic, in large doses emetic and 
cathartic It has a specific influence upon the uterus in anienorrhcra 



bob ALLIUM cei'A. 

dysmenorrhoea, prolapsus uteri, and sterility. It gives tone and vigour 
to the reproductive organs, and is chiefly indicated to prevent 
miscarriage. It should be given during the whole period of gestation. 

Liliaceaa— The Lily, Eliyo or Kanda family. 

Trees, shrubs^ or herbs, with bulbs, rhizomes, tuberous or 
fibrous roots ; stem generally simple, rarely branched ; leaves sessile 
or sheathing^ with parallel veins ; flowers regular ; perianth green, 
petaloid, or inferior, 6-parted ; stamens 6 ; ovary, superior, 3-ce!led ; 
style I ; stigma simple ; fruit loculicidal, capsule, pod or berry » or 
succulent and indehiscent, 3celled ; seeds numerous with fleshy 
albumen. 

HabilaU — Temperate climates or tropics. 

Properties, — The properties vary : some plants are purgative, 
others emetic, diaphoretic, diuretic, stimulant and acrid, several are 
astringent. The bulbs of Kanda, Lasana, young shoots, roots, and 
seeds of many species are used as articles of food and condiment. 

Alliam Cepa— Onion, A. Poimm— the Leek, A. Ascalonicnm— 

the ShaUot. 

HabilaL — India. 

PbltIs used. — The bulb and seed. 

Vernacular. — Arab. —Basal. Beng.— Pulantu. Bur. — Kyet- 
thwon-ni. Can. — Kunbatti. Chin. — Tsung. Cing. — Luno. Hind., 
Duk., Guz. — Dungaliy Kanda, Pyaz. Malyal. — ^Ira-venyayam. Mah. 
— Kande. Pers.— Goondina. Sind. — Dungari. Sans. — Platandu. 
Tam. — Vengayam. Tel. — Erra-vulli. 

Characters. — Bulb varying in size from a walnut to a large orange? 
colour varying between red and white ; other characters similar to 
those of the Bana Kanda ; taste ver}' acrid and pungent ; odour very 
pungent ; when cut into thin slices, the oil volatizes and irritates the 
eyes, giving rise to secretion of tears. 

Constituents. — An acrid volatile oil containing sulphur. 

Action and uses. — Onions are stimulant, expectorant, and diuretic. 
The juice of the bulb and conserve of the white variety are used in 
colic. With salt Kdnda is held to the nose in fainting. Its juice is 
dropped into the ear to relieve ear-ache ; when roasted its poultice is 
applied to inflamed and indolent boils. The seeds are demulcent and 
given in gonorrhoea. With navas^gara; the juice is given in retention 
of urine. 

Alliam Maoleani. 

Habitat. — Persia, Badghis. 

Farts used. — The bulbs, scalded and dried. 

Vernacular. — Eng. — Royal salep. Ind. Bazar. — B&dshahi or 
Padshahi Silap. 



U HUM SATIVUM. 



607 



^nretciers^ — Drieii bulbs, nearly spherical, sometimes uvoid, 
pointed at the upper extremity, with a depressed cicatrix or ;i white 
elevated scar at the lower end ; surface striated longitudinally, 
translucent, of a purplish brown or yelJow colour, dense and horny; 
taste bitter. They readily absorb moisture from the air. Dose. ^ to 
2 drs, 

Cnnstttuents. — MucUaige, cellulose, mineral matter and ash 
containing manganese. 

Actions aminsfs. — Tonic and deniulct^nt ; given in gener tl il^r^hfliiy, 
nervous exhaustion and seminal weakness. 

AUiam Sativam. 

HahitaL — Central Asia^ S. Europe (Italy, Sicily), and America^ 

Paris used. — The bulb. 

Vernacular* — Arab. — Sum, Sum. Burm. — Kesun-phiiu Can. — 
Beiuli, Cing, — Sudu, Lulu. Chin. — Swan, Ltvan. Eng\ — Clove 
garlic or common garlic. Guz.^ Hind., Man, Duk., Beug. — 
Lash una* Pers. — ^Sir, Sans. — Ugra-gandha, Bhutaghna, Lasuna^ Mahu 
Shuda. Tani. — Vellai-pundu. Tel. — Tella-gidda. 

CharacUrs^ — The bulbs which are called cloves of garlic arc sub* 
globular^ surrounded by dry membranous scales, and contain from 
5 to S stnall bulblels arranged in a circle round the stem, prttjccting 
from ihe base of the tuber. The bulb is round externally, wedge* 
shaped towards the stem, and compressed at both sides. It has a 
peculiar, pungeut and disagreeable udour^ and an acrid burning taste« 
B, \ to 2 drs. 

Ojtniituenls. — An acrid volatile oil, starch, mucilage j(5 p.c#i 
^umen, sugar, &c. 

Oil of garlic — a volatile oil, obtained by distillatioQ ; it contains 

allyl, propyl disulphide, diallyl disulphide, and other sulphur 
compounds. It is a cle«ir limpid liquid of a dark brown or yellow 
colour ; odour very repulsive ; taste repugnant. The medicinal 
properties are due to this oil. Dose, \ to 2 ms. 

Pre(>arattQm, — A compound garlic powder, Sval Parasona Pinda, 
containing garlic, sonachala, cumin, asafetida, rock salt, trikatu, ginger, 
longpcppet» black pepper, jirun saphed, equal parts. Given in rheu- 
matism, facial paralysis, sciatica, convulsions, tetanus, epilepsy^ &c^ 
Dose, ioto2ogrs. Syrup (i in 5 of sugar and acetic acid). Dose, 
) to 2 drs. Poultice ; extract (inspissated juice) 4 to to grs*; Succus* 
Dose, \ di . and Linimetit, 

Acitms and uses, — As a gastric stimulant^ it aids digestion, and is 
given in flatulence; as an expectorant it has a special influence over the 
bronchial and pulmonary secretions ; as an emmenagogue it pro- 
motes the flow of menses. It is a tonic, carminative and stimulant of 
the ^kin and kidneys. In large doses it is an irritant and produces 
flatulence, headache, nausea, vomitmg, diarrhoea, ike. As a 
local stimulant and irritant, it reddens the skin and causes vtesicatioii. 



6o8 ALOfc PERRYI. 

Like Kanda, it is applied to the nose of hysterical girls when in a 
state of swooning. Given with common salt it relieves colic and ner- 
vous headache As a vermifuge it expels round worms. Like onion, it 
causes copious diuresis and is hence used in dropsy or anasarca. Locally 
in bronchitis and in cold or catarrh in children, bruised garlic and 
onions are applied to the chest as a poultice or liniment. Applied to 
the perineum it relieves strangury. It is also applied to the bites 
of venomous reptiles. Mustard powder is added to promote its 
rubefacient effects. It is rubbed over ringworm with relief. Garlic juice 
slightly warmed, or the bulb is boiled with salad oil and the oil when 
cool, is dropped into the ear for the relief of earache. 

Aloe Yera, B. P., A. ChlnensiB, B. P., and other species. 

Habitat. — India, Dutch West India Islands, Barbadoes, Curacoa. 

Parts used, — The juice flowing from the transversely cut leaves, 
and evaporated to dryness. Aloe Barbadensis — Barbados aloes, B.P., 
sometimes found adulterated with akakia and babul gum. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Naba tussibr, sabar or sibar. Burm. — Sha- 
zavu-le-pa. Can. — Lola sara. Cing. — Komarika. Duk. — Kalbanda. 
Eng. — Hepatic Aloes. Hind., Guz. — Kumar-Kuvara. Malyal. — 
Katru-vazha. Bomb., Mar. — Kora-kanda. Pers. — Darakhte sibr. 
Sans. — Kumari. Tam. — Shotu katraz lai. Tel. — Kaiabanda. 

Aloes Indica, A. Abyssinioa, A. Perfoliata. 

Habitat. — Africa, India, Abyssinia. 

Parts used, — The expressed inspissated and dried juice of the 
leaves. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Sibar, Sahar, musabbar. Beng. — Gherto- 
kumari. Burm. — Mok. Can. — Kumarika. Chin.-^hin-hiang 
Cing. — Kumarilla. Duk. — Kanwar. Eng. — Bitter aloes, Indian aloes. 
Guz.. — Aba Elva. Hind. — Ban-ushtaki. Malyal.— Alivah. Pers. — 
Bol Shiah. Tam. — Karia bulan. Tel. — Mussambram. 

Aloes Perryi, B.P., and other speoies. 

Habitat. — Isle of Socotra, Eastern coast of Africa, near the Red 
Sea. 

Parts used. — The juice flowing from transversely cut leaves, 
inspissated by heat or solidified without the aid of heat — Aloe socotrina 
B. P., soctrine aloes, Zanzibar aloes, Bombay aloes. 

Vernacular, — Hind. — Ban-ushtaki, Ghi-kumar. Panj. — Kwar 
Gondal, masti. Tam. — Sirru kattalay. 

Varieties. — Aloes Litoralis — Sea-side aloe, known as Kumari 
(Beng.), Chota Kamvar (Duk.). 

Arabian aloes — Ya mani, or Moka, or Aden aloes, yielded by 
Aloes Indica ; it is of a blackish colour, shining on the surface, porous 
and translucent ; when held before the sunlight the colour cnanges 



ALOE^ PKRRYl. 



609 



"to red. It is aho knowti as Bandhano Eliyoand Petino Eltyo* The 
former is mixt-d with stone, clay, &c., and i"^ wrapped up in mats. 
The latter i^ clean and is packed in boxes. Cape atoes is yielded by 
Aloes Spicala, 

Characters, — The plant has orange coloured flowers, and resem* 
bles the century plant, or Agave Americana. Leaves succulent^ thick, 
flat, and fleshy* broad at the base, tapering at the apex, and spiny at 
their margins; colour generally greenish yellow. The juice when fresh 
is thick, mucilaginous, transparent or yellow ; generally found in 
central part of leaves, in ducts near the margins or from 
parallel brownish green vessels found beneath the ef)idermis of the 
leaves. Aloes (or dry inspis^^ated juice) is met with in opaque brown 
powder or in ttiasses or in translucent thin slices: sometimes soft, of a 
Dright golden yellow colour, and breaking wilh asmooth waxy or glassy 
fracture, not conchoidal ; when scraped and powdered, of a bright golden 
yellow colour ; odour peculiar,* disagreeable and saffron like ; taste 
nauseous, very bitter, slightly aromatic and very persistent; entirely 
soluble in alcohol, diluted with half its volume of water, in water (i 
ill 1 or 3)» Dose, 2 to 5 grs. 

Oim(itueuts,—A\o\n ; resins 30 to 50 px,, volatile oil and ash I 
p.c, also aloetic and chrysanunic acids. The odour is due to the 
vcjlatile tul. Aloin, B. P.^ — a neutral active principle ; to obtain it 
digest aloes in alcohol^ boil, filter and crystallize. Occurs in tufts of 
yellow acicubr cTystals without any odour ; the taste is like that of 
aloes; sparingly soluble in cold water, and acetic ether, more soluble in 
alcohol* freely so in hot liquids, nearly insoluble in ether. Dose, ^ to 2 
grs, Aloin \% named as ScKiiloin, Barbaloin, Nataloin and Zajialoin, 
according as it is obtained from Socotrina, Barbadoes, Natal and 
Zanzibar. 

The f>urgati\e properties of aloes are due to this principle. 
The activity of aloin is increased by giving it with an alkali, presumably 
to decompse it. Aloin in itself is not an active purgative, but becomes 
decomposed m tlie intestines into a rnorc active body, hence its 
slowness of action. 

Prt/>aniUons,—Of aloiu — Pilula Aloin Compost ta^ontains 
aloin, extract of nux vomica, sulphate of iron, myrrh and soap, 
of each ^ gr, ; also wilh ipecacuanha J^ gr. and of extract o! 
belladonna i gr, for constipation. Dose, 2 to 4 grs ; Pilula Aloin 
Sirychninae et Belladomuc contains aloin ^ gr., strychnine i\ gr. 
extract belladonna J gr. in each, make i pill. Formalom, a compound 
of aloin with formaldehyde. In yellow amorphous powder without any 
taste, insoluble in water. Of Aloes Extractum Aloes Barbadenais, B. P, 
Duse 1 to 4 grs. Pilula aloes Barbadensis, B. P. Dose, 4 to 8 grs. Pilula 
Aloes et MyrrhiXj B. P. (4 in 9)- Socotrine aloes 2, myrrh i, syrup of 
glucose ij Dose, 4 to H grs. Pilula Aloes et Asafetidae B. P* 
( I in 4). Dose, 4 to 8 grs. Wine. Dose, 1 to 2 fld. drs. Tinctura 
Aloes, B. P. ( I of extract in 40), Dose, i to 2 fld. drs* 
Enema. Tinctura Beuxoint Composita, Friars^ Balsam, (1 in 60). 
Dose, I to I dr. Pilula Rhei Composita B. P. — ^Rhubarb 48, aloes 
3b, myrrh 24, hard ^oap 24, oil of peppermint 3, syrup of 

31J 



6lO ASAGR^A OFFICINALIS. 

glucose 44, contains aloes ^ of its weight. Dose, 4 to 8 grs. Extractum 
Colocynthidis compositum. P. B. Dose, 2 to 8 grs. Decoctum 
aloes compositum, B P., Compound decoction, contains extract 
of Barbadoes aloes J^ ounce, myrrh, saffron and potassium 
carbonate, each J oz.; extract of liquorice 2 ozs., compound tincture of 
cardamoms 15 ozs.; distilled water to make 50 ozs. Dose, ^ to 2 fld. ozs. 
Pilula aloes et ferri, B. P. (2 in 9). Dose, 4 to 8 grs. Pilula 
Colcynthidis Composita, B. P., contains Barbadoes aloes i weight. 
Dose, 4 to 8 grs. Pilula Colocynthidis et Hyoscyami, B. r. Dose, 
4 to 8 grs. Pilula Cambogiae Composita B. P. (1 in 6). Gamboge i, 
Barbados aloes i, compound powder of cinnamon i, hard soap 2, 
syrup of glucose 1. Dose, 4 to 8 grs. 

Vinum aloes compositum — Kumari Asava. To prepare it, to the 
decoction containing kumara juice 100, jaggary 20, bhanga 5, and water 
50, add madha 1, dhauriphula 6. jaephala, lavanga, kankola, kababa 
chini, jatamanasi, chavaka, chitraka, javantri, kakada singi, behedan, 
pokara mula, each i, trimba bhashma, loha bhashma each i, mix, keep 
for about a month, and allow it to ferment. 

Aciioits and uses. — Hepatic stimulant, cathartic, emmenagogue 
and vermifuge ; in small doses stomachic, hepatic tonic and astrin- 
gent. It stimulates the mammae, liver and the pelvic organs, giv- 
ing rise to abortion, haemorrhoids, and priapism in the male ; and the 
milk in the female assumes a purgative quality ; in large doses it is 
an indirect emmenagogue and cathartic. It acts chiefly on the lower 
half of the large intestines, and especially on the rectum, producing 
copious soft stools with some griping and pain. It diffuses into the 
blood and is eliminated by the mucous membranes of the colon. 
It is chiefly given in fevers and in enlarged glands, as the liver, spleen, 
&c. It is rubbed round the navel to open the bowels in young children. 
It is commonly given with honey to children (newly born) to hasten 
expulsion of the meconium. It has a slow but certain action in consti- 
pation, dependent upon the atony of the intestinal muscular coat, which 
supervenes upon fever and debilitating diseases, due to old age, to 
sedentary habits and to repeated pregnancies. In hxmorrhoids with 
mucous discharges it is very useful. As an enema it is used to expel 
ascarides. Aloes with myrrh, nux vomica, and iron is useful in 
amenorrhcea, hypochondriasis, atonic dyspepsia and constipation. 
As a local stimulant it acts favourably in skin diseases. 

Asagrsea OflSoinaliB, Sohoenooaalon OflSoinale, B. P. 

Habitat, — Mexico. 

Parts //j>f^.— The dried ripe seeds, sabadilla, cevadilla ; and an 
alkaloid, veratrina, B. P. 

Characters, — A bulbous herb ; bulb ovoid with numerous black 
scales ; leaves linear and grass-like, long, smooth, entire, with strong 
midrib ; flowers numerous, lower ones hermaphrodite, upper ones 
male ; fruit composed of 3 follicles : pericarp, pale brown, and papery ; 
s«eds 2 to 5 ; testa in each follicle, thin, dark brown, fusiform, comprcs- 



JiVa ASCKNOKNS- 



611 



s€cl and wriokkd ; aibuuieii whiti&h and oily ; without any odour 
and bitter acrid taste. 

Constituents* — The seeds contain veratrtne or cevadine, cevadiJ- 
line, sabadine, sabadinine, angelic acid, methyl crotonic acid, cevadic 
acid, veratric acid, fixed oil, and ash. Veratrina or vtratrinc, B, P., is a 
poisonous alkaloid or a mixture of alkaloids* To obtain it express the 
i?eed5 with alcohol, evaporatet add water to remove resin and oil, and 
filler. It occurs in grey aniorphuus mass, highly acrid and bitter, 
irritating to the nostrils and causing tmghng and numbness to the 
tongue ; insoluble in water» soluble in glycerin ( 1 in q6), alcohol 
(i in 3), chloroform (i in 3), olive oil (1 in 56), ether (r in 6), complete* 
ly soluble in acids. Dose, ^V l^ i*i g""* *" * pill with milk sugar and 
gum tragacanth. 

I^rfia rations, — Oleate (l in 50) of oleic acid — used locally. Ung- 
uentum Veratrin;e, B. P, contains veratrine tO| oleic acid 40, lard 450 ; 
anodyne amyl colloid. 

Actions and uses. — V^eratrine is an antipyretic and may be used in 
fevers and acute itiflanimations. Like aconite it is a powerful irritant, 
causing sneezing, a sensation of pricking and twitching of the muscles* 
In large doses it leads 10 vomiting and purging. Locally the ointment 
is u^ed in pruritis, pedicuH, over stiffjoints, sprainsi &c. It should not 
be applied on an abraded surface* Cevadilla seeds may be given as an 
anthtrlmintic. Powdered seeds are used locally to destroy lice or 
vermin. 



Asparagus Ascendens. 

^/lA/A/A— Rohilkhand, Gujerat, C India. 

Farts used* — 1 he tuberous root, decorticated* 

t'erniunlat', — Arab. — Shaqa-t^-ul-e hindi. Bomb., Hind.. Mar», 
Guj£»— Saftd muisli; Malyal. — Shada vcli, Tanu^ — Tannir viitang. 
Teh— Tsalla gadda. 

Character s. — Tubers bhrivelled, decorticated. 2 to 3 inches long, 
and about 3 to 4 lines in thickness, of an ivory white colour, rather 
pointed at bt>th ends, and t%visted, brittle, hard, homogeneous 
and thorny ; also longitudinally shrivelled or fissured at their lower 
end ; taste like that oi salema misari. 

Comtituents* — Albuminous mattefi mucilage and cellulose. 

Preparations, — A compound powder containing sapheda musuli 6, 
kah musali 5, talma khana 3, beja banda 3, gokharu 5, kavacha 2, 
mocharasa 2, kikara no-gunda 5, saniurda sosha, 5, dudhcli 3, 
satavari 3, gilo 5, kakada singi 5, bahuphali 3, sankhahuli 3, 
akalakara 3, meda lakadi 5, salepa 5, nagakesara 2, taja 5, tamala 
patra 5, elchi 5, nishota 3, sakara 10. Mix and make a powder. 
Dose, 5 to 30 grb. in milk. A nuitritive tonic used in seminal weakness 
and ini Dote nee. 



6l2 ASPARAGOPSIS SARMENTOSUS. 

Aciiofis and uses. — Nutritive, tonic and demulcent ; boiled in 
milk and sakara they are used in spermatorrhoea, gleet, and chronic 
leucorrhcea ; also in diarrhoea. 

Asparagas OflSoinalis. 

Paris used. — The plant, root and ripe fruits (seeds). 

Habitat. — Europe, Turkey, Russia, Persia, N, India. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Isferaj, Halyun. Eng. — Common asparagus. 
Hind. — Nakdoun, Margiyeh. Ind. Bazaar. — Halyun. Malyal. — Akar 
parsi. Pers. — Marchubeh. 

Characters* — Root consisting of short horizontal succulunt shoots 
or rhizomes ; upper side scaly and marked with stem scars ; 
below it gives off numerous whitish simple roots which become wrinkled 
on drying. It has no odour, but a mawkish and sweet taste ; berries, 
3-celled, scarlet, of the size of a pea, containing i to 2 seeds in each cell ; 
embryo transverse and albumen horny. 

Constituents* — The root contains asparagin, a yellow resin, sugar, 
gum, albumen, chlorides, phosphates, malates, &c. The berries contain 
grape sugar and spargancin, a colouring matter ; the seeds contain a 
fixed oil, aromatic resin, sugar and a bitter principle spargin. 

Asparagin or althein is met with in colourless, transparent, hard 
crystals or right rhombic prisms, of acid reaction, without odour or 
taste, soluble in cold water (i in 50), insoluble in alcohol. An aqueous 
solution dissolves yellow oxide of mercury and hence used as a vehicle 
for hypodermic injection. Dose, i to 2 grs. 

Asparagin is also found in the roots of marsh mallow, 
liquorice, belladonna, &c. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, i to 2 fld. ozs. 

Actions and uses. — A mild aperient, diuretic and sedative ; given 
in flatulency, in calculous affections, in cardiac dropsy and chronic 
gout ; roasted seeds are used as a substitute for coffee ; young shoots 
when boiled are used as vegetable. Asparagin is recommended as a 
diuretic in i to 2 grains doses in cardiac dropsy and chronic gout, 
combined with potassium bromide. 

jlsparagopsis SannentoBaB, ABparagaB RaoemoBas. 

Habitat, — Throughout India, Concan, Deccan. 
Parts used. — The roots. 

Vernacular, —Arab. — Shakakula. Beng. — Sutamuli. Burm. — 
Kanyomi. Cashm.— Sejpana. Can — Shi pari. Cing. — Hata vari. 
Duk. — Shaka-kule. Guz.— Satavari. Hind. — Sadabori, Bozidan. 
Jehlum. — Sabuni. Malyal. — Satavali. Mar.— Sat vari. Panj — Satavar. 
Patna Bazaar. — Utees. Pers. — Shakkula. Sans. — Suta muli. Tarn. — 
Tamur. Tel.— Challa, Phillitaga. 

Satamul, from sata, a hundred, and muli, roots ; in allusion to 
the numerous fisiform roots. 



rONVALLARW MAJALIS. 



*I3 



Chatacltrs. — Root brownish white in colour, ill length from 
6 in 8 inche?, and in bteadth resembling a slender quill. Deeply 
furrowed and rugous ; on section tough, resinous, or starchy ; in the 
centre a thin, slender and wiry wood, minutely furrowed and porous ; 
smell like that of burnt sugar ; taste mucilaginous. 

Co«s^iiff^M/j.— Contains large amount of saccharine matter and 
mucilage, 

/Vr^flr/itfofi.t»— Confection ; decoction (i in 20), Dose, 1 
to 2 fid. ozs. A medicated oil, the Narayen-tel. 

Actmus ^«i//5ff.— Nutritive, tonic, demulcent, and galactagogue ; 
given in biliousness, rheumatism, dyspepsia and diarrhrifa. In com- 
bination with other diuretics it is given in scanty urine ; as a tonic, it 
is used in seminal debility, and pulmonary complaints. 

Convallaria Majalis— Lily of the Valley. 

HMtai, — Europe, N, Asia and United States. 

Parts useri* — The rhizome, roots and flowers. 

Characters. — Stemless, perennial plant ; flowers bell-shaped, white, 
sweet scented ; leaves smooth and elliptical : rhizome horizonuL ihicki 
with internodcs ; suiface wrinkled and niarkcd willi few circular scars, 
joints annulate ; odour peculiar, and pleasant ; taste, sweet, bitter, and 
.acrid. Dose, 2 to 8 grs. 

Cb«5/rV//<rw/^.— Convallarin, convalUmarin resin and a principle 
contained in the fiowcrs only* Convallarin, a glucoside, in colourless 
prisms, laste bitter and acrid j colour pale brown ; soluble in alcohol, 
insoluble in water, foaming like !»aponin. With dilute acids when boiled 
it splits up into sugar and convallaretin. Dose. 3 to 4 grs. It acts as a pur- 
gative. Convallaruarin — a bitter glucoside. To obtain it, precipitate the 
alcoholic tincture with acetate of lead, filter and evaporate ; neutralize 
the precipitate with sodium carbonate, then precipitate with tannin^ 
dissolve with alcohol, decolorize with charcoal, and decompose with 
zinc oxide, filter and evaporate, A white powder of a bitter-sweet 



Dose, j to I 



gf- 



It contaitis 



leave**. 
to ms. 



laste, soluble in water and alcohol 
active properties of the drug* 

Preparations *^Au aqueous extract from the root 
Dose, I to 6 grs. Fluid extract from the flowers. Dose, 
Tincture from flowers (j in 8), Dose, 5 to 20 ms. 

Actions and uses, — Convallaria is a heart tonic ; it acts 
on the heart more slowly than digitalis and its effect is per- 
sistent. The root is sternutatory ; Jreed from resin, it is a gastric 
tonict increasing peristalsis of the intestines without producing catharsis. 
Its action lasts tor several days even after the use has been suspended; 
Convallaria is free from any deleterious effects, and has no cumulative 
action* As a diuretic it is given in senile hypertrophy, chronic 
pericarditis, valvular disease with cardiac dropsy, in mitral stenosis, 
dilatation of the heart, palpttutton and in weak heart. It is also given 
in pneumonia, typhoid fever, and renal dropsy. 



6 14 GLORIOSA SUPKRBA. 

Draooena Oinnabari, D. Sohizantha D. Draco. 

Habitat — Socotra. 

Paris used. — The resinous substance. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Katira ad-dam, Dama-le-tinnin, Dam-ul- 
akhvvain. Chin. — Ki-lin-keep, Lung-sin-hiang. Bomb. — Heraadkhan. 
Duk. — Indarume. Eng. — Dragon's blood. Hind. — Hiradukhi, 
jaida rumi, Malyal. — Jarnang. Socotra. — Damkhoheil. Sans. — 
Catga-muruga-rakta. Tam. Kanda-moorga. Tel. — Khadga, 

murgam. 

Characters. — It is a spontaneous resinous exudation from the ripen- 
ing fruits and occurs in irregular tears or globular pieces of a dark red 
colour ; fracture dull and irregular ; surface shining and covered over 
with a reddish powdery substance ; cut surface resembling black 
varnish ; very brittle and capable of being easily reduced to a coarse 
powder when pressed between the fingers ; powder red and rather 
sticky ; taste sweetish and resinous, and resembling that of Rajana ; 
odour perceptible onlj' when heated, when it is aromatic like benzoin. 
Dose, 10 to 30 grs. 

Constituents, — Red resin and cinnamic acid. 

Prtf//7r/7//'o;;j.— Compound decoction (1 in 8). Dose, 2 to 4 drs. 

Actions and uses. — A mild stimulant and astringent. It is given 
in diarrhoea, dysentery, bleeding from piles, and in internal haemor- 
rhages as haematuria, haemoptysis, &c. The powder is used in the 
preparation of tooth paste. 

Remarks. -^^hTit is sold in China is the product of Pterocarpus 
draco, and of calamus draco. 

Gloriosa Saperba, Caroallgo Saperba. 

Habitat, — In low jungles throughout India, Travancore, 
Ajraere, Ceylon, Malacca. 

Parts used. — The tubers. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Ulat chandal. Burm. — Sunnu-dav. Can. — 
Radagari. Duk. — Nat-k&-bachanag. Eng. — Superb-lily. Guz. — 
Khadya-naga. Hind. — Kalahari, languli, kariari. Mar. — Nagakaria, 
nagamodia. Malyal. — Mavdoni. Sans. — Langalika, agnishikha, 
kalikari, gorbha-ghatini. Tam. — Katijar.. Tel — Agui-shekka. 

Characters. — Root tuberous, oblong, or flattened, and covered with 
a brown epidermis ; on section white and starchy ; odour faintly acrid ; 
taste mucilaginous, slightly bitter and acrid ; starch pure white 
and of a bitter taste. Dose of the root, 5 to 10 grs. ; of the starch 10 
to 15 grs. 

Constituents. — Two resins, tannin and a bitter principle, superbine, 
allied to the bitter principle of squill. The white farinaceous 
starch is obtained from the root by repeated washings and 
grindings, throwing away the supernatent liquid and washing the 
residue carefully for half a dozen times. 



TOLYANTHUS TITHEROSA* 

Acham andnsiSu — Tonic, alterative and purgative. It increa5.cs 
the secretion of bile and used in colic, intestinal worms and leprosy. 
The starch is given internally with honey in gonorrhoea* The Natives 
apply a paste of it to the navel or over the hypogastriura, to promote 
labour pains or for expulsion of the placenta. With chitraka chhala 
it is applied to painful piles with relief. 

/?rw^/ri^A.— Before being used the root ts soaked in butter milk 
and salt to remove its poisonous properties. It is one of the sc%^en 
nim or poisDns mentioned in the Hindu system of medicine. 

tedibouria Hyaointhaidea, L. Hacalatai Erythronium Indicum. 

//^i/»/////.^Hydiabad, Bundclkund, sandy plains of India, 

Piirts used. — The bulb. 

rcrnficn/tir, — Bomb, — Pihadi-kanda. Eng, — Small wild squtlL 
Gujj , Mar, Duk. — Chhoti-jangli-piyaz. Tarn, — Shiru nari vcn- 
gMyam. Tel.— Cheru-adavi-vulli-gadda. 

Characirrs. — ^A small bulb ivith smooth and flci^hy scales; ex- 
ternal scales dry and brownish; mtcrnal ones fleshy and cream coloured: 
in fii/e resembling a large jaephala ; oduur nauseous; taste very bitter. 

Prepare tiQtn. — Tincture (i in lo). Dose. lo to 50 m**. ; M'rup 
\ to I dr. 

Acffofts and uses, — Stimulant, expectorant and diuretic ; n^^.•d in 
relieving strangury^ in fevers, dysuriat cough, dropsy, &c . u^cncTally 
given for the same purposes as the oflicial variety. 

Polyanthus Tubero&a> 
liiiMnt, — Concan, Bombay, 
Parts used. — The bulb. 

fV/7/r/r///rfr,— Btng.— Pajuni-gundha. Hind. — Gulcheri. Malyal. 

— Andi-malleri. Sans. — Sandhy-araga. Tel. — Undi mandarc. 

Chamcters.--'Th^ bulb resembles dried onion, and has the 
fragrant odour. 

[Reparations. — Tincture (1 in 10). Dose. \ to t dr. Paste. 

At'tions and uses. — Diuretic ; chiefly used in gonorrhcea ; locally 
rubbed with turmeric and butter over small red pimples which 
trouble new-born infants ; also applied tci buboes. It sometimes emits 
phosphorescent lii^ht in the dark. 

Urginea Scilla B. P , Urginea Martiima, Urginea Indioa. 

Hahitat, — France, Spain, Italy and Southern Coast of Europe, 
Indian Peninsula, Mediterranean, Coromandel Coast. 

Parts used, — The bulb divested of its dry membranous outer scales, 
cut into slices and dried, the central portion being rejected, Scilla — 
squill B. P. 



6l6 URGINEA SCILLA. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Basal-el-unasala. Guz., Bomb., Beng. — 
Banpiydz, Jangli kanda. Burm. — Tankast-tva. Can. — Adavi- 
irulli. Cing. — Val-lunu. Duk. — Kandra. Eng. — Squill, sea onion. 
Hind. — Kocudree. Mar. — Kochinda. Malyal. — Kattulli. Pers, — 
Piyaze-dashte, Hindi, Sans. — Vana-palindam. Tam. — Ndri-vengayam. 
Tel. — Adavi-tella. 

Characters. — Bulb round and white, conical or pear-shaped and of 
the size of common onion, consisting of many fleshy scales like coats of 
a browish white colour; each coat separating from the other like flakes 
ofabraka. At the bottom of the bulb small fibre-like rootlets of a dirty 
brown colour are given ofl*. The dried slices are yellowish white, 
scentless, slightly translucent, brittle, easily pulverizable, and occur 
in I he form of curved stripes, and are of a bitter, disagreeable taste ; 
on exposure to the air they readily become flexible and moist. Dose, 
powdered pulp as an expectorant i to 3 grs.; emetic 10 to 15 grs. 

Constituents. — Scillapicrine soluble in water and alcohol, scilla- 
marine soluble in alcohol and chloroform, and scillinine soluble in 
alcohol but insoluble in water and chloroform ; a peculiar carbo hydrate, 
sinistrin, sugar, mucilage and citrate of calcium, ash 3 p.c. 

Preparations. — Pilula Ipecacuanhae cum Scilla B. P. (contains 
S p.c. of opium). Dose, 4 to 8 grs. Oxymel ScillaeB. P. (i in 15). Dose, 
\ to I dr. Pilula Scillae Composita B. P, Contains squills i|, 
ginger i, ammoniacum i. hard soap i, syrup of glucose i, as an 
expectorant. Dose, 4 to 8 grs. Syrupus Scillae B. P. (i pint of 
acetum scillae in 31b. and loozs. of the syrup). Dose, J^ to i dr. Syrupus 
Scillae Compositus, fluid extract of squill 8, fluid extract of senega 8, 
tartar emetic i. Calcium phosphate ^, sugar 75, water to 100, 
contains tartar emetic J gr. to 1 oz. Dose, as an emetic, 5 to 60 ms. 
For adults as an expectorant 20 to 30 ms. Tinctura Scilloe B. P. 
(i in 5). Dose, 5 to 15 ms. Acetum Scilbe B. P. (i in 8). Dose, 
10 to 30 ms. 

Actions and uses, — In small doses, stimulant expectorant and 
diuretic. It slows heart beat and increases the flow of urine. It is excreted 
by the bronchial, genito-urinary and gasto-intestinal secretions. In 
large doses, it is emetic and cathartic, and in excessive doses a narcotic 
acrid poison, causing nausea, strangury or bloody urine, often 
suppression of urine, gastro enteritis followed by convulsion and 
paralysis of heart and death. As an expectorant it is given in chronic 
bronchitis, whooping cough, asthma, croup and catarrhal aflections ; 
generally combined with ammonia, ipecacuanha, asafetida and benzoin. 
In croup it is generally given with tartar emetic. It should never be 
given in the acute stage of inflammation of the lungs. As a diuretic, 
it is given with digitalis and salines, in asthenic form of cardiac 
dropsy when there is no fever, in rheumatism, calculous affections 
and skin diseases. In these it is generally mixed with figs, anise, 
grape juice and honey. Syrup of squills is of great value in acute 
bronchitis where the sputum is tenaceous and scanty ; also in chronic 
bronchitis, associated with emphysema and in spasmodic croup. 



MRLANTHACB4S. 



e>i7 



Yeratram Ytrlde— American or Green Hellebore. 

SvtL — Swamp Hellebore, Devils bite, Indian poke root, tickle 
weed or itch weed, bug bane. 

Hahiiati, — N* America. 

Parta usn/.^Thc dried rhixome and rootlets, 

Characters. — Rhizome uprightt conical» simple or divided and 
thick ; tufted above and truncate below; section presenting many short, 
irregular wood bundles ; roots numerous, from all sides of the rhizome, 
shrivelled and of a yellow brown colour ; without any odour and of a 
bitter acrid taste, 

Omshinmts. — Several alkaloids, veratroidine, jervine^ pseiido jer- 
vinei rubi jervine, cevadine» resin, starch, Jervine — a crystalline 
substance^ not sternutarory is without any taste; soluble in alcohol and 
chloroform ; with hydrochloric acid* it becomes red and on cooling 
changes to yellow ; with sulphuric acid, it ^ets yellow green. Pscudo 
jervine resembles jervine. Veratroidine — anon-crystalline substance, 
probably a mixture of rubi jervine and toxic resin, soluble in ether, 
chloroform and benzene. With sulphuric acid it becomes vellow 
and then red ; with hydrochloric acid pale red ; it is sternutatory, 
emetic and cathartic, depresses the cord and paralyses respiration. 

/^v;^#ir^i/K>/^^,— Fluid extract — Dose* i to 4 ms. Tincture (i in 5) 
8C, 5 to 20 ms» 

Artimts and uses, — Emetic and errhine ; similar to aconite. In 
.small doses as a cardiac and nervous depressant and spinal paral^'^ant it 
lowers the rcspiralicm, and the temperature of the body and reduces 
the pulse force, but does not affect its rate. In large doses the pulse 
becomes frequent and feeble, skin cold and clammy. There is vomiting, 
giddiness, impaired vision and partial unconsciousness* Jervine is a 
depressant of the heart and respiration and causes death by asphyxia. 
Veratroidine is emetic and cathartic, depresses the cord and paralyses 
respiration. 

V^eratrum is used in acute rheumatism, gout, in the beginning 
of inflammatory affections as in heart disease, spinal spasms, pneumonia, 
typhoid fever, nervous palpitation, tetanus, chorea, diphtheria 
and in puerperal convulsions. It requires to be used with caution* 
Externally it is used as an errhine and to destroy vermin. 



Melanthacea or Colohicacecse — The Colcbloum or 
Sorii^ana family* 

Herbs with bulbs, conns, tuberous or fibrous roots ; flowers regular, 
usually hermaphrodite, rarely unisexual ; perianth inferior, white, 
green or purple and petaloid: stamens 6; ovary» superior, 3 ccllcdj fruit 
three-celled and three-valved, septicidal dehiscent ; seed* wirb 
membranous septa ; embryo minute, albumen fleshy. 

//aMat, — Europe, Northern parts of Asia, America* 



coLcmctm AtrrmkiVAtF, 



Prnperhn, — The plants arc usually poisonous, owing lo their 
containing a poisonous alkaloid. Some are purgative, emetic, diuretiCt 
acrid and narcotic. 

Colohicum Antamnale. B. P.— Meadow saffron* 

Habitat. — Europe, N. Africa, moist pastures. 

Patts used, — The corm and dried ripe seeds — Colchici Seniina B<P, 
and Colchici Cormus B.P. 

Characters. — Bulbous, perennial plant, a corm ; the drug consists 
of fresh ones stripped of their coals, cut transversely and dried ; the 
slices are thick, an inch long, ovoid, convex on one side, flattish and 
grooved or concave on the other and of about the size of a walnut ; 
it occurs in transverse reniform pieces, having a short and mealy 
fracture ; composed of starch granules, parenchyma and spiral duct?i. 
The taste is bitter and it has no odour. Dose, 2 to 5 grs. The frc«h 
hulh is solid and fleshy; externally it is brown and whitish withint 
yielding on section a milky juice. The dried and ripe seeds are 
sub-globular, thick and pointed at the hilum, very small, hard, and 
lough, reddish brown and pitted ; endosperm oily ; taste bitter, 
acrid, without any odour. Dose, i to 5 grs. 

Constituents, — Colchicine, colchico-resin. beta colchico resin, a trace 
of veratrine, fat, gum, starch, sugar, tannin and gallic acid. Colchicine. 
an alkaloid, is intensely bitter and poisonous and is a weak base. Its salts 
are decomposed by water. It Is the m ethyl ic ether of colchicein 
obtained by the action of mineral acids or acetic acid on colchicum, A 
white amorphous or yellowish micro-crystalline powder, darkening on 
exposure to light; odour saflfron-like, and taste bitter ; soluble in water, J 
alcohol, and chloroform; insoluble in ether. Dose, j Jj to g*, gr., used' 
hypodermicallv. Colchico resin — a brown powder, soluble in choloro- 
form and alcohol, insoluble in ether, sparingly soluble in water, 

f^f/^arafirjfts.— 0( the corm. Extractum colchici B. P. — Dose, J 
to I gr. Fluid extract— Dose» i to 5 ms, Vini colchici B, P. Colchicum 
Wine (l in 5) Dose, 10 to 30 ms. Of the seeds. Fluid exiract— Dose^ 
I to 5 ms. Tinctura colchici Seminum B. P. (i in 5) Dose, 5 to 
15 ms. 

Colchicine Salicylate, Colchi sal contains colchicine ^\(i gr. and 
oil of winter green (Methyl salicylate) 3 grs, Dose» ^^^ grs. In capsulef,^ 
Dose, I to 2. 

Actions ami uses. — Colchicum is emetic, diaphoretic, diuretic, 
gastro-intestinal irritant, drastic purgative and cardiac depressant. It 
increases the secretions of the skin, liver and kidrjeys, and also thoj 
flow of bile. In large doses, it is a gastro-intestinal irritant, producing^ 
vomiting, purging and extreme prostration. It depresses the heart|{ 
produces convulsions, collapse and death. It is given in gout with 
alkali ; in ascitis due to liver disease it is a very efficacious remedy. In 
cerebral and hepatic congesiionst it acts as a purgative with henefu* 
Good results follow its use in gonorrhoea and chordee. In rheumatic 
diathesis, the capsules of colchicine salic)l:iie art- used with relief. 



COtCHirUM \ ARrFOATDM. 



619 



Cochicine is a powerful poison, paralysing ihe brain and spinai 
bord and is given with caution in acute gout, rheumatic gout, astnma, 
cerebral congestion, and iiriemea. 

Colcbioum Luteum. 

//ij^iVfj/.— Afghanistan, Punjab, Cashmere, and Noriliern India. 

Paris ;/5r^/,— Solid extract prepared from the corm called Haran- 
Tuttha or Harantutiya, 

rrrnamhr.—lmW^n Bazaar,— Harnn Tuliya. Sans.— Tutham 
l^itihanjana. Tutthamjana means collyria made of sulphate of copper 
or of this plant with yellow flowers. 

Characters, — Corms are dark brown when dry. 

/^^/^m//V>/;5.— Extract— Dose, \ lo i gr. 

Achhm (tuti ii^rf.— Alterative ; chiefly used in rheumatism, 
gout, &c. 

Colchicum Yariegatam. Oriental Hermodactyl. 

Hermodactyl means finger of hermes. The plant resembles 
garden tulips. Marandera Persica is probably the source of sweet or 
inert variety, 

IfaMaL^S. Europe, Asia Minor, N» Africa. 

/hris used. — The corm and seed. 
rV//;r?r//Air.— Siirinj;m, 

Varietiei— white or swect> yellow or bitter^ and blaclt ; the black is 
poisonous. 

The white variety— luber or corm thick, ovoid, convex on 
one side, flattened with a grnove on the other ; outside brownish or 
dirty yellow, starchy and wrinkled ; inside white and solid ; breaking 
readily with a short mealy fracture, and is generally found as if worm 
eaten ; taste sweetish, bitter and acrid. 

The bitter variety — a good substitute for English colchicum, having 
bitter taste and smaller size ; the corm occurs in pieces from i to i J 
inches long, i to 2 inches broad, colour dirty brown; each piece resembles 
a shell, presenting two surfaces, one convex, scaly, striped or reticulated; 
the other concave and rugous; on section, pale yellow or brownish white 
and starchy; starch in silvery and shining granules of an acrid odour; 
seeds thick, slightly pointed at hilum, of a reddish brown colour; inside 
the albumen is heavy, hard and tough, of a bitter acrid taste, and 
without any odour. Dose of the corm, 2 to H grs,, of the seeds i to 
5 %^' 

Cotistituffits. — Resin, an organic acid allied to malic acid,colchicina. 

Ptcf>araimis, — The corm. Extract — Dose, 1 to i gr* Wine. 
Dose, 10 to 30 ms. Of the seeds : Tincture (I in 5). Dose, 5 to 15 ras» 

Actions and usts, — Alterative, diuretic, cathartic, emetic 
and sedative. It is useful in gout and rheumatism. With eliyo it is 



620 ANANAS SATIVA. 

given in chronic gout with torpid liver ; also in dropsy and 
enlarged spleen. In gout and rheumatism it increases the quantity 
of uric acid in the urine. It is given with trikatu in seminal 
weakness. Like ipecacuanha it is given to relieve catarrh in 
congestion of the throat and in dysentery. 

Bpomeliaoea— The Pineapple op Bromelia family. 

Characters. — Herbs or woody plants generally epiphytical ; 
leaves persistent, crowded, channelled, rigid, sheathing at the base, 
generally scurfy, margins spiny ; flowers showy, perianth arranged 
in 2 whorls, the outer of which is united into a tube, the inner one 
imbricated ; ovary, 3-celled ; fruit capsular or indehiscent, 3-celled ; 
seeds numerous ; embryo minute ; albumen mealy ; radicle next the 
hilum. 

Habitat. — Tropical regions, America, East Indies. 

Properties. — Some yield edible fruits, other fibrous materials, 
some are anthelmintic. 

Ananas Batlva, Bromelia Ananas. 

Habitat. — Americay throughout the East. 

Parts used. — The unripe fruit. 

Vernacular. — Arab., Duk. — Ananas. Burm. — Nanas. Guz.- 
Hind.. Mar., Beng. — Ananas, anaras. Cing. — Anassi. Can. — Ana 
nasu-hannu. Eng. — Pine-apple, European jack fruit. Malyal. — 
Purithi. Tarn. — Anisa-pazham. Tel. — Anasa-pandu. 

Characters^ — Leaves of a hard fibrous texture, with numerous 
short sharp spines on the edges ; fruit growing on a short stem which 
rises from the centre of the plant ; bearing a scaly conical spike 
surmounted by small spiny leaves ; fruit succulent, of an orange 
yellow colour. 

Constituettts. — The juice contains a proteid digestive ferment, 
which acts equally well in acid gastric or alkaline intestinal secretions. 
It also contains a milk curdling ferment. The ash contains phosphoric 
and sulphuric acids, lime, magnesea, silica, iron, chlorides of potas- 
sium, and sodium. 

Preparations. — Essence of the j nice. The essence is also artificially 
prepared by mixing butyrate of ethyl with 8 or 10 parts of spirit of 
wine. 

Actions and uses, — Abort ifacient ; also given to relieve flatulent 
distension of the abdomen. Under its use the uterus contracts within 
12 hours followed by haemorrhage and the ovum is expelled. The 
fruit is rendered unwholesome on account of its strong fibre which 
acts as an irritant on the bowels for abort ifacient purpose, a whole 
unripe fruit decorticated being required. 



AKKCA I Al-E* KU. 



PalmacesB —The Palm or Sopari family. 

Tree^i ur shrubs ; trunk straight, slender, !»iinple or rarely 
branched ; leaves large, with sheathing stalks feather like and 
terminal ; flawers unisexual, perfect* arranged generally on a branched 
spadix, enclosed by a large boat-shaped spathe ; perianth inferior, in 
z whorls ; stamens 3 or tiuniertius, hypogynou^ ur perigynous; ovary, 
superior, \-x celled ; fruit drupaceous, baccate or nut-like ; seeds 
with minute embryo; albumen, fleshy or horny, often rumhiated* 

Mi^f/^//.— Temperate and tropic il regions. 

Properties.— \{\^y\\f useful b tih fur dietetic and economical 
purposes, Sevtrral species yield sugar, oil, starch, wax, resin, astrigent 
matters, and wine ; also edible fruit* and seeds ; terminal leaf buds 
when boiled are eaten as vegetable. 

Ar«Qa Catechu. 

^-ffA///i/.— E. Indies, Cochin China, tropical India. 

i\iris med, — The seed or kernel aiid extract. 

Vernacular. — Arab— Fufil. Beng, — Shupari, Kunthi, Gua, Burni, 
— Kwun* Can,— Adikc. Cing — Puivak. Chin. — Pinlang-taze. Eng. 
— Areca catechu, pepcr betel, nut palm* Hind., Duk., Mar., Guz. — 
Sopfiri, Hopiiri, Jav* — Jambi. Malay, Pinang — Kachu. Malyal — 
Adaka, kavaghu, Pcrs.— Girda choba, papal. Sans, — Fugi-phallain, 
kramuka, Guvuka, kuvara, Tani. — Pakumaram kottii pakku. Tcl. 
— ^Paka-vakka. 

Characters. — Nut orange colored, of the size of a hen% egg and 
containing one seed of the shape of a short rounded cone, 
depressed at the centre of the base, brown, thick and horny inside : 
on section it presents white ruminated albumen, traversea by a net* 
work of veins resembling numieg. It has a very faint odour and 
very astringent taste. The extract known as betel nut catechu or kassu, 
o<:curs in round flat cakes z or : inches in diameter, \ inch thick, 
hlacki:>h brown internally* without odour and of an astringent bitter 
t*iste. Dose, as an astringent, 15 to 53 grs.; as an anthelmintic, 
2 to 4 drs. 

Constitfwnts, — ^The kernels contain catechu, tannic and gallic 
acids, oily matter^ gum, arecoline, arecaine, and guvacine. 

Arecoline^ an anthelmintic principle, is a liquid which forms a 
white crystalline hydrobronude. 

Pteparatiotf^ — Areca nut charcoal totith powder. Fluid extract. 
Dode, 2 drs. 

.tctions iitiii tnes, — I'le^li nuts arc iiUoxicatnig and produce 
giddiness. Dried ones arc gentle stimulant, astringent and laenifuge ; 
they increase the flow of saliva, lessen perspiration, sweeten the breath, 
strengthen the gums, remove bad taste from the mouth, and produce 
mild exhilaration. It i> recomnjendcd in worms, diarrhoea, dy:>enlery, 
and ab an ingredient in the preparation of a masticatory of great antiquity 



622 CARYOTA URKNS. 

known as betel. The powder obtained by calcining the nut is known as 
areca charcoal and used as a tooth powder. The dried expanded leaf 
stalks are used as splints. The extract is used for the same purpose as 
that obtained from acacia catechu. Arecoline — its action resembles 
that of pelletierine, muscarine or pilocarpine ; internally it causes 
vomiting and diarrhoea. It is a sialogogue and diaphoretic ; as a myotic 
it resembles physostigmine. 

Bopassus Flabelliforrais 

Habitat — India. 

Parts used. — The root, juice and fruit. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Dom, tafi. Beng. — Talgachh. Bomb. — 
Tar, the seeds ; galali, taragola. Burm. — Thanbin. Can. — Pane- 
mar&. Eng. — Palmyra-brab-tree. Mar., Hind., Duk. — Tar. Cinjj. — 
Talgaha. Malyal. — Pana, ampana. Malay. — Lontar. Pers.— Dar- 
akhte-tar. Sans.— Tad, Tala. Tam. — Paiiam maram. Tel. — Potu- 
tadi. 

Characters* — Fruit of a globular form and consisting of a husk 
containing three seeds, known as galeli. Each seed reniform, com- 
pressed, and containing a jelly like albumen, which is edible, refresh- 
ing, delicious and sweet. The juice obtained from the spat he and 
known as Tada-ni-todi, is a dirty white fluid, of a pleasant and delici- 
ous saccharine taste, somewhat intoxicating. When fermented it 
gives ar^k. 

Constituents. — Gum, like tragacanth, fat, albuminoid. 

Actions afiduses. — Demulcent, refrigerant, and diuretic ; the root is 
cooling and restorative ; the juice is cooling and diuretic when fresh ; 
the pulp obtained from the upripe fruit is diuretic, demulcent, and 
nuitritive ; given in gpnorrhoea, leucorrhoea, &c. ; the toddy, when 
fermented, is converted into Tada-no-daru (Arrak), a country drink. 
It is used as a diuretic in gonorrhoea. The terminal bud of the tree 
and embryo of the germinating seed are used as vegetable, and are 
nutritive and diuretic. The ash of the spathe is used by the natives 
in the treatment of enlarged spleen. 

Caryota Urens. 

Habitat. — Assam, India. 

Parts used, — The juice and spirit. 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Bankhjur. Can. — Yels-kae. Cing. — 

Nepara. Duk. — Mariki — ^jhad. Eng. — Jagari palm, Malabar sagopalm, 
Ghat palm. Bastard sago. Guz. — Ardhi sopari. Malyal — Irampana. 
Mar.— Berali-mada. Tam. — Konda-pan. Tel. — Kondaa-jiligu. Hind. — 
Ram guoah. 

Characters. — Fruit consisting of two nuts joined together so as to 
form one whole sopari ; when separated, each nut resembles in 
shape a common sopari cut into two pieces. It is of a chestnut colour, 



lOCOS NUttl-BKA 



6*3 



^billing and smooth ; exiernally marked with reticulations or ribs, 
which proceed from aii attachment at the base undjoin at the top. 

CousHluents — Palm sugar. 

Prepamttons. — Palm juice and palm wine. Confection^ sago> — 
(rem the trunk, 

Actiofta (tftd tmes. — The natives use it us a paste to apply to the fore- 

^head in hemicrania. As an aphordisiac the confection is used in 

Sirminal weakness and urinary disorders The juice is used as palm 

toddy. Khoti aradhi sopari (fictitious) is nothing more than a common 

severadhani sopari cleveily glazed so as to resemble Bhirali mada. 

Coooft Nucifera, Palma Indica Major. 

Nabitiit, — The Tropics, Indian Archi^^elago, coasts uf India* 

Pitrb /u^f/.— Tl;e flowers, root, fruit, oil, and ash ; the fruit contains 
shell, juice and kernel. 

I'erntKuiar. — Arab.— Jouz-i-hindi, shajratun, narjiU dhonun. 
Beng — Narikal. Burm. — Onsipin. Can.— Theinghana. Ciii — Tarn- 
bill, polnawasi. Chin,— Yetaze. Eng. — Cocoanut. Hind., Duk.Gux^ 
Mar.— Koperu, Nariel. Malay.— Kalapa Nur. Maleal — Tcnga Pers.^ — 
Diakhle-b;iding Suns.^ — Nankela, Punga, Trinuraja, Skandhaiaru 
Dur arasha, dndhaphalj ra^aphaU Nankela, Narckera, kurcha sekharu. 
Tani. — Ten an cheddi, Tel.— Gujju-Narekadum. 

The dry ktrnei— Hind , Guz,, Bomb., Kepparun. Can.— Koharu 
Malyal— Kapera Tam— Kobharait tengay. TeL— Kohera tanquaia 

The juice— Eng*— Cocoanut toddy, palm wine, Arab. — Ganje. 
narjilli Duk — Narillika-pani. Guz. — Nariel -nu-pani. Tarn, — 
Tennaur-kallu. Tel— 'fenkayia. 

Chanu'Urs — Cocoanut (formerly written coconut) is the name deriv- 
ed from the Portuguese coco> a ma^k ; in allusion to its having three 
lioles which make it rcsemblt: ihe head and face of a cat. The fruit con- 
sists of a husk or fibrous portion ol the pericarp ; coir or cocoanut fibres 
are obtained from the husk, which is thick, tough and fibrous ; shell 
uval or ovate, very hard or ivory-like^ and of a dirty red colour. On 
exposure tu the air it becomes dark brown ; cocoanut or kopurun, is 
fleshy, albuminous, and oily, of a globular, oval, or ovate form, epider- 
mis brownish red ; interior of a pure white colour. Juice within 
the albumen is a liquid portion known as cocoanut milk. The fruits 
are of 3 kinds : (i) Nalier ; [2) The miniature sued khakhota j (3) The 
immaturi; ones known as shiala or kakro. In the third variety the 
shell is less hard. Kernel soft, jelly-like, and very sweet, and contains 
a clear fluid known as cocoanut milk (kakaranu-pani), of a sweetish 
taste and without any odour. In one variety of cocoanut, the 
milky juice solidifies and is known as pushpa. Jaggary is an 
impure sugar obtained from the juice uhith oo^jes out when the 
spathes, stems, or the neighbouring parts of the tree are injured* The 
fresh juice is known as Naliera-ni*taddy winch, when fermen ted | pro- 
duces vinegar and a kind of spirit known as arrack. 



da 



mm^ 



624 tX>DOICEA SKYCHELLAKUM. 

Constituciits. — The fresh kernel contains nitrogenous substanc e, 
fat, lignin, ash, palm sugar, and inorganic substances. 

Preparations, — The oil from the shell and kernel ; juice, paste and 
confection. 

Oleum cocos — It is a fixed oil expressed from palm seed. It is 
a white, watery liquid, semisolid or of the consistence of butter ;the oil 
from shell (Katlinutel), is prepared by burning the shells over a fire 
and the oil collected. The oil so obtained is of a dark colour and 
has a smell resembling that of dammar. The concrete oil is extensively 
employed for making candles, soap and pomatum. It congeals at a low 
temperature into a white, buttery, concrete mass. The odour is 
unplesant and it soon becomes rancid. The oleine obtained by pressure 
from the crude oil and purified is used in place of cod liver oil. 

Actions and uses, — Cocoanut milk — refrigerant, nutrient, aperient 9 
diuretic and anthelmintic. Nariela-nu-pani is cooling, refri- 
gerant, demulcent and in large doses aperient. The oil is used 
as a substitute for cod liver oil in debility and phthisis, but is not so 
very digestible. An inunction of it to the whole body is used in 
fevers, and to the chest in lung diseases. It is used as an application 
for the growth of hair and to prevent them from turning grey, Katali- 
nu-tela is applied in chronic skin diseases, such as ringworm, 
psoriasis, pityriases, &c. The fresh kernel or the tender pulp 
is nourishing, cooling, diuretic and refrigerating. The pulp of the 
ripe fruit is hard and indigestible. The terminal buds are nourishing, 
agreeable and digestive, and are used as vegetable. The root is a 
diuretic. The fresh juice of the tree (toddy) is refrigerant and diuretic. 
Naliera-nu-dudha, juice of the kernel, with kali jiri is locally applied to 
freckles with relief. Kopara-ni-vati — old and dried kernel is cut into 
thin slices and used as an aphrodisiac ingredient in confection ; also as 
an anthelmintic, it is used in removing tapeworms. 

Lodoioea Seychellamm, Nax Medica, Cooos MaldiviBa. 

Habitat, — Seychelles, Indian Ocean. 

Parts used. — The kernel. 

Vernacular. — Arab., Pers. — Narajile-bahri. Bomb. — Jahari-nari- 
al. Burm. — Peule-on-si. Guz., Hind., Duk. — Darya-ka-narel. 
Cing.— Mudu-pal. Eng.— Marine cocoanut, double cocoanut. Mal- 
yal. — Katal-tenna. Port. — Cocos-de Maldives. Sans. — Ubdil nari kay- 
1am. Tam. — Kaddet-taynga. Tel. — Samudrapu-tenkaya. 

Characters, — Fruit covered externally with thick fibrous husk 
and containing one or two or sometimes 3 kernels or nuts, with hard 
thick black shells, each nut divided half-way down into two lobes ; nut; 
in broken pieces, each hard and horny ; external surface brownish red ; 
covering albumen white or yellowish, homogeneous, and externally 
tough, resembling ivory ; smell resembling that of cocoanut ; no 
taste. Dose, 2 grs. 



PHCENIX DACTVLIKERA. 

Actions and uses, — Tonic and &iomachit ; with lignum cofubrinum, 
it is given in indigestion^ diarrha?a, and for the relief of colic, A 
paste of it with subarasinga and kuchaU (strychnos nux vomica) is a 
popular local application to swollen glands. 

Remarks^ — The shell is often used by jogis as a vessel for holdiug 
water. 

HetFoxylon Saga, Bagus Farlnifera, S. Spinosus, Sagas Bumphii, 

Paarl Sago. 

HahitaL — East India Islands, Borneo, Muluccas and Eastern 
Archipelago. 

Parts used, — Prepared fecula. 

Vernacular. — Beng., Hind.— Sagu chava). Chin. — So-muh-mien* 
Guz*— Sabu^chokha- Java. — ^Sagu. Malyal. — Sagu, rambiya. Turn. 
— Showarisi, Tel.— /aw-biuni. 

Characters, — A small palm ; stems thick and covered with re- 
mains of leaf stalks; leaves many, pmnalc at the apex ; fruit a round iml, 
covered with an imbricate coat, i -needed; seeds abortive. It propagates 
by suckers from the root of the old trees. The stem before maturity 
consists of a thin hard wall and in the centre contain tissue 
commonly termed medulla or pith from which before maturity or 
previous to it, farina or sago is obtained by splitting the tree trunk. 
Starch is extracted from the pith, which when powdered form sago 
meal, or granulated sago ; pearl sago occurs in pearl-like grains, the 
granules are oblong, truncate, hilum rounded ; common i>ago is 
larger grained. When the fruit forms, the medulla disappears and the 
stem is no more than a hollow shell. 

Actiom and uses, — Demulcent, and nutrient ; used leu weak 
digestion and fevers. F'ictitious sago is made from potato and other 
starch. 

Phodnix Daotylifera, P. Sylvestris. 
Habitat, — Africa^ Arabia. 

Part^ used. — The fruit and juice obtained Irom the trunk 
(toddy). 

Vernacular.'— Afzh. — Khurmaeyabis, Tamr-na-khaL Hind., Bomb., 

3eng. — Khur~ma, khujur, chuhara. Burni. — Swon-pa, iwon. Can.— 
Ihurjura. Cing. — Invli. Duk.^ — Paynd, khanjur, sandole. Eng. — 
palm. Guz. — Khajur, dried frutt khiiraK. Malyal. — Kattmla. 
1].— Khaj. Fers. — Khur-mu, kurjan. Sans. — Khar juraha. 
Tarn.— Perch chankay. Tel— Kharjurapu chetiu. 

Characters, — Dried fruit, cylindrical, drupaceous, and covered with 
thin brown pedicle; external surface much wrinkled and containing a 
rich succulent sugary pulp. Within it is imbedded a bony seed ; taste 
sweet and mucilaginous; no odour; undried fruit is ripe, lumpy and 
sticky ; pulp juicy. The juice of the wild date palm, boiled down, yield 
^g\iT or jagary, from which sugar is obtained. It also yields shenda or 



i!& 



tlh 



imitSOA SERRULATE. 



palm wioe, Lummonly known as toddy. Thisjuice is either 
from the tree or boiled down into sugar or termentcd for on, 

when it gives out a kind of spirit called arak. The inntr wood 
furnishes by boiling a kind of catechu* which is formed into square 
cakes of a uniform texture and of a dark red colour* li caouins 
laQnin, extractive matter and mucilage. 

Constiincnts^ — Tannin, extractive, mucilage^ insoluble inaiier% 
and lime* 

Prcparathtts. ^Qoni^cixon. 

Acitnns ami uses. — Khajur i^ nutritive, tonic and diuretic ; used 
as dessert. Kharaka is used as an ingredient in various aphrodisiac 
and tonic confections. Boiled with milk it is given during 
convalescence from fevers and small-pox. The juice or toddy 
obtained from the stem is a good diuretic. A spirit known as 
kajura-no-daru (lagbi) is obtaind by distillation of the firmts^. 

Serenoa Serrulata—Saw Palmetto berry. 

Habitat — Sandy soil, South Aniericj, Geuniia. Floridj. 

Parts used, — The herb. 

Characters, — Stem creeping, brdnthing ; lea vc» circular, fan-shap- 
ed, bright green, erect ; with more or Wb^ ^piney-edgcd petiole (i r lo 
}q) divisions, slightly cleft at the apex ; spadix densely tomenio^et 
much shorter than the leaves ; petals scarcely united; style slender ; 
drupe^ ovoid, oblong ; berries about the size of the olive, dark purple in 
colour and containing a large quantity of juice. The berries are at tir^l 
exceedingly sweet but soon become acrid, giving a pungent sensation 
in the mouth that spreads to the fauces, nasal mucous membrane^ and 
larynx and then succeeded by butyraceous oii-Iike taste. The sweet 
taste increases with the age of the fruit. The seeds are enveloped in 
tough, fibrous membranes ; they are very hard, like ivory, and wlteti 
cut open present a whitc» oily, glisienuig substance which burns readily 
wilh a blue Hame and gives off the odour of roasted coffee. Flowers 
yield a kind of honey known as palmetto honey. 

Omstitnettts. — A volatile oil, soluble in alcohol; and a fixLii un. 
both obtained from the expressed jurce. By evaporation the juice 
yields a rich, golden » syrupy extract. 

Preparations,— KxiT^iCt ; solution for inhalation. The oil — Dose, | 
to I dr. 

Acth$i& atui uses, — Nutritive tonic and stimulant, having fal 
producing property. By its soothing power it relieves tronblcsomc 
coughs, promotes expectoration, improves digestion and increases fat, 
flesh and strength. As a sedative and diuretic it is given in cardiac 
asthma, phlhisib (especially laryngeal phthisis), chronic bronchitu^ 
and dilation of the bronchial lub^s, and is a good substitute for cod- 
liver oil. As inhalation, it has been lound useful in chronic Ojeaciia. 
Like copaiba sandalwood oil, cubebs and kavakava, it is given in 
sc-xual debility, in enlarged pro:itate, in irritation of the bladder and 
urethra, &c* 



^IIUS. 



Acoracese or Orontiaoese, The Vekhanda, Vaja or The Sweet 

Flag family. 

Herbs ; leaves b»i»ail ui MJinttmu-!* etisiioim ; flowers htrnia- 
phrodite^ fierfect or arranged on a spadix with or without a spat he ; 
perianth absent i>r composed of scales which are inferior ; siamenb 
4 to K, hypopynous or perigynous; ovaiy superior, i or more ceiled ; 
fruit succulent, baccate ; juice acrid and punj^cnt ; seed with an exile 
embryo ; albumen Heshy or mealy, rardy cxalbuminoub. 

Habitat, — ^Cold, t temperate, and tropical regions. 

/Vo/ifi/j>4.— Acrid, but the acridity may be Ui^ually gut nd ol 
by drying ux by heal. Rhizomes of some are aromatic and stimulant; 
\^\ a few others, anli^pasmodit » expectorant and diaphoretic ; some 
contain itarch ; others are used as food. 

AcoruB Calamtis, A. Odoratus. 

Habitat. — Europe, Western Asia, swampy places throughout 
India. 

Parta i«f^,^*The drietl rhizome. 

Veruacuhr. — Arab.— fgbir, Ikaroon, Ud-ul-vajja* Beng* — Swct- 
bachi Gora-bach. Burm. — Linhsy» Chin. — Shaichang-pu, Crng.— 
Wadda-kaha, Can. — Bajc Duk,— Gandki-lakri. h*ng.^Swc*ct flag, 
!vweet or grass mvrllcv myrtle flag, Guz., Hind,— Gora vach, Dydya- 
vaj, Bula-vaj. AialyaK — Vashambu. Mar. — Vtkand, Bnl-vckhand. 
Per:*. — V^uj, Ugir-turki. Sans. — Vacha*golf*mi, Shad-grandtra Ugra- 
gantha, Jatila. Tarn. — Vasamhu. Tel. — Vasa, vudya. 

Goravaj— Gora, or ghoda, means a horse; and vaj, a corruption 
of Sanscrit word vaju, or vacha, which means talking in allunjon 
to its fiery or biting properties when tailed. Bi^la*vaj — Buli, chililren 
— the drug used for children is, however, not so fiery. Shad -gram ha, 
from shad, six, and granth, gondha, knotted, the root being six knotted^ 
Ugragantha, strung smelling root. Jatila, having entangled hair^. 
Another variety of vaja is known as Hi ma vale or khorasani vaja, Jt 
is useful in relieving flatulence* 

Characten — Rhizomes tortuous, sub-cylindrical or flattened pieces 
of varying lengths, usually rcKigh, and shrunken ; colour varyiog from 
dark brown to pale brown : one side marked with numerous broad 
and transverse triangular leaf scar* — the remains of leaflets ; other 
side lubcrckd, or marked with ren>ains of fallen rootlets ; interior 
pale brown or of a pink colour, and very minutely porous or corky. It 
bre;iks easily with a short corky fracture and emits a very sweety arom- 
atic, and agreeable, but healing odour ; taste bitterish and very 
pungent. Dose, powdered rhizome, 20 to 40 grs* 

Constitutnts. — A volatile oil, acorin — a bitter principle, acoreiin 
(choline), calamine, starch, mucilage, &c., the volatile oil is a yellowish 
brown fluid, of aromatic odour, and contains pinene, sesquiterpene and 
a small quantity of phenol. Acoriti— aglucoside, is a honcv-like liquid, 
very bitter and aromatic; soluble in alcohol, chloroform* ether; splitting 



628 ALOCASIA INDICA. 

into sugar and volatile oil. Acoretin is a resin like body, yielding by 
reduction ethereal oil and sugar. Calamine is a crystalline alkaloid, 
soluble in alcohol and chloroform. 

jPreparatiofis.— Infusion (i in 10). Dose, i to 2 ozs. Extract — Dose 
2 to 8 grs. fluid extract 15 to 60 ms. Tincture (i in 5), ^ to 
I dr. A compound decoction — contains vekhand, asafetida, trikatu, 
chebulic myrobolans, sanchal salt, tubers of aconitum heterophylluni 
equal parts ; water ten times the quantity of the whole. Dose, 2 to 
4 drs. A compound powder containing vekhand, sagargota, chiretta 
and bitters is used in fevers. 

Actto7is and uses, — Bitter aromatic, stimulant, tonic, and a carmi- 
native; usually combined with vegetable bitter tonics and aromatics, and 
given in ague, habitual constipation, atonic dyspepsia, colic, flatulence, 
and paralytic and nervous affections ; as a stimulant it is given in low 
fevers, epilepsy and as a deobstruent and depurative in parotitis, dropsy 
and other glandular diseases. It is an ingredient of various 
approdisiac confections. As a poultice it is applied to paralysed limbs 
and rheumatic swellings. Powdered rhizome, rubbed with cashew spirit, 
is used in chronic rheumatism ; a watery solution is dropped into the 
ears in noises in the ears. Balavacha is given to children to bite to 
promote teething. Its action is similar to that of soothing syrup. 
It is also given in capillary bronchitis and cough. It acts by setting 
up emesis. Gora-vaja is used as a diuretic in calculous affections, and 
as an anthelmintic in worms in children. As an astringent, the drug is 
given in dysentery and diarrhoea. Like neem it is also burnt as an 
incense. It is regarded as an insectifuge and insecticide for fleas, &c. 
The volatile oil is used for scenting snuff" and preparation of aromatic 
vinegar. 

Alooasia Indioa. A. Montana. 

HabilaL — Indigenous in India. 
Parts used. — Root stock. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Man-kacha. Hind. — Mankand-kachu. Mar. 
— Kas-alu. 

Characters,— l^oot of a very large size, 6 to 8 inches in length, 
and as thick as a man*s leg. When dry, it is in round pieces, brown 
externally, wrinkled and marked with remains of leaf petioles and 
their sheaths. Internally it is white, opaque, and starchy ; petioles 
and root stocks acrid. It contains a large quantity of starch. 

Constituents. — Contains acicular crystals of oxalate of lime, to 
which its acridity is due. 

Preparations. — Ash, juice and poultices. 

Actio7is and uses, — The juice of the petioles is styptic and astrin- 
gent as is dropped into the ears of children in otorrhoea. Tubers made 
hot are locally applied to painful parts in rheumatism. In anasarca, 
canjee made of the root stock is given with benefit. It is a mild laxative 
and diuretic, and is given in piles and habitual constipation. The ash is 
used as a local application for aphthae in the mouth. 



ARtS^^MA TRIPHYLLUM. 



6^0 



w. 



I 



Araces, Aroidese.— The Madannm&ta, Arum or Surana family. 

Herbs or shrubs, with an acrid juice and subterranean tubers 
corms t^r rhizomes ; leaves shcathingi usuully net veined, simple or 
rarely compound ; flowers montt'cious, small, either males or females, 
;uul arranged on a spadix or within a spathe; perianth none*; stamens 
ffw or numerous ; anthers upon very short filaments ; ovary, 1-3 celled ; 
triiit succulent ; seeds pulpy ; albumen mealy or fleshy ; rarely 
exalhuminous. 

/^fi^f/rt A— Tropical countries, and cold and temperate regions. 

I^oprrties. — More (►r less acrid : often highly poisonous ; the acrid 
principle is frcqucnily volatile or decomposed by heat ; hence 
commcnly got rid of by boiling the corm in water ; <<tarch is usually 
associalcdi with the acrid principle, but when extracted it may be used 
like other starchy substance. Under-ground stems when cooked are 
eaten, 

Amorphophallus Campanulaiua. A. Sylvaticus. 

Arum Companulatus. 

Habitat, — India. 

Parts ttstiL — The corm or tubers. 

Vvrnacuhr, — Bm m. — \Va, Bcng.— OL Burm, — VVa. Can. — 
Mulen-^hina. Eng. — Teluga [lotato. Bomb,, Mar,, Hind. — ^Jangli 
suran, ol, Madana masia, Janikund. Malyal.^ — Kizhanna* Sans. — 






Arsagbna- Tarn — Karuna* Tel. — Manchi kanda — gadda. 

Characters, — The tubers when peeled and cut into segments arc 



nown by the name of Madana niasta. They arc of a reddish brown 
lour, wrinkled, and shrunken, Kach segment \^ from 2 to 3 inches 
long and about an inch broad, U is hard and hf*n»<>gcneous aho 
brittle. The taste is mucilaginous and acrid, resembling that of siilma. 

/^eparatihtts.-^Voytd^r, Dose, 5 to lo grs. Confection — known as 
l.aghu surana rnadaka or vrihat suran madakaj contains madan mast, 
treacle, trikatu and plumbago root, equal parts. Dose, J to 2 drs* in 
dy^pcp&ia. 

Actions ami uses. — Stomachic and tonic ; used in piles and given 
as a re^loriaivc in dyspepsia, debiliiy, &c. Piecci of the tubers ire 
f»ener;dfy threaded upon a string and hung in shops 

Arisama Triphyllum— Indian Turnip. A, Atrorubens— 

Dragon root. 

//ah tat. — N. America, 

/^arts NSfii. — The corm. 

Cintracttrs. — The corm is hroadi of a brownish grey colour^ while 
iind mealy within and of a burning acrid taste. Dose 3 to 15 gr«. 

Oatstttttfuts. — A volatile acrid prlnciplci Uarch, calcium oxalate, 
ftc. 

/\cf»amti(ius. — Syrup (l 104). Dose, 20 to 60 ms» 



630 SCINDAPSUS OFFICINALIS. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant, expectorant, and diaphoretic ; used 
in flatulent colic, chronic bronchial catarrh, whooping cough and 
rheumatism. Locally it is applied to aphthae in children. 

Pistia Stratiotes. 

HahitaU — Tanks and ponds of India. 

Parts used. — The whole plant. 

Vernacular. — Duk. — Unter ghunga. Hind. — Jal-kumbhi. Mal- 
yal. — Kodda pail. Mar. — Gondala, sherval. Sans. — Jalad-bhuta, Jala- 
saya, Guccha bodhra, Paniya preshthaji. Tarn. — Agasatamaray. 
Tel. — Nerubudiki. 

Characters. — An aquatic plant ; leaves found floating on stagnant 
pools, obcordate, waved on the margins ; nerves spreading like a 
fan, united in a truncate arc at the base. 

Constituents, — It contains salts of potassium, sodium, magnesium 
and lime. Also iron aluminum and silicic acid. 

Preparations, — Powder. Dose, 30 to 120 grs. and ash. 

Actions and uses. — Demulcent and sedative, given in dysuria. 
The ashes are applied as a paste with rose water to ringworm of the 
scalp. A poultice of the leaves is applied to painful piles. 

Scindapsus OflBoinalis. Pothos OflBoinalis. 

Habitat. — Bengal, 

Parts used. — The fruit. 

Vernacular. — Beng. — Gaja-pipal. Can. — Dadda-hipulli. Malyal. — 
Ounatipili. Hind., Guz., Mar. — Gaja-pipali, Bari-pipli, Thora-pim- 
pali. Sans. — Kari-pippali, Kafee-pippali, Kotu-valli, Shreyasi, Vashira. 
Tam. — Atti-tipili. Tel. — Gaja-pippali. 

Gaja pipali is derived from Gaja, an elephant ; and pipali, long 
pepper. The fructification resembles in appearance pipali ; gaja-pipli 
is of a huge size, and hence the comparison with an elephant. 

Characters. — A fungoid-looking plant, gall-like in appearance, 
and of a dark or brown colour, parasitic in its nature, and selecting 
plants of the vitaceae order for its growth. The fruit, cut into trans- 
verse pieces and dried, occurs in slices of a greyish colour and without 
any odour. Each slice has a central core surrounded by seeds, enclosed 
in a dry pulp of the arils. The pulp contains needle-shaped crystals of 
oxalate of lime ; seeds larger than hemp seed, kidney shaped and 
containing oily kernel ; smell acrid and disagreeable ; taste acrid. 

Constituents. — An alkaloid (a trace) gum and ash. 

I\eparations. — Decoction (i in 10). Dose, 2 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses. — Aromatic, carminative, and stimulant ; generally 
used as an adjunct to various alterative and astringent preparations ; 
given in fevers, chronic coughs, diarrhoea and asthma. 



7EM, 



Synantherlas Sylvatlca—Wild Saran— (Eng.) 

HahtiiL — India. 

ParU used. — The seeds. 

Chftractns,^¥TuM yellou% of the shape and size of a grain of 
maixe. closely set round ihe upper part of the spike j skin tough; 
puhn sL-aitly and yellow, enclosing 2 seeds ; seeds placed with flat 
sm faces in apposition ; te5ta soft and greenish brown ; kernel white 
and adherent ro the testa ; fresh kernel soft and juicy ; when dry hard ; 
taste acrid, causing burning on the tongue^ mucli &ahvalion and facial 
numbness. 

Actions and us%'^. — The crushed isceds are used to cure toothache* 
It acts by rapidly benumbing the nerves. It is also applied externally 
to bruises on acct>unt cvf its henunihing cfTecls. The paste of seed is 
locally applied to reduce glanduJar swellings. 

Taoca Aspera, T; Lavls, T. Pinnatiflda. 

litihitat — Tropical India. 

Parts used. — The tubers, 

F<?r«dft7//rtr.— Bcng.— Vriruhi kand. Burm. — PAn-khade, Toukta. 
Can.— Handi-gedde. Duk.— Biru^kandu, Hind. — VAriihi-kand Mar. — 
Dukar-kand, Sakara-kand. Malyah — Chancv-ki/hania. Malay* — 
Laka-liker. Sans,— Surana, Tarn* — Kara. Tel. — Kunda gadda. 

Characters.— ^o\^\\ nblong and curvtd, luber with wiry fibres 
from its sides. Externally datk broun or blacK iir>d yellowish white 
within. Taste bitter and nau<t;ous. It contains starch resembling 
arrow rout, 

/>r/i?r4? /lb wj.— Confection, 1 to z drs. 

Actmis aud uses, — Alterative, nutrient and toniC| given in 
cachexia, leprosy, scrofula, &c* 

Cyperace®. — The Sedge or Nagaramoiha family. 

Rush-like or grass-like herbs ^ stems solid, without joints or 
partitionsi frequently angular ; leaves with closed tubular sheaths 
surrounding the stem; flowers spiked, unisexual, perfect and imbricated ; 
each arising from the axil of i to 3 bracts ; stamens hypogynous; anthers 
2-celltd ; ovary» one-cellcd, superior ; embryo lenticular; fruit, one- 
seeded and indehiscenl ; seeds with llcshy or mealy albumen. 

Habitat. — Marshy ditches, running streams all over the world. 

Properties, — Cli>sely allied to gratninaceie, but deficient in nutritive 
qualities. S(*me of the plants arc: aromatic, stomachic and diaphoretic ; 
others tlemulcent and alterative; underground stems of some arc 
edible when roasted or boiled. 



0-2 CTPESUS HEXASTACHTUS. 



Cyptras PM«nris C. 

Hahttat. — Cbmp places in Bengal. 

Part% u%ed. — The tubers. 

Vernacular, — Arab, — Soade-kufi. Boinb. — Mosta. Barm. — 
Vomoungie Can.- Konnari-gadde. Cins^. — Jata-makutn. Eng. 
Indian Cypress. Hind., Beng.. Duk — Nagara-Motah. Malyal. — 
Kora kizanna. Mar. — La\ala Pers. — Muske Zamin. Sans. — 
Muitaka. Tarn. — Mutta-kach. Tel. — Kaia-tunga, moste. 

Characters. — An aquatic plant growing in ponds and ditches ; 
tub-:T^ aromatic, of a brown colour, i to 2 inches long, resembling 
finger in thickness, and marked with transverse rings ; root blunt at the 
lower end with a projecting acute point, rings on its lower half distinct ly 
marked with the remains of leaf sheaths. Between the rings the scars 
of fallen rootlets or the traces of fibril-like rootlets are seen ; upper half, 
densely covered or imbricated with striated and scale like leaf 
sheaths ; interior of a pale brown colour, and sprinkled with a red 
powdery substance. An irregular thread like ring separates the central 
p^>rtion from the margin ; odour strongly aromatic like that of kutha 
or gr^davaja, and somewhat terebinthinaie. 

/Reparations. — Decoction i 1 in 20). Dose, i to 2 fid ozs. 

Actions and uses. — Refrigerant, aromatic and stomachic; also altera- 
tive ; given in torpid liver, chronic fevers, dyspepsia and derangements 
of the bowels. In chronic fevers it relieves thirst and heat of the 
br>dy. It is also useful in ascitis, and as anthelmintic in lumbrici. 

CyperoB Botimdas, C. Commaiiis. 

Habitat. — Throughout India. 

Parts used, — The tubers. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Sab. Beng. — Moothoo. Chin. — Tsau-san- 
ling Cing. — Kalandura. Duk. — Kore-ki-jar, Mushtaka. Hind.. 
Gu/.. — Motha, Baranuga-moth. Mar. — Bimbal. Malyal. — Kora. 
Pers — Suod. Sans. — Bhadramuste. Tarn. — Korau, kore. Tel. — 
Dhadramuste, Kaiwartaka-musta. 

Characters. — Root tuberous, sweet smelling, round, black and hard 
like a knot ; culms erect, triangular, with rounded angles ; tubers 
often crowded together, each of the size of filberts, black externally, 
white internally ; odour like that of acorus. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 10). Dose, J to i fld. oz. 

Actions and uses. — Diaphoretic, diuretic, demulcent, stimulant and 
galactagogue; given in fevers, dyspepsia, diarrhoea and cholera ; also in 
urinary calculi and anienorrha^a. As a galactagogue the fresh tubers 
are applied to the breasts. 




liiihtliiL — ThrciughuiU the Peninsula of India, 

Parh used. — The root and oil dii»tiUcd from the roots. 

I 'enwcular* — Bcng» — Sveta-gothubi. Hind. — Nirbishi, Midyal. — 
Motheuga, Peuniottenga. Mar. — Musta, 

Charackrs. — Roots creeping ; culms erect, triangular and leafy at 
the base ; leaves membranous, flat, ciliated ; margins covered with brist- 
les ; flower head^lsolitary. globose and white.. 

/V<*^rtm/iowji\— Decoction (I in lo). Dose, l to 2 fld. 02s, oil 
distilled from the root. 

Actions and uses, — Rclrigcranttdtmulcent and tonic. A decoction 
of the root h given to relieve thirst in levers and in diabetes. Locally 
the oil W used to relieve pruritis of the skin. Internally the oil is 
given in torpor of the liver. Other properties are similar to those of 
Cyperus rotundus. 

PandanacesB— The Kevada, or Screw Pine Family* 

Palm like trees or shrubs ; leaves simple or pinnate, sheathing and 
imbricatedi spirally arranged in three lows ; flowers unisexual or poly- 
gamous, numerouSx and arranged on a spadix with numerous spatha- 
ceous bracts ; perianth absent or scaly ; stamens numerous ; anthers 
2"4 celled : fruits consiniing of a number of one*seeded, fibrous, druj»c» 
iir manv celled, many seeded berries ; embryo, minute, solid, with 
fleshy albumen. 

hahitai, — Tropics. 

Prtipcrtics. — Some are edible ; the juice of some is used to 

pioducea kind of wine. From the male inflorescence of Pandanus 

odoratissimust a highly odorous Aarka is prepared and used u» 

medicine. 

PandanuB OdoratisBioius, P. Sattva, Anthrodaotylis SpinoBa. 

//adilaL— Indict Persia, Arabia. 

Parts HSfd, — The stem, seed and male inflorescence* 

rtrtiacttlar — Arab. — KAdhi. keder. Beng.— Keori, kcakaida. 
Burni. — H*&at-ta-nhu* Bomb,, Guz,, Mar.— Kcvada. Burm.— Vetta- 
kayA. Cing,— Woti kayiya. Can,— Kya dage-gida. Duk,— Katagt. 
Hind, — Kevarah, Gaganphula. Eng.- Screw pine, Caldera bush. 
MalyaL— Thala kaida, Pandaing. Pers.— Gul-i-kivea, kavoridi. 
Sans,— Keteka, DhuH push pika. Tarn.— Talam Talay, TcL— 
Goj[ianji, mogali. 

Dhuli pushpika, means Dust flower. 

Character s.-^Kcv^Ldo — the male flowering spike with bracts 
of a whitish colour, line^ir, nblong, concave and pointed. In the 
axils of these bracts are highly odf)rous bunche% of small whitish 
yellow .nnthers ; fruit of the kevada oblong and as large as a cocoanut 
or pine apple* 



634 LYCOPODIUM CLAVATUM. 

Preparations. — Aqua prepared by distilling flowering tops in water 
(i in 20). Dose, 30 to 60 ms. ; perfumed oil. 

Actions and uses. — Stimulant, diaphoretic and antispasmodic ; 
given in general debility, faintness, giddiness, often with javarasha. 
Locally it is used for the relief of long-standing headache. The oil 
is dropped into the ear in earache and in otorrha»a ; the root brayed in 
milk is given in cases of threatened abortion. 

Lyoopodiaceae— The Club Moss family. 

From Lukos Lykos, a wolf and Podos foot ; in allusion to the 
likeness of the shoot to a wolfs foot. 

Characters, — Herbaceous plants resembling mosses, terrestrial or 
aquatic ; terrestrial plants with creeping stems and forked ramification ; 
aquatic with corm-like stems ; leaves small, sessile, usually imbricated, 
tufted or linear, and cylindrical ; sporangia or fructification in axils of 
leaves or immersed in their substance often spicated ; scales reniform, 
1-3 celled, 2 valved. containing many yellow spores. 

Habitat, — Universal— cold, temperate and warm climates. 

Properties. — Many contain an acrid principle, in moderate doses 
emetic, purgative, and aphrodisiac ; in large doses poisonous ; the spores 
of some are inflammable. 

Lyoopodium ClaYatum. 

Syn. — Club moss, vegetable sulphur, wolf claw, stag horn. 

Habitat, — Europe, United States, Asia. 

Parts used, — The spores. 

Lycopodium is collected by cutting ofi'tops when fruit spikes or 
cones are nearly ripe. The spores are shaken out of the sporangia. 
They resemble moss; they are 4-sided, reticulated with short projections 
on the edges. The sporules known as vegetable sulphur are gijj of an 
inch in diameter, forming a pale yellow fine powder, mobile, repellent 
of water, without any odour or taste ; when thrown over a flame it 
burns quickly with a hissing noise, giving a yellowish white hght. 

Constituents. — A bland fixed oil 48 pc, cane sugar 2 p.c, volatile 
base (methylamine) and ash 4 p.c. 

Preparations. — Tincture (i in 10). Lycopodium being first treated 
with ether. Dose, 15 to 60 ms , dusting powder. 

Actions and uses. — Antispasmodic and diuretic; given in 
rheumatism, epilepsy, and pulmonary disorders. In irritability of the 
bladder, frequent micturition, and in incontinence of urine, it is very 
beneficial; also in nocturnal micturition in children or adults; externally 
as a protective and absorbent powder, it is used in erysipelas, eczema, 
herpes, between the thighs and armpits of infants ; also used as a pill 
excipient in coating pills to render them tasteless and as a powder for 
hygroscopic pills to prevent them from adhering together. 



ANDROPOGON CITRARUM, 



Oraroinaceae, The Ghas or Grass family. 

Herbs, shrubs, or arbnrcscenl plants witti round, convmoniy IhjIIow 
jofnted stems, n^irked with irregular knots from each of which proceed^^ 
a sheathing leaf ; leaves whh split sheaths and a liguie with parallel 
veins ; fruits caryopsis ; seed with mealy albumen ; embryo lenticular ; 
flowers perfect, unisexual, arranged in spikes, panicles, or racemes 
or solitary and no perianth ; stamens i— 6 nr more; ovary superior, 
r •celled, ovule solitary, stigma feathery or hairy. 

Hahiiat* — -Universal ; in temperate and cold climates I hey are 
herbaceous ; in tropics they are shrubby. 

Properties, — ^Miisl of them afford fruits known as cereals or nutri- 
tive grains, Tlie pericarp of some grains, as wheal grains, is demul- 
cent ; that of barley is astringent. Some grasses are purgative, others 
narcotic and poisonous; some are used as fodder; culms and sterns 
of some contain sugar and starch. Some nJ the species yield 
sugar^ and others yield a volatile oil. A powder made of seeds and 
their envelope is known as flour. The pericarp when separately 
collected is known as chaff or husk. B}^ incineration a kind of ash is 
produced which contains iron, silica, alumina, lime, magnesia, $lc. 
Silica is the most abundant of all. The existence of silica accounts for 
the slow decomposition of seeds under water, and for the use of their 
ashes for polishing wood and marble^ 

Andropogon Citrarum, A. SchcBnanthus, 
Cymbopogon Schcenanthus. 

flahitat. — Eastern Archipelago, Ceyloni throughout India* 
, Western (i hauls, 

Part used, — The essential oilj the herb, 

Vernaculars* — Beng. — Agiy4*ghns. Burm«— Mikkothu. Can. — 
' Parimalada-ganjani, Cing, — Pengiri-mang, Duk.^ — Masaleh-kA* 
atr, Eng.— Sweet ru!»h, lemon grass, ginger grass, oil of 
verbena, oil of Indian Melissa, Kosx oih Hind., Guz.— Gharula- 
bela, Java. — ^Sirch. Malyal. — Sambhara-pulla. Mar.— Sugundhi. 
Pers — Gourgia» Kolnshogavat, Sans, — Devajugdhaka ; Malatrina 
Kang, Gandha Khcda ; Sugandba Rfihisha, Bhy^trina. Tanv^ — 
Sakanaru Teh— Chippagaddi. 

C/wn/t/rr^,^ Leaves green or glaucous, linear, lanceolate and very 
long ; in breadth from i inch to 2 inches, keeled or channelled and 
striated ; margins sharply ciliated ; under surface markedly scabrous, 
due to very small, minute white hairs, which are slantingly arranged, 
their lops being directed upwards ; upper surface of the leaf, irom 
below upwards smooth to the touch, and scabrous irom ?^ - -* 
downwards ; taste pungent, smell, agreeable and ]cmon*like 
presence of volatile oil. The oil is obtained by fnaccr&i 
in sweet oil and expoiiing to the sun. 



636 ANDROPOGON MARTINI. 

Constituents. — The volatile oil — lemon grass oil, oil of verbena, 
Indian Melissa oil, contains citrol and is obtained by distillation from 
the fresh plant. The oil is of a pale sherry colour, and of a pungent 
and agreeable taste, approaching that of ginger. Dose, 2 to 6 ms. 

Preparations. — Infusion of the leaves (i in 20). Dose, 2 to 6 drs. 

Actions and //^^j.— Stimulant, diaphoretic, antispasmodic and 
carminative. The infusion of the leaves with phudino, mire and 
suntha is much used by the natives in colic, fever, flatulent affections 
of the bowels, gastric irritability, catarrh, and in dysmenorrhoea. It 
is also used as a fumigatory. The oil is used as a carminative and 
stimulant in cholera to arrest vomiting ; externally as an embrocation 
in chronic rheumatism, neuralgias, sprains and other affections. 

Andropogon, Laniger. 

Habitat, — N. India, Arabia, S. Africa, Tibet. 

Parts used, — The plant. 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Kilal-el-Marmun, Iz khir. Beng. — Karan- 
kush. Hind. — Ushirbhed. Asha, khara. Guz., Mar.— Jvara-na- 
kusha, Pivala-vala. Pers. — Karanch-i-dashti. Sans. — Ushira, 
Lamajjak, Dirgha mulaka. 

Characters, — Roots hidden in the ground, slender, brown, and 
knotty, and like valo giving off many long fibrillae ; surface rugous 
and marked with traces or rings of fallen leaf sheaths ; cut portion of 
a deep brown colour; odour resembling that of caraway ; leaves, linear, 
lanceolate and of a pale brown colour, smooth on both surfaces, striated, 
but not channelled at their insertion to the stem ; leaf sheath slightly 
hairy ; odour when rubbed between the hands is like rose or like that 
of the root ; taste aromatic, bitter and acrid. 

Constituents, — The grass contains an essential oil. 

Preparations, — Infusion (i in 40). Dose, i to 2 fld. ozs. 

Actions and uses, — Tonic, stimulant, diaphoretic and carminative; 
given in fever, in enlarged glands, dyspepsia, hysteria, and cough. 
A paste of the roots is used as an inunction to the body in fevers. 

Andropogon Martini, A. Calamus Aromaticus, 
A. Pachnodes. 

Habitat. — Indian Peninsula, Ceylon, Burma, Western Ghats. 

Parts used, — The essential oil. 

Vernacular, — Beng. — Gandha-bena. Burm. — Mik-ko-thu. Cing. 
— Pengiri-niana. Duk. — Rousa-ka-attar. Eng.— Grass oil of 
Nemaur, roosa gra5s oil, geramol, Turkish essence of geranium. 
Hind. — Merchya-gandh kubel. ganjni. Malyal. — Sireku. Mar.— Rasa- 
sugandhi, rohishe. Pers— Gour-gia. Sans. — Rhustrina, Mula trina 
kang, Bhustrina. Tam. — Kamak-sha-pillu. Chor-pillu. Tel. — Kamachi 
— kassuvu. 



ANDROPDGON NARDUS, 



hnrncters. — Essential oil of a pale sherry colour ; odour 
agreeable, pungenti resembling that of ginger. Dose, i to 4 ms# 

Coftstifuents — GeranioL 

Ach'ous and uses. — ^Carminative and stimulant ; used internally 
in bilious affections for neuralgia and rheumatic pains. The 
grass is used as medicated baths in fevers to cause diaphoresis. In- 
tcrnally its tea is used as a stimulant and carminative in colic, 
biliouij vomiting and dyspepsia ; other uses are similar to those of 
kajaputa oil. It also prevents hair from falling after acute fevers, 
confinement or prolonged lactation. 

Andropogon Huricatus. 
HabitaU — ^Coromandcl^ Mysore, Bengalp N. India* E, India* 

Paris ustd^ — The fibrous wiry roots from the rhizome (Khu&khus 
grass)- 

Vernacular. — Arab. — Usir. Assam. — Khor. Beng. — Khaskhas. 
Burm. — Pen-yen, Miya-mdc. Can. — Lavanchw. Cing. — Savandra 
mill. Duk.— BiVIA. Eng. — Cuscus vetivert, vetivicra. Guz. — Vdlo- 
khaskhas. Hind. — Bala, Beua-ushir, MalyaL— Ramach-cham-vcr. 
Mar, — N^art'lu* Pers. — I/khir-i-jami ; Bikh-i-wola-khas. Sans. — 
Jalasayah-ushiram, Venimulaka, Lamajjnkamu, Sugundhi mulaka, 
Viratara. Tarn. — Viranam, Tel. — Veda-vali-veru. 

Characters* — Culm sweet, compressed, with smooth nodes ; 
roots fibrous and slender, giving off numerous very minute fibrilhc and 
uf a pale yellowish brown colour ; surface hairy, with a peculiarly 
agreeable aroma, somewhat like myrrh ; taste slightly caniphoraceous ; 
disulletl with water, ihe roots yield a fragrant oil which is used as a 
perfume. 

Constituents. — A volatile oil, a resinous substance of a deep red 
brown colour, a coloring matter, a salt of lime, oxide of iron and woody 
matters. Dose, powdered root, 5 to 20 grs. 

Prrf^aratiuns. — Infusion (i in 40), Dose, I to 2 fid* oxs. 

Aci ions and uses. -^Tomc stimulant, antispasmodic, diaphoretic, 
liurctic, and cmmenagoguc ; given in flatulence, fevers, deranged 
menstruation, hysteria, convulsions, rheumatism, gout, &c. ; also 
used in perfumery* 

Andropogon Nardus, Citronelle grass (Eng). 

/iabitat, — Madras, Peninsula, Ceylon, Travancore, Singapore. 

Part used. — ^The essential oil. 

Vcnmcutar, — Beng.— K«mn-kher. Burm, — Sinug on-raea-si. Can. 
— Khaddi yaune. Cmg. — Manna. Duk.— Gandbel. Eng.— Citrontlle 
oil. Hind— Ganjni-ka-aira. Malays— Katmikashipulla. Saiis* — 
Guchcha. Tain. — VVassa-na-pillu, Tel— Allapu^kommu. 



BAMBUSA ARUNniNACI^A. 



(Imntt'ferx, — Htrh witfi acri^i rhixomes, bmnched, with M.ars o| 
leaf sheaths , stem very high, erect, cylindrical and shining and con- 
cealed by the leaf sheaths ; leaves large and long odour ; fragrant^ taste 
somewhat acrid. The oil obtained by distillation is similar to lemon 
grass ail and is volatile, 

Constituents, — The nil contains an aldehyde, a terpene, an isomer of 
borneol named citro-neMol and acetic and valeric acids. 

Actions and uses, — Antispasmodic, carminative and stimulant ; 
given in flatulence, spasmodic affections of the bowels and ill 
cholera. Dose, i to 4 ms. 

A*cmar^s,^lt is considered a wild form of lemon grass. 

Andropogon Odopatus 

Habitat. '-\M . Ghauts. 

Parts used,-^Tht grass* 

Vertiacuiar. — JVlar. — Vaidi gavat-usadhana. 

Characters. — Culm erect, branching from lower part, glabrous 
and long; rachis, bearded; spikes and pedicles covered with silky hairs, 

ConstitnenU, — A volatile oil of a deep sherry colour. 

Pre/^atatious* — fiifusion (i in 10). Dose, t to 2 fid. ozs. 

Actions and uses, — The grass is used as a stimulant carminative 
lU bowel complaints of children. 

Bambusa Arundinacea. 

Habitat, — Throughout India. 

flirts used, — The siliceous concretions » young shoots, articula* 
liueis and seeds. 

Vernacnlar, — Arab. — Tabashira. Beng., Duk., Hind»^ — Ransa> 
kapCira, Bans-lochan. Burra. — Vadegasa. Cing. — Una-maku, Unali. 
Can.^ — Tava-kshira, Chin. — Chuh-hwang-chukan. P^ng. — Bamboo- 
sugar, Tabashir* Gut — Vans-kapura, Vans-m'i-mith* Malyal. — 
Mole-uppa. Mar. — Bansa-Iochana. Pers. — Tabashira-nai, Sana. — 
Tvaka-Kshiri, Vanas-kapura, Vans-sarkara, Vonu-lavanara. Tarn* — 
Mungi-luppu. TeL^ — Veduru-uppu. 

Characters, — Stems erect, bending at the summit and pointed 
hollow between the joints ; branches alternate; thorns 2 or 3, alternate 
on (he joints; leaves sheathing, linear* lanceolate; sheaths downy ; 
seeds the size of oats. Tabashira is a white siliceous concrete crystalline 
substance, irregularly shaped, light, soft and brittle; pieces of an opaque 
white or greyisli wiiite culour; larger pieces an inch in diameter, 
concavo-convex, and resembling m appearance the joints of the femailr 
bamboo, within whoj^e hollows these deposits take place ; taste sv 
adn cooling. It readily imbibes volatile and fat oils, wJ. 
produce an opacity; with uils tinted with acetate of copper, sulphuric or 
m^VxL .iLid, labashir as>umt;i the colours of emeral. rub\ . tupa^ ^c. 



CTNODON DACTYLON. 



*39 



UornFfHents. — Tabashir contains silica 70 or i^iliciura as hydrate 
cjf silicic acid, per oxide of iron, potash^ lime and alumina. 

Pi^eparaiififis^ — Decoction of leaves and of bamboo joints (1 in 20). 
Dose» 1 to 2 rtd. ozs. — a compound powder. Sitopaladi Churana, 
containing tabashir 8 parts, long pepper 4 parts, c^irdamonis 2, cinna- 
mon 1 1 sugar 16. Dose, i dr., as an alterative in phthisis and cachexia 

Actions and uses, — The leaves are emmenagogue. Tabashir is 

stimulant, tonic, cooling and pectoral, and used in cough, consumption, 
asthma and fever. In combination with other astringent medicines, it 
is given in chronic dysentery and internal haemorrhages. The young 
shoots are used as vegetable and made into pickles. A decoction of 
bamboo joints is said to increase the flow of lochia after delivery. The 
juice of leaves with aromatics is given in h;ematemesis. Older and 
dried stems of bamboo are used as splints in fracture, 

CtoU Lachryma* 

//aifiiat,^'PWim of India, Khassya Hill slopes. 

Pttrls used, — The seeds. 

Verftncniar. — Assam.^ — Damu Ayab. Beng, — Gargur*kunch 
Burnu— Kalelhee, kalinsi, kyeit. Chin. — J'yi*jin, Oui, — Kassai- 
hjja. Hind.— Sankhlu, Gargari-dhan. Eng. — Job's tears. Mar. — 
Ran-makai. Sans. — Gave dhuka, Damu. Arab.^Dand, Damu Ayab. 

Characters, — The seeds resemble those of Karadi; shell large, 
highly polished and very hard, larger and coarser than pearl barley; 
colour greyish white, in shape resembling drops of tears and hence 
the name jab*s tears; silicious involucre of this grass containing the 
seed is sold in shops like cowrie shell, which are shining white and 
very hard ; kernel bweet. 

Constttnents^ — The seeds contain albuminoids I-7 fatty oil 5, resin, 
sugar, starch 5?^, fibre r?, ash 2*5. 

/^^//^ra/iorw.— Emulsion. Doee, I to 2 drs, 

Actinns and m5<*4'.— The seeds are strengthening and used as 
food in the form of canji or gruel. As a diuretic they are given in 
cystitis, dysuria* &c. 

Cynodon Dactylon, Panicum Dactylon, Agrostis Liniaris. 

Habitiit. — Plains of India. 

Parts used. — The herb. 

/V/7///ci//<jr.— Mar., Hind., Beng., Duk. — Hariali, Durva, Doorha, 
Doub. Eng» — Creeping dog's tooth grass. Panj.— Kliabal, khabbar. 
Sans-— Granthi» sveta ruha. durva. Tarn. — Arugam pilu. Tel.— 
Garika ka&uvu, tella garikt. 

Cltaraciers. — Roots slcnuci , wiry, and trailing or crecpmg, giving 
nff fibres below. Plants from ^ to i foot in length, ascending ; leaves 
small, linear, lanceolate, and sheathing ; mouth of the sheath withered 
and iludded with white hairs. I'lie white variety, whtch is only a 



640 HORDEUM DISTICHON. 

diseased state of the plant, is used in medicine. Other characters are 
similar to those of Olen cha. At the top of the plant, digitate Hnear 
spikes are given off, on the lower surface of which several small pale 
yellow stamens (the rest being shaken off by the wind) and the purple 
serrated stigmas are seen ; taste aciduous. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 20), ^ to 2 fid. oz. 

Actions and uses, — Demulcent, astringent and acid ; used 
in checking vomiting. As a diuretic it is given in dysuria, and 
as an astringent in epistaxis and to stop bleeding from wounds. It is 
used as a substitute for triticum repens. 

Poa-oynosurioides. 

Habitat. — Plains of India, Punjab. 

Parts used. — The herb. 

Vernacular. — Bomb.— Dudu. Mar., Hind., Beng. — Kusha Panj. — 
Chinka, kuri ; mirukar. Bomb. — Darbha. Sans. — Durbha Bharhis, 
Suchy-agra, Yejna blushana, Durga-pattra, vijna, punya-trina, Suchi- 
mukha. 

Characters. — Root creeping ; culms straight, rigid and smooth ; 
leaves numerous, long, chiefly about the base of the culms ; margins 
rigid, panicle erect, linear, oblong, often conical and composed of 
horizontal verticelled ramifications. 

Preparations. — Infusion (i in 20). Dose, 4 to 6 drs. 

Actions and uses, — Diuretic and astringent ; it is an usual ingre- 
dient in the native prescription for dysentery and menorrhagia. 

Hordeum Distiohon (English Barley). 

Habitat. — Java, 

Parts used. — The decorticated seeds and malt. 

The Malt is prepared from barley by a process of germination 
started by artificial means. The grain after having undergone germina- 
tion, by soaking in water, is allowed to remain for a few days until the 
germ (acrospire) is ^rd length of grain or develops the maximum amount 
of diastase-ferment by which the starch of the grain is converted 
into glucose. 

Constituents. — Vegetable albumen, phosphate of lime, diastase, 
dextrin, sugar, starch, mucilage, gluten, fibrous or ligneous matter. 
Diastase a ferment, it converts starch into dextrin and maltose. This 
property renders it useful for digesting starchy food. 

Preparations. — Extractum Malti, extractum Bynes, malt extract, 
an aqueous extract containing all the soluble principles of malt as 
dextrine, diastase, glucose &c.; given in wasting diseases, weak diges- 
tion, general debility. Dose, i to 4 drs. Extractum malti liquidum, 
liquid extract. Dose, i to 4 fld. drs. Infusum Malti (3 in 7). Dose, 
2 to 4 drs. It is generally combined with cod liver oil 30 p.c, iron 
hvpophosphite, pepsine, chemical food, citrate of iron and quinine, 
phosphoruSi &c. 



IIORDHIIM HEXASTICHON. 



64! 



I 



Vinegar — it is an acid liquid, obtained from malt and from un* 
malted grain or anv liquid susceptible of vinous fermentation, or 
undcrgning acetous fermentation. In India it is prepared from toddy, 
the juice of various palms ; also from the juice of su^ar cane and from 
all the sweet and delicious fruits* rice, sugan honey &c. It is a brown 
or colourless liquid, of a fruity odour and acid taste — Dose^ i to 2 drs. 

Marrol— A proprietarj' preparation containing besides malt 
extract^ ox marrow, and hop extract; given in wasting diseases. 

Taka Diastase^ — An enzyme extracted from a&pergillus oryjja, a 
variety of malt. Given in cases of disturbed and deficient secretion of 
saliva or rn hyperacidity of the stomach. Dose, i to 5 grs. 

Actions and «5^5.— Malt extract contains food elements, and is 
nutritive and restorative ; given with milk and cod-liver oil, it aids 
di^eistion and assimilation in wasting diseases^ weak digestion and 
debility of all kinds. It converts its own weight of st^ch into sugar 
and dextrine in 15 minutes. 

Vinegar is refrigerant, sedative and antiseptic ; like dilute acetic 
acid, it is chiefly used to sponge the body in high fevers and in recent 
inflammation and other local affections. It is sometimes applied to 
burns, scalds, bruises, and sprains* It is used in the preparation known 
as aceta. It is a direct antidote to poisoning by alkalies. In tonsillitis 
and in sore throat its vapour is inhaled with benefit. 

Hordeam Hexafiticbon, H. Dlstiohon, Hordeutn Yulgape* 
Scotoh here or bigg. 

MrWit?/.— N. W. Provinces of India, Temperate Asia, Great Britain* 

Parts useit* — The dried decorticated seed or grain (with husks, and 
integument removed), pearl barley, 

I'ertiacuiar. — Arab,— Shair, Hind.« Mar , Beng, — ^Jab. Burm. — 
Muyau. Kng, — Barley, raw barley, winter ur common barley. Duk. — 
Satu. Sind, — Jao. Pcrs. — Gao. Tam. — Baraley-arishi. Tel — Baraley 

biyyam . 

Characicrs. — Seeds straw or of a greyish yellow colour, elliptical, 
long, flat, back angled ; sides grooved, front smooth and greyish yellow 
from adherent palea; ; husk when removed dark brown ; interior while 
and hard, taste very sweet* 

Consiituints, — Fixed oil or fat 2 p.c., starch 60 to Hop.c; proteid 
compounds (gluten albumin) 12 to 15 px., cellulose, other nitrogenons 

[yrinciples, ash, containing silicic acid, phosphoric acid, iron and 
imc. Fixed oil or fat 2 px. contains glycerin mixed with palmitic 
and lauric acid. 

/Reparations. — Decoction (i in 15). Dose« 1 to 3 fld. ozs. 
Actions and wi<:5*— Java is nutritious and used as food by the 
poorer clas^^es. and as canji in the dietary of the sick. The seeds are 
demulcent in the samt; way as Tukhm-i-balango, and used in diseases 
of the lungs, bronchial afiections, sore throat and urinary disorders : 
also in fevers, 
41 



642 SACCHAKUM OFFICINARUM. 

Hordeum. 

Habitat, — Asia, Europe, N. Africa. 

Parts used, — The weed. 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Zuvan, shailam. Eng. — Bearded darnel. 
Hind. — Muchhni. Pers. — Gandum-i-diwaheh. Gandum-i-diwaheh 
means foors wheat. 

Characters. — A noxious weed, growing among wheat ; roots with 
downy fibres ; stems annulated, smooth, often branched ; leaves large, 
sheathed, smooth, dark green, linear and tapering ; spikelets large ; 
flowers sessile. 

Constituents. — Seeds contain gluten 30 p.c, starch, albuminoids 
and a thick concrete green oil. The oil is partly saponifiable, insoluble 
in water and soluble in alcohol and ether. 

Actions and uses. — Used locally with salt and radishes on ulcers, 
With sulphur and vinegar for skin eruptions. With linseed to 
disperse glandular swellings ; the seeds are narcotic and cause cerebro 
spinal and gastro intestinal irritation. 

Oryza Sativa. 

Habitat, — Throughout India. 

Parts used.— The grain, spirit and vinegar. 

Vernacular. —Arzb.—Ruz, Beng., Hind.— Dhau, Pusnee(huNked). 
Burm — Saba. Can.— Akki-bhatta, (husked). Chin. — Tak, Kang- 
mi, (husked). Duk.— Chawal. Eng. — Rice. Beng., Mar., Hind., 
Guz. — Chokha, tandul, bhat, chawal. Malay.— Paddy (in straw), 
Gabah (in husk). Bras (husked). Malyal — Paijera. Pers. — Birinji 
shali. Sans. — Grihi. Tam. — Arishi, nellu. Tel. — Blum-uri. 

Constituents. — It contains more starch than any other starchy 
grains. It contains no fat and a very small quantity of proteids. 
Nitrogenous matter 7*5 ; carbohydrates 975 ; fat 8 ; mineral matter 9. 

Actions and uses. — Nutrient ; it requires some oil and albuminoids 
to make it a suitable diet. 

Saooharum Offloinarum. 

Habitat, — Tropics, India, S. Asia, Cuba. 

Parts used, — The juice from sugercane and a crystallized sugar 
obtained from the juice — Saccharum Purificatum, B. P. 

Vernacular. — Arab.— Kufseh-us, Sukr. Beng. — Uk, Ik, Aka'h, 
ukyo. Burm. — Kyin. Can. — Khabbu. Cing. — Uk. Chin. — Kanchi. 
Duk. — GandJL Eng.— Sugar cane. Hind.— U'th Ghanna, Khulea, 
Kajuli. Mar., Guz. — Sheradi, Nai-s&kara, uss. Malyal. — Karimba. 
Panj. — Paunda. Pers. — Nai-sukr. Sans — Itchu-tunda, karkara, 
rusala, gudatrina. Tam. — Karimbu. Tel. -Cheruku, aru, tella. 



SACCHAffim aKKTCIKAKUM. 



The extract prepared frtitn the juice, when crystalline* Arab , 
Guz.» Hind.— Sakkara. Burm — Saghia Beng, — Bhurra-chini, Bomb. 
— Pithi-sakara, Burm, — Kyaii. Can.— Sakkarc* Cing.— Sini* sakkere* 
Oiin,— Sbih-niih'sha-lang/ Guz.— Sakkar chini, Buro, Hind, — 
Misari. khadi sakkar a. Maleal. — Gula. MalyaL — Panjasira, soola, 
sakar. Mar.— S&khar, Persian. ^Shakkar. Sanf. — Sakara panjasa- 
ram matuy-andica. Tarn. — Shakkarai. Tel. — ^Pancha-dara. 

The extract pasty or rn granules — known as jaggery, piepared frorn 
beveral vegetable substances as sugar cane, palmyra, pha-nix sylvestns, 
caryota urens, cocoanut, &c. Arab. — Land. Can.— Bella, Tale. 
Cing. — Akuru, Talakuru. Duk, — Gur, Tarka pur. Eng. — Jaggery. 
Hind. — Gur» Malyal^Vella. Pers* — Kand. Tani.^V'ellam, TcK — 
Bellanim. 

Characters, — A perennial plant ; culm or rhfzome thick, solid, 
containing white fibrous juicy pith ; colour outside yellow, greenish 
yellow or puiple, often striped and rcscmbhng Indian corn ; cane 
annular or jointcdt s^niooth and resembling bamboo; leaves sheathing, 
hairy, very long, narrow and lanceolate ; from the juice a kind of 
residue or black extract is prepared ; it is a brown fermentible 
syrup which when .soft and sticky is called gCid^ treacle, niolasses, 
and when dry it is called guda sarkara, or khand treacle- The careless 
evaporation of the juice causes the exir.ict to be mixed with litllc of 
burned sugar, and hence the Indian gur is very dark in colour, of a 
peculiar flavour, and slightly bitter after taste* 

Saccharum purificatuni, refined sugar, B P* cane sugar, sucrose or 
s^ar, is in compact snow white crystals, perinantnt in rhc air, dry, 
scentless and purely sweet, soluble in water (l in J), alcohol (i in 175), 
and boiling alcohol (i in 28) ; insoluble in ether. It should be free from 
erape sugar (glucose) and from inverted sugar (glucose and IsBvulose). 
The uncrysiallized residue of the refining sugar is known as treacle or 
theriaca, a thick fermentable syrup. 

Barley sugar, a derivative product ; it ts cane sugar, melted carefully 
and suddeidy cooled, and occurs in amorphous transparent mass, 
gradually becoming crystalline. Rock candy, sjicchjirum crystallizatum, 
also a derivative product in large transparent crystals^ very pure* 

Caramel is cane sugar, burned for a short time ; it is dark brown 
and bitter and contains caramelan and caramelene. Cane sugar is also 
obtained from various species of sorgham, such as S. Saccharatum 
(Broom corn), one or more varieties of Beta vulgaris, common or sugar 
beet, &c* ] also from several grasses as zea mays, the maize, and from 
the juice of palm, birch, maple, &c, 

Consttinents, — The juice contains saccharine matter, water, muciU 
age, resin, fat, albumen, &c. 

Prcparatiom, — Syrupus, B.P. (2 in 3). Dose, ad libitum. 

Actimis and tt^es. — Preservative, demulcent, antiseptic, aperient 
and dietetic ; sugar-cane increases the solubility of lime ni water, 
it is used as food and nutrient to adipose tissue, hence sugar or sugar- 
forming food is needed in health; absence of it in dietary leads to rapid 



644 2B^ MAYS. 

emaciation. It is also diuretic, cooling, demulcent and laxative. As a 
refrigerant drink, it is given in biliousness and jaundice. It is a good 
rem^y in cough, hiccough, apthae and hoarseness and locally in 
granulations of the eyelids and cornea As a snuflf it is used in chronic 
oza;na ; as rectal injection, it is given in worms. Syrup is chiefly used 
as a vehicle to dbguise the taste of various nauseous medicines and 
chiefly of medicines given to children. It is of little value for its 
independent eflects. It is largely used as a preservative and antiseptic 
to protect active ingredient and certain iron preparations against 
oxidation and putrefaction, but not against fermentation. 

Zea Ibjs, B.P. 

Habitat. — Warm temperate climates, Indian Islands, S. America, 
India. 

Parts used. — The styles and stigmas and the fecula of the seed — 
amylum, B.P., starch. 

Vernaculars. — Arab. — Durah shami. Beng. — Bhuththa Mokka. 
Bur. — Pysungboo. Can. — Bottah. Cing. — Munwairingu. Duk. — 
Mukkah juari. Eng. — Indian or Turkish corn, maize, corn starch, 
corn silk. Hind. — Makka, Buttah. Malyal. — Jagung. Mar. — Makai- 
bonda. Pers. — Khoshahe-makki. Sans. — Yavanala. Tarn. — Makka 
Sholam. Tel. — Makka-zonnalu. 

Characters. — Stiff", unbranched, grooved on one side ; generally 
smooth, externally solid and spongy within and jointed ; flowers 
simple ; male spiklets in pair bearing at the summit — the tassel, 
female spike — the ear ; rachis — the cob and pistils — the silk and 
bracts of the spathe — the husks. Kernels, or the seed grains, occur 
in I o or 12 rows; color may be white or yellow or red and purple. 
Styles and stigmas (corn silk) are thread-like, thick, yellowish or 
greenish and very soft, silky or hairy, delicately veined longitudinally; 
they are gathered when the tassels have shed their pollen. It has no 
odour ; kernels sweetish in taste. 

The fecula of the seeds— starch, amylum B.P. occurs in irregular, 
angular, white, inodorous and tasteless masses of neutral reaction. It 
can easily be powdered ; insoluble in cold water, ether and alcohol ; 
with boiling water it forms mucilage which gelatinizes on cooling. 

Constituents. — The stigma or corn silk contains maizenic acid 2 p.c, 
fixed oil (oleum maydis), resin, sugar, mucilage and salts. Maizenic 
acid is soluble in water, alcohol or ether. 

The fixed oil is a viscid transparent liquid of a pale brown 
colour, non-drying, and does not become rancid ; taste bland ; odour 
of corn meal. 

Starch is found in miaze, wheat, barley, rice, oats, arrowroot, 
sago, and tapioca, also in Cetraria Islandica (Lichen starch), in 
the liver of animals, animal starch or glycogen. It occurs as granules 
in many stems, fruits, seeds roots &c. It is formed by plants from 
inorganic materials under the influence of light and is stored up in 
their seeds. 



TRiriCUM RIPENS* 



645 



Starch undergoes many chemical changes ; it is converted into 
glucose for grape sugar) bv the action of diastase, ptyalin, and pan- 
creatine or by boiling it with dilute mineral acids : into oxalic acid by 
the action of hot nitric acid, or by cold fuming nitric acid, when it 
forms an explosive compound. Alcohol or carbon dioxide by the 
action of ferments. Dextrine by the action of dilute acids — ^an inter- 
mediate product in the conversion of starch into glucose. 

Preparations, — Extractum miidts stigmatum liquidum, miscible 
with water. Dose, i to z drs. Decoction — ^Dose, i to 2 ozs. Aqueous 

extract — Dose, 5 to 10 grs. 

AcU'om and W5«.— Diuretic, demulcent, antiseptic and lithon- 
triptic ; also anodyne and alterative. It is reputed to possess a specific 
alterative influence ovtr the genito-urinar^f disorders. Its action on 
the kidneys is well marked ; it augments its secreting power, and 
has a tunic action on the secretory membranes* In diseases of the 
urethra, in vesical catarrh, acute and chronic cystitis, uric acid and 
phosphatic gravel, in haematuria, in gc^norrha-a and in cardiac dropsy 
it is very benefuiaL In renal colic it relieves the pain of gravel and 
vesical itritation, Starch is nutritive and also demulcent when 
taken internally. It is absorbed into the blood and is taken up by the 
animal organism* It undergoes digestion by the action of pancreatic 
and iniestmal secretions, and is C(«nverted into solubledextrine and into 
grape sugar. It is also used as a dusting powder in erythema, urticaria, 
erysipelas ; also as a vehicle for cuenjata* The seeds are roasted and 
used as an article of food hy poor ptople, or ground into flour and made 
into cakes, Makkai is more nutritiuus than rice ; it is useiul in con- 
sumption and in relaxed bowels ; also for invalids and children ; other 
actions are similar to ilujse of sorghum vulgarc* 



: 



Tritloum RepeiiB* 

Habitat. — Europe, N. America, in meadows and cultivated 
grounds. 

Parts used, — The rhizomes, deprived of roots. 

Characiffs-^A perennial plant, rhistome thick, very long, creeping 
with internodes ; surface wrinkled, centre hollow, colour straw yellow ; 
taste sweet, but without odour. Dose. \ to i dr. 

Constituents, — Triticin 8 p.c. ; fruit sugar, 3 p,c. inosit, glucose, 
mucilage, malates and ash, Asa result of fermentation lactic acid and 
mannit are formed. Triticin is a gum-like substance, resembling 
inulin and is convertible into levulose. To obtain it, exhaust the 
rhizome with water, neutralize with baryta, concentrate and precipitate 
with acetate of lead ; remove lead, treat with charcoal, neutralize and 
concentrate and precipitate with alcohol. A deliquescent, amorphous 
white powder without any odour, or taste. 

Preparations, — Fluid extract. Dose, 1 to 4 fld. dis. Infusion 
and decoction. Dose, i to t ozs. 




646 TRmCUM SATH-UM. 

Actions and uses. — Diuretic, aperient, demulcent, and emollient ; 
used in cystitis, irritable bladder, dysuria and gravel ; also in jaundice 
and bronchitis ; it is also given to allay thirst in fevers, in gout and 
skin diseases. 

Tiitteam SaUTum, B. P. 

HahttaL — ^The Euphrates region, N.-W. India, Central Provinces, 
Bombay. 

Parts used. — ^The grains and fecula — amylum, B. P. (starch). 

Vernacular. — ^The grains. — Arab. — Hintah-burr. Bomb., Beng. — 
Ghaun, Godhama. Burm. — Gyung-sa ba. Can. — Godhi. Chin — 
Sian^meh. Cin^. — Tiringu. Duk.— Gehun. Eng. — Common wheat. 
Hind., Mar. — Ghavum Guz. — Ghaum-no-nisha*sto. Malyal. — 
Katanpan. Pers. — Gandam. Panj. — Kunuk. Sans. — Soomuna, 
yava, gadhuma. Tam. — Godumai. Tel. — Godhumulu. 

Characters. — Wheat, a most important staple fooJ of the upper 
classes of people, is met with in two kinds, soft and hard ; soft used for 
bread making, the hard ones for preparing vermicelli. To preoare 
starch the grain is soaked in hot water, to which so:r.e alkali 
is added when the testa is softened. This is next ground under water 
and washed through sieves, the fecula or gahunuduh passes in that 
water, and after a time deposits ; gluten remains on the sieve or floats 
in the supernatant liquid. Fecula or starch occurs in powder or 
masses of a white colour. Gluten b the proteid material of the grain, 
and occurs as milk}* yellowish gray, elastic and glutinous mass. 

Constituents.— \^hez\.tn flour contains all the constituents of 
wheat except cellulose, a part of starch, sugar and a large proportion of 
gluten, hence of less nutritive value than brown bread. It 
contains albuminoids 13-5 p c, starch 68-4. oil 1-2, fibre 2-7, ash 1-7. 
free extractive 6-7, and saccharine matter. The ash contains phos- 
phoric acid. The flour contains nitrogenated principles, chiefly 
gluten or vegetable fibrin, vegetable caseine and fat. 

/r^/^m/rb/w.— Glycerinuni Amyli, B.P. (i in 9). Dose, i to 2 dr. 

Actions and uses. — Wheat starch is nutritive, restorative, demul- 
cent, and emollient. It is used by women to check profuse menstrua- 
tion and in leucorrhoea. As an emollient, it is dusted over the inflam- 
ed skin as in burns, scalds, &c. It also makes an excellent 
binding material in bandage. The bran is used for making poultices. 
Starches- — These are hydrocarbons found in vegetable food and repre- 
sent fats in animal food. They are heat producing agents, and do not 
enter into the structure or into the repair of the was:e of tissues ; for 
the well being of human frame about 14 ozs. of hydrocarbon is 
necessary. In vegetable food, starch and sugar exists in four 
or five times the quantity of proteid material. Wneat contains 
starch in ver\- large quantity. When taken in excess it delays tissue 
metamorphosis, deposits fat and increases the production of adipose 
tissue and uften leads to flatulence and acidity. It often produces 
sugar in the urine. Given in disorders of the stomach and intestines 



AOIANTUM \'F:\U!^TnM. 



647 



as diarrhcea, d3'sentery» in hepatic disorders, in Bright's disease^ alco- 
holism, gout and rhcurnaiism. In fevers, these carbo-hydrates are 
very useful in supporting life and in preventing starvation and exhaus- 
tion due to want of fuel food. Toast bread» which contains soluble 
dextrhie» also milk, sui^ar with beef*tea are very usefuK Grape 
sugar, which is digested starch, may be given \^ith benefit- Pure 
starch is medicinally inert^ and is used as a vehicle for medicated 
enemas and in iodine or bromine poisoning. 

FiliceB— The Hansaraja, op Fern family 

Plants, arborescent, flowerless, generally leafy ; stems cylindrical 
and rhizomatous ; leaves commonly called fronds, petiolale or coiled 
up when young, arising from the rhizome or placed in tufts at the 
apex of the stem, simple or divided into many segments, almost 
cirdnate in vernation ; reproductive organs consisting of small reticu* 
lated sporangia or capsules collected in heap and placed on the under 
surface of the fronds or along their margins. Sporangia may be 
stalked or sessile at last splitting, discharging many minute spores, 
circinale in the hud ; they are arranged like spikes on a simple or 
branched rachis. 

Hahitat. — Universal, moist temperate regions. 

Proper hes.^ljt'Avt:^ of several species are bitter, tonic, astringent, 
pectoral, anthelmintic, and arnmatic ; some are sweetish. The rhi- 
zomes and leaves of some are mucilaginous. The silky hairs on 
rhizomes and lower portions of caudex of some species are used for 
cushions; these are known as capillary herbs. The ashes of most of 
the species being used as a ivasli to promote the growth of the hair. 
They generally grow near moist rocks and walls near the sea. Seve- 
ral spiecies have farinacious rhizomes or stems which, when roasted and 
boiled, are edible, 

JLdiantom Yenustum. A. Capillus Veneris, A. Caudatum, 

A Lunulatum, A, Pedatum, Polypodium Vulgare, 

Osmunda Regalia, Flowering Fern. 

Habitat, — Afghanistan, Himalaya, Persia, 

Farts mat — The fronds. 

Vernacular.'^ Axdih, — Kuzhurat-cl-bir, Shuir-ul-jin, Sak-el-aswad. 
Bomb. — Hansaraja, mobarakha. Cashm. — Duur lali. Eng, — Venus, 
nr Fairies hair. Maiden hair. Hind. -Galmarium* Hansraj, Muba- 
rakha. Ind. Bazar. — R^jahansa, Hansaraja, Mubarkh. Pan].— Pari- 
sosan. Pers. — I^arosi-ava-shana, san*..— Hansa padi. 

Hansapadi, Hansa, means geese, and Padi Pedi, the fool. The 
segment of the leaves resemble feet of geese. 

Characters* — Raja hansa consists of stems and leaves ; stems %'ery 
slender, black and highly polished as if varnished, one or more chan* 
nelled. Channels deep» irregular, an<! nn one side : leaves snuillt rent- 



64^ ASPIDIUM FILIX MAS. 

form, rufous and marked with fan-like veins, serrated at the top 
like coriander, of a brownish dark colour ; taste faintly astringent ; 
odour rather disagreeable. 

Preparations. — Syrup of fronds. 

Actions and uses, — Stimulant, tonic and demulcent ; given in 
pulmonary catarrh, asthma, and as a flavouring agent in expectorant 
mixtures. A plaster is used as an application to chronic, gouty and 
other swellings. Ashes mixed with olive oil and vinegar are used in 
alopecia and as an application for itch. 

Aspleniom Paraaitioom, A. Falcatum. 

Habitat. — India. 

Parts used. — The rhizomes. 

Vernacular. '^Go2l, — Kali-pundan. Mar. — Miiha-puna. Malyal. — 
Kari-beli, pauna-maravara. 

Characters. — Rhizome thick externally, to which is attached bases 
of fronds and numerous black radicles. It is parenchymatous within 
with bundles of vessels. It has an astringent and slightly bitter taste. 

Preparations. — Decoction (1 in 10). Dose, \ to i fld, oz. 

Actions and uses. — Alterative and demulcent ; used in chronic, 
malarial fevers and cachexia. It has the property of reduc- 
ing the size of spleen ; also given in incontinence of urine and 
jaundice. The fronds of Asplenium Leucidum is regarded by the 
Nbw /ealanders as a sacred plant and the priests wave a frond 
over the head of the sick ; should it happen to break it is regarded as 
a fatal omen ; also used as a badge of mourning by the wife for her 
husband, by binding it round her head. 

Aspidiom, Filiz Mas« B. P. Dryopteris Marginalis, D. FUiz Has. 

//riAi/rf/.— Europe, N. America, N. Asia. 

Parts used. — The rhizome. Filix Mas — male fern B.P. 

Characters. — Rhizome, horizontal, long and thick, covered with 
stipe remnants ; when denuded of the stipes, the root is thick, brown- 
ish externally and greenish within, consisting of 8 to 12 scalariform 
ducts. The tuft simulates the form of animals; odour is slight and 
disagreeable ; taste acrid, bitter and astringent. Dose, \ to i dr. 

Constituents. — Filicin, an active principle. Filicic acid, 6 p.c. ; 
tilitannic acid, 10 p.c. ; gum, starch ; filix red, chlorophyll, a green 
fatty oil, a volatile oil, resin and salts. 

Filicin (Filicic anhydride), is a non-poisonous crystalline substance, 
soluble in alcohol, ether and chloroft»rm, and yielding, on fusing 
with piHash, butyric acid and phloroglucin. Aciduni Ftlicicum (Filicic 
acid) extracted from the oleo resin is a white amorphous powder, very 
poisonous ; soluble in alcohol, insoluble in water. Dose, b to 15 grs. 



POLYPOOfUM VULOARE, 



649 



Preparatians. — Oleo-resina Aspidii^ oil of fern : oleum 6licis maris. 
Dosc» 20 to 50 ms. Extract um Filicis Liquidum, B, P. Dose» 45 to 90 
ms. Mistura Filicis — Exiractum Filicis Liquidum* \ dr. ; syrup of 
ginger, 1 dr,; tincture of quillaia, \ dr.; water, 12 drs. In tape worms. 

Actions and uses^ — Txniafuge ; used against tape worms* to be 
followed by castor oil or by calomel, jalap, gamboge, or epsom salt, or 
given with cusso or pomegranate or pumpkin seeds* 

Cibotium Barometz. 

HabitaLSvL matra . 

Pittri& wiir//.— The silky hairs, covering the lower part of the caudcx* 
Penavar or Pcnghawar Jambie. 

Vemacnlaf.^Chm.—Kzn-Hxh^ Scythian or Tartarian-lamb, 

Characters, — The hairs found on the rhizomes and lower portions 
of the caudex are silky, about two inches long, and of all shades 
between bright yellow to dark brown. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent and styptic ; used as an absorbent 
hiemostalic, It is directly applied to the bleeding surface. About 
5 or 10 grains will generally suffice to stop the bleeding from small 
vessels, either cut, torn or laid open by sloughing ; in some instances 
even from very extensive surfaces ; also used for plugging. 

Polypodiiim Qaeroifolium, Oak leaved Polypody. 

Habitat. — India, Tcnasscrim, 

I^irts used* — The rhizome. 

P'ernaculat, — Mar. — Basing, Vandar-basing, AshvakAtri* Bomb. — 
Kadik-pan, Kali-pandan* 

Characters — Rhizome thick and silky, found closely adherent and 
overlapping branches of trees with its large oak-like leaves; ferns do 
not partake of the properties of the tree they grow upon like other 
parasites, hclonging to Lauranthacex, The fern growing upon Nux 
vomica is the best for medicinal purposes. 

Preparations, — Decoction (1 in 2o)* Dose, I to 2 fid, ozs., corn* 
pound decoction containing besides basing, nine other drugs, viz., 
Kaicra Singi, chiretta. ghiis. nitpapra, baelphal, padmini, sonar-wcl, 
Gokharu, and ringani miiku Mix together, prepare decoction (1 in 8) 
of water. Dose, 2 ozs. twice a day. Largely used for phthisis* hectic 
Jever, dyspepsia, cough, &c. 

Polypodium Vulgare and other species. 

Habitat, — Kurope, Persia. 

Parts used, — The rhizomes or caudex. 

Frrw*ac«/r?r.— Arab,— Kathir-el-riyl, Tha-kib-el-hajar: Eng. — 
Common polypody. Mar., Duk.^— Kalabichva, bisfaija. Hind,— Khan- 
kali, khanlrli, Ind. BajEaars. — Kala bichva, Basfaija. Pers. — Tashtiwin 
Baspaik, 



650 CETRARIA ISLANDICA. 

Characters, — Found growing in rocks or under trees ; root 
fibrous, of a dark brown or grass green colour, hard and 
heavy ; surface, rugous, longitudinally fissured, upper surface 
presenting several horn-like tubercles or scaly projections or suckers. 
Each projection is curved about ^ inch long and fissured — the remains 
of the stipes of the fronds ; interior darkish or brownish red starchy 
or resinous ; each piece is flattened, more compressed on one side 
than on the other ; aroma disagreeable, somewhat resembling that of 
opium ; taste acrid or sweetish. 

Actions and uses. — Aperient, alterative and deobstruent ; locally 
used for the relief of rheumatic pains of the joints, for indolent tumours 
and acne. As a purgative combined with myrobolans, it is used in 
bilious disorders. The powder is snuffed into nostrils in polypus 
of the nose. 

Liohenes— The Pathara-phuUa, or Liohen family. 

Plants perennial, cellular, flowerless, composed of hyphal tissue 
resembling that of fungi, fructified in the air, nourished through the 
medium in which they grow, often growing and spreading on the bark 
of trees or old paling, stones or walls or the surface of the earth or 
rocks or trees. They are composed of parenchymatous cells of a gray 
brown or blackish colour, and so arranged as to form a foliaceous, some- 
what scaly, hard and crustaceous or leprous thallus, usually propagated 
by spores, epiphytic, or sometinjes parasitic and commonly pre- 
senting a dry, more or less shrivelled and lifeless appearance. Repro- 
duction vegetative by gonidia or by true fructification. 

Habitat, — They are spread universally. 

/Vo/^r//>j.— Several plants are nutritious from containing starchy 
substances, which exist about 80 p.c, in Cetraria Islandica. They are 
also emollient and demulcent : many of them contain bitter principles 
and are therefore tonic and astringent. Some yield with ammoniacal 
solution a variety of colours, hence used as dye siufts. A few are 
aromatic, some contain a large amount of oxalate of lime ; none are 
poisonous. 

Cetraria Islandica. 

Syn, — Iceland moss. Iceland lichen ( Eng. ) 

Habitat. — Himalayas, Iceland. N. Hemisphere, mountains and 
sandy plains. 

Parts used, — The dried Lichen. 

Vernacular, — Bomb., Hind. — Lahana dagada phula, Kala-chhadila. 

Characters, — This lichen has a high, folliaceous thallus. It occurs 
in irregular thin strap-like pieces of a greyish brown colour ; upper 
surface dark, under surface brownish red and marked with depressed 
spots; surface highly wrinkled, margin of the thallus irregularly cut 
or fringed ; fructification on the upper surface presenting a cup-like 



PAHMRT.IA KAMTSCHAOAUS. 

elevation, black within and white externally; taste rather pungent, 
smell aromatic* When uf^ed as food, the bitterness should be removed 
by boiling in water or by digesting it with weak alkaline solution, 

Omstitnevts — A gummy substance called lichenin, 70 p.c, a 
bitter principle called citrarin or citraric acid 2 p*c. 
Isohchenin, lichen stearic acid, sugar, cellulose 16 p.c, ash 2 p.c, 
Licheninc is a kind ol starchy matter— lichen starch like inuulin. 
Acidum Citraricum, a crystalline white powder, soluble in alcohol^ 
slightly so in water and ether, taste bitter. Dose, \ to 2 grs, 

Pl^rparatinns, — Decoctum Celrariae (i in 20). Dose, i to 4 fld. ozs. 

Actions an<i uses, — Nutritive, tonic and demulcent. As a nutri- 
ius food and mucilaginous tonic cetrarin increases appetite^ promotes 
digestion. It is given in chronic catarrh, chronic diarrha*a, in dyspep- 
sia, consumption srnd other lung, bowel and stomach disorders. It 
has a good effect in relieving nocturnal discharges. It increases the 
formation of red and white blood corpuscles and is given in anaemia 
and chlorosis. In amenorrhcea it causes the flow of menses. When 
burnt the smoke is used to relieve headache. The starch is a good 
emollient. Its powder is applied to promote healing of wounds and used 
as food— its bitterness must be removed by heating it in water to a 
boiling point or by adding to it carbonate of potash. 



ParmdUa Kamtsohadalis^ P. Perlata, P^ Pariatlna, P. Porforata 
Lichen Odoriferous. 

y/«Wrif.— Europe, Himalaya, Punjab, Persia^ India. 

Parts used* — The plant. The Lichen (Thallus). 

Vernacular, — Arab. — Ushnrt. Hunna-i-Korisha. Burm.— Keyar- 
Poen. Can. — Kallu Luvvu. Chin.^ — Shih-jui. Eng, — Stone flowers. 
Gut — Chadila, Ghabilo* Pathara-ka-phula. Hind* — Char^la, char 
charela, Silubak, Mol^-dagada-phula, Patharake-phula. Himalaya. — 
Ausneh-chalchalira, charcharita. Pers. — Dowalah, Hazaz-el-sakkar. 
Sans. — Silavalki. 

Characters, — Thallus of a dirty white or greyish brown colour* 
about 2 to 4 inches long, and made up of numerous fibres spreading 
from a common stalk upon the trees^ fibres flat| generally 
dichoiomously, rarely trichoiomously branched ; surface of the 
thallus rugous and marked here and there with irregular depressions ; 
fructification undeveloped, looking like punched tubercles on the 
fibres ; smell rather aromatic ; taste mucilaginous, bitterish, or rather 
saline. With water it becomes soft and cartilaginous. With boiling 
water it forms a jelly. 

ConstiiuttUs — It contains yellow crystalline matter called chryso- 
phanic acid— identical with the colouring matter of rhubarb, 
lichen in, cellulose, sugar, &c. 

Frepafaiirms, — Infusion (i in 20). Dose, i to 4 drs* decoction 
liniment. 



652 AGARICUS ALBU5. 

Actions and uses, — Demulcent, tonic, febrifuge and diuretic ; 
given in amenorrhcea, chlorosis, and leucorrhcea. As a soporific and 
sedative it is given to stop nocturnal emissions. The powder as a snuff 
is used to relieve headache. As a diuretic and emollient, a poultice 
placed over the lumbar and renal regions causes a copious flow of urine — 
as in dropsy. As a liniment it is applied to the head in cases of 
headache. It is much used as an incense, and also in the preparation 
of a masiM used for washing the hair. It is administered in disorders 
of the stomach, dyspepsia, vomiting, pain in the liver or womb. 

Fungi— The Phonasa Alamba, or Mnahroom family. 

Characters. — Several plants formed of parenchymators, cellular, 
or hyphal tissue. Fruit ification produced in the air and consisting 
of congeries of cells having no flowers. Filaments found intermixed 
with cells, growing in or upon, decaying or living organic substances 
as parasites or saprophytes, nourished through their vegetative struc- 
ture called the spawn or mycelium. They are without chlorophyll, 
variously coloured, soft, fibrous, gelatinous, fleshy or leathery. 

Habitat, — Universal, except very cold regions. 

Properties. — They have very variable properties ; some are edible, 
growing solitary in dry airy places, generally white, do not change colour, 
have compact flesh ; taste.pleasant, contains watery juice ; odour agree- 
able. Many species are rich in phosphorus, and are hence aphrodisiac ; 
some are narcotic, tonic, astringent, emetic, purgative and styptic : 
poisonous mushrooms grow in clusters, and have bright colours ; flesh, 
soft and watery, if kept for a time become brown, green or blue. The 
juice is often milky and odour very disagreeable ; taste bitter and acrid. 

AgaricuB Albas, Polyporas (MBoinaliB, Fnn^s LarioiB, 
Boletus Lands, White or purging Agario (Eng.). 

Habitat, — South Europe, Asia minor, Punjab. 

Parts used. — The fungus on the larch, quercus, and fagus species. 

Vernacular. — Bomb. — Ghdre-kfim. Cashm. — Jangli bulgar. Eng. 
— White agaric, agaricus, touchwood, agaric of the oak. Hind. — 
Gharekum, Chattri. Punj. — Kiain. 

The fungus is of two kinds, male and female ; female being 
the best and having a comb-like or horse's foot structure ; male 
convolute, round and compact growing horizontally on the larch, 
on the stems of Larix Siberica, producing fructification in the air. 
Deprived of the outer rind, it is an irregular piece of a brownish, 
white colour, porous underneath ; it is found of the size of a 
fist or larger; it is light, spongy and friable, but cannot easily be powder- 
ed. In shape and appearance it resembles Bhui-kohala ; juice milky ; 
odour faint and acrid ; taste sweetish afterwards saltish bitter. Dose, 
10 to 30 grs. in powder. 



AGARICUS MUSCAKItlS. 



653 



Constittu'nts. — Re^in, bitter extractive matter, gum» vegetable 
albumen and wax* The true active principle agaric, fungic or laricic 
acid ; also phospbaric acid, potash, lime, ammonia sulphur, &c* 
Agaric acid. — Agaricin or agaricinic acid. Agaricin the resin, an 
impure agaric acid, contains ^7 p.c. of agaric acid and 3 p.c. of agaricoL 
Agaric acid occurs in minute white crystals, soiuble in alcohol, 
chh^rofnrm and ether ; boiled with water it forms a gelatinos solution. 
Dose I to I gr» given to check night sweats. 

Preparations. — Extractum agarici. Dose 3 to 6 grs, Extractum 
Agarici Liquidum, It is not misciblc with water. Dose, 3 to 20 ms. 
Tinclura Agarici (i in ro). Dose to to 60 ms. 

Actions and uses. — Astringent, cathartic and lactifuge. As a 
cathartic it is given in large doses with honey in eruptive fevers to 
promote the rising of the eruptions* It produces large watery motions. 
Agaracin in small doses is astringent and given to check diarrhoea. It is 
very useful in checking colliquativ^e night sweats, bronchial secretion 
and haemoptysis. Applied to the breasts as a galaclafuge after weaning 
it stops the secretion of milk- It checks bleeding from leech bites. 
Agaric acid is specially useful in profuse sweating of pulmonary 
tuberculosis and other diseases. 

AgaricuB Muscarius. Anianita Muscaria. Fly Agaric. 

//abitaL—Ks^mlsch^ika, Russia. 

The mushroom acts as a poison to flies« hence its specific name. 

Paris usrd, — An alkalod — Muscarina, muscarine* 

Characters. — A poisonous mushroom, odour disagreeable ; taste 
burning and acrid. 

Cfjtistitnents — An alkaloid muscarine, obtained from the fungus. 
It JH produced synthetically by the oxidation of choline and ;i5 a 
derivative from brain substance. It is a syrupy liquid, without any 
odcHir or taste, soluble in water and alcohol, readily so in water and 
in dilute acetic acid. 

Muscarinae Nitras, Muscarine nitrate, an uticrystallizable viscid 
yellowish brown hygroscopic liquid, soluble in water. Dose ,*jj to \ grs. 
used hypodcrmically. 

Actions and uses. — Narcotic and intoxicant, A^ an intoxicant it 
produces vertigo delirium, paralysis of the respiratory centre and of the 
heart. As a vaso constrictor it contracts the pulmonary vessels and 
causes dyspnsea. It increases the secretion of the salivary and lachrymal 
glands, of the skin, intestines, liver and pancreas ; it diminishes the 
secretion of the kidneys. As an irritant of the gastro- intestinal tract 
it causes colic, vomitnjg, purging, profound stupor, coma and death. 
Muscarine, like gelsemium, contracts the pupils when given internallv, 
but dilates them widely when locally applied, lis action is similar to that 
of pilocarpine, but it is almost conipjetely antagonistic to atropine. 
Muscamie has been used hypodermically m night sweats of phthisis. 
In inflammatory affectioQs with profuse exudation in eye, in 



654 CLAVICEPS PUKPURHA. 

catarrhal jaundice, acute bronchitis, pulmonary haemorrhage, diabe- 
tes, torpid liver and constipation it is given with benefit. It pro 
duces salivation, profuse flow of tears and purgation. In chorea and 
chilblain the tincture of agaricus may by used with benefit. 

Boletus CrooatuB. Pol^poros fomentarios. Agaricas Ostreatns. 

A. PalmatuB. 

The fungus growing on artocarpus integrifolia, jack tree. 

Habitat, — India. 

Parts used. — The fungus, 

Vernacular, — Enjj. — Agaric of the oak. Touchwood. Oyster 
mushroom. Mah.— Phanasa amba, phanasa alombe. 

Characters* — The fungus grows on the stumps of jack tree and 
is very beautiful and edible. It resembles in shape oyster shells or 
hoof of a horse. It is tufted, sessile or marked with stalks or sub- 
lateral stipes. The stalks are from 4 to 5 inches long, and from 3 to 4 
lines in thickness. The cap is shell like, smooth, and fleshy ; upper 
surface convex and of a pale bluish grey, or brown colour ; under 
surface concave and formed of several layers resembling the rib-bones 
or lamellae. The lamellae are of a whitish or pink colour, separate 
above and anastamosing with one another as they extend below. 

Co fistituents,^ Resin, organic acid and gelatine. 

Actions and /«^j.— Astringent; a paste of it is applied to the gums 
in aphthae ; it prevents excessive salivation. It is supposed to act as 
a good styptic and is given in diarrhoea and dysentery. 

Polyporus gigantius. It sometimes grows in the same localities as 
agaricus, but is corky, hard, variable in size, and highly foetid, and of a 
disagreeable smell. The juice flowing from them appears to resemble 
Iodine paint. They are poisonous. Many varieties of fungi grow on 
the waste ground in Bombay. These are known as Kutard-ni^topi 
(Guz.). 

ClaYioeps Porpurea B. P. 

Habitat* — Eastern Countries, Spain, France, Germany. 
Parts used. — The sclerotium originating in the ovary of secale 
cereali — Ergota, ergot, B. P. 

Syn. — Smut of rye, mother of rye, horn seed, cock spur rye. 

Characters, — Ergot is fusiform, curved, obtusely trianj^ular, three- 
furrowed. Externally purplish black and whitish within. It has 
a short fracture, the odour is peculiar and disagreeable. The 
taste is oily and disagreeable. It rapidly deteriorates ; the deteriora- 
tion is due to the oxidation of the fixed oil contained in it and to 
the attack of insects. This can be avoided by dropping a little 
chloroform upon it from time to time. Dose of the powder, 20 
to 60 grs. 




Cfiusiunents. — ScUralic, Sclerutinic or ergolic ;icid, 4 p. c; 
Ecboline cornuiiiic!, the aciive principles ergotinc and ergotininc. 
Fixed 011,30 p.c; prntcids ; cholestcTinc, a&Ii 3 p.c. Irimethylatnine. 

Acidum Scleroticum— An active coiibiiiucnt, is a yellow brown 
amorphous powder without any taste, very hygroscopiq soluble in water; 
one grain ii equal in activity to 30 grains of ergot. Dose, ^ to \ 
gr. Used as tablets \ to 1 gr. each ; used as Injcctio Acidi 
sclerotici Hypodurmicu — strength I gr, in 6 ms. Dose, 3 to 5 nis. 
This injection is preferable to ergot in, as it causes no pain at the 
leat of puncture. Ergotinina or Ergotinine, :in alkaloid, occurs in small 
white crystals^ insoluble in water, soluble in ether, chloroform and 
alcohuL Dose jio to {j^ ^t.\ used as tablcti* yio and s,io gr.; used 
hypodc-rmically, dissolved in lactic acid, for post-partcm harmorrhage. 
Ergolinnta: citras, a soluble salt of ergotinine used for hypodermic 
injection. Dose, ^J^ to ./^ gr. Spasinotin Spacelotoxin» a poisonous 
element t>f ergot, a yellow amorphous powder, insoluble in water, dilute 
acids and petroleum tther, soluble in ether and alcohoL With alkalies 
it forms salts. Dose, \ to i gr. Cornutine or ccboline, an aikaJoid* 
Dose, j gr. Hydrochloride of cornutine and citrate of cornutine 
are prepared, 

Fref>iira(mus,— Oi Ergot. Tinctura Ergolab, Ammoniata B« P. (l 
in 4). Dose, i to j fld. dr. Exlractum Ergotie commonly 
called Ergot ni B.P., a purified solid or semi* sol id extract of ergot. 
Dose, 2 to H grs. Injcclio Ergotx Hypodcrmica B.P. (110 ms. con- 
tain 33 grs, of ergotm). Dose, 3 to 10 ms,, an injection (t in i,oOij) 
isi recommended tor gonorrhtifu. Infusum Ergotx (I in 50), Dose, 
I to 2 o/s. Pilul;e Ergotini Cnniposilar— ergotin I gr., dried suU 
phate oi iiont i g^; extract ot hellelbcire, 1 gr.; extract ut aloes, I gT*\ 
oil of ^avin, ^ rns.^ make one fiill. Pilula- Ergotini cum quinina, — 
ergolin 3^ grs.; quinine i\ grs. in each. 

Actifttts (tnd H6t'j^, — Motor excitant, vascular constrictort anhydro- 
tic, emnicnagogiiCi ecbolic, parturient, and luctnostatic. It stimulates 
the lunclion^ oi the cord, the vasomotor centres, rai!»e^ the blc»od prch- 
sutc, piuduces contractions (»f unstripcd muscular (ibre:^, diminishes the 
calibre ol the arterioles, depresses the heart, slown the pulse and 
increases the intestinal peristalsis. It acts as an irritant of the gaslro 
intestinal tract, causing nausea, vomiting, great thirst, colic, painful 
micturition and [mrging ; also headache, vertigo, continuous* 
labour pain, contrjiction of the splunctor vesicx and ani ; if 
pushed lurther, I here are tetanoid convulsions of the muscles of the 
Hexsurs, of ilie ulei us» intej^tmcs and respiraiion, culdncss ot the limbs, 
lurnncation of the whole budy and »kin, los* ol scMbibihlyt abolition of 
spinal sensations, bulkc contannng bloud and dry gangrene of the lower 
extrennttcs, convulsiun ending in coma and death. It is given in 
hemorrhages irom the uterus, lungs, nose, stomach. It has the property 
ot causing poweriul Ciiniinuous instead of natural intermittent contrac* 
Uon ot the muscular coats ot the arterioles and of the muscular wall of 
llie uterusjicnce dangerous in early labour, as it might rupture the uterus, 
cause laceration of the perineum, and paralyse the festal heart. It should 



m 



656 USTILAGO MAYftlS. 

only be given in labour cases when the os is fully dilated or the head 
is born; and generally after the child is born to guard against post- partem 
haemorrhage and to promote expulsion of the placenta; given also in 
labours when the uterus is becoming exhausted. It is highly useful in 
chronic metritis, subinvolution, disordered menstruation as dysmenor- 
rhoea, and menorrhagia, in fibroids of the uterus and in polypi; in 
which it contracts the uterus and promotes absorption of inflammatory 
products ; in atonic spermatorrhoea, in incontinuence of urine^ 
or where the spinctors are relaxed, it may be given with benefit. 
It may be given for about one week after delivery to prevent sub- 
involution. In inflammation of the mucous membranes, as con- 
junctivities, gonorrhoea, &c., it is useful both externally and 
internally. It is usefully given in mania, hemicrania, migraine 
in myelitis and in cerebral congestion. In cardiac hypertrophy it 
slows the action of the heart, and the blood current. In diabetes 
mellitus, it is a valuable remedy. With quinine, it causes contraction 
of the uterus and of the spleen if enlarged. In night sweats of phthisis 
it is very useful. In low state of the pulse it is largely given with 
digitalis in fever and acute diseases. In atonic haemorrhages, as 
haemoptysis, menorrhagia and haematuria ; in acute and chronic fluxes, 
dysentery, chronic diarrhoea, &c., it is given with benefit. Hypodermi- 
cally ergotine and ergotinine are used, in post-partem and other 
haemorrhages, in prolapse of the rectum, chronic metritis, sub- 
involution of the uterus, in uterine fibroid and varicose veins. 

Torala Saooharomyoes, T. CereYisse, Fennent, Teast (Eng.). 

Parts used. — The plant. 

Characters. — It is a peculiar insoluble product of the fermentation 
of malt liquors produced by aid of alcoholic fermentation of saccharine 
fluid by this fungus. It occurs in two forms, the top or surface yeast, 
a semi fluid, frothy mass and cellular, of a peculiar odour; the bottom 
or sediment yeast. Dose, } to i oz. 

Actions and uses. — Tonic, stimulant and laxative, used in diabetes, 
diarrhoea, scurvy, typhoid fever, &c.; used also as antiseptic poultice 
on sores and bruises. 

Ustilago Haydis, Corn Smiitt, Corn Ergot, Maize Ergot 

Parts used. — The fungus or smut. 

It is a fungus or parasite growing chiefly upon the stem, the grain, 
young ears, the pistils and the male inflorescence, of zea mays, 
or Indian corn. It occurs in irregular globose masses consisting of 
blackish gelatinous membrane enclosing many globular, nodular spores ; 
the taste and odour are very disagreeable. Dose, 15 to 30 grs. 

Constituents. — Fixed oil 2*5 p.c, an acid resembling sclerotic acid, 
a' volatile crystalline principle, an alkaloid— secaline, isomeric with 
trimethylamine, resin, pectin, gluten volatile base, sugar, mucilage 
and ash 5 p.c. 

Preparations. '^Ia^siiA extract. Dose, 20 to 60 ms. 



cHONDRus carspus. 



Aciions and nses, — Simitar to those of ergot and nux vomica 
combined ; ue^ emmeiiagogue and haemostatic. As a spinal excitant 
it increases the sensibility and the reflexes, and gives rise to convulsions. 
In large doses it stimulates the pneumo-gastric, dilates the pupils* 
causes paralysis of the muscular system and death by respiratory 
spasms. Its oxytoccic action is not well marked* If given in uterine 
fibroids, it causes contraction of the uterus. The contractions are 
clonic or intermittent instead of continuous as in ergot. It is used to 
check haemorrhages and given in spermatorrhoea, psoriasis, eczema, &c, 

Algse— The China! ghasa or Sea Weed family* 

Characiers, — The weedh arc cellular. Like the lichens these arc 
flowerless parenchymatous plants, nourished through their whole 
surface. Tney grow in fresh or salt water, or in moist places. The 
t ha II us has neither true woody fibre nor vessels* It is foliaceous, 
branched, filamentous or pulverulent. Many alg^e are microscopic, 
others are of large size, usually greenish brown or rose-coloured. 

Hahiiai. — Universal, growing in salt or fresh water or in moist 
situations; some are found in boiling springs, others in mineral springs, 
some in chemical solutions. 

Profierties. — Several species are employed as food. Their nntiitious 
properties are due to the presence of starch, sugary matter (mannite). 
mucilage and albumen. Some species contain a principle called gelose, 
and to it to a great extent is due their nutritious property — one part 
of gelose dissolved in 500 parts of boiling water will on cooling leave 
a colourless transparent jelly behind. The edible bird's nests used 
^K by the natives for food owe this nutrient property to a species of alg«, 
^H and more especially to the secretion of the swallows, by w^hicli they 
f arc constructed. Some algae are used medicinally as demulcent, cniol- 

\ lieot and alterative. Several species contain iodme, and are reputed 3> 

I remedies in goitre and scrofulous diseases. Some species when burnt 

I leave an ash known as kelp, once used in the preparation of car- 

I bonate of soda. Some species arc reputed to possess verimifugal 

I properties. 

M 



Cbondrue Crispus, C. HamilloBus and Gigartlna Hamilloaa. 
Habitat. — Atlantic Ocean, Irish coast. New Kngland, 
Sym — Carrageen moss^ pearl moss, salt rock mo&St Irish moss. 
Parts f/if//.— The entire plant dried and bleached, 

Chtttacters, — It grows upon locks under water, attached by a small 
disk. Fronds yellowish. Spore vessels or capsules imbedded in the frond. 
It is pale yellowish white, horny, translucent and forked ; odour sea. 
weed-like ; taste mucilaginous and saline* It swells in cold water ; 
boiled with water (1 to 30), it forms a gelatinous solution. 

Constituents- — Water 19, albuminoids gj, mucilage ^^i^, a kind of 
pectin called carageenin, cellulose or gelatin 2 ; and mineral matter 14, 
containing chlorides, sulphates and phosphates of potassium, sodium. 
calcium and magnesium, iodine, bromine — ^no starch. 

it 



t)^^ QEUOBM CASnLAfiOmCK. 

/^€^^miimi^^A^BOOclxm (i in 4.). Dose, 1 tx> 2 M. fB&^ jd}j 
2 QI& 213 a qiart cfwdcr. 

Actioms wmd sta0t<— IQntnent, diffffffir, emolfieiit asd denmlcBnt. 
As outnent it is ^nvn JQkc la^&ccau si^go or bvle^ id ccnsiniiptian xnd 

•dianiKsa, lddi>er and liiadder con^jlsints ^md scrxtfiibL 



Bladder vxadt. Sea wnok, CaxmnoD Sea Weed. 

Hahtimt* — Mnddj rodnr fibares of tbe Aflanrir and Pacific 
Oceans. 

Arlr Mged^ — ^llie '■ikoik pbaxu tiie expressed juice of ils -vesides or 
bdaddcTE. 

OtffiBrifiRrL — ^A penamial nmhi-oelhilar sea weed groiring in 
sail vater^ fonmng a foliacerms or iilirmfntoiis T^aThi\ and of 
an olire green or ofiidaxsvn ooiknir. Ii is projiagaisd W respro- 
d a c tiit ; partides, called spores cr ^KDrales. It is iBoavrieas and 
oQD6eqix3it}T lieeriWiifL It is 40 inches long, and abont an inrh broad. 
It has a fiat leaf branched vith a niid3:&, and saiaH spherical vesicles 
filled vitb air in the leaf throughout its leoifth ; odonr sea veed- 
like : tasse mnnUgrDocs and sa&ie. Dose cf the dried plant, 20 

to JOOglS^ 

CkmxixiMemis.rr'lo&at less than in ether alss- It also contains 
organic matters, mdn^an% mncila^e, fat, maimite hjL^ the ash 
is knovn as vegetable Elhiops — ^it is a kind of charcoal, procured by 
indneratiGO in a dose vessel ; the ash contains scNia in c om bi natioD, as 
chlorides, bromides, iodides, phosphates and S3i^3hates. 

Prrparmtkm^ — Eztraci — ^Dcsc, 3 to S gr^ Laqnid ertrad — Dose, 
1 to r fid. drs. Deooctico (i to 30). Dose, 4 to f drs. Wine, 
Vegetable Ethiops. Dose, 2 to 4 drs. 

Actkmi awd sser. — ^An aheratire and tonic : grren for diminishing 
glandular sv^elling, goitre, and enlargements of joints. It prctdnces 
absorptioD c4 fat in obese sob^ects vithoot in orher respects ii^sring 
the beahb. The firrt sagns of its faroorable acricn is the increase in 
the fioT of nrine, and the a pp e aran ce of a black prlHcje ciD its surface ; 
also giTen in goitre and in scrofnloos and gjandnlar afiieacDons. The 
a^ is nsed for similar purposes. Tbe fnaions cf the pliant have been 
employed cxtemalhr in glandiilar and scrofnloas afiisctians. 



HahitaL — Indian Ocean, Java. 

FarU mtem^ — Grbtinr, 

Vrrtuumi^r. — Thao or Japanese Isinglass. Indian Bazars. — 
Chinai Gbas 



i^EACrLAKIA LICHENOIDES. 



6t<f 



CknFaciers,-~Mei with in the form of compressed four-sided iikks 
composed of shrivelled semUtransparent yellowish-white membrane, 
very light, full of cavities, very flexible, easilys broken and without any 
taste or smell ; combined with large quant i tie of water, it forms jelly. 
This power is due to its containing a principle named gelose or 
parabin ; a bo used in the manufacture of glue. 

Consiittunts* — Gelosei a gelatinous principle containing no 
nitrogen. Sugary matter (Mannite), starch and albumen, 

Actions ami uses. — Nutrient and demulent like gracilaria or 
edible moss, and used like it. The nutritious properties are due to 

gelose. 

Ke marks, — A very good 
bacteriological investigations. 



medium lor cultivating germs for 



Gracilaria Lichenoidest Q. Conf6rvoid«)8, Fucua Lichenoides. 
Habitat. — Back water of Ceylon and Indian Ocean. 

Parts Hseii, — ^Thc dried plant (moss). 

Venmctilar*—^\iTTi\, — Kiyjlv-poen, Bomb. — Chinai-ghatsa. Cey- 
lon. — Agar-agar. Duk. — Darya-ki-pachi, m**>s. Eng. — Edible sea- 
weeds, Ceylon moss, Japanese isinglass. Malay. — Rumi yarwakar 
Sajar karang. Tel.— Samudrupu-piVchi. 

Characters, — A small and delicate fiucus ; fronds filiform, filaments 
much branched ; colour light purple ; occuring in bundles. Each^ 
filament from 12 to 15 inches long^ dry, quadrangular or cylindrical 
in fonn, nearly while in colour, and reticulated, resembling the pith- 
like substance, found in the interior of a quill, very light, rather flexible, 
but can easily be broken ; i^dour resembUng sca-wccd ; taste mucilagin- 
ous and saline, resembling that of rice canji. 

CbfM/i"///^M/jr.— Vegetable jelly (40 to Ho p c ), albumen, iodine, 
true starch, ligneous matter, mucilage and sails, as ^sulphate and 
chloride of soda : sulphate and phosphate of lime, wax and iron. 

/>r/^/ra/«//^.— Decoction (i in 20). Dose, 1 to 2 fld. ozs. Jelly. — 
The moss is reduced to a fine powder. The powder is boiled with 
water and strained. The solution when cold is filtered and flavoured 
with Limbuni-chhiila (temon-peel) taja, &c. 

Actions ufiduses. — Nutritive, emollient, demulcent and alterative ; 
given to invalids in pectoral aflfcctions, and in phthisis ; the jelly is also 
given in dysentery, diarrbtca, Icucorrhoea and profuse menstrual flow. 
It contains iodine, and hence is useful as au alterative in goitre^ 
scrofula, &c. As a demulcent and an emollient it is useful in chronic 
catarrh of the intestines (diarrhoea), and in irritation of the urinary 
passages. 

Remarks, — ^It is a good substitute for isinglass. It requires a 
very large proportion of water to form a jelly. 



66o LAMINARIA SACCHARINA. 

Laminaria Saccbarina—Bweet Tangle (Eng.)* 
L. Digitata, L. Potatoriam. 

Habitat. — Throughout India, Salt lakes. Deep seas. Cashmere. 
Lahore. 

Parts used, — The plant. 

, Venuiailar. — Chin. — Seatape-hai-tai. Kng. — Sugar sea beet. 
Hi nd. — Gillurka-patta, Galhar-ka-patta. 

Characters. — The plant is a sea-weed, obtained from salt lake in 
Tibet and consists of long ribbon-like pieces. 

Constituents. — It contains 12 p.c. of mannite and iodine. 

Actions and uses. — A syrup made of this plant combined with 
decoction of quince seeds is given for the cure of goitre (Bronchocelc) ; 
also given in scrofulous and syphilitic affections. Young parts of 
L. Saccharina mixed with those of L. Digitata form a preparation 
known as tangle and used as an article of diet. 



CLASSIFICATION OF DRUGS ACCORDING TO TBEIR 
PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS ON THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 



Alteratives. 



Alangium Lamarckli 

Amoora Rohitika 

Argemone Mexicana 

Asclepias Incarnata 

Baptisia 

Bauhinca VariegaU 

Bassia Latifolia 

Bavachee seeds 

Berberis Aquifolium 

Bharangi 

Bryonia Epigcea 

Cassia Tora 

Calotropis Qigantea 

Cascara Amarga 

Celastrus Paniculatas 

Coccalus Villosus 

Condurango 

(.'optis Teeta 

Cascuia Refleza 

Cratjcva Religiosa 

Croton Oblongifolia 

Cyperus Perteouis 

Dalbergia Sympathetica 

Daphne Mezereum 

Derris Uliginoea 

Dipterocarpas Turbinatas 

Ecbinops fichinatus 

Franciscea Uniflora 

Qalium Aparine 

Gnaiacnm Officinalis 

Qynocardia Odorata 

Htsmidesmos Indicns 

Hydrocotyle Asiatica, powdered 

leaves. DoeCi 5 to 8 grs. 
Indigofera Tinctoria 
Ipom^ea Pescaprse 
Jadvar 

Juglans Regia 
Karanj leaves 



Khodaki Rasna 

Lepidium Sativum 

Marrubium Vulgarc 

Michelia Champaca 

Mimosa Padica 

Menispermum Canadense 

Mercuro Vegetal 

Nyctanthcs Arbortristis 

Olden Landia 

Pseonia Officinalis 

Pasderia Fetida 

Pongamia Glabra 

Plumbago Rosea 

Psoralia Corylifolia 

Physalis Alkekengi 

Peganum Harmala 

Phytolacca 

Pitp&pra 

Samndar Shokha 

Sassafi'as 

SarsaparilJa 

Satvin 

Siegesbeckia Orientalis 

Spermacoce Hispi<ia 

Solannm Dulcamara 

Sweet cloves 

Taoca Aspera 

Tenacetum Umbelliferam 

TinoBpora Cordifoli 

Thespesia Popnlnea 

Tragia Cannabina 

TryamAn 

Tylophora Asthmatica 

Tribal us Terestris 

Thespesia Popalnea— the viscid jnioe 

of capanles 
Vanjai 

Vitex Negando 
Withania Somnifera 



Fin'mvla, — Syrup Trifolium compound : — Contains trifoliam pretense-^« bur- 
dock root 2, stillingia 2, pLytolacca 2, Berberii aqaifolia 2, cascara amarga 2, 
Xanthozylon ^, potas iodid 1, and sugar 40. Dose, 1 to 2 drs. AlteraiiTe in sorofula, 
rheumatism, skin diseases, &c. (See page 380^ Vol, /.) 
43 



662 



ANHYDROTICF. 



Anodynes or Analgesics. 



Aconite, Aconitine, used locally in neu- 
ralgia of the 6th nerve, in goat, 
and in restlessness 

Aconite Tioctare, in drops doses 

Atropine, hypodermically in tic 
douloureux 

Belladonna Ointment, in pains in the 
pelvic region 

Camphor 

Cannabis Indica 

Chloroxylon Swietenia 

Cimicifuua, in ovarian neuralgia or 
dysmenorrhoea 

Cocaine, a 4 p.cpolution locally in tooth- 
ache and for minor surgical 
operations [pain 

Codeine, to relieve abdominal and ovcrian 



Conium fluid extract in pain of cancer, of 
rheumatism, or overian pain 

Duboisine, same as atropine 

Heliotropinm Indicum (local) 

Hyoscyamus 

Lupulus 

Morphine ^, atropine yo*o injected hypo- 
dermically in sciatica and neuralf^ia 

Opium Liniment in pleurodynia and 
neuralgia 

Piscidia Erythrina 

Rbatany, to relieve pain of blisters, 
burns, and ulcers 

Stramonium Ointment 

Taberna Montana (locally) 

Theine Injection, in neuralgic 
pains 



(&^ page 3Sl, Vol, I, ) 

An»sthetic8~Iiocal Ansesthetics or Anodirnes. 



Acid Hydrocyanic — local antetthetic 
Aconite 
Atropine 
Belladonna 

Boldoin, local anaesthetics like cocaine 
Cocaine 

Erythroxylum Coc% 
Erythrophlicum, local anaesthetic 
Eugenia Caryophyllata 
Gelsemium (general) 
Guaiacol with olive oil injected hypo- 
dermically 



Gymneroa Sylvestris, AnscUhetic on 

the sense of taste 
Kavaine (local) 
Menthol (local) 
Morphine and atropine injection 

after operation. 
Morphine, injected h.Tpodermicaliy 

before Chloroform or Ether iuhalntioa 
Opium (local anodyne) 
Quabain (local anaesthetic) 
Veratrine (local anodyne) 
Volatile oils (local anodyne) 



Anbydrotics 

These are agents which reduce sweats or perspirations. Atropine, jaborandi, Dover'8 
powder, picrotoxine, strychnine, &c., are respiratory stimulants, and they act in 
reducing the sweats of phthisis. In severe cough the respiration becomes depressed 
and the circulation is interfered with, owing to the carbonic acid gas being accumu- 
lated in the blood ; this accumulation stimulates the sweat centres and gives rise to 
profuse perspiration. (^Sre page 383, Vol, /.) 



Abies Canadensis 

Acid acetic dilute (locally) 

Acid Agaric, internally— checks 
sweats 

Acid Camphoric, 10 grs. on the tongue 
to check night sweats 

Acid Gallic, to check night sweats 

Acid Sulphuric Aromatic, to check 
sweating, but is bad for digestion 

Agarcine, 10 with atropine 1, and 
aromatic sulphuric acid 1,000, to 
check sweats of phthisis. Dose, 
10 ms. 

Atropine, a respiratony stimulant 
lio g>*« hypodermically or ,'oto ^, 
internally in pill to relieve sweat- 
ing of phthisis and exhausting 
diseases. 



Belladonna Liniment locally 
Belladonna Tincture, internally in 

weakly children to check foetid 

sweats 
Camphoric acid 
Duboisine sluphate, a good substitute 

for atropine 
Diachylon ointment for foetid sweats 
Ergot, internally very useful 
Gallic acid with belladonna, to 

diminish sweats of phthisis 
Hamamelis fluid extract with iron 

chloride and glycerin for applica- 
tion 
Hyoscyamus, acts on the sweat 

glands 
Ice, locally over the abdomen relieves 

sweats 



ANTISEPTICS, 



663 



AiihydxoticB»—((^ontd.) 



Jaborandi, internally 

Muscarine, to check sweats 

Oils, to rub over the whole skin to 

prevent sweating 
Opium with ipecacnanha to check 

colliquative sweats 
Picrotoxin, internally 
Pilocarpine, internally ^^ gr. to 

check perspiration 
Potentilla sarmentosa, infusion of 

leaves and root internally in night 

sweats 
Quinine preparations with sulphuric 

acid in general sweating or exhaus- 
tion 
Quinine and alcohol (1 in 100), rub- 



bins^ with a sponge over the body in 

general sweating 
Qnillaia Infusion, to dispel foetor of 

feet and arms 
Salvia tincture or infusion, internally, 

or locally to sponge the body 
Sa?e tea infusion for night sweats 

of phthisis internally and locally 

to sponge the body 
.Soft soap as inunction 
Stramonium, nets on the sweat glands 
Strychnine in sweats of phthisis 
Starch, locally as dusting powder 
Tannin, to relieve sweating in axilla 

and groins 
Vinegar, locally 



Alstonia constrict a 
Anthcmis nobilis 
Apocynum cannabinnm 
Asadirachta Indica 
Bcrbcris aristata 
Ccdrela Toona 
Cinchona and its alkaloids 
Clerodendron 



Antipeiiodics. 

Conessi bark [1 dr. 

Coptis Tecta Tincture, \ to 
Cc^Mlpinia coriara 
Eucalyptol 
Eupatorium 
Gardenia gnmmifera 
Holarrhena antidysenterica 
Ncctandra Rodica 



Oldenlandia Corymbosa 
Picrorrhiza Kurroa 
Quebracho 
Quinine 

Soymida fcbrif uga 
Swertia Decussata 
Toddalia aculiata 
Tricbosanthes Dioioi 



AntlphlOgistlcS. QSee Vol. I, page 388,) 

AconitnmNapellus, tincture Ergot Pilocarpine 

for the respiratory tract Gelsemiam Purgatives 

Arnica Ipecacuanha Rcsinol 

Digitalis Opium Veratram Viride 

Antipyretics. (See Vol. /, puife 388,y 
To reduce circulation. 



Aconite tincture, 2 to 

6 ms. 
Arnica 

To pro'/vre perspiration. 

Aspidospermin 
Golsimium 

To diminith tissue changes. 

Beberine 

Benzoic acid 

Bcrberine 

Camphor 

Chinolin 

Cinchona and its salts 



Avcrrhoa Carambola 
Carissa Corundas 



Belladonna 
Colohicum 
Digitalis 



Ipecacuanha with opium 
Ncctandra 



Essential oils 
Bucalyptol 
En Quinine 
GaltherU oU 
Hydroqainone 

AntiscorbntieB. 

Feronia Elephantum 
Tamarind us Indicas 



Quebracho 

Salicin 

Veratram 



Piperin 

Quinine and its salts 



Pyrocatechin 
Quillaja Saponaria 
Quinine and its salts 
Veratrum 
Thymol 



Vitis iQdica 



Ajowan (Ptychotis) 
Aloes, as dusting powder 
Anthrarobin 
Artemisia sieversiana 



AntiseptieB- (jSee Vol, /, page 389.) 

Balsam of Peru Camphor and its prcpara* 



Baptisia Tinctoria 
Bcnzoates 
Cajupnt oil 



tiona 
Caryophyllnm oil 
Chunomile 



664 



ASTRINGENTS. 



Chaviool 

Coal tar 

Coffee 

CoomariD 

Echinacea 

Eacalyptus oil, gauze 

ointment 
Eagenol 

Oaultheria oleum 
Inula 



Antiseptics— (^''w^/*.) 

Liquid Amber 
Lycopodiam 
Mentha oleum 
Menthol 
Mint essence 
and Myrtle 

Nux Vomica 

Oil of Cade 

Oleum Pinus sylvestris 

Petroleum 



Pinus longifolia 
Fix liquida 
Quinine 

Staphisagria seeds 
Styrax Benzoin 
Terebene 
Thymol 
Tobacco 
Turpentine 



Forwtda, — Antiseptic powder ccntains acid boric 1 dr., acid citric 2 gr.. 
acid carbolic 30 ms., acid salicylic 10 grs., hydrargyri bichloridi 1 gr^ aodii 
chloridi 6 5(ri.g thymol 2 gr., zinci chloridi 1 gi*., zinci sulpbo carbolatia 1| dr., 
in 20 0Z8. of water, evaporate and dry. 



Antisialagognes. C&r^ Vol. /, fkige 392.) 



Atropine, hypodermically to para- 
lyse the ends of nerves of »ccre- 
tion 

Belladonna 

Cinchona with potassium salts 

Ficns religiosa 

Hamamelis 

Hyoscine Hydrobromate 

Erameria 



Mi mops Elengii 
Myrrh gargle 

Opium, to lessen, the secretion 
Pellitory, to eliminate the poison 
Pilocarpine, as injection 
Tannic acid 
Vegetable Astringenta 
Physostigma, to lessen the blood supply 
to the secreting glands 



Antispasmodics, i^ee ViU, /, 



Acid hydrocyanic 

Aconite 

Ailanthns glandulosa 

Ambergris 

Amber electrum 

Ammonite 

Andropogon 

Asafetida 

Aspidoeperma 

Balsamodendron 

Belladonna 

Blumea balsamifera 

Camphor 

Chamomile (cherry laurel) 

Cimicifaga 

Cloves (oil) 

Coleus Camasus 

Coniom macalatum 



Curare 

Geisemium 

Oynandropsis panta- 

phylla 
Hyoscyamns 
Ipecacuanha 
.Tunde bidaster 
Kevado 
Lactucarium 
Lobelia 
Lycopodium 
Menthol 
Morphia 
Opium 

Pffionia officinalis 
Paodamus odoratissimo 
Physostigma 
Poederia FeUda 



page 392.) 

Ptychotis ajowan 

Pulsatilla tincture, 
2.10ms. 

lUndia Dumetorum 

Stramonium 

Snmbul 

Symplocarpus fa^tidus 

Terebintbioa 

Thyme oil (garden 
Thyme) 

Tobacco 

Treak Ferook 

Valerian 

Viburnum PninifoUum 

VI vcrra Zebetta — (secre- 
tion) 

Viscum sp. — WiKl jas- 
mine 



Astringents. QSee IW. I,iHige393,) 



Acacia catechu 

Achyranthes aspera 

Acid gallic 

Acid tannic 

iEgle marmelos, syrup 

of pulp, 1 oz. 
Alocasia Indica 
Alstonia 
Alum root 
Amootm rohitlka 



Areca catechu 
Avalkanthi 
Babul chhal 
Bari mai 

Berberis aquifolia, tinc- 
ture, 10-4C mf. 
Black alder 
Blue berry 

Bombax malabaricum 
Bates frondosa 



Burgundy pitch 
Cantium parvifoliuim 
Catechu 

Oelosia argentca 
Chinai kath 
Chotc-mii 

Cochlospcrmum guesy* 
pium 



CATHARTICS. 



66; 



Ctesalpinia 

Crane tree 

Cjperas rotundus 

Diospyros glutinosa 

Dita bark 

Dragon's blood 

Ergot 

Eacalyptas (gummi) 

Eugenea Jambolana 

Faronia Elephant urn, 

(gum) 
Flacourtia cataphracU. 
GalU 
Qarcinia mangostina 

(intestinal) 
Gymnema sylvestris 
Hamamclis 
Holarrliena, fin tidy sent. 

rica 



Astringents .^{rontd.) 

Iron wood tree 

Jussiae suffmiticosa 

Kaiphal 

Kanchan-chhal 

Katphal 

Kino (intestinal) 

Kramcria (Rbatany) 

Leea sambacina 

Mango bark and stone 

Matico 

Mimusops elengia 

Myristca 

Myrtus rommuni 

Oak bark 

Odina wodler 

Patanga 

PistAcia 

Poppy sec Is 

Ptcrjcarpus santatinus 



Punicagranatum. decoo* 
tion of the rind of the 
fruit, 1 to 2 ozs. 

Quercosalba (oak bai. . 

Rhus 

Rubia cordifolia 

Rumex crispns 

Spondias mangifera 

Tamanx gallica 

Terminalia 

Thea bohea 

Turpentine (chlan) 

Uncaria gambier 

Urtica dioica 

Uva ursi 

Woodfordia flnribnnda 

Verba reunia 

Zizyphus jnjuba 



Oarminatives. {Srr Vol, 1 innjr 394.) 



Acoras CAlamus (iliii- 

zome) 
Ajowan 
AlUpico 
An«iropoj^«^n 
Anetbum HDwa, fruit 
Anise oil 
Ant hem is nobilis 
Apium i^r.iveoloua 
Asafetida 
Cajuput oil 
Camphor 
Capsicum 
Cardamom 
Carraway fruit and 

oil 
Carui 
Caryophillus aroma- 

ticuH— flower buds 
rascarilla 
Chamomile 



Citrus 

(Mnnamon oil 

Coffee 

Cichorium intybus 

Coriaoiler oil 

Cuminuu cyminum 

Curcuma aromatica 

Eucalyptus oil 

Ktniculum panmorium 

Oaultheria 

(linger 

Hetleomie oil 

Lavender 

LupinuA albns 

Mace 

Menthol 

Methi seeds 

Mustard 

Nigel la s^tiva 

Nutmeg oil 

Orange peel 



Origanum marjora 
Parsley 
Patchouli oi\ 
Pavonia o<lorata 
Pcp[)er (long) 
Peppermint oil 
Pimenta oil 
Roteraary 
Rosa gallica 
Ruta gra?colcn8 
Salix nigra 
SaWia officinalis 
Sambucus 
Spearmint oil 
Star anise 
Tamal patra 
Todalia aculeata 
Valerian oil 
Xanthoxylon 
Ziiiphora tenuor 



OATHAaTIOS OB PURaATIVES. 



(a) Aperients. Laxatives, i^*' Voi, /, 



JF.f!^\c marmelos. in 
habitual const ipation 

Aleurite-i triloba, the 
oil a substitute for 
castor oil. Dose ^ to 1 oz. 

Allama.ida cathartica 

Argemone niexicana, oil of 
seeds. Dose, 20 to 60 ms. 

Belladonna, to pre- 
Tent habitual con- 
stipation 

Cascara Sajrra \n. fluid 
extract 1 <lr. 

Cassia senna 



Castor oil 

(Tanscora decussata 

Coco« Nucifera 

Emblic myraboians 

Euphorbia 

Figs 

Frangula 

Fraxinus 

Hydrastis, in sluggish li?er 

Ipecacuanha 

Indian walnut oil. Dose, 

1 to 2 ozs 
Leptandrin 
Linseed 



jMf/f* 396.) 

(liquorice powder com- 
pound 

Manna 

Nifthot 

Nux Tomica tioctar**, 
before meals, to over- 
come torpor of the 
bowels 

Olive oil 

Oatmeal 

Physostigma with nux 
vomica and bella> 
donna, in intestinal 
torpor 



666 



CHOLAGOGUE — CATHARTICS 



Prunes 

Pharbitis nil 

Rose buds 

Rhubarb with capsicum 

Saponaria trifoliatum 

(soap) 
Sessamum oil 



Aperients— (rantd.') 

stramonium supposi- 
tory 

Tamarind pulp with 
Cocculus indicus, and 
glaubers salt 

Taraxacum 



Treacle 

Turpentine, in atony of 
the bowels with 
gaseous distension 

Vitis venifera 

Zizyphus Vulgaris 



Formula, — Pathypdi Kv&th Decoction contains: — Myrabo]ans,eniblicandchebulie 
(mature fruit), each 6, purging cassia 4, baliospermum axillare 3, picorrhiza karroa C, 
euphorbia nerii folia 3, tnrpeth root 4, cyperus rotundus 5, senna 6. rhamnoa 
palamatius 4. and water 10 to 1 of the whole powder. At first boil and evaporate to 
the consistence of an extract, then add oroton seeds 1, ginger 5, sulphur 4, mix and 
make a pill mass.. Dose, 2 grs., in constipation. 

1. Podophyllin |, extract nux Tomica \ gr., ferri snlph. ), gr.. capsici pulv. \, 
extract belladonna | gr., extract ^hyoscyamus \ gr., aloin ^ gr., mix Pil 1. Doee, 2 
pills. 

2. Extract cascara sagrada 2, extract nux vomica ^ gr., extract belladonna 
i gr., euonymus 2, xantboxylon 2, capsicum resin ^, mix, make pills 2. Do^c 1 to 
2 pills. 

3. Croton oil ^, extract elaterii .\, calomel 1 gr., extract jalapse 1, extract 
colocynth 2. gingerine ^^t mix, make pil 1 . Dose, 1 pill. 

4. Aloes 1 gr.; resin scammony J gr., resin jalapae ^ gr., calomel } gr., 
extract belladonna i gr., extract stramuoii ^ gr., mix Pil 1. 

5. Fel bovinum 1 gr. ; pulv. ipecacuanha ^ gr. ; aloes 2 grs. ; pilulse asafetida 
compositae 2 grs. mix. Dose, 2 pill?. 

Artificial Hunyadi water— Mag nesii sulphatis 1 dr. ; sodii sulphatis 1 dr.; 
Potassii sulphatis 5 gr. ; sodii bicarbonatis 8 gr. ; sodii chloridi IC grs., aqua 1 oz. 
mix. Doce, a wine glassful. 

(b) Simple Purgatives. (.See Vol. i, pa4,e 395.) 



Aloes with iron sulphate or Aloin 

Carthamus tinctorius 

Cassia Fistula (pulp or pods), 1 to 2 

drs. 
Castor oil 
Clitorea temata seeds, 1 dr. with 

pot. bicarb. 
Colchicioe 
Colocynth Pulv, 2 to 8 grs., or extract 

2 to 6 grs., with ainse oil and 

hyoscyamus 
Confectio st nnae with sulphur 
Cucumis Trigonui — (pulv of fruit) 
Embelia ribes 
Exogooum purga 
Fricdriciishall waters 



Glycerrhisa (compound powder) 

Jalap 

Luffa echinata 

Pharbitis nil (seeds) 

Podophyllum, gr. |, with essence of 

ginger -^ gr., when the secretion is 

deficient, and accompanied with 

bilious headache 
Rhamnus frangula, extract 
Rhubarb 
Stillingia fluid extract 15 ms. in 

habitual constipation 
Terebenthina 

Terminalia Chebula (fruit) 
Victoria water 



(C) CholagOgaeCatharticS. iSee Vol, I, page 395.) 

Aloes Iridin 

Airopa mandragora Leptandrin 

Biophytum sensitivum Po<lophyllin 

Cosmostigma racemosum Sangninaria 

Suonymin Scammony 
Knphorbinm 



DFNTIFRICE. 



667 



(d) Drastic and Hydragogue Cathartics. (See Vol. i,page 395.) 



Allaminda cathartica 
Apocynum cannabinum 
Kryunia alba 
Cambojje 
Cathartic neid 
Chelidoniam majus, 

extract 
Colocynth 



Croton oil in impaction 
without inflamma- 
tion. Dose 1 to 2 
ms. 

Elaterinm 

Gamboge 

Oarcinia 

Jalap 



Jatropha 
E&IA dun^h 
Myrobolans 
Sumbacas nigra 
Trichosantheu nerii- 

folia 
Turpetbum 



Deliriants. iSee Vol. /, page 396,) 



Belladonna 

Cannabis 

Hyoscyamus 



Lupalas 
Opium 



Stramoninm 
Turpentine 



Demulcents and Emollients. {See Vol. /, page 396,) 



Abclmoschus esculen- 

tus(K) 
Abutdon Indicum 
Acacia Arabica 

,, Karnesiana (E) 
Almond oil (K) 
Alth(ea oHicinali:) 
Araohis hypog^ea (K) 
Arrowroot 
Asparai^us 

A strati! us ^ummifcra 
Balsamodendron 
Barley 

Biwsia latifolia (B) 
Bland oils 
Blapheris cdulis 
Boinbax Malabarica 
Boswelia 

Buohanania latifolia 
Carrot seeds (K) 
Ctemlpinia bonduccUa 
Cetraria 
Choclospermnm goasy- 

pium 
Clitoria tcrnata 
Coccos nuoifera 
Corchorus elitorius 
Cucnmis 
(-urculigo orchioides 



Curcuma Angustifolia 
Figs 

Flax seed 
Frazinu ornus 
Guizotia olifera (E) 
Glycerrhiza glabra 
Oossypium herb»»ceum 
Gracilaria lichinoides 
Hclecteris Isoni 
Hibiscus 
Iron wooil tree 
Isingl&ss 
Lactaca sativa 
Lichen odoriferous 
Linum usitatia^imum 
Liquorice 
Malva sylvestris 
Marsh mallow 
Methi seeds 
Momordica c h i n c b i • 

nensia 
Muasonda Frondosa 
Nymphcea 
Oatmeal 
Ocimum 
Olive oil 
Oriza sativa 
Fapaver Bomnifcrum 
Pedalium murex 



Phyllanthus madras- 

patensis 
Pistacia vera 
Plantago ispaghula 
Polygonun ofliicinalis (K) 
Ponvamia glabra 
Pulmonaria officlnaliM(R) 
Pyrus cydonia 
Quince seeds 
Salcp 

Salvia officinalis 
Saccbarum officinamm 
Seaaamnm orientale 
Shorca robusta ( D) 
Spinacea oleracea 
Starch 

Stercnlia fcetida 
Strychnos potatorum 
Theobroma cacao 
Tinospora cordifolia 
Tragacanth 
Tribulus t^rrestris 
Trigonella fcenam gne^ 

cum 
Triticum 
Ulmus fulwa 
Vateria indica (E) 
Viola odorata (E) 
Zea mays 



Dental Anodynes. {See Vol. I, page 396.) 



Aconite 
Capsicum 
Caryophillum 
Cocaine salts 



Acid benzoic 
Cinchona cortex 



Eucalyptus 
GauUheria 
Guaiac pulv 
Hazeline 



Opium 
Thymol 



Dentifrice. iSee Vol. 7, page 396.) 



Cinnamon 
Cornus floritla 



Iris florentina 
Myrrh, as disinfectant 



Cinchonse robrae pulvcris 2 drs., capsici pulveris 15 grs., potassii chlomtis puWeris 
1 dr., pulveris aromaticus 2 drs., magnesia cnrbonatis i drs., iridis floreotino pulveris 
8 drs., Faponis castilensis pulveris 1 dr.— tooth paste. 



668 



SPIKAL DEPRESSASTS OK SEDATIVES. 



Datrifriee.'HM^.) 

Cixkefaonm ooites 2, Mjirk polv 1, caijophilli }. oL cuuttBcn (, cafen ci bo — # 
pnbcipitdUM 4, crets yrepfmfa S^iooth powder. 

Creta pmadpitatA 4 dn^ iiidit florentino pnlv. 4 dim, as aepbe pair. S dzm, oL 
limonii 10 uML^tooth powder. 

Tbjmol 4, add besaoic 90, eocal jptifolia 900, oL gMxHtberm 90, oL Bcntbap^ 
20. Dose, Idr. ia 4oiiiioeBofwaier. As an antiaeptic appbcatSan for the tedk. 

Tiuctora capaici oowipoaitje 2 dra., rptritiis rinl galKci 2 oau tmctiine qmillaJB 
12 dn^ tintvrx fentiaBae euaapwitae 8 dia^ acidi aeetSci dOati 4 dra^ aetdi cartiofici 
6 iDf., oleniB gaoltberiK 10 ma., mix — to be oaed with a bmsk to the gums and teeth. 
To reflBore mneona depoaits. 

DEPBB88AHT8. (See IW. /, pofe 398} 

(A) Cerdml] 

Aconite 
CaffeiDe 

(b)HepiUie 

(1) Those which l e ien the aecreiicm of bOe without prodnetng pnrgatiTe elfecta 
Atropine, Caator oil. Gamboge 

(2) ThoK whidi lenen the production of urea : 



Camphor 
Opiom 



Codeine 


Morphine 


Quinine 


Colchicnm 


Opinm 




Tboae whieh leaMn the prodaction of glycogen : 




Oidf^ine 


Morphine 


Opiam 


(c) 


Motor Depranants. 




Aconite, indirect aetion 


Corare 


Naaseants 


to redocethefpinal 


Dii^iUlis, act indirectly 


Opiam, ia large doses 


circalAtion 


by reducing the 


Phytotlacca 


Add bydrocjanic 


spinal circulation 


Physostigma 


AiUnthus 


Klateriam 


Pilocarpine 


Apomorphine hydro- 


Emetics 


Palsatiila 


chlorate 


Kuc4lyptus 


Qaebracbo 


Arnica 


Gelsemiam 


Quinine, in Urge doses 


Atropine 


Grindelia 


act indirectly 


Belladonna 


Hyoftcyamas 


Saponine 


Camphor, in krge dotes 


Lactuca 


8pkrtene sulphas 


Cannabif 


Lobelia 


Stramonium (smoke) 


Co<ieine 


Morphine 


Tobacco (smoke) 


Conine 


Mascarine 


Veratrine 



(d) Banal Depressants. 

These lower the fuoction of the kidneys by lessening or suppressing the secretion 
of urine. They act through the circulation by stimulating the Tasomotor centre and 
thereby contracting the renal Tessels e.g., opium, ergot, caffein, &c. 



Acid hydrocysnic 

Atropine 

Coniine hydrobromate 

Curare 

Kcballium elaterinm 



(e) Spinal Depressants or Sedatives. 

Eserine Quinine (in large doses) 

Salix ni^ra 



Oelsemium 
Hyoscine 
M uscarine 
Physostigimine 



Sparteine sulphate 

Viburnum 

Pilocarpine 



DISCUTIENTS, &C. 



669 



(f) SMpiratory DeinroflBaiito. 



Aconite 




Hydrocyanic acid 


Physostigmine 


Caffeine 




LobeUne 


Quinine 


Camphor 




Muscarine 


Saponin 


Coniam 




Nicotine 


Veratrine 


Gelsemiam 




Opium 






(g) 


Uterine DepressantB. 




Acid hydrocyanic — 




Cannabis 


Nicotine 


vapoar and intern 




Conium 


Opium 


ally 




Emetics 


Piscidia 


Aconite 




Gelsemium 


Quinine 


Caffeine 




Lobeline 


Tobacco 


Camphor 




Muscarine 

Deobstraents. 


Veratrine 


Anthriscua cerefoli- 




Blumea balsamifera 


ElflsodendroQ glaucum 


urn 




Calotropis gigantea 


Bhamnus catharti- 


Apium ^raveolens 




Cheiranthus cheiri 


eus 


<m 

Diaphoretics (a) Simple. (See Vo/, I, page 399.) 


Absinthium 




Carissa caronda 


Moringa pterygos- 


Aconite tincture. Done, 


Celastrus paniculata 


perma, root 


2 to 5 ma. 




Chamomile 


Nyctanthes arburtrlstis 


Acorus calamus (rhizcme) 


Chelidoniam majus 


Opium 


Agrimony tea 




Crinum asiaticum 


Salvia officinalis 


Andropoffon citratucn 
BerberisTycium 




Elder flowers 


Sanguinaria 




Guaiacum 


Serpentaria 


Biophytum sensitivum 




Ichnocarpus 


Sida acutangula— Tool 


Calotropis gigantea 




Menispermine 


Tea 


Camphor 
Cartbamua tinotorius 




Zingiber officinalis 










o» 


Befrigerant Diaphoretics. 


Aconite 




Ipecacuanha 


Opium 


Capsicum 




Jaborandi 


Origanum 


BucalyptuB 




Lappa 
Lobelia 


Pilocarpine 


Guaiacum 




Physostigma 




(c) 


Nauseating Diaphoretics. 


Ipecacuanha 




Serpentaria 
Stillingia 


Tobacco 


I>>belia 




Ulmus 


Hassafraa 




SumbucQS 


Xanthoxylum 


Senega 




Tenacetum 





Discutients. Basolvents or Sorbefacients. {See VoU 1, page 400.) 



Apium graveolens. with linseed or 
barley meal, used as a poultice on 
swollen glands 

Bryonia, to promote absorption of 
effusion in glands 

Camphor 

Cocao butter 

Gundha biroxa 



Ichthyol 

Moringa pterygosperma, poultice 

of the leaTcs to reduce glandular 

swellings 
Phytolacca, locally 
Papaw juice 
Rumex crispus like sarsapa- 

rilU 



670 



ELIMINANTS. 



Dinreties. iSee Va. T, page 401.) 



AbelmoBchus esoulentas 
Acanthodiam hirtum, in high ooloar- 

ed urine 
Acid benzoic, on the bladder 
Actea racemosa— hydragogue, 

diaretic 
Adonia Temalis, tincture, 10-30 ms. 

as a hydragogue diaretic 
.£rva javanica, used in lithiasis 

and strangury 
Agava americana 
Althein 
Arctium lappa 
Asparagin, with potassium bromide 

as stimulant diuretic 
Aiema tetra cantha, in dropsy 
Balsam pern on the bladder 
Berberis aqaifolium 
Betula, extract or oil 
BUtta orientalia, as stimulant diure- 
tic 
Boerharia diffusa, in dropsy with 

scanty urine 
Broom tops— hydragogue diuretic, 

in dropsy, due to renal disease 
Buchu, as stimulant diuretic to act on 

the bladder 
Cannabis, as stimulant diaretic 
Capsicum, as a stimulant diaretic 
Centaurea behen 
Chelidoniam ma jus — infusion 

in dropsy 
Citrulus vnlgaris 

Convallaria, as a hydragogue diuretic 
Crysanthemum coronarinm 
Cubebs, stimulant diuretic on the 

urethra 
Cynodon dactylon 
Damiana, on the urethra 
Ervthrophloeum, as a hydragogue 

diaretic 
Eugenia jambolana 
Fabiana imbricata 
Fennel, stimulant diuretic 
Galium aparine 
Gaalthena oleum 
Gaoiaban 

(Hraniam macolatum 
Gokharu 
Guaiacam, stimulant diuretic 



Horse radish 

Humulus lapulus 

Hydrangea 

Ichnocarpus fruitescens 

lilicium verum 

Iridin 

Juglans nigra 

Juniper o\\ as a stimulant diuretic 
in dropsy 

Lichen 

Linum asitatissimum 

Moringa pterigosperma 

Hyrtus chikan 

Nymphcea edulis. Decoction 

Pareira root 

Parsley 

Pedalium murex 

Petrosilinum 

Pakhan bhed 

Pichi 

Piper nnguitifolia 

Polygonum 

Pulsatilla tincture, 2-10 ms. 

Qnillaja saponaria 

Rhus coriaria 

Ro6m%ry 

Rubns chamemorus 

Sambucus 

Santalum album 

Scopoia carniolica 

Sess^mum orientale 

Silajira 

Solanum jacquini 

Spartene, as a hydragogue diuretic 

Squill, as hydragogue diuretic 

Strychnine 

Sugars of milk 

Tamal patra 

Theobromine, as a hydragogue diure- 
tic 

Tobacco hydragogue diuretic 

Trayaman 

Triticnm repens 

Turpeotine. stimulant diuretii* 

IJrginia scilla 

Uva ursi, stimulant diuretic 

Viola odorata 

Water 

Zea mays, stimuUnt diuretic 



BUminaats. 

Medicinal agents excreted in the milk when taken by the nursing woman are : — 
The oils of anise, cumin, copailja, cubebs, garlic, dill, turpentine, worm wood, castor 
oil. The active principles of rhubarb, senna, scammony, castor oil, opium, atropine, 
hyoscyamine, indigo, turpentine ; copaiba if eiven to the mother can be detec*ted in 
the urine of the clSld, Opium given to the mother may narcotize the child; mercurials 
may salivate. Atropine and hyoscyamine have been found in the milk after their inges- 
tion by the woman. 



RMETICS. 



671 



EmmenMogues. (5<^ *^"^ f,p«^^ tot.) 



ActHMi raceuiof^, to restore meujies 

Aktrift farinoHii 

Aloe* with inm (indirect)) "» U)rpor, 

IV few (iftjK Ufore the porto<l 
Aiii1ropoj|*o.in muricatus 
Antliomis nabitU 
A pi 11 ill gravuolena 
AHstoInchLa 

Asnfet i(i& (direct), wilh lUfjei in torpor 
Bnmlnitia arundinacea 
HaptiBtA tiDctoria 
Bctulaoll 
Catbiba IndlcA 
CamUigSa 
Cnppriti trifoliata, with myrobolans 

r,, IK 

C I (direoi) 

tiinniuoii (indirect), caa»eath(' flow 

nf bUiod to the uterui 

llinaoDlift 
Comnum rue 
Crocus Naliviii 
Crotulitna iuneea 
l)i':;kiiiliii(Jin-«ct) 

Ki^ot (dlriH^t), tt> resir dn tiirrrnnrThfige 
JvrythritiniRdliia 
hf*rid» jN'rtica 
Ftcriu'tilam vttlgaria 
GoiiKjpum h«?rtjflceui», dcjctctian of 

the root, t'Xtnic't 10 — 'ti m«. 
iiuniiicum ulliciualili (direi:t), 1q torpor 

of the Ut4MUS 

fledeomc oil (direct) 
K^draittitie indirect 

iCsternal rem»die^, — ^Qut hipbath, 

tbfght. 



Hyaaopat ofBciaalii 

ludigo, I dr. (direct) 

Juniper 

Luptnus aJboa 

Myrrh, in torpor (direct) 

Nardoatjehoa jatam aosi 

Nfgelhi»attva 

Nox Tomica, with iron in 

hepatic torpor and amcmia 
OrigaDum oil (direct) 
PcEoaia officinalSa 
Papaya juice and aeetlt 
Tnnitey 

Pcgatiuin hJtrnuila 
Peony royal 
Peirosollnuiii aativum 
Plumbago ro^«ea 
Polygon am aloue | dr « or with iron 

(direct), tn anmmia tie fore the 

period I 
Quinine (indirect) 
Rata ftravcolcna, atony of atcra% fir 

ovary 
fiabinn oil (dlret^t), *40 m^. in nlony 
Salvadora peratca, the root burk 
SanKuinnria 

Sn mo II in befol^e the period 
Strychnine (imlirect) 
Taniy flirect) 
Thuja 

Thyme (gur Jen) 
TrigoiieJlii f<L'num grujcum 
Vise urn flnvcaecnfl (direct) 
Xanthoxylon 
VajTOn 
Kende ti&laater 

leeching to the genttalii rubefacient to the 



Emetics- (^0 V&h I, page los.) 



Allamaadu cathartica 
klangium Uninrkii 
Ipomorphine hydrochlo- 
' ride 

Arbtolochia 
AscLepia; 

Bariiutonia acutangula — 
BrjLSHica e}»m|)o6tri8 
Bryonia itKjt 
Cahtmui« 

rrif.4r.u,i^ t?i^ftotca 
(' llutii 

t' J di-< chloride 

Coninicrii iMiU and hoi water 



Coodurango 
Crinum asiaticiiui 
Emetine 
Erythrophlceum 
Eupatorlum 
Ipecacuanha 
Jairopha corcaa 
Lajrenarta vulgaris 
Luffa amara 
Karegamia almtn 
PhjtolacGa 
Pilocarpine 
Pccderia feet id a 
Qua bail! 



Randia dumatoruoi 
Sapindus trifoUalun 
Sanguinarla canaden- 

■ ID 

Sabadiltt 

bc<lum acre 

Tbevetia ncrii folia 

Tobacco 

Tytophora asthmatica, 

wiih tartar emetic 
Viola odorata^nanseal' 

ing 
Walsuria piscida 



for/v/u/d,— Com fiound emetic powder^eontalna ipeoacuanlia 2, lobelia 2, l4ood 
root I. Uoftc, 3t> to m grs. 



672 



EXPECTORANTS. 



Enemata and Injections. 

Injections. — These are liquid preparations used for introduction into the cavities 
of the body by means of a syringe. 

Bmtmata. — Enemas or clysters. The term is applied to preparations thrown into 
the rectum. The agents used may be demulcents, laxatives, nutrients, stimulants or 
vermifuges. They are incorporated with warm or tepid water. 

Enemui, — Simple enema contains soap, common salt and warm water. Warm 
water enema contains gruel or warm water with soap, turpentineand castor oil. 

Medicated enema contains aloes, asafetida, tobacco, opium, &c. Starch enema- 
starch boiled or rice boiled with laudanum, in extreme cases. 

Nutrient enemata contains materials for artificial digestion ; it bhould not 
exceed 4 ounces, should be acid to secure osmosis, as rectum is not an organ of 
digestion, and to be repeated every 6 hours. It contains olive oil, opium, i)epsine, 
soap, starch, brandy, &c. ; there are clysters enema containing glycerin or any 
similar fluid along with acetate of lead or dilute hydrochloric acid or yolk 
of eggs. 



Errhines and sternutatories. {See Vol. I, page 403.) 



Anacyclns pyrethrum 
Arnica raontana 
Artemisia stematatoria 
Boldo, leaves 
Calotropis gigantea 

(dried milk) 
Camphor 
Capsicum 
Canscora decussata 



Chamomile 

Convallaria 

Cubebe 

Euphorbium 

Qinger 

Hellebore 

Ipecacuanha 

Lobelia 

Menthol 



Quillaja saponaria 
Sanguinarioe 
Saponaria vaccuria 
Sassybark 

Thalictrum foliosum 
Tobacco (snuff) 
Veratrum 
White hellebore 



Expectorants- {See Vol. /, page 404.) 



Abrus precatorius 

Acacia arabica 

Acid benzoic (stimulant) 
„ camphoric 

Adhatoda vesica 

Agaricin 

Althoea officinalis 

Alhagi maurorum 

Ammoniacum 

Apocynum 

Apomorphine hydro- 
chloride (nauseating) 

Asclepias 

Balanitis roxburghii 

Balsam tolu 
ft pern 

Balsamodendron gum- 
mifera 

Buchanania latifolia 

Boswelia carterii 

Caparis spinosa 

Chekan 

Citrarin 



Emetine (nauseating) 

Euphorbium 

Oalbanum 

Garlic (stimulant) 

Olycerrhiza glabra 

Qrindelia 

Ouaiacam 

Inula 

Ipecacuanha and squill 

(nauseating) 
Justicia adhatoda 
Lactuea sativa 
Liquid amber orientalis 
Leucas cephalotes 
Lobelia (nauseating) 
Marrubium vulgare 
Mastiche 

Nelumbium speciosum 
Nux vomica 
Onion 

Pinus sylvestris (stimulant) 
Papaver rhceas, syrup. 
Dose, I to 1 dr. 



Pilocarpine hydro- 
chlorate (nauseating) 
Polygonum aviculare 
PruDUS virginiania 
Quebracho (nauseating) 
Quillaja saponaria 
Saccharine substances 
Sanguinaria canadensis 
Saponin (stimulant) 
Senega ( „ ) 
Solanum jacqaini 
Squills (stimulant) for 

catarrh 
Strychnia (stimulant) 
Tar (stimulant) 
Terpentine 
Tylophora asthmatira 
Urgenia scilla 
Veratrum album 
Viola odorata, purple 

flowers 
Wood tar (stimulant) 
Zisyphus vulgaris 



HYPNOTICS AND SAPORIFICS. 



673 



Febriftigas* 



Ailantbus 

Anthocephalas caclamba 

Aralia guilfoylia 

Artemisia 

AUtonia scbolaris 

Berbcris aristata 

BonducnutH 

Calendula officinalia 

Cedrela toona, bark, infusion 

Cinchoni 

Clerodendron inerme 

Desmodium ^angeticam 

Dichroa febrifuga 

Embelia ribes 

Eucalyptus oil 

Gentian root 

Hollarrbena antidyecntcrica, bark 



Melia azadirachta. Decoction. Tincture 

Nagar moth 

Ophelia chiretta 

Parsley 

Picroena exceUa 

Picrorrhi74t kurroa, rhisome 

Pittosporum floribondum 

Quinine 

Quassia 

Salix nigra 

8amadera indica 

Soymida febrifuga, bark 

Strychnos calubrina 

„ nux vomica, seeds 
Swertia chirata 
Tinospora cordifolia 



OalactagOgUeS. iSee Vol, J, page 405.) 



Alstonia scbolaris 

Anise 

Asparagus racemoeus 

Black tea 

Dill 

Erythema Indica 

Fennel 

Galega purpurea 

(tossypium. Decoction of the root or 

emulsion of Keeds useful 
Ipomioa digitata, given with wine 
Ja^)orandi, objectionable as it causes 

profuse sweats and salivation 



Jatropha curcas, milky juice 

Nigella sativa, decoction of seeiis 

Peganum barmala 

Paucidanum graveolens 

Pilocarpus, very useful in nursing women 

to increase the milk 
Physostigma 
Pulsatilla 
Kicinus, extract, or decoction intemAlly, 

or infusion or leaves locally to the 

breasta 



Vaoilla 



AttcQtion to sore nipples. Give tonics. Correct ansemia, exposure to fresh air ; 
hot Infusion of fennels as fomentation to the bi-easts, succulent food. 

FonnuU. — Ricini Fol, l^dr.; f(jeniculi, l^ dr.; anise, l| dr. ; extract gaultheria, 
15 grs. ; aquH3, 3 os. Dose, 1 os. 

Oalactafnge—LactiAige. Antigalactics. (JSee Vol. /, poife 43S.) 

These agents are opposed to galactagogues. They are measures which reduce or 
dry up the secretion of milk. 



Agaricus with potassium iodide 

Allium cepa 

Anethi fructUK 

Apiol leaves, locally 

Atropine internally and locally 4 grs. to 
1 oz. of water round the breasts 

Melladonna internally and locally 

Bandaging the breasts to cause compres- 
sion 

Chavica, warm leaves 



Camphor and Glycerin locally 

Collodion 

Conium used in enlargement of the 

breasts with profuse secretion of milk 
Desmodium trifolium 
Jasminium sambac, to arrest secretion 

in cases of milk abscess 
Parsley, leaves applied hot to the breasts 
Quinine 
Sinapism 



Hypnotics and Soporifics. iSeeVoi, i.jMtgeiOS.) 



Boldoa fragrans 
Camphor monobromate 
Cannabine tannate, 2 to 10 grs. 
Cannabis indica 
Codeine 



Coninic hydrobromate, amotor depressant 

Digitalis 

Duboisine 

Ergot, as cardiac tonic 

Gelsemium 



674 



VESICANTS. 



Hypnotics.— (<J<»«<<^.) 



Humulus lapulus 

H.vdrocyaDic acid, as pulmonary sedative 

against cough 
Hyoflcine hydrobromate, hypodermi- 

cally 
Jamaica logwood 

HsBmostatics and Styptics- iSee Vol, i^p^ge 40S.) 



Lactuca 

Opium and the alkaloid 

Pellotine 

Piscidia erythrina, extract 

Stramonium 



Aljsorbent cotton (locally) 
Acid sclerotic 

I, gallic 
Asclepias carrasavica 
Astragalus sarcocolla (locally) 
Camphor 

Capsella bursa pastprii (locally) 
Golocasia antiquorum 
Digitalis 
Erigeon 
Ergot 

Ergotine. hypodermically 
Galium aparine 

Hamamelis useful as it contains tannin 
Hydrangea 



Ipecacuanha 

Kalanchoe (locally) 

Kino 

Lanium album 

Matico 

Opium in uterine hoemorrhages 

Plantago 

Punica granatum 

Pterocarpns marsuptum 

Khus aromatious 

Turpentine, useful in passive hcemor- 

rhages or in haemorrbagic transudation 

on the free mucous surface 
Tannin 
Vegetable astringents 



Irritants andOoanter-Irritants (a) Bnbefacients. {See Vol. /, page 406.) 



Aiwan oil 

Alluim sativum 

Ammoniacum as resolvent 

Andropogan citratus, volatile oil 

Anisomeles malabarica, oil of leaves 

Anise oil 

Antbrarobin [acrid 

Argemone mexicana, seeds narcotics, 

Balispermum montanum, oil of seeds 

Cajuput oil 

Calophyllum minnopbyllum 

Camphor 

Canada pitch 

Capsicum oleo resin 

Chaul moogra oil 

Chavica Boxburghii, long pepper 

Cinnamon oil 

Goal tar 

Eucalyptus oil 



Cb) 



Adonis vemalis 

Andira araroha 

Agiya 

Ammania vcsicatona 

Anacardium occidentalis 

Argyrea speciosa 

Bhui Champa 

Bhilamo 

Celastris panicnlata 

Chelidoninm majus 

Croton oil, (postulant) 

Cochlearia armoracea 

Chrysarobin 

Cllmatis triloba 



Eugenia caryophillata 

Menthol 

Myrtis commune 

Mustard 

Myristica officinalis, expressed oil 

Picca succioifera 

Piper nigrum 

Pitch 

Plumbago rosea 

Pix burgundi 

Pongamia oleum 

Rhus toxicodendron 

Sapindus trifoliatus 

Semicarpus anacardium, acrid oil 

Thapsia garganica 

Turpentine 

Tobaccum 

Volatile oils 

Zingiber 

Vesicants. 

Daphne mesereon 

Droeera peltata 

Euphorbium 

Gynandropsis pentaphylla 

Ipecacuanha (pustulant) 

Jnglans cineria 

Moringa ptenrgosperom 

Oil mustord (volatile) 

Plumbago rosea, root bark 

Polygonum acre 

Ranasura 

Salvadora wightiana, root Ijark 

Sani^inaria canadensies (escharotic) 



NARCOTICS. 



675 



Lithontriptics. 



AcH l^enzoic 
Caffeine 

CretRjTa religiosa 
Feronia elepbantum 
Hydrangea 



Parcira roots 
Raphanus sativus 
Terminalia arjuoa 
Zea mays 



Mydriatics. 



Iheae agents cause dilatation of the pupil of the eye. Tbey act by causing 
temporary paralysis of the ciliary muscle leading to loes of accommodation. The 
tension within the organ is increased and thus focussed for distant objects only. 
The dilatation is due to stimulation uf the end orjzans of the sympathetic nerve 
leading to increased power of the radiating muscular fibres of the iris. It is also due 
to patalysis of the third cranial nerve, the motoroculi lessening the power of the 
circular muscular fibres of the iris. 

When given internally they act directly or locally on the conjunctiva or through 
the circulation. 



Anemone pulsatilla 

Aconitum napellus 

Anaesthetics 

Atropine 

Muboisine 

Daturine 

Homatropinc and its salts 



Hydrastine 

H enbane 

Hyoscyamus 

Mydrine 

lluscarinc 

Piscidin 

Stramonium 



Myotics- 



These agents act by producing contraction of the pupil, by stimulating the 
circular muscular fibres of the iris and causing tcm|)orary contraction of the ciliary 
muscle. They have an opposite action to mydriatics. Under their use the eye is 
accommodated for near objects and the tension < intra ocular) is diminished. Home 
of them act upon the end organs of the oculomotor nerve. The myotic action of 
others is of a central origin leading to paralysis of local refiex excitability. 



Kriculin Hydrobramatc 
Eserine, internally or locally. 

It neutralizes the action of 

atropine 
Qelsemine internally 
Lobeline, internally 



Moi phine 

Muscarine 

Nicotine (locally) [ability 

Opium to paralyse local reflex excit- 

Pnysofltigmine 

Pilocarpine (locally) 



Narcotics, (fi^ Vol /, page 407. •) 



Absinthium 

Atropine 

Belladonna 

Camphor monobrome, to subdue 
reHex excitability 

Cannabis sativa 

Chamomile, to relieve restlessness 
in children 

Conium tincture, to soothe restless- 
ness In delirium 

Essential oils 

Erytbroxylnm coca 

Hops 

Hydrocyanic acid 



Hyoscyamus 

Humulus luplulus 

Ignatia, to allay excitability 

lettuce 

Opium and its alkaloids 

Papaver somniferom syrup 

Soianinc 

Stramonium 

Strychnine, to sooth restlessness 

Sumbul tincture, with chloric ether 

in relieve restlessness 
Tobacco 
Turpentine 
Valerian, to allay reflex excitability 



676 



REFRIGERAN^TS. 



Parasiticides. {See Vol. /, page 407, ; 



Anamirta paniculata, insecticide 

Andira Araroba 

Anona sqaamosa, insecticide 

Balsam of Pern 

Cassia alata 

Gajapot oil 

Cleome viscosa, to kill maggots 

Dadmurdan 

Delpbiniam stapbisagria 

Derris uliginosa 

Euphorbia Pilulifera 

HydnocarpDS 

Jatropba curcas 



Karanj iel 

Myrtos commnais 

Oil of cade 

Picrasma quassioides 

Pangamia glabra 

Picrotoxin 

Rbinacanthos 

Stapbisagria seedv, oil or ointment 

Stercospermum xylocarpum 

Storax 

Sagundas margioratus, pediouli 

Ventilago madraspatana 



Poultices. 

Tbese are local applications or baths supplying heat and moisture to the patt 
thereby relaxing the tissues and relieving pain. They are useful agents in subdu- 
ing inflammation and in promoting suppuration. They should be applied 
when hot, thick or thin according to the condition of the part. In case of the 
peritoneum poultices should be thin. They should be covered with oiled silk and 
frequently changed. In sise, they should oover the inflamed area, they should be 
applied either direct over the inflamed tissues, or some sedative or anodyne flrst be 
smeared over the tissues and then applied. 

When ready they should be medicated by ammonium chloride, opium or Goulards 
extract — They are prepared of the following substances : — 

Alum, bran, capsicum, carbolic acid and linseed, carrot, charcoal, flour and 
linieed, chlorinated soda, fucus crispus (cataplasm), hemlock, hops, iodide of starch 
linseed meal alone or with bran, linseed meal with olive oil, mustard with linseed 
oatmeal, potato, slippery elm, starch, wheat bread. 

BeMgerants. (^ Vol. i, 2Mge 408,^ 



Adansonia digitata (pulp) of fruit 
Anthocephalus cadamba 
Averrhoea bilimbi 

„ carambola 
Anrantii succus 

Borasfius flabelli formis, (saccharine juice) 
Byophitum sensitivum 
Carissa carunda 
Gicer arietinum, (acid juice) 
Cichorium imtybus 
Citrus, bergamia (juice of fruit) 
C0CO6 nucifera (saccharine juice) 
Diaphoretics 
Bmbilia ribes 
Flacourtia catafracta 
Fruit juicts 
Gmelina arborea (compound decoction) 



Garuga pinnata 

Grape juice 

Hibiscus roeasinensis (petals) 

lonidium suffruticosum, locally to 

head 
Lactuca 
Mori svrup 

Nymphoea alba, syrup of flowers 
Oxalis corniculata 
Pterocarpus santalinus 
Prunus domesticus 
Rosadamascus 
Rubus idceus 
Taroarindus indicus 
Viola odorata, purple flowers 
Vitis venifera 
Vegetable acids 



SF.DATIVKS. 



677 



Restoratives.— Nutritives (Sw- Vol, /, p^tg^' 408.) 



Almonds 

Apricot 

Arrowroot 

Asparagus 

Bombiz malabaricus 

Bassia latifolia 

Ruclinnalia latifolia 

Bcnincasa 

Citrullus vulgaris 

Coffee 

Cncumig sativus 

Cucumis melo 

Curcuma angustifolia 



Ceropegia acuminata 

Cetraria Islandica 

Chinese pumpkin 

Cocoe nucifera 

Euryale feroz, the seeds 

Ficus 

Hordeum 

Hanglfera indioa 

Malt extra'^t 

Milk 

Nelumbium speciosum, 

the seeds 
Ooymum pilosum 



Orysasativa 

Panax pseud ogin sing 

Pistacia vera 

Plantain 

Prunus bokhariensis 

Quince seeds 

Saw palmetto 

Screnoa 

Theobroma cocao 

Trapa bispinnsa 

Triticum sativum 

Vicia faba 



Sialagogues, Topical andOeneral. 



Armoracea 
Capsicum (topical) 
Chrysanthemum 
Cubebs (topical) 
Horse radish (topical) 
Hydrangea 

Ipecacuanha (general) 
Jabomndi 



Kava kava 
Lobelia inflata 
Mesereoii 

Muscarine (general) 
Mustard (topical) 
Myrica sapid a 
Pepper 
Phy!>ostigma (general) 



Pilocarpine (general) 
Plumbago rosea 
Pyrethrum (topical) 
Rhubarb ( „ ) 
Tobacco ( „ ) 
Xanthoxylum fraxinum 
Zingiber 



SEDATIVES. 
(^) Oardiac Sedatives.— ('S^^r Vol, i.pagv 400.) 



Acid hydrocyanic dilute (direct) 
AconitCf acts directly by depressing mus- 
cular fibres and the cardiac motor gang- 
lia 
Adonidin. 



Anaesthetics 
Belladonna 
Mandragura 



Anagallis arvensis 
Barringatonia racemosa 



Acid hydrocyan dil 

Belladonna 

Cocaine 



Aconitum napellus 

Camphor monobromate 

Cannabis 

Cocaine 

Cocculus indicus 

Codeine 

44 



Cactus grandiflorus 

Cold 

Digitalis, to stimulate the vagus centre 
and the cardiac mascle. Ii slows the 
frequency and rhythm of the pulse 



W General Sedatives - 



Rumex crispus 



Opium 

Piscidia erythriuu [10 m?. Tobacco 

Pulsatilla tincture, 3 to 



(r) Local Sedatives. 

Liactuca sativa 

(<0 Oastric Sedatives. 

Uenbauc 

Ipecacuauha, small doses 



(e) Nerve Sedatives. 

Couium 

Duboisine sulphate 

HyoBcine 

Laciucarium 

Lobelia 

Morphine 



Martyoia diandra 



Opium 

Prunus laurocerasus 



Xarccine 
Salix Nigra 
8tiamonium 
Tobacco 
Valerianates 
Wild jasmine 



07"^ STIMULANTS. 

(/) Pulmonary Sedatives. 

Ao;«l hydrocyaa ilil Lv>beha Turpentine 

UoU.uionua Morphino Vermtrinc 

KnuMio* 

Cy> Vascular Sedatives. 

Aoouitf* KDVtic2i Ver»tiine 

O^ Vesical Sedatives. 

Biirlt\T w;itor (^mucila- Co'tuib* as aii auti^^-tic Opium, to reUere pain 

j:iium<> ruh.»i»5- ant:s»*ptic P;ireir« as ftstringeat 

IVl »i.l»>unA, 1'^ reliovo {-ciiu HrvxsorAmus. to rel^evv Mi^rmat* maid.a. to 
Bachu. ;%* AStrinsreni p*:n reliere pain 

0<innab s^ to ivlkew jviin Lius^\>i tea (nja-*iUgiiK-u5) Ur* arii as asthn«ieQt 

STIUXJL A.NTS. .5 • i :. /. ^ •, // : ) 
U^ Cardiac Stimiilaats. 






A(»aia:> vn'j* 


»r^ 




GujiUoam 
Kar:ft kar^ 
MoatiKC 






»b^ 


OuebralStii 


A ,a MM 






iV*x 


Ar.v»»'. v\ wva;: 


:.<f Ov 


a^ 


Ga*iCLa 


C*.vv-^ 






Six TWS«f 



vd> Oislnc er ^rrar^V SsaixUsts^ 



TONICS. 



679 



(g) Stimulants (local), Cutaneona or Bubefacienta. 



Allppicc 

Argemone mexican*, oil 

of seeds 
Asafetida 
Bavachee seeds 
Cajuput oil 



A bsinthin 

Atropine, in large doses 
affecting the respira- 
tory centre 

Calabarine 

Camphor 



Camphor 
Eucalyptus oil 
Karanj tel (the oil) 
Liquidamber 
Mustard 
Oil of cade 



Petroleum fluid 
Pix burgundica 
RutagraTeolena (oil) 
Turpentine 
Volatile oils 



Ch) Motor or Spinal Excitanta 



ConTallaria 

Damiana 

DigiUlift 

Brgot 

Nicotine 

Nux vomica 

(1) Vaao-Motor Stimulants. 



opium 

Bhus toxicodendron 

Strychnine, affecting the 

respiratory centre 
Thebaine,or paramorphine 



Belladonna, local vascular dilator 
Digitalis acting on vaso-motor centres 
Squill acting on vaso-motor centres 



Strychnine acting on vaso-motor centres 
Volatile oils acting on local vascalar dila- 
tors 



(J) Respiratory Stimulants- 



Apomorphine 


Brucine 


Opium 


Aspido spermine 


Digitolis 


Strychnine 


Atropine 


Duboisinc 


Thebaine 


Belladonna 


Liquidamber 


Tobacco 



Absinthiu (bitter) 
Azadirachta Indica 
Canella alba 
Capsella bursa pastores 
Cascara amarga 
Chicorium int^'bus 
Citrus aurantium 



Caffeine 

('imicifuga 

Convallaria 



TOMIOS. iSeeVol.I.pageilU) 

(a) Bitter Aromatics. 



Concssi bark 
Hydracotyle asiatica 
Limonia acidissima 
Mesua ferrea 
Myrtos chekan 
Nagkesar 
Origanum oil 

G>) Oardiac Tonicsw 

Digitalis 

Krythrophlcein 

Hellaborein 



Pcp]>cr methysticam 
Rhus aromatica 
Rumcx crispus 
Soymida Feorifuga 
Tinoipora cordifolia- 

rootstem 
Xanthoxylon rhetaa 



Sparteine 

Strychnine 

Strophanthus 



(c) Gastric or Stomachic Tonics. 

These excite the activity of nervo muscular apparatus of the stomach. 



.Egle marmelos 
Alum root 
Anthem is nobilis 
Aromatic bitters 
Aromatic oils 
Atees 

Bitters, vegetable 
Capsicum 
Coptis teeta 



Coriandrum sativum 
CratSBva religioea 
Cuminum cyminum 
Embelia ribes 
Kugenia caryopbellata 
Fennel 

Garden angelica 
Gmelina arborea 
Qentiana kurroa 



Kava kava 
LauruA nobilis 
Melia atadirach 
Mentha s^lvestris 
Myrtus chekan 
Myristica moschata 
Nux vomica 
Ophelia chiratta 
Picrasma qnassioides 



68o 



THERAPEUTICS. 



Pimeota 
Ptychotis ajwan 
Punica granatam 
PuDKent carminatiyes to 

Bttmulate the local circa- 

lation 



Araica, 5 drops to relicTe 
aching of limbe aod 
muscles and nerve pro- 
stration 

Cimicifaga, for headache 
when dae to fatigoe or 
oTerwork 

Coca, in the weakly and 
conralesoent, who are 
easily fatigoed ander 
exertion 



Abroma au.'asta 
Aleteris farinosa 
Hydrastis 



Qnassine 
Qainine 
Strychnine 
Taraxacam officinalis 
Trichosanthes dioica 



(d) Nervine Tonics. 

Cocaine, if cxhaustinii iitdoe 
to loss of blood, diarrhte^ 
and soDstroke 

Cannabinam i annate 

Coffee or Tea very reviving 

0>niam flcid extract. 

Damiana 

Krythroxylnn cocoa 

Food fattening, highly 
assimilable 

Kola 

(e) Uterme Tonics. 

Paganom hamiala 

Polsatilla 

Sapindns emarginatus 



Vakhma infusion 

VoUtile oils, to excite the 
activity of ner vo>niii8calar 
.-ipp'iratus of the stomach 

Zingil»er 



Lapnlin 

Nux vomica 

Opium tincture mixed with 
nux vomica Tr. in 
headache. Hushing, dys- 
pepsia from overwork 

Scutellaria fluid extract, # 
to 1 dr. 

Theobroma ctcao 

Tumera aphrodisiac 



Savine 

Viburnum prunifolium 



(O Urinary StimnlantB. Vesiad Toniei- 



Aaadirachta Indica 
Cbpaiba 



Belladonna 
Coeaine 
Digitalis 
Kigot 



Croton tiglium 
Dipterocarpus tnrbinatus 

VaacQlnr Oontomctors. 

Hamamelis 

Hydrastin 

Opium 



Lasiosiphoii specioeos 
Rhus aromatica 



Squills 

Scrophaathn 

Strychnine 



THE&AFRUnOS. 
AWmninal Plethorm ; Obeaitj; GoriNilencj- 



Abdominal massage* 

Antifat 

Fncus vesiculosii^ to rsdoee adipose 

tissue 
Hydragogne cathartict in eongestioB 

of portal circulatioa 



Grape core if the liver is en^ir^cd aini 

sluggish 
Lemon juice 
Pilocarpiae 
Vegetable acids 
Vinegar with care as it caoses awemia 



DUtn — DrjdiH if oberity is due to dy)4>ep8ia, hepatic enlargeaient '^r to 
excesaiTe beer drinking: avoid maeh bread, salted or highly cooked memtK »auc«», 
•olid vegetables and frails. (Xrr FW. I,jmfe 417.} 

Ata[tiaB;Ateti&ciMiti;Bebolics:Qzyiodcs: Utoine Bzcitantn. 

Add tannis withopiom and ipecseaaiiha Ananassa sativa. essence <4 th jufce 

in habitoal aboftion Asafetida, 3 gts^ to check ha^coal abur- 
ActKa iscemnsii aa aterine sti—lant tioa 

Alefeerii^ to ye e tat ■UKamage Cannabis indMa. in imp?n lin^ abocttoa 



ACNE. 



m 



Abortion*— (<?<'«^'*0 



Cartca pApftjft Mcdii — locsitly 
Ciide&f« xgmdfi, na a Inxiitive 
Cauloph V llum thalvctroiiJef^ to prevent 

Cimidfug*, » innpliUmtiir in irritable 

nod pro1ftp««a uleruH 
Cotton riK>t burk 
Cri'toUnn junceA, scesclii 
DAUcua ciirotn ntcdf^ to cnu(»e Abortion 
Krgol, ttjone or with quiuitic to restrain 

hfetiiorrtfAge in threntuor^ Rl^ortion 
HjffrMtin bydrochlorlrlt^ to iiidace Ator- 

tlon 
Mitnusopt hcxumira, piutc? of the 9e&U — 

tocftlly to prrtcurv •oortioti 
Oil o( ru»s to (>rocurc Abortion 
Ophim ttod ergot, to tr*tr*In aterine 

birr nor rliage 



Pilocnrpioe ar an ecbolic 

Pi(»cicli& 

riumbAgo rosoA, root introilaoed into tb« 

m, 
Plumeria acuminaUi, the brancbes insert- 
ed into the ot , 
Productioti of irritiitiOQ of abdomen iind 

pelvic orgftus 
Savtue, powdered leavei, or tiuctore to 

check hn^tnorrbage in Ihreatening 

abortion 
SenilcA^rpos anAcarditim, locally to the oa. 
TAmpoiiadc to the cervix uteri with eol- 

tou or spongt! dipped in glycerin or 

vinegar 
Usilliijro n)ftyd()«, as abortifiacient 
ViliMinuni prutii foil urn, in habitiud and 

threAteoL'^i niH>rtion 



▲bscera ^ Boils : Sui^puration (See Vof, i, page 417. y 



Aronite, to Abort 
Albiixia leAvc», as pouUico 
Amoionlncand ra"ii*iiry platter to abort 
Anona iijuamitsM, to loiAtLti •uppiirAtton 
AriiicA tincture ItK-AllynA lotion t4> abntl 
Atropine, 4 grw., ro««tf watt-r 1 oi or 

iplycerrn 4 oi,, applied locally to relJeve 

pAtn 
liArlcria pHonitii, pAitA of the root todls^ 

perte Awcl lings 
TtclMontiA AUint% interriAlly to ftlx>rt> or 

AA pAint mil lid the Arrota to ndieve 

pain ; tir -T ' ■ ' • i-i u«eil to 

•nbduc iintlon 

' dliatcra rt .-^a 

Biophjtiini Bt^nsitivitm, A.ctts potrdcrvd 

mixed with butter and {ippUeil lo 

Ab«C4nB«9 

Camphorftied alci^hol or camphor r'arl»<i- 

laVi ' " ! Itx'aUy to reUeve pain 

fCort' ', 1 tri 2 dr» iH*foix» m#!aK 

Tt If 

Co<!fti ' J nilay 

pain 
Dtemta exteniMi ; the jait-te, loixn! with 

Ume it, loGflUy appUiid lu boil* aymI 

nbAOiMei 



Uhatiira ilba^ aa poultice 

Ferula gnlfi;oii(1uA. locally aa n si(nii)- 

laiit to tfidoleiit itoi\n 
ClyimodropkU iieniaph^lhi^ the oil or 

I he bruised U nvea aie Applied locally 

to the botlM to promote iuppiiratton 
H^Hoti opium iodicum, Icnvi^ locally 

n|)plLcd to ^unibodi 
Lippia noditlHra, pa»tc of the herb I a 

Appliod In promAU? bUppurjition 
Mint hoi, I'lbrnut AtdutloQ t bo 9, U>oa1ty 

apnU<xl 
HirmbiliHJAli: ' ^ h>cul1y am poultice 

to haiteu u 

Morphine niiu ;,.. :u...) oWtc* to diminish 

iriilurMtion doc to old AbucetiicA and 

to prevent the foriDatlon of new 

onf'Ji 
I'oidtiren linteeil or bran, moriioated, or 

beemcnrLHl uiih opium or bellmlonna 

to as»)f^t mrituratiou ; to allay pain 

and tiiihimiimiion 
SarMipardlA in chnmt*^ abac^cwi with 

pnifn*iO dl^( hurgt'A 
8ynipli>et>4 raiemoKH, tht? plaMcr iB iiii(^l 

til prftmote inaliirition of boiU 
Vcralriim viddc, often aborta 



Kii^tmt iX^wrcfrVx.— DrAinagetube after free oiM'ning of a deep AbaceaM and 
fttfon of tbM cAYtty. PrcMU re After opening; treauing of the child in o^AnimAry 



Aeae: Acn© EosaceSt Seborrhoda. {Ste fW./, paffi ii0,) 



Acid tannic, nted Ai eolution or ns 
diiflttng powder with itaidi 



Bclhidonna, lfio«lly to check *x<*c=*lTe 
sccniiion from the AebaciOOi folUclca 



v^ 



'*fm«i£|» 



tut taut i€<^eSf ac yiUHrtiy 
"'Itr'^nBnJiiiL 






'SiLiilim 



Sir Td. 



•'IfcllBIIilXBDBk JBTtSUIA 





XL aa 


'4(tf«iX. 3UA 


trmi£Kr» 






•r* iTMWMH^ rflfairiiiifM ■ r 


AiBSl 


■te 






m :pnilllim; diB!flE«lUL 


fOlt. 


11' ttlHWt^lf 


ammxxmcxaL 







HBHTI '▼mt. OflUIIWirStlMK £1 IBil 

Bfrmucs 11 jumiAMi T^ :nauadfB- 
^[EanniK ir fsnostimt. 'v^tn 

•fiwi^iiiimfn 

-llu. n i^^milnircKStiESwm 



SrL S«*r ' •«« iL r. «v^ ii?y. 



iwsr -v:!^. TTBMiTn; milk jmc jci- 



irmonub. —^^ ^ 



X'j^UBitfarjint 




-«r^ii2iu !WTjiii IT aasnu 

wr:x. ciuarnSTCK iniiw>wig ino^'Y \f^ 



*«ffniimnniL sn suf. j 



iiciC skUit or 




r«^ I- 



4asL-. 






,~i3iQicr tiL. t fiiK taipflcir 




or sunmit ikupF* 

nJ-T as 



line* 

tmfcii7.f > » it xxrixtt. V 4!taae^ 2«inf«CT 



AMENORKHfEA. 



683 



Alcoholism; Alcoholic Intoxication; Dmnkenness. CSee Vol. I, page 421.) 



Actaea racemoga, given ia dyspc[)8ia 
due to alcoholism 

Apomorphine hydrochloride, hy|)o- 
dermically 

Capsicum tincture 10 ms. alone 
before meals or with bromides and 
arsenic, or with lupnlin to over- 
come habit, to remove distress, 
t<) prevent morning sickness, to 
promote appetite and digestion, to 
relieve restlessness and to induce 
sleep 

Cinchona rubra, to relieve gastric 
catarrh of drunkards 

C'caine, to remove the craving, to 
restore appetite, to induce sleep, to 
8oothe the brain, and to induce a 
feeling of contentment 

(lelsemium, same as bromides 

Ilvilrastint* hypodcmiically 

Lupnlin with capsicum, to quiet 
nervous system 

Nux vomica tincture, 5 ms. with 
capsicum 15 ms. as tonic and 



stimulants, to aid digestion, 
to relieve tremors, and to diminish 
craving for spirits in chionic alco- 
holism 

Opium with tonics is given before 
meals to relieve pain of gastritis 
and to produce sleep 

Orange sucked 

Picrotoxin, to relieve tremors, given 
in small dotes 

Piscidia, as a soporific to those addict- 
ed to alcohol 

Quinine, a nervine sedative, and to 
restore digestion 

Stroph<intl)U8 tincture in dipsomania 

Strychnine nitrate, hypodermically 
is useful in dipsomania, to cure 
chronic alcoholism and craving 
for spirit'* 

Strychnine with atropine, cocaine 
and codeine a« injection hypoder- 
mically to rtiuove habit 

Sumbul, to relieve headache of old 
drinkers 



External rfrnz-zf/V*— Stomach pump, in acute cases, cold douche to the head, warmth 
to the feet and limb?, artificial respiration. 

Formula. — Tamarind, dates, raisins, pomegranate 8ce<ls, oxalis corniculata, each 
12 grs. given internally. Duse. 1 dr. to remove habit. 

Alopecia, Tinea Decalvans. iSreVoi.l,page422.) 



Capsicum tincture with cnntharides, 

Eucalyptus [locally 

Frc<iucnt shaving 

Jaborandi 

Quiltaja ^aponarin, to remove pcurf 

and to renew the growth of hair 
Quinine lotion exttrnally 



Nut^all 

Pilocarpi nt', as Rubcutaneous injection 

hosemary. as lotion combined with 

c.-mthnridcM 
Saviiie oil, locally 

Tannin, solution or ointment locally 
Thymol, locally 



Formula. — Almond oil, 8 drs. ; oil of rosemary, 2 drs. ; liquor ammonia, 2 drs. ; 
spirit of wine. 12 drs. ; and honey, 50 drs ; as lotion for the hair. 

Amaurosis and Amblyopia. 



ArnicA 

Digitalis 

Emmenagogucs 

Guaiacum, to improve vision in 

persons with rheumatic diathesis 
Nux vomica 
Opium with brandy or whisky to 

relieve dimness due to tobacco 



Pilochrpine, if due to tobacco or alcohol 
Kue to relieve dimness of sight due to 

functional causes 
Snntonine 

Seton in th« linck of the neck 
Strychnine, hypodermically to relieve 

dimness due to excet>s of tobMieo. 

lead or uIcoIh 1 



Amenorrhoea. («*^r Vol, /, page 422,) 



Aconite tincture 2 to 3 ms., to refti>re 
the discharge if suppressed from 
cold and from wet feet or chill 

Actjca laccmosa. to rc»store s«?cretion to 
remove headache and lessen ovarian 
pain 



Aloes, a go<xl emmenngogue alone 01 

with iron 
Apiol— if due to functional activity ot 

the pelvic organs to be preceded 

by iron and aloes 
Arnica internally is useful 



684 



ANOREXIA. 



AmenorrboBa —(rofitd.) 



Asafctida with aloes in chlorosis 

Bapticin 

Berberine carbonate 

Cimicifuga at the onset of the flow 

to relieve pain in the head, pain in 

back and loins and in disordered 

nien-'truation 
Colocyiith in chlorotic cases, with 

constipation 
Cocculu indicus, tincture to be given 

prior and during the peri(>d if 

mtfnstr nation is irregular, scanty 

and painful 
Croton oil 

Ergot in plethoric subjects 
Eupatorium, hotinCnsion if dae to cold 
Ouaiacum, as uterine stimulant 
Ignatia, to restore the discharges if 

suppressed from hysteria 
Mustard hipbath 

Myrrh as a tonic and emmenagogne 
Nux vomica with iron 



Opium is useful to restore the sop- 
pressed discharge from Tiolent 
mental emotions 

Polygonum with iron a few days 
before menses are expected 

Pulsatilla, useful when the discharge 
is scanty or delayed by fright or 
chill 

Quiniue 

Uue in atonic condition 

Sauguinarialike rue 

Sautonine before the expected period 

i>avinc fld. extract in general 
atony as uterine tonic 

Senecio aureus, useful in functional 
ammeuhorroea, inadmissible in 
cases of phthitis or of anaemia 

Senega root as decoction is very useful, 
given during the preceding few days 

Serpentaria in aniemia 

Tansy 

Turpentine 



Port/tula Pil. — Pulv. mtoe, | gr. ; ergotine, 1 gr. ; aloes, 1 er. ; ol. sabinae, \ nan. 
hellebore niger, 1 gr.; ferri sulph. 1 gr. ; extract gossypii herbacii, 1 gr. Make a pill 
mass. Dosp, one pill. 

2. Aloes,! gr. ; myrrhae, 1 gr.; croci sativi, \ gr, ; glycerrhiia extract, 1 gr.; 
pulv. sabfna, 1 gr. make 1 pill. 

AiKBsmia. loss of smell. 

Cerebral depressants and agents which proJuce changes in the nasal mucous 
membrane, lessen the senee of smell 

Nux vomica Fugar as snuff increases the sense of 

Strychnine, alone internally or with smell 

Aneurism. iSee Vol. /, page 423 ) 



Acid gallic and iron internally iu 
aortic cases 

Aconite to slow the circulation 

Ergot, in any form to favour coagula- 
tion of blood in fac 

£uciilyptu4 

Lactucanum with h^oscyamus, to 
promote coagulation 



Morphine with atropine and croton 
chloral, locally to lessen pain 

Posture recumbent is absolutely neces- 
sary 

Surgical treatment, 'igature of the 
vesbt^ls, or introduction of fine 
wire into the sac [circnlatioii 

Verntrum viride with opium to quiet the 



Anorexia. 



Absinthin 

Anthemidis, with rhubarb and zinger 

Bitters, vegetable, as berberine carbonate, 
calumba. gentian, chiretta, quassia, 
cascarilla, ^c, to promote appetite 

Cannabis indica, pi o< luces ravenous 
appetite 

CapHicum, in convalescence 

Carissa caronda, as adjuvant to digestion 

Celerina 



Cetrarin 

Cinchonine 

Digestive ferments as papaine ingluvin, 

pepsin, &c. 
Eupatorium 
Ignatia, in hysterics 
Nux vomica with quassia 
Pine apple juice 
Quassia 
Hhubarb with anthemedis and ginger 



APOPLRXV, 



69$ 



AnginA Pectoris* (Av Vid. /, pa^e iss.) 



Aoooite is oscfnl. hat iiiictirtNin If antj^iim 

in due to cardiiiG discaiio 
Altc»pin« 
t!iictioe» in jjeoailoangiDii op in hygtcrical 

CHtiifiHor with opium or with h^di*). 

* M is unL'ful 

VI if liytjtericni 

OcKsAisc*^ intenmJly and lopicallj i« 

uscfal 
Con I (lie hvdrabromate 



Morphin*?, bjpodermicaltjt stTf'rprrii»>nf^ 
the* be&rt if there ia Gardi.< i 

Quinine, ^faen the pain is iji n( 

or when malarial taint la pru^ut 

Stropbauthua 

15 try ch nine 

Toharro tnternally In }te a?oU!ed, itaod 

Tut I " cheat torellcire 



Kj'frrHsJ remtdif4» — Atofd fatiifue, ttexoal excesaea, dim bin (^ hi! li. apply iaane 
to the ita|ie of th** ni'Ck, wartmti (n itie exlri<miiifa» Ury nir fa c»rntiaL 

AphoaiA. iStt VtiL /, pitfe 4244 



Aconite, to allay pain In the throat 
Atropine ^^^ yr. in hy«t«^rirAl caseH and 

when ffuin f&ii^tie of voail conU 
UatfiArii of (olu with I'thor Kulpburic a^ 

tnhahilion Id laryngeal catarrh 
Hi*l)adnntifi 
Ucni&oin vapour, from dusting it oTer 

livt'conl H» inhalation in larynglal 

CAi/irrh 
i^apil<-iini at iiarKl^^ in r<>Iaxe«l vocnl 

ehonU 
(*olUneon{!i canadeniia 



Klcrtn'dty, locally in hysterical or 

servo Mil cniei 
iHngvf, to chew in the mouth or rtfcnce 

of ginger with water for (;ar^le 
Olycerite r>| tannin— l<x^alJy 
ri;tia(t>i like atrxif»im« 
]pion'*uutiha wiritf, iia spray if coni^eailon 

nf TiMjal oordii 
Nux vcmikn 

Pyri'lhmm tincture internally 
Hue oil aN inhnlation in chronic catarrh 
Turpentine and tannin V>y inhalation 



Aphtha Aphthous Stomatitis. iStr V,fL i. pu^r ^ij.) 



Ahretft cnntmdcndfif «ji tract aa Kf^rKlt: 
Acid rftnnie^ locally 
Ainm root 

GaUl(!Hr|>a hiniibi, dec(X3iion of the to^t 
bark an n vvriAh 



htdinn liquorice 

Quinine 

Qticrcun hark a^i gargle 

Khtilarh 

Tnnmrind eolation as j^argle 



Apoplexy and Oerohral Hyperemia (■^'"^ i^z* A fw^c iS9,\ 



Atrtniile or ver&trntn tirldc, If Ihe 
pul^* is full and strong, ikin hot and 
dry. Given to h»wcr blood pr^sauiv? 
and to prevent hicmoiiliagc 

BcIUdonna 

Cactu« in thrvatt'uing eaaea 

Ctoton oil with glycenn intcrrfiily, or 
placed on the back of the tongue 



Klnterium with coTocynth int«nial1yi 
or with Kjap an a rectal tappoalto^ 

Opium untl calomel 

Fiiulliniw:, tluid extraot* If tbeio ia 
wvcrc piMii in the head 

Htryobnine, bypcnlertnically if reapiralion 
faila 



t&drrHnl ntrnffdirt. — Avoid atimulaiing footl or dritik, avoid exposure to hot tun 
and hcntcfl rooms. Give tepid bath to the body, with cold water to the he«d^ b]«c<ling 
from the arm? in sthenic caiicn, tdbtar to the ucck, capsicum with moBtard as plaster 
I to the ncek ami canHac region, cupping tit the na(>e of the neck, eloctricity, emhroca- 

I tion of turiiofilinc to the feet , calves and thigha, enemata of turpentinef head to be 

K kept ht{*brr than Iho b(»dy« ice to the hea4| leeebea to the anus or to the temp^ea if ron- 



686 



ASTHMA, 



Arthritis Bhenmatoid. iSee Vol, i.page ses.) 



Aconite, internally or externally as 

liniment 
Gimicifuga if due to uterine derange. 

ments, the joints stiff and enlarged, and 

pain worse at night 
Coichicnm with alkalies 

ASTHMA. (.See 
Aconite, in spasmoilic cases and in asthma 

following coryza or sneesing 
Ajowan seeds as paint to velum palati 

Ammoniacum with squills and conium 
In spasmodic and hysterical cases 

Apomorphine, ^^ gr. with ipecacuanha, 
Jy gr. intemaily, or ,», gr. alooe hypo- 
derm ieally. 

Asafetida, with antispasmodics and 
narcotics as opium and ether given hs 
a palliative 

Aspidoeperma quebracho, | gr„or aspidos* 
permine extract \ dr. is given to relieve 
dyspnoea 

Atropine or duboisine, as hypodermic in- 
jection gr. jl to abort paroxysms 

Belladonna internally if the expectora- 
tion abundant, and skin rool and moifrt 

Caffeine citras. Dose, 2 grs. 

Camphor, 3 grs., with opium } Rr. in 
nervous and spasmodic form. It is often 
given with musk, castor, and asafetida 

Cannabis Indica, tincture 5 ms. internally 
in nocturnal asthma 

Cocaine leaves alone as cigarettes or 
the solution in water applied locally 
to the nostrils, or cocaine \ gr. and 
morphia | gr., used as injection 
h ypodermicall y 

Euphorbia piluHfera, the dry extract or 
fluid extract or decoction in asthma 

Cigarettes are made of any one or mors of the following : — Belladonna, grindelia 
extract cannabis, ooca leaves, datura, lobelia, stramonium, nitie and totaco*. 

Frnmi^mtwrn. — Dhatnra leaves, eucalyptus leaves, menthol, mullein leaves, 
pUBuline, sanitas oil, yerba santa. 

IitMmfation, — Ailanthus glandulosa (oil), dhaturm leaves, lobelia, stramonium, 
leaves or root, cannabis Indica herb. 

Sau^htf. — Adhatoda vesica leaves, dhatnra leaves, eucjilyptus oil. stramoniutt.* 
bellationna, tobacco. 

JVrMn/tf.— Intonally. (1)— Tinct.sanguinaric. 1 dr.; tioct lobelia?, I dr.: tnct. 
polygalse, 4 dr.: ammonise iodidum. 1 dr.: syrup tolutani. 6 drs. Dose. 1 dr. 

(S) Extract thebaine. I gr.; tinct. lobeliie, | dr.; put iodid, | dr.: extrae: ?nsdeii:e 
fld., 1 dr.: ammoo carbooatia, \ dr.: ammon bromidnm, 2 dfS.: aqua Unrocervjsi« 4 oz^ 
Dose. I during the paroxysms. 

{iy^Cifmrftte*: — Dhatura leaves^ 6 dra.: stramonium leave. C drs.: cannabis bcrh. € 
drs^: lobelia herb. 6 drs.: potasunm nitrate. 8 drs.; eucalyptus oil, 6 dr^: for smokioft. 

(4) — imAmUtkmn — Potassium nitrate. 9 oss.: myrrh. 3 drs.: oilbanum. ^ drs.: 
belbMkuina, 15 gn.; stramooinnL, lozrr: digitalis, 15 grs.: mix and add ibts t-. a 
lacerated white paste of a paper, then roll into sheets and dry. n«e1 for ^nK-^ine. 



Counter irrilation, small blisters 
Ouaiacum ammoniat«d tincture, inter- 
nally 
Viburnum «»xtra<;t with cimicifuga inter- 
nally if joints are stiff and enUrged 

Vol, I, page 427,) 

Grindelia. extract 3 grs., or fluid extract 
.SO ms. in spasmodic form to prevent 
the attack 

Hyoscine hydrobromate, ,Jo gr. with mor- 
phine sulphate | gr. and strychnine 
sulphate .'^ gr. as combination in 
spasmodic form of cardiac • r pulmo- 
nary asthma 

Ipecacuanha wine,{n nauseant and emetic 
dosep, given in bronchial asthma as 
spray or intemaily 

Lactucarium with potassium iodide an'^ 
chloral is very useful 

Lobelia tincture, 10 ms. every 15 minutes 
during the spasm is of benefit 

Morphine and atropine, hypodermically 
cuts short the paroxysms 

Nux vomica tincture every 5 minutes 
in cardiac and bronchial asthma 

Pilocarpine kydrochlorat*, | gr. at bed. 
time, or hypodermically in spasmodic 
and broncbitic asthma 

San^niinaria tincture. 20 ms. in spasmodic 
form and repeated till vomiting occurs 

Stramonium, internally alone or with 
tincture of tobacco, oleum anisi, and 
ipecacuanha 

Veratrum nride; tincture mixed with 
morphia and ipecacuanha is giren 
with water in nervocs asthma 



Atropine boIqUod, to dikte the i>uiai 
Atid to pnmljEe aoecfBiTDodAtian for 
i^jiAmi nation 

I)nbciliasc,ft (rood iubititttl* for atropint% 



niLMtttl»N, in ccnernl ilbfroma of cAptlUrv 

of benefit 
\,i .r rctftrrU degentfriitfon of the 



ArdI tannic wtth alcobo! m a drewing 
nftrr wnAhlni; the (»»•! with ft wilutifm 
^•f font mem f»Ir 

Bedsores. Preventive and Curative fiexQediefi* iS^t v%'(. J.,fmjf* 42n,) 

rUiinphiir wUb ftlnm and i^bito of 0:^1 

iw pftinl lo I lie M>rr 
Ciitt'chii with ai'ftutf of loftd lomDy 

' ""« ''!> h»nit?ii Ihe^kln 

r • r rhe blnok vlrtQ^li follonrtfvi 



Beriberi 




AticMijrne linimentt, to ulltiy cniin(.'B nnd 

m iiaeiitar hy pr rti'^t hcftU 
|ii 't tlo*c» It iHfHberi i« doc 



A[,..,-M.v. iirtiiy til overcome pulpit*- 

tion 



PitoourpUK* hydMchloride, tubctttmieoot* 

Ijr Kfl diutcticor diaphoretic 
Strophiinihua m smali doici lu ca^liftc 

csues 
8trychnine,lnt«mnJly hi l-onlc, for ner?ou» 

or rnUMcuhir compliculion 



BilieusneBa.t Dyspei^sin:. Duodenal C&tarrh> i&^t Vol. A, pa^r 4J0.) 



Acid itydiocyrvfiic dihiU*, to relieve itrit- 

ablUtjr of thu atuoiftch 
Aconite, to ifiipiovi' the effect of p<xlt> 

phylllii nhtmld U- ^\vvu riccnAlrmAny 
AllsMfmnrtft rnt hurt left, ju a Uydmgtiguc 

N ih ipi.rMCMunhii in duo- 

1- M ,>.-^M^'^ii with i«onBti|>iitiuti 

Angui^turn baric, in worvt forniN of biltoun 

fC'VlTP 

ANifoUdM to remove flntulcucc 

Itrrhcrm Hrl&tntOt a tune nr wtth eutv 

nytuiri am un nUcriiiire 
Kryt^na, iit bi)iniij!i hcadiichfs with 

ntn^iCiHh I i vpr auid vomiting 
BufiertMl milk or ttkimmed milk if ol 

bvfit'fit 



I tho fluid cxtmiit 
bcioitt luinkh ku in^pivuftUon of bite 
nnd in f?»lUtnnppi with chronic gHRtnc 
ciitanli ' ' '.i 

M(tsl»rl foinach 

l*o<lt^pii> »., ^. .....tj*^ or with ntix 

vumirn ^ gr. m » CAthnrtio In cbildrco ; 
jriveu In hepntic torpor, to correct 
iteficit*nt tecretiun ot bile 
Kbnbirli u a choln^^ogue Is very useful 
StiUtngcfi with nux vomicii in phice of 
mercury in j?iven in deficient bllinrj 
•ecretluo;- m\m* in j« tin dice, cirrhmls of 
the liv«r aDd ntoitei 



ClltotlMpix 

loc rtljv ri 



jHon bite* 
tppUeii 

riff 



i Bites and StiD^s of Insects. 

Achymnthet Mpcra, the flowering «piket, 
l^^nity K^Ain^t stinfrs ut rcptlica 
A: irm, (resh root J<ic«J tyro 



{See Vol, i, pofe ^.\ 

Cbleaa camotna, loc«]ty to reliere pain 
»ad irritation omaed by sting* of 

centipedes 
DAdmardan, locjilly to |Mtiiioned bitei 
Eucalyptus, for U]ow|uit'> bitei 
Kupatonum (ajapana) the leAves applied 

Ia.1 t<it'r» of |KjiBonoufi imecta 



688 



BLADDER, PARALYSIS OF. 



Bitesand Stingg of Insects.— (t^'m^/f) 



Feronia elephantam. the pulp or powder- 
ed rind applied locally to bites of 
venomous insects 
Heliotropium indicum, the juice boiled 
with castor oil to allay pain of scorpion 
bites 
Ipecacuanha as poultices, or paste to 
allay pain or irritation caused by mos- 
qui toes or scorpions 
Krameria, locally to bites of venomous 

reptiles 
Lime water, locally for bees and wasps 
Martynia diandra, against scorpion bites 
Melissa oil, against insect bites 
Menthol, locally for insect bites 
Onion, or tobacco poultices for scorpion 
bites ^ 



Penny royal, essence locally for mosqai- 
toes 

Piper Iongum,against the stings of reptiles 

Poifostimon patchouli against the bites of 
gnats, mosquitoes and as insecticide 

Quassia infusion, as a wash for floors in- 
fected with fleas 

Sapindus trifoliatus locally to bites of 
venomous reptiles 

Sugar pounded and appliei to stings of 
wasps 

Thymol, locally as an antiseptic, to keep 
off mosquitoes 

Cnderkani, against rat bites 

Veta, against rat bites 

Vitex negundo, the leaves are nsed to 



preserve clothes from ravages of insect 

Formula,— "Paate against bites of ».nimals, contains butea superbs root 
nyctanthes root, woodfordia fioribunda root, cassia tora seeds, vernonia anthelmintica 
seeds, trichosanthes palmatastem juice, mix and apply locally. 

Bites—Snake bites. (See Vol. /, page 431.) 



Acanthus illicifolins — varalianf*, of shoots 

and leaves 
Aristolaochia indica, as an antidote 
Baptisiu tinctoria, against rattle snake 
Brai^aotia wallichii, the juice of leaves 

for cobra [bites 

Calmettcs—anti- venous serum for snake 
Calycopteris root, made into paste 

with that of croton oblongifolium is 

used for bites of phoorsa snake 
Euphorbia neriifoha and U. prostrata, 

locally for rattle snake 

P'irmula. — Eau-de-lnce, mastich, 3 drs. 
succinii 4 ms.; spt. ammon. aromat., 20 ozs. 



Gymnema sylvestris, the root with 

castor oil, locally applied to snake 

bites 
Ipt^cacuanha and capsicum as poultice 

for snake bites 
Nfttfchampa for snake bites 
Pittospcrinum floribun lum, as antidote 

to snake poison 
Rhinacanthus roots and leaves are rcL'ard- 

ed as antidotes 
Violet, interoally for rattle snake 

; alcohol, I oz.; ol. lavand, H ms.; ol. 
mix. Dose, 10 to 60 ms. internally. 



Bladder, IrritabUlty of. {See Vol. /, page 431.) 



Cannabis indica, in irritation or spasm of 

the bladder 
Cubebs,a good substitution for cantharidis, 

useful in vesical catarrh [useful 

Eucalyptol, 2 to 5 grs. on sugar is very 
Gelsemium, in hysterical women with 

frequent desire to urinate 
Strychnine, to lessen irritability 

Formula. — Internally extract jaborandi, 1 dr. ; extract belladonna fluid, 1 dr. 
extract tritici repentis fluid, 4 drs.; extract ergots fluid, 6 dra : extract rhuis arom.; 
6 drs. ; aqua 8 drs. mix. Dose, 1 dr. 



Acid benzoic, to remove foetor of urine, 
to render phosphatic or alkaline urine 
acid when due to enlarged prostate 

Aqua puncture is very useful 

Belladonna, 5 to 20 ms. of the tincture to 
relieve irritation or relaxation of the 
sphincter leading to incontinence of 
urine 



Bladder, Paralysis of. 



Arnica, as a curative is very useful 
Cannabis indica, in retention of urine 

and paralysis due to spinal disease or 

in spasm of the bladder 
Catheter! sation 
Ergot, in incontinence of nrine due to 



paralysis of the sphincter or from over- 
distension; also in paralytic dysuria 
Galvanism, the electro-magnetic current 

from the bladder to the spine 
Nicotine, 4 p. c. solution, for injection 
Strychnine, ,*o ^^ t« K^* ^^^^ benefit 



BRuNrMlTlS (ACUTIt). 



6% 



Blepharitis t^*' r-/, A /'«i/' 4r/j.} 



Actil Uiiitiiu fH' 
Kri:ot ft (ltd * m 



I 1<»ca11v if ascful 



Hydrastift, ikii lotion 

PuleatiliA, inicnutUy ami lucally 



Bone Diseases- (S'*^ *'"'- A fiaffc 4.t$.y 
Cratu-'vo rclijtrioaw, Ituvt'n^un'i 

of the no^nl Imuips 
Mcerrinn, in rlieamntifnrn* «* rr>iuM.u*. 
||ort>l)i:t jiml olejitrof mercury, k>c»|Jjr in 



lit iu rArks 
a, in perioHiitis 
' ivc», locnUy in lu 



.i(M 



Breath foatld or foal. 

CamjiUot Bs a correctivtj 
Myrrli h» gargle 
Myricu tuipidii 

Blight's Disease (Acute) 

Ac<mltc, us & diniwtic l*> lower thr 
tcmfifirAture, immedintuly on th<f Hpp<?a* 
rannc of ne^jhritit, also utcful iti 
itcitrliiiinft 

ChitTiHplitlm, extmnt 10 to 3W> mi, to Hlm- 
inUti dtlnjineh find to tncrca«e the 
qunntity "f "line 

niuHiiili?, infuiioo Jilorii^, or with st) nidi 
nn^l »pf* ether uitro»l, pren inter ually 
i» 4liurf!Tie, in dropej, ciae to acnte 
neptiHti;! 

Diuretira. nimpli' aa wnter; stiitittliint 
dinrrtict to boavi»f<M 



Thymol, in Hohjtion mm mouth wneh— lo 
lobiicco fiotu the 



breath 



ftr^ior of 



HY(»Bcy»rnn«, in uneful In JrtitAblcliJtUvy 

J»Iap powdei, if nriemic symptitnn xypt'r 
venc to relieve the kiclneyw 

Jumper oil, an diuretic io increiiBe the 
f]Uiu>tity of arfne 

Utt of turpentine, id drop dotes, ccmlroli 
dropny. Turpontine atupc is useful 
to incrcH«(? the action 'of the kid- 
ney !i 

PiU>ciirpine fluid cxiruot, 6 nin., with 
tincture of digitJilia tu prmlurc nwcni- 
ing 



Bright's Diiease (Ohroaic)* iSetf loU /, jtnffc 436,) 



Aoid bcDitoic, durintj: ununiic nttHcks 
Apm^ynum nunnttblnuro* in :lrop»y. 

Buuhu and o livnmi^s internally 

Cttffeini* li>f: - with tlijflttdls 

in I email \ 
£kieriuin/a9 a derivative or asGathartici 

toremuvc drop^) unrf uuidenoy to ursnniiii 
Eucalyptui In ciimni*! dc»)tt amative 

nephritis 



Jaborundi, 1^0 1MB. of the ttufd extiact if 
the urint' Jt* very iicanty; in urwrnin 
1 tir. v<'ry iittcful 

Oleum PI (ge tun tin t<i Icbmh alhumen, 
to lowtr vttDcutar teniiioiii U* itnpfuvt: 
gfiitral citndiiion, and to rct(en< urw- 
mic .lyntptoma 

Si'opfLhOR infusion. ;w a dinn^tir 

Scari^catlons owr the kuJoey regiuQ 



Bronchitis cAcute). {S^ VoL i, pagr is&,y 



A«:ld Woxoie aa etimulant cxpccturiuit 

(tr Hi in halation 

Aconite toMi, nr tinciuf*'. with belladonnii 
in bn>nthlr1 catniih 

Ammoniacucn Uftefui in old pi'uple 

Anemone puliutiUa root mixed with mtik 
and taken internal ly 

A}n morphine h^drochlorate, ^^ gr., 
bypiMlermicali> or intcrrmJIy with 
evoi'l^n iiduaion *« an expiu'tnraoi 

AuifrtMia, useful in wliee^inj: m ol*i 
jMnpie; jtj brunchitiSt it acta ad a 
f ^priitory Jitunuhmt wbeti the capil- 
:uru> lue ^h'jjk't^d wdh tnlltimmaiory 
pruiLtcta sujd f Ltiloc^ttou is itumini^nt 



Camphor in oii an hy[wHi6rin<c injection 

in^ ' ' "■- ''— ' H.To ti^ avoided 

in I thy AC um 

and ty I up at toiu a« I'l 
after thr fH'ute symptoiij It. i 

Copir Ml ej||H:ctotaut alter 

th' r 

Culieii* 3 1 „i- ir,i-Mi 19 eopioBs Afid system 

lelaxcd 
Oua'ueum ofBcir nhs, in bronchorrheca 
)pt.H;iiL'uanha wme in proftiae cx|»ect> 

oration, oilUeu It to ux|iel 
Loixdia, with opium if expectoraUoii is 

piofucic. in paroxysmal dyspncca 



i^am 



AM* 



«».<» BaoQMifims (cafill^et). 



Movyhioc aJJone hjyiieamtmtf m vtG& g—iiujuMifl m. is a d i unm a fi ijtimii a jgai 

4«£rctzna aoit ▼iofesc (sso^ : ai&By oaefixl Sf^itill fjnsp wttk pHrsgmmr ciioaB:. on 

XoiKmnBi^r \ 27. vicfc <fiigftfciTif es Che scofooiK b«e dUKcuIfi oi «zpcC 

Opi-noi is fall (taeft. fEWS wrtk capaju ar- cf cxpeerd7r»taiit if pnifiue 

:ka.». n<}> awtv tie Mtffc, ti> allkj coicdk^ rrimem -fexl'lft 

riifc is ii» -veej isaefi£ s<&>frs 

<mpfi:«i^ CO r.hi£ <t&cai:; baryacrts meiaaeriak tfet* hisrb app^eii hut ra rBs (dtias . 3iilati»> 

tziwi 4f irrMi an'rHcr <xL DomSjr to' i&# diortL mssaXSArA pJosCer. gnriii: pitoftaKSK. 

ABBunsKvnu mfik aauMOiniBB ^Memsit^ pr^ ^ as bed cbds- 

peiiffe wtfik wfteexzBf abI wtBk abK&. ecbusw fiztai cxpise&icaCBBt 

an cxpttcsocvcB bf tht ini:Ql& e&cck cseeRve anvcaat 

wikcoi shoe is fl apto « » c»y e e> 5 gtfi«a n 'Sf Pirza.'v Ttrzcxixiaxiw a iebk ■ijIm iul, 

lUf— w of %}ux;, mecBaaC? 'p«» la^iCiift <fcet«tii>a 

BftiiiHH tnmfwwr^ ttaeaag^ yoicei " mi ^■a^TBsaravrii&bdciiAjaiii^CBKaaaibii^ 

CbckaaLfaai«dBcsof ksvoLvvfOHefiil Sgttffga, =a. s&anpei 

OaBMrfaf^ atfxl a eoiiiif& «f out pe}9<» Syif I ijTTxpu wmn mbibircibii -aniiaLHbf;. 

Eatsil jpcsk SKJxI :ii c ftgrj g jit b nnigifc> - pee&m&e 

poIflBJauj okCvrk: :ScriiiD:aziciL rpiti9Car<v l*\ miw :ii tiifr a£«?*i 

EiB^iftirrica ptLxIzfera liiai «ngtai:t ^ .ir. wria. -i^s^OflBi 

Trfx. ta itfCajBagf rfir— ic bn«'=L:ta» ^orirdbKaw at» a psgun*-. iry <»cma uar. 

•cno^ jyiyrura aoid -irj aerr^ciiia 

Hv^resiCafw JscmHf a^ fstenaLj in. <^r:> Tar. S ir. i2 siZ&3 rjiziTi-iia «! ' : g t r.»:m 

■at e»7TA viisi ^e<?£i»e. uui tj ^aj ■riiuci 

l|i 111 Mail ^a a bbck f ipirTui ■iirr acif ix TcRocae. taBBC&'feti a.3iac3i±9i'iiit «af*}K> 

censz^ vttft 4vifBza aft a 9aexj i tjs: aase » r»rj lanrfxl 

■iii aa 'T - a»i ataa ^aa'iinirn. Tcrpcx ij^fsiar. 1 £cv. ^r^s rTOcmz vul 

Laitx tiit'ifxii, ti 'saiBdk i^^dja e anacsBftl c??^ ''^ Ljgcaor^rrt "t. diunaar acaf 

LAijfa^raecL » iia fill < lyi ni ■ ir ^fKZvtaoK ^jmesaaos shs ^f '' : ri ni ai<SM> 

Lnirni imdatM^ zi. panxjOBai 'ifi^aa Crgrra «dltt&. s&in^Iv 

Ycr^ aiBCta*. loxis ■*i'i.'ts «t2I ivnp c^ 
^rxa^ aft ax ^x^txKzcBtn «erv aj m £iZ 

f\ iSn r#4- /. 9a»^ «^. 

aaf »XI ii ULacr wrrib. :c. »• ril Q "iz T* Joca:- 
Ij m^^'jjBi Ztz 'JUi :^f»3 aaii iia::^ 

fi^ir-jejax-e aeaiy sa alkj ifaaK asi SB7aLiara» aft a fciKo^asfi «x3iBEnicKxe. 

e:4^ ia ca50K7 '^naeajuft ir suitcm 

I;< rarB» i i-iift . a* — atae :f f jjjaa cayaet- S^xlI f]iTx:^ aft <xjac%caa(Kaftaia#i£ 

nrmm toa ^■^iiraTl to <x?*^ Y:cya'5.'ae> at a fCDvaJaac ^rtsm «:f^. 

Lftftri^i :i 4;i^Ba» piiijMii' 1*»2. fWmta aR 
¥■!■■# paa>tiB»t>i^ cieU eg at fact 




CAU:OLI. 



09t 



Bronchocle ; ExophtluUmic Ck»itre. iSee VoL /. page 43S ) 



Con vallArf a, relieves painful pjilpiiatiou 

Dig1talii» tu tbii your)v% tamca Artcrini 
ttinsion miil filowa the lusirt , bctice vury 



Ui:.irt>'0 »ciiiiti 



or lis (i^jKKlertiiic 
<\ dm9.| to (jmei the 



useful. It nhuutd be itvoKici) ir iIkm'o tg Straniouiuni with ultn* to be bunit IQ 



trie IrrtUition or HTlhvM*.' he*rl 



tb<i5 room t/> reliere i)yB|iacBa 



Bruises. OontusionSi Siyrains. {Scr id. /, //aye #jo.) 



Aeonit«i Utiimunt, locnlly io nil (eve pain 
Am^A ...1 ; I viTli rUttiicliinofliro, iocally 
All ■!, iriiriTJJihy or IdCftlly for 

CtdantiuU nfHoiiinM^, tincture tis em bruo- 

Ation forsprninN iin<i hrubi« 
OAitipbor linimt.<nt, for tprnttiii 
CHpAdnim ttucture wilh gnm ftCAcio toc«Uy 

applied toaprAina to rctnoTc «1iscolurft- 

lioH 
CocMinc hydrochloratc with glycerin (I 

to 4), locally 
Curcuma powJi^r to^allv and alao iut^r- 

naily lo rianove hlack «^c 



UytiruAl\h tifictufi5, or solution looellj 

appli«H to Hi*.* tttjrailod oe aod oor?fs 
MyrabillB jaliipic, the briiljiod Imvm 

Bpplicil locally 
Mvrintica otl, uned lii<:4|1y 
Odlttii wcKJicr, (u'lini) beat#jn tip with 

liiMmiy iipplic<l to brutftct iind fipraJna 
Opium with M^iMp Utiiment apphed or 

riibb^tl to relit* VI! pain 
Oil of bay, lo<:ally as, stnnuhiling itni- 

niL'nt t<> the eomueciJ part fWiiHy 

Oleum nienthfls pipcril;e with glyrennt 
Rosuairtry» ta u ^timuUilrig appliwUion 
Turpentimi llDimcnt for Hpraina 



AVmu/^— I'Mtc contAltiini; jaiee of maikiug nuU I ot,; g^trlic, 2 ox.; taniariiid 
tjuicr] of Icnvi^), 2 OS.; cocoanuto$1, 1 oc; sag&rt 2 oa.; used locally in i|n-alnii, 
conluMoQi 

Lup or Nulive pla^UT— rutjtjiini ahica. hfrh«ri*i, gulhanum, L^aodha hiroaa, KUj,;al, 
frankinernfl^hlrAbol, isua, Io^mu, maiclH h'lkht i';Vl, raMwmiti, and rosin 

Cachexia du9 to A^nema; Scorfola and SypbiUs. (Sc<e VrtL /, jmgts HLy 

it rape run: ii vufv i^erviceabKr 

nv.jin>,r:M iu tstnlaiiat and Kpleuic cau:h* 

V UHcful 

I 1 of benrdlt 
buiiUx climcn&ia 



Arntcti, internally in bad CH«citp ACt^s tti nn 
cxcitnnt uf tho n«pvuu* Nvatcm 

Oooos uucifera oib Intc^rnally and uh 
InitnQtlon [generally 

Eacalyptus, a nice tonk and itimula&t 



Oalciill, Biliary or Hepatic aallstonea, i'"^ v< /, imp u^,) 



Cralji'va irligi !«m, u* Iitliontriptic, to 

lQcirt»nai< Uti? •«!cr«tbon o( bile 
Lini^ed or mustard poultin^oii to the 

hypochundnum 
Morphine, { y^x, mi\X% at opine ^oq ^^ Hy- 

(Mxtcrmloatly aji an anodyno to relieve 

{MiiY»Kyi«m»t «pn«nt atid vomiting 

tWrnttta — Ab wliftnt of 
iiiQdlw acacin, 16 dr«, ; oici : 



Olivu oil with brandy and menthol 
a« a pniphyittctic and solvent, given 
internally followed by a »aUne putgativc 

tiapo animaiiR, oi^tile Miap, very uiiQful 
idt tittiir 8C>tut(on nnd breaking np 

Tur|K5ntinu oilnnd ether, to relii^ve pain 
and altH) artK as a prophylaetio 

— chlorolornii i Urn ;tMbcr sulphunc. I d«, ; 
uit'f 2 lira* \ »aechari albi, 2 dtt^ Dose, 1 dr. 



Oalculi. Renal and Veaical- ('^ V**^* /, p^H'' ^^-) 



Acid benio'c, In iQipact«%l stout) 
iJcHailonna, init'rnaity : or as suppofltlory 

i*r ai) pUster cvr as nniment-, t^ reheve 

pain of the pas^a^e <.»f stone 
Cotton not, decuvtkin a* a demulcent 

given internal )y to relief o otiuuKury 
KriK«^rt>n to retievu Irritability of the 

bladder 
Knpavonum, m uric acid dmlheitie 



Hot fomuntatioits^ or mustard tH.)Ulticifa 

u> uticviate BpNhm and pain 
Morphine, hyp>oieiuiically as an anodyne 

snd ttj lelteve vomiung 
Olive iUl )s very useful 
Oriha»iphoo stamlnentf, aa uric acid 

^idvent 
Pareira, lo relieve irritatiuu due to 

gravel 



692 



CATARRH. 



CBlcxdi—Oontd.^ 



Picby, to disintegrate the calculi 
Tribulus terrestris 



Triticum repens, as antilithic 

Uva arsi, ia antilithic, in urinary gravel 



Diet.— Use freely fresh gieen vegetables, milk, mineral waters, lemon j nice — 
avoid sugar, fats, animal food, alcoholic beverages 

Avoid the use of such bubstanccs a^ contain oxalic acid. Ayoid 
black tea, cocoa, chocolate, chicory, pepper, coffee, parsley, white beans, celery, 
radishes, potatos, crust, crumb, barley, Indian corn, wheat, sorrel, spinach, 
rhubarb, cabbage, beet root, green peas, beans, tomatos, carrots, endives, dried figs, 
currants, plams, gooseberries, raspberries, oranges, lemons, cherries, strawberries. 
Avoid hard waters, tea, coffee, wines and beer. 

Oancer. (See Vnl, /, page 44S.) 



Acid tannic as injection into the growth 
Belladonna, locally to relieve pain and 

internally 5 to 10 ms. as palliative 
Berberis aristata, internally to relieve 

paiu 
Caunabis Indica tincture, internally to 

relieve pain 
Chian turpentine, combined with resorcin 
Codeine, as hypnotic and sedative 

[stomach 
Condurango extract in cancer of the 
Conium, as poultices, and internally to 

relieve pain — a nice palliative 
Coffee, as disinfectant ; locally in fine 

powder 
Hiematoxylon, extract to the fungous 

growth 



Hydrastis, as palliative, locally very 

useful 
Hyoscynmus, leaves bruised and applied 

locally 
Morphine salts, hypodermically or mor- 

nhinedissolvtil in glycerin and applied 

locally 
Opium as a palliative, locally and intcrn- 

Blly to relieve irritation and pain 
Poultices of starch 
Phytolacca fluid extract internally, the 

juice of the leaves with chloride of 

zinc and opium applied externally 
Rumex acetosa very useful to relieve the 

pain and to cut short the growth 
Terebinthina chia, with sulphur internally 

in pill 



Oarboncle, Anthrax- (See Vd, /, page 445) 



Arnica, extract as strapping and intern- 
ally 
Belladonna or opium, extract with glyce- 
rin locally tG relieve pain 
BorassuB flabiliformis as poultices 
Boswelia floribunda, locally as lep 
Echinacea angustifoha, as anti-suppur- 
ative, applied locally 



Oalbanum and opium plaster, to relieve 

pain 
Ipecacuanha alone as poultice or with 

morphia internally 
Poultices, linseed [locally 

Turpentine or terebenc, as antiseptic 
Withania somnifcra, leaves and root 

bruised and applied locally 



Catarrh Nasal (Acute). (See Vol. I. page 446.) 



Abies canadensis, with glycerin as injec- 
tion (1 to 4), into the nose [catarrh 

Acid hydrocyanic dilute, in bronchial 

Aconite Tincture, i, to 1 m., alone is use- 
f ul In commencing cold in the head 
or in severe cold in the head, or insevere 
cold with headache, chilline^'s, aching 
of limbs ; also given in catarrh accom- 
panying measles. Given internally with 
oelladonna (I to 2) in high fever, sore 
throat, and as a linimpnt it is applied 
to the nose 

Belladonna tincture, 5 to 10 ms., intern- 
ally or 1 in 6,000 as a spray in acute 
catarrh with profuse watery secretion 



Camphor spirit, as vapour for inhalation 

or with opium and ammonium carbo- 

nate in powder as snuff to break off or 

modify cold 

Codeine, as palliative in common 

cold 
Conii extract, as a spray (I in 50) 
Cimicif uga, as expectorant in rheumatic 

cold, pain in bones, headache 
Cocaine sulphate solution, 5 p.c, locally 
or the [lowder 5 to 10 grs. to 1 os. of 
cosminoi as spray into the nose. It 
causes contraction of the venoussin i 
of the nasal mucous membrane 



CATARKH, 



693 



Cataixli.— (<w'«<^.) 



Cttbebff tincture, intcrniiUv with iafusion 
nod of ilufleed. or aa confection, in coIjI, 
bGailAchc or m ci);arette« to »Ru>kc 
M pjiJliative in ihc dry nod conyesUTO 
etfi^e of culd la ibe hciidt or w inttufEA- 

tSOD 

Gold powder, mg«iii«t oold c3ont4iioltig 
Giimpbor 5, dissolved in etb««r, ftmmon 
cjirb 4, and opil 1. Do»c, 3 to 10 ^m. 
UB A (iroph) liiclic 

Copt is U^tM^ wiib borbtertB ABiatic* 
used M a anuH 

Dfttuni, dry leaves lu amoke 

Bclipra alba, th^ u...^,. ^f l<ja»e« witb 
ajowatt Rucil y ia oatarrb 

Kucaljrptol, I u-id wiliyolio 6, 

acid carbolic 1^ tttifwiyptQs 1, alcohol 
10, Doaf\ 1 tn 8 ma. internally, or f> to 
10 i»». to 1 ' lino! asipray 

Kupalorium [ i, lafasloa inter- 

Dally in gej I 

Kupbrasia o*' m 

Ipecacoanha v, ^ 1 jy to the faucea, 

or wl«h Qpiunk internally for acute 
naaat aotl bronchinl cj&tarrh ami cold, 

Jabor»iidi» fluid csxtrnct lu m». internally 
or I ifr. of pilocarpine hydrochlorete. 
aa hypodermic injection for abatiflga 
Qolcl and aa a diaphoretic 

lle&thul atone 2 to 10 gn, with I 01. of 
ocitmiQol AB aprmy 0? menthol with 



chloroform (I to 10), to inKai<i Uirough 

Ihii mouth and nose jiltomately. U 

relieve^cold in the early stAgeor arresta 

iU pnigjt^ae} 
Kux vomica tn dry oold in thu bead ia 

vory useful 
Oil aa inunction, to the whole body 

will prevent susceptibility to cold io 

ihii head 
Opiura» with whisky toddy, and bella- 
donna at Dight will abK)rt tlie attack 
Pilocurpine hydrocblonite, ^ gr, gireB 

r*;licf 
l^ul8:iulla, a good substitute for aconite^ 

uat-ful a-i lotion (I in 2(0 to iyringc the 

na»a1 t'^H^iiK^^ in coryaa wlUi muoo 

pur ion To lj« a voidojl if there 

ia K JmnI irri ration 

Qainine lU, with morphias | gr., to abort 

acute corysa 
Bbatany with gelatine, aa Uouglei for 

the Doae 
Sugar (iooly powdered aa a BUiifi« fn 

catarrh due io (lotaaeira iodide 
Thymol, 5 to 10 gra, to 1 ox. of ooaminot 

aa a spray 
Tltalictrum foliosum, aa aatiiiil in coryia 

Torebenei 30 gn, to 1 ob« of coaminol 

■a a ipray 
Turmeric, burnt and fumca oaed iox 

inhalation or as a epray 



OfttMrh COhronlc Naaal ) C5*f Vol. /, pa^e W.y 



Mi liSBlotOlutJon, with rectified «pint 

M BflBAl injection or tannin with 

glycerin or with acid aalicylic, 

hianiutb, calomel, and white eugar ad 

Hijull or a« inaulHailon 
Agiti gr&ndiliura^ the jaioe of leavea 

and Oowcjia la blown up tlic noetrils 

with rt'li«f 
Amiiioi'L L, iiMi with ipecacuanha and 

ae cikrbonate iutomaUy to 

h* cretion 

Aaafi:tuii«, fti^atkmulant expectarant. 
Bao^oln and (»plum over a pl€4'e of hot 

iron aa fumigation, uaefui tn chronic 

rhtnilis 
Cocaine la naeftil with tobacco annif and 

aatringtjnt powders for chronic catarrh 



Cubcba powder, blown into the none or on 
inauniatiou, or amoked or given inter- 
nally, ia uDcfut in foUcular, noae and 
phnrvn^real diacaae 

H ti uacd aa anuff 

1 tincture internally, or with 

w:iici iMjrctctl by ayringe in coryia 
with ulceration of the acptum 
naiti 

PulaaLilla, 1 in 20 aa a waah in lubacute 
iutUmmation of the noae with Jcetid 
dtschkrgc ut inucua and pna 

Banguiiiiina, tmcture Hi ma, lotemallyi 
or life duttUng powder locally to the noae 
in nuaal caiarth 

Turpenttne oil, ut liniment to Ibe 
ch«at 



I^ormula,—{l) Menthol, 2 ; collee powder, 60 ; cocaine hydrochlorate, 1; acid boriCi 
100 ; at anuff, in naaal oatiurh* 

(2) Sodii chloridi, ISO; pot. cbloratc, 50; ammon, iodide, i; acid carbo- 
lic^ $; CBmpbor pulv., ^ ; bydntftla rad. pnlv., 20; mix as a anuff, in naaol 
flntarrb. 



694 CHAPPiiD HANDS, &C. 

Catarrh (Bronchial) Bronehorrhcda. iSee Vol /, pa^e439,) 

Agaricin Orindelia, as a respiratory stimulant. 

Ammoniac very useful 

Asafetida, very useful Myrtol, eliminated by the InngSt as stimn- 

Copaiba as stimulant expectorant, but i« lant and antiseptic, useful to remove 

nauseant, to lessen copious secretion of foetor and check profuse secretion 

pus Pinus syUestris oil, as inhalation 

Cubeb, in ciironic bronchitis with profuse Terpin hydrate, or turpentine oil, as 

secretion stimulant, expectorant for inhalation 

Eucalyptus oil, 2 ms. on sugar internally by an atomiser or internally 

Catarrh of the Bladder or Urethra. 

Betol QuercuH infectorius 

Hydrastis tincture Saccharum officinarum 

Juniper Tinospora cordifolia 

Pareira brava Zea mays 
Pix carbon is liquida 

Catalepsy. iSee Vol, 1, page 446,^ 

Apomorphine during the paroxysm ; it Faradization 

causes nausea, the spasm ceases and Restoratives 

consciousness returns Tonics 

Cold douche [ness Turpentine, as enemas or embrocation 

Bxtemai stimulation to arouse conscious- along the spine, to stop the paroxysmt 

Cerebral Anamia* iSee Vol. I, page 448,^ 

Asafetida, as cerebral excitant Serpentaria, as cerebral excitant 

Caffeine, in hypochondriasis [disease Strychnine, with iron to stimulate the 

Guarano, as a restorative after acute circulation and as a tonic 

Mustard liniment, in spinal anaemia Valerian, as cerebral excitant 

Cerebral Oonciiflsion. 

Arnica, if due to a fall is very useful with collapse and insensibility, to prevent 

warmth to the extremities and rest; inflammation, and to restore impaired 

Remedies which are useful to recover from faculties 

Cerebral Congestion. (See Vol. /, page 448,) 

Aconite, a good remedy in the active Ergot fluid extract with sodium bromide 

form [cord internally 

Belladonna, in hyperaemaof the brain or Mustard, foot bath 

Cathartics, as colocynthtolessen the blood Venesection is good to prevent injury to 

pressure the brsin ; it should be avoided in 

Colchicum,in plethoric and gouty subjects anaemia, aortic disease, or in cases 

Croton oil or scammony or elaterium, as commencing with syncope 

cholagogue 

Chapped* Sore and Fissured Hands. Feet, Lips and Nipples. 

iSee Vol /, page 449,) 

Balsam of Peru or Tolu with almond Menthol, with salol, locally applied to 

oil, gum arable and rose water relieve pain 

locally Rhataoy powder with glycerin and 

Benzoin, compound tincture with water as a wash, or with cerate locally 

glycerin locally applied in fissures of the nipples 

Hydrastis, as lotion used ss a oom- Starch with glycerin and rose water 

press locally 



IRA. 



695 



Oheftt Pain 



ointment uppUecl in 
oj the ^Uio of I be 



t'rlln*i>>i)r';», fts 
h^pvnestljf^lH 

Ilrjunm, OM-ful in palriful cliett with 
cat rl I ink! c>f bruAlh 

Chilblains. (,Stt> 

Acid tunntc ^ith Icxline i&Rdc liot And 

n^^phcd to Oic Itody 
AvuUt uppliraiiun of tafclinc am] other 

fjitt^' iJtlli»lftnrtl* In the Iwidj 

liHlHHtii ot Peru ointment Ui BCparate 

Bcnrojn, compound tincture withglyce* 

rin A Dpi led after tharonghly wMniog 

and dryiii|y 
BraMirAf cjihba^'u leiiTef) ta VftrAHilns 
(vAJtiput uU| r^'Hliv «p[»Hed 
Capoten ni iiiic'lari\ with ftuva ftfftbic 

locnUy tipplud in unbrokrn skin 

rtlicvi's itchm;* nnd pain 



Cimicituga, in pfttn muier the breasts and 

for tiit» r(.-<)><iMl pa I Its 
Strycbuitte jjivf-s relief to wandrring 

neuralgic piiinB due to oervona irrltk* 

bility 

VitL A pofif 430,) 

Campbor cream or camphor with cao-de- 

colrgnc locally with friction 
Dl^Haus, itifuKfon or tincture, iaternanf 

tu iniprov*' circulation, to rclio%*e 

arterinl tttiition and peripheral v«!K)- 

dilntattoD 
QjtUs with opium, turpentine and epiHt 

of wine locally 
Opium lincturo locally 
Thiol |K)wdcr. locally applied 
Tuipuntinu alone aft a wash or with 

baathcun ointment used aa a local 

application 



Cholera AfiUtica* («» t^W. /. p^gt^ 4St .) 



AoM iHoniOi l^' oncnmta ftttAgf* 

Alofv or castor oil rb eracuant In the«»rly 
Ar^vmonc Mcxicann oil, aa Inxative, 

oombininj? the action of castor oil and 

Liinnabia 
Alri»hinc hyfiodcroiically, ^i, to ^^ gr. in 

coiiapNJ 
Caffeioe citrafi aaa diuretiG 
Camphor ipirit with opium lincturc, 

cnpaioum tincture and chloroforn In 

water 
,- k.ii: ^ij ^ robofadonr to the 



Muak root, on a »iil)»tUule for muak 

M>i'i»tiw» fnijj:ri«n^, ugalnAt fvrntDpi 

Uplumjiypwlerniiciny h jl]a|)ae 

to chccL iireiimmnr} to be 

avoided \i Uidnrya u*, ...*t-Haite«U 

enema u£ opium with starch ia very. 

uacful 

Piper nigriiui with aMafetidai capsicum 

and ramphor intcrunlly 
PoiJopfiytltn, tf ittoole itre pasty 
Poulticr^ to tlio iilxiomen cnntalninff 
clofep, gritJgcf, ctnmimon mixed with 
u» bramly or whiflky 

in, for hypodermic injection Quinirw hydftfcJilordle or •luinine «ul- 

liinffcr with myrioa siipida, loci^lly to phat»3 or f|uinine carbamide aa by|»o> 

rub on caWee dermic injt'Ction 

IprnicunnbA, if groenlali ttoola with Starch and opium aa roetal Injce- 

m \u'i\9 Atid blood tion 

Mujpiiinc^ hyp<Klt;rmtcj4lly in the oarly Sijychnine, a« prophylactic, In Uk" CJirly 
tliarrbrrn or in colUtijic to rdi'^TC dl»rrlt<i*?i a» stimiilatit to prevent 

urampi. To bt» avoidea tf kidneys art colhipeie 

disesiied Turpentine oil, lo to 20 ms* aa stimnlant 

AV^ ■' f?-wr/f>>#,— ^^fi^-- ''--rtion of ta» I' --i* '- " — • "i ' •- --^■'^^n 

intravi ion inc<'i toe Injc* 

jiodimt. ',ldr*;^:K MpintK; n ^ | , 

irrigatintiui tntv^tinrs with »u»p and hot water ; al^bnlutti rrpf, trcumbont poHturo ; 

Qiustard to the heart or t4> the neok ; warm milk by unema ; fresh air ; heat to the 

abdomen, Irps and feet ; Ajowan, made hot, or cajaput oil to rub over the ikin durin^j 

collapse. 

Formvht.^ \u the early stage acid en* '■' "* ras, ; cafjfli com tincture , 2 ms, ; 
asiifetHlft, 2):r8. ; pljier nJ^Tum, 2 (rrf. ; «ipirEr . tici, 1 dr, - :* jua, 1 ox. for a doae< 

Kxtract cauimbii indica, 1 ^r. ; Cf>»i., . - n:r, ; clilondormt, 8 m«. ; olei 

terebinth in te, \ or, ; mucilajire, 3 dr. L>o#c, lu to 2U mn. 

Chloroformi, ^0 ms. ; spjrltus letherie nnlphnnoi, (K! ms. ; olei menthie plperi* 
tie,8 ms,: oleum caryophylli, b ms. ; olco rr- 1. S m&; extract cannabis iodica, 

(i gm. ; morpbiie mariatis, ^VX^^* acidi \ c dilati, 10 ms. ; acid hydro- 

cbToric, dilute, 60 ms* ; glycerini, A os« Jjotjc, 10 to S5 dropt. 



696 



COLIC. 



Cholera Infkntnm. (&» Vol. /, pge 452.) 



Camphor spirit in milk for choleraic 

diarrhoea 
Coto bark tincture, 1 to 6 ma. is useful 
Ipecacuanha, if stools are greenish with 

mucus and blood 
Morphine with ether hypodermi- 

cally 



Mustard foot bath or mustard plaster 

over the heart 
Poultices of cloves, ginger, cinnamon 

mixed with brandy and linseed 
Tea, weak solution to be drunk freely to 

keep vessels filled and prevent paralysis 

of the heart 



Cholera Simplex. CSee Vol, 7, page 463.) 



Atropine, hypodermically 
Oajuput oil locally is very useful 
Castor oil with opium internally 
Ginger wine, internally 
Ipecacuanha, internally used with 

benefit 
Morphine, hypodermically internally 



Mustard internally as an emetic in 
collapse and as a cardiac stimu- 
lant 

Salol, internally very efiicient 

Sumbul, very serviceable 

Veratrum album, to check vomit- 
ing 



Chordee. CSee Vol. I, page 453.) 



Aconite, 1 mn. of the tincture gives relief 

to ckordee 
Belladonna, with camphor and opium 

internally 
Bromides internally 
Camphor monobromate, with lactncaria 

internally 
Cannabis Indica tincture internally 
Cocaine hydrochlorate, 4 p. c. solution 

locally to the glans penis or injected 



into the urethra to destroy erectile 

power 
Ck)lchicum wine, in gouty subjects 
Hyoscyamus with camphor internally 
Linseed tea internally 
Lupuline, very useful 
Morphine, hypodermically injected into 

the perineum 
Stramonium 
Tobacco, very useful 



Chorea. iSee Vol, I, page 453,) 



Camphor monobromate 

Cannabis Indica, internally 

Cimioifuga, fluid extract in chorea due to 
menstrual derangements or to rheuma- 
tism 

Gonii succus, 1 dr. as palliative to quiet 
muscular agitation 

Duboisine, for nervous and debilitated 
children 

Bserine, hypodermically or internally 

Hyoecyamine, hypodermicallyvery useful 

Morphine with chloral, in large doses to 
procure sleep 



Physustigmioe, hypodermically is useful 
Quinine, as stimulant to the inhibitory 

centres which control motor discharges 

from the spinal cells and which are 

weakened in chorea 
Scutellaria, to calm the nervous system 
Stramonium tincture, internally 
Strychnine, in chorea due to fright or 

commencing puberty 
Valerian if due to worms, to restrain 

undue movements 



Colic Inteetinal. Benalt Hepatic and Lead. {See Vol. i.page 455,) 



Ajowan, internally or as poultice 

Allamanda cathartica,in lead or painter's 
•oolio 

Argemone Mexicana, the oil to relieve 
;pain 

Airopine, with potassium iodide, relieves 
oolicky pain and assists in removing 
lead poison 

Asafetida emnlsioo, in flatulent, in- 
testinal oolio, in children and in 
hysterics 



Belladonna, in children to relieve in 
testinal spasmodic colic 

Blumea balsamifera, powder of the 
leaves as antispasmodic in intestinal 
colic 

Oajuput oil, locally to the abdomen 
lollowed by poppy seeds fomenta- 
tion 

Calotropisgigan tea, the leaves besmeared 
with oil are used as var&lians 

Camphor oil 



coixapse. 



69^ 



Colic.— (rt'ff^'O 



CinafnailTet in allepice, Anise oU, 

•nethom, cardamoms, me, ginger, 

clofeit cioDAmon, capsicum, Jcc.,iiBefui 

in fl* till lit coHc 
CiiitoT oil ftiid turpentine cciiictnit.orr»s- 

torotlv/ith opium inteiniiU^ vivearciief 
CHryopliylhmi» iiifuttoj), or volatile oil 
Chnmoibile oil, with »iigiir in rnlestinal 

colic in hyf^tfrlcj*! women 
Cooculu of ^R^at vnlae, in iotca- 

tinal ; l' prrgnADcy 

Colt;uf> Ai..Mn..i..M., used M An'tUpasmodie 
Ctutun oil with opium is very effectual 

when other remedlen fail In lead colic 
Counter irntatioii, at llytng lilUtcn for 

reoat oolic 
Rasential oils, to relieve tliituleiioe 
IpomcLfi pL'sdipriCf the leaves applied aa 

varalians to iLe iib<lon3«n 
Unseed, tea or fjoulticcs 
Matricaria infution during liatbiiig 
Mentha piperitH| oil, internally 
Morphiue, hyp<^Klermictiily« or iniernaily 

in all formfi of colic 



Mustard plaftter 

Myristica officinalis oil internally 

Kux vomica, with nitrate of siWer and 

hops internally, to »obdue abdominal 

cramps and Apasms 
Olive oil dmitjj? ihe attack gives relief 

in renal and hepatic colic 
Oil of tur{^>cntiDe, ts of^eful in ileus, 

colica pSctonum, tiatulence, decompose 

ed bile ; in renal colic it stops spasms 

of tht* urrtcrs 
Optum, With morphia or with chloroform, 

uflcful internally in flatulent colic and 

in hepatic colic 
Opium tincture with alum Internally is of 

benefit. (Alum converts the poisouoaa 

saltti of leaii in the f^ystem into 

Jnncx!uouH sulphate of lead.) To be 

followed by a dose of castor oil to 

rfliove the pain 
Tobacco by the month may control colic 

buttH daugerous if given by the rectum 
Turpeuline is useful tn biliary colio 



ClimACteric Disorders. iSn vUn /» i^age 4§4,) 



Aconite tincture, I mn. for nervous palpi* 

'"I'^n (ind mtlcssnen 

liua with opium and nnx vomica 
:^ Ueatr U llutreitng, if there is 

fuiiit^H of tho hctd iind flushing 
Camphor tilone internally for drowsiness 

and head lie ho, or with rAU>dtv-coto(ni<i 

locally to the licod in headache 
Ciniieifuga internally for distressing 

headache 



Cannabtn Indlco, If tbere li much btad* 

ache 
£rgi>t with cannaldt iudica tnteroally It 

tatich fluorjinir 
Kux vomica, in flushing, fulness of headi 

with hot or cold prcspiration 
Opium Internally 
Phy&«^tigma ci tract, for sensatioii of 

tiuttvring iit the pit of the atpntadlk 

and in fla*.ulencc 



(jallie acid in large ditsee gives re- Thymol^ 1 gr« internally it usefulf it 
ttef HIaHa In the blood 

OoUapte ; Exhaustion ; Shock ; Ooldneag. (Sre Tv/, t^pafe 46C,} 



Oath, wUh friction for cohl feet 
Caifeine citnu and brandy Internally 
Camphor, solution in oil, liypfKtermically 

injeoied into the fore arm in ooliapee 

of pneumonia 
Cocaine or atropine injection to raise the 

body temperature 
Digitaiifs with ammonia or brandy 

inlfcrnally as cardiac stimulant 
Klectricity to the phrenic nerve 
KHction t J the limba 



Ginger powder with kantol powder for 

friction to cold hands and feet 
Liniment t^rrbinthinic. locally 
Mon 'Icjmicallj 

Mu> 

Oler i tocally f internally 

Stiri q brandy and ammonia 

fcittv With ether and digitalis 

hypixicrmicfllly if fadufc of heart 
Tur|icntine with cannabis, internally 
Valerian internally 




698 



CONVULSIONS. 



OcntfiiBctiTitii— ChktsriiaL IMptheitticCkmorilkceal, Gnmilmr ; 
Fhtf eteniilar, Purulent or Stnunoiu Ophthalmia iStt tw. /. jm^ 456.) 



Akakiii, m a wash 

Atropine, eolation locallj and intemallj 
Tery uaefol, «b oomea is liable to slough 
and become hazy as in grmnaUr 
lids 

Belladonna, locally and internally in 
Btramous ophthalinia to relieve pain 

Castor oil, as drops into the eye to relie?e 
pain and photophobia 

Cocaine hydrochlorate, solution or 
oleate applied to the palpebral 
conjancf iTa as a palliative 

Ergot floid extract, in catarrhal and 
phtyctenalar conjanctivitis 

Eaphrasia, as a mild astringent locally 

Hydrastiue hydrochlorate. as lotion if 
lids adhere 

Jaquirity, to prodace ponilent conjuncti- 
vitis and thus cure granular conjuncti- 
vitis 



Norphine, with z nc salts or alum, as 
ooilTria 

i pinm, fluid exUact or wine, aa drops 
into the eye to relieve pain and 
improve the ooodition of the oon- 
junctiva 

Physof^tignune, locally in phlyetennlar 
conjunctivitis to reduce the pupil and 
shut out the light 

Pulsatilla tincinre, in waier as a waidi, 
and internally 

Rhubarb, to remove gastric discnder 

Staphisagria, in tarsal ophthalmia to 
destroy vermin 

Tannin with glycerin (1 to 8), as appli- 
cation in granular lids ; the powder 
dusted over ihe iids in chronic 
catarrhal conjunctivitis with injection 
of vessels and cedema. 



Ck>nTale8Cence. iSee Jol. I, page 468.^ 



Achillcea millefolium, as a bitter tonic 
Alstonia scholaris, com|.ound decoction 

as a bitter t^nic 
Anthemis nobi I is, as a gastric stimulant 
Berberis aristata, the bark and stem as a 

tonic and aperient 
Bitters, vegetable 
Bixa orellaua, as a stomachic tonic 
Calumba 
Cetraria island ica 
Clerodendron, bitter tonic 
Coca fluid extract 
Cocos nucifera, internally and as an 

inunction 
Coptis teeta tincture, bitter gastric tonic 
Cosciuium fenestratum bitter tonic 
Guarana, highly oseful 



Hydrastis, to promote digestion 

« ipium as a rftctal enema in insomnia 

Picneua excelsa, a pare bitter tonic dur- 
ing convalescence from fever with 
biliousness 

Portalacca compound tincture, with 
citrate of iron, as bitter tonic 

Premna integrifolia, infusion of leaves 
as a stomachic tonic 

Roborans syrup, containini^ quinine, 
strychnine, man^'anese and hypophue- 
phites as a tonic and constructive 
aifent 

Quinine and its preparation, to promote 
digestion and appetite 

Toddalia aculeata, usa bitter stomachic 

Vegetable bitters 



ConTolaioiia— Epileptic. Hysterical, Infantile, i^t y^^l- 1, page 468.') 



Asafetida, given as an enema, is very 
useful to mitigate convulsions due to 
teething 

Belladonna, for infants if due to teeth- 
ing or to whooping cough [modic 

Gynandropsis pentaph^lla, as antispas- 

Convulsions Puerperal- 
Acid bensoic, as a prophylactic and to 

hasten convalescence 
Aconite tincture, internally to reduce 

the arterial pressure 
Atropine, hyi)odei mil ally 
Belladonna tincture, intemslly [cally 
Caffeine citras, internnlly or hypoccrmi- 
Cannabis tincture, intcinally [tion 

Jaborandi extract, as rectal iujec- 
Morphine, with chloral internally or 



Ignatia for children if due to intestinal 
irritation without cerebral congestion 

Ipecacuanha, ss an emetic 

Opium is naiigerous in 30ung children 
efficient in adults 

Valerian in child rtu if due to worms 

Eclampsia of Pregnancy. 

alone hypodermically to n-lieve urflB> 

mic convulsioi s 
Mustard poultice to the calves 
Opium tincture, as enema with starch, 

should be prececie<i by free purgation 
Pi:ocarpine nitrate, i gr.to j gr.hypoder- 

mica 11 y is very useful 
Veratrum viride extract, internally or 

hypodermically, or by enema 



COUGH. 



699 



OoriiB : Waits ; GoDdylotmata* (> ^ io ,i,juNjr nuj 



jkoacAf^iam occitlentale, JQlco locftlty 
ArgemoQc McxiciiDv, the oil m ftioothiog 

Bells'UiMim plast<*r 

ChelJiluDium majtis, kb an frHUnI loe«Uj 

ChrjriMirt>l'iii solution, 10 p, c.Jti eth«r or 

gutu iwrch* locally for wtaia nfter 

they wrt; purcH rlown 
Oocalno bytlrocblomU', u ft Jood aii«s»* 

Ibettc 



i*oniutn. eattfrtinlly nm) interD^ly 

pjip«inCf U^tcalJy applied 

Pliifttcr of soft fttfiierlHl with bole Id tbe 

cenlreover lUe corn 
Rup, I he oil wiih hoiiev, Uicilly 
S»?ine 1, witt ' - " n# ciiuetic 
Thttjii tiriolur* , and nlfro locally 

for w arts ipua or pudeoda 



Caugb' (See V&L I, page mi,) 



Acid hytlmcyanic dilute, in irritable 

cough, iu tuuifh wf phtliiuis, and ia 

simple uervotH cough tlut* lo IxrlUiblo 

ifjit€ o! the ijrutein 
AnemontQ Is useful in irtitative coagb nf 

pbtbisil, and In nsthma 
Acooite, lo shiirt dry ticklifig oough in 

t ho astbmwt ics with anxioua look aod in 

tbroat cough 
AlMimorphiM. " ' '! orate, In hacking 

cuiigli w r *ioniiion or with 

dimculi c:..i . ,.. un 
Aspidi>«peiniii i^uubnkchOt in ipaamodic 

C<JUKh uf astiitiia 
Aaafi-Uda, owlu^f to its oontitiniDg 

•ulpbur, \h uMiful in haUtnal cou^th 
Bdladouna, trt<ern»Uy or exicmady a« 

plaster to the chei»t In spa»mr}dic and 

neiTrt"^ -.ri.-Vi 
Bqivvii pUiitcr to tbo cbent to 

■Hay iiancbitisandof pbibisU 

Campfior and cirlorul, allays spnamodtci 

oough if painted over the larynx 
Cliamomile oil« 2 tiiii., usefnl in cough 

in hysti-rtciil ^vomeii 
CodAini% i to I grs.» a mild ,<^;"-«--nnt ; 

atmi laxAttve. h does not ' mg 

and tH used to rciicvt^ ( ,, of 

1 phthlttiM 

iMlfnm. useful In highly s])asinodte cough 
^nbub kept in the tuoiitii ami rlittwed or 

with linseed teii, laki^n iritfrrtally 10 

I ' ' ' ' f" oiilarrb, of 

i ■ ■• rt 
f\tL -. -j^.; ;— 1). as poultice 

U\ tht* chest 
Dniscni, fluiil extract^ iii tpasmodic or 

phthisical cough 
Eophorina piUdifera, in npasmciilJc o^|rb 
V.v. ' ' ' ,„!,. 



(iritlij* 111 liablLtmi Coiigli Utid 

ln»iK nii^h 

dauUlK-nu <j]], UBi.'ful in spnftnodio 
tickling oighl cough 



Herr plant made hot 

ni ^1 ifi cough scd 

Ilyu**ryHMiiis, inter ually in spastncdic 

tickling night crrugh 
Ipecarunnba, in winter con^h vritli wtdx- 

dng; in troul>ir'iioni« night c^iugb the 

wloo in usifd Hi a i^pmy to thi» fauces; 

aluo inicrusily at^ ari cxp«»cforanL in 

coughs in childr«^a 
Lactucariuni, useful as a vehicle for 

Lmi (lAcful In Bpsenirxlic i^ugh 

lAuy lucs to th« throat in Iroobh - 

some Uitckiiig cough 

Loi^clia. uiiieful iu dry ppannodlc eongh 
with tickling ieniiatif<n 

Marruhiun] vulgare, a domestic remedy 
In cough 

Morphia ncclas, alone of with glyci^rio 
as flppHeation to the fauces to rHieve 
cough and irritation of the air pAs»iage« 

Morphine, with chtorgfr»rin anil moUascs 
intv^rnally in paroxysm si dry cough 

Nox vomica trncturc, has n rcry quieting 
action in Inryngcal vjm\i\\ of neurotic 
origin ; also in mrvou* sod (i«t iodic 
congb. It hail a piompt action oo 
the jiucuimiga«»nV, hence an rfficient 
remedy in bronchi tu, pncumonisi 
pbthiais and empbysrma 

Opium, internnlly, toaihiy irritallon and 
to lesacn hypersccrctkji'i. To U\ avoid. 
ed if tbc iccrction in copionn and cx- 
nulsoir tuiu... f..iih- Highly usefuhn 
uronrl u violent oooieli 

with I , and In cough 

due lo itttlaiiied aud ulcerated throat 

Picihliquida or lar water, inteinally in 
M vuodic oongb, and in cough 

4 I H and otpbtbliis. 

Piiu..- . ' n*»n plaster 10 the chest 

in cht' 

P^un^1l. ^ I ting expect orant !<> 

relieve cougli 

Prunu6 virginiana, oontaini h|drocyaDlG 
tcid and hence useful in irritattvo 
oough 




700 



CYSTITIS. 



Oonsh*— (<^<^^*) 



Terpene hydrate, in bronchial oongh and 

in night coagh 
Terebene pure as inhalation or aa 

spray 
Thuja a-'cidentalis, tincture internally 

in chronic cough 
Tobacco smoking to relieve cough 
Valerian, in aathmatical and hysterical 

coughs 



Sanguinaria, with hyoecyamns in nervous 

spasmodic cough 
Senega, as stimulant expectorant, given 

in chronic bronchitis and in subacute 

chpst affections 
Squill syrup or as acetum, or oxymel 

scillae for catarrhal cough and tickling 

in the throat 
Tannin, with glycerin, locally to chro. 

nically inflamed throat producing cough 

Formula, — Mixture : — Tinct. sanguinarise, 2 drs ; tinct. lobelias, 3 drs.; vin ipecac 
8 drs. ; tinct. opii camphorata, 12 drs. ; syrup soil lae, 12 drs. ; aqua cinnamon, 6 oa- 
Dose, 4 drs., in harrassing cough. 

Pormula.-~(FoT winter cough)— Syrup picis liquidae, 1 dr., syrup of Virginian 
prunes, 2 drs ; apomorphine, 2 p. c. solution. } dr. Dose 6 ms. 

Dtcortion. — Viola odorata, 6 drs. ; althoea officinalis 10 drs.; zizyphus, fruit* 
No. 26 : ficus, No. 5 ; cordia laltifolia fruit. No. 10 ; glycerrhiza radix, 3 drs.; water 
20 ozs. Make decoction. Dose, 1 oi. 

J?mi/i#2on.— Buchanania latifolia, encumber, dates, almonds, sessamum, ms 
emulsion for cough. 

Prunal, a stimulating expectorant, contains ammonium chloride, scillae, senegm, 
glycerrhiza. prunes, eucalyptus, balsams of pern and tolu, each 1 dr. ; pix liquida, pini 
sylvestris, heroin hydrochloride, ^ gr. in each dram given in coughs due to 
bronchial and laryngeal irritation. 

Group Oatarrhal, Membranotui or Laryngeal; Diphtheria. 
{See Vol. /, page 465,) 



Acid tannic, as spray 

Aconite, ^ mn. every hour till fever 

subsides 
Apomorphine, as an-emetic very effective 

but highly depressant 
Ipecacuanha, as an emetic at the outset 
Mustard plaster locally to the chest 



Quinine, in large doses with ammonii 
carbonas and senega in membranooa 
croup 

Sanguinaria, as emetic, very useful in 
membranous croup 

Senega, as an auxilliary to emetics 

Turpentine oil with almond oil internally 



Cystitis (Acnte and Ohronic); Oompare; Irritable Bladder ; Dysnria ; 

Enenresis. iSee Vol. /, page 465.) 



Acid benzoic, with soda biboras, internally 
in chronic cystitis with enlarged pros- 
tate; it removes fcRtor fron» the urine, 
and also renders the alkaline urine acid 

Acid camphoric, 4 to 3 p. c. solution in 
hot water is used as vesical injection to 
prevent decomposition of urine 

Buchu either alone or as infusion or the 
fluid extract, 10 to 30 ms. with tincture 
conii and morphine sulphate is given 
internally in chronic cystitis, in cystic 
catarrh complicating the ureters or the 
kidneys leading to muco-purulent 
discharge 



6el1adonna,extract locally as suppositories 
or internally as tincture. 5 ma acts as a 
sedative to relieve any form of vesical 
irritation. It is useful in vertical catarrh 
due to chill attended with pain ; 
in nocturnal incontinence due to relax- 
ed sphincter of the bladder it is very 
useful 

Beuzoate, of alkalies with glycerin, naefnl 
when the urine is alkaline 

Chimaphilla is given internally as a more 
active diuretic in chronic cystitis than 
pareira or uva ursi 



OKAFNRSB* 



701 



Cystitis. 4c.— ('•<*«<'*.) 
l^jinDftbit Indlcftfe an excellent RtKKlvnt* Hjoscyamus, 
in cftjiea of djrfforlft with irritAlnlity 
of tbe l*lfuldcr Jincl $t>itsm of the 

CiDthiii'ideSf iiitenijvUy in Mj^uriu, 

Te?sicAl CRtiirrli, enlnrge<l pr<i»UI<s ant J 

In chronic eygtitis— lar^*^ rlo!^'« cnii-r 

fnflfinimatirm of the orinAty tr«ct 
CeMMrnpclofl parelrft, iu cIiujiuc oysfitb 



Cot^aliii.' wjlution 5 p. t\ inittHiim iniu the 

ColohictiTti, 11 irfiira hmvii 

OT bufhu. i' .iknliJie itriiie 

CoUineoniii • , with morphiti 

Andnoonktr 1 acute cystitis 

Cotton ro^>t^ ituc^jtriiom liattul Co leUeve 
itmiigury 

Cnpaibii, ftlufK* or with * ubcb« ; ifi o»cful 
tor it» Inciil itction on I he inuanw 
rr ■ ^ ■ ' ■ ' tt§ uBi' 10 objwtiofitthle 
I ^ ti4»t« and pitKlueniK 

^ ,iricc 

Cut»€iifi, tnt*'nmii\\ A8 a sUmulAtit of 
the rnttfnim iiK'nibriinf, i infill In 
' 1 nnd In rhrniik* cyHtltij* 

Kii 'l)uf itrupiDr, I Iff, to t< ox*. 

ot wnur liriul in dyiiirin 

Krig^rcn c4nAilni»e, the 01), UMilttl to 
nlir V. initHblllty of tbo blftddrr 

Ki. ]t HlLnuU'fiWy tucrcoacs the 

r powir of thtt t>Mder ftnd 

to (Jiufity U8**lf mcir« 



^rfrctly 



< benefi- 



Owlwmii tin* 
I dr. ami 



luri^ I dr. with 
w^Mfr r»Odri'. 



' .1 m 

•ti^rionl women, tn rrlicv*' iruUlniity 
the' blruldcr with fr^t|Ucnl inieturiiion 

iXhru, usciful in rlyBaria^ rrsetnbtis 

in action bacba «nd uvii axui 



to relteTe dysuria ftad 
veaionl irritaiioa 

Juniper oil la uaeful in eyftitU due to 
urnthiftl ini tuition 

Litttteeil uiTu^^ion, Qj^ful in dysuriA 

Morphia, hyito<lcnnically, relieves 
simntjury 

Mu<.Mlai<tnuui drinkfl Qseliil In oyBiilln 

Oleum sROttl, intenutlly very ttscfnl ia 
nrdloftry cystitis 

OjviuTtj Mild hyckricyAniuA, as rectal 
*4uppom^ury or opiuni tincture with 
Hfiri'h lis rectal, enemn is uneful to 
n»lii?ve psiin of ft*.rftngury cnuse^i by 
bliBtem, or to prevent frequent miclMri- 
tion. Un use i« to U? avoided If the 
kidneys Aie tliitr^otted 

OrthitiMvphern useful its uric acitl wfthfrnt 

Oryy* H*tivH,«leiM>ctio!it m astfiil drink to 
ruiicve iljHuriii 

r*retnt ttifuiion ^ivcn inteninlly in 
chronic irr it Ability (^f the bljidder with 
ropy iDucuA in the ttnne. It h 
nnperior to uva ursi 

Hichi. tlnia e*tr»et, 2<) inn., internally 
useful if (he »rme is lUkiiline, r^>py, 

ftliir T * - ' ;, --■'-■■ 

Quiri in acnte 

tc- .... .-i,i.4 ., . ..., „...;iuu I In &00 

as an injcsctUtti Into the bladder con* 

(ntiicngput in th<? urine 
StJinimlA nmidfH (1 to lU) infui^itin, is 

(fivcn internally iachroniccystifiH with 

beiietlt 
Trltieuin (rhinotnes), dsuocibo (1 in l*^), 

iM gi*ea loternally, in chronic cystitis 
Turpentine otl« ioternalty and as an 

epitbem is u<»eful iu cyHtJliH due to 

urethral irritation or prostatic di»t<.su*e 
Uva urfit« infusion given iuternnlly is 

tt*rlul ID chronic casea» but len power* 

fol than buchu 



Injunctions to wash out the bladder — f^rcad acetate^ lo grs. to 4 ota, of warm 
water ; acid nitric dilute* 2 nins. to i o», af water ; acid tannic, I gr. to 1 oa, of warm 
water: Uvra\, I dr. with i;lvtxirin 7 dm., and warm water 4 dra. 

K^terml JUfitrdit^i,-*Vc»ov batb, fomentatioo or ponhiceato the bypogaatriuiD* 
Avi/til I »tT «' (.Jilt, lime jttke, Jcc. 



AeliynfcDihfw liMiKMa* tho nii^iieated oil 
u-^mI ti*^ rirops in 10 the tar 

il the taf ami fnlIowe.^ by 
•lu§ted over the denuded 

C»JLipur nil witholJvcoi) (1 tn i)aa ilrupM 
Caps^f'uni tirioiurif^with t*orai an*! nitr*? 

aw ^argh* ind»;ttfn'*'«« of a nervous origin 
Ceichictttn iDternalfy In fteafnefe due 

to gout 
Crelacmium tincture* uieful In srrvoug 

deafnoaa 



rilocarpine. hyjMxlcrmlctlly, m deafness 

due to aff«*r-tionH of I he labyrinth 
Quinine^ iron and •♦trychntne, fiit^rnally, 

cur»*s sotne cas^. U i^ften causes 

desifntrss 
Tannin with gljoerin, % local appUca- 

tion nneful for dealnefli due Ui thrt>at 

affection 
Turpcnttrie with glycerin (1 to 6}, to be 

til '• th« trifsfus in deafntM* 

»1 1 ive secretion of ceruinpn 



702 



DHOBBB'S ITCH. 



Delirium. {See Vol. I^ page 464.) 



Belladonna, in delirium of severe fonn in 

typhus and other fevers 
Camphor, or camphor monobromate in 

low muttering delirium of fevers 
Hjroscyamus in delirium of typhus of a 

mild form with hallucinations due to 

nervous excitemeut and slight cerebral 

congestion 



Opium with tartar emetic internally ia 
delirium of fevers. In tranmAtie 
oases opium should be used as rectel 
injection 

Stramonmm, in wild and furious deliriom 
in puerperal mania with restleasneas 
and suicidal tendency 

Valerian in delirium of low fevers 



Deliriam Tremens; Ohronic Alcoholism ; 
Dipsomania ; Inebriety.— (Sm; ^ol. 7, page 46S,') 



Aconite with opium, in violent delirium 
Apomorphine, to set up vomiting and 

thus lessen delirium 
Arnica tincture is useful in delirium 

tremens with depression ' 
Belladonna is useful in congestion of the 

brain, in insomnia with coma vigil 

in cyanosis an 1 cold surface 
Caffeine hydrobromate to lessen de.irium 
Cannabis Indica extract, i to | gr., a 

useful hypnotic in nocturnal delirium 
Capsicum, with honey, or as tincture 

to induce sleep in the early stage 

of delirium tremens due to dyspepsia 

of chronic alcoholism 
Cimicifnga or cimicifugin, an excellent 

brain tonic, relieves delirium 
Digitalis tincture, or infusion alone, 

or with bromides useful to lessen 

delirium due to cerebral anaemia with 

effusion 
Dnboisine, a sedative and hypnotic given 

in delirium tremens with benefit 



Gelsemium useful to lessen irritability 
Hyoscyamus, or hyoscine, useful in deli- 
rium tremens, and to relieve tremors 
due to other diseases 
Lupuline tincture or oleo resin, as cere- 
bral sedative checks delirium 
Morphia subcutaneoosly is useful 
Mustard, as an emetic relieves delirium 
Nux vomica or strychnine is rery 

useful 
Opium, as rectal or hypodermic injection, 
is useful in boisterous delirium in 
sthenic cases 
Picrotoxine, useful to relieve tremors 
Quinine, with mineral acids is useful in 

horrors and adynamic states 
Spiritus ammonias aromatic with capsi- 
cum is of benefit 
Strychnia, in delirium tremens, hypo- 

dermioally used with benefit 
Sumbul, is very useful in iufomnia of 
alcoholism 



For MiUa." In insomnia and extreme nervousness; — Tinct. capncum, 4 drs., 
potass, bromide. 4 dn.; liq. potas. arson. 1 dr.; tinct. nux vom, 2 dr^.; apt. 
ammon. aromat., 24 drs.; syr. tolntau, 16 drs. Mix. Dose, 4 drs. to overcome habiu 

Dentition in Ohildren. iSee Vol. /, page 466.) 



Belladonna tincture, or aconite tincture 
with chloroform and water (1 to 3), of 
this 2 to 3 drops rubbed on the gums, 
to relieve convulsions or other com- 
plication of dentition 

Calumba or dalcamara infusion, to 
check diarrhoea and vomiting accom- 
panying dentition 

Cannabis, hyoscyamus, and chloral 
with bromide of potassium known as 
bromidia causes tranquillity and rest 



in painful dentition 

Castor oil useful to check diarrhoea of 
dentition to be followed by chalk, 
catechu, or sine oxide to leduce 
peristalsis 

ChamoniilH tincture, as a sedative inter- 
nally is UKcful 

Hyoscyamus, is useful to relieve pain and 
subdue irritation 

Khubarb with soda is given internally to 
relieve aphthae 



Dhobee*s Itch- 

The parasites attacking the axilla or any other part of the skin leading to 
ringwormlike affection attended with itching. The parasites are the tricho- 
phytons or ordinary body ringworms, microsporon minutissimum, and diplococcus, 

Oania alata, infusion locally Chrysarobin is useful 



DtAftRHCEA* 



703 



DiAboteB luBipidufl; Polyuria* (^^ ^^^ hpage 406,) 



Aciil gjillic. l>(iA<f, 15 isn. iutcru&Hy 
Artttciinlhim (>ociHentii]Uf tlie bnrk u 

iofusion tDternnlly 
Avoid Ujiijflto, Aiipftrat^iB, b«ar»« 
BiiUiidodDji itJtrriiAlIjr Ih very uri'tiil 
Dry diet ' LuseTul 

Krgt>l« fluid L'xirtict, t ^ I *^^** ^ 
<jnlvnnl»m, eon»tnnt curr(?ot, in useful 
JalMjrmtidi, U uHcfui to reditre the 

<|(uintit| of urine 
KfAfncrfAt to Icfweu tlie cjaanUty of uritiu 

Diabetes Mellitus* 

Almond brl^a(I 

Aloiii« to rdiuve contitipntion 
Oocldne, k to | gr., Ia u^sful to nUnj 
thlrit -p^ -'■ --t- ' ■■■ ■ -,. 

tluJoill : <'tM'rtt 

Krp>t, I 1 (Uo «|(iai)tity 

of ii«if»r 11 mi Uic irolntiie uf urmt! 
H*>li(iori» tjtoru, the foul bnrk iia decoc- 

tmri inurnnlly, useful m Icaaeidng the 

'Utiiutily of su^jif 
Jniiibtil \'n\\K or the bfirk» i;iTC(t after 

iitoj^U vrtih »iicchjirlno ^irtfn fjivaor- 

KxUrmil r^mrni 4i(<.->ii4*^uljir living, 
Hvoid Jttculiol. 



MtiBCitrinr, often suooeNfal lo leweD the 

quantity of urmc 
Upium, flloue or with gfiUic »cid^ fa 

tt^ful in thrgedOM^ 
Pilocarpine, .'^ to ♦, gr. liit*(rnftUy eAUBet 

<liu|diore8t6 11ml ksscnH the iiuantUy of 

urine 

Strv' ^ ' "" ' •'■''" ■'* ^ "nicisvcry H»ef«l 

V*f« li in IftTU^* dofos 

i( * (I tiow of urine 



able iTi4ultN 
L<ivuin«o ur {luil)etin, a tacchArint* food* 

% carbo hydnit^', well njttnnitiitcid And 

oxiiiiKLHl JH very us^'iful 
Nu3t vniuiai, is very useful 
I'eii nutti, a» fMxl, rich in nlbumen, fut, 

tf^nd non-nltfogenoui extract! re mnttem 

&C. U of ^H^Mft^t 

QunbiiinJ ■ quantity of sogftr 

Tftba*hlr ' 



frtah nir, modtsrate ojctirctse, free bowels, 



DiiLrrhcBa. (<SW Vd. V, /> t^r 4itT,} 



Acikciii catcoliUi cximct of tijc wi«j<l iii C<»t 
us0i?f«>l ii 

y^('r.», t*- Mi,linrrfm»a dutj |o CXpOttUrO tO 

ttfVur and uuttiu^ paius 



■ fid 



Atfoiu^ ^^intuutf, iia sitontc di»rihcca 
AlfttoniiA ttchotniiM^ in t |ir>>Mlt^ ilinrrliosa 

AmIClfc, to cti iiOM 

Atiji5ii, ttn a t lb 

H?i! ■" •• ; . -> ajedy ic 



if 



hr ' -tiiy in iAtcfl* 

tjii«i t^it«rih 

Caluinba, UHf-fiO in r^lriietl utiile of lu- 
tostintii rii riibr»inu, l>ut to bo 

iivijidtvi ki on exist« 

Capsicum, Hi ui.tuiinii due to putrid 

^^^ tJlMltol oil, in lin « dijhtw ,\Lt]i tipioro ill 

^^B dtartliu'ii (« irri- 

^^1 tfttlUg Ujiil <t cjuial 

V Catechu coiupou Lid puvvavi, m utouic 

H dinrrhiL-A or ilmt fttUowiug withdmwal 

^^H H 01 opium httbir. Incl^nMrea, 

^^H iM given with dmlk mixture 

r 



lieuUtiuii 
CinnamoQ 



itif union, ii QicftU m 

, ro and iu thut due to 

[ato&ie eaoea 

with clii&tk i^ixa opiutu ID 



' !«'itr«ci, orcntiHM 

in rrhcL*a 

Crtu .. . ; ii spiri t amniuii 

CApAicum frud tipium in very u 
DulcAiuaiAf in ciiairUtXM of ch 

due to deotitiort 
Gall and optum, ai» rvtiUl ioppoaltory 
Giogtr, with opiuQi, in dtarrbosa with 

flatuienct: 
Qe!t>t''i - f-f ■ liarrbfEaof piithiait 
Ha; I L' quite non^irritant, la 

Ki V u Advauoed caaeaof 

diwrriiuea in cinitiren 
IpiHracuanUa wiiic% in dropdoMi if vomit' 

in^ XB due to food trntatlon, or the 

powder in diarrhoea with greenish 

motior^ 
Kino powiler, ut t(nclur«t tp naefui in 

aioiiii MiarrJiii'A, or that rcsaultiitg fzoni 

^\ >t upium tiabtt 

Kol r I «tomcdiArrh(£a 

KraDiCiiii, ^cry useful in atonic form 
Mufltard piatter to the ablotuitn in uteful 
Kux vouut^a, in atonic and epidemic 

diarr)taf«« useful tis an adjunct to other 

remedies 
Opmm la very uaeful wht?n the motions 

are watery ; la he given witli mioeriij 

acids or wirh ncctAtc ai 1«jul cir tiNid 

aa rectal inject iuo with Htardi 



704 



DROPSY. 



DiarrhcBa.— (<K>fiei{.) 



Podophyllin, j J to i gr., alone or with 
aconite in violent form of bilious 
diarrhoea with vomiting ; very useful 
in gastro-entiritiB with cutting paios 
and in prolapsus of the anus 

Pulsatilla, in mucous and dyspeptic 
diarrhoea or in diarrhoea due to piles 

Quinine sulphate or quinine carboiate, in 
periodic diarrhea with dysentery and 
jaundice 

Resorcine solution, 1 gr. in 1 dr. of castor 
oil, useful in diarrhoea in children 



Rhubarb tincture or powder, in the mAj 
stage to remove irritants and to cheek 
diarrhoea 

Rumex, to check morning diarrhoea 

Tannin suppositories or internally with 
opium, m atonic, chronic or profoae 
diarrhoea 

Turpentine, very useful 

Thymol, as an internal antiseptio in 
diarrhoea of phthisis and in chradc 
diarrhoea [vomiting 

Veratrum album, in diarrhoea with 



Fjrtfiula, — Eataja arishta or astringent wine :— contains — Endft chhal, 500 ; 
raisins, 250 ; flowersof bassia latifolia, bark of gmelina arborea, kk 8*20 ; water, 10,000 ; 
boil together to 8,500, then add flowers of woodfordia floribunda, 100 ; and treacle, 
400. Mix and set aside to ferment for one month usually buried under ground* 
The wine has an agreeable flavour. Used in chronic diarrhoea. 



Diphtheria (See Vol. I.page 469.) 



Acid benzoic, in solution as gargle 

Acid boric or with glycerin as a gargle 

(1 in 20) as a swab (I in 1,000) 
Balsam tolutani with ether and 

iodoform locally 
Belladonna is useful if throat and toosils 

are inflamed and swollen. It is given 

early to abort the exudation, given 

later on to support the heart 
Chinolin, 5 p. c. solution as a swab 
Camphor pnenique, with almond oil as a 

paint to the throat 
Capsicum tincture, as gargle or a local 

stimulant application 
Cubebs in lai^e dosea in the early stage 

in the catarrhal form is very usefnl 
Eucalyptus oil with alcohol as a spray 

with an atomiser 



Papaine solution as inhalation by a steam 

atomizer to dissolve the membrane and 

to remove the exudation 
Pilocarpine hydrochlorate, internally, to 

loosen the membrane ; it produces free 

salivation, but depresses the heart 
Pineapple juice, if sipped, is highly 

beneficial 
Sanguinaria, as emetic, very useful 
Strychnine and atropine, hypodermically, 

as a prophylactic against subsequent 

paralysis 
Tannin, 5 p. c. as a spray is useful 
Turpentine, internally or as fumigation 

alone or with tar and vapour prepared 

by bumiog coal tar burnt in a room 
Thymol and glycerin as gargle— freah 

thyme as spray or as inhalation 



Dropsj (Hepatic, BenaL Cardiac). {See va. I page 479.) 



Acetum scillae in cardiac dropsy 
Aconite tincture, 2 to 5 mst in dropsy 

due to scarlet fever 
Apocynum cannabinnm, an active hy- 

dragogne diuretic, very useful in 
dropsy 
Argemone mexicana oiL in dropsy 
Bryonia, as a drastic purgative and 

dinr«tic. Its infusion with aconite is 

useful in renal dropsy 
Cactus, in cardiac dropsy, and in 

Brisht's disease 
Caffeine citrate or iodide, as a hydra- 

gogue diuretic, to eliminate waste 

products ; useful in cardiac and renal 



dropsies ; should be avoided if urethritis 

is present 
Chimaphila, extract, useful in renal 

dropsy, a fine substitute for ico- 

parius 
Cimicifnga, in hepatic and cardiac 

dropsy 
Colchicum as hydragogue diuretic given in 

dropsy, supervening on scarlet fever or 

heart disease 
Copaiba, as stimulant diuretio ; use- 
ful in ascites due to hepatic 

cirrhosis 
Delphinium zaiil. Decoction in cardiac 

and renal dropsies 



DirOOKNAt. CATARRH. 



705 



Dropsy —O^'^fil.) 



Rfl Infoiion h uiwful tn ilrop»y 

4] lie U) iicute ficaiiUAtuativG nephritis, 

iHouHptd r««urgUHiion, tfOAntjr urine, 
^jjni tf th«n* itt general vctiouA 
oent 
1 vilhequUl «nd mercun!' is at^eful 
Hic or jx'nal aiacii9c; to be avoided 

iti aortic rcgut-gitNtloii and in cardUc 

hyjiertn»phy 
BUusfium, H gT,t with liyo^vamus, 1 gr,, 

UH«'fni lu n (ieriviitivein rennl dropsy. 

It is COD ira -indicated if there is i^iibtro^ 

intMtinal irritation 
Gripes, very iisiful in cardiac dropsy 
Hcllebiro^ llujd cjttnict, or tincture* 

10 siiri^nrcA, or ttropsy with general 

etIuHiofi }i(t«r scarlutioa 
I JttlM>randt, uaeful in renal dropsy 
Jaliip. with pcN.iophjllin or withpolaissiuui 

btUtTtnite ftud ginger as n hydniji^ogue. 

in useful m drojisy tri»m Bnght^sdisensQ 
Junl[H!r is useful in drop6y after scar* 

latina, and in, astlieoSr, • tirdii\4: <>r renal 

drupny 
KAImiunii, ntfetu] in renal dropsy 



taHa amara, uiefiil in dropsy with 

enlarged Uver or spleen 
Paracentesis (abdominal), if ssoeaslre 

«ffu«ion 
Pilocarpine bydrochlorat«, 10 reoal 

dropsy where the secretion of arine Is 

scanty or sappnsbscd 
Raphanus sativus, usefol in oardiac 

dropsy 
Scopariug, infofilgn with diluents, n» a 

hydragogne diuretic, is uneful in cardiac 

dro^wy 
S'neg», useful in dropsy, duo to rcnul 

disease 
Squill alone is uncful In cardiac dropsy 

or with iron if aumuiia 00-exislti ; to be 

avoided if reital diftestie is preaeut 
Htiilin^MiL us a hydragofcue catbartio, 

useful in luacitcH due to liver ftffectlotis 
Strophanthus, uitcfut in ctrvlirtc dropsy 
Taraxiicufn, as a diurrtic, is used in 

cardiac drop!»y 
Turt>eriiiiie oil, m ueeful in drop«y due 

U) iion-de«c)uau)ative renal rtiiKmift 

with albumen in the nrino 

D»rmMla — <1) Aeima tctracantha, 10 ou.; tribuius terremtrij (fruit), i dr,; 
triantlmnA monoj^^ynia root, i dr.; cephalandra indtoa, 1 dr.; bellene myrnbolans, 
p| dr.; ohcbultc Uiyiuliolans^ ) dr.; iroo droes. lU ot.; water, 12 oe, aa deeuct^on. Doee, 
1 1 OS. in droptty. 

{!). Tlnet. digllalisi i dr,; extract ergot^c littuidi, | dr; acidi gatlici, 20 gn.; 
' ooiasii bromidi, 120 giA.;oxymelioillie, i ox.^ syntpi 3 ok.; aqua lauroccru^i, 2 oxa. 
Mix. Dose, i to 6 dra. 

iS), Vi^hni nut%i The word Vilhni mcaos "ftie." U signifies an a^^eot 

which drives away water from the abdon^eu jtuit a^ ttnt causes wster to tvaporaU 

when brouy^bt in contact wilb it. Hence a spccitic k»rdroi»i)y. It containe p4rAkajaii| 

14; gaodhska, halada, tripbalA, each 2; ni»iiots, jaoiaiagulil, seed, ctkttraka, each 

a parta ; ■uutlia^mui. pif»ali, daniimula, jiruni each 8; tnturale, the powder in 

' the juioe of aratd and iihangro, and th«u adti emndl-lela iutUcicnt to make a pill 

IXmcv & to to grs. In dropsy. 

Duodenal Oatarrh (««' ^ol, /, jwf* 4724 



Kydrafitis, in catarrh with gallstones 
ItieuaoiiaQha, very useful 
I rodopl^Uln, in catarrhal and fnalarial 
doodenltja 



Rhubarb 

Sauguiiiaria ituctUfo 
Water melon juice as a drink 



I'SiTMiiift— Methl Kodak or Gkmleetioii of Fenugreek:— containe Fenugreek, ^; 
tripbla, 1; Irl^atUf I; cyperut rolaadtts, 1; blaek eutnin., 1, carraway^ l{ 
ooriamier, 1 ; myriGft nagi, I ; pistachio nut« 1 ; Bishop's weed|2 ; rock salt, S 1 
bid lavaoa, 1; i^esua ferea, |; eaasia leav(a>, I ; cinna<D(>ti, 2; cardatnomi, S; 
nutmefs, 2 ; mace, 2 ; cloves, 3 ; oamphort 1 ; aandaiwood, I ; sugar, 40, Mtx^ and 
saake aconloetlon. Ooeic, 1 dx. In chfonio indigeatimti atonic diarrbosa, pregnancy, 
and in wasting diaeaee. 



7o6 



DYSENTKRY. 



Dysentery (Acute, and Ohronic). C^ee Vol I, page 472.) 



Aconite tincture, 2 me., inti-rnaly wlaen 

there is fever and gripiDg pains 
.^!gle m arm clos, internally in atonic cases 

ad astriDgent and soothinf? 
Ailantbus glanduloea, infusion, with 

cinnamon, is useful in chronic dysentery 
Balsam of peru. 3, alcohol, 60, with syrup 

of lemons, 240. and water 1,000, an 

excellent drink in dysentery 
Belladonna, externally and internally in 

chronic cases 
Berber is aristata, internally in chronic 

cases 
Benzoin, with opium, catechu, aud haema- 

toxylon, in obstinate cases with bt^ncfit 
Calumba in chronic cases in theadvance 1 

stage with ulceration of the colon 
Cannabis Indica of benefit 
Castor oil, 1 oz. as a mild cathartic, with 

tinctare opium, 10 ms. in catarrhal 

cases. Mixed with sugar and gum or 

with milk given for children in 

dysenteric diarrhaa 
Chebulic myrobolnus, with finger and 

sweet fennel, internally very useful 
Chochlospermum gosypium (gum), with 

curd or whey internally in cbronicc^tses 
Ergot, with opium and nux vomica in 

acute and cnronic cases in anaemia 
Garcinia m-mgostina, in the advanced 

stage 
Geranium, usefal as a rectal injection 
Grape cure, is useful in chronic crn^eA 
Holarrhaena antidynenterica, bark and 

seeds to chronic cases 
Hydrabtis, n good stomachic tonic and 

cholago.;ue ; it promotes Intestinal 

secretions 
Ipecacuanha, as enema in acute cases. 

Id ordinary cases internally in large 

doses; 25 grs. with milk, very useful 



in greenish motions with moooos 
and blood. In dysenteric diarrhsem 
with vomiting ipecac wine is ased in 
drop doses. Ipecacuanha with opium 
as Dover's powder, is given in chronic 
cases. 

Lanium album. Infusion 4 drs., or Snocos 
i dr., internally in chronic cases 

Lemon juice, with cinchona, very osefal 

Linseed infusion, with glycerin (4 to 1) 
to allay tenesmus 

Matico infusion, by the mouth or by the 
rectum in haemorrhagic dysentery 

Mcsua ferrca, flower buds, internally 

Myrobolans chebulic (bimaj), fried In 
butter Dose, 6 to 10 jjrs. ; very useful 

Nux vomica pulv, in epidemic dvsenteiy 
when stools are attended with much 
depression 

Opium given internally in dysentery in 
every stage and in every form, or as an 
enema: with starch and milk; in chronic 
cases it is given internally to allay 
pain, moderate peristals s mo- 
derate vascular excitement, «d<1 to 
promote the action of the skin. It 
should be used after the canal ia 
emptied by salines. 

Plantago ispaghula, as demulcent, very 
useful 

Punica granatum, decoction usefal in 
advanced stage 

Poppy seeds with cardamoms burnt 
or fried in butter, internally very 
useful 

Qninine alone or with morphia internally 
in dysentery due to malaria and in 
periodic cases like fever. It is also used 
as a rectal injection (1 in 1.00<J) 

Inrpentine oil, internally useful in 
chronic castas 



/?/<*.— Avoid animal food and stimulants. Erf crfial rtmicdics— Leeches to the 
anu«, turpentine stupes to the abdomen. 

Formula.-^^AUchB. molsi di kav&th. Decoction containinp, aigle marmeloa, 
cissampelos pareira, abutilon indicum, gmelina aiborea. holarrhaena antidysenterica, 
and water, to make a decoction. When really add picrorhiza kurro:», kud^hhal, ginger 
and tinospora cordifolia. Dose, 1 oz. in bilious dysentery. 

(2). Terminalia chebula, acorus calamus, cedrus deodAra, aconitum heterophyU 
lum, cessampelos pareia, embelia ribes, cyperus rotundus, piper nigrum, holarrbena 
antidysenterica, add water to make decoction. Dose 1 oz. in dysentery. 

(8) Compound powder. — DhAnya panchaka churana (powder of 5 drugs), corian • 
drum sativum, oyperus rotundas, andropogon muricatus, segle marmelos, and singer. 
Make powder. Dose, } dr. 

(4) Inderjav, moth, dh&oriphul, v&lo, lodhra, mocharas, sunth. Mix and add 
jaggery. Dose i dr. in chronic dysentery. 

(6) M4b4 OaogAdhar Churna:— dhAoriphnl, amli\, moth, pahadmal, jethi madb, 
jambulbij,&mb^ope,kndAchh&l, sunth, ati visa, lodhra, v41o, inder jav. Dost, | dr. 
in chronic dysentery. 



nvsPKPsu. 



707 



Dysmeaorrbflea — (5i''? *W, /, p&^e 175.) 



Ac'T * -tn early i« useful in t'Mr>iy:oi*- 

i id in plethoric suhjectn 

AIll . lidl intemalJy is of great ben- 

lit 
Apiol 3 to 5 iEii« as emmensgDgue U oae- 

f uL in neumlgic caaes ; thoukj be gfren 

fot Bcvcral ctays before the period 
HtllMtlotma, a^ miUl injection or as 

|H'*usHry U ustfol in neurulgic or spaa* 

lUMic forms if the dUebAr|L;e la dark 

iut'l Fret id with aovurc cmrnpy pains 

Attended with iJiills ; or in | gr. dose 

given internally gives rettef 
Oft}Q)>nt oil, loctlty \% usefal to relieve 

ihi! pain 
Camphor internals, or ae onemA with 

opium or HH liniment locally la very 

tiaeftil 
Ciinnabis indic&, is uscfal ft^ a iMNintivc 

in dyBmenorrbcaa 
Caulophy)lani« extract given In iHe in- 

terval b a good ouraiivc in spasmodic 

t^iutea 
CImtclfuga T'"; :*'-" n'itli stmmonium 

tinciurvHi itu wioc^ given in* 

lernally lo 1 . . , ini hi the ooDges- 

live variety 
Ctoer arietinuni,as vapouror sleam locally 

to the puben \% usetui 
Globulus indiciiH tinciurc^ given two days 

befon* ihct'^rm invrry utieful 
Coileine, \ gr., in tj^c^'rol where morphine 

cannot b>e welt i>onie 



Croeiiii «ativuB with camphor and opium 

a» piultioe io tha pabes 
Er^'ot, in the congestive form and daring 

the mulfoieti is very useful 
OeLacmimn, the fluid extract, reUevei 

pain in ueumlgic caaea 
Go&sypiuffl, 10 with ergot 10 and tiiict. 
hellcb.>ri ni^jri 5, given internally ia 
usi-ful 
Guaiacum ammoniated tincture, 1 dt,, 
with natassii iodidi 10 gr., is useful tn 
the rhcnmati«:i and the neuralgic form 
of dytinenorrbaia 
Morpbine, hy^iudermieaHy injected at each 
|j«riod; or morphine with b«inadonna 
M ftupposiiory if pain is severe \% of 
benefit 
Mustard foot hath in of high value 
Opmm internally to relieve the pain or 
as a paint to the os. or with lioseod aa 
pouHiceor ait an enema is very uaefnl 
Pul>»«tillft tincture, or eattract iolernnlly 
only in the functiottMi form M thi) 
di*chiirge i» scanty, and in clofa. tt 
should be iivoide<1 in the menibraoouR, 
oUtruciitu or neuraljfic form 
Tea, hot, with ginger inteinHily i^ useful 
Turoen tine oil in membranou^ variety is 

of benefit 
Vale ft an with opiumi a« rectal enema 
Viburnum, the thiiil extract, with bro- 
mkle« and cannahis tndica la useful in 
sjiaiimt^br and in neuralgic cases 



Dyspepsia . Hyperftcidity ; Flataldnce Gastralgia ; Pyrosis* 
{Sft Vd. /» piyff 474:) 



Allspice 

Asafetida, useful in the hypochoDilriac« 

to im|— ■""• H..*..i,.....^> 
Alium >■ I lit crnally is useful 

Aur&nli fuiiton, very useful 

Belladonna, i gr. of liie extnuH inter- 
nally to leffien g^istric [min ivnd to 

relieve constipation 
Bitters, as ealomba ^cntinn and quassia 

g<iod vehicles f<>r itclds and alkalies in 

ii>spe|i»»iH 
Bryonia, in useful in hepatic disorders, 

in bilious vomiting and In biUooa 

hciutaohe 
Cannabis indica is very tuelQl Is Indl* 

gestioQ 
Capsfoum with compound rhubarb pill 

and ipecacuanha is of benefit intemaly 
Carminative«i internally, is useful to pro* 

mote expulsion of gas from the stomnch 

and intestines 
Cbiunomile, 3 ms. of the oil in atonic 

dyspepsia is useful 



Colocynth, witJi uiUxhv rhei composltus, 

and rtlei caryopitilti internally is very 

useful 
Coca wine of grent benefit 
Eucalypius, In atonic caaen du#! to pre* 

scnce of sarcinse in the si^ unnch 
Buony minand pepsin, in hepaticdyspe^isia 
Ginger, ha un adjunct 
Ignatia, useful in nervous dyspepsia 
Ipecacuanha, 4 to 1 gr,, with rhubarb or 

the wine in 5 ma. is useful in atx>nio 

and catarrhal cases to relieve dcpres* 

sion or the constiijetion when the food 

is like a heavy weight 
Kino with opium and cinnamon is uscfal 

in pyrosis 
Lipitiium tberls, ai oonfoction, of benefit 

intern Jly 
Malt extract is useful 
Milk cure— koumysa and butter milk is 

of V>enetit 
Morphia, sul^utaneously, in irritabilily 

of the stomach is oseful 



tt^ 



7o8 



DYSPN(EA. 



Dyspepsia.- 

Nux vomica, before meals ae a stomachic 
tonic is useful to relieve flatulence, 

. heartburn, heavy head; also useful to 
relieve dyspepsia of drunkards 

Opium with nux vomica, in cases of 
irritability of the stomach 

Papayotin (papain), Ureful in various 
forms of dyspepsia with benefit ; it 
has a marked action over acid, alkaline 
or neutral solution and in the presence 
of antiseptic chemicals and therapeutic 
agcnU 

Pepsin, with diluted hydrochloric acid is 
of benefit in gastric indigestion 

Physostigma, to relieve flatulence in 
women at climacteric period 

Pine apple juice, a digestive of prott id 
and albuminous matters, being an 
active ferment in the presence of acids 
or alkaline carbonates or neutral 
solutions 

Podophyllin with euonymin, leptandrin 
chirettaand creosote isof great benefit 



Pulsatilla, 5 ms. when the tongue is coat- 
ed and white, taste greasy, feeling of 
nausea, flatulence, heartburn, aod 
depression 

Quinine preparations, useful to check 
excessive fermentation in the aliment- 
ary canal 

Rhamnus purshiana, useful in torpid 
liver with constipation 

Sanguinaria, the tincture, or the alkaloid 
given in atonic dyspepsia to promote 
gastric secretion and increases appetite 

Su^ar of milk, useful in dyspepsia with 
flatulence 

Turpentine on sugar relieves flatulence 

Taraxacum, in simple atonic dyspepsia is 
very useful 

Valerian, relieves flatulence in hypo- 
chondriasis 

Vegetable diastase 

Vegetable ptyalin 

Xanthoxylum, fluid extract is useful 
as a stomachic tonic in atonic cases 



Exiernal remedies. — Diet — Avoid tea, use hot water as drink, sufficient mastica 
tion, well performed massage. 

(2). FtfTjHula. — Magnesii sulphatis, I oz. ; magnesii carbonatis, 90 grs. ; vin- 
aloes, 6 drs.; tincturn hnmuli. 2 drs. ; acidi hydrocyanic dilute, 15 ms. ; and infusion 
cascarillse, 6 otr, Mix. Dose. 1 rz. 

(3). Confection — Jeera-nopakh: — Carium nigrum, 15 ; black pepper, 5 ; ginger 
(dried), 5 ; long pepper, 5 ; satap, 5 ; peppermint, 5 ; apium graveolens, 5 ; myro* 
bolans, 5 ; sonchai salt , 5 ; eagle wood, 5 ; honey, 20. Mix. Dose, 1 to 2 drs., used in 
deranged digt>stion, biliouHnees, kc. 

(4). Amrita Haritaki. — Compound powder — Chebulic myrobolans, full size and 
ripe. Boil it in milk and remove the seeds. Stuff this seedless myrobolans with a 
compound powder containing trikatu, cinnamon, plumbago rosea, bishop's weed, 
chavak root and the three salts — Pota9. bicarb., soda bicarb, and ammonium chloride; 
also asafetida, cloves, each 4 patts. This is soaked in tamarind juice and lime juice, 
then dried in the sun and used in dyspepsia. Dose, ^ to 1 dr. 



Dysphagia. 

Cajuput oil, in the nervous form 
Cocaine hydrochloratc, 20 p. c. solution 
by swab, or as spray to relieve djs- 



(^See V(d. L pafc 476.) 

phagia in phthisis 
Strychnine, iron and quinine as tonic are 
useful 



Dyspnoea, a symptom due to Cardiac . 

or Tracheal Disease. 
Asafetida, with antispasmodics in dys- 

ncea due to chronic bronchitis 
Cimicifuga, relieves cardiac dyspnoea [fit 
Croton oil, liniment to the chest isof bene- 
Dhatura. useful in dyspnoea of phthisis 
Orindelia, useful in dyspncea with cough 

occurring, in pulmonary emphysema 
Morphine, used hypodermically. relieves 

cardiac dyspnoea. It should be avoided 

if urine is albuminous. It is very 

energetic, giving power to breathe 
Prunut TirgiDiaaa, very useful in cardiac 

dyspnoea 
Quebiadio extract. Dose, } to 1 dr. in 



Pulmonary, Pharsmgeal, Laryngeal 

{See Vol. I, page 476.) 

dyspnoea of pulmonary asthma, palpita- 
tion, &c. 

Spigelia nnthelmia, in dyspnoea accom- 
panied with palpitation 

Strophanthus tincture,in cardiac dy8[>noea 

Strychnine, as a respiratory stimulant, 
useful in dyspnoea due to lung mif«chief 
or to palpitation of heart in the hysteric 

Terebene capsules, useful in dyspnoea 
of chronic emphysema and other lung 
affections 

Terpini hydrate, is useful in asthmatic 
dyspnoea {fol 

Valerian, in nervous dyspnoea is very uae- 



I^MI'HYSHMA. 



709 



BcchymoBiB. 



Atnbn hnlafl. mailo into \ni»Ui with wbfie 

i^f .,.,., ,.t..} hrsindy is very iifscful 
Afii r<*, with wnlcr locnlly np- 

pJ ! ^ <^rseB e€Chjino«i9, due to 

CnpBioutn linotaK, or tdrong hi fusion 
mixed with glycerin »n<i iiMicilnK^', is 



used a^ a ]iaiiit t«j relieve blu^k «ye or 

abruise^l surfrtoe 
Hamamt'lis tincture, I in 5 of wat«r as 

lotion iH usefnl wben tberi^ is mnch 

diiooloriitiou 
Turmeric, locallj to the chemoted portion 

it uHefut 



EctbymA 

Chryaarobin, intcrntilljr, i* us4!fa1 
Giapo cure !• vory effective 



(Sifi VoL I, pu0€ 477.) 

Quiniiio is u^r>fiil when ecthyma it due to 
tnalnutrition 



Ecsema. {Srr Vot. /, fmiir 477,y 



Anacarditttq occidentale oil, ointmeoi 
(ItoM of lard) ia useful in chronic 
c:flioe 

Belladaiina extract, { gr^ with fjuintiic 
S irr, int43rniilly. or externnlly with 
binmuth fiubcorbonate na a duattnfc 
(jowdcT {f UBvful in ocicina of the hand 
and fc«l 

Benxoin. The paint of tincttn^ tjentoiu 
cnmpotttid IB useful Uy ailajr itching 

Buck wheat tloar a« Hroittiag in tiBe- 
fal 

Chaulniugra oil* an an ointment is useful 

Conium tincture with olivu oU, 1 to 8 at 
autifiTuritle \a of buiiL*rit 

Crr* I ' t in brandy 

LI Uiusd a« a 

,.„. ,- ....,.,.. ;itiani in tl^o 



phoapbnU, ke,^ loonlly applied is v«ry 

usnful 
[faajamcIi>iJocaliy i&osefnt ne antiprn- 

ritic :ind in rhtonfc CMCfi 
lri« ver*ieol<*r, tincture ia useful m a 

hepatic stimulant in eczema in gouty 

fiubjo^ta 
tlleum cadini with simple ointment 

(1 In H) is very iLieful 
Phytolaccii* in useful ioo^jetinate cases 
libuB toxicodendroD tincture, givtin 

internally in acute caaes ; also appliod 

externally to subdue burning ftnd 



Uuhitig 
Tar or pix 

are.. 

cli. 

Viol, 



Gi I 



iLniuing lyuo|M>Jiuint calcium av 



liqulda, jnturnally where 
1-^. Lix'ftlly used in ihc 
only 

iTifn»t,.n with SCtlOa, LN 

form ; shuuH be 



Cnlutropi!!) i^ijtcnnL^a^ root bulk 

loc'ally Ajjfilitd to (he legs or itcroitim 
DhiLtuni [yikhte with guUe^armaui, IcKially 

Kli-'^'ttulysifi 

Bclipta tt]bi*» I he paste is locally applietl 
louKlum porvldorum^ a good remedy in 
f?!(.'{jlunt lasts 



Elephantiasis' 

jiiiite Mhi*«*hc U «if tienefil 

\fortiiK'r% ptA^rygospemiA, roul aa a pa»lt' 

iti it»t'f uj 
Mux vomica, with chaulrooogra oil| locally 

applied 
Piper nigrum with ui^f^ltn stiiiva, locally 

applied in brandy and belhidoutia witb 

bonefli 
Fieviure over the affected part 



Liriiriophila {^ratioloides, locally appliisd 

to leg« or scrotum 

Fi)rmuta,^'Sif*cUm> satlva, 3 ; acorns calumui^ 1 1 piper aigmm, 1: gingiber, 1; and 
tiufili juice of dhatum alba aa a paste, to paint ovtt the scrotum. 

Bole armeuean. 4 ; harringtonia, 4 i aoorus calamus, S » nux vomloa» 1 ; pijicr 
nigrum^ 1 \ and brandy as a past^ for legs ami scivitum, 

BjSldtjrsema. (^See Vol, I, ^agt 4S0.} 
Digitalis is useful 
Orindelia, useful in emphysema with 

■athmaiic breathing 
Lobelia, to allay dyspncua aer^mpanying 

capillary bmnchirid in emphysema 



Morphine, ^ gr. and atropine ,*, gr. 
hypodermically is usefui at a palliative 

16 



f jr ttie asthmatic attacks 
J^tmn^ ' vves, as smoke to relieve 

d> ' asthma 

Stry. ,„ „ . .. vajuable respiratory ittma. 

lant, IS usi^tul Ut ivhtve dyspncea with 

prolonged expiration 
TerebenOi to relieve dyspnina 



7IO EFKTAXKw 










tr7Ti>r jfy "i^w frr»-'*'i. 4 •'^'^ guLiBtS gEjpwg "friri.T^ "f atw: cli^jm, 



«i:iif!rt:» use -wIksl dot K :^if^ frnnE siii mry'T^ mx 



riicn&j» raasmre. ^f s^w prvfiK vsu. 



^uKiaiK a^ rmr:x23c -Tmrni^T? it 



lr(aDioa> 31 ^sm. af & shrnxK izmir^ it, 

fi^ am : r 21.1017 tz '■mrhwiiaiu vintffiinr r.fcTnh-ni^-ig^ xf uacshL i: iiif: ba^MCSBcr v 
}4eIiaaf«aaL. who. Viiwf^rty » hat v rjo.- re & vtoiiav :%j£mns: 

lii^^\w THtwfi wnrmtij m ti 



ESOPHAGEAL AFFECTIONS, 



711 



Bpistaxla.— (^^'«/^.) 



Tannin powder, is used as insufflation into 
the nose or the polution 2 drs. to 4 ozs. 
of water injecteii into the nose with 



advantage 
Turpentine, useful if g^ven internally in 
epistaxis occuring in the debilitated 



External remedies. — Comprefsion of facial arteries. Feet and hands to be kept 
warm. Head to 1>e kept elevated and cool. Ice to the nose. Vinegar as tampon into 
the nostrils. 

Ernptiong produced by Drugs. 



Aconite produces yesicular exanthemata 

Atropine, erythema like rash of scarlet 
fever 

Relladonna, erythematous rash 

Castor oil, urticaria 

Chinchona, erythema 

Codliver oil, acne 

Copaiba urticaria, erythema, eczema pem- 
phigus, copaiba rash has preference for 
the ankles and wrists 

Croton oil, papules or pustules 

Di(?italis erythema 

Opium and morphine erythema, papu- 
lar eruptions, 8r}uamation and itching 

Eruptions produced 

Apples, acne about the mouth 
Fish and oatmeal, acne eruptions 
Fruits, and acid fruits, acute eczema 



Quinine erythema, purpura, pemphigus' 
prurigo papular eruptions, itching' 
generally ephemeral, first appearing on 
the face ani neck and then over the 
body. In some, indistinct spots like 
measles appear 

Rhus toxicodendron, yisiclea and pus* 
tulrs with redness and itching. 

Santonioe pemphigus, vesicles 

Stramonium, erythematous raab 

Strychnine erjthema, papular eruptions, 
itching 

Tar, acne 

Turpentine, similar to copaiba 

by articles of food : — 

Roast turkey or shell fish, urticaria; 
Strawberries, urticaria 
Walnuts,inflammation of the buccal gland 



Erysipelas. {See Vol. I, page 484.) 



Aconite is useful in the b<>giuning with 
high fever, and in erysipelas following 
vaccination 

Belladonna tincture, internally or locally, 
is useful in superficial and non- vesi- 
cular form ; if there is much fever, 
combine it with digitalis or aconite; if 
much depression mid quinine. 

Cotton wool sprinkled with starch and 
zinc oxide or with flour as an applica- 
tion is useful 

Jaborandi, fluid extract, causes diapho- 
resis and the disease is checked. To be 



avoided in antcnic subjects, and those 
with a weak heart 

Pilocarpine, ^ gr. in the beginning used 
hypodermically to abort the disease 

Quinine, with iron, if the pulse iasoft 
and tremulou«, and there is low matter- 
ing delirium. It sustains vital powers 
and*pre vents cerebral embolism 

Rhux toxicodendron, useful in vesicular 
form 

Turpentine is useful asA paint over the 
surface as a stimulant in traumatic 
cases, more serviceable than alcohol 



Erythema- (JSee Vol /, page 485.) 



Belladonna, in obstinate cases 
Quinine, in erythema nodosum 



Rhus toxicodendron is very useful 
Thiol, as a dusting powder 



Esophageal Affections* {See Vol. /, page 486,) 



Belladonna liniment, applied with 
friction to the sternum, is a nice 
palliative in stricture of the esophagus 

Cocium, is useful to relieve spasms and 
cramps of the stomach, in flatalence 



and in globus hystericus 
Hyosoyamus, if there is great irritability 

of the esophagus 
Leeches to the esophagus to relieve pain, 

tenderness and spasms 



FKVEKS. 



Eye Diseases. iSee Vol, I.p^ge 4S7.) 



Atropine, as drops locally io iritis, 
injected h.ypodermically in glaucoma 

Belladonna/ locally and internally in 
conjunctivitis, iritis, and other inflam- 
mations 

Cocaine, 4 p.c. solution as a local anaesthe- 
tic and mydriatic, injected into the 
muscle for squint operations 

Ergot as a myotic, is very useful in 
disturbances of accommodation 

Morphine with mercury oleate applied 
outside the lids in syphilitic iritis, 
palpebral conjunctivitis and stye 



Physostigmine, applied locally to oontract 
the pupils 

Pilocarpi oe, in amblyopia, from alcohol 
or tobacco; also useful in iritis, keratitis, 
haemorrhage of the retina, atrophy of 
the optic nerve, &c, 

Buta, useful in amaurosis and dimneis 
of vision 

Santonine, useful in inflammation and 
atrophy of the retina, in inflammation 
of the optic nerve and to relieve inflam- 
matory effusion 



Eyelids. (Sef Vol. I, page 487.) 



Cap«icum tincture, or infusion, locally for 

the black eye 
Ergot, .as collyriuir; to relieve ptosis and 

paralysis of the eyelids 
Morphine and oleate of mercury, 20 p,c, 

locally for stye 
Pulsatilla, internally and as a wash exter- 



nally to aborc the stye 

Tannin, as lotion or ointment, or as pow- 
der is employed with benefit 

Vera trine, locally in solation, to bnuth 
overlids in painful spasm of the orbi- 
cularis 



FEVEBS iSee Vol. I,p<ifjc468.) 

Ephemeral Fever* Dengue Fever. 



Acctum ur vinegar, diluted, used locally 
as a refrigerant 

Acid drinks, as syrup of raspberry, citric 
acid, lemons with water are useful 
as refrigerants 

Aconite, alone or with salines in dengue 
fever, useful in hyperpyrexia in the 
early stage of simple inflammatory 
fevers, in pneumonia, acute congestions 
and in ^sthenic fever ; it reduces the 
temperature and induces perspration 

Arnica tincture useful as an antipyre- 
tic, in asthenic cases and in rheumatic 
and typhoid fevers 

Aristolochia serpen taria, in advanced 
stage and in adynamic form 

Atropine, hypodermics lly, during the 
cold stage aborts the fever 

Baptisia tincture, in common continued 
and typhoid fevers 

Belladonna tincture as a prophylactic, 
to relieve delirium, and insomnia in 
febricula, eruptive fevers, dengue 
and typhus fever ; it relieves the head 
symptoms 

Berberis bark as decoction is useful in 
intermittent, ague and remittent fevers 

Bitter tonics, io advanced cases 

Bonducella seeds, as antiperiodic, very 
useful 

Camphor, useful to subdue reflex excit- 
ability, to relieve delirinm, and a6 a 
stimulant in adynamic fevers 



Chinolin as antipyretic and diaphoreti^ 
useful to moderate the intensity of 
fever as in pneumonia, typhoid fever, 
&c. 

Cicerarietium, as a refrigerant drink 

Cimicifuga, a substitute for digitalis, is 
useful in hectic fever and in fever with 
high temperature and quick pulse 

Cinchona and its alkaloids, a good pro- 
phylactic against ague 

Chmatis triloba, infusion useful in chronic 
fevers 

Emetics, every morning useful to prevent 
the attack 

Ouaiacol, locally with olive oil as an 
inunction to the surface of the skin, 
is a nice antipyretic 

Quaraca, given as a palli itivc 

Hellebore, rhizome powder, is useful 

Humulus lupulus, is useful in intermit- 
tent fever 

Lemon, decoction or the juice in agae 
useful as diaphoretic and to check re- 
currence of paroxysms 

Nimb, as a bitter tonic useful in advanced 
cases 

Opium acts as a diaphoretic to relieve 
pain and rentlessness, useful in dengue 

Picroenaexcel8a,usef ul in paroxysmal ague 

Pilocarpine hydrochlorate, hypodermi- 
cally in the cold Htage, excites 
profuse sweats and thus lessens the 
attack 



FFVFR IVTFRMITTPIST, 



71? 



Fevers— (''»«'^-> 



Piper ulKrum, iiH«rial in IntefiuUt-ent 
fever. 

QutQlttcf m an antificptie nod ttntipblogii- 
Ik, given by the atonuicb or lu an 
inject inn by rectum or hjjjodcnniciilly. 
ia of threat value in icptinettiiAt 
beetle fever* crupiive fctprH, nmlu- 
rinl, remit teut arid miermitrfiit fevers, 
and in pnroxytmul pyrexitil stage. As 
Rntipyretic It ii tc^s favournbli^ than 
bntiii- ; it Ifl ufliele«« iu typhus and 
typhoid fever 

Ehua toxicodendron, in rheninjitic or 
acarlct fever with typlioSd «ymplomi* 

Sttthngin, with quinine Hod artenJc in 
rnalarinl cachexia 

Strychnine with arBcnio is very cffldciit» 
ia eqiml to 1 gr, of qnlnine 

Strychnoii ot>lnliHn:i, in umhiit»l cachejiiu 

Rumbnl radix, ia useful in fevera wtUi 



typhoid tymptoma 

ThetctJA neriifoUa tincture, u ftnti- 
pcriodic is of hcncftt 

ThuJH nct'identalia, or arbor TitflB tinctarei 
iti us*'fuJ 

Tur(.>entine, intcrn!tllv aa Ktimulant 
to VflKymotor oervou? «ytem, useful 
in typhoid, y tallow, and puerperal 
fevers i it ia given af an enpina with 
starch anil opium in typh<dd fever 
to ehecli inLet»tina) hieniorrhage with 
tymimnitis 

Viola odorata ayrup, 

ValerSan. useful in leverato relieva nervoua 
excitability 

Veratriim v iridic is UAefnl aa antipyrclie 
in febricuta xnd rheumatic (ever ; alxo 
useful to relieve deilHiim t>f fever tn 
pniMimonia 



incli 
ehlo 



/. .^,. ' -. _i»fti,ch Vakatr* Baaa— the five fever curea or remedica* They 
];ilj, *^ul{>hur, earh, 1 ; black pepper, long pepper, and Mmtnondim 



Dow, 2 eo Ti gia. In lever. 

Hbadnaj piuirya imj i-finlaiiiii:— R(X>t of anflrY:k|K>Kon tnuricatu*^, eyperua» 
rotandua f'r C, pcrientsiD, re<i SHndnl w^n^\^ herb of ohienlandia herijacra, riK>t of 
fiavonia odornia, and dry gn d parta and water to make a decoction. 

lhm.\ i to H dra. aa a co4:»liLL drink in fever 

AntifibiUc Mixturo i-oniuu]}- .—vuinine MdpbatiH, 2 gTH, ; tlnct. ferri ehlofidtf 
2 ma. ; \i*\. (MitavHtt ui-Huoitii, 2 ttiE,; tinct opii, 2 m»* ; t^tryehine ^ulphtitla, ^^^ gi. ; 
alooholt 4 ^^* ^"^ a'jiia', 4 div. 

€k)m pound powder for chronic fever or chronic malarial diacnie; — fk)}rwocKl 
bark. 'S grs. ; caiumbm rijot« S gra, ; clerodondroOf 8 gT». 
Vi\yev,iw pepp«r, 2 gra. 



eupatoriom, 2 ^ta. ;and 



Hay Fever- 



Aconitt*. a giio<i aubMihtte for arscnir, i^ 
vrry utt^ful 

HoUadoiitta^ to n^atraln profutc nana) 
secretion 

f*t>caine, 5 tn lU p. 0. aolution dronpe<l 
into the noae, or 5 to lOfirtf. with an 
ounce of co^minol iprayc^l up the 
noatrila or applied aa a palliative to the 
naaal mocona membrane with i^f.od 
reaiilta 

Coffee, hSack, ia re'y useful 

EucJilyprua tMt« 5 to SO ma. to I ot. of 
etMminol ufse^l av a apray 

Euphnijia, to relieve the catarrh. 



00m plicated 



Giiirdplfft, u,Heful in 1 
with ant lima 

llfuatia tinctuftv ia vnry iiaeful 

lpiH.'MeuAnha, in very uselul 

I/oU*dat la very Uiefui 

Opium or nicrpidne, i^ivcn tdl the dfa* 
chnrgc abjittf* ia very uecful 

Quinine* jjivcn int«inally or injceteil 
to chi't'k ratal rh, ih useful after 
the acute ii>mptoniH have HuUiikd, or 
aa bydtruchloratc loi^-nlly appi i*d wtth 
a brush tn the na^l mucoua membninc 
to arrcat Ihf^ dieeaie 

Tobacco smokintr, or intemally la usefii 



Fever Intenniitent* Ague {s^f V9I, /, pagr sss.) 



Acorua ealamui fa adynamic form 
Apiol. before paroxyam. naefa) in 

mild caea whi re ptrjudice exiait 

agatnat quinine 
CasrariUa wiih chumomtle, vtry useful 
Chiooidine and its mltM, pod aubsti* 



tutei Icr qtilnioe, Int rvqolres Ittfger 

doaea 
Cint'honinei oineh<uiidii>c. quiiitdine aod 

their ^ulph'Uev arv uatiul 
i:uc;a1yptua tinotnre it naclol tu 

nirue 



714 FEVER SCARLET. 

Intermittent AgaB.^ioantd.') 

EmetioB as ipecacaanba to aid tbe Plumbago zeylanica, aseful as an anti- 
action of qainine ; inadmissible periodic, 
if tbere is gastric irritation Purgatives, as jalap, acammony, po.io- 

Brgot is useful if the spleen is enlarged phyllin, useful during intermiasion 

Hydrastis is useful like quinine if there before antiperiodics 

IB profuse sweating Quinine sulphate, 5 to 10 gi-s., m coffee. 

■r . . . ^ . in acute atrue : or 10 to 16 erm at first 

r^xis^' ^ recurrence of ,„ ^^^ ^^^^.^^ ^^^^^ ^^ J^ ^p^. 

paro y ^. , ^. , ed 4 or 5 grs. two hour* nfter or six 

Narootine, as an'antiperiodio. as good as hours before the next paroxysm. It 

quinine, cures intermittents quickly ^j^y be given internally, or by the 

and surely rectum or injected subcutaneoosly. 

Nux vomica, as an antiperiodic given Best plan is to give with morphine; 

with quinine is of benefit very useful in uncomplicated cases and 

Opium internally, or morphine, hypoder- in those of recent growth ; should not 

mically lessens the chill and aids the be given during the early sta^e of ague 

action of antiperiodics. It is generally as it would increase headache an'l 

^iven with quinine distress 

Fever— Malarial— Chronic Malaria. 

Capsicum, with black pepper, used as an in recent malarial cases. It is a ntc« 

fuijuoct to promote the action of prophylactic;, but should be given with 

quinine care, the indiscriminate use of it often 

Clerodendron, of much benefit leads to the weakening of tbe heart 

Eucalyptus, to reconstruct damages in Tannin is useful in malarial fever 

the organs of assimilation resisting quinine 

Quinine and its salts, or quinine salicy- Vegetable bitters, useful in chronic 

late, are useful in periodic affections malaria,and during convalescence from 

due to malarial cachexia, better borne malarial fever 

/>>rmiiZa.^Aragbadhadi qvftth contains: — Cassia fistula, picrorrhiza kurroa, 
chebulic myrobolans, long pepper root, cyperus rotund us ^ 2 drs. water, 20 fid. oe. 
make decoction. Dose, 4 to 6 fid. dra. In fever and chronic malaria. 

Fever— Bemittent. 

Aconite, in the hot sta^re with headache reduced; very useful in bilious, remit- 

Alcohol or brandy locally applied to the tent and other forms of malarial fevers ; 

back, abdomen and chest it should be accompanied by an aperient 

Gelsemium, is very beneficial in bilious- doac of calomelo if vomiting is severe, 

ness and to reduce the temperature Vegetable tonics, as calumba and quassia 

Morphine, I hypodermically is useful to with mineral acids during convalesenoe 

abort very useful 

Quinine, large doses without regard to Wurberg's tincture is very useful 

exaserbatioRS until the temperature is Wet sheet packing is of benefit 

/^(irwu//?.— Pancha bhadra, containing five bitters— p&rpata, must&kft, gulanchft, 
chirett^ and ginger, equal parts in water (1 in 40) make decoction. Dose, 1 to 2 os. 

Fever— Scarlet. 

Aconite, in the early stage to lower Digitalis, with hyoscyamus and juniper 

tem|)erfttnre and todevelope eruption to lower temperature and to maintain 

Aaolcpias, to promote the eruption renal secretion free 

Bellarionna, extract, i^ to ji gr. inter- Klaterium. with potassii bitartratia and 

nally as a prophylactic when depression scammony powder, is useful 
exists and to promote eruptions 



FRVRR TYPHUS, 



Fever— 8c»rlet -('•''«'''.) 



Jnnfptf oiJ« Ai {iiurcUo if flroptj cxiats 

llojitiuij bAtU fn of benefit 

Oil Inanctlooa, <u crnenn liutter (a ilei^UA* 

lD»llf« 8URP 18 verjr liKifiil 
PitocAJ^ifoe t«t useful 



Qttlninc.internatl J or hj cufmh If delirium 

And reitles^neM exist 
rthu* toxiwtcli^ritimti to overcome tjphoid 

or rhcumAtlc MympUiins 
Vemtrum viride fn caziTuliions 



FeTer— Typhoid, Enteric leading to Intestinal fismorrhaire ; Eectal 
Ulceration* Tympanitis- 



j^ruiti kM ii^i fij] in .t^tluiii 'i *-► -H .»r when 

ri 

A^i . nuicAlly 

to luwei lhi5 U. tu ^i^j al u 1 1") 
BaIs totu nr tincture beozuio compouml 

vk > il,ui«f III In fever campUcat* 

Bni ' :■' '^ -•"•*-' ^- ^""'" '"^^•ful 

Bt r 

ftbu useful if pupiii* fire coatr»cl«ii itnri 
there iA low umttuiinff delirium* It» 
effect tB (o counteract tbe poiion of 
ty|ihutd 

CA&me, with AOiiium benf^oatn snbcnU- 
iieou(»ly id ui»eful 

OtnDAmon oil ia cOiQSent to Abort the 
fevor 

Dti^itAliA wiili AconlUv ttnoL iodinD Aod 

eartHiltc Acid 111 timp dcufi lA ut«f(U to 

loMfi^r the* tcm|»emturc Ami |iulAe mtc 

ii HtAln ih« hL^n\ At I (on ; it it 

in tbe Iftter itAtr<-*<^ 

Kj^ .. . xtrttct for Intetiioal hasmor- 
n iL> )i ,].oilevuilCAlty il the AjmptGiDA 

Eu cm!)' pi us oil^ with 8{' frit Aoiniou. AromAt- 

f|>t, ohlor«*f<»rni And glycerin, is OAcfttl 

Gu > tjnn in tbe axjIIa 

the tcmperAtaie 



(1uaI:icoI f'Allx>llAtO, A 



i-polAon- 



QU3, abortive; 1. h4^M^« tK.. •'♦mt^.-rjilnre 

Aod ftcti as a I 
Bydni«tine to r- 
HyoifOjAruu^ toriiiiev* ibe briitn ftytiiptotna 

;m delirium, bcAdiiehc and to relieve 

coo Btt pat ion 
Ot)fum mtcniAlly given At bwl time or na 

dl..^ 

Cbrr , 
ArouM viUiipowrmwIicn much def>reEn- 
ed: ?iH*»fti! in AiivAnreit wtAjfe of fever 
cbur i by low muttering deli- 
rill «ipufbedclotb»sfl, twitch- 
in «», Ate. 
Qtiir. romAtc is uaeful in tyidio- 
ni k r Tn h,* nvi»ided lithe 
tyi EninAlQA or in 

pvn , , ■ 

Serf»euUiria, tT iiiucli d«pre«iion tXiatA 
to be Avuidcd if there Itt lnte«iinAl Irri- 
tntion 

Turpentine oil, with tincture opii and 
ojrii"' "'^'•^ •phylli ii iriven At tbe end 
of ^ wee k t o chec k i n i est i n (il 

bi» , ^tTrnpAnitls, dry or r»»fl 

touKuc And diurrhif-A. U Aroufot the 
?itAi power* if ooma or »tui>or tuper- 
vcnes 

Vcrtvtrunt rfrtde Unoture, one drop aa a 
cArdiAc tedative to rednce temf^rAture 

Vinegar, nromAtlc, lor *ptinging the Uxly 



E^trvH&^l temrdir*,- Avoiu »obd *o«id; one cold b«tb, cold pAckini^ if temf^emture 
above iU2 dcg*, cold (^imjircAaci uv wet «beeU or wasbing with cold water. 



Ohaervv ob^Aui 
AtimaUnu tl nece(«^ 



veatihfclion, perfect I reAt, milk diet, eggar broth, cofft?e, 



idrnvmla.— Acid catboUe, | mn. \ goAlACfvl, j gr : tnenlhol, | gr* ;thymc]« ^^ gr,: 
eucAlyptol, S mb, * podophylUn, ^ } gr. * aiuI ipecAcuAnhA, | gr. ; make pit. Doti* 1 pill. 

Fever— TypUns. 



Arnica is ^i^tj itBefuI 

BellndonnA, to rpduce the trmpcrature, 
to itrcngthAn the pui ' -li- 

riuui, ntolMtoii the t( rn 

the coor>»eof diica8C»pj^< I iJ n mr j.tjpilg 
Are contrACtol 



BaptiRiA is very unefnl 
CAmttbnf of L'Tr*jit Uncfit; to be Avoided if 
tli> V and red, abdomen 

tfi flC 

Cortrt' ifi nuvttiiuar it at e U very nacfnl 
tbgiUlis i» tiiicrul in lart^e doiies 



7i6 



GASTRALGIA 



TeYet'TnhQB.—ieontd.^ 



Hjoeoyarons, to reliere brain symptoms 
Podopbjllin, as a laxative at the onset to 

relieTe bilious headiche, constipation, 

and hepatic derangements 
Bhatany, a good tonic in advanced stages 

External remedies — Isolation as the disease is contagions. Diet shonld be natri- 
tioas and supporting. 



Serpentaria, with ammonium carbonate, 
in delirium, wakefuInesB^and dry tongue. 
It excites diaphoresis and supports 
vital powers 



Fistula iSee Vol. /, page 489.) 



Calotropis gigantea, in combination with 
the juice of nateriothuhar and with 
the wood of berberis asiatica as a caustic 

Capsicum infusion locally is useful as sti- 
mulant in fistulous ulcerations 



Piper nigrum, confection, a nice stimolant 

in anal fistula 
J^anguinaria, injection is very beneficial 
Ulmus fulva, the bark is used as a lint 

into the fistula 



Fractnres and Dislocations iSee Vol. /, page 490.) 



Aconite, useful if fever sets in 

Arnica tincture, internally or the infusion 

locally 'to neutralize the illeffects of 

mechanical injury 
Benzoin compound tincture, in severe 



injuries locally as a drerssingfor com- 
pound fracture. It leads to rapid healinf^ 
Opium internally or morphine hypoder- 
mically as anodvne, to relieve nervous- 
ness or musculir spasms 



Formula — Astraealus Sarcocolla, 9 ; delphinium (jadwar), ] ; aloes, 15; alum^ 8 : 
boBwelifl, 8; letsoea sebifera, 4; shorea rohusta. 4; benzoin, 7 ; curcuma sromatica, 7: 
and gamboge, 12; mix, make lep <soft plaHter) in spirit of wine. Application for dis- 
locations, fractures, simple sprains, and contusions. 

Freckles; Snn bnrn. (See Vol. /, pag^ 490.) 



Alpinia g&langal 

Amygdala amara, emulsion locally 

Balanitis roxburghii 



Benzoin compound tincture with wafer 

locally as cosmetic 
Sagargota 



Gangrene. {Sec Vol. /, page 490.) 



Charcoal, as poultices 

Cinchona or quinine is of benefit 

fjemon jiice is, sometimes, dropped into 

the wound and covered with chlorine 

solution 
Myrtol, useful in gangrene of the lungs 



Opium, to relieve pain and restleasneas 
Turpentine, is useful after thegangrenouc 
part has been removed; it may be given 
internally or inhaled from warm wat«r 
in pulmonary gangrene or applicr) 
locally in dry or chronic gangrene 



Gastralgia, Chistrodynia. 



Atropine, is very useful to relieve neural- 
gic pain of the abdominal viscera 

Belladonna, to relieve gastric pain 

Coca internally is of benefit 

Cocaine, 5 p. c. solution, gastric sedative 
and anodyne ; it may be given in- 
ternally with b*»nefit 

Codeine internally is useful 

Krgot is useful in gastric and other 
visceral neuralgia 

Hydrocyanic acid is useful to check vomi- 
ting, to relieve gastric pain and to cure 
gastralgia due to nervous derangements 

Morphine internally in small doses given 



with bismuth or milk or injected hypo- 
dermicaliy is very useful 

Kux vomica, tincture is very useful as 
a ptomachic in gastric disorders 

Opium is useful to relieve pain 

Pulsatilla is efficient in dyspepsia charac- 
terised with pain, coated tongue, head- 
ache, and uervous depression 

Quinine is useful in gastr c pain show- 
ing periodicity and a neuralgic charac- 
ter 

Strychnine hypoderimically is very nsefal 
in gastrodynia and gastntlgia 



flOlTRK. 



717 



Gastric diUtation. - 

Kas vomica HtomAch to be wubed 

Strychnine, internally or hyj*odefinlciilly 

Gastric Ulcw. (Sr^ Vol. K page 4fiJ.> 

Aold gftUic, 5 gr » Itttenmlly (or hnsmorr- i^heck hwmorrhAge 

hAge MorphiDc, to relieve pnin and vomltini;, 

Atfopfnei to rvlieve ])ain nod tomltitig to locaiiie peritntihiii ; tn full doAes if 

Charcoal t>o eaac the pain hy prevent Intr :urforatioii (icciirt aoiil adhetiona tAke 

formation of ncid products pta^so 

Rrgotinc, hypotcrmicnlly injected to Tnrpcntins, internally for hsemotrfiag^ 

Gaatritis CAcnte). is^ i'"/* A pa^f' 492,) 

AottdoUw, in canca of irriUnt poiatma tt*rna11y lo reDcirc pRin 

Mnrphine, hypwicrmicaJly of opium in- Mustard p^mltioc* to the stomach 

t\\tmMln, — Tinct. vcratrum Tffkic ITi ms. ; Uq. icorphiir snlphati^, 2ft ms. ; acidi 
ciirbolif'^. \ (n-^ : and a<|in*' monthsn pip, 1 oa. Dow*', I dr. 

Gastritis COhronlc). (»«^ ri»r. /, p^igr 492,} 
Aetd hydrocyrmic dilute* with Ifma wat^ 



it 



A I 



' itratum, to retlcTe gaittric 



and 



BtliHth^niiu extract, locally to t lie pit of 
th« 9t^niiach 

Cinchona, infusion with mineral aoid» 
to pramoti^ healthy atalr* of the 
(I I lubraDc ic gafttrlccntarrh of 

Cm,, ^iiMtric cttUir-t' ^v>..'*. r!9»fx^int- 

wi with mltrraiiiu i^ 1 

Ohinibtt arid other veir '''^ 

Caryophvili oleuiH) toiillny irntAtitin 
Euenlvptun* as ii sinmacbic very utcful ; 
it should l>i» ftvoideil in tnttammatory 
^aatriLlH 
KfMid, Miarehy, very u«4»fal 
HydraHti* UmHure, or iho (laid extract. 



Glaucoma » {See r<f/« /, jtaffr «(/i#,) 



afeftit In gaAtdc catarrh duo tfi 

aYcohoIism 
tpeeneunnha wine to check nau» 

vomitinjr 
Morphine, to check pain of gnitrtc catarrh 

due Ui nlcoholic excen 
Nux vficiiioa, tincture in gastric catarrh 

with nick headache t»r in iitastric 

cntarrh occurring Itf the onurti^ of 

chronicdliaatcs 
Opium, to quell pain of );t»tritiri due to 

jiltoiud " 

pftrif>phyUiD, km a purine to not on the 

ufiper bowela 
Pulwtdla to rclieTc gastric catarrh 

a<fM>ciAt€<:l with hcarthurn, nauiteA, 

no taiDte, white tongutv tlntidcoce Sec. 
Tannic acid, alone or with acetate of 

morphia in uneful to check vomitfnic 



Atropiae, byp<j*lern}ical}y with care. 
Pbypoatigmine, alone or with quinine to 
lower Lntm-ocular timsion, to abort 



threatened glauoomn 
Pilocarpine ^.1 very useful 



Glandular Affections as Buboes. Goitre. ParotitiSt Tabes Heseiiterica. 

Tonsilitis, &c. 



Barleria prionitU. root »n paste, appUe«l 

hically 
Bdltidnnoa, UHeful in CAn^ifitip 
Chviranthus cbetri* the flt^eds as a paste 

locally applied 
Klicodcndron glancum, the bark as a 

psate 
Ficus ^lomerata, the milky juice locally 



applied to mumps 
Kasmpfcria rotunda, the tuberts appbetl 

locally to gUndulnr Hwellings 
Pilocarpine, in acute inflammation of 

parotids and of sub-maxillary glands 
Valerian with gusiacum, internally in 

strumoui enlargements 



7iS 



GOUT. 



Aspmngna adflcendens, conpomid powder 

in milk 
Balsam of tola and pern 
Bacba infusion or tinctore internally 
Cana ia baltam internally 
Copaiba, locally to the oiethral canal 

will stop gleet 
Eacalyptol, ittefal in chronic catarrh of 

the urino genital timet 



Finns gerandianaaa oonfection intemallj 
Piper methysticom, internally intfal in 

obdtinate cases 
Qaercos infectorios as orethral injection 
Sandal wood oil internally 
Tannin with glycerin and oliire oil for 

arethrAl injection 
Turpentine, if gleet is dae to rdaxed < 

dition of the nrethra 



GonorriuBa. (See Vd. Lpa^e 494.) 



Aconite tinctore, is uaefol in the acate 

•tage 
Allinm cepa Internally U osefol 
Bo1d'>in, local anieftbetic like eocaine, 

a»eful as orethral injection 
Borassos fiabelliformi*:, the joice or toddy 

when fresh is of benefit 
Chimaphilla, fluid extract, iotemally 
Cannabis iodica, tincture, is very 

oteful to relieTB pain and diminish 

discbarge and it acts like copaiba or 

sandal oil 
Chrjrsaothemom internally with kala 

miri, as iofosion is very osefol 
Colchicum wine very osefol 
Copaiba, given with gl.Tcerrhith, gaol- 

theria oil and spirit of nitre is of b^efit, 

it is injorioos in the early state, shoold 

not be given on til pain in orination and 

chordee is gone, and the discharge be- 
comes yellow 
Cobeb oleo resin, better than copaiba is 

non-irritant, la acote cases it g^ves 

Avoid injections in acote 

Eztcraal remedies. — Injectioos chiefly osed are : — Lead acetate with acetic 
acid osefol for urethral injection ; cocaine, 2 p. c solution ; gallabromol, 1 or ^ P-o. 
solution is osefol ; hjdrastis root, infosion 1 dr. to 8 oz. of water or the noid 
extract with bismuth and glycerin ; qoinine with diluted sulphuric acid or with 
lactic acid ; hydnocarpos wrightiana infosion of seeds; opiom with lead acetate and 
glycerin ; matico ; tannin, &c. 

/Virmft/a.— Tinctura sangoinaria, I dr.; tioctora kino, 1 dr.; oleom santal 
1 dr. ; balsam copaiba, 1 dr. ; ipiritos etheris nitrosi, 1 dr. ; olei gaoltheriie, 10 ms. ; 
and liquor potasse, 1 dr. Dose, 1 dr. internally. 

(2) Copaibii oil, cubeb oil. santal oil, ati 5 drops; salol, 1 gr.; pepsin, 1 gr.; 
Mix. make a pill mass. Dose, 2 pills. 

Gout, i&e Vol. /, page. 497,) 



good results 

Dipterocarpiis torbittatos balaaiBt naefal 
like oopaiba 

Kregeron can^densi^, .fleabane) oil, with 
santal oil and aloohol internally 
is osefol 

Qarjan balsam, with star anise, in- 
ternally 

Gelsemiom serviceable in the acote stage 

Gmelina, internally as demulcent in 
gonorrhoea 

Planta^o ispaghula as demulcent is useful 

Plumeria acuminata, as a useful demul- 
cent 

Pareira tincture is useful 

Pulsatilla in sub-scute and gonorrhoeal 
ophthalima 

Saw palmetto fluid ex tract, iutemally very 
osefol 

Salvia plebia, as demolcent 

Santal oil with cinnamon oil or with 
bocbo and cobeb in sobacote ca 

Uva ursi, osefol 



Aconite, both internally and locally to re- 
lieve pain 

Belladonna, internally, also externally 
to soothe the pain, osefol in stomach 
goot 



Cajuput oil, locally to the joints 
Cascara sagrada, to promote elimination 

of uric acid 
Caffeine is useful in eliminating the poison 

of gout from the system 



HEADACHE. 



719 



Qont^^l^tmid,) 



Cotcbidne tnHcjIjitc, or colctticttm 

hcnt, prthi ii»il H^L'Uingof jofuM; useful 
jnncutc ni^tl rheatiifitic ^out, in UruQ. 
cIiiMm. tislljinn, t1>>st)«{]iHiK,iinil urticaria 
in ^out^? iubjcct^ 
|Mili»ii4'riimti CAOJidcase. likeuirsApAi ilJa 

MorpbiiM*, hypotirjrroio^Uy Injected cioae 



to the iLffecierl joint but otitiide nf the 

rcl nreoU to ri^liove imfti 
Ponltiees Hn^ocd mca!. with fio>li»tii 

carbonAte, a ttieful applicatuiM 
Stryehaine, !« vt*ry useful U\ hiter 9t«^ii 

of g lit. Ml f»:«t' iU-H!Ci 

Vertttrin- I ocnlly to relieve tht 

loHfttQTji 1 pAinffll joiota 



Owns (Spongy). (Sre m, /, page 499.) 



BenioiQ tlQCturo, local ;y 

Cntecim. with honey looally or efttccUu 

alone to (tiMoIve in th'* mouth for 

upon try gums 
Cocnine 5 p.c, soUitSon applUfl locallj to 

ICmmcrift. aa ^^arirle ia uBcful 

Mynh with cinohoiiii UifiitHftfiftajrwglcor 



M a muutU waHb, aseful for epongj 

ortilcerattM.1 gum* 
Potnc^miitite burk infuiion Jis giirglci 

aitfnl tn rcltixrfi gums 
Qucrcu«4 bnrk m gnrglo Is UBcful 
lihAtHO)-, iH umkI ftir H dentifrice 
T*ii«Sii' with glycerin locully npplieil, 

UR:fu1 fort^poii^y and bleedmi^ guuH 



Headaclie'-Congestive Headache : Bilious^ Dyspeptic or Sick headache 
Kervoaa Headache ; Hemkrania ; and Hy&terical Headache. (^^ i'"'^ /, 

Diglt*tl», uiefol to relieire eongofttivc 

betiitcraiiiA 

GQiftr«na, or thr fluid extriict as n 
pallifclivf, useful to relieve pcriwllcal 
hea^lnobfi 

<J else mi urn with bydmitB, intoriially 
useTtil tf the hcadncbc l8 accomf»aDletl 
Willi oorifttiiMit ion rhead»chc 

IjrniiiiA, uwsful to remote hysterical 

U\fi, uteful to reliev€^ headiicho with 
nupm-orhltMl pain, accompanieii with 
nausea and romitJu^ or due to hepatic 
demn^cmi^nt 

Uenthol, locnlly to the forehtMid U ut^ef al 
tn fr<MiL4il hitadai ho 

MuHt^ril ff>otbatti orasplftitnr is useful 

Mux xomkni iifl«r tiJcaU. The extract 
with iron nnd •quinine «• nvcful in 
hysterical *n chlorotic h>-arlMch« a*««jci» 
atetl wUti gastric catarrh ami tixUHra 

Oleum tneoth. pip diasiolved in iik'ohot, 
locally applied totbiif'^rchcad and ba»e 
of the occiput in liiliout hcadiicbe 

ricrotoxin. for the stomach is nseful 
in periodic hoarlnche 

Puigativcs as aWii, oolocynth or podo- 

phyllio y^'^*^ .-i.....,i .n,i Lrllninaiia, 

act an n^che 

oct^uritiL h1 ac- 

companied Willi OijiibiipMlion •>< whca 
due to iQpprcssion of hemorrhoidal 
dtAchargcR 

Quinine internally ts of great tjcucBt 

t^anguinaHa useful in hcadachtj dun to 
gastric fUsorder 



Allium or ifinger paste »ppU(d I'.ually 

A' . to lower the cironla- 

..^ ointment apptiiM) over 

w in ht*iuiicrinia 

III i to 5 n»9 of the tincture t4> 

rviii.'ve paiu ; th« cxLiari applied over 

the L^yobmwd when li^adHcho i« due to 

^ JL' or mfulal otur work or In 

or to stomach or uleriuo 

Bryonia in bill on a hcitilachc 

(laffiMnc citrttft with ilmc juice or cnlTt'iMe 

with antipyrine or with w<Nliuui bro- 

m"d*\otvr.rj ineiiniMlly or i5«od hypo<ler< 

1 uinful to rt'liere pain whm 

due to overwork 

CMjN|niM MM um, externally nnil inliTnaily 

iti v*'ty uvefut 

Camphor with ltv.v,.'vamu»i, intcrnalty 

or It? 8a« I'ltion mixed with 

ennd 1^.1-0 1 '- applied to the 

uterine headache 

if^hp 

Ir 

whence the di- 
Cimioifuga iiMefttl 
and in that occurring at the menstrual 
perioil 



720 



HEART AFFECTIONS. 



ReadMibB.—icontd.} 



strychnine with belladonna and aloes is 
useful in bilious headache with consti- 
pation 

Tea, strong, useful to relieve nervous 
headache 

Valerian, in excitable, nervous or hysteri- 



cal persons, given with either sulphuric, 
compound tincture of lavender or 
tincture of hyoscyamus 
Zinc valerianate with belladonna often 
given with success 



External remedies, — Liniments, of belladonna or veratria, or chloroform or aconite ; 
hot foot bath or mustard footbath ; mustard or capsicum plaster to the nape of the 
neck, or cajuput oil; camphor solution saturated with eau-de-cologne applied locally to 
the forehead ; dry cupping ; a paste to the forehead containing menthol dissolved 
^n alcohol or ginger, or of cloves, sandal wood, black pepper, ajmAnft phnl, nimb oil ; 
poultices of nftgli, bAjri to the head. 

Formula, — Extract belladonna, ^ gr.; extract cannabis indica, ^ gr. ; pili:klae 
asafetide co 1 grs. ; quininaa disulph, 1 gr.; acid carbolic, ^m. ; oil ci^upati, | m. » 
mix ; make pill. Dose, 1 pilL 

Heart AffecUoiis— Functional, Dilated Heart, Fatty Heart, Heart 
Palpitation, Hypertrophied Heart. (Bee Vol, /, page siso 



Acid hydrocyanic dilute or aqua lauro- 
cerasus to relieve palpitation if due to 
dyspepsia 

Aconite tincture, to diminish cardiac 
excitement or irritability ; useful in 
pericarditis, in fluttering heart, due to 
nervous palpitations and hypertrophy. 
It prevents heart complication if given 
in rheumatic fever 

Adonis vernalis tincture or Adonidin 
as cardiac regulator to increase the 
heart beats ; given in dropsy due to 
dilatation or to mitral regurgitation 

Apocynum cannabinum, to diminish the 
frequency of pulse 

Belladonna internally in irregular rhythm 
as a plaster over the cardiac region. 
In cardial! dyspnoea it is useful 

Camphor monobromate, internally useful 
in tumultuous heart 

Caffeine citrate, as a diuretic, an excel- 
lent heart stimulant, in cardiac pain, 
dyspnoea and weak heart 

Cimicifuga safer than digitalis. It is 
stimulating and tonic in fatty heart to 
relieve dyspnoea and in dilated weak 
heart 

Convallaria majalis, infusion acts like 
digitalis in functional and organic 
cardiac affections; also in aortic disease 
with oedema of tissues 



Coronilla scorpioides tincture is usefnl 

Dbutnra useful in cardiac dyspnoea 

Digitalis, infusion, acts as a stimulant 
tonic and sedative. Best given when 
the heart is weak, and irritable with 
irregular pulse; if the dilation is due to 
spermatorrhoea, it may be given with 
ergot 

Eucalyptus, is useful in nervoud palpi- 
tation with weak heart 

Grindelia robusta, in cardiac dyspnoea 
and in cough due to cardiac hyper- 
trophy 

Hyoscyamine sulphate, hypodermically 
or hyoscyamus tincture in func- 
tional derangement from emotion 
or excited brain ; in palpitation of the 
heart and other functional derange- 
ments in nervous persons it is useful 

Jaborandi useful as a diaphoretic in 
cardiac dropsy 

Morphine internally, or hypodermically 
in cardiac dyspnoea due to nervous 
emotion ; also in mitral regurgitation, 
in angina, and insomnia [anoe 

Nicotine useful for functional distarb- 

Nux vomica, tincture every half 
hour, is very useful in cardiac hyper- 
trophy or mitral insufficiency and 
sudden heart failure ; in nervous 
palpitation it is given with benefit 



H^fTMATKMFSIS. 



7ai 



Heart Affectiona— (<^'«^<iO 



Opiiitn and bvllftdonnn, in cardiac dmpsy 
Primus viijfitiiAiiA b useful in djrs|;>nu!a 
SpNrtelDe fliit(thate ; luefal la mitml or 

aortic dtHttttse 
fieneCK, with nmrtiunia and hjrnocyamus 

In byttcricAl heart Irregutahty 
Strophanthus. Ul^e digiUliii, n cardiac 

tiiimuUnt, a.<ic(ul in pnlpitntion and 

valvulnr dimsaae 
Btrj^chniDtt with inm miuI ri«jumbuig 

diGt a0 a cardiac] tonir, (u slreogtben 

th6 beiiit beAta 



Theobromine witli sodiQUi salicyUtc 
and valerian, oseful lootrvous palpita- 
tion with djBpnoea 

VerAtrtira viridti as cardiacs deprenanti 
jgMven in ehronio huari diaeaae with 
hypertrophy when dlgUalii is danger- 
ous ; un^ucntuii) vurattini(3 applJu<l to 
tilt: che»t in p:%lpitatiou with fiyBpocea, 
llvidiCy of liie face, inability io lie 
down, irrt^ulnr pulstt and drojisy 

Wild cluriy, u^^cful In '-ardiac dyspDcea 



Heart c Valvar) Disease (*Vcr y^t l.p^tge SIS.) 



Aconite tinclurt', umilul to relieve pal pi U- 
lioti; it diTinnixHtiathc bloo<! pri'Msisro in 
thr n ; It t6 il in 

hypri ■' lo organ 

Cactus, m ■ .■.uji.kfAied ttorlK i,^.. >;.,(»• 
tkm an I mitral infiuttictcDoy; it itUnu- 
h^tes the bearrii artioD 

Convallaria in mitral disuaan 

Digitaliii infualoii, or tiocturet in aortic 
rcftarintntioti^ mitral innislBcieiicy and 



in weak heart 
Jaborandi in aortic insufficiency 
Morphine. hyj>odeniiicrtlly Ujt relieve 

dynpna'a due to mitral dincaae and in 

aortic inBufTloiency 
Qncbracho cortex to relieve CJtrdiac 

dyapQu^A 
Veriiiruui virlde iinc^arc, with tjiicl 

acrtoiu* and tincture zingiber, aa 

Hcdativc, 



Fnrmtfln.'^MuBum digital^; 6 0£. ; calfetnc oiirars i dr. ; linctttne »(rt>phanth 
1 dr. ; liq potiiajii citratiii, S oM» ; ext,, glyccrrhiisr, 1) di\ , mix. Dc^cs ) oi, 
in anawLrca due to heart dlBeaae. 

Heat. Stroke* {&** y*»L /. jmge 5H.> 



BleMinK it the patient in plethoric, with 

hi|.Hi aikTiitl teiiBtou 
l)im»iliH tinctuii'jiypodcrtnioallyinii'Cictl 
MorphUif, h>|»xlerrak'Ally, to control 



G^'mvulfiionv 
Quinine hydrochlornte, bypoderiDically 
Injected if malaria la atianocted or 
j^tsrnia diacovcrcd in the Idood 



Hectic Fever. (&v Voi, /, page Si 4.) 



Aconite tincture, to rvlievd frrflarive 

!i* rffc fever of phibisis 
DigiUlifS with ij-on— to abate the fever 
— luid diminiftb Bweata 

orphloe, and other anodjraes very 



nacfuL 
Primus virginiana, the bark ia very 

unefnl !o relieve irritable C4>t;gh 
Quinine, tn large doses, to Xw lmvch l^fore 

the paroxyem 



Hsmatemesis* (<^ W, /^ jm^e 499,} 



Acid gallic, is useful in *'onilMn»tjon with 
dilute sulphuric acid to relieve hasmorr* 
ha^ 
Ergot bypoderrnleally 
Hemostatics very uwUii 
Hamamelia tincturt-, very useful 
Ipecacuanha, ujieful in smHll dodei if blee- 
ding in due to viciiriour* menstruation 
Krameria internaUy useful 



TjOgwood very useful 

Morphia hypodcrmically or opiam aa 
enema 

Tannin, u«if>ful If bleeding is due to hepa- 
tic ob^f-'"^*' •■ '*f to gaatric nicer 

Tnrpent ful in paisive htcmorr- 

b*ge w I fy ; ftnd to h«moriha- 

gic iranaudattoo on the free ttocouv 
saifaoe 



722 



HiCMORRHAGE. 



Hflematocele (Pelvic). (See Vol, /, page 409.) 



Bandage to the abdomen 
Cold application to the abdomen 
Haemostatics, as gallic acid, lead or tr4r- 
pentine to arrest btemorrbage, or ergot 
and iron with mercury bichloride 



Ice into the vagina 

Opium or morphine, to relieve pain 

Rest absolute 

Tonics 



Hsmatnria. (-Spc Vol. /, page 50(),) 



Acid acetic or vinegar with ice water in- 
jected into the bladder to arrest alarm- 
ing hasmorrhage 

Acid gallic, 10 to 20 grs., is very useful 

Camphor, removes renal hyperaeniia 
with bloody coacrulable urine caused by 
copaiba, cantharis, turpentine or oil of 
mustard 

Cannabis indica, in dysuria, strangury 
and bloody urine is very useful 

Chimaphilla, very usefullto control has- 
morrhage [useful 

Digitalis with krameria, internally is 



Ergot, internally, alone, or combineil 

with astringents as krameria, Slc. or 

injected hypodermically is very useful 
Hamamelis, useful in severe cases 
Mustard to the spine or mustard with 

capsicum application to the extremities 
Maiico infusion, as an astringent, very 

useful 
Quinine,when it is intermittent or dae to 

malarial infection 
Turpentine, in small doses with digitalis 

is very useful in haematuria associate^l 

with constitutional debility. 



Hemiplegia. (See VoL /, page 503.) 



Aconite, if due to organic cerebral lesion 
Gocculus, is useful in hysterical choreic 

and epileptic hemiplegia 
Physostigma, to prevent wasting of 



muscles 
Strychnine,intcrnally and hypoderraicallj 
when the paralysis is incomplete, and 
the muscles flaccid but not waited 



Hsmoptysis. (See Vol, /, page 500,) 



Acid gallic, with ergotine and digitalis 
very useful 

Acid tannic as inhalation 

Aconite of benefit 

Arnica is useful in cases due to violence 

Atropine, hypodermically stops hemorr- 
hage of phthisis 

Bursa pastoris is useful 

Digitalis infusion or tincture id very 
useful 

Dragon *s blood internally is useful 

Ergot, liquid extract, with ipecacuanha 
and opium internally or ergotin 



hypodermically is of benefit 
Erigeron, useful when there is no fever or 

other signs of constitutional irritatioa 
Hamamelis fluid extract or the tincture 

is very useful 
Ipecacuanha is useful in large do^es till 

nausea is produced 
Laricis tincture is useful 
Morphine, hypodermically, or opium 

internally to lessen the excitement 
Turpentine oil is very useful after other 

haemostatics have failed 



Hsmorrhage i Hemorrhagic Diathe&is. (See Vol. /, page 50l.) 



Acid gallic, alone or combined with ergot 
and digitalis, is useful in passive h He- 
morrhages in relaxed and debihtated 
subjects 

Aconite, to lower the circulation, useful 
in bleeding from the nose or lungs 

Agaric or laricio acid locally, in leech bites 

Arnica, in ecchymosis, due to mechanical 
violence 

Atropine, hypodermically utteful in in- 
ternal hffimorrhages 

Belladonna is useful in haemorrhage 
from rectal ulcers 



Cetratria islandica, soft filaments used 
like styptic cotton 

Digitalis, alone or with restoratives, is 
very useful in uterine and other haemor- 
rhages and in haemorrhagic diathesis 

Ergot, internally or ergotin hypodermi- 
cally, is useful in removing purpura 
and in checking uterine haemorrhage of 
any kind 

Hamamelis tincture very useful 

Haemntoxylon, least iiritative, and hence 
useful to check intestinal and other 
haemorrhages 




7n 



Hsmorrhace —{Mnid.) 



t|n:ciicu*ah», bcneJiciallii Intfriml I u'ut- 
orrlijigvv, whcD given in modemic 
duH^M. In Urge lioacs it prodniipfi 

llvrblic«, burnud und |K^wtUrvd, useful 
In bicaorrhagic (tiuthvuis 

Niix fomicn aIooc or with <juiiiiiit], 
photphfttcA am) tron» useful in miir.niic 
KuUJecta and in ItJumorrhAgic diJiihctt^ 



Jixmllj^ in 

mnlJ dofiCi 

>id feircr 



Turpontlne, intenmllj^ iifnl 
pA«siY<3 biemmrhavf > m 
\md\x\ in hroiiiorrh:: 
in hiirniJitiirmi Jin^i < ^ig 

Vint-x'nr (H|>p'c irine«ftij wi iujt^liyn in 
ha?nK>rrbn>^e from the blnrKkT ; lociitly 
to check hicmorrhA^ from le^ch nnd 
other iiieect Utes, %n\\ from pile*. 



Hemorrhage (Intestinal)* i-'^tr r**/, y, /w^^r :iOi*.\ 



Achi Kitllic* or iicid iJinnir wiili tin«-ttirr 
of op)iutn useful in haemorrfmgu riur* 
Ing typlioid fever 

Mlftdonna, lo relieve bicccliug fr-m 
iriitiiblc rectttl uloei-s 

Ert^oiin, uied by|.HMtiinilaiUjr 

tfiimiiiiustii» in UMful «8 It cofitttlnv 



Untiin ID Inrgt? proportion 
Opium Hi ndjunct to iUtriogeQU lu ftlttj 

nervoas oxcittimcini 
Saw pAlfDCtto very uauful 
Tiir|M>tiMa6 oil utM^ful in htcmorrhAge 

acx^oiiipan) \n^ t/pboid fever 



Hsemorrbage (Uterinet Post Partem). (Stt VnK i, ri^r 60S.) 



Acid khUIc 

Achmm 

Atropine, bypoderniiriilly 19 mttiA 

Cimiclfugiit it UH^'fui t(3 eht'Lk todioualy 

fiTMlnriLi'Pii ivrnmrrhftlJfd 

Dt- 1 int^rniilly or iojcctinn 

I with cth«rr i« uiK'ful in 

tir^'dui I fU^*^ 
Rrf^ol extract, jnU'rnatly or ^nfotino 

injcctc^l douply Into thu tiMuen of the 

nrm iA nf bi^ncht 
UttiRJunciiii in courtnuous ootitt^ In very 

UMful 

IpootcnaDkiii in eineUo donoi to check 

iBtftrnat remriiem, — Firm preamrs on the utcrnf, com presto n of th« abilo 
minnl lOTi^, inlm-uterinc injeclion nf hot wntci mt>«l prompt and certain to i:bock 
h»-ntoMhigL% tARi|.oniidL' by abnorlxint cotton, encmata of hot watrr. 

H»morrhoidfl i^^ Hi?, i.pa^esos.) 



jH>at |iiirt4;m li m^ 

Nux vomica n h iirgot extract 

Utjulil int^riMiiv \» yry uaeful 

Opitttii iivith brfindy, if hiemorrba^'e it 
profuMe 

Tnttipon by irt^iUcd gAuto, or ^ibsorbent 
cotiofi,uicrul to<'h<jrk h«?mc<rrhttgc from 
alforiion or plaeuntn prtuvia. Ta ht 
avoided in pr>Nt pnrtum iiiiimorrhiiirv 

Vinegar, astringent and amiHt f,i v 
Qncd ua a ptug Into Mie ravn 
the ut«ru«. It act* promptly by catimtig 
uterine eontraeUon 



Acid galiic and beniom, or acid latinic 

with optutn a« ft"* - • -y 
Aloe», with hymr ipecacoanha 

tn rrlicM* the b<> liui to reliftTC 

uesUon 

Clii) .! Ti, 12; itjtiuform, I; extract 
Mt K 1; I I nna^^; vaae]inef60; at applic- 
ation or AH euppfiiltoriefl 
Cociiinc Kfjiution. Ti p. c, locally 
Datura alba, jHitittite to externa} |iite« 
iCr^or, liquid uxtrart with or without 
^^ nux vomtca given internally in dilated 

^^K irrhoidal vL-in^, or wUh acid car* 

^H used loenUy in vtty useful 

^^ UaUj>, as ointment or gidl* oombinod 



with acetate of lead lind opium It very 
Onipc cure is uecd with t»enefit fuaeful 
Humamelie tincture, intarnalty or locftUj 

ui enema or -ui<t.ri^:u>r%i nr hh lotion 

or ointniont ^ 

Hydrastis tin jiy, and an 

lotion or oiniaieat ^<44iiy Co external 

piles to rrlieve contention 
HyoacyamuH, thi* h fives braii«d and 

pppltcd Iixiilly t'i rt^hcve pain 
Kruf"' fi'« ^^ M^ mucilage aa In jQotion into 

L 
I.irv- Hod and giren internally 

li of Wuctit 
Menthol, with thymol and cnoalypto! with 

chlorofonu locally 



724 



HEPATIC TOKFOK. 



BmmonhoidB.^rontd.) 



SeniiH, conftictioii to prucure »oft evacua- 

tiODS 

Stillingia, very nsefal if dae to constipa- 
tion; gives temporary relief if dae to 
hepatic obstraction 

Stramonium, leaves braised or ointment 
locally to relieve pain 



Nux vomica, very useful 

Piper nigrum confection. 

Pitch ointment, locally 

Podopbyllin, as cathartic, is useful in 

recent piles and to check bleeding from 

stasis in portal circulation 
Quercus bark decoction, as a wash or as 

injection 

Formula —Acid tannic, 1 ; acid carbolic, 2, alcohol, 4 : and glycerin, 8. iDfection 
into the pile. 

Ointment. — Galls, 1 ; chloroform, 1 ; extract ergotae, \ ; cxt. stramonii, | ; extract 
hamamelis, 1 ; oleum tar, \ ; cerate, 20, locally. 

^tft^m^iU.— Opium, 20 ; acid tannic, 20 ; acid carbolic, 10 ; extract ergotae, 120 ; 
ungt. petrolei, 500. Extract belladonna, 15 gr. ; extract thebain, 15 gr. ; antipyrin. 
30 grs. ; ungt. bydrargyri, 2 drs ; and lanolin, i8 drs. applications for inflamed 
haemorrhoids. 

HeiMltic Diseases. {Set Vol. /, page .) 



Bitters, vegetable tonics aa gentian, &c., 
useful in functional disorders 

Bryonia, useful in various hepatic diseases 
chiefly hepatalgia 

Chelidonium is useful 

Buonymin, useful in torpid liver with 
accompanjing headache 

Ipecacuanha, to promote the flow of bile, 
useful in functional hepatic disorders 

Malt liquors are to be avoided in fatty 
and other liver affections 

Kux vomica, with podophyllin and mer- 
cury in small doses is useful 

Podophyllin as an active chelagogue, very 



useful in a variety of liver diseases 
Resinous cholagoj^esor purgatives as irit, 

euonymin, leptsndriu and rhubarb 
Quinine, useful only in malarial subjects 
Sacgoinaria, in hepatic engorgement, in 

the hysteric without any organic lesion 
Stillingia, useful in torpid liver. In 

jaundice following ague it is very 

useful ; also in ascites from hepatic 

changes and in the flrst stage of 

cirrhosis 
Taraxacum, is useful in chronic liver 

affectioDs 



HeiMititis and Heitatic Abscess. iSet Vol. /. page sos,") 



Aconite, in the early stage 
Chelidonium, useful in both acute and 

chronic hepatitis 
Colchicum and alkalits when the subject 

i8 gouty 
I|:eoacuanha, in large doses if dysentery 

be present 



Linseed alone or with opium as poultices 
over the hepatic region in acute hepa- 
titis 

Quinine, useful in acute parenchymatous 
inflammation; also in chronic suppura- 
tive hepatitis without abscess 

Veratrum viride in the early stage 



HeiMltic Cirrhosis* iSce Vol. /, j^tge 504.) 



Beldo 

Coptis teeta 
Menispermum 



Bubus 

Stillingia, is useful in the early stage 



Hemttic Torpor, HeiMltic Ck>llg§StiO]l. {See Vol. /, page 50S.) 



Avoid starch, fats and alcohol 

Boldoa fragrans e> tract, in chronic cases 

Colchicum, to relieve congestion 

associated with dropsy 
Chelidonium majus, as a deobstruent to 

relieve congestion 
Chevica leaves made warm and applied 

over the hepatic r^on are of benefit 



Iris, useful if stools are clay coloured, and 

skin jaundiced ; a nice aperient 
Quinine, alone or with morphia, in acute 

congestion due to malarial and 

climatic causes 
Taraxacum, with aloes and ipecacuanha 
Turpentine stupes to the hepatic region 

very useful 



HYDROPHOBIA. 



725 



Hernia. {See Vol, /, Jftiffe SOS,) 



Belladonna and ether locally 

Castor oil or olive oil and tnrpcntine as 
eneniii 

Coffee, large doees, aids in redacing 
stran^ulateil hernia 

Ipecacuiinha, as sternutatory or as snuff 
to cause sneezing ; it his often sucoeed- 
e<l after taxis has failed to effect reduc- 
tion. The patient should lie on his 
shoulders with elerated hips 



Morphine, hjpodermicallj for strangala- 

tion 
Oak bark extract injected into the tissuies 

tu stimulate occlusion of the ring 
Oil 
Opium to narcotism sometimes obviates the 

necessity for an operation [tissues 

Oil of cloves, UMd as injection into the 
Tobacco, as rectal enema 
Hternutatories to cause sneezing 



Herpes— Herpes Zoster. {Ste Vol. /, page sos,) 



Acid tannic, locally 

Aconite or opium, locally to relieve pain 

in herpes zoster 
Belladonna, locally in herpes zoster 
Cocaine solution, 2 p c. locally 
Dulcamara, in her|>es zoster 
Ergot oil, prepartd by the action of 

lienzin upon ergot, ueef al as a coating 

in heri)e8 on the genitals and in other 

skin diseases 
Grindelia, useful to relieve pain 



Menthol locally, in herpes zoster 
Morphine oleate, to relieve pain ; useil 

locally or hypodermically 
Myrtal,anice remedy 
Pix liqnida, to relieve itching 
KliUH toxicodendron, to relieve itching or 

burning in herpes zoster 
Starch, bandage or dusted over the part 

gives relief 
Veratrine ointment to relieve neuralgia 

following herpes zoster 



Hiccough. iSee Vol, /, page SOI,) 



Apomorphine is useful 

Atropine and morphine, hypodermically 

useful to check h.ccough 
Camphor is very useful 
Cannabis indica internally is useful 
Capsicum tmcturu internally 
Conium succui iuternally 
Morphine, hypodermically alone or with 

atropine to arrest hiccongh 
I^aurel water 

Mentha piperita spirit, internally 
Mustard with hot water taken internally 

Formula, — Oleum succini, 1 dr. ; spt. 
spt. ether comp, 3 dis. ; pot, bicarb, 2 drs 



is very useful 

Nux vomica, with dilute nitric acid in- 
ternally is very useful 

Opium with chloroform is useful 

Physostigma 

Pilocarpine hydrochlorate, is Tery useful 
in obstinate cases 

Pepper, 2 to 5 grs. useful to stop hiccough 

Prtssure over the phrenic nerve, hyoid 
bone or the epigastrium 

Tobacco smoking 

Valerian with zinc internally 

ttheris nitrosi, 4 dra ; olei menthss pip, 1 dr. 
. ; and mucilage, 4 oip*. Mix. Dose, 1 tu 2 drs. 



Hydrocephalus (Acute and Ohronic). {See Vol. /, page sor.) 



Croton oil liniment as derivative or as 
revulsive, applied locally to the scalp 

Cod liver oil inunction or internally in the 
chronic form 



Malt extract internally in chronic < 
Turpentine, as enema or iotemally, or with 
castor oil as' inunction 



Hydrophobia. {See Vol, I, page SOS.) 



Belladonna, in hypersemio state of the 

brain and spinal cord 
Calabar bean 
Cannabis 
Conine 
Curare, hypodermically injected to 

antagonize convulsions, dispel symptoms 

and replace them by paialysis « f the 

limbs 
Excision of the bitten part 

47 



Garlic powder, locally and decoction 
iuternally 

Hydrastine hydrochlorate, hypodermic- 
ally 

Morphine injected deep into the tetaniz- 
ed mubcles m a good palliative 

Nicotibe 

Pasteur's treatment 

Stramonium 



726 



IMPETIGO. 



Hy drothoraz. {See Vol. /, page 608. ') 



Apocynam cannabinnm, a useful diuretic 
Broom tops, interDally 
Copaiba resin is useful 
Digitalis infusion as a diuretic is given 
to relieve the dropsical form, useful in 



pleuritic effusions 
Elaterium, as a derivative is very osef al 
Jabcrandi is very useful 
Sanguinaria, produces good effects 



Hypochondriasis. {See Vol. I, page 508.) 



Aloes, myrrh and nux vomica internally 
Asafetida, to relieve flatulence and mental 

depression 
Caffein citrate, as a cerebral stimulant is 

useful 
Coca, fluid extract or wine, useful in 

cases marked by debility, nervousness 

and mental affections accompanied by 

depression 



Cimicifttga, is useful in puerperal 
hypucbondriasis and that accompany- 
ing spermatorrbGBa 
Hyoscyamus, in syphilcphobia 
Ignatia tincture in a good remedy 
Opium with arsenic, as stimulant is very 

uFeful in the aged 
Valerian, to relieve flatulence of hypo- 
chrondriasis 



Hysteria. {SeeVol.J.pageSOO.) 



Andropogon muricatus is very useful 
Anthemis nobilia is useful internally 
Annona squamosa, locally to the nostrils 
Apomorphine hypodermically to relieve 

the fits 
Asafetida, in hysterical convulsions with 
flatulence, cough, Ac. It removes head- 
ache 
Atropine, in hysterical aphonia 
Avoid alcohol as it leads to excitement 
Camphora, to subdue hysterical excite- 
ment [ment 
Cannabis indies, internally to allay excite- 
Chamomile oil, in spasmodic and psendo- 

neuralgic affections in women 
Cimicif uga, in hysterical chorea and fits, 

also to relieve headache 
Conine hydrobromate, internally 
Ergot with quinine and iron or with 
tonics in sub-involution of the uterus 
with indigestion and anemia 
Galbanum, internally or as plaster 
Garlic or onion to smell during the 
paroxysm 



Gynandropsis pentaphylla, <iecoction, 
internally 

Ignatia, useful to relieve globus hysteri- 
cus, with hysterical cry, feeling of 
suffocation, flatulence, &c 

Ipecacuanha, as emetic 

Jatamansi like valerian 

Lupulin, to procure sleep 

Nux vomica, useful in cases with flatu- 
lence, flushing, perspiration and weight 
on the head 

Massage 

Opium tincture, 1 mn., with nux vomica 
tincture 2 ms. for the flushes, to relieve 
depression and weight on the head 

Pellitory, to chew 

Santonine, if worms exist 

Sumbul internally is useful 

Valerian fluid extract, or caffein or 
quinine or sine valerianate nsefnl in 
hysterical dyspepsia 

Volatile oils to remove flatulence 

Wormseed oil is useful 



Ichthyosis. iSee Vol I, page SU.) 



Baths 

Camphor with line oxide as ointment 

Elm bark decoction as a wash 



Sumbuca ointment with cupri sulphate 

locally 
Ulmus, decoction, given internally 



Impetigo ; Impetigo Syphilitica. 



Acid chrysophanie, locally in simple form 
Grape cure has been very effective 
Gutta percha liquor to cover the pustules 
Laurel water, to relieve itching 
Menthol locally 



Picis ointment 

Poultices to remove scabs 

Quinine and mineral acid when due to 

imperfect digestion 
Tannate of glycerin, locally 



INFLAMMATfOX. 



7«7 



Impotence ; 8periiiatoiTlue&i Emlsaioiis 



Aoonttum ferox taid cnniam locnlty to the 

perineum 
Allium lativurn (bulb), intcnmlly 
Atropine in caies of relaxed grniUlg is 

useful 
Biimbuitt uninditutcen, the sillcJoai con* 

cretton b useful witcn given internally 
BfttAlu panicnlatji (ta1»crou*i ro4jt)» intet- 

ORliy ia useful 
BellAdonna, | to { gr. with KJnc Bttlphftlo, 

1 gt* iDternnlly is tiscfuK lu atonic 

state and in «xtreiDc casea to cl^ccic 

night emiFsiona 
Camphor bi>oniide is u^cfal ; It excites 

at firvt but (a soon followed by 

J. ■■--.., 
Cit ' >ca, nax Tomica and efgot^ 

M-. V u.iiui in fttiictional impotence 
CAp«tct«m with cassin absu«, iDtcmilly la 

uweful 
Cioilcifuj^a, a nervine tonic h uiefol In 

weak and reUxcd couduion ; it lessens 

urethral irritation and relieves hypo* 

chondriftsii 
Ooenln«'f 4 p,o soluifon locnlly npou gisns 

Col>fM, to remove functional im potency 
Uurculiiroorehioldeik intemally 
Dafniiuin, a geuitnl etimulaut, very useful 
Digitalis Infusion^ very ut<eful in spcrmn- 

torrhcca with fei^ilw »«t^><M|m>H, ftet^uent 

emissions, and ( i ' 
SucAlyptuH oil lot iianstioii 

Brg<>tiD, hypodeihu- MP».> »..,mm tiie dorsal 

vein of peoii< when Itn cnlargximcnt and 

rapid emptying in the cause of Jm pot- 

enoe 
Fenugreek (seods) as injfciion internalty 
QeUemium* as an ananhrodiniac givvti in 

eombinUtlon with U'lladonna or cimici- 

fagn 
Hentp, in mild sexual delirium 
Uyotcine hydrubroniate, by Its infloenca 



on the iiipiunl centre is usefol in 

luminal emitf^inns 
Hydrastin, fluid extract la inject^ into 

the proitAtic ]K>rtion of thv urethra 
Kola, ns ageneial tonic 
Lupulin^ a good anaphnKlislae ; with cana- 

pbor, it acts as a genital sedative ajid 

thus checks emifision 
Morphia suppositories or tnjech I r- 

mically into the perineiim in 
MuGona pruriens (seoil^) a* imu'mliuh 

internally is uMcfid 
M.Trfietica f fticinah*!, j*1patii (mace) 
Nux vomica, witli ir^n, rHutharis and 

phosphoric acid is usi^ftd in Mk>nic ron* 

dltiou of the genitals with feeble ereo- 

tions and relaxation 
Opiuii), In ^mall do^^es excites at first, but 

Bo<»n |^ro^llKH.^H dcpfcsslon 
Pjfrethruiii indicum (root)^ internally 
Polygonum hydropipcroides, useful in 

functional disorder with feeble erection^ 

Wiitery semen, and soft ti»nrN 
Qatnlne Jm tmmetiineN UM/ful 
V* \Aikh, in wjiual *jtb:iu«lion 

wi, a nice ii| lirf>rJisiac» only 
..... ui the functional (oim 
Saw palm^'lto. infanmlly 
Scrprntaria linctmo, in relaxation and 

fecblr- ercetionn ; it nistorea the power 
8tran)oTitiim and morphiu internally 
Htiyelihiiie in large <lo84.*a in imi^ful in im 

jK>t«nce. It increitw'S ut^niTal nut rition 

and *-xnlts reflex excitability of the 

general centres 
Tribalas terreittrie (fruit), confection in- 
ternally 
Tinospora cordifoHa fecuta confection 

internally 
Temeraaphrodisittca, very u>*eful 
Triticuui repens. in sexQai exhaustion 



E^Urnat remedies — Avoid masturbation, bougies, bard bed. cold doucbe to the 
^Jlirtelttm and ieatiolea io atonic caaes, cold iponglnp, electricity (onntlmioiui 
eUntntX ase Ice hag Io the »pine, bath warm, and hyglenle meaiorer. 



iDflammation and Irritability of the Mucous Membraues. 
(Sft Vol, t,pag*f hlh) 



Aeonite tinctnre, as antiphlogistic, useful 
r> irtflammstion of the reiptratory 
• lis, in eruptive fevers, in inHam- 
i, v '^•nteswith hi'*i« »- inri-fHiurt^ 

I n the ear ] le 

U' nry fevers hi. ^uti- 

Uon of serons membrana aa pneumonia, 



tonsillitis, acute rheuntatftm, and 

erjsiitelas 
Aleuritit triloba, If alimenlry can^U ts 

intl*«med 
Arnica tincture, a» antipyretic is useful 

in intiaaimaiioa of ^tvni: mcmStanes 



728 



INFLUENZA. 



Inflammation.— (^(m^</.) 



Belladonna with aconite internally, useful 
in scarlet f eyer,ery8ipelas,aDd low fevers. 
Externally in inflammatary sorethroat, 
inflammation of the eyes, boils, car- 
buncles, and in inflammation which 
threatens to end in abscess, in rheu- 
matism, cystitis, pneumonia, &c. 
Bryonia in pleurisy, pericarditis, &c. 
Capsicum, as poultices 
Cannabis, in chronic cases 
Cocaine hydrochlorate, locally in acute in- 
flammation of the mucous membranes 
to coDstringe the vessels 
Colchicum tincture, is useful in 
bronchitis and conjunctivitis in gouty 
subjects 
Digitalis, locally and internally in pneu- 
monia, bronchitis, rheumatic fever, 
scarlet fever, inflammation of the joints, 
breasts, erysipelas, varicocele, &c. 
Flax seed, in inflammation of the mucous 

membranes 

Qelseminm, fluid extract, in pneumonia, 

pleurisy, and acute stage of gonorrhoea 

Linium usitatissimam, in inflammation 

of the geni to-urinary and pulmonary 



organs 

Opium, internally and looally in inflAm- 
mation of the serous membranae as of the 
peritonium, meninges, and intestines ; 
useful to check it at commenoement, 
and to relieve pain afterwards 

Poultices, to check inflammation or form- 
ation of pus 

Pilocarpine is useful in the exudative 
stage of pleuritis, keratitis, iritis, &c. 

Pulsatilla is useful in acute inflammations 
with muco-purulent discharges from 
the eyes, ears, or nose. In epididymitis, 
it is given with aconite 

Quinine, alone or with morphia is useful 
in peritonitis, to arrest acute inflamma- 
tion 

Bicinns communis if alimentary canal is 
inflamed 

Santalum album, with stramoDinm locally 
as a paste 

Tectona grandis root, locally to inflamed 
skin 

Veratrum viride tincture with opium in 
delirium of fever, pneumonia and in 
arterial excitement 



lormula. — Ant. et pot. tart., 2 gr^.; magnesia sulphatis, 2 oz. ; morphinie 
sulphatis, 1 gr. ; syrup zingiberis, 2 oi. ; acid sulphuric aromat, ) dr. ; tr. veratrl 
veridis, 1 dr, ; aqua, 8 oz. Dose, 4 drs. In fever with delirium, in pneumonia, acute 
rheumatifm, &c. 



Influenza. {See 

Acid agaric, against sweating 

Acid camphoric, on the tongue as a 
preventive against sweating 

Aconite with potassium citrate and 
spiritus setherisnitrosiiu the early stage 

Benzoin tincture compound, with pare- 
goric elixir, as inhalation 

Camphor alone in solntion, hypodermi- 
cally or with caffeine and ether inter- 
nally if nervous prostration 

C imphor, monobromate 

Uimicifuga. is very useful 

Cocaine h.vdrochlorate, 4 p. c. solution 
used in the early stage as a spray or as 
snuff to be blowed up the nof«trils 

Coca and kola tincture, to be stuffed into 
the nobtrils or internally to relieve 
nervous depression 

Cubeb tincture, with linseed tea subdues 
subsequent cough 

Digitaline, in low state of the system 

with pneumonia 
Ergot, cannabis and bromidts, in com- 
bination to relieve vertigo 



Vol, J^ page 616.) 
Eserine and cocaine during desquamation 

stage 
Eucalyptus oil, a nice prophylactic: used 

as inhalation or sprinkled' on cotton 

and placed in a room 
Gelseujium extract to relieve headache 
Guarana, to relieve pain in the chest 
Ipecacuanha as emetic, in cases of biliary 

derangements 
Menthol dissolved in chloroform or with 

cocaine used as inhalation or as a spray; 

a nice prophylactic to abort the 

attack 
Opium,to be avoided ; with ipecacnitre and 

lobelia, useful only for subsequent cough 
Quinine hydrobromate, as a prophy* 

lactic against fever and to relieve 

neuralgic pain following the acute stage 
Sanguinaria is very useful 
Steam medicated inhalations 
Strychnine, to relieve weakness and 

depression following the disease 
Turpentine inhalation is useful 
Turkish baths 



INSOMNIA. 



729 



Insanity— Dementia. Mania or Mental Excitement- {See fW. /, pa^f 



6170 

Ac^nitr. Jn high fever and reatleaanewa 

ii : L5^e 

At ilcTmically 11 uicf alia acute 

CMMcs c»i iutainty with delusioni of 

pefieontion ; a»efal where bromide* 

imve failed 
BellHiTonn* is asefut in monomania with 

hnllucinarion aiid to relieve meut.1l 

excitement 
Cltnicifu^A, in mania oscarriog durin^^ 

pn^gnancy or lifter conflnomcul 
ColcUtcum in ^'uuty casen 
CoDium, or Ue alkaloids, int^Tnttlly or 

with morpblnc hy|K>dcrmicaUy iis<h1 U) 

soothe muscular excilomcnt and to 

tliilec iioigj patients 
Croion oilt a»a piirgativsandaa revuUlirtj 

to relieve cenOmil congeation 
I'latunne hypodermically in uc«U^ aQ*l 

chroQic mania 
Difptaliii ttncture, a tticfiil palllatlrein 

acute and chronic mania, complioaled 

with epilepsy ; It ahonld be avoided if 

til© pulde Intermlif 

^ nbctlsine, UyvK > y , a good 

ifedaiivc and io acute 

'' manhi to allay lu- nim r^L1t»bllityof the 



insane, inducing quiel and refreshing 
sleep 

Ergot, fluid extract, uwjfal in recurrent 
mania ; it reduces excitemoDt, »hort43na 
attacks widerm intervals aud preventa 
exhaustion 

Qvlacmium tincture, in mania, with great 
mot.irexeihtmfnt and wakefulneai 

HyiTscfoe hydrobromate in emergent 
ca^es hypodcrmically, in delirium with 
hallucination, In hypooboodriacal 
monomania, in violent lotermitient 
noUinesa and in abusive rL'sttessnest 

Morphine, hypotlcrmically to procure 
sleep p« dan gi'Tou:^ in mania 

Opianii with tartar ciimtic is useful in 
melancholia, lu climactcrlo caacs and 
in insanity withdepresatori fonllay irri- 
tation and to ioducti skvp. It doe^ not 
produce narcotism 

SiramoQiuiu tincture!, in furious tnttT- 
mittcnt dillriumj in cerebral excite- 
ment with tert-lency to suicide and 
in nrraphomaniH, ft allayfi irtitaton 
and inducer 'luict ilovp 

Veratrum t^irf^ie, to allay excitement in 
acute mania 



Insomnia^ iSfr V^L A pap*^ /»i7,) 



K>roorplnno, hypodermloallir given when 
'the patient is ready for bed 
Atropiiic. wtth morphia iuj^-ction 
Cannabtn tannatc, aa nypnotic ia useful 
ChamiM " tiire, for children fa a 

verv ktive 

r - iism 

' ' ■ „ . ■ ^'f 

Pi^nialitf, iu( v^aui of toue xu the ? easels 
a rii«^ ^jporidc in alecpleesnesa at 
■d drowsinesa during the 
ful 
Lui"-,- ■':•f}^ ^,,.-1.-.. ,-\tropine 
Of '1 *-■'! -i-i!M,i ,kliy is 

bypuof .' .ijpi ', ■■, useful 

when great I! 11 'merit cxista 

Geliscmium, a m ' -ant in wake- 

fnlncaa of druukarilii, in over^excite- 



ment, tnanta or In simple wakcfulnei^ 
Hnmulns luputof^ tincture, at cerebral 

sedative ia usifnl 
Hytia<?y»miia tincture, ft gOod snb- 

xf ' ii tn children or hyoa* 

ae hypodermically in 

IgnatiB, in nervous orythiam to avoid 

ileoples^neae 
Nareelne and crKlcine arc useful 
Opium tincturt', wifh cliloml l» a useful 

hypnotic, In in 

rcUotln, an nium 

If'-v f-~ ' -»,._, AS a 

Scuj iwful 

Snmbiil tincture, with chloric other ill 

iiiaumniii due to chronic akoholiiim 
Tobacco »taokiug 



Intestinal Obatrnctian : IntussuBception* (S^ Vat, l, poft SIUJ) 



Belladonna* internally or as enema to 
give tone and to relieve painful 
ipasfo 

Camaiiie, to act on mnacnlar tiaaae and 
henoe naefiii 



Knemata or InHuitlalion often neootaaiy 
Opiumf intornally or morphine hypo* 
dermically to prcrent intl.tmmation^ 
to relieve pain and other *ymptoms 
and to produce painlefl purgation 



730 



JAUNDICE. 



Intestinal Obstruction.— (^^'^ei.) 

strychnine is useful if given with caution Tobacco, infusion as enema ; bat it often 

in acute cases leads to depressing naosea 

Senna infusion isHiseful as a fine purgative 

Formula.— StTjchnlne, 1 gr.; extract of belladonna, 4 grs.; podophyllin, 4 grs. ; 
ferri sulphate, 20 grs. ; aloes, 20 grs. ; make a pill mass. Dose, 2 gr s. 



Intestinal Ulceration ; Perforation. 



Belladonna, to give tone and relieve spasm 
Caffeine, acts upon the muscular tissue 
Enemata 
Hjdrastine 



Opium or morphine arrests dangerous 

symi)toms and produces a free motion 
Senna infusion 



Iritis, SyphiUtic. iSee Vol. /., page 519.-) 



Atropine solution as mydriatic should be 
used early and perseveringly 

Belladonna tincture, or extract inter- 
nally or as lotion 1 of extract to 26 of 
water is of great value 

Copaiba internally to diminish pain and 
restore sight 

Duboisine, a good substitute for atro- 
pine, less irritating to the conjunctivae; 
useful to rapidly dilate the pupils 



Eserine 

Morphine, hypodermically is very useful 
Opium as an adjuvant to relieve pain 
Quinine and iron if the patient is feeble 

and anaemic 
Santonine 
Scopolamine 
Turpentine, in small doseH is useful in 

rheumatic iritis 
Tropococaine 



Itch; Scabies. 



Acid benzoic, as ointment or lotion, very 
useful 

Anthemidis ointment with sulphuric acid 
and potassii carbonatis very useful 

Balsam of peru, with mi lie of sulphur and 
vaseline to rub over the body kills itch 
mite (acarns), disinfects the parts, 
relieves itching and dermatitis 

Cadini oleum with sulphur (I to 8), with 
glycerin starch and benzoate of lard 

C<Mil tar naphtha 

Cocculus indicns, ointment useful 



Kamala 

Karanj tel as ointment 

Melia superba with sulphur and curd as 

ointment 
Oily inunctions 

Staphisagria 1, lard 5, used as friction 
Storax 1, to olive oil 2, nnirritating, very 

useful 
Tar ointment cures itch quickly 
Terminalia chebula with &mUl fried in 

castor oil and applied 
Walsura piscidia, ointment is useful 



Jaundice. (See Vol, 7, page 520.) 



Acid benzoic 

Aloes, in simple jaundice due to atony of 

the liver 
Asadirachta indica, fresh juice 
Berberiue, in jaundice due to chronic 

intestinal catarrh 
Celandine, given as deobstruent, affects 

the liver 
Delphinium salil, decoction 
Dulcamara, is very useful 
Euonymin, as a hepatic stimulant 
Gamboge is useful 



Hydrastis is useful in malarial jaandioe 

and in that due to catarrh of the bile 

ducts 
Iris, in malarial jaundice and that due 

to duodenal catarrh 
Ipecacuanha 

Luffa echinata, infusion internally 
Pilocarpine hydrochlorate 
Pineapple juice 
Podophyllin, in catarrhal or malarial jaaa- 

dice when stools are clay coloured 

and exhibit no trace of bile 



73» 



Jaundice.— (f^^/^lO 



Quinine when due to miiUriii or whea 

periodic 
Rlinbarb, in cbildrcn with j«andiced 

flkin. »od white or cUy coloured ptmty 

stools 



StilUntfea, to relieve torpid liver 1 
intermittent ft^vcr nnd to cuvB^ 
TanixftfCutri 

Triticum roots mnd rbiiome» 
Turpentine 



Cflfftpound Pitted fr^Qudunhttiktk contains— Dan ti niula, ipomcDa tarpethnm, 
piumbttgo riiot, black pcppc^r, K^^R^^i^^ long pepper and treacle equal parts, Dose, 1 dr. 
In ftatiitent'ef jftundice^ anatareA ^e* 

A cr^ntftound coloeynth pill eontatniDg— Coloeynth pulp, 4 ; parakajali, 4 ; 

Ku rilled uttlphiir, 4 ; cardftmoms, I ; barde, 4; lonjf pepper, ii pellitory root, 4 j and 
oncyi 8, Uont't * tt> ^ !-''i*- III JAundicf', nseitcs^ fotcr, and rheuniattsm. 



Joint Affections k'^'' ^*A, I,pa^tfSSJ») 



Aoonfte, locally afl tin imt*n I in chronic 
arthritic iiwel lings and internally to 
roUevc pyrexia of polyarthritis and 
pains in inllaniRd joints 

Dij^ritaitf) rinrturc. lu water, an foment?!' 
tion to the jointJi hi acute cases 

(tUKUltt^ (IS It-'p 



Rhus toxicodendron t tntcmally and as 
lotion ifl useful to relieve itching, 
and iubacute stfffneas of joints after 
aoate rheumalin fever 
Turpenttne liniment, as luoal application 
Vitex ne^undo leaves as discutient for 
swoUen joints 



Labour -Difficult or Tedions Labotir- (&« ^d, /,|n^s a£?.) 



Althijca decoction an vaginal Injection In 
used in difficult or tedious labour 

ArtHtolochin bractiata, to iuereaMs ateriue 
contraction » 

Atropine with morphia, hy|MXlcrniicalIy 
tfi iiveroouiu i<paftm 

: VI* 

Ct\: ■■■ ■'' ,-■■■• .,■.:' ■ ■ "re, 

usetui iti nlutiy ui ihe utctu* to Bitoiu- 
late uterine contr!irnon!f. It is more 



prompt but hwy 
CimicifugH, MS at. 
but it< !• 
ohUd and 
useful to J L 
after labour, and 



am ergot 

la hkc ergot 

to life of 

Mther. It is 

exclUbllity 

to check or cor^trol 



if inadvertently given 
Eucalyptun oil, as an antiseptic used 

locally 
Gel^'miiim fluid ex tnfcct, is osofal to quJet 

t\>> r (he first stage ; it relaxes 

«p -'ulity uf the as 

Indu.-iu .u(x Ug» (fiamet), to dilate the 

OH 

Iftecoeuanha, is nsefnl after delivery to 

proiDute njfctural funetioiia 
Lobelia inflata, to dilate the rigUl 

OS. 

Morphine, with digitalis and diaphorstfcs 

If fever exists 
Uor[ibi:e, intsrnally or hypodenni- 

oally. It ts useful in tedious labour. 

It relieves severe pains due to rigid os, 

and promotes urogress uf the child. It 

al»Mi relieves after paitis 
Opium, iulernalty or us suppository. It 

promotes dilatation, IncreiLsescxpttlstvo 

power of the uterus, lestiens hmmor- 



pmt partem hiemorfhage and to relieve 
1 Iriohia 
Ci MM^ial In tedious lab<iur 

C'*" "• p. c. locally to the (» 

C*' MM'fal to eicite Wlcfine 

iirt, better thiin vtipA 
E\ 111! in nterlnr Inertia. To iC» 

(xktHit; utrrinc contraction aft4T the 

bi^id has (msi«e(l t»»e pelvic bnm: it 

■hoald not be fnven if there is any 

obstacle in front. It parTilyses the 

festal heart and thercf ate i§ dangerous 

grtemttl rtmrdies^V Tici\on over the abdomen, galvanism, hot water douche 
over the os, Indsions to the os. 



rhage. and ^t i 

oblique rau- 
Ophioxyloii 

increase lab^^^ 
Quinine, in phv 

or promote tii 
Viscttm albtmt 



>'^ nil and 



.1 to 



.'ot to strengthen 
' contractions 

! vKjtoey, extract or 



infttsioj Bd hii uxytoccic very useful 



^32 I- PKOSY. 

LaryngiamuB Stridolns ; Spasm of the Glottis, (^e Vol. I, page 523 J) 

Aconite, to check spasm and to relieve Ipecacaanha io an emetic dose, to cut 

Btridnlas breathing short the attack 

Atropine Lobelia is useful 

Belladonna is of great value Quinine, in small doses is given between 

Codeine the attacks with benefit 

Conium is useful Morhine hypodermicallj 
Gelsemium 

Laryngitis, Acute— Oatarrhal Laryngitis—Spasmodic 

Group- iSee Vol, /, page 523,) 

Aconite given till fever subsides. It is Morphine, in small doses to allay cough 

very useful to relieve inflamed state of Mucilaginous drinks 

the respiratory apparatus Rumex crispus extract, as a sedative 
Cocaine, 5 p.c. solution locally of the laryngeal mucous membrane, 

Camphorated oil, as embrocation relieves cough, catarrh, and a feeling of 

Cubeb cigarettes, to relieve hoarseness soreness behind the sternum 

Diet- Bland, nutritious, unirritating food. 

Emternal remedies, — Inhalation of hot steam or of tincture bentoin comp. 
or opium, hops, or conium ; mustard to the throat. Poultices hot. Abstinence from 
talking. 

Laryngitis, Chronic— Spasmodic Lanryngitis— Catarrhal Croup- 
Althaea, as pectoral lozengta to relieve Croton oil, locAily to the skin of the throat 

laryngeal irritation Guaiacum, internally is useful in mucous 

Bensoin on hot coals or inhaled from laryngitis 

boiling water Tanuin ol ution (I in 100) by spray or 

Cocaine, 20 p. c. solution by a brush as applied by the steam atomizer or used 

paint or by spray is useful with glycerin as paint ip ohronic 

Cubeb berries, to chew in relaxation of the catarrh and ulceration; the solution 

larynx due to cold or long speaking ii useful as gargle 

External remedies, — Insufflation of antiseptic powders us starch, and morphine to 
relieve irritation. 

Inhalaiwm, — Balsam of peru or tolu, placed on hot iron, as vapour ; 
benzoin in strumous laryngitis as vapour on hot coal or hot steam ; boswelia 
floribunda as fumigation ; diluted hydrocyanic acid as vapour on hot water ; fir leal 
oil with magnesium carbonate as inhalation ; hops with hot steam, tar, tannin, in hot 
water as vapour by atomizer. Turpentine by steam atomiser. 

Laryngeal Tuberculosis; Dysphagia. iSee Vol, j, page 524.) 

Cocaine by insufflation or allowed to melt used as paint is useful U) relieve pain 

in the mouth is useful to relieve pain and to destroy local deposits 

and dysphagia Tropacocaine is useful 

Menthol, in olive oil 

Leprosy. iSee Vol /, page 525,) 

Atropa belladonna Chysarobin, 10 p.c. in lanolin, locally 

Aconite in early stage Cr>sarobin, salicylic acid and creosote as 

Anacardium orienlate, cashewnut oil plaster is useful 

Bawachi Gurjan, balsam or wood oil as ointment 

Chaulmoogra oil with bdwachi, inter- and emulsion to alleviate the disease 

nally or as liniment Gynandropsis pentaphilla, the oil 



LOCOMOTOR ATAXY. 



733 



Leprosy.— («'^<^.) 



Gjnocardic acid, in eaily stage 
Hoaog-naD,in combination with alum and 

realgar made into pill 
H^dnocarpus inebrians oil, locally 
Hydrocotyle asiatica^as anaesthetic locally 
Ichthyol, internally with chrysarobln, 

salicylic acid, crea^te, and ▼aseline, 



as ointment 
Pyrogallic acid and lanolin to rub oyer 

the arms and legs 
Finns deodara. oil locally 
Sero- therapeutic traaiment 
Sarsaparilla, as tonic and alteratiTe 



Leucoderma. 



Aplotaxis anricularis locally 
Argemone meiicai.a oil, locally 
Azadirscbta indica 
Bawachi seeds 
Cassia tora 



Calotropis gigantea 
Curcuma aromatica 
Ourjan balsam or wood oil 
Pterocarpns santalinus 
Pangamia glabra oil 



LeuCOrrhOBa. (&<» Vol, /, page 525.) 



Abies canadensis, fluid extract internally 
Acid tannic with iodine and potassium 

iodide, locally applied round the cervix 
Balsams of pern and tolu internally 
Belladonna and tannin, as tampon in 

ulceiation of tho os ; or belladonna 

tincture, or sxlii bicarbonate, and 

water, as injection, when due to over- 
secretion of mucous glands about 

the OS 
CuscarilJa infusion with tincture sabinn 

internally 
Cimicifuga is very useful 
CocculuB iodicus tioctnre,in seropurulent 

discharge and )»ain in lumbar region 
GallH! pulv,with decoction of tormentilla 

internally 

//|;>r^y>Mx.— Acacia bark, cassia auricnlata, catechu, dyospyros embryopteris 
bydrastis, quinine, tar water if the discharge is fcetid. Tea infusion. Tormentilla 
decoction. 



Hydrastis fluid extract, applied topically 
or as an injection in uterine and 
vaginal leucorrbcea 
Hyrrb with iron and aloes is very useful 
Pulsatilla tincture, internally or as 
vaginal injection to relieve pain in 
the loins, depression of spirit, loss of 
appetite, ko, 
Q lercas infect oria infusion locsUy 
tfumbul, in atonic cases is very useful 
Tannin alone or with salicylic acid and 
bismuth as tampon loyally, or as 
dusting i>owder, or as injection of 
claret, wine or with cocoa butter as 
8up{>osit()ry if the os is ulcerated 
Vinegar, as a wash 



Lithiasis; LithoBmia ; OalcnU. iSte Vid. I., page 626.) 



Acid benzoic 

Biophytum sensitivum 

Buclm combined with an alkali is of 

benefit 
Cascara segrada, to promote excretion of 

uric acid 
Chimaphila extract, checks uric acid in 

the urine 



Colchicum wine, or colchicine with oil of 

winter green is useful 
Coffee is an excellent antilithic 
Pichi is very useful in lithaemia with 

cystitis 
Piperazinc, to promote elimination of nric 

acid 



Locomotor Ataxy- {Sfe Vol. /, page 527.) 



Belladonna, with turpentine and ergot, to 

relieve pain 
Ergot with sodii bromidi, to relieve pain 
Hyoscyamus, to relieve pain 
Morphine, in large doses, in the later 



stage to relieve pain 
Physostigma, is very useful 
Pilocarpine 
Strychnine, with syrup of hypophos- 

phites 



734 



MEASLES. 



Lung Diseases ; Pulmonary Affections. (See Vol, L.page 528,) 



Aconite, useful in acute congestion and 
inflammatory state of the respiratory 
organs 

Astragalus verus, to relieve irritation of 
the respiratory mucous membrane 

Belladonna tincture, to retard exuda- 
tion of serum in pulmonary oedema 
and* to counteract the failure of the 
heart 

Blisters flying to the chest if there is 
hypostatic congestion 

Copaiba, useful in lung diseases gen^ 
rally, when attended with profuse 
secretions 

Cimicifuga extract, is a useful sedative. 
It relieves irritative cong^h, promotes 
expectoration, and improves general 
condition 

Groton oil liniment as counter irritant 
very useful in chronic cases 

Ohavicabetle, warm leaves locally applied 
to the chest 

Cubeb, useful in old and chronic cases to 



stimulate the respiratory organs and to 
check profuse secretion 

Dorema ammoniacum, locally 

Eucalyptus oil with alcohol as inhalation 
by a steam atomizer 

Ferula galbanifera, as plaster in chronic 
cases 

Glycerrhisa in catarrh of the lungs 

Jaborandi, useful in breathlessness 
complicating lung disease ; to be given 
with care, otherwise collapse ensues 

Pinus sylvestris (tar), vapour as inhala- 
tion 

Storax benzoin, useful as fumigation 

Terpin hydrate or terebene, very osefol 

Turpentine, inhalation or internally in 
low adynamic pulmonary inflammation 

Veratrum viride,in acute parenchymatous 
pulmonary congestion with high tem- 
perature and rapid pulse ; to be 
avoided if there is prostration or 
collapse 



Lymphangitis. (See Vol. /, page 529.) 



Belladonna with glycerin, as an applica- 
tion, or as poultices to relieve pain 



Quinine, with alcohol internally in septic 
cases 



Mastitis ; Mastodynia ; Mammary Abscess. (See Vol, I, page 530.) 



Aconite tincture, alone or with actaea ra- 
cemosa tincture internally 

Arnica lotion locally 

Atropine alone, or with morphine and 
chloral, locally to relieve pain 

Belladonna internally, or with collodion 
and camphor as paint, or locally as lini- 
ment or as ointment to check secretion 
of milk and thus relieve pain of in- 
flammation 

Camphor,saturated solution in glycerin to 
be applied locally in mammary conges- 
tion and threatenins abscess 

Oonium extract, applied locally to the 
breasts and generative organs; to 
relieve inflammation and impending 
abscess of breast 

Castor oil leaves locally to relieve inflam- 
mation 

Oimicifuga, to relieve intra-mammary 
pain of uterine origin in spinsters 

Digitalis, infusion of leaves as fomenta- 



tion to relieve severe inflammation 

Hyoscyamus plaster to relieve distress, 
mammary pain and distension from 
milk 

Morphine with oleate of mercury and 
iodine applied locally in mammary 
abscess 

Opium and olive oil locally applied with 
friction to painful breasts after par- 
turition 

Phytolacca fluid extract internally 
and solid extract locally to arrest in- 
flammation of the breast and to prevent 
suppuration 

Plantago plaster, to support and compress 
mamma 

Rosmarini spirit with ammonium 
chloride as a lotion to temove indura- 
tion after the abscess has suppurated 

Stramonium leaves as poultices or as 
cataplasm to relieve induration 

Tobacco leaves, as poultice 



Measles- (See Vol, I, page 531,) 



Aconite tincture, to arrest bronchial 
catarrh or pneumonia and to lessen 
fever [mote eruption 

Asclepias infusion or decoction, to pro- 



Camphor water with liquor ammonias ace- 
tatis,when coueh and catarrh are present 
Crocus sativus liquor is useful if there is 
catarrh or much cough 



MENORRHAGIA 



7is 



Mewles.-^'''*'*^'^.) 



I^eOMnuinbii, to relieve cough and 

OAtmh 
JftlK^rnndi, hot l)*th fa n fine riUphoretio 

to promote erupt ion a 
liufttAfl f<:>ot biitl) to promote eruptions 
Oil or cocno butler in iiamd M inunction 



to reduce the tomperaturc 
Puteatnia tirKsCure int«rnallj or OA 

woflh in Qfisftl or intestinal enturrb 
Quinine, to retie?c hyperpyrexia and la 

cAtarrhAl pnciimonia 
Vemtrum viride h very useful 



Melancholia. iSer VaL /» ;wi^<» S3t,y 



itinc citfu I* n«oful 
^Amphor motj' ^ very o^ful 

CunnftbiR jruli' vo melancholia 

CocJiiii*', as » ! 1=; affection* 

accompnnir 
Cimicif ugn« in i , .^ j'j to uterine 

durant^emontA or to puerperal stat« 
fgnatia hsm a very Hootbing effect fn 

mctanchoUa 



tforphine is uaeful in penont hATtn^ 

peculiar idiosyncrasy 
Opium tincture, to subdue paroxyfloit 

of acute ang-uish and despair or wilfi 

suicidal impulse 
Valerian, useful in hysterical or suieidot 

melancholia 
Water as wet pack, shower bath, hot and 

cold douoba very serviceable 



Meningitis— Cerebral. Spinal and Oerebro-Spinal* CSee Vat. i^ page 5S2:) 



Add bydrcM yanie with wxliura carlionate 

to rhock vomiting 
Aconlto with iTuroi ;ind opium, to roduee 

tb« amounl of blood in the vetisols of 

the cord 
Belladonna.to rellfrTe (Nsrebrtil excitement, 

mad to \v9SAin hypcrmmis of the brain 



anfl . 



Brv 



V ticn due to external violence 
1 in Aerons inttammation 



Croi^Mt i^il, useful in tuberonlar nien- 

inifitiit 
Digitalis 
Irgot fluid extnvcl with potaHSlam bro- 

ijjij., ir, ^..licve convulsUjns following; 

in 
Flyi! ih to the spine and to the 



napv of the neck to prevent effusion, 

and to relieve coma 
Gebicmium fluid*'xtract, tochock dcUriom 
Hjoscysmus in subacate form, to relieve 

nervous irritabOity 
Opium with tartar emt^tic to n^lievQ pain 

in the head ; to be tt%*oUUvt if efftuion 

occurs and stupor and ooma superrenc 
Purgatires at the commencement are 

useful 
Pulnatilbi. tiHijful in the acute form 
Quinine with Ix? Madonna extnict or with 

p»ta«Hium iodide is useful 
Turpentine enema, as a deHratlre it 

u»r!(ul 
Vemtrum viride 



Aloes 

Cimictfaga 
Cocculus indicus 
Ergot 
Hydrastis 



Menses; Vicarious Menstruation 

Ipomosa dijii^itata 
Jasminum grandiftoruia 
Quinine 
Turpentine 



Menorrhagia : Metrorrhagia. QSe^t r«l. /, pa^e SS8.) 



AcHi , {15 vaginal injection 

Aci > i r h acid sulphburie aromatic 

IM vi'ry t'liieient 

Acid tannic, with sine eulphate aa injeo* 

tion 
Actcca raeemoaa 
Aloes with iron in anicniic caaos 
Atropine, with eonium pessary or alone 

liypo«1ermiciiLly in htemorrhoge due to 

abortion 



}t 



* with i^yp^nm, internally 
r I icum gum, internally 

Csuiimois innicifc, alone or with criffot, 

aa slim u Ian t of the uterine muscular 

fibres 
C^aaaiaauriculnta aann astringent injtxniou 
CatechUf useful in passive hicmorrUageit 
Cimielfu^ft, in [lassive bjemorrbages, if the 

coagnla are tmrd and dark and accom* 

panied with headache 



736 



MYALGIA. 



Menorrhagia— (<H>Ht<i.) 



Cinnamon oil intemallj is usefal to stop 

oozing from metrorrhagia 
Digitalis with morphia and hjdrocjanic 

acid 
Digitalis infusion, internally to check 

mcnorrhagia when due to disease and 

in plethoric subjects 
Erigeron oil, is very useful 
Ergot^internally with ammonium chloride 

or with sodium bromide, or ergotin 

with glycerin and water injected 

hypodermically is Tery useful 
Galls decoction, as injection 
Gossypium, extract as uterine hssmos- 

tatic, is very useful 
Hamameli:, has beneficial effects on the 

veuou8 system 
Hydrastinine hydrochloride, combined 

with ergot and cannabis and given inter- 



nally or injected hypodermically ; a 

powerful uterine vaso constrictor 
Ipecacuanha 
Opium, as a sedative, to reduce aterina 

eircnlation 
Pomegranate bark decoction as vaginal 

injection 
Quinine sulphas, in cases of anbin- 

volution is next best to ergot 
Qnercus as local injection in atonic cases 
Rue, to lower the vascular tone of the 

uterus; to be avoided during pregnancy 
Savine tincture, is useful as an uterine 

tonic in relaxeil or passively congested 

uterus 
Sclerotic acid as hypodermic injection 
Turpentine, internally 
Ustilago 
Viburnum, internally 



Metritis ; Endometritis ; Parametritis ; Peri-Metritis ; Uterine 
Congestion. 



Aconite, in the early stage of inflamma- 
tory fever is very useful 

Aloes, as enema 

Belladonna, internally 

Camphor monobromate 

Ergotine 

Heat to the feet and poultices to the 
abdomen 

Hydrastis extract with carbolic acid or 
with iodine and glycerin as application 
to cervix 



Injections, vaginal, of hot water to abort 
an attack of cellulitis 

Linseed poultices to the hypogastnum to 
relieve the pain 

Leeches in sthenic cases to the hypogas- 
trium 

Opium by suppositories or by enema, bet- 
ter borne than when given internally 

Turpentine epithem as hot as can be 
borne 

Viburnum pranifolium internally 



Myalgia ; Pleurodynia ; Lumbago. iSee Vol. /, page 535.) 



Aconite tincture internally or as liniment 
locaJly 

Arnica, useful to relieve contused muscu- 
lar fibres. Internally the tincture is 
useful in concussion, or shock 

Aqua puncture, useful 

Acupuncture, of benefit 

Atropine liniment 

l^lladonna linimrnt is useful 

Burgundy pitch plaster 

Cajuput oil liniment 

Camphor with chloral, internally or as 
liniment locally 

Capsicum tincture internally or as lini- 
ment or infusion locally on lint or as 
plaster or as oleo resin 

Cimicifuga, to relieve general bruised 
condition. In rheumatic cases and 
in myalgia due to uterine derangements 
it is useful 



Clove oil, as rubefacient is useful 
Colchicum in the gouty state 
Gelsemium fluid extract in large doses 

is usefal 
Qnarana, to remove pain 
Massage 
Menthol with thymol and eucalyptol 

locally as plaster 
Morphine and atropine hypodermically 

to relieve pain 
Opium liniment to rub in after warm 

fomentation or internally 
Rhus toxicodendron in subacute or ten* 

donous rheumatism 
Turpentine is very useful in myalgia if 

bowels are regular and urine &ee 
Veratrum tincture, internally or as oint- 
ment externally 
Xanthoxylum, locally and internally 



NERVOUSNESS. 



737 



Myalgia ; Pleurodynia.— (ecni//;.) 

/(/nn«/a.^ Medicated oil, oonUining—Acorus calamus, ajowan tela, bishop's wee<l, 
cinnamon, indian purslane, patchak (aplotaxls aariculata), oleam nigrum, clcome 
viscosa oil, nutmeg, blaok pepper, long pepper, catkins, cinnamon, tamala, indian; 
spikenard and yalerian — «qual parts, add linseed oil, 1 to 20 and boil ; used as an 
embrocation in rheumatism, bruises, dislocation, lumbago, Ac 

Myelitis iSee Vol. /, page- 533.^ 



Belladonna locally is very useful when 
the ditease is due to external yiolenco 
Ergot, in large doses is very successful 
Leeches are useful if there is much 



localised tenderness 
Posture, on one side, or prone is the best 
Rest absolute 



Nasal Affections. iSee Vol. 7, page 634.^ 



Camphor 

Cocaine, 4 d. c. solution by spray in cat 

arrh to relieve engorged venous sinuse; 

sApo in acute catarrh, hay fever, and for 

rhinoscopy 
Eucaine hydrochlorate 
Holocaine 
Hydrastis externally and intemslly in 

chronic catarrh with nasal ulcers 
Menthol as snuff 



Nasal douche and injections in catarrhal 

Pulsatilla, in nasal inflammations [states 

Sanguinaria 

Starch with glycerin locally 

Tsnnin with glycerin in excoriations in- 
side the nose, after measlcs,or scarlatina, 
in impetigeneus eruptions inside the 
nose where hair growp; also in discharge 
of greenish, black, stinking mucus 

Tropacoccaine 



NerroOS Affections. iSee Vol. I, page 534.) 



Asafeticla is useful in nervous affections 
connected with uterine derangements. 
In hypochondriasis and nervous gastric 
dyspepsia it is given with vegetable 
bitterH and aperients 

Cocaine.a nerve stimulant; it destroys the 
sense ot fatigue; as an analgesic it is 
useful in neuralgia, melancholia, and 
hypochondriasis. 

Lupulin, is useful in nervous affections 
where opium is intolerable, in hysteria 
it ii very valuable 

Nux vomica tincture, is useful in 
affections of nrflez neurotic origin 
occurring in hysterical subjects as 
cough, dyspDcea, syncope, palpitation, 
flatulence, &c. 



Opium is useful in insanity, mania, me- 
lancholia, and other painful nervous 
affections; in diabetes it is of great 
value. It gives repO:te to body and mind 

Physostigma extract, is useful in 
locomotor ataxia, writer's cramps, and 
paraplegia 

Santonine, in cases of reflex irritation 
leading to chorea, hysteria, epilepsy, 
and convulsions 

Starch with glycerin or zinc ointment is 
useful 

Bumbul, a nervous stimulant, very 
useful in neurotic cases as migraine, 
hysteria, fcc 

Valerian and valerianates have special 
influence in neurotic cases and are very 
useful 



Nervoosness or Nervoas Debility ; Nerroos Irritability or Nenroos 

BxdtabUity. {See Vol. 1, page 537. ") 



Aconite tincture in drop doses relieves 
restlessness 

Camphor, is usieful in subduing reflex 
excitability and nervousness 

Chamomile tincture, a tine nervous seda- 
tive for ehildren to lelieve nervine 
excitnbility 



Caffeine as a stimulant of the nervous 
system is useful to relieve restless- 
ness due to lowering of nervous 
power 

Coca 

Conium. the fluid extract, is useful 
as a sedative in insomnia with 



738 



NEURALGIA. 



V9tV0XUmeM'—ieantd.) 



great reetlessneBS, motor agitation, 
elirium, ko,^ resulting from over- 
work 

Gokhru 

Hops internally or as pillow 

Ignatia, in small doses to relieve mental 
excitement and nervous erethism 

Lupulin, is useful in cases where opium 
is intolerable 

Massage 

Morphine valerianate or morphine alone 
is useful 

Opium* to soothe the nervous system and 
to give repose to mind and body 



Piscidia 

Quinine preparations are useful 

Strychnine, ta nervine tonic, useful to 
assaage restlessness due to functional 
irritability of the nervous system, to 
relieve wandering neuralgic paina, 
and nervousness from over-dose of 
tobacco 

Snmbul tincture, is useful in restlesB- 
ness of pregnancy 

Valerian is a nervine sedative, usefal 
to relieve reflex excitability and to calm 
the nervous system ; useful in fevers with 
restlessness, anxiety, kc 



Neuralgia. (.See Vol. /, page SSS.) 



Aconite, alone internally or with quinine 
hydrobromate or with morphine as a 
palliative ; useful in congestive or in- 
flammatory affections or aoonitinewith 
veratrine as liniment or as ointment 
locally for headache 

Aoonitine ointment and aconiti oleas, 
used for rubbing 

Andro)X)gon citratum oil as embrocation 
locally for neuraltria of the 5th nerve 

Atropine, internally or hypodermicaily 
in the vicinity of the nerve or as 
liniment, or as ointment in leiatica 
or in peri uterine, facial, and inter- 
costal neuralgia. 

Belladonna tincture alona, or with 
chloroform or with gelaeminm inter- 
nally 

Caffeine hydrobrom, hypodermieally use- 
ful in oervioo, bronchial neuralgia 

Camphor chloial or monobromate inters 
nallv 

Cannabis indioa extract, naefnl ia aea- 
lalgic headache 

OipsicuB oleo resin or ationg infosioii 
oo lint covered with oiled silk loeallj 
is useful in facial aeoralgia 

Chamofliiltt in nevimlgia of Uw 5th oerve 



Ooceus cacti linctQfe tordievepaia 
Croloo seeds and Iism juice in orbital 

neuralgia 
Cimictfafa tinctm«. in ovarmn aeaialgla 

and in iie«ralm of the 5lh nerve 

when dee to cJt 
Cvcaiae aad its «a!ts« hypodenuceUy 

akMsg the eoene of tbe aerwe or in 

the Tidaily of t^« peinfal euif e. 

Given with chk>n>for« iateiaellj or 



earache 

Ergut alone or with iron chloride in 
visceral forms as gastralgia 

Gelsicmium fluid extract or tinctnre alone 
or with pot. iodid. is useful in 
neuralgia of 5th nerve, especially its 
dental branches, in supraorbital tie 
douleienx, trigeminal and ovarian 
neuralgia^sdatica, 4c. 

Ichthyol, menthol, thymol as ointment 

Ignatia ia useful in hysterical and inter- 
costal neuralgia with nervous erethiam 

Menthol and peppermint campor, locally 
in facial neuralgia 

Morphine, hvpodermically in the vicinity 
of the aihaeted nore is neefal in 
sciatic, plumbago, tic doulonrenx, &c. 

Nux vomica tinctnre, with carminatives 
oaefnl in visceral neuralgia aa gastralgia. 
hepata]gia,4te. 

Oil of hone chestnut with *^— plyrr and 
opium a« liniment 

Oleum cajuputi, externally and internally 

Opiunu internally and externally 

Peppermint oil locally as paint in anpcr^ 
idalaad facial nearalgia 

Physosligmine solution is useful in i 
gia of tiie eyeball 

Piecidia iiuid extract, with 
duB is very useful ia oases' dne to ooU 
or «^e*— -nation 

Fyrethnoi, root to ckevin£scial i 

Qeiaiae intphai^ or sabcylas^ witk 

arsenic jast before the ' tff ack in 

periodic nearalgia la OBalJ 

faciaL, p erio d ic , orbital, aai 

nearslgis 
Saptndes SBseifissfaii^ locaDy in 



Onieine in ovariaa 
IK^talis» lasM ia 



sctatioa aad locaQy in 



Spigf h's anibrhsis, in facial 



NIPPLES, 739 

Neuralgia.— (^'t^'t^^O 

Staphisagria, interoally and ezteraally in chloroform liniment usefnl in Eoialica 

obstinate facial and cerrical neuralgia tic douloureux, &c. 

Stramonium. To be omitted if any Theiiie, with sodium bentoatf, sodium 

symptoms of narcotism appear. Use- chloride, and water hypodermically. 

ful in sciatica, Ac. A nice analgesic. It improves the 

Strychnine, in all forms of neuralgia nutritive state of the affected nerves 

Sumbul extract, in facial , sciatic or ova- Valerian extract or valerian ammoniated 

rian neuralgia in nervous women tincture, with guaiacum in facial neu> 

Tonga, useful in facial neuralgia ralgia in hysterical subjects 

Turpentine oil, with castor oil inter- Venitrine oleate or ointment, in facial 

nally or with liquor ammonias neuralgia and sciatica, or veratrum 

and almond oil or with opium and viride tincture internally is useful 

Diet. ^AxkimaX fats, butter cream, &c. 

External remediei,^~Utst, bathing, shampooing, acupuncture, mquapuncture. 

^(>rwM/a.— Quininae Bulph., 2 ; morphinae sulph., ^*o ; aconite extract, ); strych. 
nine, ^i; ; acid arsenicus, -f^. Make one pill. In neuralgia. 

(9) Ext. aconite fl., ^ ; ext, cannabis, | ; extract conii, | ; extract, hyoscyam 
I ; extract ignatiae amarie, ) ; extract belladonanae, | ; extract opii, ^ ; and extract 
stramonii \, Make 1 pill in neuralgia. 

Paint— Chloral hydrate, 1 dr. ; camphora pulv, 1 dr.; morphias eulphatis. 2 grs.; 
and chloroform, 40 ms. Mix, to be used locally a* a paint. 

Ointment — Aconite, 4 grs.; veratria, 15 grs.; and cerati, 6 drs. Mix. Ointment. 
£lixir— Sodii iodidi, 3 drs.; hydrargyri bichloride 1 gr.; conii extract, fluid, | dr. 
and syrup, 1 os. Mix. Dose, 1 dr. 

Nearasthenia— Brain Weariness or Nervous Exhaustion 

(&■« Vol, Jf page 537,') 

Caffeine, given in nervous breakdown Counter irritation, as cautery along the 

from over-study to relieve brain weari- spine 

ness and nervous exhaustion Kola nut internally useful as it contains 

Codeine caffeine 

Cocaine, in nervous exhaustion, is very Rest cure 

useful Str} choine is very useful 

Coca, in small doses internally bumbul of benefit 

Nipples (Bore, Fissured), (fiee Vol. J, page 538,) 

Arnica lotion, locally Gutta percba, solution locally 

Bals of peru and tolu with almond oil Quercus infectorius bark infusion locally 

or roscwater, a valuable application Kbatany, ta wash or as cerate, locally in- 

Benzoin tincture compound, locally for fissure 

slight erosions Tannin, with glycerin locally applied to 

Catechu locally with honey fissured nipples 

Cocaine solution, locally 



740 



OPHTHALMIA. 



Nymphomania {See Vol. I, page 538,) 



Camphor monobromatein large doses, to 

control inordinate sexual desire 
Lapulin, is very usefal 



Tobacco, given with care, as it is 

depressing 
Stramonium 



very 



Odontalgia. (See Vol. I, page 639.) 



Acid tannic solution, with ether, a useful 
application to carious teeth 

Aconite tincture, with chloroform, opium 
and persulphate of iron locally to the 
gums or aconite ointment or liniment 
to the face for facial neuralgia due to 
a oaried tooth 

Atropine, solation locally 

belladonna extract locally to the face 

Camphor rubbed on the gam or with chlo- 
ral hydrate locally placed into caviti- 
^ es ; camphor with chloral as liniment to 
* relieve facial n«uralgia,or with morphine 
and flaxseed as poultices to the cheek 

Capsicum, strong infusion, locally on lint 
is useful 

Chamomile oil locally 

Cinnamon oil, locally on lint 

Cloves, oil as drops into the cavity 

Cocaine, solution on cotton applied to a 
cavity 

Cochlearia armoracea, to chew 

Conine solution, with alcohol, locally in the 
hollow of a painful tooth 



Delphinium root, to chew 

Gelsemium, extract locally to reliere 

pain 
Ginger, as masticatory 
Hamamelis tincture, locally on lint and 

into the cavity 
Hyo8cyamu&, smoke of the seeds applied 

into the cavity 
Meiereon, as masticatory 
Morphine, hypodeimically for severe 

toothache 
Opium, or tannin or chloroform with 

creosote placed into the cavity of a 

caricd tooth gives relief 
Pilocarpine injection suboataneously 
Plumbago rosea, root to chew 
Pyretbrum, as masticatory 
Quinine, iu full doses 
Solsnam jaquioi, as fumigation into the 

cavity 
Staphisagria,the alcoholicsolution,to drop 

into the caried cavity 
Xanthoxylnm 



Onychia and Paronychia, Inflammation of Nails. CSee Vol, I, page 539.) 



Camphorated spirit, locally 

Cocaine, solution used hypodermically 

as local anaesthetic 
Cocaine, locally injected deep into the 

tissues relieves pain— a nice anaesthetic 
Free incision 
Firm bandage 
Leeches sometimes are of benefit 



Morphine powder, locally applied to re- 
lieve pain 
Poaltices hot, very beneficial 
Rhubarb powder application 
Tar ointment 
Turpentine, locally on lint relieves pain 



Ophthalmia. (.See Vol. /.page 540,) 



Acid tannic with syrup or glycerin, ap- 
plication to lids in catarrhal or 
purulent cases 

Atropine solution, or belUdonna extract 
in catarrhal or gonorrhoea! or purulent 
cases 

Castor oil drops, to allay pain 

Cocaine hydroohlorate, solution or the 
oleate loodly, to relieve pain in catar- 
rhal cases 

Colchicum, if gouty diathesis exist 

Conine, with olive oil locally is useful 

Ergot exract, with glycerin and rose- 
water locally in catarrhal cares and 



chronic ophthalmia 
Hydrastis lotion, in strnmoat c^^. 
Jeifuerity iuf usic o as a paint in granular 

lids and in purulent oases 
Myrrh, in asses' milk locally to the eyes 
Oil of cade, in persistent rases 
Opium wine in drops, to relieve pain 
Pulsatilla, as a wash or a lotiou ; also 

useful internally 
Physoetigma, to contract pupil and shut 

oat the light in catarrhal cases 
Spigelia, useful in rheumaMc ophthaluiia 
Staphs isagria, locally 



OTALGIA. 



74» 



Opium— The Opium Habit (•&< ^^^ Lp^gt 541.) 



Atropine relieves the di&lreBsing tiTnip' 

tomt 
€}^)caiQe or coca, the fluid ex tract iM very 

ijveftil to relieve depretsbti caiued by 

the withdmwal of opium ; it re«tor<« 

nppvtite. induces 6le^p, promoteg dtges- 

lion, soothes the brain ami pniduces a 

feeling of oonUDtmc&r ant) calm 
dmnabia tincture In insomnia and 

restlMsnes 
Codeine *Jone or with tod i urn bromide 

ami trioaal, verj useful to r<.*lievc 

II /fration 

C< " «1rart,t<i relieve wander in^ 

\' i*'*k motor at'tiriiy 

C.'4 ul aa a gastHo fttimn* 

ia iL tedative 

Cat4^oUii itncture, if diarrh<L>a Beta In 
DiilKvifiine, a nice colroativc and hypnotic 

ill' la* injection to de»f roy 

'II 
firg< -^ .v>i^..cw u.^daehe 

^Vrwn fa,— Anti-opium pill contains — Sodii phospliatig «xaio, 1 gr. ; exti-act 
nux vomicai ^ ^t. ; putr. v\\ii, ^^ frr. ; ipecacuanha, i gr, : extract b«l!adonna, | gr. ; 
i plperioei 1 gr, Uix, make one pill. Dose, pill 1. To bre^dc the opiutti habit. 

Sfi^uff-, — Con t ain i n|! brom idea of ammonium, pota^^i urn, audi urn and strontium 
with a little arattoic and (»]iftlcum to which hypophoAphitea may be added it there 10 
tnucU dcprv^on. 

OrchitiB ; Epididymitis. C^*** ^W. 7,^^^.' 4Si.) 



Oi'lsc^ntuni, §tii>riue« rtstlefieneas^ und 

motor cxi'itement 
HyogcjamtiB internally or bypodermiGally 

ae a hypnotic to relieve inAomnia and 

motor activity 
Lup'ilin extract with phosphoric acid or 

with valtTiftn and chloral hydrate acta 

aa a hypnotic, helps to sustain the 

patient and leeeeoa the force of his 

suiferiuK 
5i2X vorrica with dilute^l phosphor!*' 

acid and ayrup of prune* interuAlly 
Phy^ , a gocKl tulxititutL- for 

Of ' fiai» 

Pitcu:.,. ^■^, ...uiia^a good sobetitute 
Quinine 

liednce the amount of aluobol oonanme<i 
Sparteine, hypodennloallf, to relieve 

dcprc'kaion 
Strychnine, anrum chloride and bromide 
of arsenic invaluable to complete t he cure 



Aca ni to (i nature, iuterually In acuto f piill- 

dymltit 
Arnica lotion, or tincture witli i«oa|i 

linimeat an em bn mention 
Belladonna intcn»illy» and aa ointment 

with jcljcerin or an a paint, with 

iodinvi lucully when inlUmmation has 

ttibaldt»l 
Conium k'av^rj* iilont* an )»<lu1ttCJL^ or with 

opium and uii'nMiry tin plnistcr kK^ally 
Dijkrtbili.'* leuvoiJitrnlly, viTV uiteful 
KlaJt seed [unultices 
Qtiaiacul ei with methyl liaUcytAtc 6 aud 



va^rlnie H as a local applioatiou to 

relieve the pain 
Morphine with mercury nlcate by 

inunction, i»r morphine and atropine 

»oltttinn aa injection l>onoath the tunic a 

vaglunlifl 
ratsMtiiIti with aconite, minut** do^M to 

fi'licve Unr pain, but not to a'^^uagc 

ii-dema 
fhyiotacca dococtiou internally, or 

Phytolacca e^ni.i with belladonna 

and lanolin n^ jq 

Tobacco with i ^il aa pouUiotM 



/Vrmv/#i,~Tincture Iodine 1, Uq. nrnmonla: 1, tinct. opU 4, and ol, otivjc 8, aa 
Afiplication. 

Otalgia ' Earache. (Set I Vt, /, pa^e ^L) 

Cocaine, i p. c, solutitju im a spray <»rcr 
the tymp*num» throujfh the external 
meatus and tlwti forced into the cnsta- 
«^hi«ntnl9f« bv in^fUmi/ rlie *^pray 

n ■ i ' ' ' ■ ■ o ear 

' I ocymum 



Aconite tincture t, and opmn tincture 
1, dropficfl into the external meatus to 

Almonil oil aadropa [relieve pain 

Allium e*'pa^ iuio** a* dro|i# 

A' ' or with ftpium, 

i'> relieve earache 
ui, viiijiii^ij »MM v/ i»-H>rt olilia 

C rot on oil liulmcnt behind the ear 



74^ 



PAIN. 



Ottdgt^-ie^mid.:^ 



HorphsA •olntion^ mlone or with atxopiiM 
is nied as dropf 

Olive oil, made hot and locsll j applied ia 
oaefoL It sometimea doea hann aa it 
often andergoea decon.poaitioo aod 



becomes a nidna for tbe growth 
of aapergillna or other TegeCmble 
fuDgi 
Opium and atropine, aolntioii aa drops 



Otitis. (See YtL I,page 542,^ 



Aconite, to relieTe tbe pain, used internal] j 

and locallj 
Atropine solution as drops in aente 

otitia, 



Oalendiila officinalis, aa iotioB 

Pulsatilla, as lotion^ warmed and i^ipUed 

or oaed as injection in inflammatioo of 

external acditcny canal 



OtorriMMU («f e IW. /, fagr S4g ) 



Acid tannic with glycerin locallj 

Anthemis flowers, with rose petakand 
sweet oil as drops 

Camphor and salol heated together and 
applied into the middle ear. It < 
neither pain nor inflammation 

Cleome viscota, juice as drops 



Heb'cterea isora with castor oil aadiops 

Opium in sweet oil aa drops 

Patang powder as insufllation into the 

middle car 
Quercus infectoriua, decoction aa injection 
Quinine with sulphuric acid in otorrfauaa 

after scarlatina 



OrarUn Nennlgia. (See Vol. I, page siS.) 



Atropine, hypodermically, to reliere 
pain in the pelvic viscera 

Belladonna, combined with stramonium, 
hyoscyamus and quinine internally 

Camphor monobromate with cannabis 
inclica relieves ovarian pain of spasmo- 
dic cbaraccer 

Codeine, to relieve ovarian pain either 



inflammatory or nenndgic 

Conium, as vaginal pessary, to reliere 
ovarian pain either inflammatory or 
neuralgic 

Hydrastis extract with potassiam bromide 
is useful 

Opium often relieves the pain of non- 
inflammatory character 



OraritlB, OopharitiB. iSee Vol. /, page 543,) 



Anemonin 

Belladonna 

Camphor with opium and cannabis 

internally to relieve pain 
Ergot, with potassium bromide nsefnl in 

chronic ovaritis 
Linseed meal poultice of use 



Opium suppository or enema is naefol 
Salix nigra extract is useful in 

ovarian hyperaesthesia in nervooa 

women 
Turpentine stupes over the ovarian 

region is useful 



OsmiA. {See Vol. /, page 5#3.) 



Acid tannic with glycerin by irrigation 

Camphor with sugar as snuff 

Cabeb, the oleo reeun with sugar 

internally after each meal to lessen the 

secretion and alter its character 
Hydrastis, locally as flaid extract or as 

lotion or internally as tincture 

is useful 



Erameria decoction with calcium chloride 
and water used as injection after 
cleaning the noee with soap and wmim 
water 
Menthol, with oosminol as spray 
Ocymum sanctum, snuff of leaves 
Pix liquida with soda bicarb and water 
as injection into the nose 



Pain. {See Vd, /, page S44.) 



Aconitine, ointment useful in neuralgia 
of the 5th nerve in gout and 
rheumatism 



Atropine, hypodermically to relieve local 
pain, sciatica, glaucoma, fcc. 



tvaCALYSIS« 



713 



TBXn^-(e0nid.y 



BiOla*trtaiui. tn rdicve every kiorl ot pinti 
in the pelvic visc«ni wiiit iron for the 
WAD^ierisi^ pains of AntcmiA wbert* tnor- 

?»hlDc itcoutrAOniMcAted mitl bromicJea 

Oxtelne. to rt'tk'Yc aVxIomiiiftI and 

ovArinn pain 
Cimicifutra^ to n^lfovt} pn'm of aeiimlgla 

uf rlysmen orrlittni, ovArian nearal^tA* 

pain of 5th fierce, rheumatic paia and 

headache 
Cocaine, 4 p.c, «oTiition, tooally aa anMna- 

T' ' ' the rauc^rus sTJTfaees in 
nf »ilgiH, Aic; hy jH»<lerini<'ally 

t i, . . ,,r,#.]rir: ,M ^ eJttfaction of 

Tuoth aiirj uQ 

Contttm, UB*H I il^ia^ rhetimatiim. 

Cjncfr auii ovariaQ {>atn ; aUo 

loci^motor ataaU 
Utibolsioe, a gocHJ sauttftut^ for atropioe 
Eucakue, to cnufn? aniudthesia of the 

Gi 1 oUte *>i\ or Riyceriu a* 

r hypCKleruiicaUy iujected 

ot iocaiiy AppUvd &« pMint io orchitk, 

Panilysis and PareslB 

Arnica, in pafalysii of the blmlder very 

6«ltai1onna, with ergot InterDallj or aa 
o its tine lit aK>Mir the Npi»« Id paralyaifl 
Hue tu ehroniu inUAiiimntiou of the cord 

Cajuptit oil useful in pnUy 

Cannabis Ind lea, to Ut^m irritability, for 
retention of urine in ApirmI paralyiis 

Colf^c^Qth in cerebral paralywl* acta as 
revulsivfor counter irrii«nt 

Oo<::cu)uii Indicus tincture, oieful fn 
hemipleyria, paraplegia and in paralytic 
BtifTnesh 

Ooohletiria armorai*ia or eampboi apirit 
locally ai embrocation 

Capaicum, aa general stimulant 

£rgot, hi paralysis of theblarlder ilue to 
PjOver-diatCDston, In pniixlvtie 'lyj^uria, 
eoiatifmof piirtinl eijt^ityHijjof bl»*i'ler 
In parajilegiu cumplicated with wen- 
fltrual irre^fularity ami in j*aralyai» 
ari»in;^froai spinal conceal ion; useful to 
relieve enn^tiputiuu in pnralj^Bifl wlien 
other cathartics have failed 

IgnAtta, in loii of power in the lower 
extremities 

Jatiopha oil, aa local application 



•ciat ca. rhetimatism, and nennditiA 

blurpbUie, hypo Jermically lnjii<;t0J in the 
vicinity iif the nerve is aaeftd when it 
Cftimot \ie bi^rne by the aionmcb ; u«ed 
as Hulphare wi»h Ji^ropini.', in 
sciaHra aofl other painful - — " , 
With utttif»viin it is niMre > 
pain than the ui»c of either d .^ . ,. j. 
With chloral it rcllevei pain of chronic 
rheumatism, colic, gastcalgia t^nd of 
cunctrr 

Opium, afl an analssesic, fs uaevi to reHeve 
pain. The Hniment is applied with 
fiiction in sn per filial neurit l^ia; poiihi- 
ces sprinkled with opium, is a useful 
appbcntion to relieve pain of inllani* 
mati'Mi 

Hhatjiny to relieve pain of ulcftrntlve 
diHCAae of mucous nieuibr»fies i^h pain 
of burns, blister*, uicer>» kc. 

Solaniiie to relieve gustric pain 

StronionhM' r.M.rrrwnit IS u^ful 

Th ei I) e , i < i ral gic pat n s ; i t affects 

the ner led 



iS**0 Vat. J, jfftgs 46Ji,) 

Myrifttiea officinalis, the oil at stimulant 

locally 
MufNtAni. M an emetic to flt£mutat4) the 

fi4iling heart In certain forms of 

paralysis 
Xua vomica, In liyit«rioa] paralysia, or 

thiit due to leHfi tiotaoninK^ in chronic 

pf^r^lynis. in paraplegia due to aof toning 

and wnsting of the cord 
Oil of bay, is useful 
Picrot-*f^ ... .T--f.^i i" pfiralyaii of the 

spl ii from cold and 

in . , il paralyais 

Phyi«c^{i|jit]af in general paralysis of the 

idSHtie, in progressive mascnlar atrophy, 

in long sundiog hemiplegia^ piaraplagia, 

locomotor-Ataxia ; phyaottigmiae inlo 

the eye in oc^^' * * ■^-\vsia 
Rhus tozicodeii U in patmlysia 

(1e(>cnding on ti -^in 

Senegi, in rbeumattc paralyiis is very 

useful 
Strychnine solution hypodennicalJy into 

the alTticlt».1 muscles in hemiplegia, 

paraplej^ia, local paralysis and 

mcrourinl or facial paralyiis 



Cannabis indtca, to lower reflex activity 
Cocaine^ is very baneticial in targe aad 
fre-pent doses 



(See Vol, J\ pag^ 54S.) 

Dubois! ne 

Oelsemium with cotiium *nd hyo^cvamns, 
useful to quiet thf ncrv jua uritHtif>n 



744 



PERITONITIS. 

Paralyaifl.— (<^M^<i.) 



Hyoscyamas tincture or hyoscine hydro- 
bromide as a paliative to control 
tremors 



Hyoscyamine, to relieve trembling 
Opium, arsenic, and hyoscyamui are useful 
Picrotoxin, very useful 



Parasites ; Pityriasis ; Pediculi!; Dandruff. (Set Vol, j, page ssj.^) 

nVirrannVianin T<A.iir<»1 I aavpa. HAonnt'.inn ftfl tt mrash • 



Acid chrysophanic 

Acorus calamas, rhizome to remove fleas 

Anamirta cocculns, powdered fruit to re- 
move lice 

Anona squamosa, decoction of seeds to 
kill pediculi 

Aplotaxis auriculata, root 

Asadirachta iodica, oil of seeds to remove 
lice 

Baw&chee, oil, locally applied with bene- 
fit 

Gajuput oil, to destroy pediculi 

Cleome viscosa, to kill maggots 

Cocculufl indicus tincture, undiluted as 
a wash to destroy pediculi 

Essential oils, very useful to kill pediculi 

Gardinia gummifera, to kill pediculi 

Ooa powder to kill acarus 

Helinium» for mosquitoes 

Earanjtel locally to kill lice 



Laurel leaves, decoction as a wash against 

fleas 
Melia azadiract, pbste of leaves and 

flowers locally 
Picrotoxin against pediculi 
Pyrethrum, powdered locally applied kills 

pediculi 
Solamam dulcamara, locally 
Sapindus trifoliatus, locally 
Stavesacre, as an oil or as an ointment or 

as tincture locally applied 
Tobacco, decoction of the leaf kills lice. 

The application is to be avoided if the 

surface is abraded 
Vernonia anthelmintica seeds, for pedicoli 
Vinegar to kill the knits in the hair ; it 

softens the adhesive chitin by which the 

ova are glued to the hair 
Walsura piscida, as a hair wash to kill 

lice 



Pericarditis. (See Vol. I, page 646.) 



Aconite to relieve violent throbbing and 
severe pain. If given early, it dimin- 
ishes vascular excitement or irritability 

Bryonia, during the exudation stage is 
useful 

Digitalis with hyoscyamus in the exuda- 
tion stage when the heart flags, in rapid 
and feeble heart cyanosis and dropsy 

Qautheria oil, internally, or locally with 
camphor liniment 



Opium, is very beneficial 

Quinine, with potassium carbonate, a 

good antipyretic, to suppress an acute 

attack 
Spigelia antbelmia, useful in pericaiditis 

with rheumatism 
Turpentine stupes to the chest is useful 
Veratrum viride, extract, or succus 

with calomel, is very valuable 



Periostitis. (See Vol, I, page 465.) 



Free incisions 

Mezereon, if complicated, with scrofula or 
rheumatism 



Morphine and mercury oleate, locally 
Poultices in the early stage 
Staphisagria, if long bones are affected 



Peritonitis. (.See Vol. /, page 465.) 



Aconite, to relieve febrile condition in 
sthenic cases ; useful in the early stage 
In all inflammations of serous mem- 
br^ines 
Brjoriia, useful in the exudation stage 
CocouluH indicus, useful to relieve tympa- 
nitis, to remove pain and lelieve tension 
Morphine, if given early will abort 
Opium tinctuie, to quiet ti>e intestinal 



peristalsis, with aconite to relieve 
pain 

Poultices, large and hot, snd frequently 
renewed 

Quinine is very useful in most inflamma- 
tion 

Turpentine, internally, to relieve tension 
as turpentine epithem during the early 
stage locally for tympanitis 



PLAGaK. 



745 



Fhimosis* 



BellAdoQtt«« extfaot in Urd as ointment 

used looftUj 
Gooftiiie, 4 p. c. lolation m an annsthetlc 

injection before operation to k«ep f'' ^ 

peai§ at rest 



Lojiulin, internally after thm 

operation 
Sui^eal remoTal of the |»rep«toc or 

ctrcnmcUion 



PMeffmasia Aiba Doleng. (^c Vid. j, pafff sso). 



Anofixne otntmenrs locally 

HellidanDa and niercurjr et^ual parts M 
ointmcQl 

HAmiiinclifl,U 7ery uieful. It hoa a speoi- 
Hc action on the venous lystcm as aco- 
nite ha« on the* arterial 



Leeches dnrin^ the acute ioftamtnatory 

stage 
Opium, in large doees internally or locally 

aprioklod on hot flannel used for 

fomentation to relieve pain 



Phthiflis. i&v Vt^* A p'*(fr ssi.y 



Aconite, in small do^s, to lessen irrlca* 

tlve fever 
Acid gynocordic 
Af^rk'in 
Aoirl hydrocyanic to relieve Irritative 

cough 
Ajiomorphfne, with morphine relieves 

dyspQiea and cotitiouefl cotigli with 

thiek and teeacioui^ mucus 
Atropine, to lessen perspiration 
bensoin as itihaiatiorj to tcisen ooiagh 

&Dd ex (icMSt oration 
Bttri^undy pitch plaster 
Camphorated naphthol, in olive oil 

i« u»ed liyjiodcrmically 
Cannabig Indica, rvltevcM cough 
Cimicifui^u, remove^* coughs improveci 

digestion and le.Mens inter-current hroa- 

cbitl*! 
CiQchona bark, to eheek hectic and 

sweats 
Clove oil, locally to the cbrst 
Cocaine, locally to the throat before meals 

rellevcn irritative cou^h 
Cocoa nacifera oil »h Inunction to the 

cheat 
Codeine, a* il does not conf^tipate 
CfMion uit liniment to the chest, a^ 

C4iunt4'r-irniant 
Eucalyptus oil for (nhalatiaa 
GrAp<* cure is of benefit 
Guaiacoh a.4 a Uryogcal 9pray 
Homatropine hydrobromate * 



Ichthalhin, internally very nsefn! 
Ipecaouanha wine as spray to the throat 

if there is bronchial asthma and 

emphysema combined with fibroid 

phthisis 
Juglanfl regia, infusion or extract 
Morphia acetae, with sanguinaria, in 

cou(fh preventing sleep 
Morphine, with starch or bi»mutb, locally 

to larynx in laryngeal phthisii 
Morphin, hypodermically in irritative 

ctmgh 
Myrtol 
Opium, with Ipecacuanha as tosenges to 

check sweating and to relieve irritative 

oough when due to intlamed thro4t 
PIcrotojcin, to check prespiration 
Pilocarpine, to relieve dyspncea and to 

cheek sweats 
Pix liqufdo, inhalation of tar vapour; also 

emplastrum to the eheii 
Pmnufl virgintana symp, aa a vehtolc for 

cough mixtures useful to relieve oongb 
Quinine, in large doee% to cheek sweats, 

and to lessen temperature 
Sanguinaria, promotes expeotoratioo and 

improvei apfietite 
Terebsne with thymol and carlMlic 

acid is very useful as intialation, to 

relieve dyspnoea aa a spray into the 

larynx 
Verbascum. to facilitate expectoration 

and to improve health and lessen ooogh 



External rrwiftlirj— Inhalations — Bcncoin inhalation to leaien oougb and ex- 
I otoration ; peppermint oil to the chest ; eoemata of starch and opium. 



PlAgue CBaboaic). (80^ v^l. I.pagtssi.} 



Hetladonaa, with glyoertn applie>l locally 
to the bubo and poultices 



Cocaine, hypodermically, 
carbolic 



with acid 



746 



POLYPUS. 



Plagne.— (<^^^0 



Digitalis, to sustain the heart 
Hydrocyanic acid and morphine in the 

early stage to check vomiting 
Hyoscine, with potassium bromide very 

useful 
Morpbioe, hypodermically, at the onset 

to induce sleep and to relieve distress 

and delirium 



Olea Europaea, as ino::ction 

Poultices if the buboes are red and 

inflamed 
Sparteine, to support the heart 
Strophaothu9, to sustain the heart 
Strychine, in .he early stage alone or with 

ammonium carbonate in the later stage 

when the pulse begins to fail 



Plenritifl. iSee Vol. y, jMUfe 5o4.) 



Aconite with tincture opium in the early 

stage prior to the stage of effusion 
Ammoniacum, vdth mercurial plaster to 

the chest 
Apocjnum canoabinum, fluid extract, 

as hydragogue in pleuritic efFusion 
Aspiration if effusion is great 
Belladonna plaster or liniment to relieve 

pain due to old adhesions 
Bryonia tincture, in the secondary stage. 

very useful 
Burgundy pitch plaster to the chest as a 

mechanical support 
Digitalis, as antipyretic 
Guaiacol, locally to promote absorption 

of the effusion 



Jaborandi leaves infusion, to caose absorp- 
tion of effusion 

Morphine, hypodermically or opium 
internally in the banning to cut short 
the attack ; also to relieve pain 

Pilocarpine nitrate, to absorb flaida, 
but is too depressing 

Pleurisy root is useful 

Quinine, with morphine to abort the 
disease ; also as a restorative tonic 
in low state of the system 

Veratium viride tincture, given till pulse 
is re^iuced or nnusea occurs 

Scilla. with digitalis aad mercury inter- 
nally is useful 

Strapping the chest 



Pneamonla. {See Vol, /, page S55.) 



Aconite, useful in catarrhal and fibrinous 
forms. In the early stage it cuts short 
the attack; useful to reduce drculatiou 

Apomorphine hydrochlorate is useful 

Belladonna, in the first stage as an adju- 
vant to digitalis to soothe the irri- 
table nervous system and to diminish 
profuse secretion 

Bryonia of service when pleura is affected. 
It assists absorption and limits effusion 

Cwmphor, morphia hydrochloride and 
antipyrin, internally to reduce pyrexia 
better than quinine 

Camphor in olive oil hypodermically 
in fibrinous pneumonia to lower 
the pulse and to ameliorate general 
condition 

Digitalis, t^ slow the heart with bella- 
donna as an adjuvant 

Ergot, in croupous variety very useful 

ipecacuanha wine, to promote expector- 
ation and to regulate secretion 

Muscarine Nux vomica 

Opium internally or morphine by hypo- 



dermic injection, to relieve pain and 
arrest delirium 

Poultices, jacket encircling the whole 
chest 

Quinine, to reduce the temperature. It 
acts as a tonic in asthenic casrs; very 
useful if given with aconite and vera- 
trum 

Sanguinaria, when fever has abated, to 
assist improvement 

Senega, in later stages, as expectorant 
when the cough is dry, irritative and 
painful, with tightness in the chest 

Serpen taria with ammonium carbonate^ 
as stimulant about the crisis 

Strychnine hypodermically, for impend- 
ing heart failure, or internally 
with alcohol if respiration is em- 
barassed or for impending heart 
failure 

Turpentine as stimulant durinf? crisis 

Veratrnm viride, like aconite to reduce 
the circulation ; useful in the early 
stage 



Polypus {See Vol, /, page 656.) 



Acid acetic glacial, as injection into the 
growth, to cause it to shrink 



Sanguinaria, as snuff for nasal polypi 
Tannin powder, as snuff 



PRURIGO. 



747 



Pregnancyt Disorders of as Albuminuria : Vomiting \ Ptyaltsm. &c. 

(5r<7 To/* /, pa^e 660.} 



Aloe«t to remove contti potion ind to 

care piles 
Berborlne, to relieve penodio Qearidgic 

pAiiiB ; better than quinine 
Cftlt?mbRf opium, bisnmth and &ntfBpaa* 

mo<11c5 to relievo gaetrodynin aad 

pyrneis 
Camphor linimeot, locally to relieve 

hirnbur paine 
CMtor oil, to clear oat the bowels and 

thus to che<;k diarrhcDa 
Cateohti, tiTinin or alum as me<Hcated 



pessaries, to lessen wbStes 

Cocoulas indtens, to remove flatulence 

and lessen fre<inent desire to micturate 

which is due to pressure on the bladder 

Digitalis Snf uglon to lessen albuminuria 

Galls witb opiani as ointment to relieve 

pain of biL*morrhoidsi 
denna confection, to relieve constipation 
Sunibul, a« tincture with chloric ether 
gives sleep at sight and relioves 
restlessnead 
Tannin pessaries, to lessen leucarrhccA 



FrolapSUB Ani* (•Scr Voh A patje $36,} 



AoRois arabicft, decoction in local 

prolapse 
Acid taTuiic hj iojeciion into the rectum 
Ergotln or Ergot fluid extract, injected 

hypOfltTiuicalljr into the perinieutn gives 

rrn mediate reliel 
Excision of the proli^kse 
Hydmstia, as rectal enema or lotion 
Rrameiria extract, with morphia as Bup^ 

poaitory 
^ut gallH as oiutmeni locally 
Nux vomioa extract or tincture with rhu* 



barb m prolapee in ehUdrea with 

constipation 

FsidiuMi pyrlferum decoction, locally In 
proUipsc 

Pad or T. hauda^^e as mecbafjical support 

Ptioica i^raaatun cortex and leaves 
locnJly 

S try oh nine, bypodormically to be in- 
jected into the cellular tissue parallel 
to the rectum 

S4)ymiilii fel)rifuga, hiCAlIy In prolapse. 



Prolapsus TTteri. (S'*^ y< A p<^*j* <*^^d 



Auisomcles malabarious 

Catechu, Lannin, kino, rbAtany, 0^^ 

quercui bfirk or pomegtanate nark 

as astringent locally 
Cimicifuga, to prevent miscarriage in 



prolapse 
Hamamelis 
Mechanicnl §upport 
I'eganum harmala 
Rhus aroma tic us 



Proatatlti8-'Pro6tAt6 enlarged or birpertrophied. (^s V^l /, f^s^ SS7,) 



/jtai-osma betulina 
#lbters to thi.* perineum 
Colchicum, in perK)nH of gouty diathesis 

if jmMlAto is hypcrtrophied 
Hydmngea 
Hydrastis, internmlly and locally very 

useful 
Prostate dried 
8alix nigra 



Saw i>almetto, aett on the glands of the 
fepro<luetive organs, tuod to Increase Its 
activity, aod to promote secretion 

Testicles dried 

Trtticum repens useful in ealarged pro- 
state of old men 

Turpentine oil 

Ova arsi 



ProstatorrhoBa. 



Atropine, with potassium bromide 
£rgot, to lessen relaxation 



Hydrastis is usefal locally 



PlJrtoO* (^ ^»^- ^« pa0t667,) 



Aconite or conium ointment 
Belladonna, is useful in olMtioate cases 
Cocaine solution, 5 p.c. or oleate loeally 
Juniper leaves as vapour 
"snuiol ointment 



Quinine, in large dosee to oontrol eiai* 
oerbations 

Stavesacrc ointment 

Tar oiutm&Qt 

VeiiAtrfa asotntmcnt and intenmtly 



74^ 



PTTAUSM. 



(&r rW. l^pmft .i^.) 



hckliAm ^4 pern* locally to lelieve ftdiiiig 
of pnirltof and of leabies 

BenxosD compound, Uoetere as paiot oo 
the tkiD ia onSearia aad to rdieTe 
itcfaing of ecKatia 

Brucin^, 90 px »#l8tioB loeallj applied 
if asefa! in cbromc praritas 

Campfeor with f-hlonl, the liqoid so 
f<xmtfi :i» oicd asaa oiatmeat with 
TMtliDe ss antipmritle or mixed with 
dastiog puwders to aUsj heat and 
itehinf of vctenuL and intertrigo 

Cocaine, 5 p c. solntion or create, to 
relieve itching of scrotal eesema, of 
pniritos anl, or of pmritns podendi 



GelsrBfara tinetarp, interaaDy to le- 

fit re iTcfaing 
Hjdfoc>anic acid, as lotjo a skif or wilk 

bonx or laand waiai lurfiil for 



Menthol, vetyasi fill 

PipetaziBe. bkIbI to relieve pnuii— 

aric aeid diatheas 
Tar ointment or tar and inlphnr i 

oKfol for general prartta# 
Tobaooo, loeallj is oxfal, Imt mast be 

Qsed with care 
Tmninol tincture, is oaed loeallj with 

benefit 



PSOflJUds. iStt rW. /, pafe 5S9.) 



Acid chrjsophanic ointment 

Acid pjrogallic ointment 

Aothrsfobin locally 

Betola pyroligni oil, locally 

Black dammcT 

Cbryiarobin in rose arater pomade or 

with petroleum or vaseline pomade 

locally applied to each spoL It often 

irritates 
Coptit teeta, veiy osef ol 
Cliaalmoogra oil 
Gyiioeardia oil, mads hot 'and applied 

locally 
Hiale de cade, as ointment externally 
India-mbber solution to form a coating 



Jnniperis oleom with olive oil, as 

application 
Lappa major tinciore of s ee ds made ia 

whisky 
Mexereon. a nsefaf adjunct 
Oils and fats as oodHver oil« alnond otL 

olive oil externally to lubricate tha 

skin in strumous eases 
Pongamia glabra oil 
Pitch, liquor pieis with hydrargjri nitrmtis 

locally as ointment 
Plantain, locally as poultice 
Tar ointment, or as a paint in obstinate 



Ulmns 



/ar;/iv^a.— Chrysarobin, 10; solieylic acid, 10; ether, 15; oollodion» 100: 
Pigment, for application. 

(2) Salicylic acid, 26 grs.; pyrogallic acid, SO grs.; ichthyol, 50 gta.; Taaelina, 
6 (Irs., soft Boap, 4 drs. ; for application. 



Ptoda. 



Ergot, infusion used as coUyriam for 

the lids 
Electricity 
Operation of shortening the lid if neces- 



sary 
Veratrine, with other, and alcohol 
to brush over the eye-lids, browi and 
temples 



Ptyalism. iSee Vol, /, page 5G0.) 



Atropine, hypo<lermicalIy when ptyalism 
is the result of some reflex action and 
not flue to any drug poison 

Belladoona. useful in ptyalism due to 
mercury or to prcgnanoy 

Calabar bean 

Hyoscine, b very nsefid 

Myrrh 

Opium may be used instead of atropine 



Peliitory, to ntimulate the salivary gland 
to eliminate the drug poison as 
mercury, iodine, ICc ; to be avoided if 
the gums are swollen and ulcerated 

Santalum album 

Tannin or vegetable astringents as 
gargle in ptyalism from mercury when 
the gums are swollen and ulcerated 





S^^^^^^^^^^749 ^^H 


^^^^^^^^^^^^^V Puerperal ^^| 


Cistor oil, err rhubarb to slimalAtc the 


Opium tincture, alone or with filtcmttvfe ^^^| 


bowel* ftltcr the 4th day 


to relieve intestinal irritation, t<i arrest ^^^| 


Clmteifiij^, In urcut deprenfon and 


diarrheas, and to relieve ahock and ex- ^^^| 


hTpochornirlftsHis 


ahuPtlon ^^^| 


Enema, aftur the I bird d^y 


^^1 


Puerperal Fever. iS^'' r^. ^ ^i^r 5«/.) ^^ 


Aconite^ ilrop dmcs Alonu or with caBtor 


temperature ^^H 


oil 


Stramonium, to relieve cerebral excite* ^^H 


Araic* tincture, if lochia ia excewlvo 


^^H 


CuiTite. to rr 'iy membrano or por- 


Turpentine stupes to the abdomen if ^^H 


ifon of V 1 


there is tympanitisor where the uterine ^^H 


Digitnlis, h) , : iiiilly 


discharge is altogether suspended; alao ^^H 


Lapurotoray 


in distention of the aUlomeu; or given ^^H 


Opuim, to rcIlATfl wakefoUieM and 


internally wben there is depresaion of ^^H 


^^L dcltriuirif to allay paiQ and to reduce 


the vasomotor nervous system with ^^^| 


^^H excMeiuont ut itj^ iicrfoua andraacalar 


weak heart and tynipauitis ^^^| 


^^" ^yfttcnig. Laudanum aa fomcntatiou or 


Yeratrum viride is very useful ^^H 


■ hut potiltioea 


Warberj^'s tincturei is very uselul in ^^^| 


^^_ Qntnlne, in Urge doMt to redu<3« 


puerperal malarial fever ^^H 


^1 Puerperal Maula and MelanelioUa. (5^ v^. I page sai.y ^^ 


^^M Aconite tincturia to ({uiet tlic pucrperni 


Opiutti, to allay IrriUtion and relieve ^^H 


^^H redtletsneta and nianla and to leaicn 


re^tlesBnoas ^^H 


^^H hiufh fuver ; reiy useful if ^fvcn soon 


Quiuine in cold and sweating akin with ^^H 


^^B ^fier M chill 


much weakne^K ^^H 


^^1 Cimic:iru^'i»» v<*ry uaeful in relieTlng manhi 


Strnmonium tincture, to allay cerebral ^^H 


^^B nnd hypochondrioais 


excit«mcnt» t^i Mothe the nervooa ^^H 


^H Daboiftinc, a nice calmative hypnotic ; 


system, to check <leliHuiu if mild or ^^H 


^^1 4ulKta the ncrvoui system in piicr{>eral 


furious but intermittent and to re* ^^H 


^^H 


move tendency to suicide or to destroy ^^H 


^^1 HvoKtyamuSf in milder caaet to relti^ve 


the child ^H 


^^M aeriroud ezciteaient 


Weaning h imperative In melancholia ^^H 


^H Puerperal Peritoultis* ^^ 


^^^^^ Aconite, extinct * early ttage 


rium and Ut procure sleep; uacfut in ^^H 


^^^^^KApooynum rjitiufibiniiiSf tlujd extract 


ailynamic cases ^^H 


^^^^^f CunicifukTA, in gn^At depresaion of spirit 


Quinine «looe c»r with opium* at» ^^H 


^^^^^ eBjKrt'isaly iu th« theiimAtic form 


antipyretic ^^H 


^^M CocculuM iudicui», 10 r«mo7e tympanitis 


Stramonium, if there is cerebral excite- ^^H 


^^H and \min 


^^H 


^^H Dover'B povvii«T 


Tur)>entine, as eooma or as hot atupea to ^^H 


^^B Morphiii hypcjdermically 


tUe abdomen, or internally in tym- ^^H 


^^H Opium, or aconite in cerebral irritation. 


pautiCa at a vasomotor depreaMiit ^^H 


^^^^^ to present exliauation. to check deli- 


Veratrum viride with morphia ^^H 


^^^V Fnoela. (^^ 


Vol, J, page SSS.) ^^M 


^^m Almond burned with salt and pepper* to 


acid in atonic dyapcpaia, heart burn, ^^| 


^^H relieve heart burn 


and hiccough ^^H 


^^1 Capaicamf in atonic dyspepsia, with heart 


Podophyltin, in obstinate heart burn ^^B 


^^H bam and diarrhcpa 


with liver derangement ^^M 


^^H Catechu, kino and other aKtringenta 


Palsatilla, to relieve^ heartbom of dya- ^^M 


^^H and bitter inf csioos to rdicirt; water 


pepaia ^^H 


^M braah 


Rhubarb, with ginger, to relieve heart ^^H 


^^^^^ Knx vomica tfnx^t , with dilate nitric 


burn ^^^1 



750 



RHEUMATISM. 



Bectnm (Diseases of); Ulceration of Bectum. {See Vol. /, page S62.) 



Belladonna extract alone or with mercn- 

rial ointment locally to fissures, and to 

irritable ulcers, to relieve burning pain 

following defcBcation 
Castor oil, a mild laxative in fissures, 

and haemorrhoids 
Oooaine (1 in 10) of glycerin and starch, 

locally applied with a pipe, controls 

spasm of the rectum 
CoDfectio sennsQ, with sulphur as stimu- 

lant in fistula, ulcers, and hseoior* 

rhoids 
Coninm extract, to relieve pain and 

irritability of cancer of the rectum 



Division of the sphincter in ulcers or 
fissures and snlMequent healing by 
granulations 

Incision through the mucous membrane 

Pepper confection, internally a nice 
stimulant in fistula, ulcers and haemor- 
rhoids 

Podophyilin, internally to relieve pro- 
lapse of the rectum 

Spigelia aothelmia decoction, internally, 
the succus is used as an enema 

Stramonium ointment, u useful to relieve 
pain 



Betina (Affections of) ; Retinitis. 



Atropine in retinitis due to strain 
Bark glasses 
Bserine 

Physostigmine, locally to contract the 
pupil and to diminish the amount of 



light admitted into the eye in optic 
neuritis 
Pilocarpine useful in detached retina and 
optic neuritis 



Bhenmatism> Acute and Cnironic iS-e Vol. /, page 563.) 



Absinthe 

Aconite extract, if there is much heat 
with dry skin. It relieves pain in in- 
flamed joints and shortens fever. If 
given from the onset it prevents organic 
cardiac complication. As a plaster or as 
liniment it is useful in chronic and 
subacute rheumatism. It is a valuable 
adjanct toother remedies 

Acupuncture 

A corns calamus, with cashew nut locally 

Aletris is useful 

Andropogan citratum as embrocation 

Anisomeles malabaricus oil from leaves 
locally 

Arnica tincture or infusion, useful to 
lower the temperature, to relieve arti- 
cular pain and swelling, and to diminish 
urea. 

Aqua puncture 

Atropine, bypodermically as an anodyne 
or as a prophylactic, in the vicinity of 
the affected part 

Bryonia, to relieve pain and stiffness of 
joints after the swelling has subsided 

Burgundy pitch as plaster, locally 

Capsicum oleo resin with lard, 1 to 4, to 
rub over the joints 

Chimaphilla extract, internally useful 
if lithiasis is present 

Cimicifuga, is useful to relieve the pain 
speedily in rheumatic or neuralgic head- 
aches, and in rheumatism of the uterus; 
also in lumbago and pleurodynia 



Colchicine, with quinine and colocynthi- 

dine, is very useful in shortening the 

duration and alleviating pain in chronic 

form 
Digitalis infusion, 4 drs., or powder, 2grB.» 

with morphine bypodermically and a 

blister over the proecordium in cardiac 

complications with cyanosis and 

oedema. 
Dulcamara, very useful in persons subject 

to cold or catarrh 
Eucalyptus leaves, as local stimulant 

wrapped up over the joints very useful ; 

but they would cause vesication of the 

skin if long continued 
Euphorbia antiquorum, the juice is 

used as embrocation 
Gaultheria oil, as emulsion, a subatitnte 

for salicylic acid 
Guaiacum Mmmoniated tincture, in milk 

is useful in cbrouic cases 
Ichthalbin internally, very useful. 

Ichthyol as o:uimenc (I to 2 of lard), or 

as liniment with turpentine, or with 

olive oil and chloroform 
Jaborandi, to act oii the skin 
Jatropba curcas, oil as embrocation or as 

rubefacient 
Lupulin, as an auodyne to relieve pain 
Manaca fluid extract, or the root used to 

shorten the attacks 
Menthol, ointment locally to the joints 
Mezereon is very uieful 



RHEUMATISM. 75I 

Blieiiiiiatism.*C' ofitd.^ 

Mesua ferrea, oil of seeds locally after stage; interually in subacute or 

Morphine acetas, hypodermically if there chronic muscular or tendinous form 

is cardiac complication when the pain is worse at night 

Myristica officinalis, the oil, locally Sassafras officinalis, in chronic cases if 

Nicotiana tabacum, the leaves made hot circulation is languid 

and applied locally Spigelia anthelmia, to relieve canKac 

Ocymum gratissimum for baths or for complication to allay pericarditis and 

fumigation endocarditis; also in rheumatic fever, 

Opium, as anti-rheumatic» very useful with pain shifting from joint to joint 

in rheumatic cardiac inflammation Thuja occidentalis, to relieve rheumatic 

Pilocarpine, hypodermically to act on pains 

the skin in musculnr rheumatism Turpentine, relieyes the pain when 

Plumbago rosea, root with oil as embro- applied externally as liniioeat or given 

cation internally 

Quinine bromide, or quinine salicylas, as Veratrum viride, in small doses alone or 

antipyrr^tio useful in insomnia with opium, is useful as antipyretic 

Quinine and iron as tonic, in the later Vitcx negundo, locally to swelled joints 

Ktnge or as vapour bath 

Rhus toxicodendron, externally as lini- Xanthoxylum fluid extract, externally 

ment, or as lotion, on compresses or in muscular form 

as plaster or ointment is very useful in 

Ejrternal remedies, — Electricity — massage ; hot pack, compresses ; application of 
ice. of cold, of ice and salt ; baths of steam or vapour or of mineral waters ; pine leaf 
made hot as fomentation; mustard plaster ; packing splinti for fixation of limb ; 
blisters flying. 

Formula — Asafetida, derris uliginoea bark , garlic, plumbfgo root, and gortel. 
Medicated oil as application. 

Turpentine, camphor, liquor ammonia, capsicum, alcohol and mustard oil as 
liniment 

Acidi arseniosi, \ gr. ; pulvis guaiaci, 30 grs. ; puMs capsici, 10 grs. ; pil aloes et 
asafetida, 60 grs. Make pills 36. Dose 2 pills. In chronic rheumatism. 

Syrup — Pulvis gnaiaci resin, 10 grs. ; potas iodid, 10 grs. ; tinct. catechu, 2dr.; 
tinct. cinnamon, 2 dr.; syrup, 2 drs. Mix. Dose, \ dr. In chronic rhennuitism. 

Mlxture^Olbi gaultheriae, 30 ms.; acidi salicylici, 30 grs. ; syrup picis liqnida, 
2 drs.; potaasii iodidi, 60 grs.; aquae menthae-pip, 6 os. Dose, 4 dn., three times a day. 
In acute rheumatism, 

LimentHf— Olei sinapis. 1 ; ammonisB liquor, 1; olei terebinthinae 1; olei origani,l; 
ol. hemlock, 1; ol. sassafras, 1 ; spt. camphor, \\ opium, 1 ; cayenne pepper, 1 ; alcohol, 
60 ; tinct capsici, 1. Mix ; in chronic cases used as paint. 

Bhenmatism, Muscular ; Lumbago, Neuritis ; Pleurodynia, Ohronic 

Torticollis, te., (.S^-e Vol. /, page 565.) 

Cajuput oil, externally and internally the muscles affected 

Capsicum powder with lard 1 to 4 Dover's powder as diaphoretic 

locally applied with benefit Jaborandi, hypodermically to act on the 

Cimicifuga, very useful in lumbago, skin 

myalgia, pleurodynia, &c. Morphine, and atropine hypodermioally. 

Colchicine, solution hypodermically into of great benefit 



752 



SCLEROSIS.. 



Rhinitis ; Gold in the Head. 



Camphor in solution alone or with caffeine 
and ether hypodermically 

Cocaine solution, 5 p. c, on cotton to stuff 
into the nostrils or used as spray into 
them ; useful in the early stage 

Cubeb with linveed tea 

Dover's powder, to abort cold 



Galvano cautery 

Intra-nasal operation 

Menthol with chlorlform as inhalation; 

a prophylactic it is very useful 
Pulsatilla 
Quilaja saponaria 



For mula^Tmct^tLConitet 12 ms,; tinct. belladonna, 25 ms. ; morphine aalphate, 
igr. ; pot. bromide, 60 grs.; spt menthse piperetae, 20 ms.; aquse, 2 oi. Doee, ^th. 

Oocaine, 2 grs.; ol. pini, 5 ms,; ol. eucalypti, 2 ms. ; menthol, 1 gr. ; thymol 
2 grs.; sodae biboras, 20 grs. A teaspoonful in an ounce of warm water. Used 
as spray. 



Bingworm of the Body ; Tinea Oircinata ; Trichophyton 
Tonsurans. 



Butea froiidosa, seeds with lime juice 

for rubbing 
Cassia lata tincture of the leaves as 

pamt, or the crushed leaves well rubbed 

on the part 
Chaulmugra oil 

Chrysophanic acid, with vaseline 
Cocculus indicus, decoction locally 



applied 
Eamsla locally 

Letoea macrophylla, as a paste 
Oil of tar with iodine, locally 
Papaya juice, locally applied 
Tar, pixliquida ointment 
Vista tricolor leaves, well rubbed over 

the part 



Sciatica. 



Aconitine, locally as ointment useful in 

obstinate cases 
Acupuncture 
Apomorphine, hypodermically is useful 

to relieve pain in obstinate cases 
Aqua puncture 
Atropine, hypodermically in the vicinity 

of nerve 
Baths turkish 
Belladonna Kives relief 
Cimicifnga, very useful 
Cocaine, 4 p. c. solution, hypodermically 

alont? the course of the nerve 
Duboisine, a good substitute for atropine, 

hypodermically very useful 
Onaiacol, locally painted over the nerve, 

acts as a local anesthetic 
Gelaeminm, with pot. iodid, very useful 
Menthol locally applied 



Morphine, hypodermically should be 
injected deeply into the adjacent 
muscular tissue 

Nerve stretching 

Nux vomica, in chronic sciatica very 
useful 

Opium, internally and locally 

Pichi extract 

Rannnculus bGlbo6a,flnid extract, inter- 
nally 

Rhus toxicodendron, fluid extract inter- 
nally useful in rheumatic affectioca of 
fibrous tissues 

Sarsaparilla with potas iodid, very useful 

Stramonium, is useful ; to be avoided 
if symptoms of narcotism appear 

Turpentine sometimes of value 

Veratrine, locally as oleate or as oint- 
ment, or internally as tincture 



Sclerosis ; Atheroma- (See Vol. /., page 568.) 

Belladoona, useful to retard the progress Hyoscyamus 

Digitoxin Physostigmine 

Brgot Strychnine 



SKIN KRUPTIONS. 



ScrofiiJA* i'Sfi 

B€rbert8 sqoifolium. 

Cftpsicuro iBfutton. as stimuliui^ in loro* 

ftilous Bad fistulous uloerattons 
Cetrihriii {fllftodiea 
CbitDiiphlin atnb«l)aU extract. 
Conine^ iu oH\ri'oil fipplini to theconjutic- 

tivic in scrofulous pbotaphobia 
Conium tnaoulatoDQ lenveg, local Jy to 

ulcers 
Szciik«ii or scraping of gland and pookiog 

with fmlofomi gauK« 
FaIsm inuuciioQ 



Galium nparine 

Gcntmti, a tuK^al yehlcle for chatjbe&ten 

Grape cure 

Uyosoyaiiius, leaves bruised as poultice or 

cataplaitm over scrofulous ttlcerv 
Mc Dade's combined Huid extract (luccua 

alteranp) 
Mecereum. v^ry useful 
Frutttis Tir^inUnft, to check hectic fcvei 
Saraaparilla extract aa tooicand allcia> 

tive 
Stilliiiglaj la very osefal 



Scurvy. (**^ Vd, /, j»*^<" 5^0,) 



Acid citric or tartaric, as prcTentive 
Aconite, if theic Is »toniatitis with faliva- 

lion 
Atropine, Uypo<lermlcally, if profuse sali- 

Averrhoii biUmbr.or carumbola {nioffiallj 

Cctraijii iFlandictt 

Cinchona tinctare, with coyrrli or with 

chinrntcs as ^r^le 
Cttrua aurantium, linioni^ or medica, as 

preventive ; ibc efficacy is doc to j>ot- 

»«*iuai mhHs itccntainii 
EIK<•^ inUTiuiHy to restrain iiM^tm>rrbagi> 
KrythroxyloD coca 



Feronia elepbantum 

Lemon J nice, prevent ire and curative 

Mall 

Myrrh tincture, with alum or with |iotaB- 

sium chlorate as lotion for ulceration 

of tills ^ums 
Quinine, with niineral acids when much 

prostmtion 
Tamiirindu«i iodicns 
Thuja occidentAlistinct 
Vf^|^tabie charooal, as tooth powder to 

remove fcctid odour 
Vinegar 
Vitis tiuadrangularia 



Bepticauma ; Fyaen^ia. i^ea V^L I,pit0eS69.y 



Qqininc, in (ar}f<3 dn^esi to d^iuinifii the 

tempi>ralnr€ 
Caryophilli oilf as antiseptic 



GauHhcriaoll, as aotiseptb 
Thyme oil, aB anlitteptic 



Shock after QperatioQB (Set r«.Z. /, juifje S7o,) 



Atropine and belliulonoa, hypotierrtuc- 
iiUy 

Co<Ujin<*, liy^KKterndoidly after lapar- 
atomy to rcHcvt? p»in, to prevent intest- 
inal coQiraction, nnd to relax tonic 
sinifims of ve(8cls in the (irtii sta^X! of 
shock OS known by suiaU and rapid 
pulse 

'Digifalin. with atropine bypodtrmicaUy 
U very oaefal In the icgonil stage of 



paresis of the veasela 
Kr^otine 
Morphine, a telaxer of spaams of vesseli 

in the first «tage of shock 
Strychnine, byptKlermically in the second 

or paretic «t«tc when the pulse i» woak, 

soft and cr^mpresalble 
Turp«*utinc ^tiipcss, intemally or rubbing 

over the limbs 



Skin Emptions • the result af Drags administered internally or locally 



applied- 

Aconite vcaieuUr exanthemata 
^)ple<« acue about the mouth 
M^cplne erytbctiia like the iu>h «il scnr. 



I 1 >, erythema 

t ,,^.v., ,..., utticaria 
Cinchona, (|uimnt\ tike 



ovrbulic add 



^t rychnlne.ery thetna,papalar eruptions^ 
1 urputn hiL^morrhi^lca, |>cmphigus on 
thf* fare nnd nei^.k and ihcn on the 
whole Iju^iy 
Co'P**'l''^ '^^^ <.ub«^bsi, erythema, urticaria, 
e(*«ema, pemphigus, ronh on aokles aad 
wrist t» 



754 



SPASMODIC AFFECTIONS. 



Skin EmptionB'-^ontd. 



Croton oil, locally applied, papules and 
pustules 

Digitalis, erythema 

Opium, morphine, codeine '.— erythema, 
itching, papules and marked desquama- 
tion 

Rhus toxicodendroD, and other varietes 
of senna intolerable itching, vesicles 



and pustules 
Santonine pemphigus and vesicle 
Strawberries, urticaria 
Tar, acne 

Turpentine, like copaiba 
Walnuts, inflammation of the buccal 

mucous membrane 



Sore Throat. 



Acetum, hot vinegar inhalation 

Acid tannic or gallic as' spray or dusting 

powder or gargle, very useful 
Aconite tincture when tempnature is 

high ; useful in ordinary sore throat 
Althcea with borax and sodium salicylate 
Aristolochia serpentaria. locally a^ gargle 
Belladonna alone or with aconite in high 

fever lo relieve spasm of the pharyn- 
geal muscles 
Cochlearia armoracia, as gargle 
Capsicum tincture as gargle in relaxed 

sore throat 
Catechu, as astringent gargle 
Oimicifuga tincture, in simple sore throat 

or in malignant sore throat when the 

pharynx is dry and covered with 

mucus. Given with opium and syrup 

of tolu in acute catarrh 
Cnbeb powder, locally as insuiiiation 
Olyccrrhisa glabra 
Guaiacum, compound tincture, as gargle 

in simple sore throat and commencing 

toubillttis 
Hydrastis fluid extract, as gargle in 

chronic sore throat and in follicular 

Inhalation of vapours or of pulverised fluid by atomiser. 

Formula. — Terminal ia belerica, rock salt, piper longum, eloves, liquorice and 
himaja, equal parts. A linctus to be kept in the mouth ; used in hoarsenesi, aore 
throat, cough and catarrh. 



pharyngitis 

Ipecacuanha wine, as spray, very uaef ol 

in hoaseness and in inflammatory sore 

throat due to congestion of vocals cords 

Eanchan chhal, decoction as gargle 

Meriandra strobilifera, infusion of leaves 

as gargle 
Moringa pterygosperma, infusion of bark 

as gargle 
Myrrh, as gargle in ulcerated condition 

of the throat 
Phytolacca, internally and as gargle 
Pulsatilla, in acute corysa without gastric 

irritation 
Punica granatom bark, as gargle 
Rhus glabra, decoction with potassiuiD 

chlorate as gargle 
Sanguinaria tincture as spray 
Soymida febrifuga, the bark as gargle 
Tannin, as powder, gargle or spray ; with 
glycerin it is useful aft«*r acute in- 
flammation to relieve aphthoos, aore 
throat with tendency to catarrh 
Xanthoxylum, bark decoction, used aa 
gargle or internally in chronic ( 



Spftflmodic Affections. 



Aconite, internally or externally as oint- 
ment ; useful in mild local spasmodic 
afFet:tions as spasmodic laryngitis, 
asthma, cough, angina pectoris, ko, 

itropine, hypodermicallyto relieve local 
spasm 

Belladonna, to relieve spasm of sphinc- 
tors, especially of pelvic organs 

Camphor, to relieve spasm of the bladder 
causing strangury 

Cardamom, to relieve gastric spasm 

Chamomile oil, useful in pseudo-angina 
pectoris and in spasms of hysteria 

Hyoscine, very useful in various spasms 

Ipecacuanha, useful in spasm of the res- 



piratory organs 
Lobelia is us^ul 
Lupulin, in gouty spasms 
Mustard poultices, as counter-irritant in 

spasmodic affections 
Opium, useful if given with stimolants as 

alcohol, chloroform or ether 
Strychnine, useful in spasmodic asthma, 

chorea, epilepsy, tetanus, te, 
Sumbnl, to relieve gastric spasms 
Tobacco, to relieve muscnlsr spasms, mad 

spasmodic asthom 
Veratrine solutiouy locally applied to 

the eye lids to relieve spasm of the 

orbicularis 



STOMATlTfS. 



755 



SplDEl CongeBtion and Oonoiission. BpUxMl Irritation. C*^' rw, /, /w^ S7S^ 



Aco aieur locAlij in coogication 

tv Ml 

An iiicuwion 

Be I [}• ; better thin aooDite 

to lelicve iintation 
BleeiUog to reUeye the hoftrt In cod cub- 

»ion 
Erifot, tn large dosos 
Leecliw to the column 
Opium , lead lotion in ooncuision over the 

Bear of injury 



Turpeotine stupes or ■§ hot epithcm 
Vtncgtr« to restore ooiiaoiouneKfi 
BU«t«rs to fpine 
Coo i urn, to relieve irrit^billtj of the 

r«ttex functiou of the cord 
I^oatla, todtmlai«h irrltAbiHty ofcerehro* 

epinal nxis 
Str^chnitte, to Mimu!ate the depn*««d 

Dorve centres, to relieve wnttdvrtnf 

pftint due to trritablUty of the neirotia 

ajatexn 



Spinal P&r&lyBU or Softening; Locomotor Ataxia* (See V&t. J^^gn 572.) 



Eleotricitj* to th« spine ind to nerves 

nod masoles 
Ergot, in hyperemia of Ibe cord, to 
occlude the spina I arteries and thus 
fftnrre intlftmmbtion 



Belladonns, \t softening it due to obronfc 

InflAmmAtion of ihc (X}r(l 
Hyosojimus, to oonth:)! tremors 
Physostigm^ In paraplegia doe to myeti- 

tts 



Spleen Affections. 

Cario» papajfti the milky juice, given 

Intenudly 
Cinchona and its prejiaratloni 
Er»ot 
LufTa amara Jn onlArgement of spleen 

due to malaria 



(Stt VM, I^jkife S7S.} 

Qainina^ siilphaa, in simple malarial 4 

lari?cment 
Quinine fluoride 
HAWndora persica 
Vitcx negundo 



/^<'r>viu/a.— Confection oontainiog-*Niahotiirf gulf el, garmAro, kadti, trfpbla^ 
Indrayani daruhalad» and nimdo equal parts with sugar. 

Or Qul-e-banaphsha, hira dakhan^ uate^kbudnf, kisinl, %*irtilee, dh&o4, and 
gannAro with sikar. 

Sterility. (-Sw Vui. i, poffe S7B,) 

Cimicifu^, if dne to congestive dysmenor* Sanguliisria 

rhufs 8tillin;;ia 

Coca extract DiLatatioo of the r rvii, when 

Bamlana, to cure sperroatorrhcca sterility it due t< .r to plug- 

Electriclty, if due to torpor of the uterus ging of the c«rv;- .....^us 

Oo^sypium radix, if due to dysmenorrhoea Intra^Uterine ^i- ir f.. -^nry* to stlmoUie 

Nux vomicatto relieve spermatonhofa the lining m< tut^mrtL^ of the uterua 



Stomatitis^ 



Acid tannic with gtycerto in ulcerative 

stomatitis 
Acacia catechu, locally applied to ulcont- 

e^i spongy gum 
Bal*ftnicMiendrun myrrha with lime water 

and honey Icjcally applied 
Cupslcum tinctute witri dilute muriatic 

acid and houey Itienlly 
CiScarilUt U>cal)y useful for tbruisb 
Cinchona, with ereta preperata and aoid 



tannic as dusting powder 
Cleansing nipples in breast-fed babies to 

prevent stomatitis 
Cocaine^ with soda salicylai and water 

as tampon or cocaine solution before 

cauteriaaiion to the ulcerated gumi 
Cydonia, infustoo of leaves locally 
KucHlyptui decoction of the leaves 

locally, or the tincture intemally 



756 



SVPHIIJS. 



GenniniD macnUtnm, as a ':rash or gargle 

inaphthc 
Hamameliy tinctnie, locally 
H jdrasti^ fluid extract, locally in apbtboia 

and mercorial ttomatitia 
Iria. ID d vfpeptic moath nlceia 
Krameria. 9» local aaUiugeut 
Meriaodra strobilifera, as infnaicii locally 

applied 
If yrrii, borax and potas chlorate topically 
Odina wodier, decoction as gai;^ 



Ocjmam gTmtieBiminii, locally as g^n^ 
Pteroearpos manaptiim, locally tor^taoBtd 

QTOla 

Rhus glabfa (aiiiiiacli), extxad asm aaostk 

wadb 
Slippery elm, locally to the i 
Starch, locally 

Thymol with borax, as a jDODth i 
Uncaria gambier, locally to nlecmtod 

gums 



Syseope. 



Atropine, bypodermically to improTc the 
force and rapidity of bearfa action and 
thus resuscitating the patient 

Belladonna, Tery nsefol in cardiac 
qmoope 

Cinnamon oil, a powerful stimulant 

Camphor, as caroiac stimulant 

Synovitis. iSte 

Aconite, to relieve pain in inflamed joints 
Bandage or strapping to cause absorption 

of t^ effused fluid 
Blisten flying after the acate stage has 

passed 
Conium, in scrofulous joints very nseful 
Cupping near the joints 
Fomentation, dry heat, or pooltioes to the 

joint in the acute stage 
Free stimulation in synovitis due to 

gonorrhoea, acute rheumatism, slight 



Duboisine, a good substitute for atrofttoe 

Lavander, compound tanetiire very aaefol 

Nux vomica tincture, to restofe caidiae 

action when there is fiuloie of the 

heart in syncope of a neurotic origin 

Difritalis, internally or hypodermieaUy in 

sudden coUapee after hjemorrfaage 

Vid. J^pofe 674,) 

injury occurring in strumous sobjt^rt 
Leei'hes to the joints 
Lotions, evaporating, of arnica, alcohol 

and water 
Morphine and mercury oleate, lineally to 

the affected joints in syphilitic cases 
Position straight 
Quinine, iron, and potassium iodide 

internally in syphilitic eases 
Splints to keep the limb motionless 

in synovitis d ue to i n j ury 



Oyphilig. iSee Vid. I. page 674.) 

Belladonna and mercury ointment in given internally 

secondary ulceration of the rectum 
Benzoic antiseptic dressing in secondary 

syphilitic ulcers 
Camphor dressing for phagedenic chan- 
cres 
Calotropis gigantea, useful in secocdary 

syphilis 
Guaiacnm, as alterative, in secondary and 

tertiary syphilis as a vehicle for potav 

sium iodide and mercuric chloride 
HemideFmoH ioHicos, internally in consti- 

tDtional syphilis 
Hydrocntyle asialica, intemnlly in secon- 

dary form 
Kola nuts, useful internally in tettiary 

form 
If anaca, in secondary and tertiary form 

FtfriHula, — Panch Nimb Churan (a powerful alterative) contains the root, leaves. 
froits, flowers and hark of limch), each 15 paiu ; loha-bhashm, himsj. tAkU l>ij, 
cbitrak. bhilAmo, vftvadinir, s&kar. kmlk, halad, trikato, bdvachi garmaro, gokharu 
each I part. Mix and add the juice of bhaugro and decoction of kher chhil, and 
make a paste. Dose, 2 to 4 drs. In syphilis. 

Uthbo. chobchini. surponkh, harde, btliadanA, t>stekbudus, senna, pastan 
kbubajee. kbatmi, rose buds, gurakhmundi, uoikb, gaojabao, and bansphshA : 
make decoction for secondary syphilis. 



Mesereon oil, in secondary cases 
Nicotiana tabacum, locally to syphilitic 

noies 
Papaine, for syphilitic dcen on the 

tongue and throat 
Plumbago rosea, intern;dly in secondary 

syphilis 
Sassafras oil in secondary cases 
SarsapariUa given with guaiacnm and as 

an adjunct to other alteratives^ 
Stillingea, in sloughing phagedena and in 

cachexia doe to breaking down bv a 

long course of mercury and iodide 

of potasium 
Saoguinaria, in secondary and tertiary 

forms, very useful 



TONGUE. 



757 



Tastidas (Swollen) ; TubercnlodB of. (S^r Vol. I, page 370.") 



Camphorated naphtbol, hypodermically 
used in tuberculosis of the testis 



Hyoscjamus 
Tectona grandis 



Tetanus. (See Vol. I.pa^e 676.) 



Aconite, very useful to control muscular 

spasms 
Antitetanic serum 
Apomorphine, as antagonistic, and 

motor paralyser 
Atropine, injected into muscle to produce 

mild ))oi8oning 
Belladonna extract, internally and locally 

to wound 
Cannabis indica, with chloral, useful in 

traumatic form 
Ourare, hypodermically is very useful 
Cocaine and morphine, hypodermically 

injectetl are very useful in relieving 

idiopathic < 



Duboisine, like atropine is very use. 

ful 
Qelsemium, its spinal action is opposed to 

that of tetanus and hence very useful 
Hyoscyamine, in traumatic cases is very 

useful 
Morphine, hypodermically injected deeply 

into tetanised muscles or to point of 

entrance of the nerves 
Nicotine by rectum, or hypodermically 
Phjsostigma, fluid extract, intenially 

better than nicotine, or by the rectum 

or hyj)odermically 
Opium, alone or with chloral 
Vapour bath, very useful 



Ertrrnal rermee^i^i.— Acupuncture on each Hide of the spine. Nerve stretching 
when a nerve is implicated in the cicatrix. Neurotomy. Baths, warm or vapour. Ice 
bag to spine. 



Thint. 



Bitters with acid drinks quench thirst by 

promoting secretion of alkoliiie saliva; 

but if given in excess, they derange the 

stom'ich 
Cascarilla or orange peel acidulated with 

dilute hydrochloric acid quenches 



thirst in fevers 
Cloves 

Fruit juices in moderation, very UHcful 
Ice suckinff quenches thirst in fevers 
Tepid drinks, quenches thirst of diabetic 

patients 



Tic Doulonrenz. (JSet Vol. /, page 676,) 



Aconite with benefit 

Atropine, hypodermically and as ointment 

Cannabis indica extract, is very useful, 

next to morphine 
Cimicifuga. very useful 
Menthol, locally applied 
Morphine with atropine, hypodermically 

is useful 
Physostigma extract, solution dropped 

within the eyelids of the affected side 



gives relief 

Pulsatilla, to relieve tic 

Quinine is very useful 

Stramonium extract, gives relief ; to be 
omitted if narcotic symptoms set in 

Turpentine, when the tic is due to rheu- 
matism or to faecal accumulations 

Vcratrine ointment 

Valerianate of zinc with hyoscyamus is 
useful 



Tongne (Affections of) ; Olossitis. (,See Vol, l.page 579 ) 



Cinnamon oil, a powerful stimulant, use- 
ful in paralysis of the tongue 

Cloves, as masticatory 

Cochle^iria as gargle 

Conium, is very useful in ulcer of the 
tongue 
49 



Froennm to be divided in tongue, tic 

Ginger, as gargle 

Mezereon, as masticatory in paralyse of 

the tongue 
Pyrethrum, as gargle 



758 



TUBERCULOSIS, 



TonsiUitlB. CSee V^l.hpageSId,') 



Aconite tincture, when there are high 
fererand increased arterial tension, 
eives relief 

Belladonna tincture, internally very 
beneficial 

Capsicum tincture gargle es in seTere 
tonsillitiB 

Cocaine, 10 p.c. solution locally to remoTe 
pain and to promote re8olnti<-n; it often 
leads to paralysis of the palate 
muscles so that liqaids regurgitate 
through the nose, it often when applied 
as a paint will cut short the attack 



Emetics, at the onset to cat abort tbe 
attack 

Ouaiacam tincture, with glyeerin inter- 
nally very effectire, giren as emulsion 
with mucilage or yolk of egg or as 
gargle in acute tonsillitis 

Morphine and mercury oleate, in obstinate 
and painful tonsillitis 

Opium, as Dover*s powder, is rery naeful 

Phytolacca 

Quinine 

Tannic acid, is useful as gargle 



Tonsils (Enlarged.) {See Vol. /, pa^e 57$,) 



Catechu, infusion with tincture of kino 
is used as gargle 

Cimicifuga, decoction of the root as gargle 
in ulcerated tonsils 

Citric acid when rubbed on tonsils re- 
moves enlargements 



Coptis teeta, the infusion as gargle in 

ulcerated tonsils 
Ergot or ergotin, by injection 
Tannin, saturated solution applied 

locally to tbe tonsils 
Scarification 



Torticollis. CSee Vol. 7, page S80.) 



Capsicum, infusion locally used 

Cimicifuga, is very useful 

Conium, when due to spasmodic action 

of the muscle 
Oelsemium, fluid extract, hypodermic 



cally administered is useful 
Opium liniment or as plaster 
Surgical treatment — nenre stretching. 
LoolU pressure 



TremorS' (See Vol. J, page SSC) 



Cocaine, to control tremors due to 
alcohol or old age 

Conine, to control excessive tremor 

Gelseminm with conium and hyoscyamus 
to palliate excessive tremor to quiet the 
nervous lystem 

Hyoscine, useful to relieve tremor, a symp- 
tom of disseminated sclerosis or of 



delirium 
Hyoscyamine 
Hyoscyamustincture,to control mercnria! 

tremor 
Spartine sulphate 
Veratnne, useful in alleviating aloobolic 

tremor or that due to disKminated 

sclerosis 



Trismus, Lackjaw, in new bom Infants. {Set 'Vol. /, page 590.) 



Belladonna 

Cannabis 

Conium 



Gelsemium 

Opium, with castor oil 

Warm bath 



Tuberculosis— Tuberculous affections. Tabes Mesenterica. 

{See Vol. /, page 580.) 



Barosma betulina 

Camphorated naphthol hypodermically 

in tuberculo»is of the testis, bladder, 

kc. 



Chaulmugra oil, in tabes 
Chocolate, or cocoa 

Quinine, to subdue the fever, aided by 
wine, and peptonized food 



URKTHK 



759 



Tsrmpanitifl CS/ff^ I'nf. F,pAge 581} 



Al>!s3Clitlu8 carnntna, in flatulence 
AfljtfetklA intemnlly, «ir »» enemn in tjm- 

jianitis, of fevt-r or in hjri»t«tia 
Ca|>f(icum, it Tcry useful 
Chftmomile ail, intemillj is tiecful 
CoccqIu« iriiticus titjclurcv nseful in tfm- 

pftnitU, due to fever or to peritonitis 



GiDfrer. Willi drAstic purgAtivrs reliereft 

tympaniU« 
Sumtial 
Turpentine, tiRefuI in t^vmpnititifi of 

typboifl fever with prostration 
Vegetftbk clmroofcl, in flutnlence 



Ulcers. Sores. (5^/- Vnl, /, /m^e^SJ,) 



Acid jfnllic 

HfiloAm of [lerti jknd tohu very lueftil 

HclloUonnA, i» big^tily efficient 

BeiixoJti, IticftUy 

Canipbor iluat4stl over indolent nlcere U 

iifieful 
Ti^fkNiruni tmcturt* at infualon b nacfal 
iy IM a miinulant in Mcrofiilout 
I ' r i anci (ifttilouN iore* 
C*ttt^clit] powder locally 
Chfireoftl poultice, locully to iloughln^ 

Mitts 

ChlmaphilU, locally useful 

Chliichona l>ark powcier, to Im> duflteil 
ovrr fuul, indolent, AJou^hfnjLf or gang* 
reoou4 ulcefB to cl«mn and ittimuUte 
the utcera and tu promote henling 

Contutn poultices^ k^r^ally to relievo pain 
and imp rove the iK>re 

H*lliAnieiifi, ia ufteful in rnriooete nloers 

Hydnutift, internally and cxt^rnallv in 
uloers of the legs, in rretiil and rotfcnt 
ulcere jtDd in uterine ulcen 



Ichtbyol olDtnefit^ useful in tilcerB of 
the leg 

Myrrh locally 

Opium or nQorpbine with glycerin inter- 
nal y or locflUy to relieve the pain in 
phagedenic and indolent ulcer» 

PajiAin 

Phytolftcca., as local application ?ery 

UM*flll 

PyrogntUc acid, n»efal in venereal ftoroa 

Khatany, h^nlly 

^anguiniiria, with glycerin to reprcai 

g ran atat ions of indoknt nlcera 
Savir - ™n Hcrid cauatic nseful to arrest 

II d ulcer 

8tar I, dusted locally 

Tanniu, wiih ^tyccriQ locally as a oontlog 

over woumls or discharging sores 
Tar wnier, locally 
Turpentine, iutrmally in ulceration of 

the bowchi; looally with olive oil to 

phagedeinc and indcdent ulcers 



i>/<ir«/// rrwrrfrV*.— Biinda^ing, cleanlinew, immert»ion of the part affected in 
hot water« reeumbt^nt posture, rest, aectiun of exposed nerve filamenta in oasei of 
irritable uloers. support, water dreasiog, and yeast poultice. 

Unemia ; Unsmic Coma, due to Narcotic Poisoning. iSte fvL /, page SSJ.) 

Mustartl poultc^s to the feet and anklea 



Apocynum canj*binura is useful 

Coffee, uM!ful indialKJtic ooma 

Croton (ul, internulty as a purgative 

Colchlcum. an excellent derivative with 
other purgatives 

Digitalis, leaves n« infusion, iDternally or 
a [touttkoe to the loins and hypo^^astriuni 
to procure free actiott of the kidneys 

Elateriufu, as a free purge. To be 
avoided if the heart is weak or fatty 
and (edema of the lungs is prceent 

Jaborandi ia unnmio coma is very usefal 



Urethni. Stricture of 
Aconite, in spattn s 

Bucha, in spasrt Nvith irritabi. 

lity of theljlau.va ...... .a t^teet 

Cocaine, 2 p.e. solution with olive oil 

£-, ./ - ... i: • ' • 1 hjrttatlon under an anJv^Nthetic in ftpa^m'xlie »lrictttTe, 
and II iinl dilatation » eleetrolysis, »|weali galvanic cnrnmt. 

injt^ti 



in eoiun due to narccHic poisoning 
Opium, in teroally or tnorphinebypodermi- 

cftlly, is very useful in urietnio conval* 

sions and, in acute unemia; to be 

a void* d in chronic uru^mia 
Pilocarpine* an acti%*c diaphoretic, nacfnl 

to relieve nnemic iyinptoms such aa 

beadacbfi, drow^loeas, and convulsions; 

to be ft voidetl in weak or fatty heart 

in ' f the lunjis 

?c<'i N iiiteiRjilly 

Tmp _ :_ j, 0i» snema ia useful 

{Set Vt*t. /, p&f§ ms,) 

locally injected intu ni 

Opium, ioteinally or i t >ry or 

fomentation as (n spHnajni^v ?iiiot(ire 



760 UTERINE AFFECTIONS- 

UxetiDltiS. i&e Vol. J,jpmfeS8S0 

AcmduL, gam umbic, to xeUeTe irritA ChiaaphiOa CTihri]«r»» ia <rhrooic cmmrn 

as an anziliary to other lemedies Oibeba, oleo nmn, iaternaU j 

Add tannic, aa medicated boogie MnrflagffioM diinki 

Aconite, in vethial slrietare (tpasmodic); M yrtoU internally in ^roate mirthritia 
if there is fever aftar passage of soond. and chrooie cjstitia 

to prevent a ebill Optnm snppoaiftOKy or fnsBf lutif to tiia 



Aknritu trtlobaf in inflammatory condi- 
tion StrophantkoB tiDetare,to piereat ehiH, 



Ajtragalos vem*. to relieTe irritation of after the paassge of iBstnunests into 

the macoua ssembrane of the bladder the nretkra 

Bncho, if the uethra is irritable: also in Tannin boogies for nrethzitia ia feawla 

stricture and gket 

Uiie Add Dimtkesis. CSee v^. i,pmft sss.} 

Boerhavia iliff— Phjllaathas aenm 

Ichaocarpat Stigmata maidis 

Piper nigmm 

F(§rmmU : — ^In brick red deposit. Sodii bihona, 3 dis. ; eztzaei wm mxaL S dnu 
spirittts ethcris nitrosi, 4 dm; tinct. opzi, 4 dr«u and aqaa^ 4 oss. Boacldr. 



Add *^-**-**«*i. or sodioB henaoate to nee. Digitalis leaves, imfnafcrn as a diai g tic . is 

traliae morfatdi alkahnit j of the arine. very aaefal ia smUea svpfsesaian oi 

to reader alkaliae arise acid, aai to ariac froa coU or damp or after scar- 

chock formation of phoa|ikstet joiaa 

Aconite, aaefal intemaiiy in retencioa of Strrekaine. iiaLfsl in 1 

arine dne to ckill aence of arine in oM pnipie 

Backa, is very aaefal in retentic-n cr isr Jiixx 

contineBeeof aiiae in cystic catarrh, 

implicatiag kiiaeys or aiecers TupcntxasL 

rv*ir*>>** imSea. in refentien of szae dae bw3ody nriae, in 

CO «aal diseaaes dsetaaaaBy of the 1 





Copaiba, m drop 

ocoizateii: althocgk a fall 

proiaoeatx 
Jabocandi laid eztaet, to al^ ircka^ 



BeCift5kaaa««itk 1 

; 2«&e^>e painvi 

Cazjr^^llxm taalietica&ck. a re : i DtY::sate is very 

cc*.^'zsem> 

Ctoittshi» indaea. tf^ aumj uoiTmikie «r 3^- mxt^mgez m an ^iaefiunL :: : 

til I1 11 r? f«=B» <vtb£ pkzx. «f eucvr tircn.-n ^icm.jjml ^. Ix. Jar^ 

Ct^^^itLLttt* caecr.. if- aliev^aae t.a:x mjz^z fa^-Lr-wuiaen cseru zia :my 

TiL^Te acJC&iftl:Ty and z^ rr-rrte 




VERTIGO. 761 

Uterine Affections.— (^^m^^'O 

Erigeron canadense, a nterine Bedative, Ipecacuanha, in tnbacate metritis during 

useful to relieve pain and irritability the puerperal state 

Hydrastis, fluid extract, locally applied io Opium with starch as recUl injection, to 

ulceration and erosion of oerrix, and relieve pain and irritation in csncer 

also given internally in leucorrhcsa and Tannin, locally in uterine ulceration 
to check uterine haemorrhages 

External rMn^diM.— Injections, hot water or hot douche ; and rest. 

Uvnla Belazed. {See VoL /, page S90.) 

Acacia catechu, locally applied to relaxed gent, 20 p. c. solutioui useful for en- 
uvula larged and elongated uvula 

Acetum, hot vinegar by inhalation Quercus bark, as infusion used as gargle 

Anacyclus pyretbrum, to chew in relaxed in spongy gums, and relaxed uvuSi 

uvula Rhatany, useful for relaxed uvula 

Amputation of the elongated uvula after Pyretbrum, to chew in relaxed uvula 

application of cocaine solution, 20 p. c. Soymida febrifoga, locally applied to 

Casftia auriculata, decoction as a gargle relaxed uvula 

in relaxed uvula Tannin, a useful astringent for relaxed 

Capsicum infusion as gargle uvula 

Cinchona, decoction as gargle or given Uncaria gambler, locally applied to re- 
in tcrnally laxed uvula 

Cocaine, with krameria as a local astrin- 

Vaginismusi DysiMuiraniA ; Vaginal Irritation. (See Vol. /, page S90.) 

Belladonna extract 1 and lard 8; or bella- Ice 

donna and iodoform as pessary to Krameria pessaries 

relieve pain Menthol 

Cocaine ointment, with morphine and Morphine 

conium to be smeared ovrr the painful Opium 

spot Sedatives 

Hygiene, fresh air, hot water injection Tropa cocaine 

Fifrmula, —Butter of cocao, 2 grs. : potassii bromidi, 6 grs,; belladonna extract, 3 
grs. ; acid thymic, | gr. Make vaginal suppository. For vaginismus. 

Vaginitis . iScf Vol. /, page $90.) 

Acid tannic, with glycerin locally in Vaginal pessaries : Butter of cocoa as ex- 
chronic vaginitis cipient with sedative agents as atropine, 

Caulophyllum thalictroides, very useful morphia, opium, and belladonna 

locally Vaginal astringent injections oontaining 

Opium with emollients as vaginal alum, iron, catechu, acetate of lead and 

injection opium, tannic acid, gallic acid, matioo, 

Pinus canadensis extract, locally as &a\ 
injection 

Vertigo ; Dissiness ; Menier*s Disease. iSej Vol, /, pofo 691.) 

Acid hydrocyanic dil disease is in some cases symptomatic of 

Digitalis with citrate of iron and stryoh- stomach and liver disorders 

nine, to improve general nutrition Quinine, useful in anral vertigo 
Gastric and hepatic sedatives, as the 



-62 



WHOOPING COUGH. 



VomitiBg ; Nausea ; Sea Sickness. {See VA.l^pa§eSC9) 



Acid hydrocyanic dfl, uaefal in Dervoos 
vomiting, or in that doe to (rastric ulcer 

Aconite, with biamath is oaefal in romit- 
ing of pregnancy 

Apomorpbine, to «npty the stomach of 
its contentaand then to check Tomitiog 

Atropine, bypodermically, or liquor inter- 
nally gives relief in vomiting or sea- 
sickness 

Bryonia, to relieve bilious vomiting and 
headache 

Calamba, in vomiting due to kidney 
disease, renal calculi, pregnancy, and 
dentition 

Cinnamon useful 

Cloves osefnl 

Cocaine, internally or as spray up the 
nasal passages to chedc nansea or 
locally to the cervix uteri in vomiting 
of pregnancy 

Codeine,usefol in vomiting from sny cau^e 

Coccalus iodicus.in cephalic nausea with 
ineffectual efforts at vomiting 

Ipecacuanha wine, in drop doses is useful 
in sympathetic nervous vomiting of 
pregnancy or in vomiting of chronic al- 
coholism 

Iris, in vomiting with supra-orbital pain, 
hepatic derangements, &c 

Kola nut to chew 



Menthol, in olive oil dropped oa sii|ear or 
with brandy taken inteniallj in obstin- 
ate cases 

Mustard plaster over the stomach 

Morphine, bypodermically or bj sappoai- 
tory in severe vomiting 

Nutmeg 

Nux vomica tincture, or powder mlone 

or with ipecacuanha if the tongue ia 

coated; a ^ood substitute for arsenic 

in atony of stomach, dyspepsia or in 

vomiting of pregnancy 

Opium as enema or internally in serere 
vomiting of pregnancy or in that due to 
biliary or renal calculi, dytmenorrboea, 
&c 

Pepper, peppermint, or phndino, very 
useful 

Pulsatilla, in vomiting attended with 
dyspepsia, coated tongue, and headache 

Quinine, in sympathetic vomiting 

Berpentaria, for bilious vomiting 

Staphisagria, in obstinate vomiting of 
pregnancy 

Strychnine, and atropine hypodermicallj 

Tea hot is useful 

Veratrum album, in vomiting and porg- 
ing of summer diarrhoea 

Viburnum, in vomiting of pregnancy 



Formula, — Cocaine, 2 ; belladonna, | ; butter of cocoa, 2 ; make suppoeitory, 1. 
To relieve nausea of pregnancy. 

External rtmedUt, — Blister to the pit of stomach or over 4th and 5th dorsal, 
vertebrae in sickness of pregnancy, dilatation of the cervix, horisontal posture, abso- 
lute rest, ice bag to the spine, ice to sack, iced champagne, nutrient enemaU* 
mustard poultices to the epigastrium, counter irritation. 

Whooping Oongh; Pertussis. 



Acid hydrocyanic dil, in cough from habit 
or in nervous sympathetic coufth 

Aconite, useful in acute congestion 
given with ipecacuanha and cherry 
laurel water ; a good preventive or 
an abortive remedy 

Belladonna tincture, alone or the extract 
with sine sulphate is very useful when 
dae to dentition; given in febrile stage, 
also to relieve spasm and congestion of 
the air passagef>, and in determination 
of blood to the head. It lessens the 
bronchial secretion when profuse 

Camphor monobromide, with syrup of 
iolu is very useful 



Castanea, decoction of chestnut, or the 

extract, is useful 
Chamomile oil in cherry laurel water 
Cocaine hydrochlorate, solotion. a paint 
on the tongue, tonsils, fauces, and 
larynx 
Codeine 
Conium or hydrobromate of conine, 

very useful 
Drosera is effective 

Gelsemium, during the s:;s8modio stage 
Oelspbala internally is useful 
Ipecacuanha wine, in bronchitio or pneu- 
monic complication alone or with 
ammonium bromide 



TAPE WORMS* 



763 



Whooping Cough.— (^^^^'O 



LftctQcarlam synip us a vehicle for cough 

mixtures is very useful 
Lobelia tincture, iutenuilly in sp«4modio 

Ciiaet And when the cough is imiuiotmt 
JfcWrtol giTcs gient r«U«£ 
Opium (luring the p%mxjwm k meful 
Quinine t«ituA« witli iodlniii carbotiftte, 



ftiui pulvii noftciic uaed oa nn insuUUlor 
Quinioe«iulpIuteia solution locally toth« 

f&uce« 
Quftb^n 

Tiir by inlmhition 
Viileri&n to oontrol or check the 

puroxysmi 



#4irmf»£/f.— Cfoton chlomlf iVgrs,; etheri«, 10 mn, ; potasB Uromld, 20 gn,; tt, 
belUilon, 5 mu. : tr. hy(m:ytiin, 3(i nit. : and syiup« 4 drs. Un« df»te. 

Worms— AJithelmintics ; Vermifogea* 

Ju&siiB suftruticofiutn 



Apoc^Qum isanuaUnuin 

Areca oatechu 

ArterotftJA sieTerBfana 

Atia 

Castor oil by the month or by isjeotion 

CocoAnut 

Cyj»eru?i jvcrienuiJi 

Kmlj«lia riUni 

Uifliiphal 

Jalap 



Picorrhi«a 

Pniuca granatnm 

HAvint? uil 

Scatnmouy 

Spigeliu wtth senna and pimeala 

Tnj'jicntioe oil 

ThyuJtr oil 

Ova ufHi 



VermicideB C^) Bound Wonas CAscaria lumbricoidoB). 

K{g«lltt Niilva ; sood» 

OphbxyloQ •t"rt,.*ri1itutrn fOOt 

Papnw juice f ' 

Fcganam !mni ■l^ 

r*olyf»cmis autUioiiuUcas 
Quinine, (L4 A tonic am) a& a prophylactic, 
snail J and as Injection into 
I u It prevents the prodno* 

I ; ndant' muuui which CavoufB 

f .>f worms 

San if calomel at bed time, aod 

setitm dmught next morning 
^apindus trifoliatui 
BirychnoB colubrioa (wood) 
Vernon la »nt}iclniintica seeds, powdered 



A be! 11 1 Ilium 

AlBtcmia 

Aristaloehiit inf naioa of leaves 

BAwachoo 

Blumea balsamifera 

firayem anthelmintica 

I' ' ]<T*iA (seeds j 

' anadeai«is,ext;act, at tectal 

« i m anthetmlnlionm 



Eucaiyptus, for rectal injection 

Qlofiosa sufierba 
""IcUeboroflnitrer. met 

lollarhena anti > (seeds) 

^pnatia to check . ^m v u »r.niu8 tluc to worms 

M«lia asfidirachta, root bark tlcooctlon 

Myrtol very usefttl 

Mocmia pmriens. hairs as electuary. 



Abeinth 

Acid cmbelic 

Acid filiclc 

Ailantbat i^landulosa, bark as decoction 

Ariacurdium 

Aspidium marginal is (oleo resin) 

Cnaso tiuid ex tract « or infusion of 

flowen 
Filix maff extract fmlicis liquid, upon an 

empty stomach followed by a purge 
K4lA^lanA 



(^) Tape Wonns : Taenia. 

Knmala 



Mel lotus philippiensis powder 
Oleum tigli, with chloroform 

glycerin 
Pepo 

Pelliteiine tannate 
Poly poms anthelmintlca 
Qninine as injunction 
Turpentine oil with castor oil 
Thymol 



snd 



F&rmvla. — Aspidium p ) dr.{ pomegranate radtcli, I drs.; pumkio 8eeds,8 drs.; 
ergot, ^ dns.; and aqua. H ot. Make decoction, when ready add^croton oil, 6 drops ; 
acacia:, 2 drs.; and extract of male fern, 8 fluid drs, Dose, | oe. intentally for tape 
worms. 



764 



WOUNDS. 



(c) ThreAdwomiB ; Aaearis Vermiciiljuii. 



Aloes with potatsium carbonate and a* a- 
fetida as an enema or internally 

Eucalyptol, for rectal injection 

Gardinia gnmmifera 

Kamal 

Mask root 

Myrtol 

Pharbitis Nil 

Picrsena excelsa, as enema 

Oleum morrhnae and olive oil in rectal 
enema 

Pcpo, as emulsion, against tinea 



Papaw juice 

Quassia infusion with sodium chloride 

and simple bitters intemallj or as an 

enema 
Soammonj better than aloes a.*oiie or with 

calomel 
Tannin, as injection or as suppository 
Valerian 
Vegetable, astrinKcnts for rectal injection 

namely* catechu, kino, rhatany, red 

gum, hsematoxylon, segat ehhal.Tinegar 

Titez negundo and ralerian 



Wounds ; Bedsores- 



Aconite in surgical fever 
Aloes, as dusting powder locally to favour 
' cicatrization of wounds 
Arnica infusion for external bruises, cuts, 

and for internal injaries 
Balsam of pern with carbolic acid to close 

recent wounds 
Bensoin tincture, as a basis for all 

healing balsams 
Bryonia tincture, locally 
Camphor carbolate 
Charcoal wood 
Chaulmagra oil 
Cinnamon oil 
Cotton wool 
Eucalyptus oil locally 
Qutta percha, dissolved in tincture or 

chlorform as a protective to wounds 
Hsmamelis, locally 



Hfematoxylon with butter of cocao or 

benxoated lard 
Opium camphorated, as tincture locally 

applied or given internally in abdomi- 

nal wounds to quiet the intestines 
Photoxylon, substitute for collodion 
Sesamum indicum, oil as dressing 
Tannin with glycerin as protectiva to 

wounds 
Tar bandage 
Thymol with alcohol and glyoeiin as 

solution 
Tragacanth, as a dusting powder or as a 

protective agent for grsAulations 
Turpentine oil 
Water dressing 
Yeast or charcoal poultices in phagedenic 

sores or ulcers 



INDEX. 



Aaval kAthi 

Abelmoschua ,^ 

Abies 

Abnui 

Abrus 

Abroma • 

Absinthium 

Abutilon 

Acacia 

Acaljpha 

Acanthodinm 

Accident plant 

Acetnm colchici 

„ Ipecacuanha, Dose, 10 to 

30 ms 341 

H Lobeliae, 10 p. c. Doee,6to 

60 ma. ... .. .., 37$ 

., Opii 10 p. c. of opiam. 

Dose, 6 to 20 ma. ... 48 

II SangainariaB. Doee, 10 to 

30 ms 53 

I, Scillasi DoBe, 10 to 30 mt. 616 
j> 

Acharbondl 370 

Achillea ... 347 

Achras aapota 436 

Achyranthea 504 

Acid aconitio ^ 3 

., Adonidic 6 

„ Agaric, ^ to 1 gr 652 

II Alantic .. ^ 366 

„ Anacardic 162 

ti Anemonio .^ ... ... 7 

„ Angelio orsumbalic 291 

II Aniaic. DoeOi 2to6gn. ^29$ 

I, Anthemio — 348 

I, Arabic— or gammic 181 

M Arachidic 190 

,1 Benioici Ooee,5tol5 gra. ... 431 

„ Boheic ... ^ 84 

I, CafBo tannic ^ 326 

„ Cadumbio ... ... ... 29 

, Cambogic ,.. 81 



PAOl. 




... 550 


Acic 


... 91 


1} 


.. 573 


*t 


.• 430 


»» 


.. 180 


»i 




II 


. lOI 






•1 


.. 35" 




.. 91 


II 


.. 182 






If 


.. 537 




.466 




.. 350 


>i 


.. 618 


tt 



PAGE. 

Acid Camphoric. Dom. 5 to 15 gra. 525 
Caryophyllic. DoM, 8 to 80 ma. 265 

Catechnic 183 

Catechno Tannic 184 

Cathartic. Dose, 4 to 8 gri. ... 197 
Chelidonic or gerric or malic. .. 4 1 
Chrjfiaphanic 2 to 20 p. c. 
Dow.itojgr. ... ... 651 

Cinnamic 255 

Cinnamilic aa Solution 5p.c., 
or injection 2 to 12 ma. 

Citraric 

CitriCiDoae, 5 to 20 grs. 
Comic ... ... ... 

Com bio 

CopaiTic - 

Coomaric 

Cnbebic. Dote. 10 to lA gra. 
DigalUc . 



Digitaleic 

Elemic »— m. ••• 
Embolic ... ••• ... 

Brgotic 

Briodictyonic 

Eugenic. Doae, 8 to 30 ms. 

Eoonic 

Filicic, Dose, 6 to 15 grs. 

Filitannic 

FranguUc 

Fumaric ... ... 

Fnngio 



528 
. 651 

"5 
HI 

390 
. 206 
233 
5«7 
564 
454 
177 
426 
65s 
4t4 
S65 
156 
647 
648 
158 
70 
653 



Gallic, B.P. Dose, 5 to 15 grs. 664 



Qallo Tannic 

Oarjanio 

Gelsemic 
(jkntesic ^ 
Qlycyrrhiaic ... 
Ouaiadc 

Oynocordic. Doeei 
Qymnemic 



♦ to 3 grs. 



563 

85 

402 

411 
213 

147 

56 

399 



766 



INDEX. 



Add Hennotaimie -m 

r, Bvdrocjmaie DOatom 

^ Hjpogceic ^ 

„ IgMorie 

„ IpecscaiJihir ... 

« JmpQiiie ^ ... ~ 

„ letricmMaliA ... 

ft ^ - — • 

„ Kinic ... ^ 

», Kino Tannic ^ 

„ Kinoric — 

r, KcMnbic —m .^ 

„ Knmero tMmniCmmm 

., LACtneic 

^ Laneic ^ 

M Laoric ... ... 

^ Lobdic .^ .» 

^ Heuimbic ^ 

., llJisdchic 

^ JfortMtar .^ ••• • 

y Ifmiwnir,- •<». 

^ Heth jl CiDloaic 

^ Uimo taanie ^ 
Mncic ^ ~. 

„ Mjirtiic-. 

^ Opbelie .. 

. Oxalie ^ ^ « 

^ PalBitie... ^ 

y. FuilliBi taanie ... 

« PScropodopkjUie 

., Phjtolaecic •• 

., Pipeitttjlic ^ 

^ Fbdopkyllic ^ 

^ Polj8»lbe 

, Proco OUecbvie 

4 Qnetci Tknaic ••. 

^ Qmlkic.^ _ 

9 Babinic .. «. . 

. BbeoTumie •« 



, SaBtaUc 

» Sefefotmic 

« Tkuiie .^ 

^ TkTmic ... 

^ TuxModea^ne 

V Tri b jdioxide 

, Vale^aaic 



PAGE. 

^ «7« 

... 156 

... 190 

.. 406 

... 340 

- 234 

• 41 
.. 561 

.. 3»« 
.. J18 
... 328 

- 390 
^ 71 
... 3^ 

- 653 
.. 64 

- 375 

- 195 
... 166 

-^ 48 
... 644 
^ 991 

- 234 

- 107 

- 174 

• 413 
... iss 

641 

- 75 

- 34 
... 500 

- 537 
« 36 

7« 
21 

S63 
«43 
«34 
510 
510 
M7 
^5 
655 



Aditj&Btekti 
Adina — 

Adiantnm ,^ 
Adonis ^. —. 
Adxmka... ^ 
JE^mmimAm 
.Errm JATmniea^ 
ACnntine-e-faiiidi 
Aftimnn — 

Afmllociia ^ 
AgmrAgar ^ 
Afuieos ^ 

AfMthio ^ 

AgBthotts 
Agiiidi^ .^ 
Agiji .^ ^ 
AcniGiirbli& • 

r. Jvili ... 

^ Mmntiii ... 

^ Shikhi 

AfiiBooj .» 
Agve Trae ... 

^ Weed .. 
AWOirm^ ^ 
Akaedf Idkdi nevt) 
AOmnthot •. 
AhmaiBnla ^ 
Air&Tana nauftriBft 
AittUndi ^ 

Ajjtf^aim^ 

AJBodm^ ... 
A}vma ... ... 



PAGE. 
... 60 
-- 325 
•^ 647 
... 6 
... 600 
^ 127 

— 505 

— 35» 

— 4*4 

— 53« 

— 534 
-. 652 
... 229 
... 412 
... 504 

— 275 
... 270 
.. 27« 

— 47a 
... 614 
^ 236 
... 531 

— 363 
^ 63 
.- 429 
... 142 

~ 47» 

... 252 

— 37« 

— 165 

^ 28c 
.- 479 



AeoBxte^ ... 
Aroras ... ... 



.Apjto^ 




INDEX. 



767 



Althaea ••• ••# •< 
Althein • 

Alab&ln 

Alomroot 

A 

Amli 

Amalt&s 

Amarantus 

Amaryllldaceae 

Ambi 

AmbA halad 

Ambli ••• ... •• 
Amb&ri .. •«. •• 
AmDcr ■•• ••• •< 

Amboehtd ... „ 

A 

Amboti 

AmboynS 

Ambu boyS 

Ambu pras&d .«. 

Amchur 

Amer Vel 

American Kino 

„ Valerian .. 

„ Worm seed., 

AmU lonika 

Amlaj ( 

A 

Amli ••• ••• •< 

A 

AmolukA 

Ammoni EmbeltB 
AtumonUcum ... 

Amoor^,. 

AD)OT)>bophalliiB 
Amp-lulacesiji .„ 
AmrHgaadbulfi 
Amritphal 
Amrit sT&vfi 

AmritVel 

AmnilsAk 
Amygdallus ... • 

AmyridaceaB 

Ana-b&he hindi 
Anacardium .•• 
Aoagallii ••• 
Anamirta 
Ananas Sativa 
Anunta mala ... 

Anftr 

An4rya tiktft ... 
Anasphal 
Anaitatica 
Androgpraphit ... 
Andiopogon .•• 

Anethol 

Angan-priyft ... 

Angelica 

AngozAh ^ 



PAGE. 

••• 93 

... 612 

... 242 

.-. 153 

... 230 

... 199 

... 505 

^ 604 

... X64 

... 592 

... 550 

... 97 

... 577 

... 26 

... 153 

.. 162 

... 358 

... 408 

... 164 

... 525 

... 153 

.. 587 

... 506 

... 153 

... 550 

... 230 

... 135 

... 426 

... 287 

... 117 

... 629 

... 134 

... 456 

... 550 

... 415 

... 30 

... 153 

... 239 

.. 172 

... 301 

... 162 

... 379 

... 24 

.. 620 
399 

... 277 

.. 4" 

... 20 

.. 68 

... 464 

... 636 

... 21 

... 217 

••• 280 

... 288 



PAGE. 

... 137 

... 318 

... 80 

... 479 

... 480 

... 295 

... 218 



Angnr ... *«• ... 

Anhaloninm ^ 

Anisnl 

Anisochilas 

Anisomeles 

Aniaun ... 

Anjali karika ... 

A 

Anjni ... ... ... 

Anjerat 

Anjir .•• ... ... ~v 

Ankol 

Anageiaans 

.^nnatobuah 

Anona 

Anodyne Colloid 

Antamnl 

AnthriacQS 

AntignhA 

>ntiseptic Fluid 

Aod-el-sAUb .. 

Aola 

Aperient fruit 

Aphrodisiac Pill 

II Powder ••. 

ApamargA 

Ajfiol 

Apium .. 

Aplotaxls 

Apocodeine ••• 

Apocynnm ... 

Ap'^morphinee,., 

A<ju e amtfii. Dose, | tol oz. 

,, AnieL Doae, | to ] os. 

„ A urautli florls. ^ to I os. 

,. HAkiili (1 Id 10). Dose, 4 to 
12dn. 

,1 Campkora^ \ to 2 oz. ... 

.i Carni, 1 to 2 oz. 

„ OitjDamomi, DoPt% i to 1 oz. 

II Ffisnioulf Doal% 1 to 2 oz. 

„ fjiiirocDrasi, Dose, 4 to 2 drs. 

„ LtmoTi Bal^iim fl in 10.) 
Dose, 1 to 2 OS. 

,, Menthae Dose, I to 2 oss. 

., MudAr (1 in ^0) Doifie, 1 to 2 oz. 295 

„ Ph IS (E^Ti lie-Gouflfunj, 1 in 
im. Dose, 2 to h, oi« 

,1 IMmentje, (1 in 40), Dose, 
1 to 2 OS. 

„ Ptychotis. Dose, 1 to 2 os. 

„ Rosae, Dose, ) to 1 oz 

„ Sambuci Flor, (1 in 5). Dose, 
i to 1 01 



... 275 

... 190 

... 557 

... 322 

... 257 

... 58 

... 23 

... 95 

... 401 

... 280 

... 234 

.. 498 

... 10 

... 557 

... 158 

... 303 

... 611 

504 
... 294 
... 281 

368 

:;. 3^5 

... 46 

... 294 

... 296 

... 124 

... 429 
... 526 
... 282 
... 528 
292 

243 

^\^ 
487 



582 



273 
297 
246 



Aquifolia 

Araceas 

Arachis Hypogasa 
Arak-i-bAdiAn ... 

Aralia 

Araroba 



323 

628 
189 
291 
320 

189 



768 



INDIiX. 



Arbor Vitse ,., 

Arbutin 

Archengelica 

ArctDm ... 

Ardhi sop&ri 

Areca catechu 

Argyria 

Arlsfema 

Aristolochia ... - 

ArithA 

Arjun SILdrft 

Arjuna ... ^ 

Arka k&nlk 

Aria 

Armoracia 

Arnica ^ 

Amaito 

Aroide ... ••• ., 

Arrow poison 

Arrow root 

Aru8& 

A rusaka-pas-i-pnrdfth 

Arum 

Arshaghni 

Artichoke ... •« 
Artifieial acammony .. 

»t sponges 
Artemisia ••. ., 

Asafetida 

AsragandhA 

Aaagnea 

Asftlio ... ... •« 

Aifarak 

A8far-i-b4ri .. 
Ashoki ... 

Ash-leaved bead tree .. 
Ashmi righani 
Aahti 8indhan 
Asle Kejar s&mbar .. 
Aiparagns 

Aapedium 

Atpleninm ... •• 
Aseimn ... - 

Astra canthA 

Asthma weed 

Astragalus 

Astrak •• 

Astringent root 
Asuri ... .^ 
Asava Dhinya 

,. karani ... 

« gandhi... . 

.. mirika 
Atalantia 
Atari jirAkAh ... 
Atehn ^ ^ ^ 

Atees 

AthAriyn .« 

AtheniaB state ] 
Atignha 
AtmagvpU ^ 



PAGE. 
... 584 

.• 377 

... 280 

... 350 

... 621 

... 621 

... 414 

... 629 

••• 514 

:;; ,3 

... 540 

... 60 

... 459 

... 65 

.. 629 
463 

• 599 
... 464 

453 
. 626 
... 170 
... 358 
.. 415 
... 95 

z'M 

... 452 
... 610 
.. 63 
... II 

... 373 
.. 217 
... 119 
... 59 
136 

"99 
612 
... 64S 
...648 
^ 346 
465 
-. 375 
... 190 

«87 
.. 153 
... 68 
... 183 
... 86 
... 452 

-^ 
... ia8 

— 373 

. 338 

::i8l 
... 283 

^. 218 



Atrital 

Atropa ... •.. 

Aurantium 

Australian Blue Gum Tree 
Fever Tree 

! Aval ^ 

1 Averrhoa 

' Aviprija 

Avociri .• 

Avurtani 

Ayia p&na 

Aeadirachta 

Azima ... ••• 

Azuri ... M. 



BAberAng ^ 
BAbal^:hhAl ... 
BAbun&j 

Bachelor*8 button 
Bachnic 
Bacht4rok ^ 

Bad&m 

Eliifioi-i-phirangi 
} .!-rt-aril 

.tii.KhatHi 
B-4^iaK»B*i-b4rri 

fiidTanj-bujeh 

B»d4h/ihi*ewp 
Baei phal «• 

Bmham&n abiid 
„ .i.8nrkh 
n Teta 

Bakaiyan 

B&kila-i-miari .— 

B&klut.al4aristam 



BikuUL tree ^ ^ 

Bikuri ^ ^ « 

BAkhur-i-miryam «. - 

BiUbhAdia «. 

,. chhar «. 

., goli ^ 

,, harde ... ... « 

^ hriviA ... M. • 

„ kidn 

„ taggar 

Balanites ... ^ 

BAUtfAn ... ^ 

BAlbij ^ 

Jii^Q ,. ... 

Bairn of Qikad 
,. miat ....... 

Balsam Apple «. ... ^ 
,, Poplar - ^ 

«. Peraviaanm, 5 to 15 i 
„ Spnioe ^ 



PAGE. 
.. 280 
.. 475 
- "3 

265 
... 265 

... 198 

... 151 

296 

... 121 

... 104 

... 3C2 

- 119 

". 437 
. 572 



4»5 

i8i 

347 
403 

X 

4M 
S99 

162 

373 

SO 

»9« 

485 
6od 
127 
547 
357 
495 
459 

IlH 

ai7 
485 
499 
69 
4^ 
534 
379 

XX 

344 

5 

16a 

345 

457 
346 
M3 
172 
9t 
538 
17» 
485 
311 

S73 

2X9 

57s 



INDEX. 



769 



Balsam Tola - 

Balsamodendron 

BAlukft ^ 

iSftODa ••• ••• ••• ••• 

BAniboo»t« ••• ••• ••• 

BanftD&.M ... •• 

BftDafsbi ••. 

BaodA aoap 

B&ndik&i 

Bandhakft 

BAnglft-akhrot 

Bln-laang 

B&oritb& • 

B&nsa kapor 

Banyan tree ..• ••• ••. 

Bftn-Qshtaki — 

B&ob&h tree 

B&phalli 

Baptisin ••• ••• 

Barftgftsha ••• 

BArandft ^ 

Barft kanw&r ... t*. ••• 
„ kAnd& ••• ••• ••• 

B&rahmi ••• ••. 

BArambhi ... ••• •.• 

BAr&tandi ••• 

BAratung 

Barbaloin, ) to 2 grs.— 

Barberry ••• 

Barg-i-murad 

Burbanta 

BAriarA 

BarijA gond ... .. 
Bari'pipli ••• ••• ••• 

Ban sonpha 

BArkiaend 

Barleria .- ••• 

Barley Sugar 

Baroama ,^ 

Barringotonia 

Bari-mAi 

Basilicon Ointment .,. 

Bassia Latifolia 

Batil ^ ^ .« 
Basing ^ ••• ••• 

Basaorin 

Bastard Ipecacuanha 

,, Sandal or Red Cedar 

Batoola 

Battley'6 sedative ... 

Baubinia 

BAvaobi 

Bayberry 

Baylaurel . 

Basr-el-Khum Khum 

Basrnl banj 

„ bAlank 

„ Kbasa Kbasa . 

Bdellium 

Beadseed Tree 

Bear*8 Foot 



PAGE. 

- 220 
... 172 

". 319 

... 456 

. 638 

... 598 

... 54 

... 524 

... 91 

... IC5 

- 538 
.. 299 
... 185 
... 638 
... 556 
... 608 

... 102 

... 293 

••• 192 

.•• 271 

... 492 
...604 

•M 631 

•- 57 

- 583 

- 335 
... 502 
... 609 
... 32 
... 271 

••• 449 

... zoo 

m, 290 

... 630 

... 291 

.- 545 

••• 465 

... 643 

... 128 

... 274 

••• no 

... 580 

... 426 

... 490 

... 649 

... 193 

••. 393 

... 114 

... 204 

... 49 

... 192 

•^ 225 

.. 572 

... 529 

.. 64 

... 443 

... 4S2 

... 367 

... 173 

... 801 

... 14 



Bearded Darnel 

Bear*s berry ••• 

Beaver's Poison 

Beaver*s Tree... 

Beberine 

Bede Mushk ... 

Becbotarok 

Beetroot 

BehedAnA 

Beben 

Beleric myrobolans 
Bengal Qum -. 

I, Hemp .^ 

,, Kino ... 
„ Quince 

„ Walnut 
Benne Oil 
Bennincasa ... 
Benzoinnm 
BerzAd... .^ 

Berberina 
Bergera Konigii 
Beta Vulgaris ... 
betel nut 
BbAmburdi ^ 
BbAng ^ 
Bh&Dgro 
BhanUki 
BhApbail 
BbArangi .^ 

BhSt ... 
BbAvan bAkiA.- 
BbensAbola 
Bbikshu 
BbiUmo 

BbindA 

Bbirand 

Bhisbakpriya ... 
BbwtpAl 

BboplA 

Bbonrsal 

Bbui AmalA ... 

., ChampA... 

.. Cbaal ... 

It JAm .„ 

M Bhouraal... 

t» KobalA ... 

,} Kowit ... 

„ Mung ^. 

„ Nimb ... 

n OkrA ^ 

H Bingani 

„ Tarwar ... 
Bbumi Amlaki... 

., KumrA ... 

, KusbmandA 
Bhurun Koholun 
Hbutagbna ^ 
Bhutan 



PAOE. 
••• 642 

... 377 
... 283 
... 21 

... 567 
... 414 
... 506 
... 245 
-.. 495 
." 344 
..• 475 
... 258 
... 204 
... 207 
... X94 
... 127 

- 538 
... 462 
... 304 
•.. 431 
... 290 

- 34 
... 151 
... 506 

- 515 

- 355 
... 568 
••• 360 
... 449 

!•• 00 

... 144 
•.. 642 

- 35 

- 174 
•- 370 
... 170 
••• 91 
... 80 
... 260 
... 155 

- 304 
••• 334 
.. 551 
... 598 
... 189 
... 472 

- 334 
... 416 
... 179 
... 190 
... 4<2 
•.. 47* 
... 450 
... 200 
... 552 
... 416 
... 416 
... 304 
... 607 
... 250 



//^ 



INDiiX. 



Bbut bhiravi 

Bhat-keesee 

Jatcl 

„ Ntisan ... m, 

„ PSl 

Bicbhoti 

Bidari Kand 

Bignonia 

Bijesar 

Bijbudi.. ^ 

Bijband 

BijorClu 

Bikb-i-banafB^... ••• 

„ tafti 

,, f^umbul,.. 
Bihlitml 
Hllatl PituwilK 

BilAnjiri 

BilbA 

Billi lotan 

Bilimbi .. 
Bindai ... 
Bind weed ••. 

Binta falun 

Biopbytum scnsativam 
Biranj-i-KAbuli 
Biranj-sif-e-Kohl ••• 

Birch Tar 

Birji goond 

Bird's-eye-pepper 
Birmowu ••. 

Birthwort 

Bisfaiaj 

Bishak priy& 

BUb Kb&pra 

Bishm^ 

Bishop's weed 

Bit-hore 

Bitter Aloes ... — 

„ apples ... ... 

„ bottle gourd ... 

„ cucumber 

,, gourd 

„ root 

„ stick 

Bixa 

Black alder 

„ l)alsam 

„ berry ••• 

„ cherry ... ... 

„ cohosh 

,, cumin ... ... 

,, dammar... m. 

„ draught 

„ haw ... ... 

„ pepper 

„ root ... ... 

„ snake root 

„ willow 

„ wood 

wood tree 



PAGE. 

... 472 

... 3^6 

... 281 
... 288 
... 156 
... 554 
... 416 

460 
... 226 

496 
... 100 
.. 125 

602 
... 283 

— 344 
... 6 
... 274 

— 534 
... 170 

... 344 
... 151 

— 313 

— 413 
... 238 
... 152 
... 425 
... 350 

— 565 
... 579 
... 439 
... 212 
... 512 
... 649 
... 260 
... 298 
... 6 
... 297 

.. 300 
... 608 
... 307 
.. 311 
.- 307 
... 3*6 
... 411 
... 412 
... 58 
... 157 
... 219 
... 848 
... 47^ 
... 8 
... 281 
... 178 

... 197 
... 324 

... 519 
... 458 

... 8 
... 569 

... 214 
... 237 



PAGE. 

Bleeding heart 587 

Blepharis edolis ... 466 

Blinding tree ... 546 

Blood flower 39 ^ 

„ root ^ 52 

,, veined sage 495 

Blue berry 34 

„ cohosh ... ... 34 

M flag 

„ ginsing ... ^ 

,f gum tree... ... ... ... 

,, skull cap •• 

f, violet ... 

Blnmea 

Bo& firangi 

Boedi 

Boerhavia 

Bokenal ... 

ooietus ... ... ... ... ... 

Boldoa ^ 

Bolsari 

Bombaz .« 

Boodiik-i-hindi 

Bone set » 

BootAn 

Borage ... 

Borassus 

Bori ajmod 

Boswcllia 

Botany bay kino ... 

Bougies urethral, elastic, gelatin ..• 

„ acid gallic and opium, .^ 

„ acid tannic and opinm «. 

„ hi ■ \ liidon na and opinm, 2 gr». 

and 1 gr. ... ... ... 

„ cocaine and opinm, ) gr. each 
,, eucalyptus oil 10 ms. and 

iodoform 5grs 

„ krameriae extract, 1 gr. ... 
„ morphine, 1 gr. .m 
Boxwood ... ... ... ... 

Bositl&n - 

BrAhami ... .. 

Brahmdd&ndi 

Brassica ... . ... .- 

Brayera 

Brazilian cocoa 

„ holly 

BmAli wood 

Bridelia retnsa... ^ 

Breynia Rhamnoides ... .- 

Brtnd^o. ^ 

BringrAj .. 

Mromiliaceie 

British t«a .«, 

Broad-leaved bnrweed 



34 
266 
490 

53 
355 
162 
160 
502 
376 
654 

522 

4«9 
103 
202 

363 

480 

421 
622 

281 

176 
269 

564 



477 
112 

267 
71 

4S 

321 

371 
292 
372 

66 
237 

75 
535 
204 

538 
539 
ho 
360 
620 
560 
374 



INDEX. 



771 



Broom tops 
Brown mixture 
Brucina^ -^ to \ gr. 

Bryonia 

Bnchanania ... 

Bachu 

Buck thorn 
Buck wheat ••• 
Bu^ bane ••• 
Bui-e-Mftdarin... 
Bujjir bh&ng ... 
Bukachi 

Bukhum wood... 
Bullock heart .•• 
Bully tree 
Burdock 
Bnrkisht 
Buroshi&l kftntft 
Bursera... •«. 
Burundi 
Butea frondosa 
Butteifly weed 
Bnththa 
Butter of cocao, 
Butter tree 
Buz-gunj 
Buzs-ul-karaphs 
By&kur& 

Byne 

Byttneriaceas ... 



Cabbage tree ... 

Cactus 

Cadaba 

Caffein ^ 
Calabar bean ... 
Cal&b&ah tree ... 
Calendula ••• 
Callicarpa ... 
Calonaster ••• 
Calosanthes ... 
Calumba 
Calycopteris ... 
Camel thorn ... 
Cam peachy wood 
Camphor 

i'tthnijii |>:i|iKiUt 

CaniuiKJulLS 
C'anadiiiD H^mp 

„ Moon seed 
Can chhoree ... 
Candle berry ... 
Candle nut 
Cannabis 
Caonarium 

Canella 

Cane sugar 
Cansoora 
Canthium 
Caoutchouc spirit 



PAGE. 

... 228 

... 214 

... 403 

... 305 

... 163 

128 

... 159 

::: '1 

... 347 

.. 445 

... 373 

... 2C4 

... 22 

... 436 

... 350 

... 104 

... 40 

.- 177 

... 421 

... 194 

... 394 

... 644 

... 109 

... 4*7 

... 167 

... 281 

... 449 

... 640 

... 108 



... 6a 

.. 3k8 

.. 61 

.. 3^6 

>.. 221 

- 459 
.. 355 
.. 468 

.. 237 

••• 459 

... 29 

;:: ?ii 

.. 214 

- 5*5 

.. 573 

... 592 

.. 383 

.. 30 

.. 554 

... 561 

... 538 

.. 5<>8 

.. 177 

... 116 

... 643 

... 409 

.. 325 

.. 32s 



PAGE. 

Oaoutchouc 546 

Caper 61 

Caprifoliacefe 322 

Capsicum 439 

Capella bursa pastoris 65 

Capsules of A piol ... ... 294 

n Casoara sagrada, 30 ms... 159 

„ Cascara et euonymin, 3 

grs. and 1 gr.^. ••• 159 
„ Castor oil, 2 to 6 mt. ... 341 

„ Chaulmoogra otl^ ID ms. 55 

„ Co lebi cine Salicylate ...617 
„ Gctpaibiii 5 mB< ^ ... 206 

„ Cabeb011,5ms. ..« ... 517 

Ergotiii, -I (fr 655 

.f KucnljptuiOilT 5 ms. ... 266 

„ Enonymin, igr ic6 

„ de-Goudron 582 

,, Guaiacol, 5 ms. 147 

„ Jatropha Oil, 10 ms. ... 547 

„ Oil of Malefern. 15 ms. ... 648 
,, Oil of Oaulheria, 10 ms. 378 

„ Pix Liquida, ... — 582 

,, Santal Oil ... ... 536 

Tar 582 

„ Terebene, 5 to 10 ms. ... 581 

Carrageen moas 657 

Caramel 643 

Carambol& 152 

Cardamnms 596 

Carr||f>^pi!rmuiii ... ... ... 7^ 

Careja Arborea 263 

C»riL-^i papaya ^ ••• 301 

rurJ!*^ Carandu 385 

Caroline pink ... .•• 403 

Carrot 286 

Carpaine 302 

Carthagenian Apple 277 

Carthamus ... 356 

Cart track plant 502 

CarTacrol Iodide ... 498 

Carricrol ••• ... 282 

Caryophyllus aromaticus ... .. 264 

Caryota urens m. 622 

Cascara 144 

Casearia 300 

Cassav^ meal 549 

Cassia Laurua 527 

Cassytha 525 

Castor oil plant 541 

Castinia 562 

Catechu, 5 to 16 grs 183 

Catharto carpus 199 

Cathay seed 541 

Catnip ,^ 490 

CanlophjUum 34 

Cayenne pepper 439 

Cedrala toona 115 

Celandine 41 

Cclaslraceae 154 



772 



INDEX. 



Celcriaa 

Celery .. ••• ••• 

Oelloidin 

Gelosla ••• 

Centaury ••• 
Cepbalandra ... m» 

Ceropigia 

Cerasin 

Cerbera - 

Cetraria 

CevadiD 

Ceylon oak ... ••• 

„ moss ••• ••• 

„ jasmine 

„ caw tree ••• 

Ghhadilft 

Chagul mftdi .« ••• 

Chdkino k&tho 

Chakra bhenda 

ChakramardA 

Ch&ksu ••• 

Chakulia 

Chamkift ^ 
Ch&mar musll ... — 

Cbambeli 

Chani ... 
Ch&acharm&ri 
Cbandan ••• ••• 

CbandramulA ... • •♦ 

ChandrakA 

Chandrasurft 

Cbandrapod& 

Cbanotbi .- 

Cbaniar 

Cbapol^ 

Charas 

CbArela 

Cbiroli ^ 

Chb&ti&n 

Cbauri 

Chayroot ••• 

Cbavica 

Ch&wal 

Cbeiranthos ... »• 
Cbekan... ••• •■• 
Chekonadi 

Cbelidoniam 

Chelmeri 

Cbenopodiacese ... 

Cberry birch ... -. 

„ laurel ... 

Chesmak 

Cbhagul 

Chha^l khuri 

Chhadild 

Chbikani 

Cki^yla-cJiiUQd ... ... 

„ gokhru 

janglipy&i ... 
„ kreat •«« ... 
,, kum&r 



PAGE. 

... 324 

... 281 

... 95 
...508 

•.. 356 

... 307 

... 396 

... 244 

... 386 

... 050 

... 617 

... 74 

... 659 

... 391 

... 398 

... 651 

... 370 

... 1S5 

... 92 

... 201 

" 195 

.. 234 

... 19s 

.^ 13$ 

..• 435 

.- 204 

.•• 3S5 

... 535 

. 598 

... 389 

••• 64 

... 414 

... 180 

... 63 

... 569 

... 569 

... 651 

... 163 

... 383 

... 155 

... 336 

... 5«5 

... 642 

... 66 

... 270 

... 61 

... 41 

... 539 
...506 

... 565 
... 243 
... 19s 
... 397 
... 417 
... 651 
-. 354 
... 389 
... 148 
... 615 

.- 409 
... 608 



PAGE. 

Chbot&kulf& ... ^ ... 423 

„ p&nkijar 597 

Ohhote kanval... ^ .« .«. 38 

,, mai ••• ... ... ... no 

Chian turpentine ... 167 

Chicken pea 204 

Chicory - 358 

ChikanAp&ta 100 

Chikn .«• 426 

Chilgozft 578 

Chillies ... .. 438 

Chimaphilla 378 

China bark ... 242 

„ box .. ... 131 

Chinai-ghasa 657 

,) good ... •.. ... .M 194 

„ k&tha 185 

Chinchoka 230 

Chinese anise 20 

„ gooseberry 152 

ft ginger ^ 601 

., honeysuckle ... 258 

„ pumpkin ... ... ... 304 

ChinibAd&m ^ ... 1S9 

Chia-narhua 31 

Chinol ^ 195 

Chionanthes 433 

ChiramboI& ... ... 539 

Chirongi ... 163 

Chinopodium 506 

ChirettA ... 412 

Chirbo m. 447 

I Chirk&jbAr ^ 579 

Chironia 410 

> Chirpoti 317 

I Chitra t&ndula 425 

; Ohitrak 380 

I Chloroxylon 115 

Chobchini 5^^ 

Chocolate 108 

Coodh&ri 136 

Chokh& 642 

Chol&l bh&ji ... 503 

('hondrodendron ..26 

Chondrus ^ 657 

Chor &malA ... 100 

Choud ajriwaa ». ... .« 60 

Cbrifltmasflawer ... 357 

Chrlita' thorn ... 1 57 

Cbrysaatbemom 357 

Chrysarolilu ... 189 

Cbt-yBophRnic acid 510 

Churrut 568 

Churi chintz 100 

Cibotium 649 

Oicca disticha 539 

Cicer ^ 204 

Cichorium 35^ 

! Cicutine 285 

Cimicifuga ... ^ 

Cinchona ... *.. 3^7 



INDEX. 



773 



PAOE. 
Cintiol ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 366 

Cinque foil •• ••• 238 

Cisaampeline • ... 26 

Citron ... 135 

ChitronellA ... •- -. ... 485 

ClaTiceps 654 

Clearing nut 408 

CleaTer^i graw 33 

Cleome 60 

Clerodendron ... ••• ... ... 468 

Climatifl 9 

Clitorea 905 

Olofe garlic m 607 

Club mo6B ... 634 

Clnsiaoe» •«. •• ... 77 

Cobra's aaflron 78 

Coca ... Ill 

Cocaine, ^'g to i gr xii 

Coocinia •• ••• 433 

Coocalas ... ... 34 

Cochin ginger 601 

„ turmeric — 593 

Cochlearia .« 65 

Cochlospermum 57 

Cocoa 108 

Cockscomb 506 

Cockspnr rye 654 

Cocos » 623 

Codea, i to 2 grs ^ 47 

(^odegan ... 401 

Coix 638 

Colcbiciim 617 

Colcus 480 

Colic root - 394 

Collinsonia 481 

Collodion 95 

Colocynth apple 307 

Colyoopteria 357 

Colt'tfoot ... 37i 

Colia 68 

Combretaceae ^ 256 

Common Basil 491 

Common flare hound 489 . 

„ Qardencrets 64 1 

„ Tansy 3x1 | 

Commiphora 178 ; 

Composite 346 ' 

Confectio Benincasa cerifera 

(Kohalo pnshtika), } to i d. ... 304 
Confeetio Dhauriphul ... 279 

.f Guaiaci oomposita, 1 to 

2dr8 123 I 

„ Ipomaea Digitata ... 416 

., IpomseaTarpethum,^to { 

eOgrs. 420 ! 

., Java rasa uda, 20 to 60 

gra 534 

Kuteja leha, J to 1 dr. ... 387 
KdntA k&ry aveleh, 4 to 

6 drs. 450 

KattAn& Batrisfi 589 



PAGE. 

Confeetio Laghn suran modak ... 629 

„ Mabajam-e-til, 1 to 4 

drs. M* • 243 

„ Metbi Modak 232 

„ Mncuna Frarieat, 1 to 2 dra. 219 

„ PranAdA Qudioa (com- 
pound). 2 dn 

ij Pyrethrii 6 grs. ••. 

,. Pinna gerardiana. Dose, 
1 to 3 drs. 
Roeas Uallicse, B.P. 
Dose, 1 dr. 

,, SennssB.P. 1 to S drs. . 

n Tnrbeth, ) to 2 drs. 

„ VarunAdyia OudA 

Coloniaster • 

Conium 

Condurango •«• 

Coniferse ... .« ^ 

Conserve averrboea canunbola 

„ BanincAsfl ... 

„ Oulkhand 

„ Oplanja bin 

Convallaria ^ 

Convolvulus 

Copaiba 

Coptis ^ 

Corchorus 

Coidia 

Cordial Aliteris 

„ Cascara, i tol dr. ... 
Comas .. ^ 



Com ergot 
„ smutt ^ 
„ silk 
I, Starch ... 

Comutine 

Cones Acacia ... 
„ Alatonia 
„ Aurantiom 
,1 Asidaracht 
„ Calotropis 
„ Canelln 
I, Carthagena 
„ Casca ... 
„ Cascara 
„ CascarillsB 
„ Casaiio ... 
„ China ... 
„ Chittem 
„ Cinchonas 
„ Cinnamomi 
„ Condurango 
„ Coneesi 
„ Coto ... 
„ Cotton 
,, Cramp .. 
„ Cnprcea 
„ Dita ... 
,, Doom ... 
,, Kuonymi 



531 

349 

578 

247 

197 

430 

60 

Si 

572 
153 

3C4 
347 

613 



306 

10 

87 

421 

«59 
331 
656 
656 
644 

fil 

382 
123 
119 
395 
116 
340 
211 

158 
540 
195 

3*7 
531 
398 
386 

337 
230 

334 

^f 
383 
211 

154 



774 



INDEX. 



Cortex Gossypium 

„ Granatse 

„ Holarrhenae 

„ Hamamellis 

,, Levan bark 

„ Mazerei 

„ Murillo 

„ Ordeal 

„ Oleodendron 

,, Picrsena 

., Panama 

., Picramnia 

„ Primus Padum 

„ Purushiana 

„ Quebracho •.. 

,, Quercus 

., Quellaisc 

„ Rhamni 

,, Sassy 

„ Spindle tree 

„ Toddalise 

„ Ulmi 

„ Tellicherry 

Corydaline 

Corylacese 

CoBtos 

Cosmetic box 

Coscinium 

Cosmostigma 

Cotarnine 

Coumarin 

Country Borage 

„ Geranium 

„ Gooseberry 

„ Mallovir 

,, Sarsaparilla 

Cowage 

Cow bane 

„ plant 

„ lungwort... 

Cowitch 

Oran^tree 

Crane's bill root 

Cratieva 

Oremor Eucalypti composita 
Creeping dog's tooth grass ... 
Cressa .*• ••• ••• .., 

Crescentia 

Oressulacete 

Ciinum ••• ... M. 

Crocus 

€rotolaria 

Croton 

Crow foot 

•Cruciferae 

Crystalline .. 

Oucumerioe 

Cucumis .- , 

-Cucurbita , 

Culver's Physic root 

€uminseed , 



PA6B. 

... 93 

.« 277 

.. 3«6 

... 255 

... 250 

... 532 

... 245 

... 211 

... 156 

... 144 

... 245 

... 144 

.. 241 

*.." 384 
... 563 
... 246 

... 157 
... 211 
... 154 

...386 
... 70 
... 562 
... 368 
... 131 
... 28 
... 396 
... 48 

... 480 

... 334 

... 539 

... 92 

399 
... 218 

... 283 
... 397 
... 458 
... 218 
... 257 
... 153 
... 59 
... 267 
... 639 
... 415 

459 
... 257 
... 604 
... 601 
... 207 
... 540 
... 153 
... 62 
... 96 
... 316 
... 307 

. 308 
... 458 
... 285 



Cupid's flowers 
Curara, ,V to ^ gr. 
Cupuliferaz 
Curled mint ... 
Curculigo 
Curcuma 
Curry leaf tree 
Cnscuta 
Custard apple... 

Cycas 

C^'clamen 
CydoniH 

Cylista 

()ymeDol 
Cynauchum ... 

Cynara 

Cynodon 
Cyperaceie 
Cypripedium ... 
Cytisus 



PAGE. 

... 419 
... 404 
... 562 
... 48S 
... 605 
... 59J 
... 131 
... 424 
.. 23 

... 380 

... 245 

... 207 

... 498 

... 397 

... 358 

... 639 
... 631 
^ 587 

.- 228 



D&boli 92 

DftbrA ... ... 234 

Dftdm^rdan 196 

D&drughn& 196 

Dakbanl hemp 97 

Dalbergia 208 

D&limb ... 277 

Damask rote 642 

Daman papra 337 

Damiaua 303 

D&mmul ... ... 226 

D&m ul-akhwain 614 

Dandelion 371 

Mnkuni 409 

Dansh&mula svet4 235 

DAntlmol 538 

Daphne mezereon 53a 

D&rohini ^ 527 

Dftrchob 33 

D^ruhalad 33 

Dari&ij4i ^ ... 468 

Daronicum 359 

Dftruharidra 33 

Darunaj-i-akarbi ... ... 359 

D&rurl 40 

D&rutyne 369 

D4r-shishan ... ^ 572 

DAstam ... 478 

Date palm .. 256 

Datisca 317 

Daturft ... 441 

D&tvan ... 198 

D&tyuni 383 

Deadly night shade 475 

Deadmen*8 bells 453 

Dead sea apple ... ^. ... 563 

Decoctum Acorus CaUmus (com- 
pound), 2 to 4 dm ... 628 



INDEX. 



775 



6io 



437 
649 

354 

60 

209 

578 

387 



PAGE 

Decoctum Aloes Comp., B. P. (1 in 
10.) Do0e, i to 2 drt. ; 
Tincture, ^ to 1 dr.; and 
extract, 2 to 4 gn, 

., Ar^abadhadi (componnd), 
4 to 6 drs 

„ Azyma Tetra cantha (com 
pound), 4 to lldra* .. 

„ HsiiDir (compound), 4 to 

Blumea (componnd), J to 

1 oz 

CratasTa religiotn (com 

pound), 1 to S oz. 
„ Dasa mulA (compound), 1 

in 10. Doee, 4 to 12 drs. 
Devd&ri.kT&th (1 in 16), k 

to 1 oz. ... ^ 

„ DitA bark oompound (1 in 

10). D08C, 4 to 12 drs. 
Kud&-6A1a (I ID 10), 4 drs 
>J-nrNb^rifrifQ.Jfa(lin20) 

1 to 2 01. ... - 333 
„ Moringa root (1 in 20), 2 

to 6 drs. 235 

NAragamia Alata (1 in 10), 

i to 1 oz 131 

Ni'Tinnbium s^ipecioMiiia* 

(»:(>miK>tiDd)l In 10, Dote, 

Paocjli Valkal-Kasheji, i 
to dm ..* 
,, Fancli BJifvilrn(com pound), 

1 to 2 oz. 
Quillaia (1 in 16), 1 to 

2 drs 

„ Hoina f}inc}iaka.4to6drs. 
„ SartujcotiJi>tiiitus (1 in 8) 

3to4oi. 

„ S^tilaniuii ItiHkum (com< 

l>ouud), .] to 1 oz. 
Syinplocos racemofta(l in 

luj, ^ 10 1 oz 

Theapesia |>opulQeti, Dose, 

1 to 2 OE, 

,. Tnchoeajithes cucumerina 

compound (1 in 20), 

1 to 2 oz. ... ^ 

Tribulus terristris (1 in 10), 

dose, 1 to 4 fluid drs. 
L'lmi (1 in 8). Dose, 2 to 4 

fluid drs 

Dolpbiniiie. i to J gr. 

Dcmurara pinkroot 

Dendrobium 



loi 



-. 316 



14a 



Deodangree .. 
Deoiial .» 

Derris 

Desert date .. 

Detisea 

DctA DhupAha 



560 
12 

403 
588 

313 
376 
208 

Ml 

3»7 
431 



39 
559 
337 

246 
590 

586 
449 
433 



Devari muli ... 
Devadari 
DeWrs Claw... 

., Cotton 

II Dnng 

„ Turnip 
Dewee*8 carminative , 
Dewberry 
Dbaiti ••• 

DbAknr.. 

Db&man 
Dham&^o 
DhAmni 

DbAn 

DhAnyia 
DbArwkadamba 

., karela ... 
DhAtriphal 
DbAuri... 

Dbaval 

Dhed Umbro „. 
DhAlAkurA 
DbolA kudu ... 
Dbolo champD ... 
Dbolo sbemlo ... 
DholsA mudrA... 
Dhonnl KattAu 
Dhonul-balsan .. 
DbuH pushpika 
DhumApAtram 
Dhumra pAttim 
Dhupel tel 
Dbup ... 
Diantbus 
Dichroa 
Diffitalis 
DikA mAlee 
Dil pasand 
Dionjsia 
Diospyroi 
Dipterocarpea;... 
Diplospora 
Ditamine 
DivAri mullee .. 
Divi divi 
DnyAn Vairdbni 
Dodder ^ ... 
Dodonwa 
Dcemia .. 
Dogbane 

„ button 

,, bite slimb 

., mustard ... 

,. Hnger 

„ i)oi8on ... 

,, toothgra-ss 

„ vood 
Dolichos 
Domba oil 
l>oorva... 
Dorali 



I'AGB. 

.- 355 

... 577 

... 4^1 

... lOI 

... 288 

... 305 

.- 289 

... 248 

.- 278 

... 386 

... 88 

... 147 

... XC4 

... 642 

... 282 

... 325 

... 314 

... 274 

... 278 

... 376 

... 558 

... 322 

... 386 

... 389 

... 104 

.. 134 

... 150 

... 17a 

... 633 

... 446 

... 512 

... 368 

... 176 

.- 90 

... 250 

.. 454 

• 333 

... 309 

... 380 

... 430 

... 84 

... 333 
... 383 

.-. 355 
... 203 

5fi9 

... 424 

... 76 

... 397 

... 381 

... 405 

. 215 

... 60 

... 453 

.. 405 

... 639 

... 3ai 

... 218 

... 82 

... 639 

... 450 



776 



Dorgunj 

Doronicam 

Double oocoanut 

Dove foot 

Dover's powder 
Downy grialea... 

„ thorn apple ... 
Dracasaa ••. • ••• 
Dracocephalum 

Dradrugna 

Dragon's blood 

„ root 

Darakbte azad 

„ gnlcbhakan... 
„ maryam 
„ miswak 
„ sh&n&h 
„ pist&h 

,, sibr 

„ zharnak ... 
Dr&ksha arishtd 1 to 4 drs. 

Drcgea 

Dried kh&rak ... 

Dremys 

Dropsy plant 

Drosera 

Druggist's catechu ... 

Drum stick 

Duboisine ... 

Dudhi *.. 

Dukhan-el ddru 

Dulcamara 

Dumki mirachi ... • 

Duna miirwa 

Duhun-el-garjan 

Dura labh& 

Duras-i-tafti 

Dush parsh& 

Duval ... 

Dvipata 

Dwarf mulberry 

Dyonisia 

Dyer's oak* 



Eagle wood 

East Indian Bcrewplant 

Eau sedative 

„ de-goudron 

Ebony 

Ecgonine 

Echites 

Echinacea 

Eclipta ... 

Scthol 

Edible lotus 

Etgyptian bean 

,, lotus 

„ misree 

,, myrobolan ... 

„ privet 



INDEX. 



PAGE. 
... 45« 
... 359 
.. 6a4 
... 153 
... 341 
.. 278 
... 441 
614 
... 482 
... 20c 
... 614 
•.. 629 
... 118 
... 427 
.. 172 
... 437 
... 92 
... 167 
... 608 
... 395 



62s 

1^ 
485 

253 

234 

199 

. 442 

• 3" 
. 254 

.448 
. 517 
. 351 
. 85 
. 188 
. 283 
. 147 
. 234 
. 5»5 
.. 248 
.380 
.. 563 



534 
104 
526 
582 
430 
III 
382 
359 
360 

359 
38 

38 

298 

"43 
376 



PAGE. 

Ekharo 4^5 

Elacampagne camphor 3^ 

Elaterinm ... .. •>• ... 3i< 

EUeodendron 155 

Elem tree >77 

„ creeper ... 4>4 

Elephantopus scaber ... .361 

Electnry kantakeri aveleha, 4 to 6 

drs. ... ... ... ... 

Elixir aromaticum, ^ to 2 drs. 

,, campbora. 4 grs. to 1 oz. SO to 
60 IDS. ... *.. ••• 

., Ca8cara8agradm(linl5.)Dofle, 
120 ms. 

,. Erythrozyli et guaranae, 1 
2 drs. 

;, sennae, 1 to 3 drs. 
Eliyo ... ••• ... ••• 
iiilm ••• ... •«• ••» 

Embelia ribes m, 

Emblic myrobolan 

Emetic herb 

)) nut •,. ... •.. 

Emetina 

Emex •«. ... ... ... 

Emodin 

Kmplastrum Ammon 



to 



450 
124 

$26 

158 

»i3 

,.. ... 197 

>•• ... 000 

... 560 

425 

550 

375 

342 

340 

508 

510 
hydrarg, 
B. P. (1 in 5) ... 287 

Amicse 351 

Belladonna (porous 

plaster) 477 

Oapsici 440 

Cocaine(l in 50) of lead 

plaster 112 

Gaihani (1 in 111) ... 290 
mnthol, B. P.. (1 in 5) 486 
Opii, B. P. (1 in 10) ... 48 

Picis 574 

Rhois 170 

Boborans(lin 11) ...214 
Rennae, B.P.(lin9|) 580 

Scopolae 448 

Saponis, B.P. (1 in 7) 434 
298 
214 
241 
306 



,. Thapsiie 

y%i*rf>(l Inll) 
Emulsio Amygdalae, 6 p. c. ... 

,, Cupaibae 

„ Cusso (compound), 1 to 6 
drs. M. .^ ^. 

., Dipterocarpie,I to 4 of malt. 
Dose, 4 to 2 drs. 

., Elemi 

„ Eucalypti 

„ Theobromi(oCthe oil) 

Empyreumatic oil 

Enicostema ... 

Endive 372 

English barley ... .,. «• 840 
„ wahiut 561 



... ... 237 



85 
177 
267 
109 

577 
409 



INDEX. 



EooymttB ». ... .t* ».. tsd 

L£ran<lo ,. 551 

lEpbideriiie ..* ••• .•* ••* 566 

|£r;^'ot «,, ,«. ^ , 655 

SrioficiifiG .*, ., 377 

ISrigeron .*. 361 

iBriodendron ... ..* ,*. 104 

lEricKllctylon 433 

terveilos... .» 395 

iivihrinn »♦, .« 2tf 

\T ' ... *«• **• »., 4S0 

I M .,. 510 

hi . . .i -I'^kUtjum „. »., «,, ail 

ICrylhroijlon ,. 114 

KsABA ., 176 

lE^t'iinf^,, , ... 2ai 

liStbioTiian iourgoard ••• *•• ... 102 

|£uG AlembroUi g&aie 267 

ttuptiorbift ... .,, ... ... 557 

lEu^toia,,, .^ 264 

p-uiopbiA _ .,. ^. ,.. 58g 

|EM|»bnrbon , ^ ,., 543 

Idpjitorlum „, „. ... ^ 36a 

^KuMle .„ ... .„ 17 

EutDpcAn Angel {cft ..* ... ... sSo 

EveniOi^ primro»*e .„ • 3^ 

£vcr green rr«e ... m* - I18 

KvolvuluH ... ^. , 4ie 

Kxftcum ,. , ... 410 

iK%e<'iirla ,., ,„ ... „. 546 

■RxHgoiiium 418 

Kxtnictum Ablet ia lUi^, 1ft lo4i<» am.... 573 
Acalypha lif|,, 10 to 4^* ma. 537 
., AoonUct i t^» i irr. na I 

tirtcture, ^t t^> I"* ma. ... 4 
,. AtioaiiJi« Uq. 1 to 2 ms., 
ijneturc 10 to 30 mi.| 
nnd infusion I to i iItm. 6 
A^kriol. 3 to ^ f^rt. nnd 

tincture^ 2o tn <k) mi. 6$2 
\ Icteria, KMo HO ms. and 
tinctwret J t<* T dr. ... 605 

Allil, 4u> m^r*. 607 

.. \|>ii rHrlicit ttd*, 15 to 

60 ms ... afM 

M Apocyiii lifj., 5 to 20 mi. 

nnd tincture* 20 to 6(» m». 384 
\ 'It'pi;i:i;>, liq.,20to60mB. 

til f I iK'ture, 5 to 30 niB. 394 
A.^|,jaui»iH-riT«tit fluid, 20 

t"^ ^fiRp' 384 

ItAptihji'' 111 laid, 3 to 10 ms, 
tiiicturu, 5 to 90 ma. 

ami in/uaion 192 

llVvnD«'hi fnleori»§in>, and 
tiijctiuL- 4 ti> I tlr. *t. 225 

'niit), i to 2 fld.drn. ... liS 
Bt'lladurina alcoholic | to 1 
^t t^nd tioctare, 5 to 
^Omi. ,. 475 



BximcttJiti Barberli Hq., ( to J dr.* 
rinctiire, j to 1 dr.. and 
infu»iun, i to 3 ox. ... 34 
,i Boldoa thtid, 1 to I tiis.. 

und tincture, 1 toVOm». 522 
„ Byoe(rtmlt) Uit . 11 In4drv 640 
Cacti tfq., 1 to 10 ms, ... 318 
M Cnlendtda: Huiduni, d to 
5 tni<, and tinoitire, o to 

20 mi! 355 

<Vn ' : Tk-ii. i to I irr-, 

arc 1 to 15 ms. 570 
„ Cttu.. ,■ ..... li^., ir> to fill 

ins 573 

,. Oapsella bursa pasioni liq ., 

1 to I dr.| and tinoturc, 

2n to (tO tnt. ..« 65 

('aacan*^ amiir^ bq., j to 

2tld. dr». .. 144 

«. Caullopliyllum 1tqoidum« ) 

|j» 1 dr, and titicturOj 

i lo 1 dr. 35 

«, Cbekan H aid urn. J to 3 dr«. 270 
♦, CheiiopodiuBi tlaid, 10 to 

iii mi , 506 

„ Chimaphila flaidum^ 30 

lo m> m«. ... ., 378 
,♦ Cich<'rium li(|uid,1 toSdri. 558 
tt 0(X'^«MiU timdnm, 1 to :^mE. ^5 
„ Cok'biri, aP., t to 1 jfr.» 

^tid tincturCi fi to lli ms. 618 
^, CuloeyiithldU comjioeHum, 

2 to t» ^n,, and tincture, 

3 Ui 1(1 mt» ... . 308 
., Conduranifo llq.* '» to 30 

niH.; tincture, | to 1 dr , 
litiA uifitfiot). I to 1 OK, 398 
Oonii duid, 2 to (& itri.. and 
tincture. | to t df . ... 284 
„ Cim vail art jiT, 2 to ft frra.. 
and tincture, *» to 20 
inM. ... 613 

^^ Cor'-- ""Mdn, 2t/»M|fr«. JII 
„ Ci ilJOto40m8, 70 

» Cij urn, J to 1 dn, 

tttid luttiiion^^ to t o£. 237 
.» i^oto llqaid. t *^ ft m«., nnd 

linn 20 mt. 33S 

C)prep' in it^'Mi 

iim . .»...M,r,HC, 1 lu 2 

»»- ... 5^ 

,, )>atntanir<, 2 to 10 trr9. ... 303 

^ Datara, ^ of a gmln .» 44 1 
„ KmbeliM llqtfld, I to 4 dfn. 426 
Kr^jotii*, 2 to 8 gra., tinc- 
ture, I to I dr., and 
itifiiJiion, t t(i 3 02. ... 65s 

KntNlirtirlon liquid, lo to 
It) m^ .., ... ... 434 

'•ucnlypti trummi liqai- 
iluin, M to 6*» mi, infii. 




778 



INDEX. 



PAGE. 
sioD, 2 to 6 drs., and 
tincture, 15 to 60 ms.... 267 
Extractum Euonymi liquidum, 10 to 
60 ms., and tincture, 10 

to40m8 157 

„ Eupatorii fluidum, 10 to 
GO ms.; infusion, ^ to 1 
oz. ... ... 262 

., Euphorbias piluliferae, ^ to 

^ ^rs 544 

„ Filicis liquidum, 45 to 

90 ms. ... ... » 649 

„ Fucus yesicnlosus liq., 

1 to 2 drs., decoction, 

4 to 8 drs. ... ... 658 

Gallii, 5 to 20 grs 333 

., Gelsemii alcoholicum, ^ to 

2 grs., and tincture, 6 

to 15 ms. 402 

., Geranii fluidom and tinc- 
ture, 15 to 60 ms ... 154 
„ Glycerrhizse, 5 to 60 grs.... 213 



Gossypii radicis, 1 to 4 grs. 
and tincture, ^ to 1 dr. 



94 



Granati liquidum, } to 1 
dr., decoction, 4 to 2 fid. 
oz 277 

Grindeliw, 2 to 3 grs., and 
tincture, i to 1 dr. ... 365 

Guaranse liquid, 10 to 60 
ms., and tincture, 80 
to 60 ms. 75 

Gulancha (fecula), 10 to 
20 grs 31 

Qnmmi Ruhri liq. (red 
gum). 30 to 60 ms. ... 268 

Hellebore (black), 1 to 4 
grs 14 

Hematoxyli liquid (Log 
wood), 30 to 60 ms. ... 215 

Hydrangea fluid extract, 
20 to 60 mi 25c 

Hydrastis (Hydrastin), 2 
to 5 gre., and tincture, 
) to 1 dr. 15 

Hydrocatylefluid, 9 to 5 ms. 293 

ignatiii amara, 2 to 10 grs., 
and tincture, 2 to 30 ms. 405 

Ipecacuanhae liquid, ) to 2 
ms. ... ... ••. 341 

Jalapae, 2 to 8 grs., tinc- 
ture, (to 1 dr. ... ^ 418 

Jambul liquid, ) to 2 drs. ... 269 

Juglandis, 5 to 10 grs. ... 561 

K0U880 fluid, 1 to 6 drs. ... 237 

Krameriae liquid, 5 to 20 
ms., tincture, | to 1 
dr., infusion ^ to 1 oz. ... 71 

Lappac fluidum, } to 1 dr., 
decoction, ^ to 1 oz., 
tincture i to 1 dr. ... 350 



PAGE 

Extract fjeptandrffi fluid, 20 to 60 

ms., tincture, 4 to 1 dr. 459 

, Lobelse ethereal fluid, 1 to 
10 ms., tincture, 5 to 1.% 
ms., and infusion, ) to 
1 oz. .„ ^ ^ 375 

„ Mardis fluid, 1 to 2 dn., 

decoction, 1 to 2 oz. ... 645 
M alti liq., 1 to 4 drs. ... 646 

,. Mangostine, 3 to 10 grs. .. 79 

„ Mazerii, 1 to 5 ms. ... 532 

„ Mikania guaco liq., 30 to 60 

ms 368 

„ Naregamiae liq., 45 to 
75 md., decoction, } to 
1 oz., and tincture, i 
to 1 dr 121 

„ Nucis vomicae, ^ to 1 
gr , and tincture, 5 to 
15 ms. .. 407 

,, Onabaio fluid, i5tOjV«T- S^S 

„ Opii i to 1 gr., and tinc- 
ture, 5 to 15 ms. ... 48 

„ Ortbosiphon fluidnm, 10 
to 30 ms., infusion, 2 
to 6 drs. 494 

,. Papaveris, 2 to 5 grs. ... 44 
Paraguay (holly) fluid, 30 

to 60 ms. 5:5 

Pareirffi. 10 to 30 grs. ... 26 

„ Phytolacca, tincture, 10 to 
HO ms., decoction and 
infusion, 4 to 6 drs. .. 500 

„ PliyKOStigmati^ | to 1 gr., 

tincture. 5 to ^5 ms. .. 221 

., Piohi liquidum. 10 to 60 

UiS 443 

„ Pilocarpi fluid, 5 to 60 

ms . 339 

„ Peper-methysticum fluid. 

1 to 60 ms., solid 3 to 8 
grs., tincture, | to 1 dr. 518 

Piper Nigrum liq., 4 to 

2 ms. ... ••• 520 
Pini liquid, 10 to 20 grs. 575 
Piscidiae liquid, 20 to 60 

ms 223 

Polygonum fluid, 10 to 40 
ms., solid, 1 to 5 grs. ... 509 

Potentillae fluid, 10 to 30 
ms 259 

Ptychotis liquid, 10 to 30 
ms. ... ... .•• 297 

Quebracho, 2 to 8 grs., tinc- 
ture, 4 to 1 dr. ... 384 

Rhamni frangula liq., 15 
to 60 ms., decoction, 1 
to 2 oz • 158 

Salix nigrae fluid, ; to 1 dr. 568 



INDEX. 



77^ 



PAGE. 

Extract Sarsse liquid, 2 to 4 

fluid drs. ... • ... 585 

„ Scoparll fluid, 1 to 2 drs., 

decoction infuaioD, 1 to 

2 oz 229 

,, Scopolae liquid, 1 to 6 ms. 

and tincture 448 

„ Scutellariae fluid, 30 to 60 

ms., decoction, ^ to 1 oz. 497 
., Sedam acre fluid, 16 toSO 

ma 252 

„ Spondia mangifera, 5 to 15 

grs 172 

Stromonii, ^ to 1 gr. and 

t inctnre, 5tol5m8. 441 

Taraxaci 5 to 15 grs. and 

decoction . 372 

Thaiictrum f oliolosam liq., 

5 to 20 ms. tincture 20 

to 30 ma. 19 

., Tonga compound fluid, | to 

1 dr 473 

„ Triticium fluid, 1 to 4 drs. 645 
,. Turpetbi, 10 to 20 grs. ... 420 
„ Uva ursi fluid, 2 to 30 grt., 

and infusion, ^ to 1 oz. 377 
„ Valerianae fluid, 6to 10 ms. 345 
„ Xanthoxyli fluid, 4 to 1 dr , 

and infusion, } to 1 oz. 141 
„ Yerba santa liquid, 10 to 

40 ms ', 424 



Eye balm 



Fabaceae 
Kabiana 
Fagonia 
Fairy gloves ... 

„ hair .. . 
False angustura bark. 

„ Hellebore 

„ oil of spike 
Faius M&hi ... 
Farasiyun 
Faianj MUshk 
Farfiyun 
Farid buti 
Fariogi dhotra 
l«atarfod4 
Felix mas 
Feuu greek 

Feronia 

Ferula ...1 
Fever Twig ... 

„ wort 
Ficoidae 
Ficus ... 
Field bean 

Figs 

Fig marigold ... 
Figo-del inferno 



180 

443 
146 

453 

647 

405 

6 

483 
405 
489 
49« 
545 
27 
40 

452 
648 
232 
129 
. 288 
. 448 
363 

• 3«9 
. 556 
. 218 

• 557 

• 3»9 
. 40 



Fig wort 

Filberts 

Filices 

Filfil-e-8urkh 

Filfil darAz 

Fil zabrah 

Finduk-e-Hindi 

Fir wood oil 

Fir wool wadding 

Fish catching coral tree 

Flacourtia 

Flame of the forest ... 

Flax herb 

„ seed ... ... 

Flemingia 

Flowering ash 

„ oomet 
Foenicnlum ... 
Foetid night shade ... 
Form-aloin 
Foar o*clock plant 

Fox glove 

Fragrant nut 

Franciscea 

Frangulin 

Frankincense 

Frankenia 

Fraxinos 

Fringe tree 

Frost wort 

Fucui 

Fudinfth 

Fumarinc 

Fungi 

Funduk 

Fur fur . 



Grtb 

GadhAtee 
Qagan phul 
Gag root 
OahulA ^ 
Oajakami 
Gajapipali 

Oajar 

Galeli 

Galbanum 
Galls .. 
Galangal 
Galliam Aparine' 

Qalo 

Gambier 

„ Catechu 
Gamboge 
Gamboge thistle 
GanasurlL 
GandA biroja ... 

„ l&kA ... 

„ puro ... 
Gandhabenft ^ 



PAGE. 

... 647 
••• 438 
... 519 

••• 33 
... 74 
•. 579 
... 580 
... 223 
... 57 
... 334 
... 89 
... 150 
... 212 
•.. 433 
... 312 
... 291 
... 443 
^ 609 
•.. 5C3 
.-. 453 
... 523 
... 455 
... i5| 

176 
... «9 
. . 433 

433 

.;. 65I 
... 488 
... 70 
... 652 
... 202 
... 72 



430 
5«2 

633 
37S 
242 

467 
630 
286 
622 
29a 
563 
591 
333 
30 

185 

, 81 

40 

540 

• 579 
287 

. 378 
. 636 



78o 



INDEX. 



PAGE. 



Oandhani 


... 


... 


... 5X2 


Gandheli 


... 


a*. 


... 338 


OaDiari 


.*• 


... 


... 472 


Qknjk 


... 


.•a 


568 


Oanj bil-i.8h4mi 


.» 


... 


... 366 


a&njni.k&<«tra 


... 


.. 


... 637 


Oftnti Che bhftji 


... 


... 


... 34J 


Oaoehir... 


... 


... 


.. 390 


OaosaMn 


... 


... 


... 42a 


Garabi 


... 


... 


•a. 210 


Garado 


... 


... 


.. 5^ 


Garaja phal ... 


... 


... 


... 306 


Garani 


... 


... 


... 205 


Garbha phal ... 


M* 


.«• 


... 69 


Garcinia 


... 


.a. 


... 79 


Garden Quinine 


..a 


•a. 


...468 


„ Bne .. 


... 


• •• 


... 133 


„ Sage ... 


1.. 


... 


...496 


Gardinia 


... 


... 


•.. 333 


Gardol 


... 


... 


... aio 


Gargarisma Babul chh&l 


... 


... 181 


Dhamaso 


... 


... 147 


Hir&bol 


... 


... 174 


K&tho 


... 


• •• 


^ 183 


M&juphal 


.. 


... 563 


„ Plnus Pumeli 


:the 


oil) 579 


Garjan.tel 


... 




... 85 


Garuga pinnata 
Gaun tvac ^ 


•• 


... 


... 179 
... 43 


Gazanj bin 




... 


... 110 


Gelsimium 




... 


... 402 


Gelaphal 


.. 


... 


.• 342 


Gentian 


... 




... 410 


Geranium 


... 


... 


... X54 


Geronniera 




... 


... 559 


Gh&fith 




... 


... 236 


Qhki mari 


... 




... 252 


GhAniali 






... 315 


GhHpith 




... 


... 410 


Ghare-kum 




... 


... 65a 


Gh&ru-n&ru 




... 


... 306 


Ghat palm 


... 


... 


.. 622 


Ohati pitp&pra 
., gund ... 


... 


... 


... 467 
... 129 


GhaQn 


... 


... 


... 646 


Ghi-KumAr ... 




... 


... 608 


Gholi 


... 




... 307 


Ghorft-vel 




... 


... 135 


' Gh06h4 \m ... 


... 


... 


... 312 


Ghn-b&Tul 


... 


... 


... 186 


., -kikar ... 


... • 


... 


... 186 


Giah-i-kaisar ... 




... 


... 233 


Gigantic swallow wart 
Gil-gftch 


... 


•• 395 I 
... 210 


Giloe 


... 


... 


... 30 1 


Ginger 


... 


... 


... 601 i 


GirdAehob 


... 


... 


... 621 


GirmAl&h 




... 


... 199 


Gitekia 


• •• 


... 


... 319 1 


Glorioea 


... 


... 


... 614 ' 


GloflBocardia ... 


•^ 


... 


... 364 



Glyoerrhiia, 5 to ao gis. 

Gmeliiuk 

Gnetace» ••• 

Goa powder 

,, cbi-pbnl 

Goat*« foot creeper ••• 

„ sallow ... 

„ Rue ... 

God&k&kliii — 

Gode inderjao ... 

Godh& pAde 

Gog^ri l&kri ... 

Go-jibha 

GokialHlhnp — 
Gokaran ... ^ 

Gokhm... 

Gk)ld mohar 

„ thread ... 
Golden champa 

)t seal ••• ... 
H silk cotton tree 
Gondftni^ 
Gongo note ... 
Gooeeberry (country)... 

n foot 

„ graai 

QoTik vach 

Gor nimb 

Gor-tel 

Qorakh chincha 

,; mundiaa. .•« 

Gomchettu 

Gossypium 

Govardhan 

Gracelaria 

Graminacee 

Grangea 

Grapes 

Grass Burdock 

„ myrtle ... 

., oil 

Gravel root 

Greater plantain 

Grewia .. 

Green Hellebore 
„ ginger 
M heart tree 

Greek nuts 

Grindelia 

Orislea 

Gnaiacum 

Guarana, 10 to 60 grs. 

GuAvA 

Gud4p4ndu 

Gud&pushpi 

Guduchi 

Gugal ^, 

Guggilu 

Guinea pepper 

Guisotia 

Gujar 



PAGB- 
... 213 
... 470 
...566 
189 
... 273 

... 4<7 
... 5«7 

231 
... 231 
.. 392 

136 
... 40^ 
... 361 

178 
.. 205 
... 148 

224 
.. 18 
... 22 
IS 
... 57 
... 421 
... 106 

.. 539 
.. 506 

- 333 
... 627 
... 131 
... 190 

.. 132 

... 588 

... 93 

... 544 

•• 659 

... 635 

.. 364 

... 137 

... 350 

... 627 

... 636 

... 364 

.. 502 

... 88 

6x7 

... 600 

... 530 

... 239 

... 364 

278 

... 147 

... 75 

... 273 

316 

... 427 

... 3c 

178 

... 86 

349 

365 

190 



INDEX. 



781 



Gu1(Mib£s 

Galib 

Oulil ... 

Gall 

Galancbii 

Gul-dAodi 

Gal Cbheri 

Gallar Umbro 

GnillandeDa 

Gnl-i-gbftfis 

f, Hamaz ••• 

„ Pistih 

„ TnrSb 

Qui jam 

n kali 

„ khera •« 

I) Jaift •«• ..• .». ... 

„ Mohora .^ ... 

f, aD&r ••• 

„ iakari 

M ^el 

Gum Acacia 

„ Benjamin 

„ Mattiche 

., Plant ,.. 

„ Storax 

ft WCCO ^. < «M ••• 

Gumchi ^ 

Gnmthi 

Gan cotton .•, 

Gundft pntbpfi 

Gurr 

Gariko 

Gutvel 

Gatfido 

Gatta Percba 

„ Gamba 

Gutt« A i mp] \tiv iulphat i*, I to 4 grs. 

„ DMuriiiH, 20 grB. iu 1 oz. ... 

.. UuboifliTjit fial^jhate 

,. Homntropma^, 

„ PhysoallirmiDa^ 

„ FUooarpiiiffi «. 

Qnttifene « 

Gymnema 

GynandropeiB ^ ^ 

Gypeopbila 

Habbel-balas&na 

„ Knlkul 

„ Bathad 

Hab-ul-aas 

M b&n 

., fakfld 

M gb&r 

., burer 

M Kalb 

Kbizrfi 

., mah&lib 

., mushk .. 

sAfarjala 



PAGE. 

::: ^ 

... ao4 
... 315 
... 30 

.357 
615 

• 557 
... 202 

... 410 

... 508 
... I67 

.. 224 

It 

... 236 

... 93 

... 42 

.. 224 

... 277 

... loo 

• • ,15 

431 
166 

... 364 
... 254 

... «65 
... 180 
... 315 
... 95 
.. 217 
•• 643 
... 446 
•586 
... 570 
... 427 
►o 

475 
441 

442 
476 

2CI 

339 
78 

398 
59 
90 

17a 

76 

63 
271 

235 
230 

529 

574 
170 

167 

243 

97 

245 



Hadftthankar 

Hiematoxyli .. 

H»modoraoe8e 

Hiematropine 

Higbean 

Halad 

Haladarava 

Hftldi 

H&lim 

Holi priya 

HAlynn 

HamAm& 

HamamelidaoesB 

HamsAgar 

Hanber& 

Hansar&j 
Hanzal-e'Snrkh 

Hdrjorft 

Harankbnri 

Ha ran tutiyft 

HarapbA levadi 

Harde 

Hardwickia 

HariAli 

Hari kasa 

Hark&i ^ 
HarkQcb KUntA 

Harm&ro 

Harsankar 

Harainghar 

HAsba , 

HAficbiseh 
HAtbAjori 
HAttian 
HAthi kbatiyan 

M sundbana 

„ surA 

Havea 

Hazaz-e bindi ... 

Haseline, ) to 2 dn. .. 

Heart's pea 

Heart leaved madder.. 

,. wood . 

Hodeoma 

Hedychium 
Hedyntig hispida 
HeUnin 
Heliantbemum 
Helicteris 

Heliotropum 

Hell's incense . 

Hellebore 

Helmet flowers 
Hemadruma ... 
Hemidesmos ... 

Hemlock 

Hema-poshpi 

HemsAgar 

Henbane 

Henna 

HcnukA 



PAGE. 

136 

^ 215 

... 605 

476 

... 443 

.. 593 

... 115 

... 594 

- 63 

.. 325 

... 6t2 

... 980 

... 255 

... 252 

"• 574 

.. 647 

... 316 

.. 1^6 

... 88 

... 61, 

... 539 

... 2S9 
214 

• 639 

... 463 

... 369 

... 463 

.. 132 

... 136 

... 436 

.. 497 

... 568 

... 379 
... 104 
... 102 
.. 421 

421 
... 546 
... 33 
... 256 
... 76 
... 3*3 
... 215 
... 481 
... 597 
... 336 
... 366 
.. 65 
.. 104 

421 

107 
... 13 

497 
.. 118 

.. 399 

.. 573 

.. 605 

... 252 

... 443 

.. 275 

... 441 



782 



INDEX. 



Uepatica tribola 

Uepatic aloes 

Herb of grace 

Heradakhan 

Herbera chand 

Herpestis 

Hesperidin 

Hibiscus 

High branberry 

Hijjala 

Hijli badam 

Hikal bij 

Hill champil 

Hiltit ^ 

Himaj 

Himrod's cure.. 

Hindi akhrot 

Hindubd ... — 

Hing 

flingan bet 

Hiogn nadika . 

Hingvadi Varati 

Hippion 

Hirabola 

„ dokhi 

Hiranvel 

Hoangnan 

Hoary basil 

Hog plum tree 

Holarrhena 

Holly leaved Acanthus 
,. „ Barberry 

Holonegaoeai ,^ 

Hcly Basil 

„ Garlic Pear 

Hooalu ,. 

Honey hush ... 

,, suckle 

Hooded willow herb 

Hops 

Hordeum 

Horn poppy 

„ wood sorrel 

Horse beans 

,j chestnut (Himalayan) 

„ mint 

„ ra'lisb root 

M tree 

„ wood 

Houge-oil 

Hulhul 

Humulus Lupulus 

Hnmmaz 

Hurhuria 

Hurripbal 

Hydnocarpus ... 

Hydrangea 

Hydrastis rhizome, 10 to 30 grs. 

Hydrocotyle ^ 

Hydrophyllaccai ^ 

Hydroquinine ... 



PAGE. 

... 614 

... 108 

... 633 

... 14 

. 204 

... 456 

... 125 

... 97 

■. 3a4 

274 

...- 162 

.. 2CI 
... 22 
... 288 
... 256 

... 44» 
... 538 
... 358 
... 288 
.. 143 
.. 333 
... 289 
... 409 
... 174 

226 
... 338 
... 404 
... 491 
... 172 
... 386 
... 462 
... 32 
... 300 
... 492 
... 59 

199 

•• 33« 

... 123 

.. 497 
... 305 
... 406 
... 41 

... 153 

... 217 

... 76 

... 489 

... 65 

..- 235 
... 4M 
... 224 
S9 
.. 571 
... 5" 
... 60 
... 539 
... 56 
... 250 
- 15 
^ 292 
... 423 
... 329 



Hygrophila 
Hymenodectylon 
Hyoscyamus ... 
Hypericum 
Hypoxidaoeae .. 
HysBopus 



PAGE. 
... 465 

... 333 

... 443 

... 77 

... 604 

... 483 



' Iceland most 650 

1 Ice-plant 319 

, Icbnocarpus 387 

Ignatia 405 

I Ikshu gandh& 148 

Iksbnra-gokantaka 46$ 

H&chi 596 

, lUicium 20 

, Imachi 260 

In&bethth&lib 475 

Incense-y&danArokshognairdhupfilli 534 

India rubber 546 

Indian Almond tree 262 

„ Berry 24 

„ Bread... 592 

yy Cadaba '61 

„ Copal ... .^ 85 

„ Coral tree an 

„ Com 644 

„ Dates ... 230 

„ Filbert 74 

M Fever root 349 

Fig 318 

., Gum tree 18a 

, Laburnum 199 

at Lilac ^ .. ... 119 

„ Lyceum 33 

„ Madder ... ... ... 33O 

„ Oak 473 

„ Red paint 52 

„ Root ... 393 

J, Screw plant (east) 104 

,. Shoe 587 

M Shot ... 592 

„ Spikenaxd • ... 344 

,. Tobacco - 376 

Tragacantb ^ 57 

Turnip ^ 629 

„ Turnsole 421 

„ Wild pepper 475 

„ Wild vine 135 

Indican 215 

Indigo 215 

Indr&jao 386 

Indr&sana 569 

Indrft Varuni 307 

Indryana ... 307 

Intlatine 376 

Infusion Abri (1 in 12}) for external 

use) 181 

„ Aoorus calamus, compound 
decoction 2 to 4 drs., and 

.. 627 



INDEX. 



783 



PAGE. 

Infusion AlUmanda ( 1 in 20). ) to I 
oz., and extract 1 to 2 

gra. ••• 382 

„ Althoea and Decoction (I to 

201.) 93 

„ Andrograpbis, compound 
(1 in 10), 1 to 2 fld. 0Z8, 
and tinctuie (compound) 

1 to2dn. 465 

Antbemidis (1 in 20) 1 to 

4 oz., tincture 3 to 10 ma , 
aDdextract2 to5gra. ... 348 

Arnica; (1 in 5), tincture 6 
to 30 n]8.,and extract 1 to 

3Rr8 ^ 351 

Arittolochia longa, 1 to 2 

fld. oz. 514 

,, Arch-angelica J to 1 oz.^tinc 
ture } to 1 dr., extract liq. 

5 to hO ms. 

., Aurantii compo^itam (I 

in40),i toloz i«3 

Bacliu(l in 20) i to 1 oz., 
tincture i to 1 dr., fluid 
extract 10 to 60 niH. ... 129 
Oalumbje (1 in 20), } to 

1 Of.., tincture ) to 1 dr. 29 
Capsici (1 in 40) 2 to ois.. 

tincture 5 to 10 ms., and 
extract liq. 1 to 6 ms. ... 439 
Caulophylli, B.P. (1 in 40), 

2 to 4 drB., tincture 1 to 

2 drs., and extract liq. i 

to 1 dr 35 

Cascarilla;, B.P. (1 in 20), 
i *'o 1 08. and tincture 

t to 1 dr 540 

„ Chelidonium majus (I in 40) 
1 to 2 oz., and extract liq. 

10 to 20 ms 41 

Cbekan (1 in 10), * to 2 

oz., extract liq. ; to 1 dr. 270 
ChirataB,B.P. (1 in 20) i to 
loz., tincture ( to 1 dr. 
and extract liq. 10 to 30 

ms 413 

Cinchona ( to 1 oz., 
extract liq. 6 to ir> ms. 
and tincture i to 1 ir. 
(1 in 15) ... ... 328 

., Climaiis(lin20), 1 to2oz. 9 
,, Cocae (1 in .'»0), 4 to 2 oz., 
extract liq. } to 1 dr.. 
and tincture I f o 2 dia. 113 
Oigitalisi (1 in UO) 2 to 
4 drs., tincture 5 to 15 
ms., and extract liq. ^ to 

3 ms 454 

Gokbaru (1 to 32), 1 to 2 

fld. oz. ... 410 

Grangea (1 in 10), ) to 1 oz. 364 



PAGE. 

Infusion Hepatica triloba (1 in 20), 

1 to 2 fld. ozs 14 

Illioium verum (1 in 20), 1 

to 2 oz 20 

Kino (1 in 40), A to 1 oz., 
tincture i to 1 dr. ... 225 

„ Limonis aoidissima of leaves 

1 to 2 oz. 131 

., Lini (1 in 30), linseed tea 

1 to 2 fld. oz. ... • !$■ 

„ LufEa amara (1 in 80), I to 

2oz 312 

„ Magnolia cJauea (1 in 20), 

and decoction 1 to 2 oz... 21 

„ Matic», B.P. (1 in 20), 1 to 

4oz 51^ 

„ Nyctanthes arbar tristis (1 
in 10), and decoction } 
to 1 OS 436 

, Ocimum basilicum (1 in 10), 

^ to 1 oz 491 

„ Ortbosiphon (1 in 10), 2 to 
6 drs. and extract liq. 10 
to 30 ms. . 494 

., Panax Pseudo sinecng (1 
in 20), i to I oz. and 
tincture i to 1 dr. ... 33> 

„ Piper angnstifolia (I in 20) 
1 to 2 08., tincture 4 to 
1 dr., and extract liq. i 
tol dr. 5«^ 

„ PoDgamia glabra (1 in 10), 

and decoction 2 to 6 drs. 225 

„ Portulasa (I in 20), 2 to 8 
drs., and tincture i to 

1 dr. ^ 250 

QuaseiK (1 in 100), aLd 

tincture ( to 1 dr. ... 145 
B068B acidum, B.P. (1 in 40), 
i to 1 01., extract liq. 5 to 
30 ms 247 

„ Bubi chamamori (red rasp- 
berry), 2 to 6 drs., and ex- 
tract liq., ) to 1 dr. ••• 24 
ScopnriiCl to 10), 1 to2oz., 
decoction 1 to 2 ot., and 
extract liq. ^ to 1 dr. . 229 
Senegw. B.P. (1 in 20) i to 
1 cz., tincture, } to 1 dr., 
and extract IU{. 10 to 
20 ms. 72 

M Senna; compoeitum (1 in 
16) } to 1 ox. tincture 
(componn* ) J to 1 dr., 
and extract liq. } to 1 dr. 196 
Serpentarite, B.P. (I iu 20) 
and tincture } to I dr.... 514 

9» 8pigeilae (coinpuuud) 1 to 2 

oz.,and extract liq. 10 ms. 403 

„ Strychos potatorum (1 in 

10), i to 1 oz 409 



784 



INDEX. 



PAGE, 

Infosion TiDoepone (1 in 10), 1 to 2 

flaid onDoe, extract 

(starchy) 10 to 20 grs.... 

rodrialia, (1 in 20), i to 1 

fluid 01., and tincture 

i to 1 dr 

., Tjlophora asthmatica (I 
in 10), and decoction ) to 

1 oz ^ ^ 

„ Valerianae (1 in 20), ^ to 2 
0Z8., tincture | to 5 dr., 
and ex'ract liq. 10 to 

30 m« 

., Viola odorata (I in 10), 
and decoction 1 to 2 oz.. 
IngudivrikBha (1 in 20), 4 to 1 oz. ... 143 
Inhalations — 

,, Auoia ••• ... 

„ Chekan (volatile oil) 

„ Eucalyptine 

Gudako 

., Juniper, 2) ms.... 

„ MuUeinwaed leaves 

smoking 
„ Oleum pini 

H Pinus 

„ Quinine 

„ Thymol 

„ Tincture benzoin oomp, 

30 ms 

„ Tobbacco 

Inhalation?, (moist and sedatire)-* 
„ Ajmoda ••• ... 

„ Cajnput oil 

,, Cinnamon 

„ Cloves 

Cubebs 

„ Jirun 

„ Lavender flowers 

„ Nutmeg 

„ Spearmint 

„ Suva 

Tea 

„ Zinger 

Injections ( Hypodermic) — 

„ Acid scelerotic, ^ to 6 ms... 
„ Aconitinse, 3 to 5 m». 
„ Apomorphinae, 8 to 80 ms. 
„ Atropinse, 1 to 4 ms. 
„ Ciffeinae, 1 to 6 ms. 

„ Cocain, 2 to 6 ms 

., Oodeiose, 2 to 10 ms. 
., Coninse, 10 to 20 ms. 
„ Cotoin, 5 to 10 ms. 

,, Onrare, 1 to 6 ms 

„ Digitalinse 

„ Ergotininse, 5 to lOims. ... 
„ Haematropinae, 1 to 6 ms. .. 476 
„ Hyoflcine, 1 to 2 ms. ... 443 
„ Hyoscyamln, 1 to 2 ms. ... 443 
., Morphinae aoctatis,l to 2 ms. 46 



30 



137 



401 



346 
54 



... 44 
... 270 
... 267 
... 569 
.. 575 
for 

... 458 
... 519 
... 580 
... 329 
498 



431 
445 

281 
270 

524 
264 

5«7 

'|5 

480 

522 

485 

293 

83 



655 

4 
46 

475 
326 

IZ2 

47 
ab3 
337 
404 
454 
655 



PAGE. 

Injections Morphine and atropine. 1 

to 3 mf. ... 46 

„ Physostigminse sulphatis, 

1 to4 ms. 221 

„ Picrotoxin. 3 to 6 ms. ... 24 
,, Pilocarpine nitatis, 2 to 

6 ms 339 

., Quininse acid hydrobromide 

3 to 12 ms. 329 

„ Spirtenie, 2 to 6 ms. ... 228 
„ Strychninas, 2 to 6 ms. ...403 

„ Strophanthin 390 

Injections for the urethra — 

„ Caffeine sulphas 327 

,, Katho 183 

„ Mftjuphal 563 

„ Pulsatilla, 1 of tincture in 

10 of water 7 

Injections (vaginal)— 

„ Catechu ... ... 183 

,, Majuphal 563 

,. Tannin 563 

Iron wood tree 173 

„ Bark 265 

Isamdhftri .. 46S 

Isar mul 513 

Ishand ... ^ ... 87 

Ispand 132 

Ishwar^ 354 

Isonandra 427 

Ispanlj 507 

Ispaghulft 501 

I Iswari ... 2x3 

I Itritai 373 

t Ixora 334 



J iborandi 339 

I Jadwar 9 

, jaephal <22 

' .laggery 641 

j Jt\har ki haidi 28 

I Jakhmi 76 

I JaUbriihmi 456 

I Jal-jamni 27 

I Jalanja bin 246 

I Jalap 418 

{ Jamaica Bay berry 271 

„ Pepper 271 

„ Switch sorrel 176 

j „ Wild liquorice i8d 

JamAlgotd 541 

Jambul 269 

Janrud .. 273 

' Jamti-ki-bel 27 

Jamun 5 to .^ grs. ... 269 

I Ji\ogli bad&m ... 262 

! „ began 450 

I „ chambeli «.. ... 399 

,, chichondfi 3*^ 



INDEX. 



785 



JaDgli Draksh 

., K&ndk ... 

M KaraDj .. 

,, Kami ... 

., Kulthi ... 

„ Metbi 

„ Mulla ... 

„ Parul ... 

M P&t ... 

„ Pikwan 

,1 Saran ... 
Japanese pepper 

Japdtri 

lapbal 

Jardala 
Jaaavandd 

JAsandi 

Jatamansi 
Jatropba 
Jaundice wreath 
JauE boyah 
Jauz-el-Kai ... 
Janx-e-barri ... 
Jftv ... ... 

„ Haradc ... 
„ Almond ... 
., Plum 
,, Basa-uda ... 
,1 Qalangal 

Javasa 

Jav^tbir 
J&wantri 
JayAnti 
Jayapala 
Jeberinariel ... 
Jelly leaf 
Jequirity geed ... 

Jervine 

Jesait nut 
Jew's mal'ow ... 
Jberi sontakd ... 
J bin jar wat ... 

Jhingi 

Jiba-sag 
Joa-ka pbal 
Job's tears 
Jonesia 
Jonkm&ri 
Jouie barri 
Juglans nigra ... 
Jujube ... 
Jnlanja bin ... 

Jussiie 

Justicia 
Jyotish mAti .^ 



Kabab chini ... 
Kabdbeb-kosh^eh 
Kabbu misk ... 
Kabir, ^ to 2 grs. 



PAGE. 

... 135 

... 616 

.. 263 

- 355 

••• 331 

... 100 I 

... 355 

.... 3«6 I 

... 88 I 

... 401 

... 629 

... 139 

-.. 533 

... 53« 

::: 15 

... 317 

..• 344 

... 547 

... 3« 

... S23 

... 122 

... 538 

... 378 

... 360 

... 177 

... 269 

... S34 

... S9« 

... 188 
290 

... 50 

... 230 

... 54« 

... 031 

... too 

... 180 

.. ei7 

... 3C0 

... 87 

... 382 

... 504 

.. 423 

... 586 

... 104 

... 639 

... 217 

... 379 

... 553 

... 567 

... 160 

... 246 

... 299 

... 464 

... 155 



5i7 

»39 
97 
87 



Kacbani ••• 

KAchikk 

Kachura 

KachkulA 

Kadambd 

KadavA gokharu 

Kadndodaka ... 

„ kavat ... 

,, kbajnr ... 

„ padTal ... 
Kadyi gbiaodi ^ 

„ Jiri 

» nAi 

., tnmhadi... 
RAephal 

Kafri-mircb ... 
K&ba 

K&jaryel 

KAjirah 

Kaioo .^ 

KAjrA 

K&kadA singi ... 

KAkachiA 

KAkdi ... 

KAkkola 

KAkmiUshi 

KAkmAri 

KAknaj.c-bindi 

KakonAdA 

KAkpbal 

Kakronda 

Kakrol 

KAktnndi 
Km bachnAg ... 

M BicbvA ... 

„ ChangrA ... 

M GhbadilA.. 

„ Dammar... 

„ DAnAh ... 

„ Jam 

M Kaoguna 

„ Kasturi ... 

y, Kudu 

M Masbika ... 

„ Til 

M Tulsi ... 

,» VAlo 
KalafnAth 
Kalanchoe 
Kalonji 

KalAr 

KAlgori 

KAli cbbnd ... 

17 jiri 

M kikar 

n mirchi ... 

y. kotaki ... 

„ mnsali ^ 
Kalingad 
Kal mesbi 



PAGE 

... 358 

... 330 

... 3*5 
... 461 
... 313 
... 56. 

... 120 

316 

.. 312 

.. 373^ 

... 306 

... .1X1 

... 572- 

.- 439 

•- 367 

... 326 

••. 208 

... 356 

... 162^ 

... 405 

-. 165 

... 203^ 
.. 310 

- 133 
... 450 
... 34 

... 453 
... 38 
t«. 34 

- 355 
... 314 

••• 393 

...334 
... 649 
... 379 

m. 650 
... 177 

... 417 
... 367 

... 45« 
... 97 
... 392 

... 343 

... 366 

... 492 

... 99 

... 464 

. 253 

... 16 

- 355 

... 460 

.- 344 

... a8i 

... 1^3 

... 139 

... 456 

... 604 

... 3C9 

•.. 42q 



786 



INDEX- 



Kdlmegh 
KMo baval 

„ pilludo ... 
Kalu kern 

„ kallu 
Kasmpferia 
Kamaduti 
Kamd.phitu8 ... 
Ramrakh 
Kamar-k&kli ... 
Kamarkas 
RamAzariyns ... 
Kambbari 

Kaml&ni milU . 

Kamlo 

Kamonn 

Kampila 

RamrAj 

Kamani asvad .. 

„ gbiUi ... 

rami ... 

Kanak phal ... 

Kanoh kuri ... 

Kanchan 

Kanchuki 

KandA 

Kaodul 

Randari 

Raner 

Rangani 

Kangan-iDUodi 

Rangbur 

Rangoi 

Rdnkati 

Ranocba 

KAnphuti 

RantA Dhotra .. 
,, gor-kamai 
» ]»ti ... 
,, kadroma 
„ kinl ... 
,. ringani 
,, sbelio ... 

R^nt^lo d&mbbo 

K&nteri mAt ... 

R&otbaaTala ... 

Kdnto dbatura 

Kantoliln 

Kan war 

KaiiT^ 

Kap&sia 

Kapbe-maryam 

RapilA 

Kapit&n 

RapltbA 

Kapurli 

Kapur bbendi ... 
,, kAcbrl .. 
„ madbura 

Rarabi 



Pi.GE. 

... 41a 

... 181 

... 450 

... 61 

... 195 

.- 597 

... 460 

- 355 
... 152 
... 38 
... 496 
... 370 
... 470 
... 131 
... 31 

... 123 

... 131 

.-. 549 

- 135 
... 16 

- 451 
... 281 

... 541 
554-218 
... 139 
... 452 
... 606 
... 572 
... 307 
... 388 

... 602 

... 179 

... 9a 

... 195 

... 55 » 

... 76 

... 40 

... 437 
... 466 
.., 103 
... 450 

... 450 
... 460 
... 505 
... 505 
." 539 
... 441 
... 314 

... 574 
... ^8 

... 94 
... 69 

... 549 
... 187 
... 129 
... 479 
... 121 
... 597 
... 505 
.. 38? 



- I 





PAGE. 


Karaftih 


291 


KarAi 


... X07 


Karaila 


59 


KarambbS priya 


... .- 437 


RaraDdbio .«• 


••. ... 26 


Karanj (lil ... 


224 


Karan pbul 


264 


Kftrinta 


4€6 


Kardi 


... 356 


Kardrana 


596 


Karknm 


6oi 


Rarodio 


... 76 


KArelAn 


313 


Kariza 


466 


K^rkani 

Karkataka 


135 

- 3U 


Rarkisend 


. 545 


Rarkol 


437 


Raroiida 


385 


Raroa^photA 


... . 76 


KaronU 


.- ... 461 


Rarpasi 


94 


Rarpur 


456 


Rartoli ... 


... 3»4 


Karooa - 


^ 456 


RarvA iDdcrjay 


... 386 


„ BhoplA... 


.. 311 


,. zer& 


281 


Raiyat lad 


24 


Rarvaya-i-dashti 


283 


Rarvi-nai 


306 


Kasamardii 


m- 201 


Kasbipbal 

KashsbiDg 


... 304 


144 


Rasbta pdtali 


... ... 460 


RAani 


358 


Kaaumbo 


356 


RAgundi 


... ... 201 


Ra-us 


... 424 


Rasturi manjal 


S95 


Kataka robani 


13 


Ratba ... .« 


183 


,, el Himar 


... 311 


„ ., Hindi 


Z99 


RatbAlio gund 


57 


Rftlbbel 


183 


Katioeerumi ^ 


... ^ 167 


KatirA gond 


... 191 


Kat kaddaghoo 


... ... 60 


» kaleja 


202 


., karanj 


202 


Ratpbal 


... 572 


Ratu-badra 


... 600 




457 


RatumbAri 


... 282 


Katumbi 


154 


Raundal 


316 


Raurijal 


437 


Kavale-cbe-dole 


^ 


Rava-dori 


... . 5o6 


„ kavA . 


.» .. 518 



INDEX. 



7.S7 



Kavali 

Kavitba 
Kawaoba 
K&vakmi 
Kebbar 

KelA 

Kerbo 

Kesara 

Kesaramu 
KesrAj .. 
Ke8uriD& pbul... 
Kevar&b 
Keysur... 
KliHdflki ratDu 
Kh«Heri 

Kbadir aura ... 
Kbaiiya nkg ... 
Khair champa... 

Kbajar 

Kbakhan 

KbAkro 

KbAkshi 
Khamfidrus 
Kbanak \j!-kfllb 
KbaDik-el-namir 

M «* teib 
Kharai cbeddi... 

KUarbvkliiiidL.. 

Kbar brilbmi ... 

Kharbui 

Khardak 

Kbi\r zahra 

Kb&r-e>khnsak... 
„ -e-maDJeri 
„ -e-8utra ... 

Kb&ri Darnel ... 

Kharoti 

Kbarsinj^ 

Khasba-bus sini 

Kbftrak danah... 

Khaskbas 

Kbatkbas-i-mansur 

Khatnmbro 

Kbatyan 

Khayia cbambcr 
., -Mblis .. 

Khtr sdr 

Kberio gond ... 

Kbet paipni 

Khinjak 

Kbira 

Kbokali 

Kborasani Ajwftn 

Kbabasi 

KhalaDJaD-e-Kabir 

Khabkaldn 

Kbarbozcb ruba 

Khyar-i-bfidranj 
„ kbar ... 

Kidilmar 



PAGE. 

^ 107 
^ 129 
.«. 218 
... 270 

.-. S98 
". 577 
601 
... 78 
... 360 
... 194 

..633 
... 436 
... 401 
... 218 
... 183 
... 614 

- 389 
... 6ss 

- 437 
... 194 
... 61 
... 370 
... 24 

I 
••• 3 

... 460 
... 13 
... 292 
... 309 
••• 437 
... 388 
... 148 
... 504 
... 188 
... 469 
... 5S6 
... 460 

.. 585 

... 356 

.. 637 

... 43 

- »35 
.. 104 
... 199 
... 202 

... .83 
.- 183 

::• fl5 

... 4*9 

- 537 
... 283 
... 99 

... S9I 
.. 62 
... 307 
.- 310 
.. 3" 

... 512 



Kalapb-ula-balakhi . 

KUza 

King's cumin ... 

,t cure 

Kino 

KinsbukI 
Kinyagond ... 
KirAinilla 
KirdmAni ajmo 
Kirphah 
KirdmAn 
Kinnan*M 
Kirebuf 

Kirtan 

Kiryat 

Kiabmish 

„ -i-kawaliyAn . 

Kisree 

Kitmi-i-kucbak 
Kocbinda 
Kocudrce 
Kosb tbe- Kalan jan 
Koet jing 
Kohi bAng 
Kohl farai 
Kobolun 

Kokum 

Kola nut 
Kole j&n 
Kolkuphul 
KolaAkiljhar ... 
Kolumb kAcbri 

KomrA 

Kondal 

Koonti 
Koop pie 

Kooruk 

Kooabam 
Kootbta 

Koparft 

Kopikach chbu 
Koebd-taki ^ 

Kosimb 

Kosin 

Koth gandhul ... 
Kothmiri 
Kottsbad 
Kooaso •- 

Kow&ri 

Kowtee 

Krameria 
KrisboA bliodi... 

», charft 
jirakA 

M Kamboji 

M keU 

nimboo 
pAl .. 

„ 8ariT& 

,. tel ... 

,. tulasi... 



I'AliE. 

... 567 

... 530 

... 297 

• 378 
... 226 

194 

... 194 

3>2 

.. 352 

... 527 

... 283 

... 64 

... 358 

... 208 

... 464 

- 137 

• 533 
5b 

... 99 

... 616 

... 616 

•. .59J 

- 493 

- 443 
.. 190 

- 304 
... 80 
... 106 
.. 1.^5 

- 39« 

• 449 
... 28 
... 304 

310 

... 131 

- 557 
... X13 
... 480 
.. 87 
... 62| 
... 218 
... 312 
... 74 
... 358 
... 334 
... 282 
... 4" 
... 237 
... 201 
... 56 
... 71 

... 457 

... 224 

... 281 

... 551 

.. 503 

... i|i 

... 385 

.. 387 

... 462 

• 452 



788 



INDEX. 



Ksbetr ))arpotd 
Kiihir& Champa ^ 

., vid&ri 

Kahtt-raksbi phalam ... 

Knbo 

KachiU 

Kachnar ... ^ 

Kuda bij 

Kadari .^ 
Kuddu ... .«. 
Rudrap dnkku 

KakadaTel 

Kobill ... 

Kokronda 

Kukar-ehita 

Kiikimdlir& 

KaUka ^ 

Kulanjda 

Kulitb 

Kalpha 

Kulthi 

Kulm&Qa-phul 

Kom& bija 

Kom&r 

Kam&ri asava 

Kamarik^ 

Kambb& 

Kumbli 

Kumbnlam 

KuDDuk 

Kumrd pendi 

Kamudd 

Kam kuma 

Kanobika 

Kundali 

Kandur 

Kundcl - 

Kundol 

Kunnab ••• 

KuTid&rsl 

Korra cbilla ... 

„ karat 

Kurantaka 

Karchi 

Kurki 

Kurkur jhiT& 

Kbur-ma 

Kurroft 

Karra chants 

Kunimbd cbittra pattrikS 

Karanga 

Kashoiz 

Kashmaadi 

Kashooth •*. 

Knsht ^ 

Eash thum-bari 

Kast-i-shtoi 

Kasambo 

Kat4jaleh 

Katarana 

Kater&-ni-topi.». 



PAGE. 

::'£ 

... 416 

...484 
... 40s 

••• 193 
... 386 

• 3«5 
... 13 
... 167 . 

... 218 

• 354 i 
... 5^9 
... 354 , 
... 405 ; 
... 591 ■ 
... 210 I 
... 249 
••• axo , 
... 484 j 

... 37 
... 608 ' 
... 610 . 
... 586 

... 484 
... 572 
... 304 

— 431 

... 505 

... 57a 

... 602 ; 
... 285 I 
... 469 ' 
... 176 I 
790 I 
... 107 j 
... 568 
. 193 
... 405 
... 334 ; 

... 466 
.. 386 i 

.. 393 
... 13s 
... 6i5 

... 456 

... 87 ' 

... 484 i 
... 58 
282 
... 304 
... 424 
... 368 
.. 282 
... 366 
... 356 

... 3»7 
... 423 
...654 



Katki 

Ktttte-ki-jibh ^ 
KvLridkrk ^ 
Kyllingia ^ 



Labiate .«• 

Labarnam 

1.4u:tucariaiii ... 
Ladies* glove ... 
Lagenaria valgarit ... 

Lagbu karani 

n khatAi 

L&han nayeti ^ 

,, dagada phal ... 

LajAla 

LftkchanA 

L&kmani 
Laksha m&xul ^ 

Laksha tAni 

Lallamantia 

Lai b&n lavang 

n Bherandi 

„ Chandan 

„ Chanothi 

„ Kastorika 

„ Sabani ... ... 

Laniam 

Lank& shij 

Lapadi 

Lappa ... 

Larg« floweriog sparge 
Laricts ^ 

JAatat ol4M8a fer .«• 
„ el haoial 

Lasioeiphon 

Lasorft ... — 

La8han& 

L&t chiri ^. ^ 

„ kasturi M. 
Latkaa ^ 

Lauracese 

Laurel leaved canella 

,. nut oil 

Lavang 

»f pattee ... m. 

Law-sonia 

Ledebouria 

Lead wort 

Leafnat 

Lebraz 

Leea ... ... 

Legenaria yalgaiis ... 
L^minosse ... ^ 
Lemb&rro ... — 
Leonites nepetcefolia... 
Leopard*8 bane ^ 

Lepch4... 
Lepidiam ... — 

Leptandrin 

Lesser doddar 



PAGK. 

... 13 

... 54^ 
•- 193 
... 633 



479 
X99 
367 
453 
3»« 
9 
450 

630 

2i8 
15a 

478 
478 
»94 
48a 

"99 

54» 

180 

MS 
298 
4«>3 
545 

506 

350 

652 
392 
502 

53« 

42X 

607 
504 

223 

58 
524 
116 

82 
264 
527 
276 

380 
26a 
478 
134 

3" 
180 

X20 
484 

359 

4§ 
425 



INDKX. 



789 



PAGE. 

... 367 

.. 484 

.. 24 

.. 35a 

,.. 650 

... 147 

... 613 

... 119 

... 456 

.. 139 

... 149 

..» 306 
4 



Lesser galaDg«il 

Lettuce... ^ 

Leucas 

Levant out ^ 

„ worm seed ... 

Lichenes 

LiKDum vitas 

Lily of the valley , 

Limhado 

Limnophila 

Limri 

LinacejB ... | 

LlDRa-shiva 

Linimentum nconite compo8itum 

„ belladonna conii>ositum 475 

)) Cajuputi ... 270 

„ CampboriG com podi turn 

(1 in 8) . ... 526 

., capsici (1 in 1 0) ... 439 

„ crotoois (I in 8) ... 54a 

„ menthol (1 in 5) ... 486 

opii ammoniatum ... ill 

M picis 582 

„ pHideria fotiHa 338 

„ saponis mollis . ... 434 

„ 8Co|)olfe (4 of liq. cxt. 

in o) ... 448 

„ sinspis compositum, 

iJ-So (oil 1 in 4U) 67 
tercbinthinse (.5 iu 20) 580 
- 4»5 



Lintsasoil 

Linum 

Lion's tooth ... ... 

Lipidiiun sativum 
Li(iuid amlicr .. 

„ menthol (compound) 
„ o(>odeldoc ' ... 

„ storax 

Li(iuonce ... 
Liquor abH .« 

„ apomorphinre hydrochloratis, 
4 to 15 ms. 
„ atropinfc 

,, brucinie, 1 p. c, 10 ms. 
M carboois deter^ens } dr. 

enseal a nr i: . ^ tincture 

ti and iixtriicL ^ 

„ cocaine lijrdrochlnratis 
„ cumchoHc (I in lu) ,. 
M mt? tit hoi oc^m poll od ,, 
„ urorplrfr-^fi - t?ni'^.T 'J^r.in 110 

ms. (10 to 60 m».) 
,1 plcis carbonis et liquid, B. P. 

1898 583 

y, picrotoxiui aceticus,2 to 8 ms. 

2 gr«. in 1 fld . 02. ... 25 

„ podopbyllin compound and 

tincture' 36 

„ santal cubcbs ct buchu ... 535 
51 



149 
372 
63 
254 
4S6 

4i4 
254 
214 
181 

46 
475 

407 

5»3 

159 
112 

546 
4b6 

46 



Lii^uors tarfsc compositus 

tus(l in 10), 2 

„ strychninae (1 in 

„ thymol (1 in 800) 

Liriodendron 

Litt-oea... 

IJver wort 

Lobau ... 

Lobelia 

Loiihra ... .^ 

Lodoicea 

LoganiacH3 

Log womi 

Lokhandi 

Lokbando 

lA»ndon rocket... ... 

Long pepper 

Loni ... ... ... 

Loose stripe ... 

Lopez root 

Loturine 

Lov»ige 

Luhni 

Lulfa amara 

Lunia ... 

Lupinns albus 

Lupulin 

Luvunga Fcandens ... 

Lycop(xlium 



Mace .^ 

MAclii patri 

Maconopsis ... ... 

Macrotin 

Madan ghantil 

„ Maata ... 
McDades* succus alterans 
Ma<l apple 

.. Wce<l 

Macihu druma 

Madras horse gram ... 
., Worm wooil ... 

Mftedasingi 

Maephal 

Magtiilan 

Magnolia 

Muha firfecn 

M Lung 

„ Mirdn 

„ mud& 

„ nul tiryake 

„ nimb 

„ narakh rasa 

„ Pana 

„ Parvin ... 

„ Pushpa .., 

„ Uukh 

Mahajam-c-til 



PAGE. 

concent ra- 

to 8 drs. . 586 
100) 2 to 8 

ms. 407 

... 498 

... 21 

... 530 

... 14 

... 431 

... 375 

... 432 

... 124 

... 401 

... 214 

... 161 



275 
62 
518 
249 
275 
«39 
432 
297 

2-4 
312 

249 
217 

571 
"53 

034 



523 
35» 
42 
9 
343 
629 

554 
563 
497 
427 
210 

3^4 

104 

563 

181 

2C 

595 
125 

10 
414 

44 
118 
542 
648 

10 
427 
"41 
243 



790 



INDEX. 



Mahoori 
Maida I4kri 
„ BiDgi 
Maiden hair ... 
Maydes stigmata 

Majith 

M&jum... 
M&juphal 
Maize ergot 
Makai bondd ... 
Mak&n& 
Maklai gond ... 

Makli 

Makoy 

Malabar cat mint 
„ nut ... 
„ suparl 
Male fern 
M41k^gni .M 
Mallotus 
Malt ••• M« 
Malyaceas m. 
Mamijva .•• 

Mamix&a 
Man&c& 
Mandarin 
MandraRori ... 
M an drake 
Mango tree 

„ ginger ... 
MangC'Stine ... 
Mankand-k&chu 
Manna 
Marandi 
Maranta 
March violet •« 
Mare's tail 
Marich ••• 

Marigold 
Marjoran 
Marking nut .», 
Marrol 
Marorphali 
Marrubium 
Marsh mallow... 
., raspberry 
Martynia diandra 
Marine cocoanui 

Marvel 

„ of Peru 
Mary Ad vel 
Mary*8 flower ••« 
Maeandari ... 
Mashi patri 
Mastan-pat 
Mastaru 
Mastiche 
Maswai gund ... 

Matico 

Matisul 
Maulsari 



295 
530 
104. 
647 
644 

324 
569 
563 
656 
644 

37 
181 
271 
450 
480 
464 

584 
648 

135 
M7 
640 

9" 

409 
18 

455 
126 
478 
36 
164 
592 

' 79 

. 628 

■ 433 

463 

. 591 

• 54 
. 299 

. 579 

• 355 
493 

. 170 
. 641 

104 
. 489 
. 99 
. 249 
. 461 
. 624 

397 
. 503 
. 417 
. 69 
. 468 
. 364 
,. 207 

.. 351 
.. 167 
.. 181 
.. Si6 
.. 484 
- 429 



Maun ••« ... ... ... 

Mountain pine' 

Maw seeds 

May apple 

Maydis ustilago 

Mayun (galU) 

Mazariyun 

Meadow anemone 

H Rice 

„ Saffron 

Med&phal 

Melaleuca 

Melanthacese 

Melastomacese 

Meliaceae 

Melissa ... ... 

Melilotus 

Memordica ... ... ^ 

Memycylon ... 

Mendhi &val 

Mendhi 

Menisperinacesc 

Menpbal 

Mentha 

Menthol 

Merasingi 

Mercuro vegetal 

MesbasinRi 

Mest4 p&t 

Mesua ..• ... ... ... 

Metastomacete 

Methi ... ... 

Metroxylon sagu 

Mezender&n ... «.. 

Mhais& gugal ^ 

Michelia 

Mikania ^uaco 

Milk hedge Indian tree 

,, Weeds 

„ Wort 

Mimusops ... 

Mimosa . ... ... ••• 

Min& harmA 

Mindhol 

MirshinKhA ... 

Mirzangush 

Mishk taiAmAsbi 

Mibbmee teetA 

Mish mish 

Mistletoe 

Mistura Ammoniaci 

„ Amygdalse ] in 8 (| 
oz.) 

„ Antisyphilitic (compd.) 

„ Apomorphinae 

„ Camphors ... 

„ Chlori cum quininae 

„ copaibas com(08iia 1 dr. 

„ Filicis 

„ G eatianse composita , i to 2 



PAGE. 

-. 433 
... 579 

— 43 
••• 36 
... 656 
...no 

.- 532 

... 7 
... 18 
... 618 

— 342 
... 270 
.. 617 

- 274 
... 117 
... 485 
.-. 233 
-. 314 
-. 275 
•.. 200 
... 271 
.. «3 
... 342 
... 485 
... 486 
... 399 
... 455 
... 399 
... 57 
-. 78 
.. 274 
... 232 
... 625 
... 62 
... 174 
... 22 
... 368 
... 545 
... 393 
... 72 

... 429 

... 210 

... 174 

.. 342 

... 438 

... 493 

... 499 

... 10 

... 242 

- 533 
287 



to 1 



... 241 
... 554 
... 47 
... 526 
... 331 
... 206 
... 64S 
OS. 411 



INDEX. 



791 



pAob. 
MiMura Glycerrbiza coinpo8ita, 182-214 

„ Qurako 446 

„ Quaiaci, 1 gr. (} to 1 oO ... 148 
„ Magnesiae et asafetidse | to 4 

drs. . ... 289 

f, Myrrhaea compotfita (| to 1 

oz.) 174 

„ Olei ricini, 8 drs. to 1 oz. ([ 

to 2 oz j 552 

„ Olei santali, 6 to 12 drs. ... 536 
„ Khei alkalioi, 6 .. ... 509 
„ ScammoDii, 3 grs., 1 01. ... 415 
„ Senna! ccynposita, 1 to 2 0x8. 197 
„ Smilacen composita, 4 to 8 

dre. . 554 

,» Terebintbinffi-chin 1 toSdrs. 162$ 

Miswak-el abbda 191 

Mitba InderjaT ... .^ ... 391 

„ Jir& -495 

„ knddoo ... .^ ... 304 

,y Tfl .•• «•• ... ... 462 

J, Zeher ... 2 

Mithi jar 437 

Mitho akalkaro ... 348 

Mocharas, 10 to 40 grs. 103 

Mob4raka ... 647 

Moglili behed^nA 245 

„ Krand 547 

Mogro 436 

Mohawft 426 

Mobt4 dagadphal 551 

„ antduso 141 

Mollugo stricta - 319 

Momordica ... ' 313 

llonard^ 489 

Monimiaceas ... 522 

Monk's bood 3 

Monkey bread ' 102 

„ faced tree ^ 549 

„ flower 587 

„ nut .M ••• ... ... 189 

Moocby wood tree ... ... ... 211 

Mora Ageru 301 

,, matui 301 

Morinda 335 

Moringaceae 235 

Morpbia 46 

Mortification root 92 

Morvel 9 

Morwu 495 

M()S8y btonecrop ... ... ... 251 

Motba 632 

Motber clones 264 

„ of thyme 497 

Motbi dudhi 544 

„ Ringani 449 

MoucbA .M 249 

Mountain Balm 1 485 

„ Klax 72 

„ Grapes 32 



Mountain Maboghany 
„ Sage 
„ Tobacco 

Mouse bane 

Mrig& sbingA 

Mucbbni 

MucbkundA 

Mucilago acacito 

„ Abutilon imiicnm. 

,, Akakia 

„ Attralagus .. 

„ Cydonii 

„ Gbu babul ... 

,, l^ibiscus 

„ Tragiioantb .. 

Mucuna 

Mudriku 

Mugbilan 

Mugrela 

Mugwurt 

Mukal 

Mukia scabrella 

Mulberry 

Mullein weed , 

Mulasari ... 

Mulo 

MultAni m&ttee 

Mnndi buti 

MundAr 

Mangpbali 

MuogU8-vel , 

Muridu puabpa 

Murad sing 

Murray a exotica 

Musbk dknkh 

Muabadi 

Musali-kand ^ 

MuBcariue 

Musb-karani ... 

Mnshk-i-vallc 

Mudhrooui 

Musbwui gond.M ... 

Musk mallow 

„ melon ... ... 

„ root 

Mussond^ 

Mustaka ... ••• 

Mustard 

Mustarn 

MustastMiial ... ^ 

Mutturi 

Myrabilia jalapa 

Myrica sapida 

Myristica 

Myrobolans 

Myrosin , 

Myroxylon ^ 

Myrrb .. , 

Myrsiuaceaj 

Myrtle 

1, tl4g 



PAGE. 
... 565 

— 353 
... 350 
... 3 
... 104 
... 641 
... 105 
... 182 
... 92 
... 185 
... 192 

... 24S 
... 186 

... 98 

... 191 
... 218 

... 42 

... 101 

... 16 

... 350 

... 174 

... 315 
... 560 

... 45« 

... 429 

... 63 

... 139 

... 370 

— 395 
... 190 

••• 337 
... 187 
.. lOI 
... 131 
... 97 
.. 32 
... 605 
... 653 
... 419 
... 340 
... 652 
... 181 
... 97 
... 3»o 
... 29Z 
... 336 

... 6)2 

••• 66 

... 364 
... 103 
... 462$ 
... 503 
... 571 
... 523 
... 256 
... 06 
... 219 
... 174 
... 425 
... 263 
... 627 



792 



INDEX. 



Nabatul khas ... 
Nabatus-flibar ... 
Nag down& ... 
Nagala dudbeli 
Nagamodia 
Nagarmoth ••• 
Nagarvel ••• 

Naga-8uganda ... 
Nag champ^ ... 

„ Downi ... 

„ Jhiy& 

}f l\.68ar ••• 

„ Karii 

Nagoda 

Nag-phannee ••• 

Naibel 

Nik^bhikni ... 

Kaktsk malaka... 
Nandja VarWi*.* 

Napelline, f to ^ gr. 
Nirajile-b&bri... 
Nara-kachur . , 
Narakb-e-ood .^ 
Ndra-mosbk ... 

Narasij 

Narajen-tela ... 
Narak Karan-doi 
Narceioa, | to i gr. 

Nanlos 

Naregamia 
Niriel ... ... 

Nariogce ••• 

Ninrel 

Nason&^. 
Nasturtiam 
Nisur jiin>^bi ... 
N^it-bailam 
., ki-bachDd|ri 
Kajapbatikt .< 
Nayeti ... 
Kectandra Radii 
Neemboo ... 
Ne;gii camphor 
Nepjo Coffee ... 
„ Pepper ... 
Nelli ... 
Nelambiaceas .» 
Neo-kola ... 

Nepala oil 
Nepal bitter ... 

,, dbanyia 

„ nimb ... 

„ pepper ... 

„ raspberry 
Nepenthe ^ 
Nerium Odoram 
Nenre root 
Nettle ... ^. 
Netario thoar««. 



PAGB. 



... 42 


Netra ushadhi ... 




.. 608 


Nicker tree ... 


... 


...604 


Niepa bark ... 


urn 


... 397 


Nigella sativa .. 




... 614 


Niger Seed ... 


... 


... 631 


}« Head ... 


... 


- 515 


Night Jasmine 




... 337 


„ Shade _ 


... 


.. 78 


NU 


... 


... 357 


Nila kalomi ... 


... 


... 399 


„ Kantha ... 


... 


... 78 


„ Poahi ^ 


... 


.. 614 


NilkaDt 


••• 


... 474 


Nikumba 


— ■ 


.. 318 


Nilafer 


... 


... 130 


Nimordo 


... 


... 554 


Nimb «. 


... 


— 420 


Nimbaka 


... 


... 224 


Nep&lo 


... 


... 346 


Nerbiahi 


... 


... 297 


Nirgundi 


... 


... 4 


NermaU 




...624 


Nisi .^ ^ 


... 


... 593 


Neahindi 


... 


107,559 


Nesbotar 


• • 


... 78 


NiF4 duDgi ... 


... 


... 54a 


Noah's ark ... 


... 


". 45» 


Noble pine 


... 


- 355 


Now; bleed ... 


— 


... 47 


Nub&ree 


' 


... 344 


Nncin 


... 


... 121 


Nnkhand-e.^lavandi 


... 


...623 


Not kaner 


... 


.. 123 


It oil 


... 


... 321 


„ palm 


... 


... 4S9 


Nux Vomica ... 


^. 


... 65 




•— 


... 298 


Nymphiaocae ..« 


... 


... 262 






... 614 






... 76 






— 544 


Ochro — .^ 


«.• 


... 530 


Ochrocarpas m. 


... 


... 136 


Ocimam ... 


... 


••• 354 


OdolUm 


... 


... 301 


CMitia wtwllt'C.., 


... 


... 439 


Oil, concrete oil. solid fat, 


... 


or veietable batter— 


... 38 


„ AUriond butt4?r 


... 


.. 106 


„ Baipil fjamphor 


^ 


... 54« 


„ Chironjee 


... 


- 457 


„ Cinnamon (wax) 


- 139 


„ Cwnan lit batter 


- 457 


„ Fiilwa butter 


M. 


— 439 


„ Gamboge batter 


... 33 


1 ,, Khakhnn (tel) 


... 


... 46 


„ Kokum(tel) 


... 


... 388 


„ Myrica (wax) 




... 587 


' „ Ngai camphor 


.M I 


- 555 


,, Natmeg butter 


... 


... 545 


1 „ Piney talloir 


• • 



PAGK. 
^ 165 
... 202 

II-X45 
... I6 
^ 366 

— 359 
^ 43S 
... 44S 

... 2I< 

^ 448 

... 593 
•.. 417 
... 410 
... 548 

^ 3« 

- 355 
... 119 
^ 124 

- 54« 
... II 

— 474 
... 408 
^ 600 

— 474 
... 420 

— 543 

- 587 
... 37« 

- J47 
•- 559 
... 561 
•- S14 
... 5« 
-. S6i 
... 021 

— 405 

- 436 
•^ 37 



^ ^ 7« 

... M. 4SO 

«. 386 

... 164 

solid oil, 

... 239 
... 491 
... 163 

... 530 
... ... 624 

^ ... 427 

... 80 

... 438 
«. ... 80 

... 571 
354 

... 524 
.«» ... 86 







INDKX. 






7Q3 






PAGE. 








PAGE. 


Oil, Piper Nigrum (Balsamic, < 


5on- 


Oils of Fern 


... 


... 649 


Crete oil) 


••. 


... 520 


»» 


Fleabane 


... 


... 361 


„ SaWadora Persica, fat, butter- 


i» 


Garlic 




... 607 


like 


... 


- 437 


»» 


Gingelly 




... 462 


„ 8terculifl,non drying: solid fat... io6 


♦» 


Ginger grass ... 




... 635 


„ Theobioma cocao, butter 


... 108 


!• 


Ground nut ... 




... 189 


„ Trigonella, fat oil 


... 


... 232 


11 


Gurjan 




... 85 


OilF, Medicated oils— 






»» 


Hemp seed ... 




... 568 


„ Alaoina™ 


••• 


... 322 


n 


Horse radish ... 




... 235 


„ BAvanchi • ... 


•.• 


... 225 


It 


Jasmina 




... 436 


„ Caletropis (Arkatel) 


••• 


... 395 


11 


Indian Melissa 




.. 636 


„ Carthamus ••• 


.•• 


... 356 


»i 


Lemon grass ... 




... 6*5 


„ Dcrria .- «. 


••• 


M. 208 


n 


Lavender 


M. 


... 479 


„ Dhupel ...| 

„ Dhnn-i-ward-i-kh&n 


• a. 


... 368 


i» 


Margosa 


... 


... 119 


... 


... 247 


It 


Lemons, ^ to 3 ma. 


... 


... 4i^ 


„ Kmpyreumatic (black 


:oil) 


•:• \l\ 


i» 


Linseed, containa liquid 


fat 150 


„ Ounj tel ... ^ 


— 


tt 


Mustard 


... 


... 67 


„ Gynandropiis ... 


... 


... 59 


• 1 


Myrrh (myrrhal) 


... 


... 174 


„ Hwrnatropine cum cocaine 


... 476 


tt 


Myrtjia 


... 


... 271 


., Jataroansi m. 


••• 


... 345 


ti 


Neem 


... 


... 119 


„ Marichadi tel ... 


... 


... 521 


tt 


Nutmeg 


... 


... 524 


„ Ocimum ... ... 


•.• 


... 49 « 


It 


Olivea 


••« 


... 434 


„ Oleander 


... 


... 388 


tt 


Patchouli 


... 


... 495 


„ Mugrelae 


... 


- 17 


fi 


Pennyroyal ... 


... 


... 481 


„ Narayan tel 


... 


... 452 


•• 


Pepper graaa ... 


., 


... 64 


,. Oleum Nigrum... 


... 


... 155 


It 


Pepper mint ... 


... 


... 487 


„ Pancha KapithA 


... 


•*. 130 


II 


Physic nut ... 


... 


- 547 


„ Physalis minima 


... 


...448 


It 


Rosemary, ) to 3 ms. 


... 495 


„ Rosa dubu-i-ward-i-kham 


... 247 


t« 


Rooaa graaa ... 


... 


... 635 


„ Safflower oil 


... 


... 356 


•1 


Spike 


... 


... 483 


„ St, Jacobs' oil ... 


M. 


... 4 


ti 


Savine, 1 to 3 ma.- 


•c% 


... 576 


„ Salanum jacquini 


M. 


- 450 


»• 


Sumbul 


... 


... 291 


„ Stramonii 


M. 


... 44 1 


ii 


Sandal wood «. 


... 


... 536 


„ Vcntilago 


... 


... 161 


tt 


Thyme. 


M. 


... 497 


Oils, Fixed oila-l. 






11 


Teel ... 


M. 


... 462 


Oils of Ajowan 


... 


... «97 


It 


Turpentine t... 


... 


... 579 


„ Aimondi 


«.• 


... 239 


II 


Verbena 


... 


... 635 


„ Allspice 


... 


... 272 


II 


Walnut 


... 


... 361 


„ Anise, | •*<> 3 ma. 


... 


... 20 




Winter green... 


. . 


... 378 


„ Pay . 


... 


... 271 


Olak tambol ... 


... 


.. 101 


,. Artiafs oil ... 


M. 


.. 561 


Olden 


landra 


... 


... 336 


„ Berganoet ••• 


... 


... 126 


Oleacen 


... 


... 433 


„ Bhuising 


• •• 


... 190 


Olea] 


l£uropa 


... 


... 4U 


„ Bondue nut ... 


t.« 


... 20a 


Oleander 


... 


... 388 


., Cade .^ 


... 


... 576 


Oleatura Aconitina;. « p c. 


... 


... 5 


„ Cajnput 


••• 


.. 270 


It 


Atropina;, 1 to 40 


... 


... 475 


„ Carraway 


... 


... 282 


II 


Cocaine, 1 in 20 


... 


... 112 


,, Cashew nut ••• 


... 


... 162 


•t 


Hasmatroprine cum cocaine 475 


„ Chamomile ... 


... 


... 348 


i» 


Morphinae, 1 gr. in 60 m.s. 4 


,. Chaul moogra 


... 


... 56 


It 


Q liniae, 26 p.c. 


... ' 


... 32 


„ Cheataut ^ 


... 


... 56i 


II 


btryrhnin.T, 2 p.c 


• ... 


.. 403 


.. Cinnamon 


... 


... 517 


II 


Veratrinac, 2 p.c. 




... 611 


„ Cloves, 4 to 3 ma. 


... 


... 264 


Olen Kimyat ... 




... 464 


„ Cocoanut 


... 


... 623 


Oleo 


resin CapsiM ... 




... 440 


„ Cotton seed ... 


... 


... 94 


It 


„ Cubebte 




... 517 


„ Coriander, J to 3 ms. 


... 283 


It 


„ Klemi ... 




... 177 


„ Cubeba 


M. 


... 5*7 


tt 


Pinus ... 




... 578 


„ Cucumber 


... 


... 310 


Oleum Anethii B.P. 1 to 4 


ms. 


... 293 


„ Dill, 1 iq 4 ms. 


... 


... 793 


tt 


Anthemidis, 1 to 4 ma.. 


... 347 


,, Empyreamatic 


... 


... 577 


i« 


Argemone 


... 


... 40 


„ Fennel 


... 


.. 292 


M 


betulit 


... 


... 566 



794 


INDEX. 






PAGE. 






Oleum Cadmum B.P. „, 


••• 575 


Oregon grape ... 


.M 


„ Colza (cabbage) ^ 


... 68 


Oriental sweet gum 


... 


„ Crotonis ^ ••• 


... 541 


„ Salop... 


... 


„ Eucalypti, J to 3 ms.... 


... 267 


Oryza sativa 


... 


„ Qaultheriae, 3 to 10 ms. 


... 378 


Orizabin, 2 to 6 grs. 


... 


„ Gynocardi^, 2 to 10 ms. 


... 56 


Ormocarpum Sennoides 


„ Jatamansi 


... 344 


Oroxylum Indicum 


... 


„ Juniperi 


... 575 


Orphul 


... 


„ Negundo 


... 474 


Orris root 




„ Niroli 


... 123 


Orthosiphon stamineud 


„ Origani « 


.-. 493 


Osht 


.•• 


„ Picis rectificatus 


... 582 


Ouabain 


... 


„ Pini 


— 579 


Ova 


... 


,, Kaphanus 


... 63 


Ovali . 


..* 


,, Recini 


.- 552 


Ovap&na 


• .. 


„ Rosae ••• •■• ••• 


... 246 


OxaliB 


... 


„ Rutae 


.- 133 


Oxbalm 


... 


„ Sassafra8, 1 to 6 ma. ... 


•. 53* 


Oyster Mushrooms 


... 


„ Staphisagrae 


... 12 






„ Stillingia sebifera, (tallow 


Padama K&sta 


.•• 


tree oil) 


." 554 


Paderia f oetida 


*.. 


„ Succini, 5 to 16 ms. ... 


.. «;76 


Padma . 


... 


„ SuDflower (Helianthus anus) "65 


Padsh^hi s&lap 


... 


„ Weendee 


... 82 


Pad vis 


... 


„ Tenaceti 


... 371 


Paeoni 




„ Tansy «• 


." 371 


Pagoda tree ... 


... 


Olibanum ^ 


^ 176 


Pahad-mul ... 


• >. 


Ouagraceas •• 


... 299 


Pahadi kanda ... 


... 


Onion.*. ••• ••• ... 




„ phudinA 


... 


Ood 


... U3 


„ pipal ... 
PahArvel 


... 


Oomrdvatee gond 


... 182 


... 


Ooplet ... ••• «•• ••• 


... 368 


Pakhanbhed ... 


... 


Ophelia chireta 


... 412 


Palanquium ... 


... 


Ophiorrhiza mungos 


... 337 


Pal&sh-papado 


... 


Ophioxylon serpentinum ... 


... 398 


Palmatoria de inferno ..' 


Ophthalmic discs atropine jjj to',^fl 
„ Cocaine ,Jo ^ li,, gf- 


gr- 475 
... 1 12 


Palm 

Palmyra-brab-tree 

Palo 

Piiu 


... 


„ Daturine j^'oo gr. 


... 441 


... 


„ Duboisine ^ 'q„ gr. 


... 442 


Panama bark ^. 




Galliaoid,!^ gr. 


... 563 


Panax ginsing . 




„ Gelsimine ^^ gr. 


... 402 


Panch ra«a (the five 


juices) 


„ Hffimatropiue jjI^q gr. 


... 476 


Pandanaceae ... 




Hyoscine .J^ ^r. 


... 44^ 


P&ndhra kura ... 


.. 


Hyoscyamiiic ^io-i gr. 


... 444 


„ saur ... 
Pandamus 


... 


„ Morphine and atropine 


PAndri chiki ... 


... 


(1 in 10) 


... 45 


labfln .. 


... 


„ Morphine 3J0 gr.... 


... 


PangrA 


... 


„ Physostigmiue jf^a gr. 


... 221 


Paniaia 




„ Pilocarpine j'jo gr. 


... 339 


Paniphal 


.M 


„ Thymol ^0*0 gr. 


•• 497 


Panir-photi ... 


... 


„ Opium « 


... 44 


Panj-i-mariam ... 


... 


Opodeldoc liquid 


... 434 


Panjan gusht ... 


... 


Opuutia Dillenii 


... 3*8 


PAnjoli 


... 


Orange 


... 123 


PAn-lavang 


... 


„ Hoot 


... 15 


PAn-moburi ... 




„ Swallow wort 


... 394 


Pansy 


... 


Orchis Latifolia 


... 5»8 


Papaver 


... . 


Ordeal bark 


... 211 


Papaw ... 


, , 


„ bean 


... 221 


PapitA 


... 



PAOIS. 
... 32 
... 254 
... 588 

.. 642 
... 418 
... 209 
... 459 
... 98 
... 602 
... 495 
... 79 
... 585 
... 297 
... 429 
... 480 
... 152 
... 48c 
... 654 

- «43 
... 33» 

- 574 
••• 606 
... 109 
... 17 
... 389 
••. 20 
... 615 
... 488 

... IOC 

... 36 
... 411 
... 427 
-^ 194 
... 318 
... 621 
M. 622 
... 30 
-. 515 
... 245 

- 321 
.- 269 

.- 633 
... 386 
.^ 104 
.- 633 

... 176 
... 2x1 
.- 57 
.^ 300 
... 453 
«. 69 
... 474 
... 551 
... 299 
... 291 
... 51 
... 43 
... 301 
... 404 



INDEX. 



795 



Papoose 

PApri khir 

Plara-orcss 

Paraguayholly 

nut ... 

Parasica 

PArd-pipal 

PfirA8on& ••• 

PArbutti 

Pareira ^ ... , 

PArijatak ... ... 

Parillin 

Parmelias 

PAroAbija 

Parusba-phala... 

ParpaU 

Parpatrah 

Parpnti 

Parrot need 

Parsley 

PArul 

PArvati 

Parvat nimb 

Parvat-piVdi ... ^ 

Parfi traka 

P^Mban bhed 

]^vH|tie flower 

PasMidora 

ViUKle bbilAwan (compoumi) 

„ butea frondotja ... 

„ casiia tora 

Pa!«Cinaca 

l'iH41 UiMjI^afli 

PAtAlA 

,. glialori ... { ... 

Patebaka 

Patbar-phul , 

., chura ./< ^ 

Patang 

PatbyA 

hitchouH ... ^ 

Pattra Imngah 

l*att<mki-8end 

PatwA 

Pi«|ilinia 

PavaiiA 

Pavctta 

Rivonia 

Pea nut 

l\»rl nut 

Pecbak 

PedHlium 

IVKanum 

Pclletierine 

Pellitory 

Pellotine 

Pelosine 

PeiidhAri ^ 

Penny wort 

Prniajful ... - ... 
Pentap«Hi8 



PAGE. 

••• 34 
... 184 

... 370 

... 535 
... 547 

•.. 443 

... 100 

... 607 

... 436 

... 26 

... 436 

.^ 586 

... 651 

•M 252 

... 88 

... 35 

•. 399 

... 337 

... 356 

... 294 

..; 460 

... 278 

... 118 

... 76 

.. 558 

... 251 

... 7 

... 171 

... 195 

... 202 

- 293 

- 39<5 
... 460 
... 27 
... 368 
... 650 
.. 4«o 
... 204 
... 259 
... 494 
.. 512 
... 543 
... 99 
... 75 
... 551 

... 335 

... 99 
... 189 
... 625 
... 104 
... 461 
... 132 
... 278 
... 348 
... 318 
^ 2r. 

... 342 
... 292 

... 334 
... 105 



Pentatropis 

Peony rose • 

Pepper betel' 

Pepo * 

Pepper cores (abortive) 

Pepper 

Perfume cberry tree .,. 

PersUn l>errie8 

,. collyriam 

„ lilac . 

Petroselinum 

Peucudanam ^ 

PhAlA kantak ... 

„ pural ... ^ 

Ph:il»i\ ^ 

PhtuiiflA 

Pbanas-AznbA ... .«« 

Pharl>ti8 

Phaseolusmungo phatmel 

Phatar phodA 

,. RU74 

ka phul... 

„ e-saliyun 

Phfpnix 

Pheasant's eye 

Pbellandrene 

Pbilpbil-a-aswail „ 

Phoretin 

PhudinA ^. 

Phyllanthus 

PbysaliH 

Phrsostipma 

Phytolacca 

Piar^nga 

Plcca ... .„ 

Pichi 

Picrana 

Picrorrhiza 

Picrasma 

Fiorotoxin 

Pigeon's foot 

Pigmentum chrysarobini, 1 to 10 of 
colloilium 



PACK. 

... 400 

... 17 

.. 621 

... 304 

... 521 

... 519 

... 243 

.. 157 

.. 190 

.. 118 

... 294 

- 293 

... 397 

^ 125 

^ 88 

.. 494 

.. 654 

.. 417 

,.. 366 

.. 539 

.. 364 

.. 551 

.. 296 

.. 625 
6 



519 
510 

485 

5*9 

447 

221 

500 

18 

574 

443 

144 

456 

145 

24 

76 

189 



„ menthol, 1 in 4 of olive oil 487 

„ papaw, lin 10 of water .. 302 
„ picrotoxin, 1 gr. in I dr. 
each of acetic acid, caster 

oil and eucalyptus ... 2$ 

Pilgush 366 

Piii-tpA« 57 

Pili kirbir ... .« 386 

Pilavana ... ., 234 

Pilocarpine 339 

P»l" ~ ... 437 

Pilula aloin composita .. ... 609 

„ aloin cum strychninn; et bola- 

douHHe. ... ... 609 

„ alai composita, 2 to 5 grs. .» 465 

„ aphrodisiaca 303 

„ asafetidM»coniposi(a. 5 tolOgrs. 289 



796 



INHF-X. 



PAGE. 

Pilula atropinai cum quininae et ars- 
enic ••• 

„ cambogi^e composita, 8 gre 

,, cascara; chniposita, 1 to 2 grs. 

,, catbarticai compobita... 

„ cocaiDrt; hyd rochloriili, 2 J gr. , 

,. ccxlciniu conipositH, 4 jjrs. 

„ colocynthidis composita, 4 to 
8 grs 

„ ergotiLi composita, 4 grs. 

„ Euonymi compound, 4 grs. 

„ Galbani composita, 4 to 8 grs. 290 

,, Gamboga3composita,4 toSgrs. 87 

„ Ipecacuanha cum scilla. 4 to 
8 grs. 

t, KavachapusbtikaCcompound) 
Dose, 10 grs. 

„ Kanchanara gugula, 4 to 6 grs. 

„ Maba narakh rasi (compound) 
2 grs. • 

„ Picis liquidne, 2 grs. ... 

„ Picrotoxinaj, 1 to fiO grs. 

,, Pilocarpinaj nitratis, -,'j gr 

,, Podophylli composita. ^ gr.. 



476 
81 

159 
81 

112 
47 

308 
655 
157 



340 

219 
»79 

542 

582 

24 

339 
36 



„ Purgans compound, 3 to 6 grs. 308 
„ Rhei composita?, 4 to 8 grs. .. 511 
,, Scammonii compositie, 4 to 8 

grs 415 

,. Scilla* compoaitai, 4 to 8 grs... 610 
„ Segapinum, 4 to 8 grs. ... 290 

„ Shula gaja kesari, 3 to 5 grs. 96 
,, Sajivani goticiV (compound), 5 

grs. .. ... ... ... 426 

,, Saponis composita. 2 to 4 grd. 434 
,, Sv&lpajvarnn ku8d(comp'^und) 441 
„ Terebenthinaj Ch aj, 3 grs. ... 168 

,, Trijatakad i-goli. 3 to 5 grs.... 529 

„ Yograj gugula, 3 to .5 grs. ... 179 

Pimenta 271 

Pinaceae $72 

Pind&va 55 

Pineapple 620 

Pine tulip 5)78 

Pine wool felt 560 

Piney (tallow tree) 85 

Pinglu 342 

Pinus 577 

Pipal tree 559 

Pipli mul > ... 519 

Pipsiesewa 378 

Piscidia. 223 

Pishotu dhatara 441 

Pitta 530 

PistAn 167 

Pitarsaleri 294 

Pithi-saaara ... ... 64J 

Pistia ... 6jo 

Pit-bandana 536 

Pi lay J bark •« 32S 

Pitonri m. 420 

Pitkari ... m* ••• •«• ••• 4"^ 



Pittmari 

Pittaghni 

Pitta viiksba 

Pittospermum 

Pitt pAppadii , 

Pilari ... 

Pityari 

Pix carbonis 

Pixol 

Pivala karanta... 

„ dhotra ... : 

„ kaner 

„ chainpo. . ^, 

Piyaii 

Plantago ... U 

Plantain ... 

Plaster abies canadensis 

„ balsamodendroii playfarii . 
„ chrysarobin (plaster mull 

I inch 

„ pinus longifoluB 

„ sarcacoUa — (lep or plaster) . 

„ shorea robusta (1 in 2) 

Pleurisyroot 

Plihagna 

Plumbago 

Plumeria 

Poa cynosurioides 

Podophyllum 

Po<l pepper .. 

Pogo8t*mon « 

Poiuciana 

Poison nut ... , 

,. bull V 

„ hemlock .. • 

f, ivy •«• ... ... « 

„ tobacco 

Poke weetl 

Pokal miri * 

Pokarmul 

Polanisia 

Policuiia 

Polyanthus 

Polygala 

Polygonum 

Pol} podium 

Polypoious 

Pomegranate bark 

Pond lily 

Pondi karavati „ 

Pongnmia ... 

Poor man's rhubarb 

Poplar leaved fig tree 

Poppy 

Portia tiec 

Porto gallato 

Portulacaceai 

Poshtu bijam 

Potentilla I ... 

Poultices cadnba indiea 



PAGE. 
... X»l 
... 30 
.. 172 
.^ 138 
.. 364 

•• 555 

.. 18 

,.. 583 

... 582 

... 466 

.. 40 

-. 39« 

.. 616 
,.. 501 
. 598 

•. 173 

.. 189 

.. 579 
.. 190 
« 86 

.- 394 
.. 117 
.. 3S0 
.. 388 
.. 640 

.. 35 
.. 439 

- 494 
.. 224 
... 4C5 
^ 604 
•. 283 
.. 169 

- 443 
.. 500 
•• 521 

• 370 
.. 60 

- 337 
.. 615 
.. 72 
.. 509 

•• <>49 
.. 652 
.. 277 

- 37 
... 4^8 
.. 224 

- 18 
•. 359 
•• 39 
.. 100 
,. 123 
.. 249 

- 43 
.. 262 
.. S» 



INDRX. 



797 



Poultices celoaia argentcn leaves 
Prtibbn n^tha 



PrAnada .. ■ •» 

„ gudica 

Prangos .. 

PraHarani 

Premna 

Prianga 

Prickly ash 

„ chaf! flower 

., Cedar 

„ leaved elephant's foot 

„ lettuce 

tf pear «•• •■« !«• ••• 

Pride of china 

Primrose 

Priuce^K feathers 

I, piue ... ... ... ••• 

Priaoiparni 

Protopine 

Prunes 

Pneudo rhiretin -, 

„ jorvine 

H pelleterine sulphate 

Psidium 

Psoralta .. ^ 

Psychotria 

Pterooarpus 

Pterospermum 

Ptychotis ajowan 

Padding pipe 

Pueraria 

Puffball 

Pulsatilla, I toj gr 

PuUis acorns i*alamus ( -om pound)... 

9, akarkara bh idi churun. Dose, 
6 grs 

„ Amrita haritaka, (compound) 
powder 

„ Amygdala: compoeitus, aDd 
(^in 13), 1 ta2drs. 

„ Aromaticus, I0io30 grs. .. 

„ Asafetida (compound,) 10 to 
20gii« 

„ Asparagus compound), 5 to SO 

gr- 

„ Bonductilla (compound,) 15 to 

30 grs. 
,. Cardiospermum balicacabum 

compound, 1 dr 

., Catechu (c >mpound,) B.P. (1 

in2i) 20 to 40 grs. 

„ ChaturasHiia 

„ Chitrak (compound ) 20 to 40 

grs. 

„ Chiuchonse (compound,) 3 to 

12 grs 

„ Cinnamon (comiK>und,) 10 to 

40 grs 

„ Clitoria ternata (compoaod,) 

\ to 1 dr ... .M M* 



PAGB. 

^ 506 
.- 201 
... 259 
... 521 
... 296 

... 338 
... 472 
.. 117 
... I3« 
... 504 

.. 575 
... 36c 
... 367 
... 318 

... 118 

... 379 

... 506 

... 378 

... »34 

... 41 

... 241 

- 552 
... 617 
... 552 
•. 273 
... 228 



340 

2i6 

105 
2gb 

199 
228 
372 
7 
628 

349 
261 

241 
528 

289 
611 



20J 
76 

234 

5*9 

381 
328 
528 
206 



PAGE 

Pulvis I)hunyapanchAkachnran(com- 
pouad,) t to 1 dr 283 

„ Eiateiise (compound,) B.P. (1 

in 40), 1 to 4 grs. ... 311 

„ Euphorbias (compound,) 2 to 4 

grs. ... 544 

„ Gambogiae (compound,) 10 to 40 

grs 81 

., Glycyrrhiwe (compound,) B P., 

1 to 2 drs. (1 benoa in 6) for 

adultn a teai»i>oonful 197 

„ Hing-abhtaka ctiurana, 10 to 20 

grs 289 

„ Ilydrangeie (compound,) 20 to 

tJOgrs 251 

„ Ipecacuanhas (compound,) B.P. 

5tol5gis. ... 34^-49 

., I pomrjea hetieracea (compound), 

i to 1 dr .^ 4>7 

„ Ipomoeaturpcthum(compound), 

4 to 60 gis 420 

„ julapK rom|H>uud (I in 3), 20 to 

t>Ogrs. 163 

„ Kabir (compound, J to 2 grs.) .. 87 
,, Kal&dana (compound), 50 lu 60 

gis 4'7 

„ Kapith ashtaka (compound) ... ajo 
,, Kat phaladi chunm (compound), 

4 10 1 dr. 572 

., Kino (compouDd), 6 to 20 grs, 247 
„ Liijuonue (comp^unu), 6u to 

120 grb ... 197 

„ Lobeliai («rompound) (fumiga- 
tion) 158 

., Nak I'hhikni (compound) ^ 354 
„ Nishot(compoun(l), lutotiOgrs. 420 
„ Opii (coropouou), (1 opium in 

10), 2 to 6 grs 48 

„ Pane h kola (compound) ... 5-9 

„ Panchnimbchurana,5io20gr8. IaO 
„ Pathaayia churun (compound), 

1 to 2 ars. ... ^ ... 387 
„ Plumbago rosea (compound), 

20 to 60 grs. 381 

„ Rhei (compound) (1 in 44), 20 

to bO grs Sti 

„ Sadorocihana cburana (00m- 

pouud) 413 

„ Sadusbana (compound) ... 5*9 

„ Sarcacolla (comi)Ounu) dusting 

powder ISO 

„ ScammoniH! (compound). 10 to 

20 grs. . 4«5 

„ Sitopaladi churan 1 dr 639 

„ bhad-dharana-yoga (compound), 

1 dr 3^i 

„ Stramonifc (compound) ... 441 

„ Bval-parasona-pinda, 10 to 20 

grs 607 

„ Tikta jerakiuli J to 1 dr. ... 374 



8oo 



INDKX. 



Saxcfra?a lipulata 

Hayiid kadudh... 

Scainmoniam 

Scarlet berry ... 
„ pimi^ernel 

Schima 

Schweia farthia 

Hcilla 

8cindap8U8 

Scopola 

Scopalia 

Scoparias 

Scotch pine or fir 

Hcrewpine 

Hcrofulariacese... 

Sentellaria 

Kea heath «• 

„ onion ... « 

„ wrack ^ 

gebestan plam ... 

Secale Gereate ... 

Sedatine solution 

Seduro acre 

8egapinum 

Begut 

Rehund mAh^tAra 

Sekdkul misree... 

SemicarpDB 

Senacia nepalensis 

Sendhuka 

Rendri 

Senega 

Senna 

Sephalika 

Serpent's wood^ 

Serpcntary root 

Sesaroum . 

Sesbania 

Se8(|uitcrpene 

Sevati 

Seville 

Rhabbit 

Sb&b&devi 

ShAh jiran 

Shaggy button weed . 

Shajrat-cl-bfiraghit . 
„ kafur 

„ nUdevadur 

Sh&k&kul 

Shfikar tagar ... 

Shalgam 

ShAlmah yriksha 

Shalumbi 

Sham bhalD 

MiJirnlif-OHlafhtl , 

Hlimn^ki nhiwar . , 

tihniihnijriW'-hincIt . 
4Slmbi-kij1 e4iin<li 

Shard ul ... , 



PA OK. 

... 250 

•- 345 

.. 415 

... 44I* 

... 379 

... 83 

... 457 

... 616 

••• 630 

... 448 

... 139 

... 228 

... 579 

... 633 

... 453 

... 497 

... 89 

... 916 

... 421 

.. 654 

... 49 

... 252 

... 290 

.. 235 

... 54a 

... 298 

... 170 

... 138 

::• "^ 

... 72 

... 196 

... 436 

.- 403 

.- 514 

... 462 

... 229 

... 57S 

... 357 

... ia6 

^ 293 

... 374 

^ 285 

.. 343 

... 236 

... 347 

... 577 

^ 6l2 

... 237 

... 68 

... 560 

... 62 

- 474 

... 100 

^ 508 

... 374 

... 127 

... 611 

... 258 



ShAteruhj ^ ^ 

Shathra ... 

Shembalit ••• 

Shemalo 

Sbendri «. 

Shend&ri 

SheodA 

Shepherd's puine 

Sherdea 

Shetur ... 

Shevana 

ShiAchob 

II jira... a.. ... 

Shial kanta 

Shikimin 

Shimpti M« 

Shingroti 

Shir khushk 

„ parn4 

ShitAjit 

ShitArij ^ ... ... 

Shivet pum& ... ... 

Shyal kant& ... ... 

Shodhagni 

Shoe flower 

Shonp&t 

Shorea ... ... ... 

Shorgaz 

Shring-e-hish 

„ hastini 

„ khand 

ti pnai •«• •.• 

„ p&rni ... 
Shrim&t& ... ... 

ShrivAti 

Shriri gamuda 

Shuk&i... 

Shuka-priya 

Shuprak 

Shurifa .. 

Shwet4ikaiid 

„ Sbimool 

„ Ch&mini 

8id& 

Siddhi ... ... ... 

Siegesbeckia 

Sikek&i.. 

Sikhl 

Sikhandun 

SilAjit ... ... _ 

SilhkA 

Silk cotton 

„ weed 

Silphium (parsley) ^ 
Silver leaf Queens root 

Sim&bA 

Simarubaceic 

SinAh kesar 

•t pAni 

SinalbiQ 



PAGE. 

... yo 

- 499 
... 232 

... IO| 

... 549 
••• 397 
... 5j6 
... 65 
... 642 
—• 5^ 
.- 470 
... 237 
..• 281 
... 40 
... 21 
... 163 
... 400 
... 237 
-. 323 
^ 412 
••• 5^0 
... 502 
.<.. 40 
... 502 
... 9« 
.« 207 
... 86 
... no 
2 
... 421 

- 536 
550-127 

... 470 
... 43a 

- 3J6 
... 47" 
... 50S 
... 187 
... 18 
... 23 

- 395 
... 104 
... 456 
... 91 
... 568 
... 369 
... 185 
... 156 

- 556 
-. 412 
-. 254 

... XOI 

- 393 
..• 296 
... 554 
... 146 
^ 140 
... 4S9 
... 464 
... 66 



^^ KnchnkA 

Kingihar .•• 

HlngmJan «», 

Sitigroti ••• «•« 

HipniuJin *»* *** «« 

Hlrinh .,, 

Kiriviidi,*. ... 

Sirkhialit, 

HiRhupiKli -. 

HiKybrium Iris,.* ••. 

8itA c-b« ktA 

,, ki PttHgc*rl «. 

StiAp • •.. 

HitHphn) «• •*. «•' 

81 rah bcmnji; ». .«. »•• 

6itiii]1 fcrtiit'I Ho«*T» »,. 
^^^ ,, lu»n'*i^ IcJik ... »*. 

^^f Bitmrt weed .«, ... 

^^^ Smilnei-jv »«• 

I Bniiliix a«pf HI ... «•• i*. 

^^^ rhinennis 

^^B 

^^V Sitflke MMtt hUi-Ji 

V „ WODti ,1, ... ... 

■ Snoisite wort .*. ... ««. 
B ^niiH cn{)AlH M. ... •«. 
I mc^tiTbol.., ..« ^ 

■ Kitap neaolA ,«. ... *^ 

■ „ Imrk .«. 

,t iiui ..4 «* 

^ wort 

oobAipo .4. *#4i i** <■■ 

SohikDJAn 

84>t2i(ium ... ... *-^ 

ik>lf>ii| efKmme hjrdrocKJormte 

Roru.tv&Ui* ... ... .,. 

Saofft i** *«• *'• w 
fiopilri .. .*• ... 

Sorrel *. 

Soirowftil njctnntht'S » 

Sour iliM:k ••« ..« ••« 

S<»w)l *.< •*. »•• 

8«)W brviMl ... ... — 

8ojmida «. 

0|i«gc iieeda 

fr^ [ M« **. *•* 

(^ I ' ci9 ... ««* «.^ 

<? ; ... «^ .«. 



ismx 



... 65 
*" »93 
... 436 

... 400 
... 66 
«^ 187 
.« 100 

.- 4Ji 
... 315 
... 61 
." 4t9 
•" 479 

... m 

... ij 
». 17 
-. 16 

... 615 
-. 3«9 
". 583 
*- 199 

•*- ^Sl 

... 586 
... 7a 
— 403 
" }H 
.« 440 
r*. 4^ 
... 185 
... 345 
... 74 
... 74 
«. 90 
... 117 
..« 33s 
... 448 

... 113 

... 30 
... 196 

... 29S 

... 621 

... 5*1 
.., 436 
... 5»i 
- i9i 
"• 379 
... 116 

mm. 501 
... 138 

... 403 
... 506 



Bpikciiar*! ... ^ ... ... 

Bpiro^A... .«, 249 

Splritufl AniAi (in tO), 5 lo 30 m». ... 295 

,^ urtnoTftciit: compofiitna (t m 

6), } li> 2 dis. »• ... 65 




PA UK 

Spirilui* anr»ntfi compoMtus (1 in !>y 123 
., cfijypuU (I ill 10), r» to 20 

mn. . .n ... «,« 270 

., Cunipltdrie (I In H>>, 5 lo 

30] 
., Cinoamoni (1 in IO)i 5 to 

20 mp * 

», Oftultbcriiu (l In 20), HO t« 

liO m«. 

^ JoDiperi (1 in 20)^1 t«> 4 dm. 
Lilian d III n? (1 in 30) 1898, 
30 to m I 
„ Lfmonia (I in 20) 
,f MelisBA cdoipOQud | to t <tr. 485 
,, Meiith.*!; |.KrperilJu (I in 10)» 

80 to m ma 

,, MoringA compouod (1 In 8> 

2 tif I dr*. .« „, .^ 

Mvfrifi» (Buy -rum), Mn 2 ... 

,. MvniticjL* (t oiJ iu 10), 

liOtoCOin* 

,, Niictfl JaglAndifl 1 toldrft.... 

r, Pipti A&nrn, 1 lo 2 drv. 

,« Hosmttrine (1 oil In lU), 80 

I08O ... « 
., niymol (1 in 10), 3 to IC wn. 
SpondeA mangifem 
Spreading ho^ weed ... 
Spurge wort ... 
8pQrioui« wintefe bark 
Hqiiaw btjsh .,. 
I, mot .M 
H wecil 

Squill ... «, 

Squibb>diarib(»A mixture . 

Hlaff tre« 

HLAg Ifiifih 
Hu*iihi«e ... 

Hterco^pdirmtim 
Stcrculia 
StbuU pushpa,,, 
8tlgniAta ni«idc« 
8t4«i«j rrw>t 

„ flowers . , 
8t, IgtiJitlus' bean 
., Jacob's oil •*. 
,» John wort ..♦ 
Btrophtinthiui . 
HtjcluiiuiG 
Hiyrmx .„ 
Kt/rol *„ 
Hubjrth ... 
BuccuA acifclypbjT^ ji tciia|N>onrul 

J, nllii, io III :iM 

,f AhermoN a UniApoonful 

rt ADtltogrmphia conccntrntus, 
I dr. .„ ... ... 

,« ArKvrnone mcxicanA „. 

„ B^iUndonnip, £ W 16 im. 

., Conii, I tM 1 Ur 



802 



INDEX. 



PA(}E. 

Succus Digitalis, i jjr. 454 

„ Euphorbia Neriifolia, 2 to 3 

ms. ... 544 

„ „ Autiquorum, 2 to 

5 ms. 543 

., „ Tirucalli, 1 to 3 

ms. ... 546 

„ Gallii, 1 to 3 drs 353 

., Hyoscyami, J to 1 dr. ... 445 

', Papayse 

„ Scoparii, 1 to 2 drs 229 

„ Khinocantlii . ... ^ 467 

„ Solanum Digrum, 1 to 4 om. 45 1 

„ Taraxaci, 1 to 2 dni 371 

„ Viburnum Fcetidum, 4 to 

8 drs. ... 324 

Bobjee .^ 57° 

Sachi — 47S 

Sucrose 643 

Sudhi upasaya 513 

Sufed murgah 506 

Sugandha baia chhar 345 

„ V&achha 591 

,, b41& 99 

„ marich ... 517 

,, malA 585 

Utap&la 399 

Sugar cane ... 642 

Sukadarsan 604 

Suk^kul misri 298 

Sukanasi 459 

Sukhad 53^ 

Sukbd&n4 277 

Snkk&pat 437 

Sula n&san 288 

8ultftn& champ^ 82 

Sumach ••• 16S 

Sumbul 291 

„ -e-hendi 344 

„ Jibali 346 

„ Ul-tib ^ ... 345 

Sumal himar ... . 388 

Sunahi-patt&kari 543 

Sunkha huli 374 

„ pushpi 370 

Santha ... 604 

Superb lily 614 

Suppoeitoria Acidi Qallici,5gr8. ... 563 
„ „ Taonici, 8 grs. ... 565 

„ Atropine, ^B g«» —475 

„ Belladonna 474 

„ Catechu and Zinc sul- 

phate, 10 grs. and 2 grs. 184 

„ Cocaine 112 

„ CoUinsonia 481 

„ Gallas 563 

,. Hamamclidis, 3 grs. .. 256 

„ Hinga-vadi varati ... 289 

„ Morphine, i gr 45 

„ Opium, Galls and plum- 

bi occtatia, 1 in 3 .^ 47 



PAOK. 
Suppositoria Opium Galls and anto- 

nine, 6 grs 353 

Surad&ru ... ^ 577 

Sur&ibij ... ^ 68 

Sural - 228 

Suran 631 

Surinjan 619 

Surja VratA 59 

Surpnn... •• 356 

Surpuokha 231 

Suraava or sursnn - 68 

Surw&ri 506 

Snrya patre 395 

SushAva 281 

Sush&vi 17 

Suvarnuk& •«. 199 

Svalpaj Methi moduk, 2 to 4.drs. ... 233 

,, varankusft 441 

Shwet kundur 176 

„ Murg& .M 506 

„ Maricha .- 235 

„ PushpA 388 

„ Shimool ... ... ... 104 

Swamp dog wood .^ 321 

„ Sassafras 21 

„ Sick weed 394 

Sweating plant 363 

Swedish turnip 68 

Sweet Bay laurel ... 529 

„ CloTes 233 

„ Fennel.^ ... ... ... 291 

„ • Flag ... 627 

„ Hay ••• ... ... ... 22 

„ Inderjav 39a 

„ Pellitory ... 371 

„ Scented oleander ... ... 388 

„ Sop ••• M. 23 

„ Weed ... M 92 

Swertia ^412 

Swretenia — 116 

Swine-snout 372 

SyamlatA ^ 387 

Sycacarpua Rusbyi 121 

Sylvacrol 55a 

Symplocos Raoemosa ••. 432 

Syuantherias sylvatica ... -. 631 

Synaptase 241 

SyoDikA 459 

Syrian costus ... 366 

1) ginger 366 

Syrupus, allit aoeticus, 1 to 4 drs. ^ 607 

„ althoea officinales 93 

M apomorphinae hydrocblo- 

rate, 20 to 60 ms. ^ 47 

,, aromaticus (I to 6), ( to 

I dr. ^ 123 

„ aurantii floris (1 to 8), | to 1 

dr M 123 

„ avcrrhcea carumbola .. 15a 

„ cascara aromaticus 158 

„ „ scgrada, | to 1 dr. ... 159 



INDEX. 



80^ 



PAGK. 

Syrapns, Caseana escalanta, 1 tu2dr. 301 

„ codeine, 1 dr 47 

„ Eriodictyl aroznaticns, 16 

grs. in 1 OS 424 

11 Figs 557 

„ Garcinia mangofltina ) to 1 

dr ... 80 

„ Garcinia Xanthochjmus 

compound, 2 to 6 dr8. ... 79 
„ Guniminibri, 30to60m8.... 268 
„ HemideBmi (1 in lU)), ^ to 

1 dr 400 

,, Hjssopns compoand, ) to 1 

ox 482 

„ Ipecacuanha aceticns, ^ to 2 

drs ... 341 

„ Jambnl, 1 to 2dr8 269 

„ Limonip, B.P. (1 juice 2), ( 

to 1 dr. .. 125 

„ men (I juice 2), 1 dr. ... 560 
„ Panaveris (1 to 46), J to 1 

nd. dr. M. ••• .M 44 
„ Picis Liquida;, ) to 2 drs. ... 582 
„ Pederia foetida (compound). 338 
,, Prunu8 Virginii 15 p.c, } to 

1 fid. dr. 244 

„ Khamnus catharticup, 2 to 

4 drs 159 

„ Bbei, B.P. (I in 15), i to 

2 drs 511 

„ Rhoedo8, B.P. (1 in 4i). I ^o 

1 dr. ... ... 430 

,. Rowc Gallic® (1 in 170^1 dr. 247 
„ Kubi aromaticus, 1 to 4 drs. 248 
„ Scillie compoBituB (1 in 16), 

i to 1 dr. 616 

„ Senne (1 in 2), 4 to 2 drs.... 197 
„ Tolutanui (1 in 29), ^ to 

1 dr. 220 

„ Vioia odorata flowers (1 in 

6), 2 to 4 drs. ... . 54 

„ Zingiberis, (25 in 100), 1 dr. 590 



Tabasbir ^ 

Tabella: Apomorphine, ^ gr. .. 

„ Caffeine citratis, 1 gr. 

„ Chocolate 

„ Cocaine, ,V gr- 

Mf^nthnl. * or. 



638 
46 
326 
108 
'112 
486 



„ Menthol, J gr ,„ 

,. Strophanthi, 4 ms. of tincture 390 

Tabema montana coronaria 391 

Tablets, compressed— 

„ Aloin, 1^ gr 6u8 

„ Cascara sagrada, 2 grs. ... 158 

„ Digitoxin, ,Io gr 454 

„ Ergotine, 3 grs 656 

„ Gnaiacum, 8 grs. and sul- 
phur, 3 grs 148 

„ Papain, 2 grs.... 301 

„ Quinine acid sulphate, 1 to 2 

grs >••. ... 329 



Tablets, Saccharin, | gr. 

T&briz ^ 

Tacca aspera 

Taka diastase 

Tad kl erandi ... ... 

T&g 

Taggar 

T&gambharee 

Taggar ganthodsL 
Tailed cubeb 

„ pepper 

Tainda 

TajpAt •• 

Takali 

TuiamkhAn^ 

Tdlisa«p4tra ••. ••• 

Tamd) 

Tam&l patra 

TamSre-hincli 

Tamarind 

Tamurix 

Tamb&khoo 

Tambat 

Tambol 

Tdmbri dufari 

T&mbr& cbandana 

„ Kadu ... 

„ S&g kesar ... 

„ Pushpi 

TAmrooj 

Tanacetum ••• ••• 

Tandul 

Tannin 

Tanh&ri 

Tapasa pryiA, 

Tapioca plant .. 

T&pmari 

T&r 

It gola 

„ vada 

Taraxacum 

Tarfa-jas 

Tarkhaah*kun ... 

Tarmuz 

TArwood 

TILsh mez&j 

T&U kasturika 

Tavakhir 

Taxus baccata 

Tea plant 

Teak tree 

Tectona 

Tejbala 

TejpAt ... 

Tejphal 

Tcliydbis 

TelS sheng 

Temru 

Tephrosia 

Terebenthina 

Termiualia 



PAGE. 

... 642 

... 64 

... 631 

... 641 

... 548 
... 524 
.. 391 
... 207 
... 346 
... 517 
... 517 
... 429 
.« 57 
... 47a 
... 46S 
... 583 
... 81 
... 529 
... 230 
.- 230 
... no 
... 445 
... 57 
... lOl 
... 105 

... 227 

••. 3" 
... 78 
^ 278 
... 15$ 

- 371 
••. 642 
... s^S 
-. 447 
... 163 

- 549 
... 330 
... 582 
... 622 
... 198 
-. 371 
... no 
... 37a 
... 309 
... 354 
... 195 
... 97 

- 593 
... 583 
... 83 

- 473 
.. 473 
... 546 
... 529 
.- "39 

2 
... 185 
... 430 
... 231 
... 573 
... 258 



8o4 



INDEX. 









PAGE. 


Ternstniniiaceiu 


M. 


-. 


..*. 83 


Terpinam ••• 


... 


... 


... 580 


Terra japonica 


... 


... 


... «34 


„ texak •.. 


... 


... 


.. 63 


Tetter ^ort ... 




.•• 


... 41 


Tettu 


... 


.. 


... 4S9 


Texas ... 


... 


... 


30 


Thai Hot mm .. 


... 


•V 


... 18 


Thanmori 


... 


.- 


... 447 


Thapsia 

Thea ... •. 


... 




•■ t 


Thebainc 


• •• 


... 


... 3a 


Tbeobroma oocao 


••• 


••• 


... 108 


Tbespesia ' ••. 


•M 


.•• 


... 100 


Tbevetia ^ 


... 


. 


.. 391 


Tbick-leared lavander 


••. 


... 479 


Thikree 


... 


... 


... 502 


Tbimble berrj^. 


... 


... 


... 24S 


Tbol kuri 


• •• 


... 


••• 293 


Thuji 


• •. 


... 


.. 584 


Thuar d&ndalio 


• •. 


• •• 


... 546 


„ kintero ... 


• •. 


... 


... 543 


„ tiodb&ree 


... 


... 


- 542 


Thuneer 


... 


... 


... 583 


Thyme ... •» 


... 


... 


... 497 


Tbymelacea: ... 


• a. 


... 


... 532 


Tiaridiam 


... 


... 


... 421 


Tiger's claw 


... 


M. 


... 461 


„ milk tree 


... 


... 


... 546 


Tikra 


... 


... 


... 420 


Tikri 


... 


• •• 


... 26 


TikU tambi ^ 


... 


•a. 


... 311 


It rfij 


... 


... 


... 117 


Tiktosh&k 






... 59 


Tikhar 


• •• 


... 


... 593 


Tila .. 


... 




... 461 


Tilav&n... 


... 


... 


... 59 


TiH&oor& 


... 


... 


... 32 


Tiliacess 


... 




87 


Timbami 


... 


... 


... 430 



Tioctora Actesc (1 in 10), 30 to 60 ms. 7 
„ Aiarici, 20 to 60 ms ... 653 

„ Aistonia coxistrictts (1 in 2), 

4 to 2 drs. 382 

„ Ammanite Tesicatoria (ethe- 
real) 276 

„ Anacardii (1 in 10), 2 to 10 

m«. ... „. ... 161 

„ Andrographis composita (3 

in .30) 465 

„ Antbcmidis, 3 to 10 ms. .. 348 
„ Arnica Rad, (1 in 20), | to 

1 dr. 351 

„ Aromatica acida. 6 to 20 mn. 126 
„ Asafuetida, (I in 8), ^ to 

1 dr 2S9 

n Aurantii (lin 10;, dried peel, 

i to 1 dr. 123 

„ A£adiragbtae(1 ia8), 4 toldr. 119 
„ Benzoini composita, 18US 

(1 in 10) ; to 1 dr. — 431 



PAGE. 

Tinctura, Bawachi (1 in 20),) to 2 drs. 226 

„ Bncho. (I in 5), 4 to 1 dr. ... 129 
Calumbae, (1 in 10), | to 
1 dr ... 29 

„ Caraphoise comp., ^ gr. in 1 

fld. dr. ... « ... 431 

., Capsici. 5 to l.^ms. ... ... 438 

„ Cardamomi composita, (1 in 

80) ... 597 

„ Carniiaitiva, 2 to 10 ms. ... 601 

,. Cases rfllse (1 in 5), i to 1 dr. 540 

„ Catechu, (1 in 5), ) to 1 dr... 528 
Cbiratae, (I in 10), | to 1 dr , 
liqaor | to 1 dr. and ex- 
tract 10 to 80 ms 413 

„ Cimicifuiae(l iti 10), 30 to 
60 ms. and extract fluid, 
5 to 20 ms. ... .. 9 

„ Cinchorae composita (1 in 

10,4 Idr 331 

„ Cinoamoni, (I in 5), | to 1 

dr 528 

,, Cuccinium (1 in 10), ) to 1 

dr. ... ., 28 

„ ColIinsoniae.SO ms. to 130 ms. 

and extract liq. 15 to 60 ms. 481 
Crocci (1 in 20), .5 to 15 ma. 602 

„ Cubebae, (I in 5), 4 to 1 
dr. and extract fluid, 5 to 
20 ms ^ 517 

„ Damiana composita, 3 to 10 

ms. ... ... .^ 129 

„ Paturse (1 in 5). 5 to 15 ms. 441 
Digitalis, (1 in 8), 5 tol5 ms.. 454 

„ Droserae and extract, 5 to 10 

mB 253 

„ Elaterii composita, 10 to 30 

ms. ... ... ... .. 310 

„ Erjthrophlasi (1 in 10), 5 

to 10 ms. and extract ^ to 

1 ms. „ 211 

„ Oallae, 20 p.c.|l in 8), 1 to 

2 drs. 564 

„ Gentianse composita, and 

extract } to 1 fld. dr. ... 411 
„ Ouaiaci ammoniata, 

(1 in 5). 4 to 1 dr. ... 148 

„ Hamamelidis, (1 in 10), 

30 to 60 ms. and extract... 256 
„ Hyoecyami, (I in 10). 

i to 1 dr. and extract 2 to 

8 gr 444 

„ Indurjao, J to 2 dr. ... 386 

„ IpomoBa Hederacea (1 in 

8), 2 drs and extract 5 to 

10 gre 417 

„ Jaborandi, (I in 4\ 4 to 

1 dr. and extract fld. 5 to 

10 ms. ^ 339 

Kino, (I in 10), } to 1 

fld. dr. ... ^ ^. 195 



INDEX. 



805 



PAGE. 

Tinctara, Ko'.as (1 in 5), J to 1 dr. 

extract liq. 10 to ms. .. 106 
„ Lactucariae, 10 to 30 ms. 

and extract, 5 to 16grr-«. 367 
„ Laricis (1 in 8), 20 to 30 

ms. and extract 652 

, „ Lavandulae composita, 20 

to 60 ms. 4S4 

,, Laxativa J to 2 drs. ... 159 
,, Limonis, (I in 8).4 to 1 dr 125 
„ Lobeliju Arthereae(l in 8), 

5 to 15 ms. ... ... 375 

„ Lupuli (I in 5), i to 1 dr. 

extract 2 to 5 gr. and 

infusion 1 to 2 oz. ... 571 
„ Lycopodii (1 in 10), 15 to 

60 ms, ... ... 634 

„ Menthol etherea (1 in 8). 487 
, Myrrhaj (I in 5), } to 

„. 1 fir «75 

,, riper longum (compound) 

(I in 5), i to 1 dr. ... 519 
,, Picrosma quassioides (1 in 

lu), J to 1 dr. ... 14S 

„ Piper augustifolia. 1 to 2 

dr. 516 

., Piper longum compound 

(I in 5), J to 1 dr, ... 519 
„ Plumbago rosea (I in 10) 

10 to 30 ms ' 380 

„ Prunus virginianai, 30 to 

60 ms. ••• ... ... 244 

„ Pulsatillai (1 in 10), 1 to 5 

ms. and extract 1 li<|. 

t ) 5 ms. ... ... 7 

,, Pur:jlane compound, GO to 

i>0 ms 250 

,, Pyrothri (I in ')), only 

UH^^d as insecticide ... 349 
,. Quasdia; (1 in 10) ... 145 
Quebracho (1 in 5).. ^ to 1 

tld. dr. and extract li(j. 
•■ 10 to 60 ms. ... ... 38. 

Quillaijc 1 in 10), i to I 

fld. drs. and extract 

10 to 30 ms 246 

„ Quininjc (I in 50), oran;j;e 

tincture J to I dr. 330 
„ Quininaj aromatic^ (I in 

50), i to 1 dr 331 

,, Randia Dumetorum ethere- 
al (1 in 5), 6 to 60 ms. 342 
., llhei composita (1 in 1(»), 

J to 1 fld. dr, infusion 

and extract liq. 5 to 

30 ms. ... 511 

., Khois (1 in ). 2 to ms. 

and extract ... 168 

., Kumicip, (I in 10), 1 to 10 

ms. and extract anl 

docjction 512 

«2 



PAGE. 

Tinctura, gabinac (I in S), 5 to 15 

ms 576 

,, Sanguinariae (I in 8) ex- 
pectorant, 5 to 60 ms. 
as aji emetic 1 to 2 drs. 53 

„ Saponis camphora ... 434 

„ Scillae (1 in 5). 6 to 15 ms. 616 

,, Sene^aeCl in 6)i to 1 fld.dr, 72 

,, Sennaj composita and 

liquor IJ to 1 dr. .. 197 

, Serpentariae(l in 5), liquor 514 

,, Siegesbeckiaj (1 in 8), 10 

to 30 ms 369 

„ Sovmida febrifuga (1 in 

*8). i to 1 dr 166 

., Stillinija; (I in 8), i to 1 
dr. and extract, liq 15 
to 40 ms 554 

,. Strophanthi (I in 40), 5 to 

15 ms. 390 

RuQibul, (I in 10), 30 
to 60 ms. ... 291 

„ Tolutana (I in 10) 30 to 

60 ms. ... ... 223 

,, Valerianae ammoniata 

(I in 5) 345 

Veratri viridis, J to 1 dr... O17 
, VerboBci, I0to60ms. ...458 

., Viscum 8 p. c. 1 in 10, J to 

1 dr 533 

„ Warb-rg's, 1 to 4 drs. ... 331 
„ Zinj^ibcrisfort, (I in 10), ^ 

to 1 dr. infusion 1 to 

2 oz 



Tinebarry 
Tinospora 
Tittiriphal 
Totldalia 
Todamiri 
Tolutani 
Tondali 
Tonga .. 
Tonquin bean... 
Toon tree 
Toothache shrub 
Torch tree 
Tormentilla ... 

Torula 

Touchwood 
Tow«lri 

Toxicodendron 
Trachydium ... 
Trachylobiam ,. 
Tra^'acanth 

Tra-ia 

Traumaticin ... 

Trapa 

Tratraka 
Trayam&n 
Trepnal " ... 
Trewia 



601 
;0 

541 

5»7 
220 

307 
473 
232 
114 
143 

238 
656 
654 
64 
169 
298 
232 
190 

554 
428 
300 
168 
II 
139 
555 



8o6 



INDEX. 



125 
564 
158 

438 

112 

47 

517 



PAGE. 

Trianihema 298 

Tribulas ... 148 

Trichilia 122 

Tricholepis ... 373 

Tricbodesma ... 423 

Trichosanthes 316 

Trigonella 232 

Trikantaka 148 

Trikatu ... 521 

Triticum 645 

Trivrit 420 

Trochisci Acidi Benzoici, ) gr. each... 432 
„ „ Citric (Hcid lemon 

drops) 
„ „ Tannfci, | to 2 grs 

,. Aperient fruit 
,. Capsici (voice jajube) 
,, Cascara segrada 
V Catechu, 1 to 2 grs. 

Cocaine Hydrochloratum 
jy Codeinse. } gr. 
„ Cubebae, leo resin ... 
„ Eucalypti com posit ae 1 gr. 268 
„ Fructus aperientes ... 158 

„ Glycyrrhizaet-opii ... 182 

„ Guaiaci Resinae, 3 grs. ... I48 
,» Ipecacuanha, } gr. .. 341 

„ Kramerise et, cocaine B.P. 

1 gr 71 

„ Menthse ... 1x2 

„ Morphine et Ipecacuanha 46 
„ Papaineetcocaine,JtoJ?r. 302 
„ Rhamni frangulae ... ... 158 ' 

„ Santoninse et calomelas, 1 

gr. each ... ... 353 

Tropical bind weed 404 1 

Tree turmeric ... 28 

True unicorn 605 , 

Trumpet flowers 459 

Tokhm-e-abi 245 

,, ah&re-shereen... ... 392 

y, Bftrahang 502 

„ BftlSngo 482 

„ BAratang 50a 

„ Karphas ... ... ... 281 

,, Khitmie (carpels) ... ^ 92 

„ kasuaa 424 

M nil ... 417 

„ Kihana 492 

^ Tokhra 283 

Tulasi 479 

Tnl&ti pftti .. ».. 447 

Tnlip tree 21 

Tumb& 384 

Tumburu ... ... 139 

Tumtnm ... 168 

Tundika 307 

Tupa karia ... ... 100 

Tnranjabin 188 

Turagi-gandha 452 

Tnrbad ... 420 



PAGE 

Turbcth resin ... ,^ ... ... 420 

Turkish essence of geranium ... 6j6 

„ com — 644 

Turmeric 593 

» wood 3S 

Tumera .. 305 

Turnip ... ... ... ... 68 

Turpentine .. 579 

Turpeth Root 420 

Turshah ... 511 

Tntham ... 619 

Tvak Sara .. 527 

Tylophora 401 



Ubhi\gokhru 

Ubhiringani 

Ud&-m&ki 

Ude l^alasan 

„ unb&ra 

V Balap 

Ugra gandha 

Ukshl ... 
Ulatch^ndal ... 

Ulakkambal 

UlmuB 

Umbro 

UmbellifersB 

Uncaria gambier 

Undcl 

Undir kkni 

Unguentum aoonitinse, 2 p.c. 
,, Adeps benzoratus 



... 461 

..• 449 

... 4S» 

... 172 

... 5'r 
... 17 
. 607 

... 2S7 
... 614 
... lOI 
... 560. 
•.. 537 
-. 279 
... 234 
... 82 
... 419 
... 4 
- 43 » 
Anacardii,! tarto 8 lard 161 
Annona squamosa (I In 

8) 2\ 

Aquae rosse (cold cream). 246 
Atropinse(l in 50), 2 p.c. 475 
Belladonnqe,'l tol5 ... 475 
Capsici (I in 6) ...440 

Catechu (tin 8) ... 184 

Chrysarobini composi- 

tnm ^ ... 189 

(}ocainc (1 in 25) ... 112 
Coccnli, 80 grs. to 1 01. 25 
Conii, (2 juice to 1 
ofwoolfat) ••. ... 284 

Delphinse, 20 gr. tol dr. 12 
Eucalypti (1 in 9) ... 265 
Gallae cum opio ... 564 

Gaultheriie ... ... 378 

Gynocardise (1 in 4) ... 56 
Hamamelidis, (I to 

liq. 10) 256 

Olei cadini (lln 1) ... 576 
Picialiquidea (5 in 7) . 582 
PicrotoxiDae(10gr8. to 1 
OS.) ... ... ... 25 

Pilooarpina; ... -. 339 
Sabinie (I in 3|) ... 576 

Staphiaagriae (4 in 23) « ,2 



INDEX. 



807 







PAGE. 


UDguentnm,Thyinol 


... ••• 


-. 497 


„ Veratrinae, 2 p.c. 


... 611 


UnAb 


M. ... 


... x6o 


UDhali 


... ... 


... 23« 


Upalsari 


... 


... 399 


Uraria .- 


... ... 


... 234 


Urginca 


... ... 


... 615 


Ursool 


... ... 


'.". 378 


Ureon 


.»* ... 


Urticariae 


... ••• 


... 555 


Urak ^. 


... ... 


... 10 


Uahnft 


M. ... 


... 651 


„ ooshak ... 


... ... 


••• 287 


(Jahb&h 


•.. •*• 


... 586 


Ushnan 


... ... 


... 379 


Usbir bhed ... 


... .. 


. 636 


Uaba 


•*• «.« 


... 643 


Unarehe-rewand 


••• ... 


... 81 


Ustar kh&r ... 




... 146 


Ufltalago maidis 


... 


;.. 656 


Utaktara 


... 


... 360 


Uthikaparni ... 


1.. ... 


... 467 


Uiingan& 


... M. 


... 466 


Utrandi 


... ... 


... 397 


Uva ani m. 


... ••• 


... 377 


Vada 


... •*. 


... 555 


Yadino katho ... 


..• .*• 


... 185 


Vagh&rDi hing... 


... 


... 288 


Vaidyamatru ... 





^ 467 


VaivaniD& 


... ... 


... 59 


Vaia 


... ••. 


... 627 


Va]ay& ^ 


••« «. 


.- 569 


V&jje turki ... 


... ••. 


... 2 


Vajra d&nti ... 


.•• ..• 


... 466 


V&ka vrisknhii ... 


... ••* 


... 257 


Vakhmo 


... 


... 6 


V&kucbu 


... ... 


... 225 


Yftkumbha ... 


... •.• 


... 263 

... 348 


Valeriana 


... ... 


Validolum 


... ... 


... 346 


V&lo (khos khos) 


.a. •.• 


... 637 


yalleri-ka.p^tta 


... ••• 


... 292 


Valuchl 


... ... 


... 319 


Vana adrakam 


... ••• 


... 6co 


,, baridra ••• 


... ... 


•.• 593 


VandA ... 


..» 


... 589 


VaD^j&i 


... 


^468 


Vangoria 


.* ... 


^ 344 


VArs-kapur 


*•• ... 


... 638 


VaDs-nu mitb ... 


... ... 


... 638 


VaniUa 


•>• ••« 


... 590 


Yabi nicbi ... 


.« ... 


... "55 


Yaponr batbs acbillea 


347 


„ Coninaj 


... 284 


„ Eucalypti 


... 265 


Olei 


pini sylveatris ... 579 


„ Terebinae ^ 


^ 579 


., Thymol 


-. 497 


Var dhiro 


• • 


... 419 



PAGE* 

V&rftshiki « ... 436 

VariAlee 291 

V&raangi 325 

VarkAti X04 

VaaadAni ... ... ... 27 

Vasaka 464 

Vasak lepa ... 87 

Vasanvel 27 

Vantaka 545 

Vasbiri 471 

Vateria 85 

VatsakA 386 

VatsanabbA ... 2 

VAvading 425 

Vegetable mercnry 455-3^ 

„ Rennet 453 

Vekband 627 

Venivel 26 

Ventilago ^, ... 161 

Venus Cup ^. ... 387 

M Hair ^ ... 647 

Veracruz ^ ... 418 

Veratroyl 4 

Veratrnm ^ 617 

Verbascum ... .^ ... 458 

Verbena 468 

Vernonia ^ 373 

Veronica 456 

Vervain ... ,„ ... 468 

Veeeaha ... 176 

Viburnum 323 

Vichhida 461 

Vicia faba ^ 218 

Vidanga ... 425 

Vibhl taki 259 

Vibiyeti chameli 258 

„ erand 548 

If ]ira ... ... „, ... 211 

VimboahtA 307 

Vinegar 64X 

Vine maple ... «. ... ... 30 

Vinum abainthe ... ... ... 352 

„ Aloetl to26}— 60to90m8. ... 610 

„ Aurantil4 pc 1 to2 drt. ... 124 

„ Cocse, 4 to 8 dn. ... ... 113 

„ Colchici(lin6)10to30m8 .. 618 
„ Ck>ndarango (1 to 10), 1 to 4 

dn. 398 

„ DrAksha arishta ... ... 137 

„ Elder wine 323 

„ Ipecacnanhae, 10 to 30 ms. ... 341 

,, Kumar-aaaTa 610 

,, Kola ... 106 

.. Kntej arisbtA, | to 1 dr. ... 387 
,, Opii, extract (I to 20), 10 to 40 

mt. ... 49 

,. Pipli asaTa, I to 2 drs. ... 520 
„ Quebracho 6 p c 1 dr. to 1 

01 384 

,, Qninonse, 2 p. c | to I oz. ... 331 
Violet ... ... 51 



'^A 



25Z.P-:t. 



T.nhii 

•'*-c ... 

7rt*v::-.4 ^isiraka 



%'varl ^ 

V»h'-r/ ff«rk ,^, 

Wa*fta* ... 

.. ^-nyf^ 

^%t'>.\ ... 

,, ^;r.^tnat 

f 'ja' 

W*x r^errj 

„ ffi'/rfle 

White Hryoni 
„ ^ hriNtmM T4>«e .. 

„ fMmmftr 

^ tA$i4 won 

„ LntAnt 

„ OAk 

yS'hiU/,h r/fjt 

WiWI t'Aovti ... ^ 
WiM cherry b»rk 

,, V»\ff,xij 

„ K<(icp<»nf 

f, \Amn 

4, Hrjmn 

„ 'i iirmerir ... 
Willow ),HtV 

Wiri<l Howur 

WinKcl cMfila ... 
„ rnltroiM... 
W i rinlow'fi ftfxit li i rifc N/ruiJ 
VV I ri I ism AromfttlcA 
Wliit<jr Dftfk ... 

u tt (tpariomi) ... 



*Ji«^r. 



,- ^5 


Wlnser Blonm .^ 


^ ^ca 




-^-* 


-V-.cea ammL 


.. 4cr 


Vrsiuank 


j'T 


Wiif t b*r.ft _ 


-3^1 


Tvvi-ftirti* 


.. 2C5 


« ♦>.. - — 


-41'S 


.. -MTTisi ._ 


iU 


., T*r ^ 


" *'> 


- Tme 


■' ns 


yft^Aj R-^hz vca^it 


- rj 


W-v^carm ^ 


• a^'> 


Worn sn« 


♦'-5 


^ Wcoi 


«!> 


''••'rlji.cia 


— 4:7 


Wjaiofit 


"- i^S 




■" 4x^ 




— S'^jr 


.'lan-'ain* ... 


— */5 


X*»tiifichjin:3S.,. 




:Cat-.copa«iiie 




A«af;hr>x7,4a ... 


... f^>c 


XaatJa^m _ 


7, 5/Sf 


V»rTow ^ .« 


... 65 


Var.:>rk thr.aKkci 


... 25: 


YavMA .^ 


.« 122 


Va» roct 


... 246 


V^«t ... 


... >v> 


Vellow ft.vwereri cott/'.n ' 


-. 3^.* 


Ladies' ftlipficr 


". 423 


Mik weed 


'" 57« 


Faint ^ 


... 571 


, Parilla .. 


... 436 


., Thirties 


-' 305 ; 


,. L'mbel 


.. 457 ; 


., Wood 


^. 85 


1 Y'^Va Beama .. ... 


... 3»^ 


1 .. ganta 


... 217 


Yetd dara* 


... 563 




... 304 




.^ 5*» 


ZaUn-i-irin-gUbk-i-Ulk 


... 271 


Zachon oil 


- 244 


ZiHwir 


... 194 


Zafrao ... ... ... 


... 450 


Zaitan .^ 


... yjj 


Zajmiy4 .« 


... 305 


Zakhm-hjata ... 


... 12H 


Zanonia Indica . 


... 631 


Zar nab ... ••• ••• 


- 593 


Zarrl chob4h ... ^ 


... 5«>6 


Zareer ... 


7 


Zarishk 


... 196 


Zea-mays 


• 149 


Z<fbra wood tree 


... 46 


Zedoary 


... 19 


Zengabil 


... 19 


Zebaraia 


... 116 


Zebcri m&bi 



37* 



14 
3- 
4: 



33 



3£c 

I43 
10 
602 
M3 
55» 
252 

316 
583 

594 
II 

33 
644 
165 
595 
600 

«9 
24 



INDEX. 



809 



Zerumbet 
Zhinyan 
Zinger ... 
Zirsihe rami 
Zirdnka... 



PAOE. 




PAGE. 


•• 595 


Zirki-ke-binj 


407 


.. 297 


Zizyphua 


160 


.. 590 


Zirer 


.. 152 


.. a»i 


Zakbam aatil 


474 


.. 286 


Zjgophyllacee -. 


146 



Caxtoik Printing Wifrkt^ Bombay. 



V 



\ 



LANE MEDICAL LIBRARY 



To avoid fine, this book should be returned on 
or before the date last stamped below. 



^^uy^MQ' 



m3 




