CooYi BooYv 



"Thtt Pilar/Kn- (LooV\. Bco\A. 

Si 

~r>K kad'its' Aid SoucKj 

_ » 



* 



641.50977311 
P643p 




4 



UNIVERSiTYO^ 

ILLINOIS LIBRAkY 

AT URBANA CHAI^PAIGN 

OAK STREET 



THE PILGRIM COOK BOOK 



PUBLISHED BY 



The Ladies' Aid Society 



OF 



Pilgrim Ev. Lutheran Church | 

Cuyler Avenue and N. Lincoln Street M 

CHICAGO, ILL. 1 



I Uri f ifi tiri Hfifc 

I 192 1 I 
If ill mi mi mi w 



Containiog nearly 700 carefully tested recipes 



This Book may be obtained from 

MRS. H. C. STEINHOFF, 
1840 Cuyler Avenue, Chicago, 111. 



= Price: 75 Cents 



Postage: 5 to 12 Cents, according to Zone = 











Good cooks are born, not made, they say. 






The saying's most untrue. 






Hard trying and prime recipes 






Will make good cooks of you. 











Vl^fif INDEX. SWj2_> 

SOUPS : 5 

FISH 8 

MEATS 12 

"ONE PIECE" LUNCHEONS 26 

VEGETABLES 33 

SALADS 40 

PUDDINGS and DESERTS 53 

GELATINE DESSERTS 63 

PIES .'. 66 

CHEESE and EGGS 71 

DUMPLINGS and NOODLES 75 

FRITTERS, DOUGHNUTS, PANCAKES 77 

BAKING POWDER BREADS and COFFEE-CAKES 81 

YEAST BREADS 86 

COOKIES 90 

SMALL CAKES ". 98 

ICINGS and FILLINGS 100 

CAKES 103 

TORTEN 123 

ICE CREAM and BEVERAGES 128 

JAMS 130 

CANNED FRUITS and VEGETABLES 133 

CATSUPS, PICKLES, ETC 135 

CANDIES 142 

MISCELLANEOUS 146 



Pilgrim Ev. Luth. Church 

Cuyler Ave. and N. Lincoln St. 
H. C. STEINHOFF, Pastor. RESIDENCE— 1840 Cuyler Ave. 

TELEPHONE GRACELAND 8963. 




8EK VICES — Sunday, 10:45 a. m., 7:45 p. m. 

SUNDAY SCHOOL — 9:30 a. m. 

CHRISTIAN DAY SCHOOL — 9 a. m. 

HOLY COMMUNION— First Sunday in tlie month. 

CONGREGATIONAL MEETINGS — First Tuesday, 8 p. m. 

COUNCIL— Last Tuesday, 8 p. m. 

LADIES* AID SOCIETY — Second and Fourth Wednesdays, 2 p. m. 

RUTH GUILD — First and Third Mondays, 8 p. m. 

SUNDAY SCHOOL TEACHERS— Bi-weekly on Thursdays, 8 p. m. 

MEN'S CLUB— Bi-weekly on Thursday. 

YOUNG MEN'S CLUB— Second and fourth Mondays. 



PILGRIM COOK BOOK 



He that feasts his body with banquets and 
delicate fare, and starves his soul for want of 
spiritual food, is like him that feasts his slave 
and starves his wife. 



Soups 

Cream of Green Bean Soup. 

Cook cut beans and 2 good-sized potatoes till tender ; strain, 
saving water. Take out potatoes and mash them. Brown 1 
tablespoon butter and 1 tablespoon lard, add a little flour, the 
water in which beans were cooked, potatoes, beans and 1 cup 
cream. — Mrs. A. Piepho. 

Beef Soup. 

Take about H pounds lean chuck and 1 pound smoked 
butt, cover with water and boil about two hours. Then add 
2 large carrots diced, 1 large German celery root or celeriac, 1 
large German parsley root, 1 large stalk leek, and boil 1 hour 
more; salt to taste. Boil dried peas separately, flavor with 
sweet marjoram and add to soup just before serving. Navy 
beans may be used if preferred, or dumplings are also very 
good. — Mrs. W. H. Jacobs. 

Beer Soup. 

Pour 1 pint water in a kettle and set over fire. When hot 
add I pint beer, a little salt, ^ cup sugar, 1 quart milk, a 
little flour to thicken and 3 to 4 egg yolks. Serve with toasted 
bread squares, and on top put the beaten egg whites to which 
has been added a little sugar and vanilla. — Mrs. H. G. Tischer. 

Cherry Soup. 

One pint canned cherries, 1 quart water, little stick cinna- 
mon, 1 tablespoon farina. Put in some dumplings. Sweeten 
to taste. — ]\Irs. A. Steging. 



PILGRIM COOK BOOK 



Cherry Soup. 

One quart fresh cherries, 1 quart water, J cup sugar, 1 
broken stick cinnamon, ^ lemon sliced fine, 2 tablespoons 
tapioca, 1 Qgg yolk. Cook tapioca in 1 cup of boiling water 
until clear, add more water as it evaporates. Put in the first 
six ingredients and let boil 15 minutes. Take from fire, add 
carefully the well beaten yolk mixed with a little water. 
Froth beaten dry with a little sugar on top. — Mrs. O. Klep- 
pisch. 

Cream of Clam Soup. 

Wash the clams, put them into a pan, pour boiling water 
over them and cover them tight. Let stand for about ten or 
fifteen minutes. Then take them out and remove black heads, 
flour them and season with a little nutmeg, mace, pepper and 
salt. Take three quarts of the liquid and put it into a sauce- 
pan to boil. To I pound of butter rub well 3 tablespoons of 
flour and stir it into the liquid. Put in the clams and let them 
boil fifteen minutes. If you wish, add 1 pint of cream or milk. 
—Mrs. R. Albrecht. 

Corn Chowder. 

One can corn, 1 large onion, 4 cups potatoes, 4 cups scalded 
milk, IJ inch cube salt pork, 8 crackers, 1 or 2 stalks celery, 
a part of a red or green pepper, salt and a dash of paprika or 
cayenne pepper, 4 cups boiling water. Cut the pork into 
small pieces, add onion and cook till light yellow, then add 
corn, 4 cups boiling water, onion and pork, and cook sloA^ly 
20 minutes with celery and pepper. Add potatoes cut in cubes 
and w hen done, add milk. — Mrs. D. Wagner. 

Corn Soup. 

Take i can corn and stew it with a slice of onion. Add 
salt and pepper to taste, and 1 quart of slightly thickened milk. 
Simmer for a minute, strain and serve. A few kernels of large 
popped corn are pretty floating on top of this soup. — x\licia K. 
Steinhoff. 



PILGRIM COOK BOOK 



Milk Soup. 

Boil barley or rice in water until done, add a pinch of salt, 
sugar to taste, 1 or 2 pieces of stick cinnamon, a little butter 
and milk. — Mrs. Semmlow. 

Fresh Mushroom Soup. 

In 6 cups of water boil 1 large onion, tops of some celery, 
I green pepper for J hour. Let stand J hour then strain. In 
2| tablespoons butter simmer 20 cents* worth of fresh mush- 
rooms for 10 minutes, add 2| tablespoons flour and stock ; 
simmer 15 minutes. When of right consistency add f cup 
cream. Add 1 tablespoon whipped cream when serving; add 
salt and pepper to taste. — Ada Wilson Bohnsack. 

Green Pea Soup 

Take 1 can peas, add 6 to 8 cups water, J cup carrots, diced, 
a little celery, 1 teaspoon salt, 1 scant tablespoon sugar, a 
little white pepper, 2 large tablespoons chopped onions. Let 
this simmer until carrots are done, then cream 2 tablespoons 
butter with 1 large tablespoon flour and add to the soup. 

Dumplings for soup: 1 tablespoon butter, creamed, J tea- 
spoon salt, 1 Qgg yolk, | cup milk, the beaten white of 1 egg 
and enough flour to thicken. Drop by spoonful into soup and 
boil about 15 minutes. — Mrs. H. G. Tischer. 

Potato Soup 

Four large potatoes, 1 small onion in which 6 cloves have 
been stuck, piece of celery or celery salt ; cook till potatoes fall 
to pieces ; take out onion and celery and mash the potatoes 
fine, pour in boiling milk until consistency of thick cream ; 
beat one Qgg and take tablespoonful of butter and some canned 
corn into this. Season with salt. — Mrs. A. Steging. 

Cream of Potato Soup. 
Three potatoes, 1 quart milk, 1 teaspoon chopped parsley, 
3 teaspoons butter, 1 teaspoon salt, J teaspoon pepper, 2 slices 
onion, 2 teaspoons flour. Cook potatoes until tender, drain 
and rub through sieve. Scald milk and onion (simmer onion), 
add the butter and flour which have been blended together; 
add potatoes and cook 10 minutes. — Mrs. Sodeman. 



8 PILGRIM COOK BOOK 

Cream of Tomato Soup. 
Press enough cooked tomatoes through a fine sieve to make 
1^ cups; let puree become very hot. Melt | cup butter, cook 
in it i cup flour, dash of pepper, and 1 scant teaspoon salt. 
When the mixture is frothy gradually stir in 1^ cups cream 
diluted with ^ cup water. Stir and cook until the sauce boils 
vigorously, then add the hot tomato puree and remove from 
fire at once. — Olga T. Bohnsack. 

Turnip Soup. 

Wash, pare and cut into small pieces ^ dozen medium 
sized white turnips. Boil them in unsalted water until tender, 
then rub through a fine sieve. Chop fine 1 small onion, put in 
a stew pan with 1 tablespoon butter, and cook slowly without 
browning for five minutes ; then add 1 tablespoon flour and 
when blended, 1 quart of milk. Stir until boiling hot, add the 
turnip pulp and season well with salt and pepper. Cook slow- 
ly for 5 minutes ; serve at once and pass grated cheese with it. 
— Mrs. Albrecht. 

Wine Soup. 

Boil i cup fine pearl tapioca in about 1 quart water till 
clear; then add a small piece of stick cinnamon, a little salt, 1 
large glass wine (white or red), and finally 2 to 3 egg yolks 
and 2 to 3 tablespoons sugar. Serve also with toasted white 
bread squares and drop the beaten tgg whites in little mounds 
on top. — Mrs. H. G. Tischer. 



Fish 

Oyster Cocktail. 

Open i dozen or more small oysters into a cup or glass that 
has been generously buried in ice, taking care to save the 
liquor. Season with salt and pepper and add 1 tablespoon of 
tomato catsup, a few drops of lemon juice, a drop of Tobasco 
sauce and a dash of Worcestershire sauce. — Johanna Kret- 
schmer. 



PILGRIM COOK BOOK 



Angels on Horseback. 

Select large plump oysters and a corresponding number of 
very thin slices of boneless bacon. Pick over, wash and dry 
the oysters, and season them with black pepper. Wrap each 
in a sHce of bacon and pin with a wooden toothpick ; the round 
orange wood variety is best for this purpose. Place a frying 
pan over the fire, and when hot drop in sufficient prepared 
oysters to cover the bottom of the pan. Turn them quickly 
several times until the bacon is lightly browned, then serve 
at once on a hot platter. — Mrs. R. Albrecht. 

Oysters in Grape Fruit Shells. 
Take all the pulp from halves of graps fruit and fill the 
shell with chipped ice. Make five depressions in the ice and 
lay an oyster in each with a lemon quarter in the center. Pass 
horseradish or cocktail dressing and thin strips of buttered 
brown bread ; use grape fruit pulp for salad or for fruit cup. — 
Alicia K. Steinhoff. 

Escalloped Oysters. 

Examine oysters carefully and remove all pieces of shells. 
Then to 1 quart oysters and to 1 quart cracker crumbs add 
1| pints milk, salt and pepper, and a little melted butter. 
Stir all together and bake 1 hour. — Mrs. M. Brockman. 

Creole Crabs. 

One can crab meat, 2 tablespoons butter, 2 tablespoons 
chopped onion, 2 tablespoons flour, 2 cups tomato, J teaspoon 
salt, I teaspoon pepper, few grains red pepper. Melt butter, 
add onion and cook slowly until yellow^ ; add flour ; when 
smooth, add tomatoes. Cook 10 minutes, then add seasonings 
and crab meat. Serve on slices of hot buttered toast and gar- 
nish with strips of pimientoes. — Alicia K. Steinhofif. 

Creamed Shrimps and Peas. 
One-half pint milk, piece of butter size of an Qgg. Heat 
in frying pan, salt to taste and thicken with corn starch. 
Remove from fire, add 1 can shrimps and | can peas. This 
is a nice dish for supper. — Mrs. O. A. Skibbe. 



10 PILGRIM COOK BOOK 

Codfish Balls. 

Soak codfish (cut in pieces) about 1 hour in lukewarm 
water; remove skin and bones, shred, and put on stove in cold 
water. As soon as water begins to boil, pour it off, add fresh 
cold water and bring to a boil again. Have ready potatoes 
boiled tender, mashed and seasoned with butter. Take twice 
as much potato as codfish and while both are still warm form 
into balls. Fry in deep, hot lard, or drippings, like doughnuts. 
An egg makes them lighter. If cold potatoes are used reheat 
them with a little cream and butter. — Mrs. H. G. Tischer. 

Baked Fish with Tomatoes. 

Clean well, sprinkle with salt 1 hour before cooking, rub 
flour over it and baste with butter and put in baking pan ; pour 
a can of tomatoes over fish and season well with salt and 
pepper and bake. — Mrs. Albrecht. 

Baked Fish. 

Clean thoroughly, sprinkle with salt an hour before cook- 
ing, fill with dressing and sew securely, sprinkle flour over it, 
baste with butter and place in dripping pan in moderate oven ; 
allow 1 J hours for a good sized fish ; serve with drawn butter 
sauce and garnish with sliced lemon. — Mrs. Albrecht. 

Baked Cream Fish. 

You may use salmon, finnan haddie, lobster, or any left- 
over cooked fish. Make a white sauce of 2 tablespoons butter, 
2 tablespoons flour, and 1 cup milk. Mix fish with sauce 
adding salt, pepper, paprika, chopped green pepper, strips of 
pimiento, and a little chopped onion, as desired. Place in a 
buttered baking dish or in ramekins, spread bread crumbs over 
top and bake until brown. — Alicia K. Steinhoff. 

Fried Fish with Stuffing. 

Any small fish may be used. Scale, clean and open the 
fish down the belly. Have ready an onion cut in slender 
strips, some tiny red peppers with the seeds removed, and 



PILGRIM COOK BOOK 11 

some fresh mint leaves. Place in each fish a strip of onion, 
a pepper, and a mint leaf. Skewer the fish closely together 
with a wooden toothpick, roll in flour, season with salt and a 
very little cayenne, and fry in hot lard or butter. Fry until 
a crisp brown and serve with a garnish of mint leaves. — Mrs. 
R. Albrecht. 

Halibut with Sauce. 

Brush a slice of halibut with melted butter, sprinkle with 
salt and pepper, cover with a paper and bake 15 minutes. 
Serve with Hollandaise sauce made with J cup butter, 2 Qgg 
yolks, and | tablespoon vinegar. — Mrs. G. C. Hass. 

Boiled Fish with Green Sauce. 

Enough water to cover fish, 3 or 4 bay leaves, 18 pepper 
corns, 1 onion, salt and J cup vinegar. Bring all to a boil, 
then put in the fish and cook slowly until tender, about 15 to 
20 minutes. Place fish on a warm platter and pour over it a 

Green Sauce. — Melt 2 tablespoons butter in a pan, add 1 
tablespoon flour and cook until a light brown color; then 
add enough of the water in which the fish was boiled to make 
a creamy sauce. Remove from fire and add the juice of ^ 
lemon, 1 cup of finely chopped parsley and 1 or 2 egg yolks. 
— Alicia K. SteinhoflF. 

Salmon Balls. 

One can of salmon, 12 rolled soda crackers, 1 cup milk, salt, 
2 eggs. Form into balls and fry a light brown. — Mrs. Sode- 
man. 

Boiled Salmon. 

Take 2 or 4 pounds of salmon, scrape the skin, wipe, tie in 
cheese-cloth and immerse in gently boiling water. Cover 
and cook from 20 to 40 minutes or until the flsh will leave 
the bone easily. Drain and remove the skin. Arrange on 
platter and pour egg or white sauce over and around. Garnish 
with hard boiled eggs and lemon points and serve with cucum- 
bers and potato balls. — Mrs. E. S. Berndt. 



12 PILGRIM COOK BOOK 

Salmon Loaf. 

One can salmon, 1 cup milk, | cup ground bread or 
crackers, 1 egg, salt and pepper to taste. Bake 1 hour. May- 
be served with tomato sauce. — Mrs. H. England. 

Baked Trout. 

Scale trout and remove head. Season and stuff with a 
dressing made of bread crumbs and onions to which has 
been added a pinch of salt, 1 tgg and a lump of butter. Place 
in oblong baking dish and cover with canned tomatoes. 
Bake in a moderate oven ^ hour. Just before removing from 
oven, add a little flour and water or milk to make a cream 
gravy with the tomato sauce. Dot fish with small pieces of 
butter before placing in oven. — Clara L. Kemnitz. 

Boiled Trout with Cream Sauce. 

Boil a 3-pound trout ; skin and pick out all bones. Put on 
a hot platter and pour over it a cream sauce made of 1 pint 
milk, 2 tablespoons butter, 1 tablespoon flour, 2 eggs, a pinch 
of salt and parsley cut up fine. — Mrs. Sodeman. 

Baked White Fish. 

Clean, open, and straighten the fish out. Take backbone 
out, beginning at the head and remove carefully. All the other 
bones will come out with it. Salt and allow to stand some 
time. Dredge the fish well with cracker crumbs and lay in a 
pan, skin side down. Lay bits of drippings over the top and it 
will brown fine. Ordinary fish will bake in 15 to 20 minutes. 
— Mrs. H. Stiede. 



Meats 

Filling for Turkey or Goose. 

Soak 2 loaves of stale bread, 2 teaspoons salt, i teaspoon 
pepper, 2 teaspoons minced parsley, 2 teaspoons or more of 
sage, 1 Qgg.' Boil heart, liver and gizzard until tender and 
put through food chopper with 2 medium sized onions and 



PILGRIN COOK BOOK 13 
