1 
STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD COMMUNISM 

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE MATUSOW CASE 



HEARING „ 

» ' " 

BEFORE THE 

SUBCOMMllfTEE TO INVESTIGATE THE 

ADMINISTEATIO]\' OF THE liVTERNAL SECUEITY 

ACT AND OTHER INTERNAL SECURITY LAWS 

OF THE 

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY 

UNITED STATES SENATE 

EIGHTY-FOUETH CONGEESS 

FIRST SESSION 
- — KUJigyANT TO 

S. Res. 58 



APRIL 20, 1955 



PART 11 



Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary 




UNITED STATES 
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 
.59886 WASHINGTON : 1955 



Eorton Pub'ix Library 
Superintendent of Documents 

AUG 1 1955 *^ 



COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY 
HARLEY M. KILGORE, West Virginia, Chairman 
JAMES O. EASTLAND, Mississippi ALEXANDER WILEY, Wisconsin 

ESTES KEFAUVER, Tennessee WILLIAM LANGER, North Dakota 

OLIN D. JOHNSTON, South Carolina WILLIAM E. JENNER, Indiana 

THOMAS C. HENNINGS, JH., Missouri ARTHUR V. WATKINS, Utah 

JOHN L. McCLELLAN, Arkansas EVERETT McKINLEY DIRKSEN, Illinois 

PRICE DANIEL, Texas HERMAN WELKER, Idaho 

JOSEPH C. O'MAHONEY, Wyoming JOHN MARSHALL BUTLER, Maryland 



Subcommittee To Investigate the Administration of the Internal Security 
Act and Other Internal Security Laws 

JAMES O. EASTLAND, Mississippi, Chairman 
OLIN D. JOHNSTON, South Carolina WILLIAM E. JENNER, Indiana 

JOHN L. McCLELLAN, Arkansas ARTHUR V. WATKINS, Utah 

THOMAS C. HENNINGS, JK., Missouri HERMAN WELKER, Idaho 

PRICE DANIEL, Texas JOHN MARSHALL BUTLER, Maryland 

J. G. SODRWINE, Chief Counsel 

Richard Arens and Alva C. Carpenter^ Associate Counsel 

Benjamin Mandel, Director of Research 

n 



STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD COMMUNISM 
(The Significance of the Matiisow Case) 



WEDNESDAY, APRIL 20, 1955 

United States Senate, 
Subcommittee To Investigate the Administration 
OF the Internal Security Act and Other Internal 

Security Laws of the Committee on the Judiciary, 

Washington, D. G. 

The subcommittee met, pursuant to adjournment, at 2: 10 p. m., in 
room 475 Senate Office Building, Senator John L. McClellan, presiding. 

Present: Senators Eastland (chairman of the subcommittee), and 
McClellan. 

Also present: J. G. Sourwine, chief counsel, Alva C. Carpenter, 
associate counsel; Benjamin Mandel, director of research; and Kobert 
C. McManus, professional staff member. 

Senator McClellan. The committee will come to order. 

Counsel, who is your first witness? 

Mr. Sourwine. Mr. Harvey Matusow, sir. 

Senator McClellan. Come around, Mr. Matusow. 

Mr. Matusow, you have previously testified in the course of this 
investigation before this committee. 

TESTIMONY OF HARVEY MATUSOW 

Mr. Matusow. Yes, sir. 

Senator McClellan, You acknowledge you are under the same 
oath previously administered to you to tell the truth, the whole truth 
and nothing but the truth so help you, God ? 

Mr. Matusow. Yes, sir, I do. 

Senator McClellan. Mr. Counsel, you may proceed. 

Mr. Matusow. Sir, may the record show my counsel, Mr. Faulkner 
has not been able to attend today. 

He was involved in a trial proceeding in New York which is still 
in progress and could not come to Washington and I am prepared 
to testify without counsel but I would like the record to show that. 

Senator McClellan. You announce to the committee that you are 
willing to proceed with your testimony without the benefit of counsel 
present ? 

Mr. Matusow. Yes, sir. 

If something comes up — I will adhere to the committee orders — 
some question with which I am not familiar in relation to the law — 
I can't foresee any — at that time if I might request from the com- 
mittee postponing that question in order to make a long distance call 
to New York. 

969 



970 STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF "WORLD COMIVIUNISM 

Mr. SouRwiNE. I think the record should show I talked to Mr. 
Matusow over the telephone several nights ago and he said he would 
not be able to be here today because he had personal business of his 
own and he wanted to know if the committee would hear him if he 
came on Tuesday without counsel. 

I told him that would be a matter of his choice, I couldn't promise 
him anything. 

I told him if he came the committee would hear him. He wanted to 
have a stipulation that if he came without counsel, the committee 
would permit him to telephone counsel when he needed to do so. I 
told him such a stipulation could not be made because it w^ould put 
the committee at his mercy. I talked to Mr. Faulkner last night and 
he knew he was unable to be here. 

He was expecting a telephone call from Mr. Matusow. I told him 
the committee was expecting Mr, Matusow to come today in line with 
the stipulation Mr. Matusow and counsel had made on Monday and 
it would be up to Mr. Matusow to decide whether he should enjoin 
Mr, Faulkner to come with him or get another counsel or come without 
counsel. 

I say this so the record should show clearly that Mr. Matusow is 
not caught by surprise without counsel but he is here at his own election 
without counsel. 

Senator McClellan. Mr. Matusow, you know that your counsel 
is not present. Are you willing to proceed without your counsel ? 

Mr. Matusow. Yes, sir. I would like a clarification. Maybe Mr. 
Sourwine misunderstood me on the phone call. I said if there were 
one or maybe two questions that would come up at the end of the 
hearing or prior to it if there would be a 5-minute recess if I could 
take tlie one or two questions and call counsel but not stop after such 
a question came up. 

Senator McClellax. Well, proceed, and when a situation arises 
that raises an issue, the committee will resolve it at that time. 

Mr. Sourwine. With the indulgence of the Chair I would like to 
ask one preliminary question on this matter. Did you, Mr. Matusow, 
say anything to me over the telephone about desiring to accumulate 
your questions and make one telephone call at the end of the session? 
Mr. Matusow. ]My recollection is yes. However, I might not have 
understood it. I might not have put it in those words. I don't know 
but my recollection is that I did. 

You were busy, you had another telephone call. 
_ Mr. Sourwine. I don't want to make an issue of this, but under the 
circumstances I sliould tell you there was another person on the line 
when I talked with you. What is your recollection now ? 

Mr. Matusow. My recollection is that I said to you that I would 
like to, if there are a number of questions at a recess, accumulate the 
questions and call counsel. 

Mv. Sourwine. If the committee deems that matter important, we 
can go into it further. 

Senator McClellan. I don't think it is important until we reach 
some point where it arises and we can try to resolve it at that time. 
Proceed with the examination. 

ISIr. Sourwine. You were asked by the committee to bring a number 
of papers and documents. Do you. have them with you ? 
Mr. Matusovs^. I have. 



STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD COMMUNISM 971 

Mr. SouRwixE. Do you have the address book 

Mr. Matx sow. Yes ; I do. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Which you were asked to bring. 

Will you tell us what that is and then send it forward, please. 

Mr. Matusow. It will take a moment. This is an address book 
which I kept, which I referred to, I believe, on the first day of my 
testimony, which I think was the 21st of February, about which I said 
it contained the name of an individual who was present at the Roch- 
ambeau Restaurant in New York, when I had dinner with Elizabeth 
Bentley on October 3, 1052. This is that address book. The name 
is found on page — I will put an asterisk next to it and initial it. 

Mr. SouRWiNE. What page ? 

Mr. Matusow. I will put a paper clip on it. 

Mr. SouRWiNE. Read the name. 

]Mr. Matusow. The name is Bill Henry at 56 West 11th Street, New 
York City. I don't have the phone number. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Have you talked with Mr. Henry since you first 
mentioned his existence as an unnamed person before this committee. 

]Mr. Matusow. I have not. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. All right, sir. "V^Hiat is the general nature of the 
entries in this address book? 

Mr. Matusow. Various and sundry names, some in show business, 
producers, directors, people here in Washington. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Do the persons whose names appear in this book 
all have any one thing in common? 

Mv. Matusow. No, sir. 

Mr. SouR\vi]srE. Aren't they all friends of yours ? 

Mr. Matusow. Not necessarily. I have American Broadcasting 
Co., of which I want the phone number. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Are they all addresses of persons or companies which 
you desire to keep for your own purposes ? 

Mr. Matusow. At one time I did. '\\^iether I do now is another 
story. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Over what period of time did you make the entries 
in this book? 

Mr. Matusow. This book — on 1951 through this year. 

This book is a composite of a few books. In transit last year a few 
address books I had got waterlogged. This one did, too. ^ This was 
a blank. I had transposed other names in here. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Are you saying now the entries in this book were 
many of tliem copied into this book last year? 

Mr. Matusow. Last year, yes. 

Mr. SouRwixE. From previous lists? 

Mr. Matusow. From another book, as I recall. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. From another book or lists ? 

Mr. Matusow. The waterlog marks show on this book. 

Mr. SouRwiXE. So the first entries made in this book physically 
were last year, 1954 ? 

Mr. Matusow. The last entries made in this book were in 1955. 

Mr. SouRwiXE. The first entries made in this book were in 1954. 

Mr. Matitsow. In this specific book ; yes. 

Mr. SouRwixE. Will you send that forward, please? 

Mr. Matusow. Yes. 



972 STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD COMMUNISM 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Do you have with you the recording of the wire tape 
of a union meeting at the Hotel New Yorker, concerning which you 
testified ? 

Mr. Matusow. No, sir ; I don't. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. ^Vliy didn't you bring that? 

Mr. Matusow. I believe I said I had been unable to locate it. I 
have better than 200 hours of blank or previously recorded tape re- 
cordings and to play 200 hours of tape to find approximately 3 min- 
utes is a next-to-impossible task. I refreshed my memory and that 
specific tape recording was made by investigators of this committee, 
according to the information I received from Don Surine. It is a dub- 
bing from the original wire or tape recording made by investigators 
of this committee of that meeting. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Mr. Surine, as you know, is not an investigator for 
this committee. 

Mr. Matusow. As T said, Mr. Surine told me he received it from 
investigators of this committee. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. You are attempting to give second degree hearsay 
testimony about what is on this particular recording. The committee 
instructed you to produce the recording and you stated you would do 
so. 

Mr. Matusow. I have been unable to do so. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Is it your testimony that you still have this record- 
ing in your possession? 

Mr. Matusow. I will endeavor to locate it but this will take time. 
As you know I have been in jail for a few days and 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Mr. Matusow, the committee could, if it seemed the 
most expedient thing, ask you to produce all the tape recordings in 
your possession and the committee could then go through them and 
find this particular one if it is there. 

The committee has preferred to ask you to proceed and produce this 
particular recording. Will you do so ? 

Mr. Matusow. I will attempt to do so. 

Mr. SouRWiNE. That is what you said last time and the committee 
still does not have the recording. 

Mr. Matusow. If I find it, the committee will get it. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Do you know whether you have it ? 

Mr. Matusow. I will have to play some 200 hours of tape record- 
ing to find it. I might be lucky and find it on the first hour. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Do you know for sure you still have it? 

Mr. Matusow. I presume I have it. I do a lot of tape recording 
music — I do a lot of other things, I might have erased that recording. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. You did not mark it or otherwise designate it? 

Mr. Matusow. I had marked it at one time but I have since taken 
markings off, I reused many tapes and that happened to be one of 
those tapes. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. I should like to ask, Mr. Chairman, that Mr. Matu- 
sow be instructed to produce this recording if he has it or to state 
to the committee that he no longer has it. 

Mr. Matusow. I will play the recordings and attempt to do so. 

The Chairman. Thank you. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Mr. Matusow, do you have the intermittent diary, 
consisting of loose pages, the first one being January 1, 1948, and 



STRATEGY AND TACTICS OF WORLD COMMUNISM 973 

the last April 11, 1952, concerning wliicli there has been testimony 
here which you were asked to bring before the committee. 

Mr. Matusow. No, sir ; I do not. The diary is still in evidence in 
Judge Dimock's court. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. I send you, Mr. Matusow what purports to be a 
photostatic copy of that diary and ask you whether you can identify 
it as such? 

(Document presented to witness.) 

Mr. Matusow. Without going over each page, presuming that it 
is intact, the diary if you would stipulate that this is the complete 
diary in Judge Dimock's court. Looking at it, it is part of it. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Do you recognize the first page ? 

Mr. Matusow. Yes ; I recognize subsequent pages. I presume it is 
intact. I will agree to that to save time. 

Mr. SouRwiNE. Mr. Chairman, this document was received from 
the Department of Justice as a result of an official request by the com- 
mittee and it is stated by the Department to be a photostat of the entire 
diary as it was placed into the record in Judge Dimock's court. I 
ask that this document as identified by Mr. Matusow may go into the 
record at this point. 

The Chairman. So ordered. 

(The document above referred to was marked "Exhibit No. 78" and 
appears below:) 

Exhibit No. 78 

Jantjary 1st, 1948. 
It is now New Years Eve. All over the city and as a mater of fact most of the 
world is celebrating in one form or another. Some people are at gay parties 
and some are sitting at home, or a place that they can call home and are cele- 
brating in seilence. 

I feel that seilence is the way it should be celebrated these days. Last week it 
was Christmas, Peace on Earth and Good AVill Towards Man. Thats a joke. 
How many were killed in Palastine and in the rest of the world. Some peace. 
It makes me laugh. 

Today is New Year, every body is saying that we should have a happy and a 
prosperous New Year. That is also a joke. What is the outlook for this country 
and for the rest of the world. Higher prices starvation, and a depresion plus 
many other things that do the world no good. People should not be spending 
money and having such a good time for the rest of the world needs the help 
that the money spent tonite would bring. 

After tonites party I decieded to give up the AYD and the rest of the Progressive 
organizations including the CP which after much looking into I think is a reac- 
tionary outfit that is as the House Of Rep. says UNAMERICAN. The people in 
the CP have one track minds and they are two narrow minded. They are not 
the type that I feel I should associate with. I belive that this country needs 
changes but I also belive that The CP would make it worse. These changes can 
be accomplished by a process of a lot of things, and as I said I will disaffilate 
with the Pro. Orgz. that I belong to now. I feel that in this new year I will 
make a go of the things I am setting out to do. Mom and Pop are at Minnies 
to a partie. Jules Pheffer in on my S— T list. Elonore- A--s is 0--Y. Lost $3.67 

on horse today. Filled out application for state bones for $250.00 

Saying for the Day Harvey you are a person that knows nothing about a lot 

of things 

November 30, 1950 

Left Taos about noon, met Howard S in Santa Fe. he was looking for work at los 

Aloms as a CIC etc. . . no openings, went to sandia base and got the safne story, 

made application with navel shipyard in San Francisco, but before getting the