UC-NRLF 




B M 135 313 



GIFT OF 

Charles :.;. Tt+^^j!! 




Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2007 with funding from 

IVIicrosoft Corporation 



http://www.archive.org/details/analyticalmechanOOseelrich 



ANALYTICAL MECHANICS 
FOR ENGINEERS 



BY 

FRED B. SEELY, M.S. 

Professor of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics 
AND 

NEWTON E. ENSIGN, A.B., B.S. 

Assistant Professor of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics 
University of Illinois 



TOTAL ISSUE, TEN THOUSAND 



NEW YORK 

JOHN WILEY & SONS, Inc 

London: CHAPMAN & HALL, Limited 
1921 

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 

LIBRARY • 

BRANCH OF THE 
COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE 



Copyright, 1921, 
By FRED B. SEELY 

and 
NEWTON E. ENSIGN 



PRESS OP 

BRAUNWORTH ft CO> 
tf /jl BOOK MANUFACTURERS 

BROOKLYN, N. Y. 



PREFACE 



This book, as its name suggests, presents those principles 
of mechanics that are believed to be essential for the student of 
engineering. 

Throughout the book the aim has been to make the principles 
of mechanics stand out clearly ; to build them up as much as pos- 
sible from common experience (the student's experience); to 
apply the principles to concrete problems of practical value; 
and to emphasize the physical rather than the mathematical 
interpretation of the principles. Important equations are printed 
in bold-faced type and the statements of the more important 
principles are italicized. 

The book is divided into three parts; namely, Statics, Kine- 
matics, and Kinetics. Statics is presented first because of its 
simpUcity and its direct relation to the student's experience. 
However, in the first two chapters are developed certain concepts 
and elementary principles that are fully as important in kinetics 
as in statics, and the authors feel that it is essential to a satis- 
factory grasp of mechanics, as a whole, that sufficient time and 
care be taken to cause these elementary concepts and principles 
to crystallize in the student's mind before the more general prin- 
ciples and problems are studied. The equilibrium of the various 
types of force systems are treated both by the algebraic and by the 
graphical method. A large number of problems involving the 
equilibrium of the simpler structures and machines are given, and 
figures illustrating the structures and machines are used freely. 

Although kinematics as herein developed is mainly a prehm- 
inary to kinetics, the authors' experience indicates that the 
kinematic properties of motion must be isolated and developed 
with care if they are to be used with success in the study of the 
kinetics of the motion. 



Z3Zf<^ 



iv PREFACE 

Both kinematics and kinetics have been developed with regard 
for the increasing importance of dynamics to engineers. The 
geometric and physical conceptions and interpretations of the 
quantities in Icinematics have been emphasized rather than the 
mathematical conceptions. A treatment of acceleration is given 
which, it is hoped, will help to overcome some of the difficulties 
frequently found in the use of this quantity. The treatment of 
kinetics has been restricted to the more common types of motion 
found in engineering practice, but these motions have been treated 
more fully than is usual in elementary texts on mechanics. This 
is particularly true of plane motion. D'Alembert's principle 
(involving inertia forces) has been used for each type of motion 
as a second method of solution. The methods of procedure used 
in the analysis of kinetics problems are strongly emphasized both 
in the general discussions and in the solutions of illustrative 
problems. 

Illustrative problems are given at the end of the more important 
articles and many problems are offered for solution. Great care 
has been exercised in selecting problems that are of practical 
interest and yet are easily comprehended and are free from unim- 
portant details so that the principles used in their solution will 
stand out clearly. The answers to about one-half of the problems 
are given. 

Graphical methods of representation and of solution have been 
used frequently in all three parts of the book. A knowledge of 
elementary calculus is assumed although little use is made of it 
in the first four chapters. 

The discussion of centroids (Chapter V) is developed directly 
from the principle of moments — a principle given much emphasis 
throughout the book. 

Several special topics are discussed in Section 3 of Chapter IX. 
They may be omitted without interfering with the continuity of 
the book, or any one of the topics may be studied alone without 
studying the whole section. Further, if it is desired to reduce the 
time given to kinetics, the second method of analysis of the motion 
of rotation or of plane motion (which employs D'Alembert's 
principle and inertia forces) in Section 2 of Chapter IX may be 
omitted. And, in general, the last part of the material in any 
section or chapter may be omitted without interfering with the 
student's progress in the first part of the next section or chapter. 



PREFACE V 

The authors wish to acknowledge their indebtedness to Pro- 
fessor A. N. Talbot for his interest in the book during its prepara- 
tion and for his helpful suggestions on the treatment of certain 
important topics. The authors are also indebted to Professor 
G. A. Goodenough for valuable material in the treatment of Gov- 
ernors and to Professor 0. A. Leutwiler for the data and figures 
for a number of valuable engineering problems. 

F. B. S. 
N. E. E. 

Urbana, Illinois, 
December, 1920. 



CONTENTS 



PAGE 

Preface iii 



PART I. STATICS 

Chapter I. Fundamental Conceptions and Definitions 

1. Introduction 1 

2. RigidBody 3 

3. Conception of a Force 3 

4. External Effects of a Force 4 

5. Characteristics of a Force 4 

6. Measure of a Force. Units 4 

7. Scalar and Vector Quantities. Vector Representation of a Force. . . 6 

8. Classification of Forces. Definitions 7 

9. Principle of Transmissibility 8 

10. Parallelogram Law 8 

11. Triangle Law 9 

12. Resolution of a Force 11 

13. Moment of a Force 14 

14. Principle of Moments. Varignon's Theorem 16 

15. Couples 19 

16. Characteristics of a Couple 20 

17. Vector Representation of a Couple 20 

18. Resolution of a Force into a Force and a Couple 22 

19. Methods of Solution of Problems 24 



Chapter II. Resultants op Force Systems 

20. Introduction 28 

§ 1. Collinear Forces 

21. Algebraic Method 28 

§ 2. Concurrent Forces in a Plane 

22. Graphical Methods 29 

23. Algebraic Method 31 

vii 



viil CONTENTS 

§ 3, Parallel Forces in a Plane 

PAGB 

24. Graphical Methods 34 

25. Principle of Moments 38 

26. Algebraic Method 40 

27. Couples 44 

§ 4. Non-concurrent, Non-parallel Forces in a Plane 

28. Graphical Methods 48 

29. Principle of Moments 49 

30. Algebraic Method 50 

§ 5. Concurrent Forces in Space 

31. Graphical Method 53 

32. Algebraic Method 54 

§ 6. Parallel Forces in Space 

33. Graphical Method 56 

34. Principle of Moments 57 

35. Algebraic Method 57 

§ 7. Couples in Space 

36. Resultant of a System of Couples 60 

37. Composition of Couples by Means of Vectors 62 

38. Resolution of Couples 64 

§ 8. Non-concurrent, Non-parallel Forces in Space 

39. Graphical Method 65 

40. Principle of Moments 65 

41. Algebraic Method 66 

Chapter III. Equilibrium of Force Systems 

§ 1. Introduction 

42. Preliminary 69 

43. Graphical Conditions of Equilibrium 70 

44. Algebraic Conditions of Equilibrium 70 

§ 2. Collinear Forces 

45. Equations of EquiUbrium 72 

§ 3. Concurrent Forces in a Plane 

46. Equations of Equilibrium 73 

47 Lami's Theorem 74 

48 Three Forces in Equilibrium 75 

§ 4. Parallel Forces in a Plane 

49. Equations of Equilibrium 78 



CONTENTS ix 

§5. N cm-concurrent, Non-parallel Forces in a Plane — 

PAGE 

50. Equations of Equilibrium 82 

51. Graphical Solution of a Typical Problem 85 

52. Choice of Moment-centers and of Directions of Resolution 87 

§ 6. Equilibrium of Trusses, Cranes, and Cables 

53. Stresses in Trusses 88 

54. Method of Joints 89 

55. Method of Sections 90 

56. Graphical Analysis of Trusses • 95 

57. Cranes 98 

58. Stresses in Flexible Cables 102 

59. The Parabohc Cable 102 

60. The Catenary 106 

§ 7. Concurrent Forces in Space 

61. Equations of Equilibrium 110 

§ 8. Parallel Forces in Space 

62. Equations of Equilibrium 112 

§ 9. Non-concurrent, Non-parallel Forces in Space 

63. Equations of Equilibrium 114 

Chapter IV. Friction 

64. Friction Defined 127 

65. Coefficient of Friction 128 

66. Angle of Friction and the Friction Cone 129 

67. Angle of Repose 133 

68. The Laws of Friction 134 

69. The Inclined Plane 135 

70. The Wedge 138 

71. The Screw 142 

72. Journal Friction and the Friction Circle 145 

73. Pivot Friction . 148 

74. SoUd Flat Pivot 149 

75. Hollow Flat Pivot or Collar Bearing 150 

76. Conical Pivot 151 

77. Rolling Resistance 153 

78 Belt Friction 155 

Chapter V. First Moments and Centroids 

79. First Moments 160 

80. Centroids 160 

81. Planes and Lines of Symmetry 162 

82. Centroids by Integration. . 163 



X CONTENTS 

83. Centroids of Composite Figures and Bodies 168 

84. Theorems of Pappus and Guldinus 171 

85. Center of Gravity and Mass-center 173. 

86. Graphical Method of Determining Centroids of Areas 177 

87. Determination of Center of Gravity by Experiment 178 

Chapter VI. Second Moment, Moment of Inertia 

§ 1. Moments of Inertia of Areas 

88. Moment of Inertia of an Area Defined 180 

89. Polar Moment of Inertia 181 

90. Radius of Gyration 182 

91. Parallel Axis Theorem for Areas 183 

92. Moments of Inertia by Integration 184 

93. Moments of Inertia of Composite Areas 190 

94. Product of Inertia Defined 194 

95. Axes of Symmetry 194 

96. Parallel Axis Theorem for Products of Inertia 196 

97. Moments of Inertia with Respect to Inclined Axes 198 

98. Principal Axes 199 

99. Moments of Inertia of Areas by Graphical and Approximate Methods 202 

§ 2. Moments of Inertia of Bodies 

100. Moment of Inertia of Mass Defined 205 

101. Radius of Gyration 207 

102. Parallel Axis Theorem for Masses 207 

103. Moments of Inertia with Respect to Two Perpendicular Planes 208 

104. Moments of Inertia of Simple Solids by Integration 209 

105. Moments of Inertia of Composite Bodies 2J18 

106. Moments of Inertia of Bodies by Experimental Methods 220 



PART 11. KINEMATICS 

107. Introduction 221 

Chapter VII. Motion of a Particle 

108. Types of Motion 222 

109. Linear Displacement 222 

110. Angular Displacement 224 

111. Relation between Linear and Angular Displacements 225 

112. Linear Velocity and Speed 226 

113. Distance-time Graph 228 

114. Angular Velocity 229 

115. Relation between Linear and Angular Velocities 230 

116. Components of Velocity 231 



CONTENTS xi 

rAOB 

117. Linear Acceleration 7~; .^rr 335 

118. Tangential and Normal Accelerations 236 

119. Speed-time Graph 241 

120. Angular Acceleration 242 

121. Relation between Linear and Angular Accelerations; 243 

122. Axial Components of Acceleration 245 

123. Motion of a Projectile 248 

124. Uniformly Accelerated Rectilinear Motion 250 

125. Uniformly Accelerated Circular Motion 251 

>• 126. Simple Harmonic Motion 253 

ll27. Non-uniformly Accelerated Motion 256 

128. Relative Motion 262 

129. Transverse and Radial Components of Acceleration 269 

130. Coriolis' Law 270 

Chapter VIII. Motion of Rigid Bodies 

131. Introduction 276 

132. Translation 276 

133. Rotation 277 

134. Plane Motion 278 

135. Instantaneous Center. 284 



PART III. KINETICS 

Chapter IX. — Force, Mass, and Acceleration 

§ 1. Preliminary Considerations. Kinetics of a Particle 

136. Introduction 287 

137. The General Kinetics Problem 288 

138. Characteristics of a Force System 288 

139. Inertia and Mass 289 

140. Newton's Laws 293 

141. Mathematical Statement of Newton's Second Law. Units 294 

142. Other Systems of Units 296 

143. Equations of Motion for a Particle 297 

§ 2. Kinetics of Bodies 

144. Tntroduction. Methods of Analysis 303 

Translation 

145. Kinetics of a Translating Rigid Body 305 

Rotation 

146. Kinetics of a Rotating Rigid Body : 313 

147. Second Method of Analysis. Inertia Forces 325 

148. Center of Percussion 336 



XU CONTENTS 

Plane Motion 

^ PAGE 

149. Kinetics of Plane Motion of a Rigid Body 336 

150. Second Method of Analysis. Inertia Forces 345 

151. Limitations of the Moment Equation, T = Ia 351 

152. Principle of the Motion of the Mass-center 353 

§ 3. Special Topics in Kinetics 

153. Introduction 356 

154. Hoop Tension in Flywheels 356 

155. Superelevation of Railway Track 358 

Pendulums 

156. Simple Circular Pendulum 360 

157. Compound Pendulum 363 

158. Center of Oscillation 364 

159. Torsion Pendulum 365 

160. Experimental Determination of Moment of Inertia 367 

Balancing 

161. Need for Balancing 369 

162. Balancing of Rotating Masses 370 

163. Several Masses in a Single Plane of Rotation 372 

164. Masses in Different Transverse Planes 373 

The Gyroscope 

165. The Problem Defined 378 

166. Analysis of Forces in the Gyroscope 379 

167. The Moment of the Gyroscopic Couple 382 

Governors 

168. The Action of Governors 386 

169. The Conical Pendulum 387 

170. The Loaded Governor 388 

171. The Porter Governor 389 

172. The Centrifugal Shaft Governor 391 

173. The Inertia Shaft Governor 392 

174. Comparison of the Two Types of Governors 393 

175. Analysis of Forces in the Rite's Inertia Governor 393 

Chapter X. — Work and Energy 

176. Introduction 405 

§ 1. Work and Power 

177. Work Defined 406 

178. Algebraic Expressions for Work Done by a Force 406 

179. Work Done by a Couple , 408 

180. Work a Scalar Quantity. Sign and Units of Work 409 

181. Graphical Representation and Calculation of Work 409 



CONTENTS xiii 

_^ PAGE 

182. Work Done on a Body by a Force System 414 

183. Power Defined 417 

184. Units of Power 417 

185. Special Equations for Power 418 

§2. Energy 

186. Energy Defined 420 

187. Potential Energy 421 

188. Kinetic Energy 422 

189. Kinetic Energy of a Particle 422 

190. Kinetic Energy of a Body 424 

191. Non-mechanical Energy 428 

§ 3. Principles of Work and Energy 

192. Preliminary 430 

193. Principle of Work and Kinetic Energy 430 

194. Application of Principle to Special Cases of Motion of Rigid Bodies. 432 

195. Conservation of Energy 439 

196. Relation between Potential and Kinetic Energy for Conservative 

Systems 440 

§ 4. Efficiency. Dissipation of Energy 

197. Efficiency Defined 442 

198. Dissipation of Energy 443 

199. Work Lost Due to Friction in Bearings 444 

200. A Simple Dynamometer. Prony Brake 446 



Chapter XI. — Impulse and Momentum 

201. Preliminary 449 

§ 1. Impulse 

202. Impulse and Impact Defined. Units 450 

203. Components of Linear Impulse 451 

204. Moment of Impulse. Angular Impulse 452 

§ 2. Momentum 

205. Momentum of a Particle Defined. Units 453 

206. Components of Momentum. Moment of Momentum 454 

207. Linear Momentum of a Body 455 

208. Angular Momentum of a Rotating Rigid Body 456 

209. Angular Momentum of a Rigid Body Having Plane Motion 457 

§ 3. Principles of Impulse and Momentum 

210. Preliminary 459 

211. Principle of Linear Impulse and Linear Momentum 459 

212. Principle of Angular Impulse and Angular Momentum 461 



xiv CONTENTS 

PAGE 

213. Method of Analysis of the Motion of a Body by Means of Impulse 

and Momentum 462 

214. Application of the Principles of Impulse and Momentum to Special 

Types of Motion of Rigid Bodies 463 

215. Conservation of Momentum 467 

216. Impact 471 

217. Impact of Two Translating Bodies . 473 

218. Impact of a Translating Body with a Rotating Body 475 

219. Loss of Kinetic Energy in Direct Central Impact 476 

220. Angular Momentum a Vector Quantity 477 

221. The Gyroscopic Couple 478 



ANALYTICAL MECHANICS FOR ENGINEERS 



PART I. STATICS 



CHAPTER I 
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

1. Introduction. — ^The term Mechanics is used in a broad 
sense to denote the science which treats of the motion of bodies, 
rest being considered as a special case of motion. The science 
of mechanics constitutes a large part of our knowledge of the 
laws of the Universe, including the laws concerning gases and 
liquids as weU as those of rigid bodies, and it takes a prominent 
place in the study of Astronomy and Phj^sics as well as in the 
study of machines and structures which are involved in engineer- 
ing practice. 

The object of Analytical Mechanics as developed in this book 
is to determine the laws by which the motions (including the state 
of rest) of bodies (mainly rigid bodies) are governed and to apply 
these laws to conditions met in engineering practice. 

In the development of the laws of mechanics certain concepts 
are assumed to be fundamental, that is, no one of them can be 
expressed in terms of the others or in simpler terms. Such 
concepts grow out of our experiences, and other ideas and laws 
are derived from these condensed experiences. 

The fundamental concepts involved in the laws of mechanics 
of rigid bodies are: (1) force, which is made known to us through 
the tension and the compression of our muscles as a pull or a push, 
(2) bodies or inert material (matter) on which forces act and with- 
out which forces cannot exist, (3) space, and (4) time. A more 
definite understanding of force and inert bodies can be obtained 
after the laws of kinetics have been developed. To start with, 



2 FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

however, it is necessary only to recognize the existence of these 
quantities. 

In the process of the development of the laws of mechanics, 
considerable use is made of mathematics. It should be kept in 
mind, however, that mechanics is a physical science and that 
mathematics is used, mainly, as a tool to express and interpret 
physical laws. 

For convenience, the study of mechanics is considered under 
three main divisions; namely. Statics, Kinematics , and Kinetics, 
Statics is that branch of mechanics which treats of bodies that are 
acted on by balanced forces and hence are at rest or are moving 
with uniform motion (without change of motion). Kinematics 
is that branch of mechanics which treats of the motion of bodies 
without considering the manner in which the influencing factors 
(force and matter) affect the motion. It deals with the funda- 
mental concepts of space and time, and the quantities, velocity 
and acceleration, derived therefrom. It is, therefore, sometimes 
called the geometry of motion. Kinematics forms an important 
part of the study of mechanics, not only because it treats of a part 
of the general kinetics problem, but also because in many problems 
which involve mainly the relative motion of parts of a machine, 
the principles of kinematics, alone, are sufficient for the solution 
of the main problem. Such problems are discussed in treatises on 
Kinematics of Machinery, in which subject the motion of such 
machine elements as valve gears, quick-return mechanisms, etc., 
are considered. Kinetics is that branch of mechanics which treats 
of bodies which are acted on by unbalanced forces and, hence, 
have non-uniform or accelerated motions. In particular, it treats 
of the change of motion of bodies and the manner in which the 
change is related to the factors that affect it; namely, the actions 
of other bodies (forces), and the properties (inertia, etc.) of the 
bodies themselves. It will be noted that the study of the motion 
of a body that moves uniformly may be regarded either as a prob- 
lem in statics or as ^ special case of a kinetics problem. 

Since both statics and kinetics deal with the action of forces on 
bodies, that part of mechanics embraced in these two subdivisions 
of the subject is sometimes called Dynamics. Frequently, how- 
ever, the term dynamics is used in technical literature to denote 
those subdivisions of mechanics with which the idea of motion is 
most closely associated, namely, kinematics and kinetics. 



CONCEPTION OF A FORCE 3 

For simplicity the kinematics and kinetics of a particle (mate-, 
rial point) will be treated before extending the study to bodies. 
In many problems the body considered may be assumed, without 
serious error, to be a particle. This assumption may always be 
made when the dimensions of the body are negligible in comparison 
with the range of its motion. A body, however, may always be 
considered to be made up of particles. 

2. Rigid Body. — As was stated in Art. 1, the bodies dealt with 
in this book are, in the main, considered to be rigid. A rigid body 
is defined as a definite portion of matter the parts (particles) of 
which do not move relative to each other. Actual soHd bodies 
are never rigid. The relative motion (deformation) of their par- 
ticles forms an important part of the study of Strength of Materials. 
But the theoretical laws which govern the motion of ideal rigid 
bodies may be used, usually with very small error or, with modi- 
fications if necessary, to determine the motion of actual solid 
bodies. 

3. Conception of a Force. — It was stated in Art. 1 that force 
is one of the fundamental concepts on which the subject of me- 
chanics of rigid bodies is built. A force is the action of one body on 
another body. The idea of force, then, implies the mutual actions 
of two bodies, since one body cannot exert a force on another body 
unless the other offers a resistance to the one. A force,therefore, 
never exists alone. Forces always occur in pairs; one force acting 
on one of two bodies and the other force on the other body. In 
fact, to every action there is an equal and opposite reaction. 
Our conception of force comes mainly from our experiences 
in which we have been one of the bodies between which mutual 
actions have occurred. The resistance which is offered by bodies 
to the action of other bodies arises out of (1) their ability to resist 
change of shape (rigidity) and (2) their ability to resist change of 
motion (inertia). If a body is acted on by one force, only, a 
change of motion of the body will always take place, but if the 
body is acted on by two or more forces, it may be held at rest. 

Although a single force never exists, it is convenient in the 
study of the motion of a body to think of a single force and to 
consider only the actions of other bodies on the body in question 
'without taking into account the reactions of the body in question 
on the other bodies. However, the fundamental nature of force 
should hft kent in mind. 



4 FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

4. External Effects of a Force.^When a force is applied 
to a rigid body the external effect on the body is either to change 
the motion of the body acted on or to develop resisting forces 
(reactions) between the body acted on and other bodies. Both 
of the foregoing effects, of course, may be produced simulta- 
neously. For example, consider a body falling freely under the 
action of gravity. The sole external effect of the force acting 
on the body (its weight) is to produce an acceleration g (32.2 ft. 
per sec. 2 approximately). If the same body is placed on the 
floor of an elevator which is at rest, the sole external effect of the 
weight is to produce an upward reaction of the floor on the body. 
If now the elevator moves downward with an acceleration less 
than g, the effect of the weight is partly to cause an acceleration 
of the body (the same as that of the elevator) and partly to pro- 
duce an upward pressure (reaction) of the floor on the body. 

The internal effects of a force are to produce stress and defor- 
mation in the body on which the force acts. The internal effects 
of a force are discussed in books on Strength of Materials. 
/- 5. Characteristics of a Force. — From experience we learn that 
the external effects of a force depend on, (1) the magnitude of the 
force, (2) the position of the Hne of action of the force in the body, 
and (3) the sense of the force, that is, the direction along the line of 
action. ^ These three properties of a force are called its elements or 
characteristics. A change in any one of them causes a change in 
the external effect of the force. A discussion of the exact manner 
in which these characteristics influence the change of motion of a 
body forms an important part of the study of kinetics, and their 
influence on the reactions developed in holding a body at rest is 
considered in the study of statics. 

6. Measure of a Force. Units. — Although we are conscious 
of forces of varying magnitudes, we are not able to compare the 
magnitudes with precision by means of our muscular sense. 
In order to express the magnitude of a force some standard force 
must be selected as a unit in terms of which other forces may be 
expressed. The unit of force commonly used by the engineer 
is the earth-pull (weight) on an arbitrarily chosen body, as found 
at a specified or standard position on the earth's surface. Exam- 
ples of such units are the pound, ton, kilogram, etc. The earth- 
puU on any body (its weight) varies slightly with its position 
(altitude and latitude) on the earth. For most engineering cal- 



MEASURE OF A FORCE 5 

culations, however, the variation in the weight of a body may 
be neglected.^ 

The unit of force as here defined is called a gravitational unit 
of force. (For a discussion of other units of force see Arts. 141 
and 142.) 

There are two common methods used by the engineer for 
measuring a force, that is, for finding the number cf units in a 
force: (1) by use of the spring balance in its various forms 
such as steam gages, certain forms of dynamometers, testing 
machines, etc.; (2) by use of a beam or lever balance or system 
of levers such as platform scales, screw type of testing ma- 
chines, etc. 

(1) Due to the fact that many materials possess nearly per- 
fect elasticity, within hmits, the unit of force msLj be considered 
as the force required to produce a certain stretch or deflection 
of an elastic body, the specified stretch or deflection being that 
caused by the earth-pull on an arbitrarily chosen body at a stand- 
ard locahty. A properly graduated spring balance, therefore, 
furnishes one means of measuring any force in terms of the arbi- 
trarily chosen unit of force. 

(2) In the beam or lever balance, the force to be measured 
is applied at one end of a lever or system of levers and an arbi- 
trarily selected body is placed at such a position on the other end 
of the lever that the earth-pull on the body balances the force. 
The arbitrarily selected body is a body on which the earth-pull 
at a standard location is the unit of force or some multiple thereof. 
The lever is so graduated that the number of units in the unknown 
force may be read off directly from the lever or beam. 

Attention should here be called to the fact that it is impossible, funda- 
mentally, to measure the earth-pull (weight) of a body by means of a beam 
or lever balance as stated imder (2) above. The weight of the body, as 
already noted, varies with the position of the body on the earth's surface 
and this variation is not indicated by the beam balance. Hence if this vari- 
ation were large the beam balance could not be used for measuring a force. 
Its use, then, is permissible only because the quantity measured (not the 
earth-pull) is nearly equal (numerically) to the earth-pull or weight. 

* The earth-pull on a body varies directly with g, the acceleration due 
to the earth-pull. The extreme variation in the value of g corresponding 
to a change in the position of the body on the earth's surface from a high 
altitude at the equator to the pole is 0.6 per cent. Within the United States 
the maximum variation is about 0.3 per cent. 



6 FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

Units of space (length), such as the foot, yard, mile, meter, 
etc., and units of time, such as the second, minute, hour, ete., are 
assumed to be familiar to the student. 

7. Scalar and Vector Quantities. Vector Representation of a 
Force. — Quantities which possess magnitude only, as, for example, 
areas, volumes, etc., are called scalar quantities. Many quantities 
involved in the study of mechanics, however, have direction as 
well as magnitude. Any quantity which has direction as an in- 
herent property as well as magnitude is called a vector quantity. 
Thus, as stated in the preceding article, the effect of a force depends 
on its direction as well as its magnitude, and hence force is a vector 
quantity. Other examples of vector quantities are velocity, accel- 
eration, momentum, etc. 

A vector quantity may be conveniently represented wholly or in 
part by means of a directed straight Une. Any such line is called a 
vector. Thus, the direction of a force may be represented by a 
straight line drawn parallel to the action line of the force, the 
sense being represented by an arrow-head on the Une, and the 
magnitude of the force may be represented by the length of the 
line according to some convenient scale. If the magnitude and 
direction, only, are to be represented, the vector may be drawn 
anywhere in the plane of the force. Such a vector is called a 
free vector. If, in addition, the action line of the force is to be 
represented, the vector must be laid o€ along the line of action. 
Such a vector is called a localized vector. Further, if it is desired 
to represent the point of application of the force, the point of 
appHcation may be taken as the initial end of the vector, that is, 
the point from which the vector is drawn. It will be noted, how- 
ever, that the point of apph cation of a force which acts on a rigid 
body is not one of the essential characteristics of the force (Art. 5). 

In deahng with the forces which act on a given body it is 
convenient frequently to represent the forces by free vectors. 
The diagram in which are represented the free vectors (that is, the 
vectors representing the magnitudes and directions of the forces) is 
called the vector diagram.-' The diagram which represents the body 
and the action lines of the forces that act on the body is called the 
' space diagram. Both diagrams as a rule play an important part 
in the complete solution of a problem and will be used frequently 
in the subsequent pages./'' In Fig. 1 is shown a wall bracket, the 
horizontal arm of which is acted on by three forces having points of 



CLASSIFICATION OF FORCES 




applications at 1,2, and 3, the action lines being indicated by abj 
be, and cd, as shown in the space diagram. The forces are repre- 
sented in magnitude and direction in any convenient place by the 
vectors AB, BC, and CD, the lengths of the vectors representing 
the magnitudes of the forces 
according to a convenient scale. 
The direction of each vector 
is parallel to the action line of 
the force which it represents. 

The notation used in the 
above illustration is known as 
Bow's notation and will be used 
frequently in the subsequent 
pages. According to this nota- 
tion the action line of a force is 
denoted by two lower-case let- 
ters and the vector which re- 
presents the magnitude and 
direction of the force is denoted 
by the corresponding capital 
letters. 

8. Classification of Forces. Definitions. — Forces may be 
classified as surface forces and body forces, sometimes called forces 
of contact and forces at a distance according as the action of one 
body on another is exerted over a portion of the surfaces of two 
bodies that are in contact or is distributed throughout the mate- 
rials of the bodies. The most important body force considered in 
mechanics is the earth-pull (weight). Magnetic forces are of the 
same class. A surface force becomes a concentrated force when 
the area over which the force is distributed is so small compared 
with the surface of the body acted on that it may be regarded as a 
point. This point is called the point of application of the force. 
The action line of a concentrated force is a line containing the point 
of application of the force and having the same direction as that 
of the force. 

Any number of forces treated as a group constitute a fwxe 
system. A force system is said to be eoneurreni if the action lines 
of all the forces intersect in a common point and non-concurrent if 
the action lines do not intersect at a point. A force system is said 
to be coplanar when all the forces lie in the same plane and non- 



FlG. 1. 



8 FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

coplanar when the forces do not he in a common plane. A parallel 
force system is one in which the action hnes of the forces are par- 
allel, the senses of the forces not necessarily being the same, and 
a non-parallel system is one in which the action lines of the forces 
are not parallel. If the forces of a system have a common line 
of action the system is said to be collinear. 

Two force systems are said to balance if, when appHed simul- 
taneously to a body, they produce no external effect on the body. 
The forces which hold a body at rest always balance. Forces or 
force systems which balance are said to be in equilibrium and the 
body or bodies on which they act are also said to be in equilibrium. 
If a body is acted on by a force system which is not in equihbrium 
there always is a change in the motion of the body. Such a force 
system is said to be unbalanced or to have a resultant. The 
resultant of a force system is the simplest equivalent system to 
which the given system will reduce, that is, the simplest system 
which will produce the same change of motion. The resultant of a 
force system is frequently a single force. For some force systems, 
however, the simplest equivalent system is composed of two equal, 
non-coUinear, parallel forces of opposite sense, called a couple. 
And still other force systems reduce to a force and a couple as the 
simplest equivalent system. The process of reducing a force 
system to a simpler equivalent system is called composition. The 
process of expanding a force or a force system into a less simple 
equivalent system is called resolution. A component of a force is 
one of the two or more forces into which the given force may be 
resolved. The anti-resultant or equilibrant of a force system is the 
simplest force system which will balance the given system. 

9. Principle of Transmissibility. — It was stated in Art. 7 
that the external effect of a force on a rigid body does not depend 
on the point of application of the force. This very useful fact, the 
truth of which is found in our experience, is formally expressed in 
the principle of transmissibility. This principle states that the 
external effect of a force on a rigid body is the same for all points of 
apphcation along its line of action. It will be noted that the 
external effect, only, remains unchanged. The internal effect 
of a force (stress and deformation) may be greatly influenced by a 
change in the point of application along the line of action. 

10. Parallelogram Law. — The parallelogram law is the funda- 
mental principle on which the composition and the resolution of 



PARALLELOGRAM LAW 



9 



//law 
^ of ri 



forces is based. The law states tnat the resultant of two forces- 
which act on a rigid body is represented in magnitude and in 
direction by the diagonal of a parallelogram, the sides of which rep- 
resent the magnitudes and the directions of the two forces. In 
Fig. 2(a) P and Q are two of the forces acting on a rigid body 
(bell-crank), Q being a pressure of 150 lb. at B produced by a force, 
P, of 100 lb. Sit A. If Q is laid off from a point (Fig. 26) to some 
convenient scale in the proper direction and if, in like manner, P 
is laid off from the same 
point. then i^^ represents 
in magnitude and in di- 
rection the resultant of 
P and Q. If the point 
is taken as the inter- 
section of the action lines 
of P and Q as in Fig. 2a 
then the diagonal repre- 
sents the action line of 
the resultant as well as 
its magnitude and direc- 
tion. 

The parallelogram 
is not susceptible 

rigid proof. It is an 
assumption which ex- 
presses a relation be- 
tween forces (and other 
directed quantities such 
as velocities, accelera- 
tions, etc.); an assumption, however, which appeals to experi- 
ence as reasonable; which is used intuitively in interpreting 
and analyzing many of our common experiences ; and which ) ^ 
thereby becomes a fundamental or basic fact in mechanics. 

11. Triangle Law. — The triangle law is a corollary of the par- 
allelogram law. It states that the resultant of two concurrent 
forces is represented in magnitude and in direction by the third 

^ The fact that a force is the resultant of two or more forces is frequently 
indicated by two arrow-heads on the vector representing the force. This 
fact will also be indicated sometimes by drawing the force vector as a dashed 
or broken line. 




^//Am////^ ^^^ 



Fig. 2. 



10 FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

side of a triangle, the other two sides of which represent the two 
forces in magnitude and direction. Thus, in Fig. 2(c), the result- 
ant R of the two forces P and Q is represented in magnitude and in 
direction by the side AC of the triangle ABC in which AB and BC 
represent the magnitudes and the directions of QandP respectively. 
The action line, ac, of the resultant is parallel to AC and passes 
through the point of concurrence of the two forces. 'Although 
the triangle law is included in the parallelogram law, its extension 
to more than two forces, leading to the force polygon, makes its use 
^more convenient than that of the parallelogram law. 

Instead of determining the resultant of two forces graphically, 
from the parallelogram or the triangle of forces, it may be found 
algebraically. Thus, referring to Fig. 2(6), by use of trigonometry, 
the magnitude and the direction of the resultant may be expressed 
by the equations, 

R = VP2_|.Q2_^2PQC0SQ!, 

tan = „ , ^ , 

P+Q cos a 

where a is the angle between the action lines of Q and P, and is 
the angle between the action hues of R and P. 
> Although it is not necessary to draw the parallelogram or tri- 
angle of forces to scale in determining the resultant of two con- 
current forces by the algebraic method, the student should always 
make a free-hand sketch of the parallelogram or triangle of forces 
when using the above equations. 

The expression for the resultant of two forces at right angles 
to each other (a = 90°) is of great importance. The resultant 
is completely determined by the above equations, which reduce 
for this special case to the following equations : 

tane = ? 

It should be noted that two equations are needed to determme 
the magnitude and the direction of a resultant force, whereas one 
vector diagram is sufficient for the same purpose. 



RESOLUTION OF A FORCE 



11 



PROBLEMS 

1. Two forces having magnitudes of 7 lb. and 3 lb. have the same point of 
application on a body. The action line of the 3-lb. force is horizontal with its 
sense to the right, while that of the 7-lb. force makes an angle of 45° with the 
horizontal with its sense upward to the left. Find the magnitude and the 
direction of the resultant. Solve graphically and check the result by the alge- 
braic method. 

Ans. Magnitude = 5.3 lb. 

Direction, 111° 28' with the 3-lb. force. 



2. A vertical force of 200 lb. which is appUed at point A of the bell-crank 
shown in Fig. 3 causes a horizontal pressure of 300 lb. on the vertical arm at 
point B. (a) Find the magnitude 

and the direction of the resultant -N (m 

of the forces at A and B by the ^> 

algebraic method, (b) Find the re- 
sultant completely by the graphical 
method. 200 lb. 



^//////////// 



Tr'^s y 



12. Resolution of a Force. 

— In the two preceding arti- ^ '^ 
cles it was assumed that a ^ ._ 
certain body was acted on by- 
two other bodies, and the ac- 
tion of a third body was found Fig. 3. 
which if allowed to replace 

the two would have the same external effect on the body in ques- 
tion. The reverse of this process, namely, the resolution of a force, 
is also of great importance in mechanics. The action of one body 
may be replaced by that of two bodies. The resolution of a force 
is acco nplished by means of the parallelogram and triangle laws 
and the components (resolved parts) may be found graphically or 
algebraically. For example, in Fig. 4(a), Fi represents the steam 
pressure on the crosshead, D, of a locomotive and F2 represents the 
pressure on the crank-pin, H, of the driver. Let it be required to 
resolve Fi into two components, one along the connecting rod 
DH, and the other parallel to the crank OH. The action lines, ab 
and 6c, of the two components must pass through D as shown in 
the space diagram. The magnitudes and the directions of the 
components are represented graphically by AB and BC in the 
triangle of forces (Fig. 46). This triangle was constructed by 



12 



FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTIONS AND DEFINITIONS 



laying off AC or Fi parallel to ac and by drawing from A a line 
parallel to ab and from C another line parallel to be, the two lines 
intersecting at B. Thus, the components of Fi are represented in 
magnitude and in direction, but not in action Une, by AB and BC. 
The resolution of a force into two rectangular components is of 
special importance. The particular value of resolving into rect- 
angular components lies in the fact that these components may be 
found from very simple algebraic expressions. Thus, let the crank- 
pin pressure F2 (Fig. 4a) be resolved into two rectangular com- 




FiG. 4. 



ponents (Fig. 4c). The action Unes of the components must, of 
com-se, pass through the crank-pin, H. Thus, ef is the action hne 
of the x-component and fg is the action hne of the ^/-component. 
From the triangle of forces the two components EF and FG may 
be found. Thus, if </> is the angle between the force and its x- 
component, then, 

EF = EG cos and FG - EG sin </>. 

Or, in general, if F denotes a force which makes an angle d with. 
the a;-axis, the x- and ^-components of the force are, 

Fx = F cos d and Fy = F sin d 

Hence, the eomponent of a foree in a given direction (the other 
componeni being perpendicular thereto) equals the product of the 



RESOLUTION OF A FORCE 



13 



magnitude of the force hy the cosine of the acute angle which the ferc& 
makes with the given direction. 

A force can be resolved into two components in an indefinite 
number of ways by drawing lines from any point or pole to the ends 
of the force vector. Thus, in Fig. 5 three sets of components are 
shown for the force AB, the components being AO and OB for 
each position of the pole 0. 

It is frequently convenient to resolve a force into three rectan- 
gular components. This involves only a slight extension of the 
parallelogram law. Thus, the force F (Fig. 6), represented by OA, 





Fig. 6. 



may be resolved into the two rectangular components OB and OCj 
and the component OC may be resolved further into two rectan- 
gular components OD and OE. The magnitudes of the com- 
ponents of F in the x-, y-, and 2-directions, respectively, are 

Fx=F cos Ox Fy = F cos By Fz = F cos dz, 

in which 6x, By, and Bz, are the angles which the force makes with 
the X-, y-, and 2-directions respectively. 

PROBLEMS 



3. Given the three concurrent forces as shown in Fig. 7. Find the magni- 
tude and the sense of the component of the system (sum of the components 



14 FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTIONS AND DEFINITIONS 



of the forces) along the line AB. Solve algebraically and check the result 
by the graphical method. 

Ans. Magnitude = 24.2 lb. 

Sense, Downward to the left. 




80 1b 




Fig. 7. 



Fig. 8. 



4. Resolve the weight of 200 lb. (Fig. 8) into (a) two rectangular com- 
ponents perpendicular and parallel respectively to AC, (b) into two components 
parallel to AC and BC respectively. 

5. Resolve the force F (Fig. 9) into three rectangular components in the 
X-, y-, and z-directions. 

13. Moment of a 
Force. — The moment of 
a force about (with re- 
spect to) a point is the 
product of the magni- 
tude of the force and 
the perpendicular dis- 
tance from the point to 
the action Une of the force. 
Thus, the moment of 
the force /^ (Fig. 10) about 
the point is Fd. The 
Y point about which the 

Fig. 9. moment is taken is called 

the moment-center (or 
origin) and the distance d is called the moment-arm. A unit \ 
moment is the product of a unit force and a unit distance such 



z 
















<py 


<'/ 








.f 


/ 








/ / 








/ 




/ 








/ 


/. 






/ 




/ 


/ 





MOMENT OF A FORCE 



15 




Fig. 10. 



as a Ib.-ft., Ib.-in., ton-ft., etc. The moment of a force witlr^ 
respect to a point may also be regarded as the moment of the 
force with respect to the line which passes through the point 
and is perpendicular to the plane determined by the point and 

the action line of the 
"^ force. Thus, in Fig. 10, 

Fd also represents the 
moment of F about the 
axis YY. 

The physical signifi- 
cance of the moment 
of a force as defined 
above is built up in- 
tuitively from our ex- 
periences in which we 
have exerted moments 
on other bodies. It ex- 
presses a measure of the tendency of the force to turn the body , 
on which it acts , about a given axis. ^- Strictly speaking, the 
fact that the tendency of a force to turn a body about a given 
axis is directly proportional to the moment of the force, is an 
assumption which, when reinforced by experience and the anal- 
ysis of observed facts, 
crystallizes into a fun- 
damental or basic truth 
of mechanics. 

In general, the mo- 
ment of a force about 
an axis which is not 
perpendicular to the 
plane of the force is de- 
fined as the moment of 
the component of the 
force perpendicular to 
the given axis, the other 

component of the force being parallel to the axis. Thus, in 
Fig. 11 the moment of the force F about the axis ZZ is FyOA. 

As a rule it will be convenient to select the moment axis as 
one of the coordinate axes. The moment of a force with respect 




Fig. 11. 



16 



FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTIONS AND DEFINITIONS 



to a coordinate axis will be considered as positive if the direction 
of rotation is counter-clockwise when viewed from the positive end 
of the axis. 

PROBLEMS 

6. A force of 20 lb. is exerted on the knob of a door as shown in Fig. 12. 
If the action line of the force lies in a plane perpendicular to the door, what is 
the moment of the force about the axis YY? Ans. 42 A lb .-ft. 






z 














/ 


/ 










/ 


/ 


< 








/ 








— 


y 


/ 






^ 


/ 


/ 




V 


/ 





Fig. 12. 



Fig. 13. 



7. Find the moment of the 40-lb. force (Fig. 13) with respect to each of the 
coordinate axes; each division represents 1 in. 

14. Principle of Moments. Varignon's Theorem. — The prin- 
ciple of moments is of great importance in mechanics. It appUes 
to lines, areas, volumes, etc., as well as to forces. It will be con- 
sidered, however, at this point only in connection with two con- 
current forces. ^ The principle for this restricted case, which is 
known as Varignon's theorem, states that the algebraic sum of the 
moments of two concurrent forces about any point in their plane is 
equal to the moment of their resultant about the same point. 
V The principle of moments, Hke the parallelogram law, is an 
assumption; an assumption, however, which appeals to experi- 
ence as reasonable; which is frequently and intuitively used in 
interpreting and analj^zing observed facts, under various con- 
ditions; and which thereby becomes one of the fundamental 
facts or principles of mechanics. 



PRINCIPLE OF MOMENTS 



17 



The fact that the principle of moments for forces is in agree-_ 
ment with the parallelogram law may be shown by deducing the 
principle from the parallelogram law as follows: In Fig. 14 let 
P and Q represent two forces concurrent at A, the resultant accord- 
ing to the parallelogram 
law being R. Let be 
any moment-center in 
the plane of the forces. 
It is required to prove 
that 

where p, q, and r are 
the moment-arms of P, 
Q, and R, respectively. jtjg^ 14, 

Let a set of rectangular 

coordinate axes AX and AY be chosen as shown in the figure, 
A Y passing through the moment-center 0. Let a, j8, and 6 
denote the angles which the action Unes of P, Q, and R, respect- 
ively, make with the AX axis. From the figure it is seen that 




that is, 



FG-\:AF = AG, 
P cos a+Q cos fi = R cos 6. 



By multiplying both sides of this equation by AO, the following 
equation is obtained : 



Hence, 



P'AO cos a+Q'AO cos ^ = R'AO cos 0. 
Pp+Qq = Rr. 



It will be noted that the definition of the moment of a force 
about a line as given in Art. 13 is in accordance with the principle 
of moments. It is often convenient to obtain the moment of a 
force about a point in its plane (or about an axis through the point 
perpendicular to the plane) by finding the sum of the moments of 
its rectangular components. In accordance with the principle of 
transmissibility a force may be resolved into components at any 
point along its line of action. Thus, in Fig. 15, Fx and Fy are one 



18 



FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTIONS AND DEFINITIONS 



pair of rectangular components and F'x and F'y are another pair 
of components of the force F. The moment of the force F about 
the axis ZZ is, by the principle of moments, equal to the sum of 




Fig. 15. 

the moments of the forces of either pair of components. Hence, 
the moment of F may be expressed as follows : 

Fd = Fydx-F:c-dy=^F',-d'y+F'yd\. 

If the force F is not in a plane perpendicular to the axis, as in 

Fig. 16, the force may 
be resolved into three 
rectangular compo- 
nents, one being par- 
allel to the axis and 
the other two in a 
plane which is perpen- 
dicular to the axis. 
The moment of the 
force is then the sum 
of the moments of the 
components which lie 

in this plane. Thus, 

Fig. 16. • r^- -ia 4.x. 

in Fig. 16, the mo- 
ment of F about the axis MN is, 

-Fx'dy + Fy'd,. 

The component Fz, being parallel to the axis MN, has no moment 
about the line MN. 




r 



COUPLES 



19 




Fig. 17. 



15. Couples. — Two equal parallel forces which are opposite ia- 
sense and are not collinear are called a couple. A couple cannot 
be reduced to any simpler force system. The fact that the only 
effect of a couple is to produce or to prevent turning is obtained 
intuitively. The moment of a couple about any point in the 
plane of the couple (or any axis perpendicular to the plane of the 
couple) is defined as 
the algebraic sum of 
the moments of the 
forces of the couple 
about the point (or 
axis). From this defi- 
nition it follows that 
the moment of a couple 
about any point in 
the plane of the couple 
(or axis perpendicular 
to its plane) is the 
product of the magni- 
tude of either force of 

the couple and the perpendicular distance (moment-arm) between 
the action fines of the two forces. This statement may be 
proved as foUows: In Fig. 17 let F, P be the two forces of a 
couple and any point in their plane or, YY any axis perpen- 
dicular to their plane. The algebraic sum of the moments of 
the two forces about (or YY) is 

P'OB-P'OA, 

which may be written thus, 

P{()B-Ol)=P'AB = Pp. 

In fike manner the moment of the couple may be shown to be the 
same about any other point in the plane (or any other axis parallel 
to YY). Since the moment of a couple depends only on the 
product of either force of the couple and the arm of the couple it 
follows that the turning effect of a couple on a rigid body about an 
axis in the body is the same for different magnitudes and fines of 
action of the forces, provided that the moment of the couple 
remains constant. For example, in Fig. 18, if cords are wrapped 



20 



FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTIONS AND DEFINITIONS 



around two pulleys, of radii ri and r2, which are keyed together 
and equal weights are attached to the other ends of the cords, the 
pulleys will rotate exactly the same as they would if forces F, F 
were applied as shown by the dotted Unes, provided that the 
moments of the two couples are the same, that is if W{r2—ri) is 

equal to F-2r2. On the other 
hand if motion is to be prevented 
a couple having a moment of 
— {F ' 2r2) would be required. 

16. Characteristics of a 
Couple. — The external effect of 
a couple when appUed to a rigid 
body is either to cause a change in 
the rotational motion of the body 
or to develop a resisting couple 
due to the actions of other bodies 
on the body in question. Both of 
the foregoing effects may of course 
be produced simultaneously. 
From experience we learn that 
the external effect of a couple 
depends on (1) the magnitude 
of the moment of the couple, (2) 
the sense or direction of rotation of the couple, and (3) the aspect 
of the plane of the couple, that is, the direction or slope of the plane 
(not its location) . These three properties of a couple are called its 
characteristics. Since parallel planes have the same aspect it 
follows from what has been stated above that two couples which 
have the same moment and sense are equivalent if their planes are 
parallel. The fact that the external effect of a couple is independ- 
ent of the position of the plane of the couple and depends only 
on the direction of the plane is amply verified by experience. 
7 Thus, in screwing a pipe into a joint by means of two pipe wrenches 
/ the forces applied at the end of the wrenches constitute a couple, 
y and it is a matter of experience that the effort required is the same 
\ regardless of the position along the pipe at which the wrenches are 
applied (as^ming perfect ahgnment between pipe and joint). 

17. Vector Representation of a Couple. — In dealing with 
couples it is convenient to represent the couples by means of vec- 
tors. In order to represent a couple completely by a vector all of 







Fig. 18. 



VECTOR REPRESENTATION OF A COUPLE 



21 



the characteristics of the couple must be represented. The moment" 
of the couple may be represented to scale by the length of the vec- 
tor. The aspect of the couple may be represented by drawing the 
vector perpendicular to the plane of 
the couple and hence parallel to the 
axis of the couple — that is, parallel 
to the axis about which the couple 
rotates or tends to rotate the body 
on which it acts. The sense of the 
couple may be represented by an 
arrow-head on the vector, the usual 
convention being to direct the arrow- 
head away from the plane of the 
couple in the direction from which the 
rotation appears counter-clockwise. 
This method of representing the sense 
of a couple involves the so-called con- 
vention of the right-handed screw, 
since a right-handed screw having an 

axis perpendicular to the plane of the couple would move in the 
direction of the arrow if given a rotation which agrees in sense 
with that of the couple. Thus, in Fig. 19 the vector OA com- 
pletely represents the couple Fd, provided that the length of OA 
represents to scale the product F • d. 




Fig. 19. 



PROBLEMS 

8. The steering wheel of an automobile shown in Fig. 20 is 18 in. in diam- 
eter. Forces exerted by the hands on the wheel constitute a couple which is 





Fig. 21. 



22 FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTIONS AND DEFINITIONS 




Fig. 22. 



represented by the vector AB. If the length of ^B is 1.5 in. and the scale 
used is 1 in. =60 lb .-in., represent the forces of the couple on the circumference 
of the wheel. 

9. A couple having a moment of 60 lb. -in. is required to open the blow-off 
valve shown in Fig, 21. Represent the couple completely by a vector, using a 
scale of 1 in. =24 Ib.-in. 

18. Resolution of a Force into a Force and a Couple. — In many 
problems, both in statics and kinetics, it is convenient to resolve a 

force into a force parallel to the 
given force, and a couple in 
the plane of the force. Thus, in 
Fig. 22, let P represent a force 
acting on a body at A. Let 
two equal, opposite, and col- 
linear forces P, P be introduced 
at any point 0, each of the 
forces being parallel to the orig- 
inal force and of the same 
magnitude. The three forces 
are equivalent to the original one, since the two equal, opposite, 
and collinear forces have no effect on the body. The force system 
may now be considered to be a force P acting at (parallel to the 
given force and of the same magnitude and sense), and a couple, 
the moment of which is the same as the moment of the original 
force about 0. 

The action lines of the forces of the couple, however, may be 
moved to any location in the plane of the forces and the magnitude 
of the forces of the couple may be changed to any value, pro- 
vided that the forces remain equal and parallel to each other and 
also that the moment and sense of the couple are not changed. 
Couples will be discussed in greater detail in Art. 27. 
wY Since a force may be resolved into a force _an(i couple in the 
M plane 'of tlie force it follows that a force and a couple in a plane may 
be combined into a resultant force in the same plane. Further, 
the resultant force has the same magnitude, direction, and sense 
as the given force and its action line is parallel to the action line 
of the given force. In other words, the sole effect of combining a 
couple with a force is to move the action line of the force into 
a parallel position, the force being unchanged in all other 
respects. 



RESOLUTION OF FORCE INTO FORCE AND COUPLE 



23 



ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEM 

10. In Fig. 23 is shown an arm mounted on an axle 0. A vertical force 
P = 20 lb. acts on the arm at C. Resolve the force P into a force acting 
through and a couple the forces of which act at A and B. 

P= 20 lb. 



40 1b. 



40 1b. 



■>* 



< 10^^ — ^ 



20 1b. 





^r=3 



20 1b. 



Fig. 23. 



Solution. — By introducing two vertical 20-lb. forces at which are oppo- 
site in sense the force is resolved into a vertical downward force of 20 lb. at O 
and a couple having a moment of 20X10 = 200 lb .-in. This couple may be 
replaced by two horizontal forces, of 40 lb. each, acting at A and B as shown. 
The force at O and the couple will produce exactly the same external effect 
on the arm as the original force at C. 



PROBLEMS 

11. A gusset plate B (Fig. 24) is attached to another plate A by means of 
four rivets as shown. A force of 10,000 lb. at the point (1.5 in. below 
dotted line) is transmitted to the member A. Resolve this force into a force, 
acting along the center line of the rivets, and a couple. 




Fig. 24. 



^W=20 lb. 



Fig. 25. 



12. A body weighing 20 lb. is mounted on an axle (Fig. 25) and is acted 
on by a couple as shown in the figure, in addition to its weight and the axle 
reaction at 0. Replace the weight and the couple by an equivalent single 
force. 



24 FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTIONS AND DEFINITIONS 




Fig. 26. 



13. A load P of 100 lb. acting on a wall bracket as shown in Fig. 26 causes 
the wall to exert a horizontal force of 150 lb. and a vertical force of 50 lb. at 

each of the wall attachments, 
p-iooib. Consider the two 50-lb. forces 

to be equivalent to one 100-lb. 
force and replace this 100-lb 
force and the two 1 50-lb. 
forces by an equivalent single 
force. 

19. Methods of Solution 
of Problems. A Igebraic and 
Graphical Methods. — In the 
analysis and solution of 
problems in mechanics two 
general methods may be 
used, namely, the algebraic 
and the graphical methods. 
In the algebraic method of solution, quantities are represented 
by letters or by numbers which are dealt with according to 
the rules of mathematics. In the graphical method of solu- 
tion, quantities are represented by lines which are dealt with 
by means of geometric constructions. Simple graphical methods 
have already been used in the preceding articles in con- 
nection with forces, couples, etc. In general, either of the two 
methods may be used in the solution of a problem. Some prob- 
lems, however, may be solved much more easily by the algebraic 
method while other problems yield much more readily to the 
graphical method. The operations involved in the solution of a 
problem by the two methods are so radically different that one 
method of solution serves as an excellent check on the other 
method. 

Approximate Methods. — In making computations it is impor- 
tant to keep in mind the degree of accuracy which should be 
obtained. The degree of accuracy desired will depend, in general, 
on two factors, namely: 

(1) The degree of accuracy of the original data or quantities 
on which the computation is based, and 

(2) The use which is to be made of the computed results. 
The data on which many engineering computations are based 

are determined from experiments and hence are approximate 
values, the degree of approximation depending on the instruments 



METHODS OF SOLUTION 25 

and methods used, and on the care and skill of the observer, ^lie 
computed results which are based on these values cannot have a 
greater degree of accuracy than that of the original data. In 
general a sum, difference, product, or quotient of two approximate 
values will not have a greater degree of accuracy than that of 
the least accurate of the two numbers. For example, if one 
numerical quantity is accurate to two significant figures and 
another quantity to three significant figures, the product of the 
two numbers will not be accurate to more than two significant 
figures, and hence more than two significant figures should not be 
retained in the result. 

Dimensional Equations. — In algebraic equations in which the 
variables represent physical quantities, all of the terms of the 
equation must be of the same dimensions, or, to express the same 
idea in mathematical language, an algebraic equation which 
expresses a relation between physical quantities must be homo- 
geneous. The use of this principle is of assistance in checking any 
equation for correctness and in determining the specific units in 
which a result is expressed when computed from a given equation. 
For each of these purposes the given algebraic equation is replaced 
by a dimensional equation. 

The dimensional equation corresponding to any algebraic 
equation is formed by replacing each term of the given equation 
by a term which indicates the kinds of fundamental quantities 
in wkich the term is expressed and which also indicates the degree 
of the corresponding quantities in each term. 

The fundamental quantities used in engineering are force, 
length, and time {F, L, and T). Hence, in an equation, a term 
which represents an area is replaced by L^ in the dimensional 
equation since an area is the square of a length. A velocity is a 
length divided by time and hence is represented in the dimensional 
equation by LT~^ and similarly for other quantities. It should 
be noted that in the dimensional equation only the kinds of funda- 
mental quantities are indicated and not the specific units used in 
measuring these quantities and also that the number of such units 
is not indicated. Hence, numerical constants in the algebraic 
equation do not appear in the dimensional equation. 

For example, consider the equation ad?-\-d^ = v, in which a 
represents an area, d a length, and v a volume. Since an area is 
the square of a length (L^) and a volume is the cube of a length 



26 FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

(L^), the dimensional equation is V'-\-L^ = L^ and hence the given 
equation is incorrect. 

Consider also the equation P-\-kv = as in which P represents a 
force, k a weight (force) per unic volume, v a volume, a an area, and 
s a force per unit area. The dimensional equation then may be 
written, 

That is, F-\-F = F, 

and hence the equation is dimensionally correct. 

PI 
Further, consider the equation E = — , in which P represents a 

ae 

force in pounds, I a length in inches, a an area in square inches, 
and e a length in inches. Let it be required to determine the units 
in "which E is expressed. The dimensional equation is 



L^XL L2' 

Hence, in accordance with the units stated (pound and inch), E 
is expressed in pounds per square inch (Ib./sq. in. or Ib./in.^). 

PROBLEMS 

14. The equation Q = .622 ■\/2^ib—0.2h) h^ is used to determine the quan- 
tity of water flowing per unit of time over a rectangular weir of width b when 
the height of water above the weir is h, g being the acceleration due to gravity 
(32.2 ft. /sec. 2). (a) Write the dimensional equation. (6) What are the units 
of Q if 6 and h are expressed in feet? (c) If Q equals 24.4 cu. ft. per sec. and b 
equals 3 ft. compute the value of h to the same degree of accuracy as is used in 
expressing Q, that is, to three significant figures. Note: This formula is 
valid only when .2h is small compared with b. Hence the term .2h may be 
omitted and a trial value of h may be found by solving the resulting equation. 
This value of h may now be used in the term .2h and a second trial value of h 
may be obtained by solving the resulting equation. This process may be 
repeated. 

15. In finding the diameter of a pipe required to discharge a given quantity 
of water, the formula d^ = Ad-{-B is used, in which A and B are known quan- 
tities. If A = 15.5 and J5=400 compute the value of d to three significant 
figures. If the given equation is dimensionally correct what can be said of 
the quantities A and 5? 



DIMENSIONAL EQUATIONS 27 

16. In the following equation, T is the moment of a force, *S is a force per 
unit of area in pounds per square inch, A, ho, h, and bg, are lengths in 
inches. Is the equation dimensionally correct? What are the units of T? 

_ 2 b'h-bo\ 



CHAPTER II 
RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 

20. Introduction. — The determination of the resultants of 
various force systems as discussed in this chapter is of importance, 
mainly, (1) in the study of the conditions which the forces of a 
system satisfy when they hold a body in equiUbrium (Statics, 
Chapter III), and (2) in the study of the laws by which the motions 
of bodies are governed (Part HI, Kinetics). 

(1) The equations of equiUbrium for a given type of force 
system are obtained by expressing the conditions which the forces 
must satisfy in order that the resultant of the system shall be 
zero. Therefore the resultant to which a given type of force 
system reduces must be known before the conditions which are 
required to make the resultant equal to zero can be established. 
Furthermore, in dealing with forces in equilibrium it is frequently 
convenient to replace several of the forces of a balanced system 
by the resultant of the several forces and to deal with the result- 
ing force system instead of the original system. 

(2) The motions of bodies are influenced by the unbalanced 
part (resultant) of the forces which act on the bodies. In the 
study of the motions of physical bodies, therefore, a knowledge of 
the resultants of various force systems and of methods of expressing 
the characteristics of resultants in terms of the forces of the system 
must be understood. 

§ 1. CoLLiNEAR Forces 

21. Algebraic Method. — The resultant will be found first for 
two collinear forces, P and Q, having the same sense. It is a matter 
of expei-ience that the two forces are equivalent to a single force 
which has a magnitude equal to P-\-Q and a line of action and 
sense which are the same as the line of action and sense of the 
given forces. This proposition may be proved, however, by apply- 
ing the parallelogram law. Thus, according to this law, the result- 
ant of any two concurrent forces P and Q, the lines of action of 

28 



GRAPHICAL METHODS 29 

which make an angle a with each other, is a single force of magni- 
nitude, R, which is given by the equation R =^ P'^-\-Q^-\-2PQ cos a 
(Art. 11). In the special case of two coUinear forces here consid- 
ered, a equals zero and hence i2 = Vp2_|_Q2^2PQ = P+Q. Sim- 
ilarly, the resultant of two forces P and Q having opposite senses 
(P being the larger of the two forces) is a force the magnitude of 
which is given by the equation R = P—Q, the sense of R being the 
same as the sense of the larger force P. Hence, the resultant of 
any two collinear forces is a single force having the same Hne of 
action as the given forces, the magnitude and sense being indicated 
by the algebraic sum of the forces. The extension of this method 
to any number of colhnear forces may easily be made. Thus the 
resultant of two of the forces may be combined with a third force; 
the resultant thus obtained may then be combined with a fourth 
force, and so on, until the entire system is reduced to a single 
resultant force. Therefore the magnitude of the resultant of a 
collinear force system is given by the equation, 

R=J1F. 



§ 2. Concurrent Forces in a Plane 

22. Graphical Methods. First Method. — The resultant of an 
unbalanced system of concurrent forces in a plane is a force which 
may be found by means of the parallelogram law. In Fig. 27 
are shown three forces Pi, P2, and 
Fs which act on a body at the point 
0. The forces Pi and P2 may be 
combined into a single force Pi by 
means of the parallelogram law. 
Similarly Pi and P3 rnay be com- 
bined into a single force P2. P2 
then is the resultant of the given 
forces. By continuing this process Fig. 27. 

any number of concurrent forces 

may be combined into a single force. The order in which the 
forces are taken is immaterial. If the resultant force obtained by 
combining all except one of the forces of a concurrent system is 
equal to that one, coUinear with it, and of opposite sense, the two 




30 



RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



forces cancel and hence the resultant of the given system is 
equal to zero. 

Second Method. — Another graphical method of determining the 
resultant of a system of concurrent forces in a plane involves the 
apphcation of the triangle law. Consider, for example, the three 
forces Fi, F2, and F2,, which act on a body and concur at a point 
as shown in Fig. 28(a). In order to determine the resultant of 
the three forces, draw from any arbitrary point A (Fig. 286), a 
vector representing the magnitude and the direction of the force Fi ; 
from the end of this vector draw another vector representing the 





(a) 



Fig. 28. 



magnitude and the direction of the force F2. Ri, the resultant of 
Fi and F2, is represented in direction and magnitude by the vector 
drawn from A to the end of F2. To find the resultant of i^i and F3, 
and hence of the three given forces, draw from the end of Ri 
(or F2) a vector representing Fz in magnitude and in direction. 
The resultant of R\ and F3 is then represented in magnitude and in 
direction by the vector R2 drawn from A to the end of F3. It 
should be noted that this vector R2 represents the magnitude and 
the direction, only, of the resultant of the given forces and not the 
action line of the resultant. The action line of the resultant must 
pass through the point in the body at which the forces are con- 
current. 

This method of determining the resultant may be stated 
formally as follows: In order to find the resultant of a system of 
concurrent forces in a plane, construct a polygon the sides of 
which are vectors representing the given forces in magnitude and in 
direction; a Une drawn from the beginning of the first vector to 



ALGEBRAIC METHOD 



31 



the end of the last vector represents the magnitude and the direc- 
tion of the resultant of the given system. If the force polygon 
closes, that is, if the end of the last vector coincides with the begin- 
ning of the first vector, the resultant of the given system is equal 
to zero. 

23. Algebraic Method. — In Fig. 29(a) is represented a coplanar 
force system which is concurrent. Each of the four forces of the 
system may be resolved into two components, one lying along the 
a;-axis and one along the ^/-axis. The a;-components of the forces 
constitute a coUinear system the resultant of which is a force along 




- 






^ 






R 


y^ 






J> 




u. 




/ 




H 


./^ 








2Fc 








(&) 





(a) 



Fig. 29 



the a;-axis. The magnitude of this resultant is equal to SFx. The 
^/-components of the forces Ukewise constitute a coUinear system 
the resultant of which is a force along the 2/-axis of magnitude 
'ZFy. Since the system, by this method, is reduced to two forces 
the resultant of the given system is the resultant of these two forces. 
If the magnitude of this resultant is denoted by R and the direction 
which its action line makes with the a:-axis by the angle dx as shown 
in Fig. 29(6), the resultant may be found from the equations: 



i? = V(SF,)2+(SF^)2, 



tane, 






The action line of the resultant must of course pass through the 
point of concurrence of th forces. 



32 



RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEM 



17. Find the resultant of the system of concurrent forces shown in Fig 
30(o). 

Algebraic Solution: 

XFx = 20 cos 30° -30 cos 60° -10 cos 45° +25 cos 45° 
= 17.32-15-7.07 + 17.67 
= 12.92 lb. 
7:Fy = 20 cos 60° +30 cos 30° - 10 cos 45° - 25 cos 45° 
= 10+25.98-7.07-17.67 
= 11.24 lb. 



and 



R = V(12.92)2+(11.24)2 = 17.1 lb. (Fig. 306) 



^-*^^-^^' = ^^' 







W S Fa.=12.92 lb. 

(6) 
Fig. 30. 




(c) 



Graphical Solution: 

To determine the resultant of the system graphically a force polygon is 
constructed as shown in Fig. 30(c) . The resultant is represented by the vector 
AE. The magnitude of the resultant is found, by measuring the length of 
AE, to be 17.1 lb. and the angle which the resultant makes with the a;-axis is 
found to be 41°. 



PROBLEMS 

In the following three problems the forces are concurrent at the origin. 
The values of F are the magnitudes of the forces and the values of Bx are the 
angles which the action lines of the forces make with the positive end of the 
X-axis, the angles being measured in a counter-clockwise direction. In each 
problem it is required to find the resultant of the forces specified 



18. 



19. 



20. 



ALGEBRAIC METHOD 

F 1001b. 601b. 40 1b. 50 1b. 
dx 30° 135° 240° 330° 

Ans. 72 = 75 lb., (?x = 25° 55'. 
F 20 1b. 10 1b. 15 1b. 5 1b. 
dx 0° 45° 120° 270° 

Ans. 72=24.7 lb., 0^=37° 35'. 
F 25 1b. 101b. 301b. 401b. 



33 



Ox 0° 30' 



135° 240° 



21. Fig. 31 represents a body acted on by four forces. Determine com- 
pletely the resultant of the four forces by the graphical method and check the 
results by the algebraic method. Ans. 72 = 186 lb.; ^a; = 164° 45'. 



100 lb. 




Fig. 31. 



Fig. 32. 



22. The body represented 
in Fig. 32 is acted on by five 
forces as shown. Replace the 
two 80-lb. forces by a single 
force and then find the resultant 
of this force and the remaining 
three forces. 

23. Find by the graphical 
method the resultant of the five 
forces shown in Fig. 33. 

24. Solve the preceding 
problem by the algebraic 
method. 



^^ 



f6 















■^ 


\ - 
\ 














\ 








/ 








\ 


y 






10 lb._ 




















/ 














/ 












£ 




r 









Fig. 33. 



34 



RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



§3. Parallel Forces in a Plane 

24. Graphical Methods. First Method. — A system of two 
parallel forces having the same sense will first be considered. 
In Fig. 34 are shown two such forces, P and Q, the points of appU- 
cation of which are B and A respectively. The resultant of these 
two forces cannot be found directly by the parallelogram law. How- 
ever, by introducing at B and A any two equal, opposite, and colli- 
near forces F, F, as shown in Fig. 34, the parallelogram law may be 

used. Thus the forces 
Q and F may be re- 
placed by their result- 
ant Ri. Likewise P 
and F may be replaced 
by their resultant R2. 
At C, the point of in- 
tersection of the Hues 
of action of Ri and R2, 
let Ri be resolved into 
components Q and F, 
and R2 into compo- 
nents P and F. The 
two forces F, F at C 
cancel, thereby reduc- 
ing the system to two colhnear forces P and Q along the hne DC. 
The resultant of these two forces, which is also the resultant of 
the original two forces, is a single force of magnitude P-\-Q 
along the hne DC. In order to determine the position of the 
action Hne DC of the resultant, consider the two similar triangles 
AJG and ACD. From these similar triangles there is obtained 
the relation. 




Fig. 34 



Q_CD 
F AD 



(1) 



Similarly, from the triangles BKH and BCD the following rela- 
tion is obtained, 

P CD 



F BD 



(2) 



GRAPHICAL METHODS 35 

By eliminating F from equations (1) and (2) the resulting equation" 
is 

Q BD 

Hence the resultant of two parallel forces of like sense is a 
force having a line of action which is parallel to the lines of action 
of the two forces and which divides the distance between them 
internally into segments which are inversely proportional to 
the magnitudes of the forces. The magnitude of the resultant is 
the sum of the forces and its sense is the same as that of the forces. 

If the forces P and Q are unlike in sense it can be shown in a 
manner similar to that used above that their resultant is a force 
of magnitude P—Q(P being larger than Q), the sense of which is 
the same as that of P. The line of action of the resultant is parallel 
to the lines of action of the forces and divides the distance between 
them externally into segments which are inversely proportional to 
the magnitudes of the forces. The proof is left to the student. 

It should be noted that the construction used in Fig. 34 fails 
if the two opposite, parallel forces are equal in magnitude since two 
such forces constitute a couple and cannot be replaced by a single 
force. 

This method of finding the resultant of two parallel forces can 
be extended to any number of parallel forces. For, any two forces 
of such a system can be combined into a single resultant force; 
this resultant and a third force of the system can be combined in 
exactly the same manner, and so on, until the entire system has. 
been reduced to a single resultant force. It is evident that the 
magnitude of the resultant is equal to the algebraic sum of the 
given forces. If in combining the forces of a parallel system by the 
above method it is found that the resultant of all except one of the 
forces of the system is a force which is equal to the force omitted 
and opposite to it in sense, the two forces constitute a couple 
which is the resultant of the system. If, however, the lines of 
action of the two forces just mentioned are collinear, the forces 
balance and the resultant of the system is equal to zero. Hence 
if the resultant of a system of parallel forces in a plane is not 
equal to zero, the resultant is either a force or a couple. 

The determination of the line of action of the resultant force 
by the method just discussed involves considerable work if there 



36 



RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



are many forces in the system. A second graphical method will 
now be considered. This method involves less construction than 
the method just considered and possesses other important advan- 
tages. 

Second Method. — In Fig. 35(a) is shown a system of four par- 
allel forces having the action Hnes ab, he, cd, and de. On a Hne par- 
allel to the action lines of the forces are laid off vectors AB, BC, 
CD, and DE which represent the given forces in magnitude and 
direction (Fig. 356). From any arbitrarily chosen point, 0, Unes 
are drawn to the points A, B, C, D, and E. The figure thus con- 
structed is called a force polygon; the point is called the pole, 



^ 

^'^o 

^""b 



n C 



(a) 



""^-. 



— >- — .^ 



%^ 




Fig. 35. 



and the lines OA, OB, OC, OD, and OE are called rays. From the 
triangle law it follows that by this construction the force AB is 
resolved into two components represented in magnitude and in 
direction by the rays AO and OB. AO and OB, however, do not 
represent the Unes of action of the two components, since the lines of 
action of the components of AB must intersect on ab. Similarly, 
BO and OC represent the magnitudes and the directions of two 
components into which BC is resolved, and so on for the remaining 
rays. The given system then may be replaced by another system 
of eight forces which are represented in direction and in magni- 
tude by the rays AO, OB, BO, OC, CO, etc. The forces repre- 
sented by the rays OB and BO (OC and CO, etc.), are equal in 
magnitude, opposite in sense, and their lines of action are parallel. 



GRAPHICAL METHODS 37 

If now the action lines of the pairs of parallel and equal forces 0B~~^ 
and BO, OC and CO, OD and DO, are made to coincide, each pair 
will cancel and there will remain only two forces, AO and OE. 
The resultant of these two forces is the resultant 'of the given 
system and is represented in magnitude and in direction by the 
vector AE. 

The action line of AE will pass through the point of intersection 
of the action hues of its components AO and OE. In order to locate 
the point of intersection of the action Hnes of these two forces it is 
necessary to construct another figure called the funicular polygon. 
This is a polygon the sides of which, called strings, are parallel to 
the rays of the force polygon. The funicular polygon is con- 
structed as follows: From any point on ah, the action fine of AB, 
strings ao and oh are drawn parallel to the rays AO and OB. 
These strings represent the action lines of the forces AO and OB 
into which AB was resolved. From the point of intersection of oh 
and he the string ho (which wiU coincide with the string oh) and 
the string oc are drawn. From the point of intersection of oc 
and cd are drawn co and od and from the point of intersection of od 
and de are drawn do and oe. Since oh and ho, the action lines of 
the equal and opposite forces OB and BO, are coUinear, the two 
forces OB and BO will cancel. Similarly for OC and CO and for 
OD and DO. The system then is reduced to two forces repre- 
sented in magnitude and in direction by the vectors AO and OE, 
the action hnes of the forces being ao and oe. The resultant of 
these two forces, which is also the resultant of the given system, 
will pass through the point in which their action lines ao and oe 
intersect. The resultant then is completely determined by the 
force and funicular polygons; the former determines its magni- 
tude and direction; the latter determines a point on its action fine. 

If the force polygon closes, that is, if E coincides with A, the 
rays AO and OE represent two forces which are equal in magni- 
tude and which have parallel action hnes and opposite senses. 
The resultant in this case is a couple provided that the fimicular 
polygon does not close. If, however, the funicular polygon also 
closes, that is if ao and oe coincide, the two forces AO and OE wiU 
balance and the resultant of the given system will be equal to 
zero. 

In constructing the force and funicular polygons any point may 
be taken for the pole and the funicular polygon may be started 



38 



RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



at any point on the action line of any one of the forces. A change 
in the positions of these points has the effect, only, of locating a 
different point on the action line of the resultant if the resultant of 
the system is a force. If the resultant of the system is a couple, 
the effect is to change both the magnitude of the forces constituting 
the resultant couple and the length of its moment-arm. The 
couples will be equivalent, however; that is, they will have the 
same moment and sense. 

ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEM 

26. Find by the graphical method the resultant of the four parallel forces 
shown in Fig. 36(a). 



10 1b. 



20 1b. 



25 lb. 15 lb. 



b 


6 
a ^ 


c c 
f J 


d d 


^-. ' 


^ 




o^^^ 
^^^c 

<- ^ 


No 




(c 


^f ' 





E,A 






N 



--^ 



Scales; lin.= 2ft. 



W 



l.m.= 20 1b.^ 



Fig, 36. 



Solution. — Since the force polygon closes the resultant is not a force and 
hence is a couple. In constructing the rays (Fig. 366) it is convenient to take 
the pole so that the force represented by OA has an integral value. OA here 
represents to scale 20 lb. The funicular polygon in Fig. 36(a) is constructed 
according to the method described in Art. 24. The resultant is a couple 
consisting of the two 20-lb. forces AO and OE. The arm as scaled from the 
funicular polygon is 1.25 ft. Hence the moment of the resultant couple is 
— 25 lb. -ft., the minus sign indicating a clockwise direction of rotation. 



25. Principle of Moments. — The principle of moments as dis- 
cussed in Art. 14 for the special case of two concurrent forces may 
be extended to all force systems. Briefly, the principle states that 
the moment of the resultant of a force system is equal to the alge- 
braic sum of the moments of the forces of the system. The prin- 
ciple is of great importance in the determination, by the algebraic 
method, of (a) the action line of the resultant of a system of forces 



THE PRINCIPLE OF MOMENTS 39 

when the resultant is a force, and (6) the moment and sense of the^ 
resultant of the force system when the resultant is a couple. A 
formal statement and proof of the principle of moments will not 
be given for each of the force systems considered since the method 
of proof is substantially the same for all the force systems. As 
applying to a system of parallel forces in a plane the principle may 
be stated formally as follows : The algebraic sum of the moments of 
the farces of a coplanar parallel system about any point in their plane 
is equal to the moment of the resultant of the system about the same 
point. 

In demonstrating the truth of this statement use will be made of 
the diagram in Fig. 35 and of the methods of the preceding article. 
The given system of four forces (Fig. 35) was replaced by another 
system of eight forces which were represented in magnitude and 
in direction by the rays of the force polygon and in line of action 
by the strings of the funicular polygon. Six of these forces occur 
in pairs, the two forces of each pair being coUinear, equal in magni- 
tude, and opposite in sense. Obviously, the sum of the moments 
of the two forces of each pair with respect to any point in their 
plane is equal to zero. For any moment-center in the plane, by 
use of Varignon's theorem, the following relations may be written, 

moment of AB = moment of AO+moment of OB, 
BC= " B0+ " OC, 

CD= " C0-\- " OD, 

DE= '' D0+ '' OE. 

If the two sides of the above equations are added the result 
obtained may be stated as follows: 

The sum of the moments of the forces of the system 
= moment of AO+moment of OE, 

since the remaining terms on the right side of the equations cancel 
in pairs. But AO and OE are the components of the resultant 
force of the system and hence, by Varignon's theorem, the sum of 
the moments of AO and OE is equal to the moment of the resultant 
of the system. Hence, the proposition is proved for a parallel 
force system in which the resultant is a force. 

If the resultant of the force system is a couple, that is, if the 
forces AO and OE are parallel, equal, and opposite as in Fig. 36, 



40 



RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



the proposition also holds, since the sum of the moments of AO 
and OE is equal to the moment of the resultant couple. 

26. Algebraic Method. — A system of coplanar parallel forces 
is shown in Fig. 37, the forces being parallel to the y-axis. In the 
graphical determination of the resultant of such a system it was 
seen that the resultant was either a force or a couple. If the 
resultant is a force, R, its action Hne is parallel to the action lines 
of the forces of the system and its magnitude and sense are indi- 
cated by the algebraic sum of the forces, that is, R = i:F. In 

order to locate the hne of 
action of the resultant force 
the principle of moments will 
be applied. For convenience 
the origin, 0, will be taken 
as the center of moments. 
The moment of R then with 
respect to is equal to the 
algebraic sum of the mo- 
ments of the forces with 
respect to the same point. 
If the distance from the 
action line of R to the 2/-axis is denoted by x, the moment of R 
with respect to the origin is equal to Rx. Further, if the algebraic 
sum of the moments of the forces of the system with respect to 
the origin is denoted by 2(Fx) or Silf o the principle of moments 
may be expressed by the equation Rx = 2iif o- The resultant, then, 
if a force, is parallel to the 2/-axis and is determined by the following 
equations, 

R = ^F, 

Rx=i:mo. 



Y 


i 


1 


1 


i 


Fe 


Y'' 












U 




' 


/ 

'2 









Fig. 37. 



It should be noted that the sign of x is not always indicated prop- 
erly by the ratio of XMq to R. The sign of x may be determined 
by inspection, since the resultant force must he on that side of the 
moment-center which will make the sense of its moment agree 
with that of the moment of the system. 

If the resultant of all, except one, of the forces of the system is 
equal to that one and of opposite sense, XF then equals zero and 
the resultant is a couple, the moment of which, according to the 



ALGEBRAIC METHOD 



41 



principle of moments, is equal to the algebraic sum of the moments 
of the forces of the system. Hence, if the resultant of a coplanar 
parallel force system is a couple the moment, C, of the couple may 
be determined from the expression, 

the aspect of the couple, of course, being the same as that of the 
plane of the forces. 

If both SF and XM equal zero the resultant is equal to zero. 



ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEMS 

26. Fig. 38 represents a beam resting on two supports and carrying four 
loads as indicated. Find the resultant of the loads. 



2000 1b. 



1500 lb. 



lAOOlb. 



1000 lb. 



-2-^ 



p-t-« 4 >i 1 



•x=7.54- 



FiG. 38. 

Solution— R^-LF^- 1000 - 1500 - 1000 - 2000 = - 5500 lb. 
In order to locate the action line of the resultant, the point A will be 
selected as the moment-center. Thus, 



RX = SMa 
Therefore, 



1000X2-1500X5-1000X8-2000X12= -41,500 lb .-ft. 



- 41500 _ _ . ,, 
X= =7.54 ft. 



5500 



Hence a single- load of 5500 lb. at a point 7.54 ft. from A will produce the 
same external effect (reactions at A and B) as the four given forces, 



42 



RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



27. An arm mounted on an axle at (Fig. 39) is acted on by the four forces 
shown. Determine the resultant of the forces. 



15 1b. 



T 



24 1b. 



151b. 



20 1b. 



h 



1 



24 1b. 



■< — h 



101b. 



Solution. — ■ 

i2 = 2F = 15 + 15 -20- 10=0. 

Therefore the resultant is not a 
force, but is a couple, C, the moment 
of which may be found by taking mo- 
ments about 0. Thus, 

C = SMo = 20X10-15X6-10X5 

+15X12 = +240 lb .-in. 



Hence any couple having a moment 
of +240 lb .-in. will produce the same 
external effect on the arm (change in 
the rotational motion) as the four given 

forces. One resultant couple having forces equal to 24 lb. is shown in the 

figure. 



Fig. 39. 



PROBLEMS 

28. Fig. 40 represents a beam 12 ft. long acted upon by five forces as shown . 
Find the anti-resultant of the five forces. 

29. Five forces act on a body 

2001b. 

1501b. 



501b. 



A? 



m7y 



^100 lb. 



as shown in Fig. 41. Replace 
the two 60-lb. forces by a single 
force and then find the resultant 
of this force and the remaining 
three forces. 

30. A force of 10 lb. acts along 
the 2/-axis, the sense of the force 
being positive. Resolve the force 
into components P and Q along 
the lines x = l and a; = 3, respect- 
ively. 

Ans. P = 151b. 0=-5 1b. 

31. A bar 6 ft. long is hinged 
at A and is acted on by five forces as shown in Fig. 42 
resultant of the five forces. 

Ans. C= +90 lb. -ft. 

32. A bar 10 ft. long is acted on by the forces shown in Fig. 43. Find 
the equilibrant of the force system and represent it acting on the bar. 

Ans. Equilibrant = +15 lb., 2f ft. to the left of the 20-lb. force. 

33. The 40-lb. force shown in Fig. 44 is the resultant of the 10-lb. force and 
a force P not shown. Determine P completely by means of a force and 
a funicular polygon and check the result by the algebraic method. 



801b. 



Fig. 40. 



mm 



Determine the 



ALGEBRAIC METHOD 



43 



In each of the following three problems find the resultant of the-iorce 
system. The forces in each problem are parallel to the i/-axis. The values 



80 1b. ^ 


rr — 
\ 

\ 






/ 
/ 








\ 
\ 


/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 












\ 
\ 
\ 




^ 50 lb. 


100 lb. 








\ 
\ 






Fig. 41. 



Fig. 42. 









Fig. 43. 



10 lb. 

t 



40 lb. 



Fig. 44. 



of F given are the magnitudes of the forces (expressed in pounds) and the 
values of x are the distances of the action lines of the forces from the i/-axis 
(expressed in feet). 



34. F 


+10 


-20 


+25 




-15 


X 


- 2 


+ 1 


+ 3 




+ 4 

Ans. C=-25 Ib.-ft. 


36. F 


-10 


+ 5 


-20 




+15 


X 


- 2 


+ 1 


+3 


An& 


+ 5 
. 22= -10 lb. x = -4ft. 


36. F 


+40 . 


-60 


+80 




-70 +10 


X 





+ 4 


+ 9 




+12 +14 



44 



RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



27. Couples. — In Art. 15 a couple is defined as two equal, 
parallel, non-collinear forces of opposite sense. The moment of a 
couple is defined as the algebraic sum of the moments of the two 
forces of the couple, and it is shown that the moment is the same 
for aU moment-centers in the plane of the couple. Further, it is 
shown that the characteristics of a couple (moment, aspect, and 
sense) may be completely represented by means of a vector. 
Since couples play an important part in engineering problems it 
will be of advantage to consider certain additional propositions 
and transformations by means of which couples can easily be 
combined with other couples or with other forces. 

Proposition I. — A couple may be translated into any parallel 
position in its oion plane or into any parallel plane without changing 
its &xternal effect on the body on which it acts. 

Proof. — Consider the couple Pp having a moment-arm, AB, 
equal to p as shown in Fig. 45. Construct a parallelogram having 

AB s,s one side and CD as 
the opposite side. This par- 
allelogram may or may not 
be in the plane of the given 
couple. At each of the 
B points C and D introduce 
two forces of opposite sense 
which are parallel to the 
<\ forces of the given couple and 
^ ^P equal to them in magnitude. 
The force P at A and the 
upward force P at D may be 
replaced by their resultant. 
This resultant is an upward 
force, 2P, the action line of 
which is parallel to the ac- 
tion lines of the forces of 
the given couple and is locat- 
ed half way between them. 
Hence the action fine passes through 0, the point of intersection 
of the diagonals of the parallelogram. Similarly, the force P at B 
and the downward force P at C may be replaced by a downward 
force, 2P, acting through parallel to the forces of the given 
couple. The two forces 2P, 2P at cancel, thereby leaving only 




COUPLES 



45 



the upward force P at C and the downward force P at Z). Thej»?ft 
two forces constitute a couple which is equivalent to the given 
couple. Hence the proposition is established. 

Proposition II. — A couple may he rotated through any angle in 
its plane without changing its external effect on the body on which ii 
acts. 

Proof. — In Fig. 46 the tw^o equal forces, Pi and P2, consti- 
tute a couple having a moment-arm, AB, equal to p. Through 0, 
the midpoint of the arm, draw any Une CD making an angle 6 with 
AB and scale off OD and OC 
each equal to ^p. At C in- 
troduce two opposite forces, 
P3 and P4, which are perpen- 
dicular to CD, each of which 
is equal in magnitude to the 
forces Pi and P2 of the given 
couple. Similarly at D intro- 
duce two forces, P5 and Pe, 
perpendicular to CD, each 
being equal in magnitude to 
the forces of the given couple. 
Prolong the action Une of Pi 
until it intersects the action 
line of P4 at E. The resultant 
of the two forces Pi and P4 

is a force the action line of which bisects the angle AEC and hence 
coincides mth EO. Let R denote the magnitude of this force. 
In the same way the resultant of P5 and P2 may be shown to be a 
force of magnitude R the action line of which is FO. Since these 
two forces R, R are equal, colhnear, and opposite they cancel, 
thereby leaving the forces P3 and Pe which constitute a couple 
having a moment -arm CD which, by construction, is equal to p. 
This equivalent couple, therefore, is merely the given couple 
rotated through an angle d. 

Proposition III. — The magnitudes of the forces of a couple and 
the moment-arm of the couple may he changed to any values without 
changing the external effect of the couple, provided that the product 
of either force and the moment-arm remains constant. 

Proof. — Given the couple Pp (Fig. 47) having a moment-arm, 
AB, equal to p. Let the arm be increased to CD = {p-\-2x) as 




Fig. 46. 



46 



RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



shown. At C introduce two forces of opposite sense each equal to 

Pv 

_/ and perpendicular to CD. Similarly, introduce two forces 

Pv Pv 

^ at Z). The force P at A and the upward force — r^ at jD 



p+2x " ' -- - - - IT- p-\-2x 

may be replaced by their resultant, which is an upward force of 

2P(v-\-x) 
magnitude — -jy: — , the direction of the line of action being per- 
pendicular to CD. The position of the line of action of this result- 



2P(p + x) 









p -i-Zx 








1 


2x 

1 


.P 


1 




P + 


^ 

\ 




X 


% 


p 


%P B 


0- 


D 




/ 


\ 








^ 


Pp 










Pp 


p + 2a; 




> 




P 


p+ 2x 






2P(j9+a;) 












p + 2x 









Fig. 47. 



ant is found, by applying the principle of moments, to pass through 
the mid-point oi AB. In a similar manner the resultant of the 



force P at B and the downward force 



p+2x 



at C is found to be a 



2P(v-\-x) 
downward force of magnitude — ^^^ — - perpendicular to CD, the 

action line of which also passes through the mid-point of ^P. 

2P(v-\-x) 
The two forces of magnitude — ~-^ — ~ balance, thereby leaving two 

p-f-Zx 

Pv Pv 

forces, /I at C and at D, which constitute a couple the 

p -7- Zx p -\- Zx 

moment of which is equal to Pp. 

Proposition IV. — The resultant of any number of couples in a 

plane is a couple the moment of which is equal to the algebraic sum of 

the moments of the couples. 



COUPLES 



47 



This proposition can be proved by means of the three traas- — 
formations discussed above. It is sufficient to prove the propo- 
sition for two couples, for, if two couples can be combined into a 
single resultant couple, evidently this couple can be combined with 
a third coHiple, and so on. Let the two couples Pp and Qq (Fig. 
48a) act on a body. The magnitude of the forces of the second 
couple may be changed from Q to P by changing the moment- 
arm froto q to -^ (Fig. 486), as discussed in Proposition III. 

The second couple can then be rotated until the forces of the two 
couples are parallel (Fig. 
48c) . The second couple 
can now be translated 
until one of its forces is 
collinear with one of the 
forces of the first couple 
(Fig. 4Sd). This trans- 
lation can always be 
made in such a way that 
these two equal, collinear 
forces are opposite in 
sense and hence will can- 
cel, thereby leaving the 
two equal, parallel, and 
opposite forces P, P which 
constitute a couple. The 
arm of this resultant 




cou 



Pleis(p+|) 



moment is P(p+- 



Pi 

p 


QQ 


p^ 


, p 

p 

r 



p . and its 

Qq\ I ^ t ""P I (d) 

. ~P)- 
Pp + Qq. Hence the mo- 
ment of the resultant is 
equal to the sum of 
the moments of the 
given couples as stated in the proposition. 

Proposition V. — Two coplanar couples which have the same 
moment and sense are equivalent. 

This proposition follows from the three transformations pre- 



FiG. 48. 



48 RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 

viously discussed, since, by means of them, one of the couples 
may be superimposed on the other. 



§ 4. NON-CONCURRENTj NON-PARALLEL FoRCES IN A PlANE 

28. Graphical Methods. First Method. — The resultant of a 
system of non-concurrent, non-parallel forces in a plane is either 
a force or a couple. If the resultant is a force it may be 
determined by use of the parallelogram law. In Fig. 49 are 
shown three non-concurrent, non-parallel forces Fi, F2, and Fz 
acting on a body. The forces F\ and F2 may be combined into a 
single resultant force Ri. R\ and Fz may be combined into a 




Fig. 49. ' 

single force R2 which is the resultant of the given system of 
forces. 

If the resultant obtained by combining all, except one, of 
the forces of such a system is equal to that one and is parallel to 
it and of opposite sense, the two forces constitute a couple. 
Furthermore, if the action lines of these two forces are colhnear 
the forces cancel and the resultant of the system is equal to 
zero. 

Second Method. — The resultant of a sytem of non-concurrent, 
non-paraUel forces in a plane may also be found by the con- 
struction of a force and a funicular polygon. This method is of 
great importance in engineering problems. The method of con- 
struction of these polygons is the same as that described in con- 



THE PRINCIPLE OF MOMENTS 



49 



nection with a system of parallel forces (Art. 24) and will not here- 
be discussed in detail for the non-parallel force system. The 
method will be illustrated, however, by the following problem. 



ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEM 

37. A beam 9 ft. long is acted on by four forces as shown in Fig. 50. 
Determine the resultant of the forces by use of the force and funicular 
polygons. 

Solution. — The force polygon as shown in Fig. 50(6) is constructed by 
laying off the vectors AB, BC, CD, and DE which represent the magni- 
tudes and the directions of the given forces. The closing side AE oi 
the polygon represents the resultant force in magnitude and in direction. 
By measuring ^^ to scale the magnitude of the resultant force is found 




Scale. 1 in. = 8 ft. 

(a) 



Scale. 1 in. = 2000 lb. 

(6) 



Fig. 50. 



to be 2450 lb. and the line AE is found to make an angle of 80° with the 
horizontal. 

In Fig. 50 (a) is shown the funicular polygon in which one point on the 
action line of the resultant is found, namely, the intersection of oa and oe. 
Therefore the action line of the resultant passes through this point and is 
parallel to AE. By measurement the action line is found to intersect the 
beam at a point 3.6 ft. from the left end of the beam. Hence, if the 
four forces were replaced by a single force, R, of 2450 lb. as shown in Fig. 
50(a), the reactions at the ends of the beam (external effects) would be 
unchanged. 

29. Principle of Moments. — The algebraic sum of the moments 
of the forces of a coplanar, non-concurrent, non-parallel force 
system about any point in the plane of the forces is equal to the 



50 



RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



moment of the resultant of the system about the same point. 
The proof is identical with that given for a system of parallel 
forces (Art. 25) and the principle will be used, in the algebraic 
method, for finding the action line of the resultant force or the 
moment of the resultant couple similar to the way it was used for 
parallel forces (Probs. 26 and 27). 

30. Algebraic Method. —The resultant of a system of non-con- 
current, non-parallel forces in a plane is either a force or a couple 
as explained in Art. 28. If the resultant is a force it may be deter- 
mined as follows: In Fig. 51(a) is represented a body acted on by 
four forces F\ F" , F'", and F"", Let each force be replaced 





(6) 



Fig. 51. 



by its X- and ^/-components. The original force system is now 
resolved into two systems of parallel forces, the resultant of 
each parallel system being a force parallel to the forces of 
the system. According to Art. 26 the resultant of the com- 
ponents in the a;-direction is SFx and similarly, the resultant 
of the components in the ^/-direction is l^Fy. Hence, the 
magnitude and the direction' of the resultant of these two forces 
(which is also the resultant of the original forces) may be 



found from the equations R = V {1,Fxy-{-{1.Fyf and tan^^=|§^ 

(Fig. 516), in which dx is the angle which the action line of R 
makes with the a;-axis. In order to obtain the position of the line 
of action of the resultant force R the principle of moments may be 



ALGEBRAIC METHOD 51 

used. The principle is expressed by the equation Ra=XMjj^ 
in which a (Fig. 51a) is the perpendicular distance from the mo- 
ment-center, 0, to the action Hne of the resultant, and 2lfo is 
the algebraic sum of the moments of the forces with respect 
toO. 

Hence, if the resultant of a coplanar, non-concurrent, non- 
parallel system of forces is a force, it may be determined completely 
by the equations. 



tan e^ 



^F, 



If both XFx and XFy are equal to zero the resultant is not a 
force and hence is a couple the moment, C, of which, according to 
the principle of moments, is the algebraic sum of the moments of 
the forces of the system, that is, 

C = SM. 

The center about which the moments of the forces are taken may 
be any point in the plane of the forces since the moment of a couple 
is the same about all points in the plane. The sense of rotation 
of the resultant couple is indicated by the sign of the algebraic 
summation and the aspect of the couple, of course, is the same as 
that of the plane of the forces. 

If ZFx and XFy are equal to zero and ZM is also equal to zero, 
the resultant is equal to zero. 



52 



RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEM 

38. Find the resultant of the system of four forces which act on the body 
represented in Fig. 52(a). Each space represents 1 ft. 




^ 


d 


-/ 


II 






/ 




/- . 



2 F= 16.47 lb. 



Solution. — The solution may be put in tabular form as follows: 



F dx Fx = F COS 0x 

20 45° 14.14 

25 135° -17.67 

5 270° 0.00 

20 0° 20.00 



Therefore, 



Fy=F sin d, 

14.14 

17.67 

- 5.00 

0.00 



Mo 

28.28 

0.00 

-15.00 

20.00 



SFa; = 16.47 lb. SFy = 26.81 lb. 2Mo = 33.28 Ib.-ft. 

R = V(16.47)2+ (26.81)2 = 31 .45 lb., 



0x=tan-i?^ = 58°25', 



-3Ti5 = l-«^^^- 



PROBLEMS 



39. Fig. 53 represents a board 3 ft. square acted upon by four forces as 
shown. Find completely the resultant of the forces. Specify the action line 
of the resultant by the perpendicular distance from the origin 0. 

Ans. ie = 47.6 lb. 0a; = 78° 10'. a = 1.98ft. 



GRAPHICAL METHOD 



53 



40. Determine completely the resultant of the five forces acting on the— 
body shown in Fig. 54. Each space represents 1 ft. 





Fig. 53. 



Fig. 54. 



41. The forces of a coplanar system are specified below, the magnitudes of 
the forces being expressed in pounds and distances x and y in feet. 



F 

^y y 



Find the resultant of the system. 

Am. 72 = 37.1 lb. 0, = 57°2O' a = 1.71 ft. 



20 


15 


10 


15 


0, 2 


0,2 


4,2 


6.2 


0° 


45° 


90° 


135° 



§ 5. Concurrent Forces in Space 

31. Graphical Method. — The resultant of a system of non- 
coplanar, concurrent forces is a force which may be found by any 
of the graphical methods used in finding the resultant of a system 
of coplanar, concurrent forces as discussed in Art. 22. In applying 
any one of these methods, the forces are projected on two of the 
coordinate planes and the resultants of the two projected systems 
of forces are found. The resultant of the original force system will 
be a force the projections of which on the two planes are the 
resultant forces of the projected systems. If the force polygon 



54 



RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



for each of the projected systems closes the resultant of the given 
system vanishes. A graphical method of determining the resultant 
of any non-coplanar system of forces is less convenient than is 
the algebraic method of solution. 

32. Algebraic Method. — Before discussing the method of 
determining the resultant of any number of non-coplanar, con- 
current forces the special 
case of three concurrent 
forces having action lines 
which are mutually perpen- 
dicular will be considered. 
In Fig. 55 are represented 
three such forces, P, Q, 
and *S, the action lines of 
the forces being taken as 
the coordinate axes. The 
forces P and Q may be 
combined into a single force 
OA the magnitude of which 
is VW+Q^. The result- 
ant of this force and the 
force S is also the resultant of the given system of three forces 
and is represented by the vector OB, its magnitude being 
Vp2-|-Q2_|_^2 Hence the magnitude of the resultant, R, of the 
three forces and the angles dxy dp, and dz, which the line of action 
of the resultant makes with the coordinate axes may be found 
from the equations, 




Fig. 55. 



r = VP^-\-Q^-{-S^, 



cos dx = J^, COS dy 



Q 
R' 



COS f^z = ^- 



In finding the resultant of any number of non-coplanar, con- 
current forces by the algebraic method it will be convenient to 
take the point of concurrence of the forces as the origin of a set of 
rectangular axes. Each force of the system may be resolved into 
components along the coordinate axes (Art. 12). The system is 
thus replaced by three collinear systems each of which may be 
replaced by a single force (Art. 21). Thus, the resultant of the 
components along the a:-axis is a single force along the a;-axis, the 



ALGEBRAIC METHOD 



55 



magnitude of which is expressed by llFx. Similarly, the ^/-com:^ 
ponents may be replaced by a single force of magnitude ^Fy along 
the i/-axis, etc. (Fig. 56). These three forces may be combined 
into a single force which is the resultant of the given system and 
which is completely defined by the following equations: 



cos 0o.= 



/? = V(SF,)2+(SF,)2+(SF,)2, 

z 






008 6^, = -^, 



COS 62 = —^. 



R 



where dx, By, and Bz are the 
angles which the action Hne 
of the resultant makes with 
the coordinate axes as shown 
in Fig. 56. 




Fig. 56. 



ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEM 

42. Find the resultant of the following system of forces which pass through 
the origin. The values of F are the magnitudes of the forces and the values 
of X, y, z are the coordinates of points on the action lines of the forces. 

F 50 lb. 90 lb. 100 lb. 60 lb. 20 lb. 

X, y, z 5, 5, 7, 5, 3 3, 0, 4 2, 5, 4 0, 5, 3 

Solution: 

SFa; = 50-^+90.-^+100-?-+60--|=+20--^ 
V50 V83 5 V45 V34 

= 35.4+69.2+60+17.9+0 

= 182.5 lb. 

SF:, = 50— ^+90--^+100-^+60- 
V50 V83 5 

= 35.4+49.3+0+44.7+17.1 

= 146.5 lb. 



-|=+20.^ 
V45 V34 



SF. = 50.-^+90.-^+10o4+60-^+20.-4= 
V50 V83 5 V45 V34 

=0+29.6+80+35.8+10.3 

= 155.7 lb. 



56 RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 

i2 = V(182.5)2 + (146.5)2+(155.7)2 = 281 lb. 

182 5 
0x = cos - 1 ^gp = cos - 1 . 650 = 49° 30'. 

14fi *! 

By = COS - 1 -^Ip = cos - 1 .521 = 58° 35'. 

1^^ 7 
0? = cos-i _^_ = cos-i .553=56° 25'. 

PROBLEMS 

In the following problems the forces are concurrent at the origin. It is 
-equired to find the resultants of the systems. 

43. F 10 lb. 20 lb. 15 lb. 
X, y, z 1, 2, 1 2, 2, 3 3, 1, 2 

Ans. i2 = 43.11b. 0^ = 53° 10'. 02, = 59°3O'. 0^ = 51° 50'. 

44. F 100 lb. 150 lb. 50 lb. 200 lb. 

X, 2/, z 2, 2, 1 3, 2, -2 -4, -3, -5 3,-2, 4 

Ans. R = 27^\h. 0^ = 18° 10'. 02^=80° 45' 02 = 74° 20'. 

46. F 10 lb. 30 lb. 20 lb. 

X, y, z 1, 2, 1 1, 4, 2 2, 3, 3 



§ 6. Parallel Forces in Space 

33. Graphical Method. — The resultant of a system of non- 
coplanar, parallel forces (see Fig. 57) is either a force or a couple. 
If the resultant is a force the action hne is parallel to the forces 
of the system, its magnitude and sense being given by the algebraic 
sum of the forces. The resultant force may be found graphically 
by a repeated use of the first method described in Art. 24 for finding 
the resultant of two parallel forces. Since this method of solu- 
tion, however, involves constructions in various planes it is not 
convenient to use. The resultant force may also be found by the 
construction of a force and a funicular polygon as described in 
Art. 24. In using this method the forces are projected on two of 
the coordinate planes and the resultant of each of the two systems 
of projected forces is found. The resultant of the given force 
system is a force the projections of which on the two coordinate 
planes are the two resultants of the projected forces. 



ALGEBRAIC METHOD 



57 



34. Principle of Moments. — The algebraic sum of the moments 
of any nmnber of non-coplanar, parallel forces about any line in 
space is equal to the moment of their resultant about the same 
line. The proof of this proposition is similar to the proof of the 
principle of moments given for a coplanar, parallel force system 
and will be left to the student. This principle will be used in the 
algebraic method of determining the resultant of a non-coplanar, 
parallel system in much the same way that it was used in Arts. 
26 and 30. 

35. Algebraic Method. — In determining the resultant of a 
system of non-coplanar, parallel forces by the algebraic method it 
is convenient to select coordinate axes so that one axis is parallel 
to the forces. In Fig. 57 is shown a sj^stem of parallel forces 
referred to such a set of axes. The resultant, if a force, is parallel 
to the forces, its magnitude, R, being equal to the algebraic sum of 
the forces. The line of action of the resultant force is found by 
applying the principle of moments. Thus, if the algebraic sum 
of the moments of the forces with respect to the a;-axis be denoted 
by 2Mx and the distance of the resultant from the x-axis be 
denoted by y, then the principle of moments is expressed by the 
equation Ry = ^Mx. In a similar manner, Rx='EMy. Th^^ 
resultant, if a force, will then be completely defined by the fol- 
lowing equations: 



R = ^F, 




2My 
R ' 

R ' 



If the resultant of all, 
except one, of the forces 
of a parallel system is a 
force which is equal to that 
one but of opposite sense, 

then XF equals zero and hence the resultant is not a force and is 
therefore a couple. According to the principle of moments the 
moment, Cx, of the resultant couple with respect to the x-axis is 



58 



RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



equal to the algebraic sum of the moments of the forces with 
respect to the a:-axis, that is, 



Similarly, 



Cy=i:My. 



Thus, the resultant is a couple which Hes in a plane parallel to the 
2-axis, the moments of which, with respect to the x- and 2/-axes, are 
Cz and Cy as expressed above. Methods of expressing a resultant 
couple in terms of its component couples are discussed in Art. 36. 



ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEM 

46. Find the resultant of the system of parallel forces as shown in Fig. 58. 
Each space in the figure represents 1 ft. 




Solution : 



R»25 1b. I ^30 lb. 

Fig. 58. 

72 = 2^ = 10 + 15-20-30= -25 lb. 
SM:r = 20X2+30X3 -10X1 -15X1. 

= 105 lb .-ft. 
SiWy = 10X1+15X3 -20X2-30X5. 
= -1351b.-ft. 



ALGEBRAIC METHOD 



59 



and 



5 = f=5fft. 
- 105 ,, ,^ 



Hence the resultant is a downward force of 25 lb. as shown in Fig. 58. 

Caution. — Care must be exercised in finding x and y. For instance, in the 
above example if the value of SMj; ( + 105 lb .-ft.) be divided by R{ — 25 lb.) 
the quotient is — 4i ft., which is not the value of y, since a downward force of 
25 lb. in this position would have a moment of — 105 lb .-ft. with respect to the 
a;-axis. The magnitudes of x and y should be obtained by dividing the mag- 
nitudes of XMy and SMa, by the magnitude of R and their signs should be 
determined by inspection. The signs of x and y, of course, must be such that 
the moment of the resultant will have the same sense of rotation as indicated 
by the algebraic sum of the moments of the forces of the system, 

PROBLEMS 

47. A board 6 ft. square is acted on by five forces as shown in Fig. 59. 
Determine the resultant of the forces. 

Ans. R = +10 \h. ^ = +2.5ft. y = +3.5ft. 



60 1b. 




Fig. 60. 



48. A table 5 ft. square carries four concentrated loads as shown in Fig. 60. 
Find the resultant of the four loads. 

Ans. R = lS5\h. x = +2.04 ft. y = +2.26 ft. 

49. Find the resultant of the following system of forces which are parallel 



60 



RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



to the z-axis. The values of x and y, expressed in feet, are the coordinates 
of the points where the action lines of the forces intersect the a:?/-plane. 
F 20 lb. 10 lb. 25 lb. -15 lb. -10 lb. 



X, y 



1, 3 



3. 2 



6, 6 



2, 5 



6. 4 



§ 7. Couples in Space 



Proposition, — The 



36. Resultant of a System of Couples. 

resultant of any number of couyles is a couple. 

Proof. — It is sufficient to prove 
this proposition for two couples, 
only, since if two couples can be com- 
bined into a single resultant couple 
this couple can be combined with a 
third couple in exactly the same way 
and so on. Thus, consider the two 
couples Pp and Qq in planes making 
an angle a with each other as shown 
in Fig. 61(a). The forces Q, Q of 
the couple Qq can be made equal to 

P, P if the arm be changed to -^ 

(Art. 27) as shown in Fig. 61(6). 
Each couple can then be rotated 
in its plane until the forces of the 
couples are parallel to the line of 
intersection of the two planes (Art. 
27) as shown in Fig. 61(c). Now let 
the two couples be translated until 
one force of each couple lies in the 
line of intersection of the two planes. 
This translation can always be made 
so that the two forces in this hne 
are opposite in sense and hence will 
cancel, thereby leaving a couple the 
forces of which are P, P (Fig. 6 Id). 
The arm of this couple from trigo- 
nometry is, 




Fig. 61. 



yjp 



^+51-2^^ cos «. 



Special Cases.— 1. If the angle a equals 90°, that is, if the 



RESULTANT OF A SYSTEM OF COUPLES 



61 



planes of the couples are perpendicular (Fig. 62), the moment, C, . 
of the resultant couple is 

C = P^p'+%<f = V(Pp)2+(Qg)2. 

That is, the moment of the resultant couple is the square root of 
the sum of the squares of the moments of the two couples. The 
plane of the resultant couple makes 
an angle 4> (Fig. 62) with the plane of 
the couple Pp such that 

Q 

tan0 = -- = ^-, 

and the sense of rotation of the re- 
sultant couple is indicated in Fig. 62. 
II. If a equals 180°, the couples 
are in the same or in parallel planes 
and hence have the same aspect. 
The moment of the resultant couple 
then is, 

C = P^lv'+%q'+2vlq = p{v-^qfj-Pv+Qq• 

That is, the moment of the resultant couple is the algebraic sum 
of the moments of the two couples and its aspect, of course, is the 
same as that of each of the couples, the sense of rotation being 
indicated by the sign of the algebraic summation. 




Fig. 62. 




Fig. 63. 

Resultant of a Couple and a Force. — A couple and a force not in 
the plane of the couple may be replaced by two non-coplanar 
forces. Thus, consider a couple Pp in the plane MN and a force F 



62 



RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



as shown in Fig. 63(a). The couple may be translated according 
to Art. 27 until one of the forces of the couple Pp and the force F 
are concurrent (Fig. 636) . Therefore P and F now may be replaced 
by their resultant R and hence the given system is replaced by a 
force P in the plane of the original couple and a force R not in the 
plane. Conversely, any two forces not in the same plane may be 
replaced by a force and a couple. 

37. Composition of Couples by Means of Vectors. Propost- 
Hon. — // any number of couples he represented by their vectors, the 
resultant of these vectors mil represent completely the resultant 
couple. 

It will be sufficient to prove the proposition for two couples. 
The extension of the proof to any number of couples is obvious. 

Proof. — Given two couples Pipi and P2P2 in planes which 
make an angle a with each other as shown in Fig. 64(a). It is 







y 


/ J^/ 




/" 

/ 


/ 





ia) 




Fig. 64. 



assumed that the couples have been transformed (see Art. 36) 
so that P\ equals P2. Let DOE (Fig. 646) represent a cross-section 
of the two planes shown in Fig. ^^.{0). The couple P\p\ can be 
represented by a vector OA perpendicular to the plane of the 
couple, the length of OA being proportional to P\p\. Likewise, 
the couple P2P2 can be represented by the vector OB perpendicular 
to the plane of the couple, OB being proportional to P2P2- Con- 
struct the parallelogram OACB. In order to show that OC repre- 
sents completely the resultant couple it must be shown that OC is 
perpendicular to the plane of the resultant couple (which is the 
same as showing that it is perpendicular to DE) and also that its 



COMPOSITION OF COUPLES BY MEANS OF VECTORS 63 

length represents to scale the moment, Pj), of the resultant couple; 
In the two triangles OAC and ODE the angle OAC equals the angle 
DOE. The vector OA is proportional to P\p\. This fact is 
expressed by the equation, 



Similarly, 
Hence, 


OA=kPm, 

0B = kP2P2 = AC. 

OA kPipi pi OD 
AC kP2P2 P2 OE' 


Therefore, the triangles are similar and hence OC is proportional to 
DE. That is, 

OC OA kPpi 

DE OD vi 


Therefore, 


OC = DEXkP = kPp. 



Hence OC represents the moment of the resultant couple. Further- 
more, OC is perpendicular to DE, for, since the triangles OAC and 
ODE are similar and the corresponding sides OA and OD are per- 
pendicular, it follows that the corresponding sides OC and DE are 
perpendicular. Hence, OC represents the aspect as well as the 
magnitude of the resultant couple. It is plain from Fig. 64(6) 
that OC also represents the sense of the resultant couple. Any 
number of couples then may be combined into a resultant couple by 
representing each couple by a vector and finding the resultant of 
the system of vectors. The resultant vector will represent com- 
pletely the resultant couple. 

For an application of this method of combining couples see 
the discussion of the problem of balancing rotating masses, such as 
an engine crankshaft, in Chapter IX, Section III. 

Three Couples in Mutually Perpendicular Planes. — Let the 
given planes be taken as the coordinate planes. The couple lying 
in the yz-plsme may be represented completely by a vector along 
the a;-axis. Let this vector be denoted by Cx. Similarly, the 
couples in the xz- and x^z-planes may be represented by vectors 
Cy and Cz along the y- and 0-axes respectively. The resultant of 
the three couples will be represented by the resultant of the three 



64 



RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



vectors Cx, Cy, Cg. If the resultant of these three vectors be 
denoted by C the resultant may be found from the equation, 

Also, if </>!, </)y, and <j5>z be the angles which the vector C makes with 
the coordinate axes, these angles may be found from the equations, 



C 



0y = cos-i-^, 



<f>z = COS~^—. 



That is, if the couples Cx, Cy, and Cz, which act on a given body, 
are replaced by the couple C acting in the plane defined by the 
angles c^i, <l>y, and <^2, the external effect on the body will be 
unchanged. 

ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEM 

50. Determine the resultant of the three couples which act on the body 
(cube) as shown in Fig. 65. Each of the edges of the cube is 4 ft. in length. 

Solution. — 

Cx = 200X4 = 800 lb. -ft. 

Cy = 300X4 = 1200 Ib.-ft. 

^2 = 100X4= 4001b. ft. 

Therefore, 

C = ^(800) 2+ (1200) 2+ (400) 2. 

= 1500 lb. -ft. 

. 800 





Z 










300 lb. 








y 








/ 100 lb. 








300 lb. 


X 


/ 




/^ 




/ 100 lb. 





COS- 



COS" 



/v 



Fig. 65. 



</)z = COS~^ 



1500 

1200 
1500 

400 
1500 



= 57° 47', 
= 36° 50', 
= 74° 30'. 



Hence a single couple having a moment of 1500 lb .-ft. and located in a 
plane perpendicular to the line defined by the above angles will have the same 
external efifect on the bod^^ as the three given couples. 

38. Resolution of Couples. — In order to resolve a couple into 
two or more component couples, the vector representing the given 
couple may be resolved into component vectors each of which 
represents a component couple. 



RESOLUTION OF COUPLES 65 

One of the most important cases of the resolution of a couplers 
that in which the couple is resolved into three component couples 
lying in planes which are mutually perpendicular. Let the planes 
of the component couples be taken as the coordinate planes and 
let <f)x, (f>v, and 0z be the angles which the vector representing the 
given couple, C, makes with the coordinate axes. If Cx, Cy, Cg, be 
the component couples lying in the yz-, zx-, and xy-planes, 
respectively, they may be found from the following equations: 

Cx=(7cos0i, Cv = (7 cos <^v, Cg = C cos 4>z. 

§ 8. Non-concurrent, Non-parallel Forces in Space 

39. Graphical Method. — The resultant of a system of non- 
concurrent, non-parallel forces in space may be a force and a couple, 
a single force, or a single couple. Further, since a force and a 
couple, not in the same plane, may be replaced by two non- 
coplanar forces (Art. 36), the resultant of such a system may also be 
regarded as two non-coplanar forces. If the graphical method is 
used in determining the resultant of such a system of forces, it is 
convenient to reduce the system to two forces rather than a force 
and a couple. The resultant may be found by selecting arbitrarily 
any plane which is not parallel to any of the action lines of the 
given forces and resolving each force, at the point where its action 
line pierces this plane, into two components, one perpendicular 
to this plane and one lying in the plane. The system consisting 
of the components which lie in the plane may be combined accord- 
ing to the method of Art. 28 and the components which are per- 
Vsndicular to the plane may be combined according to the method 
of Art. 33. If the resultant of each of these systems is a force 
these two forces may be regarded as the resultant of the given 
system. The two forces may be replaced, however, by a force and 
a couple. Further, in special cases the force may vanish and 
thereby leave a single couple as the resultant of the given system. 
Again, the couple may vanish, in which case the resultant of the 
system is a force. If both the force and couple vanish the given 
force system has no resultant. 

40. Principle of Moments. — The algebraic sum of the moments 
of the forces of any non-coplanar, non-concurrent, non-parallel 
system about any line is equal to the moment of the resultant 



66 RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 

of the system about the same line. Since the resultant in general 
consists of a force and a couple, the moment of the resultant 
about any Une must be regarded as the algebraic sum of the 
moments of the force and the couple about the Hne. 

41. Algebraic Method. — When the resultant of a system of 
non-concurrent, non-parallel forces in space is a force and a couple, 
the force may be made to pass through any arbitrary point, but, 
for different positions of this point, the moment of the couple will 
vary. In determining the resultant force and couple by the alge- 
braic method it is convenient to select a rectangular set of coor- 
dinate axes so that the origin is the arbitrary point through which 
the resultant force passes. Each force of the system may be 
replaced by an equivalent parallel force through the origin and a 
couple as in Art. 18. Thus the system is reduced to a system of 
concurrent forces through the origin and a system of couples. 
The concurrent system at the origin may be combined into a 
resultant force, as in Art. 32, which is completely defined by the 
following equations: 

R = V(2F,)2+(2F,)2+(2F,)2, 
(9x = cos-i -^, 

^j, = cos-i-^, 

^, = cos-i^. 

The system of couples may be replaced by a single couple as in 
Art. 37. For convenience in determining the resultant couple it 
will bo considered to be resolved, as in Art. 38, into three com- 
ponent couples lying in the coordinate planes. Let the couple 
lying in the zy-plane be denoted by Cx, since it may be represented 
by a vector along the x-axis. The vector which represents this 
couple will also be denoted by Cx- Similarly, let the couples 
in the other two planes, as well as the vectors which represent 
them, be denoted by Cp and Cz. The given system then is equiva- 
lent to the system shown in Fig. 66, namely, a force R through the 
origin and the couples Cx, Cy, and Cz. Since the two systems are 
equivalent, the sum of the moments of the forces of the given sys- 
tem about any Une is equal to the sum of the moments of the 



ALGEBRAIC METHOD 



67 



forces of the system shown in Fig. 66 about the same Kne. ThtiST^ 
let moments be taken about the .r-axis and let the moment of 
the given system about the x-axis be denoted by XMx. The only 
part of the system shown in Fig. 66 which has a moment about 
the a:-axis is the couple lying in the ye-plane, and the moment of 
this couple is Cx- Hence, i:Mx=Cx. Similarly i:My = Cy and 
XMz = Cz. The resultant of the three couples then may be deter- 
mined as in Art. 36. Thus the resultant couple is defined by the 
following equations : 



C = V(SM,)2+(SM,)24-(2Af,)2, 



<f>x = COS 



<f>P = COS 



<t>z = COS 



C ' 


C 


_, Silf, 




c 



Fig. 66. 



All of the force systems which have been discussed above 
may be considered as special cases of this system, and the six 
equations which define the resultant of this system will reduce to 
the same equations which were found necessary to define the 
resultants of the simpler systems. 



ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEM 

51. Find the resultant of the system of four forces which act on the cube 
as shown in Fig. 67. Each side of the cube is 4 ft. long. 

Solution: In resolving the 10-lb. force into its three rectangular compo- 
nents, A will be taken as the point of application of the force and at this 
point the force may be resolved into two components, one along AC and one 
along AB. The latter component may be resolved into components along 
AE and AF. The quantities needed in the solution may be put in tabular 
form as follows, forces being expressed in pounds and moments in pound-feet. 



F 


Fx 


Fy 


Fz. 


Mx 


My 


M, 


10 


-4.67 


-6.25 


-6.25 


0.00 


—6.25 


6.25 


15 


0.00 


-10.60 


-10.60 


0.00 


-42.42 


42.42 


18 


18.00 


0.00 


0.00 


0.00 


-72.00 


18.00 


40 


0.00 


40.00 


0.00 


40.00 


0.00 


0.00 



2;F;j = 13-33 2Fy =23.15 SFz = —16.85 SAfx =40.0 2My = —120.7 23/2=66. 



68 



RESULTANTS OF FORCE SYSTEMS 





1 








B ( 


r 


/ 


^ • 

1^ i 


8 1b. / 




/ 


\ 

\ 
1 \ 
1 \ 




f 


^ 


^>^6. 


X 


10 \h.\^ 
\ 
\ 

\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 


/ 





Fig. 67. 



i2 = ^(13.33)24-(23.15)2+(16.85)2 
= 31.6 lb. 

13 33 

0x=cos-i-^^=65°O' 
31. o 

23 15 
0j,=cos-'^T^ = 42°5O' 
* 31.6 

02=008-'^^^ =122° 15' 

C =^(40)2 + (120.7)2 + (66.66)' 

= 144 lb. -ft. 

40 
0^ = cos-ij^ = 73°5O' 

— 120 7 
0» = cos-^ ,,:' = 146° 55' 



</)2 = cos- 



144 

, 66.66 
144 



= 62° 25'. 



Note. — In specifying the angles which the vectors representing the result- 
ant force and the resultant couple make with the coordinate axes, the smaller 
of the two angles which each vector makes with the positive end of the given 
axis is specified. 

PROBLEMS 

62. Find the resultant of the three forces which act on the cube as shown 
in Fig. 68. Each side of the cube is 4 ft. long. 





Fig. 68. 



Fig. 69. 



53. The sides of the cube shown in Fig. 69 are each 4 ft. long. Find the 
resultant of the three forces which act on the cube. 



CHAPTER III 
EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 

§ 1. Introduction 

42. Preliminary. — In the preceding chapter equations and 
graphical constructions were found by the use of which the result- 
ants of the various force systems may be determined. In the pres- 
ent chapter are determined the algebraic and graphical conditions 
which the forces of the various force systems must satisfy in order 
that the resultants of the force systems shall be equal to zero; 
that is, in order that the force systems shall be in equihbrium. 
If a force system which is in equiHbriima acts on a body, the body 
is either at rest or has a uniform motion. 

The independent equations which must be satisfied by the 
forces which hold a body in equilibrium are called the equations of 
equilibrium, and the graphical constructions which the forces must 
satisfy are sometimes called equilibrium diagrams or equilibrium 
polygons. 

Many problems in engineering practice involve bodies which 
are in equilibrium under the action of a system of forces as, for 
example, a bridge, roof -truss, crane, etc. In such problems there 
may be certain elements of the forces acting on the body which are 
unknown as, for example, the magnitude or the direction of one or 
more of the forces. These unknown elements or quantities may 
be found if their number is not greater than the number of equa- 
tions of equiUbriima for the force system involved. Such force 
systems are said to be statically determinate. If the number of 
unknown quantities in a force system is greater than the nimiber 
of equations of equilibrium for that particular force system, the 
force system is said to be statically indeterminate, as, for example, 
the forces which act on a horizontal beam which rests on three or 
more supports and carries known vertical loads. The beam is in 
equilibrium under the action of a system of coplanar, parallel forces 
all of which are known except the three upward reactions of the 
supports. As is shown in Art. 49, there are only two independent 



70 EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 

equations of equilibrium for such a force system, and hence 
the three reactions cannot be found from the equations of 
equiUbrium. The force system is therefore statically indeter- 
minate. 

43. Graphical Conditions of Equilibrium. — In the previous 
chapter it was shown that the resultant of an unbalanced force 
system in a plane is either a force or a couple. Further, it was 
shown that if the resultant is a force, it is represented in magni- 
tude and in direction by the closing side of the force polygon, and 
that if the resultant is a couple, the two forces of the couple act 
along the first and last strings of the funicular polygon. Hence, 
if the force polygon closes, the resultant cannot be a force, but 
may be a couple. If, however, the funicular polygon also closes, 
that is, if the first and last strings along which the two forces of 
the couple act are colhnear, the two forces cancel and hence the 
resultant couple vanishes. Hence there are two conditions which 
the forces of a coplanar force system must satisfy if they have no 
resultant, that is, if the forces are in equilibrium. 

(1) The force polygon must close. If this condition is satis- 
fied the resultant cannot be a force. 

(2) The funicular polygon must close. If this condition is 
satisfied the resultant cannot be a couple. 

The conditions of equilibrium for non-coplanar force systems 
may be stated in a similar manner. In order to determine the 
resultant of a non-coplanar system graphically, the forces of the 
system are projected on two of the coordinate planes and a force 
and a funicular polygon is drawn for each of the projected systems. 
The conditions of equilibrium for a non-coplanar system, then, 
are that the force and funicular polygons for each of the projected 
systems must close. 

44. Algebraic Conditions of Equilibrium. — The two conditions 
which the graphical diagrams for a balanced force system must 
satisfy as stated in the preceding article may also be expressed 
algebraically. Thus, if the force polygon closes, the projections 
(components) of the forces on any fine also form a closed polygon, 
as shown in Fig. 70, and since these components are collinear their 
vector sum is the same as their algebraic sum. Hence, the fi^ct 
that the force polygon for the components closes may be expressed 
by stating that the algebraic sum of the components is equal to 
zero. Therefore, if the force polygon for the given system of 



ii 



ALGEBRAIC CONDITIONS OF EQUILIBRIUM 71 

forces closes, the algebraic sum of the components of the forces in 

any direction is equal to zero. 

If the funicular polygon closes, the resultant cannot be a couple, 
since the first and last strings of the funicular polygon are collinear 
and hence the algebraic 

sum of the moments of ^ ^ 

the two equal and opposite 

forces which act along 

these strings is equal to 

zero. But the algebraic 

sum of the moments of 

these two forces is equal to 

the algebraic sum of the 

moments of the forces of Yig. 70. 

the system. Therefore, 

the statement that the funicular polygon must close is equivalent 

to the statement that the algebraic sum of the moments of 

the forces of the system must equal zero. Hence the algebraic 

conditions of equilibrium are : 

(1) The algebraic sum of the components of the forces in any 
direction must equal zero. 

(2) The algebraic sum of the moments of the forces about any 
axis must equal zero. 

An infinite number of equations could be written in accordance 
with these conditions by taking different directions of resolution 
and different moment axes, but all of the equations would not be 
independent. The number of independent equations is different 
for the various force systems, as will be discussed in the succeeding 
articles, but for any force system the independent equations of 
equiUbrium are the equations which are necessary and sufficient 
to ensure that the resultant for that particular force system shall 
be equal to zero. 

If a given body is in equilibrium under the influence of a 
system of forces some of which are unknown, wholly or in part, 
these unknown elements may be found by applying the equations 
of equilibrium which apply to that particular system of forces. 

If the number of unknown elements in a system of forces which 
is in equiUbrium is. equal to the number of independent equations 
of equilibrium for that particular system, the determination of all 
of the unknown elements involves the use of all of the equations of 



72 EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 

equilibrium. Frequently, however, it is not required to determine 
all of the unknown elements in such a system, for, a single element 
only may be required, as for example, the magnitude of a certain 
force, the Une of action of which is known. In such cases the un- 
known element may frequently be found by using only one of the 
equations of equiUbrium. In applying the equilibrium equations 
the work may be materially simplified by properly selecting the 
directions of resolution and the axes of moments. Before applying 
the equations of equilibrium to any system of forces which holds 
a body in equilibrium it is important to have a clear idea of the 
forces which act on the body. For this purpose a free-body dia- 
gram is drawn. A free-body diagram is a diagram of a body 
showing the actions of all other bodies (forces) on the body con- 
sidered. It does not show the actions of the given body on other 
bodies. 



§ 2. CoLLiNEAR Forces 

45. Equations of Equilibriimi. — A system of collinear forces 
is in equiUbrium if the forces of the system satisfy either of the 
following equations : 

^F = 0, (1) 

or 

SM^ = 0, (2) 

where A is any point not on the action line of the forces. 

Proof. — As shown in Art. 21, if a colhnear force system is not 
in equilibrium, the resultant of the force system is a force having 
the same action line as the forces and having a magnitude, R, which 
is given by the equation, R = 2F. If, then, the equation 'EF = 0, 
is satisfied the resultant is not a force and therefore the system is 
in equiUbrium. The equation 2ilf a = is also sufficient to ensure 
equiUbrium, for, in order to satisfy this equation, the resultant force 
must pass through the point A . But this is impossible, since the 
resultant force, if there be one, has the same line of action as the 
forces and hence cannot pass through A . 

Therefore, if either one of the equations (1) and (2) is satisfied, 
the resultant is equal to zero and hence there is but one inde- 
pendent equation of equiUbrium for a colUnear force system. 



EQUATIONS OF EQUILIBRIUM 73 



ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEM ~ 

54. Two men pull on a rope with forces of 100 lb. each (Fig. 71o). What 
is the stress in the rope? 

Solution. — Suppose the rope to be divided into two parts A and B as 
shown in Fig. 71(6). Consider as a free-body the part A. The forces acting 

100 lb. , ! , 100 lb. 



1 (^) 
100 lb. ^ s s , B 100 lb. 



(6) 

Fig. 71. 

on A are two in number, namely, the 100-lb. force and the force exerted by B 
on A. The latter is the internal stress required. Let this stress be denoted 
by S. The equation of equilibrium then becomes, 

SF = aS-100 = 0. 
Therefore, 

^ = 100 lb. 

Obviously, B could have been taken as the free body and the same result 
would have been obtained. 



§ 3. Concurrent Forces in a Plane 

46. Equations of Equilibrium. — A system of coplanar, concur- 
rent forces is in equilibrium if the forces of the system satisfy the 
following equations: 



(A) 



where x and y denote any two non-parallel lines in the plane. It 
is convenient, however, to take as the two Knes a set of rectangular 
axes with the point of conciu-rence of the forces as origin. 

Proof. — In Art. 23 it was shown that if a concurrent system of 
forces in a plane is not in equiUbrium the resultant is a force, the 
components of which are equal to llFx and XFy. If, then, the 
forces of the system satisfy the equation SFx=0 the resultant 
cannot have a component along the x-axis and if the equation 
2i^y = is satisfied the resultant cannot have a component along 
the y-axis. Therefore if both of these equations are satisfied, the 
resultant cannot be a force and hence the system must be in 



74 



EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



equilibrium. There are, then, only two independent equations 
of equilibrium for a coplanar, concurrent system of forces. 

Another set of independent equations which, if satisfied by the 
forces of a coplanar, concurrent force system, are sufficient to 
ensure equilibrium may be expressed as follows : 






(B) 



where x denotes any line in the plane (taken for convenience as one 
of two rectangular axes through the point of concurrence of the 
forces) and A is any point in the plane not on the y-suds. 

Proof. — If the equation ZFx = Ois satisfied, the resultant cannot 
have a component along the a:-axis, that is, the resultant, if there 
be one, must lie along the y-sods. If the equation ZMa = is sat- 
isfied, the resultant, if there be one, must pass through the point A. 
It is impossible for a force to satisfy the two equations simultane- 
ously, and hence if both of the equations are satisfied the system 
is in equihbrium. 

A third set of equations of equilibrium for a coplanar, con- 
current force system is as follows : 






(C) 



where A and B are any two points in the plane of the forces, pro- 
vided that the line joining A and B does not pass through the point 

at which the forces are con- 
current. The proof that 
these equations are sufficient 
to insure equihbrium will 
be left to the student. 

47. Lami's Theorem. — 
When a coplanar, concur- 
rent force system consists 
of only three forces, the 
equations of equihbrium 
may be expressed in a spe- 
cial form known as Lami's 
theorem. Let Fig. 72(a) represent three concurrent forces in 
equilibrium. The force polygon for the three forces is shown 




Fig. 72. 



THREE FORCES IN EQUILIBRIUM 



75 



in Fig. 72(6-). Since each side of a triangle is proportional t^ — 
the sine of the opposite angle, the following equations are 
obtained from the force polygon: 



Fi 



That is, 



sin (tt— cci) sin (x— 0:2) sin (r—as) 
Fi F2 F3 



sin ai sin 0:2 sin 0:3 



Hence, if three concurrent forces are in equihbrium, the magnitude 
of each force is proportional to the sine of the angle included 
between the action lines of the other two. This statement is 
known as Lami's theorem. 

y- 48. Three Forces in Equilibrium. — If three forces are in equihb- 
rium the forces must be coplanar and either concurrent or parallel. 
In order that the three forces shall be in equilibrium, the resultant 
of any two of the forces must be a force which is collinear with the 
third force, of equal magnitude, and of opposite sense. Now, 
the resultant of the two forces will have the same line of action as 
the third force only if the two intersect on the action hne of the 
third force, or if the two forces are parallel to the third force. 
Hence, the three forces must be either 
concurrent or parallel. This principle 
is of considerable importance, as it 
simplifies the solution of many prob- 
lems. Consider, for example, the 
crane shown in Fig. 73(a). The forces 
acting on the crane are the reaction 
Ri at the upper end (assumed to be 
horizontal), the load W, the weight of 
the crane (not shown), and the reac- 
tion R2 at the lower end, the direction 
of the latter force being unknown. 

The load W and the weight of the crane may be replaced by a 
single resultant force R, and the system will then consist of three 
forces Ri, R2, and R. Since the three forces must be concurrent, 
R2 must pass through the point of intersection of Ri and R, and 
hence its action line is determined as indicated by the dotted line. 
The magnitudes of the reactions Ri and R2 may now be deter- 
mined by drawing the force polygon (Fig. 736). The force polygon 




Fig. 73. 



v/ 



76 



EQUILIBRIUM OF -FORCB SYSTEMS 



is constructed by drawing AB to represent the known force R and 
by drawing from A and B lines parallel to Ri and R2, respectively, 
which intersect at C. The reaction Ri is represented by CA and 
R2 is represented by BC. 



ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEMS 

56. A body is held in equilibrium by a system of three concurrent forces 
as shown in Fig. 74, Find the values of P and 6. 




Fig. 74. 

Solution. — The equations of equilibrium are, 

'EFx = P cos 0-10 cos 30° -20 cos 45° =0. 

/. P cos = 8.66+14.14 = 22.80 lb 

SFy = P sin 0+10 sin 30° -20 sin 45° =0. 

.*. P sin = 14.14-5.00 = 9.14 lb 

By dividing (2) by (1), may be obtained. Thus, 
9.14 



tan0: 



.401. 



(1) 



(2) 



22.80 
.*. = 21° 50'. 
By squaring and adding (1) and (2) P may be obtained. Thus, 
P2 = (22 .80) 2 +(9. 14) 2 = 603.5, 
/. P = 24.5 lb. 



THREE FORCES IN EQUILIBRIUM 



77 



56. Fig. 75(a) represents a lower panel point of a pin-connected PratL 
truss. The stresses in two of the members are 1000 lb. and 3000 lb. as shown. 
Find the stresses, P and Q, in the other members. 




Algebraic Solution. 

From (2), 
Substituting in (1), 



Fig. 75. 



^Fx = Q+P cos 45° -3000 = 0, 



(1) 

(2) 



P = 



1000 



1414 lb. 



sin 45° 
Q = 3000-1414cos45°. 
= 3000-1000 = 2000 lb. 



Graphical Solution. — The problem may be solved graphically by con- 
structing a closed force polygon as shown in Fig. 75(6). The polygon is con- 
structed as follows: Vectors AB and BC are drawn to represent the 3000-lb. 
and 1000-lb. forces respectively. A line is then drawn from C parallel to the 
direction of the force Q and a line is drawn from A parallel to the direction of 
the force P. These lines intersect at D. Q is then represented by CD and 
P by DA. The magnitudes of Q 
and P are found by measuring, 
according to the scale indicated, 
to be 20001b. and 14101b., respect- 
ively. 



PROBLEMS 

57. A sphere weighing 100 lb. 
rests between two smooth planes 
as indicated in Fig. 76. Find the 
reactions of the planes on the 
sphere. 

Ans. Pi = 51.7 lb.; i22 = 73.1 lb. 




Fig. 76. 



78 



EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



58. A body weighing 80 lb. is supported by means of a number of cords 
as shown in Fig. 77. Find the tensions in the cords and the vakie of d. 



751b 




80 lb. 




Fig. 77. 



Fig. 78. 



59. Two bodies weighing 75 lb. and 100 lb. rest on a smooth cylinder and 
are connected by a cord as shown in Fig. 78. Find the reactions of the cylin- 
der on the bodies, the tension in the cord, and the value of 0. 



§ 4. Parallel Forces in a Plane 

49. Equations of Equilibriiun. — A coplanar, parallel force 
system is in equilibrium if trie forces of the system satisfy the 
equations, 

{A) 

where A is any point in the plane of the forces. 

Proof. — According to Art. 26, the resultant of a coplanar, 
parallel force system which is not in equiUbrium is either a force 
or a couple. If the resultant is a force the magnitude, R^ is 
expressed by the equation R = 'EF, and if the resultant is a 
couple the moment, C, is expressed by the equation C = 'ZM. 
If SF = the resultant is not a force and if ZMa = the 
resultant is not a couple. Hence, if both equations are satisfied 
the resultant of the force system can be neither a force nor a 
couple and therefore the system is in equilibrium. Two equa- 
tions, then, are necessary and sufficient to ensure that the forces 
are in equilibrium. In other words, there are only two indepen- 



EQUATIONS OF EQUILIBRIUM 79 

dent equations of equilibrium for a system of parallel forces in ar- 
plane. 

Another set of equations of equilibrium for a system of coplanar, 
parallel forces may be written as follows: 

^^-M, (B) 

where A and B are any two points in the plane, provided that the 
line connecting A and B is not parallel to the forces of the system. 
The proof that these equations are sufficient and necessary to 
ensure that the forces are in equilibrium will be left to the student. 
An important problem in the equilibrium of coplanar, parallel 
forces is one in which the magnitudes of two forces are required, 
all of the other elements of the forces being known. The graphical 
solution of this problem is of particular interest. The graphical 
as well as the algebraic method of solution of such a problem is 
illustrated by Problem 62. 



ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEMS 

60. In the steelyard shown in Fig. 79 the distance AB = 5 in. Find the 
force R acting at B and the distance BC if the steelyard is balanced. 



Solution. — 

2^ = 72-40-10=0, 
•. i2 = 50 1b. 
XMb = ^0X5-10XBC = 0, 



BC=^ = 20in. I '^«>^- 



10 



-D 



Fig. 79. 



61. A load of 1200 lb. is applied to a beam AB as shown in Fig, 80(a). 
The left end of the beam is carried by a second beam CD. Find the reactions 
on the second beam at C and D. 



80 



EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



Solution. — The free-body diagrams for the two beams are shown in 
Fig. 80(6) and 80(c). The equation XMa=0 becomes 

1200X9-/2^X12=0, 

/. 7^5 = 900 lb. 

There is, then, a load of 900 lb. acting on the beam CD at B. The two reac- 
tions Re and Rd may be found by applying either set of equilibrium equations. 
Thus, using the equations SMc = and 7^Md = 0, the two reactions may be 
found as follows, 



i2r,XlO-900X6 = 0, 
-i2cXl0+900X4=0, 



n 



il200 lb. 
^ ! 



^"^.fil-J^J^/ 



(a) 

B 



1200 lb. 



900 1b. 
C Y D 

Fig. 80. 



////)/J 



ib) 



i2z) = 540 lb. 
i?c = 360 lb. 



2000 lb. 2000 lb. 



1000 1b. 



*-2 >|< 3- 
Ri 






Fig. 81. 



62. A beam 12 ft. long carries three loads as shown in Fig. 81. Find the 
reactions at the ends of the beam. 

Algebraic Solution. — 

SMjs =- 12i2i +1000 X 10-1-2000 X7+2000 X4 = 0, 

12i2i = 32000, 

/. El =26661 lb. 

SMa = 12/^2-1000X2-2000X5-2000X8=0, 

12/22 = 28000, 

/. 722 = 2333 J lb. 

In order to check the results the equation S/^=0 may be applied. Thus, 
26661 +2333i = 1000+2000+2000. 



EQUATIONS OF EQUILIBRIUM 



81 



Graphical Solution. — In order to determine the reactions by the graphical- 
method, a force and a funicular polygon are constructed as shown in Fig. 82. 
Since the forces are in equilibrium the two polygons must close. The three 
known forces are represented by AB, BC, and CD. The right reaction will be 
represented by DE, the position of the point E being as yet unknown. Obvi- 







b 


c c 


d d 


A 
B 

E 
C 


e 


a a 
a ^ 


b 

f ~~^~~^ 


e __ 
o _, 


^^d 




(6) 




Scale. 1 in. = 10 ft. 














D 






^.-" (6) 

Scale. 1 in. =4000 lb. 



Fig. 82. 

ously the left reaction will be represented by EA since the force polygon must 
close. The strings oa^ ob, oc, and od of the funicular polygon are drawn par- 
allel to the corresponding rays. Since the string oe must intersect the string 
oa on ea and since oe must also intersect the string od on de, the position of the 
string oe is determined. The direction of the ray OE is now determined 
also, since it must be parallel to the string oe. Hence E is the point where a 
line drawn through parallel to oe intersects the line AD. The magnitudes 
of DE and EA are found, from the diagram, to be 2330 lb. and 2670 lb., which 
agree closely with the values found by the algebraic method of solution. 



PROBLEMS 

63. A beam 14 ft. long carries a concentrated load of 1000 lb. and a uni- 
formly distributed load of 200 lb. per linear foot as shown in Fig. 83. If 
the weight of the beam is neglected find the reactions at the ends of the beam. 



F 



1000 lb. 



200 lb. per ft. 






m 



-H^ 



Rj 



Fig. 83. 



500 1b. 



200.1b. 



''zi^ 



y/^y'^ 



10- 



FiG. 84. 



64. The beam shown in Fig. 84 weighs 10 lb. per linear foot. Find the 
reactions due to the weight of the beam and the loads shown. 



Ans. i2i = 202 1b.; /?2 = 638 lb. 



82 



EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



66. A bar 8 ft. long is held in equilibrium by the three forces shown in 
Fig. 85 and two forces acting along the lines ef and de. Find the magnitudes 
and senses of the two forces. 

Ans. DE=-\-mO lb. EF= -740 lb. 



ymf/////////////^^^^^^ 



e 


J 






200 lb. "^ 
400 lb. 






. 420 lb. 




Fig. 85. 

66. A load of 1000 lb. on the system of pulleys shown in Fig. 86 is held 
b}'- a force P. Find the magnitude of P and of the stresses in all cords. 
Neglect the weights of pulleys and axle friction. 

§ 5. Non-concurrent, Non-parallel Forces in a Plane 

50. Equations of Equilibrium. — A system of coplanar, non- 
concurrent, non-parallel forces is in equilibrium if the forces of the 
system satisfy the equations, 

SF, = 

SF, = ■ , {A) 

where x and y denote the coordinate axes and A is any point in the 
plane of the forces. 

Proof. — If a system of non-concurrent, non-parallel forces in a 
plane is not in equiUbrium, the resultant of the system is either a 
force having components equal to ^Fx and SFj, or a couple hav- 
ing a moment equal to SAf^ (Art. 30). If the equation 2Fi=0 is 



EQUATIONS OF EQUILIBRIUM 83 

saiisficd the resultant, if a force, must be parallel to the y-a^sT 
If the equation XFy = is satisfied, the resultant, if a force, must be 
parallel to the x-axis. A force cannot be parallel to both the 
X- and y -Sixes and hence, if the first two equations are satisfied, 
the resultant of the system cannot be a force. If the equation 
SMa = is satisfied, the resultant cannot be a couple. Therefore, 
if the forces of the system satisfy the three equations, the force 
system is in equilibrium. 

Another set of independent equations of equilibrium for a 
non-concurrent, non-parallel system of forces in a plane may be 
written as follows: 






(B) 



where x denotes any line or axis in the plane of the forces and A 
and B are any two points in the plane, provided that the line AB is 
not perpendicular to the a;-axis. 

A third set of equihbrium equations for the force system here 
considered may be written as follows : 






(C) 



where A, B, and C are any three non-coUinear points in the plane 
of the forces. 

It will be left to the student to prove that either set of equa- 
tions {B) or (C) are sufficient and necessary to ensure the equihb- 
rium of a coplanar, non-concurrent, non-parallel system of forces. 

Any one of the above sets of equations, therefore, may be used 
to determine the unknown elements of a coplanar, non-concurrent, 
non-parallel force system which is in equilibrium, provided there 
are not more than three such unknown elements or quantities. 



84 



EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEMS 

67. A ladder rests with its upper end against a smooth vertical wall and 
its lower end on a smooth horizontal floor as shown in Fig. 87. SHpping 
is prevented by means of a stop at the lower end. If the ladder weighs 
50 lb. and is of uniform cross-section, find the reactions of the wall, the floor, 
and the stop, on the ladder. 

Solution. — ^A free-body diagram of the ladder is shown in Fig. 87. Since 
the wall and floor are smooth, the reactions at these surfaces are perpendicular 
to the surfaces and since the ladder has a uniform cross-section, its weight 
acts at the center of the ladder. Let the length of the ladder be denoted by I. 
The solution is effected by applying the three equations of equilibrium as 
follows : 

^Ma=RiXI sin 60°-50XZ/2 

cos 60° = 0, 

.-. 7^1 = 25 cot 6P° = 14.42 lb. 

SFx = i?3-i2i = 0, 
/. R, = R^ = UA2\h. 

sn =7^2-50 = 0. 




Fig. 87. 



.*. 7^2 = 50 lb. 



68. The wall bracket shown in Fig. 88(a) consists of a horizontal member 
AB, which is attached to the wall at A by means of a smooth pin, and a rod 
C5, which is attached to the member AB at B and to the wall at C by means 




4001b 



' 1000 U>. , 



A 



-4;- — >*<- 



400 lb. 



(6) 



' 1000 lb. 



Fig. 88. 



of smooth pins. Find the tension, 7", in the rod and the pin reaction, R, at 
A if the weights of the members are neglected. 

Solution. — A free-body diagram of the member AB is shown in Fig. 88(6) 



GRAPHICAL SOLUTION OF A TYPICAL PROBLEM 



85 



There are three unknown quantities in the force system, namely, T, R, and d. 
The three independent equations of equilibrium are, 

SMA = 7^Xl2sin30°-1000XlO-400X4 = 0, (1) 

.-. T = 1930 lb., 

i:Fx = Rcosd-T cos 30° = 0, 

/. 22 cos = 1930 cos 30° = 1670, (2) 

XFy=R sin e+T sin 30° -400- 1000 = 0, 

.*. 72 sin = 1400 -1930 sin 30° =435 (3) 

By solving equations (2) and (3) the following results are obtained, 

72 = 1730 lb. 

= 14° 35'. 



PROBLEMS 

69. A bar (Fig. 89) leans against a smooth vertical post and rests with its 
lower end on a smooth horizontal plane, shpping of the lower end being pre- 
vented by the cord as shown. If the weight of the bar is neglected, find the 
reactions of the plane at A and of the post at B and also find the tension in the 
cord. 

Ans. 72^ = 10.9 lb. 72^ = 51.1 lb. T = 32.8 1b. 




Fig. 89. 



Fig. 90. 



70. In Fig. 90 is shown a bell-crank mounted on a smooth pin at O and 
subjected to a force of 80 lb. at A as shown. Find the pin pressure at O and 
the reaction at B. Solve algebraically and graphically. 



51. Graphical Solution of a Tjrpical Problem. — Any of the 

problems which involve a balanced non-concurrent, non-parallel 
force system in a plane in which there are not more than three 
unknown elements may be solved graphically as weU as alge- 



86 



EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



braically. A graphical method of solution for one typical problem 
will here be discussed. In the force system considered all of the 
forces will be assumed to be known completely except two, the 
action line of one of these two being known and also one point on 
the action line of the other. The three unknown elements, then, 
are the magnitude of one of the two forces and the magnitude and 
the direction of the other. 

As an example of such a force system, consider the forces 
acting on the beam shown in Fig. 91(a). The unknown ele- 
ments are the magnitude of the vertical reaction at the left end 
of the beam and the magnitude and the direction of the reaction 
at the right end of the beam. 



b 6V c^^f 










C«) 




Fig. 91. 



The force and funicular polygons are shown in Fig. 91. In 
constructing the force polygon, AB, J5C, and CD are first drawn 
to represent the three known forces (Fig. 916). Since the mag- 
nitude of the force BE is unknown the location of E is not known, 
but it must lie in a vertical hne through D. The rays are then 
drawn from after which the funicular polygon is constructed 
(Fig. 91a). Since the point iV is the only known point on the 
action line of the force EA^ the funicular polygon must be started 
at this point. The strings oa, ob, oc, and od are drawn as shown. 
Since the string oe must intersect od on de and must also intersect 
oa on ea its position is determined. The ray OE must be parallel 
to the string oe. Hence E is the point of intersection of a vertical 
line through D and a line through parallel to oe. DE then rep- 
resents the left reaction, and the right reaction is represented in 
magnitude and in direction by EA. 



CHOICE OF MOMENT-CENTERS 



87 



52. Choice of Moment-centers and of Directions of Resolu^ 
tion. — In applying the three equations of equilibrium to a balanced 
force system, of the type here considered, in wliich there are not 
more than three unknown elements, the solution of the problem 
may frequently be simplified by selecting the moment-centers and 
the directions of resolution in a particular way. For example, in 
Fig. 92 is represented a portion of a roof truss which is held in 
equiUbrium by the five forces shown, of which P and R are known 
completely and Fi, Fo, and F3 are unknown in magnitude. By 
selecting C, the intersection of the two unknown forces F2 and F3, 
as a moment-center and applying the equiUbrium equation 
2Mc = 0, the force Fi may be found from the one equation. Like- 
wise by choosing D as a moment-center and applying a second 
equation of equihbrium, SMzj = 0, the force F3 may be found 
directly. Similarly, F2 may be found by selecting A as the 
moment-center and applying the third equihbrium equation, 
SMa = 0. Thus by the proper selection of moment-centers each 
of the three equations involves one unknown quantity only. 



V A 




F>S 



\ 



-^^^>-2- 



Fig. 92. 



Fig. 93. 



As another example, consider a body which is held in equi- 
librium by the six forces shown in Fig. 93, all of which are com- 
pletely known except Fi, F2, and Fs, which are unknown in mag- 
nitude. The forces Fi and F3 are parallel. By selecting B as the 
moment-center, the force Fi may be found from one equation, 
namely, 1:Mb = 0. Likewise, 7^3 may be found from the single 
equation Silf a =0, where A is the intersection of the two forces 
Fi and F2. Further, F2 may be found from the single equation 
XFj, = provided that the ^/-direction is chosen perpendicular to 
the forces Fi and F3. 



88 EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



§ 6. Equilibrium of Trusses, Cranes, and Cables 

53. Stresses in Trusses. — Important examples of balanced 
coplanar force systems are met in the analysis of the forces in 
trusses, cranes, and flexible cables. In determining the stresses 
in pin-connected trusses, only those trusses will here be con- 
sidered for which the following assumptions may be made : 

(1) The members of the truss lie in one plane and hence the 
forces acting on the truss and the stresses in the members form a 
coplanar force system. 

(2) The members of the truss are connected at their ends by 
means of smooth pins. 

(3) The loads on the truss act only at the pins, that is, at the 
ends of the members. 

(4) The weights of the members are neglected, since the stresses 
due to the weights are small in comparison with the stresses due to 
other loads. 

For practical purposes, in computing the stresses in many 
structures such as roof and bridge trusses, the structures may be 
considered to be in agreement with the above assumptions. 

According to assumptions (2) and (3), the only forces acting 
on any member are the reactions of the smooth pins at the ends of 
the member, and since the member is in equilibrium under the 
action of these two forces, the two forces must be collinear, and 
hence the action Hue of each force must coincide with the axis of 
the member. Therefore the stress in each member is a direct or 
axial pull or push (tension or compression). Thus in the truss 
shown in Fig. 94(a), the member AB is acted on by the pin pres- 
sures 7^1, Fi at the ends of the member which cause a compressive 
stress in the member (Fig. 946), while the pin pressures F2, F2 
which act at the ends of member AC cause a tensile stress in the 
member (Fig. 94c). The stress S, then, in any member is numeric- 
ally equal to the pressures of the pins at the ends of the member, 
as is indicated in the freebody diagrams of the two parts oi AC 
(Fig. 94d). The kind of stress (tension or compression) in a mem- 
ber, therefore, is represented by arrows which show the directions 
of the pressures of the member on the pins. Thus, a compressive 
stress is represented by arrows along the member directed towards 
the ends of the member, etc. Thus, the stress in member AC (Fig. 



METHOD OF JOINTS 



94a) is shown to be tension and the stress in member AB is shown 
to be compression. Another convention commonly used to indi- 
cate the kind of stress in a member is to represent a tensile stress 
by a plus sign and a 

compressive stress by a ^^ P- ^^ p* 

negative sign. In the 
analysis of the stresses 
in a pin-ended structure 
two rather distinct meth- 
ods may be used, name- 
ly, the method of joints 
and the method of sec- 
tions. 

54. Method of Joints. 
— By the method of 
joints the stresses in 
the members of a truss 
are found by the solution 
of the concurrent force 
systems which act at 
the pins, and hence not 
more than two unknown 

pin pressures at any joint or pin can be determined. For 
example, in the truss shown in Fig. 94(a) the pin at A is in 
equilibrium under the influence of three forces (Fig. 95a), namely, 
the reaction Ri, which may be found if the dimensions of the truss 
and the loads carried by the truss are known, and the two unknown 

forces (stresses) Fi and F2 which 
the members AB and AC exert 
on the pin. By using the two 
equations of equilibrium for a 





R,-^ 



A 

I 



C 
(6) 



■^F. 



system of concurrent forces in a 
plane the two unknown forces may 
Fig. 95. be found. The pin at C may now 

be considered. This pin is in 
equilibrium under the influence of three forces (Fig. 956) namely, 
the stress F2 in the member AC which has just been determined, 
and the two unknown stresses F3 and F4, in the members CB and 
CE. These two unknown stresses may be determined from the 
two equations of equilibrium. The pin at B may next be con- 



90 EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 

sidered, and so on until the stresses in all of the members have 
been determined. As already noted, in using this method the 
joints must be taken in such an order that there are not more than 
two unknown stresses at the joint considered, since there are only- 
two equations of equiUbrium for a concurrent force system and 
hence only two unknown stresses may be determined. In con- 
sidering the equilibrium of the forces at any joint the senses of the 
two unknown forces are not always evident. When such is the 
case the forces may be assumed to be directed away from the joint, 
that is, the stresses may be assumed to be tensions. If, after 
applying the equations of equilibrium and solving for the two 
unknown forces, the sign of a force is found to be positive it is 
evident that the assumed sense of the force is correct, whereas a 
negative sign indicates that the sense of the force is opposite to 
that assumed. In most problems, however, the sense of each 
of the unknown forces is evident from inspection. The deter- 
mination of the stresses in a truss by the method of joints often 
requires a large number of calculations with a corresponding chance 
for error. Thus, if the stress in a single member near the center 
of the truss is required it is necessary to start at the end of the 
truss and consider the equilibrium of the joints in order until a 
joint is reached which involves that particular member. By the 
method of sections (Art. 55) the stress in a single member may 
frequently be found by use of a single equation. 

55. Method of Sections.— In determining the stresses in the 
members of a pin-connected truss by the method of sections a 
section is passed through the truss so that it cuts not more than 
three members in which the stresses are unknown. The part of 
the truss on either side of this section is then treated as a free 
body in equiUbrium under the action of the known external forces 
which act on that part and the forces (stresses) which the members 
of the other part exert on the part considered. It will be noted 
that the method of sections involves a non-concurrent force system 
and hence there are three equations of equiUbrium from which 
three unknown forces may be found. Consequently the section 
must not cut more than three members in which the stresses are 
unknown. As a rule any one of these three unknown forces 
(stresses) may be found by usmg one equilibrium equation as dis- 
cussed in Art. 52. For example, consider the truss shown in 
Fig. 94. In order to determine the stress in the member DG con- 



METHOD OF SECTIONS 



91 



sider the section which cuts the members DF, DG, and EG. The 
free-body diagram of the portion of the truss to the left of this 
section is shown in Fig. 96(a). This part of the truss is in equi- 
hbrium under the action of six forces; namely, Ri, Pi, and P2, 
which are assumed to be known, and the unknown stresses in the 
members DF, DG, and EG. The stress (Fq) in the member DG 
may be obtained from the equation SFy = 0, since neither of the 
other two unknowns will appear in this equation. Similarly the 
stress (F5) in the member DF may be obtained from the single 
equation 'EMg=0 and the stress {F7) in the member EG may be 
obtained from the single equation XMd = 0. 





1 Fig. 96. 

It is important to note that the forces F5, Fq, and F7 are 
regarded as internal forces (stresses) when the equilibrium of the 
truss as a whole is considered, but that they are regarded as 
external forces when the part of the truss on one side of the section 
is considered. In considering the equilibrium of the part of the 
truss on the left of the section (Fig. 96a) only the external forces 
which act on the left part are involved and hence the stresses in 
the members of the left part that are not cut by the section do 
not affect the values of F5, Fq, and F7. Thus the left part may 
be thought of as a solid block as indicated in Fig. 96(6) on which 
the forces F5, Fq, and F7 act together with Ri, Pi, and P2, the six 
forces holding the block in equilibrium. 



ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEM 

71. Determine the stresses in the members of a Howe truss when loaded 
as shown in Fig. 97(a). 

Solution. — The stress in any member will be denoted by the same letters 
as the member itself. Thus, the stress in member AB will be denoted by 
AB. By considering the equilibrium of the truss as a whole, the reactions 



d2 



EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 

40,000 lb. 
20,000 lb. 




20,000 lb. 







CE 



ie) 



EG 



Fig. 97. 



METHOD OF SECTIONS 93 

Ri and R2 are found to be 40,000 lb. To find the stresses in members AB and 
AC the joint method is used. A free-body diagram of joint A is shown in 
Fig. 97(6). By applying the equations of equilibrium for a concurrent force 
system, the stresses in the two members are found as follows: 

SMb= -40,000X20H-ACX30 = 0, 

.-. AC = i O'Q^X^ g = 26,687 lb. (tension) 
oO 

XFy=-AB COS «/) +40,000 = 0. 

.-. A5 = ^^— = 40,000 sec = 48,000 lb. (compression) 
cos 

To find the stresses in members BC and BD let a section aa be passed 
(Fig. 97c). The forces acting on the part of the truss to the left of the section 
form a non-concurrent force system. But since the stress in member AC is 
already known only two of the three equations of equilibrium are needed. 
Thus, 

2M c = - 40,000 X 20 -\-BD X 30 = 0, 

/. BD = ^^'^^^^^^ = 26,667 lb. (compression) 

XFy = 40,000 - 20,000 -BC = 0, 
:. BC = 20,000 lb. (tension) 

In a similar manner the stresses in CD and CE may be found by the 
method of sections. By considering the part of the truss to the left of sec- 
tion 66 (Fig. 97d), the stresses in the two members are found as follows: 

Sikfi) = -40,000 X40 +20,000 X 20 +C^ X 30 = 0, 

.-. CE = 1^?^^ = 40,000 lb. (tension) 

SF,/ = 40,000- 20,000 +CD cos 0=0, 
/. CD= -20,000 sec </>= -24,000 lb. (compression) 

It will be noted that all of the stresses except CD (Fig. 97rf) are assumed 
to act in the correct directions, and hence are found to be positive whether 
they are tensile or compressive. The stress in CD is assumed to be tension 
and hence the negative sign indicates that it is compression. 

In considering the equilibrium of the forces which act on the pin E (Fig. 
97e), it is evident that the stress in DE is zero, and that EC equals EG. Fur- 
ther, since the truss is symmetrical with respect to the center line DE and the 
loads are also symmetrical with respect to this line, it is obvious that the 
stresses in the members of the right half of the truss are equal to the stresses 
in the corresponding members of the left half. 



94 



EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



PROBLEMS 

72. Find the stresses in the members of the Warren truss shown in Fig. 91 

Am. AB=- ^Q20\h. D^=-34601b. 



4000 lb. 



2000 1b 




Fig. 98. 

73. Find the stresses in the members of the Pratt truss shown in Fig. 99 
in which the loads P are each 10,000 lb. 

Ans. AB = -30,000 lb. BC^ +10,000 lb. BD = -26,670 lb. 




Fig. 99. 



74. Find the stresses in the members of the Howe truss shown in Fig. 100. 
Ans. A5= -12.700 lb. BC= -3000 lb. ^D= -9000 lb. 




Fig. 100. 



GRAPHICAL ANALYSIS OF TRUSSES 95 

75. In the Fink truss shown in Fig. 101 BC is perpendicular to AD and K 
is the mid-point of AD. Find the stresses in the members. 

Ans. BC=- 1730 lb. AB = -6000 lb. 



2000 lb. 
2000 lb. 2000 lb. 




Fig. 101. 

56. Graphical Analysis of Trusses. — The graphical method of 
analysis of framed structures is sometimes simpler than the 
algebraic method. This statement is true particularly when the 
form of the structure is such that a considerable amount of cal- 
culation is necessary to determine the directions and moment-arms 
of the forces involved. The graphical method consists essentially 
in constructing the force polygons for the concurrent forces at the 
joints and superimposing these polygons. The method will be 
explained in detail with reference to the Pratt truss shown in 
Fig. 102(a). It will be assumed that the loads carried at the upper 
panel points are equal. It is convenient to use the Bow system of 
notation (Art. 7). In this system the regions on either side of 
the action line of a force (either external or internal) are denoted 
by numbers or letters as shown in Fig. 102(a) and the force is 
denoted by the two mmibers or letters adjacent to the action line 
of the force. For example, the left reaction is denoted by Xi-Y; 
the load at the upper panel point at the left end of the truss by 
Xi--X'2; the stress in the diagonal in the second panel by 2-3; 
the stress in the lower cord at the left end of the truss by 
Y-1; etc. The order of the numbers or letters denoting an 
external force, or an internal stress in any member, may be reversed. 
Thus the stress in the diagonal in the second panel may also be 
denoted by 3-2. The force polygon shown in Fig. 102(6) is con- 
structed as follows: The load line X1X2X3X4X5X6 is first laid off. 
Since the loads are symmetrical, the reactions will be equal, 
and hence Y will be midway between the points Xi and Xq. 



96 



EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



Consider now the three concurrent forces at the lower left-hand 
panel point. Of these three forces the left reaction, Y-Xi, is com- 
pletely known and the directions of the other two, Xi-1 and 
1-F, are known. Since these three forces are in equilibrium, 
their force polygon must close. Hence, to determine the mag- 
nitudes of the last two forces a Hne is drawn in Fig. 102(6) 
through Xi parallel to Xi-1, and a line is drawn through Y par- 
allel to 1-Y. These lines intersect in the point 1, and the mag- 
nitudes of the stresses are indicated by the lengths of the lines 
Xi-1 and 1-Y in the force polygon. It will be noted that the 
pressure of the member Xi-1 on the pin at the lower end is down- 
ward to the left and hence the member is in compression. 



1 


' Xg ) 


- X3 


. X4 . 


r X5 , 




ii 


i 


^ 


^ 


^ 


H 



(a) 




Fig. 102. 



As soon as the stresses in the various members are found 
arrow-heads should be placed on the members indicating whether 
the stresses are tensions or compressions. The second lower panel 
point should next be taken. The stress in the member F-1 is 
now known and in order that the polygon for this joint shall close 
it is evident that the point 2 must coincide with 1. Therefore 
the stress in 1-2 is zero and the stress in 2-F is the same as the 
stress in Y-1. The first upper panel point can now be taken and 
the stresses in X2-S and 3-2 may be found. The forces at the 
remaining joints may be found in a similar manner. The student 
should follow through the construction (Fig. 1026) and build up 
the complete polygon. 



GRAPHICAL ANALYSIS OF TRUSSES 



97 



ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEM 

76. Find the stresses in the members of the truss shown in Fig. 103(a). 
The members Xi-1 and 2-3 are parallel and the members Xi-2 and F-l 
are parallel. 



+13500 





Fig. 103. 

Solution. — The stresses are determined from the force polygon shown in 
Fig. 103(6), The magnitudes of the stresses are shown on the members 
in Fig. 103(a), the plus or minus sign indicating whether the stress in the 
member is tension or compression. 



PROBLEMS 

77. The Fink truss shown in Fig. 104 is subjected to wind loads as indi- 
cated, the loads being perpendicular to the upper chord AD. The truss 




Fig. 104. 



rests on a smooth plate at the left end and hence the reaction at that end is 
vertical. Find the magnitude and direction of the reaction at the right end 
of the truss and the stresses in the members. Use the graphical method. 



98 EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 

78. Find, by the graphical method, the stresses in the members of the 
truss shown in Fig. 105, the value of P being 10,000 lb. 



'P 




P 
20 = 120^ 



'P 



ill 



Fig. 105. 



57. Cranes. — It was stated in Art. 53 that in the analysis of the 
forces which act on the members of a crane balanced coplanar 
force systems are involved. The loads on cranes, unlike those on 
trusses, are not applied at the pins only. That is, assumptions 
(2), (3) and (4) of Art. 53 may not always be made in the anal- 
ysis of the forces acting on cranes. The force system acting on 
a member of a crane, therefore, includes forces other than the 
two pin pressures at the ends of the member, and hence the stress 
in a crane member, in general, is not a direct axial tension or com- 
pression as is the case in a truss. In order to calculate the stress 
in a crane member a knowledge of the subject of Strength of 
Materials is needed, and consequently the stresses in crane mem- 
bers will not, in general, here be foimd. The main problem here 
considered in connection with cranes, therefore, is that of deter- 
mining only the forces acting on the various members of the 
crane. Since the stresses in the members of a crane are not single 
forces directed along the axes of the members, the method of 
sections as used in the preceding articles cannot be employed. 
The general method of procedure in the analysis of the forces 
acting on crane members will be first to consider the equihbrium 
of the structure as a whole and determine the external reactions, 
and then to consider the equilibrium of the various members 
separately and determine the forces (pin pressures, etc.) which 
act on the separate members. 



CRANES 



99 



ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEM 

79. In the crane shown in Fig. 106 the post AD weighs 1200 lb. and the 
boom BE weighs 1000 lb. The member CE is a cable the weight of which 
will be neglected. The reaction at D will be assumed to be horizontal. Find 
the reactions at A and D, the pin reaction at B, and the tension in the cable CE. 



^////Mm 


_D 








D 






'\ 




12' 


^y\ 






' C 


y 


yy 


/^ 


"c 


i 


1200 lb. 


>/i 


^ 

1 


6000 


lb. 




y 




1000 lb. 




"i 


■ 




(a) 




Ax^ 




A 




• 


KA 




7 

/ 


ky 












Fig. 106. 



Solution. — First consider the equilibrium of the entire crane, a free-body 
diagram of which is shown in Fig. 106(a). The reaction at D will be denoted 
by D. The reaction at the pin A will be denoted by A and, for convenience, 
will be resolved into its horizontal and vertical components which will be 
denoted by ^a; and Ay. The unknown reactions are obtained by applying 
the equations of equilibrium as follows: 

SMa = 20Z) - 6 X 1000 - 12 X 6000 = 0, 
... = 1^ = 3900 lb. 

XFx = Ax-D = 0, 
.-. D = Ax = 3900 lb. 

2Fy = Ay - 1200 - 1000 - 6000 = 0, 
/. Ay = 8200 lb. 



100 



EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



Whence, 
and, 



A = VAx^+Av^ = V(3900)2+(8200)2 = 9075 lb. 
8200 



6 A = tan 



3900 



64° 35'. 



Next consider the equilibrium of the member BE. The forces acting on this 
member are four in number; namely, the tension in CE which will be denoted 
by CE, the load of 6000 lb., the weight of the member, and the pressure of the 
pin at B on the member, as shown in the free-body diagram (Fig. 1066). The 
last force is resolved into its horizontal and vertical components as shown in 
the free-body diagram. By applying the equations of equilibrium the un- 
known quantities may be found as follows: 

2Mb = 9XC^-6X1000-12X6000 = 0, 
,. CE=I^ = 8667 1b. 

i:Fx=Bx-CE=0, 
.*. Bx = CE = SQQ7lh. 

XFv = By- 1000 - 6000 = O. 

;. By = 7000 lb. 

^ = V5a;2+Bv2 = V(8667)2+(7000)2 = ll,1001b. 

^B=tan-i|500^3go55, 
8667 



Whence, 
and, 



80. Determine the forces acting on the members of the crane shown in 
Fig. 107(a). Neglect the weights of the members. 




1000 lb. 



Fig. 107. 



CRANES 101 

Solution. — Consider first the equilibrium of the entire crane, a free-bodj^ 
diagram of which is shown in Fig. 107(a). By applying the three equations 
of equilibrium, the unknown quantities may be found. Thus, 

2Ma =20 XC^-30X 1000 = 0. 

.-. C^ = 5^^ = 1500 lb. 

XFx = Ax-CE sin S0° = 0, 

:. Ax = C^sin30° = 7501b. 

i:Fy=Av-lOOO-CE cos 30°=0, 

.*. Ay = 1000 +1300 = 2300 lb. 
Whence, 

and. 



A = V(750)2 + (2300)2 = 2420 lb. 



0A=tan-i^ = 71°55'. 

Consider next the equilibrium of the member BH, The forces acting on 
BH are shown in Fig. 107(6) . From the equations of equilibrium the unknown 
quantities may be found as follows : 

2M^ = 10.6XCD-30X1000=0, 

/. CD = ??^ =2830 lb. 
lO.o 

^Fx = Hx-CD cos 45° = 0, 

/. i7x = 2830 X. 707 = 2000 lb. 

SFy= -Hy+CD cos 45° -1000 = 0, 

*. H.,= -1000+2830X.707 = 10001b. 

H = V(2000)2+(1000)2 = 2240 lb. 

PROBLEMS 

81. In the crane shown in Fig. 108 the post AE weighs 1600 lb. and the 
member CH weighs 1200 lb. The remaining members are cables the weights 
of which may be neglected. The member CH passes through a slot in the 
post AE. Determine the external reactions, and the tensile stresses in the 
members BC, CD, and DH. Assume the reaction at E to be horizontal and 
that there is no reaction between CH and AE 



Whence, 
and, 



102 



EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



82. The crane in Fig. 109 is in equilibrium under the action of the two 
loads shown and the reactions at B and A, the reaction at B being horizontal. 
Find the reactions at A and B and the tension in the member DF. Find also 
the pressure of the pin at C on the member CF. 

Ans. 5 = 5200 lb. D/^ = 15400 lb. 
I 



'^yy////A//J// 




6000 lb. 



Fig. 108. 



Fig. 109. 



58. Flexible Cables. — In the following two articles the equi- 
librium of flexible cables or cords will be discussed. A cable is 
said to be perfectly flexible when it can offer no resistance to bend- 
ing. A flexible cable, then, can transmit a stress only along its 
axis, that is, the stress at any point of a flexible cable is tangent 
to the curve assimied by the cable. Although physical cables 
and cords are not perfectly flexible the resistance they offer to 
bending is generally so smaU that it can be neglected without 
serious error. In the discussion of cables it wiU be assumed that 
the cables are perfectly flexible and inextensible. 

59. The Parabolic Cable. — If a flexible cable is suspended 
from two points and carries a load that is distributed uniformly 
horizontally (Fig. 110a), the curve assumed by the cable is a para- 
bola, as will presently be shown. In the present discussion the 
points from which the cable is suspended will be assumed to be in 
the same horizontal plane. An example of a cable carrying a load 
which closely approximates that above indicated is the cable of a 
suspension bridge, since the weight of the roadway is uniformly 
distributed horizontally and the weights of the cable and hangers 
are small in comparison with the weight of the roadway and 



THE PARABOLIC CABLE 



103 



therefore may be neglected. Another example is that of— ar 
tightly stretched cable (that is, one in which the sag is small as 
compared with the span) which carries no load except its own 
weight, as for example, the cable of an electric transmission line, 
a telegraph wire, etc. In this case the load carried by the cable 
(its weight) is distributed uniformly along the curve assumed by 
the cable, but since the sag is small the horizontal projection of an 
arc of the curve is approximately equal to the length of the arc, 
and hence the load is distributed approximately uniformly in the 
horizontal direction. 




Fig. 110. 



In the solution of problems involving the parabolic cable, use 
is made of the equation of the curve assumed by the cable (para- 
bola) and of equations which express relations between the span, 
sag, length of the cable, tension, etc. In order to determine the 
equation of the parabola a portion AB oi the cable wiU be con- 
sidered as a free body (Fig. 1 106) . A , the lowest point of the cable, 
will be taken as the origin of coordinates and the tension at this 
point will be denoted by H. The tension at any point, B, will be 
denoted by T. The portion of cable AB, then, is in equilibrium 
under the action of the three forces Hj T, and the vertical load 
wx which acts through the point D midway between A and C. 
Since these three forces are in equilibrium they must be concurrent, 



104 EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 

and hence the action Una of T passes through D, The equa- 
tions of equihbrium are: 

1:Fx=T co&a-H = Q, (1) 

i:Fy=T ^ina-wx = Q (2) 

By dividing (2) by (1), the equation obtained is, 

wx 



But, 
Hence, 



tan a— jj , 



tan a = — . 

X 



2y _wx 

That is, 

.^g. .......... (3) 

The curve, then, is a parabola with its vertex at A and its axis 
vertical. By squaring and adding (1) and (2) and extracting the 
square root of each side of the resulting equation, the following 
expression for T is found, 

T=VlP+w^ (4) 

In applying the above equations we are concerned with the tension 
at the point of support since at this point the tension is a maximum. 
Hence, if the span be denoted by a and the maximum value of y 
(that is, the sag) by /, equations (3) and (4) reduce to 

/=S • (^) 

T = iwayjl+^„ (6) 

in which T represents the tension at the points of support. 

The length of the cable will now be determined in terms of the 
span and sag. In any curve the length of an arc is obtained from 
the equation 

" ^)- 

T^ .• /o\ dy ^^ 

From equation (3), -r^-jr- 



and 



/^l 



THE PARABOLIC CABLE 105 
Hence, if the length of the cable be denoted by I, we have 



■■f^' 



z=2i ^n+^dx. 



Substituting for H from equation (5), this equation becomes 



-^^/^ 



1 = 2 \ ^ll + ^^dx. 



The exact expression for Z, obtained from this integral, involves a 
logarithmic function and is difficult to apply. A simpler expres- 
sion for I may be obtained by expanding the expression under the 
integral into a series and integrating the series term by term. 
This method leads to the following equation, 

'-Mff-m- ■■] "> 

Since the sag ratio f/a is generally small, the series converges 
rapidly and it is sufficient in most practical computations to use 
only the first two or three terms of the series to obtain a close 
approximation to the value of I. 



ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEM 

83. The horizontal load carried by each cable of a suspension bridge is 
1000 lb. per ft. The span of the bridge is 800 ft. and the sag is 50 ft. Deter- 
mine the tensions at the ends and at the middle of the cable and also find the 
length of the cable. 

Solution. — From equations (5) and (6), 



and, 



g= oC.n =1,600,000 lb. 



T = ^Xl000X800>/l + j^^^^^ = l,650,000lb. 



The length of the cable may be determined by using equation (7) . Thus, 



106 



EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 



PROBLEMS 

84. A telegraph wire weighing 0.1 lb. per foot is stretched between 
two poles 150 ft. apart. The tension in the wire at the insulators (which 
are in the same horizontal plane) is 500 lb. Find the sag, assuming 
that the weight of the wire is uniformly distributed horizontally. Find also 
the length of the wire. 

Ans. /= 0.562 ft. I = 150.005 ft. 

85. Each cable of a suspension bridge carries a load of 1200 lb. per foot 
uniformly distributed along the horizontal. The span is 1000 ft. and the sag 
is 50 ft. Find the maximum stress in the cable and the length of the cable. 

86. A cable 100 ft, in length is suspended from two points in a horizontal 
plane which are 99 ft, apart. If the cable carries a load that is uniformly 
distributed along the horizontal what is the sag of the cable? 

^ns./= 6.10 ft. 

60. The Catenary. — The curve assumed by a flexible cable of 
uniform cross-section which is suspended from two points, and 
which carries no load except its own weight (Fig. Ill a), is called a 




Fig. 111. 



catenary. The load which causes a cable to assume the form of 
a catenary, then, differs from that which causes the form of a 
parabola in that the load is distributed uniformly along the cable 
in the former case, whereas in the latter case the load is distrib- 
uted uniformly horizontally. 

The discussion of the catenary is of practical importance only 



TOE CATENARY i07 

for cables in which the sag ratio is large, since for a small ~sag^ 
ratio the curve assumed by a cable may be regarded with small 
error as being a parabola, as discussed in the preceding article. 

In order to determine the equation of the catenary and also 
to derive certain important relations between such quantities as 
the sag, span, length of cable, tension, etc., the equilibrium of a 
portion, OA, of the cable (Fig. 1116) will be considered, being the 
lowest point of the cable and A any other point. The point 
will be taken as the origin of coordinates, the weight of the cable 
per unit of length will be denoted by w, and the length of the arc 
OA will be denoted by s. The portion, OA, of the cable is in 
equilibrium under the influence of three forces, namely, the ten- 
sion H at the point 0, the tension T at the point A, and the weight 
ws. The angle which T makes with the horizontal will be denoted 
by 6. The equations of equilibrium for the concurrent force 
system are, 

^F^=T cos d-H = 0, .'. Tcosd = H (1) 

i:Fy=T sin d-ws = 0, /. T sin d = ws (2) 

From (1) and (2) we have, 



Hence, 



ws s ' H 
isind = -rr = -' where — = c (a constant). 
He w 

du 
s = c tan d or 8 = 0-^ (3) 

This equation is the intrinsic equation of the catenary. The 
cartesian equation will now be found. In any curve. 

Hence, from (3), the following equaton is obtained, 

ds _ / c^_ Vs^+c^ 

dy \ s^ s ' 

Therefore, 

, _ sds 

Integrating, 

y+A=V^+^. 



108 EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 

If now the origin is transferred to 0', where 00' = c, then y = c when 
s=0 and hence A=0. The last equation, therefore, becomes, 

y=Vs^T^. (4) 

Eliminating y from (3) and (4), 

, cds 

ax = —== 

Integrating this equation, 

x-\-B = c\ogc (s+Vs2+c2). 

Since s = when x = 0, B = c loge c and hence the last equation 
becomes, 

, s+Vs2+c2 y-{-s _. 

X=^c\0ge = cl0ge^^ . ... (5) 

c c 

Equation (5) can also be written in the form, 

x_ 

Vs2+c2+s = ce^ (6) 

By inverting each side of (6) and rationahzing the denominator of 
the left side, the following equation is obtained, 

_i 

Vs^-\-c^-s = ce ' (7) 

Adding (6) and (7) and using (4), 

y = o(^''—^ ^) = ccosh-. (8) 

^ c 

This is the cartesian equation of the catenary. Subtracting (7) 
from (6) we have, 

r - -- r 
s=7:(e'^ — e '^)=csinh- (9) 

2 c 

Squaring and adding (1) and (2) we have, 

Hence. 

T=wy (10) 



THE CATENARY 109 

Summarizing, then, the following important properties of the" 
catenary may be stated : 

(1) The horizontal component of the stress at any point is con- 
stant and equal to wc. 

(2) The vertical component of the stress at any point is equal 
to ws. 

(3) The total stress T at any point is equal to wy. 

In engineering problems which involve the catenary we are 
concerned particularly with the tension at the points of support, 
since at these points the tension is a maximimi. Hence, in the 
above formula, T will be regarded as the tension at the points of 
support and the values of x, y, and s will be regarded as the values 
of the variables at these points. Therefore, if the length of the 
cable be denoted by I, the span by a, and the sag by /, then the 

values of x, y, and s in the above equations become ^, /+c, and h, 

respectively. 

It may be noted that when the sag of the catenary is small the 
curve very closely approximates a parabola, since the load is 
approximately uniform horizontally. The formulas of Art. 59 
are generally used when the sag is small, since they are much easier 
to apply and the results obtained are sufficiently accurate for prac- 
tical purposes. When the sag is large as compared with the span, 
however, the above formulas should be used. 

Since the relations between the quantities as expressed by the 
above equations are complicated, many of the problems which 
involve the catenary can be solved only by trial. 

ILLUSTRATIVE PROBLEM 

87. A cable weighing 4 lb. per foot is stretched between two points in the 
same horizontal plane. The length of the cable is 600 ft. and the tension at 
the points of support is 2000 lb. Find the sag and also the distance between 
the points of support. 

Solution. — From equation (10), 

,=1=2^=500 ft. 

" w 4 

From equation (4), 

c = V^^:ii^=V(500)2- (300)2=400 ft. 
Hence, / = i/ - c = 500 - 400 = 100 f t . 



110 EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCE SYSTEMS 

From equation (5), 

V;q:^_l_s \/(3oo)2+(400)2+30o 

x=c loge ^ -=400 loge -^ ^ '-^ 



Hence, 



=277.2 ft. 
a = 2a; =