rU 




t 



cM 



#'CS7I.BII8 1903 




Copy 2 



I'lKtHASKI) FROM THE INCOMK OK THK 

JOSIAH H. BENTON FUND 



5^ 



TO MY DEAR WIFE, 

Whose faithful assistance has never faltered 

during the long years which have been 

necessary to connplete my task, I 

gratefully dedicate this 

volume. 



The Author. 



PREFACE. 



THE compiler of this work has for more than thirty years 
given much time to gathering Babcock family records, 
with at first no expectation of including more than the 
records of the descendants of his grandfathers, both of whom 
were Babcocks, though remotely related. As the work grew 
the idea of publishing developed, and for the past four years 
the most of his otherwise leisure time has been given to it. 

The work begins with James Badcock (Babcock), who set- 
tled in Portsmouth, R. I., in 1642, in Westerly, R. I., 1662, and 
died there June 12, 1679. It includes records of about two 
thousand families, which can be traced with certainty to the 
James Babcock referred to above. Some of these are of the 
eleventh generation of Babcocks in America. 

Records for this book have been collected from Westerly 
and other town records and from scores of published works, 
among the most valuable of which are : Colonial Records of 
Rhode Island and Connecticut. Arnold's Vital Records of 
Rhode Island. Wheeler's History of Stonington, Smith's Civil 
and Military Lists of Rhode Island, Town Meeting Records 
of Portsmouth, R. I., Ancient Landmarks of Plymouth, and 
History of the Town of Plymouth, the last two by William T. 
Davis. ]\Iuch the larger part have l^een gathered from family 
records never before published. 

The author has been assisted in this work by many, among 
whom should be mentioned Col. A. J. Babcock, of Springfield, 
111., who for more than twenty years has been an enthusiastic 
collector of Babcock genealogy. He loaned the author all of 
his Babcock records, which included several hundred pages 
of manuscript, and has written, perhaps, hundreds of letters 
to the author and others in his efforts to make this volume a 
full and accurate genealogical record. 

Mr. A. Emerson Babcock, of Brighton, N. Y., has spent 
much time, effort, and money in collecting records of the de- 
scendants of his progenitor, Isaiah Babcock, Sr., of the fifth 



vi Preface. 

generation. His records are included in this book, and are 
published as prepared by him in the last part of the volume. 

Mr. Edwin Babcock, of Westerly, R. I., has for a genera- 
tion been collecting Babcock family records, and is considered 
authority on Babcock genealogy. By his kind permission the 
author has had free access to his records. 

Space forbids mentioning by name the hundreds who have 
given records of one or several families, but the author wishes 
to especially thank the following, who have given much help 
in collecting genealogical records: Rev. Charles H. Babcock, 
D.D., Providence, R. I.; Mr. William P. Abbott, St, Paul, 
Minn. ; Hon. Henry L. Green, Riverpoint, R. I. ; the late Hon. 
Horatio Gates Jones. Philadelphia, Pa.; the late Rev. Rufus 
Babcock, D.D., Poughkeepsie, N. Y. ; Miss Mary Rodman, 
Groton, Conn. ; the late Mr. Nathan Babcock, Westerly, 
R. I. ; Phebe J. B. Wait, M.D., New York City ; Mrs. Julia 
M. B. Ambler, Chatham, N. Y. ; Rev. Theodore Babcock, 
D.D., Syracuse, N. Y.; Mr. W. I. Babcock, New York City; 
Mrs. Persis Gray, San Francisco, Cal. ; Mr. Stephen E. Bab- 
cock, .South Bend, Ind. ; Mrs. Judge Edward Thomas, Brook- 
lyn, N. Y.; Lucy A. Babcock, M.D., Alfred, N. Y. ; Mr. 
Raymond E. Dodge, New York City ; Miss Flora I. Babcock, 
St. Paul, Minn. ; Mr. Cyrus Henry Brown, Westerly, R. I. ; 
Mrs. Mary A. Babcock, Phenix, R". I. ; Mrs. Mary Gooding, 
Los Angeles, Cal. ; Miss Margaret L Van Patten, Westerly, 
R. L ; Mrs. Prudence Carter, New York City ; Mrs. Clara 
Babcock Wadsworth, Binghamton, N. Y. ; Mr. Charles H. 
Green, Alfred, N. Y. ; Mr. Daniel Babcock, Phenix, R. L; 
]\Iiss Grace D. Wheeler, Stonington, Conn. 

For reasons given in the explanations, many dates found in 
this work may be questioned by some, although the author has 
taken great pains to verify dates and statements. Trusting that 
unavoidable errors will be excused if such be found, this work 
is now submitted to the public. 



THE COAT OF ARMS AND THE FAMILY ORIGIN. 

By Rev. Charles Henry Babcock, D.D. 

THE Babcock Coat of Arms, which is used as the fron- 
tispiece of this book, is from the Dictionary of 
American Family Antiquity. It is described in the 
language of Heraldry thus: He beareth Argent; three 
pale cocks on a Fesse cotised, gules. Crest, a cock's head. 
Motto, "Dens spcs mea." Defined,* for the benefit of those 
unversed in Heraldry, the meaning of these queer terms is as 
follows: Argent means silver, sometimes represented by 
white, Fesse cotised means a broad band crossing the shield 
horizontally in the middle between two narrow bands parallel ' 
to, and near, the Fesse. The Fesse is emblematic of the mili- 
tary girdle worn round the body over the armor. Gules means 
red. The crest is placed on the top of, or above, the shield, 
and the motto, or legend, is usually below it. Hence, ex- 
pressed in ordinary English, our coat of arms relates that 
The Babcock bears a white, or silver, shield with three pale 
cocks emblazoned on a broad red band, crossing the shield 
horizontally, with a narrow red band on each side of it ; with 
a cock's head above, and a motto beneath the shield, which 
motto expresses the sentiment, God is my Hope. 

Attempting to trace this coat of arms to its origin, we dis- 
cover that it seems to be a composite, made of parts of several 
coats of arms of the same general family. Of this, however, 
we cannot be perfectly sure, because no modern book of Her- 
aldry may be supposed to contain all the multitude of devices 
of this sort which were stamped on ancient documents, copied 
in books and manuscripts now lost, and embossed on seals 
and surcoats of armor which have, apparently forever, dis- 
appeared. Some such or other undiscovered repository may 
yet reveal the original of our escutcheon, intact, in its present 
form. But, meantime, we must base our opinion only upon 
what we have been able to definitely ascertain after consid- 
erable research, the results of which are as follows. Accord- 
ing to the best available information there are four coats of 

* Vide Burke's GeneralJArmory. 

vii 



viii Coat of Arms and Family Origin. 

arms borne by different families of the Babcock — or rather 
Badcock — name in England, and ours, as presented in the 
frontispiece to this volume, is not one of them. One of the 
four pertains to the Badcocks of St. Winow, County Corn- 
wall; another is displayed by the family in Essex and Mid- 
dlesex; a third is distinctive of the Devonshire branch, while 
the fourth is borne by Lieut.-Col. Lovell Benjamin Badcock, 
of Lincolnshire and Bucks. A fifth variety, moreover, is de- 
scribed by Burke, but is unlocated by him further than the 
general identification implied by attaching to it the name "Bad- 
cock." Our device resembling, and yet differing from, each 
one of these in some respect, seems, we repeat, a composite, 
which levied upon each of the five for its own composition. 
Thus, the argent or silver shield corresponds with the unlo- 
cated arms ; the three pale cocks are found in the Cornwall 
arrangement; the gules, or red, is displayed in the color of 
the cocks in Essex-Middlesex and in Devonshire, and is also 
found in the shield color of the Lincolnshire and Bucks device. 
As for our crest, it appears to have been derived from the 
Devonshire version, which is a cock's head — or demi-cock — 
colored gules, or red. Two other and entirely different crests 
are also used by the Badcocks in England — one a talbot in 
white, or silver, which surmounts the Lincolnshire-Bucks 
shield, and the other a stag between two branches of laurel, 
which distinguishes the Essex-Middlesex armor. Sable, or 
black, is introduced in coloring some parts of three of the 
above-mentioned arrangements, and appears, too, in some 
copies of our device as the color of the crest and of the scroll 
and motto. 

For the substance of these details we are indebted, 
mostly, to Burke's Heraldry; but that encyclopedic and 
recondite compilation does not enable us to trace the con- 
stituent parts of our armorial blend to their origin, nor 
does it enable us to determine the time of the adoption 
of them, severally, by the different county families who 
made them their own. While, therefore, the coat of arms 
we sport is seemingly a composite one, we are not, and 
so far as we know nobody is. informed as to when or w^hy it 
was thus composed. Perhaps its composition was due to mar- 
riage, at different times in the remote past and within the 
family connection, which might have induced the individuals 
concerned to blend their armorial bearings while uniting their 
joys and dividing their sorrows. But if this be the true ex- 
planation of the composition in question no proof of it can be 



Coat of Arms and Family Origin. ix 

here produced, because, so far as we are able to decide, no 
such proof exists. Whenever and however our escutcheon 
acquired its present form, there were, at that unknown time, 
brought together in it symbols of ancient family life, which 
serve to remind us that that life reaches in many directions, 
and a long way into the past of England. Mere conjectures 
upon this, as upon most subjects, are worthless, based as they 
are upon no sustaining evidence. Indeed, there seems to be 
but one clear and positive statement which here may safely be 
made, and that is, that at any rate the coat of arms printed in 
this book has been long known, at least as a picture, in this 
country; for it is, in all essential particulars, the duplicate of 
a copy in the present writer's possession, the original of which 
hung, during said writer's early boyhood, in the dining room 
of his grandfather, John Babcock, of New Haven, Conn. 

And this last statement leads to the reflection that in the 
opinion of all good Americans coats of arms are, in this coun- 
try, valuable only as pictures, anyway. They are looked upon 
by most of us as part of the worn-out trappings of a state of 
society which, so far as we are concerned, has passed away. 
To us they are merely curious reminders of ancient and obso- 
lete standards for estimating human worth, and the sight of 
them nowadays, in our land, is apt to provoke either good- 
natured derision or contemptuous sneers. Well, so may it 
always be, in so far as it is necessary to the perpetuation of 
republican institutions. Nevertheless, coats of arms, in their 
palmy days, so far from being mere flauntings of pride of 
place, served a most serious, practical purpose. They saved 
many times, no doubt, valuable human lives. For, in those 
old days when men went into battle clad from head to foot in 
armor, with faces completely concealed by the closed visors 
of their steel helmets, there was no way of recognizing a war- 
rior thus accoutered save by his coat of arms. This was so 
called because of the fact that it was embroidered on the sur- 
coat, or "camise," made of leather or silk, or other stuff, which 
was worn over the annor, in full view. Seeing this symbol of 
rank and leadership in the midst of an affray, friends would 
rally to support the wearer of it, while foes, if victorious, 
would spare that wearer's life for the sake of making a valu- 
able prisoner. It is said that the last of the De Clares owed 
his death in the battle of Bannockburn to his having^ neo-lected 
to wear his coat of arms, by which he might have been recog- 
nized and his life saved for captivity. And so, doubtless, 
many another good man and true was killed, on other battle- 



X Coat of Arms and Family Origin. 

fields, and many another spared, because of the absence, or the 
presence, on his surcoat of the heraldic emblem, which told, or 
failed to tell, who he was for the information of friends and 
foes. 

But, beyond this humane, though incidental, service ren- 
dered by the coat of arms, its blazonry as a family distinction 
tended to emphasize that individuality of being and of doing, 
which is so necessary to progress and prosperity in human 
life. Individuality stamps itself, for good or evil, on the 
world's history, strive to submerge it in the community as we 
may. Judah with his lion, and the old Romans with their 
eagles, sought by those emblems to indicate the possession of 
strength and swiftness in doing what was conceived by them 
to be right in ethical and social ways. When Judah's lion 
reared his head, righteousness was declared, as becoming a 
nation. Where the Roman eagles were uplifted, there law and 
order was proclaimed to all the world. And, similarly, the 
adoption of a distinctive armory, with crest and legend, more 
or less descriptive of individual qualities, or deeds, was the 
declaration of a personality distinct and separate, because it 
was connected with, and pledged to, a certain line of conduct 
worthy of remembrance with pride. 

Coats of arms were not granted, or assumed, save for cause 
worthy of perpetuation. Such insignia, from being personal 
at the first, soon became hereditary, subject to the rules and 
laws which governed the descent of titles and property. Fam- 
ilies in the legitimate possession of such devices traced thereby 
connection with the name and fame of their ancestors, and 
were thus stimulated, in their individual membership, to be 
worthy of the blood they shared with those who, in olden 
times, had done something worth while. If there is anything 
in this consideration which is morally stimulating to the Bab- 
cocks of our day, then our coat of arms is not quite useless — 
it has not come down to us in vain. Our escutcheon suggests 
a somewhat belligerent character, it must be confessed. Three 
fighting cocks on a fiery background, with a head of the same 
game bird lustily crowing as a crest, do not altogether bode 
for peace. 'Tis true the cocks are pale, but paleness in a 
fighter sometimes denotes great determination. If the content 
of our shield is indeed indicative of our ancestral or our actual 
temperament, let us, under the encouragement of our motto, 
hope that the fighting was, and is, always done on the right 
side. Without victories, of one sort or another, the world 
could not go on. Our weapons now must be of the moral and 



Coat of Arms and Family Origin xi 

intellectual sort. The crossbow and the mace, the battle-ax 
and the shield have passed, and forever, out of our hands. No 
camise, or surcoat, bearing argent with three pale cocks on a 
fesse gules will ever grace our shoulders as we fight, for those 
tokens of a fighter have long since gone the way of outworn 
garments. Sic transit gloria mtmdi. But there are other 
glories to win, in another kind of warfare. Let us take heart 
of grace, even though some portion of our ancestral ward- 
robe has gone into the inevitable ragbag which Time holds, 
always open, for the reception of things unfit for present use. 
From what has now been said it goes without saying that 
the Babcock family is of English — perhaps we may say of 
Saxon — origin. Precisely when and where in England it 
originated it is impossible now to ascertain. Hence the amount 
of credence to be given to the assertion* that it was founded 
A. D. 449 by a Saxon warrior in the ranks of Hengist and 
Horsa, who came with a Saxon army to succor the English 
against the Picts and Scots, must be determined by each reader 
for himself. Wherever it originated, the family — judging by 
the name — is numerous in the United Kingdom; representa- 
tives of it being found in Cornwall, Devonshire, Lincolnshire, 
Middlesex, and Essex, but found, seemingly, most numerous 
in Essex. The name Badcock — probably pronounced "Badco" 
— may have been of Saxon origin, for the family may be pro- 
visionally traced to residence in Essex County at the time of 
the Norman Conquest. The word "provisionally" is used 
advisedly here, and the proviso attaches to the reliability of 
the following statement. It is saidf that a certain Sir William 
Seager narrated, as a result of his visit to Essex County in 
1612, that Sir Richard Badcock was the nineteenth in descent 
from the first holder of the family mansion there. If we ac- 
cept this statement and allow a century to represent the lives 
of three generations, then six centuries must have elapsed be- 
tween Sir Richard and his eighteenth ancestor, who, conse- 
quently, lived early in the eleventh century — the century of 
the Norman Conquest. It is hereupon conjectured that while 
the Badcocks were among the Saxon settlers in England they 
had no family name or seat in a formal way until Richard 
Badcock's ancestor permanently located, as aforesaid, in the 
eleventh century, at Wivenhoe, Essex County, near the sea. 
It is alleged,* upon the authority of a reference to Wright's 
History of Essex, that the Badcock mansion which was occu- 

* American Family Antiquity, vol. iii, p. igg. 

+ fit'd. ; also Hinman, Puritan Settlers, pp. 92, 106. 



xii Coat of Arms and Family Origin. 

pied by Sir Richard in Wivenhoe was still standing there in 
i8so- but, as neither volume nor page in Wright s big work 
is quoted, the reference cannot conveniently be verihed. 

The foregoing sketch of our ancestry in England is given— 
in the absence of documentary corroboration— for precisely 
what it is worth, and having by this gentle word of warning 
justified ourselves, we gingerly proceed along our somewhat 
uncertain way. We are about to try to get the family aero s 
from England to New England, and the only means available 
for our purpose seems to be "family tradition." Now, tradi- 
tion is unwritten history, and if it be genuine and authentic t 
is iust as good as written history, which, notwithstanding ts 
supposed superiority, has itself been defined as the most de- 
lightful of fictions. Now, it may be fiction and it may be fact 
bSt it is certainly tradition that the first Badcock o come 
from England to our America was one James, alleged to be 
a younge^r brother of that Sir Richard Badcock who in Sir 
William Seager's time, lived at Wivenhoe in Essex. The fact 
that there w?re Badcocks at Wivenhoe, at all, -- -^e^^' ^^ ^^ 
UP to doubt. A list of persons of that name born at Wivenhoe 
"s^ 'tl true, given in Hinman's Puritan Settlers of the Colony 
of Connecticut;* but a gentleman who is, we beheve a Ba - 
cock by maternal descent writesf that m 1863 he vis te 
Wivenhoe and examined the parish register m the churd 
there without finding a single entry of the Badcock name. n 
producing this testimony it may be said that perhaps the ge - 
Ueman'siarch was not sufficiently thorough, and we ought 
to add that not far from Wivenhoe-probab ly a mi e or two- 
there is a locality named Wivenhoe Cross,t about which we 
know nothing, and which possibly may have been confused 
bv the pi^servirs of our tradition, with the first-named place. 
At all events that the family abounded, and, at a very early 
^me flo 1 i;d, in Essex County, is beyond reasonable ques- 
i^n The county was settled and named by the Saxons who 
divided this district of England and erected it into a king- 
om r Formerly, and for long, it was considered unusually 
merger in its historical remains, but later discoveries have 
^,own it to be quite rich in that particular. Incidental, and 
herTfore most valuable, references in its history prove the 
presence of the Badcock people there as early, presumably as 
the twelfth century. In the parish of Abberton, or Adbur- 

+ W f Appleton, A.M., in New England Genealogical Society Reports, vol. xix, p. .^S- 
t ^Imap of Essex County in Wright's Essex. § Wright's Essex, vol. .. p. x. «. 



Coat of Arms and Family Origin. xiii 

toil — which extends eastward from Layer de la Haye, four 
and one half miles from Colchester and fifty-five miles from 
London — in Essex, there is, a quarter of a mjle northwest 
from the church, a manor house of Badcocks* which is sup- 
posed to be the estate which belonged to one Alice le Des- 
penser, daughter and heiress of Philip Bassett, at the time of 
her decease in 1281. The land of this manor house appears 
to have been given by Thomas Whot and John Henny to St. 
Botolph's priory in Colchester in 1398.* How those gentle- 
men became possessed of the land does not appear. Later, in 
1523, Thomas Springe died possessed of the manor of Adbur- 
ton called Badcocks;" still later Thomas, Lord Audeley, had 
this estate, as had also, his nephew, Thomas Audeley, Esq., 
who died in 1572; and yet later it passed through several 
hands to the ownership of Francis Canning, Esq.* This is 
pretty circumstantial and reliable, and although the property 
mentioned evidently passed out of the family holding previous 
to 1 28 1, it shows the antiquity of the Badcocks as residents 
of Essex County. 

Again, at East Thorp — which is a village name of Saxon 
derivation — there is confirmatory evidence of the ancient resi- 
dence of the Badcock people in Essex in the existence there 
of a manor of Badcocks, which at one time belonged to the 
Tey family and later came to a family by the name of Shep- 
herd, f But East Thorp is not Wivenhoe, and Abberton is 
not Wivenhoe, and we are assured, as above, that the name 
Badcock is not in the Wivenhoe parish register. Nevertheless, 
"family tradition" has it that at Wivenhoe lived — born about 
1580 — a younger brother of Sir Richard, named James Bad- 
cock, a clergyman of the Church of England, of Puritanical 
persuasion, who became an exile in 1620 to Leyden, Holland, 
for the sake of religious liberty, and sailing thence, with 
others landed in New England — some say at Plymouth, 
Mass. — in 1623, thus becoming the founder of the family in 
this country.?: Whatever doubt, or denial, there may be of the 
truth of this tradition arises, presumably, in the first place, 
because the tradition is entirely unsupported by documentary 
evidence. There are no passenger lists of ships arriving at 
Plymouth in 1623, or in 1624; no deeds, or land apportion- 
ments; no mention of election, or of appointment, to local 
civil, or military offices or duties; no wills or other probate 

* Wright's Essex, vol. ii, p. 732. t Ibid., vol. i, p. 390. 

% Dictionary of American Family Antiquity, vol. iii, p. 199 ; also Hinman, Puritan Settlers, 
etc., p. 106. 



xiv Coat of Arms and Family Origin. 

papers; no references in contemporaneous literature — in 
short, there is nothing in the shape of discovered records to 
show that James Badcock, aforesaid, landed in 1623, as tradi- 
tion relates, at Plymouth, or elsewhere, in Massachusetts. On 
the contrary, there are circumstances and also records, which 
tend to impair, and for some minds to destroy, the trustworthi- 
ness of said tradition. What those circumstances and facts 
of record are may easily be learned by reading the pages fol- 
lowing, in the body of this book, for it does not fall within the 
scope of this Preface to relate, or to comment upon them. 
One remark, however, we may permit ourselves, which 
is that there can be no slightest doubt that a man named 
James Badcock was living, in the year 1642, at Portsmouth, 
R. I. Who was this man? Was he the traditionary James 
said to have been born in Essex, England, about 1580 and to 
have landed in America in 1623? This man himself, upon 
one occasion, in an affidavit, made it certain that he was born 
in 1611-12. Was he, then, a son of that reputed Plymouth 
James, or was he, possibly, a nephew or other relative? 

The man who is able to successfully reply to these queries 
has a most enthusiastic welcome awaiting him at the hands 
of many good, and would-be grateful, people. It is an in- 
tricate and a difficult question — the question as to precisely 
where, and by whom, the Badcock connection was made be- 
tween old England and our New England shores — and who- 
ever deals with it is entitled to his own conclusion. Fortu- 
nately for himself, the writer of this article is not called upon 
to settle this question, but he may commend it to the earnest 
consideration of the reader of these lines. Entered upon with 
interest and pursued with fidelity, we are confident this ques- 
tion would provide occupation during active life and even 
afiford food for thought during declining years. But of one 
thing herewith connected we may be sure. James Badcock 
was in Portsmouth, R. I., in 1642. How he came to be there, 
and how long he had at that time been in this country, we do 
not know. To him those of us who are concerned in this vol- 
ume trace our origin in this land. And as he evidently did not 
spring out of the earth in Portsmouth, or fall from the sky 
there, and as he said he was born in 1611-12 — and, therefore, 
not born in this country — it is pretty plain that he came here 
from England, and there is strong presumptive evidence that 
Essex County was the region of his birth. 

The solid ground of fact, therefore, upon which at last we 
stand may be indicated in about two words: i. Our branch 



Coat of Arms and Family Origin. xv 

of the Babcock folk came from old England to New England 
early in the seventeenth century — certainly prior to 1642. 
2. We share with the English Badcocks a coat of arms which 
helps to show that, as a family, we have lived long enough in 
the world to know how to live wisely and, therefore, well. 
The point of this last observation, as the renowned Cap'n 
Ed'ard Cuttle might remark, lies in the application of it. 
What more ought we to say ? Farewell ! 
New York, July i, 1903. 



ILLUSTRATIONS. 



FACING 
PAGE 



Babcock Coat of Arms (Frontispiece) 

Stephen Babcock i 

Tomb of Captain James Babcock. i6 

Tomb of George and Elizabeth Babcock 20 

Home of James, Jr., and Sarah (Vose) Babcock 28 

Mrs. Hannah (Stanton) Babcock 32 

Dr. Joshua Babcock (Chief Justice) 36 

House Built by Dr. Joshua Babcock . . 44 

Tomb of OUver and Anna Babcock 48 

Colonel Harry Babcock 64 

Adam Babcock 68 

Mrs. Abigail (Smith) Babcock 80 

Tomb of Captain Oliver Babcock 106 

Home of Hon. Daniel Babcock 112 

Stephen Babcock 128 

Samuel Babcock 140 

Mrs. Polly (Babcock) Morgan 1 54 

Asher Miner Babcock 1 68 

Rev. Rufus Babcock, D.D 184 

Daniel Babcock 192 

Jacob D. Babcock 1 94 

Oliver Babcock 200 

Phoebe (Babcock) Babcock 206 

S. Willard Babcock 208 

Elder Daniel Babcock 212 

Mrs. Elisabeth Smith (Babcock) Lathrop 216 

Mrs. Abigail S. (Babcock) Blake 220 

Oliver Babcock 226 

Elias Babcock 238 

Sarah Taylor Cranor 240 



XVU 



xvHi tllustrations. 



FACING 
PAGB 



Katherine Taylor Cranor 242 

Samuel Babcock 244 

John Babcock 252 

Rev. Deodatus Babcock, D.D 254 

Edwin Babcock 256 

E. Howard Babcock, D.D.S., M.D 258 

George H. Babcock 300 

Mrs. Emily E. (Babcock) Watts 334 

George Avery Babcock 338 

Judge William H. Potter 340 

Nathan Babcock 342 

Amanda (Babcock) Greene 346 

Daniel Babcock 348 

Henry S. Ambler 350 

Colonel Andrew Jackson Babcock 356 

Sarah Otis Babcock 364 

Elisha Gardner Babcock 37° 

Albert Franklin Babcock 384 

Joseph Alonzo Babcock 400 

Rev. Oscar Babcock ■ 4^4 

Herman A. Babcock 406 

Henry Holmes Babcock 41° 

George D. Babcock 412 

Theodore H. Babcock 424 

Silver Tankard Owned by Mrs. Emma (Babcock) Horton. . . 440 

Dr. W. Wayne Babcock, Jr 456 

John Babcock 464 

Daniel A. Langworthy, M.D 504 

George M. Moulton 478 

Charles Henry Babcock 5 ' 4 

Rev. De Grand Delos Babcock 5 ' ^ 

Langdon Babcock 5^8 

Henry Ernest Babcock 522 

Frederick H. Babcock 5^4 

Rev. Charles H. Babcock, D.D 526 

James Leland Babcock 536 



INTRODUCTION 



MANY readers of this volume may be surprised to 
find that dates and incidents pertaining to James 
Babcock, the first immigrant ancestor of the Babcock 
family, as well as records of his children, differ from records 
which they have long believed to be true. The reason is not 
difficult to find. In 1844 Mr. Sidney Babcock, of New 
Haven, Conn., printed a leaflet containing the Babcock coat 
of arms, and certain Babcock family records which he states 
were copied from records prepared by Albert Wells, of Pal- 
myra, N. Y. This leaflet must have been sent out in great 
numbers, as the author of this volume has learned of it from 
many parts of the country. 

In American Family Antiquity, published in 1881 by Albert 
Wells, the dates and incidents found in the leaflet referred to 
are essentially repeated. A catalogue of the First Puritan 
Settlers of the Colony of Connecticut, published by R. R. 
Hinman, 1846, contains virtually the same Babcock records as 
those given by Wells. In 1852 Hinman published another 
volume of the same name, in which his Babcock records are re- 
peated and enlarged, and at the end of these records he states 
"Communicated by Wells ;" hence it appears that Wells was 
responsible for Babcock records published by Hinman. 

^^'ell-authenticated historical facts show that their dates and 
statements of incidents are zvrong. While W^ells and Hinman 
differ slightly as to details, the general statements given by 
them are about as follows : James Babcock, born in England 
1580, removed to Leyden, Holland, in 1620, and in 1623 em- 
barked in the ship Anne and arrived at Plymouth, ]\Iass., in 
July, 1623, where he lived the residue of his life and died. 
At the time of his immigration he had four children, James, 
John. Job, and Mary, who were born in England from 16 12 
to 1620, and were brought over with their father. He was 
married again about 1650 in Plymouth, and had one son, 
Joseph. James, the first, Job, the third, and Mary, the fourth, 

xix 



XX Introduction. 

remained with their father in Plymouth. Joseph, the fifth, 
removed to Connecticut, near Saybrook, where he made settle- 
ment. John Babcock, the second son, removed with a number 
of others about the year 1648 into that part of Rhode Island 
now called Westerly, where the company began a settlement 
and named the place. Here he remained the residue of his 
life and died July 19, 17 19, aged over one hundred years. He 
left ten children at the time of his death. (End of statements 
from Wells and Hinman. ) 

While we are forced to admit that we have no knowledge as 
to the exact date when James Badcock came to America, it is 
certain that he did not come in the ship Anne and that he did 
not settle in Plymouth. In August, 190J, the author of this 
volume searched carefully in the library of Plymouth for 
records that might indicate that James Badcock came to Amer- 
ica in the ship Anne or that he lived in Plymouth, but found 
no trace of any such record. In the History of the Town of 
Plymouth, by William T. Davis (former President of the Pil- 
grim Society), published in 1885, is the following statement: 
"No passenger list of the Anne and the Little James, which 
arrived July and August, 1623, has been preserved; but unless 
some died before the division of lands in 1624, a list is given 
which must approximate to accuracy." In this list the name 
of Badcock or Babcock does not appear, hence it is evident 
that James Badcock did not come to America in the ship Anne. 
Ancient Landmarks of Plymouth, by William T. Davis, pul)- 
lished in 1899, contains a genealogical register of all Plymouth 
families, including all the births and marriages to the present 
generation. The author in his preface says, "It is believed to 
contain nearly every name connected with Plymouth before 
the present century." The name Badcock or Babcock is not 
found among his settlers of Plymouth ; hence it is safe to con- 
clude that the statement so often repeated, that James Badcock 
settled in Plymouth, is not true. Records in this book will 
show that James, Sr., was born in 161 2 ; that he was in Ports- 
mouth, R. I., 1642, where he resided for about twenty years; 
tliat March, 1661-2, he removed to that part of Rhode Island 
which - w^as later named Westerly, where he s]3ent the re- 
mainder of his life and died there June 12, 1679. It is not 
true that "he married his second wife in Plymouth about 
1650." His first wife, Sarah, was living in Wes